<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

    <!ENTITY apos    CDATA "&#x2019;"   --     111 -->
    <!ENTITY frac12  CDATA "&#x00BD;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY gtilde  CDATA "g&#x0303;"  --    5488 -->
    <!ENTITY ldquo   CDATA "&#x201C;"   --       8 -->
    <!ENTITY ndash   CDATA "&#x2013;"   --       3 -->
    <!ENTITY oelig   CDATA "&#x0153;"   --     684 -->
    <!ENTITY rdquo   CDATA "&#x201D;"   --      11 -->

]>
<TEI.2 lang=es>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>Diccionario Ingles-Español-Tagalog</title>
<author key="Sofronio G. Calderón" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/163146029576335822393">Sofronio G. Calderón (1878&ndash;1954)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name>Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:62659f2b-410e-48eb-bd4d-1e08cdc237a9</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20040908133150calderon</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID4142e5469dd03</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>20738</idno>
<date>2007-03-04</date>
<availability lang=en-UK>
<p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at <xref url="https://www.gutenberg.org/">www.gutenberg.org</xref>.

<p>This eBook is produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="https://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

<p>This dictionary contains a lot of obsolete words that may make one wonder how they ever landed in this dictionary, such as the word Ettin for a Giant, which is obsolete in English since the 16th century. Be aware of this, especially when using this dictionary in &ldquo;reverse.&rdquo;

<p>Numerous, but not all, misspellings and older spellings have been silently corrected or modernized. Some misspellings seem to be taken from other contemporary English-Spanish dictionaries. (Internet search-engines are wonderful in revealing such things.)

<p>The pronuciations sometimes reveal a Spanish influx.

<p>The newly designed cover contains the flags of Spain, the United States, and the Philippines, current at the time this book was first published (ignoring the fact that use of the Philippine flag was forbidden at that time by the US authorities).

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">Sofronio G. Calderón&apos;s tri-lingual English-Spanish-Tagalog dictionary originally appeared in 1915. The words used in this dictionary reflect the usage and spellings current at that time.</note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Sofronio G. Calderón</author>
<title>Diccionario Ingles-Español-Tagalog</title>
<date>1915</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
    <p></p>
    <tagsDecl lang=xx>
        <rendition selector=.small>font-size: small;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.large>font-size: large;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.center>text-align: center;</rendition>
        <rendition selector="div.body div.div1 p, div.body div.div1 p.first">
            <!-- hanging indent for dictionary works better -->
            text-indent: -1em; 
            margin-left: 1em;
        </rendition>
    </tagsDecl>
</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc lang=en>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
        <language id=en-UK>English (United Kingdom)</language>
        <language id=es>Spanish</language>
        <language id=tl>Tagalog</language>
        <language id=und>Undetermined</language>
        <language id=xx>No linguistic content</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>English language -- Dictionaries -- Spanish</item>
                <item>English language -- Dictionaries -- Tagalog</item>
                <item>English language -- Dictionaries -- Polyglot</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2007-02-28 Started.
        <item>2012-08-09 Adjustments for ePub generation.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>


<pb n=1>
<titlePage>
<docTitle><titlePart>Diccionario</titlePart>
<titlePart>Ingles-Español-Tagalog</titlePart>
<titlePart>(Con partes de la oracion y pronunciacion figurada)</titlePart>
</docTitle>


<byline>
<lb>Por

<lb><docAuthor>Sofronio G. Calderón</docAuthor>

<lb>Presidente de la sociedad literaria &ldquo;<hi rend=sc>Aklatang Kasilawan</hi>&rdquo;; 2.<hi rend=sup>o</hi> Vice-Presidente de la &ldquo;<hi rend=sc>Samahan n&gtilde; m&gtilde;a Mánanagalog</hi>&rdquo; (ó Asociación de Tagalistas); Colaborador de la &rdquo;<hi rend=sc>Aklatang Bayan</hi>&rdquo;; Miembro honorario de la "<hi rend=sc>Aklatang Barusog</hi>&rdquo;; Miembro de la &ldquo;<hi rend=sc>University Extension Institute</hi>&rdquo;; Miembro de la &ldquo;<hi rend=sc>Philipphine Academy</hi>&rdquo; etc.
</byline>

<docImprint>
Primera Edición.

<lb>Manila
<lb>Libreria y Papeleria
<lb>&ndash;:de:&ndash;
<lb>J. Martinez

<lb>Plaza P. Moraga 34/36, Plaza Calderón 108 y Real 153/155, Intramuros.
<lb><docDate>1915</docDate>
</docImprint>
</titlePage>



<pb n=2>
<div1 id=imprint type=Imprint>

<p rend=center><hi>Es propiedad de la Imprenta, Librería y Papelería de J. Martínez.</hi>

<p rend=center>Imprenta de J. Martínez, Estraude 7, Binondo.


<pb n=3>
</front>
<body lang=en-UK>

<!-- DICCIONARIO

Ingles-Español-Tagalog -->

