


=== W ===


wá_1 expression of mild disappointment uttered when s.o. fails to do
what one wanted him to do. Wá, kaláin dì man diay maná sa sini! Gosh,
why aren’t you taking me to the movies with you! Wá, kini ray ímung
ihátag! Gosh! Is this all you’re giving me?

wá_2 = wala.

wâ see walà.

wáay_1 v [A; c1] raise a weapon preparatory to striking. Giwaáyan níya
sa bunal ang irù, He raised the club at the dog.

*wáay_2 — gid = waray gid. see waray_2.

wábul v [B5; b6] shake, wobble, move in an irregular and jerky
movement. Kusug kaáyung muwábul ning awtúha básig náay dipirinsiya
niíni, This car wobbles a lot. S.t. must be wrong with it. a shaking,
wobbling. n wobbling motion.

wadwad v [A; b5] {1} break the soil, as in tilling. Unsay itanum
niánang dapíta nga inyung giwadwáran (giwadwad)? What are you going to
plant in the area you have plowed? {1a} for a pig to dig around in s.t.
with its snout. Giwadwad sa bábuy ang linadlad, The pig dug around on
the clothes put out to bleach. {2} [A; c1] take s.t. out of a container
to display it. Ákung iwadwad (wadwárun) ang ákung mga butang arun nímu
makit-an ug nía ba dinhi ang ímung gipangítà, I’ll take my things out
so you can see if what you are looking for is here. {3} [A2; b] work
hard (slang). Kinahanglang muwadwad ug maáyu ang draybir arung kabawì
sa ábang, A passenger jeepney driver has to work like hell to make
enough to recover his rent.

wagas n pure gold, not worked into jewelry. a pure, unmixed (literary).
Wagas nga kamatuúran, The pure, unvarnished truth.

wagat a for root crops to be watery and somewhat lumpy to eat. v [B;
b6] for root crops to become watery and lumpy. Muwagat (mawagat) ang
pálaw ug linghud pa, Palaw is watery and lumpy when it is cooked too
young.

wagtang v {1} [A; c] lose s.t. Diin man ka. Nawagtang ka man, Where
were you? You disappeared! Ayaw giyud nag wagtánga ang ímung bulpin!
Don’t lose your ball-point pen! {2} [AP; a] drive away, make s.t.
vanish. Álak ray makawagtang sa ákung kaguul, Only liquor can drive
away my sorrows.

wagut n fibrous, inedible portion of jackfruit. a for sweet potatoes to
be small and fibrous. v [B126; b6] come out small and fibrous. Mawagut
ang kamúti ug linghud pa kaáyu, Very young sweet potatoes are small and
fibrous. -un a {1} having a lot of fibrous inedible portions. {2} being
small and fibrous.

wagwag_1 v {1} [A13; c6] spill s.t. out of a container. Nawagwag ang
harína kay nabutbut ang sáku, The flour spilled because the bottom came
out of the sack. {1a} [A13; a12] rip or puncture a container so the
contents spill. Ikaw diay nagwagwag sa sáku kay ímu mang gidahik, You
made the sack rip because you dragged it. {2} [A; c] divulge
information. Miwagwag hinúun ku sa tanan kung nasayran báhin níya, I
spilled everything I knew about her. {3} [A] go about with penis
dangling freely. Walà giyud kay úwaw kun magwagwag kang mulakaw sa
karsáda, You sure are shameless if you can walk down the street with
your penis waving in the breeze. n secret that has become known.

wagwag_2 n a variety of white paddy rice with strong panicles maturing
late and giving a heavy yield.

wáhì v [A; c6] brush, push s.t. aside to clear the way or view. Ang
nag-una mauy miwáhì sa mga sangang nagbabag sa agiánan, The guide
brushed aside the branches which blocked the way.

wahig n river.

wáhig v [A; c1] move s.t. attached to s.t. aside or out of the way.
Kamuy muwáhig sa mga bangkù nga nag-ali sa agiánan, You move the
benches aside that are in the way. Siyay nagwáhig sa kurtína, He pushed
the curtains aside. wahigwahig v [A; c1] scatter, strew s.t. around.
Kinsa bay miwahigwahig niíning mga papil sa sála? Who strewed these
papers all over the living room? Basakang nawahigwahig sa dakung pátag,
Rice fields scattered over the broad plain.

wáhing v {1} [A; c1] move s.t. to the side without lifting it entirely.
Iwáhing (wahínga) ang kurtína arun makalìlì ta, Pull the curtain to the
side so we can peek. {2} [A2; c6] lay one’s work aside. Muwáhing siya
sa íyang gitrabáhu kun náay magkinahanglan níya, He will lay whatever
he is working aside if s.o. needs him. wahingwáhing v [AN; c1] flip
through pages.

wáis = wayis (slang).

wait n {1} lip (not used in romantic contexts). Mga libakíra nga dagkù,
nanipis na lang ang mga wait, They are a bunch of gossips with their
thin lips. (Gossipers are said to have thin lips.) {2} lip-like edge,
brim. Dúnay buak sa wait sa bangà, There is a nick on the lip of the
jar.

wak n word used in writing to represent the sound of a whack.

wákag v [B; c1] scattered all over not too large an area. Kun kit-an sa
mga bátà ning mga duwáan wakágun (iwákag) dáyun ni sa hawanan, If the
children get hold of these toys, they’ll scatter them all over.

wákal v [B; c1] be, become unintelligible in one’s speech. Wakálun
(iwákal) gánì nímug sulti dì ka hisabtan námù, If you mumble your words
we won’t understand you. a unintelligible, mumbling in speech.

*wákang insik, tsíbay — expression used to tease Chinese. Insik wákang
káun kalibang, Ching chong Chinaman, eat and shit.

wakanga expression said to be used by Chinamen in anger or surprise.

wákat v {1} [B6; c1] scatter, put in disarray. Nagwákat lang ang mga
butang sa íyang kwartu, Junk is scattered all over her room. {2} [B6C3]
intertwine, be intertwined. Nagwákat ang mga gamut sa bakhaw sa
katunggan, The roots of the mangroves in the swamps are scattered about
in an intertwining maze. n the prop roots of mangroves, so called
because they scatter out in every direction, intertwining and forming
an impenetrable mass.

wakay n k.o. ornamental fern that has large leaflets having a fine
serrated margin, used to cleanse pots: Cyclosorus sp. wakaywakay =
lukdulukdu.

wakis v [A; c1] lift a cover up or push it sideways. Hángin ang miwakis
sa ákung sayal, The wind blew my skirt up. Magwakis nà siyang matúlug,
Her skirt rides up her legs as she sleeps. Wakisa (iwakis) ang kurtína
arun makasulud ang ínit, Pull the curtain aside to let the sun in.

waklay a tall and thin. Mikalit siyag túbù maung waklay, He grew fast.
That’s why he is lanky. v [B12; b6] become tall and thin. Káun ug túda
kay nagkawaklay ka, Eat a lot because you are getting tall and thin.

wakli v {1} [AN; c] push, brush s.t. away from one. Giwakli níya ang
pagkáung gidúnul, He brushed the food they handed him aside. {2} [A;
c6] drive out from the mind (literary). Iwakli ang mga hunàhúnà mung
way hinungdan, Cast aside your foolish ideas. {3} [c6] give away s.t.
of little value to oneself. Usáhay waklíhan pud mi níya madiyut,
Sometimes he tosses a little something our way. n action of pushing
s.t. aside. Sa usa ka wakli nahapaúmud ang íyang kuntra, One brush of
the arm sent his enemy sprawling.

wakling v [A; c1] push s.t. aside, usually causing it to topple over.
Wà ka giyud makawakling ánang mga kartun nga nakasámuk sa ímung lamísa,
Why haven’t you pushed those boxes aside since they are in your way as
you work at the table? Ayaw nà waklínga (iwakling) arun dì mahúlug,
Don’t push that aside or it will fall over.

wakwak_1 n bird which comes out at night, so called from its call. Its
call signifies the presence of a vampire (unglù) or in some beliefs, it
is a form the vampire takes himself. v {1} [A13] for the wakwak to be
about. {2} [a12] victimize s.o. with vampire activity. paN- v [A2] go
about engaging in vampire activity. -un n = unglù, n.

wakwak_2 n the West piece of mahjong = wisti.

wala n {1} left hand. {2} left side. Likù paingun sa wala, Turn to the
left. — ug tuu a spending right and left. Wág tuu mugastu mu rag
Unásis, Spending money right and left like Onassis. v {1} [B1256] be at
the left side. {2} [a2] do s.t. with the left hand. Walha pagkuput kay
tuu may ímung ipakang, Hold it with the left because you strike it with
the right. Ug makigtínis ka nákù walhan ta ra ka, If you play tennis
with me, I’ll give you the advantage by playing only with the left. pa-
v [A; c] go or keep to the left. Sa Inglatíra magpawala ang sakyanan,
In England they drive on the left. walhun n {1} left-handed.
{2} implement for s.o. who is left-handed. Awtung walhun, Automobile
designed for driving on the left side. walhun nga tikì n southpaw
(humorous and derogatory from the phrase walhung tikì tuuhung mangíhì,
‘He’s a southpaw tikì, but he uses his right hand to piss’). v [B12]
become left-handed.

walà short forms: wà, wâ. no, not. {1} preceding verbs: did not, is not
doing. Walà níya lutúa, He did not cook it. Wà ku matúlug, I wasn’t
asleep. — madúgay not long after. Walà madúgay miabut ang amahan, Not
long after, the father arrived. — sukad never up to that time. Walà
sukad aku makadungug ánà, I had never before heard that. {2} not be in
a place. Walà dinhi ang maistru, The teacher is not here. Walà pa
(wap-a) sa Sámar ang bagyu, The storm hasn’t reached Samar yet.
{2a} not be in a certain condition. Walà siya sa maáyung buut, He is
not in a good mood. Walà ra siya sa kumingking itandì nákù, He is
nothing compared to me (lit. he is not even up to my little finger).
{2b} —y there isn’t, wasn’t any. Walay táwu, There wasn’t anyone. Walà
nay (wan-ay) túbig, There’s no more water. {2b1} -y [noun] [nom.]
[nom.] does not have any [noun]. Way kwarta si Huwan, Juan has no
money. Walà ku árun, I don’t know anything about this. {2b2} phrases
with walay: wà tay amígu you’re not my friend (baby talk). -y báli,
kásu [dat.] it doesn’t matter to [dat.]. Way báli nákù ug mabuak, I
don’t care if it breaks. — pay before there was any, before it got to
be. Sa wà pay gíra, Before the war. Wà pa gániy úras, It hasn’t even
been an hour. -y láin kun dílì none other than. Ang mukanta way láin
kun dì si Bin Abilyána, Our singer is none other than Ben Abellana.
{2b3} -y [doubled verb base or Culu-verb base] without doing. Milakaw
siya sa walay pupananghid (walay tingugtíngug), He left without
excusing himself (saying anything). {2b4} -y [verb base + (→)] without
having done. Bátang way ligù, way sudlay, An unwashed, uncombed child.
Ulan nga way bugtù, Rain without letup. (←) v {1} [AB12; a12b4(1)] lose
s.t., be lost. Nakawálà kug libru, I lost s.o.’s book. Nawálà ag ákung
pitaka, I lost my pocketbook. Kustumbring nagkawalà, Customs that are
disappearing. Ayawg wad-a (waláa) nang lapísa, Don’t lose that pencil.
Nawad-an ku sa pagsálig, I lost confidence. {2} [B1256] lose one’s way.
Nawálà kus lasang, I got lost in the forest. tag-(←), tig-(←) v [b(1)]
{1} misplace, lose track of s.t. Natagwaláan nákù ang papílis, I have
misplaced the documents. Ug dílì katigwaláan nákù ning nagsunud nákù,
madakpan ku, If I can’t shake off these people following me, I’ll get
caught. {2} get lost s.w. Nadúgay mi kay gitagwaláan mi sa dálan, We
were delayed because we lost our way. pahinga-, paka- v [A13] dì, walà
— be without. Ang palasikwáti dì magpahingawalà (magpakawalà) ug
tablíya, Those addicted to chocolate drink cannot be without chocolate
tablets. walàwálà v [A13] occur, come off and on. Nagwalàwálà ang ákung
hilánat, My fever comes and goes. ka-an n void, space. Unyà mibálik ang
lalum nga tíngug sa kawaláan, Then a deep voice came again from the
void. kawalad-un n utter, abject poverty.

walay {1} see walà, 2b. {2} = waray_2.

waldas v [A3; b5] move the hands or s.t. held in the hands above the
head. Nahadluk kus hubug kay nagwaldas sa íyang pinútì, I was scared of
the drunk because he was waving his sword in the air. waldaswaldas
v {1} = waldas. {2} [A; c1] gesticulate while speaking. Daw búang siya
nga nagwaldaswaldas sa íyang mga kamut, He waves his arms around like a
madman when he speaks. {3} [A1; c6] spend money wastefully, squander
money. Nagwaldaswaldas siyag kwarta nga dílì íyang hinagúan, He just
squanders money that he didn’t lift a finger for.

wáli n {1} sermon. {2} lecture read to s.o. who has done s.t. wrong.
v [A; c1] {1} deliver a sermon. {2} lecture s.o. Ayaw gánì akug walíhi
dihà arun dì ka masípà, Read me a lecture, woman, and your head will
crack like it never cracked before. mag-r-(→) n preacher.

wáling v [AP; c1] move s.t. to the side without lifting. Ang nagwáling
(nagpawáling) sa mga lingkuránan mau puy mag-úlì, Whoever pushed the
chairs to the side will have to put them back. Walínga (iwáling) kanang
mga basahun kay básig náa sa luyu, Push the books aside. Maybe it’s
behind them. Walínga ímung ilung ug kit-an nímu, Follow your nose
around the first bend (lit. turn your nose) and you’ll see it.
walingwáling v [A; c1] {1} turn over from side to side. Giwalingwáling
sa ditiktib ang minatay arun pag-ila, The detective turned the corpse
from side to side to identify him. {2} flip pages of a book.

walingwaling n k.o. orchid, grown ornamentally: Vanda sanderiana.

walis v {1} [AB26; c1] push a flexible covering aside. May kamut nga
miwalis sa kurtína, A hand pulled the curtain aside. {1a} for the lips
to turn up in a smile. Nawalis (niwalis) ang íyang mga ngábil sa usa ka
maanindut nga pahíyum, Her lips turned up in a sweet smile. {1b} — ang
kahílum [B26] for silence to break. {2} [B126] in volleyball, for the
hand to be knocked back and fail to return a ball that was hit with
force.

walts n waltz music or dance. v [AC] dance the waltz.

walu numeral eight. v see tulu. waluwálu n {1} wind and rain in heavy
torrents for eight successive days. {2} = tagiwálu. ka-, maka- eight
times. ika- eighth. tag-(←) eight at a time. v [A13; c1] do in
multiples of eight. tagi-(←) n k.o. snake that is said to stay eight
days on dry land and eight days in the sea alternately.

walug (not without l) n {1} valley. {2} — sa ginluháan, pag-antus vale
of tears (the world). v [B1256; b6] become a valley. kina-an n the
lowest place of a valley.

walup, wálup (not without l) v [A; c1] wallop, strike with a hand blow.
Lisud sagngun ang íyang sirbisyu kay kusug kaáyung muwálup (muwalup),
It’s hard to return his serve because he really wallops it. n wallop.

walwag v [A; a] insert s.t. long in an opening and work it around.
Walwaga nang nakasampung sa túbu, Work s.t. around in the pipe to get
out whatever is blocking it.

walwal (from diwalwal) v [A] for the tongue to hang out in panting, or
figuratively, for s.t. to hang out like the tongue. Muwalwal ang dílà
sa irù ug hiinitan, The dog pants with his tongue hanging out when he
is in the sun. Nagwalwal ang kinatáwu sa hubug, The drunk’s penis is
hanging out of his pants.

wánang n wide or roomy space, esp. a flat place. Dakug wánang ang ílang
sála, They have a spacious living room. v [AB; a2b2] be, become flooded
with. Nawánang ang plása sa túbig sa kusug nga ulan, The plaza became
flooded in the heavy rain. ka-an n outer space. Misutuy ang rákit
ngadtu sa kawanángan, The rocket ship shot into space.

wan-an-ihap a a one-and-a-half storey house. v [B1256; c6] be a
one-and-a-half storey house.

wan-aydyak n the jacks of hearts and spades, which are shown with only
one eye. a blind in one eye (humorous). Magdarkglásis bísag gabíi kay
wan-aydyak man, So that’s why he wears dark glasses even at night,
because he is blind in one eye. v [B126] become blind in one eye.

wandag v [A2; a2] roam, wander from place to place. Dì makapuyù nang
tawhána muwandag giyud, He never stays put, but he wanders from place
to place.

wandas = waldas.

wandirin dyú, wandiring dyú n k.o. ornamental spreading herb with
purple, acuminate leaves: Setcreasea purpurea.

wandug v [c1] move unsteadily as from fatigue, drunkenness. Wà ka
wandúgi sa trák? Didn’t it seem to you that bus was swaying?
wandugwandug v [AB3; c1] move unsteadily, stagger or sway while moving;
cause s.t. to do so. Miwandugwandug ang sakayan tungud sa dagkung
balud, The boat rocked from side to side in the big waves.

wanggu (word play on gúwang—slang. see gúlang.) n old man.

wangì v {1} [A; c1] bend, displace s.t. without moving it entirely.
Akuy muwangì sa tabla ug kuúta ang búla sa ilálum, I will bend back the
plank and you reach for the ball inside. Kinsay nagwangì sa úbas sa
sagángat? Who bent one of the tines of the spear? {2} [AB; c1] break
off a piece of s.t. long, get broken off. Muwangì kug sangang pára
ilatigus kabáyù, I’ll break off a branch to use for a horsewhip.
Muwangì (mawangì) ang ákung mga pánit sa ngilit sa kuku usáhay, The
skin on the sides of the nail sometimes breaks. a {1} displaced.
{2} broken off. Wanging kuku, Hangnail. wangìwángì n corners of the
mouth at the lips. v [c1] hit s.o. at the corners of the mouth.
Wangìwángía (iwangìwángì) siya pagkurit, Pinch her at the edge of her
lips.

*wángis paN- v [A2] for a pig’s canines to grow long because of age.
Nangwángis na ang ámung bábuy apan dì pa mangasáwa ang ámung ulitáwu,
Our pig has grown long canines but our young man doesn’t want to get
married yet.

wangkata n shape of one’s body (slang—word play on katawan, Tagalog for
‘body’). Mau nay wangkata. Pambátug banggà, My! What a body! A sure
winner in a beauty contest!

wanglùwanglù v [A; c1] stagger in one’s walk, esp. of one who is drunk.

wangsà a bucktoothed, with the upper teeth sticking out and the mouth
half-open. v [B1; b6] have this sort of characteristic. Ábi nímug gwápu
ka? Nagwangsà lang ang nawung mu, Do you think you are handsome, you
and your buck teeth?

wangsat v [A3P; c1] grin broadly (exposing the teeth). n broad grin.
Dakù kaáyug wangsat kay daúgan man, He’s grinning broadly because he
won.

wangsì a {1} having one or both the lips turned up such that it is
impossible to close the mouth. {2} partly opened due to a cut with a
side drawn up. Wangsì kaáyu ang íyang samad, She has a very wide cut.
v [B6] {1} get a wide cut or for s.t. to get upturned. Nawangsì ang
tibuuk kung kuku, My whole fingernail got turned up. {2} get opened,
ajar. Muwangsì (mawangsì) ang sira kun maluag ang bisagra, The shutter
won’t close tight if the hinges are loose. {3} [A; a] tear s.t. off,
loose. Giwangsì níya ang bungbung, He tore off the wall boards.

wangtigu n old man (word play on tigúwang—slang. see gúlang).

wangut v [A; c1] chew s.t. with the gums. Magwangut gánì ang masúsu sa
bibirun sa átù pa katul na ang lagus, When an infant chews the nipple,
it means that his gum itches. Wangutun (iwangut) sa ákung apuhan ang
maskáda, My grandfather chews his tobacco with the gums.

wangwang v [AB; b5] enlarge an opening by cutting or pushing two things
apart, be dilated, widely opened. Wangwángun sa mananabang ang agiánan
sa bátà inigpanganak, The midwife dilates the passage for the baby
during delivery. Ayaw wangwánga (iwangwang) pag-abli ang gít arun way
makasulud nga bábuy, Do not open the gate wide or stray pigs will come
in. n wide opening made by pushing two things apart.

wani v [A12; c6] be put in a wrong place, be mislaid. Ayaw nà siya
padad-ag paypay. Iwani na pud unyà nà, Don’t give her a fan to bring
with her. She’ll just misplace it again.

*wani n mangga — k.o. wild mango that bears long fruit with a peculiar
smell: Mangifera odorata.

wanklik a in one instant, without any delay. Wanklik ra ning laytíra.
Síga dáyun, With one click this lighter lights. Wanklik ra nang
bayhána. Way daghang hangyù, That woman can be had instantly, no fuss
and bother. v [c6] do s.t. in one fell swoop. Giwanklik lang ang íyang
swildu sa súgal, He lost all of his money in one fell swoop in
gambling.

wantáyim v {1} [A; b5] do s.t. just for once. Muwantáyim giyud kug
palit niánà bísag mahal, I’ll buy it even if it is expensive, just this
one time. {2} [A; b5] do s.t. all at one time. Wantaymun (wantayman) ta
lag hákut arun usa ra ka byáhi, Let’s take it all at once so we only
have to make one trip. a s.t. done just once or done all at one time.

wantid n {1} needed for employment. Wantid kaáyu ang trabahadur sa
kunstruksiyun, They need a lot of workers on the construction.
{1a} want ad. {2} one wanted for a crime. v {1} [A3; a1] be in need of
an employee. Kinsa kahay nagwantid ug tindíra? Where was it they were
needing a salesgirl? {2} [B126; a1] become wanted for a crime.

wan tu tri call sounded out in games to indicate player is ready for
the next thing to be done. v [A; a] {1} escape or get away from paying
for s.t. (slang). May gats giyud ka kun makawan tu tri kas Bisáyan,
You’ve got to have guts if you eat without paying at the Visayan
Restaurant. {2} do service poorly and hurriedly. Dì ka makawan tu tri
ug tupi basta istriktu, You can’t cut hair poorly and hurriedly if the
customer is fussy.

wanwi n {1} one-way street, trip. Dì ta makaági dihà kay wanwi nà, We
can’t go that way because it’s a one-way street. {2} a mode of betting
in jai-alai using two digits wherein only one specific combination wins
(as opposed to the lyábi_2). v {1} [A13; c1] be, become one-way.
{2} [A13; ac] bet on s.t. one way and not in a combination (lyábi_2).

waping = uwaping.

wápir n wafer. v [A; a] make, have wafers.

warak v [A; b6(1)] {1} throw s.t. or s.o. down with force so that it
breaks. Íya na untà nga iwarak ang kúlun sa kalágut, She was about to
smash the pot to the ground in anger. {2} spike a ball in volleyball.
n a spike in volleyball.

warakwarak v [A; c1] scold continuously and loudly. Kusug kaáyung
muwarakwarak si Mama ug madúgay ming mupaúlì, Mother scolds us
continuously if we come home late. n things said in scolding.

waraswáras v [A] {1} go back and forth. Nagwaraswáras pa ra ba giyud
atubángas bisíta, nanimáhù ra ba! She walked back and forth in front of
the visitors, and to think that she had B.O.! {2} go in all directions
hastily. Miwaraswáras si Kuring pagpangítà sa puldir nga nawálà, Coring
went around in a dither looking for the lost folder.

warawára v [A; c] wave the hands or s.t. held in the hands back and
forth. Miwarawára siya pagpahúnung sa awtu, He waved his hand to stop
the car.

Waray_1 n {1} the language of Samar and Eastern Leyte, so called from
the form waray used in most dialects of this language analogously to
the Cebuano walà and walay. {2} one who comes from the Waray-speaking
region. v {1} [B126; b6] be, become a Waray. {2} [A; c1] speak Waray.
-in-, Waraywáray = waray, n1, v. -nun = waray, n2.

waray_2 a be gone, not in existence (colloquial). Waray na tay pagkáun,
We have no more food. Ayaw na lang tu pangitáa, waray na tu, Don’t look
for it anymore. It’s already lost. — gid none at all (humorous for
walay gayud—from Samar-Leyte Bisayan waray and Hiligaynon gid). ‘Pilay
kwarta mu?’—‘Waray gid!’ ‘How much money have you got on you?’—‘Not a
red cent!’

ward n hospital ward. see also píward and príward.

wardabáhu warning shouted when s.t. heavy is going to fall: timber!
gangway!

wardámids klím n war damage claim.

wardas = waldas.

wardin n warden, a chief or principal keeper of a prison. v [B16; a2]
be, become a warden.

wardiwardi v [A; c] squander wealth, spend money thoughtlessly. Maáyu
lang kamung muwardiwardi sa kwarta nga wà ninyu hagúi, It’s easy for
you to squander money which you didn’t work for.

wargung v [A; c] go gallivanting around. Ug muwargung mu, kanang
mahuman na ug iksámin, You can go gallivanting around after the
examination.

warì v {1} [A; ac1] give up a possession. Iwarì ku lang ang ákung yútà
kay nagkinahanglan kug kwarta, I will give up my lands because I need
the money. {2} [A; c] give up one’s job. Muwarì ku ning trabahúa ug may
mas maáyu pa kung hikit-an, I’ll leave this job if I find a better one.

wárì v {1} [A; a2] confuse s.o. and mislead him. Waríun nátù ang mga
bátà arun dílì makabantay inigpanlákaw nátù, Let us mislead the
children so they won’t notice it when we leave. {2} [B1256] lose one’s
way. Mawárì giyud kus dawuntawun magabíi, I get lost downtown at night.
-an(→) n in the game of tubigtúbig, the line drawn where the defensive
players stand (where the offensive team is confused as to how to get
through).

warm-ap v {1} [A; c1] warm up an engine. {2} [A; a 12] warm up for
sports or other activities.

warning v {1} [A; c] give a warning prior to punishment. Warníngan ka
úsà. Dílì ka multáhan dáyun, You’re given a warning first. You’re not
fined the first time. {2} [A; b6] ring a warning bell in school.
Nagwarning na ba? Has the warning bell rung? {3} [A] be two points away
from winning in pingpong. n {1} warning given not to do s.t. again.
{2} warning bell in school. {3} player two points away from winning in
pingpong. — bil n warning bell in school.

warung a dishevelled. v [B; c1P] be dishevelled. (←), ka-(←) v [A 13]
be very dishevelled. Mu ra kag si Ayinstayin, nagwárung (nagkawárung)
ang buhuk, You look like Einstein with your hair going every which way.

*wasa hi- = aliwása. wasawasa, wasawása v [A1; c16] scatter, strew all
about, not over a large area. Asúkar nga nawasawasa na sa yútà, Sugar
scattered all over the ground.

wása (from asáwa—slang) n wife.

wasag, wásag = watag.

wasak v [A; c1] {1} scatter, put s.t. in disarray. Giwasak sa bátà ang
mga inutaw, The baby scattered the ironed clothes. {2} shatter, break
into many pieces. Nawasak ang básu sa simintu, The tumbler fell and
shattered on the cement floor. wasakwasak v [ANB12; c1] scatter all
over the place, be scattered in disarray.

was-anwir n wash-and-wear. v [A1; b6] wear wash-and-wear.

wásay n large axe. (→) v [A13; a1] cut or chop with an axe. Kawatan puy
nagwasay sa aparadur arun maabli, Some robbers also hacked the cupboard
open with an axe. wasaywasay n {1} name of bivalves which are shaped
like the head of an axe, e.g. some kinds of hammer oysters. {2} general
name for small dragonflies. wasaywásay n k.o. hatchet with a blade that
is at right angles to the hatchet, the back of which is even with the
handle.

wasdak v [A; b6(1)] hurl s.t. down. Ug ikaw muwasdak ánang lubi mabuak
giyud, If you throw the coconut down, it will surely break.

wasi v [a3] diverge from a path, go astray. Nawasi ang íyang dálan.
Mauy katungdánan ta ang paglamdag kaníya, He has strayed from the path
of righteousness. It is our duty to enlighten him. wasiwasi v [AB1; c]
scatter things; be scattered. Ang iring mauy nagwasiwasi sa inutaw, The
cat scattered the newly-ironed clothes.

wásì v [B126] for the lips or a similar opening to be cut from violent
impact. Nawásì ang ákung wait nga naigù sa bátir, I got an ugly cut in
my lips because they were hit with the baseball bat.

wasigwasig v [APB1; c1] scatter s.t. small all around; be scattered all
around. Nagkawasigwasig ang mga bugas sa pagkayabu, The rice was
scattered all over the floor when it spilled.

wásing n one who is a helper around a passenger bus, helping loading,
washing, or whatever needs to be done. v {1} [B156; c1] be a helper
around a passenger bus. {2} [b(1)] wash a vehicle.

waslik_1 v {1} [A; b6(1)] push s.t. aside with an abrupt movement of
the hands, throw s.t. hurriedly down. Gíkan sa iskuylahan muwaslik lang
dáyun siya sa íyang libru dáyung dágan sa gawas, As soon as he gets
home from school he throws his books down and runs out to play.
{2} [AN; b(1)] give s.t. as if it had no value. Usáhay muwaslik
(mangwaslik) pud siyag diyisun nákù, Sometimes he tosses a ten-spot at
me. n pushing away with a rapid motion of the hands. — sa tabuk
expression uttered upon hearing s.o. sneezing (lit. go away to the
other side of the river).

waslik_2 n wife (slang). Batan-un siyag waslik, He has a young wife.

wasngà = wangsà.

wasngì = wangsì.

waswas_1 v [AN; c] rinse off soap and dirt with clear water in doing
the laundry. Waswási úsag maáyu úsà ihayhay, Rinse it well before you
hang it out to dry. -l-an(→) n clothes to be rinsed.

waswas_2 v [A; c1] rip off clothes, bedding or anything covering the
body. Ug inítan ka, waswása (iwaswas) ang ímung hábul, If you feel hot,
kick your blanket off.

waswas_3 n wife (slang—from wása).

waswit n wife (slang—from wása).

wát command to make a water buffalo halt. (from huwat. see hulat.)

watag, wátag v [AB1; c1] {1} scatter s.t. fairly good-sized causing a
great disorder, not over a large area. Nagwátag ang papil sa salug,
Pieces of paper are strewn all over the floor. {2} for money to be
dispersed without one realizing it. Mawatag lang ang átung kwarta ug
magbiyáhi ta, Your money goes like water when you travel.

watakwatak v [AB; c1] scatter s.t. or splatter so that large splotches
result, be scattered or splattered. Nagwatakwatak ang tái sa bátà, The
baby’s feces are splattered all over the place.

wataswatas v [AB12; a12] {1} tear s.t. to small pieces, usually cloth
or some fairly strong material; be, become torn to pieces. Ang mapintas
nga hángin miwataswatas sa atup, The violent wind tore the roofing to
pieces. {2} break a large bill. Dílì lang mahibaw-ang mahurut ang ímung
bayintihun kun mawataswatas na ni, Once you break your twenty-peso
bill, it will just disappear without your even noticing how it goes.

wati_1 n earthworm. v [a4] be infested with earthworms.

wati_2 = ulat_1 (slang).

wating v [b8] hit s.o. behind one’s back by accident in lifting a
machete or axe preparatory to striking. Paháwà dihà. Tingálig
hiwatingan ka, Get out of there. I might hit you with my machete.

*wátir — kan n rectangular gasoline container with a handle, holding
five gallons. — kúlur = wutir kúlur. — mílun n watermelon. — pam
n water pump. v [A1] install a water pump. — puls n waterfall. — sil
n water-seal toilet, made of cement. v [A; c1] use water-seal toilets.

watsamára what’s the matter? (humorous). Watsamára? Ngánung mihukyab
mug pangatáwa? What’s the matter? Why did you burst into laughter?

watsinanggu = gwatsinanggu. see gwatsi.

watsir n {1} one who proctors an exam. {2} poll watchers. v [B156;
b(1)] be a proctor.

watsumára = watsamára.

watsung a {1} homely looking. {2} of inferior quality or workmanship.
Watsung ning pagkagamáa kay wà maáyung pagkasipilya, This was poorly
done because it was not well-planned. {3} not very bright, easily
fooled. Ayaw pangumprag ikaw rang usa, kay watsung kaáyu ka, Don’t go
shopping without bringing s.o. along because you are not bright enough.
v {1} [B1256; b6] become homely. {2} [B; a2] come out inferior in
quality or workmanship. {3} [B12; a2] turn out to be simple, not very
bright.

watúsi n {1} watusi dance. {2} k.o. small firecracker that crackles and
sparkles when stepped upon. v [A] do the watusi. — bam = watúsi, n2.

watwat v [A; c1] {1} open up s.t. that opens into a slit. Akuy muwatwat
sa ímung mata arun makúhà ang puling, I’ll open up your eyes to remove
the speck. Nawatwat ang gamayng lungag sa bungbung kay anhà man sila
magsígi ug lìlì, The slit in the wall got quite wide because they keep
peeping through it. {2} open up s.o.’s secrets for the whole world to
know. Giwatwat ang íyang makauúlawng kagahápun, They opened up her
shameful past to public knowledge. {3} recount s.t. in detail. Giwatwat
níya ang pagtákas sa Hapun, He described the landing of the Japanese.

waw wow! an exclamation of great delight, admiration. Waw, ligs! Wow,
legs! — sabaw see sabaw.

wáwa n in combos, an electrical device in an amplifier which produces
the sound wáwa when the guitar is strummed.

wàwà v [AB26; c1] make a wide opening pushing s.t. aside. Wàwáa ang
pultahan kay isulud ang aparadur, Open the door wide because we are
going to get the dresser inside. n {1} wide opening between two things.
{2} straits between two bodies of land.

wawug a {1} bent, curved, warped. Wawug ang linya, The line is crooked.
Ang wawug nga tabla dì maáyung himúung hagdan, A twisted board does not
make a good stair. {2} wobbly, unsteady in walk. Wawug ang linaktan sa
hubug, A drunk walks unsteadily. n bend, curve. Tuluy wawug sa káhuy.
Dì magsilbi pára halígi, The tree has three bends. It won’t do for a
post. Ang wawug sa búla, The curve of a ball. v [B; a2] be, become
bent, curved, warped. n bow. wawugwáwug v [A] moving in a zigzagging
fashion. Nagwawugwáwug ug dágan kay gisunud sa bála, Running in a
zigzagging fashion because he was being chased by gunfire.

wayà = walà (dialectal).

wayawaya n mosquito wrigglers. v [a4b4] have mosquito wrigglers in it.

way gid = waray gid. see waray_2.

wáyir n electrical wire. — gíds n wire gauge. v [A] measure with a wire
gauge.

wayis a {1} sly, crafty. Wayis si Baúhay kay nagpahilakhílak dihang
lumsan untà, How sly the turtle was when he pretended to cry when he
was threatened with drowning. {2} sly, cheating. Wayis kaáyu ang mga
tindíra sa Karbun. Kusug manayúpì, The vendors in the market are quite
sly. They love to cheat. {3} wise, in the know. Wayis kaáyu siya. Dílì
patuntu, He’s very clever. You can’t put one over on him. — gay a =
wayis, 3.

wayit drágun = ispíhu, n3.

wayit guld n {1} white gold. {2} latex.

wayit sayidwul n {1} white sidewall tires. {2} white sidewall haircut,
hair cut white on the sides. v [A; c] wear such a haircut.

waypir n windshield wiper.

wayring n electrical wiring. v [A; b] install electrical :wiring.

wayway v [B6; c1] :dangle loosely. Miwayway ang buktun nga natikbasan,
The arm that was hacked dangled loosely. Ayaw iwayway ang panaptun sa
bintánà, Do not hang the cloth over the window.

wíb_1 v [A; c] {1} in boxing, wave the body to evade a blow. {2} in
basketball, zigzag dribbling the ball. -ing n waving to avoid blows or
zigzagging in dribbling.

wíb_2 n waves in the hair. a wavy hair. v [B; b6] for hair to become
wavy. pinggir — n finger waving. v [c1] do finger waving. -ing lusyun
n cold-wave lotion.

wíb_3 n a pattern of weaving, a weaving design.

*wíding — anibirsari, dris, kík, ring n wedding anniversary, dress,
cake, ring.

wídir byúru n Weather Bureau.

wídu = uwídu.

wig n wig. v [A; b6] wear a wig.

wígik = uwígik.

wígun n station wagon. v [A; a] ride a station wagon. istisyun — =
wígun.

wik-ind n week-end. v [B1256] do s.t. on week-ends.

wiktan see witik.

wilding v {1} [A; a] weld. {2} [A; a12] set a dislocated bone in place
(humorous). -in-an(→) n welded joint.

wilga n strike. v [A; ab(1)] go on strike. Giwilgáhan níla ang
kumpaníya, They went on strike against the company. wilgista n striker.
v [B1256] be a striker. Dì na makabalik sa trabáhu ang nawilgista,
Those who had been on strike cannot return to their jobs.

wíli v [B1256; b3(1)c5] feel sad at leaving s.t. or for the loss of
s.t. gone. Nawíli siya nga mibíyà sa íyang hinigugma, He felt sad upon
leaving his beloved. Wà kuy kawid-an (kawilíhan) ning kalibútan, I
won’t miss anything in this world (when I die). — sa tuguntúgun
v [B1256] take a long time to leave a place for an errand or to get
s.t. accomplished. Kadúgay nímung nakalakaw! Nawíli ka sa tuguntúgun?
Why can’t you leave right away? What’s holding you? paN-(→), panga-(→)
v [A13] having a feeling of sadness because of a loss or s.t. left
behind. Nagpangwili (nagpangawili) siya nga mugíkan, He is leaving, but
not without a feeling of sadness. ka- n sad nostalgia, sense of loss.
mawilíhun a sad and reluctant to leave. Mawilíhun siya nga nananghid sa
pagpaúlì, He said good-night with reluctance. maka-r- a engendering a
feeling of irreparable loss.†

wilik v [AN; b6(1)] remove s.t. from oneself with a motion of rapid
shaking. Nangwilik (miwilik) siya humag hunaw, He shook the water off
his hands after washing. n action of flicking s.t. off of oneself.
Giwilik níya ang íyang itsay nga mikulabyun níya, He shook off his girl
as she was clinging to his shoulders.

*wilkam — adris n welcome address. — parti n welcome party.

wiltsir n wheelchair. v [A1; a12] ride or convey s.o. in a wheelchair.

wilwig_1 v [A; c] {1} sprinkle s.t. on s.t. Walà ku makawilwig sa
tanum, I haven’t gotten around to sprinkling the plants yet. Wilwígi
(wilwigi) únà ug diyútayng klinsir únà kuskúsa, Sprinkle a little bit
of cleansing powder over it before you scrub it. {1a} hand around money
for bribes. Kun walà pa muwilwig ug kwarta dílì untà makadaug sa
iliksiyun, If he had not tossed money around, he would not have won the
election.

wilwig_2 v [A; a1] smash s.o. in the face hard enough to distort it.
Ayaw na lag supaksupak dihà kay wilwígun ku run nang nawung mu, You’d
better stop talking back like that or I’ll smash your face so no one
can recognize it.

winblun n windblown hairstyle, cut and curled so that the ends turn
outward and to the front. v {1} [A13; c16] wear the hair or fix it in
the windblown style.

wind = bintus.

windusyáping v [A; b(1)] go window-shopping.

wíngig a deflected, crooked line or row. v {1} [B; c1] for a line to be
deflected. Muwíngig (mawíngig) ang linya kun tandugun ang rúlir, The
line will be deflected if the ruler is nudged. {2} [B26; c1] knock the
face with a force hard enough to turn it to one side, be knocked.
Muwíngig (mawíngig) giyud nang ímung nawung ug ákung hisagpaan, Your
head will spin if I slap your face.

wings n well-developed muscles in the region around the scapula, toward
the sides under the arm. Dagkug wings si Mistir Amirika, Mr. America
has well-developed muscles on his back under his arms. v [A12] get
good-sized muscles in this region.

wingwing v [A; c1] push the sides of s.t. apart forcefully with both
hands to make an opening. Átung wingwíngun (iwingwing) ang bàbà sa bátà
ug dì muinum sa tambal, Let’s force the child’s mouth open if he
refuses to take the medicine.

winirwínir_1 n k.o. dodge ball game with two teams. v [AC; b] play
dodge ball.

winirwínir_2 v [A; a12] mistreat, step all over (humorous for
daugdáug—see daug). Ábi pubri man ku, ímu lang kung winirwinírun, Just
because I’m poor, you step all over me.

winsild n windshield.

wintirgrin n oil of wintergreen. paN- v [A2] apply oil of wintergreen
on oneself.

wir-anwír a garment that has been worn for some time without being
washed (humorous—play on was-anwír).

wíraw, wirawwiraw = líraw, lirawliraw. see líraw.

wiris v [A; c] hit the volleyball with a spin. Walúpa ang búla, ayawg
iwiris, Hit the ball squarely. Don’t put a spin on it. n hit the
volleyball with a spin. wiriswiris v [A1; c1] scribble, write or draw
squiggly lines. Adris nga giwiriswiris sa papil, An address scribbled
on a piece of paper. Giwiriswirisan ku ang íyang ritrátu sa kalágut, In
my anger I scribbled all over his picture.

wiriwiri v {1} [B; b6] for a light to flicker or for the vision to be
blurred, as when one is dizzy. Nagwiriwiri ang ákung panan-aw sa
pagtindug nákù, I kept seeing stars when I stood up. Hángin ang
nakawiriwiri (nakapawiriwiri) sa sígas sugà, The gust of wind caused
the light to flicker. {2} [A1] twisting and wriggling like worms,
wrigglers. Ug ayúhun pagtan-aw daghang nagwiriwiri sa súkà, If you look
at the vinegar closely you’ll see lots of wriggling things in it.
a wavering, flickering vision or light. n wriggling things, e.g.
mosquito wrigglers. (←) v [A2S; c1] move s.t. to and fro with a quick,
jerky or shaking motion. Ig-abut nákù muwiriwíri dáyun ang íkug sa
ákung irù, As soon as my dog sees me it wags its tail immediately.

wis baskit = wist baskit.

wisdam v [b(1)] have wisdom teeth. Pagkabátà pa nímu giwisdáman ka na?
You have a wisdom tooth at your age? — tut n wisdom tooth.

wisik v [AN; c] make s.t. fly off in all directions. Nawiskan kug lápuk
pag-ági sa trák, I got mud splattered all over me when the truck sped
by.

wisiwísi v [A; a] {1} shake s.t. violently in all directions to get it
loose. Manuk nga nagwisiwísi sa úlud, A chicken pulling and shaking at
a worm. Nakawisiwísi ang irù sa íyang láwas gíkan kining nagkahúmud sa
kanal, The dog shook its body after it got all wet in the canal. {2} be
violently mauled, bested as if shaken violently. Platun sa kaáway nga
giwisiwísi sa átung sundáwu, An enemy platoon that was mauled by our
soldiers.

wiski n whisky. v [A13; a12] have whisky.

wislayin n waistline. v [A1] have a waistline of a certain dimension.

wislik v [AN; b2c] flick s.t. away with the hands, esp. to the sides.
Ayaw iwislik ngari ang ímung singut, Don’t flick your sweat on me.

wispúwin n k.o. khaki fabric used for uniforms (from the brand name
West Point).

wist_1 n {1} west piece, the name of one of the winds (bintus). {2} the
third player opposite the dealer. {3} third round in a game (see
ráwun).

*wist_2 — baskit, kan n wastebasket. v {1} [A12; c1] make, use a
wastebasket. {2} [A; a] throw into the wastebasket. Mawist baskit nang
ímung aplikasiyun ug wà kay bákir, They’ll throw your application in
the wastebasket if you don’t have s.o. backing you.

wisti = wist_1.

wistirn n western movie.

wist layin = wislayin.

wist púwin = wispúwin.

witik v [A; b] {1} strike s.t. with a flick. Wikti sa latigu ang lángaw
nga náa sa bukubuku sa kabáyù, Take your whip and flick away the flies
that are on the horse’s back. Wiktan ku nang dunggan mu, I’ll flick you
one on the ears. {1a} sprinkle with a flicking motion. Wiktig túbig úsà
utawa, Sprinkle water on it before you iron it. {1b} [A; c] throw a
basketball by flicking it (putting a spin to it). {2} [A2; bc] give a
hint. Ákung wiktan ang íyang dáang pawuntin pin inigpalit níyag bag-u,
I’ll drop some hints for him to give me his old fountain pen when he
buys a new one. {2a} make indirect, insulting remarks. Abusádu siya.
Maáyung wiktan panagsa, He thinks he’s so important. He needs a few
digs every so often to keep him in line. {3} [AN2; c] give s.t. away of
little value to oneself. Nakadaug ka man sa madyung. Wikti sab mi dihà
bi, How about tossing some of your extra mahjong winnings our way?
{3a} [AN; c] bribe. Mihílum na lang ang pulis kay giwiktan (giwitikan)
man ug singku, The policeman kept quiet because he was given a fiver.
n {1} blow with a flicking action. {1a} toss of a ball with a flicking
action. {2} a hint or biting allusion.

wíting_1 a {1} in cards or mahjong, be in a position where one needs
only one more piece or card to get mahjong or rummy. {2} one whose days
are numbered because of an incurable condition (humorous). Ubang
tigúlang nga wíting mupalit dáag lungun, Some old folks that are just
waiting to die buy themselves a coffin in advance. v {1} [B136] get to
be in the wíting situation. {2} [b5] be the card or piece one needs to
win. Wà mugawas ang kartang ákung giwíting (giwitíngan), The card I was
waiting for simply refused to turn up. n = -an(→). -an(→) n card or
piece one is waiting for.

wíting_2 n k.o. gambling games with a roulette having 37 numbers, where
the wheel is rolled twice and the gamblers bet on the winning
combination (either istrít in the first and second or istrít íkis on
the first and second in either order).

wíting lis n waiting list. v [c6] be put on the waiting list. Wà pay
bakanti. Iwíting lis ta lang ka, There are no vacancies. I’ll just put
you on the waiting list.

wíting syid n waiting shed, place where passengers take shelter while
waiting for a vehicle.

wítir n waiter. v [B156; a2] be, become a waiter.

witkan see witik.

witris n waitress. Ngánung nangasáwa siya niánang witris? Why did he
marry nothing but a waitress? v [B16; b(1)] be, become a waitress.

witwit a drooping of lips, with the lower lip hanging down. v {1} [B6;
b6] get droopy lips. {2} [A; c6] chirp. Langgam nga nagwitwit sa mga
kakahúyan, Birds chirping in the trees. {3} [A1; c2] complain about
s.t., criticizing. Wà kuy kawitwítan (ikawitwit) sa ímung ági, I can
find nothing to complain about in your work. {4} [A1; c] spread bad
things about others. Ang giwitwítan, miwitwit pud. Dì nahibáwu ang
tanan, Whoever received the gossip passed it on, so eventually
everybody learned of it. n {1} chirping of the birds. {2} senseless
talk. Ang íyang isturya pulus witwit, Her story is all so much idle
chatter. -an(→) a {1} given to complaining and criticizing. {2} given
to passing on gossip.

wìwì v [A; a1] push the sides apart to create an opening or to widen an
opening. Wìwía ang bugang arun makaági ta, Push the grass aside so we
can go through.

wudrus n a vine that grows in thickets or cultivated to grow on fences:
Merremia tuberosa.

wukatun n walking contest.

wuk-áwut v [A2; b6(1)] stage a walkout. Muwuk-áwut ang mga maistra ug
dílì usbáwan ug swildu, The teachers will stage a walkout if they don’t
receive their salary increase.

wúking n walking, a violation in basketball where a player takes more
than two steps while holding a ball. v [B1256] be guilty of committing
this violation.

wúkir n men’s briefs (from the brand name, Walker). v [A13] wear
briefs.

wukitúki n walkie-talkie. v [A; c1] communicate with a walkie-talkie.

wúl_1 n woolen cloth. v [A13] wear s.t. made of wool.

wul_2 n {1} one’s hand in mahjong. {2} = payil_1.

wulpláwir n wallflower at a dance. v [b16] wind up being a wallflower
and not asked to dance.

wungwung = yungyung.

wurding n lyrics to a song. v [A1; c] write the lyrics to a song.

wurking n student who works his way through school. v [B16] be, become
a working student. Dúgay kang mahuman basta magwurking ka, It will take
you a long time to finish if you are a working student. — istyúdint =
wurking.

wuswús v [A; c] dance with s.o. in a wild swaying manner. Nalípung ku
kay giwuswús ku níyag sáyaw, I got dizzy because he danced wildly with
me.

*wútir — kúlur n water color. v [A; b6] color with water colors. — prup
n waterproof fabric. — ripílint n water repellent fabrics. — sarásay
n coconut palm toddy (slang).

wuyuwuyu = wayawaya.
