


=== Y ===


y particle showing grammatical relations. {1} subject marker in
sentences with nominal, pronomial, numerical, or interrogative
predicates. Kinsay muuban nákù? Who will go with me? Siyay muadtu, He
is the one who will go. Si Huway ákung paadtúun, I’ll send John. Duhay
ákung balay, I have two houses. {1a} in sentences with adjective
predicates where the adjective means ‘one which is [adj.]’. Pulay íyang
gipílì, He picked a red one. Dagkù lay patan-áwun ánang salidáha, They
only allow grown-ups to watch that picture. {2} as a subject marker for
subjects which express a future condition. {2a} in sentences with
comparative adjective predicate where the subject means ‘if it is
[subject] which is the case’. Tambuk pay dyís nímu, You’re thinner than
a dime (if it is a dime, it is fatter than you). Maáyu pay mulakaw ka
run, It would be better if you were to leave now. Dúgay pay mamiluk, It
would take longer to blink the eyes. {2b} after predicates meaning
‘just imagine’. Tíaw mu bay mubáyad ug kás, Just imagine! He paid cash.
{3} after deictics, dúna, walà: there is (was, isn’t, etc.) any ...
Walay táwu, There wasn’t anyone. Dinhi ra bay nangítà nímu, S.o. was
here looking for you. Dúna siyay ipamaráyig nímu, He has s.t. he would
like to ask you for.

yáak v [A; b6] step on s.t. with the feet treading around on it to
squash or knead it. Ákung giyaákan ang bulingun didtus sapà arun
pagkúhà sa primírung buling, I stomped on the soiled clothes in the
river to get the dirt on the outside off. yaakyaak v [A; ac] roam
around s.w. to look for s.t. Dakung búkid ang ámung giyaakyaakan sa
ámung pagpamusil, We roamed around over a huge mountain hunting for
wild animals.

yaangyaang v [A; b5] walk through the mud. Lápuk nga kinahanglan
yaangyaángan iniglabang sa basakan, Mud we have to wade through every
time we cross the rice paddy.

yabag a deviating from normal or proper actions. {1} off key, out of
tune. Dì ku makigdyúwit nímu kay yabag ka, I won’t sing a duet with you
because you’re off key. Yabag nga pyánu, A piano that is out of tune.
{2} behaving in an improper, strange way. Táwung yabag nga magkamisins
simbahan, An eccentric person that attends church in his undershirt.
{3} s.t. that is senseless. Yabag nga panagsulti nga wà kuy nasabtan,
Conversation that was gibberish and made absolutely no sense. Yabag
kaáyu nang paagíha, That method is completely crazy. {4} given to
roaming or wandering. Yabag kaáyu nga amahan ug talagsa ras íla, A
father given to roaming about and rarely home. v [B2; b6] deviate from
normal or proper action: become out of key, improper in behavior,
senseless, a wanderer. Muyabag ang íyang sinultihan (kinantahan) ug
makainum-inum, He talks nonsense (sings off key) after he has had a
little to drink. (←) v {1} [B156; a] deviate severely from what is
proper or normal: be severely out of tune, be hopelessly senseless,
completely eccentric or improper, wandering. Nayábag ang inahan
pagkasúnug sa ílang balay, The mother went completely crazy when their
house burnt down. {2} [A13; a2] play a joke on s.o. Ayawg tuhúi ang
íyang gisulti kay nagyábag lang nà siya nímu, Don’t take him seriously.
He’s just playing a joke on you. {3} [C3] having a great difference of
age. Nagkayábag kaáyu ang ílang panuígun, They were very far apart in
age. yabagyabag n actions which deviate from normal or proper conduct.
v [A] engage in this sort of action. Magyabagyabag ka gánì sa ímung
pag-iskuyla, dì ka makagraduwar, If you just fool around in your
studies, you’ll never graduate. ka-(←) v [A13] = yábag. -un a of a
deviating, abnormal sort.

yabana = gwayabanu.

yábi n {1} key for a lock or for a winding mechanism. {2} term for any
wrench but a monkey wrench. -ng balikù box wrench. — túbu, — ditúbu
n pipe wrench. v {1} [A; b5] open or lock with a key. Yabíhi ang
kandádu, Open (close) the lock. {2} [b6] goad s.o. to anger with words.
Wà tà tu siya mangísug apan giyabíhan pung Putin, He wasn’t angry then
but Poten said s.t. to goad him. {2a} [A; b(1)] wind an operating
mechanism. Yabíhi ang duláan, Wind up the toy. yabihánan n {1} keyhole.
{2} winding stud. yabíra, yabíru n key holder.

yabu v {1} [A; b7c] pour liquids or grains off, spill them over from a
receptacle. Yab-ig diyútayng túbig ang baldi kay punù ra kaáyu, Pour a
little water out of the pail because it is too full. Nayab-an ug kapi
ang ákung libru, Coffee spilled onto my book. {1a} [A; c] take out the
garbage. Nakayabu ka na bas basúra? Have you taken out the garbage?
{1b} [c6] for vehicles to capsize or turn turtle. Gamayng sakayan nga
sayung iyabu sa balud, A small boat that easily capsizes in the waves.
{2} [A123P; a3] flop, result in resounding failure. Súgal ang nakayabu
(nakapayabu) sa ílang nigusyu, Gambling caused his business to flop.
Nayabu kus iksámin, I flopped badly in the test. {2a} [A; c6] ditch
one’s sweetheart. Giyabu siyas íyang trátu, Her boy friend ditched her.
{2b} [A; c1] throw a game. Kinsa tung muyabu sa dúlà suspindihun,
Whoever throws the game will be suspended.

yab-u = uyab (slang).

yabun, yabunyabun n k.o. itchy eczema, similar to ringworm, which
exudes a whitish serum when scratched. v [A123P; b4] get yabun.

yabyab_1 v {1} [A; c] shake s.t. to remove foreign matter clinging to
it. Iyabyab ang abug sa ímung karsúnis, Shake your pants to get the
dust off. {1a} send off a breeze (literary). Huyúhuy nga giyabyab sa
kinaiyáhan, Breeze sent forth by Nature. {2} [AN; b6(1)] rinse
laundered clothing in clean water. {3} [A; c] make public s.t. secret
and unsavory. Mga ginamus nga iyabyab sa publiku, Dirty linen to be
washed in public. {3a} [A1; a1] chatter, indulge in idle talk.
Nagyabyab lang ang bàbà ning bayhána. Dì ka kapúyan? You are always
shooting off your mouth. Don’t you ever get tired?

yabyab_2 v [A; c] cause solids in a container to spill out and be
strewn all over. Nayabyab ang bugas nga ákung gidala kay wà ayúhag
putus, The rice I brought spilled because it wasn’t wrapped well. Ákung
giyabyab ang usa ka sákung santul sa salug, I emptied a sackful of
santol fruit on the floor.

yad-ak v [B16] become sluggish or slow-moving due to excessive obesity.
Ása makahuman ug dalì sa íyang búhat nga nagyad-ak man ang líhuk? How
could she ever finish anything fast when she is so fat she moves
slowly? a {1} moving slowly because of obesity. {2} dull,
uninteresting. Yad-ak kaáyung pakigpúlung, A very uninteresting speech.

yadakadtu short for íya ra kadtu it was his (her) own (fault).
Yadakadtu nga salà nga gilatigu siya, It was his own fault that he got
whipped.

yadba = báyad, n, v1 (slang).

yadbut = báyad, n, v1 (slang—word play on yadba).

yadtu = kadtu (dialectal).

yad-uk v [A; c1] swallow down a liquid. Yad-úkun (iyad-uk) ra níyag
kaduha ang usa ka básung bínu, He will swallow the glass of wine in two
gulps.

yagabyab = lagablab.

yagatyat a fruit that is soft, lacking in firmness of flesh. Kinsa guy
mukáun ánang yagatyat nga ságing? Who feels like eating that soft
banana? v [B; b6] come out soft, lacking in firmness. -un(→) n soft,
not firm-fleshed fruit.

yágaw v [AB46] be in noisy commotion, confusion, bring s.t. into
confusion. Nagkadaíyang pangutána ang miyágaw sa iyang pangísip, All
those different questions confused his mind. Nagyágaw ang mga táwus
sinihan pagsiyáuks bumbíru, The people in the movie house were in a
tumult when the fire truck shrieked. ka- n confusion, din. Lúpig pay
tyanggis kayágaw, Worse than the market in noise and confusion. v [A13]
be in great confusion.

yag-aw = dyag-aw.

yagawyaw n general din, noise. Hásul kaáyung pamatíun ang yagawyaw sa
syudad, The steady noise of the city is annoying. v = yawyaw, v. -an(→)
a given to ranting.

yagàyagà v {1} [A; b6(1)] ridicule, make fun of s.o. Isumbung sa
maistra ang muyagàyagà sa bakul ninyung klasmit, If anybody makes fun
of your lame classmate, report him to the teacher. {2} [A; b5] bother,
disturb. Ayaw kug yagàyagai (yagàyagaa) niánang ímung prublíma, Do not
bother me with your problems. {3} [A; bc1] do one’s work carelessly or
shoddily. Kun magyagàyagà ka sa ímung búhat dúgay nga mahuman, If you
are careless with your work, it will take a long time to finish it.
Giyagàyagaan lang nímu pagbúhat ang lamísa, You did make the table
carelessly. Yagàyagaa (iyagàyagà) paghíwà arun masámad ka, Keep slicing
carelessly like that so you can hurt yourself. n ridicule, teasing. -un
a given to making fun of s.o.

yagbun v [AB3(1); c1] heap, pile s.t up; be heaped up. Nakayagbun na
sila sa mga dalag, They have gathered the dry leaves in a heap.
Nagyagbun ang sagbut sa ílang sílung, Garbage is piling up beneath
their house.

yagbut v [A; c1] spill out through the bottom of a container. Nagyagbut
ang bugas kay nabutbut ang sáku, The rice spilled out of the bottom of
the container because the sack got a hole in the bottom.

yagkaw a lanky.

yagpis a thin or slender of build, or by extension, thin from having
lost weight. v {1} [B; a] become thin or slim. Ug muliwat nímu,
mayagpis ang ímung anak, If your son turns out to be like you, he’ll be
thin, too. {2} [B6; c1] slice or cut s.t. thinly. Yagpísa (iyagpis)
paghíwà ang kasahusun, Slice the meat thinly for jerked meat. -un(→)
a of a slim, thin sort.

yagubhub a {1} loud put-put sound, as that produced by the engine of a
motorboat close by one. {2} muttering, murmuring in a low, inaudible
voice. v [A3; c] mumble, mutter. Miyagubhub siyag pangadyiun, He
murmured a prayer. Nagyagubhub siya pagkasábà nákù, He muttered s.t.
when I scolded him.

yagubyub n {1} muttering, mumbling. {2} dull, thudding noises made by
wind, water, machinery. v {1} [A; ac1] make muttering noises in angry
protest or displeasure. Giyagubyúban sa mga táwu ang mamumulung, The
people muttered angrily as he gave his speech. {2} [AP; ac1] make dull,
continuous thudding noises. Nagyagubyub ang tíngug sa trák sa layù, The
truck made thudding noises from afar.

yagungyung n continuous humming or droning sound, as of an airplane,
engines. Mabátì sa layù ang yagungyung sa ayruplánu, You could hear the
droning of the airplane from afar. v [A] make a continuous droning
sound.

yaguyágu v [A; b6] move busily about. Dì lang makayaguyágu si Nánay ug
magláin ang láwas, Mother always moves busily about except when she is
not feeling well.

yagùyù v [A; c] pester s.o., asking for s.t., but in an endearing way.
Ganíha pang buntag siyang nagyagùyù ug kwarta sa íyang amahan, She has
been playing up to her father for money since this morning.

yagyag v [AB12; ac] {1} scatter small things around by spilling them
from their container; for s.t. in a container to spill out and get
scattered. Pagkagísì sa bulsíta, nayagyag ang harína, When the paper
bag tore, the flour spilled all over. Yagyágun ku nang tinái mu, I’ll
stab you so your intestines hang out all over. {2} divulge secrets.
Iyagyag ku ang ímung ginamus, I’ll let all the world know the dirty
truth about you. {3} distribute s.t. in quantity with an ulterior
motive. Kandidátu nga miyagyag ug linibu sa ílang distrítu, Candidates
who poured thousands into their districts.

yahat v {1} [A; a1c] look up, raise one’s eyes up, usually without
moving the head. Miyahat siya sa nagtawag níya, She looked up to the
man who addressed her. {2} [A2; c] open one’s eyes. Dì na muyahat ang
íyang mga mata, His eyes will no longer open.

yahigyahig v [AB; c1] scatter s.t. all over a place, be scattered all
over. Kinsay miyahigyahig sa mga piryudiku? Who scattered the
newspapers all over the place?

yahung n soup bowl or small bowl.

yakà v [A; b6(1)] {1} sit with the buttocks and legs flat on a surface.
Nagyakà ang Búda, The Buddha is sitting flat on the ground. {2} do s.t.
to the finish. Giyak-an níya ang íyang trabáhu hangtud nahuman, He
spent all of his time on his work until it was finished. Giyak-an níya
ang kinílaw, dà hurut lagi, He sat down to a plate of raw fish and
finished it off. {3} [B1456] for the nose to be flat (lit. squat). Ása
kuháa ang kagwápa niánà nga nagyakà nang ílung? How can you think that
she is beautiful when she has such a flat nose? a having a flat nose.
pa- v [B1256] fall into a sitting position.

yakal n k.o. hardwood tree, producing extremely hard, first-class wood.

yakbut a for a mouth to be sunken. Yakbut kaáyu nà siyag bàbà ug way
pustísu, His mouth is sunken without his false teeth. v [B; c1] for the
mouth to be sunken.

yakmù a {1} having a protruding pointed chin. {2} having a sunken
mouth. v [B; b6] get to have a protruding chin or sunken mouth. Nayakmù
ka kay dílì ka mupustísu, You developed a pointed chin because you
would not wear your false teeth. -un(→) a being somewhat protruding,
sunken.

yakub a for the cheeks and the area around the mouth to be sunken. Ang
mga tigúlang yakub nag bàbà kay wà na may ngípun, Old people have
sunken cheeks and mouths because they are toothless. v [B; b6] for the
cheeks to become sunken. (←) = yakub, v. yakubyakub v [A; c1] for a
person without teeth to move his mouth up and down. Muyakubyakub na ang
mga tigúlang nga way ngípun, Old persons that have no teeth keep moving
their mouths.

yamáda see yamar.

yáman = mayáman.

yam-ang v {1} [B; ac1] do s.t. in a careless way, careless in one’s
behavior without regard to propriety. Siyay nagyam-ang niánang mga
plátu dihà sa lamísa, She just tossed the plates anywhere on the table.
Ayaw ug yam-ánga (iyam-ang) ang ímung sinultihan kay pikun ang mga táwu
dinhi, Be careful about the way you talk because the people here are
quick to take offense. {2} [AN; b(1)] destroy, besmirch. Siya ang
miyam-ang (nangyam-ang) niánang istatúwa, He was the one who marred
that statue. Makayam-ang (makapangyam-ang) ka pagsulti kuntra kaníya
kay náa may ímung gisalígan, You can say bad things against her because
you have s.o. behind you. -an(→) a {1} careless and not paying enough
attention. Yam-angan kaáyu nang bayhána maglingkud. Makítà ang panti,
That woman is careless about the way she sits. You can see her panties.
{2} careless, not giving a hoot.

yamar v 1–5 = lyamar. {6} [A] call out in response. Muyamar ug ‘nía’
kadtung tawgun ang ngálan, If your name is called, answer ‘here’.
{6a} [A23] respond, react to stimuli. Patay na tingáli kay dì na
muyamar ang íyang kamut bisan dut-úyan ug kaláyu, He must be dead
because his hand does not react even if you put fire to it. {7} [A;
a12] attract, elicit attention or interest. Wà muyamar sa katilingban
ang íyang pakigpúlung, His speech did not attract the attention of the
public. yamáda v {1} [A; a] call out to announce s.t. Niyamáda siyag
usa ka líbu álang sa pula, He called out a thousand-peso bet on the red
cock. Ngánung wà man ka magyamáda nga gibug-atan ka na? Why did you not
call out to let us know that it was too heavy for you? {2} [A23]
demand, ask for s.t. in a bossy manner. Magdagandagan intáwun ang
inahan kun muyámada na ang anak ug kwarta, The poor mother runs about
everywhere whenever her son demands money. n {1} a call, loud-voiced
demand. {2} the favored contestant in contests with betting.

yámas = yámat, as exclamation.

yámat {1} exclamation of pleasant surprise. Yámat, aháan! My! It’s a
giant snapper. {2} exclamation of extreme annoyance at s.t. not being
in order, working out, or being done as expected. Yámat ning
makinilyáha. Makalangan! Damn this typewriter. It sure holds you back!
yamatyamat v [B1] for s.t. that one accomplishes or a situation to be
in chaos. Nagyamatyamat ning ákung trabáhu kay wà sa ákung hunàhúnà ang
ákung búhat, My work was all chaotic because my mind was not on it.
ka-, kayamatyamat v [A13] = yamatyamat.

yamàyamà v {1} [A; c] talk without sense or factual basis. Unsa na sad
tung íyang giyamàyamà? What k.o. nonsense was he telling this time?
{2} [A1; b1] do work carelessly. Íya lang giyamàyamaan ug tahì ang
ákung sinínà maung naghíbat, She sewed my dress carelessly and so it is
all crooked. -un n one who does his work carelessly.

yambà a for a mouth or mouth-like opening to be distorted, crooked and
misshapen. v [B; c1] become crooked or misshapen, cause s.t. to become
so. Muyambà ang bàbà sa básag ug lingkúran, The mouth of the clothes
basket will become crooked if you sit on it. Ayawg yambáa (iyambà) ang
ímung bàbà kay musamut kag kangil-ad, Don’t distort your mouth because
you will become more ugly.

yambì a {1} for two movable things which should be placed even,
directly on top of one another, not to be so, with one protruding.
Yambì ang takup sa malítang daut, The suitcase is broken and the top
hangs over the edge. {2} for the lower jaw or lip to protrude. v [B;
c1] get to be, be uneven, not closing tightly; pouting. Nagyambì ang
nawung sa bátang gisugsúg, The child they are teasing is sticking out
his lower lip about to cry. Ug mayambì ang gunting dì na mudulut, If
the blades of the scissors get apart, they won’t cut.

yamhang a carelessly inattentive or neglectful. Yamhang kaáyu nang
bayhána. Húgaw kaáyug hitsúra, That woman neglects her appearance, and
she looks very untidy. Yamhang siyang magtrabáhu. Daghang sayup, She is
careless in her work and makes lots of mistakes. v [B12; b6] be
carelessly inattentive or neglectful. -an(→) = yamhang.

yam-id v [AN; b6c1] sneer, twist the lips in contempt, disapproval.
Miyam-id (nangyam-id) ang bátà sa pagkáun, The child pouted at the
food. Babáying mubug lupad nga giyam-íran sa katilingban, A woman of
loose morals the whole society sneers at. paN- n sneer. yam-iran
a given to sneering or pouting one’s lips. mayam-írun a done in a
contemptuous, sneering way.

yamíhid = tamíhid.

yamíid = yam-id.

yámis n {1} foreskin. {2} other thin layers like the foreskin:
{2a} outer epidermis. Yámis ra sa íyang buktun ang nagarus, walà ang
unud, She only scraped the outer skin on her arm, and not her flesh.
{2b} thin transparent meat of a young coconut in the butung stage.
{2c} the soft, upper layer of the mature meat of a coconut.

yam-is a slightly sweet. Yam-is ang ubang imbaw, Some clams taste
somewhat sweet. v [B; b6] taste sweetish. Nagyam-is ang ákung bàbà
human makainum sa sikwáti, I have a sweetish taste in my mouth after
drinking the chocolate. -un(→) n of a sweetish kind.

yamitak, yamítak v [B4; b6] {1} become muddy or messy. Basta mag-úwan,
muyamitak giyud ang ámung nataran, Whenever it rains, our yard becomes
muddy. Kanang inyung pagwasigwasig sa kan-un mauy nakayamítak sa
lamísa, The way you strewed the food around, the table has gotten to be
a mess. {2} talk off the topic or nonsense. Sábà dihà. Nagyamitak ka
lang. Wà man gánì ka didtu, Be quiet. You don’t know what you’re
talking about. You weren’t even there. {2a} sit around doing nothing.

yampungad v [A; b36] hang around a place idly, esp. where one shouldn’t
be. Nagyampungad sa tubaan, Hanging around the toddy stand. Irù nga
nagyampungad sa ámù, A dog hanging around our house.

yamtak a slow and sluggish in movement. Kayamtak gud nímung naurásan ka
ánà, How slow you are. It took you an hour to do that. v {1} [B; c1]
get to be slow and sluggish in motion. {2} [A; b(1)] mope, hang or loaf
around. Labihan mung nakayamtak! Buntag, hápun wà giyud kay nabúhat,
You sure do loaf. The whole day long you have not done a darn thing.

yamu walà — there isn’t (wasn’t) any at all. ‘Naa pa bay ságing ánang
baskit?’—‘Walà yamu’, ‘Are there more bananas in that basket?’—‘There
isn’t a single one.’ Wà yamuy kwarta, Not a bit of money. n zero
(humorous). Ang numiru sa ákung tilipunu nuybi, tris, yamu, yamu,
kwatru, My phone number is 9–30–04.

yámug n {1} dew. {1a} water droplets on leaves after rain. Humans ulan,
nanidlaksidlak ang yámug sa kadahúnan, After the rain, droplets of
water sparkled on the leaves. {2} = dalínug. v [B236N; b(1)] be covered
with dew. Nangyámug (miyámug) sa sayu sa buntag, Dew which formed early
in the morning.

yámuk = lámuk. see lamuk.

*yamúkat ka- = kalamúkat. see lamúkat.

yamukmuk = mayukmuk.

yamùmù a for food to be dry and crumbly in texture, as fine-grained
corn meal, cooked hard or steamed. Yamùmù kaáyung kan-un ang binlud nga
sinákul, Fine-grained corn meal has a dry and crumbly texture when
steamed. v [B; b6] get a dry and crumbly texture.

yamutyamut n {1} fine, slippery sediments that develop inside water
containers. {2} fine membranes that surround meat.

yamyam v {1} [A; ac] utter, articulate words rapidly and not for the
purpose of communicating. Nagyamyam siya sa ímung ngálan samtang
natúlug, She was uttering your name while she was asleep. Nagyamyam ug
pangadyiun, Uttering a prayer. {1a} mumble, mutter. Muyamyam ka man
lang. Súkul! You just mutter to yourself. Fight back! Klarúha nang
ímung sinultihan, ayaw yamyáma (iyamyam), Say what you have to say
distinctly. Don’t mumble it. {2} [A; c] say s.t. Dì ka kaákug yamyam sa
ímung túyù, You can’t get nerve enough to say what you want. Unsay
giyamyam mu didtu sa átung agálun báhin kanákù? What did you tell our
employer regarding me? n s.t. uttered, esp. prayers and incantations.
a loudmouthed. -unun n s.t. usually uttered, esp. prayers.

yanà = kanà_1.

yanang a sloppy and wet. Yanang kaáyu ang agiánan kay gisigíhag uwan,
The path is very sloppy because of constant rain. n watery mud. v [B;
b6] be, become wet and sloppy. (←) v [B6; b6] {1} become badly wet and
sloppy. {2} be plentiful or abundant. Nagyánang ang babáyi ug álak sa
balay sa kahiláyan, There was no end to wine and women in the
bawdyhouse.

yandak = yanggak.

yangag = danghag.

yanggak v [B1256] fall on the ground landing on the buttocks. Nakuháan
ang burus kay nayanggak sa salug, The pregnant woman fell on the floor
on her buttocks and had a miscarriage.

yanghag_1 v [A; c1] raise the head to look up. Miyanghag siya sa
pisami, He looked up at the ceiling.

yanghag_2 = danghag.

yangkaw a tall and lanky or too thin for the height. Balay nga yangkaw
ug sílung, House that has a disproportionately tall ground floor. v [B;
b6] become tall and lanky. Nagyangkaw lang ang láwas ánà apan bátà pa
nà kaáyu, He has a lanky body but he is still a child.

yangù v [A2; c1] {1} move the head upwards as a sign of assent or, by
extension, as a sign of s.t. else. Miyangù siya sa pagtúgut, He nodded
(lifted his head upwards) in assent. {2} nod downwards, bow. Ang Hapun
muyangù ágig pagtáhud, A Japanese bows as a sign of greeting.
n movement of the head in assent or indication of s.t. else. Sa usa ka
yangù mudágan dáyun ang íyang mga sulugúun, With just one nod of the
head his servants run immediately. yangùyángù v [A; c1] {1} nod the
head several times. {2} = gangù, v1.

yángud v [A2S; a] look upward. Nagyangud ang bátà sa íyang tabánug, The
boy is looking at his kite. (→) v [A13] depend, rely upon s.o. for
support. Nagyangud ku sa ákung magúwang sa pagiskuyla, I rely on my
brother to support me in school. paN- v [A2] peep up through the cracks
in the floor. Kamaldítu. Gamay ka pa gánì mangyángud na, What a naughty
child. At your age you already peep at girls through the floor.

yangùngù v [A; c1] make insistent and repeated requests. Muyangùngù
siya hangtud hatágan, He keeps asking for some until he gets it.
n repeated and insistent requests.

yanta n rim of a wheel onto which the rubber or tire is mounted; or a
metal rim put around a wooden wheel.

yantak = yamtak.

yantas = yanta.

yánu a {1} simple, humble. Ang íyang amahan usa lámang ka yánung
iskribinti, His father is just an ordinary clerk. {2} simple, without
ornate design. Yánung tabas sa sinínà, Simple cut of dress. v [B; c1]
be, become simple, humble; do s.t. simply. Giyánu níya ang íyang
panlihuklíhuk, She acted in a simple, humble way without putting on.
Yanúha ang ímung panimuyù, Live in a simple way. yanuyánu v {1} [A13]
do things in a simple, ordinary manner. {2} [A; abc] do s.t. to s.t.
without proper consideration or deference. Giyanuyánu lang nímug gámit
ang ákung mga butang, You dare use my things without permission.
Iyanuyánu man lang nang mahalun nga sapátus ug támak sa lápuk, He wears
those expensive shoes anywhere, even in the mud.

yanyan a sagging, drooping. v [B] sag. Tútuy nga nagyanyan, Sagging
breasts. Nagyanyan na ang salug tungud sa kadaghan sa táwu, The floor
is sagging under the weight of the people. Nagyanyan ang sanga sa
daghang prútas, The branch is weighted down with all the fruits.

yapa v [A] lie flat, either on one’s stomach or back, with the arms and
feet spread out. Dílì ku makayapag katúlug kay may hubag ang ákung
likud, I can’t sleep lying flat on my back because I have a boil on my
back.

yapà = yapù, of females only.

yapak n {1} soil in small pieces. {2} mud or mud puddle. Milúnang sa
yapak ang bábuy, The pig wallowed in the mud puddle. v [B; a12] be,
become muddy. Giyapak sa mga bábuy ang ílang búngun, The pigs made the
space beneath their house muddy. ka- v [A13] {1} be full of small soil
particles. Nagkayápak ang harína, The flour has got lots of soil
particles in it. {2} be all covered with mud. -un a {1} having soil
particles mixed in. Bugas nga yapakun, Cereal with lots of particles of
dirt in it. {2} soiled, full or splotched with mud. Yapakun ang ímung
gisul-ub, You are wearing mud-splotched (soiled) clothes.

yápak v [A; b6(1)] step on, put one’s foot on. May nagyápak sa bag-ung
gitanum, S.o. stepped on the things I just planted. Giyapákan níla ang
laráwan sa Pangúlu, They trampled on the caricature of the President.

yapayapa v {1} [A; b36] wave both arms in the air, as in a fond
welcoming gesture. Nagyapayapa ang bátà sa kalípay, The child waved his
arms for joy. {2} [A; c1] flap the wings, for s.t. else to flap in an
analogous way. Inighurus sa hángin muyapayapa sad ang bandíra, When the
wind blows the flag flutters.

yapù a handsome, good-looking (slang). Kasagáran sa mga artista yapù,
Most actors are handsome. v [B2; b6] be, become handsome.

yapyap v [A] cheep, chirp. Miyapyap ang mga pisù nga nawad-an sa
inahan, The chicks who lost their mother are chirping. n cheeping,
chirping.

yarda_1 n yard. Tulu ka yardang panaptun, Three yards of cloth. v [A;
c1] measure in yards.

yarda_2 n lumber yard.

yárì v [A; a] {1} finish off, kill s.o. (slang). Wà sila makayárì sa
pangúlu sa tulisan, They didn’t manage to get the bandit leader.
{2} spoil a woman’s virtue, abuse sexually. Tulu ka táwu ang miyárì sa
dalága, Three persons raped the maiden. a {1} dead, finished. Yárì na
ang íyang agálun, His employer has kicked off. {2} having lost one’s
maidenly virtue.

yaruk v [A; c1] drink bottoms-up, without removing the container from
the lips. Giyaruk níya ang usa ka básung pipsi, He gulped down a whole
glass of pepsi. n action of drinking at a long stretch. Madá ang rám sa
usa ka yaruk, You can drink the rum in one gulp.

yása = iása. see ása.

yasmì v [B12] be destroyed, ruined, brought to a low condition
(colloquial). Nayasmì ang balay sa hángin, The wind destroyed the
house. Nayasmì siya sa súgal, Gambling ruined him. Nagkayasmì ang íyang
láwas sa nagkadaghan ang íyang anak, Her figure is going to pot as she
has more and more children. a broken down, ruined.

yasyas v {1} [A; b6(1)] slash wide open. Giyasyásan sa kawatan ang
ákung bág, The thief slashed my bag open. {2} [B4; c1] for clothing to
hang loosely. Nagyasyas ang ímung karsúnis kay way bakus, Your pants
are hanging loose on you because you don’t have a belt. {2a} hang
loosely in tatters. Adurnung patikan nga nagyasyas, Palm leaf
decorations that were hanging down. {2b} for the entrails to hang out.
a loose, hanging loosely. -in-an n place slashed open.

yátak v [A; b6(1)] {1} step on s.t. forcefully. Ang muyátak sa alambri
makuryintihan, Whoever steps on the wire will be electrocuted. Yatáki
ang gasulinadur, Step on the gas. {2} kick usually in a forward
direction. Yatáki ang takup sa pultahan, Kick in the door. {3} violate
an agreement, rule. Kapila ka makayátak sa súgù sa Diyus? How many
times have you violated God’s commandments? {3a} violate a woman’s
honor.

yáti n yacht. v {1} [A13; a1c] ride, bring s.t. in a yacht. {2} [a12]
make into a yacht. {3} [A12; b(1)] have, obtain a yacht. yatíhan
a having a yacht.

yátì_1 (euphemism for yáwà) {1} expression of disgust, annoyance. Yátì
ning bat-ána uy, Darn, this child is a nuisance. {2} as a pause word
when one cannot think of the right word. Kanang yáting, unsingálang ...
klats, The, um, what-do-you-call-it, the clutch. — ra {1} expression of
disbelief. Yátì ra, dì giyud nà musalir, Oh, yeah? That will never
work. Yátì ra! Íya tà kung gisultían, I don’t believe it. He would have
told me. {2} expression of great surprise at s.t. Yátì ra. Lima ka
líbu! No kidding! Five thousand!

yátì_2 n teak, a large tree of waste spaces, the value of which is
little recognized in Cebu: Tectona grandis.

yátis = yátì_1.

yatut n name given in Leyte to supernatural beings having nearly the
same characteristics as the ingkantu’s. However, they seem to be more
closely associated with illnesses than the ingkantu’s.

yatyat_1 a slow in action, lacking energy and thinking power. Walay
mubulan nímu kay yatyat kaáyu ka, Nobody will hire you because you are
unenergetic and unintelligent. Kayatyat nímu uy! Wà giyud ka
makahunàhunag pilù sa ngilit arun mulig-un? You sure cannot think. It
never occurred to you to turn the edge over to make it strong? Yatyat
nímu à! Tu, kuyúgi diays Iyay! Boy are you slow! Eyay is just there
waiting for you! v [B145; b6] be, become slow and unintelligent.

yatyat_2 a loose and sagging due to lack of fullness. Yatyat nga unlan,
A soft and sagging pillow. v {1} [B] get to be soft and sagging.
Miyatyat ang íyang tútuy human siya manganak, Her breasts started to
droop after she had her baby. {2} [B; c1] sag under a weight. Nagyatyat
ang atup sa tulda, The roof of the tent is sagging loosely. {2a} [a12]
pull s.t. down making it dangle loose. Ayaw yatyáta (iyatyat) ang sanga
sa mangga, Do not pull the branch of the mango tree down.

yaub v [AB6; c1] turn s.t. over on its belly, turn over on the belly.
Magyaub ang bátang matúlug, The baby sleeps on its stomach. Iyaub ang
basúra, Throw out the garbage (lit. turn the can over).

yaúsà (from ayaw úsà) = yúnà.

yáwà n {1} devil. {2} devilish person. Ag yáwà, mudáyig nímu sa
atubángan unyà manglibak sa luyu, The devil praises you to your face
but behind your back she stabs you. exclamation (somewhat coarse):
expression of anger, annoyance, frustration. Yáwà! Pukáwun ta áning
maáyung pagkahinánuk! Hell! I was just sleeping nicely, too! litsing —
expression of extreme irritation or frustration. Litsing yáwà. Ímu na
pud nang gibálì, God damn! You broke it again! — ra {1a} expression of
strong disbelief. Yáwà ra. Dì giyud nà musalir, Hell! That’s not going
to work. {1b} expression of surprise at s.t. found out. Yáwà ra! Tinúud
ba nga gitirúhan ang Prisidinti? Really! You mean they shot the
President? {2} in exclamations at s.t. surprising. Yáwang nindúta ning
ímung balay, Siyung! Jesus! What beautiful house you have, Siong!
{3} pause word used when one cannot find the right term. Kanang yáwang,
kuan, unsingálan ..., That damn, what do you call it? v [B1256] be in
or caught in a bad situation. Nayáwà na ta áni nga nahutdag gasulína
nga layù sa istasyunan, We are in for it running out of gas far from
the station. (→) v {1} [b5] castigate severely, get hell. Yawaun
(yawaan) ka run nákù ug dílì mu pasagdan nang makinilya, You will get
hell from me if you don’t let that typewriter alone. {2} [b4] be
inspired by the devil. Ayaw pagdúwà ug kutsilyu kay tingálig mayawaan
ka, Don’t play with the knife. The devil might inspire you (to harm
s.o. with it). {2a} [b4] be possessed of a blinding and uncontrollable
fury. Sa íyang kasukù giyawaan siya, He was possessed of a blinding,
uncontrollable anger. {3} [AB126] ruin, cause to flop; be ruined. Mga
dúlun nga muyawà sa tanum, Locusts that utterly destroy a crop.
yawàyawà v {1} [B1256] be, become a hell. Nayawàyawà ang ílang pagpuyù
tungud sa pagkabisyúsu sa íyang bána, Their home life has become
miserable because of the husband’s excessive indulgence in vice.
{2} [b4] be made devilish. Párì ang maghingílin sa panúway sa táwu nga
yawàyawaan, A priest exorcises evil spirits from a person’s body.
kayawàyawà v [A13] be somewhat spoiled. Nagkayawàyawà ang átung
pangalígù kay nakalimtan ang sud-an, Our picnic was kind of spoiled
because we forgot the food. yawan-un a devilishly evil, diabolical.
Yawan-un nga mga panghunàhúnà, Diabolical thoughts. v [B12] be, become
diabolical.

yawan = awayan. see áway.

yáwas euphemism for yáwà.

yáwat = iyáwat. — bángil tinggutum a half a loaf is better than none
(lit. s.t. to make do in times of starvation). Naminyù ang dágang
gúwang ug sugarul. Yáwat bángil tinggutum, The old maid married a
no-good. Well, better than nothing.

yáway euphemism for yáwà.

yáwi = yábi, n1, v.

yáwì euphemism for yáwà.

yáwis euphemism for yáwà.

yawit = yawyaw.

yawyaw v {1} [A; b3c] talking at length in complaints or scolding. Kun
muyawyaw na siya, mahílum ang tanan, When he starts to scold, everybody
keeps silent. {2} [A; c1] mumble or mutter words to oneself as in
saying a prayer, memorizing a piece, and the like. -an(→) a given to
ranting.

yay short for ayay.

yáya_1 n nursemaid or servant in charge of caring for a child. v [A;
c1] work as a nursemaid.

yáya_2, yáyà = tiyà.

yàyà a {1} sluggish, slow moving. Ámung gipapaháwà ang mutsatsa námung
yàyà, We fired our maid. She was too slow. {1a} slow, gentle in speech.
Ang sinultihan sa Ilunggu yàyà kaáyu, People from Iloilo speak in a
slow and gentle way. {2} loosely hanging. Yàyà na ang ímung tútuy, Your
breasts are already sagging. Nagsul-ub si Tátay ug yàyà nga karsúnis,
Dad is wearing baggy trousers. v {1} [B; c1] be, become slow, not
lively. Way kaláki ang bayli kay nagyàyà ang urkista, The dance was no
good because the orchestra was so slow and uninspired. {2} [B; c1P]
hang down or around unevenly or loosely.

yáyay (child talk) n {1} pain, wound. Háin ang yáyay mu Bíbi? Where
does it hurt you, Baby? {2} causing pain. Ayg gúnit ánà, day, yáyay nà,
Don’t touch that, darling. That’ll hurt. v [AP; a1] give pain, be in
pain. Bunálan ta ang nagyáyay nímu ha, Bíbi? Let’s give that guy that
hurt you a sound spanking. Nayáyay intáwun ang Bíbi ku, My poor little
darling, you are in pain.

yayha v {1} [A3; c1] for one side of wearing apparel to be hanging
loose. Luag nga blawus nga nagyayhas abága, A loose blouse, one side of
which has slipped off the shoulders. {1a} open s.t. wide with one side
hanging loose. Nangyayha ang íyang pitáka, Her handbag was open. Átung
yayháun (iyayha) ang sáku, We will spread the mouth of the sack open.
{2} [B6; c1] for solids to spill, pour out of a sack or a similar
container. Tahia ang gisì sa sáku arun dì mayayha ang sulud, Mend the
tear of the sack so the contents will not spill out. Yayháa (iyayha)
ang ginhawaan sa bábuy nga aslunun, Take out the entrails from the pig
before you roast it.

yáyu n boy hired to watch a child.

yáyung v [AC; b6(1)] carry s.t. together. Magkayáyung ta íni kay
bug-at, We will have to carry this together because it’s heavy. — ang
búlan = hayà ang búlan. — ug túig v [A13] for siblings to be born on
different dates but in the same year. (→) n a pole to hang a load from
when two people carry it. see also tambayáyung.

yíba a shout of jubilation. Yíba! Magparti diay mi, Hurray! We are
going to hold a party.

yíbar = yír bar.

yíbu n exclamation of joy.

yílu_1 n ice. v {1} [B2] be, become ice. Muyílu (mayílu) ang túbig kun
ibutangs prísir, The water will become ice if you put it in the
freezer. {2} [A; a2] make ice. Dalì rang muyílu átung pridyidir, Our
refrigerator makes ice fast. {3} [A; b(1)] put ice on s.t. Nagyílu kus
mga isdà arun dílì muransiyu, I am putting ice on the fish so they
won’t spoil. litsi kun — n a sweet made of shaved ice mixed with milk
and sugar. v [A1] have, make such a sweet.

yílu_2 n yellow in color. v [B; a12] be, become yellow. Madugáyan
muyílu (mayílu) ang papil, After a time the paper will yellow. yiluhun
a yellowish.

yílu bil = kampanilya_2.

yípi expression of jubilation.

yirba buyna = hirbubuyna.

yír bar n year bar, a piece of metal fastened above the right pocket on
the uniform of an ROTC trainee, indicating which year a student is.
v [A13] use, wear a year bar.

yirs-uld a well-advanced in years, esp. said of a single woman
(humorous). Bísag yirs-uld basta mayrun, pangasaw-a lang, She may be
old, but she’s rich, so marry her. v [B125] be well-advanced in years.
Anus-a ka pa magminyù? Unyà nag mayirs-uld? When are you going to get
married? When you are too far along in years?

yíru n iron, steel. káha di- n steel safe.

yist n yeast. Ang yist pára patúbù sa pan, Yeast is a leavening agent
for bread.

yù short for iyù.

yuad a having a protuberant belly and having a lower back curved
forward. Kasagáran sa mga mabdus yuad, Most pregnant women have big
stomachs and a lower back curved forward. v [B; b6] walk with the
stomach sticking out forward.

yúbit v [AN; a1c] look down on, despise with mockery. Ayaw yubíta ang
kabus, Do not despise the poor. Giyúbit ang bungì sa isig níya ka bátà,
The harelip was teased by his playmates. n derision, words of contempt.
-an(→) a fond of heaping derision. Yubitan kaáyu, mu rag way apan, He
loves to heap contempt on others as if he were perfect. v [B125] be,
become fond of heaping contempt. ma-un a derisive, full of contempt.

yudipurmu n iodoform, a medicinal powder. v [A13; b6] apply iodoform
powder.

yudkap = yugkap.

yúdu n tincture of iodine.

yudupurmu = yudipurmu.

yudyud v [A; c6] {1} push s.o. down into the dirt repeatedly. Iyudyud
ang nawung sa irù sa íyang húgaw, Push the dog’s face into his mess.
{1a} pull or push s.t. down in general. Giyudyud sa bátà ang ákung
buktun pagyangùngù níyag kindi, The child kept pulling on my arm asking
for candy. {2} drag s.o. down into a low state. Giyudyud ta sa kakabus
tungud sa ímung pagkasugarul, We have been dragged into poverty because
of your gambling.

yúga n yoga. v [A] do yoga.

yugkap a lifeless, sluggish from poor health, lack of sleep. v [B1; b6]
be, become sluggish. Nagyugkap ku rung adláwa kay nagbilar ku gabíi,
I’m sleepy today because I was up all night last night.

yugkung a tall and stooping, yugkungyugkung v [B1; c1] walking in a
bouncing but stooped way with long strides.

yugtù n episode, section out of a series of happenings. {1} a chapter
in a story, act in a drama. Katapúsang yugtù sa sugilambung, The final
episode in the novel. {2} episode in one’s life. Halandúmung yugtù sa
kinabúhì, Memorable episodes of one’s life. {3} moment that s.t.
happens. Sa mga yugtù sa pag-inusára, During the moments of loneliness.
v [A; c1] appear, write s.t. in episodes.

yúgu n {1} yoke placed over the shoulder of a beast of burden for
attaching the harness. {2} problem weighing on the shoulders like a
yoke. v {1} [A; a12] make into or use a yoke. {2} [A; b6(1)] mount a
yoke.

yugut v [B16; b3(1)c5] {1} feeling a deep and indescribable sadness
(literary). {2} feel angry indignation and resentment. Nagyugut sa
pagbáhin sa yútà, Was full of resentment at the way the land was
divided. Gikayugut níya ang wà ku pagbáwus sa sulat, She resented it
that I failed to answer the letter. ka- n {1} feeling of extreme
sadness (literary). Tungud sa kayugut sa íyang buut, íyang gihálad ang
láwas sa íyang anak nga patay na, Because of the indescribable sorrow
that overcame him, he offered up the dead body of his son. {2} feeling
of angry resentment. mayugtánun a characterized with resentment and
indignation.

yugyug v [A; a12] shake back and forth or up and down in short, quick
movements. Yugyúga ang dúyan arun matúlug dáyun ang bátà, Rock the
hammock so that the baby will soon sleep.

yúhu an expression of joy. Yúhu! Hatágan diay tag búnus ni Sir! Yoohoo!
We are going to get a bonus from the boss!

yuhù n a k.o. long-legged bird.

yuhum n {1} = pahiyum. see híyum. {2} dimple. v [A; c1] = pahiyum.
ma-un(←) = mapahiyúmun. see híyum.

yuhut v {1} [AB3; cP] go out, in through s.t., cause to do so. Ang
pagyuhut sa usa ka mabiaybiáyung tamíhid sa íyang mga ngábil, When a
smile of derision formed itself on his lips. Iyuhut (ipayuhut,
payuhuta) ang íyang mga púlung sa píkas dalunggan, Let his words go in
one ear and out the other. {2} [A; a] go in or out of a place
stealthily. Yuhut ta sa míting, Let’s sneak out of the meeting. {2a} do
anything secretly without being observed. Nagyuhut siyag kúhag kindi sa
lamísa, He sneaked a piece of candy from the table. {2b} [A; c]
smuggle. Wà madakpi ang miyuhut sa sigarilyu, The fellow who smuggled
the cigarettes in was not caught. yuhutyuhut, yuhutyúhut v [A; c]
{1} come in and go out. Giyuhutyuhútan sa hángin ang ílang payag nga
nagkagusbat, The wind just blows freely through their dilapidated
shack. {2} penetrate through. Dì mi makayuhutyuhut sa kabaknitan, We
can not penetrate through the thickets. mag-r-(←) n smuggler, one who
sneaks things in and out.

yúin n UN, acronym for United Nations.

yúka n yucca.

yúkab v {1} [A2; a1] drag on a cigarette, cigar, pipe. Yukába (iyúkab)
ang abánu arun dílì mapálung, Draw in on the cigar so it doesn’t go
out. {2} [A; b] light a cigarette, cigar, pipe.

yukalíli = yúki.

yukaliptus n eucalyptus tree.

yukaristika n Eucharist.

*yukaristiku kunggrísu — n Eucharistic Congress.

yukayu answer to kingkiri ‘who wants what I’ve got in my hand’,
expressing that the speaker wants it. ‘Kingkiri?’—‘Yukayu.’ ‘Who wants
what I’ve got in my hand?’—‘I want it.’

yukbù v {1} [A; c1] bow down, bend low. Muyukbù ang taas nga táwu nga
musulud sa kupà nga pultahan, A tall man has to bend to enter a low
door. {2} [A3; b] recognize s.o.’s power, pay homage. Ang mga táwu sa
karáan nagyukbù sa adlaw, People of ancient times bowed down to the
sun. Dì sila muyukbù sa hukum sa ripiri, They will not submit to the
judgment of the referee. Langyawng gahum nga giyukbúan sa gagmayng
násud, Foreign power to which small nations submit.

yúki n ukelele. v {1} [A; b(1)] play the ukelele. {2} [A; a12] make a
ukelele.

yukilíli = yúki.

yukù a bent way over. Táwu nga yukù na kaáyu sa kagúlang, A person who
is already very much bent with age. v {1} [B; b6] be, become bent.
Humay nga nagyukù sa kahinug, Rice bent over in ripeness. {2} [A; c]
bend over. Miyukù siya arun pagpunit ug batu, He bent down to pick up a
stone. yukùyukù sa buktun n crook of the arm.

yukug a having one’s back bent forward, as under a heavy load or due to
old age. v [B; c1] for the upper back to be bent forward. Nayukug siya
sa kabug-at sa gipas-an, He was bent over with the load on his
shoulders. Nayukug siya pagdinúkù sa íyang trabáhu, She has become
stoop-shouldered from bending over her work too much.

yukum n dimple. v [A23] form into a dimple. Muyukum ang íyang áping ug
mupahiyum siya, Her face forms a dimple when she smiles. yukman a get
dimpled. v [b8] get to be dimpled.

yukyuk v [A; a12] stab and jiggle around. Yukyúka ug maáyu arun daling
mamatay ang bábuy, Stab the pig jiggling the knife around well, so it
will die quickly.

yumù a for tiny animals to be weak and sickly from overhandling.
v [A12; a12] handle an animal until it becomes weak and sickly. Kinsay
nagyumù sa pisù nga himalatyun na? Who has been handling the chick that
it’s about to die?

yúmud a having a frowning, pouting expression on the face from
displeasure or anger. v [A13; b3c1] pout and frown. Nagyúmud ang nawung
kay naatrasáwu ang pagkáun, He’s frowning in annoyance because dinner
is late. yumuran a having a tendency to frown.

yumudyumud v [A; c1] mumble unintelligibly. Dì ku gustung magyumudyumud
ang ákung mga anak ug kasab-an, I don’t want my children to mumble
under their breath when they are scolded.

yumyum v [A; a12] give s.o. a long and sensual kiss. Nawung nga way
mangarastig yumyum, A face nobody could bear to kiss passionately.
-ay(→) v [C] kiss each other passionately. Dì siya makigyumyumay ug
babáyi nga bahù ug bàbà, He doesn’t like to engage in passionate
kissing with a woman who has bad breath.

yunà, yúnà (from ayaw únà) {1} — pa {1a} wait a minute, just a minute.
Yúnà pa, Rus, ayaw únag lakaw, Just a minute, Rose, don’t go yet.
{1b} expression used to change the tack of a conversation. Yúnà pa.
Anus-a tung pitsáha? Just a minute. On what date did you say it was
going to be? {2} expression interrupting a speaker to get the word.
Yúnà! Patiwasa ku arun mahibáwu sila sa tinúud, Just a minute! Let me
tell it so they will know the truth.

yunanimus n s.t. that has been done with unanimity. Yunanimus ang
hukum, It was a unanimous decision. v [B126] be unanimous.

yungatyúngat_1 v [A1; b(1)] sit about idly puffing on a pipe or cigar.

yungatyúngat_2 = ungat-úngat.

yúngib n large hole in the side of s.t. v {1} [A3; b] dig a cave,
tunnel. Miyúngib ang mga Hapun sa búkid, The Japanese dug tunnels in
the mountain. {1a} [a12] carry away dirt to form a cave. Nayúngib ang
kílid sa pangpang pagbahà, A cavity formed in the side of the cliff
after the flood. {2} [A13] hole up in a cave. Nagyúngib ang kaáway, The
enemies are holed up in a cave. (→) = yúngib, n.

yungit a unable to pronounce consonants clearly. Yungit ang sinultihan
sa Insik kay dì makaluwas sa íri, The Chinaman still speaks with an
accent because he cannot pronounce r. v [B12] get to be unable to
pronounce consonants clearly.

yungki n anvil. Yungki ang dukdúkan sa binágang puthaw, Red-hot metals
are hammered on the anvil.

yungyung v [A; c1] {1} hang loosely down, droop. Muyungyung ang buhuk
ug dì masudlay, The hair will hang loosely down if you don’t comb it.
Ang mga sanga sa káhuy nagyungyung, The tree branches are hanging low.
Giyungyung níya ang íyang kálù, He pulled his hat down over his face.
{2} lower s.t. on a rope tied at one end. Yungyúngig písì ang táwu sa
atábay, Drop the man in the well a rope.

yunik a unique in kind or excellence. Yunik kaáyu ning bayhána ug mga
idíya, This woman has very unique ideas.

yunipurmi a similar, identical in appearance. Yunipurmi ug hitsúra ang
mga balay sa subdibisyun, The houses in the subdivision look exactly
alike. n uniform. Utawa ang íyang yunipurmi, Press his uniform.
v {1} [C; c1] have uniform looks. {2} [A; c6] wear a uniform.

yunùyunù v {1} [A] shake, quiver with obesity. Tiyan nga nagyunùyunù sa
katambuk, A stomach shaking like a bowlful of jello. {2} [A13] for
steps to be shaky. Tigúlang nga nagyunùyunù ang linaktan, An old man
taking shaky steps.

yunyun_1 a sagging, drooping. v {1} [A; b5] stand on s.t. and bounce up
and down on it, bounce s.t. up and down. Ayaw yunyúni ang katri, Don’t
bounce up and down on the bed. Yunyúna (iyunyun) ang sanga kay íyang
kabay-an, Bounce the branch up and down because he wants to ride it.
{2} [B] hang down, sag. Nagyunyun ang sanga sa búnga, The branch is
bent under the weight of the fruit.

yunyun_2 n labor union. líbur — = yunyun_2.

yúpis = lúpis.

yupu, yúpu a docile, tractable. Kining kabayúa tun-ig pagkabayù kay
yupu kaáyu, Learn how to ride on this horse because it is very docile.
v [B12; b6] be, become docile. Nagkayupu si Kurding human siya makaamgu
nga mapalagput siya sa trabáhu, Cording is becoming more docile now
that she realizes she could be fired from her work.

yupyup v [A; a] {1} draw in smoke, air into the mouth. Yupyúpag sígi
arun dì mapálung, Keep dragging on it so it won’t go out. {2} suck on
s.t. Nagyupyup lang gihápun siyas kumagkù, He still sucks his thumb.
{3} suck s.o. off. n action of inhaling. Usa lang ka yupyup sa mariwána
hubug ka na, One drag on the marijuana and you’ll be dizzy. -anan
n s.t. one smokes or draws on.

yúsà (from ayaw úsà) = yúnà.

yusapi, yusápi n acronym for USAFFE, United States Armed Forces in the
Far East (of the postwar period).

yúsi, yúsig n cigarette (word play on sigarilyu—slang).

yusyus a loose; clothing not fitting tight or sacks having little
content. Yusyus ang sáku kay gikuháan man sa súd, The sack is loose
because they took some of the content out. v [BN; c1] {1} be loose or
not tightly packed. Nayusyus ang íyang sinínà kay nidaut na siya, Her
dress is loose because she lost weight. {2} for s.t. held up by a
garter to slip down from looseness.

yútà n {1} piece of land. Nakapalit siyag yútà duul sa syudad, He
bought land near the city. {1a} realm, country. Yúta sa mga higanti,
Domain of the giants. — sa mga sáad Land of Promise (name given to
Mindanao). -ng tabúnun the Philippines (lit. the land of the
brown-skinned race—literary). {2} earth. Matúman ang ímung pagbuut
dinhi sa yútà maingun sa lángit, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. {3} soil. Tambuk ang yútà sa ámung gardin, We have fertile soil
in our garden. {4} ground. Nakuyapan siya ug natumba sa yútà, She
fainted and fell to the ground. v [A12] obtain, acquire land. (→)
v {1} [A13] farm, cultivate lands. {2} [B1256] for a question or
suggestion to be disregarded and not entertained (as if thrown to the
earth). Nayutà ang íyang pangutána kay may kasulti man ang íyang
gipangutána, Nobody answered his question because the man he asked was
busy talking to s.o. else. -an a landed, having lands. yutan-un a of
the earth (as opposed to heavenly). Kita mga táwung yutan-un, We are
earthly creatures. ka-an n {1} tracts of lands. {2} nations. mag-r-(→)
n {1} farmer. {2} landowner. yutàyutà n k.o. snake, the size of an
earthworm, with black skin and poisonous. tag- n owner of a piece of
land.

yutawhan n native land (coined from yútang natawhan). -un, maki-un
a patriotic.

yútik a muddy, slushy. Yútik kaáyu ang dálan ug ulan, The path is all
muddy on rainy days. v [B1; a12] be, become muddy or slushy. ka-
v [A13] be all slushy. n state or degree of being slushy. Kayútik sa
lápuk nga mu rag linúgaw, Mud that has the slushy consistency of
porridge.

yúturn n {1} U-turn. {2} sign prohibiting a U-turn. v [A2; c6] make a
U-turn.

yutyut_1 a {1} baggy and wrinkly around the waist. Yutyut kaáyu nga
karsúnis nga dakù ug pila ka sukud pára níya, A very baggy pair of
pants several sizes too big for him. {2} = yatyat_2. -un(→) a of a
baggy sort.

yutyut_2 = ut-ut_1.

yúyu n {1} yoyo. {2} wristwatch (slang). v {1} [A; a12] play with, make
into a yoyo. {2} [A; a] wear, have a wristwatch (slang).

yúyù = tiyù.

yùyù a sagging, drooping. Yùyù ang abága sa pildíru, His shoulders are
drooping because he is sad after he lost. v [B126; c16] sag, droop.
Nayùyù ang hayhayan tungud sa kabug-at sa hinayhay, The clothesline
sagged under the weight of the wash.
