


=== M ===


ma n short for the vocative of máma, ‘mother’.

má = mala.

mā̀ n {1} onomatopoetic word for the lowing sound of a cow or a water
buffalo. {2} a cow or water buffalo (child’s talk). v [A; b6] low,
produce a lowing sound.

ma-_1 future verb affix. (Past: na-. Subjunctive: ma-.) {1} potential
of the direct passive. (See -un_1 for meanings of the direct passive.
See maka- for meanings of the potential.) Mapalit nà nímu bísag ása,
You can buy that anywhere. Wà ku pa mabása, I haven’t had a chance to
read it. Uy! Dì man diay ákù ning nadá nákung pitáka, Heavens, I took
s.o. else’s purse by mistake. {2} potential of the instrumental
passive. (See i-_1 for meanings of the instrumental passive.) Dì ni
mabaligyà kay mahal da kaáyu ang prisyu, You can’t sell this because
it’s too expensive. Wà pa nákù mahátag níya kay wà pa siya muabut, I
haven’t had a chance to give it to him because he hasn’t arrived. Halá!
Nabungat ra ba nákù ang sikrítu, Oh God! I let out the secret.
{3} active of stative verbs: may become [so-and-so]. Ayaw nag hikápa.
Magubà unyà nà, Don’t touch that. It might break. Ilhan nga mulubad
nang panaptúna ug mapula ang túbig, You’ll know the cloth runs if the
water turns red. Nawálà ang ákung singsing, My ring got lost. {3a} with
roots that refer to nonvolitional actions: [do]. Matingála siya ug
ngánu tu, He will be amazed at why it should be so. Wà ku mabaláka, I
am not worried. Mahū́g unyà ka ug mabálì ang sanga, You will fall if
the branch breaks. Ug matúlug na sila, When they are asleep. Mahadluk
ku, I am afraid. Dì ka ba malúuy níya? Don’t you feel sorry for him?
{3b} with nouns: become [so-and-so]. Ug maduktur ka na, When you get to
be a doctor. {3c} with nouns which refer to a place: wind up in
[such-and-such] a place. Malangit kag maimpirnu ba? Will you go to
heaven or will you go to hell? Mauspital giyud kag pasagdan lang nà
nímung sakíta, You’ll end up in the hospital if you let your sickness
go. {3d} with nouns referring to time: get to be [such-and-such] a
time. Ug maalas tris na gánì, mulakaw na ku, If it gets to be three
o’clock, I’ll leave. Ug magabíi nag wà pa siya, If it gets to be
nightfall and he hasn’t arrived. {3e} (only with the future) when
[such-and-such] a time or season comes about. Magkítà ra silag mapista,
They only see each other during fiestas. Tábù dinhi ug maduminggu, They
hold market here on Sundays.

ma-_2 {1} affix added to most adjective roots which do not refer to a
measurement to form adjectives which mean ‘very [so-and-so]’. This
formation is used in literary or formal styles. Usa ka mapait nga
pahíyum, A very bitter smile. {2} added to some verbs to form
adjectives meaning [do]ing, usually with a short penult. Bátang
mahilak, A crybaby. Matulug, Of a sleepy sort. Matawa, Full of
laughter.

ma-ánun alternant of ma-un, used with some bases in place of ma-un.
Masuk-ánun, Tending to get irritated.

máas a old, aged. Bisan máas na siya tisar gihápung mulakaw, He may be
old, but he still walks erect. v [B] become old. Kun mumáas na ang
kalbásà dílì na maútan, When a squash becomes too old, it is no longer
good to eat.

maáyu see áyu.

mabà = mubù.

mabaw a {1} shallow. Mabaw ra kaáyu nang ímung pangatarúngan, Your
reasoning is very shallow. Dì kalanguyan nang subáa kay mabaw, You
can’t swim in that river. It’s too shallow. Ang baskit nga mabaw ug
lubut diyútayg sulud, A shallow basket holds little. Mabaw nga
panaksan, Shallow bowl. {2} in set expressions: — ug lubut sensitive or
quick to anger. Muhílak diay bísag kumidiya ra. Kamabaw nímug lubut uy,
Why did you cry when it was just a joke? How sensitive you are! {3} —
ug salabútan unintelligent. Dúgay siyang kasabut kay mabaw rag
salabútan, She doesn’t understand readily because she is unintelligent.
v [B; b7c1] become shallow. Imabaw (mabwa) lang pagkálut ang tamnan ug
kamúti, Just make the hole for the sweet potatoes shallow. hi-/ha-(→)
see himábaw under babaw. -g- shallow (plural). i- n place above s.t.
Imabaw sa kaban nákù gibutang ang libru, I put the book on top of the
trunk. -in-, -in-g- v [a12] do in a shallow way. Kun minagbáwun lang ni
nátù pagsabut ang giisplikar sa maistru, dílì giyud ta makapasar, If
you fail to understand (lit. understand shallowly) what the teacher
explained, you won’t pass. ka-(←) n half brother, sister. Kamábaw ku
siya kay paríhu mig inahan, He is my half brother because we have the
same mother. v [A23] be half brothers, sisters.

mabdus a {1} pregnant. {2} for rice grains to be in the panicle. Mabdus
na ang humay, The rice grains are forming. v {1} [B26] get, make
pregnant. Mimabdus si Maríya kay hagithagitun kaáyu, Maria got pregnant
because she was flirtatious. {1a} [A1; c] carry in the womb. Gimabdus
nà siya pagkamatay sa íyang amahan, He was in his mother’s womb when
his father died. {2} [B] for rice grains to form in the panicle.
{3} [B1] for borrowed things to have been kept too long. Dúgay kaáyu
nímung giúlì ang ákung libru. Mimabdus na nà, You kept my book too long
(lit. so long that it got pregnant). {4} [B1] — sa pasálig get fooled
by assurances (lit. got pregnant because of promises). Daghan nang
mimabdus sa pasálig sa mga pulitiku, Many people have been fooled by
the politician’s assurances. pa- v [A; c2] get s.o. pregnant.
Gipamabdus (gipamabdúsan) si Maríya ni Pidru, Pedro got Maria pregnant.

mabgas = malubgas.

mabúlu n k.o. medium-sized tree of the primary forest, cultivated for
its fruit. The wood is hard and used for furniture, the heartwood being
nearly black: Diospyros discolor.

mad-as a land that has dried up. v [B1] be, become dry land. Nagmad-as
ang pilapilan nga walà na makultibar, The rice paddies are dry after
being left uncultivated.

mádil n fashion model. v {1} [A1; c] model s.t. {2} [B156; a2] be a
fashion model. -un(→) a having a body like a model.

madrasta n stepmother.

madri_1 n nun. — dipamilya woman head of the family. — supiryúra mother
superior. v [B156; a] be, become a nun. paka- v [A; a12] pretend to be
a nun, treat like a nun. madrihun a having ways or traits of a nun.
Madrihun kaáyug nawung bayhána, inusinti kaáyug dagway, That woman is
like a nun. Such an innocent face.

madri_2 n main frame of a door or window shutter. v [c1] make a main
frame of a shutter.

madri kakaw n small ornamental tree flowering profusely with pink or
lavender blooms, used for firewood and fencing: Gliricidia sepium.

madri míya an exclamation of alarm, surprise, or disgust mainly by
speakers who have been under Spanish influence. Madri míya, tingálig
mahū́g nang bátà, My God! Watch out, the baby is going to fall. Madri
míya! Nabúhat nímu tu! My God! You actually did that!

madrína n godmother, the female sponsor at one’s baptism, wedding,
confirmation, or ordination. v [B136; c1] be, become the madrína.

madyik n {1} magic involving supernatural powers. {2} sleight-of-hand
trick. Nalingaw ang mga bátà sa ákung madyik, The children enjoyed my
tricks. v {1} [A1; a2] practice magic. {2} [A; a] steal s.t. small.
Huy, kinsay nagmadyik sa ákung bulpin diri? Hey, who swiped my ball
point pen? -íru n magician.

madyung_1 n {1} sandspurs, k.o. coarse grass growing about 1′ that
bears spikes with rows of round burrs, around ¼″ in diameter. {2} the
burrs of this grass. ka- v [A13] get sandspurs all over one.

madyung_2 n mahjong. a win the mahjong set. Pung! Madyung ku, Bingo! I
get mahjong! v {1} [A3; a] play mahjong. Dílì na lang ta magdúlag
baráha. Madyúngun ta na lang ni, Let’s not play cards. Let’s just play
mahjong. {2} [A12] win at mahjong. Wà pa ku makamadyung, I haven’t
gotten mahjong yet. -an(→) n {1} mahjong den. {2} mahjong set.
{3} piece needed to get ‘mahjong’. Ang madyungan ni Turuy tris sirkulu,
Toroy is waiting for the three circle piece. -íru, -íra a mahjong
addict.

madyurit n drum majorette. v [B16; a2] be a majorette.

mag- durative active verbal affix, future. (Past: nag- or ga-.
Subjunctive: mag-.) Magmata sila árung urása, They are awake at this
time. Nagmata (or gamata) pa ba kahà sila? Do you think they are still
awake? Walà na sila magmata, They are not awake any more. Verbs with
mag-, nag- have the following meanings (as opposed to verbs with mi-,
mu- — see mu-): {1} action not necessarily intentional. Walà siya
magsulti, He didn’t say. Walà ku maghátag níya ánang librúha, I didn’t
give him that book. {2} durative action, action or state continuing in
time. Wà na siya maghilak, He isn’t crying any more. Ug magtindug ang
mga táwu sa atubángan, dì mi makakità, If the people in front are
standing, we won’t be able to see. {2a} added to nouns. Ug magkalayu na
ang kakugnan háyag kaáyu ang lángit, When the fields are ablaze, the
skies light up. Human sa púlù ka gutlù, ang puthaw magbaga, After ten
seconds the steel will glow. {3} added to verbs referring to a state:
be in [such-and-such] a state. Ug mag-abri ang pultahan, musulud giyud
ang lángaw, If the door is open, the flies are sure to come in. Walà na
magtuyuk ang ligid, The wheel is no longer turning. {3a} added to
adjectives: be [adj.]. Magmalipáyun ta, Let us be happy. Mawà kay
hitsúra ug magpula nang ímung nawung, You will not look good if your
face is all red. {3b} added to words referring to a state of the
weather. Atúa giyud siya sa dágat, magbálud kinig maglínaw, He is at
sea, whether it is wavy or calm. Mag-ulan kag mag-ínit, Rain or shine
(lit. whether you are rainy or shining). {4} referring to an action
which redounded on the agent: do [so-and-so] to oneself. Mag-ílis pa
ku, I will change my clothes. Gustu kung maglumus, I want to drown
myself. {4a} added to nouns: become a [so-and-so]. Magpárì ku, I will
become a priest. Magsirkadur tingáli ning bataána, This child probably
wants to become a trapeze artist. {5} referring to an action which two
or more people did with each other. (Verbs with mag- of this sort
always have penultimate stress.) Didtu sila mag-ábut, They met in that
place. Magsákay ta, Let us ride together. Ug maglagyù pagkabutang ang
mga balay, If the houses are far apart from one another. {5a} with
nouns: be in the [noun] relation. Magkumpári kami ug akuy pakugúsun sa
íyang anak, We will be kumpári’s if I become his child’s godfather.
Mag-amígu lang ta, Let’s be friends.

maga- alternative form for mag- in meanings 2, 2a, 3, 3a, 4. Words with
maga- can substitute for the examples there given.

Magahat n pagan non-Cebuano peoples in the mountains (applies to pagans
in Negros and in Mindanao). v [A13] be very touchy. Ug napildi ka ug
dakù magmagahat diay ka? You are touchy just because you lost heavily?

magalyánis n downtown shopping district of Cebu (after the name of
Magallanes Street, which formerly was the principal shopping street in
Cebu).

magang, mágang v [BN] for corn to flower. Inigmagang sa mais, mugítib
na ang lugas, When the corn flowers, the grains begin to develop.

magasin_1 n magazine, periodical.

magasin_2 n ammunition clip for automatic firearms.

magay n maguey, cultivated as a source of sisal fiber: Agave cantala or
sisalana. (←) v [A] make into sisal hemp. magay mágay n ornamental
plant similar to the maguey but smaller in size: Sansevieria spp.

magaya = malagaya.

Magindánaw n Muslims of Cotabato and Zamboanga del Sur.

magka- durative active future for verbs referring to a state: be,
becoming more and more [so-and-so]. (Past: nagka-. Subjunctive:
magka-.) Verbs with this affix always have a stressed final syllable.
Imbis nga magkakusug, nagkahinay hinúun, Instead of getting faster and
faster, it was getting slower and slower. Wà lagi magkaduul ang bapur
nganhi, nagkalayù hinúun, The boat is not coming nearer. It’s actually
getting further and further away.

magka-(←) potential active verb affix, future. (Past: nagka-.
Subjunctive: magka-.) Used with verbs referring to mutual actions (cf.
mag-_1, 5) but otherwise paralleling the potential meanings listed
under maka-. {1} can [do] with each other. Dì tang tanan magkasákay, We
cannot all ride together. {2} manage to [do] with each other. Wà mi
magkasábut, We didn’t manage to come to an agreement. Nagkaábut sila sa
tungàtúngà, They met in the middle. {3} happen to [do] with each other.
Ug magkakítà gánì ang ímung babáyig asáwa, If your mistress and your
wife happen to run into each other.

mag-l- alternant of mag-r-, and usually in competition with it, but
with some roots only mag-r- is frequent or the form with mag-r- has
acquired a different nuance. Magbalantay, Watchman. Magbuluhat ug mga
mwiblis, Furniture maker.

maglalatik n k.o. folk dance in which half coconut shells are knocked
to the rhythm of the accompanying music.

magnisya n milk of magnesia. — simpli a half dose of milk of magnesia
(as opposed to — dubli, the full dose).

magnit n {1} magnet. {2} kissing scene (slang—from the notion that the
faces come together as if magnetized). Daghang magnit ánang salidáha,
There are plenty of kissing scenes in that movie. {3} syúgar — sugar
magnate. v [A; a] {1} pick up with a magnet. {2} swipe, steal, spirit
away. Kinsay nagmagnit sa ákung bálùn? Who swiped my lunch? {3} [C]
kiss one another usually in a show (slang). a won over. Inigkanta nímu,
magnit na silang tanan, When you sing, they’ll all be won over.

mag-r- n prefix added to verbs to form nouns which refer to one who
does [verb] on a regular basis. Magbabantay, Watchman. Magsusúlat,
Writer. Magpapatigayun, Businessman. Magyuyutà, Landowner or farmer.
Magbubúhat, The Creator (God) or one who does.

magsúun see *súun.

magtalisay n k.o. tree similar in shape and appearance to the talísay,
but with smaller leaves and harder wood: Terminalia sp.

mágu n {1} magi. {2} s.o. outstanding, expert. Mágu sa kinablit, A
wizard at the guitar.

mágù n tarsier.

magus = amagus.

máha n name given to various puddings and confections. — blangka
pudding made of kernels of young corn and coconut milk or just plain
milk. — diúbi a pudding made of úbi and coconut milk. — riyal candy
made out of peanuts, milk, and sugar.

mahal a {1} dear, expensive. Mahal na kaáyu ang bugas karun, Rice is
very expensive now. Magbáyad kag mahal sa ímung gibúhat, You shall pay
dearly for what you have done. {2} beloved. Siya ang ákung mahal
(minahal) nga bána, He is my beloved husband. {3} blessed (address to
saints). Pasalamáti ang Mahal nga Birhin, Give thanks to the Blessed
Virgin. {4} — nga adlaw the days of the Lenten season. {5} in set
phrases: very little, almost without. — ug pahíyum stingy with the
smiles. — ug tíngug weak-voiced. v {1} [B; ab7] become expensive, go up
in price. Basta Amirkánu mupalit, mahalun giyug baligyà, For an
American the price is always jacked up. {2} [A; a12] love. Ang mga
bayáni nagmahal sa ílang yútang natawhan, Heroes love their native
land. Gimahal ku ikaw, I love you. -in- n beloved, dear one. ka-an(←)
n majesty (address to royalty). Matúman ang ímung gihangyù, kamahálan,
Your order will be fulfilled, Your Majesty. -l-un(←), -un(←)
a precious. -un a dear or costly kind. ma-in-un(←) a loving,
affectionate.

mahan = man kahà (dialectal). see man.

maharlika n the name given to the native nobles in pre-Hispanic times.

máhay n feelings of hurt and regret at what s.o. did. Arun walay máhay
apúran ta kamung tanan, So there will be no hurt feelings, I’ll give
you each one. v [A; b3c5] have feelings of hurt. Nagmáhay kung napalit
ku tung sapatúsa, I’m sorry I bought those shoes. Ikay ákung gimaháyan
sa nahitabù, I blame you for (lit. you are the reason I’m regretting)
what happened. Gikamaháyan ta ka kay wà ka mudúaw nákù, You hurt me
because you did not pay me a visit. walay — v [A13] there was nobody
that felt bad, said in two situations: when people who attack on s.o.
are beaten up instead (i.e., they cannot blame anyone but themselves),
and when people who set on s.o. are unsuccessful (i.e., no one felt bad
because they were successful).

mahika n magic.

mahiku n word referring to an unknown location when asking or giving a
location, usually used in anger. Lupad ngadtu sa mahiku, animála ka,
Get out, I don’t care where, you beast. Ambut ásang mahikúha tu nákù
ikabutang ang pisti nga hunsuy, I don’t know where the heck I left that
blinkety-blank pipe.

mahistrádu n judge. v [B156; a12] be made, become a judge.

mahugani n mahogany.

maigang n medium to large tree of the primary forest, with fruit
similar in flavor and taste to lungbuy: Eugenia polycephaloides.

mailúku = mamilúku.

ma-in-un(←), ma-in-ánun alternant of ma-un used with some bases in
place of ma-un. Matinabángun, Helpful. Masinabtánun, Full of
understanding.

mais n {1} maize, the corn plant or any part of it. {1a} bugas — corn
grits. Mahal na ang prisyu sa bugas mais karun, The price of corn grits
has increased. v [A1] have corn grits as one’s staple food. Nagmais
lang mi kay barátu man kay sa humay, We had corn grits as our staple
food because it is cheaper than rice. -an, ka-an, -al n cornfield.
v [A1; a12] have a cornfield. maismáis n {1} ornamental plant similar
to the corn plant, and growing up to 3′: Dracaena sanderiana and  D.
fragrans. {2} folding knife with a handle that is made of sheet metal,
molded into the form of an ear of corn. {3} name given to the largest
species of flying fish (bangsi). -un = maismáis, 3.

maistra n {1} female teacher. {1a} term of address or title for a
teacher. Nía na si Maistra Lúling, Here is Mrs. Loling, the teacher.
{2} education course. Maistra ang gikúhang kursu ni Pirla, Perla is
majoring in Education. (→) voc. teacher, ma’am. v {1} [A; b6] for a
woman to teach. Tunghaan nga gimaistráhan ni Sunya, The school where
Sonia is teaching. {2} [B156; a1] be a (female) teacher. Maistráhun ku
ning ákung anak, I’ll make my daughter into a teacher. ubra — see ubra.

maistru n 1, 1a = maistra (male). {2} education course. {3} the leader
or instigator of activity, usually bad. Ikay maistru sa tanang mga
binúang, You are the instigator of all the foolishness. {4} band or
orchestra master. Pasakalyi, maistru, kay mukanta ku, Introduction,
maestro. I shall sing now. — ámu boatswain. — kusiníru chief cook.
v {1} [A; a] teach. {2} [B6; a1] be a teacher. †

maka-_1 potential active verb affix, future. (Past: naka-. Subjunctive:
maka-. Short form: ka-.) Dì ku makaalsa (kaalsa) niánà, I cannot lift
that. Nakatilaw (katilaw) na ku niánà, I have tried that. Wà ku
makasakay (kasakay), I couldn’t get a ride. {1} refers to an action
s.o. has the capability of doing. (Only the future form is used in this
meaning.) Makamau na kung mukinatsilà sa nag-idad kug diyis, I knew how
to speak Spanish when I was ten years old. {2} refers to an action
which one had the opportunity or managed to do. Ug makaadtu ku sa inyu
human sa paniudtu, muhapit ku, If I get a chance to go to your place
after lunch, I’ll drop in. Wà ku makalakaw kay síging abut ang mga
bisíta, I didn’t have a chance to go out because we kept having
visitors. {2a} with nouns: manage to get. Ug trís ákung mahulbut run,
makamadyung ku, If I draw a three, I will get mahjong. Niíning trabahúa
hálus ta makasininà, With this work I can hardly earn enough to buy a
shirt. {3} refers to an accidental or unintentional action. Diriyut
siya makaihì sa dihang gilatigu siya sa íyang inahan, Her mother
whipped her so hard she nearly wet her pants. Makaingun kag nindut ug
makakità ka, Once you see it, you won’t be able to help exclaiming at
how beautiful it is.

maka-_2 short form: ka-_4 n affix added to numbers to form words which
mean [do so-and-so] many times. Makapila (kapila) ku na ikaw ingna? How
many times did I tell you? Makaduha na ku malígù didtu, I have gone
swimming there twice. Makadaghan na ku mabiktima, I have been
victimized many times.

makahiyà = kipìkipì. see kipì.

makalibri = kalibri_2.

makan n {1} macan, k.o. large-grained rice of wet fields, highly prized
for ordinary eating. {2} k.o. very fat pig. a obese. Gwapahun untang
bayhána apan makan lang, She’s quite beautiful, only she’s fat.

makapunù (from punù) n variety of coconut which produces ordinary fruit
and once in a while fruit which are completely full of soft meat,
slightly harder near the shell. The makapunù fruit is highly esteemed
and is used for sweets.

maka-r- affix added to verbs referring to a state to form adjectives
which mean cause s.o. to get into [such-and-such] a state to a great
extent. Forms with this affix usually have long penults. Makasusúbung
hitabù, A very saddening event. Makalulúuy, Inspiring pity.
Makalalagut, Angering.

makarúni n macaroni. v [A13] cook a macaroni dish.

Makaw n {1} Chinaman from Macao. {2} Chinaman in a restaurant business
(so called because many cooks in Chinese restaurants immigrated from
Macao). lútung — see lútù.

máki_1 n a large, enamel-coated, round, metal platter, 18″ or so in
diameter for holding cooked rice or corn.

máki_2 n a Chinese dish of sliced meats, stewed and thickened with
cornstarch.

makig-(←) prefix added to bases with a prefix pakig- to indicate
future, volitional active forms. Past: nakig-. Subjunctive: makig-. No
durative or potential forms. (See pakig- for meanings.) Short forms:
kig- and tig-. Makigkáun (kigkáun, tigkáun) siya nákù sa gawas, He
wants to take me out to eat. Nakig-áway siyag dakung táwu, He picked a
fight with a large person. Walà ku makigpustaánay níya, I did not
challenge him to bet.

makina n {1} machine. {2} engine. Dílì na muandar ang makina sa awtu,
The automobile engine won’t start. {3} sewing machine. Ang makina
kinahanglánun kaáyu sa sastri, A sewing machine is a necessity to a
dressmaker. {4} — sa bugas corn, rice mill. — dimutur n motorized
machine, engine. v [a12] {1} do by machine. Ayawg kinamuta nà pagtahì,
makinaha nà, Don’t sew it with your hands. Do it by machine. {2} put an
engine s.w.

makinarya n {1} machinery, set of machinery put together for a specific
use. {2} machinery, set of activities or groups organized to accomplish
s.t. Ang makinarya sa Partídu Libiral, The machinery of the Liberal
Party.

makinilya n {1} typewriter. {2} clipper to trim hair. {3} windlass.
v {1} [A; a2] type. Makinilyáhun giyud basta sulat nga aplikisiyun,
Letters of application should be typed. {1a} [A; a12] hit with a number
of rapid blows, as if punching a typewriter. Gimakinilya nákù siyag
dyab, I hit him with a rapid-fire succession of jabs. {2} cut hair with
a clipper. -ádu, -in- a typewritten.†

makinista n engine man, machine operator. v [B16; a2] become an engine
man.

makiníta n {1} process of embroidery done by pricking the needle over
the design on the top side of the cloth until the whole design is
completed, after which the design on the bottom side is trimmed. The
top becomes the right side. {2} needle for this sort of embroidery.
v [A; a2] embroider in this method.

makmak v {1} [A; a1] pound s.t. hard with s.t. Makmáka ang puthaw
samtang ínit pa, Pound the iron while it is hot. {2} [A; ab2] beat
severely, pound. {2a} — ug kasábà, sulti [A; a12] scold severely,
lambast. Dì ka ángay mumakmak níyag kasábà kay dì ka ginikánan, You
have no right to scold him severely because you are not his father.

makra = marka.

maksut = laksut.

mákù = dakù (dialectal). — dyamù very big. Mákù dyamù ang ílang báy,
They have a huge house.

makúpa n k.o. small tree cultivated for its red, top-shaped fruits,
with white, spongy meat and a mild flavor, a large meaty variety of the
Syzygium samarangense. The same genus as tambis, but much firmer of
flesh.

mal n {1} in billiards, a false shot causing one to lose his turn.
{2} unlucky number. Daghang mahadluk sa numiru trísi kay mal kunu, Lots
of people are afraid of thirteen because it is said to be an unlucky
number. v [B126] make a bad shot. Mamal kag láin ang maigù sa bulamánu,
You lose your turn if you hit the wrong ball. — numiru = mal, n2. —
tiráda n in billiards, a shot that is not well executed. Mal tiráda
tung ímu kay layù ra kaáyu sa lungag ang ímung gitiráhan, That was a
bad shot. The target ball was a mile from the pocket.

mala a {1} dry, not wet. Mala na ang mga hinayhay, The clothes that
were hung up are dry now. {2} not displaying lively attention,
disinterested. Tingálig dì siya muapil kay mala siya ug tinubagan, He
probably won’t participate because he gave a disinterested answer.
v {1} [APB; a2] dry up, become dried. Mimala ang mga sapà, The rivers
dried up. Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy mumala (mupamala) sa mga basakan,
The heat of the sun will dry the rice fields up. Nag-úsik lang sa
panahun ang nagmala (nagpamala) íning salúga, Whoever dried this floor
off was just wasting his time. Tiil nga makamalag (makapamalag)
basakan, Big feet (lit. that can dry up a rice paddy). Namad-an ug
singut ang íyang bukubuku, The sweat on his back has dried up.
{2} [A13] be uninteresting, boring. Wà ku mutiwas sa sini kay nagmala
lang, I did not see the movie to the end because it was boring.
{2a} [b4] — sa dugù become pale. Pagpangutána sa pulis, gimad-an sa
dugù ang nawung sa dalága, The lady’s face became pale when the
policeman questioned her. ma- n land. Ang ubang bakì nagpuyù sa túbig,
ug ang uban sa mamala, Some frogs live in water and some on land.
tilapya sa ma- n prostitute (humorous). kamad-an n upland rice field.

malabagákay n k.o. rattan used in house building.

malabanu = gwayabanu.

malabutang n k.o. rattan used in construction.

malagaya n k.o. white-husked rice with very small, roundish, white
grains, used in preparation of medicinal rice cakes or mixed with
medicinal plants in poultices.

Malakanyan, Malakanyang n Malacañang, the Philippine Presidential
Palace.

mal-am a {1} old in age. {2} grown up, but not doing things befitting
one’s age (derogatory). Mal-am na, lubut gihápuy ilingkud, He is
already grown but he hasn’t got anything upstairs (lit. all he does
with his buttocks is sit on them—a readily understood circumlocution
which avoids stating outright a hurtful truth).

malangsi n k.o. sardine or small herring, growing to 4″ long and 1″
wide.

malapati n k.o. fish.

malapi (not without l) kumpradur di- n one who buys goods which he
knows the seller has no right to dispose of. v [B1256] be a buyer of
stolen goods. Makumpradur dimalapi giyud ka kun makapalit ka niánang
kináwat, You’ll be a buyer of stolen goods if you buy that stolen
article.

malapunti n k.o. red deep-sea fish with big reddish scales, 2′ by 6″,
similar to a snapper, but with a filament projecting from the tip of
the tail.

malarya n malaria. v [A123P; a4] get, cause to get malaria. Way lamuk
nga makamalarya (makapamalarya) dinhi, There are no mosquitoes here
that cause malaria. Tambáli ang gimalarya, Give medicine to the man
with malaria. malaryahun a having malaria.

málas see dimálas.

malasádu, malasáwu a soft-boiled, half-cooked. Malasádung itlug,
Soft-boiled eggs. Ang atay malasádu nga pagkalútù, The liver was cooked
rare. v [A1B26; a2] come out soft, rare, cause to do so.

malasugi, malasúgi n swordfish or sailfish: Xiphias gladius, et al.

malatálu a bananas that are almost full-grown (but still far from
ripe). Basta tinggutum tub-un na ang ságing bísag malatálu pa kaáyu, In
times of famine they cut down the bananas even before they mature.
v [B3; b6] for bananas to reach this stage.

malatinduk n mackerel scad, k.o. carangoid fish, but long and fleshy
like a tinduk banana.

*málay walay — innocently unaware, unknowing (slang). Way málay ang
asáwa nga may kabit ang íyang bána, The wife was unaware that her
husband had a mistress. Wà silay málay nga gipitluk nag ílang manuk,
They were unaware that their chicken had been stolen.

maláyang n k.o. fine, white rice introduced by the PACD.

malaypálay n poisonous part of the viscera and skin of a pufferfish,
which is removed before eating.

Maláyu n Malay in race. a tending to have the features of the Malayan
race.

malbas = marbas.

maldisiyun n malediction, a curse. v [A; b2c1] curse. Imaldisiyun
(maldisiyunun) siya sa párì, The priest will pronounce a malediction on
him.

maldíta = maldítu (female).

maldítu a {1} naughty, evil. Kadtung maldítung bátà ang nagpapilit sa
babulgam sa ímung sinínà, That naughty child put bubble gum on your
dress. Daghang maldítu sa piyir, There are lots of bad types at the
waterfront. {2} having unexpected ability. Maldítu! Natubag giyud ang
dyakpat nga pangutána dà, He’s smart! He answered the jackpot question
correctly. — sa babáyi one who deceives women. v [B12; b6] become
naughty. -in-(→) a in an evil way. v [A; b] do mischief, evil,
philander. Makamau nang muminalditu ang gamay kung anak, My little baby
has already learned how to be naughty.

mal-idukáda = mal-idukádu (female).

mal-idukádu a ill-educated, ill-mannered. v [B126; b6] be ill-educated
or bad-mannered.

malígas = hulmígas.

malignu n spirits of departed people who have not entered heaven and
are doing their penance (kundínu). If they are not prayed for they may
inflict sickness as a reminder. ispiritu — = malignu. v [A1; a4] be
sick with an illness sent by a malignu.

malignù = karbalyas.

malimnu = karbalyas.

malingka see himalingka.

malisya n {1} awareness of sex. Dúna na siyay malisya kay dì na man
maghúbù ug malígù, She is already aware of her sex because she won’t
bathe in the nude any longer. {2} bad thoughts regarding sex. Ug way
malisya, ngánung miagik-ik man ka? If you are not harboring evil
thoughts, why are you snickering? {3} ill will. Way malisya ang ákung
paghátag niíni, There’s no ill intent in my giving this to you. {4} bad
omen, usually of death or misfortune. v [A13; b] send such an omen.
Nagmalisya siya únà mamatay. Nagpakítà únà siya sa íyang mga anak nga
túa sa Amirika, He sent an omen before he died. He appeared to his
children in America. malisyúsa = malisyúsu (female). malisyúsu
a {1} conscious of sex in an unwholesome way. Ngánung dì ka man
pagúnit? Kamalisyúsu gud nímu! Why don’t you want me to touch your
hands? How sex-conscious you are! {2} maliciously done, out of ill
will. Malisyúsung mga pasángil nga way gipasikáran, Malicious and
baseless accusations. v [B12; a2] {1} be, become sex conscious in an
unwholesome way. {2} become malicious in behavior.

málit n mallet.

malíta n suitcase. v [A13] carry a suitcase. Magmalíta lang ku kay
daghan kug dalhunun, I’ll take a suitcase because I have so many things
to take.

malitin n {1} a leather bag designed to hold medicine and some medical
instruments. {2} a small suitcase.

malmal_1 v [B1256; a12] be taught, rehearsed, or be inculcated to a
high degree. Namalmal mig maáyu sa ininglis kay Amirkánu ámung maistru,
We were taught English thoroughly because our teacher was an American.
Malmálun nátù ang bátà sa bili sa pagdagínut, We will inculcate the
value of thrift in the children’s minds.

malmal_2 v {1} [A; a1] beat s.o. up, usually in the mouth. Akuy
mimalmal sa irù nga mikáun sa isdà, I gave the dog that ate the fish a
sound beating. {2} [A; a12] use s.t. or scold s.o. abusively. Natural
nagubà ang makinilya kay gimalmal, Of course he broke the typewriter
because he abused it. Malmálun kag kasábà bísag gamayng sayup, You get
abusive scoldings for the slightest mistakes.

malpagadur a failing to pay one’s debts. v [B1256] get to be a
defaulter in one’s debts. Ug mamalpagadur ka, wà nay musálig pagpaútang
nímu, If you become a bad debtor, no one will dare allow you credit.
-a(←) = malpagadur (female).

maltabána n glazed brown urn, about 2′ high with a small mouth and
handles at the shoulders. v [A13; a12] make into, put in glazed clay
jars.

maltratar v [A; a12] maltreat, mistreat. Maltratahun siya sa íyang
amaáma, His stepfather will maltreat him.

*málu — pa ug {1} on the chance that [such-and-such] a good thing
happen. Palit tag swipstik, málu pag makaswirti, Let’s buy a sweepstake
ticket. We might just win. {2} [so-and-so] isn’t bad, if that is what
comes out. Málu pa nà ug swildúhan kag bayinting adlaw? Would it be bad
if you were paid twenty pesos a day?

malù_1 — [dat.] serves [dat.] right. Malù nímu nga gipagirawut kay
tapulan ka, Serves you right that you were fired because you are lazy.

malù_2, málù_1 n pollen of corn. v [A1] grow pollen. Dì na dúgayng
masanggì ang mais basta magmalù na, It won’t be long before the corn
can be harvested if there is pollen in the tassel.

málù_2 n the one who is ‘it’ in the game of takyan or marbles. v [A;
a12] make a person remain ‘it’ for a long time. Malúun kug maáyu si
Huwan pinaági sa pagpátid sa takyan ug layù, I’ll make Juan be ‘it’ for
a long time by kicking the shuttlecock far away.

malubgas n k.o. small anchovy with a dark blue dorsal region and
silvery white on its ventral region, widely eaten preserved in salt.

maluíbun n name given to ornamental climbing vines with dark green or
yellow green cordate leaves, often grown indoors: Scindapsus aureus and
Philodendron oxycardium.

málung n name of the sarong worn by the Muslims. v [A13; b6(1)] wear a
málung. {2} [a2] make into a málung.

malunggay = kalamunggay.

málus_1 a highly fermented salted fish paste. Málus na ang ginamus, The
salted fish paste is already highly fermented. v {1} [AB2] for salted
fish to become highly fermented, cause it to do so. {2} [B] develop a
horrible smell. Kalígù na kay nagkamálus ka na, Take a bath. You’re
beginning to smell awful.

malyíti n gavel.

malyurka n a k.o. liquor of low proof made from cane sugar, flavored
with anise.

mám n {1} ma’am, term of address to a teacher or woman of high station.
Maáyung buntag kanímu, mám, Good morning, Ma’am. {2} lady teacher. Usa
sa mga mám nákù sa hayiskul mau si Mis Agápay, One of my teachers in
high school was Miss Agapay. v [A13; a12] call s.o. Ma’am.

máma_1 n mother. v [B13; a12] call s.o. máma.

máma_2 n mute. v [B12] become a mute. Namáma nà siya tungud sa
kalísang, He was struck dumb by his great fright.

mamà n {1} chew of betel nut (búnga) and piper betel leaves (búyù) with
lime (ápug) and optionally tobacco. {2} action of chewing. v [AC12;
a12] chew betel nut. Dì ku makamamà kay hálang, I can’t chew betel
because it burns the tongue. — ug dugù v [A13; c] get a bloody mouth
(lit. chew blood). Magmamà ka giyug dugù ug hisumbagan ta ka, You will
have a bloody mouth if I punch you. mam-anan, malam-an n container for
the lime, betel nut, and betel leaf. malam-un n set of complete
ingredients ready for chewing. hiN- a fond of chewing betel.

mamadur n breast pump. v [b] use a breast pump.

mámam n {1} baby talk for inum ‘drink’. {2} drinking spree (humorous
slang). v {1} [A] drink (baby talk). {2} [AC; a] hold a drinking spree.
Puwa na ang tápay, nakamámam tingáli, His ears are red. He must have
had s.t. to drink.

mamay n {1} wet nurse. {2} any nursemaid. v {1} [A; a] wet-nurse.
Gimamay ang bátà nga ílu, The orphaned infant was wet-nursed. {2} [A;
a] take care of a child. Siyay nagmamay sa tanan námung mga bátà, She
took care of all our children.

mambad = manbad.

mambu n mambo, a Latin American dance and its music. v {1} [A; a12]
dance the mambo. {2} [c1] play music in mambo rhythm.

mámi_1 n mommy. v [A3; a12] call s.o. mommy.

mámi_2 n a Chinese dish consisting of soup and narrow egg noodles with
meat. v [A; a] make mámi.

mamilúku n child’s sunsuit, a one-piece romper with short pants and no
sleeves. v {1} [A; a] wear a sunsuit. {2} [c16] make into a sunsuit.

maming = lubaylúbay, n. see lubay.

mampud short for mánu man pud. see ngánu and upud.

Mampur n Montford, a person who is said to have lived in olden times.
karáan pa ni — older than Montford. Tabas sa íyang bistídu nga karáan
pa ni Mampur, Style of dress that dates back to Montford’s time.
panahun pa ni — very old, from Montford’s time. Sa panahun pa ni Mampur
ang ákung radiyu ug wà pa giyud magubà, My radio is as old as the hills
and still in fine shape. Sa panahun pa ni Mampur nang kumidiyáha, That
joke is as old as the hills.

mamsà_1 n {1} name given to the large species of Caranx, a
highly-prized food fish. {2} dakung — influential, important person.

mamsà_2 n schoolteacher, humorous word play on mám. Ayaw mug sábà kay
náa na si Mamsà, Everybody shut up. The teacher is coming. v [B126] be
a schoolmarm.

mamun_1 n k.o. sponge cake. v [A; a12] make, make into mamun.

mamun_2 n k.o. fruit tree similar to a gwayabanu but with a smaller and
rounder fruit: Anona sp.

mámurd, mámurds a {1} marbles without a flaw. {2} for girls to be
well-rounded and smooth-skinned. Mámurds kaáyu ang trátu ni Bin, Ben’s
girl friend is very beautiful. mamuray v [C2] compare which is the
smoothest, most well-rounded. Mamuray tag dyúlin, Let’s compare our
marbles to see which is the smoothest and best rounded.

man {1} because. Kay ang íya dapit man sa dáhun, mamúnga dáyun, Because
his part was the part with the leaves, it would bear fruit quickly. —
ugud because (giving an explanation). Namatay ang tanum kay wà man gud
bùbúi, The plant died because no one watered it. {2} after an
interrogative: particle to make the question not abrupt. Háin man siya?
Could you tell me where he is? {3} particle with a statement
contradicting a previous statement or presumption. Dì man nà mau,
That’s not the one. {4} particle with a statement giving information.
Nía man si Pidru karung buntága, Oh, Pedro is here this morning. — diay
I notice that. Nindut man diay ka kaáyung mukanta! Oh, I see you sing
very beautifully. — kahà [so-and-so] apparently is the case. Kami man
kahay muluhud, anus-a man ang kasal? We are supposed to sponsor you, so
when is the wedding going to be? Dì lang ka tagáan. Dì man kahà ka
gustu, I won’t give you any. You apparently won’t want any, anyway. —
lagi I notice [so-and-so] is the case, nevertheless. Ingun siya dì ka
muanhi. Nía ka man lagi, He said you weren’t coming, but here you are!
{5} in other phrases: ingun — as well as. Mubuhis ang tagasyudad ingun
man ang tagabaryu, The city people, as well as the barrio folks, pay
taxes. mau — gánì that’s why, despite what you would expect ... Mau man
gánì nga namula ang ákung pánit kay nabulad ku, I have red skin,
despite what you would expect, because I was out in the sun. na — see
na, 4. pála — run that’s flattery. Pála man run ug dì pa tinúud, That
would have been flattery if it were not true. túud — and so, as one
would expect. Túud man miabut dáyun ang pulis, And so, as one would
expect, the police immediately arrived.

maN- (see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol N) prefix added to bases
with a prefix paN- to indicate future volitional active forms. (past
naN-; subjunctive maN-. Durative forms: future and subjunctive
magpaN-(→); past nagpaN-(→). Potential active: future and subjunctive
makapaN-; past nakapaN-.) Mangutána ta kun háin siya, Let us ask where
he is. Wà siya mangutána, He didn’t ask. Nangutána ku piru way tubag, I
asked but there was no answer. Nagpanguput siya sa kahadluk, He held on
with all his might for fright. Walà ku makapangutána, I didn’t get a
chance to ask. Makapangasáwa ka na, You can get married now.

mana, mána_1 n a title of respect to a female older than the speaker.
v [A13; a12] call s.o. mána.

mána_2 n k.o. cultivated tree, the bark and leaves of which are used
for spices.

manáging n k.o. white parrot, the racket-tailed parrot: Prioniturus
discurus.

manalabtan see sabat.

manámù short for amahan námù n the Lord’s Prayer.

mananabtan see sabat.

manananggal = anananggal.

mananangkuy n folk doctor (general term). v [B13; a12] become a healer.

mananap n animal, beast, insect. a brute, having the feelings of a
beast. Ikawng mananápa ka. Ngánung gibun-ug man nímu ang ákung anak?
You beast. Why did you beat my son? -in- a beastly.

manan-aw n general name for ornamental air orchids.

manandis a henpecked husband. v [B2] become henpecked.

manang, mánang n {1} title for elder sister. {2} title given to any
woman older than the speaker. v [A13; a12] call s.o. manang. (→) voc.
form. short form: nang.

mananggíti n toddy gatherer. v [B156] be, become a toddy gatherer.

manánuy a sweet-sounding, melodious. Ang manánuyng tíngug sa langgam,
The sweet, melodious voice of the bird.

manátad n k.o. dove: the green-winged ground dove: Chalcophaps indica.
túlin pa sa — very swift.

manau, manaul_1 n k.o. parasitic air plant, with long linear lanceolate
leaves radiating from the center: Asplenium nidus.

manaul_2 n the white-breasted sea eagle: Haliaetus leucogaster.

manay, mánay n title for a female much older than the speaker. v [A13;
a12] call s.o. manáy. (→) voc. form.

maN-ay regional alternant of maN-r-.

manbad (from subad) n {1} any large deep-sea fish. {2} usurer. Nadátù
siya kay mambad nga dakù, He became rich because he was a great usurer.
{3} dakung — an important person of great influence. Si Lawril dakung
mambad sa pulitika, Laurel is a big figure in politics. a {1} fierce
and grasping. Púru mga mambad ang tagaadwána. Padug-un ka giyud ug
táman, The customs people are voracious beasts. They’ll bleed you dry.
{2} fierce, termagant woman. Túa na pud, gitapuk-an na pud si Tiryu sa
íyang mambad nga asáwa, There goes Terio’s shrewish wife at him again.
{3} s.o. that is dangerous to women. Ayawg túu níya kay mambad nà sa
mga babáyi, Don’t believe him because he is dangerous to women. ka-
n quality of being fierce and grasping. Ang kamambad sa pamingkúngan,
The fierceness of a hammerhead shark.

mandalúsa = salimbángun.

Mandalúyung n a district in Rizal, Luzon. taga-, gíkan sa — crazy (lit.
one who has been a patient at the mental hospital in Mandaluyong).

mandamyintu diaristu warrant of arrest.

mandǎr n {1} command; word or phrase esp. in set form by which a
command is given. Ang mandǎr sa kapitan pagpahúnung ug tíru, The
captain’s command to cease fire. {2} order, a serving of food in a
public eating place. Unsa man tuy ímung mandǎr, pipsi u kuk? What did
you order, Pepsi or Coke? v [A; c] {1} command, give an order to.
{1a} command, order people around. Nagmandǎr na sad ang tapulan, The
lazy lout is giving orders again. {2} order, request a serving to be
brought. Nakamandǎr na ba mu? Have you ordered? mandasiyun n command.
Ang mga ultimu mutúman sa mandasiyun sa kábu, The privates follow the
commands of the corporal. a liking to give orders. Mandasiyun kaáyu
nang ákung maguwang unyà dì mutábang sa trabáhu, My older brother loves
to give orders, and yet he doesn’t help with the work.

mandasiyun see mandǎr.

manday {1} it’s too late to be of use. Manday human na ang baratilyu,
It’s too late. The sale is over. {1a} just when s.t. happens that is
too late or inconvenient, s.t. else happens. Manday wà tay kwarta mu
puy idaut sa mga bátà, Just when we are broke, the children get sick.
Manday human ka nag káun mu pay ipanangpit, You invite me to eat only
after you’re done? Manday lumalarga na aku mu pay pagkaíla námù, We got
acquainted just as we were about to leave town. {2} — untà instead of
doing what was expected. Manday untà masukù siya, mipahíyum hinúun,
Instead of he getting angry, he smiled. {2a} although, despite the fact
that. Manday daghang anak, gastadur hinúun, Although she has lots of
children, she spends money like mad.†

mandi, manding n a title of address for an elder sister or female
relative much older than the speaker. v [B2; a12] call s.o. manding.

mandù v {1} [A; b6(1)] give an order, command. Gimandúan ang mga tríni
pagdágan líbut sa kampu, The trainees were ordered to run around the
camp. {2} [A; b6] rule or reign. Siya ang hára nga mimandù sa pangílin,
She was the queen that reigned over the fiesta. {3} [A3; b6] prevail.
Human sa makusug nga litì ug bagyu mimandù ang túmang kalínaw, After
the fierce thunderstorm, quiet prevailed. n {1} order, command. Tumána
ang ákung mandù, Carry out my order. mag-r- n ruler, commander. ma-un
a commanding. ‘Lakaw,’ tíngug ni Aldu nga mamandúun, ‘Go!’ said Aldo in
a commanding voice. ka-an n area over which s.o. rules. Ang kamandúan
sa armi pinangulúhan ni Hiniral Riyis, The Army Command is headed by
General Reyes.

mandunggu n beef tripes. mandunggáda n dish made of blood and the
internal organs of beef. v [A12; a12] make, make into a dish of blood
and internal organs of beef.

manga always written mga. {1} particle optionally placed preceding a
noun or adjective to indicate plurals, but referring only to things
that are not all exactly alike. Ang mga istudiyanti nanambung sa
míting, The various students attended the meeting. Mga karáan kining
mga libru, These are all old books. {1a} particle preceding the name
for parts of the body of which there are more than one. Sakit ákung mga
mata, My eyes hurt. {2} preceding a form referring to time,
measurement: about, approximately. Mga alas utsu, At around eight
o’clock. Mupalit kug kutsi, tingáli mga Iníru, I will buy a car,
probably around January. Mga duha ka búwan kanhi, About two months ago.
Mga duha ka pulgáda, About two inches. Mga dus písus, Around two pesos.

mangagat, mangágat n snapper, name given to most species of Lutianus.

mangágaw n k.o. annual, stiff-haired herb, much-branched from the base,
with small flowers in dense axilliary clusters. The stem yields a white
milky sap which is used to cure fevers: Euphorbia pilulifera and hirta.

mangga n mango: Mangifera indica. manggáhun a {1} plump in cheeks.
{2} having red splotches like some varieties of mangoes. manggahan
n mango orchard. v [A13] grow mangoes.

manggad n {1} prized position, treasure, riches, wealth. Náa sa baul
ibutang ang ílang manggad, Their treasures are placed inside a trunk.
{2} dry goods. Nabasà ang mga manggad nga íyang gisúruy, The dry goods
he was peddling got wet. v {1} [AB; c] treasure, hold s.t. dear. Wà
sila magmanggad sa kabílin sa ílang katigulángan, They do not value the
things their ancestors left them. Manggára (imanggad) ang íyang mga
púlung, Treasure his words. {2} [A] care for with devotion, lavish
attention. Way mumanggad sa ákung mga tanum ug mubyáhi ku, No one will
tend to my plants if I go on a trip. manggaránun a wealthy, rich.
Lagmit sa mga manggaránun mga garbúsu, The rich are usually arrogant.

manggas n {1} sleeve, cuff. Íyang gilúkut ang manggas sa íyang
kamisadintru, He rolled up his shirt sleeves. {2} bottom of trousers.
Bukad ug manggas ang bilbátum, Bell-bottom trousers have wide trouser
legs. v [A; a] provide with sleeves or cuffs.

manggátus see gatus.

manggi- the future volitional active form of verbs with a prefix
panggi-. past: nanggi-. Didtu sila sa sála manggidáma, They were in the
living room playing checkers.

manggilis n k.o. sweet potato with light reddish peelings and white
meat. Its rather dry meat makes it good eating.

manggi-un(←) alternant of ma-un used with some bases instead of ma-un.
Manggihatágun, Generous.

manggu n handle of a pick, ax or a similar tool. v [b6(1)] make a
handle of this sort.

manggulimbaw n k.o. shrimp growing to 1½″ with one claw bigger than the
other.

manggustan n mangosteen.

manghud n younger brother, sister. a {1} younger in age than s.o. else.
Manghud ka nákug duha ka túig, You are two years younger than I am.
{2} less in intensity. Ang íyang pátid manghud lag diyútay sa pátid sa
kabáyung simarun, His kick was just a little less than a wild horse’s.
Ang ímung tíngug manghud lag diyútay sa hunghung, Your voice is just a
little softer than a whisper. v [A1; b(1)] have a younger brother or
sister. Pilay idad sa nagmanghud ning batáa? How old is the child just
before this one? Anus-a man nà siya manghúri? When are you going to
have another baby (lit. when is he going to have a younger brother or
sister)? ig- n younger brother or sister. Kanang mga gagmayng bátà
pulus níya igmanghud, Those little children are all his younger
brothers and sisters. kamanghúran, kinamanghúran n youngest child.

mangkay n old maid. Dílì tanang mangkay masulub-un, Not all spinsters
are lonely. v [B1; c1] become an old maid.

mangkimangki n fast dance characterized by monkey-like movements of the
hands. v [A] dance the mangkimangki.

mangku n s.o. with an arm deformity characterized by being twisted at
the elbow. v [B12] have a deformed arm. Namangku siya dihang napíang
íyang síku, He got a deformed arm when he broke his elbow.

mangkù n k.o. small mackerel with a maximum width of 3″.

mangkumu = † magkunu.

mangliw, mangluy = amamangluy.

mangnu, mangnù v {1} [A12; b2] remember. Hatági kug diyútay nga panahun
tingálig mamangnuan (himangnuan) ku, Give me a little time. Maybe I
will remember it. {2} [AP] cause to notice, be aware of. Ang pagbagting
sa rilu mauy nagmangnù (nagpamangnù) nákù nga udtu na, The ringing of
the clock reminded me that it was already noon. {2a} [A] be careful.
Magmangnù (magmangnù) ka kanúnay arun dì ka masayup, Be careful so that
you won’t commit any mistakes. {3} [A12; b2] come to. Didtu na siya
makamangnù sa huspital, He regained consciousness in the hospital.
pahi- v [A; b6(1)] advise, instruct s.o. not to do s.t. Gipahimangnúan
ku siya nga dílì pasudlag ínit ang pridyidir, I have warned him against
putting anything hot into the refrigerator. n instruction against.

mangsi = malangsi.

mangtas n {1} cruel, fierce beast. Ang táwung nalúnud gikaun sa usa ka
mangtas sa dágat, The drowning man was eaten up by the shark (lit.
fierce beast of the sea). {2} fierce, heartless in character. Dílì
makamaung malúuy sa pubri kanang mangtas nga adunáhan, That heartless
rich man does not know pity for the poor. Mangtas nga katalagman, A
fearful calamity. v [B2; b6] be, become fierce and devoid of tender
feelings.

mangù a brainless, dull, stupid. Mangù ka man kahà kay dì ka man
kasabut, You must be brainless because you don’t understand. v [B23;
b6] be, become stupid.

Mangyan n non-Christian natives of Mindoro.

manhak n k.o. bird.

mani n peanuts. — sa kasuy a the edible nuts of the cashew. manimani
{1} k.o. creeping herb similar to purslane (ulasíman) in appearance,
used as pig feed. {2} k.o. balat found a few inches beneath the sand
along the shore. It roughly resembles a peanut.

*máni n dinuwin, gud — during World War II, the name given to the
prewar money as opposed to the Japanese kurà and the imirdyinsi máni.
girilya — money issued by the guerilla authorities during the war.
imirdyinsi — the emergency money issued after the outbreak of
hostilities and prior to the Japanese occupation. — urdir money order.

manibila = manubíla.

mánids v [A] manage a business. -ir(→) manager. -ir(→) hiniral
n general manager. n manager of a business or boxer. v [AB156] be,
become manager.

maníhu v [A; a2] {1} drive a motor vehicle. Ambi, aku lay mumaníhu sa
dyíp, Let me drive the jeep. {2} operate or manipulate a contraption.
Makamaníhu man nà siyag dagkung makina, He can operate big machines.
{3} manage to make s.t. operate. Manihúa ra ring pawuntin pin ug
makahímù ka bag paági, Try fooling around with this fountain pen and
see if you can make it write. {3a} see to it that s.t. gets done. Aku
lay mumaníhu arun magmalampúsun ang átung prugráma, I’ll see to it that
our program is successful. {3b} manage to do s.t. in a roundabout or
underhanded way, where the usual methods won’t work. Makamaníhu ka ba
pagpasulud nákù sa trabáhu? Can you manage to get me into the job?
{3c} do s.t. surreptitiously or secretly. Lingawun ku ang tindíra
manihúa pud ang káha, While I keep the store clerk busy, you take care
of the cash register.

maniit n k.o. edible, small crab of shallow waters with a thick shell
and strong pincers. a quarrelsome, esp. said of women.

manikin n mannequin.

manikiyur n nail polish. v [A; b] manicure. -ista n a manicurist.
v [B156; a12] be a manicurist.

Maníla, Manílà_1 n Manila, the largest city in the Philippines. — buy
boy who has grown up in Manila and is, therefore, sophisticated. —
pípar Manila paper. v [B1256] be in Manila. manilan-un n from Manila,
of the Manila type. manilinyu, -a n one from Manila.

manílà_2 n k.o. striped grouper: Grammistes sexlineatus.

maniN- future volitional prefix of verbs with the base paniN-. (Past:
naniN-. Subjunctive: maniN-.) Manimalus giyud ku, I will get revenge.
Walà ku manimúhì sa ákung gikuptan, I didn’t let go what I was holding
on to.

manínay n godmother, the female sponsor at one’s wedding, and, by
extension, the sponsor at one’s baptism, confirmation, or ordination.
v [A; a] become one’s godmother.

maniníyut n photographer. Word play on maniníyat to make it sound
humorously risqué (recalling iyut, the taboo word for sexual
intercourse).

manínuy n godfather, the sponsor at one’s wedding, and, by extension,
at one’s baptism, confirmation, or ordination. v [A; a] become one’s
godfather.

manistil = mistil.

maniubra n {1} maneuver, skillful handling of a vehicle. {2} s.t. done
in a secret and underhanded way. Maniubra sa pulitika, A political
maneuver. v [A; c1] {1} maneuver s.t. skillfully. Maniubráha
(imaniubra) pag-áyu ang sakayan arun dílì masángad, Manipulate the boat
skillfully so that it won’t run aground. {2} contrive s.t. skillfully
in an underhanded way. Nakalusut dáyun ang ákung lún sa bangku kay
gimaniubrag maáyu sa ákung amígu, My loan went through OK because my
friend maneuvered it skillfully.

mankumunidad n commonwealth. v [B1256] become a commonwealth.

maN-l- {1} = maN-r-, but used only regionally. {2} affix added to verbs
referring to sorcery, praying, and other relations with the
supernatural to form nouns which mean one who engages in this activity.
Manalagnà, Seer. Manalabtan, Leader in prayers. Mamalaktul, One who
practices the sorcery called paktul.

manlà n k.o. edible crustacean similar to a prawn but with pincers. It
burrows under soft mud in swampy places.

manlawud (from lawud) n name given to fishes that are found in deep
waters.

manlulundà = manulunda.

manlut_1 = banlut.

manlut_2 n k.o. large, green grasshopper.

maN-r- affix added to verb bases to form a noun referring to a person
who does [such-and-such] as an occupation. It is most commonly added to
roots which form verbs by the addition of paN-. Mangingisdà, Fisherman.
Mananabang, Midwife. Manunúnud, Heir.

maN-r-ay regional alternant of maN-r-.

mansa n {1} stain. Dílì makúhà ang mansa sa tubà, Stains from palm
toddy won’t come out. {2} moral blemish, dishonor. Walay mansa ang
ákung ngálan, My name is unsullied. v [A; b25] {1} stain. {2} stain
one’s honor. Kaputlì nga walà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían, Purity that
has not been stained by experience. -du a {1} stained. Dì giyud nà siya
musul-ub ug sinínà nga mansádu, She never wears stained clothes.
{2} easily stained. Mansádu kaáyu ang sinínà nga putì, A white dress
easily gets dirty. mansahun a {1} having stains. {2} panty stained with
blood. Iladlad pag-áyu ang mga mansahun, Bleach those stained panties
very well.

mansánas n apple.

mansanilya n k.o. perennial aromatic herb cultivated for ornamental and
medicinal purposes: Chrysanthemum indicum.

mansanítas n small spreading tree of waste spaces, the bast fibers of
which make rope in times of scarcity: Muntingia calabura.

mansibádu n common-law couple. v [B16; a12] live as man and wife
without the benefit of a church wedding.

mansinítas = mansanítas.

mansiyun n mansion.

mansu v [A; a] {1} break in a work animal. Si Dyígu ray makamansu ning
kabayúa, Only Diego can tame this horse. {2} train, discipline s.o.
Namansu sa párì ang walay hibangkaágan nga bátà, The priest trained the
child that was innocent of all knowledge. {2a} give s.o. a lot of work
to do. Kining batáa namansu sa mga trabáhu sa balay, The household
chores were dumped on the child. mansuhan, mansuhánan n training
ground.

mantágà = mantalágà.

mantálà (not without l) v {1} [A13] herald, announce. Ang tuktugáuk sa
sunuy nagmantálà sa umaábut nga kabuntágun, The crowing of the rooster
announces the approaching morning. {2} [A; c] publish in a magazine or
newspaper. Gimantálà sa mantaláan ang umaábut nílang kasal, Their
approaching wedding was published in the papers. {3} [A13] advertise.
Mga lúhà nga nagmantálà sa ákung kapildíhan, Tears that advertised my
defeat. -an, paN-an n {1} newspaper, magazine. {2} press. mag-r-
n publisher. tagapaN- n press relations officer. tig- n {1} advertising
man. Milíhuk ang tigmantálà sa bag-ung kumpaníya, The new company’s ad
man worked hard. {2} an announcer, s.o. or s.t. who or that spreads
talk or news around. Kanang bayhána mauy tigmantálà sa tanang mahinabù
dinhi, That woman is the person who spreads the gossip of all that is
going on around here. {3} publisher.

mantalágà n giant octopus.

mantas = mangtas.

mantiának = mantiyának.

mantíaw interjection showing dismay and displeasure, but to be taken
lightly. Mantíaw ning batáa, muulì lag mukáun, My! This child never
comes home except to eat.

mantíkà n {1} lard, fat from flesh. {1a} lúpig pay — kun matúlug
tending to sleep deeply (lit. better at sleeping than lard).
{2} cooking oil. bugnaw ug — derisive reference to one who has indolent
habits or is a slowpoke. (→) v {1} [A; b] fry in lard. Mantikai ang
báhaw, Fry the leftover food. {2} [A] exude lard or oil. Haúna dáyun
kun mumantikà na ang tambuk, Take the pan out of the fire when lard
comes out of the pork fat. {3} [A] for public transportation to move
slowly and sluggishly at times that there are few passengers. Wà giyuy
pasahíru. Nagmantikà ang trák sa dálan, There are few passengers, and
the bus is moving slowly down the street empty. -in-an n food fried in
oil. -un a {1} greasy. Sud-an nga mantikáun, Greasy food. {2} obese.
Babáying mantikáun, An obese woman.

mantíka dikakaw n cocoa butter.

mantikilya n butter or margarine. v [A; c] spread butter on s.t.

mantil n tablecloth. v {1} [A; b] put, use a tablecloth. {2} [a12] make
into a tablecloth.

mantilya n veil used to cover a woman’s head in church. v {1} [A; b]
wear a veil. {2} [a12] make into a veil.

mantilyína n head covering for wearing inside a church. v [A; c] wear a
head covering in church.

mantinil, mantinir v [A3; c] make do with, content oneself with s.t.
less than the best. Magmantinil lang tag amútig way bugas, We’ll make
do with sweet potatoes if there’s no rice. Nagmantinil lang siyag
pangarga, He just took a temporary job as a stevedore. Mantiniri
(mantinihi) lag kawáyan pára halígi ang balay, Just use bamboo for the
meantime as a post for the house. -in- a of makeshift or second choice
sort.

mantiw a tall and lanky. v [B; b6] be, become, make lanky.

mantiyának n supernatural being which preys on newborn infants. It
drinks the blood from childbirth and tries to get at the newborn baby’s
liver. If the baby dies, he drinks the mother’s milk without her
knowledge and kills her thereby. It is pictured the size of a baby,
with horns and fangs, with long pointed ears, dirty brown in color and
angular in features. It has the ability to walk, change its appearance,
and make itself invisible.

mantsa = mansa.

mantsinítas = mansanítas.

mantsúsu a easily soiled or stained. Mantsúsu kaáyu ang putì nga
bistídu, White clothing gets soiled easily. v [A3P; b6] be, become
easily soiled.

mánu_1 v [AC2; a] in ball games, play off one with another to determine
who plays first or whose play it is. Átung manúhun ug kinsay mayur,
I’ll play it off with you to see who starts the game. n act of
determining the order of who plays first. manuhan n a line from which
s.t. is tossed to determine who is first.

mánu_2 n title of address for a male older than the speaker. v [A; a12]
call s.o. mánu.

mánu_3 n hand of dried tobacco leaves containing 100 leaves. v [A; a12]
bind tobacco leaves into hands.

mánu_4 = ngánu.

*mánu_5 see dimánu, armas di-, bula di-, buyna —, sigunda —. manumánu
v [AC2; c1] do s.t. by human strength, hands alone. Manumanúhun
(imanumánu) lang ni nátug bira ang awtu, Let’s just push this car by
hand. n fight with the hands. †

manúbig (from túbig) n k.o. crab of swamps and rivers lighter in color
than the kágang.

manubíla n a mechanism one manipulates to steer: steering wheel, handle
bars, etc. v [c1] make a steering mechanism.

Manúbu, Manúbù n name of an ethnic group in the mountains of eastern
Mindanao.

manugimpu, manugimpul n k.o. parasitic plant which attaches itself to
trees. It extends out a vine-like trunk which clings and covers the
host.

manuk n {1} chicken. Pinirítung manuk, Fried chicken. {1a} layù ra sa
tinái sa — {1a1} off the subject, not to the point. (Lit. far from the
chicken’s intestines.) {1a2} wound of no consequence, harmless scratch.
{2} gamecock. {2a} a protegé involved in any race or competition:
politics, boxing, love, et al. Napildi ang íyang manuk, His candidate
(protegé) was defeated. v {1} [A1] have chicken for one’s meal. {2} [A;
a12] make s.o. one’s protegé, candidate in a competition. Akuy mumanuk
nímu ug dì ba sugut dáyun nang bayhána, If I put you up as a candidate
that girl will surely accept you. Midaug siya kay gimanuk mang Sirhing,
He got elected because he was a protege of Serging’s. -an, -an(←)
n {1} poultry business. {2} one who has lots of chickens. v [A1] have a
poultry business. -in- a sleeping half-awake because of insomnia or
because of a need to remain conscious. v [A; c1] sleep in such manner.
Magminanuk kug katū́g paghuwat sa pirs trip, I’m just going to nap
because I have to make it to the first trip. -un(←) a slightly
cross-eyed. Gwápa untang bayhána, ugáling manúkun lang, That girl is
beautiful, but she is cross-eyed. n = lukgaw. -un a = -un(←), a. n the
cow-nosed ray, so called because it moves like a bird in the water:
Rhinoptera javanica.

manukmánuk n {1} wind coming in strong gusts. {2} weather vane.
v [B456; b4] be caught in gusting winds. Piligrung ilawud ug
magmanukmánuk ang hángin, It’s dangerous to set sail in gusty weather.

manukúlu n monocle. v {1} [A1] wear a monocle. {2} [A12] get a monocle.

manul n variety of jasmine of the same species as sampagíta but with
double petals and rounded leaves: Jasmimum spp.

manulunda, manulundà n angel. Daw manulundà ang íyang kaanyag, She has
the beauty of an angel.

manumbága = tinumbága. see tumbága.

manung, mánung n {1} title for an elder brother. {2} title of respect
for a man older than the speaker. v [A; a12] call s.o. mánung. (→) voc.
form. Short form: nung.

manunggal n k.o. tree.

manunggul n k.o. limestone found in tidal flats, rough and irregular in
surface, grey on the outside, but white on the inside. It is used for
road surfacing, stone walls, or wherever a porous stone is desirable.

mánus = amánus.

manútu = mánu_3.

mánuy n {1} title for an elder brother or uncle. {2} expression used by
a person who has been defeated in a scuffle to indicate submission.
Hala, mánuy arun dílì ku lubáun ning ímung buktun, Go on, say ‘uncle’
so I won’t twist your arm. v [A; a12] call s.o. mánuy. (→) voc. form.
Short form: nuy.

manwal n manual, handbook.

manya n {1} fit of bad temper. Ang paghilakhílak ánang batáa manya lang
nà, That child’s persistent crying is just a tantrum. {2} caprice,
fancy. Manya lang tung pagpapalit níyag láing sapátus, His asking for
another pair of shoes was just out of caprice. a for a horse to tend to
balk, move slow. v {1} [B; c1] throw a tantrum, act like a spoiled
brat. {2} [A; b6] for a horse to throw a fit or just balk. Dinhà giyud
sa kinasang-an ang kabáyù magmanya, ug wà mulíhuk bísag unsáug búnal,
The horse balked right in the middle of the crossing and wouldn’t move
no matter how hard it was whipped. {3} [A; b5c1] move slowly. Ang
mumanya ug tambung sa lamísa dì masalinan, If you dilly-dally in
getting to the table, nothing will be left for you.

manyak a having an uncontrollable urge to do things, esp. sexual.
v [B12; b6] be, become a maniac. Namanyak siya human makatilaw ug
kausa, She became a nympho after her first experience. Ngánung namanyak
man siya sa pangáwat nga sapían man? Why did she become a kleptomaniac
when she is so rich?

manyampuk = láwung.

*manyána — ka lang, ka purin you’re out of it, you don’t know what’s
going on. Manyána ka lang (purin). Nagkúyug ímung trátug láin, You
don’t know what’s going on. Your boy friend is going out with other
girls.

manyang n hard liquor distilled from fermented water obtained from the
bud of the nipa palm.

mápa n map. v {1} [A; b(1)] plan a course of action, esp. in committing
a crime. Nagmápa sila unsáun pagtúlis ang tindáhan, They are planning
how to rob the store. {2} [B36; b] for dirt or stains to form a
map-like configuration on s.t. Mimápa ang íyang buling sa líug, The
dirt formed map-like configurations on his neck. Gimapáhan sa tintà ang
ímung bulsa, The ink has formed a map-like configuration on your
pocket.

máping_1 = mápa, v1.

mapunti = malapunti.

Mar. n abbreviation for Marsu ‘March’.

marabal a person or animal that has grown very large. Kadakung marabal
sa ilipanti, What a giant that elephant is! Kadakung marabal ning
batáa, What a giant this child has gotten to be.

marabilyas n a k.o. ornamental bush often called alas kwatru because
its flowers open at around four o’clock in the afternoon: Mirabilis
jalapa.

marabya = murabya.

maragábit n k.o. rice suitable for planting in uplands or in paddies.

maragáti n k.o. fishing whereby a line with several hooks baited only
with decoys is dragged behind a boat.

marákas n maracas. v [A3; a] play the maracas, make into maracas.

maral n k.o. carnivorous civet, dark gray in color, having a very
offensive odor.

máram = márang.

maramà, marámà a tough, roughneck. Ang marámà nga táwu ísug ug walay
gikahadlúkan, A tough guy is rough and is not afraid of anyone. v [B12]
be tough and bad.

Maranaw n Lanao Muslims.

marang = malasugi.

márang n k.o. large fruit tree, bearing fruit similar to the jackfruit
(nangkà), but smaller and sweeter. Not commonly cultivated except in
Mindanao: Artocarpus odoratissima.

marapíta n variety of banana with thick green peelings, 20 cm. long and
{5} cm. wide coming to what looks like a nipple at the end, eaten
cooked.

maratun n {1} marathon race. {2} any long-distance or endurance
contest. v [C2; c1] hold a marathon, compete in a marathon.

marbas n k.o. half-woody herb of waste places, with numerous medicinal
uses: Abutilon indicum.

margarin, margarína n margarine. v [A; b] put margarine on s.t.

margáti n system of planting rice which has increased the yield,
whereby the bed is more carefully prepared and the seedlings planted
further apart than is traditionally done.

mari = kumári.

maribágu n k.o. shrub of the seashore: Hibiscus tiliaceus.

maribuhuk = agúhu.

mariguld = ahítu.

marihwána n marijuana.

márik n pickax. v [A; a] do s.t. with a pickax.

marika = umari ka. see ari.

marína n collar in a woman’s dress. Taúri unyag marína ang ákung
sinínà, Attach a collar to my dress. v {1} [b6(1)] attach, make a
collar. {2} [a12] make into a collar.

mariníra n sailor’s collar or the middy collar on a woman’s dress.
v [A; c] make a middy collar.

marínu n sailor on a merchant ship or in the navy or soldier assigned
on a boat. v [B156] be a sailor. Magmarínu kang dagatun ka man? You
want to be a sailor even if you easily get seasick? asul — navy blue.
mariníru = marínu.

maripúsa n a k.o. orchid that has flowers that look like white
butterflies, branching in sprays: Phalaenopsis amabilis.

marísi = mirísi.

Maríya name Mary. — klára {1} character in Rizal’s Noli Me Tangere who
embodied the traditionally praised feminine virtues of modesty and
shyness. {2} traditional nineteenth century costume with a full skirt
and low-cut blouse worn with a triangularly-folded kerchief. v [A; c16]
behave like or act the role of Maria Clara. {2} wear the Maria Clara. —
Santisima n The Blessed Virgin Mary. Santa — n mildly profane
exclamation of discomfiture. buhuk ni — = maribuhuk. see agúhù. †

maríya buhuk = maribuhuk. see agúhù.

mariyal = máha riyal. see máha.

marka n {1} a visible trace or impression on a surface. Dúnay mga marka
sa tiil sa kawatan didtu, The burglar left footprints over there. {2} a
brand, label or sign printed, written, or stamped on s.t. Unsay marka
ánang ribintadúra? What brand are those firecrackers? {3} grade in
school. Pagtuun pag-áyu arun muísa ang marka mu sa klási, Study hard so
that your grades will get better. v {1} [A; b] put a mark on. Kinsay
nagmarka áning ákung libru? Who put a mark in my book? Markáhan sa mga
inspiktur ang karni únà ibaligyà, The meat inspectors will first stamp
a mark on the meat before having it sold. {2} [A] for a meter to give
an indication, read. Nagmarka nag utsinta ang dágan sa awtu, The
speedometer already read eighty. {3} [b] be eyed for a purpose.
Gimarkáhang patyun, Marked for assassination. Sapátus nga gimarkáhan
níyang palitun, Shoes which he has long been having his eye on. —
bulkan n twenty-peso bill (slang—so called from the picture of Mount
Mayon that was on the back of the bill in former times). — dimunyu
n strong liquor, so called from a brand of strong liquor which has the
picture of the devil on it. — kalabíra n the skull markings on the
container of highly poisonous matter. v [B26N] be dead (slang). Biyà sa
ínum arun dì ka mamarka kalabíra ug sayu, Stop drinking or you will die
young.

markir n {1} marker or piece of paper to keep track of the lines.
{2} marker put s.w. to indicate a location.

markis n marquis. v [AB156; a12] be made or become a marquis. -a(←)
n marchioness.

*markit may (walay) — marriageable (not) marriageable. Minyù nang
tawhána, wà na nay markit, That man is already married. He is not
available any more. walà ang — v [B126; a12] get to be unavailable for
marriage or considered so to be.

marku_1 n wall stud. v [A; a] make a wall stud.

marku_2 n breasts. Nagbitay ang mga marku sa babáyi, mu rag búnga sa
kapáyas, The woman’s breasts are hanging like papayas. v [A; a] nudge
s.o. in the breast.

markut v [A; b] propagate plants by marcotting. n propagation of plants
by marcotting.

marmul n marble. Dúwang nga marmul, A marble font. v [A12; a1] have
marble, make into marble.

marpil n false teeth. v {1} [A1; b6] have false teeth. Kinahanglang
marpílan ang ímung pangag, You should have a bridge made for your
missing tooth. {2} [A; a] make into false teeth.

marsanti = martsanti.

marsíku = amursíku.

marsiyal n marshall, a military commander. Mag-una ang marsiyal ug may
paráda, The marshall leads a parade. v [A; b6] be, become a marshall.

Marsu n March. see abril for verb forms.

marsútu n k.o. suiting material of high quality (from the brand name
Marsotto). v [A1] wear clothing made of this cloth.

martabána = maltabána.

Marti n Mars.

martilyu n hammer. — dikabra n claw hammer. — dibúla n ball peen
hammer. v [A; a1] hammer. Martilyúha ang tabla arun matangtang, Hit the
piece of wood with a hammer to get it off.

martiníku = bartuníku.

martir n {1} martyr. — sa Gulgúta Jesus Christ. {2} one who has
suffered like a martyr. Si Lusíla usa ka martir tungud kay gisákit
siyag maáyu sa íyang bána, Lucila is a martyr because she is tortured
by her husband. v [Ab16] make s.o. suffer like a martyr.

Martis n Tuesday. See birnis for verb forms. — Santu the Tuesday of the
Holy Week.

*marts un yur —, sagitsit, gu command in a race: On your mark, get set,
go!

martsa v {1} [A; b6] march. {1a} attend one’s graduation exercises.
{2} [A; c1] dance a march or play a march number. n speed of an
automotive transmission used at higher speed. Kwarta, kinta martsa,
Fourth, fifth gear.

martsanti n middleman, one who buys and sells commodities between
producers and retailers.

martuníku = bartuníku.

marubya = murabya.

marúnung a {1} wise to the ways of the world. Dì nà maílad kay marúnung
nà, He knows what’s coming off. You can’t fool him. {2} have proficient
knowledge or skill in s.t. Katubag si Pidru sa lisud nga pangutána.
Marúnung giyud, Peter was able to answer the questions. He certainly is
bright. v [B12] be, become sly or crafty. -in-(→) v [A; c1] do s.t. in
a cunning, sly way. Minarununga (iminarunung) sad nà pagpaági arun ka
makabalus, Be cunning about it so you can get revenge.

maruy = miruy.

marúya n name given to a variety of sweets, all of which are formed
into rounded patties and fried: {1} made of ground rice. {2} made of
sliced bananas. (= bangdaybangday). {3} made of shredded sweet potatoes
(= bitsubitsu). v [A; a] make marúya.

maryánas = biyatilis.

Maryúsip see hisusmaryusip.

*mas {1} — [adj.] more [adj.]. Ang ákung balay mas gamay sa imúha, My
house is smaller than your house. Mas maáyu nga pritúhun ni kay sa
tanukun, It is much better to fry this than to boil it. {2} — báli it
is better to [do]. Mas báli ihátag kay sa hulaman nga dílì iúlì, I
would rather give s.t. away than lend it and not get it back.

mása_1 v [A; a] mix solids with a little liquid. Kinsay mumása sa
simintu? Who’ll mix the cement? Masáha na nang himúung dúnat, Mix the
dough for the doughnuts now. n {1} dough or other mixture of solids
with water. {2} proportions, things that make up a mixture. Ang másang
gigámit tris dus, They use a mixture in proportions of three to two.
masahan n place to mix dough or similar mixtures.

mása_2 n the masses, common people. — kumun n {1} common masses.
{2} property owned in common by heirs.

masáhi v [A; b] massage. Masahían ta nang ímung páang gipamaúlan, Let’s
massage your sore legs. n massage. -sta n masseur, masseuse. v [B156;
a12] be, become a masseur.

masámung n a man who is married into one’s immediate family—i.e., is
married to one’s sister or daughter. Masámung si Íki námù kay naminyù
siyang Maríyang ákung manghud. Masámung sad siya sa ákung ginikánan,
Eke is a masámung to us because he married my sister Maria. He’s also
my parents’ masámung. v [A12; a12] get as a son- or brother-in-law; be,
become this relation.

másang v [A23; c1] hit s.t. directly with full impact. Mimásang sa
ákung nawung ang íyang kúmù, His fist smashed into my face. Imásang
(masánga) ang garapun sa pusti, Smash the glass jar against the post.

masariyal = máha riyal. see máha.

mási n k.o. sweet made from mashed taro or ground sticky rice formed
into balls with peanuts. v [A; c1] make mási.

*masig_1 — ka [noun] each of two or more in a group. Nahiyusan ang
masig ka ligid, All of the wheels had a flat tire. Nagdápat ang ílang
masig ka áping, Their two cheeks touched.

masig_2 short for maskin ug. See bísan.

masimasi v [A; b5] hurry s.o. to work. Ug náay magmasimasi nátug
patrabáhu, dì na hinúun tang katunung, We make mistakes if we are
always pressed to hurry our work. Dílì kaáyu haum ang sinínà kay
gimasimasi (gimasimasihan) man ang sastri ug pahuman, The dress does
not fit well because the dressmaker was pressed to finish it hurriedly.
ka- v [A13] be pressed to work in a frenzy. Magkamasimasi mig panlútù
basta pyista, mau nga dì mi makalingawlíngaw, We get so busy cooking
during fiestas we can’t enjoy ourselves.

masimási n mashi-mashi, a k.o. dance. v [A] dance the mashi-mashi.

masin-gan = masinggan.

masinggan n {1} machine gun. {2} k.o. rapid-firing bamboo popgun. v [A;
a12] shoot with a machine gun. -in- a like a machine gun. Kasábang
minasinggan, Scolding like a burst of machine gun fire.

masítas n small ornamental plants, a flower pot with a plant in it. —
sa ingkantu = lukdulukdu. v [A12] obtain ornamental plants. -an(→)
n flower pot. masitíra n flower pot.

masiyar v [A; c1] {1} offer, quote a price in selling. Ug mumasiyar
siya sa kálù ug písus, palita, If he offers the hat for a peso, buy it.
{2} bet money on s.t. Áning manúka mumasiyar ku ug mil písus, On this
cock I will bet a thousand pesos. masyáda n {1} the amount placed as
bet. Gatus ang ákung masyáda apan sitinta ray gidáwat, I wanted to bet
one hundred, but they only accepted seventy. {2} total amount of money
bet by both sides. {3} fee paid in playing a set of bowling, tennis,
pingpong, and the like. v [A; b] pay this fee. masyadur n the person in
cockfighting who calls out bets offered and matches them with other
bets.

maskáda n bits of tobacco for chewing. v [A; a] chew tobacco.

maskara n mask. v [A; b] wear a mask.

maski, maskin = bísan.

maskipap, maskipaps n k.o. popular dance. v [A] do this dance.

maskirid bul n masquerade ball. v [A1; c1] hold a masquerade ball.

maskuláda = muskuládu (female).

maskuládu = muskuládu.

masputítu, masputítus n k.o. dance, the mashed potatoes. v [A] do this
dance.

*mastir — kátir n master cutter of a tailoring shop. — ki n master key.
— mayind n mastermind. v [A; a2] be the mastermind. Pulis ang
nagmastirmayind sa túlis, A cop masterminded the robbery.

masturbisyun n k.o. dance wherein both hands are alternately used as if
masturbating. v [A] do the masturbation dance.

másu n sledge hammer. v [A; a1] do s.t. with, make into a sledge
hammer.

mas-uk v [B126] die, be killed. Nakrás ang ayruplánu ug namas-uk ang
pilútu, The plane crashed and the pilot got killed.

masun n freemason. v [B156] become a freemason.

masuy n brand of mild liquor taken for medicinal purposes or for
pleasure. bínu uy — = masuy.

masyáda see masiyar.

masyádu a {1} being too much of s.t. Kini si Tunyu masyádu na, dúgayng
mukáun ug dì pa manghúgas sa plátu, This Tonio is too much; he eats
late and doesn’t even do the dishes. {2} how very. Masyádu kamahal! How
very expensive!

masyadur see masiyar.

masyaw n yellow corn.

mat n mat for gymnastics.

mát n math, a subject in school.

mata n {1} eyes. Nagluhang mga mata, Eyes filled with tears.
{1a} tawutáwu sa — the pupil of the eyes. {2} eyeglasses. Nangítà ku sa
ákung mata, I’m looking for my glasses. {3} eyelets in the shoes.
{4} any growth or structure in some way similar to the eyes. — sa
báling mesh of the net. — sa baskit mesh of the basket. — sa lubi two
spots in the coconut shell which resemble human eyes. — sa gábi a
button-like outgrowth on the flesh of the taro rootstock. — sa, ug
lumban an eye-like operculum found in turban shells. — sa pinya eyes of
the pineapple, the hollow cavity found on the surface of the flesh of
the pineapple fruit which contains seeds. -g tikì n small boil that has
come to a head. {5} — sa ulitáwu (dalága) expression used when playing
with children to make them blink their eyes. {6} = ay_4. {7} -mbáka =
mat-an, 5 (lit. cow-eyes). v {1} [a12] hit in the eye. Mat-a pag-igù
ang mantágà, Hit the giant octopus on the eyes. {2} [A; a2b23] wake up,
be awake. Ngánung mimata ka mag sayu? Why did you wake up early?
Nagmata ka na ba? Are you awake now? {2a} — ug buntag [A13] be unaware
of what’s going on (lit. be awake only in the morning). Nagmata ka lag
buntag sa gibúhat sa ímung asáwa, You don’t seem to know what’s going
on with your wife. {2b} himat-an, hikatulgan have s.t. constantly in
one’s mind, awake or asleep. Himat-an hikatulgan ku ang ákung prublíma,
I am constantly thinking about my problem, day and night. {3} [b8] for
a child to become aware of his surroundings. Ang íyang namat-an nga
pagmatutù mau ang kang Iyù Sinun, The first parent he ever knew was
Uncle Senon. {3a} be born s.w. (lit. aware of light). Kining dapíta ang
ákung namat-ag maháyag, This is the place I was born. {4} [A; a12] for
fats to liquify. Mumata ang mantíkà kun inítun, The lard will liquify
when you heat it. — pubri a looking down upon others as not one’s
equal. Mata pubri kaáyu. Dì mutagad sa mga kabus, She looks down on
others and pays no attention to the poor. (←) v {1} [A2; a12] estimate
a measurement by inspection. Wà nay kinahanglan ug pulgadíra, matáun na
lang, You don’t need a measuring stick. You can estimate it just by
inspection. {1a} look for s.t. simply with the eyes. Matáun lang ang
imbaw, You can find clams by just looking at the water. {2} [AC; a1]
say frankly, tell face to face. Nagkamáta ang duha ka kandidátu sa
platapurma, The two candidates had it out face to face on the platform.
Matáhun tikag sulti, I’ll talk to you frankly. {3} [A13] for bivalves
to be active, as manifested by their being open or bubbling. Magmáta na
gáning mga imbaw sayun ra pagtultul, When the clams are active it is
easy to locate them. matamata v [a4] {1} see an illusion, mirage.
Gimatamata ug busay ang táwu sa disyirtu, The man in the desert saw a
mirage, a waterfall. {2} be unable to choose or decide wisely because
of bedazzlement. Wà giyud ku kapílì. Gimatamata ku sa kadaghang
palítun, I wasn’t able to choose because there were so many beautiful
things to buy. matamáta = máta, v1. hig-/hag- v [B1256] {1} wake up
accidentally. Nahigmata ku kay sábà, I woke up because it was so noisy.
{2} become aware of s.t. Karun pa ku mahigmata sa íyang kabangis, For
the first time I became aware of what a terrible person he was. mat-an
a {1} having eyes or an eye-like configuration. {2} artful, wily,
cunning. Ang mga Insik mat-an kaáyu sa nigusyu, Chinese are very shrewd
in business. {3} mat-ay balíli, dunggánay gabíi the walls have ears.
(Lit. the grass has eyes and the night has ears.) Hináya ang inyung
sulti kay mat-an ra bay balíli ug dunggánay gabíi, Talk quietly because
the walls have ears. {4} mat-an pa sa pinya a wily, cunning (having
more eyes than a pineapple). Dì ka kaílad ni Dyú kay mat-an pa nà sa
pinya, You can’t fool Joe. He is very alert. n k.o. fish with huge
eyes: Selar crumenophthalmos. paN- = ay_4. tagi-, tagli-, tagu- n k.o.
eye infection. v [A123P; a4] get this infection.

matáda v {1} [A; a] divide the meat into portions. {2} [c16] sell meat
by the portion. -in- = matáda, v2.

matadíra = matadíru (female).

matadíru_1 n {1} butcher, one who slaughters and cuts up animals.
{2} butcher who sells meat. v [B156; a] work as a butcher.

matadíru_2 a clever, skillfully shrewd in deception and trickery. Ayawg
kumpiyansahi nang tawhána kay matadíru kaáyu nà sa baráha, Don’t trust
that man because he’s very cunning in card games. v [B1; b6] become
cunning.

matadur n {1} = matadíru1, 2. {2} matador. {3} killer, fierce. Manuk
nga matadur, A killer gamecock. v [B156; a12] be, become a matador.

matag {1a} — [word referring to time or day] every. Bisitáhan ku níya
matag adlaw, He visits me every day. {1b} — [verb base] every time
[so-and-so] is done. Usa ka bandihádu ang mahurut níya matag káun, Each
time he ate he consumed a platter of rice. — karun ug unyà every now
and then. Tan-áwa ang linat-an matag karun ug unyà, Take a look at the
stew every now and then. — usa [dat.] each and every one of [dat.].
Matag usa níla muámut ug singku písus, Each and every one of them will
contribute five pesos.

matalak-un, matak-ánun see taka.

matang_1 humorous euphemism for matay, exclamation.

matang_2, mátang a kind. Ipiktíbu kining matánga sa midisína, This k.o.
medicine is effective. Makasayaw siya sa tanang mátang sa tugtug, She
can dance to all kinds of music. ka-(←) a of the same kind, alike. Túa
ra ang íyang kamátang nga mga mugbug lupad, That’s where you find her
k.o. people, prostitutes.

matansa v [A; a] butcher an animal, slaughter it or cut it up. n fee
paid to the market authority for approval to slaughter animals.

matansíra, matansíru = matadíra, matadíru.

matay v {1} [B126; b3(1)4(1)c5] die. Namatay si Simyun sa tísis, Simeon
died of tuberculosis. Sakit nga makamatay, A disease that kills.
Katigúlang ang íyang namatyan (gikamatyan), He died of old age.
Namatyan silag bag-ung inanak, They lost a newly-born child. Ikamatay
nákù ang ímung pagbíyà, If you leave me I will die. {2} [B126] stop
functioning. Namatay ang rilu, The watch stopped. Namatay ang makina
taliwā̀ sa lawud, The engine went dead in the middle of the sea.
Namatay ang sugà pagbutu sa pyús, The light went out when the fuse
blew. {2a} [B12] for the moon to be in its invisible phase. exclamation
{1} of displeasure. Matay! Kabahù, Jesus! What a smell! Matayng mahála,
How expensive it is! {2} swearing as to the truth of s.t. Matay! Ug wà
pa ka, patay tà ku run, Believe me. If it hadn’t been for you, I’d be
dead now. Tinúud lagi nà. Matay pa, It’s true, so help me God. ka-(←)
v [C2] for people to be killing each other. Nagkamátay lang kanúnay ang
mga nanagkaáway didtu sa Byitnam, There is a lot of killing in this war
in Vietnam. n mass death, killing on a vast scale. Mahitabù ang kamátay
tungud sa típus, Typhus can mean mass death. paka- v [A13; b6] {1} die
for a cause. Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan, He gave his life
for his country. {1a} commit suicide. Magpakamatay siya kun mapakyas,
He will kill himself if he fails. {2} [a12] allow s.o. to die.
Pakamatyun lang mi ninyu sa gútum? Will you let us die of hunger?
{3} [b6] allow dirt to get deeply engrained. Ang linadlad nga
pakamatyan sa sabun kúling maputì, If you bleach clothes under the sun
without sprinkling (lit. allow the soap to die in the bleaching), it
will never get white. panga-(←) v [A23] die (plural). Nangamátay ang
ákung mga manuk, My chickens died. sa tanang nanga- more [so-and-so]
than anyone else (said of bad traits). Tapulan ka sa tanang nangamátay,
You’re the laziest of the lazy. hi-un nga búlan n last quarter.
bispiras sa hi-un the last day the moon can be seen before the new moon
(patay ang búwan). himalatyun a dying. Lúya na kaáyu ang himatyun
níyang inahan, His dying mother is already very weak. Himatyun na ang
sugà kay wà nay gás, The lamp is dying down because the kerosene is all
gone. -in- n human corpse. adlaw sa — All Souls’ Day. -in-(←) v [A;
b3c] cry loudly, wail, usually over the dead. Ngánung nagminátay ka
man, namatyan ka? Why are you wailing so loud? Did s.o. die? n loud
wailing. ka- expression of strong anger or disgust. Kamatay, wà giyud
masúd ang tris dà, Damn! The number three ball didn’t go into the
pocket! kalamatyan, kinamatyan n a fatal spot in the body. Kalamatyan
ang kasingkásing, The heart is a fatal spot in the body. ka-un(→)
n death. Kalit nga kamatáyun, Sudden death. kina-un a as if one is
about to die. Ngánung kinamatyun nang ímung trabáhu? Wà na bay ugma?
Why are you working as if you were going to die? Is there going to be
no tomorrow? mag-l-(←) n about to die. Lawus na ang dáhun sa mangga kay
magmalátay man, The leaves on the mango tree are withering because they
are dying. †

máti v [A; a12] checkmate in chess. Bantayi ang hárì kay matíhun tikaw,
Watch the king because I’m going to checkmate you. n checkmate.

matikmátik v [A3; a12] do s.t. with careful reckoning and planning. Aku
lay magmatikmátik ug paági nga mabáwì ang yútà, I will find means to
get the lot back. Matikmatíka pag-áyu arun dì ka maalkansi, Figure it
carefully so you don’t lose.

matikud v [A12; b8] notice, become aware of s.t. Karun pa aku
makamatikud sa dakù kung sayup, I just realized what a big mistake I
had made. Wà ku mamatikdi ang ímung pag-abut, I didn’t notice your
arrival.

matimáti wait for a while. Matimáti úsà kay náa pay átung paabútun,
Wait awhile. We are expecting some more people to come. v {1} [c1]
finish slowly. Átù lang ning matimatíhun (imatimáti) pagkáun arun dúgay
mahurut, Let us eat it slowly so it can last a little longer. {2} [A;
c1] make do with less equipment, or give s.t. less attention,
disregarding the quality of the work. Matimatíhun ku lang nig kinamut
ang drúwing bísag way rúlir, I’ll just make a rough drawing by hand
because there is no ruler.

matimátiks n mathematics.

mating humorous euphemism for matay, exclamation of displeasure. Mating
bug-áta ning ákung dá! My! How heavy this is!

matiriyal_1 n particle or trace of truth in feelings and emotion. May
matiriyal sa katinuúran ang íyang púlung, His words have some particles
of truth. v [A] for feelings and emotions to start developing.
Mimatiriyal ang íyang pagdúda dihang kanúnay nang higabin-ag paúlì ang
bána, She developed suspicions when her husband started always coming
home late nights. Nakamatiriyal ang gugma sa ílang duha ka
kasingkásing, Love sprouted in their hearts.

matiriyal_2 n person’s capability for a certain position. Maáyu siyang
matiriyal pagkaprisidinti, He is a good presidential timber.

matirniti n {1} maternity clinic. {2} maternity dress. v {1} [A13; c16]
wear, make a maternity dress. {2} [B1256] wind up in the maternity
clinic—i.e. have a baby out of wedlock. Mamatirniti ka giyung bayhána
kag mag-unauna ka sa mga láki, You’ll end up in a maternity clinic if
you are forward with men. — lib maternity leave.

matiryális n materials used for constructing. — pwirtis {1} durable
materials for construction. {2} for a woman to be well-built. Maáyung
pangasaw-un kay matiryális pwirtis, She’s a good prospect because she
is well built.

matmat_1 v {1} [A; a1] unravel, undo s.t. all tangled. Aku ray mumatmat
sa hílu nga nagubut, I’ll unravel the tangled thread. {2} [A; c]
recount a story, events. Ákung imatmat sa husgádu ang nahitabù, I’ll
tell the judge what happened.

matmat_2 = alimatmat.

matngà v [A; a12] be hit full in the area intended with a big impact.
Namatngà pagkaigù ang langgam sa batu, The stone hit the bird squarely.
a hit square. Matngà giyud pagkaigù ang lansang nga gimartilyu, He hit
the nail square on the head.

matngun v {1} [A13; b(1)] take care of by observing precautions, handle
carefully. Magmatngun ka arun dì ka madisgrasya, Be careful so you
don’t meet an accident. {2} [A1; b(1)] pay attention, heed. Wà mu
magmatngun sa ákung tambag, ha? You didn’t heed my advice, did you?
{3} [A12; b8] be aware of, realize. Nakamatngun siya nga walà na ang
íyang pitáka, He noticed that his wallet was gone. Namatngunan na níya
nga walà diay salà ang bátà, He has just realized that the child was
innocent. — ug buut v {1} [A; b8] be aware of, reach the age of reason.
Dinhi na ku ning baláya sukad ku makamatngun ug buut, I have lived in
this house since I saw light. {2} [A12] regain consciousness. Didtu na
siya makamatngun ug buut sa uspital, He regained consciousness in the
hospital. pahi- v [A; c] advise and admonish. Pahitmangúni siya báhin
sa íyang pag-inum, Advise him about his drinking. n admonishment. kahi-
n awareness of s.t.

matráka n grager, used as a noisemaker in the procession on Good
Friday. matrakáhun ug bàbà talking like a machine gun. Báhu ning tabian
matrakáhun ug bàbà, This gossip! Her mouth goes like a machine gun.

matrídu = matríru.

matrikula n school fees. v [c6] pay tuition.

matrimunyal n double bed.

matríra = matríru (female).

matríru a {1} wise to the ways of the world. Dì na nà siya matuntu kay
matríru, You can’t pull a fast one on him. He’s wise to the ways of the
world. {2} wise, tricky. Matríru ang mga matansíru kay dílì hustu ang
timbangan, The meat sellers are very tricky because the scales are not
honest. {3} for game to be shy and not easily approached by persons.
v [B1] be, become wise to the ways of the world or tricky.

matris_1 n uterus.

matris_2 n mattress.

matrúna n {1} the head maid in a wealthy household, the one in charge
of running the household. {2} housemother of a women’s dormitory or
boarding house. a matronly-looking, old, and slightly stout. v [B136;
c16] be, become a house mother or head maid; get to be matronly in
appearance.

mats v [B; c6] for wearing apparel to match. Mimats ang ímung sapátus
sa pitáka, Your shoes match your purse.

matsa v [A1; c1] do s.t. in a relaxed and unhurried manner. Ayaw
matsaha (imatsa) nang ímung linaktan ug sugúun ka, Don’t take it so
slow when you are told to do s.t.

matsing_1 n small monkey. a {1} like a monkey in appearance.
{2} mischievous. Matsing kaáyu ning batáa u, lukup lag panúngug sa
uban, This child is mischievous. He keeps on teasing the others.
v [B145] look ugly like a monkey. Nagmatsing lang nang dagway mu, You
have a monkey’s face.

matsing_2 n matching type exam.

matsuy humorous euphemism for matay, exclamation of displeasure. Matsuy
ning batáa, langas kaáyu, My! What a nuisance this child is.

mátud [gen.] according to what [so-and-so] says. Mátud níya, maáyu
kanang klási, According to him that is a good kind. ‘Adtu na ta,’ mátud
níya, He said, ‘Let’s go.’

matulì n k.o. balat (sea cucumber).

matúmat v [C; bc3] engage in a friendly, casual chat. Dì ku
makigmatúmat nímug dúgay kay nagdalì ku, I can’t chat with you for long
because I’m in a hurry.

matun n ruffian, tough guy. Daghang istambay nga matun sa piyir, There
are many ruffians hanging around at the pier. v [B2; b6] be, become a
tough guy.

matutù v [A; a12] {1} take care of a child. Kinsay nagmatutù sa ímung
anak samtang walà ka? Who took care of your child when you were gone?
{2} rear, bring up. Akuy nagmatutù kaníla hangtud sa ílang
pagkaulitáwu, I reared the boys until they were teen-agers. {2a} [A;
b5c] inculcate with s.t. Matutua (matutui) ang mga tinun-an sa
nasyunalismu, Teach the pupils nationalism. {3} nurture a feeling. May
gimatutù siyang pagdumut álang kanákù, He is nursing a grudge against
me. n care, guidance. Matutù sa inahan, Mother’s guidance.

matyag v [A; a12b2] observe, watch to see. Siyay mumatyag sa kamaisan
nga dì kan-un sa mga amù, He will watch the cornfield to see if the
monkeys are getting at it. Nakamatyag ka nag táwung giupirahan? Have
you ever watched a person being operated on? see also batyag.

matyanak = mantiyának.

mau short forms: mu, maw is, are, was, were. {1a} preceding subject in
sentences with nominal predicates. Kadtung íyang gisulti mau ang
nakapalágut nákù, What he said was what angered me. Ang kangihit sa
tambal muy nakapataas sa prisyu, The scarcity of medicine is what made
prices high. {1b} with no subject: it’s [predicate] which is the one.
Nagtúu giyud aku nga kanà mau, I believe that that is the one. Ug mau
kanà, ang útang maimpas sunud búlan, If that is the case, the debt will
be paid off next month. Ang ímung tubag dílì mau, Your answer is not
right. — bítaw that is so. Kadakung trabáhu nu? Mau bítaw, What a big
job, isn’t it? It certainly is! — kaáyu the very one. Mau ni? Mau
kaáyu, Is this the one? Yes it is the very one. — gayud that is the way
it is. Mau giyud nà siya ug mahubug, That is the way he is when drunk.
— gihápun it’s (it was) as usual. Ang atup sa ámung balay mau gihápun,
nípà, The roof of our house is the usual kind—of palm thatch. — lang
see lámang, 2c1. — kini ug kini, — kanà ug kanà in giving excuses,
reasons or alibis: it is because of this, because of that. {1c} in
response to a question as to the identification of s.t.: yes, it is the
one. Mau ba ni ang imúha? Dílì mau, Is this yours? No, that is not the
one. Si Pidru na ba nà? Mau na, Is that Peter now? It’s him all right.
{1d} yes, that is the case, said esp. in response to negative comments.
‘Kusug siyang manghulam mu rag kamaung muúlì.’—‘Mau,’ ‘She likes to
borrow things as if she knew enough to return them (which she
doesn’t).’—‘Yes, that is so.’ {1e} — nang, — na sa ginháwang [verb]
doing one’s best, tiring oneself out doing [verb]. Mau na nga pangítà
nákù, (or mau na sa ginháwa nákung pangítà) ug sápì apan kamu nagsígi
lang ug ínum, I wear myself out earning money, and all you do is drink.
{1f} — ra pud núun that’s the only thing that’s wrong with it. ‘Dì man
pasulayan sa dì pa mapalit.’—‘Mau ra pud núun,’ ‘It’s good, but you
can’t try it out before you buy it.’—‘That’s the only thing that is
wrong with it.’ {1g} -y (ang) pag-[verb], i-[verb] is the time
[so-and-so] happens. Mauy ipanangpit níya manday human na, He calls you
after he’s finished eating. Pag-adtu níya mau say pag-adtu nákù, When
he went was the time I went, too. {1g1} — pa see pa-, 2e, 8b. {1h} —
nga [noun] the aforementioned, said. Wà ku makaila sa maung táwu, I
don’t know that particular person. {1i} — pay ... — pay even though
[such-and-such] is the case, [so-and-so] is true of the same person
anyway. Mu pay mangáyù mu pay mangísug, He asks a favor, and yet he has
the nerve to get angry. {2} — nga [sentence] therefore, consequently.
Sígi kung praktis, mau nà nga maáyu kung mubayli, I always practice.
That’s why I dance well. Sa ámù kanúnay nga mangísug si Máma. Mau gánì
nga dílì layhang mupaúlì si Pápa, Mother is always angry at home. That
is why even Dad doesn’t like to go home. {3} — ra no more, that’s all.
‘Adúna pay láin?’—‘Mau ra,’ ‘Is there any more?’—‘That’s all there is.’
{3a} — ra nga the same. Mau rang klasíha nà. Purus tagdiyis, Those are
of the same class. They are all ten cents apiece. {4} — ra ug {4a} it
seems. Mu rag láin nà, It seems to be a different one. {4b} rather. Mu
rag giuhaw ku, I am rather thirsty. Ang báhù dílì mangga, mau rag
nangkà hinúun, The smell is not that of the mango, it is rather like
that of the jackfruit. Mau ra ug nahuwasan na ku sa ákung kakulbà, I
feel a bit relieved from my fright. {4c} as if [so-and-so] were the
case. Nagpaduludiskursu siya mu rag si kinsa, He took it upon himself
to give a speech as though he were s.o. v {1} [B1256] turn out to be
correct. Gisulaysuláyan kug duut ang usa sa mga timbri, namau bayà, I
tried pressing one of the buttons at random. It happened to be the
right one. {2} [A13] be the same. Bísan ug atbang ta sa pulitika magmau
lang gihápun ang átung pagbinatiay, Though we are opponents in
politics, our feelings towards each other are still the same. ka-
v [B1256; b8] know how to do s.t. Makamau kang musulat? Do you know how
to write? Wà kuy nakamauhan, I don’t know anything. di-(←) see dimáu.
paka- v [A13; a12] pretend, consider s.t. as right or the one. Ngánung
pakamauhun man nímu nga ang ákù man ni? Why do you insist this is the
very one, when it is mine? maumáu v [A; a12] {1} make temporary repairs
by just trying things out, make do with s.t. less than what is really
needed. Ug maáyu kang mumaumáu ug áyu, mudágan giyud nang mutúra, If
you are good at fiddling around with your motorcycle, at least it will
run. {2} fabricate, make s.t. not real. Sa mga kumunista ang Diyus usa
ka maumáu, To the communists, God is a figment of man’s imagination.
maumáu na sa ginháwa = mau, 1e.

ma-un(←) affix added to verbs and adjectives to form adjectives which
mean ‘having the characteristic of doing or becoming [so-and-so]’.
Malipáyun, Happy. Maluyáhung tíngug, In a weak voice. Mapangilyupúung
naghangyù sa Prisidinti nga luwasun ang íyang anak, With pleas she
implored the President to spare her son. Mapasalígung balità,
Reassuring news. Matuhùtuhúun, Gullible, superstitious.

maung n blue denim. v [A12] wear blue denim.

mauraúra somewhat similar. Ang ibid mauraúra sa halu ug hitsúra, gáling
may sílik lang sa líug, The agamid lizard is somewhat similar to the
monitor lizard, only it has a crest on its neck.

maut a hypocrite, one who puts up a praiseworthy, but completely false
front. Pagkamaut bayhána, manugilun nga hingatag piru labihan diayng
hakúga, What a hypocrite that woman is. She claims to be generous but
actually she is a terrible tightwad. v [B12] be, become a hypocrite.
-in- a hypocritical. v [A13; c1] act hypocritically. Ayawg minaut kay
nasáyud mi sa ímung pagkatáwu, Don’t be hypocritical. We know what you
are.

máut (from daut) a {1} not good, substandard in quality. Máut ning
ripridyiritúra kay dì muayis, This refrigerator is no good because it
won’t produce ice. {2} unfavorable condition or state. Mubagyu tingáli
kay máut man ang panahun, There seems to be a typhoon because the
weather is bad. {3} unpleasant in ways. Máut ug batásan, Disagreeable
in his ways. Máut bayà nang mamalíkas, It’s bad to curse.
{4} unpleasant in looks, smell, and the like. Máut kaáyu árung bahúa
uy, What a bad smell! v [B; a1] be, become bad, ugly, unpleasant to the
senses, etc. ka- n badness, ugliness, defectiveness.

mawu- for words with mawu- see also malu-.

mawungmáwung v [A; c1] cover up, hide one’s feeling. Dúnay mga táwu nga
makamau giyung mumawungmáwung sa ílang kaguul, There are people who
know how to hide their grief.

mawutpis n {1} boxer’s mouthpiece. v [A13] wear a mouthpiece.

maw-uy a arousing pity, touching. Maw-uy kaáyung tan-áwun ang bátà nga
makalilímus, The child beggar was a pitiful sight.

may {1} there is, are, was, were. May tulu ka táwung nangítà nímu,
There were three persons looking for you. Kun may isúgù, At your
service (lit. if there is an order to give). {2} have. May sigarilyu ka
dihà? Do you have any cigarettes on you? {2a} may pagka- be somewhat.
May pagkatabian ni si Áning, Aning is somewhat talkative. {2b} — idad
be of age. May idad na siya ug makabutar na, He is already of age and
he can vote now. {3} near a place. Didtu siya magtindug sa may
pultahan, He was standing there by the door. {4} some, [so-and-so] long
ago, May duha ka búwan na níyang trabáhu dinhi, He’s been working here
for about two months now. {4a} — mga at about [such-and-such] a time.
Didtu siya sa may mga alas kwatru, He was there at around four. — láin
pa yes, of course (is there anything or anyone else). Siya giyuy
nagkúhà sa libru kay siya ra may dihà. May láin pa? He must have taken
the book because he was the only one there. Who else could have? Kan-un
giyud ni níya. May láin pa? He’ll eat this, don’t worry. Would he fail
to do so!

máya n k.o. small bird found in rice fields, the chestnut mannikin:
Lonchura malacca. — nga bungul n k.o. brown-colored maya which is
believed to be deaf because it is not easily disturbed or afraid of
noise.

mayà a happy and cheerful in appearance. v [B4; c16] be, become gay.
Pagmayà kay adlaw nímu run, Be cheerful. Today is your birthday. Imayà
(mayaa) nang inyung panagway kay litratúhan na ta, Put on a cheerful
expression because they are going to take our picture. ka-
n cheerfulness.

mayáman a rich, moneyed (colloquial). Mayáman kaáyu ku run kay bag-ung
swildu, I am very rich now because I have just received my pay.

mayamaya, mayamáya n red snapper, Lutianus spp.

mayánà n k.o. ornamental herbs with variously colored green and purple
leaves which have medicinal uses: Coleus blumei.

mayáus n k.o. thin-bodied slipmouth (palutput).

maybay n k.o. large, light green, cooking banana, only a little smaller
than the tinduk.

mayhu, mayhum (from humay) n rice (humorous slang). Ayay! Mayhum diay
karun ang átung kan-un, Goody. We are going to have rice today. v [A1]
eat rice as one’s staple.

mayik n {1} microphone. {2} sound system with an amplifier. Mayik ang
ílang gigámit sa bayli kay mahal ang musiku, They used a sound system
for the dance because an orchestra would be too expensive. v [A1] use a
mike or sound system.

maylab n one’s sweetheart or loved one (humorous). Ímu nang maylab ang
ímung kúyug? Was that your sweetheart that was with you?

maymay v [A; b] advise, admonish s.o. in a nice tone. Maymáyi siyang
dílì na maghubughúbug, Advise and encourage him not to get drunk any
more. n advice or admonition. pa- v [A3] listen to advice. Ang táwung
dì magpamaymay háyan mahitabù, A person who does not listen to advice
is likely to get into trouble. ma-un a admonishing.

maynur n one’s minor subject. v [A; a2] take as one’s minor.

maypáy = malaypálay.

mayrun a having money (colloquial). Mayrun tingáli ni dà, kay
nangimbitar man, You’re probably in the clover today since you’re
inviting us.

maytir n miter joint. — baks miter box.

Máyu n May. see abril for verb forms: plúris di — see plúris.

mayukmuk n {1} powdery soil. Ayaw pagdúlà sa mayukmuk kay abug kaáyu,
Don’t play with the powdery soil because it’s very dusty. {1a} river
sediment. Ang mayukmuk sa subà nadala sa bahà, The river sediment was
carried off by the flood. {2} small fry: little children, anything
small or lower in class. Basta mga mayukmuk lagmit way púl, If you are
a small fry you have no influence. Nangatū́g na ang mga mayukmuk, The
kids are all asleep now. v [b2] get powdered soil on one. ka- v [A13]
get powdery soil all over one.

máyung a for the weather to be somewhat overcast, sunless. v [B] be,
become overcast. Maáyu rung ipasíyu sa bátà kay nagmáyung na, It’s a
fine time to take the baby for a stroll. It is a little overcast.

may-ung v {1} [C3; c6] have a resemblance, make things look alike.
Magkamay-ung ug panagway ang mag-ágaw, The cousins have a resemblance.
Imay-ung ang ímung nawung sa kang Dulpi nga kataw-anan, Make your face
like Dolphy’s funny face. {2} [A12; b8] recognize, be familiar to s.o.
Mu rag nakamay-ung ku sa ági niíning sulat, I think I recognize the
handwriting in this letter. {3} [A12; b2] notice s.t. Namay-ungan níya
nga may táwung misulud, She noticed a man entering. ka- n s.t. which
resembles s.t. else. Kamay-ung ang ímung panagway ánang artistáha, You
have a resemblance to that actor.

mayunis, mayunísa n mayonnaise. v [b] put, use mayonnaise.

mayur n {1} municipal or city mayor. {2} in a game, the one who has the
first play or turn. {3} major chord or key. Du mayur, C major. — diidad
a of legal age. v [B256] be of legal age. — dúma = — dúmu (female). —
dúmu majordomo of an estate, hotel, ship, or other large institutions
requiring a chief steward. v [B156] be, become the majordomo. For other
phrases with mayur as the first word, see the entry under the second
word. v [A3; a2] be, become mayor. Si Talyuks ang átung mayurun sa
syudad, Let’s make Talyux the mayor in the city. (←) v [A2C2; ac3] play
off against one another to see who goes first in the game. Átung
mayúrun kun kinsay muúnag lábay sa búla, Let’s play it off to determine
who will be the first to throw the ball.

mayuríya n majority of a body convened. Mibutar ang mayuríya sa
musiyun, The majority voted for the motion. Si Usminya nakakuhag
singkuwinta bútus nga mayuríya, Osmeña got a majority of fifty votes.
v [A] get a majority of votes.

mayurù n k.o. white upland rice with long and slender grains, harvested
after six months.

mayuskula n majuscule.

mga abbreviation for manga.

mi_1 see kami.

mi_2 n the note mi. — mayur E major. — minur E minor.

mī̀ n {1} representation for the sound made by a goat. {2} goat
(slang). Mukáun kug mī̀ piru dì kug aw-aw, I eat goat meat but not dog.

mi- past punctual active verbal prefix. see mu-.

míd n a female household help. v [B156; a12] be, become a maid. pa-
v [A] hire oneself out as a maid.

mídal n medal. Nakadawat ug mídal ang balidikturyan, The valedictorian
was awarded a medal. v [A12; b(1)] receive a medal. bruns, guld, silbir
— n bronze, gold, silver medal. -ist(→) n gold, bronze, silver
medalist. v [B1256] become a medal awardee.

midalya n {1} medal. {2} religious medal worn by devotees. {2a} dried
palutput, so called because of its resemblance to a medal (humorous).
v [A1; c] wear, win, award s.o. a medal.

midalyun n medallion. v [A1; c] wear, put a medallion on s.o.

mídi n midi skirt. v {1} [A13] wear a midi dress. {2} [c1] make a midi
dress.

midída n cloth tape measure used in dressmaking.

midikal a connected with the practice or study of medicine.

midikilyu = miriku.

midiku n physician, doctor. — ligal n legal physician who certifies the
medical facts surrounding a death.

mid-in dyapan n {1} shoddy in workmanship or quality. {2} weakling,
sickly. Tambuk tan-áwun apan mid-in dyapan. Dalì rang mayasmì, She
looks fat, but she is weak. She easily gets sick.

midisin n course of medicine. — kabinit n medicine cabinet. — bag
n medicine bag.

midisína n {1} medicine. Pagpalit ug midisína sa butíka, Buy medicine
at the drugstore. {2} chemical for the processing of s.t. Midisína sa
kulung, Chemicals for a permanent wave. {3} course in medical school.

midiya half. Midiya pulgáda ang gibag-un, Half an inch thick. Midiya
ang bátà sa sinihan, A child pays half fare in the movies. Midiya kílu
nga karni, Half a kilo of meat. i- thirty minutes after the hour. Alas
dus imidiya, Two thirty. v [B56] get to be to the half hour. ‘Alas
singku na ba?’—‘Mumidiya na hinúun,’ ‘Is it already five o’clock?’—‘It
is nearly five thirty.’ — agwa n a roof projecting beyond the wall at a
downward angle over the whole length or width of a house, or just over
a window or door. v [A; b] add an overhang. — bangku n wind coming at a
forty-five degree angle from directly in back of a boat. Pabur gihápun
sa sakayan ang hángin nga midiya bangku, A wind which comes from the
back but at an angle is still favorable to sailboats. — díya n half
day. Midiya díya ra ang trabáhu basta Sabadu, We work half-day on
Saturdays. v [A; c16] do s.t. half-day. — nutsi n the dinner served at
midnight on Christmas. — pága n half fare. — táwu n s.o. who is
extraordinarily short. midiyamidiya v [b(1)] do s.t. in a moderate way.
Midiyamidiyáhi lang pagpadágan arun dílì ta madisgrasya, Drive at a
moderate rate so we don’t meet an accident. Midiyamidiyáhi ug hugut ang
twirka arun dílì maharùs, Tighten the screw moderately so it won’t get
stripped. midiyahan n {1} a fifth, so called because it contains half
the volume of a bottle which formerly was in wide use. {2} small train
station between two main stations where a train can stop to take on or
discharge passengers or freight but cannot issue tickets. †

midiyas n {1} socks, stockings. {2} condom (humorous euphemism).
v {1} [A; b] put on, wear socks, stockings. {2} [A; c] use a condom.
-an(←) n for an animal to have a different color on its legs so that it
looks as if it is wearing stockings.

midiyu — [adj.] somewhat, a little bit. Midiyu hubug ka dà, You’re a
little bit drunk. Midiyu língin ang purma, It is somewhat roundish in
shape.

midiyus n {1} makeshift or temporary means to accomplish s.t. Pangitáan
ta nig midiyus arun muandǎr ang makina, Let’s look for some temporary
way we can get this engine to run. {2} means of resolving a problem.
Kadtung íyang labad sa úlu midiyus lang tu sa paglikay sa trabáhu, His
headache was just an excuse to get out of doing work. Wà kuy láing
midiyus gawas sa pagpangútang, I have no other way of resolving the
problem except borrowing money. Ang labing maáyung midiyus sa ímung
ubu, The best remedy for your cough.

midtik n {1} Medical Technology course. Ang íyang gikúhà midtik, He is
taking up Med. Tech. {2} housemaid (humorous and depreciatory word play
on míd). Naíbug ka ánang midtik man nà? Did you fall for that girl when
she’s just a maid?

midtirm n mid-term exams. v [A1] have the mid-term exams.

mid-ub-ánur n maid of honor at a wedding. v [A12; c6] be, become the
maid of honor.

mídul kard n name given to the pieces in mahjong from {2} through
{8} as compared to the tirminális (1 and 9).

midwayip n {1} trained midwife. {2} course of midwifery. {3} maid
(humorous, deprecatory word play on míd). v [B156; a12] be, become a
midwife. -iri n midwifery.

midyur n {1} major in the military or police force. {2} major field of
study in an academic course. Sáyans ang íyang midyur, She is a science
major. v {1} [B126; a12] be, make s.o. a major. {2} [A; c16] take a
certain course as one’s major.

migkap v [B146] be slothfully inactive. Ang táwung magmigkap dì madúgay
niíning trabahúa, A person who loafs will not last long on this job.

migkat = migkap.

migrupunu = mikrupunu.

mihihì = bahìhì.

mihìmihì v [A; b6] for a child to whimper or cry softly from discomfort
or naughtiness. Nagmihìmihì na sab si Bíbi. Katulgun tingáli, Baby is
whimpering again. She probably is sleepy. Ayaw kug mihìmihii ug dúna
kay pangayúun, Don’t whimper at me if you want s.t.

mihit = nihit.

mihúras n {1} improvements. Ang Mayur walay nahímung mihúras hangtud
karun, The Mayor has not made any improvements to this day. Kining
mangga usa lang sa daghang mihúras niíning yutáa, This mango tree is
only one of the many improvements on this land. {1a} favor of a
financial nature. Unsang mga mihúras ang ímung nahátag kaníya nga dakù
man siyag útang buut nímu? What have you done for him that he owes you
a debt of gratitude? {2} virtues, good qualities. Unsa may mga mihúras
niánang bayhána nga nakagustu man ka níya? What are the good qualities
that made you like that woman? {3} assets. Kanang magtiayúna dakù
kaáyug mihúras nga ikabílin sa ílang mga anak, That couple has a large
number of possessions to leave their children. v [A12] make
improvements. Dílì makamihúras kaaáyu ang mayur sa íyang lungsud kun
kuntra partídu siya sa administrasiyun, A town mayor can make few
improvements in his municipality if he is not aligned with the
administration.

mík n {1} a Mexican copper coin worth one-hundredth of the Mexican
peso. Formerly circulated, it is now used only as offerings to spirits
or used topically for medicinal purposes. {2} fake coin.

mikà a idle, not doing things. v [B145] {1} sit around lazily. Magmikà
lang ang babáying way hibangkaágan sa panimalay, A girl who knows
nothing about household work sits around lazily. {2} go about in low
spirits. Unsay nahitabù nga nagmikà ka man? What happened that you are
in such low spirits?

mikanikal n course of mechanic engineering. — indyinir n mechanical
engineer. — indyiníring = mikanikal.

mikaniku n mechanic. v [B156; a2b8] be, become a mechanic.

mikanismu n mechanism, the workings of a machine.

mik-ap_1 v [A; b] make up a lacking subject or part of a subject in
school. Kinahángang mik-ápan ang absin, You have to make up your
absences.

mik-ap_2 n make-up, cosmetics. Bagà siyag mik-ap, She had heavy make-up
on. v [A; b] put make-up on s.o. or on oneself.

míki n {1} k.o. large yellow noodle made of wheat flour. {2} dish made
of such noodles. v {1} [A; a2] make, make into noodles. {2} [A13; b(1)]
prepare a dish of noodles.

mikrubyu n microbes.

mikru krúm n mercurochrome.

mikrupunu n microphone. v [A13] use a microphone.

mikruskupyu n microscope. v [A1; b6] look at with a microscope.

mikskla v {1} [A; a] mix solids or liquids. Mikskláha ang pintal ug
túbig, Mix the paint and the water together. Mikskláhi ug pulug ang
minása nga simintu, Mix dye into the cement mixture. {1a} [A1] prepare
s.t. that has to be mixed. Nakamikskla ka na ba ug ilimnun? Have you
prepared (mixed) the drinks? n mixture, proportion in which s.t. is
mixed. Ispísung mikskla, A thick mixture.

mil n thousand. Ang balur sa ákung awtu trayinta mil, My car is worth
thirty thousand pesos. v see disiutsu. — únu, dusyintus, etc. One
thousand one, two, etc. milmíl a valued in thousands. Dì ku makaabut
pagpalit niánang mga milmíl nga kantidad, I cannot afford to buy things
that cost in three figures.

míl v [A; c6] post in the mail. Imíl ba kining suwáta? Shall I mail
this letter?

milagru n {1} miracle. Milagru ray makaluwas sa masakitun, Only a
miracle can save the sick man. {2} — ug it would be a miracle if
[so-and-so] were to happen. Milagrug mutúgut si Pápa mu pagpatan-aw
nímug sini, It will be a snowy day in May before your father will let
you go to the show. v {1} [A; b6] perform miracles. {2} [A1] do s.t.
which is completely unexpected. Nagmilagru uruyng tihik nga nanghátag,
A miracle! The cheapskate is giving out money. -sa = milagrúsu
(female). -su a miraculous. Ang milagrúsung birhin sa Patíma, The
miraculous Virgin of Fatima. v [B1246] be, become miraculous.

milàmilà v [B146; a4] for eyes to be watery, full of pus. Gimilàmilà
(nagmilàmilà) ang mata sa palahúbug, The drunkard’s eyes are all
watery.

milangkuliya, milangkulíya v [A13; a4] feel melancholic, esp. from
homesickness. Gimilangkulíya nà siya sa íyang trátung túa sa Amirika,
She is homesick for her boy friend in the States.

miláru n thick syrup from brown sugar. v [A; a] make thick brown-sugar
syrup.

milbaks n mailbox.

milibiki n brace, a carpentry tool used for boring wood. v [A; a12] use
this tool.

miligrámu n milligram.

miliguy = kawatkawat. see káwat.

milimitru n millimeter.

milindris n k.o. ornamental shrub with white, pink, or purplish flowers
growing on small terminal panicles: Lagerstroemia indica.

milisya n collective term for Filipino recruits during World War I. -nu
n member of the Filipino militia. v [B156; c1] become a member of the
Philippine militia.

militar n the military, soldiers. Nanghilabut ang militar sa iliksiyun,
The military interfered with the election. pwirsa — military force.
salúdu — military salute. upisyal — military officials. v {1} [A1; b6]
wear a military uniform. Gimilitaran ang sundálung namatay, The soldier
who died was dressed in a military uniform. {2} [B1356; c1] become a
military man. {3} [c1] be done in a military manner. Militarun
(imilitar) ang kasal sa ákung manghud kay níbi may íyang pamanhunun, My
younger sister will be married in a military wedding because the groom
is a navy man.

*milk pawdir — n powdered milk.

milma v [B; a] lessen, slow down. Bísan tigúlang na siya wà mumilma ang
íyang kusug, Even when he was old, his strength did not decrease.
Nagmilma na ang dágan sa trák, The truck slowed down. Hilánat ang
nakamilma sa íyang gána sa pagkáun, Fever has lessened his appetite.
Milmáhan ta ang paggastugastu, We will go slow on spending. Unsa kahay
imilma ku niánang íyang pagkahimabáyi, I wonder what I can do to
discourage his amorous activities.

milù n k.o. civet similar to the maral, but lighter in color and not so
odorous.

milun, mílun n cantaloupe: Cucumis melo.

milung v [B126] feel disappointed and embarrassed that s.t. expected
did not turn out to be or happen. Dà, namilung lagi sila kay walà man
diay salída sa sini, labun pa, walà na giyud maniudtu, They were
embarrassed and disappointed. There was no movie that day, and they had
gone without even eating lunch.

milya n mile. v [B256] be, get to be about one mile. Mumilya giyud ang
gilay-un, The distance is about a mile. -hi n mileage.

milyun n million. v see disiutsu. — dálar ismayil n a million dollar
smile. — dálar ligs n shapely legs. -arya = milyunaryu (female). -aryu
n millionaire. v [B16] be, become a millionaire.

milyun pláwir n k.o. low, ornamental shrub with large, rounded, hairy
leaves and clusters of blue or pinkish flowers: Hydrangea macrophylla.

mimbru n member. Mimbru sa simbahan, Church member. v [B156; c16] be,
make a member. pa- v [A3] join s.t. to become a member.

mími baby talk for: {1} going to sleep. {2} drinking. v [A23] sleep or
drink.

míming n term of endearment for a cat.

mímis_1 v [c] rub s.t. violently on s.t. Gimímis sa iring ang ilagang
gitangag dihas yútà, The cat rubbed the rat it was holding in its mouth
on the ground.

mímis_2 n {1} a variety of first-class rice having white, smooth,
shiny, slender, and long grains. {2} any first-class white rice.

mímu, mimurandum n memorandum.

mimuráyis v {1} [A; a12] memorize. {2} [a12] skip a meal. Gimimuráyis
ku ang paniudtu, I skipped lunch.

mimurya v {1} [A; a12] memorize. {2} [a12] skip a meal. Gimimurya námù
ámung pamáhaw sa ámung byáhi, We skipped our breakfast during our trip.

mimyu = mimyugrap.

mimyugrap v [A; a12] mimeograph. Magmimyugrap ku sa prugráma, I am
going to mimeograph the program. tig- n mimeographer.

mína_1 n {1} mine, mineral deposit. {2} explosive mine. v [A; a2] mine
a mineral deposit. minahan n mine. Túa siya magtrabáhu sa minahan, He
is working in the mine. minahun n mineral deposit to be mined.

mína_2 n situation in pool wherein two or more balls are in contact
with each other and the one in the back is directly in line with one of
the pocket holes, so that it is almost certain that the ball or balls
in front will be knocked into the hole. Sigurádung masúd nang utsu kay
mína man, The eight ball will surely go into the hole because they are
directly aligned.

minandis = manandis.

Mindanaw n Mindanao.

ming- = mi-.

míng n {1} sound used to call cats. {2} baby talk for a cat.

míngaw a {1} lonely, deserted. Míngaw ang balay, kay nanáug ang tanan,
The house is deserted because everyone went out. {2} lonely in feeling.
Míngaw ang syudad ug istranyu ka, A city is a lonely place for a
stranger. v {1} [B; b6] be lonely, quiet. Nagmingaw ka man gud, ikaw ra
bang usa? You seem to be lonely. Are you alone? {2} [a4b3] feel
homesick, miss s.o. Wà ka ba mingáwa (mingawa) sa ímung mga bátà?
Didn’t you miss your children? Buut akung magpaduul gayud sa namingáwan
(gikamingáwan) kung asáwa, I want very much to be near my wife whom I
miss so much. — sa gunting v [a12] for hair to be uncut (humorous). Ang
buhuk sa mga Bítuls gimíngaw sa gunting, The Beatles’ hair is lonely
for the scissors. ka- n loneliness, homesickness. ma- a quiet, silent.
Mamíngaw nga kagabhíun, Quiet night. ma-un a lonely. Mamingáwun kaáyu
siya sukad mamatay ang íyang bána, She has been lonely since her
husband died. ka-an a lonely, deserted place. Nagtubù siya sa
kamingáwan sa kabukíran, He grew up in the lonely mountains.

minghuy = pinghuy.

mingkay n endearing term for a cat.

mingming = míng.

minì a {1} unintelligent. Lisud ikasulti ning minì kay láin ug tubag,
It is difficult to talk with an unintelligent person because he can’t
answer to the point. {2} fake, counterfeit. Kwartang minì, Counterfeit
money. Diplúmang minì, Fake diploma.

min-ibin, min-ibint n main event in boxing. v [A13] hold a main event.
†

minimu_2, minimum n minimum wage. Sayis ang adlaw ang minimu karun, The
minimum wage is six pesos a day. v [A; c1] pay a minimum wage.

minindyaytis n meningitis. v [a4] be afflicted with meningitis.

miniral, minirális n minerals. Miniral nga gikinahanglan sa láwas,
Minerals which the body requires. Ang yútà sa Sibu tugub sa mga
miniral, The lands in Cebu are rich in minerals.

minirba n hand-fed printing press (so called from the trade name,
Minerva).

miníru n miner. v [B1456] be a miner.

miniskirt n miniskirt, k.o. skirt that hugs the hips and is 2–5″ above
the knee. v [A] wear a miniskirt.

ministil see mistil.

ministiryu n divine or religious ministration. Ang ministiryu sa
iglisya álang sa kalibútan, The church’s ministry is to the whole
world.

ministru n {1} minister, usually of a Protestant church. {2} minister
to a head of state. primir — prime minister. v [B156; a12] be a church
minister or minister to a head of state.

míns n menstruation. v [A13; a4] have menstruation. Ayaw kalígug
magmíns (minsun) ka, Don’t bathe if you’re menstruating.

minsáhi n {1} message left for s.o. Nagbílin bag minsáhi ang mitilipunu
nákù? Did the man who called me leave a message? {2} message. Ang
minsáhi sa Santu Pápa, The Pope’s message. -ru n messenger. v [B156;
a2] be, become a messenger.

mintal n mental hospital. v [B1256] wind up in a mental hospital. Ayaw
pagpalábig hunàhúnà sa ímung prublíma kay mamintal ka unyà, Don’t worry
too much about your problem or you’ll wind up in the loony bin.

mintalidad n mentality, mental ability or way of thinking. Mubù kaáyug
mintalidad ang mga bátà sa ákung klási, The children in my class are of
a low mental ability. Mau nay mintalidad sa mga batan-un karun, That’s
the way young people think these days.

mintira a pronouncing words with phonemes metathesized, e.g. balyu for
baylu, sùdan for sud-an, etc. v [B; c1] pronounce words with phonemes
reversed. Nagmintíra ang íyang ubang púlung kay natakdan sa mga taga
Simala, He pronounces some of his words with the sounds reversed
because his speech is influenced by the Simala speech.

mintiryu n cemetery. v [B1256] die (lit. go to the cemetery). Sa ímung
kabágis mamintiryu giyud kag sayu, You are such a ruffian you won’t
live long.

mintras while, during or the time that. Mintras naghulat ka,
pagkalingawg basabása dihà, While you are waiting, just amuse yourself
reading. Paglípay mintras búhì pa, Enjoy yourself while you’re still
alive. — tantu {1} = mintras. {2} for the time being. Lápis lay gamíta
mintras tantu nga wà tay bulpin, Just use a pencil for the time being
since we have no ball point pen.

mintul n mentholated candy.

mínù n a magic spell cast by supernatural inhabitants of forested areas
on persons wandering in their area. The victim is caused to see mirages
and loses his way. The mirage may consist of trails diverging from the
main path or thick underbush, so that the trail vanishes, or a person
whom the traveler follows and then vanishes. The spell may last for
days but can be counteracted if the victim removes his clothing and
puts it back on inside out. v [a4] be lost because of the mínù spell.

minúdu a sold in small quantities. Binaskit giyud ang sambag, dílì
minúdu, You have to buy the tamarinds by the basket; you can’t buy just
a few. v [A; c1] sell in small quantity or amount. pa- v [c6] for a
young woman to engage in sex occasionally. Ayaw ipaminúdu ang ímung
pagkababáyi, Don’t sell your virtue bit by bit (i.e. don’t give in to
sexual advances).

minuldi see muldi.

minúnga = binúnga.

min-úpis n main office.

minur_1 n {1} in low gear or speed. Gibutang ku sa minur ang mútur, I
put the motorcycle at low gear. {2} for engines to be revolving at slow
speed, idling speed. v [B6; b7c] for an engine to slow down. Wà siya
muminur sa kurbáda, He didn’t slow down at the curve. Ningminur ang
dágan sa makina kay way gasulína, The engine slowed down because it ran
out of gasoline. minurmínur v [b7] decrease the intensity of, or the
amount of work. Minurminúri lang ang ímung káun arun dílì ka mutambuk,
Decrease your food intake so that you will not grow fat.

minur_2 n {1} minor key. {2} minor chord. {3} songs in a minor key.

minur diidad n minor in age.

minuríya n minority.

mínus a {1} few, less in quantity. Mínus ang abut run kay húlaw, The
yield is lower this time because of the long drought. Mínus kaáyu ang
pumapálit ánang klasíhas panaptun, Few buy that kind of cloth. {2} low.
Mínus ang grádu, Having low marks. {3} inferior in quality. Ayawg palit
íni kay mínus kaáyung klasíha, Don’t buy this because it’s an inferior
sort. {4} slow in comprehension. Ikaw kay mínus ka, dílì dáyun
makasabut, Because you are slow in comprehension you don’t get it
right. v [APB6; b7] lower or reduce; be less, get scarce. Dílì giyud
mumínus (mamínus) sa kinyintus ang ákung kítà, My income will not be
less than five hundred pesos. (→) v [A12; b] look down haughtily on
s.t. Nakaminus ka nákù nga biyà may ímung ihátag? Do you look down on
me since you give me the rejects? Gikaminusan níla ang ímung trabáhu,
They look down on the kind of job you have.

minuskula n lower case letters.

minutíru n minute hand of a clock.

minútu n minute. Lima na lang ka minútu sa dílì pa ang alas singku, It
is five minutes before five o’clock. -s minutes (used after the numbers
of Spanish origin). Dus minútus, Two minutes. see also unminútu.

minyak, minyat n k.o. small musk shrew.

minyù a married. Pagdagínut na kay minyù ka na, Be thrifty because
you’re married now. Daghan sa mga minyù nga nanagbúlag, Many married
couples have separated. v [B16C; ab] get married. Gustu na si Rumulítu
nga magminyù, Romulito wants to get married now. Ug maminyù na ku, When
I am married. Makigminyù na ang ákung trátu, My girl friend wants to
get married now. Minyúun (paminyúun) sila arun dì magkawatkawat sa
gawas, Let’s let them get married so they won’t be meeting outside in
secret. Gipaburusan siya, piru wà minyúi, He made her pregnant but did
not marry her. ka-un n marriage. Gihiúsa sila sa kaminyúun, They were
united in marriage. Kinabúhì sa kaminyúun, Married life. mag-l- n about
to get married.

míra n myrrh.

mirakul a persons short in height (humorous—so called from miracle
rice, a newly developed variety of rice which ripens rapidly). — rayis
n miracle rice.

miramíra v [A; b] wave the fingers at s.o. in anger. Gimiramiráhan ku
níya, mu rag si kinsang dunyáha, She waved her fingers at me as if she
were some grand señora.

mirasul n sunflower: Helianthus annuus.

mirída n bad omen, usually portending death of s.o. far away. v [A13;
b(1)] for a portent of death to appear. Pagkamatay ni Pidil sa Manílà
nagmirída sa íla kay may itum nga alibangbang nga nagtuyuktúyuk, When
Fidel died, there was an omen that appeared to them: a black butterfly
fluttering about in their house.

miriguráwun n a children’s game in which all the participants hold
hands to form a circle; then they let the circle turn singing at the
same time.

mirkánu = amirikánu.

miriku n folk doctor that treats illnesses of natural or supernatural
cause. v {1} [B156; b(1)] be, become a folk doctor. {2} [A; c1] have a
sickness treated by a folk doctor. Imiriku (mirikuha) kanang ímung
buyagbuyag, Have a folk doctor take care of that skin ailment. pa-
v [A; c] go to a folk doctor for treatment.

mirinda = miryinda.

miringgi_1 n meringue. v [A; a] make meringue, put meringue on s.t.

mirísi expression indicating that s.o. got his just desserts. Mirísi
nga nahúlug ka kay kiat man, That’s what you get when you won’t sit
still. Now you fell.

miritu n merit, praiseworthy quality. Way miritu ang ímung paghátag ug
hinábang ug ímung gikabug-at sa buut, There is no merit in giving help
with strings attached.

mirkádu n market. Mamalit kug útan ug sibúyas sa mirkádu, I will buy
vegetables and onions in the market. v {1} [A1N; a12] go shopping.
Mangmirkádu (magmirkádu) tag sayu, Let’s do our shopping early. Isdà
lay ákung mirkadúhun kay náa na man ang tanan, All I’ll buy is fish
because we’ve got everything else. {2} [B1; a1] make into, become a
market. Gimirkadúhan ang iskwátir irya, A market has been put up in the
squatter’s area.

mirkána, mirkánu = amirkána, amirkánu.

Mirkulis n Wednesday. see birnis for verb forms. — Santu Wednesday of
the Holy Week.

mirkyur krúm, mirkyuru krúm = mikru krúm.

mirma v [B] for the body to reduce. Mumirma ang ímung láwas ug wà kay
tulug, You will lose weight if you lack sleep.

mirtiyulit n merthiolate.

mirun n {1} spectator in table games. {2} one who goes to cockfights
but doesn’t pay admission and attaches himself to people on the outside
that want to bet, helping them place their bets. {3} one who eats
without paying, mooching off others or who rides, enters, or engages in
any other activity without paying. {4} anyone who asks for handouts
shamelessly, though perfectly able to support himself. v [B6; c1]
{1} be a spectator. {2} act as the mirun for gamblers. Gimirun nà siya
sa mga tahur, The professional gamblers use him to help place their
bets. {3} get to act like a moocher. Mamirun kag magtsinílas sa
simbahan, You will be no better than a moocher if you wear slippers to
church.

miruy a having lost all one’s money in betting. Miruy na ku ug mapildi
ning katapúsan kung kwarta, I’ll go home in a barrel if I lose this
last piece of money. v [B126; a12] lose all one’s money in betting.
Miruyun ka lang ánang mga tawhána, You will just lose all your money to
those men.

miryinda n light meal taken between lunch and supper. v [A; c] take
one’s afternoon snack. — sína n a light supper given in the afternoon.
v [A13] have a merienda cena.

mis_1 n {1} Miss, a title of high respect for an unmarried woman, e.g.
term used to address a nurse. {2} muse, beauty queen. v [B16; c1] be,
become a muse, beauty queen.

mis_2 n month, used only after un or usa ka ‘one’. Un (usa ka) mis, One
month. v [B256] be a month. Hápit na mumis sukad sa íyang paggíkan,
It’s almost a month now since she left. -is(←) = mis_2 (plural). Dus
(duha ka) mísis, Two months.

mísa_1 n mass in the church. — diaginaldu, digalyu nine consecutive
dawn masses ending on Christmas Eve. — digrasya thanksgiving mass. —
ditris mass officiated by three priests. — griguryána mass said for one
hundred successive days for the soul of a departed person. — ispisiyal
any special mass. — kantáda mass that is sung. — kumun mass said for a
number of dead people at once. — kunsilibráda mass celebrated by more
than one priest. — mayur high mass with incense. — puntipikal
pontifical mass. — rikim requiem mass. — risáda low mass. — sulimni
high mass with a special offering, usually offered for the patron saint
of a place. v [A; b] say mass. pa- [A; b] have a mass offered.
n {1} mass offered. Maghatud kug pamísa sa simbahan pára sa kalag sa
ákung inahan, I will make a mass offering for the soul of my mother.
{2} amount given to have a mass said.

mísa_2 n billiard table. Maáyung pagkaníbil ang mísa. Tul-id kaáyu ang
dágan sa búla, The billiard table is good and level. The ball rolls
straight. sarhintu di- n desk sergeant. -da n amount paid for the use
of game facilities, usually based per game. Bayinti sintábus ang misáda
sa bilyar, Each game you pay twenty centavos. v [A; b6(1)] pay the
misáda.

misal, mísal n missal. v [A13] bring, use a missal in church.

misay n pet cat.

misbuy n messboy on a boat. v [B156; a2] be, become a messboy, make
s.o. a messboy.

misik v {1} [a3] for s.t. to be misplaced. Namisik ang ákung papil nga
gitrabáhu, I misplaced the paper I was working on. {2} walay — v [c6]
nothing was missed, s.t. happened to all. Way namisik níla, nakadawat
silang tanan ug latigu, Not one of them was spared. They all got
whipped. Way imisik níla sa pagkáun nga ibutang sa lamísa, They did not
miss a morsel of the food left on the table.

misímis v [A; c1] attack s.t. with utter abandon and intense violence.
Kinsa may nagmisímis niíning bag-ung piryudiku? Who crumpled this
newspaper till it is utterly ruined? Gimisímis sa iring ang ilagà nga
íyang nadakpan, The cat picked up the mouse it caught and moved it
about violently.

misimus = musimus.

misirabli a miserable. Misirabling kahimtang sa prísu, The prisoners
are in a miserable condition. v [B1; c1] be, become miserable, look
miserable. Misirabli ang pamilya sukad abandunaha sa amahan, The family
has been miserable since the father abandoned them.

misirinúbis Cebuano pronunciation of miserere nobis in the litany of
the Rosary.

mísis_1 see mis_2.

mísis_2 n {1} Mrs., title given to a married woman. {2} one’s wife.
Siya ang mísis ni Tínung, This is Tinong’s wife. v [a12] call s.o.
Mrs.; be, become Mrs. (→) voc. short form: sis. Ása ka, sis? Where are
you going, Ma’am?

misíta = lamisíta.

misítas = masítas. misitasan = masitasan.

misitíra = masitíra. see masítas.

misíyas n Messiah. Si Kristu ang Misíyas, Christ, the Messiah.

misiyun n {1} a series of special exercises getting the people in an
area to fulfill their church obligations. Magsúgud na karung adláwa ang
misiyun sa simbahan, The church mission will start today. {2} foreign
missionary. Misiyun ang nagdala ánang simbahána, A missionary is
running that church. {3} mission for which s.o. is being sent. Unsay
ímung misiyun pag-adtu sa Amirika? What is your purpose in going to
America? v [A; b6] hold a church mission s.w. to get the parishioners
to fulfill their religious obligations. -aryu, -íru n missionary.
v [B156] be, become a missionary.

miskínu a in small quantities, scarce. Miskínu ang túbig tungud sa
húlaw, There’s very little water because of the drought. Miskínu ang
taksi dinhing dapíta, Taxis are scarce in this area. Miskínu sila
mupakáun sa ílang mga kasíra, They feed their boarders in a niggardly
way. v [AB; c1] get to be scarce, small in quantities. Mumiskínu
(mamiskínu) ang ímung ginastuhan ug maminyù ka, You won’t spend on such
a big scale once you get married.

miskla = mikskla.

mismis n particles of yellowish substance sticking to the face after
sleep, hardened mucus from the eyes or mouth. v [A123P; a4] cause, have
such substances on the face. Panghilam-us kay gimismis ka, Wash your
face because you have mucus on your face.

mismu {1} with nouns or pronouns referring to a person: even
[so-and-so]. Sa klin-ap wik ang mismu nga mga tituládu manilhig, During
Clean-up Week even white collar workers sweep. Aku mismu many milútù
niíni, I cooked this myself. walay — not even this little bit. Way
mismung usa ka dakù ang íyang gitábang nákù, He didn’t even give me a
single penny in help. {2} with forms referring to a place: right in
[such-and-such] a place. Sa Maníla mismu may mga Huk, There are Huks
right in Manila. Didtu mismu siya mamatay, He died right in that place.
{2a} karun, awra — right this very moment. Karun mismu nag-íhap na sila
sa mga balúta, Right this very moment they are counting the ballots.

mistík n mistake. v [B126; a12] make a mistake in school or on one’s
paper.

mistil need to, have to do (used only negatively or in questions).
Mistil pa ba nà nímu buhátun? Must you do that? Dì na siya mistil
sultíhan, He does not need to be told. -in- = mistil.

mistir n {1} title for a gentleman. {2} husband. Háin man magtrabáhu
ang ímung mistir? Where is your husband working? {3} title for the
winner of a contest among men, as Mr. Universe. v {1} [A3; a12] call
s.o. Mr. {2} [B156; c6] be, become Mr. [so-and-so]. Kun gustu kang
mamistir Pilipins pagbarbil, If you want to become a Mr. Philippines,
practice weight lifting. (→) voc. Ása ka Mistǐr? Where are you going,
Sir?

mistiri tyún n mystery tune contest on the radio.

mistiryu n mystery, one of the fifteen events in the lives of Jesus and
Mary serving as a subject for meditation during the saying of the
rosary. Mistiryu sa Himáyà, Kalípay, Kasákit, The Glorious, Joyful,
Sorrowful Mysteries. {2} mystery, s.t. that is difficult to understand.
-sa = mistiryúsu (female). -su a mysterious. Usa ka mistiryúsung
istranyu ang nagluwas nákù, A mysterious stranger rescued me. v [B12]
get mysterious. Nagkamistiryúsu na hinúun ang íyang kamatáyun, His
death is getting to become more and more of a mystery.

mistísa n {1} woman of mixed blood. Mistísa Insik, Woman with Chinese
blood. {2} k.o. light-skinned cooking banana. {3} drink of beer, coke,
and cheap hard liquor. — dris n a modern version of the old Filipina
dress (sáyang pinarawhan) which may lack the panuylu or long skirt
(íkug) or the stiff sleeves (paráwu). mistisahun a having Caucasian
features. mistisilya a having some mestiza blood or features.

mistísu n {1} person of mixed blood. {1a} person with Caucasian
features, considered to be handsome. {2} animal of mixed breed.
v [B126; b6] be, become mestizo. — balúlang, bangus, patsang n a word
of ridicule for an ugly mestizo. mistisuhun a looking like a person
with Caucasian blood. -in-(→) n k.o. working knife (búlu) with a square
end, longer than the usual búlu but shorter than the sundang.

mistra = maistra, 1.

mistru = maistru, 1.

miswa_1 n fine, brittle, thread-like noodles of white flour. v [A1;
b(1)] make a dish of miswa.

miswa_2 n humorous term of address for young ladies, used intimately
without affixing the name. Huy, Miswa, dalì na, Miss, Miss. Come here.
Nía nang mga miswa, Here comes the girls.

misyunibirs n Miss Universe. v {1} [B16] be, become Miss Universe.
{2} [A12; b8] get a Miss Universe winner. Nakamisyunibirs
(namisyunibirsan) na ang Pilipínas, The Philippines has produced a Miss
Universe.

mitad n half the number or size of s.t. Ang mitad sa karni kang Piduy,
Half the piece of meat belongs to Pete. v [b6] in a game, give s.o. a
handicap of half the number of points. Arun lang magkadúlà ta mitaran
ta ka, Just so we can play I will give you a handicap of half the
number of points.

mítal n metal. Palábad nga mítal, Metal propeller.

mitalika see tíla.

mitaliku a metallic. Hílu nga mitaliku, Metallic thread.

mitàmità_1 v [A; b6] act childishly by crying or threatening when
demands are not met, complaining all the time, and the like. Ug dúna
kay gustu ayawg mitàmità kay dakù ka na, If you want s.t. don’t just
scream. You’re too big for that.

mitàmità_2 v [A; b6] pick at food, eat without appetite. Magmitàmità
siyag káun ug way sud-an, She only picks at the food if there’s no food
to go with the rice. -un a always without appetite in eating, given to
picking at food.

mithì n ideals, virtues. Unsay ímung mga mithì sa kinabúhì? What are
your ideals in life? v [a12] have s.t. as one’s ideal, cherish.
Ibaligyà hasta kalag tungud sa gimithì nga kalampúsan, They sell their
souls to attain the success they so desire. paka- = mithì, v.

miti, mitimíti, mitilmítil = mitirmítir.

míting n {1} meeting convened. {2} political meeting or rally. —
diabansi political rally the night before an election. v [A2C2; ab]
hold a meeting. -anan n place for holding meetings.

mitirmítir v [A; a] put a limit to or limit one’s acts. Ása
mumitirmítir ug sulti si Máma ug manuyù, Mama does not mince words when
she is angry. Karung panahúna kinahanglan nga magmitirmítir ug
sinud-anan, In these times it is necessary to limit our food
consumption. a being done in a scarce, limited way.

mitkan n mess kit, commonly used as a lunch box. v [A1; c6] put s.t. in
a mess kit.

mitmit v [B46; a4] for the eyes to be full of yellowish discharge.
Nagmitmit (gimitmit) íyang mata sa mútà, His eyes are full of eye
discharge.

mitnà n minute. Pipila ka mitnà ang nanglábay únà ku makatíngug,
Several minutes elapsed before I could say a word.

mitru n {1} taxi meter. {2} meter (not used after the numbers of
Spanish origin). Duha ka mitru (mitrus), Two meters. -s meters. Dus
mitrus, Two meters. v [A3; c1] measure by the meters. mitrusan,
mitruhan n measuring stick or tape.

mitsa_1 n small cylindrical tin can of around 4–6 oz. in a size used
for kerosene lamps. Mitsa nga punug sinsilyu, A tin can filled with
coins. mitsahan n kerosene lamp made out of small empty tin cans.

mitsa_2 n wick, fuse of explosive. Mubù ra ang mitsa sa dinamíta. Maung
mibutu dáyun, The dynamite has too short a wick. That is why it
exploded immediately. v [A; c1] use, make as a dynamite wick.

mitsádu n dish consisting of round of beef into which strips of pork
fat have been inserted stewed with spices to tender, served sliced with
tomato sauce.

mitsilin n cement used for patching rubber (so called from the brand
name). v [A13; a2] patch with rubber cement.

mituáku short for: Mitúu Aku The Apostles’ Creed.

mitudu n {1} method of teaching, learning in music. Mitudu sa sista,
Method of learning how to play the guitar. {2} being methodical. Way
mitudu ang pagpanglimpiyu, You aren’t being methodical in your
cleaning.

mituluhíya n mythology.

miunmíun v [A; b5] {1} be careful in using money or consuming goods.
Magmiunmíun ta sa bugas arun mulungtad, We must economize on our rice
so it will last. {2} hold back one’s temper or feelings, restrain
oneself. Ayawg imiunmíun ang ímung kaguul arun dílì ka masakit, Don’t
suppress your grief so that you will not get ill.

*míya íha — my darling girl. Uy, íha míya dì nà mau ang ímung nadá.
Iúlì nà, Oh, honey, you took the wrong one. Put it back! see also
madri.

miyaw n {1} meow of a cat. {2} cat in baby talk. (←) v [A] cry meow.
Kusug mumíyaw ang iring nga mangúlag, A cat in heat cries loud.

míyur n mayor.

Mlbn. n abbreviation for manlalában. see lában.

mm {1} sound made prior to plunging into one’s speech. Mm, kinsa tu?
Umm, who was it now? {2} sound emitted in showing approval of s.t.
tasted or smelled. see also um.

Mr. n abbreviation for Mistir.

mu_1 see ámù.

mu_2 see ikaw.

mu_3 see kamu.

mu_4 = mau.

mū̀ = múlù.

mu- punctual active verbal prefix, future. (Past: mi- or ni- or ming-.
Subjunctive: mu-.) Muadtu ku didtu ugmà, I will go there tomorrow.
Miadtu (niadtu, ning-adtu, ming-adtu) ku didtu gahápun, I went there
yesterday. Walà ku muadtu didtu, I did not go there. Verbs with mu-,
mi- have the following meanings (as opposed to verbs with nag-, mag-;
see mag-). {1} volitional action. Walà siya musulti, He wouldn’t
(refused to) say. Gipapaháwà siya kay walà muhátag sa báhin, He was
evicted because he refused to give the landowner his share. {2} action
which is non-durative. Muhílak siyag kusiun, He will burst out crying
if he is pinched. Mumata mi sa alas singku káda buntag, We wake up
every morning at five. Mutindug mi ug musulud siya, We will get up if
he comes in. {2a} added to nouns to form verbs of this meaning.
Mukaláyu ang kakugnan, The grasslands will burst into flames. {3} added
to verbs referring to state: come into [such-and-such] a state, become
[so-and-so]. Muabri ang pultahan, The door will open (come open).
Mutúyuk ang galingan, The mill will turn. {3a} added to adj.: become
[adj.]. Mugamay ímung láwas ug dì ka mukáun, You will get thin if you
don’t eat. Mupula ímung ngábil ug ímung lipistíkan, Your lips will
become red if you put lipstick on them. {3b} added to roots referring
to measurements: become [so-and-so] much. Ug mualas utsu na gánì, lakaw
na lang, If it gets to be eight o’clock, just go on ahead. Muduha na ka
túig, It is almost two years now. (Lit. It will become two years.)
Mutúhud ang túbig, The water is nearly knee-deep (lit. will become
knee-deep). {3c} added to verbs referring to capability: be capable of
[do]ing. Kining sakayána mukarga ug lima ka táwu, This boat will hold
five people. Kining dyípa musakay ug dúsi ka buuk, This jeep can carry
a dozen people. {4} added to verbs or adjectives referring to manner:
[do] in [such-and-such] a way. Mukusug siyag katáwa, He will laugh
loudly. Maáyu siyang mulútù, He cooks well. {5} added to nouns
referring to a place: go to [such-and-such] a place. Mugráhi ang taksi
run, The taxi is headed for the garage. Mulawud siya bísan magbagyu, He
will go to sea, even in the typhoon.

múb n move in chess and the like. Ákù pang múb ha, It’s my move, all
right? v [A; c] make a move. Dugáya sad nímung mumúb, uy, Heavens, how
long does it take you to move?

mubgas = malubgas.

múbil n {1} mobile patrol. Pag-abut sa múbil nanágan ang mga sugarul,
When the mobile patrol arrived, the gamblers disappeared. {2} Mobil oil
gasoline station. — patrul = múbil, 1.

mubù a {1} short, brief. Mubù nga sirmun, A brief sermon. {2} short in
height or quantity. Mubù si Napuliyun, Napoleon was a short man. Mubù
ang mga sinínà karun, Dresses are short nowadays. {3} low. Mubù ang
lamísa pára sa mga bátà, The tables for the children are low. {3a} low
in price, grade. Pilía nang tinda nga mubù ra ug prisyu, Choose
low-priced goods. Mubù ug grádu ang buluk, The dull child got a low
grade. {4} in phrases: having little. — ug buut in a bad mood. Ayaw nag
samuksamuka kay mubù run nag buut, Don’t disturb him because he is in a
bad mood now. — ug ginháwa short-winded. — ug idukasiyun having little
education. Mubù siyag idukasiyun maung way batásan, He’s just ignorant.
That’s why he is ill-mannered. — ug lánat lacking endurance. Mubù ra
siyag lánat sa lánguy, He cannot swim very far. — ug lupad like a
prostitute. Ang mga babáying mubù ug lupad tinámay sa katilingban,
Women of easy virtue are held in contempt by the community. — ug
paminsar lacking thinking power. Mubù nà siyag paminsar. Maung gigastu
ang puhúnan, He didn’t think very hard and that is why he spent his
capital. — ug panlantaw lacking foresight. — ug pasinsiya lacking
patience. — ug tinan-awan nearsighted. — ug tubul sensitive, easy to
take offense. Kamubù nímug tubul uy. Dì man ka kakumidiyáhan, You’re
too sensitive. It’s impossible to make a joke with you. — ug tul-an
having short limbs. {5} low in pitch. Mubù siyag tíngug, She has a low
voice. v {1} [B1; ab7] be brief, concise. Mub-a ang ímung tubag, Make
your answer short. {2} [AB; b7c1] become low, make s.t. low. Imubù
(mub-a) lang pagtábas ang ákung sayal, Just cut my skirt short. Mub-i
ning ákung buhuk dapit sa kílid, Cut my hair short on the sides. ha-
a short. -g- a short (plural). Sa mugbù pa ang lubi, In olden times
(when the coconuts were still short). -in- n shortenings. Ang yúbi mauy
minubù sa University of the Visayas, U.V. is short for the University
of the Visayas.

múda n mode, current fashion. Múda karun ang mugbù nga sinínà, Short
dresses are the style these days. v [B1; c1] be in fashion.

mudílu n {1} fashion model, one who poses for photographers or artists.
{2} style or design. {3} model to emulate. Mudílu sa maáyung pamatásan,
A paragon of good behavior. {4} a small copy, model of s.t. Mudílu sa
ayruplánu, Model airplane. v [A; c6] work as a model that poses.

mudipikar v [A; c1] modify s.t. to adopt it for a new use. Mudipikahun
nátù ning silyang himúung tuwangtúwang, Let’s modify this chair to turn
it into a rocking chair.

mudiradur n in the United Church of Christ in the Philippines (a
merging of several Protestant sects), the executive head of a
conference composed of several local congregations in a certain area.
v [B156; a2] be the moderator.

múdirn n modern dance of the late sixties and seventies. v [A23] dance
a modern dance.

mudirnu a modern. Mudirnung paági sa panguma, Modern farming methods.
v [B12; a12] be, become modern; make s.o. or s.t. modern.

mudista n seamstress, usually one who sews very ordinary clothes.
v [B156; a12] be, become a seamstress.

mudmud v {1} [A; c] press or bury one’s face hard against s.t. Mihilak
siya ug mimudmud sa íyang nawung sa unlan, She cried and buried her
face in the pillow. {2} [A; c6] put s.o. in a tight situation. Gimudmud
siya sa labihang kapit-us, He was oppressed by extreme poverty.

mudtu = udtu (except with hiN- and doubling).

múdu a liking as evinced by pleasant behavior. Wà ka ba kamatngun nga
si Kurdapya may múdu nímu? Have you not noticed that Cordapia has a
liking for you?

mud-uk a having an unsmiling, sour expression. v [A; c1] have a sour
look on the face from being in a bad mood. Dílì giyud nang batáang
makamaung mumud-uk bísag kasab-an, That child never looks angry even
when he is scolded. -un a of an unsmiling, angry sort.

múdus n procedure, system. Karáang múdus sa panguma ang íyang gigámit,
He uses old methods of farming. Mau kanà ang ílang múdus pag-ílad sa
táwu, That is their procedure for swindling people. †

mug-aw v [B1256] feel lonely and empty when parted from a dear one.
Namug-aw sila pagkahibalu nílang gitában nag ílang anak, They had a
lonely and empty feeling when they heard that their daughter had
eloped. Namug-aw man lang tag hinulat nímu, I felt so lonely waiting
for you.

mugmug = limugmug.

mugnà v [A; a2] create, bring into existence. Kinsay nagmugnà sa
kasámuk dinhi? Who created a disturbance here? Gimugnà sa Amirika ang
mga mangilngig nga paági sa pagpatay, America has created terrifying
devices to kill people. Gimugnáan ku níya ug usa ka kanta sa gugma, He
composed a love song for me. n creation. Ang kalibútan mugnà sa Diyus,
The earth is God’s creation. mag-r- n creator. tig-, tag- n creator,
originator of a certain thing. Si Baldu ang tagmugnà sa pagpalusut sa
mga kuntrabandu, Baldo is the one who thought up ways of smuggling
contraband goods.

mugtuk a frowning, scowling of face. Kinsay ganáhan makig-úban níya nga
mugtuk kaáyug náwung? Who cares for her company when she has such a
frowning face? v [B; c1] look gloomy, sad, pouting. Nagmugtuk siya kay
gipugus pagpatrabáhu, He pouted because he was being forced to work.
Nagmugtuk ang íyang nawung kay gipapha siya sa trabáhu, He has a
dejected look because he was fired from his job.

mug-ut = mud-uk.

*muhir babáying — derogatory, but meaningless, reference to a woman
(from the analogy of phrases of the form babáying [adj.], which mean
‘woman doing s.t. improper’—e.g. babáying kiat ‘flirt’, whereas muhir
[from Spanish] has no meaning by itself.) Nía na pud magsamuksamuk nang
babáying muhir, Here comes that female again, making a nuisance of
herself.

muhun n {1} concrete land marker buried in the ground. {2} penis
(humorous). v [A; b] post land markers.

mukasin n moccasin shoes, shoe that has no heel and is made of soft
leather. v [A; b] wear moccasins.

mukda v [A12; b2] {1} suddenly realize s.t. so as to get startled. Dihà
na ku makamukda nga wà kuy kwarta pagbáyad nákù, I suddenly realized I
had no money when I was about to pay. Namukdahan ku pagkadungug sa
balità, I was stunned by the news. {2} be caught in the act. Himukdahan
ang mga sugarul sa pulis, The police caught the gamblers red-handed.

múku n variety of cooking banana, growing in bunches with fewer hands
and shorter individual pieces than the kardába, but firm of flesh and
round.

*múkuy = sagmúkuy.

mul n mould or pattern for making a hat the right size. v [A; a1] use,
make a head mould.

múla n large breed of horse, reddish-brown in color.

mulásis n molasses.

muldi n {1} mold for forming s.t. Muldi sa halublak, Mold for making
hollow blocks. {2} piece of s.t. shaped by a mold. Pila ang muldi sa
bibingka? How much are the rice cakes apiece? {3} anything that is made
in large quantities in the same size and shape, such as spare parts.
v [A1; a] mold for s.t., make s.t. with a mold. muldihan = muldi, n1.
-in- n printing, block letters. v [A; c16] print, write in block
letters.

mulignù = karabalyas.

mulínu n a small hand-cranked mill. v [A; a12] grind s.t. in a grinder.
Maáyung mulinúhun dáyun ang kapi human ug sanlag, You should grind the
coffee beans immediately after roasting them.

mulistiya v {1} [A; b5] molest, bother s.o. Ipadakup kanang táwung
nagmulistiya kanímu, Have that man who molested you arrested. {2} [A;
ac] inconvenience, bother s.o. asking a favor. Ayaw kug mulistiyáhag
hulamhúlam ug kwarta, Don’t you bother me by borrowing money. Unsa na
say ímung imulistiya nákù? What are you going to bother me with this
time?

mulitsing = muritsing.

mulmul_1 n general name given to parrot fish: Scarus spp.

mulmul_2 n chicken feather coloration, ranging from light tan to
reddish brown with a yellowish tinge.

multa n fine. Adúnay multa sa mangíhì dinhi, Whoever urinates here will
be fined. v {1} [A; b6(1)] pay a fine. Ngánung mumulta man ku nga wà
man ku makalápas sa baláud? Why should I pay a fine when I haven’t
broken the law? {2} [A; c] impose a fine. Multáhan ang muabsin sa
parti, Anyone who is absent from the party will be fined.

multibaytamins n multi vitamin tablets.

multiplay v [A; c1] multiply, do the operation of multiplication. Ang
mga hay-iskul karun dì pa gihápun makamaung mumultiplay, High school
students nowadays don’t even know how to do multiplication.

multiplikar = multiplay. multiplikasiyun n multiplication.

multu n ghost of a dead person. Gipakítà siya sa multu, The ghost
appeared to him. v [A13; a2] for ghosts to appear. Nagmultu ang kalag
ni Krispin sa ikakwarinta díyas human siya mamatay, The ghost of
Crispin appeared on the fortieth day after his death. Ang balay nga
gimultúhan sa namatay, The house where the soul of the deceased
appeared.

mulù v [A; bc] complain about grievances or what one feels. Nagmulù ang
mga saup kay gagmay rag ílang mabáhin, The tenants are grumbling
because they got a small share. Ayaw imulù nákù ang ímung sakit. Didtu
sa duktur, Don’t tell me your complaints. Tell it to a doctor.
n complaint about what one feels. mud-ánun a given to much complaining
and grumbling.

mulyi_1 n pier, wharf. Nagkargadur siya sa mulyi, He is working as a
stevedore at the pier. v [a12] make into a wharf, pier.

mulyi_2 n spring, tightly coiled wire that rebounds. v [A1; a] attach,
use as a spring.

mulyi_3 v [A; a12] sharpen a thin-bladed instrument. Kinsay mumulyi
niíning bulang? Who will sharpen this gaff? Mulyíhun ta ning mga
habulan nga bulang, Let’s sharpen the blades of these dull gaffs.
mulyihan n k.o. grindstone used to hone thin-bladed instruments.

mulyínu n mill consisting of a large stone turned by a draft animal.

mumhu n little particles of cooked rice or corn that fall next to the
plate when eating. ka- v [A13] be full of morsels of rice. mumhuun
a full of morsels of rice or corn.

mumintu n moment. Mga mumintu sa kinabúhì nga dì níya hingkalimtan,
Moments in his life which he cannot forget. see also unmumintu.

múmu n muumuu. v [A; c] wear, make into a muumuu.

mumù a having as much of s.t. as one could want. Mumù sa pagpanggà ang
bugtung, An only child has love lavished on him. v [B12] get to have as
much of s.t. as one would want. Nagkamumù mi sa pagkáun sa nagkadatù
mi, We were getting to have all the food we want as we got richer.

mùmù v [A; c] bump the mouth against s.t. Nagdugù ang ngábil sa bátà
kay namùmù sa lamísa, The child’s lip is bleeding because he bumped it
against the table.

múmug = limugmug.

múmuy n pet name for a monkey. Gipakáun níyag ságing ang múmuy, He fed
the monkey a banana.

munamúna a doing s.t. to the best of one’s ability, with maximum
effort. Munamúna giyud nákung dágan apan wà giyud kung kaapas, I ran as
fast as I could but I couldn’t overtake her. Náay ákung tinígum apan
munamúna sab nákung dagínut, I have saved some money, but with great
sacrifice.

munarkíya n monarchy.

munastiryu n monastery, nunnery.

múnay n k.o. bread made with more eggs and butter than ordinary bread
and covered with a thin layer of beaten eggs which is baked onto it.

mundu_1 = baul mundu.

mundu_2, munduy n small, thin-skinned, but very full and compact
variety of cooking banana.

mungà n mother hen. v [A1; a12] raise a mother hen. Mungaa ang
hingitlug, Make the hens that are good layers into mother hens. -an(←)
= himungáan. see búnga.

*mungálung hi-/ha- v [B1236; b8] {1} be aware. Sa pagkahimungáwung
nákug buut, nawálà na sila, When I came to, they were gone. Wà ku
makahimungáwung nga nawálà ákung singsing, I wasn’t aware that my ring
was gone. {2} remember a face vaguely. Wà ku makahimungáwung sa íyang
dagway, I couldn’t place his face. {3} get a good enough look at a face
to recognize it. Wà ku makahimungáwung sa íyang dagway kay ngitngit, I
couldn’t recognize his face because it was dark. pahi- v [A; a] bring
s.o. to his senses. Ug wà makapahimungáwung nákù ang ákung mga anak,
mapatay ku siya, If my children hadn’t brought me to my senses, I would
have killed him.

*mungawmúngaw pa- v [A] pretend not to know or be aware.
Nagpamungawmúngaw siyang wà kahibáwu nga nakadaug siya sa swipstik, He
pretended not to know that he had won a prize in the sweepstakes.

*mungáwung = *mungálung.

munggus n mung bean, stewed like lentils or made into bean sprouts:
Phaseolus aureus. v [A13; b6] prepare a dish of mung beans. Nindut
munggusan ang bulad bulinaw, Dried anchovies goes well if cooked with
mung beans.

mungha n cenobite nun. v [B156] {1} be a cenobite nun. {2} cloister
oneself like a nun.

munghi n cenobite monk. v [B156] be, become a monk.

mungit n {1} k.o. edible fish of the rocks of an unusually strong
smell. {2} allusion to s.o. who smells bad. Kalígù uy nanimáhù ka mang
mungit, Wash yourself, man. You smell like a mungit fish.

mungkádu kuluni n colony of members of a religious brotherhood, so
called after their founder Hilario C. Moncado. mungkadista n a follower
of Moncado.

munha, munhi = mungha, munghi.

*munisipal hunta, kunsíhu — n municipal board.

munisipyu n {1} municipal building in a town. {2} town not as big as a
city. v [B126; a12] be, become a municipality.

munitur n monitor, a student chosen to help a teacher with order,
attendance, and other non-teaching chores. v [B126; a12] be, become a
monitor, make s.o. the monitor.

muntáda v {1} [A; c] mount, set s.t. up resting on s.t. Nagmuntáda sila
sa mga kanyun ibabaw sa kútà, They are mounting the cannons on the
upper walls of the fort. {2} [A] be mounted, put up s.w. Nagmuntáda ang
bátà sa kúna, The baby is lying flat on the crib.

muntǎr v {1} [A; c] set s.t. up, install s.t. for use. Wà pa ku
makamuntǎr sa utáwan, I have not set the ironing board up yet. Gimuntǎr
na ang ilibítur, The elevator has been installed. {2} [A2] mount, get
on a saddle. Dì ku makamuntǎr sa silyíta sa bisiklíta kay hábug, I can
not get on the bicycle seat because it’s too high. {3} for male animals
to copulate. Dílì mumuntǎr ang butù kay walà bigái, The male won’t
mount because he isn’t sexed up.

munti_1 n = muntinglúpà.

munti_2 n monte, k.o. card game. v [A2C; b6] play monte.

muntinglúpà n Muntinlupa, national penitentiary of the Philippines.
v [B1256] be sent to Muntinlupa.

muntúra n {1} saddle. Lisud ang magkabayù nga way muntúra, It’s
difficult to ride a horse without a saddle. {2} seat of a bicycle.
v [c] mount s.t. on s.t., usually so as to put it in full view. Kamira
nga gimuntúra ibabaw sa lamísa, A camera mounted on top of the table.
pa- v [A3] place conspicuously s.w. À, náa man giyus úna magpamuntúra,
mu ra mag hárì, Hm, how he dared take a seat right in the front, as if
he were a king!

munumintu = munyumintu_2.

munyíka n doll. v {1} [A13; c6] play with dolls. {2} [A12] obtain a
doll. {3} [a12] make into a doll. — nga nuug n rag doll.

munyumintu_1 n monument. v [A13; b(1)] set up a monument.

munyumintu_2 n small marker of cement to indicate the corners of land
boundaries. v [A; a2] put a cement marker up.

múr (from murtál) I swear, it’s true. Tinúud laging gipalitan kag
sinínà, múr, I swear to God, she bought you a dress. — pa I swear, it’s
true.

mura = mau ra. see mau.

múra n muslim woman.

murabya n variety of banana.

murádu a reddish purple. n = amurádu. v [a12] color s.t. reddish
purple.

mural n {1} morale. Makadáut sa mural sa sundáwu, Can destroy the
soldiers’ morale. {2} moral or moral lesson.

muralidad n morality, moral conduct. Mubù na kaáyu ang muralidad sa mga
táwu karun, The current generation does not conform to high standards
of morality.

muralista n one who is a stickler for moral propriety.

murdir v [a12] murder, corrupt a language, song. Gimurdir ni Nína ang
ispíling sa ákung ngálan, Nena murdered the spelling of my name.

murgi n morgue. v [c1] be kept in a morgue. Murgihun (imurgi) na lang
ang minatay samtang maghulat kun kinsay mukúhà, The body will be kept
in the morgue while they wait for s.o. to claim it.

murína = murínu (female).

murínu a brown or dark-brown in complexion. v [B125] be, become brown
in complexion.

muritsing v [B12; b6] be smeared, spotted with dirt, grimy. Mauy
nakamuritsing (nakapamuritsing) sa ákung sinínà ang úling nga ákung
gidala, The charcoal which I was carrying soiled my dress. ka- [A13] be
smeared all over. Nagkamuritsing man lang nang nawung mu sa sikwáti,
Your face is all besmeared with chocolate.

murkun n dish made of ground meat mixed with spices and wrapped in the
leaf fat or thinly sliced pork or beef, and boiled and then fried.
v [A13] make, have murkun.

murpína n morphine.

mursíku, mursíkus = amursíku.

murtal_1 a {1} mortal sin. Ayawg pangáwat kay salà kanang murtal, Do
not steal because that is a mortal sin. {2} I swear, it’s true. Wà lagi
ku mamakak, murtal (murtal sin) pa, I am not lying, I swear. — sin =
murtal, 2.

murtal_2 n mortar cannons. Murtal ang gamítun pagbungkag sa kaáway,
They use mortars to scatter the enemy. v [A; a] fire a mortar cannon
on.

murtar sin = murtal_1, a2.

muru a pouting, unsmiling face. v [B46; c1] having a sour face in
displeasure. Nagmuru ang babáying nasukù, The angry woman is frowning.

murumúru n {1} play in verse, dramatizing noble deeds of royalty,
performed on an elaborate and lavish scale on the feast day of a patron
saint. {2} s.t. put on merely as a show, not with serious purpose. Usa
lang nà ka murumúru ang imbistigasiyun sa kahugáwan sa Arsii, The
investigation of the Rice Administration scandals is all a big show.
v [A1; c1] hold a Moro-Moro play.

murun n k.o. torch made from a section of bamboo around 3 cm. in
diameter with a neck and fuelled with kerosene. v [A13; a12] make, make
into a torch of this sort.

múrus n {1} Muslim (derogatory reference). {2} unbaptized infant
(humorous). -in-, -in-(←) a doing things like the Moros: {1} speak the
language of the Moros. {2} fight, settle arguments like the Moros.
{3} setting outrageously high prices. {4} traitorous, stabbing in the
back. v [A; c1] do s.t. like the Moros. ka-an n place where many
Muslims live.

murúsu = amurúsu.

muryumuryu n a notorious red light and slum district near the
waterfront of Cebu City.

mus n k.o. soil with heavy humus content used by florists.

músa n {1} muse, a beauty queen. Si Bilin ang nahímung músa sa klási,
Belen became the class muse. {2} in a benefit dance where girls are
auctioned off to dancing partners, the girl who gets the highest amount
of money. v [B1256; a2] be, become a muse; make s.o. the muse.

musgut v [A; c1] pout and frown from annoyance. Mimusgut siya nga ákung
gisúgù, She frowned when I sent her on an errand. -un(→) a always
frowning in countenance.

musì n name given to an edible k.o. pufferfish with no spines.

musika n music.

musikal n musical film.

musiku n music band. Mitukar ang musiku ug usa ka martsa, The band
played a march. v [b6] provide a band. musikíra = musikíru (female).
musikíru n {1} musician. {2} member of a band. v [B156] be a musician
or member of a band.

musimus a being of the poorest and lowest class (derogatory term).
Musimus giyud nga pagkatáwu dì kahibawu mugámit ug kutsára, He was born
in a stable. He doesn’t even know how to use a spoon. v [B126; b6] be,
become lowly and looked down upon. Ug mutumpang ka ánang way grádu,
mamusimus ka sad, If you step into the gutter to fight with that
ignoramus, you’ll bring yourself down to his level.

muskatil n muscatel wine.

muskit n {1} a ship cook’s helper. Ang muskit mauy katábang sa
kusiníru, The ship cook’s helper gives the cook assistance. {2} cook
who is hired or just offers his services for a special occasion. Mau
nay ámung muskit káda pyista, He is our cook every fiesta. {3} the one
who is it (the server) in a game of takyan or marbles. v {1} [B136; a2]
be, become a cook for a special occasion. {2} [A; a12] make a person
remain it for a long time. Muskítun kug maáyu si Pidru. Lagyuun nákug
pátid ang takyan, I’ll make Pedro be it for a long time. I’ll kick the
shuttlecock far away.

muskitíru n mosquito net. v [A; a] put up, use a mosquito net; make
into a mosquito net. Magmuskitíru ta kay daghang namuk, We have to put
up a mosquito net because there are lots of mosquitoes. — ug tabla
v [A13] be dead (lit. wearing a wooden mosquito net). Ug dì ka muhúnung
ug ínum magmuskitíru kag tabla, If you don’t stop drinking, you will
wind up in a coffin (wearing a wooden mosquito net).

muskubádu n raw, unrefined sugar.

muskuládu, muskuláwu a muscular, brawny. Dì siya musúkul nímu kay
muskuládu ka, He won’t fight with you because you are brawny. v [B1256]
be, become muscular.

musmus v {1} [A; c6] push s.o.’s face hard against s.t. Imusmus ku nang
nawung mu sa bungbung, I’m going to push your face against the wall.
{2} [B1256] fall down hard hitting one’s face on s.t. Nadalispang siya
ug namusmus sa lápuk, He slipped and fell down face first in the mud.

mus na short for bámus na. see bámus.

mustása n mustard, commonly raised as a vegetable: Brassica
integrifolia.

mustra n explanation by example, showing how s.t. is or works. Mustra
kun unsáun pagbúhat ang plánu sa balay, A demonstration on how to make
the plans of a house. Mustra lang kini. Dílì ibaligyà, This is just a
sample for display. It is not for sale. v [A; c] demonstrate how to do
s.t. -dur(→) n mannequin or showcase used to display.

músu v {1} [A; b] hire oneself out to do a piece of work. Bugas ang
gisúhul sa nagmúsu ug gúna, The man who did the weeding was given rice
in compensation. {2} [c2] hire a work animal. Íyang karabaw mauy átung
imúsu (musúhan) sa dáru, We will hire his carabao. n s.o. or s.t. hired
out. pa- v {1} [A; a] hire s.o. {2} [A; c] hire one’s work animal out
to s.o. else.

musulíyu n mausoleum.

musyun n motion in a meeting of a voting body. v [A; c6] make a motion.

mútà n dried pus or mucous secretion in the eyes. v [B126] become this
secretion in the eyes. Ang abug sa mata mamútà, If dust gets into the
eyes it will turn into pus. (→) v [B146; a4] be filled with this
secretion. Nagmutà (gimutà) ang mata sa gipiskat, The man with the sore
eyes has dried pus in his eyes. hi- v [A; b] remove the mútà from the
eyes. paNhi- v [A2; b] remove pus from one’s eyes. hi-an(→) n the
corner of the eye where the mútà is deposited. -un(→) a full of mútà.

mutíbu n motive. Pangabubhu ang mutíbu sa pagpatay, Jealousy was the
motive for the murder.

mutil n motel or cabins, usually used for illicit romance.

mutimuti = kamukámu.

mutsatsa = mutsatsu (female), n, v1.

mutsatsu n {1} male servant, houseboy. {2} in children’s games, the
loser who serves out a penalty. v {1} [B126; a2] be, become a servant.
{2} [A12] hire or have s.o. as a servant. Nakamutsatsu mig kawatan, We
got a thief as a servant. pa- v [A1] hire oneself out as a servant.
Didtu siya sa Manílà magpamutsatsu, He worked as a servant in Manila.
paka- v [A13; a12] consider, treat like a houseboy.

mutsu a being temporarily rich (colloquial). Daghan kug amígu basta
mutsu ka, You will have lots of friends as long as you’re in the
clover. — diníru having lots of money. v [B1256] have lots of money.
Mamutsu lang tag tingswildu, We are rich only on payday.

mutu, mutù n mound, hill. Túa sa luyung mutu ang ámung balángay, Our
town lies beyond that hill.

mut-uk (from but-uk) v [b2] be dumbfounded, be struck speechless
because of the sudden impact of words or events. Hingmut-ukan
(namut-ukan) ku sa ímung nutisya kay mu rag dì katuúhan ang nahitabù, I
was struck dumb by your news because it sounded unbelievable.

mutùmútù_1 = tumùtúmù.

mutùmútù_2 v [A12; a12] estimate, calculate approximately. Mutùmutúa
lang unsa kadaghana ang gikinahanglan, Just estimate how many we need.

mutun n block, a metal or wooden case containing a pulley or pulleys.
v [A13; a2] attach a block to s.t.; haul out s.t. by means of a block.

mutung a for an animal in a group or flock to be fierce and domineering
over the others. v [B1] gain supremacy over others. Ang sunuy nagmutung
sa pultri, The cock is the boss of the chicken yard. †

mutur n {1} engine, motor. Nadáut ang mutur sa tiprikurdir, The motor
of the tape recorder got broken. {2} motorcycle. {3} corn or rice mill.
Túa siya sa mutur nagpagaling ug mais, He is at the corn mill to have
the corn milled. -bayik, -saykul n motorbike, motorcycle. v {1} [c] put
s.t. as an engine; use s.t. as an engine. {2} [A; a12] go by
motorcycle. di- motorized, having a motor. -ista n motorist, driver.

mutursaykul, mutursiklu n motorcycle.

mutyà n {1} precious gem with magical properties. May mutyà nà siya
búsà dílì dutlan, He has a charm and so he is invulnerable. {1a} — sa
ságing tinduk n in folk belief, a precious stone which falls from the
blossom of a tinduk banana when it opens at midnight on a moonless
night. Supernatural beings in the form of powerful monsters watch for
this stone to fall. If a man obtains this stone, he is endowed with
magical powers but he must wrest it from the supernatural beings who
are also after it. {2} anything precious or valued highly. Ang bugtung
níyang mutyà dinhi sa kalibútan mau ang íyang anak, Her only treasure
here on earth is her child. {2a} daw may -ng gisapnay, nagsapnay ug —
being extraordinarily careful in handling s.t. (as if one were carrying
a precious gem). Ampíngi ang ímung dungug sáma sa mutyang sinapnay,
Guard your honor like a jewel. {2b} treasured, most valued. — sa mga
mata apple of one’s eye. v [A12; b(1)] possess a precious gem having a
charm. paka- v [A13; a12] consider, treat as a precious gem.

muu = mau.

múuk v {1} [A1] be asleep soundly. Magmúuk ug katúlug ang bátà human
digúa, A baby sleeps soundly after you bathe it. {2} [A1; b(1)] stay in
bed due to inactivity. Magmúuk lang siya kanúnay sa banig bísag udtu
na, She is always staying in bed, even if the sun is up. {3} [A13] be
so that air cannot get at it. Ug magmúuk ang ímung samad, dílì mamaáyug
dalì, If your wound is wrapped up so air cannot get at it, it will take
a long time to get better. muukmúuk ug katáwa v [A; b3] roll with
laughter, suppressing the sound. Nagmuukmúuk mi pagkatáwa sa ámung
maistrung wà makapamutúnis, We practically exploded with laughter at
our teacher because he hadn’t buttoned his pants. -an(→), pala-
a sleepyhead.

muung n k.o. cardinal fish: name given to numerous small, red,
lightly-scaled fish of the family Apogonidae.

muut, múut (from buut) a funny, extremely laughable. Muut kaáyu si
Dulpi mudala ug kumidiya, Dolphy is very funny in a comedian’s role.
v {1} [B12; a2] be funny, hilarious. Muúta nang ímung mga líhuk arun
mangatáwa sila, Make your actions funny so that they will laugh.
{2} [B1256] be, become amused at s.t. funny. Namuut ku sa íyang
kumidiya, I was amused at her jokes. para-(←) a funny, laughable. Ang
mga salída ni Dyíri Líwis pulus paramúut, Jerry Lewis’s films are all
funny.

muwaybuway = buraybúray.

muy {1} exclamation initial to a sentence: My! How very. Muy hináya pud
nímu nga musulat! How slow you write! {2} exclamation expressing deep
disgruntlement or dissatisfaction. Muy! Ug magsígi ning gastúha,
makapútu, My! If these expenses go on, it will make us go bankrupt.

mùy = muy, 2.

*muyù hig-/hag- = hisag-/hasag-. see sagmuyù.

mwiblis n furniture. v [A12] get furniture.

mwilyi = mulyi_1, 2, 3.

mwistra = mustra. -dur = mustradur.

myápi = pyápi.

myáus = mayáus.

myimbru = mimbru.

myintras = mintras.

Myirkulis = mirkulis.

myúsik n {1} piece of music being played. Dúnay myúsik sa intirmisyun
sa sini, There’s music during the intermission in the movies. {2} music
as a course. {3} go, word uttered by a conductor of a passenger vehicle
to signal the driver to drive off. Dihang misinggit ang kunduktur ug
myúsik, mipabulhut dáyun ang draybir, When the conductor shouted
‘music, maestro’, the driver immediately took off.
