


=== I ===


i_1 {1} — midiya half past. Alas tris i midiya, Three-thirty.
{2} particle between Spanish numbers: [number_1] i [number_2]
n [so-and-so many] pesos to [so-and-so many] pesos. Gilugruhan ku níyag
tris i dus, He offered me three pesos to my two pesos.

i_2 {1} expression uttered upon making an error or inadvertently
breaking s.t. I, sayup mang numirúha ang ákung nadáyal, Oops, I dialed
the wrong number. I, nabuy-an nákù ang básu, Oops, I dropped the glass.
I, náa man diay ka sa sulud, Oops, I didn’t know you were inside (the
toilet). {2} pause word used when speaker does not know what to say
next. I, walà pa tingáli muabut, Er, perhaps they haven’t gotten here
yet. {3} exclamation expressing surprise at s.t. unexpected which s.o.
did. I, súkul diay ka nákù? You mean to say you will stand up to me?
{4} particle expressing disgust. I, sámuk ning batáa, Humph, this child
is a nuisance. I, lúpig pay hinúgas ning kapíha, Ugh, this coffee is
worse than dishwater. {5} exclamation asserting that s.t. seems to be
the case though the interlocutor might not be aware of it. I, pála na
man run, Oh, come on! You’re flattering me. (You may not have meant it
as flattery but that is what it was.) I, línug man tu, That was an
earthquake, wasn’t it?

i_3 n letter E.

í {1} teasing exclamation over s.t. one might envy a person for. Í,
bag-u man lagi tag tíbi, Hey, you’ve got a new TV set. Í, pasar man
diay ta sa bár, Hey, I didn’t know you passed the bar. {2} exclamation
of fright.

i-_1 instrumental passive verb affix, future. (past gi-, subjunctive
-i. Potential forms: past na-, or, alternatively, gika-; future and
subjunctive ma-_2 or, alternatively, ika-.) Ibutang níya ang kwarta, He
will put the money down. Gibutang níya ang kwarta, He put the money
down. Walà níya ibutang ang kwarta, He didn’t put the money down. Diin
kahà nákù mabutang (ikabutang) ang kwarta? Where could I have put the
money? Ang kwartang nabutang (gikabutang) sa lamísa, The money that was
put on the table. {1} put, bring, convey s.t. Dì ku ihátag, I will not
give it away. Iadtu kaníya ang kwarta, Bring the money to him. Isaka
ang malíta sa táas, Bring the suitcase upstairs. {1a} with verbs of
saying, asking, and the like: say [so-and-so]. Wà kuy isulti níya, I
have nothing to say to him. Unsay ipangutána nákù? What shall I ask?
{1b} with verbs containing pa-: have s.o. [do] to. (Cf. -un_1). Ipalútù
ku ang isdà, I will have s.o. cook the fish. Ipasaka nátù ang butung,
Let’s have s.o. climb up to get the coconuts. Ipahátag ang kík, Have
s.o. give the cake away. Ipaadtu ang kík didtu, Have s.o. bring the
cake there or Have s.o. go get the cake. {1c} with adjectives or words
referring to a state: bring into the state. Iandam na ang mga butang,
Prepare the things now. {2} [do] with. Wà kuy kwartang ipalit ug bugas,
I have no money to buy rice with. Díay martilyung ibuak sa alkansíya,
Here is a hammer to break the piggy bank with. Isapátus ang ímung
bag-u, Wear your new shoes (use your new ones as shoes). {3} [do] for
(confined, for the most part, to the imperative). Ikúhà ra kug túbig,
Please get me some water. {4} [do] at [such-and-such] a time (confined
to the future). Hustu na rung iadtu, Now would be a good time to go.
{4a} prefixed to verbs following adj.: it is [adj.] to [do]. Ínit rang
itrabáhu run, It is too hot to work now. Kaáyu rang ipuyù dinhi, How
nice it would be to live here! {5} become in [such-and-such] a state
because of. Ayaw ipamintì ang ímung kasukù, Don’t gnash your teeth
because of your anger.

i-_2(←) prefix added to roots referring to a place or direction to form
nouns meaning ‘place of [so-and-so]’. Ibábaw, Place up above. Ilálum,
Place below, beneath. Iláwud, Place toward town (lit. out to the sea).

-i see -an_1.

-i(→) short for hi-i(→). see hi-an.

iba = uban, 2 (dialectal).

íbà_1 n {1} k.o. sour fruit used in sour stews: Averrhoa bilimbi. — sa
insik the fruit of the bangkiling. way — ug dì maaslum everything ugly,
esp. a woman’s appearance, is disagreeable (lit. all íbà’s are sour).
Garbúsa mu rag gwápa. Way íbà ug dì maaslum, She’s proud, as if she
were beautiful. Anything ugly is disagreeable.

Íbà_2 n Eve, the first woman of God’s creation. anak ni — n woman. Ang
mga anak ni Íbà ang gitaryáhang mauy manganak, Women were given the
role of bearing children.

ibabaw, ibábaw see bábaw.

ibakwisyun n evacuation.

ibakwit = bakwit.

iban = uban, 2 (dialectal).

íban v [AP; b] reduce, take s.t. away. Ang bahà kusug mupaíban (muíban)
sa yútà, A strong flood will carry away the earth. (→) n deduction,
amount taken away. Way iban ákung swildu, There have been no deductions
from my salary. -in-an(→) n having had s.t. taken away from it.

ibang n slit in the cover of the pressure lantern (pitrumaks) into
which the screw which holds it is inserted.

ibanghilista n {1} evangelist.

ibanghilyu n {1} Gospels of the Bible. {2} part of a church service
where the gospel is read. v [A1] read the gospel.

ibapuráda n evaporated milk.

ibat a = libat.

íbay n {1} woman (slang). {2} lesbian (slang).

íbì = tíbì.

ibid n k.o. large agamid lizard with a crest on the back and tail,
reaching 3½′ in length.

ibid-íbid v [A; c] sidle up to s.o. sweetly to get s.t. n action of
sidling up to s.o. maibid-ibírun a flirting, sidling up to get s.t.

ibidinsiya n evidence, proof of a crime. v [A12; b(1)] obtain evidence
of guilt. Naibidinsiyahan siya kay didtu man siya, He was proven guilty
because he was there.

ibíngan n a k.o. short, crested, poisonous snake that makes a crowning
noise.

ibinrud n outboard motor boat (so called from the brand name).

ibis_1 n {1} k.o. small bony fish found close to shores: Ambassis spp.
{2} small fry, one of little importance.

ibis_2 v [A; b5] slice or cut off a small portion from s.t. Kinsay
nag-ibis sa ákung mangga? Who sliced a piece off my mango?

íbit v [A; b(1)] get a share of s.t. s.o. has (usually used in negative
sentences). Ayawg tagúa nang ímung gikaun kay dì ku muíbit ánà, Don’t
hide the food you’re eating because I won’t take any of it from you.

ibud v [A; b6(1)] {1} put grain before fowl to feed them. {2} feed
grains into a stone mill. {3} put grains into a hole in the ground to
plant them. n grains, feed for fowls.

íbug a attracted. Íbug ku sa íyang sinínà, I am very much attracted to
her dress. v [B12; b3(1)] {1} be attracted. Naíbug aku sa ímung
sapátus, I am attracted to your shoes. Gikaibgan (naibgan) ku ang íyang
kagwápu, I was attracted to his handsomeness. {2} [a] = paíbug.
ibug-ibug v [A2; b(1)] tempt. Nag-ibug-ibug ka lang nákù niánang
manggang hilaw, You’re tempting me with those green mangoes. pa-(→),
pa- v [A] {1} entice s.o. to do s.t. by showing him s.t. Paibgi
(paibúgi) nà siyag liníkit, Entice him with a roll of bills. {2} [A; a]
cause s.o. to want s.t. Paibgun ka lang. Dì ka tagáan, I’ll just entice
you. I won’t give you any. paN- v [A2; b(1)] for pregnant women to have
an intense liking for s.t. Naliwat sa munyíka ang ílang anak kay mau
may gipangibúgan sa íyang asáwa, Their baby looked like a doll because
the wife had developed a strong fondness for it during her pregnancy.
ka- n attraction to s.t. kailibgan = maka-r-, 2. kailibgun n thing that
arouses desire. Daghang kailibgun sa Magalyánis, There are lots of
things to arouse your desire downtown. ma-un, maibgánun, mailibgun
a attracted to. Maibúgun (maibgánun, mailibgun) kaáyu siya sa mga
malahálung aláhas, She is strongly attracted to expensive jewelry.
maka-r- a {1} capable of causing attraction. Ang íyang kaanyag
makaiíbug, She has a magnetic beauty. {2} capable of causing envy.

ibul = kibul.

íbus_1 n winged insect shaped like an ant.

íbus_2 v [A13; a1] cook food wrapped in coconut leaves in long sticks.
n food so cooked, most frequently a tidbit consisting of sticks of
sticky rice with coconut and sugar.

ibut v {1} [A; a] pull out s.t. rooted, stuck into s.t. Nag-ibut siya
sa íyang búngut, He is pulling out his whiskers. Giibut níya ang
lansang, He pulled the nail out. {2} [C] for copulating things to get
apart. Ang duha ka irù nag-íbut, The two dogs are stuck after
copulating. {3} [b6] draw a weapon on one. Giibtan ku níyag pusil, He
drew a gun on me. a pulled out. -in- n rice seedlings.

ibyuk n sugar palm, a k.o. palm resembling the coconut, the frond
fibers and midribs of which are made into brooms. Toddy and vinegar are
also obtained from it: Arenga pinnata.

ibyus a tapering at the top like a cone or funnel. Ibyus ug tudlù,
Having long tapering fingers. v [B1; a12] be tapering. Mag-ibyus ang
dáhun sa ságing basta dílì pa mabukhad, The young leaves of the banana
are narrow at the top before they spread out into a leaf.

ída see bwilta.

idad n age. Pilay ímung idad karun? How old are you now? mayur di- of
legal age. minur di- under legal age. may — be quite old. May idad na
ang ákung inahan, My mother is quite old now. — nga makalilínga
adolescence, so-called because it is the age in which the child is
confused as to whether he is an adult or a child. idad-idaran
a middle-aged. Idad-idaran na ku kay kwarinta na, I am middle-aged now
because I am forty. v {1} [B] be [so-and-so] old. Sa nag-idad kug syíti
anyus, When I was seven years old. {2} [BN] become, be made aged. Ang
íyang nawung miidad kaáyu tungud sa nahitabù, Her face aged terribly
because of what happened. {2a} keep a borrowed thing too long (have
them grow old on one). Iúlì na nang ímung hinuwaman, nangidad na lang
nà dihà, Return it to the person you borrowed it from. You’ve had it
too long. {3} [A13; b8] be [so-and-so] long, last. Nag-idad na run ug
pitu ka túig sukad sa ámung panagbúlag, It has been seven years since
we separated. Wà pa gánì maidari ug tulu ka búwan ang íyang
panirbisiyu, His service did not even last for three months. paN-,
pangidarun n = idad n, v1. idaran, maidaran a old. Idaran (maidaran) na
ang íyang napangasáwa apan sapían, The woman he married is old but
well-to-do.

idag v [A2; b(1)] dodge to avoid being hit by s.t. moving swiftly.
Idagi ang íyang tuu, Keep out of the way of his right hand.

idang n {1} title for a girl (dialectical). {2} bawdy house so called
from a woman called Idang, who ran a notorious bawdy house before the
war.

idar-idar v [B1245] be hard-pressed to keep up with lots of work.
Nagkaidar-idar siyag sirbi sa mga bisita, She’s going crazy trying to
serve all the visitors.

idibul n cooking oil. — úwil = idibul.

id-id v [A; c] rub oneself on s.t. Iid-id ang ímung bukubuku sa
sandigánan, Rub your back against the chair.

idintipikasiyun n identification card.

idipisyu n building.

idisyun n edition.

iditing n editing.

iditur n editor. v [B6] become an editor.

idituryal n editorial. v [C] write an editorial.

idíya n idea. v [A12] get an idea. Ang mga istudiyanti nakaidíya
pagkinaugalingun, Students had the idea of cooking their own meals.
{2} [a12] plan. Idiyáhun ta ni ug maáyu arun ta makaganansiya, Let’s
plan it well so that we can make a profit.

idiyuluhíya n ideology.

idlas a {1} shy, wary of being approached. {2} elusive, hard to catch.
v [B] {1} become wary. Nangidlas ang mga manuk sa ímung tinuntu, The
chickens have lost their tameness because of your foolishness.
{2} become elusive. Miidlas si Husipína human mangútang, Josephine
became hard to find after she borrowed money. Ang kadaúgan mau rag
miidlas kaníya, Victory seemed to elude him.

idlut (from dulut) a {1} piercing, having a sharp point. Idlut nga
tunuk ang gipakurúna ni Hisus, Jesus was crowned with sharp thorns.
{2} biting, hurtful. Gipadungug kug mga púlung nga maidlut, They
upbraided me with biting words. v [a] be, become piercing. pina- a make
sharp, painful. Pinaidlut nga kusì, A painful pinch.

idru n airplane. — nga báyut light plane. v [A13; ac] go, bring by
airplane. idruidru n children’s game of hopscotch played with lines
drawn in the shape of an airplane.

idruhína n hydrogen. v [c] fill with hydrogen.

idruplánu = idru.

ids n edge ball, the situation in which the pingpong ball hits the edge
of the table, flying off at an angle. v [B1256] be an edge ball.

idukar v [AP; a] {1} educate. Idukahun sa gubyirnu ang mga wáy alámag,
The government will educate the illiterates. {2} cause s.o. to become
sophisticated. Ang mga parti muidukar (mupaidukar) nímu, Parties can
make you sophisticated. idukáda = idukádu (female). idukádu
a {1} educated, sophisticated. Idukádu siya kay swítu sa bag-ung urug,
She is sophisticated, because she is right up to date. {2} educated,
well-mannered. Idukádu siya kay mangáyug katahúran, He is educated
because he greets you. v [B12] become educated. idukadur n educator.
v [B16; a] be an educator. idukasyun n education.

idukasya n k.o. ornamental arum: Anthurium crystallinum.

idulu n idol. v [A3; a12] idolize. Daghan ang miidulu ni Núbu Búnu,
Many people idolize Novo Bono.

idung = dúdung.

idyaidya (from íya—humorous.) Short for idyaidya ahùáhù, so called from
the Bohol pronunciation of íya ‘his’ and ákù ‘mine’. a paying close
attention to what belongs to one and making sure that no one else gets
benefit from it. Ang ákung bag-ung bayaw idyaidya kaáyug batásan, My
new sister-in-law watches what belongs to her very closely. v [A; b(1)]
put great importance to one’s own things and make sure no one else gets
benefit from them. Dì mi makaidyaidya sa amù kay kumunal ang tanang
butang gawas sa tutbras, We don’t pay attention to who owns what in our
family because we own everything in common except our toothbrushes. —
ahùáhù {1} what’s his is his and what’s mine is mine, i.e. = idyaidya.

idyap a {1} brisk and lively in motion. {2} trim and smart in dressing.
v {1} [B1; c1] for one’s gait to be brisk and lively. Muidyap ang
linaktan basta maghayhil, If you wear high heels you have to walk smart
and briskly. {2} [B1456] be trim and smart in dressing. Mag-idyap giyud
ang mga asáwa arun dílì hibyaan sa mga bána, Wives should keep
themselves trim and smart so that their husbands won’t leave them.

idyaw = ayaw (dialectical).

idyuk = ibyuk.

idyukisyun n teacher training course.

idyus = ibyus.

ig-_1 {1} prefix, alternant of the future and subjunctive nonpotential
instrumental prefix i-_1, used with some verb bases referring to mutual
actions referring to the person with whom the action is done. Dúgayng
wà ku siya igkítà, I haven’t met him for a long time. {1a} prefix used
in Biblical language with certain roots as an alternant of i-_1 in all
of its meanings. Birhin Maríya, ig-ampù mu kami, Virgin Mary, pray for
us. {2} affix added to roots referring to relationship, referring the
person with whom one is in that relationship. Igsúun, One’s sibling.
Ig-ágaw, One’s cousin. Dílì ku siya igláin, I am related to him.

ig-_2 = inig-.

ígad v [A; ac] brush against s.t. or stroke s.t., usually said of pigs.
Miígad ang bábuy sa halígi, The pig rubbed against the post. Igárun ku
ang tiyan sa bábuy, I will stroke the pig’s stomach.

ig-ágaw see agaw.

igaiga, igà igà v [A; b6] for a pig to make a low grunting sound. Ang
anay nga magpatútuy mag-igaiga, A sow feeding its young makes a low
grunting sound.

ígang a warm air or a body. Ígang pa ang láwas sa patay, The body is
still warm. n = ka-. v [B2; b6] warm. Miígang (naígang) ang kwartu
pagsúd sa daghang táwu, It got warm in the room with all the people.
(→) v [a4] feel warm. ka- n warmth.

igat a {1} flirtatious, lacking in feminine modesty. Igat ang íyang
tinan-awan ngadtu sa gwápung láki, She gave a flirtatious look at the
handsome man. {2} snobbish. Igat siya kay dílì makigsáyaw ug pubri, She
is stuck up because she won’t dance with a poor person. v [BN; a]
{1} be a flirt. Muigat (maigat, muígat) ang ímung nawung ug palabihan
nímug mik-ap, Your face will look meretricious if you put on too much
make-up. {2} act snobbish. -in- {1} in a flirtatious or snobbish
manner. -un a given to immodest behavior.

igbaw n {1} at the top of s.t. Sa igbaw sa káhuy, At the top of the
tree. Sa igbaw sa lamísa, On top of the table. {2} upstairs. Túa sa
igbaw ang ákung kwartu, My room is upstairs. {3} uplands, mountains.

igbítir n eggbeater.

igdal v [B; c1] protrude to form a sharp outline. Nag-igdal nga gamut,
A root sticking out of the ground. -un(→) a protruding.

igham v [AN; b6] clear the throat. Miigham (nangigham) siya arun
pagdápit sa ákung pagtagad, He cleared his throat in order to attract
my attention. n sound or action of clearing the throat.

ígi_1 v [AN; b] drive s.o. away from the place he is staying. Mangígi
bísan ug kaugalíngung anak, He would drive even his own son out. Kun
dílì mu makabayad sa ábang karung buwána, igíhan mu na nákù, If you
don’t pay the rent this month, I will evict you. igihan a fond of
driving people out.

*ígi_2 paN- v [A2; b3c5] {1} for a person to feel bad because s.o. else
is shown more affection than he is, especially by being given s.t.
which he did not receive. Nangígi ang manghud kay ang magúlang ray
gihatágan, The younger brother is jealous because he wasn’t given any
but his older brother was. {2} be jealously possessive of s.o. Nangígi
ang amahan sa dihang gipangulitawhan ang íyang anak, The father grew
intensely possessive because s.o. was courting his daughter. igihan
a possessively jealous. Igihan ang ákung irù. Bisag kinsay mudúul nákù
manuyù, My dog is intensely possessive. He gets angry if anyone comes
near me.

ig-ig v [A; c1] shake grains or s.t. similar back and forth to separate
the fine and the coarse particles or separate impurities. Ig-íga
(iig-ig) ring ákung linubuk, Shake out this pounded grain for me.

igíik v [B235; c] creak, squeak, squeal. Miigíik ang sira kay tayaun,
The door creaked because it was rusty. Nag-igiik ang bábuy, The pig is
squealing. n high-pitched creaking, squeaking, or squealing sound.

ígik v [A2S; b3] for pigs to squeal. Miígik ang bábuy kay wà hilawgi,
The pig squealed because no one had fed it yet. n squealing of a pig.

igip v [A3; a12] take pains to get s.t. not worth going after. Dúgay
silang manira kay nag-igip sa pila ka sintábus nga hálin, They close up
shop late because they don’t want to miss out on the few pennies they
can make by staying open late.

ígit v {1} [A13S; a4c] have a watery diarrhea. Nakaigit ku, ábi kug
utut lang tu, I thought I was just going to break wind, but I actually
had a watery bowel movement. Giígit (nag-ígit) ku kay wà kahilísi, I
have diarrhea because I have indigestion. {2} [A123S] do s.t. physical
with difficulty. Makaigit man lang ta sa kabug-at niíni, We’re going to
have a rough time (literally, defecate water) lifting this thing. (→)
n {1} soft feces. {2} stick-in-the-mud. Igit kaáyu nà siya uy. Dì
mukúyug nákù sa parti, She is a stick-in-the-mud. She won’t go to the
party with me. {3} — ra insignificant, nothing as compared with. Igit
ra ka níyang mutayip, You’re nothing (lit. watery feces) compared to
her when it comes to typing. {3a} expression of derision or contempt.
Ábi níyag mahaylu ku sa íyang awtu. Igit! He thought I would be lured
by his car. Shoot! Igít, wà na pud kaigù, You’re full of it! You missed
again. kaigit-igit v [A13] have extreme difficulty with s.t.
Nagkaigit-igit mi adtung iksamína, We had a hell of a time with that
exam.

igka- {1} = inigka-. {2} alternant of the future and subjunctive
inflectional affix ika-, added to the same verbs to which ig-_1 is
added (meaning 1). Wà ku siya igkakítà, I didn’t happen to meet him.

igkam = igtam.

igking v [B236; b3] jerk with a start, be taken aback. Miigking
(naigking) siya sa dihang nahikapan ang íya samput, She was startled
when s.o. touched her buttocks.

ig-l- affix added to verb bases to form nouns which are parallel in
meaning to the instrumental passive verb affix (i-_1). {1} thing to be
conveyed, brought, etc. Mau kini ang mga saput nga ighalatag sa mga
pubri, These are the clothes to be given to the poor people. {1a} thing
to be asked, said, etc. Dúna tà kuy igpalangutana, apan natubag na man,
I had some questions to ask, but you answered them already. {2} thing
to be used for. Sinínang igtalarabahu, Working dress. Igbalátil sa
itlug, Eggbeater. {3} time to do s.t. Taknang igpalahúlay, The siesta
hour. {3a} being good, bad, hot, etc. to [do]. Ig-aladtu giyud ning
ákung ginháwa, I felt very much like going.

iglisya n {1a} Christian Church as a whole. Sa katapúsan mubarug nga
madaúgun ang Iglisya, In the end, the Church will stand triumphant.
{1b} local church or congregation. Mga pruyiktu sa átung iglisya, Our
church’s projects. {2} a member of the Iglisya ni Kristu, a religious
sect. — ni Kristu n a religious sect or member thereof. v [b16] become
a member of the Iglesia ni Cristo. — Pilipína n the Philippine
Independent Church (Aglipayans), or a member thereof.

igmat a alert: being able to move rapidly, readily noticing things. Way
musipyat sa igmat níyang mata, Nothing can escape his alert eyes. Igmat
siyang milihay, He ducked cleverly. v [B; c1] {1} be rapid in one’s
motions, alert with the eyes. {2} be alert to what is happening. Igmáta
ang inyung mga mata sa mapait nga katinuúran, Open your eyes to grim
reality. {3} [b2] be outsmarted. Naigmatan ku sa múrus, I was defrauded
by the Muslim peddler. paN- v [A2; c] defraud. Ubang matansíru kusug
mangigmat sa timbangan, Some butchers cheat on the weight.
n defrauding.

ignu v [A; b] take good care of s.t. to save it from damage or dirt. Dì
siya mag-ignu sa íyang sinínà kay dì man siyay manglaba, He does not
try to keep his clothes clean because he doesn’t do the washing. Ug dì
nímu ignúhan ang ímung láwas, maamin ka giyud, If you don’t take care
of yourself, you’ll end up in the grave.

ignúdul n egg noodles. v [A] cook egg noodles.

ignurámus = ignuranti, a 1.

ignuranti a {1} ignorant, uneducated. Ignuranti siya. Way kabangkaágan,
She is completely uneducated. She has no education. {2} ignorant of,
unfamiliar with. Ignuranti ku sa mga dálan dinhi, I am unfamiliar with
the streets here. v {1} [B12; b6] be ignorant. {2} [a12] put s.t. over
on one. Ignurantíhun man ku nímu nga nakabasa man ku niánà, Don’t fool
me. I read that myself. paka- v [A12; a12] treat as, consider ignorant.

ignuy a euphemism for ignuranti.

igput v [B23; b3] be severely startled, jump back with surprise.
Miigput (naigput) ku sa dihang may mibutu sa ákung luyu, I was startled
at the explosion in back of me. igput-igput v [A3; c1] hop up and down.
Nag-igput-igput ang mga bátà nga naglumbà sa sáku, The children were
hopping up and down in the sack race.

ig-r- = ig-l-.

igsaktu = iksaktu.

igsirsáyis = iksirsáyis.

igsù n {1} children of one’s godparents (sponsors at wedding or
baptism). Ákù siyang igsù kay nínung nákù ang íya amahan, He is my
god-brother because his father is my godfather. {2} term of address for
one’s god-brother or sister. {2a} term of address commonly used between
Muslim traders and Christians. v [B126; c] be, become god-brothers or
sisters.

igsúun see súun.

igtam v [B] be wary after having experienced s.t. bad. Kun mamatyan ang
ilagà dihà, muigtam sila pag-anhà, If any mouse gets killed in that
place, the others will be wary of going there.

ígù a {1} enough, big enough. Ígù ba ang sapátus nímu? Are the shoes
big enough for you? Ígù na ning kwarta nákù, This money is just the
right amount for me. — na man more than enough. Ígù na man ang ímung
pamalíbad, You’ve refused too often. {2} — [dat.] serves [dat.] right.
Ígù kanímu ang nahitabù kay balasúbas man ka, What happened serves you
right because you are a wicked man. {3} — ra, lang can do more than.
Ang mga dinaugdáug nga kabus ígù lang manghupaw (sa pagpanghupaw), All
the poor folks who are abused can do is sigh. {4} — nga just in time.
Ígù giyung natápus ang lubung pag-abut níya, He arrived just as the
funeral was about to end. v {1} [B2P; c1P] be, become sufficient, be
big enough. Muígù (mupaígù) kahà ning pagkáun nga daghan ra bag bisíta?
Will this food be enough since we have so many visitors? Iígù (igúa) ug
tahì ang sinínà kaníya, Sew the shirt big enough for him. {2} [B] fit
into s.t. Dílì tang tanan muígù (maígù) sa dyip, We won’t all fit into
the jeep. {3} [c1] make s.t. come at the right moment. Igúa (iígù)
giyud ang pagguwà sa lamì nga magkadúngan giyud mu, Time your orgasm so
you both come at the same time. {4} [A13C; b3(1)] decide on s.t. Ikaw
lay mag-ígù ug muadtu ta, You decide if we go. {4a} [C3; c3] agree in
ideas or tastes. Nagkaígù sila dáyun, They hit it off instantly. (→)
a {1} for a mark to be hit, be just the right thing. Igù ba ang
buls-ay? Did he hit the bull’s-eye? Igù ba ang tambal? Did the medicine
hit the nail on the head? {2} be drunk. Igù ku gabíi, I was drunk last
night. v {1} [A; ab2] hit a mark. Wà makaigù ang tambal nga girisíta sa
duktur, The medicine the doctor prescribed was not the right one.
Hiig-an ang íyang nawung sa síga sa ispat, The rays of my flashlight
hit his face. {1a} make a point in a game where one aims at s.t.
Nakaigù na si Pidrug daghan, Pedro has already made many points.
{1b} [a1c] aim s.t. in a certain direction of. Giigù ni Magalyánis ang
kasadpan, Magellan aimed in a westward direction. Iigù ang sakayan sa
nurti, Head the boat northwards. {1c} [A2; a2b4(1)] win a prize in a
lottery or the like. Miigù ang íya tíkit sa rípa, His ticket won a
prize in the raffle. Nakaigù siya sa karíra, He won at the races.
{1d} [A2; a2b4(1)] for a business venture to turn out very successful.
Unsay ímung naig-an nga daghan kag kwarta? What did you make a killing
in, since you have so much money? {1e} [A3N; a2b2] allude unpleasantly.
Aku ang giigù sa insultu, I was the one alluded to by the insult.
{1f} [AN2; bc] swindle (slang). Anak ra níya ang miigù kaníya, It was
her own son that swindled her. {1g} [a3b2] have lost one’s virginity.
Ngánung gipangasáwa man níya nang bayhána nga naigù na man nà? Why did
he marry that girl when she is no longer a virgin (lit. has been hit)?
{2} [B12] get drunk. Naigù tingáli nà sa tubà, I’ll bet that man is
drunk from the palm toddy. n {1} good shot that hit the mark, points in
a game. {2} part of the body which was hit. Midugù ang igù sa baksir,
The boxer bled in the place he was hit. pa- {1} = ígù, a1, v1, 2.
v {3} [A12] make s.t. last. Díay singku písus. Paigúa ni sa átung
kumpra, Here’s five pesos. Make it do for the shopping. pahi-/paha-
v [A1; c1] make s.t. coincide in time with some other time. Pahaigúa
(ipahaígù) ang paglútù nga alas dúsi andam na ang tanan, Time your
cooking so that everything will be ready at twelve. hiN- a crack shot.
ka-an n {1} sufficiency. Dipindi sa kaigúan sa ibidinsiya, It depends
on the sufficiency of the evidence. {2} agreement reached. Tumánun
giyud ang kaigúan, The agreement should be carried out. panígù n the
piece used in certain games to hit other pieces, e.g., a marble in
shooting marbles. v [A; c1] use s.t. as a panígù.

Igurut n Igorot, name given to the natives of the Mountain Province,
Luzon. †

ígut_1 v [A; c1] creak. Miígut ang kawáyang sawug pagsulud sa kawatan,
The bamboo floor creaked when the thief entered. Kasab-an ka sa maistra
ug ímu nà iígut (igútun) ang bangkù, Your teacher will scold you if you
let your chair creak. pa- v [A; c] reveal s.t. slowly, little at a
time, to create suspense. Gipaígut níya ang íyang baráha, He looked at
his hand slowly (lit. let the cards creak). Ayaw siya tug-ánig diritsu.
Ipaígut úsà ang sikrítu, Don’t tell her right off. Let out the secret a
bit at a time.

ígut_2 v [A; b] scrape s.t. by rubbing a knife which has been fixed
into s.t. immovable up and down against it. Igúti ang kasing. Lisud
sapsápan kay lisud kaptan, Chip off the top with a fixed knife. It’s
hard to whittle because you can’t hold it easily.

igut-igut n the area on the inside of the cheeks of the rump.

igwad a having protruding buttocks. Igwad siyag lubut, She has a big
ass. v [BN] have prominent buttocks, stick out the buttocks. Naigù ang
ákung itlug, nangigwad man gud nang tawhána, The man hit me in the
testicles with his rump. igwad-igwad v [A; c1] move in a wavy, rolling
motion with the rump going up and down, wiggle the buttocks. Ang íyang
sakayan nag-igwad-igwad nga naglutaw sa dagkung balud, His boat tossed
up and down riding on the huge waves. Nindut kaáyu siyang tan-áwun nga
nag-igwad-igwad samtang nagsáyaw, She is beautiful to watch, wiggling
her buttocks as she dances. -in- n action of wiggling the buttocks.

igwális a {1} equal in score. Igwális tag puntus, We tied. {2} giving
exactly the same result. Tintà ug úling igwális ang buling, Whether it
is ink or charcoal, it’s all the same—dirty. v {1} [B; a12] for a score
to become tied. {2} [A12] manage to tie s.o. Kun makaigwális lang kita
karun dì ta malayug biyà, If we manage to make it a tie, we won’t be so
far behind.

igwit a coquette, flirt. v [AN] flirt around. Nangigwit man, dì
gipaburusan, She was a flirt, so she got herself pregnant. -ira =
igwit, a.

íha term of address for one’s daughter, or anyone young enough to be
his daughter. — dibastarda = íhu dibastardu (female).

iháda = ihádu (female).

ihádu n godson in baptism or confirmation. v [B126; a12] be, become
one’s godson.

ihálas a {1} of the jungle. Bábuyng ihálas, Wild pigs. Palíyang ihálas,
Wild ampalaya. {2} ignorant. Ihálas pa man siya sa syudad, She is
ignorant of the city. She doesn’t know the city well yet. v {1} [B2]
become wild, ignorant. {2} [A; a12] take for an ignorant person. Wà
giyuy muihálas nímu dinhi sa syudad ug ispúting ka pirmi, Nobody will
take you for an ignorant person in the city if you always dress up.
Ihása ku, tits, (Don’t) take me for a fool, buddy. -un a of the wild,
ignorant type.

ihap v [AC; a] count. Makaihap siya hangtud sa usa ka gatus, He can
count to a hundred. Nag-íhap ang duha ka sugarul sa daug nga ílang
gibakásan kay nakig-íhap man ang usa, The two gamblers are counting the
winnings of the money they had put in together because one insisted on
counting it. Ipha (ihapa) kun hustu ba ang gidaghanun, Count it to see
if it is enough. Maihap ang ímung mga adlaw, bastus, Your days are
numbered, you s.o.b. — sa lákang walk slowly. Mipaúlì siyang nag-ihap
sa lákang, He went home slowly. — sa tudlù be few in number.
n {1} count, action of counting. Nagkalahì ang ámung ihap, His count
came out different from mine. {2} things counted in preparing s.t. for
a number of people. Mikaun ang bisíta bísag way lábut sa ihap, The
visitor ate with them even if he hadn’t been counted for when they were
preparing. (←) intense counting, canvassing. Inigkahuman sa iliksiyun
sugdan dáyun ang íhap, Right after the voting the canvassing of ballots
will take place. †

ihás = ihálas.

íhaw_1 v [A3S; a] {1} slaughter an animal for food. Iháwa ang manuk
karun, Slaughter the chicken now. {2} murder a person with a knife.
Ayawg súkul ánang tigas, nakaíhaw (nakaihaw) na bayà nag táwu, Don’t
pick a fight with that thug. He has already killed a man. {3} beat
badly. Giíhaw mi sa ílang tím, We were slaughtered by their team.
{3} abuse a woman sexually. Dad-un nátù siya sa util ug adtu nátù siya
iháwa, Let’s take her to a hotel and abuse her there. -anan
n {1} slaughterhouse. {2} house that women are taken to for sexual
intercourse. maN-r-(→) n butcher. paN- n butchering animals as an
occupation.

íhaw_2 v [A; a] broil. Mag-íhaw tag bangus, We will broil some
milkfish. -in- n broiled food.

iháyup (from háyup) v [AB12; a12] tame. Ang kawbuy nag-iháyup ug
kabáyung ihás, The cowboy is breaking in a wild horse.

ihi {1} expression of surprise: so, is that so! Ihi, náa ka diay dihà,
So, there you are. Ihi, aku diay sugúun, Is that so! You’re going to
give me orders, are you? {2} expression of warning. Ihi, paghinayhínay,
Watch out, better go slow.

íhi n axle, rod which holds a wheel which turns. Íhi sa rilu, Crown
stem of a watch. Íhi sa manubíla, Steering column, the part holding the
steering wheel.

íhì n urine. — ug irù k.o. toadstool, dirty white in color, about 2½″
tall with a flat top about 2″ in diameter. v [A3S; c] {1} urinate.
Nakaihì ang bátà sa karsúnis, The child wet his pants. {2} [A123P; a4]
have too frequent urination. Giíhì mi pagininum ug sirbísa, We kept
having to urinate because we drank so much beer. paN- v [A13] urinate.
Adtu ta sa gawas mangíhì, Let’s go outside to urinate. ihìihì v [A13]
{1} urinate too often. {2} for a woman to get all wet from heavy
petting (slang, euphemism). Nag-ihìihì ang ákung uyab dihang ákung
gikulkug, My girl got wet because I got my finger into her. ka-un(→),
kahid-un a feel like urinating. pala-(→) a urinating frequently. †

ihid_1 n {1} the smallest in a litter. Ang ihid nga baktin giumbáwan sa
íyang mga igsúun, The runt in the litter was much smaller than his
brothers and sisters. {2} youngest or smallest in a group. Sa mga bátà
sa kasilingánan si Dyániy ihid, Johnny is the smallest kid in the
neighborhood. v [B1] be small for one’s age, stunted in growth.

ihid_2 v [A; bc] go or bring s.t. away unnoticed. Giihiran námù ang
míting, We sneaked away from the meeting. Iihid ning úlu sa inasal
ngadtu sa gawas, Bring this head of the roasted pig stealthily outside.

ihikutíbu n executive.

ihim the sound of clearing the throat {1} exclamation calling
attention. Arun mulíngì ang babáyi, ang laláki muingun ‘ihim!’ The man
says ‘ehem’ to make the woman turn to look at him. {2} exclamation
expressing satisfaction after eating. n sweetheart (humorous). Gimingaw
ka sa ímung ihim, nu? You miss your sweetheart, don’t you?

ihimplu n {1} example, model. {2} a part of the novena which is
optionally read after the supplicatory prayers just before the gúsus
and gives a proof of the power of the saint. v [A; c] give, make an
example. Ihimplúhan ta ka, I will give you an example. pur — for
example.

Ihiptu n Egypt.

ihirsisyu_1 n exercise, training. v [A; c1] {1} exercise. Iihirsisyu
(ihirsisyúun) sa pulyuhun ang íyang tiil, The polio victim exercises
his feet. {2} [A; a] practice, train. Nag-ihirsisyu sila unsáun
paglanguy, They are practicing swimming. Ihirsisyúha pag-áyu ang ímung
parti, Learn your part well.

ihirsisyu_2 n spiritual retreat. v [A] hold a spiritual retreat. paN-
v [A2] attend a spiritual retreat.

ihirsitu n one’s own children. Nag-alinupung ang ákung mga ihirsitu, My
children come one next to the other. -s = ihirsitu (plural).

íhu_1 term of address for son or s.o. whom one considers his son. —
dibastardu illegitimate child. — dipúta mother-fucker, a vulgar
appellation for a person at whom one is very angry. Gisúnug sa íhu
dipúta ang ákung karsúnis, The mother-fucker burnt my pants.

íhu_2 n shark.

ihud-ihud v [B56] for children or young animals to differ in height by
small intervals, be like stairs when lined up. Mag-ihud-ihud giyud ang
inyung mga anak ug dílì mu magbirt kuntrul, Your children will be like
steps lined up if you don’t practice birth control.

íhuy (from íhu) n Mr. Shark (personalized appellation in stories).
Paláwum arun kan-un kang Mánuy Íhuy, Go to the deep so Mr. Shark can
eat you.

ii {1} particle showing disbelief. Ii! Tinúud kahà run, Aha! Can that
be right? {2} = i_2, 1.

ì ì n child’s word for urine. v [A; b(1)] urinate. Gustu kang muì ì?
You want to make wee-wee?

iítu = ítu.

ík v {1} [A2] get what one wants to say out. Ug dì ka muík dílì ka
makabungat sa ímung túyù, If you don’t get it out, you can’t let her
know why you came here. {2} [A12] dílì, walà — not stand a chance in a
game. Sa baskit bul ang mugbù dì giyud makaík kun kuntráhag dagkù, In
basketball, short players don’t stand a chance against tall players.

ika- {1} inflectional affix, the potential future and subjunctive of
the instrumental passive. See i-_1. {2} affix forming ordinal numbers.
The ordinal is linked to a noun with which it is in construction by nga
or, alternatively, but less frequently, with ka. Ikaduha nga (ka) táwu,
The second man. Ikapila man ni ninyung (ninyu ka) anak? This makes how
many children for you?

íkag v {1} [B12; c] become concerned, worried. Makaíkag ang ímung
kahimtang, Your situation worries me. {2} [B12; ac] inspire interest in
s.t. Kinsay nag-íkag nímug tuug sista, Who interested you in learning
how to play the guitar? Wà ku maíkag sa madiyung, I have no interest in
mahjong. {3} [B1256; b8] like s.t. with the thought of possessing it or
becoming like it. Naíkag siyang Kulas, She has a crush on Kolas. Naíkag
siya sa ákung bisiklíta, He liked my bicycle. ma-un a enthusiastic,
filled with interest.

íkat v [A13B; a12] for the threads of cloth to be displaced when one of
the threads is pulled, cause cloth to get such a defect. Ug muíkat
(maíkat) nang panaptun, dì na maáyung sinináun, If the cloth has a
defect, it is no good to use for a dress. Kinsa may nag-íkat sa ákung
panaptun? Who pulled the threads in this cloth?

ikaw you (singular). Ikaw ang ákung túyù, You are the one I want to
see. — karun, kini, bayà oh you! (You’re so foolish, terrible, bad).
Ikaw giyud kini. Dalì ra giyung maílad, Oh you! It’s so easy to cheat
you! — lang {1} you be the one. Ikaw lay báyad, You pay. {2} it’s up to
you. Ug gustu kang mubáyad, ikaw lang, If you want to pay, it’s up to
you. {2a} it’s up to you, don’t say I didn’t warn you. Ug hilabtan nà
nímu ikaw lang, If you touch that don’t say I didn’t warn you. — ra =
lang, 2, 2a. ka short for ikaw used in constructions requiring the nom.
except the predicate. Kumusta ka? How are you? Mau ka ba giyud? Is that
the way you are? nímu {1} gen. form. Si Máma nímu túa sa simbahan, Your
mother is in the church. ábi — {1} you know. Ábi nímu, si Saning
maáyung muáwit, You know, Saning sings beautifully. {2} ábi — ug so you
presumed. Ábi nímu búang ku, Do you think I’m an idiot? {2} short for
kanímu. mu short for nímu. kanímu dat. form. Álang ni kanímu, This is
for you. Way nakagustu kanímu, Nobody likes you. Ay, purbída kanímu, Oh
my! Ay, kanímu Tasyǔ! Mag-unsa ka man lang ug wà na ku! Oh my, Tasio!
What will you do when I’m gone! ímu {1} preposed gen. Ang ímung kabáyù,
Your horse. Ímu bang ihátag? Are you giving it away? {2} yours, the one
belonging to you. Ákù ni, ímu nà, This belongs to me. That one is
yours. Unsa may — kang [so-and-so], What do you have against
[so-and-so]? — na you may have [subject]. Ímu na ni, You may have this
one. pag-[verb] ug — do [verb] by oneself. Pagkaun lag ímu, ayaw kug
tawagtawága ug panihápun, Just eat by yourself. Don’t call me to
supper. [noun] pay — My what a [noun]! Bat-ang pay ímu nga makalíbat,
Her hips can make you cross-eyed. (Lit. If you want the hips, too (to
see), they’ll make you cross-eyed.) v [a12] be, become yours. Maímu ni
ug magbinuutan ka, This will be yours if you behave. Imúhun lang diay
nang tanang kindi? So you want to have all the candy to yourself? imúha
= ímu. imuímu all by yourself, yours alone. — lang of your own
creation. Imuímu man lang ning minugnà, You just made this up. Imuímu
nang ímung gidangátan. Wà kay kapasanginlan, What happened to you is
your own doing. You have no one to blame but yourself. v [A; a12] do
s.t. all by yourself. Muimuímu ka man lag káun dihà nga walay
pulupanampit, You eat all by yourself without inviting anyone to join
you. tikaw, tika, ta ka, ka nákù, ku ikaw I did [verb] to you, you are
my [noun]. Amígu ta ka (tikaw, tika, ka nákù, ku ikaw), You are my
friend. Patyun ta ka (tikaw, etc.), I will kill you.

ikgam = igtam.

ikging = igking.

ikibáli n equivalent. Ang tulu ka tiil ikibáli ug usa ka yarda, Three
feet is equivalent to one yard.

ikid v {1} [A; a12] jump over s.t. or up in the air. Ikdun (ikirun) ku
ang kural, I’ll jump over the fence. {2} [A; c1] stand on one’s tiptoes
to reach s.t. Mutúpung ka nákù ug iikid (ikirun) mu ang ímung tiil, You
will be as tall as I am if you stand on your tiptoes. {3} [A; ac] run
fast, gallop. Miikid siya pagkakità sa latigu nga gibitbit sa inahan,
She ran away fast when she saw the whip in her mother’s hand. Ikda si
Papa nímu, Run after your father. Iikid ni sa íla, Run bring this to
their house. ikid-ikid v [A; c1] walk a distance in a hurried pace.

ikid-íkid_1 n name of a children’s game in which they see who can jump
farthest.

ikid-íkid_2 v [APB3(1)6; c1] for the hips to sway from side to side in
walking. Nagpaibug giyug maáyu nang babayhána nga nag-ikid-íkid
(nagpaikid-íkid) sa íyang samput, That woman is swinging her hips to
attract their attention. Muikid-íkid ang íyang samput iglakaw niya, Her
hips sway when she walks.

ik-ik_1 v [B; c1] for the upper lip to be drawn up. Giik-ik sa irù ang
íyang ngábil ug mingúb, The dog exposed his fangs and snarled.

ik-ik_2 v [A] squeak like a mouse. Munyíka nga muik-ik, A doll that
squeaks. n squeak of mice. Ik-ik sa ílagà, The squeaking of the mouse.

ik-ik_3 n the isti piece of mahjong.

ikipáhi n luggage.

ikípu n equipment, tools.

íkis n letter X. a zigzagging, winding. Ang dálan paingun sa Bagyu
íkis, The road leading to Baguio is winding. v [B; c1] be, become, make
zigzag. Dì ka ig-un sa pusil ug ikísun (iíkis) nímu ang ímung
dinaganan, You won’t be hit if you run zigzag.

íkit a close together, usually people. v [A2C1; ac] be close to each
other. Nag-íkit silag katúlug, They slept close to each other. Ayaw
siya ikta (iíkit) ug bayli, Don’t dance close to her. Ikítun nátù ug
butang ang mga síya, Let’s put the chairs close together. ikit-íkit
v [A; ab6] stay around close to s.o. else. Dúna gánì pangayúun
muikit-íkit (mag-ikit-íkit) dáyun nátù, If there is s.t. he wants to
ask for, he will hang around you all the time.

iklas n first grader. Kadakù na nímu unyà iklas pa gihápun ka? How big
you are, yet you are still in the first grade! v [B56; b6] be a first
grader.

iklipsi = iskalipsi.

iklisyastiku a ecclesiastical.

ikmat = igmat.

iknat v [B; c1] {1} raise the eyebrows. Miiknat (naiknat) ang kílay sa
táwu tungud sa túmang kahibū́ng, The man raised his eyebrows in
bewilderment. {2} = ínat. {3} [BN; c1] stitch wrinkles into a piece of
cloth. Ayawg iknáta (iiknat) pagtahì ang panaptun, Don’t stitch the
cloth in such a way that it becomes wrinkled. a stitched with wrinkles.

iks n {1} one’s ex-boy friend or girl friend. Wà na tagda si Níta sa
íya iks, Nita’s ex- (boy friend) no longer cares for her. {2} ex-,
former. Iks kambik (kanbik, kumbik), Ex-convict. Iks prisidinti,
Ex-president. Iks suldyir, Veteran, esp. of the old American soldiers
who settled in the Philippines in the early 1900’s.

iksahiráda = iksahirádu (female).

iksahirádu a {1} over-demanding of oneself or others. Iksahirádu siyang
nagpatiwas sa íyang báy, He demanded too much from the people who were
finishing up work on his house. {2} doing s.t. to too great an extent.
Iksahirádu siya sa íyang pamisti, He overdresses. Iksahirádu siya nga
mugámit sa mantíkà, He uses much too much cooking oil. v [B; c1] overdo
s.t.

iksaktu a {1} correct. Pulus iksaktu ang tubag níya, His answers were
all correct. {2} be the right size, amount. Iksaktu giyud nákù ning
sapátus, These shoes are just right for me. Iksaktu giyud ang pagkalútù
sa isdà, The fish was cooked just the right amount of time. {3} just at
[such-and-such a time]. Iksaktung alas utsu ang súgud sa prugráma, The
program starts exactly at eight o’clock. Iksaktu na run ipaúlì, Now is
just the time to go home. v [B3; c1] {1} be correct. {2} be just the
right size, amount, degree. {3} be exactly on time.

iksǎm = iksámin, n, v1.

iksámin n exams in school. v [A; a] {1} give, take an exam. Kanang
maistráha mauy muiksámin námù, That teacher is going to test us.
Muiksámin ku ugmà, I’m going to have an exam tomorrow. {2} give a
physical examination. Iksamínun sa duktur ang ímung kasingkásing, The
doctor will examine your heart.

iksaminádu n {1} eligible for the civil service by having passed the
exams. {2} a woman who has acquired through experience without formal
training a knowledge of assisting in childbirth, and is allowed to
practice her trade after having passed some practical tests. v [B156;
c1] be, become a midwife of this sort. a being very familiar with s.t.
Iksaminádu aku niíning dalána, I am very familiar with this street.

iksaminadur n examiner.

iksaminisyun n examination. v [A1; b6] take an examination.

iksampul n example. v [A; c1] take as an example. Miiksampul siya ni
Risal nga usa sa mga bantúgang bayáni, He cited Rizal as an example of
a great hero. Kastigúhun tikaw kay iksampúlun (iiksampul) tikaw, I’m
going to punish you to make an example of you.

iksibisiyun n {1} exhibition. {2} display. {3} certain hand in mahjong
which one gets at the first deal and which is exhibited for extra
payment. v [A; c] {1} exhibit s.t. in public. {2} show off one’s skill.
Mitindug siya sa mutur nag-iksibisiyun kunúhay, nabanggà lagi, He was
showing off driving his motorcycle while standing on it, so he crashed.

iksíbit n exhibit. v [A; b6(1)] exhibit, show s.t. or display.

iksihir v [A; a12] {1} force or oblige one to do s.t. Iksihirun ka
giyud pagpaámut, You will be forced to contribute to it. {2} [A; a2]
inquire, investigate to get complete information about s.t. Dì ka
mag-iksihir sa kinabúhì sa uban, Do not pry into other people’s lives.
Iksihia ug unsa giyuy nahitabù, Find out what really happened. {2a} [A]
be solicitous about s.o., care for. Dílì kaáyu siya muiksihir niánang
mga batáa kay ábi dílì man íyang anak, She doesn’t concern herself
about those children because they aren’t hers anyway. iksihídu
a solicitous about s.o.’s needs and well-being. Iksihídu siyang
pagkamaistra, mu rag tinúud inahan sa mga bátà, She is a solicitous
teacher as if her pupils were her own children. v [B126] become
solicitous about s.o.’s well-being.

iksilinti a excellent, perfectly done. Iksilinting pagkahímù íning
lamisáha, This table was excellently made. v [A12; c1] get a mark of
excellent in school.

iksilsiyur n excelsior, long fine wood shavings used as stuffing or as
packing material.

iksíma n eczema.

iksimtid n exempted from some obligation. v [B12; c1] exempt, be
exempted. Iksimtid ku sa píi, I’m exempted from Physical Ed.

iksirsáyis n {1} bodily exercise. {2} exercise in school. v [A; c1]
engage in physical exercise.

iksit n exit. v [b8] exit, pass to an exit. -an n = iksit.

ikskiyus excuse me. Ikskiyus únà ha kay naghilak ang bátà, Excuse me
for a moment because the baby is crying. n excuse. Nangáyù siyag
ikskiyus sa maistra kay mugawas siya, He asked to be excused because he
wants to go out. v [A; b6c(1)] excuse s.o. or oneself for being absent.

ikskambik see iks.

ikskursiyun n excursion. v [A3; b6(1)] go on an excursion. -ista n one
who goes on an excursion.

ikspan v [B6; c1] expand the chest. Ayaw ikspána (iikspan) ímung
dughan, Don’t expand your chest. -dir n expander, a chest muscle
building device.

ikspidisyun n expedition. v [A1; b6] make an expedition.
Mag-ikspidisyun sila ngadtu sa búlan, They will make an expedition to
the moon. Wà pay nakaikspidisyun sa Mars, No one has made an expedition
to Mars.

ikspild expelled from a school or organization. v [a12] get expelled.
Maikspild ka unyà ug maghinúbug ka, You’ll get expelled if you get
drunk all the time.

ikspirimin n experiment as a school problem.

ikspirimintu n experiment. v [A; c] conduct an experiment. Kanúnayng
ikspirimintúhan ang ilagà, They always experiment on rats.

ikspirinsiya n experience, things one has lived through. v [A12] have
experienced. Nakaikspirinsiya na ku sa kinabúhì sa dágat, I have
experienced life on the sea. -du(←) a experienced. v [B12; b6] be
experienced. Ikspirinsiyadu ku ánà, tits, Listen, buster, I know all
about that.

ikspirmin = ikspirimin.

ikspirmintu = ikspirimintu.

ikspirtu a expert. Ikspirtung mangunguut, An expert pick-pocket. v [B1;
b6] be an expert.

ikspiryinsádu, ikspiryinsyádu = ikspirinsiyádu. see ikspirinsiya.

iksplikar = isplikar.

iksplurasiyun n exploration for natural resources.

iksplusíbu n explosive.

ikspris n express bus, train, or the like. dawuntawun — jitneys with no
fixed routes.

ikspurtadur n exporter. v [B156] be an exporter.

ikspús v [A; c6] expose films.

ikspusisiyun n exposition.

iksri n x-ray. v [A; b] x-ray. pa- v [A; c] have s.o. x-ray one.

ikstin v {1} [A2; c1] extend the time allotted for s.t. or the size.
Kining salidáha ikstínun (iikstin) giyud, This movie film will surely
be extended. {1a} put an extension on s.t. Ikstinan ang balay, The
house will be added to. {2} [A; b(1)] extend assistance. Giikstinan kug
tulu ka búlan nga salari lún, I was extended a three months’ loan on my
salary.

ikstinsiyun n {1} extension of time, addition to a building.
{2} branch, unit of an organization located apart from the main
location of the organization. {3} extra telephone connected to the same
line as the main line. {4} extra class section to accommodate an
overflow enrollment. {4a} teacher assigned to such a class. v [A;
b6(1)] give, add an extension, make a branch or extra telephone, add on
an extra class section. Dílì kaikstinsyunan ang ímung lún, kining
baláya, kining iskuylahána, inyung tilipunu, kining klasíha, We cannot
extend your loan, put an extension on your house, build a branch of
this school, give you a telephone extension, put in an extra section to
this class.

ikstiriyur n {1} exterior portion of s.t. {2} tire.

ikstra n {1} shorts in a movie. {2} bit player in a movie. {3} one who
pinch-hits for s.o. on a blue-collar job. {4} s.t. extra which isn’t
being used. Wà ka bay ikstrang papil dihà? Don’t you have any extra
paper there you’re not using? v {1} [c] show shorts with a movie.
{2} [A; a2] be an extra in a movie. {3} [A; b6] pinch-hit for s.o. in
his absence. Muikstra ku sa mga draybir nga nasakit, I pinch-hit for
drivers who are sick. {3a} use s.t. belonging to s.o. while he is not
using it (slang). Muikstra ku sa ímung bisiklíta ha? May I play with
your bicycle? {4a} [c] add s.t. extra. Ang púlu nga ákung gidá
giikstráhan ug duha sa ákung asáwa, My wife added two extra shirts to
the one I took with me.†

ikstriyul, ikstriyur = ikstiriyur.

iktarya n hectare. v [B256] be a hectare. Gamay ra ang íyang yútà. Wà
ra muiktarya (maiktarya), The parcel of land he owns is very small. It
hardly reaches a hectare.

iktin a having an up and down bouncing gait. Iktin kaáyug linakwan ang
tagabúkid, The mountaineer bounces up and down when he walks. v {1} [B;
c1] bounce up and down. {2} [A; b6] jump up and away slightly. Miiktin
kug kalit pagkatunub nákù sa hálas, I jumped back quickly when I
stepped on a snake. -in- v [c1] done in a bouncing way.

íku_1 n echo chamber. v [B23(1)6] for a sound to echo in the echo
chamber. pa- v [b5] make an echo effect in a song. Paikúhun (paikúhan)
ang kanta sa kumbu, The songs of the combo are recorded with an echo.

íku_2 (short for tagái ku) let me have some. Íku bi, Let me have some,
please.

ikud v [A; b5] follow immediately behind s.o. Giikud (giikuran) siya
kanúnay sa kapulisan kay mu ra man siyag kawatan, The police shadowed
him constantly because he seemed to be a thief. ikud-íkud v [A; b] move
around in a circle in a limited space. Pwirting nakaikud-íkud sa irù
nga gikatlan sa lubut, The dog with an itchy rump is turning round and
in discomfort.

íkud = íkug_2.

íkug_1 n {1} tail, or analogous structure. Midágan pinabahag ang íkug,
He ran off with his tail between his legs. Ang íkug sa ayruplánu, The
tail of the airplane. {2} penis (humorous). {3} train of a dress (in
the traditional skirt [sáya], usually tucked in the front). v [A2; a]
put a tail on. Giikúgan sa bátà ang yáwà nga íyang gidrúwing, The child
put a tail on the devil he was drawing. ikug-íkug sa iring n k.o.
ornamental bush bearing small flowers in dense purple, hanging spikes.
ikug-ikug sa iring n k.o. ornamental aerial plant consisting of long
branches with fine leaves resembling a cat’s tail. paN- v [A23; c6]
put, be at the rear. Nangíkug siya sa lumbà, He was last in the race.
Mauy nahimámat sa mga táwu ang nangíkug nga asu, The people noticed the
smoke trailing behind the plane. paN-(→) n crupper, thing to hold the
saddle in place. v [b6] put a crupper on. -an a devil, devilish (lit.
the tailed one). Gisákit na pud ku íning bátang ikúgan, The little
devil is bothering me again.

íkug_2 v [B12; b3(1)c5] feel hesitant to approach s.o. for s.t., feel
embarrassed to refuse. Maíkug ka bang mubalíbad? Are you embarrassed to
refuse them? Wà ku mangasábà kay gikaikgan ku ang tigúwang sa píkas, I
didn’t scold them because I was embarrassed to do so with the father
right next door. Ngánung ikaíkug man nímu ang pagpatábang kanákù? Why
are you embarrassed to turn to me for help? paN-(→) v [A13] be feeling
embarrassed. Nagpangikug siyang misaka sa báy, He felt terribly
embarrassed as he went into the house. ilikgan, ikgánun a easily
feeling hesitation. ka- n feeling of shyness to ask or refuse a favor.

kailikgan n person whom one hesitates to approach or refuse. Kailikgan
ku nà siya kay bugtung igsúun sa ákung Máma, I can never turn him down,
for he is my mother’s only brother. ma-un(←) a characterized by
hesitation. Nangáyù siya sa maikúgung tíngug, He asked me in a shy
voice.

ikunumika n economy, economics.

ikunumíya a economical. Ikunumíyang gamítun ang sabun nga dúgay
mahílis, A soap which doesn’t easily dissolve is economical to use.
v [A13; a12] {1} economize. Mag-ikunumíya ta sa átung pagkáun, Let us
be economical with our food. Ikunumiyáha paggámit ang pumáda, Use the
pomade economically. {2} [A13] masturbate (slang—from the idea of
saving money by not hiring a prostitute).

íkus = íkut.

íkut v [A2; b(1)] for animals that leave their stingers to sting. Ayawg
samúka nang lampínig kay ikútan ka, Don’t disturb the yellowjackets
because they will sting you. (→) n stinger. iniktan n place stung.

ikut-íkut = ikit-íkit. see íkit.

ikwadur n equator.

ikyas v [A2; b6] slip away, get away after planning to do so. Miikyas
ku sa báy kay daghang buhatun,- I slipped out of the house because
there was a lot of chores to do. Nakaikyas ang prísu, The prisoner
escaped.

ikyut = ukyut.

ila_1 v {1} [A; a12b2] identify, distinguish which is which. Ang
tistígus mauy nag-ila kinsa ang sad-an, The witness identified the
culprit. Lisud ilhun kung babáyi u laláki ba kanang taas ug buhuk. Dílì
giyud maila (mailhan), It’s hard to tell if it’s a boy or girl when
they have long hair. You can’t tell. {2} [A12; a3b2] recognize who a
person is. Wà ku siya maila (hiilhi) sa ngitngit, I did not recognize
him in the dark. {3} [A12; b(1)] know a person. Nakaila aku kaníya, I
know him. {4} [A3; a12b2] acknowledge, consider s.o. as s.t. Walà sila
muila sa íyang kinaadman, They did not recognize his wisdom. Siya ang
giilang hárì sa mga matun, He is the acknowledged king of the thugs.
{4a} [A23; a12] acknowledge s.o. as arousing fear or awe. Wà siyay
giilang táwu, He’s afraid of no one. {4b} — ug Ginúu call on God’s help
when one is in distress. Makaila ka ug Ginúu ug náa ka sa kalisud, You
will call on God when you are in trouble. {5} [A12] experience, taste.
Paminyúa lag sayu arun makailag unsay kalisud, Let them marry young so
they can experience hardship. n birthmark. pa- v [A; ac] {1} make s.t.
known, introduce oneself as s.o. Wà siya magpaila nga anak sa hárì, He
did not let it be known that he was the king’s son. Ipaila ku kanímu
ang tinúud, I’ll make the truth known. {2} indicate. Ang kusug nga ulan
usáhay nagpaila nga dúnay bagyu, Heavy rain sometimes indicates that
there is a storm. ilaíla v [A2C; acP] introduce, get acquainted.
Nakig-ilaíla siya sa mga lídir sa pulitika, He introduced himself to
the political leaders. Ilailáha ang ákung kasáring, Meet my classmate.
Iilaíla (ipailaíla) aku ánang ímung kúyug, Introduce me to your
companion. pailaíla v [A; ac] introduce s.o. to s.o. else. Pailailáha
sila, Let them get acquainted with each other. ka-(←) n acquaintance.
v [C; c5] become acquainted with one or more persons. Didtu sila
magkaíla sa barku, They became friends on the boat. Gikaíla ku siya sa
barku, I made his acquaintance on the boat. ilhánan n identifying mark
or sign. Ákù nang rilúha kay dúnay ilhánan, That watch is mine because
there is an identifying mark. -in- n recognized as s.t. good,
well-known. -du a {1} well-known. Iládu siya sa íla, He is well-known
in their town. {2} notorious. Ang mga iládung mangunguut, The notorious
pickpockets. v [B12] be, become well-known, notorious. timailhan see
timailhan. †

ila_2 a shy, afraid to approach s.o. unfamiliar. Ila kaáyu ang bátà,
dílì padúul nákù, The child is very shy; he doesn’t want me to go near
him. v [B; b6] become shy. Maila ang manuk ug síging pakuratan, It
makes the chickens shy if you keep scaring them. ilahan = ila_2.

íla see sila.

ilab v [APB; a4] catch fire, cause s.t. to do so. Miilab (nailab,
giilab) ang sidsid sa íyang sinínà sa dihang naduul sa káyu, The hem of
her dress caught fire when it came near the fire. Ang pagdagkut sa
puspuru mauy miilab (mipailab) sa gasulína, When he lighted the match,
it caused the gasoline to catch fire.

ílad v [AN; a12] {1} swindle. Ilárun giyud ka kay dalì ka ra mutúu, I’m
sure you’ll get swindled because you are easily deceived. {2} fool s.o.
Siyay niílad ni Huwan nga may iskuyla kunu karun, He fooled John
telling him there was school today. n action of swindling. paN-
n business of swindling. Magsilbi ka sa pangílad kay maáyu kang mupatúu
ug táwu, You will do well as a swindler because you can make people
believe you. maN-r-(→) n swindler.

iláda = hiláda.

iládu {1} see ila_1. {2} = hiláda.

iladur = hiladur, see hiláda.

ilag, ílag v [A2; c] dodge. Iilag lang ang ímung láwas ug labáyun ka,
Move your body quickly to the side if s.o. throws s.t. at you.

ilagà n {1} rat, mouse. {2} by extension, hamsters. Timáwà pa sa ilagà,
Poor as a church mouse. — sa Urúpa white mouse. ilagàilágà n a game of
chance at carnivals or fiestas involving hamsters which are let loose
and have a choice of several holes to take shelter in. Bets are placed
on which animal enters which hole.

ilahánun see sila.

ilaid v [A13] {1} lie in intense suffering. Duha ka búwan nga nag-ilaid
siya sa banig, He suffered intensely in his bed for two months.
{2} stagger under a load. Nag-ilaid siya sa kabug-at sa íyang dala, He
was staggering under the weight of what he was carrying. — sa kawad-un
suffering extreme poverty.

ílak = damagan_1.

ilang-ílang = alangílan.

ilap, ílap v [A2; c1] {1} for flames to lick at s.t. Ang kaláyu ígù
lang miílap sa balay, The flames just licked at the house. {2} touch
lightly. Miílap ang túbig sa bàbà sa barútu, The water touched the top
of the boat gently. Giílap sa hángin ang íyang buktun, His arm was
touched lightly by the wind.

ílas n Job’s tears, a coarse grass growing to 2 m. with smooth and
large grains, used for ornamental beads: Coix lachryma-jobi.

iláwud see lawud.

ilaya, iláya n area away from the coast or town. pa- v [A] go inland.
ilayanhun a hill-*billy, one from the remote interior regions.

ilbu n elbow joint of pipes.

íli_1 n letter L.

*íli_2 see ilíhan.

ilibítur n elevator. — buy n elevator boy. v [A13; a] go by, make into
an elevator.

ilidyibul a {1} qualified for the civil service. Ilidyibul ang tanang
nagtrabáhu sa adwána, All the workers in the Customs have passed the
civil service qualifications. {2} for a man to be eligible for marriage
(usually highly eligible). v [B12] {1} make, become a civil service
eligible. {2} be eligible for marriage.

ílig v [A; b6] for a large number to move s.w. where conditions are
more favorable. Sa tingtugnaw muílig ang mga langgam sa ínit nga dapit,
During the cold season birds migrate to hot places. Búkid nga giilígan
sa mga bakwit, The mountains where the people took refuge. -an(→)
n place where a large number flock for refuge.

ilígal a illegal. †

iliganti a elegant in looks. Iliganti kang tan-áwun ánang sinináa, You
look elegant in that dress. v [B12; b6] be elegant in looks.

ilíhan n remote area, thinly populated, usually forested and
inaccessible to vehicles. Ayaw pagsúut sa ilíhan, tingálig mawā̀ ka,
You might get lost if you wander into the woods.

ílik v [AP; c1] turn the body right and left gracefully in dancing or
to view oneself better in a mirror. Mag-ílik (magpaílik) gánì kag dúgay
sa sámin, byáan ta ka, If you spend so much time primping yourself up
in front of the mirror, I’ll leave you. Klarúha lang nag sáyaw, ilíkun
(iílik) pa man, You’re wiggling your body so much, why don’t you go
ahead and dance? n action of turning left and right.

iliksiyun n election. v [A1] hold elections.

iliktrik a electric. — áyurn n electric iron. — istub n electric range.
— tsir n electric chair. v [c6] be sent to the chair.

iliktrisidad n electricity, electric current. v [b6] have electricity.

iliktrisyan n electrician. v [B16] be an electrician.

iliktruniku n electronics.

iliktur n voter. v [B126] become a voter.

ilikturáda n the electorate, the voting public.

iliktural n electoral.

ilimintári, ilimintarya n elementary school. v [A1] study in a certain
elementary school.

ilimintu n element, component.

iling = sal-ing.

ilin-ílin v [A12; b8] have a variety of things to choose from.
Makailin-ílin kag pagkáun, There’s a tremendous variety of food to
choose from. Daghan ang pagkáun nga kailin-ilínan, There’s lots of food
one can choose from. pailin-ílin v [A; ac2] be given a variety of
things to choose from. Nagpailin-ílin lang siyag puyù sa mga paryinti
níya sa siyudad, He has a large number of relatives to choose from to
stay with when he comes to the city.

ilipanti n {1} elephant. {2} k.o. herb with a spike of white or blue
flowers that curls like the tusk of an elephant. The leaves are applied
to boils and wounds: Heliotropium indicum. — nga laki plant similar in
appearance to ilipanti and with similar medicinal use: Stachytarpheta
jamaicensis or australis.

ilipant wuk n the elephant walk, a k.o. dance. v [A] dance this dance.

ílis v {1} [A23C; ab1c] give s.t. in lieu of s.t. received. Kinsay
muílis ug rilu áring ákung singsing, Who will give me a watch for my
ring? Mag-ílis tag lingkuránan, Let’s exchange seats. Napúlù ka
gip-istam ilísan ug takurì, You get a teakettle for ten gift stamps.
{2} [A; b1c] replace s.t. with s.t. else similar. Kamau kang muílis ug
batu sa singsing? Do you know how to change the stone in a ring?
Giilísan si Pidru sa kuts, The coach replaced Pedro. {2a} [A; bc] break
money into smaller denominations. Ilísi ra kinig mamísus, Please change
this bill into one-peso notes. {3} [AB13; c] put clothes on s.o.,
change s.o.’s clothes. Kinsay muílis sa bátà, Who will change the
child? Nag-ílis si Pípi, Pepe is changing clothes. {3a} [B13; c] be
dressed up. Maáyu untà nà siyag hitsúra ug mag-ílis, He looks pretty
good if he is dressed up. {4} [A2; c] pay back s.t. borrowed, replace
s.t. lost or consumed. Maáyu siyang manghulam ug kwarta apan dílì
muílis, He’s good in borrowing money but never pays you back. Ilísan ku
tung duláan nga giwálà sa bátà, I’ll replace the toy the child lost.
{5} [A12S3] come and go, happen one after the other. Mag-ílis ang
suluguun sa ámù kay daghanan ra sa trabáhu, Our helpers do not stick
with us because we make them work too hard. Nag-ilis lag pangamátay ang
íyang mga anak, His children died one after the other. {6} muílis nga
simána, búwan, etc. next week, next month, etc. n replacement, thing
given in exchange, shift of workers. Siyay ílis nákù sa trabáhu, He is
my replacement at work. Kini ílis sa ákung gibuak, This is in exchange
for the one I broke. -an(→) n clean clothes.

ilisdan/ilisdi v [b1] {1} exchange, replace s.t. Ákung ilisdan ug duha
ka buuk kabáyù nang ímung kábaw, I’ll give you two horses for your
carabao. {2} pay s.o. back or replace s.t. Ilisdan tika sa Lúnis, I’ll
pay you back Monday. Ímu giyung ilisdan tung ákung pawuntinpin, You
should replace my pen. {3} replace s.t. that was s.w. by s.t. else.
Giilisdag baratuhung batu ang singsing, He substituted a cheap stone in
the ring.

ilísi = ísi_2.

ilitirit n illiterate. v [B126; b6] end up an illiterate.

ilitsu dibilin n a k.o. small club moss used as an indoor ornamental
plant: Selaginella umbrosa.

íliw_1 v {1} [AN3; a2] long for s.t., miss s.t. that one loves. Ang
bátà wà giyud mangíliw sa inahan níyang namatay, The child did not miss
its dead mother. Ang mabdus nag-íliw ug hilaw mangga, The pregnant
woman is longing for green mangoes. Giíliw kang Máma nímu, Your mother
is looking for you. {2} [b8] take a liking to s.t. Nailiwan uruy níya
nang bataána, He has come to take a liking to that child. n k.o.
poisonous snake, so called because it is believed that the snake and
victim long for each other after the victim has been bitten, and the
victim loses his mind, forgetting to have his wound treated.

íliw_2 n sergeant fish or crab eater: Rachycentron canadus.

iltur n variety of cholera called El Tor. v [A123P; a4] get El Tor.

ílu_1 n {1} one who has lost a parent. Ílu siya sa inahan, She has no
mother. — nga tulápus orphan. {2} having lost a relative or s.o. close,
deprived of s.t. one needs. Namaldítu ang íyang anak kay ílu sa
pagtagad, His son became delinquent because he is wanting in care and
affection. v [B126] {1} lose a father or mother. {2} deprived of s.t.
one needs.

ílu_2 v [A; b] wipe s.o. after a bowel movement. (→) n s.t. used to
wipe oneself after a bowel movement. Maáyung ilu ang pákaw, Corn cobs
are good to wipe with. pa- v [A; ac] have s.o. wipe one’s anus. paN-
v [A; b] wipe oneself after a bowel movement. iluhan n anus.

ílu_3 ka-, ka-(→) Poor thing! Kaílu níya, byàbyáan lang sa inahan, Poor
thing, he’s just neglected by his mother.

*ílub see paílub.

ílug v {1} [A3S; a2] take away from s.o.’s possession. Nakailug kug
búla, I managed to get a ball away from him. Ilúgun nákù basta dì
ihátag, I will take it away from you if you do not give it to me.
{1a} — ug lugar {1a1} occupy more space than necessary. {1a2} for a
moving vehicle to run another vehicle out of its lane by cutting in on
him or coming against him. {2} [C2; b3] fight for possession of s.o. or
s.t. Bukug nga giilúgan sa duha ka irù, The bone the two dogs were
fighting over. {3} [A2; a12] overcome. Bisag unsáun kug tuun, muílug
giyud ang katulúgun, No matter how hard I study, sleep overcomes me.
{3a} — sa bandíra v [A123S; a3] manage to marry a man who has a large
number of sweethearts. Ayaw na lang ug pangabubhu ánang mga karáang
trátu sa ímung bána. Tutal ikaw may nakailug sa bandíra, You need not
get jealous about your husband’s former sweethearts. After all, you
were the one he married. {4} [A23; c] cut in on a conversation. ‘Dì nà
mau,’ miílug si Pidru, ‘That is not the one,’ Pedro broke in.
{4a} include s.t. s.w. where it wouldn’t normally be included. Iílug ra
kinig pasa, While you’re ironing would you touch this up quickly?
{4b} take time out to do s.t. Ilúga ra gud ni ug laba, Take off a
minute to wash this. {5} — sa yáwà [a12] completely forget s.t.
important which one was about to say. Walà giyud kuy nabungat nga mga
maáyung rasun. Giílug ug hurut sa yáwà. Napildi hinúun kus kásu, I
never did get my good arguments out. I completely forgot what I was
going to say, so I lost the case. n action of grabbing. (→) = ílug, v
4a, b. -an(→) a tending to grab things from others. -in-, -in-(→)
n {1} odds favorite in gambling. Adtu ku pusta sa inílug, I’ll bet on
the favored cock. {2} popular, sought after. Si Núra Unur inílug sa mga
prudyúsir, The producers fight each other to get Nora Aunor. -in-an
n merchandise which is highly popular (things which people fight with
each other to get). Inilúgan kaáyu ang pán ni Tínung, Tinong’s bread is
very popular. -un(→) a be in short supply. Ilugun kaáyu ang ákung
panahun, I have very little time. n the upper part of the small
intestines which are rolled up. siN-un(→) a = ilugun, a.

íluk n armpit. (→) v {1} [A; c1] carry under the arm. Iiluk (iluka)
kanang putus, Carry that bundle under your arm. {2} [A; a12] hit in the
armpit or at the point where the leg or fin of a beast joins the body.
Nailuk ang ihu sa ísi, The harpoon hit the shark at the base of the
fin. {3} [A1; a3] acquire a degree or other distinction. Si Huwan
nakailuk sa únang ganti, John won first prize. paN-an(→) n place where
the armpits are.

Ilukánu n Ilocano, person from the Ilocos region or his language. -in-
n the Ilocano style or language.

ilúku n k.o. thread of several strands made from low-grade cotton,
finer and whiter than the tingkal.

Ilúkus n Ilocos region, Northwestern Luzon.

ilung n nose. gáhì ug — {a} for domestic animals which have a tether
rope attached to the nose to be intractable, disobedient. {b} for a
person to be contrary, not amenable to suggestions. húmuk ug — for
domestic animals to be tractable, obedient or person to be acquiescent,
amenable. taas ug — {a} long-nosed. {b} blind to s.t. right under one’s
nose. walay — flat-nosed. -an, -an(←) n having a nicely-shaped nose.
paN- n rope passed through the water buffalo’s nose to which the tether
rope is attached.

Ilungga = ilunggu (female).

Ilunggu (from Iluílu, the principal city of the Hiligaynon region).
n {1} one from the Hiligaynon region. {2} Hiligaynon language.

ilun-ílun n variety of lowland rice reaching a height of about 5′ and
with longer and bigger leaves than most other varieties, maturing in
eight months. It has heavy yellow grains and is not much planted, as
more productive varieties have been introduced. v [A3; a2] plant this
variety of rice.

ilustráda a an illustrious woman or family, one who has done deeds
worthy of emulation and respect.

ilustrádu n illustrious persons.

ilut v [A; b6(1)] induce a rooster to fight with another rooster in
order to catch him. Dílì madakpan kanang sunúya kun dílì ilutan, You
cannot capture that rooster if you don’t lure him.

imà = ingà.

imabaw = ibabaw, see babaw.

imáhin n religious image.

imakuláda kunsipsiyun n immaculate conception.

imas added to, plus. Upat imas sayis mahímung napúlù, Six plus four
makes ten.

imat a {1} ugly: {a} in a messy way. {b} in action. {2} poor in
quality. Imat ning bulpína. Dì muági, This pen is of poor quality. It
doesn’t write well. v [B12] become ugly. Naimat ang íyang nawung sa
tantung pangulurítis, Her face was a mess with all that make-up.

imbaháda_1 v [A; b6] pace back and forth in anger. Muimbaháda ku ug
masukù, I pace back and forth when I’m angry.

imbaháda_2 n {1} embassy. {2} an announcement of s.t. to come, esp. the
announcement sent by the groom’s family to the house of the prospective
bride that they will come to ask for the bride’s hand formally
(pamaláyi). {3} messenger of a king or s.o. sent to announce the
courtship ceremony. v [A; b] notification of s.t. to happen.
Nag-imbaháda ang ákung anak nga dúna siyay mga bisítang dad-un sa ámù,
My son notified us in advance that he was bringing visitors to our
house. Wà makaimbaháda ang gubyirnu sa kalit nga pag-usbaw sa prisyu sa
bugas, The government did not have a chance to notify the people about
the sudden rise in the price of rice.

imbahadur n ambassador. v [B156; a12] be an ambassador.

imbalidu, imbalídu n {1} invalid, null and void. Imbalídu ang kuntrátu
kay way pirma, Their contract is invalid because it has no signature.
{2} invalid, ill person. v [c16] {1} invalidate. {2} [B12] become an
invalid.

imbalsamar v [A3P; a] embalm. imbalsamadur n embalmer. v [B156] be an
embalmer. †

imbargu v [A; a2] {1} confiscate. Ang maistra miimbargu sa kúmiks, The
teacher confiscated the comic books. {2} foreclose on a loan,
repossess. Maimbargu unyà ang ákung makinilya, They might repossess my
typewriter.

imbasyun n invasion.

imbaw n k.o. grey lucene clam with concentric ridges running along the
width but with no vertical lines, 2″ to 3″ in width. Most types of the
imbaw are similar in shape, color, and size to the American quahog, but
with more pronounced ridges and no blue on the inside of the shell. —
sa bunbun a small k.o. imbaw found on the shore. paN- v [A2; b(1)]
gather imbaw.

imbay_1 a moving slow with stiff legs like a crab. v [B; a] be slow and
dragging in movements or work. Nag-imbay na ang íyang linaktan tungud
sa kakápuy, His pace became very slow from fatigue. Giimbay níya
paghungit ang bátà, He is feeding the child slowly bit at a time.
Giimbáyan níya ang íyang trabáhu, He dilly-dallied on the job.

imbay_2 n name given to the women kept by Japanese soldiers as
mistresses. v [A; c1] become an imbay.

imbintu n invention. v {1} [A; a] invent. Bag-ung bumba na puy
imbintúhun sa Rusya, Now the Russians are going to invent another bomb.
{2} [A; a2] make up a lie, story. Maáyu kang mangimbintu ug katarúngan,
You are great at making up excuses.

imbǐs instead of. Si Maríya ang giminyúan imbǐs si Ilína, The man
married Maria instead of Elena. Imbǐs mutrabáhu magpúnay lang siyag
tábì, Instead of working, she would sit around blabbing.

imbistigar v [A; a2] investigate. Imbistigarun (imbistigahun) ang
hinungdan sa pagkabagsà, The cause of the crash should be investigated.
imbistigadur n investigator. v [B156; a12] be an investigator.

imbistigasyun n investigation.

imbitar v [AN; a12] invite s.o. to go to an affair or a place. Wà siya
mangimbitar nákù uy, He didn’t invite me. Imbitarun (imbitahun) ta ka
sa ámung pista, I am inviting you to our fiesta celebration. imbitádu
n one invited to an affair. imbitasiyun n invitation.

imbraimatsu n k.o. joint in which a tongue or rib at the edge of the
board fits exactly into a groove in another. v [c1] use boards with
tongue and groove joints for walling or flooring.

imbúdu n funnel. v [A; c] {1} put a funnel. Imbudúhi ang butilya
inighuwad, Put a funnel in the bottle when you pour. {2} funnel, divert
s.t. Daghang humay giimbúdu ngadtu sa blakmarkit, Lots of rice was
funnelled into the black market.

imbukar v [A; b5] start, begin. Miimbukar ang ikaduhang kagúbut sa
kalibútan mga katluan na ka túig gíkan karun, The Second World War
started some thirty years ago. Ug naimbukar (naimbukahan) pa ug sayu
ning trabahúa human na untà ni pagkakarun, Had this work been started
early, it would have been finished by now.

imburnal n culvert. v [c] put a culvert.

imbúru = imbúdu.

imbus = ibyus.

imbuyis n invoice. v [A; b6(1)] make an invoice of goods bought. Ang
tindíru mauy muimbuyis sa mga pinalit ku, The sales clerk makes the
invoices for the things I buy.

imbyirnu n winter.

ími n letter M.

imigrant n s.o. who emigrates abroad. v [B126] become an emigrant.

imirdyinsi n emergency. — máni the money issued by the provincial
governments after the outbreak of World War II before the Japanese
occupation.

imirhinsiya = imirdyinsi.

imiri — bag, burd emery bag, board.

imit v [AN; a2] {1} desire to have things of little value or which one
can’t use. Nangimit (nag-imit) ka man diay niánang mga pitsipitsi, Do
you really want to have that junk? {2} be after s.t. Wà siya mahigugma
níya. Nag-imit lang sa íyang yútà, He doesn’t love her. He’s just after
her land. a stingy, possessive.

imitasiyun, imitisyun n imitation.

imnu n hymn.

impáki v [A; c1] pack up, put in a container for carrying or storing.
Impakíhag (iimpákig) maáyu ang dad-unun, Pack up the things we will
take with us carefully.

impaktu n {1} supernatural being which causes evil and may be called
into the service of a sorcerer. If he shows himself it is usually in
the form of s.t. ordinary with an extraordinary characteristic: animal
of an unusual age, color, or shape; banana trunk blocking the way where
there had been no bananas growing, and the like. {2} by extension, s.o.
who does evil without scruples. v [B26; b6] be devilish, without
scruples.

impanáda n pastries consisting of meat wrapped in dough and fried.
v [A1; a2] make impanáda.

impantil — biribiri, paralisis n k.o. children’s disease.

impantiríya n infantry.

impas a {1} paid off, up. Impas na ang ákung útang, My debts are paid
off. {2} be done for, finished off, dead. Impas na ang manuk, The cock
is finished off. Impas na ang ákung puhúnan. Dì na ku makasúgal, My
money is all gone. I can’t gamble any more. Impas ka ug hibuthan ka ug
dinamíta, That’ll be the end of you if dynamite explodes on you.
v {1} [A3P; b5] pay off, up. {2} [B126; ab3] be done in, finished,
dead. — túdas = impas, 2.

impáti {1} for antagonists to be even in gains and losses. Impáti na ta
kay púlus ta way túri, We are even now because we both lost our rooks.
{2} having no more debts. Impáti na ta. Wà na kuy útang, We’re square
now. I don’t owe you a thing. v {1} [a3] come to a tie. Naimpáti ang
ílang dúlà, Their game ended in a tie. {1a} [A12; c3] get a tie.
{2} [AC; a1] settle up accounts between people that have debts to each
other or between mortgager and the holder of a mortgage. Arun
magkaimpáti ta, pun-an nákug tris mil ang ímung prinda, ug ákù na, To
settle up, I’ll give you three thousand and pay off your mortgage, and
the land is mine. {3} [A12] for an amount to be sufficient to meet some
obligations. Dì makaimpáti ang ímung swildu sa ímung taplanan, Your
salary isn’t enough to pay your debts to me. {4} [B126] be finished
off. Naimpáti sa mananaygun ang ákung katapúsang sinsíyu, The carolers
finished off all of my change.

impatsu n indigestion caused by eating things that don’t go together.
v [B126; a4] have indigestion. Naimpatsu (giimpatsu) ang bátà kay
nagkaug buúngun ug butung, The child suffered from indigestion because
he ate pomelos and young coconut. — sa sabun v [a3] for clothes that
have been put out in the sun to bleach to be allowed to dry out such
that the soap will not come out.

impi n {1} acronym for MP (military police). {2} wife in her capacity
as her husband’s watchdog (slang). v {1} [B156; a12] be an MP. {2} [A3;
b6] check upon husband. Dì makaguwàguwà si Dindu kay náay muimpi níya,
Dindo is not free to go out because there is a watchdog checking upon
him.

impiksiyun n infection.

impiktu = ipiktu.

impilya n leaf lard, a thin layer of fatty tissue around the outside of
the stomach of large animals or persons. impilyáhun a fat, obese.

impiradur n {1} emperor. {2} name formerly given to the brightest
student in the class, who was given a special place in front. v [B16;
a12] {1} be an emperor. {2} be the best student in class.

impiratris n empress. v [B126; a12] become an empress.

impirdibli n safety pin. v [A; b6] fasten s.t. with a safety pin.

impirmaríya, impirmarya n infirmary.

impirnu n {1} hell. Impirnu ning ákung kinabúhì uban nímu, My life with
you is hell. {2a} hain, ása, diin nga impirnúha whatever place it is, I
couldn’t care less. Ambut kun háin siyang impirnúha, I don’t know where
she is, and I don’t give a damn. v {1} [B12] become a hell.
{2} [a3b4(1)] go to hell. Ang mga dautan maimpirnu, Bad men go to hell.
Ang palábi nga pagsugal ray kaimpirnúhan mu, You’ll go to hell because
of your gambling. {3} [B16] be blazing with anger. Hílum kay
nag-impirnu ning ákung úlu, Shut up. My head is blazing with anger.

impiryu n empire.

impisar v [A; c16] start, begin. Impisahun (iimpisar) na nátù ang
trabáhu, Let us start working.

impísi = inpísi.

impitu n height of one’s anger. v [B6; b4] be at the height of anger.
Ayaw siyag duúla ug mag-impitu ang íyang kasukù, Don’t approach him if
he is fuming mad. Naimpituhan ku siyag latigu, I whipped him in a burst
of rage.

impiyirnu = impirnu.

implimintar v [A; c] implement, put a procedure into effect.
Iimplimintar na ang bag-ung baláud sa pangampanya sa pulitika, They are
going to implement the new law regarding campaigning.

impliyar v {1} [A2; b(1)] get employment. Nakaimpliyar siya sa
gubyirnu, He was employed in the government service. Mauy impliyari ang
dagkung kumpaníya, Get employed in a large company. {2} [A; b6c1] hire,
employ. Dì siya muimpliyar ug minur diidad, They do not employ minors.
{3} [A; c] employ, put into practice what one has learned. Giimpliyar
níya ang diyútayng kaálam sa dyúdu, He employed the little judo he
knew. impliyáda n female employee. impliyádu n employee. v [B16; a2]
get employed in a job. Sígi lag pangítag trabáhu hangtud maimpliyádu
ka, Don’t quit looking for work until you get employment. Ang táwung
way ambisyun mag-impliyádu lang hangtud sa pagkamatay, A man who has no
ambition will work as an employee forever. Ang upisína giimpliyadúhan
níyag upat, He employed four people in his office.

implíyu n employment, job. v [A; a2] employ. Gustu kung muimplíyu ug
kugihan nga búy, I want to employ an industrious houseboy. paN- v [A2;
b6] work as an employee. Nangimplíyu ang asáwa kay dì paigù ang swildu
sa bána, The wife took a job because the husband didn’t make enough.

impluwinsa n influenza. v [B126; a4] get influenza. Ábi kug labad sa
úlu lang, naimpluwinsa man núun, I thought it was only a headache, but
it turned out to be the flu. Impluwinsáhun ka, You will get influenza.

impluwinsiya n influence. v [A; a1] influence.

imprinta n printing press or an establishment in the printing business.
v [A; a] print. Imprintáhun giyud ang imbitasiyun, The invitation card
should be printed. imprintahan = imprinta, n.

imprisaryu n impresario. v [B15; b6] be an impresario.

imprumtu n impromptu. v [c1] be impromptu. Naimprumtu ang prugráma kay
way nakapangandam, The program was made impromptu because nobody
prepared for it.

*impuntu alas [number] — at [such-and-such a time] on the dot. Alas
utsu impuntu, Eight o’clock sharp.

impurmǎl a informal gathering, affair. v [a12] make an affair informal.

impurmasiyun n information.

impurtansiya n importance. pa- v [A; b6(1)] be given, give oneself
importance. Mupaimpurtansiya giyud nang bayhána. Dì giyud mulingkud sa
luyu, That woman pretends she’s important. She never takes a seat in
the back.

impurtanti a important, having a bearing on a situation. v [B12; b6] be
important for s.t. Nagkaimpurtanti ang túbig nga nagkaduul na ang
tinghulaw, Water is once more becoming important because the dry season
is approaching. Palita dáyun kun impurtantihan ka ánang librúha sa
ímung pagtuun, Buy that book if you consider it important for your
studies.

impurtasiyun n importation.

impurti n value. Pilay impurti sa ímung singsing? How much is your ring
worth? Káhuy nga impurtig trisyintus, Wood worth three hundred pesos.
v [B456] be worth [so-and-so] much. Kadtung lúhung awtu nag-impurti ug
trayinta míl, That luxurious car is worth thirty thousand.

impurtid n imported.

impusibli a it is impossible, very unlikely. Impusibli pug dì ka
muganansiya, It is impossible that you won’t make a profit. v [B12; c1]
be implausible, impossible to happen. Maimpusibli ang dágan sa isturya
ug pasubraag kakulbà hínam, The story will be implausible if there are
too many suspenseful details.

impuy n title of respect for old folks, male or female.

impyirnu = impirnu.

imraimatsu = imbraimatsu.

imsi n emcee. v [A; a2] emcee.

ímu see ikaw.

imulsiyun n emulsion of cod liver oil. v [b] give s.o. this
preparation.

ímung v [AN; c1] {1} forget to pay a debt or return s.t. borrowed (from
ímu [see ikaw] as used in an expression referring to the thing
borrowed, e.g., Dúna man tuy ímung dus písus diri nákù nu? I still have
two pesos of yours, don’t I?) Ayaw imúnga ang ákung bayinti písus,
Don’t k.o. forget to pay me my twenty pesos, will you? {2} cheat s.o.
out of s.t. small. Siyay miímung (nangímung) sa kwarta sa tigúwang
ignuranti, He gypped the ignorant old man out of his money.

imurahiya n hemorrhage from the womb. v [A13P; a4] have a hemorrhage in
childbirth or miscarriage. Nag-imurahiya (giimurahiya) siya dihang
gikakuháan siya, She had a hemorrhage when she had her miscarriage.

imuralidad n immorality. v [a3] be dismissed from the teaching service
for getting pregnant out of wedlock. Ug dílì siya pakaslan maimuralidad
giyud siya, If he doesn’t marry her, she will be sacked for immorality.

imut-imut v [B12] be financially hard-up on a long-term basis. Pirmi
giyung magkaimut-imut ang gastadur, A spendthrift is always in
financial straits.

imyus = ibyus.

in grammatical particle (dialectal). {1} = y. {2} subject marker for an
indefinite subject (standard Cebuano: ang). Dílì hingpit ang altar kay
dakù pa man in kúwang, The altar is not complete. There is a good deal
lacking.

ín_1 v [A12; c] be accepted as a teacher in the public schools. Wà pa
siya maín sa pagkamaistra kay way bakanti, She hasn’t been accepted as
a teacher because there’s no vacancy. n one who is ‘in’ in the school
system.

ín_2 a for a ball to be in bounds. v [A; c6] in billiards, move the cue
ball perpendicularly a certain distance from the edge of the billiard
table to make it easier to shoot.

-in-_1 derivative affix added to adjectives or nouns to form adjectives
which mean ‘in the manner of [such-and-such]’ and verbs that mean ‘do
in [such-and-such] a manner.’ Usually, there is shift to the left with
the addition of this affix. Ug dílì mahímù sa minaayu, buhátun nátù sa
dinautang paági, If it can not be done in a nice way, we’ll do it in a
bad way. Inigsuung tambag, Sisterly advice. {2} by the ... Giswilduan
silag sinimana, They were paid by the week. Ginagmayng pagkapalit,
Bought a little at a time.

-in-_2 affix added to verb bases to form nouns which are parallel in
meaning to the direct passive inflectional affix (-un_1) and the
instrumental inflectional passive (i-_1), meaning 1. {1} the thing
[verb]ed. Hinátag ba ni u pinalit ba? Was this a present (s.t. given)
or just s.t. you bought? {2} s.t. put s.w. or in s.t. Inasin nga karni,
Salted meat. Kinahun ug linata, Things in boxes and things in cans.

-in-_3 derivational affix. {1} added to verbs forming nouns which refer
to the continuous action of doing and verbs which mean ‘[do]
continuously’. Sa tantu níyang hinílak, From crying so much. Dúru
nákung pinangítà, I looked for it for all I was worth. {2} added to
words which refer to sounds to form nouns which mean ‘the sound of’.
Tinúlù, The sound of dripping. Kinasíkas, Rustling sound.

ina old word for ‘mother’ that is confined to set phrases. bilat sa —
see bilat. — nga [vegetable] variety of [vegetable] that is larger,
softer, and inferior to the ordinary. Inang palawan, Large, soft
variety of palawan. inahan n mother. inahan nga buhatan main office of
a firm with branches. v [AN; c1] be a mother to. Siyay miinahan
(nanginahan) sa íyang mga humagbus, She was mother to her stepchildren.
panginahan v [A2; a2] recognize or treat as s.o.’s mother. Naguul si
Pilar kay wà manginahan kaníya ang íyang humagbus, Pilar is worried
because her stepchild doesn’t treat her like a mother. pakainahan
v [A13; a12] act, treat like a mother. inaína {1} stepmother.
{2} foster mother. v [A; c1] be a foster mother, stepmother to. Ákung
manghud ákung iinaína (inaináhun) sa ákung mga bátà, I’ll make my
younger sister the foster mother of my children. {2} [A12] get a
stepmother, foster mother. inaan n mother hen. inaun, ináun
n godmother. v [B3; c1] act as godmother, be a godmother. paN-(←) n in
games like marbles, the piece the player uses to strike other pieces.

ínà (short for ayaw únà) {1} just a moment, a minute. Ínà pa, dúna pa
kuy gipangítà, Just a moment (a minute) I’m still looking for s.t.
{2} particle used to change the subject: by the way. Ínà pa ra gud,
kinsa tu ka? By the way, who did you say you were?

inagurar v [A; b(1)] hold a celebration in honor of an accomplishment,
having reached a certain stage, having finished s.t. Makainagurar ka
giyug mupasar ka sa bár, You’ll have to hold a celebration if you pass
the bar. Ang báy inagurahan ugmà, There will be a celebration for the
new house tomorrow. inagurasiyun n celebration. v [A13; b(1)] =
inagurar.

inámil n {1} enamel of teeth. {2} enamel paint.

-in-an affix added to verb bases to form nouns which are parallel in
meaning to the local passive inflectional affix (-an_1). {1} s.t. from,
at, on, to which s.t. was done, place at which s.t. was done. Kinutúban
sa ákung yútà, The boundary of my land. (Lit. The place to which my
land reached.) {2} the thing or person [verb]ed. Nakahibáwu ku sa ímung
tinagúan, I know your secret. {2a} s.t. caught by [such-and-such] a
method of fishing, hunting, etc. Pinaslan, Fish caught with a line.
Dininamitáhan, Fish caught with dynamite. {3} reason for [do]ing. Mu ra
nay ímung hinilákan? Is that all you’re crying about?

-in-an(→) affix added to verbs to form nouns meaning manner of doing.
Linakwan, Way of walking. Kinataw-an, Way of laughing.

-in-ánan alternant of -in-an added to some roots where the final vowel
of the root is dropped. Sinugdánan (sinugdan), Beginning. Kinuptánan sa
átung panaghinigugmaay, Keepsakes betokening our love.

inánay v [AB; c1] do or become s.t. in stages gradually, little by
little. Miinánay pagbákud ang masakitun, The sick man rose slowly.
Miinánay (nainánay) ug kaláwum ang sapà, The brook is gradually getting
deeper. Inanáya (iinánay) pagsira ang pultahan, Close the door slowly.
Inanáyan ta lang kag báyad sa ákung útang, I’ll just pay you my debt
little by little.

in-anay = -ay_1.

inánu n dwarf, midget. v [B6; b6] be a dwarf or midget.

ínat v {1} [AB23(1); c1] stretch, cause to extend farther in length or
time. Akuy miínat sa dawunggan sa bátang badlúngun, I pulled the
naughty child’s ears. Muínat (maínat) ang tisyirt, The T-shirt will
stretch. Inátun (iínat) paggastu ang kwarta, Stretch the money to make
it go a long way. {1a} [A; a] stretch a grade so that the student can
pass. Inátun na lang ni nátung grádu, kay gradwíting ka man, We’ll
stretch your grade because you’re graduating. {2} [B26] for the voice
or brows to be raised. Muínat (maínat) na gánì nang íyang kílay napikal
na nà, When he raises his brows, that means he is irked. n {1} amount
s.t. stretched. {2} stretching.

ínaw n name given to a k.o. sigay (small cowry) which is shiny.

inawgura = inagurar.

inay_1 n {1} short for Nánay mother. Háin man si inay mu (ang ímung
inay)? Where’s your mother? {2} exclamation expressing great emotion.
Inay, bitin, Mama! A snake! -an n mother hen or mother of other k.o.
fowl. v [A1; a2] raise a mother bird.

inay_2 instead of [doing so-and-so]. Inay magtuun nagpúnay man hinúug
liguy, Instead of studying he was always truant.

inay_3 I don’t know. Inay diin kahà nákù tu ikabutang ang lápis, I
don’t know where I must have put the pencil.

-in-ay = -ay_1.

inbíay n acronym for the NBI National Bureau of Investigation, the
Philippine analogue to the FBI. v [B156] be a member of the NBI.

inbitisyun kard n invitation card.

inburd n a marine motor mounted inboard or a small boat with an inboard
motor.

inbuyis = imbuyis.

indák v [A; c6] induct into an organization. indaksiyun n induction
into an organization. — bul n induction ball. v [A1; b(1)] hold an
induction. indakting upisir n inducting officer.

indángan n surgeonfish: Acanthurus spp.

inday_1 short form: day. n {1} title or term of address for a female
the same age or younger than the speaker, often adopted as the informal
first name. Ása ka Day (Inday)? Where are you going, Miss? Nagkasíra si
Inday Úping sa ámù, Miss Oping boards in our house. {2} female, girl.
Tulu ka inday nga hidakpan sa balay sa kahiláyan, Three girls were
arrested in the bawdy house. v [A13; a12] call s.o. inday. inday-inday
a {1} light and continuing wind or rain. Dì man ni bagyu, inday-inday
pa man ni, This is no storm. It’s only a playful breeze. {2} slow and
easy in gait. {2a} a slow easy bouncing game of table tennis, as
between beginners. {3} k.o. flowering weed resembling a poinsettia:
Euphorbia heterophylla. v [B456] for wind or rain to be weak, be slow
in gait. Nag-inday-inday siyang naglakaw, He’s walking slowly and
leisurely.

indíbi n acronym for NDB, the National Development Board.

indig v [A12C; b6(1)c1] compare two things to see which is better. Wà
makaindig ang íyang mga pinintal sa ubang salmut, His portraits could
not compete with the other entries. Mag-indig ta kun kinsay maáyug
tíngug, Let’s compare our voices to see which is better. Indígun kunu
nátù ang átung buktun ug kinsay dakù, Let us compare our arms to see
whose is bigger. Indígan nímu siya sa kabráyit, Are you going to
compete with him to see who is more intelligent? Iindig ku ning ákung
sinínà sa iyáha, I’ll compare my dress with hers to see which is nicer.
ka- n rival, competitor. Daghan siyag kaindig sa íyang gugma ni Ispir,
He has lots of rivals for Esper’s love. -ay n competition, contest,
comparison. v [A13] hold, have a competition.

indihistiyun n indigestion. v [A13P; a4] have indigestion.
Nag-indihistiyun (giindihistiyun) siya tungud sa kadaghan sa gikaun,
She got indigestion from eating too much.

indikasiyun n reading on a meter.

indilibli n India ink.

indimunyádu a a mild cuss word referring to a person who has incurred
one’s ire. Ikawng indimunyadúha ka, mubálik ka lang ngari, You, devil!
Just try coming back here.

inding_1 n last digit of the sweepstakes number that won. Tickets
ending in that digit win the purchase price. Dus ang inding sa búla
karung bulána, Two is the last digit number in this month’s
sweepstakes. v {1} [A3] have [such-and-such] as the last digit.
{2} [A12] get a ticket that ends the same as the winning number.

inding_2 n joke which one makes in back and forth banter by which one
saves face by turning criticism into praise. v [A12; b] succeed in
making this sort of joke. Sa dihang giingnan siya nga giinítan siyang
Rus, nakainding siya pag-ingun nga mau man giyud ning gwápu, pirming
inítan, When they told him that Rose was angry (ínit) at him, he saved
face with the joke that that’s the way it is with handsome men. Women
always get hot (ínit) for them.

indipindinsiya n national independence.

indipindinti, indipindiyinti a independent from colonization or
political party. v [B12] for a nation to become independent or a
politician to free himself from a party.

indipirinti a not giving the expected attention to s.t. Indipirinti
kaáyu nà siyang pamisitáhan, dì managad, She is indifferent to her
guests. She pays them no mind. Bisag nagdaut ang anak, indipirinti ang
inahan, Even though the child is sick, the mother is completely
indifferent to it. Indipirinti kaáyu siya sa ákung mga hangyù, She was
completely indifferent to my pleas. v [B12; b6] be, become indifferent
towards.

indiriktaminti a indirectly, in an indirect manner. Gidílì sa maistru
ang pagpamulitika bisag indiriktaminti, It is forbidden for teachers to
engage in politics, even indirectly. Gihangyù ku siya indiriktaminti, I
asked him for some indirectly. v [c16] say or communicate s.t.
indirectly.

indispír a desperate. Indispír kaáyu tu si Husi kay wà sugta, Joseph is
desperate because she turned him down. Indispír ku kay wà na kuy
huwaman, I’m desperate because I don’t know who to borrow from.
v [B126] be desperate.

Indiya n India. — ingk n India ink.

indiyan_1 n American Indian. — pánà n dart propelled by a sling. v [A;
a12] shoot with a dart propelled by a sling.

indiyan_2 v [AN; a12] stand one up. Giindiyan ku sa ákung trátu, wà
siya mutunghà, My boy friend stood me up. He didn’t come. a standing
s.o. up.

indiyan híd n k.o. strong, but not tightly woven cloth used mainly for
uniforms. v [A13C12; b6] use, wear clothing made from this k.o. cloth.

indiyu n Indio, a term given by Spaniards to native Filipinos during
the Spanish times.

indulhinsiya n indulgence in the Church. v [A12] obtain indulgence.

indung_1 n {1} title or term of address for man older than speaker.
{2} nickname of Pedro.

indung_2 n k.o. moray eel.

indúnu v [A; c] give, donate. Muindúnu ku sa yútà pára sa iskuylahan,
I’ll donate the lot for the school. Dì nákù iindúnu ang ákung kahágù,
pabáyad giyud ku, I won’t give my services free. I want to get paid.
prinda — n mortgage in which the use and revenue of the thing mortgaged
goes to the holder.

indur n {1} softball. {2} leather ball with bladder for volleyball.
v [A; b1] play softball.

industriya n industry, manufacturing enterprises.

industriyal n {1} industrial. Ribulusiyun — Industrial Revolution.
{2} Industrial Arts, a subject in school. {2a} project in industrial
arts. {3} one’s kids (humorous metaphorical). Pila na karuy ímung
industriyal? How many children do you have now? v [A1; c1] make a
project in industrial arts.

indyiksiyun v [A; b6(1)] inject into the body or perform an analogous
action on containers. Giindyiksiyunan ning agwag túbig, They diluted
this perfume by injecting water into the bottle.

indyuy v [A2; b3] have a good time. Wà siya musáyaw didtu sa parti
maung wà muindyuy, She did not dance in the party. That’s why she did
not have a good time. Ang kartun mauy indyuyan sa mga bátà, The
children will enjoy seeing a cartoon show.

ing = y.

ingà n lowing, mooing sound of cows and buffalos. v [B3] low, moo, bawl
as if mooing.

ingáhay = kanyáhay.

ingat n an ear infection characterized by a smelly pus secretion.
v [a4] have this sort of ear infection.

inggansa v [A; c1] {1} shift gears. Mag-inggansa gánì ka tumbi ang
klats, If you shift gears step on the clutch. {2} insert one’s finger
into the woman’s vagina (slang). Pag-abut sa ngitngit miinggansa dáyun
ang laláki sa babáyi, When they came to a dark place, the man
immediately inserted his finger into the woman’s vagina.

inggarasya humorous euphemism for disgrasya.

inggasti n setting of a gem. v {1} [A; a] make a setting for a gem.
{2} [A; c] use as a setting for a gem.

inggit a for the voice to be shrill and high-pitched. Inggit ug tíngug
si Lusing, Lucing speaks with a shrill voice. v [B2; c1] for the voice
to become shrill and high-pitched. ka- n shrillness, sharpness.

ingglis = inglis.

inggrandi = in-grandi.

inggrasya humorous euphemism for disgrasya.

inggráta = inggrátu (female).

inggrátu a ingrate, ungrateful. Mu ba niy ímung ibálus nákù, ingratúha
ka, Is this how you thank me, you ungrateful wretch. v [B12; b6] be,
become an ingrate.

inggrísu v [A; b6(1)] turn in revenue or goods collected. Wà niya
iinggrísu ang tanan níyang halin, He didn’t turn over all the revenue.
n revenue.

inggwintu n ointment.

ing-iíng, ing-ing-íng onomatopoetic word to represent the sound of the
music to suspenseful portions of movies, used by children in recounting
s.t. to indicate the part that is suspenseful.

ingit v [a12] disappoint s.o. by not giving him what he expected. Ayaw
ug túu nga hatágan ka kay ingitun ka lang, Don’t believe that you will
get any because you will be disappointed.

ingkáhi n fine lace. v [A; b6(1)] decorate clothing with lace.
Iningkahíang sinínà, A shirt trimmed with lace.

ingkantu_1 n supernatural beings that may show themselves in human
form, usually handsome, European in appearance. They are said to live
in dákit (banyan) trees or other natural features, and are harmless,
but may take a liking to a human, having intercourse with him or
kidnapping him. One can obtain the release of a kidnapped person by
annoying the ingkantus, but if he has partaken of their food, he is
unrecoverable. They inflict illness on anyone who disturbs their
dwelling place. anak sa — albino person (thought to be the offspring of
an ingkantu father and a human mother). ingkantuhánun = ingkantu.
ingkantádu, ingkantáda n {1} belonging to an ingkantu. {2} having
special, magical properties.

ingkantu_2 n name given to the weapon belonging to the giant in a
moro-moro play, represented by fireworks.

ingkarga n materials or provisions issued to personnel. v [A; a] supply
materials or provisions. Ingkargáhan (ingkargadúhan) ug yunipurmi ang
mga witris, The waitresses are provided with uniforms. -da_1, -du_1 =
ingkarga.

ingkargáda_2 = ingkargádu_2 (female).

ingkargádu_2 n person who is in charge of an enterprise or household in
the absence of the owner; the overseer. Si Simyun ang ingkargádu ni Dun
Manúlu sa íyang asyinda, Simeon is the overseer of Don Manolo’s
plantation. v [B16; c1] be put in charge.

ingkárids v [A; a1] encourage.

*ingkásu — ug in case. Ingkásug wà siya, ibílin lang, In case he’s out,
just leave it. paN- v [A2] prepare for some eventuality. Pagdá ug
páyung pangingkásu bag muulan, Bring an umbrella in case it rains. pur-
= ingkásu.

ingkib v [A; ab2] bite s.t. off. Ingkíba lang nang tansan kay way
abridur, Just bite off the bottle cap because we don’t have an opener.
n bite.

ingkit_1 v [A; a2b2] bite off a small piece with the front teeth.
n bite.

ingkit_2 a fingers which are joined congenitally together. Upat ray
íyang tudlù kay ingkit man ang kumingking sa paningsíngan, He has only
four fingers because his little finger is joined to his ring finger.

ingkitadur see ingkitar_2.

ingkitar_1 v [AN; a12] talk s.o. into doing s.t., usually bad.
Miingkitar (nangingkitar) siya sa ákung míd sa pagpabalhin sa íla, She
lured my maid to move to her house.

*ingkitar_2 paN- v [A] inquire. — ug tabì look for s.t. to gossip
about. Nanumbálay na sad ang tabian arun mangingkitar ug tábì, The
tattler went visiting the neighbors to look for s.t. to gossip about.
ingkitadur a inquisitive, fond of asking questions. Ingkitadur kaáyu
nang tawhána mu rag imbistigadur, That man is so full of questions as
though he were an investigator. ingkitadúra = ingkitadur (female).

ingku n title or term of address for a man considerably older than the
speaker, usually used to related persons. v [A; a12] call s.o. by this
term of address.

ingkud = lingkud (dialectal).

ingkurdun v [A; b(1)] {1} go s.w. in a file. Nag-ingkurdun ang mga
baktin sunud sa anay, The piglets walk in file following their mother.
{2} come in huge number as though in a file. Giingkurdúnan sa hulmígas
ang kámay, Ants swarmed over the sugar.

ingkuwintru v [AC; c3] {1} meet on the way. Dì kaingkuwintrúhan ning
karsadáha kay apíki, If you meet another vehicle on this road, you can
not pass each other because it is too narrow. {2} meet to fight. Kuntra
nga ámung gikaingkuwintru, The enemy we ran into. {2a} have a run-in.
Nagkaingkuwintru mig ang ákung asáwa, My wife and I had a little
run-in. {2b} go to have sex. Makig-ingkuwintru giyud siyag dunsilya, He
wants to have an encounter with a virgin. n {1} s.o. or s.t. one meets.
Wà muhátag lugar ang ingkuwintru, The truck we met on the way would not
move over to let us by. {2} action of meeting. Halandúmun nga
ingkuwintru, A memorable meeting. {3} encounter with an enemy.

ingkuy = ingku.

Inglatíra n England.

ingli n k.o. locally made salt obtained by dissolving ashes in seawater
and evaporating it. v [A; b6c1] make rock salt of this sort.

inglis n {1} Englishman. {2} area in Cebu City (so called from an
Englishman that used to live there). -in- n English language, spoken or
written in English. v [A; c1] speak or write in English. †

in-grandi a for a social affair to be on grandiose scale. v [B26; c1]
be grandiose. Muin-grandi ang piging kun gastúan, The party will be
grandiose if you spend a lot. In-grandíhun giyud ang kasal, The wedding
must be on a grand scale.

in-grátu = inggrátu.

in-gridiyinti n ingredient.

in-grísu = inggrísu.

íngug_1 a piercing and persistent in sound. Íngug kaáyu ang hadiyung sa
radiyu, The humming in the radio is very annoying. v [b3] find s.t.
unpleasant to hear. Ingúgan na ku ánang pagbalikbálik níyag isturya sa
íyang pag-adtu sa Amirika, I’m bored constantly hearing her tell the
same old things about her trip to the States.

íngug_2 v [b4] have an uneasy feeling when doing s.t. private in the
presence of s.o. Íngúgan kug náay táwu sa duul ug malibang ku, I feel
ill at ease when people are around while I’m defecating.

ingun_1 {1} like, similar. Ingun niíni ang íyang libru, His book was
like this. dílì — nátù supernatural beings (lit. ones not like us).
walay — incomparable, second to none. Usa siya ka magsusúlat nga walay
ingun, He is a writer second to none. {1a} — sa [sentence] as though.
Ingun sa nahugnù ang kalibútan, It was as though the world had
collapsed. {2} sa — in such a way. Ngánung gibuhátan man ku nímu sa
ingun? Why do you treat me like this? {2a} accordingly, in like manner.
Sa ingun matawag pud nátù ug langgam ang kabug, In like manner we can
also call bats birds. {2b} sa — niánà {2b1} accordingly. Sa ingun
niánà, nadátù siya sa pamaligyà ug isdà, Accordingly, she became rich
from selling fish. {2b2} in that case. Sa ingun niánà, dì na lang ku
mupaúlì rung hápun, In that case I don’t have to go home this
afternoon. {3} — man as well as. Kini suliran sa mga magbabalaud, ingun
man sa mga lungsuránun, This is a problem for the lawmakers as well as
for the citizens. Midalì ku ug tindug ingun man ang duha ka babáyi, I
immediately stood up, and so did the two women. {4} — ka-[adjective] sa
as [adjective] Ingun íni kadakù, It was as big as this. {5} — ngari,
nganhà, nganhi, ngadtu with this (that) much distance. Naglingkud siya
ingun ngadtu, ug diri pud ku, He was sitting that far away, while I was
over here. v {1} [B126] be like. Maingun ka ug búang ánang sinináa, You
will look like a madman in those clothes. Nag-ingun niíni ang patayng
láwas, The dead body was like this. Naingun ka niíni tungud sa íyang
sáad, You have become like this because of his promises. {2} [c1] do
s.t. in [such-and-such] a way. Ug ingnun nímu siya íni pagkuput, dì
siya makabuhì, If you hold him like this, he cannot escape. Giingnan ku
níya ánà, He did like this to me. {3} [A12; b4(1)] give cause so as to
result in s.t. Unsa may nakaingun sa inyung áway? What caused your
quarrel? Unsa may naingnan (gikaingnan) sa inyung panagbúngul? What
caused your quarrel? {4} [ma-, pagka-, inigka-] — ugmà on the following
day, more or less. Pagkaingun ugmà u sunud ba hinug na nà, Tomorrow or
the next day, it will be ripe. ingun-íngun somewhat like. Ingun-íngun
ug báhù sa rúsas ning buláka, This flower smells somewhat like a rose.
báhung ingun-íngun smells like the you know what (vagina) (humorous).
v {1} [B25] be, become somewhat like or similar to. {1a} be rather bad.
Bantug na lang nagkaingun-ingun ku, daugdaúgun lang ku, Because I’m
reduced to this, people walk all over me. {2} [A13; a12] act, be like
s.t. needlessly. Ngánung nag-ingun-ingun ka man niánà? Why are you
acting that way? -in- v [A13] do likewise. Ábi kay magbinúang sila dì
ka mag-iningun, Just because they are doing foolish things, that
doesn’t mean you have to do the same. paka- v {1} [A13] cause oneself
to be like. Ug muy ílang buhátun, dì ka magpakaingun, That’s what they
might do, but don’t put yourself in the same category. {2} [a12] be
thought to be. Pakaingnun kang bágis, They’ll think you’re a thug.
gipaka- ug [gen.] ug (short forms: pakaingun, kaingun, ingun) it seemed
to [gen.]. Gipakaingun ku (ingun ku) ug si Husi ka, I thought you were
Joe. ingung ku, ingkug = gipakaingun ku. panag-, panig- v {1} [A2; b6]
imitate: do like s.o. or make oneself like s.o. Dílì ta manig-ingun sa
mga dátung mudagmal ug binatunan, We should not imitate the rich and
mistreat our servants. Maáyu nga panig-ingnan (panag-ingnan) nímu si
Isku kay buútan, You should emulate Esco because he is well-behaved.
{2} [A; bc] compare one with s.t., consider him to be like s.t. Ayaw ku
ipanag-ingun sa buáya, Don’t liken me to a crocodile. Si Risal ang
ákung gipanag-ingnan sa maistru, I compared the teacher to Rizal.
{3} [c] do s.o. the same way he did to s.o. else. Ayaw kug ipanag-ingun
sa ímung anak, Don’t do me the same way you did your son. ka- n peer,
one like s.o. else. Dílì ka manlimbung sa ímung isig ka ingun, Don’t
cheat your fellow men. pagpakig-ingun-ingun n congenial relationship.
Angay untà ang pagpakig-ingun-ingun nátù sa átung isig ka táwu, Each
one of us ought to have good relations with our fellow men. tag-(←),
tag- each one like. Ang bansíkul tag-ingug buktun, The tuna were each
as big around as your arm. v [B1256] for each to turn out to be like.

ingun_2 v [A; b5c] {1} say, tell. Ingnun (ingnan) ta ikaw dáan sa dì pa
ka maílad, I will tell you beforehand, before you get swindled. Mauy
pagaingnun nga píling pílì sa pinilian paúlì, As the saying goes, be
too choosy and get what s.o. else didn’t want. Ang ginaingun nga Insik
mikágiw sa láing násud, The aforementioned Chinese escaped to another
country. {2} [a12] said to be s.t. Ingnun ka unyang maut, You will be
said to put on airs. Nagpadaladála siya ug libra arun ingnun siya nga
istudiyanti, He carries books around so people will think he’s a
student. pakaarun ingnun v [A13] {1} pretend. Apan siya nagpakaarun
ingnun nga walà makakità nákù, But she pretended that she hadn’t seen
me. {2} pretend, put on a front. Nagpakaarun ingnun siyang dátù, She
pretends to be rich. n — sa pag-unsa s.t. said to hurt s.o.’s feelings.
Dílì ni ingun sa pag-unsa, apan tinúud, I’m not saying this to hurt
your feelings, but it’s true.

*ingun_3 pa- toward. Midágan siya paingun sa gawang, He ran toward the
door. v {1} [A; c] head for. Ug mupaingun ang barku sa mabaw, masángad,
If the boat heads for the shallows it will run aground. Ipaingun ngadtu
ang sílit sa hús, Direct the water from the hose over there. {2} [b8]
go to for help, resort to. Wà tay láing kapaingnan, We have no one else
we can turn to.

íngus_1 v [A2S; b3] whimper. Muíngus ang ituy ug byáan, The puppy
whimpers when you leave it alone.

íngus_2 a having the smell of urine. Íngus kaáyu ang banyu kay anhà mu
sa salug mangíhì, The bathroom stinks because you urinate on the floor.
v [B126] be, become ill-smelling.

ingus-ingus n k.o. peppery dish made from chicken intestines.

inhílir n inhaler.

inhiniríya, inhinyiríya n engineering.

inhinyíru n engineer. — miníru, sibil mining, civil engineer. v [B16;
c1] be, become an engineer.

íni_1 be here (dialectal). Íni aku kay manghuwam untà kug kwarta, I am
here to borrow money.

íni_2 n letter N.

inidúru = inudúru.

inig- prefix added to active verbs to form an abstract form meaning
‘when [so-and-so] happens’. Inig-abut níya, tawga ku, Call me when he
arrives. Inigpalit nímu sa pán, When you buy the bread.

inigka- prefix added to stative verbs to form words meaning ‘when
[so-and-so] happens to s.t.’. Inigkalútù sa kík, When the cake gets
done. Inigkahúlug níya, When he falls.

iniksiyun = indyiksiyun.

inilus = hinilus. see hilus.

iníma n enema. v [A; b6(1)] give an enema.

íning n baseball inning.

Iníru n January. v see abril.

inislagan see islag_2.

ínit a {1} hot, warm to the touch. Ínit ang pán, The bread is still
warm. Ínit kaáyu sa kwartu, It was very warm inside the room. Ay kug
samúka kay ínit ang ákung ū́ run, Don’t disturb me. I’m rather
hot-tempered today. {2} enthusiastic, heated, with vigorous concern.
Ínit kaáyu ang piliay dinhi sa Pilipínas, The elections here in the
Philippines are hotly contested. Ínit kaáyu ang ílang pagtinubágay,
They had a heated argument. Ínit siyag tinagdan nákù, She entertained
me with great warmth. {3} sunny and clear. Pagpáyung kay ínit, Use a
parasol because it’s hot. — ang kwarta a money is so irresistible it
will tempt people to get themselves into trouble for its sake. Ínit ang
kwarta mau nga ang táwu nga mabuyu niíni kalagmítan mabanlud sa kadáut,
Money is irresistible so that whoever succumbs to its temptation will
likely be carried to misfortune. n {1} heat. Ang hinungaw sa ínit
malagmit mauy nakadáut sa ímung mata, The sudden evaporation of heat
from your body seems to have ruined your eyesight. {2} sun, as opposed
to shade. Ayaw ihayhay sa ínit kay mulubad, Don’t hang it in the sun
because it will fade. v {1} [AB; ab2] heat s.t., become hot. Nag-ínit
na kug kapi, I’m heating some coffee. Muínit ang kwartu ug dì abríhan
ang bintánà, The room will get too warm if you don’t open the windows.
Imna ning litsi arun mainitan ímung tiyan, Drink this milk to warm your
stomach. {1a} [B; b3] be in a bad mood about s.t. Nagkainit ang íyang
buut nga nagkapildipildi sa súgal, He’s getting in more and more of a
bad mood because he has been losing steadily in his gambling. Giinítan
ku níya, He’s P.O.’d at me (I’m the reason he is P.O.’d). {1b} = paN-.
{2} [B; ab3(1)] be heated up with enthusiasm. Sa nag-ínit na ang dúlà,
Just as the game was getting exciting. Giinítan ku nang awtúha, I got
all fired up about that car. {3} [B36; b6] for it to be a sunny day.
Dúgay nang wà makaínit, The sun hasn’t shone for some time. {4} [AN] —
ang kwarta sa kamut for money to remain in one’s possession for long.
Dì muínit (mangínit) ang kwarta sa mga táwung diswildu, If you get a
salary, you don’t keep your money for long—you spend it as you earn.
paN- v [A2] get hot from some internal source. Wà mangínit ang makina,
The machine didn’t heat up. Gitapin-an ku ang nagpanginit níyang láwas,
I felt his feverish body. Adtu ka na? Wà pa gánì makapangínit ang ímung
lubut, You’re leaving already? You haven’t even warmed your fanny (lit.
your fanny hasn’t even had a chance to warm up yet). Nangínit ákung
dalunggan pagkadungug sa insultu, My ears burned when I heard the
insult. -ay v [C3] compete or fight in a heated manner. Bahálà nang
magkumpitinsiya mu basta dì lang mag-initay, You may compete with each
other, but not too heatedly. pa- n {1} s.t. one warms oneself with.
{2} snack, usually in the afternoon. {2a} = ipa-. v [A; b6(1)] take
one’s afternoon snack. ipa- n small tip (lit. s.t. to buy a snack
with). Díay ipaínit nímu, dung, Here’s a tip for you, son. (←) v [A;
b(1)] expose s.o. or oneself to the sun. Painiti ang bátà mabuntag,
Expose the child to the sun every morning. pa-an(→) n place one can get
snacks. ka- n {1} enthusiasm. {2} = ínit, n, 1. {3} = ka-un(→).
ka-un(→) n degree of heat. -un(→) a easily angered. Initun ang táwung
hayblad, A person with high blood pressure is short-tempered. v [B12]
become short-tempered. ma-un {1} warm, affectionate. {2} enthusiastic,
avid. Mainítun nga pagsúgat, Warm welcome. {3} heated, conducted with
vigor. ting-(→) n hot season. v [B56] be the hot season.

inkáhi = ingkáhi.

inkargádu = ingkargádu_1, 2.

inklinar v [A; c1] tilt to one side. Niinklinar ug gamay dapit sa wala
ang balay human sa línug, The house tilted a little to the left after
the earthquake. Dì ku makainklinar sa ákung úlu kay nagtikig ákung
líug, I can’t let my head tilt to the side because I have stiff neck.

inklúsu v {1} [A; b5c1] wall, put a fence around s.t. Inklusúha
(iinklúsu) nang inyung gardin, Fence your garden. {2} [A; c1] include
with the others. Inklusúha (iinklúsu) siya sa kíha, Include him in the
lawsuit. {3} [A; b6c1] insert in a letter. Mahadluk kung muinklúsu ug
kwarta sa subri, I’m afraid to enclose money in an envelope.

inkuwintru = ingkuwintru.

inkyubítur n incubator. v [c] put s.t. in an incubator.

inlards v [A; a] enlarge a photograph. -ir n photograph enlarger.

Inpísi n acronym for NPC, the National Press Club.

inpuntu = *impuntu.

inpurmir n informer, one who tips off the police. v [B16] be, become an
informer.

inri n INRI, an inscription at the head of the cross.

inruk, inrúki v [A; c6] castle in chess. Iinrúki ang hárì kay
namiligru, Castle the king because he is endangered. n castling.

inrúl v [A; c1] enroll s.o. in school. Ug makainrúl ug dúsi ipadáyun
ang klási, This course will be given if at least twelve students
enroll. pa- v [A; c] enroll oneself in a school, course. -min, -mint
n {1} action of enrolling or registering in school. {2} number of
people enrolled in a certain period. v [A13] hold an enrollment period.

insaláda (not without l) n salad. a meddling in other people’s affairs.
Insaláda kaáyung pagkababáyi ang ákung ugángan, My mother-in-law is a
meddlesome person. v {1} [A; c1] have, make a salad. {2} [A13] meddle
in others’ affairs.

insayid n in bounds in a game. v [B126; c6P] be in bounds. Puntus na
untà ug nainsayid pa tung búla, That would have been good if it had
landed in bounds.

insayid dyab n inside job, robbery committed by s.o. employed in the
place robbed.

insayklupidya n encyclopedia. v [A13; c16] make an encyclopedia.

insaymáda = insumáda.

insáyu n {1} rehearsal. {2} murumúru play. v {1} [AC12; c1] rehearse,
cause s.o. to rehearse. Nag-insáyu siya sa íyang ipakigpúlung, He is
rehearsing his speech. Ang maistra nag-insáyu sa mga bátà sa ílang
sáyaw, The teacher is rehearsing her pupils for the dance. {2} [A; c1]
stage a murumúru play. insayuhan, insayuhánan n place one rehearses or
stages a murumúru play.

insi term of address to a related female older (usually much older)
than the speaker. v [A; a12] call a woman insi.

insigniya n insignia. v [A; b6(1)] wear an insignia.

Insik n Chinaman, Chinese. Insik (insikun) kaáyu siyag mata, She has
Chinese eyes. Pruduktu ni sa Insik, This is a Chinese product. -in-
n {1} Chinese language. {2} anything done in Chinese style. v [A; c1]
speak Chinese. ka-an {1} China. {2} Chinatown. {3} the Chinese as a
group. -un a Chinese-like.

Insíka n Chinese woman.

insiktu n insect (used only in writing).

insíma v {1a} [B2C3] for two things to fail to be directly aligned or
opposite each other. Nagkainsíma ang butúnis ug uhális, The buttons and
the buttonholes are not directly opposite each other. {1b} [B456] for
the eyes or line of vision to veer off. Miinsíma ang ákung tinan-awan
paglabay sa siksing babáyi, My eyes veered to a sexy girl who passed
by. {2} [AC; ab] exchange, interchange. Insimáha na ang inyung mga
papil arun makakurihir na kamu, Exchange your papers so you can correct
them. Insimáhan ku ning ákung sapátus ug láin. Mangítà pa kug iinsíma
niíni, I will change these shoes for another. I will look for a pair to
exchange them for.

insimáda = insumáda.

insinsaryu n censer, incense holder.

insinsu n {1} incense. {2} censer. v [A; b6(1)] burn incense.

insistǐr v [A2; b6(1)] insist. Ayawg insistiri ang ripiri nga nasayup
siya, Don’t insist that the referee was wrong. Iinsistǐr giyud níya ang
íyang sugyut bísag wà uyúni sa kadaghanan, He insists on following his
idea although the majority did not favor it.

insiyur v [A; c1] issue or sell insurance. Maáyu giyug insiyúrun
(iinsiyur) nang inyung balay sa súnug, It would be a good idea to have
your house insured against fire. -d a {1} insured, covered with
insurance. {2} for a woman to be no longer available, having a boy
friend already. {3} sure shot in basketball. maN-r-, tig-
n underwriter. paN- n selling insurance as an occupation.

inspiksiyun n inspection. Inspiksiyun na run sa mga timbangan sa
mirkádu, They will inspect the scales in the market today. v [AN; a12]
make an inspection or careful examination. Inspiksiyunun sa maistra ang
kwadirnu, The teacher will inspect our notebooks. Hiinspiksiyunan sa
prinsipal ang tinagúang mariwána, The principal came across the
marijuana in his inspection.

inspiktur n inspector, official examiner. — sa sanidad sanitary
inspector. v [B16; c16] be, become an inspector. Mag-inspiktur ku sa
kustum, I’ll become a customs inspector.

inspirar v [A; a] give inspiration. Inspiraha siya sa pagpaningúhà,
Inspire him to strive hard. Ang Bibliya giinspirahan sa Diyus, The
Bible is inspired by God. inspirádu a inspired. inspirasiyun
n inspiration.

instalar v {1} [A; c] install, fix s.t. in position for use. Wà pa mi
instalahig tilipunu, Our telephone hasn’t been installed yet. {2} [A;
c] install officers in clubs or some office not of high rank.
instalasiyun n {1} installation of officers into office. {2} military
installation.

institusyun n institution, an organization having a social,
educational, or religious purpose.

institiyut n small private school on any level.

instruksiyun n instructions, directions. Sunda ang instruksiyun arun
mahustu ang paggámit nímu, Follow the instructions so that you use it
correctly. v [A; b6(1)] give instructions to.

instrumintu n {1} instrument. {2} instrument, means for bringing s.t.
about. Akuy gihímù nílang instrumintu sa paghangyù sa mayur, They used
me as a means for approaching the mayor. {3} musical instrument.

instul v [A; ac] {1} buy s.t. on installments, pay installments.
Instulun (instulmínun) ngánì nímu, mas dakù kag mabáyad kay sa kás, If
you buy it on installments you are going to pay more than if you had
paid cash. Pilay ímung iinstul run? How big of an installment are you
going to pay this time? {2} = instalar. -min, -mint n installment paid.
v [c16] buy s.t. on installments.

*insular gubyirnu, kagamhánan — National government (from the usage in
Spanish times when the government of the Philippines was called
Gobierno insular to distinguish it from the Spanish government at home.

insultu v [AN; b5c] insult. n insult. †

insumáda n k.o. sweet, soft bread rolled into a spiral and covered with
butter and powdered sugar. v [A; c1] make insumáda.

insumniya n insomnia.

insuriktu n insurgent against the Spanish government. v [B16; b6] be,
become an insurgent. -s = insuriktu (plural).

insuy v [A123P; b4] {1} get sick from taking a bath after sexual
intercourse. {2} for a wound to get infected from bathing. Giinsúyan
ang ákung samad, My wound got infected.

intabládu n stage. v [c1] build a stage.

intap a afraid of s.o. for his superiority. Intap kaáyu ang mga buguy
níya kay ísug siya, The thugs are very much afraid of him because he is
fierce. v [B26; b3(1)] fear s.o. for his superiority. Gikaintápan nang
ílang tím dinhi. Wà nay manúkul, Their team is most feared here. No one
dares compete with them.

intáwun short form: táwun. {1} particle expressing or asking for pity.
{1a} in statements. Daghan táwun ang namatay didtu, A lot of people
died in that place. Mu man nà táwuy ákung panginabúhì, That’s what we
live from, poor us. {1b} with imperatives: please, have mercy. Iúlì
intáwun nà sa labing madalì, Please return that at the earliest
possible time. {2} expressing humility: I don’t necessarily deserve
s.t. good. Nahinumdum táwun siya nákù, He remembers me (though I am not
important enough to be remembered). Nakadaug táwun ku, I won just by
luck. {2a} with statement praising oneself, expressing humility. Kamau
táwun ku ánà uy, I know how to do that. (I don’t think I’m great guns,
but I do know how to do it.) {2b} with statements that a catastrophe
hasn’t happened: through the mercy of the Lord. Wà táwun mi hitabuig
iltur, We haven’t been hit by El Tor, thank God. {3} with a sharp
denial, taking the sting out of the denial. ‘Anak nu ka sa gawas ni
Pidru.’—‘Dílì, tawun uy,’ ‘They say you’re Pedro’s illegitimate
son.’—‘Good heavens, no! (Have mercy, don’t think of that.)’ paN-
v [A2S; b6] say intáwun. Nagpangintawun siya nga nanghulam nákù ug
kwarta, He kept on saying ‘poor me’ as he was borrowing the money.

intil_1 v [B126; b6] for one’s growth to be stunted. Basta maintil ang
táwu, hínayg túbù, A person whose growth is stunted does not grow fast.

intil_2 n clitoris.

intilhinti, intilihinti a intelligent. v [B12; b6] be, become
intelligent.

intimánu = antimánu.

intinsiyun n intention, plan. Wà kuy intinsiyun nga mubakasiyun kay
musámir man ku, I have no plans for taking a vacation because I’m
planning to take summer classes. v {1} [a12] do s.t. intentionally.
{2} [b4] do s.o. harm intentionally in basketball. Mihagbà si Panir kay
giintinsiyunan man sa íyang paglusut, Paner hit the floor because s.o.
tripped him as he drove into the basket.

intirbinir v [A; b(1)] interfere, get oneself involved in others’
affairs. Ayaw pag-intirbinir sa mga sulti sa dagkù, Don’t break in when
grown-ups are talking. Nahúnung ang mainítung panaglális sa dihang
giintirbinihan sa pulis, The quarrel came to a halt when the policeman
intervened.

intirbintur n poll watcher.

intirbiyu v [A; a] interview s.o. Intirbiyuhun ka sad sa manidyǐr, The
manager will interview you, too. n interview.

intiris_1 n interest, a feeling of concern or curiosity. Wà siyay
intiris sa sabdyik, He has no interest in the subject. v {1} [A12; a]
look at s.t. with an ulterior motive. Kwarta ray ílang giintiris nákù,
Their only interest in me is my money. {2} [A23N; b] steal, do
malicious damage. Ayawg byàbyái nang ímung radiyu. Daghan ra bay
mangintiris dinhi, Don’t leave your radio around because there are lots
of people that steal around here. Giintirisan ang ílang awtu, S.o. did
malicious damage to their car. {2a} [b4] abuse s.o. sexually.
Giintirisan pa giyud ang babáyi sa mga kawatan, The robbers also abused
her sexually. -adu(←) a {1} interested, enthusiastic, feeling or
showing interest or curiosity. Intirisádu kaáyu siyang mahibaw-an ang
ákung sikrítu, She is very interested in knowing my secret. Intirisádu
ka sa ímung pagtuun? Are you interested in your studies? {2} having an
ulterior motive on s.t. Intirisádu kaáyu siya sa yútà kay patadlasag
karsáda, He’s very interested in that land because they’re going to put
a road through it. v [B126; b6] interested in s.t., or interested in
acquiring s.t. -is(←) n property, holdings. Mugamut ang usa ka táwu sa
usa ka lugar kun náa ang íyang mga intirísis, A person stays rooted in
a place if he has property there.

intiris_2 n interest on a loan.

intiriyur a away from roads. Lisud pangitáun ang ílang báy kay
intiriyur kaáyu, It is very difficult to locate their house because it
is situated in the interior, away from the road. Ang intiriyur nga mga
baryu, The barrios that are located away from the highway. v [B126; c1]
be located far from the highway. n {1} inner tube. {2} bladder of an
inflatable ball.

intir kurs n k.o. dance with sexual intercourse-like movements. v [A]
dance this dance.

intirmidiya n grades 5, 6, 7 in school. v [B6; b(1)] be in the
intermediate grades.

intirmidiyu situated halfway between two. Ang ámung balay intirmidiyu
sa iskuylahan ug sa simbahan, Our house is located halfway between the
school and the church.

intirmisyun n intermission, break. v {1} [A; b(1)] be intermission.
Kinahanglang intirmisyunan nímu ang iskidyul nímu sa buntag, You have
to take a break in the morning. {2} [A; b6(1)] give a number during the
intermission of a performance.

intirn n medical intern. v [B16; b(1)] be an intern.

intirna n female student staying in a ritzy boarding school, finishing
school. v [B36; c1] board in a finishing school.

intirnal a internal, esp. s.t. to be taken or applied inside the body.
v [B126; c1] become, make s.t. internal. Intirnalun (iintirnal) ang
pagtambal, Treat the patient with medicines to take internally. †

intirnasyunal a {1} international. {2} woman having had several
children from different fathers, usually of different nationalities
(humorous). Íya ra intáwun dì manakud, intirnasyunal kaáyu nang
bayhána, God forbid it happen to anyone else. That woman has children
from all different fathers. v [B12; b6c1] be, become international.

intirnu v {1} [A1; c1] keep in seclusion. Nag-unsa ka sa ímung lawak,
nag-intirnu? What are you staying in your room for? Hiding? Iintirnu
(intirnúhun) tika sa ímung kwartu kun magbinúang ka, I will lock you in
your room if you fool around. {2} [B36; c1] be a boarder in school.
Kung sa siminaryu ka mag-intirnu, dì ka giyud kaguwàgúwà, If you board
in the seminary you aren’t allowed to leave the grounds. n {1} male
student who boards at school. {2} medical intern.

intirpriti, intirpritir n interpreter. v [B16] be, become an
interpreter.

intíru whole, complete, completely. Wà hikan-i ang kík kay intíru pa
man, No one ate any of the cake because it is untouched. Dì giyud
mairug ug hihunasag intíru, You can’t budge if you’re completely caught
by the low tide. — adlaw, gabíi, búlan, etc. the whole day, night,
month, etc. Wà siyay pahúlay intíru adlaw, He had no rest the whole
day. — kwirpu a whole body length (said of a mirror glass).
v {1} [B126] turn out to be whole. {2} [a] do s.t. to a whole of s.t.
Ayawg intirúhag pula ang balay, Don’t make the whole house red. {3} [A;
c1] do s.t. the whole length of a unit of time. Mag-intíru adlaw lang
nà siyag bása, He reads the whole day. Intirúhun (iintíru) níya
pagpatukar si Prank Sinatra sa íyang prugráma, He plays Frank Sinatra
records throughout his radio program.

intiyíru see santu.

intiw = intil_2.

intra v {1} [A2; b6(1)] participate in a game, contest, and the like;
indulge in, engage in s.t. Dì ku muintra sa inyung dúlà, I won’t join
your game. Miintra siyag pamabáyi, He started to take up with a
mistress. Nakaintra na kug pangutsíru, I’ve tried my hand driving a
rig. Kining lábil ákung iintra sa ílang bunutbúnut, I’ll submit this
label as an entry in their contest. {2} [A13; b] for s.t. to be taken
up or indulged in as s.t. additional. Sukad muintra ang pamabáyi sa
íyang nigusyu, sígi siyang nagkaalkansi, He’s been losing in his
business ever since he started taking up with women as a sideline.
Intráhig dagandágan ang ímung kuntra arun dì ka manak-áwut, Try taking
to hit-and-run tactics against your opponent so that you won’t get
knocked out. {3} [A; c] enter down in a record, list, diary, and the
like. Ayaw iintra sa libru ang risíbung nawā̀, Don’t enter the lost
receipts into the book.

intrabudyǔs = intrudyǔs (humorous).

intráda n {1} opening, beginning portion of. Ang intráda sa únang
simistri Hulyu 15, The first day of classes for the first semester will
be on July 15. Ang pasiuna náa sa intráda sa libru, The preface is in
the first few pages of the book. {2} the front part of the foot,
starting at where the foot widens before the toes. {2a} vamp, part of a
boot or shoe covering the intráda. {3} area at the nape of the neck
where one begins making the haircut. {4} entrance fee. — hiniral
general admission in places of entertainment. {5} area that serves as
an entrance. Salída ni. Túa sa pikas ang intráda, This is the exit. The
entrance is on the other side. v {1} [a3b6(1)] be at the beginning. Ang
simistri muintráda sa Lúnis, The semester starts on Monday.
Giintradáhan ni Pilíta ug kinatsilang áwit ang íyang pasundáyag, Pilita
started her show with a Spanish number. {2} [b6] put a vamp in a shoe.
{3} [A; b] make the beginning cuts in a haircut. †

intrans n entrance fee in a school, portion of the fee students must
pay upon registering. v {1} [A3] for a school to impose an entrance
fee. {2} [A3; c] pay the entrance fee in school. — iksaminisyun
n entrance examination. v [A13] hold an entrance examination.

intranti n persons who take part in a performance or contest. Ang mga
intranti sa sáyaw, The participants in the dance program. Mga intranti
sa karíra, Entrants in the horse race. v [B126; c1] be, become an
entrant or participant.

intri for matters to be between, among. Ayawg apil adtung ílang lális
kay intri ra kadtu nílang duha, Don’t mix into their quarrel because it
is only between the two of them. Intri sa mga salmut sa banggà siya ang
kinagwapahan, Among the contestants she is the most beautiful.

intribinir = intirbinir.

intribista n interview. v [A13] hold an interview. Mag-intribista run
hápun sa mga aplikanti, They’ll hold an interview for all of the
applicants this afternoon.

intribudyǔs = intrudyǔs (humorous).

intríga n intrigue. Kasína ug intríga mauy naghárì sa ílang punduk,
Jealousy and intrigue dominate their group. v [A13] intrigue against
s.o.

intrigar v [A; b6(1)] hand over or turn s.t. to s.o. personally, giving
the responsibility of it. Way láing intrigahan kun dílì ang ginikánan,
Don’t turn it over to anyone but the parents. Karun iintrigar nátù ang
prugráma sa imsi, Now I turn the program over to your host. intrigádu
a s.t. handed over and entrusted to s.o. Intrigádu ku tanan ang ákung
swildu ngadtu sa ákung asáwa, My entire salary is handed over to my
wife. Intrigádu ang ákung kalag ug láwas sa gugma nímu, Because of my
love I have entrusted my body and soul to you.

intrígu = intrigar.

intrimitir v [A; b(1)] meddle in s.o. else’s affairs. Dì ta
muintrimitir sa mga magtiáyung mag-áway, We should not meddle into a
married couple’s quarrel. intrimitída, -u a meddling in others’
affairs.

intripiti = intirpriti.

intrisádu = intirisádu. see intiris_1.

intrisáli v [A13P; b(1)] for many people to go s.w. and leave again.
Natural, mag-intrisáli giyud ang táwu dinhi kay tindáhan man, Of
course, people come and go to this place because this is a store.
Intrisalíhan sa táwu ang tindáhang hingusúgan sa pálit, People flock in
and out of a store that does a brisk business.

intriyul, intriyur = intiriyur.

intru v [c6] throw the basketball from the end courts. n a throw in
basketball from the end courts.

intrubudyǔs = intrudyǔs (humorous).

intrudyǔs v [A; c] introduce s.o. to s.o. else. Iintrudyǔs ku ánang
ímung amíga bi, Introduce me to your lady friend.

intrunisar v [A; b(1)] carry out the ceremony of blessing and
installing an image in a home or another building. intrunisasiyun n the
enthronement of an image or statue in a place of honor in the house.
v [A; b6(1)] do the enthronement.

intsards n person in charge of a class, enterprise, or any other group
activity. Siya ang intsards dinhi sa klási, He is the one in charge in
this class. v [B126; c] be in charge.

intunsis {1} therefore, consequently, the inescapable outcome is ...
Intunsis, kay nakáun na man nímu, bayran giyud, Consequently, since you
ate it, you have to pay for it. Intunsis magtuun ka arun dílì ka
mahagbung, Therefore, you must study if you are not to flunk. {2} the
conclusion we draw is ... Intunsis, wà diay ka sa klási ug wà ka kakità
nákù didtu, So, you must not have been in class if you did not see me
there. v [B1256] {1} go to waste: for an outlay to give no return, be
put to useless effort, be damaged to the point of being useless.
Naintunsis ang ákung tris míl adtung nigusyúha, In that venture I lost
three thousand. Naintunsis kug báyad ug mahal sa ímung pagpasakitsákit,
Because you pretended to be ill, I was made to go to a lot of needless
expense. {1a} end up miserable. Naintunsis ang babáying gibyáang burus,
The poor woman was ruined because she was made pregnant and abandoned.
{2} ang — [A12] the only thing wrong is ... Ang nakaintunsis nímu kay
gáhì kag úlu, The thing that’s wrong with you is that you are stubborn.

intus v [A; a] mill sugarcane. Kining intusána muintus ug lima ka
iktaryang katubhan matag adlaw, This sugar mill can mill five hectares
of sugarcane every day. -an(→) n {1} sugar mill. {2} cane crusher.

intuy = undù.

inudúru n toilet bowl. v [A; a] install, make into a toilet bowl.

inugurasiyun = inagurasiyun. see inagurar.

inuínu v [AP; a12] ingeniously devise ways to make s.t. do. Labihan
nákung makainuínu nga ang singku muabut giyug usa ka adlaw, How I tried
to devise ways to make five pesos last for one day. Giinuínu sa sastri
nga muígù ang panaptun, The dressmaker devised ways to make the cloth
go far enough.

inum v {1} [A; a2] drink. {2} [A2; a] drink liquor. Nagwandugwandug ang
linaktan níya, nakainum tingáli, He’s wobbling. Maybe he had one too
many. {3} [A; ab2] take medicine with water. Muinum siyag tablítas arun
makatúg, He will take sleeping pills so that he can go to sleep.
n action of drinking. (←) {4} [AC; c1] have a drinking spree. Ang
dispirádu túa mag-ínum sa súd sa íyang kwartu, The despondent man is
drinking heavily in his room. n drinking spree. imnanan v [A13] drink
s.w. habitually. imnanan, ilimnan, ilimnanan, inúman n {1} drinking
container. {2} place where one habitually drinks. hiN-(←) a {1} fond of
drinking. Dì ku hingínum ug tubà, I don’t care too much for toddy.
{2} drunkard. ma- n s.t. to drink, esp. alcoholic. pala-(←) a = hiN-,
2. ilimnun, imnunun n {1} alcoholic liquor or beverage. {2} any liquid
for drinking. {3} folk medicine consisting of boiled herbs and roots
taken orally. v [A; b] treat with boiled herbs or roots. Giilimnunan
lang ang íyang hilánat, His fever was just treated with boiled herbs
and roots.

inun-an = inun-únan. see un-un_1.

inunay see unay.

inúnay = kanyáhay.

inupung = alinupung.

inusinti, inusintis a {1} naive, innocent of the ways of the world.
Inusinti ka sa palípat, pildi ka giyud, You’re not wise to thimblerig
gambling, so you’ll lose. Inusinti pa siya sa mga babáyi, He’s innocent
when it comes to women. {1a} harmless, not likely to think of doing
misdeeds. Dì giyud siya muy nangíriw. Inusinti nà siya, She didn’t
steal it. She’s a harmless sort. {1b} innocent of a joke played on one.
Nasugamak sa binúang ang inusinti, The innocent fellow walked right
into the trap. {2} people having no involvement but brought to harm
through no fault of their own. Daghang mga inusinti ang naamung, Many
innocent people were caught up in the catastrophe. {3} innocent, not
guilty. {4} Innocents’ Day (December 28), The Philippine equivalent of
April Fool’s. v {1} [B12; a2] be, become innocent. {2} [A; a12] fool
s.o. on Innocents’ Day.

inut a close-fisted to the point of not spending for the barest
necessities. v [B12; b6] get to be close-fisted. inut-ínut v [A; b5c1]
spend money or use s.t. sparingly. Ug kamau ka muinut-ínut sa ímung
kwarta, dì ka giyud kahutdan, If you know how to spend your money
sparingly, you won’t run out. Inut-inúti (inut-inúta) ang pagtabakù kay
wà ka ra bay swildu, Go easy on the smokes. You aren’t earning any
money. -an = inut.

inútil n {1} invalid, disabled. Inútil siya human sa aksidinti, He was
disabled after the accident. Inútil ang ákung buktun, My arm is
completely disabled. {2} worthless person. Líhuk mung mga inutíla mu,
Get a move on, you worthless bums. {3} wash-out, one who passed his
peak. Inútil na nang artistáha, That actress is a has-been. v [B126; a]
be, become disabled. Inutílun ba nímu ang ímung anak ug kinastígu? Do
you want to cripple your child with that punishment?

inyam n k.o. tree.

inyiksiyun = indyiksiyun.

inyu see kamu.

ipak v [A; a] split, break a piece off of s.t. hard, divide into
pieces. Mag-ipak kug káhuy, I’ll chop off a piece of firewood. Giipak
ang kamúti kay dakù kaáyu, She broke the yam into pieces because it was
too big. Íyang ipakun ang mga kawáyan nga isalug, He’ll split the
bamboo poles to use for flooring. n a piece chopped, split or broken
off from.

íp buy an expression uttered when lifting s.t. heavy. Íp buy, kabug-at
na niíning batáa, Uup, how heavy this child has grown.

ípi = ígi_1, *ígi_2.

ipidimya n epidemic of some disease. v [B16] be, become an epidemic
disease.

ipikasint n efficascent oil, patent medicinal oil. — úwil = ipikasint.

*ipik way — ineffective (humorous).

ipiktar v [A; b4(1)] effect an outcome on s.t. Miipiktar na sa lungsud
ang subrang gastu sa iliksiyun, Spending too much on the elections is
now having its repercussions on the country. Nag-ipiktar na ug súgud
ang anistisya, The anesthesia is beginning to take effect now. ipiktádu
be adversely affected by. Ipiktádu ang átung ikunumíya sa kangil-ad sa
pamunúan, The economy suffers the consequences of a corrupt
administration.

ipiktíbu a {1} effective, having results. Ipiktíbu nga tambal,
Effective medicine. {2} effective, taking effect at a specified time.
Ipiktíbu karung adláwa, wà nay mga háyup nga buhían, Effective today,
no animals will be permitted to wander loose. v [B12; c1] come to have
effect. Maipiktíbu ning tambála ug tumarun káda adlaw, This medicine
will be effective if you take it daily.

ipiktu n effect. Way ipiktu nákù ang mariwána, Marijuana has no effect
on me. v [A2; b4] take effect. Ang tambal muipiktu usa ka úras human sa
pag-indyiksiyun, The medicine takes effect one hour after the
injection.

ipiktus n {1} personal belongings. {2} various goods or commodities for
sale. {3} various cargoes or load.

ipil n k.o. large hardwood tree of the primary or secondary forest,
furnishing yellowish lumber and a dye from the bark: Intsia bijuga.
ipil-ípil = byatilis.

ipiliptiku a epileptic. v [B126] be, become an epileptic.

ípis v [A; b6(1)] pour liquid into a container, esp. for drinking.
Iípis ring payn-ápul dyus sa mga básu, Pour the pineapple juice into
the glasses. n action of pouring. -anan n glass into which drinks are
poured and passed around in drinking sprees. tig-(←) n one who does the
pouring for the others esp. in a drinking spree.

ipistula n Epistle of the Bible, section of the mass where the Epistle
is read. v [A1] read the Epistle. Wà pa mag-ipistula sa pag-abut níya
sa simbahan, They hadn’t gotten to the Epistle when he arrived in
church.

ipit, ípit v {1} [A; ab2] jam, wedged in between two things. Ipitun ang
linidgid nga kamúting káhuy arun pagkúhà sa dugà, They press the
cassava to get the poisonous liquid out. Naipitan (naipit) ang íyang
kurbáta sa húnus, His tie was caught in the drawer. {2} [a3] be caught
and be forced into marrying a girl (slang). Ákù lang siyang
giduwàduwáan hangtud naípit núun ku, I was just playing around with
her, but I got cornered into marrying her.

íp lay = íp buy.

iplì = hiplì.

iprun n apron, garment worn to protect one’s clothing. v [A; a] wear,
make an apron.

ipsut v [A2; b6] {1} escape from a guard through inattention on his
part. Miipsut siya sa magbalantay, He escaped from his guard. Wà
makaipsut sa íyang mga mata ang sayup nga ispíling, The spelling error
did not escape his attention. {2} get out of doing s.t. Dì ta makaipsut
sa amutan, We cannot get out of paying our share. {3} slip out of s.t.
that is holding it. Nakaipsut ang isdang ákung gigunítan, The fish I
was holding slipped out of my hand. Gamayng lungag sa bulsa ang
giipsútan sa ákung kwarta, My money slipped through a small hole in my
pocket.

ipù_1 v [A; a] break off from an attachment without using much force.
Naipù ang gunitánan sa tása, The handle broke off the cup. Mahímung
ipuun ang mais bísan anagun pa, You can pick corn even before it is
mature. n s.t. picked from the tree. Tagak kahà nà? Dì kahà nà ipù sa
punúan? Are you sure you just found that fruit on the ground? Didn’t
you pick it from the tree?

ipù_2 v [c1] be driven, sink all the way in. Muipù (maipù) nang hasuk
sa yútà kun ímung tumban, The peg will be driven all the way into the
ground if you step on it. Kinsay nag-ipù sa sundang sa punúan sa
ságing? Who stuck the bolo all the way into the trunk of the banana
plant?

ipukrita = ipukritu (female).

ipukritu a hypocrite. v [B1; b6] be, become a hypocrite.

ipun v [A2C; c] {1} do s.t. together with s.o. as he does it. Muípun ku
sa inyung dyip, Let’s go together in the same jeep. Muípun ku ninyug
káun, Let me bring my lunch over to sit with you while you eat.
{1a} put things together. Iípun ra ang ákung bálun sa ímung bag, Let me
stick my lunch in your bag. {2} live or stay with s.o. Muípun ang
bag-ung minyù sa ílang ginikánan, The newly-weds will stay with their
parents. {2a} live as man and wife without being married. Ang babáyi
nga makig-ípun ug laláki nawad-an na sa kaúlaw, A woman who asks a man
to live with her has lost all feelings of shame. {3} mingle with. Dì ta
makaípun sa ílang punduk kay mga asyúsu, We cannot mingle with their
group because they are snobs.

ípus n k.o. small cockroach ¼″ to ½″ long with an orange-brown color.

ipus-ipus n {1} name given to various coral fishes similar to
burayburay. {2} k.o. white and brown edible rock shell.

iputíka v [A] mortgage. Dílì ka makaiputíka sa yútà nga balahinun pa sa
mga iridíru, You cannot mortgage land that is to be divided by the
heirs.

IR5 = ay-ar payib.

-íra {1} = -íru (female). {2} affix added to nouns referring to s.t.
kept and dispensed regularly to form nouns referring to the container.
Habuníra, Soap dish. Kapitíra, Coffee pot.

irad a having a stomach that sticks out very much. Irad ang kasagáran
sa mabdus, Most pregnant women have a stomach that sticks forward.
v [B] getting a stomach that sticks out.

irag v [A; b6(1)] lean back on. Kanúnay nátung makítà ang Miksikánu nga
mag-irag sa punúan sa káhuy, We always see Mexicans leaning back asleep
on a tree.

iráid n delicacy made of finely grated cassava or sweet potatoes with
coconut juice and sugar, wrapped in banana leaves, shaped into sticks,
and cooked in steam. v [A; a] make iráid.

íras v [A; c1] germinate seeds before planting them in their permanent
place. Irása (iiras) usà nang mga lísu únà luyúnga, Germinate the seeds
first, then transplant them. -an(→) n seedbed used for germination.
-in- n seedlings grown from small seeds.

*íray nag-/magdala sa — spoil an otherwise perfect performance by
ineptness. Nindut untà musáyaw ang kadaghánan, apan nagdá lang tu sa
íray ang usa, The dancers put on a good performance, only one spoiled
it all with his awkward steps.

irbabuyna = hirbubuyna.

irbras n k.o. atomizer operated by compressed air and used for spraying
paint. v [A; c1] paint with an airbrush.

irbubuyna = hirbubuyna.

irbularyu = arbularyu.

irgat a {1} for a woman to be pretentious in actions, putting on airs
and showing contempt for ordinary people. Irgat kaáyu nang bayhána, dì
giyud musul-ub ug sapátus nga baratuhun, That woman is haughty. She
won’t wear cheap shoes at all. {2} forward and immodest in behavior
toward men. Irgat kaáyu nang bayhána. Magduuldúul ug láki, That girl is
forward. She makes advances to men. v [B; c1] be, become haughty or
immodest in behavior.

irgu_1 v [A2C; ab3] argue, debate heatedly. Makig-irgu ka man sa
tindíra nga ímu man tung sayup, Why do you argue with the sales clerk
when it was your fault? n heated argument.

irgu_2 therefore, as a consequence we may conclude that. Miingun ka wà
ka mulakaw. Irgu, dihà ra ka sa balay, You said you did not leave.
Therefore, you were in the house.

irgutína n k.o. medicine to prevent hemorrhage after childbirth.

irgu trit n ergot, k.o. drug to make the muscles contract.

íri n letter R.

írid n air-raid shelter. — syiltir = írid. v {1} [A; b] build an
air-raid shelter. {2} [cP] put in an air-raid shelter. pa- v [A; c] go
to, put in an air-raid shelter.

iridar v [AN2; a12] inherit property. Kinsay muiridar (mangiridar) sa
yútà ug wà muy anak? Who will inherit the land if you have no children?
iridíra = iridíru (female). iridíru n heir. v [B126] be, become an
heir.

irigar v [A; b(1)] {1} administer a vaginal douche to oneself or s.o.
else. {2} irrigate the sinuses. irigasiyun n irrigation.

irigular a {1} uneven in occurrence or succession. Irigular ang íyang
rigla, Her menstruation is irregular. {2} irregular in school, not
taking the usual prescribed subjects. Irigular ku nga tird yir kay dúna
pa man kuy bálik sa sikan yir, I’m an irregular third year student
because I have to repeat a course in the second year. v {1} [B; c1] be,
become irregular. Ug iirigular (irigularun) nímu ang instulmin, lagmit
maimbargu, If you are not regular in paying your installments, it might
be repossessed. {2} [B16; b6] be, become an irregular student.

irihinsiya = irinsiya.

iríhis a {1} infidel or s.o. who does not believe in Christ.
{1a} unbaptized person (humorous). {2} not having attended service
during a Sunday or a holiday of obligation (slang). Iríhis pa ni si
Nituy kay wà pa kasimba, Nitoy is still a heretic because he hasn’t
gone to church yet. {3} ignorant of the ways of the world. Iríhis gud
nímu dì ka man mukáug kísu, What an ignoramus you are. You don’t eat
cheese. v [B12; c1] {1} be, become an infidel. {2} be, become ignorant.

iring n cat. iring-iring n = kandingkanding. see kanding. -un cat-like.
íhung -un k.o. shark with a broad and rounded head: Rhina ancyclostoma.

irinsiya n inheritance. v [A2N; a] receive an inheritance.

iris v [A; a] erase. Irisa ang blakburd, Erase the blackboard. -in-an
n {1} erasure. {2} place an erasure was made. -ir(←) n eraser. v [A23;
b6(1)] use an eraser.

irisipilas = paylas.

irispunsabli a irresponsible, lacking a sense of responsibility.
v [B12] be, become irresponsible.

iritar v [B126] for a wound to get infected. Nairitar ang ákung samad
kay wà tabúni, My wound was not covered, and it got infected.
iritasiyun n irritation at a particular spot on the skin or in the
body.

irkun n {1} air-conditioner. {2} = irkundisyun.

irkundisyun a air-conditioned. Irkundisyun ang sinihan, The movie
theater is air-conditioned. v [A; a] air-condition s.t. -ir = irkun.

irmad = irmat.

irmána n {1} female member of a religious group of devotees to a
particular saint. {2} woman who is in charge of raising the funds for a
religious celebration and who makes up the difference between the
amount collected and the costs. v {1} [B156] become a member of a
religious sorority. {2} [B3(1); c1] become the sponsor of a religious
celebration. — mayur n {1} mother superior. {2} = irmána, 2. v [a3]
{1} be made the mother superior. {2} = irmána, 2.

irmánu = irmána, n2, v2 (male). — mayur = irmánu.

*irmánus [proper name] — [name] and Co. Limbumping Irmánus, Lim Bonfing
and Co.

irmat n mother (slang). v [A12; b2] have a mother (slang).

irmil n air mail. v [c1] send by air mail.

irmitanyu n hermit. v [B16; b6c1] be, become a hermit.

irniya = hirniya.

irpad = irpat.

irpákit n air pocket. v [B46] for there to be an air pocket.

irpat n father (slang). v [A12; b2] have a father (slang).

irpun n earphones. v [A; a] use earphones.

irpurt n airport.

irsisyu = ihirsisyu_2.

irù n dog. suul sa — stomach spasm. Nagligidligid siya sa kasakit kay
dúna siyay suul sa irù, He was doubled up in pain because he had
stomach cramps. dílì makáun ug — treating people in an unacceptable and
completely obnoxious way. Kasábà nga dílì makáug irù, A scolding not
even acceptable for a dog (harsh and ranging far beyond the alleged
offense). {a} greedy to the point of eating food which people
ordinarily wouldn’t eat. Kay irù ka man mukáun ka sa ransiyung karni,
Because you are so gluttonous, you’ll even eat rancid meat. {b} greedy
over s.t. one loves very much. Irù kaáyu siyag sini, She loves movies
very much. — nga daug a cowardly, yellow. v {1} [B12; b6] be, become
gluttonous. {2} [B126] become a slave to an overpowering emotion
(become oblivious to shame, like a dog). Gugma mauy nakairù (nakapairù)
sa aláut nga babáyi, Love had made the poor woman a slave to her
passions. (←) v [A; a12] make notions of giving s.t. but actually not
doing so. Ayaw kug irúa. Ug ihátag, ihátag. Ug dílì, ayaw, Don’t you
make pretenses of giving. If you want to give it to me, give it. If
not, don’t. -in- v [A; a12] do s.t. like a dog. Ganáhan siya muinirù,
silbing palain, She wants to do the dog position for variety. irùírù
v [A; b5] court a woman by hanging around her. Nag-irùírù nà siya nákù
sa dága pa ku, He used to hang around me when I was still single.
n broken-off piece of white coral, roughly resembling a dog in shape.
irùirúay n k.o. game in which the players throw a stone at a can in a
circle and try to knock it out.

-íru {1} affix added to words referring to an action not approved of to
form adjectives meaning ‘one who is fond of engaging in [such-and-such]
an action’. Salsalíru, One who is fond of masturbating. Hambugíru,
Braggart. {2} added to words referring to things with which one can
make his living to form nouns which mean ‘one who engages in
[such-and-such] an occupation’. Lab-asíru, Fish vendor. Labandíru,
Laundryman.

irug v {1} [AB3; c1] move, cause s.t. to do so. Akuy miirug sa bangkù
dapit sa bungbung, I moved the chair towards the wall. Nag-irug ba nang
barku sa lawud? Is that ship in the ocean moving? Iruga (iirug) ug
diyútay ang sud-an ngari, Move the plate of food over here. {2} make
progress, move ahead in time. Sáma lang sa wà muirug ang íyang idad,
She looks as though she hasn’t gotten any older. Wà giyud muirug ang
ámung kahimtang, Our financial condition has made no progress.
{3} budge from one’s belief. Dì ni giyud siya mairug sa íyang
disisiyun, He cannot be moved from his decision. n progress,
advancement. Gamay rag irug ang kauswágan sa lungsud, The town has
undergone little progress.

iruk v [A; a12] squeeze nits, lice on the head with the thumbnail or
perform a similar action to relieve itching. Igka giyud ang lusà arun
dì mamusà, Squash the nits so they won’t hatch. Igka ring katul sa
ákung ū́, Squeeze this itching spot on my head.

isa_1 = usa_1 (dialectal).

isa_2 short for iása. see ása_1.

ísa v {1} [APB3; a] raise, rise. Ang kadíti mauy nag-ísa sa bandílà,
The cadet raised the flag. Miísa ang íyang kílay sa kahingangha, She
raised her brows in surprise. Iísa (isáha) na ang báling, Hoist the
nets. {2} [AB2; c1] increase in value, amount. Muísa (maísa) na sad ang
prisyu, The price is going up again. {3} [A2B26; c1] increase in
degree, intensity. Muísa (maísa) dáyun nang íyang tíngug ug masukù, His
voice rises when he is angry. {4} [A2B2; c1] rise, raise in position.
Nagkaisa ang íyang ranggu kay maáyu mang mutrabáhu, He is gradually
rising in rank because he works well. n increase in degree, quantity,
value.

isà v [B3(1)46] for a wound or skin ailment to develop water or watery
pus. Dílì makaisà ang núka basta kanúnayng hunáran, The sore won’t
secrete water if it is cleaned and dressed regularly.

ísà short form: sà. {1} wait a second. Ísà pa kay pangutan-un pa nákù
si Lurdis, Just a minute. I’ll ask Lourdes first. Ísà pa ha kay ákung
tawgun, Just a second. I’ll call her. {1a} — ka run, You just wait.
I’ll get you! {2} expression used upon changing a subject: by the way.
Ísà pa, tagadiin tu ka? By the way, where did you say you come from?

isab = usab (dialectal).

isang dakut na bigas n k.o. branched, spreading herb found in damp
places and grown as an ornamental in hanging pots: Pilea microphylla,
var.

isdà (from sulà) n fish. v [A12] have fish. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] go
fishing. n {1} fishing as a means of livelihood. {2} fishing equipment.
pinaN-an n catch of fish. Ang ílang gisuwà pinangisdáan sa amahan,
They’re eating the father’s catch for dinner. -an n fishpond. a having
fish. Isdáan si Husi kay nakapangisdà man gabíi, Jose has lots of fish
because he went fishing last night. -ánun a teeming with fish. Isdaánun
kaáyu ang kadagátan sa Pilipínas, The Philippine seas are teeming with
fish. maN-r- n fisherman. — sa batu fish found in rocky places. — sa
hapun name given to the bilásun, a fish formerly widely sold by
Japanese fishermen. †

isdug = irug.

isdyi n ten, ten centavos or ten pesos (slang). v {1} [A12] get ten
centavos or pesos. Nakaisdyi ku sa madyung, I won ten pesos in mahjong.
{2} [B26] be, become ten centavos or pesos.

isi, ísi_1 = ási.

ísi_2 n harpoon. v {1} [A; a12] catch with, make into a harpoon. Isíhun
ku ang sánga, I’ll harpoon the manta ray.

ísi_3 n letter S. †

ísi_4 take it easy. Ísi lang bay, ayg kasukù, Take it easy. Don’t get
angry. isiísi_1 v [A; c1] take things or people for granted, lightly.
À, mag-isiísi man lang nga muiskuyla. Wà mang gániy nutbuk, He goes to
school without even a notebook. He’s taking his schooling for granted.
Isiisíhun (iisiísi) lang ang mga linibulibug pildi sa búlang sa mga
sugarul nga tahur, Big time gamblers don’t mind losing by the thousands
in the cockpit.

ísi riturn n an easy return to the server.

*isig {1} — ka [noun] one’s fellow [noun]. Ang isig nímu ka mananagat,
Your fellow fisherman. {2} — [verb base] each do [verb] to his own.
Isig paúlì ang mga táwu, They each returned to their respective homes.
v [A13] each [do]. Nag-isig paúlì (nagsigpaúlì) ang mga táwu, They each
returned to their respective homes.

isig-isig v {1} [A; a12] rush s.o. into doing s.t. Dì siya gustung
magpatúlì apan giisig-isig siya sa mga biaybíay, He didn’t want to get
circumcised, but he was goaded on by the taunts of his playmates.
{2} order s.o. about and put him down at the same time. ‘Unsay
kalibútan mu ánà. Tumána lang ákung súgù,’ nag-isig-isig ang inaína,
‘What do you know about that? Just do what you’re told,’ said the
stepmother in her high-handed way. {3} treat cruelly. Giisig-isig sa
inaína ang mga bátà, The stepmother treated the children cruelly.
isig-isigun, maisig-isigun a tending to rush or push around,
characterized by doing so.

isiisi = isig-isig.

isiísi_2 v [A3; b] play hard to get when one intends to agree. Ayaw
isiisíhi nang nangulitawu nímu kay makabuhì, Don’t play hard to get. He
might just slip away.

isína n scene in a play, motion picture.

ising-ising v [A; c15] avoid the company of s.o. from whom one feels
one can get nothing, discard a friend or relative whom one finds no
longer useful. Íla na lang ku nga ising-isingun (iising-ising) kay wà
na man kuy kapuslánan, They’ll avoid me now, for I’m no longer of any
use to them.

ísip v [A; a2] {1} count s.t. Isípa ang suklì kun hustu ba, Count your
change to see it’s correct. {1a} count and remember favors one does for
s.o. Isípun pa giyud níya hasta ang dunut nga sinínang gihátag, He
remembers his favors, even the ragged shirt he gave me. {1b} consider,
treat s.t. or s.o. as s.t. Giísip ku siyang anak, I treat him like a
son. n {1} in the role, function of. Mutábang giyud ku sa ákung
ginikánan ísip usa ka anak, I have to help my parents as a good son.
Muhawuk aku sa kamut ni Lúlu ísip usa ka pagtáhud, I kiss my grandpa’s
hands as a sign of respect. Nangáyù siyag kinhasun ísip íyang sud-an,
He asked for shells as food. {2} — [number] number [so-and-so]. Misúd
siya sa lawak ísip katursi, He entered room number 14. -an a one who
compares his favors done with those he received to see if anyone got
advantage over him. v [B12; b6] get to be a sort who counts and weighs
favors. ka-an n mind, seat of consciousness, intellect. Daghan kaáyung
mga hitabù nga misámuk sa íyang kaisípan, Many events are troubling his
mind. ma- a {1} wise, learned. Tulu ka maísip nga hárì, Three wise
kings. {2} prudent, thinking before acting. v [B16; b6] be, become
wise, prudent. Magmaísip ka na untà karung dakù ka na, I hope you will
be prudent in your ways now that you are old enough. -l-an n mind.
Itisuk sa inyung ilisípan ang gitudlù kaninyu, Bear in mind what you
have been taught. paN- n sense, way of thinking. May pangísip ka na
man, You’re old enough to have common sense. Ang íyang pangísip bátà pa
bisag dakù na siyag idad, He has a child’s mentality even though he is
chronologically old.

is-is a having a fine and smooth complexion. v [A2PB; c1] become fine
and smooth in complexion, cause it to be so. Muis-is (mais-is) ang
pánit mug kanúnay kang hustug túg, You will develop a good complexion
if you always get sufficient sleep. ka- n whiteness. Miámag pag-áyu ang
kais-is sa mga batu nga gidan-ágan sa mabugnawng sílaw sa búlan, The
stones glowed with whiteness under the pale moonlight.

iskabitsi n escabeche, fried fish with a sour sauce. v [A; c1] make
escabeche.

iskála n stop-over. v [A; b6(1)] make a stop-over. Muiskála ang barku
sa Kagayan sa dì pa muadtu sa Ilígan, The boat makes a stop-over in
Cagayan before proceeding to Iligan.

iskalanti = kardába.

iskálar n recipient of a scholarship. v [B16; b6] be, become a
scholarship awardee.

iskalarsyip n scholarship.

iskalipsi n eclipse. v [B; b4] be an eclipse.

iskalíra_1 n staircase.

iskalíra_2 n in mahjong, a set of consecutive pieces of the same
design, numbered from 1–9. — plásis hand in mahjong consisting of an
iskalíra plus two dragúnis or bintus. — ruyal n hand in mahjong
consisting of an iskalíra plus an eye (ay_4) of the same design as the
iskalíra and two other pieces of the same design.

iskalítur n escalator. v {1} [A13] ride the escalator. {2} [b(1)]
install an escalator.

iskandalu a scandal, scandalous, s.t. that shocks the moral feelings of
a community. v [A13B12; b6] become a scandal, make a scene.
Mag-iskandalu kug musyágit kang bayhána ka, I’ll make a scene if you
scream, woman. Maiskandalu nang inyung transaksiyun ug hisakpan, Your
shady transactions will be a public scandal if you get caught. -sa(←)
a scandalous (female). -su(←) a scandalous (male).

iskapadur a one who gets out of responsibility. Si Lítu iskapadur kaáyu
sa trabáhu sa báy, Lito bugs out of household chores. Iskapadur siya sa
klási, He cuts classes. v [B12; b6] be, become an evader.

iskapal, iskapar = iskápu, v1, 2, 3.

iskaparáti n display window, showcase. v {1} [b6(1)] install a showcase
or display window. {2} [A; c] display s.t. in a showcase.

iskapaturya n way of escape. Wà kay iskapaturya ug gipangità kang Al
Kapun, There’s no escape if Al Capone is looking for you.

iskápu v [A2; b(1)] {1} escape. Gustu siyang muiskápu sa bilangguan, He
wants to escape from prison. {2} escape by artful or slippery dodges.
Muiskápu giyud siya ug pit-un nag pangutána, He knows how to get out of
it if you press him with questions. Dílì ka makaiskápu sa ákung suntuk,
You can’t evade my blows. {3} evade responsibilities. Dílì ta
makaiskápu sa mga amutan, We can’t evade making our contribution.
{4} cut s.t. one is supposed to attend. Kung iskapúhan nímu ang inyung
klási suspindirun giyud ka, If you cut classes you’ll be suspended.
n escapee.

iskapularyu n two images worn on one’s front and back suspended by
pieces of cloth or string, worn as a token of religious devotion. v [A;
c6] wear such images.

iskarp n scarf. v [AC12; c6] wear a scarf.

iskats n scotch whisky. — típ n scotch tape. v [b6(1)] use scotch tape
on.

iskáwut n {1} member of the Philippine Scouts, an outfit composed of
Filipinos under the command of the U.S. Army, during World War II.
{2} boy, girl scout. buy, gil, kab — Boy, Girl, Cub Scout. — lídir, wik
Scout leader, week. v [B16; c16] be, become a member of the Philippine
Scouts or a boy or girl scout.

iskay is da (di) limit a s.t. for which one spends with no limits.
v [A; c1] consume without any limit. Iiskay is da límit ba nang ímung
pangumpra? What are you going to do? Buy, the sky is the limit?

iskidyul n schedule. v [A; c1] schedule s.t.

iskilibinti = iskribyinti.

iskilipsi = iskalipsi.

iskilitun n {1} sandals or shoes consisting of straps with no sides.
{2} framework of a house. v [A13] wear skeleton-like shoes.

iskína n {1} corner. Iskína lang dung, Let me off at the corner,
driver. Ang iskína sa kahun, The corner of the box. {2} block, one side
of a city square. Duha ka iskína gíkan dinhi, Two blocks from here.
babáyi sa — n a cheap woman. Kanang puwa kaáyu nímu nga lipistik mu ra
kag babáyi sa iskína, With that red lipstick you look like a cheap
hussy. v {1} [b(1)] make a rectangular corner on the edge, end of.
{2} [c16] do s.t. at the corner. Iskináha paglansang ang kwadru, Nail
the picture frame on the corners. paN- v [A2; b(1)] negotiate a route
by going around instead of taking a more direct route. Nangiskína siya
sa íyang pagpadúng nganhi kay ngitngit sa lakturánan, He went round
about in coming here because the straight route is too dark. -du
a rectangular. Kanang tambal nga binisayà, maáyu lang nà niadtu sa
iskinádu pa ang ligid, Visayan folk medicine was only good long ago,
when they used square wheels. v [B124; c1] be, become rectangular.

iskiníta n the place where two small paths meet.

iskiping rup n skip rope, the game or rope. v [AC] skip rope.

iskir a brisk and alert in movement. Iskir siyang milihay, He ducked
cleverly. Iskir pa bísag tigúwang na, He is still spry, even at his
age. v [B; c] be quick and brisk in movement. Nagkaiskir na ang irù nga
nagluya human indiksiyuni, The sick dog grew slowly more active after
he was given a shot.

iskiríma = iskríma.

iskirul n {1} scab, a worker who refuses to strike, or who takes the
place of a striking worker. {2} prostitute. v {1} [B36; c1] be, become
a prostitute. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] {1} patronize prostitutes. {2} work as
a prostitute.

iskiyus = ikskiyus.

isklibinti = iskribyinti.

isklimintǎr = iskrimintǎr.

isklipsi = iskalipsi.

iskrab v [A; b5] scrub, rub clean with a brush. Iskrábig (iskrábag)
maáyu ang ímung salug, Scrub the floor hard.

iskrábul n game of scrabble. v [AC; b(1)] play scrabble.

iskram_1 v [A] cram for an exam.

iskrats_1 n scratch paper. — pípar = iskrats_1.

iskrats_2 n in pool, the situation when a cue ball gets into one of the
pockets. The shot is not counted as the player loses the ball. v [B26]
for this situation to obtain in pool.

iskríba n scribe.

iskribánu n clerk of court. v [B1256; a12] be, make into a clerk of
court.

iskribinti, iskribyinti n clerk, esp. a government clerk. v [B16; c1]
be, become a clerk.

iskríma n native fencing, using two canes or a cane and a pointed bolo
or dagger. v [AC; b(1)] {1} fence. {2} [A; c] gesticulate while
talking. Muiskríma ang íyang kamut samtang mag-isturya, His hands
gesture wildly while he talks. {3} [A3] struggle to make s.t. do
against odds, contrive to deal with a difficult financial situation.
Ang mga kabus síging nag-iskríma sa panginabúhì, The poor constantly
struggle through life. Iskrimáhun ku lang arun muínat ang gamay kung
swildu, I will contrive means to make my meager salary go a long way.
-dur(→) n native fencer, esp. a skilled one. v [B16; c1] be, become a
skilled native fencer.

iskrimintǎr v [A; b(1)] feel sorry for one’s sins or mistakes.
Mapatumbayáun kaáyu nang inahána sa íyang mga anak. Unyà ra nà
muiskrimintǎr ug mamatyan, That mother is very careless with her
children. She will be taught a lesson if one of them dies.
Giiskrimintahan ku na ang ákung mga salà, I have already repented my
sins.

iskrin n {1} screen for a home. {2} movie screen. v {1} [A; c1] screen
in. {2} [A; b(1)] block in games to afford a good shot for the
teammate. Iskrínan giyud ang gwardiya arun lugar kaáyu sa pagsiyut ang
ímung kaúban, Block the guard so your teammate is free to shoot the
ball. {3} [A; a12] screen applicants. Iskrínun úsà ang tanang aplikanti
usà pakuháa sa iksámin, All applicants are screened before being
allowed to take the exam.

iskrip n script of a movie or play.

iskrípir n rubber scraper used in scraping out the dough that sticks to
the mixing bowl and spoon. v [a] get s.t. out with a scraper. Iskripíra
ang namilit nga mása sa miksing bul, Get the dough out with the
scraper. gúma nga — = iskrípir, n.

iskrituryu n escritoire.

iskru n screw. v [b6(1)] screw, fasten with a screw. Iskrúhi ang
bisagra arun dì matangtang, Fasten the hinge with a screw so that it
won’t come off. — draybir n screw driver. v [A13] use a screw driver.

iskúba_1 n {1} hair or shoe, clothes brush. {2} mustache (humorous
slang). v [A; c] brush s.t. Iskubáhan níya ang kabáyù, He’ll brush the
horse. paN- v [A2; b6] brush oneself, one’s hair.

iskúba_2 n name given to various woody erect herbs of waste places. —
nga kiláyan: Sida acuta.

iskuhir v [A; a] sort s.t. according to class or kind. Akuy muiskuhir
sa tabákù, I’m going to sort the tobacco leaves. Iskuhirun ang bulad
úsà ibaligyà, The dried fish is sorted before it is sold. iskuhídu
n {1} the finest quality tobacco or abaca. {2} choicest k.o. anything.
Mukáun lang siyag iskuhídung isdà, He eats only the choicest fish.

iskúlar = iskálar.

iskulbus n {1} school bus. {2} admirer, friend or boy friend who
accompanies a girl, usually home from school (slang). Dúna siyay
iskulbus sa íyang pag-ulì gabíi, She had an escort in going home last
night. v {1} [A13] go by school bus. {2} [A; b(1)] escort a girl friend
home from school (slang).

iskulsuplayis n school supplies.

iskultur n sculptor. v [B16; a12] be, become a sculptor.

iskupidur n cuspidor. v {1} [b6] provide with a cuspidor. {2} [a12]
make s.t. into a cuspidor.

iskupíta n {1} shotgun. {2} air rifle. (→) v [a12] shoot s.t. with an
air rifle or shotgun.

iskúr n score, mark to keep tally of. Iskúr sa baskitbúl, Basketball
score. Pilay iskúr nímu sa iksámin? What is the mark you got on the
examinations? — burd n scoreboard. v {1} [A; b6(1)] mark the score.
{2} [A] make a point or score. Wà siya makaiskúr sa páwul siyát, He
didn’t score a point in the foul shot. -ir(←) n {1} scorer in a game.
{2} third party who tags along on a date (taken from the notion that he
has nothing to do but tally the number of kisses—slang). v [B1256]
{1} be the scorer. {2} be the third party on a date. Maiskúrir lang kag
ang kúyug mu managtrátu, You’ll just be an observer if your two
companions are lovers.

iskuríya n tiny chocolate cups for a thick chocolate drink.

iskursiyun n excursion, outing. v [A1; b6] hold an excursion.

iskurt n escort, one who accompanies for protection, company, or honor.
Wà kuy iskurt sa bayli, I have no escort for the dance. v [A; c1] act
as an escort. Duha ka mutursiklu ang nag-iskurt sa kutsing gisakyan sa
artista, Two motorcycles escorted the car the actress was riding in.

iskusya n finely-woven, silky cotton thread, used commonly for
undershirts. v [A13] wear an escocia undershirt.

iskutinyu n counting of votes. v [A1; b6] count the votes.

iskútir n child’s scooter or motor scooter. v [A; a12] ride a scooter.

iskuwadrun n squadron, unit of military aviation. v [A13] fly by
squadron.

iskuwála n try square. v [A; b6(1)] mark s.t. off with a try square. —
nga balay an L-shaped house.

iskuwat_1 v [A; b6] squat with the buttocks not resting on anything and
standing on the toes. — dyamp n squat jump. v [AC12; c16] do the squat
jump.

iskuwat_2 v [A2N] attend a class section one is not supposed to. Wà ku
makatambung sa klási sa buntag maung miiskuwat (nangiskuwat) ku sa
hápun, I missed the morning lecture so I attended the same lecture in
the afternoon. -ir(←) n {1} squatter: a person who stays on land in
urban areas which does not belong to him. {2} squatter areas in the
city. {3} s.o. occupying s.o. else’s seat (humorous). v {1} [B16; b6]
be, become a squatter. {2} [B12; b6] for a place to turn into a slum
area. Maiskuwátir unyà nang plása ug dílì nà anamug papaháwà nang mga
nagbarungbárung dihà, The plaza will soon become a squatter area if the
shanties are not removed as they are put up. {3} [A; a12] oust
squatters and demolish their houses. Iskuwatírun mi sa tag-íya íning
yútà, The owner of the land is planning to oust us.

iskuwir a {1} square. {2} being angular, squarely built. Iskuwir kaáyug
abága nang tawhána, That man is square-shouldered. {3} fighting fair
and square. Way dúmut tung ílang sinumbagay kay iskuwir man, Their fist
fight left no ill will between the protagonists because it was a square
fight. {4} square brush cut. — bab bobbed hair, cut evenly at the
bottom. v {1} [APB; c1] be, become square. {2} [A12C; c1] make a fight
a square one, hold a square fist fight. {3} [a12] make a haircut a
brush cut. {4} [A; a2] square up accounts, pay debts. Iskuyrun ku na
ang ákung útang nimu, I’ll square off my debt to you.

iskuyla n {1} school, holding of classes. Way iskuyla basta pista
upisiyal, There is no school on an official holiday. {2} pupil,
student. Iskuyla siya sa San Husi, She is a student at San José. v [A;
b6(1)] {1} attend classes. Iiskuyla nà nímung gisiun mung púlu? Are you
going to school in that torn shirt? {2} study in a certain school or a
certain school year. Dì siya muiskuyla sa síkan simistir kay way
kwarta, He can’t attend school during the second semester because he
has no money. {3} [A2] go to the cockpit to bet or see a cockfight
(slang). Káda Duminggu muiskuyla siya sa Tipúlu, Every Sunday he goes
to the cockpit at Tipolo. pa- v [A; a] send s.o. to school.
Paiskuyláhun ku ang ámung mutsatsa, We’re going to send our servant to
school. iskuylahan n {1} school. {2} cockpit (slang).

isla n island. Tulu ka isla ang naglangkub sa Kamútis, The Camotes
consist of three islands.

islag_1 v {1} [B2; b3] scatter in all directions. Muislag nang duut sa
isdà ug ímung labáyug batu, The school of fish will scatter if you
throw a stone at them. {2} [B126] get scattered out such that it is
impossible to gather. Naislag ang íyang mga anak sukad níyang
gibyàbyáan ang panimalay, His children have taken to roaming ever since
he abandoned his home. {3} [A] run away from, flee from. Miislag sa
syudad ang mga kawatan sa siya pay hípi sa kapulisan, The thieves fled
from the city when he was the chief of police. {4} [A; a] drive away.
Islága ang mga máya sa humayan, Drive the birds away from the rice
field. {5} [B126] drive away lonely feelings. Nangítà siyag trabáhu
arun maislag ang mga kaláay sa íyang pag-inusára, She looked for a job
to drive away loneliness.

islag_2 v [A; b] pound rice, coarse corn grits for a second time.
Islagi (islági) ring tipasiun, Pound this partly husked rice. -in-an(→)
n {1} coarse particles of ground or milled corn grits. {2} the portion
of sifted rice left after winnowing out the husked grains. -an(→) =
inislagan.

islaks n slacks worn by women. v [A; b6] wear slacks.

islang a speaking with unclear articulation. v [A2B2; c1] speak with
unclear articulation, for speech to become unclear. Muislang (maislang)
ang íyang sinultihan ug makainum, His speech becomes unclear when he
gets drunk.

islaw n k.o. spotted snapper, esp. Lutianus fulviflamma. -an n = islaw.

islayding n a violation in basketball where a player moves while
holding the ball.

islayid rul n slide rule. v [A; b5] use a slide rule.

isláyid_1 v {1} [B26; b8] slip, lose one’s footing by slipping.
Muisláyid (maisláyid) ang táwung makatamak ug pánit sa ságing, A man
will slip if he steps on a banana peel. {2} [B3(1)6; b6(1)] slide down
on s.t. Muisláyid ku sa pasamánu, I will slide down the bannister.
n {1} sliding ramp. {2} slide on a trombone.

isláyid_2 n {1} photographic slide. {2} microscope slide. v {1} [A13]
show slides. {2} [c6] put a slide under a microscope.

isláyis v [A; a] slice off, cut into slices. Akuy muisláyis sa pán,
I’ll slice the bread. Islaysan ta kag kík, I’ll slice a piece of cake
for you. n slice, piece cut off. a sliced.

isliblis a sleeveless dress or blouse. v [A13; c1] wear, make into a
sleeveless dress or blouse.

islindir a slender, slim in figure. v [B; c1] be, become slender.
Muislindir (maislindir) giyud kag magdáyit ka, You will become slender
if you go on a diet. pa- v [A] make oneself slender.

islú drag n slow drag, a dance with a slow tempo music.

islúput a slowpoke, person who acts or moves slowly. v [B12; b6] be,
become a slowpoke.

ismagling n smuggling.

ismaglir n smuggler. v [B16; a2] be, become a smuggler.

ismágul n {1} smuggled goods. {2} rubber slippers (so called because
the first rubber slippers sold were smuggled). v {1} [AC12; c1]
smuggle. {2} [A; b6(1)] wear rubber slippers.

ismart, ismarti a for women to be well-groomed, neat, and stylish.
v [B12; b6] for a woman to get to be stylishly dressed.

ismayling see burnay.

ismilir, ismiril n emery wheel. v [A; a] grind on an emery wheel.

ismiringhuy n paramour (slang). Taggabii na muabut ang íyang bána kay
muhapit pa man sa íyang ismiringhuy, Her husband arrives home late
every evening because he drops by his mistress’s. {2} the unpleasant
smell of body odor (indirect allusion). {3} genitalia (humorous).
v [B126; c16] be, become a paramour (slang).

ismúgul = ismágul (colloquial, humorous).

ismul batíri bul a small but capable of big things. Ismúl batíri bul
ílang mutsatsa. Kusug mamalansa, Their maid may be small but she’s very
capable. She irons like a ball of fire.

isnatsir n snatcher of bags, etc. v [A12] be a snatcher.

isníkir n sneakers. v [A; b6(1)] wear sneakers.

isnú n snow. v [A; b6] for it to snow.

ispáda n {1} sword. Nagsingkì ang ílang duha ka ispáda, Their two
swords clanged against each other. {2} the best swordsman in a place.
Sila ang upat ka ispáda sa Kastilya, They are the four swordsmen of
Castille. {3} the sword in Spanish cards. {4} variety of large, bland
pepper shaped like a sword, about 4″ long. -in- a {1} like a sword.
Inispáda nga dáhun, Sword-shaped leaf. {2} = ispáda, 4. — diúru
ornamental reed-like herb consisting of long, green, spear-shaped
leaves with a yellow edge and white splotches in the middle:
Sansevieria trifasciata var. Laurentii. — disambuwangga variety with no
splotches. — nga isdà = díwit.

ispadil = ispáda, 1.

ispaghíti n spaghetti. v [A13C12] make, eat spaghetti.

ispaltu = aspaltu.

Ispánis n Spanish class, language, person. Nindut kaáyu pamináwun ang
Ispánis gitar, The Spanish guitar is pleasant to listen to. v [A; c1]
communicate in Spanish. — lís n k.o. lace fabric, usually made into
veils.

Ispaniyul n {1} Spaniard. {2} Spanish language.

ispansbat v [A; b] wash oneself off with a washcloth. Ispansbáti ang
bátà, Wash the child with a cloth. n action of washing s.o. with a
cloth.

ispanta v [A3B12; c1] prevent s.t. from happening, s.o. from doing s.t.
Ang pinaangkan miispanta sa kasal sa nakapaanak níya, The wedding was
stopped by the woman whom the groom had made pregnant. Naispanta sa
bakúna ang pagkaylap sa buti, Vaccination kept the smallpox from
spreading.

Ispanya n Spain.

Ispanyúla = ispaniyul (female).

Ispanyúlis n Spaniards. Kanhi sa mga Ispanyúlis pa giulípun lámang ang
mga Pilipínu, During the Spanish times the Filipinos were treated like
slaves.

ispáring n {1} sparring session. {2} sparring partner. v [A2C; b(1)]
engage in a sparring session. — partnir, ka- n sparring partner.

ispǎrk plag n spark plug.

ispasyu n outer space.

ispat n flashlight. v [A; b6(1)] shine a flashlight on. Ispáti nu diri
dapit kay nahū́g ang ákung sinsíyu, Shine your flashlight over here
because I dropped my money.

ispǎt_1 n spot on the lungs that indicates tb.

ispǎt_2 v {1} [A; a2] in pool: shoot a target ball to a designated spot
on the table. {2} [A2; b] in basketball: take pot shots from a
distance. n this sort of shot in billiards or basketball. -ir(←) n one
who throws the ball accurately in basketball.

ispatlayit n {1} = ispat. {2} spotlight. v [A; b6(1)] shine the
spotlight on.

ispáyik n shoe spike. v [A; b6(1)] fasten a spike on a shoe.

ispayral a hair waved without being cut. v [A1; a12] wear, have hair
that has been waved.

ispíd n spades in playing cards. v [A12] get spades.

ispidbut_1 n speedboat.

ispidbut_2 v [A1; b6(1)] cook more rice or corn hurriedly in a small
pot because what was cooked earlier was not enough for everyone
(humorous—so called from the small speedboats that accompanied Japanese
warships). Bisitahun kaáyu mis ámù. Kanúnay lang ming mag-ispidbut ug
lung-ag, We keep having visitors, so we always have to prepare extra
rice.

ispidnu = impirnu.

ispíhu n {1} mirror, looking glass. {2} glass. Ang ispíhu sa
iskaparáti, The glass of the display case. {3} name of one of the
dragons (drágun), the white dragon which has the black outline of a
mirror-like design. v [A2N; b6(1)] look at oneself in the mirror.
Mangispíhu úsà ku, I’ll look at myself in the mirror.

ispíking n {1} the act of proposing to a girl (colloquial). {2} line
handed to convince s.o. v [A; c] {1} propose to a girl (colloquial).
Sígi lag bisíta, wà pa giyud makaispíking, He keeps visiting her but he
hasn’t proposed. {2} hand s.o. a line. Giispikíngan níya ang íyang
Nánay arun hatágan siyag kwarta, He handed his mother a line so that
she would give him money.

ispíkir_1 n loudspeaker. v [b6] use, put in a loudspeaker.

ispíkir_2 n Speaker of the House, the presiding officer of the House of
Representatives. gist — guest speaker. v [B16; a12] be, become the
speaker.

ispiksiyun = inspiksiyun.

ispíling n spelling. v {1} [A; a12] spell a word. Ispilínga ang ímung
ngálan, Spell your name. {2} [A12; a12] make s.t. out, explain s.t. to
oneself. Lisud giyud ispilíngun unsay íyang nagustuan ánang karáang
kwanggul, I can’t understand what he sees in that old coot.
{3} explain, describe in words. Dílì maispíling ang náwung níya
pag-ingkib níya sa aslum nga mangga, You can’t imagine what she looked
like when she bit into the sour mango.

ispír n spare in bowling, the act of knocking down all the pins with
two consecutive balls; a score so made. v [AB6; c1] make a spare in
bowling, for a throw to be a spare.

ispiragus = asparagus.

ispiraltima = ispíra ultima.

*ispiransa may, walay — {1} for there to be a (no) possibility or
probability that s.t. desirable happen. Wà ka nay ispiransa ánang
bayhána, You haven’t got a chance with that girl. Dúna pay ispiransa
nga mabúhì ang bátà, There is still hope that the child will survive.
{2} way — hopelessly bad. Way ispiransa nà siyag náwung, She’s
hopelessly ugly. Way ispiransa ang ági, Your work is hopeless.

ispíra ultima n a flowering plant cultivated for both ornamental and
medicinal purposes: Chrysanthemum sinense.

*ispírit — ab amunya n k.o. liquid used like smelling salts. — ub di
glas n a method of contacting the souls of the departed with a medium
using a glass. v [A; a12] hold such a session.

ispiritista n {1} medium in a séance. {2} one who believes in
spiritualism. v [B1; a12] become a spiritualist.

ispiritu n {1} spirit, human soul. — malignu soul, in folk belief, that
roams over the face of the earth doing penance. — santu n Holy Ghost.
{2} spirit, volatile substances. — dilimun lemon oil. ispirituhánun
a spiritual. Ang pangaláwat usa ka ispirituhánung bangkíti, Communion
is a spiritual feast. †

ispirma n {1} paraffin. {2} paraffin candles. v [A; b6(1)] rub paraffin
on the floor. Ispirmáhi nà arun musínaw, Rub floor wax on the floor so
that it shines.

ispisiyal a {1} special, particularly good. Lutúan níyag sud-an nga
ispisiyal ang íyang bisíta, She will fix special food for her guests.
{2} especial, out of the ordinary. v {1} [APB12; c1] be, become
special, particularly good. {2} [A; c1] do s.t. special, out of the
ordinary. Ispisyalun (iispisiyal) ta kag tawag, I’ll mention your name
especially, apart from the others. {2a} [A] do a particular dance at a
ball where only certain people are invited to dance. Mag-ispisiyal run
ug bayli, pára sa mga upisyális, The next number is a special number
for the officers only. — dilibiri n special delivery. v [A13; c6] send
s.t. special delivery. †

ispísu a {1} for liquids to be thick, of great density. Ispísu kaáyung
sikwáti kay gidaghan níyag tablíya, The chocolate drink is thick
because he put lots of chocolate on it. {2} for colors to be intense as
if thickly laid on. Ispísu kaáyu ang kaitum sa balhíbu sa ákung iring,
My cat’s hair is a deep black. {3} — nga [noun] a diehard, fanatic
follower or believer of. Ispísu giyud nang Katuliku, He is a devout
Catholic. Ispísung Usminyista, Diehard follower of Osmeña. {4} in
phrases: — ug apdu brave (lit. having thick bile). — ug dugù {a} having
guts. {b} heartless, merciless. — ug hambug laying bragging on thick.
v [AB; c1] for liquids to become thick, cause them to do so. Muispísu
(maispísu) ang sabaw ug butangag úbi, The soup will become thick if you
add yams.

ispisyalista n specialist, esp. a doctor. Ang buta nagpahiling sa usa
ka ispisyalista sa mata, The blind man consulted an eye specialist.
v [B16; a2] {1} be, become a specialist. {2} [A3; c6] specialize in a
particular field of medicine.

ispíya n {1} spy, secret agent. {2} one who spies on others. v [AN; b]
{1} spy, spy on s.o. Giispiyáhan na ku sa ákung asáwa, kay nagdúda, My
wife is spying on me because she has suspicions. {2} [B16; a12] be,
become a spy.

isplikar v {1} [A; c] explain. {2} [A; b] state one’s purpose, esp.
proposing marriage. Wà ku kaisplikar níya kay dihà man si Máma níya
sígi, I couldn’t broach the question because her mother never left us a
minute. {3} give s.o. a line to convince him. n {1} explanation. {2} a
line handed to s.o. Wà ku madá sa isplikar sa ahinti, I wasn’t taken in
by the salesman’s line. isplikasiyun = isplikar, n. isplikátut
n explanation, excuse one isn’t inclined to believe (colloquial). Ay na
lang ku ánang ímung isplikátut. Dì ku mutúu ánà, Don’t hand me that
line again. I don’t believe it.

isplǐt_1 a palsy-walsy, very close friends (colloquial). Napildi ku sa
madyung kay isplǐt ang ákung mga kuntra, I lost in mahjong because my
co-players were palsy-walsy. Makasulud ta kay isplǐt nátù ang gwardiya,
We can get in because the guard is our man. v [A2C1; ac5] be on
palsy-walsy terms. Nagkaisplǐt sila kay paríhug balhíbu, They became
palsy-walsy because they’re birds of a feather. Lisud isplitun
(ikaisplǐt) nà siya, It’s difficult to get on palsy-walsy terms with
him.

isplǐt_2 n extra piece which the dealer in mahjong gets as a privilege.
He starts the game by discarding a piece without drawing another.

isprí v [A; b6(1)] spray. Ispríhi ang rúsas, Spray the roses. — nit
hair spray. v [A; b6(1)] spray the hair.

ispringpild n Springfield rifle.

ispuksib n spokeshave, a tool for trimming and smoothing rounded
surfaces. v [A; b6(1)] use a spokeshave.

ispúku {1} -y, nga can you imagine that! Ispúku muy (mung) mupalit ug
kadilak nga way muinstulmin, Imagine! He bought a Cadillac with no
installments. Nagdawat ug kinyintus unyà mugastug sitisintus, ispúku mu
nà? He receives five hundred and spends seven hundred. Can you beat
that? {2} — ug imagine what would happen if. Ispúku ug tabangan kag
tulu. Wà kay dalag-an, Imagine if three people were to gang up on you
at once. You wouldn’t have a chance.

ispungha n {1} sponge or sponge-like substance. {2} powder puff.

ispunghar v [A2; c6] {1} for odors to rise. Muispunghar giyud ang báhù
sa kasilyas, The toilet exudes a terrible odor. {2} for volatile
substances to evaporate. Miispunghar ang agwa kay wà tabúni, The
perfume evaporated because no one covered it. ispunghádu, ispungháwu
a for s.t. to have given off its volatile constituent. Wà na kaáyuy
báhù ang agwa. Ispungháwu na man, The perfume doesn’t have much odor
any more because it weakened from evaporation.

ispungháwu a for hair to be wavy and soft. Nindut ning ispungháwu tag
buhuk kay dì na lang kinahanglan ang pagpakulung, It’s nice to have
soft and wavy hair, because we don’t need to have permanents. v [B12;
b6] for hair to be, become soft and wavy.

ispunsur n {1} sponsor of a program or social affair. {2} the girl
escort (muse) who accompanies a man in official functions. {3} one who
sponsors an immigrant abroad. v {1} [A; b(1)] sponsor s.t. {2} [AB16;
c16] take as one’s muse, become a muse. {3} [A; b6(1)] act as sponsor
for an immigrant abroad. †

ispurt_1 a {1} good sport or sportsmanlike. Ispurt giyud tu si Kusáka
kay bísag pildi, mapahiyúmun lang gihápun, Kosaka was a good sport, for
even if he lost, he was still all smiles. {2} fight that is fought on
the basis that there should be no bad feelings. v [B1; b6] {1} be,
become a good sport or sportsmanlike. Kung mag-ispurt lang ang táwu wà
giyuy gubut, If a man fights fairly there won’t be any trouble.
{2} hold a fight on condition that no one have hard feelings.

ispurt_2 = ispúting.

ispurts kar n sports car. v {1} [A13C12] travel, go by sports car.
{2} [A12] get a sports car.

ispúsa n wife. v {1} [B126] be, become a wife. Kung naispúsa pa kang
Markus, kanindut kahà nu? If you had become Marcos’ wife, it would have
been nice, wouldn’t it? {2} [A12] happen to have as a wife. Naka-ispúsa
kug bagìbian, I got a nag for a wife.

ispúsu n husband. v see ispúsa.

ispúting a smartly dressed, dressed up. Mamisíta tingáli si Usting kay
ispúting man, Maybe Osting is paying his girl a visit, for he is
dressed up. v [B3; b6] get all dressed up.

ispúwil v [A; a] spoil a child. Ispuwílun man nímu ang bátà, ayg
hatágig kwarta pirmi, You are spoiling the child. Don’t constantly give
him money. -d a for a child to be spoiled. v = ispúwil.

Israylítas n Israelites.

ist = isti_2.

istabiyin expression indicating approval: fine, good.

istablisar v [A; a] found, establish s.t. Muistablisar kug kaugalíngung
nigusyu ug makagraduwar na ku, I’ll establish my own business when I
graduate. istablisimintu n business establishment.

istadista n statesman. Si Kláru Riktu mauy usa sa mga bantúgang
istadista sa Pilipínas, Claro Recto is one of the famous statesmen of
the Philippines.

istádiyum n stadium.

istádu n {1} situation. Ang istádu mau ni: pagsulud nákù sa lawak dihay
babáyi nga naghigdà sa katri, The situation was this: when I entered
the room there was a woman lying on the bed. {2} state, condition s.t.
is in. Pag-abut nákù nagkayamúkat na ang istádu sa mga mwiblis, When I
arrived, the furniture was in a state of disarray. Wà na sa istádu ang
ákung ámu, My master is acting strangely. {2a} civil status. Unsay
ímung istádu, minyù u ulitáwu? What’s your civil status, married or
single? {3} married, settled, and thus not free to run around. Ngánung
mangulitáwu pa man ka nga istádu na man ka? Why do you run after women
when you are married?

Istádus Unídus n United States.

isták n {1} stock merchandise on hand. {2} stocks in a corporation.
v [A; b6(1)] stock up on s.t., stock s.t. with. Istákan níyag mga
linata ang íyang tindáhan, She will stock her store with canned goods.
— huldir n stockholder. v [B16; a12] be, become a stockholder. uld —
old stock, leftover merchandise. Mga uld isták ang bulad ímung gipalit,
You bought old, leftover dried fish.

istáka n stake or peg to hold s.t. v [A; a2] make, drive or use a
stake. {2} [A; a] arrange stones in a pile for some purpose. Dagkung
batu ang giistáka sa mananagat sa íyang balirung, The fisherman piled
up big stones to make his fish trap. Maáyung istakáhan ang bakilid arun
dílì ibanlas ang yútà, We should pile stones on the sloping land so
that the soil will not be washed away.

istak-ap v [B23(1)] become stuck, plugged up. Naistak-ap ang túbu sa
labábu, The drainpipe in the sink got plugged up.

istáking, istákings n {1} stockings. {2} condom. v [A; b6(1)] wear
stockings, a condom.

ístakul {1} a word used to heighten the suspense, said while performing
some suspenseful action. Ákù nang bunútun paghínay ang baráha. Ístakul!
I’ll take the card out slowly. Here goes! {2} particle used after
giving a series of commands: fine, that’s good now. Atras pa, diyútay
na lang. Ístakul! Back it up some more, a little more. O.K., fine.

istalar = instalar.

istalasiyun = instalasiyun. see instalar.

istambay {1} one standing by waiting for business or work. Daghang mga
istambay nga trák didtu sa pír nga paabangan, There’s lots of trucks
sitting at the pier to rent. {2} one who has nothing to do and hangs
around s.w. {3} out of service. Istambay úsà ang trák kay way písa, The
bus is out of commission now because it’s lacking a part. v [A; b(1)]
{1} stand-by for business or work. {2} hang around. {2a} [B16; a]
become an idle loafer. {3} [A4; c] for a machine to be out of service.
-an(→) n place loafers hang out.

istampa_1 n religious picture, usually colored and framed.

istampa_2 n patched, torn clothing. v [c] torn clothes.

istampǎr v [A; b6(1)] put a notice or picture up in a conspicuous
place. Ayawg istampahi (istampari) nang bungbung ug law-ayng litrátu,
Don’t put dirty pictures on that wall. Mga ngálan sa kaslunun mauy
giistampǎr sa bulitin burd, The names of the couples planning to get
married are posted on the bulletin board.

istampíta n small religious picture, usually colored.

istan n stand to hold s.t.

istanbay = istambay.

istandar, istandard n k.o. small kerosene lamp with a metal body and
tall with a glass chimney, similar to a hurricane lamp. v [A13] use
this type of kerosene lamp.

istandarti n religious standard or emblem consisting of an image
painted on a pennant or piece of wood mounted on a pole and used in
processions.

istanding_1 a having standing room only in theaters. Istanding kaáyu,
wà giyud ku kalingkud, It was very crowded. I couldn’t get a seat.
v [B6; b6] for a theater to have standing room only.

istanding_2 n {1} standing position in sexual intercourse (humorous
slang). {2} erection of the penis (slang). v {1} [B256] do s.t. in a
standing position. Nag-istanding kung nagkaun kay walà na may
lingkuránan, I ate standing because there were no more seats.
{2} [B1256] for penis to be erect (humorous slang).

istansa n stanza of a poem. v [c] write, add a stanza. Ang
makapahinuklug nga panápus ang iistansa sa katapúsan, Write a sorrowful
ending for your last stanza.

istanti n {1} glass showcase. {2} shelf. v {1} [b6(1)] add a glass
showcase or shelf. {2} [c16] put in a showcase or shelf. Istantíha
(iistanti) nang inyung baligyà, Put your merchandise inside a showcase.

istanyu n solder of tin and lead.

istáp_1 v [A; a12] receive the serve in volleyball and slow down the
impetus to set it up for a return.

istáp_2 n traffic sign ordering a stop. v [B236] for a traffic signal
to be red. Manghúnung ang mga sakyanan ug muistáp, The vehicles will
stop when the light is red.

istápa n embezzlement of funds entrusted to one. -dur(→) n embezzler.
v [B126] be, become an embezzler of funds.

istapbul n in billiards, the method of shooting the cue ball hitting it
near the base, causing it to stop or go backwards upon hitting another
ball. v [A2; c1] make one’s shot a stop-ball.

istǎr v [A; b36] stay, reside in a certain place. Unsay istaran
(istahan) nátug dúgay dinhi? Why should we stay here long? Maáyung
istahan ang Banáwà kay dílì ínit, It’s good to stay in Banawa because
it’s cool.

istar dansir n starring dancer. v [B16; a12] be, become a starring
dancer.

istarim n a variety of yautia (bisul) having a reddish-pink rootstock,
as opposed to the more common white variety.

istáring a {1} star in a film. {2} be prominently mentioned or
conspicuous in a picture, talk. Istáring ka man sa wáli sa párì, You
were conspicuously mentioned in the priest’s sermon. {3} be
conspicuously important or significant in an activity. Istáring mi sa
parti kay kami nangúlu sa dúlà, We were important persons in the party
because we led the games. v [B126] {1} star in a film. {2} be
conspicuous. {3} be prominently mentioned, conspicuous in a picture.
{4} be an important person in some activity.

istartir n starter of an engine.

istasiyun_1 n {1} radio, gas, police station. {2} railroad or bus
station (not common usage). -an {1} station for vehicles, gas station.
Istasyunan sa gasulína, trák, Gasoline, bus station. {2} police, radio
station (not common usage).

istasiyun_2 n station, way of the cross: 14 pictures of Christ’s
sufferings placed around the sides of a church for the worshippers to
visit. v [A] make the way of the cross, visiting each of the 14
pictures and praying before each one.

istátik n {1} static on the radio. {2} hoarseness in the throat when
singing. v [B26] {1} for the voice to get hoarse in singing. {2} have
static.

istatistika n statistics.

istatúwa n statue. v [a2] make into a statue. Íyang istatuwáhun kanang
káhuy nga íyang gisugdag silsil, He will make a statue out of that
piece of wood.

istáyil n style of doing s.t. Bítuls ang istáyil sa íyang buhuk, He
wears his hair in the Beatles style. Si Ilurdi dúnay kaugalíngung
istáyil sa pagbuksing, Elorde has his own boxing style. a stylish in
doing s.t. Istáyil kaáyug kinantahan si Sami Díbis dà, Sammy Davis has
a stylish way of singing. v [c16] make s.t. stylish. Maáyu giyung
istaylun (iistáyil) nímu ang ímung mga bisti kay batan-un ka pa, You
should dress stylishly because you are still young.

istaylis a adopting the latest fads.

isti_1 {1} expression of pause when speaker can’t think of the right
word or is embarrassed. Buy, itúnul ang kuan, isti, ang piryudiku, Boy,
pass the whatchamacallit, umm, the newspaper. {2} expression to correct
or take back what one has just said. Si Imil, isti, si Lúkas paanhía,
Emil, I mean, Lucas, have him come here. paistiisti v [A; b6] put on a
pretense of indifference to s.t. one really likes. Ngánung
nagpaistiisti kang gustu ka man diay? Why do you pretend you don’t like
it when you really do?

isti_2 n the east piece, the name of one of the winds (bintus). {2} the
dealer in a mahjong game. {3} the name given to the first round in a
mahjong set until all four players have had a chance to be the dealer.
It is followed by a second round which is called sur. v {1} [A12; b4]
draw an east piece. Giistihan aku ug mau na lay ákung giwíting, I drew
an east wind and that was what I needed to go mahjong. {2} [B1256] be
the dealer in a mahjong game.

istibidur n stevedore. v [B16; c12] be, become a stevedore.

istídi n {1} steady girl or boy friend. {2} prostitute one patronizes
on a regular basis. v {1} [B12C; a12] be, become sweethearts, go
steady. Dúgay na nà silang naistídi, They have been going steady for a
long time. Nagkaistídi ming Lurína sa úna, Lorena and I used to go
steady formerly. {2} [A12; b8] get as a sweetheart. Wà sukad aku
makaistídi, I have never had a sweetheart.

*istígi — santu expression used by an elder for blessing a younger
person who has just kissed his hands. The sign of the cross is made at
the same time the blessing is given.

istikin ap, istikinap expression uttered when pulling a hold up: ‘Stick
’em up!’ v [A; a] pull a stick-up. Síging giistikin ap nang tindahána,
They keep holding that store up.

istíkir n sticker. v [b6(1)] paste a sticker on s.t.

istilítu n stiletto, a small dagger-like instrument used for making
holes in cloth to be embroidered. v [c6] use s.t. as a stiletto.

istilmáting n steel sheets laid on soft ground for vehicles or
temporary airstrips. v [A13; b6] surface with steel matting.

istilmit n stalemate in chess. v [B126; c16] come to a stalemate in
chess.

istílu = istáyil.

istilwul n steel wool.

istima, istimar_1 v [A; a2] take care, look after s.o. Dì kamaung
muistimar sa mga bisíta, Doesn’t know how to take care of the visitors.
Istimáha ang inyung katigulángan, Take care of your old folks.

istimar_2 v [A; c1] {1} estimate, calculate. Istimaha (iistimar) kunu
ang magastu, Figure out the expenses. {2} treat, consider s.o. as.
Istimáha (iistimar) nga inyung igsúun ang mga ílu ninyung ig-ágaw,
Consider your orphaned cousins your own brothers and sisters.
n estimate, rough calculation. istimasiyun n {1} estimate. Untup-untup
ang ákung istimasiyun (istimar), My estimate is almost exact. {2} the
way one regards s.o. Taas ang ákung istimasiyun níya, I have a high
regard for him.

istimit v [A; c1] estimate. Maáyu muistimit sa gibug-atun sa usa ka
butang, He is good at estimating weights. n estimate. Pilay ímung
istimit sa galastúhan? How much do you estimate it will cost?

istinsil v [A; c16] mark s.t. with a stencil, reproduce s.t. by
stencil. n {1} typed stencil, stencil from which a design or lettering
is made. {2} design, lettering done by a stencil.

istinugrapir n stenographer. v [B156] be, become a stenographer.

istip n word asked by a player in hopscotch asking whether he had
stepped on the line. Istip, nu? Did I step on the line or not?

istipburd n narrow board under the passenger bus running along the
chassis on either side between the front and rear wheels, where cargo
is placed.

istip-in n open-heeled shoes or slippers for women, with or without
high heels. v [AC12; b6(1)] wear step-ins.

istíping n {1} step in dancing. Lisud kaáyu ang istíping sa
kinabag-uhang sáyaw karun, The steps for the latest dance are very
complicated. {2} a violation in basketball, making steps not allowed.
sayup ang — v [a12] for s.o. to make a mistake in an important move.
Nasayup lang ang inyung istíping ug dì mu mudúul ug pulitiku nga
mangaplay ug trabáhu, It is a wrong move for you to apply for a job
without a politician’s help. v [B126; c1] commit the violation of
stepping in basketball.

istiplir, istípul v [A; b5] fasten with staples. Mas maáyung ímung
istipúlun (istipúlan) ang mga papil arun dì magbúwag, It’s necessary
that you staple the pieces of paper together so that they won’t get
separated. Lisud na ni buwágun ug ímung istipúlun (istipúlan), It will
be difficult to get these apart after they have been stapled.
n {1} stapler. {2} staples.

istíril a sterile, incapable of procreation. v [B6] be, become sterile.

istiriláyis v [A3P; a] sterilize, free from germs.

istiryu n stereo phonograph or tape recorder. — púnu n stereo
phonograph. a stereophonic in sound reproduction. v {1} [B126; c16]
reproduce a sound stereophonically. Dì maistiryu ang ipiktu ug usa lang
ka ispíkir ang gamítun, You don’t get a stereophonic effect if you use
only one speaker. {2} [A13] do s.t. with stereo music on. Mag-istiryu
giyud nà siyag magtuun, He always studies with stereo music on.

Istits n the States, U.S.A. pa- v [A; c] go, bring to the States.

istitsáyid a {1} coming from the States. Kanang íyang sapátus
istitsáyid, His shoes are imported from the States. {2} a person in the
Philippines who originates in the States. {3} being like s.t. American.
Istitsáyid siyag linihukan, She acts like an American. v [B126] be from
the States or like s.t. from the States.

istituskup n stethoscope. v [A; b6(1)] use a stethoscope.

istityu n children’s game of freezing or keeping still when the leader
shouts istityu. — dans n statue dance, a dance in which the
participants freeze every time the music is stopped. v [A1C2; b(1)]
play ‘statue’ or do the statue dance.

istranghíru n {1} a foreigner. Barku nga istranghíru, A foreign ship.
{2} foreign ship. v [B126; b6] be, become a stranger in another land.

istranyu n stranger, newcomer to a place. v [B12] be a stranger to a
place. Naistranyu na ku dinhi tungud sa daghang kausában, I have become
a stranger in this place because of the changes that have taken place
here.

istráp n strap. v {1} [A; b6(1)] put, fit a strap on. Istrápi ang rilu,
Put a strap on the watch. {2} [a12] make into a strap.

istráyik_1 n {1} strike: {a} in baseball. {b} the pins in bowling
knocked down in one ball, or the score so made. {2} unpleasant allusion
made against s.o. v {1} [B126] be, become a strike in baseball or
bowling. {1a} [A12] make a strike in baseball or bowling. {2} [A2; a12]
make unpleasant allusions about s.o. Ug istraykun ku níya, dì lang ku
manumbáling, If he makes unpleasant allusions about me, I won’t pay any
attention.

istráyik_2 v [A; b3] for students or workers to strike. Giistraykan ang
Yúbi sa mga maistra, The teachers at U.V. are striking. n strike of
students or workers.

istri n three, esp. three pesos (slang). Manan-aw tag sini, dúna kuy
istri diri, Let’s go and see a movie. I have three pesos here. v [A12]
get three pesos.

istribilyu a cross-eyed. v [B; c16] be cross-eyed. Muistribilyu ang
iyang panan-aw ug masukù, He becomes cross-eyed when he gets angry.

istríbu n {1} stirrup of a saddle or anything one steps on to mount
with. {2} running board. v [A; a] attach, make a stirrup, mounting
step, or running board.

istribur n starboard of a vessel. v [A; c1] turn to the starboard.
Istribura (iistribur) ug diyútay arun dì ta mabanggà, Turn the boat to
the right so that we will not collide.

istrikta = istriktu (female).

istriktu a strict in demanding obedience. Istriktu na run ang baláud sa
pagbáyad sa buhis, The law is very strict about paying your taxes.
v [B; a2] be, become strict, do strictly. Dílì istriktúhun
pag-inspiksiyun ang malíta sa táwung kuniktádu, They aren’t strict in
inspecting baggage which belongs to s.o. with connections.

istrilya n s.t. which has the shape of a star. Istrilyang parul, A
star-shaped lantern. -du, -wu eggs fried sunny side up. v [A; a] fry or
serve eggs sunny side up.

istrilyíta n s.t. shaped like a small star.

istrimlayin a streamlined, built without excess corners or structures.
v [c1] build s.t. in a streamlined style.

istrit_1, istrít1 a {1} upright. Istrit kaáyu nang huwísa, dì nà madág
bagsak, He’s an upright judge. He doesn’t accept bribes. {2} frank.
Istrit ra kaáyu nang manulting tawhána, mahilaw ka lang usáhay, He’s so
frank that sometimes he embarrasses you. {3} fluent in speech. Istrit
kaáyu nang maistráhang muininglis. Way kunù, That teacher speaks fluent
English. She doesn’t stammer. v {1} [A2; b] tell, do frankly. {2} [A;
a12] go, walk straight on a road.

istrit_2, istrít2 n {1} straight blow in boxing. {2} straight in poker.
v {1} [A; c] deliver a straight blow. Istríti siya arun mutagam,
Deliver a straight blow to teach him a lesson. {2} [A12] get a straight
hand in poker. {3} [A2; c1] vote a straight ticket. Ayaw istrita
(iistrit) pagbutar ang Libiral, Don’t vote straight Liberal. {4} [A2;
c1] drink all the contents down without a break.

istrit_3, istrít3 n street. Háin tang istríta na, What street are we on
now?

istritbul a the situation in billiards where the cue ball and the
target ball are directly in line to the hole.

istritsabul, istritsibul a stretchable cloth. v [A12; b(1)] wear s.t.
of stretchable cloth.

istritsir n stretcher. v [c1] carry s.o. on a stretcher.

istrú n {1} straw used in weaving. — bag bag made of straw. {2} straw
to drink through. v [A; b5] drink with a straw.

istrubíri n strawberry.

istrúk n good way of doing a particular thing, esp. unusual or
unconventional. Lahì sab siyag istrúk mangumidiya kay dì mukatáwa, He
tells jokes in an unusual way. He doesn’t laugh. Maáyug istrúk siya nga
mangáyug kwarta, He has a smart way of asking for money.

istrúki = istúki.

istrúking = istrúk.

istruksiyun = instruksiyun.

istrungkǎr v [A; a12] take apart, disassemble. istrungkadur n screw
driver. v [A; a12] use, make into, hit with a screw driver.

istrúpa n stanza of a sort.

istúb n gas, electric stove. v [A12] get a stove. gas, iliktrik — gas,
electric stove.

istudiyanti n student. v {1} [B16; b(1)] be, become a student. {2} [A1;
b26] have as a student. Mag-istudiyanti gánì kag tarung, hayáhay
kaáyung dad-un ang klási, If you have good students, it is no problem
to handle the class.

istudiyu_1 n {1} artist’s or photographer’s studio. {2} motion picture
studio. {3} broadcasting studio. v [A13; a] make, make into a studio.

istudiyu_2 v [A; b(1)] {1} study s.t. Giistudiyúhan pa sa duktur ang
íyang sakit, The doctors are studying his disease. {2} take a certain
course. Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan, He’s taking up law.

istukáda v [A12C; a2] fence or make motions like fencing. Miibut siya
sa íyang sundang ug miistukádang nagpaninggit, He pulled out his sword
and raised it in the air shouting.

istúki v [B12C; b3c15] have a heated argument, make an argument heated.
Maistúki giyud nà madúgay ang ílang isturya, I bet their conversation
is going to end up in an argument. n heated argument.

istula n stole worn by a priest. v [A; c6] use, wear a stole.

istumagu n stomach viewed medically or physiologically. Ang istumagu sa
báka duhay hut-ung, A cow’s stomach has two chambers. Pagkáung makadáut
sa istumagu, Food which can ruin the stomach.

istúpa v [A; c] stuff s.t. into seams to make them watertight.
n material stuffed into seams to make them watertight.

istupádu n {1} k.o. dish made of thinly sliced meat stewed and served
with gravy. {2} food with a filling. Istupádung pán, Bread with a meat
filling. — nga lansang n dried anchovies (humorous). v [A; a] have
istupádu.

istupida = istupidu (female).

istupidu a stupid, doing stupid things. Istupidu! Ngánung gipainum man
nímug gátas nga bahù ang bátà? Stupid! Why did you give the child
spoiled milk to drink? v [B12; b6] be, become stupid.

isturbu n {1} nuisance, bother. Isturbu kaáyu ning batáa sa ákung
pagsuwat, This child is a terrible nuisance to me while I’m writing.
{2} public disturbance. v [A3P; a1] make a nuisance or public
disturbance. Siyay miisturbu sa bayli, He created a disturbance at the
benefit dance. Ayawg isturbuha (isturbúha) si Istir kay natúlug, Don’t
disturb Esther. She is asleep.

isturya v {1} [A; c] tell a story. Iisturya didtu sa kurti ang tinúud
nga nahitabù, Tell the court what really happened. {1a} tell s.t.
untrue. Ayaw kug isturyáhi! Don’t tell me! {1b} tell s.o. about s.t.
Ayawg iisturya ning sikritúha, Don’t tell the secret. {2} [A2C; bc3]
converse, talk to s.o. Unsay inyung gipanag-isturyáhan? What are you
discussing? Kinsa tung ímung gikaisturya? Who were you conversing with?
{3} [C1; a12] talk s.t. out with s.o. to reach an understanding.
Nagkaisturya na mi ug ang ákung trátu, ug nagkaúlì na mi, I have
already talked it out with my girl, and we’re on good terms again. Mas
maáyung inyu nang isturyáhun arun dì mu magdinumtanay, You should
thrash out your differences so that you won’t end up hating each other.
n {1} story. Daghan siyag isturya báhin sa gúbat, He has lots of war
stories to tell. {1a} plot of a story. Unsay isturya sa sini? What was
the movie about? {1b} s.t. told. Mutúu ka ba sa isturya níyang namatay
ang prisidinti? Do you believe his story that the president died?
{2} conversation. Taas kaáyu inyung isturya sa tilipunu, Your telephone
conversation lasted a long time. {3} talk, useless talk. Daghan nímug
isturya. Buháta lang nà, You talk too much. Just go ahead and do it.
isturyahánay, isturyahay v [C] converse, tell each other stories.
-dur(→) a {1} fond of telling stories. {2} fond of engaging in
conversation. Hilumun nà. Dì kaáyu isturyadur, He’s a silent sort. He
doesn’t like to talk very much. v [B12; b6] become a good
conversationalist.

*istiyúdint wurking — n student working his way through school.

isud, isug = irug, v 1.

ísug a {1} brave, full of guts. Ísug kaáyu si Dyú kay dì mahadluk
muatubang ug mikrupunu, Joe is full of guts. He doesn’t hesitate to get
up before the microphone. {2} quick to anger, getting fuming mad at the
slightest provocation. Pagmatngun sa ímung trabáhu kay ísug ra ba kaáyu
ang manidyǐr, Be careful with your work, for the manager is
short-tempered. {3} fierce. Ísug ang irù. Dì mudágan, It is a mean dog.
He won’t run away. {4} strong in odor, taste, etc. Ísug tabak-un ang
Sálim, Salems are strong cigarettes. — ug dugù {1} having highly smelly
blood in menstruation. {2} having characteristics that tend to be
inherited. Ísug ug dugù nang rasáha. Maáyung paliwatan, That breed has
characteristics which tend to appear in the children. It would be good
to use for breeding stock. v {1} [B12; c1] be, become brave. Unsang
tambála ang makaísug (makapaísug) sa manuk, What medicine can make a
fighting cock brave? {2} [B2; b6] be, become quick to get angry.
{3} [B] get fierce. {4} [B2; c1] for a smell, taste to get strong. (→)
v [A13N] be in a bad mood, continuously angry. Nag-isug (nagpangisug)
siya kay dakug pildi sa tárì, He’s in a bad mood because he lost
heavily in the cockfight. paN- v [A; b(1)] {1} be fuming mad. Ug
mangísug na gánì ang maistra, mahílum dáyun ang klási, Once the teacher
starts to bark, the class becomes quiet. {2} for meteorological
phenomena to be violent. Gihampak sa nangísug nga balud, Beaten by the
violent waves. {3} for the penis to erect. Nangísug ang íyang buhì sa
dihang nakakitag páa, His penis grew erect when he saw a woman’s thigh.
{4} insist, strive hard to do s.t. Ug wà pa giyud ku mangísug nga
muuban, dì untà ku makaanhi, Had I not insisted on coming along, I
wouldn’t have gotten here. Ákù gayung pangisgan nga magmalampúsun aku
sa ákung mga gimbuhátun, I will strive hard to be successful in my
undertakings. papaN- v [a12] get s.o. angry. Papangisgun (papangisúgun)
ku siya, I’ll get his goat. ka- n bravery. {2} nerve to do s.t. May
kaísug ka pa uruy nga misulti nákù nga gihigugma mu pa aku, You’ve got
a nerve to tell me that you still love me. ma- a very brave, fierce,
quick to anger, for a smell to get strong. v [B1456] be strong in
spirit, courageous. Kinahanglang magmaísug kita sa pagpakig-atúbang sa
matúud, Let us be brave enough to face reality. ma-un a {1} in a brave,
courageous way. Maisúgun siyang miasdang sa mga kaáway, He faced his
enemies courageously. {2} in an angry way. Maisúgun siyang namúlung, He
spoke angrily.

ísul_1 v [A; cP] move backwards without turning around. Iísul (ipaísul)
ang trák ngadtus iskína, Back the truck up to the corner. n the
triangular structure of a fowl or bird from which the tail feathers
grow. (→) = ísul_1, n.

ísul_2 = irug, v1.

iswag = irug, v1.

iswid = giswid.

iswim_1 n k.o. dance characterized by motions similar to swimming.
v [A] dance this dance.

iswim_2 [A12] drink, esp. in a spree (slang). Nakaiswim tingáli si
Rupínu kay puwa man ang tápay, Rufino must have drunk again because his
ears are red.

iswis exclamation expressing that s.t. has been put in just the right
place. Iruga pa. Hustu na. Iswis, Move it a bit. Enough. That’s it.

isyu_1 v [A; b] issue a license, permit, or the like. Giisyúhan ka na
ba ug bag-ung lisinsiya? Have you been issued a new license?

isyu_2 n {1} issue of a periodical. {2} political issue. v [B126; c1]
be, become a political issue. Ngánung isyuhun (iisyu) pa man giyud sa
kaatbang ang kamahal sa palalitun? Why does the opposite camp have to
make a political issue of the high cost of living?

íta_1 short for tagái ta. please give me some.

íta_2, ità = ayta_1.

itad-itad v [AB26; a] stretch s.t. to make it go a long way, for s.t.
to be stretched out. Muitad-itad ang kwarta ug buut giyud, If you
really want to make the money stretch, you can. Itad-itarun námù ang
bugas kun dúna miy kamúti, We will make the rice go further if we have
sweet potatoes.

itay n Father.

itbi n 8-B, a recently introduced variety of rice.

itgam = igtam.

iti v [B2; b6] {1} dry up, evaporate to dryness. Muiti (maiti) na sad
ang mga sapà ning iníta, The rivers will dry up again in this heat.
Giithan (hiithan) ang linung-ag kamúti, The water in the cooked sweet
potatoes has boiled away. {2} for s.t. that is prepared by evaporation
to come out powdery and not good. Muiti ang sabun ug palabian sa síga,
Soap turns into powder if the flame is too high. {3} [AN; b6(1)] for
fowls and birds to excrete their bodily wastes. Bugáwa ang manuk dihà
sa hawanan kay tingálig mangiti (muiti), Shoo the chickens out of the
living room because they will make a mess. hunsuy nga mu- ug mani
n small caliber firearm (lit. tobacco pipe that excretes
peanuts—slang). {4} [b4] get inside a woman, esp. in an extra-marital
affair (slang). n {1} what results when the process of boiling off is
not properly done. {2} excrement of birds, fowl, lizards, crabs. {3} —
ug langgam k.o. sweet potato with white-colored flesh and red skin.

íti eighty (usually said of scores, grades). v [A12; c1] get eighty,
make s.t. eighty. Ug makaíti ka, pasar ka, If you get an eighty, you
pass. Kinahanglan nga itíhun nímu ang ímung grádu, You must get a grade
of eighty.

itì n term of address for a male much younger than the speaker.

itiíti v [A; b] run at a slow pace with short steps. Mag-itiíti na lang
ku kay kápuy na ikusug ug dágan, I will just trot because I’m too tired
to run fast.

ítik_1 n {1} white duck. {2} pimp (slang). v [B16; a2] be, become a
pimp. paN- v [A2] work as a pimp. -an(→) n duck farm. v [A1C12; c6]
raise ducks. itik-itik n {1} name of a folk dance characterized by an
imitation of the movements of a duck. The dancers wear balintawak
costumes. {2} k.o. ornamental vine: Aristolochia elegans. v [AC12]
dance the itik-itik.

*ítik_2 pa- n a game of chance where a coin is spun and covered with a
cup or s.t. similar and players bet on heads or tails.

itikíta n tailor’s tag sewn into the article. v [A; b6(1)] sew or put a
tailor’s tag on s.t.

ítip v [A; c1] clip, crop s.t. very close. Muítip kaáyug putul ang
lunmúwir sa sagbut, The lawn mower cuts the grass very short. Kinsa
kahay nag-ítip ug gunting ning kuku sa bátà? Who cut the baby’s
fingernails so short? Itípun (iítip) ba nátù pagputul ang mga sanga sa
kamunggay? Shall we cut these kamunggay branches very short? a cropped
short.

ítir n ether.

itirinaryu n itinerary.

itlib v [AN; a2] {1} bite gently with the front teeth. Miitlib
(nangitlib) siya sa íyang ngábil arun dílì mahikatawa, He just bit his
lips to keep from laughing. {2} nibble at. Itlíbun lang sa isdà ang
paun apan dílì ang tagà, The fish just nibbles at the bait but not the
hook. — ug asin v [A13] be so hard up as to have barely anything to eat
(lit. bite salt). Nag-itlib mig asin sa kapait pagkapapha sa ákung
bána, We can barely eat now since my husband got fired.

itlug n {1} egg. {2} testicles. putì ug, ang — cowardly. v {1} [AN;
b6(1)] lay an egg. Muitlug (mangitlug) na tingáli ang himungáan, The
hen is probably going to lay eggs. {2} [A13C13] serve, eat eggs.
Mag-itlug lang ta sa pamáhaw, Let’s just have eggs for breakfast.
{3} [a12] hit in the testicles. Nikúum si Kusáka kay naitlug, Kosaka
doubled up in pain because he was hit in the testicles. paN- n laying
of eggs. Ang mga manuk nga íyang gipamalit álang sa pangitlug, The hens
he bought are for laying eggs. -ánan n nesting place. -in-
a {1} egg-shaped. {2} yellow in color.

itnib (from binti) n twenty (slang).

itsa v {1} [c] throw, toss s.t. towards; be thrown off from a position
due to impact. Didtu siya mag-itsa sa íyang láya sa may lawumlawum, He
cast his net in the deep part of the sea. Naitsa sa layù ang táwu
dihang mibutu ang mína, The man was thrown a long way when the mine
exploded. Iitsa ra ngari nákù ang ákung káwù, Toss me my hat. {2} [A;
b6(1)] shoot the ball in basketball. Tagsa ray sipyat ug siyay muitsa,
He rarely misses when he shoots the ball. — ug tualya v [A; b6(1)] in
boxing, throw the towel to a boxer to signify surrender. Itsáhi nag
tualya ang ímung buksidur kay gihímu na lang nang pantsing bag, Toss
your boxer a towel. He is being turned into a punching bag. — puyra
v [A; c1] remove s.o. from a job, position, dwelling without ceremony.
Itsa puyráhun (iitsa puyra) nátù nang mga iskuwátir, Let’s kick those
squatters out. — sa kálù throw one’s hat in the ring, enter a political
race. itsaitsa n shooting of the ball into the basket for fun and
practice. v [A; c] do some practice shooting in basketball.

itsar v {1} [A123P; b] cause to move the bowels. Giitsaran (giitsahan)
siyag dalì sa purga, The purgative caused her to have a B.M. in no
time. {2} [A13; a4] have loose bowel movements. Nag-itsar (giitsar) ang
bátà, Her child has loose B.M. {3} excrete s.t. from the body. Miitsar
ang íyang dugù pag-alsa níyag bug-at, She had a profuse discharge of
menstrual blood when she lifted s.t. heavy. Dúgay kang itsahan
(itsáhan) ug mugámit kag ritardiks, It will take you a long time to
come if you use retardex.

itsas_1 = hitsu.

itsas_2 a one who has completed the fixed number of points for winning
in pool billiards. v [B23(1)6; a2] wrap up the game in pool.

itsay n {1} mistress. {2} girl friend. v [A2; a12] keep a mistress.

itsiban n medicinal plaster applied to sore places (from the brand name
Itchiban).

itsu diritsu = hitsu diritsu. see hitsu.

itsus v [AC; a2] have sexual intercourse (slang). Nag-itsus ang
managtrátu sa sulud sa mutil, The two sweethearts made love in the
motel.

itsuy n {1} male lover. {2} chum, buddy (slang). Short form: tsuy.
Itsuy, padagkúta ku, Let me have a light, pal. {2a} term of address
between intimate male friends. Ása ka, tsuy, Where are you going, pal?
v [A; c16] have a male lover.

ítu n general name for catfish. itúhun a coloration of chicken
feathers, variety of a talisáyun or lambuhun type: dark green feathers
interspersed with black or grey feathers, esp. on the breast.

ítuk v [A23; a1b3] {1} provoke s.o., make s.o. angry. Naítuk ang bána
kay dugayan mag-ílis ang asáwa, The husband was irritated because his
wife took so long to get dressed. Hikaiktan (giitúkan) ku sa ákung
inahan kay dúgay kung mipaúlì, My mother got angry at me because I came
home late. {2} stimulate interest in s.t. Itúkun ku siya sa pagpanulat,
I’ll stimulate his interest in writing. ka- n anger. ma-un a done with
annoyance.

itum a black. — ug dílà a having a black spot on the tongue, a sign
that a person is a buyágan. — ug kasingkásing, tanlag cruel, heartless.
Way kalúuy ang itum ug tanlag, The heartless fellow has no mercy.
v [AB; a] become black, make s.t. black. Akuy miitum sa sapátus mung
putì, I dyed your white shoes black. Muitum (maitum) ang ímung úban ug
ímung tináun, Your grey hair will turn black if you dye it. (←) v [B14]
be very black. Nag-ítum na lang ang ákung buktun sa mga bun-ug, My arms
were black with bruises. itman n k.o. large, black, fresh-water shrimp.
-un a somewhat dark or black-colored. Dì siya angayang magsul-ub ug
pula kay itumun, She doesn’t look good in red because she is
dark-complexioned.

it-un a intelligent. Ang bátang it-un dalì rang musabut, An intelligent
child easily understands. v [B12] become intelligent.

*ítung pa- v [A; b6] {1} stay put and do nothing when told to do s.t.
or when there is a clear need. Nagpaítung nà siya bísan ug walay túbig
ilung-ag, He just sits there doing nothing even though there is no
water to cook with. {2} endure s.t. without moving. Nagpaítung sila sa
katugnaw nga nagpaábut sa trák, They sat around shivering waiting for
the bus.

ítus v [A; a] evaporate or boil off liquid from a mixture until it
reaches a certain consistency. Itúsun nákù ang arníbal arun maispísu,
I’ll boil the syrup so that it will become thick. -an(→) n evaporating
dish.

itus-ítus v [A; a12] bear intense hardships or sorrow alone. Masakit ka
ug muitus-ítus lang ka sa ímung kaguul, You’ll get sick if you bear
your sorrow in silence. Itus-itúsun námù ang kalisud arun mu
makatunghà, We will go through hardships so that you can have an
education.

ítut v [AC; a12] have sexual intercourse (coarse slang). Itútun níya
ang ílang binatunan, He will screw their maid.

ituy n puppy, kid of goats, baby of monkeys and some other animals.
ituy-ítuy v [AP; b(1)] kowtow to, behave obsequiously to. Muituy-ítuy
(mupaituy-ítuy) siya sa mayur arun hatágag pabur, He will fawn on the
mayor to get a favor. Nagpaituy-ítuy siya sa dalágang íyang gihaláran,
He fawned on the lady he courted. Ituy-itúyi (paituy-itúyi) ang ímung
ámu ug gustu kang umintúhan, Serve your boss obsequiously if you want
to be promoted. n {1} young of a squash, esp. the climbing variety.
{2} shill, one employed in gambling to act as a customer and attract
bettors to the game. {3} one who kowtows.

íwa n wet nurse. v [A; c1] act as a wet nurse, be made wet nurse.
Nakaíwa kug bátang hilak, I have nursed a baby that tends to cry.

iwad = igwad.

íwag v [AN; b] illuminate with a moveable source of light. Iwági sa
ispat ang dā́n nga ímung agian, Light your way with a flashlight. (→)
n {1} moveable light used to illuminate s.t. {2} light, source of
inspiration or guidance. Ang ákung hinigugma mauy gihímù kung iwag sa
ákung kinabúhì, My sweetheart is the light of my life. paN- v [A2C12;
b(1)] go fishing using a light to attract the fish. -in-an, in-an(→),
pinang-an n fish caught using a light.

iwang-íwang v [A3PB5; b6c1] walk with the legs apart due to pain in the
groin or fat legs. Nag-iwang-íwang siya paglakaw kay may hubag ang
íyang búgan, He’s walking with his legs apart because he has a boil in
his groin.

iwas, íwas v [A; b(1)] {1} slip away from, get out of the way. Miiwas
siya sa íyang mga kúyug nga pulus hubug, He slipped away from his
companions who were all drunk. Kun wà pa makaiwas, igù na untà siya,
Had he not dodged, he would have been hit. {2} avoid doing s.t.
Ubligasiyun nga dílì maiwasan, Obligations one cannot avoid. {3} [A3]
miss a mark. Miiwas ug diyútay sa íyang úlu ang bala, The bullet missed
his head by just a little bit. Miíwas hinúun ka sa ámung pista, You
missed our fiesta (came after it).

íway v [A2; ab2] move out of the way, cause s.t. to do so. Miíway ang
mga táwu pag-ági sa bumbíru, The people moved aside when the fire truck
passed by. Pag-íway sa pangánud, nakítà ang búlan, When the clouds
drifted away, you could see the moon. Mga pulis ang miíway sa mga táwu
nga nag-ali sa agiánan, The police cleared the people who were blocking
the route out of the way. Iwáya ang mga kúgun, Push the saw grass out
of the way. — sa kadáut v [AP; c6] spare s.o. from a mishap or danger.
Ákù ta kang iíway sa kadáut kay gimahal ta ka, I’ll keep you from
danger, for I love you.

iwígik v [A2S; b3] for pigs to squeal. Miiwígik ang babuy pagkadungug
sa hugangkul sa baldi, The pig squealed when it heard the clatter of
the pail.

íwik = iwígik.

iwit a last in a race, class, or anything where things are compared.
Iwit siya sa klási, He’s the dumbest in the class. v [B126; b] come out
last. Naiwit (nangiwit) siya sa banggà sa lánguy, She came out last in
the swimming race. Dílì siya maiwit sa hitsuraay lang, If you consider
looks, she doesn’t come out bad (lit. the last). pa- v [A13] allow
oneself to be outdone. Wà siya magpaiwit. Mitindug ug mibayli pud, He
did not let himself be outdone. He got up and danced too.

íya preposed gen. form from siya. Iyang libru, His book. Íyang gibása,
He read it. sa -ng lagay, luslus (or any part of the body) strong
expression of disbelief (coarse, if a coarse word is used; not coarse,
if a mild word is used). Mangasáwa sa íyang túngul, unsay ibuhì, Get
married, my foot (lit. stomach)! What will they live on? — ra, — ra dì
manakud phrase uttered when discussing s.t. bad that happened to s.o.
to forestall the possibility that it should happen to anyone else.
Kadakù sa íyang kabahung, íya ra dì manakud, My, what a huge ulcer! God
forbid that anyone else should get it. v [a3] be his, hers. Maíya ni ug
íyang bayran, It will be his if he pays for it. iyaíya, iyáhay v [A13]
{1} each one did [so-and-so]. Nag-iyáhay silag panghílak pagkadungug sa
balità, Each one of them cried upon hearing the news. {2} each do alone
for himself. Nag-iyaíya (nag-iyáhay) silag lung-ag, Each cooked his own
dinner. sig- [A13] each one [does, did] to his own. Nagsig-íyag pamaúlì
ang mga táwu dihang nag-ulan, All the people returned to their own
homes when it rained. tag- n owner. Siyay tag-íya sa sini Uryinti, He
is the owner of the Oriente theater. v [B1256] {1} become the owner of.
Ug siyay matag-íya sa tindáhan, wà nay mupalit didtu, If he is the
owner of the store, nobody will buy there. {2} [A12] have acquired
possession. Pára nakatag-íya ug usa ka taksi garbúsu na siya kaáyu,
Just because she acquired a taxi, she has become very haughty. paN-
v [A2; b5] own s.t. Gastúsu kaáyu ning manag-íya ta ug awtu, It is
expensive to own a car. tag-iyáhan a having an owner. Dílì ni
ikabaligyà kay tag-iyáhan na ni, I cannot sell it because s.o. owns it.
see also idyaidya, kadaíya, and kinaíya.

iyà n title or term of address for women, much older than the speaker.
v [A; a12] call s.o. by this title. -an n aunt. v [A12; b8] have an
aunt. -an sa pag-agáwan n cousin (of any degree) of one’s father or
mother.

iyágak v [A2S; b3] {1} for a chicken to squawk in pain. {2} for a child
to cry upon being punished. Muiyágak ka man lagi ug hibunalan, You’ll
cry if I hit you. {3} cry out in pain like a chicken, squawk.
n squawking of fowl, cry of a naughty child, or similar sound.

íyak v [A; b3] chirp, cheep. Muíyak ang mga pisù, The chicks will
cheep. n chirping, cheeping.

iyak-iyak n k.o. bird, the barred graybird: Coracina striata.

iyása = iása_1.

iyat a {1} snobbish, unwilling to mix with people deemed inferior. Iyat
na siya kay naidukar man sa syudad, She is snobbish now because she
went to school in the city. {2} choosy, unwilling to take s.t. one
deems not up to his class. Iyáta nímu uy, dì ka man musakay ug paráda,
My, how choosy you are. You won’t ride on a rig. v [B2] become snobbish
or choosy and particular.

iyawan = awayan. see áway.

iyáwat for s.t. small to be of some use. Díay diyis iyáwat na lang ning
ikapugung sa gútum, Here’s ten cents. Perhaps this might help stave off
hunger. Dì ku ibaligyà ning yútà. Iyáwat ra ni sa ákung mga anak, I
won’t sell this piece of land. It will surely be of use for my
children. v [AN; a12] make good use of s.t. one has little of or can
only get in limited quantities. Mag-iyáwat ka sa dáan mung sapátus,
Wear your old shoes to economize. Iyawáta ang ímung panahug tuun, Make
good use of your limited time by studying. (→) {1} = iyáwat. {2} [AN;
a12] do s.t. in order to save on s.t. or get s.t. not readily
available. Mikúyug siya nákù kay nangiyawat nga malibri sa plíti, He
came along with me because he could save by having me pay the fare.
Miapil siya sa tím kay giiyawat ang unipurmi, He joined the team to get
a free uniform.

iyù n term of address or title for a man much older than the speaker.
v [A; a12] call s.o. by this title. Iyù Hantuy Uncle John, the
imaginary character representing the Filipino people (s.t. like the
American Uncle Sam). Gituntu si Iyù Hantuy sa mga pulitiku, Politicians
are taking advantage of Uncle John.

*iyukaristiku Kunggrísu — Eucharistic Congress.

Iyurúpa = urúpa.

íyut v [A2SC; a2b2] have sexual intercourse with (avoided word). Ikay
nag-iyut sa míd? Did you screw the maid? íyut ta, yuta coarse
interjection of disbelief. Yuta! Mu nay íyang gisulti apan dì ku mutúu,
My foot! That’s what he says, but I don’t believe it. pala-(→) a having
great appetite for screwing.
