


=== S ===


sa_1 particle indicating grammatical relations. short form: s.
{1} preceding a phrase referring to a place. Niadtu sa Manílà, Went to
Manila. Sa ibabaw, Up on top. Lakaw ngadtu sa unáhan, Walk up ahead.
Ihátag sa bátà, Give it to the child. Nahúlug sa pangpang, Fell off the
cliff. Amíhan sa kanáway, Northwind from a westerly direction.
{1a} following a word meaning ‘be in a place’. Nia dinhi sa Sibu, It is
here in Cebu. Didtu siya sa Manílà iskuyla, He went to school in
Manila. Walà sa lugar, Not at the right time or place. {2} preceding a
phrase referring to time. Muanhi sa alas dúsi, Will come at twelve.
Malígù ta sa sunud Duminggu, Let’s go swimming next Sunday. Sa káda
ámut mutugbang pud siyag hátag, Each time they contribute, he gives an
equal amount. {2a} preceding a sentence referring to past time. Sa
pag-abut na níya didtu, When he arrived there. Sa nagalakat ang
panahun, As time went by. {3} indicating gen. relations.
{3a} possession or analogous concepts. Ang balay sa ákung amígu, My
friend’s house. Ang mga pagtulun-an sa Bibliya, The lessons given in
the Bible. Ang sa ákung mga igsúun, The ones belonging to my brothers
and sisters. Usa sa ákung mga sákup, One of my people. Ang kamahal sa
palalítun, The high cost of things. Búlan sa Máyu, The month of May.
{3b} agent of a passive verb. Gihambat sa liyun, Was devoured by the
lion. Kaúnun sa mga bátà, The children will eat it. {3b1} preceding the
agent of a nominalized verb. Ang pagkamatay sa bátà, When the child
died (lit. the dying of the child). Káda kanáug sa pasahíru, Each time
a passenger got off. (Lit. Each getting off of the passengers.)
{3c} following an exclamation to mark the thing exclaimed over. Kamahal
gud sa ímung gibáyad! What a high price you paid! Dakúa sad sa balay!
What a huge house it was! {4} indicating dat. relations. {4a} specific
goal of an action. Nakabunù sa íyang kaáway, Killed his enemy. Akuy
gitagáan sa libru, The book was given to me. {4b} in comparisons: than.
Dátù pa sa ákung amahan, Richer than my father. {4c} — ákù, ímu, íya,
ámù, átù, inyu, íla = kanámù, kanímu, kaníya, kanámù, kanátù, kaninyu,
kaníla. {5} indicating causal, instrumental, or concomitant relations.
Mihílak sa kapungut, Cried out of anger. Sa tantung paningkámut,
milampus, He succeeded after trying so hard. Íyang gisuntuk sa walang
kamut, He hit him with his left hand. Sa minaayug sa dinautan, By hook
or by crook. Sapátus nga naghilíra sa kadaghan, Rows and rows of shoes,
there were so many of them. Mitandù sa walay lángan, He agreed without
delay. {5a} following a word which expresses these relationships. Báhin
sa ákung hangyù, As for my request. Tungud sa kalúuy, On account of his
mercy. Uban sa íyang amahan, Together with her father. Para ni sa Nága?
Is this bound for Naga? Human sa klási, After class. {6} optionally
preceding an infinitive with pag-. Arun sa pagpauswag sa lungsud, In
order to develop the town. Misúgud na sad siya sa pag-inum, He began to
take to the bottle again.

sa_2 {1} short for unsa used at end of phrases. see unsa, 5. {2} short
for unsa gánì. see gánì, 5a.

sā́ = sála_2.

sà short for ísà, úsà.

sâ = salà.

sáa {1} where (past or present tense)? Sáa man tu paingun ag bátà?
Where could the child have gone? Sáa man ang inyung balay? Where is
your house? {2} which of the several. Sáa áning duha imung palitun?
Which of these two are you going to buy?

sáad v [AC; c] promise. Nagsáad siya nga mubálik, He promised to come
back. Dílì ku makasáad nímu ug trabáhu, I cannot promise you a job.
n {1} promise. Tumánun ba nímu ang sáad? Will you keep your promise?
Yútà sa mga sáad, The Land of Promise (Mindanao). {2} s.t. promised.
Diyis pursyintu ang ákung sáad sa Ginúu, I promised to give ten percent
to the Lord. Bag-ung, Dáang — New, Old Testament. paN- v [A2; c6] make
a promise or vow to oneself. Nanáad si Supru nga dílì na siya mubálik,
Sofro vowed that he would never go back. n vow, solemn promise to do
s.t. if s.t. is fulfilled. Panáad ku nga dì ku muusab, basta lang
maluwas siya, I made a vow never to do it again, if only she would get
better. sinaáran n {1} s.t. spoken for. Dì na ni mabaligyà kay
sinaáran, I can’t sell it because it has been spoken for. {2} a
betrothed girl that has never been married. ka- n one with whom s.o.
made a promise of love or marriage. masaárun a promising. Masaárung
kaugmáun, A promising future. pakig- n covenant, mutual giving of
promises.

saag (from saláag) a stray, not in the usual course or passage. Usa ka
saag nga huyúhuy mipakítuy sa mga dáhun, A stray breeze stirred the
leaves.

sáag = saláag.

saang n spider conch.

sab = usab.

sáb = sálab.

sábà a noisy. Sábà kaáyu ang tyanggihan, The marketplace is very noisy.
n noise. Ang sábà abut diri nákù, The noise reaches me here. — dihà
{1} shut up! (said in anger). Sábà (sabà) dihà, nagrawraw ka lang, Shut
up! You’re talking nonsense! {2} Oh, come on, you’re kidding. Sábà
(sabà) dihà uy, gipaláhan na pud ku nímu, Oh come on. You’re just
flattering me. See also bà dihà. v {1} [A; b6] make noise. Ngánung nía
man mu magsábà sa huspital? Why are you making noise here in the
hospital? Gisabáan ka ba námung nagdúlà? Do you find it too noisy if we
play here? {2} [A3; c] tell s.t. to s.o. Ayaw isábà ang átung rilasiyun
ha, Don’t breathe a word about our affair, O.K.? -an(→) a {1} given to
making noise or talking. {2} given to divulging secrets. v [B12] be,
become noisy or tending to divulge secrets. ka- n {1} din, noise.
{2} scolding. Ang kasábang ákung nadáwat dílì makáun ug irù, I got a
scolding not fit for a dog. v [AN; b(1)] scold. Ayawg ihagpak ang sira
kay kasab-an kang Máma, Don’t slam the door because Mom will scold you.
hinga-, hinga-(→) a fond of scolding. kalasab-an a {1} always scolded.
{2} worthy of a scolding.

sab-a n {1} variety of cooking banana with rectangular fruit similar to
but smaller than the kardába, with 7–12 or more hands in the bunch. The
fiber can be made into cloth: Musa sapientum var. compressa. {2} cloth
made from the sab-a.

sabad a restless, unsteady, always moving. Sabad kaáyu ang tabánug, The
kite was very unsteady. n propeller, blade of a fan, windmill.
v {1} [B] be, become annoyingly restless, unsteady. Musabad ang mga
bábuy ug gutúmun, Pigs get restless when they are hungry. {2} [A13;
a12] attach, make into a propeller or fan, windmill blade. {3} [A; c1]
whiz closely by, moving fast. Wà gánì makasabad sa íyang gipusil ang
bála, The bullet did not even go near the target. {4} [A; c1] go near
s.t. for a purpose. Gisabaran níya kanúnay ang asáwa nga nagsugal, He
kept hanging around his wife who was gambling. Isabad (sabara) ang bátà
kun túa ba sa iskuylahan, Go by the school for a moment and see if the
child is there.

sabadista n Seventh-day Adventist. v [B15] be, become a Seventh-day
Adventist.

Sabadu n {1} Saturday. — iglurya, Santu the Saturday of the Holy Week.
{2} one point short of winning. Sabadu na ang ílang iskúr. Usa na lay
kuwang pára mudaug, They are one point short of winning. They only need
one more point to sew up the game. see birnis for verb forms. -in-
v {1} [A; b5] use s.t. sparingly or in little amounts. Musinabadu lang
ku ug pangagwa basta lang mahumut ta, I will use the perfume sparingly
just enough to smell sweet. {2} [A13; a12] preserve fish with a small
amount of salt. Magsinabadu ta kay daghang bulinaw ug dì nátù mahurut,
Let’s make fish preserves because we’ve got lots of anchovies and we
can’t consume them all. n fish preserved with a little salt.

sab-ag_1 v [A; c] hang s.t. light over the shoulders or a projection.
Isab-ag ang tualya sa abága, Drape the towel over your shoulders.
Isab-ag ang bukag sa lansang, Hang the basket on the nail.

sab-ag_2 = sabwag, 1.

sábak_1 v {1} [A; c1] put s.t. in one’s lap to carry it. Dì ku musábak
nímu kay dakù ka, I will not allow you to sit on my lap because you’re
too big. Ákung sabákun (isábak) ring bátà arun makalingkud tang tanan,
I will put the child on my lap so that all of us can sit down.
{2} [a12] hit s.t. squarely. Usa ka suntuk nasábak sa íyang apapángig,
A blow with the fist struck him squarely in the jaw. {3} [A13; a12]
sponsor a bill, espouse a cause. Ang bag-ung urdinansa gisábak sa
tanang mga kawáni, The new ordinance is supported by all the employees.
{4} [A13] having a certain property (literary). Hángin nga nagsábak sa
madulútung kabugnaw, A wind that brought penetrating coolness. — ug
bitúun v [A3; a12] for a crescent moon to have a star just above it—a
sign of good luck for courtship. Ug musábak gánì kunu ang búlan ug
bitúun, dalì sugtun ang láking mangulitáwu, They say that a man will
easily win the hand of a woman he courts when the moon is carrying a
star in its lap. (→) v [A3; c] be pregnant. Kalúha tingáli ning ákung
gisabak, I must be pregnant with twins. -an(→) n {1} lap or s.t.
analogous to it. Nag-ulun sa ákung sabakan, Resting her head on my lap.
Sa sabakan sa dakung búkid, At the base of a big mountain. {2} the
mother’s womb (literary). Gíkan sa sabakan ni Maríya, From Mary’s womb.
{2a} one’s parents. Anak sa pubring sabakan, A child from poor parents.
{2b} -an sa yútà the bosom of the earth (literary). {3} female
genitalia (euphemism). {4} small basket with an open mouth, usually
rounded, made of rattan or bamboo, used as a container for the seeds
when sowing or for harvested rice. v [a12] hit in the genital region.†

sábak_2 n area of a field assigned to a particular person to work on.

sábal a {1} offering resistance to motion. Sábal kaáyu ning maggúyud ta
ug gákit, It’s slow-going if you tow a raft. {2} entailing encumbrance,
a burden. Sábal kaáyu ang bátà sa lakaw, The child is a nuisance to
take with you when you go out. Kining mga lúun sa balay sábal kaáyu,
It’s a burden to have other people live with you. {3} obstructing the
vision. Sábal kaáyu sa átung panan-aw ang mga káhuy, The surrounding
trees obstruct our view. v [B46; b6] be, become a drag to forward
motion, burden, or obstruction.

sabana = gwayabanu.

sabang, sábang n area on or near the mouth of a river.

Sábas a name of a person, not much respected, who is a smart aleck who
makes cheap puns and wisecracks. -in- v {1} [A1; b6] make foolish jokes
and wisecracks. Ayaw kug sinabási, Don’t try to ridicule me. {2} [a12]
treat s.o. the way one would treat Sabas (without proper deference).
Sinabásun man ku níya ábig dílì musúkul, He treats me like Sabas as if
I wouldn’t stand up to him.

sabat v {1} [A23] speak after s.o. has spoken. Unyà misabat pud ang
usang táwu bísag walà sultíhi, And then the other man spoke in turn,
though he hadn’t been spoken to. {1a} answer. Ngánung dì man ka musabat
ug tawgun ka? Why don’t you answer when you’re called? {1b} repeat
words after, as in prayer. {2} [A2] attend a novena. Dílì ángayng
itambung ug kumbira ug walà makasabat ug pangadyì, You shouldn’t attend
the banquet if you did not attend the prayer. — amin a always agreeable
to another’s viewpoint. Ang táwung sabat amin pirmi lang úyun, A
yes-man always gives his approval. panabtan v [A2; b6] lead the novena.
manalabtan, mananabtan n one who leads the prayer in the novena.†

sabaw n {1} soup, gravy, juice given off by s.t. cooked. Sabaw sa
manuk, Chicken soup. {2} water in coconut. {3} water that has gotten
into a boat. {4} queer character trait, quirks. Láin nímug sabaw à, You
sure are a strange sort. Magkauyun mu kay paríhu mu ug sabaw, You two
will hit it off nicely because you have the same quirks. waw —
exclamation of admiration for a sexy woman. v {1} [A3; b] cook s.t.
with extra water or juice. Sabwi ug diyútay ang útan, Add a little
water to the vegetable stew. {2} [b4] for a ship or boat to take in
water. Nasabwan ang sakayan kay dagkung balud, The boat took in water
because the waves are high. láin ug — v [A23] take a different tack in
a conversation. Muláin ka man ug sabaw ug mag-isturyahánay ta sa ímung
kaági, You change the subject when we talk about your past.

sabay_1 n hand net used for scooping small fish out of water. v [A13;
a12] make, make into such a net.

sabay_2 often, usually. Sabay ingun niárung urása siya malígù, She
usually takes a bath at this time.

sábay_1 v {1} [A2C; bc3] walk with, beside. Misábay siya paglakaw sa
íyang giulitawhan, He walked beside the girl he was courting. {2} [A2;
b(1)] go by, around s.w. Unsa man tung mananápang misábay sa ákung úlu?
What k.o. insect is this that is darting around my head? Gisabáyan nákù
ang ákung kuntra arun maglágut, I purposely went by my enemy’s house to
provoke his anger.

sábay_2 n k.o. jellyfish with stinging cells in the tentacles.

sab-ay v [AN; c] let s.t. dangle over the edge of s.t. or over one’s
shoulder. Kinsay nagsab-ay sa tualya diri sa kurdísu? Who hung the
towel over the window sill? Ayawg sab-áyi ning ákung abága sa ímung
buktun, Don’t hang your arms over my shoulder.

sabdyik n subject in school.

sabid n encumbrance, s.t. making action laborious. Way sabid nga
mulakaw ang way anak, S.o. with no children can go out unencumbered.
v [AB12; c5] become encumbered, cause encumbrance. Makasabid ning ákung
pagsabak sa ákung trabáhu, My pregnancy is a terrible encumbrance to my
work.

*sabikil (from bikil) v [b(1)] accidentally nudge s.t. with the elbow.
Ayawg yapayapa kay sabiklan nímu ang butilya, Don’t wave your hands
around because you might knock the bottle with your elbow.

sabilay, sab-ilay = sambilay.

sabin v [A; b6] do s.t. in addition to one’s main task. Musabin kug
pangutaw samtang maglung-ag, I’ll do some ironing while I’m cooking the
rice. Isabin ta kag palit ug sigarilyug manmirkádu ku, I’ll buy your
cigarettes when I go shopping.

sab-it v [A; c] {1} put s.t. small around s.t. that holds it or pierce
it with a hook. Nasab-itan ang ákung karsúnis sa alambring tunukun, I
snagged my pants on the barbed wire. Isab-it lang nang ímung baskit sa
halígi sa kural, Just hang your basket on the fence post. {2} decorate
with a medal hung from a ribbon put around the neck. Gisab-ítan siyag
midalya, He was decorated with a medal. {2a} attribute credit to s.o.,
give him the honor due him. {3} put a curved thing around s.t. to pluck
or bring it down. Sab-ítan lang nímu ang búnga ug kaw-it, Dì na mistil
sak-un, Just pull the fruit down with a hook on a pole. You don’t have
to climb up for it. -anan n s.t. onto which s.t is hooked.†

sablag = sabwag, 1.

sablaw v {1} [B1256] for the strings to be out of tune. Unsáun nímu
pagkuskus ánang sistáha nga nasablaw man nà? How can you play that
guitar when the strings are not tuned? {2} [B1256] be somewhat off,
crazy. Uy nasablaw ka nga nagswítir ug mudtung dakù, Hey, have you gone
crazy, wearing a sweater at high noon!

sablay v {1} [A1; c] put s.t. on top of s.t. else going beyond its
edge. Kinsay nagsablay íring kawáyan sa kural? Who placed the bamboo
pole across the fence? Dì tà nímu sabláyan nang alambri sa
iliktrisidad, You should not hang anything from the electric wire.
{2} [a12] for a boxer to totter (lean on the ropes). Nasablay sa ring
ang buksidur dihang nagrúgi siya, The boxer leaned on the ropes when he
became groggy. — sa luwag state of development of the coconut where the
meat is firm enough to hold together (lit. will hang over the edge of
the ladle) but not stiff. -an(→) n longitudinal beams under the roof
running along the posts on which the rafters (salagunting) rest.

sabli n saber. v [a12] make, make into a saber. (→) v [a12] stab with a
saber.

sablig v [AN2; a12] throw or splash water on. Gisablígan níyag túbig
ang nagbagang puthaw, He splashed water on the glowing steel. n action
of splashing or throwing water. paN- v [A2; c6] splash water on oneself
in bathing, -ay v [C23] for politicians to engage in mudslinging.

sabluk n intense desire to eat s.t. one hasn’t eaten in a long time.
v [A123P; a4] have an intense desire to eat s.t. Gisabluk kug mangga sa
didtu ku sa Istíts, I conceived an intense craving for mangoes when I
was in the States. hiN- v [A] eat s.t. in great quantity to satisfy
one’s intense desire to eat it. Makahinabluk tag káun ug mangga karung
swildu, We can eat mangoes to our heart’s content on payday.

sabnit v [A; a2] snatch s.t., esp. in stealing. Nasakpan ang nagsabnit
sa íyang pitáka, The man who snatched her bag was apprehended.

sabsab v [AN; a2] graze. Túa sa lagúna nanabsab, It’s in the pasture
grazing. Háin áning kandínga nagsabsab sa misítas? Which of these goats
ate the ornamental plants?

sabud_1 v {1} [A2; b(1)] catch s.t. against an obstruction. Bantay kay
musabud ang ímung tiil sa tiil sa lamísa, Watch out or you will hit
your foot against the table. Nasabdan ang misitíra sa íyang sáya, Her
skirt accidentally caught against the flower pot. {2} [A; a12] trip,
cause s.o. to stumble. Kinsay nagsabud sa ákung tiil? Who tripped me
(lit. my foot)? {2a} [A23] make a slip, trip up. Bisag unsáun nátug
amping sa átung trabáhu, musabud giyud ta usáhay, No matter how careful
we are, we can’t help making a mistake once in a while. {3} [a12] be
delayed. Didtu na pud ka masabud sa bilyaran! You’re late again because
you played billiards. walay — without offering obstruction. Way sabud
nga pagkasyát, A basketball shot that went in without touching the
ring. Pilipínu, apan way sabud ang íyang dílang musultig Ininglis, He’s
a Filipino, but he can speak English with the greatest of fluency.
(←)_1 a cumbersome, giving hindrance to movement. Ubang bátà, dì layhan
ug taas nga karsúnis kay sábud kunu, Some children don’t like long
pants because they’re cumbersome.

sábud_2 v [A; c] {1} sow, sprinkle seeds on a bed. Ang dáwang ákung
isábud, The millet I am going to sow. {2} feed chickens by sprinkling
grains on the ground. n action of throwing grains. Ákù rung sábud sa
manuk, It’s my turn to feed the chickens. (→)_2 {1} grain to strew to
fowls. {2} = saburan. saburan n seedbed where seeds are sprinkled for
germination.†

sabug, sábug usually, most commonly [so-and-so] rather than s.t. else.
Sabug siyang muanhi sa upisína maalas utsu, He usually comes to the
office at eight o’clock. Sabug sa ákung midiyas putì, Most of my socks
are white. ma- = sabug.

sábul = bulsa (slang).

sabúlag (from bulag) v [A; c] strew, scatter out. Nahisabúlag ang mga
libru nga ákung gikaptan dihang gipakuratan ku, The books I was
carrying fell in all different directions when s.o. frightened me.

sabúlak v [A; c] strew, sprinkle s.t. small. Kinsay nagsabúlak ug pasì
sa mais sa ákung gardin? Who strewed corn grains in my garden? Sabuláki
ug kinudkud kísu ang sud-an, Sprinkle grated cheese on the food.

sabun n {1} soap. {2} intense scolding. v {1} [A; b(1)] soap s.t.
Sabnig maáyu ang kamisin kay nagkagrása, Soap the undershirt well
because it is smeared with grease. {2} [A; b5] be severely scolded.
Nasabun (nasabunan) ku. Ikaw man gud, I got a good scolding because of
you. -in-an n s.t. onto which soap has been rubbed.

sábung n cockfight, usually without gaffs. v [AC; a] {1} fight cocks.
Sabúngan ku nang ímung ugis sa ákung pula, I will try out my red cock
on your white one. {2} pair off people, usually in a love match. pa-a
let [subject] have a light from a burning cigarette. Pasabúnga ku bi,
Let me have a light. -íru, maN-r-(←) n one who fights cocks.

sab-ung v [A; c6] {1} hang s.t. by passing it around s.t. else.
Kasab-úngan nang ímung simud ug baskit, You’re pouting. (Lit. A basket
could be hung from your mouth.) Isab-ung lang nang sista sa halígi,
Just hang the guitar over the post. {2} decorate with a pendant medal
hung from a ribbon. -anan n hook or nail from which things are hung.

saburnu = suburnu.

sabut v {1} [A2] understand. Walà ka makasabut kay dílì man ka musabut,
You didn’t understand because you don’t want to understand. Ayaw ug
sabta ug láin ug dì ku muadtu sa inyu, Don’t take it wrong if I do not
go to your place. {2} [A12] sense, be vaguely aware of s.t. Midágan ang
irù kay nakasabut nga iháwun siya, The dog ran away because he sensed
that he would be slaughtered. Hingsabtan ming Máma nga manan-aw mig
sini, Mama became aware that we were planning to go to the movies.
{3} [A23] obey, do what one was told to do. Bísag sáun nímug ingun dì
giyud nà siya musabut, No matter how much you tell him, he won’t obey.
n one’s way of understanding. Sa ákung sabut, dì na tu mubálik, As I
understand it, he won’t come back. interjection {1} I don’t know
(giving a curt tone). ‘Kahibáwu kag háin si Tatay?’—‘Sabut,’ ‘Do you
know where Father is?’—‘Nope.’ Sabút uruy níya ug mukúyug ba siya, I
don’t know about him, if he is going. {2} understand? (short for
nakasabut ka?) (←) v {1} [C; ab4] make, come to an agreement with s.o.
Magsábut tag unsáun nátù pagbáyad sa útang, Let’s agree on how to pay
the debt. Nagkasábut na ba mu si Pidru báhin sa pagbáhin sa yútà? Have
you come to an agreement with Pedro about how the land is to be
divided? Ikay makigsábut ni Binut kay kamuy amígu, You make the
agreement with Benot because you two are friends. Unsay inyung
gikasabútan? What agreement did you make? Lisud kang igkasábut kay dì
ka mutúman, It’s impossible to have an agreement with you because you
don’t stick to your promises. {2} [C; abc3] talk s.t over to reach s.t.
mutually agreeable. Magsábut lang unyà ta ug pilay bayranan, We’ll come
to an agreement later on the price. Mahímù pang sabútun ang inyung
gikasungían, You can still talk your quarrel over. Sabúti siya ug
musugut ba, Have a talk with him to see if he is amenable. Dì siya
ikasábut kay dì mamínaw ug rasun, You can’t come to terms with him
because he doesn’t listen to reason. {3} [C; a12] conspire, be in
cahoots, make special arrangements with s.o. Nagsábut ning duha kay
paríhu ug pamasángil, The two are in cahoots because they have the same
alibi. Sabútun nákù ang gwardiya arun mu paagíun, I will make
arrangements with the guard so that you will be allowed to pass.
{4} [C13] hit it off. Nagkasábut dáyun ning duha kay paríhu sila ug
sabaw, The two hit it off nicely because they are both of the same ilk.
n agreement reached. pa- v {1} [A3] show, give indications of doing
s.t. Dì ka mupasabut nga nangísug ka, Don’t show that you are angry.
{2} [A2; a2] explain to make s.o. understand s.t. Pasabta ku ngánung
kining sumáhay miguwà, Explain to me why this sum appeared. Unsa may
ímung ipasabut ánà? What do you mean by that? -in-(←), sinabtanay,
sinabtánay v [C3; c3] understand each other’s viewpoint. ka-(←)
n person with whom one has an agreement. ka-an(←) n agreement, pact.
Ang kasabútan báhin sa nigusyu nakahátag ug dakung pabur sa Pilipínas,
The trade agreement gave the Philippines a big advantage. -l-an(←)
n mind, intellect. Háit ug salabútan si Míri kay húmuk siya makasabut,
Mary has a keen mind because she easily understands. paN- = sabut, n.
salabtunun a meaningful, giving hidden meaning. Mau tuy ímung nadungug
apan sabtunun (salabtunun) tu kaáyu, That’s what you heard but it was
full of hidden meaning. masinabtánun, masinabútun a considerate,
understanding.

sabutáhi v [A; a12] sabotage. Sabutahíun nátù ang baskit arun mudaug
ang pusta ni Pidru, Let’s sabotage the game so that Pedro will win his
bet. n sabotage.

sabúwak = sabúlak.

sábuy v [A; b6] pass by close to a place. Misábuy lang mi sa Sikihur
padúlung sa Dumagíti, We just went by Siquijor on the way to Dumaguete.
sabuysábuy v [A; b6] pass back and forth. Nagsabuysábuy lang ang
ulitáwu sa íla kay naúlawng mamisíta, The young man just walked back
and forth in front of the house because he was too shy to go in.

sab-uy v [A; a] throw hot liquid at s.o. Sab-úyig ínit túbig nang
nanghangad, Throw hot water at the peeping tom under the house.

sabwag (from bulag) v [AN2; c] {1} throw liquid or s.t. in grains.
Kinsay nagsabwag nímu ug túbig? Who threw water on you? Sabwági ug
balas ang dáub kay misiláub, Throw sand on the fire because it flared
up. Isabwag ang sinsilyu sa mga bátà, Throw the coins out to the
children. {1a} supply in abundance. Dílì makadaug ang pulitikung way
kwartang isabwag, The politician who doesn’t have money to spread out
can’t win. {1b} emit, send forth s.t. in extensive or intensive degree
(literary). Búlan nga nagsabwag sa íyang kasílaw, The moon that was
sending forth its rays. {2} [A13; c6] spread news, make s.t. known to
many. Isabwag ang balità nga nakadaug kita sa burúka, Spread the news
that we have won the court case. {3} [A2] spread. Misabwag sa íyang
láwas ang hanggà, The smallpox spread all over her body. -ay n a
version of jackstones where the player throws a number of stones on the
ground and flips them against each other. v [AC; c1] play sabwagay.

sabyag v {1} [A; c6] throw water, sand. Akuy misabyag ug túbig sa káyu,
I threw water on the fire. Kinsa man tung nagsabyag ug balas sa ákung
nawung? Who was it that threw sand in my face? {2} [A13B; c6] spread,
cause to spread. Isabyag ang balità, Spread the news. Misabyag ang
hanggà sa íyang kalawásan, The chicken pox spread over his body.

sabyu a wise and deeply experienced, often with prophetic abilities.
Ang sabyung tigúlang nakatagnà sa gúbat, The wise old man foretold the
Second World War. v [B12] become wise.

sabyuk = sabluk.

sad = usab.

sád = sálad_1.

sad-ang_1 n in cockfighting, when a larger cock fights a smaller one, a
manner of attaching the gaff on the larger one to offset his advantage:
the gaff is placed higher than usual and the ring holding the gaff is
not tied around the cock’s hind toe. v [c1] attach the gaff in this
way.

sad-ang_2 v [A; b6(1)] hook, snag s.t. s.w. Kinsay misad-ang sa sudlay
sa ákung úlu? Who stuck the comb on my head? Gamay nga sanga ang íyang
gisad-ángan sa kawit, He hooked the palm toddy container over a small
branch.

sad-ay v [A; c] rest s.t. over s.t. else. Nagsad-ay siya sa íyang síku
sa kurdísu, He rested his elbows on the window sill. Hisad-ayan sa
ákung kamut ang íyang páa, I accidentally rested my hand on her thigh.

sadiyà a lively and gay. v [B; a2b6] be, become, make lively, merry.
Magsadiyà ta kay midaug ang átung kandidátu, Let’s be merry because our
candidate won. Sa nagkahubug sila nagkasadiyà pud, The drunker they got
the gayer they became. ka- n liveliness, state of being merry. ma-un
a gay, lively.

sadlayin = sayid layin.

sadsad v [A; a2] dance, with the feet (rather than with the hands or
some other part of the body). Hala! Panadsad mung tanan, All right!
Everybody dance! n dancing. Dúgayng wà makatilawg sadsad, Hadn’t danced
for a long time.

sadsarun = sitsarun.

sadtu {1} = niadtu. see kadtu. {2} = kaniadtu (dialectal).

saduk = saruk.

sad-ung_1 = sab-ung.

*sad-ung_2 -in- n close stitches for sewing buttonholes. v [A; ab] sew
a buttonhole stitch. Akuy nagsinad-ung sa sidsid, I sewed the hem with
buttonhole stitches. -in-an n trimmed with lace.

sadyap n k.o. twill weave of cloth done in the same way as amákan (cf.
amákan). -in- v [A13; a12] weave s.t. in this way.

sā́g = sálag.

ságà n {1} portion or group from a larger quantity, esp. of things for
sale. Tagpíla ang ságà sa kík? How much is the cake per portion?
{2} portion of things strung. Usa ka ságang isdà, A string of fish.
v {1} [A; a] apportion things. Akuy muságà sa dakung isdà, I’ll divide
the big fish into several portions. {2} [A; a12] string things into
groups, usually for sale.

sagábal a hindering, restricting movement, esp. in the achievement of
s.t. Sagábal kaáyu sa átung panghunàhunà nga adúnay daghang atimanun,
It’s difficult to think straight when there are too many details to
attend to. n hindrance, s.t. that prevents achievement. v {1} [A; b6]
constitute a hindrance. Ang íyang pagkaiks kumbik nagsagábal sa íyang
pangimplíyu, His record was an obstacle to his getting a job. Sagabálan
ka bag dala áning malíta? Will it be a burden for you to bring this
suitcase? {2} [B46; b6] be unwieldy. Musagábal gawíun ang prakul ug
tas-un ang pul-an, The hatchet will be unwieldy if the handle is made
too long.

sagábay (from gábay) n friend, comrade with whom one has common
interests and sympathies. Adúnay mga prupisur nga sagábay sa kumunista,
There are professors who are communist sympathizers. v [B256C; a12] be
friends with, stick together as friends. Musagábay kahà ka nákù ug
tinuntuhan ku? Would you stick by me if s.o. tries to do s.t. to me?

ságad_1 {1} — sa most, all. Ságad sa muanhi taganurti, Most of those
that come here are from the North. Ságad sa mga táwu dinhi, Most of the
people here. Ang ságad gibug-atun, The usual weight. {2} with verbs:
usually. Sàgad mulikì ang básu ug huwarag ínit túbig, Glasses usually
crack if hot water is poured into them. {3} common, usual thing. Ang
ságad nímung buhátun mau ang pagtug-an nímu sa inyung dakùdàkù, The
usual thing for you to do is for you to report (it) to your immediate
superior. v [A13] be, become usual, commonplace. Nagságad na ang
pangáwat diri sa ámù, Stealing is rampant in our place. kasagáran =
ságad, 1, 2, 3. {4} ordinary. Ispisiyal ni, dílì ingun sa ubang
kasagáran nga bulpin, This is special, not like other ordinary ball
point pen.

*ságad_2 sagdi short for pasagdi. see pa-(→), 2a. pa- v [A2S; b6]
{1} do s.t. without adequate preparation or forethought. Mipaságad ka
lag tubag bisag wà masáyud, You just went and gave any old answer, even
though you didn’t know. Ngánung magpaságad (magpasagad) ka man ug yabu
ug túbig sa bintánà? Why do you throw water carelessly out of the
window? Pasagári lang ug pusil. Makaigù tingáli kag usa, Just shoot at
random. You might hit one. pa-(→) v {1} [A; b(1)] neglect, fail to give
s.t. its proper attention. Tibíhun ka ug magpasagad ka sa láwas, You’ll
contract T.B. if you neglect your health. Nahagbung siya kay nagpasagad
lang sa pagtuun, He flunked because he neglected his studies. {2} [A12;
b(1)] ignore, not heed, disregard. Makapasagad ka sa íyang mga abúsu?
Could you ignore his abuses? {2a} [b(1)] let be, don’t do anything to
s.t. Pasagdiku. Lakaw lag ímu, Let me be. Go by yourself. Sagdi
(pasagdi, pasagdahi) lang, Never mind, forget it. 2b [b8] be
disregarded. Ang kalagmítan nga ang mamumúnù nía pa sa syudad dílì
kapasagdan, The likelihood that the killer is still in the city cannot
be disregarded. pinasagdan n s.t. neglected. mapinasagdánun,
mapinasagárun a neglectful. {3} [A] live, stay unconcerned or
resignedly (come what may). Magpasagad lang ku dinhi kay wà na kuy mga
paryinti, I’ll stay here to rot for I have no more family.

sagadsad a shuffling. v [A13; a2b6] walk with shuffling steps. -in-
n shuffling noise. Ang sinagadsad sa íyang sinílas, The shuffling of
his slippers.

sagahid_1 v [B6; c1] drag one’s legs in moving from one place to
another, usually because of an injury or defect. Magsagahid nang íyang
mga tiil kay gipulyu man siya, She drags her feet when she walks
because she is a polio victim. Ayaw sagahira (isagahid) ang ímung
sapátus arun dì magubà ug dalì, Don’t drag your feet when you walk or
your shoes will wear out right away.

sagahid_2 = saghid.

sagákang = sagákay.

sagákay v [A; a12] carry or support s.o. with both arms under him.
Amahan nga misagákay sa patayng láwas sa bátà, A father carrying his
child’s dead body in his arms.

sagalak v [B2S46; c1] for liquid to flow with a noisy bubbling or
slurping sound. Nagsagalak ang túbig sa tubud, The water in the spring
is flowing with a bubbling sound. Ayaw sagaláka (isagálak) paghígup ang
sabaw, Don’t sip your soup noisily.

sagalsal a rough with small bumps. v [B; c6] be, become rough. Nawung
nga nagsagalsal sa bugas, A face dotted with pimples. -un a a rough,
bumpy sort. v [B12] become rough. Nasagalsalun ang karsáda pag-ulan,
The road became rough when it rained.

sagang v {1} [A; a12] fend off, ward off or block a thrust or blow. Wà
siya makasagang (makapanagang) sa ákung hampak, He wasn’t able to ward
off my blows. {2} [A; a12] support, keep weight up. Kining parúlus mauy
musagang sa mga busaug, This crossbeam is what supports the joists.
n {1} protection. Tambal nga muhátag sab ug talagsaung sagang sa mga
sakit sa pánit, Medicine that gives unusual protection against skin
diseases. {2} the action of fending off a blow. paN- v [A] answer,
respond to a query. Wà ku makapanagang sa kinalisdang tuksù sa banggà,
I was not able to answer the hardest question in the contest. n s.t.
magical (charm, medicinal concoction, prayer) worn on the body as a
defense against evil spirits or influences. sagangságang v [A; c] ward
off hunger, difficulty temporarily. Makasagangságang giyud ning
lagutmun sa kagútum, We can depend on root crops for food during the
lean months.†

sag-ang_1 a thin and emaciated. Sag-ang siya kaáyu human masakit, He
was very thin after his sickness. v [B; b6] become thin and emaciated.

sagangat n a barb of a hook, spear, arrow, harpoon. v [A; a12] hit with
a spear having several tines. (←) n spear with several tines for
fishing. v {1} [AB6; a1] hook s.t. on a barb, be hooked. Misagángat
(nasagángat) ang angkla sa dakung batu, The anchor got hooked on a big
stone. Sagangáta ang isdà, Spear the fish. {2} [A2SP; a12] make, make
into a spear with several tines.

sagangsang v [B] be rough with sharp projecting edges. Nagsagangsang
ang íyang nawung sa buti, His face is rough with smallpox. -un a rough,
not smooth. Sagangsangun ang ngilit sa dáhun sa magay, The edge of a
maguey leaf is sharp and thorny.

sagansal = sagalsal.

ságap v [A123S; a3b2] {1} catch a whiff by accident. Nakasagap kug báhù
sa patayng ilagà, I got a whiff of the dead rat. {1a} catch some
gossip. Dalì siyang makasagap ug tábì, She is good at sniffing out
gossip. {2} come upon suddenly, become aware of the existence of s.t.
Nasagapan sa mga sundálu ang tinabúnang masinggan, The soldiers came
upon the hidden machine gun nest. {3} [A; a] search for s.t., covering
an area. Giságap níla ang kabukíran sa pagpangítà sa púga, They covered
the mountains looking for the fugitive.

sagapsap_1 a {1} fibrous and dry to chew. Sagapsap kan-un ang lútung
way sabaw, Rice with no soup is very dry to try to eat. Giluwà na nákù
ang tubu kay sagapsap na, Wà nay dugà, I spit the sugarcane out because
it was all pulp and didn’t have any more juice. {2} rough to the touch.
Sagapsap na siyag nawung kay napunù sa bugas, His face is rough because
of the pimples. n sound made by a pig eating. v {1} [B; b6] be, become
pulpy or dry to chew. Masagapsap ang humay ug dì baghásan, Rice is hard
to eat if it isn’t well-polished. {2} [B; b6] for a surface to be rough
to the touch. {3} [B1; a12] make the noise of a pig eating.

sagapsap_2 n k.o. fish.

sagarat, sagárat = lagarat.

sagàsà_1 v [A] make the hollow cracking sound of s.t. splitting.
Misagàsà ang sag-ub nga natumba sa batu, The bamboo container went
crack when it fell on the stones.

sagàsà_2 n k.o. small tree of second growth forest, commonly used as
firewood. -un(→) a wood resembling sagàsà which has grains that do not
run straight and parallel, such that splitting it lengthwise is
difficult.

sagatà = sugatà.

sagay a matured coconuts at the stage when one can hear the water but
the husk is still green. v {1} [B5] reach the mature, but not brown,
stage. {2} [A; a] gather mature coconuts.

ságay v [B2456] for s.t. highly fragile to break into pieces. Miságay
ang bangà nga natumba, The earthen jar broke to pieces when it toppled
over.

sagáyad v [A2S; c1] drag, trail behind. Nagsagayad ang íkug sa búda,
The train of her gown was trailing behind her.

sagaysay v [AB3(1); c1] make stones skip over the surface of the water,
for a stone to do so. Dílì makasagaysay ang batu nga língin, A round
stone can’t skip over the surface of the water. n action of skipping a
stone over the surface of the water.

sagbat = sakbat.

sagbay = sablay.

sagbuk = sabluk.

sagbut n {1} weeds or grasses: any herbaceous plants growing wild. — sa
dágat n seaweeds. {1a} leafy vegetables (humorous). Sígi lang tang
mangáun niínig sagbut, We always have to eat weeds. {2} trash, rubbish.
v [A; b6] put rubbish s.w. Kinsa may nagsagbut diri sa tugkaran? Who
strewed rubbish all over the yard? ka-an(→) n place where there are
weeds. -un(→) a full of weeds, trash. v [B1256] get to be full of weeds
or trash.

saghid v [A; b4(1); c6P] brush, come into light contact. Napásù ku kay
nasaghiran sa kamut ku ang ínit nga plansa, I burned myself when I
touched the hot iron. Ayawg isaghid (ipasaghid) ang alambri sa atup,
Don’t let the wire come into contact with the roof.

ságib_1 v [A; a12] go about a place covering it thoroughly. Ang mga
mananagat miságib sa dágat pagpangítà sa nalumus, The fishermen combed
the sea searching for the drowned man. Sagíbun nátug panaygun ang
tanang tindáhan, Let’s carol at every store.

ságib_2 v [A; a12] transport firewood by letting it float from the
place it was gathered to its destination. n this method of transporting
firewood. mag-r-(→) n one who gathers firewood and transports it this
way.

sagíbu v [A; a] scythe down weeds and small bushes. Ákung sagibúhun ang
mga tanum nga wà kinahanglana, I’ll cut down the useless plants. n s.t.
used to cut down weeds. sagibunhun n thicket of weeds. v [B2; a4] get
overgrown with weeds. Nagkasagibunhun ang tugkaran nga way
bungaybúngay, The yard hasn’t been weeded in ages and is getting
overgrown. Gisagibunhun na ang plása, The plaza is all overgrown.

sagidsid v [A3; b4(1)] move too close to the edge of a pathway or
passageway. Nagpasagidsid pagpadágan ang awtu mau nga nasagidsiran usab
ang táwu nga dihà sa daplin nagtindug, The car was too close to the
edge of the road, so the man standing by the roadside was sideswiped.
pa- v [A; c1] get close to the edge of a pathway. Nagpasagidsid kus
kabalayan nga galakaw kay gaulan man, I walked close by the houses
because it was raining.

sag-ilay v [A13; c6] carry on or sling s.t. over the shoulder. Ang
mananagat nagsag-ilay sa bugsay paúlì sa íla, The fisherman was
carrying his paddle over his shoulder as he walked home. Isag-ilay ang
bág arun sayun dad-un, Sling the bag over your shoulder so that it will
be easy to carry.

sagílit v [A2S] move forward swiftly over the water. Musagílit ang
sakayan basta kusug ang hángin, The boat will move swiftly if the wind
is strong.

ságing n banana tree, fruit. v [b6] put bananas in s.t. Sagingan ba
nátù ang linat-an? Shall we put bananas in the stew? -in-(→) n sweet
made from mashed, ripe tungdan bananas mixed with rice flour, wrapped
in young coconut leaves and boiled. v [A; a] make, have sinaging.
sagingsaging n k.o. ornamental tuberous plant, the general name for
members of the genus Canna.

sagiput v [A2; a2] get away, moving through s.t. with great agility.
Dalì rang nakasagiput ang mangunguut sa daghang mga táwu, The
pickpocket easily eluded capture by running through the crowd.

sagip-ut = hagip-ut, a1, v1. see gip-ut.

sagírit v [A2S; b6] speed away from s.t., whizz by s.t. Nagsagírit
(nagsagirit) siyang nagsakay sa mutur, walà manumbáling ug hiabugan mi,
He sped by on his motorcycle not caring that he was getting dust all
over us.

sagísag n {1} name taken by a person as a pen name, stage name, or
given as a representation of his character. Hitlir ang sagísag ni
Sikilgrúbir, The world knew Schicklgruber as Hitler. {2} object used as
a symbol. Pati ang sagísag sa kalínaw, The dove is a symbol of peace.

sagisi = bil-is. sagisihun n k.o. fish, a type of lagaw.

sagitsit v [A] speed on the surface of water or skip over the surface.
Lisud ig-un ang tambasákan ug musagitsit sa túbig, It is hard to hit
the mudskipper when it races over the surface of the water. Spidbut nga
nagsagitsit sa túbig, Speedboat rushing over the water. — gu words
uttered to start a race. Únu, dus, sagitsit, gu, Get ready, get set,
go!

sagiwsiw v [A] for blood to flow profusely. Misagiwsiw ang dugù sa
gisubáan, Blood flowed profusely from the woman that had a hemorrhage.

sagka = saka, in all meanings and with all affixes except -da.

sagmukù v [B1456; b3] be in low spirits. Nagsamukù siya, may gikagul-an
tingáli, She is in low spirits. S.t. must be bothering her.

sagmúkuy v [A3; c1] be crestfallen, have a downhearted look.
Nagsagmúkuy ang íyang nawung kay wà hatági sa gipangáyù, She had a
crestfallen look because she wasn’t given what she had asked for.
hi-/ha- v [B1256] have a crestfallen, downhearted look. Nahasigmúkuy si
Tátay sa pagkahibalu nga nahagbung ku sa bár, Father became silent in
disappointment when he learned I failed the bar exam.

sagmun_1 n cloth or clothes used to wrap a baby. v [A13; a] wrap a baby
up in s.t. Sagmúni ang bátà kay tugnaw, Wrap up the baby because it’s
cold.

sagmun_2 = salúmun. see sálum.

sagmuyù (from puyù) v {1} [B156] be, become pensive and quiet.
Nagsagmuyù siya sa paghinunàhúnà sa nawálang kwarta, She was pensive
and silent thinking about the money that had disappeared. {2} [B26] be,
become silent and dejected as if in disappointment, defeat,
embarrassment. Nasagmuyù ang ulitáwung gibalibáran, The young man was
dejected when she turned him down. hi-/ha- v [B1256] be struck dumb
with surprise. Nahisagmuyù ang amahan pagkabatì sa nutisya, The father
became speechless upon hearing the news. kahi- n silent, speechless
surprise.

sagnunut see nunut.

sagpà v [A; a2b2] slap, strike the face with the open palm. mu rag gi-
ug wala deeply insulted (as if slapped in the face with the left hand).
Mitalikud si Pidru mu rag gisagpag wala kay gigahutan ni Ansay, Pedro
turned away very much embarrassed because Ansay shouted at him.
n {1} slap in the face. {2} insult. Sagpà sa ákung pagkatáwu ang íyang
gipamúlung, What he said was an insult to my honor. — bahà n a k.o.
freshwater shrimp about 1½″ long which has one claw broader than its
body. paN- v [a1] for s.t. to boomerang on one such that he becomes the
very thing that he scorns. Kusug kaáyung manaway nang bayhána kaniadtu
sa mga laláking turútuy, apan gipanagpà kay inánu giyud hinúun ang
nabána, That woman used to laugh at short men, but it boomeranged on
her because she got a midget for a husband.

sagpang = sikuhan. see síku_1.

sagpù v [A; a12b2] {1} catch birds in the nest by putting the cupped
hands over the top. {2} touch parts of s.o.’s body with the whole hand,
esp. private and other delicate parts. Ayawg apil ug dúlà sa mga láki
kay hingsagpuan ímung tútuy, Don’t join in the boys’ games because s.o.
might touch your breasts. paN- v [A2] go hunting for birds to catch
them in their nests.

*sagráda — iskritúra n the Holy Scriptures. — Pamilya n The Holy
Family.

sagrádu a sacred. Sagrádu kaáyu ning dapíta kay dinhi mahúgas ang
kasundalúhan, This place is very sacred because here the soldiers were
annihilated. v [B125; b6] be, become, consider s.t. sacred. Nasagrádu
álang sa mga bitiránu ang singgit nga Batáan, The cry ‘Bataan’ has
become sacred to the veterans. — Kurasun di Hisus n The Sacred Heart of
Jesus.

sagu_1 n starch obtained from palm trunks, esp. the sago palm (lumbiya)
and the buri palm (buli).

sagu_2 n dead man’s saliva.

sag-ū́ = sag-úlu. see úlu.

sagū̀ v [A23] produce a sudden but prolonged groaning sound. Misagū̀
siya dihang naigù sa kutukutu, He let out a groan when he received a
blow in the solar plexus. Pagdusù níya sa tukun dihà sa túbig misagū̀
kini, The water produced a rushing sound when he thrust a pole into it.

sag-ub n a bamboo 6–7′ long with the nodes removed except at the
bottom, used to fetch liquids. v {1} [A; a] haul liquid in this
container. Sag-úbun ta lang ning tubà, Let’s haul this palm toddy in a
bamboo tube container. Sag-úban tikag túbig, I’ll fetch you some water.
{2} [A3; a12] make into such a container. maN-r- n one who carries
water.

sagubang v [A; a1] face responsibilities, difficulties and endure them.
Akuy musagubang sa ímung galastúhan, I will take care of your expenses.
Nagsagubang tag daghang suliran, We are faced with many difficulties.
Sagubangun ku ang kamíngaw, I will endure the loneliness.

sagud v [A; a1] {1} take over the responsibilities for the expenses or
care of s.t. Akuy nagsagud sa mga galastúhan sa balay, I’m shouldering
the household expenses. Sagura ang ílu, Take care of the orphans.
{2} take the blame. Ang nakasalà mauy musagud sa tanang pagbásul, The
culprit must take all the blame.

ságud v [B12; b6] for a rope or string to be worn out by friction.
Naságud na ang ákung pasul, My fishline is all worn out.

sagudsud n noisy sound of shuffling feet. v [A; c] walk with a
shuffling sound. Ayawg isagudsud ang sapátus kay dalì mahílis, Don’t
drag your shoes when you walk or they’ll wear out fast.

saguksuk n :triggerfish which grow the size of a man’s hand and which
have a long projecting dorsal spine.

sagúkum v [A; a1] {1} take s.o. in the arms and :embrace him tightly.
Ákung gisagúkum ang bátang naghilak, I took the child that was crying
and embraced him. {2} assume :responsibility for. Ang uyuan mauy
misagúkum sa mga ílu, The uncle took on the responsibility of taking
care of the orphans. {3} incorporate into. Mga katungud nga gisagúkum
sa Batakang Baláud, Rights incorporated into the Constitution.
{4} harbor feelings within oneself (literary). Kasilù nga gisagúkum sa
kinahiladman, The disappointments he harbored deep within him.

sagukuy v [A2] leave a group or gathering surreptitiously. Musagukuy ta
arun dì ta hitawgan ug pakanta, Let’s sneak out of here so we won’t be
called on to sing.

ságul v {1} [AC; ab2] mix s.t. with s.t. else, be mixed. Kinsay
nagságul ug asin áring asúkar? Who mixed the salt and the sugar
together? Sagúlun ta ning sibin-ap ug ram, Let’s mix seven-up and rum
together. Bitsuylas ang iságul sa linat-ang bábuy, Put beans in the
pork stew. {2} [AC] go, mix with a group. Nagságul ang hayiskul ug
tagakálids sa bayli, The high school and college students were together
in the dance. n {1} thing added or mixed in. May ságul nga ram ang kúk,
The coke has rum added. {2} mixed, interspersed with. Gibatbátan ku
níya sa nahitabù ságul bakhù, She told me what happened interspersed
with sobs. (→) {1} = ságul, n1. {2} fresh coconut palm toddy which has
old toddy mixed into it. Ang tubà nga sagul daling makahubug, Fresh
coconut palm toddy mixed with old toddy makes you drunk quick. -in-
n things mixed or used in mixing. saksak -in- a mixture of all
different things. Ang ílang sud-an saksak sinágul nga karni: may bábuy,
báka, kanding ug irù pa, The dish was a mixture of various kinds of
meat: there was pork, beef, and dog’s meat as well. v [B145] be a
varied mixture of all kinds. Nagsaksak sinágul ang íyang
sinultihan—Tinagawug, Binisayà, Ininglis, Her speech is a hodgepodge of
English, Tagalog, and Visayan. sagulságul varied in profusion. v [C] be
varied and profuse. Sagulságul ang mga baligyà sa Tabuan, There’s all
different things for sale in the market. ka-(←) n a different one each
time. Kaságul lang nang ímung pamalíbad, You have no end of excuses.
(You make a new one each time.) v [A13] come up with a different one
each time.

sag-úlu see úlu.

sagumáyun n k.o. freshwater fish with a flat head, the size of a man’s
finger.

sagum-ut a {1} unsmiling. Sagum-ut ug nawung ang mga pildíru, Losers in
gambling have unsmiling faces. {2} for the hair to be disheveled,
uncombed. Panudlay kay sagum-ut kaáyu ang ímung buhuk, Comb your hair
because it’s all disheveled. v {1} [A; b6] get an unsmiling expression.
{2} [B; c1] get disheveled. ka- n facial expression depicting a feeling
of unhappiness.

sagungsung v [B; a12] speak through the nose. Magsagungsung ang átung
sinultihan basta sip-unun ta, You speak through the nose if you have a
cold.

sagúngut (from úngut) v [B246] pierce into s.t. and stick fast.
Misagúngut ang tagà sa hásang, The hook got stuck in the gills.

sagunsun (from sunsun) v [A; a2] do s.t. in rapid succession or several
times in a row. Misagunsun siyag ubu, He coughed repeatedly. Ug
makasagunsun kag igù sa buls-ay, If you can hit the bulls-eye
repeatedly. a done repeatedly. Sagunsun ang íyang panganak, She had
babies in rapid succession.

sagunting = salagunting.

saguntù v [A2] {1} hit s.t. and jounce. Misaguntù ang dyíp sa batsi,
The jeep bounced when it hit the hole in the road. {2} grunt, esp. when
hit in the pit of stomach. Misaguntù ang pubring naigus kutukutu, The
poor fellow groaned when he was hit in the pit of the stomach.

sagup v [A; a12] {1} adopt or take s.o. under one’s care. Ug sagupun ta
ka, dad-un mu ang ákung apilyídu, If I adopt you, you will take my
surname. {1a} harbor, give temporary shelter. Saláud ang pagsagup ug
púga, It is a crime to shelter an escaped convict. Ang ákung
kandidatúra gisagup sa partídu, My candidacy was under the aegis of the
party. {2} accept an idea, belief. Ang pagsagup sa binag-ung paági sa
pag-uma, Adoption of the modern methods of farming. Ang kumunismu
sayung sagupun sa mga pubring nagkalisudlisud, It is not hard for the
poor people who have a hard life to embrace communism. -in- n an
adopted person.

sagúran n cloth woven of fiber taken from the unopened leaf of the buri
palm, similar to raffia, used for curtains, blankets, and the like.
v [A; b6] weave this material.

ságut v [B3(1)4] for a trawling net to drag on the bottom when it
should just skim. Nagságut ang palakáya kay daghang bagal ug batu nga
nadala, The trawl net is dragging on the sand because we took in lots
of rocks and shells.

sagutsut (from sutsut) n {1} slurping sound. {2} = sagadsad. v [AP;
c16P] slurp, eat or drink with a sucking sound. Insik nga nagsagutsut
sa íyang nilúgaw, A Chinaman slurping his rice soup. ka-an n place
where grasses or bushes are tall and dense and hard to get through (so
called from the rustling sounds one makes in going through this sort of
land).

sagutsutun_1 a stunted of growth. Sagutsutun kaáyu ang mga tanum nga
mahawngan, Plants growing in the shade are stunted in growth.

sagutsutun_2 a rough-surfaced, not smooth. Sagutsutun kaáyu kag pánit,
You have very rough skin. v [B; b6] for a surface to be rough.

saguy {1} = gaguy. {2} = buguy.

saguysuy n continuous, persistent cough that sounds resonant, vibrating
against the back. v [B; a] have a persistent, continuous, dry cough.
Akuy lisdan ug magsaguysuy na ang bátà, I am the one who feels uneasy
when the child coughs continuously.

sagúyud (from gúyud) v [A2S; c1] be trailing along behind with one end
being pulled at an elevation and the other end being dragged. Musagúyud
ang kawáyan nga gikarga sa karumáta, The bamboo loaded on the cart will
drag on the ground. Ug mulúun ka sa bisiklíta, dílì saguyúrun
(isagúyud) ang ímung tiil, If you ride on the back of the bicycle,
don’t drag your feet.

sagyad v [A; c6P] hang down and touch a lower level. Dílì makasagyad sa
salug ang íyang tiil iniglingkud níya, His feet don’t touch the floor
when he sits.

sáhà 0n shoot, a plant that comes up from the root. v [A2N2] grow
shoots. Ug musáhà (manáhà) na nang ságing, mudaghan, If the banana
grows shoots, it will multiply. paN- v [A2; b6] gather shoots.
manggi-un a giving or growing abundant shoots.

sahì a different from the others. v [B6] come out different from the
rest. Misahì ang íyang túnu sa ubang nanganta, He sang in a different
key from everyone else. Sa parti siya ray misahì kay ang tanan
nag-amirkána, He was different from everybody else in the party because
everybody wore a coat except him.

sáhì {1} similar to, same as. Nagtindug siya sa prúwa sáhì sa usa ka
aráyis sa sakayan, He stood at the bow like the skipper of a boat.
{1a} — pa could it be any different! Sáhì pa? Mau ra nà ang duha! Could
it be any different? The two are the same. {2} as though. Naghigwaus
sila sáhì nga may nakítà sa gawas, They were uneasy as though they saw
s.t. outside. v [C3] be the same. Nagsáhì ang inyung taras, You have
both the same sort of character. -um-, -ay it is exactly the same.
Ayawg pasakiti ang bátà kay sahíay (sumáhì) ra bang paníta! Don’t
inflict pain on the child because (his) skin is no different from
anybody else’s. Ngánung aku may pangutan-ung sumáhì (sahíay) sa usa ka
ignuranti? Why are you asking me, as if I were a fool?

sáhid = salahid.

sahù (from unsay áhù. see unsa, 1d.) Sahù bag dì ka mangasáwa nákù.
Maáyug nahúngut ang kalibútan, Who gives a damn if you don’t marry me?
You’re not the only fish in the ocean.

sáhù v {1} [A; ac] mix things well into each other. Sahúa ang harína ug
ang asúkar, Mix the flour and the sugar together. Íyang gisahúan ug
gamay nga putì ang lugum nga manikyur, She mixed a little light-colored
nail polish into the dark polish. {2} [A; b6] be, move about in
profusion and confusion. Nagsáhù ang mga kutsig dyíp sa Kulun, The cars
and jeeps were in vast profusion on Colon Ave. Íyang panghunàhúnà
gisahúan sa mga pagdúda, All manner of suspicions presented themselves
to his mind. a full of all different things moving in confusion. Sáhù
kaáyu ang Magalyánis ug mapasku, It’s a bustling confusion downtown at
Christmas time.

sáhug v [AC; ac] be mixed together. Misáhug ang kawatan sa punduk sa
táwu, The thief mixed with the crowd. Nagkasáhug ang asúkar ug asin,
The sugar and the salt got mixed together. Dì ka makasáhug sa labadúra
ug wà ang igbabatil, You can’t mix the dough without the mixer. -in-
n mixture.

sahuy n k.o. striped fish of reefs, growing to 6″.

sái, sáin {1} which of the two or several. Sáin man nílang mga tawhána
ang nagsumbag nímu? Which of those persons struck you? {2} which place
is it, was it. Sáin ka ba trabáhu run? Where do you work? Sáin kahà
nákù tu ikabutang? Where (which of the various possible places) could I
have put it?

saka v {1} [A; ac] climb, bring s.t. up. Nagsaka sa hagdan, Going up
the stairs. Kinsay nagsaka sa ákung malíta? Who brought my suitcase
upstairs? Sak-un ku nang hinug nga kaimítu, I will climb to get that
ripe star apple. Isaka ning antína sa ibabaw sa atup, Put this antenna
up on the roof. {1a} [b(1)] work off a debt by gathering coconuts.
Sak-an ku ang ákung útang nímu, I’ll work off my debt to you by
gathering coconuts. {2} [A; a2b2] break into the house. Gisaka na mig
kaduha, Our house has already been broken into twice. {3} [A; b6]
lodge, stay in. Mu nay ákung gisak-an sa istudiyanti pa ku, That’s
where I stayed when I was a student. n {1} yield of coconut trees.
Pilay saka ning ímung kalubian? How much does your plantation yield?
{1a} action of climbing or gathering coconuts. {2} action of coming to
stay at s.o.’s place. Káda saka níya sa ámù magdala giyud siyag
sinugátan, Every time he comes to stay with us he brings a present.
{2a} one who is staying at s.o.’s place temporarily. — kanáug v [A; a2]
go in and out of a house. Mga bátang nagsaka kanáug ug dúlà, Children
running in and out of the house playing. {2} go up and down. — lugsung
n going up and down. Dálang saka lugsung, A road that goes up and down.
(←) v {1} [A; ac] go, bring uphill. Tuktuk nga bungtud nga dì masákag
trák, A steep road that a truck cannot negotiate. {2} [A2S] rise to a
high degree. Gasíging sáka ang prisyu, The prices keep rising. {3} [A2]
formally ask permission to marry. Ugmà musáka na sila si Pidru sa ka
Maríya, Tomorrow Pedro and his family will ask for Maria’s hand.
{4} [A2; c] gain stones in a game of sungkà (putting them in the home
base). {5} [A12; c6] carry numbers in adding or multiplying.
Singkuwinta idus. Ibutang ang dus ug isáka ang singku, Fifty-two. Write
down two and carry your five. {6} [A2; b6] for a school of fish to go
near the shore. Ang mga bansíkul musáka sa búlan sa Máyu, The mackerel
come near the shore in the month of May. {7} [A2; c] for a boat to put
into shelter. Musáka ang mga barku ning luúka basta magdáut ang tyimpu,
The boats put into this cove when the weather is not good. {8} [A] for
cards to come to one. {8a} [A12; b4] draw cards. Kun sakáan kug maáyung
baráha, If I get good cards. n {1} set of cards coming up. {2} rental
for a gambling device. {3} bag-ung — s.o. who has just recently become
popular. Bag-ung sáka pa siya sa buksing mau nga sikat kaáyu, He is a
new boxing star so he is very popular. 4, 5 = saka, n. — kanáug = saka
kanáug. — us-us = saka kanáug, 2. pa-(←) v {1} [A; c] file a charge,
application, petition. Kásung ákung gipasáka bátuk níya, The case I
filed against him. {2} [A; c56] file, pass a law. Wà pa ikapasáka ang
balaudnun, The bill hasn’t been passed (or filed). {3} [A1; b6] rent
out a gambling device. paN-(←) v [A2] climb up to pick. Túa, nanáka ug
lubi, He’s picking coconuts. sakaan n in a sungkà game, the hole
nearest the home base (balayan)—so called because that is where the
stones go into the home base from (sáka, 4). -da(←) n group of people
recruited to work in another place. Adúnay sakáda sa mga trabahadur sa
asyinda, They are recruiting labor for the plantation. v [A; a] recruit
workers. sinak-an a {1} amount paid to a person picking coconuts.
{2} gift of the groom to the bride following the marriage ceremony.
{3} amount paid by a parent of children enrolled in a public school to
pay for minor projects. {4} food and drinks stored up in a house one
has moved into, enough to last for three days, usually including a
slaughtered animal. The purpose of doing this is magical: it assures
that the owner will not run out of anything while he lives there.
mag-r-(←), maN-r-(←) n coconut picker. sakaun a s.t. one has to climb
if he is to reach it. Layù ang íla ug sakaun pa, Their place is far
away and you have to climb to get there.

sakáang v {1} [A2S3P] totter under a heavy weight with the legs spread
far apart for balance and foothold. Pára usa ka tárung túbig,
nagsakaang ka na! All you are carrying is a can of water and you are
tottering! {1a} [B28; b6c1] walk with the legs wide apart due to some
ailment. Musakáang ang táwung danlákan, A person who has a hernia walks
with his legs wide apart. {2} [A2S3P] undergo great hardship.
Nagsakaang ku adtung pangutanáha, I sweated out that question.

sakab n k.o. fishing trap of shallow waters put directly over the fish
to be trapped. v [A; a] fish with a sakab.

sak-absurbir n shock absorber.

sak-ang v [A; c] {1} sit down, set s.t. on s.t. that fits the bottom.
Nagsak-ang sa inudúru, Sitting on the toilet. Gisak-ang níya ang kúlun
sa dagang, He put the rounded pot on top of the holder. {2} sit, set
s.t. down carelessly without noticing whether it is in the proper
place. Ayawg sak-ángi nang kartun kay mahulbà, Don’t just plunk
yourself down on that box because it will collapse.

sakapi, sakapì instead of (doing s.t.). Sakapì nga magtrabáhu natúlug
siya sa landung, Instead of working, he slept in the shade.

sakar a fitting exactly. Sakar kaáyu níya ang sinínà sa íyang kalúha,
Her twin-sister’s dress fit her perfectly. v [B26; c6] fit exactly.
Musakar kahà ning yawíha sa ímung aparadur, I wonder if this key will
fit the lock in your chest.

sakat v {1} [A2; b4(1)] take hold by piercing. Dílì kaáyu musakat ang
tagà sa gáhing paun, The hook doesn’t easily pierce hard bait. Nasaktan
ang kabli sa angkla, The anchor caught the cable. {2} [A2; c6] for a
gear to mesh. Ang kambiyu dílì musakat sa primíra, The transmission
doesn’t mesh in first gear. {3} [A2; a1] be on time to do s.t. Musakat
ku sa primírung byáhi sa trák, I want to catch the first bus trip.
{4} [B246] believe s.t. obviously not true. Ug musakat ka ánang
isturyáha, tuntu ka, If you believe that story, you’re a fool.
a falling exactly on a certain time. Sakat giyud ang íyang kasal sa íya
pung adlaw, Her wedding day falls just exactly on her birthday.

sakáti n a slender perennial grass of waste places: Paspalum
conjugatum.

sakay v {1} [A; ac] put s.t., ride, get on a vehicle. Dì ku musakay
ánang ímung awtu, I will not ride in your car. Wà ku makasakay dáyun, I
couldn’t find transportation right away. Taksing ákung gisakyan, The
taxi I took. Isakay ring bátà sa taksi, Get this child on the taxi.
{2} [A2] for a vehicle to accommodate a certain amount. Ang sakayan
níya musakay ug lima, His boat takes five. {3} [A2; b(1)] join in with
other people. Dì ku musakay sa inyung hantak, I will not join your
coin-tossing game. Dílì nímu ángay sakyan ang panagsultisulti námù, You
should not butt into our conversation. Hungíhung nga isakay run sa
Libiral si Pilayis, Rumor that Pelaez would cross over to the Liberal
party. {3a} [c6] include s.t. together with a list that has been made
up. Ikasakay pa ba ni sa badyit rung tuíga? Can this be included in
this year’s budget? Ikasakay pa ang ímung ngálan sa lista kay dì pa
ulahi, We can still add your name to the list because it’s not too
late. {4} [A2] believe or react favorably to s.t. not true. Dì ku
musakay ánang ímung ulug-úlug, I will not believe your flattery.
n {1} passenger, cargo. Pila may sakay sa dyip? How many passengers did
the jeep have? Blu sil ang sakay sa bangkà, The boat was carrying
smuggled cigarettes. {2} load capacity. Pilay sakay sa ímung sakayan?
How many passengers does your boat hold? {3} aboard. Sakay na ang
tanang pasahíru, The passengers are all aboard. Milarga ang trák sakay
ang íyang asáwa, The bus left with his wife aboard. (←) v [C; c6] ride
together. Táwung ákung gikasákay, The man I rode together with. a for
there to be lots of people wanting rides. Kay ulan man, sákay kaáyu
run, Since it is raining, there are lots of people who are looking for
transportation. -an n wooden boat of any size, with or without a sail.
v [A1; a1c] go, take by boat. paN-an v {1} [A2; b6] engage in hauling
or passenger business with boats. Sa nanakayan pa ku abut kug Masbáti
usáhay, I sometimes went as far as Masbate with my ferrying business.
{2} [A2; c6] go boating. Manakayan ta ug mangalígù ta sa Talísay, We
will go boating when we go swimming at Talisay. {3} [A2] man a boat.
Duha ka táwu ang nanakayan niíni, Two people were manning this boat.
-anun(←) n {1} crew on a sakayan. {2} fisherman. ka-(←) n fellow
passenger. Mangunguut ang ákung kasákay, The other man in the vehicle
was a pickpocket. salakyanan, salakyan n passenger vehicle. -um-r-(←),
mag-r-(←), maN-r-(←) n passenger.

sakbang a across, on the opposite side. Ang naglingkud sakbang nákù,
The one sitting across from me. v {1} [C] be across from each other.
Nagsakbang mig balay, Our houses are across from each other. {2} [AC;
a] be contenders, opponents. Akuy musakbang kaníya sa pulitika, I’ll
run against him in politics. Makigsakbang ku bísag dakù, I’ll take him
on, big as he is. {3} [A1; c6] push s.t. concave into s.o.’s face.
Isakbang ku ning usa ka hulmahang litsi plan sa ímung simud, I will
push this dish of custard on your snout. ka- n rival.

sakbat v [A; a1c] say s.t. after s.o. else has spoken, butting in or
not. Way batásan tung nagsakbat sa panagsultiánay, The one who cut in
on the conversation has no manners. n thing said in response or butting
in. ‘Muadtu pud ku,’ sakbat níya, ‘I’ll go, too,’ said he.

sakbit a adjacent, very near. Ang ákung lamísa sakbit sa kang Abil, My
table is beside Abel’s. v {1} [C; ac] be near, next to each other.
Nagkasakbit sila paglingkud sa sini, They happened to sit beside each
other in the movies. {2} [AC; b] touch lightly, brush against. Ang
ílang gipanagsultíhan misakbit sa Kumunismu, Their conversation touched
on the subject of Communism. Nasakbitan ang bátà sa naghagurus nga
awtu, A speeding car brushed the child. {3} [A; a] snatch s.t. from
s.o. Gisakbit ang ílang kalubihan kay wà makabáyad sa útang, They lost
their coconut lands because they couldn’t pay their debts. Nakasakbit
kug pila ka púlung sa ílang panagsulti, I caught a few snatches of
their conversation.

sakbut v [A; ab2] {1} scoop, get by cupping in the hand. Musakbut kug
usa ka kumkum bugas, I will scoop out a handful of rice. {2} snatch,
grab s.t. from. Gisakbut níya ang kwarta nga gibitbit sa táwu, He
snatched the money the man was holding. {3} get fruits with a sakbut.
n fruit picker made of a blade to which a basket or bag is attached,
tied to a pole.

sakdap v {1} [A; b6] swoop down at, on. Gisakdápan ku sa dakung banug,
A big hawk swooped down at me. {2} [A2; cP] touch swiftly and lightly
with one’s hand. Kamut nga kugihang musakdap sa mga sangput sa dalága,
A hand that readily touches young girl’s buttocks. -ay(→) n game with
kites where the kites are made to battle each other. v [AC; c6] have a
kite fight.

sakdaw v 1, 2 = sakgaw. {3} [A; a] divert s.o.’s hands or arm. Misakdaw
ang ákung anak sa ákung kamut arun ku muundang, My daughter held my arm
to stop me. Nanuyù nà siya nga nakasakdaw lang ku níyag gamay, She got
angry at me when I happened to nudge her arm lightly.

sakdup v [A; b(1)] swoop down on. Ug musakdup ang ayruplánu, butangi
dáyun, If the airplane swoops down, let him have it. Gisakdupan ku sa
langgam pag-úlì nákù sa kuyabug, The bird swooped down on me when I put
the nestling back in the nest.

sakgaw v {1} [A2; ab2] butt in on a conversation. Ug magsulti ku, dì ka
musakgaw, If I talk, don’t interrupt. Ayawg isakgaw nang ímung mga
hingì ug dúnay bisíta, Don’t interrupt with your whimpered requests
when I have visitors. {2} [A; ab2] snatch, grab at s.t. Wà ku kità
kinsay nagsakgaw sa ímung báhin, I did not see who snatched your share.

sakgum v [A; a1] {1} hold s.t. in both hands. Íyang gisakgum ang inágas
arun imnun, He caught the flowing water in his hands to drink it. 2, 3,
4, 5 = sagúkum. n the amount held in both hands. Usa ka sakgum nga
utanun, The amount of vegetables one can hold in both one’s hand.

sákir n soccer. v [B3C; b6] play soccer.

sakit a {1} painful. Sakit nga samad, A painful wound. {2} hurting,
causing wounded feelings. Sakit kaáyung musulti si Pidru, Pedro speaks
in a hurting way. {3} violent death or way of dying. Naimpas siya sa
usa ka sakit nga kamatáyun, He expired in a violent death.
n {1} physical pain. Sakit nga dílì maagwanta, A pain that can’t be
endured. Sakit sa tiyan, Stomachache. — sa kalyu, pus-un, tíyan, tungà,
túngul s.t. that bothers one intensely (used sarcastically). Sakit ba
nà sa ákung kalyu ug dì ka pahulam? What do I care if you don’t lend me
any (lit. you think it hurts my corns)? {1a} ache, emotional pain. Ang
sakit sa ákung kasingkásing, The ache in my heart. {1b} — sa buut hurt
to one’s pride or feelings. Sakit sa ákung buut nang pagsaway mu nákù,
It hurts my pride the way you criticized me. {2} ailment, sickness. Ang
sakit mikaylap sa kabaryúhan, The disease spread through the
countryside. Sakit sa kasingkásing, Heart disease. binulang —
menstruation. — sa babáyi {a} venereal disease. {b} menstruation. — sa
láwas injury. Nagpakúsug siya sa íyang mutur kay nangítag sakit sa
láwas, He rides fast on his motorcycle because he must want to get
injured. v {1} [A; ab4] become, make painful. Nagsakit ba ang ímung
tangu? Does your tooth hurt? Gisakitan kug maáyu, It hurts like hell. —
ang dughan, kasingkásing [B46; b4] {a} be heartsick. {b} be very
harrassed. Nagsakit ning ákung dughan pagpahílum ning mga bátà, I am
going crazy trying to keep these children quiet. {c} be deeply worried
over s.t. Nagsakit ang íyang dughan kay mikúyug ang íyang trátu ug
láin, She is deeply worried because her boy friend went out with s.o.
else. {1c} — ang kalyu, pus-un, tíyan, tungà, túngul v [A3P; b6] bother
s.o. intensely (sarcastic usage). {2} [AB1256] be, become ill. {3} [b4]
for plants to bear less because of damage. Gisakitan ang agbáti nga
gipanglabnut lang pagpangúhà kay dúgay nga nangudlut, The leaves were
not taken off carefully from the agbáti vine and it took it long to
develop new buds. sakitsakit v [B16] be sick now and then. Mamalhin
kami ug láing puy-anan kay kanúnay lang kung magsakitsakit
(masakitsakit) dinhi, We have to move to another place, as I always get
sick here. n miscellaneous diseases. Sakitsakit sa pánit, Various skin
ailments. (←) v {1} [A13; a12] torture, inflict unnecessary pain.
Gisákit úsà patya, Tortured before being put to death. {1a} [A; ac5]
inflict emotional pain. Gikasákit ku kanang ímung gibúhat, I was deeply
offended by what you did. {1b} [A13; a12] ask insistently, as if
torturing. Ayaw ku sakíta sa ímung bálun, Stop nagging me for your
spending money. {1c} [A3; b6] for children to put up a crying fit.
Musákit na pud ning bátà kay kúlang ug tulug, The baby will put up a
crying fit again because he didn’t sleep long enough. pa- v [b(1)]
inflict several small cuts on the trunk of trees to make them bear more
fruit. pa-(←), paka-(←) v [A13; b6] make sacrifices. Magpakasákit ku
arun mulampus ang ímung pagtuun, I will sacrifice to see you through
your studies. -in-(←) n martyr. ka- n pain, physical or emotional.
ka-(←) n {1} crucifix. mistiryu sa — the Sorrowful Mystery of the
Rosary. {2} severe suffering. -l-an(←) a {1} susceptible to diseases.
Salakítan kaáyu búsà dì maáyu ang biyáhi pára nákù, I easily get sick
so I shouldn’t travel. {2} infested with organisms that cause diseases.
Salakítan kaáyu ning dapíta kay sunaup, This place is infested with
disease-giving organisms because it is low and dark. ma-un n patient,
an ill person. v [A13] be, become gravely ill. Magmasakitun ka ug
magsígi kag kaguul, You will become gravely ill if you always worry.
paN- n pains, aches, characteristics of a sickness. Kining banyúsa
álang sa panakit sa labad sa úlu, This compound is for pains that
accompany a headache.

sákit n socket for an electric light. — tayip nga tigib k.o. chisel in
which the handle is set into a socket instead of having a tang.

sakíyu v [A; a2] get money or valuables belonging to s.o. else by
stealing or swindling. Gigúkud sa pulis ang nagsakíyu sa ákung bág, The
policeman ran after the man who snatched my bag. Gisakíyu ni Huwan ang
kuliksiyun sa buhatan, John embezzled the office money.

saklaw v [A; ab2] snatch at s.t., grab s.t. away from s.o. Sukmágun ta
ka ug saklawun mu ning ákung ayiskrim, I’ll hit you if you try to
snatch my ice cream from me. aN-r- see ananaklaw.

saklit (from kalit) v {1} [AN; ab2] snatch with suddenness. Misaklit
ang bátag duláan pag-ági níya sa tindáhan, The child quickly snatched a
toy as he passed the store. Kamatayun, ngánung gisaklit mu ang bugtung
kung kalípay sa kalibútan, Death, why did you snatch my only source of
happiness in this world? {1a} commandeer on the sea. Ang ílang sakayan
nasaklitan sa Hapun, The Japanese commandeered his boat. {1b} grab
s.o.’s land. {2} [A; a] take a short time off from what one is doing to
do s.t. else, do s.t. quickly. Musaklit kug higdà ug magtrabáhu ku, I
will take a few minutes off from work to lie down. a sudden.

saklub_1 n {1} sheath, holster. {2} wife (humorous). Bisag ásas Timyung
uban giyud ang íyang saklub, Wherever Timyong goes his wife tags along.
v {1} [A13; c6] put, put in a sheath, holster. Isakub na nang ímung
ispáda, Sheathe your sword. {2} [A13; c1] make into a scabbard. -an n =
saklub, n.

saklub_2 n lid, s.t. put over s.t. else as a cover. v [A; b6(1)] cover
s.t. over with a lid or a loose covering. Saklubi ug maáyu ang sud-an
kay arun dílì sungkábun sa iring, Cover the dishes well so that the cat
can’t get at them. Díay tualya isaklub sa ímung úlu, Here’s a towel to
cover your head with.

saklut n sack cloth.

sakmal v {1} [A; a2b2] snatch at s.t. to hold it, grab at as if to
hold. Manakmal siyag tutuy, He’ll grab for your breasts. Nakaikyas ang
bábuy kay tiil ray ákung hingsakmalan, The pig got away because I only
got hold of its feet. {2} [A; c1] put s.t. in the mouth, usually big
enough to fit in it. Sakmala (isakmal) kunu ang ímung kinúmù sa ímung
bàbà, Try putting your fist into your mouth.

sakmit v [A; a2] {1} snatch s.t. away from s.o. Gisakmit ákung rilu,
S.o. snatched my watch. {2} confiscate. Sakmítun sa maistra ang kúmiks,
The teacher will confiscate the comics. {3} take s.o. into custody from
his home. Gisakmit sa Hapun ang gidudáhang girilya, The Japanese
arrested the man they suspected of being a guerrilla. maN-r-
n snatcher.

sakna, saknà v [A; a12] {1} ask s.o. whether he wants to do s.t. or is
willing for s.t. to happen. Nagsaknà si Nítuy nímu ug muuban ka ba,
Nitoy is asking you whether you would like to go along. Saknaa si Máma
mu ug pakuyúgun ka ba, Ask your mother if she’s willing to let you go.
{2} challenge s.o. to a fistfight. Saknaag musúkul ba, Challenge him
and see if he fights. — ug pamaláyi v [A23] for a young man to notify
his parents of his intensions of getting married. Misakna nag pamaláyi
ang anak kung ulitáwu, Our son notified us of his intention of getting
married.

saknib v [AC; c1] lay two things out flat so that the one is partly
over the other. Nagkasaknib ang ámung mga banig kay gamay ra man ang
kwartu, We spread our mats with the edges overlapping one another
because we were in a small room. Sakníba ang duha ka hapin arun dílì
mutagpas ang íhì sa bátà, Let the child lie on two pieces of cloth so
the urine won’t seep through.

saknit = sakmit.

sakpaw a for a broad container to be too shallow. Diyútay rang masúd
áning baskit kay sakpaw, You can’t get very much in this basket because
it is too shallow. v [B1; a12] be, become, make s.t. shallow. Nasakpaw
ang panaksan kay gimasáhag simintu, The basin became shallow because
they mixed cement in it.

sakramintu n Sacrament, one of the seven sacred rites of the Roman
Catholic Church. anak sa — n legitimate child.†

sakrilihiyu n sacrilege.

sakripisyu a requiring an extraordinary expenditure of time, effort, or
money. Sakripisyu kaáyu nákù ning ákung pag-iskuyla kay magtrabáhu pud
ku, It is a great effort for me to study because I must also work.
n sacrifices made. — sa mísa Sacrifice of the Holy Mass. v {1} [A; c]
expend unusual effort or money or deprive oneself for some end.
Magsakripisyu úsà kami arun sa ngadtungadtu makapalit mig balay, We’ll
sacrifice ourselves so we can eventually buy a house. Unsay dílì nákù
isakripisyu pára nímu, What wouldn’t I sacrifice for you? {2} [a12] put
s.o. to an extraordinary expenditure. Ngánung sakripisyúhun man ku nímu
ug paadtu ug dílì nà impurtanti? Why do you make me go there to no
purpose if that is not important? {3} [A13; c1] sacrifice one’s
principles. Sakripisyúhun (isakripisyu) man nímu ang ímung kadunggánan
sa pagkúyug ánang mga tawhána? Why do you sacrifice your honor so you
can go around with those people? {4} [A13; c] sacrifice s.t. for a
future advantage. Isakripisyu ku ning túri arun mabábuy ang rayna, I’ll
sacrifice my rook to checkmate your queen. {5} [A13; c1] mortify one’s
body. Magsakripisyu ang mga madri sa ílang láwas pinaági sa búnal
inigka Byirnis Santu, The nuns mortify their bodies on Good Friday by
lashing themselves.

sakris n sack race. v [A1; b] hold a sack race.

sakristan n sacristan, the priest’s helper in performing various chores
connected with religious duties. v [A3; c1] become, serve as a
sacristan. — mayur n senior acolyte or assistant to the priest.

sakristíya n sacristy.

saks n sax. altu — alto sax. tinur — tenor sax.

saksak_1 v [A; ac] {1} mix solids up or one solid into another. Akuy
musaksak sa baráha, I will shuffle the cards. Ayawg saksákig balas ang
kupras, Don’t mix sand into the copra. {2} chop s.t. into pieces,
usually to mix into s.t. else. Akung saksákun ning sagínga, I’ll chop
these bananas into pieces. {3} [A; a] cook rice or corn mixed with
chunks of sweet potatoes. Musaksak mi ug wà miy sud-an, We mix in
chunks of sweet potatoes in cooking corn or rice when we don’t have
anything to go with it. n cooked cereals mixed with tubers, usually
sweet potatoes. — sinágul see ságul. -in-an n corn or rice cooked with
chunks of sweet potatoes.

saksak_2 v [A; a] stab (slang). Nakasaksak siya apan wà mamatay, He has
stabbed a person but he didn’t die.

saksak_3 n {1} = lumbiya. {2} the starch taken from this tree.

saksak_4 n k.o. small bird.

saksi v {1} [A2; b2] see, witness. Gustu kang musaksi ug bahugbáhug?
Would you like to see a free-for-all? {2} [A2; c6] testify, say s.t. in
evidence. Ayawg isaksi nà sa hukmánan kay makadáut nà nímu, Don’t make
that declaration in court because it can harm you. {3} [A; c1] ask
s.o.’s opinion about s.t. Nakasaksi ka na ba sa ímung mga ginikánan
mahitungud niíni? Have you asked your parents about this? — ug pamaláyi
for a man to notify his parents of his intentions of marrying. Andam na
mi ug musaksi ug pamaláyi ang ámung ulitáwu, We are prepared if my son
signifies his intention to get married. n witness. Bungbung ray saksi
sa ílang gibúhat, Only the walls bore witness to what they had done. —
ni Hiyúba a religious sect, Jehovah’s Witnesses.

saksupun n saxophone. v [AN] play the sax.

saktu short for iksaktu.

sáku_1 n {1} sack of cloth. {2} sackful. Usa ka sákung humay, A sack of
rice. v [A13; a12] put into a sack. -in-(→) v [A; a] do by the sackful.
n by the sackful.

sáku_2 = sákù.

sakù v [A; b6] thrust the buttocks forward with a jerk. Panagsaan ug
sakù sa istriptis ang íyang sáyaw, The stripteaser jerks her buttocks
forward every so often as she dances. a busy, having intense activity.
Sakù kaáyu mi sa tindáhan matábù, We are busy at the store on market
days. (←) v [A13] be intensely busy. Nagsákù mi sa upisína kay duha ra
ming katábang, We are busy as heck at the office because there are only
two of us helpers. sakùsakù v [A; b6] push the buttocks forward to and
fro in rhythmic fashion. Pastilang nakasakùsakù sa irù, My! How the dog
is pumping away at it.

sákù v [A; b6] refuse, not give s.t. Ug sakúan ku níya sa pagpaiskuyla,
unsay ákù? Who cares if he refuses to send me to school? Dalù giyud kay
isákù pa ang paggáwì sa íyang libru, He’s selfish because he denies me
the use of his books. hiN- v [A; b6(1)] begrudge, fail to give s.o.
s.t., esp. s.t. abstract. Dì siya muhinákug bísan unsay ímung
pangayúun, He will not begrudge you, whatever you ask. Naghináku siyag
hátag sa íyang gugma kang Pidru, She refused to give her love to Pedro.
-an(→) a greedy, selfish. -in- v [A] act selfish, ungiving. Dì mi
musinákù sa ámung kusug ug musampit ka námù, If you call on us, we will
not begrudge an ounce of our strength.

sakub = saklub_1.

sákul n k.o. pútu, a sweet made of fine corn flour, cassava flour, and
shredded or squeezed coconut and steam-cooked. v [A; a] make, make into
sákul. -in- = sákul, n.

sakum n clearing in a forest or thicket for planting crops. v [A; b5]
make a clearing for crops.

sakung a bent downwards more than it should be. Sakung kaáyu ning ímung
sundang, bakikaw ug huyad, Your bolo is bent too much downwards. It is
awkward to use. v [B6; a12] get to have too much of a downward curve.
Musakung ang tulawug ug palabihan ug banting, The spring pole will get
a curve in it if you weigh it down too much.

sakup_1 v [A12; b4(1)] {1} catch, capture. Walà ku makasakup sa bábuy,
I was not able to catch the pig. Hingsakpan ta gihápun kang limbungána
ka, I’ll catch you yet, you cheater, you. {2} come upon s.o. doing s.t.
Nasakpan ku sila nga nagháluk, I caught them kissing. {3} come to
understand s.t., esp. for the first time. Sakpan ku na ngánung dílì
muandar ang makina, Now I understand why the engine won’t start. (←)
v [C3] meet each other. Dì mi magsákup kay sayu man kung mulakat sa
trabáhu, We do not meet each other because I go to work early.

sakup v [A; b5c1] do s.t. for s.o. else at the same time as he is doing
it for himself, include another action together with an action one is
performing. Sakpa (sakpi, isakup) kug paniudtu, When you fix lunch, fix
me some, too. n {1} included. Ayaw na lang pagbáyad kay sakup nang ímu
sa ákù, Don’t pay because what I gave already includes yours.
{2} interior, the inside of a house or any enclosure. Dayun diri sa
sakup, Come on in. (←) n {1} member, part of a group. Sákup ka ba sa
ílang kapunúngan? Are you a member of their organization? Sákup pa sa
Kabisay-an ang Sikihur, Siquijor is a part of the Visayan Islands. Dílì
ni sákup sa átung liksiyun, This is not included in our lesson.
{2} member of a group subject to s.o. {3} household help. Gihiyáan mig
bíyà sa ámung mga sákup, All of our household help left us at one time.
v {1} [A23B; c1] make, become a member of s.t. Kining lungsúra nagsákup
(gisakúpan) ug tulu ka baryu, This town includes three barrios.
{2} [A13] have a household servant. Dì ta magsákup arun trabáhu ang
tanan, We won’t get a maid so that everybody works. gin-an(←) n member
of a group subject to s.o. Ang ginsakúpan ni Sultan Ramil, Sultan
Ramil’s men. pa- v [A; ac] hire oneself out, be hired as household
help.

sakup_3 v [A; b5c1] close s.t. Ang maulahig lakaw mauy musakup sa
pulta, The last to leave the house will close the door. Sakpa (sakpi,
isakup) ang ímung libru, Close your book. a closed.

sákut = ságul. paN- n spice. v [A; b] put in spices. Panakútig tángad
ang tinúwa, Put some lemon grass in the boiled fish.

sakuting n folk dance which portrays a mock fight between the Chinese
settlers and native Filipinos. v [A13] dance the sakuting.

sakúung v [A2S; a12] bend forward when walking as if in pain.
Nagsakuung ang táwung bag-ung giupirahan sa apindisítis, The man had
been recently operated for appendicitis and bent forward in walking.

sakwat v [A; a12] lift s.t. up to carry it, putting the hands
underneath it. Sakwáta ang bátà ug ibutang sa katri, Lift the child and
put her on the bed. n action of lifting, amount carried at one time.
Usa na lang ka sakwat ug dá na ang tanan, You can carry everything in
your arms in one trip.

sakyab v [A; c] {1} spread out a blanket with a flinging motion, cast a
net. Gisakyab níya ang basang kurtína sa ibabaw sa lamísa, She spread
out the wet curtain on top of the table. Dì makasakyab ang usa lang ka
táwu ánang dakung báling, One man cannot cast that huge net alone.
{2} scatter, throw in a similar motion. Misakyab ku sa sabud sa mga
manuk, I threw the chicken feed to the chickens.

sakyud v [A; b6] move, push one’s buttocks forward and backward with
the rest of the body stationary. Nagsakyud siya sa pagpanghiláwas, He
was working his buttocks back and forth in the coital act. Ngánung
gisakyúran man ku nímung walay batasána ka? Why did you nudge me with
your lower region, you shameless man? panakyuran n the hip joints. see
also ananakyud and bangkiyud.

sála_1 (not without l) n {1} living room. {2} dakù, lapad ug — one who
wears house slippers outdoors (making the area outdoors as an extension
of his living room—humorous).

sála_2 v [A; a12] strain, filter liquids. Saláhun (saláun) nímu úsà ang
asíti úsà itibul, Filter the oil first before pouring it in. salahan,
salaan n filter, strainer. v [A13; c] make, use as a strainer.

salà n {1} sin. {2} fault. Wà kuy salà nímu, I haven’t done anything
wrong to you. v [A12; b(1)] commit a sin, fault. Nakasalà ka sa ímung
pagbiaybíay, You have committed a sin in ridiculing him. Siyay ímung
gikasad-an, He is the one you wronged. paka- v {1} [A13] be committing
a sin. Nagpakasalà kag púyù ánang minyù, You are committing a sin
living with that married man. {2} [a12] impute a fault on s.o. Ngánung
pakasad-un man ku nímu nga wà man gánì ku makahikap ánà? Why do you
blame me when I didn’t even touch it? sad-an a guilty. v [B1256] be
found guilty. Ug masad-an ka, ipaprísu ka, If you are found guilty, you
will be put in prison. kasal-ánan n wrongdoings or guilt. Ang
kasal-ánan ímung gibúhat dílì mapasaylu bísan anus-a, Your wrongs can
never be forgiven. maka-r-(←) n sinner. Ginúu, pasaylúa ning
mapaubsánung makasasálà, Lord, forgive this humble sinner. masalad-un
a sinful, inclined to commit faults or sins. tag- n one who committed a
specific fault.†

*sálà_1, salà — túud, gud just as I expected. Sálà ra gud túud. Dì wà
mabakak ang ákung panagnà, See, my guess turned out true. Salà gud. Wà
lagi kapasar, Just as I thought. He didn’t pass.

sálà_2 = sála_2.

saláag v [B1256] lose one’s way. Nalángan mi kay nasaláag mi sa
Magalyánis, We were delayed because we lost our way downtown. (→)
v [B46; c1] be off the topic, incoherent in speech, conversation.
Musalaag ang ímung tubag ug dì ka mamínaw sa diskasyun, You’ll be
speaking off the topic if you don’t listen to the discussion. Nagsalaag
ang diskursu sa pulitiku. Wà maáyu pagkahan-ay, The politician gave an
incoherent speech. It was not well planned.

sálab v [A; b6(1)] singe, pass a flame over. Gisában ku ang katring may
kuting, I passed a flame over the bed that was infested with bedbugs.

salában (from súlab) v {1} [A1; a12] for an unglù to pass on the force
that possesses him by inserting it in the food of the victim who then
also becomes an unglù. Kunu makasalában ang pagkáun sa salin sa usa ka
unglù, They say that eating the leftovers of an unglù will make you
one. {2} [a12] be won over to and become crazy for s.t. Gisában na
giyud ka sa madyung, You have gone crazy for mahjong.

salabat (not without l) = tahu.

salábay (not without l) n k.o. longline fishing for small fishes where
several hooks are attached to a line with leaders spaced six feet
apart, one end anchored to the sea bottom and the other end attached to
a float. paN- v [A2; b6] go fishing with a salábay line.

sálad_1 = sanggut, n, v.

sálad_2 tsíkin — n chicken salad. saladsálad v [A; c1] hide poor
quality products underneath or between things of good quality. Ang mga
tindíra sa tabákù maáyung musaladsálad sa mga iskuhídu ug barut, The
tobacco sellers are adept in mixing the first class leaves with the
poor ones.

sálag n {1} nest. {2} the home (literary). {3} source, place where s.t.
or s.o. comes from. Ang Pásil kunu mauy sálag sa mga butangíru, Pasil
is where the toughs come from. — sa kaminyúun state of being married
(literary). Bayinti anyus ang ílang ípun sa sálag sa kaminyúun, They
have been living together in wedded bliss for twenty years. v [A; b6]
nest. Dílì musálag ang langgam dinhi kay duul sa agiánan, The bird will
not nest here because it is near a pathway.

salagmà = sulagmà.

salagsag n matting placed between layers of objects: {1} used in
packing. {2} placed above boiling water to act as a double boiler.
{3} in thatched roofing, the thin slat around which the cogon of the
thatching is wound, tied to secondary rafters. v [A; a] install, pack
s.t. with salagsag.

salag-un n the class of starchy foods consisting of plantains and root
crops. v [A13] have root crops as staple food.

salagunting n principal rafters of a roof. v [A; a2b6] put, make, make
into a principal rafter.

salahid v [A3S; ab2] {1} drag, search the bottom of water for s.t. with
a net or grapnel. Ang pulis musáhid sa línaw pagpangítà sa patay, The
police will drag the bottom of the lake to look for the body. {2} dig
up information. Sahírun mu ang tanang kasayúran báhin sa disgrasya, Dig
up all the information about the accident. Mau ning tabía ákung
nasahiran, I stumbled across this little piece of gossip. (←) n general
term for fish net, grapnel dragged along the bottom. paN- v [A2; b6] go
fishing with the sáhid. n fishing with the sáhid.

salak v [A; a12] catch s.t. in the hands. Salka ang búla, Catch the
ball.

sálak n k.o. nonfatal sickness which is characterized by the yellowing
of the white of the eyes, thought to be caused by stepping over certain
plants or by walking at the back of s.o. who is believed to be a
salakan. v [A123P; b4] get this disease. -an(→) n one who causes this
disease if people walk behind his back. A person gets this supernatural
power involuntarily and often may not realize he has it. He can also
cure it by rubbing the patient’s clothing and saying puyra sálak.

sal-ak v [A; c] intersperse, insert in between. Sal-ákan tag sáyaw ang
átung prugráma, We will insert a dance number every now and then in our
program. Isal-ak ning kartun sa libru, Insert this cardboard between
the pages of the book. n s.t. interspersed or inserted. sal-aksal-ak
v [A; b6(1)] place alternately, do s.t. at intervals. Sal-aksal-ákan
tag kamúti ning átung bugas kay layù pang tingsanggì, We’ll eat meals
of sweet potatoes alternately with rice because the harvest is still a
way off.

salakut (not without l) n {1} = saruk, 1. {2} name of a folk dance
which uses the saruk hat. v [A; c] dance this dance.

salamà v {1} [A12; a12] mispronounce a word so that the resulting
mispronunciation will mean s.t. else. Bútù na man. Bútu diay. Nasalamà
lang ku, I don’t mean vagina. I mean votes. I just misspoke.
{2} [B1256] miss a step in walking. Masalamà man gáning kábaw nga upat
ang tiil, kita pa! If a water buffalo with four legs can miss its step,
how much more can we!†

salamabit, salamabits = salumabits.

salamangka (not without l) n sleight of hand. v [A1; a12] {1} do
sleight of hand tricks. {2} steal. Ayawg isayàsayà nang kwarta kay
salamangkáhun unyà, Don’t display your money carelessly. S.o. might
just magic it away. salamangkíru n magician.

salámat (not without l) thanks, thank you. daghang — thanks a lot. — na
lang thank heavens! Wà miy uban sa balay. Salamat na lang kay miabut si
Bidung pagkahápun, There wasn’t anyone in the house. Thank heavens
Bidong arrived by that afternoon. pa- v [A; b6] thank, give thanks.
Ángay kang mupasalámat níya, You ought to thank him. n thanksgiving,
thanks. mapa-un a grateful, thankful.

salámi n salami.

salamin, salaming n {1} mirror. {2} s.t. made of glass: windshield,
lens, spectacles. {3} paragon, example of s.t. good. Salamin sa kakúgi,
A paragon of industry. paN- v {1} [A2; b6] look at oneself in the
mirror. Manalamin ta arun makítà ug bulingun ba tag nawung, Let’s look
in the mirror so we can see if we have dirty faces. {2} [b6] look at
[so-and-so] and draw a lesson therefrom. Panalamíni lang ang anak ni
Nang Lúling. Mu nay mahitabù ug maglaaglaag, Look at Loling’s daughter.
That’s what happens if you go out. Panalamíni siya kay gustu kung
mag-iningun ka, Look at her. That’s what I want you to be like. sulu-,
salaminsalamin, -an n k.o. pomfret: Apolectus niger.

salampáti (not without l) n {1} general term for pigeons.
{2} prostitute (euphemism). — nga mubù ug lupad = salampáti, 2.

salan n varnish. v [A; b6] apply varnish on s.t.

sálan = unsingálan.

salánap (from lánap) v [A2; b6] {1} flood or spread over an area. Huy,
siradúhi ang grípu kay musalánap ang túbig diri sa kwartu, Hey, turn
off the faucet because the water will flood the room. {2} affect the
emotions intensely (literary). Nawung nga gisanápan sa túmang kalípay,
Face flooded with joy.

sal-ang v {1} [A2; b6] skip over, leave out s.t. Si Pidru dílì
musal-ang ug adtu sa sini káda adlaw, Pedro doesn’t fail to go to the
show every day. Muihap ka gíkan sa iskína, musal-ang kag tulu ka balay,
ang ikaupat mau nay ámù, From the corner, skip three houses. The fourth
is ours. Nakasal-ang ang taypist ug duha ka linya, The typist skipped
two lines. Ayaw sal-ángi ang sunud yugtù, Don’t miss the next chapter.
{2} [C; c1] be placed in alternate sequence. Nagsal-ang ug lingkud ang
mga láki ug báyi, The boys and the girls were seated alternately.
n {1} miss, the instance one fails. Káda kablit usa ka butu. Walay
sal-ang, Each time you squeeze the trigger, one shot fires. It never
misses. {2} amount of time or space intervening. Dakù ang sal-ang sa
ámung pangidarun, There’s a great interval between our ages.
sal-angsal-ang v {1} [A12; c1] mix in two different ingredients
alternately in small amounts. Isal-angsal-ang (sal-angsal-ángun) nímug
lúnud ang harína ug asúkar, Put in the flour and the sugar alternately
in small portions. {2} [A; c1] do s.t. at intervals. Isal-angsal-ang
(sal-angsal-ánga) ang ímung pag-anhi dì kay káda adlaw, Come here every
other day, not every day.

salánga = pantíhan.

salangásag a for the teeth to be overlapping and protruding. v [B] for
the teeth to get to be crooked and protruding. Maung misalangásag
(nasalangásag) ang íyang ngípun kay mahadluk man magpaibut, Her teeth
are crooked because she was afraid to have her baby teeth pulled.

salangásang = salangásag.

salangkap = langkap.

salantà v {1} [A2; b6] stop by, stay for a while. Inigbiyáhi nákù sa
Manílà, musalantà sà kug duha ka adlaw sa Rumblun, When I take my trip
to Manila I will stay for two days in Romblon. {2} [A; a12] put a stop
to s.t., prevent s.t. Kapakyas nga makasalantà sa mga panganduy,
Failures that foil one’s ambition. Salantáun ku ang íyang laksut nga
batásan, I will put a stop to his bad habits.

salapang n spear that is thrown or a harpoon. v {1} [A; a12b2] hit with
a spear, harpoon. Salapangun ku nang irúa ug mubálik diri, I will spear
that dog if it comes back here. {2} [A13; a12] make into a spear.

salapat v [B1256] for s.t. not to go directly into a hole but get
splattered around the edge. Kinsa may diri sa kasilyas nga nasalapat
man ang tái sa bankíyu? Who used the toilet that there’s feces on the
seat?

salapáti = salampáti.

salápi (not without l) n corn stalks, esp. the younger ones. v [AN; a]
gather corn stalks as feed.

salapì n {1} money. {2} fifty-centavo coin. {3} silver. paN- n source
of income. Sa alkabála may panalapì ang lungsud, The market fee
provides a source of income for the town. kalíhim sa — Secretary of
Finance. maN- n fifty centavos each. see also sápì.

salápid = sulápid.

salapsap n collective term for various k.o. tiny fish that are found in
large schools.

salapwang v {1} [A; a12] carry s.o. with the arms underneath.
Nagsapwang sa patay níyang láwas, Carrying her dead body in his arms.
{2} [A3; a12] support that is placed on top of it. Ang usang halígi sa
balay sapwángun áning lapad nga batu, This flat stone will support one
of the posts.

salapyaw n dip net with a light mesh weight or a butterfly net. v [A;
a] get with a dip net. Salapyáwa ang pitupitu, Dip out the pollywogs.

sálas = sála_1.

salasa_1 v [A; a] cut the leaflets from the fronds of the nipa palms
for shingles. -in- n nipa palm frond leaflets cut and prepared for
making into shingles.

salasa_2 n k.o. garfish: Ablennes hians.

sálat v [A; a] catch s.t. by surrounding it, keep s.t. entrapped or
confined. Kural ang nakasálat sa mga manuk, The fence kept the chickens
penned. Ang gagmayng isdà dílì masálat niánang balínga kay dagkug mata,
That net has too large of a mesh to catch small fish.

salátan n strong wind coming from the south during storms.

saláud (coined from salà and baláud—not without l) n crime against
persons and property. Ang saláud sa pagpatay, The crime of murder.

salawákì = saluwákì.

salawásid = saluwásid.

salay v {1} [A; c6] lay s.t. over s.t. else so that part of it hangs
over. Isalay lang ang tualya sa kurdísu, Just hang the towel over the
window sill. {2} [a3b8] for s.t. that fell to be caught atop s.t., not
reaching the ground. Ang gilábay nákung sinílas didtu masáy sa atup,
The slipper that I threw landed on the roof. -an(→), saylanan
n {1} drying rack. {2} boat rack made of two forked sticks. {3} wooden
support for a stone mill.

salaysalay n k.o. fish, name given to various crevallies.

salba n shot fired into the air. Kadtung salba pára pagpahúnung sa
kawatan nga midágan, That shot fired into the air was to make the thief
that was running away stop. v [A; b6] fire a warning shot into the air.

salbabída n lifesaver or life jacket. v [A12; a12] wear, make into a
lifesaver.

salbadur see salbǎr.

salbáhis a cruel or incorrigibly ill-mannered. Ang salbáhis níyang bána
nanagmal na pud sa mga bátà, That beast of a husband of hers is beating
the children again. v [B12] be, become a beast. -in-(→) v [A; b6]
behave like a beast. ka-anan n atrocities. Ang mga kasalbahisánan nga
nabúhat sa mga Hapúnis, The atrocities that were inflicted by the
Japanese.

salbǎr v [A; a12] save from defeat, ruin, or dishonor. Aku may
nagsalbǎr sa íyang nigusyu, I saved his business. Ug dúnay kaláyu
salbaha ang mga mahalung mga butang, If there’s a fire save the things
of value. salbadur dil mundu n one who saves the honor of an unmarried
woman whom s.o. else made pregnant. v [B56] be, become a woman’s
saviour.

salbáru_1 n k.o. round thin, baked wafer, big as a dinner plate (or
nowadays also in other shapes), made from a mixture of flour, sugar,
and shredded coconut. v [A; a] make salbáru.

salbáru_2 n euphemism for salbáhis.

salbasiyun n salvation of the soul from sin and hell.

salbid, salbids n {1} salvage from s.t. destroyed, saved for later use.
{2} used clothing sold cheaply. v {1} [A; a] salvage s.t. from s.t.
destroyed. Salbidyun ku ning mga butilya. Mahálin ra ni, I will salvage
these bottles. We can sell them. {2} [c1] donate used things as relief.
Bag-u pa ning sapatúsa, apan salbidyun (isalbids) ku na lang, These
shoes are still new, but I’ll donate them for relief.

salbu n style of fighting of a cock in which it leaps, slashing with
its feet and moving backward at the same time to evade the blows of its
opponent.

salga v [A2; b6] {1} put in one’s word in a conversation. Íya ra tanang
sulti. Dì ku makasalga, She does all the talking. I can’t get a word in
edgewise. {2} enter in a game or some collective activity. Way bátang
makasalga áning súgal sa baráha, No child may participate in this card
game.

salgu n in carom billiards, the opening shot of a round. v [A; c16] do
the opening shot. salguhan n fixed points on the table where the three
balls are placed for the opening shot.

sáli v [A; abc] [do] constantly. Nagsáli ka lag pangáyù, You are always
asking me for s.t. Ayaw isáli ug dukduk ang rúlir sa lamísa, Stop
tapping the ruler on the table all the time.

saliabgaw = adgaw.

saliat v [A] leave off what one is doing for the moment to do s.t.
else. Káda anhi níya sa syudad musaliat giyud sa rílis, Every time he
comes to town he stops in at the red light district.

saliay = sag-ilay.

salibadyaw = salibagyaw.

salibag v [A; c] {1} throw s.t. with force. Pagkabanggà sa mutur
nasalibag siya sa kanal, When his motorcycle crashed, he was hurled
into the canal. {2} throw s.t. away so as to have it out of one’s way.
Isalibag na nang mga butilya, Throw those bottles away. -anan(←)
n place where garbage and rubbish is thrown.

salibagyaw a {1} annoyingly noisy. Gustu tà kung mutuun, piru
salibagyaw ka kaáyu dihà, I would like to study, but you are disturbing
me with your noise. {2} having the head awhirl, not knowing what to do.
n noise that is disturbing. v [B; b6] {1} be, become annoyingly noisy.
{2} be confused with the head awhirl. Nagsalibagyaw ang ákung úlu karun
ása kug ipalit ug bugas, I’m at a loss now as to where to get my next
meal. Nasalibagyaw ang ákung úlu tungud sa pagpamabáyi sa ákung bána,
I’m very disturbed because my husband is fooling around with women.

salibagyu = sulaybagyu.

salibay = salibag.

salib-ay v [A; c] carry s.t. slung over on the shoulder. Isalib-ay ang
kamira, Sling the camera on your shoulders.

salíbu v {1} [A; b] sprinkle water on live embers. Gisalibúhan ku ang
dáub únà mulakaw, I doused water on the fire before I left. {2} [A23;
b6] for rain to be blown in by the wind. Ug musalíbu, tabúnig plastik
ang mga písa, If rain comes in the window, cover the spare parts with a
plastic sheet. {3} [A; b6] for it to drizzle lightly. n {1} rain blown
into a sheltered area from outside. {2} light drizzle. Salíbu ra man
ni. Dì na lang ta musílung, All this is is a light drizzle. Let’s not
bother taking shelter.

salibut (from líbut) n dip net with a light weight mesh, used mainly in
sea fishing. v {1} [A; a] get with a dip net. {2} [a1] catch s.o. by
means of a ruse or trick; be caught by means of trickery. Nasalibut
giyud ang kawatan sa gipan-an ug kwarta, They finally caught the thief
when they baited him with money.

salibutbut n k.o. shrub, the leaves and milky sap of which have
medicinal uses: Tabernaemontana pandacaqui.

salída_1 n {1} appearance on stage. Ikapila na ni níyang salída sa
dráma? How many times has she appeared in the play? {2} showing of a
movie. {2a} movie shown. {3} exit sign in a public place. v {1} [A; b]
appear on stage. {2} [A23; c] show, expose s.t. conspicuously before.
Mangaláwat musalída giyud sa atubángan, Making herself prominent when
she goes to take communion. Ayaw isalída kanang gisiun nímung sinínà,
Don’t display your torn shirt.

salída_2 a for sales to be brisk. Way salída ang nigusyu, Business is
no good. v [B1] for sales to be brisk. Masalída ang tinda basta Pasku,
Sales are good during Christmas.

salid-ay v [A; c] carry s.t. with a sling or strap, dangling it over
the shoulder. Misalid-ay siya sa ripli, He slung the rifle over his
shoulder. Nagsalid-ay si Santa Kláwus ug sáku nga punù sa duláan, Santa
Claus was carrying a sack filled with toys over his shoulder.

salidsid (from sidsid) v {1} [AN; c] go, take s.t. along the edge of
s.t. Nanalidsid ang sakayan sa baybáyun, The boat followed the
coastline. {2} [A; b6] skid, slide in doing a curve. Musalidsid ang
trák kay danglug ang karsáda, The truck will skid because the road is
slippery.

sálig v {1} [A2S; b6] trust, rely. Dì ku musálig níya kay bakákun siya,
I don’t trust him because he is a liar. Nagsalig ku nga muanhi ka apan
wà diay, I was depending on you to come but you didn’t. {2} [c]
entrust, leave s.t. in s.o.’s care. Isálig ku ning ákung kabtángan nímu
ug wà ku dinhi, I will entrust my property to you while I’m gone.
n trust in s.o. Wà kuy sálig níya, I have no trust in him. (→) v [A13;
b6] depend on s.o. for s.t. Nagsalig ka nákù sa ímung iskuyla, You are
depending on me for your schooling. pa- v [A; b6(1)] assure, give
assurance. Mupasálig ku nímu nga buhátun ku nà, I assure you that I
will do that. ma-un a confident. Milakaw siya nga masalígun nga
kabayran siya, He went away confident that he would be paid. pag- =
sálig, n. -in-an n {1} person left s.w. entrusted to run the affairs in
the owner’s absence. {2} a team member considered the best on whom the
rest put their hopes of success. Napildi mi kay nadiskuwalipáyid ang
ámung sinalígan, We lost because our star player got disqualified.
saligsalig v [A13P] give assurances of doing s.t. when one has no plans
to do it. Nagsaligsalig (nagpasaligsalig) ka mag búhat nga hínay ka
man, You assured us that you could do the job, when you’re so slow.

sal-ig v [A; c] for s.t. standing to be leaning against s.t. Nagsal-ig
siya sa lubi, He leaned on the coconut tree. Isal-ig lang nang pála sa
halígi, Just lean the spade against the post.

salig-ay = sag-ilay.

saligbay = salib-ay.

salihukngaw (coined word from sakayan, líhuk and hungaw) n steamboat.

salíid v {1} [A2S; ac] move very close or alongside. Musalíid ang adlaw
sa kasadpan inigsawup, The sun sinks down close to the horizon at
sunset. Misalíid kug lakaw sa daplin sa karsáda, I walked very close to
the side of the street. Gisalíid níya ang íyang kamut sa hubù nga láwas
sa babáyi, He ran his hand lightly over the woman’s naked body.
{2} [A2S3P] reel, leaning to one side due to a heavy load. Nagsaliid
ang trák tungud sa kapunù, The truck is leaning to one side under the
load.

salíit v [A23] sound shrilly, shriek. Misalíit ang bumbíru samtang
nagbagrung padulung sa káyu, The fire engine roared towards the fire
with sirens screaming.

salik v [A; a2] {1} wind thread on a frame in a criss-cross fashion to
determine its quantity. {2} for the water buffalo to wind its tether
rope around its horns in an analogous fashion. {2a} [A; a1b2] for a
water buffalo to gore using the analogous motion with its head.
saliksálik v [A; b6] pass by frequently near s.o. or s.t. Ang táwung
nagsaliksálik sa ákung luyu mangunguut, The man who was going back and
forth in back of me was a pickpocket. -an n {1} H-shaped frame around
which the thread is wound. {2} hammerhead shark, the head of which
resembles this sort of winding frame. {3} horn.

salíku n sleeveless sweater or vest. kamisin di- sleeveless undershirt.
v [A; ab] wear, make a vest or sleeveless sweater.

salikubkub a for the back to be bent in a curve. v [B; c1] for the back
to become bent. Musalikubkub (masalikubkub) ang táwung matigúlang
pag-áyu, A man’s back gets bent when he gets very old.

salikwaut a {1} improper, lacking in tact and timeliness. Salikwaut
tung ímung pag-imbitar sa Múrus ug litsunáda, It was very tactless of
you to invite the Muslims to the roast pig feast. {2} awkward, lacking
in grace. Salikwaut ang pagkahan-ay sa mga púlung, The words were
awkwardly put. v [B4; b6] be, become awkward or improper.

salikway v [A; c] {1} push s.t. aside to show dislike or gain passage.
Makasalikway ka ba ánang sanga nga nagbalabag sa dálan? Can you push
aside the branch that’s in the way? Salikwayi mig diyútay diri, Toss
some of that stuff you don’t want this way. Ayaw isalikway ang ímung
pagkáun, Don’t push your food aside. {2} reject, spurn. Ikaw nga
nagsalikway sa ákung gugma, You, who spurned my love. Ang maung hukum
sigúrung isalikway sa kurti supríma, The Supreme Court will surely set
that decision aside. -in- n s.o. rejected. Gugmang sinalikway, Spurned
love. Sinalikway sa pálad, Unfortunate (lit. spurned by fate).

salikyat = dalikyat.

salikyaub a having a deep bow, shaped and curved like a half sphere.
Ang salikyaub nga káhuy gihímung sakayan, The curving tree trunk was
made into a banca. (←) v [B2P; a1c1] become curved, arc-shaped. Bumba
ang nakasalikyáub (nakapasalikyáub) sa yútà, The bomb made holes in the
ground. Isalikyáub (salikyáuba) ang papil arun sudlan nátù sa bugas,
Fold the paper into a deep bowl to put the rice in. -un nga búlan
n crescent moon.

salíli = alíli.

salimagaw, salimágaw a for the vision to be blurred. Salimágaw ang
íyang panan-aw tungud sa katigúlang, His vision is blurred from old
age. v [B; a4] for the vision to become blurred. Gisalimágaw
(misalimágaw) ang íyang panan-aw sa asu, Smoke made his vision blurred.

salimbágat n k.o. vine.

salimbángun n k.o. erect, branched, smooth shrub of waste places, the
leaves of which have medicinal uses and are used for bathing babies,
coming in two species or varieties: — nga pula a variety with
maroon-tinged stems and leaves, and — nga putì a variety with green
stems and leaves: Pseuderanthemum sp.

salimbung v [A; b6(1)] {1} cover s.t. as a protection from view or the
elements. Dakung káhuy ang misalimbung sa ílang balay, A huge tree hid
their house. Úlung gisalimbúngag piryudiku, Head protected from the sun
(or rain) by a newspaper. {2} hide, conceal from s.o.’s knowledge
(literary). Ang íyang mik-ap mauy misalimbung sa mga túig nga íyang
gilukdu, Her make-up concealed her age. Gisalimbúngan níyag katáwa ang
kaguul nga íyang gibátì, She laughed to cover the sadness she felt.
n screen, protection from view, the elements, or public knowledge.

salimpúkut see púkut.

salimuang v [A13P; a4b] be delirious, talk in a delirium. Nagsalimuang
(gisalimuang) ang tigúlang tungud sa hilánat, The old man is delirious
due to his fever. Unsa may gisalimuangan sa pagsulti sa masakitun? What
is the delirious patient saying? n {1} delirium. {2} random thoughts in
one’s musing (literary), Kadtu mga salimuang lámang sa balaknun níyang
hunàhúnà, Those were the random thoughts of his poetic mind.

salin n {1} leftover, leftovers. Ang salin ipasaw sa bábuy, Feed the
leftovers to the pigs. Imúha ang usa ka dusína ug ang salin ihátag kang
Bituy, One dozen goes to you, and the rest give Bitoy. {2} s.o. left
behind or abandoned by s.o. else. Salin siya sa Kanù kay ang íyang
amahan suldádung Amirkánung mipaúlì na, He is a war baby left behind by
an American soldier that went home. {3} s.t. or s.o. that survived a
disease or accident. Misánay ang íyang manuk nga salin sa átay, His
chickens that survived the chicken cholera multiplied. — sa gúbat
{1} war veteran. {2} s.o. born during the war. — sa úwak {1} a fallen
woman. Mangasáwa ka ánang bayhána nga salin sa úwak? You’re going to
marry that disgraced woman? {2} one who has lots of round scars on his
head where the hair won’t grow. v [A; c] set aside, leave s.t. for s.o.
Salinig sud-an ang kasíra, Set aside some food for the boarder.

salindánaw = alindánaw.

salindrun n mouth organ. v {1} [A2N2] play the mouth organ. {2} [A2N;
c6] eat corn on the cob as if playing a mouth organ. paN- n action of
playing the mouth organ or eating corn on the cob.

salindut v {1} [A; c6] shove s.t. away with force to make it slide.
Isalindut ngari nang bangkítu, Shove the stool this way. {2} [A1; c6]
cast or put aside, disregard. Ug dì nímu palitun nà, nagsalindut ka sa
talagsaung higayun, If you don’t buy that, you are casting aside a rare
opportunity. Isalindut lang níya nang átung pagmulù mu rag walà tay
bili, He just disregards our complaints as if we were nothing.

salindyǐr n challenger to a sports title or record holder.

sal-ing n k.o. bird resembling the starling, the coleto: Sarcops
calvus.

salingawa a annoying, making one feel uneasy. Salingawa kaáyung
pamináwun ang kanúnayng panag-áway sa mga silíngan, It’s an annoyance
to hear my neighbors constantly quarreling. v [b4] feel ill at ease,
bothered. Mubalhin kug puyù. Gisalingawhan kaáyu ku niíning dapíta,
I’ll move s.w. else. I feel ill at ease here.

salingay_1 v [A; c6] put s.t. to one side or at some distance to get it
out of the way. Ang tinúla isalingay lang arun ka makalung-ag, Put the
stew off to the side so you can cook the rice.

salingay_2 v [A; ac] carry s.t. on the shoulders. Salingaya (isalingay)
ang kahun, Carry the box on one shoulder.

saling-ay v [A; c1] sling s.t. over the shoulders, hanging. Isaling-ay
(saling-áya) lang ang mga butung, Just carry the young coconuts slung
over your shoulders.

salinggáay n k.o. shrub of waste places and under coconut trees:
Desmodium pulchellum.

salinggáway = gawaygáway.

salinggúkud n k.o. lined snapper.

saling-it v [A; c6] lodge s.t. firmly into s.t. V-shaped. Kinsay
nagsaling-it sa búla diri sa sandayung? Who lodged the ball in the roof
gutter? Isaling-it ku ning munyíka sa luyu sa aparadur arun dílì
makit-an, I will lodge this doll behind the locker so they won’t find
it.

salingkápaw_1 a superficial, not heartfelt. Pagdáyig nga salingkápaw,
Insincere praise. Salingkápaw nga imbitasiyun, An insincere invitation.

salingkápaw_2 = mangágaw.

salingsing n {1} new branch growing out from a mature branch. {2} one’s
offspring (literary). {3} outgrowth, outcome of s.t. (literary).
v [AN2] {1} grow new branches. Musalingsing ang sanga sa san pransiskug
itanum, A croton branch will send forth shoots if you plant it.
{2} produce results (literary). Manalingsing ang ímung kakúgi, Your
efforts will bear fruit.

salingtuud (from túud_2) v [A1P; b6P] show s.t. around which one can
see readily enough to draw people’s attention to it. Nagsalingtuud
(nagpasalingtuud) siya sa íyang bag-ung rilu, He was showing his new
watch around.

saling-uwang (from ulang) n scorpion.

salinrun = salindrun.

salintuud = salingtuud.

salinyási n k.o. sardine.

salip-ang v [A; c1] carry a child astride the hips. Ayaw salip-ánga
(isalip-ang) ang bátà arun dílì mabakang, Do not carry the baby astride
your hips or he will get bow-legged.

salipì v [AP; b8P] stay close beside or behind s.t in order to hide
oneself. Musalipì (mupasalipì) ku áring dakung batu arun dì ku makítà
níla, I will stay close beside this big stone so they won’t see me.

saliping, salíping v [AB56C; ac] go, put s.t. next to s.t. Musalíping
ku sa kiliran sa ákung asáwa, I will lie down next to my wife. Si Nánay
ang nagsalíping sa kúlun tupad sa takuri, Mother put the clay pot
beside the teakettle. Salipínga nig butang, Put these things down side
by side. (←) n twins. v [C23] be twins. {2} [B2356] for a pregnancy to
turn out to be twins. ka- n one’s twin.

salip-ing v [AB; c] put s.t. next to or in between s.t., be put in this
position. Musaliping pa lang ka sa luyu sa balay, dílì ka hikitan, If
you just keep close to the back of the house, no one will see you.
Nagsalip-ing kug kwarta sa libru, I placed some money in between the
pages of the book. Makasalip-ing ba kug ínit túbig sa dinung-ag? May I
put a kettle of water next to the cooked pot of rice to heat it?

salip-it v [A1P; c6P] wedge s.t. in between. Kinsa kahay nagsalip-it
(nagpasalip-it) ug diyisun sa ákung libru? Who could have placed a
ten-peso bill in the book? Isalip-it (ipasalip-it) ang lápis sa
dalunggan, Put the pencil behind the ear.

salipnù v [A2; b6] duck down behind s.t. Didtu ku musalipnù sa luyu sa
batu mau nga wà ku makit-i, I ducked behind the rock so they didn’t see
me.

salipud (from lipudlípud) a completely or partially hidden behind s.t.
Salipud kaáyu ang íla gíkan sa karsáda, You can’t see their house very
well from the road. n s.t. that obstructs the view. v [A; b(1)]
obstruct the view. Pangánud nga nagsalipud sa búlan, Clouds that are
hiding the moon. (←) a very well hidden. pa- v [A; b8] hide behind s.t.
paN-, paN-(←) v [A2; b(1)] defend, protect s.o., oneself from danger.
Akuy manalipud (manalípud) nímu sa mga piligru nga maghulgà sa ímung
kinabúhì, I will protect you from the dangers that threaten your life.
n defense, protection.

salip-ut a narrow, having little room for motion. Salip-ut nga sayal
nga lisud ilíhuk, A narrow skirt that is difficult to move in. Salip-ut
nga dálan, A narrow road. v {1} [B; c1] be narrow, get to have too
little space. Masalip-ut (musalip-ut) gánì ang kwartu, alimúut kaáyu,
If the room gets too crowded, it will be very hot. {2} [A; c] wedge
s.t. in between s.t. Isalip-ut nang papil sa pultahan arun dì maabli,
Stick a piece of paper into that door so it won’t come open.

salir_1 v [A23] do, be useful, come out successful. Dílì musalir nang
ímung paági, Your procedure will not do. Misalir ang ákung buláda.
Misugut siya, My flattery worked. She accepted me.

salir_2 v [A2] engage in naughty behavior when there is some
encouragement. Musalir ra ba dáyun ning batáag pangáyug kwarta ug náay
átung táwu, The child comes out to ask for money when there are
visitors around. Misalir ang hubug nga giabibáhan, The drunk started
acting wild when the others egged him on.

salírap = sulírap_2.

salíring v {1} [A] swerve, travel in a curve. Pagbutu sa ligid, ag awtu
misalíring ngadtu sa kanal, When the tire blew, the car swerved into
the ditch. {2} [A; b6] pass by near s.t. for a purpose. Musalíring ang
bátà sa lamísa kay nakakità sa dulsi, The child will veer over toward
the table because he saw the candy.

salisi, salísi n {1} drizzle. {2} rain or drops blown into a sheltered
area. Salisi ang nakahumud sa salug, The rain that was blown into the
house wet the floor. v [A3; b6] {1} drizzle. Buklása ang binlad nga
humay ug magsalísi, Take in the rice we’re drying if it drizzles.
{2} for the rain to be blown into a sheltered area. {3} sprinkle water
on s.t.

salìsì (from sìsì) v [A; a] cut into strips or slats. Gisalìsì ang
kawáyan, The bamboo was cut into strips. n slat, strip. Tagái kug usa
ka salìsì, Give me one strip.

salit = tsalit.

salitri n saltpeter, potassium nitrate in crystal form. v [A; b] use,
put saltpeter on s.t.

salíut = sulíut.

saliut-ut v {1} [A; c6] force one’s way through a crowd or bushes.
Musaliut-ut úsà ka ug púngut úsà ka muabut sa baul, You have to force
your way through a thicket before you reach the field. {2} [A] force
oneself into an overcrowded place to get accommodated. Misaliut-ut
giyud siya sa dyíp bísag kargádu na, She squeezed herself into the jeep
even though it was full.

salíyab v [A; c] {1} flap a cloth. Isalíyab ang alpumbra pagtaktak sa
abug, Shake the rug to get the dust out. {2} scatter dust or water with
a motion flinging it in the air. Íyang gisalyában ug íhì ang
nangharána, She threw urine on the serenaders. {3} [A3P; c6P] scatter
news, gossip. Isalíyab (ipasalíyab) sa kayutáan ang malipáyung balità,
Spread the glad tidings to all the lands.

salmu n psalm. -s n the Book of Psalms.

salmun n {1} canned fish in large cylindrical cans. {1a} k.o. herring.
{2} the large cylindrical can, about 5″ tall, used as a measure.
{3} orange-colored. v [A13] wear s.t. orange. -an(→) = salmun, n2.

salmuníti n k.o. small goatfish, reddish in hue.

salmut v [A2; b6] {1} enter, participate in a group activity. Dì ka
musalmut sa rípa? Won’t you participate in the raffle? Dílì ka
makasalmut sa lumbà, You cannot participate in the race. {2} engage
oneself in some occupation. Unsang nigusyúha íyang gisalmútan? What
business did he engage in? n entry in a contest, contestant:
participant in a play or game. Ipadala ku ning ákung salmut sa banggà,
I’ll send my entry.

salpù n k.o. edible sea cucumber, brownish in color and measuring up to
3″ long.

salsa n thick sauce made to eat with s.t. v {1} [A; a] make into a
sauce. {2} [A; b6(1)] add sauce to.

salsag v {1} [A; a12] break into several pieces, usually in slivers or
fragments. Ikay nagsalsag sa sag-ub, You broke the bamboo tube water
container into slivers. Salságun ku nang kúlun sa ímung úlu, I will
break that clay pot on your head. {2} [A; a] flatten s.t. cylindrical.
Misalsag siyag kawáyan nga ibungbung, He flattened bamboo poles for
walling. Gisalsag níya ang láta sa litsi, He flattened out the milk
can.

salsal v {1} [A; c1] forge. Gisalsal na sa tigúlang ang ímung sundang,
The old man has already forged your bolo. {2} [A; a] pound, hammer out
metal that has not been heated. Nasalsal ang puluan sa tigib sa
pagdinukduk, The handle of the chisel is all flattened due to constant
hammering. {3} [A; c2] masturbate (slang—from the notion of moving the
arms as in pounding steel). {4} teach, train. Makugíhun siyang misalsal
sa íyang tím, He trained his team with zeal. -an(→), -anan
n {1} blacksmith shop. {2} anvil. {3} one’s wife (the one on whom one
forges his children—humorous). -íru a fond of masturbating. maN-r-
n {1} blacksmith. {2} one who trains.

salsitsas = surísu.

salta v {1} [A2; b6(1)] get loose, out of position, but not disengaged.
Ug musalta ang tabla ilansang ug bálik, If one end of the floorboard
gets loose and comes up, nail it back down. Nasalta ang tikud sa
sapátus, The heels of the shoes got loose. {2} [B; c1] rise, raise.
Nasalta ang íyang tíngug sa kahikugang, His voice rose in surprise.
Isalta (saltáha) ang ímung tiil, Raise your feet.

saltu_1 n style of fighting of a cock in which it leaps, at the same
time lashing out with the feet and moving backward to evade the thrust
of its opponent.

saltu_2 v {1} [A2; b] skip, miss doing s.t. Dì siya musaltu ug simba
maduminggu, She attends mass every Sunday and never misses. {2} [A; c1]
stop doing s.t. Misaltu nang tawhána sa ínum sa dihang giulsir na, That
man stopped drinking when he developed ulcers. Nagsaltu ang trabáhu sa
mína nga ákung gitrabahúan, The mine where I was working has stopped
operations.

sálu v {1} [A2C; b6] eat together with s.o. from the same plate. Abúga
ang irù kay gisalúan ang bátà, Drive the dog away because it’s eating
off the child’s plate. Isálu ring bátà dihà arun ímung maatiman, Have
this child eat with you so that you can attend to him. {2} [A; c6]
share a place with s.o. for any action. Nagsálu mig kamarúti sa
pagpaingun námù sa Manílà, We shared the same cabin when we went to
Manila. {3} [C; c] go through s.t. together with s.o. Ang asáwang
gikasálu ku sa kalípayg kasákit, The wife with whom I shared my sorrows
and joys. {4} [A12] be born in the same period of time. Ang duha nákù
ka bátà nagsálu ug túig, My two children were born in the same year.
salusálu n get-together where food is served informally. v [A 13] hold
such a party.

salù v {1} [A; a1] catch s.t. thrown or falling. Saw-a (sal-a) ang
butilyang ákung ilábay, Catch the bottle I’m going to throw. {1a} [A3;
a12] accept, receive s.t. from s.o. Ang múda gisalù sa mga batan-un sa
madaling panahun, The youth took to the fad in short order. {2} [a12]
for an ailment to develop into s.t. worse. Tinúud ba nga ang sip-un
sal-un ug húbak? Is it true that colds will develop into asthma?
{3} [A2; a12] talk or answer right away after s.o. has spoken. Sal-un
dáyun nímu ug tubag ang íyang sukut arun dì ka dudáhan, Answer his
questions immediately so he won’t doubt you. salùsálù v [A13; a12] for
several agents to do s.t. in succession. Lahì na kaáyu ang isturya ug
salùsalúun sa pipila ka bàbà, The story changes when it is repeated by
several mouths.

sal-ub v [A; a] {1} place, fit s.t. bigger over s.t. smaller. Dì ku
gustung musal-ub nímug sapátus arun ka makakat-un, I won’t put your
shoes on you so you’ll learn to do it yourself. Sal-úbig iprun ang
sinínà ug maghíkay, Wear an apron over your dress when you cook.
Isal-ub (sal-úba) ang hapin sa makinilya, Put the cover on the
typewriter. {2} catch a bird with a sal-ub trap. n bird trap set above
a bird’s nest with three open sides through which the bird must pass in
order to enter the nest. Each side is provided with a noose.

sálud v {1} [A; a] catch s.t. falling or thrown in s.t. Salúra ang tulù
ug salúri (isálud) ring palanggána, Catch the dripping water and use
this basin to catch it in. {2} [a12] catch s.t. by being in its path.
Usa ka dakung kúmù ni Tasyu nasálud sa nawung ni Piduy, Tasio’s fist
landed in Pidoy’s face. Sa búkid, ang húni ra sa mga langgam mauy
masálud sa átung dalunggan, In the mountains, all we hear is the songs
of the birds. (→) n {1} a vessel used to catch falling liquids, e.g.
the container for catching the dripping toddy. {2} a unit of liquid
measure equalling one toddy container full.

saludar (not without l) v [A; b6] {1} bow. {2} greet s.o. on meeting by
nodding one’s head. {3} [A2; b6] pass by s.o.’s place to say hello.
Káda anhi níyas syudad musaludar siya sa ámù, Every time he comes to
the city, he drops by my place to say hello.

salúdu (not without l) v [A; b(1)] salute. Kinahanglan musalúdu ka sa
bandílà úsà musaylu, You must salute the flag before going by it.
n salute. — militar military salute.

salug n {1} floor. {2} storey. Ikaupat nga salug, The fourth floor.
v [A; b6(1)] put, construct a floor. panalganan n {1} storey of a
house. {2} floor joist. {3} floor clearance from the ground. Dílì
kahuktan ug kanding ang sílung kay mabà ug panalganan, We can not tie
goats under the house because the floor is close to the ground.

sálug (not without l) n river, any body of flowing water.

salugsug n splinter sticking into the skin. v [A123P; a4] get a
splinter in the skin. Makasalugsug ug tiil nang tabláha kay way
sipilya, You can get a splinter from that piece of wood because it
wasn’t planed.

salukgu = salugsug.

saluksuk_1 v [A; c] give s.t. small, e.g. small farm animals, in
exchange for a part of a bigger animal. Nisawuksuk kug baktin niánang
inasála, I gave a piglet in exchange for a part of the roast pig.

saluksuk_2 n k.o. cricket living in fields.

salukut (not without l) = saruk, 1.

sálum v {1} [A2S; ac] swim under water. Misálum ang submarínu pag-abut
sa bapur digíra, The submarine dove when the battleship arrived.
Salúmun (sadmun, sagmun) ku tung imbaw, I will dive for that clam.
Isálum ang úsuk, Bring the stake to the bottom of the water. {2} [A2S]
for the sun to set (literary). Sa nagsalum na ang adlaw, As the sun was
setting. {3} — sa lubug [A12S3] be doubtful (lit. swim under murky
water). Way kasigurúan kun madáwat ba ku. Nagsawum pa ku niíni sa
lubug, It’s not sure that I’ll be accepted. I’m still unclear. paN-
v [A2; b6] go diving for fish, shells. maN-r- n diver.

salúma (not without l) n {1} song, melodious music (literary). Ang
dinagayday sa sapà salúma sa íyang památì, The rippling of the river is
music to his ears. {2} an improvised courtship song sung by a man and a
woman (balítaw) and performed at social gatherings, accompanied by
improvised dancing. v {1} [A; a] sing a melodious song. Walay
makasalúma ug sáma kaníya, Nobody could sing like him. {2} [A; c1] hold
a salúma session. Magsalúma sila ug makainum na, They’ll start the
salúma after they’ve had s.t. to drink.

salumabit, salumabits (not without l) exclamation of mild anger shouted
at s.o.

salumsum n dusk. v [A23; b4(1)] be dusk, for the sun to sink.
Inigsumsum sa adlaw, When the sun sets.

salun (not without l) dance hall where a man goes to dance with girls
employed by the management. -ira(←) n taxi dancer. v [B156] be, become
a taxi dancer.

salundung v [A2; a2b2] gore. Ayawg dúul kay salundúngun ka ánang báka,
Don’t go near that bull because he will gore you.

sálung n {1} dammar resin in a soft state or as an ingredient of the
balaw used to caulk boats, esp. from the almasíga tree. {2} = almasíga.
— lúnay dammar resin in a soft state. salngan = almasíga.

salunggat n sliver, splinter, or anything that pierces the skin at an
angle. v [A12; a3] for a sliver or splinter to lodge in the skin. Ayawg
dalus-us ánang buungun kay ang tunuk makasalunggat (makapasalunggat) sa
ímung láwas, Don’t slide down the orange tree because the thorns can
stick into your body.

salungsung (from sungsung) v [AN2; c6] {1} go directly against the
current or wind. Lúgus na mi makairug dihang nagsalungsung mi sa sulug,
We could hardly move when we went against the current. {2} brave
adverse weather conditions or a battle. Isalungsung níya ang ayruplánu
sa nag-atak-atak nga bála sa kaáway, He braved the hail of enemy
bullets, driving his airplane directly into them. {3} bravely face s.o.
difficult to approach. Misungsung (nanungsung) siyag atúbang sa mga
ginikánan sa babáyi, He faced the parents of his girl friend bravely.
-un(→) a adverse, coming from the opposite direction.

salup v [A; c1] skim or scoop s.t. off from a surface or from the upper
portion. Misalup siya ug tipasì unyà gisábud, She scooped a handful of
kernels and threw them. Isalup (salupa) sa kutsára ang ayiskrim, Scoop
the ice cream with a spoon. n = salúpan. -an(←) n unit of dry measure
equivalent to one-sixth of a ganta.

sálup v {1} [A2S; ab8] for the sun to set. Ug musálup ang adlaw pasigáa
ang sugà, When the sun sets, light the lamp. Sa nagsalup ang búlan
miinánay ug língay ang anínu, As the moon was setting the shadows moved
slowly. Nasálup na ang adlaw ug namátug na ang mga manuk, The sun has
set and the chickens have gone to roost. {2} [B2S] for one’s life to
come to an end in old age (literary). Sa nagsalup na ang kinabúhì sa
tigúlang, As the old man’s life was reaching its end. kasaladpan,
sadpanan n west. tali-(→), -um-r-(→) n about to set.

salúpan see salup.

salùsù v [A12; c6] move s.t. scheduled ahead to an earlier date or
time. Gisawùsù ang kasal sa Sabadu imbis sa Duminggu, The wedding was
moved ahead to Saturday instead of Sunday.

salut v [A; b] salute with the hands. Gisalutan níla ang bandíra, They
saluted the flag. han — n a hand salute. v [A] execute a hand salute.
gan — n gun salute.

sálut_1 v {1} [A2P; a12] cause stunted growth. Ang taas nga húlaw
musálut (mupasálut) sa tinubuan sa tanum, The long drought will stunt
the growth of the plants. Masálut ang bátà ug kúlang ug tulug, The
child will be stunted if it lacks sleep. {2} [B126] get sick, esp. for
s.t. that brings general body weakening and loss of weight. Nasáwut ka
ba nga miníwang ka man kaáyu? Were you sick? You lost so much weight.
(→) a stunted or checked growth. Salut kaáyug tinubuan ang lubi, The
coconut tree is stunted in growth.

sálut_2 n the south of Cebu (humorous—from sáwut, so called from the
fact that the dialects in the south of Cebu retain l where the city
dialect has w. Cf. Section 5.211 of the Introduction). taga- one from
the south of Cebu. v [B1256] become like the Southerners.

sal-ut v {1} [A23] butt in on a conversation. Dì ka musal-ut sa ámung
panaglális, Do not butt in in our argument. {2} [A2] cut in on a queue
or force one’s way into a crowd. Dì ka untà musal-ut sa tungà sa linya,
adtu ka sa ulahi, You should not have butted into the middle of the
line. Go back to the end. {3} [A2; b6] take part, participate in a game
or group activity. Gustu kang musal-ut sa abat-ábat? Would you like to
participate in a game of tag? {4} [A; c6] include s.t. in a group or
batch. Kinsa may nagsal-ut sa imung papílis adtung grupúha? Who
included your documents in that batch? Isal-ut ra ni dihà ug hílum, Put
this in there with the others secretly. Nasal-ut ku sa kasábà bísag wà
kuy salà, I got scolded as well even though I hadn’t done anything
wrong. {4a} [b6] be interspersed with. Ang íyang diskursu gisal-útan
pud ug kumidiya, His speech was interspersed with jokes. sal-utsal-ut
v [B1456; c1] be arranged alternately, do s.t. alternately.
Gisal-utsal-útan ug mga áwit ug sáyaw ang prugráma, The program had
song and dance numbers inserted into it.

salutaturyan (not without l) n salutatorian in a graduating class.
v [B156; a12] be, become the salutatorian.

salutsut v {1} = sagutsut, n1, v. {2} = sutsut, v1.

saluwákì n k.o. sea urchin with short, non-venomous thorns and edible
meat (tihìtihì).

salúwal n {1} pants. {2} woman’s panties. v {1} [A; b6(1)] put on, wear
pants. {2} [A2; a] sew, make into pants.

saluwásid n k.o. halfbeak with greenish coloring: Hemirhamphus georgii.

salúyut n commercial name for a wild vegetable: kukug banug. see kuku.

salwag n k.o. ornamental palm similar to the areca palm: Adonidia
merrillii.

salwákì = saluwákì.

salya v {1} [A; b(1)] overflow, spill over. Musalya ang mga manan-áway
kun nindut ang salída, There is an overflow of moviegoers when the
picture is good. Nagsalya ang sinakung bugas sa budíga, Sacks of rice
are spilling out of the door of the warehouse. {2} [B26; b2] be thrown
off, splashed off from impact or pressure. Misalya (nasalya) ang mga
táwu sa trák pagkaigù niíni sa bumba, The people were thrown from the
truck when it was hit by the bomb. Hingsalyahan ku sa bawud, I was
splashed by the water from the waves. {3} [A3; c] throw s.t. over into.
Akuy musalya sa mga káhuy ngadtu sa trák, I will throw the firewood up
into the truck. Ayaw isalya sa ílang kural ang mga sagbut, Do not throw
the garbage over their fence.

salyáda v [A; c1] in trawl fishing, pull in the net from the sea.

sáma {1} like, same as. Sáma sa miáging iliksiyun, napildi siya
pagkasinadur, Just as in the last election, he lost in the race for
senator. {2} similar. Tan-áwa nang irúa, sáma kaáyu sa ímu, Look at
that dog. It is very similar to yours. — ug balhíbu birds of a feather.
Sáma silag balhíbu. Púru sila sugarul, They’re birds of a feather. Both
of them are gamblers. v {1} [AC; b] be like, similar to. Ug musáma ka
níya, primyúhan ta ka, If you can be like him, I’ll give you a reward.
Samáhi ang íyang tanyag ug ákung ibaligyà, Match his offer and I’ll
sell it. {2} [c6] treat, consider s.o. as, or similar to. Ngánung isáma
man ku nímu ni Pinduy nga dílì man ku nímu sulugúun? Why do you treat
me like Pindoy when I am not your servant? samasáma v {1} [C2] be fair,
not taking undue advantage of one another. Magsamasáma ta ug wà lay
pamintaháay, Let’s be fair to each other and let’s not take advantage
of one another. {2} [C12] be in a spirit of good fellowship with s.o.
Dílì siya makigsamasáma nátù kay pubri ta, He doesn’t want to mix with
us because we are poor. paka- = sáma, v2. ka- n s.o. or s.t. that is
similar to s.t. else. Kasáma nákù siya ug dugù, He has my type of
blood. kasamáhan n equity, fairness. Usáhay sa pagpahamtang sa baláud
mu rag walay kasamáhan, Sometimes in the application of the law there
seems to be no justice.

samà n mistake. Ákung usbun ang mga samà sa ákung trabáhu, I’ll correct
the mistakes in my work. v [B126; c1] make mistakes.

sámad v {1} [A; b(1)] wound, hurt. Ayawg dúlà ánang bildu kay makasámad
nà, Don’t play with that glass because it can hurt you. Samári (samdi)
ug diyútay ang pánit arun makaguwà ang nánà, Make a little incision in
the skin so that pus can go out. {1a} [A123S; b8] manage to inflict a
wound. Ang íyang manuk walà makasamad sa ákù, His cock wasn’t able to
wound mine. {2} [A; b(1)] hurt s.o.’s feelings. Púlung nga makasámad sa
kasingkásing, Words that can hurt one’s feelings. (→) n {1} wound, cut.
{2} — nga walay pagkaáyu vagina (lit. the wound that never
heals—humorous). samaran, samarun, samdan n the wounded. Ang
dinunggábay misamput sa tuluy samarun (samaran, samdan), Three were
wounded in the stabbing. dughang samaran n heart bleeding in sorrows
(literary). Kanus-a pa nímu kaluy-a ning dughang samaran? When will you
take pity on this bleeding heart?

samágaw = salimágaw. see salimagaw.

samalabit, samalabits = salumabits.

samalúna = simalúna.

sam-ang n {1} cemetery. {2} grave. Mamíngaw kung sam-ang, My lonely
grave. v [a12] make into a burial place or cemetery. Ang kanhi basakan
sam-ángun sa gubyirnu munisipal, The former marshland will be converted
into a cemetery by the municipal government.

Sámar n Samar, an island in the Eastern Visayas. -inyu, -nun n one from
the island of Samar.

samàsamà v [A; b] dare do s.t. lightly, not in the proper place or
time. Nagsamàsamà mag súkul sa pulitikung tang-an, dì namunbun, He had
the nerve to take on a seasoned politician, so of course he was
trounced. Dì ta makasamàsamà ug pangáyù ug kwarta ni Máma ug sapútun,
We can’t just ask Mother for money like that when she is in a bad mood.

samaw, sámaw a glaring due to too much brilliance or light. Magsan-glas
ta kay samaw, Let’s wear sunglasses because it’s glaring. v [B12; b6]
be dazzled or temporarily blinded because of glare.

*samay -in- n cloth woven from abaca fiber, used for stiffening parts
of a dress that are meant to be stiff or for the lining of native bags
and for other kinds of native costumes.

samba_1 v [A12; b8] {1} do s.t. or hit the correct answer by luck.
Hingsambahan nákù ang tubag, I hit on the right answer by luck. {2} get
a chance to do s.t. that one isn’t likely to get. Maáyu gánì kay
nakasamba kug sakay sa ímung dyíp. Maglakaw lang untà ku, Luckily I had
the chance to get a ride on your jeep, because otherwise I would have
had to walk. n s.t. done correctly by pure luck. Samba lang tung
pagkaigúa, It was pure luck that you hit it.

samba_2 n samba music or dance. v [AC; c1] dance the samba.

sambà v [B; c1] for plants to grow lush with plentiful leaves. Musambà
ang tanum ug abunúhan, The plants will grow lush if you fertilize them.
a having lush leaves.

sambag_1 = tambag.

*sambag_2 -un(→) n k.o. mackerel (tulíngan).

sambag_3 n tamarind: Tamarindus indica. sambagsambag n k.o. bush with
leaves similar to tamarind leaves and which are used to bring a fever
to a head.

sambara = pík.

sambat = sakbat.

sambil = sumbil, v1.

sambílat n small loop at the end of a rope. v [A; a1] make a loop at
the end of a rope. Sambiláti ang tumuys písì arun sayun nga kaw-ítan,
Make a loop at the end of the rope so it will be easy to put a hook to
it.

sambilay v [A; c6] carry s.t. draped or slung over the shoulder.
Isambilay nang bag arun makahayun ka sa ímung buktun, Sling the bag
over your shoulder so you can swing your arms.

sambíngay = sumbíngay.

sambiri n machine embroidery over the edges of cloth to prevent them
from getting frazzled. v [A; a2] embroider the edge of a piece of
cloth.

sambud = sangbud.

sambug v [AC; c] {1} mix things together. Isambug ring pipsi sa tubà,
Mix this Pepsi into the toddy. {1a} mix rice and corn together. {2} for
emotions to have a tinge of s.t. else mixed. Kalípayng gisambúgan ug
panganduy, Happiness tinged with a feeling of desire. n {1} mixture.
{2} added ingredient. Tambal sa ubu nga may sambug nga makapakatúlug,
Cough medicine that has an ingredient that will put you to sleep.
{3} mixture of rice and corn. Unsay átung lung-águn, sambug u lunlun?
What shall we fix for dinner. Pure rice or the mixture of rice and
corn?

sambul a sensitive, readily susceptible to pain if touched. Sambul ug
masabdan ang uluk sa bag-ung gitúlì, The head of a newly circumcised
penis is highly sensitive. Sambul kaáyu ning puling ug kipátun ning
ákung mata, The particle in my eye gives me discomfort when I blink my
eyes. v {1} [A3] being sore and sensitive to pain if touched. {2} [A1;
b6] be an eyesore. Kanang barungbárung makasambul sa nindut nga parki,
These hovels are an eyesore in that beautiful park.†

sambúlak = sabúlak.

sambúnut n a rough scuffle with scrambling and no holds barred. Sa
sambúnut nahuslut ang íyang karsúnis, In the scuffle his trousers came
off. v [C; a2b3] have a rough scuffle with s.o. Magsambúnut ta run ug
dílì nímu iúlì ang ákung rilu, We will have a real fight if you do not
return my watch. -ay = sambúnut.

samì v [AB56; ac] smudge, smear s.t. by not having s.t. hit the area
intended. Misamì (nasamì) ang lipstik sa íyang ngábil, The lipstick
smeared her lips. Ayawg samia iniglitiring nímu, Don’t let it smudge
when you print the letters. Ayawg isamì inyung tái sa bangkíyu, Don’t
let your feces smudge the toilet seat.

sam-id v [A; c1] {1} hone, sharpen s.t. to a high degree. Sam-íra
(isam-id) úsà nang labáha, Sharpen that razor first. {2} sharpen,
refine one’s ability. Sam-írun ku ang ákung ininglis, I’ll sharpen my
ability in English. sam-iran n s.t. to sharpen s.t. with. -in- n s.t.
sharpened to gleaming sharpness.

samilya = similya.

sámin_1 = salamin.

sámin_2 = ispíhu, n3.

saminsámin_1 (from salamin) n eardrum.

saminsámin_2 = salaminsalamin. see salamin.

sámir n summer school. v {1} [A; b56] take summer classes. Unsang
sabdyíka ímung samírun (samíran)? What subject are you going to take
this summer? {2} [A2; c] take the ball used in practice shooting to the
other goal for a short time, making a shot or two and bringing it back
(slang).

samkun v {1} [A3N2] be in the early stages of pregnancy. Ug musamkun
(manamkun) ku, kasukaun ku, If I get pregnant, I feel like vomiting.
Dílì makasamkun (makapanamkun) ang íyang asáwa kay dipiktúsu siyag
matris, His wife cannot conceive because she has s.t. wrong with her
uterus. {2} [A13; c6] conceive an idea in the mind. Dílì mulibkas sa
ngábil nang mga pulúnga ug wà pa na isamkun sa hunàhúnà, Those words
would not have come out from the lips, if they had not been conceived
in the mind. paN- v {1} [A2] develop a craving or dislike in early
pregnancy. Ang mabdus nanamkun ug manggang hilaw, The pregnant woman
craved for green mangoes. {2} [A23; c] for a conceiving mother to have
her child be like s.t. she has a liking or craving for. Gipanamkun
siyag iring maung kusug mulayat, When his mother was in her first few
months with him, she took a liking to a cat. As a result he can jump
high. Ayawg panamkúni ang bábuy, Don’t conceive a fondness for pigs or
your baby will be like one. n the cravings or dislikes one feels in
early pregnancy.

sampablu = kardába.

sampaday = sampiray.

sampágà n k.o. deadly chicken ailment characterized by swelling on all
parts of the body.

sampagíta n jasmine, spreading and ornamental bush, grown for its
fragrant flowers: Jasminum spp.

sampak v {1} [A23BN; c6P] be stuck or pushed all the way into s.t.
else. Misampak (nanampak) na ba ang gítung sa pul-an? Is the tang stuck
all the way into the handle? Kinsay nagsampak (nagpasampak) áring lipak
diri sa túbu? Who stuck this stick all the way into the tube? Isampak
(ipasampak) ang pidal arun muháwid ang brík, Push the brake pedal all
the way down so that the brakes will hold. {2} [B256] for s.t. moving
to come into contact with s.t. stationary. Sa íyang pagtíra misampak
ang táku sa táwu sa íyang luyu, He hit the man in back of him with his
cue when he was making his shot.

sampáka = tsampáka.

sampal_1 v [A; a1b2] slap s.o. with the hand on any part of the body,
but esp. the face. Akuy nagsampal sa ímung abága, I slapped your
shoulder hard.

sampal_2 n k.o. magic charm tied to the branches of fruit trees to
prevent the fruit from being stolen. Stealing the fruits causes the
victim to suffer swelling of the stomach and sometimes death. v [A13;
b6] attach this charm to a tree.

sampaling = sagpà.

sampalita = sagpà.

sampalung v [A; a2b2] slap s.o. in the face. Sampalungun ku nang
mutsatsáha ug dílì mutúug sugúun, I will slap that maid if she does not
do what she’s told to do. n {1} slap in the face. {2} an act or
situation causing deep embarrassment.

sampan n a flat-bottomed, square-ended barge usually with no engines.
v [A13; a1c] {1} go by, take a barge. {2} make into a barge.

sampangkung -in- a done poorly, shoddily. Sinampangkung kaáyu ning
pagkalutúa sa kík kay dinalian, This cake is no good because we baked
it hurriedly. Sinampangkung ning ákung ininglis kay gamay ra man kug
grádu, My English is poor because I didn’t go far in school. v [A2; c1]
do s.t. shoddily.

samparay = sampiray.

samparing humorous pronunciation of sampaling ‘slap in the face’ in
imitation of Japanese soldiers.

sampay v {1} [A; c] hang laundry out. Isampay ang linabhan sa hayhayan,
Hang the laundry on the clothesline. {2} [A; c] put up in s.o. else’s
place, cause one to do so. Musampay unyà mi sa inyug higabin-an mi,
We’ll put up at your house if it gets to be night. Mga disgrasyáda nga
nagsampay sa ílang mga anak sa asílu, Unwed mothers who put their
children in the orphanage. Nasampay siya sa ámù pagkaílu níya, He came
to our place to live when he got orphaned. sampaysampay v [B; c] be
shoved around from home to home as a dependent. Nasampaysampay sa
kaparyintíhan ang mga ílu, The orphans were shoved around from one
relative to another.

sampayna n {1} dish made of pig’s innards and blood. {2} menstrual flow
(humorous). v {1} [A; a] make sampayna. {2} [a4] menstruate.

sampid = sampig.

sampidru = san pidru.

sampig v [A; c] put s.t. right next to s.t. else. Isampig ang kaldíru
sa kaláyu, Put the pot next to the fire.

sampil_1 a moving with a limp. Sampil kaáyung mulakaw si Badung kay
balì siyag tiil, Badong walks with a limp because he has a broken leg.
v [B126] get a limp.

sampil_2 v [A; a1b2] touch or brush against s.t. lightly. Wà may
nagsampil sa pluríra. Nahúlug lang nag íya ra, Nobody touched that
flower vase. It just fell by itself. Sampíla ra nang táwu sa ímung duul
arun mulíngì, Please touch the man next to you so he turns around.

sampilà v {1} [A; c16] carry s.t. astride the hips. Ayaw sampilaa
(isampilà) nang bátà kay tingálig mabakang nà, Don’t carry the child on
your hip because she might become bowlegged. {2} [A; c1] sit on one’s
buttocks with the legs crossed. Binhúrun ka ug ímung sampilaun
(isampilà) ang ímung paglingkud, You will get cramps if you sit on your
buttocks with the legs crossed.

sampilay v [B; a12] be drooping over the shoulders. Misampilay ang úlu
sa bátà, The child’s head was drooping on its shoulders. Gisampilay
níya ang tualya, She drooped the towel over her shoulders.

sampiling v [A; a2b2] swat on the cheeks.

sampíling n {1} sideburns, the hair growing on the face under the ears.
{2} the back part of the jawbone under the ears or the analogous
structure in animals. paN-(→) v [A2; b6] rest one’s head by propping
his cheeks in his hands. Naglangkaw ka lang sa trabáhu kay síging
nanampiling, You’re just sloughing off on the job because all you’re
doing is resting with your cheeks in your hands. -un a having thick
sideburns.

sampínit n a thorny vine with compoundedly pinnate leaves of a
yellowish, green color profusely armed. Several leaves, tied to the end
of a stick, are used as a swatter to catch fruit bats in flight:
Caesalpinia nuga. paN- v [A2; b6] catch fruit bats with sampínit
leaves.

sampiray v [A3] stagger or wobble in motion. Magsampiray ang tinday nga
bag-ung nahimugsù, A newborn colt is wobbly. Nagsampiray siya sa
kahubug, He was tottering because he was drunk.

sampit = sangpit.

sampiyad v [A3] walk with the abdomen well forward. Ang mabdus
musampiyad ug lakaw, A pregnant woman walks with her abdomen well
forward.

sampiyun n champion, the most superior of all competitors. v [B1; a2]
be, become a champion.

sampul n sample given away to prospective users as a trial. v [c] give
samples. — bálut n sample ballot.†

sampung v {1} [A; b(1)] cover or obstruct an opening or passage. Akuy
musampung ug tabla ánang bangag arun walay ilagà nga makaági, I will
cover the hole with a board so no rats can come in. Sampúngi ug nuug
arun dílì mutúlù, Plug it with a rag so it won’t drip. {2} [A12; a12]
reach the highest part of s.t. Ígù ming nakasampung sa bungtud mau say
pagdulhug níla, They were descending just as we had reached the summit.
n = -an(→). paN- v [A] cover an opening in one’s body. Panampung ug
muatsi ka, Cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze. -an(→), paN-an(→)
n the triangular portion in the upper part of the wall at the end of a
ridged roof, from the level of eaves upwards. kina-an(→) n the highest
part of s.t., apex. -un(→) n small part of the rice in the field left
to be harvested. Aku na lay tiwas ug áni sa sampungun, I’ll just finish
up harvesting this remaining portion of the rice field.

sampúngut (from púngut) n thicket of intertwining bushes, vines, and
branches of trees. Didtu ang langgam magbatug sa sampúngut, The bird
was perched in the thick growth of branches. v [A1] form a thick tangle
of branches and growth.

sampura = sampurádu_2.

sampurádu_1 n a mixture of salt and fresh water or tasting thereof. Ang
túbig sa bukána sa subà sampurádu, The mouth of a river is a mixture of
salt and fresh water.

sampurádu_2 n rice porridge with chocolate and sugar. v [A13; a12] make
sampurádu.

sampuráwu = sampurádu_1.

samput = sangput.

samsam v {1} [A; c1] move the lips in speaking without making a sound.
Musamsam siya sa íyang urasiyun ug ang irù dílì makapaak níya, He
mumbles his magic formula and the dog can’t bite him. {2} [A13; c1] eat
light food to keep the mouth occupied while doing s.t. else. Magsamsam
giyud nà siya kanúnay ug biskwit sa íyang trabáhu, He keeps eating
crackers idly while he is at work. -un(→) n {1} in folk belief, a magic
charm chewed so that one does not get hit in battle. {2} k.o. wild vine
which tastes like betel leaves and chewed to treat toothache.

samsuy n k.o. hood made of woven palm leaflets covering the entire head
and back, worn as a protection against rain. v [A; a] wear, make this
sort of hood.

samtang while, at the same time as. Pagbása samtang nagpaábut ka, Read
while you are waiting. ka-an n {1} time in the meanwhile. Sa
kasamtángan, siya ang intsards, For the meantime, he is in charge.
{2} person acting in temporary or substitute capacity. Kasamtángan nga
mamahandì sa kapunúngan, The acting treasurer of the organization.
ka-an(→) n temporary. Hatágan kag kasamtangan nga kagawásan kun
magbinuutan, You will be given temporal liberty if you behave well.

samu short for sa ímu it doesn’t matter to me. Samu ug madáut, maáyu
man ug ákù nang mutur, I don’t care if the motorcycle gets broken; it
is not mine anyway. — lang {1} never mind, don’t take it to heart. Samu
lang ug wà iúlì ang libru, ákù man tà tung ihátag níya, Never mind if
she didn’t return the book. I was going to give it to her anyway.
{2} it doesn’t matter. I accept the situation with good grace. Samu lag
pagawpaw ang yútà. Dì ku man nà tamnan, It doesn’t matter if the land
is barren. I wasn’t going to plant anything on it anyway.

sámù n k.o. brown seaweed that grows rooted, with small nodules
scattered over its branches. It is hung on plants to rid them of worms.

samúal v [A3P] talk unintelligibly due to a cold or when the mouth is
filled with food. Nagsamúal ka dihà. Búsà tunla ang kan-un nga ímung
giúsap, I can’t understand a word you’re saying, so swallow the food
you are chewing.

samúhan n farm tenant. v [B56; a2] be a tenant. Samuhánun námù ang
ímung igágaw, We will employ your cousin as a tenant. pa- v [A; b(1)]
have one’s land be taken care of by tenants.

sámuk a {1} bothersome. Sámuk kaáyu ning batáa nga galmun kay kanúnayng
mangáyù ug túbig, This child is a nuisance to take care of because he’s
constantly asking for water. {2} crowded and chaotic with activity.
Sámuk kaáyu ang Tabuan ug malúnis, Taboan market is very busy on
Mondays. Sámuk kaáyu ang upisína kay namalhin mi, The office is in an
uproar now because we just moved. v [A; a] disturb, bother. Latiguhan
ang bisag kinsay musámuk dinhi, I’ll whip anybody that makes noise
here. Dúna kuy isámuk nímu kadiyut, I have a favor to ask of you (lit.
s.t. to disturb you with). n {1} fight, disturbance. Dinhay sámuk sa
ámung klási; nagsumbagay, There was trouble in the class. S.o. was
fighting. {2} that which bothers, annoys. Maáyu puy-an sa búkid kay way
sámuk, The country is a nice place to live because there are no
annoyances. ka- n {1} trouble, bother. Ang ímung pagkapalahúbug
makahatag ug dílì gamayng kasámuk, Your drinking causes us no end of
trouble. {2} war, esp. the Second World War. Natáwu siya sa miáging
kasámuk, He was born during the recent war. -an(→) a given to causing
trouble or giving inconvenience. -in(→) a endearing way of referring to
s.o. that is troublesome. Samukin giyung bat-ána, This kid is a cute
little troublemaker. †

samúk n k.o. fish: Gerres spp.

samung n top shells. samungsamung n small top shells.

samut v [A23P] become more so, do all the more. Pagkabatì níya sa
balità, misamut siya ug hílak, After hearing the news, she cried all
the more. Misamut kaguul, She got all the more worried. Ug dílì ka
mupahúway musamut ang ímung húbak, If you do not rest your asthma will
get worse.

samuyaw, samúyaw n k.o. citrus tree 6–10′ tall, with marble-sized
fruit, very juicy and sour, tasting like limes: Citrus hystrix var.
microcarpa.

san_1 n title of address of most male saints.

san_2 = sa_1 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (dialectal).

sán = sálan.

sana_1 short for unsa na.

sana_2 = sanasána.

sanad (from anad) usually [do]. Sanad siyang muanhi sa may mga alas
trís, He usually comes at about three o’clock. a {1} doing s.t.
skillfully. Sanad na kaáyu kung mumaníhug awtu, I now drive the car
very well. {2} being very familiar with s.t. Magpahagíyus lang kus
dálan sa Tulídu kay sanad na kaáyu ku ánà, I just whizz over the road
to Toledo because I am very familiar with it. v [B12] be, become expert
in doing s.t. or familiar with s.t.

sanag a cheerful of countenance. v [B; a12P] be, become, make cheerful.
Karung balitáa makasanag (makapasanag) sa átung buut, This piece of
news can get us in a cheerful mood. ma-un(←) a {1} characterized with
cheer. {2} giving intimation of a bright outcome. Masanágun siyag
kaugmáun, He has a bright future.

sanan, sánan and (dialectal).

sánap = salánap.

sanasána v {1} [A; a12] practice, rehearse a particular skill or act.
Nagsanasána ku sa ákung pakigpúlung, I am practicing my speech. {2} [A;
c6] try s.t. on before actually wearing it. Isanasána ang sinínà ug
angayan ka ba, Try that dress on and see if it becomes you.

sanaturyum n sanatorium.

sánaw_1 v {1} [A; a] make a very watery porridge. Magsánaw ta pára
pamáhaw, Let’s make watery porridge for our breakfast. {2} [A; b6(1)]
stew food in coconut juice. Gisanáwan níya ang kinhasun, He stewed the
seashells in coconut juice. -in- n very watery porridge. -in-an n food
stewed in coconut juice.

sánaw_2 a for heights to give a dizzy feeling. Pagkasánaw tan-áwun sa
ubus, How dizzying it is to look below. v [B2; b6] give a dizzy
feeling. Gisanáwan ku sa ubus gíkan sa kampanaryu, I felt dizzy looking
down from the bell tower.

sánay v [A2; a12P] multiply, procreate. Ug musánay nang ímung ítik,
baligyái kug usa ka pár, If your ducks multiply, sell me a pair.
manggi-un, ma-un a prolific in reproducing.

sanaysánay = sanasána.

sanburn n sunburn. v [B12] get sunburned.

sandak v [B; b4] for the stomach to be distended with gas. Gipanúhut
siya, maung nagsandak ang tiyan, He has had gas pains, and so his
stomach is distended.

sandal = sandalyas.

sandalyas n sandals. v [A; b6(1)] wear or use sandals.

sandanan = sandanun.

sandánaw = alindánaw.

sandanay, sandanun n a name close friends or relatives call each other
mutually. v [C; c6] call each other by a special name mutually.
Nagsandanay ang mga mag-ágaw ug ‘prímu’, The cousins call each other
‘primo’.

sandaw a for s.t. that normally produces a certain amount, to have a
small yield. Sandaw ang lubi kay dúgay ang húlaw, The yield of the
coconut trees decreased considerably in the long drought. v [B12; a4]
come to give a low yield. Nasandaw (gisandaw) ang kadagátan dinhi sa
pagdininamíta, The yield of the seas in this area has become
considerably reduced because of all the dynamite fishing.

sanday v [A; c] lay or rest s.t. on and across s.t. else. Kanang trúsu
nga nagsanday sa kural mauy makapahugnù niánà, The log that is laid
across that fence will make it collapse. Isanday ang sumbuhan arun
makatíun kag maáyu, Rest the barrel on s.t. so that you can take good
aim.

sandayung n {1} roof gutter. {2} gutter, usually made of a large bamboo
tube, used to channel water from an elevated position. Gihimúag
sandayung ang tubud, A gutter was made for the spring. v [A; a2] make
into, attach a roof gutter.

sandig v {1} [AB6; c] lean against s.t., cause s.t. to do so. Ayawg
sandígi ang kural kay matumba, Don’t lean on the fence because it will
topple. Isandig ang sag-ub sa káhuy, Let the bamboo water container
lean against the tree. {2} [A2; b(1)] rely on, depend on s.t. one can
avail himself of. Mudaug ang ímung kandidatúra ug musandig ka sa
partídu, You will win if you rely on the party. {3} [c6] pin one’s
hopes on s.t. Anhà nákù isandig ang átung kaugmáun sa ímung kalampúsan,
I pin our hopes for the future on your success. — sa kalíwat take after
a forebear’s characteristic or peculiarity. Palahúbug siya kay sandig
man sa kalíwat, He is a drinker, because he takes after his forebears.
pa- v [A; c1] {1} cause to lean. {2} base on. Sugilánung gipasandig sa
Biblíya, A story based on the Bible. -anan n back rest.

sandi skul n {1} Sunday school. {2} gambling games and cockfights held
Sundays (humorous). v [A13] hold a Sunday-school class.

sandíya n {1} watermelon. {2} watermelon seeds, dried and salted.

sandu n {1} sleeveless undershirt worn by women. {2} men’s sleeveless
undershirt of similar shape. v [A1; b6(1)] wear this garment. Náa nay
brá. Magsandu pa giyud, Are you going to wear chemise over your bra?

sandúgù (from usa and dugù) n blood compact. v [C; b6] make a blood
compact. Nagsandúgù sila si Ligaspi ug Sikatúna, Legaspi and Sikatuna
made a blood compact.

sanduk v [A; ab2] scoop s.t. out or off of. Sandúkun ta ning lápuk sa
kanal arun makaagi ang túbig, We will scoop out the mud from the ditch
so the water can pass through. n {1} scoop. {2} utensil used to scoop
rice from the pot. {3} a scoopful. Butangi ug tulu ka sanduk balas, Put
in three shovelfuls of sand. ig-l- = sanduk, n1, 2.

sandul = sindul.

sanduluy n cooked cereals, usually corn, with sweet potato mixed in.
v [A13; b(1)] cook rice or corn with sweet potato. -in- v = sanduluy.

sandúrut a intimate. Sandúrut kaáyu silang amigúha, They are very
intimate friends. v [C1] be, become intimate with s.o. Dílì ku
makigsandúrut ug tabian, I don’t want to become intimate with
gossipmongers. ma-in-un, ma-un a friendly, done as would be done to a
friend. Masinandurútun nga pagabiábi, Entertaining in a most friendly
manner. maki-un a friendly, tending to treat people amiably. Sayun ra
siyang pakigsabútan kay makisandurútun man, It is easy to make an
agreement with him because he is amiable. ka- n one with whom one is on
intimate terms.

sandùsandù v [B6; b6] scurry about in all directions. Misandùsandù ang
mga humígas pagpangítag makáun, The ants scurried about looking for
food. Nagsandùsandù mig dágan paglínug, We ran every which way when the
earthquake struck.

sang = sa_1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (dialectal).

sáng v [B1; c1] be strewn all over, be in disarray. Nagsáng ang mga
butang sa íyang lamísa, The things on his table are all in disarray.

sanga n {1} branch, limb of a tree. Ang langgam nagbatug sa sanga, The
bird perched on a branch. {2} lateral extension of a road or path. Sa
tuung sanga sa dálan, On the right branch of the path. {3} fork of a
slingshot. {4} bamboo or wooden hook attached to a rope used to draw up
a fish trap from the water. {5} an extra finger or toe in addition to
the normal five. — nga buhatan branch office. v [A] {1} have or grow a
branch. Ang mais dílì musanga, Corn doesn’t grow branches. {2} for the
road to fork. Inig-abut sa nagsangang karsáda, disilya, When you get to
the fork in the road, take the left. — ang dílà v [B1456] be fierce and
violent (like a snake with a forked tongue). Musúkul giyud ku nímu
bísag nagsanga pa nang ímung dílà, I’ll fight back against you even if
you are fierce and violent. — ang tinggil a for a woman to have sexual
appetite (lit. have a forked clitoris). (←) v [A13] = sanga, v.
sangasanga v [A; a12] fell a tree branch by branch. sanghan a having an
extra finger or toe branching off. kinasang-an n {1} the place where
the road forks off. {2} crotch of a tree branch.

sánga = pantíhan.

sángab n {1} swath or a long rectangular area designated as an area to
be worked. Maggálab ta ug kúgun, kining sangába ákù, ang píkas ímu, We
will cut down the cogon. This swath is mine and that one is yours.
Sángab nga ági sa ílang panggúna, The swath that was left when they cut
grass. {2} k.o. fish trap of shallow waters with a broad mouth tapering
towards the bottom, set in the path of the fish. a right in the path.
v {1} [A2; b5] {1} do s.t. in swaths. Sangábun (sangában) nátù nag
sanggì ug tagurha ka dupa, We will harvest it in swaths two fathoms
wide. {2} [A; c] put s.t. right in the path. Nasángab sa íyang mata ang
páa sa dalága nga atbang níyag lingkud, He couldn’t help seeing the
thighs of the girl sitting directly across from him. Isángab nang
sugung sa túbud, Put the mouth of the bamboo tube to the spring.
{3} [AN; c] catch fish with a sángab fish trap.

sángad = sanglad.

sángag = sanglag.

sángan = pantíhan.

sángat = sang-at.

sang-at v [A; c] {1} put s.t. up s.w. Isang-at ni dihà sa paril arun
dílì maabut sa irù, Put this on top of the fence so the dog cannot get
at it. {2} file a suit or complaint in court or petition with the
proper authorities. Ang piskal mauy nagsang-at sa kíha imbis ang
tagtúngud, The district attorney filed the complaint in place of the
aggrieved party. hi-/ha- v [B1256] 1 be put up high. {2} for success or
s.t. that one desires to be located s.w. (literary). Anhà sa
paningkámut mahisang-at ang ímung kalampúsan, Your success rests on
hard work. -anan n shelf, usually higher than shoulder-level.

sangay n people having the same first name. Ang santus kung sangay, The
saint I’m named after. (←) v [C3] have the same first name.

sángay = sanglay_1.

sang-ay v [A; c1] carry s.t. on or sling over the shoulders.
Nagsang-ayg bátà, Carrying a child on one shoulder. Isang-ay (sang-áya)
ang malíta, Carry the suitcase on your shoulder.

sangbat = sakbat.

sangbud v [B1; b8] for the tether rope of an animal to get tangled on
itself or around s.t. else. Nagsambud ang písì sa kábaw ug diriyut
matuuk, The water buffalo’s rope got tangled and the animal nearly
choked. sangburan n length of tubing made of a piece of bamboo 7–8″
long, used for storing yarn.

sangga_1 v [A2; a12] barge in on a conversation, games. Ngánung
musangga man ka nga wà ka man mahibalu sa ámung gisultíhan? Why do you
barge in when you don’t know what we are talking about? Ngánung
sanggáhun man nímu ang dúlà ug dì ka paapilun? Why do you force your
way into the game if you are not supposed to participate?

sangga_2 n {1} in children’s games involving bets (of rubber bands and
the like), one’s partner with whom one pools his bets. Pangáyù ug sigay
sa ímung sangga ug mapildi ka, Ask for some more cowries from your
partner if you lose. {2} close friend. Kaila ku kaáyu níya kay sangga
ku siya sa ámung pagkabátà, I know him very well because he has been my
chum since childhood days. v {1} [A2C; ac3] make s.o. his partner for
games. {2} [C1] be friends with s.o. ka- = sangga, n.

sanggà v {1} [A13; a12] be underneath s.t. so that it supports or
protects it. Kanang língin nga nagsanggà sa misitíra plastik, That
round thing the flower pot is resting on is plastic. {2} [A3; a12] put
s.t. under s.t. else. Sanggáa ug batu ang halígi arun dílì suphun sa
umug, Place a stone slab under the post so moisture can’t penetrate.
{3} [A; a] catch s.t. dripping or falling with a container. Nagsanggà
siya sa inágay nga túbig sa íyang kamut, He cupped his hands to catch
the dripping water. n saucer.

sanggab_1 v {1} [A; a] catch a liquid that is dripping or falling by
sticking s.t. under it. Sanggába ang gátas nga nagtulù sa lamísa, Catch
the milk that is dripping off the edge of the table. {2} [a12] be
caught by the ear. Ang huhungíhung sa pagwilga mauy nasanggab sa íyang
dalunggan, The rumors of the strike caught his ears. {3} [A13; a12]
make a palm toddy container sanggab. n a bamboo tube container for palm
toddy, the length of one node, the bottom of which is the lower node.

sanggab_2 n k.o. fishing net used in bays, attached to fish corrals,
set such that the current hits them broadside at certain seasons of the
year. v {1} [A] set the sanggab. Magsanggab rung bulána, The sanggab
will be set this month. {2} [a12] catch fish with a sanggab.

sanggabun a {1} gamecocks of a kind that are killed during the first
match. {2} woman that easily gets pregnant out of wedlock.

sanggákà a for plants to spread out in the branches or roots. v [B] be,
become outspreading. Ug musanggákà kunu ang sanga, diyútay ang búnga,
If the tree has lush and spreading branches, they say it will bear few
fruit.

sanggaráyung = singguráyung.

sanggat v [Ab6; b8] catch or snag when being pulled; cause s.t. to do
so. Lagmit musanggat ang tagà sa mga batus ilálum, Most likely the hook
will snag on the stones on the bottom. Ikay nagsanggat sa tagà; karun
ikay tangtang, You let the hook snag so you get it loose.

sanggì v {1} [A; a] rip, break off s.t. stiff at the place of
attachment. Nasanggì ang palwa pagtunub níya, The coconut palm frond
broke off when he stepped on it. Misalingsing ang gisanggían sa sanga,
The place where a branch was broken off grew new shoots. {2} [AN; a12]
harvest corn. Mananggì ta rung simanáha. Layà na ang mais, We harvest
the corn this week because it is ready now. n {1} action of harvesting.
Ang sanggì pagahimúun sunud búlan, The harvest will be held next month.
{2} output realized from a specific harvest. Dakù mig sanggì, We had a
big harvest. -l-un(←) n mature, ready for harvest. maN-r-/l-
n harvester.

sanggíkit v [AC; c1] for people, vegetation to be close to each other.
Nagsanggíkit ang mga káhuy sa anut, The trees in the second-growth
forest are growing thick. Dílì ku makatulug ug dílì makasanggíkit sa
láwas sa ákung bána, I cannot sleep if I am not close to my husband’s
body. Nasanggíkit ang pagbátì sa duha ka bihag, The captives developed
a close feeling for one another. Ayaw sanggikíta (isanggíkit) pagbutang
ang mga bangkù, Don’t put the benches close to each other.

sanggra n {1} vaccinate by pricking with a needle, not with a shot.
{2} the wound caused by vaccination or the scar left. v [A; b(1)]
vaccinate. Sanggráhan ka úsà ka makalangyaw, You have to be vaccinated
before you can go abroad.

sangguli n drink made of palm toddy, chocolate, and eggs. v [A; c1]
make, have a toddy shake.

sangguráyung = singguráyung.

sanggut n sickle. v {1} [AN2; b(1)N] get palm toddy from a coconut
tree. {2} [a12] make into a sickle. -an(→) n coconut tree from which
one obtains palm toddy. -in-an(→) n pidgin (lit. s.t. just picked up as
toddy from a coconut tree). v [A; c] speak pidgin. maN-r- n palm toddy
gatherer.

sangguwar n k.o. white, somewhat round-grained rice.

sanghid v [AN; b6N] ask permission. Misanghid (nananghid) siyang Máma
níya nga muadtu siya sa sini, He asked his ma to let him go to the
show. Ninyung tulu kinsay nananghid? Which one of you three asked
permission to go? Ug nakasanghid (nakapananghid) kang Pápa, dad-a nang
kabáyù, If you have asked Dad, you may take the horse. Kinsay ímung
gisanghíran (gipananghíran) pagkúhà nímu sa mutur? Who did you ask when
you took the motorcycle? n permission. Kini si Pidru kanúnayng mulakaw
nga walay sanghid (pananghid), Pedro always goes out without asking
permission. paN- = sanghid, n.

sangì v [AB6; a] break a piece off s.t. at its attachment or edge.
Kinsay nagsangì sa sabungánan sa kálù, Who detached the thing to hang
the hats on? Dalì ra ning ákung kuku musangì (masangì), My nails break
easily.

sángì n road intersection.

sangig n k.o. erect, hairy, aromatic herb, widely used as a spice.
v [A; b(1)] season with sangig.

*sángil pa- v {1} [A; b(1)] blame, impute s.o. with a fault. Siyay
nagpasángil nga akuy naglábay sa irù, He is accusing me of stoning the
dog. Ang húlaw gipasanginlan sa kangihit sa bugas, Drought was blamed
for the scarcity of corn. Ug náay pyansa ang gipasanginlan makaguwà sa
prísu, If bail is posted, the accused party can get out of jail.
{2} [A; c6] make excuses, pretend to do s.t. for a purpose. Mupasángil
ka ug pamisíta, sa tinúud naníid ka níla, You make a pretense of
visiting them when in truth you are observing them. Ug mupalta ka,
ipasángil lang sa labad sa úlu, If you want to be absent, just say you
had a headache. n {1} charge, accusation. {2} excuse for not doing s.t.
-um- v [A23] make or offer an excuse. Walà siya katubag ug misumángil
nga gidukà siya, He was not able to answer and made the excuse that he
was drowsy. pasumángil = pasángil, v2.

sángit v {1} [A2; b8cP] be in the way and hold s.t. in place, snag,
catch. Kining tungguytungguy mauy musángit sa pinsúti, This lug is what
holds the firing pin back. Kuháa nang mga lipak dihà kay makasángit sa
muági. Get those bamboo slats out of there because they might snag
people that go by there. Way kasangítan ang antiyúhus kay mubù siyag
ilung, The eyeglasses won’t hold because her nose is so short.
{2} [B125; b4(1)] be delayed by s.t. which ordinarily should not have
caused the delay. Naulahi mi kay nasángit mi didtu sa bilyaran, We are
late because we were delayed at the pool hall.

sangkà_1 n a contest matching skill, wit, strength or a quarrel.
v {1} [C; b8] have a contest of strength, wit, skill. Magsangkà tag
makatulu. Píhu giyud ug kinsay pildi, We will play it off three times.
Then it should be clear who is the loser. Unsa may inyung gikasangkaan?
What did you two quarrel about? {2} [a12] pair off two contenders in a
match. Sangkáun nátù ang átung isig ka sunuy, Let’s pair off our
gamecocks.

sangkà_2 a for the crotch to be too tight. Apíking ilakaw ning
karsunísa kay sangkà rag pundíyu, It’s hard to walk in these pants
because the crotch is too tight. v [B12] have a crotch that is too
tight.

sangkad a broad, having ample width. Sangkad nga panaptun, Cloth that
is of ample width. v {1} [B1256] be completely covered with s.t. Ang
íyang nawung nasangkad ug bugas, Her face is all covered with pimples.
{2} [a12] do s.t. to the entire area of s.t. Sangkára ug páhid ug asíti
ang káhuy, Smear oil all over the wood. {3} [A12; c16] be enough for
everybody. Ang lima ka buuk tinápay ni Hisus nakasangkad sa gatusan ka
mga táwu, Jesus’ five loaves of bread were enough to feed hundreds of
people. {4} [b4(1)] have one’s fill of s.t. Nasangkaran sa bunal ang
mga bátang nag-áway, The quarreling children got a whipping such that
they decided they never wanted to do it again. ka-, gisangkarun,
kasangkarun n width, breadth. Ang lamísa may kasangkad (gisangkarun,
kasangkarun) nga duha ka mitru, The table is two meters wide.

sangkap (from salangkap) a complete, having the necessary equipment.
Kusína nga sangkap sa galamitun, A kitchen completely equipped. Sangkap
kaáyu siya sa pangáyu sa awtu, He is completely equipped to repair
cars. v {1} [B2] for equipment to become complete. Ug musangkap na ang
balhíbu, ang kuyabug makalupad na, The nestling can fly once he gets
his complete feathers. Nasangkap na ang tangu sa bátà, The child has
all of his teeth now. {2} [A; b6] equip with needed things. Akuy
sangkap nímug galamitun sa pamanday, I will equip you with carpentry
tools. {3} = salangkap. ka-an n equipment, tools. Gihímù ka lang
kasangkápan arun mulusut ang kuntrabandu, They are only using you as a
tool to smuggle in their goods.

sangkay_1 n friend (slang). v [A3PC; a12] make friends, befriend, be
close to each other (slang). ka-an n group of friends, gang.

sangkay_2 v [A; c] throw s.t. with moderate force in an underhand
motion. Kinsay nagsangkay ug sinilhig diris asíras? Who threw the
sweepings on the sidewalk?

sangkayud v [B6; a12] walk slowly with halting steps and a slight
forward thrust of the hips. Nagsangkayud paglakaw ang babáying nagbatì,
The woman who was in labor walked haltingly with a thrust of the
abdomen. a walking in this way.

sangki n k.o. aromatic Chinese spice. v [b(1)] spice with sangki.

sangkíguy v [AC; a] have sexual intercourse (humorous). Bisan sa banyu
nagsangkíguy sila, They do it anywhere, even in the bathroom.

sangkiig v {1} [A3P; c1] totter as one walks under a burden or because
of difficulty in getting one’s footing. Nagsangkiig ang kargadur, The
stevedore is tottering under the heavy load. {2} [B146] be heavily
burdened financially. Nagsangkiig ku sa pagpaiskuyla sa mga bátà, I am
staggering under the burden of sending my children to school.

sangkil v {1} [A; a2b2] touch or brush s.o. or s.t. lightly. Ug
musangkil ang alambri sa iliktrisidad sa linya sa tiligrama, náay
hikurintihan, If the electric line touches the telegraph wire, s.o.
will be electrocuted. Sangkíla sa kuhit arun matambug nang kartun,
Touch the box with the stick so that it will fall. {2} [AN; a1b2] gore
with the horns. Ayaw pagpaduul niánang kabáwa kay musangkil (manangkil)
ra ba giyud nà, Don’t go near that water buffalo because it gores.
{3} [A; a12] for an unpleasant feeling to bother one. Ang pangabubhu
nga nagsangkil sa íyang dughan, Jealousy which pricks his heart. -aN-r-
see ananangkil.

sangkiríbut = singkiríbut.

sangkis = sankis.

sangkiyud = sangkayud.

sangkù v {1} [A2; ac] reach, arrive at a point in time or place. Kining
dalána musangkù sa subà, This path reaches the river. Makasangkù sa
lángit ang ákung kasukù, My anger knows no limits (reaches the high
heavens). Unsay gitas-un ang gisangkúan sa íyang pagluksu? How high did
he manage to jump? {2} [A23; b6] end up, result in. Ang ílang dúlà
misangkù sa áway, Their game ended up in a quarrel. Ang ílang
panaghigála misangkù sa panaghigugmaay, Their friendship eventually led
to love.

sangkung = sakung.

sangkuráyung, sangkuriyung = singguráyung.

sangla n leprosy. v [a4] be afflicted with leprosy. sanglahun n leper.

sanglad v [AB2; c] run aground, stranded on the sand; cause s.t. to do
so. Mangluksu ang mga sundálu sa dì pa musanglad ang bards, The
soldiers jump off before the barge hits the beach. Ang barku nasanglad
sa bàbà sa subà, The ship is stranded at the mouth of the river.

sanglag v [A; a2] roast s.t. in a pan with little or no oil. Maáyung
pagkasanglag sa kapi, The coffee was well roasted. n action of roasting
in a pan. -in- n thing roasted. Sinanglag mani, Roasted peanuts.

san-glas n sunglasses. v [A13; a12] wear, make into sunglasses.

sanglay_1 v [A; a2] carry things tied to both ends of a pole over one’s
shoulder. Sangláyun (sinangláyun) ku lang ang duha ka táru nga tubà, I
will carry two cans of palm toddy on a pole over the shoulder. -in- =
sanglay. -in-an n a pole on which things are carried.

sanglay_2 n {1} variety of wild tomatoes having red, oval-shaped
fruits, less than ½″ in diameter and about 1″ long. {2} [name] nga —
Chinaman [so-and-so]. Nagpalit ug bugas sa ílang Singking Sanglay,
Buying rice at the Chinaman Sing King’s store. mistísu — person of half
Chinese, half Filipino blood.

sanglit since, for the reason that. Sanglit siya may amahan ni Husi,
íya nang tulubágun, Since he is José’s father, it is his
responsibility. paN- n example, supposition. Íning ímung pangatarúngan,
kanang ímung pananglit dílì musalir, In your argument, your example
won’t serve. {a} for example. Pananglit, kining librúha dílì na mapalit
ug dúsi, This book, for example, cannot be had for twelve pesos. {b} if
assuming that [such-and-such] a probable thing happens. Pananglit
muanhi si Tasyu, siyay mudala sa sulat, Assuming Tasio comes, he will
bring the letter. v [A; c6] give an instance as an example. Ipananglit
ku nímu ang usa ka langgam nga ímung gipusil: mamumúnù ka ba? Let me
give you as an example a bird you shot. Are you a murderer for that?
paN-an = pananglit, n. -anan n {1} s.o. made into an example,
reference. Si Hub nahímung sanglitánan sa paílub, Job became an example
of patience. {2} story or saying made as an example. Ang nahitabù sa
Truy usa ka sanglitánan sa nagsubrang kumpiyansa, What happened to Troy
is an example of overconfidence.

sangpit v [A; a12] {1} call s.o. to come or attract his attention.
Sangpítun ta ka ug manihápun na, I will call you when supper is ready.
Gisangpit ku siya, apan wà siya mulíngì, I called to him, but he did
not turn his head. {2} ask a favor or help from s.o. Sangpíta ang amígu
nímu sa kustum, Call on your friend in the customs for help. paN-
v [A2; c] {1} invite s.o. to partake in s.t. lami nga dílì ikapanangpit
coitus (the delicious feeling one cannot invite s.o. to share). {2} in
the búhat ceremony, to invoke the spirits and invite them to partake of
the offering. n the invocation in the búhat ceremony.

sangput v [A23; b(1)] result in, become. Kanang inyung lantúgì musamput
unyà sa áway, Your discussion will end up in a quarrel. n {1} buttocks.
{2} = -an(→). -an(→) n seat of a pair of pants. -anan n outcome,
result. Laksut ug sangputánan nang ímung hingárig ínum ug álak, You
will come to a no good end the way you drink all the time. paN-an(←)
n seat of pair of pants as reckoned for measurement.

sangsang_1 v [A; a12] blunt s.t., bending the tip backward or spreading
out the fibers at the tip. Ang batuun nga yútà makasangsang
(makapasangsang) sa tumuy sa bára, Stony ground can blunt the tip of
the bar. Sangsángun ta ning tumuy sa lipak arun walay masámad, Let’s
blunt the tip of the bamboo slat so nobody will get hurt.

sangsang_2 v [A; b6(1)] stuff a hole, cavity, or opening. Siyay
nagsangsang ug papil nga kinúmut sa lìliánan, She stuffed a piece of
crumpled paper into the peephole.

sangù v {1} [B256; cP] for s.t. pulled, pushed, or thrown to get caught
on an unmovable obstacle. Wà masulud ang búla kay misangù (nasangù) sa
búrd, The ball didn’t get into the loop because it hit the board. Átung
isangù (ipasangù) sa tuud ang kangga abir makabira ba giyug kábaw, We
will let the sled hit a stump and see if the carabao can pull it out.
{2} [B1256] hit one’s jaw while moving. Nasámad ákung dílà kay nasangù
ku sa kurdísu, I hurt my tongue because I hit my jaw on the window
sill. {3} [B1256] be stuck with s.t. hard to solve. Nasangù ku sa ákung
paghúbad sa isturya, I was stuck in the translation of the story.
{3a} [B2456] stammer, speak or sing haltingly. Maáyu nga dílì ta
musangù ug mudiskursu ta, Better not to speak haltingly in giving a
speech. {4} [B126] be frustrated, foiled. Ang íyang pamalíbad nakasangù
sa ákung mga plánu, His refusal foiled my plans.

sángud_1 n nickname intimate friends call each other. ‘Way uyab’ ílang
sángud kay púrus sila way trátu, They call each other ‘no girl’ because
neither of them has a girl friend. v [C2] call each other with a common
nickname.

sángud_2 n an amulet which gives the owner an unusual chance for
financial success or unusual power and strength. (→) v [A12] possess
such a charm. Nakasangud kunu nà si Sisuy kay síging makadaug sa
búlang, They say Sisoy has a charm because he always wins in
cockfights. sangúran n s.o. who possesses a sángud.

sanguhal = sangúwal.

sángun v {1} [A; b] hitch up, harness an animal. Kábaw ságad sangúnan
ug dáru, They usually hitch a water buffalo to the plow. Isángun na ang
yúgu sa kábaw, Put the yoke over the water buffalo now. {1a} [A2] go
out to earn money with a horse and rig or draft animal hitched to a
cart. Musángun ka ba rung buntag? Are you going out to get passengers
this morning? {2} [b(1)] be entrusted with a responsibility or onerous
burden. Ayaw kug sangúni ánang buháta kay dì ku suluguun nímu, Don’t
burden me with that work because I’m not your servant.

sangúwal v [A13; c1] speak or talk indistinctly because the mouth is
full or because of difficulty in articulating. Nagsangúwal ka kay punù
man nang ímung bàbà, You’re talking indistinctly because your mouth is
full. (→) a indistinct of speech. Sanguwal na kaáyu ang sinultihan sa
nagpinal, The dying man’s speech is very unclear now.

sangyad = sanglad.

sangyag = sanglag.

sangyaw v {1} [AP; c6P] disseminate news, information. Ang balità
nasangyaw na sa tibuuk gingharían, The news has spread throughout the
kingdom. {2} [A; c6] proclaim, declare officially. Ang partídu
nagsangyaw nga si Rúsis kandidátu upisiyal, The party proclaimed Roces
an official candidate. n proclamation. ka-an n group of proclamations.
mag-r- n preacher.

San Huwan n {1} St. John. {2} the twenty-fourth of June celebrating St.
John’s Day where people go to the sea to bathe. paN- v [A2; b6]
celebrate St. John’s day by swimming.

sani_1, sáni (from unsa ni) {1} pause word used when one cannot recall
what is to be said. Arun dílì mukángù ang makina hináyig búhì ang sani,
klats diay, So that the motor won’t stall, slowly release the
watchamacallit, um, the clutch. {2} particle expressing discomfiture or
dislike at what s.o. is doing or is happening. Sani gud nga bisitáha!
Mupaúlì man lang ug way panamílit, What kind of a visitor is he anyway!
He just goes home without saying goodbye. {3} = unsa (dialectal).

*sani_2 kasaníhan n department of health. sanidad n department of
health.

sánib v [AB16; c1] arrange in tiers, neat pile; be so. Nagsánib siya sa
mga papil, She is stacking the papers in a neat pile. Nagsánib ang mga
tabla, The boards are piled on top of one another. n layer. May tulu ka
sánib ang playwud, Plywood is composed of three layers. (→) v [A;
b6(1)] {1} insert into or in between. Gisanib níya sa sakuban ang
sundang, He inserted the bolo into its scabbard. {2} support, give
assistance. Ang mga tinun-an misanib sa punduk sa mga mamumuu, The
students gave their support to the labor union. Ang íyang súhul dílì
makasanib ug lima ka táwu, His salary cannot support five persons.
n layer situated or inserted in between. May sanib nga karni ang pán,
There was a layer of meat in between the pieces of bread.

*sanib pa- v [A; b] court s.o.’s favor by showing exaggerated concern,
giving lavish gifts, and the like. Dalì ra siyang miusbaw kay maáyung
mupasanib, He quickly got promoted because he is great at boot-licking.

sanidad see *sani_2.

sanílas = sinílas.

sanínà = sinínà.

sanípa n {1} edging similar to an eaves board which trims a roof. {2} a
short curtain across the top of a window, framework of a bed, and the
like. {2a} design in series at one side or around the edges of the
cloth. {3} folding room divider. {4} lamp shade to concentrate light.
v [A; a] install, use, use as, make into a sanípa.

sanit v [A; a] {1} pull with a jerk. Ímung sanitun ang pasul ug dúnay
isdà nga mukubit, Pull the line with a jerk if a fish bites.
{2} snatch, grab. Maáyung musanit ug pisù ang banug, Hawks are good at
snatching chicks. {3} [B6; c] snag, pierce and get caught in s.t.
Musanit ang tagà sa bàbà sa isdà, The hook will snag in the fish’s
mouth. Nasanit sa gamut sa káhuy ang dáru, The plow got caught in the
roots of a tree.

sanitári inspiktur n sanitary inspector. v [B126; b6] be a sanitary
inspector.

sankis n sweet, juicy orange similar to the Valencia oranges (so called
from the brand Sunkist). v [b6] put orange into s.t. as flavoring.

sanla = sangla.

San Markus n {1} St. Mark. {2} reference to marriage. Naliug siya sa
bitik ni San Markus, She was hooked into marriage (lit. caught by the
neck in Saint Mark’s trap). Nagpainrǔl siya sa Unibirsidad di San
Markus, She enrolled in the University of Marriage (i.e. got married).

San Pidru n {1} Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul (June 29).
{2} gatekeeper (just as St. Peter is the keeper of the Gates of
Heaven). Sirádu man ang pultahan. Háin kahà ang san pidru dinhi? The
gate is closed. Where could the gatekeeper be? v {1} [A13N] celebrate
St. Peter’s Day by going swimming. {2} [B156] be a gatekeeper. — San
Pablu = san pidru, n1.

sanpípar n sandpaper. v {1} [A; b(1)] rub or smooth s.t. with
sandpaper. {2} [a] use a certain k.o. sandpaper on.

san pransisku = kalípay, n2.

sansan v {1} = sangsang_2. {2} [A2; a12] in weaving, force the woof
threads close to each other by swinging the beater hard. Sansánun nímu
ang hulug arun singpun ang panaptun, Force the woof threads close to
one another so that the cloth will be tightly woven, -in- n cloth made
of abaca fiber tightly woven, as distinguished from the kind used as
fish netting where the warp and woof are spaced far apart. †

sansiyut, sansut n sunsuit, playing suit for children, usually backless
and sleeveless. v [A12; ac] make into, wear a sunsuit.

sansuy n collarless, short-sleeved shirt. v {1} [A; b6] wear a sansuy.
{2} [a12] make into a sansuy.

santa n {1} exclamation: short for Santa Maríya (see 3b). {2} title for
female saints. Santa Katalína, Saint Catherine. {3} in phrases: — búla
the Papal Bull granting special indulgence to Spain and her colonies. —
iglisya the Holy Church. — Kláwus Santa Claus. — krus {a} the Cross.
{b} Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, celebrated in the
Philippines in May, a novena culminated with feasting and merry-making.
v [A1] offer a devotion to the Holy Cross. — Krúsan n the celebration
of the Holy Cross as practiced in Luzon with a Rayna Ilína. — lána
{a} holy oil. {b} extreme unction. — Maríya {a} Holy Mary.
{b} exclamation of sudden surprise or worried fear. Santa Maríya,
mahúlug ang bátà, Christ! The child is going to fall! — santíta see
santíta. simána — The Holy Week preceding Easter. — sína communion
given by Protestants as part of their church service (as opposed to the
Catholic communion—kaláwat or kumulga). v [A] {1} administer communion.
{2} take communion.

santà = salantà.

santak v [A; a12] pull a fishing line with a jerk to hook a fish that
nibbled at the bait. Tandugun gáning ímung pasul santáka dáyun, If a
fish tugs at your line, pull it up with a jerk.

santáku v [A; a12] strike or beat heavily with the fist. Hala,
santakúhun man kunu ku nímu, sigi, O.K. you said you would beat me.
Let’s see you do it.

santal n k.o. ornamental bushes: Ixora sp.

santa lusíya n k.o. ornamental crawling vine grown in pots: Zebrina
pendula.

santan = santal.

santas n female saints. v [B1; a12] be, become a saint.

santíban (short for San Istíban) exclamation denoting helpless, sudden
surprise. Santíban ning batáa, gikablit ang gátu, Heavens this child!
He pulled the trigger!

santik_1 v [A; a2] {1} build a fire by rubbing two dry bamboo sticks
together. {2} build a fire by rubbing flint and steel together.
n {1} method of producing fire by friction. {2} k.o. flint used in
building a fire by friction. -an(→) n stone used for building fires by
rubbing steel over it.

santik_2 n slingshot. v [A; c] hit with a slingshot. paN- v [A2; b6(1)]
go hunting birds with a slingshot.

santik_3 = amimitas.

santilmu n light seen at night moving over swamps or the sea caused by
natural phenomena but thought to be the soul of a dead person coming
back to the world. v [A13; b(1)] for this wandering light to appear.
Magsantilmu gánì, ayawg dágan, Don’t run if a will-o’-the-wisp appears.

santing v {1} [AN] swell with a pricking, burning sensation. Musanting
(mananting) ang tútuy ug punù sa gátas, The breasts swell with a
pricking sensation when they are full of milk. Nagsanting ang hubag nga
wà pay buthanan, The boil has not come to a head and is swelling with a
pricking, burning sensation. {2} [A3] for s.t. to penetrate the ear and
stay there naggingly. Nagsanting pa sa ákung dalunggan ang íyang
mabiaybiáyung talidhay, Her derisive laughter keeps resounding in my
ears. {3} for s.t. to appear suddenly to evoke recognition. Misanting
sa ákung hunàhúnà nga dílì maabli ang pultahan, It suddenly struck me
that the door couldn’t be opened. — ang dunggan v [B46] flare up in
excitement or anger upon hearing s.t. Ang pagtubagtubag sa anak mauy
makasanting (makapasanting) sa dunggan sa ginikánan, Parents flare up
when their children talk back to them.

santisima exclamation denoting sudden surprise at s.o.’s behavior.
Santisima, ning batáa, mulabang lang ug kalit bísan ug nangági ning mga
awtu, Heavens, this child suddenly rushes into the street even though
there are so many cars passing. — Trinidad The Holy Trinity.

santisimu n the Blessed Sacrament. — sakramintu = santisimu.

santisiyam euphemism for santisimu. — nga karáan humorous expression of
sudden surprise.

santíta n fake saint. santa — a pretending to be saintly in behavior.
Santa santíta silabun maldíta, She pretends to be a saint, but she’s
naughty. santitasantíta v [A] pretend to be saintly.

santítu, santítù_1 = santíta (male).

santítù_2 n children’s game played with marbles, shells, stones in
which the pieces are thrown on the ground and a lead piece is flicked
to hit a designated piece and no other. v [A2C; b6(1)] play this game.

santu n {1} title for male saints. Santu Tumas, St. Thomas. {2} in
phrases: purdiyus pur- exclamation denoting deep agitation at the
gravity of a situation. Purdiyus pursantu, Bidung, ibutang nang pusil!
God have mercy, Bedong! Put that gun down! — Intiyíru image of the dead
body of Christ carried in a procession on Good Friday. — Kristu {a} the
crucified Christ. {b} a small crucifix. — lána holy oil. — Ninyu
{a} the Christ Child. {b} the image of the Christ Child thought to have
been brought by Magellan. b1 the church which houses it. — Pápa The
Pope. — Rusaryu the Holy Rosary. — santítu = santa santíta (male) see
santíta. istígi — see *istígi. pasantusantu v [A13P] put on a pretense
of good behavior. Magpasantusantu siya ug náa si Pápa níya, He puts on
a pretense of good behavior if his father is around.

santul_1 n medium-sized tree cultivated for its deep-yellow fruits, the
size and shape of a tennis ball, sour and juicy with a seed in several
sections in the center: Sandoricum koetjape.

*santul_2 -un(→) a unsociable: tending to be quiet, keep to oneself and
cranky if approached. Kasagáran santulun kaáyu ang mga dalágang gúlang,
Usually old maids are very cranky. v [B12] be, become cranky.

santup v [A2; c1] come to one’s mind. Misantup sa íyang buut ang usa ka
sayun nga paági, A simple method of doing it came to his mind. Isantup
(santúpa) sa ímung hunàhúnà ang mga tambag, Implant the advice firmly
in your mind.

santus n {1} saint, one like a saint in character. Kanhi mu ra ka ug
santus, karun dakù kang salbáhis, You used to be like a saint, but now
you’re a brute. {2} the sanctus of the Holy Mass. — Diyus Holy God. —
nga Mísa the Holy Mass. — nga Rusaryu Holy Rosary. túdus lus — All
Saints’ Day. v [a3] {1} be successful. Dì ka masantus ánang ímung
pagiskuyla kay daghan kag absin, You will not be successful in your
studies because you are always absent. {2} get a benefit from s.t. Dílì
ka masantus ánang ímung hubughúbug, You will not reap any benefits from
being drunk all the time. {3} [A3] get to the Sanctus of the Holy Mass.
{4} [A13P; c16] make holy. Magsantus ta sa adlaw nga igpapahulay, Let
us keep the Sabbath holy.

sanu = unsa nu. see unsa, 4.

san-u when, at what time (dialectal).

sanung v [A23; a12] {1} agree, consent to s.t. Wà musanung si Bin sa
ákung hangyù nga muhulam ku sa íyang awtu, Ben did not consent to my
request to borrow his car. {2} obey, comply with a request. Buútan ning
batáa kay musanung dáyun sa ákung súgù, This child is obedient because
he at once obeys my command. {3} [A13] verify that s.o. agrees to do
s.t. Kining risibúha nagsanung sa ímung báyad, This receipt
acknowledges your payment. n agreement to do s.t.

sanùsanù v [A; c1] be in rapid succession. Misanùsanù ang mga bala sa
atumátik, The bullets from the machine gun came in rapid succession.
Nagsanùsanù ang mga pangutána sa nag-intirbiyu, The interviewer’s
questions came in rapid-fire succession.

san-ut a {1} for clothing to be baggy or crumpled from having been
subjected to unusual strain at one spot. {2} worn-out from having been
subjected to unusual strain at one spot. v [AB; a12] wear out or
crumple s.t. by subjecting it to heavy wear; become so. Musan-ut
(masan-ut) ang sangput sa karsúnis ug idalus-us, The seat of the pants
will wear out if you slide in them. Ang íyang karsúnis nasan-ut sa
túhud, His trousers became baggy at the knees.

sanúud (from suud) a intimate, close in relationship as friends. (→)
a close in physical space. Sanuud ra mu kaáyung pagkalingkud, You are
sitting too close to each other.

sanuuy v [A] {1} give the appearance of being weighted down under a
heavy load. Misanuuy ang sakayan sa kadaghan sa kuhà, The boat is
weighted down under the load of a great catch. {2} look enervated,
without life. Nagsanuuy ang bána pagkabuntag human sa kasal, The groom
looked enervated the morning after the wedding.

sanwit, sanwits n sandwich. v {1} [A1; a12] make, make into a sandwich.
{2} [c6] use as sandwich filling. {3} [A3P; a3] situate s.o. in between
s.t. Nasanwits ku pagkalingkud sa duha ka dalága, I was seated between
two ladies.

sápa n {1} washer; disc with a hole or flattened ring. {1a} a rounded
piece of coconut shell with a hole in the middle through which a tether
rope is passed into to prevent it from slipping through the water
buffalo’s nose. {2} a flat piece of s.t. wedged between two things to
prevent looseness. v [A13; a] make, make into, put a washer or wedge.

sapà n brook or creek.

sapak a {1} apt, exact, just the right one. Ang ímung tubag sapak giyud
kaáyu, You gave just the right answer. Sapak nga pagpangasáwa, dátù, A
perfect marriage—a rich wife. {1a} timely, well-timed. Sapak ang
pagabut mu kay tingkaun, You arrived just at the right time. It’s time
to eat. {2} having just the right qualities. Sapak sad ug láwas si Iyay
ug magbáting sut, Iyay has a beautiful body when she wears a bathing
suit. v {1} [A12; a4b8] do s.t. at just the right time. Nakasapak sad
kag baligyà sa ímung mga ipiktus—subídu ang prisyu, You sold your
things at just the right time—when the prices went up. Ug muadtu ka
karun masapak (masapakan) nímu ang pista, If you go there now, you’ll
be just on time for the fiesta. {2} [B2; b5] become perfect, having
just the best qualities.

sapal v {1} [A; b1] back up s.o.’s obligations. Kinsa guy musapal sa
ímung alkansi sa nigusyu, Who is going to cover your losses in
business? {1a} [A; a2] take charge or care of another person’s needs.
Akuy musapal sa ímung káun ug muuban ka nákug paniudtu, I’ll treat you
if you go to lunch with me. Saplan ku sa ákung tiyù sa gastu sa
iskuylahan, My uncle will shoulder my school fees. {2} [A12; a3] be
enough to cover expenses. Ang ákung swildu dì makasapal sa tanang
galastúhan, My salary cannot cover all the expenses.

sápal n the pulp residue of grated coconut meat after the juice has
been extracted. -un a having more pulp than what is ordinary. Tam-is
ang buúngun apan sapálun, The pomelo is sweet, but it is pulpy.

sápang = salapang.

sap-ang = salip-ang.

sapar = sapal.

sápat_1 n {1} an animal or insect. Kurali ang silinganan arun dílì
makasulud ang sápat, Fence off the yard so the animals cannot get in.
Tan-áwag unsang sapáta ning misulud sa ákung mata, Look to see what
k.o. insect got into my eye. {2} a brutal, cruel person. Ang sápat nga
hubug nanagmal na pud sa asáwa, The drunken beast is maltreating his
wife again.

sápat_2 = salapat.

sapatilya n open-heeled shoes or slippers with low heels. v [A; a]
wear, make sapatilya’s.

sapátus n {1} shoes. — sa kabáyù horseshoe. {2} part of the plow
analogous to the landside of steel plows. Sa dárung káhuy ang sapátus
mauy hal-úpan sa punta, In wooden plows the share is fitted over the
landside. {3} presser foot, a piece on sewing machines that presses the
cloth against the feed. v [A; b6(1)] {1} wear, make into, get a pair of
shoes. {2} shoe a horse. sapatíru n shoe repairman. v [A12] be a shoe
repairman. sapatiríya n shoe repair shop.

sápaw v {1} [A13; ac] wear two things one on top of the other. Magsápaw
ku ug midiyas, I will wear two pairs of socks. Sapáwi lang nang ímung
amirkána ug rinkut, Just wear a raincoat over your jacket. {2} [AC; b6]
be in the same place as s.o. else at the same time. Ngánung musápaw man
mug dúlà nga kami may nahauna? Why do you want to play in the same
place as we are playing when we were here first? Ngánung magsápaw man
mung duha ug lingkud sa síya? Why do you two sit on the same chair? Sa
maáyung radiyu ang usa ka istasiyun dílì makasápaw sa láin, With a good
radio one station doesn’t overlap another. {2a} drown out a voice with
another voice. Ang ákung tíngug gisapáwan sa íyang danguynguy, My voice
was drowned out by her wailing. {3} [A13; a] place s.t., usually flat,
over s.t. else. Sapáwi ug sín ang kináma nga playwud, Just cover the
stacked plywood with a sheet of galvanized iron. n layer, esp. of
cloth. Nagsul-ub ku ug tulu ka sápaw, I am wearing three layers (of
clothing). (→) v [B1456] for teeth to be overlapping. Magsapaw ang
ngípun ug dì ibtun ang tay-ug, The teeth will overlap each other if the
loose ones aren’t extracted. n {1} s.t. worn or laid over s.t. else.
{2} overlapping teeth. paN- v [A2] commit adultery. Dílì ka manapaw,
Thou shalt not commit adultery. maN-r-, maN-r-(→) n one who practices
adultery. †

sapay v [A; a12] in weaving with straw or the like, terminate the run
of the weave by folding the ends of the strands at a right angles under
and over the next two parallel strands.

sapayan v [A13; c4] mind, consider s.t. a bother or appreciate s.t. Wà
lang ka magsapayan sa bili sa kahágù ug panahun, You just don’t
appreciate the value of effort and time. Dílì ku igsapayan (isapayan)
ang ákung sakripisyù, I will not mind the sacrifice. in phrases: — sa
as recognition for s.t. bad done to s.o. who pays it no heed. Sapayan
sa ímung pagtámay nákù, Diyus ray magígù, God will repay you for the
way you scorned me. walay — {1} you’re welcome (reply to salámat ‘thank
you’). {2} it doesn’t matter. Way sapayan ug kasab-an ku, It’s all
right if I’m given a scolding.

sapáyan = pasáyan.

sapda v [A; a2b2] knock off s.t. being held or placed s.w. with a quick
motion of the hand. Sapdáha ang íyang síku inigsiyát níya, Knock his
elbow to the side when he shoots the ball. Nabuak ang básu kay ákung
nasapdahan, I accidentally brushed my hand against the glass and broke
it.

saphag v [A; a] {1} penetrate through a forest or thicket. Saphágun sa
mga bátà ang kalibunan sa pagpamayábas, Children will penetrate
thickets to gather guavas. {2} roam around with a purpose. Dúnay mga
táwu nga magsaphag pa sa pagpangítà sa ílang pagkáun, There are people
who roam around looking for their food.

saphid = saphig.

saphig v [A; c1] {1} remove s.t. by brushing against it. Balud nga
nagsaphig sa húgaw sa baybáyun, Waves which washed away the dirt on the
seashore. {1a} brush against. Ayaw isaphig ang ímung kamut sa pintal,
Don’t brush your hand against the paint. {2} level off grains heaped up
over a measuring container. {2a} level a cleaned rice paddy prior to
planting. -in- n levelled off.

sapi v [A; a12] {1} ward off, brush away with the hand. Akuy misapi sa
íyang kamut nga isagpà untà sa bátà, He was about to strike the child,
but I warded off his hand. Wà ku makasapi sa búla nga gilábay sa ákung
nawung, I was not able to ward off the ball that was thrown in my face.
Hisapihan nákù ang tása sa kapi, nayabu hinúun, I accidentally brushed
the cup of coffee, and it spilled over. {2} level off s.t. heaping.
Sapiha ang bugas sa gantangan, Level the rice in the ganta measure.
exclamation: word uttered to brush s.t. away. Sapi! Pahawà dihang
irínga ka, Scram! Get out of there, cat.

sapì = saplì.

sápì (from salapì) n = salapì, n. v {1} [A23; a12] earn money from s.t.
Kining gidaghanúna musápig mga mil písus, This quantity will derive
some thousand pesos. {2} [a12] be sufficient for a purpose. Masápì nang
ímung tíngug sa nayitklab, Your voice will do in a nightclub. (→)
v [A12; b8] get hold of money. Nakasapì kug utsinta písus adtung
baligyáa, I earned eighty pesos from that sale. paN- v [A2; a12] make,
squeeze money out of s.o. or s.t. Tū́, nanápì na pug pulis ug pangubrag
tung, There, the cop is making money collecting his protection money.
n capacity for earning money. Ang kahibalu mupauswag sa panápì sa usa
ka mamumúu, Knowledge can increase a worker’s earning capacity. -an
a wealthy. v [B12] be, become wealthy. hiN-, maki- a too fond of money.

sápid = sulápid.

sapidpid v [A; c] move, be close to s.t. Nagsapidpid siya sa bungbung
kay nag-ulan, He was walking close to the wall because it was raining.
Isapidpid ni sa bungbung kay mapatiran unyà, Put this by the wall, for
s.o. might stub his toe on it.

sap-ig = sampig.

sapígad v [A; b6] move close to s.t. so as to be touching it.
Magkabalhibu ka ug musapígad ang iring sa ímung bitíis, You’ll get hair
all over you if the cat rubs itself against your leg. Natúlug ang ituy
nga nagsapígad sa inahan, The puppy slept snuggled close to its mother.

sapil v [A12; b8] brush against s.t., usually accidentally. Nataltag
ang gihay sa buwak nga íyang hisapilan, He brushed against the flower
and knocked the petals off.

sapilis = sipilis.

sapilya = sipilya.

sapilyu = sipilyu.

sapin n {1} footgear: shoes, slippers, boots, but not socks.
{2} diaper.

sapinday v [A13] stagger, walk weaving from side to side. Tingáli hubug
ka kay nagsapinday man ka nga naglakaw, You must be drunk because you
are staggering. †

sapinit = sampínit.

*sapínu dì — v [b8] be trusted with s.t. Dílì masapinúhan ug kwarta
nang tawhána, That man cannot be trusted with money.

sapípid = sapidpid.

sapiray = sampiray.

sapiring n k.o. hairy worm with very itchy hair. v [b4(1)] be stung by
the itchy hair of this worm.

sapiru_1 n k.o. sapphire.

sapiru_2 n variety of cultivated guava with fruit sweeter and more
reddish than the wild varieties.

sapisápi n {1} a simple kite constructed of a cross with string strung
around the edge to which paper is attached. {2} general name for small
slipmouths, less than 3″ long: Leiognathus spp. v [A13; a12] make, make
into this k.o. kite.

sapiti v [A; a12] trip, block s.o.’s feet so as to make him stumble.
Siyay nagsapiti nákù pagbaskit námù, He tripped me when we played
basketball.

sapla_1 a {1} slightly bitter in taste with an astringent effect, as
unripe bananas. {1a} get this taste in one’s mouth. {2} for unpolished
cereals to be rough on the tongue when eaten. v {1} [B126] become
slightly bitter and astringent in taste or get this taste in the mouth.
{2} [B16] for cereals to be rough to eat.

sapla_2 v [a12] for branches to break off at the crook under weight or
other force. Nasapla ang sanga nga gitumban, The branch broke at its
juncture when he stepped on it.

saplag_1 v [A; a1c] throw s.t. into s.o.’s face or hit s.o.’s face with
the open hand, but not much force. Kaáyu rang saplágun nang nawung mu
áring usa ka plátu nga nilúgaw, How I’d love to throw this plate of
porridge into your face. {2} [A; ab2] brush, knock s.t. out of or off
of s.t. that holds it. Abtik siyang misaplag sa búla nga ákung
gikaptan, He quickly knocked the ball out of my hands.

saplag_2 v [A; a2] go about with or without a purpose. Dílì makasaplag
ang mga batan-un human sa kurpyu, Young boys don’t go around after the
curfew hour. Gisaplag námù ang kabyabsan ug pamayábas, We wandered
about among the thick growths of guava trees gathering fruit.

saplì v [A; a2] {1} pluck off a leaf, break off a branch at its point
of junction with a downward pull. Nagsaplì kug sanga pára itanum, I
broke off a branch to plant. {2} [AN] harvest corn. Manaplì mi sunud
simána, We will harvest the corn next week. n harvest. Pilay abut káda
saplì? How much do you get each harvest?

saplína (from disiplína) n whip or lash, esp. reserved for disciplinary
purposes. v [A13; a12] discipline with a whip. Arun ka mabut-an maáyung
saplináhun ka ug sígi, I should whip you constantly so that you will
learn to behave.

saplù = salpù.

saplud a slightly bitterish in taste. v [B1; a2] get a bitterish taste.
Gisaplúran ku sa sirbísa, I found the beer somewhat bitter.

saplung n sling, an instrument for throwing stones and the like
consisting of a pair of strings fastened to a strip of leather or
cloth. The missile is hurled by whirling it (lambuyug) and releasing
one string. v {1} [A; a1] hit with this instrument. {2} [a12] make s.t.
into a sling.

saplut v [A; c] {1} put a rope with a noose or loop around s.t. or ring
s.t. Bi, akuy musaplut ug písì ánang naglutaw nga bátang, Here, I will
lasso that floating log. Iitsa ang argulya nga musaplut sa butilya,
Throw the metal ring over the bottle. Saplúti ang halígi makaduha, Put
a double loop over the pole. {2} encircle s.t. with a rope or s.t.
analogous. Gisaplútan nákù siya sa líug, wà makalíhuk, I put my arm
around his neck, and he couldn’t move.

sapnay v {1} [A; a12] carry s.t. laid across one’s arms. Nagsapnay sa
binughà, Carrying the firewood over the arms. {2} [A13; a12] for s.t.
to cradle or support s.t. smaller placed on it. Usa ka tablun nga batu
nagsapnay sa usa ka dakung baril, A slab of stone supported the big
barrel. Ang sulang gisapnay sa duha ka kamut, His jaw was cradled in
his hands. {3} [A13; a12] carry, have s.t. as an attribute. Kining
katungdanána nagsapnay sa daghang mga pribilihiyu, This office carries
with it many privileges. Kining kapangakuhána gisapnay sa ímung
katungdánan, This is a responsibility that pertains to your office.
n an armful. Usa ka sapnay nga dagámi, An armful of corn stalks.

sapnig v [A; c1] {1} strike off, level off s.t. heaping. {2} gather
small things piled on s.t. flat towards the center by bringing up the
sides. Aku ray musapnig sa bugas arun dì mayabu, I’ll pile up the rice
at the center of the mat so that it won’t spill over the edges.
{3} [C3; c1] for a sheet to overlap s.t. Isapnig (sapníga) ang isig ka
daplin sa papil, Let the edges of the paper overlap. {4} [A; c] put
s.t. right next to s.t. else. Isapnig ang kaldíru sa kaláyu, Put the
pot next to the fire.

sapnut a for a surface to be rough or tacky. Sapnut ang salug kay
nagkabálas, The floor is rough because it is covered with sand. v [B1;
a12] be, become rough or sticky. Ubang sabun makasapnut (makapasapnut)
sa pánit, Some soaps make the skin rough. Masapnut ang buhuk ug dílì
syampúhan, The hair will become sticky if you don’t shampoo it.

sapsap_1 v [A3; b(1)] trim down a piece of wood by chipping pieces off.
Sapsápi ang usuk kay dì masulud, Trim down the stake because it won’t
go in. -in- n chips of wood which result from this process.

sapsap_2 v [B1] be rough, not smooth to chew, esp. unpolished, unhusked
corn.

sapsap_3 n k.o. fish, general name for slipmouths: Leiognathus spp.

sapsing a {1} lean, scrawny. Sapsing ning batáa, mau ra ug gíkan sa
dapit nga may gútum, This child is scrawny, as if he comes from a place
where they had a famine. {2} for an amount to be too meager to meet the
need (euphemism). Mau ra nay kwarta mu pára átung ipanini? Sapsing ánà
uy! Is that all you have for the movies? What a meager amount!
v {1} [B1; b6] be, become lean or scrawny. Láyug ta ug gisapsíngan ka
nákù, Let’s wrestle if you consider me scrawny. {2} [b6] consider an
amount meager for the need.

sapsiyútir n sharpshooter. v [B12] be, become a sharpshooter.

sapsuy n Chinese dish of mixed vegetables. v [A12; a12] make, have chop
suey.

sapu v [A; a] wipe, put s.t. back in place using the hands. Ayúhag sapu
ang tipasì nga muaslay sa lusung, Scoop the spilled rice back to the
mortar carefully. Sapuha kanang buhuk mu nga nagyungyung, Put your
loose strands of hair back in place. paN- v [A2] cover one’s genitalia
from view. Panapu dihà uy. Kítà ímung antitirhi, Pull the back of your
dress up between your legs so people can’t see your hoosy.

sapud_1 n the first few mature leaves of the tobacco plants.
v {1} [B23; b6] for the first few leaves of the tobacco plant to
develop. {2} [AN; a] gather the first few matured leaves of tobacco
plants.

sapud_2 a next. Akuy sapud nímu sa linya, I am next to you in line.
v {1} [A23; c6] do next after s.o. does it. Musapud ku nímu ug bása ug
mahuman ka, I will read it after you when you’re all done. Isapud ku
ikaw ug latigu, I will whip you next. {2} [b(1)] be followed by another
event. Wà pa gánì matúig ang bátà nasapdan dáyun, Another baby followed
even before the first was a year old.

*sápul_1 pa- v [A; b(1)] bring oneself to do or undertake s.t. Ngánung
nagpasápul ka man ug dáru nga nagdaut pa man ka! Why do you undertake
to plow when you’re still sick! n sponsorship. Kining amatyúra ubus sa
pasápul sa Akmi Tríding, This singing contest is under the sponsorship
of Acme Trading.

sápul_2 = syápul_1, 2.

sapun_1 v {1} [A12; b2] catch s.o. doing s.t. Hisapnan sila sa amahan
sa dalága, They were caught redhanded by the girl’s father. {2} [A12;
a12b2] be on time to catch s.t. before it leaves. Makasapung pa ta sa
byáhi, We can still catch the bus.

sapun_2 = sapud_2.

sapung n k.o. river fish trap, usually cylindrical in form with an
opening at one end, placed facing downstream to catch fish or shrimps
going upstream. v [AN; a] catch fish with this trap.

sap-ung v [A; b] cover or block an opening. Tingáli papil ang
nakasap-ung sa túbu sa hugasan, Probably a piece of a paper has blocked
up the drainpipe. Sap-úngi ug tabla ang bangag arun walay mabulasut,
Cover the hole with a piece of wood so no one will step into it
accidentally. paN- v [A] cover one’s nose, mouth, ears with s.t.
Nanap-ung ku kay nanimáhù, I covered my nose because it stank.

sapunir v [A23; a3] for an idea to pop into one’s mind. Misapunir sa
ákung alimpatakan nga gibinuángan ku, It suddenly occurred to me that I
was being made a fool of. Nasapunir sa ákung hunàhúnà ang pagpanimalus,
The idea of revenge came to my mind.

sapúpu v {1} [A; a12] have, pick up s.t. in one’s arms. Ngánung
misapúpu man tu siya sa íyang mga sinínà ug milakaw? Why did she gather
up her clothes in her arms and go away? Sapupúha (sapupúa) ang masusu
arun dì tugnawun, Hold the baby in your arms so it won’t feel cold.
{2} [A12; a12] receive, get hold of what is there. Ang bugtung anak
mauy makasapúpu sa tanang kabílin, The only son gets all of the
inheritance. Mauy nakasapúpu sa tanang kasábà, The one who received all
the scoldings.

saput n clothes. v {1} [A13] wear clothes. Kadtung nagsaput ug putì,
The one wearing white. {2} [A; c1] cloth s.t. in s.t. Saputan ang
nangkà arun dílì tamasúkun, Cover the jackfruit so the worms can’t get
at it. paN- n {1} attire, the k.o. clothes one wears as opposed to the
type worn by other classes or on other occasions. Panaput sa tugnaw,
Winter clothing. {2} the way one dresses. Maáyu siyag panaput ug wà
ilhing makalilímus, He dressed well, and no one recognized him as a
beggar. panaptun n {1} cloth, ready to make into clothing. {2} piece of
cloth, rag.

sáput n bad temper or mood. v [B146; a4] be in a bad mood. Ayaw siya ug
pangutan-a kay nagsáput (gisáput) siya rung buntága, Don’t ask him
questions because he is in a bad mood this morning. -un(→), salaptun
a easily given to bad moods. v [B12] be, become cranky.

sapúti v [A; a12] do s.t. in a secret, dishonest way. Abtik nga
misapúti sa baráha ang dílir, The dealer stacked the cards deftly. Ang
inyu ra pud nga mga diligádu ang nagsapúti sa kumpirinsiya, It was your
delegates that worked to undermine the conference. Ug ímung saputíhun
ang buksing, wà nay mupusta nímu, If you throw the boxing match, no one
will bet on you again. n thing done in a secret and dishonest manner.

sapwang = salapwang.

sapya v [A; c1] for the waves to lap gently at. Sapyáhun (isapya) sa
mga balud ang mga lúsay ngadtu sa baybáyun, The waves gently carry the
seaweeds to the seashore.

sapyà a {1} flat, said of s.t. which is normally full and bulging.
Sapyà siyag dughan, She is flat-breasted. Sapyà nga batu ang íyang
gilingkúran, He sat on a flat stone. {2} for a plate or bowl to be
shallow. n a flat liquor bottle containing about 375 cc. v {1} [A3B;
b6c1] flatten, become flat. Musapyà (masapyà) ang úlu sa bátà nga
pirming maghayang, The head of an infant will get flat in the back if
it is always laid on its back. Hílum. Nagsapyà lang nang ilung mu, Shut
up! You and your flat nose. {2} [B] for s.t. rounded to become
flattish.

sapyag = sabyag, 1.

sapyaw v [A; a] cup, scoop s.t. using both hands. Musapyaw kug bugas sa
sáku, I will scoop up rice from the sack with my hands. n = salapyaw.

sapyur n driver of an automobile vehicle. v [A13; b(1)] drive a
vehicle, be a driver.

sapyut a {1} ungainly posture characterized with hips too far forward.
{2} for the buttocks to be flat, not full. v [B; a12P] having the hips
too far forward or flat buttocks.

sarà = karun (dialectal).

sarabya {1} = gwayabanu. {2} = kardába.

saragáti a having a bad character, heartless, cruel, arousing
resentment (euphemism for salbáhis). Saragáti kaáyu nang maistráha, dì
malúuy muhagbung, That teacher is a real s.o.b. She has no qualms about
failing people. Saragáti ning batáa, kahúgaw, What a nasty child you
are. You’re so dirty.

sarahintu = sarhintu.

sarang {1} adequate. Mangítà kag trabáhu nga sarang nímu nga
pangabuhían, Look for a job that will give you an income adequate for
you to live on. Kaanyag nga sarang ikapanghambug, Beauty that is worth
bragging about. {1a} be up to doing. Nalunúpan ang átung báy. Unsa may
sarang nátung mabúhat niíni? Our house is all flooded. What can we do
about it? {2} properly and justly. Mau nay sarang kung ikasulti áning
kahimtánga, That is what I can properly and with justice say about this
situation. v [A12; c5] be up to doing s.t. properly or adequately.
Makasarang kag báyad sa binulang balayranan? Are you able to keep up
with the monthly payments? (←) n k.o. bamboo tray made of loosely woven
bamboo strips, usually hung above the kitchen stove. -in-(←) n a simple
weave of wide bamboo strips or palm leaflets. ka-an(←) n average,
moderate. Mau niy kasarángang gidak-un sa púsù, This is the usual size
of the corn ear.

saranggat (from sanggat) n {1} a sharp barb which is pointed in the
opposite direction from a point at the tip of a dart, hook, or the like
to prevent easy extraction. {2} group of four or more fishhooks tied
together so that the hooks are facing in different directions, used for
catching squid or any fish that come in masses. v {1} [A; b(1)] attach
a barb. {1a} [AN; a] fish, catch with a saranggat. {2} [B6; b5c] lodge,
take hold like s.t. with a barb. Misaranggat sa íyang tutunlan ang
bukug sa isdà, The fish bone stuck in his throat. {3} [A; a] scratch
with a sharp, pointed instrument. Lansang nga tayaun ang nakasaranggat
sa íyang lapalapa, It was a rusty nail that scratched the sole of his
foot.

sarap_1 a delicious, said only of food. Kasarap sa sud-an, What
delicious food. v [B2; a] for food to be or become delicious.

sárap v {1} [A; a12] go over a place in fine detail so as not to miss
anything. Sarápun ta ang kakahuyan arun kit-an ang bátà, Let’s search
the woods thoroughly to find the child. {2} [c6] move one’s line of
sight in a different direction. Isárap ang ímung mata sa wala arun mu
makítà ang sakayan, Point your eyes to the left so you can see the
boat. {3} [A; cP] dive and make a pass at s.t. Misárap ang ayruplánu sa
bapur sa kaáway, The airplane buzzed the enemy ship. Gisarápan sa
lángaw ang sabaw, The fly made a pass over the soup. paN- v [A13; b6]
go fishing with the sarap. (→)_2 n finely woven fish net dragged by two
or more people walking in shallow water.

sarásay v [B26; a3] move in a waving, zigzag manner. Misarásay ang
hubug, The drunk zigzagged as he walked. Usa ka kusug nga suntuk
nakasarásay (nakapasarásay) nákù, A strong blow made me stagger. wátir
— n coconut palm toddy, or, by extension, any alcoholic drink.

sardínas n {1} fish in oval cans. {2} any fish canned whole. v [A2S;
b6] have canned fish. -in-(→) a closely packed, like sardines. v [A13;
a12] be packed tight in a place for few people. Nagsinardinas ang mga
táwu ug sakay sa trák, The people were packed in the bus like sardines.

sargáti = saragáti.

sarguylas = siriguylas.

sarhintu n sergeant. v [B36; a12] be, become, make one a sergeant. —
dimísa n desk sergeant. v [B36; a12] become a desk sergeant.

saril = salir_1, 2.

saring n class in school. -an n place where classes are held. ka-(←)
n classmate.

sarìsárì n {1} all different types of things sold in one place.
{1a} category of store which sells miscellaneous items in small
quantities. Dì ka na mulukat ug lisinsiya kay sarìsárì ra man nang
tindáhan mu, You don’t have to get a license for your dime store.
{1b} be of all different types. Sarìsárì ílang písang gibaligyà, They
sell spare parts of various brands. {2} dish made of pork with various
vegetables and liver and sautéed. {2a} dish made of various greens
mixed with diced squash and eggplants and stewed. v [A13; a12] be
varied or of different kinds. Sarìsaríun nátù ang klási sa prútas arun
náay átung kailin-ilínan, Let’s serve fruits of different kinds so we
can have a choice.

sarlistun n Charleston dance. v [A12; a12] dance the Charleston.

sarsa_1 = salsa.

sarsa_2 n bottle cap.

sarsaparilya n k.o. sweetened carbonated beverage similar to root beer.

sarsuyla n {1} zarzuela, a form of musical comedy. {2} the second part
of the pastúra (shepherd’s play) wherein each lady participant renders
a song and dance number. v [A; b6c1] present, stage a zarzuela.

sartin n an enamel-plated metal plate or drinking cup. v [A; a2]
provide, use such a utensil.

sáru n {1} goblet. {2} the heady wine of love in sexual pleasure
(literary). Malipáyun kaáyu ang nanaghigugmaay nga nagdimdim sa sáru sa
gugma, The two lovebirds are happy drinking the wine of love.

saruk n {1} a wide-brimmed hat with a sharp metal point at the center,
tapering to the brim, usually made of buri palm leaves and black
climbing fern (nítù), used as a protection against the sun. {2} hat in
general (usage in areas which call the sun hat salukut). v [A; a] wear,
make into a hat of this sort. saruksaruk n k.o. edible limpet, from
1″–3″, so called because of its resemblance to the saruk.

sarul_1 n hoe with a short handle used for breaking up soil. v [A13;
a12] loosen the soil with a hoe.

sarul_2 = tsarul.

sarung, sárung n sarong, worn by Muslim men and women. v [A; c1] wear,
make into a sarong.

sarunsuy n sweet made of white rice cake wrapped in banana leaves,
steamed and shaped like a canoe. v [A; a] make into sarunsuy.

sása = salasa_2.

sàsà v [A; a12] crack and flatten bamboo stems so as to make them
resemble and serve as boards for walling. n sheet of cracked and
flattened bamboo for walling, or the walling of this sort of material.

sasag n k.o. exterior walling made of bamboo slats and palm thatch,
nailed to wooden studs.

sásing n k.o. edible, white worm of the mud near the seashore.

sasirdúti n priests of other religions than the Roman Catholic. labaw
nga — High Priest. v [A13; a12P] be a priest.

sastri n {1} seamstress, dressmaker. {2} tailor. v [B156] be, become a
tailor or seamstress. paN- v [A2; b6] go into the tailoring or
dressmaking business. -ríya n dress or tailor shop.

sátan = salátan.

satanas n {1} Satan. {2} devil.

satgan n shotgun. v [a12] fire at with a shotgun.

satin n satin.

satispitsu a {1} satisfied with the way s.o. does s.t. Satispitsu ku sa
íyang ági, I’m satisfied with his work. {2} satisfied, convinced by an
argument or explanation. v [B12] be satisfied with work or an
explanation. Kadtung íyang iksplikasiyun walà makasatispitsu
(makapasatispitsu) ug diyútay kanákù, His explanation did not convince
me a bit.

satsat v {1} [A12; c1] slurp, eat or drink in a noisy sucking way.
{2} [A; c3] gossip, engage in idle talk. Ayawg isatsat ang átung
gisultíhan, Don’t go blabbing around what we have been talking about.
n idle talk, esp. gossip. -ay v [c] engage in idle gossip. -íra
n gossip.

sátu, sátum n children’s game played with two sticks, in which one is
flipped in the air and struck a distance. The one who hits his stick
the shortest way is punished by being made to run a certain distance
shouting sátu (sátum). v [A1; b6] play this game.

satung v [A2; c1] {1} rush off and do s.t. Napáwul ang ránir nga
misatung ug dágan sa wà pay butu, The runner who started before the
go-signal was declared foul. {2} do s.t. straight without pausing for
breath. Dì ku makasatung ug inum ug usa ka búl tubà, I cannot drink a
whole jarful of palm toddy straight.

sátung (from satung) = sátu.

saud v {1} [B256C3; c] press s.t. hard against s.t. Walà nay kasibúgan
ang lamísa kay misaud (nasaud) nas bungbung, You can’t move the table
any further because it is already pressed against the wall. Nagsáud ang
katri ug ang síya, The bed and the chair are pressed against each
other. {2} [A; c] knock s.t. hard against s.t. Ákung gisaud ang lubi sa
batu, I knocked the coconut against the stone.

saudsaud v [A; c1] do, occur one after another in rapid succession.
Misaudsaud ang dimálas níya, He was hit by bad luck without letup.
Labihang nakasaudsaud sa mga pumapálit niánang buntag, The buyers came
steadily all morning long.

saudsáud v [A23C] be on friendly, cooperative terms, help each other
when help is needed. Nagsaudsáud ang mga managsúun sa buluhatun sa
balay, The brothers and sisters cooperated with one another in doing
the household chores.

sáug v {1} [A; c1] drag a boat ashore or back to the sea. Tabangan tag
sáug ang barútu, Let’s all help drag the boat ashore. {2} [A3; a12]
move, carry away by an emotion (literary). Gisáug siya sa usa ka
tawhánung pagbátì, She was carried away by an ecstatic feeling.
-l-an(→), -l-anan n place where one usually drags a boat in going
ashore or back to the sea.

sául n highest point of pain in labor when the baby is expelled. v [b4]
reach this point in labor. Gisaúlan na ang babáying nagbatì, The woman
in labor is in acute pain now.

saulì see ulì.

saulu = sag-ulu. see úlu.

saúlug v [A; b5] celebrate the memory of some event. Dílì ku musaúlug
sa ákung adlaw, I will not celebrate my birthday. Magsaúlug mi sa ámung
pyista rung dúsi ning bulána, We will celebrate our fiesta on the
twelfth of this month. n celebration.

sáun short for unsáun. see unsa.

saup_1 n sharecropper. Dílì ni ákung yútà, saup lang ku dinhi, This is
not my land. I’m just a sharecropper here. v [A; b6] work a piece of
land by sharecropping. paN- v [A2; b6] earn one’s living as a
sharecropper. n sharecropping.

saup_2 v [b4] be in an angry mood. Gisaupan ku kay gilabtan ag ákung
butang, I was in a bad mood because s.o. touched my things.

sáup v {1} [A; ac] for a liquid or water level to be above the surface
of s.t. Kinahanglang musáup ang túbig sa karning lat-an, If you boil
meat, the water level should be above it. Gisaúpan (gisáup) sa túbig
ang dakung pátag, The vast plain was flooded with water. {2} [A; b(1)]
flood with feelings. Misáup sa íyang dughan ang hilabihang kamíngaw,
She was overwhelmed with feelings of loneliness. Gútum nga misáup sa
balángay, A famine which overwhelmed the village.

sáuy v [A13] for all sorts of people to move around in all directions
in a certain place. sauysáuy v [A; b(1)] go back and forth over a
place. May táwu nga misauysáuy tungud sa átù, There was a man who was
going to and fro in front of our house. Mga mamistáhay nga nagsauysáuy
sa kadalánan angat sa pyista, People passing back and forth in front of
our house during the fiesta.

sawa n {1} large snake. {2} python. — nga baksan banded python.

saw-a a feeling uneasy when one stops doing things he usually does.
Saw-a kaáyu ug dì ku maggirdul, I feel uneasy if I don’t wear a girdle.
v [b4] get this feeling of uneasiness.

sawad n the measure of corn (usually basketful) left over after the
crop has been divided. Sawad nga tungà sa bukag, A remainder of half a
basketful after the crop had been divided.

sawáli = amákan.

sáwan a giving a dizzying feeling from looking down from heights. Sáwan
ang walug gíkan sa tumuy sa búkid, It is dizzying to look down into the
valley from the top of the mountain. n intense fear or shock.
v {1} [b4] get a dizzy feeling. {2} [A123P; a4] be intensely
frightened. Gisáwan ku sa butu sa bumba, I was terribly frightened by
the explosion of the bomb. -anan(→) a prone to intense fright.

sáwang n town proper, the part of the town where the people are
concentrated.

sawásid = saluwásid.

saway v {1} [AN; a1c] speak disparagingly about s.t., mention bad
qualities of s.t. Kadtung magsaway áning panaptúna dílì swítu sa
panaptun, Whoever speaks disparagingly of this cloth doesn’t know
anything about cloth. Walà kuy ikasaway (ikapanaway) sa íyang
panglíhuk, I have nothing to criticize about his deportment. {2} [A12]
disapprove, consider s.t. improper. Nakasaway ku sa íyang gisulti sa
íyang diskursu, I think it’s improper what he said in his speech. hiN-
v [B1256; b4(1)] disapprove, consider s.t. as improper. Unsa may
nahinawayan nímu níya? What do you disapprove of in him? -l-un(←)
a worthy of condemnation. Ang paglibak usa ka búhat nga salawáyun,
Speaking ill of others is a contemptible act. v [B1256] become
contemptible. hiN-un(←) a fond of criticizing or disparaging. v [B1256]
be given to criticizing.

sawi a giving a feeling of uneasiness when s.t. is new. Sawi kaáyu ang
antiyúhus basta bag-u pa, One doesn’t feel comfortable wearing glasses
for the first time. v [b6] feel uncomfortable with s.t. new. Sawihan
kaáyu kus marpil, I don’t feel comfortable with my new false teeth.

saw-id v [A23C3; a2] join two strands by winding them around each
other, hook the fingers together. ‘Matay pa, tinúud lagi,’ nanumpà siya
nga gisaw-id ang duha ka tudlù, ‘So help me it’s true,’ she insisted,
hooking her two fingers together. Nagkasaw-id ang hukut sa duha ka
bábuy, The tether ropes of the two pigs got tangled up in each other.

sáwil n children’s game wherein objects are placed in a circle for the
players to hit out of the circle using a piece designated to hit other
pieces. v [AC; a2] play this game.

sawilik (from wilik) v {1} [A13; c] flick s.t. away with the back of
the hand. Ayaw ug isawilik ang úlud diri nákù, Do not flick the worm
off on me. {2} [c] push or move aside or away, as if flicking. Isawilik
lang unyà ang hábul ug galhaan ka, Just push the blanket aside if you
feel warm.

saw-it v [b8] be caught or snagged by s.t. Walà masaw-iti ang kabli sa
sáhid, The grapnel did not catch on the cable.

sawpan = salúpan. see salup.

sawsaw v [A13; c6] dunk s.t. into s.t. else and shake it around. Kinsay
nagsawsaw áring túbig nga nahúgaw man? Who dunked (his hand) into the
water (and swished it around)? It is dirty. Karing sukáa sawsáwi sa
sinugbang bábuy, Dunk your roast pork and swish it around in this
vinegar. Isawsaw ang nuug sa túbig, Swish the rag around in the water.

sawsyung n {1} a player who inadvertently gets more cards than the
required number. {2} a player who announces mahjong on a false alarm,
penalized if the other players have displayed their hands.

sawu- for words with sawu- see also salu-.

sáwun n {1} sound system of a movie. Kláru ug sáwun nang sinihána, That
movie house has a clear sound system. {2} way — saying nothing in a
group conversation (humorous). Tíngug bay, wà ka may sáwun dihà, Say
s.t., pal. You haven’t said a word yet. — sirbis, sistim public address
system.

sáwut = sur.

sawuy v [A13] feel weak and sickly from bad health. Magsawuy giyud ku
ug musakit ang ákung ngípun, I feel ill whenever I have a toothache.

sáya n skirt of the native dress, usually ankle-length and generally
having a tail, wound around and tucked in front. di- see abab and
andir. v [A; a12] wear, make into a skirt of this sort. Ayaw
kadispirádu. Siya ra bay nagsáya? Don’t get desperate. Is she the only
fish in the sea (lit. only one wearing a skirt)? — sa búnga v [A13] for
trees to bear fruit in abundance. Nagsáya sa búnga ang mangga nga
maáyung pagkagalam, A mango tree that is well taken care of bears fruit
in abundance.

sayà_1 a {1} being in a merry or joyful mood. Ang dag-an sayag
panagway, The winner had a joyful expression on his face.
{2} engendering good feeling. Hílum ug sayà nga kabuntágun, Quiet and
pleasant morning. v [A13B1] be, make merry. Magsayà ta kay Pasku run,
Let’s be merry because it’s Christmas. ka- n mirth, gaiety. ka-an(←),
kasayáhan n entertainment. Kasayáhan (kasayáan) sa karnabal,
Entertainments at the carnival. ma-un(←) a gay and lighthearted.

*sayà_2 pa- v [A; c6] leave, expose s.t. carelessly for others to be
able to see or touch it. Nagpasayà silag háluk sa parki, They kissed
openly for all the world to see in the park. Ayaw ipasayà nang sundang
sa agiánan, Don’t just leave that bolo carelessly in the passageway.
sayàsayà v [c6] expose s.t. carelessly or for public view. Musamut ang
ímung ubu kun isayàsayà mu ang ímung láwas sa tun-ug, Your cold will
persist if you expose yourself in the draft.

say-a_1 v {1} [B1256; b6] for s.t. that fell to be caught atop s.t.
Nasay-a sa sandayung ang búlang gilábay, The ball that was tossed
landed in the gutter. {2} [A; b8] wind up s.w. Ang táwung maantígung
mutrabáhu makakaun bisag ása musay-a, A man who knows how to work can
eat wherever he winds up. {2a} stay in s.o. else’s home temporarily.
Makasay-a kahà mi sa inyu ug magabin-an mi? Can we stay at your place
if we are overtaken by night? Kamurúsan ang nasay-ahan sa mga bakwit,
The evacuees happened to stay among the Muslims. say-asay-a = say-a, 2,
2a.

say-a_2 v [B3(1)6; b6] overflow from a container. Nagsay-a ang isdà sa
íyang sakayan, His boat is filled to overflowing with his catch.
Napáwung ang káyu sa abúhan nga gisay-ahan sa sabaw, The fire went out
when the soup spilled over on it.

sayab n k.o. disease affecting chicks making them droop. v [A13P] get
this sickness. Magsayab ang mga pisù basta tinginit, During the hot
season the wings of newly-hatched chicks droop.

sayad v [A; c1] for the hem of a dress or robe to touch the ground. Ang
sidsid sa sutána mauy únang mabuling kay mau may musayad sa yútà, The
hem of a soutane gets dirty first because that is what touches the
ground.

sayag a cheerful or bright of countenance: bright and clear. Sayag na
ang lángit kay gipálid na man ang dag-um, The heavens are bright again
because the clouds have been blown away. v [B; c1] be, become cheerful
or bright and clear. Musayag ang dagway sa mga maistra ug muabut ang
tsíki, The teachers get a bright look on their faces when their
paychecks arrive. -un a having a happy and cheerful countenance or
disposition.

sayal n skirt. Sayal ug bláwus ang íyang sinínà, She wore a skirt and
blouse. v {1} [A; c] wear a skirt. {2} [a12] make into a skirt.

sáyang expression of regret at s.t. wasted or an opportunity missed.
Sáyang lang ang ákung pag-anhi kay wà mi magkítà, I came for nothing
because we didn’t meet. Sáyang wà nákù madá ang ákung báting sut.
Mangalígù tà ta, Too bad I didn’t bring my bathing suit. We could have
gone swimming. v [B1256; b6] for s.t. to be a waste, consider it so.

sáyans n {1} science. Tungud sa sáyans nakaabut ang táwu sa búlan,
Science has allowed man to reach the moon. {2} science course.

sayantis, sayantist n scientist. v [B156] be, become a scientist.

sayaw n general name for swifts: Collocalia spp. -in- a having the form
of a swift in flight or of its tail.

sáyaw v {1} [AC; c] dance. Dì ku makigsáyaw ug hubug, I won’t dance
with a drunk. Isáyaw ta kag makaduha ug mamaúlì na ta, I will dance
with you twice, and then we’ll go home. {2} [A23] by extension, any
movement likened to dancing. Misáyaw ang mga dáhun sa hángin, The
leaves danced in the breeze. — ang kasingkásing v [A23] be gladdened
(literary). Misáyaw ang íyang kasingkásing dihang gisugut siya, His
heart danced when the girl accepted him. n dance. Sáyaw sa mga karáan,
The dance of the old-timers. Pistang way sáyaw, A fiesta with no dance.
sayawsáyaw n dance presentation, esp. folk dance. -an(→), -anan n dance
hall, dance floor. hiN-(→) a fond of dancing. -in-an(→) n way of
dancing. maN-r-(→) n dancers.

sayhanan n rack or anything flat on to which or over which s.t. can be
laid. Gibutang níya ang awditíbu sa sayhanan, She put the receiver down
on the cradle.

sayid-áwut n in volleyball, the situation where the serving team makes
an error and loses the serve.

sayid bit n an extra bet with an individual in addition to the main bet
of the game. v {1} [AC; c] make a side bet. {2} [A; a1] for a husband
to play around with other women. Daug kaáyu siya sa asáwa. Dì giyud
makasayidbit, He is such a hen-pecked husband he can never fool around.

sayid layin n {1} sideline, s.t. one does in addition to his usual
occupation. {2} a married man’s mistress (humorous). Dílì nà asáwa uy,
sayid layin lang nà, That’s not his wife. That’s his mistress.
v {1} [A; c] have a sideline. {2} [A13] maintain a mistress.

sayid tru n throw-in in basketball. v [A; c] make a throw-in.

sayidwuk n sidewalk, as the place where things are sold. Didtu nákù
palita sa sayidwuk, I bought it from a sidewalk vendor. — bindur n one
who sells items displayed on the sidewalk or the stand or stall selling
things on the sidewalk.  

sayin_1 v [A; b6] shine, polish the shoes. — syús expression uttered by
shoeshine boys in asking s.o. if he wants his shoes shined. — syu buy
n shoeshine boy.

sayin_2 v [A; b6] sign. Gisaynan na nákù ang tsíki, I have signed the
check.

sayinburd n {1} billboard. {2} sign indicating where a vehicle is
going.

sayintist = sayantis.

sayin-up v [A; c6] terminate a broadcast, sign off for the day.
n action of signing off for the day.

sayis_1 number six. see tris for verb forms.

sayit_1 v [A; a] cite s.t. in reference or evidence. Musayit ka sa
urdinansa pabur sa ímung pitisiyun, You quote the ordinance in favor of
your petition.

sayit_2 v [A; a2] sight, aim a firearm. n sight of a weapon.

sayit_3 n eyesight (humorous).

saylà = suylà.

saylinsǐr n silencer, muffler of a combustion engine or silencer of a
weapon.

saylu v {1} [A2C3; c] pass, bring by beyond s.w., pass s.o. by. Musaylu
ka man lang, mu rag dì ta kaíla, You just pass me by as if we didn’t
know each other. Musaylu ning karsadáha sa Talísay? Does this road go
beyond Talisay? Atras. Nasayluan nátù ang ámù, Back up. We passed by
our house. Isaylu lang ku sa unáhan sa taytáyan, Just drop me a little
way beyond the bridge. {2} [A2; c6] do s.t. beyond a certain point in
space and time. Ug musaylu sa alas utsu ímung pagpaúlì, dílì ka ablíhan
sa pultahan, If you come home after eight o’clock, they won’t open the
door for you. {3} [A1; b(1)] omit, leave s.t. out. Ayawg saylui ang
rúsas ug magtubig ka sa mga tanum, When you water the plants, don’t
forget the rosebush. a farther up, beyond, or into. Ang íla saylu pa
kaáyu sa ámù, Their place is way beyond my place. saylusaylu
v {1} [A3C] pass s.w. or each other repeatedly. Musaylusaylu ka man lag
ági sa balay. Dì ka man giyung kahapit, You just keep going by our
house, but you never drop in. Nagsaylusaylu ang mga trák, The buses
kept passing each other. {2} [c1] overlap each other in alternating
motion. Saylusaylúa (isaylusaylu) ang mga tiil igsáyaw nímu, When you
dance make your left go over your right and then your right over your
left. {3} [b] bypass. Gisaylusaylúan lang ang ákung mga papílis kay wà
man ku muhátag ug bigay, My papers were just bypassed, because I didn’t
give any grease money. pa- v [A; a12] forgive, pardon. Ang prisidinti
nagpasaylu ug dúsi ka binilanggù karung Pasku, The president pardoned
twelve prisoners this Christmas. n forgiveness. mapa-un a forgiving.

saylub v [A3C3; aP] {1} overlap. Ang duha ka tumuy nagsaylub ug mga dus
purgádas, The two ends overlap by about 2″. {2} = saylu, but not with
pa-.

saynus n sinusitis. v [a4] have sinusitis. -un(→) a having sinusitis.

saysay v [A; c] narrate, relate. Saysáyan ta ka unsay tinúud nga
nahitabù, Let me tell you what really happened. Isaysay níya nímu ang
mga paági sa pag-aplay, He will tell you the procedure for applying.
n narration, declaration. Nakumbinsǐr siya sa mga saysay sa mga
bakákun, He was convinced by the false declarations. lakbit —
n synopsis. sagbat — v [A23] relate s.t. by cutting in on a
conversation. ka-an n {1} history, chain of events. Mau tuy talagsaung
hitabù sa kasaysáyan sa ikaduhang gúbat, That was an unusual event in
the history of the Second World War. {2} legend, story handed down by
tradition. Kasaysáyan sa amù ug sa bau, The tale of the monkey and the
turtle. -l-un a eventful. Ang ílang kasal usa ka salaysáyung hitabù sa
ámung baryu, Their wedding was an event of great moment in our village.
maka-anun a historic, full of history. Manúaw sila sa makasaysayánun
nga pulù sa Kurihidur, They will visit the historic island of
Corregidor.

saysinta numeral sixty. see disiutsu for verb forms.

sayu a early. Sa sayung kabuntágun, In the early part of the morning.
Sayu ming míabut. Dúgay pa ang prugrámang magsúgud, We arrived early.
The program won’t begin for some time. v [AB5; c1] be or do s.t. early.
Sayuhun (isayu) nímu ug híkay ang pamáhaw arun makasayu ka sa
iskuylahan, Prepare breakfast early so you can get to school early.
sayusayu v [A2; c1] do s.t. a little early, or a little too early.

sáyud v {1} [B1256; b4(1)] know; have cognizance or awareness of s.t.
Nasáyud aku nga usa ninyu namutbut, I know that one of you is telling a
lie. Wà ku masáyud kun háin ang ílang balay, I don’t know where their
house is. {2} [b(1)] tell s.o. about s.t., give information, news, etc.
Sayran ta kang dáan nga si Binduy usa ka minyù, Let me inform you
beforehand that Bendoy is a married man. {3} [A; b] hold the sáyud
ceremony. Human na mi makasáyud. Kasal na lay kúwang, We have already
held the formal betrothal ceremony. Now only the wedding is left. n the
ceremony held after the pamaláyi (in which the marriage proposal is
made) in which the prospective groom returns to the bride’s family to
find out whether or not they accept. In this ceremony all formal
agreements and terms are stated, and the couple is engaged. a be
thoroughly acquainted with s.t. Sáyud aku sa mga kinaíya sa mga táwu
dinhi, I’m thoroughly acquainted with what the people here are like.
paki- v [A13; b(1)] ask information about s.t. Magpakisáyud tag unsay
nahitabù, Let’s ask what happened. n request for information. sinayúran
n a girl who is engaged and has gone through the sáyud ceremony.
v [B1256] be formally betrothed. kasayúran n information. masinayúrun
a informative.

sayukmù v [B5; c1] for the chin and lower jaw to jut out, esp. when one
is pouting or sulking. Musamut kag kangil-ad ug musayukmù ang ímung
suwang, You look more ugly if you let your chin protrude. Ug way marpil
musayukmù ang suwang, If you do not have false teeth your chin will jut
out. a {1} for the chin to be sticking out. {2} for the face to be
squat and wide.

sayun a easy. Sayun kaáyu ang iksámin, The test was very easy. Sayun
man gung bayhána maung pirming paangkan, That woman is easily had. She
has had several children out of wedlock. v {1} [A12B125; a2] be or make
s.t. easy. Sayun nà siya patuhúun, It’s easy to make him believe s.t.
Ug gisayunan ka sa iksámin, handrid giyud ka, If you consider the test
easy, you must have made a hundred. {2} [b(1)] be too familiar with
s.o. so as to take him for granted. Ngánung manggáwì ka man sa ákung
mga butang? Mu rag gisayunan ka nákù, Why do you use my things? It
seems as though you take me for granted. sayunsáyun v [a12] {1} do s.t.
with great ease or facility. Gisayunsáyun lang níya ug húbad ang
‘Ultimu Adiyus,’ He just translated the ‘Last Farewell’ with the
greatest of ease. {2} take s.o. for granted. Sayunsayúnun
(sayunsayunun) lang ku ninyu nu, ábi kay minsahíru ra man ku, You give
me orders just like that just because I’m a mere messenger here. paka-
v [A13; a12] take s.o. or s.t. for granted. Nagpakasayun ka lag kúhà sa
ákung kinawus, You just help yourself to the water I fetched.
Gipakasayun lang níla ang kaminyúun, They think marriage is such an
easy thing. ka- n ease, facility of doing s.t.

sayup a wrong, erroneous. Sayup kaáyu tung ímung tubag, Your answer was
wrong. n error, mistake. Náay sayup sa ímung lista, There is an error
in your list. v {1} [B12; a2b2] be wrong, make a mistake. Nasayup ku sa
ákung kalkúlu, I am wrong in my calculation. Ug masayup ka bísag kas-a,
payir-awtun ta ka, Make just one mistake and you are out. Mau ning
prublimáha ákung nasaypan, This is the problem I made the mistake in.
{1a} [b8] mistake s.o. for s.o. else. Hisaypan ka unyà sa pagkapampam
ug mau nay ímung isul-ub, If that’s what you wear they’ll mistake you
for a prostitute. {2} [a12] fail to avail oneself of an opportunity.
Ayaw ug saypa ang sunud nga yugtù sa maung isturya, Don’t miss the next
installment of the story. {3} [A23] escape, avoid a trap. Kanang
lagsáwa dílì na giyud musayup áning balag-únga, That deer will not
escape this trap for sure. masalaypun, masaypánun a erring. Ang íyang
masalaypun (masaypánun) nga bána nangáyù na pug pasaylu, Her erring
husband is now asking for forgiveness. kasaypánan, ka-an(←) n wrong,
moral infractions. Ang kasaypánan nga ímung gihímù sa ímung asáwa, The
wrongs you have done to your wife. see also istíping.

sayúti, sayútis n k.o. vegetable, similar in appearance to a pear,
cooked and eaten like squash, growing on a climbing vine with
squash-like leaves: Sechium edule.

si_1 particle before names or titles of persons used in constructions
which require the nominative. Si Pidru ákung ig-ágaw, Pedro is my
cousin. Si Tátay, Father. — kinsa who does he think he is? Si kinsa ba
siya nga musulti sa ingun? Who does he think he is to say that?
Nagmandarmandar siya nákù mau ra ug si kinsa, He was ordering me around
as though he were s.o. see also ni_1 and kang_1.

si_2 n letter C.

sí yes, used only in response by people who are influenced by Spanish
or jokingly by people who know a smattering of Spanish.

sì n sound used to drive away dogs and other small animals, but not
fowls and pigs.

síad v {1} [B; b6] become distended or burst, as from internal
pressure. Misíad ang ligid human bumbáhi, The tire became inflated
after air was pumped into it. Nasíad na ang tiyan sa burus, The
pregnant mother’s abdomen has become distended. {2} [B2; b6] be, become
luxuriant or lush in growth. Misíad ang túbù sa tanum nga nating-ulan
na, The plants have become lush in their growth now that the rainy
season has set in.

siak v {1} [A; a12] split s.t. along the grain. Masiak ang tabla ug
ibulad sa ínit, The board will crack if you leave it under the sun.
{1a} — sa úlu v [A12B1256] be a great mental burden. Suliran nga
makasiak sa ákung úlu, A problem that can crack your head. {2} [A3;
a12] disturb violently as if to crack. Singgit nga misiak sa kahílum sa
kagabhíun, A shout that rent the stillness of the night. {3} [b3(1)] be
worried, angry, sad. Masukù lang nà siya bísag way gikasiakan
(gikasik-an, gikasilik-an), He gets angry even without cause.
kasilik-an n enmity, misunderstanding.

siákù short for unsa bay ákù. see unsa, 1d.

siang v [B34] {1} come out partly. Misiang na ang adlaw, The sun is
partly out now. Nagsiang na ang bátà, The child is now coming out.
{2} for the vaginal opening to dilate. Sa dì pa makasiang ang pwirtu,
tawga na ang midwayip, Call the midwife before the vaginal opening
dilates.

siátab see átab.

siaw a {1} mischievous, given to doing irresponsible but harmless fun.
Siaw kaáyu ning batáa kay íyang gihuktan ug písì ang íkug sa irù, This
child is very mischievous because he tied a rope to the dog’s tail.
{2} misbehaving. Siaw batáa, way disiplína, A misbehaving,
undisciplined child. — sa babáyi philandering. v [B123; b6] be, become
mischievous, misbehaving. (←) v {1} [A23] get worse; grow more [adj.].
Ug pahilúmun siya, musíaw siya hinúun, If he is told to keep quiet, he
gets noisier instead. {1a} be, become worse, more intense. Misíaw ang
ilagà sa Mindanaw, The rats are getting worse and worse in Mindanao.
{2} [A13; b6] joke, play a prank on. Nagsíaw ka tingáli kay láin ang
nutisya nga ákung nadunggan, You must be joking because I heard a
different story. pa- v [A1] engage in mischief. Ug magpasíaw ka,
mabanhà ang klási, If you are mischievous, the class will be noisy.
ma-un a characterized with jocularity.

siawan = awayan. see áway.

síay v {1} [A3PC3] for different smells, tastes, atmospheres to be
mixed together in one place. Ang tánang báhù nagsíay sa simbahan, All
different odors are mixed together inside the church. {2} [A23C3] for
different smells or atmospheres to mix and contradict each other.
Magkasíay ang ginamus ug kámay ug dungánun pagkáun, Fish paste and
brown sugar do not go well if you eat them together.

siay-is n acronym for the Criminal Investigation Service.

siba v [A; c] {1} add fuel to a fire to increase it or keep it going.
{2} incite, get s.o. to do s.t. bad. Siyay nagsiba sa mga istudiyanti
pagdimunstrít, He incited the students to demonstrate. †

síbà v [A2; b6] sip nectar from a flower. Mau niy klási sa búlak nga
sibáan sa mga alibangbang, This is the class of flowers the butterflies
sip nectar from. -un(→), -l-un(→) n flowers that are attractive to
birds and insects.

sibakung v [A; c] cook a mixture of rice and corn grits.

síbang v [A; b6] nick a blade. (→) a nicked. n nick in a blade.

sibásid = saluwásid.

sibat_1 v {1} [A2; b6] get out of s.w., usually without leave. Musibat
ta sa prugráma arun dílì ta hingtawgan ug pakanta, Let us get out of
this place before we are called upon to sing. Wà ka kinahanglána dinhi.
Hala, sibat! You are not wanted here, So, scram! {2} [A1; c1] take s.t.
without permission. Sibatun (isibat) ku ning libru ug walay magtan-aw,
I will take this book when nobody is looking. †

sibat_2 n small fishing spear, usually made of wire as thick as a man’s
finger or bamboo pointed at one tip. v {1} [A; a] spear using the
sibat. {2} [a12] make into a sibat.

síbaw v {1} [A2; b2] bounce from s.t. towards s.t. Misíbaw nákù ang
búla nga gilábay sa bungbung, The ball was thrown against the wall and
bounced toward me. {2} [A3] for a sound to reverberate and be noisy so
as to rise above other sounds. Misíbaw ang butubutu sa mga ribintadur,
The explosion of firecrackers resounded. {3} [B246] rise to an alarming
proportion. Misíbaw karun pag-áyu ang pangáwat, Robberies have
increased to alarming proportions. ka- n turmoil, confused noises,
tumultuous sounds.

sibay n an extension room added to an already existing dwelling, with
the floor raised some distance from the ground. v [A13; b6] add an
extension to a house. sibaysíbay n woman maintained by a married man.
Ang sibaysíbay sa íyang bána hustis, Her husband’s woman is a
night-club hostess. v [A; abc] for a married man to maintain a woman.

sibáya = kisibáya.

*sibika, *sibiku kapunúngang — n civic organization. hinábang nga —
civic aid.

sibil n {1} civil, not by the church. Sa sibil lang ta magpakasal,
Let’s make it a civil marriage. Sibil nga mintiryu, Public cemetery.
{2} = gwardiya sibil. v [c1] have a civil wedding. gíra — civil war.
gwardiya — Civil Guard of the Philippines during Spanish times. -in-
v [A; c1] punish s.o. heavily or make s.o. do a lot of work rapidly (as
the Spanish civil guards do). Maáyung musinibil ug súgù sa mga
sinuhúlan apan dílì maáyung mupakáun, Knows how to make farmhands work
hard but doesn’t give them enough food to eat. Dì na run magsinibil ug
kastígu ang mga maistra sa klási kay manúkul na man run ang mga
istudiyanti, Teachers do not inflict heavy punishments in class any
more because nowadays the students fight back.

*síbil — sirbis n civil service. — sirbis tist Civil Service test.

sibilisar v [A; a12] civilize. sibilisádu a civilized, well-mannered.
v [B12] be, become civilized. sibilisasiyun n civilization.

sibilsíbil n game of hide-and-seek played in pairs. v [A12C; c1] play
hide-and-seek in pairs.

sibilyan n {1} civilian. {2} ordinary clothes as opposed to a uniform
or frock. v {1} [A1] wear civilian attire or ordinary clothes as
opposed to a uniform or frock. Dì giyud mailhan nga párì kay
nagsibilyan man, You’d never know he was a priest because he was
wearing ordinary clothes. {2} [a3] become a civilian.

síbin_1 v [A; b6] {1} wipe s.o.’s face or any other part of the body
with a moist cloth. {2} shave hair on the body. paN- v [A2; b6]
{1} wipe one’s face with a wet cloth. {2} shave one’s body hair.

síbin_2 v [b4] be a hermaphrodite. Gisibínan ang anak ni Maríya,
Maria’s child had both male and female genital organs. -an
a hermaphrodite.

sibin-ilíbin n k.o. dice game. v [A; c1] {1} play this game. {2} for
males to masturbate (slang).

síbin pirs = síti páris. see síti.

síbins gríd n seventh grade of elementary schools. Karun wà nay síbins
gríd, They have abolished the seventh grade of elementary schools.
v [A3] be or get to be in the seventh grade.

sibintiit n 78 rpm record.

sibinti páak n grade of seventy-five, the lowest passing grade
(humorous slang). v [A12] get seventy-five.

sibinti siks n k.o. rice introduced by the PACD.

sibit n {1} safety pin. {2} = pálud. v [A; b5] {1} fasten in with a
safety pin. Sibta (sibti) ang lampin, Pin the diapers. {2} = pálud.
-in- = pálud, n.

sibsib v {1} [A; a2b2] for animals that graze to nibble at plants.
Hingsibsiban ang rúsas sa kanding, The goat nibbled at my rosebush.
{2} [AN; a] nibble at s.t. boney to get at the meaty parts. Ákung
sibsíbun ang mga bukug kay nía man dinhi ang lamì, I’ll nibble at the
bones, for that is where the delicious parts are. paN- v [A2] graze.
Didtu sa lagúna nanibsib ang kabáyù, The horse was grazing in the
meadow. -anan n pasture.

síbu n fat of bovine and other animals with hooves, except pigs.
v [B1245; b6] put beef fat. Nagkasíbu ang linat-an, The stew is full of
fat. Sibúhi ang ímung hiraminta arun dílì tay-an, Smear beef fat on
your tools so they won’t get rusty.

síbù a {1} fitting precisely, of exact dimension. Kining twirkáha síbù
kaáyu sa pirnu, This nut fits precisely into the bolt. {1a} exactly
[so-and-so] long, at [such-and-such] a time. Síbung duha ka túig,
Exactly two years. Síbung alas dúsi, At exactly twelve o’clock.
{2} timepiece synchronized with another, musical instrument tuned to
another. Dílì síbù ang ákung rilu sa íyang rilu. Alas dus nas íya apan
walà pa diris ákù, My watch isn’t running at the same time as his. He
has two o’clock, but I don’t. {3} harmonizing with, fittingly with the
personality. Ang íyang papil sa dráma síbù kaáyu sa íyang pagkatáwu,
His role in the drama fits his personality perfectly. {4} commensurate,
proper in kind. Kadtung ímung tratamyintu níya síbù sa íyang nabúhat,
What you did to him is just appropriate for what he did to you. {5} for
the moon to be full. v {1} [A2] fit into s.t. {1a} [B56; a12] be
exactly [such-and-such] a time. {2} [A1C3; ac] tune a musical
instrument to another, synchronize a watch with another. Sibúun ta ning
duha ka sista, Let us tune the two guitars to each other. {3} [B2C23;
c6] harmonize with, fit a personality or style. Kining kalúa musíbù sa
bísan unsang kurti sa nawung, This hat goes nicely with any face.
{4} [A; a2] borrow a quantity of s.t. and return the same amount or
multiples thereof. Musíbù ku ug walu ka gantang mais. Ulían ta ka ug
dubli sa tingsanggì, I will borrow eight gantas of corn, and I will pay
you back double during harvest time. {5} [B245] for the moon to become
full.

síbug v {1} [AB3(1); c1P] back s.t. up, move back. Ug musíbug ka,
matambug ka sa kanal, If you step backward, you will fall into the
ditch. Kinsay nagsíbug sa lamísa? Who moved the table back? {1a} [A23;
b6] back down from s.t. Dílì ta ka sibúgan ug sumbagay, I will not back
down from you in a fight. {2} [A2; b6] back out of an agreement.
{2a} [A; c6] withdraw an application, candidacy, case in court. Dílì ku
musíbug sa ákung kandidatúra, I will not withdraw my candidacy. Ug
musíbug ka sa ímung kíha, ariglúhun ta lang ni, If you withdraw your
case, we will settle it amicably. Isíbug ku ang ákung aplikasiyun, I
will withdraw my application. {3} [A1; c] move an event to an earlier
or to a later date. Átung isíbug ang kasal ug tulu ka adlaw arun tukmà
sa pyista, Let’s move the wedding ahead (or postpone it) three days so
that it will coincide with the fiesta. {4} [A2] visit (dialectal).
Musíbug mis inyu rung pila ka adlaw, We’ll visit your place one of
these days. n action of moving back, backing out, retreating. Pagsábut
nga way síbug, An agreement you can not back out of.

sibúkaw n small tree with scattered prickles, the wood of which is used
for nails in boat building: Caesalpinia sappan.

sibul = subul.

sibut n k.o. very small dip net made of finely meshed cloth. v [A13;
a2b2] pick out with a small dip net. Sibuta ang isdà. Ayaw ug kab-a sa
panaksan, Catch the fish with a dip net. Don’t scoop it out with a cup.

síbut v [A3P; a1] inspire s.o. with enthusiasm to do s.t. Ang kanindut
sa kahigayúnan sa Amirika mauy nakasíbut (nakapasíbut) nákù paglangyaw,
I was inspired to go to America by the attractive opportunities that
are available there. Gisíbut mi sa ámung ginikánan pag-iskuyla, Our
parents inspired us to study. ka- n enthusiasm. ma-un a full of
enthusiasm to do s.t.

sibúyas n {1} general name for various kinds of onions and leeks.
{2} humorous name given to Union cigarettes (where Union is pronounced
homophonous with onion in the Philippines). — amirikánu leeks with a
slightly larger bulb than the bisayà. — bisayà leeks with tiny red or
white bulbs, the tops of which are used. — bumbay onions with large
bulbs. -un ug tíngug a squeaky-voiced.

sibuying n k.o. small onion or leek, smaller than sibúyas bisayà, with
a small white bulb and a flavor differing from ordinary leeks.

sibya v {1} [AN; c] peddle fish. Sibyáhan kug lab-as nang mga báy dihà,
I peddle fresh fish around to those houses. {2} [A; c6] broadcast.
Isibya ang anunsiyu sa tíbi, Broadcast the announcement on T.V.
{3} [A13; c6] announce, give notice of. Hinagtub nga nagsibya sa íyang
pag-abut, Footfalls that announced his arrival. mag-r- n radio
announcer.

sibyà = sibya, v2, 3.

sída n silk cloth. sidasida n name given to several grasses with silky
tufts.

sidbaks n box used as a seedbed for germinating seeds. †

sidhawus n shed providing shade for seed beds. v [A; b6] construct such
a shed.

sidi v [b(1)] receive favorably, approve. Wà sidihi sa huwis ang
diklarasiyun sa sinumbung, The judge didn’t receive the allegations of
the accused favorably.

sid-ing v {1} [A; a12] look closely at s.t. by bringing one’s face to
it or putting it near the face. Nagsid-ing ku áring pínung litra, I am
looking closely at this fine print. {2} [A1; a12] look at s.t. out of
the corner of the eyes. Nasakpan ku siya nga nagsid-ing kang Marta, I
caught him regarding Martha out of the corner of his eyes.

sidlak a sparkling, glittering. v [A] {1} sparkle. Diyamanting
nagsidlak, A sparkling diamond. Hingsidlakan aku sa adlaw, I woke up
after the sun had risen. {2} be glittering in prominence. Misidlak ang
íyang kabantug, He reached glittering fame. n ray, beam. -an(→) n east.
Layung sidlakan, The Far East. Duul nga sidlakan, The Near East.

sidlit v {1} [A; b2] squirt out in a stream. Misidlit ang nánà sa
dihang gipislit ang hubag, The pus squirted out in a stream when I
pressed the boil. Hingsidlitan ku sa íhì sa bátà, The little boy
urinated on me. {2} [A23] for the sun to shine (literary). Sa walà pa
musidlit ang primírung bidlísiw sa adlaw, Before the first rays of the
sun shone.

sidlut = sidlit, v1.

sidsarun = sitsarun.

sidsid n {1} hem, lower edge of dress, curtain, or the like. {2} edge,
border (literary). Ang sidsid sa kapunawpunáwan, To the outer reaches
of space. sidsiran = sidsid, 2.

sid-uk n hiccup. v [A2; a4] have the hiccups. Misid-uk si Lúlu, unyà
miyupyup sa íyang kwáku, Granddad hiccuped and then puffed on his pipe.
Inum ug usa ka básung túbig ug sid-ukun ka, Take a glass of water if
you have the hiccups.

sidula n {1} the head tax of the Spanish time and now, the residence
tax. {2} the residence certificate, evidencing the payment of this tax.

síga_1 a {1} bright, giving off intense illumination. Síga kaáyu ang
sugà, The lamp is very bright. {2} bright-eyed or having big round
eyes. Síga ug mata kining batáa paríha sa íyang uyuan, This child has
big, round eyes like his uncle’s. n flame, light given off. v {1} [A2S;
a2Pb7] burn bright. Nagsiga pa ba ang dáub? Is the fire still burning?
Sigái ang linung-ag, Turn up the fire under the rice. {1a} for the
lights to be on. Sigáha (pasigáha) ang sugà kay ngitngit na, Put the
lights on because it is dark now. {2} [A2S; b6] for the eyes to be big
or bright. Misíga ang mga mata sa kahikugang, Her eyes grew wide in
astonishment. {2a} for the eyes to be wide, glaring at s.o. Gisigáan ku
níya sa kapungut, He glared at me in anger.

síga_2, sígà n notorious tough guy. v [B12; b6] be, become a tough.
sigasíga = síga_2.

sigabu n continuous, thudding sound. v [A3] be thudding, give a
thudding sound. Musigabu ang balud ug ting-amihan, Strong waves dash
against the shore when the northwind blows. Unsa may nagsigabu sa táas?
Mga bátang nagdúlà? What is it that is thudding upstairs? Children
playing?

sigamnu v [A3; a12] care, give attention or concern to s.o.’s welfare
or needs. Wà siya magsigamnu sa idukasiyun sa íyang mga anak, She
doesn’t concern herself with her children’s schooling. Sigamnúa ang
ímung láwas arun dì ka masakit, Take care of your body so you won’t get
sick.

sig-ang_1 v [A; c1] put the pot on the fire. Nagsig-ang na siya sa
paniudtu, She is preparing lunch now.

sigarilyu_1 n cigarette. v [a12] make into a cigarette. paN- v [A2;
b6(1)] smoke cigarettes, ask s.o. for cigarettes or cigarette money.
Kamau na diay ka nga manigarilyu, So, you already know how to smoke.
Panigarilyúhan nátù si Iduy kay nakadaug sa súgal, Let us ask Edoy for
cigarette money because he won in gambling.†

sigarit kís n cigarette case.

sigaw v [A; c] confess or tell s.t. which s.o. wants to be kept secret
(slang). Nadakpan ang tanan kay misigaw ang usang nadakpan, All of them
were caught because one of them sang. Íyang gisigaw ang tinagúan sa
íyang inahan, She revealed her mother’s secrets.

sígaw a noisy, making a disturbance. n shouts and noise. Ang sígaw sa
nagsúgal dungug sa ámù, You could hear the shouts of the gamblers as
far as our house. v [B1; b6] be noisy. Nagsígaw ang mga istudiyanti kay
way maistru sa klási, The students are all in uproar because the
teacher is not in the room. ka- v [A13] be very noisy.

sig-aw v [A; b3] make a loud noise at the top of one’s lungs. Wà siya
makasig-aw kay ákung gikasab-an, He did not dare make noise because I
scolded him.

sigay n general name for small cowries.

sigbaw formula uttered to prevent one from being struck by lightning
when making fun of animals. Ang ungguy mu ra sigbaw ug táwu, The monkey
looks like man, may I not be struck by lightning. Sigbaw ug paríha ang
táwu sa irù nga magpungutay, May lightning not strike me, how would it
feel if people had intercourse like dogs.

sigbin n animal possessed by and at the service of s.o. It has the
power of making itself invisible to a person other than the owner. The
sigbin can do good to the owner, transport the owner, and will inflict
fatal bites on whomever the owner commands it to. It cannot be killed
as long as the owner can see it. It is said to have long hind legs and
walks with the head looking back in between the legs. Ownership is
handed down to relatives when the owner dies. A person who refuses a
sigbin is said to go mad. -an n possessing a sigbin. v [B1256] get a
sigbin handed down to one.

sígi v {1} [A; b5c1] continue or go on doing s.t.; do s.t. always. Ug
magsígi ning ulána háyan mubahà, If this rain keeps on, it’s likely to
flood. Sigíhun (sigíhan, isígi) nímu ug túyuk ang twirka hangtud
muhugut, Continue turning the screw until it gets tight. Ngánung
sigíhan man ku nímu ug tan-aw? Why do you always look at me? {1a} [A23]
walk or go on or forward. Inig-abut nímu sa iskína, musígi ka ug mga
bayinti mitrus, When you reach the corner, go ahead for about twenty
meters. {1b} [A2; a12P] proceed with one’s studies. Dílì ku makasígi
karung sunud túig kay wà kuy kwarta, I cannot proceed with my studies
next year because I have no money. exclamation: {1} urging s.o. to do
s.t. Sígi, káun na, Come on, eat! {2} expressing acquiescence. Ug walay
láin sígi na lang ta áning nía, If there is no other, we will just have
to make do with this. {2a} O.K. Bye. ‘Adtu na ku.’ ‘Sígi,’ ‘I’m going
now.’ ‘O.K., Bye-bye.’ {3} always. Sígi ka lang ug sulti, way búhat,
You’re always talking. You never do anything. — lang {1} never mind, it
doesn’t matter. Sígi lang ug pubri, basta malipáyun, Never mind if I’m
poor as long as I am happy. {2} Oh, please. Sígi lang, tagái lang ku,
Oh, please. Let me have some! (→) = sígi, exclamation.

sig-id n k.o. vine used for tying purposes: Malaisia scandens.

sigídas n {1} successive, frequent. Lápuk kaáyu sa ámù kay sigídas ang
ulan, My place is very muddy because it keeps raining. {2} automatic,
rapid-firing weapons. {3} freewheeling, such that the chain that links
the pedal gear to the wheel gear engages only in the forward direction,
and not in the backward direction. Sigídas ang bisiklíta nga rísir, A
racing bicycle is freewheeling. {3a} racing bicycle. v [A; a12] become
frequent or successive; do s.t. successively or frequently. Nagsigídas
ang ákung mga sulat rung mga adláwa, I keep getting letters one after
another these days. Sigidásun nímu ug tindak ang pidal arun magsígi ug
túyuk ang ligid, Keep pumping the pedal so the wheels will keep
turning.

sigidilyas = karabansus.

sígin n k.o. net designed for taking out catch from the fish corral.
(→) v [A; a] get the fish out of the corral with a net.

sigingsiging an exclamation uttered together with shaking s.o.
emotionally upset by the shoulders. v [A; a12] {1} shake s.o. and say
sigingsiging. Sa nagsigingsiging ku sa bátà, mihínay ang íyang
paghílak, After I had shaken the child and said sigingsiging to him, he
began to stop crying. {2} make s.o. hurry in doing s.t. Kinsa mang
kustumíra ang nagsigingsiging ug pagpakúha nímu ug túbig? Who was the
customer that made you hurry in getting a glass of water?

sigisígi n name of a notorious gang of Tagalog hoodlums as opposed to
the uksu (OXO) of the Visayans. — gang = sigisígi.

sigkat = siklat.

sigking = sikging.

sigkit = síkit.

siglu n century. Sa Siglu Katursi, In the Fourteenth Century.

sigmit v [A; ab2] {1} seize by the arms or legs, usually in a stealthy
manner. Nakasigmit kug manuk, I managed to catch a chicken by the legs.
Misáwum siya ug gisigmit ang tiil sa dalága, He swam under the water
and seized the woman’s legs. {2} arrest s.o. wanted by the law. Mga
sikríta mauy nagsigmit sa isnatsir, Plainclothesmen nabbed the
snatcher.

sigmuk_1 v [AN; a12] swipe or lift things of small value. Dúnay
nagsigmuk sa ákung bulpin, S.o. swiped my ballpoint pen.

sigmuk_2 v [A123P; a4] crave for food that one has not eaten for a long
time. Gisigmuk na kug kinílaw tangígi, I crave for raw Spanish
mackerel.

signal n signal. v [A; b6(1)] give a signal. Signáli ku sa busína, Blow
your horn as a signal to me.

signit = sigmit.

signus n {1} in folk belief, the preordained agent through which one
meets his death as revealed by fortune-telling. Pagkalúnud sa barku wà
siya mamatay kay kaláyu may íyang signus, When the boat sunk he didn’t
die because his fate was to die by fire. {2} = agnus. v [A12; b8] be
saved from unexpected death because it is not one’s signus to die that
way.

sigpat v [b8] get a glance stolen at one. Nasigpatan ku siya nga
nangupya sa iksámin, I glanced at him copying during the test. pa-
v [A; b6] steal a glance. Ayaw ug pasigpati ang babáyi kay masakpan ka,
Don’t steal glances at the woman because you might get caught.

sigpaw n a small dip net around 4–6″ in diameter with a handle used for
scooping up wrigglers, small bait, butterflies. v [AN2; a12] gather,
scoop up with this k.o. net.

sigpit (from sipit) a narrow, not affording easy passage. Sigpit kaáyu
ang mga kalyi sa ámung lungsud, The streets in my town are very narrow.
v [B125; b6] be, become narrow.

sigsag a zigzagging, winding road or course. Sigsag kaáyu ang karsáda
paingun sa búkid, The road into the mountains is zigzag. n zigzag
stitches; fancy stitches made at the edge of cloth to keep it from
getting unravelled. v {1} [A; a12] run a zigzag course. Nagsigsag ku ug
dágan sa dihang gitirúhan ku, I ran in a zigzag course when they shot
at me. {2} [A; c1] make zigzag stitching. — nga makina n a k.o. sewing
machine that can make zigzag stitching. -in-an, -in-an(→) n having
zigzag stitching sewn in it.

sígu a tight or precise in fit. Gáhing ablíhan ang pulta kay sígu
kaáyu, The door is hard to open because it is very tight in fit. Ang
sígu nga sinínà sa mga babáyi dílì ángay nga isimba, Clothes that fit
the body too tightly are not appropriate for church. v [B] be, become
tight or precise in fit, cause s.t. to be so. Sigúhun (pasigúhun) nímu
ang sungsung ngadtu sa bangag arun dílì muhunub ang túbig, Make the
stopper fit precisely so the water won’t seep through.

sígù a {1} fitting appropriately as words, action, attire. Ang íyang
pakigpúlung sígù kaáyu sa ukasiyun, His speech fits the occasion.
{2} exact. Sígù na kung usa ka túig sa ákung trabáhu, I’m exactly one
year in my work. v [AC; c1] be appropriate or exact. Dílì musígù ag
singsing sa ákung tudlù, The ring doesn’t fit my finger. Sigúa (isígù)
ang ímung linihukan sa ímung idad, Act your age.

*sigun_1 — sa {1} according to. Sigun sa ákung hibatian dílì nà mau ang
íyang gisulti, According to what I have heard, that is not what he
said. {2} in conformance with. Kining ákung gása kanímu sigun sa ákung
gisáad, This gift of mine is just what I have promised you. {3} depends
on. Sigun lang sa unsay náa, It depends on what is available. Mu ra ug
dílì nà ikatúgut, apan sigun lang nà sa pagkumbinsǐr níya, It seems as
if it is not allowed, but actually it is just a matter of convincing
him.

sigun_2 n a breed of chicken raised for meat purposes, referred to for
their quality of developing feathers on the neck, thighs, and wings
late in life.

sigunda n {1} second gear. {2} the second player in group games played
by individuals in succession. {3} the second voice in group singing. —
mánu {a} second hand. Pridyidir nga sigunda mánu, A second-hand
refrigerator. {b} a woman that has had sexual experiences prior to
marriage. Nakaasawag sigunda mánu ang laláking himilì, He was so choosy
in the end he had to settle for a second-hand woman. v {1} [B26; b6]
do, happen after the first thing happened, was done. Ang pagkasúnug sa
ílang balay nasigunda ang ílang Birtu, After their house burnt, the
same thing happened to Berto’s. Gisigundahan siya ug pátid human siya
matumba, After he fell, they kicked him. {2} [A; c6] put in second
gear. Isigunda ang makina ug dulhugun, Put the car into second when you
are headed downhill. -rya = sikundaryu.

sigundu n {1} second to perform in group games performed by players in
a series. {2} second, one-sixtieth of a minute. — anyu second year of
college or secondary school. — upisyal second mate.

sigurádu sure, [so-and-so] is true without a doubt. Ug mugíkan ka ug
alas sayis, sigurádu nga túa ka sa mga alas unsi, If you leave at six,
you are sure to be there at about eleven o’clock. Dílì katuhúan
nutisyáha! Sigurádu ka? That’s unbelievable news! Are you sure? ‘Muadtu
kas bayli rung gabíi?’—‘Sigurádu!’ ‘Will you go to the dance
tonight?’—‘Sure!’ v [B156] be sure. Nakabayad kug sitinta apan
nasigurádu na ang ákung aplikasiyun, I paid seventy, but my application
is a sure thing.

siguridad n {1} security, freedom from danger. Ang gikasabútan
naglakbit sa siguridad sa átung násud, The agreement included the
security of our country. {2} assurance of compliance. Kadtung
panagsabúta way siguridad sa pagtúman kay walay mga papílis, There is
no assurance that they will comply because there are no documents.

sigurista a inclined to take the greatest possible advantage from an
agreement. Sigurista kaáyu ka kay dì ka mupahulam ug kwarta nga dílì
kinuháan dáans pátung, You drive too hard a bargain because you take
out the interest in advance when you lend money. v [B12; b6] inclined
to take undue advantages.

sigúru {1} sure. ‘Muadtu ka sa bayli rung gabíi?’—‘Sigúru!’ ‘Will you
go to the dance tonight?’—‘Sure!’ Uu, sigúru kaáyu ku nga mau nay íyang
gisulti, Yes, I am very sure that that is what he said. Way sigúru ang
ímung kaugmáun, Your future is uncertain. {1a} butang sa — make sure of
s.t. Ug makig-áway ka, ibutang sa sigúru nga náa ka sa bintáhà, If you
pick fights, make sure you have the upper hand. {2} most likely,
probably. Dì lang ku musulti apan muanhi sigúru tu siya, I won’t say
for sure, but he probably will come. v {1} [A; a2] do s.t. without
fail; be sure of doing or obtaining s.t. Musigúru (manigúru) ka ug anhi
sa may mga alas unsi, Come without fail at about eleven o’clock.
Sigurúun ta ni ug báwì kay makalimut siya nyà ug úlì, Let’s be sure to
take this back because he might forget to return it. {2} [A12; a12]
take for granted, that s.t. will happen. Ayaw kug sigurúa, kay wà ka
kahibáwu sa ákung abilidad, Don’t be too sure of me because you don’t
know my ability. {3} [A2N] be sure to do s.t. for oneself not minding
or considering others. Misigúru (nanigúru) siyag lingkud kay daghang
pasahíru, He made sure to get himself a seat because there were lots of
passengers. {4} [A] insure s.t. Way kumpaníya musigúru sa ímung balay
nga dáan kaáyu, No company will insure your house. It’s so old.
n {1} insurance. Sitinta písus mátag túig ang ákung balayran sa sigúru,
My insurance is twenty pesos a year. — dibída life insurance.
{2} insurance company. Ang Pil-am usa sa mga dagkung sigúru dinhi sa
Pilipínas, Phil-Am is one of the big insurance companies in the
Philippines. kasigurúhan, kasigurúan n {1} assurance. Walay kasigurúan
tung átung hangyù, There’s no assurance that our request will be
granted. {2} protection, safety from s.t. Álang sa kasigurúan sa
pangláwas mu, inum sa Tunikun, For the protection of your health, drink
Tonicon.

sigwálu (from walu) n a deadly snake of shallow sea water. A victim is
generally given only eight hours to live. If he survives he is given
another eight days, then eight weeks, and so forth. Cf. tagiwálu under
walu.

*sigwar pa- v [A; c1] show s.t. off. Mapagarbúhun kaáyu siyang
mipasigwar sa íyang singsing brilyanti, She is proudly showing off her
diamond ring.

sihag a {1} transparent or translucent. Sihag kaáyu siyag bláwus, She
has a blouse on you can see through. {2} clearly visible through s.t.
Sihag na ang kadaúgan, The glow of victory is visible at the end of the
tunnel. v [A; a12] {1} be, become transparent or translucent. Musihag
ang papil ug duhígan ug asíti, Paper becomes translucent if oil is
smeared on it. {1a} [B5; a] be, become apparent, clear, understandable.
Kalit nga misihag sa ákung panumdúman ang buut níyang ipasabut, It
suddenly dawned on me what she meant. {2} be visible through s.t.
Misihag ang lángit sa buslut sa atup, The sky shone through the hole in
the roof. paN- v {1} [b5] read the past, present, or future through
some magic article or power. Kahibáwu man kung muabut mu kay gipanihag
(gipanihagan) man nákù, I knew that you were coming because I saw it in
my crystal ball. {2} [A23] wear s.t. people can see through. Uy nanihag
ka kay wà ka tingáli magkamisun, People can see right through your
clothes because you are apparently not wearing a slip. n crystal ball
or power by which one can read the past, future, or a person’s
thoughts. panihagsíhag ang tutunlan v [A23] be very beautiful (lit. for
the throat to be white and transparent). Daghang mga laláki ang
nabatubaláni sa babáying nanihagsíhag ang tutunlan, Many men became
magnetized by that beautiful woman. sihagsíhag, sihagsihágan n k.o.
very tiny fish made into salted preserves.

sihì, síhì n nerite snails.

sihud n k.o. small fish trap made of flexible vines, used to scoop
small fish from shallow waters. (←) v [AN; a] fish with the sihud.
Kalita pagkabù ang isdà ug magsíhud ka, Pull the trap up with a jerk
when you fish with a sihud.

sii = ugud, except after ra.

siin {1} where did or does? Siin man paingun ag irù? Where did the dog
go? Siin man siya iskuyla? Where does he go to school? {2} which (of
several)? Siin man íning duha ímung gustu? Which of the two do you
like?

sik. abbreviation for sikritaryu, secretary.

sikà = sikàsikà. sikàsikà v [A; b6] talk harshly and loudly in giving
commands. Gisikàsikaan ang suluguun sa dunya, The lady shouted at the
maid, giving her one order after another. sikàsikaun a disrespectful in
speech.

síkad v {1} [A; b(1)] propel s.t. with the feet, bending the knees and
kicking the legs. Sikári ang síya arun dílì na lang nákù kuháun, Kick
the chair over here so I don’t have to get it. {2} [A; b] pedal.
Kumpása ug síkad ang makina, Pedal the sewing machine rhythmically.
{3} [AC2; ac] have two fighting cocks spar by holding them by the tail
and allowing their legs to scratch or kick the ground. Kanúnayng isíkad
ang manuk arun lig-un ang tiil, Always have the cock spar to make its
legs strong. {3a} [A] — ang manuk for a candidate for a woman’s hand to
say his piece. Dílì maáyung musíkad ang ákung manuk kay wà sugta, My
man doesn’t know how to talk to women because he was unsuccessful. (→)
= aninikad. pa- v [A; bc] base an argument or belief. Ayawg ipasíkad
ang ímung hukum sa mga tabìtábì, Don’t base your decision on gossip.
pina- n based on. Panglíhuk nga pinasíkad sa maáyung pamatásan,
Behavior that is based on good manners. paN- v {1} [A; b6] push with
the feet exerting effort. {2a} kick the ground, as if eager to fight.
Ag túru nagpanikad kay gustu nang muhasmag nákù, The bull is pawing the
ground because it wants to charge me. {2b} [A13] be very eager to do
s.t. Nagpanikad siya ug adtu sa Manílà, He is very eager to go to
Manila. -um-(→) v [A13] originate, start from. Ang ílang áway
nagsumikad sa pagbáhin sa irinsiya, Their quarrel started from the
apportioning of the inheritance. sikadsikad, aN-r-(→) see aninikad.

síkan n {1} second in rank, prize, sequence. Akuy síkan, bayinti ang
ákung prayis, I was the second. I got twenty pesos as a prize. — bis
second base of baseball. — grid second grade. — han second hand. — hap
second half of a game. — plís second place. — plísir one who placed
second. — rawun second round in boxing. — yir second year of high
school or college. v [A2] obtain, get to be the second place. —
dimusyun v [A; b(1)] second the motion.†

sikandir n a boxer’s second.

sikápat (from upat) n a coin of Spanish times originally worth a
quarter of a peso, but ten centavos in the 1900’s.

sikat_1 = siklat.

síkat a cocky, showing off one’s good looks or posture. Síkat kaáyu
siya nga mulakaw, He walks in a very flippant and cocky manner. (→)_2
a worthy of praise or envy. Sikat kaáyu siyag kutsi, He has a flashy
car. pa- v [A; c] show off. Mupasíkat dáyun siya ug náay mga dalágang
nagtan-aw, He shows off if there are girls around.

síkaw a being in large numbers and moving about noisily. Síkaw kaáyu
ang mga táwu didtu sa tabuan, There is a noisy, bustling crowd in the
market. v [B6] be noisy and moving about in different directions.

sikawalu n coin worth half a sikápat.

sikaysíkay v {1} [A2; c1] strive to make a move. Misikaysíkay
(nanikaysíkay) pagbángun ang hubug, The drunk strove to get up.
{2} [A2N] strive, struggle for existence. Basta musikaysíkay
(manikaysíkay) ang táwu, mabúhì giyud, If a man struggles, he will
survive. {3} [AN] buzz about in some activity. Sayu sa buntag
nagsikaysíkay (nagpanikaysíkay) nag mga kumpradur, Early in the morning
the dealers in produce were already buzzing about.

sikbat v [AN; a12b2] for a fierce animal or an angry person to snarl at
s.o. suddenly. Gisikbat ang iring nga midúul sa irù nga nagkaun, The
dog snarled at the cat that came near him while he was eating.
Hingsikbatan ku siya kay midúul man nákù ug nangáyù ug itan-aw sa sini,
I snapped at him when he came to me asking for money to go to the
movies.

sikbit n contiguous, located next to. Sikbit siya nákug lingkud, He sat
next to me. Nagsikbit ang ámung lúti, Our lots are adjacent. ka- s.o.
who is located next to s.t.

sikbut v {1} [A; a12] cut s.t. with a single stroke toward the agent,
esp. with a sickle. Sikbuta lang ang písì arun maputul dáyun, Just cut
the rope to get it loose quickly. {2} [AN; a12] swipe. Nanikbut ang
bátag lumbuy sa tindíra, The little boy swiped a lumbuy from the fruit
seller. {3} pick out with a small dip net. n {1} sickle. {2} small dip
net. paN- v [A2; b1] finagle s.t. out of s.o. without much fuss and
bother. Manikbut siya ug plíti sa mga amígu, He gets his friends to pay
his fare for him.

sikdu_1, sikdù_1 v [A; a12] scoop s.t. up quickly by tossing, flipping
up a container. Sikdúha ang binlud. Ayawg iípun sa bugas, Remove the
fine meal by scooping it off as you flip it. Don’t put it together with
the grain. n scoop. (→), ig-l- = sikdu, n.

sikdu_2, sikdù_2 v [A; a1b2] jab, nudge. Sikdúun ta lang kag
makigpamaúlì na ku, I’ll just nudge you when I want to get home.

sikdù_3 = sid-uk.

sikdul = sikdu_2.

sikging v [A; a12] snatch at s.t. live suddenly to catch it. Biktun pa,
pára ituy! Sikgínga lang, You don’t have to trap a puppy! Just grab it!

siki n fetlock, a thumb-like projection above the foot in the legs of
animals.

sikil v {1} [B3(1)46; bP] for s.t. long to jut out. Misikil ang bukug
sa íyang síku sa íyang pagkahū́g, The bone in his elbow stuck out when
he fell down. {2} [A; a2b2] nudge s.o., esp. with the elbow. Musikil
giyud siya nákù inig-ági níya nákù, He nudges me every time he passes
by me. {2a} pierce with a horn or tusk. Ang túru nga misikil sa
mag-uúma, The bull that gored the farmer. n protuberance, s.t. that
juts out.

síkit a close, with least distance. Síkit kaáyu siya nga mubayli, He
dances very close. Didtu magtágù ang ilagà, síkit sa busaug, The rat
hid close to the floor joists. Síkit silang mga higála, They are close
friends. v [AC; ac] be or get close to each other. Sikíta ug butang ang
mga misitíra, Put the flower pots close to each other.

siklahun a scarce. Lisud makatrabahu ang táwung siklahun ug ininglis,
It’s hard for people whose English is limited to find work. v [B] be
scarce. Nagkasiklahun na run ang bábuy ihálas, Wild pigs are getting
scarce now.

si-klam n C-clamp.

siklap v [b4(1)] take a quick glance at. Nasiklapan ku siya nga
nagbaylu sa baráha, I caught him switching the cards around. pa- v [A]
take a glance at. Mupasiklap siya nákù matag karun ug unyà, She takes a
glance at me now and then.

siklat n {1} fence or wall made of bamboo slats woven through or nailed
to two or more horizontal slats. {2} one of the vertical slats of such
a fence. v [A1; b5] put siklat fencing. Siklatun (siklatan) ku ang mga
manuk, I will enclose the chickens with a fence of bamboo slats.

siklib n sick leave. Way siklib ang ámung gitrabahúan, There’s no sick
leave in the company I’m working for. v [A2] take sick leave.

siklista n cyclist, bicycle rider.

siklit v [A12; b4(1)] {1} get a glimpse of. Nakasiklit ku sa íyang
gisulat, I got a glimpse of what he wrote. {2} come to notice by
chance. Hingsiklitan nákung dihay mihíkap sa ákung bulsa, I was
suddenly aware of s.o. touching my pocket.

siklut n = balinsay. v {1} = balinsay, v1. {2} [A; c6] flip s.t. with
the fingers by holding the middle finger with the thumb and letting it
go with a snap. {3} [A12; b8] obtain s.t. with ease. Usáhay makasiklut
siyag mamisus sa pamantayg awtu, Sometimes he gets a peso for watching
cars.

sikma v [A2N2; b6] blow one’s nose. — ug dugù [A1] have a nosebleed.
Nagsikma intáwun ug dugù ang aláut sa kakusug sa sukmag nga íyang
nadáwat, The poor fellow was hit so hard he had a nosebleed. — ug
kusáhus [A13] get a good punch in the nose (lit. blow jerked meat out
of the nose). — ug manintimus, trín blow a long column from the nose
after crying. Tan-áwa lang unyà ninyu dì ba manikmag manintimus kining
búang nga asáwa, Just watch if that crazy wife of mine doesn’t blow her
nose from crying.

sikmat v [A2N; b6] snarl at suddenly and without warning. Takwáhaw lang
kung gisikmátan sa irù, The dog just suddenly snarled at me.

sikmul v [A; ac1] {1} touch s.t. lightly to the mouth or the mouth
lightly to it. Igù lang misikmul sa kan-unun ang irù ug milakaw, The
dog just sniffed at the food and walked away. Sikmúla (isikmul) ang
imáhin sa santus, Touch the image of the saint lightly to your lips.
{2} touch s.t. to a child or baby animal’s mouth just before he begins
to eat or talk, an action which is thought to influence the child’s or
animal’s behavior for life. Sikmúla (isikmul) ug hulmígas ang mga ituy
arun maísug, Give ants to the puppies before you wean them to make them
become fierce. {3} hone s.t. by rubbing it back and forth lightly over
a sharpener. n the thing put to a child’s or young animal’s mouth to
influence its future behavior. Ang sikmul nga tamalà makapalistu sa
paniil sa bátà, A small octopus is a good inauguratory feed for the
child because it will make him quick on his feet.

sikpaw = sigpaw.

sikrit = sikrit kang. see kang_2. — pákit {1} watch pocket. {2} pocket
sewn in the side of a dress, esp. uniform at the seam. v [A; c] in
blackjack, take an additional card. Musikrit ku kay layù ra sa
bayntiúnu ang ákù, Hit me because I’m miles away from twenty one.

sikríta n plainclothesman. v [A13; a12] be, make one a plainclothesman.

sikritári n {1} secretary in an office. {2} an officer of the
government who administers a department. v [A13; a12] be, appoint s.o.
as secretary.

sikritarya n lady secretary in an office. v [A13; a12] be, make s.o. a
secretary. -l n secretarial course.

sikritaryu n = sikritarya (male).

sikrítu n {1} secret. {2} watch pocket. {3} = sikrit kang. see kang_2.
v [A; a] do s.t. secretly. Sikritúhan ta kag ingun arun ikaw ray
mahibalu, I will tell you secretly so that you will be the only one to
know.

sikrítu diamur = amur sikrítu.

siksbay siks n k.o. six-wheeled motor transport with six driving
wheels, used by the armed forces. v [A13] travel in a six-by-six.

siksi a sexy, stimulating erotic feelings. Si Ikang siksi kaáyu nga
mamustúra, Ikang is very sexy when she dresses up. Kanang pilikuláha
siksi kunu kaáyu, That is supposed to be an erotically stimulating
film. v [B12; a2] be, become sexy.

siksik v [A; a] {1} go over an area in systematic detail to search for
s.t., ignoring no inch. Ang kanipáang ílang gisiksíkan sa bátang
nawálà, The nipa swamps they combed in search of the lost child.
{2} screen applicants for a post. Átung siksíkun sila ug maáyu arun
mapílì nátù ang kinamaayúhan, We will screen them carefully to get the
very best. {3} = hiN-. paN- v [A] for birds and fowls to preen their
feathers. n research, detailed investigation. hiN- v [AN2; b6] search
for nits in the head by running the strands of hair between thumb and
forefinger. maN-r- n researcher.

siksiríkay = sitsiríka_1.

siksiyun n {1} section of a certain grade in school. Duha ka siksiyun
ang tirsíru grádu, There are two sections in the third grade.
{2} section in an article, chapter, law, and the like. v [A13; a12] set
up sections in school.

siksrawundir n boxer who fights in six-round bouts preliminary to the
main event. v [B126] become a six-rounder.

sikstináyin n the sixty-nine position in sexual intercourse. v [A; a12]
do the sixty-nine.

sikstin kards n a manner of playing mahjong using sixteen pieces.

sikstring n {1} k.o. guitar with six strings. {2} the particular tuning
of such a guitar (D or E, A, D, G, B, E). v [a12] tune a guitar in this
way.

sikstu grádu n sixth grade.

siks-uklák n aim at six o’clock—i.e. slightly below the target.

sikswa a sexy, said in humorous reference to effeminate boys.

siktur n sector, area appertaining to a certain armed force.

siku = gwayabanu. — karabaw = siku. — kapúti = tsíku.

síku_1 n {1} elbow. {2} a unit of measurement reckoned from the tip of
the middle finger to the elbow, used to measure yarn. (→) v [AN; a2]
nudge with the elbow. Ug dì ku nímu paagiun sikhun ta ka, If you do not
let me pass, I will hit you with my elbow. sikúhan v [C] nudge each
other with the elbows. sikuhan n a needle used for mending nets, made
of a flat piece of bamboo about 6–10″ long with a pointed end that has
a U-shaped slot and notch at the opposite end. maN-(←) n = síku_1, n2.

síku_2 (from risíku) v {1} [AP; a12P] boil off water from s.t. as in
making syrup. Ikay musíku (mupasíku) sa dugà arun maispísu, Boil the
water off from the juice so that it will get thick. {2} [B2] for s.t.
to be cooked until it is thick and hard. Ilúnud ang pilit kun musíku na
ang latik, Put in the rice when the syrup gets sticky. Lamì ang humay
nga sikúhun paglung-ag, Rice tastes good when boiled hard. n s.t.
cooked hard or thick.

síku_3 a rigidly strict with an air of superiority and
unapproachability. v [B] be haughty. Nagkasiku siya sukad makabana ug
Katsílà, She has become strict and haughty since she married a
Spaniard. sikusíku v [AP; b6] act haughtily strict towards people. Ayaw
kug sikusikúhi kay suhítu ku sa ímung kaági, Don’t try to be haughty
and stand-offish to me because I know where you came from.

sikuláti = sikwáti, n, v1.

sikuluhíya n {1} psychology. {2} the knack of dealing with people to
get them to perform in a desired way, read their feelings. Ug may
sikuluhíya ka pa wà lang untà nímu palita arun itanyag ug barátu, If
you’d had a better knowledge of human behavior, you wouldn’t have
bought it right away so that you could have gotten it cheap.

sikundarya n secondary school (grades seven through ten).

síkund grid = síkan grid. see síkan.

síkup_1 v {1} [AN; a12] catch fish or shellfish by running a net or
hands along the bottom of the water. {2} [A1; a12] arrest, usually
after a dragnet operation. Ug sikúpun ka sa ipbiay walà kay
iskapaturya, If the FBI institutes a dragnet to find you, there is no
escape. {2a} trap an elusive bachelor into marriage. sinikpan n fish or
shellfish caught by hand.

síkup_2 n k.o. bird of prey. mata ug — a hawk-eyed.

sikuy v [A; a] steal s.t. not of great value (slang). Kinsay nagsikuy
sa ákung bulpin? Who swiped my pen?

sikwa n k.o. squash: Luffa cylindrica.

sikwalu = sikawalu.

sikwáti n chocolate, a beverage made of sugar and ground roasted cacao
beans, served hot and thick. v {1} [A13; a12] make, have chocolate.
{2} [A123P; a12] defeat decisively. Sa baskit nasikwáti mi, We were
trounced in the basketball game. {2a} punish severely. Bantay ka lang
ug sakpan kang Pápa kay masikwáti ka giyud, Watch out if Daddy catches
you. You will get it. {2b} perform badly. Pisti tung prublimáha. Mau
tuy nakasikwáti (nakapasikwáti) nákù, That damn problem was my downfall
in the exam. {2c} be erotically stimulated to a high degree. Ug muuban
nang bayhána nákù sa sini, masikwáti giyud, If that woman goes to the
show with me, I’ll get her all hopped up.

sikway v [A; ab2] shove to the side with a sweeping motion of the arms.
Sígi siyang sikway sa mga bugang pagsúut níya sa kalibunan, He kept
shoving away the weeds to the sides as he went through the thicket.
Hisikwayan nákù ang básu maung nahúlug, I happened to knock my arm
against the glass, and it fell.

sikyuriti n security guard. — gard = sikyuriti.

síl v [A13; c] hold a bargain sale. Nagsíl karun sa Wayitguld, They’re
having a sale at the White Gold. Krismas, prumusiyun, payir dámids,
watir dámids — Christmas, promotional, fire, water damage sale.

sila they. Muadtu sila sa Mandáwi, They will go to Mandaue. — si, -ng
[name] [name] and his friends or family. Túa na sila si (silang) Prid,
Fred and his friends have left. silahánun n {1} townmates. Mutábang
giyud si Pidru kang Husi kay silahánun ra, Pedro will surely help José
because they are townmates. {2} distant relatives. Silahánun si Piduy
ug Baldu kay mag-ágaw ílang isig ka apuhan, Pedoy and Baldy are
distantly related because their grandfathers are cousins. níla
{1} gen.: of them, by them. Ang awtu níla bag-u, Their car is new.
Gibaligyà níla, They sold it. {2} short for kaníla. kaníla dat.: them.
Wà ku kakità kaníla, I have not seen them. Kanílang duha, kinsay mas
taas? Of the two of them, which one is taller? íla, iláha preposed
gen.: their, by them. Ang ílang amahan, Their father. Ílang gipalit,
They bought it. {2} thing that’s theirs. Ang ákung awtu bag-u, ang íla
(iláha) dáan, My car is new. Theirs is old. {3} their home, place. Háin
man ang íla? Where is their house? Adtu ku sa ílang (íla ka) Husi, I’m
going to José’s house. silasíla n related to each other . Si Anuy ug si
Badung? Ah, silasíla ra nà, Anoy and Badong? Oh, they are related to
each other. v [A13] do s.t. by themselves. Nagsilasíla ra sila ug
pangáun, walà manawag, They just ate by themselves. They did not invite
us. ilaíla = silasíla, v. ilahánun = silahánun.

silab_1 v [A; b6] set fire to, put s.t. burning close to s.t. else.
Ayawg silabi ang ákung balay, Don’t set my house on fire. Silaban ku
áring sulù nang nawung ánang irúa, I will put this burning torch to
that dog’s face.

silab_2 n blade, the sharpened edge of a cutting tool. v [A; a] put a
blade on, make into a blade. Gisilaban ni Ingku ang kawáyan, Ingko made
a cutting edge on the piece of bamboo.

sílab v [B12] for the leaves of plants to become reddish. Ang taas nga
húlaw mauy nakasílab (nakapasílab) sa dáhun sa lubi, The coconut leaves
became reddish because of the long drought.

silaba n syllable.

silabi = sulábi, 2. see labi.

silabun = labun, 1.

sílag v [B1256; b8] {1} be, become envious. Kasilágan ka sa mga táwu ug
ikaw ray mag-awtu, The people will be envious of you if you are the
only one who drives a car. {2} have an intense hatred for s.o. Nasílag
siya sa nagpildi níya, She came to hate the man who stole her chastity.
Gikasilágan ku ang tanang Katsílà, I hate all Spaniards. ka- n enmity,
hatred. Kasílag nga lubngánan ray kinutúban, A hatred that will end
only in the grave. ma-un a envious.

siláhis n low-hanging, light-gray clouds, the movement of which
indicate the velocity of the wind. Basta kusug ang siláhis may bagyung
muabut, Fast-moving clouds indicate an approaching storm.

silak, sílak_1 n shellac. v [A; b6] shellac s.t.

sílak_2 a for the sun to be shining clear and bright. Sílak na, ay na
lang pagpáyung, The sun is out now. You don’t need your umbrella.
v [A2] for it to be clear and bright. Masilákun ang kaugmáun sa táwung
buútan, One who behaves well has a bright future.

sílang v {1} [A2S; b4(1)] for heavenly bodies to rise. Hingsilangan mi
sa adlaw kay dúgay mi nga nangatúlug, We went to bed late and got up
after the sun rose. {2} [A23] appear, become known with fame and honor.
Usa ka bantúgan nga magbabalak misílang kanátù, A famed poet is born
among us. pa- v [A; b6(1)] peep, peer through. Nagpasílang sa
largabista ang kapitan, The ship captain is peeping through the
binoculars. -an(→) n east, general direction where the sun rises.
halayù, layù nga — Far East. kinatung-an nga — Middle East. duul nga —
Near East.

silangga n body of water separating neighboring islets.

silanis n celanese.

siláub (from dáub) v [A2S; b6] {1} burst into flame, flare up and burn
brightly. Tayhúpa ang mga bága arun musiláub, Blow on the live coals so
they will burst into flame. {2} for emotions to flare up. Hináya lang
ug sulti. Musiláub ka man lang dáyun, Say it calmly. Don’t just flare
up suddenly. {3} [B246] for war to break out. Misiláub ang ikaduhang
gúbat sa kalibútan sa 1941, The Second World War broke out in 1941.

sílaw n {1} ray, beam of emitted light. Ang sílaw sa adlaw, The sun’s
rays. Ang sílaw sa sugà sa trák, The glare from the headlights of the
truck. v [A2S; b6] shine, emit rays of light. Nagsilaw ang ispat sa
íyang nawung, The flashlight was shining into his face. ka-
n brilliance.

silbátu = sirbátu.

silbi, silbidur, silbidúra = sirbi, sirbidur, sirbidúra. see sirbi_1.

silda n cell of a prison or convent.

silhig v {1} [AN2; a] sweep or rake a surface to remove dirt. Silhígun
mu ang ginabas, Sweep away the sawdust. Silhígan nátù ang tugkaran,
Let’s rake the grass. {2} [a12] remove from office in numbers. Kadtung
walà mubutar nákù silhígun sa katungdánan, Those who did not vote for
me will be removed from office. n broom. — sa ngípun toothpick
(humorous). maN-r- n sweeper.

síli n pepper: Capsicum spp. — nga amirikánu a large yellow variety. —
nga ispáda long variety: Capsicum anuum var. longum. — nga kagùkù the
large sweet pepper which turns red when ripe: Capsicum anuum. — kulikut
tiny, hot, red peppers: Capsicum frutescens. (→) v [A; b6] use, put hot
peppers to, into s.t. Musili ka ba? Do you use pepper in your food? —
kay gihángan [A13] for s.o. to get hurt by some indirect hints which
refer to what he was actually doing (if the shoe fits, put it on).
Nahimangud si Líta sa ákung sulti. Nagsili tingáli kay gihángan man,
Lita was hurt by what I said. It probably was true. (Lit. She must be
putting pepper in her food if she feels it is too spicy.) sinilian,
sinilihan a spiced with hot peppers .

silib n {1} sunray {2} place where rain can come in. Silib dihà sa
bintánà kun mag-ulan, The rain comes in the window when it rains.
v {1} [A2; b2] for the sun to shine from behind s.t., for rain to come
in. Maháyag ang kwartu ug musilib ang adlaw gíkan sa kakahúyan, The
room will become bright when the sun appears from behind the trees.
{2} [A23] appear as if coming out from hiding. Pahíyum nga misilib sa
íyang nawung, A smile that appeared on her face. {3} [a12] go and take
a look. Ákung silbun ang kábaw nga ákung gitugway, I will go and see
the carabao I put out in the pasture. pa- v {1} [A; b] peep, look at
while remaining hidden. Ngánung nagpasilib man ka dihà luyu sa kurtína?
Why are you peeping from behind the curtain? {2} [A3; c] look furtively
out of the corner of the eyes. Dílì siya mutárung ug tan-aw. Mupasílib
lang, He doesn’t look straight at you. He just looks furtively from the
corner of his eyes.

silibrǎr v [A; b5] celebrate, observe the memory of an event. Dílì siya
musilibrǎr sa íyang adlaw, He will not celebrate his birthday.
silibrasiyun n celebration.

silid n degree, a course of study or career. Silid sa pagkaduktǔr,
Medical course.

sílid n bedroom, room.

sílik n {1} dorsal fin of fishes. {2} analogous growth on reptiles.
{3} crease along a trouser leg. {4} in a hip roof, the junction of the
lateral and end slope which forms linear edges somewhat in appearance
like a dorsal fin. v [B2456] for a crease to form along a trouser leg.
-an a crested, having a crest.

silik-an see siak, 3.

silin n k.o. one-stringed musical instrument, played with a bow,
resting on the ground, high in pitch. The sound is produced by a
trumpet at the bottom.

silindru n cylinder of an engine.

silindrun = salindrun.

silindrus = silindru (plural).

siling = ingun_2 (dialectal).

síling v [A; a] fire shells, bombard. n act of shelling out.

sil-ing v {1} [A; a] look at s.t. closely to study it. Gisil-ing níya
ang títik nga milakra sa papil, He studied the letters that appeared on
the page. {2} peep, look hard through a small opening. Gisil-ing níya
sa bungbung kung kinsay nahiabut, He peeped through the slit in the
wall to see who was coming. -an(→), -anan n opening one can peep
through.

silíngan n neighbor. v [A2C; c3] {1} be, have one for a neighbor. Lisud
ikasilíngan ang palaaway, It’s difficult to happen to have a
quarrelsome person for a neighbor. {2} [A23] border, verge on. Ang
ílang kinataw-an musilíngan sa biaybíay, Their laughter borders on
derision. -an(→), ka-an(→) n {1} yard, area surrounding the house.
{2} neighboring. Kasilinganan (silinganan) nga lungsud, The neighboring
towns. ka-an n neighborhood, group of people composing a neighborhood.

silinsiyu a silent, quiet. Silinsiyu kaáyu ang kurti pagpakanáug sa
hukum, The court became very silent when the decision was handed down.
-su(←) a for machines to be noiseless. Silinsiyúsu kaáyu ning makináha,
This machine is noiseless. v [B; b6] for machines to become noiseless.

sílip, sil-ip v [A; a] peep through a small hole or opening. Misílip si
Husi pagsúsi kun kinsay náa sa gawas, Joseph peeped to see who was
outside. (→) n k.o. device in box form with one side covered with
glass, used to look at s.t. under the water, held with the bottom in
the water while the user peers into it. v [A; a1] look at or for s.t.
using this device. pa-(→) v {1} [A; b6(1)] peer slyly or secretly; take
a hasty furtive look. Nagpasilip siya sa ákung baráha, He snuck a look
at my cards. {2} = sílip, v.

siliri n celery.

silísi = salísi.

sílit v {1} [A2S; b26P] flow in a continuous stream from where it is
pent up. Misílit ang túbig sa grípu, The water flowed from the faucet.
{2} [A23P; a12P] drive, move swiftly forward. Unsa tung awtúha, misílit
(mipasílit) man lang? What car was that? It just whizzed on by.
{3} [A2S; a12P] for firecrackers to fizzle or sputter. Usáhay ang
ribintadur dílì mubutu. Ígù ra nga musílit, Sometimes the firecracker
won’t explode. It just simply fizzles. (→) a leaky. Silit kaáyu ning
tangkíha, This tank is very leaky.

sil-it v [B3(1)6; c1] come partly into view, be seen or exposed partly.
Misil-it na ang adlaw sa ákung pagmata, The sun had already started to
rise when I woke up. Wà pa makasil-it ang ngípun sa bátà, The baby
hasn’t gotten any teeth yet. Ayaw sil-íta (isil-it) ang ímung kwarta sa
bulsa, Don’t let your money stick out of your pocket.

silsil n cold chisel, a chisel for metal, stone. v {1} [A; a] inscribe,
work s.t. with a chisel. Kinsay nagsilsil aring mga litra sa simintu?
Who carved these letters into the concrete? {1a} [A13; c6] fix in one’s
mind, inculcate. Mga sulti nga nasilsil sa íyang kaisípan, Words that
were chiseled into his mind. {2} [A; a] remove s.t. with a chisel.
Átung silsílun ning kabilyáha, We will remove this reenforcement bar
with a cold chisel.

silstuk n {1} sales talk. {2} glib talk to win over or convince s.o.
v [A13; b6] give s.o. a glib line. Silstúkan na man pud ku sa íyang
bakak, mu rag mutúu ku, He is giving me his line again, as if I could
be taken in by it.

sílu n cello. v [A] play the cello.

silù v [B126C23; a2] have hurt feelings. Nasilù ku kay aku ray wà
imbitaha, I was hurt because I was the only one not invited. Mga
biaybíayng makasilù (makapasilù), Words of derision that can hurt the
feelings. Nagsílù ang managtrátu, The lovers are on bad terms.

silulúsa n bagasse, sugar cane pulp left after the juice has been
extracted.

sílung n {1} downstairs. May duha ka kwartu sa sílung, There are two
bedrooms downstairs. {1a} space underneath the house and including the
surrounding yard. Didtu níya ihukut ang kanding sa sílung, He tethered
the goat under the house. taas ug — a standing with the crotch
comparatively high above the ground (humorous). Kasagáran sa mga
Amirkánu taas ug sílung, Most of the Americans are tall.
{2} protection, care. Lisud ikíha ang usa ka táwu nga náa sa sílung sa
usa ka pulitiku, It is difficult to press charges against a person
under the aegis of a politician. {3} building where domestic animals,
esp. cocks are kept. v {1} [AN; b] take shelter under. Anhi ku musílung
(manílung) sa iláwum sa káhuy, I’ll take shelter under the tree.
{1a} [A; c] put into shelter in the shade. Isílung ang kanding ug
muulan, Take the goat to shelter if it rains. Isílung pagtanum ang mga
kakaw sa lubi, Plant the cocoa under the shade of the palms. {2} [A23]
put oneself under s.o.’s influence or protection. Ang ílu misílung sa
íyang uyuan, The orphan was put under the care of his uncle. (→) v [A;
b6(1)] plant a crop between the rows of another crop that is taller.
Musilung kug mais sa kalubihan, I’ll plant corn between the rows of
s.t. taller. pa- = sílung, v1. {1a} paN- v [A23] {1} for cocks to go to
another chicken yard, not the owner’s. Manílung ang sunuy kun way mungà
sa íla, A rooster will go to another house if there are no hens in its
own place. {2} for an adolescent to begin or start visiting girls.
Manílung na ang íyang anak laláki, His son has started visiting girls.
-anan n shelter or shade.

silungsilung n minor recurrence of measles or chicken pox eruptions
following a period of quiescence. v [A23N; b4] for measles or chicken
pox to have a minor recurrence or eruption. Natural giyud nà sa hanggà
nga silungsilungan (musilungsilung, manilungsilung), Chicken pox rash
normally recurs in a mild way.

silupin n cellophane.

sílus v [A1; b3] feel jealous, esp. of a beloved one. Gisilúsan sa
asáwa ang sikritarya sa íyang bána, The wife was jealous of her
husband’s secretary. -a a jealous (female). v [B12] become jealous.
-u_1 a jealous (male).

silusíya n venetian blinds. v [c] put up venetian blinds.

silúsu_2 a for machine parts to be loose and have too much free play.
Piligru ning ímung taksi kay silúsu kaáyu ang manabíla, Your taxi is
dangerous because it has a very loose steering wheel. v [B123] get to
be too loose.

sílut_1 n {1} penalty for a crime. Ang sílut sa pagpatay kinsi anyus,
The penalty for murder is fifteen years. {2} penalty in a game for an
infraction of the rule. v [A; b(1)] impose a penalty for a crime or in
sports.

sílut_2 n young coconut, the meat of which is harder than the ‘butung’
stage but softer than the ‘ungul’.

silúwid n celluloid.

síluy = asusíluy.

silya n chair. v [a12] make into a chair. — iliktrika electric chair.
di- see disilya. silyíta n {1} saddle of a motorcycle or bicycle.
{2} small bamboo or rattan stool. v [b6] put, attach a saddle. -dur(→),
-dura n leader of a group of ten Roman Catholic lay people organized
for a devotion to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus. v [B36; a1] be,
become the silyadur.

silyu n {1} postage or revenue stamp. {2} seal, put on s.t. to show
that it has been inspected. {3} seal to close an envelope. v [A; b6]
seal or put a postage or revenue stamp on s.t. Gibálik ang suwat kay wà
silyúhi, The letter was returned because there was no stamp on it.

símà n {1} barb. {2} glans penis (euphemism). v [A; b6] make, attach a
barb. -an a barbed.

símag v [A; b6] glow, brighten up. Musímag ang mga aniníput
inigkagabíi, Fireflies glow in the evening. Nagsímag siya sa kaputì,
She is very fair. Gisimágan ang bátà sa maistra, The teacher glared at
the child.

simalúna a happening in an alternate fashion. Simalúna ang hárì sa
hantak gabíi, In the coin tossing last night it was alternately heads
and tails all night long. Simalúna ang úlan sa miáging simána, Last
week the rains came on alternate days. v [A3; c16] do s.t. alternately.

simána n week. v {1} [B2] get to be a week. Musimána na lang wà mahiulì
ang amahan, A week passed, and the father had not returned. {2} [a12]
do s.t. by the week. Simanahun ta ikaw ug suwildu, I will pay you by
the week. {3} [A; b] earn [so-and-so much] every week. Gisimanáhan
(nagsimána) akug singkuwinta, I earned fifty a week. — Santa n Holy
Week. v [A13N] spend one’s days during the Holy Week. Ása ka man
magsimána Santa (manimána Santa)? Where are you going to spend Holy
Week? -in-(—), -l-(—), tag-(—) a weekly, by the week. Ang ámung swildu
sinimana (simanal), Our salary is on a weekly basis. v [A; a12] do s.t.
on a weekly basis. Culu- every week. Duáwun tika sulusimána, I will
visit you every week. v [A13; b5] do every week.

simang v {1} [A; b6] change a course, turn off. Inig-abut nímu sa
iskína musimang ka sa tuu, Upon reaching the corner, turn off to the
right. {2} [A23] deviate from a previous course, track of conversation.
Dílì usáhay siya masabtan kay musimang siya sa unsay gipanagsultíhan,
Sometimes you can’t understand him because he deviates from what he was
talking about. -l-an, -an, -anan(←) n fork of a road or path.

simaníya n chimney of a house, smokestack.

simàsimà = simùsimù.

simba v [A; b] {1} go to attend church services. Musimba ku ugmà, I
will attend church services tomorrow. {2} adore, regard with respect
and affection. Ang babáying ákung gisimba, The woman I adore. {3} [A12;
a3] know s.o.’s innermost thoughts. Nasimba ku na unsa ang ímung
pagtan-aw kanákù, I can read your thoughts of what you think of me.
n worship service. Unsang urása ang simba? What time is the service?
simbasimba n praying mantis. simbahan n church, church building.
simbahan ni Pilátu n female genitalia (humorous). -ku exclamation
uttered upon remarking about s.t. bad to keep it from happening to the
speaker. Simbaku ikaw lang untay mabúang, dílì aku, God forbid that I
go crazy, too. -ku lagung humorous exclamation: May it not happen to
me! Simbaku lagung, paúlì sa namúlung, I’m rubber, you’re glue.
Everything you say to me bounces back and sticks to you. (Lit. May it
not happen to me, but go to the one who said it.) panimbaku v [A2] say
simbaku. ig-l- n {1} what one wears to church. {2} special girl friend.
Daghan kug trátu, apan usa ra giyuy igsilimba, I have lots of girl
friends, but I have only one special one. -um-l- n about to go to
church. maN-r- n churchgoers. silimbáhun a worthy of adoration.

simbal_1 v [A; c] add a piece of cloth or paper to another piece to
make it larger. Ákù lang simbálan ang dapit sa íluk kay kúlang ang
panaptun, I’ll add a piece of cloth to the armpits because there isn’t
enough cloth.

simbal_2 n cymbal.

simbu a pubescent youngsters, esp. girls who bloom into adulthood,
developing curves and stoutness. v [B12; b6] be strong and healthy as a
result of pubescence. hiN- v [B46] grow stout and healthy as one enters
adulthood. Maghinimbu na gánì ka dì na madúgay nga madága ka na, If you
grow stout and healthy, it won’t be long before you’re grown up.

simbug = sambug.

simbulu n symbol. v {1} [A13; c6] have or use as a symbol. {2} [B1456]
symbolize. Ang pula nagsimbulu sa pakigbísug, The red symbolizes
struggle.

simburyu n domed roof. v [A13; b6] construct a dome.

simhut v {1} [A; a2] smell, take a whiff. {2} [A12; b2] be aware, get
wind of. Nía tus Baldu ug makasimhut tus átung kumbira, Baldo will be
here if he gets wind of the party. paN- v [A] smell, sniff. Dílì nà
mamáak irúa. Manimhut lang nímu, That dog doesn’t bite. He will just
sniff at you.

simik v [A2] for any of a group to fail (usually negative). Way misimik
sa ákung kandidátu. Lusut tanan, None of my candidates lost. They all
won. Way misimik sa ákung antug. Púlus hárì, None of my tosses of the
coin failed. They all came out heads. pa- v [a12] allow a single
failure or miss. Ádik nà siyag sini. Way pasimikun ánang salída, He is
a movie addict. He won’t let a single picture go by.

similya n {1} seedling, esp. for transplantation. {1a} seeds used for
propagation as opposed to those used for consumption. Ayaw ni ipagaling
kay similya ning lisúha, Don’t have these seeds milled because we’ll
use them for planting. {2} fingerlings. {3} breed of domestic animals
used for food. Maáyu ug similya ning babúya kay dagkuun, This pig is of
good breed because it is the big kind. v {1} [c1] reserve seeds for
planting purposes. {2} [A; b6] plant seeds in a seedbed. similyahan
n seedbed. similyahun ug láwas a for a woman to be healthy (lit. a body
fit to bear children).

siminar n seminar. v [A13; b6] hold a seminar.

siminarista n student in a seminary. v [B156] be, become a seminarian.

siminaryu n seminary.

simintiryu = mintiryu.

simintu n {1} cement, concrete. Balay nga simintu, A concrete house.
{2} the dikes around a rice paddy. v {1} [A; a2] cement s.t. Simintúhun
ang mga karsáda sa prubinsiya, They will cement the highways in the
province. {2} [A; a] put s.t. in plaster cast. Simintúhun ang íyang
buktun arun dílì makalíhuklíhuk, His hand will be put in plaster cast
so he can’t move it around. {3} [A13; b5] construct a dike for a rice
paddy. {4} [A; a] fill the teeth cavities. Gisimintu ang lungag sa
ákung ngípun, I had my cavity filled. simintádu a {1} cemented,
concrete. {2} plaster-casted.

simirísir n {1} medium-sized bicycle tire, larger than a racer but
smaller than the wide-tired bicycle. {2} bicycle with a medium-sized
tire.

simistir, simistri n semester. v [b8] get to be a semester.

simpatika = simpatiku (female).

simpatiku a charming, having an attractive personality. Ang ímung anak
simpatiku (simpatika) kaáyu nga mupahíyum, Your daughter smiles very
charmingly. v [B12; b6] be, become charming.

simpatíya n {1} sympathy, the capacity to feel the problems of others.
Dúna giyud na siyay simpatíya sa mga tinun-an nga nagtrabáhu, He has
sympathy for working students. {2} feeling of loyalty and tendency to
favor s.t. Ang mga hurnǎl usáhay may simpatíya sa mga kumunista, Day
laborers often are sympathetic to communism.

simpì = singpì.

simpig a close to. v [AB6; c] go, put s.t. s.w. near s.t. Musimpig ku
sa bungbung arun musulud ta sa katri, I’ll keep close to the wall so we
can all sleep on the bed. Kinsay nagsimpig áring parul diri sa baril sa
gasulína? Who put the lantern near the barrel of gasoline? Isimpig ang
ímung dunggan sa bungbung, Put your ears next to the wall.

*simpin see sinimpin.

simpís, simpiyis n k.o. ornamental fern: Nephrolepis biserrata var.
furcans.

simplan v [B246] be thrown to a distant place after being hit by a
strong blow. Musimplan ka run ug butangan ta ka áring kúmù ku, You will
find yourself thrown to a distance if I strike you with my fist.

simpli a {1} simple, without ornament, artifice, or ostentation. Ang
ílang kasal simpli kaáyu, They had a simple wedding. {2} easy to do,
solve. Simpli kaáyung buhátun, It is very easy to do. v [B; a] make
s.t. simple, become simple. Magsimpli tag káun arun makadagínut, Let’s
eat simply so we can save.

simpul a {1} simple, without affectation and ostentation. Simpul ang
ílang kasal, They had a simple wedding. {2} easy, uncomplicated to do.
Simpul ra ang suliran sa ámung tíst, We were given simple problems in
the test. v {1} [B2; c1] do s.t. simply, without ostentation. Simpúla
ra nang ákung sinínà, Just make it a simple dress. {2} [A; c1] make
s.t. simple to do. — líbing n a simple way of living. v [A; c1] live
simply. Magsimpul líbing na ta run kay mahal na ang palalítun, We’ll
have to live simply now that everything is so expensive.

simpun = singpun.

simput = singput.

simsim_1 n k.o. low herb similar in appearance to purslane but with
white axillary flowers, soft pilose leaves, and a woody stem.

simsim_2 n a k.o. reed found in marshes, used for decorative purposes.

simsim_3 v [A; b] taste a liquid in small sips. Ang mga buyug nagsimsim
sa dugus, The bees are sipping the nectar. Dì ku makasimsim ug ínit nga
sabaw sa luwag nga aluminum, I can’t sip hot broth from an aluminum
ladle.

simtum, simtúma n symptom.

simúaw v [A; c] sound boisterously. Sayu pa gáning buntag nagsimúaw nas
Maríya, nakamata lang kug ahat, Maria was talking loudly when it was
still early in the morning and I woke up. Unsa man say gisimúaw ni
Pidru? What is Pedro going on about again?

simud n {1} snout of an animal. {2} the analogous structure in a person
(the lips and the area adjacent that can be pushed forward). Ayaw
pabudlut sa ímung simud, Don’t pout (stick out your lips).

sim-ung a dark and dreary. v [B] become dark and dreary. Musim-ung ang
kalibútan basta magdag-um, The world becomes gloomy when there is a
heavy overcast.

simùsimù v [A; a12] eat a little, esp. enough to stave off hunger, but
not be fully satiated. Musimùsimù lang ta ígù nga isustinir hasta
paniudtu, Let’s take a little of s.t. enough to sustain us until
lunchtime. paN- v [A2] nibble at grass leisurely.

simyat = sipyat.

sin = ug, 1, 2a, b, 4a, b (dialectal).

sín n {1} galvanized sheet-iron roofing. {2} house with sheet-iron
roofing. Balay nga sín, A house with sheet-metal roofing. v [A13; a12]
put, construct with galvanized sheet-iron roofing.

sína_1 v [B126; b3(1)] be envious. Nasína si Dúdung sa ákung duláan,
Dodong is envious of my toy. Ang pagkaadunáhan lagmit kasináhan sa
uban, Other people are likely to envy your wealth. sinahan a tending to
be envious. ka- n envy. masináhun, manggisináhun a envious.

sina_2 see miryinda and santa.

sinádu n the senate. -r(→) senator. v [B156; a12] be, become a senator.
-ra n lady senator.

sinagúga n synagogue.

sinaguylas = siriguylas.

sinamay see *samay.

sinampangkung see *sampangkung.

sinamun n cinnamon. v [A2; b6(1)] flavor with cinnamon.

sinaryu n scenery as a background for a stage. v [b6] use scenery.
sinaryuhan n stage.

sinátì a {1} familiar. Daw sinátì nákù kaáyu nang tingúga, It seems
that I am very familiar with that voice. Sinátì ku sa trabáhu dinhi, I
am very familiar with this job. {2} well-known. Ang paghíngus mauy usa
ka sinátì nga tilimad-un sa sip-un, Sniffling is a well-known sign of
colds. v {1} [B1236] be familiar with s.t. {2} [A12] experience.
Nakasinátì kug kagútum sa gíra, I experienced hunger during the war.
{3} [C13] be acquainted with each other. Wà pa kami magkasinátì kaáyu
mau nga dapítun ku siya karun, We are not acquainted with each other so
I am going to invite her now. ka-an n {1} knowledge. Wà kuy kasinatían
báhin sa panglútù, I have no knowledge of cooking. {2} experience.
Halandúmung kasinatían, Memorable experience.

sínaw a shiny, glossy. — ug úlu bald-headed or head with the hair
shaved off. v {1} [B26; aP] be, become shiny. Musínaw (masínaw) ang
salug ug bagnúsan ug waks, The floor will become shiny if you wax it.
{2} [A; b(1)] give an opponent zero. Ang ámung tím nagsínaw sa iláha,
Our team gave theirs a zero. n {1} zero score. {2} = ispíhu, 3. pa- sa
lingkuránan v [A] keep sitting, not doing any work. Ang tapulang asáwa
pirmi lang magpasínaw sa lingkuránan, A lazy wife does nothing but sit
idly.

sindà n {1} k.o. illness which involves pain in a local area, esp. a
spot on the back which may move to another area; or a migraine, a k.o.
recurrent headache that affects the side of the head. {2} k.o. eye
ailment in which the eyes become red and sometimes swollen from too
much work. v [A123P; a4b4] have sindà. Pagpalit ug aspirína kay gisindà
(gisindáan) ku, Buy some aspirin because I have an attack of sindà
(headache or eye fatigue).

sindalan see dálan.

sindi v [A; b] light a pressure lantern. Nagsindi si Tátay sa hásag kay
ngitngit na, Father is lighting the pressure lantern because it’s
getting dark. -dur(→) n container from which alcohol is poured to fire
up the pressure lantern.

sindikátu n syndicate, a group of people banded together for business
or criminal purposes. v [B1256] become a crime syndicate.

sindul v {1} [A; a2b2] kick away, nudge s.t. with the toe of one’s
foot. Akuy musindul sa láta, unyà manágù mu, I will kick the can, and
you all go hide. {2} [A12; b8] find, come across s.t. Unsáun nákù
pagbáyad ug dì ku makasindul ug kwarta, How can I pay if I do not
happen to find some money. Tabì nga ákung nasindulan sa tyanggihan,
Gossip I ran across in the market.

sindúrut = sandúrut.

sing-al v [A; b6] {1} talk harshly. Ayaw kug sing-áli, Don’t shout at
me. {2} sing loudly. Mananaygun nga nagsing-al sa gawas, The carolers
singing loudly outside. {3} [A; b3] cry loudly, bawl. Himì ka kay
musing-al dáyun ug gutmun, You’re a cry-baby because you bawl as soon
as you’re hungry. n harsh talk, loud singing.

sing-aling n shing-a-ling, a k.o. dance. v [A] do the shing-a-ling.

singán = unsingálan.

singáni = unsa (dialectal).

singári v [A; abc] keep on [do]ing, always do. Ug singaríhun nímu nà ug
dukduk mabuak nyà nà, If you keep pounding that, it will break. Ayawg
isingárig usar ang bag-u, Don’t always wear your new clothes.

sing-aw = sing-al.

singba = simba.

singdalan = sindalan. see dálan.

singgáak v {1} [A2S; b6] shout, cry. Pára gamay rang samad musinggáak
ka dáyun! For such a small wound you scream bloody murder. {2} [A; bc1]
shout, snarl loudly at s.o. in anger. Singgaákan níya ang bátà kun
kasab-an, He shouts at the child when he scolds him.

singgalung n k.o. brownish civet.

singgapur = kamúting káhuy. see kamúti.

singgaráyung = singguráyung.

singgil n strong wire made of an alloy of copper, tin, and some other
metals.

singgit v [A; b6] shout, yell at s.o. Gisinggitan siya sa pulis nga
pasurindírun, The police shouted at him to surrender. n shout. Ang — sa
Balintawak n the Cry of Balintawak, the signal for the Philippine
Revolution of 1896. — awhag goading and urging done by shouting. —
pakitábang cry for help. tubag — answer given by shouting. ka-un(→)
a feel like shouting. Kasinggitun ku sa kalágut, I felt like shouting
in anger.

singgul a single-sized, good for one occupant as opposed to a double
one. Singgul nga katri, Single bed. v {1} [a12] make s.t. a single
rather than double size. {2} [C2; ac3] play singles, make it singles
instead of doubles. {3} [A; c1] goose. Ilang singgúlun ang mutuwad,
They will goose you if you bend over.

singgurayung, singguráyung n k.o. large Cerith shell, 4–5″ long.

singhag v [AN; c] snarl, talk harshly to. Ngánung singhágan man ku nímu
nga dílì man ku bátà? Why do you snarl at me? I’m no longer a child.
Ayawg isinghag ang ímung gustu, Don’t say what you want with a snarl.
n harsh talk, s.t. said snarlingly. -in-an n goods or articles acquired
from inferiors by virtue of one’s influential position. Kanang íyang
mga ilimnun pulus sininghágan sa mga Insik, All those drinks were
donated free by Chinese businessmen.

singhir n {1} Singer brand sewing machines and other appliances.
{2} sewing machine. báyad nga -in- n installment payments.

singì v [A; a2] separate or take one piece off from a bunch of fruit.
Kinsay nagsingì ug pipila ka dawin sa búlig nga ságing? Who took
several pieces from the banana bunch? n space between the fingers and
toes.

singil v {1} [AN2; a2N] ask for payment. Singlun (paninglun) na ba nímu
ag ákung útang? Are you going to make me pay my debt? {2} [A13N; a2N]
exact payment for what one has done, collect on a promise. Magsingil na
ku sa íyang gibúhat nákù, I will now collect for what he has done to
me. Maningil na ku nímu sa ímung gisáad nákù nga pinaskúhan, Now I will
ask for the Christmas gift you promised me. maN-r- n bill collector.
singlunun, paninglunun n amount collectible.

singilugun = ilugun. see ílug.

síngin n {1} fruits, ordinarily separate, joined together in growth
with a common continuous skin. {2} Siamese twins. v [C3] for fruits to
be joined as one.

síngir n singer, crooner. v [B156] be a singer.

síngit_1 n {1} hand in mahjong and the analogous situation in rummy
where a single number is missing to obtain a siyà. {2} the missing
number. paN- = síngit, 2. búnut paN- n drawing of the paníngit.

síngit_2 v {1} [A2; c] include one’s small amount together with a
larger amount belonging to s.o. else. Misíngit kug písus sa íyang
pusta, I put in one peso together with his bet. Nakasíngit kug lung-ag
níla, I put my small amount of rice together with the rice they were
cooking. {2} [A2; b] go in with a group or with s.o. important to share
with their food, fun, etc. without sharing in the expenses. Misíngit ku
níla sa sini, I tagged along to the movies with them.

sing-it = saling-it.

*singit pa-, pa-(←) v [A3; a12] give s.o. cause to goad him into a
course of action. Pasingitun ka lang níya arun magkaáway mu, He will
simply do s.t. to give you cause to quarrel with him. n goading.

singka v [A; c] speak harshly to s.o. Ayawg isingka ang ímung tubag kay
nangutána lang ku, Don’t shout your answer at me because I was just
asking. n s.t. said in a curt and harsh way. siningkáhan n things s.o.
obtains from people under him by virtue of his position.

singkamas n k.o. vine cultivated for its fleshy and juicy turnip-shaped
root, widely eaten raw and cooked: Pachyrrhizus erosus.

singkámut (from kamut) v [AN; b5] do one’s best, strive. Musingkámut
(maningkámut) ku paglingkawas, I will strive to escape. Singkamútan
(singkamútun) kung mabalhin ka, I’ll do my best to have you
transferred. paN- n striving, earnest, hard work. Milampus siya pinaági
sa íyang kaugalíngung paningkámut, He succeeded through his own
efforts. mapaN-un a diligent, industrious.

singkaw n {1} scythe. {2} have the arms bent bow-shaped at the elbow
like a scythe. v [B126] for the elbow to get to be this way. (→)
v [a12] hit with a scythe.

singkiríbut n sexual intercourse (coarse slang). v [AC; c1] have sexual
intercourse.

singkit v {1} [A; a12] tie two coconuts together by their husks partly
stripped off. Singkítun ta ning duha ka lubi arun dílì magbúlag, We
will tie these two coconuts together with their husks so they won’t be
separated. {2} [C3] for two separate things to be physically joined.
Gitawag ug sayamis twins kanang kalúha nga magsingkit, Twins that are
joined in flesh are called Siamese twins. n two separate things joined
in flesh. Usa ray ihap sa ságing nga singkit, Joined bananas are
counted as one.

singku number five. n a nickle. Tagái kug singku, Let me have a nickle.
v see trís.

singkul n hard growth on the skin covering bony parts, esp. on the
ankles and elbows. v [b4] develop a singkul. Sigun sa karáan, singkúlan
ka ug musúkul kag ginikánan, In folk belief, one gets singkul if one
talks back to his parents.

singkulyágas n k.o. sweet table banana much stouter than the tundan,
with dark red peelings and yellow-orange meat when ripe.

singkuríbut = singkiríbut.

singkurung v [A; a12b2] strike, knock the head hard in a sweeping
motion. Tungud sa kalágut íyang gisingkurung ang bátà, He smacked the
child on the head in anger.

singkurúyung = singguráyung.

singkuung a {1} well-curved on the sides. Singkuung nga sanggut, A
sickle with a well-curved edge. {2} for the roof or the bottom of a
boat to be curved so that it affords little room. v [B; c1] for the
sides, roof, or bottom to become well-curved.

singkuwinta number fifty. v see disiutsu.

singkuy a having the defect of horses where the hocks knock against
each other as they move. Dílì maáyu nga mudágan ang ímung kabáyù kay
singkuy kaáyu, Your horse doesn’t run well because its hocks knock
against each other. v [B156] get this defect.

singpì n clay cover for clay pots, roughly conical in shape with a knob
for a handle. v [a12] make into a cover of this sort.

singpun a tightly woven, with the threads close together. Nipis ang
panaptun kay dílì singpun ang mga hílu, The cloth is thin because the
threads are not tightly woven. v [B156; a12] get to be tightly woven.

singput a closely woven or fastened together, not sparsely. Simput nga
pagkatágik ang ámung salug nga kawáyan, The bamboo slats in our floor
were put down very close to each other. v [AB; a12] be closely woven,
put down; cause it to be so.

singsing n {1} ring. Singsing nga ingkantádu, kahibulúngan, An
enchanted, magic ring. {2} any metal band resembling a ring or small
hoop. {3} short rope connecting the whippletree and the plow.
v {1} [AN2; a] wear, put a ring on s.o. {2} [A; a] make into a ring.
{3} [A; b] firmly hook an orifice with a finger. Misúkul siya piru
dihang gisingsíngan nag iyáha, nagpuyù lagi, She fought back, but when
I got my finger hooked into her vagina, she stopped moving. paN-an
n ring finger.

síngu v [A12; a2b2] inhale a smell or aroma. Singúha ning kan-un ug
maáyu pa ba, Smell this food whether it is still good. Mu rag gás tung
nasinguhan nákù dinhà sa butilya, I smelled s.t. like gas in the
bottle.†

síngud v [A; a12] observe intently. Nagsíngud siya kun nagtrabáhu ba
mi, He was watching us to see if we were working. Wà ku makasíngud sa
uma sa búkid, I did not visit my field in the mountain to see how they
were doing. paN- v [A; a2] listen intently. Mupaníngud (maníngud) siyag
sultíhan apan dì lagi mutúman, He listens intently to what you say, but
he won’t do it. paningudsíngud v [A2; a2] go get some news.
Paningudsíngud ug unsay nahitabù sa nakrás, Go get some news about what
happened to the plane that crashed.

singulu (from úlu) v [A] for the child’s head to crown in childbirth.
Sakit sa ngatanan kun musingulu na ang bátà, The pain is most intense
when the child’s head crowns.

singut n {1} perspiration, sweat. {2} condensation on an object cooler
than the atmosphere. búngag — prickly heat. a annoying, irritating to
one’s nerves. Gipul-an ku sa íyang mga isturya, singut kaáyung
pamináwun, I’m bored with her stories. They’re so annoying to hear.
Singut kaáyu nà siyang manúgù nátù mu rag hárì, It really irritates me
the way she gives orders like a queen. v {1} [B26; a4N] perspire,
sweat. Ug musingut ang kabáyù papahuwáya, If the horse sweats, let it
rest. Mupahúway ku ug singtun (singutun) ku, I will stop working if I
perspire. {2} [A; a4] gather condensation. {3} [C123P] have a hard
fight. Ug gustu kang makigsíngut (makigpasíngut), hala andǎr, If you
want to have a fight, o.k. let’s get to it. paN- v [a4] {1} sweat
profusely. {2} for a sick person to break out in cold sweat. Mukunhud
ang hilánat ug paningtun ka, The fever lowers if you break out in cold
sweat. ka-(←) v [A13] be all covered with sweat. pa-(←) v [A13] do s.t.
to make oneself sweat. Wà mi magdúlà, nagpasíngut lang mi, We didn’t
play, we just had a little workout. kadu-, du-(←) v [A13] sweat
profusely. Undang na ug dúlà kay nagkadusíngut ka lang ug dágan, Stop
playing now because you are sweating profusely from running around.
singtánun a given to sweating easily with the slightest exertion.

sini n {1} movie house. {2} motion picture. {3} showing of motion
pictures. Way sini run kay Birnis Santu, There are no movies today
because it’s Good Friday. {4} love-making sight, as seen by peeping
(humorous metaphor). Pirmi ming kakità ug sini inigpamisíta sa íyang
uyab, We always see a ‘movie’ every time her boy friend comes.
v {1} [A13] show a movie. Ang Yuis-ay-is magsíni (magsini) sa
iskuylahan karung gabíi, The USIS will show a film in the schoolhouse
tonight. {2} [a12] convert into a movie house. (←) v [A13] {1} show a
movie. {2} display lovemaking. Nakakità ang mga bátà nga nagsíni sila
gabíi, The children peeped at them necking last night. paN- v [A2] go
to the movies. Manini ta, Let’s go to the movies. sinihan n movie
house. kasinihan n {1} movie houses collectively. {2} movies, as a
source of entertainment and as an art form. maki-, maki-(←) a fond of
movies. sinisíni n {1} slide-show. {2} free outdoor movie offered by
advertisement panels or mobile units.

siniguylas = siriguylas.

sinílas n slippers. v [A; a] wear, make into slippers. (→) v [a12] hit
with slippers.

sinimaskup n cinemascope or wide-screened movie. v [B156] be in
cinemascope.

sinimpin n k.o. plain finger ring with no gems.

sinínà n {1} dress. {2} shirt. {3} = gínit. v {1} [A; a] wear a shirt
or dress. Nagsinínag pula, Wearing a red shirt, dress. Sininái ang
bátà, Put a shirt on the child. {2} [A12] get a shirt. -un(→) n cloth
to be made into a shirt or dress.

sinípit see sípit.

sinisíru n ash tray. Sa sinisíru ninyu ibutang ang inyung upus, Put
your cigarette butts in the ash tray.

siniyal = sinyal.

siniyur n title of address for men of high station. short form: nyur
{1} Mr., sir. Si Nyur Pidru muabut rung hápun, Mr. Peter will arrive
this afternoon. Andam na ang ímung awtu, nyur, Your car is ready, sir.
{1a} form of direct address between intimate male friends. Kumusta,
nyur! How are you, man! {2} in set usage for names of saints (not
shortened). — San Pidru St. Peter. — San Bisinti St. Vincent. — Santu
Ninyu the Holy Child. pista sa — Feast of the Holy Child. -un
a detesting manual work. Ságad sa mga dátù mga sinyurun ug kusug
musúgù, Most rich people are too good to do manual work and tell people
to do things for them.

sinkuwínta = singkuwinta.

sinsilyu n {1} small change. Wà kuy sinsilyu diri, I don’t have any
change on me. wà kuy — humorous way of answering a compliment (implying
one has no money to pay the person for his flattery). {2} change given
back for a bill. Dúna kay sinsilyu áring písus? Do you have change for
this peso? {3} washer. {3a} metal rings found inside the hub of wheels.
v {1} [A; b(1)] give change or break s.t. into change. Makasinsilyu ka
áring singkuhun? Can you change this five peso bill? Wà ku nímu
sinsilyúhi (sinsilyúi), You haven’t given me my change! {2} [B1256] be
broken into fragments. Nasinsilyu ang básu nga natambug sa simintu, The
glass was broken to pieces when it fell onto the concrete. pa- v [A]
have children (humorous). Agad pay tibuuk, nagpasinsíyu giyud, You were
doing o.k. single (lit. a whole bill). What did you have to go and have
children for (lit. make yourself into small change)?†

sinsíru a sincere.

sinsitib, sinsitíbu a {1} sensitive, easily offended. {2} for electric
equipment to be sensitive. v [B12] be sensitive or easily offended and
irritated.

sinsiya n science.

sinsíyu = sinsilyu.

sinsu n census, an official enumeration of population or some other
statistics of an area. v [A1; a12] have or hold a census.

sinsur n censor. v [A; a12] censor s.t. presented to the public.
Gisinsur ang báhin sa salída nga dúnay naghúbù, The part where there
was a nude scene was censored out. -s censors (plural).

sinsúru n large, deep-sea fishing net which encircles the fish. v [A;
a] fish with this sort of net, esp. in harvesting fish from under the
páyaw. sinsuradur n one who operates this sort of equipment.

sinsus = sinsu.

sinta v [A; b6] {1} for horses to rear up. Pagbantay kay musinta ang
kabáyù! Watch out! The horse will rear. {2} flare up in anger, raising
the head. Ngánung musinta ka man pára sa usa ka gamayng hangyù? Why do
you flare up for such a tiny request? — libanta n a dog’s trick where
the dog can sit or stand on its hind legs on command. v [A] perform
this trick. hi-/ha- v [B1256] be taken aback so as to jerk one’s head
back. Nahasinta ku sa íyang tinubagan, I was taken aback by the way he
talked back.

sintà n pieces of wood or bamboo slats nailed horizontally across posts
as fence railings, to which small vertical slats are attached. v [A; a]
put up, make into this sort of fence railing.

sintábu = sintabus (singular). Usa ka sintábu, One cent.

sintábus n centavo. Singku sintábus, Five centavos. maN-(→) n {1} one
centavo coin. {2} s.t. costing one centavo apiece. Kining gidak-úna sa
agridulsi manintabus, This size of calamondin is one centavo apiece.
v [A13; a12] be one centavo apiece.

sintak v [A; a12] pull a fishline or a line attached to a trap with a
jerk. Sintákun nímu ang pasul inigkubit sa isdà, The moment the fish
bites, pull the line with a jerk.

sintas n {1} strip of silken ribbon or cord with a religious medal worn
around the neck as an indication of one’s devotion to a particular
saint. {2} film-strip. {3} story. Nagsulat siyag sintas nga kawbuy, He
wrote a cowboy story. {4} shoe laces. {5} — nga balátung n variety of
very long balátung. v {1} [A13; b6(1)] wear a ribbon with a saint’s
picture. {2} [A; c] lace shoes.

sintídu n {1} meaning, implication of. Laksut ug sangputánan ang
sintídu sa íyang púlung, His words carried the implication of unhappy
things to come. {2} final decision. v {1} [A13] have a meaning. Tambag
nga nagsintídug kasábà, Advice that was meant as a scolding. {2} [A;
c1] hit squarely or fatally. Nakasintidu siya sa katapúsan níyang tíra,
He made a hit on his last shot. {3} [A; c] give one’s final, fixed
decision or answer. Gisintidúhan na ang ginikánan báhin sa kasal, The
parents have given their decision regarding the wedding. {3a} [A; a12]
ask, find out one’s answer or word. Nagsintídu ku kun mahinayun ba ta,
I want to get the final word from you as to whether we are going as
planned. {3b} [C13] come to an agreement. Nagkasintídu na ang isig ka
ginikánan báhin sa kasal, Both parents have come to an agreement about
the wedding. — kumun n common sense.

sintimintal, sintimintǎl a {1} sentimental, arousing tender
sensibilities. Pilikulang sintimintal nga nakapahílak, A sentimental
picture that made me cry. {2} having a sad expression on the face.
v {1} [B1256; b6] be, become sentimental. {2} [B456] put on a sad face.
Nagsintimintal siya kay napildi sa madyung, He is wearing a long face
because he lost in mahjong. -ista a characterized by being sentimental.

sintimintu, sintimyintu see sintǐr.

sintimitru n centimeter.

sintimus n one centavo. Bísan sintimus dì ka makaabut? You can’t even
afford a penny? maN- costing one centavo. see also sikma.

sintinaryu n centenary. v [A1; b6] have or celebrate a centenary.

sintinil = sintiníla.

sintiníla n sentinel. v [A; a2] act as sentinel.

sintinsiya n {1} sentence in court. Ang sintinsiya sa kurti
nagpahamtang ug sílut nga lima ka túig sa prisuhan, The judgment of the
court imposes a penalty of five years in prison. {2} obvious thing to
do under the circumstances. Usa ray sintinsiya ánang bátang maldítu.
Latiguha, There is just one thing to do to a mischievous child. Whip
him. v {1} [A; b6] impose a sentence. Gisintinsiyáhan siya ug
kamatáyun, He was sentenced to death. {2} [A23] have one’s way as to
how s.t. is to be done. Pritúhun lang nà ug akuy musintinsiya ánà, If I
am to have the say, we’ll just fry it. -du n one who has been
sentenced.

sintinyal n centennial. v [B2456] be a century. Musintinyal nákung
panguyab níya únà mi magkatrátu, I courted her for nearly a century
before we became engaged.

sintir n center player in games like baseball, soccer, basketball,
tubigtúbig. v [A; a1] play center.

sintǐr v {1} [B2; b3] feel offended and hurt, take offense. Unsa may
íyang gisintiran, ang ákung gisulti u ag ákung gibúhat? What did he
feel offended at? Was it what I said, or what I did? {2} [A23] rise to
the bait. Gidakup ang asáwa ug anak básun musintǐr ang púga, The wife
and the child were arrested in the hope that the fugitive would come
out of hiding. sintimintu, sintimyintu n feeling of hurt, offense.
Naghambin siya ug sintimintu mahitungud sa pagtratar níya, She is
nursing a hurt because of the way she was treated. v [A13; b6] harbor a
hurt feeling, without rancor. Subù siya kay nagsintimintu sa ímung
pagkasábà níya, He is sad because he was hurt by your scolding.

sintral n {1} central school of a town. {2} mill for sugar cane.
{3} [noun] sintral the dominant, central [noun]. Bangku sintral,
Central Bank.

sintripugal, sintripyugal n light brown sugar obtained from sugar cane,
lower in quality than the white refined sugar, but more refined than
the muskubádu.

sintru n {1} center, point in the very middle. {1a} central portion of
an area. {2} place where certain activities are concentrated. Sintru
purikultúra, Puericulture center. Ang Sibu sintru sa kumirsiyu sa
Bisáyas, Cebu is the center of commerce in the Visayas. {3} = sintir.
v [A1PB2; a1] be, put at the center.

sintu- (combining form) one hundred. Sintudyǐs, One hundred ten.

sintún v [A; b6] push work off on one another. Dì sila makasintún sa
pagtrabáhu ug tagáag asaynmint káda usa, They can’t push the work off
on each other if each of them has his own assignment.

sintunádu, sintunáwu a for a voice to be flat, lacking in tonality and
pitch. v [B; a2] be, become, make flat. Musintunáwu ákung tíngug ug
musáka ang túnu, My voice goes flat when the song rises.

sinturiyun n centurion.

sinturun n belt to hold trousers up. v {1} [A; a12b2] whip s.o. with a
belt. {2} [A; c] wear a belt.

sin-u = kinsa (dialectal).

sinulug n ritual dance performed at the altar in fulfillment of a vow
made to a saint or the Holy Child. v [A; c5] do or dance the ritual
sinulug. Maáyu nang sakíta ug isinulug, That disease will be cured if
you vow to dance the sinulug for it.

sinuylas = sinílas.

sinya, sinyas = plurdilis.

sinyadur (from sinyal) n in logging, the person who signals the
directives of the foreman to the hauling machine operator.

sinyal n {1} sign or mark thought to have significance. Ang alum sa
ngábil sinyal sa pagkatabian, A mole on the lip is a sign of being a
gossip. {1a} storm signal. {2} a scheme of scale arrangement on the
legs of gamecocks which is thought to indicate the fighting ability.
{3} birthmark. -an a {1} having a freakish or odd physical
characteristic. Sinyálan nang batáa kay unsiy tudlù, That child is a
freak because he has eleven fingers. {2} having an odd or unusual
characteristic (slang). Sinyálan tawhána kay mau ray ituun ug way
iksámin, That man is really odd because he studies only when there are
no exams.

sinyas n the movement of a part of the body as a sign to indicate s.t.
v [A; b6(1)] signal with the body. Sinyásan ta lang ka. Paábut lang, I
will give you a signal. Just wait.

sinyúra n {1} short form: nyúra. term of address for a married woman of
high position: Mrs., madam. Si Nyúra Pilang, Mrs. Pilang. {2} in set
usage before names of saints (not shortened). Nwistra — sa Patima Our
Lady of Fatima. Nwistra — sa Lurdis Our Lady of Lourdes. a for a woman
to demand solicitous service. Sinyúra kaáyung bayhána kay patágay pag
túbig, She thinks herself a grand dame. She even has to have s.o. come
to pour her water. v [A13; a12] call s.o. sinyúra. v {1} [A1] move with
measured and unhurried steps. Makasinyúra nà siyag lakaw kay daghan mag
masúgù, She can afford to move leisurely because she has lots of
servants. {2} [A] not do any work. Ayawg pakan-a ug magsinyúra sila,
Don’t feed them if they don’t do any work. sinyurahun, sinyuranhun a of
the sinyúra type.†

sinyúris n term used in direct address: ladies and gentlemen or
gentlemen. Atinsiyun, mga sinyúris, Attention, ladies and gentlemen.

sinyuríta n {1} short form: nyuríta. term of address to an unmarried
lady of high station. Si Nyuríta Maríya, Miss Mary. {2} lady’s pistol,
small pistol made esp. for ladies to use, usually of .22 caliber.
pistula, ribulbir nga — = sinyuríta, n2. a wanting solicitous
attention, considering oneself too classy to do any sort of work.
Sinyuríta kaáyu siya. Paípis pa giyug kapi, She is very high class. She
even has to have s.o. pour coffee for her. v [A13; a12] call s.o.
sinyuríta. sinyuritahun a of the sinyuríta sort.

sinyurítu n short form: nyurítu. term of address for young boys of high
standing. Nía tu run si Nyurítu Haymi, Master James will be here
presently. a considering oneself too good for any sort of physical
work. v [A13; a12] call s.o. sinyurítu. sinyurituhun a of the sinyurítu
type.

síp a safe in games. v [B1256] be safe. Nasíp ku kay nabuhian ag búla,
I was safe because he dropped the ball. sipsíp n hide-and-seek. v [A]
play hide-and-seek. -anan(→) n home base in hide-and-seek.

sípà_1 a {1} for a voice to be loud and resonant. Ang magsisibya
kinahanglan sípà ug tíngug, An announcer must have a resonant voice.
{1a} loud and piercing. Mu rag mukulíkut sa dunggan nang tíngug nga
sípà, The loud and sharp voice seems to pierce the ears.
{2} ear-*splitting, resounding and sharp. Ang sípang butu, The
earsplitting explosion. Sípang sagpà, Resounding slap. v {1} [B26S;
a12P] be, become loud, resonant. {2} [A2; a12] give a loud, sharp
sound. Musípà ka run ug sagpáun ta ka, You will resound with a crack if
I hit you. ka- n loudness, resonance. Ang kasípà sa sista, The
resonance of the guitar. ma-un a characterized with loudness,
resounding. Masipáung haluk, A resounding kiss.

sípà_2 n a game played usually with a woven rattan ball by participants
standing in a circle. The ball is kicked with the instep and directed
to another player, who in turn passes it on, and so forth. The player
who misses the ball incurs a penalty. v [A; a12] kick s.o. with one’s
instep as one would do in a game of sípà.

sipak v {1} [A2N] for plants to multiply by developing bulbs, shoots,
spreading tubers, and the like. Ayaw kuhái ang sibúyas nga wà pa
musipak (manipak), Don’t harvest the leeks that haven’t developed new
bulbs. {2} [A; a] remove new growths, or pieces of tubers. Sipakun mu
ang mga sáhà sa ságing, Split off the banana shoots. n shoots, bulbs,
pieces of tubers. -in- n shoots, bulbs that have been gathered.

sip-ak v {1} [A; a12] split s.t. lengthwise along the grain. Sip-ákun
nákù ning uwáya ug tulu, I will split this piece of rattan into three.
{2} [A2; a12] disturb or destroy s.t. as if rending it. Kadtung mga
pulúnga makasip-ak (makapasip-ak) sa ákung pagtagad níya, Those words
can destroy my regard for him. n s.t. that has been split lengthwise
from a bigger piece.

sípan n betel nut husk used as a toothbrush. v [A; b6(1)] brush the
teeth with this material.

sipat a naughty, mischievous, making a nuisance. Sipat kaáyu ning batáa
kay maghingári ug pabuyag, This child is very naughty because he always
makes a nuisance of himself. Sipat ang mga lamuk dinhi kay mamáak bísan
ug adlaw pa, The mosquitoes are a real nuisance here because they bite
even at daytime. v [B12] be, become naughty or a nuisance. (←) v [B6]
become rampant. Misípat ang panúlis kay krísis sa kwarta, Thievery is
becoming rampant because of the scarcity of money.

sípat v [A; a2b] look with a sharp, piercing look. Grábi siyang
makasípat mu rag mudulut ang mata, My, how fiercely he looked at me, as
if his eyes were piercing through me.

siphag v [B5; a12] for a group to disperse by running in different
directions or for s.t. in a piece to break into smithereens and be
thrown in all directions. Sa dihang mibutubutu misiphag ang mga
dimunstríturs, When the shots rang out the demonstrators dispersed.
Nasiphag ang mga parti sa awtu pagbutu niíni, The car parts flew in all
directions when it exploded. Siphágun nákù nang ílang punduk, I am
going to break their group up. -ay v [c] = siphag.

sipi interjection used to drive away cats. Sipi! Sámuk ning irínga,
Scat! What a bothersome cat.

sipì n hand of bananas, a group of bananas growing in one line in the
bunch. v [A; a12] separate into hands. Sip-a ang búligs ságing,
Separate the banana bunch into hands.

sipii n acronym for CPA, Certified Public Accountant. v [A13] be a CPA.
— lúyir one licensed as a CPA and as a lawyer.

sipilin n zeppelin. v [A13] do s.t. using a zeppelin.

sipilis n syphilis. v [A123P; a4] be affected with syphilis.

sipilya n plane for smoothing wood. v [A; ab] smooth wood with, make
into a plane. Sipilyáhan nátù ning tabláha arun mahámis, Let us plane
this board to smoothen it. -in- n shavings.

sipilyu n toothbrush. v [A; b6] brush s.o.’s teeth. paN- v [A2; c]
brush one’s teeth. Manipilyu giyud ta káda human ug káun, We should
brush our teeth after every meal.

siping v {1} [AN; b] gather small bulbs, small shoots for harvest or
replanting. Magsiping ku sa sibúyas, I’ll get some onions. {2} [A2N;
b(1)] reproduce by growing new shoots or bulbs. Misiping (naniping) na
ang mga sibúyas, The onions are multiplying. n new shoots or bulbs
growing from a plant.

síping_1 v [AC; ac] stay, put close by the side. Musíping ku nímug
lingkud inigtís, I will sit close to you during the exam. Isíping ning
takurì sa linung-ag arun maínit ning kapi, Place the kettle next to the
pot of rice to make it warm.

síping_2 n rudimentary genital organ of the opposite sex in addition to
one’s own genital organ. -an n hermaphrodite.

síping_3 n shipping line.

sípir n zipper. v {1} [A13; b6] put or attach a zipper. {2} [A; b6] zip
s.t. up. Sipíri ra ring ákung likud, Please zip my back. paN- v [A2]
zip oneself up.

sipit_1 n {1} earwig, a shiny black bug abounding in coconut trees
about 1 cm. long with large mandibles. It does not bite. {2} k.o.
small, blackish, scorpion-like insect about ½″ long which bites, found
on furniture.

sípit v {1} [A; b6] carry s.t. between the arm and body. {2} [A; b6]
hold firmly between the legs. Gisipítan ku níya sa duha níya ka páa,
She held me firmly between her legs. — ug diplúma v [B1346] be a degree
holder. Nagsípit na ku ug diplúma pagkaminyù nákù, I already had my
degree when I married. (→)_2 n pincer of a crab or lobster. -in- n a
simple anchor made from a forked branch in between which a stone is
tied.

siplà v {1} [A; c1] knock down s.t. s.o. is holding. Kalita pagsiplà
ang gikaptan níyang búla, Knock the ball out of his hand suddenly.
{2} [A; a1] slap with the palm or an open hand. Ákù siyang gisiplà kay
nagsubìsubì, I slapped her when she talked back.

sipláag v [APB6C3] scatter over a wide area, cause to do so. Kinsay
nagsipláag (nagpasipláag) áring mga pasì diri sa kwartu? Who scattered
the corn all over the room? Natigwaláan ku siya dihang nagsipláag ang
mga táwu, I lost sight of him when people ran away in every direction.
Nagkasipláag ang mga magsúun pagkamatay sa inahan, The children were
scattered when the mother died.

siplágay = suplágay.

siplat v [AP2N; b] glance, take a furtive look. Nasiplatan (hisiplatan)
ta ka nga nanglìlì sa lyabihánan, I caught you peeping through the
keyhole. Ákung gipasiplatan siya ug mulíngì ba nákù, I glanced at him
to see if he would look my way.

siplin n seaplane. v [A13; a12] travel by, make into a seaplane.

siplit = siplat.

sipra n {1} monogram, a mark showing ownership. {2} sign, label. Sakay
sa dyip nga dúnay siprang Lahug, Take a jeep which is marked Lahug.
v [A; c] {1} put a monogram on s.t. {2} mark a sign, label.

sipris n cypress tree.

sipsáyid v [A; c] dock on the side of another ship. Musipsáyid na lang
ang barkug wà nay lunang kadunggúan sa pír, A ship docks on the side of
another ship if it can’t find any other berthing place.

sipsip_1 v [AN; a12] cut s.t. with long sweeping strokes with a bladed
implement. Maáyung kasab-an ang nagsipsip sa ákung mga misítas, How I’d
love to scold whoever cut down my ornamental plants.

sipsip_2 v [A2N; b6N] polish the apple (euphemism for supsup). Mupasar
siya kay musipsip (manipsip) man sa íyang maistru, He will pass because
he licks the teacher’s boots. n one who polishes the apple. bútù apple
polisher.

Sipt. n abbreviation for Siptiyimbri, September.

sipti v [c6] put s.t. in a place for safekeeping. Isipti nà sa sulud
kay tingálig sibatun, Put it inside for safekeeping because s.o. might
make off with it.

Siptimbri n September. v see abril.

siptimu grádu n seventh grade. v [B56] be in the seventh grade.

siptinaryu n a seven-day devotion, the Septinary for the Holy Ghost.

sipu v [A; b] clean or clear an area of grasses, bushes, and small
trees, usually at the borders of a cultivated area to prevent the
plants from being in the shade or to afford a good view of the field.

sípuk v {1} [A; b] gather around s.t. Misípuk ang mga táwu sa lamísa
nga gibutangan sa pagkáun, The people gathered around the table where
the food had been set. {2} [B6; a12P] for the head to be awhirl with
too many problems. Sipúkun (pasipúkun) mu ang ákung ū́ ning ímung mga
binúang, You are driving me mad with your foolishness. (→) a having the
head awhirl and being short-tempered on that account. Ang táwung daghag
prublíma sipuk kaáyu ug úlu, A person who has many problems is
short-tempered. -un a of a short-tempered sort.

sipukar v [B16] for work to be fast-paced. Maáyung hinayhináyan ang
trabáhu arun dílì magsipukar kun hápit na kinahanglána, Do the work
little at a time so that you won’t have to do it in a great rush when
the need arises. sipukádu, sipukáwu a {1} short-tempered. Sipukádu ang
táwung daghag prublíma, A person with many problems gets to be
short-tempered. {2} requiring a fast pace of work. Sipukádu na kaáyu
ning ámung trabáhu kay dúna man miy didlayin, We are working as fast as
we can because there is a deadline to meet. v {1} [B1; a12] be, become
short-tempered. {2} [B12; c1] for work or a person to require a fast
pace.

sipul n a knife 3–5″ long with a somewhat humped back used to cut
threads and fibers in weaving. Instead of a handle it has a long tang
curved at the end forming an eye. v [a12] make into, hit s.o. with a
weaving knife.

sipulkru n sepulcher.

sipultíru n caretaker of a cemetery. v [B156; c1] be the caretaker in a
cemetery.

sip-un n {1} head cold. {2} nasal mucous. Pahíri nang sip-un mu, Wipe
your nose. v [A123P; a14] {1} have a cold. Ug sip-unun ka, inum áring
tambal, If you have a cold, take this medicine. {2} have a runny nose.
Gisip-un ku tungud sa abug, I have a runny nose from the dust. sip-unun
a {1} having a runny nose. {1a} tender in age, at the age when one has
a runny nose. {2} awkward and ignorant.

sípung v {1} [A; a12] draw s.t. together, as a net or mouth of a sack.
Dílì ku makasípung sa bàbà sa sáku kay punù kaáyu, I cannot gather the
mouth of the sack because it is very full. Sipúngun níya ang buhuk,
unyà pangkúun, She gathers up her hair and ties it into a knot. {2} [A;
c1] join two ends or sides together. Sulda ray makasípung sa isig ka
tumuy sa alambri, Only solder can join the two pieces of wire. {3} [A;
b] finish a weave, terminating it. Magsípung na ku sa kálù, I’ll finish
weaving the outer edges of the brim of the hat. {3a} [A; c1] finish
harvesting the rice, usually the little remaining part of the last part
near the end of the field. -un(→), -unun n last small remaining part of
the rice in the field to be harvested.†

sípur n C-4 rice, a recently introduced variety of white rice.

sip-ut a narrow and tight, affording little space or freedom of
movement. Sip-ut kaáyu ang agiánan, The passageway is very narrow.
Sip-ut nga sayal, A tight skirt. v [B2] be narrow and tight. ma-
a crowded, thick with vegetation. Masip-ut nga kalibunan, Thick
underbrush.

sipuy = sipul.

sipya n sepia in photography. v [A12] make a print in sepia.

sipyat v {1} [A23] make a mistake. Musipyat ka lang ug kas-a,
papahawáun ta giyud ka, Just commit one mistake, and I’ll fire you.
{2} [B26] miss an aim, fail in a plan. Dílì ku musipyat ug akuy
patirúhun sa langgam, If I shoot the bird, I won’t miss. Plánung dílì
masipyat, A plan that cannot fail. {3} [A23] overlook, fail to do s.t.
Ug akuy pabasáhun walay sayup nga musipyat, I won’t overlook a thing if
I read it. Ayaw sipyáta pagbása ang sunud gulà, Don’t fail to read the
next issue. n {1} error committed. Way sipyat siyang muantug, He never
misses in his shots. {2} failure to do s.t.

sír n term of address for male teachers and other men of high status.
Si Sír Gabútin dílì makaanhi sa iskuylahan run, Mr. Gabutin cannot come
to school today. Náay nagtawag nímu sa tilipunu, sír, S.o. is calling
you on the phone, sir. n [gen.] — my, your, etc. teacher. Giingnan mi
sa ámung sír, Our teacher told us. v [A; a12] address s.o. sir.

sira v {1} [A; b5c1] close a window or door. Sirhun (sirhan, isira,
sirahun, sirahan) ta ning pwirta, ha? Let me close the door. May I?
{2} [ABN2] close, cease to operate, cause s.t. to do so. Anus-a musira
(manira) ang klási? When do classes close? Una lang kay magsira
(manira) pa ku sa tindáhan, Just go ahead, because I will close the
store. {3} [A2; a12] wind up, make complete. Átung sirhun ang nigusyu
kay muadtu mi sa Amirika, We will wind up the business because we are
going to America. {4} [A; b(1)] lock s.o. or oneself in s.t. Ug
magpabuyag ka, akuy musira nímu sa kwartu, If you make a nuisance of
yourself, I will lock you in your room. {5} — ug dugù v [b4(1)] miss
several menstrual periods, usually for a long span of time. Nagmulù
siya kay nasirhan siya ug dugù, She is worried because she has missed
several menstrual periods. {6} [AB12; c1] plant fully with; be fully
planted. Dì makasira (makapasira) ning tagúra sa basakan, These rice
seedlings aren’t enough to fill all the rice paddies. n {1} door.
{1a} gate or anything that closes. {2} window shutter. {3} end of
school. Kanus-a inyung sira sa klási? When do your classes end? — gána
dessert. v [A; c1] have for dessert. paN- v [A2] {1} = sira, v2.
{2} lock oneself in a house or room. Manira ta kay náay púsil sa gawas,
Let’s close up because there is a gunfight outside. Nanira ku kay
naglágut ku, I locked myself in my room because I was angry. {3} zipper
or button up one’s clothes. Walà ku makapanira sa ákung karsúnis, I did
not zipper my trousers. karga siráda see karga. sirádu a {1} tightly
closed. Sirádu kaáyu ang kwartu kay walay hángin makasulud, The room is
closed tight, and no air can get in. {2} full, filled to capacity. Dì
ta makasakay kay sirádu kaáyu ang trák, We can not get on because the
truck is completely full. v [B1256; b6] {1} be tightly closed, close
s.t. tight. {2} filled to the last seating capacity. panirádu = panira,
2. siradúra n {1} device to close a door. {2} a lock for closing
jewelry or anything to close wearing apparel.

sírà n venereal disease infection. v [B126] be infected with a venereal
disease (slang).

siráli n k.o. fruit similar in appearance to cherries, green or dark
red when ripe, with a single pit, growing in bunches on a small wild or
cultivated tree: Flacourtia jangomas.

sirámiks n ceramics.

sirapínis n seraphim.

sirbandu n servant (sarcastic usage). Sirbandu ba ku nímu nga ímu kung
sugúun niánà? Am I your servant to make me do what you command?

sirbátu n {1} whistle producing a high shrill noise. {2} horn on a
vehicle. {3} notification, word of intimation for an important event
(humorous). Nakasal na diay mu? Wà man lang muy sirbátu! Why, you got
married without even giving us the slightest hint! v {1} [A; b6] sound
a whistle or horn. Gisirbatúhan ka. Padaplin, He blew his whistle at
you. Go to the side. {2} [A] give word or notification for an important
event (humorous).

sirbi_1 {1} is considered, reckoned as. Kining kwartáha sirbi swildu
nímu, This money is considered as your salary. {2} by way of. Sirbi ug
pasalámat níay ákung gása álang nímu, By way of thanks I have a present
for you. walay — useless. Way sirbing pagkaanáka! Tapulan, What a
useless son! He’s so lazy. v {1} [A3] make do, serve. Magsirbi kahà ni
pára halígi? Will this do for a post? {1a} [A13] be of use, service.
Ang ákung kahibalu sa ininglis nagsirbi nákù sa ákung trabáhu, My
knowledge of English stood me in good stead in my work. {2} [A; b6]
serve in a household. Adtung nagsirbi pa ku sa íla, At the time when I
was serving in their place. {2a} work off a debt by rendering menial
service or serve time for a penalty. Sa átù pa, musirbi pa ku sa
bayinti písus, In other words, I will work off the twenty pesos by
serving you. {2b} care, attend to. Ikaw ba tu ang nagsirbi nákù sa
huspital? Were you the one who attended to me in the hospital?
{2c} serve in the mass. {3} serve food. Isirbi na ang panihápun, Serve
supper now. -dur(→), -yinti n waiter. v [A13] be, become a waiter.
-dúra, -yinta n waitress. v [A13] be, become a waitress. mag-l-
n {1} waiter or waitress. {2} one who assists in saying the mass. -syu
n {1} service, performance of a job in one’s line of duty. Sa dinhà pa
ku sa sirbisyu sa pulis, When I was working on the police force.
{2} function, purpose which s.t. serves. Unsa may sirbisyu áning
pidála? What is the purpose of this pedal? {3} church service. Sa alas
dyís ang sirbisyu, The service starts at ten o’clock. -syu Sibil Civil
Service. v {1} [A13] serve, perform a job or duty in line of duty.
{2} [b] serve or work to pay one’s debt. Sirbisyúhan ku lang ang ákung
útang, I will just work my debt off. {3} [A; b6] hold a church service.
-syáwu a having rendered a great service, served well. Gisì na ning
payúnga apan sirbisyáwu kaáyu ni kanákù, This umbrella is torn, but it
has served me well.

sirbi_2 v [A; c] serve in tennis and other games played with a net.
n turn to serve, action of serving the ball. Kinsa rung sirbi
(sirbisyu)? Whose serve is it? -syu n = sirbi, n.

sirbilyíta_1 n napkin. v [a] make into, provide with napkins.

sirbilyíta_2 n k.o. compact, seedy cooking banana, yellow-orange when
ripe.

sirbis n {1} s.t. set aside for a certain specific use. Sirbis ning
awtúha pára sa mga bisíta, This car is for the special use of the
visitors. Maáyug sirbis tung ristawrána, That restaurant gives good
service. v {1} [b6(1)] make s.t. available for a specific use. Ayaw ug
kabaláka kay sirbísan ta mu ug dakung amplipáyir, Don’t worry because I
will have a big public system available for you. {2} [A] service,
provide maintenance for. Kinsa may musirbis sa mga awtu? Who will
service the cars? — diluks n service in a de luxe manner. Gihatdan man
giyug pamáhaw. Sirbis diluks man giyud, She was served breakfast on
bed. De luxe service, I should say.

sirbísa n beer. sirbisahay v [A1; a12] play a game with beer as bets.

sirbisyáwu see sirbi_1.

sirbisyu see sirbi_1 and sirbi_2.

sirbyinta = sirbidúra. see sirbi_1.

sirbyinti = sirbidur. see sirbi_1.

sirguylas = siriguylas.

siriguylas n small tree cultivated for its sweet and juicy fruits,
yellow or reddish, similar to plums: Spondias purpurea. paN- v [A2; b6]
gather siriguylas.

sirikinya n k.o. flying fish with a long nose.

síril v [A3; a12] look all around s.w. to find s.t. Nagsíril mi sa mga
kasilingánan pagpangítà sa bátà, We were searching all over the
neighborhood looking for the child. hasirilsíril v [B1256] go
frantically looking for s.t. everywhere.

sirimunyas n {1} ceremony, prescribed procedure. Ang sirimunyas sa
pag-inugurar sa tulay, The ceremony for the inauguration of the bridge.
{2} fuss, ado. Way daghang sirimunyas gipapuyra siya, He was fired
without much ceremony. v [A; b6] hold a ceremony.

sirína_1 n siren. Sirína sa bumbíru, Fire engine siren. v [A; b6] sound
a siren.

sirína_2 n a mythical sea creature said to be a woman of some sort.

sirináta n an open air concert. v [A; b6] have, perform an open air
concert.

síring = syíring.

siringsíring v [A; a] go about in a circular motion seeking or watching
s.t. Misiringsíring ang iruplánu úsà mutugpa, The plane circled before
landing.

sirínu n night watchman. v [A13] be a night watchman.

sirip_1 n sheriff. v [A; a12] {1} attach property for nonpayment of a
debt on it. Ang bangku mauy musirip sa yútà ug dílì kabayran ang lún,
The bank will attach the land if the loan is not paid. {2} confiscate.
Ákung siripun ang baráha kay dì mu magtuun, I will confiscate the
playing cards because you don’t study.

sirip_2 = silip.

siripinti = sirpinti.

síris n {1} Christmas tree lights. {2} series connection of bulbs or
batteries. v [A; a] connect several batteries or electric bulbs in a
series.

sírit v {1} [A2P; a12P] rush swiftly with a whooshing noise. Mipasírit
(misírit) ug padágan sa awtu, Zoomed away in the car. {2} [A2] do s.t.
fast and with ease. Misírit siya sa iksámin kay maáyu mang pagkaribyú,
He answered the examination easily because he had reviewed well.
n hissing noise of s.t. released under pressure. (→) v [A13] make a
hissing noise. Nagsirit nga kaláyu, The hissing flame.

sirku v {1} [A3] fall headlong, tumble down into s.t. Misirku siya sa
kanal pagkabanggà sa mutur, He fell headlong into the ditch when the
motorcycle crashed. {2} [A; b6] flip, do tumbling. Human siya mudágan
misirku siya didtu sa túbig, He ran and then somersaulted into the
water. {3} [A13] for there to be a circus. Magsirku didtu sa ámung
lungsud karung pista, There will be a circus in our town this coming
fiesta. n circus. sirkíru, sirkadur n trapeze artist, acrobat. sirkíra,
sirkadúra n a lady trapeze artist, acrobat. v [A13] be, become an
acrobat.

sirkul n {1} circle. {2} the mahjong piece having the design of a
circle. v {1} [AC23; c1] encircle, form a circle. Magsirkul na ta,
Let’s form a circle. Nagsirkul ang mga girilya sa kampu sa Hapun, The
guerillas encircled the Japanese camp. Gisirkulan ang mga sayup, The
mistakes were encircled. {2a} [A12; b] draw a circle in mahjong.
{2b} [B126] for the piece drawn to turn out a circle.

sirkular n circular, a directive distributed from a head to lower
ranking departments.

sirkulasiyun n periodical circulation.

sirkulu = sirkul.

sirkumpirinsiya n circumference.

sirkumstansiya n specific situation in which s.t. happened. Kining
hitabù usa ka sirkumstansiya sa pangágaw sa katungdánan, The happening
is a specific instance of usurpation of authority.

sirkus n circus. v [A13] hold a circus.

sirmun n {1} sermon delivered by a clergyman. {2} scolding. v [A; c]
{1} deliver a sermon. {2} give a scolding. Gisirmúnan siya ni Máma kay
tagdugay nga mupaúlì, Mom gave him a scolding because he comes home
late.

sirpinti n {1} a mythological dragon or serpent of stories. {2} a
treacherous and malicious person. v [B1256; b6] become, consider one a
serpent.

sirta = sirtu.

sirtipay v [A; b6(1)] certify, make a written declaration concerning
s.t.

sirtipikar v [A; b6] attest to the state or verity of s.t. Musirtipikar
ku sa pagkatinúud sa íyang diklarasiyun, I will attest to the truth of
his declaration. Gisirtipikahan na ba ang ímung tsiki? Has your check
been certified? sirtipikádu n s.t. certified as true, valid. v [B1256]
be, become certified.

sirtipíku n {1} certification of having finished a certain course or
elementary grades. {2} a formalized declaration of thanks. {3} a
document evidencing ownership of stock. — sa kandidatúra certificate of
candidacy.

sirtu v {1} [A1; a12] ascertain. Nakasirtu ka ba unsay íyang súgù nákù?
Have you ascertained what it was he wanted me to do? {2} [C; a12] come
to final terms on an agreement. Nagkasirtu na mi sa prisyu, We have
come to an agreement about the price. n {1} having come to an
agreement. {2} expression in an auction sale indicating that the bid is
closed. Dusintus! Ala úna! Alas dus! Alas tris! Sirtu! Two hundred!
Going once! Going twice! Going thrice! Gone!

síru n {1} zero. {2} situation of having gotten nothing. Dimálas ang
ámung pangisdà run kay síru, We had bad luck in our fishing because we
got nothing. {3} exactly in round figures, no more, no less. Síru
giyung kinsi písus ang hálin, The sales was exactly fifteen pesos. Síru
nga siyam ka búlan ang íyang pagmabdus way subrang adlaw, Her pregnancy
was exactly nine months, not a day more or less. v {1} [A; b6] give a
zero, make s.o. come out with zero. Pagtuun kay musíru giyud nang
maistrúha, Study, because that teacher will really give a zero.
Gisirúhan mi sa ámung kuntra, Our opponents made us come out with zero.
{2} [B256; c16] put into round figures. Hustu nang aníhun ug masíru
nang duha ka túig, It’s time to be harvested when it gets to be exactly
two years.

sirù_1 v {1} [A; c] feed s.o. who is weak from childbirth or disease.
Dì ku makalakat kay nagsirù kug masakitun, I can’t leave the house
because I’m feeding s.o. that is sick. Sabaw sa báka ang isirù sa
nagpatútuy, Give the nursing mother beef broth. {2} [A; b] give a dole
or handout (deprecatory). Dì mu mauwaw nga gubyirnu ang magsirù ninyu?
Are you not ashamed to receive handouts from the government?

siruhánu n surgeon. v [A13; a12P] be, become a surgeon.

siruk a {1} greedy, having a strong desire for food. Siruk kaáyu ning
irúa kay walà makakaun ug tulu ka adlaw, This dog is very greedy
because it hasn’t eaten for three days. {2} fond of, having a strong
liking for. Siruk ug bayli ni si Pidru, Peter is crazy about dancing.
{3} one who is present at any event where food is served, invited or
not. v [B12] be, become greedy or fond of s.t. (←) v [A; b6] attend a
party or feast uninvited, just to eat the food prepared. Mga bagà ug
náwung nga misíruk sa híkay, Those nervy people who went to the party
uninvited. paN- v [A2; b6] go s.w. to scrounge for food. Adtu sa mga
basúra magpaniruk ang mga irù ug iring, The dogs and the cats scrounge
for food in garbage cans. — buy a {1} attending banquets uninvited.
{2} one starved for food, entertainment, or sex without scruples.
v [B12] become a person of this sort.

síruks n {1} xerox machine. {2} a xerox copy. Síruks lay ihátag, dílì
ang uridyinal, Just turn in a xerox, not the original. v [A; b6] xerox
s.t.

sirul n stomach cramps. v [A123P; a4] get stomach cramps. Diyútay ray
kan-a sa hilaw nga mangga arun dílì ka sirulun, Don’t eat so many green
mangoes so you don’t get cramps.

sirumsirum n k.o. goby.

sirung v [B26; c1] for the eyebrows to be knitted. Masirung (musirung)
ang ímung kílay ug masukù ka, You knit your eyebrows when you are
angry. a knitted eyebrows.†

sírung = sinulug.

sirutsu n hand saw. — pára láras ripsaw. v [A13; a12] cut with a saw.

siryal n installment in a serialized movie, radio program, published
stories. v [c6] have s.t. appear in installments.

siryal nambir n serial number.

siryus a {1} serious, earnest in one’s attitude to things. Siryus siya
kaáyu sa íyang trabáhu, He is very serious in his work. {2} seriously
ill. Siryus na kaáyu ang masakitun, The patient is very serious.
v {1} [B1; b6] be serious and earnest. {2} [B12; b6] for an illness to
get serious. -in- v [A13] take things seriously.

siryúsa a serious-minded, not easy-going. Dì siya katiáwan kay
siryúsang pagkababáyi, You can’t fool around with her because she is
the serious type. v [B2] become serious-minded.

siryúsu a serious and earnest about what one does, not joking. Siryúsu
kaáyu ning ákung ig-ágaw, panagsa ra mupahiyum, My cousin is serious.
He rarely smiles. Sigúru kang maánur ug siryúsu ka sa ímung pagtuun,
You will get honors if you are serious with your studies. v [B1] be
serious.

sís {1} short for Mísis, term of address for a married woman. {2} term
of address to a sister.

sisariyan n caesarian section. v [A; a12] perform or have a caesarian
section.

sisi n k.o. small oysters.

sìsì v {1} [A; a] make an incision on s.t., rip s.t. open with a long
tear. Sìsíun ta ning ímung dintru arun maabut ku ang samad, We’ll have
to rip your shirt so I can get at your wound. Arun makúhà ang bála
sìsían ang dughan, We’ll have to make an incision in the chest to get
the bullet out. {2} [B126; a] for the edge of s.t. hard to have a tear
in it. Nasìsì ang kílay sa buksidur, The boxer got a cut on his
eyebrow. Sìsíun mu nang kílid sa silya nga ablíhan mu nang kúk? Are you
going to rip the edge of the chair by opening a coke on it?
{2a} [b4(1)] have a vaginal laceration. Ang bátà nga gilúgus nasìsían,
The child that was raped had a vaginal laceration.

sisig = alig-ig, v1.

sisik, sísik n carapace of a sea turtle, or similar material from a
carabao horn, used for making combs. sudlayng — turtle-shell comb.

sisinta = saysinta.

sisip n s.t. tapered and thin, used as a wedge to hold s.t. tightly in
place. Ayaw ug nipsa ang sisip arun dílì mahalù dáyun ang pul-an, Don’t
make the wedge thin so the handle will not come loose easily. v [A; a]
put, make into a small wedge.

sista n guitar. v [A23N; a12] play a guitar. Kaantígu kang musista
(manista)? Do you know how to play the guitar? maN-r- n guitar player.
paN- n art of guitar playing.

sisti what really makes it bad is... Walà lang untà tuy kásung
gigisìgisì. Ang sisti (nakasisti) kay gisúnug man sab, It really
wouldn’t have mattered if it had only been torn to pieces, but the
thing that really is bad is that it was burnt too. Way kásu kanang
samára, ang sisti (nakasisti) lang, ug ímung pasagdan, Don’t worry
about that wound. It’s only s.t. to worry about if you don’t take care
of it. v [A12] = sisti.

sistíma n system, way in which s.t. is done. Bag-ung sistíma sa
pagtudlug ininglis, A new system for teaching English. v [a12] do s.t.
in a sensible or systematic way. Sistimáha nà ug búhat, unáhun ri,
isunud tu, Do it in a systematic way: This first, next that, and so
forth. -tiku(→) a done in a systematic, sensible way.

sistu = sistusumyásis.

sistusumyásis n schistosomiasis. v [A123P; a4] be afflicted with
schistosomiasis.

sísu n see-saw. v [A1; a2] play on, make into a see-saw.

sisyun n session, the meeting of members of a body to transact
business. v [A1; b6] hold a session.

sít_1 v [A; c1] set the hair. Rúla ang ímung buhuk usà isít (síta),
Roll your hair on curlers before you set it.

sít_2 n {1} set of dishes, furniture, mahjong, and the like. {2} in
mahjong a set of three consecutive numbers (siyà) or a set of three
pieces of the same number (tríyu). v [A12] obtain a set of s.t.

sít_3 v [A; c] adjust the time of a timepiece. Isít ang rilu inigpítu,
Set the clock when the siren sounds.

síta n letter z.

sitar v [A; c] express or cite s.t. Nausab ang íyang hunàhúnà human ku
makasitar sa ákung túyù, He changed his mind after I had expressed my
purpose. Bi, sitari ku ug usa ka higayun diin walà ka mapildi, All
right, give me an instance where you did not lose. Hala, isitar ang
prisyu ug pila man gáling nà, All right, tell me the price. How much
could it be.

sitasiyun n summons, an official order to appear in court.

sithaw v [B] be embarrassed to the point of blushing in shame. Musithaw
ta ug hisakpan tang mamakak, It is embarrassing to be caught cheating.
Nasithaw ang duha ka managtrátu nga hinsakpang nagháluk, The couple
blushed with shame because they were caught kissing.

síti number seven. Used only with words of Spanish origin: dates,
prices, time of day. v see tris. n k.o. white rice with long and
slender grains that ripens in seven months. — Birnis n aged palm toddy.
— duktúris n Christmas pageant concerning the life of Christ,
especially focusing on the debate between Christ and the seven learned
rabbis in the temple. — palabras n {1} the seven last words of Christ
before He died on the cross. {2} a Good Friday ritual commemorating the
seven last words. v [A] perform this ritual. — páris n a mahjong hand
containing seven pairs (see karnabal_2). v [B36; c6] make, get seven
pairs.

sitihul n City Hall.

sitinta numeral seventy. v see disiutsu.

sitlayit n man-made satellite. v [b6] have a satellite s.w.

sitru n sceptre. Ang sitru mauy timailhan sa gahum, The sceptre is a
symbol of power.

sí tru n see-through cloth, k.o. lace cloth which one can see through.
v [A; b] wear s.t. of see-through cloth.

sitsaru n commercial name for peas or pea pods. The plant (or the
vegetable) is called gisantis.

sitsarun n a tidbit made of hog skins fried crisp. v [A; a12] prepare,
have sitsarun.

sitsiríka_1 a gay, vivacious, and friendly. Lagmit makatratu ning
bayhána kay sitsiríka kaáyu, This girl will likely get herself a boy
friend because she is very vivacious and friendly. {2} dressing with
verve, somewhat wildly. v [B12; b6] get to be vivacious and friendly.

sitsiríka_2 = kumintang.

sitsiríku a being vivacious and friendly with the opposite sex, but not
necessarily loose.

sitsiríya, sitsiríyas n miscellaneous goods for everyday use. Namaligyà
mi ug sitsiríyas ingun sa asúkar, linata, panaptun, ug uban pa, We sell
various goods for everyday use such as sugar, canned goods, cloth, and
the like.

sitsit v [AN; b(1)] attract s.o.’s attention by hissing in short
bursts: sst, sst. Mupatúu nà siya ug akuy musitsit, He’ll stop if I go
sst, sst to him. Sitsíti si Nítu kay nabyaan ang íyang libru, Call Nito
back because he left his book behind. n a hissing call to attract
attention. paN- v [A13] hissing at s.o., call done in this way.

situn this, that (nom. and dat.—dialectal).

sitwasiyun n {1} state of health or well-being. Sa ímung sitwasiyun
dílì ka pa makalakaw, In your delicate state of health you should not
walk. {2} situation, the circumstances that pertain at a given moment.
Ang sitwasiyun sa pamulitika sa Ilúkus, The political situation in
Ilocos.

sityu n a territorial subdivision of a barrio, having no political
signification.

síug v [A; b] press the abdomen downward in childbirth. Gisiúgan sa
mananabang ang babáying nanganak, The midwife pressed down on the
abdomen of the woman who was giving childbirth.†

síut a {1} crowded. Síut didtu sa sini kay maáyu ang pilikula, It was
crowded in the movie house because it was a good film. {2} full of
weeds or grasses that obstruct. Bungayi ang gardin kay síut na kaáyu,
Weed the garden because it is full of weeds. {3} littered with trash.
{n} trash, weeds. v {1} [A2; ac] force one’s way with difficulty
through a crowd or thicket. Gisíut níya ang katawhan pagpaduul sa
intabládu, He forced his way through the crowd to get near the stage.
{1a} for a sound to penetrate. Ang kabanhà musíut sa ákung dalunggan,
The noise penetrates into my ears. {2} [B2] become full of weeds.
{3} [B126; a12] become full of litter. Ginunting papil ang nakasíut
(nakapasíut) sa sála, Cut up pieces of paper littered the living room.
siutsiut v [A; b6] scatter litter.

siwag a jutting out inconveniently. Siwag kaáyu nang rúlir ilukluk sa
bulsa, The ruler protrudes inconveniently if you stick it in your back
pocket. v [A2S; c6] be, become protuberant and inconvenient.

siwagkang v [B6; c1] stick out or be crookedly placed. Dakù ang intráda
sa ákung sapátus kay nagsiwagkang ang ákung kumagkù, I take a shoe with
a very wide vamp because my big toe sticks out to the side. Ayaw
siwagkánga (isiwagkang) ang ímung tiil kay malukápa ta, Don’t stick
your legs out because we’ll stumble over them.

siwakug v [B3(1)6] be cumbersome and difficult to carry due to its long
length. Magsiwakug dad-un ang tag-as nga mga lipak, Long bamboo slats
are cumbersome to carry. a cumbersome to carry because of length.

síwang v [A; b6] cut or split the lips. Siwángun tikaw run ug dì ka
magtárung, I’ll split your lips open if you don’t behave. (→)
a harelip. Dáan na nà siyang siwang sukad sa gamay pa, She has been a
harelip since childhood.

siwásid = saluwasid.

siwil v [A] for long slender things to stick out. Misiwil ang lansang
sa píkas bungbung, The nail stuck out through the other side of the
wall. Punyal nga nagsiwil sa bulsa, A dagger sticking out of the
pocket.

siwit n clitoris.

siwitsiwit n gossip. v [AN; c1] gossip; bear tales. Dì ta
makasiwitsiwit ug daghan tag búhat, We can’t gossip if we’re busy.

siwsiw v [A] for blood to flow profusely. Misiwsiw ang dugù sa dakù nga
samad, Blood flowed profusely from the wound.

siya he, she. Akù siyang igsúun, He is my brother. She is my sister.
kanà, kini, kadtu — {1} him, her (used when speaking about s.o.,
usually saying s.t. unpleasant). Tabian nà siya, She is a gossip.
{2} this, that thing. Kari siya indángan. Kanà siya mamsà, This is a
surgeon fish. That is a crevally. {2a} that umm... (used when one can’t
think of the name of s.t.). Kanang instrumintu, kanà siyang ibángag sa
puthaw gánì, That instrument, that thing they make holes in iron with,
you know... siyasíya v [A13] do s.t. all by himself, herself. Way
mitábang níya ug nagsiyasíya lang siya ug tuun, Nobody helped him out
and he studied all by himself. níya {1} gen.: his, her. Ang libru níya,
Her book. {2} dat., short for kaníya. kaníya dat.: him, her. Adtu
kaníya ihátag, Give it to her. see also íya.

síya n chair, seat. v [a12] make into a chair.

siyà n {1} in mahjong, a set of three consecutive pieces of the same
design. {2} act of obtaining siyà. v [A; a12] get siyà. — ditirminális
a siyà which has a terminal (tirminális). — minay a winning hand which
has one of each of the winds (bintus), dragons (drágun) and terminals
(tirminális).

siyam numeral nine. v see tulu. — pa sa kamut not completely certain.
(Lit. There are still nine when you count it on the fingers of the
hand—from the notion that a newly conceived baby is not certain because
much can happen in nine months). Bísag hinug nag humay, siyam pa
gihápun ni sa kamut kay nía pa man sa yútà, Our rice is ripe, but we
can’t be sure of the harvest because the harvest hasn’t been done yet.
ka-an n ninety.

siyap_1 v [A] peep, chirp. Musiyap ang pisù ug walà dihà ang mungáan,
The chick will peep if the hen is not there.

siyap_2 n shop, an establishment devoted to repairing things or making
things. — sa makina machine shop.

siyatsíyat n shooting of the ball in basketball for practice or for
leisure. Sa siyatsíyat hingígù siya, piru sa dúwà, sus lagyúa, In
practice shooting he is a good shot, but when it comes to the actual
game, his shots are way off the mark. v [A; c] do practice shooting,
usually leisurely. Magsiyatsíyat únà ang mga magduduwà sa dì pa sugdan
ang baskit, The players do practice shooting before the game starts.

siyin one hundred, used only before words of Spanish origin referring
to measurements or quantities. Siyin mil, One hundred thousand. Siyin
anyus, One hundred years. v see disiutsu.

síyuk_2 v {1} [A2S] sputter. Ígù rang nakasíyuk ang ribintadur ug walà
makabutu, The firecracker just sputtered and didn’t explode. {2} give a
continuous hissing or screeching sound. Ang hángin misíyuk sa mga
alambri, The wind hissed through the wires. {3} have the sensation of
being filled with a humming sound, ring. Misíyuk ang ákung dalunggan
human sa butu, My ears rang after the explosion. n {1} k.o. stone found
in chunks which crackles and sputters when put into a fire.
{2} hissing, sputtering sound. -in-(→) n = síyuk, n2.

siyun n a way of determining magically who stole s.t. v [A; a12]
practice this sort of magic. maN-r-(←) n shaman who can help find
things that have been stolen.

siyung n a nickname, often used in address to a hypothetical person in
an exclamation to indicate disbelief. Ámut siyung! Ipalit níya ug dulsi
sa iskuylahan unyà, My foot he wants the money for school. He wants to
buy candy, that’s all. Tuntúha siyung. Maáyu mag karun pa ku ánà, Don’t
you fool me, buddy roe. You think I haven’t heard that one before?

siyut_1 a lacking in good judgment or prudence. Siyut kaáyu ning
tawhána kay magswítir bísan ug galhà, That man hasn’t got a brain in
his head because he wears a sweater no matter how hot it is. v [B12]
be, become lacking in good sense.

siyut_2 = syút_2.

siyutsiyut = batiwtiw.

stábus short for sintábus.

sts. abbreviation for sintábus centavos.

sú_1 word used to drive chickens away.

sú_2 n zoo.

sū́ = súlù.

súag v [B46; b4] feel nauseated. Musúag ang ákung ginhawaan ug makabahù
kug kanal, I feel nauseated if I smell a ditch. Makasúag (makapasúag)
sa ákung ginhawaan ang tambuk sa bábuy, Pork fat nauseates me.

súb n substitute teacher.

súba = súbak.

subà n river. (←) n uterine hemorrhage. v {1} [b4] have a uterine
hemorrhage. Ang babáying gisubáan sa dugù namatay, The woman who had a
uterine hemorrhage died. {2} [A2] go upstream or to the hinterland.
Kadaghánan sa mga táwung nagpuyus ubus misúbà sa panahun sa gúbat, Most
of the people living along the coast went to the mountains during the
war. Walà makasúbà ang mga uwang sa pagkagámay sa túbig, As the water
receded the shrimps could no longer proceed upriver. suban-un
n {1} person living near the river. {2} the Subano, a non-Christian
tribe of Western Mindanao. a having dirty habits, like the Subano’s.

subad v [A; a12] {1} devour a prey and swallow it. Subarun ka sa
dagkung isdà ug mahúlug ka sa dágat, The big fish will devour you if
you fall in the sea. {2} eat (said humorously of oneself or
contemptuously of others). Maáyu ka lang musubad ug pagkáun apan
tapulan ka, You’re good at eating, but when it comes to work you’re no
good. Musubad kug bisan unsa, I’ll eat anything. {3} [A23; a12] be
gullible enough to swallow s.t. Musubad dáyun nà siyag hambúgan, She
believes any tall story told to her. — nga way paun = kubit nga way
paun. see kubit. n fish caught by hook and line. (←) n the period when
fish bite. Súbad run sa núkus, This is the time the squids are biting.
subadsúbad v [A3; b6] for fish to start to bite. Misubadsúbad na ang
isdà run, The fish are starting to bite now. paN- v [A2] {1} for fish
to be biting. Dì pa manubad ang isdà kay dì patay ang búlan, The fish
are not biting yet because the moon is still out bright. {2} prey on,
upon. Unsa may manubad sa pisù, sawa u iring? What was preying on the
chicks? A snake or a cat? maN-r- n wild animal that preys for its food.
see also manbad.

súbak v [A; c] give a flavor to vegetables by adding fish or meat.
Maáyung isúbak ang bulad sa munggus, Mung beans taste good if cooked
with a little dried fish. (→) n meat or fish used with vegetables for
flavor.

subang v {1} [A; b8] for heavenly bodies to rise. Pagsalup sa adlaw
misubang ang daktul, When the sun set, the full moon rose. {1a} [A] for
it to be the first quarter. Mutári sila sa ílang manuk inigsubang, They
will wait for the first quarter to fight their cocks. {2} [A] appear,
become known as s.o. distinguished. Iládu na siya sa nakasubang na siya
sa pamálak, He was well-known after he had distinguished himself in
poetry. {3} [A23] appear as if to rise. Usa ka pahiyum misubang sa
íyang dagway, A smile appeared in her face. n moon of the first
quarter. Primírung subang, First day after the new moon. -an n east.
subangsúbang = subang, n.

subasku n {1} squall. {2} a surge of emotion. Mu ra siyag malumus
adtung subasku sa kamíngaw, It seems as though he would drown in that
wave of loneliness. v [A; a2] squall. Nabalían mi ug pálu kay
hingsubaskuhan mi, We had a broken mast because we were caught in a
squall.

subasta v [A; c6] auction s.t. off. Isubasta ang mga rilu nga walà
malukat, They will auction off the watches that were not redeemed.
n auction.

súbaw n head cold. v [A12; b4] catch a cold. Gisip-un ku kay gisubáwan
ku, I have a runny nose because I have a cold.

súbay v {1} [A2S; a2] follow, go along a certain way. Musúbay ka sa
dálan ug likù sa tuu sa may mangga, Follow the path and turn right near
the mango tree. Ang karsáda musúbay sa baybay, The road goes along the
beach. Subáya ang alambri arun hibaw-an nímug háin ihukut, Follow the
wire up so you will know where it is tied. {2} [A2; a12] imitate s.o.
Maáyu siya nga musúbay sa sinultian sa maistru, He is good in mimicking
the way the teacher speaks. {3} [A; a12] go through the details of an
event to learn about it more clearly. Magsúbay ta unsay nahitabù adtung
gabhiúna, Let’s discuss what happened that night in detail. {3a} trace
a family tree. Subáya ang kagíkan sa kaslúnun kay tingálig paryinti,
Trace the engaged couple’s family tree, for they might turn out to be
related. {3b} go through accounts in detail. Subáyun ta ang nakúhà
gíkan sa Hulyu, Let us review how much you took, starting from July.
{4} [A12S3; a12] follow rules, customs, manners. Nagsubay ka ba sa
baláud? Are you observing the law? {4a} be in accordance with. Ug
subáyun ang baláud sad-an siya, Under the law, he is guilty.
n {1} along, following a path. Lakaw súbay sa karitíras, Go along the
feeder road. {2} in accordance with. Ang ákung gibúhat súbay man sa
baláud, What I did was in accordance with the law. hiN- v [A12S]
{1} relate in detail. Naghinúbay (naghinubay) si Pidru sa íyang mga
kaági, Pedro related his past experiences. {2} trace relationships.
pina- according to. Pinasúbay sa baláud dakù tà kag buhis, According to
the law, you should pay a big tax.

subdibáyid v [a12] subdivide an area of land into housing lots for
commercial purposes.

subdibisyun n housing development. v [A; a12] make, make into a housing
development.

*súbid paN-, subidsúbid n trolling with a swiftly paddled one- or
two-man boat. v [A2; b6(1)] fish by trolling. subiran n a small and
narrow outriggered boat used for trolling of this sort.

subída n upgrade. v [A] go uphill, on an upgrade. Ug musubída ang
karsáda, isigunda, When the road goes into an upgrade, shift into
second. Nangínit ang makina samtang nagsubída ang trák, The motor
overheated while the truck was negotiating the upgrade. subidahun
a {1} steep. {2} difficult, hard to solve. Subidahun kaáyu ning
sulirána, This problem is very difficult. v [B1256] be, become
difficult or steep.

subing_1 n individual stalks of rice not ripe during the harvest and
left to be gleaned. v [AN; b6] glean rice that was left to ripen.

subing_2 n a one-string musical instrument made of bagákay bamboo.
v {1} [A] play the subing. {2} [c1] make a subing.

subir v [A] increase in price or intensity. Misubir ang prisyu sa mais,
The price of corn went up. Misubir ang íyanq hilánat, His temperature
went up. subídu a for prices to be high or s.t. else to be high in
numerical quantity. Subídu ang íyang grádu, He got high grades.

subirbíya = subirbíyu (female).

subirbiyu, subirbíyu a difficult to discipline, insistent on doing as
one likes. v [B12] be, become recalcitrant. Masubirbiyu ang prísu ug
ímung lugaklugákan, A prisoner will become unmanageable if you show him
leniency. pubring — a financially hard-up, but insisting on one’s
wants. Pubring subirbiyu kaáyu nang tawhána. Gitagáan gánig trabáhu,
dílì kay gustung magmanidyǐr siya, That man is a beggar but he won’t
work except as manager.

subìsubì v [AN; b5] answer back when reprimanded. Hílum! Ayaw kug
subìsubia (subìsubii), Shut up! Don’t you talk back to me.

sublì v {1} [A; a12] do s.t. twice, again for the second time around.
Musublì ku ug káun kay gigútum pa ku, I will eat again because I am
still hungry. {1a} [a12] repeat, say s.t. again. Sublíun ku lag kas-a
ug památig maáyu, I will repeat once. Now listen carefully. {2} [A;
a12] go over s.t. for errors. Sublíun nákù nà ug makatulu arun walà
giyuy mga sayup, I will go over it three times so there will be no
mistakes. {3} [A13; b] reelect s.o. Sublían nátù si Anduy pagkamíyur,
Let us reelect Andoy for mayor. n repeated term in office. ka-an
n reelection aimed at.

submarínu n {1} submarine. {2} bedbug (humorous). Unsáun pagkatúlug nga
ayruplánu sa táas submarínu sa ubus, How can you sleep with lots of
airplanes (mosquitoes) above and submarines (bedbugs) underneath you?
v {1} [A12] travel by submarine. {2} [A13; a12] sabotage an activity.
Walà mulampus ang ákung paági kay ímu man nga gisubmarínu, My procedure
did not succeed because you sabotaged it.

submasinggan n submachine gun. v [A13; a12] shoot with a submachine
gun.

submit v [A; c] hand in or over. Kinsay nagsubmit áring blangku nga
papil? Who submitted this blank piece of paper? Walà pa ku makasubmit
sa ripurt, I have not yet handed in the report.

submitir = sumitir.

subpína n subpoena. v [A; b6] serve s.o. with a subpoena.

subra a in excess, too many, too much. Subra ra kaáyu ang túbig nga
ímung gibutang sa linat-an, You put much too much water in the stew.
Subra ra kaáyu ang ímung pag tabakù, You smoke much too much.
v {1} [B46] be excessive. {2} [A] be more than a certain amount. Ang
íyang swildu musubra ug gatus human ug báyad sa mga útang, His salary
will be a bit more than a hundred after he pays off his debts.
{2a} [A12] get a little extra. Sa ákung pangisdà makasubra ku ug
diyútay nga ibaligyà human kuhái sa pagkáun, I get a little extra from
my fishing after taking out what we use for food. {3} [A; b(1)] set
aside a bit for s.o. Subráhi (subrái) ku ug diyútay nga dulsi, ha?
Leave some candy for me, will you? {n} the remainder left over after
what is needed has been taken, the excess. Ang subra gibálik human ku
mukúhag tulu, I returned the remainder after I took three. Iúlì ang
subra kay kini ray ákung gikinahanglan, Return the extra ones because I
only need this one. — ibasta a done in excess. v [B; c1] be given, done
in excess. Dì na hinúun makamaung manikaysíkay ang táwu ug magsubra
ibasta ra ang átung tábang kaníya, A man won’t know how to shift for
himself if he is given more help than necessary. Bísag unsay buhátun
basta masubra ibasta makadáut, Anything done in excess is harmful. hiN-
v [A13; b6P] be excessive, too much. Naghinubra ang ímung pag-inum, You
are drinking too much. pa- v [A; b6] exaggerate a story. Wà ra tuy kásu
piru gipasubrahan ug sugílun, It was nothing serious but he exaggerated
when he recounted it. subraánay a excessive, beyond the bounds of good
taste. Subraánay pud nga nakapamulbus si Pilang, Pilang powders her
face excessively.

subri n envelope. v [A13; c1] place s.t. inside an envelope.

subrikáma n bedspread.†

subrikargu n purser on a vessel. v {1} [B156; a2] be, become a purser.
{2} [A1; c1] make s.o. a purser.

subsik. abbreviation for subsikritaryu undersecretary.

subsub a frequent. Kasubsub nímu nga mutan-aw ug sini! How often you go
to the show! v [A; a12] do s.t. often. Subsúbun nímu ug túbig ang
tanum, Water the plants frequently.

subu v {1} [B23(1)46; b8] for s.t. boiling to overflow. Ukbi ang
kardíru kay misubu ang inínit, Take the cover off of the pot because
water is overflowing. {2} [A; b] douse water onto live embers. Subhi
ang bága úsà ta manglákaw, Pour water on the embers before you leave.
{3} [A; b(1)] temper, harden iron or steel by heating it and then
immersing it in oil or water. {4} [A; b(1)] initiate a series of
activities or wear s.t. for the first time. Ang prisidinti mauy musubu
sa bayli, The president will start the dance. Siyay nakasubu ug sakay
sa ayruplánu, He rode the inaugural flight of the airplane. n temper of
metal. walay — inexperienced. Ayawg patugatuga ug pangulitáwung Maríya
kay wà kay subu, Don’t try to court Mary because you are inexperienced.

subù a sad. Subù ug nawung, Having a sad countenance. Subù nga
palandúngun, Sad to think about. v [A1; c5] be sad. Gikasubù ku ang
dílì kalikayan nga hitabù, I very much regret the unavoidable incident.
paha- [A; b6] extend one’s condolences. n condolences. ka- n sadness.
kasub-ánan n grief, sorrows. Kasub-ánan nga way katapúsan, Sorrows
without end. masulub-un a {1} characterized with grief, mournful. Usa
ka masulub-un nga bakhù, A mournful sob. {2} grieving. Ang masulub-ung
kapíkas, The grieving wife. v [A13] be, become sad. maka-r-(←)
a saddening. Makasusúbung hitabù, A saddening event.

súbuk n pith. subuksúbuk sa mais n {1} pith of cornstalks or pith-like
substance in the middle of a corncob. -un a mostly pith. Dílì lig-un
ning kahúya kay subúkun kaáyu, The piece of wood is not strong because
it is mostly pith.

subul n sprout from the ground, sprout of hair or feathers. v [A2; b6]
sprout. Makasubul na sab ang mga balíli ug uwanun, The grass will
sprout if it rains. Gisubulan nag balhíbu ang íyang íluk, Hair has
sprouted in his armpits.

*subung see sumban.

súbung_1 v [AC; c] light a cigar or cigarette from s.o. else’s
cigarette or cigar.

*súbung_2 -in- n gold alloyed with other metal. Sinúbung ning
singsínga, This ring is not pure gold. v [B126] be gold alloy.

suburnu n {1} bribe. Madúgay ang papílis ug way suburnu, The papers
will take forever if there is no bribe. {2} crime of bribery. Ang
suburnu nabúhat sa panahun sa prisidinti pa si Makapagal, The bribery
was done when Macapagal was president. v [A; c] give a bribe.

súbut v [B126] be pricked, get a splinter in one. Nasúbut siya pagpapha
níya sa íyang gisapilyáhan, He got a splinter in him when he rubbed his
hands over the board he was planing.

subwak v [B3(1)4; b6] {1} for water to burst out of a hole. Misubwak
ang túbig sa tuburan, The water gushed out of the source of the spring.
{2} for the contents to overflow a container. Misubwak ang mga pasahíru
sa trák, The bus is overflowing with passengers. Nagsubwak ang mga táwu
sa sinihan, The moviegoers spilled out of the movie house.

súd = sulud.

súda n {1} soda water. {2} soda crackers. v [b(1)] mix s.t. with soda.
— krákirs = súda, n2.

sud-an see sulà.

sud-ip v [B1246; b8] choke on s.t. that went into the respiratory
passage. Hingsud-ipan ka ug muinum ka ug dalìdalì, You will choke if
you drink too fast. -an n k.o. sweet potato with reddish peelings and
white meat, so called because the meat is moist and tends to stick in
the throat.

sudiyà v [AN2; b(1)] point out to a person that he was wrong or that he
failed to do s.t. Walà pa ku makasudiyà (makapanudiyà) níya báhin sa
íyang gisáad nákù, I have not reminded him about what he promised me.
Sudiyái ku ug mahustu ka kay sigúru ku nga sayup giyud tu, You may
point it out to me if it turns out you were right, because I am sure
that you are wrong. ma-un a characterized with a remonstrating
attitude. Mitan-aw siya nákù sa usa ka masudiyáun nga pagtan-aw, He
looked at me with a remonstrating look. paN- n the action of pointing
it out to a person that he was wrong. adlaw sa paN- Judgment Day.

sudiyang_1 n a cone-like, tapering structure used as an animal or fish
trap into the smaller end of which the animal enters with ease, but
which has tines, such that the animal cannot back out. v [A; b6] catch
or make into this sort of trap.

sudiyang_2 n large tree of the primary or secondary forest producing
hard, dark red lumber: Ctenolophon philippinense.

sudlay n {1} comb. {2} harrow, a raft-like device with toothed
undersides pulled by a water buffalo, used for raking off weeds and
breaking up the lumps of soil. v [A; a12] {1} comb s.o.’s hair.
{2} harrow. {3} [a12] look at s.t. from one point to the other with
deliberate care. Gisudlay níya pagtan-aw ang babáyi gíkan sa úlu ngadtu
sa tiil, She scrutinized the girl from head to foot. paN- v [A2] comb
one’s hair. Wà ka makapanudlay, You haven’t combed your hair!

sudlut v {1} [A; b2] spurt, squirt out. Misudlut ang dugù sa samad,
Blood spurted out of the wound. {2} [B46; b6] bulge or come partially
out of an opening. Nagsudlut na ang bátà sa pag-abut sa mananabang, The
infant’s head was already out when the midwife arrived.

sudsud_1 a close together. Sudsud kaáyu ang kamátis nga pagkatanum, The
tomatoes are planted very close together. v {1} [A13; c1] place, or
plant close together. Isudsud (sudsúrun) nímu ug butang ang mga silya,
Place the chairs close together.

sudsud_2 v {1} [A; a] dig up or turn up the earth by shoving with the
tip of an instrument or (by animals) with the snout. Sudsúra ning mga
balíli, Clear off this grass (with a pushing motion). Ang gisudsúran sa
bábuy nga yútà nangalúngag, The place where the pig had dug out the
earth with its snout is full of holes. {2} [AN; a] push sand lightly
with the feet in search of crabs. {3} [A; a] catch fish with a sudsud.
n {1} bladed instrument with a blunt end used to remove weeds by
shoving under the roots. {2} k.o. small one-man fishing net made of
coarse sinamay mounted on two poles, pushed through shallow water to
catch shrimps or small fish. paN- v [A2] go fishing with the sudsud.

sud-uk = sid-uk.

sud-ung v [A13; a] look at s.t. or s.o. with interest or intent.
Sud-úngun ku ang ímung ritrátu ug abutun ku ug kamíngaw, I will gaze at
your picture if I feel lonesome. pa- v {1} [A; ac] allow s.o. to see.
{2} [a12] live long enough to see the fruit of one’s labor,
foolishness. Gipasud-ung ang amahan nga nagsípit ug diplúma ang tanan
níyang mga anak úsà siya mamatay, The father lived long enough to see
all his children graduate before he died. {2} [A13] live only long
enough to be seen. Ígù lang nagpasud-ung tung batáa kay usa ra ka búwan
sa maháyag, That child lived only long enough to be seen because it
died a month after birth.

súduy = súruy.

suga v [A; a] repolish rice that still has some unhusked grains. Sugaha
ang bugas arun hanglas kan-un, Repolish the rice so that it is smooth
to eat.

sugà_1 n {1} lamp. alambri sa — electric wire. -ng dikumbáti barn
lantern. {2} electric lights. Way sugà karung gabíi, There will be no
electricity tonight. v {1} [A; b(1)] light lights. Sug-i ang altar kay
mangadyì na ta, Light the altar because we’re going to pray. {2} [A13;
b(1)] use s.t. for light. Nagsugà mi ug kandílà pagblak-áwut, We used
candles during the blackout. {2a} ika- ang íhì for a woman to be very
beautiful (lit. such that her urine could be used to light a lamp).
Ikasugà ba ang íhì sa naasáwa sa ímung anak? Is your son’s wife
beautiful? paN- v [A2; b6] go fishing using lamps. Manugà mi rung gabíi
sa hunásan, We will hunt shellfish in the tidal flats tonight with a
lamp. sugàsugà n {1} k.o. marine crab usually found inhabiting rocks
and shallow water, 3″ across and round with a thick shell. {2} name
given to dried lagaw.

sugà_2 v [A] for corn plants to develop or grow tassels. Malípay ku kun
magsugà na ang ámung mais, I am happy when our corn plants begin to
grow tassels.

sugabin v {1} [A; bc] add s.t. to the principal thing. Sugabini ug
kamúti ang kan-un, Supplement the rice with sweet potatoes. Isugabin sa
ímung sulat ang ákung pangumusta kaníla, Give them my regards in your
letter. {2} [A; a] have a sideline. Nakasugabin kug tudlù magabíi gíkan
sa upisína, I got a job part-time teaching at night after office hours.

sugábu v [B26; b6] dive or fall with a splashing or thudding sound.
Misugábu sa lunangan ang hubug, The drunk splashed into the mud puddle.

sugákud v {1} [A2] be up to doing s.t., keeping up with s.t. Dílì ku
musugákud ánang trabahúa, I am not up to that job. Dì ku makasugákud sa
instulmin, I cannot keep up with the installments. {2} [A12] bear,
endure. Dílì siya makasugákud sa katugnaw, He cannot bear the cold.

súgal n gambling. Ang súgal mauy nakapútu níya, Gambling made him
bankrupt. v {1} [AC; c] gamble. Ug isúgal nímu ang ímung kwarta, náa ra
nà nímu, If you want to gamble your money away, it’s up to you.
{2} [C3] click, be in position to come to an understanding with one
another (humorous). Ulitáwu ku ug dalága ka, magsúgal giyud run ta
niíni, I’m single and you are unmarried. We would make an ideal pair.
Dì ta niíni magkasúgal kay nagkalainláin ang átung mga iduluhíya, We
can’t have a meeting of minds because we hold to different ideologies.
(→) v {1} [A23; b6] go ahead with s.t. come what may. Musugal kag larga
bísag bagyu? Are you going to take the risk and sail even though
there’s a typhoon? {2} [A13; c6] risk, expose s.t. of value to loss.
Nagsugal ka sa ímung kinabúhì ánang trabahúa, You are risking your life
in that work. {3} [b6] pretend s.t. to serve as an excuse or to mollify
s.o. Gisugalan níya si Pápa ug hilakhílak arun dì siya hilatiguhan, She
treated Daddy to her crocodile tears to escape a spanking. Ayaw kug
sugali ánang baráhang dunut, Don’t give me those phoney excuses. -an
n gambling den. sugarul n gambler. v [B123] be, become a gambler.

sugála v [AN; b] bother or annoy by doing s.t. at a most inopportune
time. Musugā́ (manugā́) ug sakit ang ákung riyúma ug tingtugnaw, My
rheumatism bothers me terribly when the weather is cold. Ngánung
magsugā́ ka bag pangáyug kwarta ug wà tay kulirù? Why do you have to
annoy me by asking me for money at a time when I’m broke?

*sugamak hi-/ha- v [B1256; b8] {1} run into, collide. Ug didtu
mahisugamak ang awtu sa paril, And the car ran smack into the stone
wall. {2} run into s.t. to experience, meet. Ug dílì ka mag-amping
mahisugamak ka sa kasámuk, If you are not careful, you will run into
trouble. Patrulyang íyang hisugamakan, The patrol he ran into.

sug-ang n wood burner composed of three stones triangularly arranged or
a heavy metal ring or a clay burner onto which pots are set.
v {1} [A13; a12] put, make, make into such a burner. {2} [A1; c6] set
the dinner on the burner. Nagsug-ang ku ug paniudtu kay alas unsi na, I
am putting the dinner on the stove because it is eleven o’clock. -in-
v [C; a12] be placed in a triangular arrangement like the sug-ang.
Nag-atúbang silang tulu ug lingkud, nagsinug-ang, The three sat in a
circle facing each other. -an(→) = sug-ang, n.

sugapà v [A12; a3b4(1)] encounter s.t. by accident. Nakasugapà mig
bangkíti paglabay námù sa íla, When we went by their house we came upon
them having a banquet. Dílì ka untà masugapà sa kadaútan, I hope you
don’t meet danger.

sugarul see súgal.

súgat v {1} [AC; ac3] meet, approach from opposite directions. Dílì ka
musúgat samtang maglatay na ku sa tabla, Don’t come across in the
opposite direction while I am still walking along the plank. Nagkasúgat
kami sa Magalyánis, We happened to meet downtown. Sugáta siya sa
istasyunan, Meet him at the bus terminal. {2} [a1] welcome, greet
heartily. Sugátun nátù siya sa usa ka masipáung pakpak, Let’s welcome
him with a resounding applause. {3} [A23] meet the senses. Usa ka hínay
nga hagíyus misúgat sa íyang dalunggan, A low hissing sound met his
ears. n the Roman Catholic ritual on Easter dawn which represents the
meeting of Christ and the Blessed Virgin. Two groups start out from
different houses, one group of women, carrying the image of the Holy
Mother veiled on a cart, and the other, a group of men carrying an
image of Christ on a cart. The two groups meet where an arch has been
erected in which a child or several children dressed as angels
(alilúya) are suspended. Upon the meeting of the two groups the angels
are lowered and white pigeons are released, and one of the angels lifts
the veil of the Holy Mother. The decorations used in this ceremony are
gathered by the spectators for their magical properties. -in-an
n presents brought by a visitor.†

sugatà v {1} [A12; b4(1)] meet accidentally, run into. Ayaw ug súruy
magabíi kay makasugatà ka ug áway, Don’t go around at night because you
may just run into a fight. Nasugat-an nákù sila sa may taytáyan, I
happened to meet them near the bridge. {2} [a12] experience, be met
with difficulties or misfortune. Nasugatà siya sa usa ka pait nga
katalagman, He was met with bitter calamity.

sugba v [A; c] {1} broil over hot coals. Isugba na ba ring karni? Shall
I broil this meat now? {2} put or throw into the fire to burn. Akuy
musugba sa ímung duláan ug dì ka maghílum, I will throw your toys into
the fire if you aren’t quiet. aN-r- n moth. sugbaánan n {1} an open
fire where meat is broiled. {2} forge. -in- n broiled meat or fish.

Sugbu_1 n name of the island of Cebu. syudad sa — Cebu City. Sugbuánun
n Cebuano, from the island of Cebu. sinugbuanun n Cebuano. v [A] speak
Cebuano.

sugbu_2 v [A2; a3] dive or jump into water. Dì ku musugbu dihà sa
mabaw, I won’t dive where it’s too shallow. Nasugbu siya sa lunangan sa
kábaw, He fell into the puddle where the water buffalo wallowed. pa-
n k.o. fishing with a hand line for fishes that feed on the bottom,
composed of a line, sinker, and a hook with a long leader. The
equipment is lowered, and when the sinker touches the bottom, it is
raised so that the hook is a couple of inches off the bottom, and the
line is held until s.t. bites.

sugi n k.o. halfbeak with very fine scales.

súgid v {1} [AN2; c6] tell, relate. Kinahanglan nga musúgid ka sa
tinúud nga nahitabù, You must relate what really happened. {2} [AN; c]
confess one’s sin to a priest to obtain absolution. Human siya
makasúgid (makapanúgid) gimaymáyan siya sa párì, After he confessed his
sins, the priest gave him words of advice. {3} [c3] be heard of. Wà na
igsúgid ang nangalúnud sa barku, The passengers of the ship that sank
were never heard of again. Ikasúgid ka pa kahag nakauban ka pa sa
Byitnam? Do you think you would still be alive if you had been sent to
Vietnam? paN- [A2] = súgid, v1. walay paN- wiped out, annihilated (lit.
nobody was left to tell the story). Way nanúgid sa inasal nga gidá sa
piknik, The roast pig that was brought to the picnic was wiped out.
hiN- v [A12S; b(1)] tell stories at length. Naghinugid siya sa mga
primyu nga íyang nadaug, He related in great length the prizes he won.
sugilánun n short story. magsusugilanun short story writer. ig-r-
n confession. kasugíran n {1} history, a related series of past events.
{2} legend, s.t. handed down by tradition. see also sugílun.†

sugígi n large basket woven out of thin bamboo slatting, used for
storing large amounts of grain. v [A12; a12] make, make into a storage
basket.

sugilagming n very short story (coined from sugilánun and gagming).

sugilakbit n story in a summarized version of a longer story (from
súgid and lakbit).

sugilambung n novel.

sugilánun see súgid.

sugílun (from súgid) v [AN2; c] {1} tell, report. Hilatiguhan ta ug
musugílun (manugílun) kang Pápa nga nangáun ta ug mangga, We’ll both
get whipped if you tell Daddy that we ate mangoes. Gisuginlan ka na ba
sa balità? Have you been told the news? {2} enumeration of pertinent
facts. May mga sugílun nga midagsang diri nga minyù ka, The story is
going around that you are married. píla may — to make a long story
short. Píla may sugílun gipangasáwa níya ang babáyi, To make a long
story short, he married the woman. paN-(→) v [A2; c6] tell s.t. around.
Nanugilun si Tasyu nga uyab na kunu mu, Tasio is telling people that
you’re his girl now. hiN- = hinúgid. see súgid.

sugkay v [A; a] {1} stir a mixture that contains some solid. Sugkáya
ang linúgaw, Stir the porridge. {2} for the emotions to be stirred up.
Galamhan nga gisugkay sa túmang pagbásul, Thoughts that were disturbed
by extreme feelings of repentance.

suglib = sugnib.

sugmat v {1} [A2; b4] for a quiescent disease to recur, act up.
Misugmat na sab ang ákung riyúma, My rheumatism is acting up again.
{2} [A2] for criminality to recur or be on the rise. Misugmat na usab
ang kúut karun, Pickpocketing is on the rise again. n recurrence of an
ailment.

sugmaw v [A3PB26; c1] {1} for a body to plunge into liquid, as a fly in
coconut palm toddy, hot metal in water. Kinsay nagsugmaw sa ákung
sapátus sa túbig? Who threw my shoes into the water? Misugmaw ang
lángaw sa tubà, The fly plunged into the coconut palm toddy. {2} plunge
into s.t. unpleasant. Nasugmaw siya sa mga útang, She plunged herself
into debt.

sugmuy a dejected, with a slumping body. Sugmuy kaáyung kandidátung
napildi, The candidate who lost was quite dejected. v [B126] {1} become
crestfallen. Nasugmuy ang ulitáwu kay gibastid, The young man was
dejected because he broke up with his girl. {2} be assuaged. Nasugmuy
ang ákung kabaláka dihang nakítà ku siya, My worry was relieved when I
saw him.

sugnib v {1} [A; b(1)] set s.t. on fire or touch a flaming brand to it.
Ákù na ba ring sugníban ang sagbut? Shall I set fire to the trash?
{2} [A3P; b(1)] incite s.o. into action, enthuse s.o. for s.t. Usa ka
suliran nakasugnib nákù sa pagsulat kanímu ning pila ka púlung, A great
problem goaded me to write you these few lines. Gisugníban níya ang mga
istudiyanti pagdimunstrít, He goaded the students into demonstrating.

sugnud n {1} wood for fuel. {2} fuel for propulsion. v {1} [A; b] use
s.t. as firewood or fuel. Dílì mi makasugnud ug bunut kay kusug muasu,
We cannot use coconut husks as fuel because they give off too much
smoke. {1a} use fuel in an engine. {2} [A1; b(1)] add fuel to s.t. to
increase the problem. Ang ímung sulti nagsugnud sa ílang áway, Your
statement added fuel to their quarrel.

sugpà n vomitting or spitting of blood. Sugpà ang namatyan sa gikuláta,
The mauling victim died of internal hemorrhage. v [B1463; b3(1)] vomit
or spit blood. Nagsugpà si Tiryu, ang tibíhun, Terio, the TB patient,
is spitting blood.

sugpù v [AB12; a1] put an end, cut short s.t. that is flourishing. Akuy
musugpù sa íyang dautang batásan, I will put an end to her ugly habits.
Masugpù ang túbù sa bátà ug pukáwun ug sayu, A child’s growth gets
stunted if he is made to get up early.

sugpung v [A; a] tie two ends together, add a span or length to s.t.
Aku ray musugpung sa hayhayan nga nabugtù, I’ll tie the clothesline
that snapped back together. Ákung sugpúngan ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà
nga mubù, I’ll add a piece of cloth to the bottom of my skirt because
it is too short. n knot formed in a joint. ka- ug tinái n one’s
sibling. Kining batáa kasugpung ku ug tinái, This child is my brother.
ka- ug kasingkásing n one’s lover. -in-an n s.t. made at the end of
things to join them to s.t. else.

sugput (from suput) v [B26; b8] squirt or pop out. Misugput ag kitsup
dihang gipikpik nákù ang samput sa butilya, The catsup squirted out
when I tapped the bottom of the bottle. Nasugput ang sungsung sa
syampín, The cork popped out of the champagne.

sugpuy_1 v {1} [A; a1] calm s.t. down. Mga púlung nga makasugpuy sa
kaínit sa úlu, Words that can calm one’s anger. Masugpuy ang hilánat ug
butangag yílu ang úlu, It will lower his fever if you put ice on his
head. {2} [B126] stunt the growth. Kakúlang sa sustansiya ang
nakasugpuy (nakapasugpuy) sa tinubuan sa bátà, Undernourishment stunted
the child’s growth.

sugpuy_2 n feverish feeling in which the temperature of the upper part
of the body is warm and the lower part is cold, esp. of children during
teething. v [A123P; a4] have such an affliction.

sugpuy_3 = sugmuy.

sugsug = salugsug.

sugsúg = sulugsúlug.

súgù v {1} [A; a1c] tell s.o. to do s.t. Sugúun ta ka ug pagpalit ug
gasulína, I will send you to buy gasoline. Unsa may isúgù nímu nákù?
What do you want me to do? Aku si Husi dila Krus ug dúnay isúgù, I am
José de la Cruz at your service. -a ku ninyu forgive me for leaving the
table while you are eating (lit. tell me to go fetch s.t. so I may
leave the table). {2} [a12] in pool, hit a target ball in such a manner
that it knocks another ball towards the pocket. Sugúa nang nuybi arung
masúd ang kinsi, Knock the number nine ball towards the number fifteen
ball to knock it into the pocket (lit. order the number nine ball to
make the fifteen go in). {3} [A; a12] use a water buffalo for plowing.
Dì pa masúgù ang turíti, You can’t use a young water buffalo for
plowing. n {1} things one was told to do. Gitúman ba nímu ang ákung mga
súgù? Have you done the things I told you to do? — sa Diyus napúlù the
Ten Commandments. {2} specific duties in an organization, group
activity. Unsa may íyang súgù ánang kapunungána? What are his duties in
that organization? {3} in phrases: — sa láwas things one has to do out
of biological necessity and cannot avoid: urinate, sleep, and the like.
— sa panahun exigency resulting from a state of weather. — sa pálad
decree of fate. — sa papil according to the script. — sa pagbátì needs
arising from some emotion. pa- v [A13; b6] send s.o. s.w. to convey a
message. Pasugúan ta ka ug magsúgud na ang dúlà, I will send s.o. over
to notify you when the game starts. balin-an(→) a fond of giving
orders, not liking to do things oneself. Balinsuguan bayhána dì mulíhuk
sa íyang kaugalíngun, She is fond of giving orders to other people. She
does not do things for herself. v [B12] be fond of giving orders. -in-
n one sent on an errand. ka-an n orders, set of regulations. -l-un(→),
-l-un household help, servant. pa-l-un, pa-l-un(→) v [A13] hire oneself
out as a servant.

*sug-u pa- v [A; b6] {1} do s.t. with dark looks in order to hurt or
put to shame s.o. who ought to do it or at least help do it. Nagpasug-u
ang agálun pagpanglaba, The mistress is doing the laundry to put her
servant to shame. {2} do s.t. bad for oneself in order to spite s.o.
and make him feel he was the one that led the agent into doing it.
Nagpasug-u siyag inum-ínum sukad nímu bulagi, He started drinking for
spite since you left him. pahiN- = sug-u, v2.

sugub_1 v [B3(1)6; b6] sprout from the earth or skin. Misugub
(nagsugub) na ang ákung pugas mais, The corn I sowed has sprouted.
Gisuguban na ang íluk nga íyang giibtan sa balhíbu, Hair has sprouted
in her armpit where she had pulled it out. n new growths of hair,
feathers, or sprouts from the earth.

sugub_2 = sugud.

sugud n sting of an insect. v [A; b5] for poisonous insects to bite
leaving a stinger in the thing bitten. Tánga ang misugud sa ákung
bábuy, A scorpion bit my pig.

súgud v [A; b5] start, begin s.t.; begin doing s.t. Nagsúgud ug
kapakpak ang pintal, The paint is starting to flake off. Sugdun
(sugdan) nátù ug limpiyu dinhi, Let us start cleaning here. n start,
beginning. Ang hagwà mauy súgud (sinugdánan) sa áway, Horseplay is the
beginning of a quarrel. Súgud ugmà wà nay byáhi sa Buhul, Starting
tomorrow there will be no more trips to Bohol. sugudsúgud v {1} [A13;
b6] start s.t. with no intention of finishing it. Nagsugudsúgud ka man
ug túkud ug balay nga walà ka may kwartang ikagastu, You are starting
to construct a house when you don’t have money to finish it. {2} [b6]
begin s.t. with a slow start. sinugdan, sinugdánan n {1} start,
beginning. {2} beginning from which s.t. results.

súguk v {1} [A; c1P] for liquid to rush and gather s.w. Ang túbig sa
mga sapà musúguk ngadtu sa dágat, The water from the streams rushes
into the sea. Gipasúguk (gisúguk) níla sa lungug ang túbig, They let
the water rush into the hole and gather there. {2} [A2; b4] for blood
to rush to the heart or head. Ang mamatay sa alta prisiyun ingnun nga
gisugúkan sa dugù sa ū́, If a man dies of high blood pressure, it is
said that he suffered from a rush of blood into the head. {3} [A2; ac]
go, bring through a dense growth of vegetation. Dì ta makasúguk niánang
kalibunan, We can not pass through that underbrush. n — sa dugù rush of
blood.

sugung_1 n a liquid container fashioned out of a section of a bamboo
stem, the node of which serves as the bottom. v {1} [A; a12] make, make
into this sort of container. {2} [A; b] get a cutting for propagation
and put it in a bamboo section with rooting medium. -in- {1} cuttings
propagated in this way, ready for planting. {2} style of cutting
trousers with narrow legs.

sugung_2 v [B246] become more, grow worse. Misugung siyag kasukù
pagsugsúg námù, He got angrier when we teased him. Kakúlang sa káun ang
nakasugung (nakapasugung) sa íyang sakit, Lack of food made his illness
worse.

sugut v {1} [A2; a12] agree to do s.t., acquiesce. Musugut siya ug akuy
mupakúhà níya sa libru, He will agree to do it if I will send him to
get the book. Ug sugtun nímu nang matánga sa pagbáhin, maalkansi ka, If
you accept that division, you will be at a disadvantage. {1a} [A23]
agree to let s.o. do s.t. Musugut ba si Máma mu nga mutan-aw ka ug
sini? Will your mother agree to let you go to the show? {2} [A2; a12]
accept as one’s fiancee. Dì siya musugut ni Pidru kay sugarul, She will
not say yes to Pedro because he is a gambler. a willing to accept or
comply. Sugut kag dì ka bahínan? Are you willing not to take a share?
masinugtánun a amenable to requests.

súgut n edges all around s.t. Gitamnan ug lubi ang súgut sa uma, The
farm had coconut trees planted all around the borders.

sugwak v {1} [A; b6] gush out in large quantities. Misugwak ang asu
pag-abli níya sa pultahan, Smoke gushed out when he opened the door.
Nagyánang ang dálan human sugwáki sa túbig, The path is flooded after
the water gushed out on it. {2} [A] spread beyond bounds, spill over.
Sa amatiyur misugwak ang mga táwu didtu sa karsáda, The audience of the
singing contest spilled over into the streets. {3} [A13] for emotions
to appear with suddenness and intensity. Nagsugwak ang íyang kalípay,
He was overflowing with happiness.

sugyut v [A; c] {1} mention s.t. in a casual manner. Musugyut lang kung
Pidru báhin sa ímung tanyag, I will just mention your offer to Pedro
casually. {2} suggest, put an idea into the mind. Gisugyútan ku siya sa
paglún sa bangku, I suggested that he get a loan at the bank.
n {1} thing mentioned casually. {2} suggestion.

súhà v {1} [C; c1] for objects having length to be in disarray, with
the ends pointing in different directions. Nagsúhà ang mga bátà nga
nangatúlug sa katri, The children were asleep on the bed with their
heads in all different directions. {2} [A2D; ac] go against, disagree.
Makasúhà ka ba sa gustu sa ímung ginikánan? Could you go against your
parents’ wishes?

suhì a {1} contrary, opposite. Suhì sa ímung pagtúu siya hinúuy
mitábang kanákù, He helped me, contrary to what you think. {2} for
babies to be born feet first. Suhì nga pagkatáwu ang bátà, The baby was
born feet first. v [A1C; c1] put s.t. the wrong way around. Kinsay
nagsuhì áning bangkù? Who put the bench the wrong way around? Nagsúhì
ang ímung sapátus, You have your shoes on backwards.

suhid n oil extracted on Good Friday from a coconut growing as the only
fruit on a tree. It is said to possess magical powers for curing
various kinds of skin diseases. v [c1] treat with suhid. Suhira
(isuhid) nang bun-íha, dì ba muhúnung nag lakaw, Try treating that
ringworm with suhid. See if it doesn’t stop spreading.

súhid v {1} [A; a12] copy, mimic. Suhíra ang mápa sa libru, Copy the
map in the book. Sayun ra ning baylíha ug suhírun lang nímu ang ákung
lákang, This dance is easy if you follow my steps. {2} [A1; a12] watch
s.t. intensely while it recedes out of view. Suhíra giyud siya arun
hibaw-an nátù háin baláya siya misulud, Watch him carefully so we will
know what house he went into. {3} [A3; a12] retrace a course one has
just passed. Nagsúhid ku sa ákung giagian kay nahúlug ang ákung pitáka,
I am going back the way I came because I dropped my wallet. {4} [A;
a12] scan, search thoroughly. Pulis ang nagsúhid sa ílang kalawásan,
The police searched their bodies thoroughly. Ílang suhírun ang mga
lasang sa Mindanaw, They will explore the forests of Mindanao. suhiran
a given to copying or imitating.

suhildu = swildu.

suhítu_1 = swítu.

suhítu_2 n unmarried member in a group of brothers and sisters. Tulu
nay naminyù. Usa na lay suhítu, Three are married now. Only one is left
unmarried.

súhul v [A; c] hire for wages, pay a certain wage. Musúhul ku nímu ug
písus matag adlaw, I will pay you a peso a day. Nagsúhul ku ug panday,
I hired a carpenter. n wages. Pílay ímung súhul adtung trabahúa, How
much were you paid for that work. -in-an n workers paid on a wage
basis. pa-(→) v [A] work on a hired basis. Kay wà ka may grádu ígù ka
lang magpasuhul, Because you don’t have an education, all you can do is
unskilled labor.

suhung, súhung v [B12; b6] for charms and magical powers to become
ineffective. Napildi ku kay nasuhung (nasúhung) ang ákung bangil, I
lost because my amulet has become ineffective.

suhup v {1} [APB; a12] for liquids to penetrate or percolate into s.t.,
cause them to do so. Mawálà ang lim-aw ug musuhup (masuhup) na ang
túbig sa yútà, The pool will disappear when the water seeps into the
ground. Tintà nga suphun dáyun sa barut nga papil, Ink that is readily
absorbed by cheap paper. {2} [A2; a12] for feelings to get into one’s
being. Dakung kalúuy nga misuhup sa ákung dughan, Great pity that
permeated my heart (lit. permeated into my heart). suhupsuhup v [A3N;
b(1)] permeate throughout. Ang íyang dugù misuhupsuhup (nanuhupsuhup)
sa íyang áping, The blood in her vessels penetrated through to the skin
so that you could see them in her cheeks. Ang lála sa uhípan
nakasuhupsuhup na sa ákung láwas, The poison of the centipede has
penetrated through my body.

suhut v [A; a] clean an area by cutting down trees and weeds. Suhutun
ku ning mga tanum nga nakaáwung sa gardin, I’ll clear off the plants
that are shading the garden. -anan(←) n place to be cleared.

súhut v {1} [A; a12] go into or pass through a place, esp. with tall
trees or grasses. Pagbantay sa limátuk ug musúhut mu sa lasang, Watch
out for leeches when you go through the forest. {2} [A2; b6] enter a
trap under water. Gisuhútan ang búbù ug pawíkan, The fish trap caught a
sea turtle. n catch from a fish trap. kusug, walay — (ang báling)
having a brisk (slow) business (lit. having lots of [no] catch in the
net). Nagmíngaw ílang tindáhan. Way súhut ang báling, Their store is
deserted. Business is slow. Kusug kaáyu ang súhut. Nagkapulíkì siyag
atindir sa íyang kustumir, Business is good. She is very busy attending
her customers. (→) bágun n {1} s.o. whose origin is not known.
{2} vagabond, one who just roams about and does nothing. v [B1] be,
become an idle wanderer. Nagsuhut bágun nang tawhána kay tapulan man
mangítag trabáhu, That man became a vagabond because he’s too lazy to
look for work. suhutsúhut v [A2N; b(1)] for odors to diffuse, be
present in a diffuse way. Alimyun sa búlak nga musuhutsúhut
(manuhutsúhut) sa huyúhuy, The fragrance of flowers diffused by the
breeze. Karning may tambuk nga nanuhutsúhut sa unud, Meat with fat
running throughout it. paN- n muscular ache resulting from exposure to
damp or draft, esp. during sleep. v [A23P; b5] get muscle ache. Lagmit
makapanúhut ang pagkatúlug nga dílì maghábul, Sleeping without a
blanket can cause muscle ache.

suik a diagonal, oblique thrust. v [A; a12] execute a stroke or throw
from an angle. Suikun nákù pagbundul arun maigù ang búnga, I will poke
at the fruit from an angle so it will fall.

súka v {1} [A2S; c] vomit. Gisúka sa pasyinti ang tambal, The patient
vomited out his medicine. {2} [A2] squeal, divulge a secret. Misúka na
ang mangunguut ug nahibalu ta ug kinsay íyang kaúban, The pickpocket
squealed and we know who his companions were. n vomit, the contents
expelled from the stomach. — kalíbang n intestinal disorder of vomiting
combined with diarrhea. v [A13P] be affected with this disorder.
kasukaun a feel like vomiting.

súkà n vinegar. v [A12B12; a12] become, make into vinegar. Nagkasúkà na
ang tubà, The palm toddy is becoming vinegar. (→) [A; b6] season s.t.
with vinegar. ka- v [A13] get vinegar all over it.

sukad — sa [dat.] {1} from s.w. Sukad sa íla nganhi may mga dusintus
mitrus, It’s about two hundred meters from their house to here.
{2} since, from [dat.] on forward. Sukad karun dì na giyud ku
makigsulti nímu, From now on I will never speak to you again. Sukad
niadtu, From that time on. Sukad pa sa alas utsu kung hinulat nímu, I
have been waiting for you since eight o’clock. — mabakì since birth
(humorous). — masukad {1} in negative statements: never ever. Wà pa
giyud ku makakità ug babáyi ingun kagwápa sukad masukad, I have never,
in all my born days, seen a woman so beautiful. {2} since, far back
beyond the reach of memory. Dinhi na ang ílang katigulángan sukad
masukad, Their ancestors have been here since the beginning of time.
v {1} [A13N; b6N] start, originate from. Tan-áwa ug unsang kuniksiyúna
ang gisukaran (gipanukaran) áning alambríha, See where this wire
originates. {2} [AN; b6] rest on, be based on a certain support. Dílì
untà muun-un ang balay ug didtu pa makasukad (makapanukad) sa batu nga
tiúnay, The house would not have sagged had it rested on bedrock.
{2a} [A13N; cN] base, found. Tubag nga gisukad (gipanukad) sa usa ka
katarúngan nga dílì malális, An answer based on an indisputable reason.
paN- v {1} [A2; b6] start movement from a certain point. Ang prusisiyun
adtu manukad sa kapilya, The procession will begin at the chapel.
{2} have a foothold on s.t. Dílì ka makadusù kay balas ang ímung
gipanukaran, You can’t push because you are standing on sand. {2a} [A2]
get a good foothold, steady oneself. Nanukad siya úsà muluksu, He
steadied himself before he leapt. n {1} poise, standing posture. Ang
trátu ni Iyay may panukad labi na kay taas ug gwápu, Eyay’s boy friend
has poise, esp. because he is tall and handsome. Maáyu ug panukad ning
manúka háyan maáyung muáway, The cock has a good posture. Most likely
it fights well. {2} way of placing one’s feet while standing, action of
gaining a foothold. sukaránan, panukaránan n {1} base, s.t. which
supports or sustains s.t. immaterial. Ang ímung pangatarúngan walay
sukaránan (panukaránan) sa baláud, Your reasoning has no basis in law.
{2} runway for airplanes.

súkad v {1} [A; a2] take food out of a container or pot and set it on
the table. Nagsúkad na si Máma sa pamáhaw, Mother is putting the
breakfast on the table now. {2} [b6] proffer. Gisukáran siya nákù sa
usa ka madaníhung pahiyum, I gave her a very engaging smile. sukaran,
sukaránan n round platter to hold rice and corn. — nga bastus =
sukaran.

sukalsukal v [B1456] be overflowing in fulness. Nagsukalsukal sa kapunù
ang húngut sa tubà, The toddy glass is overflowing with toddy.

sukalu n {1} cement foundation under a house. {2} low cement fence
surrounding a yard, made to prevent the water from getting inside.
v [A; b6(1)] make a cement foundation or low walling around a house.

sukam-ag v [B1236; b8] walk or fall forward onto. Nasukam-ag ku níya
kay napandul ag ákung tiil sa batu, I fell forward onto him because my
foot tripped on a stone. Mau ning siyáha ákung nasukam-ágan sa ngitngit
gabíi, This is the chair I bumped into last night in the dark.

sukámang (from kámang) v [B126; b6] fall forward sprawled on the
stomach. Nasukámang siya sa kusug nga sumbag, He fell forward under the
impact of the blow he received.

sukámud v [B12] fall forward on the ground. Nasukámud ku kay nakatunub
ku ug pálut sa ságing, I fell down on my nose because I stepped on a
banana peel.

sukárap v {1} [B1216] stagger and then fall. Didtu siya masukárap sa
suuk dihang nabunalan ang íyang úlu sa ulísi, He was pummeled by a cane
and he staggered and fell into the corner. {2} [B12S6] grope around.
Nagsukarap ku nga nagsaka sa hagdan sa ngitngit, I groped my way up the
stairs in the dark. {2a} [B12S6; b8] bump into s.t. in the dark. Silyay
ákung hisukarapan sa ngitngit, I bumped into a chair in the dark.

súkat v [AN; b] confront s.o. to make him prove or disprove s.t. which
he previously said. Mu ra tag mabastus ug musúkat (manúkat) tag tabì,
It makes you cheap when you confront a gossipmonger to prove or
disprove his allegations.

sukbut v [A; c1] join by letting the edges touch each other. Nagsukbut
kug upat ka síya nga katulgan, I put four chairs together to sleep on.

sukdip v [B6; c1] for the eyes to roll upward so that only the white
can be seen. Misukdip ang mata sa bátang gihilantan, The eyes of the
child with high fever were turned upward into his head.

súki v {1} [A; b6] for horses to prance and refuse to pull or be
ridden. {2} [A2; b(1)] defy a command or authority. Misúki ang mga
kadíti kay istriktu ra kaáyu ang sarhintu, The cadets rebelled because
the commandant was too strict. Misúki na giyud kining ákung láwas sa
tambal, My body seems to be rebelling against the medicine. masukíhun
a of a disobedient, rebellious sort. sukihan a {1} given to prancing
and refusing to pull. {2} rebellious in behavior. {3} for hair to be
unmanageable. v [B1256] be, become given to rebelliousness.

súkì n steady customer or seller. short form in address: kì. Ákung
súking butíka, The drug store I always buy at. v [A2C; a2] be in the
súkì relation, i.e. that of a seller and buyer. Magsúkì na ta. Dì ku
mupalit sa láin, From now on I’ll be a steady customer of yours and I
won’t buy from anyone else.

súkib a lower in elevation than the surroundings. Anhi magtígum ang
túbig kay súkib kaáyu ning lugára, Water collects here because this
place is very depressed. v [B1; a12] be, become depressed.

sukip v {1} [A; c] include s.t. together with s.t. sent. Isukip ring
dukumintu sa ímung aplikisyun, Enclose this document with your
application. {1a} [A13] for a legal document to include a special
clause. Ang kuntrátu nagsukip sa mátang sa pagbáyad, The contract
stipulates the manner of payment. {2} put closely in between two things
or inside s.t. Sukipi nang bulsa ug sápì, dì ba mulusut ang papílis,
Put a little money in his pocket and see if the papers don’t get
processed immediately.

sukit v [A; a1] ask a question that requires a specific answer. Sukita
siya kun háin ang kwarta, Ask him where the money is. sukitsukit v [A;
a12] interrogate, pester with questions. Sukitsukitun nátù siya básin
ug mutug-an sa kadugáyan, Let’s keep pestering him with questions in
hopes that in the end he talks. hiN- a inquisitive. Hinukit ning batáa
mu ra ug sayun tubagun ang íyang mga pangutána, This child is very
inquisitive as though his questions were easy to answer.

suklat v [b4(1)] be struck accidentally with the end of a stick or
finger. Nasuklatan ang ákung tuu nga mata sa íyang tudlù, He
accidentally poked his finger in my eye.

suklay = sudlay, n, v1, 2, paN-.

suklì n change given after paying for a purchase with a larger bill.
v {1} [A; c] give s.o. his change. {2} [A2; b6] answer back, give back
talk. Musuklì ka man ug kasab-an, You talk back when you are scolded.
{3} [A23; c] do s.t. in return. Gisuklían kug kidhat ang íyang pahiyum,
I winked at her when she smiled at me. -in-ay v [C] do back and forth
to each other. n action of doing back and forth. Sinuklíay sa
binutubutu sa mga pusil, The exchange of gunfire.

sukmag v [A; a12b2] box with the fist. Hingsukmagan ang íyang apapángig
ug nawad-an siya sa panimúut, He was hit in the jaw and lost
consciousness. n blow with the fist. -ay(→), -in-ay(→) n fistfight.
v [C] have a fistfight.

sukmat v [AN; b5] {1} confront s.o. asking him about s.t. Sukmátan
(sukmátun) ku siyag tinúud ba, I’ll confront him and ask him if it is
true or not. {1a} ask s.o. whether or not he intends to do s.t.
Nagpanukmat siyag muadtu ba giyud ku, He kept asking me if I would
really go. Ug sukmátun kag sumbagay, ayaw ug súkul, If s.o. challenges
you to a fight, don’t take him on. n act of confronting s.o. with a
question or challenging s.o.

sukmil = sikmul, n, v2.

suknà v [A; a2] press a person for an answer on whether or not he
intends to do s.t. Ayaw kug suknáa. Ingnun ta ra kag mupalit ku, Don’t
press me. I’ll tell you if I intend to buy one. n question ascertaining
the permissibility or feasibility of s.t.

suknib v {1} [A; b6(1)] set s.t. on fire. Akuy misuknib sa mga sagbut
sa baul, I set fire to the pile of grasses in the field. {2} [A; b]
incite s.o. to do s.t. bad. Ikaw bay nagsuknib sa íyang kalágut? Did
you incite him to anger?

suksuk v [AB; c] go or put s.t. into or in between s.t. else. Misuksuk
ang bátà sa bilahan sa íyang inahan, The child snuggled between her
mother’s legs. Kinsay nagsuksuk sa kálù luyu sa pyánu? Who stuck the
hat behind the piano?

sukù a angry, mad but not such that one is impelled to take action.
Labihang sukúa níya pagkadungug sa balità, He got real mad when he
heard the news. v [B12; ab3(1)c5] be, get angry. Masukù ku ug mamakak
ka, I will get angry if you tell a lie. Gikasuk-an ku ni Pápa kay
nawálà ang libru, Daddy got mad at me because I lost the book.
masuk-ánun a full of anger. v [A13] be angry. ka- n anger. Dílì
magdúgay ang íyang kasukù, His anger won’t last.

súkub v [C12] for s.o. who ought to receive less to try to get an equal
share. Ang anak sa gawas nakigsúkub sa mga tinúud anak báhin sa
irinsiya, The illegitimate child wanted to have a share of the
inheritance equal to that of the legitimate children.

sukud v {1} [A; a2] take measurements. Nagsukud kug pila ka dupa ring
písì, I am measuring how long this piece of rope is. Gisukdan akug
karsúnis, I had the measurements taken for my pants. {2} [A13C; a12]
test ability against each other. Nagsukud lang tu siya sa ímung
pasyinsiya, He was just trying you to see how patient you were.
Magsúkud ta ug kinsa giyuy ísug nátù, Let’s have it out which of us is
the bravest. Sukdun nákù ang ímung ginháwa ug muagwanta ka ba, I will
test your mettle to see if you can take it. {3} [A12SN; b6] distribute
land grants. Nanukud ang gubyirnu ug yútà álang sa mga bitiránu, The
government is distributing parcels of land to the veterans. {3a} [A12]
receive a land grant. {4} [C3; b6] be of the same size of fit. Nagsúkud
ang ámung sapátus, Our shoes are of the same size. n {1} the
measurements of s.t. Unsay sukud sa ímung sapátus? What size of shoes
do you wear? {2} extent to which s.t. is done (literary). Way sukud sa
báwus, Revenge that knows no limit. {3} land grant distributed by the
government. sukdanan n {1} thing on the basis of which other things are
measured: stick, cup, and the like. Ang kaangáyan mau untay sukdanan sa
átung panglíhuk, We should use fairness as the yardstick for our
actions. {2} = sukud, n2. mag-r-(←), maN-r-(←) sa yútà n land surveyor.
paN- n meter of verse. Ang íyang mga bálak kanúnay nga naghambin sa
panukud, His verses are always with meter. -in- a measured, slow and
deliberate. Sa sinukud nga lákang, With measured steps. hiN-, kahiN-
v [A13] for s.t. to be properly done. Dílì magkahinúkud ang ákung káun
ug náay maghilak, I can’t eat properly if there is s.o. crying.

sukul n young mushroom that has not opened yet. v [A2; b6] {1} gather
young mushrooms. {1a} add or mix young mushrooms to s.t. {2} [AN] have
body growths protruding on the skin. Nanukul na ang íyang dughan, Her
breast has developed now. Gisuklan ang íyang nawung sa dagkung bugas,
She has big pimples on her face. Way limpiyu ang nakasukul
(nakapasukul) nímu, Your unsanitary habits caused you to have pustules.

súkul v {1} [A2; b] fight back against, stand up. Sa sumbagay musúkul
siya kang bisan kinsa, He will stand up to anyone who challenges him to
a fight. Pagsúkul sa ginikánan kanang pagtubagtubag, You are rebelling
against your parents when you talk back. {1a} [A23] react, snap back
into place as if offering resistance. Bísan ug unsáun ug dukduk
musúkul, No matter how much I pound it, it snaps back into place.
{1b} play against or engage in any activity where people are pitted
against each other. Suklan ta kag tínis bisan anus-a, I’ll take you up
on tennis any time. {1c} tackle s.t. to be accomplished. Way misúkul sa
tambuk, No one had the stomach to take the pork fat. {2} resist,
endure. Musúkul sa ínit sa adlaw ning pintála, This paint resists the
heat of the sun. {2a} endure and do the same in return. Ayaw siya ug
kumidiyáhi kay dì siya musúkul ug kumidiya, Don’t rib him because he
can’t take jokes. {3} — sa kábu [A2] be rebellious. Húnit ang
prumusiyun sa magtutudlung musúkul sa kábu, It takes a long time for a
rebellious teacher to get promoted. — dágan n guerrilla warfare. Súkul
dágan ang gigámit nga inawayan sa mga sundálung Pilipinhun bátuk sa
Hapun, The Filipino soldiers used guerrilla warfare against the
Japanese. v [A2] employ guerrilla warfare. paN- v [A23] for gamecocks
to be in a state ready to contend in a cockfight. Bísan ug tulu pa ka
búlan nga sunúya manúkul na, This rooster is only three months old, but
he is ready to contend in a cockfight.

sukut v {1} [A; a12] ask a question regarding s.t. specific. Misukut
ang maistra, The teacher asked. Suktun ku siya báhin sa ímung hangyù, I
will ask him regarding your request. {2} [AN; b5] ask to collect
payment. Akuy musukut (manukut) sa íyang útang, I’ll ask him to pay me
his debt. {3} [A; c] ask a certain price. Gisuktan kug mahal sa
tindíra, The salesgirl charged me a very high price. {4} [A; b5]
challenge to a fight. Gisuktan aku níyag áway, He challenged me to a
fight. sukutsukut v [A; a12] make inquiries in great detail. Dinhay mga
imbistigadur nga misukutsukut báhin sa buhis, There were investigators
that made inquiries regarding the taxes. maN-r- n bill collector.
masuktánun a questioning.

sukwahì contrary. Sukwahì sa ímung pagtúu, ang anak sa gawas may báhin
sa irihinsiya, Contrary to what you believe, the illegitimate child
gets a share of the inheritance. Ang ímung gibúhat sukwahì kaáyu sa
maáyung pamatásan, What you did is very much against good manners.
v {1} [B56] be contrary, backwards. Nagkasukwáhì ang ámung mga
hunàhúnà, Our ideas are opposed to one another. Ang písa nasukwahì nímu
ug butang, You put the piece in backwards. {2} [B5; a12] be in error.
Nasukwahì ang katapúsan mung tubag, Your last answer was in error.

sul_1 n name of a dance or music for it. v [A] do this dance.

sul_2 n the note sol.

súla n unopened terminal stem of plants that are sharp, e.g. of cogon
or lagnub. suláhan n k.o. nose fish, a delicious fish with a sharp
projection in front of the eyes: Naso spp.

sulà_1 v [A; b6(1)] eat s.t. together with the staple. Asin ray ámung
gisuwà, The only thing we had to go with our rice was salt. n = sud-an.
sud-an n s.t. eaten with the staple. v [A; a12] use to eat with one’s
staple. Laming sud-ánun ang sikwáti, Chocolate is good to eat with your
rice. panud-an v [A2] search for or obtain s.t. to eat with one’s food.
Ari mi sa tyanggi kay manud-an mi pára sa panihápun, We’re off to the
market to look for s.t. to go with the rice for supper. n action of
searching for food to go with the rice. sud-anun n things to be cooked
for the food to go with the rice. ig-l-(←) = sud-an, n.

sulà_2 v [B1456] stare blankly. Nagsulà lang ang mata sa táwung nasakit
ug amnisya, The amnesia victim is staring blankly.

súlà = súla.

sulab n blade, cutting edge of an instrument. v [A13; b6] put or make a
blade.

súlab v [A3P; b4] cause one to be addicted or crazy over s.t. Ang
madyung makasúlab (makapasúlab) sa táwu, It is easy to get addicted to
mahjong. Gisulában ka na sa pagtabakù sa upyum, You are already
addicted to smoking opium.

sulábi see labi.

sulad, súlad n hell, a place of much wickedness and turmoil. v [B126]
wind up in hell. -nun a evil. Suladnun kang pagkatáwu, You are a
devilish man. v [B12] become devilish.

sulagmà (not without l) a chance, coincidence. Usa lang ka sulagmà nga
nag-ábut mi karun dinhi, It is a coincidence that we met each other
here today. v [A12; b8] do s.t. correctly by coincidence. Salámat nga
nakasulagmà ku sa pagtubag sa pangutána, Thank heavens, I chanced to
answer the question correctly.

sulambì n {1} an extension to a house, appended to a side or end,
usually used for storage. {2} paramour. v [A; c1] make an extension
room for the house.

sulaminti (not without l) {1} one’s very own, [so-and-so] oneself.
Sulaminting mga ginikánan níya nagpakabuta bungul sa íyang kalisud, His
very own parents turned a deaf ear to his needs. {2} the only one.
Sulaminti nga anak, An only child. {2a} walà — not even a single one.
Way sulaminting usa ka díyut ang íyang gitábang nákù, He didn’t give me
a bit of help, not a half a cent. Way sulaminting paryinti nga midúul
sa minatay, Not a single relative came to stay by the corpse.

sulampatid (from pátid) v [B6; a12] walk snagging one foot on the
other. Nagsulampatid si Duruy kay hubug siya, Doroy kept catching his
feet on each other because he was drunk.

sulang n chin and jaw bones. -un(→) a having a prominent jaw and chin
bones.

sulanggà = kalamantígì.

sulápid v {1} [A; a12] braid, plait. {2} [B2S] walk crossing the feet
over each other. Íning dápit sa sáyaw ang lákang magsulápid, In this
part of the dance the feet cross over in front of each other. {3} — ang
dílà [B] be inarticulate in speech. Sa nagkahubug ku nagkasulápid
(nagkasulapid) ákung dílà, The drunker I got, the more inarticulate my
speech became.

sular n yard or lawn immediately contiguous to the house. v [A12; a2]
have an open space next to the house for a lawn. Makasular kag dakùdakù
niíning gidak-úna sa lúti, With this size of a lot you can have a
good-sized space for a yard.

sulat v {1} [A; c] write s.t. Ngánung gisulatan man nímu ang bungbung,
Why did you write on the wall? Pagkúhà ug papil ug isulat ri, Get a
piece of paper and write this down. {2} [A; a] write a letter, story.
Ákù pang sulatun ring ákung humwurk, I still have to write out my
homework. Gisulatan siya nákù, I wrote him a letter. n {1} letter,
mail. {2} written or printed message. (←) n entry of the parties’ name
into marriage records. pa-(←) v [A1] have entries made for marriage
records. -anan(←) n writing desk. ka-an(←) n {1} collection of
writings. baláang — Holy Scriptures. {2} set of written records.
mag-r-(←) n writer. paN- n writing as an avocation or profession. tag-,
tag-(←) n author.

sulatuk v [A13] stare blankly without blinking the eyes. Nagsulatuk
lang ang búang nga wà kasabut, The idiot just stared blankly because he
didn’t understand.

sulaw a {1} glaring, shining with a harsh and uncomfortably bright
light. Sulaw kaáyu ang sugà sa awtu, His car has glaring headlights.
{2} disconcerting, causing loss of composure. Sulaw kaáyu nga ikúyug
nátù ang usa ka higála nga átung gikaáway, It is very disconcerting to
have s.o. we just had a quarrel with come along with us. n glare,
intensely shining light. Ang sulaw makadáut sa mata, Glare can damage
the eyes. v {1} [A; b6(1)] give off a glare. Musulaw ang línaw
inigsílang sa adlaw, The pool gives off a glare when the sun shines.
Nagsulaw diri nákù ang ispíhu ug kasilingan sa adlaw, The looking glass
is giving off a glare from the sun. {2} [A123P; b4c5] feel bad about
s.t. bad s.o. else did to a third party. Akuy gisulawan sa gibúhat sa
ákung asáwa. Siya walà magpakabanà, I felt bad at what my wife did, but
it didn’t bother her. (←) v [C; b3] be on bad terms with s.o., glaring
at each other. Bísan ug nagkasúlaw ta wà man kuy pagdumut nímu, Though
we have been on bad terms I don’t harbor a grudge against you. ka-
n {1} = sulaw, n. {2} bad relationship.

sulay v {1} [A; b6(1)] try doing s.t. Sulayan ta ug paandar ang makina,
Let us try starting the engine. Isulay ring sapatúsa ug maarang ba, Try
putting these shoes on to see if they fit. {1a} put s.t. to a test. Ang
Diyus dílì musulay nátù labaw sa átung maantus, God doesn’t try us
beyond what we can bear. Gisulayan ta lang kag kahibáwu ba giyud ka, I
was only testing you whether you really were good at it. {2} [a3] get
s.t. distasteful, e.g. a beating. Hala, balía lang nà arun masulay kang
pápa mu, Go ahead and break that so you can get hell from your father.
n {1} try. Sulay lang tung ákù ug mahímù ba giyud, I just tried it out
to see if I could really do it. {2} expression challenging s.o. in a
taunting way to see if he has the guts to do s.t. bad for him or try to
prevent him from doing it. Mukáun giyud ka íni? Suway man ug
magkalíbang, You sure you want to eat it? Watch if it doesn’t give you
diarrhea. (←)_1 v [C; a12] have it out, clear a matter of contention
with a fight. Suláyun nátù ug kinsay ísug nátung duha, Let’s have it
out to see which of us has guts. paN- v {1} [A23] tempt s.o. to do s.t.
he won’t ordinarily have done. Dì tà ku mupalit ánà apan nanulay siya
nákù pagpalit ug usa lang, I would not have bought it, but he tempted
me to buy one. {2} [b6] be possessed of a devil. Gipanulayan nà siya
dihang patábug na siya ug pamusil sa mga táwu, He must have been
possessed of a devil to shoot indiscriminately at the people.
{3} [a12P] get a dose of disciplinary action. Panulayun ta ka nyà ug
ímu nang daútun, I’ll give you hell if you break that. n devil. Ug
luwasa kami sa mga panulay amin. And deliver us from evil. Amen. pag-
n {1} trial of one’s virtue. Kining mga hitabúa mga pagsulay lang sa
átung pagsálig sa Diyus, These events are but trials of our faith in
God. {2} experiment, testing out of s.t. maN-r-(←) n {1} = paN-. {2} a
person who tempts s.o. into doing s.t. bad.

súlay_2 v [AN; a1] brace, prop s.t. standing to prevent it from
collapsing. Suláyun nátù ang ságing arun dílì matumba sa kabug-at sa
íyang búnga, Let’s brace this banana tree before it falls from the
weight of its bananas. n brace, prop placed against s.t. vertical.

sulaybagyu n {1} k.o. dwarf banana growing to 4′, with a large bunch of
fruit similar to the búngan, eaten when ripe. {2} hornfish.

sulbad v [A; a12] {1} solve, find a solution or answer. Átung sulbárun
ning kahimtánga kay dì ni madala nátù ug hilakhílak, We will find a
solution because we cannot get it over with by crying. {2} undo a knot.
Nasulbad ang baligtus sa písi, The knot of the rope came undone.
n solution to a problem. Dì siya manug-an sa sulbad sa tanghágà, He
won’t tell us the solution to the puzzle. a solved. sulbaran n swivel
in a fishline, a revolving link placed between the line and leader to
prevent kinking. kasulbáran, kasulbarun n solution reached. Walay
kasulbáran ning sulirána, There’s no solution to this problem.

sulbǎr v [A; a12] solve a personal problem or puzzle. Dílì ku masulbǎr
king mga prublíma ku, I can’t find a solution to my problems.

sulbung v [A; b8] splash up, rise rapidly. Pagbutu sa bumba sa dágat
misulbung ang daghang túbig, When the bomb exploded in the sea, a lot
of water splashed into the air. Nagsulbung pa ang asu sa súnug pag-abut
námù, The smoke of the fire was still gushing upwards when we arrived.
a for the voice, fever to rise. Singgit sa kahadluk misulbung gíkan sa
nanan-aw, A cry of fear rose from the spectators. Pastilang nakasulbung
sa prisyu! My, how the prices have risen!

sulda v [A; a12] solder. n solder. -dur(→) n soldering iron or gun.
maN-r- n solderer.

suldádu n soldier. v [A13; a12] be, become a soldier.

súli v [A; a2b2] {1} look at s.t. to find s.t. out. Sulíha ang pitákag
dúna bay kwarta, Look into the wallet to see if there is any money.
Hisulihan siya nga patay na, He was found dead. {2} look for s.t.
Nagsúli ku sa ákung kábaw nga nakabuhì, I’m looking for my carabao
which got loose. sulisúli v [A; a2] peep. Hilabihan níyang nakasulisúli
nímu sa lyabihánan! How he peeped at you through the keyhole!

sulì = suhì.

sulib v [A; b6(1)] put fire to s.t. Nasakpan na ang nagsulib sa
katubhan, They have apprehended the man who set the sugar cane field on
fire.

sulibag a crooked, not straight, askew. Sulibag kaáyu ang ákung
gibadlis, The line I drew is too crooked. v [AB; c1] come out crooked,
cause s.t. to do so. Ikay nagsulibag sa linya, You made the line
crooked. Musulibag (masulibag) giyud ning ákung sinulatan ug way
linyang subáyan, My writing comes out all crooked when I don’t have
lines to follow. (←) = sulibag, v.

súlid_1 n small twine, thread of two or more strands twisted together.
v [A; a2] make a thread of this sort. -in- = súlid, n.

súlid_2 n name given to fish of the genus Caesio which are rounded (but
not so broad as the bilásun).

sulíkat v {1} [A; c1] glare at s.o. with the eyes wide open. Musulíkat
gánì ku, paháwà dáyun, If I glare, better beat it at once. {2} [A2S; c]
for the eyeballs to roll up into the forehead. Misulíkat ang mata sa
bátang nagkumbulsiyun, The child’s eyes rolled up into his forehead
when he had convulsions. (→) a for the eyes to be rolled up into the
forehead. Ang táwung sulikat ug mata mu rag pirming maghangad, A person
with rolled-up eyes always seems to be looking up. n {1} a defect of
the eyes where the eyelids don’t close from disease or injury. Dì siya
ilhan ug natúlug ba kay sulikat siya ug mata, You never know whether he
is asleep or not because his eyes don’t close. {2} one with such an eye
defect. v [B1256] get this defect.

sulimaw a having one eye looking off in a direction it shouldn’t, e.g.
when one has one weak eye which fails to move. v [B; c1] develop this
defect.

sulimbad a having the eyes in the wrong position in the head: crossed,
rolled upwards, one eye out of focus, and the like. v [B; c1P] get this
defect. Musulimbad ang íyang mata ug makuyawan siya, She becomes
cross-eyed when she gets scared. Gisulimbad níya ang íyang mga mata
timáan nga wà siya makaayun, He rolled his eyes up as a sign that he
did not like it.

sulimni a solemn ceremony or event. v [B126; c1] for an event to be
made solemn. Masulimni giyud ang ukasiyun sa paghandum sa átung mga
bayáni, It should be a solemn occasion when we remember our heroes.
mísa — see mísa.

sulindir = surindir (colloquial).

súling v {1} [AN2; a12] peep. Ang táwu nga musúling (manúling) sa
lyawihánan way batásan, A person who peeps through keyholes has no
manners. {2} [A; a12] peer, look closely at s.t. to examine it. Sulínga
ang ágig kang kinsa nà, Look at the handwriting to see whose it is.
sulingsúling v [A13] look with careful attention from a distance.
Táwung nagsulingsúling sa gít, A man standing at the gate, peering
inside.

sulínga v [AN; c1] {1} look askance with contempt or anger. Nasukù tu
siya nímung nanulínga man? Why did she look at you with scorn? Was it
that she was angry with you? {2} make faces at s.o. jokingly. Misulínga
siya nákù dihang giingnan nákù siyang gwápa, She made a face at me when
I told her she was pretty. {3} [A; b6] growl in distrust or
disobedience. Musulínga siya ug pakab-un ug túbig, He will growl if he
is told to fetch water. masulingáhun a having a scorning or
disbelieving look on the face. Hilum, apan masulingáhun kaáyu siyang
namátì sa diskursu, He was quiet, but he listened to the speech with
disbelief all over his face.

sulípat_1 v [A; c1] glower at s.o. to show anger or disapproval. Ákù
siyang gisulipátan kay nagsábà man, I glowered at her because she was
being noisy.

sulípat_2 v [A; c] blink the eyes in the water to remove a foreign body
lodged in it. Ákung gisulípat ang ákung mata sa túbig arun pagkúhà sa
puling, I blinked my eyes in the water to remove the speck in them.

suliping, sulíping {1} = salipì. {2} = saliping.

sulip-it = salip-it.

sulírab v [A2P; c] glower, stare fiercely with an angry frown.
Gisulirában sa kapatas ang mga kaminíru nga nagpataypátay, The foreman
glowered at the street cleaners that were dilly-dallying on the job.

suliran n problem, an unsettled condition or situation that requires a
solution. Suliran nákù ang pagpakáun sa ákung pamilya, It is a problem
for me to feed my family. v [A13] have a problem.

sulírap_1 v [A23] for the eyeballs to move up so that they are almost
hidden by the upper eyelid. Basta taas ang hilánat, musulírap ang mata,
If the fever is high, the eyeballs move up into the forehead.

sulírap_2 n matting made out of woven coconut palm fronds. v [A; a12]
weave coconut fronds into matting.

sulírat v [AB6; c1] for the eyes to open wide in anger; cause them to
do so. Mihílum ang mga bátà dihang ákung gisulirátan, The children kept
quiet when I glared at them.

sulisilit v [A13; a12] solicit contributions (humorous—from sulisit).

sulísit v [A; a12] solicit contributions, donations. Nagsulisit ang
maistrag hinábang sa nasunúgan, The teachers were soliciting
contributions for the fire victims.

sulisitadur a prying or maliciously inquisitive. Sulisitadur kaáyung
bayhána, nangutána kun pilay ákung swildu, What a nosey woman. She
asked me how much I earn.

sulisitur hiniral n Solicitor General, an officer of the Justice
Department that handles government cases.

sulit v [A; b] set s.t. afire or ablaze. Sulitan nákù ang kakugnan,
I’ll set the grass field on fire.

*súlit pa- n test, examination. v [A13] hold an exam.

sulitaryu n {1} solitaire card game. {2} solitaire ring with a single
gem. v [A1] {1} play a game of solitaire. {2} wear a solitaire ring.

suliut n k.o. giant clam with yellow coloring around the edges of the
mouth.

sulíut (from líut) v [A2; b6] force oneself through a crowd or s.t.
similar. Misulíut siya sa katawhan arun makadúul sa intabládu, She
forced her way through the crowd to get near the stage.

sulíyaw v [A; b6] for a crowd to shout either in applause or derision.
Misulíyaw ang mga táwu pagdiskursu sa pulitiku, The people booed when
the politician delivered a speech. Misulíyaw ang mga táwu pagkabatì sa
balità sa kadaúgan, The people shouted upon hearing the news of
victory. n shouts of a crowd.

sulpa n sulfa drugs.

sulpà n container for jewelry or important documents used in former
times, made of a short bamboo tube, 1–2′ long, having another cover of
bamboo which fits over it and reaches its base. v [c1] place s.t. in a
sulpà.

sulput v {1} [A2; b6] issue forth suddenly, pop out of. Misulput ang
sungsung ug miágay ang súkà, The stopper popped, and the vinegar flowed
out. Misulput lang ang bátà pag-anak níya, The baby just popped out
when she gave birth. {2} [A23] leave suddenly, move with speed. Nây,
misulput siya ug mipaúlì nga way tingugtíngug, Well! He got up and went
home without saying a word.

sulsul v [A; b] urge, egg s.o. into doing s.t. bad. Gisulsúlan sa mga
iyaan ang mga bátà sa pagpasúkul sa ílang inaína, The children’s aunts
incited them into rebelling against their stepmother. n urgings,
incitement.

sultáda n a match in cockfights. v [A13] for there to be a cockfight
match. Ug magsultáda ug bayinti sa hápun, dì na hínay ang tárì, If
there are twenty matches in the afternoon, cockfighting is doing all
right. sultadur n handler who releases fighting cocks in a match.

sultan n sultan, the name given the chief of some Muslim groups.

sultána n a sultan’s wife.

sulti v {1} [A1; c] tell, speak. Way láin nga makagsulti báhin níya kun
dílì ang amahan, No one can say that about him but the father. Sultían
ku pa siya ug musugut ba, I still have to tell him to see if he would
agree. Ayaw nag isulti níya! Don’t tell him that! {1a} [C; abc3] talk
s.t. over together. Dúnay makigsulti nímu sa tilipunu, S.o. wants to
talk to you on the telephone. Sultíun (sultíhun) nátù ni. Dì ta mistil
maglális, Let’s talk this out. We don’t have to fight. Gipanagsultíhan
pa námù ang nahitabù, We are still discussing the events.
Gipakigsultíhan mu na ba siya? Have you gone to see him to talk it
over? Gikasulti ku na si Pápa, I’ve already talked it over with Dad.
{2} [A2] utter s.t., speak. Makasulti na ang ákung anak, My daughter
knows how to talk. {3} [A23] deliver a speech. Maáyu musulti tung
kandidatúha, That candidate speaks quite well. n {1} word of caution or
advice. Usa ka sulti hustu na, One word is enough. {2} thing said as
news, gossip. Unsa man nang sulti nga nabátì ku nga wà ka na mutunghà?
What is that talk I hear that you are not attending classes? {3} speech
or talk delivered. Daghang nakasaway sa ímung sulti, A lot of people
criticized your speech. sultisulti v [A13; b6] chat, converse.
Nagsultisulti mi báhin sa ámung gradwisyun nga umaábut, We are
conversing about our forthcoming graduation. n gossip, rumor. Mga
sultisulti nà nga dílì katuhúan kay gíkan sa mga tabian, That is gossip
not worth believing because it originates from the gossipmongers. paN-
v [A23] {1} circulate gossip or news. Ikaw may nanulti ánang tabía, You
were the one who spread that gossip. {2} speak in a certain way. Sakit
kaáyu siya nga manulti, He speaks in a very hurting way. sultiánay,
sultihánay v [C; c3] have a conversation. n conversation.

sultiánan n subject of conversation. Ang nahitabù nahímung sultiánan sa
mga táwu, What happened became a subject of conversation for the
people. hinultihun a talkative. Dì siya hinultihun ug dì pa níya sinátì
ang táwu, He doesn’t say much if he does not know the person well.
v [B12] be, become talkative. ka- n person with whom one is talking.
sinultihan n manner of speech, language. panultihun, sultihúnun
n {1} saying, proverb. {2} thing usually said or spoken. Kanang mga
pulúnga mauy panultihun ug táwung buangbuang, That is the k.o. thing
crazy people say.

sultid bins n canned salted beans. v [A1] have salted beans for food.

sultíra = sultíru (female).

sultíru n single, unmarried male.

súlu (not without l) v [A; a12] {1} sing a solo. Sulúhun ku lang ang
kanta, I will make this song a solo. {2} do s.t. alone by oneself.
Musúlu lang ku ug trabáhu kay aku ra may nía, I will just work by
myself because I am the only one around. {2a} sulúha expression of
harsh rejection when s.o. asks for one’s company. ‘Manan-aw tag
sini.’—‘Sulúha!’ ‘Let’s go to the movies.’—‘Go by yourself!’ n vocal
solo. sulusúlu v [A1; b5] do s.t. alone. Magsulusúlu lang kag adtu sa
parti? Are you going to the party alone? — pláyit v [A1] go s.w. alone.
Magsúlu pláyit siya ig-adtu sa Mindanaw, He will go to Mindanao alone.
-wist, -wista n soloist, lead singer or player of a group. v [a12] be,
be made the soloist.

sulù n torch made of a dry palm frond bound tightly at regular
intervals along its length to make it burn slowly. v {1} [A; a12] make
into a torch of this sort. {2} [A13; a12] use a torch in doing s.t., or
illuminate one’s way with a torch. Sul-un ku tung langgáma rung gabíi,
I will catch that bird tonight lighting my way with a torch. paN-
v [A2; b6] go hunting or fishing at night with torchlight.

súlù v [A2S] make a sizzling, hissing sound. Ug musúlù ang mantíkà
ilúnud ang sibúyas, When the fat sizzles, put the onions in. Basà ang
pabílu kay síging nagsulù, The wick must be wet because it keeps
sizzling.

sul-ub v [A; c] {1} insert s.t. into s.t. that it fits into. Palíhug
rag sul-ub ug bálik ánang húnus sa lamísa, Please put the drawers back
into the table. Isul-ub ring argulya sa usuk, Insert this metal ring
over the stake. {2} put on, wear. Sul-úbi ang bátà sa putì níya nga
sinínà, Let the child wear her white dress. Isul-ub ang ímung singsing,
Wear your ring. n wedding dress. Malagmit dílì mahinayun ang kasal ug
isukud ang sul-ub, It’s likely that the wedding won’t go through if the
bride tries on the gown beforehand.

sulud v {1} [A2; a12] go in, into. Dílì ta makasulud sa sini saylu sa
alas nuybi, We cannot get into the movies after nine o’clock. Guwà dihà
sa kwartu kay ug dílì ka, sudlun ku ikaw, Get out of the room because
if you don’t I will go in after you. {1a} — sa úlu [ac] for s.t. to
have entered the head. Unsay nasulud sa ímung úlu sa pagbúhat sa ingun?
What got into your head to make you do such a thing? Isulud nis ímung
úlu, ayaw giyud ug lisúa ning twirkáha, Get this into your head. Don’t
ever turn this screw. {1b} [a3] understand s.t. Dílì masulud sa ákung
úlu ang liksiyun, I cannot understand the lesson. {1c} [b8] be
pregnant, esp. in the early stages. Sa pagkasal níla nasudlan na ang
babáyi, When they were married, the girl was already pregnant.
{1d} [b8] be under the influence of alcohol. Nanghágit nas Pidru ug
áway, nasudlan na tingáli, Pedro was challenging people to a fight. He
must be drunk. {1e} [A2] for the gears of an engine to engage. Musulud
(makasulud) ang primíra apan dílì mulyamar, The first gear will engage,
but it won’t function. {1f} [A2; c6] be sent into a game. Misúd si
Basilan pagkasíkan hap, Basilan was sent into the game in the second
half. {2} [A; b6] enter, take a job as. Musulud siya sa pagkapárì, He
will enter the priesthood. Unsang trabahúa ímung sudlan? What k.o. job
are you going to take? {3} [A; c] put s.t. inside s.t. else. Nagsulud
ku aring mga linata sa kahun, I am putting the canned goods in the box.
Isulud ni sa kumúda, Put this in the drawer. {3a} — sa bulsa see bulsa.
{3b} [A; c6] in weaving: sley, arrange the threads of a warp in a reed.
{4} [A2] accommodate, hold. Kining baríla musulud ug nuybinta ka litru,
This barrel will hold ninety liters. n {1} contents. Way sulud ang
pitaka, The wallet was empty. {1a} capacity to hold. {2} place within.
Túa siya sa sulud sa awtu, He is inside the car. {2a} within, inside a
period of time. Sulud sa tulu ka túig mupaúlì ku, Within three years
I’ll go home. Lat-i sulud sa tulu ka úras, Boil for three hours. — sa
búyut in the bag, absolutely assured. Sulud sa búyut ang ímung
kadaúgan, Your victory is already in the bag. {2b} an extra room in a
house: a bedroom or a storeroom. sulud guwà v [A; b6] {1} go in and
out. Ngánung nagsulud guwà ka man? Wà kay láing lingaw? Why do you keep
going in and out? Have you nothing else to do? {2} shift one’s
allegations in one’s tack of reasoning. Nagsulud guwà kas ímung sulti
maung dì ka katuhúan, You keep changing your story. That’s why no one
can believe you. pa- v [A; a2] give a job or recommend s.o. for a job.
Pasudlun ta kag trabáhu iggradwar nímu, I’ll arrange for you to get a
job when you graduate. suludsúlud n small room for storage. sudlanan
n container. suluran n the reed in weaving, which has the purpose of
slamming the weft threads tightly together, so called from the fact
that the warp threads go through it. sinudlan n having a filling. Pan
nga sinudlan, Bread with a filling baked inside. sudlunun a way back
off the road or usual route (lit. a place you have to go into to get
to). Sudlunun kaáyu ang ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda, Their house is
far back from the road. v [B1256] be way back from the usual route.

súlud n fine-toothed comb with two parallel rows of teeth, used to rid
the hair of lice. v {1} [A; a12] comb with the súlud. {2} [a12] make
into a súlud. paN- v [A2] comb one’s own hair with the súlud.

sulug n {1} current. Ang kabáyù naánud sa sulug, The horse was swept
away by the current. {2} onrush of s.t. as if brought with the current.
Usa ka sulug sa pagbátì mikánap kaníya, An onrush of emotion engulfed
him. a {1} flowing with a swift current. Sulug kaáyu ang túbig sa subà,
The water in the river is swift. {2} flowing copiously. v {1} [B2] be,
become swift. Masulug man lang ning subáa sa ting-ulan, This river only
becomes swift during the rainy season. Ang musulug nga kasukù, The
onrush of anger. {2} [b4] have a copious blood flow. Gisulgan siya kay
nakuháan, She had profuse bleeding because she had a miscarriage.

sulugsúlug v [A; a1] {1} tease, harass s.o. by irritating actions or
remarks, or by poking fun at him. Ayg sugsúga si Maríya kay pikun,
Don’t tease Maria because she easily cries. {2} annoy, bother with
persistence. Sa kahapúnun ang lamuk na puy musulugsúlug nákù, The
mosquitoes annoy persistently in the evening. n action of teasing.
-an(→) a given to teasing.

suluksuluk n = kutukutu. see kutu.

sulum = pala.

sulumilyu (not without l) n loin of beef or pork, esp. the upper
portion.

sulung v {1} [A] see, look at. Musulung ku sa ímung baligyà, Let me
take a look at the things you are selling. {2} [cP] show s.t. Isulung
(ipasulung) nákù ninyu ang ákung bag, I will show you my bag. pa- v [A;
ac] show. Íya kung pasulúngun sa íyang bag-ung sapátus, She’ll let me
see her new shoes.

súlung_1 v {1} [A; a12] set against, attack. Sulúngun nátù ang Hapun
rung gabíi, We will attack the Japs tonight. {2} [AN2; a12] go s.w. to
look for trouble. Ug sulúngun (sulngun) ka níya sa iskuylahan, itug-an
siya sa maistru, If he goes to school to pick a fight with you, report
him to the teacher. {3} [A2N; a12] go s.w. to do s.t. Musúlung
(manúlung) ta ug baskit sa Talísay, We will go to Talisay to play
basketball. n attack. Ang súlung idungan sa bumbardíyu, The attack will
be synchronized with the bombardment. dasmag — n rush attack or
assault. maN-r-(→) n attacker, invader.

súlung_2 v [A2] stare directly at s.t. dazzling. Mu ra kag mahálap ug
musúlung kas adlaw, You get blinded if you stare directly into the sun.
sulnganay, sinulnganay v [C] communicate by looking at each other
without exchanging words (literary). Nagsinulnganay (nagsulnganay) si
Hisukristu ug ang Íyang Mahal nga Inahan kay dílì matúkib sa púlung ang
ílang gibátì, Jesus Christ and His Blessed Mother looked at each other
with emotions words could not express.

sul-ung v [A2; b4] for an illness or some personality quirk that recurs
ever so often to make its appearance. Musul-ung ang íyang sáput kun
magdugù, She gets her tantrums when she menstruates. sul-ungsul-ung
v [A3] recur in intervals.†

sulup a dark, lightless. Wà kuy nakítà sa lángub kay sulup kaáyu, I did
not see anything in the cave because it was very dark. n {1} early
evening, just after the sun has gone down. Sulup na sa paggíkan nákù sa
búkid, It was already dusk when I started home from the mountains.
{2} jungle, thicket. bábuyng — wild pig. v {1} [B] become dark. Misulup
ang lawak sa pagkapálung sa sugà, The room became dark when the lamp
was put out. {2} [A; b6] disappear into the forest or tall grass. Duha
ka táwu ang misulup sa bagang lugut, Two men disappeared into the thick
brush. {3} [b6] be overgrown with brush.

sulusiyun n {1} solution, answer to a problem. Ang sulusiyun sa
prublíma sayun ra, The solution to the problem is very simple. {2} a
drug or chemical solution. Gipailísan nákù ang sulusiyun sa batiríya, I
had the battery solution changed.

súlut_1 a giving a piercing look, staring hard. Sulut kaáyu ug
tinan-awan ang íyang mga mata, His eyes gave a piercing look. v [A2S;
b6] look at piercingly. Gisulútan ákung bátà kay nagpabuyag, She stared
hard at my daughter because she was being naughty.

súlut_2 a tightly wound rope. v [a12] be, become, make tight. Sulútun
nákù pagpísì arun dílì dalì nga mabugtù, I will make the rope tight so
it cannot break easily. sutanan n a device used in rope-making having
two or three cranks which impart an appropriate degree of twist to the
individual strands after which the strands are twisted collectively
into the rope.

sul-ut v {1} [A; c6] fit s.t. precisely over, around, or into s.t.
else. Sul-útag plastik ang alambri dikuryinti, Encase the electric wire
in plastic. {2} [c6] put s.t. on, wear. Isul-ut ang sapátus ug maarang
ba, Try on the pair of shoes whether they fit. Kanang putì isul-ut sa
parti, Wear your white dress to the party. sul-utsul-ut = sal-utsal-ut.
see sal-ut.

suluwist, suluwista see súlu.

sulyà = suylà_1,2.

súm = sulum.

súma v [A; a12] total up, reckon the final amount. Kinsay nagsúma sa
pátung sa mga sápì nga gihulaman? Who is reckoning the interest on the
money we lent? n figure arrived after calculation. Ang súma diri nákù
mil syitisyintus, The sum total I get is one thousand, seven hundred.
-da = súma.

sumā̀ = sumálà.

súmad n {1} the day exactly one year after a certain event. Ang súmad
sa kamatáyun sa ímung amahan mahiatul ug Byirnis Santu, The day exactly
one year after your father’s death will fall on Good Friday. Súmad niá
run túa na ku sa Amirika, A year from now I will be in America. {1a} —
nga Lúnis, usa ka simána, etc. it was exactly one Monday, one week,
etc. after a certain event. Súmad nga usa ka búwan rung pitsa dús sukad
sa íyang paggíkan, On the second it will be exactly one month since he
left. {2} anniversary. Ang súmad sa átung kagawásan saulúgun karung
Duminggu, The anniversary of our independence will be celebrated this
Sunday. v {1} [A2; b8] get to be a week, month, etc. after s.t. Musúmad
na karung Lúnis ang ákung pagkasakit, It will be exactly one week on
Monday since I got ill. {2} [A1; c] celebrate an anniversary.
sumadsúmad v [A; a12] do s.t. yearly. Musumadsúmad siya ug palit ug
awtu kay dátù siya, He buys a new car every year because he is rich.
kasumáran n birthday. Ása man ta magsaúlug sa ímung kasumáran? Where
will we celebrate your birthday?

sumagang n second-class tobacco leaves somewhat smaller than the first
class, not perfectly mature, and having minor tears.

sumálà_1 {1} according to. Náa kunuy bagyu sumálà sa balità, According
to the news there’s going to be a storm. {2} — [gen.] it’s up to
[gen.]. Sumálà gud nímu ug muadtu ka ba, It’s up to you whether you go.
{2a} it is up to you. ‘Mangalígù ba ta?’—‘Sumálà!’ ‘How about going
swimming?’—‘It’s up to you.’

sumálà_2 v dílì mag- regret not doing s.t. which one had been warned to
do. Padad-un kag bálun, dì ka. Dì ka magsumálà ug gutmun ka, I told you
to bring your lunch, but you didn’t. Now you will regret it if you go
hungry.

sumalabit, sumalabits = salumabits.

súman n = budbud, v3; n3. v [A1; a12] cook, make into súman. — nga
hilaw the penis (humorous).

sumángil see *sángil.

sumarínu = submarínu.

sumat_1 v [A; c] {1} ask for one’s answer. Misumat ang dalága sa laláki
kun kanus-a sila pakasal, The girl asked the man when they would get
married. Wà pa ku makasumat níya kun muuban ba siya nátù, I have not
yet asked him whether he would go with us or not. {2} remind s.o. of
s.t. Sumati siya sa íyang sáad, Remind him of his promise.

sumat_2 v [A23N] for an unpleasant characteristic to be due to
inheritance from forebears. Kanang kangil-ad sa batásan ánang batáa túa
musumat (manumat) sa apuhang babáyi, That child’s nasty character is
inherited from her grandmother.

sumatin n policeman.

súmay v [A; a12] repeat what s.o. said. Sumáya ug makadaghan hangtud
larínu ka na nga mulituk, Repeat it over several times until you can
say it fluently. sumaysúmay v [A; a12] ape, mimic. Ug musumaysúmay ka
sa ákung sinultian, sukmágun ta ka, If you ape my way of speaking, I
will strike you.

sumbag v {1} [AN; a12b2] strike with the fist, box. Nagpanumbag siyas
bungbung sa kapungut, He banged his fist against the wall in anger.
{2} [C; a12] have a fistfight with s.o. n blow with the fist. -ay v [C]
{1} = sumbag, v2. {2} — ang kwarta (humorous) have plenty of money.
Nagsumbagay ang kwarta ánang tihíka, That miser has loads of money.
-in-ay(→) n fistfight. Ang sinumbagay dílì makasulbad sa inyung
panagbángì, Your differences cannot be resolved by fisticuffs.
sumbagsumbag v [b5c] dunk, dip food in s.t. to add more flavor to it
(humorous). Pagkúhà ug unà nga átung sumbagsumbágun (sumbagsumbágan) sa
ságing, Get some fish paste sauce to dip the cooked bananas into.

sumbalihuk (coined from sumbalik and líhuk) n reaction.

sumbalik (from bálik) v {1} [A2; ac] bounce back on, boomerang.
Misumbalik kaníya ang batung íyang gilábay, The stone he threw bounced
back at him. Ayaw ug bugtawg irung búang kay sumbalikun ka, Don’t chase
a mad dog because he will turn back on you. Kanang ímung pangutána
ákung isumbalik ug pangutána nímu, I’m going to turn around and ask you
the same thing you asked me. {2} [B26] turn out to be the exact
opposite. n the exact opposite. Ang íyang nawung sumbalik sa linawas
kay sa laráwan, In real life his face is the exact opposite of what it
is in the picture. — dasdas n counterattack. v [A; a1] counterattack.
Gisumbalik dasdas sa mga Aliman ang atáki sa mga Rúsu, The Germans
counterattacked the Russians.

sumbaling = tumbáling.

sumban (from *subung) gisumban/sumban/sumbi v make s.t. modelled after
s.t. else. Ritrátu ray ákung gisumban paggamà nákù áning dulaána, I
made this toy by copying a picture. pa- v [b(1)] allow s.t. to go on
without doing anything about it, happy that it is being done or
resigned to it. Ikaw ray madáut ug pasumban mu ang ímung kaliguy, You
will suffer if you just allow yourself to drift along doing nothing all
the time. Gipasumban lang sa babáyi ang pagpanghikap sa íyang
hinigugma, The girl just allowed her boy friend to keep on caressing
her. -an(→) n {1} model, pattern. Sumbanan ni paghímù ug mga kartun,
This is the pattern in making cardboard boxes. {2} code, regulations on
which actions are based. Ang kaangáyan mauy sumbanan sa íyang
pakigdáit, He bases his personal relations on fairness. Sumbanang
baláud, Civil Code. {2a} basis on which one acts. Panimalus mauy
sumbanan sa íyang panglíhuk, His actions are motivated by a desire for
revenge. -un(→) n s.t. that runs in a family. Ang pagkabúang sumbanun
ánang pamilyáha, Insanity is hereditary in that family.

sumbil v [A; c] {1} make a piece of cloth larger by sewing another
piece to it. Tinábas lay isumbil sa ubus arun mataastaas, Just add some
remnants to the bottom to make it longer. {2} light one’s cigar or
cigarette from s.o. Lisud nga sumbílan ang mubù nga sigarilyu, It’s
difficult to light one’s cigarette on a shorter one.

sumbíngay n {1} parable, allegory. Ang sumbíngay sa magpupúgas, The
parable of the sower. {2} hint, s.t. said in asking for s.t.
indirectly. v [AP; cP] give hints for s.o. to do s.t., ask for s.t.
indirectly. Ákung gipasumbingáyan (gisumbingáyan) ang táwu nga dì na
pabalíkun sa balay, I gave the man hints not to come back to the house
again. pa- = sumbíngay.

sumbríya n culvert. v [A13; b6] put or construct a culvert.

sumbuhan n barrel of firearm or ordnance.

sumbung v {1} [A; c] tell on s.o., report. Isumbung ta kang Pápa, I
will tell Father on you. {1a} [A2; c] tell s.o. about oneself in
private. Ug makasumbung pa lang untà ku níya ning ákung gugma, If I
could only tell her how much I loved her. {2} [A; b] accuse s.o. in
court, file a complaint. Isumbung ta ka ug pangáwat, I will accuse you
of theft. n {1} report, tale s.o. tattled. Wà panumbalínga sa
supirintindinti ang sumbung, The superintendent did not heed the
report. {2} complaint filed in court. -in- n the accused person. -íra =
sumbungíru (female). -íru, mag-r- n tattle-tale, informer.

súmil n sawmill.

sumitir v {1} [A; c6] turn in for consideration, submit homework. Unsa
mang upisináha sumitihan sa aplikisyun? What office will the
application be submitted to? Isumitir ang ímung humwurk run, Submit
your homework now. {2} [A23] submit, yield to a stronger force. Dinhay
pila ka táwu nga walà musumitir sa gahum sa kaáway, There were a few
persons that did not submit to the power of the enemy. {3} [A2] agree
that a certain thing is right. Walay but-an nga makasumitir ánang ímung
paági, No sane person could accede to that procedure of yours.
{4} [B26; b3] be immensely impressed with s.o.’s ability. a be
impressed by s.o.’s ability. Sumitir kaáyu ku nímung mudiskursu, I take
my hat off to you for your oratorical ability.

sumpà n s.t. to counteract s.t. evil before it happens, usually of a
magical nature. Sumpà sa ulan, S.t. to keep it from raining. Sumpà sa
dápaw, S.t. to keep itchy trichomes from affecting one. Sumpà sa
tunglu, S.t. to render a curse ineffective. v [A; a1] render s.t.
ineffective, counteract some evil before it happens. Sumpáun ang bábuy
arun dílì mahurut sa mamistáhay, They will put a special charm on the
pig so that it won’t be all eaten up at the fiesta. paN- v [A; c]
swear, make an oath to do s.t. or that s.t. will happen. Manumpà kung
tinúud kini, I swear this is true. Gipanumpà níya nga manimalus siya,
He swore he would get revenge. Ayaw ipanumpà ang ngálan sa Diyus sa
pasipála, Don’t take God’s name in vain (make oaths in God’s name for
light situations). n oath, solemn declaration of truth or one’s
intention. ig-l- n = sumpà, n.

sumpákì n disagreement, dispute. Dì ta na lang painítun ang átung mga
sumpákì, We won’t let our disagreements get heated. v {1} [A23C; b3]
contradict, disagree. Musumpákì giyud nà siya sa bísan unsay ákung
isulti, He contradicts whatever I say. Nagkasumpákì ang ámung hunàhúnà,
Our ideas are not in agreement. {2} [C; b3] have a disagreement, small
argument.

sumpay v {1} [A; ac] join things together to make them larger. Sumpáyun
ta ning duha ka mubung písì arun mataas, Let us join these two short
pieces of rope together so it will be long enough. Nagsumpay mi sa
pantalan ug mga bayinti mitrus, We are adding about twenty meters to
the wharf. {2} [A2; b6] add, saying s.t. to s.t. previously said.
Sumpáyan pa giyud níya ug kumidiya bísan ug unsay ákung isulti, He
always adds jokes to whatever I say. n {1} the additional span or
length added. {2} succeeding installment of a serial. ápas — n sequel.
Kining sugilanúna ápas sumpay sa isturya sa bau ug ungguy, This story
is a sequel to the story of the monkey and the turtle. ka- ug tinái
n brother or sister. ka- sa kasingkásing n s.o. close to one’s heart.
-in-an(→) n joint, place s.t. has been added or tied to s.t. else.

sumpit = sungpit.

sumpù v [A; a12] {1} put an end to s.t. bad. Sumpúun ku nang ímung
pagkatabian, I will put an end to your gossiping. {2} check
development. Tambal nga musumpù dáyun sa ubu, Medicine that checks a
cough instantly. Kanang bisyúha makasumpù sa túbù, That vice stunts the
growth.

sumpung v [B246; a4] be in one of one’s bad moods, have one’s sickness
or fit come over one. Misumpung na sag sáput ni Lúla kay nagyawyaw man,
Grandma must be in one of her ugly moods again because she is
grumbling. Gisumpung siya sa íyang kabúang, She had her fit of madness
again.

sumput = sungput.

sumsum v {1} [A; c2] eat s.t. with drinks. Isumsum (sumsuman) nátù ning
surísu ug bír, Let’s have sausages with our beer. {2} [b6] be the
subject of gossip. Aku na puy gisumsúman ninyu ug tabì, This time I am
the subject of your gossip. n {1} thing eaten along with drinks.
{2} action of having food with liquor. Dúnay sumsum sa ka Kardu rung
gabíi, There’s going to be drinks with eating at Cardo’s tonight.
-ay(→) n eating and drinking spree. -an n {1} = sumsum. {2} subject of
gossip. v [A13] have an eating and drinking spree.

sumu_1 a for tobacco to burn poorly. Sumu kaáyu ning tabakúa ug mabálaw
tag yupyup, This tobacco is so hard to get to burn, and you go crazy
trying to suck on it. v [B126; b6] be slow-burning.

sumu_2 a boring, tired of s.t. due to its frequency and repetition.
Sumu kaáyu ning kinabuhía! What a boring life this is! Sumu pamináwun
ang sirmun nga gabalikbálik. It’s boring to have to listen to the same
lecture over and over again. v [b4] be fed up with s.t. Gisumhan ku sa
íyang pangatarúngan, I was bored with his reasoning. Gisumhan na kug
kináun ug bábuy, I am sick of eating pork.

sum-uk v {1} [A; a2b2] go into a mass of s.t. Nakasum-uk na ang
ayruplánu sa mga pangánud, The plane disappeared into the clouds. Ayaw
ug sum-úka ang kasagbutan kay náay sawa dihà, Don’t go into the
undergrowth because there are snakes. {2} [A2; a12] try, venture into
s.t. Wà ku makasum-uk ánang mga mátang sa panarbáhu, I have not tried
my hand at that k.o. work.

sum-ul a {1} for food to be unpalatable from having been served too
often. Sum-ul ang bábuyng isígig sirbi, You can get fed up with pork if
you have it all the time. {2} boring, tiresome. Sum-ul kaáyung pamatíun
nang isturyáha, I’m fed up with hearing that story. — ug nawung
a having a nice face, but not one so beautiful people can’t get enough
of looking at it. v [B1; b6] {1} be, become repulsive and unpalatable.
{2} become boring. ka- n feeling of repulsive dislike for food eaten
too often.

suna v [A; a12] inquire of s.o. whether he is amenable to s.t., but
without putting pressure on him, esp. asking for a second time. Nagsuna
si Husi ug mahinayun ba ang piknik, Jose is asking whether the picnic
will go on as scheduled.

súna n zone, area particularly designated. Ang Sibu gihímù nga súna
libri, bisag kinsang tawhána makalansar, Cebu has been made a free
zone. Anyone may launch his candidacy. v [A13; a12] divide into zones.

sun-ad v [A; c1] {1} boil young corn on the cob. {2} boil root crops or
staple food. -in- n {1} boiled young corn on the cobs. {2} any starchy
food boiled. sun-arun n the young corn ready for boiling.

sunánuy = sunítu.

sunáta n musical number, usually instrumental. Mau rag nakadungug na ku
ánang sunatáha, It seems as if I have already heard that song. Pagtukar
ug sunáta. Ayaw nang mga bag-ung sunghit, Play a classical number, not
one of those new song hits. v {1} [A] play an instrumental number.
{2} [A13] for a baby to cry (humorous). Nagsunáta na pud ang anak ni
Iska, Eska’s baby is crying again.

sunaup a low, dark, and damp places. v [B12] for an area to be, become
depressed and watery. Nasunaup ang ámung yútà kay naunlud human sa
línug, Our land became depressed and watery because it sank after the
earthquake.

sunda_1 v [A; a1] insert s.t. having length into a hole or cavity.
Gisunda níya sa íyang tudlù ang íyang ilung, He inserted his finger
into his nose. Masunda giyud ka ug dì ka makaihì, You’ll be
catheterized if you can’t urinate. n s.t. of any size but with length
to insert into s.t., e.g. a catheter.

sunda_2 = sáyud, n, v3.

sundalísa n a letter sent by a boy’s parents requesting an audience
with a girl’s parents for the formal marriage proposal (pamaláyi).
v [A; b] send this letter.

sundálu n {1} soldier. {2} worms found in salted fish preserves
(humorous). Náay daghang sundálus ginamus, There are lots of worms in
the salted fish. kasundalúhan n group of soldiers or soldiers in
general. Ang átung kasundalúhan giila pud nga ísug, Our soldiers have
also shown themselves to be brave.

sundang n bolo, the general name for large knives, machetes, and swords
used for heavy cutting work and as weapons. v [a12] make into a bolo.
(→) v [a12] strike with a bolo.

sundanun = sandanun. see sandanay.

*sunding see pasunding.

sundug v [AN; a2] copy, follow s.o.’s way of doing s.t. Dì ku musundug
(manundug) sa bag-ung alut, I will not follow the new style of cutting
the hair. -in- n s.t. copied or adapted from.

súng = súlung.

sungad n {1} the upper snout of animals. Sungad ang ikálut sa amúti sa
bábuy, The pig uses its snout to dig up sweet potatoes. {2} the area
around the mouth of a person from the nose to the chin (humorous and
derogatory). {3} the point of s.t. Sungad sa dáru, The tip of the plow.

sungag v {1} [A; a1] horn, strike or butt with the horn. Sungagun ka
ánang kanding ug mudúul ka, That goat will butt you if you go near it.
{1a} [C; ac3] for animals to fight with their horns. Nagkasúngag ang
duha ka kábaw, The two carabaos are goring each other. {2} [A; ac3] ram
against s.o. with the head. Napáwul ang usang buksidur kay misungag sa
kuntra, One of the boxers was penalized because he butted his opponent.
{2a} [A; a1] bulldoze s.t. Sungagun sa buldúsir ang pangpang human
dinamitáha, After they dynamite the cliff, they will bulldoze it.
{3} [AN; a12] hit the jaw with the fist. Makasungag giyud ku run ug
magbinúang ka, I’ll hit you in the jaw if you do anything foolish.
{4} [A; a12] go against the wind or current. Ug musungag ta sa hángin,
dúgay ta muabut, If we go against the wind, it will take us a long time
to arrive. {5} [A12; a12] plane against the grain in wood. Dì ka
makasungag ug sipilya kay dílì hámis ang ági, You cannot plane against
the grain because it won’t come out smooth. (←) n fight between horned
animals.

sung-ag = lung-ag.

sungasung v [A; a12] brave adverse weather or conditions to do s.t. or
get s.w. Ngánung misungasung ka mag anhi nga ulan kaáyu? Why did you
brave the downpour to get here? Aku ang misungasung sa mga kasukù sa
mga ginikánan sa babáyi, I had to face the anger of the girl’s parents.

súngay_1 n horn. v [AN; ab2] butt, gore. Ug mudúul ka sa kábaw sungáyun
giyud ka, If you go near the water buffalo, you will be gored. -an
a {1} animal with horns. {2} the devil. {3} one like a devil. Ag
sungáyan nagpabuyag na sab, The little devil is making a nuisance of
himself again.

súngay_2 n one’s lineal or collateral descendants of the fifth
generation: grandchild, grandnephew, or grandniece of a great
grandchild, grandnephew or grandniece. apu sa — = súngay. apuhan sa —
grandparent, granduncle or grandaunt of a great-grandparent, uncle, or
aunt.

sung-ay v [A; c16] {1} carry s.o. on one’s shoulder, esp. with legs
astraddle the neck. Dì ku makasung-ay nímu kay sakit ang ákung abága, I
cannot carry you on my shoulders because they are sore. {2} assume a
financial burden, esp. for a political candidacy. Sung-áyun níya ang
kandidatúra ni Kabaybay, He will support Kabaybay’s candidacy.

sungban = sumban.

sunggal v [A; a12] come to disturb or harass s.o. Kanúnayng musunggal
sa íyang kunsinsiya ang dakù níyang kasal-ánan, The wrong he had done
always disturbs his conscience. Hawu ang nagsunggal sa íyang manukan, A
monitor lizard raided his chicken yard.

sunggat = salunggat.

sunggaw = sunggal.

sunggu n nosebleed. v [B16; a4] suffer nosebleed. Nagsunggu (gisunggu)
ang buksidur pagkaigù sa ilung, The boxer got a bloody nose when he was
hit in the nose.

sunghan n a very itchy k.o. scabies with tiny scales on top. see also
sungu.

sunghit, sunghits n booklet in which the words to popular songs are
printed.

súngì_1 v [A1; a12] for the teeth of a comb, nails, and other
projections that are somewhat flexible to break off. (→) having teeth
broken off. Ilábay nang sudlay nga sungì, Throw away that comb with the
broken teeth.

súngì_2 v {1} [B126] for the feelings to be hurt. Nasungì ku sa ímung
gisulti, I was hurt by what you said. {2} [C13; b3(1] have bad feelings
toward one another. Gikasungían níla ang pagbáhin sa yútà, They had a
misunderstanding about the division of the land. a having hurt
feelings. Súngì kaáyu ákung buut kay wà ku imbitaha, My feelings were
badly hurt because I wasn’t invited. ka-an n misunderstanding.

súngil = sikmul, v2.

sungisuk a bulldog-faced: snub-nosed, having pudgy cheeks, and
overhanging bones on the brow.

sungkà n a game for two played with a board and pieces, the object of
which is to get as many pieces as possible. The board consists of two
rows of five or seven holes each, each row assigned to one of the two
players, and a hole at either end, each assigned as a home base (balay
or balayan) of one of the players. One player picks up a given number
of the pieces and distributes them on the board, one piece in each
hole. At whatever hole the last piece is dropped, the player picks up
all the pieces in it and continues on dropping pieces until he runs
out, picks up the pieces in the hole where he ran out, and so forth
until he comes to a hole with nothing in it, in which case the opponent
gets the turn. Pieces are gained in three ways: (1) a stone is gained
each time the home base is passed; (2) when the pieces run out in the
player’s row opposite a hole in the opponent’s row with pieces in it,
they go to the player (hantuk); or (3) when the throw ends in the hole
immediately before the home base the pieces in that hole revert to the
player (sáka, 4). v [A12] play sungkà. -an(→) n board for playing this
game.

sungkab v [AN; a 12] get at food by breaking open the place where it is
kept. -an(→) n an animal that steals food by forcing open the place in
which it is kept.

sungkad a exact in fit. Ang íyang bistídu sungkad kaáyu nákù, Her dress
fits me perfectly. v {1} [A2C] fit, fit into. {2} [A12; b(1)] make s.t.
according to certain measurements. Unsang gidak-únag ímung gisungkaran,
What size box did you take the measurements from? sungkaran n s.t. from
which s.t. can be copied, from which the measurements can be taken.

sungkil n growth on the body resembling ginger roots, esp. on the
joints, which appear after an infection of yaws. v [B246N; b4] get
these growths.

sungkip v [A; c] patch a thatch roof. Pára mantinil, kartun lay átung
isungkip sa atup, We will use cardboard as a make-shift patch for the
roof.

sungkit n pole or stick, usually with a hook at the end used to get
s.t. out of reach. v [A; a] get s.t. out of reach with a sungkit.
Sungkítun nákù ang mga prútas nga dì maabut, I’ll get the fruits that
are out of reach down with a pole.

sungkiub = singkuung.

sungkù v {1} [A2; c] reach up to a point. Musungkù ang Krismas tri sa
pisami, The Christmas tree touches the ceiling. Isungkù ang kural sa
kílid sa balay, Have the fence reach the side of the house. {1a} [a3b2]
bump one’s head against s.t. above. Gi! Nasungkù ang ákung úlu sa
sanga, Ouch! I bumped my head against the branch. {2} [A; a12] go to
see s.o. for a purpose. Akuy musungkù sa mga táwu arun sila mahibalu
nga may trabáhu ugmà, I will go notify the people that there will be
work tomorrow. Gisungkù ku ang ákung inahan arun papuy-un dinhi sa
Sugbu, I went to fetch my mother to have her live here in Cebu. — sa
reaching as far as. Sungkù sa lángit ang ákung kalípay, My happiness
knows no bounds (lit. reaches the heavens).

sungkud_1 n cane, crutch. v {1} [A; b6] use a walking stick or crutch.
{2} [A; a1] make into a cane. {3} [a12] hit with a cane.

sungkud_2 n great-grandchild, nephew, or niece. apu sa — = sungkud_2.
apuhan sa — great-grandparent, granduncle, or aunt. v [b6] have a
great-grandchild. sungkuran n great-grandparent (uncle or aunt) or
great-grandchild (nephew or niece).

sungkudsungkud n auger shells and other long stick-shaped shells.

sungkul n k.o. smooth herb coming in two varieties or species: — putì,
with green leaves, and — pula with purple bottom surface: Clerodendron
sp.

sunglug v [A; a12] {1} tease, provoke to anger with words or actions.
Dì siya musunglug nákù kay dì man ku masukù, He does not tease me
because I don’t get mad. {2} for circumstances to mock one, as if
teasing. Naplát pa ta, giulan pa giyud. Gisúngug giyud ta sa panahun,
We had a flat and got caught in the rain. Circumstances were conspiring
against us. -an(→) a given to teasing.

sungpit n blowgun or s.t. used to squirt liquid. v [A; b5] squirt
liquid or blow pellets with a blowgun. Kinsay nagsungpit nímu ug túbig?
Who squirted water on you?

sungput v {1} [AC; ac] put things in line, end to end. Isumput ning
lamisáha sa usa arun ímung kahigdáan, Put this table next to the other
one so you can sleep on it. {2} [A2] join a queue. Ngánung musumput ka
man dihas tungà sa linya? Why do you butt in at the middle of the line?
{3} [A23; b2] appear from nowhere. Misumput lang siya, wà gánì
magtiligráma, He just appeared suddenly. He didn’t even send a
telegram. -ay n tailgating.

sungsung_1 v [A; b6] stop up or stuff s.t. into a tube or mouth of a
bottle. Nagsungsung ku ug tabákù sa ákung hunsuy, I am stuffing tobacco
into my pipe. Nasungsungan ang labábu, The washbasin got stopped up.
Sungsúngi ang bàbà sa butilya, Put a cork into the mouth of the bottle.
n {1} stopper. {2} pinch of pipe tobacco, enough to put in the pipe.
{3} k.o. posthole digger made of a bamboo pole which is forced into the
ground and then pulled out with the dirt stopped up inside it.

sungsung_2 = salungsung.

sungu n {1} bill, beak of fowl or birds. {2} similar structure in other
animals: trunk of elephants or the proboscis of mosquitoes. {3} the
whitish triangular lower structure of a grain of corn that attaches it
to the cob. {3a} by extension, the tough, somewhat transparent covering
of the corn kernel. (←) v [C; a12] in cockfighting, set the cocks and
let them peck at each other before fighting them or determining the
winner. n action of having cocks peck at each other. sungusúngu sa mais
= sungu, n3a. sunghan = suláhan. see súla.

súngug = sunglug.

sung-un see suung.

sungut, súngut a acrid in smell. Sungut kaáyu ang báhù sa purmalin,
Formaline smells acrid. (←) a irritating, irksome. Súngut kaáyu ning
tawhána kay samukan, This man is very irritating because he always
meddles in my affairs. v [A3P; b4] be, become irritated or irked.
-an(←), masungtánun a irritable, easily irritated.

súnguy v [A; b5] for an illness, bad trait, public disorders, and the
like to make their appearance in large quantities. Musúnguy ang ákung
ubu ug hitun-ugan ku, My cough sets in when I get exposed to damp.
Nagsúnguy ang panúlis run, Robberies are rampant now. Gisúnguy
(gisungúyan) ug balatían ang ákung manukan, A chicken epidemic attacked
my poultry.

sunítu n sonnet.

sunluk n sprain or dislocation caused by bending the limb backwards or
knocking the bone on its end. v [AP; ab3(1)] sprain or dislocate bones
in this way. Sunlukun ku nang ímung líug pinaági sa pagbunsù, I’ll
dislocate your neck by banging you down onto the ground head first.
Búla ang nasunlukan sa íyang tudlù, He sprained his finger when it was
knocked backwards with a ball.

sunlut v [A; b5] peel off, draw off the skin or skin-like covering. Ákù
nang gisunlut (gisunlútan) ang mga tiil sa manuk sa mga pánit, I have
taken the outer skin off the legs of the chickens. -an(→) n the sea
cucumber stripped of its skin and innards, ready for consumption.

sunsun a close together or to each other. Sunsun kaáyu ang pagtanum sa
mga lubi, The coconuts are planted very close to each other. Sunsun nga
pag-ubu, Coughing fits in rapid succession. v [A; a12] be close to each
other or together. Bagà ning panaptúna kay nagsunsun ang mga hulug,
This cloth is thick because the weft threads are close to each other.

sunting = asunting.

suntuk v [AN; a] strike with the fist, box. Nagpanuntuk siya sa
bungbung sa kalágut, He banged his fists on the wall in anger. -ay(→)
n fistfight.

súnù n k.o. medium-sized, red grouper (pugápu).

sunub v {1} [A2; b6] for liquids to penetrate, seep into or through.
Gáhì musunub ang túbig sa yútang kúnun, Water doesn’t seep easily into
clay soil. Dì makasunub ang uwan íning páyung, The rain can’t penetrate
this umbrella. {2} [A; b] add a small amount of juice pressed from
coconut meat to a stew of meat, fish, or vegetables and cook it. (←) =
sunub, 2. -in-an, -in-an(←) n food cooked with coconut juice.

sunud v 1 [A; ab26] follow, go behind s.o. Sunda tung awtúha! Follow
that car! {1a} [A23; c] do s.t. later as the next thing. Pamáhaw na mu
kay musunud ra ku, Eat your breakfast now because I’ll eat next.
Silhígi ang salug kay akuy musunud ug lampásu, Sweep the floor because
I will follow it up with scrubbing. Isunud ni pagmakinilya, Type this
the next thing. {1b} [A; a2P] do s.t. right after having done s.t.
else. {2} follow, imitate. Dílì siya musunud sa bag-ung múda, She
doesn’t imitate the new styles. Ayaw ug sunda nang batasána, Don’t
imitate that sort of manners. Ayawg sunda ímung maguwang nga balirúsu,
Don’t be headstrong like your elder brother. {3} [A2N] inherit. Siyay
musunud (manunud) sa ákung kabtángan, He will inherit my property.
{3a} [A2; b6] succeed in office. Ang bísi mauy musunud ingkásug mamatay
ang prisidinti, The vice-president succeeds in office if the president
dies. — ug kasal [AN] sponsor a wedding. Gubirnadur ang nagsunud sa
ámung kasal, A governor sponsored our wedding. n {1} the next, the one
following. Sunud simána, Next week. Sunud ugmà, The day after tomorrow.
{1a} the next thing done. Sunud ilúnud ang balátung human sa karni,
After the meat, put the beans in next. {2} following, according to the.
Sunud sa naandan nga batásan, Following the usual custom. {3} next.
Sunud simána, Next week. Sunud gulà, Next issue. Siya ang sunud nga
prisidinti, He will be the next president. (←) v [C; a12] be close to
each other in a series, line or succession. Sunúra ang mga misitíra nga
púlus pula, Put the red pots next to each other in line. sunudsunud
v [A] do s.t. one after another, following each other in rapid
succession. Musunudsunud ug pangaláyà ang dáhun sa tinghulaw, The
leaves withered one after another during the drought. sunudsúnud v [A;
a12] keep following, tagging along after. Kining irua musunudsúnud
bisan ása ku mulakaw, This dog keeps following me around wherever I go.
pa- v [A] set an example. Ikaw kay magulang, ikay mupasunud sa ímung
mga manghud, You are the elder brother, so you should set an example
for your younger brothers and sisters to follow. n in consecutive
order. Hinganlan nákù pasunud ang ngálan sa mga táwu sa laráwan gíkan
sa wala ngadtu sa túu, I will name the people in the picture in order
from left to right. pa-(←) = pa-, n. sundánun a tending to have
offspring closely spaced. masunúrun, masundánun, masinundánun
a obedient. maN-r-(←) n heir. -um-r- n the following, as enumerated.
-um-r-(←) {1} = maN-r-. {2} followers of a certain leader, belief, or
religion. sulundun a exemplary, worth imitating. panulundun n s.t.
which is inherited. Pagtúung panulundun sa katigulángan, A belief
inherited from one’s ancestors. Panulundun sa ílang pamilyang
pagkaunglù, The curse of needing to suck human blood is passed down
from generation to generation in their family. salang panulundun
{1} original sin. {2} act of coitus (euphemism).

sunug_1 n small room added to a house, usually to a small shack. v [A;
a] make such a small room.

súnug v {1} [A; a] burn s.t. up. Sunúgun nátù ning mga sagbut, Let us
burn these weeds. Ang mga nasunúgan, The people whose houses burnt
down. {2} [A] be burnt, destroyed by heat. Gisúnug man nímu ang dukut,
You burnt the rice. Nasúnug ang tanum sa ínit sa húlaw, The sun burnt
up the plants in the drought. {2a} roast s.t. that one uses slightly
burnt. Sunúga ang dáhun, kupúga, ug ibutíbut sa samad, Burn the leaves,
pulverize them, and spread them over the wound. n fire, conflagration.
(→)_2 n {1} s.t. slightly burnt. Sunug man ning mani, These peanuts are
burnt! {2} in a game of sungkà, any of the lateral holes which do not
have pieces in them. -an_2 = sunug, n2.

sunugan_2 n flathead fishes.

sun-uk v {1} [A; c] insert, dump s.t. under s.t. to hide or protect it.
Gisun-uk níyag ribulbir iláwum sa unlan, He hid the revolver under the
pillow. {2} [A2; b2] push through an area with obstacles. Dì ka
makasun-uk dihà kay tunukun, You can’t pass through that thicket
because it is thorny. {2a} go s.w. through great difficulty. Hisun-ukan
ku ang tanang kalisud sa kinabúhì, I have gone through all kinds of
difficulties in life.

sun-an, sun-un see suun_1.

sun-ut n width of the opening around the hem of a skirt. v [b5c1] add
to the opening of the skirt. Sun-úti (sun-úta, isun-ut) ang ákung sayal
arun dì ku maglisud ug líhuk, Add to the opening at the bottom of the
skirt so I can move without encumbrance.

sunuy n rooster, cock.

supa n sofa.

súpa n soup. v [A; a] have, make soup. supíra n soup tureen.

supà v [A; b6] feed s.o. pre-chewed food. Ug ubhun ang inahan hitakdan
ang bátang gisup-an, If the mother has cough the baby is likely to get
it if he is given pre-chewed food. n pre-chewed food. -in- = supà, n.

súpak v {1} [A; a12] go against, violate. Dílì ku musúpak sa súgù sa
maistru, I will not disobey the teacher’s orders. {1a} [B1256; a1c] cut
against the grain in wood working. Ayaw ug isúpak ang tumung sa tigib
arun dílì gáhì nga ihandus, Don’t chisel against the grain or it will
be hard to push. {2} [AC2; a12] oppose, be contrary to each other.
Musúpak ku sa ímung plánu, I will oppose your plans. Nagsúpak ang ámung
mga paminsar, Our opinions are contrary to each other. n {1} person
opposed. Kadtung súpak muísa sa ílang kamut, Those who are opposed,
raise their hands. {2} s.t. contrary, against. Supak sa ákung
kabubut-un nga mulakaw ka sa walay pananghid, It is against my will if
you go without asking my permission first. paN- n rebuttal. rigla sa
paN- rebuttal technique. ma-in-un, -iru a disobedient, tending to
oppose. -ira = supakíru (female).

sup-ak v [A; a12] split s.t. lengthwise, esp. along the grain. Ákù
úsang sup-ákun ang káhuy arun masulud sa pugun, I will split the wood
first so it will go into the stove. n the long piece split off from a
bigger piece. Tulu ka sup-ak nga kawáyan, Three slats of bamboo.

súpan = salúpan. see salup.

súpang a fat and healthy. v [B2N; b6] be, become fat and healthy.
Musúpang (manúpang) ang bátà ug sígi siyang inum ug gátas, The child
will become fat and healthy if he keeps drinking milk. ka- n state of
being fat and healthy.

súpas_1 n crackers or cookies. v [A13; a12] make, have crackers or
cookies.

súpas_2 = súpa.

súpat n grain in wood that is irregular and intertwined. Ang súpat
makapalisud sa pagsipilya sa káhuy, The irregular grain makes the wood
difficult to plane. -un a {1} full of irregular grains. {2} be hard to
split because of irregular grain. Káhuyng supátun kaáyung bugháun, Wood
that is very difficult to split. v [B1256] be wood of this sort.

supbul n softball. v [A13; b6] play softball.

sup dringk n soft drinks. v [A1] have soft drinks.

súpi n a peso (slang).

súpil v [A23; b6] go against what s.o. wants one to do. Ug supílan mu
ang tambag sa ímung amahan, gabáan ka, If you disobey your father’s
advice, you will get your just desserts. ma-un a rebellious,
disobedient. v [A13] be, become rebellious.

supíra see súpa.

supirbaysing n teacher in charge of the administration of a whole
school, one rank above the principal.

supirbaysur = supirbisur.

supirbisar v [A; b6] supervise, superintend. Supirbisahi (supirbisari)
ang mutsatsang nagdigámu, Supervise the maid while she is preparing
dinner.

supirbisur n supervisor of a school district. v [A13; a12] be made,
become the supervisor.

supirbisúri n supervisory position. v [A13; c1] hold a supervisory
position. Dalì rang magsupirbisúri ang mga inhinyíru sa mína, It’s easy
for mine engineers to get supervisory positions in the mining company.

supirbisiyun, supirbisyun n supervision.

supirintindint, supirintindinti n superintendent of the public schools
in a city or in a whole province.

supir istár n superstar of the movies. v [B1256] be, become a
superstar.

supiriyur a of a high quality. Supiriyur kaáyu ning panaptúna sa ímung
napalit, This cloth is very much better in quality than the cloth you
bought. n one’s superior in an organization or in rank.

supirmarkit n {1} name of one of the public markets in Cebu.
{2} supermarket.

supiryúra n mother superior. v [A13; a12] be, be made the mother
superior. madri — = supiryúra.

supla v {1} [A; a12] arrest the motion of dice or coins that have been
thrown. Ákung supláhun (suplahun) ang dayis ug dílì maáyung pagkalábay,
I will arrest the dice if they are not thrown properly. {2} [A; a2]
interrupt s.o.’s speech, usually with a question. Makasupla ba ta sa
nagsulti? May I put a question to the speaker? {3} [A; a12] check vice,
bad manners. Ángay nga supláhun nang tarása nga laksut, That bad trait
should be put to a halt. n violation of the rules in certain games. Sa
dáma ubligádu ka pagkáun sa ákung batu. Ug dì ka mukáun, supla ka, In
checkers you are obliged to take my piece. If you do not, you violate
the rules. supládu a {1} curt, laconic to the point of rudeness.
Supládu kaáyu siya ug sinultihan, He is very curt in speech.
{2} characteristically bent on going against advice, orders, or
instructions. Dì masápì ang supládu sa siminaryu, A disobedient person
doesn’t fit in the seminary. v {1} [B125] be rudely laconic. {2} [B2]
become characteristically inclined to disobey. supláda = supládu
(female).

suplágay v {1} [A; a3] be dispersed into various directions, cause s.t.
to be dispersed. Kinsay nagsuplágay sa mga húlin diri sa kwartu? Who
scattered the marbles all over the room? Nasuplágay na mi human mamatay
ang ámung inahan, We were scattered after our mother died. {2} [B2;
a12P] disperse, run in every direction. Pagbutu sa pusil, misuplágay
ang mga táwu, When the gun fired, the people scattered in all
directions.

suplimintu n supplement to a publication, to a diet. v [A13; c] take or
add s.t. as a supplement. Pagkáung gisuplimintúhag bitamína, Food
supplemented with vitamins.

suplǐr = suprǐr.

suplíti n blowtorch. v [A13; b6] use a blowtorch.

suprímu n title of the leaders of some organizations. Si Suprímu Luis
Taruk pangúlu sa Kumunista kanhi, Supreme Chief Luis Taruc was the
leader of the communists formerly.

suprǐr v [A; c] substitute for s.o., substitute s.t. for s.t. else. Ug
mupalta ka sa trabáhu dúna bay musuprǐr nímu? If you’re absent from
work do you have s.o. to substitute for you? Way hingpit nga makasuprǐr
sa gátas sa inahan, There is nothing that can substitute perfectly for
mother’s milk.

supsup v {1} [A; a] suck, take s.t. in by sucking. Ang búwak sa
antuwángang dinukduk kusug musupsup ug nánà sa hubag, Crushed hibiscus
flowers suck the pus from boils. Supsúpun sa limátuk ang dugù, Leeches
suck the blood. {1a} [A; b5] suck s.o. off. {2} [A2N] fawn, suck up to
(somewhat coarse). Musupsup (manupsup) siya sa mga táwung íyang
kapangayúan ug pabur, He sucks up to people he wants to ask favors
from. — bútù n apple polisher (coarse).

supsupun n saxophone (word play on supsup and saksupun—humorous).

supu v {1} [A; a12] embarrass s.o. by proving his allegations false.
Dílì ka makasupu nákù kay tinúud ang ákung gisulti, You cannot prove me
wrong because what I said is true. {2} [A12; a3] discard a card or
mahjong piece that allows an opponent to win the game. Dì ku masupu kay
magbantay man ku sa mga karta nga ilábay, I don’t discard pieces that
would allow anyone to go mahjong because I keep an eye on the pieces
that have been discarded.

supurtǎr v [A; b6] {1} provide s.o. with sustenance, support. Pila ka
kirída ang íyang masupurtaan? How many mistresses can he support?
{2} provide support to an attacking unit. Ang atáki sa dágat supurtahan
ug tulu ka bapur digíra, The sea assault will be supported by three
battleships. {3} [A13; b6] support a certain weight. Unum ka halíging
simintu nagsupurtǎr sa taytáyan, Six concrete columns supported the
bridge. {4} [A; b6] endorse, support a candidate. Dì siya musupurtar sa
ákung kandidátu, He would not support my candidate.

supurtir n athletic supporter. v [A; b6(1)] wear, use an athletic
supporter.

suput v [A; a12] 1 shoot with a blowgun. Kinsay nagsuput sa ákung
manuk? Who killed my chicken with a blowgun? {2} force s.t. out from a
tight hole by hammering in s.t. in its place. Supta nang lansang ug
láing lansang, Force out the nail by banging in another nail on top of
it. {3} [A23; c] soar up as if shot from a blowgun. Mu rag misuput ang
íyang kalípay ngadtu sa kawanángan, It seemed as though his happiness
soared up into space. {3a} do s.t. with speed, as if shot from a
blowgun. Misuput siyag dágan pagkakità sa ákung pistúla, He ran like
all get out when he saw my gun. Misuput siya ug usa ka pangutána sa
tsirman, He shot a question at the chairman. n blowgun or a dart shot
from a blowgun.

súput n general name for bags, esp. paper bags. v [c6] put in a bag.
Isúput lang nang kámay, Place the sugar in the paper bag.

sup-ut v [A; c] {1} fit s.t. tightly over, in, or around s.t. else.
Nagsup-ut ku áring plastik nga túbu sa bára, I am fitting this plastic
tube over the iron rod. {2} put on a piece of clothing wear. Nagsup-ut
siya ug bag-ung bistídu, She was wearing a new dress.

sur_1 n {1} mahjong, the south piece, one of the winds (bintus).
{2} the player at the right of the dealer. {3} the second round (ráwun)
in a game.†

sur_2 title for nuns. Sur Matildi, Sister Matilde.

súra_1 v [A; b5] {1} tease, ridicule a person for a defect. Suráhi
(suráha) siya nga pisut, Tease him for being uncircumcised. {2} bother,
annoy. Ngánung inyung gisúra ang bátà nga natúlug? Why did you bother
the child? She was sleeping so nicely. {3} ask a person to buy one s.t.
Musúra na pud ning ákung bátà ug sapátus kay gradwisyun na, My son will
ask me to buy him a pair of shoes because it will be graduation.
masuráhun a teasing.

súra_2 v [A] dance with the hands, feet, and body. Pwirting nakasúra sa
bátà arun hatágan siyag singku, How the child danced to earn a nickle.

súrab v [AP; c1P] flash a fierce look of anger, hate. Surábun (isúrab,
pasurábun, ipasúrab) níya ang íyang mga mata ug masukù, She flashes her
eyes when she is angry.

suraban a greedy eater that eats another’s share as well as his own.
Gipaulahi pagpakáun ang suraban nga baktin, The greedy piglet was fed
last. v [B12] become a greedy grabber of food.

surambaw n {1} double-cross, tamper with a game so that the outcome is
fixed. Way dalag-an ang átung pusta kay surambaw kaáyu tung duláa, We
didn’t have a chance with our bet because the game was completely
fixed. {2} name of a child’s game played with rubber bands knotted
tightly together. v [A; a12] throw a game, double-cross. Kadtung
nagsurambaw sa baskit dílì na paapilun unyà, Those who threw the
basketball game will not be allowed to participate next time. Dílì
gihápun ku mapildi sa iliksiyun bísag imu kung surambáwun, I will not
lose in the election anyway, even if you double-cross me.†

surangsurang v [A; a12] pester, annoy s.o. that is in a bad mood to
start out with. Ayaw bayà ku surangsuranga kay ínit ning ákung úlu,
Don’t anybody pester me because I’m in a bad mood as it is.

surbi v [A; a12] {1} survey land. {2} inspect a place to see how it is.
Musurbi úsà ku ánang yutáa úsà ku mudisidir, I’ll inspect that land
first before making any decision. {3} make a survey or poll.
n {1} survey of land, inspection of how s.t. is. {2} survey, poll.
-yur(←) n land surveyor. v [B156] be a surveyor.

surbíti n ice cream. v [A13; a12] make, make into ice cream. paN-
v [A2; b6] have ice cream. -ru n ice-cream vendor. -s = surbíti.

surihir v [A; c] make a suggestion. Sa míting karun musurihir ku nga
multáhan ang dílì mutambung, At the meeting today I will move that
absentees be fined.

suriksurik v [AN; b5] inquire searchingly, search for s.t.
meticulously. Ug musuriksurik (manuriksurik) kag trabáhu, makakità ka
giyud, If you’re serious in looking for a job, you’ll surely find one.
Ang sikríta nagsuriksurik ug pangutána sa kasilingánan sa mamumúnù
báhin kaníya, The detective inquired in great detail about the criminal
from his neighbors. Ang ákung maistra pwirting makasuriksurik
(makapanuriksurik) ug buling sa suuk, My teacher searches the corners
meticulously for dust.

surindir v {1} [A2; b6] surrender, give oneself up to proper
authorities or a stronger power. Misurindir ang mga Hapun sa mga
Alyádu, The Japanese surrendered to the Allies. {2} [A23] yield,
concede defeat. Ug áway lang, dì ku musurindir nímu, I will never
surrender to you in a fight. {3} [A23; b6] stop eating due to
satiation. Dihà ku sa ayis krim musurindir, When we got to the ice
cream, I had to stop eating.

suringiw a one who never does a thing right when sent on an errand.
Suringiw kaáyu ning batáang sugúun tungud sa kalinga, This child never
does a thing right when he is sent on an errand because he is so
inattentive. v [B] fail to follow instructions. Ngánung musuringiw ka
mag sugúun? Why don’t you follow instructions when you are sent on an
errand?

surísu n Spanish sausage made of pork. — di Bilbaw k.o. imported
Spanish sausage. — sa Insik Chinese sausage. v {1} [A; a2] make
sausage. {2} [A13; b6] cook s.t. with sausage as a spice.

súrit n home-made rifle that uses empty bullet shells reloaded with
broken nails and gunpowder. suritsúrit n bamboo squirt gun.

surku v [A; a12] plow between rows of corn to loosen the soil and
remove weeds (done usually once about halfway to the harvest time).
surkuhúnun n corn plants at about 2–3′ high, ready for weeding.

surpan = surtpan.

surplas n leftover military supplies and equipment sold to the civilian
population.

surprísa n surprise, surprise gift. Dúna kuy surprísa pára nímu, píyung
úsà, I have a surprise for you, close your eyes (first). v [c6] give
s.t. as a surprise gift.

sursi v [AN2; b6] darn, mend by darning. Sursíhan nátù ang samput sa
ímung karsúnis, Let us stitch over the seat of your pants. — tápak
v [A; a1] put a piece of cloth under a tear and run stitches over it to
strengthen the mend. n method of mending in this way. sinursihan
n place that has been darned on a garment having been mended with
darning stitches.

surtídus a of different sorts. Surtídus ang kulur sa pintal sa balay,
The house is painted with all different colors. n {1} a k.o. folk dance
performed by at least six pairs of male and female dancers. Each dance
figure is to a different tune. {2} assorted sweets sold packaged.

surtpan n short pants. v [A3; a12] wear, make into short pants.

súrù_1 n young of freshwater shrimp. paN- v [A2; b6] gather small
freshwater shrimps.

súruk v [A2S] for the blood to boil in anger. Nagsuruk pa ning ákung
dugù sa kalágut, My blood is still boiling in anger.

surup, súrup v [A2; b5] {1} for air to penetrate through the body
causing gas pains. Musurup (manurup) ang tun-ug, Draft causes gas
pains. Surupun (surupan) ka ug dì ka maghábul nga matúlug, You will
have gas pains if you sleep without covering yourself. {2} for feelings
to flow through one (literary).

surusúru n k.o. spiny shrub with fleshy tongue-shaped leaves of strong
astringent effect, the young leaves of which are used to spice paklay:
Euphorbia neriifolia.

súruy v {1} [A2; ac] go about, stroll. Diin ka musúruy gabíi? Where did
you go to last night? Isúruy ang bátà sa parki, Take the child for a
stroll in the park. {1a} ika- presentable (lit. can be worn for
strolling). Dílì ku mauwaw sa ákung uyab kay ikasúruy man pud, I am not
ashamed to be seen with my girl friend because she is pretty. {2} [A;
c1] bring s.t. around. Nagsúruy siyag isdà, She peddles fish. Isúruy
ang mga ilimnun sa mga bisíta, Bring the drinks around to the visitors.
libud — a given to wandering about with no useful purpose. v [B1]
become a vagabond. (→) bagduy = libud súruy. suruysúruy v [A13; b6]
{1} promenade, take a pleasure stroll. Magsuruysúruy ta sa baybáyun,
Let’s take a walk by the beach. {2} roam about uselessly. Nagpúnay lang
siyag suruysuruy ug way nahímù, All he ever did was roam about and
never accomplished anything. sinurúyan n {1} s.t. gained as a result of
going about. {2} a woman’s child born out of wedlock (lit. s.t.
obtained as a result of reckless wandering). {2a} one’s eldest child
(humorous). maN-r-(←) n peddler.

sus = hisus, n2. — maryusip = hisusmaryusip.

súsa n sodium hydroxide in white powder form used for making laundry
soap.

susáyid v {1} [A3; b3] commit suicide. Nagsusáyid siya kay dispirádu,
He committed suicide because he was disappointed in love. {2} [A23; bc]
do s.t., gamble against very great odds (lit. commit suicide).
Mususáyid lang kug kúhà sa tist bísag wà ku katuun, I’ll just take a
long chance on the examination, even if I didn’t study. Isusáyid kug
siyut ning tanan kung kwarta, I’ll bet all my money, come what may.
{2a} in rummy, pick up a card one needs but for which must also pick up
a large number of other cards which will be a burden.

súsi v {1} [A; a2] look into s.t., go and see to find s.t. out. Nagsúsi
mi sa mangga human sa bagyu, We went to see what became of the mango
tree after the storm. Wà ku makasúsi ug dúna pa bay túbig ang bangà, I
have not gone to see if there is still water in the jar. {1a} [a12]
look into, investigate. Susíhun sa Inbíay ang anumalíya sa Iltísi, The
NBI will look into the LTC anomalies. (→) v [A12; b2] {1} come across
s.t., inadvertently find s.t. out. Hingsusihan námù sila nga nagtabakù
ug ampiyun, We discovered them smoking opium. {2} come into information
about s.t. Nakasusi giyud ku ánang mga makina kay dúgay kung trabáhu sa
taliyir, I got to learn s.t. about engines because I worked in a shop
for a long time. susisusi v [A3N; a12] make inquiries about s.o.’s
life, doings, habits, and the like, usually maliciously. pa- v [A13;
c6] have a medical examination. Ipasúsi ang bátà sa duktǔr, Have the
child examined by the doctor. paki- v [A13; b6] ask for information,
inquire. Didtu mi ni Kaduy magpakisúsi báhin sa yútang ibaligyà, We
asked for information from Cadoy about the land for sale.
n investigation, inquiry.

suskribir v [A] subscribe to a periodical. Gustu ka bang mususkribir sa
Tayims? Do you want to subscribe to the Times?

suskrisiyun n subscription.

suskritur n subscriber.

susmaríya (from Hisus and Maríya) interjection {1} expressing helpless
frustration at s.t. which happened or about which nothing can be done.
Susmaríya ning batáa! Giyabu na pud ag gátas sa lamísa, Goodness, this
child! He spilled the milk all over the table again. {2} expressing
reaction to fright. Susmaríya, pwirting kuráta nákù, Heavens! I sure
was frightened.

suspi n peso or one peso (slang).

suspindǐr v {1} [A; a12] suspend from office or privilege. Suspindihun
ka ug makítà ka nga sad-an, You will be suspended if you are found
guilty. {2} [A1; a12] cause an action or practice to cease for the time
being. Suspindihun ang klási sa Lúnis ug Martis, The class will be
suspended on Monday and Tuesday.

suspinsu n suspension from office, school. v [A3P; a12] suspend s.o.
from office, school. Ang prisidinti mauy mususpinsu níya sa íyang
katungdánan, The president will suspend him from office.

suspíru, suspírus n sugar candy. — dimani k.o. sugar candy into which
peanuts have been thrown. v [A; a12] make sugar candy.

suspitsa, suspitsǎr v [A; b(1)] suspect. Walay mususpitsǎr nátù áning
kawáta, Nobody will suspect us of this robbery.

suspitsu v [A13; b6] suspect, regard s.t. in a certain way without
proof. Nagsuspitsu ku nga walà ning batáa magtunghà karun, I am
beginning to suspect that this child is not attending school. Siyay
gisuspitsuhan nga mauy nagkúhà sa kwarta, I suspect him of being the
one who took the money. n suspicion. -sa = suspitsúsu, 2 (female). -su
a {1} arousing suspicion. Suspitsúsu ug líhuk ang istranyu, The
stranger’s behavior is suspicious. {2} suspicious of others. Asáwang
suspitsúsu sa íyang bána, A wife suspicious of her husband.

sustansiya n nutriment. Daghang sustansiya ang útan, Vegetables are
very nutritious. ma-, masustansiyáhun a nutritious. Ang ayis krim nga
Magnulya masustansiya (masustansiyáhun) kaáyu, Magnolia ice cream is
very nutritious. v [A13] be nutritious.

sustinídu_1 n {1} sharp, a note one-half step higher. Pa sustinídu, F
sharp. {2} a sharp cord.

sustinídu_2 see sustinir.

sustinir v {1} [A2; b6] last, manage to keep up with some work.
Musustinir ka nákù ug buksing ug mga lima ka ráwun? Can you last five
rounds boxing against me? Sustinihan ku nang trabahúa, I will keep on
with that work. {1a} [A; c] withstand weight or pressure, sustain. Ang
sanga dì na makasustinir sa gibug-atun sa mga búnga, The branch cannot
withstand the weight of the fruits. {2} [A3; b6] stick to a line of
reasoning or allegation. Musustinir ka sa ímung gisulti? Will you stick
to your story? {3} [a2] make do with s.t. less in quality or quantity.
Gisustinihan ku níya ug sulti sa íyang kinawayan nga ininglis, He made
do, speaking to me in broken English. Ságing nga isustinir sa
tinggutum, Bananas which we make do with in times of famine.
sustinídu_2 a {1} assiduous, sticking to s.t. Kadtung sustinídu sa
ílang trabáhu pag-usbáwan ug swildu, Those who are assiduous in their
work will be given a raise in salary. {2} having the capacity to
endure, carry on with work. Sustinídu kaáyu siya ug kálut ug kanal kay
dagkù siyag buktun, He has the capacity to dig ditches because he has
muscular arms.

sustintu n money for one’s sustenance. Ang sustintu nga ipadala sa
íyang bána ígù ra sa pagkáun, The sustenance her husband sends is
enough for food. v [A; b6] give money for sustenance. Dì na ku
musustintu nímu ug magminyù ka, I will not support you any more if you
get married.

súsu n {1} breast, the mammary gland or its analogous formation in
males. {2} angular corners of pillows, sacks, and the like which can be
taken hold of. -g agtà n hornet’s nest hanging from a tree (lit. an
agtà’s breast). v {1} [A2S; b(1)] suckle. Ang tútuy nga walà sus-i dílì
bitay, Breasts that have not suckled a baby do not sag. {2} [a12] hit
in the chest, underneath the breasts toward the arm. Ug sushun
(susuhun) ug dunggab ang táwu, matigbak, If a man is stabbed on the
side next to his breast, he will die right away. pa- v [A; ac] feed
with the breast or bottle. Ayaw ni ipasúsu sa bátà kay dáan ning
gatása, Don’t give the baby this milk because it is not fresh. sus-an
a having a mammary gland or s.t. like it. Bitin nga sus-an ang gipakítà
sa karnabal, They showed a snake with mammary glands in the carnival.
{2} mother with a nursing infant. úmang sus-an see úmang. ma-(→)
n infant.

susù n k.o. smooth cerith shell of fresh waters, black, dark green, or
brown. paN- v [A2; b6] gather susù.

sùsù v [A; a1b2] {1} pound s.t. usually with short and moderately heavy
strokes. Sùsúun nímu pag-áyu ang pánit arun mahúmuk, Pound the leather
well so it will get soft. {2} knock s.t. on the surface and bruise it
without breaking the surface. Sùsúun ku nang ngábil mu ug mutubag ka
pa, I’ll bruise your lips if you answer back again.

susun a close together, in rapid succession. Susun ang mga balay sa
syudad, The houses in the city are close to each other. v [B3(1)6;
b6c1] do, situate in rapid or close succession. Misusun siya sa íyang
inahan ug kamatay, She died soon after her mother died.

susut a {1} stunted in growth. Pulus susut ang mga tanum, The plants
are all stunted. {2} scarce. Susut ang taksi árung urása, Taxis are
scarce round about this time. v [B; b6] {1} be, become stunted or
runty. Mususut ang mga bátà kun paalsáhun ug bug-at, Children will grow
up to be stunted if they are made to carry heavy loads. Nagsusut ang
mga tanum tungud kay wà abunúhi, The plants were stunted in growth
because they weren’t fertilized. {2} be, become scarce. Nasusut ang mga
isdà tungud sa dinamíta, Fish have become scarce because of the
dynamite fishing.

susyádu (from susyu_2) a having a defect on the surface. Dì na mahálin
ang mga prútas nga susyádu, Fruit with defects on the skin is hard to
sell. Dì na siyang patabak-un kay susyádu nag bágà, He is not allowed
to smoke any more because he has defective lungs. v [B126] be, become
defective.

susyal a fond of attending social functions. v [B12] be, become fond of
attending social gatherings. Burung niadtu si Lurna, karun nasusyal na,
Lorna used to be shy but now she has become fond of parties.

susyalayit n socialite. v [B1] be, become a socialite.

susyidad n {1} society. Susyidad nga maut, Hypocritical society.
{2} society, club. Susyidad sa mga kababayin-an, Women’s society. alta
— see *alta.

susyu_1 n partnership. v {1} [C; b6] be partners with, make a partner
of s.o. Magsusyu mi si Inting ug ristawrant, Inting and I are partners
in a restaurant. {2} [A13; a1c] organize, contribute to a partnership.
ka- n partner in business.

susyu_2 n {1} defect or imperfection in a fruit. Kining mga mangga nga
may susyu laina kay dílì ibaligyà, Separate these mangoes with
imperfections because we won’t sell them. {2} mark, imperfection in
s.t. that is supposed to be smooth. Kutsing way susyu, A car without a
scratch.

sút = súlut_1,2.

súta_1 n a coat coloration of animals consisting usually of half black
and half white fur.

súta_2 n {1} stable boy, groom. {2} the jack of the Spanish cards
(number 10). v {1} [B156; a12] be, become a groom. {2} [A12; b8] draw a
jack.

sútà v {1} [A13; a2b2] go to find out or verify s.t. Sutáa didtu ug
pilay baligyà sa íyang kabáyù, Go and see how much he wants to sell his
horse for. {2} [C; a1c3] have it out with s.o. to find out who is
really who. Sutáun nátù ug kinsay talawan nátung duha, We will have it
out and see which of us two is a coward.

sutána n {1} priest’s cassock, the soutane. {2} the priestly office.
Ánang ímung gibúhat wà lang gánì ka maghunàhúnà sa ímung sutána, When
you did that you completely forgot that you were a priest. v [A; a12]
wear, make into a soutane.

sutanghun n bean threads or dish made of bean threads. v [A; b6] make
sutanghun.

sutil_1 = limunsítu.

sutil_2 a rebelliously stubborn. Layhan kung mulatigu ánang sutil kaáyu
nga bátà, I’d like to whip that stubborn child. v [B12; b6] be, become
rebelliously stubborn.

sutsut v [A12; c1] {1} slurp, eat or drink noisily in a sucking way.
Íya lang gisutsut ang usa ka panaksang sabaw, He simply slurped down
one bowl of soup. {2} [AN; b6] attract s.o.’s attention with a low
interrupted hissing sound, either to call him or reprimand him. n the
hissing or slurping sound of this sort. paN- n act of hissing at s.o.

sutuy v [A2] {1} leave immediately without looking back or saying
anything. Misutuy siya ug lakaw kay nangísug tu nákù, He walked
straight away without looking back because he was mad at me. {2} zoom
or shoot off like a projectile. {3} for a child to slip out easily on
delivery. Misutuy lang ang bátà sa pagsakit sa íyang tiyan, The mother
had a pain in her stomach, and the baby just slipped out.

suub_1 n {1} pointed stake made of a length of thinnish species of
bamboo (bagákay) put in the bottom of pit traps. {2} a spear fashioned
in the same way. v [a12] make into a stake or spear.

súub = sul-ub, v. (→)_2 = sul-ub, n.

suud a {1} close in space or time. Suud na kaáyu ang adlaw sa kasal,
The wedding day is near. Ang baril sa gasulína suud ra kaáyu sa dapug,
The gasoline barrel is a bit too near the stove. {2} intimate. Suud
kaáyu ming amígu, We are very intimate friends. v [ABC; a] place, be
set closely. Suúrun ta nig butang arun dílì magkabulagbulag, Let’s
place these close together so they won’t get separated. {2} [BC; a12]
be, become intimate, close to. Dílì ku makigsúud sa tabian, I don’t
want to be intimate with a gossip. ka- banay n close relative. Ákù
gihápun siyang kasúud bánay kay mag-ágaw mi, He is still a close
relative because we are cousins.

suudsúud v [A; a12] mimic s.o. usually to make fun of him. Nagsuudsúud
ang bátà sa nagdiskursu, The child is mimicking the man delivering a
speech. Suudsuúrun ku siya arun manuyù, I’ll mimic her so she’ll get
angry.

suuk n {1} corner, the inside space. Suuk sa kaban, Corner of a trunk.
{2} a remote secluded place. Suuk tung íla sa iskwátir, They live deep
in the squatter area. {3} in recesses of one’s thoughts. Sa mga suuk sa
ímung kunsyinsiya, In the recesses of your conscience. {4} foul smell
characteristic of a dank, dirty corner. Pag-ílis gánig sinínà, nanimáhù
ka lang suuk dà, Change into s.t. clean. You smell like a dank and
dirty corner. v [c] be put at the corner or in a remote secluded place.
paN-(←) n wisdom tooth. v [b4] grow a wisdom tooth. ka-an n remote
out-of-the-way places of s.t. Íyang gisangyaw ang balità sa kasuukan sa
ginharían, He spread the news to the remote corners of the kingdom.

suul v {1} [A2; b4] for an illness or bad behavior that recurs at
intervals to recur. Misuul na pud ang íyang kabúang, His foolishness is
showing itself again. Gisul-an na pud siya sa íyang húbak, He is having
an attack of asthma again. {2} [A; b4] have a stomach ache. Ug magsuul
pa nang ímung tiyan, tumar áning tambal, If your stomach still hurts,
take this medicine. n stomach pain. — sa irù very painful stomach
cramps believed to be a kabúhì which has found its way into the pit of
the stomach. sulul-an, sul-ánun a prone to having recurring sicknesses
or emotional derangements.

súul v [A; c] wear, put s.t. on. Ngánung nagsúul ka mag bulingun? Why
are you wearing dirty clothes?

suun_1 v {1} [A; a2] imitate, adopt a fad or mannerism. Dílì ku musuun
sa mga bag-ung múda sa pamisti, I will not follow the new dress styles.
Sayun ra ning baylíha, sun-a lang ang ákung lákang, This dance is easy;
just follow my steps. {2} [A; c16] wear s.t. belonging to s.o. else.
Sun-un ang ákung sinínà sa ákung manghud, My younger sister will wear
my dress.

suun_2 v [A; c] {1} fill up a hole, cavity with solid objects. Siyay
misuun ug balas sa ímung sapátus, He filled your shoes with sand.
Sun-ig batu ang mga láta, Fill the cans with stones. {2} = sul-ut, 2.

*súun ig- n brother or sister. ig- sa inahan, amahan n half-sister or
brother on one’s mother’s or father’s side. ig- sa ngálang ig- a
brother in the real sense of the word. v [A123S] have as a brother or
sister. paN- v [A2; c1] consider s.o. as a brother or sister. Ug ang
Muslim na gániy makapangigsúun nímu, unúngan ka giyud, When a Muslim
considers you a brother, he is loyal to you. mag-, manag- n siblings.
v [A13; c] do s.t. together as siblings. Imagsuun níla ang ílang
nigusyu, The siblings will do business together. mag- sa lamísa apan
dílì sa bulsa each must pay his own way, whether or not they are
brothers (lit. brothers at the table but not with the pocketbook).
Bayran giyud nímu ang ímung útang nákù kay bísan túud ug magsúun ta sa
lamísa, dílì man sa bulsa, You should pay me what you owe because
though we are brothers, we have different pocketbooks. inig-(→) n in a
brotherly, sisterly fashion. Inigsuung tambag, Sisterly advice.

suung v [A; b5] go, swim under s.t. that is not far above one’s head.
Misuung siya sa awtu pagtan-aw ug wà ba mabálì ang mwilyi, He crawled
under the car to see if the spring hadn’t broken. Dílì ka makasuung sa
pantalan kay daghang sisi didtu, You can not swim under the wharf
because there are lots of sharp shellfish there. sung-anay n method of
punishing the losers in a group game by making them crawl between the
legs of the winners standing in a line. v [A1] impose this punishment
on the loser. suungsúung = sung-anay. sung-unun a for s.t. to be so low
one has to bend his head passing under it.

súung = sul-ung.

suup v [A23N; b6N] look and hear covertly to gather information. Hadluk
ka nga musuup (manuup) sa ímung asáwa, You’re scared to spy on your
wife. Unsay ímung gipanupan dihà? What are you spying on there?

suut n arthritic pains, usually in the finger joints. v [b4] have
arthritic pains, esp. in the finger joints.

súut_1 v {1} [A; a12] pass or force one’s way through tall objects.
Dílì ta makasúut dihà kay bagà ang mga bágun, We cannot get through
there because the vines are very thick. {2} [A2; a12] penetrate, pass
through pores. Ang bulà sa Rinsu musúut giyud sa lugas sa panaptun,
Rinso suds really penetrate the fibers of the cloth.

súut_2 = sul-ut.

súuy n {1} the edible flesh of the jackfruit (nangkà) which encloses
the seed. {1a} name given in some localities to the jackfruit itself.
{2} the inedible pulp of the jackfruit which surrounds the edible
flesh. {2a} undeveloped seed of fruit which is small and flat, and
analogous to the inedible pulp of the jackfruit.

suwa n word to drive away chickens.

suwà_1 n general term for various sour, fragrant citrus fruits with a
taste similar to lime and thick peels that adhere to the flesh, varying
in size from the tiny samuyaw to the byásung. suwàsuwà n bush bearing
leaves with an odor like citrus and small mucilagenous berries, red
when ripe: Triphasia trifolia.

suwà_2 = sulà_1.

suwa- for words with suwa- see also sula- and swa-.

súwal v [A2] for a sickness to recur (said of sicknesses for which it
is possible to prevent recurrences). Nakasúwal ang íyang pamutu kay
nag-abusar man siya sa babáyi, His skin disease came back because he
indulged in women.

suwat_1 a remark uttered by s.o. upon hearing s.o. else sneezing, as a
way of preventing s.t. worse from happening (said as a sumpà).

suwat_2 = sulat.

súwat v [A; a] pull up s.t. lightly rooted on the ground. Átung suwátun
ang mga tag-as nga sagbut, We’ll just pull up the tall weeds.

suway bagyu = sulaybagyu.

súwing gam n chewing gum.

suwits n switch; a device for opening or closing an electric circuit.
v {1} [A; c6] switch s.t. on. Isuwits ang sugà bi, Switch the lights on
please. {2} [A23] shift from one course of study to another.

súyà v [B126; b3] feel dislike towards s.o. out of envy or because of
an overbearing, braggart sort of personality. Makasúyà man nang ímung
pagkahambugíru, Your bragging makes people resent you. Nasúyà siya nákù
kay dílì man giyud siya makalupig, He resents it that he can never beat
me.

suyágit = syágit.

súyak v [A; c] put a spike, thorn, or anything pointed on a path to
pierce a foot or tire. Suyákan nátù ang kadaplínan sa gardin, Let’s put
pointed stakes all around the edges of the garden. n = suyak. (→)
n nail, tack or the like, to pierce the foot.

suylà v [A; ab7] {1} overflow, spill over. Kun mag-ulan, ang túbig
musuylà sa kanal, When it rains, the water spills out of the ditch. Sa
prugráma ang mga táwu misuylà ngadtu sa karsáda, The people who
attended the program spilled over into the street. Gisuylà níla ang mga
prútas sa lamísa, They put fruit on the table until it spilled over the
edges. {1a} splash up as a result of pressure or impact. Dílì makasuylà
ang tubà kay gamay ug bàbà ang sudlanan, The palm toddy cannot splash
out because the container has a small mouth. {2} [A3] for an emotion to
be extremely great. Misuylà ang ákung kalípay pagkadungug nákù sa
balità, I was overflowing with happiness when I heard the news.

suylan = kamúning.

suylas n {1} small tacks of the sort used to nail the straps of clogs
to the wooden sole. {2} side of the heels of men’s shoes. v [b] nail
with suylas.

suysuy v [A; a] pound a small amount of rice with a pestle. Magsuysuy
lang kug pára lugáwun, I’ll pound just enough rice for porridge.

suyud n bee stinger. v [A2N; b8] sting. Dílì makasuyud (makapanuyud)
ang buyug ug kuptan sa pakù, Wasps can’t sting if you hold them by the
wings.

súyup v [A2S; a12] {1} suck in, draw in air or liquid. Ug suyúpun ang
túbig sa bumba, maáyu pa nang bumba, As long as the pump sucks in the
water, it is still good. {1a} absorb, draw by capillary action. Ang
naylun kúlì musúyup ug singut, Nylon does not absorb sweat well.
{1b} for magnets to draw. Ang lansang mutaput ug suyúpun sa batubaláni,
The nail will stick if it is attracted by the magnet. {2} [A3; a12] use
up money as if it were sucked away. Ang gastu sa gasulína musúyup ug
dakù sa ímung kítà, The cost of gasoline just sucks away a large
portion of your earnings. n action of sucking, absorbing, pulling by a
magnet.

swá n acronym for the SWA, Social Welfare Administration.

swábi_1 a {1} bland, not irritating. Sa mga tambal sa ubu, kiniy swábi,
Of all the cough medicines this is the one that is blandest.
{2} socially graceful, smooth. Swábi kaáyu siya ug binaylihan, He
dances very smoothly. {3} slow but perceptible in effect or outcome.
Maáyu ning tambála kay swábi ug ipiktu, This medicine is good because
it has a slow but perceptible effect. v [B2] be, become bland, smooth,
not so harsh in effect.

swábi_2 = sulábi. see labi.

swágir n k.o. loose blouse used by pregnant women. v [A; b6] wear, make
into a blouse of this sort.

swágit = syágit.

swakan a eating anything that comes one’s way. Nagsakit ang tiyan sa
bátà kay swakan man kaáyug bàbà, That child has a stomachache because
he eats anything and everything that he can get his hands on.

swákì = saluwákì.

swángit (from swápang and pángit) a greedy and ugly.

swápang a oppressively opportunistic, taking advantage. Swápang insíka.
Maáyu lang manghuwam, piru dílì magpahuwam nákù, That Chinese is a no
good opportunist. He’s great at borrowing, but when it comes to
lending, forget it. Swápang nímu uy. Ikay nagswildu, akuy mubangka, You
are so inconsiderate. You get the salary and I have to pay the bill.

swásid = saluwásid.

swíbil n a joint that pivots freely and is attached between two lengths
of line or chain to prevent kinking. v [A13; a2] make into, attach a
swivel.

swildu n salary, fixed compensation paid regularly for services done.
v {1} [A3N2; c] pay a salary. Ug siyay nagswildu nímu adtu ka
magsirbisyu níya, If he pays your salary, you work for him. {2} [A; b]
get a certain salary. Anhà na ku mangasáwa ug magswildu na kug míl, I
will get married when I have a salary of a thousand a month. swilduánan
n persons who are to receive their salary. di-, swildádu n having a
salary, wage earner. Sa púlù ka magsúun, walu ang swildádu (diswildu),
Of the ten brothers, eight are wage earners. Kusug kaáyu kang mugastu.
Mu ra kag diswildu (swildádu), You sure do spend, as if you were
earning money. v [B1256] be a wage earner. ting-, tingpaN- n payday.
Lamì pud ta ug pagkáun sa tingswildu (tingpanwildu), We have delicious
food on payday.

swiltu a free to do anything. Swiltu kaáyu nà siya sa paglakawlákaw kay
daghan mag masúgù, She’s free to go anywhere she wants to because she
has lots of servants. v [B123(1); b6] be, become free to do anything.
Ang kadakù sa aláwans sa istudiyanti mauy makaswiltu (makapaswiltu)
niíni ug gastu, A student spends money freely if he gets a big
allowance.

swing n swing music. v [B1235; a12] play in swing time.

swíng n swing to swing on.

swípir n sweeper, the child assigned by the teacher to sweep. v [B156;
a12] be the sweeper. -unun n one’s turn to be the sweeper.

swipstik n sweepstakes, the national lottery, the winners of which are
usually determined by horse races. v [A13] hold the sweepstakes.

swirti n {1} luck, good fortune. Ug may swirti ka makahálin ka ug tulu
ka tíbi ang simána, With luck you can sell three TV sets a week. Swirti
nga nahitabù tu kay nahibaw-an ang íyang binúang, It was a good thing
that that happened because I found out what he had been doing.
{2} fate, fortune. Íyang swirti nga maminyù ug bálu, It is her fate to
marry a widower. Swirti nga naabut ang amahan ug naabtan sila,
Unfortunately the father arrived and they were caught in the act.
v {1} [A12; b8] do s.t. lucky by chance. Nakaswirti ku ug pílì sa únang
ganti, By luck I picked the one that won first prize. {2} [A23; a4] be,
get to be lucky. Muswirti usáhay pud ang ákung pangisdà, Sometimes I
turn out lucky in my fishing. swirtiswirti a chancy, a matter of luck.
Swirtiswirti kanúnay ang panágat ug maáyu nga mangítà ka ug trabáhu,
Fishing is a chancy occupation, and you would do better to look for
work. v [A13; a4] be, get to be lucky at times.

swis línin n k.o. finely woven imported cloth.

swít n slow music. v [A2; b6] dance to slow music. swit myúsik = swít.

swítik a clever, smart and mischievous at the same time. Swítik kaáyung
batáa, kay mangáyù nákù bisag natagaan na siyang Máma, What a clever
rascal. He asks me for money when his Mother already gave him some.
v {1} [B125] be clever and haughty. {2} [A; a12] deceive with sleight
of hand, esp. in cards. Ug wà pa tu switíka sa nagbangka, alas untà tuy
ákung madáwat, If the dealer hadn’t cheated, I would have gotten an
ace.

swítir n sweater, sweatshirt. v [A12; a12] wear, make into a sweater or
sweatshirt.

swítu a {1} know how to do s.t. Swítu kaáyu siya sa panágat, He knows
all about fishing. {2} familiar with a place. Swítu kaáyu siya ug ásang
pampaman, He knows where all the bawdy houses are. v {1} [B125; b8]
come to know s.t. Naswítu na ku sa inyung sikrítu, I have found out
your secret. {2} [a12] go s.w. to find out s.t. Switúha didtu ug naunsa
nang ílang ámut, Go and find out what happened to their contribution.

syágit v [A2S; b6(1)] shout. Walà siya makasyágit kay gitiúnan ug
pusil, She wasn’t able to shout because a gun was pointed at her.
Isyágit ang ímung tubag, Shout out your answer. n shout.

syákuy n tidbit made of flour, and optionally eggs, formed into long
slender pieces and deep fried in fat. v [A13; a12] make, make into
syákuy.†

syálan = unsingálan.

syampu n hair shampoo. v [AN; c] shampoo. Dì ku musyampu (manyampu) kay
manglarut ang ákung buhuk, I don’t use shampoo because I am losing my
hair.

syánga = pantíhan.

syáping v {1} [A1; b6] go shopping for dry goods. Magsyáping ka sa
Wayit Guld? Will you go shopping in the White Gold (department store)?
{2} [A; b6] window-shop.

syapirun = tsapirun.

syápù n k.o. shrub of waste places, the bark of which makes a weak
rope.

syápul_1 v [A; c1] shuffle cards, mahjong pieces.

syápul_2 v [A2C23; b5] for a cock to fight by making thrusts with the
feet. Syapúlun (syapúlan) dáyun nang inyung manuk sa akúa, My cock will
attack yours with his feet instantly. n action of fighting, making
thrusts with the feet. -in-an(→) n manner of fighting in this way.

syárap shut up! Syárap! Dì giyud ka pul-an ug sulti! Shut up! You never
get tired of talking, do you!

syarpsyútir n {1} sharpshooter. {2} one who consistently puts the ball
into the goal or hole. v [B12] be, become a sharpshooter or consistent
scorer.

syáru — ug expression of disbelief: it’s impossible. Syáru ug mahúbad
ning pagkabaáta, It is impossible that it should come undone the way it
was tied. Wà giyud kay ikahátag? Syáru ug wà kay diyis! You can’t give
a penny? Surely you can let me have ten!—[name, pronoun] How could
[noun or pronoun] do such a thing! Syáru sab ka Tina. Wà na lang
makapakáun sa bátà! Tina, how could you! You haven’t even thought of
feeding the child!

syát v [A; c1] {1} shoot the ball into the basket or hole to score a
point. {2} take a still photograph. n {1} point or goal scored by
shooting the ball. {2} a shot of liquor. {3} shot, single exposure on a
roll of film. -ir a one who is a good shot or good at throwing in games
that require aiming. v [B12; b6] become a good shot. maniníyat
n photographer (humorous). -gan n shotgun. v [A12; b2] fire a shotgun
at.

syátir a see syát. n shutter of a camera.

syáuk v [A2S; b6] long, drawn out shout, shriek. Misyáuk ang bumbíru sa
pagpaingun sa kaláyu, The fire truck went to the fire with screaming
sirens. Intáwun ang bátà nagsiyauk sa kasakit, The poor boy was
shrieking in pain. n loud, long-drawn sound, shriek.

syáwir n {1} shower for bathing. {2} shower bath. v {1} [a2] install a
shower. {2} [A] take a shower.

syáwir parti n shower for brides. v [A; b(1)] give a bridal shower.

syíding n shading of s.t. drawn or letters. v [A; a1b] shade s.t.
drawn.

syílak = sílak_1.

syimpri expression indicating an obvious and unavoidable consequence.
Syimpri, ímu giyud tung bayran kay ikay mikáun sa mangga, Of course you
must pay for the mango because you ate it.

syinsiya = sinsiya_1.

syintipiku n scientist. a done in a scientific way. Gigamà ni sa
syintipiku nga paági, This was made in a scientific way. v {1} [A1] be
a scientist. {2} [a12] do s.t. scientifically.

syintu combining form for counting one hundred between 101 and 199.
Syintu diyis, One hundred ten. -s hundreds, used only after the numbers
of Spanish origin except singku ‘five’. Dus syintus, Two hundred. v see
tris.

syíring v {1} [A; c1] sew s.t. with shirring. {2} [A; b6] wear s.t.
with shirring. n s.t. sewn with shirring.

syirtu = sirtu.

syista n siesta, a brief nap after lunch. v [A] take a siesta.

syíti = síti.

syúap v {1} [A23] show up as expected. Dì na tingáli musyúap ang ímung
dít kay lawum nang gabíi, Your date is probably not going to show up
any more because it is already quite late. {2} [A2] shine in a field of
activity. Ingun ug bráyit. Wà man lagi siya musyúap sa klási, They say
she is very bright. Why didn’t she show up in class?

syudad n {1} city. {2} pubic region (humorous). Ug daghang táwu sa
baryu, labi na sa syudad, There are plenty of people in the village
(i.e., hair in the beard). How many more there must be in the city
(i.e., hair in the pubic region)! v [B12; a12] be, become, make into a
city. -nun n city resident. a like one from the city. v [B125] become
citified in one’s ways.

syukang kaw n action of winning in mahjong where a player has obtained
an úpin kang (see kang_2) and the fourth piece which made the kang_2.

syuktung n k.o. cheap commercial alcoholic drink, called after the
brand name Se Hoc Tong.

syúmuy n {1} k.o. game of marbles in which the marbles are thrown
toward five small holes such that only one marble gets in. If none
does, the player hits a marble designated by the opponent without
hitting any of the others. Hitting more than one marble or putting more
than one marble in the hole nullifies the play. {2} action of putting
the marble in a hole. {3} intercourse (humorous). v [A; c] {1} play
syúmuy. {2} shoot the marbles into the hole. {3} [AC; c] have
intercourse (stick it in—humorous).

syúpaw n snack made of rice flour filled with meat, eggs, and spices,
and cooked in steam. v [A; a12] make, have syúpaw.

syurtkat n short-cut route, shortest way to reach a place. Kining
karsáda mauy syurtkat sa Talísay, This road is a shortcut to Talisay.
v [A2; a2] take a shortcut. Nagsyurtkat mi sa baul, We took a shortcut
through the field.

syurt pants, syurts = surtpan.

syút_1 go ahead ask the question. Ug andam ka na sa ímung pangutána,
syút! If you are ready with your question, go ahead, shoot!

syút_2 v [A; c6] put all the money one has on one bet. Isyút ang ímung
pusta, daug lagi, Shoot your money. We’ll win, you can count on it.

syúting n filming of a motion picture. wà pa mahuman ang — a humorous
phrase used in referring to a man with long hair, from the notion that
actors wear long hair throughout the duration of the filming of s.t.
v [A1; b6] {1} film a motion picture. {2} take pictures. Magsyúting mi
sa baybay, We’ll take pictures at the beach.

syútis {1} = asyútis. {2} = sayúti.
