


=== A ===


a n letter A. walay — illiterate.

-a subjunctive direct passive affix. see -un.

-a(←) {1} affix added to nouns forming words which refer to a specific
one of several: Kanang isdáa, dílì kadtu, That fish there, not that one
further over. Háing baláya ang íla? Which house is theirs? {1a} added
to possessive pronouns: the particular one that belongs to [so-and-so].
Dakù ang amúang balay, gamay tung iláha, Our house is large, and theirs
is small. {2} affix added to adjectives to form exclamation. Dakúa uy!
My! How big it is! Patyun tikaw, irúa ka! I’ll kill you, you dog you!
Ngilngígang awtúha à! That’s some car!

á particle used as a pause word before starting to speak. {1} as a
filler. Á, muanhi ka ugmà? Um, are you going to come here tomorrow?
{2} deprecating or showing unimportance of what just preceded. Á,
paríha ra nákù, Oh, it’s all the same to me. Á, nagkumidiya lang siya,
Oh, he’s just joking. {3} showing mild disapproval. Á, dì nà mahímù,
Oh, you can’t do that. {4} recalling or conceding s.t. Á, duha diay tu,
Oh, yes. There were two of them, weren’t there. {4a} preceding s.t.
just found out. Á, Lítu diay ímung ngálan, Oh, so your name is Lito. Á,
kanindut, Oh, how nice! {5} expressing relief. Á, nahuwasan ku, Ah,
what a relief!

à particle preceding or following a sentence with an adjective
predicate. {1} dismissing s.t. as impractical, too easy, impossible,
etc. À, mu ra diay nà? Kasayun à! Oh, is that all there is to it? How
easy it is! À, ása man ku mutúu nímu, Hm, you think I could believe
you? {2} showing disapproval. À, hináya nímung mulíhuk, Hm! You sure
work slowly! {3} showing surprise. À, kanindut nímug sinínà, How come
you have such a beautiful dress on!

ā̀ = álà.

aba_1 n breast of fowls.

aba_2 exclamation of pleasure and surprise. Aba! Nakadaug ku, My! I
won!

ábà tuy (from sábà dihà untuy) shut up! Ábà tuy, maáyu ka lang sa
tayáda, wà kay tadtad, Shut up! You’re great at talking, but let’s see
you do s.t.

abaa particle indicating disapproval (literary). Abaa! Mahū́g ka gánì
dihà! Stop that! You might fall!

*abab taga- n hillbilly. pakataga- v [A13; a12] act, treat like,
consider a hillbilly. Gipakatagaabab lang ku ninyu. Ihása, You just
think I’m a hillbilly. Don’t try to fool me. — disáya a be the boss and
not henpecked.

ab-ab v [A; a] {1} chew to pieces. Ab-ábun sa irù ang íyang hikut, The
dog will chew up his rope. {2} eat away, erode. Ang pagluib ni Maríya
nag-ab-ab sa íyang balatían, Maria’s infidelity ate away at his
insides. Giab-ab ang íyang pinútì sa tayà, His sword was eaten away by
rust. {3} fester. Ang nag-ab-ab kung núka, My festering wound.†

abad n abbot.

ábag v [A; b] give material help, help do work. Kinsa may mag-ábag nímu
sa ímung pag-iskuyla? Who will help pay for your schooling? Abági ku
áring pagsilhig, Help me sweep. n help given. ka- n helper.

abaga n sweet potatoes growing from the outer vines and not from the
main root.

abága n shoulder. v [A2SN; b5] {1} take financial responsibility.
Abagáhun (pangabagáhun, pangabagáhan) ni Mánuy níya ang galastúhan sa
pag-iskuyla, His brother will shoulder his school expenses. {2} take
responsibility for accomplishing s.t. Kita giyuy muabága (mangabága)
áning prugramáha, We must undertake to carry out this program. (→) =
abága, v. paN- n right-hand-man. abagáhun a broad-shouldered.

*abáhu — kunsidirasiyun, dispusisiyun n bound by s.o.’s will. Abáhu
(báhu) kunsidirasiyun ku sa ákung bána, I am bound by my husband’s
decisions.

abaka n {1} abaca plant: Musa textilis. {2} abaca fiber. abakahan,
abakanhan, abakal n abaca plantation. v [A3] own an abaca plantation.

abakáda n alphabet.

abakal see abaka.

abal n = balbal. v = abat.

abalu n assessed value. v [AB56; b5c] assess, be assessed at. Ug ikaw
muabalu sa ákung yútà, ayawg dak-a, If you assess my land, don’t set it
too high. Ang yútà miabalu (giabalu, giabaluhan) ug singkwinta mil, The
land was assessed at fifty thousand pesos.

abalwasiyun n assessment. Purus dagkug abalwasiyun ang mga yútà dinhi
sa syudad, The lots in the city all have high assessments.

abandunar v [A3P; c1] abandon, neglect. Nag-abandunar na lang siya sa
íyang kaugalíngun sukad mamatay ang íyang asáwa, He neglected himself
entirely after his wife died. Ayaw abandunaha (iabandunar) ang ímung
pamilya, Do not abandon your family. abandunádu a {1} abandoned.
{2} neglectful. v = abandunar.

abandúnu = abandunar.

ábang v {1} [A2S; b] rent. Ang usa ka kwartu giabángan sa tigúlang, The
old man rents one of the rooms. {2} [b] hire a prostitute. {3} [A2; c]
make an offering to a supernatural being for the use of land which is
thought to be in his possession. Iábang ni nákung baktína álang sa uma,
I will sacrifice this pig as rental for the land. n {1} rent paid.
Pilay ábang nímu sa libru? How much rent did you pay for the book?
{2} money paid a prostitute. {3} toil taken by supernatural beings.
Kadtung nalumus dinhi ábang kunu tu sa ingkantu, The man who drowned
here is said to have been the rent collected by the supernatural
spirit. paN- v [A2] patronize a prostitute. -an(→)_1 1, 2, 3 = ábang,
n. {4} haunted place, place where departed spirits take a toll or rent.
Abangan kunu kanang baláya. Náa giyuy mamatay káda túig, That house is
haunted (lit. has a rental on it). Each year s.o. dies there.

abangan_2 n k.o. rattan used as anchor rope for a búbu fish trap.

abánid v [A; c1] do s.t. step by step, and in sequence. Iabánid
(abaníra) kini pagpintal arun dílì magkampat, Paint it one square at a
time so it will come out even. a done in succession, order. Abánid ang
íyang pagsukut sa mga istudyanti, He asked the students one after
another in turn.

abaníku n {1} folding fan. {1a} fan of any sort for fanning oneself.
{2} blackberry lily, k.o. bulbous ornamental: Balamcanda chinensis. It
is so called because the leaves are arranged like an opened fan. {3} =
baníku. {4} kurta di- see kurta_1. v {1} [a12] make into a fan. {2} [A;
b6] fan s.o. paN- v [A2] fan oneself. inabaníku n s.t. made in such a
way that it can be folded for storage, e.g., a folding chair,
jackknife.

abansáda a exposed to the wind. v [B12; c1] for s.t. to be directly
open to the wind. Naabansáda sa hángin ang ákung bukubuku, maung
gisip-un ku, My back was directly exposed to the wind. That’s why I
caught cold. Ayaw abansadáha (iabansáda) sa hángin ang inyung bintánà,
Don’t put a window right where it catches the full breeze.

*abansi miting di — grand rally immediately prior to an election.

abansin v [A] advance, for a body of people to move forward. Ang mga
Hapúnis miabansin sa pátag sa Lusun, The Japanese advanced over the
plains of Luzon.

abanti a {1} forward, ahead. Abanti ka rang milingkud, You took a seat
too far to the front. {2} ahead in score. v {1a} [A2; c] move forward.
Muabanti kag diyútay, matambug ka sa bangag, If you move forward any
more, you will fall into the hole. Iabanti nang ímung awtug diyútay,
Move your car forward a bit. {1b} [A; a] be ahead, have more points in
a game. Naabantíhan mu námug diyis puntus, We were ten points ahead of
you. {2} [A2; a12] keep up with s.t. Dì ku makaabanti sa galastúhan sa
iskuylahan, I cannot keep up with the school payments. {3} [A2; a12]
endure work. Dì ku makaabanti sa pagdáru kay dautun ku, I can’t keep up
with the plowing because I’m sickly. {4a} [A] ask part payment in
advance, especially in salary. {4b} [c] give s.o. a cash advance on his
salary or other payment. n {1} front wheel(s). Nahiyus ang abanti sa
mutur, The front tire of the motorcycle is flat. {2} forward gear.
{3} front seat in a car. atras — see atras.

abánu n factory-made cigar. v {1} [A; a12] make into a cigar.
{2} [A123S] have, obtain a cigar. paN- v [A2] smoke a cigar.

abat n {1} any supernatural being or human with supernatural powers
which shows itself in an unexpected and startling way. {2} one who is
‘it’ in games. v {1} [A2; a2] head off s.o. Maapsan pa nímu siya ug
ímung abatun sa iskína, You can still catch up with him if you head him
off at the corner. {2} [AN; a12] frighten s.o. by appearing suddenly or
otherwise startling him. Ig-ági níya, abta siya, When he comes by, give
him a scare. alabtan, abtanan a haunted, place where things appear
suddenly. alabtun s.o. to whom spirits tend to show themselves.
abat-ábat n game of tag. v [A13] {1} play tag. {2} try to meet without
succeeding. Wà giyud mi magkítà, nag-abat-ábat lang, We just kept
missing each other.

ábat_1 v [A2S; b6] hold on to s.t. fixed to support oneself. Ang
tigúwang miábat sa pasamánu paingun sa táas, The old man held on to the
bannister while going upstairs. -an(→) n a railing in shape of a ladder
for baby to cling to when he starts to walk.

ábat_2 v {1} [A; a1] feel with the hands, esp. to find s.t. out.
Nag-ábat siya sa yáwi sa íyang bulsa kung wà ba hibyai, He felt for the
key in his pocket to see if he hadn’t left it behind. Abátun ku ang
íyang agtang ug hilanatun ba, I’ll touch her forehead to see if she is
feverish. {2} [A123S; a12b2] feel s.t. with the sense of touch.
Nakaabat ku sa kabugnaw sa sinihan, I felt the coolness of the movie
house. Abátun gánì nímu ang kasakit, musamut giyud, If you think about
the pain, it will get worse. {3} [A123S; b2] happen to notice, sense
s.t. Nakaabat kung mu rag may misaka sa ámung báy, I sensed that s.o.
had entered our house.

abay v {1} [AC; b6] move along together with s.t. moving. Lagmit
hiligsan ang bátà kay nag-abay sa tartanilya, The child is likely to be
run over because he is running alongside of the rig. Silang duha
nag-ábay paglanguy, The two swam side by side. {1a} — ug sawa have a
snake born at the same time one is born. The snake is called one’s twin
(kalúha) and is supposed to bring him and his family luck. Pagkatáwu sa
ákung iyaan, giabayan (giabyan) ug sawa. Mau nang nadátù ang íyang
inahan, When my aunt was born, a twin snake was born with her, and so
her mother became rich. {2} [A2; c] go in with s.o. who buys or invests
in s.t. Ug mupalit kag usa ka sákung humay muabay kug lima ka gantang,
If you buy a sack of rice, I will go in with you for five ganta’s
worth. Giabyan níyag singku písus ang ákung pusta, He went in for five
pesos on my bet. {3} [AN] go in together in a fishing operation which
requires several hands. {4} [c1] attach a gaff in the abay way (see
abay, n 4). n {1} money paid as a share in a purchase or investment.
Ang ákung abay bálig dus písus ra, My share is two pesos’ worth.
{2} bridesmaid or best man. {3} man’s male friend. {3a} title used by
males of the same age to each other. short form: bay. Ása man ning
dyípa, bay? Where is this jeep headed for, driver? {4} manner of tying
a gaff to a cock level with and parallel to the spur to offset any
advantage it may have over its opponent. maN-l-(←), maN-r- n persons
who go in together in a fishing operation. -an, abyanan n life saver.
abyan n {1} friend, companion. Alang kaníya walà siyay láing abyan kun
dílì álak, He has no other friend except liquor. {2} supernatural being
that provides a shaman or sorcerer with his power. v [C1] {1} be
friends. Kita lay mag-abyan, Let’s be friends. {2} indulge in a bad
habit. Walà siya makig-abyan sa huguyhúguy, He did not indulge in
roaming about.

abgaw = adgaw. -un n k.o. snapper with a yellow streak along the body:
Lutianus sp.

abhak v [A; b5] diminish s.t. by taking away or destroying part of it.
Naabhak (naabhákan) ang íyang abága sa bála, The bullet tore a huge
piece out of his shoulder. n hole left when s.t. is chopped off, out.
Dakù kaáyu ang abhak sa káhuy, There’s a big cut in the tree. a done in
such a way that s.t. is chopped off. Abhak nga pagkabuldúsir ang inyung
nataran, Your yard was bulldozed clean.

abhul = abhung.

abhung a musty and flat in smell: damp clothing, rice, sweet potatoes,
salted fish, et al. v [B; b6] be, become musty. -un(→) a of a musty
kind.

abi = abir 1, 2.

ábi {1} — [gen.] [gen.] thought, took for granted. Ábi nákug tinúud, I
thought it was true. — nímu You know what? Ábi nímu? Nakit-an ku siya
nga láig kúyug, You know what? I saw him going out with s.o. else.
{2} — kay just because. Ábi kay nakadaug sa byúti kuntis midakù na ang
úlu, Just because she won the beauty contest she thinks she is s.t.
{3} — na lang s.o. might think that. Súkul. Ábi na lang, daug. Fight
back. They might think you give up.

abiábi v [A; a12] show hospitality to. Mu giyud ning táwung iládu,
abiabíhun giyud sa mga tagilungsud, The townspeople show hospitality to
any famous visitor. maabiabíhun, manggiabiabíhun a hospitable.

abíba, abibar v [A; b5] cheer one on, encourage to do. Nag-abíba sa mga
bátag binúang, Egging the children on in their naughtiness.
n encouragement, egging on. maabibáhun a giving encouragement, egging
on.

abíhid = alabíhid.

abilay = sambilay.

abilidad n ability, capacity or skill to accomplish s.t. v [A12] obtain
a certain ability. abilidaran a skilled, able. Abilidaran nà si Tunyu.
Bansayng mutínis, Tony has talent. He plays tennis well.

abilyána a tan-colored shoes. n tan polish. v [A13] polish shoes with a
light tan polish, color them tan. Abilyanáha (abilyanáhi) ning sapátus
kung putì, Dye these shoes of mine tan. Wà kuy bitung itum. Abilyanáhi
lang, I don’t have any black polish. Just put tan polish on them.

ábin v [A2C; b] {1} engage in an enterprise or game together. Mag-ábin
ta sa pamaligyag pagkáun, Let’s become partners in selling food.
{2} ally on oneself with. Mga hakug sa gahum ang miábin kaníya, People
who were greedy for power allied themselves with him. Nakig-ábin aku
kaníya sa íyang mga panglantaw sa unáhan, I share his views of the
future. n partner in business or game. Ug siyay ákung ábin sa bíku
kanúnay ming mudaug, When she is my partner in hopscotch, we always
win. ka- n = ábin.

abintúra n {1} adventures. {2} adventure film, story. Makítà siya sa
mga lílas abintúra, He appears in adventure films. v [A; b5] {1} try
going s.w. for the adventure of it. Nag-abintúra mig katkat sa
Manunggal, We went on an expedition to Mt. Manunggal. {2} = abinturar.

abinturar v [AN; b5] try one’s luck. Miabinturar (nangabinturar) lang
siyag aplay básig madáwat, He tried his luck in applying in hopes he
might be accepted. Abinturahi (abinturaha) lang si Maríyag hangyù, Try
your luck with Maria and ask her. abinturíru, -a = abinturista.
abinturista a adventurous, tending to try things out without knowing
the outcome. Dì ku mugugul ug kwarta niánà kay dì ku abinturista. Básig
dì musalir, I won’t invest my money on that because I’m not daring. It
might just fail.

abir {1} particle used in calling attention to a point in contention.
Ang diyus makagagáhum. Abir, unsáun man nímu pagpangutána diin siya
manukad, God is almighty. All right then, how can you ask where He
comes from? {1a} particle used in inciting a person to do s.t. Abir,
sulayi ug musalir ba nang paagíha, O.K. Just see if that procedure
works out. Abir, sumbága kunu ku kay isumbung tikaw ni Pápa, All right,
just try hitting me, and I’ll tell Daddy on you. {2} pause word
expressing hesitation when one doesn’t know how to do s.t. Abir, lisúa
nag hínay dúngan sa pagtulbuk ári, Let’s see now, turn that slowly and
press this at the same time. {3} = ambi. 4 v [AN; ac] try one’s luck,
take a stab at. Nangabir (miabir) lang siyag panlútù. Dì hinúun siya
kamau, He just took a try at cooking. He doesn’t really know how.
Abirun unyà nákug hangyù si Maríya, I’ll just take a stab at asking
Maria. Iabir kunu ni sa ahinsiya ug dawátun ba, Try taking this to the
pawnshop and see if they will accept it.

abirids n {1} average, the usual size or quantity. {2} average rating
in school. Pasar ku kay utsinta ákung abirids, I passed because my
average was eighty. v [A] {1} average so and so much. Makaabirids mig
lima adlaw-adlaw, We can sell on the average five every day. {2} have
an average grade of.

abiríya a be broken, inoperative. v [B] {1} for an engine to break
down. Kining trak dílì magámit. Nag-abiríya man, This truck cannot be
used. It is broken. {2} be under the weather. Naabiríya aku kay
nagkalíbang aku gahápun, I’m not feeling well because I had diarrhea
yesterday.

abirtu = abyirtu.

abis v [A; ab7] slice with a curved blade, cut a small or thin part
from a bigger piece. Abisig diyútay nà, Slice a piece off of it. paN-
v [A2] slice the terminal portion of a coconut bud to induce sap flow.
Kaduha sila mangabis káda adlaw, They make an incision in the bud twice
a day.

abísu n announcement of s.t. to come. v {1} [A; c] announce s.t. to
come. Nag-abísu ang radyu nga adúnay bagyung umaábut, The radio
announced that there is a typhoon coming. {2} [A12] receive an
announcement. Nakaabísu ming way túbig ugmà, We received the
announcement that there would be no water tomorrow.

abitsuylas = habitsuylas.

abitu n habit, a distinctive apparel worn by devotees, priests, monks,
and the like. v [A] wear a habit.

abíyu n food, provisions, money, supplies for daily consumption. v [A;
c] provide food, etc. Báhin sa mga kinahanglanun matag adlaw akuy
muabíyu, As far as your daily needs go, I will provide. Abyúhan ta lang
mug usa ka sákung humay matag búlan, We’ll supply you with one sack of
rice a month.

abiyun n airplane. ka-an(←) n group of airplanes.

abkay v [A; a] dig up, out. Abkáyun ku ang kwarta nga ákung gilubung
dinhi, I will dig up the money that I buried here.

abla v [A; c] speak to s.o. with some purpose in mind. Abláhi kunu si
Máma, básin pag musugut, Try to talk mother into it. She might let us.
n {1} persuasive talk. Dílì ka sugtun niánang bayhána kun walà kay
abla, That woman will not accept you if you don’t sweet-talk her.
{2} big talk. Abla lay nagdaghan. Walay líhuk, It was all just big
talk. No action. paN- n art or technique of expressing one’s viewpoint.
Malampúsun siyang abugádu kay maáyu siya sa pangabla, He is a
successful lawyer because he has a good technique in talking.

abládu n {1} delivered in spoken fashion. Ang kúru abládu, dílì
kantáhun, The chorus is spoken, not sung. {2} lines of a play. v [A]
speak lines.

ablása = abrása.

abli v [AB; b5] {1} open s.t., be open. Ikaw bay nag-abli sa pultahan?
Were you the one who opened the door? Sulud lang kay nag-abli ang
pultahan, Just come right in. The door is open. {2} begin, start a
class, business, etc. Muabli ang klási sa Hunyu, Classes begin in June.
Ablíhag (ablíhug) sayu ang klási sunud túig, Classes will open early
next year. {3} found, establish an enterprise. Anus-a man ablíhi
(ablíha) ang inyung iskuylahan sa panahì? When will you open your
sewing school? n {1} opening. Dakug abli nang tarúha, That can has a
big opening. {2} opening of classes. a {1} open. Abli ang bintánà.
Sirhi ra gud, The window is open. Please close it. {2} be started. Abli
na ang tindáhan. Palit ngadtug kapi, The store is open now. Go buy some
coffee.

Abr. abbreviation for Abril, ‘April’.

abrap a {1} sudden. Abrap ra kaáyu nang ímung pag-anhi, Your coming is
very sudden. {2} brusque. v [B12; c1] {1} be sudden, do s.t. by
plunging right into it. {2} be brusque. Naabrap ra tu nímu pagkatubag,
You answered in a brusque way.

abrása v [AC; bc3] walk side by side with. Hulat kay muabrása kug lakaw
ninyu, Wait for me. I’m going to walk next to you. Dílì ta mag-abrásag
lakaw sa karsádang hagip-ut, We shouldn’t walk side by side on a narrow
street.

abrasadur n = tangdayan. v = tangday, 2.

abrasíti v [C2; c2] promenade arm in arm or side by side. Nakit-an kung
ímung bánang may giabrasíting (giabrasitíhang) babáyi, I saw your
husband walking arm in arm with a woman (with a woman holding on to his
arms).

abrasyíti = abrasíti.

abri_1 = abli. -dur n opener.†

abri_2 = abyirtu_2.

abrigána n s.t. that stimulates the appetite. Maáyung abrigána ang bír,
Beer is good to stimulate the appetite.

abrigáwu n {1} apprentice on a ship. {2} one who works on a boat for
his passage. v [A1; a12] {1} be an apprentice, apprentice s.o. to.
{2} work in lieu of paying passage.

abrígu n shawl. v [A1; a] wear, make, receive a shawl.

Abril n April. v [a] {1} do s.t. in April. Magbakasyun mu sa Hunyu? Ah,
Abrila lang, Will you take your vacation in June? Oh, just make it in
April. {2} write down April in a document. Máyu ímung nabutang? Abrila
lang hinúun, Did you write May? It should be April.

abriláta n can opener.

absin v [A2; b6] {1} absent, fail to attend work or class. Absínig
kas-a nang klasíha nímu, Just miss your class this one time. {2} mark
one absent. Absínan tikaw, I’ll mark you absent. n absence, time away
from class. Daghag absin nímu Dyú, lagmit ka mahagbung, How many
absences you have, Joe! You’re likely to flunk. hiN-, pala-, absiníru,
absinus a given to missing classes. Anus-a gud nà siya makapasar nga
absinus man nà sa klási, How can he pass if he always misses classes? —
mayindid a absent-minded.

absinus see absin.

absulusiyun n absolution. v [b6] give absolution. Gilubung siya nga
walà gánì kaabsulusyuni, He was buried without having received
absolution.

absuwiltu n acquitted in court. v [A3P; a12] acquit.

abtik a {1} nimble, quick in reaction. Ang musáyaw sa tinikling
kinahanglang abtik ug tiil, Whoever dances the tinikling has to have
nimble feet. {2} fast, live in action. Mahuman ni dáyug abtik lang
mutrabáhu, It will get done right away if you work rapidly.
{3} cunning, sly. Abtik giyud siya kay midáwat imbis mubáyad, He sure
is sharp. Instead of paying as he should have, he got paid. v [B]
{1} get to be nimble. {2} get to be fast in action. Muabtik (maabtik)
lagi ang íyang panglíhuk basta pakit-ug sápì, He’ll get moving fast as
long as you show him money. {3} [B12] get to be cunning, sly.
{4} [b4(1)] outsmart. Naabtikan sad ku sa bátà, The child put one over
on me. paN- v [A2; b6] engage in chicanery. Ayaw kug pangabtíki kay
suhítu ku, Don’t try to put a fast one over on me, because I know my
way around.

abtung n rope used for tying the plow to the crosstree.

abu n {1} ashes. {2} = alabúhan. v {1} [A; a12] make ashes. Abuha nang
mga palwa ug gam-ang sabun, Make the palm stems into ashes to make soap
out of. {2} [B1256] be razed or burned to the ground. Pag-abut nákù
naabu na ang balay, When I arrived, the house was already burned to the
ground. ka-(←) v [A13] get ashes all over one. Nagkaábu ku kay misum-uk
ku sa nasunúgan, I got ashes all over me because I went into the
burned-out area. alabúhan n stove or any place a fire for cooking is
built. abuhun n ash-colored. Manuk nga abuhun, Gray-colored cock.

abuábu n k.o. fish.

*abubhu paN- v [A2; b6] be jealous of a loved one. n jealousy. abubhuan
a jealous. Abubhuang bána, A jealous husband. mapangabubhúun a of a
jealous type. Mapangabubhúun nga pasiklap, A jealous glance.

abud, ábud_1 v [A; c] {1} throw grains, throw grains to. Ang bukbukung
mais mauy iábud sa manuk, Throw the beetle-infested corn to the
chickens. {2} drop grains into a hole in planting. Mag-abud sila sa
ílang baul, They will plant their field. {3} feed grain into a mill.
Ímu síging abdan (abúran) ang galingan, Keep feeding grains into the
mill. {4} supply a factory with raw materials. Kanang kumpaniyáha mauy
tig-abud sa mga papil sa imprinta, That company supplies paper to the
printing press. {5} feed news, gossip. Aha! Ikaw diay nag-abud sa mga
nutisya, So you were the one who spread the news! n {1} feed for fowls.
{2} one’s turn to throw grains. Ákù na rung abud, It’s my turn to feed
(the chickens). alabdan = abud, n 2.

ábud_2 n ornamental bulbous plant: Eurycles amboinensis. The leaves are
applied over the bladder to facilitate urination.

ábud_3 n k.o. head louse lighter in color and with a longer and more
slender body than the ordinary head louse (kútu).

abug_1 n dust. v {1} [B46; a4b4(1)] become dusty. Muabug ang karsáda ug
dúgayng uwanun, The road gets dusty if the rains come late. Giabug ang
ámung balay kay dúgay na nga wà puy-i, Our house became all dusty
because it hadn’t been lived in for a long time. Tabúni ang libru arun
dílì maabugan, Cover the books so they won’t get dusty. {2} [B1256]
turn into dust. Sa kadugáyan kitang tanan maabug, In the end we will
all turn to dust. ka-(←) v [A13] get dust all over it. Nagkaábug ang
ákung buhuk tungud sa byáhi, My hair is all covered with dust because
I’ve just gotten off the bus. -un a dusty. -l-an(←) exposed to dust.
Kining kwartúha alabúgan. Duul man gud sa karsáda, This room is exposed
to dust. It’s close to the street.

*abug_2 paN- euphemism for pangabughu. see *abubhu.

ábug_1 v [A; a] {1} chase, drive, drive away. Abúga ang bábuy ngadtu sa
tangkal, Drive the pig into the pen. Abúgi sa lángaw ang lamísa, Drive
the flies away from the table. {2} drive s.o. to do s.t. Ang kaúlaw
mauy nag-ábug kanákù pagpaháwà sa ámung lungsud, Shame drove me to move
out of town. (→) n stick with strips of paper, plastic, etc., attached
on one end, used to chase flies away. -an(→) n an enclosure of the fish
corral into which the fish are driven before being caught.

ábug_2 = abyug.

abugáda n female lawyer.

abugádu n lawyer. v {1} [B16; a2] be, become a lawyer. {2} [A; b] speak
for s.o. Abugadúhan ta lang ka kay wà kay pangabla, I’ll speak for you
because you don’t have the knack of saying what you want. abugaduhun
a lawyer-like. Abugaduhung pangatarúngan, Lawyer-like reasoning.

abugágu n dumb lawyer (play on the words abugádu ‘lawyer’ and gágu
‘stupid’).

abugar = abugádu, v 2.

abugasíya n {1} law course. {2} law profession. Sa abugasíya
kinahanglan mamakak ug panalagsa, In the law profession it is necessary
to lie once in a while.

abughu, abughù = *abubhu.

abukádu n avocado or alligator pear: Persea sp. It is usually eaten
with sugar and milk.

abúkay n k.o. white cockatoo, often kept as pet: Cacatua
haematuropygia. (→), abúkay v [A] for babies to make noises like a
cockatoo.

abunansiya = abunda.

abunda a {1} abundant. Abunda ang bugas karun, There’s plenty of rice
now. {2} have plenty. Ug abunda ka sa sápì, mamalit kag yútà, If you
have lots of money, you should buy land. v [B] be, become abundant.
Unyà ra ta mamalit ug mangga ug muabunda (maabunda) na, We will buy
mangoes later when they become abundant. n abundance.

abundansiya = abunda.

ábung_1 v [A; c] bar, block the way. Abúngan ta ning karsádag dakung
batu, Let’s block the road with a big stone. n k.o. fishing equipment
consisting of dried coconut leaves tied to a raft. (→) n s.t. which
blocks the way. Ang káhuy nga abung sa pultahan, The wood that was
blocking the door. a in the path of the wind, smoke, smells, and the
like. Abung sa hángin, Exposed to the wind. Abung ka kaáyu sa íyang
dautang tingúhà, You are very much exposed to his evil powers. pa-(→),
pa- v {1} [A13; ac] put in an exposed position. Ug magpaabung ka sa
sílit sa túbig, mahumud ka, If you put yourself in the path of a jet of
water, you’ll get wet. Paabungig asu ang mangga, (Make the fire so
that) the mango tree will be in the path of the smoke. n k.o. fishing
whereby a net is set across the path of a fish. {2} [a] give allowance
in measuring s.t. Paabungan ug diyútay ang sukud ígù pagsipilya,
Measure it with a little allowance for planing. Mutíru gánì kag langgam
nga naglupad paabungig diyútay, If you shoot at a flying bird, aim a
little ahead. paN- v [A2] do s.t. in anticipation of a favor or reward.
Buútan nà siya run kay nangábung man nga hitagaan ug diyis, He’s
obedient this time because he’s anticipating getting a dime.
n preparation of oil and plants medicinal roots and herbs used as a
protection against some evil.†

abungaw_1 n k.o. tiny, light brown insect which swarms over food and
the like, similar in appearance to a fly. v [a4] be infested with
abungaw.

abungaw_2 = bungaw.

abúnu n {1} fertilizer. {2} transfusion or infusion. Nagkinahanglan
siyag abúnu kay gisulgan sa dugù, He needs a transfusion because he
lost a lot of blood. v [A; c] {1} put fertilizer on. Abunúhi ang rúsas,
Put fertilizer on the roses. {2} give a transfusion or infusion.
{3} supplement, fill in. Ikaw bay mag-abúnu sa kúlang? Will you make up
the lack? Ang gísu mauy iabúnu sa batsi, They use limestone to fill the
rough spots in the road.

aburídu a — ang úlu, pangísip, etc. be upset, irritable. v [B] be
upset. Kadtung ímung tahù nakaaburídu (nakapaaburídu) sa ákung úlu,
Your news got me all upset.

abusáda = abusádu (female).

abusádu a tending to take advantage, infringe on rights. Abusádu ang
mga kutsíru dinhi. Basta muulan, pabayrun ta nílag dubli, The rig
drivers are abusive. If it rains, they double the fare. Nagníwang lang
nà siya kay abusádu man gud sa íyang láwas, He is thin because he
neglects his body. v [B126] become abusive.

abusar v {1} [A3; b(1)] a do s.t. one is not entitled to, take
advantage of s.o. by infringing on his rights. Nag-abusar siya paggáwì
sa makinilya nga way pananghid, He took the liberty of using the
typewriter without permission. Giabusahan sila sa magbabaligyà kay way
kumpitinsiya, The storekeeper took advantage of them because there was
no competition. {b} mistreat one’s health. Nag-abusar ka lang sa ímung
láwas sa ímung pag-inum, You’re abusing your health with all your
drinking. {2} [A] do s.t. to a superfluous degree. Wà na nà magkaun;
nag-abusar na nà, That is not eating; that is excessive indulgence.

abúsu n taking advantage, acting beyond one’s rights. Ang pagdáwat sa
suburnu usa sa mga abúsu, Taking bribes is one of their abuses. v =
abusar.

abut v {1} [A; a12] arrive, reach a place. Dì pa makaabut (maabut) ang
suwat, The letter won’t have arrived yet. Duul ra. Maabut ug lud-an,
It’s close by, within spitting distance (can be reached by spitting).
{1a} [A; ac] lead to and reach a place. Muabut ba ning karsadáha sa
subà? Does this road reach the river? Kining lugára dílì abutun sa
táub, The tide doesn’t get as far as this place. {1b} [A; ac] reach
s.t. with the arms. Maabut ba nímu ang sanga? Can you reach the branch?
Iabut kunu nang ímung kamut sa bungbung, Reach your hands out to the
wall. {1c} [B; b4] reach an amount, last a certain length. Ang ákung
swildu dílì muabut ug dus mil, My salary doesn’t reach two thousand.
Walà abtig duha ka adlaw ang bugas, The rice did not last two days.
{1d} — sa hunàhúnà come to the mind. {1e} [b4] receive money. Abtan
(abutan) ku tingálig kwarta rung hápun, I’ll probably get my money this
afternoon. {2} [a4] have a feeling come over one. Giabut siyag kakulbà,
A feeling of terror came over her. {3a} [A23; b4] catch s.o. doing s.t.
Si Turyuy nakaabut nílang nagháluk, It was Torio who came upon them
kissing. {3b} [b4] be overtaken. Abtan kag gabíi sa dálan, You will be
overtaken by night on the road. {4} [A2; b4] come to an orgasm. Dílì
giyud muabut ang lamì, She won’t have an orgasm. (The delicious feeling
will not arrive.) Abtan ra gihápun síya basta maningkámut ang duruha,
She will have an orgasm if both try their best. {5} [A23] for an event
or season of the year to come around. Dì na madúgay muabut na ang
Pasku, It won’t be long before Christmas comes. {6} [A12; b] be on time
for s.t. Nakaabut ka ba sa panahun sa Katsílà? Do you go back as far as
the Spanish times? Maabtan pa nímu ang barku, You can still catch the
boat. {7a} [A12; a1] afford to pay for s.t. Dì ku makaabut ug palit
niánà, I can’t afford to buy that. Wà siyay ikaabut sa báyad, He has no
funds to meet the payments with. {7b} [a3] can be done, reached.
Tabángan tikaw kútub sa ákung maabut, I’ll help you as much as I can.
{8} [A; b6] stay temporarily some place. Háin man ka mag-abut run?
Where are you staying now? n {1} s.t. or s.o. that has arrived s.w.
Dílì ni karáan uy. Bag-u ning abut, This is not old stock. It just
arrived. Bag-u kung abut dinhi. Wà pa ku kadumdum, I am a newcomer
here. I don’t know how to get there. {2} yield, proceeds from an
effort, income, harvest. Pilay abut sa yútà káda túig? How much does
the land yield each year? Gamay rag abut ang munisipyu, The town has a
small income. (←) v [C; ac] {1} meet together. Abútun nákù ang duha ka
tumuy, I will make the two ends meet. Mau kadtung lugára ang ámung
gikaabútan (gipanag-abútan), That is the place where we met.
{2} overlap in time. Nag-ábut na man gánì ang sinanggì karun ug sa
miáging túig, This year’s corn crop overlaps with last year’s. (I.e.,
this year’s crop was harvested before last year’s crop had been used
up.) {3} [A13] — ang ginháwa be panting for breath (gasps of breath
overlap). Giúyug siya sa ubu. Nag-ábut ang íyang pagginháwa, He was
shaken by his coughing fit. He was panting for breath. pa-(←) v [A; a]
wait in expectation for. Dì na ku mupaábut sa kumbira, I won’t wait for
the party. Paabútun tikaw hangtud sa alas kwatru, I’ll wait for you
until four o’clock. abut-abut v [A3; b6] arrive in close succession.
Nag-abut-abut ang mga bisíta, Visitors came one after another.
abut-ábut v [A3; b6] go every now and then. Nag-abut-ábut nà siya sa
Hungkung, She goes to Hong Kong often. siN- v [A13] {1} for a time,
event to approach. Nagsingabut ang pista, The fiesta is approaching.
{1a} for one’s time of the month to approach. Nagsingabut na, maung
saputun, She’s in a bad mood because her time of the month is
approaching. {2} be in expectations of, look forward to. Nagsingabut ku
nga mahuman ang trabáhug sayu, I’m expecting to finish the work early.
-l-un(←) n {1} subject to periodic attacks of an illness. {2} s.o. who
has the fortune of getting a large yield from an effort. alabtan,
abtanan n place one usually stays temporarily. -l-an-(←) n {1} =
abtanan. {2} place one meets s.o. else. um-r-(←), um-l-(←), tali-,
tali-(←), sali-, sali-(←) n about to arrive. May umaábut (umalábut,
taliabut, taliábut, saliabut, saliábut) nga mga bisíta, There are some
visitors about to arrive.†

abwag v [AP; c1] break up, scatter. Miabwag ang mitambung sa ráli
pag-ulan, The people at the rally scattered when it started to rain.
Abwagun (iabwag) nátù ang mga papil, Let us scatter the pieces of
paper.

abyadur n aviator. v [B156; a12] be, make into an aviator.†

abyan see abay.

abyasiyun, abyasyun n aviation.

abyirtu_1 a open. Abyirtu ang ganghaan, The door is open. v [A2PB; c1]
open s.t.; be opened.

abyirtu_2 n seventh chord. v [A2; c1] play a seventh chord. Iabyirtu
(abyirtúha) ang tapuy ig-abut sa dapit nga muingun ‘Matam-is uyámut’,
When you get to the part that goes ‘How very sweet ...’ play a seventh
chord.

abyug v [A; c1] rock s.t. hanging back and forth. Abyúga (iabyug) lang
ang bátà sa dúyan kun muhílak na, Just rock the baby in the hammock if
he starts to cry. n action of rocking s.t.

A.D. Anno Domini.

ád_1 v [A; ac] add up. Ádun (adun) nátù ni, Let’s add this up. Iád ang
kwatru ári, Add the four to this column.

ád_2 = álad.

ada {1} particle showing that s.t. is not important. Ada, irù ra gud
tu. Kahadluk na man nímu! Heck, that was just a dog. What a scaredy cat
you are! {2} particle expressing annoyance. Ada! Sábà na, Oh, be quiet!
— uruy = ada, 1. — uy particle expressing exasperation at being unable
to cope with s.t. (used only by women). Da uy, lisud kaáyu, Oh dear!
That is so hard!

áda n mythological beings represented as beautiful maidens living in
forests, streams, etc. v [B126] become an áda.

adá = ada.

ad-ad v [A; a] slice into thin, but not long pieces. Ang baláni ad-árun
únà iláwug sa bábuy, The banana trunk is chopped up finely before it is
fed to the pigs. ad-aran n slicing board.

Adan name: Adam.

adbans n advance payment on a salary, debt, etc. v {1} [AP; cP] give an
advance. Adbansan ka nákug singku, I’ll advance you five pesos. {2} [A;
a] ask for an advance. Muadbans akug singku pára sa kumpra, I would
like to have five pesos in advance for shopping. {3} [A; c] for
soldiers to advance. Miadbans ang mga Hapun, The Japanese advanced.
Ílang giadbans ang mga kanyun, They put the artillery on the front
line. — gard n {1} a contingent sent ahead to the front. {2} s.t. sent
s.w. to prepare the way (humorous metaphor). Nag-una ang mga adbans
gard kay silay magpriparar, The advance guard has gone ahead because
they will get things ready.

adbaysir n adviser. v [A13; b6] act as class adviser in school.
Giadbaysíran ku ang primíru anyu, I am adviser to the freshmen. klas —
class adviser in school. idituryal — editorial advisor.

adbintista n a Seventh Day Adventist. v [B1256] be, become a Seventh
Day Adventist.

adbirbiyu n adverb.

Adbiyintu n Advent.

adgaw n k.o. small tree: Premna odorata. The leaves are fragrant and
used medicinally.

adía short form: día {1} is here (nearer me than you). Adía sa táas ang
lamísa, ikanáug, The table is up here. Bring it downstairs. {2} in
narration: now, at this juncture. Nalípay siya kay, día, nadátù na man
pud siya, He was happy because, here he was, he managed to become rich
in turn.

ádik n drug addict. v [B1256] become a drug addict.

adilantádu a {1} developed, advanced. Adilantádu ang Pilipínas sa
Aprika sa panguma, The Philippines is ahead of Africa in agriculture.
{2} for a watch to be advanced.

adilantar = adilantu.

adilantu v [B2] become better. Dílì ta muadilantu niánang pangitáa, Our
financial situation won’t improve if that is the only way we can make
our living. kaadilantúhan n improvement. Pára sa kaadilantúhan sa átung
panimúyù, For the improvement of our standard of living.

adilpa n oleander, k.o. highly poisonous, tall ornamental shrub with
showy pink or white flowers: Nerium indicum.

adimas furthermore, besides. Adimas utúkan man sab siya, Besides, he’s
intelligent, too.

adingmasin n adding machine. v [a12] add up on a machine. Adingmasina
lang ni arun way sayup, Add this up on the machine, so there won’t be
any mistakes.

adinúwid n adenoids. v [a4] have adenoid trouble.

adisir, adísir before [so-and-so] happens. Adisir ka muadtu,
pagtilipunu úsà, Before you go there, phone him first.

adiyus, adiyús {1} farewell (literary). {2} — na lámang never mind,
forget about s.t. expended for nothing. Ug mupahulam ka níyag kwarta,
adiyus na lang, If you lend him money, you might as well kiss it
goodbye. {3} exclamation at the unpleasant consequences of s.t. one has
observed taking place. Adiyús nabásag na hinúun, Oh Jesus! It broke!
Adiyús nalimtan nákù ag pitáka, Jesus! I forgot my purse!

adlaw n {1} sun. {2} day. May adlaw nga magbásul ka, The day will come
that you will be sorry. {2a} day, as opposed to night. pila ka — it
won’t be long. Pila ka adlaw makapánaw ta sa búwan, Soon we’ll be able
to take trips to the moon. {2b} one’s day for winning. Ímu tanang
adlaw, You get all the breaks. {3} birthday. {4} amount earned in a
day. Singku ra may íyang adlaw niánà, He only gets five pesos a day
from it. — sa minatay All Soul’s Day. Mahal nga — Holy Week. v {1} [A3;
b6] receive a certain amount daily. Muadlaw kug tagduha ka líbu ka
písus, I net two thousand pesos a day. Adláwi lang siyag tag-diyis, Pay
him ten pesos per day. {2} [A; b6] celebrate a birthday. Adtu nyà sa
ámù kay mag-adlaw ku, Come to my house for my birthday party.
adlaw-adlaw every day. -an a for it to be daylight. Ayaw úsà pagpaúli.
Adláwan pa bítaw, Don’t go home yet! It’s still daylight anyway. -an(→)
n food used to celebrate a birthday with. Iháwa na ang adlawan,
Slaughter the birthday pig. -in- a {1} daily, by the day. {2} lukewarm
(lit. put in the sun). Túbig inadlaw, Warm water. v {1} [A; a2] do on a
daily basis. Inadlawun (inadláwun) ka nákug dúaw, I will visit you
daily. {2} [A; c1] make water warm. -in-an n birthday present. ka-an
n birthday, day of patron saint. ka-un n dawn. Mugíkan ku ugmà sa
kaadláwun, I’ll leave tomorrow at dawn. pang- n {1} s.t. used during
daytime. Sanínang pang-adlaw, Dress for daytime wear. {2} day shift
work. tala-an n diary. ti- {1} = ting-. 2 a sunny. Sa buntag tiadlaw,
apan sa hápun nag-ulan, In the morning it was sunny, but in the
afternoon it rained. ting- n dry season.†

adlib_2, adlip_1 ad lib in music. v [A; b6(1)] perform music ad lib.

adlip_2 v [A; ab27] slice into long pieces. Adlípa ang mangga sa
makatulu, Slice the mango into three pieces. Hiadlipan ákung tudlù, My
finger got cut as I was slicing s.t. n slice.

adlù n k.o. fish.

administradur n {1} administrator of an estate. {2} head of a
government agency. v [A; a2] be an administrator.

administrasiyun n the administration incumbent at a certain period. Sa
administrasiyun ni Garsíya, During Garcia’s administration.

administratíbu n administrative.

admirar v [A; b] admire. Ug buhátun nà nímu, admirahan ka giyud, If you
do that, people will admire you for it.†

admisiyun n {1} general admission section in a theater or stadium.
{2} cost of admission in a theater or stadium. {3} admission slip to an
exam.

admitar v {1} [A; b(1)] admit, concede a point. Admitahi lang nà, Just
admit it. {2} [A; a12] admit to a hospital.

admitídu n one who has conceded a point, admitted s.t. Admitídu siya
nga siya nakadawat sa sulat, He admits that he has received the letter.

admitir = admitar.

adngan n k.o. small fish.

adpan v [B1; a4] be slightly scorched to the point of being discolored.
Naadpan (giadpan) ang ákung pánit, My skin became tanned. -an a tending
to get easily tanned.

adris n address. way — n tough guy, police character (lit. one who does
not have an established residence). Ikaw nga maistru makigbúnù ánang
way adris, You, a teacher, want to fight with that police character?
v [A; c] write an address. Unsay ákung iadris sa suwat? What address
shall I put on the letter?

adtu_1 {1} there (far away, future). Adtu ku higdà sa íla, I will sleep
there at their house. {2} will go s.w. far. Adtu ku sa Karbun, I’m
going to the market. {3} there he (she, etc.) goes doing it (although
he shouldn’t be). Adtu nanghambug na sad, There he goes again, showing
off. v {1} [A2; b3c] go, bring to a place. Nakaadtu na ku didtu kas-a,
I went there once. Unsa mang lugára ang giadtúan ninyu? What place did
you go to? Iadtu kini ngadtu sa íla, Go bring this to their house.
{2} [A13; a2] go get s.t. Ikaw bay nag-adtu kang Pidru arun paanhíun
siya? Were you the one who went to Pedro’s to tell him to come? Ug dì
ka manáug ánang kahúya adtúun tika, If you do not come down from that
tree, I’ll come up after you. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b6] happen to go.
Diyútay ra kaáyu ang mahiadtu sa mga táwu, A very small amount seeps
down to the people. adtuan v [A13] always go s.w. Mag-adtuan ku sa íla
káda buntag, I always go see them every morning. adtuúnun, aladtúun
n things one has to get. a hard to get to. Dì ku muadtu sa inyu kay
aladtúun kaáyu, I won’t go to your place because it is hard to get to.
umaadtúay, umaadtu n about to go. kaadtuun a feel very much like going
s.w.

adtu_2 {1} short for niadtu. {2} short for kaniadtu. {3} = kadtu
(dialectal).

adtut = adtu (colloquial).

adubádu = adubáwu.

adubáwu_1 n meat cooked in salt, vinegar with spices then fried, with
fat or liquid leftover. v [A; a] cook adubáwu. Átù lang adubawúhun ning
bábuy, We’ll just make adubáwu out of this pork.

adubáwu_2 = kútil, n, v1.

adúbi n adobe, bricks made of clay. v [A; a12] build s.t. with adobe.

adúbu n meat fried in salt and vinegar. v [A; a] cook adúbu.

adul a mentally deficient. Dì giyud kasabut ang adul bísag unsáug
isplikar, No matter how you explain it to the imbecile, he will never
understand.

*adult n — idyukisyun adult education.†

adultiryu n adultery.

ad-un = adúna (dialectal).

adúna short form: dúna there is, are, will be. Dúnay libru sa lamísa,
There is a book on the table. -y [subject] [subject] has. Dúnay libru
si Huwan, John has a book. paka- v [A; a] {1} strive to have s.t. Bisag
wà kuy kwarta, pakaadunáhun giyud aku nímu, Even though I have no
money, you want to force me to get some. {2} = pakaadunáhan. adunáhan
a wealthy. Usa siya sa mga adunáhan sa ámung lungsud, He is one of the
wealthy people in our town. pakaadunáhan v [A13; a12] pretend to be
wealthy, consider to be wealthy. Nagpakaadunáhan siya bisag way nahut,
He pretends to be rich even though he hasn’t got a penny.
Gipakaadunáhan ba aku nímu? Do you think I’m rich?

aduptǎr v [A; a12] adopt a child.†

adurnu n decoration. v [A; c] decorate. Nindut kaáyu ang kapilya nga
giadurnúhan ug búlak, The chapel was beautifully decorated with
flowers. paN- v [A2] make oneself up, put on s.t. special. Nangadurnu
ang mga dalága, The girls are getting themselves all fixed up.

adwána n customs.†

*adyà -an a selective, choosy. Adyaan man gud nang bayhána; mau nga wà
maminyù, That woman is choosy; that is why she did not get married.
v [B12] become choosy.

adyaks n {1} a brand name for a dish cleanser. {2} prostitute (slang).

adyas v [A; c] put at a specific setting, adjust. Ákung adyasun
(iadyas) ang pabílu sa sugà, I’ll adjust the lamp wick.

adyinda n agenda. v [A; c] put on the agenda. Iadyinda nà sa sunud
míting, Put that in the agenda for the next meeting.

adyinumútu n brand of monosodium glutamate. v [A; bc] cook with
Ajinomoto.

ag short form: g subject marker for specific or past time subject
(dialectal). Ag táwung gibukbuk sa buguy namatay ganíha, The man that
was mauled by the ruffian died a while ago. — sa past time substitute
for sa. Pwirting uwánga ag sa irù, My, how that dog barked.

agaab v [A2; b3] cry out loudly. Miagaab ang bátà kay giilúgan sa íyang
duláan, The child cried loudly when his toys were snatched away.

agáak = akáak.

*agad — ug, y it would be a good thing if such-and-such were the case.
Agad pag magtuun ka imbis magdúlà, It would be better for you to study
instead of playing. Agad pa untay nagduktur ka sa kaping mag-abugádu,
It would have been nice if you had become a doctor instead of a lawyer.
— nga it was good enough as it was before a change took place. Agad
siyang natúlug, ngánu pa mang ímung gipúkaw? He was doing all right
sleeping. What did you have to go and wake him up for?

ágad = alágad. paN- v [A2; b6] for a prospective bridegroom to stay in
the girl’s place just prior to the marriage ceremony in order to serve
the family. Pangagáran úsà nímu ang ginikánan arun kauyúnan ka níla,
You serve the girl’s parents so that they will come to like you. -um-
n son-in-law. v [A23S; a12] take as a son-in-law. umagarun
n prospective son-in-law.

agad-ad_1 a slightly rubbery, but soft to chew. Ang alud-ud sa manuk
agad-ad kaúnun, Chicken cartilage is soft to chew.

agad-ad_2 v [A] grunt contentedly. Muagad-ad ang anay ug magpasúsu sa
íyang mga baktin, A sow grunts when nursing its litter. n prolonged
grunt of contentment emitted by pigs.

ag-ag = alag-ag.

*agagang hi-/ha- v [B1256] hesitate doing s.t. due to indecision or
confusion. Nahiagagang siya pagdáwat sa rigálu, She hesitated before
accepting the present.

agáhad v [A; b6] clear one’s throat. Miagáhad siya, unyà nangluwà, He
cleared his throat, then spat. n action of clearing the throat.

ágak v {1} [A; a12] give the hand to lead or lend support. Akù siyang
agákun tapun sa karsáda, I’ll help him cross the street. {2} [A; a12]
guide s.o. in moral principles. Kitang mga hamtung angayang muágak sa
mga batan-un, We older folks should guide the younger generation. -ay =
ágak. mag-r-(→), mag-r- n trainer, one who guides others in learning
s.t. -l-un(→) a weak, to be led when walking. Gúlang na táwun si Lúlu
alagakun ug mulakaw, Grandpa is so old that he is to be led when he
walks.†

agak-ak v [A] {1} for chickens to make the clucking sound of being
disturbed. Miagak-ak ang manuk kay nasangkilan, The chicken squawked
when s.o. touched it. {2} cackle, squawk with laughter.

agálun (from ágad) n master, boss. v {1} [A123S] happen to get a
master. Nakaagawun akug dagmalan, I happened to work for a cruel
master. {2} [A2SN] for animals or possessions to allow only the owner
to make use of it. Nag-agawun kining ákung kabáyù, aku ray makakabayù,
My horse is choosy. I’m the only one who can ride on him. paN- v [A2S;
b(1)] work for a master. Mangagálun lang kug way láing kapangabuhían,
I’ll work as a servant if I can’t find any other job. Insik ang íyang
gipangagawunan, He worked for a Chinese.†

agan-an n sand-like pellets which are the droppings of a k.o.
wood-boring insect. v [a4b4] be infested with wood-borers. -un(→)
a having agan-an.

agáng {1} exclamation uttered upon experiencing pain. Agáng sakíta!
Ouch, how painful! {2} exclamation of disbelief or disgust. Agáng, ikaw
na lang nawnga ang manlangyaw? Tapulan! Humph! The likes of you
immigrating? You’re too lazy.

agang-agang v {1} [A; b(1)] hesitate before doing s.t. Miagang-agang
kug palit, mau nga naunhan aku, I hesitated before buying, so s.o. got
it before me. Dílì ku nímu ángay nga agang-agangan, You should not
hesitate (to ask) me. {2} [AN23; a12] shoulder work, responsibility,
and other duties which ought to be done by s.o. else. Dílì maáyu nga
ang mga inahan mauy muagang-agang (mangagang-agang) sa trabáhu sa balay
ug dagkù na ang mga anak, It’s not good for a mother to do the
household chores when her children are big. -un a tending to
shouldering work, responsibilities, and the like which should be done
by other persons.

agap a {1} in a great hurry to do s.t. Agap ka ra kaáyung misudyà níya,
You were much too quick to remind him he was wrong. {2} intensely
interested in obtaining s.t. Aku nga agap ug salapì mihátag sa ákung
láwas, Greedy for money, I surrendered my body. v [A13; a12] {1} make
haste to. Agapun nátù pagtabuk únà magbálud, Let’s make haste to cross
before the waves rise. {2} be after s.t. Nagpabulubuútan uruy nà siya
kay nag-agap man ug dulsi, He is pretending to be well-behaved because
he is interested in getting candy.

agápang n k.o. mullet.

agára v [A; a2] claim as his own s.t. owned in common with s.o. else or
belonging to s.o. else. Hasta ang ákung tutbras ímung agaráhun, You
want to lay claim to my toothbrush, too? Giagaráhan mig yútà sa
asindíru, The landowner laid claim to our land.

agaray ouch! Agaray! Bídang sakíta nímung mangusì! Ouch! That pinch
hurt. v [A] say ‘ouch’.

ágas v [A2S; b6] flow from an opening. Nag-agas na ang túbig, There is
water now. (Lit. The water is flowing now.) Giagásan ang dálan ug
gasulína, Gasoline flowed over the street. (→) a leaky. Agas kaáyu ang
táru, The can is leaky. — ug pálad spendthrift (lit. having leaky
hands).

agaw short form: gaw title for people who are cousins. Anía si Agaw
Tídu, Here is Cousin Tido. ig-(←) n cousin: children of one’s parent’s
sibling or parent’s ig-ágaw. ig-(←) igtagsa first cousin, children of a
parent’s siblings. ig-(←) igtagurha second cousin, children of a
parent’s ig-ágaw igtagsa. ig-(←) igtagutlu third cousin, children of a
parent’s ig-ágaw igtagurha. ig-(←) sa kasingkásing n a lover one
pretends is his cousin in public. mag-(←), manag-(←) n people who are
ig-ágaw with each other. pag-agáwan, panag-agáwan n sa — related by
virtue of being ig-ágaw to the (grand)parents or (grand)children of
one’s cousin. Uyuan ku siya sa panag-agáwan, He is my uncle by being a
cousin of my parents. Pag-umangkun ku siya sa panag-agáwan, She is my
niece by being a daughter of my cousin.†

ágaw v [A, A3S; a] take s.t. away from s.o. Ayawg agáwa ang duláan sa
bátà, Don’t take the toy away from the child. -an(→) a fond of
snatching. Babáying agawag bána, A woman that is a husband snatcher.
maN-r- n one who snatches.

agáwun = agálun.

agay ouch!

ágay v [A2S; b6] flow from a faucet, in a stream. Dílì muágay ang túbig
kay gisiradúhan ang grípu, The water won’t flow because the faucet is
closed. Nag-ágay ang íyang mga lúhà, Her tears flowed.

agay-ay_1 = agan-an.

agbat v {1} = ábat_1, v. {2} [A; ab2] go after s.o. to catch up with
him. Dalì, agbata si Tátay, Quick, go catch up with Father. Maagbatan
pa nímu ang íyang grádu, You can still catch up to him in your grades.

agbáti = alugbáti.

agbaw = adgaw.

agbay = alagbay.

agbun n fine particles of soil or ashes. v {1} [A] fly in fine
particles. Ayawg isagudsud ang ímung tiil kay muagbun ang abug, Don’t
drag your feet because dust will fly. {2} [B12] turn to dust.
Nagkaagbun na ang mga karáang mga papílis, The old papers are turning
into dust.

agda v [AN; a12] invite s.o. to do s.t. Miagda (nangagda) ku níya ug
pakigkalígù, I invited him to join me in going swimming. Paghulat lag
agdáhun kag káun, Just wait until you’re invited to eat. n request,
invitation to s.o. to do s.t. alagdahun, agdahúnun n one who has to be
told to do things. Ang alagdahung binatunan maáyu dáyung ilísan, A
servant that needs a special invitation to work should be immediately
replaced.

agdul = arul, v 2.

agh written representation of throaty sound produced in uttering a gasp
of pain or in clearing the throat.

aghad = ughad.

aghat v {1} [A; a12b2] challenge s.o. to a fight. Aghátun siya nátug
sumbagay, Let’s challenge him to a fight. {2} [A3P; a12] induce, prompt
s.o. to do s.t. Ang kapubri makaaghat (makapaaghat) nátù sa
pagpangáwat, Poverty can drive us to steal. Aghátun tikaw sa pagbása sa
libru, I will urge you to read the book. ma-un a provoking, inviting.
Nadápit ku pagdúul níya sa maaghátun niyang pahiyum, I was drawn to her
by her inviting smile.

aghud v [A3; b(1)] force oneself to bear with a backbreaking task.
Ngánung nag-aghud ka mag-uma nga tigúlang ka na man? Why are you
breaking your back farming when you are old?

aghup a tender in feelings or treatment. ma- a tender. v [a12] do in a
tender way. Giaghup ku silag buyag, I scolded them tenderly.

aghuy_1 n supernatural being which does good, does not show itself, and
puts itself at the service of a single sorcerer and no other person. He
cures sick persons and sorcery victims only through the intercession of
this sorcerer. He also acts as a spy for the sorcerer. -an n a sorcerer
with an aghuy.

aghuy_2 v [A; ab5] shout over distance to attract attention. Adtúa na
lang; ayaw na lang aghuya (aghuyi), Just go to him; don’t shout to call
his attention. n a shout over a distance.

agi {1} oh my!, expression of surprise. Agi, kadakù ánang isdáa! Oh my!
How big that fish is! {1a} expression of revulsion to s.t. perceived.
Agi, kangilngig naadtu! My! how terrible that was! {1b} expression of
objection to s.t. different from what is desired. Agi! Dì man nà mau!
My! That is not the one I asked for. {1c} expression of happiness at
s.t. found out. Agi, kanindut, kun tinúud, My! How nice, if it’s true.
{2} expression of sudden pain. Agi! Sakíta, Ow! That hurts.

ági v [A2S3S; b6] {1} go by, through a place. Dílì ku muági dihà kay
náay irù, I won’t go that way because there’s a dog there. {1a} [A2S;
c] for food to be cooked in s.t. Dì ku makakáug sud-an nga giági ug
mantíkà, I can’t eat food that was cooked in fat. {2} for time to go
by. Nakadaug aku sa swipstik sa miáging simána, I won the sweepstakes
last week. Sa nag-aging mga búlan, nagkaluya pud siya, As the months
went by, he became steadily weaker. {3} gone through one’s hands, had
experience with one. Pila na ka babáyi ang niági kaníya? How many women
have gone through his hands? Daghan na ang ispisyalista nga miági
kaníya, Many specialists have examined her. {4} have experienced s.t.
Nakaagi na ku sa pagpamutsatsu, I have already experienced being a
servant. {5} [A23] for a writing instrument to work. Dì na muági ning
bulpína, This ballpoint pen doesn’t write any more. n {1} path
traversed. Mibálik siya sa íyang ági, He retraced his steps. {2} result
of the action of some instrument. Ági sa gabas, The kerf of the saw.
Ági sa lápis, The imprint of the pencil. Ági sa makina, Stitches of the
sewing machine. Ági sa bunal, Welts made by a whip. Ági sa dáru,
Furrows. {3} handwriting. {4} output, work accomplished. Gamay kaáyu
siyag ági kay tapulan, He has little output because he’s lazy.
{6} profits. Dakù siyag ági sa pagpahulam, He made big profits from his
usury. {7} transient. Ági lang ang íyang kasukù, His anger will soon
pass. {8} — ug, sa by way of, as an expression of. Kining rilu ágig
handumánan nátù, This watch is by way of remembrance. (→) v [A; ac]
pass by to pick up or leave s.t. on the way. Agiun tika unyà, I’ll stop
by to pick you up. Iagi ang karsunsilyu sa ka Pidru, Bring the shorts
to Pedro’s on your way. a leaky. Tárung agi, A leaky can. v [B1256]
become leaky. pa- v {1} [A; ac] cause to go in a certain way. Unsáun
man nátù pagpaági nga dílì mailhan? How will we do it so it won’t be
recognized? Ang íyang gugma gipaági níya sa suwat, He made his love
known through letters. n way. Unsay maáyung paági sa paglútug bam-i?
What is a good way to prepare noodles? pina- n means. Nabuksan ang
kandádu pinaági sa yáwi, The lock was opened by means of a key. paN-
v [b4] for an expectant mother to have her bag of waters break.
Gipangagían na siya piru wà pa magbatì, Her bag of waters has broken,
but she is not in labor yet. agiánan n {1} passageway. Makalapus ka
ngadtu kay náa may agiánan, You can pass through there because there is
a passageway. {2} a means to an end or accomplishment. Kanang
hulamhúlam ug libru mauy usa ka pasángil, agiánan sa panagsulátay níla,
Borrowing each other’s books was a means for them to write each other.
alagían n = agiánan. a near a place people pass. Ang ílang balay
alagían kanang paingun ta sa lungsud, Their house is right on the way
when we go to town. -um-r-, -um-l- n {1} about to pass. {2} of a
passing character. Umaági (umalági) ra ning ulána, This is just a
passing rain. ka- n an event, happening, or experience. Ang súnug usa
ka kaági nga dílì malimtan, The conflagration is an unforgettable
event. kaaginhun, maaginhun a full of history, eventful.†

ágid = amgid.

agigísing n temples, hair on the temples.

agíik n creak, squeak. v [A; c1] creak, squeak. Nag-agíik ang íyang mga
túhud, His knees creaked. Ayawg agiíka (iagíik) ang sira, Don’t let the
door creak.

agik-ik v [A; b6] laugh, but not openly. Nag-agik-ik sila pagpangutut
sa maistra, They snickered when the teacher broke wind.

agil v [AN; b5] shave hair off (not beard). Ug mangagil (mangágil) ka
sa bábuy ayawg samári ang pánit, When you shave the pig, do not damage
the skin. Ayaw ug agila (agili) ang patilya, Don’t shave the sideburns.
n razor. ig-l-(←) n razor to shave pig bristle.

agila n eagle.

agímud v [AN; c1] stick out the lips in pouting or in displeasure.
Muagímud (mangagímud) man lang ug átung sugúun, He just puckers his
lips when we ask him to run an errand.

*aginaldu mísa di- = mísa digalyu.

agíngay n k.o. tall hairy grass of open fields used as forage.

aginsud = agínud.

agínud v [A2S; a] {1} move dragging s.t. on the ground. Nag-agínud ang
bakul padúng sa simbahan, The cripple dragged himself to the church.
{2} move forward slowly but steadily. Miagínud ang barku pagsulud sa
dungguánan, The boat slowly moved into the dock. n slow, dragging
movement. Agínud sa hálas, The creeping of a snake. Ang agínud sa mga
úras, The slow passing of the hours.

agipu n piece of wood with a glowing or burning tip.

agiri {1} ouch! {2} exclamation of jubilation.

agis-is n white scales on skin of the type which develop when the skin
is dry. v [B6; a4] develop whitish scales on skin. Muagis-is
(maagis-is, agis-isun) ang íyang bagtak, Her legs develop whitish
scales.

agit-it_1 n squeaking strident sound made by two surfaces rubbing
against each other. v [B] squeak stridently, become squeaky. Kasábà sad
íning siráha, muagit-it (nag-agit-it) man, How noisy this door is! It
squeaks.

agit-it_2 n {1} white streaks of dirt or dried up perspiration.
{2} dirt that sticks to things or the skin. v [a4b4] be begrimed with
agit-it. Giagit-itan (giagit-it) ang ímung líug, Your neck is streaked
with dirt. -un(→) a covered with agit-it.

agítung a burnt to charcoal. v [B2; c1] get burnt to become charcoal.
Miagítung (naagítung) ang mais nga ákung gisugba, I broiled the corn on
the cob until it turned to charcoal. (→) n fire kept burning low over a
long period of time so that it won’t have to be rekindled.

ágiw n fine, white ashes. v [AB2; a12] burn to white ashes, cause to
burn to ashes. Muágiw (maágiw) na gánì nang úling tayhúpi, When the
charcoal turns to ashes, blow some of them away. Mag-ágiw kug tabákù
nga itambal, I’ll make some tobacco ashes to use as medicine. pa-
v {1} [A; c1] let s.t. turn into ashes. Ayaw ipaágiw (paagíwa) ang
úling, Don’t let the charcoal burn to ashes. {2} [A; ac] have s.o. make
ashes. -l-an, -anan n ash tray.

agkut = hagkut.

aglidulsi = limunsítu.

aglípay, aglipayánu n member of the Aglipayan religious sect. v [B1]
become an Aglipayan.

agmang n k.o. eel.

agmud n grunting, snorting noises. v [AN; c1] grunt, snort. Ígù lang
siyang miagmud (nangagmud) sa ákung pagpananghid, He just grunted when
I asked his permission.

agngan n = adngan.

agni v [A; a12] urge s.o. to do s.t. Giagni siya sa pagpaúlì sa asáwa,
He was urged to return to his wife.

agnus n holy charm or relic affixed to the body to ward off evil.
v [A1; b] wear an agnus.

agpan = adpan.

agpang n a thin piece of bamboo, three or four inches in length used to
set the size of the hole in weaving fish nets.

agpas v [A; a12b2] {1} go after s.o. to catch up with him. Agpása, kay
wà tu siya kabayad, Go after him. He hasn’t paid. {2} meet a seller’s
offer. Dì pud ku muagpas ug baynti ánang sapatúsa, I would not even
give you twenty for those shoes. {3} catch up in time. Dì na nákù
maagpas ang trabáhu, taudtaud na kung naabsin, I can’t catch up with
the work. I’ve been absent too long. {4} be after, interested in
obtaining s.t. Kwarta lay íyang giagpas, All she’s after is money.
{5} [A12; b5] {a} catch a meaning. Wà siya kaagpas sa lísu, He didn’t
catch the joke. {b} know the cause or defect. Wà ku kaagpas unsay
dipiktu íning mutúra, I can’t figure out what is wrong with this
motorcycle. {6} [AN; c] think of s.t. to say. Walà nay ikapangagpas
(ikaagpas) ang dalága sa pagpamalíbad, The girl could think of no more
excuses for refusing him. n highest price offered in buying s.t. Pila
man giyuy agpas mu? What is the highest price you offer? pa- v [A; c]
say s.t. additional as an afterthought. Mipaagpas siyag túgun sa
paglakaw nákù, He called after me to ask me to do s.t. for him as I was
leaving. paN- v [A] {1} go after s.t. and take advantage of it in time.
Mangagpas ta sa higayun samtang barátu pa, Let’s take advantage of the
opportunity while it is still cheap. {2} figure s.t. out. May nangagpas
nga láin siyag túyù, S.o. figured out that he had evil intentions.
n {1} interpretation of a situation. {2} a second planting to replace
seeds that did not do well. Namatay ang ubang tanum. Pangagpas ning
tanúma, Some of the plants died. This planting is to replace them.†

agrabiyar v [A2] have a complaint about treatment. Makaagrabiyar ka pa
uruy nga nakabintahà ka man, You claim you’re being treated unfairly,
though before, you had the advantage.

agrabyádu a {1} taking offense. Agrabyádu ku sa ímung gisulti, I feel
offended at what you said. {2} having a grievance, reason for
complaint.

agrabyu v [A2; a2b3] have a complaint about a treatment. Ayaw agrabyúha
ning ákung gibúhat, Don’t complain about what I did. n s.t. which gives
rise to grievances. Ang agrabyu sa mga Pilipínu gíkan sa mga Katsílà
walà na maagwanta, The Filipinos could no longer endure their
grievances against the Spaniards.

agri, agridulsi = limunsítu.

agrigáwu = abrigáwu.

agrikultúra n agriculture. agrikulturista n agriculturist. v [B156] be
an agriculturist.

agriminsur n land surveyor. v [B156] be a land surveyor.

agrísib = agrisíba, agrisíbu.

agrisíba a {1} = agrisíbu, (female). {2} aggressive, eager for sex.
Agrisíba kunu ang mga mistísa, They say the mestiza girls are sexually
aggressive. v [B12] be sexually aggressive.

agrisíbu a aggressive. v [B1; b] be aggressive. -in- a in an aggressive
manner. v [A13; a12] do s.t. aggressively. Inagrisibúhun nátù pag-aplay
ang trabáhu, Let’s be aggressive in our application for the job.

agsa_1 v [A; b5] work on s.t. and be paid with half of product. Muagsa
ku sa ímung tíkug kay wà kuy puhúnan, I will work with your material
for half the output, as I have none of my own.

agsa_2 = igtagsa. see agaw.

agsing v [A; b2] for a missile to graze s.o. Ígù lang nakaagsing ang
bála sa íyang agtang, The bullet just grazed his forehead.

agtà n {1} supernatural man of dark complexion and extraordinary size,
said to inhabit trees, cliffs, or empty houses. He is said to play
practical jokes on people, kidnap them. He has a large cigar in his
mouth. {2} name occasionally given to Negritos.

agtang n {1} forehead. {2} region just above the genitalia (humorous
metaphorical). (→) v [A; a12] hit at the forehead. Agtangun tika run, I
will hit you on the forehead. -un a having a prominent forehead.

agtì v [BN] {1} become very dark due to heat. Miagtì (nangagtì) íyang
nawung sa ínit, His face has become black because of the sun. {2} be
dry and brittle. Ning-agtì ang káhuy, The wood became dry and brittle.

agú exclamation of woe or pain: ouch! Agú! Kalisud sa way inahan, Woe,
how difficult it is to have no mother. v [A2] exclaim agú.

Agu. abbreviation for Agustu, August.

agū̀ = agúlù.

agubhub n hollow thudding sound. v [A] resound with hollow thudding
sound. Miagubhub ang platapurma nga ílang gisayáwan ug tiniil, The
platform they were dancing on in their bare feet resounded with a
thudding sound.

agub-ub_1 a crunchy and hard to chew, like hardtack. Agub-ub kaúnun ang
sinángag pasì, Fried corn grains are crunchy to eat. v [A4] make
crunchy sound.

agub-ub_2 n mold. v [A123P; a4b4] be moldy. Giagub-ub (giagub-uban) ang
surísu nga dúgayng gitagúan, The sausages have become moldy because
they were kept too long.

agud = arun_1 (dialectal).

agúha n {1} big sewing needle for sewing up sacks. {2} name given to
any large needle or safety pin.

aguhilya n {1} U-shaped hairpin. {2} a small needle bigger than the
ordinary sewing needle, but smaller than the agúha. {3} hypodermic
needle. v {1} [A; a] use an aguhilya. Aguhilyáun lang ni nátung gisì sa
sáku, Let’s sew the sack with a large needle. Ug dílì ka mukáun,
maaguhilyáan ka sa duktur, If you refuse to eat, the doctor will have
to use his needle on you. {2} [a12] make an aguhilya.

agúhù n Australian pine: Casuarina equistifolia. Lumber and ornamental
tree. The roots and bark have medicinal uses. Young specimens are used
as Christmas trees.

aguk-uk v [A; b3] laugh vigorously in suppressed or stifled laughter.
Muaguk-uk giyud kug katáwa kun mahinumdum ku, I break into suppressed
laughter when I think about it. n vigorous but suppressed laughter.
n k.o. grunt: Pomadasys hasta.

agúkuy see alagúkuy.

agul a with the hair completely shaved off. v = agil.

agulang see gúlang.

agúlù v [A2S] groan, moan. Ngánung nag-agúlù man ka, may sakit ka ba sa
tiyan? Why are you groaning? Do you have a stomach ache? n groan.

agum = lagum.

águm v [B1256; b4(1)] {1} undergo a bitter or painful experience.
Naágum sa dakung kapildíhan ang lungsud adtung bagyúha, The town
suffered a great loss in that storm. {2} get full use out of some
benefit s.o. bestows on one. Makaminyù ka na kay naágum na ku sa ímung
kabudlay, I allow you to get married because I made use of your labor
(while you were single). pa- v [A12] cause one to learn a lesson. Ang
dakung pildi nakapaágum nákù, Losing a large amount taught me a lesson.
hi-/ha- = águm. ka-an n bitter experience.

agumáa n chub or striped mackerel: Rastrelliger sp.

agúmud v [A2; c] grunt. Nag-agumud ang bábuy nga naglúnang, The pig was
grunting as he wallowed in the mud.

agum-um n k.o. large dove.

águng n gong. v [A; a] sound a gong.

agúngal n corn cob.

agung-ung_1 n loud sound that reverberates. v [AB46] reverberate, make
s.t. reverberate. Muagung-ung na gánì ang ayruplánu, When the roar of
the airplane resounds.

agung-ung_2 v [A; b3] whine in a somewhat suppressed way, as in pain.
Nakaagung-ung sa kasakit ang irù nga gibunálan, The dog he whipped
whined in pain.

agúnguy n prolonged wail of grief or pain, any wailing-like sound.
Agúnguy sa ambulansiya, The wail of the ambulance. v [A; b3] wail. Dì
man angayang agungúyan nang samára, That wound is nothing to wail
about.

aguníyas n death knell at a funeral; also the knell on Good Friday to
indicate the hour of Christ’s death. v [A; b6] sound the death knell.

aguntù v [A] emit a short grunt when hit in the pit of the stomach or
when exerting an effort. Miaguntù siya dihang naigù sa kutukutu, He
groaned when he was hit in the pit of the stomach. n short grunt.

agup-up n mildew, mold. v [a4b4] get mildewed, moldy. Ayawg paumgi ang
ímung dintru arun dílì agup-upun, Don’t let your shirt get moist so
that it won’t get mildewed. Giagup-up (giagup-upan) na ang sud-ang
hikalimtan, The food they forgot about got all moldy. -un(→) a mildewy,
moldy.

aguruy ouch! Aguruy, ngánung namáak man ka? Ouch! Why did you bite me?
v [A] cry ‘ouch’.

águs v [A2S] ooze, flow out slowly. Miágus ang nánà, The pus oozed out.

agusahis n k.o. shrub or small tree. The leaves have rough upper
surface and are used as sandpaper: Ficus odorata and ulmifolia. v [A13;
b(1)] sand s.t. with agusahis leaves.

Agustu n August. v see abril.

agus-us n {1} delicacy made of cornstarch mixed with sugar, water, and
sometimes other ingredients made into cylindrical rolls with banana
leaves and broiled. {2} delicacy made of sweet potatoes and pork
wrapped in coconut leaves. v [AC12; a2] make agus-us.

agut a {1} simple-minded. Dalì mutúu ang agut, The simple-minded fool
believes anything you tell him. {2} slow, stunted in growth. Agut ka
man. Hilabwan na man lang ka sa ímung manghud, You are stunted. Your
little brother is taller than you are. v {1} [B; a] be ignorant,
simple-minded. Makaagut man diay ning mag-istar ug búkid, Staying in
the mountains makes you simple-minded. {2} be stunted in growth. -un
a of a stunted or simple-minded sort. Agutun mig kalíwat, We are a
family of short people.

agút a gritty. Agút ang ginamus sa bás, The fish paste is gritty with
sand. v [B; b] become gritty.

agútay n k.o. wild banana, producing 2″ long seedy fruit with a
yellowish peel and sweet orange meat when ripe.

aguting n {1} k.o. tobacco blight which makes the leaves turn whitish
and curl up when they are dried. {2} k.o. banana blight which forms
spots and makes the meat hard and inedible. v [a4] be affected with
aguting.

agutíut n squeaking, creaking sound produced by two surfaces rubbing
against each other. v [A] for surfaces to squeak, creak. Muagutíut man
ning ákung sapátus, My shoes squeak.

agutnga v [A; b6] emit a somewhat prolonged grunt as when one is
lifting a heavy load or has suffered pain. Miagutnga siya sa kabug-at
sa íyang gipas-an, He groaned under the load he was carrying. n grunt.

agut-ut_1 n squeaking sound like that made by chewing on meat. v [A]
make a squeaking sound.

agut-ut_2 a stunted in growth. v [B; a] be stunted in growth.
Nagkaagut-ut ang mga tanum kay kúlang na sa tambuk ang yútà, The plants
are coming out stunted because the soil is infertile.

agut-ut_3 a painful in a throbbing, gnawing way. v [B46; b4] be
throbbingly painful. Nag-agut-ut ang ákung hubag, My boil is giving me
a gnawing pain. Muhílak ku ug agut-utan ku sa ákung upirasyun, I cry if
the wound from my operation gnaws painfully.

agúut a for s.t. soft or smooth to have a sandy, gritty texture because
of improper cooking or some hard materials mixed in with it. Agúut pa
kaáyu ning kan-un, pataudtauri pa, This rice is still hard in the
center. Leave it on a little longer. v [B; b6] be gritty. Nag-agúut ang
ginamus sa balas, The fish paste is gritty because of the sand.

aguy {1} ouch! Aguy, sakíta! Nasuyuran kus buyug, Ouch! It hurts. I was
stung by a wasp! {2} particle expressing pleasant surprise. Aguy! Dúna
diay kuy bag-ung sapátus, Yipee! I have a new pair of shoes! v [A]
shout aguy.

aguyangyang_1 n a k.o. poisonous field spider with a red tip at the
abdomen.

aguyangyang_2 n k.o. wild annual vine that bears small, poisonous beans
which are hard and red with a black tip. The beans are used
ornamentally and medicinally: Abrus precatorius.

agwa n perfume, lotion. — bindíta n holy water. v {1} [A; b6] apply
perfume to s.o. {2} [A12] get perfume. paN- v [A2] use perfume. Humut
ka dà. Nangagwa ka ba? You smell nice. Are you using perfume? agwahan
n perfume atomizer. — uksináda n hydrogen peroxide.

agwáda v [A; a2] fetch water. Agwadáhan lang tikag túbig, I’ll fetch
water for you. paN- v [A2] fetch water for a fee. n the occupation of
fetching water. Makasapì pud siyag diyútay sa pangagwáda, He can earn a
little money in fetching water.†

agwádu a watery, of a thin mixture. Pagkaagwádu sa ímung tsukuláti, mu
rag hinúgas, How watery your chocolate is. It is like dishwater. v [A;
a12] make a thin mixture.†

agwadur n water vendor. v [B156] be a water vendor.

agwanta v {1} [A; a12] endure, put up with. Walay pawntinping muagwanta
ánang ímung ginawian, No pen can last the way you are using it. Dì kung
kaagwanta níya, I cannot stand her. Agwantahun lang nátù ang kagútum,
We’ll just endure our hunger. {2} [A; b5] put up with. Bisag bagìbian
ang asáwa, agwantahan (agwantahun) ku na lang, My wife is a shrew, but
I’ll just put up with her. — nga how very. Agwantang lisúra, My! How
difficult it is! — muy Can you imagine! Agwanta mu bay mupalit ug
kadilak mukás dáyun! Can you imagine? He bought a Cadillac for cash!
-du, -dur(→) a able to endure. Agwantadur ang tagabaryu sa trabáhu,
Village folk can endure hard work. see also †maríya.

agwardiyinti n refined alcohol, usually used in making liquor.

agwas n public water system. Ámung túbig gíkan sa agwas, Our water
comes from the public supply. — putablis = agwas.

agwasil n = alguwasil.

agwásun n k.o. large poisonous snake, black on the back and
yellow-bellied.

ah particle expressing rejection or denial. Ah! Dílì kanà mahímù, Oh!
That’s impossible. Ah, dì ku. Kápuy, Oh, I don’t want to. It’s too much
like work.

aha aha! Aha! Nasakpan ka na giyud, Aha! At last I’ve caught you!

aháan n k.o. blue-lined snapper: Lutianus rivulatus.

áhag v [A; a] {1} sift fine particles from coarser ones. Ahágun ku ang
ginaling kapi, I’ll sift the ground coffee. {2} shake the remaining
grains out of rice straw. Ahága ang uhut, Shake out the straw.
{3} choose the best or biggest from a group. Ikaw bay muáhag sa maáyung
klásing isdà, You choose the best fish. -an n sifter for milled corn.

áhak a crazy (used only in exclamations). Aháka sad nímu uy! You’re
nuts! v [a4] be crazy. Gipabáyad kag singku? Giáhak, She made you pay
five pesos? Is she out of her mind? Wà ku nímu sugta. Ahákun ka pa
untà, You don’t accept me? I hope you go mad.

áhas_1 v [A; a] {1} haul in a fishing net. Ahásun ni Durik ug sayu ang
íyang púkut, Doric will haul in his net early. {2} get s.t. from s.t.
Wà tay maáhas ug mangasáwa tag way kanghu, There’s no profit in
marrying a poor woman.

áhas_2 v [A12; c1] separate husked from unhusked rice. Ahása (iáhas)
pag-alig-ig ang gilubuk, Separate the husked from the unhusked rice by
shaking it.

ahat a {1} done before the proper time. Ahat nga kamatáyun, Premature
death. {2} forced. Ahat nga pahiyum, A forced smile. Ahat nga
pagkaminyù, Forced marriage. v {1} [A23] do s.t. suddenly and
unexpectedly. Giunsa man nímu tung bátà nga miahat maghílak? What did
you do to the child that it cried suddenly? {2} [B3(1); a12] {a} do
s.t. before the proper time. Kinsa may nag-ahat ug pùpù sa mangga? Who
picked the mango prematurely? Naahat siyag pagkabut-an pagkamatay sa
íyang amahan, He had to become a grown-up before his time, when his
father died. {b} do s.t. at an inopportune time. Nakaahat lang kug
katáwa. Nangutut man gud ka! I couldn’t help laughing. You broke wind!
{3} be forced into doing s.t. by circumstances. Miahat kug huwam ug
kwarta, I was forced to borrow money. athanay v [C3] force each other
to do s.t.

ahaw a lacking entirely. Ahaw sa tanum ang yútà nga palanas, The rocky
area is bare of plants. Ahaw ang bátà sa pagpanggà sa inahan, The child
lacks a mother’s love. n vegetable cooked with no meat or other
condiments except, perhaps, tomatoes, onions, and salt. v {1} [B1; b6]
be empty, lacking. Nag-ahaw ang ákung kinabúhì sukad aku papháa sa
trabáhu, My life has been empty ever since I was fired. Giahawan aku sa
ímung pangatarúngan, I consider your reasoning to be empty. {2} [A13;
a] cook vegetables plain. Ahawun ku ang útan, I will cook the
vegetables plain.†

ahay exclamation expressing utter tiredness or frustration. Ahay,
kapait ning walay ginikánan, My! How bitter it is not to have parents.

ahidris n chess set. v [AC3; c3] play chess. -an(→) n chessboard.

ahinghu n tiny shrub grown in flower pots, not native to the Visayas:
Crossostephium chinense.

ahinsiya n {1} pawnshop. {2} agency. Ahinsiya sa trabáhu, Employment
agency. v [A13] open up a pawnshop.

ahinti n agent, one who sells on commission. Níay ahinti sa sabun,
There’s a man selling soap here. v [BN56; b6] be a salesman on
commission. Ahintíhan ku ning ímung yútà, I’ll be your agent in selling
the land. — sa bábuy one with an AB (humorous).

ahítu n marigold.

áhù = ákù; see aku. idyaidya ahuáhù see idyaidya.

áhug v [AC; ac] mix s.t. moist or wet with s.t. dry. Nag-áhug ang gátas
ug harína, The flour and the milk are mixed together. (→) n mixture.
Gátas, harína, kámay. Hustu giyud nang ahug, Milk, flour, sugar are
just the right mixture.

áhus n garlic. (→) v [c] season with garlic. Dì ba nímu ahusan ang
tinúlang isdà? Are you not going to season the stewed fish with garlic?
-an(→) n garlic patch. ahus-áhus n = awrúra_2. ahus-ahus n ornamental
vine with purple flowers which smells somewhat like garlic. — nga putì
n k.o. ornamental bulb with white flowers.

ak word used in writing to represent the sound of a blow.

akáak v [A] make a cracking sound, loud creaking sound. Miakáak ang
pultahan sa pag-abri námù, The door creaked (went aak) when we opened
it.

ákab = abhak.

akadimíya n academy.

ak-ak v [A; a2] peel, rip off, usually s.t. not flexible. Ikaw bay
muak-ak sa pánit sa káhuy? Will you strip the bark off the tree?
Naak-ak ang lapalapa sa ákung sapátus, The sole of my shoe came off.

ákal a bulging and bulky in the pocket or pocketbook. v [B] be bulgy.
Nag-ákal ang íyang bulsa sa batu, His pocket was bulging with rocks.

akasya n monkey-pod tree, a large tree extensively planted as shade
tree and producing excellent lumber: Samanea saman. akasyahan n acacia
tree stand.

akata, akatar v [A; b5] look after, take care of. Kinsa may muakatar sa
tigúlang ug muuban ku nímu? Who will look after the old man if I go
with you? Ang táwung kasámuk ray akatahan (akatahun) dì giyud
muhangtud, A man that has nothing to do except look for trouble will
not live long.

akawntant n accountant. v [B16] be an accountant.

akba v {1} [B3(1); c] lean on the chest with the arms hanging over the
edge. Nag-akba siya sa pasamánu samtang nagtambù sa sílung, She was
leaning over the banister as she looked downstairs. {2} [A; c1P] carry
s.o. with his chest just below or against the shoulder. Iakba (akbaha,
ipaakba) ang bátà arun manug-ab, Pick up the child with his chest
facing you to burp him.

akbay = alagbay.

akbù v [A; a] lean on the lower arms. Nag-akbù siya sa bintánà, She’s
in the window leaning on her arms. Ayaw ug akbúi nang balabag, Don’t
lean on that rail. -anan n rail over which one usually leans. Akbuánan
sa kumpisyunaryu, Confessional rail.

akhab = abhak.

akin = nakinnákin.

akip v [B6; c1] be included, include oneself in s.t. Ang bátang
mag-akip ug sulti sa dagkù way batásan, A child who joins in an adults’
conversation is ill-mannered. Kinsay nakaakip ug kúhà sa ákung papílis?
Who accidentally took my papers along with his? akip-akipun a tending
to include oneself in on things.

aklas v [A; a2] go on strike. Ug dílì ta tugtan, aklásun nátù, If our
demands are not met, we’ll strike. Giaklásan ang kumpaníya, They went
on strike against the company. n strike of workers.

akmù = akbù.

akni n acne.

aknit v [A; a2] peel s.t. flexible off in such a way that it does not
get torn. Akníta ang silyu, Peel the stamps off carefully.

aksì v [A; a] tear off flexible material attached or pasted to s.t. Wà
níya aksía ang pahibalu nga gitaput sa bungbung, He didn’t rip off the
poster pasted on the wall.

aksidinti n {1} accident. {2} accident, happenstance. Aksidinti lang
nga nagkítà mi, We just met by accident. v [B126] have an accident.
Naaksidinti si Pidru, Pedro had an accident.

aksidu n acid, usually hydrochloric acid. v [A] put acid. Aksiduhan
nímug diyútay ang batiríya, Put a little acid in the battery. ka-(←)
v [A13] get covered with acid.

aksintu n accent, mark. v [A3; b6] put an accent, mark.

aksiyun n {1} action, movement. {2} interest or part owned in a
business. May aksiyun siya sa Maníla Iliktrik, He has part interest in
the Manila Electric Company. Usa lang ka aksiyun sa swipstik, One share
of a lottery ticket. v [A2; b] make a move to, show signs of doing s.t.
Wà makaaksiyun ug pamúlak ang tanum, The plants haven’t shown any signs
of flowering yet. Giaksiyunan ku siyag pátid, I made a move to kick
him. -ista n one who has an interest or share in a business.

aksul n axle. v [A13; a] make into, supply with an axle. Giaksúlan níya
ang karumátag káhuy, He put a wooden axle on the cart.

akta n minutes of a business meeting.

aktibidádis n activities.

aktibista n political activist.

aktíbu a active, energetic. Aktíbu kaáyu ang inyung mga bátà, Your
children are very active. Aktíbung mimbru, An active member. Bulkan nga
aktíbu, An active volcano. Ingridiyinting aktíbu, An active ingredient.
v [B2; b6] get to be active.

akting n {1} acting, functioning in a temporary capacity. {2} way of
acting. Layhan ku sa akting ni Gluriya Rumíru, I like Gloria Romero’s
acting.

aktitud n attitude. Ang aktitud sa mga táwu báhin sa prisidinti, The
people’s attitude towards the president.

aktris n actress. v [B156] be an actress. -l-un(→) a having the looks
or character of an actress. Musalir sa pilikula si Tirya kay alaktrisun
ug hitsúra, Terry will do well in the film because she has the
appearance of an actress.

aktu n {1} the act of doing s.t. Ang tanang mga aktu sa simbahan
pagabayran na, You have to pay for every church ceremony now. Nasakpan
siya sa aktu, He was caught in the act. {1a} acts in the church. Aktu
sa pagbásul, kuntrisiyun, Act of Contrition. {2} the time that s.t.
happens. Sa aksidinti tulu ang namatay sa aktu, In the accident three
died on the spot. Ang táwu nga náa sa aktu sa kamatáyun dílì mamakak, A
man does not lie when he is at the point of death. {3} acts of a
legislative body. {4} acts of a drama. v {1} [b4(1)] be caught in doing
an act. Hiaktuhan siyang nangáwat, He was caught in the act of
stealing. {2} [A] a engage in some action. Ug muaktu siyag dautan,
singgit, If he acts suspiciously, scream. {b} show signs of dying. Ug
muaktu na, ipatawag ku, If he shows signs of dying, send for me.

aktur n actor on stage or screen. v [B156] be an actor. -l-un(→) a be
like an actor. — kantur n actor-singer.

aktuwal n sa — {1} at the very moment. Sa aktuwal na giyud siya
midágan, gitirúhan dáyun, The very moment he made to run away, he was
shot. {2} in person, in real life. Sa aktuwal batan-un pa kay sa
litrátu, He is younger looking in real life than in his picture.
Isturiya lang nà. Dílì sa aktuwal, It’s just a story, not real.

aku I, me. Aku lang, Let me do it. Short form: ku. Adtu na ku (aku),
I’m going now. ay — nímu expression of helpless frustration at s.o.’s
incompetence. Ay ku nímu, undù. Mag-unsa man lang ka ug wà na ku, My
God, son. What will you do when I am not around any more! tig-akuaku
a always say ‘aku’. Tig-akuaku ka man bisag dílì ka kamau, You don’t
know how, but you keep saying ‘lemme’. ákù {1} preposed gen.: me, my.
Ákung anak, My child. Ákung gibása, I read it. {2} be mine. Ákù nà,
That is mine. Unsa may ákù niánà? What do I get out of that? v [B1256]
become mine. Maákù ka na giyud, At last you will be mine. — na May I
have to keep? Ákù na nang kindi, ha? May I have that candy? Ang — gud
{1} what worries me. Ang ákù gud ug dì siya kaanhi, What worries me is
if he can’t come. {2} all I am concerned with, interested in. Ang ákù
gud nga makatinir kug pruyba, All I care about is that I can have
proof. maakuakuun a tending to want things for oneself. akúa mine as
opposed to other things that are not. Akúa nà, That one (as opposed to
the others) is mine. kanákù dat.: me. Ihátag kanákù, Give it to me.
Nagtan-aw siya kanákù, He was looking at me. ku {1} nom. (short for
aku). {2} gen.: = nákù. nákù {1} gen.: my, by me. Anak nákù, My son.
Gibása nákù, I read it. — ug (short for gipakaingun nákù) I thought.
Nákug muadtu ka, I thought you would go. {2} short for kanákù.

áku (from aku) v [A12] {1} stand to do s.t. Dì ku kaákug tan-aw nímu, I
cannot stand to look at you. {2} = paN-. paN- v {1} [A2] have nerve to
do s.t. Walà giyud ku makapangáku (makaáku) sa pagbuyag kang Maríya, I
couldn’t gather the nerve to admonish Maria. {2} [A2; b5] do s.t. on
one’s own responsibility. Dílì ku mangáku sa pagpaandar sa makina, I
will not take it on myself to start the engine. Ngánung gipangakúhan
(gipangáku) man nímu nag-istrungkar? Why did you take it on yourself to
take that apart? n particular responsibility or task. Dakù kaáyung
pangáku sa lungsud ang pagtúkud sa simbahan, It was a great
responsibility which the town undertook to build the church. kaakúhan,
kapangakúhan n responsibility. Kaakúhan (kapangakúhan) sa usa ka
amahan, A father’s responsibility. akuakuhan, maakuakuhan,
manggiakuakuhan a tending to take things on oneself one should not.
Akuakuhan kaáyu siya manlísù sa twirka, He likes to take it on himself
to mess around with the screws. v [B12] get to be so that one takes on
things one should not.

akub v [AC; ac] fit s.t. over s.t. else face to face so that the edges
meet, or the edge of the cover overlaps the edges of the thing covered.
Kinsa may nag-akub sa nígu sa tabig? Who covered the clothes basket
with a winnowing tray? Ang duha ka bagaw sa imbaw nag-ákub, The two
shells of the clam fit together precisely. Akúba ang duha ka papil, Lay
the two papers face to face with the edges even. Akbi ang pawntinpin,
Put the top on the fountain pen. (←) n things that fit against each
other with the outer edges matching. Duha ka ákub ang ílang kík, Their
cake has two layers.

ákud_1 a for the chest to be tight or heart to be heaving. Nagsubsub
ang ákud sa íyang dughan. Gihúbak na sad, Her wheezing fits in her
chest intensified. She was having another asthma attack.

ákud_2 v [AB126; b5] disable, be disabled. Naákud ang táwu nga nabalían
sa páa, The man who broke his thigh became crippled. Akúrun (akúran)
tikaw run yawáa ka, I’ll disable you, you devil. (→) n cripple.

akúdi v [A; b5c] mind, take care, look after. Maakúdi (maakudíhan) nákù
ang tanan kung mga anak bísag wà kuy katábang, I can take care of all
my children even without a helper. Akudíha, akudíhig maáyu nang ímung
kabílin, Take good care of your inheritance.

akulitu n {1} altar boy, server in a mass. {2} one who is at a person’s
beck and call and kowtows to him. Ása man nà mudáut ni Markus. Akulitu
man nà siya, He would never talk against Marcos. All he is is his
yes-man. v [B56] be a server.

akumpaniing n one who stays with a patient in a hospital to look after
his needs. Kaning katríha pára sa akumpaniing, This bed is for the one
who stays in the room with the patient to attend to him. v [B; a] be,
become the one who stays with a patient in a hospital to attend to his
needs. Giakumpaniing ku sa ámung silíngan nga naaksidinti, I went to
the hospital to stay in the room with our neighbor that met an
accident.

akumpaniyamintu n accompaniment in music.

akumpaniyar v [A; b] {1} accompany s.o. in music. Akumpanyahi aku sa
ímung sista, Accompany me with your guitar. {2} go with s.o.
Akumpanyahi ku didtu bi, Accompany me there.

akumplísi n accomplice.

akup-akup v [A3; a12] monopolize a job, possession, or enjoyment of
s.t. Kinsay layhan mutábang nga muakup-akup man siya sa mga trabahuun?
Who likes to help when he monopolizes all the work? Ayaw akup-akupa ang
tanang duwáan, Don’t monopolize all of the toys.

akurdiyun n accordion. v [A] play the accordion.

akusádu see akusar.

akusar v [A; b5c1] accuse. Ayaw ku akusaha (akusahi, iakusar), Don’t
accuse me. akusádu n one accused, defendant. akusasiyun n accusation.

akwaryum n aquarium.

akwintans n acquaintance. — parti n get-acquainted party.

akyut a acute, critical sickness. v [B] for a sickness to become acute.
Naakyut ang íyang apindisaytis, His appendicitis has gotten acute.

*ala (not without l) — úna {1} one o’clock. {2} going once (in
auction). Dusintus. Ala úna, alas dus, alas tris, sirtu, Two hundred.
Going once, going twice, gone. v [B5; b] see alas_1.

Ála (not without l) n Allah.

alà v [A13P; c6] avoid engaging in certain activities, esp. eating
proscribed foods. Dì gánì ka mag-alà sa ímung pagkáun, dì ka giyud
mamaáyu, If you don’t avoid eating proscribed foods, you will never get
better. Kining ákung balatían mauy nakaalà (nakapaalà) nákù sa
pagkalígù sa dágat, My ailment has kept me from bathing in the sea.
walay — not avoiding things, esp. in eating. Wà siyay alà. Mukáun bisag
unsa, He’s not choosy. He’ll eat anything. paN-(←) v {1} [A; b] for
pregnant women to conceive an intense desire for or dislike for s.t. Si
Íli nangálà sa ímung ilung, básin pag muliwat ang bátà, Ely has a great
liking for your nose. Maybe her baby will get that nose. Manggang hilaw
ang íyang gipangaláan, She had an intense craving for green mangoes.
{2} [A] be in the early months of pregnancy. Bag-u pa siyang nanganak,
nangálà na pud, She just had a baby, but she’s pregnant again.

álà v [b] be mistaken for another person. Naaláan ku siyang kawatan, I
mistook him for a thief.

alabádu (not without l) v [AN; c1] say the final prayer in a novena, on
any day. Hápit na mahuman ang pangadyì kay nag-alabádu na, The prayer
is about to end because they are offering the final prayer.

alabanit = rabanit.

alabíhid n wild tree in same genus as siriguylas with sour leaves and
fruits: Spondias pinnata. The leaves and fruits are used in stews, and
the leaves have medicinal uses.

alabútun see abut.

álad n {1} wooden fence, enclosure. {2} pig sty. v [A1; a] enclose in a
fence. Alára ning babúya, Put this pig in an enclosure. Alári ang mga
tinanum, Put a fence around the plants.

alagad v [A13; a12] wait for s.o. to do s.t. Muagad lang ku sa inyung
hukum, I am guided by your decision. Panahun ray ákung agdun, I will
let time decide. ulualágad, agad-ágad v {1} [A13; c1] put off doing
s.t. temporarily until s.t. else happens. Mag-agad-ágad ku sa pag-abut
ni Tátay úsà ku mulakaw, I am waiting for Dad to get here before I go.
Iagad-ágad (agad-agára) lang úsà ang báyad, Put the payment off awhile.
{2} [a12] put off doing s.t. to wait for s.o. Agad-agára ku kadiyut
arun magkúyug ta, Wait a second for me, so we can go together.

alágad (not without l) n {1} servant, employee. — sa baláud law
officer. {2} service rendered. Mapasalamátun kami sa alágad sa Krus nga
Pula, We are grateful for the services of the Red Cross. v [A; c]
{1} serve, be a servant or employee. Dílì siya layhang mualágad sa
pamilya nga daghag kasíra, She doesn’t like to serve in a household
with lots of boarders. Nag-alágad siya sa gubyirnu, He works for the
government. Dúgay ku níyang gialagáran, ningbíyà na lang ku sa
tindáhan, It took her a long time to wait on me, so I just left the
store. {2} attend to, care for. Aku ang mualágad sa bátà samtang túa pa
sa huspital ang inahan, I will take care of the child while the mother
is in the hospital. kaalagáran n duty. maalagárun a serving
conscientiously. Kanímu maalagárun, Your faithful servant. alagdun
a requiring intensive care. Alagdung masakitun, Patients who require
intensive care.

alag-ag v [A; a] sift. Ag-águn ta ni rung buli, Let’s sift the buri
flour. -l-un(→) n powdered matter ready for sifting. -an(→) n a device
for sifting.

alagási n k.o. small tree of thickets producing soft wood: Leucosyke
capitellata.

alagaw = adgaw.

alagay v [A; b3] groan in pain. Nag-alagay siya sa kasakit, He groaned
in pain.

alagbáti = alugbáti.

alagbay v [AC; c] to put one’s arm around s.o.’s shoulders. Miagbay ang
ryumáhun sa nars, The rheumatic patient put his arm around the nurse’s
shoulders. Ayaw ku agbáyi, Don’t put your arm around my shoulder.

alagúbay = bagaybay.

alagúkuy n k.o. light orange crab living in holes along the shore. It
is about an inch across, and one claw is much bigger than the other.

aláhas (not without l) n jewelry. maN-r-(→), alahíru n jewelry dealer.

alahíru = mangangalahas. see aláhas.

álak (not without l) n liquor, strong alcoholic beverage.

alakáak n k.o. edible mollusk resembling the chiton, about an inch in
length.

alakri (not without l) n sealing wax, for package, letters, etc. v [b]
seal s.t. with sealing wax.

alaksiw (not without l) n hard liquor of the cheapest sort.

al-al_1 a adult, full-grown birds. Lisud tudlúag sulti ning al-al nga
piríku, It’s hard to teach a full-grown parrot to speak. v [B15] become
full-grown. Samtang nagkaal-al ang langgam nagsúgud pud ug kapakápa, As
the bird was growing up it began to flap its wings.

al-al_2 n childish in action, particularly in speech and articulation.
Kadakù na nímu. Al-al gihápun kang musulti, How big you are, but you
still talk like a child! v [B] become, consider childish. Mual-al giyud
ang bátà basta labihan sa paráyig, A child will stay immature as long
as he is spoiled.

alálay (not without l) n one who helps or supports s.o. in doing s.t.
(slang). Dì siya mahadluk mamarigla kay daghan mag alálay, He is not
afraid to maul anybody without provocation because he has plenty of
supporters. v [A; b(1)] help s.o. (slang). Alaláyan ta ka sa
pag-iksplikar, I’ll help you explain.

*álam (not without l) ka- n knowledge of some special field, specific
know-how. Wà kuy kaálam sa pagpanghílut, I have no expertise in
massage. kinaadman n {1} general knowledge. Lalum siyag kinaadman, He
is deeply learned. {2} special magical knowledge. ma- a know how to
[do]. Maálam siya nga mutukar ug pyánu, He knows how to play the piano.
ma-un, manggi-un, makinaadmánun a wise, knowledgeable. Nahibúlung ang
mga tigúlang sa makinaadmánun nga tubag ni Hisus, The old men were
amazed at Jesus’ wise answers. pakama-un, pakamanggiun,
pakamakinaadmánun v [A13; a12] pretend to be, consider wise.†

alámag n {1} reflected, luminescent light. Ang alámag nga ímung makítà
sa túbig gíkan sa sugà sa mga mananagat, The light you see in the water
is from the fishermen’s lamps. {2} may, walay — (l not dropped) {a} be
informed, uninformed. Walà siyay alámag sa baláud, He is ignorant of
the law. {b} have awareness of a happening. Pagbisíta námù sa uspital
walà na siyay alámag, When we visited him in the hospital he had no
awareness of his surroundings. v (l usually dropped) {1} [AP2S; b2S]
gleam, cause to gleam, usually with reflected light. Ang kaháit sa
suwab miámag, The blade gleamed because of its sharpness. Mialámag ang
íyang mata sa túmang kalípay, Her eyes gleamed with joy. Ang mga sugà
nag-ámag (nag-amag, nagpaámag) sa túbig, The water reflected the
lights. {2} [APB; c] enlighten, make aware. Mialámag sa ákung
panumdúman ang hustung tubag, The correct answer presented itself to my
mind. Kun alamágan lang sa Diyus ang Santu Pápa, If God would only
enlighten the Pope. paN- v [A; b5] stay up late in doing s.t.
Nangalámag aku pagpanahì, I stayed up late sewing. (→) n {1} k.o.
glowing toadstool. {2} k.o. fish. amag-amag, amagan n k.o. small fish.

alam-álam v [A; c] {1} coax s.o. to do s.t. he does not want to do.
Alam-alámi siya, Coax him. {2} mollify or assuage s.o. by comforting
him. ma-un a {1} coaxing. {2} assuaging. ‘Dì bitaw ka nákù unsáun,’
maalam-alámun níyang sulti, ‘I’m not going to hurt you,’ she said,
mollifying me.

alambíhid, alambíhud = alabíhid.

alambri_1 n wire. -ng pinutus insulated wire. -ng tunukun barbed wire.

alambri_2 = alambrilyu.

alambrilyu n name given to several ornamental ferns, e.g., Adiantum
capillus-veneris.

alambríru (not without l) n the rigger in logging. v [B6; c1] be, make
s.o. the cable man in logging.

alampad v [A12C; ac] go up alongside, be side by side. Miampad siya sa
ákung sakayan, He tied up alongside of my boat. Nagkaampad mi ug
lingkud sa sini, We happened to sit side by side in the movie. n being
beside. ka- n one who is alongside of one.

alampat n intelligence, brilliance of mind. Alampat sa pagbálak,
Brilliance in writing poetry.

álan a having a bitter taste similar to that of half-cooked kamunggay
leaves. v [B; b6] be bitterish in taste. Muálan ang kamunggay ug haúnun
kun dì pa lútù, Kamunggay leaves become somewhat bitter if you fail to
cook them well.

álang (not without l) for the sake of. Kini álang kanímu, This is for
you. Álang kanákù dílì nà ángayng ikasukù, As far as I’m concerned,
that’s nothing worth getting angry about.

alangáang n for weather to be oppressively hot and moist with no wind.
Alangáang kaáyu; tingáli muulan, It is very hot and muggy; maybe it’s
going to rain. v {1} [B2S] be muggy. {2} [B2S3] ache with heat.
Mualangáang (maalangáang) ang ímung kamut ug makahikap kag dugà sa
síli, Your fingers will hurt if you let hot pepper juice get on them.

alang-álang a {1} not quite time, unseasonable. Ang-ā́ng na run igikan.
Dì na ka kaabut, It’s no use going now. You’ll never make it. Ang-ā́ng
iadtu run kay sayu pa, No use going so early. {2} not quite the right
amount. Alang-álang pa ning kwartang ilukat sa prinda, This money is
insufficient to pay off the mortgage. Ang-ā́ng ning panaptúna pára
karsúnis, This is not enough cloth for a pair of pants. {3} not up to a
certain level. Ang-ā́ng pagkapanday, It was poorly done. Sumbágun ta
untà ka, apan ang-ā́ng ka ra nákù, I would love to fight you, but
you’re too small for me. {4} somewhat, but not quite. Ang lamì
alang-álang nangkà, alang-álang pinya, The taste is somewhat like
jackfruit, somewhat like pineapple. n {1} it would be silly if, it
would be the wrong thing to do if. Ang-ā́ng dílì dawátun. Gihátag man,
It would be silly not to accept it. It was given to you, wasn’t it?
Ang-ā́ng akuy manghúgas nga náa may masúgù, Why should I do the dishes
when there’s s.o. I can tell to do them. {2} of course. ‘Malígù
ka?’—‘Ang-ā́ng. Mau bitaw nay átung gianhi,’ ‘Are you going to
swim?’—‘Of course, that’s what we came here for, isn’t it?’ v [A; b5c1]
{1} do s.t. poorly, halfway. Ug alang-alángun (alang-alángan,
ialang-álang) nà nímug búhat, ay na lang, If you’re going to do a poor
job, never mind. {2} do s.t. at an inopportune time. Dílì pa ku run
mualang-álang ug minyù nga walà kuy salapì, I’m not going to go and get
married at this time when I don’t have any money. {3} [B256N; b4(1)]
arrive a little too late or early for s.t. Mangang-ā́ng kug larga, I’ll
leave a bit ahead. {4} [b4] lacking s.t. Naang-ángan ku sa kwarta, I am
short of money. {5} [ab2] be put in a difficult situation by s.t.
inopportune. Ímu kung alang-alángug pangutána nga náa may láing namátì,
You put me in a difficult situation asking that question when s.o. else
is listening. {6} [A23] have hesitations about doing s.t. Dílì giyud
aku mualang-álang nímug pangutánag dílì pa tinúud, I wouldn’t have
reservations about asking you if it weren’t true. {7} [b6] consider
s.t. alang-álang. Giang-ā́ngan aku sa íyang hitsúra, I consider his
looks not up to par. Giang-ā́ngan akug hangyù níya, It’s a bad time for
me to ask him. (→) = alang-álang, v, a3. paN- v [A2; c6] eat a single
heavy meal in between mealtimes to make one do for two. Mangalang-álang
lang ta kay kúlang tag bugas, Let’s eat two meals in one because we
don’t have enough rice. n single meal eaten in place of two.

alangíing a giving off intense and penetrating heat in the atmosphere.
v [B2S] be very hot. Basta ting-init mag-alangíing ang adlaw sa palis,
During summer the sun gets to be stinging hot in the early afternoon.

alangílan n k.o. medium- to large-sized tree which produces a multitude
of fragrant flowers, esp. in May and June: Cananga odorata. The flowers
are made into flower necklaces, and a scented oil is extracted from
them which is made into perfume.

alangísig = alingísi.

alangitngit n woody herb of open waste places; used as a poultice:
Ehretia microphylla.

alangsúhan n a medium-sized forest tree: Alphitonia philippinensis.

alapáhap n k.o. fish.

alap-alap v [BN16] be in doubt, uncertain of. Nagpangalap-alap
(nag-alap-alap) ku nga muanhi pa siya, I doubt if he is still coming.

alap-ap n k.o. fungus skin disease characterized by white splotches on
the skin. v [a4] be infected with alap-ap. Giap-ap ang íyang pánit, She
had ap-ap on her skin. -un(→) a covered with or infected with alap-ap.

alarma (not without l) n {1} alarm, sound notifying danger. {2} report
of danger. May alarma nga náay púga, There was an alarm out that there
was a jailbreak. v {1} [A; b6] give an alarm. Alarmáhan ta sa gwardiya
ug muabut ang kuntra, The guard will give us a warning when the enemy
arrives. {2} [A; c] report danger. Walà pa ialarma sa pulisíya ang
túlis, The police has not been given an alarm about the robbery.†

aláru (not without l) n arrowroot: Maranta arundinacea.

*alas_1 (not without l) — [number] [so-and-so] o’clock. Alas dus na ba?
Is it two o’clock yet? Alas sayis ang puntaríya sa pusil, The sight of
his gun is at six o’clock. Ala úna, — dus, — tris (in auction) going
once, going twice, gone! túlin pa sa — kwatru faster than blazes.
v [B5; b4(1)] be [so-and-so] o’clock. Nialas tris na lang, wà gihápun,
It got to be three and he still did not come. Sa nag-alas dus na,
nagsúgud na sila, When it was two o’clock, they began. Ug maalas kwatru
na, ayaw na lag lakaw, If it gets to be four, don’t bother going.
Pagkaala úna na, namatay, By one o’clock he was dead. Nagkaalas dúsi na
lang, It was getting toward twelve o’clock. Naalasnuybihan mig mata, We
didn’t wake up until nine. (We were overtaken by nine o’clock in waking
up.) Alas dusa (ialas dus) ang pagsúgud, Have it start at two. ika- at
[so-and-so] o’clock. Sa ikaalas singku ang taknà, At five o’clock. (At
the fifth o’clock hour.)

alas_2 (not without l) n ace, a card or die marked with a single spot.
v [B23; a12] be an ace, draw an ace. Mualas (maalas) gánì ning ákung
mahulbut, pildi ka, If I draw an ace, you lose.

alasan (not without l) n chestnut-colored horse with small white
speckles.

alas dúsi n name given to various ornamental plants, the flowers of
which tend to open at noon or midnight.

alasíman = ulasíman.

alasiwsiw = alisiwsiw.

alas kwatru = marabilyas.

alas utsu n k.o. ornamental climbing cactus the fragrant flowers of
which open around eight in the evening and close within two or three
hours: Hylocereus sp.

alasúus n k.o. fish: Sillago sp.

alat n big and tall wide-mouthed basket with loose hexagonal mesh
weave. v [A] make into an alat.

álat_1 (not without l) n cop (slang).

álat_2 (not without l) n salted eggs.

alatan n k.o. grunt: Plectorhynchus sp.

aláut (not without l. from dáut) a unfortunate, wretched. Aláut nga
biktima sa bagyu, The unfortunate victims of the typhoon. v [APB12]
make, become wretched.

alaw (not without l) v [A; a12] {1} watch s.o. from hiding unobserved.
Iring nga nag-alaw sa pisù, The cat that is stalking the chick. Alawa
ag bátà ug unsay buhátun, Spy on the child and see what he does.
{2} watch for, wait for. Pag-alaw didtu ug taksi, Watch for a taxi.
{3} [A3; a12] be after s.t. with a hidden motive. Ang íyang kadátù ray
alawun sa mangulitáwu, Her suitors are only after her wealth. alaw-álaw
v [A; b5] try to get to see s.o. hard to see by catching him s.w. Dúgay
kung gaalaw-álaw ánang pulitikúha arun irikumindar ku, I have been
trying for the longest time to run into that politician so he will
recommend me.

álaw (not without l) not have (slang for walà). Álaw kuy bugas, I don’t
have anything to eat.

aláwans (not without l) n {1} allowance, amount of money given
regularly. {2} leeway, extra space. v [A; c6] {1} give or receive an
allowance. Mualáwans akug singku písus, I will get an allowance of five
pesos. Mualáwans ku nímug singku, I will give you an allowance of five
pesos. {2} give allowance, leeway. Mag-aláwans kag purgáda arun dì
háyan mamabà, Leave an inch allowance so it won’t come out too short.

alawíhaw = aluwíhaw.

alawiswis (not without l) n {1} bamboo stem an inch around or less: the
top part of a stem or a young stem. {2} the top part of a palm frond.

aláyun n group of people who work together on jobs on a more or less
permanent basis. The person for whom the job is done has an obligation
to repay each worker with an equal amount of time. v {1} [A2C; b5c4]
work on the aláyun basis. Alayúnun (alayúnan) nátù ang pagpananggì,
We’ll harvest on the mutual help basis. Alayúnan tika karun, ug impas
na, I’ll work for you now, and we’re all square. {2} [A3; b6(1)] do
s.t. as a favor. Nag-aláyun siya nákug hatud ngadtu, He did me the
favor of taking me there. Alayúni siyag panghúgas, Do him the favor of
helping him wash the dishes. Ialáyun kug kúhag túbig, Please get me
some water. {2a} please. Aláyun, ambi ra nang libru, Please, give me
that book. ka- n one with whom one has an aláyun arrangement. -an
n work obligation one has.

alayupiyup = aliyupyup.

alba n alb, a type of priest’s garment. v [A; a] wear an alb, make into
an alb. -in- n dress shaped like an alb. v [A; a] wear, make into a
dress of this sort.

albaháka n name given to several herbs with a sweet mint-like aroma
used as a condiment, medicinally, and for delousing fowls. {1} Ocimum
basilicum. {2} = kalugungkugung.

albangku clear away from the sides of the billiard table. Albangku, mga
mirun, Spectators, get out of the way.

albáti = alugbáti.

albínu n albino.

albularyu = arbularyu.

album n album, scrapbook. v {1} [A; c] put in an album. Albúmun ku ning
ákung mga ritrátu, I’ll collect these pictures in an album. {2} [A12]
get or obtain an album.

algudun n cotton as manufactured, commercial cotton.

alguwasil n {1} s.o. employed as a general office boy-janitor
combination in offices in Spanish times. {2} constable. v [B6; a] be an
alguwasil.

alhíbi n a large water container with a faucet at the bottom.

alhu n pestle. v {1} [A12] make into a pestle. {2} [a12] hit with a
pestle. Alhúun tika run, I’ll hit you with a pestle.

áli v [A; c] block a path, prevent passage, be a barrier. Ang bahà
nakaáli sa ámung pagtabuk, The flood prevented us from crossing to the
other side. Gialíhan ku ang íyang dálan, I blocked his way. Kiring
kaban iáli sa pultahan, Put this trunk as a barrier behind the door.
(→) n {1} barrier. {2} a gill net set as a barrier to catch stunned
fish.

*alibagbag pa- v [A; b6] avoid answering or seeming to heed by speaking
off the topic, or pretend to be doing s.t. else in order to avoid the
embarrassment of a confrontation. Ayaw paalibagbag ug basabása myintras
gisultíhan ka nákù, Don’t sit there reading while I am talking to you.
Gialibagbágan (gipaalibagbágan) ku níyag tubag kay dì man siya
muadmitir nákù, He answered me off the topic to avoid admitting it.

alibangbang n {1} butterfly. {2a} butterfly fish: Chaetodon sp. {2b} by
extension, angel fish: Holacanthus sp. {3} k.o. seashell. -un butterfly
fish.

alibángu a bothering others by being noisy. v [B1; b6] bother s.o. by
being noisy. Gialibangúhan ku sa ímung pangyawyaw, I find your
grumbling bothersome.

alibay_1 n excuse for failing to do s.t. v [A; c] give an excuse.
Ialibay nga namatyan kag lúla, Give the excuse that your grandmother
died.

alibhat v [A; b5] head s.o. off. Mualibhat lang ta sa parid, Let’s
catch up to the parade by heading it off. Alibháti (alibháta) siya.
Didtu ági sa luyu, Head him off by going around the other way.

alíbi = alhíbi.

alibusbus n k.o. winged large red house ants that come in swarms, esp.
during rainy days, and hover around bright lights.

alibwag v [AB3(1); aPc] disperse, scatter in all directions, scatter
s.t. Mialibwag ang báhù sa kasuuksuukan, The smell spread to every
corner. Kinsay nag-alibwag sa duldul? Who scattered the kapok all over
the place? Alibwágun ang punduk sa tirgas, The tear gas will disperse
the crowd.

alibyu n {1} alleviation, improvement of an affliction.
{2} improvement. Walay alibyu ang ámung kahimtang, Our financial
condition is no better. v [APB; b3c5] get better, make s.t. get better
in health. Ang biks mualibyu (mupaalibyu) sa sip-un, Vicks alleviates a
cold. Mialibyu ang ákung ubu, My cold got better.

alid-an, alid-i see alíli.

alig-alig v [AP; b(1)] {1} do s.t. which is not one’s ordinary duty,
take s.t. on oneself. Ngánung gialig-aligan man nà nímug táud nga wà pa
man mahuman ug pintal? Why did you go and put it up when we hadn’t
finished painting it? {2} undertake a task which one is not up to
doing. Bisag dì kamau mudrayib, mualig-alig nà siyag maníhu, He doesn’t
know how to drive, but he takes it on himself to do so.

aligasiyun n allegation.

aligatu n fiery particles carried off from a fire by the updraft. v [A;
b6] give off flaming particles. Piligru ug aligatuhan ang atup nga
nípà, It’s dangerous if flying embers hit the roof because it is palm
thatch.

aligáya v [A; b6] take a nap. Nag-aligáya siya sa dúyan, He is taking
his nap in the hammock.

aligi n the yellow fat of crabs. v [A13; b4] {1} for crabs to have fat
in abundant quantities. Kasag nga gialigihan, Crabs with plenty of fat.
{2} for dirt to be present in thick rolls like fat on a crab. Nag-aligi
ang buling sa ímung líug, You have deep rolls of dirt on your neck.

alig-ig v [A; a] {1} separate coarse and fine grains by shaking them on
a tray. A jerking motion is made in one direction so that the heavier
grains collect at one end of the tray. Alig-íga ang ginaling, Shake out
the ground corn. {2} rock vigorously from side to side. Makusug nga
línug nga mialig-ig sa Manílà, A strong earthquake that rocked Manila.
Pastilan níyang nakaalig-ig sa samput dihang hápit na, My, how she
moved her buttocks from side to side when she was about to come.
{3} shake up personnel. Kinsay gialig-ig ni Markus? Who did Marcos
dismiss (from his cabinet)? -in-ay n shake-up of personnel. Human sa
iliksiyun, dakù giyung inalig-ígay, After the election, there will be a
big shake-up. -un(→), -unun n ground cereal to be winnowed.

aligri a lively, gay. Aligri ang ílang piging, Their party was gay.
Aligring ikúyug si Pingping, Pingping would be fun to take along. v [B;
a] be or become gay or lively. aligrihun a of a lively type.

aliguríya n parable, allegory. v [A2; c1] speak by way of allegory.

aligutgut_1 n a prayer imploring the saving of a soul recited or sung
in recitation-response style at the end of a novena.

aligutgut_2 n rancor, deep abiding anger. v [B; b3] feel rancor,
bitterness, or hatred. Gialigutgútan níya si Pidru, He feels rancor
towards Pedro. Ang ímung pagbutar sa píkas mauy íyang gikaaligutgútan
pag-áyu, What embittered him most is that you voted for the other side.
ka- n = aligutgut_2.

alihid v [B; c16] lean to one side. Nag-alihid ang balay sa kadáan, The
house is leaning to one side from age. Nagkaalihid ang linaktan sa
táwung nagdalag bug-at, The man is walking leaning to one side because
of the burden he’s carrying.

alíid v [A2S; a12] stagger under a heavy load. Nag-aliid ang bátà ug
pas-an sa táru, The child is staggering under the weight of the can of
water. Nag-aliid siya sa túmang kawad-un, He was staggering under the
burden of his poverty.

alikabu = abug_1.

alikási a nervously restless. v [B; b6] be nervous and restless.
Mualikási (maalikási) kug maduul na ang ting-iksam, I get nervous when
exams approach.

alikáti n long-nosed pliers. v [a12] do s.t. with a long-nosed pliers.
Gialikáti ang paglarut sa ákung ngípun, My tooth was extracted using a
long-nosed pliers.

alikáti sa múrus n k.o. herb of waste places, growing to 2′, widely
used as a poultice for wounds. It has alternate ovate leaves with
dentate margins, decreasing in size toward the ends of the branches and
multiple branching, with a branch growing in the axils of the larger
leaves. Flowers are in axillary spikes, colored green, with small,
tri-segmented fruit in the calyx, bearing tiny rounded seeds.

alikúmù (from kúmù) n k.o. sea crab with roundish bulging body, 2″ in
length, yellowish green, with fat stubby claws and appendages for
paddling. Not usually eaten.

alikún n k.o. fish.

alikway n {1} shoots of the taro (gabi) before they develop leaves.
{2} k.o. vegetable eaten by the Suban-un.

alíli v [AC; ac2] swap, exchange. Kinsay mualílig kabáyù sa ákung
kábaw? Who will swap a horse for my carabao? Nagkaalíli kami sa ámung
pawntinpin, We took each other’s pens by mistake. Alilíhun ta ning síya
ug kulumpiyu, Let’s put the chair where the rocking chair is and put
the rocking chair here where the chair is.

alíling n k.o. ant, slightly bigger than the red ant (umígas), dark
orange, somewhat translucent. It does not bite and is found swarming in
all directions over sugar.

alílis = alíli.

alilúya n {1} alleluia, song in the church. {2} the name given to the
child playing the role of the angel in the pageant performed on Easter
Sunday dawn depicting the meeting of Mary and the Lord Jesus (súgat).
The child is suspended from an arch which is placed in the spot where
Mary and Jesus are to meet after their separate processions from the
cathedral. {3} name of this pageant.

alilúyuk n whirlpool. v [B46; b(1)] form a whirlpool. Mualilúyuk ang
subà ug magbahà, The river forms a whirlpool when it floods.

álim_1 v [APB2S] heal, make s.t. heal. Muálim (maálim) ning ákung
samad, My wound will heal. Kining tambála muálim (mupaálim) sa ímung
núka, This medicine will heal your sore. Panahun ray makaálim
(makapaálim) sa ímung kaguul, Only time will assuage your sorrow. pa-
v [A; a] allow s.t. to heal.

álim_2 = álum.

alíma (from líma) v [A; b] take care of s.o. by administering to his
needs. Alimáhi ang ímung manghud, Take good care of your younger
brother. n hand (dialectal).

alimadmad = alimatmat.

aliman n German.

alimángu n k.o. edible crab of tidal swamps, black on the back, but
lighter on the inside and on claws. It has large meaty claws, is round
in shape, thick-shelled, without spikes and occasionally reaches 10″ in
diameter. alimanguhun a having large lower arms and small biceps like a
crab.

Alimanya n Germany.

alimása v [A; a] wash the body, esp. the lower limbs. Akuy mualimása
(mag-alimása) sa mga bátà, I’ll wash the children. paN- v [A] wash
oneself.

alimásag n k.o. edible crab.

alimatmat v [A12; b8] {1} regain consciousness. Dihà na ku
makaalimatmat ug buut sa uspital, I was in the hospital when I regained
consciousness. {2} have earliest awareness of life. Sukad ku
makaalimatmat ug buut wà pa ku hibunali, I have not been spanked since
the earliest time I can remember.

alimátuk n leech. v [a4b4] be infested with leeches. ka- v [A13]
covered with leeches. -an(→) n place infested with leeches.

alimbrilyu = alambrilyu.

alimbúkad (from bukad) v [A2S] {1} expand in an upward direction, well
upwards. Mialimbúkad ang asu pagkasúnug sa asíti sa baril, The smoke
welled up as the oil in the barrel burned. {2} for feelings to well up.
Mialimbúkad sa íyang kahiladman ang kahínam, A feeling of eager
expectations welled up inside him. {3} pull in the cheeks and stick out
the lips slightly in an expression of distaste. n an underwater source
of a lake from which water rushes into the lake.

alimgas n tobacco seed. -an(→) n tobacco seed container.

alimgat = alinggat.

alimpatakan n {1} the mind as the seat of thinking processes. Isilsil
pag-áyu sa inyung alimpatakan arun dì giyud ninyu hikalimtan, Imprint
it indelibly in your mind so you don’t forget it ever. {2} cranium.
Dakdákan ku nang ímung alimpatakan, I’ll knock you on your skull.

alimpúlu n {1} crown, part of the skull in the back where the hair
forms a whorl. {2} topmost part of a mountain. {3} = alimpúlus.
alimpulúhan n place where the crown is or place analogous to it.
Nakatungtung siya sa alimpúhan sa dakung batu, He was perched on the
topmost part of the rock. kinaalimpuluhan n the very spot at the center
of the back of the head.

alimpúlus n small whirlwind. v [B346; a4b4] for there to be a
whirlwind. Naukab ang ámung atup nga nípà dihang mialimpús, Our
thatched roof was blown away when there was a small whirlwind.

alimpuyang = luy-aluy-a. see luy-a.

alimpuyas n k.o. plant similar to luy-aluy-a, the rhizomes of which are
used medicinally: Curcuma zedoaria.

alimpuying = luy-aluy-a. see luy-a.

alimugmug = limugmug.

alimúkaw n {1} state of semiconsciousness just before falling asleep or
awakening. Ang íyang gisulti búnga lang sa íyang alimúkaw, What he said
was the product of his semiconsciousness. {2} action of the sort
performed by fully conscious persons performed in one’s sleep. Wà ka
nákù tuyúag igù. Alimúkaw lang kadtu, I didn’t mean to strike you. I
did it in my sleep. v [b4] do s.t. in one’s sleep of the sort one
normally does awake. Nanáug siya tungang gabíi. Gialimukáwan diay, He
went downstairs in the middle of his sleep.

alimúkun n k.o. wild dove with white ears and light brown feathers
speckled with black: Phapitreron leucotis.

alimúngaw (from bungaw) = alimúkaw.

alimungáwung n s.t. faintly similar to s.t. else in appearance.
Alimungáwung ang hitsúra sa plurdilis sa ahítu, The zinnia is faintly
like a marigold in appearance. v {1} [BC13; b6] come to resemble
faintly. Mialimungáwung (naalimungáwung) ang bátang sinagup kaníla, The
adopted child came to look like them. {2} [A12; b8] faintly discern a
resemblance. Nakaalimungáwung ku nímu kay may-ungmay-ung ka sa ímung
igsúun, I recognized you because you look like your brother.
Hing-alimungawúngan siya sa bantay nga mauy nangáwat sa kwarta, The
guard faintly recognized him as the one who stole the money.

alimúsan n k.o. fish raised in fishponds: Paraplotosus albilabris.

alimúut (from púut) a confining, oppressive so as to make people feel
uncomfortably hot. Alimúut nang naylung isul-ub, Nylon is oppressively
hot to wear. Alimúut sa Magalyánis, way hángin, It’s oppressively hot
downtown. There’s no wind. — ug nawung {1} sour-faced. {2} be so ugly
as not to have one redeeming feature in one’s face. v [B; b3] be
oppressively warm. Mualimúut (maalimúut) ang kwartu ug mahápun, It gets
hot (might get hot) in the room in the afternoon. Gialimuútan
(gialimut-an) ka? Do you feel hot?

alimyun n sweet smell, fragrance. Ang alimyun sa mga búlak, The
fragrance of the flowers. paN- v [A; b(1)] smell sweet, give off
fragrance. Nangalimyun ang mga dalága nga nagpadúng sa bayli, The girls
that were headed for the dance smelled sweet.

alindáhaw n drizzle. v [A; b4] drizzle.

alindánaw (from danaw) n dragonfly.

alindánga a hot and sticky. v [B; b4] become hot and sticky. Hukásun ku
ning ákung swítir kay gialindangáhan ku, I’ll take my sweater off
because I feel hot and sticky.

alindángay a slightly feverish, uneasy in the body because of a slight
fever. Dì ku mutarbáhu run kay mu rag alindángay ang ákung láwas, I
won’t work today because my body is somewhat feverish. v [B; a4] have a
slight fever, be restless. Nag-alindángay ang bátà kay gihilantan, The
child is restless because he has a fever.

alindasay v [B46] uneasy, restless in place one is lying. Nag-alindasay
ang bátang taas kaáyug hilánat, The child was restless because of his
high fever.

alinga v [A; b5] give one’s attention to, care for. Walà siya
mag-alinga sa daghang táwung nagpaábut kaníya, He paid no attention to
the people waiting for him. Alingaha (alingahi)g maáyu ang mga bátà
samtang wà ku dinhi, Watch the children carefully while I’m not here.

alingabngab v [B; b6c1] for s.t. to be wide open. Mualingabngab
(maalingabngab) nang ímung samad ug dì tahiun, If you don’t stitch that
wound, it will gape. Nag-alingabngab ang ímung pitáka, wà kasirhi, Your
bag is wide open. You didn’t close it. Ayaw alingabngaba (ialingabngab)
ang ímung bàbà arun dì masudlag lángaw, If you open your mouth wide
like that, flies will get in it.

alingagngag n upper part of throat and back part of oral cavity,
including the soft palate. -an(→) n the general area where the
alingagngag is.

alingása_1 a annoyingly noisy. Alingása ang bátà, The child is
annoyingly noisy. Alingása ang íyang pandungug, His ears are full of a
disturbing din. v [B1; a2] be noisy. ka- n noise.

alingása_2 a feeling hot and humid. Alingása kining sinináang isul-ub,
This shirt is hot to wear. v [B; b6] be hot. Ug maalingása (mualingása)
ang panahun, mulupad ta sa Bagyu, When it gets hot, we fly to Baguio.
n = ka-. ka- n heat.

alingásu (from asu) a smoky. v [B; b6] get filled with smoke. Ug
magsugba ka dinhi, mualingásu (maalingásu) ang kwartu, If you broil
food here, the room will get filled with smoke. n smokiness. Ang
alingásu mauy nakalagum sa pintal, Smoke tarnished the paint.
alingasúhun a of a somewhat smoky sort.

*alingawngaw_1 pa- v [A; b6] pretend not to hear or see or know about
s.t. one knows very well about. Mipaalingawngaw siyag basabása labun
síging pasiplat, She pretended to be absorbed in her reading, but she
kept on peeping out from the corner of her eyes. Mipaalingawngaw ang
mangingilad dakù nga wà siya makautang nákù sa maung kantidad, The
swindler denied knowing anything about the money he owed me.

alingawngaw_2 n a k.o. very small gnats that swarm over leftover foods.
v [a4] have alingawngaw swarming over it. Gialingawngaw ang kan-un, The
food had gnats all over it.

alinggánay = linggánay.

alinggat v [A12; b8] be aware, take notice of s.t. Nakaalinggat ka ba
nga niwangniwang na run si Tasya? Have you noticed that Tasia is a
little thinner now? Hialinggatan nákù nga wà na ang táwu, I noticed
that the man was gone.

alingíing = alangíing.

alingísi a making a piercing, screeching noise. Alingísi siyag tíngug,
She has a piercing voice. v [B; a2] be noisy. Naalingísi ang tíngug sa
kutsi sa gibríkan, The car screeched as the brakes were put on.

alingísig = alingísi.

alingisngis a making very high-pitched and drawn out piercing noise.
Ayaw ug ikágis ang ímung kuku sa pisára kay alingisngis, Don’t run your
fingernails over the blackboard because it’s screechy. v [B; c1] be
high-pitched and screeching. Nag-alingisngis ang sín nga gigúyud, The
iron sheeting they are dragging is making a screeching sound.

alingit a short-tempered, irritable. v [B; ab3] be irritable. Pakatulga
nang bátà ug udtu arun dílì mualingit (maalingit), Have the child take
an afternoon nap so he won’t be irritable later. Mauy ialingit
(alingitan) níya ug hilabtan ang íyang gamit, If you touch his things
it will make him mad.

alingiting n intense dry heat, greater than alangíing. v [B; b6] be
exceedingly hot. Ang adlaw mag-alingiting lang, basta kwarisma, The sun
is scorching during Lent.

alingkawas = lingkawas.

alingugngug a noisy in a constant drumming way. Alingugngug kaáyu ang
tíngug sa tambul, The drum made an annoying sound. v [B] be annoyingly
noisy. n constant noise which drums in the ears.

alinsúub a warm, moist and stuffy without wind. Alinsúub ang panahun.
Kauwanun tingáli, The weather is hot and stuffy. It’s probably going to
rain. v [B; b6] be hot and airless. Nag-alinsúub lang ang barungbárung,
The shanty is cramped and poorly ventilated.

alintabu v [B; c1] turn over, producing a loud turmoil. Nagkaalintabu
ang mga balud, The waves churned more and more vigorously. Nag-alintabu
sa hilabihang kayugut ang ákung kahiladman, I was in complete turmoil
within myself because of my great anger. Alintabuhun (ialintabu) ku
ning mga gamit nátù ug dílì ka musugut, I’ll turn this house upside
down if you don’t agree. n noise produced by things turned upside down
with a crash.

alinupung (from túpung) v [A3; a] {1} for vertical things to be almost
the same height, esp. for children to be so close together they are
almost the same height. Ug alinupungun ninyu ang inyung anak,
magsangkiig mu, If you have your children one after another, you’ll
reel under the burden. {2} coming one after another (figurative).
Nag-alinupung nga suliran, Problems that come one after another.

alipadnu n k.o. edible fresh-water limpet of dark olive green to grey
color, oblong, growing to 1″. It clings to stones.

alipadsay v [B; c1] {1} for good-sized things to be scattered. Ang
ímung mga butang nagkaalipadsay lang sa kwartu, Your things are
scattered all over the room. Alipadsáyun (ialipadsay) ang mga papílis
sa hángin, The papers will be scattered by the wind. {2} for s.t. to be
consumed rapidly as if scattered. Kadalì rang mualipadsay ang kwarta
karun, How quickly money vanishes these days. Gialipadsay lag kausa ang
mga pagkáung giaray sa lamísa, The food that was heaped on the table
vanished in one fell swoop.

alipanti = ilipanti.

alipasa v [B46; b4] for a child lying in bed to be restless due to
discomfort, worry, etc. Ang bútud sa tiyan mauy makaalipasa
(makapaalipasa) sa bátà, Gas pains can cause a child to become
restless.

alipáta, alipátà n k.o. medium-sized tree of the seashore, the ashes of
which are used for soap making. Ingredient for a broth to counter
bárang: Excoecaria agallocha.

alipatpat a for vision to be blurred. v [BN] become blurred or bleary.
Mialipatpat (nangalipatpat) ang ákung panan-aw sa dúgay nákung binása,
My vision became blurred from reading too long.

alip-ip_1 n {1} person’s back reaching from the shoulders as far as the
waist. {2} waist, part on the side directly beneath the lower rib.

alip-ip_2 v [AP] {1} hide by making oneself as small as possible behind
s.t. Mialip-ip (mipaalip-ip) ang kawatan sa bungbung, The robber
pressed himself against the wall so he couldn’t be seen. {2} peer or
look furtively from behind s.t. Ang sanlahun mialip-ip (mipaalip-ip)
lang ug tan-aw sa luyu sa bintánà, The leper peered furtively from
behind the windows.

alipúlu = alimpúlu.

alipúlung v [b4] feel dizzy. Alipudngan ku ug gutmun ku, I feel dizzy
when I’m hungry.

alipunga, alipungà n {1} eczema caused by allergy. {2} athlete’s foot.
v [a4] get a rash or athlete’s foot. Alipungahun ku ug malígù kug sayu
sa buntag, I get a rash when I bathe early in the morning.

alipúnga_1 a having difficulty in breathing. v [BN; a4b4] have
difficulty in breathing. Nangalipunga ang ákung gininháwa kay gibutdan
aku, I had a hard time breathing because of the gas in my stomach.

alipúnga_2 a noisily bothersome. Alipúnga ning batáa, síging hílak, The
child is very bothersome. He keeps crying. v [BN; b6] be noisily
bothersome.

aliputu, alipútu a short tempered because of s.t. which is weighing on
the mind. Alipútu run nà siya kay napildi sa súgal, He is in an
irritable mood because he lost in gambling. v [B; a2c5] get to be in a
bad mood. Gialipútu na sad ku níya sa íyang mga binúang, He irritated
me with his foolishness.

alíraw = líraw.

alirdyik a {1} allergic. {2} tending to react to s.t. nice more than
usual (humorous). Alirdyik kus mga gwápa, Good-looking girls turn me
on. v [B12; a4b3(1)] be allergic. Ug mutúu kang alirdyik, maalirdyik ka
núun, If you think you’re allergic to s.t. you will be allergic.
Gialirdyik kug pasáyan, I’m allergic to shrimps. Unsay ímung
kaalirdyíkan? What caused your allergy?†

alírung v [AB3(1); c] gather around s.t. Nag-alírung ang mga táwu sa
sugálan, The people stood around the gambling table. Nag-alírung siya
sa silya sa lamísa, He put the chairs around the table. n {1} people
gathered around. {2} the surroundings, the space around. Ang mga gángis
lámay nagtingug sa alírung, Only the crickets were chirping in the
area.

alisbu n bad smell permeating the air. Ang alisbu sa patayng irù, The
stench of the dead dog. v [BN46; b4(1)] give off a bad smell.
Naalisbuhan ku sa báhù sa íhì, The stench of the urine reached me.

alisbung = alisbu.

alisdan, alisdi = ilisdan/-i.

alisiwsiw n k.o. grasshopper about 25 to 30 mm. long, abounding in open
grasslands, light yellow-green dorsal side and yellowish dirty gray
underside, not glossy. Not migratory or destructive to crops.

alisngaw v [A; b6] {1} evaporate, give off steam. Mualisngaw ang
alkuhul, The alcohol will evaporate. Ínit pa diay ang túbig kay
nag-alisngaw man, The water is still hot, then, because it’s giving off
steam. {2} for anger to vent itself. Mualisngaw na ning ákung kasukù,
I’m going to blow up in a minute. n steam or evaporation given off.
paN- v [A; b6] give off a smell. Nangalisngaw ang tanglad, The lemon
grass gave off a pleasant smell. -in- n {1} thing given off as steam or
evaporation. {2} shadow, small portion of a character trait which is
exuded. Ug daghan may natuntu níya, inalisngaw lang tu sa íyang
kamaldítu, He cheated lots of people, but that was just a fraction of
his mischief. Kadtung kasábà inalisngaw lang tu sa ákung kasukù, The
scolding was just a faint shadow of what I really felt.

alistu a {1a} energetic. Alistu siyang mutrabáhu, He works
energetically. {b} agile. Alistu siyang milikay, He dodged agily.
{2} shrewd, clever. Alistu siyang musabut, He understands things
readily. Alistu, apuntin, puygu! Ready, aim, fire! {3} do s.t. well.
Alistu siyang mulútù, She cooks well. v {1} [B2] be energetic, agile.
Mualistu (maalistu) ka man lang ug makakità ug kwarta, You only move if
you see money. {2} [B1] be clever, smart. Ug makig-úban ka sa mga abtik
maalistu ka giyud, If you go around with shrewd people, you’ll become
shrewd, too. Alistu ka lang kay itug-an tikang Pápa, Better watch out
because I’ll tell Father on you. {3} [b4(1)] be outsmarted. Naglágut ku
kay naalistuhan kung Husi, I’m mad because Jose put one over on me.

alisuksuk = saluksuk_2.

alitundan n k.o. banana with light yellow skin, which grows to six
inches. One of the most important commercial bananas, it is eaten
uncooked.

aliwálang = alíling.

aliwarus v [A13] be restless in expectation of s.t. Nag-aliwarus siyang
nagpaábut sa íyang trátu, She nervously awaited her sweetheart.

aliwárus a nuisance, annoyance caused by noise and motion. Ang daghang
pidikab mauy nakaaliwárus (nakapaaliwárus) sa karsáda, The large number
of pedicabs are a nuisance in the streets. Maaliwárus lang ang balay
kun magdagandágan ang mga bátà, The house will just be in commotion if
the children keep running about.

alíwas n large monkey, ape. -un a ape-like.

aliwasa, aliwása v [B2S; a4b34] restless because of discomfort or
worry. Nag-aliwasa siya kay nagabin-an ang íyang bátà, She was restless
because her child came home late.

aliyupyup n shrub of clearings: Pseuderantheum bicolor. The leaves are
used for uterine bleeding and roots and trunk for stomach ache.

alkabála n fee charged for the use of a space to vend. v [A; c] charge
a fee for that. Alkabaláhan kag bayinti, You will be charged twenty
centavos for a place in the market.

alkaldi n mayor. v [B126] be mayor.

alkampur n {1} camphor wood. {2} name of a folk dance. -adu, asayti
-adu, di- camphorated oil.

alkansi a losing, without gain or advantage. Alkansi kaáyu kug
singkwintay ibáyad mu, I lose a lot if you pay fifty. Alkansi aku niya
sa pagkáun, I lose on his food. Alkansi aku níya sa báhin, I lose out
the way it is divided. n {1} loss. Dakù silag alkansi sa ílang nigusyu,
They incurred a big loss in their business. {2} lacking in amount. Dus
mitrus alkansi sa sukud pára sa usa ka páris karsúnis, Two meters is
not enough material for a pair of pants. Alkansi ning ímung gihátag sa
pagpangumpra, You haven’t given me enough shopping money. v [B; c]
{1} incur a loss. Alkansíhan aku nímug diyútay, You will take a small
loss on me. {2} cause to take a loss. Alkansíhun aku nímug singkwinta
ray ímung ihátag, You will make me take a loss if you only give me
fifty pesos. {3} [AP; a] cause to get insufficient return from an
investment. Ug siyay ímung suluguun, mag-alkansi lang siya sa káun, If
he is your servant, you lose out on his food. — sa lutaw v [APB] cause
to have a small amount of freeboard, have less freeboard. Ang karga
mualkansi sa lutaw sa sakayan, The cargo lessens the amount of
freeboard which the boat has.

alkansíya n container for saving coins, piggy bank. v [A; a2c] make,
obtain, put in a piggy bank. Ialkansíya ang kwartang ímung hikit-an,
Put the money you found into the piggy bank.

alkaydi n = alkaldi.

alkila = arkila.

alkitran n mixture of tar and creosote painted on wood to preserve it.
v [AN; a1b] apply, make into tar of this sort.

alkúba n {1} ceiling. Amákan ang alkúba sa ílang balay, The ceiling of
their house is made of woven bamboo. {2} space between the ceiling and
roof, attic. Isang-at sa alkúba ang mga ginámit nga kahun, Put the used
boxes in the attic. {3} canopy of a bed. v [A; b6(1)] put a ceiling.

alkuhíris n mosaic disease that affects abaca and bananas. v [a4] get
mosaic disease.

alkuhul n alcohol. -íra n alcohol container with a pouring spout.

alkumbra n {1} rug. {2} k.o. tall ornamental ginger plant with soft
velvety leaves: Costus speciosus.

alkuntra n s.t. put behind s.t. else which is to be hammered in order
to absorb the blow, acting as a counterpoise. v {1} [a] make into a
counterpoise. Alkuntráhig pintul dinhing pikása ug paknga ug martilyu
sa píkas, Put a piece of wood on this side to absorb the blow and
strike it with a hammer on the other side. {2} [A; c1] react in
opposition to s.t. Ang pagkagastadur sa asáwa gialkuntráhan
(gialkuntra) sa katihik sa bána, The husband’s tightfistedness acted as
a counterpoise (was used as a counterpoise) to the wife’s spending.

almagri n powder put on materials to dye them red or brown prior to
applying finish. v [A; b6] apply almagri powder. Átung almagríhan ang
simintu arun mapula, We’ll dye the cement so that it gets red.

almamátir n Alma Mater.

almanáki n almanac. v {1} [a12] do by means of an almanac. Ug lisdan
kag hunàhúnag ngálan, almanakíhun na lang nátù, If you have a hard time
thinking of a name, let’s find one in the almanac. {2} [A12] obtain an
almanac.

almasíga n almaciga, a large forest tree producing lumber, balaw, and
the dammar resin important in trade since prehistoric times: Agathis
philippinensis. v [A; a12] make s.t. of almaciga wood.

almasin n {1} dry goods store. Sapían siya kay dakug almasin, He is
rich because he has a big store. {2} a k.o. thick cloth with large
prints, not locally woven, formerly sold in stores. Ang panaptung
almasin naúsu sa mga mil nuybi sintus bayinti, The almasin cloth was
widely used in the twenties.

almindras n almonds.

almiranti n admiral. v [B156; a12] be an admiral.

almiris n a small mortar used in cooking or pharmaceutical work.
v [a12] make into a small mortar.

almirul n prepared starch used for clothing. v {1} [AN; b] starch
clothes. Ímu na bang gialmirulan ang karsúnis? Have you starched the
pants yet? {2} [a12] make into starch.

almismutyimpu occupying a certain position concurrently. Prisidinti
siya, almismutyimpu tisuríru, He’s president and at the same time
treasurer.

almuháda n uterus of female animals.

almuhadun n cushion. v [a] make into a cushion.

almundigas n dish consisting of meat balls with plain sauce. v [A1; c1]
make this dish.

almunída n bargain sale. v [A; c] sell at a cheap price. Gialmunidáhan
aku ug balay, I was offered a house for sale at a low price.

almuránas n hemorrhoids. v [a4] be afflicted with hemorrhoids. Kanà
kunung hingaug síli lagmit almuranásun, They say people who eat hot
peppers tend to get hemorrhoids.

alpa n harp. v [A1; a12] make a harp. paN- [A; b6] play the harp.

alpabitayis v [A; a12] alphabetize. Alpabitayisa kunu ring lista sa mga
ngálan, Please alphabetize this list.

alpáka n alpaca cloth.

alpalpa n alfalfa. alpalpahan n alfalfa field.

alpilir n safety pin. v [A; b6] put a safety pin in s.t. Ímu lang
alpiliran ang karsúnis kay wà nay butúnis, Just put a safety pin in the
trousers because they have no buttons. paN- v [A] pin oneself up with a
safety pin. Mangalpilir ku arun dì mahushus ang ákung sáya, I’ll use a
safety pin so my skirt won’t slip down. — dinágum = dinágum. see dágum.

alpiril, alpirin = alpilir.

alpirisíya n k.o. children’s disease.

alpumbra n rug, carpet. v [b6] put or spread a carpet on.

alpunsínu n style of haircut where the hair is short at the side, but
enough is left on the top to part in the middle (the style worn by King
Alfonso of Spain). v [a12] cut the hair in the alpunsínu style.

alput n prostitute (euphemism for púta). v [B16; a12] become, make into
a prostitute.

alsa v {1} [A; a12] lift s.t. from underneath. Alsáhun nátù ning
lamísa, Let’s lift the table. {2} [A2] rise in rebellion. Mialsa ang
mga Pilipínu bátuk sa Katsílà, The Filipinos rose against the
Spaniards. {3} [A] for dough to rise in baking. Ug mualsa na gánì ang
minása, When the dough rises. {4} [A6; b4] — ang kabúhì for the kabúhì
to rise out of its place from fright. Gialsáhan ku sa kabúhì sa
pagbutu, I had a severe case of fright when it exploded. n {1} action
of having lifted. Tulu ka alsa, kutasan na ku, If I do three lifts, I’m
out of breath. {2} load that can be carried in a trip. Pila ka alsa úsà
matiwas ug hákut? How many loads till it’s all delivered? — butang
v [B1456; c6] for various medicines to be applied in succession without
waiting for results. -in- n k.o. haircut where the top of the head has
hair and the sides cropped short. -du — ug kabúhì a easily frightened.
Alsádu ra pud nímug kabúhì, kasíkas ra tu sa dáhun, How jittery you
are. It was only the rustling of leaves. v [B12] get to be easily
frightened. Naalsádu ang ákung kabúhì sukad ku makatunub ug bitin, Ever
since I stepped on a snake, I have been jittery. — ug kamut quick to
lift the hand in anger. v [B12] be quick to lift the hand in anger.
-myintu n uprising, revolt. Ang alsamyintu bátuk sa Katsílà, The
uprising against the Spaniards. v [A; a12] rise up. Dílì ni madala ug
kumpirinsiya, alsamyintúhun lang nátù ni, A conference is no good.
We’ll have to revolt in this case.

*alta — prisyun n high blood pressure. v [B12; a4] have high blood
pressure. Ayawg hingárig káug tambuk kay alta prisyunun (maalta
prisyun) ka, Don’t keep eating fat because you will get (might get)
high blood pressure. — susyidad high society. di- n dignitaries. Ang
prisidinti gitagbù sa mga dialta, The president was met by the
dignitaries. a suitable for high society. di- mar a high-class,
luxurious.

altar n altar.

altu_1 v [A3P; b(1)] halt. Mialtu siya pagkabatì sa mandar, He halted
on hearing the command. Gialtúhan úsag kadiyut ang trabáhu karun sa
mína, The work in the mine has come to a stop for the moment.

altu_2 n alto voice, part, or instrument. v [A; b6] play or sing the
alto part. Altúhi ang átung áwit, You sing the alto to our song.

*alu (not without l) aluálu v [A; a12] tease. Ug mag-aluálu kas irù,
paakan ka, If you tease the dog, you will get bitten. Ayaw alualúha ang
bungì, Don’t tease the harelip. n act of teasing. alualuhan a fond of
teasing. v [B12] get to be fond of teasing. maalualuhun a of a teasing
nature. aluhánay n game of tag where everybody chases everybody else.
v [C; c3] play tag.

álù n channel in tidal flats.

alubíhid = alabíhid.

alud-ud n {1} s.t. which has the chewing quality of soft bones: the
tender part of a stem, the husk of young coconuts near the bud, bone
cartilage. Nahíwì ang íyang ilung kay napislat ang alud-ud, His nose
got crooked because the cartilage was squashed. {2} top half of the
coconut bud which is soft and edible with a somewhat bitter taste. -un
a having the quality of alud-ud.

alug v [A; a] go down to get water. Mag-alug ang tagabúkid ug túbig,
The mountaineers will be going down to get water.

alugbáti n k.o. vine, the leaves of which are widely used as a
vegetable. Wild and cultivated, it has cordate leaves which come in
green and purple-tinged varieties, slightly mucilagenous when cooked:
Basilla rubra. v [A1; b6] cook alugbáti.

alug-ug v [A; c] shake in short jerky motions. Gialug-ug níya sa
butilya ang túbig, He sloshed the water around in the bottle.

aluhánay see *alu.

aluhípan = ulahípan.

alukaba n eggshell.

alukabhang n {1} shell of eggs, sea shell, cartridge shell.
{2} housing, skeletal structure of s.t. Maáyung pagkahimulbul.
Alukabhang na lay nahibilin, It was completely stripped down. The only
thing that remained of the car was the frame of the body.

alúla (not without l) n cylindrical basket made of coconut leaves,
holding about two bushels, container for buláhan. v {1} [A; a] make an
alúla. {2} [A; bc1] put s.t. into an alúla. Aluláhun (ialúla) nátù ning
buwáhan arun itúmud, We will put the lanzones in the alúla to bring
them to market.

alum n mole. -an a having a mole. (←) n snappers which have dorsal
moles on the side just in front of the tail: Lutianus sp. -un a having
lots of moles.

álum n k.o. small tree, with itchy leaves which are used as a poultice:
Melanolepis multiglandulosa.

aluminum (not without l) n aluminum metal. — rápir n aluminum foil.

alumínus (not without l) [so-and-so] (which is not desirable) is better
than for s.t. else to happen. Pangayúun, pangayúun. Alumínus hulaman
nga dílì iúlì, If you want it, ask for it. Better than borrowing s.t.
without giving it back. Puwis palitan ta ka. Alumínus maghásul ka, All
right, I’ll buy you some. Better than you bothering me all the time.

alumnus (not without l) n breed of large, meaty pig with a short snout,
broad face, and roundish body.

alum-um a for the sky to be overcast. v {1} [B] become overcast.
Mialum-um ang búwan, The moon became covered with a thin veil of
clouds. {2} [b7c1] dim s.t. Alum-úmi (alum-uma, ialum-um) ang síga sa
pulawan, Turn the night lamp down. {3} [b] be surpassed, put into the
shadow by s.t. better. Gwápa siya apan naalum-uman siya ni Tidang, She
is beautiful, but she is overshadowed by Tidang.

álun n long rolling wave, swell. v [B46; a4] for there to be big waves.
Miálun sa dágat paghuyup sa amíhan, The sea had big waves when the
northwind blew. Manday dinhà na mi sa píliw giálun hinúun mi, Just as
we reached the shallow waters we were buffeted by big waves.

alundris_1 (not without l) n sewing thread. v {1} [b6] thread a needle.
Ákung gialundrísan ang makina, I threaded the machine. {2} [a1] make
into sewing thread.

alundris_2 n wild vine with a disagreeable odor, the berries of which
are edible: Passiflora foetida.

álung_1 v [A; b6] cast a shadow over s.t. Ang taas káhuy nag-álung sa
ákung gardin, The tall tree casts a shadow over my garden. Ang íyang
panganduy alúngan sa kahadluk, His hopes are overshadowed by fear.
n place that is overshadowed. Muayun sa áwung ang kapi, Coffee plants
do best in the shade.

álung_2 v [A2; b6] be attracted to go near s.t. Ang dinagkutan nga
kandílà gialúngan sa mga anunugba, The moths were attracted to the
lighted candle. n fish attracted to the light in fishing that uses
lights. Mga tugnus ang mga álung nákù, The fish attracted to my light
were sardines. alung-álung v [ANP; b5] secretly keep watch on s.o. in
hopes of getting a chance to see him. Ang laláking nangulitáwu níya
pirming muawung-áwung (mangawung-áwung, mupaawung-áwung) níya sa dálan,
The man who is courting her keeps waiting in the street for a chance to
talk with her.

alungáing n jaw, mandible. -un a having a prominent jawbone.

alungaug a having a heavy feeling in the head from lack of sleep,
hangover, blow, etc. v [BN] for head to be heavy. Mialungaug
(naalungaug, nangalungaug) ang ákung úlu sa íyang kusug nga sumbag, I
got a headache after she smacked me one.

alungnan = unlan. see ulun.

álup v [B] {1} for light, sense of sight to become dim. Nag-álup man
nang ímung kaláyu, Your fire is low. Nagkaálup na ang íyang panan-aw,
His sight is getting dim now. {2} for sounds to dim. Sa nagkalayù siya,
nagkaálup pud ang íyang tíngug, As she got further away, her voice grew
fainter. (→) a dim. Alup ang sugà, The light is dim.

alupaup = álup, 1.

alupì (from lupi) n k.o. tidbit made from grated young corn, optionally
with milk or coconut milk, wrapped in corn husks and boiled. v [A; a12]
make into an alupì.

alup-up, alupuup = álup, 1.

*álus pa- v [A; b5] stretch one’s patience, control oneself when
provoked or distressed. Dì ku makapaálus sa mga táwung gágu, I can’t
tolerate morons. Paalúsa (paalúsi) lang nang ímung bána ug masukù kay
daghan mag prublíma, Just be patient with your husband when he gets
angry because he is beset with many problems.

alusíman = ulasíman.

alut v [AC2; b(1)] {1} shave the head. {2} cut hair. Aluti ku, Cut my
hair. {3} [A; b7] eat a portion of food intended for s.o. else. Ubang
míd muawut sa litsi sa bátà, There are maids that help themselves to
the baby’s milk. n {1} shaved bald. {2} haircut. Wà kay alut, You need
a haircut. pa- v [A1; b(1)] get a haircut, have s.o. get a haircut.
Magpaalut ku, I’ll get a haircut. Paalutan ku si Pidru, I’ll have Pedro
get a haircut.

aluwíhaw n k.o. tree of second growth forest bearing small, depressed,
globular yellow fruit, edible but acidic.

aluy_1 (not without l) — subjunctive passive verb [so-and-so] almost
happened. Aluy siya hiligsi, He was almost run over.

aluy_2 n k.o. large mackerel or tuna.

áluy (not without l) n money (slang).

aluyan = ayayan. see ayay.

alúyuk (not without l) n part of the skull where the hair forms a
whorl. -an a having a whorl on the head. Gwápu si Pidru kay aluyúkan sa
buna, Pedro is handsome because he has a whorl on the front of his
head. kina-an(→) n topmost or innermost part of s.t. Ang mga Magahat
túa magpuyù sa kinaaluyukan sa lasang, The Magahats live in the very
center of the forest. see úyuk.

alyádu n {1} ally. {2} employee (humorous). Alyádu siya nákù sa
upisína, He’s an employee of mine in the office. v {1} [AC; b5] ally
with, to become an ally with. Maáyung alyadúhun (alyadúhan) ang
Pilipínas, It is good to make an ally of (ally oneself with) the
Philippines. {2} [A; c1] have an employee.

alyádus = alyádu.

alyansa n alliance. v [C2; b(1)] have an alliance. Ang Amirika
gialyansáhan sa Pilipínas, The Philippines had an alliance with
America.

alyas n alias. v [B1; c] give, have an alias. Alyásan ka ug Rúhas,
You’ll be given the name Roxas as an alias.

alyin n aliens (euphemism for Chinese).

*ama — námù n the Lord’s Prayer. short form: manámù. paN- v [A; b5] go
to s.o. as if he were one’s father to ask for help. Kinsay inyung
gipangama (gipangamahan) sa pagkasúd sa inyung bátà sa trabáhu? Who did
you approach to get a job for your son? amaáma n stepfather. amaáma sa
buti n the first single eruption of smallpox before spreading. amahan
n father. — námù n the Lord’s Prayer. v [A1] act as, have a father.
Dimálas nga nakaamahan kag mangtas, It is unfortunate that you have a
beast for a father. pangamahan v {1} [A2] act as a father. Siya na lang
ang nangamahan sa mga bátang ilu, He was the only one left to act as a
father to the orphaned children. {2} [A2; b(1)] sponsor. Ang balaudun
gipangamahan ni Briyúnis, The bill was sponsored by Briones. {3} =
pangama. amáun n godfather in any ceremony.

amá (from ama) expression uttered when frightened: help! Amá! Náay
sawa! Help! There’s a snake!

ámag = alámag, v, n1.

amaga n k.o. forest tree: Diospyros sp.

amag-amag (from alámag) n k.o. fish that stays near the shore and
glows.

amagan see alámag.

amagus n small, black, fresh-water shrimp that has a small white stripe
on the back. a black-complexioned.

amágus n k.o. shrub bearing juicy dark red berries, 1 cm. in diameter
with a nauseous taste: Homonoia riparia.

amahan see *ama.

amahung n k.o. bivalve of sea, greenish brown in color, oblong, 2″ in
length, with orange meat. Found clinging to rocks. Popularly eaten
preserved in salt.

amákan n bamboo matting woven with a k.o. twill weave, commonly used
for walling. The weft is passed over two and under two warp pieces. The
successive weft is passed over two and under two warp pieces again, but
such that the second weft passes over one and under one of the warp
pieces that the first weft had passed over, and over one and under one
of the warp pieces that the first weft had passed under. v [A; a12]
weave amákan. -in- n s.t. woven like amákan.

am-am v [B1256] {1} be open-mouthed from having eaten s.t. spicy.
Naam-am (nahaam-am) ang ákung bàbà sa síling kulikut, I opened my mouth
wide when I ate the hot peppers. {2} feel stung by words of derogation
which are true. Nahaam-am (naam-am) ku pag-ingun níya nga tapulan kaáyu
ku, I got stung by her words that I was very lazy. hi-/ha- = am-am.

am-ám = alam-álam.

amamahung = amahung.

amamakul n k.o. edible mushroom that grows on decayed banana stalks. It
has a slender stem, thin skin, and is dark grey in color.

amamaliw (from baliw) n s.o. incestuous who gets struck by a
thunderbolt as divine punishment. v [B126] become an amamaliw.

amamangkas n k.o. thick-bodied and thick-shelled, edible, fresh-water
crab growing to 3″, found in rivers and rice paddies. They are so
called because they climb on water lilies and ride them (angkas) to the
sea.

amamangluy n insect similar to the katydid. It makes a chirping sound
in the evening.

amamangpang n k.o. fish of shallow waters.

amamaylan = baylan.

amang a {1} mute. Unsáun pagtubag ni Pidru ug amang siya? How can Pedro
answer if he is mute? {2} silent. Ang bungbung ray amang nga saksi sa
ílang gibúhat, The walls were the mute witnesses to their deeds.
v [B123(1)] become mute, struck speechless. Naamang si Pidru sa
pagkadungug sa balità, Peter was struck speechless upon hearing the
news. -in- n pantomime, in sign language.

amang-amang v [A; b(1)] have the nerve to do s.t. which an ordinary
person wouldn’t dare do. Mu ra nay ímung abilidad, unyà mag-amang-amang
kag pangulitáwu sa anak sa ímung manidyir? You are a nobody, but you
dare propose to your manager’s daughter?

amangtan n k.o. fish of shallow waters.

*amanti prinsipi — Prince Charming.

amánus a equal, even stevens. Pildi kug diyis, pildi sad kag diyis, dì
amánus na ta, I lost ten pesos and you lost ten pesos, so that makes us
even. v {1} [B1C; c1] make things come out even. Amanúsun (iamánus) ku
lang ang ímung útang sa útang ni Máma kanímu, You owe me the same
amount my mother owes you, so I’ll call it even. {2} [C; c1] call it
quits, declare a tie. Amanúsun (iamánus) ta ning átung tsis, Let’s call
our chess game quits.

amapúlun n blood clots in the womb after delivery. v [b4] have blood
clots in the womb after delivery. Giamapúnan ku mau nga misakit ang
ákung tiyan, I had blood clots in my womb so I had stomach pains.

amapúng n wild vine with round leaves and bell-shaped white axillary
flowers. The leaves are cooked as a vegetable.

amargúsu = paliya.

amarilyu a yellow. v [B; a] be, color s.t. yellow. Ug dulaw ipulug,
maamarilyu ang buluk, If you dye it with turmeric, it will come out
yellow.

amaspas n sawfish.

amasúna n amazon.

amat a bad, ugly, poor in quality. Amat ang klási ning panaptúna, This
cloth is of poor quality. Amat siyag batásan, She has bad ways about
her. v [B; a2] be poor in quality, bad, ugly. Ayawg amata nà pagbúhat,
Don’t do it untidily.

ámat n sweet potato sprout, esp. those which come from potatoes missed
in the harvest. paN- v [A2; b(1)] dig out the leftover sweet potatoes
that have sprouted. Nangámat silag kamúting ílang isugba, They looked
for leftover sweet potatoes to broil.

amátung n method of catching crabs by using shredded coconut as bait.
v [A; a] catch land crabs by strewing coconut around.

amatyur n {1} singing contest for amateurs. Muapil ka sa amatyur sa
diway-arsi? Will you take part in the singing contest over DYRC?
{2} amateur singer, athlete, etc. v [A1; b(1)] hold an amateur contest.

amáun see ama.

amaw n feeble-minded. Ang amaw maglisud ug sabut sa mga túgun, The
feeble-minded person has a hard time understanding instructions.
v [B12] be, become feeble-minded. -un a of a feeble-minded sort.

ámay n {1} marrow of the bones. {2} outermost layer of the timber next
to the bark. v [c1] make s.t. out of this material.

amáyung a gloomy, lightly overcast. v [B] be or become gloomy, lightly
overcast. Muamáyung gánì hipúsa ang binulad nga humay, If it gets
overcast, gather the rice grains.

ambà v [A; b3] low, moo. Nag-ambà ang báka, The cow is lowing.

ambáhan v [A; b(1)] go s.w. in a large group. Nag-ambáhan ang mga
táwung nanagbù sa bag-ung kardinal, The people trooped in to greet the
new cardinal. n large moving group.

ambak_1 v [A; c] jump down to a lower place. Ang túbig nga nag-ambak sa
línaw gíkan sa humayan, The water that falls into the pool comes from
the ricefield. Giambakan ku sa ungguy, The monkey jumped down on me.
Iambak nang písì didtu, Throw that rope down there. ambak-ambak_1 v [A;
b(1)] jump up and down.†

ambak_2 n headhunters in Negros of former times who killed strangers to
bury with their dead.

ambak-ambak_2 n k.o. fish.

ambalang n k.o. edible seaweed found in tidal flats. It is green, soft,
and has short straight branches similar to corals.

ambáng = ambalang.

ambangul = umbangul.

ambas a equal in some way. Ambas si Pidru ug Husi ug abilidad, Pedro
and Jose are equal in ability. v [BC3; b] be equal in quality or
ability. Muambas ang tíngug mu sa kang Husi, Your voice is just like
Jose’s. Dílì kaambásan kining pintúra, This paint job cannot be
matched.†

ambaw n a k.o. small mouse.

ambi {1} give it to me. Ambi ra gud ang butilya, Let me have the
bottle. {2} particle used in making a request or asking permission.
Ambi, tugtúga kunu tung ‘Sa Kabukíran’, Here, play ‘In the Mountains’.
Ambi, pasimhúta kunu ta, Here, let me take a whiff. {3} here, let’s
give it a try. Ambi, átung basáhun áring pahináha. Día tingáli, Here,
let me take a look at this page. It’s probably here. {4} particle
expressing a concession for the sake of argument. Ambi, ug walà pa ka
dinhi, dì tà ka hikit-an, All right, if you were not here, nobody could
have seen you, right?

ambid, ambig = amgid.

ambihas, ambíhas a two things parallel or face to face but one slightly
behind or to the side. Ambíhas ang duha ka gawang, The two doors are
opposite but not face to face. v {1} [B56; a12] for things to be
parallel but not face to face or in line. Ug muambíhas ang paglátid
muhíwì ang bungbung, If the measurements are out of line, the wall will
turn out crooked. Ambihása pagbutang ang duha ka silya arun makakità
ang maglingkud sa luyu, Stagger the two chairs so that whoever is at
the back can see. {2} [C] pass each other while travelling in opposite
directions along the parallel routes. Ang duha ka trín nagkaambíhas,
The two trains passed each other.

ambilay v [A; c1] carry s.t. with a strap slung over the shoulder.
Nag-ambilay siya sa íyang kamira, He is carrying his camera slung over
his shoulder. Iambilay nang ripli, Carry your rifle slung over your
shoulder.

ambir = abir.

ambisiyun n ambition, aspiration. Mu ray íyang ambisiyun ang
pagkamaistru, Being a teacher is his only ambition. v [A1N] aspire.
Nag-ambisiyun (nangambisiyun) siyag palit ug awtu, He has ambitions of
buying a car.†

ambisyúsu a ambitious. Kining búang nga ambisyúsu kaáyu nangulitáwu sa
prinsísa, This ambitious fool is courting the princess. v [B12] become
ambitious.

ambit v {1} [A; a2b7] get a share. Kiri rang usa ka kílu ákung ambítun,
I’ll take only this one kilogram as my share. Ambítan tag duha ka
gantang ning ímung humay, I’ll take six quarts as my portion of your
rice. Ambíti kug gamay, Let me have a small share. — sa kasubù, kalípay
share in one’s sorrow, happiness. {2} [A2; a2] get in on gossip. Diin
na pud ka makaambit ánang tabía? Where did you hear that gossip?

ambù v [AN; acP] overlook, look from a high point, tower over. Ambúa
tung táwu sa sílung, Look down at the man downstairs. Ang gamayng balay
giambúan sa dakung balay, The large house towered over the small one.

ambug v {1} [Ab2; ac] go, bring down from the mountains to the
lowlands. Unsay ímung ambúgun? What are you going down to get? Iambug
ning kamúti arun ibaligyà, Bring these sweet potatoes down to sell
them. {2} [A13] looking over. Ang káhuy nag-ambug sa ngilit sa
pangpang, The tree is overlooking the edge of the cliff. pa- v [a]
build s.t. so it overlooks. Gipaambug ku ang ámung payag sa ngilit sa
pangpang, I built my hut looking over the edge of the cliff.

ambúhut v [A] belch forth smoke. Nag-ambúhut ang asu, Smoke is
billowing up. pa- v [A; b(1)] blow smoke from cigarette. Gipaambuhútan
níya ang ákung nawung, He blew smoke into my face. -an n whale.

ambulansiya n ambulance. v {1} [A13; a12] go by ambulance.
Ambulansiyáhun nátù ang angul, Let’s take the injured person in an
ambulance. {2} [a12] make into an ambulance.

*ambung_1 -an a beautiful, handsome. Ambúngan kaáyu ka ánang sinináa,
You are very handsome in that shirt. v [B12] become beautiful,
handsome. ka- n beauty, handsomeness. Ang kaambung ni Maríya walay
ingun, Mary’s beauty is unequalled.

*ambung_2 -an a giving the illusion of bigness or bulk. Ambúngan kang
tan-áwun ánang sinináa, piru wà ka muángay, You look impressively big
in that dress, but you don’t look good in it. v [B2] look impressively
big and bulky. Nagkaambungan ang labadúra nga ákung gihurnu, The batter
that I am baking is beginning to rise.

ambus v {1} [AN; b(1)] ambush, waylay. {2} [A2] go meet a girl at her
place of work or study to accompany her home. Nía na pud si Pidru
nangambus sa íyang giulitawhan, Here comes Pedro to meet his girl
friend and take her home. {3} join a group with food or other
provisions to avail oneself of them (colloquial). Nangambus lang ku sa
ílang bálun, I just joined them and got some of their picnic food.
Makaambus ku sa ímung hábul? Can I use part of your blanket?

ambut I don’t know. Ambut ug kinsa nang bayhána, I don’t know who that
woman is. — [gen.] it’s up to [gen.]. Ambut nímug pilay ihátag, It’s up
to you how much we should give. — sa lángaw, lagung, kágang I don’t
know and I don’t care (it’s up to the fly, crab). Ambut sa lángaw ug
muanhi, I don’t know if he’s coming, and I don’t care. paN- v [A] say
‘I don’t know’. Ug pangutan-un, mangambut lang, If you ask him, he just
says he doesn’t know.

ambuy_1 n a nickname of Pablo. a {1} a slow-witted person. Ambuy ka man
diay, ngánung ímu nang gikaun? What did you eat that for, you fool?
{2} penniless. Ayaw nà sugta, ambuy nà, Don’t marry him. He doesn’t
have a penny. v {1} [AB; a] be, become slow-witted, make a fool of s.o.
Ang gugma mauy nakaambuy (nakapaambuy) sa ákung anak, Love has dulled
my son’s wits. {2} [B12; a1] be short of cash, penniless.

ambuy_2 n a style of men’s sport shirt the lower end of which extends
below the level of the buttocks and with two tapering slits on the
sides, close-fitting around the waist. v {1} [A] wear this sort of
shirt. {2} [c1] tailor into this sort of shirt.

amgid a similar. v {1} [BC; ac1c3] be similar. Miamgid (naamgid) ang
istatuwa sa mudílu, The statue grew to be more and more like the model.
Ngánung nagkaamgid ang inyung tubag? Why were your answers similar?
Iamgid (amgíra) lang ang ímung sinulat sa ákù, Make your composition
like mine. {2} [A2; b] imitate. Ang mga Insik maáyung muamgid sa mga
búhat sa Hapun, The Chinese imitate the Japanese products well.
Giamgiran (giamgíran) sa arkitiktu ang dibúhu sa katidral, The
architect imitated the sketch of the cathedral. {3} [A; ac] compare.
Amgíra sila kung háin ang maanyag, Compare them to judge which one is
most beautiful. Ang íyang kaanyag ikaamgid sa bitúun, Her beauty can be
compared to the stars. n one’s double. Ákung kalúha nang ákung amgid,
The fellow that looks just like me is my twin brother. ig-, ka- =
amgid, n.

amgu v [A12; b8] be aware of s.t. Mauy ákung naamguhan nga dinhay
miabli sa bintánà, All I was aware of was that s.o. opened the window.
paghi-, pagka- upon reaching consciousness. Paghiamgu (pagkaamgu) níya,
dihà na siya sa uspital, When he regained consciousness, he was in the
hospital.

amíga n {1} close friend (female). {2} girl friend (circumlocution to
avoid saying trátu ‘fiancée’). miga (vocative) friend.

amígas = hulmígas.

amígu n {1} close friend. {2} boy friend (circumlocution). v {1} [C;
a12] be friends. Mag-amígu ta, Let’s be friends! Amigúha siya kay
makatábang nátù, Befriend him, because he can help us. {2} [A123S] get
as a friend. Nakaamigu kug tagaadwána, I managed to make friends with
s.o. in the customs. paN- v [A23] become friends. Ayaw pangamígug
buguy, Do not become friends with those no-goods. migu (vocative)
friend. Ása ka, migu? Where are you going, friend?

amíhan n wind from the north. paN- v [A23] blow from the north. Kun
Nubimbri mangamíhan, The northwind blows in November. n northeast
monsoon time. Uktubri hangtud sa Disyimbri mauy pangamíhan, It’s the
northeast monsoon from October to December. -an(→) n north, northern.
Milálin sila sa Amihanang Lusun, They moved to Northern Luzon.

amimihid, amimihig (from bihig) n fiddler crab, k.o. small crab of
tidal flats with one large red claw bigger than the other which moves
in a fiddling-like motion.

amimislun n kidney of animals.

amimitas (from bítas) n k.o. large biting black and red ants with long
pincers, found in rotten wood.

amin amen. v {1} [A; b(1)] kiss the hand or take a hand to the
forehead. Amini si Tiyù mu, Kiss your uncle’s hand. {2} [A3; b(1)] give
in, concede, surrender. Human sa ámung panagbúngul miamin siya kanákù,
After we had not been on speaking terms, he gave in to me. Ang mayur
lang kunuy íyang aminan, He says he will surrender only to the mayor.
amin-ámin n food prepared for the last day of the novena (slang).
v [A13; b] prepare some food for the guests on the last day of a
novena. Mutambung ta sa katapúsan ug mag-amin-ámin sila, We will attend
the last day of the novena if they prepare s.t. pa- v [A; a] have s.o.
kiss the hand. Paaminun tikaw áring kinúmù! I’ll let you kiss my fist
(i.e. smack you one).†

amindar v [A; a] {1} amend. Muamindar sa baláud ang Kungrísu, Congress
will amend the law. Nag-amindar ang hunta sa mga lagdà niíni, The board
is amending its policies. {2} make amends for. Nakaamindar giyud siyas
íyang mga salà, He was able to make amends for his offenses.
{3} restore good feelings. Giamindar níya ang nagúbà nílang
panaghigalaay, He patched their broken friendship up.

Amirika n America.

Amirikána short forms: Amirkána, Mirkána. n {1} American woman.
{2} sport or suit jacket. v [A; a] wear, make into, get a jacket.
Mag-amirkána ka ba sa bayli? Will you wear a jacket to the dance?

amirikanayis a Americanized. v [B12] become Americanized.
Nagkaamirikanayis ang ininglisan ni Prid, Fred’s way of speaking
English is becoming Americanized.

Amirikánu short forms: Amirkánu, Mirkánu. n American. -in- v [A; c1]
speak English.

amirul = almirul.

amistad n amnesty.

amitu n amice.

ampa v [AC2; b6] want to have just as much work and not a bit more than
the others. Ang mga suluguun dì paalkansi. Gustu giyung makig-ampa sa
trabáhu, Helpers insist on a fair deal. They argue about who has the
most work. Unsang trabahúa nang inyung giampáhan? What work are you
bickering about? ampaampa = ampa.

ampad = alampad.

ampáhan n k.o. good-sized carangoid fish that fetches a high price.

ampaláya = paliya.

ampapángig = apapángig.

ampara v [A; a12] interrupt a wedding ceremony by objecting. Wà
makaampara sa kasal ang puyùpúyù, The common-law wife couldn’t
interrupt the wedding.

ampaw n delicacy consisting of puffed rice coated with caramel and
stuck into bricks. v [A1; a12] make ampaw.

ampay a {1} favorite. Ampay ku ang mangga, Mangoes are my favorite.
{2} much to one’s liking. Ampay kaáyu níya nga tawgun siya ug lúlu, He
likes it very much if they call him ‘granddad’.

ampáyir n umpire. Si Pidru bay ampáyir sa buksing? Is Pedro the umpire
in boxing? v [A; b(1)] be the umpire. Ampayíri ring dúlà, Umpire this
game.

amping v [A; b(1)] treat s.t. with care, be careful with s.t.
Mag-amping ka arun dílì ka masámad, Be careful so you don’t get hurt.
Ampíngi nang makinilya, Be careful with that typewriter. ma-un,
ma-in-un a careful. Maampíngun (mainampíngun) siyang nanáug sa dakung
káhuy, He was careful in going down the big tree.†

ampityatru n amphitheater. v [A1] make an amphitheater. -in- n an
amphitheater. v [B1456; a12] be constructed into an amphitheater.

ampiyun_1 n opium. v [A12; a12] obtain opium, make opium. Ang lísu mauy
ampiyunun, They make opium from the seeds. paN- v [A2; b(1)] smoke
opium. Kasagáran sa mangampiyun Insik, It’s usually Chinese who smoke
opium. -íru n opium addict. v [B126] be, become an opium addict.

ampiyun_2 n a small tree that bears large yellow flowers and large
black pods reaching 40 cm. The pulp found in the pod is used to cure
stomach pains: Cassia sp.

ampli n short for amplipáyir.

amplipáyir n amplifier, public address system. v [A1] use a public
address system. -an n possessing, having a public address system.

ampù v [A; c] {1} pray, worship. Dílì mu ampúan ang mga diyusdíyus,
Don’t worship false gods. Birhin Maríya, ig-ampù mu kami, Virgin Mary,
pray for us. Giampù ku ang ímung kalampúsan, I pray for your success.
{2} adore. Giampúan ku ang ímung kaanyag, I worship your beauty.
{3} [A2; b6] surrender, turn oneself in to the authorities. Mamatay ku
úsà ku muampù, I’ll die before I will turn myself in. {3a} admit one
was wrong or ask for forgiveness in order to make up. Dì ku muampù nímu
kay wà kuy salà, I won’t take steps to make up with you because I
didn’t do anything wrong. -l-anan n {1} altar, place one worships.
{2} thing worshipped. ma-un, ma-in-un, ma-l-un a prayerful. mag-r-,
mag-l- n one who prays on behalf of another. Ang mga santus mauy
mag-alampù (mag-aampù), The saints are the intercessors.

ampúngul n head of octopus or squid (including the tentacles of the
squid).

amu = mau (dialectal).

ámu vocative short form: mu n master, employer. Makagáwì ba ta sa ímung
tilipunu, mu? May I use your phone, boss? v [A123S] happen to have a
master, employer. Lisud ning makaamu tag istriktu, It’s difficult if
you happen to have a strict employer. paN- v [A2] have s.o. as an
employer. Nakapangámu na ku ug Katsílà, I have already experienced
having a Spaniard as employer. maistru — n one who oversees the
preparation of s.t., e.g. the head chef on a boat or the quality
controller in a factory.

amù n monkey, ape. Pubri pa sa amù, Poorer than a monkey (which has
what looks like two one-centavo coins in its buttocks). inúlug — waxing
gibbous moon. v [B126; b6] get broke (get to be like a monkey that has
only two centavos) (colloquial). a broke. -ay(←) n Mr. Monkey. Si Amúay
nangáwat sa ságing ni Baúhay, Mr. Monkey stole Mr. Turtle’s bananas.
-l-an(←) n place infested with monkeys.†

ámù see kami.

amul a for a blade to be very dull. Amul ang sundang, The machete is
dull. v [B12; a12] become dull. -an, -un a of dull kind.

amúma v [A; b5] take care of s.o. and guide him. Giamúma (giamumáhan)
siya sa inaína sáma sa kaugalíngung anak, Her stepmother took care of
her like her own child.

*amumun — lumban sa dágat n sundials, k.o. sea shell.

amumúng v [a4] lose one’s way under spell of evil spirit. Kun amumúngun
ka baliha lang ang ímung sinínà arun makatultul kag bálik, If you lose
your way, put your clothes on inside out, and you’ll find your way
back.

amumunggut = tibalas.

amumungpung n k.o. edible top shell reaching an inch, pyramid-shaped.

amumuntag n k.o. octopus which tends to come out when the moon rises.

amung v [A; c1] drag s.t. to perdition, bring s.t. to ruin together
with it. Ang mga latang kamátis makaamung sa uban, The rotten tomatoes
can ruin the others that are packed together with them. Ayaw ku iamung
(amunga) sa inyung kabúang, Do not involve me in your foolishness. Sa
pinusílay naamung ang inusinting bátà, During the gunfight an innocent
child was hit in the crossfire. paN- v [A2] {1} exert bad influence.
{2} try s.t. on a long shot. Nangamung siyag pangulitáwu, básig sugtun,
He tried his luck at courting her in hopes of succeeding. amung-ámung
v [A; b(1)] {1} inflict malicious, needless harm. Ang mga tulisan
nag-amung-ámung pa giyud níya, The bandits raped her as well.
Giamung-amungan tingáli ang masitíra sa irù kay nangabúak man, The dogs
probably messed up the flower pots, because they are broken. {2} tease
maliciously. Giamung-amúngan níla ang irù paghikut ug láta, They teased
the dog by tying a can to it. amung-amungan, maamung-amungun
a maliciously destructive.

amunistal v [A; c6] register for marriage in the church. n payment for
church services in marriage. Mahal ang amunistal sa kasal nga ispisyal,
The payment for the church services in a special marriage is dear.

amur n liking. Wà giyud kuy amur sa dayuk, I cannot bring myself to
like salted fish innards. Gitugkan siyag amur kang Birtu, She developed
a liking for Bert. — prupiyu amor propio.

amurádu n k.o. red, thick, sweet banana, eaten raw. It is starchier
than the yellow bananas usually sold commercially in the States.

amural v [A; a12] {1} speak one’s love to. Giamural níya si Maríya,
piru wà sugta, He proposed to Maria, but she turned him down. {2} speak
out one’s purpose asking for s.t. Nag-amural kung Tiyù pára sa ákung
karsúnis, I am asking my uncle for money to buy a pair of pants.

amur sikrítu n bleeding heart, k.o. ornamental vine with heart-shaped
flowers: Clerodendrum thomponae.

amursíku n k.o. crab grass with long towering stems bearing barbed
spikelets which adhere to the clothes: Andropogon aciculatus. ka-
v [A13] be full of amorseco spikes. Nagkaamursíku ang ákung sinínà, My
dress has amorseco all over it.

amurtisasiyun n amortization. v {1} [A1] be amortized. Ang ákung útang
nag-amurtisasiyun ug dusyintus matag búlan, The amortization on my debt
is two hundred every month. {2} [ac] pay off an amortization.
Amurtisasyunan ku ang útang ug katungà, I’ll amortize half of my debt.

amurúsu n delinquency in paying off an obligation. Upat ka búwan ang
ákung amurúsu sa bangku, I’m four months delinquent in my payments to
the bank. v [B1256] be delinquent in paying off an obligation.

ámut n contribution. Pilay ámut sa salusálù káda usa? How much is each
person’s contribution to the party? v [A; c] {1} contribute. Daghan
siyag ikaámut sa kauswágan sa násud, He has much to contribute to the
development of the country. {2} contribute to increase the intensity or
quality. Ang kaígang nakaámut sa íyang kapungut, The heat contributed
to making his anger worse. -l-an, -l-an(→) n contribution. Pagkadaghag
alamútan (alamutan) sa iskuylahan, makapubri! You can go broke with all
the contributions you have to make in school.

amúti = kamúti.

ámuy_1 n {1} icon. {2} the name of God used in speaking to small
children. Ayaw pangáway kay masukù ang ámuy, Don’t quarrel because God
will get angry.

ámuy_2 n term of address for very old men of respectability. Kanà si
Ámuy Militun kapitan sa panahun sa Katsílà, Amoy Meliton was a village
head during the Spanish times. v [a12] call s.o. Amoy.

amyun v [BN] emit a sweet fragrance. Miamyun (nangamyun) ang kahumut sa
mga búlak, The flowers emitted a sweet fragrance. ka- n sweet smell.

-an_1 local passive verb affix, future. (past gi-an; subjunctive -i.
Potential forms: past na-an; future ma-an or, alternatively, ka-an;
subjunctive ma-i or, alternatively, ka-i.) Not all verbs occur with
this affix, and those that do may occur with only one or two or all of
the meanings. {1} [do] for, at, on, in. Palitan ku siyag kík, I will
buy him cake (or buy cake from him). Gipalitan ku siya, I bought some
for (from) him. Wà ku siya paliti, I didn’t buy any for (from) him.
Mapalitan (kapalitan) ku siya, I can buy some for (from) him. Napalitan
ku siya, I managed to buy some for (from) him. Wà ku siya mapaliti
(kapaliti), I couldn’t buy any for (from) him. {1a} with noun bases:
give, provide s.o. [noun]. Sirúhan ka nákù, I will give you a zero.
Sapatúsan ku ang bátà, I will put shoes on the child. {2} [do] directly
to s.o. or s.t. Hagkan ku ikaw, I will kiss you. Bantayan ninyu ang
prísu, Watch the prisoner. {2a} [do] to part of s.t. Kuháan ku ang
ímung kík ug gamay, I will take a little of your cake. Kunhúran ku ang
prisyu, I will take a little off the price. {3} with verbs from
adjectives: consider s.t. as. Lisdan siya sa átung sinultihan, He will
find our language difficult. Gipilahan ka lang uruy niánà? Do you
consider that a small amount? {4} have [verb] happen to one. Naulanan
aku, I was caught in the rain. Labdan ka sa úlu, You will get a
headache. (It will happen to you that your head will ache.) {5} [do]
because of, due to. Unsay gihilákan mu? What is it you are crying
about? Dílì nà ángayng kabalak-an, That is not worth getting worried
over. {6} do in [such-and-such a manner]. Usaan nà nákug alsa, I will
lift that with one (hand). Datadatáhan ku nag báyad, I will pay for
that in installments. {7} work off a debt, pay for by [do]ing. Mahímù
nímung trabahúan ang ímung útang nákù, You may work off your debt to
me. Buk-an kug lubi kining bugas, I’ll pay for this rice by splitting
coconuts.

-an_2 suffix forming verb bases to which the prefixes mag-, tig- and
pag- may be added. The verb with these affixes always has stress on the
final syllable and means ‘[do] s.t. at a certain place habitually’.
Mag-anhian siya dinhig maduminggu, He comes here on Sundays. Siyay
tig-anhian dinhi, He comes here often. Sa ímung pag-adtuan didtu,
nakailaíla kag usa ka Mang Tiryu? In the times you’ve been going to
that place, did you ever meet a certain Mang Terio?

-an_3 noun forming affix. {1} forming nouns which refer to a place
where s.t. is found, done, held, located. Humayan, Rice field. Tubaan,
Place where toddy is sold. Baskitbulan, Place basketball is played.
Habagatan, West (place from which the habágat ‘west wind’ blows).
Bairan, Sharpener (thing on which one sharpens). Tindáhan, Store (place
one sells). {2} forming nouns which refer to a person possessed of a
certain power. Nouns of this sort always have long penults. Tambálan,
Folk doctor. Hilútan, Doctor specializing in massage. Barángan, A
sorcerer with magic insects at his disposal.

-an_4 adjective forming affix. {1} forming adjectives which mean
‘characterized by being [so-and-so]’. Words of this sort have the
stress on the final syllable. Langasan, Of a noisy type. Talawan,
Cowardly. Gahian, Of a hard sort. {2} added to nouns to form adjectives
which mean ‘having [so-and-so]’. Utúkan, Brainy. Kwartáhan, Moneyed.

-an(→) short for hi-an(→).

-an- infix optionally added to all forms with the prefixes nag-, mag-,
pag-, indicating that affixed forms refer to more than one person.
Nanagsábut sila, They made (plurally) an agreement. Duha ka managsúun,
Two brothers. Ang ílang panagsábut, Their (plural) agreement with each
other.

anā̀ {1} expression of surprise. {a} at s.t. pleasant. Anā̀, kanindut
sa ímung ariyus, Oh what beautiful earrings you have! {b} at s.t. which
causes worry. Anā̀! Nabuak, Oh-Oh! It broke. {2} expression chiding
s.o. Anā̀! Nagpabuyag man ka! My! You’re making a nuisance of yourself.

ánà = niánà. see kanà.

anáa short form: náa. {1} be there (near you). Náa ba dihà ang yáwi? Do
you have (is there) the key? {1a} be employed at, work at. Náa siya sa
Atlas, He works for Atlas. Náa ra siya sa báy, He is always at home.
{2} there is. Náay suwat pára nímu, There is a letter for you. {3a} —
dat. [dat.] has. Náa kaníya ang yáwi, He has the key. {3b} it depends
upon [dat.]. Náa ra nímug muadtu ta, It’s up to you if we should go.
{3c} be menstruating. Dílì mudúul ang bána ug náa sa asáwa, A husband
cannot have intercourse with his wife when she is menstruating.
{4} unsa may — niánà, sa [noun]? what does that, [noun] have to do with
it? Unsa ba guy náa sa idad? And what does age have to do with it?
pagka- n the state of being there. Ang íyang pagkaanáa sa balay, His
presence in the house. paka- v [A13; a12] strive to have s.t. Ímu kung
pakaanaáhun bisan wà kuy nahut, You try to get s.t. from me even though
I haven’t anything. anaáhun a well-to-do.

ánab (from bána) n husband (slang).

anabu n k.o. shrub or small tree which produces strong bark fiber of
commercial importance: Abroma augusta.

anabyung = hinagdung.

ánad v {1} [B23(1); b(1)] take to, become fond of. Pakúgus ang bátà nga
nakaánad na nímu, A child that has become fond of you will want you to
carry him. {2} [B2S; b8] get accustomed, get in the habit of doing s.t.
Muánad (maánad) siyag panghilabut sa ákung butang, He will (might) get
used to touching my things. Naandan na níya ang pamakak, She is
accustomed to lying. Ang naandan nga paági, The usual way. {2a} [b8]
treat s.o. too familiarly. Hiandan ka lang; ábi níla maáyu ka man,
They’re just abusing you; they think you’re nice. Naandan ka níya ug
kumidiya, He has gotten in the habit of joking with you (when he should
not have). (→) a {1} accustomed to, familiar with s.t. Anad kaáyu ku ug
byáhi, I am accustomed to travelling. {2} tame. Anad ang langgam, The
bird is tame. Kaanad nga batáa bísan kinsa makakúgus níya, That child
is not afraid of people. Anybody can hold him. v [B12] become
accustomed. Ug maanad ka na ánang trabahúa, dì ka na lisdan, When you
get used to the work, you won’t find it hard. anaran a having a special
appeal to animals, children, etc. so that they feel immediately at
home.

ánag v [A; a12b(1)] broil crops to eat. Anága ang mais nga húmuk, Broil
the soft corn. -in- n broiled crop. -un(→) n young corn. Gitanuk níla
ang anagun, They broiled the young corn. v [B3] for corn to be at an
edible but not yet full-grown stage. Nag-anagun na ang mais. Hápit na
ang sanggì, The corn is growing ears. Harvest time is near. anagunan
n field of corn with young ears.

anagási = alagási.

anagu, anágu n hazy, unclear image. Ang anágu sa dálan gibantayan
pag-áyu sa draybir, The driver paid close attention to the blurred
outline of the road. v [B2S] appear hazily. Nag-anagu ang balay sa
bungtud tungud sa gábun, The house on the hill was hazy because of the
mist.

anahà n k.o. small ant with a light tan color and with a black spot on
the body and which takes to sugar. It inflicts a mild bite. v [B125;
a4] be infested with anahà ants. Sus, nagkaanahà (gianahà) ang asúkar!
Heavens! The sugar is swarming with ants.

anáhaw n k.o. palm with fan-shaped leaves: Livistona rotundifolia. The
leaves are used for mats, hats, etc. Potted anáhaw are widely used for
ornamental purposes. — lagwis = anáhaw. — mubù ornamental palm similar
in appearance to anáhaw: Licuala spinosa.

anak n son, daughter. — sa búhat {1} laborer. {2} accustomed to hard
work. Way báli kanà, kay anak man aku sa búhat, I don’t mind that,
because I’m used to hard work. {3} poor people. Lisud ang panginabúhì
sa mga anak sa búhat, Life for the poor is very difficult nowadays. —
sa bunyag godson or daughter at baptism. — sa gawas illegitimate child.
— sa húlaw short person (son of the dry, lean times). — sa kágang
exclamation of discomfiture: My! Anak sa kágang! Ngánu nga naílad ka
man! My heavens! Why did you let them cheat you! — sa sápì child that
has been adopted by purchase. v [AN; cN] {1} give birth. Dì na muanak
(manganak) nà si Kurdapya kay gúlang na, Cordapia will not have any
more children because she’s old. Nag-anak siyag kalúha, She had twins.
Ang banig nga gianakan (giangkan, gipanganakan), The mat she gave birth
on. Diin ka ianak (ipanganak)? Where were you born? {2} [A12] happen to
have for a child. Nakaanak si Pidru ug abilidaran, Pedro had a genius
for a son. (←) n in prayers: Son of God. Sa ngálan sa Amahan, sa Ának,
sa Ispiritu Santu ..., In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost ... pa- v {1} [A; a2] assist in childbirth, cause s.t.
to be born. Mananabang ang nagpaanak kanákù, A folk-midwife assisted me
in childbirth. Paangka siya sa matirniti, Let her have her baby in the
clinic. {2} [A; b(1)] make pregnant. Ang mutsatsa gipaangkan sa
kutsíru, The rig driver got the maid pregnant. palaangkanan n delivery
table. pinaangkan n {1} illegitimate child. {2} one who gave birth out
of wedlock. (Cf. paangkan v 1, below.) paN- v {1} = anak, v. 2 [A]
sponsor in a baptism. Aku ang nanganak ni Bíbi sa bunyag, I was Baby’s
godfather in her baptism. paN-(←) n pebble in game of pungga.
pinanganak n godson or daughter. anak-ának n {1} adopted child.
Anak-ának ra man nà si Kadyu kay walay bátà ang magtiáyun, Cadio is
just an adopted child because the couple is childless. {2} in a child’s
game, the pretend child. angkan a having given birth. Yàyà ug láwas ni
si Kurdapya mu rag angkan, Cordapia’s body is flabby like a woman that
has just given birth. Angkan na siyang dakù pagkaminyù níla, It was
well known that she had had a child before they got married. paangkan
v [A13] make s.o. pregnant. Kinsa may nagpaangkan sa labandíra? Who
made the laundry woman pregnant? pinaangkan n one who gave birth to an
illegitimate child. angkánun a for people to be prolific in childbirth.
Angkánun (palaának) kaáyu si Maríya. Manganak káda túig, Maria is
prolific. She gives birth every year. alangkan n delivery room.
hinangkan, hingangkan n hen that has raised a brood. ig-(←) n relative
of any sort. v [A12; c1] be related. Naig-ának siya sa mga Blangku kay
naasáwa man níya ang anak, He became related to the Blancos because he
married the daughter. ig-alának n {1} child in the womb. {2} in a
condition about to give birth. Ig-alának na kaáyu ang íyang tiyan, Her
stomach looks as though she’s about to give birth. -in- n {1} godson,
daughter in any ceremony. Inanak ku siya sa kasal, He is my godson
because I sponsored his wedding. {2} child born. Bag-ung inanak, Newly
born child. mag-alának, taliának, umaának n about to give birth. -un(←)
{1} = inanak. {2} = pag-umangkun. pala-(←) a {1} for people or animals
to be prolific in childbirth. Palaának ang ákung anay, My pig is very
prolific. {2} prolific in output. see also pag-umangkun, mantiának,
taguangkan.†

anam v {1} [A; c1] take care of s.t. as fast or before the next comes
around. Anamun (ianam) ku nig hákut sa táas, I will take these upstairs
as fast as they arrive. {2} [A23] become gradually. Samtang sila
nag-ínum, nag-anam kapula ang íyang nawung, As they were drinking, his
face gradually got redder and redder. pa- [A] waste time. Dì ku paanam
sa úras, I won’t waste time.

-anan_1 affix added to verbs to form nouns which have meanings
analogous to the meanings of the local passive verbs. Cf. -an_1.
{1} place or person for whom s.t. is done. Palitánan sa bugas, Place
one buys rice. Lingkuránan, Seat. Hatagánan sa limus, Persons to whom
the alms are given. {2} thing to which s.t. is to be done. Labhanan,
Wash to be done. Handumánan, Keepsake (thing which one thinks back on).

-anan_2(→) alternant of -an_2 used with roots that have a short
penultimate vowel that is dropped on suffixation. Maghagkanan sa tiil
sa birhin, They kiss the feet of the Virgin.

an-an n k.o. small tree of thickets: Buchanania arborescens.

ananaklaw (from saklaw) n k.o. tiny house spider that jumps on its
prey.

ananakyud (from sakyud) n k.o. bird of the seashore that moves its
buttocks up and down.

ananamsi n k.o. small timber tree.

anananggal n k.o. unglù who, when under his supernatural spell,
detaches the portion of his body above the waist from the lower portion
and flies away with trailing intestines in search of his prey, leaving
the lower portion. This detachment occurs only at night, and the
anananggal dies if the sun strikes any portion of the separated body.
He can also be killed by putting salt on the lower portion. see also
tanggal.

ananangkil (from sangkil) n k.o. small hawk with black and brown
speckles on a light brown and white background.

anapug n {1} k.o. soft shale. {2} soft coral rock. -an n place where
there is shale or coral rock. -un a full of shale, coral rock.

ánas v [B; c1] landslide. Muánas (maánas) gánì kanang búkid, malubung
giyud mung búhì, If there is a landslide on that mountain, you’ll be
buried alive. Kun mukusug ang ulan, iánas kanang ímung baul, If it
rains hard, your field will be washed down.

ánaw_1 v [A; a12] determine truth by careful deliberation. Anáwa ang
tahù úsà ipublikar, Verify the report before publishing it.

ánaw_2 n area of the surface of the sea which has a different texture
from the surrounding area, usually visible when the sea is calm.

anawnsir n {1} announcer. {2} dispatcher of buses and jeeps (slang).
v [A13; a12] be, make into an announcer.

anay_1 (from ina) n {1} sow. {2} woman that is a mother. Dílì ka ángay
nga mag-istiwardis kay anay ka na, You are not fit to be a stewardess
because you are a mother now. -un, -un(←) n pig raised to bear a
litter. v [A; a12] raise to be a sow. Anayúnun ni nátung baktin, Let’s
use this piglet for a sow. -l-un(←), -unun(←) a for a woman that is
nursing to be thin like a sow that has been nursing her litter.

anay_2 (from ina) exclamation uttered in fear. Anay! Náay íhu! Help!
Sharks!

ánay_1 n termite. v [a4b4] be infested with termites. Gianáyan (giánay)
ang balay, The house was infested with termites.

ánay_2 = únà (dialectal). paN- n {1} first born. Mu ni si Bingbing
ámung pangánay, This is Bingbing, our eldest child. {2} one who bears a
child for the first time. Pangánay ka ra ba ayaw paghárig katúlug, This
is your first time to bear a child. Don’t sleep too much.

-anay alternant of -ay_1.

anay-anay n k.o. small fish of shallow water belonging to the family
Blennidae.

anda_1 give me. Anda ug súpas bi kay gigútum ku, Give me some cookies
because I’m hungry.

anda_2 be gone! leave! (Biblical usage). Anda, Samuel sa paglakat, Be
gone, Samuel. Be on your way.

andadur n walker on rollers for a baby to learn to walk on. v [A1; a12]
obtain, make into, use a walker. Makalakaw na siya apan mag-andadur, He
can walk, but only with a walker.

*andak paN- v [A] boast that one can do s.t. Nagpangandak siya nga
musúkul siya nímu bísan anus-a, He was boasting that he would stand up
to you any time. n boasting that one can do s.t. -an(→) a boastful
about things one can do. v [B12] get to be boastful. Nagkaandakan siya
samtang nagkasuhitu sa pag-áyu sa makina, He got so he claimed he could
do more and more as he grew better at fixing engines. mapaN-un, maN-un
a over-confident. Mapangandákung tingúhà, Over-ambitious in one’s aims.

andam a prepared. Andam ka na sa pagtubag? Are you prepared to answer?
Andam na ang tanan, Everything is ready. v [A; c1] prepare s.t. Kinsay
muandam sa pagkáun? Who will prepare the food? Mag-andam ka sa
kamatáyun, Prepare for death. n preparation for a banquet. Dílì dakù
ang andam níla sa kumbira, They did not make big preparations for the
banquet. paN- v [A] {1} prepare. {2} get ready for, be on guard.
Pangandam sa banhig, Be ready for an attack. n preparation. mapaN-un
a watchful.

andamyu n gangplank. v [A1; a] make into, put a gangplank to s.t.

andána n {1} storey. {2} deck of a multi-decked ship. v [b6] construct
a house in storeys.

andar v {1} [A] for s.t. mechanical to run. Dílì muandar ang awtu, The
car won’t start. {2} [A2] for a peculiar trait to show itself. Miandar
na pug íyang pagkahinugsū́g, His fondness for teasing is making its
appearance again. {3} [A2; b2] make trouble. Giandaran níya ang
tindíra, He made trouble for the salesgirl. n the way an engine runs.
Maáyu ug andar ang ákung makina, My machine runs well. hiN- a fond of
making trouble.

andarul n {1} k.o. chair for an infant suspended from a springpole or
from springs in which the baby can bounce around. {2} = andadur.

andas n a stretcher-like contraption used to carry a corpse. v [A12]
make into, carry in a stretcher-like contraption. Andásun níla ang
minatay, They will carry the body in a stretcher.

*andaw tuli — circumcised naturally from birth, born with the glans
penis exposed.

andáyag n medicine of snake feces, herbs, bark for stomach complaints.

andáyun = undayun.

anding n title for an older female to whom one is related.

andir a {1} short for andir dibúnal, bakyà, sáya be dominated,
subjugated to one’s wife. {2} subordinate to. Andir ku ni Kapitan
Santus, Captain Santos is my superior. {3} be a student of. Andir ku ni
Lúpis sa mat, I studied math with Lopez. {4} under the net in tennis,
volleyball, etc. v {1} [A; a12] dominate. Dì giyud ku maandir, I will
not be henpecked. {2} [B1256] get to be under s.o., student of s.o.
{3} [B1256] for the ball to be under the net. {4} in phrases: —
dibakyà, búnal, sáya = andir, 1. — ditíbul n s.t. given under the
table. Ug way andir ditíbul dì mulusut ang ímung papílis, Your papers
won’t get through without s.t. given under the table. v [A; c1] bribe.
— grawun n underground place, cellar. Dúnay andir grawun ámung balay,
Our house has a cellar. — gul n {1} the area directly beneath the goal
in basketball. {2} being directly beneath the basket. Ayawg syát ug way
andir gul, Don’t shoot if there is no one in the area under the basket.
{3} a shot from directly beneath the basket. v {1} [A] man the area
beneath the basket. {2} [A; c6] make a shot from directly beneath the
basket. Inigpása nákù nímu iandir gul dáyun, When I pass you the ball,
shoot from directly beneath the basket. — ids underage. v [B1256] be
underage. — kúbir n undercover agent. v [B156] be an undercover agent.
— pas n underpass. — tayim undertime in job. v [B6; b] do undertime.†

andu, andù_1 v {1} [A1; a12] expect to realize s.t. out of s.t.
Mag-andu kag hángin ánang pangitáa, You will get exactly nothing from
that sort of livelihood. Unsay maandu mu ánang pagpúnay ug katúlug?
What do you expect to get out of sleeping all the time? {2} [A; a] sum
up, make an account of. Nag-andu siya sa mga butang nga wà gánì níya
mahímu, She is counting up things for credit to get credit for them,
when she hasn’t even done them. Ayaw kug paningli, kay ug andúhun nátù
ag ákung nagastu nímu, dì ka kabayad, Do not try to collect what I owe
you, because if we sum up all that I spent on you, you could never pay.
{3} [A; b4(1)] lay open one’s cards. Kun makaandu na ka, dì ka na
makapunù, When you have already laid your cards on the table, you
cannot add any more cards. {3a} pag- (inig-) pa but actually, when it
came (comes) to the test (when the cards were laid on the table). Sígi
siyang hangyù. Pag-andù pa, dì diay gustu, He kept begging, but when I
finally agreed to it, he didn’t want to. Padatùdátù siya. Pag-andù pa,
pubri kaáyu, He pretended to be rich. But when it came to the test, he
turned out to be poor. n way — not certain. Wà pay andu ug maghíkay ba
mi sa pyista, We’re undecided as yet whether to prepare for the fiesta.
andúhay n confrontation. v [C] have a confrontation. Mag-andúhay ta
arun mahúsay ang tanan, Let’s have it out to settle everything.
anduhúnun n matter to be decided. Anduhúnun pa ning ákung pagpaiskuyla
nímug midisína, I’m not sure whether we will send you to medical
school.

andù_2 n k.o. tall wild tuber the corm of which is eaten in times of
famine: Amorphophallus campanulatus.

andù_3 = angdù.

andúhaw = agumáa.

andúhay see andu.

ang short form: ng {1} subject marker. Nawálà ang libru, The book is
lost. {2} marker for definite predicate. Ang íyang libru mauy nawálà,
It was his book that was lost. {3} following a form meaning including,
together with. Sitinta ang ábang, apil ang túbig, The rent is seventy
pesos including the water. {4} preceding forms referring to quantity or
measurement: each. Ang ábang, sitinta ang búlan, The rent is seventy a
month.

ánga_1 n the fry of some kinds of goby.

ánga_2 = ángal.

angáang = alangáang.

ángal v [B; b3] find s.t. to complain about. Unsa may angálan nímu sa
trabáhu ug sayun man gáling? What is there to complain about when the
job is so easy? -an a given to complaints.†

angalaskálas n k.o. green crab with splotches of dirty yellow between,
2½″–3″ in diameter, commonly found on wharves.

angan-ángan v [A; b5c1] delay awhile. Muangan-ángan ku ug pila ka
minútu, I will wait for a few minutes more. Angan-angána (angan-angáni,
iangan-ángan) ang ímung paglarga, Put off your departure.

ang-ang n {1} steps of stairs, ladder. {2} grade or year of a course.
Náa pa siya sa ikaduhang ang-ang sa abugasíya, He is still in the
second year of his law course. v [A3; a1] put steps into, make into
steps. Ang-ángan lang nímug tulu ang hagdan, Just put three steps in
the stairs. -an(→) n = ang-ang.

angat_1 n teeth marks. Angat sa pinaakan sa hálas, Teeth marks of a
snake.

*angat_2 — sa as [such-and-such] approaches. Ínit ang kampanya angat sa
iliksyun, The campaign went into high gear as elections approached.
v [B145] for an event to approach. Nag-angat na ang pista, Fiesta time
is approaching.

ángat v [A; ac] go, bring up a hill or place in the hills. Angátun sa
mga turista ang bulkan sa Mayun, The tourists are going to climb Mount
Mayon. Iángat ni nátù sa bū́d, We will bring this up the hill. paN-
n tool for mountain-climbing. angatun a steep to climb.

ángay ought to. Ángay kang magtuun arun makapasar ka, You ought to
study if you want to pass. Dì nà ángay nímu ikabaláka, You should not
worry about that. a {1} fitting, proper, right time or situation. Ángay
ni nímung kulúra, This color suits you. {2} evenly cut, equally spaced.
Ángayng pagkaputul ang mga pánid, The pages are evenly cut. Ángayng
pagkatisuk ang mga pásuk, The stakes are evenly spaced. v {1a} [B3S6;
b8] be appropriate. Miángay ang ímung ilung sa ímung nawung, Your nose
goes well with your face. {1b} [A23S] like s.t., consider s.t. suitable
to one’s taste. Dílì ku muángay ánang tubà nga initlugan, I don’t like
toddy mixed with eggs. {2a} [A; a] make s.t. equal, even. Angáya ang
káyu, Make the flame even. {2b} [A; a12] tune a musical instrument.
Angáyun ta ning pyánu, Let’s tune this piano. {2c} [C; a12] treat each
other equally, do s.t. equally to several people. Mag-ángay mig káun sa
ámù. Way pinihig, We all eat the same food at home. Nobody gets
anything special. Angáyun ta mug dukduk sa úlu, I will knock you all on
your heads. {2d} [C; b] be in agreement. Nag-ángay ang ílang mga
disisyun, They were in agreement in their decisions. (→) walay —(→)
a unbecoming, ugly. v [B12] be unbecoming, ugly. Mawalà kay angay ug
itum isul-ub, It will not become you if you wear black. pa-, pahi-
v [A; c] {1} put, place carefully in order. Gipaángay (gipahiángay)
níya ang búlak sa bukag, He placed the flowers carefully in the basket.
{2} furnish. Gipaangáyan mig pridyidir, We were furnished a
refrigerator. pa-(→) v [A; b] make s.t. even. Paangayi ang linung-ag,
Let the food get cooked evenly. -an(→) a for a person to be becoming,
proper. v [B] get to be becoming. Nagkaangayan ka sa ímung úban, Your
grey hairs become you more and more. ka-an n just, equal treatment.
ma-un n just, equal. Maangáyung pagbáhin sa kabílin, A just division of
the inheritance. maki-un a tending to be on equal terms with everyone.

angdù v [A; a12] consent. Dílì siya muandù ánang paagíha kay lángan, He
won’t consent to doing it that way because it’s too slow. Andúun ka
lang ug dílì siya mubúhat sa gisúgù, He will just say yes to you and
then won’t do what you told him to. ma-un a readily giving one’s
consent.

anggà n nickname. Si Bituy ang ákung anggà, My nickname is Bitoy. v [A;
c] give a nickname. Gianggáan siya ug pakà, They nicknamed him ‘frog’.

anggal n {1} birds that have their full feathers but cannot fly yet.
{2} for children to be nearly grown up. Ayaw paghulat nga hungitun ka
sa ímung inahan, anggal ka na, Don’t wait for your mother to feed you.
You’re grown-up now. a grown-up and still unable to speak properly.

anggid = amgid.

angguy n familiar term of address for boy or man much younger than
speaker: sonny, lad. Purbída, angguy, lisud nà kung masukù, If he gets
angry, lad, he is hard to control. v [A13; a12] call s.o. angguy.

anghal v [B] become ajar. pa- v [b5] keep s.t. ajar. Paanghála
(paanghali) ang pultahan arun makítà sila, Keep the door ajar so we can
see them.

anghaw = anghal.

anghil n {1} angel. {2} short for — magbalantay. Gibyáan siya sa íyang
anghil, Her guardian angel left her. v [A12; b2] save s.o. like a
guardian angel. Ang paghut sa irù nakaanghil kay nakamata ku, The dog’s
barking saved me in the nick of time because I woke up. — magbalantay
n guardian angel.

anghilika n k.o. flowering herb, cultivated and wild, which has large
succulent, ovoid, undulating leaves from which new plants sprout:
Bryophyllum pinnatum.

anghinghu = ahinghu.

anghit a smell bad like the body, rancid meat, milk, goats, cows. v [B;
b6] get to smell bad. Muanghit ang rípridyirítur ug butangan ug karni
sa kanding, The refrigerator will smell if you put goat meat into it.
ka- n foul smell. Ang kaanghit sa litsi dílì kaáyu ísug, Milk does not
have a terribly strong smell.

angíing = alangíing.

angílan = alangílan.

ángin v [A; c1] bring s.t. to ruin together with it. Ang ínum nakaángin
sa ákung pagtuun, Drinking brought my studies to ruination. Daghang
kinabúhing naángin pagkahúlug sa trák, Many people lost their lives
when the bus fell.

angitngit = alangitngit.

angka v {1} [B4] for s.t. to get loose, give way. Muangka dáyun ang
tikud sa sapátus, The heels of the shoes will come off right away.
Miangka ang silya tungud sa íyang kabug-at, The chair gave way because
she was too heavy. {2} [c1] remove s.t. to leave a gap. Ayaw iangka
(angkáha) ang tabun sa kaldíru, Do not lift the cover off the pot.
{3} [A23; b3] quit doing s.t., a job. Muangka ka na nga wà pay úras?
You’re quitting now, when it hasn’t even been an hour? Hápit na
mamatay, piru wà gihápun muangka ang ugis, The white cock was nearly
dead, but he didn’t desist.†

angkab v [A; ab7] take a big bite. Angkábun (angkában) ku ug kausa ning
ímung mansánas, May I take one big bite from your apple? n bite, result
of the bite. Dakug angkab ang irù, The dog has a big bite.

angkas v {1} [A; b] ride mounted on s.t. Bátang nag-angkas ug kábaw, A
child mounted on a water buffalo. {2} [AC; c] ride double on a cycle or
horse. Nag-angkas sila sa mutur, They rode one behind the other on the
motorcycle. Iangkas ta ka sa bisiklíta, I’ll take you on the back of my
bicycle. -anan n carrier at the back part of the bicycle.

angkat v [A; a12] take s.t. for resale on credit. Angkátun sà run nákù
ang isdà kay walà kuy puhúnan, I’ll take the fish on credit this time
because I have no capital. n amount for which s.t. is taken on credit.
Dì ni ikabaligyà ug tris kay kwatru ang angkat áni, I can’t let you
have it for three because I had to pay four for it. maN-l-, maN-r-
n one who obtains things for sale on credit.

angkla n {1} anchor. {2} anchor-type contraption used for fishing for
squid. v [A12; a12] obtain, make into an anchor.

angkub n a covering over the opening of a small boat, the analogue of a
deck on large boats. v {1} [AN; b5] make, put a cover for a boat. Ílang
angkubun (angkuban) ang sakayan ug playwud, They will make a plywood
cover for the boat. {2} [AN; ac] fill s.t. in to cover up a deficiency.
Angkúba ra ang lab-ang sa ímung pinintálan, Fill in the spots you
missed painting. Angkúbi ang kúwang sa ákung twisyun, Make up the
balance of my tuition fees. Iangkub kining usa ka gantang humay arun
mahustung usa ka bákid, Add this one ganta of rice to make it one
cavan. a {1} for boats to be covered, having an angkub. {2} complete,
nothing lacking. Angkub ang ímung paghátag kanámù sa diriksiyun, You
gave complete directions.

angkun v [A; a12] claim as one’s own, admit authorship of an act. Dì
siya muangkun nga siyay may salà, He will not admit that he is wrong.
Kinsay nag-angkun nga iyáha ning libru? Who is claiming that this book
is his? {2} [A2; a12] acquire, get as one’s portion, share or luck. Mau
niy pálad ákung naangkun, This is my lot in life. {2a} [A23] be in a
certain situation. Dílì siya gustung muangkun sa kinabúhing pinubri, He
does not want to lead the life of a poor man. {3} [A3; a12] take as
one’s share of contributions or responsibility. Akuy muangkun sa
ilimnun, I’ll take care of the drinks. Angkúnun ku ang panghúgas sa
plátu, I’ll take care of washing the plates. n share claimed, turn
being claimed. Ákung angkun ning lutíha, This lot is my share. Ákung
angkun sa pag-adurnu sa simbahan ugmà, It’s my turn to decorate the
church tomorrow. maN-r- n one who lays claim to things that are not
his. hiN-, -íru a fond of claiming as one’s own.

anglit n small earthen pot. Anglit ray lung-ági kay duha ra ta, Just
cook in the small earthen pot because there is only two of us. v [A12;
a12] get, make into a small earthen pot.

angsu a smelling of urine. Angsu ang ílang kasilyas, Their toilet
smells. v [BN; b6] become smelly. ka- n foulness. angsúhan n {1} k.o.
small ash-grey shark that has an odor like urine. {2} = alangsúhan.

angsud a {1} having body odor. Kalígù na kay angsud ka na kaáyu, Take a
bath. You have awful b.o. {2} = angsu. v [BN] have b.o.

angtad a be in line of sight. Angtad ra sa bintánà ang tíbi, You can
watch TV through the window. Maigù giyud nà siya kay angtad kaáyu siya
sa ákung punting, I can hit him because he is in my line of fire. v [B;
c1] be where one can see it. Naangtad (miangtad) sa ákung mga mata ang
ugdu sa íyang dughan, Her bulging breasts were right in my line of
sight. Ug ímung ibutang ang sámin dinhi muangtad (maangtad) sa sílaw sa
adlaw, If you put the mirror here, the sun’s rays will be reflected
directly off of it. pa- v [A; ac] put s.t. in the line of sight. Ang
nawung bayà sa nagpaangtad, mu ra ug gwápa, Some nerve of her to make
herself the center of attention, as if she were beautiful.

angtud a having the smell of burnt hair, cloth, or flesh without fat.
v [BN; b6] smell of burnt hair. Náay nangangtud kay nagsúnug siya sa
balhíbu, S.t. smells bad because he is burning feathers. angturun
a smelling somewhat of burnt feathers.

anguangu v [a4] be senile. Gianguangu ka na, You’re getting senile.
anguanguhun a somewhat senile.

angul, ángul v [B126] be injured to the point of incapacity. Tulu ang
naángul sa aksidinti, Three people were injured in the accident. (→)
n injured and incapacitated persons or animals. Ang mga angul giíhaw,
The injured animals were slaughtered. Angul nga bitiránu, Incapacitated
veteran. angul-angul v [A13; a12] satisfy only partly. Angul-angulun
man ku nímu sa diyútay nga pagkáun, I won’t get full with just a little
food.

angulunkulun n k.o. large black hornet, the dwelling of which looks
like a clay pot (kúlun).

angus = angsu.

angut, ángut_1 a disfigured by pockmarks or large scars. v [B2] be
disfigured by thick pockmarks or large scars.

ángut_2 v [A2; c1] {1} last long. Makaángut kahà nang nagpinal hangtud
matígum ang tanang anak? Can the dying man last until all his children
get here? Iángut (angúta) ang ginamus hangtud tápus búlan, Make the
salted fish last until the end of the month. {2} persevere, have
strength to endure. Dì na ku makaángut ug saka sa hagdan, I don’t have
the strength to climb the stairs.

anhà there, far from the first person, near the second person; or near
s.t. remote in time but just referred to. Anhà ibutang ang mga mangga,
Put the mangoes down near you. Anhà ra bítaw nà, You’ll get it (lit. it
will be there) in good time. — pa that’s the only time [so-and-so] will
happen. Anhà pa ku makaawtu ug makadaug ku sa swipstik, I could get a
car only if I were to win the sweepstakes. — ku I bet on. Anhà ku sa
putì, I will bet on the white cock. v {1} [A2; b3c] go there. Muanhà ku
dihà, I will go there. {2} [A13; a2] go get s.t. Kinsa may nag-anhà
nímu dihà gahápun? Who went to get you yesterday? Anháun ku nà rung
hápun, I will go to your place for it this afternoon. anhaan v [A13]
habitually go s.w. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b8] happen to go, be brought.
Nahaanhà sa inyu ang librung ipaari untà nákù, The book which was
supposed to be sent to me, wound up in your place. kaanhaun a feel like
going s.w.

anhi {1} here, in this place. Anhi ibutang ang síya, Put the chair
here. {2} let’s get to [such-and-such] a matter. Karun anhi kita báhin
sa túbig nga gawíun sa panimalay, Now let’s get to the matter of water
for household use. v {1} [A2; b3c] come, bring here. Muanhi ka ba ugmà?
Will you come here tomorrow? Ianhi nà dinhi, Bring it here. {2} [A13;
a2] come to get s.t. Nag-anhi ku sa libru, I came for the book. Anhíun
ta ka rung hápun, I’ll come here to get you this afternoon. anhian
v [A13] habitually go s.w. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b8] happen to come, be
brought here. Nahianhi lang mi dinhi sa ámung libutlíbut, In our
wandering, we wound up here. kaanhiun a feel like coming here.

anhin, anhing the late. Si anhing Uy, The late Uy. v [B1256; a12] be,
become dead, kill. Anhíngun ta ka run ug magbinúang ka nákù, I will
kill you if you make a fool of me.

anhuy a smell of boiled starchy foods which have been burnt. v [BN; a2]
for boiled starchy foods to smell burnt. Ang kamúti maanhuy ug
pahubsan, The sweet potatoes will get a burnt odor if you let the water
boil away.

áni v [A; a12] {1} harvest (usually rice, but by extension, other
crops). {2} get benefit from s.t. Way maáni sa ímung pagsúgal, You can
get no benefit from your gambling. n harvest. Dakù mig áni nga humay
rung tuíga, We had a big rice harvest this year. -in- n harvested rice
or millet.

anía short form: nía is here, where you and I are. Anía si Pidru sa
Sibu, Pedro is here in Cebu. Aníay dus písus, Here is two pesos. Mau
kanay nía sa ákung hunàhúnà, That is what is (here) in my mind. —
kanákù {1} I have. {2} I’m menstruating.

aniag = taniag.

ánib_1 n {1} chapter in a book. {2} a span of time in one’s life. Ang
panahun sa gúbat mauy usa ka maitum nga ánib sa ákung kinabúhì, The war
period was a dark chapter in my life.

*ánib_2 ka- allies. Ang mga huk kaánib sa mga kumunista, The Huks are
allies of the Communists. v [C2; c] be allies.

aníbal n syrup. v [A; a1] make, have syrup.

anibirsaryu n anniversary. v [A; b6] celebrate one’s anniversary.
Anibirsaryúhan giyud níla ang pitsa sa kasal, They will celebrate their
wedding anniversary.

aníbung n fishtail palm: Caryota spp. It is found in forests and used
as flooring.

anig-ig v [B46] for a stream to flow slowly and gently. Nag-anig-ig ang
sapà kay taudtaud na mang way ulan, The brook is flowing slowly and
gently because it has not rained for some time.

aníhag (from síhag) v {1} [A; c1] peer or look through s.t.
transparent. Dihay mianihag (nag-anihag) sa bildung takup, S.o. peered
through the glass shutter. {2} [B26] be clearly visible through s.t.
transparent. Muanihag ang mga isdà kun tin-aw ang túbig, You can see
the fish clearly when the water is clear. Maanihag ang íyang láwas sa
nipis nga sinínà, Her body showed through her flimsy dress. {3} [B]
become clear or transparent. Muanihag (maanihag) ang bildu kun
trapúhan, The glass will become transparent if you wipe it. {4} [B4N]
become bright and clear. Mianihag (nanganihag) na ang kadaúgan sa
kandidátu, The candidate’s victory is already clear. Nagkaanihag na ang
lángit, The sky is getting clearer. n crystal ball.

anii n shade tree: Erythrina fusca.

anikad = aninikad.

anílaw n name given to trees of the genera Columbia and Grewia. The
anílaw are small trees or shrubs found in second growth forests.

anilyu n {1} game in which a number of one-inch rattan or metal rings
with ribbons are suspended at a height within reach of a player riding
a bicycle. The contestants speed towards them holding a dart, trying to
hook a ring with it. {2} the ring used in such a game. v [A13; b6] play
anilyu.

animal n vile, brutal person. Buhíi ku, animal! Let me go, you beast!
v [B] become a vile person.

animar v [A; b5] encourage. Ikaw giyuy nag-animar níla sa binúang, You
encouraged them to be naughty. Akù siyang gianimar (gianimahan) sa
pagpaninda, I encouraged her to open a small store.

animas a {1} for a person to be emaciated and ugly in appearance.
Pagkasakit níya sa tísis, daut siya kaáyu daw animas, When he got sick
with TB he became thin, like a skeleton. {2} term of reproach: You
beast! Paháwà dihà animása ka! Get out of there, you beast, you! paN-
v [A2; b6(1)] say a prayer for the dead when the church bells ring at
eight o’clock in the evening.

animasiyun n animation.

anímik, animiku n anemic. v [B] become anemic.

animu n consciousness, awareness. Nawad-an siya sa animu, She lost
consciousness. Walà intáwuy animu ang bána sa gibúhat sa asáwa, The
husband has no idea of what his wife is doing.

animya n anemia. v [a4] get anemia. Káun ug atay arun dílì ka
animyáhun, Eat liver so you won’t get anemia.

anínag v [BN; b6] become visible. Mianínag ang usa ka hanap nga pahíyum
sa íyang mga ngábil, A faint smile appeared on her lips. Wà pa
manganínag ang adlaw, The sun had not yet appeared. Ang íyang nawung
naaninágan sa ispat, Her face appeared in the rays of the flashlight.

anínaw v {1} [A; a12] observe carefully. Gianínaw níya kun natúlug na
ba ang tanan únà manáug, She looked carefully to see, listened
carefully to hear, if everybody was asleep before going out. {2} [A12;
a3] come to sense s.t. Samtang natagpilaw siya, nakaanínaw siyag
kasíkas sa píkas lawak, As he was dozing off to sleep, he noticed a
rustling sound in the next room. Naanínaw ku nga buntag na diay, I
became aware that it was already morning. n observation. Sa ákung
anínaw wà siyay gustu nímu, I notice that she doesn’t like you.

anindut short form: nindut a nice, beautiful. Nindut ímung bistídu, You
have a beautiful dress on. Kanindut sa pagkáun, What nice food! — nímu
à sarcastic expression of disapproval. Nindut nímu à, ímung gilingkúran
ang ákung kálù! How nice of you to sit on my hat! v [APB; a2] become,
make s.t. beautiful. Kinsay munindut (mupanindut) sa intabládu? Who
will beautify the stage? Nindúta ang ímung diskursu, Make your talk
fancy. ma- a nice, beautiful.

aninikad (from síkad) n k.o. edible small conch which moves forward
with a kicking-like motion.

aniningsing (from singsing) n ring finger.

aniníput (from kíput) n firefly. Makaiksplikar ka ngánung musíga ang
aniníput? Can you explain why the firefly lights up? kità ug — see
stars. Suntuk nga nakapakakità nákug aniníput, A blow that made me see
stars. paN- v [A23] see stars. Nanganiníput ákung panan-aw sa
nasumbagan ku níya, I saw stars (lit. fireflies formed in my sight)
when he struck me.

anínu n shadow. dakù ug — important, prominent person. v [A; a2] cast a
shadow on. Muanínu ang káhuy sa tanáman, The tree will cast a shadow on
the garden. paN- v [A2] reflect a certain feeling, for a feeling to
reflect itself. Nanganínu ang kamatáyun sa íyang panagway (sa kamatáyun
ang íyang panagway), Her face showed that she was a dying woman.

anipay n k.o. vine producing oval pods covered with irritating hairs:
Mucuna nigricans.

anis n fennel. v [B6] cook s.t. with fennel. -ádu n flavored with
fennel. v [a12] flavor s.t. with fennel.

ánis, ánist a {1} honest. {2} in earnest. Ánis ka, way klási? You’re
not kidding me, are you? There’s no classes today? v [B12] be honest.
Maánist man lang nà siya ug arayan ug bunal, He is honest only when
they show him the whip. anisay v [A13] play without a referee, agreeing
to call the points honestly. Mag-anisay lang ta kay wà may muripiri,
We’ll just play honestly since there’s no referee. n playing without
referee.

anis-is a immaculately white and smooth. Anis-is nga pamánit, Smooth,
fair complexion. Anis-is ang lángit, The sky is smooth and white. v [B]
become, make smooth and white. Muanis-is ang bisting putig labhag
Tayid, White clothing becomes immaculate if you wash it with Tide.

anislag n k.o. shrub or small tree used for firewood: Securinaga
flexuosa.†

anistisya n anesthesia. v [A; a12] anesthetize. Parabir ka upirahan,
anistisyáhun úsà ka, Before you are operated, you will be anesthetized.

ánit n leather. Ang bag nga ánit mas lig-un kay sa plastik, A bag made
of leather is much stronger than one of plastic. v [A; b] remove the
skin, peels.†

anítu n supernatural beings which do not show themselves and do good to
people. Ang mga anítu mag-uban kanímu sa inyung pánaw, May the good
spirits accompany you in your trip!

aníyu n the short rope passed through the nose of a carabao to which
the tether rope is joined. v [A; b] put an aníyu, use as an aníyu.

anlit n = anglit.

ansir n answer. v [A; c] answer a letter, question, problem. Ansíran ku
na ba nang sulat? Shall I answer that letter? Unsay ákung iansir? What
answer shall I give?

*ansiyánu n — sa simbahan church elder.

ansu = angsu.

ansuy v [A123P; b4] get infected. Ang húgaw nga túbig mauy nakaansuy
(nakapaansuy) sa íyang samad, The dirty water caused his wound to get
infected. Ansúyan ang samad, The wound will get infected.†

antad = angtad.

antagunismu n antagonism. Ang antagunismu tálì sa duha ka tríbu, The
antagonism between the two tribes.

antáhay v [A3P; b1] hesitate, have second thoughts about doing s.t. Ang
maldítung anak dì muantáhay sa súkul bisag ginikánan, The naughty child
doesn’t hesitate to talk back to his own parents. Wà nà nákù antaháyig
palit, I had no hesitations about buying that.

antak v [A; b36] stamp one’s foot. Ayaw kug antáki sa tiil, Don’t stamp
your foot at me. Ayaw ug antáki ang kartun, Don’t stamp on the
cardboard box.

antaw a for things at a distance to be visible. Ang Buhul antaw sa
Talísay, Bohol is visible from Talisay. v [B156] be visible. Sa unáhan
ang íyang balay nag-antaw, His house is visible in the distance. pa-
v {1} [A; b6] be at a distance. Gipaantáwan níla ang namúhì ug
dinamíta, They kept their distance from the dynamiters. {2} [A13] look
at s.t. from a distant, detached point of view. Magpaantaw lang siya sa
mga katarúngan ug dílì muapil sa lantúgì, He just takes a detached view
of the reasons and doesn’t get into the argument. {3} [A13] be aloof.
Sa mga tígum si Lúlit magpaantaw ug dílì muapil sa kulukabildu, At
parties Lolette would keep to herself and not join in any of the
conversations.

anti_1 n k.o. erect branched weed, the leaves of which have a peppery
taste and are used as a vegetable: Solanum nigrum.

anti-_2 anti-. Anti-Amirikánu, Anti-American.

anti_3 n {1} aunt, parent’s or grandparent’s sisters or their female
cousins of any degree. {2} title given to such a relation.

antibayutiku n antibiotic.

antígu a know how to. Dì ku antígung mupasipála, I don’t know how to
harm others. v [B123; b8] know how to do s.t. Makaantígu ka ba nga
mukuskus ug sista? Do you know how to play the guitar? Unsay ímung
naantiguhan sa tantu nímung tuuntúun? What have you learned to do after
studying so much? -in-(→) a requiring skill or know-how. Ang pagdala ug
awtu sa syudad inantigu, It takes skill to drive a car in the city.

antíhay v {1} [A; c] dodge a blow. Wà níya iantíhay ang íyang kamut,
mau nga naigù, He did not get his hand out of the way in time, so it
was hit. {2} [A; b6] avoid a fight because of cowardice. Ikaw na lay
ákung antiháyan? Do you think I would avoid a fight with you?

antikristu n anti-Christ.

antimánu v {1} [A; b5c1] do s.t. early before s.t. else happens.
Muantimánu kug lakaw arun dílì hiabtan sa ulan, I will leave early
before I get caught in the rain. Antimanúhun (antimanúhan) ta sila ug
sulti arun dílì hiunhan, Let’s tell them early before s.o. else does.
{2a} [A3P; a12] kill s.t. with a single blow. Wà nímu maantimánug patay
ang bábuy, You didn’t kill the pig at the first blow. {2b} [A3P; b5c1]
do s.t. immediately with finality. Iantimánu (antimanúhun, antimanúhan)
giyud ang pagbalíbad arun dílì na magbalikbálik, You should refuse him
with finality then and there so that he will not keep coming back.
a for a killing to be done with one blow.

antína n antenna, aerial. v [A; a] put, make into an antenna.

anting-anting n a charm, amulet. Naghábak siya ug anting-anting arun dì
siya madutlan sa bála, He is wearing an amulet so that bullets cannot
penetrate him. v [A1; a] wear, have, make into an amulet.
Gianting-antíngan ang igtalarì, The cock had a charm tied to it.

antipára n {1} eyeglasses. {2} diving goggles. v [AN; a] make into,
wear eyeglasses or diving goggles.

antipas n mask covering the eyes. v [A1; ac] wear, obtain, make into a
mask. Walà giyud mailhi ang kawatan kay nag-antipas man, They could not
recognize the thief because he was wearing a mask.

antipatiku n antagonistic. v [B12; a] be, make s.o. antagonistic. Ayawg
adtu sa íla kay giantipatikuhan ka sa íyang ginikánan, Don’t go to
their house because her parents are antagonistic to you.

antipúlu n k.o. toilet with a long hole dug as the receptacle for
waste.

antipun = awrúra_1.

antipúna n a prayer in a novena or rosary, read by the leader.

antirábis n anti-rabies vaccine.

antis before doing s.t. Antis nímu lung-ága nà, hugási úsà, Wash it
before you cook it.

antisiptiku n antiseptic.

antisípu n advance payment. Díay singku nga sabtun antisípu sa ímung
kabáyù, Here is five pesos as down payment for your horse. v [A; c]
give down payment.

antitirhi n genital organs (derogatory). Pagtárug lingkud arun dílì
makítà ang ímung antitirhi, Sit properly so you don’t display your
genitalia to the whole world.

antiúhus, antiyúhus n eyeglasses. v [AN2; a] wear, make into, get
eyeglasses. Kadtung nag-antiyúhus si Pidru, The one wearing eyeglasses
is Pedro.†

antū̀ = antúlu.

antúan n medium-sized tree of second growth forests: Pittosporum
pentandrum.

antúbung n k.o. large, branching coral.

antud a = angtud.

antug_1 v [A; c] {1} toss the coin in a coin-tossing game (hantak).
Ayaw ug antúgi ning batúha, Don’t toss coins on this stone. {2} slam
s.t. down as a coin is slammed down. Iantug ta ka run, I’ll throw you
on the ground (said to a child one is holding in his arms). {3} shoot
the ball in a basketball game. Inigkagunit níyag búla muantug dáyun,
The moment he gets hold of the ball, he shoots it right away. n turn to
toss the coin. -an(→) n place on which coins are thrown in hantak.
-un(→) n coins used in hantak.

antug_2 a rather heavy to lift. Antug ra kanang malíta nímu, That
suitcase is too heavy for you. Antug nga káhuy, Dense and heavy wood.
v [B2] become heavy.

antúhuy = anhuy.

antúlang (not without l) n k.o. big bivalve, the empty shells of which
are used for decorative purposes.

antulánga n hibiscus. — nga lut-ud n double or triple petaled hibiscus.
— nga asul n a blue hibiscus, cultivated as an ornamental: Hibiscus
syriacus.

antulíhaw n k.o. small yellow-colored bird. -un a having the yellowish
color of this bird.

antúlù v [B2] pause in surprise, be taken aback. Miantū̀ (naantū̀) siya
sa pultahan pagkadungug sa singgit sa sulud, He paused in surprise at
the door when he heard the cry within.

antus v [A; a1] {1} endure, stand. Mag-antus arun masantus, Endure if
you are to become a saint. Makaantus ka ba sa kabahù sa lápuk? Can you
stand the stench of the mud? Antúsun ku na lang ang íyang mga pagtámay
kanákù, I will just endure his words of disparagement. {2} suffer.
Nag-antus siyag dúgay úsà mamatay, She suffered for a long time before
she died. -l-un a needing endurance, perseverance. Alantúsun kaáyu ning
batáa kay mahilak, This child needs patient handling because he is very
sensitive. ma-in-un, ma-un a patient, persevering. Ang mainantúsun nga
kinaíya ni Husi mauy makapalampus níya, Jose’s patient nature will make
him succeed.

antutu v [B46; b6] pour forth smoke in quantities. Dakù giyung hikáya
kay nag-antutu ang kusína, It must be a big feast because their kitchen
has been belching forth smoke.

antuwánga = antulánga.

anu = unsa (dialectal).

ánud v [AP; c1] for the current to carry s.t. off. Ang bahà nag-ánud
(nagpaánud) sa ílang balay, The flood washed their house away. Walà
siya anúra (iánud) sa lawud, He wasn’t carried off into the deep. (→)
n {1} things carried away by floodwater. {2} a person who just drifted
s.w. or into s.t. Usa lang siya ka anud sa pulitika, He is s.o. who
just drifted into politics. {3} = pa-(→). pati- v [A; c1] allow oneself
to go with the current, but with control. Kun kapúyun siya sa
paglinánguy mupatiánud lang siya sa sulug, When she becomes tired of
swimming, she just lets herself drift in the current. Patianúrun
(ipatiánud) námù sa luyu sa sakayan ang bugkus sa káhuy, We will let
the bundle of wood be carried along behind the boat. pa-(→) n drift net
which is left to float in the sea and catches fish by the gills. paN-
n cloud. kapanganúran n clouds. panganúrun n spirits of children that
have died unbaptized that are believed to be wafted in the skies.

anugas n k.o. small tree which is a violent contact poison: Semecarpus
cuneiformis.

anúgun short form: núgun (from hinúgun) what a pity, it is a waste.
Anúgun sa ímung nawung, I expected more of you. (Lit. Your nice face is
just being wasted.) Anúgun nga walà siya dinhi, What a pity he’s not
here! v [B1256; b6] consider s.t. a waste. Naanúgun na lang ang kwarta,
The money just went to waste. Gianugnan ku sa mga patátas nga
gipanglábay, I considered it a waste that the potatoes should be thrown
away. paN- v [A12] feel bad about s.t. wasted. Nanganúgun ku sa
kwartang giusíkan, I feel bad about the money that went to waste.

anugut n torch made from dried coconut blossom sheaths.

anúhus = anúus.

*anuk, *ánuk pa- v [A3; b(1)] keep cooked food over the embers so that
it will be evenly cooked. Ayaw haúna inighubas, paanuki úsà, Don’t
remove the pot when the water evaporates. Let it stay over the fire.

anular v [A; a12] annul, void. Anulahun ang kuntrátu kay walay pirma,
The contract will be annulled because it has no signature.

anumalíya n anomaly, usually said euphemistically of fraudulent
transactions.

-anun adjective forming affix added to roots which are nouns and which
usually occur in the alternant -nun, with the a of the penult dropped.
{1} having the characteristics of [noun]. Hariánun nga balay, A
palatial (lit. kingly) house. Yawan-ung hunàhúnà, Devilish thoughts.
{2} being from [such-and-such] a place or like s.t. from that place.
Dagatnun nga mga binúhat, Creatures of the sea. Bul-ánun, One from
Bohol. Bukidnun, A mountaineer.

an-un = unsáun (dialectal). see unsa.

anúnang_1 n name given to sharks that look like sawfishes and
guitarfishes.

anúnang_2 n k.o. small tree with a yellow-white fruit like a cherry,
round and with a single pit: Cordia dichotoma. The fruit is
mucilaginous and is used for paste. A sticky sap in the inner portion
of the bark is scraped off for poultices.

anúnas n k.o. heart-shaped fruit similar to átis: Anona reticulata.

anunimus n anonymous person. Anunimus ang nagpadala sa sulat, The
person who sent the letter remained anonymous.

anunsiyu n announcement. v [A; c] announce. Ianunsiyu sa radyu,
Announce it over the radio.

anunugba (from sugba) n moth that gathers around a light at night.
v [B1256] be, become a moth.

anunugbu (from sugbu) n k.o. brown edible fresh-water crab reaching 3″
in diameter, usually used as bait in bantak fishing.

anupug = anapug.

anup-up = alup.

ánur a an honor student. v [B1236] make the honor roll. Nakaánur
(naánur) ku kas-a, I made the honor roll once. — rul honor roll. v =
ánur.

anus-a when? (future). Anus-a nímu dad-a? When will you bring it?
Anus-a pa gud ku mutúu! I certainly would not believe that! (Lit. When
would I ever believe that?)

anut n second growth. v [B13(1)6; b4] become a second-growth forest.
Ang kaíngin kaniadtu hápit na pud maanut, What was once a clearing is
now practically a jungle again.

anutasiyun n annotation.

anúus n soot. anak sa — a very dark-complexioned person. v [A23; b(1)]
give off soot. Ug muanúus ang sugà, pagamyi ang pabílu, If the lamp
gives off soot, shorten the wick.

anuwal n a school yearbook. v [A1] publish, get a yearbook.

anyag a for s.t. in nature or women to be beautiful. v [AB2; b5]
become, make beautiful. Naanyag si Maríya human siya mamulbus, Maria
became beautiful after she powdered herself. ka- n beauty. Ang kaanyag
sa palíbut, The beauty of the surroundings. ma- a beautiful.

anyil n bluing for wash. v [A; b6] put bluing in wash.†

anyu n {1} a certain year. Unsang anyúha ka matáwu? What year were you
born? {2} [such-and-such] a grade, year in school. Ang ákung bátà
sigundu anyu na sa hayskul, My son is already a sophomore in high
school. — nuybu New Year. v {1} [AN] celebrate New Year’s. Manganyu
nuybu (mag-anyu nuybu) ku dinhi, I will celebrate New Year’s here.
{2} [B256] get to be New Year’s.

anyus following a number of Spanish origin: [so-and-so] many years.
Bayinti anyus na ku dinhi, I have been here for twenty years.

apa = apla.

ápa n thin pastry of the sort used as ice cream cones or wrappers of
egg rolls. {1a} ice cream cone. {1b} by extension, crackers. v [A1;
a12] make, make into thin pastry.

apáhap = alapáhap.

apáli n k.o. oval-shaped, smooth-textured yam, cultivated and growing
wild: Dioscorea esculenta.

apan_1 but, on the contrary. n defect in a person. Táwu nga walay apan,
A person without defect. v [A12] constitute the defect in s.o. or s.t.
Maáyu ang lawlaw. Ang nakaapan bukugun, Salted sardines are good; the
only thing wrong with them is that they are boney. apan-ápan v [A13;
b6] keep saying ‘but’ to avoid doing s.t. Lakaw na, way apan-ápan, Get
going, no but’s about it. Mag-apan-ápan siyag sugúun, He keeps saying
‘but’ when you tell him to do s.t.

apan_2, apan-apan_1 = alisiwsiw.

apan-apan_2 n dish prepared from the young stems of kangkung cut into
strips, cooked with spices and vinegar. v [A; c1] prepare apan-apan.

ap-andawun n the situation in a game of mahjong where to obtain mahjong
(go out) the player needs to complete only a single straight (sequences
of three pieces in numerical order) such that either the lower number
of the higher number will complete the sequence. E.g., if a player is
complete for mahjong except for one straight for which he has only the
pieces five and six, he needs either seven or four to make the straight
complete and get mahjong, and thus he is in the ap-andawun situation.

ap-ap = alap-ap.

apapángig n jaws. v [a12] hit in the jaw. -un a have prominent jaws.
v [B1246] get a prominent jaw.

aparadur n wardrobe, cupboard. Ibutang ang sud-an sa aparadur, Put the
food in the cupboard. v [a12] make into cupboard, wardrobe.

aparátu n apparatus.

aparisyun n apparition.

apartmin, apartmint n apartment. v [A1; a2] get, make, make into
apartments.

ápas v {1} [A2; a12b2] follow and catch up with. Muápas níya ang íyang
asáwa sa Rúma, His wife will join him in Rome. {2} [A; a12] go after
s.o. to bring him home. Apása siya sa iskuyláhan, Go get him at school.
{3} [A; a12] go as high as [such-and-such] an amount in buying s.t.
Dílì ku muápas (muapas) ug bayinti sa ímung bábuy, I will not go as
high as twenty for your pig. n {1} amount offered in bargaining after
an original offer was made. Kwatru ni. Dì mahímug tris. Pilay ímung
ápas? This costs four pesos. Three is not enough. How high will you
offer? {2} s.t. uttered to s.o. leaving as a reminder. Ápas pahinumdum,
A reminder as he is leaving. {3} — sumpay n sequel. Ang ‘Fili’ ni Risal
ápas sumpay sa íyang ‘Noli’, Rizal’s ‘Fili’ is a sequel to his ‘Noli’.
(→) {1} = ápas, 3. {2} [A12; b(1)] catch up, overtake. Dì ku makaapas
nímu sa lumbà, I can not overtake you in a foot race. Hiapsan ku sa
ulan, I will be caught in the rain. {3} [A12; a3] get meaning of. Dílì
nákù maapas ang íyang gisulti, I cannot get what he’s talking about.
{4} [A12; a2] keep up with work. Dílì siya makaapas ug utaw sa ákung
paglaba, He cannot keep ironing as fast as I wash. Apasun ku ning
trabáhu, I will keep up with the work. {5} effect s.t. Dílì maapas sa
tambal, The medicine cannot help. {6} [A13; a12] be after s.t. Nag-apas
ka lang sa íyang sápì, You’re only after her money. apas-apas v [A]
keep doing one after another. Nag-apas-apas ug abut ang mga bisíta, The
visitors kept coming, one after another. apas-ápas v [A; a12] run
after. Giapas-ápas siya sa íyang trátu, Her boyfriend ran after her.
pa- = paagpas. see agpas. apsunun, alapsunun a requiring instant
attention. Ayaw kug langána kay apsunun ning trabáhu, Don’t delay me
because this work needs instant attention.

apat [so-and-so] would be, would have been better. Apat magtuun ka kay
sa magdúlà, You’d do better to study than to play. Apat pag ímung
gipalit ug baktin, You would have done better to buy a pig with the
money. — kay the situation was fine except s.t. happened to make it
bad. Apat kay wà tà tu maghilak, ímung gihilabtan, He wasn’t crying.
What did you have to mess with him for? Apat kay dì ku muuban, gipugus.
Naapil ku sa kasábà, I didn’t want to go with you, but you forced me.
Now I got in trouble along with you. n action of saying ‘apat’. Walay
apat nga mag-una, The apat (‘it would have been better’) always comes
afterwards.

ápaw v [B23(1); b(1)] for the surface level of water to rise above s.t.
Wà maápaw ang túbig sa bugas, The water was not enough to submerge the
rice. Muápaw ang bahà sa taytáyan ug mukusug ang ulan, The flood will
rise above the bridge if there is a downpour. Giapáwan sa sabaw ang
sálad, The salad was submerged in the sauce.

apay_1 n salad made of sweet potato tops. v [A; a] prepare a salad of
sweet potato tops.

apay_2 a pale-complexioned. Apay siya kay anímik, He is pale because he
is anemic. v [B2N; b3] become pale. Miapay (naapay) siya sa kahadluk,
She grew pale in fright.

apáyud n fan. v [A; b] {1} fan s.t. Ikay muapáyud sa kaláyu, You fan
the fire. Apayúri ra ang mga bisíta, Fan the visitors. {2} make into a
fan. paN- v [A13] fan oneself. Nangapáyud siya kay giinítan, She fanned
herself because she felt hot.

apdu n {1} gall, bile. {2} s.t. bitter to endure. Apdu sa kamatuúran,
The bitter truth. ispísu ug — brave.

ápid v [A; c1] arrange things of approximately the same size in a neat
stack. Akuy muápid sa mga pinalantsa arun dì malum-it, I will stack the
ironed clothes neatly so that they do not get crumpled. apid-apid
{1} be stacked. {2} numerous. Apid-apid na ang íyang útang, He has
debts to the ceiling. v [A; c1] {1} stack. {2} be numerous. Giapid-apid
man gud níya ang íyang trátu, He has numerous sweethearts (lit. stacked
them up).

apidábit n affidavit.

apíki a {1} inadequate in space. Apíki ang gamayng balay pára kanámung
tanan, A small house is inadequate for all of us. {2} be in a tight
financial position. {3} having little time. Apíki ang panahung itiwas
sa trabáhu, There wasn’t enough time to finish the job. {4} homely to
the point that one is hard put to find any redeeming feature. Apíkig
nawung tanan íyang mga bátà, His children are all homely. {5} too near
s.t. Apíki sa karsáda ang balay, The house is too near the street.
{6} near. Apíki sa simbahan ang ámù, We live near the church.
v {1} [B12; b(1)] get to be short of space, money, time. Ang pyánu
nakaapíki (nakapaapíki) sa sála, The piano took up too much space in
the living room. Hing-apikihan ku sa kwarta karun, I happen to be short
of money now. {2} [A; a12b2] press s.o. by not giving him time or room
for maneuver. Ayaw ku apikíha, dì lagi ku, Don’t try to force me. I
told you I won’t. Dílì sila mubáyad ug dílì apikíhun, They won’t pay if
you don’t press them. Naapikhan ku sa ahinti, mipalit na lang ku, The
agent cornered me, so I just bought one.

apikta = apiktǎr.†

apiktǎr v [A; b(1)] affect. Dílì ku apiktahan (apiktaran) ug usa lang
ka básu nga ram, One glass of rum isn’t enough to affect me.

apil a be included. Ang ábang sitinta apil ang sugà, The rent is
seventy including light. walay — [subject] [subject] is not included.
Wà kay apil sa dúlà, You are not included in the game. v {1} [A13; c1]
include, put s.t. with s.t. else. Kinsay nag-apil sa ákung bulpin didtu
sa sagbut? Who threw my ballpoint pen out with the trash? Apilun
(iapil) ku ni ug lútù karung gabíi, I will include this in our dinner
tonight. {2} [B26; b6] participate, take part in. Muapil ka sa ámung
dúlà? Will you take part in our game? Maapil ka unyà sa kasábà, You
might get scolded as well. apil-apil v [A] include oneself when one
shouldn’t. Dílì ka muapil-apil ug isturya sa mga tigúlang, You must not
insinuate yourself in the grown-ups’ conversation. manggiapil-apilun
a given to including oneself in conversations. maN-r-(←)
n participants.

apilar v [A; c] appeal to a higher court. Iapilar nátù ang kásu ug
mapildi ta, We will appeal our case if we lose. apilasiyun n appeal to
a higher court. Kurti diapilasyúnis n Court of Appeals.

apílu v [A2; b(1)] take sides with s.o. Ngánung muapílu ka man níya nga
sayup man níya? Why do you take his side when he is at fault?

apilyídu n surname. v [A1; c] have, give [such-and-such] a surname.
Unáhun pagtawag ang nag-apilyídug Abad, Those who are named Abad will
be called first. Giapilyidúhan siyag Krus gikúhà gíkan sa nagkúgus sa
bunyag, He was surnamed Cruz, after his sponsor in baptism.

apindiks n the appendix in the body.†

apindisaytis n appendicitis. v [A123P; a4] cause, be afflicted with
appendicitis.

áping n {1} cheek. {2} surface (metaphorical). Ang sakayan mitadlas sa
áping sa dágat, The boat traversed the surface of the sea. paN- v [A2]
for the cheeks to fill out. Uy katambuk na ni Lári. Nangáping na, Larry
has gained weight. His cheeks have filled out. ka-an n the cheeks.

apínig v [A2; b(1)] side with. Apinígan nátù si Magsaysay karung
iliksiyun, We’ll support Magsaysay this coming election.

apir n social affair.

ápir n {1} short for ápir baks upper box in a theater, boxing ring.
{2} short for ápir kat upper cut in boxing. v [A2] hit with an upper
cut. Pagbantay kun muápir si Balug, Watch out when Balug hits you with
an upper cut.

ápir baks n upper box of a theater or boxing ring.

ápir kat n uppercut in boxing. v [A; a12] hit with an uppercut. Ápir
katun bítaw siya ug sagunsun, plat lagi, He was hit repeatedly with an
uppercut, and so he fell flat.

apirmatíbu a affirmative.

apisiyun n {1} craze for s.t. May apisiyun siya sa dyás, She is crazy
about jazz. {2} have a knack for doing s.t. Wà kuy apisiyun sa
panggansilyu, I have no great ability at crocheting. -áda, -ádu
n having a passion for s.t. Apisyunádu siya sa baksing, He is a boxing
fan. v [B12] develop a passion for s.t. Naapisyunáda siya sa bayli
human makatilaw kas-a, She became passionate over dancing after she
tried it once.

apítung n name given to three species of primary forest trees, source
of timber and balaw resin: Dipterocarpus spp.

apla a {1} = aplud. {2} having a flat, insipid taste like tahuri beans.
v [B; b6] become apla in taste.

aplay v {1} [A; b6] apply for a job. Giaplayan ba nímu ang trabáhu? Did
you apply for the job? {1a} try one’s hand at courting a girl
(humorous). Ug wà pa kay trátu, muaplay ku, If you have no boy friend,
I’d like to apply. {2} [AN; b6] apply cosmetics. Dì ka ba muaplay
(mangaplay) ug mik-ap? Aren’t you going to put make-up on?

áp lay upsy-daisy. Íyang giaswat ang bátà ug miingun ‘áp lay’, He
lifted the child and said ‘upsy-daisy’.

aplikasiyun n application.

aplud a having an insipid to slightly bitter taste with an astringent
effect, such as unripe bananas. v [B; b6] get to have an aplud taste
and texture. Ang tungug mauy makaaplud (makapaaplud) sa tubà, Mangrove
bark is what gives the palm toddy its astringent taste.

Aprika n Africa. -na n African woman. -nu n African man.

aprindis, aprintis n apprentice. v [B136; a2] be, make into an
apprentice.

apríta v [A; a2b2] {1} force s.o. to do s.t. by pressuring him.
Hing-apritahan siya pagpatug-an, He was pressured into revealing the
information. {2} [A; a12] hurry up, rush doing s.t. Mag-apríta tag
lakaw kay umuúlan, Let’s walk fast because it’s about to rain. -du
a pesteringly insistent.

apritáda (from prítu) n dish made of sauteed meat, peppers, peas, and
potatoes or bananas. v [A; b2] make apritáda.

aprubar v [A; b(1)] approve a request. Aprubahan ku lang ning hangyù,
I’ll just approve this request. aprubádu a {1} approved. {2} be in
favor of s.t. Háin may ímung gustu? Aprubádu ka íning planúha? Which do
you like? Are you in favor of this plan? {3} proven to be good. Ang
Linimintu Sluwan aprubádu nga maáyu sa panakit sa kalawásan, Sloan’s
liniment is proven the best for body pains. v [B1256] get to be
approved. Ug maaprubádu ang ákung lún, If my loan is approved.

aptan see atup.

apu n grandchild. paN- v [A2] have grandchildren. Unsang idára ka
nangapu? At what age did you have grandchildren? apuhan n grandparent.
— sa sungkud, túhud, matag bagul Great, great-great, great-great-great
grandchild, respectively.

ápù v [APB2S; c1P] pierce into or go into a hole as far as it will go,
cause s.t. to do so. Siyay miápù (mipaápù) sa lansang, He drove the
nail all the way in. Nag-apù ang gasulinadur ug kusug ang dágan, The
accelerator was all the way down and it went fast. Nagkaapù na ang táwu
sa lungag nga íyang gikubkub, The man is getting hidden beneath the
hole he is digging. a gone all the way into a hole.

apud = aplud.

ápud v {1} [A; b5c] give each. Apúrun (apúran) ta mu ug tagurha ka
libru, I will give each of you two books. {2} [B15] to have
[so-and-so-many] each. Nag-ápud silag pusil, They each have a rifle.
{3} [A12] be enough for each to have a share. Kining prútas dílì
makaápud kanátù, These fruits are not enough for all of us. maN- n cost
one centavo each. Ang dulsi mangápud, The candies are one centavo each.
pang- n distribution. Gipadayúnan ang pang-ápud sa humstid, They
continued giving out homestead sites. apud-apud v [AN; c] distribute,
divide among. Ang pusta giapud-apud sa daghang táwu, The bet was
divided up among many people.

ápug_1 n lime made from burnt seashells. v [A; a12] make lime. Mag-ápug
ta pára mam-un, Let’s make lime for our betel chewing. -l-an n {1} lime
container for tobacco or betel chewers. {2} lime factory.

ápug_2 ‘no win’ in a kind of lottery where a black piece of paper,
indicating no win, may be drawn. Walà pay nakadaug, pulus ápug ang
nahulbutan, No one has won because all the numbers drawn turned out to
be ápug. v {1} [B1256; a12] turn out to be ápug. {2} [B12] for a
business to fail. Nagkaapug ang íyang nigusyu tungud sa íyang
pagkasugarul, His business is failing because of his gambling.

ápul_1 n coagulated blood. Dinhay daghang ápul namilit sa sundang, A
lot of coagulated blood was sticking to the bolo. v [B3(1); b6] for
blood to coagulate. Dílì makaápul (maápul) ang dugù kay atimanun ug
trápu sa nars, The blood cannot coagulate because the nurse keeps
wiping it away.

ápul_2 n apple.

apung v {1} [A; b6] keep watch, wake over s.t. Miapung siya sa
masakitun, She kept watch over the patient. Nag-apung ang purman sa
nagtrabáhu, The foreman was watching the workers. Giapungan níla ang
minatay, They kept wake over the body. {2} [A13; b6] stand around
looking at s.t. Nag-apung siya ni Maríyang wà mutíngug níya, He was
standing by, watching Maria, but she didn’t say anything. {3} [A3] be
s.w. without doing anything, hang around a place. Nía ka na sad
mag-apung sa tubaan, Here you are again, hanging around the toddy
stand.

ápung v [A2; b(1)] for fish to gather in a mass. Sugà nga giapúngan sa
mga bulinaw, Light that the anchovies were attracted to. n mass of
fish.

apuntadur n prompter in a drama. v [B156] be the prompter.

apuntasiyun n prompting in a drama.

apunti v [A; c] record, list s.t. down. Akuy muapunti sa ímung gikúhà,
I’ll write down the amount you borrowed.

*apuntin Alistu, —, puygu Ready, aim, fire!

apúpa a in the path of s.t. that comes from a general direction: rain,
wind, smell, etc. Ang Sibu apúpa sa bagyu, Cebu is in the path of the
storm. Apúpa ang ákung gilingkúran sa báhù, The place I’m sitting is
right in the path of the smell. v {1} [B1256] get into the path of.
{2} [cP] put in the path of. Ayaw iapúpa (ipaapúpa) ang bátà dihà.
Banlásan námù ang salug, Don’t put the child in the way of the water we
are going to splash over the floor. pa- v {1} [A; a1c] go into the path
of. {2} [A; b6] place oneself in full view of s.o. Nagpaapúpa si
Kurdaping sa mga laláki samtang nalígù, The fairy stood where the boys
could look at him while he was bathing.

apura v [A; c1b2] hurry s.o., s.t. up. Mag-apura kug tuun, I’ll study
quickly. Ayaw apuraha ang draybir kay piligru tag mabanggà, You must
not tell the driver to hurry because we might have an accident. Apuraha
(iapura) ang panihápun. Gigútum na ku, Hurry the dinner up. I’m hungry.
-du(←) a wanting things done in a hurry. Apurádu kaáyu siya kay gustu
siya nga mahuman dáyun, He always rushes people up because he wants
things done right away. v [B1256] wanting to do things in a hurry.

apúru n facing, piece of cloth added to a material to allow for a hem
or any turning. v [A; a2] add, make into facing.

apus n string for spinning a top. v [a12] hit s.t. with, make into the
string for a top. Apsun (apusun) nímu ang kasing arun magsígi ug úgung,
You hit the top with the string so that it will continue to spin.

apustrupi n apostrophe.

apustǔl_1 n apostle.

apustǔl_2 n k.o. paddy rice with elongated white grains. v [A; a2]
plant apustǔl. Apustulun námù ámung basakan, We will plant our paddy to
apustǔl.

apustulis n {1} apostle. {2} persons who take part in a tableau of the
Last Supper presented on Holy Thursday.

apuwintmint n {1} appointment to a job or office. {2} date, appointment
to meet with s.o.

apuy n boil which goes deep into the flesh and develops slowly, esp.
around the knees.

apúya n pulpy, fibrous material left after extracting the juice of s.t.
Apúya sa amirul nga balanghuy, The pulpy material left after starch has
been extracted from the cassava. Apúya sa kapi, Coffee grounds. v [b6]
consider pulpy. Giapuyáhan na ku ning nilugáwa kay wà na may lanut,
This porridge is all pulp because there is no water.

apuyus n maggots. v [a4] be maggotty. Ang kusáhus giapuyus kay dílì
maáyung pagkabulad, The jerked meat is full of maggots because it was
not well-dried.

apyu n variety of celery with a thin body and light green leaves.

apyug n {1} general debility brought about as a result of sickness or
malnutrition. Human sa tákig gitaptan siya sa apyug, After his malaria
a general debility settled over him. {2} weakling. v [a4] get to be
weak. -un(→) a weak, debilitated. v [B12] get to be weak, debilitated.

árà = anáa (dialectal).

árab_1 v [AB; c1] burn s.t. with a rapid bright flame and then die
down. Ang kaláyu miárab sa kakugnan, The fire burned the cogon grass.
(→) a burning readily. Kining tabakúa barut kay arab, This is a poor
k.o. tobacco because it burns fast.

árab_2 v [AP; b5P] cut s.t. without hesitating or caring much about the
result. Kinsay nag-árab sa ákung karsunisun? Nadáut na, Who did such a
sloppy job of cutting my trousers? Now, they are ruined. Giarában
(giárab) lang nímu ang ákung buhuk, You cut my hair too short and in a
careless way.

arabi n tall breed of horse with a white coat and slender body.

arabun n k.o. special sticky rice used for the preparation of
confections.

arabya = gwayabanu.

aradur n full-grown male carabao.

árag v [BN] for leaves to fall off. Mangárag ang dáhun sa arbul ug
ting-init, The poinciana loses its leaves in the hot season.

arang {1} possible and fitting. Arang himúung upisína kining baláya,
This is a good house to make into an office. Wà kuy arang ikabáyad, I
don’t have enough to pay the debt. Dì tà nà arang isulti níya, That is
not a fitting thing to say to him. Kinsay arang mugámit niíni? Who has
the right to use this? {2} walay, kinsay — no one has, who has more
right and power. Kinsay arang sa Diyus? Who is more powerful than God?
Walay arang nákù dinhi. Ákù ning tanan, No one has more rights around
here than I have. All this belongs to me. {3} followed by exclamation:
My, how! Arang paíta! My! How bitter it is! v [B256] fit, be
accommodated. Muarang ning pirnúha ánang bangag? Will this bolt get
into that hole? Maarang ba tang tanan sa dyíp? Can all of us get into
the jeep? kun ma- please. Kun maarang ayaw ug sábà, Please don’t make
any noise. (←) = arang, 3. -an a presentable, all right. Arangan tà
siyag hitsúra apan tagabúkid, She looks all right, but she’s a mountain
girl. arang-arang, maarang-arang a a bit better. Arang-arang
(maarang-arang) ning ákung sapátus sa imúha, My shoes are a bit better
than yours. v [B] get better. Miarang-arang (naarang-arang) na ang
ákung památì, I’m feeling a bit better now. Nagkaarang-arang na ang
ílang kahimtang, Their financial situation is improving. ka-an n being
well-off financially.

árang v [A13; a12] call off a game. Arángun ta ning dáma kay sígi ku
nímung limbúngan, We’ll call off this checker game because you keep
cheating.

arangka_1 v [A; b(1)] speak seriously in order to convince. Arangkáhi
si Tasing, básig musugut, Speak seriously to Tasing. She might accept.

arangka_2, arangkǎr v [A; a12] {1} force s.t. open, by prying s.t. off.
Ug way yáwi dì arangkáhun! If there’s no key, then force it open!
{2} disassemble a machine. Siyay nag-arangkar sa makina, He was the one
who disassembled the engine.

aransil n {1} church fees. {2} schedule posting church fees.

aranya, aranyas n {1} chandelier. {2} teardrop-shaped pieces of crystal
that hang on a chandelier. {3} earring with a pendant shaped like a
teardrop. {4} k.o. hanging fancy hibiscus: Hibiscus schizopetalus.
{5} = tahuri (so called because the tahuri is teardrop-shaped).

arapal (from dápal) n a cactus similar to the prickly pear, but
thornless: Nopalea cochinellifera. v [A13] appear in distinct rounded
lumps like a cactus. Nag-arapal nga pangánud, Billowing clouds.

aráru = aláru.

áras_1 n coins used in a marriage ceremony.

áras_2 n tars produced by burning s.t. v [A13] form, produce tar. Ang
kwáku kusug muáras, The pipe collects lots of tars. -un a producing
tar. Ang byatilis arásung kahúya, The ipil-ipil is a tree that forms
lots of tars.

áras_3 = káras_1.

*arasti paN- v [A2; b6(1)] {1} venture to do s.t. which one is
incapable of doing satisfactorily. Nangarasti kag gubà niánà, ug karun
unsa, dì na ka makaúlì? You took it on yourself to take that thing
apart, and now you can’t get it back together again? {2} take a long
chance on s.t. Pangarastíhi lang siyag hangyù. Básig musugut, Try and
ask her. She might just agree.

arastri n loading, unloading, transshipping service of goods shipped
from abroad.

árat_1 a {1} for throat to be sore. {2} for citrus to have an acrid
taste. v {1} [B3N; a2b4] for the throat to be sore. Nangárat ang ákung
tutunlan sa pagsinyágit, My throat became sore from shouting. Arátan ka
gánì sa tutunlan ubhun ka, If your throat becomes sore, you are going
to catch cold. {2} [B; b6] turn out to have an acrid taste.

árat_2 n actions to impress others. Bídag árat ning tawhána, My, how
that man puts on. pa- v [A1; b(1)] do s.t. to impress s.o. Dì ku
kapaarátan níya. Wà siyay ikapaárat nákù, He can’t impress me. There’s
nothing he can do that will impress me.

arawkarya n k.o. ornamental tree similar to a fir but with bright green
needles and with fewer branches.

aray_1 = agay.

aray_2 v [AP; cP] set s.t. out before s.o. Giarayan (gipaarayan) ku
siya ug tulu ka butilya, ug mikanta dáyun, I put three bottles in front
of him, and he sang at once. Pagkáun nga giaray (gipaaray) kaníla, The
food that was set before them.

arayis n skipper of small boats. v [B156] become, make into skipper.

arbul_1 v [AN; b5] join s.o. in s.t. they have to eat, drink, ask for a
smoke. Mangarbul (muarbul) na sad nig sigarilyu, He’ll probably come
over to get a cigarette from us.

arbul_2 n the royal poinciana tree: Delonix regia.†

arbularyu n a folk doctor who deals with plants. v [B156] be, become an
arbularyu. pa- v [A1; b6(1)] have s.o. treated by an arbularyu.
Paarbularyúhi na lang nà, kay dì madá sa duktur, Let an arbularyu treat
it because a regular doctor can do nothing.

argabyádu = agrabyádu.

argabyu = agrabyu.

argardulsi = limunsítu.

argh word used in writing to represent sound of coughing.

argulya n {1} metal ring. {2} k.o. merry-go-round consisting of a wheel
mounted on a pole from which metal chains with rings at the end dangle.
To operate this contrivance the child holds on to a ring and runs
around generating momentum until he can swing around holding on to the
ring. Other children can ride by holding rings suspended from the other
chains.

argumintu n {1} arguments for or against s.t. {2} argument, discussion.
v [C; a12] argue with s.o. about s.t. Nagkaargumintu mi mahitungud sa
báyad, We had an argument about the payment. Argumintúhun nátù ni ug
dílì ta magkaúyun, We will argue this out if we can’t make each other
see eye to eye.

ari {1} here (near speaker but not near person spoken to). Ari ibutang
ang lamísa, Put the table over here. Ari na mi, We’re on our way (lit.
will be over here) now. {2} let’s go over to the following point. Karun
ari ta sa ikaduhang ánib sa libru, Now, let’s turn to the second
chapter of the book. v {1} [A2; c] come over here, bring here. Makaari
ka sa Lúnis? Can you come over on Monday? Iari nákù ang bátà kay akuy
bantay, Bring the child over here and I’ll watch (him). {2} [A13; a2]
come to get. Kinsa may mag-ari diri sa libru? Who is going to come here
to get the book? Aria diri ang libru, kay dì ku makahatud, Come here to
get the book, because I have no time to deliver it. umari ka, marika
come here (said by superiors to inferiors). Marika ra gud Pidung, Come
here, Pedong. (←)_1 = ari. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b6] wind up here. arian
v [A13] always come here. ariúnun, alaríun n things one has to come
here to get.

ári_2 = niíri. see kiri.

aríba_1 n a percentage deducted by the operator of a gambling game from
the proceeds of the winner. Bayri úsà ang aríba arun makítag pilay
limpiyu, Pay the rake-off first so we can determine the net winnings.
v [A; b6(1)] pay the owner his rake-off. Aribáhan úsà nátù ang bulangan
únà bahína ang daug, We’ll pay the arena’s percentage first before we
divide the winnings. -dur(→) {1} one who rents out gambling devices for
a percentage of the winnings. {2} one who gambles with s.o.’s gambling
equipment and pays a percentage to him. v [B16; a12] be, become a
gambling device operator.

aríba_2 v [A; c1] hoist, lift. Wà makaaríba pagdúngan ang mga
nanaglálung sa balay, The persons who were moving the house didn’t lift
it together. Iaríba (aribáha) ang láyag, Hoist the sail.

aríba_3 v [A; b] block the way. Kuháa nang nakaaríbang batu, Remove
that stone blocking the way. Giaribáhan nákù ang awtu, I blocked the
path of the car.

aribáda v [A2; c] go, put s.w. for refuge or safekeeping. Didtu mi
nakaaribáda sa simbahan pagbagyu, We took refuge in the church during
the typhoon. Ug dúnay Hapun iaribáda sa lángub ang mga babáyi, Hide the
women in the cave when the Japanese soldiers come.

arigláda = arigládu, 1.

arigládu a {1} neat, orderly. Arigládu siyang mamisti, She dresses
neatly. Arigládu na ang ímung kwartu, Your room is in order now.
{2} prepared, ready. Arigládu na ang papílis pára sa ímung byáhi, The
papers for your trip are all in order. Arigládu na ang panihápun,
Dinner is ready now. {3} in agreement. Arigládu na. Adtu ta ugmà, It’s
all arranged. We’ll go tomorrow. {3a} for a quarrel to be settled.
Arigládu na ang ílang áway, Their fight is settled now. {3b} surely;
it’s all right. Makagáwì ku sa ímung tilipunu? Arigládu, May I use your
phone? Surely. v [B1256] get neat, in order, reconciled.

ariglǎr v [A; a12] {1} arrange, put in good order. Tabángi ku
pag-ariglǎr sa ákung buhuk, Help me fix my hair. Nakaariglǎr ka na ba
sa ákung katri? Have you made my bed yet? {2a} attend to, take care of.
Wà ku kapanglaba kay nag-ariglǎr ku sa mga bátà, I wasn’t able to do
the washing because I was looking after the children. {2b} [A3; a12]
take charge of, assume responsibility for. Ariglahun ku ang mga gastus
sa ímung pag-iskuyla, I will take charge of your school expenses.
{3} [A; a12] settle a case, quarrel. Ariglaha na lang ang inyung áway,
Settle your dispute. {4a} [a12] beat s.o. up (lit. put him in order).
Ariglahun ta ning limbungan, Let’s beat this cheater up. {4b} do away
with s.o. Giingun nga ariglahun si Bituy sa mga buguy, The thugs said
they would liquidate Bitoy. {5} [AN; a12] treat an illness with
ariglǎr. n treatment in folk medicine with special water made magic by
having had a piece of paper with a magic formula (urasiyun) put into
it. The water is either drunk or applied directly over the diseased
part, and the person under this treatment is prohibited from uttering
curse words. paN- v [A2] groom oneself nicely. Nangariglǎr na siya kay
mamisíta man ni Tíba, He is grooming himself carefully because he is
going to visit Tiba.

ariglu n settlement, compromise. Maáyu pa ang ariglu nga alang-álang
kay sa burúka, A poor compromise is better than a court case. v [A;
a12] settle by arbitration. Ariglúhun mu sa kapitan sa baryu, The
barrio captain will arbitrate between you two.

arikmitik = aritmitik.

arimadur n the one who brings the fighting cocks into the arena when
they are ready.

arimar v [A; b5] enliven, help cheer up. Ang kumidiyanti mauy
mag-arimar sa dúlà, The comedian brings a note of comedy to the play.
Arimáha (arimáhi) ang subù nímung inahan, Cheer up your mother because
she is sad.

arína = harína.

arindu n lease on land or s.t. that produces an income. Ang arindu sa
ímung yútà mulungtad ug lima ka túig, The lease on your land will last
for five years. Mil písus ra ang arindu sa ákung yútà pára lima ka
túig, The lease on my land is a thousand pesos for five years. v [A;
b(1)] lease. Giarindúhan ku ang ílang panágat, I leased their fishing
equipment.

aringkil n clattering sound. Ang aringkil sa mga táru, The clattering
of the cans. v [A] clatter, clink. Miaringkil ang mga butilya dihang
gipamakling sa iring, The bottles clattered when the cat knocked them
over.

arinúla n chamber pot. v [b6] provide with a chamber pot.

*arisgǎr paN- v [A; b6] try s.t. regardless of the consequences.
Mangarisgǎr kug panágat bisag dakù ang balud, I will venture out to sea
even though there are big waves. Nagpangarisgǎr siyag tindug bisag lúya
pa ang láwas, He’s trying bravely to get up even though his body is
weak. arisgádu a daring, bold. Ug arisgádu ka pa, mulátay ka sa usa ka
bulus kawáyan, If you are daring, you will cross over on a bamboo pole.
v [B12] become daring.

aristǎr v [A; a12] put under arrest. Aristahun ta ka, I’ll put you
under arrest. aristádu be under arrest. Aristádu ka. Ayawg líhuk,
You’re under arrest. Don’t move. v [B1256] be arrested. Kun maaristádu
ka gánì, ayaw giyud pagsúkul, If you are ever arrested, don’t resist.

*aristu mandamyintu di- warrant of arrest.

aristukrata a snooty, snobbish in behavior. v [B12; b6] become
condescending, snooty.

árit (from tíra) v [AC; a2b2] have sexual intercourse (slang).
Kuyugkúyug pa sa ímung trátu ug magabíi hing-aritan unyà ka, Keep going
with that boy at night, and you’re going to wind up in bed with him.†

arítis = ariyus.

aritmitik n arithmetic. v [A2; a12] figure things out. Maáyung
muaritmitik ning bat-ána, swítung way Santa Kláwus, This child figures
things out fast. He knows there is no Santa Claus.

aritmitika, aritmitiku = aritmitik.

arítus = ariyus.

aríya_1 v {1} [A; b7c1] lower. Ariyáhi ang písì ug dupa, Pay out a
fathom of rope. Iaríya (ariyáha) na ang láyag, Lower the sail. {2} [A;
c] {2a} unload cargo. Iaríya na ang mga kargang humay, The rice cargo
will be unloaded now. {2b} throw overboard. Iaríya tanang mga karga
arun masalbar ta, Throw the cargo overboard so that we may be saved.
{3} [a2] come out, be released. Miaríya na ang tumatub, The bag of
waters has broken. {4} [A; c] dispose of s.t. by sale. Iaríya dáyun ang
abut inigprisyu, Sell the produce at once when the price rises. {5} [A;
c] move from one place to another. Muaríya mi íning baláya kay mahal ug
ábang, We will move from this house because the rent is too high.†

aríya_2 v [A; b(1)] beat up thoroughly or rape. Giariyáhan ang impurmir
sa mga ismaglir, The smugglers mauled the informer.

ariyádu timber (the tree is falling)!

ariyus n {1} earrings. {2} seal made of metal fastened to s.t. with
wire which locks it. v [A; a] {1} put on, make into earrings. Kinsay
nag-ariyus sa bátà? Who put earrings on the child? {2} put a seal on
s.t. Dì mahilabtan ang kuntadur kay giariyúsan, Nobody can tamper with
the meter because it has a seal on it. paN- v [A2] wear earrings. Ang
laláki karun mangaríyus na, Men are wearing earrings these days.

ark word used in writing to represent sound of infliction of pain.

arka n {1} Noah’s ark. {2} ark of the covenant. v [A; a] make, make
into the ark.

arkabála = alkabála.

arkanghil n archangel. Si San Migil Arkanghil, St. Michael the
Archangel.

arkaydi = alkaldi.

arkila v [AN; b] rent. Inarkilahan lang kining baláya, We’re just
renting this house. n amount of rent. Pilay arkila sa dyíp? How much is
the rent for the jeep?

arkitiktu n architect. v [B156; a12] become, make into an architect.
-ra n architecture course, subject.

arku n {1} arch placed over a thoroughfare to commemorate s.t. {2} arc.
v [A13; a12b(1)] {1} make, put an arch s.w. {2} [A] form an arc. Miarku
ang ági sa kwítis, The fireworks formed an arch.

arkuhul = alkuhul.

arkus = arku.

armáda n armada.

armádu aarmed. Usa ka grúpung armádu ang mitúlis sa bálu, An armed
group robbed the widow. v [B1256] be, become armed.

armamintu n armament. Lumbà sa armamintu, Armament race.

armar v [A; c] set up s.t. folded or in pieces, or set s.t. in its
proper place so it may be operated. Nag-armar siya sa ulutáwan, He is
setting up the ironing board. Nag-armar mig mga kanyun líbut sa planta,
We emplaced cannons around the plant. Ang bumba sa túbig iarmar duul sa
kanal, Emplace the water pump near the canal.

armas n {1} arms, weapon. {2} penis (humorous euphemism). — dimánu
bladed weapons. — dipuygu firearms.

armatyur n armature of an electric motor or generator. v [b(1)] put the
armature on a motor.

armi n army.

armikat n crew cut. pa- v [A13] get a crew cut. Magpaarmikat ku kay
mag-ar-utísi mi ugmà, I will get a crew cut because we have ROTC
tomorrow.

armirul = almirul.

armistisyu n armistice. v [A1; b(1)] have an armistice. Mag-armistisyu
sila sa Bitnam, They will have an armistice in Viet Nam.

armunyum, armunyun n harmonium. v [AN13] play the harmonium.

arníbal = aníbal.

arnika_1 n = anghilika.

arnika_2 n arnica. tintúra — tincture of arnica.

arnis v {1} [A; b(1)] throw s.o. off balance by tripping or shoving. Ug
ímung arnísan ang ímung kadúlà mapáwul ka, It’s a foul if you trip your
fellow player. {2} [C; c3] fence using sticks. n fencing with sticks.

arpa = alpa.

arpilir, arpiril = alpilir.

arsa = alsa.

arsii n RCA, abbreviation for the Philippine Government Rice and Corn
Administration. Bugas arsii, Rice from the RCA.

arsubispu n archbishop. v [B16; a12] be, make into an archbishop.
arsubispádu n archbishopric.

art. n abbreviation for artikulu.

artal = altar.

arti n art. Arti sa pamálak, Art of poetry. may, walay — be (not be)
artistic. May arti siyang mukanta, She sings artfully. a {1} affected.
Arti kaáyu nga manulti ning buánga, mu rag unsay nakamauhan, The fool
speaks in an affected way. You’d think he knew s.t. {2} affected in
dress. Pastilang artíhang mamisti ning bayhána, My! That woman sure
does overdress. v [B3N; a2] {1} for speech or behavior to be affected.
{2} overdress, have too much make-up on. {3} [A23] put on an act. Maáyu
muarti, makalingaw sa naguul, He puts on a good act which could
entertain people who are sad. artiarti v [A; b6] do s.t. unessential
and unnecessary just to put on a big show. Tuhi, muartiarti pa nà siyag
pamaláyi bísag dúgay na nílang púyù, Phooey, he puts on a show of
asking for the girl’s hand, as if they hadn’t already been living
together for a long time. n action of doing unnecessary things just for
show. Ug náay mangasáwa nákù, minyù dáyun sa way daghang artiarti, If
s.o. asks me to marry him, I’ll say yes, without fuss and bother. pa-
v [A; b6] make a show of doing s.t. Magpaarti silag hulgà nímu, piru
ayawg tagda, They will put a big show of threatening you, but pay no
attention. paN- n things one wears for vanity’s sake. Nangáyù siyag
lipstik, ariyus ug uban pang mga pangarti, She asked for lipstick,
earrings, and other vanities. di- a artistic. Panulat nga diarti,
Artistic writings.

artikulu n {1} article, a piece published. {2} article of a law.

artiliyiríya n artillery.

artipisyal a {1} artificial, affected and not natural. Dalágang
syudadnun nga púlus artipisyal ang panglihuk, City girls that always
put on. {2} not naturally occurring, contrived. Ang kangihit sa humay
artipisyal dílì tungud sa húlaw, The scarcity of rice is artificial and
not due to the drought. v [B; a12] become, make artificial.

artista n actor, actress. v [B15; a12] be, become an actor. Gustu
siyang mag-artista sa Haliwud, She wants to become an actress in
Hollywood. -in- v [A; a1] put on an act. Nag-inartista siyag hangyù,
He’s putting on an act while he is asking for it.

*artisyánu púsu — artesian well.

*árù ka- v [A13] be in varied profusion. Nagkaárù ang mga pagkáun nga
giaray, Food was set before them in lavish profusion. pa- v {1} [A; c]
ask for s.t. to one’s heart’s desire. Nagpaárù na sad siya sa mga
pahindik, She is asking for cosmetics to her heart’s desire. {2} [A;
c1] lavish on s.o. to his heart’s content. Gipaarúan na lang siyag
unsay gustu, They gave him whatever he wanted to his heart’s content.

aruk n money (slang). -an a having money (slang).

arul v {1} [A3; b6] shave the hair off the head. Giarulan ang
binilanggung patyunun, The condemned prisoner had his hair shaved off.
{2} [BN; b6] lose hair, feathers. Muarul (mangarul) ang manuk ihás ug
mating-init, Wild chickens shed their feathers in the hot season.

arúma n spiny shrub or small tree similar to ipil-ipil, used for
firewood. Said to be the plant from which Christ’s crown of thorns was
made: Acacia farnesiana.

arun_1 in order to. Mupaúlì siya arun pag-utaw (nga mangutaw), She is
going home to iron. kay — in order to, so that. Magtígum ku kay arun
makapalit kug awtu, I will save so that I can buy a car. — ingnun in
order to be said, to be mistaken for. Nagpulupangutána siya arun ingnun
walà masáyud, He keeps asking questions so they will think he does not
know. pa-, paka- ingnun v [A13] make false pretenses. Adtu siya
magpakaarun-ingnun (magpaarun-ingnun) nga dakung táwu, There he goes
making pretenses that he is an important person. paarun-árun v [A13] do
s.t. under pretenses. Nagpaarun-árun siya ug diskursu bísan ug dílì
siya kamau, He made pretensions of delivering a speech though he
doesn’t know how.

arun_2 (from karun) {1} particle calling s.o.’s attention when he is
being spoken to. Arun, Pidru, gitawag ka, Hey, Pedro! S.o. is calling
you! {2} particle introducing a new subject. Arun, muadtu ka sa
Amirika? Now, are you going to America?

árun see karun.

arunsa v {1} [A; c] move, move s.t. over. Iarunsa ngari ang kahun, Move
the box this way. {2} [B] advance, progress. Muarunsa ang táwu ug
magkúgi, A person who works hard will prosper. {3} [b7c1] advance, move
s.t. ahead in time. Arunsáhun (iarunsa, arunsáhan) nátù ang adlaw sa
kasal, Let us advance the date of the marriage. {4} [B] become more and
more. Nag-arunsa siya pagkaabusáda, She is getting more and more
abusive. {5} [APB; b7c1] raise, rise. Muabut na ang bag-u nátung isták,
mag-arunsa (magpaarunsa) ta sa prisyu, When the new stock arrives,
let’s raise the price. Muarunsa ang prisyu sa humay, The price of rice
will rise. n progress, advancement. Gamay ang arunsa sa íyang swildu,
He received a very small increase in pay.

arus_1 v [A; a] cut a growth short: hair, grass, hedge; strip the
leaves, fruits, or flowers from a plant. Kinsay miarus sa mga rúsas?
Who picked all of the roses? Naarus ang íyang kílay dihang mikalit
pagsiláub ang kaláyu, Her eyebrow was singed off when the flame
suddenly flared up. Giarusan ku siya kay gikutu, I cut her hair short
because she has lice.

*arus_2 — ala balinsiyána n Arroz a la Valenciana. — kaldu n rice
porridge with chicken. — kun kamarun n rice with shrimp. v [A] prepare
a rice dish.

ar-utísi n ROTC. v [A] hold, attend ROTC. Dílì ku muar-utísi rung hápun
kay sakit ákung tiil, I will not attend ROTC drill this afternoon
because my foot hurts. Mag-ar-utísi ba ta ugmà? Will we have ROTC
tomorrow?

aruwákà n {1} k.o. ornamental plant with flowers that bloom at
midnight. {2} prostitute. v [B; b6] become a prostitute.

aruy = agay.

arya = aríya.

aryat a for women to be vain, choosy, affected, and coquettish. v [B1N;
b6] be aryat. Nangaryat na sad ang byúda, The widow is putting on airs.
-in- v [B4; a] act in a vain, affected way. Kuntra ku giyud nang
mag-inaryat ug sinultihan, How I hate those women that are affected in
their speech.

aryindu = arindu.

asa v [A3; b6] pay attention to, take s.o.’s word or behavior
seriously. Ayawg ashi (asahi) ang sulti sa hubug, Don’t take a drunk’s
words seriously.

ása_1 {1} where? (future). Ása ka muiskuyla? Where will you go to
school? {1a} going where? Ása ka? Where are you going? {2} which (of
several) will... Ása kang siníha mutan-aw? Which movie will you go to
see? {3} — [verb] how could [so-and-so] ever happen? Ása gud siya mutúu
nímu? How could she ever believe you? {4} (short for mahi-) What ever
happened to...? Ása na man tung ákung bulpin? Now, where did my pen go
to? {5} such-and-such a thing is likely to be there in due time. Ása
man nang bisiklítag madakù ka, It’ll be time enough to get a bicycle
when you get big. (Lit. Where will your bicycle be when you grow up.)
Ayaw pangulitáwu. Ása ra man nà ug matituládu ka, Don’t propose yet.
She’ll still be there (lit. where will she be) after you have
graduated. Ása ka ra man unyà. Magkítà ra ta, You’ll be right there
(where I can get you). We’ll meet again some day. i- what can you do
with, of what use will it be? Iása man nà nímung mga dáang papil? What
good are those old papers to you? ‘Gustu ka?’—‘Iása.’ ‘Do you want it?’
‘No. What good is it to me?’ ma- {1} = ása, 5. {2} = mahi-. hi-/ha-
v [B1256] where did/will it wind up at. Bísag mahiása ku, mabúhì,
Wherever I wind up, I can survive.

ása_2 v [A; b5] keep doing s.t. Inay gipahílum miása hinúun, We told
her to stop crying, but she kept on. Wà kay búhat nga mahímù ug mag-ása
kag hinuktuk, You won’t accomplish anything if you keep brooding.
Asáhan (asáhun) bítaw námù ug tan-aw, midukù lagi, We kept staring at
her until she finally bowed her head.

ása_3 v [ab(1)] hope. Makaása ba mi sa ímung pagbálik? Can we hope for
your return? Si Dun Magnu ang ílang giasáhan nga muluwas kaníla, They
hoped Don Magno would save them.

asádu a roasted, broiled rare. v [B1256; a12] roast, broil rare. Ayawg
lutúa, asadúha lang, Don’t cook it through. Just broil it rare.

asal v [A; a] roast over hot coals (not said of sea food). Kinsay
nag-asal íni nga kagubkub man? Who roasted this pig that it is so
crisp? aslunun, alaslun n a pig of the size right for roasting. -in-
n roast pig.

asamblíya n the assembly, the lawmaking body of the Philippine
Commonwealth.

as-as a for leaves to be very dry. v [B2; a12P] for leaves to become
very dry. Nagkaas-as ang patayng dáhun nga nabulad, The leaves are
getting dried out well under the sun.

asáwa n wife. — sa banig good-for-nothing wife (lit. good only in bed).
v [A123S; a3] happen to get for a wife, can marry. Nakaasawa siyag
iridíra, He got an heiress for a wife. Maasáwa ku siya, I can marry
her. paN- v [A1; a12] for men to get married. Dì ku siya pangasaw-un, I
refuse to marry her. pa-, papaN- v [c4] be married off to. Ipaasáwa
(ipapangasáwa) ba gud siya nákù ánang hubug? Would I allow her to marry
that drunk? maN-l- n bridegroom-to-be. igpaN-r-(→) n {1} s.t. used for
marriage. Ang kang Lúlit ang gugma igpapangasawa, As far as Lolet was
concerned love (i.e. sex) was s.t. reserved for marriage. Igpapangasawa
ning bábuy, This pig is to be slaughtered at his wedding. {2} desirous
of getting married. Igpapangasawa na kaáyu ang ákung ginháwa, I am very
ready to get married. pangasaw-unun, pangalasaw-un wife-to-be.†

asayti n lubricating oil. v [A1; b] apply lubricating oil. Asaytíhig
diyútay arun dílì muígut, Apply a little lubricating oil so that it
won’t squeak. — dibakalaw cod liver oil. — dikastur castor oil. —
diulíbu olive oil.

asbistus n asbestos. v [b(1)] put asbestos sheets on s.t.

asdang v [A; a] move forward to attack, face in battle. Asdángun ta ang
mga Hapun, We will attack the Japanese. n advance, attack.

asgad a very salty. v [B; a] become salty. Ug asin sa lawlaw iasgad,
mudúgang sa lamì ug muasgad gihápun ang sabaw, If you salt the soup
with fish salt, the soup will become more delicious and get salty at
the same time. -in- n salt pork.

ási {1} expression needling a person for pretending. Ási, patulugtúlug.
Bákun na dihà, Ha, pretending to sleep, are you? Get up! Ási,
padilìdílì, apan gustu uruy, Ha, you pretend you don’t want any, but
you do. {2} chiding a person jokingly for s.t. one notices for the
first time. Ási, bag-u ta run ug sapátus, My! I see we have new shoes
today. Ási, kúyug man lagi ka, Ah, I see you are going out with him!
{3} chiding a person for acting beyond his station. Ási, pasugùsúgù pa
man siya nákù! Hey! Where do you get off ordering me around! asiasi
v [A; b5] {1} rush in to do s.t. without thought. Dì ni maáyung
asiasihung (asiasihang) trabahúa, This isn’t the sort of thing you
should rush in to do without thinking. {2} presume to do s.t., taking a
person for granted. Nag-asiasi ka lang ug kúhà sa ákung mangga sa way
pupananghid nákù, You presumed to take a mango without bothering to ask
my permission. Dì nà nímu maasiasing tawhána, He isn’t the sort of man
you can take for granted (rush into doing anything you want him to do
on the spur of the moment). {3} [AP; b5] presume to do s.t. one cannot
do. Nag-asiasi (nagpaasiasi) ka mang mag-istrungkar íning makinilya. Na
karun, iúlì, You presumed to take the typewriter apart. Now let’s see
you put it back together. manggiasiasihun, maasiasihun, asiasihun
a presumptuous, taking for granted.

asidu n acid. Kining tambála makalínis sa asidu, This medicine can
dissolve the acid. v [b(1)] apply acid to s.t. Asiduhi ang labábu,
Apply acid to the wash bowl.

asikásu v [A; a12] {1} pay attention to. Wà na lang asikasúhi níya ang
mga biaybíay, He just paid no attention to the words of derision.
{2} attend to. Wà siya mag-asikásu sa íyang pamisti, She didn’t pay
attention to her appearance. Dì ku makaasikásu sa ákung papílis, I
cannot attend to my papers. Asikasúha ang mga bisíta, Tend to the
visitors. {3} make an issue out of s.t. Ug mag-asikásu ka ánang
diyútayng tabì, If you make an issue out of that small gossip.

asiláda n a girl student who works for her board and lodging in a
dormitory run by nuns. v [B16; a12] be an asiláda. Nakaiskuyla ku kay
nag-asiláda man ku, I was able to study because I had a job in a
dormitory.

asílu n asylum for orphans, destitute people.

asíman = ulasíman.

asin n salt. walay — without substance, unbelievable. Walay asin ang
íyang mga púlung, His words cannot be believed. v {1} [A] form salt.
Muasin ang túbig sa dágat ug itúsun, Sea water forms salt if you boil
it. {2} [A; b(1)] make salt. Nag-asin siya, He’s making salt. {3} [A;
a12] preserve food with salt. Asinun ta ning karni, Let’s preserve this
meat with salt. {4} [A; b(1)] season with salt. Asini ang sabaw, Put
salt in the soup. -in- n food preserved in salt. -l-an(←) n salt
factory. pang-an(←) n salt beds.

asin-ásin n rice or corn cooked to a mushy consistency. v [A; a] boil
rice or corn grits soft, but not watery. Asin-asína ang sampuraduhun,
Cook the rice and chocolate into a pudding.

asinda n plantation. asindíru n plantation owner. v [B56] become a
plantation owner.†

asinsiyun n Ascension Day.

asinsu v [A; a12] improve economically. Dílì ka makaasinsu ánang
panginabuhía, You can not better yourself financially in that line of
work. n improvement in economic situation. Walay asinsu kining
lungsúra, This town hasn’t shown any improvement.

*as-ip pa- v [A1; b(1)] pretend to be what one is not. Magpaas-ip bayà
siyang dátù unyà pubri diay, She is pretending to be well-off although
she is poor.

asir v {1} [A2] come out successfully. Sulayi lang ning tambála básig
muasir, Just try this medicine. It might be effective. {2} [AN; c1]
assert. Kinahanglan giyud nga mangasir ka sa ímung katungud sa
pagkaasáwa, You’ve got to assert your rights as a wife. pa- [A; c]
prove s.t. by making it come out. Ipaasir sab ang ímung pagkaduktur,
dílì kay dukturduktur lang, Prove to them that you are a genuine
doctor, not just a quack.

asíras n sidewalk. v [A1; b(1)] put a sidewalk. Maáyung asirásan ang
kílid sa kalyi, It’d be good to put a sidewalk at the side of the
street.

asiráwu a for a steel to be mild-tempered, soft. Asiráwu nang
kutsilyúha kay dalì rang mahábul, That knife is mild-tempered because
it easily gets dull. v [B12; a12] for steel to come out mild-tempered.†

asíru n {1} steel. {2} steel wire leader of fishlines. v [A13; b(1)]
attach a steel wire leader.

asistinsiya n financial assistance given in social or civic programs.

asistǐr v [A; c] {1} give aid in doing work. Muasistir sila sa pagtúkud
sa balay, They will help build the house. {2} assist at a mass.†

asíti = asayti.

asitíra n oil can. v [a12] make into an oil can.

asitun n acetone. v [b(1)] put or apply acetone. Asitunan lag diyútay
ug mahuswà ang kútiks, Just apply a little acetone on it, and the nail
polish will come off.

aslay v [A3P; b6] splash up, for grains to bounce up. Ayawg ibundak ang
baldi kay muaslay ang túbig, Don’t bang the pail down because the water
will splash out. Ang humay nag-aslay tungud sa ímung linubkan, The way
you are pounding it is making the rice fly up.

aslum a {1} sour. {2} cross, sour in facial expression. v {1} [B; a12]
be, become sour. Way kaláki ang tubà nga nag-aslum lang, The palm toddy
is no good because it is sour. Aslúmun nátù ang kahiláda, Let’s make
the lemonade good and sour. {2} [BN; a12] be sour-faced. Mangaslum
dáyun íyang nawung ug badlúngun siya, Her face gets a sour expression
if she is told to stop doing s.t.

asnat v [A; a1] lift s.t. heavy. Asnáta ang lamísa arun dì magasgas ang
salug, Lift the table when you carry it so you don’t scratch the floor.

asnu n ass.

aspaltu n asphalt. v [A; a12] apply asphalt. Aspaltúhun ang
baskitbulan, The basketball court will be asphalted. aspaltádu a paved
with asphalt.

asparagus n asparagus. — irmúsu ornamental herb with leaves like
asparagus.

aspíra ultima n = mansanilya.

aspiranti n aspirant for a position. v [B] become an aspirant. Dì ku
mag-aspiranti sa pagkaprisidinti kay hikuntrahan ta, I don’t want to be
a candidate for president because I will make enemies.

aspirasiyun n aspiration. v [b(1)] aspire. Ang pagkaduktur mauy íyang
giaspirasyunan, He aspired to be a doctor.

aspirin, aspirína n aspirin.

asta = hasta.

astri n ash tray. v [a12] make into an ash tray.

astrunawta n astronaut.

astrunumíya n astronomy.

astrunumu n astronomer. v [B1256; a12] be, become an astronomer.

astrunut n astronaut. v [B1256; a12] be, become an astronaut.

asu n {1} smoke. Way asu nga makumkum, You can’t hide smoke in your
fist. (No secret can be kept for long.) {2} fumes. v {1} [A] give off
smoke, fumes. Ngánung nag-asu man ang dapug? Why is the hearth giving
off smoke? {2} [b4] be in path of smoke. Ayawg dáub dihà kay maasuhan
mi diri, Don’t build a fire there because we’re right in the path of
the smoke. {3} [B1246] go up in smoke, be for naught. Ang kwartang
gigugul nímu naasu lang, The money you invested was for naught. pa-
v [A; b6] fumigate, apply smoke to plants to make them bear. Paasuhi
ang mangga arun mamúwak, Smoke the mango tree so it will bloom. asuasu
v {1} [A] give off smoke continuously. {2} [A3; b(1)] come fast and
thick, in rapid succession. Miasuasu ang íyang kúmù, The blows from his
fists came fast and furiously. alasúhan a exposed to smoke. n chimney.

ásud v {1} [A2C; ac] for two or more people to pound cereal in mortar
together and in synchronization. Asúra (iásud) ang mga lubuk, Do your
pounding alternately—when one lifts, the other comes down. {2} [A13;
b(1)] come one after another in rapid succession, like several people
pounding rice on one pestle. Nag-ásud ang pangutána sa mga piryudista,
The newspapermen’s questions came in rapid succession. Giasúran ug
haluk ang bátà sa mga dalága, The girls smothered the baby with kisses.
asud-asud v [A13; b(1)] = ásud, 2.

asúgi n head of a match.

asúkal = asúkar.

asúkar n refined sugar. v {1} [A13B23] make into, become sugar. Ang
sintral nag-asúkar sa tubu, The mill is making refined sugar. Ug
muasúkar na ang binúkal nga dugà, When the boiled juice forms sugar.
{2} [c] put sugar into s.t. Giasukaran ba nímu ang kapi? Have you put
sugar in the coffee? asukaríra n sugar container for table use.

asul a blue. — marína, marínu navy blue. v [BN; a1] be blue. Nag-asul
ang lawud, The deep part of the sea looks blue.

asunting n k.o. erect branching shrub, wild but occasionally planted as
ornamental. The leaves are used in treating skin fungi: Cassia alata.

asuntu n {1} court case. {2} matter, concern to be reckoned with.
Asuntu sa kasingkásing, A matter of the heart. v [C2; a12] have a court
case. Asuntúhun pa ba nátù kini nga gamay ra man? Shall we make a court
case out of this small matter?

asupli n sulphur. v [b6] put sulphur on s.t. Asuplíhan kunu nang núka,
Put sulphur on the sores.

asupri = asupli.

asus = hisus, 2.

asusasiyun n association, organization.

asusíluy n k.o. black and white songbird, the magpie robin: Copsychus
saularis.

asusína = asusínas, 1.

asusínas n {1} k.o. bulbous ornamental plant with spikes of fragrant
white flowers, borne in pairs: Polianthes tuberosa. {2} k.o. dried
banana blossoms used as a spice. v [b6] spice with banana blossoms.

asusisyun = asusasiyun.

asusyit v [A2C12; b(1)] associate with people. Maáyu nà siyang datúa
kay muasusyit (makig-asusyit) sa mga pubri, That rich man is a fine man
because he associates with the poor. n associate. — iditur associate
editor.

asutíya n open porch. Adtu mi manglingkud sa asutíya ug walay ulan, We
sit on the porch when it doesn’t rain. v [A13; b6] construct, attach an
open porch.

asúus = alasúus.

ásuy v [A; c1] tell, relate. Lisud asúyun (iásuy) ang ákung kaági, It
is hard to relate my experiences. Památì, asúyan ta kag isturya,
Listen, I’ll tell you a story. Ang naásuy nga tigúlang, The old man I
mentioned just now. n story, narration. hiN- n conversation. Ang ílang
hingásuy milungtad sa gabíi, Their conversation lasted into the night.
v [A1; b6] engage in story-telling. Naghingásuy siya sa kaági níya sa
gíra, He was telling stories about his experiences in the war. -l-un
a be a long story.

aswang = unglù.

aswas (from asáwa) wife (slang).

aswat v {1} [A; a1] lift s.t. heavy. Aswáta ang malíta, Pick up the
suitcase. {2} [A12; a12] lift part of one’s body. Aswáta ímung tiil bi,
Please lift your foot.

Asya n Asia.

asyinda n {1} plantation. {2} department of finance in government.
v [a12] make into a plantation. Asyindáhun ug tubu ang yútà, Turn the
land into a sugar plantation.

asyíti = asayti.

asyus a finicky, fussy. Asyus kaáyu siya. Dì mukáun ug munggus, dì
muhigdag salug, magsingárig ílis, He’s terribly finicky: he doesn’t eat
beans, won’t sleep on the floor, and keeps changing clothes. paN-
v {1} [A] be overly finicky. {2} [A2] dress up. Nangasyus man ta run,
náa bay mamisíta? We are all dressed up today, aren’t we? Is s.o.
coming over?

asyúsa = asyúsu, (female).

asyúsu a {1} = asyus. {2} choosy about whom one is friendly with.
Asyúsu kaáyu. Dì na mutagad námù, He’s very hoity-toity. He doesn’t
notice us any more. v [B12; b6] become finicky or choosy.

asyútis n k.o. small tree, the seeds of which produce a reddish-brown
dye: Bixa orellana.

át = alat.

átà n ink of squids and similar creatures. wà nay — be out of semen
(lit. ink). Magminyù pa giyud ang tigúwang bisag wà nay átà, The old
man is going to marry again, even though his semen is all dried up.
v [B1456] be black as ink. Nag-átà ang kagabhíun, The night was
pitch-dark. ka- v [A13] get ink from the squid all over oneself.
Nagkaátà ang ímung dintru, You got ink from the squid all over your
shirt.

átab_1 v [A13] for the mouth to move vigorously in eating or talking.
Nag-átab ang ímung bàbà ug úsap sa mani, Your mouth is moving
vigorously chewing peanuts. pa- v [A1; b(1)] engage in idle talk.
Nagpaátab siya ug tabì nga ikaw pinaangkan, He spread the word around
that you are an illegitimate child. Ug paatában ka gánì sa íyang
pagkadátù, If he gives you big talk about his being rich. pasi-,
pasi-(→) v [A; c] boast. Nagpasiátab siyang daghang trátu, He is
boasting that he has lots of girl friends.

átab_2 (from bátà) n girl friend (slang). v [A12] get a girl friend.
Makaátab kahà ning hitsúra ku? Do you think s.o. with my face can get a
girl friend?

atábay n open well. v [A3S; b6] dig a well.

átad v [A13; b(1)] be spread in profuse disarray. Wà makítà ang yútà
nga giatáran sa mga dáhun, You couldn’t see the ground for all the
leaves scattered over it.

atádu = atáru.

atáhu = muhun.

átak v {1} [APB3(1); a] for s.t. which is of some weight and attached
to s.t. to fall off. Ug muátak (mupaátak) kug búnga, bantayig ása
tugdun, If I knock one down, watch where it lands. Naátak sa kaínit ang
mga tuytuy, The buds fell off the tree because of the heat. {2} [B12;
b8] for the eyes to bulge out, a symptom of a fatal disease caused by
sorcery. Namatay siya. Naatákan man sa mata, He died because he got the
bulging eye disease.

atakar v [A2; a12] {1} for a sickness to attack one. {2} dare to
approach s.o. Unyà na atakara ug báli kun maáyug buut, Approach him for
a cash advance later when he’s in a good mood.

atáki v {1} [A; a12] attack, assault. Atakíhun nátù ang Hapun, We will
attack the Japanese. {2} [A; a12b2] attack s.o. personally. Ug
manuburnu ka atakíhun ka sa mga piryudista, If you give bribes, the
newspapers will attack you. {3} [a12] be attacked by a sickness.
Giatáki sa kasingkásing si Pápa, Dad had a heart attack. n {1} attack,
assault on s.t. {2} attack of a disease. — silibrǎr n cerebral
thrombosis.

atáman v [A; a3] manage to keep up with a large quantity. Dì na
maatáman ang daghang asayinmint, I can’t keep up with all the
assignments.

atang v {1} [A; b(1)] watch, but not carefully, keep an eye on. Atngi
(atangi) ang linung-ag arun dílì muáwas, Keep an eye on the rice so it
won’t boil over. {2} [A; b(1)] watch for s.t. or s.o. to pass. Ímu tang
atngan ang trák arun makasakay ta, You should watch for the bus so that
we can get on. (←)_1 [A; b(1)] ambush. Ang mga girilya nag-átang sa mga
Hapun, The guerillas are ambushing the Japanese. {3} [A2N] meet one’s
girl friend at her place of work or study to accompany her. Túa siya
nangátang sa íyang trátu, There he is, waiting for his girl friend to
bring her home. n ambush.

átang_2 n shelf set next to a stove at the same height with it to hold
the pots and pans. Haúna ang tinúla ug ibutang sa átang, Take the fish
stew off the stove and put it on the sideboard. v [A13; a12b(1)] put a
sideboard next to a stove.

atáru v [A; a2] make s.t. into portions for sale. Atarúha sa tagdus
písus ang bábuy, Cut the pork into pieces and put them together into
portions worth two pesos each. n a portion for sale. Ang tabákù
tagdiyis ang atáru, The tobacco leaves are ten cents a bundle.

átas v {1} [B126] be sickly, retarded in growth after being made to do
s.t. before reaching the proper age. Maátas ang baktin kun sayung
lutásun, The piglet will be stunted if you wean it prematurely. {2} [A;
a12] wear out a razor blade. (→) a worn out dull. v [B] get worn out.
Muatas ang labáha, The razor will get dull.

at-at_1 v {1} [A; a] make an opening by pushing two sides apart. Midakù
ang lungag sa kural kay íya mang giat-at ang alambri, There is a big
hole in the fence because he pushed the wire strands apart. {2} [A; c1]
bring s.t. to public knowledge by telling the whole story. At-átun
(iat-at) ku nang tanang líhuk nímu ngadtu ni Tátay, I’ll tell Father
everything you did. {3} [AB12; a] find out in complete detail, be found
out. Ang ditiktib miat-at sa hinungdan sa súnug, The detective
investigated in detail the cause of the fire. Nagkaat-at na ang
mistiryu sa íyang pagkawā̀, The mystery of her disappearance is
gradually coming to light.

at-at_2 = ak-ak.

atatalu = hantatalu.

atay n {1} liver. {2} liver as the seat of emotions. makapakitbì,
makapakúlù sa — makes the blood curdle. makapadakù sa — make s.t. go to
one’s head. {3} bàbà sa — n pit of the stomach. v [a1] hit in the
liver. Giatay siya pagdunggab, He was stabbed in the liver.

atay-átay n {1} pit of the stomach. {2} the hollow or fleshy part of
the palm and its analogue in the foot. Natunuk siya sa atay-átay sa
íyang tiil, He got a thorn in the arch of his sole. {3} k.o. ornamental
shrub with mottled red or green elliptic leaves and smooth margins:
Graptophyllum pictum. v [A3; a12] be hit on the solar plexus or on the
fleshy part of the palm or sole of the foot.†

átay n illness of chicken. v [a12] {1} be affected with chicken
cholera. Walà ba atáya ang inyung manuk? Are not your chickens affected
with chicken cholera? Atáyun ka untà, Why don’t you drop dead? {2} [a4]
be, act in a way that arouses annoyance and disapproval. Giátay nang
bayhána. Miápas na pud, That damn woman. She followed me again.
{2a} gi- Damn! Giátay, mabdus na sad ku! Damn, I’m pregnant again!
-l-un, -unun a susceptible to chicken cholera.

atbang (from atubang) across, opposite. Ang íla atbang sa ámù, Their
place is across from ours. — sa hángin where one can get the full
benefit of the breeze. v [C; ac] {1} be in the place across. Mag-atbang
ang ílang balay, Their houses are across from each other. Atbángun ta
silag lingkud, Let’s have them sit opposite each other. {2} be
opponents. Atbángan ta ka bísag unsay partídu mu, I’ll be your opponent
whatever your party is. pa- v [A; b(1)] go to a place opposite s.o. so
he can see you. Gipaatbángan ni Kurding ang gwápung laláki, Cording
took a seat opposite the handsome young man. ka- n opponent, rival.
Kinsay ímung kaatbang sa tínis, sa pangulitáwu níya? Who is your
opponent in tennis, rival in courting her?

atbu v [A; b6P] {1} for emotions to surge up and burst forth. Miatbu
ang ákung kalípay, My heart leaped with happiness. Bantay. Hiatbuhan ka
unyà sa ákung kasukù, Watch out. I’ll blow up in anger at you. {2} for
very fine particles to fly up and be scattered in the air. Nag-atbu ang
duldul sa unlan, The kapok flew out of the pillow. Giatbúhan
(gipaatbúhan) lang ku níya sa asu. Wà giyud mutubag, He just blew smoke
in my face. He didn’t reply at all.

atbug v [A; b(1)] {1} fly up in thick quantities. Miatbug ang lángaw
pag-itsa nákù sa basúra, The flies rose in a swarm when I threw out the
garbage. {2} for emotions to burst forth.

athag = kulangkulang. see kúlang.

atibás = tibalas.

átik (from bulátik) a show-off, boastful. v [AP; b6] get s.t. from s.o.
by flattery or other verbal chicanery. Kahibáwu siyang muátik
(mupaátik) ni Lúla, He’s good at getting things out of Grandma. Ayawg
hátag kay giatíkan ka lang, Don’t give him any. He’s just putting you
on to get s.t. from you. n {1} s.t. said to get s.t. from s.o.
{2} pocket money (slang). atik-átik = átik, v. pa- v {1} = átik.
{2} [A; c] show off. Ipaátik níya ang bag-u níyang kutsi, He will show
off his new car.

atiman v [A; a12] {1} give s.t. the attention that it requires. Dì siya
makaatiman sa mga bátà, She cannot look after the children. Atimana ang
ímung pagtuun, Tend to your studies. {2} keep up doing s.t. Dì ku
maatiman ning labhanan, daghan kaáyu, I can’t keep up with all this
laundry.

atimúya n k.o. large fruit similar to the guayabana, but with yellowish
flesh and a flat taste: Anona sp.

atin v [A2; b(1)] attend classes or a meeting. Dì ku muatin sa klási, I
won’t attend classes.

atindan, atindant n hospital attendant. v [B16; b(1)] be a hospital
attendant.

atindída = atindídu (female).

atindídu a {1} attentive, courteous. Atindídu siya sa íyang pamisti, He
dresses carefully. Atindídu siya sa mga bisíta, She attends to the
visitors courteously. {2} paying attention to things that are not one’s
business. Atindídu kaáyu nà siya sa sayup sa uban, He is very observant
of other peoples’ mistakes.

atindir v {1} [A2; b6] attend classes or a meeting. Kumpirinsyang ákung
giatindiran (giatindihan), The conference I attended. {2} [A; b5] give
one’s attention to s.t. Dúna kuy asuntu nga atindihan (atindihun), I
have a court case to attend to. Atindihi (atindiha) ang mga bisíta,
Attend to the visitors.

atinsiyun n {1} attention, special care. Nagkinahanglan ug atinsiyun
ang masakitun, The patient needs special attention. {2} attention!
Atinsiyun mga sinyúris, Attention, Ladies and Gentlemen!

átip v [A; c1] {1} join pieces by sewing, welding, or pasting. Maátip
pa kahà nang maáyu mang pagkagidlay? Do you think it can still be put
back together in one piece? It is completely torn up. {2} put a crazy
person in a kapok tree stock to cure him. Atípa ang búang sa duldul,
Put the crazy man in the stocks.

atipú, atipúlu n name given to several large wild trees of the
breadfruit family which have small to medium fruits, the seeds of which
are eaten: Artocarpus spp.

átis n {1} sugar apple, a widely planted sweet fruit with numerous
black seeds: Anona squamosa. {2} bruise, cussing out, or anything
unpleasant that can be inflicted on one (slang). Unsa bay sígig
tagawtaw dihà. Mangáyù ka bag átis? What are you grumbling about. You
want me to box you? Si Nanit hinúun walà kaáyu makatilaw ug átis,
Nanette, however, escaped the cussing-out.

atlíta n athlete.

atmuspíra n atmosphere surrounding the earth.

atnga, atngal n {1} teat, nipple. Gisakitan siya sa atngal human
magpasúsu, Her nipples hurt after she suckled the baby. {2} the lower
right-angled corner of a sack or one of the four corners of a pillow.
Ug mag-aswat mug sáku usa ninyu maggunit sa atngal, If you lift a sack,
one of you hold the lower corner.

atngaw = atngal.

atráka v [A; a12] {1} get close to s.t. not easy to approach. Mu rag
dílì muatráka sa kaláyu ang mga bumbíru, It looks as though the firemen
will not get close to the fire. Dì ku kaatráka níya kay dátù, I feel
ashamed to approach her because she is rich. {2} attack a job with
dispatch. Ug dílì ka muatráka sa trabáhu, wà kay umintu, If you don’t
do your work with dispatch, you won’t make progress. Atrakáha lang siya
pagpaningil, Get in there and press her to pay you. {3} [A2; a12] hold
one’s own in a conversation. Burung. Dì kaatrákag kukabildu, She lacks
social grace. She can’t keep a conversation going.

atraksiyun n attraction, s.t. that appeals. Ang Luníta usa sa mga
atraksiyun sa Manílà, The Luneta park is one of the attractions in
Manila. Bisag unsáug arti, wà giyud kay atraksiyun, No matter how much
you put on, you still don’t have sex-appeal.

atraktíbu a attractive. v [B12] become attractive.

atras n {1} rear wheel. Nahyúsan mi sa atras, We had a flat tire in the
rear. {2} rear part of vehicles. Adtu ikarga sa atras, Load it in the
back. {3} reverse gear. Ang kambiyu dílì musulud sa atras, The gear
won’t shift into reverse. — abanti a sewing machine capable of forward
and backward movement. v [A] {1} back up a vehicle. Iatras ang trák,
Back the truck up. {2} back out of an agreement. Dì ku muatras sa átung
sábut, I will not back out of our agreement. {3} give way, back off
from. Dì ta ka atrásan, I won’t give ground to you.†

atrasádu a late, not on time. Alas nuybi na, atrasádu ka kaáyu, It’s
nine o’clock now. You’re very late. v [B123(1)6; a2b3] be, late.
Atrasadúhun nátù ang átung paglarga, Let’s start late.

atrasar v [AP; a2b3] delay s.t. Ayawg atrasara ang ákung paniudtu,
Don’t delay my lunch. Unsa kahay naatrasahan ni Pípi? What could have
delayed Pepe?

atrasáwu = atrasádu.

atrásu v [AP; a12P] {1} = atrasar. {2} cause s.t. to become delayed or
get behindhand in fulfilling an obligation. Ug maatrásu ta ug duha ka
adlaw, dakù ang multa, There is a big fine if you are two days
delinquent. {3a} [A12] have done a wrong to s.o. which requires
retribution. Nakaatrásu ka nákù, panimaslan ta ka, You have done me a
wrong. I’ll get revenge. {3b} have a debt which one has failed to pay.
n {1a} delay. Ang atrásu nakapaalkansi námug dakù, The delay caused us
great loss. {1b} fine imposed for a delay. {2} wrong done to s.o. Unsay
atrásu nákù nímu? What wrong have I done you?

atribídu see atribir.

atribir v [A3] do s.t. one has no business doing. Kinsay nag-atribir ug
arangka niíni? Who went and took this apart? paN- v touch s.t. one has
no business touching, mix into things not of one’s business.
Nangatribir ka pud sa ákung butang, ha? So you dared to touch my
things, did you? atribídu a doing things one has no business doing.
Atribídu ka bisag dílì kamau, You take it on yourself even if you don’t
know how. Atribídu ka sa mga áway bisag wà kay lábut, You mix into
quarrels that are none of your business. v [B12] get to be atribídu.

atril_1 n music stand, lectern. v [A; c1] use, use for a music stand,
lectern. Muatril ka pa nga namimurya na man nímu ang písa? Will you use
a music stand even if you’ve memorized the piece?

atril_2 v [B46; a12] for dust, dirt to be thick. Miatril ang abug
paglabay sa trák, Dust filled the air when the bus passed. Nag-atril
ang buling sa ímung tangkúgù, You have thick dirt on your nape.

atripisyu, atripisyun n s.t. one is occupied with temporarily or one’s
work. Pagpanágat mauy íyang atripisyu, Fishing is his occupation.

atsa n axe, hatchet. v {1} [A23; a12] hit, chop s.t. with an ax. Aku
lay muatsa ánang irúa ug mabúang nà, I will hit that dog with an axe if
it has distemper. {2} [a12] make into an axe.†

atsaatsa v [B1] be hard pressed doing s.t. because of its being more
than one can handle. Nagkaatsaatsa kug pangítag ikabáyad sa ákung mga
útang, I am going crazy trying to look for money to pay my debts.

atsal n {1} pickles made of shredded green papaya and various other
vegetables cut in slivers. {2} name given to various varieties of large
peppers, e.g., sweet pepper, long hot pepper: Capsicum annuum.
v {1} [A; a12] make papaya pickles. {2} [A1; b6] cook sweet pepper, put
sweet peppers into s.t.

atsar = atsal.

atsára = atsal, 1.

atsay_1 n {1} kept woman, paramour (coarse). {2} maid of all work,
servant (coarse). v {1} [A12B; a2] become a mistress, manage to get a
mistress. Nakaatsay na kug mistísa, Dung, Let me tell you, son, I have
already had a mistress of Spanish blood. Giatsayan ka lang nákù. Tinúud
kung asáwa, arun ka masáyud, You think I’m your mistress? Well, in case
you didn’t know, I’m your wife. {2} [A3; a2] be paid female help.
Nakaatsay na ku sa tagasinyur istap, I’ve already tasted what it’s like
to be a helper to the Senior Staff.

*atsay_2 gi- euphemism for giátay, an expression of displeasure at
s.o.’s behavior. Giatsay ka ba nga natúlug ka man dihà? What are you
doing sleeping there? Are you crazy?

atsi_1 n name of letter H.

atsi_2 n sneeze, act of sneezing. v [A2N; b6] sneeze. Ug muatsi
(mangatsi) ka, panap-ung sa ímung bàbà, If you sneeze, cover your
mouth.

atsuytis = asyútis.

atu v [A12; a12] keep up doing s.t. to things as they come up. Makaatu
ka ba sa mga balayranan sa iskuyláhan? Can you keep up with the school
fees? Atuhun nímug laba ang mga bulingun, You should wash the soiled
clothes as soon as they get dirty.

átu = adtu.

átù see kita.

atúa short form: túa is there, far away. Atúa (túa) pa ba siya puyù sa
Manílà? Does he still live (there) in Manila? Tua na. Bag-u pa siyang
milakaw, He’s gone (lit. over there). He just left.

átub_1 n {1} stone prison cell. {2} pile of stones put s.w. to attract
fish and crabs and get them where they can be readily found. {3} pit
with a flimsy top for trapping animals. v {1} [A1; a] construct an
átub. {2} [A2N; a1] trap in a pitfall. Nakaátub (nakapangátub) mig
bábuy ihálas, We trapped a wild pig in a pitfall.

átub_2 v [A; b5] soak maguey leaves in the sea to soften them. Atúban
(atúbun) ang magay unyà labhan, Maguey leaves are soaked and the flesh
is washed off.

átub_3 v [A3; b6] fall in great quantities. Miátub ang bumba sa syudad,
Bombs rained on the city. Nag-átub ang ulan, The rain was pouring down.
pa- v [A3] {1} expose oneself to a downpour. {2} expose oneself to
danger. Hiilugan ka sa búlag magpaátub ka, They’ll get the ball away
from you if you just stand there.

atubang v {1} [A; c1] face towards. Sígi ka lang nag-atubang sa ispíhu,
You’re always looking at yourself in (lit. facing) the mirror. Iatubang
ang ispíhu ngari, Face the mirror this way. {2} [A2; a12] set oneself
to doing s.t. as it needs to be done. Daghan akung buluhatung
atubangun, I have lots of work to do. Atubangun kug báyad ang
instulmin, I’ll pay the installments as they come up. (←) v {1} [A3C;
c3] be face to face with s.o. Nag-atúbang silag lingkud, They were
sitting face to face. {2} [A3; a12] receive, entertain visitors.
Kinahanglan atubángun ang mamisíta, If s.o. visits you, you have to
receive him. {3} [AN2; a12] go see s.o. to talk things over. Ikaw bay
muatúbang (mangatúbang) sa hípi? Will you go to see the chief to talk
things over? Kinsay ákung atubángun (pangatubángun)? Who shall I go to
see to talk it over with? {3a} speak for a girl’s hand. Sa pamaláyi ang
dakung táwu mauy mangatúbang, In arranging a marriage, the intermediary
will speak to her parents. pa- towards, in a direction to. v [A; c1] go
in a direction to (lit. make oneself face). Nagdagan si Pidru
nagpaatubang sa baybay, Peter was running toward the shore. Paatubanga
ang barútu sa píliw, Head the boat for the shallows. -ay v [C] meet
face to face in a confrontation. -an n genitalia usually female
(euphemism). -an(←) {1} place in front of, in the face of. Wà giyud
siya mag-usab atubángan sa mapait nga kalisud, He hasn’t changed in the
face of bitter difficulties. Ang irù túa gihukut sa atubángan, The dog
is tied in the front yard. Gibundak níya ang libru sa ákung atubángan,
He banged the book down in my presence. {2} = atubangan.

átud particle showing displeasure (euphemism for giátay). Átud, nawà
man ta, Darn! We are lost. gi- darn! Giátud ka bang nangindiyan ka man,
Darn you! You didn’t show up for our date.

atug n clitoris. taas ug — having a shrill voice (humorous).

atug-atug v [AP; a] presume to take responsibility or present oneself
and one’s services unasked. Nakaatug-atug (nakapaatug-atug) si Píli
pagtábang sa táwu kay nalúuy siya, Fely forced her help on the man
unasked because she pitied him.

atul coincide in time. Ang íyang adlaw atul sa bag-ung túig, His
birthday coincides with New Year’s. v {1} [A2C; c1] do s.t. at the same
time as s.t. else happens. Dì ka muatul ug labang ug dúnay awtung
muági, Do not cross at the same time that there’s a car coming.
Nag-átul mig pamisíta sa ka Lusing, We happened to visit Lucing at the
same time. Atulun (iatul) nílag pangáun ang pamisíta, They make their
visits coincide with mealtime. {2} [b2] for s.t. to happen to one
coincidentally with s.t. else. Hiatlan mig ulan sa Magalyánis, We were
caught in the rain downtown. Naatlan níya si Bin nga bugnaw ang úlu,
This time, she chanced to come on Ben while he was cool-headed.

atuli n {1} earwax. {2} materials like earwax. {a} yellow paste.
{b} tobacco tars. {c} yellow, hardened grease sticking in corners of
machinery. v [A; ac1] make, apply paste to. Nagkayabkáyab nang mga
drúwing sa bungbung. Iatuli (atuliha) ra, The drawings are flapping up
and down on the wall. Paste them down. (←) = atuli, 2a. paN- v =
panghiN-. hiN- n instrument for getting earwax out. v [A; b(1)] remove
earwax. Akuy muhingatuli sa bátà, I will remove the child’s earwax.
panghiN- v [A2; b(1)] remove one’s earwax. Dílì maáyung manghingatuli
sa kadaghánan, It’s not good to remove one’s earwax in public.

átum_1 n atom.

*átum_2 atum-atum {1} = atug-atug. {2} [A; a] attach undue importance
to s.t., pay s.t. heed which is not worth it. Ang muatum-atum sa sulti
sa gamayng bátà buang, Whoever gives importance to everything a child
says is a fool. Sigíhan man kug súngug, nakaatum-atum ku, They teased
me mercilessly, so I rose to the bait. {3} = pangarasti. see *arasti.
atum-atumun a tending to give undue importance to s.t. -ay v [A; ab5]
give s.t. careful and diligent attention. Kinahanglan atumáyun ang mga
ginikánan sa ílang pagkatigúlang, One should give good care to his
parents in their old age. Láin man ang ímung giatumáyan (giatúmay),
dílì ang gisúgù nímu, Instead of sticking to your chores, your
attention was elsewhere.

atumátik n {1} s.t. automatic. Atumátik ning ákung kamira, My camera is
automatic. {2} automatic pistol. {3} snap fastener for clothing. v [A;
b6(1)] attach, close a snap fastener. Atumatíki ang likud, Put a snap
fastener on the back (or snap the back).

*atúmik — bam atom bomb. — ids atomic age.

atumika a atomic, nuclear. Bumba atumika, Atomic bomb.

atung = atang.

atup n {1} roof. {2} paper covering for a kite. v [A; c] {1} put a
roof. Aptan (atpan) tag sín ímung balay, We’ll put a galvanized iron
roof on your house. {2} cover a kite.

atup-atup_1 n k.o. roundish sea crab around nine square inches in size
with scalloped edges.

aturga, aturgǎr v [AN; b5] take on responsibility, assume work without
being asked to. Giaturgǎr (giaturgaran, giaturgahan) nákù ang pagdáwat
sa urdir, I took on the responsibility of receiving the order.

aturni n {1} public attorney, lawyer. {2} short form: turni title of
address for lawyers. Maáyung buntag, turni, Good morning, Attorney.
v [B15] be, become an attorney.

atutung n blackening of the teeth. v [A123P; a4] get blackened teeth.
Ug dì ta manipilyu atutungun ta, If you don’t brush your teeth, you’ll
get black spots on them. ka- v [A13] having black spots on the teeth.
Nagkaatutung íyang ngípun, His teeth has black places all over them.

aw, àw {1} particle preceding a statement made to correct oneself.
Tagdus písus, aw, dus singkwinta diay, It’s two, I mean, two-fifty.
{1a} particle preceding an afterthought. Aw kanà lang diay, ímu na nà,
Oh that. You can have that. {2} particle preceding a statement or
question meaning ‘is that so?’ and shows surprise. Aw, mau diay nà? Oh!
Is that so! {3} pause word before starting to speak. Aw, makahímù ba
tag gáwì sa ímung tilipunu? Er, may I use your phone? {4} particle
preceding a predetermined answer: ‘of course’. Aw, ú. Mabalibáran ba
gud nà nákù? Yes, of course. How could I refuse that!

áwà_1 n k.o. fish, the ten-pounder: Elops hawaiensis.

áwà_2 v {1} [B126; b5c1] envy, be jealous. Ngánung maáwà ka man sa
ímung igsúun? Why should you be jealous of your sister? Makaáwà man
nang ímung kahimtang, Your circumstances inspire envy. Dílì man nà
ángay awáun (awáan, iáwà), That is not worth envying. {2} [B1; b5c1] be
worried. Mag-áwà man ka nga wà may nahinabù? Why are you worried when
nothing terrible has happened?

awáaw a deserted place. Giatángan sila sa dapit nga awáaw, They were
ambushed at the remote and lonely spot. v [B] be, become deserted and
lonely.

awahi = ulahi.

áwak n continuous vaginal bleeding, severe or slight. v [A123P; a4b4]
have continuous vaginal bleeding. Giáwak (giawákan) ka na ba sukad? Did
you ever suffer continuous vaginal bleeding?

awang_1 n space between the upper two front teeth. In folk belief, a
woman is thought to be oversexed if she has this gap. v [b4] for s.o.
to have a wide gap between the two front teeth. Birgatinya kunu ang
babáying awangan, They say that a woman is oversexed if she has a wide
gap between her two front teeth.

awang_2 n k.o. small fresh-water crab that is edible.

áwas v {1} [A2S; b6] for liquid to boil over, spill over the top of a
container. Muáwas ang sabaw, The soup will boil over. Nag-awas ang
túbig sa baldi, The water in the pail is running over. {1a} [b4] have
wet dreams. Awásan siyag magabíi, He has wet dreams at night.
{1b} [B256] — sa kalindaryu pass thirty (Lit. go over the number in the
calendar—slang). Miáwas (naáwas) na lang síya sa kalindaryu, wà pa
giyud maminyù, She is past thirty and still hasn’t gotten married.
{2} [A2S] for blows to miss the mark. Muáwas lang ang kúmù kay maáyung
mulikay ang kuntra, Since his opponent dodge well his fist won’t hit
the mark. pa- v [A; a12] parry, ward off blows. Paawásun níya ang
pipila ka sukmag úsà siya mubálus, He will ward off several blows
before he retaliates. (→) a abundant to overflowing. Ang Hapun karun
awas sa mga pruduktu, Japan has products in abundance. —, -an(→) ug
pálad spendthrift, extravagant. -an(→) sa apdu k.o. sickness. awasánan
n down spout of a roof gutter.

awat, áwat_1 v [A; ac] imitate, follow after. Kusug kitang muawat sa
múda sa mga kanù, We are quick to imitate American fashions. Awata ang
ákung linaktan, Imitate my way of walking. Iawat ang ímung linihukan sa
ákù, Make your movements be like mine.

áwat_2 v [A; a12] part or disengage persons fighting. Awáta sila kay
magpatyanay unyà, Break them up because they might kill each other.

aw-aw v [A; ab2] bark. Ay lag dágan ug aw-áwun (hiaw-awan) ka sa irù,
Don’t run if the dog barks at you. n dish prepared from dog meat
(slang). Aw-aw ang ílang gisumsum, They had dog meat to go with their
drinks.

áway v [AC; a12b3] quarrel, fight. Awáyun ta ka run, I will quarrel
with you. Ug dì madalag sulti, átù ning awáyun, We’ll fight it out if
we can’t talk it out. Unsa may inyung giawáyan? What are you two
quarreling about? Ang pátag nga ílang gipanag-awáyan, The plains where
they did battle. Gikaáway ku siya, I had a fight with him. n fight,
quarrel. -an(→) n in a game, a piece used to hit off others or used to
determine the first performer of the game. ka- n enemy. pala-(→)
a quarrelsome. Dì ku makigdúlà nímu kay palaaway ka, I will not play
with you because you’re quarrelsome. v [B12] become quarrelsome.

awdisyun n audition. v [A; a12] audition.

awditíbu n telephone receiver.

awditur n auditor.

awdituryum n auditorium.

awgid = amgid.

awhag v [A; b5] urge s.o. to do s.t. Miawhag námù ang pulis sa
pagpadágan ug hínay, The police urged us to drive slowly. Awhágun
(awhágan) ta mu sa pagdagínut, I urge you to economize. ma-un
a persuasive, urging. Maawhágung mga púlung, Words of persuasion.†

awhu n k.o. barracuda.

awíhaw = aluwíhaw.

áwil v [A; b] paddle a boat to make it stay in place. Awíli ang sakayan
arun dílì ta iánud, Paddle the boat in place so we won’t be carried
away.

áwit v {1} [A; a] sing. Unsa may íyang awítun? What will she sing?
Awítan ta ka, I will sing you a song. {2} [A2; b6] sing, squeal
(slang). Hibaw-an na mung tanan kay nakaáwit na ang dinakpan, You are
all known because the suspect has squealed. {3} [A; b6] scold.
Hastilang nakaáwit ni Nánay mu, naghápun man lang, How your mother
scolds. It lasts till afternoon. {4} [b] demand a person’s possessions
(slang). Pagsulud níyas prísu, giawítan dáyun ang íyang púlu, As soon
as he entered the prison, they demanded his shirt right away. n song.
karáang — old, oft-repeated story.

awlà n k.o. fish.

*awra — mismu right then and there. Awra mismung gipapaháwà ang kiriwan
nga mutsatsa, They dismissed the maid on the spot because she was a
thief. Anus-a ta mulakat? Awra mismu? When shall we leave? Right away?

awrúra_1 n {1} religious procession held in time of pestilence in the
early morning or late evening hours for the purpose of preventing
further pestilence. {2} religious procession held on eight consecutive
evenings before the feast day of saints. This procession is held after
the novena. v [A; b6] hold a procession of this sort.

awrúra_2 n name given to several k.o. ornamental bulbous plants.

Awstriyanhun n Austrian.

awsud n k.o. barracuda.

awtburd n outboard motor or motorboat.

awting n outing. v [A1; b6] have or hold an outing. Ang klási
mag-awting sa Talísay ugmà, The class will have an outing at Talisay
tomorrow.

awtlit n {1} drain for liquids. Naglúmung ang túbig dinhi kay walay
awtlit, Water stagnates here because there is no outlet. {2} electric
outlet. v {1} [b(1)] supply with a drain for water or electric outlet;
make an outlet.

awtu n car. v [A13; a] go by, get a car. Dílì maawtu, You can’t go
there by car. awtúhan a having an auto. v [B1256] getting to have a
car.

awtugrap n autograph book, book of dedications. v [A; b(1)] write in an
autograph book.

awtumátik, awtumatiku = atumátik.

awtumubil = awtu.

awtunumíya n autonomy.

awtupsi, awtupsíya n autopsy. v [A; b5] perform an autopsy.
Awtupsiyáhun (awtupsiyáhan, awtupsíhun) ang minatay antis ilubung, The
cadaver will be autopsied before it is buried.

awtur n {1} author of a book. {2} author of an act.

awturidad n {1} authority, right to do s.t. Wà kay awturidad sa
pagpapaháwà nákù áning yutáa, You have no authority to eject me from
this land. {2} governmental authorities. Ang awturidad nag-awhag sa mga
táwu sa pagpabáyad sa mga buluhísan, The authorities are enjoining the
people to pay their taxes. Gipangítà siya sa awturidad, He is being
hunted by the authorities. {3} authority, expert in s.t. Si Manang usa
ka awturidad sa madyung, Manang is an authority on mahjong. v [B1256]
be an authority on s.t.

awturisar v [A; b6] authorize, empower.

awturisasyun n authorization.

awu- see also alu-.

áwug_1 v [A3; c] furnish s.t. for free or as a privilege. Giawgan siyag
dyip sa gubyirnu, The government furnishes him with a jeep. Walay buhis
ang mga baligyang iáwug sa Amirika sa íyang mga sundálu, The goods that
America furnishes her soldiers are tax-free.

áwug_2 n magical charm hung on fruit and vegetable plants to protect
them from thieves. This charm may harm the culprit who eats it or give
him some illusion which prevents him from leaving the place until he
gets caught. v [A; b] apply a charm of this sort. Awgi ang kalbásà arun
way mangáwat, Hang a charm on the squash so nobody will steal it.
-in-an n fruit trees on which a charm has been hung; fruits from such
trees.

áwuk = unglù.

awuk-uk = uk-uk.

awul v [A2; b6] go awol. Ug dílì ku tugtan, muawul na lang ku, If they
don’t give me permission, I will go awol.

awumbak n dried piece of banana trunk.

áwut_1 a {1} be out in a ball game. {2} be out of a place, out of
stock, etc. — ab bawuns, lak, istak, etc. out of bounds, luck, stock,
etc. Awut ab tápik ka, You are out of order, off the subject.
v {1} [A3P; a2] make s.o. or s.t. out in ball games. Nakaáwut na ang
pitsir ug duha, The pitcher has already struck two batters out. Hiawtan
silag duha, They have had two outs. {2} [B56] get to be out of a place,
out of luck, stock, etc. Muáwut ku ugmà, I’ll get out of this place
tomorrow. Maáwut ang búla, The ball will go out of bounds.

áwut_2 = alut.

awutsayid n out of bounds. v [B12; a12] go out of bounds. Ug maawtsayid
ang búla ning sirbíha, pildi ta, If the ball goes out of bounds on this
serve, we lose.

áwuy n k.o. shrub that bears umbels of black pellet-sized berries which
are edible. The leaves are used as a fish poison and are applied to
wounds to stop bleeding: Calliocarpa eriochlona. — agkut k.o. áwuy that
is hairy: Calliocarpa formosana.

awyan = ayayan. see ayay.

ay_1 {1} expression dismissing what follows as unimportant. Ay kanà,
ihátag na lang nà, Oh that! Just give it away. {2} particle showing
exasperation or frustrated helplessness. Ay, Inday. Wà pa giyud ka
makat-un? Goodness, my dear. Can’t you ever learn? Ay, ulahi ka na,
nahurut na ug kahálin, Oh you are too late. They’re all sold out. Ay,
kapait ning kinabuhía, My, how difficult life is. {3} particle
preceding an exclamation of delight. Ay, kanindut sa búlak! Oh, what a
beautiful flower.

ay_2 particle following s.t. which calls attention to s.t. Si Pidru ay,
Mam. Nanghíwì nákù, Teacher, Pedro was making faces at me. Pagkabuta
nímu. Túa sa iskína ay, How blind you are! It’s right there at the
corner! Kining bataána ay. Nagsígi lag dúlag lápuk, My, this child. He
keeps playing in the mud. únu, dus, —, tris one, two, three, go!

ay_3 = ayaw.

ay_4 n a pair of mahjong pieces of the same number and design. In order
to get mahjong, a set must contain an ay.

-ay_1 affix forming verbs which refer {1} to reciprocal actions.
Naglalisay sila, They argued back and forth. Nagtutukay sila, They
stared at each other. Naghigugmáay sila, They were in love with one
another. {2} to intense actions. Naghilákay sila, They cried and cried.
Naghikayay sila kay pista ugmà, They were busy preparing because the
fiesta was the following day.

-ay_2 affix added to verbs to form nouns referring to manner in which
s.t. is done. Maghúlin ta, bihagay, Let’s play marbles for keeps (in
the manner of bíhag ‘capture’). Magtínis ta, sirbisahay, Let’s play
tennis. The loser buys beer (lit. in the beer manner). Tagsingkwinta
ang gatus, way piliay, They cost fifty a hundred, but no choosing.

ayà = wayà.

ayaan = iyaan. see iyà.

ayáay n time when water is slack at low tide before rising or at high
tide before ebbing. v [B; b4] become slack tide. Maáyung ipamúkut ug
muayáay ang dágat, A good time to go net fishing is when the water is
slack.

ayad_1 v [A; b(1)] {1} refuse to go through with s.t., have second
thoughts, esp. about buying. Walay makaayad áning prisyung kubus, No
one can have second thoughts about buying it at this low price.
{2} reject an offer. Ikaw pa lay miayad sa ákung panábang, You’re the
only one so far who has refused my aid. Pagkaaláut ning gugmang ímung
giayran, Pity the one whose love you spurned. {3} avoid, refrain
contact with. Nangayad siya sa mga pagkáun kay nanamkun, She couldn’t
stand food because she was pregnant. Giayran siya sa mga táwu human
siya mabangkarúta, People avoided him after he went bankrupt.
{4} particle expressing eagerness. ‘Mukáun kag mangga?’—‘Ayad!’ ‘Do you
want to eat mangoes?’—‘Sure thing. (Lit. Would I avoid them?)’ inayran
n s.t. spurned, avoided. Inayran sa katilingban, Spurned by society.

ayad_2 v [A; a12] repair s.t. Ayrun nákù ang munyíka nga natangtángag
kamut, I’ll fix the doll that lost one of its arms.

áyag v [A; a12] sift, separate the coarse from the fine. Ayágun ang
bugas arun malain ang pínu, The rice is sifted so the fine particles
can be separated. -an(→) n sifter, sieve.

ayágak = iyágak.

áyam v [A; a] {1} for a dog to chase s.t. Háin íning irúa ang nag-áyam
sa manuk? Which dog chased the chicken? {2} hunt with dogs where the
dog keeps track of the spoor. Bakatin ang ílang giáyam, They are
hunting for wild pigs. paN- v [A] go hunting with dogs. Nangáyam sila
sa lasang, They went hunting in the forest. n {1} occupation of hunting
with dogs. {2} s.t. used to hunt. {3} hunting trip. -an(→) n place one
hunts. ig-l-(→) = paN-, 3. maN-r-(→) n hunter. pinaN-an n s.t. caught
hunting.

ayang-ang a in full view, uncovered. v [B] be open to full view.
Muayang-ang gánì ang pultahan, musulud dáyun ang irù, If the door is
open, the dog will get in. Nag-ayang-ang ang mga pinalit sa mga bukas
nga bukag, The goods they bought were in full view in the open baskets.
pa- v [A; ac2] expose s.t. to full view. Magpaayang-ang lang nà siya
bísan ug daghang táwu, She sits in such a way that she exposes her
crotch, even when there are a lot of people around. Nakapaayang-ang
siya sa íyang kasukù, She exposed her anger. Paayang-anga lang nang
pultahan sa ímung kwartu, Leave your door partly open. Ayaw
paayang-angi ang sud-an, Don’t leave the food exposed. -un, -an
a careless of speech and ways.

ay-ar payib n IR5, k.o. recently-introduced strain of rice.

ayaw short form: ay don’t do! Ayaw ug syágit. Ayaw pagsiyágit, Do not
shout. Ayaw ug kabaláka, ayaw kabaláka, ayaw pagkabaláka, Don’t worry.
— lang {1} never mind doing. Ayaw lang ug sirhi nang pwirta, Don’t
bother closing the door. ‘Gustu ka?’—‘Ayaw lang,’ ‘Do you want
any?’—‘No, thanks.’ {2} don’t (it’s a small thing to ask). Ay lang
ingna ánà, Don’t do like that! — na stop doing. Ayaw nag hílak, Stop
crying. Ayaw na, Tay. Dì na ku muusab, That’s enough, Dad. I won’t do
it again. — na lang don’t bother doing what you’ve started or made a
motion to do. Ay na lang kug ihatud, Don’t bother taking me home. — na
lang ku ánà don’t give me that reason. Ay na lang ku ánà. Nakabatì na
ku ánang rasúna, Don’t give me that. I’ve heard that line before. — na
ku, ta (nímu) don’t try to fool me. Ay na lang ku nímu, Syu. Swítu na
kaáyu ku nímu, Don’t try to put one over me, Cio. I know you too well
already.

áyaw v [A2; b6] for a child to cry when not allowed to go with s.o.
Natural, ang bátà muáyaw sa inahan, It’s natural for a child to cry
when he’s not allowed to go with his mother.

ayawan = awayan. see áway.

ayáwat = iyáwat.

ayay particle {1} expressing pleasant surprise. Ayay, kanindut! Yippie.
How nice! {2} expressing pain. Ayay, kasakit, Ouch. How painful. -an
a overly sensitive and easily incapacitated by pain or sickness. Ayayan
kaáyung batáa maung dì magpaindiksiyun, This child is a terrible sissy.
She won’t let them give her a shot. v [B12] be a big sissy.

aybru n {1} eyebrow. {2} eyebrow pencil. v [A; b6] apply eyebrow pencil
on s.o. paN- v [A2] apply eyebrow pencil on oneself.

ayda n kerosene pressure lantern (so called from the brand name).

aydi n identification card.

ayhà_1 v [A; ac] talk s.o. into doing s.t., esp. buying. Ayháun ku siya
sa ámù, I’ll persuade her to stay at our place. Singsing nga kináwat
ang giayhà sa táwu, They offered the man a stolen ring.

ayhà_2 before [so-and-so] happens. Mikáun siya ayhà mulakaw, He ate
before he left the house. — na only then will, does [so-and-so] happen.
Ayhà na ka bayri ug maintrígu mu ang risíbu, You get paid only when you
hand over the receipt. — pa only then did [so-and-so] happen. Hápit na
mahurut ayhà pa ku tagái, I wasn’t given any until they were almost all
gone.

ayhab  v [a4] menstruate (euphemism). Giayhab ka? Are you menstruating?

ayis n ice. — bag n ice bag. v [b6] apply an ice bag to. — baks
n refrigerator. — drap n popsicle. v [A; a12] make, make into a
popsicle. — kap = ayis bag. — kindi n ice candy. — krim n ice cream.
v [A13; a12] make, make into ice cream. — kiyub n ice cubes. — pik
n ice pick. v [a1] use an ice pick on, stab with an ice pick. v {1} [a]
make ice. Maáyu muayis ang ripridiyirítur, The refrigerator makes ice
well. {2} [B3; c1P] freeze. Dalì rang muayis (maayis, mag-ayis) ang
ayis kindi kun ibutang sa prísir, The ice candy will freeze quickly if
you put it in the freezer. {3} [A; b5] preserve s.t. with ice. Inaysan
ba nang isdà? Has that fish been kept with ice?

ayis-ayis v {1} [AC; a1] flirt with the eyes. Maistra man diay tung
ákung giayis-aysan, I just found out that the lady I was making eyes at
was a teacher. {2} [A; b5] eye s.o. or s.t. for a purpose.
Nakaayis-ayis ku niánang sinináa, I have been eyeing that dress.
n flirtation with the eyes.

ayri n air that gets into s.o.’s body causing disorder. Kuyaw sa ayri
nang paságad lag indiksiyun, If you’re careless in giving shots, there
is danger of air getting into the body. v {1} [B246; b4] for air to get
into the body. Ayawg pahangin humag kalígù kay ayrihan ka, Don’t expose
yourself to the wind after you bathe, for air might get into you.
{2} [A; b6] admit air into a kerosene pressure lamp. Ayríhag hínay arun
dílì musiláub, Let air into it slowly so it won’t flare up. {3} [A2; c]
get on a bicycle by stepping on the pedal which is in an up position,
so that the wheel is propelled as one steps on the pedal. Iayri ang
bisiklíta inigsakay nímu, Pump the pedal as you get on the bike.
{4} [A; b6] mount a woman (slang). Nindut ayríhan nang bayhána, It’d be
nice to have intercourse with that woman.

ayruplánu n airplane. — nga báyut n light plane. v [A13; a12] go by,
ride a plane. Ayruplanúhun ta lang ang Manílà, Let’s go to Manila by
airplane.

aysyid n eye shadow. v [A; b6] apply eye shadow on s.o. Aysíran kang
manang mu, Big sister will apply eye shadow on you. paN- v [A2] apply
eye shadow on oneself.

ayta_1 n Aeta, the Negritos.

ayta_2 short form for tagái ta ‘give me’. Ayta duha kabuuk bi, Let me
have two, please.

áyu v {1a} [A13; a12] do s.t. well. Ayúha nig limpiyu, Clean this
carefully. Gitan-aw níya pag-áyu ang sulud, He looked carefully into
the insides. {1b} do s.t. to an intense degree. Giáyu siya ug kastígu,
He was severely punished. Nasukù siya pag-áyu, He got very angry.
{2} [A3] do well in a given situation. Muáyu ang mais dinhi kay hustu
sa ulan, Corn will do well here because there is enough rain. {3} [A;
a12] repair, restore into working order. Ikay muáyu sa awtu kay ikay
nakadáut, You repair the car because you ruined it. Ayúha ning ákung
mutur, Repair my motorcycle. {4} [B12] get better. Naáyu na ku. Wà na
ku hilanti, I am well now. I don’t have a fever any more. — ang buut
v [B4] be in a good mood. Muáyu ang íyang buut ug bisitáhan siya ni
Piduy, She gets in a good mood when Pedoy visits her. Giayúhan siya sa
buut, She is in a good mood. {5} [A23; b6] treat s.o. nicely. Muáyu ka
lang nákù ug magkinahanglan kag sápì, You treat me nicely only if you
want money. Ug dì ka níla ayúhan, ayawg tagda, If they don’t treat you
nicely, never mind. {6} [c] be on good terms with one another. Nagkaáyu
na ba mung duha? Have you two gotten to be on good terms yet? ma-
a short forms: maay, máyu {1} nice, good, well. Maáyu ning librúha,
This book is good. Maáyu siyang magkinatsilà, He speaks Spanish well.
{2} -ng buntag, hápun, etc. Good morning, afternoon, etc. -ng Pasku
Merry Christmas. {2a} greeting upon arriving at s.o.’s premises (short
for maáyung buntag, etc.). Maáyu. Uy wà may táwu, Hello! Oh, there’s
nobody home. {3a} — nga bátà beautiful. Maáyung bátà ang íyang asáwa,
He has a beautiful wife. {3b} — láki of exceptional ability in s.t. Si
Tiryu maáyung láki sa pamálak, Terio has exceptional ability in poetry.
{4} ug ma- done well, to an intense degree. Gilimpiyuhag maáyu, It was
well cleaned. Gibunálag maáyu, Got a good beating. v [B] be good,
better. Ug mumaáyu ang guwà, padayúni, If it gives a good outcome,
continue with it. Ug mamaáyu ang íyang tíngug sa mayik, dawáta pára sa
amatyur, If his voice turns out good with the microphone, accept him
for the singing contest. Namaáyu na ku sa sakit, I recovered from the
sickness. Nagkamaayu ang íyang ági, His penmanship is getting better.
Nagmaáyu ang tilimad-un ug walay kapakyásan, The indications are good,
and it won’t fail. mina-(→) a in a good way. ayuáyu v {1} [A13] behave
properly. Mag-ayuáyu ka sa ímung paglakaw, You behave properly on your
trip. pag- goodbye, be careful on your trip. {2} [A23; b5] treat
nicely. Ayuayúhun (ayuayúhan) ka lang níya pagkakarun, He is just
treating you nice for now. pahi-/paka- v [A13; a12] cure an illness.
Didtu siya magpakaáyu (magpahiáyu) sa Manílà sa íyang sakit, He was in
Manila to get treated for his sickness. paayuáyu v [A13] pretend to be
nice. Nagpaayuáyu ang libakíra, The scandalmonger is pretending to be
nice. ka-, kama- how nice, well. Kaáyu (kamaáyu) nímung manista, How
nicely you play! Kaáyu gyung latiguhun nímu, How nice it would be to
whip you! ka- short forms: kaay, káyu very, very much. Mahal kaáyu,
It’s very expensive. Gustu ku kaáyu, I want to very much. alayúhan
n repair shop. alayuhun n s.t. to be repaired. kaayúhan n benefit.

ayù (from káyù) a asking for trouble. v [A13] ask for trouble. Nag-ayù
ka ug kasab-an? Are you asking for a scolding?

ayúda v [A; b] {1} help. Ayudáhi kug alsa ári, Help me lift this.
{2} give s.t. as a help. Ang mga Láyuns nag-ayúda ug kinahun nga
sardínas, The Lions gave boxes of sardines as aid. n aid, help given. —
dikampu aide-de-camp. -nti n {1} helper. Ayudanti sa imprinta, A helper
in the printing press. {2} aide-de-camp. v [B; a12] be, become a
helper, aide-de-camp.

ayudi n intra-uterine device (I.U.D.) pa- v [A] have an I.U.D.
installed.

áyum v [APB3(1); a12] {1} for a wound to be healed or cured. Dalì rang
miáyum (naáyum) ang samad, It took only a short time for the wound to
heal. {2} free from troubles, grief, evil habits. Ang panahun muáyum
(mupaáyum) sa kaguul, Time will make us forget our sorrows. {3} [A;
a12] repair, mend, fix. Muáyum siyag sapátus gubà, He repairs torn
shoes. Ayúma ang ímung sinínà kay hugut da, Fix your dress because it’s
too tight. ayum-áyum v {1} [A1; c1] fix s.t. up quickly in a makeshift
way. Nag-ayum-áyum siya sa kunut sa íyang sinínà, She hurriedly
smoothed over her wrinkled dress. Kini makaayum-áyum sa ímung kagútum,
This will alleviate your hunger temporarily. Ayum-ayúma (iayum-áyum)
lang nang hiwì sa bukag, Just straighten out the crooked basket
quickly. {2} [AP; b6P] make do with s.t. Maáyu siyang muayum-áyum
(mupaayum-áyum) sa tinábas sa pagtahì ug bistídu, She is good in making
do with remnants in sewing her dresses. {3} [AP; bP] put up with s.t.
temporarily. Ayum-ayúmi (paayum-ayúmi) lang ang íyang kasábà, Tutal,
ági man lang nà, Try to put up with her scolding. Anyway, it won’t
last.

ayun moving dragged along with s.t. Midágan ang barútu ayun sa súg, The
boat is travelling along with the current. v {1} [B2] go with, for s.t.
to harmonize with s.t. else. Kining dintrúha muayun sa ímung karsúnis,
This shirt goes well with your pants. {2} [A2C3; b(1)] like, come to
like. Ug ákung kaayunan ang buluk, ákung palitun ang panaptun, If I
like the color, I will buy the cloth. Wà magkaáyun ang magtiáyun, maung
nagkabúlag, The couple couldn’t get along very well so they separated.
pa- = pahi-. pahi- v {1} [A2; c6] make s.t. fit with, conform to s.t.
else. Ang balay gipahiayun sa ílang gustu, The house was built exactly
according to their wishes. {2} [A; b6] put up with s.t., adjust oneself
to s.t. Pahiayunan ku lang ang ílang hukum, I will just go along with
their decision. ti- see tiáyun.

áyun = aláyun.

*ayup pa- v [A13; b(1)] let s.t. cook over low heat before taking it
off the stove. Paayupi ang linung-ag kadiyut úsà haúna, Let the rice
stay on the fire awhile before you take it off.

ayup-up = álup, 1.

ayus v [A; b(1)] refuse to have intercourse with one’s new husband. Ang
bána nga giayusan sa asáwa, The husband whose wife refused to sleep
with him.
