


=== U ===


u_1 or. Kinsa may muadtu, ikaw u aku? Who will go, you or me? Muadtu ka
ba u pabilin ba, Are you going or staying here? — byín, bín particle
offering two choices of action: or, if you wish. Ikaw bay muanhi u byín
aku bay muanhà? Are you coming here, or shall I go there?

u_2 {1} particle initial in the sentence: exclamation of surprise upon
finding out s.t. {1a} expressing annoyed surprise. U, ngánung kúlang
man ning suklì! Hey, this isn’t enough change! U, ngánung mipaúlì ka pa
man! What are you doing back here! U, ngánung wà man siya mukúyug! Why?
How come she’s not with you? U, mudílì ka na hinúun nga náa gitúnul na?
You mean you are going to refuse it when you already have it in your
hand? {1b} expressing pleasant surprise. U, Ting! Nía man diay ka! Hey,
Ting. You’re here! {1c} exclaiming surprise at having made a mistake:
Oh! U, singku písus ba diay tu ímung gihátag nákù? Oh! Was it five
pesos you gave me? {2} exclamation preceding an emphatic denial. U
dílì, dílì nà mahímù, Oh no, that can’t be done. {2a} preceding a
statement that s.t. is not the way the interlocutor thought. U, sayun
ra nang lutúun. Lat-i lang, Oh, that’s easy to cook. Just boil it.
{3} pause before speaking. U, ári diri nà ibutang, Oh, just put that
over here. {4} (most often at the end of the clause) particle to draw
s.o.’s attention. U, Dyú, dalì ra kadiyut, Oh, Joe, would you come here
a second. Ambi ra nang lápis u, Would you hand me that pencil, that one
over there. Díay písus u. Patupi didtu, Here, here’s a peso. Go get a
haircut.

u_3 n letter O.

ū́_1 expression of frustration. Ū́, ngánu ug ngánu gayud nga nahitabù
tu, Oh why, oh why did that have to happen?

ū́_2 = úu.

ū́_3 = úlu.

úbak n trunk of a banana or abaca tree. v [A; a12] separate layers of
the banana trunk. Ubáka ang baláni para kan-an, Separate the banana
trunk layers to use as plates.

uban n {1} companion, s.o. together with s.o. else. Kinsay ímung uban?
Who is your companion? {1a} s.t. that belongs together with s.t. else.
Kining mayka uban adtung tiprikurdíra, This mike belongs with that tape
recorder. {1b} — sa, [dat.] together with. Mianhi ku dinhi uban níya, I
came here together with him. Misugut siya uban sa pagtúu nga ... He
agreed in the belief that ... {1c} — ang including, [so-and-so] is also
along. Milakaw siya uban ang íyang masusu, She left taking her baby
with her. {1d} one’s wife or husband, referred to in the third person.
Ákung ingnun ang ákung uban inig-abut níyas trabáhu, I’ll tell my
husband when he gets home from work. {2} the other ones, additional
ones. Háin na man ang uban, Where are the others? Unsa pay uban, What
else? ug uban pa and so forth (abbreviated ubp.). {3} some of a group,
but not all. Mauy buhátun sa uban, Some people do that. Ságad barátu
ang prútas, piru uban mahal, Usually fruit is cheap, but some kinds are
expensive. {4} mau rang -a(←) of the same class. Ang tulíngan ug
barílis mu rang ubána, The mackerel and tuna are in the same family.
v {1} [AC; ac] go with, accompany s.o. Muuban ku nímu, I’ll go with
you. Nagkaúban mi pag-adtu sa Manílà, We happened to go to Manila
together. Unsa pa may ímung ubanun ngadtu sa dawuntáwun? What do you
want to go downtown with me for? Ubanan ku siya kanúnay, I always go
with her. Kinsa may ákung iuban dinhi, Who will I bring here with me?
{1a} [A; b6] escort s.o. in an affair or any gathering. {2} [c] include
in a group. Nauban nà diri sa ákung lista, That is included here on my
list. {3} [b] give s.t. else in addition. Mutúu ku nímu ug ímung ubanag
pasálig, I’ll trust you if you give me additional assurances. (←) v [c]
{1} be, do together with s.o. Nagkaúban mi sukad sa gagmay pa mi, We
have been together since childhood. Makig-úban ku níyag puyù didtu sa
syudad, I’ll stay with him in the city. {2} share happiness,
difficulties, etc. with s.o. Nag-úban mi kanúnay sa mga kasákit, We
share each other’s sorrows. uban-úban v [AC; c] participate in things
one should not. Wà na ku muuban-úban sa ílang mga binúang, I no longer
take part in their foolishness. n {1} common-law spouse. {2} s.t. taken
along on short notice. pa- v {1} [A; ab] have s.o. go with s.o. else or
oneself. Mupauban ka pa ba? Do you still need s.o. to accompany you?
{2} [A; b6(1)] do s.t. unnecessary in addition to s.t. Dì ku mupauban
(magpauban) ug púng bísan unsay ákung ihátag, When I give s.t., I don’t
say a lot of unnecessary things. {2a} [c] take in, send together with
s.t. else. Paubanan nákù ug túbig iniglamuy sa tablíta, I’ll wash the
tablet down with water. Ipauban ang unum ka kutsárang mantikilya, Add
the six tablespoons of butter. -ay (pa) untà [so-and-so] should have
been done under the rules of propriety. Ubánay pa untà mananghid, The
least you could have done is asked. Ubánay pa untà mutábang ka nákù
imbís maghinan-aw lang, You should have helped instead of just looking
at me. -in-an n done together with s.t. else. Inubanan ug kasábà ang
íyang pagtúgut, He agreed to it but not without a good cussing out
first. ka-(←) n {1} companion. Irù ray ákung kaúban dinhi, A dog is my
only companion here. ka- sa kinabúhì one’s spouse. {2} one who is
together with s.o. in a job or in a place. Kaúban sa klási, A
classmate. {2a} ka- nga fellow-. Kaúban nákung maistru, A teacher that
teaches in the same school as I do. v [B1256] happen to be together
with s.o. ka-an(←) n {1} kin. Daghan mig mga kaubánan sa Mindanaw, We
have many relatives in Mindanao. {2} people belonging to the same large
group. Mga kaubánan níya sa partídu, His fellow party members.

úban n gray hair. Daghan na ku ug mga úban, I have lots of gray hair.
v [A123P; a4b6] have gray hair. -un a having grey hairs. Ubánun na ang
tigúwang, The old man has lots of gray hair. v [B12] get to have grey
hair.

ubaryu n ovary in women.

úbas_1 n grapes.

úbas_2 n {1} refuse from soft-boiled rice or cooked cassava flour after
extracting the starch used for starching clothes. {2} pulp of citrus
fruits. {3} chips or curled up slivers that result from drilling wood
or metal.

ubaub n {1} eyelid. {2} temple of the head.

ubaug n eye socket. Ang ubaug mauy nagsanggà sa mata, The eye socket
supports the eyeball.

ubay a parallel to, along the lines of, in line with. Ang dálan mitúlin
ug usa ka kilumitru ubay sa subà, The path ran for a kilometer along
the river. Ang íyang gitambag ubay sa mga lagdà sa maáyung pamatásan,
The advice he gives is in accordance with the rules of proper behavior.
Ubay sa prugráma sa pagdagínut, In line with the austerity program.
Ubay sa panahun ang pagpangarsúnis sa mga babáyi karun, It is in
accordance with the times the way women wear pants these days.
v {1} [AC; ac] go along the side of, be situated alongside, put s.t.
parallel. Daghang táwu ang miubay sa kutsi nga gisakyan sa pamúnù, Many
people went along beside the car bearing the president. Nag-úbay kami
pagkatúlug, We slept lying down beside each other. Nag-ubay sa baybáyun
ang mga payagpáyag, The shacks lined the beach. {2} [A; c] do s.t. in
accordance with s.t. else. Kung iubay nímu sa katárung ang ímung líhuk,
If you act according to the rules of right conduct. pa-un(←) v [A2; b]
concur, go along with s.o.’s decision. Gipaubayúnan níya ang tanang
hangyù sa asáwa, He consented to everything his wife wanted to do. ka-
n s.t. parallel with s.t. else.

ubay-ubay a of a considerable number or amount. Ubay-ubay mi ug kuhà
run, We had a good-sized catch today. v [B26; c1] be of a good number.
Ubay-ubaya (iubay-ubay) ang ímung pagkáun arun dì na ku magbálun, Fix a
good amount of food so I won’t have to take any along.

úbi n widely grown yam of variable color and size; used mainly as an
ingredient in sweet dishes: Dioscorea alata. — nga gataw n variety, the
tuber of which becomes exposed above the ground. — nga kinampay variety
with purple meat. v [b6] make s.t. of úbi. kulur di- violet-colored.
ubihan n yam patch.

ubíhas n word used in the gúsus of certain novenas to refer to the
souls who have joined the angels.

úbir_1 a beyond the allowed limit. Bug-at ra kaáyu. Úbir nas timbangan,
It’s too heavy. It weighs way more than the scale indicates. v [B26] go
beyond the limit. Miúbir siyas linya maung napáwul, He went over the
line and so he was declared foul. — drap n {1} overdraft. {2} shortage
of money. a being short of money. Dì kung kapalit kay úbir drap ku run,
I can’t buy any right now because I’m short of money. v {1} [B1256]
become short of money. {2} [B12] be bankrupted. — dus n overdose.
v [B126] take an overdose of s.t. — hid n violation in basketball where
a player dribbles the ball above his head. v [B1256] commit this
violation. — hit v [B] for engines to overheat. — hul v [A; a2]
overhaul a vehicle. pa- hul v [A; ac] have a general physical check-up.
Kinahanglang magpaúbir hul ta kausa sa usa ka túig, We need a general
physical check-up once a year. -ispíding n speeding. v [A] be speeding.
— kut n jacket. v [A; c1] wear, make into a jacket. — lan v [A] go s.w.
overland rather than by sea. — lap n trousers made to be worn without a
belt, having an overlapping closing in the waist. v [c1] make trousers
in this style. -lúdid a for a vehicle or boat to carry a load greater
than the legal limit. v [B12] be over-loaded. -nayit v [A2] stay s.w.
overnight. n overnight bag. -nayit bag n overnight bag. -prayis v [A2;
b(1)] overprice s.t., jack up the price. — sis n vessel that goes
overseas out of the Philippines. v [A] sail or work on an overseas
vessel. -tayim n {1} overtime work. {2} overtime pay. v [A; b6] work
overtime. Náay ámung giubirtayman, We’re working overtime on s.t. — tik
v [A; b1] {1} pass another vehicle. Ayaw pag-ubir tik sa kurbáda, No
overtaking on a curve. {2} get a girl to say yes to one before s.o.
else does. Naguul si Huwan tungud kay giubirtikan siya ni Pidru sa
pagpangulitáwu ni Maríya, Juan is sad because Pedro beat him to Maria
(and Maria accepted Pedro). — ul n overalls. v [A; c1] wear, make
overalls.

úbir_2 v [A; c] in volleyball, toss the ball back to the opponents.

úbir_3 humorous reference to the song U Bírhin Maríya.

ubispu n bishop. v [B6; c1] be, become a bishop. ubispádu n bishopric.

ubligar v [B; a12] force, compel s.o. Kanang ímung sakit mauy muubligar
nímu sa kamatáyun, Your illness will bring you inexorably to your
death. Wà siya nákù ubligara (ubligaha) pagbáyad sa íyang útang, I
didn’t force him to pay his debt. Naubligar ku sa pagpangútang ug
kwarta pára sa masakitun kung anak, I was forced to borrow money for my
sick child. ubligádu a must do. Ug gustu kang muabut sa pyista,
ubligádu kang mularga run, If you want to make it to the feast you must
leave today. Dílì ubligádu ang pagsimba sa mga Hudíyu, It is not
obligatory for Jews to attend church. v [B126; a12] be obliged to do
s.t ubligasiyun n {1} obligation, moral compulsion to do s.t.
Ubligasiyun sa usa ka ginikánan pagbuhì sa íyang mga anak, Parents have
an obligation to raise their children. {2} financial obligation. Wà kuy
ikabáyad sa ákung ubligasiyun, I don’t have the means to pay my
obligations. may — a married man.

ublung a {1} oblong in shape. {2} for s.t. normally round not to be so.
v [B2] for s.t. round to get out of shape. Kun ímung padagánun nang
bisiklítang plát muublung (maublung) ang yantas niánà, If you ride the
bicycle flat, the rims will get out of shape.

ubp. abbreviation for ug uban pa ‘and so forth’.

ubra v {1} [A; b6] work, esp. manual. Nag-ubra ku sa báy ni Andis, I’m
working on Andis’ house. {2} [b(1)] work off a debt. Ákung ubráhan tung
bayinti nga útang nákù, I will work off my twenty-peso debt to you.
{3} [A23; b(1)] for medicine to take effect. Wà pa ka ubráhi sa purga?
Hasn’t the purgative taken effect yet? {4} [B; b4] for menstruation to
flow freely. Dì muubra ang ákung dugù ug malígù ku, My menstruation
won’t flow freely if I take a bath. n {1} work, esp. manual or heavy.
gíkan sa — padúlung sa trabáhu going from work to more work. Wà kuy
diskansu kay gíkan sa laba padúng sa kusína, padúng sa bátà — gíkan sa
ubra padúng sa trabáhu, I have no rest. From the laundry to the
kitchen, to the baby. I go from work to more work. {2} finished works.
— maistra n masterpiece. Nahálin ug dakù ang ubra maistra sa pintur,
The masterpiece of the artist sold for a good price. ubríru
n {1} manual laborer. {2} member of a household (humorous). v [B1256;
a12] be a worker. ubrírus = ubríru (plural). pina- n hired hands,
workers. inubráhan n remuneration for one’s work. ulubrahun, ubrahúnun
n things to be done. -s publikas n public works.

ubríru see ubra.

ubsirbar v {1} [A; b6] make an observation, keep an eye on. Ubsirbahan
úsà nákù ang ímung trabáhu úsà ku muumintu sa ímung swildu, I will see
how you work before I give you a raise. Giubsirbahan sa duktǔr ang
ipiktu sa iniksiyun sa masakitun, The doctor observed the effect of the
injection on the patient. {2} [A12; b8] notice. Hiubsirbahan ta ka nga
naghinuktuk usáhay, I’ve noticed you have been wrapped in deep thought
from time to time. ubsirbádu {1} be one’s observation. Ubsirbádu na nà
nákù sa muguwà gánì ang mga úbus, muulan giyud, I have already observed
that when the winged ants come out, it will rain. {2} having first-hand
experience with s.t. Ubsirbádu ku ánang sakíta kay daghan kug anak, I’m
familiar with that sickness, because I have lots of children.
ubsirbasiyun n as one looks at it. Sa ákung ubsirbasiyun, mulansad
giyud si Imilda, As far as I can see it, Imelda is sure to run.

ubsirbaturyu n observatory.

ubu n cough. amígu sa — one who is susceptible to coughs and colds.
v [B46; a4] cough. Sap-úngi ang ímung bàbà ug muubu (ubhun) ka, Cover
your mouth if you cough. ubuubu n tuberculosis. v [B146; a4] have tb.
Nag-ubuubu (giubuubu) ku, I have tb.

ubù v {1} [c] lie down on the stomach. Ákung iubù ning ákung tiyan arun
mawā̀ ang bútud, I’ll lie on my stomach to get rid of my gas pains.
{1a} for a baby to be able to turn over on its stomach. Kining batáa
kay muubù na, maáyu na ni pasundan, This child can turn over on his
stomach. It’s about time to have another baby. {2} [A; c] crouch or
stoop with the body low. Ug dì ka muubù masungkù ka, If you don’t
stoop, you’ll bump your head. {3} [b(1)] throw oneself on s.o. to
protect him. Ákung giub-an ang bátà sa nagpungasì na ang bála, I threw
myself on the child when the bullets came fast and thick. bilat sa
íyang — a coarse and humorous euphemism for bilat sa iyang ina. pa- sa
bága v [c1] broil s.t. over hot coals. Paub-a (ipaubù) sa bága ang
manuk, Broil the chicken over the coals.

ub-ub v {1} [A; a] chew and eat s.t. crunchy between the molars. Ub-úba
ang tablítas, Chew the tablets. {2} [A; a] eat (slang). Muub-ub siya
bísan unsa, He eats anything.

ubud n general name for marine eels. — itúhun k.o. eel the head of
which is shaped like a catfish’s (ítu).

úbud n {1} the tender heart of the trunk of palms, bananas, bamboos,
rattans. Lamì lumpiyáun ang úbud sa lubi, The heart stem of the coconut
is good for egg rolls. {2} bamboo shoots. v [AN; b6] get, gather hearts
of stems and trunks. ubúrun a having the whiteness and smoothness of
the heart of a banana stem. v [B126] develop a white, fine texture.

úbug v [A; b5] wade or walk through shallow water. Tagahawak ang túbig
nga ákung giúbug, I waded through water that was waist-deep.

ubul-úbul n {1} Adam’s apple. {2} trachea or windpipe of vertebrates.
v [c16] hit s.o. on the Adam’s apple.

ubus n {1} beneath. Ubus sa káhuy may táwu nga naglingkud, Beneath the
tree there sat a man. {1a} the lower part of body. {1b} lowlands,
usually coastal areas. {2} under, subjected to. Ubus sa íyang
pagdumála, Under his management. Magminyù aku nímu ubus sa usa ka
kundisiyun, I’ll marry you under one condition. a {1} low, not high in
price or degree. Ubus kaáyu nang prisyúha, That price was very low.
{2} low, not high in elevation. Itaas ang kutay kay ubus ra kaáyu, Put
the strand up higher because it is too low. {2a} for the womb of a
pregnant woman to be low. {3} low of station or of social rank. —
balauránan, pamalauránan Lower House. {4} arrive s.w. later than s.o.
else. Ubus ka nákug singku minútus, You arrived five minutes later than
I did. v {1} [B2; b7Pc] decrease, go down. Ug muubus ang ímung grádu,
If your grades go down. Ubsi (paubsi) ang ímung tunung, tingáli
buls-ay, Lower your aim. You might make a bulls-eye. {2} [APB; cP] be
lower in elevation or placement. Miubus ang sawug kay mius-us ang
panawganan, The floor sunk because the joists sunk. Miubus na ang íyang
tiyan. Hapit na manganak, Her baby has descended. She is about ready to
have it. pa- v {1} [A; b(1)] travel, fly low. Ang banug talagsa ra nga
magpaubus, Hawks seldom fly low. {2} [A3] go to live in coastal areas.
{3} [A13] be humble. Magpaubus ta kay mabà ra ta ug ranggu, We should
be humble because we are of low rank. {4} [A; b7c] lower one’s voice.
Mipaubus siya sa íyang tíngug, hadluk hidunggan, He lowered his voice,
afraid of being heard. {5} [A1; c2] reduce an amount. Paubsan (ipaubus)
sa prisidinti ang sílut, The president will reduce the penalty. {6} [A;
a1c] put down, lower. Ug mupaubus siya sa íyang pusil ayaw ug tirúhi,
If he lowers his gun, don’t shoot him. Ipaubus ang inyung bangkaw. Way
kásu, Lower your spears. There’s nothing wrong. hi- v [B126; b3(1)] be
offended, hurt. Nahiubus ku sa íyang sulti, I was hurt by what he said.
ka- n condition or state of being inferior or low in rank. kahi- n hurt
feelings. mapaubsánun, mapahiubsánun, mapinaubsánun, mapainubsánun
a humble. taga- n people residing in the coastal areas.†

úbus_1 v [AB12; a12] be all consumed. Kinsay nag-úbus sa kík? Who ate
the cake? Átung ubúsun ang pagkáun, Let’s eat all the food.

úbus_2 = alibusbus.

ubuub a low-roofed house, building. Ngitngit ning baláya kay ubuub
kaáyu ang atup, This house is dark because it has a very low roof.
v [B6; c1] make a building or house low-roofed.

ū́d = úlud.

úday = úray.

udhak n deep cough or gasp for breath of the sort one gets from an
asthma attack, over-exertion, a blow on the chest, or the like. Ang
udhak sa tisísun milánug sa kagabhíun, The coughing of the tubercular
resounded in the night. v [A; a4] have a deep coughing fit or gasp for
breath. Mu rag dílì siya makaginháwa ug muudhak (udhákun) siya, It is
as if he can’t breathe when he has his attacks.

udhan a be mean enough to do s.t. Udhan (udhánun) kang mulakaw bísag
nagdaut ang ímung anak? Can you bear to leave the house when your child
is sick? -un = udhan.

udíyu n extreme unction. v [A; b6] give the extreme unction.

udiyung n arrow, dart. v {1} [A12; a2] make arrows. {2} [A; a12] hit
with an arrow. -un(←) a slender, arrow-like. Udiyúngun ug láwas ang
babáyi, The lady has a slender body.

udlut n {1} young leaf, leaf bud. {2} one who belongs to the upper
class or top level of society. Ikaw kay udlut magpataas ug aku kay
laylay magpaubus, You, who are of the upper class, should stay on top
while I, who am of the dregs, should remain down where I belong.
v {1} [AN; b4] sprout leaf buds. Miudlut (nangudlut, giudlútan) na ang
ákung manan-aw, My orchid is budding. {2} [A3P; b4] for the flesh to
swell in forming scar tissue in a place where there was a wound or
boil. Kining samára ang giudlútan sa prisku nga unud, This is the wound
where scar tissue formed. {3} [AN; b5] pick the top of leafy plants.
Ang kanding mauy miudlut (nangudlut) sa ákung agbáti, The goat chewed
off the leaf buds of my alugbáti. ting- n time for sprouting new leaves
of plants, trees, etc. -an(→) n the topmost part of the tree in
monocots.

udtu n {1} twelve o’clock, for the sun to be overhead. — nga láruk,
tútuk, tuktuk high noon. {2} for the moon or s.t. else to be overhead
in the heavens at the noon position. see also phases of the moon under
búlan. v {1} [B25; b8] be noon. Muláruk ang adlaw ug maudtu na, The sun
reaches its zenith when it is noon. {1a} [B] for a heavenly body to get
into the noon position. {2} [A13; b4(1)] do s.t. till noon. Hiudtuhan
(naudtuhan) siyag pagwápa atubángan sa ispíhu, She primped in front of
the mirror the whole morning until noon. {3} [B1256] do s.t. at noon
time. Maudtu ray ákung ipahúway, I take a rest only at noon time. hiN-
v {1} [B56] be almost high noon. Ínit kaáyu ang adlaw ug muhingudtu
(mahingudtu) na, The sun becomes hot when it’s almost noon time.
{2} [A; c] slice the terminal portion of a coconut bud to induce sap to
flow regularly at noon. {2a} gather coconut palm toddy at noon.
panghiN- v [A2; b6(1)] do s.t. at noon one doesn’t normally do at noon,
e.g. have sexual intercourse. Dúgay siyang miabut sa upisína kay
nanghingudtu pa man, He arrived late at the office, because he still
had his noon intercourse. udtuhan n zenith. Ang búwan náa sa udtuhan,
The moon is at the zenith. kaudtúhun n noon time. Ang kaudtúhun ínit
kaáyu, At noon time it is very hot. pani- n lunch, lunch time.
v [A2C12; b6(1)] have, eat lunch. udtúhun, udtuudtu n a tiny, poisonous
black snake having bright reddish-orange eyes, so called because its
poison is said to kill the victim at noon. tali- n time just before
noon. udtuhun n coconut palm toddy gathered at noon.

udù = undù.

ud-ud_1 v {1} [AN; b5] dig up the ground with the snout. Ang ákung
bábuy ang nag-ud-ud sa ímung nataran, It was my pig that plowed up the
ground in your yard. {2} [A] for an unborn baby to squeeze its head
into a position above the groin causing the mother to have difficulty
in walking. n the condition where an unborn baby presses on its
mother’s groin.

ud-ud_2 = alud-ud.

uduy = undù.

ug short form: g. particle showing grammatical relation between two
forms. {1} preceding non-specific goals. Mipalit siya ug libru, He
bought a book. Gitagáan ku níyag kindi, He gave me some candy.
{1a} preceding a noun referring to s.t. specific, but referring to it
as s.t. general on any and all occasions. Dì síya muadtug Manílà, He
refuses to go to Manila. {1b} ása — where is one to get. Ása man ka ug
kwartang ibáyad ánà? Where will you get the money to pay for that?
{2} preceding infinitives (replacing a prefix pag-). Naglísud ku ug
saka, I had a hard time going up. {2a} with adjectives of manner.
Milakaw siya ug kusug, He walked away fast. {2a1} — ímu, íya, íla, etc.
by yourself, himself, themselves, etc. Káun ug ímu, Just go ahead and
eat on your own. Mutúyuk ug íya ra, It will turn all by itself.
{2b} after ayaw. Ayaw siya ug tan-áwa, Don’t look at him. {3} adj. plus
ug plus noun: ‘have’. Si Pidru dakù ug buktun, Pedro has big arms. Uy,
kanindut bayà níya ug mata! What beautiful eyes she has! {4} preceding
a non-specific genitive. {4a} marking the possessor. Anak ug hárì, The
son of a king. {4b} marking the agent. Gidágit ug banug, Was taken by a
hawk. {5} if, when. Ug maabut siya, pahibaw-a ku, When he arrives,
notify me. Ug aku pa nímu, If I were you. {5a} with indirect questions:
whether. Pangutan-a siya ug muabut ba ang barku ugmà, Ask him whether
the boat will arrive tomorrow. {5a1} with indirect questions containing
interrogatives. Nangutána aku ug unsa nà, I asked what that was.
{5b} linker for qualifying phrases. Nákù ug ímu nang nahuman, I thought
you had finished it already. Tingáli ug muanhi siya ugmà, Perhaps he
will come tomorrow. Syáru ug dì nà mahímù, I don’t believe that is
impossible. {6} or. Pritúhun ug tuláhun, paríha ra nákù, Deep fried or
stewed, it’s all the same to me. {7} and. Lakaw ug ayaw pagbálik! Go
away, and don’t come back! Sila si Huwan ug si Pidru ang mianhi, John
and Pedro were the ones who came here.

uga a {1} dry, having no moisture. Uga na kaáyu ang kupras, The copra
is very dry now. Ugang ubu, A dry (hard) cough. {2} lifeless, dry in
personality. Uga kaáyu nà siyang ikaisturya, He is very lifeless to
talk to. n dried fish. v {1} [APB; c1P] dry out; cause s.t. to do so.
Nag-uga (nagpauga) ku ug isdà, I am drying some fish. Muuga (mauga) ra
nà ug ihayhay, It will get dry if you hang it up. Nagkauga na ang
atábay, The well is drying up. Hiughan na ang ímung linadlad, The
clothes you were bleaching have gotten dry. {2} [B; c1] get lifeless
and dry in manner. Nauga na man ka run, You have become cool to us.
{3} [b4(1)] be affected by s.t. being dry. {3a} have a dry labor.
Naglísud pagpanganak ang babáyi kay naughan, The woman had a difficult
delivery because she had a dry labor. {3b} for one’s throat to be
parched. — ang tutunlan needing a drink (of liquor).

ugáhip n a contagious skin disease which forms itchy pustules that pop
and become painful, forming a crust, found most commonly around the
mouth, but spreading over the body. — likuslikus n k.o. ugáhip that
spreads over any part of the body. v [A123P; a4b4] get ugáhip.

ugahípun n k.o. very venomous snake, short and stout, having
dark-grayish body, yellowish front and black spots on the back.

ugáling short form: gáling. = gánì in all meanings except 5. ka-un
{1} one’s own. Ákù ning kaugalíngung kutsi, This is my own car. May
kaugalíngung banyu ang kwartu, The room has its own bathroom. Gigastu
ku ang kaugalíngun kung kwarta, I spent my own money. {1a} one’s home.
But-an ku nímu sa ákung kaugalíngun? You dare dictate to me in my own
house? {2} oneself. Nagsulti siya sa íyang kaugalíngun, She was talking
to herself. panga-un v [A2] manage a home. Hustu na siya sa idad nga
mangugalíngun, She is old enough to manage a home. n home, as it is
managed. kina-un(→) v [A13] {1} live on one’s own. {2} have one’s meals
on one’s own. Dì ta mangasíra. Magkinaugalingun lang ta, Let’s not
board. Let’s have our meals on our own. kaugalingnan n independence of
a nation. Nagpakamatay si Risal álang sa kaugalingnan sa átung násud,
Rizal gave his life for the independence of our country.

ugam n whitish substance coating the tongue and upper palate. v [A123P;
b4] get ugam.

ugang n mother hen.

ugángan n parent of one’s spouse. v {1} [B126] be, become one’s father-
or mother-in-law. {2} [A; c] have as a parent-in-law. Muugángan ka níla
nga pubri man, Would you like them to be your parents-in-law when they
are poor? -un(→) a one’s prospective parents-in-law.

ugat n vein, blood vessel. — mayur penis (humorous). v {1} [A2NP] for
the veins to come out from exertion or anger. Miugat (nangugat) ang
íyang líug sa íyang pagkanta, The veins on her neck bulged out when she
sang. {2} [A23] do s.t. with serious intent. Nangugat giyud siyag
hangyù nga muuban, He seriously asked to be taken along. paN- v [A2; b]
be angry. Pamínaw ug katarúngan. Mangugat ka man lang dáyun, Just
listen to reason. You must not get angry right away. pangli-(←) = ugat,
v1. ugat-ugat a leaves having lots of veins. v [B1456] for leaves to be
veined. ka-an n blood vessels. -un a full of prominent veins.

ugaúga = gaugáu.

úgay v [A; a1] fondle or stroke. Dúgay na ku nga wà makaúgay sa ákung
mga binuhì, It’s been a long time since I stroked my pets. Bátang
nag-úgay sa íyang tintin, A little boy playing with his thing.

ugba v {1} [A; a1] work arduously, earnestly. Adlaw-adlaw muugba si
Pidru sa íyang uma arun mabúhì ang pamilya, Pedro toils on his farm all
day long so his family may survive. {2} [A1] establish, found, bring
into being. Ílang gipasidunggan ang táwung nag-ugba sa kapunúngan, They
conferred an honor on the man who founded the organization. {3} [A; a]
reconstruct, work again on s.t. left to deteriorate or ruin. Mag-ugba
ta sa karáan nátung báy nga natun-as, Let’s rebuild our old dilapidated
house.

ugbáti = alugbáti.

ugbp. abbreviation for ug uban pa ‘etc.’ see uban.

ugbuk v {1} [A; c] plant or stick s.t. upright or erect. Mag-ugbuk mi
run sa mga pusti sa kural, We will now set up the fence posts.
Kandilíru ang ákung giugbúkan sa mga kandílà, I set the candles upright
on a candlestand. {1a} — ang, sa pálu [A; c] have sexual intercourse
with a woman (lit. implant the mast—slang). {2} [A; c1] construct,
build a structure. Ugbúkun (iugbuk) ba ang inyung balay dinhi? Will you
build your house here? {3} [a3b8] stand still as if rooted to the
ground. Naugbuk siya tungud sa kalísang, He stood stock-still in fear.
n stake.

ugbun n {1} mound, esp. a heap of finely-textured things. Usa ka ugbun
nga abu ang nahibilin sa táwung nagsulit, Only a small mound of ash was
left of the man who burned himself. {2} ashes. v {1} [B6] be, become a
small mound. Miugbun (naugbun) ang dapit nga gilubngan sa patayng irù,
The place where the dead dog was buried has formed a mound. {2} [B2]
burn to ashes. Naugbun na ang báy pag-abut níla, The house was a heap
of ashes when they arrived.

ugbus n young and unopened palm frond. v {1} [c1] do by fronds. {2} [A;
b(1)] remove young fronds. Ayawg ugbúsi ang lubi kay masálut, Do not
remove the young frond from the coconut because it will be stunted.

ugda, ugdà v [A; b(1)] initiate, introduce s.t. by first doing it.
Kinsa ninyu ang miugda ug kukabáyù sa mga unlan? Who of you started
this playing horse with the pillows? Ang mga Amirikánuy nakaugda
paggámit sa abúnu, The Americans initiated the use of fertilizer. pasi-
{1} = ugda. {2} [A; b(1)] sponsor. Prugráma nga gipasiugdáhan sa sabung
Laks, Soap opera sponsored by Lux soap. Banggà sa panugilánung
gipasiugdáhan sa LUDÁBI, A short-story contest sponsored by LUDABI.
tigpasi- n sponsor of a program, project.

ugdang a {1} heavy for one’s size. Ugdang kaáyu ning batáa bísan gamay,
This child is very heavy though he is small. Ugdang ning kasága kay
tambuk man, This is a heavy crab because it is fleshy. {2} serious,
matured for one’s age. Ugdang na kaáyu siyag nilihukan, She acts mature
for her age. {2a} serious in demeanor. Ugdang nga paníngug sa agálun,
The master spoke seriously. {3} weighty, full of meaning. Ugdang kaáyu
tung buut níyang ipasabut, What she meant to imply had more meaning
than would appear on the surface. v {1} [B12; b6] get to be heavy for
one’s size; mature, full of meaning. {2} [B236; b6] sink into the
bottom of water. Miugdang na ang pundu, The anchor has sunk to the
bottom. ka- n weight, seriousness, meaningfulness.

ugdaw v [A3P; a12] burn down completely to ashes with no flames left.
Naugdaw na ang ámung báy pag-ulì nákù, Our house was in ashes when I
arrived home. n burnt to ashes.

ugdu_1 a {1} for a dry measure to be heaping. Maigù ug barátu kay ugdu
ang takus, It comes out cheap because it is a heaping measure.
{2} rounded in shape and full. Ugdu kaáyu siya ug dughan, She has very
full breasts. v {1} [B; a12] be, become heaping, full, or rounded.
{2} [B3; b6] be piled up high. Muugdu ang labhanan ug paugmaan, The
soiled clothes will pile up if you leave them for tomorrow. pina- =
pinaulbu. see ulbu.

ugdu_2 = bugdu.

ugduk n {1} stake. {2} general name for eels of any sort. v [A; c]
plant a stake in the ground.

ugdul a short, trimmed. Gipalabihag ugdul níya ang íyang buhuk, She had
her hair cut very short. v [B12; c1] be trimmed short. Naugdul ang mga
mais kay giharíag tuhak sa manuk, The chickens pecked the corn plants
right down.

ugdung = ugdu_1.

ughad a for a throat to be sore. v {1} [B; b6] for the throat to get
sore. Nag-ughad ang ákung tunlan. Ubhun tingáli ku, I have a sore
throat. I’m probably getting a cough. {2} [AN; c1] expel phlegm by
coughing it out hard.

ughak = udhak.

ugíngut n body odor of unwashed perspiration and dirt. Nanimáhù lang
kang ugíngut, You have a terrible b.o.

ugis a {1} having completely white feathers. Limpiyu tan-áwun ang ugis
nga manuk, White-feathered chickens look clean. {2} fair of complexion.
Ugis kaáyu sila, They are very white. {2a} people belonging to the
white race. {2b} albino. v [B26; b6] be, become white-feathered,
white-skinned.

ugíut = ígut_1.

ugkad v {1} [A; a] dig, pull out s.t. that is completely or partly
buried or contained inside s.t. else. Láing dyíp ang miugkad sa dyíp
nga nalubung sa lápuk, Another jeep pulled out the jeep that got stuck
in the mud. Ang nakaugkad sa buláwang budha, The man who dug up the
golden Buddha. Giugkad sa kawatan ang ákung kaban, The thief dug up the
things in my trunk. {2} [A12; b8] find s.t. that was in s.t. or buried.

ugkal = ukal.

ugkat v {1} [A; a1b2] dig s.t. out from under s.t. Giugkat níla ang
natabunan, They dug out the person who had been buried. {2} [A; a12]
dig out or find out s.t. not known. Buut ba ninyung ugkátun ang ákung
kagahápun? Do you want to dig into my past?

ugkay (from ukay) v {1} [A; ab2] dig out s.t. buried. Mga pulis ang
nag-ugkay sa gilubngan sa gibunù, The policemen exhumed the murder
victim. {1a} [A; a12] ransack things in looking for s.t. Ákung ugkáyun
ang mga butang nímu básug túa didtu ang ákung rilu, I’ll ransack your
things in case my watch is there. 2 [A; a] stir s.t. thoroughly to mix
it. Ang muugkay sa harína kinahanglang ugag kamut, Whoever wants to mix
the flour must have dry hands. {2a} [B; b6] for a home to be broken.
Naugkay ang ílang panimalay tungud sa bisyu sa bána, The husband’s
vices finally broke their home.

ugmà n {1} tomorrow. — puhun (paabutun pa) n tomorrow, God willing (if
I am allowed to see it). Ugmà puhun na ku mularga, I’ll leave tomorrow,
God willing. {2} one’s future. Kinsay nasáyud sa átung ugmà? Who knows
what the future holds for us? — damlag n in the future, someday.
Magkítà ra ta ugmà damlag, We’ll see each other again someday.
v {1} [B256; b4(1)] for it to be the next day. Miugmà (naugmà) na lang
wà gihápun siya muabut, Another day came and he still hadn’t arrived.
Dì na nà siya kaugmaan (hiugmaan), He won’t live till the next day.
{2} [A; c1] put s.t. off till the next day. Ugmáa (iugmà) lang ang
ímung híkay, Put your party off till the next day. ugmaugmà v [A; c1]
put off doing s.t. Dì ku muugmaugmà ug akuy musáad, If I make a
promise, I won’t put it off. pa-, paka- v [A13; b6] let s.t. be, delay
oneself until the next day. Ayawg pakaugmai. Buháta ni dáyun, Don’t let
it wait till the next day. Do it right away. ka-un n one’s future. Wà
kay kaugmáun dinhi sa baryu, You have no future here in the village.
panghi- v [A23] get to be about the next day. Muabut si Mirli
manghiugmà, Mirlie will arrive by about tomorrow.

ugmad v [A; a12] {1} till the soil. Upawng yútà nga dílì ángayng
ugmárun, Barren land not worth tilling. {1a} develop or cultivate a
talent. Ang mga magtutudlù mauy muugmad sa mga útuk sa mga bátà,
Teachers develop the minds of the children. Masápì ang talintu ug mauy
maugmad, Talent that is developed is a source of livelihood. {2} build,
establish. Siyay nag-ugmad sa dráma balítaw, He wrote the first drama
wherein the dialogue was in the balítaw form. Giugmad níya ang únang
prindahanan, She established the first pawnshop. {3} [A; c1] prepare
rice for storage, winnowing it and allowing it to dry out somewhat. pa-
v [A1] set a paugmad fish corral. n a k.o. fish corral set in the deep
waters and allowed to remain there until it falls apart. ugmaran n s.t.
which is cultivated, worked on for one’s livelihood. Ang dágat mauy
ugmaran sa ílang panginabúhì, The sea is the source of their
livelihood. kaugmáran n development, s.t. attained by cultivation.
Siyay nagpaluyu sa kaugmáran sa pruyiktu sa riklamasiyun, He was behind
the development of the reclamation project. mag-r- n peasant. paN-
n occupation of tilling.

ugnat v {1} [A; c1] stretch out s.t. somewhat elastic. Ugnáta (iugnat)
ug maáyu ug dì ba tagù nga hilúha, Stretch the string out hard and see
if it is strong. {2} [B] lose elasticity from getting stretched out.
Miugnat (naugnat) ang íyang swítir nga gilubágan, His sweater is now
all stretched out because he wrung it out when he washed it. Nagkaugnat
ang lastiku sa ákung hapslip, The garter of my half-slip is getting
loose. pa- n exercise for the purpose of developing the body. v [A; c1]
exercise. Mupaugnat (magpaugnat) ku sa kusug káda buntag, I do some
exercise every morning.

ugnuk v [B126P; b3] be stunned, suddenly surprised. Naugnuk (napaugnuk)
siya sa kalit nga butu nga íyang nadungug, She was stunned by the
sudden explosion that she heard. Naugnuk siya dihang gisultían siya nga
karnis irù tung íyang gikaun, She did a double take when she was told
that what she was eating was dog’s meat. Ang íyang hinanálì nga
kamatáyun mauy nakaugnuk (nakapaugnuk) sa mga táwu, His sudden death
stunned the people.

ugnut = bugnut.

ugpak n cloth woven from abaca fiber. v {1} [A13; b6] wear abaca-fiber
cloth. {2} [b(1)] put abaca-fiber cloth as lining to stiffen the cloth.
{3} [a12] weave into abaca-fiber cloth.

ugpas = upas.

ugpù v {1} [A12] leap up to defend oneself or escape. Wà makaugpù ang
kawatan kay hiabtan man sa pulis, The policeman caught the thief before
he was able to get out of there. Wà makaugpù ang kuntra sa dihang
milayat si Rubinsun arun pagribáwun sa búla, There was nothing the
other team could do when Robinson jumped to get the ball on the
rebound. {2} [A; b(1)] for a child to bounce up and down when held
standing. Miugpù na ang bátà, The child has reached the stage he
bounces. a characterized with a bounce in walking. Ugpù ug linakwan
ning tagabúkid, Mountain folks walk with a bounce. ugpuugpù v [B; c1]
bounce, jounce up and down. Nag-ugpuugpù ang trák sa karsádang
batsihun, The bus is jouncing on the road that is full of potholes.

ugpung v [A] for plants that die after maturity to bear their last
leaves before bearing fruit. Mamúsù na nang sagínga kay miugpung na,
That banana is about to flower because it has born its last leaf buds.

ugput = igput.

ugsad v [B36; b6(1)] land, touch the ground in a gentle manner. Sa
dihang miugsad ang buwà sa sabun sa yútà, mibutu kini, When the soap
bubble landed on the ground, it burst. Ayaw iugsad (ipaugsad) ang tumuy
sa kurtína sa sawug, Don’t let the end of the curtain touch the floor.
ugsad-ugsad v {1} = ugsud-ugsud. see ugsud. {2} [A; b6] bounce or
jounce in riding on a rough road or sea. Nag-ugsad-ugsad ang trák sa
kabatsihan, The bus is bouncing up and down on the potholes. -in-
n footfalls. Kláru kaáyu sa sílung ang inugsad sa tiil sa naglakaw sa
táas, The footsteps upstairs are very loud downstairs.

ugsud n {1} stake, post. {2} firewood. v [A; c] {1} drive a stake into
the ground. Mag-ugsud na ta sa mga halígi sa kural, Let’s drive in the
posts for the fence. {1a} throw s.t. down with force to the ground as
if driving a stake. {2} [A; b6] add firewood to make a flame higher.
Ákung ugsúran ang ákung gilung-ag arun malútug dalì, I’ll add firewood
to the fire beneath the rice I am cooking so that it will get cooked
soon. ugsud-ugsud v [A; c1] stamp the feet lightly, usually in childish
refusal. Ayaw ugsud-ugsúra (iugsud-ugsud) nang ímung tiil ug sugúun ka,
Don’t stamp your feet when you’re told to do s.t.

ugsuk = úsuk in all meanings except n2.

ugtad v {1} [B236] for ropes or like materials to snap under force or
abrasion. Miugtad (naugtad) ang písì sa kakusug sa pagbira, The rope
snapped when it was pulled strongly. {2} [A2] get loose after the
tether rope snapped. Muugtad giyud nang kábaw kay gabuk na ang hikut,
That carabao will surely get loose because the tether rope is weakened.

ugtak v {1} [A; b3] for chickens to squawk in fright. {2} [B2; c1] for
the voice to be loud and abrupt. Miugtak ang íyang sinultihan karung
kwartáhan na siya, He speaks in a loud and gruff tone now that he has
become rich. n action of squawking. a having a gruff and loud voice.

ugtas v {1} [B1; c1] tire oneself out, be exhausted. Nagkaugtas siya sa
nadúgay nang lánguy, He was becoming exhausted after swimming for a
long time. {1a} get worn out emotionally. Naugtas na ku ug tambag nímu,
I’m exhausted from trying to give you advice. {2} [B] for rope or wire
to snap and break after heavy use or friction. Muugtas (maugtas) ang
alambri sa síging bag-id sa batu, The wire will break from rubbing
against the stone. {3} [B126; b] for a life to end, usually after long
suffering.

ugtud (from utud) v [B2; a12] break, chip off, break into pieces.
Naugtud ang líug sa butilyang napangkà, The neck of the bottle broke
off when he banged it against s.t. Naugtud ang mga halígi nga giánay,
The post broke into pieces when the termites attacked it. n pieces
broken off.

ugtuk a {1} still. Ugtuk karun ang dágat, The sea is calm now.
{2} slow, almost dragging. Mas ugtuk mulakaw ang kábaw kay sa báka, The
water buffalo walks more slowly than a cow. v {1} [B46] stand still,
stop. Muugtuk ang rilu kun dì yawíhan, The clock will stop if it is not
wound. {2} [A; b] do s.t. slowly, drag in one’s work. Muugtuk
(mag-ugtuk) sila sa ílang trabáhu kun way magbantay, They drag their
work when nobody is watching. {3} [A; b3] mope or brood over s.t.

ugtus v [B1; a12] exhaust oneself emotionally. Naugtus kug gastu sa
ímung pagtuun, I’ve worn myself out paying for your schooling. Ugtúsun
pa giyud ku nímu ánang ímung binúang, You still have to worry me to
death with your shenanigans. a be exhausted emotionally.

ugud short form: gud. {1} particle accompanying a statement of
explanation. Ang ákù gung gianhi nímu, The reason I came here.
Nangutána lang gud ku kay ... I’m asking you because ... Ang ákù gud,
ug mahibaw-an unyà, The thing that I’m worried about is if he finds
out. Misyágit. Tíaw mu gud sakit kaáyu, He screamed. Because imagine,
it was so painful. man — because. Wà ku palita kay mahal man gud, I did
not buy it because it was expensive. {1a} ugud ba particle initial in a
sentence explaining why one has put a certain question. ‘Ngánung
nangutána ka?’—‘Ugud ba, arun mahibáwu,’ ‘Why do you ask?’—‘Oh, I just
want to know.’ ‘Ngánung nangutána kag muadtu ku?’—‘Ugud ba, náa tay
ákung ipadá nímu,’ ‘Why do you ask if I’m going?’—‘I would like to have
you take s.t. for me, if you would.’ {1b} particle affirming s.o.’s
statement casting aspersions. ‘Dátù man kahà ngánung nag-antus mag
maistra?’—‘Ugud,’ ‘If she is rich, how come she puts up with
teaching?’—‘I’ve been wondering that myself.’ {2} in questions or
exclamations. {2a} with interrogatives: in the world. Ngánu gud nà! Why
in the world should it be like that. Anus-a gud nà nímu humana, When in
the world are you going to finish it? {2b} with nominal predicates:
what [noun] are you talking about? Sinsíyu gud. Wà man tuy suklì, What
change are you talking about? You don’t have any change coming. {2c} ba
— how is it possible that [so-and-so] should happen? Kay wà pa ba guy
halin? You mean to say there haven’t been any sales till now? Mangáwat
ba gud ku? You think I could possibly steal? {2d} in exclamations:
particle exclaiming about s.t. discovered for the first time. Kadakù na
gud nímug idad! My! How old you are! Kadaghan gud nímug gihátag, You
sure gave me a lot! {3} in commands: [do so-and-so] even though you
don’t want to. Sígi gud. Ihatud na lang gud ku, Come on! Take me there
already! Ihátag na gud nà, Go on now, give it to him. {3a} used
sarcastically in commands: why don’t you just [do]. Buk-a na lang gud
nang tanan. Barátu bítaw, Why don’t you just break all of them while
you’re at it? They’re so cheap. {3b} ra — see ra.

ug-ug_1 v {1} [A; c1] jog, move bouncing up and down. Muug-ug na gánì
ning kabayúa timailhan nga gikápuy na, Once the horse starts to jog it
shows that it is tired. {2} [B3(1)6; b6] be jarring. Muug-ug (maug-ug)
gánì ang sakyanan pamaúlan ku, If the vehicle jounces up and down, I’ll
get fatigued. {3} [AB; c16] shake, cause to move up and down or back
and forth. Dì mumata ang bátà ug akuy muug-ug, The child won’t wake up
if I shake him. Muug-ug (maug-ug) ang mga balay ug maglínug, The houses
will shake if there is an earthquake. Nakaug-ug ka na sa midisína? Have
you shaken the bottle of medicine? n {1} jogging, jouncing. {2} art of
shaking s.t. a jouncy, bouncy. Ug-ug kaáyu ang dálan, The road is very
bumpy. ka- n bounciness, jounciness. Tungud sa kaug-ug sa dyíp, Because
of the way the jeep bounced.

ug-ug_2 v [B] for open wounds or sores to putrify.

ug-úg = ulug-úlug.

uguk_1 a short-necked due to fat or thickness of the neck. v [B1N; b6]
have a short and fleshy neck. Ang báka nangúguk, The cow has a hump on
its neck. Ang íyang katambuk mauy nakauguk (nakapauguk) sa íyang líug,
Obesity has caused his neck to look short.

uguk_2 a moronic, having feeble mental capacities. v [B12; b6] be
moronic.

úgum v {1} [A; c1] hold or keep s.t. inside the mouth. Ayaw ugúma
(iúgum) ang kan-un sa ímung bàbà, Don’t keep the food in your mouth.
{2} [A13; a12] enclose s.t. within it as if contained in the mouth.
Nag-úgum ug pútut ang búlak, The flower encloses a fruit bud. {3} [A;
c1] harbor emotions. Ayaw ugúma (iúgum) ang ímung mga kaguul, Don’t
keep your problems to yourself. {4} [A; a12] swindle contributions,
funds entrusted to one. Ug siyay matisuríru, ugúmun lang níyag átung
ámut, If he is made the treasurer, he will just pocket our
contributions. {5} [A; a12] answer or assume responsibility for a crime
committed to keep accomplices from getting involved. Ayaw mu kahadluk
nga masakpan ta. Tutal ugúmun man nákù ang tanan, Don’t be afraid if we
get caught. I’ll take complete responsibility.

úgung v {1} [A; a12] spin a top. Ugúnga ang kasing arun hibaw-an ta ug
karagan ba, Spin the top so we’ll know if it spins well. {2} [B23(1);
c1] be steady and without a wobble. {3} [A2; c1] run or drive very fast
and at a steady speed. n action of spinning a top. a {1} spinning
steadily, without wobbling. Úgung kaáyu ang ákung kasing, My top spins
very steadily. {2} running fast at a steady speed. Úgung siyang midágan
kay nahadluk man, He ran fast without stopping because he was afraid.

ugut v [A13; b3(1)] frown in distaste, or from not being permitted s.t.
Dì ku mag-ugut ug sugúun ku ni Nánay, I won’t frown if Mother sends me
on an errand.

ugut-úgut v [A; b3] roll in suppressed laughter.

uguy v [B2] for growth to be retarded or stunted. Miuguy (nauguy) ang
mga búlak nga gitanum iláwum sa kasagingan, The flowers planted under
the banana trees did not do well. Ang bug-at nga trabáhu makauguy
(makapauguy) sa mga bátà, Hard work can stunt a child’s growth.

úguy v [A; a12] rock a child slowly in the arms, sway the body gently
as in time to slow music. Siyay miúguy (nag-úguy) pagpakatúlug sa bátà,
She rocked the baby in her arms to sleep. Ugúya ang bátà, Rock the
child in your arms. uguy-úguy v [A; b] dance to slow music
(colloquial). n slow dance music with the partners close together
(colloquial). uguy-úguy blus = uguy-úguy, n.

ugwad v [A; a] turn the earth over with a knife, bar, or s.t. similar.
Ugwárun lang nátù ang yútà sa kabatuhan, We’ll dig up the soil near the
rocks with a bar. Ugwárun sa bábuy ang tanum ug dì kuralun, The pig
will uproot the plants if you don’t fence them. n bar to dig the soil
up with. ugwad-ugwad = igwad-igwad. see igwad.

ugyab v [A; c1] for a group to break into laughter. Miugyab sila ug
katáwa sa ákung sinínà nga nabali, They broke into laughter upon seeing
me with my dress on backwards.

uha v [A; b6] for a newborn child to cry. Miuha ang bátà sa pagguwà,
The child cried when it came out. n cry of a newborn baby.

uhag a restlessly moving about. v [A] move restlessly with bouncy
actions. Way muuhag kun kantáhun na ang nasudnung áwit, Nobody move
when the national anthem is sung. Kun mag-uhag mu matikwang ang búti,
If you move around restlessly, the rowboat will capsize.

uhaldris n k.o. cookie. v [A; a2] make, eat, or serve uhaldris.

uhális n buttonhole. Ang dakung butúnis dakug uhális, High rank carries
great responsibility. (Lit. Big buttons have big buttonholes.) v [A;
b6] make buttonholes.

uhang n space between two things which are supposed to be touching or
fitting each other. Dì ku makalusut sa uhang sa kural, I can’t pass
through the spaces between the fence. v [B; b6] for things that are
supposed to be solid to have spaces in between them. Miuhang (nauhang)
ang bungbung sa pagkúlù sa mga káhuy, The wallboards developed spaces
between them when the boards shrunk. uhang-uhang v [AN; b6] {1} eat
snacks casually. {2} go to other people’s houses to have meals. Ang
táwung manguhang-uhang mu rag irung way tag-íya, A person who goes
around to have his meals is like a stray dog.

úhas n {1} cutting or piercing instrument that is part of s.t. bigger:
drill bit, saw blade, knife blade, barbs on a hook, et al.
{2} matchstick. Mangáyù lang ku ug tulu ka úhas sa puspuru, I’ll just
ask for three matchsticks. {3} lead of a pencil. v [A; b6(1)] put in a
cutting or piercing instrument to its handle.

úhas bulantis n leaflets.

uhaw a {1} thirsty. Maay tag náay túbig kay uhaw kaáyu, It would be
nice if there were water because I’m very thirsty. {1a} having a strong
craving. Uhaw ku sa lawasnung kalípay, I’m hungry for pleasures of the
body. {2} devoid. Kinabúhing uhaw sa kalípay, A life devoid of
happiness. n thirst. v [A123P; a4] {1} be thirsty. Ug akuy uhawun
muúgum lang kug kandi, If I feel thirsty, I’ll just put a piece of
candy in my mouth. {2} feel a longing, craving. Giuhaw aku sa pagpanggà
sa inahan, I thirst for a mother’s love. hiN- v [A13N; c6] quench the
thirst. n s.t. to quench the thirst. ka- n {1} thirst. {1a} craving.
{2} emptiness.

uháwun n k.o. big parrot fish about 2′ long and 8″ wide, having
blue-green scales on the dorsal region and whitish-yellow scales on the
ventral region.

uhay n seed-bearing panicle (e.g. as of rice but not corn). v {1} [a12]
harvest s.t. by just taking the whole panicle. Uhayun nátù ang pag-áni
sa humay, We’ll harvest the rice by panicles. {2} [AN; b4] grow
panicles. Miuhay (nanguhay, giuhayan) na ang átung humay, Our rice is
bearing panicles now.

uhípan = ulahípan.

uhu word representing the sound of coughing.

uhú so, I caught you. Uhú, sayup na pud ka, Aha, you made a mistake
again. Uhú, dáan pa lagi ku, Aha! Just as I thought. Uhú, pildi diay
ka, Aha! So you lost!

uhù as expected. Ug uhù da man, miguwang mananáug si Ilurdi, As
expected, Elorde came out the winner. Uhù túud, namatay ang masakitun,
Just as one would expect, the patient died.

úhù before [do]ing. Úhù ka mutubag, panigurúa únag hustu ka, Before you
give your answer, make sure you are right. — pa {1} wait a minute. Úhù
pa kay nagkaun pa ku, Just a minute. I’m still eating. {2} just a
second, to change the subject. Úhù pa diay, nagdá ba tu kug bág? By the
way, did I have my bag along?

uhún = uhú.

úhung n k.o. white mushroom. mudugù pay — harder than getting blood out
of a mushroom, said of women past child-bearing age who are not likely
to menstruate or of people who are cheap. Tihik siya kaáyu. Mudugù pay
úhung, He’s terribly cheap. It’s easier to get blood out of a stone
(lit. mushroom). v [A2; b6] cook this k.o. mushroom. -an(→) n place
where mushrooms grow readily.

uhut, úhut n straw of rice or other grain-bearing grasses. v [B6; b6]
be reduced to straw, become all straw. Miuhut (nauhut, nag-uhut) ang
humay kay gikaun sa máya ang mga lugas, The rice plant became all straw
because the ricebirds ate the grains.

úk = uluk.

uka v [B; b6] split one’s sides with laughter. Giukhan (nauka) giyud
kug katáwa sa ímung binaylihan, I just about died laughing at the way
you dance.

ukab v [APB; b5] {1} open with an upward or lifting motion, get opened.
Akuy miukab sa kaban, I opened the trunk. Wà siya makaukab sa láta, He
could not open the tin. Librung nag-ukab sa lamísa, A book lying open
on the table. Ukba (iukab, ukbi) ang ímung bàbà, Open your mouth.
{2} pry s.t. up, open. Akuy miukab sa batu, I turned the stone over.
Dikabra ray makaukab sa mga salug nga ilisánan, Only a crowbar can pry
the floorboards loose. {3} [B126] for a part of the body, clothing to
get a rip or slash. Naukab ang íyang lapalapa kay nakatunub ug bildu,
His sole got slashes in it because he stepped on glass. n opened
upwards, ripped off, slashed open. ukab-úkab a s.t. that can be opened
and closed. n the general name for bivalves. v [B1256] be s.t. that
could be easily opened and closed. ukban n tangerine, a loose-skinned
orange that is easy to open. v [c1] plant tangerines.

ukabhang = alukabhang.

ukadyang v [A; c1] {1} turn things upside down to search. Ukadyánga
(iukadyang) ang tanan arun makit-an, Search everything so that it can
be found. {2} put things in utter disarray. Kinsay nag-ukadyang sa
ákung aparadur? Who disarranged the things in my cabinet? {3} [A123P;
a3] be agog or put into frenzied action. Naukadyang sila pagkatribukar
nga kulángan ang sápì, They were thrown into a dither upon finding out
that the money was short.

ukal v {1} [AB; a] peel off, detach s.t. from a surface to which it is
firmly attached, esp. over its entire surface; become so. Wà pa muukal
(maukal) ang unud sa lubi, The coconut meat has not detached from its
shell. Nag-ukal ang tikud sa sapátus, The heel is coming off the shoes.
Nagkaukal na ang pintal sa dáang balay, The paint of the old house is
peeling off. {2} [A3P; a12] take out or away from s.t. as if detached.
Ukala na nang bátà sa íyang inahan, Take that child away from its
mother. Dì na siya maukal sa pagkamaistru, He can’t be removed from his
teaching post.

ukang v {1} [AB2; c1] remove s.t. attached to a surface. Dílì na siya
makaukang sa kwadru nga gilansang sa bungbung, He can no longer remove
the frame that he nailed to the wall. Maukang ning gipapilit ug
mainitan, These things which are pasted on will come off when the sun
gets on them. {2} [AB2C; a1] cease to do s.t. Dúgay nà silang muukang
(mag-úkang) sa ílang pag-ínum, It will take them a long time to finish
their drinking spree. Dúgay naukang ang íyang panan-aw sa libru, It
took him a long time to take his gaze off the book. Ukánga (uknga) nang
nagsinumbagay, Separate those people that are fighting.

ukas v [A12; b8] {1} catch s.o. in the act. Naukasan sa bána ang íyang
asáwa sa makauúlawng kahimtang, The husband caught his wife in an
embarrassing position. {2} get a chance to do s.t. Mangáwat siyag
makaukas, He steals if he is given the chance.

ukasiyun n {1} occasion, a favorable opportunity. Ukasiyun nà nímu.
Pahimudsi, That’s a chance for you. Take advantage of it. Way ukasiyun
nga sarang kagamítan ning sinináa, There’s no occasion for which I can
wear this dress. {2} trip of public transportation. Wà nay ukasiyun
rung mga urása, There are no more buses at this hour. v {1} [AN; c1]
take advantage of an opportunity. Nangukasiyun siya pagbisíta samtang
wà didtu ang ginikánan, He took the opportunity of visiting her while
her parents weren’t there. {2} [A12] get a chance to do s.t. Mangáwat
siya ug makaukasiyun, He steals if he gets a chance. paN- n action of
taking an opportunity. Kining ákung pagkúyug nímu pangukasiyun kay
malibri kus plíti, I’m taking advantage of the chance to go with you to
get a free ride.

úkat = ugkat.

ukay v {1} [A; a1] stir or agitate s.t. Ukaya nu ang linúgaw, Please
stir the porridge. Rík ang iukay sa humay nga gibulad, Use a rake to
mix up the rice we are drying. {1a} [A; a] plow lightly, esp. a second
time, across existing furrows. Maáyu giyud nga ukayun ang daruhan úsà
tudlínga, It is wise to plow the field lightly a second time before you
make the furrows. {2} [AN; a2] turn things upside down in searching.
Náa ra nà dihà ug ímu nang ukayun, If you turn everything upside down,
you’ll see it is there. {2a} [A12; b8] find s.t. by turning things
upside down. Naukayan ang píkas sinílas sa basúra, He found the other
slipper after they ransacked the garbage. {3} [B126; a12] stir s.o. up.
Naukay ang mga táwu pagsúnug, The people were all excited when there
was a fire. n s.t. to stir with. ig-l-(←) = ukay, n.

úkay O.K., I give agreement.

ukba v [B; a] get detached from what it was stuck to. Ákung ukbáhun ang
pánit sa inasal, I’ll peel off the skin from the roasted pig. a having
come off.

ukhab = abhak.

úki a {1} O.K., all right. Úki kaáyu ang ímung trabáhu, Your work is
all right. {2} in agreement. Dílì ku úki ánà, I won’t go along with
that. n approval. Nagpaábut pa sa íyang úki, Still waiting for his
approval. v [A; a3b] give one’s approval. Siyay miúki (nag-úki) sa
ákung ripurt nga gisumitir, He approved the report that I submitted. Wà
maúki (maukíhi) ang plánu, The plan was not approved.

ukiduk, ukidúki emphatic expression of approval or agreement.

ukikà humorous for ukiduk.

úkit v {1} [AN; a] peel off s.t. with the front teeth or take little
things off or apart with the fingers. Ukítun pagkáun ang pakwan, You
eat watermelon seeds by peeling them with your front teeth. Mahímù nga
kuku ang iúkit, You can peel it off with your fingernails. {2} [AN;
a12] pry into s.o.’s secrets. Ngánung mangúkit ka sa ákung kagahápun?
Why do you want to pry into my past? {3} [AN; c1] study s.t. in detail
to find s.t. out. Nangúkit siyag unsay dipirinsiya sa mutur, He’s
examining the motorcycle to see what is wrong with it. ukit-ukitan,
ukit-ukitun, ma-un a curious or nosey. Ukit-ukitun kaáyu ning táwung
libakíra, This gossipmonger sure is nosey.

ukíuk v [A2; b6(1)] squeeze, penetrate deep into. Miukíuk sa íyang
tanlag ang mga sudiyà sa namatay níyang inahan, The words of reproach
from his dying mother penetrated deep into his soul. Dì ka makaukíuk
dihà kay bagà kaáyu ang táwu, You can’t elbow your way through because
the crowd is so thick. Húmuk ang yútà nga giukiúkan sa wati, The worm
wiggled into the soft earth.

ukiut, ukíut = kulíkut (but not kulikut).

uklab = ukab, v.

uklaba v [B126] fall down forward. Nauklaba ku dihang nasángit ang
ákung tiil sa tuud, I fell down forward when my foot got caught on a
stump.

ukmil = utmil.

uknul v {1} [A3P; a3] be mildly surprised or startled. Mauknul
(mahiuknul) giyud ang táwu nga makakità nímu, People will be surprised
to see you. Nauknul ku pagkabalità nákù, I was taken aback on hearing
the news. {2} [B] hesitate to do s.t., esp. with the action of starting
and then stopping suddenly. Ngánung muuknul ka man sa pagsulud? Why do
you stop suddenly before coming in? Muuknul kung mugámit ánà kay
dilikádu ang tag-íya, I hesitate to use that because the owner is
fussy. uknul-uknul v [B; c1] move in a bouncing, jouncing way.
Nag-uknul-uknul ang trák sa libaungung karsáda, The bus jounced over
the road that was full of holes. Tagabúkid nga mag-uknul-uknul nga
maglakaw, A mountaineer that bounces up and down as he walks.

ukpaw v {1} [A2] leap while in a squatting position or in a manner like
the frog. Miukpaw ang bakì ngadtus túbig, The frog leaped into the
water. {2} [B; c1] walk with a bounce. Muukpaw ang linakwan sa táwung
naánad ug puyù sa búkid bísan ug mapátag na ang laktan, People who are
used to the mountains bounce when they walk, even on level areas.
ukpaw-ukpaw v [A12] walk with a bounce or gallop. Nag-ukpaw-ukpaw ug
maáyu ang kabáyù, The horse was galloping wildly.

ukra_1 n okra.

ukra_2 (from rauk—slang) n money.

uksidyǐn, uksihína n oxygen. v [b5] use oxygen on s.o.

uksihináda n hydrogen peroxide. v [b6] apply or clean s.t. with
hydrogen peroxide.

uksihínu = uksidyǐn.

uksilyu v {1} [A; a12] borrow s.t., esp. for immediate and temporary
use. Kun masakit ang mga bátà muuksilyu mig binatunan sa ka Máma, When
the children get sick we temporarily use Mother’s maid. Uksilyúha ang
íyang awtu sa Duminggu, Borrow his car on Sunday. {2} [A; c1] request
or hire s.o. to help or assist in work. Nag-uksilyu kug kusiníru pára
sa pyista, I’m hiring a cook for the fiesta. {2a} be an assistant. Ang
ákung mga anak ang muuksilyu nákù sa nigusyu, My children are the ones
who assist me in my business. n helper, assistant.

uksináda = uksihináda. agwa — = uksihináda.

uksirbǎr = ubsirbǎr.

uksu n acronym for OXO, a gang of Visayan hoodlums in Manila.

Ukt. abbreviation for Uktubri ‘October’.

uktába_1 v [AP; c16] postpone, put off to a later date. Wà nay lugar
nga uktabáhun (iuktába) pa ang inyung kasal, There’s no more time for
your wedding to be postponed. Mauktába ang sibil sirbis ug náay líkids,
They will postpone the civil service test if there is a leakage.
n postponement. Pila ka adlaw ang uktába sa didláyin? How many days is
the postponement of the deadline?

uktába_2 n octave. v [c6] raise the pitch an octave higher. Átung
iuktába ang paníngug kay ubus ra kaáyu, We shall raise the pitch an
octave higher because it is too low now.

Uktubri n October. see abril for verb forms.

uku, ukù expression uttered to babies three or four months old, the
interpretation of the baby’s cooing. v [A3] for a three- or
four-month-old baby to coo in response when talked to, tickled, blown.
Makalingaw ang bátà basta makamau nang muukù, A baby is a lot of fun
when it starts to coo back at you when you talk to it.

úkù = úkuy_2.

úkub v {1} [A; b] cling or hold on firmly to. Miúkub ang bátà sa íyang
yáya dihang ákù untà siyang kuháun, The child held on firmly to her
nursemaid when I was about to take her. Miúkub na ang kula, The glue
has set. Hiukuban giyud ka dihà ug lintà ug muúbug ka, If you go wading
over there you will get leeches on you. {2} [B; a] for two convex
things to fit together at their brims. Muúkub ning duha ka kartun,
These two boxes are the same size because the edges match perfectly.
Nag-úkub ang duha ka ngábil, Their two lips met and held to each other.
{3} [A2; b(1)] bite, letting the teeth sink in, or for an insect to
bite. Miúkub lang dáyun ang irù sa ákung bitíis nga wà muúsig, The dog
sank its teeth in my legs without barking at me. pa- v [A; b(1)] apply
dry cupping on s.t. to suck out undesirable matter. Nawálà ang sakit sa
ákung likud nga gipaukúban, My backache disappeared after dry cupping
was applied. ma-un a penetrating, piercing (literary). Maukúbung
pagsud-ung, A penetrating look.

uk-uk v {1} [A23P; c1] draw back, shrink back into. Miuk-uk ang úlu sa
bau pag-ági nákù, The turtle drew its head back when I passed by. Gustu
na lang kung muuk-uk sa kaúlaw, I wanted to shrink into the floorboards
with shame. — ang butbut v [A23; b4] back out, decide not to do s.t.
that one earlier showed interest in doing. Miuk-uk ang butbut ni Pidru.
Karun nga pakantáhun na untà, midumílì na hinúun, Pedro chickened out.
Now that we want to have him sing, he refuses. — ang dílà v [B2456] be
tongue-tied. Walà dáyun siya makatíngug kay miuk-uk ang íyang dílà sa
túmang katingála, He couldn’t say a word because he was tongue-tied
with amazement. {2} [B26; b6] shrink, esp. of cloth. Miuk-uk (nauk-uk)
ang ákung panaptun human ihúmul, My cloth shrunk after it was soaked.
{3} [B; b6] go down in value or worth. Miuk-uk ang prisyu sa palalítun,
The price of goods has gone down. {4} [A123P; a4b4] be infested with
cockroaches. n cockroach. Pubripubri sa suuk náa giyuy uk-uk, No matter
how homely a girl may be, s.o. will court her. (Lit. No matter how poor
the corner, there is bound to be a cockroach.) Ngánung nagminátay ka,
mu ra ka mag namatyag uk-uk, Why are you wailing? You’re acting as if
you lost a beloved cockroach (i.e. it’s not worth crying about).

úkul n {1} lump which is small enough to be held in the hand. {2} lump
of leftover rice. Nagbitbit ang bátà ug úkul nga gisulaan níyag bulad,
The child is carrying a lump of leftover rice which he ate with his
dried fish. v [AB; c1] form lumps, cause s.t. to do so. Muúkul ang
pawdird milk ug dílì kutáwun pag-áyu, Powdered milk will form lumps if
you don’t stir it well.

ukun-úkun v [A3P; c1] hesitate to do s.t. Dì ku muukun-úkun arun ingnun
nga ísug ku, I won’t hesitate so that they’ll say that I have guts.
Ayaw ukun-ukúna (iukun-úkun) ang ímung pagdáwat, ábi pa lang wà ka
kaayun, Don’t hesitate to accept it or else they will think you don’t
appreciate it.

ukupar v [A; b5] {1} occupy or take possession of by settlement or
seizure. Wà pay nakaukupar ánang isláha, No one has ever settled on
that island. Ang lugar nga giukupahan sa armi, The place occupied by
the army. {2} take up most of a space. Ang lamísa miukupar sa gamayng
lawak, The table took up most of the space in the small room. {2a} take
up time. Naukupar ang tanan kung panahun sa mga pitsipitsi, My time was
taken up with trivialities. ukupádu a {1} for a space to be occupied.
Ukupádu ning lingkuranána, This seat is occupied. Ukupádu na kaáyu ang
átung sakyanan, Our bus is already full. {2} busy. Ukupádu kaáyu mi kay
nagpriparar sa pista, We are busy preparing for the feast. v {1} [B12;
c1] get occupied. {2} [B12; b6] be busy with much work.

ukupasiyun n {1} occupation. Wà ka bay láing ukupasiyun gawas sa
pagyampungad sa tubaan? Have you nothing else to occupy your time than
hanging around the toddy stand? {2} the Japanese occupation in World
War Two.

ukut v [B456; b6] get stuck into s.t. deep such that it is hard to
disengage. Miukut ang dyip sa lápuk, The jeep got stuck in the mud. Mga
libun nga nag-ukut sa dunggan sa irù, Ticks sticking to the dog’s ears.
ma-un a penetrating (literary).

ukuy v [AN; a12] snoop, look about in a sneaking prying way. Muukuy
nang bayhána sa íyang bána, That woman spies on her husband. Akung
ukuyun (ukyun) ang mga bátà ug wà ba manglákaw, I’ll spy on the
children and see if they didn’t go out.

úkuy_1 n dish of meat, shrimp, and bean sprouts fried in dough. v [A;
c1] have, make úkuy.

úkuy_2 n a supernatural being in the shape of a small man, residing in
the sea, said to drown people. v [a4] be drowned by an úkuy.

ukyab v {1} [A23P] be suddenly excited or startled. Miukyab ang ákung
ginhawaan sa pagkahibalu nga may dakung hā́s nga nakasulud, I was
startled to know that a big snake had entered the house. {1a} [A23]
make an uproar due to excitement and thrill. Miukyab ang mga táwu
pagpangatáwa pagkakità nílang Dulpi nga nagbinabayi, The people laughed
uproariously when they saw Dolphy dressed as a woman. {2} [B26; b3]
leave hurriedly in fright. Miukyab (naukyab) ang mga langgam pagkakità
námù, The flock of birds flew away upon seeing us. a {1} talking in an
upsetting, overly-frightened way. Hápit na kunu matápus ang kalibútan,
pū́ng pa sa mga táwung ukyab kaáyung manulti, The people who are
nervously apprehensive say the world is going to end. {2} easily
stirred into doing s.t. Ukyab kaáyu nang mga tawhána kay dalì ra
kaáyung patuúhun, Those people are easily stirred up because it’s easy
to lead them to believe. pa- v {1} [A; b6(1)] cause excitement or
thrill. Ang íyang pagsulti nga ubsirbahan ang tanang klási nakapaukyab
sa mga maistru, He got the teachers nervous by telling them that their
classes would be observed. {2} [A; a12] flush a bird from hiding. Akuy
mupaukyab sa buntug. Listus pagtíru, I will flush out the quail. Be
ready to shoot. n thrill, s.t. causing excitement. Punù sa mga paukyab
ang isturyang ditiktib, A detective story is full of suspenseful
episodes. ma-un a suspenseful.

ukyù v [A2P; b(1)] shrink back into a hole or a place of hiding. Miukyù
ang kágang dihang íyang gikúhit, The land crab shrunk back to the hole
when he poked it with a stick.

ukyut a {1} tapered, tapering. Ukyut ang tumuy sa lápis, The tip of the
pencil is tapered. {2} body or form having irregularly shaped surfaces
or sides. Ukyut ang pabúrut níya, His balloon has an irregular form.
n the part of a body or form that has sunk or depressed. Anhà putla sa
ukyut ang lubi, Cut the coconut tree on the part of the trunk that is
narrow. v [B; c1] for part of a body or form to become depressed or
irregularly shaped due to depressions, become tapered. n sweepstakes
(humorous).

úlà (not without l) v [A; c] shed blood as a sacrifice (literary).
Muúlà ku sa ákung dugù álang sa yútang natawhan, I’ll shed my blood for
my native land.

úlag v {1} [AN2; b(1)] for animals to copulate. Giulágan na ang bigal
sa butakal, The boar served the sow. {2} [A2SN] be in heat, crave
intercourse. Nag-ulag na ning irúa kay hingári lang ug kúyug sa laki,
This dog is in heat because it is going around with the male.
{2a} behave flirtatiously to evoke masculine attention (as if in
heat—somewhat coarse). Kanang íyang kinataw-an ug linihukan way láin
kun dílì nag-úlag, She is laughing and acting no different from a bitch
in heat. n = kaúlag. ulag-ulag v [A13] act immodestly by being forward
to men. Ang babáying mag-ulag-ulag dì tahúrun sa mga laláki, An
immodest woman is not respected by men. a = ulágun. see also uwagúwag.
-an(→) = -un. ka- n sex urge. ma-un, -un a sexually lustful. v [B12]
become over-sexed.

ulahi a {1} last in a group to do s.t. Ulahi siya kaáyu nga nakahuman,
He was the last to finish. {2} late. Ulahi ka na kaáyu sa paniudtu, You
are very late for dinner. {3} recent, latest. Mau niy ulahi nga gulà,
This is the most recent issue. karung — recently. Naáyu na siya apan
karung ulahi nabughat, She had already recovered but recently she had a
relapse. {4} later, not the early days of one’s life. Sa ulahing mga
panahun sa íyang kinabúhì nabúang siya, In the later days of his life
he became crazy. v {1} [B126] be the last in doing s.t. {2} [B126] be
late for s.t. Maulahi ka giyud ug maglangaylángay ka dihà, You’ll
surely be late if you tarry over there. {3} [A; c1] leave s.t. for
later. Ulahia (iulahi) na lang ang uban nga dì na madala, Just leave
those things you cannot take along behind. pa- v {1} [A1; c] be the
last, do s.t. as the last thing. Aku lay mupaulahi, I’ll just be the
last one to go. Ipaulahi ang pagplansa, Do the ironing as the last
thing. {2} [A3] allow oneself to be left behind. Dì giyud si Maríya
magpaulahi sa urug, Maria won’t allow herself to be left behind by the
styles. paN- v [A23] {1} be way too late, be behind the times. Karun ka
pa kadungug? Nangulahi ka diay, You just heard about it? You are behind
the times. {2} be at the rear of s.t. Nangulahi sila sa prusisiyun,
They were at the rear of the procession. n the one at the rear.
Pangulahing ligid, Rear wheel. ka- n delay, lateness. kaulahían n the
last. sa — = sa kaulahíay. pangulahían = pangulahi, n, v2. kaulahíay sa
— in the long run. Tingáli ug magbásul ka sa kaulahíay, You might
regret it in the long run (in the days to come). kinaulahian n the last
one in the group.

ulahípan n centipede. — sa baybáyun n sandworm, any of numerous
annelids which burrow in the sand. They are used as bait.

ulalag (not without l) n pus concentrated in an infection coming to a
head. v [A; b4] have pus coming to a head. Mangulngul ang hubag nga
mag-ulalag, A boil that is coming to a head throbs. hiN- v [A23N; b]
remove pus.

ulan n {1} rain. {2} rainwater. Lad-ang ang lamì sa ulan, Rainwater
tastes flat. v {1} [A; a4b4] rain. Giulan ang bayli, The dance was
rained out. Kalígù na lang kun hiulanan (maulanan) ka, Take a bath if
you get caught in the rain. {1a} [b4(1)] be crazy (as if having been
caught in the rain—from the belief that being caught in the rain after
too much fun or lack of food causes one to become crazy). Naulanan
tingáli nà siya kay láig linihukan, He must be crazy because he is
acting strange. {2} [A; b6(1)] rain or pour as if rain. Miulan ang mga
bulantis sa syudad, The leaflets rained on the city. (←) = ting-. pa-
v {1} [A13] stay out in the rain. Dì ka magpaulan kay mahumud ka, Do
not stay out in the rain because you’ll get wet. {2} [A; b6(1)] rain in
large quantities. Mipaulan ug suntuk ang buksidur, The boxer rained
blows on his opponent. ulan-úlan n drizzle. v {1} [B456] drizzle. Dì ku
mulakaw ug mag-ulan-úlan, I won’t go out if it drizzles. {2} [A12] give
s.o. a treat or give cash in return for a favor. Makauwan-úwan ku
ninyug tabángan ku ninyu sa ákung ripurt, I’ll give you a treat if you
help me with my report. paulan-úlan v [A; b6] give s.o. a treat or cash
in return for a favor. Gipauwan-uwánan mi sa kandidátu ug usa ka kahun
nga sirbísa, The candidate treated us to a case of beer. n treat or
money showered on one in exchange for a favor. pasiN- v [A; b4] go out
in the rain. Mipasingulan siyag hatud, He braved the rain to deliver
it. ting-, ting-(←), tali-(←) n rainy season.†

ulandis (not without l) n {1} white-skinned pig. {2} Hollander,
Dutchman. v [AB; a] become bald and white; shave bald and white. Akuy
muulandis ánang ímung úlu ug dì nímu paputlan nang ímung lambúngay,
I’ll shave you bald if you don’t cut that mane of yours. see also
uwandis.

ulang_1 v [A; b3] for dogs to howl. Miuwang ang irù gabíi, The dogs
were howling last night. n the action of howling.

ulang_2 v [A; a12] {1} separate, keep apart. Kurtína ra ang miulang sa
duha, Only a curtain separated them. {1a} separate s.o. or s.t.
fighting. Ulanga ang irù nga nagbugnù, Break up the dogs that are
fighting. {2} [A; a12] stop a wedding ceremony on account of an
objection. Giulang ang kasal kay miabut ang asáwa sa pamanhunun, The
wedding was stopped because the real wife of the groom came on the
scene. {3} [A1] bar, constitute a detriment to one’s success. Kapubri
nga nag-ulang níya sa kalampúsan, Poverty that was a bar to his
success. n {1} s.t. used to block the way. Ang ulang itrangka sa
pultahan, Bolt the door with the piece of wood. {2} age that separates
people. — ug pitu ka lawud Heaven forbid! (lit. may it be separated by
seven seas!) Ulang ug pitu ka lawud dílì tà mudagsang nang sakítas átù,
Heaven forbid that the sickness strike us here. ulang-úlang n the space
between the anus and the vagina. ulang-úlang sa ilung n cartilage
dividing the nostrils. ka-an(←) n impediment, barrier. paN- n a
concoction of oil and plants to protect one from natural or
supernatural evils.

ulang_3 n fresh-water shrimp. v [A; b6(1)] have, cook fresh-water
shrimps. paN- v [A12; b6(1)] catch fresh-water shrimps. n trap used for
catching fresh-water shrimps. ulang-úlang n fishing lure in the shape
of a shrimp.

ulan-úlan = hukihuk.

ul-ap n the situation in mahjong where one is ready to make mahjong
without having opened any pieces. v [A12; a2] win with an ul-ap hand.

ulápì v [A3P; a4] shiver with cold or have chills. Giulápì ang bátà kay
gitas-an sa hilánat, The child has the chills because he’s running a
high fever.

ulasíman n purslane: Portulaca oleracea.

ulat_1 a ignorant of ways or facts. Uwat ku dinhi sa Sugbu, I don’t
know my way around Cebu. v {1} [B1256] be ignorant of s.t. {2} [A3P;
c1] fool s.o. Giuwat ku sa tindíra kay báhaw ang ákung napalit, The
salesgirl pulled one over on me because it was leftovers I bought. (←)
{1} = ulat, v2. {2} [B126; a12] disappointed and embarrassed when s.t.
is different from what one supposed and the whole world knows about
one’s error. Wà ku mahibalu nga giuswag diay ang adlaw sa ílang kasal.
Naúlat lang ku pag-adtu ku sa simbahan, I didn’t know that their
marriage had been postponed. I was embarrassed when I went to the
church.

ulat_2, úlat n scar. v [B36; b4] form a scar. Miúlat (naulat) na ang
ákung samad, My wound has formed a scar. -un a covered with scars.
Ulátun ug páa nang bayhána, That girl has scars on her thigh.

ulátiw = bálù_2.

úlaw a ashamed of what people think, embarrassed. Hastang uláwa nákù
dihang nadiskubrihan ku, How ashamed I was when they caught me! Hastang
uláwa nákù sa pagkadalispang nákù, How embarrassed I was when I fell.
walay — shameless. Wà ka bay úlaw pagbúhat sa ingun? Doesn’t it shame
you to do that? v [B126; b4(1)c5] be ashamed. Naúlaw kung pakítà níya
kay sad-an ku, I’m ashamed to show myself to him because I am guilty.
Kagahápun nga makaúlaw (makapaúlaw) sa táwu, A past that can cause one
to be ashamed. Nauláwan ku niadtung pangutanáha, I was put to shame by
that question. Ikaúlaw ku ang pagpangáyù ug pagkáun, I’d be ashamed to
have to ask for food. ulaw-ulaw v [A13; a12] tease by saying
embarrassing things. paka- v [A; b] {1} make s.o. feel ashamed. Kanang
maistráha kusug kaáyung mupakaúlaw sa mga bátà, That teacher is good at
making the children feel embarrassed. {2} bring shame on s.o. Ang ímung
pagpangáwat nakapakaúlaw sa ímung ginikánan, You put your parents to
shame when you stole. Ngánung gipakauláwan mu man aku, Why did you put
me to shame? paka-(→) v [A13] do s.t. to put oneself to shame. -an(→),
manggi-un a bashful, shy. Uwawan siya. Wà makasulti, He’s terribly
bashful. He didn’t say a word. v [B125] be, become shy, bashful. ka-
n shame, embarrassment. ka-an n cause for shame. Gihatágan níyag
kauláwan ang babáyi kay wà pangasaw-a, He caused the girl great shame
because he did not marry her. ka-un(→) n shame as an end effect. Kay
ímu nang búhat, ímu nang kaulawun, Because it is your doing it will be
your shame. maka-r- a causing shame. Kanang ímung batásan makauúlaw
kaáyu, You have shameful manners. manggi-un {1} = -an(→). {2} =
kipìkipì. see kípì. ma-un a {1} characterized by bashfulness. {2} be
full of embarrassment. Nangatarúngan siya nga mauláwun, He offered
reasons shamefacedly.

úlay a {1} virgin, chaste. Úlay nga pagkababáyi, A chaste woman. Úlay
untà apan putling anay diay, She’s about as much a virgin as a sow is
chaste. Úlay nga lasang, Virgin forest. {2} pure, free from sin. Úlay
kaáyu ang ákung gugma kanímu, My love for you is very pure. v {1} [B16;
b6] remain chaste. {2} [A13] for a woman to be so pure her body fails
to decay. Nag-úlay si Inday Putinsiyána kay ang íyang láwas walà man
malatà bísag napúlù ka túig siyang gilubung, Inday Potenciana was so
pure that her body hadn’t decayed ten years after she was buried. ka-
n chastity.

ulbu v {1} [A; b28] flare up, burst forth or out as in a fire or
explosion. Miulbu dáyun ang táru sa gasulína, The can of gasoline burst
at once into flames. {1a} erupt. Ug muulbu ang bulkan, mulínug usab, If
the volcano erupts there will also be an earthquake. {2} [B46; b4] for
an emotion to flare up. Ngánung miulbu ka man lang dáyun nga wà ka man
masáyud sa hinungdan? Why did you flare up when you didn’t know the
cause? {3} [B246] for war to break out. {4} [AP; c1] puff up the hair
by teasing. Ákung ulbúhun (iulbu) ug diyútay ning ímung buhuk arun
mutáas ang ímung náwung, I’ll tease your hair a little to give length
to the face. n the height of s.t. that rose up. Ang ulbu sa asu lápaws
pangánud, The pillar of smoke went beyond the clouds. pina- n puffed-up
hairdo. v [B136; c6] do one’s hair in a teased style.

uldáwun n a hand in mahjong where all the pieces are open on the table
except the one or two pieces which one is holding waiting to get
mahjong.

uldug a puffed-up, heaped-up. Uldug kaáyu ang ímung hirdu, You have a
puffed-up hairdo. v [B3(1); c1] be, become puffed-up or piled up in a
mound. Uldúgun (iuldug) ku ang sagbut úsà daúban, I pile the trash into
a heap before I burn it.

ulhi = ulahi.

ulhus v [C; c1] take turns doing s.t.; do s.t. by turns or alternately.
Mag-ulhus ta ug káun kay gamay ra ang lamísa, Let’s eat in turns
because the table is small. Nagkaulhus mig anhi kay way mabilin sa báy,
We are coming here one at a time so s.o. can be left home to watch the
house.

úli n oil cloth. v [A; b6] cover with, use oil cloth.

úlì v {1} [A; c] return s.t. to s.o. Nag-úlì ku áring libru nga
hinulaman, I am returning this book I borrowed. Kinsay giulían mu sa
tigib, Whom did you return the chisel to? Iúlì ni ngadtung Túni, Return
this to Tony. {1a} — ang lisinsiya [A; c6] for a couple to stop having
babies because the wife is no longer able to or because they choose to.
Dì sà mi muúlì sa ámung lisinsiya kay wà pa miy babáyi, We won’t stop
having babies until we have a girl. 2 [A; a1c] return s.t. to its
place, reassemble. Antígu kang muúlì áning karburadur, Do you know how
to put this carburator back together? {2a} = ulì balay. {3} [C; a12] be
reconciled after having quarreled. Nag-úlì na mi human sa ámung
panagbángì, We are on good terms again after our quarrel. {4} [A; b(1)]
buy s.t. from s.o. which he had originally not bought for resale. Ulían
ta ning ímung sapátus, I’d like to buy from you that pair of shoes that
you bought for yourself. {5} [A; b(1)] reimburse s.o. for what he had
spent. Muúlì ka nákù sa gastu sa ákung byáhi, Will you reimburse me for
my expenses on my trip? n amount paid for s.t. which was not originally
for sale. (→) v {1} [A2; a12] come, go home. Dì ta makaulì kay way
trák, We can not go home because there’s no bus. {2} [b8] regain
consciousness. Naulian na ba ang táwu nga gikuyapan? Has the man that
fainted regained consciousness? {3} [b8] be relieved of anxiety or
emotional distress. Naulian ku human makadungug sa maáyung nutisya, I
was relieved after I heard the good news. {4} [b8] for dried corn or
rice grains which have been stored to become damp again. (→) bálay n in
circumcision, the condition where the slit skin reverts to its former
condition. v [B25; b4] for a circumcision to revert. -an(→) v [A13] be
home from time to time. Tagsa ra ku mag-ulian sa ámù, I seldom go home.
hiN- v [AN2; b(1)] {1} replant in spaces where seeds failed to sprout.
Hingulíi ang ímung bitsuylasan pára dakug abut, Replant the vacant
spaces in your bean patch to obtain a good yield. {2} weed the second
time around. Ug dì ka muhingúlì sa maisan, masálut ang túbù sa mais, If
you do not weed the cornfield a second time around, the corn will grow
stunted. {3} = úlì, 4. hiN-(→) v [A13; b4] be in one’s second
childhood. Lisud atimanun ning tigúlang nga maghingulì (gihingulian)
na, It’s difficult to look after an old man who is in his second
childhood. pa- v {1} [A; ac] = ulì, 1. {1a} [c] bring s.o. back home.
{2} [A23] go back to the place one started. Mupaúlì ang prusisiyun sa
simbahan, The procession will return to the church. {2a} bísag unsa
kataas sa prusisiyun mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan, no matter how wayward a
husband is he will eventually go home to his wife. {2b} [b6] be on the
receiving end of s.t. bad. Ang ímung paghubug mupaúlì sa ímung láwas,
Your drunkenness will affect your health. Akuy paulían sa íyang
kapungut, I will be on the receiving end of his anger. {3} = úlì, 2.
pa-(→) = pahi-(→). pahi-(→) v [A; b(1)] {1} play a prank on s.o. and
set him straight afterwards. Pait siya nga mukumidiya, dílì siya
mupahiulì, He plays mean pranks and does not set you straight
afterwards. {2} regain one’s health. Mubakasiyun ku kay magpahiulì ku
sa ákung láwas, I’ll take a vacation to regain my health. Pahiulii úsà
ang ímung láwas úsà mubálik sa trabáhu, Regain your health first before
going back to work. paha-ay = úlì, v3. sa-(→) v [b4] contract s.o.
else’s disease by treating him. Muhílut gánì kug hilantan saulian giyud
ku, Whenever I massage s.o. with fever, I will always get the fever
from him. hiniN-an, -in-an n s.t. one bought from s.o. who had bought
it previously not intending to resell it again. ulìúlì kalag n a magic
formula uttered three times while shaking a child that has been
intensely frightened, to prevent him from getting boils. ka-un(→)
a feel like going home. pa-anan, pa-an n home, a place one goes home
to. pumapa-(→), tali-(→), talipa-(→), -um-r-(→), pumapa-(→) n on the
way home. -unun, -únun(→), ig-r-ay, ig-r-ay(→) n s.t. that is to be
returned. Mga hinuwamang uliúnun (ig-uulíay), Borrowed things which are
to be returned. pa-unun, pa-unun(→) n s.t. one has to go home to get.
see also tambaúlì.

ulianun = kulianun. see kulì.

úlib n olive. — drab n olive drab cloth. — úwil n olive oil.

ulíba = palma ulíba.

*ulíba, *ulíbu asayti di- n olive oil.

uligark n the wealthy families and their members that run the
Philippines.

ulíhad = kulíhad.

ulihi = ulahi.

ulílang n {1} off-season planting of rice and corn. {2} crop planted
off season. v [b] plant an off-season crop. paN- v [A2] {1} plant an
off-season crop. {2} do s.t. later than the usual or normal time for
doing it. Nangulílang ka na sa paniudtu, You are late for dinner.
Nangulílang ka sa nutisya, You got the news late. n = ulílang, n.

ulimpíkir n a champion athlete who has been to the Olympics.

ulimpiyan n tennis shoes (from the brand name Olympian). a a simple
wedding without much fuss (so called because it should be kept silent,
like walking in tennis shoes). v [A] {1} wear tennis shoes. {2} hold a
simple wedding. Ulimpiyánun (iulimpiyan) ku untà ang ákung kasal,
nabakyà man hinúun, I want to keep my wedding quiet and simple, but the
news has spread everywhere.

ulin n stern, the rear end of a ship. v [AN; b6(1)] steer a boat from
the stern.

úling n charcoal. v {1} [APB26; c1] make charcoal; become charcoal.
Pag-úling para iutaw, Make charcoal to iron with. Ang usa ka sákung
bagul muúling ug duha ka taru, A sack of coconut shells will make two
cans of charcoal. {2} [A12; b(1)] put, add charcoal into. {3} [A;
b6(1)] use charcoal. -un n {1} things suitable to be made into
charcoal. {2} k.o. tree of the secondary forest.

ulingì, ulingig = tulíngì.

ulipad (from lipad) a {1} walking sideways. Ulipad ang linaktan sa
lambay, A crab walks sideways. {2} — ang tinan-awan cross-eyed.
v {1} [A] walk sideways. {2} [B] be, become cross-eyed.

*uliping pa- v [A; b6] hide standing behind s.t. with the head
partially exposed for observation. Mupauliping ku sa sira arun makítà
kug unsay ílang gibúhat, I’ll hide behind the door so I’ll see what
they’re doing.

ulípun n {1} slave. {2} slave to some power. Ulípun sa salapì, Slave to
money. — sa tamalà n k.o. univalve seashell having its mouth covered
wholly with some of its flesh, about 1¼″ in length. v [AB12; c1]
enslave, become a slave to. Nagkaulipun ka sa ímung bisyu, You are
becoming a slave to your vices. pa- v [A; b(1)] let oneself become a
slave. kaulipnan n bondage, slavery. Ang kaulipnan sa Pilipínas ubus sa
mga Katsílà, The Philippines’ enslavement to the Spaniards.†

ulísi n walking cane, staff. v {1} [A] carry, use a cane. Muulísi ku
iniglakaw kay daghang buguy, I’ll carry a cane when I go out because
there are lots of thugs. {2} [A; c1] make a cane, staff. {3} [A; a1b8]
beat with a cane or rod.

ulit a desiring s.t. greatly in an indiscriminate way. Mukáun ug
ransiyu kay ulit, He’ll even eat spoiled food, he is such a glutton.
Ulit sa babáyi, Hungry for women. v [B2; b6] be, become greedy. (←) =
ulit, v. ka-, ka-(←) n gluttony, great desire.

úlit v {1} [A3P; b3c1] provoke s.o.’s anger. Maúlit na siya ug
kataw-an, She’ll become angry if they laugh at her. {2} [B126; a1] be
frustrated or disappointed in one’s expectations. Naúlit kug huwat níya
ug wà giyud mutunga, I waited for her but she didn’t show up.

ulitáwu (from táwu) n {1} bachelor, unmarried man. Ulitáwung gúlang, An
old bachelor. {2} young man old enough to be married. Tapulan ámung
ulitáwu. Magpúnay lag panista, Our son is lazy. All he does is sit
around playing the guitar. Ayawg binátà kay ulitáwu ka na, Don’t be
childish. You’re grown-up now. v [b(1)] court a girl. Kinsa may ímung
giulitawhan run, Whom are you courting now? paN- v [A2; b(1)] court a
girl. Nangulitáwu si Pidru ni Istir, Pedro is courting Esther.
n courting, wooing. ulitawhay n boy about to embark onto adolescence.
v [B1256; b6] be an adolescent boy. kaulitawhan n group of young men.

ulíut (from líut) v [A2; b6(1)] squeeze, wriggle through or deep into.
Wà siya makaulíut ngadtu sa unáhan kay punù kaáyu ang lugar, He
couldn’t elbow his way to the front because the place was full.

ulput v {1} [B26] pop or bounce up. Miulput (naulput) ang tabun sa
tirmus pagbutang nákù, The thermos cork popped up when I put it on.
{1a} [A; b28] bounce the ball against s.t. else. Dì makaulput ang búla
sa lápuk, The ball cannot bounce on mud. {2} [B2] start back with a
jerk upon being surprised. Naulput ku pagkadungug ku sa kusug kaáyung
hagsà, I started when I heard the loud crashing sound. {2a} [B46] for
the heart to thump. Nag-ulput ang ákung kasingkásing sa kahínam, My
heart is thumping with expectation. — ang kabúhì = ulput, 2.

ulsir, ulsira, ulsíra n stomach ulcers. v [A123P; a4] get an ulcer.
-un(→) a having stomach ulcers. v [B1256] having stomach ulcers.

ultima n {1} last, final after all the others. Ultima na lang ning
ákung pag-anhi dinhi, This will be my last visit here. {2} = ultimu,
n1. — úra at the last minute. Ultima úra giyud nang idisidir ug lakaw,
She always decides to go at the eleventh hour. v [A3; b6] ask s.o. to
give his final decision. Giultimahan siya nákù ug magpakasal ba siya u
dílì, I asked him once and for all if he was going to marry me.

ultimatúm n ultimatum, final offer or proposal. v [b6(1)] give an
ultimatum. Giultimatúman siya nákù sa pagpabalhin ug layù dinhi, I gave
him an ultimatum to move far from here.

ultimu_1 n {1} last, lowest price. — prisyu = ultimu, 1. {2} — [noun]
even [so-and-so], when it is the most unexpected thing. Daginutan kaáyu
ning bayhána kay ang ultimung mumhu hipúsun pa, This woman is very
thrifty. She even saves the crumbs from the table. Grábing sugarúla
nímu, ultimung sapátus gibaligyà pára pamuhúnan, You are an
incorrigible gambler! You even sold your shoes in order to secure money
for betting.

ultimu_2 n {1} private, the lowest rank of an enlisted man in the Army.
{2} an ordinary person or small fry as opposed to one who is at the
top. Padáyun lang mu sa inyung pagtugbaw sa táas, aku magpabílin nga
ultimu, Proceed with your rise to stardom while I remain here a mere
nothing. v {1} [B16; a12] be a private. {2} [B1256] be a small fry.

úlu n {1} head. {1a} head as the source of thinking power. Gamíta ímung
úlu, Use your head. {2} each person. Dus písus da ang báyad sa káda
úlu, The cost is only two pesos per head. {3} head, forefront. Banda sa
pulis ang úlu sa paráda, The head of the parade was the police band. —
ug amù = inúlug amù. — sa bagyu eye of the typhoon. — sa bahà the first
onrush of floodwaters. — nga buhatan main (lit. head) office. — sa
hilánat in folk medicine, a lump in the muscle which bulges and when
massaged, alleviates one’s fever and pains. — sa sakit source of an
ailment. — sa sibúyas the bulb of an onion. v {1} [AN; b(1)] lead, be
at the head. {1a} lead s.o. to do s.t., usually bad. Ikay nangúlu sa
tanang mga tinuntu, You led them into doing all their mischief. {2} [A;
c1] shape, make a head. paN- v {1} [B126; c] be, become a leader,
chief. {2} [c] have as its title. Ang sugilánun gipangulúhan ug ‘Líwas
Sa Ugmà’, The story is entitled ‘Beyond Tomorrow’. n leader, chief.
sag-(→), sag- v [A; a12b2] {1} memorize, learn s.t. by heart. {2} skip
a meal. Sag-ulúhun ku na lang ang paniudtu, I’ll just skip lunch.
siN-(→) see singulu. uluhan, ulúhan n s.t. at the top at the head: head
of a bed, title of a song, et al. v {1} [A3; c] give s.t. a title.
{2} [A13] have s.t. as a title. Bálak nga nag-uluhan ug ‘Lúhà’, A poem
that is entitled ‘Tears’. -in- n shaped like a head. -in- ug amù waxing
gibbous moon. inulúhan n having a head, e.g. a pin. kaulúhan n capital
city. kapangulúhan n editorial board or staff.

úlub v [A1; a2] cut even around the edges. Ulúbun nákù pagputul ang
bàbà sa baril, I will trim off around the mouth of the barrel. Ang
íyang buhuk maáyung pagkaúlub, His hair was nicely trimmed all around.

úlud n worm. v [a4b4] be infested with worms. Ginamus nga giúlud,
Salted fish that was full of worms. hiN- v [AN; b6(1)] pick out the
worms from. Akuy muhingúlud (manghingúlud) sa tabákù, I’ll pick out the
worms from the tobacco plants. ighihingulud, ighilingulud n s.t. used
to pick worms out from inaccessible parts. ulud-úlud n decayed teeth.
v [A123P; a4] be decayed. Misakit ang ákung ngípun nga giulud-úlud, My
tooth was decayed and caused me great pain.

úlug v [A; c] put a burden on s.o.’s head for him to carry it. Iúlug na
nang bukag kay adtu na ta, Please put the basket on my head because
we’re going now.

ul-ug v [A; c] feed nestlings.

ulugnan = unlan. see ulun.

ulug-úlug v [A; b6(1)] flatter s.o. to make him feel good or to get
s.t. out of him. Akuy muulug-úlug níya arun ta kab-an ug túbig, I’ll
flatter him so that he’ll fetch water for us. n flattery. -an(→)
a readily falling for sweet talk.

uluk, úluk n {1} glans penis. {2} — sa kasing bottom of a top that
resembles the glans. uluk-uluk n a rounded or knoblike extremity of
s.t. kasing nga inulúkan n top with no nail but with glans-shaped
bottom.

ul-ul_1 v [A; a2b3] bark. Ul-úlun ka sa irù ug mudúul ka, The dog will
bark at you if you go near. n bark.

ul-ul_2 a {1} throbbing pain. Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung samad, My wound
hurts very much. {2} heavy, uneasy feeling due to muscular fatigue.
Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung láwas tungud sa kadaghan sa trabáhu, My body is
heavy from so much work. v {1} [B; b6] be, become painful, heavy in
feeling. {2} [b] have labor pains. Dad-un na si Pína sa matirniti kay
giul-ulan na, Bring Pina to the hospital because she has labor pains.
ka- n degree or intenseness of pulsating pain.

ul-ul_3 v [A; a] masturbate, word play on lùlù.

ulun v [A; c] lay one’s head on s.t. Dílì ku muulun ánang bukugun mung
buktun, I will not lay my head on those bony arms of yours. unlan,
ulunlan, ulúnan n pillow. — sa hálas k.o. vine of waste areas bearing
red, shiny, rounded fruit, the size of a tennis ball, poisonous,
smelly, and full of seeds. v [A; a] use for, make into a pillow.
inunlan n placenta.

úlung a for a measure to be very full or heaping. v [A12; c1] measure
s.t. out with a full or heaping measure. -in- = úlung, a.

ulunglan = unlan. see ulun.

ulungnan = unlan. see ulun.

ulun-úlun n not fully developed rice grains.

úlup a early morning at around sunrise. Ulup silang muadtu sa simbahan,
They will go to church at sunrise. v [A; ac] do early in the morning.
Muúlup ta sa lungsud ugmà, We will go to town early tomorrow morning.

ulus v [A; b(1)] borrow s.t. Aku ang nag-ulus sa ímung lápis, I
borrowed your pencil. pa- v [A; a12] lend. Ayaw nag pausli, Don’t let
anyone borrow that. inuslan n s.t. borrowed. inuslan nga batásan put-on
behavior. Dílì malílung ang inuslan níyang batásan kay daghang nasáyud
nga siya aryat, Nobody is fooled by the way she puts on. Everybody
knows she is a plain snob. pinauslan n s.t. lent.

Úlus = ulhus.

ulusíman = ulasíman.

ulut_1 v [b(1)] have a boundary in between. Giutlan ang duha námù ka
balay sa usa ka mutu, Our houses are separated by a hill. (←)_1
n outside edges or boundaries. v [C; c] for pieces of land to be
contiguous. Mag-úlut tag yútà ug palitun nímu nang lutíha, Our land
will be contiguous if you buy that lot. ulut-úlut {1} = úlut. {2} place
between two things. v {1} = úlut, v1. {2} [b1256] for a space to
develop between two things. utlánan n boundary. Ákung gikural ang
utlánan sa ámung yútà, I fenced the boundary of our land. Butangan
nátug utlánan ang átung panag-amígu, Let’s set a limit to our
friendship. v [c1] be made into a boundary, limit. ka- n person whose
land is contiguous to one’s own.

ulut_2 n stalk or stem of grasses, dry or fresh.

úlut_2 v [A; ac2] run after. Muúlut sa mangági ang ílang irù, Their dog
runs after passers-by. Ulúta ang trák, Run after the truck. Iúlut ning
páyung sa nánay mu, Run after your mother and give this umbrella to
her.

uluúlu = ulug-úlug. uluuluhan a {1} susceptible to sweet talk.
{2} tending to give sweet talk.

uluy v [A; b6(1)] start doing an action or going into a state. Miuluy
nag kabugtù ang písì, The rope started to snap. Giuylan (giuluyan) ku
siyag ulísi, I raised my cane to whack him.

ulyahut v [A; b3] complain loudly. Unsa pa may ímung giulyahutan ug
nabayran ka na? What are you griping about if you have already been
paid? n loud complaints.

ulyap = uylap.

um̀ pronounced [mmʔ] or [əəʔ]. particle expressing dissatisfaction or
contempt. Um̀, mu rag mupalit nga nagtan-awtan-aw sa mga baligyà,
Humph, the way he is inspecting the things you’d think he was going to
buy s.t. Um̀, ábi níya ug mahadluk ku, Humph, he thinks I’m scared.
Um̀, kusiun ta giyud ka sa ímung minalditu, Humph, I have to pinch you,
you are so mischievous.

uma n a piece of land on which crops or animals are raised. v [A; a]
cultivate or till a piece of land. Umahun ku ning yutáa, I’ll cultivate
this piece of land. Sa giumahan nátù kanhi, On the land we cultivated
in former times. umhan, umahan, kaumahan, kaumhan n cultivated piece of
land. mag-r-(←) n farmer. paN- n occupation of farming.

umag v [A2; b4] for colors to run. Giumagan ang putì níyang sinínà nga
naípun sa dikulur, His white shirt got stained because it was put
together with the colored ones. a color that has run. Kining mantsa
umag sa ákung midiyas, This stain is where my socks ran.

umágad see ágad_2.

umagak, umágak n mother hen.

úmang n {1} hermit crab. — sus-an hermit crab in a shell having a
barnacle, used as a medicine for mothers with a swelling breast.
{2} kámang daw — see kámang, v1a. v {1} [A2N; b6] gather hermit crabs
for bait. {2} [AN; a12] use, wear s.t. belonging to s.o. else.

umapún = amapúlun.

umari ka see ari_1.

úmat v [AC; c1] go over a series of events or genealogies to recall
them. Miúmat siya sa íyang kaági sa gúbat, He related his experiences
during the war. Manag-ágaw diay kami kay nagkaúmat man mi sa ámung mga
kagíkan, We are cousins, as it turned out, when we traced our ancestral
tree.

umaw a having lost its fertility. v [B2] for soil to lose fertility.
Magkaumaw ang uma nga pirming tamnan unyà way uabúnu, Lands that are
always planted without getting fertilized become barren.

umay-úmay v [A; b5] make funny imitations of how s.o. does s.t. Nasukù
si Tsiding kay giumay-úmay (giumay-umáyan) ni Kuring ang íyang
sinultihan, Cheding got sore because Coring mimicked her manner of
talking. -an(→) a fond of teasing by imitating.

umbangul, umbángul v [A2S; b3] howl, bellow loudly. Nag-umbangul siya
sa kasakit, She bellowed with pain.

umbaw v {1} [A13; b6] overlook, tower over. Ang ílang balay nag-umbaw
sa kasilingánan, Their house towers over the neighborhood. {2} [A; a]
look down from a height over the edge of s.t. Nag-umbaw siya sa
pangpang, He was looking down over the edge of the cliff. Umbáwa ang
mga bátà sa búngun, Look out of the window and see what the children
are doing.

umbihas, umbíhas = ambihas.

úmid v {1} [A; c1] wallow, roll in s.t. that sticks. Iúmid (umíra) ang
ságing sa asúkar, Roll the bananas in sugar. {2} [B; c1] be needlessly
implicated in s.t. bad. Naúmid ku sa kasábà bisan ug wà kuy salà, I was
included in the scolding even though I hadn’t done anything.

umidu v {1} [B; b6] for s.t. designed to burn to be slightly moist. Ang
libintadur nga muumidu (maumidu) dì na mubutu, A firecracker that gets
moist won’t explode. {2} [B1456] for a wound or sore that appears
healed on the surface to fester or generate pus underneath. Giabríhan
pag-usab ang íyang upirasiyun kay nag-umidu sa ilawum, Her operation
was reopened because it was festering inside. {2a} for an emotion to
fester in one’s heart (literary). Pagdumut nga nag-umidu sa dughan,
Hatred that rankles in the breast. a {1} moist and not burning well.
{2} festering.

umígas = hulmígas.

umil a soft, having lost its crispness. Umil na kaáyu ning pinipíga,
The rice crunch has gotten all soggy. v [B2; b6] be, become soft, no
longer crunchy. (←) v [B; a] for flat things to stick together from
being moist. Muúmil ang mga playwud kun basà, The plywood sheets will
stick together if they get wet.

umintádu a having risen in amount. Umintádu ang mga palalítun run,
Prices of goods are high these days. v [B126] rise in degree.
Maumintádu ang hilánat mahápun, The fever goes up in the afternoon.

umintu v [AB; bc] {1} become greater in degree or number, cause s.t. to
do so. Ang mga kumirsiyanti miumintu sa mga prisyu sa mga palítun, The
merchants raised the prices of goods. Nagkaumintu ang gidaghanun sa mga
sakyanan sa syudad, There are getting to be more and more cars in the
city. {2} improve, progress. Muumintu (maumintu) ang inyung pagkabutang
ug mutrabáhu mu, Your situation will improve if you work. — sa kunhud
v [B] become worse, go down. Nag-umintu mi sa kunhud tungud sa
kagastadur, We are getting to be worse and worse off because we keep
spending money. n {1} amount s.t. has increased. Gitagáan ug umintu sa
swildu si Pidru, Pedro was given a raise. n one’s children added to a
growing brood. Pila na ruy átung umintu? How many children do you have
now? {2} progress, improvement of s.t. Walà giyuy umintu ang syudad,
The city hasn’t shown any improvement.

umnis v [c1] skip, miss s.t. Sa kaapíki sa mga buluhatun sa panimalay
naumnis na lang ang ákung paniudtu, I was so busy with the housework
that I missed my dinner.

umpas v [A123P; b28] fall away, crumble down. Kusug nga ulan nga
nakaumpas (nakapaumpas) sa kimba, A strong rain that crumbled away the
embankment.

umpaw_1 v [A12; b8] be outclassed or outstripped in comparison. Walay
makaumpaw sa ímung binúang, No one can match your foolishness. Awtu nga
bísan kanus-a walà hiumpawi, A car that has never been outclassed.

umpaw_2 v {1} [A123P; b4(1)] come to after having fainted. Didtu na sa
uspital maumpawi ang nakuyapan, The man who fainted came to in the
hospital. {2} [B12; b4(1)] for one’s anger to wear off. Maumpaw ang
íyang kasukù ug ímung amuy-amúyun, His anger will vanish if you play up
to him.

umpù n {1} grandparent or a grandparent’s sibling or cousin of the same
generation. {2} term of address for a relation of the grandparents’
generation.

umpul a cut short. Umpul kaáyu ang mga sinínà sa mga batan-un karun,
Young people wear very short dresses nowadays. sáyang — n k.o. shirred
skirt with no tail, worn now only by old women. v [B12; c1] be, become
short. Ayaw kaáyug umpúla (iumpul) pagputul ang ímung buhuk, Don’t cut
your hair too short.

-um-r- {1} prefix added to most verb roots which refer to an action to
form nouns which mean ‘one who is about to [do]’. Umuulì na ku, I am
about to go home. Pumipirma na untà siya sa kuntrátu, He was just about
to sign the contract. {1a} added to words referring to weather
conditions. Umuulan tingáli run dà, It looks like it is going to rain.
{2} prefixes added to a few verbal roots to form nouns referring to the
agent who does [so-and-so]. Sumasákay, Passengers. Pumupúyù,
Inhabitants.

úmud v [A6; c] push the face or s.t. analogous down, bury the face or
fall with the face into s.t. Naúmud siya sa lápuk, She fell face first
into the mud. Unlan nga íyang giumúran sa paghílak, The pillow she
buried her face into when she cried. Ákù lang iúmud ang agipu sa abu
arun mapáwung, I’ll sniffle the firebrand out by burying it in the
ashes. — ang náwung v [c1] bury one’s face in work, preoccupation,
hobby, and the like. Ug dì ku iúmud (umúrun) ang ákung nawung sa
trabáhu wà miy makáun, If I don’t bury my face in work we won’t have
anything to eat. hipa-, hapa-, pa- v [B1256] fall face first. Napaúmud
(nahipaúmud) siyas kanal pagkadalispang níya, He fell face first into
the ditch when he slipped.

umug a damp, moist. Umug kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa singut, Your dress
is wet with perspiration. v [B; b2c1] become moist. Nadáut ang kapi kay
naumgan, The coffee spoiled because it got moisture into it.

úmuk pa- v [A; ac] sleep late or lounge around in bed past waking
hours. Paumúka lang siyag katū́g kay Duminggu man run, Allow her to
sleep in because it’s Sunday.

úmul v [A; a12] {1} roll s.t. into a ball. Umúla ang karni pára sa
bulabúla, Roll the meat into balls to make meat balls. {1a} mold into
other shapes. {2} mold the personality and mind. Mga iskuylahan nga
nag-úmul sa mga batan-un, Schools that mold the youth. n s.t. formed
into balls or molds. -an(→) n school as the molder of the youth. -in- =
úmul, n.

um-um v [A; a12] {1} put s.t. partly or wholly into the mouth or
between the lips. Muum-um nà siya dáyun sa íyang kwáku inigmata, He
immediately puts his pipe into his mouth when he wakes up. {2} — ug
kalibútan v [A13] for a woman to have a prolapsed uterus. Nagbakaang
ang babáyi kay nag-umum man ug kalibútan, The woman is walking with her
legs far apart because she has a prolapsed uterus.

umung v [AN; c1] pile up harvested rice together with the stalks.

umu-um = alum-um.

umuy n bodily strength. Nawad-an si Samsun sa umuy dihang giputul ni
Dilayla ang íyang buhuk, Samson lost his strength when Delilah cut his
hair. v {1} [A12] have the strength to do s.t. Dì na giyud ku makaumuy
paglakaw, I have no more strength to go out. {2} [b6] get strength.
Giumuyan na ang ákung buktun, My arm has gathered strength again.
paumuy-umuy v [A; c6] keep the body still without motion. Paumuy-umuy
lang, makatū́g ka lagi, Just lie still and relax and you’ll fall
asleep.

*un see marts.

-un_1 direct passive verb affix, future. (past: gi- subjunctive: -a.
Potential forms: past: na-; future and subjunctive: ma-.) Palitun ku
ang bábuy, I will buy the pig. Gipalit ku ang bábuy, I bought the pig.
Walà ku palita ang bábuy, I didn’t buy the pig. Dì ku mapalit ang
bábuy, I cannot buy the pig. Napalit ku ang bábuy, I managed to buy the
pig. Wà ku mapalit ang bábuy, I didn’t get to buy the pig. {1} do
directly to. Lutúun ku ang kík, I will bake the cake. Kuháun ku kanà, I
will go get it. Patyun níla, They will kill it. {1a} with verbs of
motion: go to get. Sak-un ku ang butung, I will climb up to get some
coconuts. Balíkun ka námù, We will come back to get you. {1b} with
adjectives, nouns, or roots referring to a state: make s.t. [adj.],
[noun]; or bring into [state]. Pulahun ku ang ákung ngábil, I will make
my lips red. Hubgun ku siya sa mga sáad, I will make her drunk with
promises. Ulipúnun ang Pilipínas sa Ispanya, Spain will enslave the
Philippines. Karsunísun ku ning panaptun, I will make pants out of the
cloth. Hutdun ku ang kwarta, I will use up the money. Upatun ang kík,
The cake will be cut into four pieces. {1c} with adjectives referring
to manner: do it in [such-and-such] a manner. Ayúhun ku pagsilhig ang
sawug, I will sweep the floor carefully. Kalitun ku paglabni ang íyang
kutsilyu, I will grab his knife away suddenly. {1c1} with words
referring to time: [do] at [such-and-such a time]. Ugmáun na lang nà
nákù, I will just do that tomorrow. Binulanun ku sílag swildu, I will
pay them by the month. {1d} with verbs referring to an action two
things can do with each other (usually with a long penult), have the
two [do] to each other. Sagúlun ku ang itlug ug harína, I will mix the
eggs and the flour. Abútun ku ang duha ka tumuy, I will make the two
ends meet. {1d1} have s.o. do [so-and-so] with one. Sabútun ku ang
draybir, I will come to an agreement with the driver. Awáyun ku si
Pidru, I will fight Pedro. {1e} with nouns referring to names or
titles: call s.o. by [such-and-such] a name. Lulúhun ku ang tigúwang, I
will call the old man Grandfather. {1e1} say [so-and-so] to. Litsíhun
ku giyud siya, I’ll cuss at him and say litsi. {1f} with nouns
referring to things that can be used as an instrument: strike with
[so-and-so]. Bakyáun ku siya, I will hit him with a wooden slipper.
{1g} with verbs referring to fighting, competing, and the like:
accomplish s.t. by doing. Kun dílì mahímung sultíhun ang átung
gikasungían, átù na lang awáyun, If we can’t settle our differences by
talking, we’ll fight it out. {2} with words referring to a sickness or
feeling: get [such-and-such] a sickness, feel [so-and-so]. Gitulug
siyag maáyu, He is very sleepy. Giátay ang manuk, The chickens got
chicken cholera. {3} háiy, unsay [noun]-un, there is no [noun]! (Lit.
What is there to make or call a [noun].) ‘Tagái kug singku.’—‘Unsay
kwartáhun!’ ‘Let me have a nickel.’—‘Where am I supposed to get money?’
Gipangítà ku si Tinyung sa dapit nga íyang gibarugan ganíha. Háin pay
Tinyúngun, I looked for Tenyong in the place he had been standing.
Tenyong was nowhere. (Lit. Where could there be s.t. to be called
Tenyong?).

-un_2 {1} suffix added to adjectives and nouns to form adjectives which
mean ‘of [such-and-such] a kind’. Usually, forms with this suffix have
final stress. Yagpisun siyag láwas, He has a thinnish body. Dugúun
(duguun) nga hitabù, A bloody event. Baratuhung panaptun, Cheap sort of
cloth. {2} added to numbers to form nouns meaning ‘ones worth
[so-and-so] much’. Pisusun (pisúsun) nga bayhána, A cheap woman
(costing only a peso). Bayintihun, Costing twenty.

-un(→) alternant of -unun, used with some of the bases which occur with
-unun, but not all of them. Dúna pa kuy hatagun nímu, I still have s.t.
to give you.

úna n {1} ahead, earlier. Ákung turnu kay úna kaáyu ku nímu, It’s my
turn because I was here well before you. {2} the one that is first in
position. Ang Únang Gínang, The First Lady. {2a} sa — in former times.
Sa úna way sugà, In former times there was no electricity. mga -ng táwu
the people of former times. {2b} first, not second. — sa tanan above
all. sa — nga lugar in the first place. Dì ka katagáan. Sa únang lugar
pilyu ka, You can’t get any. In the first place, you’re naughty.
v {1} [A; a2b2] do s.t. the first thing, or ahead of s.o. else. Muúna
ku ug tindug. Sunud lang, I will stand up first. Just follow suit.
Unáhun ku ni ug lútù, I will cook this first. {1a} [A123S; b8] beat
s.o. to s.t. Ákù ning syáha. Akuy nakauna áni, This is my chair. I got
it first. Hiunhan siyag mata sa adlaw. Alas syíti nang mimata, He woke
up late (lit. the sun got up before him). It was already seven o’clock.
{1b} [A; b6(1)] pay an amount in advance. Muúna ku nímug diyis, I will
advance you ten. {2} [A2S; b(1)] be at the head, go ahead of others.
Muúna ku nímu kay nagdalì ku, I will go home before you because I am in
a hurry. Nag-una sila sa parid, They were at the head of the parade.
{3} [A13N; b(1)] do s.t. to s.o. first. Kinsa may nag-úna ninyung duha?
Which of you started it? {4} [A23N; b(1)] flirt with a boy
aggressively. Gipaangkan hinúun si Mirli kay mau may miúna (nangúna) sa
laláki, Merle got pregnant because she flirted too much with the boy. —
sin utra a alternate, occurring one after the other. Úna sin utra ang
lalákig babáyi, The boys and the girls are put in alternate position
(boy, girl, boy, girl). (→) = úna, n1; v1, 1a, 1b, 2. v [A23; b] give
unwanted advice. Muuna mu nákù? Ulahi ra mu kaáyu sa dúyan, What are
you giving me advice for when you are way younger than me? pa-
v {1} [A; a1c] for a woman to have premarital relations. Dì maáyu nga
mupaúna sa láki, It’s not good for a woman to have relations with a man
before marriage. {2} [A13] let s.o. do s.t. to one first. Sa sumbagay
dì giyud siya paúna, He won’t let his opponent get the first blow in a
fight. pa-(→) = paúna, v1. unauna v [A1; a12] do s.t. ahead of others
when it is not proper or usual. Dì ka makaunaunag lingkud kay wà pa
mulingkud ang pinasidunggan, You cannot sit down first because the
honoree has not taken his seat yet. Unaunaha nig lung-ag, Cook this
ahead in a hurry. pasi-, pasi-(→) v [A; c] {1} say s.t. by way of
introduction, before s.o. else. {2} say or convey s.t. in advance.
Mupasiuna lang ku nímu nga dì ku makaanhi ugmà, I’ll tell you in
advance that I can’t come here tomorrow. Ipasiuna ku lang ni nímung
kwartáha, I’m just giving you this money in advance. n {1} s.t.
preliminary or a preface. {2} advance notice. unáhan n {1} place up
ahead. {2} further. Ang íla unáhan ra kaáyus taytáyan, Their place is a
considerable distance up beyond the bridge. pangunáhan v [A23] be the
leader in a novena. n {1} s.t. placed in front of s.t. else.
Pangunáhang ligid, Front tires. {2} one who is in the limelight.
Pangunáhang papil, Starring role. kinaunahan, kinaunáhan n the very
first. maunaunahun, unaunahun a {1} one who provokes trouble. Kanúnay
siyang makakitag áway kay unaunahun man, He always finds himself in a
fight because he is a trouble-maker. {2} forward with women.

unà n juice of the salted fish. Pakapini kug unà nga isúbak sa útan,
Give me additional salted-fish juice for my vegetable stew.
v {1} [B3(1); b6(1)] for salted-fish preserves to give out juice.
{2} [A12] have juice to eat with the staple. {3} [A; b6(1)] put
salted-fish juice on. Giunaan níyag daghan ang útan, She put lots of
salted-fish juice on the vegetable stew.†

únà = úsà.

unanut v [A3P] do s.t. with difficulty or with great effort. Nag-unanut
ku sa ákung mga sabdyiks rung tuíga, I am having difficulty with my
subjects this year. Nag-unanut ku pagbira sa pyánu, It was a great
effort to move the piano.

unap v [A1; a2] peel off the thin outer layer of a dried, young nipa
leaf for smoking.

unas n dry banana leaf. v [AN; b6] remove the dried banana leaves. hiN-
v [AN; b6(1)] = únas, v.

unásis a very rich old man. Unásis kaáyu ang íyang nabána, She married
an Onassis.

unat = ínat.†

unaw n cassava or buri flour. v [A; a] extract cassava or buri flour.

unawup (from alup) a for light or vision to be dim. Unawup kaáyu ang
síga sa sugà, The light of the lamp is very dim. v [B; c1] get dim.
Muunáwup (maunáwup) ang ákung panan-aw, My eyesight becomes blurred
sometimes.

unay n {1} mainland. Ang tagaisla adtu magkabù sa unay, The islanders
fetch water from the mainland. {2} a deeply embedded sliver or foreign
body. {3} s.t. solidly attached to or forming a solid or contiguous
part of s.t. Dílì matangtang ning putháwa kay unay sa íhi, This piece
of iron can not be removed because it forms a solid part of the axle. —
sa láwas = taput láwas. see láwas. {4} instantly accessible. Sa
nagtrabáhu pa ku sa panadiríya unay ra ku sa pán, When I was working in
the bakery, I always had bread instantly accessible. v {1} [A; b6] go
stay with a member of the family that is s.w. else. Muunay ku sa mga
bátà sa syudad sa ílang pag-iskuyla, I will go live with the children
in the city while they attend school there. {2} [AN; a12] do some harm
to a member of one’s own family or group. Ang íya rang anak nag-unay ug
káwat sa ílang karabaw, His own son stole the carabao from them.
{3} [A13] commit suicide. Nag-unay siya kay disispirádu, He killed
himself because he was despondent in love. {3a} [A12; a3] be harmed by
one’s own trick, weapon. Mirísi. Naunay ka sa ímung tinuntu, It serves
you right. Your foolishness backfired on you, and you got it instead.
{4} [ac] do s.t. to s.t. one is wearing without taking it off. Giunay
lang nákug sursi ang gísì sa ákung púlu, I sewed up the tear in my
shirt without taking it off. {5} [AN; bN] do s.t. personally, not
delegating it to s.o. else. Aku giyuy mangunay (muunay, mangúnay) íni
kay mga tapulan mu, I guess I’ll have to do this myself because you are
so lazy. Unayi nag trabáhu kay kuti nà, Work on that personally because
it is an intricate job. (←) n {1} s.t. fixed or attached to s.t. Sa
mamilúka únay ang sinínà sa karsúnis, In a child’s one-piece suit the
pants and the shirt are together in one piece. batu nga — bedrock.
{2} fight among friends or relatives. Sa únay ang amahan hingpatyan,
The father was killed in the family fight. v {1} [C3; c1] be fixed,
attached as part of one another. Nag-únay ang púnu ug radiyu kay
gibutang ang duha sa usa ka kabinit, The radio and phonograph are a
single unit because they were put in one cabinet. {2} [A; ac3] for
friends or kin to do s.t. to each other they shouldn’t. Nag-únay ang
managsúun maung gibáliw, The brother and sister committed incest.
That’s why they were cursed. Ang mismu níyang amahan ang gikaúnay níya
sa pulitika, He ran against his own father in the elections. unay-únay
v [A; c6] put on special wearing apparel for ordinary situations. Ayawg
iunay-únay ang bag-u mung sinínà, Don’t go wearing your new dress
around the house. n clothing for ordinary use. -in- n rolled tobacco
leaf for smoking. v {1} [A] smoke rolled tobacco leaf. {2} [A1; c1]
roll tobacco leaves for smokes. ti-(←) see tiúnay.

undag v [B2; b(1)] sink, settle down to the bottom of a liquid medium.
Lawum ang giundágan sa barkung nalúnud, The ship sank in deep waters.

undak v {1} [B3(1)4; b6] jounce in riding. Miundak ning trák tungud sa
batsi, This bus is jouncing because of the potholes. {2} [A; c1] stamp
the feet, walk with heavy footfalls. Ayaw undáka (iundak) ímung tiil
kay náay táwu sa sílung, Don’t stamp your feet when you walk because
there are people downstairs. pina- ang tíngug speaking in a rough, curt
way.

undan a aware of what is happening around one. n awareness. Wà siyay
undan nga gidala sa huspital, He was unconscious when he was brought to
the hospital. v {1} [A12; b28] know, be aware of what is going on. Wà
pa ku makaundan paghalin námù sa Mindanaw, I was not old enough to know
what was going on when we moved to Mindanao. Wà ku makaundan nga gikúut
ang ákung kwarta, I did not notice that s.o. had picked my pocket.
{1a} [A12] regain consciousness. {1b} come to understand fully s.t.
about which one had misapprehensions. Hiundanan (naundanan) na níya ang
íyang sayup, He has just realized his mistakes. {2} [A13; b8] grow up
under the conditions, environment of. Nag-undan siya sa pagkaharúhay,
She grew up in great comfort. — sa buut = undan. see also unud.

undang v [A; ab1] stop doing s.t., come to a stop. Naundang ang ámung
pagpangáun sa pag-abut níla, Our meal came to a halt when they arrived.
Giundángan námug dáru ang íyang uma, We had stopped plowing his farm.
Giundángan na siya sa íyang dugù, Her menstruation has stopped. walay —
unending, incessant. undang-undang a intermittent, on and off.
Undang-undang nga kasakit sa tampihak, Intermittent migraine. v [B; b5]
be intermittent, periodic, or on and off. Giundang-undang
(giundang-undángan) pagpaági sa túbig sa agwas karun, We only have
water periodically these days. -in-an n food served at the end of the
work. -in-an nga swildu separation pay.

undaundà v [B; c16] for a process to be broken by short intervals, not
going on smoothly. Mag-undaundà siyang musulti mu rag maghunàhúnà ug
unsay isunud, He speaks haltingly as if he was thinking of what to say
next. Pirmíha pagtulud. Ayawg undaundáa (iundaundà), Push continuously.
Don’t keep stopping now and then. a going on haltingly, not smoothly
continuous.

undáyag v [A2; b] step backwards, dodging to avoid the blows of an
attacking opponent. Muundáyag siya kun dasdásun apan síging nagpika, He
steps out of the way when he is attacked, but continues to deliver
punches.

undayun, undáyun (from dáyun) a space which is contiguous or continuous
with s.t. Ang kumidur undáyun sa sála, The dining room is a
continuation of the living room. pa- v {1} [A; b5c1] continue, go on
doing s.t. Mipaundáyun siyag lakaw bísan ákung gitawag, She continued
on walking away even as I called her. Wà siya makapaundáyun ug iskuyla
kay nasakit, He was not able to continue his studies because he got
sick. {2} [A; b] go along with s.o.’s decision, wishes. Magpaundáyun
kami sa ímung hukum, We will go along with your decision. Ayaw
paundayúni sa tanan níyang gustu, Do not give him everything he wants.

undù short form: dù. n {1} address of endearment for a boy.
{2} familiar term of address to a man the same age or younger than the
speaker. v [A; a12] call or address s.o. this way.

unduk v [B6; c1] be piled high. Muunduk ang labhanan ug dílì amnun
paglaba, The laundry will pile up if you don’t take care of it as it
comes up. n pile, heap of s.t. Ang unduk sa basúra, The heap of
garbage.

undul a for plants to have lost their crowns or leaves at the top. Mais
nga undul kaáyu human agii sa dúlun, Corn that had its tops eaten away
by the locusts. v [APB; a2] for plants to lose their crowns, cause them
to do so.

unduy = undù.

undyan = unyà.

ū́ng = úlung.

ungà_1 v [A23P; b] stop sucking on s.t.; stop suckling. Dì muungà ug
supsup sa dugù ang limátuk ug dì mabusug, A leech won’t stop sucking
blood until it gets full. ungaúngà v [A; c1] loosen s.t. by working it
back and forth. Nag-ungaúngà ku sa halígi arun húmuk ibtun, I’m pushing
the post back and forth so that it will be easy to pull it up.

ungà_2 = ingà.

ungab_1 v [A; a1b7] bite a big chunk off. Ug ikaw muungab, mahurut ni,
If you take a bite of it, nothing will be left. Ang plíti muungab ug
dakù sa ákung swildu, The fare takes a large chunk out of my salary.
n {1} bite. {2} action of biting. Usa ka ungab mahurut nà dáyun, That
would all be gone in a bite. -in-an n the area from which a large chunk
has been bitten.

ungab_2 v [A; b36] cry aloud. Nakamata ku kay nag-ungab siya, I woke up
because he cried so loud.

úngad v {1} [AN; a12] dig out with the snout or s.t. analogous. Dì na
muúngad (mangúngad) ang bábuy ug gawungan, The pig can no longer dig up
the soil if a ring is attached to its snout. {2} [A23; c] bury one’s
face in. Miungad siya sa dughan sa íyang minahal ug mihílak, She buried
her face on her boy friend’s bosom and cried. {3} [A23] bury oneself in
what one is doing. Matigayun giyud ang íyang uma kay muúngad siyas
trabáhu, His farm will do well because he applies himself assiduously.
{4} [A12S3] stay s.w. for one’s subsistence. Náa ra mag-ungad sa mga
ginikánan ang mga anak nga nangaminyù, The married children are living
with their parents. pa- v [B1256] fall down on one’s face. Napandul
siya ug napaúngad siyas lápuk, He tripped and fell face first into the
mud. inungáran n {1} soil that has been all dug up by a pig.
{2} earnings, s.t. obtained for a work done.

ungal, úngal v [A] make a loud bellowing cry. Miúngal (miungal) ang
higanti pagkaigù sa agtang, The giant bellowed when he got hit on the
forehead.

ungas n bad scratch. v [AB12; b6(1)] scratch s.t. badly. Siyay miungas
sa ákung nawung, She scratched my face.

ungat-úngat n the joint between the upper and lower jaw and the muscles
and jawbone in the vicinity. Gikápuy ang ákung ungat-úngat ug kináun sa
inánag, My jaws were tired from eating the broiled corn.

ungaug = alungaug.

ungaw v [B146; b6] {1} be on the brink of death. Nag-ungaw na siya sa
kamatáyun, She is on the brink of death. {2} be at the brink of some
calamity. Mag-ungaw na gánì ang ákung kwarta sa kahurutun, mukáun na
lang ku ug buwad, When my money is nearly gone I resort to eating dried
fish.

ungdan = undan.

unggà v {1} [A; c1] break limbs, anything projecting off. Unggáun
(iunggà) ku ning úlu sa munyíka, I’ll break the head of the doll off.
Naunggà ang pakù sa ayruplánu pagkahúlug niíni, The wing of the
airplane broke off when it fell. {2} [B12; a 12] for a sungkà player to
lose all his pieces to his opponent. Dì abtag diyis minútus makaunggà
ku nímu, In less than ten minutes I’ll have all your pieces.
a {1} being broken off. Unggà nag kawu nang tasáa, That cup doesn’t
have a handle any more. {2} having lost all one’s pieces in sungkà.
unggaunggà n = anananggal. v [a3] be detachable.

unggal = unggà.

unggu = pamaláyi. see bayi.

ungguwintu n ointment.

ungguy n monkey. — nga nahapunan crestfallen of countenance. Naunsa ka
man nga mu ra ka man ug ungguy nga nahapunan, pri? What happened to
you? You look crestfallen (like a monkey overtaken by sunset).
dalunggan sa — = layat_2. ungguy-ungguy n k.o. card game where the
players try to match pairs by drawing from each other’s hands. v [A1;
a12] play this game.

ungkad, ungkag v [A3PB12; c1] {1} scatter, be, become scattered or
disarrayed. Kinsay nag-ungkag sa mga papil? Who scattered the papers
all over the place? Naungkag ang mga táwu dihang miuwan, The people ran
in all directions when it started to rain. {2} stir or disturb the
peace or calmness of. Ang dautang balità mauy miungkag sa mga
lungsuránun, The bad news stirred up the townspeople. {2a} break up a
home or a peaceful or friendly relationship. Maungkag ang inyung
pagpuyù tungud sa ímung pagbisyu, Your home life will be broken up
because of your indulgence in vice. {2b} disturb one’s sleep. Siyay
miungkag sa ákung paghinánuk, She disturbed my sleep.

ungkat v [A; a1] revive, bring back to one’s consciousness s.t. that
has long been forgotten. Ákung ungkátun ang tanang nahitabù arun
mahibaw-an ang kamatuúran, I’ll go over everything that happened so
that the truth will come out.

unglan = unlan. see ulun.

unglù n a person who is possessed of a supernatural force, which
attacks from time to time causing him to change his form and go out,
often to harm others, preying on their blood, livers, et al. The power
which possesses the unglù is passed to him by salában. v {1} [B126; b6]
become an unglù. {2} [B126] be addicted to a despicable vice. Naúngù
siya sa madyung, He has become addicted to mahjong. paN- v [A2; b(1)]
for a person who is an unglù to get possessed and do his malicious
acts.

ungnan = unlan. see ulun.

Úngù_1 = unglù.

Úngù_2 = wakwak_2.

úngud a giving serious and undisturbed attention to work or activity.
Úngud siya sa trabáhu, He is diligent in his work. v [A; c] do s.t.
seriously and with diligence. Mag-úngud mu sa pagtuun arun mu
makapasar, You must be diligent in your studies so that you can pass.
Iúngud ang ímung panahun sa ímung nigusyu, Devote your time to your
business.

ungul n stage of maturity of a coconut where the meat is getting hard
but not completely mature. v [B25; b6] for the coconut to reach this
stage.

úngul v [A2; b3] object angrily upon being asked for s.t. or told to do
s.t. because the person who did so does not have the right (slang). Ug
miúngul pa siya pagpangáyù nákug dilihinsiya gúbut untà, Had he
objected when I asked for protection money, there would have been
trouble. n angry complaint. Way úngul ang butanti nga ámung
gitirurismu, The voter we terrorized didn’t dare complain.

ung-ung v [A; c6] appear partly in an opening or hole. Tawga dáyun ang
duktǔr ug mag-ung-ung na ang bátà, Call the doctor immediately when the
child appears in the vaginal opening. Ayaw iung-ung ang ímung úlu sa
pultahan kay mahadluk sila, Don’t pop your head out of the door or
they’ll be scared. n {1} the buwà_1 at an early stage of development.
{2} supernatural beings who appear to people showing only their human
head above the ground in odd places. They frighten but are harmless.

ungus-ungus, ungus-úngus v [AN; a] sniffle or whine. Naghilak ka man
tingáli, kay nag-ungus-ungus ka man, You must have been crying because
you are sniffling. Nag-ungus-ungus ang irù, The dog is whining.

úngut v {1} [APB2S] get stuck and not be able to move forward, cause
s.t. to do so. Miúngut (naúngut) ang dáru sa dakung batu, The plow got
stuck on a big boulder. Siyay nag-úngut (nagpaúngut) sa kambiyu, He
caused the gears to jam. Lawum nga lápuk ang giungútan sa trák, The
truck got stuck deep in the mud. {1a} — ang bàbà. {1a1} get lockjaw.
{1a2} be at a loss for words. Miúngut ang íyang bàbà sa dihang gisukut
siya, She didn’t know what to say when she was questioned. {2} [B23S6;
b3] become stopped, detained. Miúngut ang ákung papílis sa imbasi, My
papers got stuck in the embassy. {3} be puzzled, stuck so that one
can’t proceed. Muúngut (maúngut) giyud ku áning prublimáha, I’ll be
stumped by this problem. {4} [B2S3(1)6; b(1)] for s.t. long to pierce
into s.t. Nag-ungut ang kwáku sa bàbà sa tigúwang, There was a pipe
stuck in the old man’s mouth. Wà makaúngut ang panà sa káhuy, The arrow
didn’t stick into the tree. {4a} be fixed, glued s.w. Miúngut ang íyang
mata sa dughan sa dalága, His eyes were glued to the young woman’s
breasts. {5} = úngud, v. a {1} being stuck on tight. {2} = úngud, a.
pina- n action that is prolonged, done without letting go. Ang íyang
hinagkan pinaúngut, He kissed her with a prolonged kiss.

unguy_1 (word play on bungul) a deaf (humorous). Kusga pagsulti kay
unguy nang gikaisturya nímu, Speak loudly because you are talking to a
deaf man.

*unguy_2 unguy-únguy v [AP; b(1)] malinger. Mag-unguy-únguy
(magpaunguy-únguy) dáyun nang batáa basta náay súgù, That child
pretends to be sick as soon as there is work to be done. -an a unable
to endure work. Unguyan kaáyu sa trabáhu nang tawhána kay tapulan man
gud, That man can’t endure work because he is lazy. v [B12] get to be
so one cannot endure work. unguy-unguyan a malingerer. v [B12; b] be,
become a malingerer.

unibirsidad n university. v [AB126; a2] found a university, become a
university.

unidu = umidu, 2, 2a.

unidúru = inudúru.

unipurmi = yunipurmi.

unkuwartu n one-fourth. Unkuwartu ra nga karni ang ákung palitun, I’ll
only buy a quarter (kilogram) of meat. v [B1256; a12] amount to a
quarter. Unkuwartúha lang pagpalit ang asúkar, Just buy a quarter of a
kilo of sugar.

unlan see ulun.

unlud v {1} [AB23; c1] sink into s.t. so as to be submerged. Dì muunlud
(maunlud) ang sakayan nga kinatígan, A boat with outriggers won’t sink.
Unlúrun (iunlud) ta ka, I’ll pull you under the water. {1a} for s.t.
solid to sink into the earth or land to sink. Nahíwì ang balay kay
nagkaunlud ang halígi, The house is crooked because the post is
sinking. {2} [APB2; c1] for a business to go to pot, cause it to do so.
Muunlud ang ímung nigusyu ug dì ikaw ang mangunay, Your business will
go to pot if you don’t manage it yourself. pa- n lead sinker of a
fishing net or line.

unminútu n one minute. Unminútu ra ang ákung pahúway, I rested for only
one minute. v {1} [A2; c1] do s.t. for a minute. Muunminútu ra ku
pagpakigsulti nímu, I’ll talk to you for only one minute. Wà pa ka
makaunminútu ug sulti, You haven’t talked for a minute. {2} [B56] be
about a minute. Miunminútu (naunminútu) tingáli tung ákung pagkalípung,
I was dizzy for about a minute.

unmumintu {1} wait a moment, excuse me a second. Unmumintu, maglipstik
na lang ku, Just a second. I’ll just put my lipstick on. Unmumintu
diay. Kinsa tuy ímung ngálan? Just a minute. What did you say your name
was? {2} wait a minute, be silent for a minute. ispíra — = unmumintu,
2.

unra = rilip.

unras n honors for the dead, a special ceremony at a funeral where the
priest accompanies the body from the house to the church, and from
there to the cemetery. v [A; b6] perform the unras. — bihilya n this
ceremony in which the body remains in the church for some time.

unsa interrogative {1} what? Unsay ímung gibúhat? What are you doing?
Unsa man nà? What is that? Unsay úras? What time is it? Unsay átù? What
would you like? Unsa man diay? Ug dì swildúhan mubíyà giyud, What do
you expect? If you don’t pay, of course she’ll quit. Báhin sa unsa?
What is it about? {1a} bisan (bisag) — whatever, anything at all. Bisan
unsay ihátag, dawáta, Whatever they give you, accept it. Bisag unsa
mahal run, Everything is expensive nowadays. {1b} — nga [time]-a at
what [time]? Unsang urása? At what time? {1c} — ka-[adj.]? how [adj.]
was it? Unsa kadakù ang ílang balay? How big is their house? Tíaw mu ba
kun unsa kalisud, Imagine how difficult it is. {1d} -y ákù? what do I
care? Unsay ákù ug muláyas ka? Na hala, What do I care if you run away?
Go right ahead. Unsay ákù kaníya? What do I care about her? {1e} -y ímu
[dat.] what do you see in [dat.]? {1f} -y ngálan gud what in heaven’s
name? Unsay ngálan gud diay? Minyù? What in heaven’s name do you mean?
He’s married? {2} how about it? Unsa, muadtu ba tag dílì? How about it?
Shall we go or not? {2a} say, how is it now? Unsa, human na ba, wà pa,
Say, is it done or not? {2b} — na how are things now? Unsa na? Nadáwat
ka na? How about it? Did you get your job? ‘Unsa na?’—‘Mau gihápun,’
‘How are things?’—‘Oh, just as usual.’ {2c} — na kahà how much more so
if. Ug dagmálan ka na níya run, unsa na kahag maminyù mu? If he is mean
to you now, how will it be when you’re married? {3} what do you mean?
what are you talking about? Unsay barátu? Mahal uy! What do you mean
cheap? It’s expensive. Unsang kwartáha! Nagastu na, What money are you
talking about? It’s all gone. {3a} what’s the matter with? Unsa ka bang
sultían, mu ra ka mag bungul, What’s the matter with you that when I
talk to you you act deaf? {4} at the end of a phrase: it is so, is it
not? short form: sa. Maáyu, unsa (sa)? It was nice, wasn’t it? {5} ug —
pa kadtu, dihà and so forth. Mga bínu, tubà, sirbísa, ug unsa pa kadtu
(dihà), Wine, toddy, beer, and what have you. v {1} [A3; a1] do what?
Muunsa kag hanaan ka níya? What will you do if he aims at you? Nag-unsa
man mu samtang wà ku dinhi? What did you do while I wasn’t here? Giunsa
man ninyu ang bátang naghilak man? What did you do to the child to make
him cry? {1a} [a1c] how does one do. Unsáun ku pagpatay sa (ang) irù?
How can I kill the dog? Iunsa man nà nákù pagtáud? How shall I attach
it? {1a1} bisan — no matter what was, is done to it. Bisag giunsa
(unsáun) nákù pagbira dílì maibut, No matter how I pulled (pull) it, it
didn’t (won’t) come out. {1b} unsáun man nga what could I do? Unsáun
man ug dì magpatúu, dì hilatiguhan, I couldn’t help it. If he doesn’t
obey I have to whip him. {1c} dílì ingun sa pag- it is not to make s.o.
feel bad. Dílì ni ingun sa pag-unsa nímu, piru tinúud giyud nà, I’m not
saying this to hurt you, but it is true. {1d} bisag unsáun n name given
to the followers of Osmeña, who stick with him through his attempts to
capture the presidency (sticking to him, whatever he does). {2} [B16]
what does it become, happen to it. Maunsa man ang átung láwas ug patay
na ta? What happens to our bodies when we die? Nag-unsa man ang patay?
What was the position of the body? Makaunsa (makapaunsa) kanang
tambála? What can that medicine do? {2a} [B1256] what happened to...?
Naunsa ka? Nabúang ka ba? What’s the matter with you? Are you crazy?
{2b} ma- ba who cares. Maunsa ba ug dì mahinayun, Who gives a darn if
it doesn’t go through? paN- v [A23] do harm. Dì mangunsa ning irúa,
This dog won’t do anything. Nangunsa man tu? Dì walà? What did he do to
you anyway? Nothing, didn’t he? unsáay v [B126] what happens to.
Maunsáay átung nigusyug muritíra ka? What will become of our business
if you pull out? Walà giyud makaunsáay ang bagyu sa ámù, The storm
didn’t do a thing to our house. ka- v [A13] what will happen to. Ug
magkaunsa gánì ri, makapangasáwa giyud ka, Whatever happens to her, you
will have to marry her. kina-, kinaunsáay v [A13] what it will become.
Ug magkinaunsa, nía giyud ku, Whatever happens, I’ll always be here.
mag- how are they related? Mag-unsa man nà sila? Magsúun ba? How are
they related? Are they brothers? ig- n what relationship. Ig-unsa ka
nákù? What relation are you to me? walay unsaunsa no more anything. Ug
mamaláyi ka run, largu ang kasal, wà nay unsaunsa, After you have asked
for the hand, you can get married without any further ceremonies.

unsas n ounce. v [c1] measure by the ounce.

unsi numeral eleven. Unsi ka buuk bátà, Eleven children. Unsi písus,
Eleven pesos. v see tris. unsiunsi v {1} [A; b] do s.t. on a ten-to-one
basis. Unsiunsíhan nátug hákut ang mais, We will carry the corn to
market on a ten-to-one basis (for every ten you carry, you get one for
yourself). {1a} [a12] pay on a ten-to-one basis (instead of some other
way). Ug átung unsiunsíhun ang swildu, iguígù giyud, If we give them a
tenth share, that is fair enough. {2} [A13; b(1)] beat s.o. by turns.
Ang dinakpan giunsiunsíhan sa mga sikríta, The plainclothesmen took
turns beating the suspect.

unsingálan (from unsay ngálan) a what? Unsingálan man nà? What is that?
Unsingálan gud ning kagulyánga gud? What’s all this ruckus about
anyway?

unsiyálan = unsingálan.

unsuy v [A3P; b4] be, become sick after exposing oneself to the cold or
taking a bath after having sexual intercourse. Ang pagkalígù human
mukáyat makapaunsuy (makaunsuy), Taking a bath after having sexual
intercourse can get you sick.

untà short form: tà. {1} with requests or suggestions ‘should, would
like to’. Muhulam untà ku ug kwarta nímu, I would like to borrow some
money from you. {1a} may [so-and-so] happen. Mahúlug tà ka, I hope you
fall! Dílì untà siya masaklit sa kamatáyun, May death not take him
away. Dì tà ka magbinúang, I hope you don’t do anything foolish. hináut
— I hope. Hináut untà nga dílì ka maghubug, I hope you do not get
drunk. {2} [so-and-so] was going to be the case, but it isn’t;
[so-and-so] might have happened, but it did not. Mugíkan na untà siya
apan mibagyu, He was about to leave but there was a storm. maáyu — it
would be (have been) better. Maáyu untà ug madala nímu rung hápun, It
would be nice if you could bring it this afternoon. Nindut tà ug nadala
pa nímu, It would have been nice if you had brought it. {2a} in the
apodosis of conditions contrary to fact: then [so-and-so] would have
been the case. Maáyung wà makagikan ang sakayan, kayg kagikan pa,
malúnud untà, Thank God the boat didn’t leave, because if it had, it
would have sunk. Walà untà ku muanhig wà pa ku imbitaha, I wouldn’t
have come unless I had been invited. Ug aku pa, mahuman na tà run, I
could have gotten it done, if I were to have been the one to do it.
Dílì aku, kayg aku pa, nahuman na tà run, It wasn’t me, because if it
were, it would have been done now. Ug ugmà pa giyud ang kasal naghíkay
tà run, If the wedding were really going to be tomorrow, he would be
preparing now. Ug aku pay kaslun magkapulíkì tà ku run, piru siya
hayáhay lang, If it were me getting married, I’d be going crazy; but
he’s just taking it easy. {2b} [so-and-so] should not be the case.
Ngánung mutúlù man ning bangáa nga wà man untay sulud? Why does this
jar leak when it is supposed to be empty? Háin man siyang nía man tà tu
run? Where is he since he was supposed to be here? {2c} — kay because
of [so-and-so], [such-and-such] should have been done. Untà kay gawíun
nímu samtang wà siya dinhi, nananghid kang dáan, Since you wanted to
use it while he was gone, you should have asked before he left.

untu_1 n one of the four top front teeth. v [b4] have one’s upper
incisors. Lima pa ka búlan ning batáa apan giuntuhan na, The baby is
only five months old but she already has upper teeth.

untu_2 v [A2; c6] bear down hard as in delivery or defecation.

untul v {1} [AP34; b6] bounce, cause s.t. to do so. Maáyung muuntul ang
gáhing búla, Hard balls bounce well. {2} [A23] rebound, fail to
register or to take a firm hold on. Miuntul ang ákung gitun-an, dì na
masulud sa ákung úlu, The things I studied won’t register in my head.
{3} [A23; b4] for checks to bounce. Miuntul ang tsíki nga ákung
gipailísan sa bangku, The check that I cashed in the bank bounced.
{4} [B2] be taken aback, stop in one’s tracks due to surprise. Miuntul
(nauntul) ku pagkakità ku sa anínu, I was taken aback when I saw the
shadow. {4a} [A23P; b3] have second thoughts about buying s.t. Sa maung
prisyu muuntul giyud ang pumapálit, At that price the buyers will
surely have second thoughts. n amount of bounce. untul-untul v [B4;
b(1)] jounce, bounce up and down. Miuntul-untul ang sakayan sa dagkung
balud, The boat was bounced around in the big waves. Muuntul-untul
mulakaw ang tagabúkid bísan ug pátag na, Mountaineers bounce as they
walk, even in the lowland. -um- nga humay n k.o. upland rice bearing
fine, white grains that are hard to husk when pounded.

untup a {1} cut close near the base. Untup kaáyung pagputul sa dagámi,
The cornstalks were cut very close to the base. {2} curt, concise.
Untup kaáyu siya ug tubag, His answers are very brief. {3} just the
exact magnitude, amount. Untup kaáyu ang bugas nga lung-águn pára
paniudtu, The rice is just enough for dinner. {3a} exactly at a certain
time. Untup kaáyu nga alas syíti ang ímung pag-abut, You arrived
exactly at seven. v {1} [A; c1] cut s.t. close to the base. Nagpangpang
hinúun nang ímung tingkuy kay giuntup man pagkatupi, The nape of your
neck looks as if there was a cliff above it because the hair was cut
short there, but not above it. {1a} [A; c1] spin a top by throwing it
straight down hard. Giuntúpan níya ang kasing sa kuntra ug nabuak kini,
He smashed his top down on top of his opponent’s and broke it.
{2} [B12; a12] be, become short, curt. Mauntup ang ímung tubag ug wà
kay láing ikasulti, Your answer will be short if you have nothing else
to say. {3} [B126; b6] be just exact or enough for. Ug mauntup ra ning
ákung kwarta pára pamilíti wà na kuy ikapaínit, If my money is just
enough for my fare, then I won’t have any more to buy snacks. {3a} [A2;
b6c1] arrive on time.

untuy_1 n big, porcelain or enamel-coated, round plate. v [A; b6(1)]
use this sort of plate.

untuy_2 v [a12] be cuckolded and unaware of it. Giuntuy lang intáwun
ang inusinting bána sa marúnung níyang asáwa, The wife was making a
fool out of her trusting husband.

untuy_3 = undù.

únu one (used only in counting). Dì pa ka mulíhuk? Únu, dus, ... You’re
not going to do it? O.K. One, two, ... a the best there is, second to
none. Únu siyang musáyaw, He is the best dancer. — lus dús for there to
be a fifty-fifty chance. Únu lus dús lag mabúhì ba ang naligsan, It’s a
fifty-fifty chance that the victim will survive. numiru — n number one,
tops. Numiru únung palahúbug, Number one drunkard. Numiru únung
mananagat, The best fisherman. v [b6] give s.o. a first warning. Ákù ta
na kang giunúhan, ha, Watch out. This is your first warning. — ug igù,
syát v [A; a12] hit in one shot. Unúhun kug igù kanang langgam sa
káhuy, I will hit that bird in the tree with only one shot. walay —
v [b6] you can’t win, have no way to win people’s approval, for
whichever way it is done, it will be wrong in their eyes. Wà giyud tay
pagaunúhan (giunúhan) kay ug magdaginut tag gastu nganlan tag tihik, ug
kusug pud tang mugastu ingnun tag gastadur, You can’t win. If you’re
careful with your money they call you cheap. If you spend your money
they call you a spendthrift.

unud n {1} flesh. Unud sa báka, Cow’s flesh. Unud sa imbaw, The flesh
of the clam. Unud sa mangga, The flesh of the mango. — sa ímung, íyang
— one’s offspring (lit. flesh of one’s flesh). baligyà sa — v [A; c]
practice prostitution (lit. sell one’s flesh). kalípay sa — sexual
pleasure. {2} content, integral part within s.t. Liking way unud, A
cigar with no tobacco in it. Impanádang gamay ug unud, A meat pie with
very little meat in it. {2a} content, meaning. Pangatarúngan nga way
unud, Empty reasoning. v {1} [B23N; b6] put on flesh, become fleshy.
Nangunud na ang kamúti. Makálut na, The sweet potatoes have developed
nice and fat. You can dig them up now. Giunuran na sad ang íyang láwas,
He has gotten flesh back on his body. {2} [A; b6] give content or
filler to s.t. Dì ku muunud ug barut nga tabákù, I do not use a poor
k.o. tobacco in my pipe. Ilagà kunu ang giunud sa syúpaw, S.o. said
they used rat meat as the filling for the Chinese sandwich. undan
a having flesh. see also undan. undánun, maundánun a {1} fleshy,
muscular. {2} pithy, full of substance or meaning. Undánun kaáyu ang
ímung sulti, What you said is full of meaning. kaunuran n flesh,
muscles collectively. Nangúrug ang ákung kaunuran sa kalágut, My flesh
trembled in anger. pa- n filler, filling. Balahíbung gagmay ang paunud
sa unlan, Pillows are stuffed with fine feathers. v (A; c] use as
filler. -nun a pertaining to the flesh. -nung tingúhà carnal desire.

unugan n place where wild animals or birds habitually stay or go. Ang
bábuy ihálas didtu lang níla atángi sa unugan, They lay in wait for
wild pigs at the place they habitually pass. v [A; b(1)] make a place
into a lair.

*unuk-unuk pa- v [A13; bc] keep silent and idle. Dílì giyud mahuman
nang ímung trabáhu kay imu man lang nang gipaunuk-unukan, You’ll never
get done with your work if you just remain idle with it. Ipaunuk-unuk
lang nang ímung labad sa úlu. Maáyu ra lagi nà, Just take it easy with
your headache and you will get better.

unuk-únuk v [A3; b5] beset, bother persistently at a particularly
inconvenient time. Naatrasáwu na man gánì ku sa upisína, miunuk-únuk
sab ning ulan pagbundak, I am already late to the office as it is, and
here the rain is tying me up. Gipapha siyas trabáhu ug giunuk-únuk pag
sakit, He was fired from his job, and that is when he had to get sick
of all times. ma-un a characterized with annoying persistence.

unum numeral six. v see tulu. kan-uman sixty.

-unun suffix forming nouns similar in meaning to the direct passives.
{1} added to bases which occur with direct passive verbal affixes: the
thing to be [so-and-so]-ed, that is [so-and-so]-ed. Ang pangasaw-unun,
The bride-to-be. Mahal ang mga palitúnun run, Things are expensive
these days. Kan-unun, Things to eat. {2} added to roots which do not
normally take the direct passive. Labhunun, Things to be washed. May
hatagunun pa diay ku nímu, Oh, I still have s.t. to give you.

un-un_1 n meat or fish stewed in vinegar. v [A; c] cook meat or fish in
vinegar. -in-, -in-an = un-un_1, n.

un-un_2 v [B2; b8] {1} for solids to settle, but not in a liquid.
Muun-un ang harína ug maúyug ang sudlanan, The flour will settle if you
shake the container. Nagkaun-un ang túri kay húmuk ang yútang
gitukúran, The tower is sinking because it is built on soft ground.
{2} for s.t. in the body to move downward. Ug magmabdus, dílì mangalsag
bug-at kay muun-un ang bátà, A pregnant woman shouldn’t lift heavy
things because the baby will descend. n fine particles of milled or
pounded rice, buri, or cassava flour.

un-ún_1 n k.o. shrub of waste spaces producing a dark red, juicy,
edible, berry, about 1 cm. in diameter and furnishing firewood.

un-ún_2 = un-un_2, n.

únung v {1} [AC2; b6(1)] stick to s.o. loyally, through thick and thin.
Muúnung ku nímu sa mga kalisdánan ug kaharúhay, I’ll stick to you
through thick and thin. Akù siyang giunúngan pagbilar, I stuck the wake
out with him. {2} [c6] involve or implicate s.o. in a misdeed. Iúnung
ku níya sa íyang mga salà, He wants to implicate me in his offenses.
{3} [A; b(1)] stay with s.o. to take care of him. Muúnung kus mga bátà
samtang nag-iskuyla sa syudad, I am going to the city to set up house
for the children while they attend school there. {4} [b5] die with a
fetus in the womb or in giving birth. n {1} fetus in the womb of a
mother or animal that died. {2} mother or animal that died while
pregnant. Nadiskubrihan námung únung diay ang giíhaw, We discovered
that the animal we slaughtered was pregnant. (→) n = únung, n. v [A13;
a12] mind what s.o. says or does. Dì ku mag-unung sa kasábà ni Nánay
kay ági man lang nà, I don’t mind Mother’s scolding because it won’t
last. Kamu ray alkansi ug ungnun ninyu ang mga tabìtábì, You only hurt
yourselves if you mind idle talk. -an n = unung, n2. ma-un a devotedly
sticking to s.o. through thick and thin.

unur n one’s honor, reputation. Unur sa pamilya, The honor of the
family.

únur = ánur.

unurabli a honorable, decent. Unurabling pagkatáwu. Mutúman giyug sáad,
An honorable man that keeps his word. Pangítà ug trabáhu nga bísag
gamay rag swildu basta unurabli, Look for a job, even if it does not
pay well, as long as it is decent.

unurári n honorary title. Si Míyur Búris gihímung unurári upisyal sa
intirskulastik mit, Mayor Borres was made the honorary officer for the
interscholastic meet. v [B1256; c1] be conferred an honorary title.

unuraryu n honorarium.

unus n a squall, sudden burst of heavy wind. — sa kinabúhì rigors of
life. v [A; a4b4] for there to be a strong gust of wind. Nag-unus nang
dáan paglarga sa barkung natundag, There were already squalls when the
boat that sank left the harbor. Giunus (giunusan) mi sa taliwálà sa
lawud, We were caught by a squall in the middle of the sea.

únus see tris.

unus-únus a done alternately, not together. v [A; c1] do one after
another. Mag-unus-únus tag ihid, Let’s sneak out one at a time.

unut = nunut.

únut v {1} [C2] for people or animals of the opposite sex to engage in
horseplay with sexual overtones. Ang irù nga mangúwag kanúnayng
mag-únut, Dogs in heat are constantly engaging in horseplay. {2} [C]
for two women to claw at each other and pull each other’s hair.
Nagkaúnut ang duha ka babáyi tungud sa pangabubhu, The two women are
clawing each other because of jealousy.

unyà short forms: unyà, nyà. {1} at a later time. Mukáun ku unyà, I
will eat later. Unyà ra nà nákù buhátun, I will do it later. — nga
[word referring to time] this [day, month, etc.] coming up. Unyang
hápun, This afternoon (coming). Unyang alas dus, At two o’clock (this
coming afternoon). — sa [day of week, month, year] next [so-and-so].
Unyà sa Martis, Next Tuesday. Unyà sa sunud túig, Next year. {1a} matag
karun ug — every now and then. Matag karun ug unyà mulìlì siya sa
bintánà, He gets up every now and then to take a peep out of the
window. {2} furthermore, in addition. Dúm kaáyu tu, unyà way búwang
nakítà, It was very dark. And the moon was not out. {2a} then, the next
thing that happens, happened. Mitan-aw siya nákù, unyà midágan, He
looked at me, then he ran. {2b} also, the next thing in the
conversation. Namisíta mi nímu. Unyà baligyáan ka námù ug tíkit sa
bayli, We came to visit you. And also we would like to sell you a
ticket to the dance. {2c} so? (urging speaker to continue). Unyà,
naunsa na man tung amahan? So, what became of the father?
{2d} nevertheless. Gidid-an siya sa duktǔr. Unyà, muinum siya gihápun,
The doctor forbade him to drink. But nevertheless he still drinks
anyway. {3} particle giving a warning: lest. Hílak nyà arun latiguhun
ka nákù, Cry and I will whip you. {4} [verb base, noun, adj.] — it is
[so-and-so], my foot. Pangadyì unyà. Bisag mitan-awg sini, He’s
attending prayers, my foot! He went to the show. Bag-u unyà. Bísag sa
tyimpu pa nang mampur, New, my foot! It’s older than the hills. Báka
unyà, bisag irù, What do you mean beef? This is dog meat. n when you
get to doing it (coitus) (humorous). Kinahanglang mutúu ka sa ímung
asáwa, kay ag unyà, You have to do what your wife tells you because you
are going to get you-know-what from her. unyaunyà v [A; a12] put off
doing s.t. to a later time. Dì ku muunyaunyà ug unsay isúgù nákù, I
won’t put off what I am told to do.

unyas n {1} plectrum. {2} diamonds in playing cards (which resemble a
plectrum). v [A; a] use or make a plectrum.

unyun n union or organization. Unyun sa pamúu, Labor union. v {1} [C;
c1] form a union. Wà maunyun ang mga trabahadur, The laborers were not
united. {2} [C3; c] agree, be in accord. Unyúnan na lang nátù ang íyang
sugyut, Let’s agree to his suggestion. Iunyun námù ang ámung mga búhat
sa ámung gipamúlung, We will act in accordance with what we said.

unyur see *marts.

up_1 a off work, not on duty. Up na ku, I’m off duty now. v [B236; c1]
be off duty. Muup (maup) ku sa alas singku, I’ll be off at five
o’clock.

up_2 v [AB; c1] switch s.t. off, be switched off. Kinsay nag-ǔp sa
bintiladur? Who switched the electric fan off? Awtumátik ning punúha.
Muup (maup) ra nig íya, This phonograph is automatic. It switches off
by itself. a turned off.

úpa v [ANC23; b26] for fowl to serve. Dì makaúpa ang ugis kay daug sa
usa, The white cock cannot cover because it is afraid of the other one.
inupáhan n the chick that results from a particular mating. King mga
pisúa inupáhan ni sa ugis, These chicks are the offspring of the white
cock.

úpà v {1} [A; c1] chew food for s.o. else, esp. for a child to eat.
{2} [A; b6] spit s.t. out. Giupáan ku sa núkus sa íyang átà, The squid
squirted its ink out at me. Akung giúpà ang midisína kay pait kaáyu, I
spat out the medicine because it was very bitter. n pulp left after
sucking the juice of s.t. chewed. -in- n chewed food for s.o. else to
eat.

upak n a piece or part of s.t. in cake or bar form. Usa ka upak kámay,
A cake of sugar. v {1} [AB; a1] cut s.t. into bars or pieces; get
broken. Upaka únà ang mahariyal únà ibaligyà, Cut the candy into cakes
before you sell it. {2} [A; b] break or cut off a piece for s.o.
Giupakan nákù siyag duha ka báhin sa tsukulit, I broke off two pieces
of the chocolate bar for him.

úpak n bark of trees. Ang úpak maáyung isugnud, Bark of trees make good
fuel. Usa ka úpak tungug, A strip of mangrove bark. v {1} [A; a]
gather, take the bark off of trees. {2} [AB2; a2] peel off, get peeled
off. Ínit sa adlaw ang nakaúpak sa íyang pánit, His skin peeled in the
heat of the sun. Nagkaupak ang hapin sa diksiyunaryu, The cover of the
dictionary is working its way off.

úpal n k.o. soft, fine-weave cloth.

upas v [B2; b6] {1} lose flavor from being left uncovered. Muupas
(maupas) ang sigarilyu ug byáan nga abyirtu, The cigarettes lose their
flavor if you leave them around open. {2} lose fertility. Muupas ang
yútà ug dílì abunúhan, The land will lose its fertility if you don’t
fertilize it. a lacking in flavor or potency.

úpas n banana leaf stalk.

upat numeral four. Upat ka buuk bátà, Four children. v see tulu. — ug
(ang) mata a having glasses (four-eyed) (humorous). — ang tiil for a
wife to have clandestine relations with another man (humorous). Inig
talikud sa bána sa trabáhu, upat dáyuy tiil sa asáwa, When the husband
leaves for work his wife meets her lover (lit. gets four legs). ika-
fourth. kap-atan n forty. maka-, ka- four times. tag-, tagup-at
n {1} four apiece. {2} odds of four to three in betting. v [AC2; c]
give four to three odds in betting. Gitagupátan ang ámung manuk, Our
cock was given odds of four to three. tinagup-at v [A; a12] do by
fours.

upaup = †alupaup. see álup, 1.

upaw_1 a {1} bald, lacking hair on the head. {2} bald, devoid of
vegetation. Upaw nga mga búkid, Deforested mountains. {3} infertile.
Upaw nang dáan ang yútà sa Marigundun, The land in Marigondon has
always been infertile. v {1} [B; c1] grow bald. Naupaw ka sa hilabihang
pininsar, You have grown bald from worrying too much. {2} [c1] be,
become denuded of forest. {3} become barren, infertile. (←) v [A; c1]
make s.o. bald or s.t. barren. Giupáwan ku siya kay gikutu, I cut off
her hair bald because she had lice. bísan pag mangaúpaw come what may,
by hook or by crook (lit. even if I go bald trying). Bísan pag
mangaúpaw magdátù giyud ku ug mag-idad kug kwarinta, By hook or by
crook I’ll become rich by the time I’m forty.

upaw_2 v {1} [A; b] block a shot in basketball. Luksu inigsiyát arun dì
ka upawan, Jump when you shoot so that your shot won’t be blocked.
{2} [A2; b(1)] prove much better than s.t., putting it to shame. I,
bag-u ka mag kutsi. Upawan mag akúa, My, you’ve got a new car! It puts
mine to shame.

upay, úpay v [APB; a12] {1} heal a wound or sore. Nagkaupay na ang
ákung mga núka, My scabies are healing. {2} relieve emotionally. Ang
ímung mga tambag mauy nakaupay (nakapaupay) sa ákung mga kaguul, Your
advice has relieved my worries. ka-an(←) n relief, healing. ka-un(→)
n healing as a resultant state. Walay kaupayun sa ákung mga kagul-ánan,
There is no relief for my sorrows. a at the verge of being healed.

up bit n off-beat, k.o. fast dance. v [A] do the off-beat.

uphag a {1} uninteresting. Nagpanghuy-ab ku nga nagtan-aw sa uphag
kaáyu nga sini, I was yawning looking at the boring movie. {2} having a
dry, not cared-for look. Uphag kaáyu ang ákung buhuk kay way hisù, My
hair looks drab and not groomed because I didn’t put oil in it.
v {1} [B156] be uninteresting. Wà nay manan-aw sa dráma nga nag-uphag,
Nobody likes to see a stage play that is boring. {2} [B; b6] be, become
drab and not well-groomed.

uphak = hup-ak.

úpin a {1} open, frank. Amígung úpin kaáyu nga dílì maúlawng mutug-ans
íyang kagíkan, A very open person who doesn’t feel embarrassed telling
about his origins. {2} outspoken. Úpin kaáyu siyang musaway sa
administrasiyun, He is very open in his criticisms of the
administration. see also klús. — kard = tindída. see tindǐr.

upiniyun n opinion, judgment. Pamináwun ta ang upiniyun sa usag-usa,
Let’s listen to each person’s opinion.

úpin tsik n in chess, a situation where one’s king or queen is open to
checkmate.

upira_1 v [A; b6(1)] perform an operation. Upirahan ta ang ímung hubag,
We’ll have to operate your boil. -siyun n operation.

upira_2 n opera. -tik(←) a having an operatic quality, with plenty of
tremolo (humorous).

upirarya n a dressmaker’s helper who usually does the finishing
touches, e.g. sewing on buttons. v [B156] work as a dressmaker’s
helper.

upiraryu n a barber or tailor who works in s.o. else’s shop on a
piecework basis. v [B16; c1] be, become an employee of this sort. paN-
v [A2] work as a barber or tailor in s.o. else’s shop.

upirisyun n {1} operation to achieve some object. Upirisyun sa pagsíkup
sa numiru únung huk, Operation to capture the number one Huk.
{2} surgical operation. v [A; b5] for an industrial enterprise to be in
operation.

upirit v [A] {1} operate a machine or device. Dakug swildu ang
makamaung muupirit ug buldúsir, One who knows how to operate a
bulldozer is highly paid. {2} = upirisyun, v. -ur(←) n {1} one who
operates or takes charge of machinery. Upirítur sa buldúsir, Bulldozer
operator. {2} one who owns a transportation line. Upirítur sa Atlas
taksi, The owner of the Atlas taxi. {3} radio or telegraph operator.
v [B156; c1] {1} work as the operator of machinery. {2} be, become a
radio or telegraph operator.

upiríta n operetta. v [A1; b6c1] have or stage an operetta.

upirturyu n offertory in the mass. v [A13] say the offertory.

úpis = lúpis.

upisína n {1} office. {2} office, work day. May upisína ba tas Lúnis?
Do we have office on Monday? v {1} [A23; b(1)] go to the office, be in
the office. Muupisína ku ug píkas adlaw lang, I’ll be in the office
only half day. {1a} [A13] hold office. Mag-upisína ta maskig pista
upisiyal, We will hold office though it will be a holiday. {2} [A; c1]
make an office s.w.

upisir n officer of an organization or in the armed forces. v [B16; c1]
be, become an officer.

upisiyal n {1} official, a person holding an office or position of
authority. Upisiyal sa militar, Military officer. {1a} any of the chess
pieces other than the pawns. {2} official, coming from the proper
authority. pista — public holiday, officially declared. kandidátu —
official candidate endorsed by the party. v {1} [B16; c1] be, become,
make into an official. {2} [B126; b6c1] be, become official. Maupisyal
na gánì ang ímung apuwintmint, Once your appointment becomes official.
-is(←) n = upisiyal, n1 (plural).

upisiyun {1} = upisyu, n1 2. {2} = apisiyun.

upisyu n {1} occupation. Wà kuy láing upisyu run, panahì ra, I have no
other job other than sewing at this time. {2} s.t. to keep oneself busy
with. Wà ka bay láing upisyu gawas sa pagpamantay? Don’t you have
anything better to do than nose into other people’s business?
{3} religious office, set of prayers one has vowed to recite. v [A13;
c1] {1} make s.t. one’s line of work. {2} occupy oneself with.
{2a} always do. Nag-upisyu lang kug trabáhu. Wà na giyuy lingawlíngaw,
All I do is work. I never have fun.

upluk a {1} lacking in ability, not up to what would normally be
expected of one. Upluk kaáyu sa klási, Very slow to understand in
class. Upluk duktúra, A half-baked doctor. {1a} foolish, stupid.
{2} fond of playing tricks, pranking with a straight face. Upluk kaáyu
siya ug dì ka pahiulian sa íyang tistis, He is very fond of playing
jokes with a straight face, and he never lets on that he has played a
joke. {3} fond of asking for things, but not willing to give when one
has s.t. and is asked. v {1} [B12; b6] be, become half-baked, dull, or
stupid. {2} [AN; b5] cheat s.o. out of s.t. by hoodwinking him. Uplúka
(uplúki) lang sa kwarta apan ayawg pangasaw-a, Just cheat her out of
her money. Don’t marry her.

uprisar v [A; c] offer for sale. Dúnay nag-uprisar ug sáma niíni nga
barátu ra, Somebody offered s.t. like this for sale cheaper. Giuprisar
ang ílang balay ug yútà, They put their house and lot up for sale.

uprisir v {1} [A; c] offer. Dì ku muuprisir nímu ug pagkáun nga dì
maáyung pagkalútù, I won’t offer you food that is not well cooked.
Giuprisihan ku níyag trabáhu, He offered me a job. {2} [A3P; a] force,
compel s.o. to do s.t. Kawad-un ang nakauprisir (nakapauprisir) níya
pagpangútang, Poverty forced him to take things on credit. Uprisira
siya pagpabáyad, Force him to pay.

ups expression uttered on exerting great effort, esp. in lifting
weight.

uptikal n optical store.

uptiku n {1} optometrist. {2} optician. v {1} [B16; a12] be, become an
optometrist or optician. {2} [A12] take up optometry.

úpu = kalabásang putì. see kalabásà.

upù v [A; b6(1)] duck, dodge to avoid a blow or hide. Ug wà siya
makaupù maigù giyud ang íyang náwung, Had he not dodged, he would have
gotten it in the face. Wà níya iupù ang íyang úlu mau nga napangkà, He
did not lower his head so he bumped it.

upud as a predicate modifier: = usab. v {1} [AC; ac] go, bring with.
Nag-úpud sila sa sini, They went to the movies together. Unsa pa may
updun mu? What are you going with me for? Giupdan ku siya sa pagsúgat
sa barku, I accompanied her to meet the boat. Iupud nà siya ninyu
panúruy, Take him with you when you go out. {2} [A; c1] do s.t. again,
repeat doing s.t. Dúna giyuy nag-upud sa ákung búhat unyà nasayup ra ba
hinúun, S.o. did my work again, and has spoiled it instead. Dì maáyuug
updun (iupud) nang buháta, Don’t repeat what you did. n companion.
ka-(←) = upud, n.

upung n bunch of stems or stalks, enough to grasp in the two hands.
Pila ka upung ang ímung naáni? How many bunches have you harvested?
v [A; b(1)] get a bunch of stalks, put in a bunch. Upunga ang humay,
Tie the rice into bunches. -in-, upung-upung v [A; b6] be all one of
the same height. {1} for children to be so close they are almost of the
same height. Mag-upung-upung (mag-inupung) ang inyung anak ug dílì mu
magkuntrul, Your children will be so close they’ll be almost the same
height if you don’t practice birth control. {2} for a crowd to be so
great one can’t distinguish the different heights. Nag-inupung ang mga
táwu sa plása, There was a sea of people in the plaza.

upunir v [A; b(1)] oppose, contend forcefully against. Nag-upunir
gihápun sila sa ímung paági kay walà sila kagustu, They are still
opposing your procedure because they don’t like it. Ayaw ug upunihi ang
ákung risulusiyun, Don’t oppose my resolution.

up-up = alup-up. see álup, 1.

upurtunista a opportunistic. Upurtunista kaáyung tawhána,
mubalhinbalhin ug partídu, You are an opportunist, changing parties
whenever it suits your purpose. v [B12; b6] be, become opportunistic.

upus n {1} s.t. long used up until only a stub is left. Upus sa
kandílà, Stump of a candle. {2} cigarette or cigar stub. Nagpatákà lag
butang sa íyang upus, She just puts her cigar stub anywhere.
v {1} [B12; a12] wear s.t. down. {2} [B12] for one’s years or patience
to be used up. Naupus na ang ákung paílub, My patience has come to an
end. Nagkaupus na ang íyang kinabúhì, His life is slowly coming to an
end.

upusisiyun n {1} opposition, resistance. Way upusisiyun kanang balaúra,
There is no opposition to that bill. {2} opposition party in Congress.
v [B126] be in, join the opposition.

upuy-upuy, upuy-úpuy v [A3P] behave meekly or timidly before s.o.,
usually from fear or lack of self-confidence. Miupuy-upuy pagsulud ang
suluguun sa lawak sa íyang agálun, The maid entered her master’s room
timidly. pa- v [A13] keep to oneself. Nagpaupuy-upuy lang siyas suuk ug
wà muapil sa kukabildu, He kept to himself in the corner and did not
participate in the conversation.

upyu = ampiyun_2.

urabang = uyabang.

uradur n orator. v [B16; a2] be, become an orator.

urakan n hurricane, name reserved for strong typhoons. Ang urakan sa
1912, The Great Hurricane of 1912.

urakulu n {1} oracle, prophet. {2} prophecy. Nagnúud ang urakulu, The
prophecy came true.

úral n s.t. oral. Púru úral ang ámung iksámin, We had all oral exams.
v {1} [A13; c1] communicate orally. {1a} [A; a12] eat alone without
anything to go with it (humorous). Maáyung klásis kan-un, maúral, A
good variety of rice that is good even if eaten all by itself. Urálun
ta na lang ning sinugbang isdà kay walà na may kan-un, Let’s just eat
the broiled fish alone because there’s no more rice. {2} do s.t.
relying on one’s memory or knowledge without any other aid. Bilib ku
nímug makaúral kag úlì niíning makináha, I would really be impressed if
you could put the machine together without referring to the manual.
{3} eat with the bare hands s.t. that should be eaten with silverware.
Urála na lang nà ninyung pagkáun kay kápuy ipanghúgas unyà, Just eat
with your fingers to save washing the silverware.

uran v [A; c1] put s.t. on for daily wear. Nag-uran kug dáan kay
mamanday ku, I am wearing old clothes because I’ll do some carpentry
work. n s.t. worn casually. Ang sinínà níyas balay mau puy uran sa uma,
The clothes he wears around the house is what he wears in the fields.
uran-úran v [A12; c6] {1} wear s.t. in a casual way. {2} use s.t. in a
situation it is too good for. Anúgun sa ímung dagway nga giuran-úran
nímug suruyg isdà, You have a lovely face. What a pity to waste it on
peddling fish! ig-l-/r-(←) n clothes usually worn for a certain job.

urang-utan, urang-utang n orang-utan.

uran-uran for some time; for quite a time. Uran-uran giyud námung
paábut nímu, We have been waiting for you for some time.

úra pru núbis phrase of the litany: pray for us.

uráray v [A13; b6] be situated in a low place or elevation. Lungsud nga
nag-uráray sa tiilans búkid, A town nestled at the foot of a mountain.
pa- v [A; c] draw oneself close to, snuggle close to. Mipauráray siya
sa ákung buktun úsà matúlug, He nestled in my arms before going to
sleep.

uraryu n hand of a clock or watch. v [A; b6(1)] attach the hands of a
clock or watch.

úras n {1} hour. Pila ka úras ang byáhi? How many hours does the trip
take? {2} time of day. Unsay úras? What time is it? Unsang urása siyang
miabut, What time did he arrive? {3} time that s.t. is done. Alas utsu
ang úras sa ámung panihápun, Our supper time is at eight o’clock.
{3a} time that s.t. inevitable will finally happen. Haduul na ang úras
sa masakitun, The sick man’s hour is close at hand. Úras na tingáli
nímu kay nagsakit man ang ímung tiyan, It must be the time now (for you
to have your baby) because your stomach hurts. {3b} point at which s.t.
happened. Nag-uwan sa úras sa ílang pag-abut, It was raining at the
time of their arrival. Way mitábang nákù sa úras sa ákung kalisud, No
one helped me when I was in trouble. {3c} dì — for s.t. to happen at an
unsuitable time. Tingálig manganak ka ug dì úras ning ímung pagkahúlug,
You’ll probably give birth prematurely because you fell. {4} a period
or time available for doing s.t. Wà kuy úras nga itan-aw ug sini, I
don’t have time to go to movies. v {1} [A; b(1)] time, mark the time.
Akuy muúras sa íyang pag-abut, I’ll mark down the time of his arrival.
{2} [B256; b(1)] be an hour, take an hour. Giurásan ang ákung
pagtrabáhu sa ímung kálù, It took me one hour to make your hat. -an(→)
n clock, watch. -in- a by the hour. Inuras ang ímung trabáhu, You work
by the hour.

urasanta n Holy Hour devotion, a one-hour devotion offered to the
Sacred Heart of Jesus led by a priest and said once a month in church.
v [A1] offer a Holy Hour devotion. paN- v [A2] attend or offer a Holy
Hour devotion.

urasiyun n {1} special set prayers in the liturgy. {1a} a magical
formula in Latin or pseudo-Latin which has curative or other magical
powers, esp. as sumpà. It is applied by reciting or by putting written
representations on or near whatever it is supposed to affect. The
urasiyun is effective only in the hands of the owner. {2} the angelus
prayer said by the family in the evening, and sometimes at dawn.
{3} twilight (lit. the time when the angelus is said). {3a} the bell
announcing the angelus. v {1} [A] pray the urasiyun in the liturgy or
the angelus. {2} [A; b(1)] treat with a magic formula. Giurasiyunan
níya ang irù. Wà kapaghut, He uttered a magical formula at the dog and
it couldn’t bark. {3} [B1256; b4] for evening to fall. Naurasiyun na
lang. Walà pa giyud muabut ang gisúgù, It got to be evening and the boy
we sent on an errand still hadn’t arrived. -an n one who possesses an
urasiyun, 1a.

uray_1 n k.o. sickness of supernatural origin which causes women to
abort, giving birth to an octopus or other sea creature (actually a
misshapen fetus). v [A12SP; b4] become the victim of uray. Malagmit
urayan ka ug pakabuntagan nímu ang ímung panti, You’re likely to become
a victim of uray if you don’t take your panties in.

uray_2, úray title of respect for a related woman older than the
speaker, esp. an elder sister, aunt, or cousin. v [A; a12] address s.o.
úray.

urbanidad way — unrefined, unversed in urban ways. Way urbanidad. Dì ka
kamaung mangáyug katahúran, You are a boor. You don’t know to greet
people.

urbanisar v [B126] become civilized, polished in one’s ways. Ang mga
tulunghaan makaurbanisar (makapaurbanisar) sa táwu, Schools teach
people refinement and civilization.

urdín n religious order.

urdin n {1} order given by a higher authority. Kinahanglan buhátun mu
karun dáyun. Urdin kanà, You must do it immediately. That’s an order.
{2} order, command. Urdin diaristu, Warrant of arrest. Urdin sa
pagpangusísa, Search warrant. v [A13; a12] {1} issue an order.
{2} command s.o. to do s.t. -ansa n ordinance. v [a12] enact into an
ordinance. urdinansahun n things to be made into an ordinance.

urdinar v [A; b26] ordain into priesthood. urdinasiyun n ordination.

urdinaryu a ordinary, not especial. Urdinaryu kaáyu ang ílang mga
butang sa báy, They just have ordinary things in their house. v {1} [A;
c1] use s.t. that should be special for ordinary wear. Dì ku
muurdinaryu ug mahalun nga sinínà, I won’t use expensive clothes for
ordinary wear. {2} [B12; b6] be, become ordinary. Sa nadúgay na,
naurdinaryu na lang ang taas nga buhuk, After some time it became an
ordinary thing to have long hair.

urdir v {1} [A; b6] command, give an order. Kinsay nag-urdir ninyu sa
pag-atras? Who commanded you to retreat? {2} [A; a2] order s.t. in a
restaurant or cafe, Unsa may inyung urdírun? What will you order?
n {1} order, command. {2} item ordered in a restaurant or cafe. pa-
v [A; b6] buy by mail order. Magpaurdir ku ug bisiklíta pára nímu, I
will buy you a bicycle by mail order. máni — n money order or
telegraphic transfer. v [A1; a] send a money order or telegraphic
transfer. mid tu — n made-to-order.

urgan n electric organ, of the kind used by combos. v [A23] play the
electric organ.

urgandi n organdy. v [A; b5] wear, make into organdy cloth.

urganisar v [A; a12] organize, bring s.t. into being. Nag-urganisar pa
siya sa Lihiyun ni Maríya, She is organizing a Legion of Mary unit.
urganisasiyun n organization.

urganista see urganu.

urgansa n embossed cloth.

urganu n organ, a large musical instrument. v [A12; b(1)] have, be
accompanied by an organ. urganista n organist. v [B16; a12] be, become
an organist.

urhinti a urgent, calling for immediate attention. Urhinti ba kaáyu ang
túyù mu kaníya? Do you have a very urgent purpose in visiting her?

urig n intense sexual desire of a person or an animal, esp. women
(euphemism for ulag). v [B; b6] be in a highly-sexed mood. Nagkaurig na
nang bayhána human makasuway, That woman became lustful after she had
experienced sex once.

urihinal n {1} original, first copy of several struck at the same time.
Ang urihinal nga kupya mauy ímung tagúan, You keep the original copy
for yourself. {2} an original of a work of art. {3} script, copy of
one’s lines in a drama.

*urímaw (colloquial) paN- {1} = urímus, v2. {2} = pangurímus.

urímus word used in the novena asking the congregation to pray the
final prayer. v {1} [A; b] say the concluding prayer. {2} [B1256N] be
done in, killed (get so people will be saying ’urímus’ for one). Ug
matumbahan kas káhuy maurímus ka, If that tree falls on you, you will
be done for. paN- v [A23] do oneself irreparable harm which sometimes
results in death. Hala, ínum arun mangurímus ka, Go ahead, drink, so
you can do yourself in.

úrins n {1} orange fruit or tree. {2} orange in color. v {1} [B125]
become orange in color. {2} [A13] wear s.t. orange in color. — dyús
n orange juice.

urinúla n chamber pot or bedpan. v [A13; c1] use a chamber pot.

urit = hala. Urit! Adtu na mi, All right! We are going now. v [A2]
cease doing s.t. and call it a day. Muurit kug sayu kay nagláin ang
ákung láwas, I think I’ll call it a day as I’m not feeling well.

urkid n orchid. maripúsa — butterfly orchid: Phalaenopsis amabilis.
taygir — n variety of orchid with spotted leaves and petals. — tri
n orchid tree, ornamental tree, the flowers of which resemble orchids.
Various species have various colors: Bauhinia spp. walingwaling — see
walingwaling. wayitdab — white dove orchid: Dendrobium crumenatum.

urkilyas = trinsas.

urkista, urkistra n {1} orchestra, the main floor of a movie house.
{2} a group of musicians usually playing string instruments.

urkiyu a {1} honest-to-goodness, genuine. Ang urkiyu nga sugarul dílì
mupusta ug sinintabus, An honest-to-goodness gambler does not bet
nickles and dimes. Kining kapíha urkiyu, dílì puyay, This is genuine
coffee not ersatz.

urlun n orlon. v [A; b6] wear orlon.

urna n {1} glass case where a religious image or s.t. precious is kept.
{2} ballot box. v [c1] place or encase s.t. of religious importance in
a glass case.

ursa v {1} [A] for dough to rise. {2} [A123P; b4] for a disease that
breaks out in s.t. to come out. Ang tubà makaursa (makapaursa) sa
dálap, Palm toddy can make measles appear and hasten development.
{3} [A2; c6] do s.t. with a great amount of force. Iursa ang inyung
tanang kusug arun nà ninyu maalsa, Exert all your strength so you can
lift that up. pa- n {1} leaven. Tubà usáhay ang paursa sa bingka, Palm
toddy is sometimes used to make the rice cake rise. {2} medicine used
to make a disease appear and hasten development.

*urti walay — without restraint, without stopping. Way urti ang hukasay
ning salídang bumba, This dirty movie has love scenes without end.
Ayawg panagána. Way urti ang káun dinhi, Don’t hesitate. No one holds
back on their food around here. urtiurti walay — = walay urti. v [A1;
c1] do s.t. with restraint (usually in negative sentences).

urtikarya n hives. Tambal kini sa sakit sa pánit ug sa urtikarya, This
is a treatment for skin diseases and hives. v [A123P; a12] have an
attack of hives.

úru n gold. —, pláta, mála gold, silver, bad luck: a formula for
determining whether a household will have good or bad luck. As one
climbs the stairs the formula is recited one word for each step. If one
reaches the top with úru, the house will have exceptionally good luck;
with pláta, fairly good luck; with mála, bad luck. — tsína 24-carat
gold. búda di- see búda. v {1} [b(1)] cover teeth with gold capping.
{2} [c1] be in gold.

urud a pregnant. v [B126; b6] be, become pregnant.

urug, úrug n fashion, style. v [B126; b6] go into style, vogue. Naúrug
na run sa pagpalupad ug tabánug, Kite-flying is the latest fad.

urug-úrug = ulug-úlug.

úruk v [A2S; b6] for a top to spin fast so as to stay exactly vertical.
Dì kaúruk ang kasing ug hínay ang túyuk, A top is not immobile when it
spins slow.

úrul v [A; a2] take all the hair or leaves off. Akuy muúrul sa ímung
buhuk, I’ll shave your hair. Urúlun sa kanding ang mga dáhun sa tanum
ug anhà nà nímu ihigut, The goat will eat all the leaves of your plants
if you tie it there.

úrum n nightmare, dream where one is extremely frightened but cannot
move or shout. v [A123P; a4] have a nightmare. -un(→) a prone to having
nightmares. v [B126] get prone to having nightmares.

úrung_1 v {1} [B2S6; c1] stop, cause one to do so. Nag-urung ang
puntírus rilu, The watch hand is not moving. Iúrung (urúngun) nákù ang
ákung pagtabakù, I’ll quit smoking. {2} [A13] be idle, unemployed.
Mag-úrung lang únà siya rung tuíga kay wà may bakanti pára sa maistra,
She will be out of work this year because there are no vacancies for
teachers. pa- v [A; a12] suspend or dismiss from work. Paurúngun kas
trabáhu ug sad-an ka, You will be dismissed from work if you are
guilty. urung-úrung v [A13; c1] do s.t. on and off.

úrung_2 = úrum.

Urúpa n Europe. ilagà sa — n guinea pig.

úrus_1 v {1} [A2S3P] sizzle. Muúrus ang unud ug isugba sa káyu, Meat
sizzles if you broil it over fire. {2} [b4] sizzle with sexual urges.
Giurúsan nang bayúta kay nanghíkap, This fairy is sizzling for sex
again. He grabbed me. n sound of sizzling. urus-urus v [B1456] be
intense, as if sizzling. Kapugngan pa ang bahà kay sa gugmang
gaurus-urus, It is easier to control a flood than a sizzling love.

úrus_2 n {1} suit of the Spanish cards in the shape of a gold coin.
{2} suit of circles in mahjong. v [B1256; b6] draw an úrus card or
mahjong piece.

uruy {1} particle with a statement that disabuses the interlocutor of
his misconceptions, softening the blunting effect of the contradiction.
‘Wà pa mahuman ang trabáhu?’—‘Human na uruy!’ ‘They didn’t finish the
work?’—‘Yes, they did.’ Búhì pa uruy siya, He is still alive. (You
believe he died, but he is still alive.) {2} expressing contempt for
s.t. the interlocutor did. Hilakhílak uruy, mau rag dílì siyay
nakaingun áning tanang kasámuk, Crying indeed! As if she were not the
cause of all these troubles. Gibaratúhan ka uruy ánà mu ra ug ikay
mubáyad! Oh indeed. You think it is cheap. Well, you can say that when
you pay the bill. {3} [noun]-a ba — what do you mean [noun], when all
there is is ... Bisitáha ba uruy, si Pidru ra diay, What visitor! It is
only Pedro. {4} ngánu ba — so what if ... Ngánu ba uruy ug dílì siya
muanhi. Dì magsakit ang ákung tiyan, So what if he doesn’t come. I’m
not going to get a stomachache from it. {5} ada — particle expressing
resignation to s.t. bad and indicating the speaker doesn’t care. Ada
uruy. Mabúhì man gihápun ta áning trabahúa, Oh, anyway, I can still
make a living with this work (even though I might like to have s.t.
better). {5a} expressing contempt in dismissing s.t. as
inconsequential. uruy-úruy v [C2; a3] be gentle with one another,
instead of treating each other with the usual gruffness. Mag-uruy-úruy
ta kay wà na tay ginikánan, Let us go easy on each other because we
don’t have parents any more. Bisag bantúgan siya makig-uruy-úruy siya
sa ingun nátù, Though he is famous, he goes easy on people like us.

*úruy pa- n liquor made by distilling the juice from the nipa or
coconut palm bud.

ús = ulus. see ulhus.

usa_1 numeral one. {1} — ka a one. Sa usa ka púlung siyay nidaug, In
short, he won. {b} a certain (unnamed) one. May usa ka hárì nga taas
kaáyu ug búngut, There was once a king who had a very long beard. —
niánà ka [word referring to time] one [time]. Usa niánà ka adlaw,
miadtu siya sa hárì, One day, he went to the king. {2} — nga the other
one of the two or more. Anhi ka áning manúka pusta? Adtu kus usa, Will
you bet on this cock? I will bet on the other one. Adtu líkù sa usang
iskína, Turn into the next corner. {2a} the other day, week, month,
year that passed. Dinhi siya sa usang adlaw, He was here the other day.
{3} ísig (isig) — each, each one. Ísig (isig) usa ninyu mubáyad nákù ug
singku písus, Each (each one) of you will pay me five pesos. {4} — ug —
each and every one. Usag usa ninyu magdala sa íyang galamitun, Each and
every one of you must bring his own tools. {5a} — usab, sad, upud
[so-and-so] is another one who will [do]. Usa sad siya sa mungadtu, He
is also a member of the group going there. {5b} — ka pa you’re another
one who does [such-and-such a bad thing]. Usa ka pang danghag, You’re
another careless fellow. v {1} [A12; a12] be, become resolved or
decided. Ug mausa pa untà ang ákung hunàhúnà pagbíyà kaníya! If only I
could make up my mind to leave her! {2} [b(1)] do s.t. with one hand
where both hands are usually used. Gaan ra ning aswátun, usaan ra nákù
ni, This is easy to pick up. I’ll do it with one hand. Sumbagay ta,
usaan ta ka, Let’s have a fight. I’ll beat you with one hand. {3} walay
ma- no one, not a single soul. Walay mausang mitábang kanákù, Not a
single person helped me. (←) v {1} [C; a12] group things together in
one. Mag-úsa lang ta dinhis kwartu, Let’s just stay together in the
room. Usáhun ta na lang ni arun usa ray sudlan, Let’s just put this
together so we use only one container. {2} [a12] = usa, v1. hi-(←)
v [B126C3] be, become united or unanimous. Naghiúsa sila sa pagpapuyra
sa suluguun, They were unanimous in wanting to have the servant fired.
Nahiúsa ang ílang hukum human makabatì sa tinúud, Their decision became
unanimous after they heard the truth. usaúsa n get-together party.
v [C] have a get-together party. usáhay sometimes, occasionally. Usáhay
dì ku makadungug, Sometimes I cannot hear. binagsa = tinagsa, v1.
inusára v {1} [A] be by oneself, alone. Ug manglákaw sila mag-inusára
lang ku áning baláya, If they leave, I will be alone in this house.
{2} [A1; a12] do s.t. alone by oneself. Ákung inusaráhun lag dáru, I
will do the plowing alone. inusaranhun a characterized by being all by
oneself. Kinabúhing inusaranhun, A life all alone by oneself. maka-,
ka-, kas-a once. Kausa (kas-a) miadtu siya sa balay, He came to the
house once. v [A12; a12] do s.t. to s.t. all at one time. Maáyu untà ug
makas-a nig lútù, It would be nice if these could be cooked all at one
time. kag-usà, makag-usà, tag-usà = talagsa. kahiusáhan n {1} state of
being united. {2} marriage. Karung adláwa mau ang kahiusáhan níla ni
Idyun ug ni Bilma, The wedding of Edion and Vilma will take place
today. ulusáhun a wondrous, unique or peculiar. Adtu nímu makítà sa sú
ang mga mananap nga ulusáhun ug mga hitsúra, You will see strange and
peculiar animals in the zoo. Si Samsun sa karáang panahun mauy usa ka
táwu nga may ulusáhung kusug, Samson of ancient times was a man of
extraordinary strength. tagsa n {1} one apiece. Tagáan ta mug tagsa,
I’ll give you each one. tagsa ray púlung of few words. Kun muingung
dílì, hustu ra, dílì giyud. Tagsa ray púlung niánang tawhána, If he
says no it is no, period. He is a man of few words. {2} = talagsa.
tagsatagsa v [A1; c1] do s.t. one by one. Magtagsatagsa na lang tag
pamaúlì, Let us now go home one by one. igtagsa n one’s first cousin.
magtagsa n being first cousins. talagsa a seldom. Talagsa ka ra man
mamisíta nákù, You seldom visit me. talagsay búngut it will be a long
time before [so-and-so] happens. Talagsa lay búngut ug makigsulti ku
níya, Don’t expect me to talk to him for a long, long time. panalagsa
a being at great intervals. Unyà mihagtuk sa atup nga sín ang
panalagsang ulan, Then a few scattered raindrops rattled on the tin
roof. v [A; b6] do s.t. once in a while, at infrequent intervals.
Panalagsai akug dúaw, Come visit me once in a while. talagsaun
a {1} rare, few. Talagsaun ra ang asáwa nga makaagwanta sa íyang
pagkabána, Few wives could bear the sort of husband he makes. Ang 1904
nga salapì talagsaun kaáyu, The 1904 fifty-centavo coin is very rare.
{2} extraordinary. Talagsaun kaáyu ang íyang kaanyag, Her beauty is
remarkable. — ra pud phrase said in reaction to s.t. unbelievable:
‘that’s unheard of!’ ‘Mukanta na run nà siya.’—‘Talagsaun ra pud.’ ‘Now
he’s going to sing for us.’—‘The hell I will!’ tinagsa v {1} [A; a] do
one at a time. {2} [AC; b] do the tinagsa dance. a done one at a time.
n k.o. folk dance in pairs, wherein the man tries to court an elusive
woman, following her with courtship movements wherever she goes.

usa_2 n doe.

úsà short forms: sà, usà. {1} before [do]ing. Úsà ka mulakaw hipúsa ang
ímung kwartu, Before you go out, fix your room. {2} do [so-and-so]
beforehand. Mag-ílis úsà ku sa dì pa ta manglákaw, I’ll change my
clothes first before we go out. {3} for now, for the time being.
Ibutang úsà diri, Put it down here for the moment. Ayaw úsag lakaw,
Don’t go for the while. — pa {3a} wait a minute. Úsà pa gánì, Wait a
minute, will you? Úsà pa kay ákung tawgun, Just a second, because I’m
going to call him. {3b} just a second, to change the subject. Úsà pa
diay, kinsa tu ka? By the way, who did you say you were? {4} — ka you
just wait. Gihilabtan giyud nímu nang ákung búhat dà. Úsà ka giyud run,
You touched my work, did you? Well you just wait what’s going to happen
now.

usab short forms: sab and sad. {1} also, in addition, as well, (after
negatives) either. Gipatay usab ang mga bátà, They killed the children,
too. Ikaw sab, utru ka, You, too. You’re another one of the same ilk.
Dílì sab ku muadtu, I will not go either. Sa nagtubù siya, nagkadakù
sab ang íyang káun, As he grew, his food consumption grew as well.
{1a} in turn. Ug ikíha ku níya, ikíha ku sab siya, If he sues me, I’ll
sue him in turn. {1b} na — {1b1} again. Nag-ulan na sab, It’s raining
again. {1b2} in turn. Human sa unus, ang ulan na say mibundak, After
the squall, the rain came pouring down. {1c} [so-and-so] is in
conformity with [such-and-such]. Ug mahalun ang ímung kuhaun, dakù sab
ug instulmin, If you buy an expensive kind, you’ll have to pay large
installments, too. syáru — under the circumstances it is unbelievable.
Syáru sag wà ka kahunàhunà, It’s impossible that you didn’t even think
of it. mau ra — hinúun = mau ra pud núun. see hinúun, 6. 1d dílì lang —
kay ... not only is [so-and-so] true. Dílì lang sad kay muinum siya,
súgal pud, Not only does he drink, he also gambles. {1e} [exclamation]
— My! [so-and-so] is the case, isn’t it though. Sus! Kapubrisíta sad
intáwun níya! My! What a pitiful child, don’t you think? Kagwápu ba
sad! How beautiful it is, though! {2} but then, when [so-and-so]
happened, happens. Apan pag-abut sab nákù didtu, wà nag manuk, But then
when I arrived, the chicken was gone. Dì ku muinum. Apan ug muinum sad
ku, tingbánay dyud, I don’t drink. But when I do, I really drink.
{3} do [so-and-so] when one should not. Bída sad nímu uy! Gitug-an man
nímu! Oh you! You went and told. Si Máma sad! Mauy ímung isulti pirmi,
Oh, Mother! That’s what you always say! {4} [adj.] — somewhat [adj.].
Mahímù man sad, It is quite possible. Gwápa man sad, She is quite
pretty. Udtu na sad ming migíkan, It was already quite late when we
left. {5} man — anyway, [so-and-so] is OK because. Ihátag na lang. Daut
man sad, Might as well give it away because it’s no good anyway. Sahug
dì siya mangasáwa. Maáyu man sag siya ray nagkarsúnis, Who cares if he
doesn’t marry me? Anyway there is lots of fish in the ocean. Ngánu man
sad? Anyway, who cares? {6} with imperatives: particle giving a
pleading tone. Sígi sad uy, Oh, come on! Do it. Iuban sad ku,
magbinut-an lagi ku, Please take me. I’ll be a good girl.
{7} [interrogative] man — just out of curiosity, who, when, why, how
much, etc. Tagpíla man sad ni? By the way, just out of curiosity, how
much is this? v {1} [A2C; c] do s.t. again. Mag-úsab pa ta ug dúlà?
Will we still play with each other again? Usbun kug bása, památì, I
will read it again. Listen. {2} [A; a12] modify, redo. Usba ring ákung
karsúnis, Alter these pants of mine. Ang inhinyíru mauy muusab sa
plánu, The engineer will revise the plans. {3} [A; a12] change,
substitute with s.t. else. Dì ku muusab sa ákung hukum, I will not
change my decision. ka-an(←) n changes that have taken place. Way
kausában dinhi sa syudad, The city hasn’t changed. usbunun n s.t. to be
altered.

usad = usab, 1–7 (but not as v).

usáhay see usa_1.

usámud v [B126P; b6] stumble or fall forward flat on one’s face.
Nausámud (napausámud) siya sa pagdágan, He stumbled and fell flat on
his face when he ran.

úsap v [A2SN; a] {1} chew, grind with the molars. Usápun sa mga bábuy
ang mga sáhà sa ságing ug dì nà kuralun, The pig will chew up the
banana shoots if you don’t fence the plantation. {2} chew up, crush
between two moving parts like with the molars. Lindug sa tubu nga
giúsap sa ligsanan, Cane stalks that were crushed by the rollers.

usar v {1} [A; a12] use, make of. Dì siya muusar ug butang sa láing
táwu, He does not use other people’s things. {2} [A; c1] wear s.t. Dì
ku muusar ug lipstik, I don’t use lipstick. Íya pa ning usarun (iusar)
sinináa sa panarbáhu, He’ll still wear this shirt to work. usádu
a {1} used up, worn-out. Magpalit kug bag-ung sapátus. Usádu na kaáyu
ning ákù, I’ve got to buy a new pair of shoes. My old ones are all used
up now. {2} a woman that has had sexual experience. Usádu na kaáyug
dagway nang bayhána, That woman looks like she has already been used.
v [B1256] get used up.

usbaw v {1} [B2] improve, prosper. Ang íyang pagpaningkámut nakausbaw
(nakapausbaw) níya gíkan sa kakabus, He rose from poverty through hard
work. {2} [AB2; c1] rise in degree or quantity. Ang manidyǐr mauy
nag-usbaw sa íyang swildu, The manager gave him a raise. Miusbaw ang
kadagátan sa Miditiranyan, The Mediterranean Sea rose. Ang traktur
makausbaw (makapausbaw) sa áni, A tractor can increase the rice
production. ma-un a prosperous. ka-an n improvements or progress.
tingusbáwan n improvements, either planned or accomplished. Untà íyang
panalangínan ang átung mga tingusbáwan, May He bless the things we plan
to accomplish. Kining taytáyana usa sa mga tingusbáwan sa íyang
pagkagubirnadur, This bridge is one of the improvements he brought
about while he was governor.

usbung n {1} topmost part of plants or trees, Usbung sa kasagbutan,
Topmost part of the shrubs. {2} s.t. formed into a mound. Usbung sa
ánay, Termite hill. v [B3(1); b6] {1} rise up, soar up to a higher
level. Labihang nakausbung sa iruplánu nga dyít, How the jet plane
soared. {2} = usdung.

usdak v {1} [A; c] let s.t. drop with a light thud. Ayaw iusdak ang
malíta kay náay mabuak sa sulud, Don’t drop the trunk like that because
there is s.t. breakable inside. {1a} [C] — ang tiil walk with noisy
footfalls. Maglágut ku ug usdákan kug tiil, I get angry if s.o. walks
with heavy footfalls in my presence. {2} [B126; b8] slip and fall down
on one’s buttocks. Nausdak ku sa hagdanan, I fell down the stairs.
n sound of thumping. -in- = usdak, n.

usdu_1 n two, esp. two pesos (slang).

usdu_2 a filled heaping high so as to form an elevation. Usdu ra kaáyu
ang sulud sa kartun dì na masira, The contents of the box are piled so
high that the box can no longer be closed. v [A13; c1] be heaping high.

usdug v [A; a] help s.o. lift s.t. to put it on his head. Usdúgi siya
sa táru, Help him lift the can onto his head.

usdung a filled or piled to heaping. Ang kan-un usdung kaáyu nga
pagkabutang sa bandihádu, The hominy is piled high on the platter.
n moundlike top or heap. Ang usdung sa nilabhan nga gisulud sa
planggána túpung nákù, The mound of clothes I put in the wash basin is
as tall as I am. v [A13; c1] be heaping high. Iusdung (usdúnga)
pagtakus, Make it heaping measures.

usig, úsig v {1} [A; a2] bark. Kinsay giúsig sa irù? Who is the dog
barking at? {2} [A2S] cough (colloquial). Sayu pa nà siyang miúsig, He
has been coughing since early morning. hiN- a given to barking. -l-un
a prone to being barked at.

úsik a waste. Úsik kaáyung ilábay ning kan-úna! What a waste to throw
this food away. Úsik, wà ku makapalit! What a pity, I couldn’t buy it.
n name given to a variety of types of sorcery all of which cause grave
illness. {1} k.o. sorcery similar to voodoo, in which s.t. is done to a
representation of the victim, which in turn hurts the victim. {2} k.o.
sorcery inserting insects into the victim. v {1} [A; a3b(1)] waste. Dì
ku mag-úsik ug panahun, I won’t waste my time. Wà nákù usíki ang
kwarta, I did not spend the money uselessly. {1a} [b4] feel bad over
the loss or waste of s.t. Giusíkan ku sa mga kahigayúnang ímung
gipalabay, I regret all the opportunities you allowed to go by.
{2} [A1; a3] spill s.t. out of a container, thus wasting it. Daghang
kan-ung naúsik sa lamísa, You spilled a lot of rice on the table.
{2a} — ang, ug dugù v [a3b3] spill blood. Kung kinahanglánun, usíkan
nákug dugù ang pagpanalípud sa ákung yútang natawhan, I will shed my
blood in the defense of my native land if necessary. {3} [b4] be a
victim of the sorcery úsik. (→) n things that spill or fall off onto
s.t. Kining mátang sa paggaling daghag usik, This way of milling
results in a lot of spillage. -an(→) a wasteful, extravagant. Usikan
kaáyu siya, She is very wasteful. n sorcerer who can practice úsik.
ma-un a having or entailing waste. Mausíkun nga paági, Wasteful
procedure. Anak nga mausíkun, The Prodigal Son.

usísa v {1} [A23] ask, seek to be informed. ‘Unsa, nakagustu ka sa
ímung trabáhu?’ miusísa nákù si Husi, ‘How do you like your work?’ Joe
asked me. {2} [A; a12] study, examine closely to analyze. Nag-usísa ang
piskal sa kásu sa pagpatay, The fiscal is conducting an investigation
on the homicide case. Usisáhun nátù ug unsay nakapakunhud sa átung
baligyà, Let us study what made our sales drop. {3} analyze, test to
determine s.t. Nag-usísa silas yútà ug magkinahanglan bag abúnu, They
are testing the soil to see if it needs fertilizer. n investigation,
inquiry. mausisáhun a {1} questioning, inquisitive. {2} scrutinizing
with full attention to details.

uska short for usa ka. see usa.

uslub_1 v [B2; c1] for earth to fall in, either collapsing or from a
process of erosion. Nauslub (miuslub) ang lugar nga gisigíhag ági sa
túbig, The place where the water constantly passes over has become
depressed. n earth that has been eroded. Dakù ang uslub sa pangpang nga
gikan-an sa túbig, The water ate a large amount of dirt from the cliff.

uslub_2 v {1} [A; b6(1)] dip or immerse into a liquid. Iuslub sa duktǔr
ang bátà sa inadlaw nga túbig ug mutaas ang hilánat, The doctor will
dip the child in warm water when his fever rises. {2} [A; a] treat with
uslub. n k.o. treatment by steam, esp. for stomach disorders derived
from eating the wrong thing at the wrong time or in the wrong
combination, where the substance that caused the disorder is boiled in
a pot, and the patient is made to cover himself together with the pot
in a blanket and inhale the vapors, following which he is wrapped in
more blankets and made to sweat profusely.

Usminya n Sergio Osmeña, Sr., the second president of the Philippine
Commonwealth, and a native of Cebu City. pwinti — a park in Cebu.
Usminyista n political followers or supporters of Osmeña (or, now, his
family).

usmud = usámud.

usngad v [A; a] for a pig to dig out or push hard with its snout.
Nayabu ang pasaw sa bábuy kay íya mang giusngad, The pig pushed its
feed hard with its snout and it spilled. Nabuhùbuhù ang nátad nga
giusngáran sa bábuy, The front yard which the pig dug out with its
snout is full of holes. n a boat having its top pointing at an angle
above its body. inusngaran n diggings made by a pig with its snout.

uspag a dry, unkempt of skin or hair. Uspag kaáyu ug pánit ang nagpuyù
sa isla, People living on islands have very dry skin. v [B; b6] for
hair or skin to be dry and unkempt.

uspital = huspital.

ustiya, ustiyas, ustíyas n host, the bread of the Eucharist. v [a2]
make the host.

úsu_1 n {1} mode, fashion. Bilbátum ang úsu karun, Bell-bottoms are the
mode these days. {2} fad, thing in rage. Úsu kaáyu karun ang pangáwat
ug manuk, Chicken stealing has become the latest fad. Úsu na man run
nga ang bána mauy bílin sa báy, It is now the practice for husbands to
tend the house. v [B; c16] be the fashion, thing in vogue. Maúsu na sab
ang tabánug, The fad for flying kites will come back into vogue again.
pa- v [A1; c1] start a fad, initiate a movement. Gipausúhan nímu ang
ímung anak ug kalígù maduminggu. Na, mangítà na hinúun, You started
bringing your child to the beach on Sundays and now he expects it.
pina- a according to the latest style. Buhuk nga pinaúsu, The latest
style hairdo. v [B456; a1] have, wear s.t. of the latest style.

úsu_2 n bear.

usub = usab, v.

úsuk_1 v {1} [A; c] drive stakes into the ground. Iúsuk ang sundang
dihà sa yútà, Stick the knife into the ground. {2} [b(1)] put stakes
around. Ákung usúkan ang mga tanum, I’ll put (drive) stakes around the
plants. {3} slam s.o. or s.t. to the ground. n cigarette (slang). (→)
n stake.

úsuk_2 v [A] for smoke to rush in a thick stream. Miúsuk ang asu sa
tambutsu, The smoke gushed out of the exhaust pipe.

úsung v [A; b6(1)] help s.o. lift and carry s.t. on his head or
shoulders. Akuy muúsung nímu sa sáku, I’ll help you lift the sack for
you to carry on your shoulder.

usúra n usury. v [B126; b6] be, become usury. Mausúra nà ug dakù ang
intiris, It would be usury if you charge excessive interest. usuríra =
usuríru (female). usuríru n usurer. v [B12; b6] be, become a usurer.

us-us v {1} [A2; b6(1)] slide down on s.t. holding on partially.
Mius-us ang mga bátà sa pasamánu, The children slid down the stairs.
Makaus-us ka ug dalì sa plagpul kay dangug, You can easily slide down
the flagpole because it is slippery. {1a} [B2; b6(1)] for s.t. to slip
down lower. Nagkaus-us ang ímung tiyan. Hápit ka nang muanak, Your
stomach is slipping down. It won’t be long now and you’ll have your
baby. {2} [APB; b7] for quantities to go down; cause them to do so.
Muus-us (maus-us) ang prisyu sa bugas ug daghan ang abut, The price of
rice will go down if there is a good harvest. Tambal nga muus-us
(mupaus-us) sa hilánat, Medicine that will bring the fever down.
{2a} [A; c1] reduce a sentence. Ang huwis mius-us sa ímung sintinsiya,
The judge reduced your sentence. — ang, sa kabúhì v [A; c1] bring the
kabúhì to just above the navel, where it is supposed to be. a {1} low,
having slipped down. Us-us kaáyu ang ímung karsúnis. Biraha sa táas,
Your pants have slipped too far down. Pull them up. {2} lowered in
quantity, degree.

usuus v [A13] {1} for s.t. hot to give off steam. Nag-usuus pa nang
kapi. Mapásù kag ímung imnun, The coffee is still steaming. You’ll burn
yourself if you drink it. {2} for a pain to give a burning sensation.

usúus = alasúus.

uswa v [A; b6] reprimand s.o. in a scolding way, harping on all his
past faults. Uswáhan ku siya inig-abut níya. Dúgay nga muulì, I’ll give
him a good cussing-out when he comes home. He always comes home late.
uluswahan n worthy of being reprimanded; a good reason for being
reprimanded. mauswáhun a in a reprimanding, scolding way.

uswag v {1} [A; c] raise, move s.t. or oneself to a higher position. Ug
muuswag ka ug diyútay makahigdà ku sa ímung tiilan, If you move up a
little I can lie down beneath your feet. Ákung iuswag ang atup ug mga
diyis pulgádas, I’ll move the roofing up about ten inches. {1a} [B]
rise in quantity. Niuswag ang prisyu, The price has gone up. {2} [A2;
b(1)] go upstairs, into the house. Muuswag ta kay tugnaw dinhi sa
sílung, Let’s go into the house because it’s cold down here. {2a} [A;
c1] bring s.t. upstairs. Iuswag (uswága) ang mga silya, Carry the
chairs upstairs. {3} [A; c] turn a light on. Giuswágan níya ang sugà
kay hínay ra kaáyu ang síga, He turned the lampwick up some more
because the light was too low. {4} [A; c1] postpone, put off to a
future date. Dílì na mahímung uswágun ang kasal, It is no longer
possible to postpone the wedding. {5} [A23P; c1] improve, progress.
Muuswag ang inyung kahimtang ug makatrabahu ka na, Your situation will
improve once you have work. n improvement, rise in degree or quantity.
ka-an n progress, improvement. ka-un(→) n improvement finally attained.
ma-un a progressive. Usa ka mauswágun kaáyung lungsud, A very
progressive town.

usyus = asyus.

usyúsa = asyúsa.

usyúsu = asyúsu.

útak = útuk_1, n1, 2 (slang).

útan n vegetables. v {1} [A; a2] cook vegetables. Maútan ang kamansi,
Seeded breadfruit can be eaten as a vegetable. Ákung utánan ang prítung
isdà, I’ll cook the fried fish with vegetables. {2} [a12] for young
corn plants to be eaten by fowl. Diyútay ra ang mais manúbù ug utánun
sa mga manuk, Few of the corn plants will grow to maturity if the
chickens eat at them. paN- v [A2; a2] pick, gather vegetables. -un(→),
-l-un n uncooked vegetables.

útang n debt. May útang ku nímung duha ka adlawng trabáhu, I owe you
two days’ work. — buut see buut, 4. — kabubut-un see kabubut-un under
buut. v {1} [AN; a] get s.t. on credit. Miútang (nangútang) ku ug usa
ka gantang bugas, I bought a ganta of rice on credit. Inyu ba diay nang
utángun? You mean you’re not paying cash for it? {1a} [AN; a2] get a
loan. Kadtung muútang (mangútang) ug dakù kinahanglan may garantíya, If
you apply for a good-sized loan, you must have collateral. {1b} — (sa
hárì) [a12] take a life. Ay kug hadlúkag búnù kay utángun ta ka sa hárì
(utángun ta ka), Don’t try to scare me with a talk of a fight because I
will kill you. {2} [A3S; a3b6] owe s.o. a favor. Siya ang nautángan mu
sa ímung kinabúhì, You owe your life to him. utang-utang v [B12] incur
many small debts. Gamay ra ang nahabilin sa swildu kay nakautang-utang
ku, I have little left from my salary because I incurred so many small
debts. pa- v {1} [A; ac] extend credit. {2} [A] get in the last word in
a dispute. Dì siya mupaútang (magpaútang) ug sulti sa íyang bána, She
won’t let her husband have the last word. -an n one who owes one s.t.
hiN-(→), pala-(→) a always buying things on credit or asking for loans.
-unun n goods for sale on credit.

utang-útang n k.o. slipmouth fish: Leiognathus sp.

utap, útap n k.o. cookie made of flaky pastry and formed into thin,
tongue-like shapes, sold commercially. v [A; a2] make, have utap.

utas v [B126] faint due to a sickness, hunger. Nautas na sad ang
masakitun, The sick man became unconscious again. -an(←) a prone to
fainting spells. v [B12] get subject to fainting spells.

útas v [A; b] do s.t. always or constantly. Ug mag-útas lang mu ug tábì
dinhà wà muy mahímù, If you keep on talking like that, you’ll never
accomplish anything. Dì ku makaútas ug bantay niánà kay may láin kung
búhat nga giatiman, I can not keep constant watch over it because I
have other things to attend to.

utaw v [A; b6] iron, press. Wà níya utawa ang mga hábul, She did not
iron the sheets. n iron. -an(←) n ironing board. -an(←) nga kinabáyù
n ironing board with legs. -l-un(←), -unun(←) n things to iron. -in-
n pressed clothes. tigpaN-, tig-l-(←) n person who does the ironing.

utaw-útaw v [AP; b(1)] float or move gently in the air or on the
surface of a liquid. Muutaw-útaw (mipautaw-útaw) lang ku kay kápuyng
ilanguy, I will just float because it is tiresome to swim. Mga pangánud
nga nag-utaw-útaw (nagpautaw-útaw) sa kahangínan, Clouds that float
gently in the wind.

utay-utay, utay-útay v [AB12; c1] do s.t. little by little, have s.t.
happen to it a little at a time. Utay-utáya lang pagbáyad, Pay for it
little at a time. Utay-utáya paggámit ang sabun, Use the soap little at
a time.

utbu = ulbu, n, v1, 1a, 2, 3.

utbung n tender stalks with leaf buds. v [AN; c1] pick the tips of
plants or their axillary shoots off. Mitambuk ang mga dáhun sa tabákù
nga giutbúngan na sa salingsing, The leaves of the tobacco plants grew
stout after their suckers were picked off.

utik = dutù.

utika n {1} phlegm of a person with tb. {2} TB. v [B16; a4] have
tuberculosis. Nag-utika (giutika) na lang nang tawhána sa íyang
kaabusádu, That man has got TB because he abused his health. utikahun
n tubercular. v [B1256] become consumptive.

util = hutil.

útin n penis. pubri nga — poor father as head of the family (humorous).
Walà giyud siya makatilaw ug mga maáyung pagkáun kay anak man siya sa
pubring útin, He never tasted good food because he is a son of a poor
father (lit. poor penis). v [a12] hit on the penis. Ug utínun nímu
siyag banyak makuyapan giyud, If you hit him on the penis with a kick,
he will surely faint. utin-utin n k.o. parrot fish. -an a having a
penis.

utingkad v [AN; a12] ransack, search thoroughly or examine every part.
Ákung utingkarun ning mga butang sa kaban arun makit-an tung lyabíha,
I’ll search everything in this trunk so I can find the key.

utingkag v {1} = utingkad. {2} [A3P; a3b6] for a home to be broken. Ang
pagkababayidur sa bána mauy nakautingkag (nakapautingkag) sa ílang
kaugalíngun, Her husband’s fondness for women broke up their home.

utingkay v {1} [AN; a12] disarrange s.t., usually in searching for s.t.
Dì ku gustung inyung utingkáyun ang mga libru sa laybrari, I don’t want
you to disarrange the books in the library. {1a} [A12; b8] find, come
across s.t. in ransacking or searching through. Nakautingkay kug
buláwan sa sulud sa kaban, I came across a piece of gold in rummaging
through the trunk. {2} [A; a12] go into the details of s.t. to find out
about it. Sa kurti utingkáyun ang tanan nga nahitabù báhin sa kásu, In
court all facts surrounding the case will be examined in detail.
{2a} [A12; b8] find out by ransacking details. Nautingkayan na hinúun
ang makauúlaw níyang kagahápun, They stumbled over the shameful details
of her past.

utitud n k.o. tiny, biting red ant. v [a4] be infested with this k.o.
ant. utiturun a infested with red ants. v [B1256] get to be infested
with red ants.

utíut v [A; c6] creak, squeak. Miutíut ang sawug nga kawáyan, The
bamboo flooring creaked. Wà makautíut ang ligid, The wheel does not
squeak any more. n creaking, squeaking noise.

utlánan see ulut_1.

utlub v [A; ab2] bite s.t. off with the front teeth or for machinery to
do an analogous thing. Muutlub lang ku ug gamay sa ímung kindi, I’ll
just take a small bite of your candy. Nautluban ang ákung tudlù sa
galingan, The mill took a small piece off of my finger. paN- sa dílà
v [A13] bite one’s tongue. Nagpangutlub kus ákung dílà arun dílì
makakatawa, I bit my tongue to refrain from laughing. -in-an n s.t. a
part of which has been bitten off.

utmil n oatmeal. v [A; a2] eat, raise s.o. on oatmeal. Giutmil si Búbuy
sa gamay pa siya, Boboy was raised on oatmeal when he was small.

utnga_1 v [A; c] emit a somewhat prolonged grunt as when one is lifting
s.t. heavy or has suffered pain. Miutnga siya sa pag-alsa sa usa ka
sákung kupras, He grunted when he lifted the sack of copra. Nakautnga
siya sa pagsuntuk sa íyang tiyan, He grunted when he received the blow
in the stomach.

utnga_2, utngà v [B26] come off, let go of s.t. attached firmly to s.t.
Dì muutnga ang limátuk ug dì mabusug, A leech won’t let go until it is
full. Miutnga na ang lansang sa sawug, The nail came out of the
flooring.

utra = utru, 1 (female).

utrabis v [A] do s.t. a second time. Muutrabis pa pagminyù ang byúda
kay nagdalaga, The widow must want to get married again because she is
primping herself up. Utrabis! Wà pa man ka mabúngì, Do it again, why
don’t you. You didn’t break anything the first time. n s.t. having been
repeated. Utrabis na nà níya sa pirst grid, This is his second time
around in the first grade.

utru {1} [so-and-so] is another one of those bad people. Utru ka sab.
Paríhas mung búang, You’re another one. You’re both fools. {2} repeated
action. Utru gánì, ayg ingna ánà, The next time don’t do it like that.
v [A; ac] do s.t. again. Dì ka na kautrug binúang nákù, You can’t fool
me again. Íya pa ning iutrug lútù, She’s going to cook it again.

utsing v [AC; a2] have sexual intercourse (humorous).

utsinta {1} number eighty. {2} humorous euphemism for utsing ta, let’s
have intercourse. v see disiutsu.

utsu number eight, confined to phrases with words of Spanish origin.
v {1} see tris. {2} [a12] for a bicycle tire to be deformed (lit.
twisted into an eight).

utud v {1} [AC; a] cut s.t. long in two or s.t. off of it. Utdun níya
ang pán álang ninyung duha, She will break the bread for the two of
you. Giutdan níya ang hílu, He cut a piece off the thread. {2} [B2; b6]
be, become short after s.t. has been cut off. Nagkautud ang písì nga
sígig kabugtù, The rope is getting shorter and shorter because it keeps
breaking. a short after a part has been cut off. n sibling. (←) = utud,
n. ka- n blood relation.

utug a for a penis to be erect. n the erected penis. Hikápa ang ákung
utug, Touch my hard-on. v [B; b4] {1} get erect. Sa sulti lang gánì
nag-utug na ang íyang útin, His penis erects even if he just listens to
stories. Giutgan ku, I have an erection. {2} tauten or erect like the
penis. Miutug ang pasul pagdágan sa isdà, The fishline tautened when
the fish lunged away. pa-(←) v [A; b6] masturbate. n {1} masturbation.
{2} s.t. that helps one have an erection. ulutgan a having a tendency
to get erections. pala- n given to masturbation.

utuk_1 v [A; a2] cook land crabs with shredded coconut meat, spices,
turmeric, but no water.

utuk_2, útuk_1 a a top that spins so fast and steadily that it appears
motionless. — ug kinúmù a having the ability to deliver fast and
furious blows. Útuk kaáyug kinúmù nang banáha kay kanúnay lang
gipahubag ang nawung sa asáwa, He is a husband with a fast and steady
fist. His wife’s face is constantly swollen. v [B26; b6] be fast and
steady in spinning. pa-ay n contest to see whose top spins most
steadily. v [A13] hold such a contest.

útuk_2 n {1} brain. {2} intelligence, mental ability. Gamíta ang ímung
útuk, Use your brain. {3} mastermind of evil doings. {4} — sa bukug
marrow. lísù sa — = lísù sa buut. see lísù. singtánun ug — a tending to
get angry easily. -an a brainy, intelligent. -an(→), paN- n intellect,
mental ability.†

utul v {1} [A: a] sever s.t. long. Utla ang kawáyan sa makaduha, Break
the bamboo into two. {1a} [A; a12] cut down. {1b} [A; ab7] cut s.t. out
of or off of s.t. Ákung giutlan ug diyútay ang tiil sa lamísa, I cut a
small piece off the leg of the table. {2} [A; a] put an end to s.t.
Utlun ku ang inyung pagtagbùtagbù, I’ll put an end to your secret
meetings. Giutlan mig túbig, Our water connection was cut off. a s.t.
cut off from s.t. Gisumpay ug bálik ang utul sa íyang tudlù, They sewed
his severed finger back on. — sa adlaw half day. — sa píkas a quarter.
(←)_1 v [C; a] divide s.t. into two. Utlun nátù ang ímung tsukulit,
We’ll divide your chocolate between us. (←) ug tinái, kinabúhì
n sibling. Útul siya nákù ug tinái, She is my sister. ka-(←), ig-(←)
n sibling. utul-utul a {1} broken, cut into pieces. {2} for stools to
be hardened and small from constipation. v {1} [B1; b6] be broken into
tiny pieces. {2} [B; b6] for stools to get hard and small. {2a} [a4b4]
suffer from constipation.

útul_2 v [A13B12; b5] lose the leaves, hair, feathers. Kanding ang
nag-útul sa kamunggay, A goat stripped the kamunggay tree bare of its
leaves. Naútul ang úlu ni Tasyu, Tacio’s head became bald. (→) a bald,
stripped of most leaves.

utung v {1} [A2] hold one’s breath. Miutung siyang misáwum, He held his
breath as he dived. Miutung siya sa kasakit, He couldn’t breathe for
the pain. {2} [A; c6] bear down hard in delivering a child or
defecating. Miutung ku ug kusug sa pagpaguwà sa dakung tubul, I bore
down hard to get the hard stools out. {3} [c1] suffer, bear to the end.
Utungun (iutung) ku na lang ning gastu sa ákung anak sa pag-iskuyla,
I’ll have to bear it until I can get my son through school. n ability
to hold one’s breath. Taas siyag utung, He is able to hold his breath
for a long time. (←) v [B12; b6] be able to hold one’s breath for a
long time. ka-un a feel like bearing down.

utut n fart, gas released from the stomach. bitik sa — see bitik. —
[gen.] expression of disbelief or denial: what [gen.] maintains is
false! Utut nímu! Ingun ka ug dì muanhi unyà nía ka man lagi, You
little liar! You said you were not coming, but here you are! v [A2N; c]
break wind. Muutut (mangutut) ka man lang bísag náay mga táwu! Why do
you break wind in front of people! (←) v [A13P] break wind frequently.
Mag-útut ka giyug mukáun kag inánag, You’ll keep having to break wind
if you eat broiled young corn. pala-(←) a one who keeps breaking wind.†

ut-ut_1 v [APB12; b5] lose all one’s possessions through foolishness;
cause one to do so. Ang súgal ug babáyi mauy nakaut-ut (nakapaut-ut)
níya, Gambling and women has driven him to poverty. Giut-útan siya
ánang bayhána, That woman milked him dry. a having lost all of one’s
possessions foolishly.

ut-ut_2 v [A; c1] boil rice in a small pot. Mag-ut-ut ku kay aku rang
usa ra, I’ll cook rice in a small pot because it’s only for me.

ut-ut_3 v [A; a12] for dogs to bark. Muut-ut nang irúa ug náay táwu,
That dog barks when there are people around. n bark.

ut-út see úlut_1.

utwang = hutwang_2.

úu short form: u. {1} yes. Ú, túa na ku, Yes, I’m coming. {2} in
narrations, rhetorical answer to an unasked question. Misulud siya sa
lángub, ú misulud dáyun siya, He went into the cave, yes, he went right
in. aw — of course, it is obviously so. Aw ú, unyà ra ka mubáyad ug
ihatud na nákù dinhi, Of course, you only have to pay when I deliver
it. — walay tiil, íkug expression inquiring as to the sincerity of
one’s intentions of doing s.t. (humorous). ‘Muari ka unyà sa
balay?’—‘Ú’—‘Ú way tiil?’ ‘Will you come to the house
later?’—‘Yes.’—‘Is that yes meaning no (lit. yes without legs)?’

úù word said to induce young children to defecate. v [A; c] child’s
word for defecate.

úun = un-ún_1.

úwag = úlag.

uwag-úwag (from úlag) n {1} animal ovaries. {2} the two pockets of fat
which are found on the top of the tail of chickens, so called because
they are believed to stimulate sex urges.

uwahi = ulahi.

uwak n crow. mamutì (muputì) ang — [so-and-so] is impossible (lit. the
crow will turn white first). Muputì pay uwak ug muhátag ku, It will be
a snowy day in May before I contribute any. (←) n the sound of the
crow. v [A13] say s.t. in protest, gripe. Nag-úwak ang mga trabahadur
sa kadúgay sa ílang swildu, The laborers were complaining about how
long it took them to get their pay. kang-an(←) n place where crows
abound.†

uwandis (from ulandis) n k.o. light-skinned cooking banana which looks
like the sab-a, not commercially grown.

uwang-uwang = saling-uwang.

uwápay n k.o. parrot fish.

uwaping n a k.o. edible mushroom that grows on rotten abaca or banana
stalks, with a thin pileus, brown on top, and a slender stalk. paN-
v [A2; b(1)] gather uwaping.

uway n general name for rattans. — palásan n large brittle species used
for furniture making. v [A; a12] cut rattan cane into strips. paN-
v [A2; b(1)] gather rattan. maN-r-(←) n rattan gatherer.

úway n address to aunts, female cousins of the parents’ generation.

uwídu n music played by ear. v [A2; c1] play by ear.

uwígik v [A2S; b3] for pigs to squeal. n squealing of pigs.

úwil v [A; b6(1)] {1} give s.o. sweet-talk to get s.t. out of him
(colloquial). Ug akuy muúwil ánà, musugut nà, If I sweet-talk him,
he’ll agree. Giuwílan ni Pidru si Huwan sa pagpapalit ug sigarilyu,
Pedro sweet-talked Juan into buying cigarettes for him. {2} lubricate,
put oil on. n {1} flattery (colloquial). {2} lubrication oil. — ab
wintirgrin n oil of wintergreen.

uy {1} particle initial to the sentence: {1a} an impolite way of
attracting attention. Uy, Pituy, dalia nang ímung búhat, Hey! Pete.
Hurry up with that work! {1b} exclamation of surprise upon noticing
s.t. Uy Pilang! Ingun kug dì na ta magkítà, Why, Pilang, I didn’t think
I’d ever see you again. {1c} exclamation of delight or worry. Uy!
Malípay ku ug buhátun mu nà, My! Would I ever be happy if you did that!
{2} particle final in the sentence. {2a} contradicting the
interlocutor’s opinion or an opinion he might form: don’t think it’s
not like this.—it is. Mahal uy! Tíaw muy tag-utsu ang usa! It’s
expensive, for your information. Imagine! Eight pesos apiece! dílì ku —
I don’t want to, don’t think I do. ‘Paghúbù.’—‘Dílì ku uy!’ ‘Get
undressed!’—‘No, I won’t.’ {2b} with imperatives: go on now, do it.
Sábà uy. Hibatian tang Pápa, Keep quiet now. Daddy might hear us. Ayaw
úsà ug lakaw uy. Maniudtu pa gánì ta, Hey! Don’t go yet. We are going
to have lunch yet. {2c} particle indicating surprise upon discovering
s.t. Sus, Mam, maáyu giyud ka kaáyu uy! Goodness, Ma’am. You sure are
good. {2d} particle expressing annoyance. Sus nis Iduk uy! Nakulbaan
kug maáyu, My goodness, Edok. You sure gave me a scare. ada — see ada.

úy = uluy.

uyab_1 n girl or boy friend. v [ANC; a2] be sweethearts, get for a
sweetheart, make into a sweetheart. Mag-úyab na sila kay sígi sa sini,
They must be sweethearts because they keep going to the show together.
Byúda ang íyang giuyab, He made a widow his fiancée.

uyab_2 v [A; c] let fighting cocks clash for a short time for practice.
Iuyab ang mga hiniktan, Let the fighting cocks clash for practice.
n cockfight for practice. Way uyab kining manúka, This cock has no
practice in fighting.

úyab v [A; b6(1)] rinse with clean water. Íya nang giuyában ang
linabhan, She has rinsed the laundry.

uyabad v [A13; b3] {1} bawl, cry out loudly. Nag-uyabad ang bátà kay
nangáyù ug dulsi, This child is bawling because it is asking for candy.
{2} grumble to oneself. Unsa may ímung giuyabaran nga dakù ka mag
báhin? What are you griping about when you have a big share?

uyabang n fry of river shrimps. Ang uyabang mga pínung ulang, The young
of river shrimps are tiny.

úyag {1} so that [such-and-such] a thing happen. Uban lang úyab
kapalitan kag sapátus, Just come with me so I can buy you some shoes.
{2} instead of doing [so-and-so] as one should have, he did s.t. else
(and s.t. bad happened). Úyag pa bítawng paiskuyláhun siya, nyà wà
giyud magtuun. Dan, wà núuy titulu, He was supposed to go to school,
but he didn’t. So, he doesn’t have a degree. {3} [so-and-so] was going
to happen (or not going to) but you did s.t. to ruin matters. Úyag
natū́g untà tung bátà, ímu pa giyung gipúkaw, The child was doing fine
asleep but you had to go and wake him up. Úyag wà tà tu kahibáwu sa
ákung sikrítu, ímu núung gibuku, He would not have known about the
secret, but you had to go and tell him.

uyágak = iyágak.

uyakut v [A3; b5] {1} mind talk not worth heeding. Makunsimisiyun ka
lang ug mag-uyakut ka sa mga sulting dugmuk, You’ll only worry yourself
to death if you mind that idle talk. {2} mind business, work which is
not worth it, does not give a profit. Dílì ku mag-uyakut ug nigusyung
dì makabúhì, I won’t kill myself for a business that doesn’t even allow
me to earn a living.

uyámut [adj.] — quite [adj.] I should say, rather [adj.]. Daghan uyámut
silag kwarta, They had a rather goodly amount of money. Lahì uyámut ang
íyang kinaíya kay sa íyang igsúun, She has a quite different
personality from her sister. Pubring uyámut, Quite poor, I would say.
Ngil-ad uyámut nga dì na ka muatúbang sa ímung nautángan ug kabubut-un,
It is rather unseemly, I should say, that you turn your back on s.o.
you should be grateful to. a miserable, extremely poor. Uyámut kaáyu
ming mga iskwátir, We squatters are miserably poor. v [B12; b6] be
extremely poor. ka- n extreme poverty.

úyang title for one’s grandmother or a grandparent’s sister or a female
cousin of the grandparent’s generation. (→) {1} voc. of uyang.
{2} address of respect for old women not related. v [A; c1] address
s.o. as uyang.

uyap n tiny salt-water shrimps. paN- v [A2; b6] catch, gather tiny
shrimps.

uyas a past its usefulness or productiveness. Ang apuhan námù uyas na,
Our grandparents are already very old. Uyas ang yútà sa bakilid, The
soil on the slope is infertile. (←) v [B2; b6] be, become unproductive.
Muúyas (maúyas) ang dágat kun kanúnay dinamitáhan, The sea will become
bare if they constantly fish with dynamite. Nagkauyas ang mga lubi, The
coconut trees are becoming unproductive.

úyat_1 v [A; b] hang on s.t. to bend it downward. Nabálì ang sanga kay
íyang giuyátan, The branch broke because he hung on it with all his
weight.

úyat_2 v [A; b] take hold of s.t. or hold s.t. lifting it. Siyay
nag-úyat sa kápa sa rayna, She held the queen’s cape. Nakaúyat siya sa
alambri sa kuryinti, He accidentally took hold of the electric wire.

uyat-úyat v [A; a1] tease s.o. or annoy him by persistent, irritating
actions or remarks. Ákù siyang uyat-uyátun nga dì na muulì ang íyang
Máma, I’ll tease her by saying her mother isn’t coming back any more.

uyauya a good enough amount to do for modest use or consumption. Gamay
kaáyung tindahána apan uyauya usab ang hálin, iguígù giyung makasapal
sa gastu, This store is very small, but it has a goodly sale, enough to
cover the expenses.

uyit = iwit.

uylab = uylap.

uylap v [A; b6] {1} flare up, burst into flames. Dalì kaáyung miuylap
ang kaláyu, The fire quickly flared up. {1a} for a light to flicker.
Salipdi ang sugà arun dì muuylap ang síga, Cover the lamp so that its
light won’t flicker. {2} for pain to pulsate. Nag-uylap ang kangutngut
sa ákung hubag, I have a pulsating pain in my boil.

uyuan n uncle: parent’s brother or male cousin of the parent’s
generation. v [A12] have an uncle. paN- v [A23] respect as one’s uncle.
Kun nanguyuan ka kanákù, patúu sa ákung tambag, If you respect me as
your uncle, heed my advice.

úyug v [AB2S; a1] shake back and forth in any direction with quick
motions, cause s.t. to do so. Miúyug ang balay paglínug, The house
shook in the earthquake. Uyúga siya ug kusug arun mumata, Shake him
hard to wake him up. (→) n mature coconut, at the stage when the water
sounds if it is shaken. (→) ug útuk a feeble-minded. Uyug tingáli ug
útuk kay dì makasabut dáyun, He must be feeble-minded because he cannot
understand right away. v [B25; b6] for a coconut to reach maturity. pa-
n ceremony and party upon blessing a house or inaugurating a building.
v [A; b5] hold a house blessing.

uy-ug = úyug.

úyuk n s.t. in the center. middle part: {1} middle part of the place
where the fire is built in the stove. {2} bone marrow. {2a} young palm
frond, esp. coconut. {3} = alúyuk. {3a} the whorl on the fingers made
by the prints. -an(→) n place where the úyuk is located. kina-an(→) =
kinaaluyukan. see alúyuk.

úyun n {1} s.t. long, parallel to, alongside. Mga balay nga úyun sa
karsáda, Houses built along the road. {2} in accordance, conformance
with. Úyun sa átung gikasabútan, In accordance with our agreement.
v {1} [AC; c1] put long things parallel to s.t. or each other, be put
parallel. Mag-úyun tag higdà arun ta muarang dinhi, Let us lie down
beside each other so that we can both fit on this place. Wà magkaúyun
ang mga bughà, The pieces of firewood weren’t placed parallel to each
other. {1a} [A2; b6c1] stay, place oneself parallel to s.t. {2} [A2C3;
bc3] agree, go along with s.t. Dì ku muúyun sa inyung plánu, I won’t
agree to your plan. Sumálà sa gikauyúnan, According to the agreement we
came to. (→) n = úyun, n. (→) ug bàbà female genitalia (humorous). v =
úyun, v2. uyun-úyun v [AP; b(1)] agree with, go along with
half-heartedly. pa- v [A; c] do s.t. lengthwise. Ipaúyun paghíwà ang
patátas, Cut the potatoes lengthwise. n done lengthwise. pahi-, pasi-
{1} = úyun, 2. {2} [A; c] adjust oneself to s.t. or adjust s.t. so
others can agree to it. Pasiúyun na lang ku sa pagkáun dinhi, kay way
láin, I’ll just adjust myself to the food here, because there is
nothing else. Gamay ra ákung gibutang síli kay ákung ipahiúyun sa
tanan, I put in very little chili pepper so everybody could eat what I
was fixing. ka-an n agreement reached. Ang kauyúnan sa míting, The
agreement reached in the meeting.

úyung n title for one’s grandfather or a grandparent’s brother or a
male cousin of his generation. v {1} [B2; b6] become old. Miúyung
(naúyung) lag kalit ang íyang nawung sukad mamatay ang íyang asáwa, His
face suddenly aged when his wife died. {2} [B126; b6] become a
grandfather.
