


=== K ===


ka_1 see ikaw.

ka_2 {1} linker between numeral and noun. Tulu ka mansánas, Three
apples. Líbu ka líbu, Thousands and thousands. {2} between isig or
masig and nouns. Ísig nímu ka táwu, Your fellow men. Ang ílang masig ka
áping, Each of their cheeks. {3} — ug particle in expressing
alternative situations: ‘be it ... or’. Manágat giyud siya mag-ulan kag
mag-ínit, He goes fishing rain or shine.

*ka_3 sa — [name], íla — [name] at [name]’s place. Adtu ku sa ka Banung
(íla ka Banung), I am going to Banong’s place.

ka_4 n letter K.

ka-_1 = naka-. see maka-_1.

ka-_2 affix forming nouns which mean ‘one’s co-[noun]’. Ákung kaklási,
My classmate. Ákung katagilungsud, My fellow townsman. Ákung kaáway, My
opponent.

ka-_3 affix added to adjectives. Adjectives plus ka- have these uses:
{1} as nouns which mean ‘the state of being [so-and-so]’. Tungud sa
ákung kasubù, Because of my sorrow. Ang katahum sa palíbut, The beauty
of the surroundings. {2} in exclamations. Kagwápu sa ímung balay! What
a beautiful house you have! Kadakù! How big it is! {3} after unsa to
form a phrase: how (to what extent) s.t. is [adj.]. Unsa kadakù? How
big is it? Dì mabatbat kun unsa kangilngig, Words cannot describe how
horrible it was.

ka-_4 = maka-_2.

ká n hemorrhoids. Gipaupirahan na ba níya ang ká sa íyang lubut? Did he
have his hemorrhoids operated on?

káag v [B6; c16] move in haste. Nakáag (mikáag) siya kay mibagting na
ang alas syíti, She was in a hurry because it was already seven
o’clock. (→) a doing s.t. with great haste and carelessly. Kaag kaáyu
kang mamuhatbuhat. May mga sayup, You are very fast but careless in
your work. You made lots of mistakes. v [B15; a12] be, become careless.
Kinsa guy musálig nímus trabáhu nga nagkaag ka man lang? Who would
trust your work when you work so carelessly?

ka-an_1 inflectional affix: the local passive potential, future. see
-an_1.

ka-an_2 affix forming nouns {1} added to adjectives to form nouns which
mean ‘the quality of [adj.]’. Kalampúsan, Success. Kalipáyan,
Happiness. Ang íyang kasuk-ánun mauy usa ka kasukwahían sa íyang
maáyung pamatásan, His quickness to anger is not in harmony with his
good manners. {2} added to nouns or adjectives to form nouns which
refer to a group of [noun]’s. Ang mga kabatáan, The children. Balay sa
kahiláyan, Den of vice. Kanipáan, Nipa swamp. {2a} forming numbers, the
multiples of ten’s. Katluan, Thirty. Kapituan, Seventy.

ka-an_3 (←) affix added to adjectives which refer to a state to form
nouns which refer to the achievement of the state. Way katin-áwan ang
inyung burúka, Your case has not reached a clear resolution. Way
kahusáyan ang inyung burúka ug isig pasángil, Your case will never be
resolved if all you do is accuse each other.

kaang_1 n flowerpot. v [A; c16] plant in a flowerpot.

kaang_2 a having legs apart when walking. v [B; a12P] walk with legs
apart. Mukaang siya ug lakaw kay may hubag sa bilahan, He walks with
legs apart because he has a boil in the crotch.

kaangkáang v [A; b(1)] go here and there, from place to place in
excitement. Nagkaangkáang siya ug pangítag kwarta nga íyang mabáwun, He
went here and there excitedly looking for money to take with him on his
trip.

káat v [A; a12] go out and wander around aimlessly to pass idle time.
Mukáat ku kay gilaáyan ku dinhi, I’ll go out and mess around because
I’m bored here.

kába v [A; a] {1} carry close to the chest or strapped to the back. Ang
inahang ungguy nga nagkába sa íyang ituy, A mother monkey carrying its
little one. {2} carry a house to move it. Gikába níla ang balay ngadtu
sa tabuk, They carried the house across the street. n = kabahan. (→)
v [A; b(1)] copulate, esp. animals. Ang irù mukaba bísag náa atubángan
sa daghang táwu, Dogs will copulate even in front of people. kabahan
n strap for a load carried on the back.

kabad v [A23] run or walk instantly without hesitation. Mikabad
pagpanágan ang mga sugarul sa pagkakità níla sa pulis, The gamblers
took to their heels when they saw the police.

kábag v [B46; b4] have gas pains. Gikabágan ku humag káun sa nangkà, I
had gas pains after eating the jackfruit. n gas pain.

kabaghak = baláhak.

kabahíru = byatilis.

kabahung n large and deep sore caused by an infection. v [B2; b4] get a
sore. Makabahung nang núka kun dì tagdun, That sore will turn into an
ulcer if you don’t take care of it. Gikabahungan ang íyang tiil, His
foot developed a deep ulcer. -un a having deep ulcers.

kabàkábà n {1} k.o. butterfly, orange in color, and unusually big.
{2} k.o. sailboat the sail of which looks like butterfly wings.
v [B1256] {1} turn into a kabàkábà butterfly. {2} ride, make into this
sort of sailboat.

kabal n one point short of winning. Kabal na ang ámung iskur. Usa na
lang ka syát, daug na, Our score is just one point short of winning.
One more shot to victory. v [B2] reach a score which is one point to
winning.

kabalungga n k.o. medicinal oil made from the snake melon
(Trichosanthes quinquangulata).

kabalíti = kabilíti.

kabalyiríya n cavalry, horse-mounted soldier (not mechanized).

kabalyíru_1 n {1} gentleman. {2} acting like a gentleman. {3} spending
liberally. prísu — {1} one under house arrest. {2} trustee in prison
who can go about as he pleases. v [AB12; c1] spend on a liberal scale,
become a liberal spender. Wà giyuy búngang makúhà ug kabalyirúhun
(ikabalyíru) ug gastu ang kwarta, No good can result of it if he spends
money lavishly.

kabalyíru_2 n k.o. small ornamental tree with pinnate leaves bearing
red or yellow flowers: Caesalpinia pulcherrima.

kabalyíti = kabilíti.

kabalyu, kabalyus n horsepower. Tris kabalyus, Three horsepower.

kaban_1 n trunk, chest. v [a12] store in a trunk. — mundu n trunk with
a rounded top and lined with upholstery tacks along its sides. -in-
a rectangular in shape. v [a12] make into a rectangular shape. Kinabana
pagtábas ang líab sa ákung sinínà, Cut the neckline of my dress square.
kabankaban n k.o. bivalve, so called because it opens and closes like a
trunk.

kaban_2 n measurement equivalent to twenty-five gantas. Usa ka kaban
nga bugas humay, A cavan of rice. -is(←) cavans (plural).

kabang a {1} spotted, splotched. Ang ákung iring kabang putì ug itum,
My pet cat is spotted white and black. {2} unevenly painted or cut.
Kabang ang íyang tupi, His haircut is uneven. {3} uneven in voice
because of fright, adolescence, and the like. Kabang ang íyang tíngug
kay hápit na maulitáwu, His voice is uneven because he is an
adolescent. v [B2; a] be splotched, uneven. Nagkabang ang íyang nawung
sa ap-ap, His face is splotched with fungus. (←) v [B145] intensely
uneven or splotched. Nagkábang ang íyang nawung sa pulbus, Her face was
splotched with powder.

kab-ang n hook, crook. v [AB3; ac] hook around s.t., for a crook to
catch onto s.t., cause it to do so. Mikab-ang (nakab-ang) ang angkla sa
dakung batu mau nga wà mabira, The anchor hooked on a big stone. That’s
why we couldn’t get it up. Nagkab-ang ang gunitánan sa páyung sa
lansang, The umbrella is hung by the handle over the nail. Ikab-ang ug
hugut ang ímung buktun sa sanga, Hook your arm tight around the branch.
n hook that holds or grabs s.t.

kabangáhan = balbangáan.

kabarit n cabaret. -íra n cabaret girl.

kabaryu = byatilis.

kabási n gizzard shad: Nematalosa nasus and Anodontostoma chacunda.

kábat = kalábat.

Kabatáang Makabáyan n name of a militant, leftist youth organization
(Pilipino for Patriotic Youths).

kabatkabat v [A; a] hop from island to island in going s.w.
Gikabatkabat sa mga kuntrabandista ang mga pulù, The smugglers hopped
from one island to another.

kábaw_1 = kalabaw.

kábaw_2 n female genitalia (euphemism).

kabawkábaw = kinalabaw. see kalabaw.

kab-ay v [A; b6(1)] lay the forearms over s.t., generally for support.
Mikab-ay siya sa barútu dihang gikápuy nag linanguy, He hung onto the
boat when he grew tired of swimming.

kabayru {1} = kabalyíru_2. {2} = byatilis.

kabáyù n {1} horse. {2} paramour (slang). {3} knight in chess. {4} face
card showing a horse in Spanish cards, worth eleven. — sa dágat sea
horse. — sa dáru plow beam. (→) v [A; ac] {1} ride, bring s.t. on a
horse. {2} ride, mount on s.t. Bansay siyang mukabayù sa bisiklíta, She
rides a bicycle expertly. {3} [A; b6] be on top of s.o. in wrestling or
similar activity. {3a} have sexual intercourse with (slang). Nakakabayù
aku níyag kas-á, I have had intercourse with her once. {3b} [b6] be
mobbed. Gikabay-an sa mga batan-un ang mga artista, The movie stars
were mobbed by the young people. kinabay-anay v [c] have intercourse.
Udtung tútuk, nagkinabay-anay pa gihápun! It’s high noon and they are
still having intercourse! Culu-, kabayùkabáyù n {1} folding ironing
board. {2} toy horse. -in- n {1} long-armed corn grinder. {2} =
kulukabáyù, 1. kinabay-an n manner of riding. -un a horse-like.
Kabayúug nawung, Horse-faced.†

kabdus = mabdus.

kabhang = alukabhang.

kábi = kábig.

kabiba, kabíba v {1} [A; c1] carry s.t. strapped or slung over the
shoulder. Hasta bátà nga gamay kabibahan pa giyud ug putus, Even the
small child has to carry a package over her shoulders. {2} [A; b6(1)]
wear s.t. wrapped around the torso. Nagkabíba siyang nalígù, She took a
bath with s.t. wrapped around her body. {3} [A; c1] {a} make into a
shoulder strap. {b} make into a chemise or s.t. to wrap around the
body. n {1} shoulder strap. {2} loose chemise or anything wrapped
around the torso.

kabíbat v [ac] climb holding on to s.t. with both hands, climb up to
get. Kabibáta kanang mga sambag nga hinug, Climb up to get those ripe
tamarinds. Ikabíbat ang písì ngadtu, Climb up there to put the rope up.

kabibit v {1} [A; c] hold on to s.t. Nagkabibit kug malíta, I was
carrying a suitcase. Sanga nga íyang gikabibitan, The branch he was
holding on to. {2} [A; b] {a} put a handle onto s.t. {b} make s.t. into
a handle. n handle, s.t. with which one holds on to s.t.

kábig v [A3P; a] {1} make s.t. move toward one; attract towards s.o.,
to s.t. Nakábig ákung pagtagad sa manánuy níyang tíngug, Her sweet
voice attracted my attention. Kining tawhána nagkábig sa íyang signus
kay kiat kaáyung mudráyib, This fellow is courting danger with his
reckless driving. Kabíga (ikábig) ang túbig sa kanal, Draw the water
towards the ditch. {2} convert. Kabíga (ikábig) ang mga Múrus, Convert
the Muslims. (→) n convert.

kabíkab v [A2S; a2] climb up with the hands taking an important part.
Makabíkab ku ning inyung bintánà kay náay káhuy sa tapad, I can climb
up to your window because there is a tree next to it.

kabíkag = kabíkab.

kabil v [A; ab2] touch, brush against s.t. lightly. Nabanggaan ímung
awtu? Wà, nakabilan lang, Did you wreck your car? No, it was just
scratched. -l-un(←), -únun a touchy, sensitive. Kalabílun (kabilúnun)
nà siyag buut. Daling masukù, He’s very sensitive. He gets angry right
away.

kabílaw n k.o. slender, creeping herb of waste places, with sticky sap
used as a poultice for disorders of the uterus: Commelina benghalensis.

kabildu n conversation. v [C; ac] converse. Nagkabildu mi báhin sa
ámung trabáhu, We were talking about our jobs. Ngánung mangísug ka man?
Kabildúhun ta lang gud ni, Why do you have to blow your top? We can
talk this out calmly. Unsa may inyung gikabildúhan (gipanagkabildúhan)?
What were you talking about? kabilduhay v [C] converse. Culu- =
kabildu.

kabilinggan n {1} impediment to one’s freedom of action. Makalangyaw ku
kay ulitáwu pang way kabilinggan, I’m free to travel as I am unmarried
and have no responsibilities. Dúnay kabilinggan ang yútà, There’s some
problem with the title to that land. walay — {a} of no impediment.
{b} of no importance. Dinhay áway piru wà tuy kabilinggan, There was a
fight, but it was nothing worth talking about. Way kabilinggan nang
samára. Kadlas ra, That wound was nothing. It was just a scratch. Way
kabilinggan ug hutdan tag kwarta kay makahuwam ta, It doesn’t matter if
we run out of money because we can always borrow. {2} responsibility.
Dakung kabilinggan ang pagkuput ug dakung kwarta, It’s a big
responsibility to be in charge of a large sum of money. {3} things to
attend to. Dúgay siyang maulì kay may kabilinggan pang giatiman sa
upisína, He will come home late because he has s.t. to attend to at the
office. -un a having responsibilities.

kabilíti n ridge pole of a roof. v [A; a12b(1)] make, put in a ridge
pole.

kabilkabil = kawilkawil. see kawil.

kabilúsu a ready to take offense and therefore trouble-prone. Dílì
katiáwan ang táwung kabilúsu, You can’t play jokes on people who take
offense easily. v [B1; c5] become readily offended and therefore
trouble-prone. Ug magkabilúsu ka íning dapíta, tabangan ka giyud sa mga
buguy dinhi, If you act touchy around these parts, the toughs will gang
up on you.

kabilya n {1} bars for reinforcing concrete. {2} iron bars for window
grills. v [c] put iron bars in.

kábin n ship’s cabin. v [A1] travel cabin class.

kab-ing = kab-ang.

kabinit n cabinet, case with drawers or shelves for medicine, food,
jewelry, etc.

kabir v [A2; a3b8] make a profit. Dakug makabir ang nigusyung
ismagling, There’s a big profit to be made in the smuggling business.
Bay-ansil mauy ákung nigusyung nakabiran, I made profit in the business
of buying and selling.

kábir n cover. v {1} [A; b6(1)] put a cover on s.t. Kabíri ang libru
arun dì mahúgaw, Put cover on the book so it won’t get dirty. {2} [A;
c] protect oneself from blows with the hands. Mukábir siya dáyun kun
dyában, He covers immediately if his opponent jabs him. {3} cover the
ball in a volleyball game. Páwul kay síku ímung gikábir, Foul! You
covered the ball with your elbow. kabirkábir v [A13] dílì, walà — fail
to keep s.t. concealed, be direct where propriety requires the
opposite. Sa walay kabirkábir íya akung gihingawátan, Without beating
around the bush, he accused me of being a thief.

kabísa n {1} provincial capital. {2} village chief. — dibaranggay, sa
baryu = kabísa, 2. v [B156; a12] be, become the village chief.

kabisáda n bridle. v {1} [A; a] put a bridle. {2} [a12] make into a
bridle.

kabisádu a {1} have complete knowledge of s.t. Kabisádu na nákù ang
(kabisádu na aku sa) mga dálan dinhi, I’m completely familiar with
roads here. {2} have complete knowledge of a procedure. Kabisádu kaáyu
siya sa mga makina, He is very knowledgeable about engines.

kabisdak n an old variety of paddy rice with long, white grains.

kabisilya n head of the table. v [A; b] sit, seat at the head of the
table.

kabisíra n {1} capital town. {2} seat at the place at the table
occupied by the most honored person in the group.

kabit v [A; b6(1)] {1} cling to, hang on to. Punù na kaáyu ang trák.
Mukabit lang ta, The truck is already full. Let’s just hang on to the
sides. {2a} join in on a transportation franchise on a minor basis.
Mukabit na lang sila sa ámung linya kay duruha ra man ka buuk ang ílang
dyip, They have decided to let their jeep run on our line as they only
have two. {2b} hook up to a telephone with another line. {3} set
decorations in another material. Ang sinínà sa birhin gikabitan ug mga
brilyanti, The dress of the image was inlaid with diamonds. {4} [B126]
be late in planting (grab on to the tail end of the season). Makabit
giyud ning átung pagpugas tungud sa kadúgay sa ulan, We’ll be late
sowing because the rains came late. {5} [A; a12] take a paramour or
lover. n {1} connection of public transportation, party line in
telephone. Bísi kaáyu ang tilipunu kay daghang kabit, The telephone is
very busy because there are a lot of party lines. {2} s.o. with whom
one has extra-marital relations. Nahibalu na giyud ang asáwa nga may
kabit diay si Tiruy, The wife finally found out that Terry had a
paramour. {3} planted at the end of the season.

kábit n gambling game of tossing coins, where bets are placed on heads
or tails. v [AC; c3] toss coins.

kab-it = kab-ang.

kabkab_1 v [A; a] dig a hole by scooping out dirt. Gikabkab sa irù ang
bukug, The dog dug up the bone. — sa, ang kabúhì v [A; a] press the
finger tips into the pit of the stomach to relieve it of kabúhì and
massage it with a digging motion. -ay(→) n action of digging and
disturbing the surface. Pwirting kabkabay sa mga táwu sa nasunúgan! How
the people dug around the ruins of the fire!

kabkab_2 n {1} k.o. fern, grown as an ornamental: Drynaria quercifolia.
{2} k.o. light brown, thick, edible fungus.

kabkab_3 = kalabkab.

kabli n cable, wire rope.

kabligráma n cablegram.

kabling v [A; a1] turn s.t. heavy over on its side. Dì ka makakabling
ánang aparadur nga mau rang usa, You can’t turn that chiffonier over on
its side all by yourself.

kablit v {1} [AN; ab2c] touch, move s.t. by curling the fingers. Maáyu
siyang mukablit ug sista, He plays the guitar well. Gikablit ku siya
arun mulíngì, I touched her to get her to turn to me. Hikablitan gánì
ang gátu, maimpas ka giyud, If you accidentally pull the trigger,
you’ll be done for. {2} [A12N; a12] ask a favor readily from a close
acquaintance or friend. Makakablit (makapangablit) ta sa átung manidyǐr
ug dúna tay kinahanglánun, We can always ask a favor from the manager
if ever we need anything. Wà giyud kay makablit dihà sa kustums? Don’t
you have any friends (to help us out) at the Customs? -in- v [A; a12]
play a guitar. Unsa mang kantaha ang íyang gikinablit? What’s that song
he’s playing on the guitar? n action of playing a guitar. -l-un,
-l-un(→) a sensitive, easily angered.

kabra v [A; a] {1} break s.t. open by prying it. Bára ray makakabra
niánang bintánà, We can force that window open only with an iron bar.
Kabráha ang kandádu ug way yáwi, Force the lock open if there’s no key.
{2} remove a big portion from s.t. Kabráha nang pánit nga kagumkum, Get
that big chunk of crunchy skin of the roast pig. Wà mahimbà ang búus
nga gikabráhan ug usa ka trák nga mais, It hardly seemed to make any
difference that they took a truckload of grain from the granary, there
was so much. bára di- n crowbar.

kabtang see butang_2.

kabting = kulabting.

kábu n {1} foreman. Ang ákung amahan mauy kábu sa trabáhu sa karsáda,
My father is the foreman on the highway construction. {2} corporal in
an armed force. v [B156; a12] be, become a foreman or corporal.

kabù v [A; a] {1} dip water, scoop solids out of a container. Kabuun ta
ning túbig sa tangki, Dip the water out of the tank. Ayawg ikabù ang
ímung básu sa bugas, Don’t use your glass to scoop the rice out.
{1a} [A2] take in some water in tilting to one side. Pagtakílid sa
barku, nakakabù giyug diyútayng túbig, When the ship listed, it took in
some water in the process. {2} fetch water. Túa siya sa atábay,
nagkabù, He’s at the well, fetching water. {3} [a12] make, use as water
dipper. n s.t. used as a dipper or scoop. kab-anan n {1} container for
fetching water. {2} place from which water is fetched. {3} s.t. used to
dip or scoop up. paN- v [A2; b6] catch fish fry with a dip net. Mangabù
mig bangus páras púnung, We will catch the fry of milkfish with a dip
net for the fishpond.

kabud v [A; c] tie ropes, strings, wires around s.t. large. Kinsay
nagkabud sa alambri diri sa halígi? Who wound the wire around the post?
Ikabud ang písì sa kabáyù sa íyang hiktanan, Tie the rope of the horse
to the post. n rope for tying.

kabuduk n red light district.

kabug_1 n k.o. large fruit bat with a dark brown color, growing to a
five or even seven-foot wingspan. The flesh is highly esteemed. kabgan
n abode of this sort of bat. -in- v [A; b6] stay awake at night and
sleep during the day like a bat. Pirmi kung mabilar kay nagkinabug ang
bátà, I’m always losing sleep because the child stays awake at night.
n a k.o. triple-looped hitch used to fasten a line to a piece of wood
so that it will not slip when the rope is pulled parallel to the wood.
So called because the loops form what look like a bat’s claws holding
to the wood.

kabug_2 n variety of millet (dáwa) that is small, rounded, and dark,
but highly prized.

kabugasun, kabugwasun n morning star.

kabúgaw n k.o. astringently sour citrus used for hair rinse and
seasoning: Cytrus hystrix.

kabúhì (from búhì) n {1} a pulsating thing located in the abdominal
region which is what one feels when one experiences hyper-acidity or
other sharp abdominal pains. The cause of these pains is thought to be
the displacement of the kabúhì, most often in an upward direction, and
treatment is by hot compresses and by massage (kalaykay) to put the
kabúhì back in place. Misáka ákung kabúhì sa kutukutu, My kabúhì rose
to under my rib cage. {2} this pulsating thing viewed as the seat of
life. Unsang urása nabugtù ang íyang kabúhì? What time did he expire
(lit. was his kabúhì broken off)? v [A13P; a4b4] have pains because of
the kabúhì. Gikabuhían (gikabúhì) aku, I have pains in the abdominal
region. (→) = kabúhì, v. -un(→) a tending to get pains caused by
kabúhì.

kabukabu n dust that settles on things. v [BN; a4b4] covered with dust,
spray. Mikabukabu (nakabukabu, gikabukabuhan, gikabukabu) ang salug kay
walay lampasu, The floor was covered with dust because it had not been
cleaned. v [A; b6] be swept up by the wind into a fine spray or
particles of dust. Nagkabukabu ang dágat, The sea was whipping up a
fine spray. kabukabuhun a dusty.

kabúkaw = bukawbukaw. see búkaw_2.

kabulay n a black wax formed as a dwelling place by the kíyut, a
honeybee that nests in houses. v [A13; b6] put this k.o. beeswax on
s.t.

kabunghan n name of a wind.

kábu nigru = ibyuk.

kaburáta n {1} riding crop. {2} policeman’s club. v [A; a12] strike
with a riding crop or policeman’s club.

kabus_1 a very poor, indigent. v [b4] run out of s.t. Nakabsan kami sa
pálad, We ran out of luck. Makabsan unyà ta sa bugas, We will run out
of rice.

kabus_2 v [AB2; a2b2] for s.t. to slip off from a place it has been put
or tied, cause it to do so. Mikabus (nakabus) ang kuríya sa makina, The
cord of the machine slipped off. Kinsay nagkabus sa kahun sa bangil?
Who pushed the box off of the wedge? Kabusa lang ang bugkus arun maabli
ang putus, Just slip the string off so the bundle can be opened.

kabus-uk see bus-uk.

kábut v {1} [A; a1] stir a liquid. Ug kabútun ang nilúgaw, dílì
mudukut, If you stir the porridge, it won’t stick. {2} [A; b5] dig a
hole in the ground. Íla nang gikabútan (gikábut) ang mga lungag pára sa
mga halígi, They have dug up holes for the posts. n hole dug into the
ground. (→) n s.t. used to stir liquids.

kab-ut v {1} [A; a12b2] reach for. Kab-úta nang hinug nga byábas, Reach
for that ripe guava. Nakab-utan ang ákung buhuk sa ungguy, The monkey
managed to get hold of my hair. {2} [A2; a12] attain. Damgu nga
gitingúhà námung kab-útun, The dreams we have striven to fulfill. ka-an
n achievement, realization. Ang pagkaduktur mauy kakab-útan sa íyang
mga damgu, Being a doctor was the realization of his dreams.

kabútan = kulabútan.

kabuway = kabulay.

kabya v {1} [A; c1] move s.t. with a heavy sweeping motion of the arms
as in moving water with a paddle or splashing. Mukabya kag kusug arun
matúlin ang barútu, Paddle hard to make the boat go fast. Ikabya
(kabyáha) ngari ang gabayan arun ákung maabut, Splash the waterwings
this way so I can reach them. {1a} move s.t. light with a sweeping
motion. Mikabya siya sa kurtína arun sa paglìlì, She moved the curtain
aside to peep outside. {2} [A; c] fling water or grains out or into
s.t. Huy, kinsa may nagkabya ug túbig sa lagúna? Hey, who threw water
out onto the lawn? Ayawg kabyáhig balas ang asíras, Don’t throw sand
onto the sidewalk. {2a} toss a ball to a teammate using this k.o.
motion. n action of sweeping with the arms or flinging.

kabyára n reddish-brown coloration of a chicken.

kabyaw = kulabyaw.

kabyun = kulabyun.

káda each, every. Káda túig, Each year. Káda káun níla usa ka ganta ang
ílang mahurut, Every time they eat, they consume a whole ganta of rice.
— usa [dat.] each and every one of (us, you, them). Káda usa kanátù
(ang káda usa kanátù) magdalag pusil, Each and every one of us brings a
gun.

kadáding n k.o. sweet potato with yellow flesh and white peels.

kadaíya (from káda and íya) a of various kinds. Kadaíya man lang ang
prútas nga gibaligyà sa karbun, Fruits of various kinds are sold in the
market. v [B1456] be all of different kinds. Nagkadaíya ang mga
midisínang gidápat, All different kinds of medicines were administered.

kadal-ug n an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

kad-ang = kab-ang.

kadangkadang n blight affecting coconut trees. v [a4] have coconut
blight. Gikadangkadang ang mga lubi, The trees have coconut blight.

kadastral n cadastre, public records of real estate for purposes of
taxation. †

kadaw-ug = kadal-ug.

kadína n chain. Kadína sa bisiklíta, Bicycle chain. v {1} [AB; a] form
a chain, cause s.t. to do so. Magkadína kitag búlak, Let’s join these
flowers in a chain. Kadináhun nátù ning mga lastiku, We’ll make a chain
out of these rubber bands. {2} [b6] shackle with chains. Átù ning
kadináhan arun lisud ablíhun, Shackle it with chains to make it
difficult to open. — pirpituwa n life imprisonment. — diamur n k.o.
small, leafy vine of waste places with tiny pink or white odorless
flowers: Antigonon leptopus. — wib n k.o. weave in a series of
interlocking chain stitches. Ang muskitírung kadína wib dílì mahilhig,
The threads in a mosquito net that is woven with chain stitches cannot
be pushed apart. kadiníta n tiny chain worn as jewelry.

kading n one who gossips (slang). Ang mga kading namínaw pag-áyu sa
lális sa magtiáyun, The gossips listened with close attention to the
couple’s quarrel. v {1} [A; c] tell s.o. of, usually gossip (slang).
Kinsay nagkading nímung mabdus si Níla? Who told you that Nella was
pregnant? {1a} [A12] receive information, usually gossip (slang).
Nakakading kung daghan kunug babáyi si Dyú, I have heard that Joe has
many mistresses. {2} [B12; b6] be, become a gossip (slang). (←) v [C;
c16] talk idly, gossip together. n action of gossiping idly (slang).
Dúgay nahuman ang ílang káding sa tilipunu, Their telephone
conversation took a long time.

kadisnun = kardába.

kadíti n cadet.

kadkad = kaladkad.

kadlas a having scratches on the surface. Kadlas kaáyu ang pintal sa
ímung awtu, The paint on your car is full of scratches. n scratch, mark
left on a surface. Dílì mailhan ang kadlas, The scratch is invisible.
v [A13P; a12b2] put a scratch in s.t., make a break on a surface.
Hikadlasan ang tapalúdu sa awtu, The fender got scratched. -un a full
of scratches. -ánay = tubigtúbig. see túbig. -an(→) n a leader of the
defenders in a children’s game called tubigtúbig. v [B] be the leader
in this game.

kadlit v [A; a] {1} strike a match, put a match to s.t. Kadlíti ang mga
kandílà, Light the candles with a match. {2} make a small incision or
other motion analogous to striking a match. Akuy mukadlit sa hubag, I
will make an incision in the boil. Tambálan ang mikadlit sa buayáhun, A
folk doctor made an incision in the palm of the child that had the mark
of the crocodile. Gikadlítan ku kuntra sa buti, I was vaccinated
against smallpox. n action of striking a match. way — don’t strike any
matches, humorously said when a man is urinating on analogy of what one
says when pouring gasoline. -ánan n the side of a matchbox where
matches are struck. -an n general name for surgeon fish so called
because of the powerful sharp spines situated on each side of the
caudal peduncle.

kadlum n k.o. erect, branched, hairy herb, aromatic when crushed, with
pink and purple flowers, sometimes cultivated. Used as hair rinse:
Pogostemon cablin. — ihálas similar hairy herb of waste places, the
leaves of which are used to cure boils: Waltheria americana.
kadlumkadlum = kadlum ihálas.

kadtu short form: tu. {1} that (far from speaker and hearer). Kadtung
balay sa unáhan kang Husi, That house up ahead is Joe’s. {1a} he, she
(far away). Wà man gud tu makasabut sa ákung sulti, He did not get what
I said. {2} that one that was past in time. Ngánu man kadtu? Why did
that happen? Kadtung ákung giingun, What I said. {2a} that was the
case. Dihà kadtuy higayun nga ..., It happened one time that ...
{2b} he, she (referring to a person remote in time). Nagtúu ang mga
tulisan nga kadtu patay na, The bandits believed that he was already
dead. {3} followed by a verb: that time when. Kadtung musumbag na siya,
mulikay pud ku, When he would strike me, I would also dodge. {4} the
ones, those that are. Kadtung nakaapil na walay lábut áning duláa,
Those who have already tried it once are not to take part this time.
niadtu {1} gen.: of that. Ang tag-íya niadtung sakayána, The owner of
that boat. {2} dat.: to, on that. Ihátag niadtung tawhána, Give it to
that man. Niadtung adláwa migíkan siya pára sa Manílà, On that day he
left for Manila. {3} formerly short for kaniadtu. adtu = niadtu. naadtu
= niadtu.

kadtut = kadtu.

kadyapà = kudyapà.

*kadyì see pangadyì.

kadyung v [A; a] cook root crops and bananas in steam. Kadyungun ku ang
kamúti arun dì malatà, I’ll steam the sweet potatoes so they won’t
become soggy. -an n steamer for root crops and bananas.

kadyus n cultivated bush bearing beans the seeds of which are like
small, black pellets. The young pods are eaten as a vegetable and the
seeds, when mature: Cajanus cajan.

kág = kalag.

kagà v [B; a12] become thin and emaciated. Hala, kagaa giyud inyung
láwas pagpúnayg bilar magabíi, Go on, make yourselves thin and
enervated by staying up late at night. a emaciated, thin.

kágà a {1} talking excessively of foolish things. {2} lying, esp.
boastfully. v {1} [A23N] talk foolishness excessively. {2} [AN; b6(1)]
tell a lie, esp. a boastful one. Nakapangágà (nakakágà) siya sa mga
tagabúkid nga abugádu siya, He has led the gullible mountaineers to
believe that he was a lawyer. Bísag unsa lay íyang gikágà (gipangágà)
sa íyang giulitawhan, There was no limit to the lies he told the woman
he was courting. {3} for a chicken to make clucking noise instead of
fighting. Ayaw ug isígig sábung ang sunuy tingálig mukágà nà, Don’t
keep fighting the rooster. It will get so it will cackle instead of
fighting. {3a} [A23N; b3] grow timid like a chicken. Ngánung kagáan man
nímu nang gwápa nga may hitsúra ka man sab? Why are you scared to face
that beautiful woman when you’re good-looking? n {1} empty talk. Ísug
kaáyug sinultihan, kágà man lang diay pulus, He talks so fiercely, but
it’s nothing but all empty talk. {2} liar, esp. a boastful one.
{3} cowardly, timid, chicken. Kagáun kaáyu ning manúka dílì ángayng
itárì, This cock is very cowardly. It is not fit for a cockfight. -un
a talkative. v [B12; b6] be, become a boastful liar or timid.

kagabkab n flapping sound. v [B46] make a flapping sound. Mukagabkab
ang bandíra ug hangínun, The flag flaps noisily in the wind.

kagàkà_1 n {1} dull, non-reverberating but loud sound produced by the
knocking of light materials. {2} sound of stuttering. Nahadluk táwun tu
siya. Kagàkang mitubag, He was afraid and stuttered when he answered.
v [B3] make such a sound. Mikagàkà ang ákung tápir wir búl ngadtu sa
sílung, My tupperware bowl rattled as it fell down the stairs.

kagàkà_2 v [A; a2b3] burst into loud laughter. Mukagàkà nà siya dáyun
ug makadungug ug kataw-anan nga isturya, She bursts into hearty
laughter when she hears a funny story.

kagalkal a clanking, rattling, jangling sound: broken-voiced,
boisterous-sounding laughter. Ang trák nga gubaun kagalkal kaáyung
mudágan, The broken-down truck runs with a rattling noise. Kagalkal nga
ubu, A rattling cough. v [A] make a clanking sound.

kágang n {1} k.o. small crab of muddy areas near the shore, with highly
prized flesh, but small. {2} = kagangkagang. kagangkagang n a small
land crab, dark brown in color, inedible, and with a venomous bite. a
for machines or vehicles to be rickety and ready to fall apart. Ang
kagangkagang níyang kutsi, His rattletrap car. v [B15] be rickety.

kag-ang a thin, emaciated. Kag-ang na siya kaáyu run kay daghang
prublíma, She has gotten emaciated because she has so many worries.
v [B; b6] be, become thin or emaciated.

kagar v [B46; b6] for a machine to fail to work. Mikagar ang dyíp
paglabang sa subà, The jeep stopped dead upon crossing the river.
Mikagar ang pusil, The rifle didn’t go off.

kagaral see garal.

kágards (from kagirun—slang). a {1} having pockmarks. Dì nímu ikapusta
ang kágards nga dyúlin, You can’t bet marbles with a rough surface.
{2} ugly. {2a} old, above thirty. Ang amatyur kantis karun álang sa mga
kágards, The amateur contest is for the above thirty’s. {3} broke, out
of money for gambling. Dì na ku mudúwà kay kágards, I won’t play any
more because I’m broke. v [B; b6] be, become pockmarked.

kagas a haggard and emaciated. v [B1456] be haggard and emaciated.
Nagkagas na ang pinirísung wà pakan-a, The prisoner is haggard and thin
from lack of food.

kágas_1 v [B2S] for skin diseases to dry and develop scabs. Mukágas ang
núka nga maigù sa tambal, A skin disease dries instantly if you apply
the right medicine.

kágas_2 v [A3] go in haste. Mikagas (ningkágas) pagdágan ang bátà
pagkakitas íyang tátay, The child immediately ran when he saw his
father.

kagaskas n rustling sound. v [B; aP] rustle. Nikagaskas ang mga dáhung
layà paghángin, The dry leaves rustled in the wind. Kagaskásag armirul
ang ákung sanínà, Make my shirt rustle with starch.

kagat v [A; a12b2] {1} bite to inflict injury, grab, or hold s.t.
Mikagat ang isdà sa paun, The fish grabbed at the bait. Kagtun ku ang
ímung dalunggan run, I’m going to bite your ears. {1a} be fooled into
s.t. Dalì ra siyang mukagat sa buláda, She is easily taken in by (bites
at) flattery. {2} catch, snag so as to hold firmly. Mubasiyu lang kun
sikáran ang bisiklita. Dì mukagat, The bicycle pedal just goes round.
It does not hold. n pincer of a crab. kagtan n k.o. adult freshwater
shrimp with well-developed pincers. -um- a ready to bite at the least
provocation. Iring kumagat nga nagkaun ug ilagà, Cat eating a rat,
ready to bite whoever comes within range.

kágaw n germs. — sa laláki sperm (euphemism). v [B1245] be contaminated
with germs. Nagkakágaw na nang pán nga nahúg sa yútà, The bread that
fell to the ground is covered with germs now. -un v [B126] be full of
germs.

kagáwad n municipal councilors.

kagawkaw = kagalkal.

kagay_1 n very mature coconut that is brown.

kágay n rattle of dishes. v [A; c1] make a rattling sound. Nikágay sa
baskit ang mga buak nga plátu, The broken plates rattled in the basket.
(→)_2 a for a cough to be loose. v [B2] for cough to become loose.
Mukagay na gánì ang ubu, hinug na nà, If the cough is loose, it’s
mature.

kagaykay_1 n {1} sound made by empty shells or the like, rattling. Ang
kinagaykay sa mga pitsas, The rattling of the mahjong pieces. {2} s.o.
who talks too much without saying any thing of value. {3} a braggart.
v {1} [A; a12] make a rattling sound. {2} [A13] talk much without sense
(slang). Nagkagaykay lag íyang sinultihan. Wà giyuy unud, He is talking
so much blah-blah. There’s nothing to it. {3} [A] brag around.

kagaykay_2 n k.o. herb of waste places bearing beans: Crotolaria
mucronata.

kagibúhì (from kaági and kinabúhì) n biography.

kagid n contagious skin disease, characterized by small eruptions which
develop white scales and itch intensely. v [a4] be infected with kagid.
kagirun a itch-ridden. v [B12] be, become itch-ridden.

kagidlay see *gidlay.

kagíit n high-pitched squeak or creaking noise caused by friction.
v [A4] creak, squeak.

kagìkì n snicker, laughter that is suppressed. v [A; b3] snicker.
Mikagìkì ang mga bátà kay walà makapamutúnis ang maistru, The children
snickered because the teacher forgot to button his pants.

kagilkil n clinking, high-pitched sound of metal. v [A; a] make a
clinking sound. Ang mga sinsilyu nikagilkil sa íyang bulsa, Coins
jingled in his pocket. Ayawg kagilkíla ang kadína, Don’t rattle the
chain.

kaging a stiff. v [B; a] become stiff. Makaging (mukaging) ang kusáhus
ug mabulad ug dúgay, The jerked meat will get too stiff if you leave it
out too long. Dúgay na siyang nakaging, He kicked off (lit. became
stiff) a long time ago.

kagingking n {1} growth on a bamboo which extends like a vine and has
thorns. It grows at the tips as branches. {2} k.o. spiny bamboo:
Bambusa spinosa.

kágis v [A; ab] scrape s.t. carefully so it is not damaged. Kagísa ang
pintal sa bungbung, Scrape the paint off the wall. {2} shave. Kagísan
únà ang pasyinti úsà upirahi, They shave the patient before operating.
paN- v [A2; b] shave oneself. -in- n scrapings.

kagiskis_1 n shrill, scraping, scratching sound. v [A; a12] make a
shrill, scraping sound. Nagkagiskis ang puthaw nga gikiskísan sa
pintal, There was a scratching sound as the paint was being scraped off
the metal.

kagiskis_2 = agis-is.

kagiskis_3 = agusahis.

kágit v [A; ac] make a creaking sound. Nikágit ang lansang dihang
giibut, The nail made a loud, creaking sound as he pulled it out.
Kagítun kung ákung ngípun, I’ll grit my teeth.

kagitkit n grinding, grating sound. v [A; b6] make a grinding, grating
sound. Mukagitkit ang sín ug gabsun, Galvanized iron produces a grating
sound if you saw on it. Magkagitkit ang lansang nga iwiriswiris sa
bungbung nga simintu, Nails produce a high-pitched screeching sound
when you grate them against cement.

kágiw see lagiw.

kagkag_1 a for hair to be standing up and going in every direction.
v [B1; a12] have hair going every which way. Nagkagkag man nang buhuk
mu, mu ra kag si Stukuski, Your hair is standing up and going in every
direction. You look like Stokowski.

kagkag_2 = kalagkag.

kagmu n snort of pigs or people when they are angry. paN- v [A] snort.
Nangagmu ang bábuy ihás, The wild pig snorted.

kagmud = agmud.

kagù = bagù_2.

kagubkub a {1} crunchy, crisp. Kagubkub kaáyug pánit ang inasal, The
roast pig has very crisp skin. {2} making a crunching sound. Kagubkub
pamatíun ang yílu nga giúsap, The ice he’s chewing sounds crunchy.
v {1} [B; a] be, become crisp. {2} [A; a12] make a crunching sound.

kagud v {1} [A; a] grind s.t. to shreds by rubbing or scraping it.
Kagdun (kagurun) ku ning ímung lubi, I’ll grate your coconut. {2} [b4]
abrade, wear off. Wà pa kagdi ang ligid, The tire is not worn down yet.
(←) v [C] have intercourse (slang). kaguran, kalagúran n shredder made
of a serrated metal circle attached to a piece of wood to scrape out
the coconut meat. paN-(←) n skin irritation of the toes characterized
by welt-like eruptions and extreme itching. It is said to be caused by
stepping in dung with the bare feet. The itching is relieved by an
action similar to that of shredding a coconut. -in- n shredded coconut
meat.

kagùkù_1 v {1} [A] make a hollow thumping sound. Ug mukagùkù ang
sambag, hinug na, When the tamarind rattles, it’s ripe. {2} [A; b3]
laugh with a deep, loud voice. Nahikagùkù akug katáwa sa íyang isturya,
I burst into loud laughter at his story. n {1} hollow sound in large
fruits; chugging sound of trains in motion. {2} a large k.o. sweet
pepper of the same type as is commercially grown in the States, so
called because it makes hollow sounds if you tap it.

kagùkù_2 n a large k.o. crab with a long, reddish body like a hermit
crab, but dwelling in its own shell. Inedible, but used as bait.

kagulángan n virgin forest, untouched by man.

kagulíyang n noisy confusion. Ang kagulíyang sa nanúgat sa artista, The
noise made by the people meeting the actress. v [A13; b3] be in noisy
confusion. Nagkagulíyang ang mga táwu sa súnug, The people broke into
noisy confusion at the fire.

kagulkul n noise made by the knocking of hollow and heavy things. v [A;
a] make a hollow, rattling sound. Nagkagulkul ang mga húlin sa kumúda,
The marbles rattled in the drawer. Mukagulkul kamu sa prisuhan, You
will rot (lit. rattle) in prison.

kagumkum a {1} crisp (but not so crisp as kagubkub). Kagumkum kaáyu ang
patátas, The cookies are somewhat crisp. {2} making a crunching, but
slightly prolonged sound. v [B; a] be crisp.

kagung_1 v [AN] {1} make a hollow sound when empty. {2} be empty, as if
producing such a hollow sound. Nipaúlì ku gíkang namasul nga mikagung
(nangagung) ang sakayan, I came home from fishing with an empty boat.

kagung_2 = kagungkung.

kagungkung n {1} the portion at the base of the spine of fowl just
above the triangular structure which holds the tail feathers (ísul).
{2} the analogous structure in mammals. v [B26N; b6] be, become skin
and bones (like the kagungkung which has little flesh or fat).
Mangagungkung (mukagungkung) ka kun dì ka mukáun, You will become very
thin if you do not eat. -un a bony, thin.

kagunkágun v [AC; ac3] go around as a group, take s.o. along with a
group. Daghang mukagunkágun nákù sa pagpangharána, A lot of people take
me around to go serenading. Dì ku makigkagunkágun sa mga palahúbug, I
don’t go around with drunkards.

kagupà, kagúpà n collective term for one’s blood relations. Aku ray
tituládu sa ámung kagúpà, I’m the only one in our clan that has a
degree.

kágus v [A; a] scrape s.t. that is hard and coarse. Nagkágus siyag
bagul, He is scraping a coconut shell.

kaguskus n dull, rustling sound. v [A; a12] make a dull, rustling
sound. Nagkaguskus siyang nanguskus sa dukut, He made a dull, rustling
sound, scraping the rice that stuck to the pot.

kágut n gnashing, grinding sound. v [a2] make a gnashing, grinding
sound. Nikágut ang ákung ngípun sa kalágut, I gnashed my teeth in
anger. Nagkágut ang galingan. Abdi, The grinder is making a grating
sound. Pour more grains into it.

kagutkut n sound made by s.t. gnawing away at s.t. or scraping s.t.
off. Ang kagutkut sa ilagang gakitkit sa kumúda, The gnawing sound of
the rats nibbling at the drawer. v [AN; c] make a continuous gnawing
sound. Nikagutkut ang tísas pagsulat nákù sa islít, The piece of chalk
made a scraping sound when I wrote on the slate. Ang kinagutkut sa
limbas, The scraping sound of the carpenter’s file.

kagwang n {1} flying squirrel. {2} a joking, half-affectionate
reference to a person implying a mild insult, general in nature but
nothing in particular, made in annoyance or amusement. Kagwang nímu nga
ímung gihúlug ang sulat nga way prangkíyu, You dodo! You mailed the
letter without stamps.

kagyu = kalagiw. see lagiw.

káha n {1} box, pack, case made to contain s.t. Duha ka káhang
sigarilyu, Two packs of cigarettes. {2} cash register. {3} safe. —
diyíru n steel safe. — sa trák body of a truck. v {1} [A; a12] make
into a case or boxes. Gwápu nang ímung gikaháan ang radiyu, The radio
looks nice now that you’ve made a case for it. {2} [A; c] put into a
cash box, register. kahíru n cashier. v [B15; a12] be a cashier. kahíra
= kahíru (female).

kahà = kayhà.

káhà = kaláhà.

káham v {1} [A; c1] touch with the whole hand. Ang mukáham sa pagkáun
manghunaw, Whoever touches food should wash his hands. Ikáham (kaháma)
ang íyang líug kun gihilantan ba, Feel her neck to see if she has a
fever. {2} [AN; a12] touch for sexual purposes. Dúnay báyut nga
nangáham nákù sa sinihan, A homosexual tried to touch me in the movie
house. {3} [A; a] steal. Wà hibaw-i ang mikáham sa mga aláhas, No one
knows who stole the jewelry. -in- a s.t. that is one’s favorite. Ang
kináham kung pagkáun, My favorite food. Kináham níyang basahúnun, His
favorite reading matter. Kináham níyang prugráma, His favorite program.
v [B1256] become one’s favorite.

kahamkaham n k.o. edible, greenish-brown seaweed, not highly esteemed.

kahangay_1 v [A; b6] dare touch s.t. forbidden. Way mukahangay sa ákung
gamit ayug latiguhun, Nobody dares touch my instruments for fear of
getting whipped. Ayawg kahangyi nà kay wà pa mahuman, Don’t dare touch
that because it’s not done.

kahangay_2 v [A13; b6] {a} do s.t. to while away the time or in one’s
spare time. Nagkahangay kug basabása samtang nagpaábut níya, I read the
papers to while away the time while I was waiting. {b} do s.t. as one’s
avocation during spare time. Nagkahangay siyag pangahintig mintiryu,
She sells cemetery lots in her spare time.

kahápun = kagahápun. see gahápun.

káhas v [AN; a2] {1} have the audacity to get or use s.t. without the
consent of the proper person. Gikáhas sa asáwa ang ílang tinígum arun
ipalit ug tíbi, The wife had the nerve to take their savings to buy a
T.V. set. Gikáhas níyag baligyà ang bábuy, He took it upon himself to
sell the pig. Gikáhas ug lúgì sa íyang anak ang ílang kalubihan, His
son had the nerve to harvest their coconuts. {2} embezzle. Ang tisuríru
nga mikáhas sa pundu, The treasurer who embezzled the funds. pangáhas
v [A2; b5] {1} do s.t. one should not. Ayaw giyug pangáhas ug paúlì nga
mag-inusára sa kagabhíun, Don’t dare go home alone at night. {1a} abuse
s.o. sexually. Buut ku siyang pangahásan, I wanted to abuse her.
{2} dare do s.t. that takes courage. Dì ku mangáhas pagtabuk samtang
bahà pa, I don’t dare cross while the river is in flood stage. mapaN-un
n daring to do s.t. forbidden.

kahátì = kalahátì.

kahid-un = kaihiun. see íhì.

káhig v [A; a] bring s.t. to one or push s.t. away with an instrument
or, analogically, with the hand or foot. Kahígan ku ning daspan sa
sagbut, I’ll sweep the rubbish into the dustpan. Ikáhig (kahíga) ang
túbig ngadtu sa kanal, Sweep the water towards the canal. dala sa —
swept along with the majority. Pagpanglíup sa mga kawáni, apil sad
siya, nadá sa káhig, When there was a layoff of the employees, he was
included, swept along by the tide. Hugut siyag kumbiksiyun, dílì madá
sa káhig, He has strong convictions, he can’t be swept along by the
majority. (→) n implement used to rake, poke, push things.

kahil_1 v {1} [A; a1b2] touch, brush lightly against s.t. Nagkahil ang
dáhun sa alambris kuryinti, The leaf is in contact with the electric
wire. Kahila ug hínay sa lipak arun dílì mapakling, Touch it lightly
with the bamboo stick so that it won’t fall over. {2} [A; b6] do an
activity to a lesser degree than usual. Wà gánì ku makakahil níya,
haluk na hinúun, I haven’t even touched her, much less kissed her.

kahil_2 n k.o. small, green, somewhat bitter orange which turns yellow
when overripe: Citrus aurantium. -áda n lemonade, orangeade. v [A; a2]
make lemonade.

kahimtang see butang_1.

kahir v [A3P; a] entice, lead s.o. to do s.t. not good for him. Dì aku
makahir sa ímung pangatarúngan, I cannot be swayed by your reasoning.
Nakahir siya sa usa ka mamaligyag isdà, He fell for a fish vendor.
Bísag karmilítus lay ikahir sa bátà, You can easily attract a child
with candies.

kahíra, kahíru see káha.

kahis = kalis.

kahista n typesetter. v [B156] become a typesetter.

kahíta n small box, case. Kahíta sa aláhas, Jewel box.

kahug, káhug v {1} [A1; ac] mix moist and dry ingredients together.
Kahugun ku ning tahup ug kinagud nga lubi, I’ll mix the corn bran with
shredded coconut. Kahugi ang makarúni sa mayunis, Mix the mayonnaise
into the macaroni. {2} [A; a] stir s.t. thick. Kahúga ang linúgaw arun
dílì mudukut, Stir the porridge so it won’t stick.

kahun n {1} box. {2} square or rectangular section in a rice paddy.
Napúlù ka kahun ang íyang pilapilan, There are ten square partitions in
his rice paddy. {3} group of fives in tallying (four vertical lines and
one slanting line). v {1} [A; a] make into a box. {2} [a12] divide into
square, rectangular sections. {3} [A12] obtain groups of fives. Sa
pag-iskutinyu wà gánì makakahun ang átung kandidátu, When the ballots
were counted our candidate did not even get a score of five. -in-
n enclosed in boxes. Mga kinahun nag íyang dala, The things were all
enclosed in boxes. -is = kahun, 3 (plural).

káhuy n {1} tree. {2} wood, firewood. {3} búngang — fruit tree.
v {1} [A12] obtain firewood. Nakakahuy (nakakáhuy) giyud mi sa ginubà
sa ámung balay, We had firewood when our house was demolished. {2} [a]
make into firewood. Kahúyun nátù ning gubang kural, We’ll make this
broken fence into firewood. {3} [a2] steal by picking the pocket
(slang). Gikáhuy ang íyang pitáka didtu sa Kulun, S.o. picked his
wallet downtown. (→) v [B4] for muscles to get stiff with fatigue.
Nagkahuy ang ákung abága sa pagpinas-ag kupras, My shoulders are stiff
from carrying sacks of copra. paN- v [A2; b6] {1} cut down and gather
firewood. Didtu sila mangáhuy sa búkid, They were in the mountains
gathering firewood. {2} take parts from an engine. Gipangahúyan níla
ang trák daut, They cannibalized the broken-down truck. {3} [A2; b(1)]
steal by picking. Ang babáying gipangahúyan sa íyang trisintus, The
woman who had three hundred stolen from her. pangahuykáhuy v [A] for
muscles to get stiff with fatigue. Undang na tag pangarga kay
nangahuykáhuy na ang ákung háwak, Let’s stop loading now because my
waist is getting stiff. -in- n {1} fuel gathered. {2} s.t. shoplifted,
cannibalized. ka-an(→) n woods. maN-r-/l-(→) n woodcutter. kahuykahuy
n k.o. weed roughly resembling a full grown tree in structure, growing
up to 1½′, the leaves of which are used as a poultice to stop bleeding.
tig- n {1} log with branches cut off. {2} twigs. v [A; a] gather, cut
down wood for firewood. Mitigkáhuy ku sa íyang tinápuk, I gathered the
wood he had piled up. talig- n = tigkáhuy. v [A2N] gather logs for a
house. Manaligkáhuy ta. Magbáy ra ba ta, Let’s gather logs because
we’re going to build a house. -un a coarse, like wood.

kahúyung n variety of rice.

kaimítu = kaymítu.

kain = háin (dialectal).

kaína = ganíha.

kaing n large, cylindrical, rattan basket loosely woven in a hexagonal
design, 3′ tall by 2′ across. v [A; a12] make, make into a kaing.

kaíngin n {1} slash and burn agriculture. {2} area in the forest
cleared by burning for agriculture, of temporary or permanent nature.
v [A; b5] make a clearing in a forest for agricultural purposes. -iru
n one who practices slash and burn agriculture.

kaintì n variety of rice.

kairil = kayril.

kák v [A; c1] cock a firearm. Gáhì kákun (ikák) ang gáran, It takes a
great effort to cock the garand rifle. a cocked. Kák na dáan ang íyang
pistula, His pistol was already cocked.

káka = kàkà_2.

kakà n k.o. grayish-brown spider with a body the size of a pea that
spins webs in trees.

kákà n children’s word for female genitalia.

kàkà_1 n tobacco tars. v [B246; a4b4] get filled up with tobacco tars.
Mukàkà (kàkáan, kàkáun) na gánì ang hunsuy, limpiyúhi, If the pipe gets
filled with tar, clean it.

kàkà_2 a stammering, having a speech impediment whereby one repeats the
beginning sounds of what he is trying to get out. v [B; b6] speak in a
stammering way.

kákak n {1} cackle. {2} how a person reacts. Makítà ra giyud ang kákak
ánang tawhána kun makaingkuwintrug buguy, We’ll see what k.o. a fellow
that man is when he runs into a bully. v [A] {1} cackle. {2} chicken
out, coward. Mu rag ísug apan kun suklan giyud, mukákak diay, He
appears tough but if you challenge him, he runs away. {3} [A; b3] for a
woman to squawk with displeasure. Nagkákak ang asáwa kay dúgayng miulì
ang bána, The wife is squawking because her husband came home late.

kakas v [A; a] {1} detach s.t. that has been stitched or similarly
attached. Kinsay nagkakas niíning ginansilyu? Who undid this
crochet-work? Kakasa (kaksa) na lang ang gubà nga atup, Tear off the
worn-out part of the roof. {2} uproot vines in clearing an area.
Gikaksan na ang kamutihan, The sweet potato patch has been cleared of
old vines. -in- n {1} thin membrane which encases the small intestines
of pigs and attaches it to the rear wall of the abdominal cavity, used
for wrapping murkun. {2} = ilugun, n. see ílug.

kakaw n cacao.

kakawáti = madri kakaw.

kakha v [AN; ab2] scrape, scratch out s.t loose. Nangakha ang túru úsà
mudasmag, The bull kicked the ground before charging. Nagkakha ug
pagkáun ang manuk, The chicken is scratching around for food. — tukà, —
tuhak a hand-to-mouth existence.

káki n {1} khaki cloth. {2} khaki color. {3} brown one-centavo piece.
v {1} [A13] wear khaki or s.t. khaki-colored. {2} [B6] become khaki in
color.

kakin = nakinnákin.

kaktil n cocktail drink.

kaktus n cactus.

kakyup n {1} yesterday (dialectal). {2} late in the afternoon, evening
(dialectal).

kál_1 a an egg-layer which has stopped laying at a profitable rate.
v [B2; b6] for an egg-layer to have ceased laying profitably.

kál_2 n cal, a white powder used as a whitener for shoes. v [A; b]
whiten with cal. Káli ang sapátus putì, Apply cal to white shoes. (←)
v [B1245] get cal splattered over it. -iru_2 n {1} kiln for burning
limestone or seashells to obtain lime. {2} any big fire for roasting or
burning s.t. or obtaining s.t. v [A; c1] make a kiln or a large fire to
obtain s.t.

kalába (not without l) n honeycomb. Ang tálu gíkan sa kalába, Beeswax
comes from the honeycomb. v [AN] form or build a honeycomb.

kalab-ánan = kalabánan. see lában.

kalabanghan = balbangáan.

kalabantus = karabansus.

kalabásà n squash of various varieties: Cucurbita maxima. — nga putì
general name for squashes with light-green skin and white flesh:
Lagenaria leucantha. see also balantíyung, tabáyag, tambalíyung. — nga
pula n {1} general term for squashes and pumpkins with red or orange
meat. {2} zero grade. Kalbásà ang ákung nakúhà, I got a zero.
{2a} failure of grades or ratings. v [B126N] be a failure as a student.
Ayaw pagbuguybúguy sa ímung pagtuun kay makalabásà (mangalabásà) ka
unyà, Don’t play hooky from school or you’ll fail.

kalábat v {1} [A2; c] reach up to an amount or length of time. Ang
húlaw nakakábat giyud ug tulu ka búlan, The dry season lasted for three
months. Ikábat ug singkuwinta ka tápuk ang inasal, Make the roast pig
do for fifty portions. {2} [A2; a] go as far as. Kabátun ku ang mga
bitúun álang kanímu, I’ll go to the stars for you. {3} [A; a] walk
holding on s.t. Gikabátan sa bátà ang mga silya, The child walked
holding onto the chair. -an(→) n s.t. one holds onto while walking.

kalabaw n carabao, water buffalo. dakung — fully grown, old enough.
Dakù ka nang kábaw wà gihápun kay buut, You’re fully grown now but you
still are irresponsible. -in- v {1} [A; a12] work like a carabao.
Nagkinábaw ku pagtrabáhu arun mu mabuláhan, I work like a horse to give
you a better life. {2} [A13] have sexual relations. Ada, mag-agaw lag
maadlaw, kun gabíi magkinábaw, They pretend to be cousins during the
day but at night they have sexual relations. n stage in an infant’s
development before it actually crawls. -un a {1} having thick and big
feet like a carabao’s. {2} having a pregnancy that lasts more than nine
months or so. Kabáwun siyang nagmabdus, She’s like a carabao in this
pregnancy (having passed nine months without giving birth).

kalabíra n skeleton, skull. v [BN] become a skeleton or like one.
Nangalabíra (nakalabíra, nikalabíra) na intawun ang íyang lawas, His
body has become skin and bones. marka — n {1} skull and cross-bones.
{2} poisonous preparation.

kalabkab v [A; b] {1} fan a fire. Nagkabkab siya sa kaláyu sa
pagpasíga, He fanned the fire to make it catch. paN- v [A] fan oneself.
Nangabkab siya sa kaínit, He fanned himself because it was so hot.
n {1} hand fan. {2} delicacy made of flour or cassava flour baked thin
and crisp in the shape of a large fan. a having large ears (humorous).

kalábu = klábu.

kalabus, kalabúsu (not without l) n jail. v [B125] land in prison, in
jail. Nakalabus ra giyud ang kriminal, The criminal finally went to
jail.

kaladángan n name for a large variety of fish similar to porgies.

kaladkad v [A3P] boil. Ug mukaladkad ang nilúgaw, If the porridge
boils.

kaládu (not without l) n k.o. embroidery stitch with a mesh design,
usually done on fine fabric. v [a12] make a mesh design on.

kalag n {1} soul. Kaluy-an mu ang kalag ni Luísa, Have mercy on the
soul of Louisa. {1a} a person as reckoned for count. Walà giyuy bisag
usa ka kalag nagtikawtikaw sa íla, Not a soul stirred in the house.
{1b} walay — a heartless, cruel. Wà kay kág, wà kay kalúuy, You’re
heartless, without mercy. {2} ghost. {3} human skeleton showing itself
as a ghost. Naingun kag kalag sa kaníwang, You’re as thin as a
skeleton. — sa animas thin as a soul in purgatory. v [A; a12b2] for a
ghost to haunt s.o. Mamatay gánì ku kágun (kalgun) tikaw, If I die,
I’ll haunt you. Hikalgan siya sa íyang asáwa, He was haunted by his
wife’s ghost. paN- [b8] for a ghost to come back to earth. kalagkálag
n {1} All Souls’ Day or a small party of prayers and eating on All
Souls’ Day, in honor of the dead. {2} = plasíbu, n, 1. v [A1] {1} hold
such a celebration on All Souls’ Day. Káda adlaw sa minatay
magkalagkálag giyud mi, Every year on All Souls’ Day we hold a
celebration. {2} = plasíbu, v. pangalagkálag v [A2; b6] {1} go to
s.o.’s home to celebrate the All Souls’ Day ritual. {2} = pamlasíbu.
kalagkalag v [a4] get a sickness caused by the soul of a departed
relative. Walay duktur nga makaáyus íyang sakit. Gikalagkalag man diay
nà siyas íyang lúlu, No doctor can cure his disease. He is suffering
from an affliction caused by the soul of his grandfather. kalagnun
a spiritual.

kalagiw see lagiw.

kalagkag v [A; a] loosen soil, flour, and the like, breaking small
lumps into fine particles. Nagkalagkag pa ku sa harína nga ákung
ayágun, I’m breaking up the lumps in the flour I’m going to sift.

kalagu n dogs having long, shaggy, and curly hair.

kaláhà n frying pan with a rounded bottom and a handle.

kalahátì n {1} coin of the early 1900’s worth twenty centavos. {2} s.o.
who shares with or is part of. Ang ákung mga anak mauy kahátì nákù sa
pagtagad sa ákung bána, My children and I share my husband’s attention.

kalàkalà n {1} croaking sound of frogs. {2} sputtering sound of
defective engines. {3} sound of s.t. boiled at a stage when the water
and the material boiled has formed a soft and thick mass. v [A3] croak,
sputter. Mukalàkalà giyud ang mga bakì sa panahun sa ting-ulan, Frogs
croak on rainy days. Ipatan-aw ang trák kay nagkalàkalà ang tíngug,
Have the car checked because the engine sputters.

kaláki see láki_2.

kalakkalak n sputtering sound of a defective machine. v [B46; b6] for a
defective machine to sputter. Mukalakkalak ang makina ug náay dipiktu,
The sewing machine will sputter when there’s s.t. wrong with it.

kalam v [A; a] plow by describing a spiral starting at the outer edge
of the field. Kalamun nákù pagdáru arun maapil ang mga daplin, I’ll
plow the field circularly so that the outer edges are also plowed.
n spiral described by this manner of plowing.

kálam (not without l) v [A; a2] {1} search, look for. Mukálam pa siya
sa íyang hunsuy nga nawā̀, He still has to look for the pipe he lost.
Labihan nakakálam ang pulis sa gipangítang kawatan, How the policeman
looked for the thief that was wanted! Kaláma ang dinakpan ug wà bay
armas, Search the prisoner to see if he is armed. {2} earn a living.
Inyung amahan ang nagkálam sa átung gikaun, It is your father who earns
what we eat.

kalamalunggay = kalamunggay.

kalamansi, kalamansì (not without l) = limunsítu.

kalamantígì n ornamental annual growing to 2′ high, bearing red, white,
and pink flowers, and fleshy capsules which burst when touched:
Impatiens balsamina.

kalámay n {1} sugar. {2} brown sugar (as opposed to asúkar). v {1} [A1;
a2] make sugar. {2} [B5] become sugar. Kun itúsun ang tubà mukámay
(makámay) diay, Palm toddy can also be made into sugar by crystallizing
it. (→) v [A; c] {1} put sugar into. Kamayan tang ímung tsá? Shall I
put sugar in your tea? {2} sweet-talk s.o. Ímu na pud kung gikamayan,
You’re giving me sweet talk again. {2a} bisan -an pa no matter what
inducement is given (even if you put sugar on it). Bísag kamayan pa, dì
giyud ku musugut níya, I wouldn’t accept him for all the tea in China.
{3} [B246] for coconut taffy to fail to turn out and become crystalline
and sandy. Daling mukamay ang kukunat ug kúwang sa lubi, The coconut
taffy comes out sandy if you don’t use enough coconut milk. {4} [A; a]
(not without l) make kalamay. n (not without l) sweets made from ground
sticky rice boiled with the juice of coconut meat and brown sugar.

kalamayu, kalamáyu n an acute infection which has swollen and become
red, but not yet open or oozing. v [BN; a4] be acutely inflamed.
Nangalamáyu (nikalamáyu, nakalamáyu, gikalamáyu) ang íyang samad, His
wound became acutely inflamed.

kalambíbat = kabíbat.

kalambitay = kulumbitay.

kalambri_1 (not without l) n cramp. v [BN; a4b4] get a cramp.
Nikalambri (nakalambri, nangalambri) ang íyang tiil sa dúgayng hinúmul
sa túbig, He got a cramp in his legs because he stayed in the water too
long. Ang mabdus dalì kaáyung kalambríhun (kalambríhan), Pregnant women
are easily attacked by sudden and painful cramps.

kalambri_2 n cuss word, fairly strong, but which can also be used with
a light note of humor, expressing annoyance. Kalambri ning tawhána,
manúgug paningil íning wà pay swildu, Damn, this man. He tries to
collect from me before I even get paid!

kalambúra = karambúla.

kalamidad n calamity.

kalamri = kalambri1, 2.

kalamúhuy n k.o. fish.

kalamúkat see lamúkat.

kalamundì, kalamundin, kalamunding (not without l) = limunsítu.

kalamunggay n {1} small, rapidly growing cultivated tree, with thrice
pinnate leaves, the leaflets of which are one of the most popularly
eaten vegetables in the Visayas: Moringa oleifera. {2} clubs in playing
cards.

kalamutsing = kamuritsing. see muritsing.

kalan, kálan (not without l) n small portable stove made of clay.
v [a12] make into such a stove.

kalandátay v [B; c1] for a conversation to drag on, going from one
subject to another. Nakalandátay ang isturya kay púlus na hubug, The
conversation went on and on because everybody had one drink too many.

kalandrákas n things of all different kinds and varieties coming at
once. Ang kalandrákas sa inadlawng pagkinabuhì, The various activities
of daily life. v [A; a12] be a conglomeration of various things or
kinds. Magkalandrákas lang ang mahisgutan sa mga tapuktápuk, They talk
about all different things in their gatherings. Kalandrakása pagpalit
ang mga kulur, Buy all different colors.

kálang (not without l) n portion of a field which has been plowed at
one time. v [A1; b5] plow a certain portion of the field. Nakakálang na
sila sa katungà sa daruhan, They had already plowed half of the field.
Ang duul sa sapà mauy ákung kalangun (kalangan) pag-úna, I’ll clear up
the part near the river first.

kal-ang n {1} gap. Adtu lapus sa kal-ang sa paril, Pass through the gap
in the wall (or between the two walls). {2} distance in time or space
between two things. Ang kal-ang sa ílang pangidarun, The gap in their
ages. v [B5; c1] be located with gaps in between. Kal-ángi ang mga
silya arun dílì magkinupyahánay, Place your chairs far apart so you
won’t be copying from each other. -an(→)n space between two things. Ang
kal-angan sa sini ug iskuylahan gitukúran ug balay, A house is built in
the space between the movie house and the school. -in-an(→) n place
where there is the biggest gap.

kalangkálang (not without l) v [A; a12] estimate, consider s.t.
carefully. Ikaw ra ang mukalangkálang ug makaáyu ba nímu, Weigh it
carefully yourself whether it would do you any good. Aku ray
mukalangkálang nga maígù ang pagkáun sa tanan, I’ll ration the food out
so that it will go around. n estimation, consideration. Sa ákung
kalangkálang mudaug giyud ang prutista ni Usminya, As I see it,
Osmeña’s protest will be successful.

kálap_1 v [AN; a] look for medicinal plants. Mukálap kag tambal didtu
sa patayng búlan, You must look for medicinal herbs when there is no
moon. Unsang mga tambála ákung kalápun? What medicinal plants shall I
get? paN- v [A2S] look for s.t. one wants to obtain but is not easy to
find. Makapangálap kag kwarta basta imirdyinsi, You have to scramble
about to find money if it’s an emergency. -in- n medicinal plants
gathered. Ang sulud sa básu mga kinálap nga gamut, The glass contained
medicinal roots.

kálap_2 v [A; b(1)] {1} touch, tinker, play with s.t. forbidden.
Latusun ku ang magkáp sa gamitun, I’ll whip anyone who tinkers with the
tools. Gikápan giyud ang tigib kay nagíbang, S.o. must have played with
the chisel because it got nicked. {2} tease, play a joke on s.o.
{3} [AN] engage in petty stealing. Bantáyi siyang musulud kay mukáp nà,
Watch him if he comes in because he lifts things. kalapkálap v [A3]
tinker, try one’s hand at s.t. new. Namikaniku siya kay ganáhan
mukapkáp ug makina, He became a mechanic because he likes to tinker
with machines.

kalapáti (not without l) v {1} [A; b5] calk, make s.t. watertight by
filling the seams or cracks. Gikalapatíhan (gikalapáti) ang tanang
sinumpayan sa káhuy nga mikang-a, All the wooden joints that came loose
have been calked. {2} [B1; b6(1)] be covered with s.t. sticky and
dirty. Nagkalapáti ang nawung sa bátà sa bábul gam, The child’s face is
smeared with sticky bubble gum. Ayaw pagdúwà sa taguk sa nangkà kay
makakalapáti (makapakalapáti) nà sa kamut mu, Don’t play with the
sticky sap of jackfruit, as it will get your hands all sticky.

kalapi_1 n k.o. thin and thorny rattan used in fishing equipment
because of its resistance to salt water. It produces clusters of
edible, sour berries: Calamus sp.

kalapi_2 (not without l) a a defect in coconut trees manifested by the
fronds, such that the lowest fronds do not hang but tend to be vertical
and easily break off. v [B1456] for a coconut tree to be of this sort.

kalapíti = kalapáti, 2.

kalapitsi = karapitsi.

kalapkap v [AN; b5] go to a woman’s bed to have intercourse with her
without her knowledge.

kalapúti = kalapáti, 2.

kaláru = kláru.

kalas_1 (not without l) v {1} [A; a] rake out s.t. that is growing,
harrow. Kinahanglan kalasun ang mga sagbut samtang wà pay ulan, You
must rake out the weeds before the rains come. Ímung kalasan ug úna ang
dapit sa sapà, First harrow the part which is near the brook.
{1a} [a12] make into a harrow, rake. {2} [A; b1c] give the owner of
gambling equipment a rake-off. Kalasan námù ang ímung baráha kun
magpúkir mi, You will get a rake-off for your cards when we play poker.
Kalasi si Pidru, Give Pedro his rake-off. n {1} rake, harrow.
{2} rake-off to the owner of gambling paraphernalia. maN-r- n one who
lets people gamble with his equipment for a rake-off.

kalas_2 (not without l) v {1} [B12; a12] die in a disaster, accident,
war. Kadaghang way lábut ang nakalas sa gúbat sa Byitnam, A lot of
innocent people died in the war in Vietnam. Kalasun kamung tanan, You
will all meet your death. {2} [a3] be destroyed, annihilated. Daghang
ayruplánu ang nakalas sa Pirl Harbur, Many planes were destroyed at
Pearl Harbor. (←) a (with l droppable) wasteful, using in an
extravagant way. Kás kaáyu sa panahun ang ar-utísi, ROTC is a big waste
of time. Kanang plantsáha kás ug kuryinti, That iron uses more
electricity than necessary. v [A2; a2] waste, use wastefully. Ayaw
kalása paggáwì ang túbig, Don’t waste the water. -an a wasteful, using
more than necessary. Kalasan ka kaáyug papil, You use paper wastefully.

kalásag (not without l) n {1} shield. {2} defense. Ang pagkamatárung
mauy bugtung níyang kalásag bátuk sa dautan, Righteousness is his sole
defense against evil.

kalasíkas n rustling sound like that produced by the motion of leaves.
v {1} [A3; c1] produce this k.o. rustling sound. Kasikása (ikasíkas)
ang mga dáhun arun sila mahadluk, Rustle the leaves so they’ll be
afraid. {2} [A1] bustle about in preparation for s.t. Mikasíkas ang mga
tagibalángay kay nagkaduul na ang pyista, The people are bustling about
with the fiesta approaching. Hápit ka na mugíkan, wà pa ka kakasíkas!
It’s nearly time to leave and you haven’t made any preparations! — sa
panahun n doings, activities of constant and ordinary nature.

kalaskálas n {1} = angalaskálas. {2} name given to tiny inedible crabs
that dig holes in the sand.

kalaskas n a bird which appears at night, believed to be an unglù which
has assumed this form. So called from its purported sound: kas-kas.

kalat, kálat_1 v [A; b6(1)] cane with bamboo or rattan. Kamau kang
mukalat ug síya? Do you know how to cane a chair? n s.t. caned from
bamboo or rattan. Buslut ang kalat sa katri, The caned portion of the
bed is broken.

kálat_2 v {1} [AB46; c] be scattered in a confused manner, cause s.t.
to be so. Kinsay nagkálat sa mga duwáan sa sáwug? Who scattered the
toys all over the floor? Hipúsa ang mga papil nga nagkálat sa salug,
Gather the pieces of paper scattered all over the floor. Ayaw ikálat
ang mga bulingun sa salug, Don’t scatter the soiled clothes on the
floor. {2} [A; cP] for news, rumors to spread. Mikálat ang hulungíhung
báhin sa ribulusiyun, There were rumors about a revolution that began
to spread.

kalatkat v [A; ac] climb up s.t. using the hands and feet: climb to
get, bring. Nikatkat ang bátà sa lamísa, The child climbed up on the
table. Katkátun gihápun nà sa iring dihà, The cat can still climb up
there to get it. — sa kapáyas v [A] have intercourse with a woman
(humorous). Inigdunggù giyus bána mukatkat giyud sa kapáyas pagkagabíi,
As soon as the husband arrives from abroad, you can be sure he’s going
to get him some papayas that night.

kalatsutsi n frangipani, k.o. ornamental tree planted for its flowers:
Plumiera spp.

kalátung (not without l) n knocker made from a section of a bamboo with
a slit on the side. It is resonant and is rapped to call or send
signals.

kálaw n hornbill bird: Buceros hydrocorax.

kaláwan v [A23; cP] be somewhat raised, get somewhat off the ground.
Ang salug sa balay mikáwan lag usa ka pí gíkan sa yútà, The floor of
the house is elevated about a foot from the ground. Nakakáwan nag
ayruplánu sa pag-abut námù sa irpurt, The plane had already gotten off
the ground when we got to the airport. see also kawankawan.

kaláwat (from dáwat) v {1} [AN2; b(1)] take Holy Communion. Nakakalawat
(nakapangaláwat) ka rung Duminggúha? Did you take communion this
Sunday? {2} [A; a12] accept s.t. as true. Dílì ku mukaláwat árung mga
pangatarúngan mu, I will not accept any of your reasons. {3} receive,
accept (Biblical). Kalawátun mu ba si Kurdaping nga ímung asáwa? Do you
take Kordaping as your wife? n Holy Communion. -an(→), -ánan
n communion railing.

kalaw-it v [AN; b25] {1} get s.t. with a hook, hook s.t. onto s.t.
Mikaw-it (nangaw-it) siya sa ákung líug, She hooked her arm around my
neck. Átung kaw-ítun (kaw-ítan) ang kaimítu, We’ll hook the star apple
and pull it down. Íyang gikaw-it ang kawit sa íyang abága, He hooked
the bamboo palm toddy container to his shoulders. {2} capture as the
result of having run into by accident. Ang patrulya nakakaw-it ug
kumpit sa ismaglir, The patrol ran into a smuggler’s boat and captured
it. {3} s.t. with a hook on it to pull things out of reach to one.
-an(→), -ánann hook onto which s.t. is hung.

kálay n k.o. children’s game similar to marbles played with cowries.
v [AC2; b(1)] play kálay.

kalaykay_1 v {1} [A; ab2] dig up s.t. with the hands, hoe up s.t. in a
scratching manner. Nagkaykay siyag kamúti, He is digging up sweet
potatoes. {2} [A; b5] press hard with the finger tips in the pit of the
stomach to massage it in a manner similar to scratching. Mukalma ang
kabúhì ug kalaykáyun (kalaykáyan) ang tiyan, A burning stomach calms
down when you massage it in a digging motion. n hoe.

kalaykay_2 n a k.o. tellin clams, about 1½″ long and 1″ wide,
sand-colored and found in the sand along the shore.

kaláyu n fire. v [B2S6] {1} grow into, be on fire. Nakáyu ang bága nga
giitsa sa basúra, The ember thrown into the garbage turned into a fire.
{2} be on fire with an emotion. Nagkalayu siya sa kalágut, He was
fuming with rage. {3} spark, produce sparks. Nagkayu ang ismiril sa
dihang gidaítul ang amul, The sharpener gave off sparks when the bolo
was pressed against it. kayukayu v {1} [A] for cooking utensils or
burners to produce sparks while cooking s.t. {2} [B1456] for love to be
burning. -in-(→) n boiled corn on the cob. kakalayúhan n fires of hell.

kalbaryu n {1} calvary. {2} situation causing intense mental suffering.
Kalbaryu nákù ning pagtuun ug sista, Learning to play the guitar is
utter torture to me. v [B126] become a calvary.

kalbásà = kalabásà.

kalbu n bald-headed. v [B1] be bald-headed.

kalbúru = karbúru.

kaldíra n {1} boiler of steam engines. {2} seat of one’s emotions as
the source of ardent feelings. v [A; a2] install, make into a boiler.

kaldirin see kaldíru.

kaldiríta_1 see kaldíru.

kaldiríta_2, kaldirítas n {1} a stew of goat’s meat and spices.
{2} stewed dog’s meat (humorous). v [A; a] make goat stew.

kaldíru n metal pot, usually flat-bottomed. baryu nga way — cemetery
(humorous). kaldirin n cooking pot, cylindrical in shape, usually made
of galvanized sheet metal, and flat-bottomed. kaldiríta_1 n light metal
pot with flat bottom, usually for storing food.

kaldíyu n egg drop soup, usually with a fish base but may be made of a
different base. v [A1; a] make egg drop soup.

kaldu n {1} soup made by sauteeing meat and spices to which broth has
been added.{2} bowl, cup to hold soup. v [A1; a] make soup. kalduhan
n tiny cup for chocolate.

kalgas n animal flea. v [a4] have a skin disease characterized by
small, itchy pyramid-shaped eruptions. It spreads when scratched.
-un(→) a having this type of skin disease.

kalhang = kal-ang.

kalhay_1 v [AB1N; a] {1} make big tears in s.t. Nagkalhay (nangakalhay)
ang íyang sinínà, Her dress was all tattered. {2} destroy utterly.
Nakalhay ang taytáyan sa bumba, The bridge was utterly destroyed by the
bombs.

kalhay_2 a for grains or powder to be dry and not stuck into lumps.
Kalhay ang balas nga uga, Dry sand is loose. v [AB2; a2] for grains or
powder to be, become dry and loose, cause them to be so. Ag-ága ang
harína arun makalhay, Sift the flour to make it nice and powdery.
Kinsay mukalhay (magkalhay) sa nagbúgul nga yapak? Who will break up
the lumpy soil?

káli v [A; a] gather root crops by digging. Magkáli (mangáli) tag
balanghuy, Let us dig some cassava. kalihun a mature root crops (ready
for digging).

kalibhay = kalìhay.

kalibkib n the slivers of coconut meat and brown exterior portion which
remain after the meat of the coconut has been shredded. binday nga -un
woman’s sex organ that is thin like the kalibkib.

kalibri_1 n {1} caliber, quality, ability. Mau nay kalibri sa táwung
húmuk masukù, That is the k.o. man that gets angry easily. {2} caliber
of a bullet or firearm.

kalibri_2 (from libri) n k.o. cassava with red stems. It may be eaten
with little cooking without poisoning effect in contrast to other
varieties. It is so called from the phrase makalibri sa kagútum ‘save
from starvation’.

kalibugan see líbug.

kalidad n {1} quality. Maáyug kalidad ang panaptun, The cloth is of
good quality. {2} kind, sort. Unsa may kalidad sa íyang pagkatáwu? What
k.o. a person is he? -is(←)_1 a of various kinds. v [B1; a1] be of
various types. Nagkalidádis lang ang ákung tinda, I sell all sorts of
goods. — ang tíngug for the voice to change pitch in fear. Basta
malísang ku, makalidádis dáyun ang ákung tíngug, When I get frightened
my voice gets uncontrolled.

kalidádis_2 n k.o. small sweet potato with an orange flesh and dark-red
skin.

kálids n {1} college. {2} one in college. Kálids ka na? Kabátà pa gud
nímu! Are you already in college? You sure are young for that! v [B6]
be in college. Mukálids na siya sa sunud abli, She will be in college
next schoolyear.

kálids swing n college swing, a k.o. old-fashioned permanent wave where
the hair is cut up to the nape of the neck. v [A; c1] wear a college
swing permanent.

kaligkig = kigkig, 3, 4. paN- = pangigkig. see kigkig.

kaligutgut = aligutgut_2.

kalìhay v [A; c] carry s.t. by having it slung over the shoulders.
Nagkalìhay ug pusil ang mga mangangáyam, The hunters had shotguns slung
over their shoulders.

kalíhim n secretary, an official in charge of a department of the
government. v [B1256] become a secretary.

kalimbagas v [A] run as fast as one can to get away from s.t.
Mikalimbagas siya ug dágan paghitungud sa mintiryu, He ran as fast as
he could as he passed the cemetery. Kábaw nga nagkalimbagas ug
ginukdánay, The mad rushing of carabaos running after one another.

kalimpus n a variety of white-grained paddy rice.

kalimutaw, kalimútaw n {1} iris or pupil of the eye. Mudakù ang
kalimutaw sa iring ug magabíi, A cat’s eyes grow large in the evening.
{2} by extension, eyeball. Ang nagbudlat níyang kalimutaw, His bulging
eyeballs.

kalindaryu n calendar. káwas, lápas na sa — for a girl to be above
thirty (and get beyond a marriageable age—lit. go beyond the calendar).

kalinding = kalíring.

kaling n small dried anchovies. -in-(←) = kaling.

káling v {1} [AB6; c1] turn over on the side, cause s.t. to do so.
Mukáling ang kúlun nga ibutang sa lamísa nga way bangil kay língin ang
lubut, If you put a clay pot on the table without a support it will
turn over on its side because it is round-bottomed. Kalínga (ikáling)
ang mga libru sa lamísa básin nadat-ugan ang sulat mu, Turn the books
over on the side. Maybe the letter is just underneath them. {2} [A;
a12] move s.t. solid and heavy showing it one side at a time. Kalíngun
lang nátù ang pridyidir kay dì ta makadaug, Let’s just move the
refrigerator by shoving it one side at a time because we cannot carry
it. {3} rock a small boat that has been grounded so it will move free.
Kalíngun nátù ang búti kay mitaub na, Let’s rock the boat to free it
because the tide is beginning to come in.

kalíngag = kaníngag.

kalingkaling n k.o. mussel living in the roots of mangroves, about 1½″
long.

kalingkit n old variety of red, fine-grained paddy rice.

kalinyas n {1} bobbin on which the thread for weaving is wound. It is
attached to the shuttle. {2} amount of thread put on one bobbin. v [AN;
a] wind thread around the bobbin in weaving. -an(→) n = kalinyas.

kalípay n {1} name originally given to an ornamental shrub planted for
its leaves: Polyscias fruticosa. {2} name now also given to the croton,
an erect ornamental shrub planted for its large, shiny leaves in
various mottled colors and in a variety of shapes: Codiaeum variegatum.
-an = kalípay, 2.

kalipikar v [A] register for voting.

kalipikasiyun n {1} qualification. {2} registration of new voters. v =
kalipikar.

kalipir n caliper, an instrument used to measure the thickness or
diameter of s.t.

kalipláwir = kulipláwir.

kalipsu n {1} calypso song, dance. {2} calypso outfit, consisting of a
straw hat and a sport shirt or blouse, the lower edges and sleeves of
which are scalloped or raggedy.

kalíring v [APB3(1); c1] roll, usually said of flat disk-like things;
cause s.t. to do so. Ang taklub sa kaldíru mikalíring sa kanal, The pot
cover rolled into the canal. n hoop used as a toy for children to roll.

kalíru_1 v [A; c1] stack ears of corn or rice on the stalk in an
orderly arrangement. Íyang kalirúhun (ikalíru) ang ináni, He’ll stack
the harvested rice. n orderly stack of rice on the stalk or ears of
corn.

kalíru_2 see kal.

kalis v {1} [A; a12] flatten off s.t. that heaps up to measure them
exactly. Kalisun nátù arun way bintáhà, Let us level it off carefully
so no one gets too much. {2} [a12] dismiss a group from office. Ug
malibiral ang administrasiyun kalisun mu sa inyung katungdánan, If we
get a Liberal administration you will all be swept from office. n s.t.
used to level off a measured item.

kális_1 n chalice.

kális_2 n k.o. pointed sword, around 18–20″ long with serrations near
the handle.

kalísa n a two-wheeled horse drawn carriage. v [A13] ride in a kalísa.

kaliskis n scale-like crust on the skin. v [B1456; a4] have such
scale-like encrustation on one’s skin. Butangig lána ang ímung bitíis
kay nagkaliskis (gikaliskis), Rub oil on your legs because they have
scales on them.

kalit a {1} sudden. {2} suddenly, abruptly. Sa kalit lámang nalímut
siya kanákù, He suddenly forgot all about me. v {1} [B] happen
suddenly, quickly. Nikalit (nakalit) lag abli ang pultahan, The door
opened suddenly. {2} [AN; abc] do s.t. suddenly, quickly. Átù ning
kalitug kúhà, Let’s grab this quickly. Gikalitan ku siyag haluk, I
suddenly kissed her. Ayawg ikalit pagbutang, Don’t put it down hastily.
{3} [b8] be surprised, caught unaware. Nakalitan siya sa balità. Walà
giyud siyang katíngug, He was shocked by the news. He couldn’t speak.
kalitkálit v [BN; abc] squeeze in s.t. in one’s spare time.
Nagkalitkálit silag ábut, They took time out for a quick tryst.
Kalitkalíti nag silhig, Take out a few moments and sweep it. pa- v [A;
b(1)] take s.o. by surprise. Átù siyang pakalitan arun dílì
makapangandam, Let’s take him by surprise so that he cannot prepare
himself. paniN- v {1} = kalitkálit. {2} [A2; b] walk out on s.o. or
one’s obligation. Dílì ku makapaningalit kanímu kay ikaw may ákung
pakaslan, I can’t desert you, for I am going to marry you. Wà kung
kauban níla kay íla man kung gipaningalitan, I did not get to go with
them because they walked out on me. ma-(→) a sudden. Makálit nga
katalagman, A sudden calamity. ma-un(←) a do things on the spur of the
moment, without proper thought. Makalítun ka ra kaáyu sa ímung mga
sáad, You are two-faced in your promises.

kalítang n k.o. banana eaten raw, rarely grown commercially because it
keeps poorly.

kalkag a for the hair to be disheveled, in disarray. v [APBN; c1] for
hair to become disheveled, cause it to do so. Ang hángin mauy mikalkag
(mipakalkag) sa ákung buhuk, The wind caused my hair to get disheveled.
Panudlay kay mikalkag (nangalkag) nang ímung buhuk, Comb your hair
because it is disheveled.

kalkal v [A; a] dig with light instruments. Magkalkal ta ug tambákan sa
mga sagbut, We will dig a pit to throw the garbage into. Nakakalkal
silag usa ka kaban nga buláwan, They have dug up a trunkful of gold.

kalkulu, kalkúlu = karkulu.

kalma a {1} calm. Kalma kaáyu ang panahun run, It’s a very calm day.
Kalma kaáyu siya taliwálà sa kakuyaw, He remains very calm in the face
of danger. {2} slow, deliberate, and sure in behavior. Kalma kaáyu
siyang nagtrabáhu bísag giapíki, He worked slowly and deliberately even
if he was under pressure. Kalma siyag sinultihan, He speaks slowly and
deliberately. v {1} [B; a12] become calm, be unruffled of feelings, be
soothed in pain. Kalma lang. Ayawg kasukù dáyun, Calm down. Don’t get
mad right away. Nakalma (mikalma) na ang dágat. Mularga na kita, The
sea has become calm now. Let’s go. Makakalma (makapakalma) sa sakit
ning tambála, This medicine can soothe pain. {2} [b4] be becalmed. Wà
makairug ang barútung gikalmáhan, The sailboat was caught in a calm and
could not move. -du a calm and collected. -nti n tranquilizer. Kalmanti
lang tung iniksiyun nga gihátag sa duktur, The injection that the
doctor gave was only a tranquilizer.

kalsáda = karsáda.

kalsadur see kalsu.

kalsitin n socks. v [A; b] put socks on s.t., get, make into socks.

kalsu v {1} [A; ac] wedge s.t. into s.t. to make it hold or to make it
come on or off. Kalsúhun sa panday ang tabla nga gilansang sa bungbung,
The carpenter will pry off the boards that were nailed to the walls.
Kalsúhi ang ímung sapátus arun sayung isul-ub, Use a horn for your
shoes so you won’t have any trouble putting them on. Ikalsu ning papil
sa húnus arun dílì mabukas, Wedge this paper in the drawer so it won’t
come open. {1a} wrench s.t. loose at the joints or s.t. tied around
s.t. else. Ang kawatan nakakalsu sa íyang mga kamut gíkan sa púsas, The
thief managed to wrench his hands out of the cuffs. {2} [A; c1] stick
s.t. in the pocket. Ayaw ikalsu (kalsúha) ang ímung daug. Iplantáda
giyud sa lamísa, Do not pocket your winnings. You must keep them on the
table. n {1} lever to pry s.t. off, open. {2} shoehorn. kalsadur
n shoehorn or anything used for putting on the shoes.

kalsúnis = karsúnis.

kalsunsilyu = karsunsilyu.

kaltik n an empty can of motor oil about 7″ long with a diameter of
about 2′, locally used as a unit of measurement for sea shells.

kaltiks n {1} Caltex, name of a company and a brand of gasoline. {2} =
kaltik.

kalù_1 = kalùkalù. kalùkalù a stupid, mentally defective. Sugúa lag
simpling butang ang táwung kalùkalù, Give morons simple orders. v [B12;
b6] become stupid, slow-witted; consider s.o. as such.

kalù_2 v [A; c1] scoop out the top part of a liquid. Ikawù (kaw-a) ang
buwà sa linung-ag, Scoop away the foam from the top of the boiling
rice.

kálù n hat. — sa pitrumaks n shade of pressure lantern. v [A; a] wear a
hat, make into a hat. kalùkálù n {1} glans penis (humorous).
{2} conical cover for a chimney top. v [A; b6(1)] put up a conical
cover over a chimney. Gikalùkalúan níyag sín ang panghaw, He put a
conical cover made of iron sheeting on the smokestack.

kalub a for the surface of s.t. round and flat to be depressed. Dílì
giyud muhárì ning usa ka dakúa kay kalub man ang patay, This one
centavo coin will not come up heads because its tail is depressed.
v [B; a12] get depressed in the middle. Nagkalub man lang ang ági
niíning plakáha, My! How warped this record is.

kalubay n a variety of common squash that has a club-shaped fruit, 2–4′
long, with smooth whitish-green skin and white flesh, the skin and
flesh of which are edible. It is sold commercially as kalbásang putì:
Lagenaria leucantha. v [A13; b6] cook kalubay or with kalubay.

kalúbid n an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

kalubkub n small, low-roofed hut for temporary shelter. v {1} [A; b]
make such a hut. {2} [A; c] put, store in such a hut.

kalug n k.o. hand tool similar to a small sickle used in cutting rice
panicles during harvest. v [A; a] use this instrument.

kalugkalug = kalùkalù. see kalù_1.

kalugpus, kalugpuy = kulugpus.

kalugtì n k.o. sweet potato with white peelings and yellow or reddish
meat.

kalugungkugung n name given to several aromatic herbs, used as a hair
rinse. In some areas the name is given to a plant used as a spice,
probably Ocimum sanctum. — sa kabáyù a tall, strongly aromatic, woody
herb of waste areas: Hyptis suaveolens.

kalúha (from duha) n twin, twins. Si Pidru ákung kalúha, Peter is my
twin. Nanganak siya ug kalúha, She gave birth to twins. v {1} [C3] be
twins. {1a} [A12; b6] have as one’s twin. — ug sawa be born at the same
time as a snake. Some people are thought to have snakes around them
that bring good luck. These snakes are thought to have been born at the
same time as the person and are considered his twin. {1b} [b(1)] be
coupled with. Ang íyang mga kasákit gikaluháag pagmáhay, His sufferings
were coupled with regrets. {2} give birth to twins. Ang íyang asáwa
gikaluháan ug babáyi, His wife gave birth to twin girls.

kalukalu (not without l) n sweet made of very fine corn grits (tiktik)
boiled with coconut milk and sugar. v [A13; a] make kalukalu.

kalukálu_1 (not without l) n fried rice, made of leftover rice and
usually nothing else but salt. v [A; a1b(1)] cook or make simple fried
rice.

kalukálu_2 n the sweet, watery outer coating of coconut meat.

kalukhu v [A; a] scrape, scratch off s.t. that sticks to a surface with
a thrusting motion. Gáhì kalukhúun ang dukut sa kúlun, It’s hard to
scratch burnt rice in the pot. Kukhúi ang dárug lápuk, Scrape the plow
clean of mud. kalukhuun n {1} meat of very young coconut at a stage
that it is just scraped, not dug out, or the dalínug. {2} dredged to
the point that only a little is left to dig out.

kalúkud = kulúkud.

kalúkus = kulúkus.

kalumingking = kulumingking. see kingking_1.

kalumitsing = kamuritsing. see muritsing.

kalumpang n spreading tree which reaches a height of twenty meters or
more bearing foul-smelling flowers which are deep-red in color and
kidney-shaped fruit, as big as a child’s fist with edible peanut-like
seeds: Sterculia foetida.

kalumpit n an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

kalung_1 n upland river crab with a red breast.

kalung_2 = kalug.

kalunggu n {1} feathers just coming in. {2} warts. v {1} [AN; b6] for
feathers to come in, either in young birds or after shedding. Ug
mangalunggu ang balhíbu, sakit nga hikápun, If the feathers are just
coming in, it hurts the bird if you touch them. {2} [B26; a4b4] turn
into a wart, be affected by a wart. Ug makahikap kag kawunggug manuk,
kawunggúhun ka, If you touch sprouting feathers, you will get warts.
Gikalunggúhan (nangalunggu) ang tibuuk níyang bukubuku, His back is all
covered with warts.

kalungkung v [B; c1] for the body or limbs to be curled up, bent.
Nagkungkung siya sa katri sa túmang katugnaw, He curled up in bed from
severe cold. Nakungkung ang mga tudlù sa tigúwang, The old man’s
fingers are gnarled. Ikungkung (kungkunga) ang ímung tiil, Pull in your
legs. a curled up, bent.

kalunsing = lunsing.

kalúpù v {1} [A; c] wrap s.t. around s.o. or oneself. Kalupúi ang bátà
kay tugnaw, Put s.t. around the child because it’s cold. {2} [c1] make,
use as a shoulder wrap. n s.t. used to wrap around oneself. Unsa may
kalúpù mu ug paalut ka, tualya? What do you use around your shoulder if
you get a haircut, a towel?

kalus v [A; a] {1} fetch water. Nakakalus na kug pára ikalígù, I’ve
already fetched water for my bath. {2} get liquid out with a dipper.
Mukalus na lang ku ug sabaw, I’ll just ladle out soup for myself.
Kalusun lang ni nátù arun maángay, Let us just ladle this out so we
will have equal shares. n {1} s.t. used as a dipper. {2} dipperful. (←)
n intense action of fetching water. v = kalus, 2. paN- = kalus, n1.

kaluskus_1 v {1} [A; ab] scrape or scratch to remove s.t. from a
surface. Kuskúsag maáyu ang kan-un nga namilit sa kaldíru, Scrape out
the rice that is sticking to the pot. {2} [AN; b5] scratch the hair
hard with the hands. Nagpanguskus siya sa kakatul sa íyang úlu, He kept
on scratching because his head itched so intensely. Nakakuskus
(nakapanguskus) siya sa íyang úlu tungud sa kalisud sa prublíma, He
scratched his head due to the difficulty of the problem.

kaluskus_2 v {1} [AN; a12] pull up the trouser legs or sleeves.
Nangaluskus (mikaluskus) siya sa íyang karsúnis, He rolled up his
trousers. {2} = kuyuskus.

kaluskus_3 = kaguskus.

kálut v [A; a] {1} dig, excavate. Ang luyu sa balay gikalútan ug
atábay, A deep well has been dug in our back yard. {2} scratch an itch.
Kalúta ang ákung likud, katul, Scratch my back. It’s itchy. — ug dílì
katul = hikap sa dílì hilikápun. see híkap, 6. (→) n {1} pit or hole
dug up. {1a} amount dug up. {2} instrument for scratching oneself. paN-
v [A] scratch oneself. Nangalut siya sa íyang tingkuy, He scratched the
back of his neck. -in-an(→) n {1} place where a hole or pit is dug up.
{2} place s.o. scratched. maN-r-(→) n {1} one who digs s.t.
{2} gravedigger.

kalutkut v [A; a] scrape off s.t. hard by rubbing it back and forth.
Nagkalutkut siyag dukut, He’s scraping off the food sticking to the
pot.

kaluwaan see duha.

kaluykuy n whooping cough. v [a4] have a whooping cough. Nanglugwà ang
íyang mata ug inubu kay gikaluykuy siya, He is coughing his head off
because he has a persistent cough.

kalyi n street. Náa sa Kalyi Magalyánis ang mga dagkung tindáhan, The
large department stores are on Magallanes Street. pasa- girl one is
playing around with, not seriously in love. Unsa guy mangasáwa? Pára
pasakalyi lang nà siya, Who said I was going to get married? I’m just
playing around with her.

kalyu n corns on the toes. v [B126; a4b4] get corns. Gikalyu
(gikalyúhan) ang ákung tiil, I have corns on the feet. kalyuhun
a having corns all over it.

kalyus n dish made from the legs and tail of cows or carabaos. The
bones are removed and the meat is sliced, sauteed with spices, and then
stewed with vegetables.

kám = kalam.

káma n {1} bed, usually with mattress. {2} a large stack of s.t. piled
in an orderly fashion. v {1} [A1; ab] make one’s bed, make into a bed.
Magkáma ka sa katri inigmata nímu, Make your bed after you wake up. Kun
walay láing higdáan mahímu rag kining tag-as nga bangkù kamáhun, You
can use these benches as beds to lie on. {2} [A1; c1] stack into a neat
way. Ákù ning ikáma (kamáhun) ang káhuy sa sílung, I’ll pile this
firewood under the house. -in- n in a large neat stack. -da = káma, 2
n, v. kinamáda = kináma.

kamadutsay n married man’s mistress. v [A; a12] have, make into a
mistress.

kamagkù = kumalagkù.

kamagung n k.o. large forest tree producing a highly prized, hard,
black wood used as building material and for making canes. The fruit is
brown and hairy with white flesh and edible. Varieties bearing fruit
with few seeds are planted and sold commercially as mabúlu: Diospyros
discolor. a a person who is very dark black. †

kamálig n {1} storehouse for farm products. {2} stable for work
animals. Ang Diyusnung Bátà natáwu sa kamálig, The Christ Child was
born in a stable. v [c1] store farm products in a storehouse. atup nga
-in- roof consisting of a single piece of wood set at an angle. -in-,
-in-(→) a by the granaryful. Kinamálig kun mupalit siyag bugas, He buys
rice by the granary.

kamálù (not without l) n k.o. poultry disease characterized by black
spots on combs or eyes of fowls. v [A123P; a4b4] be affected with this
poultry disease. Gikamálù (gikamalúan) ang mata sa manuk, The chicken’s
eyes are affected with poultry disease.

kamalunggay = kalamunggay.

kamandag n {1} meconium, the first stools of a newborn baby. {2} poison
venom.

kamandir n commander. v {1} [BN; a2] be a commander. Kinsa na man karuy
nagkamandir (nangamandir) sa mga huks? Who is the commander of the
Huks? {2} [AN; a2b2] commandeer. Ákung awtu nakamandir sa armi, My car
was commandeered by the army. -un a like a commander.

kamang n k.o. red snapper producing red fat: Lutianus sp.

kámang v [A2S; b5] {1} creep, crawl. Tabúni ang pagkáun kay kamángun
unyà sa mga uk-uk, Cover the food or the cockroaches will crawl all
over it. {1a} — sa kalisud, — daw úmang be in utter poverty. Nagkamang
kami sa kalisud, We’re crawling in poverty. {1b} be sent sprawling on
the floor. Nakakámang intáwun ang táwu nga naigù sa suntuk, The poor
fellow was sent sprawling to the floor after he was hit by the blow.
{2} [A; a12] go to a woman’s bed without prearrangement to have illicit
relations. Ang ílang búy nagkámang ni Pitra, Their houseboy crawled
into Petra’s bed. {3} [A; a12] go after a voter to keep him from voting
for the opposition. Ang wà pa nímu mahaylu, kamánga. Kinahanglang way
bútung Usminya dinhi, Go after those you can’t win over. There must be
no votes for Osmeña. -in-ay(→) n going after voters in the last moment
to keep them from voting or buy their votes.

kamangyan n a dried form of the resin obtained from almasíga and other
forest trees. It is burned over coals for its smoke, which is used in
folk medicine and other rituals for magical purposes and also used as a
mosquito smudge or for other non-magical purposes.

kamaníru n one who works on street or road maintenance. v [B16; a2]
worker on street maintenance.

kamansi n breadfruit with seeds, the seeds and pulp of which are eaten
as a vegetable when not ripe: Artocarpus camansi.

kamansili, kamansilis n medium-sized tree with short, sharp spines at
the base of the leaves and on the branches that bears a white or
reddish edible fruit similar to tamarind (sambag) but smaller and with
a more pronounced spiral. The bark is used for tanning: Pithecolobium
dulce.

kamantígì = kalamantígì.

kamanyan = kamangyan.

kamara báha n House of Representatives, the lower house of the Congress
of the Philippines.

kamarin n warehouse with an iron roof. v [A12; a2] make, build, make
into a warehouse. -in- a by the warehouseful.

kamarun n dish of shrimps, split and dipped in eggs, optionally mixed
with ground meat. v [A; a] make, have kamarun. — ribusádu = kamarun.

kamarúti n an officer’s quarters on the deck, cabin in a sailing
vessel.

kámas_1 v {1} [AN; c6] struggle, strive intensively in an endeavor.
Hala, kámas arun ka mulampus, Strive hard so that you’ll be a success.
{2} [AN; a] do s.t. in the shortest time possible. Nagkámas siya
pagpanghúgas arun makasúruy dáyun, She did the dishes hurriedly so that
she could go out soon. kamaskamas = kámas_1, v2.

kámas_2 = kamras.

kamátis n tomato. v {1} [b6(1)] cook s.t. with tomatoes. {2} [B2S] be
green or red like a tomato. {2a} [B2S46N; a4S] for a penis just
circumcised to swell like a tomato. Nagbulad ka man gud sa ínit maung
nagkamatis (nangamátis, gikamatis) ang ímung tulì, You went out in the
sun, so your penis you just had circumcised has become red and swollen.

kamáug_1 n a mild cuss word, euphemism for kamatay, expressing disgust
or anger over s.t. or s.o. Kamáug, nahibilin man diay ang yáwi, Darn! I
forgot the key.

kamáug_2 n k.o. terrestrial orchid that grows in waste places, commonly
under coconut trees. It has a fleshy rootstock which produces a sticky
sap, used as a glue for guitars. The scrapings also have medicinal
uses: Geodorum nutans. v [A; b6(1)] glue s.t. with kamáug.

kam-aw n shallow earthen bowl, used to hold food. v [c16] put in a
small earthen bowl.

kamay v [AN; b5] summon by a wave of the hand. Ang dakung pátag sa
Kauswágan daw nagkamay (nagpangamay) kaníya, The wide plains of
Kauswagan seemed to be beckoning to him. Ákù siyang gikamay
(gikamayan), I beckoned to him.

kámay (from kalámay) n {1} taliwálà, ibabaw sa — in ecstasy (usually
sexual). Bisag mamatay ku karun dáyun basta sa ibabaw sa kámay, I don’t
mind if I die this instant as long as I’m in the midst of ecstasy. — mu
{1} now see what you have done! Kámay mu nà karun, nadakpan hinúun ta,
Now see what you have done! We’re caught! {2} can you imagine this
surprising thing happened! Kámay mu bay siya pay manghulam, unyà
mangísug pa, Can you beat that! He borrows and then gets angry! {2a} —
ug imagine if this surprising thing were to happen. Kámay mu bag láking
makigminyug láki! Imagine a man marrying a man!

kamayingking = kumingking. see kingking_1.

kamayu = kalamáyu.

kamba v {1} [A3; b4] have a quickened heartbeat. Mikamba ang ákung
dughan sa gitiúnan aku sa pistúla, My heartbeat quickened when the
pistol was pointed at me. {2} [B46; b4] be inhibited by a feeling of
fear and respect. Mukamba giyud ming sír, We are all scared of the
teacher.

kambang n k.o. grouper.

kambantulì n a k.o. long sword with a pronounced and a flat end jutting
out to a point at the bottom.

kambas v {1a} [AN; b5c] canvass for votes or sales. Kambásun (kambásan)
nátù sila kay wà pa sila hibaligyai, Let’s canvass them because they
haven’t bought any. Ikambas ning bag-ung pruduktu sa kasilinganan,
Bring this new product around the neighborhood. {2} [A; a12] count
votes, ballots.

kambat v [A; a] tie or weave a network: {a} around a bottle to protect
it or across the mouth of s.t. to keep the contents from falling out.
Kambáta ang pagbáat sa bukag arun dílì kataktákan, Tie the basket up
with a net over the mouth so that nothing can fall out of it. Átung
kambátan ning dáma sa tubà, Let’s weave strips of rattan around the
demijohn. {b} to mend or patch s.t. Gikambat nákù pagsursi ang midyas,
I darned the socks by weaving a network.

kambáya n {1} reenforcing string tied crisscross over a kite’s frame to
which the paper is pasted. Butangig kambáya ang tabánug, Put
reenforcing string on the kite. {2} parallel lines crossing each other
at right angles, forming a design similar to plaid. Ang kambáya sa
íyang bistídu pula ug birdi, Her dress has crisscrossing red and green
lines. v [A; b(1)] tie or put reenforcing string. -in- = kambáya, 2.

kambirs n brand of expensive high sneakers.

kambiyáda n {1} transmission of cars and other automotive vehicles. Ang
kambiyáda sa íyang awtu may kwarta martsa, The transmission of his car
has a fourth gear. {2} change of key in a piece of music. Nindut kaáyu
pamináwun ang kambiyáda íning kantáha, This song is very melodious the
way it changes keys. — sa hángin change of wind. Kining hilanáta dala
sa kambiyáda sa hángin, This fever was brought on by the change of
weather. v [A; c1] {1} put or shift into gear, operate the gearshift.
{2} change the key in a piece of music. {3} [B; b4] for the wind to
change.

kambiyu n {1} transmission of automotive vehicles. Daut ug kambiyu ning
awtu, This car has a defective transmission. {1a} stick shift of the
transmission. {1b} gear. Kambiyu sa primíra, First gear. Kining
trakturáha may dusi ka kambiyu sa abanti, This tractor has twelve
forward speeds. {2} change of key within a piece of music. {3} change
of wind. {4} money given as change. Pila may kambiyu sa ímung písus?
How much change did you get for your peso? v {1} [A; c6] shift gears.
{2} [A; c1] change the key in music. {3} [B; b4] for the wind to
change. {4} [AC; c] exchange things with s.o., give s.t. in exchange.
Magkambiyu ta ug lingkuránan, ha? Let’s exchange seats, shall we?
Singku písus ákung ikambiyu sa matag dulyár, I will give five pesos for
every dollar. {4a} [A23; c] give s.o. his change. Wà ku nímu kambiyúhi,
You haven’t given me my change. -in- n s.t. given in exchange for s.t.
else.

kambiyúlu n {1} vertical roulette, table roulette. {2} raffle drum.

kambúha n {1} chicken whose feathers are naturally upturned like those
of an angry hen. {2} name given to fish with fins sticking out
prominently like the kambúha chicken, e.g. kinds of dragonets.

*kamhir nagdala ug — for a woman’s action to have a note of flirtation
in it. Ang íyang pahíyum nagdala ug kamhir, Her smile said, ‘Come
here.’

kami we (not including addressee). Kami mubáyad ug makagustu, We pay if
we like it. mi short for kami. Dílì mi mubutar ni Markus, We will not
vote for Marcos. námù {1} gen. Amahan námù, náa ka sa mga lángit...,
Our Father, who art in heaven. {2} short for kanámù. kanámù dat. Ári
kanámù ihátag, Give it to us. Ayaw língì kanámù, Don’t turn around to
look at us. ámù preposed gen. {1} our. Ang ámung irù, Our dog. Ámung
ibaligyà, We will sell it. {2} my place, at home. Si Pápa túa pa sa
ámù, Dad is at home. taga- one from our place. Si Pídu taga-Karkar,
dílì tagaámù, Pedo is from Carcar. He is not from our place. {3} the
one that is ours. Ang inyung irù putì, ang ámù itum, Your dog is white,
ours is black. {3a} ang — gud the thing that worries us. Ang ámù gud ug
mahibalu sa plánu ang amahan, The thing that worries us is that the
father will know of the plans. {4} [verb] ug ámù [do] by ourselves.
Magdúwà mig ámù, We’ll play by ourselves. {5} sa ámù = kanámù. amúa =
ámù. kamikámi n {1} just us, no one special. Kamikámi ray naglútù áni,
We cooked this ourselves. {2} — ra [nom. or dat.] be distantly related
to us. Kamikámi ra si (ni) Markus, Marcos is distantly related to us.
{3} — ra we are of the same caliber, age, in comparison. Kamikámi ra si
Ríta ug abilidad sa mat, Rita and I are about the same in math. v [A13;
a12] do s.t. by ourselves. Nagkamikámi lang mig puyù áning gamayng
balay, We’re just living by ourselves in this small house.

kámig a cold to the touch. Kámig kaáyu ang ayis, Ice is very cold.
v [BN; c1] be cold. Nangámig na ang patayng láwas, The corpse is cold.

kámil, kamilyu n camel.

kamingking = kumingking. see kingking_1.

kaminíru = kamaníru.

kamintang_1 = kumintang.

kamintang_2 variety of croton (kalípay, 2).

kamira n camera.

kamísa = kamísa tsínu. — dintru n men’s dress shirt. v [A3; a] wear,
make into a dress shirt. — tsínu n men’s outer garment worn loose and
hanging either long or short-sleeved and collarless. It is used by
older men for formal or casual wear. v [A3; a2] wear, make into a
camisa chino.

kamisin n undershirt, sleeveless or T-shirt style. — dibrásu sleeveless
undershirt. v [AN; a] wear, make into an undershirt.

kamisíta = kamisin.

kamisúla n a k.o. loose, chemise-like, sleeveless undergarment for
women, with a rounded neckline, worn below the kimúna and nagwas. v [A;
a] use, make a kamisúla.

kamisulin = kamísa dintru. see kamísa.

kamisun n whole slip. Naglabaw ang ímung kamisun, Your slip’s showing.
v [AN; a] wear, make into a slip. -in- a like a slip in shape.

kamkam v {1} [A; ab2] touch with the fingers. Ayawg kamkáma ang
tunukung sanga, Don’t touch that thorny branch. {2} [AN] take s.t. that
is not one’s own. Ngánung mikamkam ka man sa dílì ímung butang? Why did
you touch s.t. that didn’t belong to you? Nasakpan ang tisuríru nga
nangamkam, The treasurer was caught embezzling.

kamlà v [A; a] touch s.t. heavy-handedly. Dúnay nagkamlà sa ákung
linabhan kay nabuling, S.o. pawed my laundry because it has dirt on it.
Nakakamlà kug basang iti, I inadvertently touched wet chicken dung.

kamlas = kamras.

kamlut v [A; a] pull out s.t. with little force or pull gently on s.t.
with the hands. Ayaw kamlúta nang sanga kay mahurut katágak ang mga
dáhun, Don’t pull on that branch because you’ll knock all the leaves
off. Kamlúta ang húnus, Pull out the drawer. Kamlútan níya ang basakan
sa mga sagbut, He’ll pull out the weeds in the rice paddy.

kampamintu n encampment, temporary camp. Ang kampamintu sa mga
trabahadur duul sa subà, The laborers’ camp is near the river.

kampána n {1} church bell. {2} uvula. v {1} [A; b6] ring the bell. Ug
kampanáhan ang bunyag, dakù ang báyad, You have to pay a lot if you
want them to ring the bell for the baptism. {2} [b6] install a bell.
kampanakampána = kampána, n 2. -ryu n belfry, bell tower. v [b6(1)] put
a bell tower to a church. kampanilya_1 n small bell. v [A; b6] ring a
small bell. Kinsa guy ímung gikampanilyáhan dihà? Who are you ringing
that bell at? di- having a small bell at one’s disposal. abugádu di- a
high-class lawyer (lit. one who uses a bell [to summon assistants]).
{2} anything high-class. Púru dikampanilya ang ákung kahúguy, I only
associate with high-class people. kampaníru n one who rings bells.
v [B156; a2] be a bell ringer.

kampanilya_2 n ornamental shrub with large, yellow bell-shaped flowers:
Thevetia peruviana.

kampanti a dressed elaborately, esp. with jewelry. v [A; c] be
elaborately dressed and adorned with jewelry.

kampanya n campaign. v [ANC12; c] campaign, talk in campaigning.
Nangampanya siyag pára itúkud ug iskuyláhan, He is campaigning for
money to build a schoolhouse. Kampanyáhan tikaw básin adtu kang Markus
butar, I’ll talk to you. Perhaps you’ll vote for Marcos. Kampanyáhan
nátù si Markus, Let’s campaign for Marcos. Sa naandan bakak lang
gihápuy ikampanya, As usual, they’ll tell a lot of lies in their
campaign.

kampat a having paint, powder, or the like unevenly applied. Kampat ang
pagpintal, The paint job was uneven. v [AB; c1] become splotched or
uneven, cause s.t. to be so. Nawung nga nagkampat sa pulbus, Face,
splotched with powder.

kampi_1 v [A2C; b(1)] take sides with. Dì ku makakampi sa usag usa níla
kay púlus nákù sila minahal, I can’t side with either of them because
they are both dear to me. Nagkakampi ang Hapun ug Aliman sa gúbat, The
Japanese and Germans were on the same side during the war.

kampi_2 v [A; b5] tuck overlapping or dangling parts of a skirt, esp. a
wrap-around, into the waist. Akuy mukampi sa ikug-íkug sa ímung sáya,
I’ll tuck in the train of your skirt. Kampíhun (ikampi) níya ang
subrang tumuy sa patadyung iniglíkus níya niíni sa háwak, She’ll tuck
in the overlap of her wrap-around when she wraps it around her waist.

kampílan n k.o. long, sharp sword, straight-bladed, with the top
sloping down to form a point and having a sharp spike protruding from
the top side 2 or 3″ in the back of the tip.

kamping v [A; b] go camping, esp. scouts.

kampísaw = kulampísaw.

kampiyun n champion, winner of the first place in a competition.
v [B16; a2] be, become a champion. -atu(←) n {1} championship: being a
champion or period of time that one is a champion. Ang kampiyunátu ni
Ilurdi nilungtad ug dúgay, Elorde was champion for a long time.
{2} championship contest. Kampiyunátu run ang amatyur, Tonight’s
amateur program will determine the champion.

kampu_1 n encampment, permanent or temporary. — santu n cemetery.
v {1} [A1; b(1)] encamp. Nagkampu ang mga trabahadur sa may karsáda,
The workers encamped near the road. Ang tiilan sa búkid mauy gikampúhan
sa mga kaáway, The enemies encamped at the foot of the mountain.
{2} [a12] make into a camp.

kampu_2 = alundris_2.

kampur n camphor oil.

kampus n campus, the grounds of a school or college.

kamras v [A; a12b2] scratch with the nails or claws. Ayawg híkap sa
halu kay hingkamrasan ka, Don’t touch the monitor lizard. It might
scratch you. -in-an n scratch marks. Nagdugù ang íyang buktung daghag
kinamrasan, His arms were all bloody with the numerous scratches he had
received.

kamray n pineapple fiber woven into a cloth.

kamrut v [A; a] {1} touch, grab s.t. with the bare hands. Ayaw kamrúta
kanang atsára kay mapan-us, Don’t grab that sauerkraut made from
papayas with your bare hands because that will cause it to go bad.
{2} = kamlut.

kamu you (plural). Kamung duhay gitawag, I called the two of you. short
form in position other than predicate: mu. Kinahanglan magtuun giyud
mu, You must study. kamukámu {1} just you all and no one else. Kamukámu
ras inyu run kay namaúlì na ang mga bisíta, You are the only ones left
in the house now that the visitors have left. {2} distant relative.
Kamukámu ra si Uyung kay mag-ágaw inyung isig ka amahan, You and Oyong
are distant relatives because your fathers are cousins. v [A] do s.t.
by yourselves. Magkamukámu lang diay mug adtu ug dì mu mangimbitar, Are
you going by yourselves and not invite anyone else along? kamuhánun
n related to you distantly or coming from the same place. Kamuhánun mu
si Isku kay tagadidtu pud siya, You and Esco are from the same place
because he also comes from there. ninyu gen.: your, by you. Bahinbahina
ni ninyu, Divide this among yourselves. {2} = kaninyu. kaninyu dat.:
you. Kaninyung duha kinsay maáyung mukanta? Who sings better of the two
of you? Muawhag ku kaninyu sa pagpaningkámut, I urge you to strive
hard. inyu {1} preposed gen.: your, by you. Ang inyung suliran, Your
problem. Inyung buhátun, You all will do it. {2} belongs to you. Inyu
ba ni? Does this belong to you? v [a12] make, get, have s.t. for
yourselves. Kinta inyúhun na lang ang yútà bisag wà pa kabayri, In
other words, you will have the land for yourselves even if you have not
paid for it? inyuinyu v [A13; a12] do, have s.t. by, for yourselves.
Mag-inyuinyu man mug kartíyu ug dílì musampit ug pakitábang, You manage
things by yourselves and don’t call on anyone else for help. tagainyu
n one coming from your place.

kámu v [AN; c1] prepare, cook food. Mabuntag siyay mukámu sa ámung
pagkáun, She cooks our food in the morning.

kamù v [A; a] touch food with the bare hands. Kamua ang pagkáun ug dalì
dang mapan-us, Touch the food with your fingers and it will get spoiled
right away.

kamug = kamul.

*kamug way — {1} with no inheritance. Nakaasawa siyag way kamug, He has
married s.o. without any inheritance. {2} penniless. Wà na kuy kamug
kay nahurut ug pamáyad, I’m flat broke again because I paid all my
bills.

kamúgaw = kabúgaw.

kamúhuy = kalamúhuy.

kamukámu n k.o. vine of open fields resembling the sweet potato, with
violet, pink, and white flowers resembling the morning glory: Ipomoea
sp.

kamul v [A; b5] moisten s.t. Kamulun (kamulan) ang binlud úsà ilúnud,
The corn grits are moistened before you put them into the boiling
water.

kámul a numb, devoid of sensation. Kámul pa ákung lagus sa iniksiyun,
My gums are still numb from the injection. Kámul ákung tiil sa
pagtinindug, My legs are numb from standing so long. v [B3PN; b4] be,
become numb. Nagpangamul man ang ákung tiil, tingáli may piang, My foot
is becoming numb. Maybe it is broken.

kamulitsing = kamuritsing. see muritsing.

kamúlu (not without l) {1} for s.t. to occur just when an activity
starts or is about to start. Kamúlu giyud námung pangáun, pagkapálung
sa sugà, We had just started eating when the lights went out.
{2} simultaneously, while. Kamúlung gasirbisyu sa simbahan, gabúnù pud
sa gawas, While the church service was going on, there was a murder
outside.

kamunggay = kalamunggay.

kamúning n k.o. small tree of the secondary forest and also cultivated,
furnishing a yellow wood used for canes, sword handles, and the like.
The leaves are used to make wreaths or for other ornamental purposes:
Murraya paniculata.

kamuritsing see muritsing.

kamusta = kumusta.

kamut n hand. v {1} [a12] do with the hand. Kamuta lang pagkáun, Just
eat it with your hands. {2} [b8] be obtained, achieved. Makamtan nímu
ang kalípay, You can achieve happiness. -in- v {1} [A; c1] do s.t. by
hand. Magkinamut na lang kug tahì, I’ll just do my sewing by hand.
Magkinamut ta, Let’s eat with our hands. {2} [A1] go about barefooted
(humorous). Nagkinamut na lang siya kay gibanus ang íyang sinílas, He
walked barefooted because s.o. was using his slippers. (←) = kamrut.
paN-, paniN- v [A2; b6] {1} do s.t. by one’s own hand. Pangamutan
(paningamutan) ni nákug trabáhu arun way mga sayup, I will do this work
myself so there won’t be any errors. {2} = singkámut. n skill, ability
of the hand. Ang íyang pangamut sa burda, Her skill in embroidery.
maN-, maniN- v do s.t. expertly with the hands. Maáyu mangamut pandáya,
A skilled carpenter. sing-, sin-(←) see singkámut.

kámut = kamlut.

kamúti n sweet potato: Ipomoea batatas.v [A2] have sexual intercourse
with (humorous slang). Nakapangamúti si Isku gabíi sa íyang asáwa, Isko
had sexual intercourse with his wife last night. — nga káhuy cassava:
Manihot esculenta. paN- v {1} [A2; ab] dig sweet potatoes.
Makapangamúti gánì kug usab hatágan ku ikaw, Next time I dig sweet
potatoes, I will give you some. {2} [A23] be way behind in a contest,
race, exams. Ang búgù nangamúti sa iksámin, The stupid fellow was way
behind in his exams. kamutihan, kamutinhan n sweet potato patch.

kamuy = kulamuy.

kamwà n {1} the young of the katang, k.o. fresh-water crab. {2} k.o.
harp shell.

kamya n k.o. ornamental ginger producing good-sized, white, fragrant
flowers. The rhizomes are used medicinally: Hedychium coronarium.

kamyas = bangkiling.

kanà_1 {1} that (near hearer, far from speaker). Mau kanay ákung gustu,
That is the one I want. -y bátà, láki expression of praise: atta boy!
Kanay bátà! Síging nubinta, Atta boy! You always get ninety’s. {2} him,
her (referred to previously or well-known). Sígi, bisitáhan nátù nà (nà
siya), All right. Let’s visit her. {3} that, this, just mentioned or
well-known. Ug pagbutar kaníya ang gikinahanglan, buhátun nátù nà, If
what we have to do is vote for him, that’s what we’ll do. — nga when
one does [so-and-so], when [so-and-so] happens. Sálum gud, kanà bang
mulanguy sa ilálum sa túbig, Diving is, you know, when you swim under
water. Arun lamì ang litsun kanang ínit pa isirbi, Serve the roast pig
while it is still hot so that it will be tasty. {4} — nga ... pause
word used while speaker is trying to think of what to say. Kanang, ímu
úsà nga kuan, panítan, Er, you watchamacallit, you peel it first.— siya
= kanà, 2. nà short for kanà or niánà. niánà short form: ánà. {1} gen.:
of this. Háin man ang tabun niánang kahun? Where is the lid of that
box? {2} dat.: to, at this. Ibutang ang siya niánang iskína, Put the
chair in that corner. usa — ka [word of time] one day (week, month).
Usa niánà ka buntag miabut ang bána, One morning the husband arrived.
unsa may náa — what is the matter with that? Unsa may náa ánà, paríha
ra man nang duha, What difference does it make? They’re both the same.
Sigi lang, unsa may náa ánà? Gitan-aw man lang níya, Never mind.
There’s nothing wrong with it. He was just looking at it. wà ku — I
have nothing to say to that. Unsa may ímung ikatubag áni? Wà ku ánà,
What can you say to this? I have nothing to say to that (lit. I don’t
have that). naánà = niánà. ánà short for niánà. v [A3; a12] do like
that, that way. Muánà ka paglingkud, You sit that way. Nag-ánà siya
paghigdà, He lay down like that. Anáun nímu pagbatil, Stir in that way.
taga- n Cebuano speakers of Leyte, so called to distinguish them from
the speakers of Samar-Leyte Visayan (Warays) whose language does not
use kanà.

kanà_2 n American lady (colloquial).

kanáas v [A2S3] make a rustling, rushing sound. Mikanáas ang mga dáhun
nga gihuyup sa hángin, The leaves rustled in the wind. Nagkanaas ang
túbig sa busay, The water in the waterfalls made a rushing sound.
n rustling, rushing sound.

kanahan_1 a eager, enthusiastic in anticipation of s.t. Ang hinayaw
kanahan kaáyu muadtug bayli, The girl who is so fond of dancing is
eager to get to dances. v [B126; b6] get to be very eager.

kanahan_2 a {1} silly, stupid. Kanahan kaáyu ning batáa. Dì makatunung
sugúun, This child is very stupid. He just can’t do things right.
{2} reference to a person who causes one slight anger, given as a mild
reproof. Kanahang dakù, gibílin lang ang suklì! You oaf, you forgot to
get the change!

kanáhù = kanákù (dialectal). see aku.

kanáit see náit.

kanáka_1 = inday-inday, 3. see inday.

kanáka_2 n a native Hawaiian woman, usually thought of as being big and
heavy-set. a of a kind that is tall or long and big in size. Kanáka
kaáyu ug tiil nang bayhána. Makahubas ug dánaw, That girl has huge
feet. They’re big enough to dry up a pool. Kanáka tingáli ning kapayása
kay dagkù, These are monster papayas because they are so big.

kanákù see aku.

kanal n {1} ditch. {2} the grooves on the sides of a bowling alley.
v {1} [A; b6(1)] dig a ditch. Magkanal ku sa átung balisbísan, I’ll dig
a ditch around the house. {2} [B25; c16] be thrown towards the ditch,
bowling grooves. Makanal (mukanal) pirmi ang búla inigdúwà níyag
búling, The ball always rolls along the groove whenever he bowls.
kanalkánal n small linear depression running on or along a surface.
Kanalkánal sa lubut, Linear depression between the cheeks of the
buttocks. Kanalkánal sa ilung, The depression running between the nose
and the upper lips.

kanámù see kami.

kánap v [B; c1] spread over an area. Ang tipdas mikánap (nakánap) sa
tibuuk láwas, Measles spread all over his body. Ikánap (kanápun) níya
ang íyang mga ahinti dinhi sa syudad, He will spread his salesmen over
the city. Ang baul gikanápan sa túbig, Water spread all over the field.
kanapkanap a blurred, dim eyesight. v [B; b6] for the eyesight to
become blurred. Mukanapkanap na giyud ang átung panan-aw kun
magkatigulang na kita, As we grow older our eyesight becomes more and
more blurred.

kanastru n a large hamper made of thin, loosely woven strips of bamboo
or rattan, with no handle. It is usually used as a container for rice
or corn grains, or versions with a lid are used as clothes hampers.

kánat v [B; c1] cover an area, length. Mikánat (nakánat) ang balità sa
daling panahun, The news spread in a short time. Nikánat ug usa ka líbu
ang gastu, The expenses reached a thousand pesos. Kanátun (ikánat) ni
nátung písì arun hikit-an ang gitas-un, We should unwind this rope to
see how long it is. n spread, breadth, length. Taas ang kánat sa
kaláyu, The spread of the fire covered a large area. -in-, pina-
a writing in longhand.

kanátù see kita.

kanáug see *náug.

kanáway_1 n wind that blows from a westward direction. Kanáway sa
amíhan, Northwest wind. Kanáway sa habágat, Southwest wind. v {1} [B5]
for the west wind to blow. Ug mukanáway ang hángin, dílì ta mularga, If
the wind blows from the west, we will not sail. {2} [AN] sail before
the west wind. Nanganáway sila paglarga, They sailed before the west
wind. -an n direction from which the kanáway blows.

kanáway_2 n k.o. white sea bird, some 6″ long and 4″ high, found
perched on driftwood or on sea corals.

kanawkánaw v [A2N] be perceived at a great distance, extend into the
distance. Ang íyang tíngug mikanawkánaw sa mamingáwung kagabhíun, Her
voice can be heard from way off in a distance coming through the
stillness of the night. Nanganawkánaw ang kalapad sa humayan, The rice
fields extended into the distance. Gamay na ang ayruplánung
nanganawkánaw sa kalangítan, The airplane looked very small in the
distance.

kánay v {1} [A23] for a feeling to spread throughout one’s body. Ang
kabugnaw sa túbig mikánay ngadtu sa ákung tinái, The coolness of the
water spread through my innermost bones. {2} [A23N; b6] for a sound to
reach out or come from a great distance. Ang kagabhíun gikanáyan sa
uwang sa irù, The stillness of the night was broken by the howling of
the dog. kanaykánay = kánay.

kanày particle expressing surprise at what s.o. did and implying that
the agent should be ashamed of himself. Kanày, naunsa mag táwu,
nanghaluk nákù! Hey! What has gotten into this man, kissing me like
that!

kanayun (from náyun) v [A13] say s.t. in a conversation. ‘Sa átù pa,’
nagkanayun siya, ‘In other words,’ he continued ...

kanbas_1 n canvass cloth.

kanbas_2 = kambas.

kandádu n padlock. v [A; b] padlock s.t. Baul nga gikandadúhan, A trunk
that is padlocked. rumpi — k.o. barracuda.

kandaktur n musical conductor. v [B1256] be a conductor of a musical
group.

kandi = kindi.

kandidáta n female candidate, usually in beauty contests. v [B12356] be
a candidate.

kandidátu n {1} political candidate. — upisiyal candidate nominated for
a certain post by the Party. {2} s.o. to whom s.t. unpleasant is likely
to happen. Niánang ímung ubu kandidátu ka sa mintiryu, You’re a
candidate for the cemetery with that cough of yours. Kandidátu mu sa
kastígu hiniral, You’re both in for a spanking. v [B12356; a2] be a
candidate. Nakandidátu siya apan walà kadaug, He was a candidate but he
didn’t win.Unsang pwistúha ang ímung kandidatúhan? What position will
you be running for?-ra n candidacy.

kandidit n candidate for office. v [B12356; a2] be a candidate.

kandíis_1 n dimples. -un a having dimpled cheeks.

kandíis_2 n k.o. tree about 30′ tall producing a lot of sap and bearing
small rounded edible drupes: Garcinia sp.

kandil n {1} k.o. oil lamp made of a piece of bamboo about 2–4′, to the
bottom of which a clam shell to hold the oil is attached. It is usually
hung near the altar in a house or s.w. else in the house and kept
burning throughout the night. {2} cylindrical metal cooking pot having
a flat bottom.

kandílà n candle. v [A13] use a candle. Walay kuryinti karung gabíi,
magkandílà na lang ta, There will be no electric current tonight, so
we’ll just use candles. paN- v [A23] be like a candle. a be standing
like a candle, bare and stripped. Nangandílà ang kamaisan nga naagian
sa dúlun, The corn stalks stood bare and stripped of everything after a
swarm of locusts had passed over them. {b} become skin and bones.
Nangandílà siya sa kaguul, She is all skin and bones now because of her
sorrows. {c} be grades of one. Nangandílà ang mga grádu sa iskálar, The
scholarship student got all one’s (A’s). {2} [A2; b6] sell, make
candles for sale. Nangandílà si Nánay pára nga makakitag kwarta, Mother
makes (or sells) candles to earn money. {3} [A2] be kept standing for a
long time. Haskang nakapangandílà nákug pinaábut nímu, My! I waited and
waited for you. mag-r-(→), maN-r-(→) n candle seller. -un a shaped like
a candle. Kandiláun siyag tudlù, She has long, slender fingers.

kandilabra n candelabrum.

kandilarya n {1} church festival celebrated on the second of February
(forty days after the Nativity) for the blessing of candles. It is in
commemoration of the presentation of Christ in the Temple and the
purification of the Blessed Virgin and marks the end of the Christmas
season. {2} candles blessed on this day, burnt during lightning storms.
paN- v [A2] {1} sing carols during candelaria (carols about the three
Kings, not about the birth of Christ). {2} spend this holiday s.w.

kandílaw (made up from kandílà and sílaw) n candlelight (literary).

kandilíru n candlestick or chandelier.

kanding n goat. — nga way súngay n dog, viewed as food (slang).
Nag-íhaw silag kanding nga way súngay, They are butchering a dog.
-un(←) a {1} goat-like. {2} hating to take baths. v [B12] develop an
aversion for bathing. -an(←) n herd of goats. v [A13] raise goats
commercially. kandingkanding n lantana, a k.o. aromatic perennial herb
planted as an ornamental for its flowers and also growing wild. So
called because the fruit resembles goat’s dung: Lantana camara.

kandul = kundul.

kandungga n a triangular neckerchief worn around the shoulders with any
native dress, originally of heavily starched cotton. v [AN; a] wear,
make into a kerchief of this sort.

kandus v [A; ab2] scoop up or shovel off s.t. Mikandus siyag balas sa
karumáta, He shoveled sand out of the cart. Kandúsi ra kug sabaw,
Please dip me some soup. n {1} scoop, shovel, dipper. {2} hand net used
for scooping fish out of the water. {2a} scoopful, shovelful,
dipperful.

kanduwálì n k.o. long, straight sword with a V-shaped indentation at
the end.

kang_1 dat. marker for proper names. Ihátag kang Tasyu, Give it to
Tacio. Aku ang nag-ingun kang Tátay, I was the one who told Dad. Ang
kang Tiryu nga balay, The house that belongs to Terio. — kinsa to whom?
Kang kinsa nang baláya? Who does that house belong to?

kang_2 n four mahjong pieces of the same suit (same design and number).
Having a kang wins a certain amount. — buki a kang consisting of a
buki. — sa búlak (pláwir) a kang consisting of four búlak’s. sikrit — a
kang which one has not laid down, but retains in his hand. úpin — a
kang which has been laid on the table. v [A2; a] get a kang. Mukang ku
ánang karta nga ímung gilábay, I’ll get kang with the piece you
discarded.

kángà a stammered speech due to nervousness. Kángà ang tubag sa maistra
nga gipangutána sa supirbaysur, The teacher gave a stammering answer to
the supervisor’s question. v [B6; a12] be rattled or stuttering in
speech because of nervousness. Nakángà (mikángà) ang sinultihan sa
tistígus nga gipangutána, The witness stammered under interrogation.
kangàkangà = kángà.

kang-a a slightly open, having come off, having a long crack. Nanglìlì
ang mga bátà sa kang-a sa pultahan, The children peeped through the
small opening in the door. v [B3(1); a12] come off, develop a crack,
get slightly opened. Mikang-a ang kaban kay punù ug bisti, The trunk
opened up a bit because it was chockful of clothes. Nagkang-a ang
laminisyun sa playwud, The veneer came off the plywood.

kang-al = kang-a.

kangga n k.o. carabao-drawn sled with two large runners laid flat on
the ground to which traces are attached, with or without a whippletree.
látay sa — v [c6] be thrown into the bargain. Way lábut ang karír sa
mutur apan átù na lang ilátay sa kangga, The carrier doesn’t come with
the motorcycle, but we’ll throw it into the bargain. kanggahan =
kangga.

kanggaru n kangaroo.

kanggrína n gangrene. v [B2N; a4b4] develop into gangrene. Nakanggrína
(manganggrína, mikanggrína) ang samad, The wound developed into
gangrene. Giputul ang wala níyang tiil kay gikangrína (gikangrináhan)
man, His left foot was amputated because it was infected with gangrene.

kangkang v [B36; c1] for two or more things which are joined at the
base to spread apart. Mikangkang (nangangkang) ang íyang kamut nga
nidáwat sa kwarta, He spread out his palm to receive the money.
Nagkangkang ang mga panid sa libru, The leaves of the book are spread
open. Ayaw kangkánga (ikangkang) ang ímung tiil, Don’t sit with your
legs spread apart. a spread apart.

kangkárut a having lost all of one’s gambling money; go bankrupt.
v [B12; b6] lose all gambling money; go bankrupt.

*kanghu walay — not have a cent. Wà kuy kanghu diri, I don’t have a
cent with me.

kangrína = kanggrína.

kángù v {1} [AB; c16] shake s.t. erect, be shaken. Kinsay nagkángù sa
lamísa? Nayabu ang sabaw, Who shook the table? The soup spilled. Unsay
nakakángù (nakapakángù) sa ímung ngípun? What caused your teeth to get
loose? Nikángù ang bintánà paghampak sa makusug nga hángin, The window
shook from the impact of the strong wind. Nagakakangù na ang úlu ni
tátay, tigúlang na giyud, Dad’s head is becoming shaky. He’s growing
old. {2} [B] be rattled by a question. Mikangù ku adtung gipangutána
kus abugádu, I got rattled when the lawyer put a question to me.
{3} [B6] for an engine to sputter just before conking out. Mikángù ang
makina dáyung kamatay, The engine sputtered and then conked
out.kangùkangù a rickety and shaky. Kangùkangù nga taytáyan, tigúlang,
A rickety bridge, old man. v [B; b6] be rickety or rickety and old.

kanhi {1} in former times. Kanhi, sa wà pay gíra, barátu ang palalítun,
Formerly, before the war, goods were cheap. Sa kanhing mga tyimpu, In
olden times. {2} the one which was formerly. Si kanhi Prisidinti
Garsíya, Ex-President Garcia. Asáwa níya si kanhi Dga. Maríya Ríyis,
His wife is the former Miss Reyes. Ang kanhing balay lungsud, The
former town hall. {3} at end of phrase: it was [so-and-so] long ago
that s.t. or s.o. achieved a new status. Naminyù siya sa Amirika tulu
ka búlan kanhi, He got married in the States three months ago. kanhíay
= kanhi, 1. kanhiánun a the ones of former times. Ang kanhiánung mga
múda, The styles of former times.

kani = kini_1.

kaniadtu formerly. Kaniadtu ang pantalan didtu sa lawis, Formerly the
pier was at the point. n {1} past event. Nindut handúmun ang átung mga
kaniadtu, It’s nice to think back on what we used to do years
ago.{2} former sweetheart. Mipahíyum tu níya kay íya man tung kaniadtu,
She smiled at him because he was her former sweetheart. niadtu, adtu
short for kaniadtu in all uses but as n. — pa long ago was the first
time—i.e., [so-and-so] has been since long ago. Kaniadtu pa aku
mamaistra, I’ve been a teacher since way back. Kaniadtu pa ku kabalità
ánà, I’ve known about that for ages. Kaniadtu pa aku makakità sa ingun,
That time was the first time I saw the like.

kaníha = ganíha.

kaníla see sila.

kanilun v [A; a1] do s.t. severely or in rapid-fire order. Kusug siya
mukanilun ug súgù mu rag katsílà, He gives a lot of heavy orders like a
Spaniard. Gikanilun kung Tátay ug kasábà kay nakapaburus ku, Father
scolded me severely because I got a girl pregnant. Gikanilun nákug
human ang mga buluhatun, I finished the work up in rapid-fire order.

kanímu see ikaw.

kanína = ganíha.

kaníngag n small to medium-sized tree of the forest, the bark of which
produces cinnamon: Cinnamomum mercadoi and perhaps some other species
of this genus.

kaninyu see kamu.

kánit v {1} [AC3; c16] do, be in close succession, form a close line.
Mikánit ang mga duguung hitabù, Bloody events came one after another.
Nagkánit lang ang mga balay sa daplin sa baybáyun, The houses are one
right next to the other along the seashore. Kaníta (ikánit) pagláray
ang mga silya, Put the chairs in a line close together. {2} [A] spread
fast. Nagkánit ang káyu sa silinganan, The fire has spread through the
neighborhood. Nagkakánit na ang mga hulungíhung, The rumors have
spread. n action of spreading. a in close, uninterrupted succession.

kaníya see síya.

kaniyun_1 n cannon. v [A; a2] shoot with a cannon or artillery piece.
-ásu v [A; a] bomb intensively with artillery. Ang bapur sa níbi
nagkanyunásu sa Nurt Byitnam, The navy ship fired a barrage on North
Vietnam. n artillery bombardment.

kaniyun_2 n {1} bobbin 4″ to 5″ long which holds newly spun yarn or
fiber. {2} warp in a loom. {2a} length of cloth being woven. v [A; a12]
wind thread on spools.

kankan v {1} [A; b6] for movement of water to erode or wash s.t. away.
Ang balud kusug mukankan sa yútà, Waves are rapidly washing away the
beach. Nakankanan ang bakilid, The slope is all eroded. {2} [A; a]
remove soil or sand from an area. Nagkankan siya sa lápuk nga naglúup
sa kanal, He shoveled the mud which clogged the ditch. Átù ning
kankánang dapíta arun mapátag, We’ll remove some of the soil from this
place to make it level. a eroded, worn away. -in- n s.t. that has been
removed by eroding action.

kanlat v [A; a] {1} tear s.t. off or out with force. Dinhay buut
mukanlat sa íyang kwintas, S.o. tried to pull her necklace off. Kinsay
nagkanlat sa abísu sa bulitin burd? Who ripped the notice off the
bulletin board? Ang kakusug sa hángin mauy nakakanlat sa atup, The wind
tore the roof off. {2} throw a basketball downwards with force. Sulud
giyud ug siyay mukanlat sa búla sa gúl, It’s sure to be good if he
hurls the ball into the basket.

kansa (from kang kinsa) -ng whose. Kansang sulat ni? Whose letter is
this? Babáyi, kansang dagway ..., A woman, whose face ...

kansil v [A; a] {1} cross out s.t. written. Kansíla ang subrang
sintins, Cancel the extra sentence. {2} cancel s.t. already set. Kinsay
nagkansil sa ákung urdir? Who cancelled my order? Ímu gánì syang
kansílun sa lista, If you strike her off the list. Gikansílan ang
tindáhan sa lisinsiya sa ilimnun, The store lost its liquor license. -d
a crossed out, cancelled. kansilkansil n k.o. game of ‘she loves me,
she loves me not’ done by cancelling the letters in the two persons’
names.

kansilar = kansil.

kansiling n crime of concealing a deadly weapon. Gikíha siyag kansiling
kay hisakpang naglukluk ug báraw, He was caught with a dagger in his
waist and was charged with concealing a deadly weapon.

kansir n cancer. v [B26; a4b4] become a, get cancer. Makansir ang tumur
ug pasagdan, A tumor may turn into cancer if you let it go. Gikansíran
(gikansir) ang íyang súsu, She has cancer of the breast. -un(→), -us(→)
a having cancer.

kansiyun_1 v [AN; b] serenade. Gikansiyunan námù si Míla gabíi, We
serenaded Mila last night. n song sung in a serenade. karáang — old
tune, s.t. one cannot believe because it has been repeated too often.
Wà nay mutúu ánang ímung karáang kansiyun, No one can believe that old
song and dance of yours any more. -íru n the one who does the singing
in a group of serenaders. v [B156; a12] be the singer.

kansiyun_2, kansiyung n in mahjong, drawing of the piece needed for one
to go mahjong from the flower pile (payil sa búlak). Winning in this
way entitles one to extra pay.

kansursilyu = karsunsilyu.

kanta n song. v {1} [A; a] sing. Káda buntag kantáhun níla ang
nasudnung áwit, They sing the national anthem every morning. {2} [A; c]
confess a crime, squeal on others (humorous slang). Nikanta siya sa
kapulisan, He confessed to the police. Kinsay nagkanta ngadtu sa átung
ámu nga miabsin ku? Who squealed to the boss that I was absent? — mísa
n first high mass offering of a newly-ordained priest. v [A; b6] offer
his first high mass. kantakanta a musical movie or play. v [A13] in a
jolly mood, humming and singing. mísa -da n sung mass. Kantáda ang mísa
karun, There will be a choir at the mass today. v [A12; c1] hold a high
mass. -du s.t. sung as opposed to spoken. Púru kantádu ang mga linya
áning papíla, The lines for this role are all sung.

kantalíta v [AN; b3c] mock, scorn. Sapían nga nagkantalíta sa mga
kabus, A rich man who scorns the poor. Gikantalitáhan siya kay musugut
kang bísan kinsa, She is scorned because she gives herself to anyone.
n scorn. Kantalíta nga katáwa, Mocking laughter. makantalitáhun
a scornful, derisive.

kantidad n {1} amount of money. {2} value or worth of s.t. in money or
its equivalent. v {1} [B346] reach a certain amount or value.
Mukantidad ning baláya ug kinsi mil písus, This house will be worth
fifteen thousand pesos. {2} [c] give a certain monetary value to s.t.
Pila giyuy ímung ikantidad sa itlug kung dinusinahun ku pagpalit? What
price will you quote me for a dozen eggs? táwung di- a person of more
than ordinary social standing.

kantil n drop-off in the ocean close to the shore. a be sharply
dropping. -adu = kantil, a.

kantin n water canteen.

kantína n company store or eating place. v [a2] make into a canteen.
paN- v [A2; c] go to the canteen to eat or shop.

kantíru see kantu.

kantu n corner, edge of s.t. rectangular. Isig gúnit mug kantu sa
kahun, Each of you take hold of a corner of the box. Túa sila sa kantu
mag-istambay, They are hanging around at the street corner. Kantu sa
halígi, The edge of the post. — barína n corner brace used to bore in
cramped places. — buy n punk who hangs around on the street. v [B16;
b6] be a street punk. kantíru n stonemason, stone cutter.

kantur n male singer in a church. v [B16; a2] be a singer. -a n female
singer in a church.

kanù n American (colloquial).

kanukay v [A; a12] disturb s.o.’s peace, disturb s.t. put in order. Way
láing makakanukay sa mga híman sa laburaturyu gawas sa tiglilimpiyu, No
one may disturb the laboratory equipment except the janitor. Mu rag
gikanukayng hulmígas ang syudad sa paglínug, After the earthquake the
city looked like an anthill that had been disturbed. Kanukayun ka sa
mga maniníngil ug daghan kag útang, Your creditors will keep disturbing
you if you have lots of debts.

kan-un see káun.

kanúnay a {1} always, frequently. Muy kanúnay nímung isulti, That’s
what you always say. Muadtu siya kanúnay sa Buhul, He frequently goes
to Bohol. {2} steadily consistent. Kanúnay ang inandaran sa makina, The
engine runs steady. v [A; b5c] do s.t. always. Kanunáyag (kanunáyig)
batil, Keep stirring it all the time. Ang íyang kalampúsan mauy
ikanúnay níya ug sulti námù, His success is all he ever tells us about.
-an(→) v [A13; b5] frequent a place, do s.t. frequently. Sukad niadtu,
magkanunayan siyag bisítang Maríya, From that time on, he always
visited Maria. Kanunayana (kanunayani) ug páhid ang singtánun mung
nawung, Wipe your sweaty face frequently. ma-un a constant.

kanunisar v [A; b5] canonize s.o. into a saint.

kanus-a when? Kanus-a man ka muabut (miabut)? When did you arrive?
Kanus-a ka man mularga? When will you leave? — lang when did
[so-and-so] ever happen (when it never did)! Kanus-a lang gud ku mutíaw
nímu? When did I ever joke with you?

kanúus n loud hissing sound. Sa kanúus sa suplíti dì ta magdúngug, We
won’t hear each other over the roar of the blowtorch. v [A2S; ac1P]
make a loud hissing noise. Mikanúus ang pitrumaks, The pressure lantern
made a hissing sound.

kanyáhay {1} no wonder [such-and-such] a thing usually happens.
Kanyáhay kang maníwang kay dì ka mukáun, No wonder you lose weight. You
don’t eat. {2} sa — eventually, in the long run. Sa kanyáhay mamatay ra
giyud siya tungud sa ínum, In the long run he will die from drinking
too much.

kanyamásu, kanyamu n k.o. thin transparent cloth made of pineapple,
maguey, or abaca fiber. Ang kanyamu mauy tahiun nga kimúna, Kanyamu
cloth is used for the kimona.

kanyunásu see kaniyun_1.

kanyútu n small tube or hollow cylinder: e.g., a cylindrical metal tube
in a kerosene lamp where the wick is inserted, or an enema tip. v [A;
a] use, make a small cylindrical tube. Mikanyútu siyag papil nga
sungsúngan sa upus, He rolled a piece of paper into a small tube to
hold his cigar stub.

kap n short for kapitan, captain.

káp = kalap1, 2.

kápa_1 n cape. v [A; a] put on a cape, make into a cape.

kápa_2 = kápal.

kapagkapag v [A13; c1] walk fast—half running, half walking.
Nagkapagkapag ang asáwa nga niápas sa íyang bána sa sugálan, The wife
half-walked, half-ran to the gambling den after her husband.

kapakápa v [A2S; c1] {1} flap the wings or arms. Nikapakápa siya sa
túbig kay dílì maantigung mulanguy, He flapped his arms in the water
because he did not know how to swim. {2} jump up and down in happiness.
Nagkapakápa ang bátà sa kalípay, The child jumped up and down in
happiness. n fluttering or flapping of wings or arms. Ang kapakápa sa
mga manuk mauy nakapúkaw kanákù, I was awakened by the flapping of
chicken wings.

kapákut see pákut_1.

kapal n k.o. dark gray, highly esteemed fish, as big as a man’s palm,
about as wide as it is long.

kápal, kap-al v [B3; c1] {1} cover, coat s.t. with a thick layer.
Mukápal (makápal) nang buling sa ímung líug ug dì ka manglúgud, Your
neck will be caked with dirt if you do not rub it when you bathe.
Nakakápal ang abug sa mga silya, The dust has formed a thick layer on
the chairs. Gikapálan ug lápuk ang tapalúdu, The fender got mud caked
on it. {2} for an emotion to appear all over the face. Mikápal ang
kalípay sa íyang nawung, His face shone with happiness.

kapálaw n k.o. sweet potato, oblong-shaped, with white meat and reddish
peelings.

kapan, kapankapan = alisiwsiw.

kapan-usan n evening star, said to be so called because it disappears
and by the time it returns its food has become spoiled (napan-us).

kapar v {1} [A; a2] spend money belonging to s.o. else or on a purpose
for which it was not supposed to be spent. Mukapar (mangapar) nà siyag
kwartang ipiyal níya, He is apt to spend money entrusted to him.
Nakapar nákù ang igbalayad sa sugà, I spent the money I was supposed to
pay the electric bill with. {2} [A; a12] buy, take all of s.t. Dì mi
kapalit ug kaparun sa nigusyanti, We won’t be able to buy any if the
merchant takes all of it. Kaparun námù ang tanang lingkuránan, We will
take all the seats.

kapasidad n {1} power one has to do s.t., power of a machine. Sa
kapasidad sa pagkaprisidinti, mabúhat nákù nà, As president it is
within my powers to do that. Pilay kapasidad niíning pabrikáha? How
much can this factory produce? Walà sa ákung kapasidad ang pagpahulam
nímug kwarta, It’s not within my powers to lend you money. Susíhun
giyud ang kapasidad sa mulún, We must check the borrower’s capacity to
repay. Makinang may kapasidad nga kwarintay singku kabalyus, A motor
with a capacity of 45 hp. {2} amount s.t. has space to hold. Ang
sinihan may kapasidad nga dus míl ka táwu, The movie house has a
capacity of two thousand people. v [A2] have a certain power or
capacity to hold.

kapatas n {1} foreman. {2} one who loafs on the job, esp. in hard
manual work done by a group (humorous). Dì mahuman kay daghan mang
kapatas, It won’t get finished because there are too many supervisors.
v [B6; a2] {1} be a foreman, act as a foreman. {2} act like a
supervisor and not work.

kápaw v [B3; cP] {1} come to the surface. Mikápaw ang sílik sa íhu, The
shark fin appeared above the water. {1a} rise up into s.t. Mikápaw ang
ayruplánu sa kapunawpunáwan, The airplane went up into outer space. Usa
ka maitum nga láraw nakakápaw sa íyang hunàhúnà, A diabolical plan
hatched in his mind. {2} for an emotion to show. Nakápaw sa íyang
nawung ang túmang kasukù, Intense anger showed on his face. n amount
that s.t. shows above a surface. Ang kápaw sa submarínu, The amount of
the submarine which appears above the water. saling- see salingkápaw.

kapay n {1} pectoral fins on a fish. {2} anything analogous that
propels: wing, flipper. Ang mga kapay nga gigámit sa mananáwum, The
flippers the diver used. Kapay sa langgam, The wings of the bird. v [A;
a] {1} swim, fly with flapping motions. Tiil na lay ikapay ug kapúyun
na ka, Kick your feet to help you swim if you get tired. {2} make
flippers, wings for s.o. or s.t. kapaykápay v [A; c1] flap s.t.
repeatedly. Nagkapaykápay ang kabaw sa íyang dunggan pag-ábug sa
lángaw, The carabao flapped its ears to shoo off the flies.

kapáyas n papaya, small tree which bears a melon-like fruit. It is
eaten ripe as a melon, unripe as a vegetable, esp. pickled, and the
leaves are used medicinally: Carica papaya. katkat, dap-us sa — v have
intercourse (humorous). — sa Amirikánu variety of large and often
tasteless papaya. -un a {1} tending to cry readily, like the papaya,
the skin of which exudes sap at the slightest touch. Kapayásun nang
batáa, That child is a cry-baby. {2} for breasts to be pendulous like
papayas. Tambuk ang mga anak niánang babayhána kay kapayásun man siyag
dughan, The children of that woman must be fat because she has large
and pendulous breasts. v [B12] get to be a cry-baby, have pendulous
breasts.

kapdrap n cough drops.

kapi_1 n {1} coffee bean, plant, drink. {2} brown in color. Panaptun
nga lútù kapi, A piece of dark brown cloth. v {1} [A13; b(1)] make,
prepare coffee. {2} [A1; a12] make into coffee, grind into coffee.
{3} [B2; a] turn brown in color. Kapihun ku ning ákung sinínà nga putì,
I’ll dye my white dress brown. {3a} [A1] wear s.t. brown. Magkapi ang
dúnay dibusiyun sa Karmin, A devotee of the Lady of Carmel wears brown.
paN- v [A2; b6(1)] drink coffee. kapihun, kapinhun a colored s.t. like
coffee. -tíra n coffeepot.

*kapi_2, *kápi_1 sa — nga instead of doing [so-and-so]. Sa káping
muhílak, mikatáwa ang bátà, Instead of crying, the child laughed.

kápi_2 = kalapi_1.

kapi aspirína n brand of aspirin.

kapìkapì v [A13] for an emaciated person or animal to move with unsure
steps. Nagkapìkapì na intáwun ang tisísun, The T.B. patient is walking
unsteadily.

kapilya n small chapel or temporary chapel built annually to honor a
patron saint. v [A1; a2] construct a chapel.

kapin v [B456; b(1)] be in excess or extra. Mukapin sa gatus ang
mitambung, More than a hundred people attended. Nagkapin ka na sa ímung
pagpasagad, Your irresponsibility is getting too much. Kapinan ug sulti
sa tabian ang íyang mga libak, The gossip always exaggerates the
stories she tells behind people’s backs. Kapin sa tungà ang ganansiya,
The profit was more than half. — kun kúlang more or less. Ang íyang mga
apu kapin kun kúlang, singkuwinta ka buuk, He has fifty grandchildren,
more or less. — nga buut ulterior motive. Ayaw laínag sabut. Way kaping
buut niíning ákung ihátag, Do not misunderstand me. I have no ulterior
motives in giving you this. may (way) — nga kabubut-un having strings
attached. Dúna giyuy kaping kabubut-un ang paghátag, kay unyà lisud
pagbalíbad, There are strings attached to that gift, because she’s
going to have a hard time refusing him after she has accepted it. — pa
moreover. Kapin pa, nasáyud na giyud ang bána sa íyang gibúhat didtu,
Moreover, the husband also found out about everything she did there.
pa- v [A; c] give an excess or extra. Ngánu bang mukapin pa man giyud
siyag sulti? Why does he have to say more than what is necessary?
Gipakapinan kug usa ka buuk kay mipalit kug usa ka dusína, She gave me
an extra one, because I bought a whole dozen. n extra, s.t. additional
given. hiN-, hiN-(→) v [B1456] be done to an excessive degree.
Naghingápin ra ang íyang pag-inum, He drinks too much. -an(→)
{1} having anomalous growth s.w. in the body. {2} the donkey’s ears
abalone, or any oval-shaped abalone, so called because there is more
flesh in proportion to the shell-size than other types of bivalves. -an
= -an(→), 2. tag-(→) each more than. Tagkápin sa gatus ámung báhin, We
get more than a hundred as our share.

káping n capping ceremonies for nurses. v [A1; b(1)] hold capping
ceremonies.

káping sú n coping saw.

kápir n copper.

kapisnun n old variety of white, fine-grained rice.

kapistuwa n k.o. medium-sized forest tree producing a hard wood, used
as lumber.

kápit n influence or special connections for getting s.t. Dì ka madáwat
ug wà kay kápit sa byúru, You won’t be successful if you don’t have
influence in the bureau. v [A12; b6] manage to have s.o. influential to
whom one can turn. Makakápit ta kang Sidru ug mapílì siyang diputádu,
We can have s.o. to pull strings for us if Sidro is elected
congressman.

kapital n {1} capital letter. {2} capital city. {3} capital, resources.
{3a} quality that is an asset to success. Kapital na nímu nang ímung
pangútuk, Your brains are an asset to you. v {1} [A; c1] write in
capital letters. Kapitala (ikapital) pagsuwat ang mga ngálan sa táwu,
Write the names of persons in capital letters. {2} [B126; a12] make
into a capital city. {3} [A; c] put up capital. Niuprisir siya nga mauy
mukapital sa manukan, He offered to put up the capital for a poultry
business. {4} [c6] use as a source of profit or benefit. Ang kaálam ug
katakus mauy maáyung ikapital sa panginabúhì, Knowledge and skill are
assets in our struggle for existence. -ista n capitalist. v [B156] be a
capitalist or financier.

kapitan n {1} boat captain. {2} army captain. — sa baryu n barrio
captain, the titular head of the village. — birínu n the one who treats
when a group eats and drinks. v [A1] treat a company. Kinsa may
mukapitan birínu sa átung nangakáun? Whose treat is this dinner?

kapitíra see kapi_1.

kapitiríya, kapitirya n cafeteria, usually serving snacks, not heavy
meals. v [A; c1] make, have a cafeteria. paN- v [A2; b6] go to a
cafeteria.

kapitul n provincial government building housing the provincial
government administrative offices.

kapitulu n chapter of a book, Bible.

kapitulyu = kapitul.

kapkap_1 v {1} [A; b6] grow clinging onto s.t. Bágun nga nagkapkap sa
paril, A vine climbing on the wall. Dakù na ang dákit sa káhuy nga
íyang gikapkápan, The strangling fig is larger than the tree it has
grown around. {2} [A3N] grope for s.t. Nagkapkap (nagpangapkap) na lang
kung naglakaw sa ngitngit, I had to grope my way in the dark. {3} [A;
b(1)] search a body for s.t. Gikapkápan sa gwardiya ang buut musulud,
The guard searched those who wanted to get inside. {4} [A2N] struggle
to obtain s.t. Mukapkap (mangapkap) giyud ang táwu arun mabúhì, A man
has to struggle to live. {5} [AN; a2b2] sneak into a house with the
intention of having intercourse with a girl. paN- v [A] {1} grope.
{1a} grope for s.t. to say. Ang táwung namakak mangapkap sa unsay
itubag, A person who lies gropes for what to say.

kapkap_2 = kalapkap.

kapkáp n k.o. trigger fish, bigger than the pugut, and black in color.

kaplag (from pálag) v [A12; ab2] find s.t., come across s.t. Adtu níya
sa Mindanaw kaplága ang íyang kapaláran, He will seek his fortune in
Mindanao. Nakaplagan na ang tambal sa tísis, The cure for TB has
already been discovered. Hikaplagan na ang taguánan sa tulisan, They
found the hiding place of the robbers. Bag-ung kaplag sa maputing
tábil, New movie discovery.

kapling n {1} cuff links. {2} coupling, mechanical device for joining
things. v {1} [A; b6] wear, make into cuff links. {2} [A; b] join s.t.
with coupling. di- having cuff links.

kapri = agtà, n 1.

kapritsu n caprice. Kapritsu tung ámung pagminyù, We got married on a
whim. v [A; c1] make whimsical demands. Nagkapritsu ang asáwa níyang
burus, His pregnant wife is making capricious demands. -sa = -su
(female). -su a capricious.

kápul v [A; b6] form a thick layer that sticks. Mukápul ang tayà sa
sulab, Rust will form a thick layer on the blade. Gikapúlan ug kayankan
ang hunsuy, The pipe had a thick layer of tar in it. n encrustation,
coating. Ang kápul sa buling sa íyang líug, The layer of caked-up dirt
on his neck.

kapulíhay see púli.

kapulut (not without l) n bird trap made of a sticky sap extracted from
a tree and placed on a stick tied to a branch. Any bird that alights on
the stick will adhere. v [A; a] catch s.t. with this trap.

kapun v {1} [A; b5] castrate or spay domestic animals. Kapni (kapna)
ang iring arun dì mahígal, Castrate the cat so it won’t get over-sexed.
{2} [b2] take s.t. away from s.t., take a little bit out of s.t.
Gikapnan ang kík, The cake has had s.t. removed. Nakúlang ang ákung
suklì kay gikapnan níya, I didn’t get enough change because she held
some of it back. {3} [A; b] cut off a portion from a plant to make
growth take place in a desirable part. Kapni ang tabákù arun managkù
ang dáhun, Cut off the terminal buds of the tobacco plant to make the
leaves grow large. kinapnan n castrated.

kápung n woman prostitute (colloquial).v [B126; a2] be a prostitute.
paN- v [A2; c] patronize a prostitute, engage in prostitution. -an(→)
n red-light district.

kapunsa n a k.o. fine-grained, white rice with a savory, permeating
smell.

kapupungtan see púngut.

kapus_1 v [B; ab] for s.t. which cannot be replaced to be practically
running out. Nagkapus ang ámung bugas, ug dúgay pa ang swildu, Our rice
is practically gone, and we won’t be paid for a long time. Nagkakapus
na ang panahun nga gilugway kanákù, My time has practically run out.

kapus_2 = kap-us.

kap-us v [A; a1] {1} finish eating. Bag-u pa giyud kaming nakakap-us sa
ámung panihápun, We have just finished our supper.{2} finish s.t. else.
Mahingpit giyud ang átung pagpahúlay kun makap-us na ang átung
kinabúhì, We can have eternal rest when our life is over. a be done
eating. ‘Mangáun ta.’—‘Salámat na lang. Kap-us na ku,’ ‘Would you like
to eat?’—‘No, thanks. I’m done eating.’

kaput = kubut.

káput_1 = kuláput.

káput_2 = kápit.

kapúti n {1} raincoat. {2} condom (humorous). v {1} [A; a] wear, make
into a raincoat.{2} [A; b6] use a condom.

kápuy a {1} tired, weary, exhausted through exertion. {2} s.t. that is
too much trouble, one who is too lazy to do. Dì ku musimba kay kápuy, I
won’t go to church because I’m too lazy. — na it is too much to
believe, it’s tiring to hear this repeated thing. Kápuy na ug tinuúrun
nímu kug prí sa sini, I’m sick of hearing you say it. I doubt if you
would really treat me to a movie. v{1} [A123P; a4b4] be tired. Pahúway
ta kay gikápuy (gikapuy, gikapúyan) ku, Let’s take a rest. I’m already
tired. {2} [b4] be too lazy to do s.t., find s.t. too much trouble to
do. Kapúyan ku mutambung ug parti, I find it tedious to attend parties.
Kapúyan ku malígù inigmata, I am too lazy to take a bath when I wake
up. {3} [a4b4] be bored with s.t. oft repeated. Gikapúyan (gikápuy) kug
pamínaw sa íyang mga panghambug, I have grown tired of his bragging.
Gikapúyan (gikápuy) na kug kináun ug bulad, I am tired of eating dried
fish. paN- v [A23; a4b4] be affected with a sore, tired feeling in the
bones, of the sort one feels when ill. May hilánat ku maung nangápuy
ákung láwas, I have a fever so my bones are all weary.n feeling of
weariness. ka- n exhaustion, weariness.

kapyaspirína = kapi aspirína.

kapyut {1} = kulapyut. {2} = kápit.

kára n a gambling game just like hantak but using two coins. dubli —
see dubli. kára krus = kára. laba- n washcloth. v [A2C3; ac3] play
kára.

kárà v {1} [A; c1] speak rapidly with excitement. Mikárà siyag sugílun
sa nahitabù níla pagbagyu, She described their experiences in the
typhoon with great excitement. Hilum, nagkárà lang nang bàbà mu, Keep
quiet, you blabber-mouth. {2} [A23] rush, go excitedly and hurriedly.
Mikárà siya sa bangku pagkadawat sa tsíki, She excitedly rushed to the
bank when she received the check.

karáan see dáan.

karab, kárab v [A; b6] for monkeys to chatter. Nagkarab ang ungguy mu
rag dinhay gikahadlúkan, The monkey was chattering as though there was
s.t. it was scared of.n monkey chatter.

karabalyas = karbalyas.

karabansus n k.o. bean with long pods having four, longitudinal,
angular lobes, which are eaten: Psophocarpus tetragonolobus.

karabaw_1 = kalabaw.

karabaw_2 expression of slight annoyance. Karabaw. Sakit sa ákung tiil,
Damn! That hurt! Karabaw. Kadúgay adtung ákung gisúgù, Damn! What could
be taking him so long?

karábu = klábu.

karadutsi = kalatsutsi.

karadyaw = kaáyu (dialectal). see áyu.

kárag v {1} [A2; a] wander about. Imbis ka magkárag, maáyu pang magtuun
ka, Instead of wandering about, you’d do better to study. Unsa pay
inyung karágun, gabíi nang dakù? What do you all want to go out for
when it’s already night? {2} [A2] do in a hurry, right away. Mikárag
siyag trabáhu pag-abut sa íyang agálun, She rushed back to her work
when her mistress arrived. (→), -an(→) a {1} restless, given to
wandering. Karagan (karag) siya. Dílì magpuyù sa balay, He is restless.
He does not stay at home. {2} for women to go out or deport themselves
uninhibitedly (with lots of motion, gestures) in a way deemed
unsuitable for women. Karagan (karag) nímu à! Ayawg yapayapa ug musulti
ka, How immodest you are! Don’t throw your arms around when you talk.
{2a} for a top to jump about instead of spinning steadily. Karag
(karagan) kaáyu nang ímung kasing, Your top moves about as it spins.
{3} — sa mga babáyi tending to go after women. v [B; b6] {1} get to be
restless, wandering, uninhibited. {2} for a top to jump instead of spin
steadily.

karahay_1 v [AN; b] do s.t. by borrowing s.t. which s.o. else owns.
Nakapanahì ku kay nakakarahay (nakapangarahay) man ku sa íyang makina,
I managed to sew some things because I got to use her sewing machine.
pa- v [AN; ab] lend s.t. for s.o. to use while the owner is not using
it. Pakarahaya ra ku sa ímung makinilya, May I use your typewriter
while you’re not using it? Dì níla pakarahayan ang ílang utaw, They
don’t lend their iron.

karahay_2 n cast-iron skillet with a round bottom, 2–4″ smaller in
diameter than the kaláhà with proportionate depth.

karahay_3 v [A2; b4] leave a place in a hurry. Unsa may naingnan átu?
Mikarahay man tu pag-abut nákù? What’s the matter with her? She left as
soon as I arrived. Amù ang tanang líhuk run kay gikarahayan mi sa mga
míd, We do all the work now because our household help walked out on us
suddenly.

karáhu_1 n half-humorous reference to a big, clumsy, slow-witted
person, often said in anger, but not necessarily so. Natumban ákung
tiil sa karáhu, The lout stepped on my feet. Putì, dílì itum, karahúa
ka, I said white, not black, you oaf.

karáhu_2 n lizard fish: Trachinocephalus sp. and Saurida sp.

karáhu_3 n penis (slang).

karakara v [A; b(1)] hurry s.o. or oneself up. Káda human sa ámung
trabáhu mukarakara dáyun kug paúlì, As soon as work is over, I hurry
home. Dì ka angayan mukarakára níyag súgù, It’s not right for you to
give her orders and tell her to hurry it up. karakarahun a fond of
hurrying others.

karaktir_1 n character in fiction.

karaktir_2 n one of the nine mahjong pieces that have Chinese
characters as their design. v {1} [B126] for the piece as drawn to turn
out to be a ‘character’. {2} [A12; b8] get a ‘character’ mahjong piece.

karakul n general name for volute shells or other univalves similar in
shape.

káral v {1} [A2S3] rattle, give a clattering sound. Mikáral ang baldi
ngadtu sa kanal, The pail fell into the ditch with a clattering noise.
{2} [c1] do s.t. in a rattling, noisy way. Ayaw ikáral (karála)
paggúyud ang silya, Do not drag the chair so noisily. n clattering
sound.

karamba reference to s.o. made in mild anger, but not implying anything
about the person to whom the reference is made. Karamba ning bat-ána.
Nangáyù na pug túbig, Darn this child! He asked for another glass of
water.

karambúla n {1} free-for-all cockfight in which three or more cocks
take part. {2} free-for-all among people. {3} way of playing billiards
such that the cue ball must hit both balls to score. {3a} score thus
made. v {1} [AC; c1] hold a free-for-all cockfight. {2} [C; a2b3] have
a free-for-all fight. Sa iláwum sa íyang dughan ingun sa adúnay daghang
butang nga nagkarambúla, It was as if there were numerous matters
fighting it out with each other deep in his breast.Husáyun ta lang ni.
Ngánu bang karambuláhun pa man giyud? Let’s settle this case amicably.
Why do we have to fight it out? {3} [AC; b] play carom billiards.

karamílu n white sugar that has been melted and allowed to harden, cut
into rectangular pieces. It is used for beverages or flavoring. v [A1;
a2] make rock sugar, put rock sugar into s.t.

karampag n k.o. sweet potato with slightly lobed and almost rounded
roots (some irregularly shaped) white-skinned, with very light yellow,
mealy meat, not sweet.

karamúsing n noisy fight, such as that between cats and dogs. v [C23;
b3] have a noisy fight.

karamutsing = kamuritsing. see muritsing.

kárang n {1} stilts or similar contrivance to walk on, used for walking
through water or for amusement. {2} = andadur. a tall and lanky. v [A;
a] {1} walk on stilts, make into stilts. {2} = andadur.

karansa, karansay v {1} [A] be active and moving about a good deal.
Nagkaransa ang duha ka buksidur nga nagpagayun, The two boxers danced
about waiting for a chance. Nagkaransa na sad ang byúda, The widow is
back in action again. {2} [C] have a noisy quarrel, ruckus.
Nagkakaransa na sad ang magtiáyung palaaway, The quarrelsome couple is
at it again. n action of moving about a lot, quarreling. Karansa sa
istukáda, Dancing about in fencing.

karapáta n {1} k.o. fast multiplying, blood-sucking mite that burrows
under the skin in the pubic hair causing intense itching. It is
commonly spread by prostitutes. {2} k.o. tick. v [a4] be infested with
this k.o. mite or tick.

karapatdápat humorous euphemism for karapáta.

karapitsi n sugarcane crushing apparatus composed of two steel rollers
stood vertically on a platform, turned by a long piece of timber which
is pulled by a carabao. The carabao is made to walk round and round to
turn the rollers while the sugarcane stalks are fed into them one or
two at a time, and the juice is squeezed out into a vat. v [A; a12]
crush and squeeze juice out of sugarcane stalks with the karapitsi.
karapitsihun ug bàbà having a mouth like a karapitsi—i.e., a voracious
eater.

karapkarap v [A13] grope blindly for s.t. to hold on to. Nagkarapkarap
ming misúbay sa pasilyu kay napáwung ang sugà, We groped our way along
the corridors because the lights went out.

karas v [A; a] {1} rake out s.t. growing, harrow. Karasa ang mga
sagbut, Remove the weeds by raking. Karasi ang humayan human madáru,
Harrow the paddy after you plow it. {2} scratch lightly. Nakaras ang
íyang buktun sa tunuk, His arm got scratched by the thorns. {3} scratch
out, cross off. Karasun ku ang ngálan mu sa lista, I’ll cross your name
off the list. n {1} rake, harrow. {2} light scratch. {3} marks made to
cross s.t. off.

káras_1 a {1} for citrus to be acrid and biting. {2} for the throat to
be raspy, dry, and sore. v {1} [B46; b6] for citrus fruit to be biting
in taste due to acidity. {2} [B3N; a2b4] for the throat to be raspy,
dry, and sore. Nagkáras ang ákung tutunlan pagkináun sa buúngun nga
káras ug lamì, I felt a stinging sensation in my throat after eating
too much of the acrid pomelo.

káras_2 v [B6] do s.t. suddenly in a hurry. Mikáras siyag saka sa táas
pag-abut sa mga bisíta kay nagkarsunsilyu lang, He suddenly rushed
upstairs when the visitors arrived because he was in his underwear.

karaskaras v [AP] behave roughly and ill-mannered, as when drunk. Dì ta
makakaraskaras sa parti kay purmal man, You can’t let your hair down in
the party, for it is a formal affair.

karat v [B; c1] for a top to keep jumping about instead of spinning
steadily. Mukarat (makarat) ang ímung kasing ug dì matàrung ang
lansang, Your top will jump about if the nail is not in straight.

kárat_1 a {1} giving off a grating sound like the sound given off by a
sharp-pointed metal instrument rubbed on a surface. {2} = árat_1. v [B;
c1P] give off a scraping or grating sound. Nakárat (mikárat) na ang
tíngug sa radiyupúnu kay hilis na ang dágum, The victrola gives off a
raspy sound because the needle is worn down. Makakárat (makapakárat) sa
pawuntin pin kung iduut ni pagsuwat, Pressing down hard on the fountain
pen causes it to give off a rough, grating sound.

karáti n karate. v {1} [A23] practice, do the art of karate. Ayaw siyag
hagíta kay kamau nang mukaráti, Don’t challenge him because he is
skilled in karate. {2} [A; ab2] deliver a karate chop with the side of
the palm. Buak ning halublak ug ákung karatíhun, This cement block will
break in two if I hit it with a karate chop. karatihay v [C2] engage in
karate blows against each other. -sta, -syan n one versed in karate.
v [B126; a12] become an expert in karate.

karatil_1 v [A; b3c] move away from s.w. fast and suddenly. Pagsirbátu
sa pulis nikaratil ug panágan ang mga nanaghantak, When the cop blew
his whistle the gamblers immediately took to their heels.

karatil_2 n large reel to which strands of hemp fiber twisted into rope
are wound, used in rope manufacture. v [AN; a] reel twisted hemp
strands on a frame in the process of making rope.

karatsutsi = kalatsutsi.

karatsutsu v [A; a] pile or roll chips or coins into groups of the same
denomination. n pile or roll of chips or coins of the same
denomination.

karatula n signboard, small hanging sign. v [A13; a] put up a
signboard.

karátung = kalátung.

káraw_1 v {1} [A; a1] stir or shuffle s.t. around to mix it. Gikáraw
nákù ang mga pitsas sa madyung, I shuffled the mahjong pieces. Karáwa
ang armirul arun dílì magbitulbitul, Mix the starch so it won’t get
lumpy. {2} [B; c1] shake back and forth. Mukáraw ang mga dáhun sa
balíli inighuyup sa hángin, The blades of grass will stir when the wind
blows. Nagkaraw ang síga sa kandílà, The candle flame is flickering.
Karáwa (ikáraw) ang langkay arun manglúpad ang mga máya, Shake the dry
coconut fronds to scare away the rice birds. {3} [AN; a12] touch or
take things belonging to s.o. Kinsa na puy nangáraw sa ákung midiyas?
Who could have used my socks? Walay makapangáraw sa butang sa upisína,
Nobody can touch things in the office. -an(→) a tending to touch or
take s.o.’s things. karawkaraw v [A; a12] {1} move around continuously.
{2} busy oneself in household chores. Bísi ku kay daghan kug
karawkarawun sa balay, I’m busy because I have lots of things to do in
the house.

káraw_2 v {1} [B46] make a clattering noise. {2} [AC; b6(1)] play
mahjong (so called from the noise made by the pieces). n noise made by
movements of things that fall or are knocked.

karáwi n k.o. upland rice.

karaygan n the right side of cloth, the side which shows the design, as
opposed to the obverse side which does not. v [c1] have clothing such
that the right side shows. Karaygana (ikaraygan) ang lugum nga kulur sa
panaptun, Sew the cloth with the darker color on the outside.

karbalyas n k.o. crevally: Caranx sp.

karbansus = karabansus.

karbáyin, karbin n carbine rifle.

karbun_1 n {1} coal. {2} carbon paper used in duplicating written or
typed work. v [b] use carbon paper. Karbúni ang sulat, Make a carbon of
that letter. — kápi n {1} carbon copy. {2} exact replica; children that
look just like their relatives. Ang ímung anak karbun kápi giyud nímu,
Your son looks exactly like you. v [A; c1] make a carbon copy of s.t.†

karbun_2, karbǔn n largest public market in Cebu City. paN- v [A2; c6]
go shopping at the Carbon market. Mangarbun mi ug mabirnis kay tábù, We
go shopping at Carbon on Fridays because that’s the market day. —
kálids humorous appellation for the public market in Cebu, so called
because most of the public transportation routes to the market also
pass the schools, and where other passengers are heading for this and
that college, the maids are heading for Carbon.

karbunátu = bikarbunátu.

karburadur n carburetor.

karbúru n calcium carbide. v [b1] treat a fruit with calcium carbide to
make it ripen faster. kinarburúhan n fruit that has been treated with
calcium carbide.

kard n {1} student’s report card. {2} in set phrases: balintayins,
birtdi, krismas, pus — Valentine’s, birthday, Christmas, post card.
v [A; a] list s.t. on a card.

kardába n variety of banana, 6–8″ in length, square in shape, and
yellow when ripe. Usually cooked, though edible raw.

kardinal n cardinal in the church. v [B126; a12] be, become a cardinal.

kardíru = kaldíru.

karga v [A; c] {1} load, put in or on a conveyance. Suhúli ang nagkarga
sa bukag sa trák, Pay the man who loaded the basket on the truck.
Ikarga ring ságing sa balsa, Load these bananas on the sled. {1a} [A]
take a load. Mukarga ug tris tuniládas ning tráka, This truck can take
a load of three tons. {2} charge a firearm or battery. Gikargáhan nákù
ang ripli, I loaded the rifle. Gikargáhan na ba ang ákung batiríya? Has
my storage battery been charged? {2a} [A] hold a certain charge. Dì na
mukarga ning batiriyáha, This battery cannot be charged any further.
{3} [A; c1] carry s.o. in one’s arms. Akuy mukarga sa bátà kay
nagkagúkam ka sa mga dad-unun, I’ll carry the baby for you. You’ve got
enough to carry. {4} [A1; c] include figures in another figure. Kinsay
nagkarga sa sumáda karun sa lista sa miáging búlan? Who included
today’s totals in last month’s list? Ikarga ni sa útang nákù, Add this
to what I owe you. {5} [A13; b6] charge s.o. for s.t. falsely.
Gikargáhan siyag útang, He was falsely charged a debt. {5a} charge
interest on. Ang ákung útang gikargáhan ug diyis pursiyintu, I was
charged ten percent interest on my debt. n {1} load. hustu sa — well
prepared. Antis mularga, hustu sa karga, Before venturing into s.t.,
everything should be prepared in advance. trák di- cargo truck. {2} —
búru, búrut k.o. card game, similar to idiot’s delight. Each player
gets five cards. The dealer pulls a card from the pack and puts it down
face up. Each player follows suit. Whoever cannot follow suit must draw
from the pack until he can. The one who puts down the highest card
leads. The object is to rid oneself of his cards. v [A; c] play carga
burro. — siráda a full, filled to capacity. Wà mi makasakay kay pulus
karga siráda ang mga trák, We did not manage to get a ride because the
buses were filled to capacity. Karga siráda ang ákung tiyan adtung
kaúna, My stomach was filled to bursting after that dinner. v [B12; c1]
become full. paN- v [A2; b6] work as a laborer loading goods. -da
n {1} action of loading cargo on a boat. Ug way kargáda, wà say trabáhu
ang mga kargadur sa piyir, If there is no loading to do, the stevedores
are idle. {2} supplies or materials issued to an army, workers, and the
like. v [A; c] {1} supply with materials or provisions. Kargadáhan mug
dúgang bála, You will be supplied with additional bullets. {2} give
supplies to. Ang SWA mikargáda (nagkargáda) ug panaptun sa nasunúgan,
The SWA supplied the fire victims with materials for clothing. -du
a {1} loaded, full. Dì na pasakyan ang trák. Kargádu na, The truck will
take no more passengers. It’s full. {2} drunk. Ayaw na siyag paimna kay
kargádu na, Don’t give him any more to drink because he’s already
loaded. {3} full of, having lots of. Kargádu ug búnga ang nangkà, The
jackfruit is full of fruits. {3a} most of. Kargádu sa mga istudiyanti
karun way batásan, Most of the students nowadays are ill-mannered.
{3b} be present in large quantities. Kargádug Insik sa Hungkung, Hong
Kong is full of Chinese. Kargádu mga way kwarta ang nagpuyù dinhi, A
lot of the people that live here don’t have money. Kargádug asin ang
ímung timpla, You use a heck of a lot of salt in your cooking. v [B1;
c1] {1} get to be loaded. {2} get drunk. -dur(→) n one who loads things
onto a conveyance. v [B156; a12] become a loader, stevedore. -mintu
n cargo, baggage.

karganti a making a pest or nuisance of oneself. v [b6] consider a
pest. Gikargantíhan ku ánang batáa, sígig pangáyug singku bísag
gibalibáran na, I find that child a pest because he keeps asking for a
nickel even though I already told him no.

kargu n financial responsibility. Ímung kargu ang pagpaiskuyla sa ímung
anak, It is your responsibility to send your child to school. Kargu sa
suluguun ang mga plátung íyang nabuak, The servant is held responsible
for any plate he breaks. v {1} [A; a1] take financial responsibility.
{2} [A; c6] hold s.o. responsible.

*kari_1 — dipáta n dish of beef joints and feet with banana bud and
eggplants cooked into a thick soup with rice and peanuts added.
karikari n a dish of beef joints and feet cooked with Chinese spices.
v [A; a2] have one of these two dishes.

kari_2 {1} = kiri. {2} = ari (dialectal).

kári n curry powder. v [A; a12] cook with curry. karihan n curry powder
container.

karidad n charity. íhas di — Daughters of Charity, a religious order.

karikatúra n drawn caricature. v [A; b5c1] portray in caricature.

karikit = kurikit.

karína n k.o. skirt with no tail which gathers around the hips and with
projecting ends used for tying around the shoulders, usually of
home-woven cloth. It is worn around the house. v [AN; b6c1] wear the
karína, make into a karína.

karindiríya n a small eatery where ready-to-eat foods are displayed.
v [A13; a2] engage in a carenderia business. paN- v [A13; b] go to a
carenderia to order food.

karingking v [A23] for women to conduct themselves so as to attract
admirers. Kanúnay na siyang magmik-ap run, mikaringking na tingáli, She
always makes her face up nowadays. She must be trying to attract
admirers. n paramour, mistress (humorous).

karinyu n showing of affection by words or action. v [AC; b] express
affection physically or with words. Ang hustis mikarinyu sa íyang
kustumir, The nightclub hostess caressed her customer. Karinyúhun únà
ang pagdúlug úsà magkúan, We engage in tender exchange of affections
before we do it. Karinyúhan gánì siya sa íyang anak, mawā̀ dáyun ang
kasukù, As soon as his little girl kisses him, his anger vanishes.
-sa_1 a {1} showing affection. Dì ku kabalíbad sa karinyúsa nákung
anak, I cannot refuse my daughter because she is so affectionate.
{2} being charming in action and speech. Ang mga Ilungga karinyúsag
tíngug bísag masukù, The Ilongo women talk sweetly, even when they are
angry. v [B12; c1] {1} become affectionate. {2} become charming and
pleasant. Ang íyang sanag nga pagtan-aw sa kinabúhì mauy nakakarinyúsa
níya, Her bright attitude on life allows her to be sweet and charming.
-su = karinyúsa (male).

karinyúsa_2 n {1} folk dance in 3/4 time. {2} song which accompanies
this dance. v [A2C2; b6] dance the cariñosa.

karír = kírir.

karíra_1 n {1} horse race. {2} = anilyu, n1, v. v [A13; b6c1] have or
run a horse race. karirahan n {1} race track for horse racing.
{2} racehorse.

karíra_2 n career.

karista (from káru) n one who works in a sawmill placing the logs to be
sawed on the carriage that conveys them to the revolving blade.
v [B156] become a loader.

karíta_1 n {1} spool for thread. {2} spoolful.

karíta_2 n Carreta, name of an area near Cebu City, where there is a
leprosarium.

karíti n {1} spool. {2} spoolful. v [A; c1] wind s.t. on a spool.
karitihan n bobbin on a sewing machine or on which thread is wound.

karitil = karatil_1.

karitíla n {1} calesa, k.o. horse-drawn cab, holding two passengers
facing frontwards. {2} = karitilya. v [A1] {1} ride such a carriage.
{2} = karitilya.

karitilya n wheelbarrow or small three-wheeled cart for transporting
light items. v [A; c1] load or transport s.t. in a wheelbarrow.

karitíra, karitíras n main road or public highway running outside of a
town. v [A13; a2] make, make into a highway. paN- v [A2] go along the
main road. — prubinsiyal main or arterial road or highway.

karítis = karíti.

karitun n {1} device consisting of a pole and a wheel or two wheels,
from which a load is suspended. {2} drifter, one who always goes about
anywhere like the karitun. v [A; c1] transport s.t. with a karitun.

karkulu, karkúlu v [A; a12] reckon, calculate. Karkulúha ug pilay átung
magastu sa piknik, Estimate how much we will spend for the picnic.
n {1} reckoning, calculation. {2} viewpoint, way one regards a
situation. Sa ákung karkúlu mu rag dílì háyan ang gíra, As I see it,
there’s no likelihood of war.

karlang_1 = bisul.

karlang_2 n liar, boaster (euphemism).

karmas = kamras.

karmilítus n candy.

karmílu = karamílu.

karmin n {1} the Virgin of Mount Carmel. {2} badge worn by Carmelite
nuns and devotees. {3} habit worn by devotees of the Virgin of Carmel.
v [A; b] wear this habit. paN- v [A2] make oneself up pretty, smell
nice (like the Virgin of Carmel). Nangarmin siya kay mamasíyu, She’s
making herself up nice because she is going for a walk. lubag ang paN-
what happened is the result of [agent]’s own stupidity (lit. your
dressing up has turned sour). Lubag na ang ímung pangarmin. Ayaw na
pagkatkat ug usab, You brought it on yourself. Next time do not climb.
v [A; b4] for s.t. to happen to one as a result of his foolishness.
Naglubag na ang ímung pangarmin, What’s happened is your own doing.

karminatíbu n carminative, a k.o. liquid medicine for expelling gas
from the stomach.

karnába = kardába.

karnabal_1 n carnival or fair. v [A1; b6] hold a carnival or fair. paN-
v [A2] go to a fair or carnival. -an(→) fair grounds.

karnabal_2 n in playing mahjong with a deal of sixteen pieces, the
situation where a player has eight pairs. He is then in a position to
get seven pairs of two (syíti páris) and one three of a kind on his
next draw, which gets him mahjong.

karni n {1} meat, flesh of animals (not fowl) used as food. {2} a woman
viewed as having a nice body. Kanay karni! Maáyung kusìkusíun, What a
woman! It would be fun to pinch her all over. v {1} [A; a12] have meat
for meals. Talagsa na lang kitang makakarni panahun sa kwarisma, We
rarely eat meat during Lent. Karung mga panahúna makarni na ang irù,
Nowadays dog meat can be used as food. {2} [A; a] use s.t. for meat.
Ang usa ka bábuy átung aslun, ang usa karníhun, One pig will be
roasted, the other will be cut into pieces for meat. — asádu roast
meat. — nurti n corned beef. v {1} [A13] have corned beef. {2} [A3;
a12] make into corned beef. — púra lean meat. karnihan n meat section
in the market. -síra, -síru n meat dealer.

karníru n sheep. -in- a a way of weaving, usually of a blanket or a
towel, that comes out thick and curled like a sheep’s pelt.

karpintíru n carpenter. v [B156; a12] be, become a carpenter.

karpit n carpet. rid — n {1} red carpet, royal welcome. {2} seats
placed just outside a ring where live shows, boxing, or wrestling
matches, or exhibitions are held.

karsáda n street, highway. v [A; a2] build a road. Ang mga baryuhánun
mismu mauy nagkarsáda niíni, The village people themselves built this
road. Karsadáhun ning dapíta, This place will be made into a road. paN-
v [A2] go along the street or highway.

karsil n prison house. v [AP; c1] put s.o. in prison. Karsílun
(ikarsil) nang táwung walay salà? Imprison an innocent man?

karsitin = kalsitin.

karsu = kalsu.

karsúnis n {1} trousers. {2} = nag-, 1a. v {1} [A; a] wear, make into
trousers. Mukarsúnis ka bag dáan? Would you wear old trousers? Bísag
mga babáyi run magkarsúnis na, Even the women wear trousers these days.
Ang babáyi dílì pa makakarsúnis sa simbahan, Women still cannot wear
trousers to church. Karsunísun ku kining panaptúna, I will make this
cloth into trousers. Karsunísi ang bátà, Put the child’s pants on him.
Ikarsúnis ning bag-u. Tan-áwun ta, Put on these new trousers. Let’s
look at them. {1a} nag- men, viewed as potential partners for women.
Unsay ákù? Dílì ra ikay nagkarsúnis (karsúnis), What do I care? You’re
not the only man in the world. {2} [A12; b8] get pants. Nakakarsúnis ku
pagbisíta nákù sa ákung uyuan, I got me a pair of pants free when I
visited my uncle. Lúgus ku makakarsúnis niíning ímung iswildu nákù, I
can hardly afford to buy pants with what you pay me. Pagbisíta sa ákung
bayaw hikarsunisan kug mahalun, When my brother-in-law came for a
visit, it cost me an expensive pair of pants. paN- v [A2] put one’s
pants on. Nangarsúnis pa ku pag-abut sa bána, The husband arrived while
I was putting my pants on. Midágan siyang wà ngánì makapangarsúnis, He
ran off without even getting a chance to get his pants on. -un(→)
n cloth to be made into pants. Bayinti ang karsunisun niíning
panaptúna, This cloth costs twenty pesos per cut (enough to make a pair
of pants). -in- n made like a pair of pants. Paldang kinarsúnis, A
skirt made like a pair of pants. -in-an n way one wears one’s pants.
Yasyas ug kinarsunisan nang tawhána, That man wears his pants
crookedly.

karsunsilya = karsunsilyu, n1.

karsunsilyu n {1} panties. {2} man’s undershorts or boxer-style trunks.
v [A; a] wear, make panties, underpants or boxer trunks.

karta_1 n letter sent by a prospective groom’s parents to the parents
of the prospective bride announcing that they will come to the house to
ask for the girl’s hand formally (pamaláyi). v [A; b6] send such
letter.

karta_2 n {1} cards or mahjong pieces. {2} hand in cards or mahjong. Sa
íyang karta dihay duha ka alas, He got two aces in his hand.†

kartabun v [AN; a1] strike from an upraised position with the hand or
s.t. held by the hand. Mukartabun ning batáa sa íyang gulunggulung ug
sungúgun, This child will strike you hard with his rattle if you tease
him. Way sakit ang unlan nga ikartabun sa ū́, A pillow does not hurt if
you strike the head with it.

kartil n placard, poster, notice for display in a public place.

kartilya_1 n {1} system of teaching reading where the student starts by
learning the alphabet, then the combination of two or three letters to
form syllables, and finally the blending of the syllables to form
words. {2} primer reader teaching this method.

kartilya_2 = karitilya.

kartíra_1 n {1} wallet. {2} lady’s bag. {3} small briefcase or
suitcase.

kartíra_2 = karitíra.

kartíru n mail carrier, postman. v [B156; a2] be, become a postman.

kartíyu v {1} [AN; a] be able to work out a problem, think one’s way
out of a tight spot. Wà siya makurnir kay maáyung mangartíyu, They
couldn’t pressure him into marriage, because he was a quick thinker.
Kartiyúhun nátù ang makina básig muandar, Let’s try to use our brains
on this sewing machine. Maybe we can figure out how to make it go.
{1a} [A; a12] accomplish s.t. with less than what one would normally
have available. Ug maáyu kang mukartíyu, makapaiskuyla ka sa ímung
anak, If you handle your limited resources right, you can still send
your son to school. Wà tay istrungkadur, átù lang kartiyúhun ug
kutsilyu, We don’t have a screwdriver, but we’ll manage it with a
knife. {2} [A13] slap together a plan hastily. Nagkartíyu lag usa ka
dinalìdaling ripurt, He just waffled up a quick report. n ability,
thinking power to solve problems. kartiyúhan a having a knack for
solving problems.

kartulína n k.o. smooth and fine-grained cardboard of a thin and sturdy
sort.

kartun_1 n {1} cardboard box. {2} cardboard. v [a12] put in a cardboard
box. Gikartun ang mga rilip, The relief goods were put in boxes. -in-
n {1} put in a box. {2} by the boxful.

kartun_2, kartuning n animated movie cartoon. v {1} [A] have, show a
movie cartoon. {2} [c1] make into or show as a cartoon.

kartutsu = karatsutsu.

káru n an open carriage on wheels used for carrying sacred images of
saints during a religious procession or a body in a funeral procession.
v [A; c1] put on a carriage, make a carriage for a procession.

karù v [AB; a12] shake s.t. to see if there is anything inside or to
loosen it, for s.t. rooted to be loosened. Dúnay nagkarù sa halígi kay
nagharag na, S.o. must have shook the post because it’s leaning to one
side. Nagkarù na ang íyang ngípun ug ipaibut na, His tooth is loose and
should be extracted. Karua nang kawit ug may sulud ba, Shake the toddy
container to see if there is any inside.

karul (from arul) v [AB16N; a] pluck feathers out, molt. Nagkarul
(nangarul) ang mga balhíbu sa manuk, The chicken is molting. Gikarul
níya ang balhíbu sa manuk, He plucked out the chicken’s feathers.

kárul_1 v [AC12; b] go Christmas caroling.

kárul_2 v {1} [A3] clatter, make a clattering sound. Mukárul ang bakyà
níya sa salug, Her wooden slippers will clatter on the floor.
{2} [B2S46; a4] for the teeth to chatter. Mikárul (gikárul) ákung
suwang sa katugnaw, My teeth (lit. chin) chattered because of the cold.
n clatter. Dungug sa sílung ang kárul sa mga plátu, The clatter of the
plates could be heard downstairs.

karumáta n k.o. large two-wheeled cart with shafts, designed for draft
animals but in urban areas pushed by people, used for transporting s.t.
heavy. v {1} [A; a2] haul s.t. in a carromata. Karumatáhan ta kag balas
tulu ka biráda, I will deliver you three carromata-loads of sand.
{2} [A13; a12] go s.w. in a carromata. paN- v [A2; b6] earn one’s
livelihood by hauling things on a carromata. karumatilya n a small
three-wheeled cart, pushed by people.

karun short form: run {1} this time now. Gikinahanglan ka karun, You
are needed now. Sukad karun ayaw na pagpakítà dinhi, From now on, don’t
show yourself here. sa pagka — as of this moment. Sa pagkakarun wà kuy
ikabáyad nímu, For the moment, I can’t pay you yet. — dáyun right now.
Lakaw karun dáyun, Go this minute. matag — ug unyà every now and then.
Nahigmata siya matag karun ug unyà, He kept waking up every so often.
{2} this time, immediately ahead of us. Latiguhun ta ka run, I’ll whip
you in a minute. — na I’ll do it in just a minute. ‘Mangáun na
ta.’—‘Karun na!’ ‘Let’s eat.’—‘OK. Just a minute.’ — pa {a} just now.
{b} in a little while. Wà pa siya. Karun pa tu siya, He hasn’t gotten
here yet. He’ll be here presently. — ka giyud you’ll get it in a
minute. Karun ka lang giyud, bayhána ka, You’ll get from me, woman.
{3} today. Unsa man ta run (rung adláwa)? What is it (lit. are we)
today? — nga [time] this [time] we are at now. Karung simanahúna, This
week. Karung adláwa, Today. Sus, ínit rung udtúha, My, how hot it is
this noon. {4} -ng this coming. Kitáun ku siya karung udtu, I’ll go to
see him this noon. Karung Hulyu, This coming July. Mugíkan mi karung
alas dúsi, We’ll leave this coming noon (twelve o’clock). {4a} -ng
bag-u recently. Gibisitáhan ku níla karung bag-u, They recently visited
me. {5} the ones now as opposed to people at other times (Nominative or
Dative). Ang karung mga istudiyanting nagbanhà dihà, sa ímung klási,
The students that are making noise there are from your class. Karung
(niárung) mga panahúna, mahal tanang palalítun, These days everything
is very high. niárun, árun (Genitive, Dative). Wà ku mahibalu niárun, I
don’t know this thing here. Sáma niárung panahúna, Just about like the
weather we’re having here. {6} particle used to keep a narration on
track: now. Karun, kadtung ákung giingung babáyi ..., Now, this woman I
was telling you about ... {7} ba — particle of pause in making a
calculation: let’s say. Padangtan ba rug diyis minútus, Let it boil,
say, for about ten minutes. Sumā̀ sa ímung gustu. Dus písus ba run ang
ihátag, maáyu na, Whatever amount you want—say, two pesos, that’s good
enough. karún (from karun, 5) that’s right. Karún. Mau nang tubága
ákung gustu, There. That’s the answer I want. karunkarun v [A12; a12]
tell s.o. to do s.t. in a hurry. Dílì ta makakarunkarun ug súgù níya,
We cannot tell him to do s.t. in a hurry. karunkarun dáyun this very
instant. Lakaw karunkarun dáyun, Go this very instant. -ay at this very
moment. Karúnay pa siya batíag kalúuy sa íyang asáwa, It’s only now
that he felt pity for his wife.

kárung a disheveled. v [B3; c1] be, become disheveled, become tousled
(hair). Human sa áway nagkárung íyang buhuk, After the fight her hair
was all disheveled.

karunsing n a variety of sweet potato, oblong-shaped, reddish-skinned,
and with white meat. When cooked it has dry and powdery, but tasty
meat.

karúsa n {1} = káru. {2} = karumáta. {3} float, a decorated vehicle for
carrying exhibits in a parade. v {1} [A; c1] make, use as a karúsa.
{2} [A; c] carry on a karúsa. {3} [A; a12] go s.w. on a karúsa.

karut, kárut_1 v {1} [A; a] scratch hard so as to take flesh. Ayaw
karúta ímung pangágud, kay magdugù, Don’t scratch deeply into your
athlete’s foot because it will bleed. {2} [A; a] get the last bit that
remains in a container out, such that the bottom of the container is
scraped. Karúta ang dukut kay wà nay kan-un, Scrape out the rice
sticking to the bottom of the pot because there is no more rice.
{3} [B126; a12] run out of gambling money or go bankrupt in a business.
Nakárut siya sa tárì, wà giyuy nahibilin sa íyang kwarta, He lost all
his money at the cockfights. He had nothing left. Nakárut ang tindáhan
nga wà maáyu pagkadá, The store went bankrupt because it was not well
managed.

kárut_2 n carrot.

karwáhi n a horse-drawn passenger carriage, usually four-wheeled.
v [A13; ac] go, bring s.t. by carriage.

karwas = kamras.

karyáda v [A; a] transport things with animals or people. Nagkaryáda mi
ug bála sa kaniyun ngadtu sa panggubátan, We hauled artillery shells to
the front. Nalúya ang kabáyù kay usa na ka simánang gikaryáda, Our
horse is weakened because it was used to haul things for the whole
week. n action of hauling. Sa maung gidaghanun sa mais ang karyáda
mulungtad ug duha ka adlaw, With that much corn, the hauling will take
two days. paN- v [A2] engage in a hauling business. karyadahan
n vehicle used for transporting. kinaryadáhan n money earned in
hauling.

karyír = kírir.

kás_1 n {1} cash, money on hand. Pílay kás náa nímu dihà? How much do
you have? {2} money as opposed to other things of value. Ang nakáwat
aláhas ug kás mga dusintus, I lost jewelry and two hundred pesos cash.
v [A; a2] pay s.t. in cash. Kásun ku lang ang báyad, I will make the
payment in cash. — adbans advance on one’s salary. v [A; ac] ask for or
give a cash advance.

kā́s_2 = kálas. see kalas_2.

kasa v [A; bc] bet on s.t. or an amount. Mukasa ka sa ákung manuk? Will
you bet on my cock? Kasahan kug usa ka líbu si Ilurdi, I’ll bet one
thousand pesos on Elorde. Pilay ímung ikasa? How much do you bet?

kása n {1} business firm. {2} commercial building. — digubyirnu
government building. — riyal the term given during the Spanish regime
to refer to the building in which government offices were located.

kásà v {1} [A; c16] produce a crackling, rustling sound. Nagkásà ang
mga ilagà sa táas sa atup, The rats are rustling up in the roof. Ayawg
kasáa (ikásà) ang pagkúmut sa mga papil, Do not make the papers crackle
when you crumple them. {2} [B] talk loudly, too garrulously. Mukásà nà
siya basta náay babáying mamínaw níya, He talks a lot and loud when
there are women listening. Ngánung nakásà man mu dinhà? What are you
chattering about over there? n {1} crackling, rustling sound.
{2} preparation for a party, esp. cooking, as evidenced by noise. May
kásà sa íla. May kumbira dagway, There’s the noise of preparations at
their house. They must be planning a party. a a chatterbox, talking too
much.

kas-a_1 {1} short for kanus-a. {2} see usa.

kasába = kamúting káhuy. see kamúti.

kasádu {1} see kasal, 2. {2} see kasar1, 2.

kasag n k.o. edible salt-water crab growing to 4″. paN- v [A2; b6(1)]
catch kasag.

kasáhus = kusáhus.

kasal n {1} wedding. {2} taking of vows by a nun. v {1} [A; a]
officiate marriage rites. Ang misiyun mukasal sa mga magtiáyung
mansibádu, The missionary priest will marry the common-law couples.
Daghan ang kaslun basta Hunyu, Many people get married in the month of
June. {2} [a12] for a nun to take her final vows. Gikasal na ang madri,
The nun has taken her final vows. (←) n intense wedding activity. pa-
v [AC12; c] marry s.o. Kinahanglang mupakasal siya nímu kay burus ka,
He should marry you because you’re pregnant. Íyang gipakaslan ang
babáying íyang napaangkan, He married the woman who had borne him a
child out of wedlock. Ipakasal nà sila, Have them get married. kasádu
{1} having gone through a marriage ceremony. Mansibádu ang ákung
ginikánan kay dílì kasádu (kinasal), My parents are common-law husband
and wife. They have not been married. {2} married, as opposed to
divorced or single. -in- = kasádu, 1. kaslunun, kalaslun n s.o. about
to be married. kasamintu, kasamyintu n state of being officially
married. Ang kasamintu dílì garantíya sa malipáyung panagpúyù, It’s no
guarantee that you will be happy living together, just because you have
been officially married.

kasaníhan see *sáni_2.

kasap a not being able to taste. v [B; b6] get to be so one can’t taste
a thing. Mukasap ang bàbà basta kahilanatun ta, One loses his sense of
taste when there is an incipient fever.

kasapuygu n a box of matches.

kasar_1 v [A; c1] load or cock a gun. Nagkasar siyang dáan kay nahadluk
siyag hiunhan, He loaded his gun beforehand because he was afraid he
would be shot at first. Gikasar níya ang pistúla ug gitan-aw kun dúna
bay bála, He cocked his pistol and looked to see if it had bullets in
it. kasádu a for guns to be loaded.

kasar_2 v [A; bc] put up money for a bet, see s.o.’s bet. Mukasar kug
dusintus. Mudáwat ka? I’ll bet two hundred. Do you accept? Kasdan ku
ang ímung mil, I’ll accept your thousand-peso bet. kasádu n amount put
down in a bet. Pilay kasádu ninyu? How much money is involved in the
betting? a for a bet to be finalized. Kasádu na. Dì na ta makabakwì,
The bet’s been made. We can’t get out of it. v [AC; a2] make it a bet,
bet money against each other. Nakigkasádu kug milyunaryu, I bet against
a millionaire. Hinúgay nang ímung hambug. Kasadúhun nátù, That’s enough
of your big talk. Let’s make it a bet.

kásaw v [A; c1] make noise by splashing water. Wà siyay kuhà kay dinhay
nagkásaw, He didn’t make a single catch because s.o. was splashing.

kasba_1 v [A; a] eat greedily like a pig. Nakakasba ka na, mangáyù pa
giyud, You have already eaten, but you are asking for more. Gikasba sa
bábuy ang ákung kamutihan, The pigs chewed up our sweet potato garden.

kasba_2 v [AC; ab2] for animals to mate, or (applied vulgarly) for
people to do so. Pakasbahun ang ámung butakal sa ímung anay, We’ll have
our male mate with your sow.

kasbu n k.o. heron that eats rice: Nycticorax caledonicus.

kási_1 almost all, nearly all. Kási sa mga istudiyanti nakabayad,
Nearly all of the students have paid. Kási sa (ang) mga nagpuyù dinhi
dátù, Almost everyone who lives here is rich. kasikási = kási_1.

kási_2 v [AC; ac] make or take on a bet, make it a bet, bet with each
other. Nagkási sila. Siya didtu kang Markus ug ang usa kang Sirhing,
They made a bet. He was for Marcos and the other one was for Serging.
Kasíhi siya, ambi mukasar ba, Bet him. Let’s see if he takes it. Ikási
ang ákung kwarta sa manuk níya, Bet my money on his cock. n bet made.

kasibáya = kisibáya.

kasíkas = kalasíkas.

kasíli_1 = bais.

kasíli_2 n k.o. darter: Anhinga melanogaster.

kasílik n general name for wrasses.

kasilyas n toilet, room with a toilet in it. v [A13; a2] build a
toilet, bathroom. a nothing as compared to. Kasilyas lang ang Sibu sa
Manílà, Cebu is nothing compared to Manila. paN- v [A2; b6] go to the
toilet. Hulat únà kay mangasilyas pa ku, Wait a moment. I’m going to
the toilet. kasilyíru n a person hired to empty the septic tank or a
toilet hole of its contents. v [B136] be a kasilyíru.

kasing n top. v [a12] make into a top. (←) n game of playing with a
top. v [AC; b6(1)] play with a top. -in- a shaped like a top. Talabánug
nga kinasing, Kite shaped somewhat like a top. kasingkásing n heart.
Laming adubáwhun ang kasingkásing, Heart tastes good stewed in soy
sauce. Dakung haw-ang sa ákung kasingkásing, A feeling of emptiness in
my heart. Tigpatantu nga way kasingkásing, A heartless money-lender.
gastu ang — = gastu ang kunsinsiya. see kunsinsiya. -in- a sincere.
Kinasingkásing ang íyang pahalípay, He was sincere in his
congratulations. -an a {1} kindhearted. {2} heartless. Nakaáku pagbíyà
sa íyang mga anak, kasingkasíngang amahána, He could actually abandon
his children. What a heartless father! {2a} iron-nerved, stouthearted.
Kasingkasíngan giyung duktúra kay nakaáku pag-upira sa kaugalíngun
níyang asáwa, He’s a very stouthearted doctor because he can operate on
his own wife.

kasíra n {1} one who gets room and board. {2} amount paid for room and
board. v [A; c] board s.w. Balay nga íyang gikasiráhan, The house he is
boarding at. Háin mu ikasíra ang ímung anak? Where did you have your
child board? kasirahan n boarding house.

kasirúla n a covered saucepan with a long handle or with ear-like
handles at the sides.

kasíyu = kisíyu.

kaskádu = kaskáru.

kaskáru n {1} name given to skin infections characterized by numerous
sores. {2} scaly skin infection caused by ringworm. v [B126; a4b4] be,
become affected with this k.o. skin disease.

kaskas_1 v {1} [A; a1] dig in, scratch to get a foothold. Makakaskas
kining ligíra bísan dangug ang dálan, This k.o. tire can hold even on a
slippery road. {2} [A23N] strive hard, make great efforts. Mukaskas
(mangaskas) ku karun myintras bátà pa, I’ll strive hard and make use of
my time now while I’m still young. n activities, intense work. Ímu ra
man ang tanang kaskas dinhi, You are the one doing all the work here.

kaskas_2 v [A; a1] strum a guitar. Kaskása ang sista kay musáyaw ku,
Play the guitar because I’m going to dance. n action of strumming.
Akung kaskas, ákung sáyaw, Why do I have to do everything around here?
(Lit. It’s my strumming and my dance.)

kaskas_3 v [A; ab2] uproot vines to clear an area. Kaskása ang
kamutihan, Clear off the sweet potato patch.

*kaskas_4 -in- n mesentery, the membranes which enfold the intestines
and their appendages and connect to the dorsal wall of the abdominal
cavity. It is used to wrap murkun.

kaskas_5 = kalaskas.

kaskás = kalaskálas.

kasku n {1} the framework and the main structure of s.t. without
appendages. Kasku sa sakayan, The hull of the boat. Kasku sa kutsi, The
body of the car. Kasku sa táwu, The torso of a man. Kasku sa muskitíru,
Walling of the mosquito net. {2} a blunt-bowed wooden boat with square
stern about 30′ long, towed or with a sail, used for lightering or for
river or coastal transport. It is so called because it consists of
little more than a hull. v [A; a] build the basic structure of s.t.,
use as the basic structure. Wà pa ku makakasku sa ákung muskitíru kay
wà pa kuy ilangitlángit, I haven’t made the sides of the mosquito net
because I don’t have materials for the top.

kaskug v [A12] muster enough strength to move or to do s.t. Dì pa
makakaskug sa pagbángun ang masakitun, The patient doesn’t have enough
strength to get up out of bed.

kasla = tubatuba. see túba.

kaspa n dandruff. v [A123P; a4] get dandruff. kaspahun a having
dandruff.

kaspag a for hair to be dry. Brilyantíni ang ímung buhuk kay kaspag
kaáyu, Put brilliantine on your hair because it is very dry. v [B] for
hair to become dry.

kaspat = kampat.

kasta v {1} [A; b(1)] for animals to mount in copulation. Ug mukasta
ang báka sa láing báka, nag-ulag na, When the cow mounts another, it
means she’s in heat. {2} [A] have sexual intercourse, copulate
(derogatory). Hígal kaáyung tawhána. Mukasta bisag unsang bayhána, He’s
over-sexed. He’ll go to bed with anybody.

kastanits = kastanyas, n2, v2.

kastanyas n {1} chestnut. {2} castanets. v {1} [a1] make into
castanets. {2} [A; b6] use castanets.

kastanyíta, kastanyítas = kastanyas, 2.

kastǎr = kasta.

kastígu v [A; ab2] inflict punishment on s.o., usually physical.
Ginadilì sa maistru ang pagkastígu sa istudiyanti, It is forbidden for
teachers to inflict physical punishment on their students. n physical
punishment. — hiniral punishment meted to all in a group, without
distinction. kinastiguhan n manner of inflicting punishment.

kastílà = katsílà.

kastilya n Castile. kastilyanhun n {1} Castillian. {2} Castillian
speech.

kastilyu n {1} castle. {2} ornate fireworks, pyrotechnical display.
v {1} [A13; b] display fireworks. {2} [a12] make into pyrotechnic
fireworks.

kastur úwil n Castor oil.

kastus n celibate. Ang mga munghi mga kastus, Monks are celibates.
v [B16; c1] be, become a celibate, take the vow of chastity or
celibacy.

kásu n case, suit. palit ug — get dragged into a case. way — nothing
serious. Síging bayli kay way kásu, On with the dance because there’s
nothing serious. v [A23C; b3c1] make a legal case. Magkakásu giyud kamu
kun dílì mu magkasinábut, You will have to go to court if you can’t
come to an understanding. Makásu giyud nang yutáa kay way mga
dukumintu, That property will become a matter of legal dispute because
the papers are not in order. Pára singku sintábus kasúhun pa giyud nà?
You want to make a federal case out of a nickel? paN- v [A2; b] get
involved in a lawsuit. Kun mangásu ka kinahanglan hustu ka sa bulsa, If
you get involved in a lawsuit, you must have enough money. Hitabù nga
gipangasúhan, Incident that was the subject of a lawsuit. ing-,
pur-ing- see ingkásu.

kasulya n chasuble. v {1} [A; b] have, put on a chasuble. {2} [a12]
make into a chasuble.

kasuy n cashew: Anacardium occidentale.

kaswal n casual worker, government worker employed with no permanent
appointment.

kasway n {1} k.o. deep-sea crab about the same size as the langbay and
with longer claws. Parti na gánì sa nigusyu kasway nà sa lápuk, hínay
nga mangapay, lagsik mamiluk, When it comes to business, he is like a
crab in the mud: he moves slowly but his eyes are constantly blinking
(i.e. he is alert). {2} crab legs. Walu ang kasway sa langbay, Sea
crabs have eight legs. {3} limbs of people. Tag-as ug kasway ang taas
nga táwu, A tall person has long limbs.

kasya_1 n traces of the harness of a plow. v [A; a] use as the traces
in a plow. kasyahun n rope to be used as trace in a plow.

kasya_2 = akasya.

kasyahan = akasyahan. see akasya.

kasyúti, kasyútis = sayúti.

kát_1 v {1} [A; b(1)] take or give a cut from an amount of money due
s.o. Kátan sa ahinti ang halin, The agent will take a cut from the
proceeds. Kátan ang ahinti ug dyís pursintu, The agent will get a cut
of ten percent. {2} [A; a] cut playing cards. Kátun ang baráha paghumag
saksak, The deck of cards is cut after it is shuffled. {3} [A; a] for a
movie to have s.t. cut out of it. Gikát sa sinsur ang hílas nga parti,
The lewd scenes were cut out by the censors. {3a} [A; a12] stop a
recording to correct an error by re-recording. {4} [A; a2] cut the ball
in table tennis, hitting it with the edge of the paddle to make it
spin. n {1} one’s share in a deal, commission. {2} action of cutting in
cards or table tennis. {3} portions of a movie removed by the censors.
{4} recording. Maáyu kaáyu mukanta. Usa lang ka kát, úki na, He is
really a good singer. Just one recording, and it is O.K. {4a} single
side of a record.

kát_2 = kálat1, 2.

káta a for sounds to be rapid, in quick succession. Kátà lang ininglis
níya! He talks English so fast! v {1} [B6; c1] talk rapidly. Mikátà lag
tabian ay, There’s the babbler talking at full speed. Ug katáun (ikátà)
nákù ang ákung sinultihan, dì mu kasabut, If I talk rapidly, you won’t
understand. {2} [B3(1)6] make a series of sharp short sounds in quick
succession. Mikátà ang masinggan, The machine guns rattled. Makakátà
gánì ang makinilya, If the typewriter makes a rapid popping noise.
Mikátà na ang ákung gilung-ag ságing, The bananas I’m cooking are
bubbling now. (→) a talking rapidly.

kátab v [A; ac1] chatter, talk rapidly about s.t. trivial and not
sensible. Nagkátab ang bàbà sa tabì, She’s running off at the mouth
with gossip. -un(→) a given to chattering.

katabuk n k.o. sweet potato with reddish peelings and white, not prized
meat.

katadkatad v [A; c] stamp one’s feet in anger or in a tantrum.
Mikatadkatad ang bátang gustung muuban, The child stamped his feet
because he wanted to go along.

kátag v [AB16; c1] spread, scatter out, cause s.t. to be scattered.
Ngánung nagkátag mu dihà. Tápuk mu ngari, Why are you scattered out all
over? Come in close here. Ikaw nagkátag sa mais sa bululáran? Was it
you that spread the corn out on the drying tray? n how good one is in
s.t.: one’s ability as it appears after being tested in competition.
Hawud aku sa Pámas. Makatulu nga bist aktur. Kanà ang kátag ku, I’m one
of the top actors. I won the FAMAS award as best actor three times.
That’s how good I am.

katakáta a {1} for s.o. to be too eager to do work no one told him to
do. Katakáta ka man giyung mudáru. Hala tiwasag dáru tung umahan, You
have been wanting to plow so much, so go ahead, plow the whole field.
{2} daring to do s.t. one is not supposed to do. Katakáta giyud ning
bayhána mulakaw magabíi nga mag-inusára, This woman is daring. She goes
out all alone at night. v [A13P] take s.t. onto oneself one shouldn’t.
Kinsay nagkatakáta (nagpakatakáta) ug lútù niíning bábuy nga wà may
mandù nga lutúun? Who went and cooked this pork when nobody told you to
do it?

katála_1 (not without l) n monkey wrench with straight gripping edges
as opposed to one with curved grips (yábi túbu). v [A; a2] use a monkey
wrench on.

katála_2 (not without l) n k.o. white parrot with a red beak.

katalagman see tagam.

katalug, katalugu n catalog, esp. of fashion design. v [A13; c1]
compile or make a catalog.

katambak n general name for porgies and sheepheads, esp. Lethrinus
spp., and also loosely given to fish of similar appearance such as
Monotaxis grandoculis.

katang n k.o. edible fresh-water crab growing to 4″ by 3″, dark
brownish-green in color.

kátap v {1} [B; c1] spread all over. Mikátap ang mga táwu sa plása,
People were all over the plaza. Ang usa ka galun nga pintal dílì
makakátap sa pisami, A gallon of paint will not cover the entire
ceiling. {2} [B] for vision or reasoning powers to be blurred. Nagkátap
ang ákung tinan-awan sa mga lúhà, My vision was not clear because of my
tears. Mikátap ang íyang hunàhúnà sa hilabihang kasábà, He couldn’t
think clearly because of the incessant din. a {1} be spread widely.
Kátap kaáyu ang balità, The news spread widely. {2} for vision or
thoughts to get blurred.

katarak, kataráta n cataract of the eyes.

kataru n cough. v [A1; a2] have a cough.

kataw n supernatural sea creatures with the head and trunk of a
beautiful woman and the tail of a fish, which play practical jokes on
fishermen, kidnap them, or drive them crazy. v [A13; a12] for a kataw
to annoy a fisherman. Dúna kunuy nagkataw ni Pidru sa íyang pagpamasul
gabíi, They say a mermaid took an interest in Peter (played jokes or
tried to lure him) last night while he was fishing. Gikataw nà siya
maung nabúang, A mermaid went after him, and that’s why he went crazy.

katáwa see tawa.

kátay v {1} [AN; b(1)] for plants to creep or climb onto s.t. Nakakátay
na ang kamúti sa tibuuk baul, The sweet potato vines have spread all
over the field. Ang kural nga gikatáyan sa bágun, The fence the vines
were climbing on. {2} [B3(1)6; aP] for news, fire, and the like to
spread. Mikátay dáyun ang balità, The news spread quickly all over the
place. Dakùdakung lunà ang gikatáyan sa súnug, The fire spread over a
wide area. pina- n longhand writing. ka- v [A13] for s.t. to trail in a
scattered way behind s.t. moving forward. Nagkakátay ang tinái sa
hidunggaban, The intestines of the stabbing victim trailed behind him.
-an(→), -ánan n s.t. on which vines climb.

káti, kátì v {1} [A; a] set s.t. into motion by providing a stimulus or
catalyst. {1a} use, lure s.t. with a decoy or lure in hunting or
fishing. Katíhun nákù ang núkus íning uwang-úwang, I’ll lure squids
with this artificial shrimp. Kining ákung sunuy mauy ikáti sa mga ihás
manuk, We’ll use my cock to lure wild chickens. {1b} [A13SN; a12] win a
big amount in gambling with a small starting bet. Nakakati
(nakapangati) giyud kug bayinti sa ákung písu, I managed to win twenty
pesos with my one peso. {2} [A; b5] prime a pump by pouring water in
until suction is established. Dílì muágay nang bumbáha ug dílì katíhun
(katíhan), That pump won’t work unless it is primed. {2a} [A; a] induce
vomiting. Katía ang íyang pagsúka arun isúka ang hilu, Induce him to
vomit so that he will vomit out the poison. {2b} [A; a] remove water
that has gotten into the ears by priming with warm water. Kinahanglan
inadlaw ang túbig nga mukáti sa túbig nga nahasulud sa dalunggan, Use
warm water to get the rest of the water inside your ears out. {3} [A3P;
a1] stir up emotions. Bantay ka lang sa ímung kakiriwan. Magkáti ka
lang sa ákung pangísug, You’d better stop touching my things. You might
stir up my anger. (→) n {1} decoy. {2} water used to prime a water
pump. katihan, paN- n decoy, lure in fishing. katihanan n place where
one catches or traps game or fish by using a decoy or lure. maN-r-
n person who traps game. katikatiun, katìkatiun, katikatihun a {1} for
a woman to be provocative. Kanang bayhána katikatiun kaáyu sa íyang
míni nga sinínà, That woman is provocative in her miniskirt.
{2} inciting trouble, butting in to create trouble. Katìkatiun kang
pagkatáwu. Dalì ra kang makaagig áway, You’re such a trouble-maker. It
doesn’t take you long to find a quarrel.

katíbu n children’s game of tag played by two. v [A1; b6] play katíbu.

katidral n cathedral.

kátids n vacation home, house in the mountains or on the beach where
one spends one’s leisure time. v [A13] have a vacation house.

kátids indastri n cottage industry.

kátig n float of the outrigger. v [A; a] provide a boat with
outriggers. Gikatígan na ang sakayan, The floats are being put up now.

katigbì = ílas.

katiguríya n category. v [c1] place in a class or category.

katíkat v [A; a] climb up s.t. vertical using both hands and feet.
Nahadluk kung mukatíkat sa bintánà, I’m afraid to climb through the
window. Katikáta kanang hinug kapáyas, Climb up to get those ripe
papayas.

katikati n doodlebug, larva of the ant lion.

katikismu n catechism. v [A13] hold a catechism class.

katikista n a person who teaches the fundamentals of religion. v [AB16;
a12] be a catechist.

katisismu = katikismu.

katimpa n k.o. large sweet potato with white peelings and yellowish
meat, rather dry and good eating.

kátin a for things to be suspended or hanging higher than the normal
level. Iubus-ubus paghikut ang muskitíru, kátin ra kaáyu, Hang the
mosquito net a little lower. Its edges are too high. v [B1; c1] hang,
be suspended in mid-air or not hanging down as far as the normal level.
Mikátin (nakátin) ang íyang sinínà kay mabdus man siya, Her dress is
kind of up in the front because she is pregnant. udtung —, — ang búlan
half-moon in the last quarter (so called because the moon is high in
the sky at daybreak).

kat-in v {1} [A; b6] cut in in a dance. Maglágut ku ug kat-ínan ta, I
get irritated if s.o. cuts in on me. {2} [A; c] insert s.t. in its
proper place in a file or series. Ikat-in ring bulyúma sa láray sa
insayklupidiya, Replace this volume in its proper place in the row of
encyclopedias.

káting n cuttings of plants to be propagated. Wà gyud kuy pinalit
niíning ákung mga tanum. Pulus ni káting nga ákung pinangáyù, I didn’t
buy any plants. They all come from cuttings that I got from my friends.

káting klásis v [A] cut classes. Gisuspind ang iskuylang nagkáting
klásis, The student got suspended for cutting classes.

katípa n k.o. freshwater catfish of swamps, dark brown with venomous
spines at the base of the pectoral fin. Edible, but not prized.

katípan n k.o. dark brown, very hard-shelled cowries up to 3″ (k.o.
sigay): the humpback and snake-head cowries.

katipúnan, katipuníru see típun.

kátir_1 n cutter in a tailoring shop. v [B16; a2] be a cutter in a
tailoring shop.

kátir_2 v {1} [A; b6] cater food for a party. Mukátir mi ug náay
kaslun, We cater to weddings. {2} [AP; acP] hire a caterer. Sa átung
parti magkátir (magpakátir) lang ta arun way hikayhíkay, For our party
let’s just get a caterer so we won’t have to prepare.†

kátir_3 n coast guard cutter.

katitir n catheter. v [A; bc5] insert a catheter into, catheterize s.o.

katkat_1 v [A; a] undo s.t. sewn or crocheted. Ang sastri nagkatkat sa
karsúnis nga usbunun, The tailor undid the seams of the pants to be
altered. Katkáta ang tahì sa atup, Undo the shingles of the roof.
Nakatkat ang atup sa hángin, The roof came off in the wind.

katkat_2 = kalatkat.

katmun n k.o. fruit.

katri n bed. v {1} [A13; b] lie on a bed. Dílì siya makatulug kun dílì
magkatri, She can’t sleep unless she lies on a bed. {2} [a12] be made
into a bed.

katsa n unbleached muslin cloth.

katsap = kitsap.

katsaw n secondary rafters, beams which slope from the ridgepole down
to the eaves, to which nipa shingles are attached. The katsaw are
smaller than the primary rafters (salagunting). v [A; b6] put or attach
secondary rafters to s.t.

katsílà n Spaniard. -in-(→) a {1} like the Spaniards. Kinatsilang
batásan, Strict and hard in discipline (like the Spaniards). {2} the
Spanish language. v {1} [A1; c1] do s.t. like a Spaniard. {2} [A; a2]
speak, write Spanish. -un a Spanish-like. Katsiláun nga ilung, Spanish
nose.

katsir n {1} catcher in baseball. {2} a woman who tends to get
pregnant. Katsir kanang bayhána. Dílì hisaghirag bahag, That woman is
very fertile. You must have to look at her to get her pregnant. {3} a
woman who will accept any suitor if she can get s.t. from him. {4} a
person that hangs around restaurants to pick up the leavings of the
diners. {4a} fish that eats anything. Ang bugáung katsir kaáyu, Jarbua
is a fish that eats excrement. {5} not missing out on any gossip.
Katsir kaáyung bayhána. Dì masipyatag tabì, That lady is good at
ferreting out gossip. v [B56; a2] be, become a catcher in baseball,
softball.

katsúrì (from katsílà) n Filipino with Spanish blood (derogatory).
Kining katsúrì ay. Patuutúug kinatsilà, That half-breed! He thinks he
can talk Spanish!

katu_1 n k.o. dog tick. v [A123P] be infested with dog ticks.

katu_2 fast speech for kadtu.

katù — ang úlu a little deranged. May katù ang úlu sa ímung anak kay
mukáun ug sabun, Your son must be a bit deranged because he eats soap.

kátù v [A13B; b4] for dirt to cake on s.t., have dirt caked on it.
Nagkátù (gikatúan) lang ang lamísa sa abug, The table is thick with
dust on it. Nagkátù ang buling sa kwilyu, The collar is caked with
dirt. (→) a be dirty or untidy in one’s clothing. Katù nà siyang
mamistibisti, She dresses in a dirty and shabby way. katùkatù v [A; b5]
make s.t. very dirty, untidy. Ayaw mug katùkatù sa sála kay dúna tay
bisíta, Don’t make the parlor untidy because we are going to have
visitors. Dì ku mulaba sa ímung sinínà ug ímung katùkatuun
(katùkatuan), I won’t wash your clothes if you make them very dirty.

kátud v [B; b6] have lots of dirt sticking to it. Mukátud ang bisti ug
dúgayng hubúun, The dress will become very dirty if you do not change
it for a long time. Kaligúa nang anak mu kay nagkátud na, Bathe your
child. He is filthy.

katuk v {1} [A; a1] conk s.o. on the head. Katuka siya sa martilyu,
Conk him with a hammer. {2} [B2; b6] become stupid, slow to understand
and lacking in sense (as if having been hit on the head). Mukatuk siya
kun higutman pag-áyu, He gets so he doesn’t understand readily when he
is very hungry. n blow delivered on the head. a lacking in good sense
as if one has been conked on the head.

katukà n k.o. large sweet potato with reddish peelings and white meat,
too dry for good eating.

katukatu n common sense, ability to reason, knowledge. Dílì ka
makasabut? Háin gud nang ímung katukatu? You can’t understand? Where’s
your head? Wà giyud nay katukatung bayhána kay wà katunub ug
iskuyláhan, That woman is illiterate because she hasn’t gone to school.

katul_1 a {1} itchy. Katul ákung kamut. Kwarta na, My hands are
itching. I must be due to get some money. {1a} having a social disease
(lit. having an itch). Ug katul ang gamítun nímung babáyi ..., If you
happen to have sexual contact with a woman who has the itches ...
{2} causing itch. Katul ang dápaw sa mais, The hairs on corn plants are
itchy. — ug kamut a having hands that itch to steal. v [AN; b4]
{1} itch, feel itchy. Mukatul ang ákung pánit ug abugan, My skin itches
if dust gets on it. Nangálut siya sa bukubuku kay gikatlan, He is
scratching his back because he itches. {2} feel a restless desire or
craving to do s.t. Makabatì gánì kug tukar, katlan dáyun ku, Whenever I
hear music, I feel the itch (to dance). {2a} [b8] feel the itch to have
sex. Ug katlan ka, pangrílis, If you feel the urge, go to the rílis
(red light district). (←) v [AN; b4] itch intensely. katulkatul
n {1} skin disease that itches. {2} s.t. which is enough to stimulate,
but not satisfy and then displeases because it is inadequate. Mu ra nay
ihátag mung kwarta? Nagkatulkatul lang nà nákù, Is that all you’re
giving me? It just makes me itch. It isn’t enough to satisfy.

katul_2 n mosquito repellent in coil form, burnt to give off smoke
(from the brand name Katul). v [A13] burn a mosquito coil.

katulik dipindir n Catholic Defenders, an organization sworn to defend
the Roman Catholic church against attacks from within or without.
v [B156] be a member of the Catholic Defenders.

Katulika n Roman Catholic (female).

katuliku n {1} Roman Catholic religion. {2} a Roman Catholic. v [B1;
a12] become a Roman Catholic.

katulisismu n Catholicism.

katumsan = patumsan. see tumus.

kat-un (from tuun) v [B36; b8] learn to do s.t. Makat-un ka
pagmakinilya kun magsígi kag praktis, You will learn to type by
constant practice. Walà ka giyuy nakat-unan didtu, You learned nothing
there.

katunggan see tungug.

katursa_1 n reddish fish about an inch long with fine scales, rough
skin, eaten stewed in vinegar or fermented, preserved in salt.

katursa_2 n variety of short-term paddy rice with large reddish or
white grains.

katursi n fourteen. v see disiutsu.

katyális n brand name of a medicinal ointment for skin diseases.

katyubung n k.o. coarse herb of waste places and cultivated for its
long, white, trumpet-shaped flowers, which are burnt for the treatment
of asthma: Datura metel.

kaub v [AB36; c1] lie down on one’s belly, be turned over, cause s.t.
to do so. Mukámang na ang bátà kay makakaub na, The baby will soon be
able to crawl because it can turn over now. Nakaub ang sakayang
gihampak sa balud, The boat was turned over when it was lashed by big
waves. Gikauban níya sa kaldíru ang íyang bánang libudsuruy, She left
no food for her good-for-nothing husband (lit. she turned the pot
upside down on him).

kaug a active, lively in movement of body. Kaug kaáyu ning batáa. Dílì
mahamutang, This child is very active. He cannot keep still. v {1} [B]
be, become or act lively. Nagkakaug ang sáyaw nunut sa sunáta, The
dance is getting lively together with the music. {2} [A; c1] make s.t.
at rest move by touching it, touch s.t. and disturb it. Dúnay nagkaug
sa gipaugang pinintal nga laráwan, S.o. touched the portrait before it
had a chance to dry. Ayaw kauga (ikaug) ang lamísa arun dì mahíwì ang
ákung gibágis, Do not shake the table so the line I’m drawing won’t get
crooked. (←) v [B] be intensely active or misbehaving by moving about.
Nagkáug ang mga bátà samtang milakaw ang maistra, The children
misbehaved and ran about while the teacher was out of the room.

kaugalíngun see ugáling.

káun v {1} [A2S3S; a] eat. Nagkaun ka na? Have you eaten? Nakakaun na
kug amù, I have eaten monkey meat. Unsa may kan-un sa masakitun? What
should the patient eat now? {1a} [a3] be eaten to get one to act in an
unusual way. Unsay nakáun sa táwu? Mangúhit man, What got into you that
you touched me? {2} [A; a2] destroy by fire, erosion, corrosion. Ang
asidu mukáun ug tayà, Acid eats away rust. Ang balay gikaun sa kaláyu,
The house was destroyed by the fire. Nahánaw siya kay gikaun man sa
kangitngit, He suddenly vanished because he was engulfed in darkness.
Gikaun ang túbu sa tayà, The pipe is corroded with rust. Dimungkug! Wà
uruy kan-a sa kílat, The devil! Why didn’t lightning strike (lit. eat)
him? Pangpang nga nakan-an sa balud, Cliff eroded by the waves.
{3} [A12] consume, use up. Ang ímung plansa mukáun ug dakung kurinti,
Your iron consumes a lot of electricity. {4} [A; ab7] take a man in
games of chess, checkers, and the like. Wà pa kan-i ang ákung mga
piyun, None of my pawns has been captured yet. {4a} [b48] when one
returns the shuttlecock in takyan (by kicking it), for the return kick
to be caught and kicked by the opponent. Hikan-an ang ákung pátid kay
ang ákung patid napatiran níya. Sa átù pa, hikan-an ku, My kick was
returned (lit. eaten) because he returned the shuttlecock when I kicked
it. In other words, I had my kick returned. {5} [A] for a man to have
sexual relations with a blood relative. Háyup ka mukáun kag
kaugalíngung anak, You’re a beast. You have intercourse with your own
child. {5a} [a3] for a girl to be old enough to be had for sexual
intercourse. {6} [b4] for a fish to bite on one’s line. Wà ku kan-i
gabíi, I didn’t get a bite last night. n {1} food served. Sa míting
adúna usáhay puy káun, In the meeting they sometimes serve food. Sa
pagpabulan lábut na ang káun, If you work as a maid, food is included.
{1a} action of eating. Tris díyas kung way káun, I went three days
without food. {2} consumption, amount of s.t. that is used up. Dakug
káun sa gasulína ning kutsíha, This car consumes a lot of gas. {3} in
games of chess, checkers or drafts: a turn to take an opponent’s man.
Ákung káun, kúhà na ang ímung dáma, Now it’s my move to take your man.
I have your king. {3a} action of taking a piece in mahjong which
another player had discarded. {4} biting of fish. Kúsug ang káun sa
isdà run, The fish are biting in force. pa- v [A; ac] feed, give to
eat. Pakan-a na ang mga bátà, Feed the children. Unsay átung ipakáun
níla? What shall we give them to eat? pina- n s.t. fed with s.t.
special on a regular basis. Ákung sunuy pinakáug karni, My rooster is
given meat. panag-(→) v [A23; a2] for several to eat. Gipanagkaun sa
bilat sa ílang ina, The sons of bitches ate it. paniN- v [A23] feed on,
look for s.t. to feed on. Naningáun sa kahumayan ang mga langgam, The
birds are feeding in the ricefield. kan-anan v [AP3] eat s.w.
regularly. kaunkáun, kaunkaun v [A1; a12] eat light snacks between
meals. Aníay mga biskwit ug kúkis kun gustu mung magkaunkáun
(magkaunkaun), Here are some biscuits and cookies for your snacks.
kan-anan, kalan-an n place to eat (eating table, dining room,
restaurant). hiN- a fond of eating. Hingáun kug mga prútas, I’m fond of
fruits. -in- n s.t. eaten, consumed. Kináun sa gabas, Sawdust (what was
eaten by the saw). kinan-an n way of eating. kakan-unun, ka-un(→)
a feel very much like eating. Kakan-unun kug bága, I’m so angry I could
eat coals. ma- n food ready to eat. Inig-ulì ni Máma, daghan siyag dáng
makáun, When Mom comes home, she will bring lots of food. pag-
n {1} meal. Maáyu sab tung pagkaúna dà, That was a good meal. {2} food.
Unsay átung pagkáun dihà? What food do we have? kan-un n cooked rice or
corn. kalan-un {1} food. Kalan-un námù sa matag adlaw ihátag mu karung
adláwa, Give us this day our daily bread. {2} snacks. -um-r-(→) a ready
to eat. — ug táwu be very angry. Ayaw mu pagsurangsurang kay kumakaug
táwu ning ákung ginháwa, Don’t provoke me because I’m so angry I could
eat s.o. right now.

ka-un affix added to nouns which refer to a time of day or of life to
form nouns which mean ‘period of time that it is [so-and-so].’
Kagabhíun, In the evening time. Manunggù ang mananagat sa sayung
kabuntágun, The fishermen return in the early hours of the morning.
Pribinihig kwarta ang ímung katigulangun, Set money aside for your old
age. Kamatáyun, Death.

ka-un(→) {1} affix added to verbs which refer to personal feelings to
form adjectives which mean ‘be on the verge of, feel that one is going
to do and cannot keep himself from it.’ Kahilakun kaáyu ku, I was on
the verge of tears. Kaihiun ku, I have to urinate very urgently.
{1a} affix added to words referring to meteorological phenomena to form
adjectives which mean [such-and-such] an event is about to burst forth.
Kaulanun kaáyu run, It’s just about to burst into rain now. {2} affix
added to adjectives which refer to a state to form noun which refer to
the achievement of the state. Way katagbawun, There’s no satisfaction.
Way katapusun ning trabahúa, There’s no end to this job.

kaung_1 = kagung_1.

kaung_2 = bígà_1. kaungkaung n a small aroid similar to bíga often
gathered and planted in flower pots as an ornamental.

kaung_3 n a sweet delicacy made from the young fruit of the buri palm.

kaungkuy n old variety of white-grained paddy rice.

ka-unun(→) alternant to the affix ka-un(→) added to roots with a short
open penult where the vowel of the final syllable is dropped when
affixation takes place. Kakataw-unun kaáyu ku, I felt very much like
laughing. Way kahutdunun, It never runs out.

kaw short for ikaw (dialectal).

káwà n a broad, deep pan without a handle used for stewing, made of
cast iron. kawàkáwà n concaved depression on the ground roughly having
a depth and diameter of a káwà.

kawáli, kawálì n round bottomed skillet with no handle, smaller than
the káwà.

káwan = kaláwan.

káwang a futile. Káwang lang ang paghílak kay nahitabù na, It is futile
to cry because it is already over and done. v [B126; a12] fail, be in
vain. Walà makáwang ang íyang ginadamgung kalampúsan, Her dreams of
success were not in vain. They came true. Dílì ku kawángun ang ímung
kinahanglan, I will never fail you if you need me.

kawáni n white collar employee. v [B1256; b6] be, become employed.
Nakalit siyag kasapían sukad nakawáni sa adwána, He has grown rich
suddenly since he was employed at the Customs Office. kawaníhan
n employees’ force. Kinahanglang magyunyun ang kawaníhan, The employees
should form a union.

kawankawan (from kaláwan) v [BN46] for an area to look very large
because of little or scattered content. Mukawankawan (mangawankawan)
ang awdituryum ug way táwu, The auditorium looks very large when
there’s no one in it. (←) v [BN46] for s.t. to stretch into, appear in
the distance. Mikawankáwan (nangawankáwan) ang tabanug sa tumuy sa taas
nga tugut, The kite soared way high at the end of the long string.

káwas v [AB; c] {1} get, bring out of a vehicle. Tabángi kug káwas
íring kahun gíkan sa trák, Help me unload the box from the truck.
Nikáwas na ang tanang pasahíru sa barku, All the passengers have gotten
off the ship. Ikáwas ang mga kargamintu sa dyíp, Unload the cargo off
of the jeep first. {2} get, bring s.t. out of the water. Mikáwas siya
gíkan sa línaw, She came out of the water. Ikáwas ang báling, Pull in
the net. {2a} [B2S4N] for solids to come out of their container.
Mikáwas ákung tiil sa sapátus kay gitubúan, My feet came out of my
shoes because I outgrew them. Iduut ang mga bulingun kay nanggáwas na
nà sa bàbà, Press down on the laundry because it is coming out of the
hamper. — sa kalindaryu for a woman’s age to get to be more than the
days of the calendar (and thus be beyond the age of marriage). Dì na
tingáli siya maminyù kay nikáwas na man sa kalindaryu ang íyang idad, I
doubt if she will get married because her age has outgrown the
calendar. n on dry land. Mamatay ang isdà sa káwas, Fish won’t survive
on dry land.

kawasdak n k.o. white rice with long, fine grains. It grows both in the
paddy and in the uplands.

káwat_1 v {1} [A3S; a2] steal s.t. Way mukáwat ánang rilu mung
baratuhun, No one would steal that cheap watch of yours. Kawátun ku nà
ug dì nímu ihátag, I’m going to steal it if you don’t give it to me.
Gikawátan ang tindáhan, The store has been robbed. {1a} [A2; b7] steal
space from s.t. Nakakáwat ug duha ka pulgáda ang dapit nga ímung
gigunting, You cut off about two inches when you cut it with the
scissors. {2} [A23SN; b(1)] do s.t. without s.o.’s knowledge or while
he wasn’t watching. Mikáwat ku pagtan-aw níya, I stole a glance at her.
Mikáwat siyag lakaw samtang natúlug ku, He stole away while I was
sleeping. Gikawátan nákù siyag haluk, I stole a kiss from her.
{2a} steal a basket ball from s.o. while he is dribbling. n theft. Ísip
káwat ang pagtípig sa kinit-an, It’s considered theft to keep what you
have found. panghiN- v [b5] charge s.o. with being a thief, usually
with malicious intent. Gipanghingáwat (gipanghingawátan) siya sa íyang
agálun, Her employer falsely charged her with thievery. kawatkawat
v [AN] do s.t. surreptitiously, secretly, and repeatedly. Mukawatkawat
(mangawatkawat) giyud siyag káun ug bábuy bisag gidid-an, She eats pork
secretly even though she’s not supposed to. kinawatkawat a s.t. done
surreptitiously, secretly. Kinawatkawat nga kalípay, Happiness (in
love) stolen on the sly. -an n thief. -in- n loot, booty, spoils.
-in-ay n outbreak of thievery. -un(→), kawatúnun n s.t. to be stolen.

káwat_2 n wire used for conducting electricity. hatud — n message sent
by telegraph or apparatus used to send telegraph (literary). v [A; c]
send a telegram.

kawatkáwat = sakáti.

kaway = gaway.

kawáyan n general name for bamboo, but most specifically refers to
armed species, esp. Bambusa spinosa. -un a resembling a bamboo.

kawbuy n cowboy movie. a like the cowboy of the movies: rough, rugged,
tough. Kawbuy kaáyung tawhána. Buut ug ruburúbu, abtik kaáyung
muiskápu, He’s a cowboy sort. He puts up with anything and is quick to
escape. -in- n {1} like a cowboy as shown in the movies. Kinawbuy ang
íyang bisti, He is dressed up like a cowboy. {2} Western movie.
{3} rough and informal. Mau ni gustu kung kumbira, kinawbuy, This is
the kind of party I like, informal and rugged. v [A3; a12] do s.t. in
an informal, cowboy way.

kawhaan = kaluhaan. see duha.

kawhat v [AN; a] reach for s.t. Kawháta ang libru kay dì kung kaabut,
Reach for the book because I can’t. n {1} action of reaching.
{2} extent of reach. Taas ug kawhat ang buksidur, A boxer has a long
reach. paN- v [A13] reach for s.t. without quite being able to get it.
Nagpangawhat ang bátà sa plátu, The child is grabbing for the plate.

kawhit n pole or stick, usually with a hook at the end, used in picking
or getting s.t. which is out of one’s reach. v [A; a] get, pick s.t.
with a kawhit. Akuy mukawhit sa baskit, I’ll get the basket down with a
pole.

kawil = kawilkawil. kawilkawil v [A; c1] dangle loosely. Níay
nagkawilkawil sa sidsid sa ákung sinínà, S.t. is dangling at the hem of
my dress. Nagkawilkawil ang nindut níyang aríyus, Her beautiful
earrings were dangling. Ayawg kawilkawila (ikawilkawil) ang ímung tiil
ug magsakay kag swíng, Don’t let your feet dangle when you swing.

kawinkáwin = kawilkawil. see kawil.

kawit n container made to hold the water from the palm blossom as it is
gathered. It is made out of two or three bamboo nodes, with a wooden
hook on the upper side to hook over the shoulders.

kaw-it = kalaw-it.

kawkaw v {1} [A; ab2] touch s.t. with the hands. Dúnay nagkawkaw sa mga
inutaw, S.o. put his dirty paws on these clothes. Hala kawkáwa nang
bága, Go on, touch those glowing embers. Sa pagkawkaw lang mailhan ug
pila ka búwan ang tiyan, You can tell just by feeling how many months
the baby is in the stomach. {2} [AN; a2b2] steal s.t. that one has
access to. Mahadluk kung mukawkaw sa pundu, I’m afraid to touch the
fund. -an, maN-r- n one who steals things.

kawkus n political caucus or similar discussion. v [A12C; ab3] {1} hold
a caucus. {2} discuss, confer as in a caucus. Nagkawkus ang magsúun kun
unsáun pagbáhin ang yútà, The brothers were discussing how to divide
the land.

kawpi n k.o. medicinal seeds.

kawras = kamras.

kawrut = kamrut, v1.

kawsa v [A13; bc] accuse s.o. Gikawsáhan (gikawsahan) siyang naníkas,
He was accused of embezzling. Unsang saláa ang ímung ikakawsa níya?
What crime can you accuse him of? n {1} accusation. {2} cause one
espouses. Nagpasákit si Risal sa íyang kaugalíngun tungud sa kawsa sa
kagawásan, Rizal suffered for the cause of freedom.

kawu n handle for s.t. that is lifted or strap that hangs over the
shoulder. Kawu sa kamisin, Strap of one’s undershirt. Kawu sa kabù,
Handle of the dipper. Kawu sa tásà, The handle of the cup. Kawu sa
baldi, Handle of the pail. v [A; b] make a handle or strap for s.t.

kawu- see also kalu-.

kawunsil n council.

kawuntid a for a point to be counted. Kawuntid tu kay ids bul man, It’s
good because it was an edge ball. nat — for a point not to be counted.

kawuntir_1 n counter of a store, bar, or eatery.

kawuntir_2 v [A2; b] {1} in boxing, strike one’s opponent while
parrying. Pagsumbag ni Ilurdi gikawuntíran siyag usa ka istrit, When
Elorde delivered a blow, his opponent countered with a straight.
{2} make a counter drive in pingpong.

kaw-uy v [A12; c] have the strength to get up or lift the limbs. Dì na
ku makakaw-uy kay gútum na kaáyu, I cannot lift my arms or legs because
I’m famished.

kay {1} because, for the reason that. Undang na ta kay gikápuy man ku,
Let’s quit because I’m tired. Kay magminyù ka man giyud, na hala, sígi,
Since you’re bent on getting married, all right, go ahead. ábi — just
because. Ábi kay bag-ug awtu muhambug dáyun, Just because he has a new
car, he has to brag about it. — arun because in that way a desired
result will happen. Magtuun ka kay arun makapasar ka, You should study
so you can pass. kúmu — seeing as how, because the situation is that
... Kúmu kay ikay amahan, ikay mubadlung, Since you’re the father, it’s
your duty to keep him in line. Kúmu kay wà kuy kwarta, dì ku magminyù,
Since I have no money, I won’t get married. maáyu — it’s good that.
Maáyu kay nía ka, It’s a good thing you’re here now. tungud — because,
just for the reason that. Tungud kay gikusì ka, mamúnal diay ka? Just
because he pinched you, you beat him up? untà — since it is, was like
that, [so-and-so] should have happened. Untà kay ikaw may magulang,
ikaw untay dílì magpabuyag, Since you are the elder, you should have
behaved yourself. Untà kay wà nay bugas, ímu untà kung giingnan, Since
we were out of rice, you should have told me. {2} why is it that way?
Traynta? Kay pabayrun ba diay ang bátà? Thirty cents? Why? You mean to
say the baby has to pay fare too? — [interrogative] Why is it like
that? Who, what, why, how, etc. is it, that it should be like that?
Misulti siyag ingun? Kay kinsa ba nà siya, Is that what he said? Why,
who the hell is he? Dì mau? Kay unsa man diay tu? Isn’t that it? Why?
What was it then? Kay ngánu man diay? Dì ka mutrabáhu? What do you
mean? You mean you don’t want to work? Dì mau? Kay unsáun pa man diay?
What do you mean it’s not the right way? How are we to do it then?
{3} — [dative] than. Dakù siya kay kanákù (sa ákung anak), He is bigger
than I am (than my child). {4} — basta {a} if [so-and-so] is done,
[such-and-such] is the result. Kay basta (basta kay) ímung dugáyun ug
ínit, madáut giyud, If you heat it for a long time, it will get ruined.
{b} that’s the way it is. Kay basta (basta kay) mu tuy gisulti, That’s
the way it is. That is what he said. {5} dílì — {a} it is not really
that way. Dílì kay aku ray nagmulù, It’s not as though I were the only
one that had a complaint. Ang giingung barátu, dì kay barátu giyud,
ubus-ubus lang sa uban, When he says it’s cheap, it’s not really cheap.
It’s just a little lower than the others. {b} not only is it
[so-and-so]. Dì lang kay barátu, barátu gayud, It’s not just cheap,
it’s very, very cheap. dílì — ... kun dílì not only ... but also. Dì
lang kay gwápu, kun dì dátù, Not only is he handsome, he’s rich.

kaya n youngest child. Ságad sa mga bátà nga kaya manyahun giyud, More
often than not, the youngest child is wilful.

káya (slang) {1} within one’s ability, easily tackled. Ayaw na lag
tábang. Káya ku ra ni kaáyu, Never mind helping me. I can easily tackle
this job. {2} within one’s financial capacity to shoulder. Káya kaáyu
nákù ang balur ánang awtúha, The car is very much within my reach.
v [A12; a] tackle, handle s.t. with ease. Dì ku makakáya pag-alsa ánà,
I can’t lift that thing easily. Kayáhun giyud nímu bísag labihang
lisúra? Are you going to force yourself to tackle it even if it’s very
hard for you? -an a having the means to spend for whatever one likes.
Dakù kaáyu ang íyang báy; kayáhan (kayáan) giyud tingáli, His house is
very big; he must be rich.

kayà = kayhà.

kay-a n a small square-mouthed basket made of loosely woven thin bamboo
strips. v {1} [c16] put inside a kay-a. {2} [A; a12] make a kay-a.

káyab v {1} [APB; c1P] for cloth or the like to flap, cause it to do
so. Mikáyab (mipakáyab) siyag panyù paglarga sa barku, She waved her
handkerchief as the boat moved away. Nagkáyab ang bandílà sa hángin,
The flag waved in the breeze. Kayába (ikáyab) ang ímung kamut, Wave
your hand. {2} [A; c1P] raise a flag or unfurl a sail. Kayába (ikáyab)
ang bandílà, layag, Raise the flag, unfurl the sail. {3} [A2] for a
divinity to ascend into the heavens. Mikáyab si Kristu sa lángit,
Christ ascended into heaven. n the Ascension of Christ.

kay-ag v [A3P; a] {1} disarrange s.t. that was put in order, scatter
s.t. put together neatly. Hángin nga mikay-ag sa pinunduk nga papílis,
The wind that scattered the piles of paper. Ayaw kay-ága ang kamáda sa
káhuy, Don’t get the stacks of wood all in disorder. {2} cause things
in one place to scatter. Ang pinusílay nakakay-ag (nakapakay-ag) sa mga
táwu sa plása, The shoot-out scattered the people in the plaza. — ang
láwas v [B125] for a dead body to be in an advanced state of
decomposition. Nakay-ag na ang láwas sa nabangalang patay, The body
they found was in an advanced state of decomposition. — ang tinái v [A;
c1] kill a man by stabbing. Kay-águn (ikay-ag) nákù ang ímung tinái ug
maglúib ka, I’ll kill you if you betray me. a scattered about.

kayag-ang = kagangkagang. see kágang.

kayagkag_1 n k.o. fishing in which the net is made to touch the bottom
of the sea. The fish are driven towards it by people beating large
cans. paN- v [A2; a] catch fish with this method.

kayagkag_2 v [B; c1] be in disorder, dishevelled. Mikayagkag ang íyang
buhuk sa hángin, Her hair was all in disorder from the wind.
Nagkayagkag ang mga sinínà sa aparadur, The dresses were all in
disorder in the closet.

kayálì n k.o. large, spineless bamboo similar to butung but with itchy
hirsutes on the trunk and with smaller nodes.

kayamúkat = kalamúkat. see lamúkat.

káyang n shed consisting of a roof of buri palm thatch supported by
sticks or poles with no walls: {1} put on a small boat as a shelter
against rain. {2} used as a shed by transient vendors or purveyors of
entertainment. v [A; b] put up such a shed.

kayangkayang v [A3] fall on one’s back tottering and grasping the air
with the limbs. Nagkayangkayang siyang natikalbung sa kanal, He fell
backwards into the ditch, waving his arms wildly.

kayankayan n {1} tobacco tars. {2} burnt food stuck at the bottom of
cooking utensils. v {1} [a4b4] get clogged with tobacco tars. Gáhì
yupyúpun ang hunsuy kay gikayankan (gikayankánan) na kaáyu, It’s hard
to puff the pipe because it’s too clogged up with tars. {2} [B26] for
food to burn at the edges or bottom. Ayaw palabihig síga ang ímung
gilútù kay mukayankan (makayankan) unyà nà, Don’t turn the fire up too
high or the food will burn. {3} [A; ab] mix tobacco tars into drinks as
a practical joke. Gikayankanan ang ímung ilimnun, maung nalípung ka,
Tobacco tars were mixed with your drink. That’s why you got dizzy right
away.

kayapà = kudyapà.

káyas v [A; a] harvest corn. Gikáyas níla ang mais bísan anagun pa,
They harvested the corn while the ears were still young. n harvest of
corn.

káyat v [AC2; ab2] have sexual intercourse (not coarse, but replaced by
a euphemism in polite speech). Kayátun ku siya run kay wà na dug-a,
I’ll have her today because she’s not menstruating any more. n sexual
intercourse. Ang káyat mauy lamì nga dì ikapangagda, Sexual intercourse
is one of the pleasures which we need not, in fact cannot, invite our
friends to share. hiN-(→), pala-(→) a having a great appetite for sex.

káyaw_1 v {1} [A; b6] fly up high to a distance. Mikáyaw ang pati
pagkabuhì, The pigeon flew up high when it got loose. Mikáyaw sa lángit
si Kristu, Christ ascended into heaven. {2} [A3P; b4] for one’s spirit
to soar, be elated. Ang maung hitabù nakakáyaw (nakapakáyaw) sa ákung
pagbátì, That event lifted my spirits.

káyaw_2 = kálaw.

kaybuy n cowboy of the movies (humorous—children’s talk).

kayda n covered porch in the front of a house and an extension of the
main floor. v [A3; a] make a front porch in a house, make into a front
porch.

kayhà (usually pronounced kahà) {1} perhaps, possibly. Kayhà
mahikalimut pa usab siya kang Mirilin kun mahigugma siya sa láin,
Perhaps he will forget Marilyn again if he falls in love with s.o.
else. {1a} kayhà ... kayhà maybe because ... or perhaps because.
Nanghátag siya—kahà kay manggihatágun, kahà kay dihay giapas, He gave
me s.t., maybe to be nice or maybe he was after s.t. {2} in questions
{a} with no interrogative: by any chance, I wonder if. Muanhi ba kahà
siya? Will he come by any chance? Dílì siya makahúbad, aku pa kahà?
Even he can’t translate it. Could I possibly do so? {b} with an
interrogative: who (what, where, etc.) can it be? Ginúu ku, unsa kahay
nahitabù? My Lord! What can have happened? Unsáun ku kahà pagbáyad sa
útang? How could I ever pay the debt? {c} maybe, approximately.
Magkinahanglan kahà kug tulu, I’ll need approximately three. {3} man —
since apparently [so-and-so] is the case. Mutan-aw ka man kahà sa sini.
Ngánung nía ka pa man? You said you were going to the movies. Why are
you still here? -an(→) a {1} s.t. held doubtful or uncertain.
‘Makapasar kahà siya sa iksámin?’—‘Kayhaan pa,’ ‘Will he pass the
examination?’—‘It is still doubtful.’ ‘Anus-a ka magpakasal níya?’—‘Sa
kayhaan,’ ‘When will you marry her?’—‘Someday (but when, I still do not
know).’ {2} accidentally, unexpectedly. Sa kayhaan nagkítà sila sa
Manílà, By chance they met in Manila.

kayhun v [A; b6(1)] lean on s.t. with the hands. Mukayhun ku nímu arun
dì ku matumba, I’ll lean on you so I don’t fall. Nabálì ang sanga nga
íyang gikayhúnan sa duha níya ka kamut, He leaned on the branch with
both hands and it broke. paN- v [A] lean on s.t. for support.

kayi v [A; c1] pull in s.t. not stiff or push it with a sidewise
motion. Láin ang magkayi sa báling, ang uban mamunit sa mga isdà, Some
of them will pull in the net and the others will gather the fish.
Kayiha (ikayi) ang túbig sa lamísa arun dílì mutúlù sa ímung páa, Wipe
away the water on the table so it won’t drip on your legs.

káyì n piles of sand made by small sand crabs (agúkuy) along the beach
or on tidal flats. v [A; b1] for small crabs to dig up the sand or do
like them. Magkaun ka, mu rag agúkuyng magkáyì kay daghang mumhu sa
ímung atubángan, When you eat, you are like a sand crab digging up sand
because you spill the rice all over the edge of the table.

kaykay_1,2 = kalaykay_1,2.

kaykay_3 n a k.o. round cookie about 3″ in diameter, topped with ground
peanuts.

kaylab, kaylap v [A; b6] {1} for s.t. that leaves some sort of effect
to spread. Mikaylap ang kaláyu sa balay, The fire spread to the house.
Ang pagmariwána nagkaylap na, Smoking of marijuana is spreading
everywhere. Gikaylápan ang íyang láwas sa nukanuka, His body is covered
with sores. {2} for roots to spread. Inigkadakù na sa lubi, layù ug
kaylápan ang gamut, When the coconut tree reaches a good size, the
roots spread far.

kaymítu n star apple, a medium-sized tree cultivated for its fruit
which is the size of an apple, green or purple when ripe with juicy,
white flesh: Chrysophyllum cainito.

kayril n watch chain. v [A] wear a watch chain.

káyu = kaláyu.

*káyù paN- v {1} [A2S; ac1] ask for s.t. Nagpangayug pakitábang ang
nabanggà, The accident victims shouted for help. Pangayúa ang suklì,
Ask for the change. Dúna untà kuy ipangáyù (pangayúun) nímu ug mahímù,
I would like to ask s.t. of you if it isn’t too much. {2} [A2; a] set a
bride price. Pangáyug barku arun dì makatúman, Set the bride price so
high they cannot meet it. {3} — ug katahúran v [A2; b6] greet s.o. by
saying ‘good morning’, etc. Ug makahinagbù kay tigúlang, pangáyug
katahúran, When you meet an elderly person, bid him good morning
(evening). n {1} s.t. asked for. Pilay pangáyù sa nanaygun? How much
are the carolers asking for? {2} bride price. pinaN- n {1} s.t. which
has been obtained by asking. Dì ni pinalit, pinangáyù ni, I didn’t buy
this. I solicited it. {2} child born to a childless couple that prayed
to God for it. Pinanggà kaáyu ang bátang pinangáyù, A child born to a
childless couple after fervent prayers is highly cherished. -an(→)
a fond of asking for things. Kayuan kaáyu, dì maglútug iyáha, He is
fond of asking for things and doesn’t bother to fix his own.

kayúang n a large and deep sore caused by an infection on the legs.
v [B12; a4b4] for the legs to become ulcerated. Gikayuángan (gikayúang)
íyang batíis, His legs got deep ulcers on them.

káyud v [A2; b] work hard (slang). Ang draybir kinahanglan giyung
mukáyud sa hustu arung makabawì sa ábang, A jeep driver has to work
hard to earn enough money to pay for the rent of his jeep.

kayug = kalug.

kayugpus = kulugpus.

kayukayu (from kaláyu) v [B1456; b] rain blows on s.o. or strike s.t.
in quick succession. Nagkayukayu ang tigbas sa huramintádu, The man who
ran amok is swinging his sword like a blazing fire. see also under
kaláyu.

kayunda v {1} [A; b(1)] misuse equipment by treating it too roughly.
Nagubà ákung makina kay bísag kinsa lay mukayunda niíni, My sewing
machine broke because anybody and everybody was allowed to use it in
any old way. {2} [A; a12] work energetically to get a lot of things
done. Dílì ku makadiskansu kay gawas nga mukayunda sa labhanan, náa pa
giyuy ulutáwun nga kayundáhun, I can’t rest because I have to get the
laundry done, and then there is the ironing to do.

kayung v [A; a] cook root crops with steam.

kayúring v [A3] jabber, talk rapidly and noisily, often unintelligibly.
Nagakayúring ang mga Suban-un human sa butu, The Subanos jabbered away
after the explosion. n action of jabbering. Hinúgay nang inyung
kayúring dihà. Matúlug na ta, That’s enough of your jabbering. Let’s go
to sleep.

kayut v {1} [ANC; abcP] hold or touch s.t., hold on to s.t. so as to be
joined to it. Ang bátà mikayut (nangayut) sa sinínà sa inahan, The
child held his mother’s dress. Magkáyut tang tanan nga manglábang sa
subà, We will all join hands together in crossing the river. Kayútun ku
ning duha ka tabla, I will join these two boards together. Wà kuy
kwartang makaytan, I can’t get my hands on any of the money. {2} [A23]
in pool, for the cue to slip off the ball when shooting.

kayútis = sayúti.

ki {1} — [verb] — dílì, walà, or [verb] whether [so-and-so] happened or
not. Ki nagkahigugmaay sila ki nagdinumtanay, ambut háiy tinúud,
Whether they love each other or hate each other, I don’t know. Ki
mutangdù ki dílì, ayaw panigurúa, You can’t be certain whether or not
he will consent. {2} [verb] ki [verb] (where the verb refers to an
action) doing [so-and-so] intensely. Ínum ki ínum lang mu. Wà giyud muy
láing nahunàhunaan, nu? All you do is drink and drink. You don’t think
of anything else? Búnal ki búnal lang ang pulis. Wà giyud siya
mutug-an, The police kept beating and beating him. He refused to reveal
anything.

kí n key in music.

kî short for súkì.

kiamkiam = tiamtiam.

kiang v [B] limp, become crippled in the feet or legs. Nagkiang siya
kay natunuk, He is limping because he got a thorn in his foot. Nakiang
siya tungud sa aksidinti, He became crippled due to an accident. (←)
v [B; b4] for an enterprise to be crippled by the absence of some part
or member. Nakíang (gikiángan) ang trabáhu pagrisáyin nímu, The work
was crippled because you resigned. a {1} having a limp. {2} being
crippled. -un a = kiang, a.

kiat a {1} restless and inclined to rowdy or bouncy actions. Nagsáyaw
sila inubanan sa kiat nga tugtug, They danced to the bouncy music. Kiat
ka man kaáyu dì nadam-ag, You jump about all the time so you slipped
and fell. {1a} immodestly forward toward men. Dalì makúhà ang babáying
kiat, One easily gets a loose woman. {2} doing s.t. carelessly because
one’s attention jumps to other matters. Wà magkadimáu paglútù kay kiat
man kaáyu, The dinner came out awful because she was so careless and
heedless. v [B] get to be rowdy, unreserved in manners or restlessly
inattentive. {a} get to be immodest, unreserved towards men. Nakiat
siya tungud sa íyang pagkuyugkúyug ánang taga Manílà, She has become
immodest due to her association with that girl from Manila. {b} be
intensely restless, careless or immodest. Mikíat lang paglakaw, binyáan
ang dinung-ag, She just walked off without thinking what she was doing,
leaving the food on the fire.

kiaykíay v {1} [A; c1] sway the hips. Nagkiaykíay ang hawayána, The
Hawaiian dancer is swaying her hips. {2} [AP] walk around to exhibit
oneself. Sabadu ipanudlay, Duminggu ikiaykíay (ipakiaykíay), Saturday
is to make oneself up. Sunday is to promenade. n swaying of the hips or
metaphorically, a similar action. Ang kiaykíay sa mga dáhun nga
gihurusan sa huyúhuy, The playing of the leaves in the breeze.

kibà v [AB; ab7c] for liquids to spill over the top of a container,
cause them to do so. Paghínay arun dílì mukibà ang túbig sa baldi, Walk
carefully so the water in the pail won’t spill. Kibai nang básu kay
punù ra, Spill some of the water out of the glass because it’s too
full. Anhà ikibà sa masitíra ang túbig, Toss the water onto the potted
plant. n liquid spilt over the top of a container.

kibad v [A23] {1} get out of a place without losing time. Pag-abut sa
kubradur mikibad ku sa kusína, When the bill collector arrived, I left
on the double through the kitchen door. {2} move by swiftly. Mikibad
lang ang dyit sa íyang paghangad, The jet just zoomed by when he looked
up.

kibag a {1} behaving in a strange and socially unacceptable way:
tactless in speech, oblivious to the propriety of what one is saying or
doing. Kibag ang íyang pamisti kay way nakabadlung níya, She dresses
immodestly because no one ever told her what was proper. Kibága nímu
uy! Dì tu níya mutsátsa. Asáwa tu, You idiot! That wasn’t a maid. That
was his wife. {2} not to the point, not reasonable. Kibag tung ímung
tubag. Swítu kug unsay nahitabù. Tug-áni kug kinsa, You didn’t answer
my question. I know what happened so just tell me who did it.
v {1a} [B6; c6] be, become improper in one’s behavior. Ug mag-ismágul
ka sa simbahan kibagan giyud ang mga táwu, If you wear rubber slippers
to church, the people will consider it bad manners. {1b} [AP; aP] do
s.t. in a socially unacceptable way. ‘Ma! Nía na ag yàyà,’ mipakibag ug
singgit ang bátà, ‘Mom! The old goat you were talking about has
arrived,’ shouted the little girl thoughtlessly. {2} [AP; aP] get off
the point, be unreasonable.

kibhang v [B26; b7c] be lessened or diminished. Wà giyud mukibhang ang
átung kalisud bísag gamay, The misery of our condition hasn’t lessened
a bit. Nakibhang ug dakù ang íyang tinipígan sa nagastu níya sa
uspital, His savings were greatly reduced after he paid his hospital
bills. n deduction in amount.

kibídu n eyeglasses. v [A; a2] wear, get, make into eyeglasses.

kibkib v [A; ab7] wear down s.t. bit by bit with the front teeth. Ákù
lang kibkíbun ning lubi kay gáhì nang kuskúsun, I’ll just bite the
coconut meat from its shell because it’s hard to scrape it out. Ang
punúan sa kapáyas gikibkiban sa bábuy, The pig has nibbled away at the
trunk of the papaya tree. n = kalibkib.

kibra v {1} [B; ab7] be decreased, be diminished. Usa ka kalihúkang
nakakibra (nakapakibra) sa ákung pagmahal, An action which makes my
love for you grow less. Kibráhan ang takus kay mahal na man, They give
you less in a package because the price is going up. Dakù na ang kibra
sa ákung timbang, I have lost a lot of weight. {2} [A; a] in a card
game like rummy, deal a player a card which will force him to put down
or discard cards he is holding—i.e., cause an opponent’s hand to
diminish. Nakakibra siya sa ákung baráha ug nahátag ku ang ákung
gikuptan, He dealt me a card such that I had to open, and I
relinquished the cards I had been saving. -da n {1} downgrade.
Giatángan sila sa kibráda, They were ambushed at the downgrade.
{2} decrease. Kibráda sa mga prisyu, Lowering of prices. v [A] {1} for
the road to descend. {2} for s.t. to move downward, becoming less.

kibù v [B246] {1} do s.t. in reaction. Wà siya mukibù dihang gitiúnan
na, He didn’t move a muscle or say a word when I aimed at him.
{1a} [B126] be affected. Wà giyud makakibù (makapakibù) ang mga balud
sa sakayan, The waves had no effect on the boat. {1b} [A2; b(1)] show
signs of recognition upon meeting s.o. Dì man lang ta nímu kibuan, You
go by me as if you don’t know me. {1c} [A2; b(1)] for the shoulders to
be shrugged. Ígù lang ku gikibuan sa abága. Wà ku níya klarúhig unsa,
All he did was shrug his shoulders. He didn’t give me a clear answer.
{2} = kibà. n {1} movement in reaction. {2} liquid spilled over. pa-
v [A; c1] move a part of the body in reaction: shrug the shoulders, nod
the head, and the like.

kibul a {1} having a cropped or cut-off tail. {2} for s.t. else to be
cropped short. v [A; ab] {1} cut a tail off or short, usually of
animals but by extension, also of fowl. Kibulun nátù ang íkug sa ituy,
Let’s cut off the puppy’s tail. {2} cut s.t. else short. Buhuk nga
kibulan, Hair which was cut short. ka-(←) v [A13] with the tail cut
short. Tan-áwa ra ang irù nagkakíbul lang ang íkug, Look at the dog
with its tail cut short.

kíbul_1 v [AC; b5] mate, have sexual intercourse (euphemism). Nagkíbul
ang duha ka irù, The two dogs are mating. Kibúlun (kibúlan) ku nang
bayhánag kalugar ku, I will have that woman if I get a chance.

kíbul_2 n textile cone shell.

kíbul_3 v [B3(1)46] for the spines of sea urchins to go deep into the
skin; for the flesh of sea shells to recede into the inner part.
Mukíbul ang kinhasun ug mapalabian ug lútù, Sea shells shrink into the
shell if you overcook them. Gáhì nang kuháun ang tunuk sa tuyum ug
makakíbul na, It’s hard to pick out the spines of sea urchins once they
penetrate into the skin.

kíbut v [A2S] {1} for the anus to move in contracting. Huypa ang lubut
sa manuk dì ba mukíbut, Blow on the chicken’s rear. See if it doesn’t
twitch. {1a} for any part of the body to twitch. Dúnay kusug nga kalit
lang mukíbut, There are muscles that suddenly just twitch. {2} for the
mouth to move in chewing or speaking. Mikíbut ang íyang ngábil
pagyamyam, Her lips moved as she uttered her prayers. {3} [B256] for a
mass of s.t. to move in a somewhat wriggling fashion. Nagkíbut ang mga
úlud sa ginamus, The worms are wriggling over the preserved fish.
n {1} movement of the anus or lips. {2} anus. {2a} — nímu, níya
expression showing complete disbelief (lit. your anus) (not refined
usage). Madátù sa ímung kíbut! We couldn’t become rich, and you know
it. Buta sa íyang kíbut. Makakità bayà siya, Blind, my foot (lit. his
ass)! He can see.

kid n {1} friendly address to children or to persons younger than the
speaker. {2} friendly term of address among intimates of the same age.
{3} title affixed before names of boxers.

kida, kída v {1} [A; bc] deduct s.t. from an amount. Mukída nà siyag
swildu sa míd basta makabuak, She deducts it from servants’ wage if
they break anything. Kidahi ang íyang yútà kay dakù ra, Lessen his
quota because it is too large. {2} [B6] for s.t. to remain after
division. Hustung pagkabahína kay walà magkída, It was very well
divided. There was no extra. n {1} deduction. {2} amount remaining
after division.

kída bwilta = ída bwilta. see bwilta.

kidangkídang v [A3; c1] rock or sway. Mukidangkídang ang barku ug
bawrun, The boat rocks sideways when it is buffeted by waves. Íyang
kidangkidángun (ikidangkídang) ang silyang tuwangtúwang, He will rock
the rocking chair.

kidhat v [AN; b6] signal with the eyes or eyebrows. Kinsa man nang
tawhána nga nagkidhat (nagpangidhat) nímu? Who’s that fellow winking at
you? Kidhátan ta lang kag úras na, I’ll just signal you with my eyes
when it’s time. n signal with the eyebrows.

kidlap v [A; b6] for a light (strong or soft) to be intermittent:
glitter, flash. Mikidlap ang bitúun, The star twinkled. Nagkidlap ang
sugà sa patrul, The police car’s light is flashing. n flash, sparkle.
paN- v [A13] sparkle intermittently and rapidly. Nagpangidlap ang
linantip sa kaháit, The bolo is sparkling, it is so sharp.

kidnap v [A; a] kidnap, abduct. Mga ribildi nga mikidnap sa upisyal,
The rebels who kidnapped the official. Gikidnap siya sa sinalikwayng
trátu, She was abducted by the man she had spurned. maN-r- n a
kidnapper. paN- n kidnapping.

kig-(←) prefix, short form for nakig- and makig-.

kigi v [A; a] strip fiber from a plant by running it between two things
that squeeze out all matter but the fiber. Magkigi siya ug lánut arun
himúung písì, He’ll strip abaca fibers to make them into rope. Gikighan
níya ang íyang útang nákù, He worked off his debt by stripping abaca.
kilighan n {1} abaca stripper. {2} debt to be worked off by stripping
abaca.

kigkig v {1} [B46] twitch in death spasms. Nikigkig ang manuk pagkaigù
sa tarì, The cock twitched in its death spasm when the gaff hit it.
Maáyu rag mukigkig nang malditúha nà, If that devil dies (twitch in a
death spasm), that will be fine by me. {1a} [B] become very thin such
that the bones become prominent. Mukigkig ka giyud ug sígi kang
gapulaw, You will become all skin and bones if you keep staying up late
at night. {2} shiver or shudder due to cold, fright. Mikigkig siya sa
katugnaw, He shivered with cold. {3} [b6] for water shaken off the fur
to land on one. {4} [b6] for s.t. to scratch itself in front of one.
paN- v [A; b6] {1} shake water off the fur. Nangigkig ang irù gíkan sa
ulan, The dog shook water off its body when it came in from the rain.
{2} scratch the body vigorously. Síging pangigkig ang irù nga
gikarapáta, The dog which is infested by fleas is constantly
scratching. -un a of a thin sort and not tending to get fat by nature.

kignat v [B126] start because of s.t. that distracts the attention.
Nakignat siya pagkamatngun nga may táwung nagbarug sa íyang luyu, She
started when she noticed a man standing behind her.

kigul n {1} place around the sacrum and coccyx in man and animals.
{2} by extension, the anus. Hugási ang kigul sa bátà, Wash the baby’s
rectum. (sa) ímung — affectionate and humorous expression of disgust or
disappointment. Unsay nakakaun? Unsa may kan-un, ímung kigul, nga walà
may nahibilis kan-un! What do you mean, have I eaten? What is there to
eat when you didn’t leave me anything, you fool! v [a12b2] be hit in
this area.

kigwa n tiny white intestinal worms which appear in the anus and tickle
intensely. v [A123P; a2] have these worms. Makakigwa kunu kanang
magtiniil tag lakaw, They say walking barefoot causes pinworm
infestation. kigwahun a having these worms.

kíha v [A; c6] file a case in court. Ikíha ta ka sa ímung pagpakaúlaw
nákù, I’ll sue you for slandering me. — ug atras v [c6] sue s.o. for
backing up, a joking threat (inasmuch as there is no such crime as
‘backing up’). Ug mangulitáwu, ikíha ug atras, If he courts you, sue
him for ‘backing up’. n complaint in a lawsuit. Ang kíha gidismis kay
kúwang sa ibidinsiya, The case was dismissed for insufficiency of
evidence. -nti n complainant.

kihar v [A1; b3] complain on account of s.t. Nagkihar mi tungud sa
kasábà sa makina sa ámung duul, We are complaining about the noise the
machine near our house is making.

kihat = kidhat.

kihud, kìhud v [B; c1] walk with a limp. Nagkihud siya kay mubù ug
píkas tiil, He walks with a limp because one of his legs is short.
Nakihud siya pagkabálì sa íyang páa, He limped after he hurt his leg.
n one who walks with a limp. tang- = kihud.

kihul v [A; b6] make motions to do s.t. Wà lang mukihul gisúgù ay, I
asked him to do s.t., but he didn’t make a move. n motion made
preparatory to s.t. Wà tingáli kumbira sa íla kay way kihul, I doubt
that they’re going to have a party because they haven’t made a move to
prepare.

kíim n {1} acronym for Kabatáang Makabáyan. {2} be a member of the k.m.
{3} person short in height (humorous slang—so called for the term
kabatáang mugbù ‘short children’ a teasing reference to Kabatáang
Makabáyan).

kík n cake. v [A; a] make a cake.

kikbak n money given as kickback. v [A; c] give, get kickback. Padag-a
sa bíding ang kusug mukikbak, Award the contract to the one that gives
the biggest kickback. Mukikbak sad ang ahinti sa biay-ar, Internal
revenue agents also get kickbacks.

kikhi v [A; a] scrape off s.t. that cakes onto s.t. Kikhía ang buling
sa tsinílas, Scrape the dirt off of your slippers.

kíkì n child talk for female genitalia.

kìkì n food particles left in the teeth. hiN- v [A] pick s.t. out of
the teeth. n s.t. used to pick the teeth. panghiN- v [A2] pick one’s
teeth. Díay tutpik u. Panghingìkì, Here’s a toothpick. Pick your teeth.
ígù rang ipanghingìkì for food to be so little as to be just enough to
stick between the teeth (lit. to pick out of the teeth). Mu ra ni
ihátag mu? Ígù ra nang ipanghingìkì, Is this all you are giving me?
It’s hardly enough to stick to the teeth.

kíkik_1 n {1} bird which makes the sound kíkik which is said to
accompany an úngù or, in other versions, which is a form the úngù
takes. {2} illegitimate woman abortionist (slang). {2a} gold digger.
v {1} [B126] turn into a kíkik bird. {2} [A; ab2] for a kíkik to harass
s.o. Ug dúnay magkíkik sa manganak, patay ang ianak, If a kíkik
harasses a mother in labor, the baby will be stillborn. paN- v [A2; b6]
for a kíkik to go about its evil business.

kíkik_2 = kikbak (slang).

kikílu n name given to flat fish nearly as wide as they are long:
Scatophagus argus.

kikim v [A; b6(1)] wring out, rub off dirt or stains with little water
from a worn clothing.

kíking n kicking the ball, a violation in basketball.

kilá = kilála.

kilab v [A3] flash by swiftly, do s.t. in a flash. Mikilab lang ang
dyit, The jet plane flashed by. Ang íyang hulagway mikilab sa ákung
panumdúman, Her image flashed through my memory. Nagkilab ang mga
katuígan, The years went by like a flash. kilabkilab v [AN] glitter,
flash intermittently. Ang sikwins sa íyang sinínà nagkilabkilab, The
sequins in her dress sparkled. paN- v [A13] = kilabkilab. -in- n gleam,
flash, luster. Dakug sángat ang kinilab sa linti gíkan sa barku, The
flash of the boat’s light ranges over a wide area.

*kilába pa- v [A] plead, implore, ask earnestly. Kun magkalisudlisud
ka, ása ka mupakilába? When you are in dire need where do you go to ask
for help? Nagpakilába siya sa katawhan nga pamináwun ang íyang
katarúngan, He pleaded to the public to listen to his explanations.
paN- = pa-.

kilála n ornamental shrub, the reddish leaves of which have medicinal
use: Cordyline fruticosa.

kilas a {1} characterized by making rapid and shifting movements. Kilas
ang talabánug kay dílì balansi, The kite is unsteady because it is not
balanced. Kilas nga tugtug, Fast and lively song. {2} moving about too
much, roaming about. {2a} flirting too much with the opposite sex.
Ikaw, kay babáying kilas, buut rag ása makatulug, Since you are a woman
who lets herself go all the time, you would agree to sleep anywhere.
Bisag minyù ka na, kilas gihápun ka sa mga babáyi, Even though you are
married you go after women too much. v [B; b6] {1} be, become unsteady
and shifting in motion. Unsa guy nindut ánang kasing nga nagkilas?
What’s so good about that top? It is unsteady. {2} roam about, move
about too much, get to have loose morals. Ayaw pagkilas. Paúlì dáyun
human sa klási, Don’t go roaming about. Come straight home after
school.

kílat n lightning. kusug pa sa — faster than greased lightning.
v {1} [A] for lightning to flash. Mukílat gánì, dúna giyuy dalugdug,
Where there is lightning, there is thunder. {1a} -an curse hoping
lightning strikes s.o., esp. for doing s.t. immoral. Nagpabaliw ang
amahan ug anak. Kilátan pa untà, The father and daughter are having
sexual relations. May lightning strike them! {2} [b(1)] have a lucky
break in a seemingly impossible situation (lit. have lightning flash at
one). Mupalit kug tíkit sa swipstiks uruy. Ug kilátan dì madátù unyà
ku, I’ll buy a sweepstakes ticket. Who knows. If I get a lucky break,
I’ll be rich. Musúkul ta bísag maáyu sila. Básin pag kilátan nga
makadaug, We will play against them, strong as they are. Who knows we
might get a break and win. {3} [b6] be done with lightning speed.
Gipanggútum ang kabatáan kay gikilátan lang ang pagkáun sa lamísa, The
children must have been hungry because they finished their food with a
lightning speed. paN-(→) v [A13] for lightning to be flashing
intensely. Dautan ang panahun kay nagpangilat, The weather is bad and
the sky is ablaze with flashes of lightning. -nun a with lightning
speed.

kiláti n carat, unit of weight for precious stones or metals.

kílaw v {1} [A; a] eat s.t. raw or unripe. Kiláwun sa bátà ang bugas,
The baby will eat the rice raw. {1a} eat vegetables slightly cooked or
raw fish or meat together with vinegar and spices. Maáyung kiláwun ang
púsù sa ságing, The end of a bunch of bananas is good for salads.
{1b} [C2; b6] have a raw seafood eating spree. Magkílaw ta sa hunásan,
Let’s have a raw seafood party at the seashore. {2} [A; a12] take care
of a task handily and easily. Kiláwun lang níya ang mát, He’ll just
breeze through mathematics. {2a} -un ug way sukàsúkà I’d like to make
mince meat out of you (lit. cut you up for raw fish without vinegar).
Kagágu bayà nímu. Maáyu giyud kang kiláwun ug way sukàsúkà, What a
dumbbell you are. I’d like to make mince meat out of you. {3} =
kilawkílaw. n raw seafood to eat. Nindut ang kílaw ug dúnay tubà, Raw
seafood goes well with palm toddy. -in- n a dish, usually of raw foods
prepared with vinegar and spices. v [A1] prepare or eat kinílaw.
-un(→), -nun n s.t. for eating raw, esp. raw fish meat. kilawkílaw
v [A; a] speak hurriedly with poor enunciation. Unsáun pagsabut nga
gikilawkílaw man lang níya ang íyang pakigpúlung? How could people
understand when he just mumbled his speech hurriedly?

kiláwan n k.o. porgy.

kílay n eyebrows. v [A; a] put on false eyebrows, line the eyebrows.
hiN- v [A] pluck one’s eyebrows. -un a having bushy eyebrows.

kilditáyim v [A; c] in games, kill time so that the losing team won’t
have time to make points.

kílid n side. Samad sa kílid ni Hisus, Wound on Jesus’ side. Ipapilit
sa píkas kílid sa bungbung, Paste it on the other side of the wall.
v [B2S6; c1] lean to one side. Mikílid (nakílid) ang barku paghampak sa
bawud, The ship leaned to one side when the waves hit it. Nagkilid ang
trák sa kadaghan sa pasahíru, The truck was leaning to one side because
it was overloaded with passengers. Kilíra (ikílid) nang baril arun
karútun ang túbig, Turn the barrel sideways so that the water can be
scooped out to the last drop. (→) v [A; a12] hit on the side. Nakilid
pagsumbag si Humaw-as, Jumao-as was hit on the side. kiliran n at one’s
side. Milingkud ku sa kiliran sa masakitun, I sat beside the patient.
hiN-(→) a tending to be hit on the side.

kiligkilig v [A; b6] shudder from cold or on experiencing s.t. that
raises goose bumps; shake the body. Nagkiligkilig kung nagtan-aw sa
sud-an nga tambuk, I got goose pimples seeing the fatty food.
Gikiligkiligan ku sa irù human nákug lígù áni, The dog shook off his
water on me after I had bathed him.

kilígù humorous for kalígù. see lígù. Way kilígù, Needing a bath.

kilikísi = kisikísi. see kisi.

kilikíti v {1} [A; a] make s.t. into a tight roll. Nagkilikíti siyag
papil nga gam-ung pabílu sa ribintadur, She made fine, tight rolls of
paper to make into firecracker fuses. {2} [A; a1] make motions with the
palms or fingers of the sort one makes in rolling s.t. Arun paglínis sa
tablíya, kilikitíha (kilikit-a) ug maáyu ang buluníyu, In order to
dissolve the chocolate, twirl the stirring stick between the palms.
Kilikit-a ang tútuy, Tickle the nipples by rubbing them between the
thumb and forefinger.

kilíkug see kulítug.

kilíkut = kulíkut.

kilim n k.o. large tree.

kíling v [A2S; c1] {1} lean, list to one side. Nikíling ang sakayan
paghampak sa dagkung balud, The boat tilted because the waves lashed at
it. Nagkiling ang túri sa Písa, The tower of Pisa is leaning.
{2} defect to the opposite side. Ang ámung partídu mauy íyang
gikilíngan, He defected to our political party. (→) a listing, tilting
to one side. Kiling ning lamisáha, This table is tilting to one side.

kíling ditayim = kilditáyim.

kilípay humorous for kalípay. see lípay. Way kilípay kay wà íyang bána
dinhi, She hasn’t been having any (sexual) fun because her husband
isn’t here.

kilis v [A; b] wash cereals, sand, or anything granular. Kisli ang mais
únà lung-ága, Wash the corn grits before you cook them. Ang balas sa
dágat kislan úsà imása sa simintu, The sand from the sea has to be
washed first before one makes the cement mixture. -in-, -in-an n water
which had been used in washing grains. kislanan, kilislan, kislunun,
kilislun n grains to be washed.

kilísiw = kulísiw.

kilkig v [A; a] get scrapings from s.t. Ang tambálan nagkilkig ug
tambal pára sa masakitun, The folk doctor is scraping medicinal bark
for the sick man. Kilkígun ang pánit sa kaníngag pára ipanákut, They
scrape cinnamon bark to get a spice. -an thing on which one scrapes
s.t. -in- n scrapings.

kilkil v [A; ab] {1} scratch an itch. Nakilkil ku na, lakip ang dílì
makatul, I’ve scratched it, including the part that doesn’t itch.
{2} extort money. Gikilkílan kug singku sa pulis, kay nadakpan nga way
lisinsiya, The policeman extorted five pesos from me because he caught
me without a license. -in-, -in-an n s.t. extorted. paN- n occupation
of extortion.

kilu = kítung.

kílu n {1} kilogram. {2} weight as it comes out on the scale. Mu rang
kilúha, dinhi sa átug sa íla, It’ll come out to be the same weight, on
our scale or theirs. v {1} [c1] buy or sell s.t. by the kilogram.
Kilúha (ikílu) pagbaligyà ang bwáhan, Sell the fruits by the kilogram.
{2} [A; a] weigh. Kilúhun ni nákung ripulyu, I will weigh the cabbage.
{3} [B256; a12] be a kilogram. kiluhan n scales graduated in kilos.
-in-, -in-(→) n {1} s.t. measured by the kilo. {2} sex on a
business-like basis (as one would buy a kilogram of s.t.). Gustu mu
bang mupalit na lang kug kinilu? You want me to go to a prostitute (buy
flesh by the kilogram)?

kilù v [AN; c1] wink the eyes to signal. Nagpangilù siyang nagtan-aw sa
gwápa, He kept on winking as he was looking at the pretty girl. Kiluan
ta lang ka ágig sinyas, I’ll wink at you as a signal. n wink.

*kilug paN- v [A; b4] shudder (with pleasure or revulsion). Nagpangilug
(gipangilugan) aku sa kalamì, kangilngig, I shuddered with pleasure,
horror. pangilugkilug v [A; c] shudder, shiver in waves. Nangilugkilug
ang kabáyù pag-ábug sa lángaw, The horse made his skin shudder to get
rid of the flies.

kilumitru n kilometer. v [B256; b6] be a kilometer. Wà ra mukilumitru
(makilumitru) ang gilay-un sa ámung gibaktas, The distance which we
hiked did not reach a kilometer. kilumitráhi n {1} kilometer post.
{2} mileage (reckoned in kilometers). Bag-u ning awtúha mau nga mabà ug
kilumitráhi, This car is new. That is why it has low mileage. -s
kilometers (plural—used with numbers of Spanish origin).

kilumkílum n dusk. v [B5N; b2] be dusk, be overtaken by dusk. Manghúp
ang manuk ug magkilumkílum na, Chickens roost when it’s dusk.

kilya n {1} an edge that is square. Háit ra ang kilya sa lamísa, The
square edge of the table is too sharp. {2} keel, chief timber or piece
of steel which extends the entire length of the bottom of a boat or
ship and supports the frame. v {1} [A; c1] make the edges of s.t.
square. {2} [B126] bump against an edge. Nakilya ang íyang úlu sa
pasamánu pagkatumba, He hit his head against the bannister when he
fell. kilyakilya v [A23; c] keep knocking the ball at the edge of the
table in pingpong to keep the opponent off balance. Magdagandágan ang
íyang kuntra ug íya nang ikilyakilya ang búla, His opponent has to run
all over the place when he keeps bouncing the ball off the edge.
n action of hitting the ball this way.

kimàkimà v [B6; b6] talk haltingly, stammer. Mukimàkimà siya ug
pangutan-un na sa huwis, She stammers when the judge questions her.

kimaw = kiwaw.

kímay v [B26; b4] have a broken, twisted, or deformed wrist. Nakímay
siya pagkabálì sa íyang kamut, He got a twisted wrist when he broke his
hand. Kimayan ta ka ug mangáwat ka pa, I’ll break your wrist if you
steal again. (→) n having a broken, twisted, or deformed wrist.

kimba n low cliff or gully. Nahū́g ang kábaw sa kimba. Maáyu nga wà
kabalíig tiil, The carabao fell into the gully. It was a good thing it
didn’t break its legs. v [B; a] develop into a gully. Mukimba (makimba)
giyud ning dapíta sa tantung kinankan sa túbig, This area will turn
into a series of gullies from erosion.

*kimbid paN- v [A; b4] shudder, get goose-pimples. Nagpangimbid aku sa
kaísug sa álak, I shuddered because the liquor was so strong. hi-/ha-
v [B1256] have shudders come over one. Nahakimbid siya sa pagkahinumdum
sa mangilngig hitabù, He shuddered when he remembered the grisly
incident.

kimbig = *kimbid.

kimi = kumi.

kimì_1 a awkwardly hesitant in doing s.t. Mau diayng kimì
manglihuklihuk, buta giyud diayng tinuuray, So that’s why he moves
hesitantly. He really is blind. kimìkímì v [A13] move in an awkward
manner as if hesitating. Nagkimìkimì siyang naggámit sa tinidur. Wà man
gud maánad, He looks awkward when he uses the fork because he is not
used to it.

kimì_2 v [A; b] wash out dirt or stains from s.t. without washing the
whole thing. Akuy mukimì sa mantil nga natuluan sa kitsap, I’ll wash
out the ketchup stain which got into the table cloth.

*kimì_3 = *timì.

kimika n chemistry. -l n chemical engineering course. v [B156] take up
chemical engineering. — indyinir n chemical engineer.

kimikna, kimiknà v [A; a] ask s.o.’s final decision or say on a matter.

kimiku n chemist. v [B156; a12] be, become a chemist.

kímin n person holding an important position in a company. v [AB1; c1]
become, make into a key man. Makímin (kimínun, ikímin) giyud siya kay
anak sa tag-íya, He will be given an important position because he is
the son of the owner.

kimist n {1} chemist. {2} mixer of the drinks in a drinking party
(humorous slang). v [B156] become a chemist.

kimpang v {1} [B; c1] walk with a limp as if with one leg shorter than
the other, become a limp. Mikimpang ang íyang linaktan kay way tikud
ang píkas sapátus, She limped because she lost the heel on one of her
shoes. {2} [B] for a table or chair to wobble with one leg shorter.
Mukimpang (makimpang) ang lamísa ug ímung mab-an ang usa ka tiil, The
table will become wobbly if you make one of its legs short.
a {1} limping in walk with one leg shorter than the other. {2} wobbly
with a short leg.

kimpì a knock-kneed. Magpingkì ang túhud sa kimpì iniglakaw, A
knock-kneed person’s legs bang against each other as he walks. v [B6]
be knock-kneed.

kimpit {1} = kumpit_2. {2} = kulampit, 1.

kimpitay n the Kempetai, a branch of the Japanese army in charge of
liquidation, or a Japanese soldier belonging to that branch.
v {1} [B156] become a member of the Kempetai. {2} [c1] send to the
Kempetai prison.

kimù_1 v [A; b6(1)] {1} wash out a stain with a little water without
taking the clothes off. Kimui lang nang namantsahan arun makúhà, Just
wash out the stain you got on your dress to get rid of it right away.
{2} eat up s.t. in a jiffy. Kimua (ikimù) na lang nang ímung gikaun kay
manlákat na ta, Eat your food down quickly because we’re leaving.

kimù_2 = kímud.

kimud, kímud v [A; c1] point to a place or at s.t. with mouth or chin.
Mikímud siya diin sila padúng, He pointed out where they went to with
his mouth.

kimug v [A3; b4] twitch involuntarily. Nagkimug ang ákung unud sa
kagiluk, My flesh trembled because it tickled me so much. Gikimúgan
siyang namínaw sa mangilngig nga balità, The terrible news chilled her.
paN- v [A13] keep trembling. kimugkimug v [AN3] = paN-.

kimùkímù v [AN] for flesh to quiver, shiver. Mukimùkímù (mangimùkímù)
ang átung unud basta tugnaw, Our flesh quivers if it’s cold.
Magkimùkimù ang unud sa kabáyù nga isugba, Horse flesh appears to
twitch when it’s put over the coals.

kímun v [A2N2; c1] gather a wide skirt together in front of the body to
hide s.t., or get it out of the way, or minimize body odor, and the
like. Kimúnun (ikímun) sa girigla ang íyang sayal ug náay muági, The
woman gathers her skirt close to her body when s.o. passes by because
she is menstruating.

kimúna n k.o. loose, short-sleeved blouse worn as part of the native
costume, cut low at the neck and made of a flimsy, translucent
material. v [A; a] wear a kimúna, make into a kimúna.

kimut, kímut, kim-ut a murky, or dark such that it is difficult to see.
Kimut ákung mata kay bag-u pa kung nagmata, My eyes are dim because I
just got up. v [B; c1] {1} be, become gloomy, dark. Mikímut ang
kalibútan pagsálup sa búlan, Everything became dark when the moon set.
{2} for one’s expression to be gloomy. Unsay suliran, tì, nga nagkim-ut
man nang dagway mu? What’s your problem, friend? Your face is so
gloomy.

kina-an(→) affix added to adjectives or nouns referring to a position
to form nouns which mean ‘the most [adj.]’ or ‘the very heart of.’
Kinadak-an, The largest. Kinamaayuhan, The best. Kinalawran, The
deepest part of the sea. Ang trapik layit náa sa kinasang-an sa dálan,
The traffic light is in the very middle of the crossing.

kináham see káham.

kinahángan, kinahanglan (from hangul) should, must, it is necessary.
Kinahanglan (kinahanglang) magtuun ka arun makapasar ka, You must study
if you wish to pass. n s.t. needed, required for a particular thing.
Pilay ímung kinahanglan? How much do you need? v [AN; a] need, require.
Kun mulangyaw kita magkinahanglan (manginahanglan) giyud kitag bísa,
When we travel abroad we need to have a visa. Gikinahanglan ka sa
míting, You are needed at the meeting. Kinahanglánun kaáyu ang bitamína
sa bátà, Vitamins are very necessary for children. paN- n needs. -un(→)
n s.t. required in general, for general use. Mau kiniy mga
kinahanglanun sa iskuylahan, These are the things we need for school.

kinaíya (from siya) n {1} characteristic traits of s.t. or s.o.; the
way it (he) is. Maáyug kinaíyang bayhána, A woman good in her ways.
Kinaíya giyud niánang tawhána nga matúlug lang kun mahubug, It’s that
man’s characteristic just to fall asleep when he is drunk. {2} natural
thing for s.o. Kinaíya sa asáwa nga mangabughù, It is natural for wives
to get jealous. Kinaíya man nang bun-ug nga mapáyuk, It is natural for
a bruise to be bluish. Kay wà man makatunghà, kinaíya níya nga dílì
makabasa, He never went to school, so naturally he can’t read.
{3} genitalia (euphemism). v [B1246] become one’s habit. Nakinaíya na
nákù karun ang pagmata ug sayu sa buntag, I have gotten into the habit
of getting up early in the morning. kinaiyáhan n nature, the natural
things one observes in the world: the sky, sea, mountains, trees, et
al. kinaiyanhun a pertaining to nature.

kinákin = nakinnákin.

kinampay n any root crop or fruit that is violet, usually said of yams,
and by extension star apples and ice cream.

kinaunsa see unsa.

kindàkindà = kírà.

kindang, kindangkindang a wobbling, rocking from side to side. v [AB;
c1] rock from side to side. Tupúnga ang tiil sa lamísa kay
nagkindangkindang, Even out the table’s legs because it wobbles.
Kindangkindángun (ikindangkindang) ang kúna sa bátà, Rock the baby’s
crib. n action of wobbling from side to side.

kindaykinday v [A] move with slow waddling or gracefully swaying
motion. Nagkindaykinday ang tambuk babáy, The fat lady was waddling.
Gikindaykindáyan níla ang sunátang pandanggu, They swayed gracefully to
the music of the Fandanggo. n action of swaying or wobbling slowly.

kindi n candy. v [A; a] make candy. Lamì kaáyung kindíhun ang duryan,
Durian can be made into a very delicious candy. Amirkánu, Amirkána nga
walay — persons of fair complexion or with American blood but not
American citizens; or persons who do not have a trace of American blood
or do not look American but have American citizenship (humorous).

kindir, kindirgartin n {1} kindergarten, the year before first grade.
{2} at kindergarten level. Duhay ákung bátà nga kindirgartin, I have
two children in kindergarten. v [B56; c1] be in kindergarten.

kindwit n k.o. rattan tie to hold beams in place in bamboo dwellings,
used instead of supporting pegs (tarúgu).

king contraction for kini nga (literary).

kíng n {1} king in a playing card. {2} king in chess. v [A12] get a
king in cards.

kíngas v [B2S; b6] move about too much, be careless, lack poise and
grace. Mukíngas ang nawung ánang bayhána ug náay mga laláki. Malukup ug
língì, That woman becomes restless when there are men around. She has
to keep turning around to look at them. Nagkíngas ka man gud maung
hintumban lang ang ákung tiil, You were so rowdy, you stepped on my
foot. Ngánung makíngas man ang nawung ánang maistráha ug ubsirbahan?
Why does that teacher get fidgety when her superior observes her?
Nagkakíngas lang mu. Tan-áwa dì nabyaan ang átung bálun, You were so
careless. Look, you left our lunch behind. (→) a rowdy, carelessly
inattentive.

kíngat v [B6; c1] do things fast, in a rough, rowdy manner. Kuyaw ug
mukíngat ug drayib ang draybir, It’s scary if the driver drives
roughly. Nakingat lang bayà ang íyang nawung nga misulud sa kwartu, He
entered the room in such a rowdy manner.

kingki_1 n k.o. hanging kerosene lamp with a glass chimney and a
covering. v [A13] use this kind of kerosene lamp. -lya n k.o. small
kerosene lamp similar to the kingki, often used to light an altar or a
room while all the other lights are out. v [A13] light a kingkilya.

kingki_2 a kinky. v [B; b6] for hair to become kinky. Mukingki
(makingki) ang ímung kulung ug lutúug maáyu, Your permanent will become
kinky if it’s overdone.

kingking_1 v [A1N; a] do in a gingerly way with the thumb and the
forefinger. Nangingking siyang mikuput sa tiil sa bakì, He held the
frog’s feet carefully with his thumb and forefinger. -alum-, -ulum-,
-um- n little finger. walà sa — {1} not as big as the little finger
when compared. Si Karangkál walà sa kulumingking itandì niadtung dakù
kaáyung isdà, Tom Thumb wasn’t as big as a little finger compared to
that huge fish. {2} nothing as compared to. Kanang ímung abilidad walà
ra sa ákung kumingking, Your ability is nothing compared to mine.

kingking_2 = takingking.

kingkiri expression used by children when they want to have a group of
children compete for s.t. they are to give away: ‘Who wants it?’ The
first one who says yukayu gets it. v [A13; c1] have kids compete for
s.t. by saying quien quiere.

kingpin n the kingpin placed at the center in bowling. v [A12; a12] hit
the kingpin in a game of bowling.

kingpus n the king post, a vertical supporting post connecting the apex
of a triangular truss (e.g. of a roof) with the base. v [A1; a] put up
the king post, make into the king post.

kingsan n k.o. pink snapper that turns deep pink when caught: Lutjanus
sp.

king sayis a {1} king-sized cigarettes. {2} s.t. unusually big for its
kind.

kinhas (from hunas) v [A; a] {1} gather seashells on tidal flats. Sayun
nang kinhásun kay magmata, It’s an easy k.o. shell to gather because it
is open. {2} [A2] go around caroling for money (slang). paN- v {1} [A2;
b] gather shells. Manginhas ta inighunas, Let’s gather shells when it’s
low tide. {2} [b5] get hold of money by any means whatsoever, usually
dubious. Manginhas kug ipangmadyung diri sa bulsa sa ákung bána, I’m
going through my husband’s pockets to find some change to play mahjong
with. {2a} go caroling for money (slang). -un(→) n seashells. -in-an
n {1} seashells one has gathered. {2} money acquired by dubious ways.
{2a} money acquired by caroling.

kinhud = kihud.

kini_1 short forms: ni, king {1} this (near speaker and person spoken
to). Pila man ni? How much is this? {1a} mau -g — expression used in
lieu of giving reasons or excuses why s.o. failed to do s.t. or cannot
do s.t. Mau kinig kini, mau kanag kanà ... Sus, daghan kaáyug
katarúngan, Because of this and this, and that and that ... there’s no
end to reasons why he couldn’t do it. {1b} this one now. Tinúud na
karun kining ákù, What I am saying now is true. {2} this well-known
kind of. Natural, kay láin man ning kumbira ug walay bayli ug ínum! Of
course! Because a (lit. this) party is no good without dancing or
drinking. {3} he, she (person just referred to). Átù ning tabangan,
Let’s gang up on him. {4} — nga pause word used when one is hesitant
about plunging into things. Kining, nía ku kay dúna kuy ihangyù, Err, I
came here because I have a request. {4a} this action of, when one does.
Uh, unsa gud ning ámut na pud! What’s all this stuff about
contributions again! {4b} when, at that time you know well. Pag-abut
níya sa íla, kining pagsaka níya sa íla, When he arrived home, when he
went up the stairs. niíni, niáni gen., dat. Niíni, nakat-un aku
pag-amping, Because of this, I learned to be careful. Ang amahan niíni,
His father. íni, áni short for niíni, niáni.

kini_2 = kumi. kinihun n k.o. shark that resembles the kumi fish.

kinína n quinine.

kinis, kínis a clear and smooth on the surface. v [B2] become clear and
smooth on the surface. Mukínis (makínis) ang ímung nawung niíning
lusyúna, This lotion will give you a creamy complexion. Mukínis ang
káhà, The frying pan will become clean and smooth. ka- n fineness of
complexion or surface.

kinkin v [BN; c1] for the hemline, sleeves, curtains, and the like to
be shorter than intended. Ayúhag táud ang muskitíru kay mikinkin
(nanginkin), Fix the mosquito net because it is up too high off the
bed. a for the hemline to be shorter than it is supposed to be. Kinkin
rag buktun ang púlu, The sleeves of this shirt are too short.

kinlaw a gleaming brightly, shining with a steady reflected light.
Kinlaw ang lamísang gisilakan, The table is gleaming because it was
shellacked. v [B; a] gleam brightly with a steady light. Nagkinlaw ang
linimpyáhang sapátus, The shoes I polished are gleaming.

kinsa {1} who, whose? Kinsay muanhi rung hápun? Who will come this
afternoon? Kinsa ring lapis? Whose pencil is this? — [noun]-a {2} which
person (of several). Kinsang batáang naligsan? Which child was it that
was run over? {3} in phrases: bísan — anybody, and everybody. Ang mayur
nag-awhag kang bísan kinsa nga ang sidula pagabayran giyud, The Mayor
urges anyone and everyone to pay his head tax. Abúga bísan kinsang
batáang magdúlà dinhi, Drive away any child that plays here. ni, si
bísan — no one at all, no matter who it is. Way si (ni) bísan kinsa ang
makahilabut niíni, No one, and I don’t care who, can touch this. kang —
whose. Kang kinsa ni? Who does this belong to? — pa {a} who else? Kinsa
pay gustung mupalit? Who else wants to buy? {b} who in the world! Kinsa
pay layhan nga mutrabáhu ug mau nay swildu! Who in the world would want
to work here if that is the salary! -y ngálan [gen.] what is [gen.]’s
name? Kinsay ngálan níya? What is his name? si — {a1} s.o. who thinks
he’s of importance but is not. in interrogative sentences: who does he
(she) think he is? Si kinsa ba siyang musúgù nákù? Who is he to command
me? {a2} mu rag si — as if he were s.o. Nagpasugùsúgù si Ambuy mu rag
si kinsa, Amboy is giving orders as if he were s.o. {a3} abi, kaingun
[gen.] ug si — [gen.] thought it was s.o. of importance, when it
wasn’t. Ingun nákù ug si kinsa, ikaw diay, For a moment I thought it
was s.o., but it was just you. b — kadtung whoever, anyone who. Si
kinsa tung makapildi sa higanti hatágag primyu, Whoever can kill the
giant gets a reward. kinsáun, maha-, mahakinsakinsa whoever it turns
out to be. Bísan kinsáun (mahakinsa, mahakinsakinsa) padayunun sa
balay, Whoever comes, she just lets him come into the house. kinsakinsa
anybody and everybody. Kinsakinsa na lang duktur ákung gitawag. Wà ma
maáyu ang masakitun, I called every doctor there was, but the patient
did not improve.

kinsan = kingsan.

kinsay = kintsay.

kinsi n fifteen. Kinsi anyus, Fifteen years old. Kinsi ka buuk, Fifteen
pieces. v see disiutsu.

kinsína, kinsínas n half a month. v [c1] do on a bimonthly (twice a
month) basis. Sukad karun dì na sinimanal. Kinsináhun (ikinsína) nátù
nà, From now on, we won’t do it every week. We’ll do it twice a month.
Culu- every half month. -in-(→), -l-(→) n by the fifteen days.
Kininsina (kinsinal) ang ámung pagswildu, We pay salaries every fifteen
days.

kinta_1, kintà_1, kintǎ {1} let’s just consider how it would be—perhaps
it is so, perhaps not. Naghátag sila arun kinta pagpakítà sa
kadaghánan, They gave some perhaps just for appearances’ sake (or
perhaps in all honesty). {1a} supposing that it is or will be the case.
Kinta nagtúu kang kináwat ku kadtu. Unsay pagtúu mu kanákù—kawatan?
Supposing you think I stole it. What do you think I am, a thief? Kinta
ig-adtu ku didtu, bayran na ku nímu? Let’s say I go there. Will you pay
me? Kinta bungatan kag dyís, hangyúag dus, If he offers to sell it for,
say, ten, offer two for it. {1b} let’s say for the sake of the game or
the story. Ang nakakuhag dyís puntus, kinta, muy mananáug, The one who
gets, say, ten points wins. Ang gilay-un sa ílang balay gíkan sa ámù,
ingun kinta dinhi ug ngadtu sa Kapitulyu, Their house was about as far
from ours as, say, it is from here to the Capitol. {2} pretending to
be. Naghilak kinta ka, ayaw paila nga nagkumidiya, You’re supposed to
be crying. Don’t let on you’re joking. {2a} since [so-and-so] is, after
all, the case. Ikaw man kintay pinyalan dinhi—ayúha pagdá ning ímung
mga sákup, You’re supposed to be in charge here, so treat your men
fairly. {3} kay — why, is [so-and-so] really the case (when it
shouldn’t be)? Kay kinta ikaw bay magbuut dinhi? Why, do you think you
have the right to have the say here? Kay kinta siya ra giyuy
taypist—mangítà tag láin, What the hell. Does he think he’s the only
typist in the world? We’ll look for another one. Kay kinta patrabahúun
pa giyud kug maduminggu? What? Do I have to work on Sundays, too?
kintáhay = kinta_1, 1, 2.

kinta_2 — martsa fifth gear of vehicular engines. — siniyal the fifth
signal in a typhoon. v [AC6] do, put into fifth gear.

kintà_2 a {1} for horses, dogs to be sprightly, frisky. Ang ákung
kabáyù batan-un, abtik, ug kintà, My horse is young, alert, and frisky.
{2} self-confident in a posturing, showy way. Kintà siyang musulti, mu
rag siya ray kamau, He speaks so self-confidently—as if he were the
only one who knew how. Mukintà ang kabáyù nga laki basta dúul sa bayi,
The male horse becomes frisky if there is a female around.  {2} [B] be,
become self-confident in a showy, posturing way.

kintab a shining, gleaming with a steady reflected light. Kintab kaáyu
ang pagkalimpiya sa ímung sapátus, Your shoes have been polished very
shiny. v [B; c1] become clean and shiny.

kintal n a unit of weight measurement roughly equalling fifty
kilograms. v [B256] reach or add up to a kintal. Ug mukintal (makintal)
ang timbang sa kupras ibaligyà, If you get enough copra to make fifty
kilograms, sell it.

kintid a short, for s.t. to be hanging such that its lower edge is more
above the ground than normal. Kintid kaáyu ang íyang míni, Her
miniskirt is very short. v [B; b6] come out too short. Magkakintid ang
kurtína káda laba, The curtains become shorter every time they are
washed.

kintsay n variety of celery (Apium graveolens) with narrow stalks, the
leaves of which are used as a seasoning in Chinese dishes.

kintu_1 v {1} [A; c1] move, be on one’s tiptoes. Mukintu ang mubù arun
makakità sa intabládu, The short person will stand on his tiptoes to
see the stage. Magkintu ta paglakaw kay dúnay natúlug, Let’s walk on
our tiptoes because there’s s.o. asleep. {2} [A13; b6] be cautious, be
extra wary of s.o. Magkintu giyud ming Tátay kay istriktu kaáyu, We are
very circumspect with Dad because he is quite strict. n high-heels.
-in- = kintu_1, n.

kintu_2 {1} fifth grade. Kútub ra ku sa kintu, I just went as far as
the fifth grade. {2} fifth grader. Kintu na si Maríya, Maria is a fifth
grader now. — distrítu n fifth congressional district. — grádu n fifth
grade. — limbu n a region bordering Hell, where souls of unbaptized
children are consigned. Bísan ug magtágù ka sa kintu limbu, pangitáun
ta giyud ka, Even if you hide in the fifth limbo, I’ll look for you.
v [B56] be in the fifth grade, be fifth in rank.

kintuplits n quintuplets.

kinù v [AB45; a2] shake s.t. Akuy mukinù sa alkansiya ug bug-at na ba,
I’ll shake the piggy bank to see if it’s heavy. Mukinù giyud ang
lahing, A mature coconut sloshes when you shake it. — ang útuk v [B;
b4(1)] become somewhat mentally unbalanced. Nakinuan siya sa útuk
dihang nabangkarúta, He went slightly crazy after he went bankrupt.
n {1} mature fruit of the coconut. Ang mga kinù lang mauy taktákun,
Only the mature fruit of the coconut should be harvested. {2} — ug útuk
mentally unbalanced.

kinul, kínul v [B2] {1} shrivel up. Mukínul ang útin human ug tíra, The
penis shrinks after coitus. Ínit mauy makakínul (makapakínul) sa
kupras, Heat causes copra to shrivel. {2} become callous, insensitive
after being subjected to s.t. for too long. Mikínul na nang batáa ug
kinasábà, The child got hardened to the parents’ constant scolding.

kínut a for food to be tough and hard to break but flexible. v [B; b6]
come out tough, become tough. Mukínut (makínut) ang sitsarun ug dílì
isulud ug sirádu, Pork rinds get tough and lose their crispness if you
don’t keep them in a jar.

kinyintus number five hundred. v see disiutsu.

kípat v [A; c1] blink the eyes. Ikípat (kipáta) sa túbig ang ímung
puling, Blink your eyes in a basin of water to get the speck out. (→)
v [A] do s.t. quick as a flash. Mikipat lang ang íyang úlu sa bintánà,
His head just appeared for a second in the window. a constantly
blinking. Kipat siyag mata kay nirbiyusun, Her eyes blink all the time
because she is nervous. n action of blinking.

kipditsíns don’t give or ask to be given the change. Kipditsíns na lang
kay wà kuy isuklì, Just let me keep the change because I have no
change. v [A2; c6] ask to keep the change. Ang mga silbidúra run kusug
kaáyung mukipditsíns, The waitresses nowadays ask to keep the change.

kípì v [A; c1] draw the knees and thighs together. Mikípì paglingkud
ang nagmíni, The girl wearing a mini skirt sat with her knees drawn
together. Kipía (ikípì) ang ímung mga páa inigkanáug nímu sa hagdan,
Keep your legs together as you go down the stairs. kipìkipì n {1} k.o.
spreading, half woody herb with leaves consisting of four pinnae which
contract when touched: Mimosa pudica. {2} name also given to a related
ornamental herb, less sensitive with yellow axilliary flowers.

kípit v [A12; b6] hold or take hold of s.t. between two fingers or with
two sticks, tongs or the like. Ikípit ning duha ka lápis sa singkuwinta
nga náa sa lungag, Pick out the half-dollar in the hole with these two
pencils.

kíput_1 v {1} [AB2; ab7] for an opening to become closed or s.t.
exposed to get to be covered or hidden, cause it to do so. Si Dyúli ang
mikíput sa lungag sa bungbung, Jolly closed up the hole in the wall.
Mikíput (nakíput) ang íyang mga mata ug hinílak, Her eyes became mere
slits from crying. Kipútun ku nang ímung dakung bàbà, I’ll shut that
big mouth of yours. Kipúti ug gamay nang ímung mga páa, Keep your legs
more together. {2} [A2] disappear from one’s sight in a flash. Wà gánì
siya makatimbayà nákù. Mikíput lang, He didn’t even greet me. He just
flashed by me. (→) {1} = kíput_1, 2. {3} [A2; b2] for the surface of
the water or ground to be high enough to bury s.t. standing erect.
Lawum na ang buhù kay mikiput na sa ímung úlu, The pit is now deep
enough because it is higher than your head. Inigtáub kiptan ang
bungsud, When it’s high tide, the sea rises above the fish corral. pa-
a woman who plays hard to get. Dì dáyun nà musugut nímu kay pakíput
nang dakù, She won’t accept your love right away because she is great
at playing hard to get. v [A; b] for a woman to play hard to get.

kíput_2 v [A; ab3] move about or do s.t. busily, in quick movements and
in a quiet manner. Sígi ka lang gakíput sa kusína bísag gabíi na, Why
are you still busying yourself in the kitchen at this late hour?
kiputkiput = kíput_2.

*kíra pa- v [A13] {1} allow s.o. to get the last word in a quarrel.
Ngánung magpakíra man ku nga magulang man ku, Why should I let you get
the last word in when I’m older than you are? {2} let oneself get left
behind, outclassed by others. Dílì giyud siya pakíra sa urug, She won’t
let herself get left behind by the fashion.

kírà v [AB; a12] move or wobble rapidly back and forth or side to side.
Nagkírà ku sa kúna pagtū́g sa bátà, I’m rocking the crib to make the
baby sleep. Mikírà ang sakayan kay dagkù kaáyu ang bawud, The boat
rocked because of the big waves. kiràkírà rock or wobble rapidly back
and forth. n rocking motion. síya nga — n rocking chair.

kírang = kindangkindang.

kirat a having a scar in the upper part of the eye. Kirat nà siya kay
mibutu ang hubag sa íyang mata, He has a scar on the upper part of his
eye because his boil burst. v [B126; b6] develop such a scar.

kíraw v [A; a] {1} mess, mix things up. Gikíraw ang ákung aparadur unyà
wà hipúsa, S.o. messed up my closet without putting the things back.
{2} steal s.t. Putlan kug kamut ang mikíraw sa alkansiya, I’ll cut off
the hands of whoever stole the piggy bank. n activity, hum of business.
Ang kíraw sa balay sa kaslunun, The hum of activity in the
bride-to-be’s place. a noisy, with confusion. Dílì ku gustu muistǎr sa
siyudad kay kíraw kaáyu, I do not want to stay in the city because it
is very noisy. -an(→) n a petty thief. kirawkiraw v [A; a12] move about
busily doing little chores. Sígi gihápun ka dihang kirawkiraw bisag
gabíi na kaáyu? You’re still very busy taking care of little things
even if it’s already late?

kiri short form: ri. {1} this (near speaker but not near hearer). Dì
nákù ihátag ring librúha nímu, I won’t give you this book. {2} this (on
side of speaker away from hearer). Kawháta ring písì ug ihukut dihà sa
pusti, Grab this rope and tie it to that post. niíri gen. and dat. Ag
taklub niíring bulpin nabuak, The cover of this ballpoint pen is
broken. Ibutang ang kahun niíring lamísa, Put the box on this table.
íri, ári = niíri.

kíri see pahilihíli.

kirída n mistress, concubine. v {1} [A; a12] have as one’s mistress.
Ságad sa mga dátù magkirída, Most rich men take mistresses. {2} [B156]
become s.o.’s mistress. Nakirída nà siyag kapitan, She became a ship
captain’s mistress.

kírig v [B246] go into violent convulsions, usually leading to death.
Nikírig ang ilagà nga nakakaun sa hilu, The rat went into convulsions
after eating the poison. kirigkirig v [B456; c1] for the body (or part
of the body) to move, shiver, move in convulsions. Mikirigkirig ang
íyang kamut, His hands are shaking. Nagkirigkirig ang láwas sa
mananayaw, The dancer wiggled her body furiously.

kirilya n charges of a criminal nature. v [A; b(1)] file charges
against s.o. for a criminal offense. Gikirilyáhan na ang nakabunù, The
murder suspect has now been formally charged.

kiring, kíring v [A] for a doorbell, phone, clock, or the like to ring.
n ringing sound of an alarm clock, phone, etc. pa- v [A; c1] set the
alarm clock. Mupakiring kug sayu arun ku mahimata, I’ll set the alarm
ring early so I can wake up early.

kírir n bicycle carrier at the back. v [b6] put a carrier on a bicycle.

kiríring = kíring.

kiritkirit a do s.t. at a fast clip. Kiritkirit siyang mulakaw, lisud
apsun, She walks at a fast clip. It’s difficult to catch up with her
pace. v [A; a] do things hurriedly. Gikiritkiritan kug suwat ang ákung
papil kay tayim na, I wrote the answers on my test paper hurriedly
because the time was up.

kíriw v {1} [A2S] wriggle, move rapidly in a wriggling motion. Mikíriw
ang íkug sa tùtù nga naputul, The house lizard’s tail squirmed when it
was cut off. Tudlù nga nagkiriw sa tikla, Fingers that flew over the
keyboard. {1a} [A] cause s.t. to move or wriggle about. Nagkíriw na
lang mig agipu pag-ulì, We lighted our way home by shaking a glowing
stick back and forth. {2} [A2S] wriggle with the itch to do s.t.
Magkiriw sa pagsáyaw ang ákung tiil ug dúnay sunáta, My foot itches to
dance when there is music. {3} [A; a] steal s.t. of little value.
Bantáyi nang sinsilyu kay kiríwun unyà, Keep an eye on that change
because s.o. might swipe it. -an(→) a tending to swipe things.

kirkir n skin eczema caused by mites, characterized by intense itching
which spreads with scratching. v [A3P; a12] have this eczema. Sígi lang
siyag pangáwut kay gikirkir siya, He kept scratching with his kirkir.
-un a having kirkir.

kirubínis n cherubim, heavenly beings of some sort.

kirug = *kilug.

kírus v {1} [A; b3] do s.t. hurriedly in less time than one has
available. Mikírus dáyun mig panghípus pag-abut sa tiligráma nga
papaulíun mi, We hurriedly got busy packing when we received the wire
to go home. Unsa may inyung gikirúsan? Náay bag-ung niabut? Why are you
bustling and hustling about? Is there a new arrival? {2} [B26; b6]
scratch an itch intensely. Mikírus siya ug pangálut, She started to
scratch violently. {2a} itch to do s.t. Mikírus siya sa kahínam sa
pag-abli sa sulat, She was itching to open the letter. paN-(→) v [A13]
itch to do s.t.

kirut v [AN; a1b2] pinch to inflict pain. Unsa bay salà nákù nga
gikirut mu man aku? What have I done to make you pinch me? n pinching.

kiryi n kyrie eleison in the mass. v [A; b(1)] be at the kyrie eleison.

kiryulína = kriyulína.

kís v {1} [A] kiss (usually said for babies). Ngánung dì man ka mukís?
Why don’t you want to kiss me? {2} [AC3; c1] for two or more balls in
billiards to be just touching. Ug nakalígid pag singku mukís (makís)
untà tu sa katursi, Had the number five ball rolled it would have
touched number fourteen. Nagkís ang bulimánu ug ang dús, The lead ball
is touching the number two ball.

kísà = kásà.

kisákit n socket for an electric bulb that has a switch in it.

kisami n ceiling of a house. v [A; c1] put up the ceiling. Kinahanglang
kisamihan ang balay nga sín kay ínit, A house with iron-sheet roofing
must have a ceiling because it’s hot.

kisamkisam = kisapkisap.

kisap a for eyes to have sand in them. Kisap kaáyu ang ákung mata ug
katulgun ku, My eyes get sand in them when I am sleepy. v [B; b6] for
the eyes to get sand in them.

kisapkisap v [A1; a] move the jaw up and down in a chewing motion,
munch. Pirming magkisapkisap ang kábaw bísag dì manabsab, A carabao is
always munching even if it’s not grazing. Maáyu ning swinggam
kisapkisapun samtang magdúlà, It’s good to chew gum while playing.

kisas v [A23P; b2c1] fail to follow through on s.t. set forth. Mukisas
ka sa átung sábut, You don’t adhere to our agreement. Kining mga
pitsipitsing gastu mauy makakisas (makapakisas) sa átung badyit, These
miscellaneous expenses wreak havoc with our budget.

kísaw v [A; a] {1} make a soft, pleasant rustling sound. Mukísaw lang
ang kalasangan ug huypun sa hángin, The forest rustles only when the
wind blows through it. {2} disturb the water. Ayaw kisáwa ang túbig kay
dúnay namasul, Don’t disturb the water because s.o. is fishing.
{3} [B46] hum with activity. Magkísaw ang kusína ug mapista, The
kitchen hums with activity during fiestas. {4} [A; b6] stir up, disturb
the peace. Nakísaw ang ílang pamuyù sa parinting niípun, The relatives
which moved in with them disturbed their peace. {4a} confuse s.o.’s
mind. Usa ka dakung suliran mikísaw sa íyang kaisípan, A serious
problem is disturbing his thoughts. Kisáwan kaáyu ku niánang dúwà nga
madyung, I find mahjong very confusing. n {1} sound of rustling or
splashing. {2} activity. a disturbing or confusing. ka- = kísaw, n.

kisaykísay v [AN; c1] thrash the arms and legs around in water to stay
afloat or thrash the legs and arms about while lying on the back. Bísag
dì makamaung mulanguy basta mukisaykísay (mangisaykísay) lang dílì
giyud malumus, Even if you don’t know how to swim, if you thrash your
arms and legs about, you won’t drown. Nagkisaykísay ang bátà sa kúna,
The baby thrashed its arms and legs about in its crib.

kisdum v {1} [B; b6] for the sky to darken. Nagkisdum ang panahun kay
may bagyung muabut, The weather is gloomy because a typhoon is coming.
{2} [B; a2] for the face to get a gloomy and frowning expression.
Nagkisdum ang nawung. Nasukù tingáli, He has a dark expression on his
face. He must be angry.

kisdung = kisdum.

kisi, kisikísi v [A2S; b6] {1} wriggle around as if to get free.
Nagkisikisi ang isdà sa ákung kamut, The fish wriggled in my hand.
{2} for a child to stamp its feet, jump around or just insist on
fulfilling its desire. Magkisikisi (magkisikísi) ang bátà ug dì
paubanun, The child throws a tantrum if you don’t let him go along. pa-
v [A; b6] insist, be insistent. Mipakisi siya pag-adtu bísag
gibalibáran, She insisted in going though she wasn’t permitted to.

kisì = gisì.

kisibáya I don’t care, to hell with it. Kisibáyag kurawun sila, dì ku
giyud sila tabángan, I don’t care if they starve. I won’t help them.
Kisibáya nang kwartáha. Kalimti, To hell with that money. Forget it.

*kisíra — ug, kun {1} in case, in the event that. Kisíra ug madúgay ku,
una na lang, In case I am late, just go ahead. {2} had it been the
case. Kisíra ug dì pa amígu nákù tung pulísa, nadala na ta, If that
policeman hadn’t been my friend, we would have been arrested.

kisíyu n k.o. cheese made from carabao milk.

kiskis v [A; ab] scrape, to remove, smooth, or get scrapings. Nagkiskis
ku sa tayà sa mga kubyirtus, I’m scraping the rust off the silverware.
Kiskísun nákù ang bágun kay gamítun ang pánit, I’ll scrape the vine
because I would like to use the bark. -an(→) n corn mill that grinds to
a highly polished degree. -in- n scrapings left. -in-an n thing
scraped.

kislabù n potholes, small depressions formed by water. hi-/ha- v [B126;
b8] fall or step accidentally into a water-filled depression. Nakislabù
siya sa las-ag, He stepped into a mud puddle. ka- v [A13] be all full
of potholes. Nagkakislabù ning dána, This road is full of holes.

kislap n gleam, sparkle. Ang kislap sa íyang mga mata, The gleam in her
eyes. v [B; c1P] sparkle, flash momentarily. Ang tinúud nga diyamanti
mukislap, A true diamond will sparkle. Nagkislap ang suwab nga
nasilawan, The blade flashed in the sunlight.

kisma = kusmu.

kismi n short strands of hair near the forehead curled upwards, called
the ‘kiss me’ hair style. Nagwápa kag samut nga náay ímung kismi, You
look prettier with your ‘kiss me’ curls. v [A13; a2] have a ‘kiss me’
curls.

kísu n cheese. v [A13; b] have, put cheese in s.t. — dibúla n cheese
shaped into a ball and coated with red wax.

kisul n k.o. perennial herb about 10–12″ high with dull, yellow-green,
cordiate leaves, aromatic in root-stock and leaves. The leaves and
roots are used medicinally. The leaves are also given to cocks to make
them aggressive and used as a rinse after washing the hair.

kisum a for toddy to be sour. v [B; a] become sour.

kita {1} we, us (including person addressed—nominative). Kita ra giyud
way láin, Just us. No one else. Short form in position other than
predicate: ta. Kinahanglan kita (ta) magbantay giyud, We must be on the
alert. {2} I, me (humble). Makaagi ba ta áning karsadáha? May I pass on
this road? {3} you (patronizing). Nindut man lagi ta ug sinínà run! My!
Aren’t we wearing a pretty dress today! kitakíta {1} just us, no one
else. Kitakíta ra bítaw. Way kauláwan, It’s just us. There won’t be
anyone to cause us embarrassment. {2} one who promotes a love affair by
carrying messages, arranging meetings and the like. {3} distant
relative. Kitakíta si Pítir kay púrus mag-ágaw ang átung isig ka
apuhan, Peter is our distant kin because our grandfathers are cousins.
v [A] {1} do s.t. by ourselves. Bída, nagkitakíta man lang ta ug
trabáhu áni, My, we are doing the work (by) ourselves. {2} be the
go-between in a love affair. Kanang magkitakíta ka makapahanig nímu sa
impiyirnu, If you act as a go-between, you’ll be sent to hell to pave
the way for the lovers. kitahánun n related to us distantly or just
coming from the same place. Ayaw ug duhadúha ug pangáyù ug hinábang kay
kitahánun ra ta, Don’t hesitate to ask help from me because we are
relatives. nátù {1} gen. form. short form: ta. Dílì nátù (ta) buhátun,
Let’s not do it. Kumusta na man ang kásu ta? How is our case coming
along? ta ka, ta ikaw, ta kamu I will [do] to you, you are my [noun].
Ihatud ta ka (tikaw, ta ikaw) sa pultahan, I will see you to the door.
Amígu ta ka, You are my friend. {2} = kanátù. kanátù dat. form.
Kanátung tulu usa ray dawátun, Of us three, only one will be accepted.
Tingáli gitudlus níya kanátù (nátù) ganíha, Perhaps he gave it to us a
while ago. átù {1} gen. Ang átung balay, Our house. Átung tan-áwun,
Let’s see. Átù ra kini, This is just between us. unsa may — what would
you like. Unsa may átù, kukakúla u bir? What would you like, Coca-cola
or beer? sa — pa in other words. Sa átù pa, ay na lang ug anhi kay way
trabáhu, In other words, don’t come because there will be no work. láin
pay — by the way. Láin pay átù, nakapamahaw ka na? By the way, have you
had your breakfast yet? atuánun coming from our place. Ayaw panigláin.
Atuánun ra ta, Make yourself at home. You’re from our place. inátù
a informal, like at home. Inátù lang ning kaúna, This is a simple
dinner, just like at home. v [A; a12] behave, do s.t. with informality.
tagaátù n one coming from our place.

kítà v {1a} [A123S; a2b2] see. Nakakità ka ba sa pilikula? Have you
seen the movie? Makítà ba nímu ang ayruplánu? Can you see the plane?
Nakit-an ku siyang nagsakayg dyíp, I saw her riding a jeep. Ingun sa
pagahikit-an ku ang dautang sangputánan sa ákung gugma, It was as if I
could see the terrible results of my love. — ug aniníput see stars
(lit. fireflies) after being hit. {1b} [A123S; b8] find. Nakakità kug
diyis, I found a dime. Dalì rang makit-an kay dakù, It won’t take long
to find it because it’s big. {1c} [a3b2] see s.t. good in s.t. Unsa
kahay nakit-an ni Mildi kang Atilyu? What does Meldy see in Atillo? Wà
kuy nakítang maáyu niánà, I don’t see anything good in that. {1d} [B12]
become visible. Makítà dinhi ang búkid ug way gábun, You can see the
mountain from here if there’s no fog. {2} [C; a4c] meet with. Magkítà
ra tag usab, bastus, We’ll meet again, you rat. Kitáa ang duktǔr, Go
see the doctor. Talagsa rang igkítà kanang klasíha, You rarely meet
with that kind. {3} [A2; a12] earn. Mukítà siyag trayinta ang adlaw, He
earns thirty pesos a day. a visible. Kítà kaáyu ímung panti, Your
panties are very much in view. — mu You see what you did? Kítà mu? Gubà
na núun, See what you did? Now it’s broken. (→) a = nakakità. kitàkítà
v [C; a12] {1} meet secretly. Nagkitàkítà ang duruha kay may
kabilinggan, They met on the sly because one of them is married.
{2} meet occasionally. pa- v [A; b5c] show, let one see. Dì ku mupakítà
níya kay utángan ku, I will not show myself to him because I owe him
money. Pakitáa (pakitái) mi sa abilidad nímu sa sáyaw, Show us your
dancing talent. Ayawg ipakítà ang ímung baráha, Don’t show your cards.
paN- v [A2S; a2] {1} look for. Nangítà kug trabáhu, I am looking for
work. Human ka makatilaw áni, magpangità ka sa maung klási, Once you
try this kind you will always look for it. Mahímù. Pangitáan nátug
paági, It’s possible. We’ll look for a way. {2} court trouble.
Nagpangità ning batáa ug latus kay nagminalditu, This child is asking
for a whipping the way he is so naughty. n work, job. paN-(→) v [A13;
a12] look for s.o. with intent to harm. Gipangità ka sa mga buguy, The
toughies are looking for you. pinaN-(→) a highly sought-after.
Pinangità nga klási sa mangga, A highly sought-after variety of
mangoes. Pinangitang tulisan, Highly wanted robber. paN-un(→) n s.t.
available, but not everywhere all the time, s.t. one has to expend
effort to get. Pangitaun kaáyu ang písa niíning awtúha, Spare parts for
this car are hard to get. paka-(→) v {1} [A13] see (plural). {2} [A12]
cause one to see. Usa ka suntuk nga nakapakakità níyag aniníput, A blow
that caused him to see stars. hiN-, hiN-(→) a {1} easily finding
things. Hingítà siya ug sayup sa ímung tináyip, He easily finds the
errors in your typing. {2} fond of looking for. Hingítag away, One who
looks for trouble. pinaN-an, -in-an n earnings. Katungà sa íyang
kinitáan ihúlug sa bangku, Half of his earnings he deposits in the
bank. pala-(→) = hiN-, 1.

kitaipúni a detachable, removable. Kitaipúni ang ákung pustísu, My
false teeth are detachable. v [c1] be detachable, removable. Maáyung
kitaipuníhun (ikitaipúni) ang sira sa tindáhan, It’s good to have the
doors of a store that are removable.

kitang n k.o. longline sea fishing, done with a main line (baháyan) to
which individual leaders with hooks are attached, for catching large
fish. v [AN; a2] fish with the kitang.

kitára_1 n a small four-stringed ukelele, the body of which is made of
coconut shell. v [AN; a2] play the kitára.

kitára_2 n tantrum, a fit of ill-temper or caprice. Mau giyuy ilíhuk sa
kitára niánang batáa kun maghimatayun ang búlan, She always throws a
fit of temper whenever the moon is in the last quarter. kitaráhun
a temperamental.

*kitbì — ang, sa atay, kabúhì v [B246; b4] be gripped with a feeling of
revulsion or gruesomeness at some blood-curdling or revolting
experience. Mikitbì ang ákung atay pagkakità sa dugúung hitabù, I was
overcome by a feeling of revulsion when I saw the bloody incident.
Makapakitbì sa atay ang íyang pagdagmal sa tigúwang, It’s revolting the
way he mistreats the old man.

kítib v [A; b6] move rapidly in a repeated action. Mikítib siyag lakaw,
He walked with rapid steps. Mikítib íyang bàbà mu rag masinggan, His
mouth chattered away like a machine gun. (→) v [B46] for the heart to
beat rapidly. Mikitib ang íyang kasingkásing, His heart beat rapidly.
-an(→) a chattering incessantly.

kítid a taking short and hurried steps, or stamping the feet in place.
v [B; aP] walk with short, hurried steps. Ang bátà mikítid pagsunud sa
íyang pápa, The child walked with short and rapid steps following his
father. (→) a short in length or height. Kitid ang ákung lápis sa
pagginámit, My pencil is worn short after being used so much. Ang
magulang kitid kay sa manghud kay dì man kaáyu mukáun, The elder child
is shorter than the younger one because he doesn’t eat much. Kitid na
ang mga sinínà run, They are wearing short dresses these days. v {1} =
kítid, v. {2} [AB; ab7] shorten, become short. kitidkitid v [A; c1]
stamp the feet in place. Nagkitidkitid ang bátà kay wà paubana, The
child stamped his feet because they would not take him along.

kitíkut v [A2; ac] squeeze into or penetrate deeply and slowly into a
very tight space. Ang kasakit mikitíkut sa ákung kahiladman, The pain
creeped deep into my innermost self. Ákù giyud nang kitikútun ngadtu
arun ku makadúul sa artista, I’ll squeeze through the crowd to the
front so I can get near the actress.

kitin = kiting.

kiting n {1} tendons of the heel. {2} tendon in the back of a carabao’s
leg joints. v [b6] cut the heel tendon or the carabao’s tendon in back
of the knees. Kitnan ku nang kabáwa ug manabsab sa ákung mais, I’ll cut
the tendons in back of that carabao’s knees (thus rendering it useless)
if it feeds on my corn. unsay sakit sa — Who cares? It does not bother
[so-and-so]. Unsa bay sakit sa kiting ku kun byáan mu aku, What do I
care if you leave me. putì (bakud) ang — v [B6] take to one’s heels
(lit. the heels will look white [rise]). Naputì (nabakud) ang kiting ni
Tumas pagkakità nákù, Thomas took to his heels when he saw me.

kitiw n clitoris.

kítiw v [B; c1] move from side to side with quick motions, take quick
steps. Mikítiw ang mga tudlù sa pyanista, The pianist’s fingers moved
rapidly. Tiil nga nagkítiw pagtinindak sa bisiklíta, Feet moving
swiftly, pedaling the bicycle. Pwirting nakakítiw ang irù sa íyang
íkug, How the dog wagged its tail. n quick movement from side to side.
kitiwkitiw = kítiw.

kitkit v [A; ab7] wear s.t. down, wear off bit by tiny bit, with the
front teeth taking tiny bites. Ilagà ang nagkitkit sa kísu, A rat
nibbled at the cheese. Kitkíta ang lubi ug way lugit, Bite off the
coconut meat if there is nothing to get it out of the shell with.

kitsap n ketchup. v {1} [A; a12] make ketchup. {2} [A; b6] use ketchup.

kitu {1} = kadtu. {2} = kini_1.

kítung n a deep-sea fish with a compressed body and very fine, soft,
thin scales, usually golden brown, speckled with grey, similar to
danggit, but a good deal larger.

kítuy v {1} [A2S] for the fingers or toes to twitch. Búhì pa ang
gipusil kay nagkítuy (nagkituy) pa ang tudlù, The man that was shot is
still alive because his fingers are twitching. {2} [A; c1] play close
and open the palm with a baby. Inigkatulu ka búlan makakítuy na ang
kamut sa bátà, At the age of three months a baby can open and close its
palms on command. n expression used to induce a baby to open and close
its hands. Kítuy nang kítuy. Báyad sa tútuy, Open your palms to pay for
your titty.

kiug, kíug v [AB2; c1] jounce, shake, cause s.t. to do so. May nagkiug
tingáli sa lamísa kay nayabu ang sabaw, S.o. must have shaken the table
because the soup spilled. Mukíug ang sakyanan ig-ági sa daghang
libaung, A vehicle that passes over a bad road bounces a lot. Wà mukiug
ang íyang panagway pagkadungug sa pamalíkas nga íyang nadáwat, He
didn’t betray a bit of emotion upon hearing curses that were heaped
upon him. (→) a jouncing, shaking. Kiug nga lingkuránan, A wobbly seat.

kíum = kyúum.

kiung = kiang, 1.

kiwà, kiwag, kíwag a awkward because of self-consciousness or not
knowing how to do s.t. well. Kiwag ta sa trabáhu ug bag-u pa, We do
things awkwardly when we’re new at them. v [B; c1] be awkward or
clumsy. Mukíwag ang átung panlihuklihuk basta maúlaw ta, One tends to
be awkward if he feels self-conscious. (→) v [A; c] for s.t. long to
stick out prominently. Nagkiwag ang ímung káhuy nga gibugkus, Some of
the pieces of wood you bundled are sticking out. Nagkiwag ang ayis pik
sa íyang bulsa, The ice pick stuck out of his pocket. Ayaw ikiwag ang
ímung mga tiil sa agiánan, Don’t stick your feet into the passageway.

kiwákiw v [A; b6] wag one’s tail. Mikiwákiw ang íkug sa irù, The dog
wagged its tail.

kíwat v [B3(1); c1] move busily and fast. Mikíwat ang íyang bàbà ug
pangatarúngan, Her mouth went like a machine gun as she explained
herself. Mukíwat ug panghípus ang mga bátà inigpamúhì, The children
move as quick as they can putting their things away when classes are
over.

kiwaw a awkward, esp. in movement, but also, by extension, in speech
and behavior. Kiwawng linihukan, Awkward movements. v [B; b6] feel
awkward. Makiwaw ang pagbúhat áni basta primíru pa, One usually does
this awkwardly the first time around. Kiwawan kung mulakaw nga
magbirmúda, I feel awkward going out with bermuda shorts on.

kiwì, kíwì v [B; c1] grow stiff or cramped in the joints, twisted out
of shape. Mikiwì ang íyang bàbà sa pagpangyam-id, She screwed up her
mouth into a frown. Mikiwì ang tabla nga nainitan pag-áyu, The board
got twisted out of shape in the sun. Nangíwì ákung tudlù ug hinílut, My
fingers got stiff from massaging so much.

kiwiskiwis n a long, tapering tip of bamboo, or the ends of palm fronds
including the leaflets, or the tips of branches at the top of a tree.

kiwkiw v {1} [A2] shake rapidly in pain. Nakakiwkiw ku dihang
nadukdukan ang ákung tudlù, I shook my hand in pain after I hit my
fingers with the hammer. {2} [A3N] pick, hold s.t. gingerly with the
tips of the thumb and index finger. Nangiwkiw siyang mipunit sa ilagang
patay, She gingerly picked up the dead rat.

kiwut see kíyut.

kíya, kíyà v [AB; c1] rock from side to side, cause s.t. to do so.
Dagkung balud mauy nagkíyà sa sakayan, Big waves rocked the boat.
Kiyáun (kiyáhun, ikíyà) nátù ang dyíp arun mahadluk sila, Let’s rock
the jeep to scare them.

kiyag-ang = kagangkagang. see kágang.

kíyas v [A; a] scrape or shave s.t. close to the surface. Nagkíyas ku
sa takuling sa kaldíru, I’m scraping off the soot from the kettle.
Ákung kyásun ang balhíbu sa ákung íluk, I’ll shave my armpits. -in-
n scrapings.

kíyaw n {1} k.o. bird that stays on the ground. It is nearly as big as
a wild chicken, and good to eat, named for its sound. {2} the cry or
sound emitted by the kíyaw bird. v {1} [B46; a] emit the sounds of
kíyaw. {2} [B; a] make a lot of fuss over trifles.

kíyud v {1} [A; b] thrust the lower part of the body forward, as a male
does in sexual intercourse. {2} [AC; b] have sexual intercourse
(coarse, though not as taboo as iyut). kiyudkiyud v [A; b] keep moving
the belly forward. Hílas ang bag-ung sinayawan nga magkiyudkiyud ang
duruha, I find it revolting the way they thrust their bellies forward
in the modern dances. kiniyúran n offspring (coarse).

kíyus v [B2] for meat to shrink. Mu rag daghan nang karníha, piru ug
malútù, mukíyus na, That looks like a lot of meat, but when you cook
it, it’s going to shrink.

kíyut n {1} k.o. wild black bee that does not sting, smaller than a
fly. It builds a nest of wax (kabulay) in sheltered places, often
dwellings, and produces a small amount of honey. {2} = kabulay.

KKK n letters placed in the center of the flag of the insurgents
against the Spaniards, an abbreviation of the Tagalog name of their
society: Kataastaásang Kagalanggalángang Katipúnan ng mga Anak ng Báyan
‘The Supreme, Most Venerable, Union of the Sons of the Nation’.

klab n club, organization. nayit — n night club. paN- v [A2] go to a
night club.

klábu n k.o. aromatic mint with hairy, fleshy leaves which are used as
a spice for cooking and also for curing coughs and boils.

klag-ap v [B26] for a water outlet to get clogged up. Ayawg lundi ug
buhuk ang labábu kay muklag-ap (maklag-ap), Don’t throw the hair from
your comb into the washbowl because it will clog it up.

klam n carpenter’s clamp. v [A; b] fasten together with a clamp. Maáyu
pang kláman nà arun malig-un, It’s better to fasten it with a clamp to
strengthen it. bar — n bar clamp, a device used in joining the sides of
boards together to set them in place.

klap v [A3; a] clap the hands. Maáyu na kaáyung mukláp ang bíbi ku, My
baby can clap its hands very well now. n clapping of hands.

klára n egg white.

klarinit, klariníti n clarinet. v [A3] play the clarinet.

kláru a {1} clear, clearly defined and easily made out. Kláru ning
ritratúha, This picture is clear. Kláru dinhi ang Buhul, You can see
Bohol clearly from here. Kláru ang tútuy sa hugut nga bistídu, Her
breasts stand out clearly in her tight dress. Kláru siyang bakákun, She
is obviously a liar. Kláru ang tíngug níya sa tilipunu, Her voice on
the phone was clear. {1a} — na lang obviously, naturally. Kláru na lang
mangísug siyag dì ka mananghid, Naturally, she will get angry if you
don’t ask permission. {2} unequivocal, definite. Way kláru tung inyung
panagsábut, Your agreement hasn’t come to any definite results. Kláru
na ang kadaúgan, Victory is clearly in our hands. Kláru pa sa adlaw nga
musubang sa sidlakan, As sure as the sun will rise in the East. {3} for
vision or optical instruments to enable the user to discern clearly.
Kláru pa ang ákung panan-aw, I can still see clearly. Kláru ang
mikruskupyu, The microscope offers a clear view. v {1} [A12B2] see
clearly; be, become distinct and clear. Makakláru lang kug tan-aw ug
dúnay kibídu, I can see clearly only if I wear glasses. Makláru ang
litra ug gamítan ug linti, The letters will be clear if you use a
magnifying glass. {2} [AB12; c1] become clear, apparent; make s.t.
clear. Ug nagkláru ka pa dì ka untà dudáhan, Had you made yourself
clear, you won’t have been suspected. Sa katapúsan nakláru na giyud kun
kinsay sad-an, At last it came out clearly who was the guilty party.
Klarúha (ikláru) unsay ímung túyù, Make it clear what you really want.
{2a} [A; c] tell s.o. frankly. Klarúhan ta kang dì nà mahímù, I’ll tell
you frankly that that can’t be done. {2b} [A; a12] go ahead and really
do s.t., not just do it half-way or a semblance of it. Nag-igwad-igwad
kang bayúta ka. Kláruha na lang nag sáyaw, You wiggle your fanny so
much when you walk, you fairy. Why don’t you just dance and be done
with it? {3} [A; a3] find out for sure, make out s.t. clearly. Nagkláru
lang kug mangadtu ba ta run, I’m just trying to get it clear if we’re
going or not. Nakakláru ka ba unsay íyang gisulti? Did you hear clearly
what she said? Makláru ba ang ákung pustísu? Are my false teeth really
obvious? klaruhay v [C] have s.t. clear with each other, tell each
other frankly. Sa katapúsan nagkaklaruhay na giyud sila unsáun pagbáyad
sa útang, In the end they got it clear how to pay the debt.

klás a showing class, classy. Ristawran nga klás, A classy restaurant.
pirs, síkan — first, second class.

klási_1 n {1} class, kind. Primíra klási nga panaptun, First class
cloth. Klási sa mananap, A kind of animal. Way mutagad ánang klasíha sa
pagkatáwu, No one pays that sort of person any heed. v [a12] classify,
sort out by kind. Klasíha ning panaptun, Classify these pieces of
cloth. ka- v [A13] be of all different kinds. Nagkaklási lang ang táwu
sa Karbun, There are all different types of persons at the Carbon
market. klasiklási a be all different kinds. v [AB1456; a] put, be of
various types or kinds. Magklasiklási giyud ang táwu, There are all
different sorts of people. Klasiklasíha pagpalit ug utanun, Buy
vegetables of various kinds.

klási_2 n {1} class of students. Klási sa mil nuybisyintus bayinti
utsu, Class of 1928. {2} class session. Way klási maduminggu, There are
no classes on Sundays. v {1} [A; b(1)] hold, teach classes. Dì kita
magklási ugmà kay pista upisiyal, We don’t have class tomorrow. It’s a
legal holiday. Giklasíhan mi bísag nagbagyu, We held classes even
though there was a typhoon. ka- n classmate.

klasika a classical music, dance, and the like.

klasipikar v [A; c16] sort out, separate by type. Átù ning
klasipikahung mga sambag: ang hinug diri, ang hilaw dihà, We’ll sort
out these tamarinds: the ripe ones go over here, and green ones, over
there.

klasmit n {1} classmate. {2} people who have similar defects,
sicknesses (colloquial). Náa rang ímung klasmit u, nga hubákun sad,
Here comes your ‘classmate’. He is asthmatic, too. v [A12C; ac3] be
classmates. Nakaklasmit kug púlus bráyit, I had nothing but bright
students as classmates. Nagkaklasmit mi sa Ingglis, We were classmates
in English.

klas ríkurd n teacher’s grade book.

klas ring n class ring in school.

klats n clutch or clutch pedal. v [A; b(1)] put in the clutch. Klatsan
úsà nímu antis ka mukambiyu, Step on the clutch first before you shift
gears.

klik_1 v [A23C3] for people to click with, take to each other. Miklik
dáyun mi, We hit it off immediately.

klik_2 v [BP; ac1] click, make a clicking sound. Wà kung kabantay nga
miklik na diay ang kamira, I was unaware that the camera had already
clicked. Paglingkud nákù sa taksi nagklik dáyug súgud ang mítir, As
soon as I was seated in the taxi, the meter began to click. Ábi kug
mubutu giyud ang pusil, giklíkan lang diay ku níya, I thought the gun
would go off, but it just clicked.

klím v [A; a2] claim for possession. Wà pay nagklím dinhi kay pablik
lan pa man kini, Nobody has made a claim here because it is still
public land. Dúna kuy klímun nga pákids sa adwána, I have a package to
claim at the customs bureau. n mining claim.

klíma n {1} climate. {2} fever. v [B1456] be feverish. Hikápa ra ning
bátà, mu ra mag nagklíma, Feel the baby. She seems to be running a
fever.

kling n word to represent the sound of ringing.

klínik, klinika n medical clinic. v [A; b6] hold clinic hours. Dúnay
duktur nga muklínik sa Sintir káda Sabadu, A doctor attends the clinic
at the Center every Saturday.

klinsing krim n cleansing cream. v [A; b6(1)] apply cleansing cream.

klip v [A; b] fasten s.t. with a clip. Nangalkag ang ákung buhuk kay wà
ku makaklip (makapanglíp), My hair is a mess because I didn’t fasten it
with a clip. Klípi ang papílis arun dì magbúlag, Clip the papers so
they won’t get separated. n paper or hair clip.

klíping n clippings from newspapers or magazines.

klír_1 a free of T.B. or V.D. v [B1256] for a medical examination to
come out clear.

klír_2 v [A; b5] give s.o. leaving a job clearance from financial or
other responsibilities, Dì ka pa matranspir ug dì ka pa maklír, You
can’t transfer before you’re cleared. -ans n clearance, certification
of freedom from encumbrance.

klirikal n clerical work. Laáyan kug trabáhung klirikal, Clerical work
is boring for me.

klirk n clerk. v [B16; a2] work as a clerk.

klitsi n cut for pictures or designs to be printed. v [A; a] make a cut
for printing. Klitsíhun ning ritratúha kay iapil sa prugráma, They will
make a cut of this picture because it will be included in the program.

kliyinti v client. v [B126; a2] be s.o.’s client. Manlulugus ang
nakliyinti ni Aturni Gu, Atty. Go got a rapist for a client. Maáyung
kliyintíhun ang mga langyaw kay maáyung mubáyad, Foreigners make good
clients because they pay generously.

kliyintíla n clientele.

klum_1 n term used during the war to refer to relay stations for
porters which also doubled as lookout posts for approaching Japanese.

klum_2 n sluiceway for irrigation, either dug into the ground or above
the ground, made of boards. v [A13; a2] install, make into a sluiceway.

klúruks n Chlorox, solution for bleaching clothes. v [A13; b(1)] apply
Chlorox to s.t.

klús a being close, intimate. Klús na kaáayu ang managtrátu, The lovers
are now very intimate. Klús kaáyu mi sa mayur, We’re very close to the
mayor. v [A23C1; a12] become intimate with s.o. Muabusar nang tawhána
ug ímung klúsun, If you get intimate with that man, he’ll take
advantage of you.

klusnik n turtleneck, opening at the neck, or a narrow opening which
comes as far as the neck but does not cover it. v {1} [A1; b6] wear
s.t. with a turtleneck or near turtleneck opening. {2} [c1] cut
clothing with a turtleneck opening.

klus-úpin v [A; b(1)] for a baby to close and open the hand upon being
told to do so. Makamau nang muklus-úpin ang bátà sa íyang kamut, The
baby can close and open its hands when told to do so.

krak_1 word used in writing to represent a cracking sound.

krak_2 n in table tennis, a ball bouncing in an unexpected way due to
some foreign particle on the table. Way kwinta sa puntus basta krak,
They don’t count a dead ball. v [B26] for a ball to bounce off
irregularly in table tennis.

krákir, krákirs n crackers, usually square-shaped. v [A13] eat or have
crackers.

krang n crank to start a motor. v [A; b(1)] {1} crank an engine to
start it. {2} goad s.o. into a feeling. Wà tà tu siya mangísug, ímu
pung gikrangan, He wouldn’t have gotten angry, but you goaded him into
it.

krás_1 v [B126; c] for vehicles to crash. Nakrás ang ayruplánu (trák),
The plane (bus) crashed. n crash, accident.

krás_2 v [A; ab] cancel or cross out s.t. written. Kinsay mikrás sa
ákung sinulat? Who crossed out what I wrote? Krásun nátù ang íyang
ngálan sa lista, Let’s cross his name off of the list. Ayaw nag krási
kay hustu nà, Don’t put a line through that because it’s correct.

krás_3 v [B126; b8] have a crush on s.o. Nakrás ku ni Sinatra, I had a
crush on Sinatra. Artistang íyang nakrásan, The actor she had a crush
on. n crush, infatuation.

kratsis n crutches. v [A; b] use crutches. Kinahanglang kratsísan nang
ímung balì nga tiil, You need to have crutches for your broken leg.

kraysis = krísis.

krayula, krayúla n crayons. v [A; b] draw, color with crayons.

kridinsiyal n {1} documents required for enrollment in a school.
{2} certificate of ownership of work animals. v [A; b6] make a
certificate of ownership for work animals. Munisipyu ang mukridinsiyal
sa kábaw, The municipal office makes credentials for carabaos.

kriditu n {1} credit, acknowledgement of s.t. good. {2} credit rating,
trust people have in one’s ability to repay. Maáyu siyag kriditu sa
ámung tindáhan, His credit is good in our store. {3} the time allowed
for payment. Ang kriditu nákù sa tindáhan báli rag usa ka búwan, My
credit in that store is only good for one month. v [A12] get credit for
s.t. done.

krídu n the Nicene Creed or the part in the mass where it is recited.
v [A1] recite the Nicene Creed; be at that part of the mass where the
Nicene Creed is recited.

krím n cosmetic cream. v [A; b6(1)] apply cream.

kríma a cream-colored, cream-complexioned. Kríma ang kulur sa íyang
bág, Her bag is cream-colored. v [A13; a] wear s.t. cream-colored, make
s.t. cream-complexioned. krimáhun a of a creamy-complexioned sort.

krímin n crime. -al(→) n {1} one who has committed a crime against a
person. {2} criminal deed. v [B126] be, become a criminal. -alidad(→)
n extent to which crime exists. Midagsang ang kriminalidad sa syudad,
Crime has become rampant in the city.

krín n mechanical crane. v [c1] use a crane.

kring = kíring.

kríp n crepe. — pípar n crepe paper.

krís n a kris, double-edged sword with a wavy blade. v {1} [A1] wear or
use a kris. {2} [A; a12] make a kris.

krísis n dire scarcity of s.t. Krísis sa túbig kun hulaw, There’s a
severe shortage of water during droughts. {2} depression of the
Thirties. Daghang magpapatigayun nga naghíkug niadtung dakung krísis sa
trayinta, Many businessmen committed suicide during the Great
Depression of the Thirties. v {1} [A13; a4b4] experience severe
shortage. Human sa iliksiyun magkrísis (krisísun, krisísan) ang násud
sa kwarta, After the elections the nation will undergo a financial
crisis. {2} [B26] become severely lacking. Nakrísis (mikrísis) ang
humay, There is a severe rice shortage.

krismas n {1} Christmas season, day. {2} Christmas present. v [B56; b8]
be Christmastime. — kard n Christmas greeting card. — tri Christmas
tree.†

kristal n {1} crystal, brilliant glass. {2} watch glass. {3} glass pane
of a showcase. — bul n crystal ball. — silk n k.o. cloth made of
pressed fabric of fibrous material, soft and silky with a shiny gloss
on one side. v [A1] wear s.t. made of crystal silk.

kristíya = sakristíya.

kristiyánu n Christian person or in practice. kristiyanismu
n Christianity.

kristiyánus n Christian person. Múrus nà siya, dílì kristyánus, He’s a
Muslim, not a Christian. v [B16; a12] be, become a Christian.

Kristu_1 name Christ. v [B16; a1] be like Christ. Magkristu ka nga dílì
ka man musúkul? Do you want to be a Christ that you do not fight back?
iglisya ni — name of a religious sect or a member thereof. — Rí n a
religious feast day in honor of Christ the King. kristuhánun
a Christian.†

kristu_2 n in cockfights, a gambler with no capital but who makes money
by placing bets for other people who give him a cut of their winnings.

krít n crate. v [A; c1] put s.t. in a crate. Mga dilikádung butang ang
ílang krítun (ikrít), They will put the fragile things in crates.

kritikal a critical, grave. Kritikal ang kahimtang sa masakitun, The
patient’s condition is critical.

kritiku n critic.

kriyáda = kriyádu (female).

kriyádu n household help. v [B6; a2] be, become a servant.

kriyulína n a disinfectant compound, so called from the trade name
Creolin.

krúdu n crude oil. v [B124; b] get crude oil on it.

krukidnul, krukignul n {1} croquignole, a method of making the hair
wavy by winding the hair around metal rods and applying heat or
chemicals, or a hairstyle fashioned by this method, e.g., like the hair
styles of the Thirties. v [A; c1] wave the hair by this method or wear
the hair in this style.

krumyu n chromium.

krúnir n crooner. v [B56; a2] be a crooner.

krus n {1} cross. {2} the cross one has to bear. Ang palahúbug kung
anak mauy ákung krus, My drunkard son is the cross I must bear.
v [B156] become the cross one has to bear. -an n hammerhead shark.

krusáda n crusade, vigorous campaign for or against s.t. v [A; b(1)]
crusade for s.t.

krúsing n place where a path or road crosses another path, road, or a
river. Didtu siya banhígi sa may krúsing, He was ambushed near the
highway intersection.

krusipíhu n crucifix. v {1} [A; b] wear, place, show s.t. a crucifix.
Mudágan ang abat ug krusipihúan, The ghost will run away if you raise
the crucifix at it. {2} [a12] make a crucifix.

krusipiksiyun n the crucifixion of Jesus.

krusláyin n {1} misconnection in a telephone where, when one dials a
busy number, one can talk to another party which also has dialed a busy
number. {2} action of purposely dialing a number one knows to be busy
in the hopes of finding s.o. to talk to through the cross line.
v [A1NC1; b(1)] look for s.o. to talk to by the cross line.

krus raypul n crossed rifles, the insignia of the infantry. v [A1; c]
wear this insignia.

krus rúha n {1} Red Cross. {2} red cross pin.

krutsay = kurutsay.

krutsítis = kutsítis.

ku see aku.

kuadhutur, kuadutur n assistant priest to the parish priest. v [B16;
a2] be, become an assistant priest.

kuan {1} pause word used to fill in when the speaker cannot think of
the right word: um, well. Kining, kuan, Day! Ikúhà kug bir! Err, um,
you. Bring me some beer. {1a} as a verb (with any affixes). Human nímu
pagkuan, pánit, ímung kuanun, pikásun, aw kuanan úsà, hugásan, After
you um, whatchamacallit, peel it, you, umm, cut it up, rather um, wash
it. {2} word used to avoid saying a taboo word. Maáyung kusiun sa kuan,
It would be nice to pinch her in the — you know (the genitalia).
Pwirting kuánay níla, My how they were busy doing IT. pakuankúan
v [A13; b6] pretend to be s.t. Nagpakuankúan siyang dátù, He was
pretending to be rich.

kuaw_1 a {1} for s.t. packed in s.t. to be lacking, not tightly filled.
Ayaw ku baligyáig puspurung kuaw, Don’t sell me boxes of matches that
are not filled. Kuawng itlug, An addled egg (egg that has failed to
develop and has an empty area inside it). {2} — ug útuk addle-brained,
confused, not having complete thinking functions. Kuaw ug útuk ang
tigúwang, Mawálà ug mulakaw, The old woman is confused. She gets lost
whenever she goes out. (←)_1 v [B12; b6] {1} get to be lacking in
content. Ngánung nakúaw man ning biskwit? Inyung gikan-an? How come
this box of crackers isn’t full? Did you eat any of them? {2} for the
brain to get confused.

kúaw_2 v [AB; a] disturb liquids, thrash them about; get disturbed.
Mukúaw ang túbig sa subà kun magbahà, Water in the river gets all muddy
when it floods. Ayaw kutáwa ang kapi kay makúaw ang linugdang, Don’t
stir the coffee because you will stir up the sediment. (→)_2 a for
liquids to be disturbed, mixed up.

kū́b = kúlub.

kuba v [A; b4] for the chest to tighten from fright or from suddenly
realizing s.t. frightening. Mikuba ang ákung dughan kay dihay
misinggit, I got a tight feeling in my chest because I heard a scream.
Gikubahan ku kay dinhay ákung nabyaan, I felt my chest tighten because
I forgot s.t. n a pang in the chest from fright. (←) v [B; b(1)] for
the heart to beat in a pounding way. Nagkúba ákung dughan humag túngas
sa bakilid, My heart pounded after I climbed the slope. kubakuba
v [A13] for the chest to pound wildly, repeatedly. Nagkubakuba ang
ákung dughan samtang nagtíun ku sa liyun, My heart pounded wildly as I
aimed at the lion.

kúbà = kulbà.

kubad a {1} for children to be moving around too much, making a
nuisance of themselves. Dì ta makasuwat dinhi kay kubad kaáyu ning mga
bataána, I can’t write properly because these children are running
about too much. {2} engaging in vice constantly. Kubad na kaáyu siya sa
panúgal, He is a constant gambler. {3} thoughtless or tactless in
speech. Naghisgut sa ákung kirída atubángan sa ákung asáwa. Dì ba nà
kubad? He talked about my girl friend in front of my wife. That’s what
I call stupid. {3a} asking questions when one knows the answer. Kubára
nímu uy. Nakakità sa ákung gidala, nangutána pa, You sure are stupid.
You saw what I brought, so why ask? v [B] {1} move around too much.
{2} engage in a vice constantly. Nakubad siya sa babáyi, He became
woman crazy. {3} become thoughtless in action and speech. {4} do things
quickly in a rapid, careless manner. Mikubad man lang tug ági, He just
walked by in a flash. Nagkubad ang bàbà ni Dyíni nga nakig-áway,
Jenny’s mouth rattled away as she fought. (←) v [B] {1} move about much
too much. {2} engage in a vice to an extreme degree. Mikúbad ang
pinalitay sa balúta, There was rampant vote buying. Manday natigúwang,
mikúbad sa pamabáyi, In his old age, he has gotten worse and worse in
his lust for women.

kubal, kúbal n {1} callus. {2} thick skin on a pig. Maáyung tsitsarunun
ang kúbal sa bábuy, The thick part of the pig’s skin is good for fried
pork rinds. v [B1246; b(1)] develop calluses. Gikubálan na lang ning
ákung túhud ug linuhud wà gihápun dungga ang ákung pag-ampù, I have
been praying until I got calluses on my knees, but my prayers were
never answered. -un a thick-skinned, callused. v [B126] become
callused. kubalkúbal n k.o. salt-water fish with thick and tough skin.

kubana = gwayabanu.

kubanug = kukug banug. see kuku.

kubásà = kalabásà.

kúbaw = kúbal.

kubay n name given to young bean pods that are eaten, the young of the
balátung, tahúri, munggu, and habitsuylas.

kubiku n cubic meters.

kubìkubì v [AN; a12] {1} touch, monkey with. Ayaw kubìkubia ang mga
butang sa lamísa, Do not mess with the things on the table. {2} touch
things to steal them. Wà gyud ku makakubìkubì sa mga butang sa ímung
bulsa, I have never touched the things in your pocket. -un, -an
a having the tendency to monkey with things or engage in petty
thievery.

kubil v [A; a12] touch s.t. so as to do s.t. to it. Bunálan giyud nákug
dúnay mukubil ning ákung papílis, I’ll spank anyone who touches my
papers. Unyà na nákù ni kubila kay gabíi na, I’ll work on this later
because it’s now late.

kubing n tripletail, a k.o. fish: Lobotes surinamensis.

kúbir n {1} cover. Kúbir sa magasin, Magazine cover. {2} amount charged
per setting in a dinner party at a restaurant. Tagsingku písus ang
kúbir sa parti, The party will be five pesos per person. v {1} [A;
b6(1)] cover s.t. Kubíri ang libru, Put a cover on the book. {2} [A; a]
take cover, shelter. Mukúbir ta ánang batu inigpinusílay, Let’s take
cover behind that rock when the firing starts. {2a} [A; b] cover up for
s.t. Bisag unsay íyang buhátun kubíran dáyun sa inahan arun dì hibaw-an
sa amahan, Whatever he does his mother will cover it up, so the father
won’t find out. {2b} [A; b] shield s.o. in a ball game. Kubíri ku
samtang magdríbul ku, Cover me while I dribble. {3} [a3] be put on a
magazine cover. Makúbir si Imilda sa Layip, Imelda will be on the cover
of Life. {4} [A] give s.t. news or radio-TV coverage. Ang istasiyun sa
radyu diway-ar-ip mauy nikúbir sa dakung súnug sa dálan kulun, Station
DYRF covered the big fire on Colon Street. kubirkúbir v [A13] walà,
dílì — be direct, keep nothing concealed where propriety would require
the opposite. Wà siya magkubirkúbir sa íyang pagkadisgrasyáda, She made
no bones about not being a virgin. way — frank, without concealing
anything (when one should).

kubirta = kubyirta.

kubirtus = kubyirtus.

kubit v {1} [A; a] touch s.o., curling the fingers to get his
attention. Milíngì ku kay dihay ningkubit nákù, I turned around because
s.o. poked me. {1a} turn to s.o. influential for help. Dúna ba tay
makubit didtu sa kustums? Do we have anybody influential to help us out
in the custom? {1b} [A1; a2b2] steal s.t. not of great value. Bantayi
nà kay kubitun unyà nà, Keep an eye on it because s.o. might lift it.
{1c} [A2; a12] get a woman for illicit sex. Wà giyuy mukubit niánang
tigulánga, No one wants to have an affair with that old woman. {2} [A;
a12] take the bait. Kusug mukubit ang isdà ánang paúna, Fishes like to
take that k.o. bait. {2a} [A12; b4] catch a fish by hook and line.
Nakakubit ang mananagat ug íhu, The fisherman caught a shark. Gikubitan
kug bugáung, I caught a jarbua. {2b} [A2; a12] hook s.o. in marriage.
Nakakubit siyag sapíang bálu, She hooked a rich widower. {2c} — ug way
paun {2c1} confirm s.t. bad the interlocutor suspects but doesn’t know
for sure by assuming that he does know for sure and letting out s.t. to
confirm it. Wà tà ka hibaw-i, ningkubit ka sa tagà nga way paun.
Nabistu na hinúun, I wouldn’t have known about you but you took the
bait. Now I found out. {2c2} butt in in a conversation where one has no
business or answer remarks intended for s.o. else. Dílì ikaw ang
gisultíhan, ngánung mukubit ka man dihà nga way paun? I wasn’t talking
to you. Why do you butt in when I wasn’t talking to you? n fish caught
with hook and line. (←) n biting of fish. Hínay ang kúbit basta way
súg, Fish don’t bite if there is no current.

kubkub_1 v [A; a] dig away dirt scooping it with the hands or with a
similar motion using an instrument. Gikubkub sa irù ang gilubung níyang
bukug, The dog dug up the bones he had buried. Ilang kubkúbun
(kubkúban) ang daplin sa sapà arun mutubig, They will dig a shallow
hole next to the river to get water. n shallow well made by scooping
sand out in the vicinity of the river, seashore, or above an
underground spring. -ay n k.o. narrow spade or a long pole used to
dislodge rocks. -un(→) a s.t. one can easily scoop out to dig a hole.

kubkub_2 n purse seine or impounding net used to catch fishes that run
in schools. The school is surrounded with the net which is then pursed
at the bottom. paN- v [A1; b6] catch with the kubkub net.

kublà = kulbà.

kubli, kublì v [A; c] take cover, hide behind s.t. to keep from being
seen. Mikublì ku sa pakshul, I took cover in the foxhole. Mikubli ku
luyu sa pusti, I hid behind the post.

kubra_1 v {1} [A; a2] get money coming to one or collect a debt.
Nikubra na ka sa ímung swildu? Have you already drawn your salary?
Kubráha ang ábang, Collect the rent. Basta dátù dílì kubrahan sa buhis,
As long as he’s rich, no one will collect taxes from him. {2} [A; ab7]
pull in a rope or a string. Kubráha na ang pundu kay mularga na ta,
Lift the anchor. We are leaving. Kubráhi ug mga bayinti ka dupa ang
tugut, Pull in twenty fathoms of rope. -da n fish harvested from
fishing gear. Kubráda sa bungsud, Harvest from the fish corral. v [A]
collect fish caught s.w. -dur(→) n bill collector. v {1} [B156] be,
become a bill collector. {2} [A12] have as bill collector. -nsa see
kubransa.

kubra_2 n cobra. rid — n breed of fighting cock.

kubransa v [A; b(1)] make a collection of a certain amount. Mukubransa
kug duul ug manggátus káda adlaw, I collect almost a hundred pesos
daily. n {1} action of collecting. {2} amount collected or bill
presented.

kubri_1 = kubli.

kubri_2 n k.o. simple kerosene lamp made of a flat bottomed metal cup
with a spout having a wick on it.

kubri_3 v [A; b6(1)] cover one’s obligation or what is lacking. Dúnay
nagkubri sa ákung amutan kay wà man ku paningli, S.o. paid for my
obligation because nobody collected from me.

kubrikáma n bedspread, bed cover. v {1} [A; b] put a bedspread on a
bed. {2} [a12] make into a bedspread.

kubu = kuba.

kubù a stoop-shouldered. Ságad sa mga tisísun kubù, Most people with TB
are stoop-shouldered. v {1} [A; c1] stoop a little, bend over. Nikubù
siya pag-ági sa mabang pultahan, He stooped when he went through the
low door. {2} [B] for the posture to be hunched over.

kubul v [B2] {1} for s.t. cooked to come out tough or hardened. Mukubul
ang pánit sa giasal kun dì humdan ug túbig, The roast pig skin becomes
tough if it has been roasted without daubing water on it. Nagkakubul na
ang kindi nga ákung gilútù, The candy I’m cooking is gradually
hardening. {2} become hardened, insensitive. Mikubul (nakubul) na ang
íyang kasingkásing sa tanang biaybíay, Her feelings have become
hardened to any and all insults. Nagkakubul ang ákung láwas sa
katugnaw, My body is gradually becoming inured to the cold.
a {1} hardened. {2} hardened in feelings, insensitive. Kubul siya sa
mga pakilúuy, She is insensitive to pleas for mercy. kublan
a {1} invulnerable. Dì nà siya dutlan ug bála kay kublan, Bullets can’t
pierce him because he is invincible. {2} = kubul, a. v [B] become
invulnerable.

kubung_1 n drinking glass made of a piece of bamboo some 5″ long cut
just below a node which serves as the bottom. v {1} [A1; c16] make into
such a bamboo glass. {2} [A13; c1] use or put s.t. in such a bamboo
glass.

kubung_2 n {1} protective covering. {2} mosquito net. v [A1; b6] put up
a protective covering, make into a protective covering. Gikubungan sa
mananagat ang lampara arun dì mapálung, The fisherman put a covering
over the lamp to keep the wind from blowing it.

kubung_3 = kúlut.

kúbung n keyhole limpets, limpets with a small hole at the top of the
shell, living in shallow water.

kubus a low in amount. Kubus ang bili sa ismágul, Smuggled goods are
cheap. v [AB2; b7c] for an amount to become less, cause it to do so.
Mukubus ang swildu ug hínay ang nigusyu, Salaries go down when business
is poor. Kubsan ang ímung tagal sa pagbáyad sa útang, We’ll shorten the
term for you to pay off the debt.

kubut v {1} [AC; b(1)] hold, take hold of s.t. Kinsay nagkubut sa
lyábi? Who has the key? Magkúbut ta arun dì ta magkabúwag, We’ll hold
hands so that we won’t be separated. Nawálà ang lápis nga ákung
gikubtan, The pencil I was holding got lost. {1a} [AN; b6(1)N] hold on
to s.t. to keep from falling. Nangubut (mikubut) siya nákù kay danglug,
He held on to me because it was slippery. {1b} [A3; b8] get hold of
s.t. to have it. Wà pa ku makakubut ánang kantidára, I had not held
such an amount (of money). Hikubtan sa pulis ang kawatan nga miiskápu,
The policeman happened to get hold of the thief who was about to
escape. {1c} [A2] hold on by sticking to it. Ang iskats tip mukubut
kaáyu sa átung papitlan niíni, Scotch tape adheres well to whatever you
stick it to. {2} [A; b(1)] occupy, hold a certain position or office.
Ang katungdanan nga íyang gikubtan, The position he is holding. {3} [A;
b26] handle, play, operate. Maáyu siyang mukubut sa sista, She plays
the guitar well. Sipii ang nagkubut sa íyang libru sa tindáhan, A CPA
takes care of the accounts in their store. {4} [A; b(1)] keep a
mistress. Dúna siyay gikubtan nga hustis, He has a night club hostess
for a mistress. (←) v [A; a12] wed s.o. on his deathbed by just having
the couple hold hands and blessing them. Kadaghan na makakúbut ang párì
ug himatyung páris nga nabúhì, The priest has officiated at many
deathbed weddings where the dying partner recovered. kubtanan n handle.
kinubtánan n keepsake among close friends or sweethearts.

kubútan = kulabútan.

kubyirta n covered decks of ships.

kubyirtus n silverware. v [A1; c] use silverware. Magkubyirtus mig
mangáun kun adúnay bisíta, We use silverware when we have visitors.
paN- v [A; b] put silverware on the table.

kúd n code, secret writing. v [A13] write in code.

kū́d = kúlud.

kudak n camera. v [A; b] take pictures. Maáyu kudakan nang byúha, That
is a good view to take a picture of. pa- v {1} [A; b] have one’s
picture taken. Nagpakudak ang bag-ung kasal, The newly weds had their
picture taken. {2} [A13] for the cue ball and the target ball to be
directly aligned in the direction of the pocket. -ir n photographer who
attends affairs and roves about taking pictures to sell to the people
who attend it (humorous slang). maN-r-(←) n photographer.

kudakíris n photographer that takes still pictures. v [B156] be, become
a photographer.

kudambus = kurambus.

kudigu n {1} code of laws. — iliktural election code. — iliktural
ribisádu revised election code. — pinal penal code. — pinal ribisádu
revised penal code. — sibil civil code. {2} compilation of answers to
cheat from in exams or similar jottings for a talk or other public
performances. v [A; b] use notes in an exam or in a talk. Dílì ku
mukudigu kay mahadluk kug hisakpan, I won’t look at my notes because I
am afraid I might be caught. Wà siya masayup sa pagkanta kay nagkudigu
man, He didn’t miss any words in his song because he had a copy to
glance at.

kuding = kuting_1.

kudkud v {1} [A; a] grind into fine pieces by rubbing or scraping.
Kudkúra ang lubi, Grate the coconut. Kudkura ang yílu, Take some
shavings off the ice. {1a} [A; a2] carry s.o. astride the hips (from
the notion that the way the child is carried is analogous to the
coconut put over the shredder). {2} [A; a] file off metal to clean it
or thin it before sharpening it. Kinahanglan kudkúrun kanang tayà sa
suwab únà baíra, You should scrape the rust off the blade before you
whet it. kudkuran n coconut shredder.

kudkúd = kuludkúlud.

kudlis v [A; b] make a scratch or a mark on a surface. Kinsay mukudlis
sa ímung hubag? Who will make an incision in your boil? Gikudlísan sa
bátà ang bungbung ug krayúla, The baby marked up the wall with crayons.
n scratch or mark left on a surface.

kudlit v [A; a] {1} make a scratch, pinprick, or line on s.t.
Kasingkásing nga gikudlit sa buktun, papil, káhuy, A heart tattooed on
the arm, drawn on the paper, carved into the tree. Gikudlítan sa duktur
ang hubag, The doctor made an incision in the boil. [A; b]
{1a} vaccinate. Nía na ang nars nga mukudlit sa mga bátà, Here is the
nurse to vaccinate (lit. prick) the children. {1b} change the palm
configuration of a child that has the mark of a crocodile on his palm
(buayáhun) which betokens ill. Kinahanglang kudlítan ang buayáhun arun
kabuhíag anak, A child that bears the mark of the crocodile on his palm
should have it extended so his parents will not have all their children
die on them. {2} write s.t. (literary). Bálak nga gikudlit sa íyang
dágang, The poem that his pen produced. n lines, scratches, pinpricks.
— sa pálad {1} lines in the palm. {2} one’s fate or fortune as
indicated by the palm. pa- v [A; ab] have oneself inoculated or have
the lines on the palm extended. -anan n person to be inoculated, place
to be punctured, surface to be written on. -in- n marks made. mag-r-
n one who inoculates or tattoos.

kudrísu = kurdísu.

kudsan = kurusan, 4. see kurus.

kudyapà n herb of waste places, the tender parts of which are eaten as
a vegetable. There are two species called by this name: -ng bayi an
unarmed species, the best for use as vegetable (Amaranthus viridis) and
-ng laki an armed species (Amaranthus spinosus).

kudyapì n musical instrument with six or more strings, having a flat,
rectangular, wooden body. It is laid down and plucked with both hands.

kugal a for the meat of fruit or eggs to be completely separated from
the skin or the pit. Daling panítan ang sambag kugal, It’s easy to peel
ripe tamarinds when the skin is separated from the flesh. v {1} [B2]
for the flesh to separate from the peelings or pit. Mukugal ang lísu sa
abukádu basta mahinug na, The seed in the avocado gets loose when it is
ripe. {2} [B; b6] for a cough to loosen. Tambal nga makakugal
(makapakugal) ning ubúha, Medicine that can loosen this cough.

kugan n dry crust, scab of a sore or wound. v [B4; b(1)] for a scab to
form. Maáyu na ang núka kay mikugang (gikugangan) na, The sore is
healing because it is forming a scab.

kugang_1 a startled. Hastang kugánga nákù paglagpak sa sira, God! How
that slamming door startled me! v [B1256; b4(1)] startle, be startled.
Nakugang (nakugangan) ku sa pagbutu sa ribintadur, I was startled when
the firecracker burst. kugangkugang n {1} skin eruptions on some parts
of the body of various sizes, thought to be caused by fear, fright, or
being startled. This disease is usually diagnosed in small children and
the cure is smoke treatment with the kugangkugang herb.
{2} low-growing, woody herb of waste places used to treat children who
have the skin eruptions also called kugangkugang. The kugangkugang is
set on fire just after sundown, and the child is made to inhale the
smoke. The treatment is repeated for three consecutive afternoons.

kugang_2 = kugan.

kugaw, kúgaw n fingerling of the milkfish (bangrus) at the stage 4–8″
in length: Chanos chanos.

kugay_1 v [AB; ac1] make brown sugar in a dry and powdered state. Kun
sagúlag apug ang dúgà sa tubu nga intúsun mukugay (makugay) ang kámay
nga malútù, When lime is added to milled cane juice, the brown sugar
will come out dry and in powdered form. n brown cane sugar in its
powdered form.

kugay_2 n delicacy made of buri palm starch, brown sugar, shredded
coconut meat, and, optionally, other flavorings. v [A; a12] make kugay.
-in- n = kugay_1, n.

kughad v [A; c1] clear the throat vigorously, loosen mucous or phlegm
stuck in the lower throat by agitating the throat organs with a
clearing-the-throat-like action. Mikughad siya dáyung nangluwà, He
cleared his throat vigorously and then spat. -in- n phlegm one spits
up.

kughal n phlegm.

kughay n midrib from a coconut leaflet. Kughay sa lubi ang ákung
himúung tutpik, I’ll use a midrib for a toothpick.

kughun n part of the weaving loom: the heddle and its mounting which
alternately raises and lowers each of the two sets of the warp threads.
v {1} [A; c] put threads in the kughun (heddles). {2} [A12; a2] attach,
make into a weaving harness.

kúgi v [A; b(1)] do s.t. with a little extra effort. Wà giyud ninyuy
nakakúgig limpiyu sa salug, nu? None of you ever took the initiative to
clean the floor, did you? Ákù giyud ning gikugíhan ug trabáhu arun
mahuman dáyun, I put in extra effort to finish the work quickly.
n extra effort put into s.t. Walay kúgi nga dílì musangput sa kaayúhan,
If you put in effort, it is bound to result in good. a taking to doing
certain things which require effort, doing them with enthusiasm. Kúgi
siyang mamunit ug láta, He’s very diligent in picking up old cans. Kúgi
manakup ug alasiwsiw, He’s great in catching grasshoppers. paN- v [A23]
woo a girl hard to win her (slang). ka- n = kúgi, n. kugihan
a industrious, hard-working. kinugíhan n s.t. reaped from one’s
diligence. Ayawg usíki ang ákung kinugíhan, Don’t waste the fruit of my
labor.†

kuging = kigwa.

kugíta n {1} k.o. octopus with the body about the size of a baby’s
head. {2} eye disease in which there is a growth on the eyeball which
spreads out like the tentacles of an octopus. v [b4] get cataracts on
the eyes. paN- v [A2] catch octopuses. kugitáhun a like an octopus.

kugíut v [A2S] creak, squeak. Mikugíut ang salug nga kawáyan sa ákung
paglakaw, The bamboo floor made a creaking noise when I walked on it.
Nagkugiut ang sira, The door creaked.

kugkug_1 v [B; c1] {1} curl up stiff and hard. Ug mukugkug ang
sinugbang bulad núkus, kuháa, When the dried squid curls up, take it
off the coals. Nagkugkug ang tiil sa inasal, The feet of the roasted
pig is curled up stiff. {2} for the body to be hunched over. Tigúlang
na si Lúlu magkugkug na maglakaw, Grandfather is old now, and he is
hunched over when he walks.

kugkug_2 v [A3; b4] shiver from cold, usually with quivering lips.
Pagdyákit kay nagkugkug ka nas katugnaw, Wear a jacket because you are
shivering with cold.

kugkug_3 = kulugkug.

kugmat v [B126; a12] get startled. Nakugmat ku sa nagsungasung nga
butubutu sa pusil, I was startled by the rapid report of gunfire.

kugmu n dry, hardened mucous in the nose. v [A123P; a4b4] get hardened
mucous in the nose. hiN- v [A; b1] pick the hardened mucous out of a
nose. panghiN- v [A; b] pick one’s own nose. kugmuhun a nostrils full
of dry hardened mucous.

kugpus = kulugpus.

kugpuy = kulugpus.

kugtung n name given to very large groupers: Epinephelus spp.

kugum_1 v [A; b5] hold on to s.t. with the fingernails or claws. Tag-as
ug kuku ang dalága nga mikugum sa íyang buktun, The girl who clutched
his arms with her nails sure had long ones. Gikugman (gikugum) sa banug
ang pisù, The hawk clutched the chick with its claws.

kugum_2 n muscular cramp. v [B26; b4] get a muscular cramp. Mikugum
(gikugman) ang íyang tiil sa dúgayng linanguy, He got a cramp in his
feet from swimming so long.

kúgun n tall, tough grass, with solid, slender stems, somewhat like
bamboo. This grass together with taláhib moves into deforested areas
and takes possession after the area is burnt. The leaves are used for
thatching and the stems for various handicrafts: Imperata cylindrica
and exaltata. v [a12] thatch roof with cogon. kakugnan n cogon lands.
v [B1246] become cogon lands.

kugungkugung = kalugungkugung.

kúgus v {1} [A; a1] carry s.t. in the arms. Nagkúgus sa bátà ang
inahan, The mother is carrying the baby in her arms. Kugúsa ang bulsíta
arun dì mabutbut, Carry the paper bag in your arms so that the bottom
won’t come out. {2} [A; a2b2] be a child’s godparent. Kinsa tung batáa
ang ákung gikúgus sa bunyag? Which child did I sponsor in baptism? -in-
n godchild.

kugwa = kigwa.

kúhà get and bring, get and take away. v {1} [A3S; ab7] get. Magkúhà
kug túbig pára nímu, I’ll get you some water. Kuháa (kwáa) na ning mga
plátu, Come, take these plates away. {1a} [A; ab7] take away, remove.
Makakúhà ning syampúha sa kaspa, This shampoo removes dandruff. Nakúhà
ang ákung kasukù pagpangáyù níyag pasaylu, My anger vanished when she
apologized. Ayaw nig kuhái (kwái), Don’t take any of this. {1b} [A;
ab4(1)] perform an abortion, have a miscarriage. Way mananambal nga
mukúhà sa ímung gisabak, No doctor will perform an abortion on you.
Nakuháan siya human madakdak, She had had a miscarriage after she
slipped and fell. {2} [A3S; a] obtain. Mikúhà kug lúti sa subdibisyun,
I bought a lot from the subdivision. Nakakuhà si Pilimun ug tambasákan,
Filemon caught a mudskipper (fish). Kuháan ta kag apidábit, I’ll get an
affidavit from you. {2a} [A2] get goods on credit. Kúhà ug bugas sa
íyang tindáhan, Get some rice at his store on credit. {2b} [A; a12]
hire for service. Si Isku lay ákung kuháun arun pagpanday sa kusína,
I’ll hire Isko to repair the kitchen. {3} be able to do s.t. {3a} [A3S;
a2] catch what s.o. said. {3b} imitate, catch on how to do s.t. by
following what s.o. else does. Kuháun ku ang dúyug pinaági sa
pagpamínaw sa pláka, I’ll pick up the accompaniment by listening to the
record. {3c} have the capacity to do the sexual act. Mukúhà ug tulu ka
ráwun ang íyang bána, Her husband can do it three times in a row.
{3d} manage to get a girl to engage in sexual acts. Húmuk siyang
makúhà, It’ll be no trouble to get her for sexual intercourse. Ug dì
musugut, kuháa sa kusug, If she doesn’t agree to do it, rape her. a
achievable. Kúhà nákù nang nutáha, That note is very much within my
range. n {1} action of getting s.t. {2} s.t. one got. Pilay ímung kúhà
sa mat? What did you get in Math? {3} production of a photo. Dì maáyu
ang kúhà kun ngitngit, The picture doesn’t come out good if it’s too
dark. (→) n catch of fish or game. Way kuhà ang mananagat, The
fisherman came home without any fish. hiN- v [b(1)] get one’s
livelihood from. Way láing gihinguháan níya sa paggastu sa pag-iskuyla
gawas sa pagpabúy, He had no other source of income for his studies
other than his wages as a servant. tiN-, paniN- see tingúhà.

kuhil v [A; ab2] {1} touch lightly against s.t. Ákung gilíngì kun kinsa
ang nagkuhil sa ákung buktun, I looked back to see who had touched my
arm. Ígù lang nakakuhil ang dyíp sa awtu. Wà gánì makadlasi, The jeep
just brushed against the car. It wasn’t even scratched. {2} touch and
disturb. Ug kuhilun ning mga butang mailhan nákù, If anyone touches
these things I’ll know right away.

kuhin n {1} a cushion or soft pad for sitting or kneeling on.
{2} special church wedding where there is a special white cloth for the
bride and groom to walk over. v {1} [A; a] use, put s.t. as soft
cushion. Átung kuhinan ang lingkuránan sa dyíp, Let’s put cushions on
the seats of the jeep. {2} [A; c1] hold a special wedding. Kuhinun
(ikuhin) kunu ang kasal maung nangútang, The wedding will be special.
That’s why they are going around borrowing money.

kuhir v [A; a12] reach a certain number of points agreed to as the
winning score in billiards or pool. Ug makakuhir siyag dyís, daug na
kay mauy íyang wíting, If he gets ten (by hitting the number ten ball
into the pocket), he will win because he needs ten points to reach the
number we agreed to.

kúhit v [A; a] {1} poke, jab, touch s.t. with the fingers or s.t. long
to remove or obtain it. Kuhíta nang búla nga nasaling-it sa sandayung,
Poke the ball that is stuck in the gutter. Kuhíti akug bayábas, Knock a
guava down for me. {2} touch s.o. by curling the fingers to attract his
attention. Milíngì ku dihang may mikúhit nákù, I looked back when s.o.
touched me. {2a} [AN; a12] approach s.o. influential to ask for a
favor. Ug mikúhit (nangúhit) ka pa nákù dì untà ka madá sa prisintu,
Had you approached me you would not have been brought to the police
station. (→) n {1} stick to get s.t. {2} thin, tapering stick with a
slit in it used in the process of weaving designs to catch hold of
strips of grasses or palms that are being woven. {3} hook used in
embroidery to catch hold of threads.

kúhu v [B12; b4(1)] for the hands to be disabled with the joints
stiffening such that a person is unable to make a fist. Nakúhu ang
kamut sa sanlahun, The leper lost the ability to use his fingers.

kukakúla n {1} coca-cola. {2} tb (so called from the name Koch’s
bacillus (humorous slang). Ayaw paduul ánang tawhána kay kukakúla nà,
Don’t go near him because he has tb. v [A1] drink coca-cola. — bádi
n having a curvaceous body (like a coca-cola bottle).

kukhan see kuku.

kukhu = kalukhu.

kúkib n cave, pit, large hole in the ground. v [AB12; a] for a hole to
develop in the earth, dig a pit or cave. Ang mga miníru nagkúkib sa
kílid sa pangpang, The miners are excavating the side of the mountain.
Nakúkib ang daplin sa sapà kay natimpag ang yútà, The edge of the river
caved in because the earth washed away.

kukiri n cookery, a course in cooking.

kuku n {1} fingernails, toenails. {2} claws, hooves. v [b] get caught
or hit by the claws. Gikukhan sa banug ang pisù, The hawk got the chick
in its talons. {3} -g banug n k.o. wild shrub, the leaves of which are
eaten as greens and sold commercially under the name of salúyut:
Corchorus olitorius. hiN- v [A; b6(1)] cut nails of. Tinúud bang
hinguk-an (hingukúhan) ang kabáyù? Is it true that they trim horses’
hooves? panghiN- v [A; b6(1)] trim one’s own nails. kukhan a {1} having
claws. {2} grasping, inconsiderate of others’ needs. Kukhang dakù kay
patúngan ug dakung pursintu, She is a grasping thing because she
charges a huge percentage on her loans. {3} k.o. crevally.

kúku n unbleached muslin. — krúdu = kúku. v [A1; a2] wear or use s.t.
of unbleached muslin.

kùkù v [A; c1b] shrink back, curl up into oneself. Mikùkù siya sa íyang
gilingkúran sa panghináut nga dì siya himatikdan, He shrank back into
his chair in hopes that no one would notice him. Kùkúa (ikùkù) ang
ímung tiil arun ka masulud sa kaban, Draw in your legs in so you can
get into the trunk. a drawn into oneself, curled back. ti- see tikùkù.

kúkud = kulúkud.

kúkug = kulkug.

kúkuk_1 n k.o. bird, the Philippine coucal: Centropus viridis.

kúkuk_2 n prostitute (slang). paN- v [A2] go out with prostitutes.

kuku krúdu = kúku.

kúkuks n euphemism for kulúkuy.

kúkus = kulúkus.

kukwa n {1} cocoa powder. {2} chocolate milk. v [A13; a] drink, make
chocolate milk or make s.t. with cocoa powder.

kúl_1 n {1} phone call. {2} a summons to duty, need. Dúnay kúl ang
duktur bísag gabíi, A doctor gets calls even at night. {3} a bet or bid
shouted or called out (without giving money). {4} invitation to drink
at s.o.’s expense. Adtu ta sa Dayamun Táwir kay ákù rung kúl, Let’s go
to the Diamond Tower. It’s my treat. v {1} [A; c1] call on the phone.
Dúna ruy mukúl nákug lungdistans, S.o. will call me up long distance
today. {2} [A; c1] call s.o. to duty. Gikúl siya sa armi, He was called
into the army. {3} [A; a] give or accept a bet without showing cash.
Kúlun ku ang ímung pusta bisag pila, I’ll accept whatever bet you
offer. {4} [A2; c1] accept a challenge to a fight or contest. Ug áway
ímung gustu, mukúl ku, If you want a fight, I’ll take you up on it. -ay
n system of betting without showing money.

kúl_2 n inferior quality of wood taken from the interior portion of the
trunk.

kúl_3 v [A; a2] sort out chicks according to sex.

kula, kúla_1 n {1} glue to hold s.t. together. {2} hard rubber. Kúla
ang sudlay, Hard rubber comb. v [A; b5] glue s.t. together. Kuláha
(kuláhi) ang gitára, Glue the guitar together.

*kúla_2 pyánu di- grand piano.

kulabting (not without l) v [A; a] hang onto or cling to with little or
no support from below. Ang kabug nikulabting sa sanga, A bat was
hanging on the branch. Trák nga gikulabtíngan ug daghang pasahíru, A
bus which had lots of passengers clinging on the outside.

kulaburítur n collaborator with the enemy. v [B16; a12] be a
collaborator with the enemy. Kuútun sa girilya ang magkulaburítur, The
partisans will liquidate those who are collaborators.

kulabútan n k.o. large cuttlefish sometimes growing to 25″.

kulabyaw n a k.o. edible fruit bat similar to but smaller than the
kulaknit. paN- v [A2] catch kulabyaw.

kulabyun v [A; b6(1)] {1} cling to for support. Kabyun lang nákù arun
dì ka muunlud, Cling to me so you won’t sink. Nabálì ang sanga kay
gikabyúnan sa mga bátà, The branch broke because children hung on to
it. {2} have influential connections. Náay ímung parinting makabyúnan
sa kustums, You have relatives to turn to for influence in the customs.

kulag (not without l) a be panic-stricken. v [B126; b3] get
panic-stricken. Nakulag ang mga táwu sa paglínug, The people became
panic-stricken when there was an earthquake. -an a of a hysterical
type.

kulagting = kulabting.

kulágù_1 v [A2S; b3c] cry wildly and loudly. Mikulágù ang bátà nga
giilúgan sa duwáan, The child screamed wildly because s.o. took his toy
away from him. Ikuwágù ku na lang ang ákung kaguul, I will shriek with
grief. n a loud, wild cry, or crying. Ang íyang kulágù nabátì sa mga
silíngan, His loud cries were heard by the neighbors.

kulágù_2 n k.o. owl: Tyto sp.

kulakdup n brown, edible fungus growing on rotting wood, used as a
condiment with noodles (pansit).

kulaknit n k.o. edible fruit-eating bat, larger than the kulabyaw. paN-
v [A2] catch such bats.

kulambus = kurambus.

kulambut v {1} [A; b6(1)] tie a string across a row of strings,
crisscross fashion, to make netting for s.t. to protect or secure it.
Magkulambut ku sa bàbà sa baskit sa itlug, I’ll crisscross strings
across the mouth of the basket of eggs. Dì na mabungkag nang kartun kay
gikulambútan na ug maáyu, This bundle of boxes won’t get untied because
I have tied it securely in a crisscross fashion. {1a} [A; ac1] make or
attach a leader in longline fishing. {2} [A; b6] wrap oneself up
entirely in a blanket. Nagkulambut siya kay gitugnaw, He wrapped
himself up with a blanket because he felt cold. n {1} string used in
longline fishing connecting the hook with the main line or the leader
with another ganging line. {2} blanket.

kulambútan = kulabútan.

kulampísaw n k.o. frigate bird, a large sea bird: Fregata arielariel.

kulampit v [A; c] {1} wind one’s limbs around tightly and firmly. Wà
kalíhuk si Pidru kay gikulampítan siya sa líug sa kuntra, Pedro
couldn’t move when his opponent locked his legs around his neck. {2} be
entwining. Gikulampítan ang ríhas sa bintánà sa mabagang bágun, Thick
vines entwined themselves around the window grill.

kulámug = dalínug.

kulámus v [A; a] grab with the fingers and nails and squeeze or
crumple. Kulamúsun nákù ning papílis ug maglágut ku, I’ll crumple these
papers if I get mad. Kulamúsun ku nang nawung mu dì ba makísì nang
ngábil mu run, I’ll grab your face with my fingernails and rip your
lips off.

kulamuy n {1} claws of birds, shellfish. Ang idágan sa kasag mau ang
íyang mga kamuy, The crab runs by means of its claws. {2} fingers and
toes. Tag-as kag kulamuy. Angayan kang magtuun ug pyánu, You’ve got
long fingers. You should take piano lessons. — sa baláud n arms of the
law.

kúlan n long-term variety of white rice with very fine and slender
grains that ripen after eight months.

kulandir n colander.

kúlang a lacking, deficient. Kúlang ra ni pára nákù, This is not enough
for me. {2} too puny to pose a challenge. Magsinumbagay? Kúlang ka ra
nákù, You want to fight? You’re not strong enough to pose a challenge.
n balance, the amount needed or lacking. Pilay kúwang? How much is
needed? v {1} [B; ab7] be wanting, lacking, deficient. Dì kita
makalingkud kay nagkúlang ang lingkuránan, We can’t take a seat. There
are not enough chairs. Ayawg kulánga pagsuklì, Don’t fail to give the
right amount of change. Arun ka makaganansiya, kulángi ug gamay ang
takus, If you want to make a greater profit, make the measure a little
bit short. {2} [A13] not give s.o. his proper due or attention.
Nanglaki ang asáwa tungud kay nagkúlang kaníya ang íyang bána, The wife
took up with other men because her husband didn’t give her adequate
affection. {3} dílì, walay — v [B2456; a4] be not less than. Dílì
makúlang (kulángun) sa singkuwinta ang mitambung, The number of people
who came is not less than fifty. ka-an n deficiency, shortcomings.
Pasaylúa aku sa ákung mga kakulángan, Forgive me for my shortcomings.
kulangkulang a mentally retarded, slightly lacking in intelligence for
the age. v [B126; a12] become mentally deficient. -un a not quite
enough. Kulángun ra ning usa ka bábuy sa mga bisíta, One pig is not
enough for the visitors. -an a lacking a lot to reach the proper
amount. Kulángan kaáyu ning usa ka sáku, This isn’t a whole sackful.
There’s a lot missing.

kulangù a slightly retarded mentally, silly. Trayinta anyus, magdyúlin
pa. Kulangù, He is thirty years old but still likes to play marbles.
He’s a bit retarded. v [B12; b6] be, become stupid, silly, or
slow-witted. -un a of a slightly retarded or silly sort. Kulanguun tung
mga pangutána, Those were silly questions.

kulángut (not without l) n moist nasal discharge in the nose, but not
soft. v [B124; a4b4] be full of moist, hard nasal discharge.
Limpiyúhing ilung, nagkakulángut (gikulángut, gikulangútan), Clean your
nose. It’s dirty. -un(→) a always having a stuffed up nose.

kulansi = kulasísi.

kulap, kúlap a dim, not affording much light; or for the eyes to be
dim. Ang kaháyag sa sugà nga lána kulap kaáyu, The light of the oil
lamp is very dim. v [B; b6] {1} for light or vision to dim. {2} for
one’s popularity to fade. Nagkakulap na ang kabantug ni Ilbis Prisli,
Elvis Presley’s popularity is fading. kulapkúlap v [B46; c1] blink the
eyes. Nagkuwapkúwap ang ákung mata sa kasulaw sa adlaw, My eyes are
blinking in the glare of the sun.

kul-ap v [A; a] call s.o. on the telephone. Kul-ápun ku ang ákung asáwa
sa lungdistans, I’ll call up my wife by long distance.

kulapíti (not without l; from kúla and piti) v [B13; b] get s.t. sticky
on s.t. which does not come off easily. Nagkulapíti ang íyang buhuk sa
pumáda ug buling, His hair is sticky with dirt and pomade.
Gikulapitíhan sa bábul gám ang íyang kamut, His hands are all sticky
with bubble gum.

kulápu n {1} brand of a cheap local wine. {2} penis (humorous slang).
Kay dakù man siyang pagkatáwu, dakù sab giyud nag kulápu, He is a big
fellow, so he must also have a big penis.

kuláput v {1} [A; c] twine around s.t. Putla nang kalabásà nga
nagkuláput sa kapáyas, Cut down the squash that is entwined around the
papaya tree. Ikuláput ang ímung buktun sa ákung líug, Twine your arm
around my neck. {2} [A2SN; b6] cling to s.t. by twining s.t. long
around it. Ungguy nga nagkulaput (nanguláput) sa sanga, A monkey
clinging to the branch.

kulapyut v [A; a] {1} hang down from s.t. holding on with the limbs.
Mukapyut ang sirkadur sa tsíning bar, The acrobat clings to the
chinning bar. Ayawg kapyúti ang ákung líug, Don’t cling to my neck.
{2} [A12; b] ask a favor by turning to s.o. influential. Nasúd siyas
kapitulyu kay nakakapyut man ug pulitiku, He got a job in the Capitol
because a politician recommended him. — sa sagbayan v [A3] get sick
with venereal disease (lit. hang on to the rafters). Patúu ug tambag ug
dì ka gustung mukapyut sa sagbayan, Listen to advice if you don’t want
to get v.d. paN- v [A] cling, hold on to s.t. vigorously or
frantically. Nagpangapyut sa bágun ang táwung nahū́g sa bung-aw, The
man who fell into the chasm clung frantically to a vine. -ánan n place
for clinging or holding onto.

kulasísi n k.o. parakeet with a shrill voice, commonly kept as a pet:
Loriculus philippensis.†

kulasiyun n a light repast taken in place of a real meal when fasting.
v [AN; b6] take a light repast. Magkulasiyun ang rilihiyúsu sa Byirnis
Santu, Religious people take only a light repast on Good Friday.

kulat v [A; a12] splice long pieces of rope by unravelling the strands,
running the two pieces together, and retwisting or make the ends of a
rope into a loop by an analogous process. Maáyung kulatun ang tumuy sa
písì ug dugtúngun arun dílì mubaknal, It is good to join the two pieces
of rope by splicing them so there will be no bulges in the middle.
n the finished splice. maN-r- n one who splices rope.

kuláta_1 (not without l) v [A; a] maul s.o., beat s.o. badly. Mga pulis
ang nikuláta sa mangunguut, The cops beat the pickpocket up. n mauling
administered. -du a badly beaten up. Kulatádu siya sa íyang kuntra
gíkan sa it ráwun, After the eight round, he was badly punished by his
opponent.

kuláta_2 (not without l) n gunstock. v [A13; a2] make, make into,
attach a gunstock to s.t.

kulating (humorous euphemism for kuláta) v [A; a12] maul, beat s.o.
badly. Maáyung kulatingun ang asáwang kusug muputak, A wife that nags
all the time needs a good mauling.

kulatiral (not without l) n collateral on a loan. v [A; c] offer or use
s.t. as collateral.

kulat-ug n venereal disease. v [a4] be infected with venereal disease.
-un(→) n infected with venereal diseases.

kulaw-it = kalaw-it.

kulánap = kuyánap.

kulaykulay a double jointed. v [B126] get to be double jointed.

kulbà a {1} provoking a feeling of fear at s.t. impending.
{2} startling, provoking a pang of fear suddenly. v [b4] {1} have a
feeling of fear at s.t. impending or unexplained fear. Gikulbaan kug
maáyu kay mu rang usa ra ang bátà sa balay, I feel very apprehensive
because the child is all alone in the house. {2} be very frightened by
s.t. sudden. Gikulbaan ku pagpaghut sa irù, I was startled when the dog
barked. — hínam a anticipated with eagerness and fright. v [B] for s.t.
to get thrilling, breathtaking. Nagkakulbà hínam ang isturya kay
nagkasulbad na ang mistiryu, The story is getting very exciting because
the mystery is nearing solution. paN- v [b4] have an intense feeling of
apprehension or be intensely startled. ka- n feeling of fearful
apprehension. -ánun, kululbáan a given to being apprehensive.

kulbásà = kalabásà.

kuldas = kwirdas_1.

kuldun n drawstring or cord passed through the waist of a garment.
Nahushus ákung karsunsilyu kay naputul ang kuldun, My underpants fell
down because the drawstring broke. v [A; ab] {1} tie s.o.’s drawstring.
{2} [A; c1] supply with, make into a drawstring. paN- v [A2] tie one’s
drawstring. Panguldun dihà uy. Mahushus unyà nang panti mu, Tie your
drawstring or your panties will come falling down.

kulgirl n prostitute that gives home service. v [B1] be, become a call
girl.

kulgit n toothpaste, so called from the brand name Colgate. v [A1N; b]
use toothpaste. Asin na lay ikulgit, Just brush your teeth with salt.

kulhánun see kulu_1.

kulhíad = kulíhad.

kulì v [a4] get senile in the mind. Ang táwung gikulì mu ra na lang
bátà, A person who gets senile behaves like a child. -un, -ánun
n confused due to old age. Kuliánun na si Lúlu. Ábi níyag ang íya kung
anak, Grandfather has gotten confused now. He thinks I’m his son.

kúlì a {1} having a hard time doing s.t. because of some obstacle. Kúlì
kaáyu ning mahuman kay kúwang ug panahun, This is going to be hard to
finish because there isn’t enough time. Kúlì ta makasakay ug mag-uwan,
We have a hard time getting transportation when it rains.
{2} reluctant. Kúlì siyang musugut, I doubt if he will consent to that.
Kúlì kaáyu sa ákung buut ning pagpangáyug ámut, I find it very much
against my will to ask for contributions. {3} seldom, rarely. Kúlì siya
muanhi, He seldom comes here. Kúlì kang kakità ug dunsilya dinhi, You
rarely find virgins here. v [B; a2] have a hard time doing s.t. Ngánung
mukúlì ka paghátag sa ímung anak? Why do you find it hard to give s.t.
to your own child? Kun muhátag ka, hátag dáyun. Ngánung kulíun pa man?
If you want to give, all right, give. Why make it so hard? ma- a =
kúlì. v [B1; b3c] be hesitant, be reluctant. Magmakúlì ku sa
pagpaiskuyla ug tapulan, I’m reluctant to send a lazy person to school.
ka-an n obstacle, difficulty. Mga kakulían nga dì kapugngan,
Circumstances beyond our control. ma-un a hesitant, reluctant. Makulíun
kaáyu siyang nikúyug nákù, She was very hesitant to go with me.

kulibugan = kalibugan. see líbug.

kulígi v [A; b3] cry noisily and loudly. Mikulígi ang bátà nga wà
hatágig singku, The child cried noisily because he did not get his
nickle. Nagkulígi ang masúsu kay gigútum, The baby is crying because it
is hungry.

kulíhad, kulìhad v {1} [AN; c] loosen phlegm in the throat and expel
it. Humag pangíhì, nangulíhad siya ug nanglup-ad, After urinating he
loosened his phlegm and spat out. {2} [A23N; b] clear out phlegm in the
throat as a sign of derision or contempt. Mangulíhad (mukulíhad) dáyun
ang Dunyag náay pubring mangulitáwu sa íyang anak, The Doña clears her
throat in contempt as soon as a poor man comes to pay a call on her
daughter. n derision and contempt. Giantus ni Magdalína ang mga
pagbiaybíay ug kulíhad sa katawhan, Magdalene endured all the people’s
derision and contempt. -in- n s.t. expectorated. paN- = kulíhad, n.

kulihiyála n a student in an exclusive girls’ high school or college.
v [B156; a12] be, become a student in a girls’ school.

kulihiyu, kulihíyu n college or lower grade affiliated with a college.
— iliktural n polling place where voters cast their votes in an
election.

kulíik n shrill, piercing shriek. v [A; b3] shriek or scream with a
shrill or piercing voice. Mikulíik ang bátà nga naipit sa siras
pultahan, The child that got its finger wedged in the door let out a
piercing scream.

kuliksiyun n {1} a collection, an accumulation of things collected,
esp. as a hobby. {2} aggregate amount of money received at any one
time, receipts. Kuliksiyun sa simbahan, Church collection. v [A; a2]
{1} have a collection. Nagkuliksiyun ku ug silyu, I collect stamps.
{2} take up a collection. Magkuliksiyun ta pára sa namatay, Let’s take
up a collection for the deceased.

kulikta v {1} [A; ac] collect, give payments, usually not for any
pre-existing contractual obligations. Nagkulikta siyag dilihinsya sa
mga draybir, He is collecting protection money from drivers.
Gikuliktáhan ku ug ámut pára sa simbahan, They collected a donation for
the church from me. Písu ang ákung ikulikta, I’ll give one peso for the
collection. {2} [AN; a2] gather for a collection. Nangulikta siyag
trátu, He is collecting girl friends. {3} [A1] come to the part of the
church service where the offering is collected. Nagkulikta na pag-abut
nákù, The offering was already being passed when I arrived. n {1} money
collected from payments, dues, taxes, etc. {2} items collected or
gathered for one’s hobby. {3} collection taken up during a church
service.

kuliktar = kulikta, v.

kuliktur n {1} bill collector. {2} collector of s.t. as a hobby.
Kuliktur nà siyag mga silyu, He is a stamp collector. {3} collector of
fares on public transportation. v {1} [B156; a2] be a bill collector,
collector as a hobby, collector of fares. {2} [B156] be a collector of
items, such as coins, stamps, etc.

kulíkug v [A23] for sound to penetrate into one’s ears. Dì ku makatulug
kay mukulíkug giyud ang tíngug sa bátà nga naghilak sa ákung dawunggan,
I can’t sleep, because that child’s cries are penetrating into my ears.

kulíkut v {1} [AB; c] squeeze, penetrate into a narrow space; cause
s.t. to do so. Mikulíkut siya sa daghang mga táwu, He elbowed his way
into the crowd. Singgit nga mikulíkut sa ákung dawunggan, A scream that
penetrated deep into my ears. Ayaw ikulíkut nang lápis sa ímung
dunggan, Don’t shove that pencil into your ear. {2} [A; b6(1)] make or
bore a hole usually with a twisted instrument or twisting motion. Ubang
buyug mukulíkut sa yútà unyà mangitlug, Some wasps bore a hole in the
ground to lay eggs in. (→) n tiny chili pepper with a strong bite.
síling — = kulikut.

kulikutkut v [A] be curled up. Tag-as na ang ímung patilya,
mukulikutkut na gánì sa dunggan, Your sideburns are so long, they are
curling up to your ears. Nagkulikutkut siya sa kasakit sa íyang tiyan,
He is curled up because of his stomach ache.

kulíling n ringing, tinkling sound as that of a phone or small bell.
v [A; c1] for a small bell to ring.

kulilísi n a game played during wakes after the prayers in which the
participants recite verses (ditsu), contesting with each other. -ng
hárì the leader of the kulilísi. v [A] hold a kulilísi game.

kulímà v [A2S; c] screw up the face in pain or upon experiencing an
unpleasant taste. Mukulímà ka giyud kun makakaun kag aslum, You will
grimace if you eat s.t. sour. Mikulímà ang bátà sa dihang gikusì,
dáyung mihílak, The baby screwed up its face when I pinched it and then
burst into tears.

kuling v [A; a] bring s.t. into disarray, shuffle it all up, as in
searching for s.t. Nagkuling siya sa libru kun dúna bay gisalip-it, She
is going through the pages of the book to see if s.t. was placed
between them. Kulinga ang kaban ug túa ba ang dukumintu, Search the
trunk to see if the document is in it.

kulípà v [AN; c] expel from the mouth by pushing with the tongue or
blowing. Mukulípà (mangulípà) ang bátà kun ímung dalìdaliun paghungit,
The child will spit the food out if you feed it too rapidly. Ikulípà nà
kay húgaw, Spit that out. It’s dirty.

kulípad = kulípà.

kulípas v [AN; c1] refuse to acknowledge. Ang mga táwung bakákun dílì
mahadluk mukulípas (mangulípas) sa ílang sulti, Liars are not afraid to
disclaim their own words. Si San Pidru mauy nagkulípas nga wà siya
makaila ni Hisus, St. Peter denied Jesus saying he did not know Him.
hiN- a fond of denying. paN- n denial.

kulípat v [A; a2b2] tweak, pinch s.t. and twist. Kulipátun ku nang
ímung bulug ug ímung samúkun ang nagtuun, I will tweak you in the groin
if you bother these children that are studying.

kulípì_1 v [AN; b6] {1} cover up for s.o. Ang inahan mauy nangulípì
pagbalíbad nga wà mulakat ang íyang anak, The mother covered up for her
son by saying he hadn’t gone out. {2} take on s.o. else’s duties. Aku
lay nangulípì (mikulípì) sa íyang trabáhu kay nagtuun man, I took over
his duties because he was studying. paN- v [A2; b] be jealously
possessive of s.o. Mangulípì ang inahan sa mga ituy ug duúlun sila, The
mother dog guards her puppies jealously when s.o. goes near them. -an
a jealously possessive.

kulípì_2 v [A3P] shrink, cower in fear. Mikulípì sa suuk ang mga bátà
pagkadungug sa dalugdug, The children cowered in the corner when they
heard the thunder. Mukulípì ang irù ug han-an ug bunal, The dog will
shrink in fear if you raise a club at him.

kulipíti = kulapíti.

kulipláwir n cauliflower.

kúlir n cooler. v [c1] put s.t. in a cooler.

kulira n {1} cholera. {2} rather strong curse uttered in anger. Kulira!
Napildi nímung ákung pusta dà! Damn! I lost my bet! v {1} [A123P; a4]
cause, get cholera. {2} [a4] curse in which s.o. is wished ill (lit.
may you be afflicted with cholera). Kulirahun ka pa untà! Nagpakaulaw
ka lang sa átung bánay, God damn you! You only bring shame to our
family.

kulirit n euphemism for kulira, n2.

kulirù_1 n a half centavo copper coin. Wà gayud kuy kulirù diri, I
don’t have a cent. a stupid, simpleton. v [B12] become stupid. Nakulirù
siya human masakit ug típus, He became slow-witted after he got sick
with typhus.

kulirù_2 euphemism for kulira, n2, v. Gikulirù ka ba nga walà man ku
nímu salinig kan-un? Are you sick or s.t. that you didn’t leave me
anything to eat?

kúlis n {1} collards: Brassica oleracea var. acephala. {2} ornamental
shrub with yellow leaves which are eaten as a vegetable, esp. together
with fish stewed in vinegar: Pisonia alba. v [A13; b6] cook, cook with
kúlis.

kulisaw, kulísaw a annoyingly noisy, disturbing, chaotic. Dì ku
makatulug kay kulísaw kaáyu ang mga bátà, I can’t sleep because the
children are so noisy. n a noisy disturbance. Unsa may naingnan adtung
kulísaw ganíha? What was the cause of the fracas a while ago. v [B; b6]
be, become disturbing with a chaotic noise.

kulisdum, kulisdung = kisdum.

kulísiw n loud, piercing shriek. v [A2S; b3] shriek. Mikulísiw siya
pagkakità sa abat, She screamed when she saw the ghost. Nagkulisiw ang
bátà nga nasakitag maáyu, The child screamed because it hurt.

kulisíyum n coliseum.

kulismaut v [AP; c1] grimace in disgust or dissatisfaction, be
frowning. Nagkulismaut ang nawung kay wà tugti, She’s frowning because
they didn’t allow her to go. a frowning, grimacing. n grimace of
disgust. -un a of a frowning sort.

kulismut = kulismaut.

kulistirul n cholesterol.

kulísuk v [A2S; b3] scream loudly in anger, pain, or fright. Mukulísuk
ang bátà sa pagkakità sa duktur, The child screamed wildly in fright on
seeing the doctor. Úngù tung íyang gikulisúkan, She screamed at seeing
the vampire. n loud scream.

kulisyun = kwalisiyun.

kúlit v [A; ac] carve or engrave. Magkúlit kug istatúwa sa anghil, I’ll
carve the statue of an angel. Kulíta nang ági sa lápis, Remove the
pencil marks by carving them out. Ikúlit ang litra sa káhuy, Carve the
letters into the tree. -in- n engraving, carving. -in-an n s.t.
engraved. Ilhan ra kay kinulítan tug ngálan, You can identify it
because it has a name engraved into it. mag-r-, maN-r- n sculptor.

kulítis = kudyapà.

kulitu = akulitu.

kulítug v [A; a] insert s.t. into a hole and move it around. Nagkulítug
siyag gápas sa íyang dunggan, He is cleaning his ears with cotton.
Kulitúga nang gul-anan arun mudakùdakù, Insert a stick into the outlet
and turn it around to make it bigger. n s.t. used to insert into a
hole.

kulitus = akulitu.

kuliut = kulikut. see kulíkut.

kulíut_1 v [B2S46; c1] grimace or distort one’s face in anger or pain.
Ayaw kuliúta (ikulíut) ímung nawung bísan ug dì ka ganáhan, Don’t
contort your face, even if you don’t like it.

kulíut_2 = kulíkut.

kuliyun n Culion island, a leper colony. v [A2; c1] send lepers to
Culion.

kulkug v [A; a] shove s.t. slender into an opening just about big
enough for it and work it around. Kulkúga íring lipak ang lungag sa
ilagà, Thrust this stick into the rat hole. Ayaw ikulkug ang ímung
tudlù sa ímung ilung, Don’t stick your finger in your nose. n {1} s.t.
used to thrust into a hole. {2} action of inserting s.t.

kulkul v [B46; a] {1} grow to be gnarled, curled up. Mukulkul untà ang
mga tudlù sa nagkúhà adtu, May the fingers of the person who stole it
stiffen with arthritis. Mikulkul ang tinubúan sa káhuy, The tree grew
into a gnarled mass. {2} shrink back in fear. Mukulkul sa kahadluk ang
ímung irù ug pirming bunálan, Your dog will shrink back in fear if you
constantly beat it. {3} withdraw, back out from an undertaking out of
apprehension. Ngánung mikulkul ka sa ímung nigusyu? Why have you gone
out of business? a curled up stiff. -ánay n withdraw, back out. Sábut
nga way kulkulánay, An agreement we cannot withdraw from.

kultibar v {1} [A; a] cultivate land for growing crops. Kultibahun ku
ning luyu sa balay arun tamnan kug mga utanun, I will dig up the back
of my house to grow vegetables. {2} [A; a12] use up, get rid of. Ang
ákung mga anak mauy mikultibar sa kík, My children ate all the cake.
Ang banggiítang kwirpu sa mga sikríta mauy nakakultibar sa nanaghítak
nga sugálan, The crack group of detectives rid the place of gambling
dens. Kultibahun lang sa lídir sa kandidátu ang kwarta, dílì ipamalit
ug balúta, The leader of the candidate just pockets all the money for
himself. He won’t use it for buying ballots. kultibádu a {1} cultivated
land. {2} all eaten up or drunk. v [B1246] become cultivated land. Ang
yútà níya sa Mindanaw may kagulángan ug may nakultibádu na, He has
forest lands in Mindanao and also some which are now cultivated.

kultsun = kutsun.

kultu_1 n a Protestant service held at a member’s house. v [A13; b6]
hold a service at a member’s house. Nagkultu sila sa balay sa ansiyánu
kay naáyu ang íyang anak, They are holding a service at the elder’s
place because his son recovered.

kultu_2 v [A; a1] shoot marbles with the thumb. Hingígù siyang mukultu
sa húlin, He shoots marbles like a marksman. {2} [A23] in a game of
marbles, commit a foul by shooting the marbles into the wrong hole.
Mukultu ka sa síkan ug mudyurds ka dihà, You will commit a foul if you
shoot the marble in the second hole. n foul in marbles.

kultúra n culture, civilization.

kulu_1 v [b(1)] {1} use s.t. awkwardly because of unfamiliarity. Daghan
siyag sayup kay gikulhan pa sa bag-ung aybíim, He made lots of mistakes
because he doesn’t have the feel for the new IBM machine yet. {2} be
awkward, nervous. Wà ka kulhi nga nikanta sa daghang táwu? Did you not
feel nervous singing in front of all those people? {3} [b4] be unable
to react upon seeing violence due to fear. Gikúhan ku pagkakità nákus
bátà nga naligsan, I was transfixed when I saw the child run over.
kulhánun a {1} operating s.t. awkwardly because of unfamiliarity.
{2} nervous, fearful, apprehensive. Dì ka giyud makat-un ug dráyib kay
kulhánun kaáyu ka, You’ll never learn how to drive, you’re so nervous.
v [B12] become nervous, fearful. kakulhánun n fearfulness, timidity.
Tungud sa íyang kakulhánun wà gihápun siya makaabla níya, He is so
timid he hasn’t brought himself to tell her he loves her.

kulu_2 n seedless breadfruit, usually cooked with syrup as a sweet or
used as an ingredient in sweet preparations: Artocarpus communis.

kúlù v {1} [B23(1); b4(1)] shrink in length or width. Panaptun nga dílì
mukúlù, Cloth that doesn’t shrink. Kwáa ang sinugba sa dì pa makakúlù,
Take the meat off the coals before it shrinks. Nainútil siya kay
nakulúan ug ugat, He became disabled because he had contracted tendons.
{2} [B46; b34c1] curl up, draw back. Ug mukúlù ang tamalà sa bangag,
lisud hisakpan, When the octopus shrinks into the hole, you can’t catch
it easily. Kulúa (ikúlù) ímung tiil kay dúnay gustung muági, Pull your
feet in because people want to go by. Namatay siya kay gikul-an sa
dílà, She died because she swallowed her tongue (her tongue shrunk into
the throat). {2a} draw back in fear. Mukúlù ka man lagi ug hanaan, You
draw back in fear if s.o. threatens you. n shrinkage. igsaktu, hustu sa
— be a bit too large so that it fits after shrinkage. Sagdig luag ang
bistída kay hustu nà sa kúlù, Never mind if the dress is a little too
loose because it will fit perfectly after it shrinks. kulùkúlù v [B6]
writhe, double up in pain. Mikulùkúlù siya sa kasakit sa tiyan, He was
doubled up with stomach pain.

kulub v [AB6; c1] lie on one’s belly, be overturned. Ug mukulub
(makulub) ang sakayan, patay ta, If the boat turns over, we’re done
for. Magkulub paghigdà ang buktut, A hunchback sleeps lying on his
belly. Kulba (ikulub) ang mga hinugásang plátu, Lay the washed plates
face downward. — sa plátu, kúlun, etc. v [b(1)2] deprive s.o. of his
livelihood (lit. turn the plate, pot, etc. upside down on him—as a sign
that it is empty). Kun kuháan mu siya sa trabáhu sáma ra sa gikulban mu
sila sa kaldíru, If you deprive him of a job, it’s just like
overturning the kettles on them. — hayang a unstable, uncertain: one
day up, the next day down. Kulub hayang ang kinabúhì sa sugarul, A
gambler’s life is up today, down tomorrow. n game of group tag in which
s.t. is tossed and one group chases the other according to which side
the thing that was tossed falls on. ma-, mahayang whatever will be will
be, whatever happens. Pasagdi ang ímung anak. Tutal makulub mahayang
laláki man siya, Let your son do as he pleases. Anyway, whatever
happens, he is a man. — hubag n a boil which swells downward instead of
outward and fails to develop a head (lit. an overturned boil).

kúlub v [B23; b6] shrink, shrivel up. Mukúlub ang prútas nga linghud
rang pagkapùpù, Fruits that are picked too young will just shrivel up.
Nagkakulub na nà siya kay tigúlang na kaáyu, She is shriveling up with
old age. Mikū́b ang núka. Wà na magkamayu, The sore has shriveled up.
It’s not infected any more.

kulubútan = kulabútan.

kulud = kuludkúlud.

kúlud n midrib, the central rib of a leaf. v [AN; b7] remove the midrib
of leaves. Nagkúlud siya sa lukay, He is removing the midribs of the
palm fronds. Ákung kulúran ang mga dáhun sa tabákù, I will remove the
midribs of the tobacco leaves.

kuludkúlud a be undulating in little waves. Kuludkúlud nga sín,
Corrugated iron. n undulation. Kuludkúlud sa tuud, The rings in the
stump. v [ABN; c1] undulate, cause s.t. to do so. Mikudkū́d
(nangudkū́d) ang kahumayan, The ricefield is undulating. Ang midisína
mauy mukudkū́d sa buhuk, The medicine will make the hair wavy.
Nagkudkū́d ang linámang dikulur, The color is in an undulating pattern.

kulugkug v [A; a] insert s.t. slender into a narrow opening and work it
around. Akuy mikulugkug sa túbu nga nasampungan, I worked a stick
around in the pipe that was clogged up. Gikulugkúgan níya sa húgaw ang
hunsuy, He cleaned out the tar in the pipe.

kulugpus v [AN; c1] {1} fold the arms in any position with the forearms
crossed as a sign of repose. Nangulyugpus lang siya nga nagpaábut ug
trák, He stood with his arms folded waiting for the bus.
Nagpangulyugpus sa íyang mga buktun nga nangalíya sa mahal nga birhin,
She prayed to the blessed Virgin with her arms crossed, hands on the
shoulders. {1a} curl the legs up close to the body. Íyang kulugpúsun
ang íyang mga tiil ug tugnawun, He’ll curl up his feet if he feels
cold. {2} do nothing in the face of a situation which calls for action.
Nangulyugpus lang siya samtang nagkapulíkì mig trabáhu, He just stood
by with his arms folded while we went crazy with so many things to do.
Magkiyugpus ba lang tang magtan-aw sa ílang kalisud? Shall we just
stand by utterly indifferent to the situation?

kulugpuy = kulugpus.

kulukar (not without l) v {1} [AP; c] place s.o. in a job. Kunggrisman
ang mikulukar (mipakulukar) nákù sa trabáhu, A politician procured me a
job. Ikulukar ta kag maáyung trabáhu, I’ll find a good job for you.
{1a} [A; c1] find, obtain s.t. for which there is fierce competition.
Kun mag-ulan kúlì kang makakulukar ug sakay, When it rains it is
difficult to get public transportation. {2} [A; c] attend to s.t. so
that it is done properly, in the proper situation. Wà giyuy paryinting
nagkulukar sa minatay, There was not a single relative to attend to the
funeral. Sa nakulukar na ang minatay nag-áway dáyun sila sa kabílin, As
soon as the body was laid to rest, they set out to fight over the
inheritance. Ákung ikulukar ning ákung manghud úsà ku magminyù, I will
see my younger brother through school before I get married. kulukádu
a settled in a job, marriage, having a place to stay. kulukasiyun
n job, occupation. paN- v [A; c] go job hunting. Muadtu siya sa siyudad
mangulukasiyun, He will go to the city to look for a job.

kuluks, kúluks n euphemism for kulúkuy.

kulúkud v [A2S; a] bundle up dried coconut leaves to make a torch.
Kulukúra ang langkay, Bundle up the dried coconut leaves for a torch.
n torch of this sort.

kulúkus v [B; c1] curl up. Mikúkus ang mga dáhun sa kahúlaw, The leaves
curled up in the long drought. Nagkulúkus gihápun sa katri bísag taas
na kaáyu ang adlaw, He’s curled up in bed even though the sun is high
in the sky. Kulukúsa (ikulúkus) ang alambri, unyà hipúsa, Roll up the
wire and put it away.

kulukúsu (not without l) = kusukúsu.

kulúkuy a stupid, lacking in common sense and sound judgment. Kulukúya
nímu! Ímu man siyang gisultíhan sa surprísa, How dumb you can get! Why
did you tell her our surprise? v [B12; b6] be lacking in common sense
and sound judgment.

kulumbabit, kulumbábit v [A2S; b6(1)] hang or cling onto s.t. with the
body suspended but leaning or working against part of it. Mikumbábit
ang bátà sa ákung líug, The child clung to my neck. Ang kawatan
nagkumbabit sa ríhas, The thief is clinging to the window bars.

kulumbitay, kulumbítay v [A; b6] {1} hang down from s.t. by clinging to
it. Palwang gikumbitayan sa kwaknit, A palm frond on which a bat was
hanging. {2} hang down suspended. May parul nga gakulumbitay sa ílang
mga bintánà, There were lanterns hanging in their windows. Bágun nga
gikumbitayan sa úbas, Vine loaded with (from which were suspended)
grapes.

kulumna (not without l) n column, pillar in a large building.

kulumnista (not without l) n {1} newspaper or magazine columnist.
{2} member of the fifth column. v [B156] be a columnist.

kulumpiyu (not without l) n rocking chair. v [a12] make into a rocking
chair. paN- v [A2; a12] rock oneself in a rocking chair. Kinsa man nang
nangulumpiyu sa diskansu? Who is that rocking on the porch?

kulumrínu = byatilis.

kúlun_1 n cooking pot made of clay. v [A13; a1c] cook in this k.o. pot,
make into this k.o. pot. hayang ang — {1} a sure thing, very certain of
victory (lit. the pot is upright—the implication being that s.t. is
inside). Ari pusta sa ákung kandidátu kay hayang na dáan ang kúlun
niíni, Place your bet on my candidate. You are sure to win with him.
{2} for s.t. to make do as a livelihood. Bísan lang ug pangáyu ug rilu
apan hayang na ang kúlun, Even if it’s just watch repairing, it’s
enough for a livelihood. baryu nga way — cemetery. tak-ang sa — v [A]
for a woman to answer the call of nature (urinate or defecate—humorous
euphemism). -un a clay soil for making pots. kulunkulun {1} =
angulunkulun. {2} one who sees to it that no one uses his things and is
careful not to use things belonging to others. Nag-ípun ug usa ka
bubung apan kulunkulun, They live under one roof, but each has his own
things (lit. cook with different pots).

kúlun_2 (not without l)n colon, k.o. punctuation mark.

kulung_1 a for the hair to be curly, wavy. v [AB; a] for the hair to
become curly or wavy; cause it to do so. Ikaw ray ginindutan ánang
buhuk mung nagkulung, You’re the only one that considers your curly
hair pretty. Akuy nagkulung sa íyang buhuk, I gave her a permanent.
n {1} the process of curling hair. {2} its result. Dúgay ang ákung
kulung mituy-ud, The permanent I received lasted for quite a while. -un
a curly, wavy in hair. maN-r- n beautician. pa-an n beauty parlor where
one gets a permanent. paN- n the profession of curling hair.

kulung_2 v [A; a] put in confinement of some sort. Nagkulung ang byúda
sa sulud sa íyang balay, The widow shut herself up in her home.
Nakulung ang tibuuk pamilya sa uma tungud sa bahà, The family was
imprisoned on their farm because of the flood. -an n {1} place of
confinement. {2} = kurung_1. kulungù = kulangù.

kulunya n colony.

kulúpug v {1} [A; b] attack in the manner of a mother hen attacking
s.t. Mikúpug ang himungáan sa midúul sa íyang mga pisù, The mother hen
attacked the man who went near her chicks. Gikupúgan siya sa nasukù
níyang asáwa, His wife set on him like an angry hen. {2} [AC2; b(1)]
jump over one for sexual purposes. Dinhà pa sa gawang mikúpug dáyun ang
laláki sa pampam, They were hardly through the door when the man set
upon the prostitute. Nisúkul ang babáyi sa dihang gikupúgan na siyag
haluk, The woman put up resistance as she was showered with hot kisses.

kulur, kúlur n {1} color. {2} one’s true colors, real character. Mu ra
nà siyag buútan apan dílì nà mauy tinúud níyang kulur, She appears to
be of good character, but that is not what she really is. v [A; b]
color s.t. Kulúri ug lainláing kulur ang mga búlak, Color the flowers
with all different colors. di-(→) a colored. Sayal nga dikulur, Colored
skirt. (←) n pud — food coloring. tikni — technicolor. wútir — water
color. kulurkúlur a of different colors. Ning-ayun ku sa ímung sinínà
kay kulurkúlur, I like your dress because it is of all different
colors. -áwu a {1} of many colors, having different colors. Kuluráwu
kaáyu ang mga sugà sa Pasku, The Christmas lights are of all different
colors. {2} flushed in the face. Kuluráwu siyag nawung kay
nakainum-inum na pud, His face is flushed because he’s had one drink
too many again. v [B2; a] become, be made colorful. Mu ra unyà kug
mag-aawit sa nayitklab kun kulurawhun kaáyu nímu ang ákung sinínà, I’ll
look like a night club singer if you make my dress too colorful. agwa
diáwu(←) n cola drinks, or palm toddy or liquor mixed with cola drinks
(humorous).†

kuluríti, kulurítis n rouge. v [AN; b] put rouge or lipstick on.

kulúrum a {1} unlicensed. Kulúrum nga pistúla, Unlicensed pistol.
Kulúrum nga taksi, Cab without a franchise. {2} without a name. Kulúrum
nang klasíha sa manuk, That kind (breed) of chicken has no name. {3} a
dissident group in Surigao in the early twenties, who always wore a red
band around the head. paN- v [A2] hire an unauthorized car for a ride.
Nangulúrum man gánì kug sakay arun mamínus ang plíti, naabiríya hinúun,
I hired an unlicensed cab to minimize the expenses, but it broke down.

kulus a having a kink or a tight loop in it. v [B; b6] get a twist or
kink in it. Nakulus ang hús maung wà kaagi ang túbig, The hose got a
kink in it so the water couldn’t go through it.

kuluskulus n rustling sound made by leaves or paper. v [A; c1] produce
a rustling noise. Nagkuskús ang mga ilagà sa kumúda, The mice were
rustling about in the drawer. Ayawg kuluskulusa (ikuluskulus) ang mga
papil kay sábà, Don’t rustle the paper around. It’s disturbing.

kuluskus = tikuskus.

kulut_1 a curly haired. Kulut kaáyu ang buhuk sa Nigrítu, The Negritos
have very curly hair. v [AB2; b6] for hair to become curly, cause it to
do so. Byutisyan ang mikulut sa íyang buhuk, A beautician gave her a
permanent.

kulut_2 n culotte. v {1} [A; c1] wear, make in a culotte.

kúlut n k.o. wild yam, a hairy climbing vine, having immense poisonous
tubers with yellowish flesh. It is eaten in famine situations after the
poison has been washed away: Dioscorea hispida.

kulyáda_1 v [A; c] bleach wash by putting it under the sun. Kining mga
dikulur ayawg ikulyáda, Now don’t bleach these colored things in the
sun.

kulyáda_2 a windy weather. Dì maáyung ipanágat ug kulyáda, It’s not
good to go fishing during windy weather. v [B6; b6] for it to be windy
weather.

kulyar n animal collar, harness. v [A; b] attach a collar. Kulyari ang
irù arun ilhang tag-iyáhan, Put a collar on the dog so that people will
know it has an owner.

kuma_1 v [AN; c] get a good hold with the hands or feet by holding
tight with the fingers, toes, nails, etc. Kinahanglan mukuma (manguma)
ang ímung tiil kun danglug ang dálan, You should try to get a good grip
on the path with your feet if it’s slippery. Inigsaka nímu sa pangpang,
ikuma giyud ang ímung kamut, When you climb up the cliff, get a good
grip with your hands. a for a child to be troublesome because it likes
to hold on to the mother all the time. (←)_1 n a contest of strength
similar to Indian wrestling using just the hands clamped into each
other instead of the forearms. v [AC; b] wrestle in this way.

kuma_2 a cute and cuddly, such that one would love to pick it up and
squeeze it. v [b6] feel like fondling s.t. cuddly. Gikumhan kung
nagtan-aw sa ímung bátà, I feel like squeezing your baby when I look at
it.

kúma_2 n comma. v [b] put a comma. Kumáhi, ayawg piryúdi, Put a comma,
not a period.

kumadri = kumári.

kumads short for kumadri, used intimately. v [C2] call each other
kumads.

kumagat see kagat.

kumagkù = kumalagkù.

kumàkumà v [B4] speak haltingly because of being flustered. Mukumàkumà
giyud ku ug pangutan-un na sa kurti, I’ll surely get rattled if I am
questioned in court.

kumalagkù (from dakù) n thumb, big toe. v [a12] hit on the thumb or big
toe.

kuman = karun (dialectal).

kumandansiya n headquarters, building where the command of a military
unit is located. Dad-a ni sa kumandansiya, Bring this to the
headquarters.

kumandanti n commandant, commanding officer. v [A; a] be, become a
commandant.

kumandir = kamandir.

kumári n a woman who has one of the following relations to one: she is
the mother, godmother, or mother-in-law of children to whom one also is
a parent or godparent (but not one’s wife). Kumári ku si Kurdaping sa
tulu ka higayun: inahan siya sa ákung kinúgus, ug sa ákung linudhan, ug
sa ákung binaláyi. Aku sad kumári níya, Cordaping is my kumári on three
grounds: she is the mother of my godson, and of another son whom I
sponsored in marriage, and the mother of my daughter-in-law. And for
that reason I am also her kumári. {a} term of address to a person with
whom one has a relation of kumári. {b} friendly term of address to a
woman of one’s own generation with whom one is familiar. Short form:
mari. Kumusta mari? How are you, dear? v [C; ac3] {1} be in the kumári
relationship. Gikakumári ku si Imilda kay siyay nagkúgus sa ákù pung
gikúgus, Imelda became my kumári because she sponsored a baby which I
also sponsored. {2} [A; a] call s.o. by this title. Ayaw kug
kulukumaríha dihà. Dì ka makapangútang nákù, Don’t bother calling me
kumári. You can’t borrow another cent from me. — kumablit n a godmother
who has some clandestine relationship with the father of her godchild.

kumaw a awkward in the way one does s.t. Kumaw kaáyu siyang mugansilyu
kay dì anad, She crochets awkwardly because she is not used to it.
v [B12; b6] do s.t. awkwardly. Kumawan kung musuwat sa wá, I find it
awkward to write with my left hand.

kumayingking = kumingking. see kingking.

kumbabit = kulumbabit.

kumbal n k.o. hammer the ends of the head of which are rounded, used in
moulding metallic sheets into bowl-shaped objects. v [A; a] use this
k.o. hammer.

kumbansíru n musical ensemble having a singer, accordion, string
instruments, and maracas or substitutes therefor, usually playing
Mexican-style songs. v [A13] join this sort of ensemble.

kumbat n army combat boots. v [A13; b6] wear combat shoes.

kumbáti n fight, battle on land. Sígi pa gihápun ang kumbáti sa
Byitnam, The war in Vietnam is still raging. v [C; a] {1} do battle or
come to a physical fight. Nagkakumbáti mi kay íya man kung gitulísuk,
We came to a fight because she wagged her fingers at me. {2} [A; a]
combat a vice or disease. Ang mga ismaglir kinahanglang kumbatíhun sa
átung kagamhánan, The government should combat smuggling. sugà nga di-
barn lantern.

kumbi n closed van of the microbus type.

kumbiksiyun n {1} seriously considered opinion. Unsa may ímung
kumbiksiyun báhin sa átung násud karun? What is your opinion about the
state of our country? {1a} conviction or belief. Way kumbiksiyun siya
kay usáhay mulában sa trabahanti, unyà sa tag-íya, He’s a man of no
conviction. Sometimes he sides with the workers and sometimes with the
owners. {2} conviction of crime. v [A; a3] convict of a crime.

kumbinar v {1} [A; ac] combine things that belong together or
complement each other. Kumbinahun ku ning dalag ug kapi, I’ll combine
yellow and brown colors (in one dress). Maáyung kumbinahan ning
bungbung adúbig táyil, Tiles would go well with this adobe wall.
{2} [A; a] modify s.t. so that it goes with s.t. else. Kumbinahi ning
radiyu pára kuryinti, Adapt this radio to house current. Ang barútu
kumbinahan ug makina, They’ll adapt a motor to put in this boat.

kumbinasiyun n {1} combination of things that complement one another.
Nindut ug kumbinasiyun sa mga kulur ang ímung sinínà, Your dress has a
beautiful combination of colors. Nindut ug kumbinasiyun ang adúbi ug
batu, The rocks and adobe make a good combination. {2} underhanded
agreement. Gibinuángan lang ta. Kumbinasiyun tung awáya, They made a
fool out of us. It was a fixed fight. {2a} illusion produced by some
device or sleight of hand. Dì tu tinúud nga nagkumbitay siya sa
pangpang. Kumbinasiyun lang tu, He isn’t really hanging from a cliff.
It was just a camera trick. {3} combination of a lock. v {1} [A; a2]
rig s.t. up with a combination of things that complement each other.
Kumbinasiyunun nímu ang bilin ug sugang palungpálung, Rig the nativity
scene up with blinking lights. {2} [C; b2] get in cahoots to do s.t.
shady. Kumbinasyuni ang pagadur ug magpatantu ka sa impliyádu, Make an
agreement with the paymaster if you lend money to the employees.

kumbinasyun n {1} combination shot in pool whereby the cue ball hits
another ball into the pocket by deflecting off the target ball. — nga
pinasúgù a combination shot where the target ball knocks the desired
ball into the pocket instead of the cue ball. {2} = kumbinasiyun.
v [c1] make a combination shot in pool.

*kumbíni walay ma- nothing good can be gotten out of [such-and-such] an
action. Wà tay makumbíni ánang súgal, We can derive no good from
gambling.

kumbininsiya n good gotten out of s.t. Unsa may kumbininsyang makúhà
ánang pagsingárig katúlug? What good can you get from staying in bed
all the time?

kumbinsi, kumbinsǐr v [A3P; a1] convince, persuade. Musugut lagi siya
basta ayúhun lag kumbinsǐr, He will consent to it if you do a good job
of convincing him. Kumbinsiha (kumbinsira) giyud ang kurti nga wà kay
sà, You must convince the court that you are innocent. kumbinsídu
a persuaded, convinced. Hustu na. Kumbinsídu na ku, That’s enough. I’m
convinced. v [B12] become convinced.

kumbinsiyun n convention, assembly. v [A1; b3] hold a convention. Mau
nay ílang kumbinsiyúnan karun ang pag-itsapuyra ni Lawril, That is what
they’re having a convention for: to expel Laurel. — kunstituyinti
n Constitutional Convention.†

kumbintu n convent or rectory. v [a2] build a convent or rectory.

kumbinyinti a convenient, affording ease of action or use. Kumbinyinti
kaáyu ang rilu nga dì na lyabíhan, A watch that needs no winding is
very convenient. v [b6] find, consider s.t. convenient.
Gikumbinyintíhan ka uruy ug lakaw sa tarbáhu, You really find walking
to work convenient.

kumbinyu n out-of-court settlement. abugádu di- lawyer with no
business: so called because of the practice for such lawyers to sit
around the courthouse and waylay opposing parties on their way to court
to try to convince them to settle out of court (for which he gets a
small fee). v [C1; a12] {1} settle out of court. Kumbinyúhun ta lang ni
arun way sámuk, Let’s settle it out of court to avoid trouble. {2} get
reconciled, make up in general.

kumbira n a feast, sumptuous party. v [A; b] hold a feast. Kumbirahan
ta ka ug makapasar ka sa burd. I will give you a banquet if you pass
the board exams. paN- v [A2; b6] go to a feast. Pangumbira mu sa ámù,
Come to the feast at my house!

kumbirs = kambirs.

kumbirsiyun n conversion to a religion. Ang kumbirsiyun sa mga
Pilipinhun mauy tingúhà sa mga Kungkistadúris, The goal of the
Conquistadores was the conversion of the Filipinos.

kumbirtibli a convertible clothing that can be used for several
purposes by making small adjustments. Kút nga kumbirtibli nga mahímung
balibalíhun pagsul-ub, A convertible coat that you can wear inside or
rightside out. Pilipína dris nga kumbirtibli. Ug kuháan sa buktun
mahímung sinínà pára sa balay, A convertible Filipina dress with
removable sleeves to use as a house dress.

kumbirtibul n convertible automobile.

kumbirtǐr v {1} [A; a12] convert s.o. to a faith. Makumbirtǐr kahà ang
Múrus sa Kristiyanismu? Do you think the Moros could be converted to
Christianity? {2} [A1; a1] convert to an idea, convince of s.t. new.
Nakumbirtǐr aku paggámit sa Táyid, I was converted to Tide detergent.
{3} convert, change s.t. into s.t. else. Ang dakung balay kumbirtihung
ristawrant, The large house will be turned into a restaurant.

kumbis n flooring in a small boat. May kumbis ang sakayan ibabaw sa
luwang, The boat has a flooring above the bilge. v [A; a] make the
flooring in a small boat.

kumbitatay, kumbitay = kulumbitay.

kumbíti = kumbira.

kumbu n combo, instrumental ensemble. a having clothes of the same
color or cut (like the musicians in a combo). Kumbu ug sinínà ang
kalúha, The twins are wearing identical outfits. v {1} [A13; b6] have
combo music for an affair. Nagkumbu mi sa ámung parti gabíi, We had a
combo for our party last night. {2} [A13] wear clothes of the same
color or style.

kumbù n fritters made from cooking bananas, sliced crosswise, mixed
with a binder of flour, and deep fried. v [A13; a12] make this sort of
banana fritters.

kumbukasiyun, kumbukisyun n program in school held for a special
purpose where speakers in a particular field are invited to speak.
v [A; b6] have, hold a convocation.

kumbulsiyun n convulsions. v [B46; a4] suffer convulsions. Ug
mukumbulsiyun (kumbulsiyunun) ang bátà, dágan dáyun sa uspital, If the
child gets convulsions, rush him to the hospital.

kumbútan = kulabútan.

kumbuy v [A; b] accompany s.o. going s.w. as a protection. Sikyuriti
ang mukumbuy sa pimastir, Security guards will escort the paymaster.
Nabyaan sa barku ang nagkumbuy sa kábaw nga itúmud sa Manílà, The man
who was supposed to go along with the carabaos being shipped to Manila
missed the boat. n protective escort.

kumbúya n {1} partner in a business or ally in war. {2} naval convoy.
v [C; ac3] {1} be, become partners or allies. Nagkumbúya ang duha ka
magsúun sa nigusyu, The two brothers joined their capital together into
a business enterprise. Nagkakumbuya ang Alimanya ug Hapun sa gúbat, The
Germans and Japanese joined forces during the War. Nakigkumbúya ang mga
ismaglir sa mga písi, The smugglers were allied with the P.C. soldiers.
{2} provide convoy protection.

kumi n suckerfish, remora: Remora spp. kumì v [A; b] rub out a smudge,
dirty spot, wetting the whole piece of clothing or just wetting the
dirty spot. Kumian dáyun ang mansa arun dì makataput kaáyu, Wash out
the stain immediately before it gets fixed in the cloth.

kumída n meal. libri — n free meals. Maáyu ang prisuhan kay libri
kumída, Jail is fine because you get free meals.

kumidi a {1} for a person to be funny because of s.t. stupid he did.
Kakumidi bayà nímu. Ngánung nabyaan ka sa barku? What a dope! Why did
you miss the boat? {2} comedy show. v [A3] do s.t. stupid in a funny
way. Nagkumidi ka mag suruysúruy nga nagkampat nang nawung mu sa
mik-ap, What a funny sight it is to see you going around with your face
spattered with make-up.

kumídiya v [A; b] {1} play a joke on, tease s.o. with s.t. fabricated.
Ayawg hílak. Nagkumídiya ra bítaw ku, Don’t cry. I was only joking.
Kumidiyáhi siyag itsa ug dinamíta nga dì mubutu, Play a joke on him by
throwing a stick of dynamite at him that won’t go off. {2} bluff s.o.
Kumidiyáhi ang bátà nga dì ta mulakaw arun dì mukúyug, Fool the child
into thinking that we aren’t going out so he won’t want to come with
us. {3} [b(1)] for supernatural beings to play a prank or cause harm to
s.o. Nabúrut ang íyang tiyan kay gikumidiyáhan sa dílì ingun nátù, His
stomach swelled because the spirits played a practical joke on him.
n {1} joke played on s.o. {2} s.t. bad that happens to one brought on
by a supernatural being. -nti a given to playing jokes or doing things
to make people laugh. n minor character in a play or movie whose role
is to make people laugh. v [A13; a2] become a comedian or a person who
does things to make people laugh. Angayan kang magkumidiyanti kay muut
kag nawung, You’d make a good comedian because you’ve got a funny face.

kumidur n dining room in a house. v [a12] make into a dining room.

kumiks n comics.

kumilik n Comelec, acronym for the Commission on Elections.

kumingking see kingking.

kumintang n periwinkle, a small ornamental grown as a border plant and
for its flowers: Catharantus roseus.

kumintarista n newspaper, radio commentator. v [B16; c1] be, become a
commentator.

kumintaryu n comment, observation on s.t. v [A; c] say s.t. about s.t.
Wà ku manaway ígù lang kung nagkumintaryu, I am not criticizing. I’m
just making a comment. Wà kuy ikakumintaryu báhin sa ímung pamulitika,
I have no comment to make about your politics.

kumintítur n radio, newspaper commentator. v [B16; a2] be, become a
radio commentator.

kumirsiyal n commercial on radio or TV. a {1} done on a large scale for
commercial purposes. Pamuhig bábuy nga kumirsiyal, Raising pigs
commercially. {2} area where commerce is carried out. Distrítu (nga)
kumirsiyal, The commercial district. v [A13] broadcast commercials.

kumirsiyu n {1} commerce, business. Gipuhúnan dáyun níyag kumirsiyu ang
íyang salapì, He immediately invested his money in business. Ang
iskuyláhan nahímù nang kumirsiyu, The school has been turned into a
business enterprise. {2} course in business or commerce. v [AN; c1] be
engaged in business. Nangumirsiyu siyag panaptun, He is engaged in the
textile business. Babáyi íyang gikumirsiyu, Prostitution was his
business.

kumirsyanti n businessman. a like a businessman in dealings.
Kumirsyanti kaáyung tawhána. Bísan igsúun paganansiyáhan ug dakù, He is
a real businessman. He even makes a profit on his brother. v [B156;
a12] be a businessman.

kumisiyun, kumisyun n {1} commission on s.t. sold. {2} commission, a
group of people appointed by the government for certain duties.
Kumisiyun Iliktural, Commission on Elections. {3} officer’s commission.
v {1} [A12; c] get a commission. Nakakumisiyun ku sa bakpi nga ákung
gihíkay, I got a commission on the back pay claim that I saw through.
{2} [A; b5] commission an officer. -ir(→), -ádu n commissioner, one in
charge of a certain government department or of a colony.

kumíta n comet.

kumiti, kumíti, kumitíba n committee. v [A13; c1] organize into a
committee.

kumitir v [A; c1] commit oneself or s.t. Dì ku mukumitir sa ákung
kaugalíngun ánang sabúta, I won’t commit myself to that agreement. Ayaw
ikumitir ang primírung batalyun kay irisirba, Don’t commit the first
battalion because it is in reserve.

kumkum v {1} [A; c1] hold s.t. in the hand with the palm closed.
Kumkúma (ikumkum) pag-áyu ang sinsilyu arun dì mawā̀, Hold the change
tightly in your hand so you won’t lose it. {2} [A; a12] get possession
of s.t. Ang kadaúgan nga karun ílang gikumkum nakúhà sa limbung,
Victory is in their hands now, but it is an ill-gotten one. Kun muabut
kanang higayúna, kumkúma dáyun kay dì na nà mubálik, When the chance
comes, grasp it and hold onto it, for it will not come back again. — ug
kamut a tight-fisted. Kumkum kaáyug kamut. Asin ray isulà, He’s
terribly tight-fisted. He won’t eat anything but salt with his rice.
n a fistful. Paghakup ug usa ka kumkum nga balas, Take a handful of
sand. pa- v [A; a1] let a baptized child hold an amount as a baptismal
gift from his godfather or godmother who failed to bring a gift. Ákù
lang pakumkúmun ug singku písus ang ákung kinúgus kay wà man kuy dáng
rigálu, I’ll let my godchild hold five pesos as a baptismal gift
because I didn’t bring any gifts.

kumnay name given to nosefishes: Naso spp.

kumpabli v [A2; b(1)] admit one’s guilt, defeat. Dì ku mukumpabli nga
aku nasayup, I won’t admit that I was wrong. Dì nátù kumpablíhan ang
íyang kadaúgan kay may tíkas, We won’t concede his victory because
there was trickery involved.

kumpad v [A; a1] toy, play around with s.t. with the fingers. Kumpárun
sa bátà ang íyang pagkáun ug pasagdan, The child will play with his
food if he is left alone.

kumpadri = kumpári.

kumpang n k.o. disease of pigs, manifested by a foul odor emanating
from the mouth and giving a yellow color to the fat. v [a4] get
kumpang. -un(→) a sick with kumpang.

kumpaníya n {1} business establishment. Sákup siya sa usa ka mauswágung
kumpaníya, He is a member of a prosperous company. {2} business
partners. Kumpaníya sila niadtu piru nagbúlag ug nigusyu, They used to
be business partners but now they have split their business.
{2a} habitual associate. Pirmi nákù siyang kumpaníya sa pagpangharána,
He is always with me when we go serenading. {3} military company. v [C;
ac3] {1} be partners or associates in business. Nagkumpaníya sila
niánang ílang tindáhan, They are partners in that store. Gikumpaniyáhan
sa mag-ágaw ang pagpalit sa yútà, The cousins bought the land as
co-partners. {2} be a constant companion or associate.

kumpanya = kampanya.

kumpanyíra = kumpanyíru (female).

kumpanyíru n term of address to intimates, used esp. among lawyers.
Kumpanyíru, nauswag ang átung bista, Our hearing has been postponed,
friend.

kumpara, kumparar v [AC2; ac] compare with. Ug kumparahun kamung duha,
wà kay dag-anan, If you two are compared, you have no chance of
winning. Sayun ni ikumparar niadtu, This is easy compared to that.
kumparasiyun n comparison, act of comparison. Way kumparasiyun nang
duha, The two have no comparison. Sa ákung kumparasiyun lugum tung usa,
As I look at them, one is darker than the other.

kumpári n {1} a male who has one of the following relations to one: he
is either the father, godfather, or father-in-law of children to whom
one also is a parent (but not one’s husband). {2} term of address to a
person with whom one has this relation or general term of address to
s.o. of one’s own age with whom one feels intimate. short form: pari.
v {1} [C; ac3] be in this relationship. {2} [A1; a] call s.o. kumpári.

kumparsa n {1} ensemble of plucked, stringed instruments. {2} folk
dance interlude at a dance. {2a} folk dance pageant, presented as a
contest among groups in a school or among different schools.
v {1} [A13; b(1)] have music from a string band. {2} [A1; b(1)] present
this sort of dance pageant.

kumpas_1 a {1} being in harmony or correct timing with s.t. else.
Mikanta siya kumpas sa dúyug, She sang in time to the accompaniment.
{2} deliberate, slow, and poised in action. Kaanindut niánang bayhána,
kumpas kaáyu manlihuklihuk, That girl is very nice; she moves slowly
and gracefully. Kumpas pinadulut ang íyang sinultihan, She is slow and
careful in speech. n {1} beat, time. Dílì ku makaagpas sa kumpas
niánang sunatáha, I cannot catch onto the tempo of that song. {2} acts,
mannerism. Mu ra man nà siyag buang sa íyang mga kumpas, She seems like
a mad woman, the way she acts. kuntra — out of rhythm or tempo. Kuntra
kumpas ang ímung sinayawan, You are not dancing in time to the music.
v {1} [AC; c1] act or do s.t. in harmony or time. Mikumpas siya
pagpakpak uban sa sunáta, She clapped in time to the music. Nagkumpas
ang duha ka bátà ug singgit, The two children shrieked in unison.
{2} [B; a] be, become deliberate and posed in action, cause s.t. to be
slow and deliberate. Mikumpas ang íyang tíngug (mikumpas siya sa íyang
tíngug) sa nasukù na ku, Her voice became soft and measured as I grew
angrier and angrier. Ug dì ka magkumpas, mahúlug ka, If you aren’t slow
and deliberate, you’ll fall. {3} [C2; b] keep up with what s.o. else
does. Makigkumpas man gud ning ákung anak ug unsay buhátun sa mga anak
sa dátù, This child of mine wants to do whatever the rich people’s
children do.

kumpas_2 n compass for determining directions or for drawing circles.

kumpay_1 n k.o. grass growing wild or cultivated in wet places for hay:
Panicum maximum. Unsáun pa ang kumpay ug patay na ang kabáyù, Locking
the barn door after the horse has been stolen. (Lit. What are they
going to do with the hay after the horse is dead?) v [AN; a] gather
s.t. for animal fodder. Humana silag pananggì, kumpáyun na nátù ang
mais nga sinanggian, The harvest is over. Let’s gather the cornstalks
to feed the water buffaloes. -an n a field with hay.

kumpayut v [AN; b] cling to s.t. hanging from it with or without
support from below. Nagkumpayut ang ubang pasahíru kay kargádu ang
trák, Some passengers clung to the sides because the truck was
overloaded. Gikumpayútan siya sa íyang asáwa kay dì siya pagikánun, His
wife clung to him because she didn’t want him to leave.

kumpì a {1} limping in one’s walk because of an injury or permanent
defect in the legs. Lúgus makadágan ang bátà nga kumpì, The lame child
can hardly run. {2} = kimpì. v [B6; b6c1] walk with a limp. Mikumpì
(nakumpì) ang íyang linaktan tungud sa piang, He walks with a limp
because he has a sprained ankle.

kumpidinsiyal n confidential. Kumpidinsiyal ni. Ayawg isábà ug láin,
This is in complete confidence. Don’t tell anyone.

kumpirinsiya n {1} conference. {2} organization of local Protestant
churches of the same denomination. v [C; b3] hold a conference.
Nagkumpirinsiya ang mga myimbru sa búrd, The board members are holding
a conference.

kumpirma n confirmation, a religious rite. v [A; b(1)] {1} perform
confirmation rites. {2} confirm an appointment or certify a law. Dílì
mukumpirma ang prisidinti sa íyang apuwintmint, The president won’t
confirm his appointment. Kumpirmahan na gánì sa mayur ang urdinansa
anhà pa nà muipiktu, As soon as the mayor certifies his approval, the
ordinance will take effect. -du a confirmed, having received the
sacrament of Confirmation. -siyun(→) n {1} confirmation in a religion.
{2} confirmation of an appointment or ratification of a law.

kumpisal v [A; c] {1} go to confession. Kinahanglang mukumpisal úsà
mukaláwat, One should go to confession before taking Holy Communion.
{2} confess to a crime. Mikumpisal ra ang mamumúnù, The murderer
finally confessed. pa- v [A; a] hear confession. Túa ang párì sa
uspital magpakumpisal sa mga masakitun, The priest is in the hospital
hearing confession for the patients. -an(←), kumpisinaryu,
kumpisinaryuhan n confessional box. paN-, paN-(←) n act of confessing
in church.†

kumpisinaryu see kumpisal.

kumpiskǎr v [A; a2] confiscate. Gikumpiskǎr ang tíbi kay wà siya
makadata, His TV was confiscated because he didn’t keep up the
payments. kumpiskádu n s.t. that has been confiscated. Gibaligyà ang
mga sigarilyung kumpiskádu, They sold the confiscated cigarettes.
kumpiskadur n one whose job is to confiscate things. v [B156] be,
become a confiscator.

kumpisur n priest who hears confession and gives absolution.

kumpisyun n {1} confession of guilt. {2} the sacrament of confession in
church. v [A2N; b8] go to confession. Kausa ra ku mukumpisyun
(mangumpisyun) sa usa ka túig, I go to confession only once a year. pa-
v [A3; b] hear confession. -aryu = kumpisinaryu. see kumpisal.

kumpit_1 n k.o. full-bodied boat with a deep draft and without
outriggers, wider than other native boats. They are used for long
distance travel, esp. by Muslims in carrying on trade. v [A; ac]
travel, bring by kumpit.

kumpit_2 v [A; a] squeeze s.t. between two long things to hold it.
Nagkumpit siya sa íyang pinangkù, She held her hair bun in place with a
hairclip. Kumpíta pagkúhà ang inánag mais, Take the roasted corn with
tongs. Ikumpit kining duha ka lipak pagpunit sa ilagà, Pick up the rat
with these two sticks. Gikumpítan sa asáwa ang láwas sa bána, The wife
held her husband’s body firmly with her legs. n {1} hairclip.
{2} tongs. {3} chopsticks.

kumpitinsiya n competition or competitor. Mahal ning tindahána kay way
kumpitinsiya, This store is expensive because there are no competitors.
v {1} [AC; b] be competing. Mukumpitinsiya man nímu nang bag-ung
istudiyanti, The new student is going to give you competition. Sa
nigusyu ra sila nagkakumpitinsiya, They are rivals in business only.
Gikumpitinsiyáhan ang Amirika sa Rusya sa pag-adtu sa búwan, Russia
competed against America to get to the moon. {2} [b] outshine. Nasukù
siya kay nakumpitinsiyahan (nakumpitinsiyaan) man ang bag-u níyang
sinínà, She got mad because s.o. else outshone her in her new dress.

kumpítis n confetti.

kumpiyansa n confidence in s.o. or oneself. Wà kuy kumpiyansa sa táwu
nga bakákun, I have no confidence in a liar. a confident. Napildi siya
kay kumpiyansa ra kaáyu, He lost because he was so over-confident.
v {1} [A; b] have trust or confidence in oneself or s.o. Nagkumpiyansa
siyang makadaug, maung wà na magpraktis, He was sure he could win so he
didn’t practice. {2} [A; c] entrust s.t. to s.o. Makumpiyansahan kahà
nà siyag sikrítu? Do you think we can trust her with a secret? Ayawg
ikumpiyansa nang ímung anak sa míd, Do not entrust your child to your
maid. abúsu di- breach of confidence or of trust. Ug isugílun nímu ang
sikrítu, kanà abúsu dikumpiyansa, If you tell the secret, that will be
a breach of confidence. Ang pagkawkaw mu sa sáping gibílin ku nímu mauy
abúsu dikumpiyansa, It was a breach of trust for you to touch the money
that had been left with you.

kumpli a {1} finish with one’s service or study. Ang tanan kung mga
bátà kumpli na sa ílang pagtuun, All my children have completed their
studies now. {2} completely ruined, spoiled beyond use. Mau pay pingag
ang pinggan, ímu pung gibuak, kumpli na, The plate may have been
chipped, but it was still useful. Now you broke it. So that’s it.
{3} all done, finished. Kumpli na ang bayranan sa balay, My payments on
the house are complete now. v {1} [A] finish a term, one’s study.
Magpaábut lang ku hangtud makakumpli ku sa ákung sirbisyu, I’ll wait
until I can complete my service. {1a} [A2; b6] retire from the armed
forces. Kapitan ang ranggung íyang gikumplihan, He retired a captain.
{2} [a12] be completely ruined beyond use. Kumplíha na lang nà arun
kailisdag bag-u, Finish it off, why don’t you, so we have to buy a new
one. n = kumplianyu.

kumplianyu n birthday. v [A13; b] hold a birthday party. Káda túig
kumplianyúhan giyud siya sa íyang mga ginikánan, Every year her parents
give her a birthday party. paN- v [A2] attend a birthday party.

kumplikádu a complicated, difficult to untangle or understand. Mas
kumplikádu ang makina sa mutursiklu kay sa muturbáyik, The motorcycle
has a more complicated motor than a motorbike. Kumplikádu ning kasúha,
This is a complicated court case. v [B1245] be, become complicated.

kumplikar v [B] for a disease to have complications. Mikumplikar
(nakumplikar) ang íyang plú ngadtus íyang kasingkásing, His flu
developed complications of the heart. kumplikasiyun n complication in a
sickness.

kumplimintu n {1} s.t. said or done out of respect or good manners.
Kumplimintu lang tung íyang pagdápit nímu kay silíngan man mu, She
invited you out of courtesy because you’re her neighbor. Bísan wà nay
gustu, gibaslan ku ang suwat ágig kumplimintu, Even though I don’t like
her any more, I answered her letter for politeness’ sake.
{2} compliment, s.t. said in admiration or praise. v {1} [A; b(1)] say
or do s.t. insincere out of politeness. Mukumplimintu lang kug tambung
sa íyang parti, I’ll just attend his party out of courtesy. {2} [A2]
say s.t. in admiration or praise. Mikumplimintu siya nakù sa bag-u kung
hirdu, She complimented me on my new hairdo.

kumplín v [A2; c6] complain about one’s grades in school. Kun wà ka
mahimuut sa ímung mga grádu, ngánung dì ka man mukumplin? If you aren’t
satisfied with your grades why don’t you complain?

kumplítu a complete, having s.t. complete. Kumplítu ang iskuyláhan sa
mga kasangkápan, Our school is completely equipped. Kumplítu ang ákung
gamitun sa pamanday, My tools for carpentry are complete. Kumplítu ta
sa impliyádu, We have our full contingent of employees. Ang búhat nga
kumplítu ihátag sa maistru, All papers that are complete should be
turned in to the teacher. v [AB12; a] be, become complete, make s.t.
complete. Mukumplítu kug báyad sa matrikula, I’ll pay the tuition fees
in full. Kining istáma mauy mukumplítu sa ákung kuliksiyun, This stamp
will make my collection complete. Nagkakumplítu na ang ngípun sa bátà,
The child’s teeth are almost complete. Mu ray ikakumplítu námù ug ma
Pasku, The only time the whole family can get together is on Christmas.

kumplut n {1} conspirator. Ang kahíru usa sa mga kumplut sa pangílad sa
sápì, The cashier was one of the people who plotted to swindle the
money. {2} person with whom one is intimate such that arrangements can
be made on favored terms. Giprumut siya kay kumplut man sa manidyǐr, He
was promoted because he had made especial arrangements with the
manager. v [C] {1} conspire. Nakigkumplut ang ismaglir sa pulis sa
pagpalusut sa mga sigarilyung ismágul, The smuggler connived with the
policeman to let in his smuggled cigarettes. {2} become intimate with
s.o. to make special illegal arrangements.

kumpra v [AN; a] buy s.t. in quantity, go shopping. Nakapangumpra ka na
bag pára sa ímung kumbira? Have you bought the things for your party?
Kumpráha ning tanang nía sa lista, Buy all the things on this list.
n things bought. Unsa may ímung kumpra? What things did you buy?
-dur(→) n buyer, dealer in some commodity. Mga kumpradur sa kupras,
Dealers in copra. v [A13] become a dealer. see also malapí.

kumprumísu n {1} committal to s.t. onerous or objectionable from which
there is no turning back. {2} spouse or family as one’s responsibility.
Karun nga may kumprumísu ka na sa ímung kinabúhì, pagbinuutan na, Now
that you’re married, you must resolve to be good. v [A; a] be committed
to such objectionable situations. Nagkumprumísu nákù ning pagkapalíta
sa awtu kay dì kung kaabut sa dáta, It put me in a tight fix to buy
this car because I can’t meet the installments. Ayawg paságad ug pirma
kay tingálig makumprumísu ka, Don’t sign anything recklessly. It might
get you into hot water. Nakumprumísu ku pagbúrd sa ákung bátà, I got
myself into debt when my son took the bar exams.

kumprumitíbu = kumprumitídu. see kumprumitir.

kumprumitir v [A2; c] promise, pledge. Mikumprumitir ku nga mubáyad sa
tápus búlan, I pledged to pay at the end of the month. Gikumprumitir na
níya ang íyang kasingkásing sa láing táwu, She has already pledged her
heart to another man. kumprumitídu a bound, committed to do s.t.

kumprunta v {1} [A2N; c] ask or seek one’s opinion or advice on s.t.
Mikumprunta (nangumprunta) na mig abugádu íning ámung kásu, We
consulted a lawyer about our case. Ngánung dì man nímu ikumprunta nang
prublimáha sa ímung kumpisur? Why don’t you seek the advice of your
father confessor regarding that problem? {2} [A; a] sound s.o. out to
see how he feels about s.t. Kumpruntaha si Tátay ug úyun ba siyang
iprinda ang yútà, Ask father’s opinion if he will go along with
mortgaging the land.

kumpruntǎr v [A12; c] set a timepiece. Ikumpruntǎr ang rilu sa radiyu,
Set your watch by the radio.

kumpuni, kumpunir v [A; abc] do make-shift repairs. Átù lang ning
kumpunihun kay way bag-ung pyísa, We’ll just do make-shift repairs
because we don’t have new spare parts. Kumpunihan lang ug pasta ang
bangag sa tangu, Just put a temporary filling in this tooth. Ikumpunir
lang ug tápak ning playwud sa bungbung, Just fix this wall with a piece
of plywood.

kumpurmi {1} depending on, in accordance with. Ang gidak-ung palitun
kumpurmi lang sa sukud, The size to buy depends on her measurements.
‘Unsay ákung ihátag nímu?’—‘Aw, kumpurmi lang,’ ‘What shall I give
you?’—‘Oh, it depends on you (whatever you have).’ {1a} according to
what is necessary. Nanghípus na sila sa ílang mga kumpurmi lang nga
dad-unun, They were packing whatever it was that they used to take.
Isigbáyad sila kumpurmi sa ílang nakúhà, Each one paid according to the
amount he had borrowed. {1b} whatever happens to be at hand, whatever
comes into the head. Kumpurmi lay pangayúun ning batáa, This child asks
for whatever enters his head. Kumpurmi sa íyang makítà íyang palitun,
He buys whatever he sees. {1b1} different kinds or sorts. Kumpurmi lang
ang ílang gipamalit sa Karbun, They bought all different things in the
market. {1b2} nanimáhung — an odor to be so foul that words cannot
describe it (lit. smells like anything and everything bad). {2} be in
agreement. Bisag kaáway ta apan kumpurmi ku sa ímung idíya, We may be
enemies, but I agree with your ideas. Kumpurmi ka ba nga sa Sabadu na
lang ta mangadtu? Is it all right with you if we go on Saturday
instead? {3} same as. Unsa ka dakù ang lungag nga tamnan ug ságing?
Kumpurmi sa tamnan ug lubi, How large a hole do we make for planting
bananas? The same size as the hole for planting coconut trees. ‘Pila ka
mitrus nga panaptun ang ímung palitun?’—‘Kumpurmi sa imúha,’ ‘How many
meters of cloth will you buy?’—‘The same as what you buy.’ {4} now look
who’s talking. ‘Túa ag kawatan!’—‘Kumpurmi lag kinsay nadakpan,’ ‘There
you are, you thief!’—‘Look who’s talking? Who was arrested, anyway, me
or you?’ Unsay dakug káun? Kumpurmig kinsay nakahurut ug usa ka
bandihádu nátù! What do you mean eating too much! Look which one of us
finished a whole platter off? v [A12] be agreeable. Ang mga táwu nga
dílì mukumpurmi sa súgù silútan, Whoever doesn’t agree to follow the
orders will be punished. Wà siya mukumpurmi sa plánu, He was not
agreeable to the plan.

kumpurtabli a comfortable. Kumpurtabli ning síya, This chair is
comfortable. Kumpurtabli ílang kahimtang, They are in comfortable
circumstances. Kumpurtabli ning sinináa. Dílì hugut, dílì galhà, This
is a comfortable dress. It’s not tight, and it’s not hot. v [B2] be
comfortable.

kumpúsir n composer. v [B156] become a composer.

kumpusisyun n {1} a musical composition. Ang átung nasudnung áwit
kumpusisyun ni Hulyan Pilípi, Our national song was composed by Julian
Felipe. {2} composition book. {3} written theme. v [A1] write a
composition.

kumpusitur disapátus n shoemaker.

kumpúsu n ballad in a minor key treating of love or heroism. It is
composed of stanzas of four lines of no set number of syllables and
which may have one or two syllables more than the song allows, but at
least two of which must be rhymed. The melody may be the same
throughout the kumpúsu or two melodies may be alternate, the second
modulated four notes higher than the initial. v [A; b6] compose this
sort of ballad.

kúmu {1} — [noun, adjective] as one in [such-and-such] a capacity. Kúmu
magulang siya nímu, mutáhud giyud ka níya, As your older brother, you
must obey him. Kúmu gwápa, daghang mulíngì iniglabay níya, Being
beautiful, many people turn to look at her as she passes by. {2} — kay
since, seeing that. Kúmu kay girikumindar kag pulitiku, nakulukar ka
na, Because a politician recommended you, you got placed in a job. Kúmu
ba kay prisidinti siya sa kapunúngan, dílì siya muámut? Just because he
is the president of the organization, he doesn’t contribute? {3} may,
way — there is s.t. (nothing) as good as ... May kúmu pa bang basahun
ingun sa Bisayà? Is there any magazine as good to read as the Bisaya?
Way kúmu ning dúna tay amígu sa Kustum, There’s nothing as good as
having a friend in the Customs Bureau.

kúmù n {1} clenched fist. {2} interjection indicating a brusque
rejection of one’s suggestion: go to hell! ‘Ikay manghúgas run,
ha?’—‘Kúmù!’ ‘You wash the dishes today, OK?’—‘Drop dead, will you?’
v [A1N; ac1] clench one’s fist, keep s.t. tightly in one’s palm.
Nangúmù siya sa hilabihang kalágut, He clenched his fists in anger.
Kumúa nang kindi arun dì makítà, Keep the candy in your fist so that no
one can see it. Kumúa (ikúmù) ang ímung kamut, Clench your fists. -in-
= kúmù, n. -in-ay v [C23] clench fists at each other.

kumuda, kumúda n drawer. Túa sa kumúda sa ákung lamísa, It’s in the
drawer in my table.

kumudkumud v [A; b3c5] mumble under one’s breath in complaint.
Mukumudkumud nà siyag sugúun, She mumbles under her breath when she is
told to do s.t. Gamay ra nang trabahúang ikakumudkumud, That work is
too light to grumble about. kumudkumuran a tending to mumble under
one’s breath.

kumúhuy = kalamúhuy.

kumulga, kumulgǎr v [AN; b6] take Holy Communion. Adlaw-adlaw siya
mukumulga, She takes Communion daily. -nti n one who takes Holy
Communion. -siyun n Holy Communion.

kumun a {1} common, ordinary. Kumun kaáyu nà dinhi. Daghan man gud,
That’s awfully common here. There is so many of them. {2} ordinary, not
special. Kumun kaáyung pagkáun, Very ordinary food. {3} shared equally
among all the members of a group. Kining yutáa wà pa mabáhin. Kumun
kini, This land hasn’t been divided yet. It belongs to everyone in the
family. Mísa karun nga kumun álang sa tanang kalag sa purgaturyu, This
is a common mass for all souls in purgatory. v {1} [B126; a2] become
common. Dílì madúgay makumun na sab ang tag-as nga sanínà, It won’t be
long before long dresses get to be a common sight. {2} [c1] make s.t.
common property, shared by many in a group. Ug way tistamintu, makumun
ang kabílin, If there is no will, the inheritance becomes common
property. sintídu — n common sense.

kúmun v {1} [A; a12] crumple s.t. up into a ball, put s.t. that can be
crumpled s.w. carelessly without folding it or smoothing it out. Kumúna
na lang nang mga sinínà sa malíta, Just throw those dresses into the
suitcase any old way. Ayaw kumúna nang papil kay magámit pa ang luyu,
Don’t crumple up those papers because we can still use the back.
{2} [A; a2] wrap s.t. up by just crumpling the wrapper. Kumúna lang ang
mga hirpin sa panyù, Just wrap up the hairpins in the handkerchief.
{3} [A; a] hold s.t. in the fist. Kumúna pag-áyu ang kwarta arun dì
mahúlug, Hold the money tightly in your fist so it won’t fall.

kumunal n for public use. Ang kasilyas sa mirkádu kumunal, The comfort
stations in the market are for public use.

kumungkumung = alikúmù.

kumunikasiyun n communication.

kumunismu n communism.

kumunista n communist. a ill-mannered, grasping. Kumunista ka giyud.
Bísag gibahínan, nangílug pa giyud, What a grasping sort you are. You
have been given your share, but you still want s.o. else’s share!
v [B1; a12] be, become a communist. Ug makumunista ning nasúra,
magkumunista sab ku, If this country goes communist, I’ll become a
communist, too.

kumunwilt n commonwealth. v [B126] become a commonwealth.

kumunyun n the sacrament of Holy Communion. v {1} [AN; c] receive Holy
Communion. {2} [A1] give communion. primir, primíra — n {1} first
communion. {2} first communicants. -an(→) n communion rail.

kumurga = kumulga. -nti = kumulganti.

kúmus_1 = kulámus.

kúmus_2, kum-us = gum-us.

kumusta how is (was, are, etc.). Kumusta ka? How are you? Kumusta ang
ímung pagbisíta? How was your visit? Kumusta ang ímung anak? Nakatápus
na ba sa íyang pagtuun? How is your child? Has he finished his studies
now? v [AC; a1] greet s.o. upon his arrival. Mukumusta ku sa bag-ung
abut, I’ll greet the new arrivals. paN- v [A2; a1] {1} ask how s.o. is,
send regards. Aníay íyang sulat nangumusta kanátung tanan, Here’s a
letter from him asking how we all are. Ipangumusta lang kung Pápa mu,
Give your father my regards. {2} = kumusta. pangumustahay n exchange of
greetings upon arrival. -mus friendly greeting to s.o. familiar, after
not meeting for some time.

kúmut v [AN; ab2] {1} lay hands on any part of the body including the
hair and squeezing or clawing at it. Kumútun ku nang nawung mu, I’ll
claw your face. {2} crumple in the hands. Kumúta ang papil úsà ilábay,
Crumple the paper before throwing it away. Kalamì rang kumútun sa bátà,
How I would love to squeeze that chubby baby. {3} extract the juice of
s.t. by squeezing. Akuy mukúmut sa amirul nga bugas, I’ll get starch
for the laundry by squeezing the cooked rice. {3a} [A; b] put salt on
s.t. and squeeze it to remove undesirable properties in the juice.
Kumúti ug asin ang paliya arun makúhà ang pait, Squeeze the bitter
vegetable together with salt to remove its bitter taste. {4} wash small
pieces of clothing in a basin. Kumúti ang mga kamisin sa kabatáan, Wash
out the children’s undershirts. {5} [A2; a12] afflict with anguish,
grief, etc. Ang mapait níyang mga púlung mikúmut sa íyang kasingkásing,
His bitter words clawed at her heart.

kum-ut = gum-ut.

kun {1} if. Kun mau kanà, iitsa ta ikaw sa kaláyu, If that is the case,
I will toss you into the fire. Kun maarang, adtu na lang sa prusintu
pangatarúngan, Please (lit. if it is all right), explain at the
precinct. Ang ákung ngálan si Husi Krus kun adúnay isúgù, My name is
Joe Cruz. At your service (lit. if you have anything to command). Kun
wà pa nímu iúlì ang awtu, ikíha ta ka, If you hadn’t returned the car,
I would have filed a case against you. {1a} when [so-and-so] happens.
Kun mulakaw na siya pahibalua ku, When he goes, tell me. Kun ting-init
dinhi, ínit giyud, During the hot season it is really hot. {1b} if,
whether. Pangutan-a si Máma mu kun haúnun na ba ring kík, Ask your
Mother if I should take the cake out of the oven. {2} — dílì {2a} if
not. {2b} except. Way láin makasulbad sa ákung suliran kun dílì ikaw,
No one can solve my problem except you. {2c} dílì (walà) lang ... kun
dì {2c1} not only ... but also. Wà lang gánì siya magmuru nákù, kun dì
milingiw pa giyud, He not only frowned at me but even turned his back
to me. {2c2} not ... but rather. Sa ílang dríl dílì lámang káhuy ang
gigámit kun dílì ripli giyud, In their drill they did not use wooden
guns but rather real rifles. {3} expression to introduce an explanatory
phrase: that is to say. Ang mga gradwádu karun walay kadásig sa pagtuun
kun sa pagtukì sa kinaadman, The recent graduates have no enthusiasm
for study that is to say, to delve into knowledge.

kún = kúlun_1.

kúna n crib.

kúnan n conant coins, coins issued by the American occupation
authorities for circulation in the Philippines during the period before
the Commonwealth.

kúnat a being tough and slightly elastic, difficult to chew. Kúnat ang
intiriyur sa bisiklíta, A bicycle tube is tough and slightly elastic.
Kúnat ang tiratíra, Taffy is very tough and hard to chew. v {1} [B; b6]
turn out to be tough and difficult to chew. Way kaláki ang inasal nga
magkúnat ang pánit, Roast pig is no good if the skin is tough. {2} [A;
a] tweak and pull. Kunáta ang dunggan sa inasal, Twist off the roast
pig’s ear.

kúnay v = kunaykúnay. kunaykúnay v [A; a] {1} play around with a mass
of s.t. with the hands. Ang bátà nagkalingawg kunaykúnay sa lápuk, The
child is having fun with the mud. {2} fondle, stroke. Ganáhan
mukunaykúnay si Tátay sa íyang hiniktan, Father likes to fondle his
fighting cock. Gikunaykúnay sa irù ang íyang mga ituy, The dog is
fondling its puppies. {3} take good care of s.t. Ug dúna kay kwarta,
kunaykunáyun ka sa mga narsis, If you have money, the nurses will give
you first class service.

kundádu see kundi.

kundas v [A2N; b] snarl at s.o. as if about to charge at him. Mikundas
(nangundas) ang irù sa dihang natumban ang íyang íkug, The dog snarled
when I stepped on its tail.

kundat v {1} [AC12; b] play together vigorously, usually involving
physical contact. Ganáhan siyang mukundat sa mga bátà, He likes to
engage in horseplay with the children. Gustung makigkundat ang irù sa
bátà, The dog wants to play with the boy. {2} [A; b6] move about
noisily, in a fluttering or loud way, unbecoming to a woman. Mikundat
dáyun ang mga silbidúra pag-abut sa ílang mga súkì, The bar waitresses
immediately flirted and acted noisily when their customers arrived.
Gikundátan kaáyu ku sa íyang sinayawan, I consider her way of dancing
boisterous and unbecoming. n horseplay, boisterous actions. -an(→)
a moving about in an exuberant, boisterous way, unbecoming to a woman.
v [B12] get to have these characteristics of behavior. Nakundatan na
kaáyu ang ámung míd, Our maid has become flirtatious now.

kundi n count. v [B156; a12] be, become a count. Gustu ka bang magkundi
sa átung dráma? Would you like to play the count in our drama? kundádu
n area ruled over by a count. -sa n countess. v [B156; a12] be, become
a countess.

kundim v [AN; c1] condemn s.t. as unfit for use. Ang layinman mauy
nagkundim íning kuniksiyúna kay dilikádu, The lineman declared this
connection unfit for use because it’s dangerous. Ang mga libru lang nga
dunut mauy kundima (ikundim), Declare the worn-out books unfit for use.
a declared unfit.

kundíman_1 n k.o. red cotton cloth of a cheap variety, commonly used
for pillows. v [A13] wear clothes made of kundíman cloth.

kundíman_2 n k.o. love song of a traditional genre.

kundina v [A; a12] treat s.o. with condescension and contempt. Ayaw
siya kundinaha nga usa ka patay gútum, Don’t look down on him for being
extremely poor.

kundína n punishment, imprisonment for heavy offenses. Napúlù ka túig
ang kundína sa binilanggù, The prisoner was sentenced to ten years.
v [A; c] pass a sentence for a heavy crime. Nakakundína na siyag
daghan, He has already sentenced many people to heavy punishment.

kundinǎr v {1} [a3] be condemned by God to eternal wandering.
Magbalikbálik ang kalag nga nakundinar, A restless soul returns and
haunts his place. {2} [A3; a12] be carried by bad influence. Kun dílì
pa ikaw mauy nagkundinar nákù dì untà ku maingun niíni karun, If it had
not been for your bad influence, I wouldn’t be what I am now.
Kundinahun ka na sab ánang tawhána sa súgal ug ínum, That
good-for-nothing fellow will again drag you to gambling and drinking.
{3} [A; b] condemn or convict a prisoner to severe punishment. Tulu ka
binilanggù gikundinahan sa kamatáyun, Three prisoners were condemned to
die. kundinádu n soul condemned by God to eternal punishment, said to
go back to earth to roam and wander restlessly. a reference to a person
one is angry at, implying that he deserves to be damned. Ang kundinádu
mung anak mauy nakadaldal sa ákung anak sa kadaútan, Your damned son
led my son into evil. v [B156] be, become a doomed soul.

kundinsáda a condensed milk. litsi — n condensed milk.

kundísa see kundi.

kundisiyun n {1} manner or state of being. Kumusta ang kundisiyun sa
masakitun? How is the patient’s condition? Lisud ámung kundisiyun human
ku papháa, Our situation has been difficult since I was fired.
{2} requirement, stipulations. Mga kundisiyun sa kuntrátu, The
conditions in the contract. {3} grade given on condition that the
student make up specified deficiencies. May kundisiyun ku sa Mát, I
have a conditional pass in Math. v {1} [A; c] set conditions to s.t.
Nagkundisiyun ku nga makalakaw ka basta mupaúlì ug sayu, I make the
condition that you can go out if you come home early. Unsa may ímung
ikundisiyun kun magpahulam kag kwarta? What conditions do you impose
when you loan money? {2} [A12; a12] be given a conditional grade.
Nakundisiyun (nakakundisiyun) ku sa Histuri, I got a conditional pass
in History. -al conditional, dependent upon certain stipulations.
v [B1256] be conditional. Ug makundisiyunal ang pagsurindir, dílì
dawátun, They will not accept any surrender hedged with conditions.

kundukta_1 n behavior, deportment.

kundukta_2 v [A; b] guide, escort s.o. to a place. Akuy mukundukta sa
mga turista, I will guide the tourists. Gikunduktuhan ku siya kútub sa
istasyunan, I conducted her up to the bus station.

kunduktur n conductor in public transportation. v [AB156; a2] be,
become a conductor in public transportation.

kundul n spreading annual vine producing long, green melons of oblong
or bottle-like shape, eaten cooked when unripe, and when ripe made into
candy: Benincasa hispida.

kundun n condom, a contraceptive device put on the penis. v [A; b]
wear, use a condom.

kung = kun.

kúng = kulung_1.

kungas = kingas. see kíngas.

kunggrísu = kungrísu.

kunggu = kalunggu.

kungking n vagina (euphemism used to children).

kungkista v [A; a12] subject a foreign land and make it a colony.
Gikungkista ang Pilipínas sa mga Katsílà, The Philippines were
conquered by the Spaniards. -du a conquered people or land that is
subjugated and made a colony. -dur(→) n one who conquers a land or
people. v [B1256] become a conqueror.

kungkiyang, kungkíyang n conquian, a k.o. rummy played by two players.
v {1} [A; c1] play conquian. {2} [B6; a2] win in conquian.

kungkrítu = kunkrítu.

kungkung = kalungkung.

kungrigasiyun n church congregation.

kungrísu n congress, the national legislature. kungrisista
n congressman. v [B156; a2] be, become a congressman.

kunhud v [APB; c2] reduce, diminish. Mukunhud ang prisyu sa bugas kun
ting-ani, The price of rice goes down during the harvest season. Adúnay
baláud nga nagkunhud sa gidaghanun sa mga mulangyaw gawas sa násud,
There’s a law lowering the number of those who may go abroad. Kining
tambála makakunhud (makapakunhud) sa prisiyun, This medicine can lower
blood pressure. Ikunhud (kunhúran) ang swildu kun hínay ang trabáhu,
The wages are reduced if business is slow. see also túbù.

kuníhu n {1} rabbit. {2} expression indicating annoyance or pretended
annoyance, referring to a person, but not really saying anything about
him. Nía na sad ang kuníhu, karun pa magpakítà, Here you are, you
s.o.b. Where have you been hiding yourself? Kuníhu! Nasayup na sad ku
dà, Darn! I made another mistake.

kunik v [A; c] in rummy, put cards down which are of the same suit or
from a series with cards that have been laid on the table.

kuniksyun n {1} pull, connections. May kuniksyun siya sa síti hul, He
has connections in City Hall. {2} connection in plumbing, wiring,
telephone, and the like. Naputul ang kuniksyun sa túbu, The connection
in the pipeline broke. {3} connections in transportation. v {1} [A12]
be connected with influential people. Muasinsu dáyun ang makakuniksyun
ug pulitiku, A person who has connections with a politician can rise in
the world. {2} [A2; b6] have an electrical connection. Mukuniksyun na
ku sa minláyin, I will be connected to the main line. {3} = kunik.

kuniktádu see kuniktǎr.

kuniktǎr v [A; ac] {1} connecting, going through two disparate things.
Ang sakit sa ngípun mukuniktǎr sab ngadtu sa tampihak, When the tooth
aches, the pain also seems to be in the temples. Ang Sibu ikuniktǎr ug
taytáyan ngadtu sa Maktan, Cebu will be connected to Mactan by a
bridge. {2} connect a telephone, electric line. kuniktádu
{1} connected, connected up. Ayaw nag hikápa ang alambri kay kuniktádu
na kanà, Don’t touch that wire. It is connected up now. {2} having
connections in high places.

kuniktid a {1} be connected with some institution. Kuniktid ku sa Yúbi,
I’m connected with U.V. {2} be connected, hooked up electrically,
telephonically, and the like. v [B1256] be, become connected with.

kunínit v [A; b] for a large number of agents to do s.t. to one thing.
Ang mga táwu mikunínit sa artista, The crowd mobbed the movie star.
Nagkunínit ang mga táwu sa mga tinda sa baratilyu, The people crowded
in to buy the goods at the bargain sale. Gikuninítan sa mga iring ang
isdà, The cats crowded around on the fish to eat it.

kunis v [A; a] tear apart, into shreds. kuniskunis v [A; a] {1} tear
into pieces, into small bits. Sa íyang kalágut gikuniskunis níya ang
suwat, In her anger she tore the letter to shreds. Nakuniskunis ang
íyang sinínà sa irù, Her dress got ripped to shreds by the dog.
{2} break the heart. Túmang kaguul nga mikuniskunis sa ákung
kasingkásing, The sorrow tore my heart to shreds.

kunklusyun n conclusion drawn, deduction. Usa ray kunklusyun átung
mahímù ánà, We can come to only one conclusion about that.

kunkrítu n concrete, cement. Balay nga kunkrítu, A concrete house.
v [A; a] make s.t. of concrete.

kunkun_1 v [AN; b] rinse the hair and scalp with s.t. Magkunkun kug
suwà human ug kalígù, I’ll rinse my hair with citrus fruit after my
bath.

kunkun_2 n name given to the Constitutional Convention, begun in the
summer of 1971.

kunpirma = kumpirma.

kunpirmasyun = kumpirmasiyun. see kumpirma.

kunpisinaryu = kumpisinaryu. see kumpisar.

kunpisur = kumpisur.

kunsábu v [C; c3] plot or connive on the sly to do s.t. shady, or
detrimental to s.o. Nagkunsábu ang ubang impliyádu nga malagput ku,
Some employees are conniving to see if they can get me kicked out.
Nakigkunsábu ang tulisan sa gwardiya, The robbers connived with the
security guard. n co-partners in a shady act. Kunsábu tu sila maung
nakalusut sa kustum, They plotted together; that’s why it got through
the Customs. ka- n accomplice in conniving.

kunsad v [A23; b(1)] descend from heaven or into hell. Daw manulundà
nga mikunsad gíkan sa lángit, Like an angel descended from heaven.

kunsagrar v [A; b(1)] {1} consecrate, declare sacred. {2} ordain a
priest. kunsagrasiyun n {1} consecration of the host in the mass.
{2} ordination to a sacred office.

kunsidirar v {1} [A; b(1)] give especial consideration, give allowance
for. Mukunsidirar ku karun kay primíru pa nímung sayup, I’ll give you
especial consideration this time because it’s your first mistake.
Kunsidirahi pud ku, tsip, kay daghan kung anak, Please give me a
chance, officer, because I have so many children. {2} [A; a] consider
s.t. to be s.t. Dì ka ba mukunsidirar nga maáyu ning panwildúha? Don’t
you consider this a good wage? Gikunsidirar ku siyang inahan, I
considered her a mother. kunsidirasiyun n {1} consideration,
understanding of s.o. else’s problems. Way kunsidirasiyun ang ákung
agáwun. Bísan namatyan mi, wà giyud ku tugúti pagpaúlì, My master has
no consideration for my problems. We had a death in the family, but I
wasn’t allowed to go home. Kining kwartáha ági lag kunsidirasiyun sa
dúgay nímung pagsirbisyu nákù, This money is in consideration for your
long period of service to me. {1a} special benefits, considerations of
employment. Gamay túud ug swildu, apan daghan ug kunsidirasiyun, The
salary is small, to be sure, but there is a lot of extras. {2} the way
one thinks. Sa ákung kunsidirasiyun dílì ángayng patrabahúun ang minur
diidad, The way I look at it, a minor should not be made to work. abáhu
— {1} under advisement, with the expectation of giving it further
thought. Dawátun ku nang ímung tubag pagkakarun, apan báhu
kunsidirasiyun, I’ll accept your answer, under advisement. {2} bound by
the way s.o. else thinks. Ang asáwa báhu kunsidirasiyun sa bána, The
wife follows what her husband thinks best.

kunsigrar = kunsagrar.

kunsigrasiyun = kunsagrasiyun. see kunsagrar.

kunsihal n member of a city or lower level council. v [B156; a2] be,
become a councilor. -in- n waltz. v [A; c1] dance the waltz.

kunsihála = kunsihal (female).

kunsíhu n council. Kunsíhu ihikutíbu, Executive council. Kunsíhu
munisipal, Municipal council.

kunsilba n a sweet made of sliced, dried bananas immersed in syrup.
v [A; a] make, make into kunsilba; be made into kunsilba.

kunsilyu n council in the church.

kunsimisiyun = kunsumisiyun.

kunsinsiya n conscience. gastu ang, sa — v [A; b] for one to be
concerned and disturbed mentally and emotionally. Mugastu giyud ang
asáwa sa kunsinsiya ug mamabáyi ang bána, It disturbs a woman
emotionally when her husband fools around with other women. Ayaw igastu
ang ímung kunsinsiya sa mga pitsipitsing kahásul, Don’t worry so much
about trifles.

kunsintadur = kunsintidur. see kunsintǐr.

kunsintǐr v [A2] allow s.o. who is in one’s charge to do s.t. wrong:
either by helping him overtly or by closing the eyes to it. Ug makasalà
mi, dì giyud mukunsintǐr ákung inahan. Isumbung giyud mi sa ákung
amahan, My mother won’t go along with it if we do s.t. wrong. She tells
my father right away. kunsintidur a one whose job is to keep an eye on
s.o. but lets him get away with s.t. kunsintidúra = kunsintidur
(female).

kunsirba_1 = kunsilba.

kunsirbatib a conservative in morals or religious conviction. Dì siya
patambúngun ug parti sa kunsirbatib níyang Pápa, Her conservative
father will not allow her to attend parties.

kunsirbaturyu n conservatory, a school for teaching music.

kunsirtu = kunsiyirtu.

kunsisiyun, kunsisyun n concession, right given to exploit natural
resources, usually forest or sea resources. May kunsisiyun sila sa
kalasangan sa Mulábi, They have a concession in the forest of Molave.
v [A1; a2] get a certain concession. Singkuwinta ka iktarya ang íyang
gikunsisyun álang sa íyang pastu, He obtained a concession of fifty
hectares for his ranch. -aryu n concessionaire.

kunsiyirtu n concert. v [A13; c] hold a concert. Nagkunsirtu na sad
dinhi kay kastígu hiniral, We’re having a concert (of crying) again
because everybody got punished. Púru mga klasika mauy ílang
ikunsiyirtu, They will present a concert of purely classical music.

kunstabularya n Philippine Constabulary.

kunstabularyu n member of the Philippine Constabulary.

kunstitusyun n constitution. -al(→) n {1} pertaining to the
constitution. Kwistiyun kunstitusiyunal, A question of Constitutional
legality. {2} in accordance with the constitution. Dílì kunstitusyunal
kanang balaúra, That law is unconstitutional. -al kumbinsiyun
n Constitutional Convention.

kunstituyinti see kumbinsiyun.

kunstruksiyun n {1} construction site. {2} building viewed as the work
of a certain person. Kanang mga bildínga kunstruksiyun ni Inhinyíru
Lim, Those buildings were constructed by Engineer Lim. {3} way s.t. is
constructed. Usa nà ka mátang sa kunstruksiyun nga mulungtad sa
katuígan, That k.o. construction will last for years.

kunsul n consul. v [B156; a2] be a consul. kunsuládu n consulate.

Kunsulasiyun n town of Consolacion. — guwà n humorous name given to the
town of Consolacion. — súd leprosarium situated at Consolacion.

kunsulisyun prayis n consolation prize. v [A12; c] win, give a
consolation prize.

kunsulta v [AP; b5c] consult, see s.o. for consultation. Kunsultáha
(kunsultáhi) sila ug muúyun ba, Consult them to see if they are
amenable. Ikunsulta ug ispisyalista ang ímung mata, Consult a
specialist for your eyes. n consultation. -siyun n consultation.

kunsumisiyun n intense grief that wastes away the body. Ikay ákung
kunsumisiyun, bataána ka, You’ll be the death of me. Kunsumisiyun ang
gikamatyan sa asáwang gibiyáan, The wife wasted away and died of grief
after she was abandoned. v {1} [B16; a4] be afflicted with grief that
wastes away the body. Gikunsumisiyun (nagkunsumisiyun) ang inahan sa
kamaldítu sa anak, The mother wasted in grief because of her wayward
son. {2} [B1456; b3] worry very much over a trifle. Ngánung
magkunsumisiyun ka man ánang druwínga ug dì giyud mahímù? Why do you
have to worry yourself to death over that drawing if you can’t do it?

kunsumpsiyun = kunsúmu.

kunsúmu n {1} consumption. Dakug kunsúmu ning awtúha, This car uses a
lot of gas. Mínus karun kitag kunsúmu sa túbig, We use less water now.
{2} provisions, food supplies. Kun muadtu mu sa isla, pagdala ug
kunsúmu kay way pagkáun didtu, If you go to the island, bring
provisions because there is no food there. v [A] consume. Mukunsúmu mig
tagsa ka bákid bugas bulanbúlan, We consume a cavan of rice each month.

kunsurti n consort of a reigning beauty queen or muse. v [AB156; c1]
become, be the consort.

kunsuylu n {1} s.t. that makes s.t. unpleasant easier to bear. Bug-at
ning trabahúa apan kunsuylu sab ning magswildu tag sayu, The work is
hard, but one thing that makes it easier to bear is that we are paid
early. {2} improvement, a happy sign in s.t. that had been distressing.
Sukad siya madapati sa tambal, may kunsuylu na ang íyang pangláwas,
Since she has been taking that medicine, there has been an improvement
in her health. {3} situation that provokes enjoyment, fun. Wà tay
kunsuylu áning tindahánang magpalit kay púlus magmug-ut ang mga
tindíra, We get no pleasure in buying in that store because the
salesgirls are all unfriendly. {4} advantageous. Kunsuylu ning may awtu
kay dílì lisud sa pagpaúlì, It is an advantage to have a car because it
is no problem to get home. v {1} [A123P; a] give consolation, make s.t.
easier to bear. Bísag sulat makakunsuylu na kaáyu sa kamíngaw ku
kanímu, A letter from you would be enough to console me in my
loneliness for you. Pabakasyuna siya pára ikunsuylu sa íyang kapakyásan
sa burd, Give him a vacation to give him solace and comfort after his
frustration in the board exams. {2} [B; b6] for a situation to provoke
excitement, delight. Mukunsuylu ang dúwà ug payitpáyit ang tím, A game
gets more fun if the teams are equally good. pa- v [A; b] give
consolation. n s.t. which can give consolation.

kuntadur n {1} meter. Ngánu gung dus písus nga písus ra man ang náa sa
kuntadur? Why two pesos, when the meter reads only one peso? — sa túbig
water meter. {2} scorer, scorekeeper. v [A1; ac1] have a meter.

kuntak n contact, connection in an organization or high places. Basta
nigusyanti daghang kuntak, A businessman has to have lots of contacts.
v [A; a] contact, get in touch with. Kun makigkuntak ka níya, tawga
lang sa tilipunu, If you want to get in contact with her, just call her
on the telephone. Inig-abut sa mayur, kuntáka dáyun ku, As soon as the
mayor arrives, contact me immediately.

kuntǎr v [A; c1] {1} keep score, count a score. Tulu ka táwu ang
mukuntǎr (magkuntǎr) sa buksing: ang ripiri ug ang duha ka huwis, In a
boxing three persons keep the score: the referee and the two judges.
Dílì tu níya kuntarun (ikuntǎr) kay páwul man, He won’t count that shot
because they had called a foul. Ikuntǎr (kuntara) sa papil ang matag
puntus níla, Mark a score for each point they make on a piece of paper.
{2} shout out the score. Ikuntǎr (kuntara) ang matag puntus, Shout out
the score every time s.o. makes a point.

kuntidyus n contagious ward in a hospital.

kuntimpuraryu n contemporary, one living in the same era as another or
being in a certain association at the same time. Kuntimpuraryu si
Aginaldu ni Risal, Aguinaldo was a contemporary of Rizal. Kuntimpuraryu
ku siya sa hayiskul, We were in high school at about the same time.
v [C13] be contemporaries.

kuntindir n contender for a title in fight. v [B126] be a contender.

kuntininti n continent.

kuntintu a satisfied, contented. Dì ku kuntintu sa ákung swildu, I’m
not satisfied with my salary. v [B12; b6] be, become satisfied. Wà ku
makuntintu adtung kaúna, I wasn’t satisfied with that meal.
kakuntintuhun n state of reaching contentment. Dúnay mga babáyi nga way
kakuntintuhun, There are women that are impossible to satisfy
(sexually).

kuntis n a contest, competition. Kuntis sa áwit, Singing contest.
v [AC; ab] have a contest. Kuntísun nátù kun kinsa giyuy maáyung láki,
We must have a contest to determine who is really the best. Ispíling
ang ílang gikuntísan, They will have a spelling bee.

kuntra a {1} s.t. contrary to one’s liking. Kuntra ku giyud nang táwung
palahúbug, I very much dislike people who drink too much. {1a} — sa
dugù s.t. that is regarded with aversion. Kuntra sa ákung dugù ang mga
maut, I loathe people who are hypocrites. {1b} — gustu done against
one’s will. Kuntra gustu siyang mitúman, She complied against her will.
{1c} — hitsu for a body or s.t. manufactured to be unproportional in
build or structure. Kuntra hitsu kaáyu siya kay tambuk unyà gagmayg
bitíis, She is out of proportion because she is fat but her legs are
small. {1d} — kumpas out of time, not in rhythm. {1e1} — partídu
political opponent. Magsúun nga kuntra partídu sa pulitika apan dílì sa
lamísa, Brothers and sisters may be opponents in politics but not in
their relationships with each other. {1e2} people who are always
opposed to everything. Mga kuntra partídu kaáyu nang mga tawhána sa
tanan tang buhátun, dì maáyung iuban sa punduk, Those people are always
opposed to everything we do. Let’s not include them in our group.
v [B23(1)6C] be, become political opponents or always oppose s.o.
else’s views or stand. {1f} — tyimpu an impediment to a course of
action to be done in the future. Ug way kuntra tyimpu, karung Duminggu
mag-ayskrim ta, If nothing gets in the way, we can have ice cream on
Sunday. {2a} causing unpleasant bodily reaction to s.o. Kuntra sa húbak
ang pasáyan, Shrimps are bad for asthma. {2b} remedy for s.t. bad.
Kuntra sa húbak kining tablítas, These tablets are good for asthma.
{2b1} — sa ampay love s.t. very much (humorous—lit. it’s a remedy for
my craving). Mukáun ug inasal? Kuntra nà sa ákung ampay! Do I like
roast pig? No, I love it! {3} — sa opposed to, rather than. Maáyu na
lang ning makalilímus kuntra nímu nga kawatan, It’s better to be a
beggar than to be like you, a thief. Mas maáyu ang bínu kuntra sa túbà,
Wine is much better than palm toddy. Maíbug kahà ku níya kuntra nímu?
Would I be attracted to him more than to you? {4} — ug [such-and-such]
an amount bet against [so-and-so] much. Ímung pusta singku kuntrag
kwatru, I bet him five to four. n {1} enemy or opponent. Kuntra sa
Inglatíra ang Alimanya, Germany was Britain’s enemy. Kuntra si Ilurdi
ni Usáka, Osaka was Elorde’s opponent. {2} in folk belief, s.t. used to
drive away evil spirits, usually hidden in one’s clothing. {3} s.t.
used to reinforce s.t. which is placed at the other side of it.
v {1} [AC; ab2] be, become hostile to each other. Dì ku mukuntra ug
parinti, I won’t act hostilely toward my relatives. Nagkakuntra ang
managsúun tungud sa kabílin, The brothers became enemies on account of
the inheritance. Nakuntrahan (gikuntra) ang íyang trátu sa ginikánan,
Her parents took a dislike to her suitor. {2} [A2C; ac3] oppose s.o. in
a contest, politics, and the like. Dílì siya mukuntra ug dakù níya, He
won’t play against anyone bigger than he is. Kuntráhun nímu sila sa
pagkamayur nga paryinti man? Are you going to oppose them in the
mayoralty contest when they are your relatives? Ikaw mauy ikuntra námù
níya, We will pit you against him. {3} [c6] use as a remedy. Kining
tablítas ikakuntra sa tulug, These tablets are good to take to keep you
awake. {4} [c] be [so-and-so] much against [such-and-such] an amount.
Sigurádu man kahà ka, kuntráhan ta nang diyis mug singku, If you’re so
sure, I’ll bet five pesos against your ten. {5} [A12] wear s.t. sewn in
the clothing to drive away evil spirits. {6} [c] put a reinforcement
behind s.t. Kuntráhi (kuntrahi) nang gitaúras batúnis arun dílì magísì,
Put a reinforcement behind where you sew on the button so it won’t rip.
{6a} = balinsiyána, v 2. -in- n a seam sewn with the balinsiyána
stitch. paN- n s.t. worn as protection against s.t.†

kuntrabandu n contraband. v [B1256] be classified as contraband.
Makuntrabandu giyud ang butang nga dílì ipaági sa kustum, Smuggled
goods that don’t pass the Customs can be called contraband.
kuntrabandista n smuggler, one who deals in contraband goods. v [B156]
be a smuggler.

kuntrabída n {1} a villain in a drama or story. {2} one who acts like a
villain, spoiling or opposing s.t. good. Kuntrabída kaáyu nà si Máma
uy, dì ku patambúngun sa parti, Mother is a killjoy, she won’t let me
attend the party. v [B156; c1] be, become the villain in a drama.

kuntra gustu see gustu.

kuntraktur n contractor for the construction of s.t. v [B156; b6] be,
become a contractor. Pruyiktu sa gubiyirnu nga ákung gikuntraktúran,
Government projects for which I was the contractor.

kuntraryu a being enemies. Kuntraryu mi kaáyu kay wà siyay batásan,
We’re enemies because he has no manners. v [C1] be enemies with each
other.

kuntrasinyas n password or secret signal. Ug muhíngus ku, kuntrasinyas
nà nga wíting ku, If I sniffle, it’s a sign that I’m about to go rummy.
Unsay kuntrasinyas sa pagsúd sa kampu? What is the password to enter
the camp? Dúnay kuntrasinyas ang balúta arun hibaw-an nga mibutar ka
nákù, There’s a secret mark on the ballot so we know you voted for me.
v [A3; c6] give a word or secret signal.

kuntráta, kuntrátu n written contract or verbal agreement. Pilay
kuntrátu sa matadíru íning ímung bábuy? What price have you agreed upon
with the butcher for your pig? v [ANC2; c] make a contract or verbal
bargain. Nagkuntrátu kug sakyanan pára sa átung ikskursiyun, I have
already made an agreement for our transportation on the excursion.
kuntratádu a bound with a contract or oral agreement. Kuntratádu na
ning babúya, This pig has already been spoken for. kuntratista n one
who buys and sells things or services on a professional basis,
contracting for the things bought or services rendered. Kuntratista sa
bábuy, One who buys and sells pigs. Kuntratista sa hákut, One who
contracts to haul things. v [B156] be, become a contractor of this
sort.

kuntribusiyun n {1} financial contribution. {2} tax on real property.
v [A1; c] give a contribution or pay a real property tax.

kuntringkanti n opponents in a political election. v [C; ac3] be
opponents for electoral office. Dì sila maáyung kuntringkantíhun kay
manag-ágaw sila, They should not be made to oppose each other because
they are cousins. Bag-ángang pulitiku ang ákung gikakuntringkanti, The
man I fought against was a seasoned politician.

*kuntrisiyun aktu sa — n Act of Contrition.

kuntrǔl n control over s.o.’s actions, discipline. Ang mayur way
kuntrǔl sa kapulisan, The mayor has no control over his police force.
v {1} [A] control oneself or the actions of s.t. else. Nagkuntrǔl lang
giyud ku nga dì makapangísug, I did my best to control my temper. Wà na
ku makakuntrǔl sa manubíla, I couldn’t control the wheel any longer.
{2} [C2] exercise birth control. Wà mi magkuntrǔl, maung daghan mig
anak, We didn’t practice birth control so we had lots of children.

kuntrular v [A; a] control s.t. Kuntrulaha ang inyung mga bátà, Control
your children. Gikuntrular sa mga Huk ang Sintral Lusun, The Huks
control Central Luzon. Ang pamaligyag bugas gikuntrular sa mga Insik,
The rice trade is controlled by the Chinese. kuntruládu, kuntruláwu
a {1} in the control of. Ang Kunggrísu kuntruládu sa Nasyunalista, The
Congress is in the control of the Nacionalista Party. {2} under
control, subdued. Kuntruládu na ang mga prísu nga nagráyut, The
prisoners that rioted are now under control. {3} done with control.
Kuntruládu ang íyang paghapak sa búla maung nasúd ni sa lungag, He
drives the golf ball with control. That’s why it goes into the hole.

kuntud_1 v [AB; b2c1] decrease in amount or quantity. Mukuntud
(makuntud) ang tubà sa tinghangin, The coconut palm toddy yields less
when it is windy. Dì siya makakuntud sa íyang pagkáun, She can’t cut
down on her food intake.

kuntud_2 a for the surface of a piece of land to be uneven. Ayúha
pagpátag kay kuntud pa kanang dapíta dihà, Level that part carefully.
It is still bulging there. v [B; c12] be, become uneven. Ipapátag sa
buldúsir kanang dápit nga nagkuntud, Have the bulldozer level that part
where it is bulging.

kuntúdu a elaborate, having all the trimmings. Kuntúdu siyang mamisti,
She is dressed elaborately. Ang kuntúdu nga kumbira dakug gastu, An
elaborate feast will incur great expense. — ubligasiyun n job involving
all chores there are to be done. Ang ímung trabáhu dinhi kuntúdu
ubligasiyun. Ímu ang tanang líhuk, Your work here includes anything
there is to do. You must do everything. v [A1] go about in grand style.
Kláru na lang nga makakuntúdu si Imilda kay milyunarya man, Of course
Imelda can live in style because she is so rich.

kunu short form: nu {1} it is said, s.o. said. Namatay kunu ag pilútu,
They say the pilot died. {2} with imperatives: particle used to person
with whom one is familiar implying that he is not under obligation to
obey it—i.e., is not a person one has a right to command: ‘please, do
me a favor and ...’ Itúnul kunu nang libru, Do me a favor and hand me
the book. {2a} followed or preceded by verb: do [so-and-so] as a trial.
Ikuniktar kunu nátù ring alambri, tingáli ug muandar na ang makina, Try
connecting this wire. Perhaps the engine will start. {3} in conditions:
on the chance that. Madúgay pa ba nu ku dinhi kay muanhi siya, If I
stay here long, he will come. Ákung gihípus kay básin kunu magámit
unyà, I kept it on the chance that we might be able to use it later.
kunhun take s.o. to be ignorant of s.t. Akuy kunhun nímu nga kadúgay na
nákù niíni, You take me for ignorant when I’ve been at this for such a
long time. paN- v [A] show one is uncertain of s.t. by saying kunu. Dì
kaáyu siya sigúru kay nangunu, He’s not that certain because he said
‘they said’. kunúhay {1} allegedly, they say, but I’m not sure whether
or not it is true. Pipila ka mga pulitiku nga nagsabutsábut kunúhay tu,
A few politicians who were allegedly making agreements under the table.
{2} do s.t. to make a show of being a certain thing. Arun pagrispitar
nanghúnung kunúhay mi ug paghungit, In order to show respect we made a
pretense of stopping eating for the moment. Nagpakítà siya sa íya
kunúhay nga pagkamanggihunàhunáun, He is displaying his supposed
thoughtfulness. Ayaw ug katáwa kay nangísug kunúhay ka, Don’t laugh.
You’re supposed to be angry. {1a} be supposedly. Ísug kunúhay ka—dì ka
muhílak ug sugsúgun, You’re supposed to be brave. You shouldn’t cry if
they tease you. {2} particle giving an excuse for doing s.t. in
preparation. Namalit kunúhay mi sa dì pa musáka ang bili, We are buying
food before the prices go up. {3} particle belittling s.o.’s
accomplishments. Prisidinti kunúhay kanà siya sa kapunúngan, He’s the
so-called president of their organization. {3a} particle of modesty
detracting from one’s own or one’s family’s accomplishments. Magsusúlat
kunúhay kining ákung bána, ug kini mauy bugtung níyang pangítà, My
husband is a writer, you know, and that’s how he earns his livelihood.

kúnu n large rice mill or the building which houses it and serves as a
storehouse for the rice to be milled.

kunùkunù v [A; c16] speak haltingly, uncertainly, and in short
syllables. Nagkunùkunù siya pagbungat sa íyang hangyù, She made her
request in a halting, unsure way. Ayawg kunùkunua (ikunùkunù) ang ímung
pagsulti kay maklárung ginirbiyus ka, Don’t speak haltingly because
everybody will see you’re nervous.

kunul v {1} [B24] fail to ripen or to grow. Mikunul ang mga lubi nga
tinanum nga naatul sa huwaw, Our coconuts didn’t grow because they were
planted during the dry season. {2} hardened because of failure to
ripen. Mikunul ang ságing kay ahat, The bananas failed to ripen and
just hardened because they were picked too soon. {2a} [B] become
hardened, calloused from abuse. Nakunul na lang giyud ang bátà sa
pagbinúnal nímu, The child has gotten hardened because you’ve punished
him so much. {2b} [A23] be stubborn, uninterested in obeying orders.
Mukunul na lang nang batáag sugúun. Dílì muirug sa íyang nahimutangan,
That child is just stubborn when you tell him to do s.t. He won’t move
from his place. {3} [A23] give a dull knock when s.t. hits. Mikunul ang
lápuk nga miigù sa sín, The mud went thunk as it hit the galvanized
iron sheets. a {1} hardened from failure to ripen. {2} hardened. {3} —
ug úlu stubborn. {4} for s.t. to lack the hardness needed to give
bounce to things that hit it. Ang nipis playwud kunul kaáyu untúlan sa
búla, If a ball is hit against thin plywood, it won’t bounce well. -un
a of a hard, shrivelled-up sort.

kúnun = kulúnun. see kúlun.

kunup v [B24] disappear suddenly en masse. Mukunup ang tipdas ug
mahanginan, A measles rash will disappear if you expose it to the wind.
Pag-abut sa prinsipal, mikunup ang mga maistrang nagtábì, When the
principal arrived, the teachers just disappeared. Mikunup ang mga duut
sa isdà nga gitugaw sa dinamíta, The schools of fish disappeared
because of the dynamite fishing.

kunuskunus v [A3] make a rustling sound. Mukunuskunus gánì ang papil sa
basúra náa giyuy ilagà, If the paper in the trash rustles, there must
be a rat. Nagkunuskunus ang dáhun sa hángin, The leaves were rustling
in the wind.

kunut n {1} wrinkle, fold in s.t. Daghang kunut ang íyang nawung, She
has lots of wrinkles in her face. May kunut ang karsúnis, The trousers
had pleats in them. {2} anus or female genitalia (humorous allusion).
{2a} sa ímung — expression of disbelief. Diyis písus sa kunut mu, pára
usa ka buuk nga gilabhan, What do you mean ten pesos? You only washed a
single piece. a having wrinkles, not flat and smooth. bira sa — v [a4]
grow way over a marriageable age (lit. have one’s wrinkles
pulled—humorous insult). v {1} [ABN; a2] for a piece of cloth or skin
to be not flat and smooth, cause it to be so. Mikunut ang tinahian sa
sinínà, The dress is sewn with wrinkles at the seams. Nangunut ang
nawung paghinunàhúnà, Her face is wrinkled from thinking so much.
Nakunut ang papil pagkabasà, The paper got wrinkled when it got wet.
{2} [A; c1] gather pleats or ruffles and sew them into a piece of
cloth. -un a wrinkled.

kúnut v [A; ab2] pinch s.o. with a finger and the thumb. Kunútun ku
nang búgan mu, I’ll pinch your groin.

kunya n wedge. Bagang kunya ang ipasuk arun mahuut, Insert a thick
wedge so it will be tight. v {1} [A; a] make into a wedge. {2} [A; b]
wedge s.t. into s.t. Kunyáhi ang ubus sa takup arun dì ipálid sa
hángin, Place a wedge in the lower part of the shutter so it cannot be
blown open by the wind. {3} [A; b5] get a lock on s.o. so that he
cannot move. Kunyáha (kunyáhi) ang ímung kaáway, Hold your opponent in
an armlock.

kupa, kupà a {1} for the roof to be almost flat, not steeply inclined.
Kupa ra ug atup ang ámung balay mau nga nitúlù dáyun, Our house has
quite a flat roof, and that’s why it developed a leak quickly. {2} for
s.t. flat to be close to the ground. Kupa ang lamísa nímu, The table is
too low for you. v {1} [c1] build a house roof almost flat. {2} [B; a2]
become low, not raised from the ground.

kúpa_1 n {1} goblet. {2} goblet design of the Spanish cards. v [A13;
c6] use a goblet.

kúpa_2 = makúpa.

kúpà v [A; b] want to do what s.o. else is doing. Mukúpà nà siya ug
makakitag náay mulakaw, She’ll insist on going out too when she sees
s.o. going out.

kúpad_1 v [A; c] {1} toss grains to fowls. Busug na ang mga manuk kay
gikuparan na man, The chickens are satisfied because they have been
given their feed. {2} expel s.t. from the mouth. Kinsay nagkúpad áring
kindi? Who spat out this candy?

kúpad_2 = kumpad.

kupal a for speech to be unintelligible, badly articulated. v [B; b6]
for speech to become unintelligible. Nagkakupal na ang sinultihan sa
himatyun, The speech of the dying person is becoming unintelligible.

kupas v [B23(1); b6] for s.t. to lose its aroma from having been left
uncovered. Mukupas ang tabákù ug dì pustun, Dried tobacco leaves will
lose their flavor if you don’t keep them wrapped. a having lost its
aroma.

kúpas = kúpa_1, 2.

kúpat v [B3(1); c1] move fast, busily. Wà magkadimáu ang tabì kay
nagkúpat ang bàbà, Her speech is incoherent because she talks too fast.
Nakúpat silag panlimpiyu kay náay umaábut nga bisíta, They are cleaning
as quickly as they can because they are expecting visitors.

kúpay v [A; a] play around with in the fingers. Nagkúpay ang bátà sa
íyang tái, The baby is playing around with its feces. Ayawg kupáya nang
ímung binahugan, Don’t put your fingers in your food and play around
with it.

kupidu n Cupid.

kupil a indistinct in pronunciation, not intelligible. Kupil siya ug
sinultian kay miági man siya ug daut, He has been unable to talk
understandably since he underwent a grave illness. v [B; a12] for one’s
speech to become impossible to understand. Mukupil ning átung dílà
usáhay basta kuyawan ta, We sometimes get tongue-tied when we get
frightened. (←) a speaking rapidly and indistinctly. v {1} [B; b6] come
to speak this way. {2} [A] talk back in self defense. Ígù lámang siyang
naníngud sa walay pagkúpil sa matag higayun nga hisgútan siya sa íyang
kumpári, All he could do was stand idly by and listen whenever his
friend would talk about him. (He was so ashamed.) pa-(←) v [A13]
{1} allow oneself to be left behind, outclassed or outdone. Aku pay
sapían dì giyud ku magpakúpil sa mga urug sa panaput, If I were rich, I
would never allow myself to get left behind by the fashions. {2} let
s.t. go by without answering back. Ang asáwa wà magpakúpil sa íyang
bána, The wife wouldn’t let the husband get the last word in.

kupirar = kuupirar.

kupit v [AN; b] extort petty amounts. Ang dispatsir mangupit ug diyis
sintábus sa draybir káda byáhi, The dispatcher extorts ten cents out of
the driver each trip.

kupíta n a small goblet.

kupitinsiya = kumpitinsiya.

kupkup a for hair to be lying down flat close to the scalp. v {1} [B]
for hair to become flat on the head. Mukupkup ang buhuk basta lutúun
pagkulung, The hair will become so kinky it sticks to the head if you
wave it with too much heat or too many chemicals. {2} [A; b6] stick
close to s.t. for protection. Mikupkup ang mga pisù sa himungáan, The
chicks kept close to the mother hen.

kupras n copra, dried coconut meat. v {1} [A; a2] make, get copra.
Magkupras mig ipatimbang, We will make copra to sell by the kilo.
Kuprásun ang kalubihan káda trimistri, The coconut plantation is
harvested (made to copra) every four months. {2} [AN; a12] get money
from a candidate and then fail to vote for him. Gikupras lang diay ang
salapì sa kandidátu kay napildi man, The people must have pocketed the
money and not voted for him because he lost.

kupù v [A; b3] lower the head, cower. Nikupù sa suuk ang irù nga
gibunálan, The dog was beaten and cowered into the corner. Kupù arun dì
ka makit-an, maigù, Crouch down so they won’t see you, hit you.

kúpù v {1} = kalúpù. {2} [A; c16] fold the arms across the breast. Ang
bátà nga nag-ampù, nagkúpù sa íyang mga buktun, The child is folding
his arms across his breast as he prays. (→) n = kalúpù, n.

kúpug_1 v {1} [A3P; a1] crumble s.t., break into tiny pieces. Kupúgun
nátù ning báhawng pán, Let’s crumble this stale bread. {2} [B] crumble
into ruins. Nakúpug ang túri sa kadugayun, The tower crumbled as the
years passed.

kúpug_2 = kulúpug.

kupukúpu v [A2S; b(1)] quiver and flutter noisily, twitch, thrash
around. Mikupukúpu ang manuk sa abug, The chicken shook the dust off.
Dì siya kamaung mulanguy maung nagkupukúpu sa túbig, He can’t swim.
That’s why he just thrashed around in the water. Wà makakupukúpu ang
táwung naantimánu pagkapusil, The man suffered a direct hit and didn’t
even have time to twitch before he died.

kupun, kúpun n coupon, blank form in an advertisement filled out to
order goods or which can be used to redeem a prize.

kupun bán n coupon bond, a k.o. typewriter paper.

kupungkupung, kupungkúpung n thick and dense plant or a cluster of
plants. Mitágù siya sa kupungkupung, He hid in the thickets. (←)
v [A2N] for plants to grow thick and dense. Pul-úngi ang búwak arun
mukupungkúpung, Prune the flowers so they grow thick and lush. ka-an
n thicket, area covered with dense growths.

kúpus v [A; ab] {1} squeeze to extract the juice from s.t. Kupúsa ang
kinagud lubi, Squeeze the juice out of the shredded coconut meat.
{1a} squeeze s.t. together with s.t. to change the flavor. Kupúsig súkà
ang kinílaw, Squeeze the raw fish together with vinegar. {2} = kupus.
(→) a shrunken, shriveled after the juice has been extracted. Kupus na
ákung hubag, My boil has dried up now. v {1} [APB2] shrivel, shrink,
usually because liquid has been removed, but by extension, because of
disease; cause it to do so. Mikupus ang karning gibulad, The meat
shrunk as it was dried in the sun. Magkupus tag tambuk, Let’s fry fat
meat until all of the lard comes out. Nagkakupus ang láwas sa tisísun,
The tubercular’s body is shriveling up. {2} [B] shrink away in fear,
from cold. Mukupus nag ímung suklan, He’ll shrink away if you stand up
to him. Mikupus siya sa katugnaw, He shrunk his body into a small ball
because of the cold. -in-an n pulp left after extract has been removed.
kinupsan, pinakupsan n fat meat fried until all of the lard is removed
and nothing but a crunchy mass remains.

kuput = kubut.

kúput a characterized by intense activity or movement. Kúput kaáyu tu
sila sa ílang priparasiyun sa pista, They were bustling about in
preparation for the fiesta. Dalì rang mahuman ang trabáhu kay kúput man
ang tanan, The work will get done in no time because everybody is
working hard. n intense movement. v [B46; b(1)] characterized by
intensely active movement. Nagkúput man lang ning lamuk dinhi sa inyu,
This place is buzzing with mosquitoes.

kupuy a timid, shy, shrinking back. Kupuy siyang pagkalaláki, mahadluk
ug babáyi, He is a shy person. He is afraid of women. v [B2; b6] be,
become timid or shy. Mikupuy siyang gihagítan, gikasab-an sa asáwa, He
just shrunk back when he was threatened, when his wife cussed him out.

kupya v {1} [A; a] copy, imitate, make a copy of s.t. Kupyáhun ku nang
ímung disáyin, I’ll copy your design. Unsa mang ritratúha ang
gikupyáhan? For which picture did you have copies made? {2} [AN; a]
copy in an exam. Nangupya siya. Maung nakapasar, He copied. That’s why
he passed. n {1} copy. Sitinta sintábus na ang kupya sa Bisayà, The
Bisaya costs seventy cents a copy now. {2} print of a photo. pa- v [A;
b6] have a photograph reproduced. -dur(→) n {1} a copyist, one who
makes written copies. Náay kupyadur sa ámung upisína kusug kaáyung
mumakinilya, There’s a copyist in our office who types very fast.
{2} one who imitates, copycat. {3} one who copies in exams. v [B156]
be, become a copyist. -mus a a cheat in exams (colloquial). Gibantayan
pag-áyu sa maistra si Ális kay kupyámus kaáyu, The teacher watched
Alice closely because she is known to copy.

kupyur n coiffure, hairdo. v [A; a] give s.o. a hairdo. Kupyúri kunu
kug paríhas kang Imilda, Do my hair up like Imelda’s.

kura, kúra_1 v [A2] for the heart to pound or beat rapidly due to fear.
Mikúra (mikura) ang ákung dughan pagkadungug nákù sa balità, My heart
beat with intense fear when I heard the news. kurakura = kura.

kúra_2 n parish priest. v [B156; a2] be, become a parish priest. —
parúku = kúra_2.

kurà n {1} the money which circulated during the Japanese occupation.
{2} Japanese.

kuradang n {1} name of a k.o. folk dance with lively movements.
{2} general name for dancing. {3} insulting term of address to a woman
named Dádang. v [A] {1} dance the kuradang or with lively movements.
{2} go to a dance. — kun danggit nonsense words used to fill out the
lines in a rhyme. Kuradang kun danggit, Kumusta ang inun-únan, Mudúul
lag muduslit, Dáyung dalágan, Kuradang or danggit (k.o. fish), How is
it stewed in vinegar? He only comes near me if he wants sex, and then,
when he’s done, he leaves me.

kurag a for a woman to be fast. Túa na sang kurag, mau pa gánì pag-abut
gíkan sa sini, mangnayitklab na pud, There goes that fast woman again.
She just got home from the movies. Now she’s going to the night club.
v [B12] get to be fast. Nakurag na dà, sukad nakapuyù ug syudad, She’s
gotten to be a fast gal since she went to live in the city. -an a =
kurag.

kurakul n {1} snail. {1a} k.o. olive shell of the sea. {2} woman of
easy virtue, easy to get. v [B16N; c1] for a woman to engage in
promiscuous and ready sex. Nagkurakul siya kay bigáun, She is
over-sexed so she goes about engaging in promiscuous affairs. paN-
v [A2; c] go after loose women.

kural n fence, enclosure. v [A; b5] fence s.t. in. Kinsay nagkural ug
tunukung alambri sa misítas? Who put barbed wire around the plants?
Kuralun (kurawun, kuralan) ku ning ákung lúti, I will fence my lot in.
-in- n {1} fenced. {2} dance held in a street and enclosed with an
improvised fence: considered a dance for the hoi polloi and not for the
rich and sophisticated. Dì ku mubaylig kinural uy, You won’t catch me
dancing in a street dance!

kuralun n k.o. synthetic fiber.

kurambus v [A2C; ac] pool funds in a bet or, by extension, for some
other common purpose. Kurambúsun nátù ning átung kwarta ipalit ug
sista, Let’s pool our funds to buy a guitar. Tagpíla may átung
ikurambus áning pustáha? How much do we chip in in this bet?

kurambúsà n chicken with feathers which curve outwards instead of lying
flat.

kurang n lesbian (derogatory). v [C; c1] for females to have homosexual
relations. Gikurang ni Hinya si Tasing, Genia made Tasing her lover.

kurangut a {1} rough, rugged in surface. Kurangut ug pánit,
Rough-skinned. {2} ugly-faced. Ug kurangut tag dagway bawiun tas
batásan, If you have an ugly face, compensate for it with a pleasant
disposition. v [B; b6] {1} become craggy of surface. Mukurangut
(makurangut) ang ibabaw sa lamísag hiwáan, The surface of the table
will become rough if you use it to slice things on. {2} become ugly in
face.

kurapkurap v {1} [B146] for lights to flicker. Nagkurapkurap ang
lamparilya nga wà nay gás, The kerosene lamp is flickering because the
kerosene is almost gone. {2} [A13P] grope in the dark. Nagkurapkurap mi
sa kangitngit, We were groping in the dark. {3} [B4N] for vision to
become blurred. Nagkurapkurap ang mata sa tigúwang, The vision of the
old man is blurred.

kurapsiyun n corruption in the government or in a corporation. Naghítak
ang grap ug kurapsiyun sa subasta sa gubyirnu, Corruption is rife in
government bidding.

kurasiyun n a medical certification as to the extent of one’s wounds
used as evidence in court. v [A; b(1)] certify the extent of wounds.

kurat v [B126] (usually with hi-, ha-) be startled or frightened by
s.t. sudden. pa- v [A; b] startle or frighten s.o. with sudden
surprise. Pakuratan nátù siya lábun nagtalikud, Let’s startle him now
that his back is turned to us. Gipakuratan ku níla ug parti, They
surprised me with a party. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b] be startled with s.t.
sudden. Nahikurat siya sa íyang pagkatúlug, She was suddenly awakened
from her sleep. Kinsa guy dì hikuratan sa kalit níyang kamatáyun? Who
wouldn’t be shocked by his sudden death? ka-, kahi- n startling or
shocking surprise. Sa dakù níyang kahikurat, nabuhian níya ang butilya,
Because of his great shock, he lost his hold on the bottle. -l-an(←)
a nervous, easily startled.

kuratsa n curacha, a lively folk dance of the Eastern Visayas or the
music thereto. v [A2C; c1] dance the curacha.

kuraw_1 n starvation. Ang tigúlang makililímus namatay sa kuraw, The
old beggar died of starvation. v [A123P; a4] starve, die or weaken with
hunger. Daghang gikuraw sa panahun sa gúbat, Many people died of
starvation during the war. -l-an(←), -l-un(←) a one who cannot stand
hunger.

kuraw_2 = kural.

kúraw v [A; a] {1} stir or agitate to make it smooth and even. Nagkúraw
ku sa amirul arun dì matibug-uk, I’m stirring the starch so that it
won’t form lumps. Kuráwa ang binulad arun mauga ug dalì, Stir the corn
around so it will dry quickly. {2} shuffle mahjong pieces. — ug
kinhasun v [AC] play mahjong (lit. shuffle shells—colloquial). Walay
láing búhat gawas pagkúraw ug kinhasun, They have nothing to do but
play mahjong. (→) n s.t. used to stir. -in- n sound produced from the
shuffling of mahjong pieces.

kúray v [B2S46N; a4] shiver with cold or fear. Tualya bi kay nagkuray
(nagpanguray, gikuray) na ku sa katugnaw, Give me a towel. I’m
shivering with cold.

kurayag v [A] move with a wriggling motion. Mukurayag ang kasing nga
karagan, An unbalanced top wriggles. Nagkurayag ang mga wayawaya, The
mosquito larvae are wriggling.

kuráyus v [B26N; b6] be, become shriveled, wrinkled, withered.
Mikuráyus (nanguráyus) pag-áyu ang kusáhus sa hilabihang kaínit, The
jerked meat shriveled up very much because it was left in the sun too
long. Mikuráyus (nanguráyus) ang luy-a nga dúgay nang gihípus, The
ginger got shriveled because it was left lying around too long.
Makuráyus ang nawung basta tigúlang na, Your face wrinkles when you get
old.

kuráyut v [B2SN; b6] get wrinkled and shriveled and thus wither. Ang
nagkurayut níyang kaapíngan, Her wrinkled, sunken cheeks. Wà nay lamì
nang kamutíha kay nagpangurayut na, That sweet potato is not very good
because it is on its way to becoming all shriveled and dried up. (→)
a all shriveled up.

kurba n curve. Ang kurba sa karsáda, The curve in the road. Ang kurba
sa íyang láwas, The curves of her body. v [AB3; c1] describe a curve;
cause s.t. to do so. Nagkurba ang linya kay walà ka mugámit ug rúlir,
The line is curved because you didn’t use a ruler. Kurbáha (ikurba) ang
búla pagpits nímu, Pitch the ball in a curve. -da n a curve in a road.
Nagkabanggà ang duha ka trák sa may kurbáda, The two buses collided at
the bend. v [A; c] for a vehicle to turn sharply. Mikurbáda ug kalit
ang trák ug nakulub, The bus swerved suddenly and turned over. -du
a curved, curving. v [B; c1] become curved; be curving. Nagkurbádu man
ning ági sa tahì, The stitches are not sewn in straight. pina- a shaped
in a curve; curved. Ang lamísa níya pinakurba, His table is shaped like
a curve. kurbáhun a shapely body. Dílì siya maanyag apan kurbáhun siya
ug láwas, She isn’t beautiful but her body is shapely.

kurbáta n {1} necktie. {2} k.o. cracker shaped like a bow tie.
v {1} [AN; b6(1)] wear a necktie. mananggíti nga nag-/mag- be a toddy
gatherer that wears a necktie (i.e., prepare artificial coconut palm
toddy). — ang tubà for toddy to be artificial. {2} [a12] make into a
necktie.

kurbáwu = kurbádu. see kurba.

kurbu a convex or concave, shaped round like a bowl. Kurbu ang atup sa
kampanaryu, The roof of the bell tower is rounded. v [B; b6(1)] be,
become bowl-shaped. Nagkurbu ang sáku sa kapunù, The sack is bulging
because it is so full.

kurd n cord for electrical appliances.

kurdaping n {1} name given to male homosexuals in derision. {2} male
homosexual. Ságad sa mga kurdaping mga maáyung mangulung, Most fairies
are good at curling people’s hair.

kurdíru n lamb. — sa Diyus Lamb of God.

kurdis n musical chords.

kurdísu n {1} window sill. Mitikang ang kawatan sa kurdísu sa bintánà
pagsulud sa balay, The thief stepped over the window sill in going into
the house. {2} horizontal piece in the frame of a building to which
vertical boards are nailed, placed at the height of the window sill.
Íyang giláray ang mga butilya nga basíyu sa kurdísu sa bungbung, She
lined the empty bottles on the sills along the wall. v [A13; a] put up,
make into a window sill or a window-height sill.

kurdun n {1} = kuldun. {2} cord sewn into embroidery work. v [A; b6]
embroider with a cord.

kurduruy n corduroy cloth. v [A1] wear s.t. made of corduroy.

kúri_1 = kurídas.

kúri_2 frequently, always. Kúri siyang mamisíta sa ámung dalága, He
frequently visits our girl. Kúring abyirtu, Always open. v [A; a12] do
s.t. often, always. Gikúri níyag sul-ub ang paburítu níyang sinínà, She
always wears her favorite dress.

kuríbut n paramour, lover. v {1} [A1NC; c1] for a married man or woman
to have a lover or have a married lover. Nakigkuríbut ang asáwa sa
higála sa íyang bána, The wife took her husband’s friend as her lover.
{2} [A2N] fool around with married men, women or for a married person
to fool around.

kurídas n {1} for a number of examples of an item to be bought or
otherwise taken at random without selection. Tagsingku písus ang gatus
sa tamátis, apan kurídas. Walay pílì, Tomatoes are five pesos a
hundred, but you take them at random. You’re not allowed to choose.
Kurídas ang pagkasulud sa prútas sa baskit, They put the fruits in the
basket without sorting them out. v [A; a] {1} take a bunch without
selecting. {2a} in billiards, make a carom with all the three balls in
straight line but with the cue ball not bouncing off the sides of the
billiard table. {2b} shoot two or more billiards into the pocket with
one shot.

kurídu n long narrative poem made for oral recitation, but otherwise
like the kumpúsu. v {1} [A; b6(1)] recite the kurídu. {2} [c1] make a
story into a kurídu.

kuridur_1 n corridor.

kuridur_2 n dealer of livestock, but not poultry. Gisaáran nga palitun
sa kuridur ang ákung báka, The animal dealer promised to buy my cow.
v [B156] be, become a dealer of livestock. paN- v [A2] buy and sell
livestock. -a(←) n a woman who recruits girls for employment, not
usually said of women who recruit for the white slave traffic.
v {1} [AN; b8] recruit girls for employment, usually prostitution.
{2} [B156] become a white slaver.

Kurihidur n Corregidor, an island in Manila Bay.

kurihir v [A; b1] correct mistakes. Akuy mikurihir sa inyung tist
pípar, I corrected your test papers. Naúlaw siya nga gikurihian
atubángan sa kadaghánan, She was embarrassed because she was corrected
in public.

kurik exclamation of agreement that s.t. is the right thing. Kurik!
Dílì giyud siya ángayng pasaylúun, Right! He should not be pardoned.
Kurik nang Binisayáa, That’s correct Visayan. mau rag (si) — {1} as if
he were the real one, as if it were the real thing. Naghiraghírag ka
bayà sa silya sa manidyǐr, mu rag kurik! You are sitting and leaning
back in the manager’s chair as if you really belonged there! {2} know
it all. Patubagtúbag bisag dì makamau, mu rag si kurik, He
knows-it-all, answers all the questions (as if he knew). v = kurihir.
-siyun n correction. v [b1] correct an error. Ayaw kug kuriksiyuni,
Don’t correct me. Kuriksiyuni ang ákung mga sayup, Correct my mistakes.

kurikit n {1} variety of rice which yields a high quality cereal. The
grains are about 1 cm. long, white, smooth in texture and taste
comparatively good. {2} small variety of cooking banana.

kurìkurì v [AN; a2b2] putter around doing little things, petty chores.
Mga kurìkuríung mga búhat ni piru dúgayng mahuman, These are just
little odd chores but it’ll take a long time to finish them up.

kurindu v [A; c6] push, shove s.t. away that one doesn’t want. Ag
nawung nga mukurindu sa íyang plátu, mu rag daghag pagkáun sa íla, The
nerve of him to shove away his plate as though he had plenty of food at
home. Ikurindu ang irug musámuk nímu, Shove the dog away with your foot
if it bothers you.

kurinti = kuryinti.

kuríput a miserly, not liking to spend money. Kuríput kaáyu. Kamúti lay
ipaniudtu bisag daghang kwarta, He’s terribly cheap. He has nothing but
sweet potatoes for lunch even though he has plenty of money. v [B2; b6]
be, become miserly.

kuríring = kulíling.

kuriskuris v [A; b6] make squiggly or criss-cross lines on s.t.
Gikuriskurisan níya ang ákung drúwing kay nangísug siya nákù, He
scratched out my drawing because he was angry at me.

kurispundinsiya n correspondence, mail matter.

kurispunsal n news correspondent. v [B1256] become a news
correspondent.

kur-ispunsur n corps sponsor chosen to accompany an ROTC cadet
commander in social functions or activities. v [B156; c1] be, become a
corps sponsor.

kurista n a member of a choir or chorus. v [AB156; c1] make s.o. a
choir member; be a choir member.

kurit v [A; ab7] take a small pinch or piece of s.t. by pinching, pinch
a small area of s.t. Kurita lag bátà. Ayawg latusa, Just pinch the
child. Don’t spank him. Kurita kunu ang unud ug húmuk na ba, Try to nip
off a piece of the meat and see if it’s tender now. Nadáut ang purma sa
kík nga gikuritan, The cake is ruined now after you have picked a
little piece off the sides.

kuríya n {1} belt for the transmission of power or rotation. Kuríya sa
makina, The belt on the sewing machine. {2} cord used to tie around the
habit of devotees. Ang nagdibútu sa Birhin sa Karmin nagbakus ug kuríya
nga kapi, The devotees to the Virgin of Carmel wear brown belts.
v {1} [AB; b6] attach a belt for transferring motion. {1a} [a12] make
into such a belt or band. {2} [A13; b6] wear a cord around the waist
with a habit. {2a} [a12] make into such a cord.

kuríyu n mail. v [c6] send through the mails. — rihistrádu n registered
mail.

kur kamandir n cadet commander of an ROTC unit in a school. v [B156;
a2] be, become a corps commander.

kurkubádu, kurkubáwu a crooked, having a curve. Ilinya nímu sa papil
nang káhuy nga kurkubádu? Are you going to use that crooked stick to
line the paper? Kurkubádu siyag bukubuku, She has a crooked back.
v [B12P; a] become curved, crooked. n hunchback. Nagminyù siyag
kurkubádu, He married a hunchback.

kur kumandir = kur kamandir.

kurlir n hair curlers. v [A; b6] put hair curlers in the hair.

kurmáta = karumáta.

kurna_1 v {1} [A; c1] tow s.t. that cannot run on its own power.
Kurnáhun (ikurna) na lang nang dyíp ngadtu sa talyir, Better have the
jeep towed to the repair shop. {1a} drag s.o. s.w. Nangumprang gikurna
ang mga bátà, Shopping dragging the children along. {2} [AN; a2] find
s.o. unexpectedly s.w. and pick him up. Sundálu ang nagkurna sa tulisan
ngadtu sa búkid, A soldier found the bandit unexpectedly in the
mountains and picked him up. {2a} meet s.o. with goods of his own
production on the way to market and buy them from him. Ug makurna nímu
ang kuhà sa mananagat, barátu ra, If you can buy the fish directly from
the fisherman, it’s cheap. {2b} pick up a girl in a public place for
promiscuous petting. Adtu siya sa barátung sinihan mangurna, He goes to
cheap movie houses and picks up s.o. to pet with. {2c} [A; a12] take a
girl around for rides. Gwápa tung ímung gikurna gabíi, The girl you
took around last night was pretty. -da = kurna_1, 1.

kurna_2 = kurnir.

kurnáwu n {1} partners in a small business. {2} companion.
{2a} side-kick. Dì siya mubulag sa íyang kurnáwu, He won’t separate
from his side-kick. v [AC; c1] be business partners. Kurnawhun
(ikurnáwu) kung Pápa sa íyang nigusyu, Father will make me his business
partner.

kurnil = kurunil.

kurnir_1 v [AN; a2b2] {1} trap s.o. into marriage. Láyas kay makurnir
ka sa ginikánan sa ímung gipamabdus, Escape or you’ll be forced into
marriage by the parents of the girl you made pregnant. {2} trap a
criminal or s.o. into doing s.t. Wà makabalíbad ang amahan sa gipangáyù
sa íyang anak kay nakurnir giyud siya, The father couldn’t refuse his
daughter’s request because she trapped him into it. Miampù ang púga
dihang gikurnir siya, The escapee surrendered when he was cornered.

kurnir_2 n boxer’s corner in the ring.

kurnit n skin eruptions at the neck characterized by a copious flow of
pus from the eruptions; the knotted, ugly scars which this disease
leaves. Dalìdalía pagtambal nang ímung lusay kay arun dílì makurnit,
Treat that swelling on your neck immediately before it turns into ugly
scars. -un a having these eruptions or scars therefrom.

kurníta = kurnitin.

kurnitin n {1} cornet, a brass instrument. {2} bugle. v [A; c6] play
the cornet.

kurpinyu n k.o. loose blouse worn under a kimúna of the Filipina dress.
It is usually ornately decorated because it is seen under the kimúna.
v {1} [A; b] wear such a blouse. {2} [A; c1] make into such a blouse.

kurpiyu n {1} curfew. {1a} the whistle at curfew time. {2} sexual
intercourse (humorous usage). Kapila ang kurpiyu ninyu gabíi? How many
times did you have intercourse last night? v {1} [A3; b2] for the
curfew to sound. Dakpun ang makurpiyuhan sa karsáda, Anyone caught in
the streets when the curfew sounds is subject to arrest. {2} [AC2; b5]
have sexual intercourse.

kurpural n corporal in the military or police. v [B156; a2] be, become
a corporal, be made a corporal.

kurpurasiyun n {1} group of people associated for a common purpose.
Kurpurasiyun sa mga magyuyútà, Association of landowners. Kanang
napalit nga asyinda kurpurasiyun sa mga magsúun, The brothers formed a
corporation to buy the plantation. {2} pool of money to be spent for a
common good. v {1} [B156] organize oneself into an association.
{2} [C2; c1] pool money to spend for the benefit of everybody. Mag-ínum
ta piru magkurpurasiyun lang ta kay singkwinta rang ákù diri, Let’s
have a drinking spree, but let us pool our money because I only have
fifty centavos.

Kurpus Kristi n Corpus Christi.

kursan = kurusan. see kurus.

kursǐ n corset. v [A1; b] wear a corset.

kursikan n polo shirt (from the brand name Corsican). v [A1] wear a
polo shirt.

kursilyu n an association of lay people who go on a three-day retreat
to renew their faith. v [A1; b6] go on the kursilyu retreat.
kursilyista n one who has undergone this retreat. v [B16] become a
person who has gone on this retreat. Sukad siyang nakursilyista dakù
kaáyu ang íyang pagkabalhin, After he became a cursillista, he has
changed a lot.

kursit = kursǐ.

kursu_1 v [B3(1)N; b6] be full of guts or courageous in carrying out a
difficult course of action. Nagkursu ang inahan sa pagpaiskuyla sa
íyang mga anak, The mother moved heaven and earth to send her children
to school. Usáhay muinum ang ulitáwu arun makursung mudíga sa íyang
gipangulitawhan, Sometimes a young man drinks to summon enough courage
to speak his love to a lady.

kursu_2 n course of study, major subject. Nakatápus na siya sa kursu sa
midisína, He has finished medical school.

kursunáda n {1} guts, courage, drive. May kursunáda siya. Dì giyud
mahadluk musulay, He has guts. He is not afraid to try. {1a} unashamed
boldness, impudence. May kursunáda giyung tawhána sa pagpangáyù ug
umintu sa íyang súhul, That man had the nerve to ask for a raise in
salary. {2} have an interest in doing s.t. Wà kuy kursunádang mubayli
níya kay maut, I don’t feel like dancing with her because she is stuck
up. {3} a girl one is interested in. Mutambung kug sigúru sa parti kay
túa ang ákung kursunáda, I won’t fail to attend the party because a
girl I am interested in will be there. v [B2N; bN] get an interest,
guts enough to do s.t. Mukursunáda (mangursunáda) siyag hákut basta
suhúlan, He’ll develop an interest in hauling the stuff if you pay him.
Nakakursunáda ku human makainum, I became bold after I had a drink.
Sapátus nga ákung gipangursunadáhan (gikursunadáhan), The shoes I was
interested in.

kurt n court for playing games. balibul — volleyball court. baskitbul —
basketball court. tínis — tennis court.

kurta_1 n jackknife. -ng awtumátik switch blade. — diabaníku k.o.
jackknife with a single blade which is covered by two pieces which pull
apart and fold back to form the handle. — plúma penknife. v [a12] use,
stab with a knife. -dur(→) n in logging: {1} an apparatus which slices
planks or sawn timber into smaller sizes. {2} the operator of such a
machine.

kurta_2 a {1} for eggs or milk to be spoiled, usually from exposure to
sun. {2} for the brain to be addled. {3} for menstruation to stop or
hardly flow. v [B2; b6] {1} for eggs or milk to get spoiled. Mukurta
ang gátas (itlug) ug dílì hipúsun sa pridyidir, Milk (eggs) spoil if
you don’t keep them in the refrigerator. {2} for the mind to be addled.
Mikurta ang íyang útuk sa kahadluk, His brain became addled because of
his extreme fright. {3} [B246; b4] for menstruation to stop suddenly
before the proper time. Mukurta ang dugù ug mag-útas ug káun ug aslum,
Your menstrual flow will halt if you always eat lots of sour foods. -du
= kurta_2.

kurtal n cortal, a patent medicine for pain relief.

kurti_1 n {1} measure of cloth cut in advance. Tagpíla man ang kurti
íning karsunisúna? How much is this pant, material per cut? {2} shape,
type of a face. Nawung nga kurtig katsílà, A face with a Spanish shape.
{2a} style in which s.t. is cut. Nindut ug kurti ang ímung alut, Your
hair is cut in a nice style. Wà ku makagustu sa kurti sa íyang bistídu,
I don’t like the cut of her dress. v {1} [A; ab] delineate a desired
shape or pattern on s.t. to be cut or cut into a certain shape. Akuy
kurti sa panaptun ikay tábas, I’ll make the pattern on the cloth, you
cut it. Kurtíhag kinasingkásing paggabas ang tabla, Saw the wood into
the shape of a heart. Kurtíhan ta nang kílay mu, Let’s trim your
eyebrows. {2} [A; b(1)] cut a deck of cards. Wà pa gániy nakakurti, íya
nang gipanghátag ang mga baráha, No one has cut the cards, but he has
already dealt. {3} [A2; b6] join in a pleasurable activity where one is
not immediately concerned. Samtang gikasab-an ag míd, mikurti sab ku,
While they were cussing out the maid, I also put in my two bits.
Gikurtíhan sa mayur ang ílang pag-isturyahánay, The mayor put his two
bits into their conversation. {3a} participate in the giving of
punishment, usually physical punishment. Mikurti kug sumbag sa kawatan
nga hidakpan, I joined in mauling the thief they caught. {3a1} [b8] be
ganged up on. Hikurtihan siya pag-adtu níyas Pásil, S.o. ganged up on
him when he went to Pasil. {3b} [A; b(1)] acknowledge that s.o. has new
wearing apparel or haircut by touching the new thing. Nakakurti na ku
sa bag-ung sapátus ni Buy, I have already acknowledged Boy’s new shoes
by stepping on them. Kurtíhi si Ramun kay bag-ug tupi, Slap Ramon on
the head in acknowledgement of his haircut. {4} [A; b] use s.t.
belonging to s.o. else usually for a brief period of time. {4a} try
doing s.t. Nakakurti na bitaw kug sakays mutur, piru nabanggà ku, I
have tried driving a motorcycle, but I crashed. {5} [A; b] refute s.t.
said. Kurtíhan ku nang ímung gisulti, I will refute what you said.

kurti_2 v [A; b] {1} court a girl. {2} have sexual relations
(humorous).

kurti_3 n {1} court for ball games. {2} law court. — supríma n Supreme
Court. v [a3] for an incident to be brought to court.

kurtína n curtain. v {1} [AN; b] put up curtains. {2} [a12] make into a
curtain. paN- v [A23] for one’s slip to show. Unsa gud, pyista karun sa
inyu nga nangurtína ka man? Is it fiesta now (the time people hang up
curtains) because your slip is showing (lit. the curtains are up)?
kurtinahun n cloth to be sewn into curtains.

kurtin rísir n {1} preliminary boxing bouts before the main events.
{1a} boxer who fights only in preliminary bouts, usually in four
rounds. {2} a short play or skit presented before a longer and more
elaborate production. v [B156; c] be, become a curtain raiser. Pirmi ka
lang magkurtin rísir, wà giyud mamin-ibintir, You are always used as a
curtain raiser. You never fight in a main event. Ang ímung áwit mauy
ikurtin rísir sa dílì pa ang banggà, Your song will be made the curtain
raiser for the contest.

kurtisíya n good manners. Way kurtisíyang tawhána, He’s an ill-mannered
person.

kurtsítis = kutsítis.

kurtsu = kutsu.

kurtu a {1} made short, low. Kurtu na kaáyu run ang mga sinínà, Dresses
are very short these days. Kurtu ra kaáyu ning lamisáha pára
makinilyáhan, This desk is too low to type on. {2} — ug buut
short-tempered. Ang táwung way kwarta malagmit nga kurtu kaáyug buut,
If a man has no money he is likely to be short-tempered. v {1} [B2; c1]
be, become short, low. Putli ang ákung buhuk, piru ayaw lag kurtúha
(ikurtu) kaáyu, Cut my hair but don’t cut it too short. {1a} — sa buut
short-tempered. {2} [A13] wear s.t. short. Kanang nindut ug páa lang
ang magkurtu ug sinínà, Only those with pretty legs should wear short
dresses.

kúru n {1} choir. {1a} choir loft. {2} the refrain of a song following
the verse.

kúrù n {1} game played similarly to jackstones but different in that
the stone or ball must be caught in the palm before it hits the floor.
{2} = balinsay, n.

kúrug v [B2S; ab3(1)] tremble. Mikúrug ang yútà paglínug, The ground
shook during the earthquake. Nagkurug ang tíngug sa kalísang, Her voice
is trembling with fear. Ayaw kurúga ang lamísa kay mayabu ang sabaw,
Don’t shake the table or the soup will spill. n vibration, shaking. Ang
kúrug sa makina, The vibration of the machine. (→) a trembling,
quivering. Dì na siya hingígù kay kurug na ang íyang kamut, He is no
longer a sharp-shooter because his hands have become unsteady. v [B12]
become shaky, quivering. paN- v [A2S; b3] for a person to tremble.
Nagpangurug ku paghúbit sa dugúung kaági, I trembled as I recounted the
bloody event. ma-un a shaky, trembly.

kurúhay = kurutsay.

kúruk v {1} [A; a] call a chicken to come by saying krrrk-krrrk,
rolling the r’s in a high-pitched voice. {2} [A] for a chicken to go
krrrk-krrrk. Mikúruk ang sunuy sa dihang gihapyudhapyud, The rooster
went krrrk-krrrk when I patted him. n the krrrk-krrrk sound produced by
chickens.

kurukignul = krukignul.

kurukunghu a being a simpleton and slightly crazy. Lisud pasabtun ning
mga táwu nga kurukunghu, It’s very difficult to get simpletons to
understand. Naghúbù sa kadaghánan ang kurukunghu, The simpleton is
getting undressed in public. v [B12] be, become silly, witless, a
simpleton.

kurukuntung a eccentric in behavior, doing things deemed unusual if not
improper. Kurukuntung siya kay nagswitir ug ting-init, He is eccentric
because he wears a sweater during hot weather. v [B125; b6] be, become
eccentric.

kurukúru v [A; b6] for cocks to parry and stab on the wing. Lúgus maila
unsang manúka naigù sa nagkurukúru silang duha, It is hard to tell
which rooster was hit while the two were parrying and stabbing at each
other on the wing. Midágan ag íyang sunuy dihang gikurukurúhan sa ákù,
His rooster fled when mine parried and stabbed at it on the wing.

kurukutuk_1 n sound made by chickens in summoning other chickens. v [A;
b6] for a rooster or hen to make a sound like kurukutuk. Mingkurukutuk
dáyun ang sunuy pagkakità sa himungáan, The rooster immediately called
the hen when he saw her. Gikurukutukan sa himungáan ang íyang mga pisù,
The mother hen called her chicks.

kurukutuk_2 n k.o. bird, the zebra dove: Geopelia striata.

kúrum n {1} quorum of a meeting. {2} have a requisite number of people
for a game of cards or other table game. Kúrum na giyud ta, magmadyung
na ta dáyun, We’ve got a quorum, so let’s start our mahjong at once.
{3} have an intimate get-together, esp. for drinks (slang). Dúnay kúrum
sa ámung balay karung gabíi, We’ll have a drinking session in our house
tonight. v {1} [B13(1)6; b6] form a quorum in a meeting or for a game.
{2} [C; c] have an intimate get-together among friends.

kurúna n {1} crown of royalty or royalty in a pageant. {1a} garland put
on the head. {1b} crown as a symbol of supremacy. Maílug kahà ang
kurúna sa átung kampiyun? Will anyone wrest the champion’s crown from
him? {2} wreath of flowers as an offering for the dead. {3} priest’s
tonsure. {4} tails of a coin. {5} the curved lower part of the anchor.
Ang kurúna sa angkla mauy mag-una pagbungad sa bunbun, The crown of the
anchor touches the sand first. {6} a small side-compartment in the fish
corral (bungsud) into which the fish which were not caught in the main
compartment are driven. v {1} [A; b6(1)] crown royalty. Ang gubirnadur
mauy mikurúna sa hára, The governor crowned the beauty queen. Si Kristu
gikurunáhan ug tunuk, Jesus Christ was crowned with thorns. {1a} [a12]
make into a crown or wreath. {2} [A; b6] put a wreath on a grave or
coffin. {3} [b(1)] tonsure a priest. Gikurunáhan na ag manghud kung
siminarista, My brother in the seminary has already been given his
tonsure. {4} [B256; a2] for tails to come up in coin tossing. Mukurúna
(makurúna) gánì ni, ikaw na say antug, If this comes out tails, you
take a turn in tossing. paN- v [A2; b(1)] for the baby to crown in
delivery. Nangurúna na ang úlu sa bátà, The baby has already crowned.

kurunasiyun n coronation. v [A13] perform a coronation ceremony.

kurung_1 n chicken cage about 2–3′ high and just as deep and wide,
usually set in rows abreast. v [A12; b6] construct or put a chicken
cage s.w.

kurung_2, kúrung n veil or any other head covering used by women in
church. v [A; b] wear a veil on the head while in church. Salingawhan
ku ug dílì ku makakúrung sa simbahan, I feel uneasy if I do not wear a
veil in the church.

kurungkuntung a somewhat mentally retarded or not able to think. Dílì
makatumung sugúun ang táwung kurungkuntung, A person who is somewhat
retarded cannot do errands properly. v [B12] lose one’s common sense,
ability to think reasonably. Nakurungkuntung siya pagkabangkarúta sa
íyang nigusyu, After he went bankrupt he began to act unreasonably—as
if his mind were s.w. else.

kurunil n colonel in the military or police. v [B1256] be, become a
colonel.

kurunit n woman’s hair style in which the curled hair is formed like a
crown around the head.

kuruntù a stupid, not knowing what to say. Kuruntung tawhána. Ug
pangutan-un, dílì mutubag, He’s a stupid man. If you ask him a
question, he won’t answer.

kurupsiyun = kurapsiyun.

kurus n {1} cross, crucifix. Way kurus nga lubung, A grave without a
cross. {2} trouble, problem that tries one’s virtue. Ang pagkabisyúsu
sa íyang bána mauy kurus nga íyang giantus, Her husband with his vices
is a cross she has to bear. — pa cross my heart and hope to die. Kurus
pa, mangasáwa lagi ku nímu, Cross my heart, I’ll marry you. v {1} [A;
b] make the sign of the cross on s.t. Kurusi ang ímung ngábil ug
makalimut ka sa ímung isulti, Make the sign of the cross on your lips
if you forget what you were going to say. {1a} make a cross mark.
Ngánung ímu mang gikurusan ring ákung tubag nga hustu man? Why did you
mark my answer with a cross when it is correct? {2} [A1P] become s.o.’s
cross in life. Ang íyang bána nga himabayi mauy nakakurus (nakapakurus)
sa íyang kinabúhì, Her philandering husband was the cross she had to
bear in life. {3} [A; ab5c] cross s.t., bring s.t. across, cross each
other’s way. Mikurus siya pagdalì sa karsáda, She quickly crossed the
street. Tápus sa dúgayng panahun nagkúrus pag-usab ang ílang mga dálan,
After many years their paths crossed each other’s again. Kurusa
(kurusi) nang plása padúng sa simbahan, Cross that plaza on your way to
the church. (←) v [C; c1] be in a position crossing each other.
Magkúrus ta paghigdà arun dílì ku hitakdan sa ímung kútu, Let’s lie
crosswise so I won’t get your lice. kuruskurus v [A; b] make
criss-cross marks or lines on s.t. n {1} criss-cross lines. {2} k.o.
grass of waste places, with four or five short spikes, eaten by water
buffalo: Dactyloctenium aegyptium. {3} brittle star, k.o. sea creature
similar to a starfish but with long flexible tentacles that easily
break off. kuruskúrus v [A; a] travel or negotiate a distance back and
forth several times. Kuruskurúsan ni nákung kadalánan pagpangítà nímu,
I’ll go back and forth over those streets looking for you. paN- v [A2N;
b] make the sign of the cross. Nangurus siya pagkílat, She quickly
crossed herself when the lightning flashed. -an n {1} person having
crossed lines on the palm. Maáyu kag kapaláran kay kurusan ang ímung
pálad, You’ll have good luck in life because you have a cross on your
palm. {2} the spot at the center of the forehead between the eyebrows
in line with the nose. {3} place one crosses. {4} hammerhead shark.
kina-an n {1} the center of the forehead. Pagbantay nga dílì ka maigù
sa kinakurusan, Beware that you don’t get hit at the center of your
forehead. {2} center point of a junction of two streets.

kúrus n {1} chorus, refrain of a song. {2} chorus, a song rendition by
a group. v [A13; a12] {1} sing as a chorus. {2} answer in chorus.

kurut, kúrut v [AN; a] pinch, squeeze hard using the thumb and the
sides of the bent forefingers. Dúnay nagkúrut sa ímung buktun kay
nangalágum man, S.o. must have squeezed your arms because they’re
bluish.

kurutsay a call uttered by becalmed sailors to bring on the southwest
wind (habágat).

kúruy v [B2S46N] shiver with cold. Nangúruy siya sa katugnaw, He was
shivering with cold.

kuryinti n {1} electric current. {2} electric wire. Ang tabánug
nasángit sa kuryinti, The kite is entangled in the electric wire.
v {1} [A23; b] shocked with electricity. Kuryintihan kag hikápun nà
nímu, You’ll get a shock if you touch that. {2} [A23] give a feeling
similar to a shock when the soft area within the elbow joint is hit.
{3} [b(1)] for s.o. not invited to be taken along to a party by s.o.
who was invited (humorous). Nitambung sad sila sa parti kay
nakuryintihan tu sila, They attended the party as well because they
were taken along by one of the invited guests. {4} [A2; b] among
children, for a child to do to the person nearest him, what s.o. did to
him, and for the person who had that happen to him to go ahead and do
it to another child, and so forth. Nanghapak siya, dì gikuryintihan sab
dáyun nákù ang ákung tupad, He slapped me, and so I slapped my
seatmate. di- electrified, operated by electricity. -syan n electrician
(humorous slang).

kuryúsu_1 a queer, strange. Kuryúsu kaáyu nang buwáka kay mangalimyun
lag tungang gabíi, That is a very strange flower because it only blooms
at midnight. Midiyu kuryúsu ang kinaíya sa mga langyaw, Foreigners seem
to have queer ways. v [B12] become queer, odd. Ang pagkaláin sa íyang
úlu mauy nakakuryúsu (nakapakuryúsu) sa íyang linihukan, A mental
disturbance made him behave strangely.

kuryúsu_2 n k.o. arum, the roots of which are edible. It is violet and
when boiled it gets an even tenderness without becoming soggy.

kuryúsu_3 n k.o. spider conch.

kús = kulus.

kusáhus n {1} jerked meat, esp. beef, preserved with spices and dried
under the sun. {2} s.t. s.o. used in bathing hung over the line to dry
(so called because of the way it grows stiff on the line like jerked
meat). v [A; c1] jerk meat, esp. beef.

kúsaw v [A; a1] swish the liquid around. Kusáwa ang anyil sa túbig,
Swish the indigo around in the water.

kusay a fast in doing s.t. Kusay kaáyu kang mugamà ug kálù, You are
very fast in making hats. Kusay ang úras basta náay kalingawan, Time
goes by fast if you’re busy. v [B2; c1] accomplish s.t. rapidly; be,
become fast in doing s.t. Ayaw kusaya (ikusay) ang ímung pagkáun kay
hituk-an ka, Don’t eat so fast or you’ll choke.

kusbat {1} in a mess, disorder. Kusbat kaáyu ang ímung buhuk kay wà
nímu bubhúig brilyantin, Your hair is a mess because you didn’t put any
brilliantine in it. {2} having a nasty expression on the face.
v {1} [A; a12] tear s.t. apart with the hands or teeth. Mga irù ang
mikusbat sa baskit, The dogs tore the basket apart. {2} [AB1; ab4] get
in disarray, disordered; cause s.t. to become messy. Kinsay nagkusbat
íning butang sa lamísang mu rag giagiag bagyu? Who made this mess on
the table? It looks as though a tempest had passed over it. Nagkusbat
(gikusbátan) ang íyang nawung sa lápuk, His face was a mess with all
the mud. {3} [B; c1] for the face to get a nasty expression on it.
Mikusbat ang íyang nawung pagkáun sa aslum, Her face screwed up when
she ate the sour stuff.

kusi = kulasísi.

kusì v {1} [AN; a1b2] pinch. Kusiun ku ang ímung ngábil ug magsábà ka,
I’ll pinch your lips if you make any noise. {2} [A; b7] pinch off from.
Íyang gikusian ug gamay kaáyu ang íyang tsís, She got a very small
pinch from her cheese. n action of pinching. (←) v [A; a2] tear, rip.
Nakúsì ang ákung sinínà sa alambring tunukun, My shirt got torn on the
barbed wire. Ang mangupya kusían sa papil, Whoever copies will have his
paper ripped up. kusìkusì v [A; a] tear meat into small shreds.
Nagkusìkusì ku sa linat-ang manuk nga pára sa bam-i, I’m tearing the
cooked chicken into pieces to mix it with the noodles. paN- v [A]
causing a pricking or pinching pain. Nagpangusì ang kagútum sa ákung
tiyan, Hunger pangs are pinching my stomach. -in-ay(←) v [C] pinch one
another. Dì ta magkinusíay kay sakit, We won’t pinch each other because
it’s painful. -in-an n {1} part of the skin which is pinched.
{2} manner of pinching. hiN- a fond of pinching s.o.

kusína n kitchen. v [A; a] build a kitchen. paN- v [A2; a] work in the
kitchen, esp. preparing foods. Káda pyista sa íla aku giyuy mangusína,
Every fiesta I do the cooking at their place. a nothing compared to a
place. Kusína lang ang Urmuk sa Sibu, Ormoc City is nothing compared to
Cebu City. Kusína lang ning bildínga sa Lúim, This building is nothing
compared to the Lu Ym building. duul sa — a close to the powers that
be. Nakasulud dáyun siyag trabáhu kay duul ra man sa kusína, He landed
a job immediately because he is close to the powers that be. kusiníra
n female cook. kusiníru n chef. v [B56; a] be, become a chef. maistru —
n head chef.

*kusing way — not having any money at all. Wà giyuy ákù bísag kusing na
lang, I don’t have anything, even a single cent.

kúsing n (from singku) five centavos or five pesos (slang). Napildi
siyag kúsing sa hantak, He lost five pesos in the game of tossing
coins.

kusinilya n a pressure-burner stove using kerosene as fuel. v [A13]
cook on such burner.

kusísang = súkà (dialectal).

kusitsa = kutsitsa.

kuskus_1 v [A; a] strum a stringed musical instrument. Kinahanglang
kuskúsun ug kusug ang sista kay bungul, You must strum the guitar hard
because it’s dull. — balúngus making a lot of fuss about s.t., having
to meet a lot of useless requirements. Daghang kuskus balúngus ning
aplikasiyun. Daghang purma, daghang mga pirma nga way hinungdan, This
application involves too much red tape. There are too many forms, too
many irrelevant signatures. v [A; a1] put to a lot of needless trouble
and red tape. Kuskus balungúsun ang barku ug dílì hiphípan ang
tagakustum, The boat won’t be allowed to sail without a lot of red tape
if they don’t bribe the customs people. Daghang ikuskus balúngus ug wà
kay ikatíngal, They’ll give you a lot of trouble if you don’t have s.t.
to bribe them with.

kuskus_2 = kaluskus_1.

kuslad n host of lice and nits. v [B124; a4] for hair to be infested
with lice and nits. Sulúra ang nagkakuslad nga buhuk, Comb the
louse-infested hair with a fine comb. Sígi lag pangáwut sa buhuk ang
babáying gikuslad, The woman keeps scratching her hair because she is
infested with lice.

kusmáut v [B2S] grimace, distort one’s face. Mukusmáut ang nawung sa
babáying magbatì, A woman’s face becomes distorted with pain during
labor. Nagkusmaut ku sa kabahù, I’m grimacing from the smell. Nakusmáut
ang íyang nawung sa ritrátu, Her face is distorted in the picture. (→)
a grimacing, frowning.

kusmítik n cosmetic pomade in stick form. v [AN; b] apply stick pomade
to the hair.

kusmu v [b6] snort, blow air out through the nose and vocalize at the
same time. Gikusmúhan lang ku sa kabáyù, The horse snorted at me.
n snort. paN- v [A; b(1)] snort in anger or as a sign of displeasure.
Nagpangusmu ang bána sa kalágut nga milakaw ang íyang asáwa, The
husband snorted in anger upon hearing that his wife had gone out.
Nakapangusmu ku sa kabahù sa patay nga ilagà, I snorted with
displeasure at the smell of the dead rat.

kusmud v [B46; c1] pout and frown in displeasure or disapproval. Ayawg
kusmúra (ikusmud) nang nawung mu ug dì ka tumánan, Don’t pout when you
don’t get what you want.

kusmus n odorless variety of marigold with orange flowers and a single
row of wide petals.

kusnit v [A; b6(1)] {1} rip into little pieces, pinch off a tiny
portion from s.t. Mikusnit kug gamay sa ímung sinugbang isdà, I pinched
off a tiny portion from your broiled fish. Ayaw kusníta ang papil,
Don’t rip up the paper. {2} pinch, tweak. Kusníta ang íyang dunggan ug
dì mamínaw, Tweak her ears if she doesn’t listen. n {1} action of
ripping or pinching. {2} amount pinched off from. kusnitkusnit v [A;
a1] pinch s.t. softly many times over a surface to tickle or caress.
Duha ka babáyi ang mikusnitkusnit (nagkusnitkusnit) sa íyang áping
didtu sa bar, Two women were pecking at his cheeks in the bar. -in-an
n thing s.o. pinched. Nagdugù ang ímung kinusnitan, The part of the
skin that you pinched is bleeding.

kusnut a wrinkled, crumpled. Kusnut na kaáyu ning ákung sinínà, My
clothes are very wrinkled. v {1} [a] wrinkle, crumple. Sa ákung kalágut
gikusnut ku dáyun ang ákung papil, In my anger I immediately crumpled
my paper. {2} disarrange hair. Ayawg kusnúta ang ímung buhuk, Don’t
rumple your hair. {3} [AN; ab2] take hold of s.o. with a pinch and a
twist. Mukusnut (mangusnut) ra ba ku dáyun kun akuy maglágut, I readily
take hold and pinch when I am provoked. n wrinkle in cloth, paper, and
the like.

kuspag a for the hair to be in disarray. Kuspag pa ang íyang buhuk.
Bag-u tingáling nagmata, Her hair was still in disarray. She must have
just woke up. v [B; c1] for the hair to get dishevelled.

kuspidur n cuspidor.

kustabli n member of the Philippine Constabulary. v [B16; a2] be,
become a member of the Philippine Constabulary. kakustablíhan
n constabulary. -s = kustabli (plural).

kustabularya = kunstabularya.

kustanyíra n irregular slabs of wood which have been cut off from the
ends and sides of a log when it was squared off for sawing into lumber.

kustǎr_1 v [A] be worth, cost. Kining klasíha mukustǎr ug dus míl, This
kind costs two thousand.

kustǎr_2 v [A2] last, take a certain length of time. Mukustǎr ug dúgay
ang karni basta ibutang sa ripridyirítur, Meat will stay fresh long if
you keep it in the refrigerator. Makakustǎr sigúru ug dúgay ang
pag-imbistigar sa krímin, The investigation of the crime may well take
a long time. Kustahan giyud siyag tagurha ka túig sa íyang sapátus, His
shoes last him two years.

kustiyáda, kustiyar v [A12N; c] go, travel to another place for a
purpose. Mangustiyáda (mangustiyar) silag panugal, They go to other
places to gamble. Nagkustiya (nagkustiyáda) sila sa kabaryúhan ug
pamaligyag panaptun, They traveled to the rural areas to sell dress
material. paN- v {1} [A2; c] venture into some undertaking.
Nangustiyáda (nangustiyar) siyag apil sa banggà sa áwit, He ventured to
participate in the singing contest. Kining kantidára ígù nang
ipangustiyáda (ipangustiyar) ug nigusyu, This amount is enough to
venture into business with. {2} [A2; a12] make efforts, do whatever it
takes. Sa kawad-un mangustiyáda giyud ta arun mabúhì, Because of our
poverty we must do whatever is necessary to make ends meet. n {1} going
to other places for a purpose. {2} venturing to do s.t. {3} efforts
expended to achieve s.t. kustiyadur a one who ventures to go out to
other places with a purpose.

kustiyun = kwistiyun, n 2, 3; v 2, 3.

kustum n {1} customs bureau. taga- n people who work for the customs
bureau.

kustumbri n {1} customs, established practice of a group. Kustumbri
dinhi sa upisínang mangadyì úsà mutrabáhu, It is a custom in our office
to say a prayer before we begin work. Kustumbri sa mga Pilipínu nga
muamin sa mga tigúlang, It is the custom of Filipinos to kiss the hands
of their old folks. {2} characteristic nature of an individual. Ngil-ad
ug kustumbri nang babayhána, bintahúsa, That woman has a bad character.
She takes advantage of others.

kustumir n {1} customer in a store. {2} customer in a night club or
bawdy house. v [A12; b8] have as a customer. Nakakustumir siyag
kulat-ugun, She got a customer that had syphilis.

kustumri = kustumbri.

kusturíra n a seamstress. v [B156; b6] be, become a dressmaker.
Magkusturíra ag inyung baklà, Your son, who is a pansy, wants to become
a seamstress.

kusug a {1} fast, rapid. Kusug mudágan ang trín, The train travels
fast. Kusug kaáyu ang dágan sa úras, Time flies very quickly. {2} loud,
heavy or forceful motion. Kusug ang butu sa luthang, The bamboo cannon
gave out a loud boom. Kusug kaáyu ang pagkahagbà ni Sísar, Caesar fell
with a hard thug. Kusug nga bundak sa uwan, Heavy downpour. {3} selling
brisk. Kusug kaáyu ang pálit áning tindahána, This store does a brisk
business. {4} avid doer of s.t. Kusug siyang mangulikta ug silyu, He is
fond of collecting stamps. Kusug siyang mukáug mangga, He loves to eat
mangoes. v [AB3; c1] {1} do s.t. fast, rapidly, become fast, rapid;
cause s.t. to do so. Mikusug siya paglakaw kay nalít na siya, She
walked quickly as she was already late. Kinsa may nagkusug ug patúyuk
sa bintiladur? Who made the electric fan turn very fast? Nakusug
(mikusug) ang pag-andar sa makina, The engine started to revolve
faster. {2} do s.t. in a loud, heavy way; become loud, heavy. Kusga
(ikusug) pagsulti kay bungul nang ímung gikaatúbang, Talk loudly
because the person you are conversing with is deaf. Dílì ni makakusug
hangína, This won’t develop into a strong wind. {2a} [A12] have
strength to do s.t. Káun pag-áyu arun makakusug kag dáru, Eat well so
you’ll have the strength to plow. {3} [B2; b(1)] for sales to become
brisk. Ang pálit sa dulyar mauy gikusúgan karun, Dollar-buying is brisk
business nowadays. {4} [B2; b4] do s.t. avidly, at a rate more than
normal. Mukusug siyag káun basta ganáhan, He eats plenty if he feels
like it. Gidalì pagtabang ang bag-ung nanganak kay gikusgan sa dugù,
The woman who has just delivered was treated as an emergency case
because she was bleeding fast. n {1} dynamic strength, force. Wà na kuy
kusug itrabáhu tungud sa kagútum, I have lost my strength to work
because of hunger. {2} muscle. Nangugdal ang kusug sa barbiládu, The
weight lifter’s muscles bulged. paN- v [A2; b(1)] {1} exert strength,
do s.t. energetically. Nangusug siyang miupunir sa ákung musiyun, He
opposed my motion energetically. Wà maalsa ang lamísa kay wà ku
makapangusug, I didn’t lift the table because I didn’t exert enough
effort. Pangusgi pagpugung ang bátà arun dì kadágan, Hold the child
securely so he can’t run away. {2} tense one’s muscles. Ayaw pangusug
ug indyiksiyunan ka, Don’t tense your muscles if you are injected.
hiN-(←) v [A13N; b(1)] do s.t. as quickly as one can, putting all one’s
energy into it. Naghingúsug (nanghingúsug) mi sa pagtiwas niíni dáyun,
We are putting all our efforts into finishing this right away. Hayáhay
sila samtang nanghingúsug pa ang ílang tindáhan, They lived in comfort
as long as their store continued at its height of activity. Sa
paghingúsug sa kampanya daghang mga ginamus ang nayagyag, At the height
of the campaign, we witnessed lots of dirty linen being washed in
public. kusgan a strong. Gamay apan kusgan, He is small but strong.
gi-un, kakusgun n {1} speed. {2} loudness or intensity. {3} briskness
of sales. pa-(←) n {1} contest of strength. Ang barbil pakúsug,
Weight-lifting is a sport that involves a contest of strength.
{2} rough play. v [A13] play rough.

kusukúsu v {1} [A; a] rumple or rub s.t. in the hands. Kusukusúha ang
papil nga iílu, Rub the paper to soften it so you can use it for toilet
paper. {1a} [A; b5] rub to remove dirt or stains in washing.
Kusukusúhag (kusukusúhig) maáyu ang sinabunan, Rub the clothes
vigorously after you soap them. {1b} [A; a] rub in washing the hair.
Kusukusúha ang buhuk arun mubulag maáyu ang syampu, Rub it well so that
the shampoo will get nice and foamy. {1c} [A; a12] twirl the beater in
the palms to beat a chocolate drink. {2} [A; a12] treat s.t. violently.
Gikusukúsu ang kalubihan sa kusug hángin, The coconut grove was lashed
by the violent wind. Kusukusúhun ku kanang ímung bátang lampingásan,
I’ll give that naughty child of yours a sound thrashing. {2a} [a12]
beat soundly in a game. Gikusukúsu námù ang ílang tím, We thrashed
their team soundly. n = buluníyu.

kusung a for cloth or thin sheets to be wrinkled, crumpled, creased.
Ayawg sulati nang papíla kay kusung kaáyu, Don’t write on that paper.
It’s all crumpled. v [A; a] wrinkle, crumple. Kining panaptúna húmuk
kaáyung makusung, This k.o. material wrinkles easily. Dì na ku musul-ub
ning sinináa. Gikusungan na ku niíni, I won’t wear this dress any more.
It looks so crumpled to me.

kút n coat. — an tay n coat and tie outfit. v [A] wear a coat.

kúta n quota, a certain quantity assigned to be met. v [A13; b6(1)]
give s.o. a quota. Gikutáhan mig tagnapúlù ka tíkit, We were given a
quota of ten tickets to sell.

kútà n fort. v [A1; a] make a fort.

kútab = kátab.

kutána v [a1] ask a question, inquire about. Kutan-a siyag unsa ni, Ask
her what this is. paN- v [A; b5] ask a question, inquire about.
Nangutána ang kustumir sa prisyu, The customer asked about the price.
Syárug wà tay kapangutan-an (mapangutána) nga uturidad sa panulat, We
could surely ask s.o. who is an authority on writing. Unsay ímung
ipangutána? What would you like to ask? n question, asking.
mapangutan-un a questioning, showing curiosity.

kutang_1 v [A; b6] faint. Mikutang si Pí pagkabasa sa tiligráma, Fe
fainted upon reading the telegram. Ínit kaáyu didtu sa kwartung íyang
gikutangan, It was hot inside the room where she fainted.

kutang_2 v [B] for s.t. that flows or blows to lessen in intensity.
Manágat tag mukutang na ang hángin, Let’s go fishing once the wind
stops blowing. Turniki ra ang nakakutang (nakapakutang) sa dugù sa
íyang samad, The tourniquet caused the flow from her wound to stop.

kutang_3 = gutang.

kutas_1 a {1} panting for breath from exhaustion. Kutas bayà kaáyu.
Ayaw giyud kug sugúa, I’m so exhausted. Don’t make me do anything yet.
{2} causing s.o. to run out of breath. Kutas trabahúa, Terrible hard
work that makes you pant. v [A123P; b4] cause to be gasping or panting
for breath. Gikutasan lang kug inagpas nímu, I was panting from trying
to catch up with you. pa- v [A; b(1)] work s.t. till it pants for
breath. Ayaw pakutasi ang kábaw. Tangtangig palunánga, Don’t work the
carabao till it’s panting. Unhitch it and let it wallow from time to
time. paN- v [b4] be severely short of breath. hiN- v [A13] gasp for
breath when one is dying. Ang aláut nga masakitun naghingutas na, The
patient is exerting great effort to catch his breath. ka- n hard
breathing. -l-an(←) n prone to running out of breath.

kutas_2 a hungry. Mangáun na ta kay kutas kaáyu, Let’s eat now because
I’m very hungry. v [B2; b4] feel, be hungry. Gikutasan na tingáli nang
bátà, The child must be hungry now.

kutat v [B; b4] abate, for a flow to weaken. Salámat kay mikutat na ang
bagyu, Thank heavens, the wind has finally abated. Mikutat ang gátas sa
inahan, The mother’s milk gave out. Walay pagkutat ang ági sa mga táwu
sa háyà, The flow of people that passed by the bier did not subside. Ug
kutatan ta sa bahà, mutabuk ta, When the flood subsides, we can cross.

kútaw v [A; a] {1} stir two liquids or a liquid and powder around to
mix them. Kutáwag maáyu ang pintal, Stir the paint up well. Kutáwi ra
kug niskapi, Please mix me some instant coffee. {2} stir up water and
disturb it. Nakútaw ang dágat tungud sa kusug nga hángin, The sea was
stirred up in the strong winds. {3} get disturbed, confused. Suliran
nga mikútaw sa ákung hunàhúnà, Problems that disturbed my thoughts.
Makútaw ang kalínaw sa panimalay kun magbisyu ang bána, The peace in
the family will get disrupted if the husband takes up a vice. {4} — ang
líbug v [B; c1] be confused or worried as to what to do. Nagkútaw ang
ákung líbug ug diin tu nákù ikabutang ang ákung rilu, I’m confused as
to where I could have put my watch. Nakútaw ang ákung líbug nímu, I
don’t know what to do about you. (→) n stirrer.

kutay v {1} [A1; c] string a line from one point to another. Nagkutay
kug písì pára hayháyan, I tied a rope for the clothesline. Ikutay ang
mga bumbilya sa duha ka halígi, String the light bulbs up between the
two posts. {2} [B146; c] place, arrange things in line. Nagkutay siyag
batu daplin sa alagían, He lined the pathway with stones. Nagkutay ang
mga pumapálit sa tíkit, The people buying tickets were standing in a
long line. n {1} line; row of. Ang kutay sa bungtud milagbas sa duha ka
baryu, The range of mountains stretches across the two barrios. Naputul
ang kutay sa íyang hunàhúnà pagkadungug sa butu, The trend of his
thought was interrupted when he heard the explosion. {2} rope.

kuthan see kutu.

kuti a {1} intricate, requiring close attention and exactness. Kuti
kaáyu ang pagburda sa kamut, Hand embroidery is very intricate work.
{1a} intricate and thus tiresome. Kuti kaáyung pitsipitsing atubangun,
Tiresome little details to take care of. {2} thoroughly done, with
attention to doing details. Makuting imbistigasiyun, A thorough
investigation. — báru trouble, bother. Kuti báru kaáyu ang paghímug
hamun, It’s a nuisance to make ham. v [A13B12; a2] become intricate,
complicated. kutikúti v [A; a12] going into small details, fussing over
minor details. Ang ámung agáwun mukutikúti giyud ug inspiksiyun sa
ámung ági, Our master inspects our output to the minutest detail.
n fuss, bother. a inquisitive about every aspect of a thing. Kutikúti
siyang pagkabátà, sígi lang pangutána, He is a very inquisitive child.
He keeps asking questions. kutikutihan a fussy, paying attention to
small details. makutíhun a doing things with great attention to
details. Makutíhung tukì, A very detailed investigation. kutiháwu
a meticulous, extremely or excessively careful in details. Pulídu ang
íyang búhat kay kutiháwu kaáyu, Her work is highly polished because
she’s very meticulous. v [B12] be very meticulous over details. Ug dì
ka makutiháwu daghang sayup nga mulusut, If you don’t get fussy over
details lots of errors will make their way into the work.

kúti = kasing.

kútib v [B3(1); c1] for the lips to move rapidly as in mumbling or
eating. Mikútib (nakútib) ang bàbà sa tigúlang nga nangadyì, The
woman’s lips are moving fast in prayer. Bàbà nga nagkutib sa pagkináug
pakwan, A mouth moving rapidly, chewing watermelon seeds.

kutíhu n list of winning numbers in a raffle or draw. v [A; c1] compare
the list of winners against one’s tickets. Dúna kuy tíkit nga ákung
ikutíhu (kutihúun), I have a ticket that I will compare to the list of
winning numbers.

kútiks n {1} sanitary napkin, so called from the brand name Kotex.
{2} nail polish so called from the brand name Cutex. v {1} [A1] wear a
sanitary napkin. {2} [A] polish fingernails, wear a certain k.o.
fingernail polish. paN- v [A2] polish one’s nails. Mangútiks ku kay
mamista, I’m going to polish my nails because I’m going to the fiesta.

kútil n drink consisting of palm toddy (tubà) mixed with eggs and/or
hot chocolate. v [A; a] {1} mix a strong drink with a non-intoxicating
beverage, esp. palm toddy with eggs and/or hot chocolate. Káda buntag
sayu magkútil giyud siyag itlug, tubà ug sikwáti, Early every morning
he drinks an egg-cocktail. {1a} mix any sort of drink. Magkútil kug
gátas pára sa bátà, I will mix a formula for the baby. {2} [B125; a12]
for the mind to get all disturbed or confused. Nakútil ang ákung úlu
pagpininsar unsay ibáyad, My mind is in a whirl thinking of how to pay.
kutilkútil, -in- = kútil, n.

kutim v [A; a1] nibble small hard seeds. Paspas mukutim ug humay ang
ilagà, Rats nibble rice grains fast. Kutima ang pakwan, Chew on the
dried melon seeds.

kuting_1 n kitten.

kuting_2 n bedbug. v [a4] be infested with bedbugs. Gikuting ang mga
silya sa sinihan, The seats in the movie house are infested with
bedbugs. -un a infested with bedbugs. Kutingun kaáyu ning katríha, This
bed is very much infested with bedbugs.

kúting n coat of paint.

kutingkuting n sound of the strumming or plucking of the strings of
musical instruments. Náa tingáli mangharána kay náa may kutingkuting,
There must be some serenaders now. I seem to hear the strumming of
strings. v {1} [A2; a1] sound a stringed instrument by plucking or
strumming. {2} [a12] have lots of little things to do. Daghan pa kug
kutingkutingun sa báy, I have lots of little things to do in the house.
n things one might collect or little things to do.

kútir = kútil.

kútis n skin texture, fineness of complexion. v [A12] get a certain
k.o. complexion. Makakútis lang kug sáma sa ímu, If I only could have a
complexion like yours!

kutítub a {1} given to talking, loquacious. Ang babáying kutítub bísag
sa simbahan magpúnayg tabì, A talkative woman keeps babbling away, even
in church. {2} given to talking back, murmuring against, or making lots
of unpleasant, irritating remarks. Kutítub nang batáa. Ug kasab-an
mutubag giyud, That child is big-mouthed. He talks back when you scold
him. v [B12; b6] {1} become talkative. {2} be given to talking back,
murmuring, or making lots of unpleasant remarks.

kutkut v {1} [A; a] scrape off s.t. hard by rubbing on it back and
forth. Kutkúta ang takuling sa kaldíru, Scrape off the soot on the pot.
{2} [A; ab2] paw s.t. up, dig s.t. up like a dog. Daliag kutkut ang
kamúti, Dig up the sweet potatoes fast. Gikutkut sa irù ang gilubung
nga bukug, The dog dug up the buried bones. {2a} befriend a person for
what one can get out of him, be a gold digger. Gikutkut lang ang byúda
sa palikíru, The gigolo was just getting what he could out of the
widow. {3} [AN; a] scratch an itch. Nangutkut siya sa íyang úlu, He
scratched his head. Kutkútun ku ning katul sa ákung tiil, I will
scratch this itch on my feet. {4} [AN; a] gnaw. Nalúngag ang bungbung
nga gikutkut sa balagtuk, Some rats gnawed a hole into the wall.
Gikutkut ang ákung tiyan sa kagútum, Hunger gnawed at my stomach. -in-,
-ag-, -inag- n sound of gnawing. -in-an n gnawed part of the thing,
having a gnawed part. Ang kapáyas nga hinug dúnay kinutkutan sa kabug,
The ripe papaya has a hole where the bat pecked on it.

kutlì v [A; ab2] break off s.t. soft by twisting it between the thumb
and index finger. Kutlía ang mga bátung, Break up the string beans into
small pieces.

kutlig v [A; a] detach or pick s.t. tiny between the fingers or teeth
with a quick twisting or snapping motion. Mikutlig si Tátay ug tabákù
nga íyang gimaskáda, Father bit off a piece of tobacco to chew. Kutlíga
lang ang mga udlut. Ayawg gabnúta, Just pick the young leaves gently.
Don’t rip them off.

kutlù v {1} [A; a] break off a flower, leaf, seed stalk, bud carefully.
Ángay na bang kutlúun ning buláka? Is this flower right to pluck?
Kutlúag udlut ang tabákù arun mudagkù ang dáhun, We pluck the buds off
the tobacco plant so the leaves will get bigger. {1a} reach for the
stars (literary). Kutlúun ku ang mga bitúun tungud kanímu, I’ll pluck
the stars for you. {2} [AN; a2] pick out a quotation, take s.t. from a
certain source. Sirmun nga gikutlù gíkan sa Salmu, Sermon taken from
the Book of Psalms. Ay in is ang kutlúan níla sa balità, They get their
news from the I.N.S. (International News Service). -in- n quotation,
s.t. gotten from a certain source. paN- n action of harvesting rice.

kúts n coach, usually for a team. v {1} [A; b6] coach a team. Way
nagkúts sa ákung diklamasiyun, Nobody coached me for my declamation.
Unsang tíma ang ímung gikutsan? What team are you coaching? {2} [B156;
a12] be a coach. Nakúts siya sa ámung tím sa baskitbul, He used to be
our basketball coach.

kutsára n tablespoon. Gáwì sa kutsára ug tinidur igkáun nímu, Use a
spoon and fork when you eat. v {1} [a] eat with a tablespoon.
Kutsaráhun diay ang kúkis? Are you going to eat the cookies with a
spoon? {2} [A; a12] spoon s.t. out. Kutsaráha ang harína, Get the flour
out with a spoon. Gikutsára sa duktur ang gilúgus, The doctor took a
spoonful of secretion from the girl that had been raped. paN- v [A2]
use a tablespoon on s.t., eat with a tablespoon. kutsaríta
n {1} teaspoon. {2} k.o. fleshy ornamental herbs grown for their
colorful leaves as a border plant: Alternanthera spp. v [A13; a] use,
eat with a teaspoon. kutsarun n ladle, large serving spoon. Kutsarun
ang isanduk sa linúgaw, Use a ladle to scoop out the porridge.
v {1} [A1; a1] dip out with a ladle. {2} [b6] provide with a serving
spoon or ladle. Kutsaruni ang sabaw inigsilbi nímu, Provide a ladle for
the soup when you serve it.

kutsi n car, automobile. v {1} [A13; a2] ride in a car, use as a car.
Kutsíhun pa giyud nà nga kaduul ra niánà? Do you need to go there by
car when it is so near? {2} [A12] get an automobile.

kutsilyu n table or kitchen knife. v {1} [b5] use a kitchen knife.
Kutsilyúha (kutsilyúhi) ang litsun, Cut up the roast pig. {2} [b]
supply with a table knife. paN- v [A2] use a knife. Ang mga Amirikánu
nga magkaun mangutsilyu giyud, When the Americans eat, they are sure to
use knives. huwis di- n massacre.

kutsína = kutsínu_2 (female).

kutsinta = pútu kutsinta. see pútu_1.

kutsínu_1 a unthinking about small but important details. Kutsínu ning
mutsatsáha kay nagbáli ang kutsára ug tinidur, What a careless maid.
Her mind must be in the clouds because she put the tablespoons and
forks on the table backwards. v [B1245; b6] doing things without
thinking. Nagkakutsínu siya nga síging naghunàhúnà ug piknik, He
doesn’t think about what he is doing because his mind is on the picnic.

kutsínu_2 a dirty in one’s habits. Kutsínung bataána, nagkupaykúpay sa
íyang linúgaw, That child has dirty habits. He plays with his porridge.
v [B12; b6] be, become uncleanly or dirty in one’s habits. Gikutsináhan
ku nímu dà, dúgay kang mag-ílis, I think you’re a slob because you
rarely change your clothes.

kutsínu_3 a be the one in a group that fails to do s.t. Kutsínu ang way
kwarta, dì kauban, Whoever doesn’t have any money will be left out. He
cannot come along. v [B126; a2] fail to do s.t. that others in a group
get to do. Makutsínu ang maulahig mata, dì na kapamahaw, Whoever wakes
up late will be left out. He won’t have any breakfast. Nakutsínu siya
kay wà makatápus sa pagtuun, She wound up the only one who didn’t
finish her studies.

kutsíru n rig, coach driver. v [A3; a2] be a rig driver. Kinsa may
nagkutsíru sa ímung tartanilya? Who is the driver of the rig you were
riding on? paN- v [A2; b(1)] be a rig driver by occupation. Wà may
láing pangítà, mangutsíru na lang siya, He has no other job, so he just
drives a rig. n the occupation of rig driving.

kutsítis n small snap fasteners on clothing. v [A; b] attach snap
fastener on s.t. paN- v [A2] fasten one’s snaps. Milakaw siya nga wà
makapangutsítis sa kílid, She went out without snapping up her sides.

kutsitsa n {1} crop, harvest. Ikaduha kining kutsitsa námù karung
tuíga, This is our second harvest this year. {2} amount harvested.
Gamay ra tung kutsitsa, It was a small harvest. v {1} [A; b(1)] have
[so-and-so] many crops. Mukutsitsa kamig katulu sa usa ka túig, We can
have as many as three harvests a year. {2} [A; c6] raise, plant a
certain crop. Gustu ka bang mukutsitsa ug kurikit karung timpúha? How
would you like to raise kurikit rice this season?

kutsu n k.o. women’s slipper, made of thick soles and solid cloth or
leather end. v [A1; c6] wear this sort of slipper.

kutsukutsu v [A; b3] make a lot of fuss, ado about s.t. Nagkutsukutsu
siya kay gamay ra ang íyang báhin, He is making a fuss because he only
got a small share. n fuss.

kutsun n cushion. v [A1; a] use, have, be provided with a cushion, make
into cushions, use as cushions. di- having cushions. Dikutsun giyud ang
ílang mga lingkuránan, Their seats are all upholstered or have
cushions.

kutu v [b4N] be extremely hungry. Gikuthan (gipanguthan) na ku sa
pinaábut nga malútù ang paniudtu, I’m starved waiting for lunch to be
cooked. kutukutu n pit of the stomach. v [a12] hit in the pit of the
stomach. Gikutukutu nákù siya pagsumbag, I hit him in the solar plexus.

kútu_1 n head louse. v [a4] be infested with head lice. Kutúun ka giyud
ug dì ka malígù, You will get infested with lice if you don’t bathe.
hiN- v [AN; b6(1)] delouse the head. Hingut-i (hingutúhi) ang bátà kay
síging paniksik, Delouse the child because she keeps scratching her
head. hingut-ánay v [C; c3] pick each other’s lice. kutuhun, kutuun
{1} infested with lice. {2} for a woman to have the karapáta, a k.o.
louse spread by sexual contact. Ayawg paduul ánang bayhána kay kutuun
nà, Don’t get near that woman. She is full of lice in the genitals.
v [B1256] become a woman of this sort.

kútu_2 v [A] cut down, hold back on doing s.t. Mikútu siya sa íyang
pagkáun ug bábuy tungud sa íyang prisiyun, He is restricting his intake
of pork because of his high blood pressure. Kinahanglan giyud nga
kutúhan (kuthan) nátù ang átung paggastu, We have to limit our
spending. (→) n action of restraining oneself.

kútù_1 a fast in doing s.t. or getting s.t. done. Kútù siyang mulálag
banig, She weaves mats quickly. v [B3; c1] do s.t. rapidly. Makútù
(mukútù) ang dágan ánang rilúha ug yawíhan, That watch runs fast when
you wind it. Ug ímung kutúun (ikútù) pagsulti, dì ku makasabut nímu,
When you talk rapidly, I can’t make out anything you say.

kútù_2 n creak or cracking sound. v [A2; a12] creaking or cracking
noise. Mikútù ang salug nga kawáyan sa ákung pagtunub, The bamboo floor
creaked as I stepped on it. Mikútù ang sanga, dáyung kabálì, The branch
made a cracking sound and then broke. kutùkutù v [A] make a crackling
noise. Mukutùkutù ang sitsarun inig-úsap, Fried pork rinds make a
crackling noise when you chew them.

kutub a having wrinkles sewn into it. v [B6] for sewing to come out so
that wrinkles appear in unintended places. Mukutub (makutub) ang buktun
sa ímung sinínà ug dì nímu ilagdà, The sleeves of your dress will come
out wrinkled if you sew them directly without basting them.

kútub {1} as far as a certain point in space or time. Kútub ang karsáda
sa Bukánu, The road reaches as far as Bocano. Kining trabahúa kútub ra
sa Disimbri, This job will last only to December. Ása kútub kining
dalána? Where does this road go up to? {1a} — sa [word referring to
action] only as much as doing, no more than. Kútub ra sa paghisgut, way
líhuk, They only went so far as to discuss it. They didn’t take any
action. {2} as much as. Gikúhà níla kútub sa ílang madala, They took as
much as they could carry. {2a} whatever, anyone. Patákà ka lag tubag
kútub sa ímung mahunàhunaan, You just take a stab saying whatever
enters your head. {3} — karun starting now. Kútub karun dì na ka
mamisíta nákù, From now on don’t visit me any more. -in-an, kinutbánan
n end, limit. Walay kinutúban ning ákung pag-antus, My suffering has no
end. v [B2456] last, go as far as. Basta mukútub ra sa háluk, way
piligru, As long as it does not go beyond kissing, there’s no danger.
Ug mukútub sa alas utsu ang prugráma, makapanini pa ka, If the program
doesn’t last later than eight o’clock, you still have time to go to the
show.

kutubkutub n throbbing, low, booming sound. Kutubkutub sa lansa, The
put-put of the launch. v {1} [A] make a low throbbing or booming sound
from a distance. {2} [A; a12] mumble words incoherently. Sugúun gánì nà
siya, mukutubkutub dáyun ang bàbà, When you ask her to do s.t., she
immediately starts mumbling under her breath. Dì makláru ang pangadyì
kay nagkutubkutub lang ang bàbà, You can’t understand the prayers
because they are just mumbled.

kutud v [B; b4] for liquids to slow down or stop flowing at the source.
Mikutud na ang tubud, The stream dried up. Sustinihi lag pananggut ug
dì pa makakutud ang buluk, Keep getting the juice from the bud before
it stops flowing. Nagkakutud na giyud ang ákung gátas, My milk is
growing less and less in quantity. Gikutdan na ang gúma, The rubber
tree has ceased giving latex.

kutukkutuk = kurukutuk_1.

kutul v [A; ab7] pinch s.t. hard with the thumb and the index finger.
Kutulun (kutlun) ta ka ug dì ka mamínaw, I’ll pinch you if you don’t
listen. Ayawg kutli ang kík, Don’t pinch anything off that cake.

kutuy v {1} [A; a] pinch a comparatively small area of the skin, esp.
with the nail of the thumb and a finger. Mikutuy siya sa ákung buktun
ágig paráyig, She pinched my arm as a sign of affection. {2} [B146]
feel a sharp, steady pain in the stomach or pangs of hunger. Wà man gud
kuy pamáhaw, nagkutuy na ang ákung tiyan, I’ve had no breakfast, so I’m
having hunger pangs now.

kuub a bent forward in body posture. Ságad sa mga tigúlang kuub ug
láwas, Most old people have bent bodies. v {1} [B1; c1P] be bent
forward. Nagkuub ang ímung láwas. Itísu, Your body is bent forward.
Straighten up. {2} [AB] be lying face down, place s.t. face down.
Nakuub ang bátà sa salug, The child was lying face down on the floor.
Ikuub (kuuba) ang mga kaldíru, Place the pots face down. (←)_1 v =
kuub, v2.

kúub_2 v [A; b] snuggle up under a blanket of the like. Mikúub ku sa
hábul pagtunghà sa kág, I curled up in a blanket when the ghost
appeared. Gikuúban sa himungáan ang íyang mga pisù, The mother hen
covered her chicks with her wings.

kúug v {1} [B346] for the head to move to and fro or up and down with
short, rapid movements. Mikúug ang úlug dinágan, His head shook as he
ran. {2} [A23] go away hurriedly without turning the head to any
direction but forward. Mikúug lang siyag lakaw, wà gánì ku hulata, She
went out straight away without waiting for me. kuugkuug v [B146] shake
involuntarily, as with weakness or disease. Magkuugkuug nga maglakaw
ang paralitiku, A paralytic trembles when he walks.

kúul n k.o. edible bubble shell.

kúum v [B246] double up in pain, esp. as a result of a blow in the
solar plexus. Mikúum ku dihang naigù ku sa kutukutu, I doubled up in
pain when I received a blow in the pit of the stomach.

kúup n canteen in school or small business establishment run on a
cooperative, non-profit basis.

kuupirar v [A2; b] cooperate, do s.t. to facilitate the accomplishment.
Mikuupirar ang mga ginikánan sa pagpamaligyà sa tíkit, The parents
cooperated with their children helping them sell tickets. Mabungkag ang
punduk ug dì mukuupirar ang tanan, The group will be dissolved if
everybody doesn’t cooperate. kuupirasiyun n cooperation.

kuurdinadur n coordinator. v [B156] become a coordinator.

kuurdinasiyun n coordination.

kúut v [A; a] {1} thrust one’s hand into a small place to fish s.t. out
or just feel it. Mikúut siya sa íyang bulsa pagtan-aw ug náa pa bay
sinsilyu, He felt around in his pocket to see if he had any more
change. Kuútun sa duktur ang bátà ug maglísud ang pag-anak, The doctor
pulls the baby out if it is a difficult delivery. {2} pick a pocket or
handbag. Gikuútan ku. Wà gánì kuy ikapamilíti, My pocket was picked. I
don’t even have carfare. {3} do s.t. underhanded, pull strings to get
s.t. done. Kuútun kung ímung aplikasiyun arun madáwat, I’ll pull some
strings with your application to make sure it is accepted. {4} [A; a12]
fall back on s.t. Maáyu gánì nga dúna tay gamayng tinipígang makúut,
It’s a good thing that we have some small savings to fall back on.
{5} [A; a12] tap s.o. to liquidate him. Gikúut ang impurmir sa mga
girilyista, The guerrillas tapped the informer for liquidation.
{6} [AN; ab2] touch s.o.’s genitals. Kuúta lang ug gustu ka, Go ahead
and touch it if you want to. {7} [A12; c1] get in a blow or a shot in
basketball under difficult circumstances. Bísag maáyung gwardiya kuútun
ni Martiris, Martires can outmaneuver the best of guards. paN-
n {1} pickpocketing. {2} catching of sea life by sticking the hands
into holes or crevices. kuutkúut n getting in shots or blows under
difficult circumstances. -l-un(→) a intricate, difficult. Kuutun ning
prublimáha. Dílì ni masulbad, This is a difficult problem. We can’t
solve it. Kuutun na kaáyu ang túbig sa bangà kay hápit na mahurut, The
water in the jar is very difficult to reach because it’s almost gone.
Kuutun kaáyu ang mga tapuy nga íyang gigámit, He uses very difficult
chords. Kuluutung nutáha, A difficult-to-reach note. — sa kuluutun
manage to do s.t. difficult by exerting oneself to the utmost (reach in
to get the things difficult to get). Bída ning may ámut, unyà way
kwarta. Makakúut ta sa kuluutun, God! When they take up a collection,
if we don’t have money, we have to come up with it somehow. maN-r-(→)
n pickpocket.

kuuykuuy a feeble, trembling with weakness. v [B146] become trembly
with weakness. Nagkuuykuuy siya sa katiguwangun, He’s shaking all the
time because he is so old.

kuwa- for words beginning with kuwa- see also kula- and kwa-.

kuwak = miriku, n.

kuwan = kuan (dialectal).

kuwing n guinea pig.

kuyabug n {1} nestling, a young bird that has not abandoned its nest.
a {1a} neophyte, a beginner at s.t. Usa lang ku ka kuyabug nga
magsusúlat, I am only an amateur writer. {1b} young and inexperienced
person. Ayawg sagbat sa isturya sa mga dagkù kay kuyabug ka pa, Do not
butt into the conversation of your elders because you are still a
child. {2} mistress, concubine. Mahal níya ang íyang kuyabug kay sa
asáwa, He loves his mistress more than his wife. paN- v [A2] hunt for
nestlings.

kuyáig v [AB16; c] scatter s.t. that had been in one place, usually
such that it makes a sound. Ang mga irù mauy mikuyáig sa mga sagbut
gíkan sa basurahan, The dogs scattered the garbage that was in the
trash can. Nakuyáig ang básu nga nahagbung sa simintu, The drinking
glass fell on the cement floor and broke to pieces all over the place.

kuyákin = nakinnákin.

kuyákiw v [A; b6] wag back and forth. Mikuyákiw ang íkug ni Bantay
pagkakità nákù, Rover wagged his tail when he saw me. Ang putul nga
íkug sa tikì nagkuyákiw sa salug, The severed part of the lizard’s tail
wriggled on the floor.

kuyaknit = kulaknit.

kuyamad n newly-hatched head louse (kútu). a young, innocent, and
inexperienced. Ayawg salga ánang buháta kay mga kuyamad pa mu, Don’t go
in that work yet, young and innocent as you are. paN- v [A2N] turn into
a small louse. Siksíkun ang mga lusà sa dì pa manguyamad, Pick out the
nits before they hatch into little lice.

kuyámang v {1} [A2S; b] for insects to crawl. Mikuyámang ang básul sa
ákung buktun, The caterpillar crawled on my arm. {2} [A; b(1)] spread
slowly to an area. Mikuyámang sa Sugbu ang pamúhat ug lílas,
Film-making spread slowly in Cebu. {3} [A23; b(1)] creep deep through
one’s feelings. Ang kalalim sa íyang haluk mikuyámang sa ákung
kinahiladman, The sweetness of his kisses crept through my innermost
senses.

kuyamas n long and sharp fingernails, claws of a bird, crab, etc.
Hikawrasan ku sa kuyamas sa iring, I got scratched by the sharp claws
of the cat.

kuyámis n {1} the soft parts in a young coconut at a stage prior to the
formation of meat (pútut) where the insides are edible and not bitter.
Most coconuts are bitter when young (pútut), but there are varieties
which have edible insides at this stage. {2} a variety of coconut with
orange-colored outside husk, smaller in size than the ordinary coconut.

kuyámud v [A; c1] get an expression of distaste or dislike on the face.
Mikuyámud siya sa aslum nga sambag, She puckered her face at the sour
tamarind. Ayaw ug kuyamúra (ikuyámud) ang ímung nawung ug sugúun ka,
Don’t get a nasty expression on your face when I tell you to do s.t.

kuyámug = dalínug.

kuyamuy = kulamuy.

kuyánap v [A; b(1)] spread all over an area, for emotions or feelings
to creep over one. Ang katugnaw mingkuyánap sa tibuuk kung kalawásan,
The cold spread throughout my body. Nagkuyánap lang ang mga
nagkalainláing mga bágun sa ílang tugkaran, All different kinds of
vines spread over his yard. Gikuyanápan ang ákung kasingkásing sa
túmang kaguul, My heart is overwhelmed with grief.

kuyap n {1} fainting spell. Magpalit kug ítir kay tambal nà sa kuyap,
I’ll buy a bottle of ether, as a medicine for dizzy spells. {2} a
condition of slight nausea and drowsiness caused by eating certain
foods, esp. greasy ones. v [A123P; b4] {1} faint. Gikuyapan ang babáyi
nga napunáwan sa dugù, The woman fainted from loss of blood. {2} feel
slight nausea and drowsiness after eating s.t. Kuyapan ku ug mukáun ug
tinunuan, I feel somewhat nauseous and drowsy when I eat food cooked in
coconut milk. -l-an(←) n prone to fainting.

kuyapì a {1} for fruit or seed to develop in a faulty way such that
there is no flesh. Kuyapì kaáyu ang mga ságing. Wà kaáyuy unud, The
bananas are very thin. There’s not much flesh to them. {2} for a person
to be thin, emaciated. Kuyapì kaáyu ning batáa kay naátas man, The
child is very emaciated because he is undernourished. v [B2] come out
to be undeveloped and no good. Mikuyapì (nakuyapì) ang ubang lísu sa
kakaw kay kúwang sa abúnu, Some of the cacao seeds are thin and
undeveloped because they lack fertilizer.

kuyáput = kuláput.

kuyárut = kuráyut.

kuyaw a {1} frightful, dreadful. Labihang kuyáwa ang ákung damgu gabíi,
My dream last night was very dreadful. {2} dangerous to the extent of
inspiring fright. Anáa sa kuyaw nga kahimtang ang pasyinti, The patient
is in a critical condition. Kuyaw ning tubíga kay húgaw, This water is
dangerous because it is dirty. Kuyaw ang dálan sa Tulídu, The road to
Toledo is hazardous. Kuyaw nà siyag masukù, That man is dangerous when
he gets angry. {3} unusually skillful, awesome in his ability (slang).
Kuyaw nang tawhána mupingpung, That man plays pingpong frightfully
well. {3a} terribly, unusually good and attractive (slang). Kuyaw ka
manguyab bay, blúsil man, You’ve got yourself a hell of a girl. She’s
an American. v [A123P] feel scared, frightened. Gikuyawan ku pagkahúlug
nímu, I was frightened when you fell. Gikuyawan ku dihang dihà na ku
atubángan sa daghang táwu, I felt nervous when I was standing before a
large audience. paN- v [b8] be terribly frightened. Gipanguyawan ku, I
was frightened out of my wits. pa- v [A; b6(1)] frighten s.o. Mikalit
ka lag labang sa karsáda, nagpakuyaw ka lang nákù, You suddenly dashed
across the street, giving me a terrible fright. n s.t. used to startle,
scare, or frighten. ka- n terror, fright. kuyawkúyaw a for s.t. grave
to be touch-and-go. Kuyawkúyaw pa malibri ba ang masakitun, It’s
touch-and-go if the patient will recover. Kuyawkúyaw tung ákung
iksámin, It’s touch-and-go as to how I did on the exams. v [A13; b4]
feel apprehensive and nervous. Hápit na ang iliksiyun. Gikuyawkuyáwan
na ang mga kandidatu, Election is near and the candidates are now
becoming troubled and uneasy. -l-an(←), -ánun a easily frightened.
v [B1256] be, become easily frightened.

kuyayì n k.o. edible small mushroom that grows on dead trees and glows
in the dark. v [b4] have this sort of mushroom growing on it.

kuyba n cave, hollowed out portion in the sides of a slope or cliff.
v [A1B12; b5] become a cave, cause s.t. to do so. Ang mga miníru mauy
nagkuyba sa bungtud, Miners dug out a cave in the side of the mountain.
Nagkakuyba na man ning dapíta nga gisigíhag káwut, This place is fast
turning into a cave because they keep digging in it.

kuydáwu watch out! be careful! Kuydáwu! May kurinti nà, Be careful!
That’s a live wire. Paubanun ku ikaw apan kuydáwu kun maghásul ka
didtu, I’ll let you come with me, but watch out if you make a nuisance
of yourself. n responsibility one must personally answer to. Tagáan
tikawg libru. Ang pagpasar ímu nang kuydáwu, I’ll give you books. But
it is your lookout to see that you pass. Kúmu sirínu ímung kuydáwug
dúnay mawā̀ dinhi, As the night watch, it’s your responsibility if s.t.
gets lost here. Ug magminyù ka, may kuydáwu ka na sa kinabúhì, If you
marry, you have responsibilities on you. {3} way — nothing to worry
about. Wà nay kuydáwu. Púru lang nà panghásì, That’s nothing to worry
about. They are just empty threats. Culu-, kuydawukuydáwu n hesitation,
inhibition. Wà miy kuydawukuydáwu nga mangáun sa íla, We are not
hesitant about going to their place to eat. v [B1456] for s.o. to do
s.t. without inhibitions. Ang mga nars dì magkulukuydáwu paghíkap sa
láwas sa mga masakitung laláki, Nurses do not have inhibitions about
touching the bodies of male patients.

kuykuy v [A; a] dig up s.t. by scratching things that cover it. Lawuma
paglubung kay kuykúyun unyà sa irù, Bury it deep under the ground or
the dog will dig it up. Daghan siyang nadala gíkan sa basurahan nga
íyang gikuykúyan, He found a lot of nice things in the garbage he was
digging around in.

kuyláda = kulyáda_2.

kuylaw a provoking the feeling of nervous excitement, almost fright.
Kuylaw kaáyu nang muági na ta sa sigsag, It is nerve-racking to
negotiate the zigzag curves. v [b4] be nervously excited. Gikuylawan ku
pagkadawat sa rás nga tiligram, I was nervous when I got the rush
telegram.

kuymi n umpire in a cockfight or in jai-alai. v {1} [B156; c1] act as a
referee in jai-alai or a cockfight. {2} [A; b8] eavesdrop in a quarrel.
Ngánung midúul man mu sa magtiáyung nag-áway? Kamuy mikuymi? Why did
you go near the couple quarreling? Did you want to referee their
quarrel or s.t.?

kúyug v [AC; ac1] go together with. Kinsay mukúyug nákù sa sini? Who’ll
accompany me to the movies? Ayaw kuyúga pagdispatsar ang púlus daut,
Don’t sell any one buyer all bad ones. Unsa may ímung kuyúgun sa búkid?
What will you get out of accompanying me to the mountains? Walà sukad
siya ikúyug (kuyúga) sa íyang amahan, His father never had taken him
along. Kuyúgi siya kay mahadluk, Go with her because she is scared. —
sa lupad v [A23] {1} plunge imprudently into s.t. uncertain after
having been persuaded. Way maáyung sangpútan ang mga táwung mukúyug
lang dáyun sa lupad bísag hanap, No good can come to people who do not
look before they leap (go along with the flight even if they cannot
see). {2} abide with the decision of the majority. Dì lang ku mutambung
sa míting. Mukúyug lang ku sa lupad ug unsay masabútan, I will not
attend the meeting. I’ll abide with whatever decision they reach.
n {1} companion. {2} together with. Miláyas siya kúyug sa íyang trátu,
She went away together with her boy friend. (→) — babuy n one who
always tags along. kuyugkúyug n {1} gang mate, regular companion.
{2} going together with a gang regularly. Ang kuyugkúyug mau usáhay ang
sinugdánan sa gúbut, Going out with a group regularly is often the
beginning of trouble.

kuyugpus = kulugpus.

kuyúkus = kulúkus.

kuyus v {1} [BN] shrivel and wrinkle up. Tigúlang na giyud si Túnay kay
nanguyus na ang mga áping, Tonay has grown really old because her face
has become all wrinkled. Ímu pang ilámas nang luy-a nga nakuyus na
kaáyu? You’re going to use that wrinkled up piece of ginger? {2} [B2]
get shrunk or diminished in quantity. Mikuyus (nakuyus) na ang íyang
nawung nga naghubag, Her swollen face has shrunk now. Punù man untà
ning sáku sa bugas. Ngánung dalì ra kaáyung nagkakuyus? This sack was
so full of rice. Why has it shrunk so rapidly? {3} [A23] shrink back,
lack guts. Ísug siyang musulti apan mukuyus ug suklan, He talks big,
but when s.o. stands up to him, he shrinks away.

kuyuskus v [B2N] shrink and curl up. Karun nga mikyuskus (nakyuskus) na
ang kusáhus wà na makapunù sa palanggána, Now that the jerked meat that
we set out to dry has curled up, it no longer fills the basin. Ang
túmang kaínit mauy nakakuyuskus (nakapakuyuskus) sa mga dáhun, The
intense heat caused the leaves to wither and curl up.

kuyut_1 a for the flesh to sag due to old age. v [BN] for the flesh to
sag. Namínus ang ákung timbang ug nanguyut ang ákung buktun, I lost a
lot of weight and the flesh on my arm is sagging.

kuyut_2 v {1} [AC; b6(1)] get hold of s.t. Nagkúyut ang magtiáyun, The
couple held hands. Nawálà ang paypay nga ákung gikuytan (gikuyutan), I
lost the fan I was holding. {1a} [AN; b] hold on to s.t. for support.
Dì ku mukuyut (manguyut) nímu, wà kay umuy, I won’t hold on to you (for
support). You have no strength. {2} hold, occupy a certain position or
office. Ang katungdánan nga ákung gikuytan pait kaáyu, I am holding
down a very difficult job. {3} [A] play, operate s.t. Mukuyut sad nà
siyag bayulin, He also plays the violin.

kwa- see also kula.

kwabútan = kulabútan.

kwadhutur = kuadhutur.

kwadirnu n soft-backed composition book.

kwadra n stable or stall. v [A1; c1] lodge or keep in a stable or
stall.

kwadráda [measurement] — square [measurement]. Tris pís kwadráda, Three
feet square.

kwadrádu a square or having square sides. Tabási kug mga kwadrádu nga
mga panaptun, Cut me some square pieces of cloth. Kwadrádu ang paghíwà
sa mga patátas, Cut the potatoes into cubes. v [AB12; a] be, become
square-shaped, make s.t. square.

kwadrísu = kurdísu.

kwadru_1 n frame for a mirror, picture, diploma, and the like.
v {1} [A; a] enclose in a frame. {2} [B1256] for the picture in a movie
to be out of focus. Kwadru! Nakwadru ang salída, Focus! The picture is
out of focus. {3} [A; b] obstruct a person’s vision. Kwadru dihà! Down
in front!

kwadru_2 v [A; a] in a benefit dance, outbid s.o. else for the
privilege of dancing with a certain girl.

kwadruplikit n quadruplicate. v [A; c1] make s.t. in quadruplicate.
Kwadruplikita (ikwadruplikit) ang ímung aplikisyun, Make your
application in quadruplicate.

kwáhab v [A; c1] cry aloud (with the mouth wide open). Mukwáhab nà siya
ug sugsúgun, He’ll go ‘waa’ if you tease him.

kwahaw, kwáhaw n k.o. black bird said to portend a long drought, so
named from its sound.

kwáhu n {1} anus of pigs. {2} human anus (humorous).

kwákig n {1} pig’s tail with a little portion of its base. {2} tail of
a fowl or bird where the tail feathers grow.

kwákir uts n quaker oats.

kwáku n pipe for smoking. v {1} [a12] make into a pipe. {2} [B246N]
become thin and bent like a pipe. Mukwáku (mangwáku) ang babáyi basta
bulus ang pamuyù, A woman becomes very thin if she lives in poverty.
paN- v [A2] smoke a pipe.

kwalipikar = kalipikar.

kwalipikasiyun n qualification.

kwalisiyun n political coalition. v [C; c16] form a political
coalition.

kwalta = kwarta_1, n.

kwámug = kuyámug. see dalínug.

kwandig v [A; c1] sit up in bed, with the body in a reclining position.
Mukwandig siya sa pinatungpatung nga unlan, She’ll sit up reclining on
the pillows that were piled up. Butákang uway ang íyang gikwandígan,
She reclined on the rattan chaise lounge.

kwanggul a lacking common sense. Ngánung wà nímu hanigig panaptun
pagplantsa nímu, kwanggúla ka, You idiot! Why didn’t you put a piece of
cloth over the pants when you ironed them? v [B12] become silly. But-an
ka man untà kaniadtu, apan karun nagkakwanggul ka na man, You used to
be so sensible before, but now you’re becoming more and more idiotic.
-ù(→) a = kwanggul. -un(→) a of the sort lacking common sense.

kwári, kwárì n quarry.

kwarinta n {1} forty. {2} = kwarinta díyas, 2. v see disiutsu for verb
forms. — díyas n {1} forty days. {2} the fortieth day after a person’s
burial, an occasion commemorated with a novena ending on that day and
usually a banquet. — isingku n forty-five caliber revolver.

kwarintína, kwarintínas n quarantine. v [A; a12] place under
quarantine.

kwarisma n Lent. v {1} [B256; b4(1)] be the Lenten season.
Hikwarismahan pa ang ikaduhang simistri, The second semester classes
will still be on during Lent. {2} [B1456] be sad and gloomy. Kanúnay
lang nang nagkuwarisma ang ímung panagway. Unsa bay suliran mu? You are
always sad and gloomy. What is the matter? paN- v [A23; b6] spend Lent
s.w.

kwarta_1 n {1} money. {2} it’s going to be a profit, a point, be in the
bag. Ug masyát nà ni Mumar run, kwarta na, If Mumar sinks that ball,
the game will be in the bag. Ug alas ning mabúnut ku, kwarta, If the
card I’m going to draw turns out to be an ace, it’s going to help me a
lot. v {1} [A; a] buy, purchase s.t. Mukwarta kug kindi pára sa bátà,
I’ll buy some candy for the child. Unsay ímung kwartáhun sa tindáhan?
What are you going to buy in the store? {2} [A12; b8] make money out of
s.t.; secure money. Nakakwarta kug arang-arang sa ákung nigusyu, I have
made quite a profit from my business. Makwartahan (makwarta) ra gihápun
ni nátung tinígum nga papil, We can still make some money out of the
waste paper we are saving. paN- v [A2; b5] {1} engage in s.t. as a
means of earning money. Mangwarta ku sa Nigrus inigtingtápas sa tubu,
I’ll go to Negros to earn some money during the season for harvesting
sugar cane. {2} earn money illegally, immorally. Nakwartáhan nang
mayúra kay nangwarta sa íyang katungdánan, That mayor became wealthy
because he enriched himself in office. Ayaw mug apil ánang Ápag kay
tingálig pangwartáhun (pangwartáhan) lang mu niánà, Don’t pay AFAG
(Anderson’s Filipino-American Guerillas) a membership fee. They’ll just
get money out of you for nothing. n means of getting money, esp. for a
living. kwartáhan a moneyed, wealthy. v [B12] become wealthy.

kwarta_2 — klási, martsa, parti fourth class, gear, part. n fourth
gear. v [A; c6] put into fourth gear.

kwartil n barracks and headquarters of a military or police group.
v [a2] be made a headquarters and barracks.

kwartisar v [A; a] divide s.t. into four equal parts. Kwartisara nang
butung pára ninyung upat, Divide that young coconut into four equal
pieces for each of the four of you.

kwartu_1 n {1} room. {1a} bedroom. Ang sála ug kan-anan náa sa ubus ug
ang mga kwartu sa itáas, The living and dining rooms are on the first
floor and the bedrooms are upstairs. v [A1; a2] make a room or
partition in a house. Dakù pa ning lugaráha. Makakwartu pa bisag duha,
This is quite a large space. We can even make two rooms here. Ímu man
ning gibungbúngan. Kwartúhun nímu ni? You are putting up walls here.
Are you partitioning it off into a room?

kwartu_2 a {1} fourth. {2} quarter. v {1} [B256] be, become fourth in a
series. Mukwartu anyu na siya sa hayiskul sa sunud túig, She will be in
her fourth year in high school next year. {2} [A1; a1] divide into four
equal parts. Kwartúha ning usa ka kílung bábuy, Divide this kilo of
pork into four parts.

kwatru number four, used only with words of Spanish origin. Kwatru
písus, Four pesos. v see tris. — kantus n {1} name given to the bottles
with four sides made to contain gin. {2} dagger with a square
four-edged blade, usually made from steel girders. numiru — see numiru.

kwáyir n {1} choir. {2} quire of paper.

kwilyu n collar of a dress or shirt. — sa matris cervix of the uterus.
v {1} [A; ab] attach a collar, make into a collar. {2} [A; b] hold s.o.
by the collar. Gikwilyuhan sa pulis ang mangunguut, The policeman
grabbed the pickpocket by the collar.

kwín n {1} k.o. sweet, small pineapple. — áni = kwín, n1. {2} queen in
cards. {3} queen in chess. {4} title for a queen. v {1} [A12] get a
queen in cards. {2} [B256] be, turn out to be a queen in chess.

kwinpus n the queen post supporting a roof.

kwinta_1 v {1} [AC12; a] compute, sum up accounts. Nagkuwinta ang
tindíra sa bayranan, The salesgirl is summing up the total cost.
{2} [A; a12] count things numerically. Makamau nang mukwinta ang bátà,
The boy knows how to count. Kwintáha ug pilay nadá nímung sinínà, Count
the number of shirts you brought with you. {3} [b6] count favors done
to s.o. Bísag paryinti, íyang kwintahan sa íyang mga natábang, He
counts the favors he has done, even to relatives. n computation, an
accounting of. walay — worthless. Way kwinta ang táwung tapulan, A lazy
person is worthless. Ayawg palit ánang mga walay kwintang butang, Don’t
buy those worthless things. paN- v [A23] count favors done to s.o.
Kusug kaáyung mangwinta nang bayhána sa mga nahátag níya nákù, mu rag
dílì igsúun, That woman certainly counts things she has given to me, as
if I weren’t her sister. hiN- a given to counting favors done.
kwintakwinta n rough estimate. v [A13] {1} make a rough estimate.
Nagkwintakwinta na siyag pilay magastu sa íyang kasal, He is making a
rough estimate of how much his wedding will cost. {2} weigh s.t. on
one’s mind. Kwintakwintáha kunug háin ang maáyu, mubakasiyun ba ta ug
dì ba, Decide which way is better, to go on a vacation or not. -da
n accounting. Ipatában ang mga risíbu sa kwintáda, Attach the receipts
to the accounting. v [A] make an accounting.

kwinta_2 = kinta_1.

kwintas_1 n necklace. v {1} [AN; c] wear a necklace or s.t. around the
neck. Ikwintas ring tinúhug sampagíta, Wear this string of jasmine
flowers around your neck. {2} [a2] make into a necklace or ornamental
chain around the neck. {3} — ug bukug v [A13N] become very thin and
haggard. Mangwintas (magkuwintas) ka lag bukug sa kabadlungun niánang
ímung bána, You will be reduced to skin and bones by your husband’s
vices.

*kwintas_2 — kláras n proper accounting of. Ang awditur muhátag ug
kwintas kláras sa kagastúan sa kapunúngan, The auditor will render a
proper accounting of the expenses incurred by the organization.

kwirdas_1 n string of a musical instrument. v [A; b] string a musical
instrument. nalisúan sa — see lísù.

kwirdas_2 n clock or watch spring. v [A13; b6] put or install a spring
in a time piece.

kwirpu n a body of police or military force. Nagkaanam kadakù ang
kwirpu sa kapulisan sa syudad sa Sugbu, The police force in the city of
Cebu is growing bigger and bigger.

kwistiyun n {1} question raised in a class, meeting, examination. Píla
ka kwistiyun ang tís? How many questions are there in the test?
{2} problem, thing wrong with s.t. Ang kwistiyun gud nímu dílì ka man
mamínaw ug tambag, The problem with you is you never listen to advice.
Way kwistiyun nang sayúpa. Gamay ra kaáyu, That error is no problem.
It’s a very minor one. Dì gud nà pait kaáyu. Kwistiyun lang nà sa ánad,
It’s really not difficult. It’s just a question of getting used to it.
{3} controversy, dispute. Mupalit ka niánang yutáa nga nag-atubang kanà
karun ug dakung kwistiyun? You are going to buy that land when it is
being seriously questioned at the present time? v {1} [A; ac6] ask
questions in a class or session. Mukwistiyun giyud ku basta dì kung
kasabut, I ask questions when I don’t understand. Kwistiyunun ka gánì
sa maistra, tubag dáyun, When your teacher questions you, answer
immediately. Kini ang ákung ikwistiyun sa tís, I’ll have this question
in the test. {2} [A12; c1] be a problem or difficulty. Maáyu ang plánu,
ang nakakwistiyun lang kay way kwarta, It is a good plan, but the
problem is there is no money. {3} [A; c1] raise s.t. to challenge or
dispute. Wà kahay mukwistiyun niíning inyung gibúhat? Don’t you think
anybody will question what you did? -abli a open to suspicion, having
s.t. anomalous or dishonest about it. Kwistiyunabli nga transaksiyun, A
questionable transaction. Kwistiyunabli kaáyu ang kagíkan ánang
bayhána, The real background of that woman is open to suspicion.

kwítis n fireworks consisting of rockets. v [A1; b(1)] explode
fireworks consisting of rockets.

kwúta = kúta.

kyag-ang = kagangkagang, n. see kágang.

kyaknit = kulaknit.

kyampaw n sting rays of genus Dasyatis, but usually not brightly marked
species.

kyampi k.o. fish, name given to species of slipmouth that are thick and
fleshy, as opposed to the rather thin and rounded species (palutput and
sapsap): e.g., Secutor ruconius.

kyamud = kuyámud.

kyamuy n k.o. candied fruit sold in Chinese stores with a single seed,
the size of a small prune, with a taste that is salty, sour, and sweet
at the same time.

kyápù n {1} Quiapo, a district in the heart of Manila. {2} female
genitalia (humorous allusion, originating with a movie in which the
hero, a jeepney driver, keeps peeping at his female passengers’
genitalia while shouting his destination, Quiapo).

kyawkaw, kyawkyaw n fussy complaints. Ug mupirma ka, pirma lang. Way
daghang kyawkyaw, If you are going to sign the papers, sign them. Do
not make such a fuss. v [A; b3] making complaints on small things.
Bísag gamay kaáyung sayup, mukyawkyaw ang manidyǐr, The manager makes a
fuss about the tiniest mistakes.

kyugpus = kulugpus.

kyúkus = kulúkus.

kyungkung v [B3(1)6; c1] curl up. Mikyungkung (nakyungkung) ang núkus
sa ínit nga bága, The dried squid curled up in the glowing embers.
Nagkiyungkung pa gihápun ka dihà bísag taas na ang adlaw? You are still
curled up there, even at this hour of the day?

kyusku n a kiosk in a park or plaza, usually used as a bandstand or a
place for resting. v [b6] put a kiosk up s.w.

kyuskus = kuyuskus.

kyúum v {1} [B; c1] for s.t. with a horizontal opening to close
tightly. Mukyúum ang imbaw ug matugaw, Clams shut tight when they are
disturbed. Makyúum nang samára, That wound will close. Nagkakyúum ang
mga dáhun sa akasya nga nagkagabíi na, The acacia leaves are slowly
closing up as night is drawing near. {2} keep the mouth shut and not
talk. Mukyúum nà siya ug hisagpaan, She’ll shut up if you slap her.
Kyuúmun (ikyúum) ku lang ang tinúud nga nahitabù, I’ll just keep my
mouth shut as to what really happened. {3} [B; a1P] be doubled up in
fear or pain. Mikyúum siya sa pagkaigù níya sa kutukutu, He doubled up
from pain when he was hit in the solar plexus. a {1} tightly closed.
{2} keeping the mouth shut.
