


=== R ===


ra particle following the first word of a predicate. {1} only
[predicate] and nothing else. Si Pidru ra ang mitábang nákù, Pedro was
the only one that helped me. Mau ray ákung gianhi, That is all I came
to get. Ginúu ray mahibalu ug unsáun nà, Only the Lord knows what to do
with that. {1a} [so-and-so] did it himself. Siya ray nag-unay sa íyang
anak, He raped his own daughter. {1b} [preposed gen. pronoun] — it is
all my, your, his, our, etc. very own. Ang mais, ímu ra pud diayng
abut? Oh, is the corn your own product, too? {1b1} íya — may this bad
thing happen only to him (phrase to ward off the possibility that the
bad thing may happen to s.o. else). Ag íyang úlu, íya ra, maáyung
pagkapusà, He got his head completely smashed—may it only happen to
him. {1c} — hinúun {1c1} it’s merely, only. Sitinta ra hinúun ning
íyang ámut apan makatábang ug tapal sa galastúhan, He only contributed
seventy, but it can help cover the expenses. {1c2} oh, it’s nothing
(said in modesty or sarcastically about s.t. impressive). Rulsruys ra
hinúun ang íyang awtu, His car is only a Rolls Royce. {2} exactly
[so-and-so]. {2a} with measurements: [so-and-so much] and no more. Tulu
ray makaadtu, Only three people can go. {2a1} with words referring to
fitness, sufficiency, preciseness: just exactly right, fitting, etc.
Hustu ra ning tulu, Three is just the right number. Paríha ra ang duha,
The two are exactly alike. Mahímù ra nang gidak-úna, That size will do
perfectly. {2b} with words referring to location: it is right here,
there. Día ra ku, I’m over here. Náa ra sa ímung atubángan, There it
is, right under your nose. {2b1} no further than [such-and-such a
place]. Anhi ra kútub ang dálan, The road doesn’t go any further than
this. Didtu ra mi manáug, We got off there and went no further.
{2b2} anáa — [dat.] it is up to [so-and-so]. Náa ra níya ug mupalit ba
siya, It is up to him if he wants to buy. Náa ra nímug mupadáyun ka,
It’s entirely up to you if you will continue. {2c} mau — ug, nga just
exactly like, as if. see mau, 3, 4. {2d} maáyu — it would be just the
right thing. Maáyu rag mamatay siya, It would serve him right if he
died. Maáyu rang napildi siya, Serves him right that he lost. (see also
3c and 4d.) {3} [so-and-so] is certain to happen. Muanhi ra nà, He’ll
come, don’t worry. May adlaw rang gabáan ka, The day will come when you
get yours. Magkítà ra tag usab, We’ll surely see each other again.
{3a} — gayud [so-and-so] will, did finally happen, despite everything.
Nakatápus ra giyud ku, I finished, despite everything. Gimahalan ra
giyud mi sa tambal, Much as we needed it, we found the medicine too
expensive. {3b} bantug — no wonder. Bantug rang nagdalì. Mamisíta diay
siya, No wonder he was in such a rush. He wants to visit s.o.
{3b1} kanyáhay — no wonder [such-and-such] a thing always happens.
Kanyáhay rang dì padúul nang batáa nímu, kay hingúsì ka, No wonder that
child won’t let you get near him. You keep pinching him. {3c} maáyu —
some day it will be good for s.t. Ayg ilábay kay maáyu ra unyà nà,
Don’t throw it away because someday it will be of some use. {4} [adj.]
— {4a} too or more [adj.] than satisfactory. Ang sapátus dakù ra kaáyu
pára nákù, The shoes are too big for me. {4b} with adjectives
indicating the smaller, the easier, cheaper, lesser of two opposites:
only a (small, light, short) very (easy, cheap, etc.). Kanang Tuway
gamay ra nang baryúha, Toway is just a small barrio. A, sayun ra kaáyu,
Oh, it’s so easy. {4b1} láin, lahì — very much different. Lahì ra ang
ímung batásan kay sa ákù, Your ways are very different from mine. subra
— much too much. Subra ra ang ímung gihátag, You gave much too much.
{4b2} layù —, walà — very far behind in, not anywhere near as good as.
Ang inyung balay layù ra sa ámù, Your house isn’t anywhere near as nice
as ours. Walà ka ra sa kumingking itandì nákù, You’re nothing compared
to me—not even up to my little finger. {4c} sámuk — leave me be.
(You’re too much of a nuisance.) Sámuk ra. Magtuun ku, Leave me alone.
I want to study. {4d} maáyu — very nice. Maáyu rang ipakung nang úlu mu
sa bungbung, How nice it would be to smash your head against the wall.
{5} with imperatives: particle taking the abruptness out of a command
but definitely a command given to s.o. who doesn’t have the right to
refuse. Ambi ra nang kutsilyu, Let me have that knife. {5a} — ugud =
ra, 5, but with slightly less curtness. Kuháa ra gud ri, Would you come
get this, please. {5b} tan-áwa —, — gud can you beat that! Tan-áwa ra,
siyay nangúna siya pay nangísug, Take a look at that! He started it and
now he gets mad! {5c} — gánì go on now and do [so-and-so]. Lakaw ra
ngánì kay dúru na nílang paábut, Go on now. They have been waiting
forever. Ayaw ra gánì nag garùgarúa, Stop jiggling that. You know you
shouldn’t. {6} yátì, yáwà, yátis — I don’t believe it. Kadaug kas
swipstik? Yátì ra! You won the sweepstakes? I don’t believe it. {6a} in
accepting a challenge: I don’t believe you dare challenge me! Yátì ra!
Makigsumbagay ka nàkù? You mean to say you dare challenge me to a
fight? {7} — ba {7a} particle with a reason which is given as advice or
warning. Higúpa dáyun kay ínit pa ra ba, Eat it right away because it’s
still warm. Mangísug ra ba tug madúgay ka, He will get angry if you
take too long. {7b} ordinarily [so-and-so] would have been OK, but ...
Sus, nía na ang mga bisíta. Wà ra ba tay giandam, My! The visitors have
arrived and here we don’t have anything to give them. Dà, nag-uwan na
hinúun. Wà ra ba kuy páyung, Darn! It’s raining, and I don’t have an
umbrella. {7c} particle with an apology. Wà ra ba diri si Nánay, I’m
sorry, Mom’s not here.

rabana = gwayabanu.

rabanit a {1} in rags, tatters. Kadtung bátà kanhi nga rabanit, karun
maáyu na nga mamisti, That child used to be in tatters, but now he
dresses well. {2} poor, destitute. Napútu mi, ug karun rabanit na, We
went bankrupt. And now we’re destitute. v [B12] {1} be in rags. {2} be
penniless. ka- v [A13] be all in rags.

rabanus = labanus.

rabatikung n porridge of sticky rice and mung beans boiled with coconut
milk and brown sugar. v [A; c1] make, have rabatikung.

*rábir — plant, tri n rubber tree planted as an ornamental: Ficus
elastica.

rábis n rabies.

rábit n rabbit.

rábuls n breed of fighting cock.

rabunit n k.o. grass grown potted, of two kinds: one with yellow and
green leaves, the other with all green leaves.

radar, rádar n {1} radar. {2} the ears or any way one has of picking up
gossip or conversation. Ngilngig kaáyug radar ni si Asay kay daghag
tabì nga mahípus, Asay has terrific radar when it comes to picking up
gossip. v [A13; a12] do s.t. by radar.

radikal a radical, one who wants to change the social structure
radically, or for ideas to be radical. v [B12; b6] be, become radical
or a radical.

rádis = labanus.

radiyu n {1} the radio business. Usa ka mag-aawit sa radiyu, A singer
on the radio. {2} radio set. v [A; c] broadcast over the radio.
Giradiyu nga may bagyung umaábut, They broadcast that a storm was
approaching. — baktas one who repeats idle talk. — balágun (kawáyan)
the grapevine, orally repeated news. Sa panahun sa girilya ang ámung
nutisya gíkan sa radiyu balágun (kawáyan), During the war we got our
news over the grapevine. -gram n radiogram. -púnu n radio-*phono.
-upirítur n radio operator.

radya = ráha_1.

radyaw = áyu (dialectal — from dáyaw).

rágid a {1} rugged, strong and robust. Ang gustu níyang mabána kanang
laláking rágid, She wants a rugged man for a husband. {2} not polished,
coarse. {3} ragged, shabby, worn-out. v {1} [B12] be, become rugged.
{2} [A1B12] dress in old clothes. Magrágid tag sinínà sa búkid, We’ll
wear old clothes to the mountains. Narágid na ang mga bátà nga walay
inahan nga mag-atiman, The children have become shabbily dressed
because they lack a mother’s care. ka- v [A13] be all shabby.

ráha_1 n the rajahs of pre-Spanish Filipinos.

ráha_2 n wood cut from freshly cut ipil-ipil (byatilis) or mangrove
(bakhaw) trees, peeled and dried for firewood. v [A; a] cut and sell
mangrove or ipil-ipil commercially.

rak-an rúl n rock and roll. v {1} [A2C; c6] dance the rock and roll.
{2} [A13] for the stomach to be rumbling from indigestion. Nagrak-an
rúl ang ákung tiyan tungud sa sagulságul nga pagkáun, My stomach is
doing the rock and roll from all the things I ate.

rak-in rúl = rak-an rúl.

rákit_1 n racket for tennis, pingpong, and the like. v [A12; a12] have,
make into a racket.

rákit_2 n rocket ships or bombs.

rákit_3 n racket, fraudulent means of obtaining money. Rákit lang giyud
nang kapunúngan. Pangwarta lang, Their organization is just a racket to
get money. v [c16] dishonestly take money entrusted to one. Girákit
lang ang ámung ámut, The man just pocketed our contribution.

rakrak v [A; b(1)] {1} fire bullets rapidly in bursts. Balay nga
girakrakan, A house riddled with bullets. {2} in billiards, hit the
target ball forcefully so as to scatter the balls that surround it with
the hope that one or two of these balls will go into any of the holes.
n bursts of rapid rifle fire.†

rám n rum. v [A13; b6] have rum.

ráma v [A; b] set flowers on a palm leaf as decorations. Nagráma mig
búwak sa kapilya, We set some flowers on palm leaves in the chapel.

rambul_1 n {1} rumble, free-for-all fist fight. {2} in Jai-alai,
betting on the first three players out of a series such that whatever
order they are in, the bet wins—e.g. if one bets that players 3, 6, and
{2} are the first, second, and third place, his bet wins as long as
this is so, no matter which one was first, which was second, and which
was third. v [A2C; a12] engage in a rumble. Ang ílang punduk mauy
mirambul sa nangharána, It was their group which engaged the serenaders
in a brawl. Nagrambul ang magtiáyun, The husband and wife had a brawl.

rambul_2 v [AC; c1] take a ride with s.o. on his bicycle or motorcycle.
Magrambul lang tas ímung bisiklíta, Let us just ride double on your
bicycle. Irambul (rambúla) ning tutú ka bátà dihas ímung mutur, Take
these children on your motorcycle.

rami_1 n shrub cultivated for its fiber, which is made into blankets,
cloth, and string. Rami cloth is coarse, but very sturdy: Boehmeria
nivea.

rami_2, rámi n {1} game of rummy. {2} situation where one goes rummy.
v {1} [AC2; ac3] play rummy. {2} [A2; ab2] go rummy.

rámids sil n rummage sale. v [A1; c6] hold a rummage sale.

*ramus Duminggu di- n Palm Sunday.

rán n run in stockings or knitted fabrics. v [B26] develop a run. Kausa
pa gánì nákù masul-ub narán dáyun, I only wore the stockings once and
they got a run right away.

ran-abáwut n an automobile with a rumble seat.

ranggu n {1} rank. {2} high position in society, high standing,
eminence. Ang nanambung sa kasal púrus táwung may ranggu, The wedding
guests were all persons of rank. v [A13] have a rank of.

ráning n running, a violation in basketball wherein a player takes more
than two steps while the ball is in his hands. v [B1256] commit the
running violation.

ráning burd n {1} board laid along a bridge for vehicles to pass over.
{2} boards put underneath a passenger bus running parallel to the
chassis, one on either side, between the front and rear wheels, used
for cargo. {2a} running board of cars.

ransiyu_1 a spoiled meat or cooked food. v [B2; b6] be, become rancid.
Muransiyu (maransiyu) ang karni kun dílì ipridyidir, The meat will
spoil if you don’t put it in the frigidaire.

ransiyu_2 = ransu_1.

ransu_1 n ration, share of food given out. Ang ransu sa mga nasunúgan,
The ration for the fire victims. v {1} [A2; a] give rations. {2} [A12]
obtain a ration.

ransu_2 n ranch. v [A1; a2] have a ranch. ka- n associates, friends
(slang). Walay táwu nga manghilabut níya sa piyir kay pulus karansu
níya ang mga buguy didtu, No one will harm him at the waterfront
because all the tough guys there are his friends.

rantsu = ransu.

ranwi n runway in an airport.

rapal = arapal, n.

rapdrap n rough draft. v [A1; c1] make a rough draft.

rapidu v [A; a12] {1} fire a volley. Rapiduha ninyu ang miláyas nga
kriminal, Fire a volley on the escaping criminal. {2} do s.t. in rapid
succession, like the firing of a volley. Nagrapidu siyag búnal niánang
maldítung dakù, She gave that naughty child a sound whipping. Girapidu
nílag káun ang inasal, They consumed the roast pig with machine
gun-like rapidity. a done machine gun-like. Rapidung pagkasábà, A
scolding like the burst of a machine gun. di- n weapon that is capable
of automatic fire.

rápir n wrapper for manufactured goods or gifts.

rás a rushing, doing s.t. hastily. Kanúnay ka lang kabuk-an ug plátu
kay rás ka man gud kaáyug líhuk, You keep breaking plates because you
work in such a rush. v [A; c6] do s.t. in a hasty, rushing way. Kinsa
ka gud nga murás ka man lang dáyun ug súd nga way pupananghid? Who are
you just to rush in without asking permission? Ámung girás ang
masakitun sa uspital, We rushed the patient to the hospital.

rása n breed of animals or fowl. Unsang rasáha nang ímung sunuy? What
breed is your rooster? di- of a special breed, pedigreed.

rásak n RASAC, acronym for a government organization: the Regional
Anti-Smuggling Action Center.

rasiyun n {1} allotment given out for subsistence. {2} one’s share of
s.t. rationed. v {1} [A; c] give out rations. Girasyunan lang intáwun
ang mga sundálu ug mais ug bulad, The soldiers were being given corn
grits and dried fish as their ration. {1a} [c] cater food on a regular
basis. Mahal, piru maáyu ang ílang irasiyun, It’s expensive, but the
food they cater is good. {2} [A; a12] ration s.t. in short supply.
Rasyunan ang túbig sa tinghuwaw, Water is rationed during droughts.

raspa_1 n scraping of the womb (dilation and curettage). v [A; b(1)]
{1} perform the d and c on s.o. Raspahan ang babáying talinug-an, A
woman with excessive bleeding has to get a d and c. {2} trim and thin
the hair with a razor. {3} shred papayas or other things in a similar
way. raspahan, -dur n papaya shredder.

raspa_2 = laspa.

rasun n {1} reason that s.t. happened. Unsa may rasung mipalta ka? What
is the reason you were absent? {2} reasoning. Ang íyang rasun walà
makakumbinsǐr nákù, His reasoning was not convincing to me. v [A2N; c6]
give reasons why s.t. is or is not. Ngánung murasun (mangrasun) ka pa
man nga naabtan man ka? Why do you keep trying to explain, when I
caught you red-handed? Mau tuy ákung girasun níya nga nasakit ka, The
excuse I gave to him was that you were sick. -abli a {1} reasonable.
Rasunabli ang íyang gibúhat kay maalkansi man tà tug wà, What he did
was reasonable because he would have lost money if he hadn’t.
{2} tending to give excuses, reasons why s.t. was or was not.

ratatat n {1} rattling sound of a machine gun. {2} rattling off
scoldings. Ayg kan-a nang kík, ratatat ra ba kaáyu si Tiyà, Better not
eat that cake. Your aunt is great at reading lectures. v {1} [A2] for a
machine gun to rattle. {2} [A13] scolding in a rattling way.

ratipikar v [A; b(1)] {1} ratify. {2} approve an action after it has
been carried out by a subordinate. Núlu ang kuntrátung dílì ratipikahan
sa manidyǐr, The contract is null and void if the manager doesn’t
ratify it.

ratsáda everybody [do]. Bugsay, ratsáda, Everybody row. Ratsáda, bira,
Everybody pull. v {1} [a3] be included in s.t. that is supposed to have
happened to s.o. or s.t. else. Naratsáda ku sa ákung ábin pagkapildi sa
íyang manuk, I lost the amount I put in on his bet when his cock lost.
Naratsáda núun ku sa kasábà bisag wà kuy salà, I was scolded as well,
even though I hadn’t done anything. Daghang mga way lábut ang
nangaratsáda sa pinusílay, A lot of innocent people got caught up in
the crossfire. {2} [A; c1] win successively in a mahjong game. Wà ka
makaratsáda sa wà pa ka muílis sa ímung silya, It was only when you
moved to another chair that you started winning successively.

ratsar = ratsáda, v1, 2.

*rátu káda — each time s.t. happens. Káda rátu na lang kung gikasab-an
bísag dílì ákung sā̀, I’m always scolded even if I’m not at fault. — ug
each time [so-and-so] is done. Káda rátug ínum, mahubug giyud, Each
time he drinks, he gets drunk.

rauk n money (slang). Wà giyud kuy rauk, I don’t have a cent.

raw = daw.

rawraw v [A13] talk nonsense. Sabà dihà! Nagrawraw ka man lang, Shut
up! You are just talking nonsense. n nonsense.

rawun, ráwun n {1} round in sports. Gipahaplà sa ikalimang ráwun, The
boxer was knocked down in the fifth round. {1a} round in mahjong in
which all four players have had the deal. {1b} walay — no chance of
winning. Wà giyud kay ráwun kun makig-áway kag buksidur, You don’t have
a chance if you fight with a boxer. {2} one complete sexual act.
Nanghambug siyang makalima siya ka ráwun, He boasted that he could do
it five times. {3} a complete round of a circular course. Duha ka ráwun
ang ithandrid, The 800-meter run is two rounds of the track. a good in
many things. Ráwun siya sa tanang sabdyik, He is good in all his
subjects. v {1} [A23] make a complete circuit around. {2} [A; a] make
the rounds of. Nagráwun ang mga bumbíru sa syudad, The firemen are
making regular rounds in the city. Giráwun námù ang tanang nayit klab,
We made the rounds of the night clubs. {3} [B126] get to be good in
many things. — rúbin n {1} tournament done such that each contestant is
paired off with every other contestant. {2} session practicing
basketball in which every player has a chance to shoot in turn. v [A1;
c] hold a rawun rúbin practice in basketball. rawunrawun v {1} [A; c6]
keep going around and around. Nagrawunrawun ang mga bátà líbut sa
balay, The children kept running around the house. {2} [A13; c6] go
round for a walk, pleasure. Mintras wà pay abri ang mga sinihan
magrawunráwun lang únà ta sa syudad, Let’s walk around downtown until
the movie houses open. {3} [A; c6] spend money going about.
Girawunráwun sa istudiyanti ang kwartang pangmatrikula, The student
squandered the money for tuition fees by gallivanting around.

*rawundir pur, payib, siks — boxing match of four, five, six (etc.)
rounds.

ráya n {1} long narrow band or streak. {2} game of chance played by
tossing coins on a surface marked with criss-crossing lines. Coins that
land on the lines are given to the opponent. v {1} [A; b(1)] mark
stripes. Ang bandíra sa Amirika girayáhan ug putì ug pula, The American
flag has red and white stripes. {2} [AC; b(1)] play ráya. -du,
rinaháyan, nirayáhan n having stripes.

rayadilyu n a strip of ribbon sewn along the side seams of trousers, as
in uniforms. Pula ang rayadilyu sa unipurmi sa písi, The P.C. have red
stripes on their trousers. v [A; ac] attach, make a stripe on trousers.

rayban n sunglasses (so called from the brand name). v [A13; b6(1)]
wear sunglasses.

rayit han n right-hand man. Ang banggiítang kriminal ug ang íyang rayit
han nadakpan na, The notorious criminal and his right-hand man have
already been arrested. v [B16; c16] be, become s.o.’s right-hand man.

rayit huk n right hook in boxing.

rayna n {1} queen. {1a} beauty queen, woman reigning over a
celebration. {2} woman that is foremost like a queen. Si Glurya Sibilya
mauy rayna sa pilikulang Binisayà, Gloria Sevilla is the queen of the
Visayan screen. v [B16; a12] be, become a queen; make into a queen. —
ilína n the queen of the feast of the Holy Cross as practiced with a
procession in Manila (Santa Krúsan). v [B6; c1] be made the Queen
Elena. — sa panimalay n wife as the head of the family. — sa kalibángan
n ugly woman (lit. queen of the toilet—humorous).

ráyu íkis, rayuiks n x-ray. pa- v [A1] get an x-ray.

rayúma n rheumatism. v [B126; a4] cause, become affected with
rheumatism. rayumahun a suffer from rheumatism.

ráyus_1 n spokes.

ráyus_2 n a two-wheeled cart usually drawn by a water buffalo or ox.
v [A13; a12] travel by cart.

ráyus íkis = ráyu íkis.

ráyut n riot, wild or violent disorder. v [A13; a12] riot. Nagráyut ang
mga pinirísu, The prisoners are rioting. Ug dílì sila makigdayalug
rayútun nátù, If they don’t have a dialogue with us, we’ll riot. anti —
iskwad n anti-riot squad. — gan n riot gun.

Rdu. abbreviation for Ribirindu, Reverend.

ri_1 n the note re in music. — minur n d minor. — mayur n d major.

ri_2 short for kiri.

riaksiyun n reaction. Nagkalainláin ang riaksiyun sa namínaw, The
audience responded with various reactions. v [A; b4] give s.o. a
reaction. Wà siya riaksiyuni sa tambal, He was unaffected by the
medicine.

riay = diay (dialectal).

Rib. = rdu.

ribáha n discount. Adúnay singku pursintung ribáha ug bayran ug kás,
There is a five percent discount if you pay cash. v [A; c] {1} allow a
discount on s.t. Iribáha ang útang sa swildu, Deduct the debt from the
salary. Ribahái ang prisyu kay sigunda mánu man ni, Give me a discount
because it is second hand. {2} deduct the tare weight. Dus kílus
iribáha sa pisáda pára sa sáku, They will allow two kilos for the
weight of the sack.

ríbal n rival. v [A2C; b(1)] be, become rivals; engage in rivalry.
Ákung ribálan nang nangulitáwu ni Tinay, I’ll compete with him for
Tinay’s hand. ka- n rival.

ribansa, ribansin v [AC; c1] {1} play a game again with the same
adversaries. Makigribansa ug dúlà ang mga pildíru, The losers want to
have a replay. {2} do s.t. a second, third, or more time around. Human
sa usa ka básu miribansa pag katulu, After the first glassful, they had
another three. n {1} in games, the second time around. Isyút ang pusta
kay way ribansa ning duláa, Bet all you’re going to bet because there
is going to be no replay. {2} s.t. done the second or more time around.

ribáwun v {1} [A23; b6] bounce. Hínay na muribáwun ning buláha, This
ball bounces poorly. {2} [A; a12] get the rebounds in basketball. Hawud
siyang muribáwun kay taas, He is good in catching the rebounds because
he is tall. n {1} bounce. {2} rebounds in basketball. -ir n a ball that
rebounds in basketball.

ribildi n rebel. v [AC1; b6] rebel. Muribildi ang bátà nga pinugngan, A
child that is repressed usually rebels.

ribilyun n rebellion against the government in power. v [A] hold a
rebellion. (→) v [a12] settle s.t. with a rebellion.

ribintadur_1 n k.o. reddish fish with a cylindrical body about the size
of a firecracker.

ribintadur_2 = libintadur.

ribirb n electronic mechanism which causes the sound to reecho or
resound, usually used for guitars.

Ribirindu a Reverend.

ribisar v [A; a12] {1} inspect, examine s.t. closely. Nagribisar ang
isklibinti sa mga papílis kay dúnay impurtanting dukumintu nga nawani,
The clerk is examining all the papers because an important document was
misplaced. {2} revise, make changes. Naribisar ang ubang sirimunyas sa
simbahan, They have revised some of the Church ceremonies. ribisádu
n s.t. revised. Libru nga ribisádu, Revised edition books.

ribisiyun n revision.

ribista n magazine.

ribíti n edgings, trim. Ribíting pula iláwum sa kurdísu, A red trim
underneath the window sill. v [A; b] {1} put edgings on. {2} take a
strip off s.t.

ribulbir, ribulbǐr n {1} revolver. {2} prominent hipbone. v {1} [A13]
carry a revolver. {2} [A12] obtain a revolver.

ribultu n {1} sculptured figures used as sacred objects. Ribultu sa mga
santus, Images of the saints. {2} sculpture, statue. Ribultu ni Husi
Risal, The statue of Jose Rizal.

ribulusiyun n {1} revolution, complete political or social change.
{2} revolution of a machine. v {1} [C2; b35] have a revolution. Háyang
magribulusiyun dinhi ug way kausában, They will surely have a
revolution here if things don’t change. {2} [A] make the engine turn
over. {2a} for an engine to turn over. -aryu n a revolutionary, one who
wants a social revolution. gubyirnu -aryu government of the
revolutionaries.

ríbun n {1} decorative ribbon, ribbon of honor. — dans n benefit ball
where the gentlemen wear ribbons of different colors. Each ribbon has a
price and before each dance the color of the ribbon is announced, for
which the men must pay the specified price. {2} typewriter ribbon.
v {1} [A; a] wear, make into a ribbon. {2} [A12; b(1)] obtain a ribbon
in a contest. Nakaríbun ku sa dibit, I got a ribbon in the debate.
{2a} [A; b(1)] pin a ribbon on. {3} [b] put a typewriter ribbon in.

ribunit = rabunit.

ribyú v {1} [A; a12] study one’s lesson for review. Muribyú ta pára sa
tist, We’ll review for the test. {1a} hold a review class. {2} [A;
b(1)] attend review classes for board exams. {3} [AC12; a12] stay to
see a movie for a second time. Muribyú ku kay wà kung kasabut sa
isturya, I’ll see the movie again because I didn’t get the story the
first time around. {3a} eat again. Human na ku makapaniudtu apan
muribyu ku kay wà pa ku mabusug, I’ve already had my lunch, but I’ll
eat some more because I’m still hungry. n {1} review classes.
{2} action of studying for review. {3} action of seeing s.t. or eating
a second time around.

ríd n {1} police raid. {2} raid on the enemy in war. v [A; a12]
{1} conduct a police raid. Giríd sa mga pulis ang sugálan, The police
raided the gambling den. {2} conduct a raid against the enemy. Giríd
ang kampu sa mga kaáway, The enemy raided the camp.

rid drágun = dágir, 2.

ridhart n suit of hearts.

rídi a ready, prepared for use or action. Rídi na ang paniudtu, Dinner
is read now. Rídi na ku. Mularga na ta? I’m ready now. Shall we go?
Rídi, ím, payr, Ready, aim, fire. — mid ready-made clothes. v [B136;
c1] be, get ready.

ridiskwintu v [A12; b] give a second discount. Dílì na mi
makaridiskwintu kay maalkansi na mi, We can’t give any further
discounts because we will lose.

ridiyu upirítur = radiyu upirítur. see radiyu.

rid karpit n in boxing, cockfights, and other spectator sports, the
seats nearest the ring or platform.

rid krus n Red Cross.

ridyistǐr n record, list of names and personal particulars of items.
Káda absin italà sa ridyistǐr, Each absence is listed in the register.

ridyistir-ub dids, ridyistir-up dids n register of deeds.

ridyun n region, certain large area.

ridyǔs v [B24] for the body to reduce in weight. Miridyǔs siya
pagkasakit níya, She lost weight when she got sick. pa- v [A; c1] go on
a diet to lose weight.

*ridyuyridyǔy ka- v [A13] be in a miserable condition, esp. financial.
Nagkaridyuyridyǔy siya sukad mawad-ig trabáhu, He has been miserable
ever since he lost his job.

rigadíra, rigadur, rigadúra n sprinkling can.

rigálu n {1} gift, present. {2} in games, a free ball. v {1} [A; c]
give as a present. Sa kasal ninyu murigálu kug inasal, On your wedding
day, I’ll give you roast pig as a present. {2} [A12; b6(1)] get a free
ball.

rigla n {1} principle of almost established certainty. Mauy ílang rigla
nga kun manggulà ang mga ípus, mag-ulan, As a rule, when winged
termites come out in the open, it will rain. Sumálà sa rigla, ang sunud
háyan hárì, According to the pattern, the next one is sure to be heads.
{2} menstruation (normal, untinged word). Birhin sa — the Guiding
Mother, the patron saint of missionaries and of Opon (now Lapulapu
City). v [A13; a4] menstruate. Ug magrigla (riglahun), dílì malígù,
Don’t bathe when you are menstruating. pa- v [A; b] {1} deviate from
the usual norm of conduct, do things not in the usual way. Muparigla
kug pakítà sa ákung katapúsang baráha, I’ll do s.t. unusual. I’ll show
my last card to everybody. {2} destroy s.t. belonging to s.o. else
maliciously. Dúna giyuy nagparigla sa mutur kay nagáras man, S.o. must
have messed around with this motorcycle because it is all full of
scratches. {3} attack passers-by and unknown people without provocation
and for no purpose. Mga buguy tung nagparigla níya, It was street
toughs that attacked him. n {1} unusual behavior. {2} malicious
destruction of others’ things. {3} thrill attacks on unknown people.
-mintu, -myintu n regulations, rules of conduct.

rigudun n formal ballroom dance done in squares. v [A2C2; c6] dance
this dance. — diunur = rigudun.

rigul = rigur.

rigular a {1} average, conforming in form to the normal. Rigular ang
íyang gidak-un, He is of average build. Rigular ang íyang rigla, She
has a normal menstrual cycle and normal amounts of discharge. Rigular
na ang íyang pulsu, His pulse is now regular. Lahì kini sa rigular nga
kútiks, This one is different from the ordinary Kotex. {1a} regular,
not special student. Rigular purt yir siya run, He is a regular fourth
year student this year. {2} consistent or habitual in action. Rigular
kining tulumanun sa radiyu, This is a regular program over the radio.
v [B1256] become a permanent worker, employee.

rigulasiyun = riglamintu. see rigla.

rigur v [B146] feel uneasy when s.t. pent up can’t be released.
Nagrigur nà siya kay wà tugúting muadtu sa bayli, She is ill at ease
because she was not given permission to go to the dance. Magrigur giyud
kug dì kapanimalus, I won’t rest until I get revenge.

rigyular = rigular.

ríhas n window grills. Migúnit ang prísu sa ríhas sa prisuhan, The
prisoner clung to the prison bars. -in-an n having grills put in front
of it. v [A1; c1] install grills on windows or doors.

*rihistráda marka — registered trade mark.

rihistrǎr v [A; c] register, officially record. Irihistrǎr ang yútà sa
ákung ngálan, Register the land in my name. rihistrádu a registered;
officially recorded. Kuríyu rihistrádu, Registered mail.

rihistru = rihistrǎr.

rihiyunal n regional. Banggà rihiyunal sa amatiyur, Regional contest
for amateur performers. Kumpirinsiya rihiyunal, Regional conference.

riiliksiyunista n s.o. up for reelection.

rík n rake. v [A; a] rake s.t. Ríka ang mga sagbut, Rake up the trash.
Ríki ang sílung, Rake the yard in front of the house.

rikábir v {1} [A2] for a boxer to get back on his feet or regain his
composure. Wà gánì siya makarikábir, giusban dáyug sukmag, Hardly had
he recovered when he was hit again. {2} [A; a12] recover s.t. lost or
stolen. Dì na marikábir nang puhúnan, The capital can no longer be
recovered.

rikádu n spices. v [A; c] spice food. Dì ku murikádu ug luy-a sa
tinúlang isdà, I don’t put ginger into fish stew.

rikap v [A; ab2] recap tires. n recapped tires.

rikargu n surcharge. v [A; b] cause s.o. to pay a surcharge. Murikargu
nímug diyis pursintug mulápas ka sa tagal, You’ll have to pay a ten
percent surcharge if you go past the due date.

ríkim n requiem mass.

rikísa v [A; ab2] search for s.t. hidden. Abtik nga mirikísa sa
dinakpan ang pulis, The cop quickly frisked the suspect. Girikísa ang
ákung malíta sa kustums, My suitcase was thoroughly searched in the
Customs.

rikisisiyun n requisition. v [A; c1] requisition s.t. Nakarikisisiyun
ka na ba sa mga kinahanglanun sa upisína? Have you requisitioned the
things we need for the office? Girikisisiyun sa mga sundáwu ang ámung
dyíp, The soldiers requisitioned our jeep.

rikisíta, rikisítas, rikisítus n requisites, requirements. Kwarta ray
rikisíta sa kaminyúun, Money is the only prerequisite for marriage.
Unsay rikisíta sa pag-istudiyug narsing? What are the prerequisites for
studying nursing?

rikiyim = ríkim.

riklamadur a one who complains all the time. Riklamadur kaáyung
kasiráha. Dì kaángay sa káun, The boarder complains all the time. She
doesn’t like the food. v [B12] be, become a complainer.

riklamasiyun n reclamation area.

riklámu n complaint, utterance of dissatisfaction. Wà pamatía ang
riklámu sa mga trabahanti, No one heeded the laborers’ complaints.
v {1} [A; b3c5] complain. Unsay giriklamúhan (giriklámu) sa mga
istudiyanti? What are the students complaining about? Adtu nà iriklámu
sa kapulisan, File your complaint with the police. {2} [A; b(1)]
request food or money, usually on a short-term loan. Muriklámu kug
bayinti nímu, I would like to ask you for a loan of twenty pesos.

rikrak n {1} ricrac, a k.o. trimming for clothing. {2} k.o. ornamental
bush with leaves that look like they have a ricrac, a variety of
kalípay, 1 (Polyscias fruticosa). v [A; b] trim, adorn with ricrac.

rikta a using a language that is rudely brief and curt (female). Rikta
kaáyung manubagtubag nga bayhána mu rag hawud, She answers in a curt
and rude manner as if she were the boss. riktahun a being blunt and
curt in one’s replies.

riktanggul, riktanggulu a rectangle. v [B1256] become rectangular.

riktu_1 = rikta (male).

riktu_2 n penis (slang—so called from Claro M. Recto, a statesman whose
bald pate reminds one of the glans).

riktur n rector. v [B56; a2] be, become a rector.

rikúbir = rikábir.

rikúdu v [A; c6] for a land vehicle to turn a corner, negotiate a
curve. Ayaw ug pakúsug ug magrikúdu ka, Don’t drive fast when you
negotiate a turn. rikuduhan n curve in a street.

rikúla v [A; b6] {1} refuse to do s.t., usually for some reason. Dì
giyud nà murikúla kun sugúun, He doesn’t refuse if you tell him to do
s.t. Ug áway ímung gustu, dì ti ka rikuláhan, If it’s a fight you want,
I am not afraid. {2} back out of s.t. Sáad nga dílì marikuláhan, An
agreement you cannot back out of. {3} [A2; b3] raise an objection to
s.t. Mirikúla siya sa ákung hukum ug páwul, He raised an objection to
my calling a foul.†

rikulúta_1 n military recruit. v [A; a12] recruit for military service.
a novice, greenhorn. Rikulúta pa siya sa panganak, She is still new to
childbirth. Rikulúta pa ku sa kinaíya sa mga Múrus, I am not accustomed
to the ways of the Moros.

rikulúta_2 a be distrusting and saying so openly. Rikulúta kaáyu siya
sa ímung mga pasálig, He disbelieves your promises and says so. v [B12]
be, become distrusting and vocal about it. Makarikulúta
(makaparikulúta) nang ímung binahinan, Who wouldn’t say s.t. the way
you divide it up?

rikumindǎr v [A; c6] recommend s.o. or s.t. Dì ku murikumindǎr ug
tapulan, I don’t recommend lazy people. Kining librúha ang girikumindǎr
sa maistru, The teacher recommended this book. rikumindádu
n recommendee. Nadáwat siya kay rikumindádu man sa mayur, He was
accepted because he is one of the mayor’s recommendees. v [B1256] be
one’s recommendee. rikumindasiyun n recommendation for a job.

rikunsidirasiyun n reconsideration.

rikunusir v [A; a12] examine s.o. physically. Rikunusihun ka ug wà ka
bay tíbi, You will be examined for T.B. pa- v [A; ac] have oneself
medically examined. Iparikunusir ang ímung asáwa ug mabdus ba, Have
your wife examined to see if she is pregnant.

ríkurd n {1} record, official account of s.t. Tan-áwa sa ríkurd pilay
íyang grádu, Look into the records to see what his grades were. {2} the
known or recorded facts about anything: one’s conduct, performance,
one’s career. Si Dígu may ríkurd sa íyang pagkakriminal, Diego has a
criminal record. {3} phonograph record. {4} record, the best
performance. Ang íyang ríkurd wà pa hilupigi, No one has surpassed his
record. v [A; c6] put in the record. Iríkurd ang mga gastus, Record the
expenses. klas — n class record in school. -ing n recording. v [A1]
have a recording session. Paghílum mu kay nagrikurding na mi, Keep
quiet. We are recording.

rikurída, rikurídas v [b5c] {1} advertise a movie or some public event
with a roving truck. {2} make the rounds to check, inspect. Murikurída
ang pulis patrul sa tanang dapit káda gabíi, The police make their
rounds in our neighborhood every evening. {3} make the rounds of s.t.
for pleasure. Girikurídas námù ang tanang nayit klab dinhi, We made the
rounds of all the night clubs here. n action of making the rounds to
advertise s.t. or check up.

*rikursus naturális Dipartamintu sa Agrikultúra ug Rikursus Naturális
n Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

rikwirdu n souvenir, keepsake. Rikwirdu sa ílang kasal, Souvenirs of
their wedding.

rikwisasiyun n = rikisisiyun.

rikwisisiyun, rikwisisyun = rikisisiyun.

rikwisítus = rikisítus. see rikisíta.

rilak, rilaks v [A; c6] relax, take it easy. Rilaks lang. Ayg kabaláka,
Just take it easy. Don’t worry. Murilaks ku human sa iksámin, I’ll take
a vacation after the exams.

rilansi a shoddy, poor in workmanship. v [AB12; b6c1] do work poorly or
shoddily. Maáyu nang mananahía kay dì giyud murilansi sa íyang trabáhu,
That seamstress is good because she never relaxes on the quality of her
work.

rilasiyun n {1} kinship by blood or marriage. Wà silay rilasiyun bísag
paríhug apilyídu, They are not related even though they have the same
surname. {2} love affair. Dúna tingáli rilasiyun ang manidyir ug ang
sikritarya, The manager seems to be having an affair with the
secretary. {3} relations among nations. Ang rilasiyun sa Pilipínas ug
Malisya tandugun kaáyu, The Philippines’ relations with Malaysia are
very shaky.

rilíbu n s.o. who relieves s.o. else on duty. v [AC; c] relieve s.o. on
the job, work on a rotation basis. Nagrilíbu mig bantay sa masakitun,
We took turns watching the sick man. Girilibúhan na ba ang gwardiya?
Has the guard been relieved?

rilidyun n religion, a subject in school consisting mainly of
catechism. v [A1] hold a religion class.

rilihiyun n religion.

rilihiyúsa = rilihiyúsu (female).

rilihiyúsu a religious, devout. v [B12; b6] be, become religious.

rilikaryu n place where religious relics are kept.

rilikyas n religious relic.

rilip n second-hand clothing gathered by charitable organizations and
sold cheap. v [A1] have, wear relief clothing. -an n place where
second-hand clothes are sold.

rilis_1 v {1} [c6] set free. Narilis ang binilanggù, The prisoner was
released. {2} [A; c6] issue a permit, publish test results. Narilis na
ang ímung lún, Your loan has been released. Hápit nang irilis ang
risulta sa bar, The results of the bar exam are about to be released.
pris — n press release. v [A; c] issue a press release.

rilis_2, rílis n {1} railway tracks. {2} district in Cebu where the
railroad station used to be, and where there is a red light district.
babáyi sa — n prostitute. paN- v [A2] {1} patronize a prostitute.
Nangrilis siya kay gibigáan, He went to the red light district because
he got the urge to have sex. {2} go through the area where the railway
used to be. Mangrilis tag ági igpaúlì, Let’s go by the railway tracks
when we go home.

rilisiyun = rilasiyun.

rilu n watch or clock. — dibulsa pocket watch. — dipasmu a watch that
is always late. — dipulsu wrist watch. v {1} [A; c] wear a watch.
{2} [A12] get a watch. riluhíru n watch repairman; watchmaker. v [B156]
be, become a watch repairman or maker.†

rilus n watch pocket.

rilyíbu = rilíbu.

rilyínu n dish of fowl or shellfish, prepared by removing the inner
bones or shells and the meat, replacing them with meat mixed with other
ingredients. v [A; a] have, make this dish.

rím n {1} ream of paper with 500 sheets. {2} a carton of cigarettes.

ríma n rhyme. v {1} [A2; c1] make rhymed verse. {2} [A; c1] make words
rhyme. {3} [A2C3; b(1)] rhyme with. Wà muríma ang púlung kahil sa
púlung kahun, The word ‘orange’ does not rhyme with the word ‘box’.

rímas = kulu_2.

rimatádu n for s.t. pawned to be foreclosed so that it is no longer the
possession of the owner. v [B1256] get foreclosed. Ug marimatádu na nà,
únu lus dus ug mabalik pa nímu, If you don’t redeem it before the due
date, it’s all a matter of luck whether you can ever get it back.

rimáti_1 v [A] for many bells to peal in a jumble. Tána kay nagrimáti
na ang kampána, Come on! The bells are ringing for the mass.

rimáti_2 v {1} [A; c1] for a pawnshop to take over possession of
articles that weren’t redeemed. {2} [B126] for a matter to become
worse. Ang ulan mauy nakarimáti (nakaparimáti) sa ákung ubu, The rain
made my cough worse.

rimatsi n rivet. v {1} [A; ac] attach with, make into, put a rivet.
Rimatsihun nátù ni arun lig-un, Let’s attach this with a rivet so it
will be strong. Irimatsi ni sa babag, Rivet this to the crossbar.
{2} [A; a12] beat, like riveting. Rimatsíhun ka sa mga buguy ug dì ka
manghátag ug sigarilyu, The toughs will beat you up if you don’t give
them cigarettes. {3} [A; a12] finish up, get done with. Awáya siya kay
akuy murimatsi ug kasábà, Quarrel with her, and I will finish her up
with a tongue-lashing. {3a} finish a girl by having intercourse with
her. Rimatsíha (rimatsía) ang imung uyab, Do s.t. to your sweetheart
that will complete your relationship. {4} [A; a2] steal surreptitiously
(slang). Nagrimatsi siyag manuk sa ílang silíngan kagabíi, He stole his
neighbor’s chicken last night.

rimidiyu v [A; a2] {1} acquire s.t. for one’s needs. Magrimidiyu kug
kwartang ibáyad sa iskuylahan, I must secure money to pay for the
school. {2} tinker around with s.t. to improve it. Rimidiyúha nu nà ug
muandar pa ba, Tinker around with it. Maybe it will still run.
{3} [AC2; a2b2] have sexual intercourse (humorous). Dì ku makarimidiyu
sa ákung asáwa kay gidugù, I can’t do anything with my wife because she
is menstruating. pa- v [a12] lend. Parimidiyúha ku dihag písus kay
ákung ipamúlang, Lend me one peso to use for the cockfights. n remedy,
s.t. that can repair or restore s.t. to good state. Wà na kay rimidiyu
kay kansir man, You have no hope because it’s cancer. Wà nay rimidiyu
nang makinilyáha, That typewriter is broken beyond repair. rimidiyuhay
v [C] have sexual intercourse. n action of having intercourse.

rimin v [A; a12] stay after school.

rímu v [A; b6(1)] scull, move a boat forward by twisting an oar from
side to side over the stern of a boat. Rimúhi ring búti kay punù nag
kupras, Scull this small boat because it’s already full of copra.
n scull.

rimulatsa n light brown sugar, closest in class to the refined white
sugar.

rimurki_1 v [A; a] tow or drag s.t. in the water. Dakung trúsu ákung
girimurki, I’m towing a big log in the water.

rimurki_2 v {1} [A; a12] make use of, eat s.t. with or without proper
permission (colloquial). Nagrimurki ang mga irù sa basúra, The dogs are
busy with the garbage. Nakarimurki na nà sa kusína kay nanghingìkì na,
He has eaten in the kitchen because he is picking his teeth. {2} [A3;
a12] open up s.t. to get at the contents illegally. Taga kustum mauy
mirimurki sa pákids, A Custom official helped himself to the contents
of the package.

rimut kuntrul v [A; c6] broadcast away from the radio station. Magrimut
kuntrul mi sa mísa sa Santu Rusaryu, We will broadcast the mass from
Santo Rosario church by remote control.

rína = rayna.

rinda n reins. sigunda — checkrein. Pahugti ang sigunda rinda arun dílì
madugmù ang kabáyù, Tighten the checkrein so the horse won’t stumble.
paghátag ug — let s.t. go free, release the restraints. Wà siya
magduhadúha sa paghátag ug rinda sa íyang mga kapritsu, She did not
hesitate to give full course to her caprices. v {1} [A13; a12] attach,
make into a rein. {2} [b6] pull on the reins. Rindáhi arun muhínay ang
kabáyù, Pull on the reins to slow the horse down.

rindǐr v [A23] {1} give way, collapse. Hápit na ku murindǐr sa kalisud
sa trabáhu, I’m practically ready to collapse because the work is so
hard. Kining bangkúa dì murindǐr bisag daghang maglingkud, This bench
won’t give way no matter how many people sit on it. {2} for s.t. to
expire. Murindǐr na ang sidula sunud búwan, The residence certificate
expires next month. rindídu a {1} having given way. {2} come to an end,
expired. Búlan sa Disyimbri aku natáwu, rindídu na ang túig, I was born
in December when the year was ending.

rindyir n ranger, unit in the Philippine Constabulary or member
thereof, highly trained in hand-to-hand combat. see also púris.

ring n {1} boxing or wrestling ring. {2} ring in logs. {3} basketball
ring.

ríng v [A; c1] for the telephone or doorbell to ring. Muríng gánì ang
tilipunu tubaga dáyun, When the telephone rings, answer it immediately.

ringgíru n k.o. fish.

ringlis a shot in basketball which does not touch the ring in going
into it. Basta maáyung musyát, ringlis pirmi, A player who is a good
shot always makes clean shots.

rinigar v [B16] be, become desperate enough to do s.t. at the peril of
one’s own life. Kinsay dílì murinigar (marinigádu) nga hápit na malumus
ang bátà, Who would not be out of his mind with desperation if his
child was at the point of drowning. rinigáda = rinigádu (female).
rinigádu a desperate to the point of not caring whether one lives or
dies. v [B16] be, become desperate.

rintas n internal revenue. Bayranan sa rintas, Payments to be made to
the Bureau of Internal Revenue. — intirnas = rintas.

rinyun n {1} kidney. {2} kidney ailment. Dì makakaun ug parat ang dúnay
rinyun, A person with a kidney ailment can’t eat salty foods. v [A123P;
a4] get a kidney ailment.

RIP abbreviation on graves for Requiescat in Pace.

rip. n abbreviation for riprisintanti representative.

ríp v [A; a2] rape. Mga batan-un ang miríp sa usa ka tigúlang, It was a
bunch of young men that raped the old woman.

rípa n drawing of lots or game of chance, usually with lots. v [A; a2]
draw lots; conduct a raffle. Átung ripáhun kun kinsay makabangka, Let’s
draw lots to see who treats. pa- v [A; b(1)] raffle off. Unsay
giparipáhan? What are they raffling off?

ripan v [A; c] make a refund. Katungà na lang sa kantidad ang iripan,
Only half of the amount will be refunded. n refund.

riparasiyun n reparations.

ripásu n rehearsal. v [A; a2] rehearse s.t. or s.o. Kinsa may muripásu
ninyu sa dráma? Who will rehearse you for the drama? Nakaripásu ka na
ba sa ímung diklimisyun? Have you rehearsed your declamation piece?

ripíki n pealing of a large number of bells. v [A; c1] for bells to
peal.

ripílint n {1} water repellent cloth. {2} mosquito repellent rubbed on
the skin.

ripinádu n refined sugar. v {1} [A13; a2] make refined sugar.
Maripinádu ang sintripugal kun usbun kini paglútù, The semi-refined
sugar will become refined after it is processed again. {2} [A; c] put
refined sugar in s.t.

ripir v {1} [A; a12] repair s.t. mechanical. {2} [A; c1] stitch up the
genitalia after childbirth (humorous). pa- v [A; ac] {1} have s.t.
repaired. Iparipir nátù ang tíbi, Let’s have the TV fixed. {2} have the
genitalia stitched after childbirth.

ripiri n referee. v {1} [A; a2] referee s.t. {2} [A; c1] make s.o. the
referee.

ripitir v {1} [A; c1] say or do s.t. again. Ayaw ug ripitiha (iripitir)
ang ímung sayup, Don’t repeat your mistake. Gihangyù si Múna nga
iripitir ang íyang kanta, Mona was asked to sing her song again.
{2} [A; a1] do s.t. to s.o. in rapid succession. Giripitir ku níyag
sumbag, He struck me again and again. {2a} [A2; a12] in a certain k.o.
billiard game, make successive caroms, usually ten times or more. Maáyu
gánì ang mísa muripitir man kug sín, If it is a good billiard table, I
can make a hundred successive caroms. {3} [A; c] ask for an encore by
throwing money. Giripitir níya ang singku písus sa mananayaw, He threw
in five pesos so the dancer would give an encore. (←) n a student who
has to repeat a course.

ripitisiyun encore, an exclamation asking for repetition of a
performance. n encore given by a performer. Walà muhátag ug
ripitisiyun, He wouldn’t give an encore.

riplǎn n {1} folk belief about s.t. that will happen. Mauy riplǎn sa
karáan nga kun magdamgu ug tái makadaug sa súgal, It’s a folk belief
that when one dreams of feces he will win in gambling. Mauy riplǎn sa
mga karáang táwu nga muabut ang panahun nga ang puthaw manglúpad, Old
folks believe that time will come when iron flies. {2} proverb, saying.
Adúnay riplǎn nga nag-ingun nga ang tábì dílì maputus, There’s a
proverb which says ‘You can’t wrap gossip up (i.e. keep it secret).’

ripli n rifle. v {1} [A12; a12] shoot s.t. with a rifle. Riplihun ku
nang irúa kay mamáak, I’ll shoot that dog with a rifle because it
bites. {2} [A12] obtain a rifle. — nga dibumba n air-rifle.

riplí v [A; c1] replay recorded music.

ripliksiyun n reflection in a mirror or the like.

ripliktur n reflectors for motor vehicles.

riprǎn = riplǎn.

ripridyirítur n refrigerator. v [A1; c6] use, obtain a refrigerator.

riprisintǎr v [A; b(1)] represent. Si Glurya Díyas mauy miriprisintǎr
sa Yúbi sa banggà, Gloria Diaz represented U.V. in the contest. Siya
mauy nagriprisintar sa ikaduhang distrítu, He is the representative of
the second district. Unsang kapunungána ímung giriprisintahan? What
organization do you represent? riprisintanti n {1} congressman.
{2} s.o. who represents. Dúnay riprisintanti ang átung punduk sa maung
kumbinsiyun, Our organization sent a representative to the convention.
v [B156; c1] be, become a congressman or representative.
riprisintasiyun_1 n representatives collectively sent s.w. Ang
riprisintasiyun sa kabisay-an mauy nanaug sa Prisáa, The
representatives of the Visayas won the PRISAA athletic meet.

riprisintasiyun_2 {1} standard to maintain, a front to keep up. Gamay
ra ug swildu ang magtutudlù apan kinahanglan may riprisintasiyun ang
íyang pamuyù, A teacher has a meager salary, but he still has to keep
up a front. {2} bearing, personality that impresses. Ang íyang kunsurti
way riprisintasiyun kay mabag tambuk, Her consort is unimpressive in
his bearing because he is short and fat.

riprisku n refreshments. v [A; c] take refreshments.

riprismin, riprismint n {1} refreshments esp. cold drinks. {2} — parlur
refreshment parlor. v [A12N; c] take refreshments.

ripublika n republic. v [B1256; c1] be, become a republic.

ripulyu n cabbage.

ripurt n {1} report, piece of news. Mátud sa mga ripurt, tulu ang
patay, According to the reports, three were killed. {1a} piece of
malicious information. Ayaw panumbalinga kanang mga ripurt, Don’t pay
any heed to that gossip. {2} official report or presentation of facts.
Way kamatuúran ang ripurt sa prisidinti, The presidential report lacks
credibility. v {1} [A2] report to a place of work. Dílì ku muripurt sa
upisína ugmà, I will not report to the office tomorrow. {2} [A; c]
report s.t. wrong. Iripurt ta ka sa manidyǐr, I shall report you to the
manager. Ímung giripurt ang tilipunung nadáut? Did you report the
telephone out of order? {2a} give a report, piece of news. Giripurt
siyang patay, He was reported dead. -ir n {1} news reporter, one who
reports bad things to the authorities. Dúna giyuy ripurtir ning átung
upisína, There’s a spy in the office. {2} gossip. Paglikay ánang
bayhána kay ripurtir nà, Keep away from that woman because she is a
gossip. v [B156] be, become a news reporter.

rirayit v [A; c1] rewrite. Irirayit nà kay di mabása, Rewrite that
because it’s illegible.

*risáda mísa — n low mass.

Risal name Jose Rizal, a national hero of the Philippines. v [B1456] be
earnest, diligent like Rizal. Mutrabáhu giyud nà siya bísag Duminggu.
Magrisal tingáli, He goes to work, even on Sundays. He must want to be
a hero. -in- a hair style like Rizal’s.

risáyin v [A2; b3] quit one’s job. Mirisáyin ang sikritarya, The
secretary resigned.

risáyit v [A; c1] recite a poem in class.

risaytal n musical recital. v [A1; c6] hold a recital.

risgu n risk, the chance or danger of injury, loss. Risgu ang
pagpanguntrabandu, Smuggling is a risky business. Ang paglabang ánang
subáa dakung risgu sa kinabúhì, You cross that river at the risk of
your life. v [A3P; c1] take a risk. Dautan ang panahun apan murisgu
lang ku pagbiyáhi, The weather is bad, but I’ll take a risk and travel.

risibi v [A; a12] {1} look after, take care of. Ug dì ka kamau murisibi
sa mga urkids, mangamátay lang nà, If you don’t know how to take care
of the orchids, they’ll die. {1a} entertain, receive a guest or
visitor. Maáyug mga bigsyat ta kay risibihun dáyun, They would have
tried to outdo each other in entertaining us had we been big shots.
{2} pay attention to what one is about. Risibiha ang ímung gibúhat arun
dílì magkasayupsayup, Pay attention to what you are about so it won’t
be full of mistakes. -dur(→) n living room. -in- n s.t. given full care
and attention.

risíbu n receipt. v [A2; b] make or issue a receipt.

risidídu = disidídu.

risidins n {1} = risidinsiya. {2} residence in school to graduate or
get honors.

risidin sirtipikit n residence certificate.

risidinsiya n {1} residence, dwelling place of a nice sort.
{2} residence to fulfill voting requirements. v [A] have a long enough
residence.

risikáda n copra that has dried beyond the usual standard moisture
content. Ang kupras risikáda mas mahal ug prisyu, Very dry copra
fetches a higher price. v [A2; a1] be, become quite dry.

risíku n decrease in weight from evaporation. v {1} [A2] for copra to
lose its moisture content. Mugaan ang kupras ug murisíku, Copra becomes
lighter if it loses moisture. {2} [A; b6(1)] deduct possible loss in
weight due to evaporation from the material weighed. Risikúhi ang
timbang ug báli singku kílus, Deduct five kilos from the original
weight for evaporation.

risintǎr v [A; c] resent. Dílì ta murisintǎr ug tagáan ug mga maáyung
tambag, We should not resent it when we are given good advice.

risipi n {1} recipe. {2} recipe book. v [A1; b] use a recipe book.

rísir n racing bicycle.

risirba n {1} s.t. spare for later use. Kining kwartáha risirba pára sa
timpu sa kalisud, This money is a reserve for difficult times. Wà nay
hángin ang risirba, The spare tire has no air. {2} s.t. set aside for a
special person. Adúna ka nay risirba nga lamísa sa nayitklab, You
already have a table reserved in the night club. {3} reservist in the
armed forces. v {1} [A; c] reserve, set s.t. aside for later use. Átung
irisirba ang ítik pára sa pista, I’m reserving the ducks for the
fiesta. {2} [B1256] be a reservist. -du a s.t. set aside for a special
purpose. Gidilì ang pagtagà sa mga risirbádung kalasangan, Felling
trees in a forest reservation is prohibited. n forest reservation.
-siyun n forest reservation.

risis n recess. v [B56; b(1)] be recess time, begin recess. Mupaulì
siyag marisis, He goes home at recess time.

risistinsiya n {1} resistance. Risistinsiya sa inpiksiyun, Resistance
to infection. {2} endurance. Way risistinsiya sa bug-at nga trabáhu, He
cannot endure hard work. Dúgay siyang kapuyun ug magbaskit bul kay
maáyug risistinsiya, He doesn’t easily run out of breath in basketball
because he has lots of steam. -du(←) a having lots of endurance.
v [B12] get to have good endurance.

risíta n doctor’s prescription. v [A; c] issue a prescription.

risma n ream of paper of 500 sheets.

rispitar n {1} respect, showing s.o. the deference and courtesy due him
in his station. Wà kay rispitar sa ímung ginikánan, You don’t show your
parents the respect that is due them. {2} sign of courtesy. Rispitar
lang tung ákung pagtambung sa íyang kasal, I went to his wedding out of
respect for him. v {1} [A; b(1)] respect, recognize a person’s station
and rights. Nagrispitar ku sa ímung katungud, I respect your rights.
Rispitai ang butang sa uban, Respect other peoples’ properties. {2} [A;
b6] do s.t. out of respect for s.o. Rispitahan lang nátù ning básung
gitágay, We’ll just accept this glass as recognition of the person who
offered it. rispitádu a {1} respected. Mutúu giyud ang mga táwu níya
kay rispitádu kaáyu siya, People believe him because he is very much
respected. {2} respectful. Rispitádu kaáyu nang tawhána sa mga babáyi,
That man is very respectful to women.

rispítu = rispitar, n.

rispundi v {1} [A] take the responsibility for s.t. Ikay murispundi ug
madáut nà, You’re responsible if that breaks. Kinsay nagrispundi
pagpakatúlug sa mga bátà? Who’s responsible for putting the children to
sleep? {2} [A] shoulder expenses, provide. Akuy murispundi sa ímung
pagtuun, I’ll take care of your studies. {2a} [A; b6] take care of
s.o.’s expenses for the moment. May talagaan kung dus sa taksi.
Rispundihi sà ku, I owe the taxi driver two pesos. Take care of it for
me, will you?

rispunsabli a {1} reliable, having a sense of responsibility. Makasálig
ka ánang tawhána kay rispunsabli nà, You can rely on that person
because he is trustworthy. {2} responsible for s.t. Dì ku rispunsabli
sa ímung mga útang, I’m not responsible for your debts. v [B12] develop
a sense of responsibility.

rispunsabilidad, rispunsibilidad n responsibility.

rispunsu n ceremony of blessing a tomb, usually at the funeral, on
death anniversaries, or on All Souls’ Day. v [A; b(1)] bless the tomb.

rista v [A; a12] check up on how s.t. is. Akuy muristar kun
natrangkahan bag pultahan, I’ll check the door to see if it is bolted.
Pagaristahan ang kík ug mitúbù ba, Keep checking the cake to see if it
rose.

ristanti n balance, the amount still owed after a partial settlement.
Ilátay ang ákung bag-ung útang sa ristanti, Just add my new debts to
the balance I owe. v [A; c] leave a balance after partial payment.

ristǎr = rista.

ristawran n restaurant. v [A1; c1] engage in a restaurant business;
make into a restaurant. paN- v [A2; c] go to a restaurant.

risulta as a result. Sígi lang siyag ínum. Risulta, giulsir, He keeps
drinking. As a result, he developed an ulcer. n result. Makaguul ang
risulta sa iksámin, The results of the exam are depressing. Mau kanay
risulta sa gahiag úlu, That’s what happens to s.o. who is stubborn.
v [A23] result in s.t. -du n result of a bad practice or behavior. Ang
ímung ulsir risultádu na nà sa sígi nímung pagpagutum, The ulcer you’ve
got comes from letting yourself go hungry all the time.

risulusiyun n formal resolution to do s.t. v [A13; c] pass a
resolution.

risuriksiyun n the Resurrection of Christ.

ritásu n {1} remnants of cloth. {2} remnants of wood, metal.
{3} children (humorous). Kadaghan sa ímung mga ritásu! What a lot of
kids you have! {3a} small ones. Inigsúgud sa bayli padaplin mung mga
ritásu ha? When the dance starts the small fry step to the sides, will
you? v [B1256] be, become a remnant.

ritatsir n one who retouches pictures.

ritáyir v [A2] retire from one’s job or position. -d retired. -min
n {1} retirement. {2} retirement pay. Inigkadawat ni Tátay sa íyang
ritayirmin, makapadáyun ku sa ákung pag-iskuyla, When Dad receives his
retirement pay, I can continue my studies.

rítim n {1} an instrument for giving the rhythm. {2} music played by
the instrument which gives the rhythm. {3} rhythm method of birth
control. v {1} [A; b6(1)] play the rhythm in a combo performance.
{2} [A; a12] use the rhythm method for birth control.

ríting n rating in a board examination. v [A] get, obtain a rating of.

ritíra v [A2; b36] {1} retreat, withdraw. Miritíra sila pag-abanti sa
kaáway, They retreated as the enemy advanced. {2} leave a place.
Ngánung miritíra ka man sa Sugbu? Why did you leave Cebu? {3} [A2; b36]
back out of an agreement. Dílì ku muritíra sa átung sábut, I will not
back out of our agreement. pa- v [A2; a12] kick s.o. out of a home or
job. Paritiráhun ka nákù sa ákung pudir, I’ll kick you out of my home.

ritmu n rhythm. Adúnay ritmu ang pitik sa átung pulsu, Our pulse beats
rhythmically.

ritratar v [A; c] take pictures. Akuy muritratar nímu, I’ll take your
picture. Dílì makaritratar sa sulud sa simbahan ang ritratista,
Photographers can’t take pictures inside the church. pa- v [A; b(l)]
have one’s picture taken. Nagparitratar mi sa dágat, We had our picture
taken by the sea. ritratista n photographer. v [B156; c1] be a
photographer.

ritrátu n photograph. v [A; b(1)] take a picture. pa- v [A1; ab] have
one’s picture taken.

ritrít n religious retreat. v [A; b] hold a retreat. Magritrít mi antis
sa Simána Santa, We will hold a retreat before Holy Week.

ritríta n ceremony held in the evening of the first day of a novena
which precedes the day of the patron saint of a place, where people
shouting ’Bíba’ together with a band parade to herald the coming
fiesta. Also, the parade held at the dawn of the feast day, where the
image of the Saint is paraded with a band to the church for blessing
and back to the chapel.

ritru di- see paktu.

ritrúku n k.o. combination shot in billiards where the player makes a
carom when the cue ball is between the two object balls. v [A2; c1]
make this sort of shot.

ritubáda = ritubádu (female).

ritubádu a given to talking back. v [B12] get into the habit of talking
back.

ritubar v [A; c1] make clothing from an old piece of clothing.
Ritubahun ku ning sinínà sa ákung anak kay gamay na man ni nákù, I’ll
remake this into a dress for my daughter because it is too small for
me.

ritukadur n one who touches up photographs.

ritúki v [A; a12] touch up a photograph. Batan-un siyang tan-áwun sa
litrátu kay maáyung pagkaritúki, He looks young in the picture because
it was well touched up. dílì ma- for s.t. to be so ugly nothing can be
done to make it look nice. Dílì maritúki ang íyang nawung sa kasukù,
When he gets angry he looks terrible.

riturn báwut n return bout in boxing. v [A2C] have a return bout.

riurganisar v [A; a12] reorganize. Riurganisahun sa Prisidinti ang
íyang gabiníti, The President will reorganize his cabinet.
riurganisasiyun n reorganization.

riyal_1 a liberal spender. v [B126; c1] be liberal in spending. Wà kay
kaugmáun kun magriyal ka sa ímung kwarta, You have no future if you
spend your money liberally.

riyal_2 n silver coin worth one eighth of a peso, circulated in Spanish
times. -is(←) = riyal (plural—used only after the numbers of Spanish
origin).

riyal_3 in the variation of billiards game called hardin, the downing
on the first strike of the four billiard pins placed in the center.
v [B1256; a12] become, make a riyal.

riyal istít n real estate. v [A] go into the real estate business.

riyúma = rayúma.

riyumatismu n rheumatism.

riyunyun n reunion of a class or family. v [C] hold a reunion.
Magriyunyun ang pamilya káda Pasku, The family holds a reunion every
Christmas. paN- v [A2] attend a reunion.

RPS /arpíis/ abbreviation for Republic of the Philippines Ship put on
Philippine naval craft. Ang arpíis Lapulápu mauy yáti sa Prisidinti,
The RPS Lapulapu is the yacht of the President.

rubar v [A; a1] draw a mahjong piece. n action of drawing. rubáda =
rubar.

rubi n ruby, a precious stone.

rublis = gawaygáway.

rúbu v [A2C; ab2] {1} rough s.o. up. Unyà mu na ba buyaga kun magrúbu
na nang duha? Will you reprimand them only after they have started
roughing each other up? Rubúhun nátù ang dúlà ug lúpig ta, Let’s play
the game rough if we get out-classed. {2} engage in heavy petting.
Hikit-an si Liyun nga nakigrúbu sa íyang trátu, Leon was seen engaging
rough romance with his sweetheart. n fight or rough and tumble romance.
Kun gustu kag rúbu, andam ku, If you want to play rough, I’m ready.
pára — n rough and tumble. Kanang sinináa pára rúbu, This dress is for
rough use. ruburúbu a {1} rough and tumble. {2} informal, rough and
easy-going without paying attention to niceties of etiquette. Wà nay
platuplátu. Ruburúbu bítaw ni, Let’s not bother with plates. This is a
rough and tumble get-together anyway. v [A; a] do s.t. in a rough way.

rúbut n robot.

rud-aylan n Rhode Island chicken.

rúgi a groggy, dizzy. Rúgi siya kay naigù sa usa ka búl, He’s groggy
because he got drunk on his jarful of toddy. v [B12; ab3(1)] get groggy
from a blow or liquor. Liphuk nga makarúgi (makaparúgi), A left hook
that will send you reeling.

rúl_1 n {1} rules of sports. {2} rules of a school, religious order,
and the like.

rúl_2 v [A; c1] roll the hair up on curlers.

rúling_1 n {1} the rules or procedures by which s.t. is carried out.
Mga rúling sa baksing, Rules of boxing. Unsa may mga rúling sa inyung
kapunúngan arun makasúd ta? What are the rules for joining your
organization? {2} the decision pronounced by a referee, ruling handed
down by a judge. Unsa may rúling sa ampayir? What was the umpire’s
decision? May rúling sa kurti nga dílì dawátun kúmu piyansa ang yútang
prindádu, The court ruled that you cannot post bail with mortgaged
property.

*rúling_2 — báyan n snack made of old bread, sugared, fried, and shaped
into an oval. — dú = bùbuay. see bùbù. — istǔr n store or canteen set
on wheels.

rúlir n ruler. v [A; ac] make into, use as a ruler. (→) v [ab2] hit
with a ruler. Rulirun ta ka run ug dì ka muhílum, I will whack you with
a ruler if you don’t keep quiet.

rulíta n roulette wheel, a rotating disc divided into numbered or
colored portions for gambling or drawing lots.

rulkul v [A; a12] call the roll. Magrulkul ang maistru inigsúgud sa
klási, The teacher calls the roll at the start of the session. Rulkúlun
ang mga diputádu kun dúna bay kúrum, The roll is called for the
congressmen to see if there is a quorum. n roll call.

rulpad n pad of ruled paper.

rulyu_1 v [A; c1] coil or roll s.t. up. n anything that is stored by
rolling it up: roll of film, paper, coil of rope.

rulyu_2 n lecture in the cursillo (a series of religious lectures and
prayers for laymen). v [A; b6(1)] give the lecture in a cursillo.

rulyista n lecturer in a cursillo.

rúmi = rami_2.

rúma = arúma.

Rumanista n member of the Roman Catholic church. v [B1256; b6c1] be,
become a Roman Catholic.

rúmans a petting or necking. Báhin sa sining may rúmans, The part of
the movie that shows scenes of romance. pára — a not to be used for
anything but romance, i.e. not for hard work (humorous). Ayaw táwun ku
pagunáha kay pára rúmans ra ba ning kamúta, Don’t make me weed. These
hands of mine are made only for romance. v [C] engage in petting.

rumansa n {1} romance, love affair. Ang rumansa sa duha ka bitúun, The
love affair of the two stars. {2} = rúmans. v = rúmans.

rumantika = rumantiku (female).

rumantiku a {1} romantic, evoking feelings of amorousness or
sentimentality. Rumantikung lugar, A romantic place. {2} romantic,
amorous. Rumantikung mga mata, Romantic eyes. v [B12] be, become
romantic.

Rumánu n {1} Roman. {2} Roman Catholic. katuliku — n Roman Catholic.
v [B156] become a Roman Catholic.

rumba n rhumba. v [AC; c1] do the rhumba.

rumblun n k.o. pandanus grown widely as an ornamental and for its
leaves which are particularly pliant and suitable for weaving. The
color is lighter than the other species and the leaves are armed along
the edges and the midribs.

rumbu v [A; ac] {1} head towards the direction of; take s.t. s.w.
Sakayang nagrumbu dinhi, A boat heading this way. Ang ímung kabúang
nagrumbu nímu sa kadáut, Your foolishness is leading you to misery.
Rumbuha nang kahúya, Head towards that tree. {2} be the target or
object of. Aku tung íyang girumbu sa insultu, I was the target of his
insult. {3} [A; a] batter, ram s.t. down. Rumbúhun ta ning pultahan kay
nawálà ang yábi, Let’s batter the door down because we lost the key.
n {1} direction or heading taken. Tan-áwa ug unsay rumbu sa barku, See
what direction the ship took. Ása rumbu ning dalána? Where does this
road lead to? Gitumba níya ang káhuy rumbu sa sapà, He felled the tree
directly into the river. {2} destination, goal. {3} target, object
aimed at.

rumíru n rosemary, sold as a dried herb for spice.

rumlun = rumblun.

rumpi v [A; a] {1} destroy s.t. by breaking it to pieces. Ang mga
tulisan mauy mirumpi sa pultahan, The robbers broke the door down. Si
Ilurdi mauy nagrumpi sa gúsuk ni Kusáka, Elorde shattered Kosaka’s
ribs. {2} destroy a girl’s reputation. Narumpi na ang kadunggánan ánang
bayhána, The reputation of that girl is ruined. n = rumpi kandádu. —
kandádu n general name for barracudas (the lock breaker): Sphyraena
jello, et al.

run short for karun.

runda v [A; a12] {1} police raid. Mga Písi ang mirunda sa sugálan, The
P.C. raided the gambling den. {2} go to s.o.’s house unexpectedly to
collect a debt, ask for charity. Girunda mi sa mananaygun, The
carollers came to see us to solicit money (lit. raided us).

rundalya n orchestra consisting mainly of native stringed instruments.
v [A1] form a rundalya.

rúng a wrong answer in an exam. Rúng tanan ang ákung ansir, All my
answers were wrong. v {1} [A; b(1)] mark s.t. wrong. {2} [B126; b6] be,
become wrong.

rungkilyu n name of a notorious bandit during Spanish times. v [B3(1)]
flare up at s.o. unreasonably at the slightest provocation. Murungkilyu
(marungkilyu) siya kun mahubug, He gets mad easily when he is drunk.

runíyu n mimeographing machine (so called from the brand name Roneo).
v [A; a] mimeograph s.t.

rup gardin n roof garden.

rúral n rural doctor, bank. Dílì maáyung ipanghuwam sa rúral kay dakug
pursintu, It’s no good to borrow from rural banks because they charge a
high percentage. — duktur rural doctor. (→) bangku — rural bank.

rús n rose. byitnam — {1} ornamental herb bearing rose-like flowers:
Portulaca grandiflora. {2} k.o. venereal disease.

rúsa n rose-colored, pink. v [B] be, become rose-colored.

rusal n gardenia, grown as an ornamental.

rusaryu n rosary. v [A; b(1)] pray the rosary. rusaryuan, rusaryuhan,
rusaryúhan n rosary beads.†

rúsas n {1} rose. {2} = rúsa. — dihapun, — dipapil kinds of
chrysanthemums. — dipúkì = púkì, 2. di- a rose-colored. Dirúsas ang
ákung páyung, My umbrella is rose-colored. v [A12] anything that is
wrong with (humorous euphemism). Ang nakadirúsas nímu kay dì ka kamau,
The thing that’s wrong with you is that you don’t know how.

rusítas n rosette design of jewelry.

ruska n screw or small nut. v [b6(1)] attach with, drive in a screw or
bolt.†

ruskilyus n k.o. ring-shaped fancy cookies made of flour and egg yolks.
v [A; a2] have, make this k.o. cookie.

Rúsu n Russian.

rúta n route, itinerary. Ang rúta sa ámung paglangyaw muági sa Rúma,
Our tour will go through Rome. Dílì ku muhatud sa Pwinti. Dílì nà ákung
rúta, I don’t take passengers to the Fuente because that is not my
route.

rutisiyun n working in shifts or on a two-week rotational basis.
v [A13; c1] work in shifts or on a rotation basis. Hínay ang trabáhu
maung nagrutisiyun ang mga trabahanti, Business is slow so the laborers
are working on a rotation basis.

rutunda n small round park or grass island at an intersection.

rúyal a winning mahjong hand consisting of only one design. — buki n a
buki consisting of all black or all red numbers. — iskalíra see
iskalíra. — midul kard a rúyal hand composed of midul kards. — pyanghaw
a rúyal hand consisting of a pyanghaw.†

ruyda n {1} wheel with wooden spokes. {2} wheel or flywheel with spokes
in a printing press. {3} arena or ring in a cockpit, boxing stadium,
circus. v [B46; c1] turn around. Nagruyda ang ákung úlu sa pagkainum,
My head is awhirl after I drank s.t. Nagruyda ang palábad sa ayruplánu,
The airplane propeller is whirling. Ruydáhun (iruyda) sa kábaw ang
galingan sa intusan, The carabao will pull the sugar cane grinder
around.
