


=== ADDENDA ===

Forms marked with a dagger have already been entered in the main
portion of the dictionary, and what is listed here should be studied in
conjunction with the main entry.


==== A ====

†ab-ab v [B; b6] for a fire to be blazing. Miab-ab (naab-ab) na ang
káyu pag-abut sa bumbíru, The fire was already ablaze when the firemen
arrived. a chewed up, eroded, festering, blazing.

abansádu a be close to the roadway. — sa buling a not showing dirt,
masking stains well. Abansádus buling ang kalsúnis nga itum, Black
pants don’t show dirt. v [B2] be, become close to the roadway.
Maabansádu ang inyung balay kun padak-an ang kalsáda, Your house will
be close to the road if they widen it.

abansáwu = abansádu.

†abri — birat v [A; b6] yield to a man under threat (humorous—from the
pidgin Japanese for abríhi ang bilat used during the Japanese
occupation). Abri birat (miabri birat) na lang si Kulása kay gitiúnan
mag ribulbir, Colasa surrendered herself because they were pointing a
revolver at her.

abrisíti, abrisyíti = abrasíti.

†ábung_1 (→) n 2 being in a state where s.t. is likely to happen to
one. Ayaw mug panaway sa kaminyúun kay abung pa mu, Don’t scorn
marriage because it won’t be long before you, too, will be married. Ang
tigúwang abung sa kamatáyun, Old folks are in the state where death is
likely to overtake them. v [A13] for an event to approach. Nag-abung na
ang Pasku, Christmas is approaching.

ábung_2 n the drunken feeling one gets from eating tainted food.
v [A123P; a4] get this feeling. Giábung ku human makakaun sa dubuk nga
tulíngan, I got dizzy after eating the tainted tuna.

†abut (←) a variety of grain that gives a big yield or k.o. soil that
yields well. Ábut kaáyu ang basakan kay sa kamad-an, Rice paddies yield
more than the uplands. pa-(←) n expected delivery date for a mother.
Karung simanáha ang paábut sa ákung asáwa, Our baby is due this week.

†abyadur — sa lubi n palm toddy gatherer (humorous).

adbinturar = abinturar.

†adlaw — gabíi doing s.t. all the time. Adlaw gabíi ang ákung trabáhu,
I work day and night. may — rang magabíi the day will come when the
tables will be turned (lit. the day will come that will turn to night).
Ímu kung gidaugdáug kay ábi pubri man ku, apan may adlaw rang magabíi,
You are stepping all over me because I am poor, but the day will come
when the tables are turned. -an(→), hiN-an(→) n the share of palm toddy
given to the owner of the tree, reckoned as the amount gathered on one
particular day of the week.

adlib_1 v [A; b6] deliver s.t. extemporaneously without any script.
Kinahanglan sa usa ka anawunsir nga maáyu muadlib, It’s necessary for
an announcer to be good at ad-libbing. Giadlíban na lang níya ang lima
ka minútus, He just filled in the five minutes by ad-libbing.

†admirar admiradur n admirer. Daghan siyag admiradur kay gwápa man, She
has lots of admirers because she is beautiful.

†adult pur — for adults only (movie).

aduptǎr v {2} [A; a] adopt a form of government. Kun unsang matánga sa
kagamhánan ang aduptahun kanà mag-agad lang unyà sa plibisítu, It
depends on the plebiscite as to what form of government will be
adopted.

†adwána n {2} place where the customs house is located or the port area
near the customs house. Didtus adwána dunggù ang bapur, The ship docked
near the customs house.

ág — lang anything and everything. Ág lay kan-un sa bábuy, Pigs eat
anything and everything. Ág lang trabáhu ang íyang gidatug kanákù, She
dumped whatever she had to do on me.

†ágak v {3} [A; a12] guide s.o. in doing things. Musúkul kus kásu ug
dúnay muágak nákù, I’ll put up a fight in court if I have legal
counsel. Agákun tikaw sa pag-atiman sa tanum, I’ll show you how to tend
the plants.

†agálunpaN- v [A23] for a long-lost thing to be found again by its
owner or for a thing long sold by its owner to find its way back to
him. Nangagáwun ang ákung singsing nga narimáti kay aku ra gihápuy
nakapalit sa pagsubasta, My ring must consider me its master, because
after I pawned it and failed to redeem it, I still got it back at the
auction.

†agaw ig-(←) ug ikatrayinta idús ug tungà (humorous) one’s fiancee
(lit. thirty-second and a halfth cousin).

agay-ay_2 v [B346] for liquid to trickle down very slowly from a
source. Nag-agay-ay ang túbig sa punúan sa káhuy, The water is
trickling very slowly down the trunk of the tree. n slow trickling of
water. -in- n {1} slow trickling of liquid. {2} water which has
trickled out.

†ági (→) anhà mag- it will inevitably be so. Anhà giyud ka mag-agi sa
latigu kay buyágun ka man, It looks like you’re going to have to get
whipped. You’re so naughty. pa- v {2} [A; ab] go over s.t. with an
instrument. Paagia kug kadiyut sa ákung sinínà, Let me just press my
dress a second time. Gipaagian ku na ang mga hábul nga gisiun, I have
already run the torn sheets through the sewing machine. pa-(→) = pa-,
v2.

†agpas v {5} [c] for medicine to cure an ailment. Dílì maagpas
(maagpasan) sa binisayà ang sakit sa bágà, Folk medicine cannot cure a
lung disease.

agribyádu = agrabyádu.

†agwáda agwadahan n {1} the pole carried on the shoulder with a can on
each end. {2} the cans used to convey water. {3} the place where one
fetches water. {4} the families to whom water is delivered by the
carrier.

†agwádu a {2} for dough not to be baked through. v {2} [B12] come out
not baked through. Ang kakúlang sa síga mauy nakapaagwádu sa bibingka,
The rice cake came out half-cooked because the fire was too low.

ahan = kayhà (dialectal).

†ahaw v {1a} [B1256] be without, lack. Hala, níay mil arun dì ka
maahaws igalastus syudad, Here is a thousand pesos so you won’t lack
spending money while you are in the city.

akadímik n academic supervisor, the second highest official of a public
school, next to the superintendent. v [B; c1] be, become an academic
supervisor.

akawunting n accounting as a subject in schools.

alabádu v {1} [A; c1] clasp the hands on one’s breast. Ug mualabádu ang
párì, sunud pud, If the priest clasps his hands on his breast, do the
same. {2} [A1] say one’s final prayers at the point of death.
Nag-alabádu na ang bitayun, The doomed man is saying his final prayers.

alahíbi = alhíbi.

†álam may (walay) (→) uneducated (having no education). Lisud ang
pangimplíyu ug wà kay alam, You’ll have a hard time finding a job if
you have no education.

†alarma v {3} [B12] be alarmed about s.t. Nagkaalarma ang mga táwu sa
kahimtang sa násud, The people are getting concerned about the
condition of the nation.

alastar v [B12] for an anchored boat to get loose and drift away.
Nagkaalastar na ang ímung sakayan, Your boat is getting loose and is
drifting away.

albumina n albumen. albuminahun a containing albumen.

alibanta command to heave s.t. Únu, dus, tris, alibanta! One, two,
three, heave!

alibay_2 v [A; c] drape s.t. over the shoulders. Alibayan ta kag tualya
arun dì ka tugnawun, I’ll drape a towel over your shoulders so you
won’t feel cold.

†alirdyik {3} having an aversion to s.t. Alirdyik kaáyu ku sa hílak, I
hate crying. v {3} [B12] be, become averse to s.t.

alis get out, scram (colloquial). Alis dihà bi. Akuy naglingkud dihà,
Get out of my chair.

ális n wake of a boat. v [A] produce a wake. Muális ug maáyu ang
ispidbut ug pakusgan, The speedboat produces high waves in its wake
when it runs fast.

aliyunyun (from yunyun) n an insect similar to a spider, of light
dirty-brown color, having long spindly legs, so called because it moves
its body up and down when it is disturbed.

almahadun = almuhadun.

alpabit n the alphabet.

†álup v {1a} [B24] for one’s popularity to wane. Miálup na ang bitúun
ni Súsan Rúsis, Susan Roces’ popularity has waned.

alupaup = alup-up.

amamaylu = tabilus.

amara v [A; a] brandish a weapon in a fighting stance or in anger.
Misibat siya pagkakità sa íyang kuntra nga nag-amara ug pinútì, He got
out of there when he saw his enemy waving a sword.

amatung n large boulder or pile of rocks formed into a boulder found in
shallow waters, usually slightly exposed even at high tide.

†ambak v {2} [A; c] go, climb down. Mihínay siyag ambak sa káhuy, He
climbed out of the tree slowly. {2a} go out of a house. Bisag gabíi na,
muambak gihápun ka? It’s already night. Don’t tell me you’re going out!
{2b} get, bring off a vehicle. Anhi ra ku dinhi ambak, I’m getting off
here. Iambak ra ang ákung dala, Take my baggage off. {3} [B6] for the
seam between the shoulder and the sleeve to fall below the shoulder
line. Ipausab nang sinínà kay miambak ang tahì sa abagahan, Let them
redo that dress because the shoulder seam falls below the shoulder
line. a shoulder seam falling below the shoulder line. -an n edge of an
area that drops off. Ang ambakan sa intabládu, The edge of the stage.

†ambas v {2} [AC] for two or more persons or things to arrive at almost
the same time. Nag-ambas ug abut ang sulat ug ang tiligráma, The letter
and the telegram arrived almost at the same time.

†ambisiyun n {2} way of playing mahjong where one doesn’t open as soon
as he has mahjong but rather tries to parley his holdings into s.t.
that gives a better return. v {2} [AP; b] play one’s hand in this way.
Mumadyung na tà ku, apan wà lang kay nag-ambisiyun (nagpaambisiyun) kug
syíti páris, I could have gone mahjong, but I didn’t because I was
holding out for seven pairs. {2a} [c1] make it an ambisiyun hand. -ar
v = ambisiyun, v1. -adu a ambitious. Ambisiyunádu kaáyu ning batáa nga
makahuman sa íyang pagtuun, This child is very ambitious to finish his
studies. v [B126; b6] be, become ambitious.

ambisyúsa = ambisyúsu (female).

ambríla kat n style of skirt with several triangular pieces flaring to
the hem and narrow at the waist, roughly resembling an umbrella.
v {1} [A; c1] make a dress in this style. {2} [A; c] wear a dress in
this style.

amimispis = pispis.

†amin v {3} [A; a12] admit a wrong or mistake one has done and be held
responsible. Kun aminun nímung tanang nabitabù, maminusminus pa ang
ímung sintinsiya, If you admit everything, your sentence will be
reduced. {4} [A; a] kill (humorous). Akuy muamin ánang hingusig nga
irù, I’ll put an end to that noisy dog. a dead.

†amping -in-an n {1} s.t. one must guard. {2} genitalia of a virgin
(euphemism).

†amù maáyu pay amù náa pay duha ka dakù sa lubut poor as a church mouse
(lit. a monkey is better off because at least he has two centavo pieces
on his buttocks).

amurítis n lovesickness (humorous). v [B126; a4] be affected with
‘amoritis’. -un(→) a lovesick.

Ámuy_3 n Amoy Chinese.

amuy-ámuy v [A; b5] pacify, appease one’s anger. Amuy-amúya
(amuy-amúyig) kindi ang bátà ug maghilak, Appease the child with a
piece of candy when it cries. n act of appeasing, pacifying.

amyat a looking down on others and being pretentious. Amyat nang
bayhána. Dílì makighuyhúy nátù, That woman is stuck up. She won’t go
around with us. v [B12] be, become stuck up and pretentious. Lagmit ang
kadátù makaamyat (makapaamyat) sa usa ka asáwa, Usually wealth makes a
wife think too highly of herself. -in- v [A; a2] behave in a conceited
and affected way.

an = ang (dialectal).

†anak n — sa salà, pagpakasalà illegitimate child. — sa pagkaulitáwu a
man’s child before his marriage. — sa pagkadalága a child born to a
woman before her marriage. — sa Táwu Jesus Christ. — sa Diyus Jesus
Christ. — sa sakramintu legitimate child.

†andir — gráwun a done in secret. Andir-gráwun ang mga kalihúkan sa mga
kaáway nátù, Our enemies carried out their activities in secret. v [c1]
do s.t. secretly. — wit a underweight. Andir wit kaáyu ning batáa kay
níwang, This child is very underweight because he is thin. v [B12; b6]
be, become underweight.

†ángal v {2} [A; c] reveal a secret (slang). Muángal siya sa pulis kun
dì nátù bahínan, He will sing to the police if we do not give him a
share.

anghuy = anhuy.

†angka v {3a} [A23P; b3] change one’s mind, back out of an agreement.
Dì ku muangka. Ang sábut, sábut, I will not back out. An agreement is
an agreement. pa- v [A; a] make s.o. quit or change his mind. n s.t. to
make one change his mind. Ingun sa paangka ang ílang gipangáyù nga
bugay, They asked for that bride price just to get him to back out.

†anislag -un n a rooster feather coloration of shiny, light gold with
streaks of dark brown.

†ánit n {2} strip of leather attached to the ends of the rubber strips
of a slingshot used to cradle the stone. v {2} [A; c] attach the sling
to the slingshot. {3} [A; a] shave the head bald. (→) a shaved bald.

†ansuy v {2} get sick from getting oneself wet after sexual
intercourse. Gíkang mugámit dì siya muhíkap ug túbig kay mahadluk
ansúyan, He doesn’t go near water after sexual intercourse for fear of
getting sick.

antidit v [A; c16] antedate, assign an earlier date to a document than
the true date. Antidítun (iantidit) lang nátù ang aplikasiyun kay ulahi
na, Let’s put an earlier date on the application because it is too
late.

antititanus n anti-tetanus injection.

†antiyúhus — ug bíka v [A13] miss seeing s.t. too big to be overlooked
(lit. wearing glasses made of potsherds).

antrak, antraks n a big boil without a head, usually growing on the
breast, the nape of the neck, or at the back. v [A123; b5] have a big
boil of this sort.

†anyil — sa lubut n a patch of blue skin found at the tip of the
vertebral column of infants.

apartǎr a located far from s.w. Apartǎr kaáyu ang ámung balay sa
mirkádu, Our house is very far from the market. v [B; c1] be, become
far from s.w. Apartaha (iapartǎr) pagtúkud ang inyung balay sa karsáda,
Build your house far from the road. -du = apartǎr.

†apiktǎr -du(←) a affected by s.t. Apiktádu kaáyu ang mga ginikánan sa
mga bátang magbinúang, The parents are very much affected if their
children misbehave. v [B12] be affected. Maapiktádu ang tibuuk láwas sa
bísan unsang sakit nga átung batíun, The whole body is affected by any
sickness one has.

†apindiks n {2} appendix of a book.

aplikisyun = aplikasiyun.

aprísir n appraiser.

apsaydawun kik n upside-down cake. v [A] make upside-down cake.

aptudit a au courant, up-to-date on events. Aptudit kaáyu ning bayhána
sa mga tabì, That woman is au courant when it comes to gossip. v [B126]
be au courant.

apuntǎr v [A; c] record, list down s.t. Ang iskúrir mauy miapuntǎr sa
iskur sa nagbaskit, The score-keeper recorded the score of the teams
playing basketball. Iapuntǎr unya kiring ákung giútang, List down the
things I am getting on credit.

arangka_2 v [C; b3] engage in a noisy quarrel. Gubut kaáyug mag-arangka
na ang bana ug ang íyang abubhuang asáwa, All hell breaks loose when
the husband and his jealous wife quarrel.

arastǎr = alastǎr.

*araw-áraw paN- a for one’s daily and ordinary use (slang).
Pang-araw-áraw níya ang ílang mutsatsa, ang íyang uyab panagsa ra níya
dulgi, He has his maid for ordinary, everyday intercourse, and only
rarely his fiancée.

†arbul_2 — di = arbur di.

arbur di n Arbor Day.

aríba_4 shout of encouragement to a player or performer. Aríba, Kutya,
usa na lang ka puwint, Come on, Cotia, you only need one more point.

ar-ip si n acronym for the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation, now
known as the Development Bank of the Philippines. v [A; a12] make a
loan with the R.F.C.

†árit n sexual intercourse (slang). pala- a having a great capacity for
sexual intercourse.

†aríya_1 v {5a} [A] for a boat to begin moving away from the wharf.
Miaríya na ang barku pag-abut námù sa pantalan, The boat had started to
move away when we arrived at the wharf. {6} [B4] start to give way,
collapse. Miaríya ang payag nga nadaghanan sa táwu, The hut was so full
of people it started to collapse.

armunída = almunída.

arsínik n arsenic. v [a12] poison with arsenic.

arsupu n word-play on arsubispu (humorous).

asam-asam v [AN; b(1)] {1} dare do s.t. difficult, beyond one’s
capacity to do. Mag-asam-asam kag pangusína nga dì gánì ka kamaung
muháling? Do you dare cook when you don’t even know how to kindle a
fire? {2} dare do s.t. one doesn’t have a right to do. Nag-asam-asam
man siyag lingkud sa uluhan sa lamísa, dì nauláwan siya? He had the
nerve to sit at the head of the table. So he was put to shame.

†asáwa asawaasáwa, uluasáwa n common-law wife. v [B6; c1] be, become;
have a common-law wife.

asáyin v {1} [A; a] assign s.o. to a position. Giasáyin ku sa
paniktikag bakì, I was assigned to the backwoods. {2} [A; c] assign
s.o. work. Wà kuy humwurk nga giasayin, I was not assigned any
homework. -min n {1} assignment to a job. {2} assignment to do work.

asimbul_1 v [A; c1] assemble a contrivance, machine. Asimbul na ang
radiyung ákung gipalit kay dì ku maantígung muasimbul, I bought an
assembled radio because I don’t know how to assemble one.

asimbul_2 v [AC; c1] assemble together in a place. Didtu ang parid
mag-asimbul sa plása, The parade assembled in the plaza.

†asinda asindíru n {2} owner of salt beds (humorous). asindíra =
asindíru (female).

†asiráwu — ug buhuk having wiry hair.

asirkásu = asikásu.

†asistǐr v {3} attend a function, meeting. Asistiran (asistihan) ug
banda ang ílang kasal, There will be a band in attendance at their
wedding.

†atay {4} — sa abu the whitest part of the ashes made into lye, used as
medicine to treat indigestion. {5} — sa súkà the accumulated dregs of
vinegar that form into a soft, slippery mass. v [A2] for vinegar to
form a soft, slippery mass. Dì pa aslum ang súkà ug dì pa muatay,
Vinegar is not sour before it has formed a soft, slippery mass.

atitaw v [B3(1)4] for a boil to come to a good, clear head. Tusdíka ang
buthanan sa hubag ug muatitaw na, Prick the boil when it comes to a
well-formed head. a having a sharply defined head.

†atras {4} stern, rear of a boat. v [A] {1a} for a boat to back up.

†atsa n {2} grade in the seventies (so called because a figure 7 looks
like an axe).

atsak = atsay_2.

átut = átud.

awagan = ulagan. see úlag.

†awhag n urge to do s.t. Ang awhag nga lawasnun, (Sexual) urges of the
body.

ay-ar it n a recently introduced variety of rice, the IR-8 miracle
rice.


==== B ====

báag_2 = bálag.

báag_3 n a small preparation of food for a get-together. Ug dúnay báag
sa inyu muadtu ku, I’ll go to your house when you have a little eating
party. paN- v [A2; b6] attend a small eating party.

†baang, báang (←) n {1} the mouth opened to eat s.t. Kagamay nga táwu
apan dakug báang, Such a small man, but how wide he can open his mouth
to eat. {2} mouthful. Usa ra ka báang sa buáya, You are only one
mouthful for a crocodile.

†bàbà dakù ug — a talkative, noisy.

badíday n loving and tender address for little girls. Gikápuy ang ákung
badíday? Is my little sweetie tired?

†badigard n {2} one’s fiance or spouse (humorous).

†bag n {4} syuldir — shoulder bag. pansing, pantsing — punching bag.
ubirnayit — overnight bag. ayis — ice bag. pípar — paper bag. ham-,
hand- handbag.

bagnul a {1} dull, not sharp. Ang bagnul nga kutsilyu dì limpiyu ug
pinutlan, A dull knife will not make a clean cut. {2} for solids to be
hard and compacted, not easily crumbling. Bagnul ang batu ikumparar sa
anapug, Stone is harder than lime. {3} for skin to be calloused and
tough. v [B; a] {1} for a blade to become dull. {2} solidify or form
into hard lumps. Ang kabugnaw makapabagnul (makabagnul) sa túbig, Cold
will make water solidify. {2a} for the skin to form callouses. -un
a lumpy, having hard lumps. v [B2] become lumpy.

†bagting n {2} one of the three significant events in one’s life for
which bells are rung: baptism, marriage, death.

†bagtuk a {2} having a sour expression on the face. v [B6] {2} wear a
heavy and sour look. Dì ka giyud makasúgù niánang bayhána kay mubagtuk
dáyun ang nawung, You can never ask that girl to do anything because
she immediately gets a nasty expression on her face.

†bag-u {2} -ng kaláyu, kandílà, túbig blessing of the New Fire, Easter
Candle, and Holy Water on the night of Holy Saturday. -ng kinabúhì new
lease on one’s life after it has been spared from an accident or from a
serious illness. Magpasalámat ta sa Diyus sa átung bag-ung kinabúhì,
Let us thank God for giving us a new lease on life. v {2} — sa kaláyu,
kandílà, túbig [A13; c1] perform the rite of blessing the Holy Water,
New Fire and Easter Candles. {3} — sa kinabúhì [A12] give s.o. a new
lease on life. — sa útang [A; a12] renew a loan. kabag-úhan
n {1} modern times. {2} the younger generation.

bagul_2 a poor. Dì ku mutúu nga kun bagul ka sa sinugdan, bagul ka na
lang sa hangtud, I don’t believe that if you start poor, you must
always remain poor.

bagurung = bagrung.

†bagyu — sa kinabúhì misfortunes in life (literary). Taliwā̀ sa ímung
kalípay muhúrus usáhay ang mga bagyu sa kinabúhì, Into every life some
rain must fall.

†bahù paniN- {1b} -ng yútà for death to be near (lit. smell of
earth—humorous). Nagpanimahù nang yútà ang kansirun, The cancer patient
already smells of the grave.

bait v [A13] walk the straight and narrow path (slang). Dì na siya
muinum. Nagbait na siya, He doesn’t drink anymore. He is following the
straight and narrow path.

†bakgráwun -ir = bakgráwun, n3, 4, 5.

bakhan n backhand slap, backhand stroke in tennis. v [A; a12] strike
with a backhand slap or hit with a backhand stroke. Bakhánun ta ka rug
magtubagtubag ka, I’ll slap you with the back of my hand if you talk
back to me.

†bakì -in- a {1} sitting squat with the legs crossed. {2} bikini
panties. v [A; c1] {1} sit on the ground with crossed legs. {2} wear
bikini panties.

bakig = pakì_2.

†bakrayid v {2} [A; b6] share in what s.o. else has. Mahímù bang
mubakrayid kus ímung kan-un? May I share your food?

baksit n back seat of a bicycle or motorcycle. v [A; c1] ride on the
back seat.

†balalà v {1} = balálà. {2} [A; c1] fail in school. Balaun (ibalà)
tikaw sa klási ug dì ka magtuun, I’ll fail you if you don’t study.
{3} [A2; b6] fall to the ground with a big thud. Mibalà ku sa salug nga
sínaw, I fell flat on the slippery floor with a thud.

†balay — sa lamígas ant hill. tag- call shouted upon reaching the house
of a friend to announce one’s presence.

balbangáhan = balbangáan.

†baldúsa n {2} k.o. square-shaped white cracker.

†bali_1 v {7} [A] change goals in basketball at the second half.
n exchange of goals.

bali_2 n ballet. v [A; b] dance the ballet.

†báli a {2} — ug ígù serves [so-and-so] right. Báli ug ígù ang íyang
gidangátan kay matinumánun sa gustu, It serves her right what happened
to her because she is so headstrong.

†bálì balìbálì n {3} in basketball, bending the upper part of the body
far to the back while shooting to make it difficult to block the ball.
Maáyu sa balìbálì si Bárun, Baron is good in making shots with his body
bent backward. v [A; c1] shoot the ball in this way.

†balibul v {2} [a12] toss s.t. about as if it were a volleyball.
Gibalibul sa mga bugáung ang tubul nga nag-utaw-útaw, The jarbua fish
are poking at the hard stools that are floating in the sea.

balikturyan n student who failed a grade (word play on balidikturyan
and bálik — humorous).

†balisbis paN-an v {2} [A2; b6] for rain to be heavy enough to flow
from the eaves. ‘Kusug ba ang ulan?’—‘Ígù giyung nakapamalisbisan,’
‘Was the rain heavy?’—‘It was heavy enough to flow from the eaves.’

†balista v {3} [A23] for wind or luck to change to an opposite
direction. Mibalista ang hángin maung nanimbang na pud sila sa píkas,
The wind blew in the opposite direction and so the people moved to the
other side of the boat to balance it. Namawì na pud si Pabling.
Mibalista na tingáli ang íyang dimálas, Pabling is having a winning
streak. Maybe his luck is starting to change. -da = balista, v3.

†balítà walay (←) without any knowledge of what is going on or what had
happened. Wà lay balítà ang bána nga naglaki ang íyang asáwa, The
husband has no idea that his wife is playing around.

bálit prup a bullet proof.

†bálun pa- v {3} [A; c] give a pabálun, 4a, 5. n {4} the custom of
throwing earth or gravel upon the coffin as soon as it is lowered into
the grave as a sign of respect and also so that the soul of the dead
person may not come back to haunt those he left behind. {4a} soil that
is thrown on the coffin in the pabálun ceremonies. {5} send-off gift
for a newly-wed couple consisting of equal contributions from both sets
of parents.

†balur a dignified, having high prestige. Ang pagmaistra balur kaáyung
pangitáa, Teaching is a prestigious calling. pa- v {2} [A; b7] give
dignity to oneself or to one’s office. Magpabalur giyud ang huwis sa
kurti, A judge should maintain his dignity in court. di- a carrying
respect and high prestige. Dibalur nga tígum. Púlus imbahadur sa mga
násud ang mitambung, A high-level meeting, attended by ambassadors of
various nations.

baluskad = baluskag.

bambu_2 v [A; a12] hit s.o. in the body with a hard blow with a
thumping sound. Bambuhun ta kag magtubagtubag ka, I’ll give you a hard
blow on the body if you talk back.

†banà pasi- v [A; a] call s.o.’s attention to, warn. Gipasiban-an
(gipasibanáan) ku siya sa dílì pagpúnay ug kúyug adtung tawhána, I
warned her not to go out with that man all the time.

†bandu_2 n {2} place where a group of people united for a common
purpose meet. Bandu Usminya, The place where the followers of Osmeña
meet.

†bangdaybangday n {2} children’s game of flicking rubber bands by turns
wherein one wins a rubber band if it lands lying over the opponent’s.
v {3} [AC; b] play bangdaybangday.

†banghag v {3} [A23; b6] cut into a conversation. Dì ka mubanghag ug
náay magsulti, panábì, Don’t join in a conversation suddenly. Ask
permission. a cutting in a conversation even when one doesn’t know the
topic being talked about.

†bangku n toilet (humorous—cf. dipusitu, v 5). Buysit. Humag káun,
diritsus bangku! Darn! As soon as I had finished eating I had to rush
to the ‘bank’.

bangkúru n k.o. small tree of the seashore and thickets with a stinking
fruit used medicinally: Morinda citrifolia.

†banting v {2} [A; c] weigh s.o. down with an onerous task,
impositions. Lima ka klási ang gibanting sa usa ka maistru, The teacher
was burdened with five classes.

†bantuk n land for upland rice as opposed to paddies. humay sa — upland
rice. pulis — a humorous and deprecatory allusion to a policeman who is
not quite up to standard or k.o. funny-looking.

†banwag -in-an n {1} a newly-organized religious sect in Mindanao that
patterns its religious practice after those of the Roman Catholic
Church. {2} member of this sect. v [B156] be, become a member of the
binanwágan.

bara_2 v [AB] clog s.t. up, be clogged up. May nuug nga mibara sa túbu
sa hugasan, A piece of cloth clogged up the drain in the sink. Nabara
ang isdang búhì sa ákung tutunlan, The live fish stuck in my throat.
Magkabara ang trapiku basta magkaalas dúsi, Traffic gets clogged up at
about twelve o’clock.

†bára_1 n {4b} — sa Ispiritu Santu n a grievous sin originally
committed by an ancestor to be paid subsequently by seven generations.
v {2a} [b5] suffer from having incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit.
Gibára (gibaráhan) sa Ispiritu Santu nang pamilyáha, That family has
incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit.

bards = part.

barit euphemism for barut.

†bása v {1a} [b6] say the prayers for a dying person. Gibasáhan ang
himalatyun nga nagtingà, Prayers were said for him as he breathed his
last. {1b} — ug kúmiks [A13; b(1)] for a prostitute to be so oblivious
of the sex act that she can read the comics while she is being had.
Basáhan ka lag kúmiks ánang kapúnga, dakù na kaáyu nag bangag, That
prostitute will hardly feel you (lit. will read the comics on you), she
has such a huge hole.

†baskit bul n {2} k.o. dance characterized by movements which suggest
the dribbling and shooting of a ball. v {2} [A] dance the basketball
dance.

batangginyu = batangginya (male).

†batbat v {2} [A; a] follow, traverse along the edges or outskirts.
Mibatbat sila sa lapad nga humayan, They walked around edges of the
wide rice field. Batbáta ning dalána ug muabut ka sa tubud, Follow this
footpath, and you will reach the spring.

†bátì -l-an n {2a} epidemic. May balatían karun sa Pásil, There’s an
epidemic in Pasil now. v [B1] be, become sick. Nagbalatían ang inahan,
The mother has an illness.

*batingting hugut ang — see hugut, a5.

†batu batubátu n {4} testicles (humorous slang).

baybay_3 n k.o. dance in which partners embrace each other and swing
the upper part of their body sidewise in rhythm with the music. v [AC;
c1] dance the baybay.

bayi kababayin-an n {2} = bayin-an. v [A12] belong to the group
consisting of friends or relatives of the bride.

baylarína = baylirína. see bayli.

báyung_1 n k.o. dark-colored hardwood.

†bibirun v {3} [A13] for a grown person to behave with childlike
immaturity and dependence. Unsa, nagbibirun ka pa nga magpatábang ka pa
mag pasul-ub sa karsúnis? Are you still a baby that you ask for help in
putting on your pants?

†bíbu n {1} in a card game of the bridge or whist type, the situation
where the players must follow suit. {2} the card lead. v {2} [A; c1]
lead with a suit that must be followed or follow suit. Bibúhun (ibíbu)
giyud sa magburiskas ang íyang baráha ug dúna siyay ikabíbu, The
buriskas player follows suit if he can do so.

†bigu tilyu n {2} wearing a mustache. Sa úna bigutilyu nà siya, He used
to have a mustache.

†bikarbunátu — disúsa = bikarbunátu.

†bilíbid n {2} jail. v {2} [B126] be put in jail, imprison. Nabilíbid
sa salà nga panlúgus, Imprisoned for rape.

binhurun a women who are not highly esteemed, women left by their
husbands, disgraced women, women of ill repute, and the like. Ayawg
pangasáwag binhurun, Don’t marry a cheap woman. v [b6] consider a woman
cheap.

binipisya v [A; c1] concoct medicine from herbs. Binipisyahun
(ibinipisya) sa tambálan ang mga sagibunhun, The medicine man concocts
medicine from herbs.

†binta_1 a ready-made clothes that are not finely-done. v {2} [c1] be
cheaply and poorly made.

bintul_2 an expression of mild disappointment or disgust. Bintul, wà
man diay nákù kasirhi ang pultahan, My goodness! I forgot to lock the
door.

†bínug n {2} quicksand.

birianádir a having adopted a haughty, stand-offish attitude
(colloquial). Basta iksámin birianádir siya kay dì man pakupya, He is
very different when it comes to exams because he doesn’t let you copy.
v [B126] develop a stand-offish attitude to others. Nabirianádir na
siya sukad muasinsu, He has become quite distant since he got his
promotion.

bís_2 n military base.

†bisti n s.t. that is typical of a place. Ang kuting ug lamuk mauy
bisti sa Sugbu, Bedbugs and mosquitoes are an integral part of Cebu.
v [B1256] for s.t. to be typical of a place.

bitirána = bitiránu (female).

†bitiránu n {3} widower (humorous).

†bitúun {6} — sa dágat the Blessed Virgin. paN- {3} — ang panan-aw
v [A2S3P] see stars. Namitúun ákung panan-aw pagkaigù sa ákung mata, I
saw stars when I was hit in the eyes.

bluprint n blueprint. v [A; c1] make a blueprint of s.t.

bradi, brádi = brad, n1.

†búang -in- v {2} [A13] misfunction. Nagbinúang na sad ning awtúha dà.
Dílì na sad muandar, This car is acting up again. It won’t start.

bugalu n bugaloo dance. v [A] dance the bugaloo.

†bugas n {2a} — bugtung a small boil without a head. v {2a} [a4] have a
small boil without a head. Gibugas bugtung ku, I have a small boil
without a head.

†bugtik v {1} [B; a] for containers to stretch, bulge, and become tight
from being too full. Mubugtik (mabugtik) ang íyang pitáka kun
tingsuwildu, His wallet bulges on payday. Bugtíka pagsulud ang sáku,
Fill the sack brimful.

búgù_3 = bugun, n1, v.

†bugwak n {2} reclaimed area in Cebu City, so called from the spewing
of mud during dredging.

†búhat n {4a} the Acts of the Apostles, one of the four Gospels.

†búhì_1 a {2} — nga bakak obvious lie. — ug bakak obvious liar. Way
mupiyal sa mga táwung búhì ug bakak, No one believes an obvious liar.

búing euphemism for búang, used as an endearing curse and not
particularly as an insult. Kabúing nímu uy! Gipahulat ku nímug maáyu,
You sure made me wait, you handsome S.O.B., you!

bukádu_2 = abukádu.

†bukàkà v {3} [A; c1] open s.t. up. Kinsay nagbukàkà sa putus? Who
opened the package up? {4} [B12; b6] be, become a tattler, talking too
much. Nabukàkà siya tungud sa pagpanumbálay, She became a gossip
because she liked to go visiting.

bulaktǎy n k.o. scaly fish with a silvery body, 2″ in diameter and 3″
long, found in brackish waters of bays.

bulasa, bulasà = lamudlaw.

bulis walà ma- [so-and-so] did not fail to happen, just as was
expected. Giingnan ta kag musaka ka dinhà, mahúlug ka. Dà, wà mabulis
ag ákung sulti, I told you you’d fall if you climbed up there. There,
now you fell.

bulitlit v [A; a] make a small opening wide, push the sides apart with
both hands. Akuy mibulitlit sa gamayng lungag sa bungbung, I was the
one who widened the small opening in the wall. Ákung bulitlítan ang
ímung buhuk ug wà bay kútu, I’ll go through your hair to see if there
are any lice.

bupalu n buffalo.

†búru_1 n mangga — salted green, sliced or shredded mangoes.

burumbut = alundris_2.

búsa núba n bossa nova song, dance. v {1} [A] dance the bossa nova.
{2} [c1] do the music in bossa nova time.

busting a show off, braggart (slang). Busting kaáyu siya, pakitàkítà
dáyun sa íyang bag-ung rilu, He is such a show-off displaying his new
wristwatch for everybody to see. v [B12] become a show-off, braggart
(slang).

butáka_2 n in movie houses, the section at the back of the orchestra.

†butang_1 v {5a} butangi [bū́tangi] exclamation indicating that a taunt
is so apt there is no answer possible (lit. hit him where it hurts).
‘Primírang tihik ug mangáyù lag sabaw nga dílì mupalit ug
unud.’—‘Bū́tangi,’ ‘What a tightwad! He asks for gravy but won’t buy
the meat it’s supposed to go with.’—‘OK, you win (I can’t answer
that).’

†butar v {2} [A2; b6] favor or give one’s approval to s.o. or s.t.
Mubutar ku kun duktúra ímung pangasaw-un, I would approve if you
married a doctor. Dílì sad ku makabutar ánang idíya nga muwilga ta, I
would not favor the idea that we go on strike.

butikin n small drugstore. v [A; a] make a space into a small
drugstore.

butíkul n {1} pockmarks (humorous). {2} person with pockmarks
(humorous). -un a having pockmarks (humorous).

†butu paN- v {1a} [A2] develop skin eruptions. Namutu ang ákung líug, I
developed skin eruptions. n eruptions of the skin caused by
tuberculosis of the skin.

buyna_2 n black beret made of felt. v [A; b6] wear a beret.

bwaybuway = buraybúray.

bwisit, bwísit = buysit.

†byáhi n {2a} katapúsang — {2a1} last trip to the cemetery. {2a2} last
chance to get married. v [B1256] marry at the last chance. Bísag
makatapúsang byáhi basta prantsit, úki, Even if it is the last trip, it
is all right, as long as I get a good seat. (I.e. never mind if I marry
late so long as it is a good catch.)

†byúda — aligri a flirtatious widow. Nagpalámì uruy ang byúda aligri,
Humph! The merry widow seems to be having fun. v [B13] be, become a
flirtatious widow.


==== D ====

†dágat paN-an(→) n {1} fishing boat. {2} fishing grounds. v [a12] be
made into a fishing boat or fishing ground.

†daghan v {2} [b8] put more than enough of s.t. Nadaghanan ra sa asin
ang ákung linatan, I put too much salt into my stew.

Dagúhuy the leader of an anti-Spanish revolt in Bohol. kalíwat ni —
people from Bohol.

†dagungdung a {1} heavy with fruit. {2} overcast. v [B; b6] {2} for the
sky to be overcast. Nagkadagungdung ang panahun. Muulan tingáli, It is
getting overcast. It will probably rain.

†dagway n {4} = bayhun, n4.

dahúluy v [A23] for food to slide smoothly down the throat. Ang landang
mudahúluy lang inigtún, The buri starch sweet just slides down the
throat.

dakang v [A; a] {1} = dakul. {2} hammer s.t. down hard. Dakngun ku ang
mga lansang nga nanglábaw, I’ll hammer down the nails that are
protruding. n s.t. used to rap or hammer s.t.

†dakdak -an(→) n -an ug Sabadu a face that is so flat it looks like the
stone they pound their wash on on Saturdays. v [B125] for a face to
become flat.

dakug = pakug.

†dalága (→) v [A13] for a widow to primp herself up. Gustu na pud
tingáling magminyù pag-usab ang byúda kay nagdalaga man, The widow must
want to get married again because she is primping herself up.

†dalágan dagandagan v [A2] {1} for money to grow. Mudagandagan ang
kwarta ug inigusyu, Money will grow if you invest it in business.
{2} not be used up for a certain period. Maáyu kay nakadagandagan ang
ámung bugas hangtud sa katapúsan sa búwan, It’s a good thing our rice
lasted until the end of the month.

dalímasù (from pásù) n an insect about 1″ by ¾″ in diameter, covered
with green, kinky, hair-like growths, found on the underside of coconut
leaves. They produce an itchy, burning sensation and affect fowl that
consume them with extreme debility.

dalipasù (from pásù) n a k.o. skin protrusion like a pasù, n1, in
appearance, having a clear liquid content, caused by the bite of a mite
found in loose, powdery soil.

dalipsut = dalipsù.

damagan_3 a careless in doing one’s work. Dì giyud magkadimáu ning
íyang búhat kay damagan kaáyu, Her work is always a mess because she is
so careless. v [B125] be careless in doing s.t.

†damikà, damíkà v {2} [A; b6] sit flat on the floor, usually with the
legs crossed at the ankles. Gidamikaan níla ang húgaw nga salug, They
sat sprawled on the dirty floor.

dámun = kanámù (dialectal). see kami.

†dánag v {2} be unaware of what is going on round about one. Nagdánag
lang ang bána sa dautang líhuk sa íyang asáwa, The husband is unaware
of the terrible things his wife is doing.

†danggit -in- n {2} position in sexual intercourse where the partners
both lie on their sides and the man faces the woman’s back. v {2} [A;
a] do it in this position.

†daplak v {3} [B3(1)6] be lying flat on the ground. Giánay ang trúsu
nga nagdaplak sa yútà, The log that is lying flat on the ground has
gotten infested with termites. Nadaplak ang bátang nadugmù sa balas,
The child stumbled and fell flat on the sand.

dapli, daplì v [A; c] put, set aside. Mìdaplì siya sa íyang buluhatun
pag-abut námù, She put the things she was working on aside when we
arrived. Nagdaplì kug sud-an pára ninyu, I set some food aside for you.
Nakadapli kug duha ka gatus ka písus, I have put aside two hundred
pesos.

†daplin pa- v {1a} [A2; c] put aside s.t. one is doing. Mipadaplin siya
sa íyang gibása ug namátì sa tabì, She put aside what she was reading
and listened to gossip.

dápul bag n duffel bag. v [c1] place in a duffel bag. Dapulbága (idápul
bag) ang tanang bulingun, Put all the soiled clothes in a duffel bag.

†dáru n {2} plowed field. daruhan n {2} animal used for plowing.

datsun n dachshund.

†dátù_3 sakit ug, sa — n TB (from the notion that one who has TB should
have a total rest).

dátù_3 n k.o. crudely distilled medicinal liquor of local make.

dawa v [B46; b6] for the blood in a dish of dugùdugù to curdle.

dawungdung a, v1, 2 = dagungdung. {3} = dayungyung.

†dáyun -in- n {3} continuous in one piece. Dináyun ang karsúnis ug
kamisadintru, The shirt and the trousers are sewn together.

dì_2 n word used to call pigs. v [A; c1] call a pig by saying dì, dì,
dì. dìdì_2 = dî.

†dibisiyun n {1a} school division. — syupirintindint n Division
Superintendent of Schools.

diditi n DDT.

didtut = didtu.

dík = dî_2.

dikyam = kyamuy.

dimasyádu, dimasyáwu = masyádu.

†dipirinsiya -du(←) a defective. Dipirinsiyádu siyag matris, She has a
defective uterus. v [B126] develop a defect.

diprisyun n depression of atmospheric pressure. May diprisyun kunu kay
may bagyu, They say that there’s a depression because there is a storm
coming.

†diskarga v {1b} [A; b(1)] defecate or urinate (colloquial). Mudiskarga
úsà ta dinhi kay way mga táwu, Let’s urinate here because there is no
one around.

diskutsu = biskutsu.

†dispatsar v {5} [A; a12] tell s.o. off, say s.t. curtly to s.o.
Dispatsahun ka lag ingun nga wà kay kwalipikasiyun, They will just tell
you curtly that you are not qualified.

†dispatsu n errand boy. v [B126; a12] be an errand boy.

†dispuwis {2} therefore, so. Miingun ka nagdamgu ka, dispuwis natúlug
ka, You said you were dreaming, so you must have been sleeping.

†distansiya v {2} [A23; a] give an opponent an advantage of a certain
distance in a race. Mudistansiya ka níyag lima ka dupa? Will you give
him an advantage of five lengths?

distinar v [A; c] {1} assign s.o. s.w. for a job. Supirintindinti mauy
nagdistinar nákù dinhis isla, The superintendent assigned me to this
island. {2} be destined to a certain fate. Gidistinar ku sa pag-antus,
I was destined to suffer.

distribyútur n distributor of an engine.

distrungkǎr = istrungkǎr.

†distsards unurabul, dis-unurabul — honorable, dishonorable discharge.
v [A; c] give an honorable, dishonorable discharge.

dramstik n ice-cream cone shaped like a drumstick.

dridyir n dredger, for clearing out or deepening channels, harbors.
v [A; b6] dredge out.

drísing v [A; b6(1)] dress a wound or sore. n dressing for a wound.

duak = dukà.

†duas v {2} [B] rot or wear down from exposure to the elements. Bísan
ang dagkung batu muduas sa kadugáyan, Even large rocks wear out with
time.

dugsaw = dugsak.

†duha v {2} [b(1)] do s.t. with both hands. Bug-at nà. Kinahanglan
duhaan nímu pag-aswat, It’s so heavy you have to lift it with both
hands.

†dukà v {2} [B1456] for light to flicker or to burn unsteadily. Nagdukà
ang lamparilya kay wà na nay gás, The lamplight is flickering. It must
be out of kerosene.

†dulurúsa — ug nawung, panagway a having a sad look on the face.
Dulurúsag dagway kay gibulagan sa trátu, She has a sad look because her
boy friend left her.

dulyan = duryan.

dumikà = damikà.

†dungug dunggánun a {2} having the reputation of being a vampire
(unglù). Dunggánun kaáyu nang pamilyáha, The people in that family are
reputed to be vampires. v [B126] get to be reputed to be a vampire.

dyíay n {1} an American soldier during World War II. {2} a six-by-six
lorry. {3} acronym for galvanized iron.

dyú term of address to American men (from the WW II appellation of
American GI’s). Máni, dyú, Give me money, Joe.


==== G ====

†gabíi gabíing gabhiúna exactly last night. Gabíing gabhiúna mukrás ang
ayruplánu, The plane crashed just last night.

gabing_2 n a dependent that is an encumbrance. Makalakaw ku bísan ása
kay wà kuy gabing, I can go out anywhere because there is no one I have
to stay home for.

gábing = gabling.

gái short for tagái. see *tágà.

gakàgákà = bakàbakà. see bákà.

†galinggaling n {2} k.o. cicada that makes noise in the late afternoon.

gangstir n gangster. v [B16; b6] be, become a gangster.

†gangù v {2} [AB; a] for a small or slender object joined to s.t. else
or a continuation of s.t. to break off, get detached; cause it to do
so. Migangù ang tiil sa lamísa, The leg of the table broke off. Wà siya
makagangù sa sanga, He was not able to break the branch off.

garantisar v [A] give assurance that s.t. is as asserted. Garantisaran
ta kang mulampus ning batáa, I can guarantee you that this boy will
succeed.

gardim = gádim.

gardímit = gadímit.

garis n {1} k.o. itchy skin disease caused by a mite, usually spreading
over large areas of the body. {2} very light scratches, as one would
get from brushing against s.t. v {1} [A123P; a4] get this skin disease.
Garisun giyud ka ug magsígi kag táak sa lápuk, You’ll get scabies if
you keep wading in the mud. {2} [B126; b8] be lightly scratched. -un
a having this skin ailment.

*gats may — have the guts to do s.t. May gats ka ug makawan tu tri kas
Wayt Guld, You have got to have guts to steal s.t. at the White Gold.

gay n intimate nickname among young men (colloquial). Muuban ka námug
panúruy, gay? Won’t you go out with us, buddy?

gidlaw = ginlaw.

†gílis (→) v [A] for palm leaflets to separate. Sa dì pa makagilis ang
lubi, piligru sa mga mananap, Before the leaflets of the coconut palm
frond break apart, the plants are in danger of being eaten by harmful
insects.

gil iskáwut n girl scout. v [B126; b6] be, become a girl scout.

giníya n guinea fowl.

gíwaw v [B; b6] start to appear or come out from behind a hiding place.
Migíwaw na ang adlaw sa pagmata nákù, The sun had started to appear
when I woke up. Dì pa makagíwaw ang turuk sa pugas humay sa duha ka
adlaw, In two days the rice sprouts still won’t have come out. n s.t.
that has started to appear.

†grába v [b5] pave with gravel.

†grádu n {5} degree of a fever.

†grátis — it amúri = grátis.

gráyin n k.o. dance characterized by grinding action. v [A] do the
grind.

†gúlang ma-(→) {3a} — sa hátag, pangáyù so cheap it is practically
being given away, being asked for for nothing. Kanang ímung hangyù
maguwang lang sa pangáyù, You’re offering so little, you might as well
just ask me to give it to you.

gús n gauze.

gutì_2 a small. Ang mga gutì kaáyung mga sigay maáyung isungkà, The
small cowries are good to play sungkà with. v [B; b6] be, become small
in amount, size. Mugutì (magutì) ang inyung kapital ug sigíhag útang,
You’re going to run out of capital if you keep extending credit.

gúwing istrit v [B146] go straight, follow the straight and narrow.
Kaniadtu gibuguybugúyan níya ang pag-iskuyla, karun naggúwing istrit na
siya, He used to fool around with his studies, but now he is serious. a
following the straight and narrow.


==== H ====

hábir sak n knapsack.

†hagkut — ug kamut light-fingered. Ayaw isayàsayà ang ímung kwarta kay
hagkut ra bag kamut ang mga mutsatsa dinhi, Don’t leave your money
around because the maids around here are light-fingered.

hàhà v [A; b6] clean s.t. in water by swishing it around. Ákù nang
gihàháan ang mga piníkas nga isdà, I swished the split fish around in
the sea to clean them.

hákut(→)_2 v [A1] for a boil to accumulate pus. Mag-ugnap ang hubag nga
maghakut ug nánà, A boil develops a throbbing pain when it begins to
accumulate pus.

halag = halaghag.

halahála n the halahala, a k.o. dance. v [A] do the halahala.

halíya n jelly, jam. v [A1; a2] make a fruit jelly.

haltir n women’s upper garment designed like a halter. v [A; c1] make
into this sort of garment.

hambù = hambuk.

hamilsing_2 a healthy, growing well. Hamilsing ang mga tanum sa walug,
The plants in the valley are healthy. Hamilsing ang bátà nga pinainum
ug gátas, A child who is fed with milk is healthy. v [B] be, become
healthy.

hamuy_2 = hamluy.

hantir a sharpshooter. Hantir kaáyu siya. Makaigù ug langgam nga
maglupad, He is a good shot. He can fell a bird on the wing.

hapaag v [A; b5] playfully jump on s.o. Natumba ming duha kay mihapaag
man siya nákù nga walà ku kabantay, We both fell to the ground because
he jumped on me when I wasn’t looking.

†hapnut a {2} for a mixture of solids and liquids to be smooth and
stiff. v [B; a12] be, become smooth and thick. Muhapnut ang sikwáti ug
ayúhun ug kusukúsu, Chocolate becomes smooth and thick if it is well
stirred.

hapsak n hopsacking, a k.o. rough, loosely woven fabric used for
clothing. v [A13] wear s.t. of hopsacking.

háras v [A; a] harass. Pulis ang nagháras sa mga pumipilì, The police
harassed the voters.

hard líbur n sentence to hard labor in prison.

†haum v {1} [A23] apply aptly. Pangartíyu sa bálak sa ininglis nga
muhaum sa pamálak nga binisayà, Techniques in writing English poetry
that are applicable as well to Visayan poetry.

háwung v {1} [A; a123] rekindle s.t. smouldering to produce a flame.
Hawnga tung káyu kay maglung-ag na ta, Rekindle the fire because we are
going to cook rice now. {2} encourage s.o.’s burning interest or desire
of s.t. Ang íyang pag-apil-apil sa dráma nakahawung sa íyang tingúhà
nga maartista, Her parts in small plays fanned her interest in becoming
an actress.

hibul v [AN; b6] dress a chicken. Ákung hibulan ang manuk nga ímung
giíhaw, I’ll dress the chicken that you killed.

hidláyin n headlines of a newspaper. v [B126; c1] be in the headlines
of a newspaper. Nahidlayin ang kamatáyun ni Kinidi, President Kennedy’s
death was in the headlines.

híkaw_3 n bracelet.

†híkug n suicide.

hinhin_2 a women refined and delicate in manners (colloquial). pa-
v [A1] behave gently and refinedly. Bágis kaáyu nang bayhána apan
magpahinhin dáyun igpamisíta sa íyang trátu, She’s a rough sort of
woman, but when her boy friend calls on her, she is ever so delicate.

†hitak hitakhitak v [A13; b(1)] play around in the mud, jumping around
in it or walking back and forth in it.

†hitsu v {2} [a] do s.t. to completion, to the finish. Hitsúa ang usa
ka búhat úsà ka magsúgud ug láing buluhatun, Finish one piece of work
before you start s.t. else. Wà pa ku níya hitsúi ug báyad, He has not
paid me in full.

†hiyá(←) {2} [B146] be growing, produced in abundance. Barátu ang
mangga karun kay naghíya pagbúnga, Mangoes are cheap because they are
fruiting in vast quantities.

†hubag v {2a} — ang pusud v [B4; b6] become pregnant (humorous).

hubashúbas a money coming and going at irregular intervals. Hubashúbas
ning panápì sa sugarul, For gamblers, money comes and goes at irregular
intervals. v [A3] for money to come and go at irregular intervals.

†hulam v {3} [A; b5] develop uncultivated land belonging to s.o. else
and cultivate it without sharing with the owner. Hulamun (hulaman) nákù
ang ímung lasang ug napúlù ka túig, I’ll clear your forest and
cultivate it for ten years without sharing.

†hulat v {4} [c6] set s.t. aside to have it in readiness for an event
or suitable occasion. Ayawg ibaligyà! Ihulat ug maáyung prisyu! Don’t
sell it! Keep it in readiness until you can get a good price for it.

hulbut sínaw n sexual intercourse (humorous allusion—word play on
English ‘All boats are in the sea now’—lit. pull it out, it’s
glistening). Hulbut sínaw sa buntag? Doing ‘it’ in the morning? v [C]
do the hulbut sínaw.

hulstir n holster. v [A; b6] use a holster, put in a holster.

†hulughúlug = bùbuay. see bùbù.

†hulungíhung v [a12] be rumored. Gihulungíhung nga makadawat kitag
búnus, There’s a rumor going around that we’re going to get a bonus.

hurnǎl n a laborer who does odd, heavy manual work. v [B6; b6] do
heavy, odd jobs. Dì ku maghurnǎl sa piyir kay bug-at kaáyu ang
pangalsáhun, I can’t be a laborer at the pier because they make you
carry terribly heavy things. pa- v [A; b6] hire s.o. to do heavy labor.

huswà_2 v [A2; b6] leave the bed undone after waking up. Kining mga
batáa mu rag mga úmang. Muhuswà lang sa ílang higdaánan inigmata, These
children are like hermit crabs. They leave their beds undone when they
get up.

hútuy_2 n a reddish swelling on the skin due to a burn or disease, soft
with water beneath. v [B2S3(1); b4] get this sort of swelling. Mihútuy
ang íyang buktun nga nayab-an sa ínit túbig, She developed a big red
blister on her arm when she spilled hot water on it.

†huwis — diprimir istansiya n judge in the Court of First Instance.


==== I ====

†igurut {2} euphemism for ignuranti.

†ihap v [b(1)] give s.o. a count to three to get going. Iphan ta ka kay
bunálan ta kag dì ka mulíhuk, I’ll count three. If you don’t move, I’ll
whip you.

†íhì n {2} liquid excretion of some worms and millipedes. Ang íhì sa
labud makapásù kunu, They say millepede excretions burn the skin.

*ikman tigúlang — a a very old person.

†ikstra bágids n third party when there is a couple (humorous).
v [B126] be a third party. Ayawg uban kay maikstra bágids ka, Don’t
come with us because two is a company, three is a crowd. -lards n extra
large size.

†ila_1 v {4a} dílì, walà — [A23] not mind, take into consideration as
s.t. worth noting. Trabahanti nga walà muilag ulag ínit paghuman sa
taytáyan, Workers that didn’t mind the rain and heat in building the
bridge.

ilidyitimit n illegitimate child. v [B1256] be an illegitimate child.

†ilígal — pusisiyun n illegal possession of firearms. v [B1256] be
booked for illegal possession.

ilik v [A; c1] elect or vote for s.o. for a position in school.
Nag-ilik mig mga upisyal sa ámung klási, We elected our class officers.

†imbalsamar imbalsamádu n embalmed.

impirmu n ill or wounded soldier. v [A; c1] for a soldier to be
admitted to the infirmary. Impirmúhun (iimpirmu) ang sundálung magdaut,
Sick soldiers are admitted to the infirmary.

impiyirmu = impirmu.

inday_2 = ambut (dialectal).

indibag a in the bag, very certain that s.t. will come out as one
wishes (colloquial). Indibag na ang ímung kadaúgan kay gipamalit man
nímu ang mga butanti, Your election is in the bag because you bought
lots of votes. v [B126] be, become in the bag.

inggrasadur n one in charge of lubricating an engine in a ship. v [B1;
c1] work as an engine oiler.

Ingk n acronym for Iglisya ni Kristu.

ingkargu v [A; c1] order s.t. by list. Nag-ingkargu na kug mga dapat sa
balay, I have ordered the things we need to build the house.

†Inglis — ispíking n one who uses English in daily conversation, even
at home. v [B126] become an English speaker.

ini = kini_1 (dialectal).

inkargu = ingkargu.

insisaryu = insinsaryu.

instraktur n school instructor. v [B156] be, become a school
instructor.

instrumintal n instrumental (as opposed to a vocal) musical number.
Instrumintal na puy ákung ipatukar, I’ll put on an instrumental number
this time.

†insultu insultadur a given to insulting people.

†intirnal v {2} [A; a2] give an internal medical examination. —
himurids n internal hemorrhage.

intrabínus n intravenous feeding or injection. v [A; a1] give an
intravenous injection.

†intráda n {6} the coming-in of an accompanying instrument. Sayup ang
ímung intráda. Nag-una ka ra sa tayming, You didn’t come in right. You
were ahead of the beat.

ip-is n surplus navy ships used for inter-island shipping (so called
from the legend FS painted on the sides).

iri = kiri (dialectal).

irpap n hairstyle of the early Twenties where the hair was tied into a
knot in the back and puffed around the ears.

†isdà — sa insik groupers (lapulápu), so called because Chinese are
fond of buying this fish. — sa mintiryu k.o. large, fleshy catfish
(tambangúngu) which in folk belief is said to be the body of a corpse
turned into a fish by magic powers.

ísi_3 n {2} metal bar or rod formed into a letter S, usually hooked on
to a horizontal bar and used for hanging objects.

iskram_2 scram, get out of here.

ispiktur = inspiktur.

†ispiritu n {3} walay — lifeless, without spirit. Walay ispiritung
ikasulti, A person who doesn’t react when one talks to him.

†ispisyal — minsiyun having especial mention, getting publicity for
s.t. v [B126; a1] get publicly mentioned. Naúlaw siya nga naispisyal
minsiyun ang íyang pagkaismaglir, He was embarrassed to hear his name
mentioned in connection with smuggling.

isplit_3 v [A; c1] split a class or political party. Ang way
pagsinabtanay mauy nakaisplit sa partídu, Lack of mutual understanding
split the party. Isplitun (iisplit) ang klási ug dakù ra, The class is
split if it is too big.

†ispunsur n {4} sponsor of a wedding. v {4} [A; b(1)] be, become a
wedding sponsor.

ispur is n acronym for ‘smooth four sides’ (S-4-S), a classification of
lumber, all four surfaces of which have been planed. a beautiful girl
(humorous).

istínu n stenography. v [A; c1] write in shorthand.

istraglir n an outsider who mingles with a group, one who doesn’t
belong to a group (humorous). Nakúlang ang pagkáun sa parti kay dúnay
daghang istraglir, There wasn’t enough food at the party because there
were so many gate-crashers. v [B156] be a gate-crasher, go with a group
one does not belong to.

istritkat n straight cut pants. v [c16] tailor trousers in the straight
cut style.

istú is n acronym for ‘smooth two sides’ (S-2-S), a classification of
lumber, only the top and bottom surfaces of which have been planed.

íyay a asking for sympathy, affection by crying. Íyay kaáyung bayhána.
Gamay lang kaáyu nga sakit muhílak dáyun, She whines a lot. The
slightest thing and she has to burst into tears.


==== K ====

†kabáyù kabayùkabáyù n {3} a toy-horse race which determines winners by
lottery.

†kadastral v [A; c1] for lands to be surveyed for tax purposes.
Kadastrálun (ikadastral) ang tanang yútà sa búkid, All the lands on the
mountain will be surveyed for tax purposes.

kamagung v [B23] be, become dark-complexioned. Nakamagung na ka sa
pagkinalígù sa dágat, You have become dark because you always bathe in
the sea.

kaman v [A] give a military command. Nikaman ug atinsiyun ang sarhintu,
The sergeant gave the command of attention. n military command.

kamanir = kamaníru (humorous).

kampíhì n k.o. tiny crab of the sand with one pincer considerably
larger than the other.

kantar v {1} [A; c6] call s.t. out loud to notify people within
earshot. Kinsa kadtung ngálan ang ikantar dúul, Whoever’s name is
called out, come forward. {2} [c6] for documents, letters or any
official paper to state s.t. Ang gikantar sa papílis mau nga akuy
tag-íya sa yútà, The document states that I am the owner of the land.

kanugkug v [A] roar with a low, continuous rumble. Mga kanyǔn nga
nagkanugkug pagbumbardíyu sa baybay, Thundering cannons shelling the
shore.

karapkarap = kurapkurap.

kárat n {1} carat, unit of weight of precious stones or metals.
{2} may, walay — having (not having) money. Gwápa untà siya apan way
kárat, She is beautiful but she doesn’t have a cent.

†karbun n {3} a black speck in a diamond, considered a flaw in the
stone.

†karta -s cards, mahjong pieces (plural).

kas-a_2 v [A; b5] tell s.o. frankly. Kas-aha (kas-ahi) ug sulti arun dì
magdahum nga gastúhan siya sa íyang pag-iskuyla, Tell him frankly not
to count on our sending him to school because we don’t have the money
to do so.

kásir n cashier. v [B126; b6] have, be, become a cashier.

kasyir = kásir.

kátir_2 -ir(→) n caterer of food and food service. v [B156] be, become
a caterer.

katlà v [A2; a] cut with the tips of the scissors. Katláa ang panaptun,
Clip the cloth with the tip of the scissors. Ikatlà ang gunting, Use
the tip of the scissors to cut it.

katsuy = hatsuy.

kaw-ing = kab-ing.

kidni n kidney ailment. batu sa — kidney stone. sakit sa — = kidni.

kighud v [B4] for the tide to go out. Manginhas ta ug mukighud ang
taúbun, We will gather shells when the tide begins to ebb. n the
receding of the tide.

kimúnu n k.o. sweat jacket used in judo or karate. v {1} [A; c] wear a
kimúnu. {2} [a12] make into a kimúnu.

kiwat v [b8] be hit with the tip of a slender object. Ayawg ikiwatkíwat
nang rúlir kay hikiwatan ta, Don’t wave the ruler around. We might be
hit. kiwatkíwat v [c] wave slender objects about.

krak_3 a crack company in military training. v [B; c1] be, become a
crack company.

krak_4 v [A; a] work a handgun mechanism to make it ready for firing,
usually with a clicking round. n sound of the cocking of a rifle.

†krismas v {2} [B146] put up Christmas decorations. Krísis kaáyu ta
karung tuíga. Dì lang ta magkrismas, We don’t have any money this year,
so let’s not put up any decorations.

†Kristu n Christ in his various roles. Ang -ng Diyus Christ God. Ang
-ng Hárì Christ the King. -ng Hisus Jesus Christ. -ng manunúbus Christ,
the savior.

kruwis v [A; a] take a cruise for pleasure.

kudlungun n k.o. marine crab, poisonous to eat, growing to 4″, having
fine hair on the legs and having uneven bulges at the back.

†kúgi kinugíhan n {2} one’s children (humorous).

†kulasísi n {2} husband’s paramour. v [A1; c1] maintain a paramour.

kulintas = kwintas_1.

†kulur — dikarni a flesh-colored.

†kumbinsiyun kunstitusyunal — n Constitutional Convention.

kumpay_2 = kúpay.

†kumpisal v {3} [AN] defecate (humorous). -an(←), kumpisinaryu
n {2} toilet (humorous). Túa pa sa kumpisálan, She’s still out back.

kumpus pit n compost pit.

kunbinsyun = kumbinsiyun.

kunsirba_2, kunsirbǎr v [A; a] conserve s.t. Ákung kunsirbahun
(kunsirbarun, ikunsirbǎr) ang mga karáang mga butang sa ákung mga
apuhan, I’ll save the old things which belong to my grandparents.

†kuntra — risíbu n document entered upon to nullify a previous
document. v [b(1)] execute a document of this sort. Ámung gikuntra
risibúhan ang dukumintu sa pálit, We have executed a document
nullifying the sale.

kurasunáda = kursunáda.


==== L ====

labanu = gwayabanu.

lagang_2 a a woman who is completely bald. v [B12; b] for a woman to
become bald. Gilagangan ang bátang punúun arun sayun pagtambal, They
cut all the hair off the child with scabies so that it would be easy to
treat her.

lagpat v [A2; b8] do s.t. by chance, at random. Hilagpatan kug pílì ang
kukakúla nga may lakináyin, I happened to choose the bottle of coke
that had the lucky nine prize in the cap. pa- n s.t. done or said in
guesswork. Tubag nga palagpat básun na lag swirtihun, Answer I just
guessed at in the wild hope that it would come out to be right.

†lagus sa ímung, íyang — expression of disbelief. Unásis sa ímung lagus
nga wà gánì tuy diyuy! Onassis, my foot! He doesn’t have a penny!

†lagut v {3} walay gi- not have anything to eat. Bisag way gilagut
mutan-aw giyud ug sini, Even when there is no money for food, she has
to go to the show.

laksit = laksì.

†lála a {3} having destructive effects on plants. Lálang háyup ang
kanding kay dílì tubúan ang ílang sinibsiban, Goats are destructive
animals because they nibble at plants in such a way that they won’t
grow back.

†lamánu v {1a} [AC3] for couples to join their hands or have their
hands joined in the wedding ceremony. Nagkalamánu na ang gikasal sa
dihang may mibábag, The priest had already told the couple to take each
other’s hands when s.o. stopped the ceremony.

lampak v [A; c1] for a bamboo tree to bend and crack but not break.
Lampákun (ilampak) sa hángin ang kawáyan, The wind bends and cracks the
bamboo tree.

†lána {2} — sa hílug n consecrated oil used for the extreme unction.

†landig {1a} — sa pantalan sa himáyà v [A2; b(1)] ask a woman for
coital access for the first time (euphemism). Kurdaping, makahímù bang
mulandig ku sa pantalan sa himáyà? Cordaping, let us enter the bower of
bliss together.

†lantáka n {2} k.o. cannon used by the Spaniards.

Lapulápu_2 the chieftain of Mactan who fought against Magellan in 1521.
dílà ni — the Cebuano language (literary). kalíwat ni — Cebuanos
(literary).

largit = larga, v, 1b.

law-it v [A; c1] {1} hook s.t., pick up with a hook. Nakalaw-it silag
sapátus dunut, They hooked an old shoe. Law-íti ang sáku, Pick up the
sack with a hook. {2} hang s.t. on a hook, over s.t. like on a hook.
Gwápa ang milaw-it ug lukung sa búlak sa íyang líug, A beautiful lady
hung a garland around his neck. Lansang ang law-íti, Hang it on the
nail. n hook to catch things.

lay short for alálay.

libud n k.o. very small fish having transparent flesh and dark-grey
rings around its body.

†ligal — nga asáwa, bána, anak a lawful wife, husband, legitimate
child. — nga siparasiyun legal separation. v [A2; c1] make an agreement
official. Ligalun (iligal) nátù ning átung sábut, We’ll make our
agreement official.

†lígù paka- sa buláwan, pláta v [a12] gold-, silver-plated. pinaka- sa
buláwan, pláta gold-, silver-plated.

lihud n awl, a small slender metal hand instrument for piercing small
holes. v [A; c1] use an awl, make into an awl.

†likì n {2} female genitalia (humorous euphemism).

liúgat see ugat.

líup v [A; c1] be laid off from work. n {1} one who has been laid off.
{2} action of laying off. †liwat ka-(←) n {2a} — ni Adan men as a
group. — ni Íbà women as a group. ka-an(←) n = kalíwat, 1.

†lublub v {2a} [A13; b(1)] stay and live with s.o. for some time. Túa
na lang giyud maglublub si Lusyu sa íyang badyikdyik. Wà na lay uliúlì
sa íla, Lucio has finally gone to live with his woman. He doesn’t
bother going home any more.

lunghan v [c1] write s.t. in longhand, as opposed to shorthand or in
typewritten form.

†lupad v {4a} — ang, sa ispiritu [B246; c2] be terribly frightened.
Milupad (gilúpad) ang ákung ispiritu sa íyang dakung tíngug, I was
terribly frightened by his loud voice.

lupug a {1} weak and wobbly. Lupug siya kay bag-u pang naáyu, He is
weak because he just recovered from an illness. {2} crippled. v [B; b6]
be, become weak, crippled. Nalupug siya human mahúlug, He became
crippled after he suffered a fall.

lúrù_2 v [AN; a] stare at s.o. with a sharp look. Gilurúan níya ang
bátà, maung mihílak, He gave the child a sharp look, and it burst into
tears.

†luyu tagluyúan a be related to each other in two ways through both the
maternal and paternal lines. Tagluyúan mi kay magsúun ang ámung isig ka
inahan ug ámung isig ka amahan, We are related twice through both our
fathers and our mothers because our mothers are sisters and our fathers
are brothers. v [B156] be, become related on both the paternal and
maternal sides.


==== M ====

maagmaag v [B; c1] talk or write without coherence. Nagmaagmaag ang
diskursu sa pulitiku, The politician is talking incoherently.

mádirn = múdirn.

magkunu n {1} k.o. large forest tree furnishing dark maroon wood,
harder than stone, highly resistant to water, used for foundations of
large buildings, ships, deadeyes, et al. {2} deadeye.

magkut = hagkut.

†maistru v {3} [A; b(1)] be an initiator of mischief. Way láing
nagmaistru niíning binúang kun dì ikaw, No one else could have started
this mischief but you.

†makinilya v {3} [A; c1] use a windlass or winch to hoist s.t.
Nagmakinilya siya sa písì sa angkla, He is winding the anchor line
around the windlass.

mámaw n bogeyman. Ayawg kanáug sa sílung kay náay mámaw, Don’t go out
because there is a bogeyman.

Mandarin n Mandarin Chinese.

manipistu n manifesto of passengers or cargo on a boat or plane.

†manday {2b} instead of doing what is expected. Manday palitan ug
sapátus, midílì núun. Minì, Just when I was about to buy him a pair of
shoes he didn’t want any. The fool!

†mánu manumánu v {1a} [A; b5] do s.t. by hand without the aid of
mechanical devices. Gimanumánu (gimanumanúhan) lang námù ning
pagpanghulma ug halu blak, We are molding the hollow blocks by hand.
{2} [A; b5] do s.t. alone by oneself. Aku ray mumanumánu sa ákung
balay, I’ll build my house by myself.

máping_2 — upirisyun v [A1] mop up after a battle wiping out the rest
of the enemy force. Nagmáping upirisyun ang Hapun sa búkid, The
Japanese had a mopping-up operation in the mountains. n mopping-up
operation.

†Maríya — agwanta the personification of a woman who is resistant to
heavy work, punishment, abuse. Ayaw ku paalsáha ug bug-at kay dílì ku
si Maríya Agwanta, Don’t make me lift heavy objects because I’m not
Maria Agwanta.

martinis, martínis n variety of bisul with purplish, compact meat.

masusuylu n rough, granular spots on the gums of a baby of several
weeks. v [A13; a4] for an infant to have rough, granular spots on the
gums. Gimasusuylu (nagmasusuylu) ang bátà, The baby has rough, granular
spots on the gums. masusuyluhun a having this sort of problem.

†matay ka-(←) n {2} epidemic, pestilence. Gúbat, gútum, ug kamátay mauy
mga katalagman nga kastígu sa Diyus, War, famine, and pestilence are
the calamities which God sends as punishment.

mawmaw = mámaw.

†midiya — lútu n mourning halfway with black and white clothing. v [A;
c1] be in halfway mourning. Magmidiya lútu ku human sa tulu ka búlan sa
pagkamatay sa ákung amahan, I’ll go out of full mourning three months
after my father’s death.

míni = miniskirt.

†min-ibint -ir n {1} the boxer of the main bout. {2} the chief
protagonist in a fight or quarrel (humorous).

minimu_1 n minimum amount or quantity. v [A; c] do s.t. to a certain
amount as the minimum. Kun muminimu (makaminimu) tag hálig usa ka líbu
matag adlaw dílì ta maalkansi, If we could make a sale of at least one
thousand pesos a day, we won’t lose. Sa byáhi kinahanglang iminimu ang
ímung gastu bwáhan dílì ka mahutdan, When you travel, keep your
expenses to the minimum so you won’t run out.

miringgi_2 female genitalia of a child (humorous).

mirku krum = mikru krum.

míya n acronym for the Manila International Airport.

†múdus — upirandi n modus operandi, system employed for doing s.t.,
esp. against the law.

†mutung paN- v [A2] be, become violent when desperate. Nangmutung ang
ulitáwu nga wà sugta, The young man became violent because he was
spurned.


==== N ====

námun = námù (dialectal). see kami.

nárik n relief clothing, used or second-hand clothing from the States
(humorous).

†natural v {2} [c1] do s.t. in one’s natural way. Inatural (naturala)
lang pagkanta. Ayaw ipanundug ni Prank Sinatra, Just sing it your own
natural way. Don’t imitate Frank Sinatra.

nayitgáwun n nightgown. v [A; c1] wear, make into a nightgown.

†ngísi {1a} nagngisi mu rag búhì v [B2S] grin stupidly. Wang kasabut sa
gisúgù maung nagngisi mu rag búhì, He didn’t understand the order, so
he is grinning stupidly. †

ninya buníta = ninyu bunítu (female). see ninyu.

ninyu — inusintis = inusintis, n4.

nípa n acronym for the National Economic Protectionism Association.

†numíru di- a done by the number. Dinumiru ang ílang pagtawag sa ílang
mga binatunan, They call their servants by shouting out a number.

†nutaryu — publiku n notary public. v [B16] be, become a notary public.


==== P ====

†pabur -abli a {1} favorable. {2} in favor. Paburabli kaáyu ku sa ímung
mga plánu, I’m very favorable to your plans. v [B12; b6] {1} be
advantageous or favorable to. Ug mapaburabli ang hángin sayu tang
muabut sa píkas isla, If the wind is favorable we’ll get to the other
island quickly. {2} be in favor of s.t.

†paka- {1a} added to nouns to form verbs meaning ‘assert oneself, act
like a [noun]’. Kay dì ka man kirída magpakaasáwa ka, You are not a
paramour, so assert your rights as a wife. Pagpakamagulang. Buyaga ang
ímung manghud, Show you’re the older brother. Tell your younger brother
to stop doing it.

pakbit n dish of vegetables and meat with gravy, originating with the
Ilocanos. v [A; c1] make, have pakbit. -in- = pakbit.

†pálà_1 (→) n eraser.

pálas n Palace of Justice.

†palit (←) v {3} [C13] make a sale with a customer. Dì ta magkapálit sa
prisyu nga ímung gitanyag, We cannot make the sale because I cannot
give it to you for the price you offer.

palsi walsi a be palsy walsy. v [B; b6] be, become palsy-walsy.

†palu alúlung — (not without l) expression of derision said to s.o.
whose request was denied. Alúlung palu. Wà siya tugtis pagsúruy, Nma,
nma, nma. You weren’t allowed to go out.

†pamínaw v [A2] for a treatment or medicine to give temporary relief.
Ígù lang mamínaw ug kadiyut sa sakit kining ákung tambal, This medicine
just gives me temporary relief.

pamugkat v [A; b6] go s.w. very early in the morning. Nakapamugkat kug
puspuru sa tindáhan kay nahutdan mig úhas, I went to the store very
early in the morning because we ran out of matches.

†pamúu pinamuhúan n compensation for work done. Daghan kag mais nga
pinamuhúan, You managed to get lots of corn in compensation for your
labor.

†pan — byína k.o. bread baked in a large, rounded loaf. diagwa,
dilitsi, dilmundu, ilmundu, ilpuwiblu n k.o. bread shaped like two
large buns joined together. — dipásas raisin bread. — pransis French
bread, a k.o. elongated hard bread.

panghalwan n barracuda.

parian n a small gathering of people in villages to engage in business
on a small scale, gamble, take in entertainments. v {1} [A1] hold a
parian. paN- v [A23] attend a parian.

pariti n a law granting Americans equal rights with Filipinos in the
Philippines.

pasgaw n a k.o. nongregarious wasp bigger than the lampínig and which
gives a painful sting.

†pásis v {3} [AC; b5] for two or more people to hook their little
fingers as a sign that their quarrel is settled.

†pasku — sa pagkatáwu n the Nativity.

pasyandu v [A] take a leisurely walk when one is supposed to be doing
s.t. Uy, mupasyandu giyud ku. Dì bitaw mudágan nang búhat, I’m going
for a walk. Anyway, the work won’t run away. — dulur pakítà sa balur
v [A] walk about for want of anything better to do. Human na mang
iksámin, dì magpasyandu dulur magpakítà sa balur, The examination is
over so now I can just stroll about.

†patrǔn midyur, maynur — n a captain of a small passenger or cargo
boat. v [B6; c1] be, become a captain of this sort.

†pílay -in- n hair style with the hair parted in the middle and laid
flat to the sides.

†pildi v {4} [A12; a3] break s.t., usually of ordinary value. Ayawg
dulái nà kay makapildi ka, wà kay ibáyad, Don’t play with that because
you have no money to pay for it if you break it.

†pilit a {2} for mechanisms to hold or function efficiently. Pilit ug
brík ang íyang awtu, His car’s brakes function efficiently.

pinakbit = pakbit.

pitrun n patron of a benefit performance. — tíkit n patron ticket.

*piutpiut panimáhung — v [A2] smell unpleasant. Ang mga bátang
gipaningut nanimáhung piutpiut, The children smell unpleasant because
they are sweating.

planting rayis n aerial bombing where bombs are spaced to obtain
contiguous but not overlapping burst coverage. v [A13; a12] bomb in
this way.

†primíru -ng buling dirt on the outside of s.t. — makinista n chief
engineer. v [B6; b6] be, become a chief engineer.

†pugà v {1b} [A; b(1)] put s.t. into s.t. else coupled with squeezing
action. Kinahanglan pug-ag asin ang paliya arun mawálà ang kapait, You
have to squeeze the ampalaya out with salt to get rid of the bitter
taste.

†púkaw v {3} [A12; c6] drink alcohol the morning after a drinking bout
to sober up. Ug tubà ang makahubug sa gabíi, tubà ra puy makapúkaw, If
you get drunk on palm toddy, the only thing that can sober you up the
next morning is toddy. {4} [A12; c6] cause the oil to come out of
fermented coconut extract by pouring boiling water into it before
cooking it. Ang ínit túbig mauy makapúkaw sa tinang-ug nga bulalakawun,
Hot water makes the oil come out of the fermented coconut juice when it
has become all foamy.

†pulsu v {3} [A] throb, pulsate. Nagpulsu ang ákung dungandúngan sa
kasakit, My temple is throbbing with pain.

pungaw n k.o. owl.

†pungkù = lingkud, v4. a squat (used only in set phrases). — ug ilung
a for a nose to be squat. Ilung ray gadakù ánang putúta kay pungkù
kaáyu, Everything is diminutive in that midget except his squat nose. —
ug tútuy a for breasts to be firm. Pungkù ug tútuy ang babáyi basta dì
pa manganak, A woman’s breasts are firm before she has a baby. v [B12]
for breasts to become firm.

†puphu v {2a} [A12; a3] acquire, get s.t. exclusively of the sort
several people would normally share. Ang bugtung anak mauy nakapuphu sa
pagkabutangs tigúlang, The only son inherited the old man’s estate.

purbisung = prubisung.

purmas n Host, the bread of the Eucharist.

pusdit v [A; c16] postdate. Way dipusitu. Átù na lang ipusdit
(pusdítun) ang tsíki, There is no money in the bank so we’ll just
postdate the check. -id a post-dated.

pusisit = puririt.

puspurit n match (humorous).

†putru a a man who is a devil when it comes to women. Putru kaáyu nang
tawhána kay maibúgun kaáyug babáyi, That man is a real devil because he
easily falls for women.

puyuk_2 a assuming and pretentious. v [B12] become assuming and
pretentious. Napuyuk siyang namaistra, She has started to put on now
that she has become a teacher.


==== R ====

ráking tsir n rocking chair. v [A; a] make, obtain a rocking chair.

†rakrak v {3} [A; c] give s.o. a good cussing out.

ránir n one who is sent on errands. Aku ang ílang ránir, I am their
errand boy. v [B16; a] be an errand boy.

rapid páyir a doing things rapidly. v [A; c1] do s.t. hurriedly,
rapidly. Nagrapid páyir kug panglimpyu kay mulakaw ku, I’m cleaning the
house rapidly because I’m going out.

ríban = rayban.

ribili n reveille. v [A] have reveille.

ridyistrǎr n registrar in school. v [B16; b6] be, become a registrar.

rikuhir v [A3; c1] mind idle talk. Makunsumisiyun ka ug rikuhirun
(irikuhir) nímu ang tanan nímung madungug bátuk nímu, You’ll get sick
at heart if you pay attention to all the things they say against you.

†rikúla n objection, complaints about s.t.

rikulítu n name of a church, run by the Recollect Fathers. rikulitánu
n Recollect priest. -s n the Recollect order.

rili n relay race. v {1} [A13] have a relay race. {2} [A; c6] relay
commands, orders. Wà makarili ang awutpus sa urdir, The outpost did not
relay the order.

†rilu — dipalsu n a wristwatch that gives incorrect time (from palsu, 1
— humorous).

riluhiríya n watch-repair shop. v [A1] establish a watch-repair shop.

rimurímu v [A; a1] try to fix s.t. with only a small knowledge of how
to do it. Hidakan giyud ku sa mikaniku ug dì nákù rimurimúhun ning
ákung dyíp, The mechanic is going to charge me too much so I’ll fix my
jeep myself.

rindirpǐs n rinderpest.

ringlit n ringlet curls of hair. v [A; c1] wear ringlet curls; form the
hair into ringlets.

riprap n riprap. v [A; c1] make riprap.

rípu n faucet.

ritílir n retailer of rice or corn to the consumer from a government
agency. v [B16] be, become a retailer of this sort.

†rusaryu — kantáda n sung rosary.

†rúsas pa- v [A] for a woman to beautify herself.

†ruska di- n attached with a screw.

†rúyal — blu n royal blue color.


==== S ====

†sábak v {5} [A; a12] give s.o. on-the-spot instruction on how to do
s.t. Ayaw pagunauna kay sabákun tikawg dráyib, Don’t try to drive on
your own. Wait till I show you how.

†sabat v {3} [A2] for muscles to react or respond. Musabat ang tiil kun
tikdúlan ang túhud, The foot will react if you knock the knees.

†sab-it 1 a kasab-ítag kawit ang simud for the lips to be pouting (lit.
one could hook a toddy container over them).

†sábud (→)_2 n {3} rice seedlings.

†sagang n {1a} shield.

sag-ang_2 v [A; b6] cook s.t. on the stove. Wà ku makasag-ang ug sud-an
kay way gás, I have not cooked our meat and vegetables yet because
there’s no kerosene.

†sakramintu n {2} sacrament of matrimony. {2a} wife, wedded in the
Roman Catholic Church. v [a12] be wedded in the Roman Catholic Church.
Gihuwis úsà mi, úsà mi masakramintu, We had a civil marriage before we
were wedded in the church.

†salà n {1a} — nga ikamatay mortal sin.

†salamà v {1a} [B1256; c6] for s.t. which is supposed to be a secret to
slip out. Nasamà ku kay nakalimut ku nga dì diay untà tu ipatug-an, I
let it out because I forgot that it was supposed to be a secret. Ayawg
isalamà pagsulti nang mga pulúnga ha? Don’t let those words slip from
your mouth.

salamagan = salumagan.

salig-ang n hips. -un a of s.o. having big hips. v [B12; b6] get to
have big hips.

†sálud — sa gábà v [B2S] be the recipient of gábà (a divine curse).
Magsalud tas gábà ug musúkul ta sa átung ginikánan, We will earn
heaven’s wrath if we defy our parents.

salumagan (not without l) exclamation of mild anger shouted at s.o.

sambágul = bágul. see bagul.

†sambul a {2} s.t. new which causes whoever has it to feel uneasy.
Sambul kaáyu ang antiyúhus basta bag-u pa, Eyeglasses are uncomfortable
until you get used to them.

†sampul v {2} [A; b(1)] take a bite or taste of s.t. (humorous).
Sampúlan ta nang ímung kík, Are you giving away free samples of your
cake?

samsi n a Chinese dish of pork cut in thin long slices with shredded
cabbage and sauteed.

†sámuk -in-(→) v [A; a12] be bothersome. Dì mu magsinamuk ug náay
bisíta, Don’t be bothersome when there are visitors around.
sinamuksamuk = -in-.

san-antun short for San Antonio Saint Anthony. pa- v [c] light a candle
and implore St. Anthony’s help in sending punishment to a person who
wronged one. Íyang ipasan-antun ang nangáwat sa íyang kwarta, She’ll
implore St. Anthony’s help to bring retribution on the one who stole
her money.

sánaw_3 a having an uncomfortable feeling of inferiority. Sánaw kaáyung
iságul sa punduk sa mga dátù, I feel so uncomfortable when I am thrown
together with rich people.

†sansan v {3} [A; b] fill the sansan stove with sawdust. n k.o. stove
composed of a tube stuffed tightly with sawdust. A hole is left in the
center and underneath into which firewood is inserted, causing the
sawdust to catch fire a little at a time and burn with intense heat for
a long time. -an = sansan, n.

santunína n santonin, a k.o. anthelmintic in candy form.

†sápaw v {2b} [A; b(1)] stake a mining claim on land where s.o. has
already made a stake, uprooting the stakes. Duguun ang mahitabù ug
sapáwan ang klím, S.t. bloody will happen if s.o. stakes a claim on the
same land s.o. else has staked previously.

†sapinday a staggering, unsteady in footing.

sapud_3 = aplud.

sapunul a rough and not smooth to feel or swallow. Sapunul kaáyu tunlun
ang kan-ung mais, Corn grits are very rough to swallow. Sapunul kaáyu
ang ímung nawung tungud sa bugas, Your face is very rough with your
pimples. v [B; b6] be, become rough.

saringsáring v [AP; b] go about in front or in full view of a group of
people where one has no business being. Magsaringsáring
(magpasaringsáring) giyud ning batáa atubángan sa mga bisíta, This
child prances up and down in front of the visitors when he should stay
out of the way.

satù v [A; a] dip up or scoop out solids or liquids. Satui kug usa ka
luwag nga linúgaw, Give me a ladleful of porridge. n {1} scoopful.
{2} action of scooping.

sayantipiku n scientist. a scientific.

sayis_2 n size, measurement of s.t. to be worn. Unsay sayis sa ímung
sapátus? What size of shoes do you wear?

sayitsíing v [A13] go sight-seeing. n action of sight-seeing.

saytid v [B125] be in sight. Nasaytid na ang átung swildu, Our salary
is already in sight. Nagkasaytid na ang átung kadaúgan, Our victory is
already in sight. a be in sight.

síb a be freed in a game of hide-and-seek or saved from punishment in
other kinds of games. v [A; a] set s.o. free. v — bay da bil saved by
the bell, i.e. just barely escape getting punished. Nasíb bay da bil ku
sa kasábà ni Nánay kay may mga bisítang nangabut, I was saved by the
bell. Mother didn’t get to scold me because some visitors arrived.

†siba v {3} [A; a] load a firearm.

sibag v [A; b6] {1} change a course, turn off. Dì ta makasibag dihà kay
náa may du nat intir, We can’t turn off there because there is a
do-not-enter sign. {2} for the voice to go off key. Musibag ka man sa
túnu ug ipataas na ang tíngug, You’ll be off-key if you go off on a
higher pitch. {3} deviate from one’s topic. Dì ka makasibag ug sulti sa
kurti, You can’t get off your topic of conversation in court.
a off-key, deviating from the topic.

†sibat -in- n s.t. taken without permission. Dílì nà íyang sinínà. Íya
nang sinibat, That dress isn’t hers. She snuck off with it from s.w.

síbay = †*tsíbay.

†sidbaks v [A; c] sow in a seedbox. Talagsa ray nabúhì sa gilúyung
níyang lísu kay wà man isidbaks, Only a few seeds germinated because
they were not sown in the seedbox.

sig-ang_2 = salig-ang.

†sigarilyu — sa ilung = inhílir (humorous).

sigarilyu_2 = budburun. see budbud.

síkan n {2} boxer’s second. v [A; a] {2} act as boxer’s second. Siyay
misíkan ni Ilurdi, He acted as Elorde’s second.

sikpat = siplat.

†síngu dì, wà ma- for an offensive odor to be unbearable. Dúnay patayng
ilagà dinhi kay dì masíngu ang báhù, There is a dead rat here because
the odor is unbearable.

†sinsilyu a {3} for a woman to be careless in her ways and deportment.
Sinsilyu kaáyung bayhána, magpahungaw lang nga maglingkud, That woman
is careless. She sits in such a way that one can see her private parts.
v [B1; c1] {3} for a woman to act without proper reserve.

sintimíngaw = sintimintǎl, v (humorous).

sintimiruy = sintimintǎl, v (humorous).

sintimiyut, sintimiyuy = sintimintǎl (humorous).

sintins n sentence in a language.

sinturíra n loop attached to the waist of trousers through which the
belt is passed. v [A; a] provide belt loops.

†sinyúra Nwistra Sinyúra n Our Lady (the Virgin).

sipara, siparar v {1} [A3P; c1] separate, part ways. Ang mudyul
musiparar sa rákit, The module separates from the rocket ship.
Nagsiparar ang magtiáyun, The couple parted ways. {2} [A; c1] set s.t.
aside. Magsiparar kug isúd sa bangku, I set s.t. aside to deposit in
the bank.

siparasiyun ligal n legal separation, a couple with separate bed and
board, but not divorced. v [C; a12] have a legal separation.

†sípung(—) v [A; a] corner s.t. Tulu ka simána siyang nasipung sa
lángub, He was trapped inside the cave for three weeks. Sipunga ang
manuk sa kwartu, Chase the chicken into the room to entrap it.

sirù_2 a for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the center.
Sirù kaáyu ang ímung kílay, Your eyebrows are very close to each other.
v [B6; b6] for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the
center.

†sirung a {2} = sirù_2. v {2} = sirù_2.

síu n {1} the C.O., acronym for the Commanding Officer in a military
headquarters. {2} anyone in charge of an establishment (humorous). Aku
na karuy síu sa ámù kay túa sa Mindanaw si Pápa ug Máma, I’m the C.O.
at home now because Dad and Mom are in Mindanao. v [B1256] get to be
the C.O.

siúdi n {1} C.O.D., acronym for cash on delivery. {2} get s.t. on
credit. v [A; c1] get s.t. on credit. Ug wà kay kwarta karun siudía
(isiúdi) na lang, If you don’t have any money just get it on credit.
n debt.

†síug (→) v [A; a] {1} budge, move s.t. heavy. Batu nga dì masiug ug
tulu ka táwu, A rock that cannot be budged by three persons. {2} move
one’s emotions. Ang lúhà sa dalága wà makasiug níya, The tears of the
maiden did not move him.

siyuk, síyuk v [A; a] for the eyes to squint in bright light. Misíyuk
(nagsiyuk) ang íyang mga mata nga nagtan-aw sa kaláyu, He squinted as
he looked at the flame.

†subrikáma v [A; c1] make, use as a bedspread.

†súgat sugatsúgat v [A; a 12] accompany a song or melody with make-do
chords. Sugatsugátun lang sa magduduyug ang kanta nga dì kaáyu níya
sinátì, The accompanist uses make-do chords if he is not very familiar
with the song.

†súgid sugilánun n {2} conversation. v [C2] converse. Dì úsà ta
mangatū́g kay magsugilánun usà ta, Let’s not go to sleep yet. Let’s
talk for a while. Ayaw úsag lakaw kay makigsugilánun pa ku nímu, Don’t
leave yet because I want to talk with you.

sulisitar = sulísit.

súlu — alún = súlu, v2.

†sul-ung v {2} [B246] for heat or temperature to rise. Ug musul-ung ang
kaínit sa ímung láwas, hilantan ka, If your body gets hot, you have a
fever.

†súma pag- (inig-) pa but when it comes to a test. Ingun kang kamau ka.
Pagsúma (pagsumáda) pa, dì diay, You said you knew how, but when it
came to a test, you didn’t.

sumu_3 a the first litter of piglets a sow has. Sa karáang tinuhúan dì
kunu maáyung buhiun sa tag-íya ang bábuyng sumu, According to folk
belief the owner should not raise the first litter of piglets a sow has
(for they will die under his care).

sung-ad = sun-ad.

sungkat = sungkad.

sunlut -an(→) v [A13; a3] prepare sunlutan to eat.

supukar = sipukar.

†sur_1 n {4} south. Lánaw Sur, South Lanao.

†surambaw n {3} a large square or rectangular lift net operated with a
scareline at night, using a lantern. paN- v [A2; c6] go fishing with a
surambaw.

súrù_2 v [A2S; b6] start sizzling or bubbling with heat. Magsurù gánì
ang tumuy sa agipu kanà timailhan kunu nga may bisíta, If the end of a
firebrand starts to exude bubbling juice, it is a sign that visitors
are coming. n the sizzling or bubbling of s.t. liquid.

suspindir = tiranti, 2.

suy bins n soy beans.

swáb v [A; b6] swab s.t. with medicine or to clean it. Tunlang
giswában, A throat that was swabbed. n swab.

swáing v [C13; c5] {1} to get tired of s.o.’s unpleasantness. Dílì
ikaswáing nang tigulánga kay huyù, You don’t get tired of that old man
because he is tender. {2} have a misunderstanding and hurt feelings.
Nagkaswáing ang mga magsúun tungud sa kabílin, The brothers and sisters
had a misunderstanding over the inheritance.

†swirti n — dikasáhus bad luck or misfortune of a sort that shouldn’t
normally be happening to the person. Tituláda nga naminyug buguy. Mu na
nay nganlag swirting dikasáhus, A girl with a degree marrying a
no-good. That’s what they call jerked-meat luck.

†syákuy {2} grades in the eighties (so called from the rough similarity
of the figure 8 to a syákuy — slang).

syatdáwun v [A; c1] shut down operations in a factory, mine, logging,
and the like. Musyatdáwun ang mína ug wà nay úr, The mine will shut
down operations when the ore is gone.

syúgar dádi n sugar daddy, a man who keeps a woman.

syurthan n shorthand. v [A; c1] write s.t. in shorthand.


==== T ====

tabagak n k.o. fish similar to the malangsi but with a broader body,
esp. around the abdomen.

tabatsuy a obese (humorous — from Tagalog tabà ‘fat’).

†tagud_1 n {2} seeds of any fruit or vegetable used for seedlings.

taháda n toast made from sliced, stale pansu bread, shaped into an
oval. v [A; a] make taháda tidbits.

tahíru = byatilis.

takdas v [A; b6] jump onto s.t. Mutakdas ang mga bátà sa ílang inahan
inig-abut, The children will jump on their mother when she comes home.

takdul_2 = tikdul.

takiling, takíling v [B; c1] tilt, turn over on the sides. Dalia ang
masitíra kay nagtakiling na, Hurry and fix the flower pot because it is
tilting to one side. Ug takilíngun (itakiling) sa pilútu ang iruplánu,
mahadluk ang mga pasahíru, If the pilot tilts the airplane to the side
the passengers will be afraid.

taklaba = takaba.

takmù_2 = takmul.

taksip = tagsip.

†taktak pa- sa bukbuk = paúyug. see úyug.

talagtag a be thinly spread or distributed. Talagtag kaáyu ang mga
balay sa búkid, The houses in the mountain are very sparse. v [B; c1]
be thinly spread or distributed. Mitalagtag ang íyang buhuk nga
nanglarut, His hair is sparse because it is constantly falling out.

†tali v {2} [a3] just be weaned from one’s mother’s breast and too
young to do s.t. (humorous). Magminyù ka nga bag-u ka pa gáning natali?
You’re getting married when you’re just weaned?

talíngab v [A; b6] make a sharp point on s.t. a sharpened to a point.

tampikas = tampihak.

tampird a radio that has been poorly repaired. Dì ku makagarantíya
ánang radiyúhag patíngug kay tampird, I can’t guarantee that radio will
play because it has been repaired once and not very well.

†tampuk_1 — sa, ang luyu, likud v [A; a12] betray, stab s.o. in the
back. Kun wà ku dinhi libakun kunuku ninyu. Ngánung inyu man kung
tampukun sa likud? You say mean things about me when I’m not around.
Why do you stab me in the back?

tamudlaw = lamudlaw.

†tangantángan panahun pa sa — in the olden times, when people still
used castor oil for lamps. Ang ílang gigámit nga libru panahun pa sa
tangantángan, The books they are using go back to the days of the horse
and buggy.

†tanggu_1 — kriminal, makapíang n tango dance characterized with
difficult and fancy steps (humorous).

tanggu_2 a slow in understanding simple things, incompetent in doing
simple things (from tangà and gágu). Tanggu kaáyung tawhána, dì lang
gihápun kamau ug ása pirma, He is an idiot, because he still doesn’t
know where to sign his name. v [B12] become stupid in this way.

†tangtang — útang n the state or condition where one pays off debts and
incurs debts again. Mau giyud ning pubri ta, tangtang útang, This is
the way it is when you are poor. You pay off one set of debts and incur
another.

†tapang n successfully executed or accomplished out of sheer luck
rather than due to skill or ability.

tardi a arrive late at a time set for s.t. Tardi ka na kaáyu sa klási,
You are very late for the class. v [B12; b6] get to a place late.

†tarípa n rate, schedule of charges, esp. fare. Naumintu na karun ang
tarípa sa mga salakyanan, The fares on transportation have gone up.
v [A13] charge according to a certain schedule.

tibak v [A2; a12] make a killing, make a lot of money (slang).
Nakatibak silag maáyu sa pag-ismágul ug sigarilyu, They made a fortune
in smuggling cigarettes.

tígì_2 v [A; a] pour all the remaining portion of liquid from a
container. Tigía ang patis sa butilya, Drain the last drop of soy sauce
from the bottle.

tikarul_2 = tingkarul_1, n.

†tikì — nga kwanggul n a stupid gecko (so called because of the fact
that he hides but shouts to let the world know where he is).

tik-ibis v [A] 1 in baseball, take a base. Mitik-ibis ang bátir, The
batter took a base. {2} for a teacher of long service to take an easy
test to give her official eligibility. Dì untà ku mailidyibul ug wà pa
ku makatik-ibis, I wouldn’t have made eligible status if I hadn’t taken
the promotional examination.

†tikwì {3} euphemism for wakwak_1 or unglù. Mga tikwì nang pamilyáha,
That is a family of vampires.

†timáan (→) = timáan, v1, 2.

†timbri_2 n {2} booby trap or any scheme or device for catching s.t.
unaware. Gibutangan sa mga Múrus ug mga timbri ang agiánan padulung sa
ílang kampu, The Moros placed booby traps on the trail that leads to
their camp. v [A; b] {2} place, catch with a booby trap or a similar
tricking device. Nakatimbri silag bábuy ihálas, They trapped a wild
pig.

tingkarul_2 = tikarul_1.

†tiniblas n {2} ceremony held on the Wednesday before Easter.

†tipas paN- n a charm that renders one bullet-proof.

tipli n soprano voice. v [A; b6] sing the soprano voice.

tiriring a having a slight mental derangement. v [B123] be slightly
deranged. -un a slightly deranged.

tirminisyun pí n termination pay.

trakítu, trakítuk = talakítuk.

†trangka trangkilya n small fastening stick or bar. v [A; c1] attach,
make a small fastening bar or stick. Nagtrangkilya kus paradur sa
sud-an, I am making a small bar to lock the food cabinet.

trúnu n {3} toilet (humorous). Naghingári lang kug lingkud sa trúnu kay
gihibús, I keep sitting on the throne because I have diarrhea.

tsariti n charity ward in a hospital. v [c1] be placed in the charity
ward.

*tsíbay insik —, — wákang phrase said to insult a Chinaman. see wákang.

tsit n chit.

†tubà — nga balintung n tuba mixed with an adulterant that will cause
one to get more drunk than normal.

†túbù — sa kunhud v [A2S; b7] for a thing to diminish when it should
grow (humorous). Sa ímung binaligyaan mutúbù sa kunhud ang ímung
nigusyu, The way you do business it will grow—but downwards.

†túhud (→) v {3} [a12] have pains in the knees. Abi nákug tigúwang ray
tuhurun, I thought only old people had rheumatism in the knees.

túka n one’s part in doing s.t., one’s turn to do. Ímu na rung túka sa
panghúgas, It’s your turn to do the dishes. v [A2; b(1)] for one’s turn
to come to him. Dì makabalíbad ang táwu ug mutúka na níya ang
kagul-ánan, When it is a man’s turn to have sorrows he cannot refuse.
tukatúka v [A; abc] do s.t. by turns. Gitukatukáhan mig hátag, We were
given some in turns.

tukistukis n illegal cockfight on a small scale (slang). Dúnay
tukistukis sa ílang baryu káda adlaw, There is a small-scale illegal
cockfight in their barrio every day. v [A; c] hold a small illegal
cockfight (slang).

†tumuy sa — sa dílà be at the tip of one’s tongue, but still one cannot
quite remember it. Dì giyud kung kahinumdum ug kinsa tu ka apan nía ra
giyud sa tumuy sa ákung dílà, I cannot quite remember who you are, but
you are so familiar, it is right at the tip of my tongue.

túpung {3} dílì, wà mag- ang tudlù not everybody is the same. Wà
magtúpung ang tudlù sa táwu, Some people are rich and some are poor.
(Lit. A man’s fingers are not the same.)

tusínu n salt pork. v [A; a] make salt pork.

†túud [plant name] nga — n the most common variety of [such-and-such a
plant]. Kamúting túud, The common sweet potato.


==== U ====

úa = úi.

†ubus pa- v {3} pa- kay laylay pa v [A13] be humble because one is at
the bottom of society (laylay, a 2a). Mau giyud, magpaubus kay laylay
man, I should be humble because I am poor. (Lit. A matured leaf is
naturally found in the lower part of the plant.)

úi a acronym for over-acting: putting on airs, engaging in exaggerated
actions uncalled for by the situation. Úing muhílak arun tugtan,
Putting on a big show of crying so she would be allowed to go. v [B]
overact. Naúi siya arun himatikdan sa ulitáwu, She started to put on a
big act so the young man would notice her.

úiks u n OXO, a gang of Visayan toughs in Manila.

†ulan n {3} diamond with some yellowish coloration. Bubaratu ang
brilyanting ulan, A yellowish diamond brings a lower price.

†ulípun (→) v [A; a12] enslave.

†unà v {4} [A13] be oozing with dirt. Hubúa nang ímung sinínà kay
nag-unà, Take off your dress because it is oozing with dirt.

†únat v {3} [A1; c1] do s.t. in a leisurely manner. Dì ta makaúnat sa
átung trabáhu kay mag-apas ta sa úras, We can’t dilly-dally with our
work because we are rushing things.

unir v [A1] {1} own s.t. Maáyu nákung pagpahalúnà sa kutsi sa ákung
higála, mu rag nakaunir, I made myself comfortable in my friend’s car
as if it belonged to me. {2} = unay, v.

urihinal n {4} salà nga — {a} original sin. {b} adultery.

†úrus pa-, pina- v [A; b6] prepare s.t. by sautéing, usually said of
preparing s.t. special (by people who don’t normally prepare food that
needs to be sautéed). Ákù siyang paurúsan (pinaurúsan) run kay Duminggu
man, I’ll sauté some food for him today because it is Sunday.

†útak — brin n one’s brains as a means of thinking (humorous). Gamíta
ang ímung útak brin, Use your head! -in- v [A2; c1] do s.t. from
memory, not written. Inutukun (iinutuk) sa mga ispíya ang ílang mga
kúd, Spies memorize their codes.

†utut — ug bapur n dark-complexioned.

†uwak (←) gibalikas n a person who is such a nuisance that he keeps
coming to a place he knows he is unwanted (like a crow that keeps
coming back the more it is cursed). Mu rag mga úwak gibalikas ning mga
batáa. Dì patúu ug badlung, These children are like crows you shout at.
They just won’t listen when you try to get rid of them.


==== W ====

wan-a = walà na. see walà.

wap-a = walà pa. see walà.

wásu = huwásù.

wáway child talk for áway. v [A; a12] quarrel with (child talk).

†wiliwili v [AN; a12] lure s.o. to stay s.w. Ang mga bag-ung bisyu sa
ákung bag-ung naglakaw mauy magwiliwili nákù, My toddler has so many
cute tricks it lures me to stay home.


==== Y ====

yá word shouted simultaneously with the execution of a karate chop,
blow, or kick.

†yamu — ug never did, do, does. Yamug midúaw ang ákung binaláyi
pagkauspital nákù, Never did my daughter-in-law visit me when I was
hospitalized. Yamug muhátag nákù, He never gives me any. n {2} none.
‘Duna kay kwarta?’—‘Yamu,’ ‘Do you have money?’—‘(I have) none.’

yatap (from patay—slang) v [A; a1] kill. Ang kriminal nga nagyatap sa
gitulísan, The criminal that killed the robbery victim.

yíma n candied yolk. v [A; a] make yolk candy.
