


=== L ===


la_1 = lámang (dialectal).

la_2 n {1} la, the sixth note in the musical scale. {2} a syllable used
in place of words forgotten when singing a song.

lā́ = lála_1, 2.

láag v [A; ac] roam about for no special purpose, just for diversion.
Atúa si Pidru sa syudad miláag, Pedro is downtown roaming about. Unsay
ímung laágun didtu? Mangítà na pud kag áway? What are you going to roam
around there for? Are you looking for another fight? (→) a roving
about, going nowhere in particular. Lagmit paangkan ang babáying laag,
A woman that roams about is likely to get pregnant. Ang laag níyang
panan-aw didtu mahiúrung sa babáyi, His roving gaze stopped at the
woman. v [B12] get to be a wanderer. -an(→) = laag.

láang n {1} noose of a trap. Biraha ang láang inigtunub sa manuk, Pull
the noose when the chicken steps in. {1a} any trap that has a noose.
{2} stratagem designed to catch or trick s.o. Babáyi ang gamíta nga
láang pagsíkup sa ispíya, Use a woman as a trap to snare the spy. v [A;
a] {1} trap s.t. with a noose. Laángun nátung bábuy, Let’s trap the pig
with a noose. {2} employ a trick to catch s.o. Dì siya madiritsu ug
dakup. Laángun giyud, He can’t be caught easily. He should be trapped.
-in- = láang, n1.

laas v {1} [A; c] take a sword or rod and raise it. Naglaas ug sundang
ang hurimintádu, The amok was brandishing a bolo. Gilaas sa tigúlang
ang íyang ulísi, The old man raised his cane in the air. {2} [A13; b6]
go bare of protection. Naglaas ka lang nga tugnaw kaáyu? Why aren’t you
dressed when it’s so cold?

láas v [A; a] {1} tear leaves or thin sheets lengthwise into strips.
Miláas siyag papil pára himúung bandirabandíra, She tore some papers
into strips to make into pennants. {2} tear, peel s.t. off from an
attachment. Nakaláas ku sa bulsa sa íyang púlu, I accidentally tore the
pocket off his shirt. Ang uban nga táwu laásun lang ang pánit sa
kanding, Some people just peel the skin off of goats. {2a} remove the
cloth-like sheathing of the coconut bud as the first step in tapping
the toddy. n {1} the lower part of the leaves of the areca palm which
sheathes the trunk. Maáyu kaáyung buhátun ug sudlanan sa bugas ang mga
layà nga láas sa káhuyng búnga, Several pieces of dry palm frond
sheaths of the areca palm can be made into useful containers for rice
or corn grits. {2} the covering cloth-like sheath of the coconut bud
which grows from the sides of the bottom of the frond.

laaw n stray cat.

láay a {1} monotonous, wearingly boring. Láay kaáyu ning wà tay búhat,
It is so dull to be without anything to do. Láay kaáyu ang pagpaábut,
It is very boring just to wait around. {2} disgusting, disappointing in
that one doesn’t conform to what is expected of him. Laáya nímu uy,
ingun ka palitan ku nímug sapátus, How disgusting! You promised to buy
shoes for me (but you didn’t). Kaláay bayang Nína, gipanabì diay níya
ang ákung sikrítu, How disgusting of Nina. She told my secret to
everybody. v [B124; b4] be boring, feel bored. Nagkalaay na ning
trabahúa kay mu ra gihápun, This work is getting boring because it is
always the same thing. Mipaúlì na lang siya kay gilaáyan nag pinaábut
nímu, He just went home. He got tired of waiting for you. (→) n a
variety of corn that takes a long time to mature. laaylaay v [A; b(1)]
while away time or do s.t. for the meantime. Samtang magpaábut ku
mulaaylaay lang kug gansilyu, While I’m waiting, I’ll while away the
time crocheting. Gilaaylaayan ku lang nig búhat, nahuman na giyud, I
just did this little by little during my spare time, and now it’s
finished. ka-(→) = laaylaay. ka- n boredom.

láb_1 n half of the number of points or one less half the number of
points that make a tennis or pingpong game. (From the notion that when
the one who is behind reaches half the number of points—usually ten
points, that number is subtracted from the winner’s points and the one
behind is reckoned at zero. E.g. a score 12 to 10 is reckoned at dus
láb instead of dúsi diyis.) v [A; b6] for the one who is behind to get
as far as the half-way point. Makaláb lang ku, sigurádu giyud kung
makaagpas ug makadaug, If I can make it to love (ten points), I’m sure
I can catch up and win. Siya ang kampiyun apan gilában ku siya, He is
the champion, but I was able to get ten points (out of twenty-one).

láb_2 n lab.

laba v {1} [A; b1] wash clothing. Gilabhan níya ang ákung púlu, She
washed my shirt. Ang batu nga ílang gilabhan, The stone where they do
their washing. {2} [A; b] scold, talk against. Gilabhan ka na sad sa
ímung bus? Did your boss give you a cussing out again? {3} [b(1)] be
badly defeated. Gilabhan námù ang ílang tím sa baskitbul, We trounced
their team in basketball. -kára n washcloth. v [A; b] wash the face
with a washcloth. labalába v [A; bc1] work furiously, in a concentrated
way. Átung labalabáhan pagpanday ang iskuylahan, Let’s work furiously
building the school. {2} keep scolding, ranting against. a done at a
furious pace. labhanan n {1} dirty laundry. {2} place to do wash.
{3} place to air grievances. labhunun = labhanan, n1. nilabhan
(linabhan) n clean laundry. -bu(←) n lavatory, sink. -da(←) n laundry
done for pay. v [AN; b5] take in wash, work off a debt by doing
laundry. Naglabáda (nanglabáda) na lang siya, She took in wash.
labandíra n washerwoman. v [B156; a] be a washerwoman. labandíru
n laundryman. -dur n basin.

labà_1 n stains, spots, uneven color. Ang labà sa íyang mga sinínà walà
makúhà, We could not get the stains out of her dress. v [B; c1] get
stained, spotted in color. Mulabà (malabà) ang kulur sa sinínà ug
ibuwad kini sa ínit, The color of the dress will become uneven if it
gets exposed to the sun. Ayaw nag labaa (ilabà) ug pintal, Don’t paint
it unevenly. labàlabà v [B46] have splotches of lighter or darker hue,
not evenly smooth. Naglabàlabà ang sinínang dikulur nga giladlad, The
colored dress got splotched when it was bleached in the sun.

labà_2 = taas (dialectal). pa-(←) v [A; b6] do s.t. to enhance one’s
image in public. Kanang íyang panghátag kwarta nagpalábà lang sa íyang
papil, He gave money, but only to enhance his public image. n action of
doing s.t. for the show and not with earnest intent.

*lába see kilába.

labábu see laba.

labad a {1} for the head to ache. Labad kaáyu ang ákung úlu, I have a
terrible headache. {2} giving a headache, problem. Labad kaáyung
tudlúan. Búgù unyà dì pa mamínaw, It’s a real headache to teach him.
He’s stupid and on top of that, he won’t listen. Ang pagbáyad ímung
labad, It’s your headache how to pay it off. v {1} [B46; b4] get, have
a headache. Naglabad ning ákung úlu sa inyung kasábà, I have a headache
because of your noise. Labdun (labarun) pa giyud ku ninyu ánang mga
sulirána, You still have to trouble me with those problems. Tumar ug
aspirin ug labdan ka sa úlu, Take aspirin if you have a headache.
{2} [B12; b4] be mentally disturbed. Malabad siya basta higutman, He
becomes deranged if he misses meals. labdunun a mentally disturbed.
labdanan a prone to headaches.

*lábad pa- n {1} propeller of a plane or windmill. {2} toy propeller.
v [a2] make into, install a propeller. labadlábad = palábad.

labáda see laba.

labadur see laba.

labadúra n batter. v [A; a2] make a batter.

labag, lábag_1 n {1} a bundle of abaca fibers consisting of thirty-two
smaller bunches (bituul). {2} any large bundle of threads or yarn.
v [A; a] group fibers into bunches. Labágun lang ning tingkal arun
mahibaw-ag pilay abutun, Let’s take this twine and group it in bundles
so we know how much it amounts to.

lábag_2 v [A; b(1)] wring water out. Gilabágan sa mga sumasákay ang
ílang mga saput nga nahumud sa dágat, The passengers of the boat wrung
out the sea water from their wet clothes. -in- n s.t. wrung out.

labáha n straight razor. v [A; b] shave s.o. with a straight razor.
Mubui ang tingkuy piru ayaw labahái, Make the nape short, but don’t
shave it. paN- v [A2] shave oneself with a straight razor.

labak v [A; c] {1} throw s.t. hard on the ground. Nakalabak na bayà kag
daghang plátu. Tingálig mahurut ni, You’ve already thrown down a lot of
plates. No doubt you intend to break all of them. {2} throw s.t. away.
Ayaw nag ilabak, ákù na lang, Don’t throw that away. Let me have it.
{3} [A; a1b2] spank with open palm. Nakalabak ku sa íyang samput, I
spanked her on the buttocks.

lábak v [B26] for a sore or an infected wound to be opened wide.
Milábak (nalábak) ang íyang hubag nga gitambálan niánang tambála, Her
boil opened wide when that medicine was put on it.

lab-ak v {1} [AB; a] get to have spaces or omissions in between; cause
s.t. to do so, skip. Mulab-ak lang kug pila ka klási arun ku masayu, I
will just skip some classes so I can get home early. Nakalab-ak kug usa
ka linya sa ákung pakigpúlung, I accidentally left out a line in my
speech. Gilab-akan níya ang tulu ka balay únà siya muhúnung, He passed
up three houses before he stopped. Kining pula ilab-ak nímu sa putì,
Intersperse these red things between the white ones. {1a} for colors to
get uneven. Mulab-ak ang kulur sa sinínà ug ibulad sa ínit, The dress
will get uneven in color (with dark interspersed with light) if you dry
it in the sun. {2} [A; b7c1] go beyond a measure, too far or too
deeply. Ang karsáda milab-ak ug usa ka mitru sa ámung yútà, The road
encroaches onto one meter of our land. Pasaylúa ku kay nakalab-ak kug
sulti ganína, Please forgive me for having spoken beyond the bounds of
decency a while ago. Gilab-ak níya paghíwà ang íyang báhin sa kík, He
sliced a bigger portion of the cake for himself than for others.
a {1} having spaces or omissions in between. Lab-ak nga pagkakural,
Fencing with the posts put too far apart. {1a} being uneven in color.
{2} cut too deeply, gone over the mark or limits. n space left, area
beyond which one has gone.

labakára see laba.

laban (from labi) greater in number, size, intensity. ka-an, ka-an(←)
n most of a number of. Kalabanan (kalabánan) sa mga Pilipínu mugbù,
Most Filipinos are short. v {1} [B3; b2c1] exceed, be more. Mulaban
(malaban) sa úras ang íyang paglakaw nganhi, It will take more than an
hour for him to get here. Hinglabanan na sad nang ímung bisyu, Your
vices have gone beyond the limits of tolerance. {2} [b2P] do s.t.
excessively. Ayaw ug palabani (labani) ug latà ang tinúlang karni, Do
not cook the meat overly soft.

lában v {1} [A; b] take sides with. Mulában ku nímu ug hustu ka, I’ll
go to your defense if you are right. Gilabánan sa Yúis ang Israil, The
U.S. took sides with Israel. {1a} — sa nigusyu cooperate in making a
business do well. Dúnay mga tindírang dílì mulában sa nigusyu sa ílang
agáwun, Some salesgirls do not do anything to help their master’s
business. {2} [A; b(1)] defend s.o. in a lawsuit. Si Aturni Katunggal
ang mulában sa ákung kásu, Attorney Catunggal is defending me in a
lawsuit. {2a} [A; b] defend one’s honor, uphold the stand he has taken.
Naglában lang ku sa ákung dungug sa pagpatay ku níya, I killed him in
defense of my honor. Gilabánan níya ang íyang barugánan, He stood by
his principles. paN- v be a lawyer by occupation. n occupation of
lawyer. -an(→) a tending to take sides with one’s child or other person
in whom one is interested. Ayg pakig-áway ánang bat-ána kay labanan ra
ba kaáyu nag inahan, Don’t quarrel with that child because his mother
tends to take sides with him. v [B126] become one who mixes in
quarrels. maN-r- n attorney.

lab-an = laban.

labana = gwayabanu.

labandíru, -a see laba.

labang v {1} [A; b5c] cross s.t., go across, bring across. Mulabang na
ta, rid láyit na, Let’s cross now. It’s red light. Labangun pa nímu ang
pitu ka lawud úsà ku nímu maangkun, You cannot have me (lit. you have
to cross seven seas before you can possess me). Ilabang siya ngadtu sa
píkas, Bring her across the street. {2} [A2; b8] pass examinations.
Gamay ra ang milabang sa pasúlit sa pagkaduktur, Only a few people
passed the doctor’s examination. {3} [A; b5] come through a crisis.
Labangun (labangan) pa nímu ang túmang kaguul, You will have to pass
through great sorrow. {4} [A; b] surpass. Labangan pa kunu níya ang
ríkurd ni Sulayman, She says she will beat Sulaiman’s record. Ayaw
ilabang sa napúlù ang ímung pagkúhà, Don’t take more than ten. n place
across from s.t. Ang ílang baul náa sa labang sa sapà, Their field is
across the river. — pa, sa further than, more than. Labang pa niánà ang
ákung buhátun ug tagáan kug higayun, I’ll do more than that if I’m
given the chance. —, -un ug pitu ka lawud may it not happen, may it be
impossible (lit. have to cross seven seas to commit). Simbaku. Labangun
(ilabang) ug pitu ka lawud nga mamatay, God forbid. Let it not happen
that he die! -unun(←) n things one has to surmount, trials to which one
is put. -anan(←), labnganan n place one crosses.

lab-ang v [A; ab] pass over, miss. Milab-ang siyag usa ka dahun sa
íyang gibása, He skipped a page of what he was reading. Lab-ang ug usa
ka parapu, Skip one paragraph. n amount missed, interval.

labanus n radishes. The white (Chinese) radishes are the variety most
commonly grown in Cebu.

labas_1 (from lab-as) v [AN; a2c] vend or peddle fish that one has
bought (usually from the fisherman). Naglabas lang ang íyang anak únà
kay wà pa makasulud ug trabáhu, Her daughter works buying and selling
fish for the while because she doesn’t have a job. Ilabas ring ákung
kuhà, Peddle my catch. -íra female fish vendor. -íru = labasíra (male).

labas_2 = gulà (used only by speakers strongly influenced by Tagalog).
pa- n boast, ostentatious display. Ayaw tug tuúhi ang íyang hílak,
palabas lang tu, Don’t pay attention to his crying fit. That was just a
put-on.

labas_3 v [A; ab7] spend entrusted money for oneself. Gilabasan kug
diyútay ang ímung gibílin nákù, I used some of the money you had me
keep for you.

lab-as a {1} for s.t. quickly perishable to be fresh. Lab-as nga
hángin, Fresh air. Lab-as nga balità, Fresh news. Lab-as nga búlak,
Fresh flowers. Lab-as isdà, Fresh fish. {2} fresh in manner. Lab-as ra
kaáyu nang ímung panlihuklihuk, Your actions are very fresh. n fresh
fish. Musúruy siyag lab-as káda buntag, She peddles fresh fish every
morning. v {1} [B2] be fresh. {2} [AB2; a12] make s.t. fresh to one’s
mind. Mga handumánan nga naglab-as sa átung kagahápun, Memories that
keep our past fresh. nilab-as a in a fresh way. v [a1] do s.t. in a
fresh way. Ginilab-as ku níyag pangutána, He asked me in a
disrespectful way. -íra n female fish vendor. v [B1; a12] be a fish
vendor. -íru = lab-asíra (male).

labat n {1} fence. {2} patches made in clothing, walls, fence. Ang
labat sa íyang karsúnis lainláin ang kulur, The patches on his pants
are of various colors. v [A; b5] {1} put up a fence. Si Angì ang
milabat sa ámung gardin, Angi fenced our garden. Labatun (labatan)
nákug kawáyan ang bakilid sa ámung kalubihan, I will fence the sloping
part of our coconut plantation with bamboo slats. {2} repair a hole by
filling or patching it. labatlabat n {1} rough and hurried mending.
{2} makeshift fence or barrier. v [A; b5] {1} put up a temporary fence.
{2} make coarse, temporary repairs. Gilabatlabatan lang námù ug mga
pinunit nga káhuy ang nagubang kural, We patched up the broken fence
with whatever pieces of wood we found. Átù lang ning labatlabatang
karsúnis, We’ll just do quick patchwork on these trousers.

labatíba n {1} enema. {2} the apparatus used to give an enema. v [A; b]
give s.o. an enema. Labatibáhan ta kag dì ka malibang, If you don’t
have a B.M. I’ll give you an enema.

labaw v {1} [B3; c] jut out higher than s.t., stick out farther from
the margin or limit. Milabaw ang íyang úlu sa mga táwu, His head jutted
above the crowd. Naglabaw ang ímung kamisun, Your slip is showing.
Ilabaw ang antína sa mga atup, Put the antenna higher than the
rooftops. {2} [B3; b] be more, over in degree, number. Way makalabaw sa
íyang kahingatag, No one can surpass his generosity. Labwan nákù ang
ímung kininhas, I’ll gather more shells than you did. {3} be ahead in a
contest. Isáka ang pusta ug mulabaw ta, Raise the bet if we are ahead.
{4} prevail over. Milabaw ang ákung gugma sa kayugut níya, My love for
her prevailed over my hate. a {1} sticking out from the general level
or margin. Putla ang mga labaw, Cut off the ones sticking up above the
rest. {2} more, over in degree or number. Labaw siyang dátù kay kanámù,
He is much richer than us. {3} ahead in a contest. n {1} amount s.o. is
ahead. Pilay labaw sa ímung kuntra? How many points is your opponent
ahead of you? {2} superior, boss. {3} — pa, sa in addition to, beyond.
Hatágan kag primyu, ug labaw pa niánà, makabyáhi ka, You will be given
a prize, and in addition to that, you can travel. Buútan siya, utúkan,
ug labaw sa tanan, gwápa, She is good, brainy, and above all else, she
is pretty. pa-(←) v {1} [C; b3] try to outdo one another, vie with s.o.
Nagpalábaw sila sa hambug, They try to outdo each other with their big
talk. Unsa may inyung gipalabáwan nga nagpanghugyaw man mu? You must be
having some sort of a contest that you’re shouting so much. {2} [A12C2;
b5c] play a game of any sort whereby the one who gets the highest
number wins. Nagpalábaw sila arun sa pag-ila kung kinsay musúgud sa
dúwà, They drew cards to determine who will start the game. n s.t. done
to outdo s.o., e.g. action of winning by getting the highest number.
palabwánay = palábaw.

labay v {1} [A2; a] go, pass by s.t., bring s.t. by s.w. Milabay lang
ku, wà ku muhapit, I just passed by, I didn’t drop in. Nakalabay na ba
ang dyip? Has the jeep passed by yet? Labyun ku unyà tung ákung
nalimtan sa inyu, I’ll come by to get the thing I forgot at your house.
Gilabyan lang ku nímu, You just passed by me. Ilabay kining sud-an unyà
sa íla, Bring this food by to them on your way. {2} [b(1)] pass over,
bypass. Gilabyan níya ang ákung ngálan sa pagpanghímug prumusyun, He
passed my name over when he made the list of promotions. {3} [A2] for
time to pass. Milabay ang daghang katuígan, Years passed. a passing,
short-lived. Labay lang ning hangína kay unus man, This strong wind is
only temporary. It is just a squall. pa- v [A; c1] let s.t. pass by.
Magpalabay ku sa ákung kasukù únà ku muulì, I will let my anger pass
before I go home. Palabyun (ipalabay) lang tu nákung íyang sulti, I
just won’t mind what she says. -um-r-, -um-r-(←) n {1} people passing
back and forth. {2} passing, transient. — pa {1} beyond. Ang íla labay
pa sa pusti, Their place is just beyond the post. {2} in addition, even
more. Maáyu siyang mutrabáhu, labay pa musayu siyag anhi, He works well
and furthermore, he comes early. ‘Duha ka túig ka didtu sa
Amirika?’—‘Labay pa,’ ‘You were two years in the States?’—‘More than
that.’ {3} surely, even more than sure. ‘Makapasar kahà ka?’—‘Labay
pa,’ ‘Do you think you can pass?’—‘Most assuredly.’

lábay v {1} [A; ac] throw at. Labáyun tikawg hanggranid animála ka,
I’ll throw a hand grenade at you, you beast. Labáyi tag duha ka buuk
bi, Throw me down a couple. Ilábay kanákù ang búla, Throw me the ball.
{1a} [A; c] throw away. Ilábay ang mga latà, Throw away the spoiled
fruits. {1b} throw, discard in a card game. {2} [A; c] assign to a
remote place. Way láin makalábay sa mga impliyádu ngadtu sa layù gawas
sa supirintindinti, No one can assign the employees to a remote place
except the superintendent. n throw. Kinsang lábay run? Whose turn is it
to throw? Ang íyang lábay walà makaabut sa paril, His throw didn’t get
as far as the wall. -an(→) n line drawn to indicate the place at which
to stand in throwing s.t. -anan n dumping place. Ang Pásil labayánan sa
tanang húgaw sa syudad, Pasil is the place they dump all garbage in the
city.

labayan n {1} of several species of sea fish growing to 6″, with fine
scales, found individually zigzagging in seaweed. {2} one who seems to
be always on the go, like the labayan.

labhà v {1} [ABN; b4] for the skin to get welts, bruises, or red
splotches; cause it to do so. Nalabhà (nalabhaan) ang íyang nawung sa
sagpà, She got red splotches on her face when she was slapped.
Nanglabhà nang ímung nawung sa tipdas, Your face is all splotched with
measles. {2} [BN; a1P] blush, redden. Milabhà (nanglabhà) ang íyang
nawung sa kasukù, His face became red with anger.

labhag n welts, marks, splotches on the body. Ang mga labhag sa kuku
maila kaáyu, You can easily tell welts made by the fingernails.
v {1} [B4; b4] get welts, splotches on the body. Milabhag ang íyang
láwas sa tipdas, His body became splotched with measles. Ngánung
nalabhagan ka man? Gipawù ka? Why are you all covered with welts? Were
you given a whipping? {2} [B; b4] appear like welts. Milabhag dihà sa
íyang agtang ang nagbandaybanday nga ugat, His criss-crossing veins
appeared like welts on his forehead. {3} [A; a2] for emotions to leave
their mark. Milabhag sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga háit nga púlung,
Her sharp words etched themselves deeply in my memory. {4} [BN] blush,
turn red all over. Manlabhag ákung nawung ug makainum ku ug bínu, My
face gets red if I drink wine.

labhak n rectangular piece, area. Gibáhin ang syudad ug dagkung labhak,
The city was divided into large rectangular areas. v [A; c1] divide
into rectangular pieces or areas. Kinsay naglabhak sa káhuy nga wà
maángay? Who cut the wood into rectangular pieces of all different
sizes?

labhu, labhù v [A; a3b] pour boiling water over s.t. Nakalabhù ka na ba
sa mga sus-anan sa bátà? Have you scalded the baby’s bottles yet? Ayaw
pagdúul sa abu, malabhù (malabhuan) ka unyà, Don’t go near the stove.
You might get scalded. -in-an n s.t. scalded. Háin man ang ímung
linabhúan? Where are the things you have scalded?

labi a more, greater. Ug mau nay paági pag-uma, labi ang abut sa yútà,
If that is the method of farming employed, the yield of the land will
increase. v [B; b] {1} be greater than s.t. else or excessive. Mulabi
ang sakit ug mulíhuk ka, The pain will increase if you move. Naglabi
ang mga gagmay sa mga dagkù, There are more small ones than big ones.
Asgad ni kay nalabihan (nalabian) nákug timplag asin, This is salty
because I put too much salt into it. {2} — nga more, most. Siyay labing
dátù, He is the richest one. {2a} — pang [adj.], [verb] even more
[adj.], [do] all the more. Usa ka labi pang kusug nga pátid, Even a
stronger kick. Ug búang ku, labi pa siyang búang, If I’m a fool, he’s a
greater one. Ug sultíhan, labi pa siyang mangísug, If you tell him, he
gets all the angrier. {3} — na {a} = ilabi na. {b} — nang [verb] [do,
did] all the more. Labi na siyang nangísug, He got all the more angry.
Labi na (pa) siyang muhílak ug sugsúgun, He will cry all the more if
you tease him. i- na, — na especially. Lamían, ilabi (labi) na ug
timpláhag asin, It’s very tasty, esp. if you season it with salt. pa-
v {1} [A; a12] prefer, favor. Magpalabi kung magpabíling pubri kay sa
ingun nímu, I would rather be poor than be like you. Palabihun ba nímu
ang ímung irù sa ímung asáwa? Do you favor your dog over your wife?
{2} [A; bc2] do s.t. to excess. Nagpalabi siyag ínum, He is drinking
too much. Ayaw palabihi (palabii) pagpanggà ang ímung anak, Don’t dote
on your child too much. Ayaw ipalabi (palabii) ang ímung hílak, Don’t
cry too much. pina- n s.o. preferred, favored. Sa iskuyláhan way
pinalabi, No one gets special treatment in school. pa-(←) = pa-, 2.
labilábi way — no one gets more than anyone else. Way labilábi. Púrus
ángay, No one gets more than anyone else. We all get a fair share.
palabilábi v [A; b(1)] mistreat s.o. Ayaw kug palabilabíhi
(palabilabíi). Dì bayà ku nímu suluguun, Don’t kick me around. I’m not
your servant, you know. palabilabihun a tending to mistreat.
mapalabilabíhun a characterized by mistreatment. Mapalabilabíhung
kasábà, Arrogant scolding, far beyond the limits of propriety. su-(←)
{1} especially, all the more so. Sulábi nag timpláhag asin, wà giyuy
lamì, Esp. if you mix salt with it, it will have no flavor. {2} — ug
better than s.t. else which has the same disadvantages to a worse
extent. Ibaligyà lang nà run bisag barátu sulábig mubarátu pa ugmà,
You’d better sell it now, even at a low price. Better than getting even
less tomorrow. v [AP] {1} do s.t. all the more. Manday gitagáan ug
diyis, misulábi (mipasulábi) ug hílak, I gave him a dime, but he cried
all the more. {2} = palabi, 2. mapasulabíhun characterized by excessive
indulgence. Mapasulabíhun sa babáyi, Indulging in women excessively.
si- = su-, 2. hilabihan a carried out to excess. Nahugù siya tungud sa
kaguul nga hilabihan, He became thin because of his excessive sorrows.
labihan, labian, hilabihan, ilabihan, hilabian, hinglabihan, labihánay,
hilabihánay, labhan a — nga [adj.] -a, ka-[adj.] how very! Labihang
mahála sa karni, Labihan kamahal sa karni! How expensive the meat is!
{b} — nga [maka-/naka-verb] how it [did]. Labihang makaulan dinhig
mahulyu, How it rains here during the month of July. Labihan níyang
nakaantus, How he suffered! labíhay, labihánay pud (sad) It’s
unbelievable. Labihánay pud. Nakaáku (makaáku) siya niánà? It seems
incredible that he could do (would do) that!

lábid v [AC3; a] braid, become entwined. Akuy mulábid niíning lánut, I
will braid these abaca fibers into rope. Nalábid ang íyang dílà sa
kalisud sa mga púlung, His tongue became twisted because of the
difficult words. Nagkalábid ang duha ka hiniktan, The two roosters
became entwined. Kataas sa ímung buhuk! Nindut labírun, How long your
hair is! It would be nice to braid it. n s.t. braided. Unsay gidak-un
niánang ímung lábid? How big around is the rope you braided?

labigan n k.o. herb of moist places, with stout-branched, aromatic
rhizomes and long, flat leaves with medicinal uses: Acorus calamus.

lábil n label, a mark put on s.t. for identification. v [A; b] label
s.t. Labílan lang ni nátung malíta, Let us label this suitcase.

lábing a like sweethearts. Lábing kaáyu silang magtiayúna, They are a
very loving couple. v [B1] be loving. Malábing ra man nà silag náay
mutan-aw, They get to be very loving if s.o. is watching them.

labit v [A; b] stitch with a loop that holds but can be unravelled. Si
Lúsi ang mulabit niánang ímung panyù, Lucy will stitch loops around the
edges of your handkerchief. labitlabit n small bits of meat adhering to
the bones or any part of a slaughtered animal. v {1} [AN; b5] stitch
s.t. hurriedly and unevenly by hand. {2} [A13] for bits of meat to be
left adhering to bones. Panguháag mga unud nga naglabitlabit sa bukug,
Get the small bits of meat that are adhering to the bones. a meat which
has lots of sinews. Gáhì kaáyu usápun ning karníha, labitlabit, This
meat is very tough to chew. It is sinewy. labitlabitun = labitlabit, a.
-íra, -íru n one who works stitching materials.

labka a partially cooked, usually said of root crops and bananas, but
sometimes of cereals as well. Labka pa man ning kamúting ímung gilútù,
These sweet potatoes that you are cooking are still half done. v [B26;
b5c1] cook root crops halfway, and, by extension, cereals. Mulabka
(malabka) ang linung-ag ug dílì maángay ang káyu, Rice will become
unevenly cooked if the fire underneath it is uneven. labkahan = labka,
a.

lablab v {1} [AB12; ab2] slash, tear in a long slash. Malablab ang
bandíra ug kusgun ug hángin, The flag will get ripped if it is blown in
too strong a wind. {2} [B6; c1] be loose fitting. Mulablab (malablab)
ang ímung sáya ug ímung padakuan, Your skirt will be very loose if you
have it enlarged. — ang bàbà v [B6; c1] shoot off the mouth with
unsensical, boasting talk. Naglablab ang bàbà sa táwung nahubug, The
man who got drunk became very talkative. n {1} big rip, slashed part.
Ang lablab sa sáku gipíkut, The big rip on the sack was mended.
{2} nonsensical talk, boasting. a loose fitting.

labnaw a {1} heavily diluted, having too much water. Labnaw ra ning
pagkalúgaw, This porridge has too much water in it. Labnaw ug dugù,
Weak-blooded, lacking drive or guts. {2} cool, lacking in warmth.
Labnaw siyag tinagdan sa mga bisíta kay dílì íyang grúpu, She received
her visitors coolly because they weren’t her crowd. v [B; ab7] {1} be
diluted, put too much water in a mixture. Nagkalabnaw man ning ímung
kapi nga daghan na hinúun kag súkì, Your coffee is becoming weaker now
that you have lots of customers. {2} get too cold, lacking in ardor.

labni v [A; a] snatch, grab with a jerk, esp. s.t. that s.o. has. Wà
mailhi sa dalága ang milabni sa íyang pitáka, The maiden did not
recognize the man who snatched her bag. Gilabni lang níya ang suwat sa
ákung kamut, He just snatched the letter out of my hand.

labnit v [A; a] snatch s.t. attached or just placed s.w. with a jerk.
Gilabnit ang íyang bangkaw ug mikaratil pagkanáug, He grabbed his spear
from the place he had put it and rushed out.

labnub, labnug = lagnub.

labnut v [A; a] pull s.t. with a jerk, usually s.t. that is in s.t.
else. Sa íyang kapungut gilabnut níya ang tahì sa sanínà, In her anger
she ripped out the stitches of her dress. Ang kurd sa plantsa dílì
labnútun, hináyun pag-ibut, You should pull out the cord slowly, not
with a jerk. Gilabnútan aku níya sa buhuk, He pulled my hair.

labsik a lovesick. Labsik kaáyu nà siya, maung ganíwang, He is so
lovesick that he has grown thin. v [B12] get lovesick.

labsit n game of tennis or pingpong played so that a player is declared
winner if he gets half the score of the set without letting his
opponent get a single point. v {1} [A; a12] win by this method. Musúkul
ka nákù labsítun tika, Are you going to play against me? I’m going to
beat you eleven to nothing. {2} [a12b8] get nothing for one’s efforts.
Wà ku makalabsit sa ákung pagpanágat, I did not go fishing for nothing.
I got s.t.

labtik v {1} [A; b] strike with a flicking or snapping motion. Labtíkan
tikaw sa lastiku, I’ll flick the rubber band at you. Hilabtikan ka sa
nawung ug buy-an ku ring sanga, You’ll get lashed in the face if I let
go off this branch suddenly. {2} [B46] for a mechanism to click or
snap. Nagpúsing pa ku, nilabtik na diay ang kamira, I was still posing,
but the camera had already clicked. {2a} [A] for the heart to beat.
Milabtik ang ákung dughan sa kahinangup, My heart beat with joy at
seeing her. n {1} whip or s.t. to flick at s.t. {1a} reins of a
carabao: a rope usually about 3–4 meters long attached to the end of
the nose cord (pangilung). It is snapped on the carabao’s back to urge
it on. {2} action of flicking. pa- hint, s.t. said indirectly. Ang
íyang mulù nga wà pay swildu ági lag palabtik nga muhulam siyag kwarta,
His complaints that he hadn’t been paid were just his way of hinting
that he’d like to borrow money. v [A; b] give hints.

labting v [A; b6(1)] whip s.o. by flicking s.t. long and somewhat
pliant at him. Gilabtíngan nákù siyag tualya, I flicked her with my
towel.

labtingaw, labtíngaw a moderately salted fish, not completely dried.
v [AB6; c1] dry fish, but not completely, with a moderate amount of
salt. Milabtíngaw silag bulad ug daghang isdà pára sa húngus, They half
dried a quantity of moderately salted fish for the work bee. Walà
malabtíngaw (mulabtíngaw) ang buwad kay naulanan, The salted fish did
not dry even part way because it got rained on.

labu_1 a {1} for ripe fruit, cooked root crops, and squash to have a
dry and consistent texture of meat without being soggy. {2} for skin to
be dry. v {1} [B2] get to have a dry and consistent texture. {2} [B]
get dry skin. Mulabu ang pánit sa síging kalígù, A person who always
goes swimming will get dry skin.

*labu_2 kwartang ma- sure, easy money. Kwartang malabu ug maáyu kang
ahinti, láway ray puhúnan, It’s sure money if you’re a good sales
agent. All you need for capital is yourself (lit. your saliva).

lábu_1 v {1} [B; c1] sink deeply. Milábu ang ayis pik sa dughan ni
Kindi, The ice pick sank deep into Candy’s breast. Mu ra ka man ug
bairan nga nalábu sa lápuk, You take forever to come back when I send
you s.w. (Lit. You are like a whetstone thrown into the mud and fail to
come up.) {2} [A1; c6] throw overboard. Ang mga ismaglir naglábu sa
ílang mga karga samtang gibugtaw sa taga kustum, The smugglers
jettisoned their cargo when the customs men pursued them. {3} [AP; b5]
go into a woman. Kinsa na sad kahay mulábu (mupalábu) niánang bayhana
karung gabíi? I wonder who will use that woman tonight. {4} [B26; a1]
for garments to become loose-fitting and flapping. Milábu (nalábu) ang
íyang mga sinínà karung daut na siya, Her clothing has gotten loose now
that she lost weight. n depth of s.t. sunk in. Usa giyud ka pulgáda ang
lábu sa lansang sa íyang lapalapa, The nail sank 1″ into the sole of
his foot. pa- n k.o. net fishing whereby the net is spread before the
sun sets and hauled in some hours later, but before the sun rises.
v [A; c1] go net fishing in this way.

lábu_2 v [AN; ab2] fool s.o. by flattery or lies. Nalábu sa kandidátu
ang mga pumipilì, nakadaug giyud, The voters were fooled by the
candidate, so he won. — líbà, — kasuy n s.t. said to fool s.o. Lábu
líbà (kasuy) lang ang mga pasálig sa tinuryu, The Don Juan’s promises
are designed to deceive. linabúhan, pinanglabúhan n s.t. gained by
flattery or deceit. -um-r- a flatterer, deceiver.

lábu_3 v [B46] for fish to run in schools. Mulábu ang mga isdà sa ímung
tungud kun patungdan mug sugà, Fish gather in throngs beneath you if
you beam a light down into the water. Ang paun nga íyang gisabúlak mauy
nakalábu (nakapalábu) sa mga isdà, The bait that he sprinkled around in
the water made the fish gather in schools. n school of fish, throng of
people.

labù = labu_1, v2.

lábù_1 v [AB] for vision to get blurred; cause it to do so. Milábù ang
íyang mga mata sa lúhà, Her vision was blurred with tears.

lábù_2 v [B2] grow thick and lush. Mulábù ang mga tanum kun hambúkan,
Plants will grow thick and lush if you loosen the soil around the base.
a lush, thick in growth. Lábù ug kílay, Thick eyebrows.

lab-u = labhù.

labud n {1} welt. Dílà ra ang walay labud nímu, I’ll beat every inch of
you. (Lit. only your tongue will escape welts.) {2} k.o. millipede,
about 5″ long and an inch around, found in moist earth. The body is
covered with a hard, black shell divided into thin segments which go
around the body and overlap. It does not bite but secretes a clear
yellow substance which burns the skin and may blind the eyes. {3} lies
designed to convince s.o. (slang). Dì ku mutúu nímu kay labud nà, I
don’t believe you, because that is nothing more than big talk.
v {1} [BN; b4N] get welts on. Nanglabud (gipalabdan) ang ákung
bukubuku, My back has welts all over it. {2} [a4] infested with
millipedes. Gilabud ang sílung sa ámung balay, The area under our house
is full of millipeds. {3} [A; a] convince s.o. with lies (slang).
Nakalabud siya sa íyang asáwa nga pasurúyun, He told his wife some tall
stories so she would let him go out.

labug n {1} dish consisting of shredded boiled fish stewed in vinegar,
coconut juice, and spices. {2} dish consisting of shredded broiled fish
mixed with pickled fish. v [A; ac1] fix labug. Labugun lang ni nátung
pági, Let’s cook this rayfish in vinegar and coconut juice. -in- =
labug.

lábug v {1} [A; c] throw out. Dílì ku mulábug ug butang hangtud dílì
madúnut, I don’t throw things away until they are rotten. Sábà dinhà,
ikaw unyà ang ákung ilábug, Keep quiet, or I will throw you out.
Nahilábug (nalábug) ku paglíkù ug kalit sa trák, I was thrown a
distance when the bus made an abrupt curve. {2} [A3P; c] assign s.o. to
a far away place. Ang kuntra níyang supirbisur mauy milábug níya ngadtu
sa búkid, The supervisor that had a grudge against him assigned him to
teach in the mountains. n distance to which s.t. is thrown.

labuk v {1} [A; b] for a chicken to attack. Milabuk ang himungáan
dihang gihilabtan ang pisù, The hen charged when s.o. messed with her
chicks. {1a} charge into a fray like a chicken. Gilabukan níya ang
íyang kuntra sa dihang gimiramiráhan siya, She lunged at her enemy when
he waved his finger at her. {1b} [CP; acP] have cocks fight each other
for practice. Nakiglábuk (nakigpalábuk) si Talyu sa íyang tiksas sa
halsi sa íyang silíngan, Talyo had his Texas cock have a practice fight
with his neighbor’s Hulsey. {1c} [A] come in a gust. Milabuk ang hángin
ug unyà mikalma dáyun, The wind gusted and then calmed down. Katáhap
nga milabuk sa íyang pangísip, A suspicion that suddenly arose in his
mind. {2} [A] go after what one wants. Ingun ka báyut siya. Mulabuk sad
nà ug makalugar, You said he was a sissy, but I assure you he won’t sit
on his hands if he gets half a chance. {2a} — sa hílum go after what
one wants without letting on to others. Milabuk siya sa hílum ug
nakaunag hangyù, He moved in without letting others notice it, and he
was the first one to ask. n way of attacking. hílum, sikrítu ug — doing
things on the sly (secretly). Pahilumhílum nang tawhána, apan sikrítug
labuk, That man pretends to be quiet, but actually he is doing things
on the sly. (←) n action of clashing with one another. labuklábuk v [A;
b] do s.t. intermittently. Ígù lang siyang mulabuklábuk sa trabáhu kay
may láin siyang lingaw, He just appears at work from time to time
because he has other diversions.

lab-uk v [AN; b3] {1} swallow one’s saliva. Nagpanlab-uk siya sa láway
sa kaíbug, He swallowed his spittle in his great desire. {2} = lad-uk.
n {1} action of swallowing the saliva. {2} = lad-uk.

labulábu v [AC; ab25] do s.t. with intensity and unrestrainedly. Ug
mulabulábu ug trabáhu wà man gihápuy ingkris, If I work very hard, I
still won’t get a raise. Naglabulábu ang káun sa inyu, They were eating
in great quantities and without restraint at your house.
Hinglabulabúhan lagig hawuk, padilìdílì bítaw, She was subjected to
intense and rough kissing. That’s what she gets for pretending not to
want to.

labun, lábun {1} when in fact, actually. Gwápa kaáyu, labun hugawan
diay, She is beautiful, but actually she has dirty habits. {2} — kay
anyway, [so-and-so] is OK. In any case ... Musugut sad kug dílì ta
mangadtu, labun kay daghan ku ug trabáhu, It would be all right with me
if we don’t go there. Anyway, I have lots of work to do. {3} while, to
take advantage of a situation. Manan-aw tag sini labun daghan pa kug
kwarta, Let’s go see a movie while I still have lots of money. (→)
v [B46] be more prevalent. Maglabun ang sulti kay sa búhat, There is
more talk than action. -ay(←), si-, si-(←) = labun, 1. pa- v [A; ac] be
partial, have preference for. Nagpalabun si Albin sa pagkatúlug kay sa
pagsuruysúruy, Alvin would rather sleep than go around. Palabunun kung
mag-inusára kay sa magminyù nga maglisudlisud, I’d rather be alone than
marry and be financially hard up. Ákù ning ipalabun ang dakung páhat sa
tigúlang, I’ll give the old woman the bigger share.

labung_1 = dabung.

labung_2, lábung a {1} abundant and long of growth. Labung (lábung) ang
buhuk sa ákung anak, My child has thick, lush hair. Lábung ang kúgun,
The saw grass is growing tall and thick. {2} exaggerating for the sake
of bragging. Labung ug sinultihan, Boastful in his speech. v {1} [B]
growing abundantly. Milabung ang mga sagbut pag-ulan, The weeds and
grasses became thick and lush when it rained. {2} [B; c1] become
boastful. Gilábung níya ang íyang sinultihan arun pagpatúu nga dakù
siyang asyindíru, He spoke in a bragging way to make people believe he
was a big plantation owner.

labur n embroidery. v [AN; b6(1)] embroider. Mga madring Bilgas ang
naglabur sa mga bílung pinya, The Belgian sisters embroidered the
pineapple fiber veils. Ákung gilaburan ang tanang panyù nga ákung
gipangrigálu, I embroidered all the handkerchiefs I gave out as gifts.

laburaturyu n laboratory.

labut n = lubut (dialectal).

lábut n {1} concern, connection, part of. Wà kay lábut sa ámung
gipanagsultíhan, What we are talking about is no concern of yours. Wà
kuy lábut sa nahitabù, I have nothing to do with what happened.
{2} including. Lábut ba ning baskit sa prisyu sa prútas? Is the basket
included in the price of the fruits? Lábut ka sa íyang kasukù, You’re
included in his anger. {3} — pa besides that. Tagáan siyag primyu.
Lábut pa maasáwa níya ang prinsísa, He will be given a reward, and
besides he can marry the princess. v {1} [AN23; c1] concern oneself
with s.t., be included in the responsibility for s.t. Dì lang ku
mulábut (manlábut) ánà kay mu ra mag siyay sad-an, I won’t mix into
that affair because he’s apparently guilty. Ayawg ilábut ang inahan
nákù sa áway, Don’t drag my mother into the quarrel. (→) v = hilabut.
hi-(→) v [AN; a] {1} touch, meddle with s.t. or s.o., cause trouble or
bother. Ang muhilabut niíning ákung butang mapawù gayud, Whoever
touches my things will get a whipping. Hilabtan gánì nang ákung
manghud, If you dare meddle with my little sister,... {2} steal. Hipúsa
ang ímung aláhas, hilabtan unyà, Put your jewels in a safe place. They
might be stolen. {3} have sexual intercourse (euphemism). Wà siya
muhilabut (manghilabut) sa íyang asáwa kay nagdaut pa man kini, He did
not have sexual intercourse with his wife because she was still sick.
{4} harm. Dílì na makahilabut nátù ang úngù kay dúna man tay panagang,
That vampire can’t harm us because we have a charm. hilabtánun
a {1} meddlesome, given to stealing. {2} tending to molest women. Sus,
pagbantay giyud mu ánang lakíha, hilabtánun ra ba nag babáyi, My!
Better be careful. That man is known to be dangerous to women.
labutlabut v {1} [B1256] become meddlesome. Ayawg labutlabut sa ámung
áway, Don’t meddle in our quarrel. {2} [c] include s.t. which shouldn’t
be included. Ayawg ilabutlabut sa átung lális ang way lábut, Don’t
include irrelevant matters in our argument. pangi-, panggi-, pangin-,
panghi v [A; b(1)] meddle in with s.t., make s.t. one’s business.
Ngánung manggilábut ku sa inyung prublíma? Why should I mix in with
your problems? Ngánung panggilabútan pa níya ang ákung kaminyúun? Why
is he meddling into my wedding plans? ig-, dílì ig- not related.
Makapangasáwa ka níya, kay dílì mu siya iglábut, You can marry her
because she is unrelated to you. ka-an n involvement, responsibility.
Ang taksi draybir may kalabútan sa káwat, The taxi driver had s.t. to
do with the robbery.

*labuy pa- v [A; c1] ignore s.t. said against one’s own person. Maldíta
kaáyu nang bayhána, dì giyud nà mupalabay ug sulti, suklían giyud, That
woman is ill-natured. She never lets a word pass without answering
back. Ipalabuy (palabuya) lang ang mga huhungíhung nga way katinúan,
Just ignore groundless rumors. palabuylábuy v [A; b(1)] give hints.
Palabuylabúyi ug sulti si Máma arun makasabut nga nagkinahanglan tag
kwarta, Give Mama some hints so she will understand that we need money.

labúyù n {1} adolescent rooster. {2} wild chicken, male or female,
characterized by its smallness as compared with the domestic ones. -un
a having the characteristics of a wild chicken.

labyug v {1} [AB46; c] swing vigorously with a sweeping arc. Grabíha
sad nímung nakalabyug sa dúyan, My, how vigorously you swing the
hammock. Milabyug ang bágun nga gikumbitáyan ni Tarsan, The vine that
Tarzan rode swung with sweeping arc. Ilabyug ang písì úsà ilábay, Swing
the rope vigorously before you throw it. {2} [A13] wear a loose style
of trousers. n {1} swinging motion with a sweeping arc. {2} style of
loose-fitting trousers. paN- v [A13; a] go fishing with a line. Ang
katambak panlabyúgun, Porgies are caught by casting a line. pina- n =
labyug, n2.

lad-an see lála.

lad-ang a {1} water having a slightly salty taste. Lad-ang ang túbig sa
atábay nga duul sa dágat, Water from a well near the sea tends to taste
a bit salty. {1a} for drinking water or soup to have a flat taste.
{2} responding with no enthusiasm, coldly. Lad-ang ang íyang tinagdan
kanákù, She gave me a cool reception. v {1} [B; a6] get, be flat or
salty tasting. Mulad-ang (malad-ang) ang túbig human pabukála, Water
tastes flat after it is boiled. {2} [B; a12] be cool in one’s dealings
with s.o.

ladíla n trowel for plastering or smoothing out cement. v [A; b5] use a
trowel on s.t.

ladlad v [A; c] {1} spread soaped white clothes under the sun to bleach
them. Nagladlad siya sa íyang mga sinabunan sa kasagbutan, She spread
the soaped clothes on the grass. Ang mga dikulur ayaw iladlad, Don’t
spread the colored things out to bleach. {2} spread for display.
Iladlad ang mga baligyà sa asíras, Spread the goods to display them on
the sidewalk. Dílì ángay iladlad ang láwas sa publiku, It is not proper
to display your body to the public. {2a} show, present, tell. Miladlad
siya sa ákung angsu nga kagahápun, She spread the smelly details of my
past out for the public to enjoy. {3} [A; c] set a fishline or net. Dì
ta muladlad sa pukut sa duha ka dupa kay mabaw ra, We will not set the
net at two fathoms because it’s a bit too shallow. n goods laid out on
the sidewalk for display. Kining guntínga didtu níya mapalit sa ladlad,
She bought this pair of scissors from a sidewalk vendor. -in- n soaped
clothes spread for bleaching.

láds v [A] lodge, rent a room or sleeping space. n loge in a movie
house. ladyir n lodger.

lad-uk v [A; b6] {1} gulp down a liquid. Mulad-uk lang siyag kapi
dáyung adtus trabáhu, He gulps down a cup of coffee before leaving for
work. {2} = lab-uk. n {1} action of swallowing liquids. {2} quantity of
liquid in a swallow. Tulu ka lad-uk sa túbig ígung ipugung sa uhaw,
Three swallows of water, enough to stave off thirst.

ladyir see láds.

laga = hulmígas.

làgà v [A; a] broil water or water with s.t. in it: coffee, medicinal
herbs, and the like. Naglàgà kug luy-a pára sa nagsakit kung tiyan, I
am brewing ginger tea for my stomachache. -anan n any cooking utensil
used for boiling purposes.

lagáak v [B2S3(1)46] produce a loud cracking or splitting sound. Kusug
nga nakalagáak ang kawáyan pagpíkas niíni, The bamboo produced a loud
cracking sound when it was split.

lag-ab_1 v [A; a] drink in large gulps, drink greedily. Adtu na pud sa
tubaan. Paglag-ab na pud didtu, Go on to the drinking stand. Swig your
toddy. Ug lag-ábun nímu ang sabaw, dì na hisalinan ang uban, If you
gulp all of the soup down, there won’t be any left for the others.
n gulp. Sa usa ka lag-ab nahurut níya ang usa ka básu, He drank up the
glassful in one gulp.

lag-ab_2 a having spaces in between. Lag-ab ang pagkasalug sa balay,
The flooring was put in with spaces between the floor boards.
v {1} [B2; c1] get spaces between. Naglag-ab ang kamaisan kay daghan
ang wà muturuk, The corn plants came up far apart because so many
failed to germinate. Nalag-aban ang ámung baul sa karsáda, The road
divided our field. {2} [A; b7] destroy a large portion of s.t., remove
a large chunk out of. Ang bagyung Naring milag-ab sa ámung kalubihan,
Typhoon Naring destroyed a large number of our coconut plants.
Gilag-ában ug dakù ang kík, A big part was taken off the cake. n amount
taken off.

lag-ab_3 v [A; b6] belch, burp. Milag-ab siya sa kabusug, He burped
because he was full. Dílì makatulug ang bátà ug dílì makalag-ab, The
child can’t go to sleep unless he burps.

lagablab (from lablab) a {1} for clothing to be loose so as to be
flapping. {2} talking continuously and inconsequentially. Katuúhan ba
gud nà nga lagablab man, Can you believe him when he babbles on all the
time? v {1} [A] be loose and flapping. Nalagablab ang pagkatahì sa
íyang sinínà, After it was sewed, her dress was so loose it flapped.
Naglagablab ang íyang ági sa íyang paglabay, She passed by with her
skirts flapping. Naglagablab ang bandíra, The flag flapped. {2} [A; c]
blab, talk too much. Sugut lang nà siyag way káun basta makalagablab
lang, She doesn’t mind not eating so long as she can shoot off her
mouth. Pagbantay unyag kining ímung hidunggan ímung ilagablab, Better
watch out if you blabber about what you heard here.

lagak, lágak v [A; c1] lower s.t. on a line. Dinhi lang nátù lagákun
(ilágak) ang báling, Let us just cast the fishing net here. n length of
line lowered.

lagàlà a given to loud boasting. n action of boasting. Maáyu sa abugádu
nang lagàlà, kay dílì palúpig, Having a big mouth is good for lawyers,
because no one can outdo them. v [B12] be vocally boastful. Nagkalagàlà
si Ídi nga nagkadakù ang íyang katungdánan, Eddie is getting more and
more loud-mouthed with his boasting now that he has been promoted.
-un(→) a boastful sort.

lagàlagà n a darting light from a flickering fire or phosphorescent
light. Ang lagàlagà sa mga aniníput nakahátag ug talagsaung dan-ag, The
flashes of phosphorescence given off by the fireflies gave an unusual
brightness. v [A] give off flashes of darting light. Naglagàlagà ang
lamparilya nga nahutdan sa gás, The kerosene lamp is flickering because
it ran out of gas.

lagalaw (not without l) = lagaraw.

lagamak = lugamak.

lagang_1 n chambered nautilus.

lagapak, lagápak = lugapak.

lagaplap v [A] for s.t. flat to come partly off so as to flap.
Mulagaplap ang lapalapa sa sapátus ug maukang, The sole of your shoe
will flap if it comes partly off.

lagarat, lagárat a harsh and grating sound of voice. Misinggit siyag
pakitábang sa lagarat nga tíngug, She called for help in a raspy,
hoarse voice. Lagarat sa masinggan, The rat-a-tat-tat of the machine
gun. v [B2S; a] for the voice to get harsh, grating. Magkalagarat ang
tíngug sa táwu nga palaínum, A heavy drinker’s voice becomes harsh with
time.

lagaraw n k.o. long machete with a blunt end which curves downward,
used for rough clearing, picking up coconuts, and the like. v [A1; b6]
wear or use a lagaraw.

lagárì n saw. v [A; a] saw.

lagas_1 a {1} for a person to be old. Dalágang lagas, Old maid. {2} for
corn to ripen. Lagas na ang mais. Sanggiun na, The corn is mature,
ready for harvesting. {3} withered, shriveled up to the point that it
falls off the stem. Nagkayamúkat ang nataran sa lagas, The yard is
untidy with all the fallen leaves. {4} having spent long s.w. Lagas na
ku dinhi sa Pilipínas, I’ve spent a long time here in the Philippines.
v {1} [B2] for a person to become old. Mulagas (malagas) kag dalì ug
maghínay kag panuyù, You’ll age fast if you are always angry. {2} [B2]
for corn to mature, be ready for harvest. {2a} [b8] be overtaken by the
ripening of corn. Malagasan ka na lang ánang ímung gitanum, dílì ka pa
makaamural, Those corn seedlings will be ready for harvest before you
get around to proposing. {3} [APB; a] for leaves, fruits to wither and
fall off; cause them to do so. Yugyúga ang mansanítas arun mulagas
(malagas) ang mga búnga ug dáhun, Shake the tree so that its dried
leaves and fruits will fall off. {4} [B5] for a period of time to come
to an end. Maghinayhínay na kug panghípus kay nagkalagas na ang adlaw,
I had better begin packing up as the day is coming to an end.

lagas_2 v {1} [A; a] pursue, run after. Nakalagas ku sa trák kay
gilabyan lang ku, I was forced to run after the truck because it just
passed me by. {2} [b8] get caught up with. Diin ka hilagasi? Where did
they catch up with you?

lagasak n splattering, pattering noise made by water falling on s.t.
v [A] for water to make a splattering noise. Naglagasak ang íhì níya sa
batu, Her urine made a splashing sound as it hit the rocks.

lagat_1 a for root crops or bananas to have a soft, stringy consistency
with no flavor. Lagat ning sagínga kay ahat pagkahinug, These bananas
are soft and stringy because they were picked before they were ripe.
v [B; a1] get soggy and fibrous. Mulagat ang kamúti ug madugay ug húmul
sa túbig, Sweet potatoes become soggy if they are left soaking in water
too long.

lagat_2 a for the eyes to be bulging. (←) v [B23] for the eyes to
bulge. Nilágat ang íyang mga mata sa kahibúlung, His eyes popped out of
his head in surprise.

lagatak n {1} a clattering, slapping, thudding noise of numerous things
hitting s.t. {2} = lagasak. v [A; a1] {1} strike with a clatter.
Milagatak ang mga batu sa bungbung, The stones hit the wall with a
rattling sound. Milagatak ang mga sinsilyu sa simintu, The coins
dropped with a clatter on the cement floor. {2} shell out a large
amount of money for s.t. not necessary. Upat ka gatus ang nalagatak
níya sa nayitklab, He spent four hundred pesos at the night club. {3} =
lagasak.

lagatlat a for corn grits to be wet and unevenly cooked. v [B6; c1] for
corn grits to come out lagatlat. Mulagatlat ang linung-ag ug daghan ang
túbig ug kúwang sa káyu, Corn grits come out wet and unevenly cooked if
you use too much water and not enough fire.

lagatukan a almost cooked, but not quite. Lagatukan pa ang kamunggay,
ayaw únà haúna, The vegetables are not quite soft. Let them cook a bit
longer.

lagaw n k.o. deep sea fish with pink skin about 6″ in length and 2″ in
width, caught in large schools.

lagay_1 n {1} penis (coarse). {2} scrotal sack encasing the testicles.
v [a12] be hit or struck on the penis or in the scrotum. Lagaya siya
pagpátid, Kick him in the balls.

lagay_2 v {1} [A; c] bribe, grease the palm (slang). Wà man ka mulagay
mau nga gidakup ka, You didn’t give him anything, so you were arrested.
{2} bribes given to s.o. in power.

lagbà = labà_2.

lagbas v {1} [A2; b5] pierce or traverse through. Milagbas sa íyang
panumdúman ang tíngug sa íyang asáwa, The voice of his wife passed
through his mind. Milagbas ang lansang ngari sa píkas, The nail pierced
through the other side. Lagbasun (lagbasan) ning sinilása ug lansang, A
nail can pierce through these slippers. {2} [A2; a123] arrive at a
destination after having gone through s.t. Dúgay kung kalagbas dinhi
kay daghan kug gihapithapitan, It took me a long time to get here
because I had to stop at several places. {3} [AC; bc] go, bring s.t.
beyond s.t. Tingálig magkalagbas ta, I’m afraid we might pass by each
other without knowing it. Makalagbas ka kahà sa íyang abilidad? Do you
think you can surpass his ability? Gilagbasan námù ang inyung balay, We
went beyond your house. — sa {1} through an area or over a stretch of
time. Babáying naglakaw lagbas sa háwan sa tulunghaan, A woman walking
across the courtyard of the school. {2} beyond s.t. Lagbas pa sa pusti,
Beyond the post. -anan n place one passes through. -in-an(→) n a mark
left by s.t. that passed.

lagdà n pattern or outline to which s.t. is to conform. {1} rules of
behavior or action. Lagdà sa gramatika, Rules of grammar. Lagdà sa
pamatásan, Code of behavior. {2} temporary stitches to be sewn over.
{2a} tracing. {3} signature. Way lagdà ang tsíki, The check lacks a
signature. v {1} [A; c] give a set of rules to be followed. Unsay
gilagdà sa Kudigu Pinal báhin niíni? What does the Penal Code state
about this? {2} [A; a] baste, make temporary stitches prior to sewing.
Gilagdaan pa ni, dílì untà maghíbat, If you had basted it first, it
wouldn’t have come out crooked. {2a} [A; c1] trace a pattern. Ang tiil
sa bátà gilagdà ku sa papil, I traced the outline of the child’s foot
on a piece of paper. {3} [A; b] affix one’s signature.

lagdas a careless, not giving s.t. its proper attention. v [AP; bP]
{1} do s.t. without proper care. Mulagdas (mupalagdas) lang nag higdà
bísan ása, He lies down any old place. Hikaiktan kay naglagdas man lag
sulti, He got scolded because he spoke without thinking. Gipalagdásan
(gilagdásan) lang níla ang nigusyu maung nabangkarúta, They just let
their business go, so it went bankrupt. {2} be any old place,
everywhere. Gibutangan nákug hilu ánang gabíi. Pagkabuntag nanglagdas
na ang ilagà, I put out poison for the rats that night, and in the
morning the rats were scattered all over the place. {3} [A12] = pa-, 1.
pa- v {1} [A; b6] stay in a place without moving away, though there may
be good reason to settle elsewhere. Mupalagdas (magpalagdas) lang ku sa
ámù kay mahadluk kung mulangyaw, I’ll stay in our place forever because
I’m afraid to migrate. {2} [A; c1] fish with the palagdas set s.w.
n fishing with a pole which is left alone s.w. and tended only when
s.t. bites. pama- v [A2] put in an application s.w. on a slim chance.
Mamalagdas lang kug aplay dihà básin pag dawátun, I’ll try my luck in
applying in case I am accepted.

lagdù n droplets. Gagmayng lagdù nga namilit sa kadahúnan, Small
droplets that stuck to the leaves. v [B6] form droplets, fall in
droplets. Milagdù ang ákung mga lúhà sa ákung kaapíngan, My tears
formed droplets on my cheeks.

lagduk n {1} a small stake. {2} penis (humorous slang). {3} — ang anínu
noon (lit. for the shadow to have been driven in the ground like a
stake). {3a} noon (short for lagduk ang anínu). Lagduk na (ang anínu)
pag-abut námù, It was noon when we arrived. v {1} [A; b] drive a small
stake into the ground. Maglagduk kug tugwáyan sa kábaw, I’ll drive a
peg to tether my carabao to. {1a} stick s.t. into s.t. Ilagduk ang
kandílà sa kik, Stick the candles into the cake. {1b} [A; c] hold
oneself upright and firm. Makalagduk na si Bíbi pagtindug, Baby can
stand by herself now. {2} [A13; c] put a fighting cock out in the yard
by staking the tether string to the ground. Kinsay naglagduk sa manuk
diris gardin? Who tied the cock here in the garden? {3} [A; a2] in
bowling, throw the ball keeping the feet together in place without
moving them or taking a step. Nakalagduk na ku, apan wà ku kadaug, I
tried throwing the ball without taking a step, but I couldn’t win.
{4} [B3; b4] for the sun to be directly above one. Mulagduk ang adlaw
ug maalas dúsi, The sun gets directly above you at twelve o’clock.
{4a} be, become noon. Gilagdúkan na lang siya sa adlaw wà pa giyud
mahumag dáru, It was already noon, and he still had not finished
plowing. {4b} for s.t. to be above one like the sun. Milagduk ákung
tabánug, My kite soared above me. {4c} [B246; c1] for the eyes to roll
upwards. Milagduk íyang mata sa kalamì, Her eyes rolled upward in
ecstacy. (→) v [a4] become absent-minded. Uy, gilagduk na tingáli ka
kay walà ka makapanira sa ímung karsúnis, My, you have become
absent-minded because you haven’t buttoned up your pants. -an(→) =
lagduk. n 1.

lagdung n sinker for a fishing line, net, or any other rope dropped
into the sea. v [b] use or put a sinker.

laghang = lahang (plural), a and v.

laghaw a low and throaty in voice. Laghaw ang tíngug ni Lurin Bakal,
Lauren Bacall had a low and throaty voice. v [B; c1] be, become husky,
rasping. Makalaghaw (makapalaghaw) ug tíngug ning sip-un, Colds make
the voice weak and throaty.

laghay a for s.t. in grains or powder to be hard and dry. Gaan ang
laghay nga munggus, Dry mung beans are light. — nga ubu dry cough,
difficult with no discharge. v [B1; c1] be, become hard and dry.
Ilaghay (lagháya) paglung-ag ang kan-un, Cook the rice hard and dry so
that each grain is separate.

laghus (from lahus) v [A; ac] proceed, take s.t. directly s.w. Dì ku
magdúgay dinhi. Mulaghus ku sa ákung gidulngan, I won’t stay here long.
I’ll go directly to the place I’m headed for. a straight without bends.

lagi particle used to assert emphatically that s.t. is what it is.
{1} particle giving assurance about s.t. the interlocutor may be
inclined to disbelieve: believe it or not, I assure you [so-and-so] is
the case. Ayaw ug kabaláka kay muabut lagi si Máma mu, Don’t worry.
Your mother will come back. Wà lagi nákù tuyúa. Ayaw kasukù, I told you
I didn’t mean to do it. You shouldn’t get angry. {1a} in narration, a
particle acknowledging that there might be reason to disbelieve:
believe it or not. Ang manuk lagi ni Pidru nga bayat nakabunù, Believe
it or not, that weakling cock of Pedro’s managed to win! {1b} — kay
because, after all, that is what one would expect. Tungud lagi kay
abtik man tu siya, siyay nakadaug, And since he was, after all, pretty
smart, he won. {2} expressing surprise at s.t. contrary to one’s
expectations. Ingun kang wâ. Nía ra man lagi, You said it was gone, but
here it is! Ingun kang dílì mulubad, milubad man lagi, You said it
wasn’t going to fade, but it did. {2a} náa na pud — expression of deep
exasperation at s.t. that occurred a second time, which already was
exasperating to start out with. Náa na pud lagi. Ímu na pung
gihilabtan, There you go again. You touched it again. {2b} apan — but
despite what might have been expected. Apan lagi, dinhi puy pipila nga
nanambung, However, there were a few who attended. {2c} [so-and-so] is
the case, after all, much as one might wish it otherwise. Nalípay nga
naadtu sa Amirika ang ílang anak, piru kay anak man lagi, mingawun
giyud sila, They are happy that their son went to the States, but
because he is, after all, their son, they will miss him. {2d} with a
repeated command or request: didn’t I tell you to do [so-and-so]? Now
do it! Ibutang lagi nang kutsilyu, Didn’t I tell you to put that knife
down? Ayaw lagig sábà, I said stop that noise. Tris lagi. Dì lagi ni
ikatúgut ug dus, I said three. I told you I can’t let you have it for
two. {3} indicating that the speaker was right all along about a
certain point in contention: see, I told you. Lagi, giingnan ta lagi
kang hustu tu, See, I told you that was right! ‘Uu. Mubálik giyud ku.
Duul ra man.’ — ‘Lagi,’ ‘Yes, I will come back again. Anyway, it’s
right close.’ — ‘Yes (that’s what I’ve been saying).’ dáan pa — [gen.]
that’s what [gen.] thought. Dáan pa lagi ku, wà siya dinhi, That’s just
what I thought! He’s not here. {3a} conceding a point with some
reservation. ‘Gwápu siyag kutsi.’ — ‘U lagi, piru inútang,’ ‘He’s got a
nice car.’ — ‘He sure does, but it’s not his.’ v [b(1)] emphatically
assure s.o. by saying lagi to him. Dì ku musálig sa íyang pasálig bísan
ug gilagihan ku níya, I won’t count on his promises even though he
assured me emphatically.

lag-i n thin piece of bamboo or rattan used for flooring, fencing, or
tying. v [a; a] split bamboo or rattan.

lag-id_1 a hard, tough. Lag-id ang tugas labi na ang íyang lúbas,
Molave is a hard wood, esp. the heartwood.

lag-id_2 v [A; bc] brush, whizz, speed by s.t. touching or grazing it
slightly. Duha ka íhu ang milag-id (naglag-id) níya, Two sharks whizzed
by him. Ígù lang nakalag-id sa íyang nawung ang bala, The bullet just
grazed his face.

lagilági kinds, quality. Lagilági ang buluk sa bángaw, The rainbow has
various colors. v [A; c16] be, get, make various kinds. Dílì ta
makalagilági sa putáhi kun wà tay kwarta, We can’t have all different
kinds of food if we have no money. Ayaw lagilagíha (ilagilági) ang
ímung ági, Don’t vary your penmanship. ka- of all different kinds.
v [A13] be of all different kinds. Ang útan nga magkalagilági lamían, A
vegetable stew of various kinds of vegetables tastes good.

lagilhi v [A; b] smooth sticks by scraping or whittling off unnecessary
edges. Siyay milagilhi sa kawáyang igsalálug, He smoothed the slats to
put in as flooring.

láging = lúging.

lagingling n soft tinkling sound. Ang lagingling sa kampanilya, The
tinkling of the small bell. Ang lagingling sa íyang kinataw-an, The
tinkling of her laughter. v [A; c1] make a tinkling sound.

lagínit v [B2S45] emit a ripping, tearing sound. Nagkalaginit ang pánit
nga giláras, The leather that was sliced gave a ripping sound. n a
ripping, tearing sound. Nadungug námù ang lagínit sa pagkasìsì sa íyang
karsúnis, We heard the sound of his trousers ripping. -in- = lagínit,
n.

lag-it a {1} rough and sharp. Mga lag-it nang mga batu, Those rocks are
sharp and rough. {1a} sharp, keen, piercing. {2} hard and durable.
Lag-it nga káhuy, pánit, Hard wood, durable leather. v {1} [B12; a] be,
become sharp, piercing. Sigíhig báid hangtud malag-it, Keep working at
it until it becomes sharp. Dinhà na ang babáyi batíag kahadluk sa
nagkalag-it na ang tinan-awan sa táwu kaníya, The girl didn’t feel
frightened until the man started shooting penetrating glances at her.
{2} [B] be, become hard and durable. Mulag-it ang kámay ug latikun,
Sugar becomes crystallized if you make it into syrup.

lagitì n a sharp, snapping or cracking sound. Ang lagitì sa pistúlang
gikák, The snapping of the pistol that was cocked. v [B46] make a
cracking, snapping sound. Milagitì ang gamayng sanga nga ákung
natumban, The twig cracked when I stepped on it. Ang asin mauy
nakalagitì (nakapalagitì) sa káyu, The salt thrown into the fire made
it crackle. -in- = lagitì, n.

lagiting a intense heat of the sun. Mulakaw kang lagiting ang ínit? Do
you have to go when the heat is scorching? v [A] for the sun’s heat to
get intense.

lagiw v [B56; b3c] run away, escape from a place. Milagiw (nalagiw) ang
mutsatsa kay gidagmálan, The maid ran away because she was badly
treated. Unsay ímung gilagiwan sa inyu? What did you escape from at
home? Ilagiw ang ímung uyab gíkan sa íyang pamanhunun, Take your girl
away from her husband-to-be. n escapee, stowaway. Nasakpan ang lagiw sa
pínal kuluni, They caught the escapee from the penal colony. ka- v =
lagiw. kágiw = kalagiw.

lagiwliw n spiny outgrowths from bamboo plants. v [A; b] gather
lagiwliw.

lagkaw n makeshift shelter for staying in temporarily. v [A; a] make a
temporary shelter. Naglagkaw ang mga bakwit sa lasang, The evacuees
erected lean-to’s in the forest. -in- a built like a temporary shelter.

laglag a {1} fallen off. Mga laglag nga dáhun, Fallen leaves.
{2} destroyed, ruined. Laglag nga mga damgu, Ruined dreams. v {1} [B;
a] fall off, cause to do so. Ang hángin naglaglag sa mga lusuk sa
humay, The wind caused the grains of rice to fall off. Nagkalaglag ang
íyang buhuk human masakit sa típus, Her hair has been constantly
falling off after her bout with typhoid. Gilaglag níyag túyù ang panyù
arun nákù punitun, She dropped the handkerchief on purpose so that I
would pick it up. {2} [B6] abort, have a miscarriage or an abortion.
Prisúhun ang duktur nga mulaglag ug bátà, A doctor who performs
abortions will be put in prison. Bag-u pa siya nga nalaglágan, She just
had a miscarriage. {3} [AB12; a] bring to a downfall, destroy. Ang
Diyus naglaglag sa Súdum, God destroyed Sodom. ma-un a destructive.
Malaglágung hunàhúnà, Destructive thoughts.

laglum see lalum.

lagmaw = lugmaw.

lagmun n impulse, what one wants to do at a certain instant. Unsa may
lagmun ku? Sa pagkakità kung nanágan sila, midágan sab ku, When I saw
them run away, my impulse was to run away, too.

lagmit likely, the chances are very good that s.t. will happen. Ayúhag
báat kay lagmit mabadbad ang hukut, Tie it well because the knot will
likely come undone. Lagmit sa (ang) mapasahan sa gútum mabúang, A
person who has become over-hungered is likely to go crazy. ma- =
lagmit. ka-an {1} = lagmit. {2} probability. Ang kalagmítan nga may
gíra dílì ikalimud, It cannot be denied that there is a good likelihood
of war.

lagnak a loose, sagging. Lagnak ra nang pagkahigut sa muskitíru, The
mosquito net has been tied so that it is sagging. v [B; c1] be, become
slack, loose. Nagkalagnak ang íyang mga sinínà gíkan sa íyang
pagkasakit, Her dresses have become too loose for her after her
sickness.

lagnas v [A; b(1)] for water to spread out or flow over. Mulagnas ang
túbig sa subà ngadtu sa pilapílan ug tingbáhà, Water from the river
spreads over the rice paddies during the flood season. Basta dakung
dágat maglagnas ang ámung sílung, When the tide is high, water spreads
under our house.

lagnaw = labnaw.

lagnay a sagging for lack of firmness. Lagnay kaáyu ang unlan nga
kúwang sa dasuk, A pillow that lacks stuffing is very soft. v [B; a2]
sag for lack of firmness. Mulagnay ang tútuy sa inahan basta dì na
sus-an, The breast of a mother sags after she stops nursing.

lagnub n erect shrub or small tree with smooth, glaberous, and shiny
oval leaves, used to stop bleeding: Ficus hauili.

lagnut = labnut.

lagpad = lapad (plural).

lagpak v [A; a1b2] {1} slap, strike a part of one’s body with the hand
or with s.t. flat. Kinsa tung naglagpak sa ákung bukubuku? Who slapped
my back? {2} [A; b] patch a hole. Lagpáki na lang nà bisag unsa arun dì
ka lìlíun, Patch that with anything so they won’t peep at you. Pula ang
ilagpak sa ákung sinínà, Use a red piece of cloth to patch the tear in
my dress. n slapping sound. -in- n having a checkered or striped
design. Linagpak nga hinabul, Cloth woven in a checkered design. v [A;
a] weave cloth in a checkered design.

lagpang v [AN; c1] broil peeled mature bananas. Lagpangun (ilagpang)
níya ang salin nga ságing linung-ag, He will broil the leftover cooked
bananas. -in- n broiled bananas.

lagpì v [A; a2] harvest corn. Hinug na ang púsù sa mais hustu nang
lagpíun, The corn ears are ripe, just right for harvest. -unun n corn
that is ready for harvest.

lagput v {1} [B26; b6] be knocked a distance. Milagput ang búla ug layù
pagpátid ni Rúmi, Romy kicked the ball, and it flew off in the
distance. Hilagputan ku sa íyang láway, I was hit by his spit. Nalagput
ku nga giigwáran níya, I was thrown to the side when she hit me with
her buttocks. {2} [B246] remove from a job, expel. Nalagput na siya sa
iskuylahan. Hasta ikaw mulagput ug dì ka mag-amping, He was kicked out
of school, and you will be, too, if you don’t watch it. {3} [B26] be
caused to move with alacrity. Milagput mi pagkadungug sa mandasiyun, We
moved off smartly when we heard the command. pa- v [A; c1] {1} cause to
fly off. {2} expel from school or job. Wà na lang nákù siya ipalagput
(palagpúta) sa íyang gisap-an, I didn’t expel him from the land he was
working.

lagsaw_1 a for the voice to be cracking, dry. v [B] get to be cracked
and dry. Milagsaw ang tíngug sa bátà ug hinílak, The child’s voice
became hoarse from crying.

lagsaw_2 a {1} tall and lanky. {2} having bones sticking out
prominently. v [B; b6] {1} become tall and lanky. Milagsaw lag kalit
ang batan-ung laláki sa pagkabayung na, The young boy suddenly shot up
when he reached his teens. {2} for the bones to stick out. Naunsa man
kang nanglagsaw na nang ímung gúsuk? What’s the matter with you that
your ribs are sticking out?

lagsaw_3 n deer.

lagsik_1 a {1} speedy and energetic. {1a} doing s.t. quickly. Lagsik
kaáyu siyang mulálag banig, He is quick in weaving mats. {2} healthy.
Lagsik na man si Máma. Wà nay hilánat, Mother is fine again. She
doesn’t have any fever any more. v [B; ab] get to be energetic,
healthy. Milagsik ang ílang mga lákang pagtaligsik, They started
walking faster when it started to rain. Inum sa ímung tambal arun ka
malagsik, Take your medicine so you get your energy. ka- n briskness.
ma-un a of a quick, brisk, healthy sort.

lagsik_2 v [B456; b2] for small things to fly off, splatter. Milagsik
ang lápuk pagluksu nákù, Mud splattered in all directions when I
jumped. Nanglagsik ang bildu pagkahúlug sa básu, Bits of glass flew off
when the tumbler fell. Hilagsikan ku sa íyang láway pagsulti níya, His
saliva splattered on me when he spoke. n matured coconut fruits which
were thrown in all directions as they were gathered from the trees.
-in- n s.t. that flew off.

lagsut v [B246; b2] splatter up or out, for things in pieces to scatter
in various directions. Mulagsut ang íyang láway inigsulti, His saliva
showers you when he talks. Nangalagsut ang mga lubi sa pagkahúlug sa
búlig, The coconuts that came off the tree fell all over the place.

lagtang_1 v [A; a] roast kernels of corn. Dúnay nanimáhù, may
naglagtang tingálì ug mais, S.t. smells good. S.o. must be roasting
corn kernels. -in- n roasted corn kernels.

lagtang_2 n k.o. woody vine, the seeds of which are roasted and used
for poisoning fish: Anamirta cocculus. v [AN; b5] fish using this plant
as poison. -in-an n fish caught in this way.

lagtiw v [B26] {1} for s.t. small to be knocked off to a distance. Mu
rag milagtiw (nalagtiw) ang ákung ispiritu pagbutu sa bumba, It seemed
that my spirit left my body when the bomb exploded. Nanglagtiw ang mga
binughà nga íyang gibundak, Pieces of wood flew off in all directions
when he dropped the logs. {2} be caused to move with alacrity under
some pressure. Nalagtiw ming gisingkáhan ug súgù, We moved smartly when
we were given orders in no uncertain terms.

lagtub a {1} giving off a single thud. {2} giving a crunchy sound.
{2a} cooked half-way so that it is still crunchy. {2b} cooked so that
it is crisp. {3} inflamed, blistered (like s.t. cooked crisp). Unsa man
nang lagtub sa ímung buktun? What is that blister on your arm?
v {1} [A] giving a thudding sound. Naglagtub ang batu sa íyang
bukubuku, The stone bounced off his back with a thud. {2a} [B; c1] get
to be cooked in a half-done manner. Lagtúba (ilagtub) pagsugba ang
atay, Broil the liver rare. {2b} get to be overcooked, till it is
crisp. Mulagtub ang adúbug lat-an úsà, The spiced meat will get crisp
if you boil it first. {3} [B] blister (like s.t. fried crisp). pina-
n {1} food that is broiled or fried half-way. Mais nga pinalagtub
pagkaánag, Corn broiled half-way. {2} food fried crisp.

lagù a filthy, very dirty. Ilísi nang kurtináha, lagù na kaáyu, Change
the curtains. They are so filthy. v [B; a] be, become filthy. ka-(←)
v [A13] all covered with dirt. Nagkalágù siya gíkan sa trabáhu, He was
filthy when he came from work. -un a dirty-looking.

lágub_1 v [A2C; c1] join s.t. of value together, as money, land,
business. Mulágub ku sa inyung nigusyu, I will join your business.
Nagkalágub ang ámung duha ka lúti sa usa ka titulu, Both of our lots
are included in the same title. Lagúba (ilágub) ang inyung puhúnan arun
mu makalíhuk sa nigusyu, Pool your capital so that you can start a
business.

lágub_2 v [A; bc1] for s.t. long to penetrate all the way into s.t.
(not said of things put in a case). Milágub ang lansang sa íyang
lapalapa, The nail went all the way into the sole of his foot.

lagubu, lagúbu n dull, hollow thudding sound. Ang lagúbu sa bawud sa
baybáyun, The thudding of the waves on the seashore. v [B46P] be
thudding in a hollow way. Milagubu ang ákung likud sa íyang sumbag, My
back resounded with his thudding blows. -in- n = lagúbu.

lagudlágud n ovary of a sow. layà ug — incapable of bearing children,
said of a woman who marries late in life (derogatory). Ang babáying
dúgayng maminyù layà na ug lagudlágud, A woman who marries late in life
is incapable of bearing children.

laguk_1 n {1} sticky, resinous substance taken from trees, esp. the
tipúlu tree. {2} trap for birds and small insects using this resin. The
trap is baited and the birds get stuck. v [A12N; ab2] trap birds with
laguk. Nakalaguk si Silis ug limúkun, Celes caught a dove with laguk.
paN- v [A2; b6(1)] go trap game with laguk.

laguk_2 v [A] for a liquid to come out scantily from its source. Ígù na
lang nilaguk ang túbig sa tubud, The water in the spring was just
coming out in a few drops. Wà giyud mulaguk ang íyang mata sa
pagkamatay sa íyang inahan, Not a tear formed in her eyes when her
mother died. Wà na giyud maglaguk ang sanggutan tungud sa huwaw, The
coconut palm didn’t produce a drop of toddy because of the drought.

laguk_3 = lad-uk.

lag-uk= lad-uk.

lagukluk (from lukluk) v [A; b(1)] hide, conceal by staying out of
sight or away from the open. Dì ka giyud makalagukluk ug pangitáun ka
níla, You can’t hide from them if they look for you. Lawum ang lungag
nga gilaguklúkan sa kasag, The hole where the crab hid itself was deep.

lagúlu n coarse fern with huge leathery pinnate leaves found in open
mud flats, in mangrove swamps, and along tidal streams: Acrostichum
aureum.

lagum a dirtyish white, greyish. Lagum ang linabhan ug dì iladlad,
Washed clothes are greyish if they are not bleached. Lagum na ang íyang
ngábil kay nagdúgayg húmul sa dágat, His lips are blue from staying in
the water too long. v [B; b6] be, become darkish, greyish in color.
Milagum (nalagum) siya kay sígig kalígù sa dágat, He has become dark
because he always goes swimming. paN-(←) v [A23] get dark all over in
color. Nanglágum ang bátà nga dúgayng natáwu, The baby that took long
to be delivered is blue all over. Nanglágum ang bukubuku sa binunalan,
His back is black and blue from being beaten too much.

lagumlum (from lumlum) v {1} [A13; b(1)] for s.t. to lie dormant and
hidden beneath or inside s.t. Naglagumlum sa átung kabukíran ang
daghang mína, Ores to be mined are lying dormant in our mountains.
Naglagumlum nga kahadluk sa íyang dughan, Fear lurking in her heart.
{2} [A; c16] keep s.t. one doesn’t own or should share for oneself. Ang
tagakustum kusug mulagumlum sa dílì íla, The Customs people are quick
to keep things that don’t belong to them. Ayaw lagumlúma ang sikrítu.
Ibutyag, Don’t keep the secret to yourself. Tell us. {3} [A; b3] stay
s.w. for some good reason. Milagumlum siyag usa ka simána sa íyang
panágat, He stayed out fishing for a week. Unsay ímung lagumlúman sa
tubaan, dì ínum? What are you hanging around at the toddy stand for if
not to drink?

lagumù, lagúmù a producing a crunchy sound. Lagumù ang sinángag mais
kan-un, Roasted grains of corn are crunchy to eat. v [A2S; c1] make a
crunching, grinding sound. Milagúmù ang bildu nga gigaling, The glass
made a crunching noise as it was ground.

lagumuk, lagúmuk_1 n the sound of s.t. brittle which is being crushed.
v [A; b6] produce this sound. Milagumuk ang itlug nga ákung hitumban, I
stepped on the egg and it made a crunching sound.

lagúmuk_2 v [A23P; c1] fall down helpless on the floor, ground, ring,
etc. Milagúmuk sa ring ang kuntra ni Ilurdi, Elorde’s opponent fell
prostrate on the ring.

lagúna n a meadow. v [B126] turn into a weed-covered field.

*lagundà Culu- v [A; c1] fall asleep some place other than one’s usual
sleeping place before transferring to one’s own bed. Ayaw paglulagundà
dihà sa sála kay mahinayak ka, Don’t take a nap in the living room
because you won’t be able to wake up till morning.

lagundì n k.o. shrub of thickets and waste places, bearing
palmately-arranged groups of fine leaflets, with a velvety
undersurface, used as a poultice for panúhut: Vitex negundo.

lagung n name given to flies larger than houseflies, including the
bluebottle fly. v [a4] be infested with lagung. Gilagung ang patayng
irù, The dead dog was covered with bluebottle flies. ambut sa — see
ambut. simbaku — see simba.

lagunit n screeching, ripping sound. Ang lagunit sa tayaung lansang nga
giibut, The screeching of the rusty nail that was pulled out. v [A]
make a ripping, screeching sound. Naglagunit ang papil nga gilaksì sa
bungbung, The paper that was ripped off the wall made a ripping sound.

lagunut, lagúnut n dull ripping sound, as when weeds are pulled out.
v [A] make a dull ripping sound. Milagunut ang gamut sa sagbut nga
giibut, The roots of the weeds made a dull ripping sound as they were
uprooted.

lagupù, lagúpù n dull cracking sound of bones. (←) v [A2S] for bones to
make a dull cracking sound.

lagúrul v [A; b] shave the head clean. Gilagurúlan ang prísu nga
patyunun, They shaved the prisoner’s head clean.

lagúrut n grating sound or sound of uprooting s.t. Ang lagúrut sa
balhíbu sa manuk nga gilabnut, The sound of the chicken feathers being
pulled out. v [A2S] make this sound. Naglagurut ang kamúti nga
gilidgid, The sweet potatoes make a scratching sound as they were being
grated.

lagus n gums. Ang íyang lagus makítà inig katáwa níya, Her gums show
when she laughs. †

lagusà n hissing, splashing sound of water. Ang lagusà sa busay, The
swirling sound at the bottom of a waterfall. v [A13] hiss, as when
waves dash on the rocks or bubbles burst. Ang balud nga naglagusà sa
lapyahan, The waves hissing against the beach.

lagusu v [A; c6] involve, include s.o. in some sort of mischief or
punishment. Ikaw mauy nakalagusu (nakapalagusu) nákù sa tinuntu, You
dragged me into doing mischief. Ayaw kug ilagusu sa ímung kasábà kay wà
kuy lábut, Don’t scold me, too, because I didn’t have any part in it.

lagúsù n a soft, crunching sound, as for example that produced by
chewing s.t. fleshy and easy to chew, but not soft. v [A2S] produce
such a sound. Mulagúsù ang kapáyas nga tagudtud ug kan-un, A hard but
ripe papaya produces a faint crunching sound when you eat it.

lagut v {1} [A; a12] chew tobacco. Bahù ug bàbà ang táwung mulagut, A
person who chews tobacco will develop foul-smelling breath. Lagutun ku
ning tabakúa, I’ll chew this tobacco. {2} [A13; a1] do chewing motions.
Ang kábaw maglagut kanúnay, The carabao is always chewing. Íya lang
gilagut ang karni, He just chewed the meat. n chewing tobacco. a for a
child to be so cute one would love to pinch or bite it. Lagút kaáyung
bataána. Kaáyu dyung kusiun, This child is so cute. How I’d love to
pinch it. (←)_1 v {1} [A; c1] gnash the teeth. Gilágut níya ang íyang
ngípun sa kasukù, She gnashed her teeth in anger. {2} [B146; b3(1)c3]
get irritated, angry. Naglágut si Ibuy sa ímung sugsúg, Iboy was irked
at your teasing. Ángay ba nà nímung ikalágut (kalagútan)? Is that worth
getting mad about? a irritating, irksome. Lágut kaáyu nang bataána,
samukan, That brat is very irritating. He’s a pest. pa-(←) v [A; ac]
get s.o.’s goat. Unsa na puy ílang ipalágut nákù? What are they going
to think of next to annoy me? n s.t. to irk, anger s.o. or rouse s.o.
to resentment. paN- v [A2] for a child to be teething. Paliti ug
lagutan ang bátà kay nanglagut na, Buy the baby a teething ring because
he’s beginning to teethe. -an n teething ring. -unun n tobacco for
chewing. maka-r-, maka-r-(←) a very maddening. Makalalágut kanang ímung
binúang, Your foolishness is maddening. ma-un(←) a irritated. ka-(←)
n anger, irritation. †

lágut_2 v [B126] be knocked to a distance by a force. Nalágut ang
bisiklítang hidumbulan sa dyip, The bicycle was thrown off to a
distance because the jeep bumped into it.

lagutmun see lagutum.

lagutù n {1} dull, cracking sound. {2} for rice or corn grits to be
half-cooked, such that they still crunch. v {1} [AN] make a dull,
thick, cracking sound. Milagutù ang ákung lutáhan pagtindug nákù, My
joints made a dull cracking sound when I stood up. Ang nagpanlagutù nga
pundu sa gángu, The creaking of the ropes tying the large raft.
{2} [B15; b6] for rice or corn grits to be half-cooked.

lagútub v [A2S] make a low, prolonged, resonant thud. Milagútub ang
kílid sa tangki nga nasaghiran sa trák, The tank made a prolonged
thudding sound when the truck scraped it. Naglagutub ang bumbu nga
nagkalinding sa handag, The drum resounded as it rolled down the slope.
n this sound.

lagútuk n knocking sound produced when the bony part of the body is
hit, cracking sound of bone joints. Ang lagútuk sa túhud sa íyang
pagtindug, The cracking of his knees when he stood up. v [B2346]
produce this sound. (→) = lagutù, n 2, v 2.

lagutum (from gútum) v [A; bc] eat, feed with root crops and bananas in
times of scarcity. Naglagutum mig balanghuy paggíra, We ate nothing but
cassava during the war. Gilagutuman nákug kamúti ang mga bátà paggútum,
I fed my children sweet potatoes during the famine. Ang gábi ikalagutum
ug magníhit ang pagkáun, Taro can substitute for the staple food when
food is scarce. lagutmun n crops which can be used to replace the
staple (corn or rice): root crops and cooking bananas. Ang binignit
nilútù sa nagkalainláing lagutmun, Binignit is a sweet soup made of all
different kinds of root crops and cooking bananas. v [A13] = lagutum,
v.

lagutuy v [B456; b4] for the stomach to have nothing in it. Naglagutuy
ang tiyan sa nagpuása, The man who was fasting was starving to death.
Nalagutuyan ang bábuy nga nakalimtan ug pásaw, They forgot to feed the
pig for a long time and it practically starved to death.

laguy {1} = lagiw. {2} going about to avoid work, not staying put.
Gipapaháwà siya kay laguy man, He was fired, because he never stayed
put in his place. laguyláguy_1 v [A; b(1)] roam around on the job.
Gamay siyag ági kay naghínay lag laguyláguy, He hardly accomplished
anything because all he ever did was gad about on the job.

laguyláguy_2 v [A; c1] chew s.t. tough. Ígù lang siyang makalaguyláguy
sa kúbal, She couldn’t do anything but chew away at the tough pork
rinds.

laguyluy = byatilis.

lagwirta n small vegetable garden or, by extension, a yard planted to
grass or flowers.

lagwis a tall and slender. Lagwis kaáyu ug mga bitíis nang bayhána, mu
rag tukun, The legs of that woman are long and straight like a bean
pole. Lagwis nga pinútì, Long sword. v [B3(1); b6] grow tall and
slender. Mulagwis ang kawáyan, Bamboo grows tall and slender.

lagwum = laglum. see lalum.

lagyu = lagiw.

lagyum = laglum. see lalum.

láhà v [A; b6(1)] trim or clean the top of coconut trees to prepare
them for becoming toddy-producing palms.

lahang n crack in between s.t. Naglìlì siya sa lahang sa bungbung, He
was peeping through the cracks in the walls. a have spaces in between,
be at wide intervals. Gwápa untà apan lahang lag ngípun, She would be
beautiful if it were not for her teeth which are too wide apart. v [AB;
c1] be so arranged as to have spaces in between. Kinsay naglahang ug
pugas sa mais? Who planted the corn so far apart? Naglahang man ning
sawug. Simpúta, The floor slats are so wide apart. Put them close
together.

láhap v [A; ab2] slice a thick slab off, cut off s.t. wide and thick.
Muláhap untà kug gamay pára isugba, I’d like to slice off a chunk to
broil. Ang bahà nakaláhap ug dakung parti sa íyang yútà, The flood took
off a big chunk from his land. Naláhap ang tumuy sa íyang tudlù sa
blíd, The blade sliced off the tip of his finger. a having been cut
widely and deeply. Kaúsik sa mansánas, láhap nga pagkapánit, What a
waste! The apples were peeled with so much flesh adhering to the peels.
-in- n chunk sliced off. -in-an n s.t. from which a chunk has been cut
off.

lahawlahaw v [A; b5] wander without purpose over a wide area.
Nalahawlahaw (nalahawlahawan) na nákù ang tanang suuk sa kalibútan, I
have wandered aimlessly over the face of the earth.

*lahay walay — {1} not having a liking, inclination for s.t. Wà kuy
lahay sa baskit, I have no inclination for basketball. {2} lacking
flavor. Walay lahay ang kan-un kun hilantan ta, Food doesn’t taste good
when one is sick. v {1} [B23(1)46; b4] feel like doing s.t. Ang táwung
hilantan dílì mulahay sa káun (layhang mukáun), A person with a fever
won’t feel like eating. {2} [A; b(1)] do liberally to one’s heart’s
content. Mulahay silag katúlug kun wà ang agálun, They sleep to their
hearts’ content when the mistress is not home. lahaylahay v [A; b(1)]
do s.t. to pass the time. Maglahaylahay lang kug bása samtang maghulat
níla, I will pass the time reading while I wait for them.

lahì a different. Káda táwu lahì sa usa, Each person is different from
every other. v {1} [BC; ac] be different or dissimilar. Malahì giyud
kag muadtu kag magdyins, You’ll surely be different from everybody else
if you go there in jeans. Nagláhì ang ílang hitsúra bisag kalúha sila,
They look different even though they are twins. Ilahì (lahia) ang
pagkáun sa mga binatunan sa átù, Give the servants different food from
ours. {2} [AC12] do s.t. apart from others or the main group. Mulahì
sila sa grúpu inigpangáun na, They eat in a small group off to
themselves. pa- v [A; a] do s.t. different from the ordinary. Dílì ku
manundug, mupalahì giyud ku, I won’t imitate, I’ll do s.t. different.
lahìláhì a of different kinds. Lahìláhing mga panaptun ang íyang
gipalit, She bought different kinds of cloth. v [B16; a] be of
different kinds. ka- v [B1456] be of various kinds. Nagkalahìláhì ang
ámung upiniyun, Our opinions were varied.

láhib, làhib v [AN; b6(1)] slice off the end part of the coconut bud to
induce a flow of palm toddy. Gilàhíban na nákù ang ákung sanggutan, I
have sliced off the end part of the coconut buds for the toddy.

láhid v {1} [A; c] spread, smear s.t. over. Lahírig túbig ang pánit sa
inasal, Rub water over the roast pig’s skin. Gilahíran ug dyam ang pán,
They spread jam on the bread. {2} [A; a1c1] involve s.o. else in s.t.
unpleasant. Muláhid man ka sa uban nga way sâ, Why do you involve
others who are blameless? Ayaw kug iláhid sa kastígu, Don’t include me
with the punishment. (→) n magical medicine of coconut oil and herbs
used for skin ailments of supernatural origin, or the application of
this medicine. v [A; c] subject to this treatment. ka- v [A13] get all
smeared. Nagkaláhid ang bungbung ug húgaw, The walls are all smeared
with dirt.

lahing, láhing n {1} mature coconuts. {2} matured person, of age
(metaphorical). Lahing na siyag hunàhúnà kay idad-idaran na, He is
mature in his ways of thinking, because he’s middle-aged. v [B2] for
coconuts to become mature. Dalì mulahing (malahing) ang lubi nga
inariglǎr, Coconut fruits mature early if they are well tended.

láhit v [AN; b26(1)] cut, slice off with a sharp blade. Muláhit
(mangláhit) pa ku sa ákung sanggutan, I still have to make a cut in the
coconut buds. Kinsay nagláhit sa sáhà sa ságing? Who cut off the banana
shoot? Mityábaw ang kanding nga gilàhítan sa dalunggan, The goat cried
because a part of his ear was cut off. n sickle, scythe.

lahù v [A2; a2] pass loosely through s.t. Milahù ang búla sa dakung
lungag, The ball easily went into the large hole. Gilahù níyag tulun
ang dakung lísu, She swallowed the large seed with ease. Kanang
gilhánga sa kural lahuan lang nà sa irù, With those gaps in the fence,
the dog will pass through it with ease. a fitting loosely inside s.t.
Lahù ang íyang tiil sa íyang sapátus, His shoes are too big for his
feet.

lahug v [A; b5c1] mend a tear in a rough way using long stitches. Ákù
lang lahugan (lahúgan, ilahug) ang gisì, kay kápuy sursíhan, I’ll just
stitch the tear hastily because it’s a nuisance to darn it.

láhug v [AC; c1] {1} mix s.t. together and stir around. Nagláhug ang
mga trabahanti ug simintu, The laborers are mixing the cement. Nagláhug
ang dátù ug pubri niadtung mitínga, The rich and the poor mixed
together in that gathering. {2} get all mixed up in no special order.
Nagkaláhug ang ílang sulti, They were talking on all different topics
mixed up without any order. -ay v [B] = láhug. lahuglahug v [AC12; a]
{1} roam around with others. Dì ku gustung makiglahuglahug ka sa mga
buguy, I don’t want you to roam around with bums. {2} roam around in
general for no good purpose. Sa kaping magtrabáhu magpúnay lag
lahuglahug, Instead of working, he just used to roam about. {3} go
straight s.w. Manglahuglahug ta dihà ánang mga lagúna paingun sa ámù,
Let’s cross those meadows to get to our house.

lahundung n k.o. grunter (lipti or alatan), also called the alatan nga
Maniláun.

láhung v [AC; b] help carry a load. Nagkaláhung mi sa kaban, We carried
the trunk together. Lahúngi ninyu ang pyánu, Carry the piano together.
ka- n one with whom one carries s.t.

lahus v {1} [AC; ac] proceed, go on or forward, esp. after an
interruption or stop. Mulahus lang kug pangumpra human sa simba, I will
just proceed to the market after going to church. Nagláhus ang
nagsaaray, The engaged couple went through with their marriage. Lahusa
nyà ákung karsúnis sa tiluring, Please go ahead to get my pants at the
tailor’s. Ilahus ni ngadtu sa íla, Bring this on ahead to their house.
{2} [A2] penetrate, pass through. Lahusa (ilahus) lang ang ímung mga
plánu, Just go ahead with your plans. {3} [B3; c1] get through, finish
s.t. successfully. Milahus na siya sa íyang abugasíya, He has gotten
through his law course. {3a} [a12] be finished in the first fight.
Gilahus ang íyang sunuy, His cock was killed in the first fight. — sa
going through s.t. Lahus ning lansánga sa píkas bungbung kay taas, This
nail goes through to the other side. Mu rag kining ákung tambag lahus
lang sa píkas mung dunggan, Apparently my advice to you goes in one ear
and out the other. n k.o. small shark, so called because its liver
causes instant defecation. (←) v {1} [C23; a12] for two things to lead
into each other. Nagláhus ang duha ka lángub, The two caves lead to
each other. Lahúsa ang duha ka kanal, Have the two ditches connect to
each other. {1a} [C23] for two openings to be arranged in a straight
line configuration. Nagláhus ang duha ka pultahan, sayun ra paglahus,
The two doors are right in line with each other. It’s easy to go
through. {2} [B; c1] do s.t. straight without interruption. Naláhus ang
ílang isturya hangtud sa tungang gabíi, Their talk lasted until
midnight. Lahúsun (iláhus) ni nákù ug laba kay gamítun ugmà, I will
have to wash this in one day because I’m going to use it tomorrow. sa —
entirely. Ang ákung kaguul nawálà sa láhus, My sorrows are gone
forever. Malimtan ku nímu láhus, You will forget me entirely.
lahusláhus a {1} for s.t. to have lots of openings so that it is easy
to pass through it. {2} taking things easy without much sense of
responsibility. Mamána ka niánang lahusláhus nga pagkatáwu? What, you
want to wed that irresponsible person? v [A] go s.w. readily without
bother. Mulahusláhus lang mu sa ákung kwartu mu rag ristawran, You keep
coming into my room without any ado as if it were a restaurant.
Malahusláhus na ang Úpun ug mahuman na ang taytáyan, You’ll be able to
get to Opon in no time when the bridge is done. pa-(←) n k.o. tarik
that consists of one long piece of timber going from one outrigger
float to the other, usually put on large-sized boats.

láhus n slaughtered animal and other food given by the bridegroom’s
parents to the bride’s parents on the eve of the wedding. v [A; b6(1)]
give the láhus.

lahútay v [A; c] continue doing s.t. one has started, endure to
continue s.t. Mulahútay kug isturya hangtud sa kaadláwun, I can go on
talking till dawn. Mulahútay ba ang ílang panagdáit hangtud mahuman ang
pruyiktu? Will their good feelings for each other endure to the end of
the project? Dílì makalahútay sa trabáhu ning ákung láwas, My body
cannot endure to keep on with the work. n action of persevering. Bilib
ku sa íyang lahútay nga musimánag bilar nga way pupahúway, I take off
my hat to his ability to continue keeping vigil for a week without
rest.

lahuy v [A] pass or go through with ease, slip in or through without a
hitch. Milahuy man lang wà giyud mangáyug katahúran, He just went
through without greeting anyone. Milahuy ang kawatan sa kasayun kay wà
may táwu, The thief slipped in and out with ease because there was no
one about. Ang ákung mga tambag mulahuy lang sa píkas dunggan, My
advice went in one ear and out the other. lahuyláhuy v {1} [A; b6] pass
back and forth easily, smoothly. Maglahuyláhuy ang hángin niíning
baláya, The breeze blows in and out of this house unobstructed.
Singsing nga naglahuyláhuy sa íyang tudlù, A ring that passes readily
over his fingers. {2} [A; c1] escape from s.t. Ilahuyláhuy man lang gud
nímu ang súgù sa ímung inahan, You try to get out of what your mother
tells you to do. lahuylahuy v [A1; b5c] go from one place to another
with no purpose. Gilahuylahuy (gilahuylahuyan) sa ulitáwung gúlang ang
kalibútan úsà pahikut sa pilitína, The bachelor roamed around the world
first before he let himself get hooked.

láin a {1} different, another. Láin ning klasíha sa panaptun, This is a
different k.o. cloth. {1a} may — pa of course, could it be different?
‘Wà na pud tingáli nay kwarta.’—‘May láin pa?’ ‘He’s probably out of
money again.’—‘Of course, could it be otherwise?’ {1b} — nga kalibútan
afterworld. Adtu ta magkítà sa láing kalibútan, We’ll meet in the
afterworld. {1c} sa — nga báhin on the other hand. Hustu pud ang íyang
sulti, apan sa láing báhin, sayup pud siya, What he said is true, but
on the other hand, he’s also wrong in some ways. {2} bad, sick. Láin
kaáyu ning ákung gibátì, I feel very sick. {3} odd in behavior,
different from what one would expect. Kaláin nímu nga dílì gánì
mupahíyum inighinagbù nátù! How odd of you not even to smile when we
meet! Láin ug báhù ning agwáha, This perfume has a strange smell.
{3a} — ug buut, úlu unpredictable in behavior, somewhat crazy. Ayaw nà
siya kumpiyansáhi kay láin ra ba nag úlu, Don’t trust him, because he’s
somewhat crazy. {3b} — ug sabaw acting strangely, unexpectedly. Láin
siyag sabaw kay manáug manday nanghúkad, He’s a strange fellow. He
leaves just when they are serving dinner. {4} not of a good sort, bad.
Láin ang panahun run, The weather is no good now. Láin kaáyu ug batásan
nang íyang asáwa, That wife of his has very offensive manners. {4a} —
ug buut, úlu short-tempered. Ayaw siya bikla kay láin ra ba nag buut
(úlu), Don’t irritate him because he’s short-tempered. {4b} — ug kamut
tending to steal. Láin ug kamut tung ákung binatunan, Daghan ang nawā́,
Our servant was a thief. So many things disappeared. {4c} — ug sabaw
sensitive, easily taking offense. Láig sabawng bayhána. Wà bayà kuy
gipasabut nga dautan! What a sensitive woman. I didn’t mean anything by
that remark. {5} for a person to be dangerous, capable of supernatural
harm. Láin kaáyu ang mga táwu sa Nága. Daghang mga unglù, The people in
Naga are dangerous. There are lots of vampires. {6} — nga táwu
unrelated person, outsider. Nagbalunbálun pa man ka. Mau ra ka mag
láing táwu, You’re bringing food, as if you weren’t related to us. Way
láing táwung pasudlun dinhi, No outsider is allowed in. {7} — pay ákù,
átù {7a} by the way. Láin pay átù, tagadiin man tu ka? By the way,
where do you say you come from? {7b} = mau pay ákù. v {1} [A3] be,
become different, unusual. Ug muláin ang andar sa makina, pahunúnga, If
the engine develops a strange sound, turn it off. Ayaw laína pagsabut,
Don’t take it the wrong way. {1a} [B126; b4(1)] become mentally
deranged. Nalaínan (naláin) siya tungud sa labihang kaguul, He went off
his rocker because of his extreme grief. {2} [A13] be or feel bad,
sick. Nagláin ákung ginháwa, I feel sick. {3} [B] get bad, worsen.
{3a} [B1256; b6] be disconcerted, feel distaste. Naláin siya pagkabatì
níya sa balità, He reacted with distaste upon hearing the news.
Gilaínan ku sa ákung pagkabutang, I feel uneasy in my situation. dílì
ig- {1} related by blood. Dílì ka nákù igláin, You’re not unrelated to
me. {2} of the same family as. Ang barílis dílì igláin sa tulíngan, The
tuna is not unrelated to the mackerel. Ang arti sa panugilánun dílì
igláin sa arti sa pamintal, The art of story writing is not unrelated
to the art of painting. (→) v {1} [A; a12] separate oneself from the
group, do s.t. s.w. else or at another time. Milain ang dalágag káun sa
laláki, The girls ate apart from the boys. Mulain ta kay lisud ug ípun
ta sa mga bayaw, We will live separately because it is difficult to
live with in-laws. Lainun nákù ni ug anhi kay dì nákù madala run, I
will come back for this some other time because I can not take it now.
{2} [A; ac] separate s.t., set aside. Laina ang hilaw ug ang hinug,
Keep the unripe and the ripe ones separate. Ilain kini pára níya, Set
this aside for him. lainlain a {1} k.o. crazy. {2} thieves. Kaning mga
iskwátir mga lainlain, The squatters around here are a bunch of
thieves. {3} people of supernatural powers. Dílì maáyung paliwatan nang
mga tawhána nga lainlain, We mustn’t marry our children off to those
people because they are thought to be vampires. lainláin a various.
Lainláin ang mga klási sa pagkáun, There are all different kinds of
food. v [A13; a12] {1} be varied. Lainlaínun nákù ang kulur sa
bungbung, I’ll paint the walls all different colors. {2} do s.t.
separately or alone by oneself. Ngánung naglainlàin ka mag káun dihà?
Why are you eating alone by yourself there? kalainláin v [A13] be all
different. ka-an n {1} difference. Wà kay kalaínan sa kawatan, You’re
no different from a thief. {2} change. Dakù ang kalaínan nga mahímù sa
ímung pánit ug mugámit kag Kamay, It will make a great difference for
your skin if you use Camay. -un(→) a — ug buut, úlu, kamut, etc. of the
sort that gets easily angered, tends to be crazy, tends to steal.
pa-(→) v [A; b6] change the subject in a conversation. Wà ku maagpas
kay mipalain siya sa íyang isturya, I did not understand because he
changed the tack of his story. Palainan nátù ang sulti, Let’s change
the tack of our conversation. panag- v [c] = panig-, 1. panig-
v {1} [A23; c2] feel like a stranger, be treated like a stranger. Dílì
siya manigláin nákù kay dúgay na mi nga nagkaíla, He feels at home with
me because we’ve been friends for a long time. Mahiubus ku ug ímu kung
paniglaínan (ipanigláin, ipanagláin), I will be hurt if you treat me
like a stranger. {2} [A23; c3] treat s.o. as if he were not related. Dì
ku manigláin sa paryinti sa ákung asáwa, I will not treat my wife’s
relatives like outsiders.

láis n fibers made from the strippings of the outer part of coconut,
buri palm fronds, or from bamboo. Pagkúhag láis ibugkus sa sugnud, Get
strips of coconut palm fronds to tie the firewood. v [A; a] get fibers
from the outer part of coconut, buri palm fronds, or bamboo.

Laíti = layti.

lák n lock, latch. v [A; b5] lock. Wà ku kasulud kay gilákan (gilák)
man ang gít, I was unable to come in because the gate was locked.

lak-ab_1 = lab-ak.

lak-ab_2 n a stanza in a poem or song.

lákad v {1} [A; a] step over s.t. Dílì ku makalákad sa kanal kay pinsil
ang ákung palda, I cannot step over the ditch because my skirt is too
narrow. Lakárun lang níya nang kurála, He’ll just step over that fence.
{2} [A; b6] go beyond, exceed. Kun mulákad sa trayinta díyas dubli na
ang bayranan, If it exceeds thirty days you will have to pay double.
Kadtung ímung mga sulti nakalákad sa maáyung pamatásan, What you said
went beyond the bounds of proper behavior. {3} [A; b(1)] marry or wed
ahead of big brothers or sisters. Dì sà ta magminyù kay dì ku gustung
lakdan (lakáran) ang ákung magúwang, We won’t get married because I
don’t want to get ahead of my big sister. {4} — sa adlaw v [b4] for
s.o. to be caught by the noon sun still asleep. Gilakdan (hilakdan)
siya sa adlawng natúlug, maung nagluya ang láwas, He slept until
afternoon so his body is weak. a {1} — sa beyond a limit. Lákad sa
baláud ang ímung buhátun, What you are going to do is a transgression
of the law. {2} — ang búlan for the moon to be moving toward the noon
position in the early hours of the evening—i.e., the second quarter.
(→) v [b4] — ug búlan {1} affliction of individual coconuts whereby the
meat of the coconut is hard, grooved, and scanty or there is none at
all, and the juice, if there is any, is sour, unfit to drink. A coconut
with this disease is called búang nga lubi (lit. ‘crazy coconut’) and
is believed to be caused to be so by the moon’s rays. {2} be mentally
deranged. A person is so called because he is compared to the coconut
afflicted by the moon (called búang ‘crazy’). Mu rag gilakaran
(gilakdan) ug búwan ang linihukan ánang tawhána, That man acts as if he
had been exposed to the moon (i.e. crazy). -in-an, linakáran n fine
given to the older siblings by a younger sibling who marries ahead of
them.

lakag v [AC; ac3] chase. Naglákag ang duha ka trák, The two buses are
chasing each other. Lakaga (lakga) ang manuk nga nakabuhì, Chase the
chicken that escaped. -ay v [C; c3] chase each other. Naglakagay ang
mga bátà, The children are chasing one another.

lákang v [A; a] step across. Lakángun ku nang kanal, I’m going to step
across that ditch. Ilákang pag-úna ang walang tiil, Take the first step
with your left foot. n step, stride. Hínay ang íyang lákang padúng sa
simbahan, She walked to church slowly. tag-as ug — arriving at a house
in time for a meal (lit. having long leg strides). Such a person is
considered lucky. Tag-as kag lákang, Dù, kay mu pay pagsúgud námù, You
are lucky you came in time, young man, because we just started to eat.
sayup nga — false move.

lak-ang v {1} [A; b(1)] stand or squat with legs wide apart. Ayaw
lak-ángi ang unidúru kun mugámit mu, Do not squat with your feet on the
toilet bowl when you use it. {2} [A; c] set s.t. on a fire to cook. Ang
kalapíhan ang ilak-ang pag-úna, Set the pot of coffee on the stove
first. {3} [A2; b] miss, skip s.t in a series. Milak-ang ang íyang dugù
ug usa ka búlan, She missed her period for one month. Nalak-angan ang
íyang ngálan pagrulkul, They skipped his name when they called the
roll. {3a} [B] for there to be a gap. Naglak-ang ug dakù ang idad sa
íyang mga bátà, Her children were widely spaced. n {1} s.t. skipped or
missed. {2} distance, gap. Dakug lak-ang ang kinaíya nílang duha, There
is a big difference in their character.

lakat v {1} [A; a] walk. Mulakat na ang bátà, The baby is able to walk
now. Duul ra man nang ámù. Laktun ta lang, My house is near here. Let’s
go on foot. {1a} [A] for s.t. to be going on. Milakat ang daghang
katuígan, Many years went by. Samtang naglakat ang pangadyì, While the
prayers went on. {1b} approaching an age, length of time. Mulakat na ug
usa ka túig sukad sa íyang pag-anhi, It’s been close to a year since he
came here. Naglakat na ku sa kwarinta, I’m approaching forty. {2} [A2;
ab3c] go away, depart. Wà ra ba dinhi. Milakat na, He’s not here. He
went out. Unsa may laktun mu sa lungsud? What are you going to the city
for? Kagamay ra ánang butang nga ímung laktan, My, you are running away
from such an insignificant thing. Ilakat ang bátà sa parki arun
malingaw, Take the child to the park to amuse him. {3} [B46; c] spread.
Milakat ang balità nga bakak, The false news spread. Maáyung puúhun
ning bagúna arun dílì makalakat nganhi, It would be best to kill this
vine off completely so that it can not spread here. {4} [AP; a1] follow
up. Akuy milakat (mipalakat) sa titulu sa ámung yútà, I followed up the
title to our land. Laktun sa supirintindinti ang átung apuwintmint, The
superintendent will follow up our appointments. n {1} trend, course or
direction s.t. is taking. Lakat sa panahun, Trend of the time. Lakat sa
nigusyu, The way business is going. {2} errand, chore s.o. is sent to
do. Wà kuy lakat run, I don’t have anything to do now. {3} trip,
journey. {4} procedure for doing s.t. Ang lakat sa sinadiyap lahì sa
yánung paghablun, The procedure for weaving twill is different from
that of a simple design. (←) n action of going some place on foot.
Lákat na pud ta kay wà nay sakyanan, Here we go, having to walk again
because there is no transportation. v = lakat, 4. pa-, pa-(←) v {1} [A;
c6] make s.t. walk, go away, spread news, follow it up. {1a} move
pieces around the board in a game. Sígi, ipalákat pa ang mga batu kay
dì ra ka mapasu, Go on, keep moving your stones because you haven’t
stopped in an empty hole. {2} [A; a] operate an enterprise; business.
Antígu siya mupalákat ug nigusyu, He knows how to run a business.
{3} [A; b6(1)] continue working on a design that was started. Akuy
mupalákat niíning ginansilyu, I’ll continue working on your crochet
work. n {1} way, means of doing s.t. Ang íyang palákat sa íyang
tindáhan inantigu, She runs her store in a knowledgeable way.
{2} manner or process of doing. -an a prone to roaming about. hiN-(←)
a tending to go out a lot for business or for just plain roaming.
linaktan, nilaktan n way of walking. laktunun n {1} way or distance to
be walked. {2} errand to be run. tali-(←), -um-r-(←) n about to go out,
depart.

lakatan = bángan_2.

lakaw = lakat.

lakayan n container consisting of a bamboo tube about 8″ long with the
node serving as its bottom. It is worn strapped to the side as
container for miscellaneous little things: seeds for farmers, bait for
fishermen, et al. v [A12; a12] make into a lakayan.

lakbang n step, procedure. Ang íyang mga lakbang nagkahinay, Her steps
began to falter. Unsay inyung mga lakbang arun madakpan ang kriminal?
What steps have you taken to catch the criminal? Hukmanan sa únang
lakbang, Court of First Instance. v [A2; a] go s.w. walking. Milakbang
na kug súgud apan íya kung gialíhan, I began to walk away, but he
blocked my path. Kaduul ánà, lakbángun rag katulu, It is very close-by.
You can get there in three steps.

lakbay v [A; b5] travel, take a trip. Pila ka adlaw makalakbay na ang
táwu sa búwan, Soon we’ll be able to take trips to the moon. {2} [A; a]
walk, travel on foot. Mulakbay (maglakbay) siyag paúlì mahápun, He
walks home from work in the afternoon. Lakbáyun lang nátù ang lungsud,
We will just walk to town.

lakbit a {1} brief, short in time. Sa lakbit nga pagkasulti, In short
or briefly. Lakbit nga pagkakítà, A brief meeting. {2} sa — all of a
sudden. Sa lakbit misantup sa íyang panumdúman, Suddenly it occured to
him that ... v {1} [A; a] make s.t. brief. Átù lang ning lakbítug
sulti, We’ll just say this briefly. {2} [b2c] touch on s.t. briefly and
suddenly in the main course of the conversation. Lakhiti ku dihag ampù,
Mention me in your prayers. Gilakbit níya pagtug-an ang tinúud, He
revealed the truth in the course of his conversation. n a brief
portion, part. Usa ka gamayng lakbit sa ákung kagahápun, One small bit
of my past. pa- v [A; c] drop hints. Gipalakbítan (gipalakbitan) ku
níya sa íyang gustung pinaskúhan, She dropped some hints as to what she
wanted for Christmas. pa- n hints.

lakdap v {1} [A3C3; a12b2] for chickens to dash into fight for only a
few clashes. Milakdap ang mungà sa banug, The hen dashed at the hawk.
Naglakdap ang duha ka sunuy, The two roosters clashed for a short time.
{1a} [A3P; c16P] have chickens clash with each other. {2} [A; b] swoop
down over, whizz close by. Milakdap ang ayruplánu sa digíra, The plane
swooped down over the battleship. Lakdapi siya pagpusil, Let a bullet
whizz by him.

lakdup v {1} [A] swoop down. Banug da tung milakdup sa mga pisù, It was
a hawk that swooped down on the chicks. Ilakdup ang ímung tabánug sa
iyáha, Make your kite swoop down on his. {2} [A23; b6] appear in one’s
mind in a flash. Milakdup sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga túgun, His
last words came back in my mind. n swoop.

lakgak v [A; a2] join strands of abaca fiber (lánut) end to end to make
thread. -an(→) n container into which the strands of fiber are laid
after they have been joined.

lakgut v [AC3; a] tie a series of things together by means of a series
of locked knots. Lakgutig maáyu ang mga nípà. Adtu ilakgut sa katsaw,
Tie the palm shingles up firmly. Tie them to the rafters. n tie that
cannot come undone.

laki n {1} male animal or plant. {2} descriptive term given to plants,
where the same name is given to different species or varieties. The
thorny and/or smaller variety or species is called laki, as opposed to
a larger and smoother species or variety called bayi ‘female’.
{3} paramour. v {1} [B1256; b6] have male offspring. {2} = laláki, v.
(←)_1 n = laláki. v [B1256; c1] turn out to be a boy. Maáyu untag
maláki ning ákung gisabak, It would be nice if my baby turned out to be
a boy! laláki n {1} human male. Laláki kaáyu siyang manlihuklihuk, He
acts all man. {2} paramour. Pusilun ku ang laláki sa ákung asáwa, I’ll
kill my wife’s paramour. {3} -ng búhat acting in a way proper to a man.
Mu nay láking búhat nga makig-áwayg babáyi? Is that what a gentleman
does—quarrel with a woman? {4} mau nay — Atta boy, that’s the way you
ought to do it (said only to males). la-(←), panla-, panla-(←) v [A; a]
have a paramour. Nanglaláki (naglalaki) ang íyang asáwa, His wife has a
paramour. Gipanglalaki (gilalaki) níya ang íyang humagbus, She took her
stepson for a lover. -in-(←) a done like a male; man-like. Lináki ang
íyang tupi, She has a man’s haircut. v [A; a] do things like a male.
Mulináki ku ug ímu kung suhúlan, I’ll act like a man if you pay me.
Ilináki (linakíha) ang ímung pagbayhun arun dì ka hiilhan nga báyut,
Carry yourself like a man so people won’t recognize that you’re a
fairy. -in- n {1} man’s bicycle. {2} riding astraddle like a man. v [A;
a2] ride astride an animal or vehicle. Maglinaki ku pagbakráyid sa
mútur, I’m going to ride astride the back of the motorcycle. pakala-(←)
v [A13; a12] act like a man, consider, treat like a man. Kinahanglan
kang magpakalaláki arun dì ka ingnung báyut, You have to act like a man
so they won’t call you scared of women. kalalakin-an n {1} the menfolk
as a group. {2} = tag-(←). lakin-un a a female that acts like a male,
tomboy. tag-(←), taglakin-an, taglalakin-an n the groom’s relatives at
the wedding.

láki_1 see laki.

*láki_2 maáyung — have exceptional ability. Maáyung láki si Maríya sa
ininglis, Maria has exceptional ability in English. ka- n {1} ability,
skill. Pwirtig kaláki níya sa karáti, He is very skilled in karate.
{1a} extraordinary ability of supernatural origin. May kaláki siyang
makatihul samtang mag-inum, He has the ability of whistling while
drinking. {1b} walay — no good. Way kaláki ang pagkáun dinhi, The food
here is no good. {2} course of action, maneuver. Ug dì ta mangampanya,
masíru giyud ta íning kalakíha, If we don’t campaign we will get no
votes in this race. Maprísu ta ánang kalakíha nímu, We might land in
jail with those plans of yours. {3} doings, usually evil. Unsa tung
inyung kaláki sa Manílà? What was going on in Manila? {3a} way one does
things. Kanúnay kang malít ug mau nang kalakíha, You’ll never be on
time if that’s the way you do things. {3b} unsay ka- how are things?
Unsay kaláki run bay? How are things, pal? v {1} [ANP; a1] find ways
and means to remedy a problem. Akuy mukaláki (mupakaláki, mangaláki)
niíni arun dílì magkúlang, I’ll do s.t. so that this will be enough for
all of us. Kalakíha ri ug mahímù pa ba ning pawuntin ping daut, See if
you can do s.t. with this broken fountain pen to make it work.
{2} [A1P] do s.t. one shouldn’t be doing. Nagkaláki (nagpakaláki) ka
dihag languylánguy ug malumus ka, You dare to swim where you shouldn’t
be. You might drown. Kaláki (pakaláki) kag mulumakinilya ug sakpan ka
sa tag-íya, Better stop playing with that typewriter. The owner might
catch you. paka- v [A1] 1, 2 = kaláki, v. {3} do one’s best.
Magpakaláki giyud aku sa pagtuun, I’ll do my best in my studies.
kalakíhan a having an extraordinary ability of supernatural origin.

lakiláki, lakìlákì n splint to brace s.t. broken: broken plants, broken
bones, broken furniture legs, and the like. v [A; a1] make into a
splint, put a splint on. Gilakìlakían sa duktur ang ákung piang, The
doctor put a splint on my broken arm.

lakináyin n a card game in which the winning number of points is 9,
wherein the face cards count zero. v [A] play lucky nine.

lakip including, included. Lakip na niíning báyad ang túbù, This
payment includes also the interest. Nangamátay ang mga manuk sa tukdaw
lakip ang mga pisù, All the chickens died of the pest including the
chicks. v {1} [A; c1] include in a group or activity; be, become
included in a group or activity. Dì ku mulakip ug kasábà sa way lábut,
I won’t scold (lit. include in the scolding) anyone who had no part in
the ruckus. Wà ka malakip sa lista, You were not included in the list.
Ayawg lakipa (ilakip) kining ámung yútà pagsukud, Do not include our
land in your survey. {2} [A; a] enclose s.t. within s.t. Nalakip
tingáli ang risíbu sa sulat pagpadala, I must have accidentally
enclosed the receipt in the letter when I sent it.

lákir_1 n lacquer. v [A; a] apply, put lacquer on s.t.

lákir_2 n locker.

lákit n locket. v [A; c1] have, wear or attach a locket.

laklak v [B; c1] for trousers, pants, underpants to be too loose.
Mulaklak ang karsúnis basta luag ang hawakan, Trousers hang loosely if
the hip part is loose. Naglaklak ang pundíyu, The undershorts are big
around at the seat.

laknit v [A; a] tear or peel s.t. off with a certain amount of force.
Makalaknit ba kahà ning hangína sa atup, I wonder if this wind can rip
the roof off. Gilaknit ang íyang bág sa kawatan, A thief snatched her
bag. Nalaknitan ug gamay ang ákung sinínà sa alambri, The wire ripped a
small piece off my dress.

lakpawlakpaw v [A; c1] walk very lightly, hardly touching the ground.
Naglakpawlakpaw siya sa katunukan, He walked carefully over the thorny
ground.

lakra v [B; b6] {1} make an impression on a surface. Mulakra sa iláwum
nga papil ang ági kun iduut pagsulat, If you write with pressure it
will leave a mark on the paper beneath it. Mga tudlù nga naglakra sa
líug sa gibunù, Finger marks left on the murder victim’s neck. {1a} for
s.t. to show through a transparent or thin surface. Naglakra ang ímung
panti kay hugut ang ímung sinínà, Your panties are showing through
because your dress is too tight. {2} for feelings or emotions to show
in one’s face. Milakra sa íyang nawung ang íyang kaguul, Her sorrow was
apparent on her face. n impression on a surface. Lakra sa banig sa
íyang likud, Impression of the mat on his back. a showing through
clearly. Lakra kaáyu ang ímung tútuy sa ímung blawus, Your breasts show
clearly through your blouse.

laksà n measure of quantity: ten thousand. Usa ka laksang lubi, Ten
thousand coconuts. v [B256] reach ten thousand.

laksanti n a laxative.

laksi = laski.

laksì v [A; a] {1} tear off, detach with a jerk. Mulaksì kug usa ka
pálid sa ímung nutbuk, I’ll tear a sheet out of your notebook. Laksíun
ku nang pahibalu nga gipapilit sa bungbung, I’ll tear off the notice
pasted on the wall. {2} wipe out of one’s mind. Dì na malaksì gíkan sa
ákung panumdúman ang átung kagahápun, Our past can never be obliterated
from my memory.

laksut a bad, ugly, unpleasant to the senses. Laksut ug hitsúra, Ugly
in face. Laksut ug batásan, Having bad manners. Laksut ug lamì, Tasting
bad. v [B; a] be, become ugly. Milaksut (nalaksut) man hinúun ang ákung
nawung nga gimik-ápan, This make-up makes my face uglier instead of
prettier. Ang makalaksut (makapalaksut) sa managhigála ang
panaglinibákay, What is bad among friends is when they backbite each
other.

laktaw v [A; b] miss, skip over. Sukad sa iskína mulaktaw kag tulu ka
balay. Ang ikaupat ámù, From the corner, skip three houses. The fourth
is my place. Ug makalaktawg pila ka púlung, maigsaktu ang ihap sa
tiligráma, If you can skip a few words, the telegram will have exactly
the right number of words. Ayaw laktawi (laktáwi) ang ákung ngálan sa
pagtawag, Don’t miss my name in the roll call. n s.t. skipped over.
laktawlaktaw a not continuous, unevenly spaced. v [B; a] have gaps or
omissions. Ayawg laktawlaktáwa pagpintal, Paint every inch. Don’t keep
skipping spaces. ka- v [A13] have gaps or omissions. Nagkalaktawlaktaw
ang íyang isturya sa íyang kahadluk, His story had several details
missing because he was so frightened.

laktud a {1} direct, not going round about. Laktud ning dalána kay
diritsu, This is the direct route because it is straight. {2} done
directly, straight to the point without spending time on s.t. else. Sa
laktud nga pagkasulti, In short, to say it directly. {3} suddenly,
straight away without warning. Laktud man lang siyang nawálà, way
pupananghid, She just disappeared without saying good-bye. v {1} [A; a]
go or take s.t. right away, directly. Milaktud siyag súd, way
tulutuktuk, He came in directly without bothering to knock. Laktúra
pagsulti ang ímung túyù, Say what you want directly. Ilaktud ni Káti
pagsulat ngadtu sa manidyǐr, Cathy will send the letter direct to the
manager. {2} [AN; b] go, take a shortcut. Nanglaktud ku padúng sa
simbahan, I took a shortcut to church. -anan, lakturánan n shortcut.
-in- a done in the shortest possible time, with unnecessary steps
omitted.

lakun v [A; a] coil s.t. Lakunun (laknun) únà nang písì úsà hipúsa, The
rope should be coiled before you store it. n a coil. Usa ka lakun
alambri, A coil of wire.

lakung v {1} [AB6; c1] loop around, wind into a loop. Dihay hálas nga
naglakung sa sanga, There was a snake curled around the branch. Siyay
naglakung sa pasul, He coiled the fish line up. {2} [B; b5] warp or
curl up at the edges. Nagkalakung ang playwud, The plywood is curling
up at the edges.

lakuy n k.o. wrasse.

lakuy-ung v [B2] fall in a heap when the legs or props give way.
Mulakuy-ung nang silyáhag lingkúran kay balig tiil, That chair will
collapse if you sit on it because it has a broken leg. Nakalakuy-ung
siya sa dihang gipatíran ku ang íyang batíis, I kicked him in the
shins, and he fell in a heap.

lakwatsa v [AC12; ac] go about with no fixed destination and have fun
doing so. Adtu ta sa Talísay maglakwatsa, Let’s go to Talisay to stroll
about. Ayawg ilakwatsa ug uban ang nagtinarung pagtrabáhu, Don’t take
the serious workers along when you go roving about. lakwatsíra =
lakwatsíru. (female). lakwatsíru a one who gallivants about. v [B12]
become a gallivanter.

lakwig a tall and lanky. v [B] be, become tall and lanky. Naglakwig
lang ang bayungbáyung, The adolescent is tall and lanky.

lála_1 v [A; a] weave leaves, straw, plastic. Mulā́ silag mga kálù,
They will weave hats. Lad-i (láhi) akug banig, Weave me a mat.

lála_2 a {1} for bites to be poisonous. Lā́ kaáyu ang tuyum, Black sea
urchins inflict a painful sting. {2} — ug bàbà, dílà one who has the
trait that whatever bad he utters will come true. Such people usually
have a birthmark on the tongue. Dì siya makabuyag, mahitabù dáyun, kay
lā́g dílà, He cannot make comments, because they will come true right
away. He has a poisonous tongue. Simbaku malála kag bàbà, God forbid if
what you said comes true. (Lit. God forbid that you be a person with a
poisonous tongue.) v [b4] {1} be affected by venom. Dì siya lad-an sa
suyud sa buyug, He is not affected by bee stings. {2} be hurt or
embarrassed by a comment regarding s.t. which is secret but true.
Nalad-an siya sa ílang panaghap nga may kurang, She was embarrassed
when they figured that she was having homosexual relations with s.o.
because it was true. {3} [b4] feel the effects of an activity so that
one cannot continue doing it. Gilad-an sa bayli maung dì na gánì
gustung mamínaw ug sunáta, She has danced so much that she doesn’t even
want to hear music. lad-ánun a having strong reactions to venom. †

lálà = balalà.

làlà v [A; a] {1} slurp, lap up s.t. noisily. Gilàlà sa iring ang
gátas, The cat lapped up the milk. {2} drink liquor (slang). Naplastar
kay milàlà man gabíi, He is flat on his back because he tied a good one
on last night. n drinking spree (slang).

lalag {1} = dalag_1. {2} yellow of complexion, having jaundice. v [B1]
get a yellow, sickly complexion. Malalag sab ang mata sa maawásan sa
apdu, Your eyes get a yellow cast if you suffer from jaundice.

lalagan n k.o. scaly, yellowish fish about three fingers wide and 5″
long found in shallow waters.

lalan (not without l) v [A; a12] {1} eat food one usually eats with
staples alone. Ayaw lalana ang sud-an kay wà na unyay isulà sa
paniudtu, Don’t eat the food without rice because we’ll run out.
{2} eat s.t. without the thing it usually accompanies. Ayaw lalana ang
mantikilya, Don’t eat the butter without bread.

lalang (not without l) v [A; a] create. Ang mga táwu gilalang nga dì
managsáma, Men are created different from one another. n {1} creature.
{2} power. Unsa kahay lalang ánang tawhána nga mu ra mag tukúyun ang
mga babáyi, What sort of power does this man possess that women come to
him like chickens coming for their feed. -in- = lalang, n1.

lalau n muddy water. Ayaw pagdúlà sa lalau arun dì ka nukaun, Don’t
play in the muddy water because you’ll get sores. kalalauhan n a swampy
area, portion of a river or bay where the water is muddy.

lalawígan see lawig.

lalha v [A; a] strip leaves or fronds off of a stem by ripping them
with a sudden downward motion or cutting downward with a knife such
that a clean break is made. Lalháun ku ang dáhun sa tubu, I’ll strip
the leaves off the sugar cane.

lálì n k.o. amberjack.

lálik v [A; a] form into a certain shape. Ang iskultur nga naglálik
ánang istatwa, The sculptor who carved that statue. Maáyung pagkalálik
ang íyang batíis, She has well-formed legs. Gilálik ku na sa ákung
hunàhúnà ang ákung buut isulti, I have already formed in my mind the
things I want to say. -in- n s.t. carved, formed. Dílì ka magyukbù sa
linálik, Thou shalt not worship graven images.

lalim a {1} pleasurable. Lalim pamináwun ang Rúsas Pandan, The song
Rosas Pandan is very pleasant to listen to. {2} delicious, delightful
to eat. Lalim kaáyung kan-un ang práyid tsíkin nímu, Your fried chicken
tastes delicious. — mu, ka, ninyu, -y or nga imagine that, can you
believe it! Lalim mu ba nga (y) wà diay kuy ikapilíti, Imagine! It
turned out that I didn’t have money for fare. v {1} [B; b6] be, become
pleasurable. Magkalalim ang tubà imnun ug madúgay nang ininum, Coconut
palm toddy becomes more delicious after a quantity has already been
taken in. {2} [b6] don’t you think that is s.t.? Gilaliman kag bulagan
ug uyab? Don’t you think being jilted is bad enough? Gilaliman ka ba
ánang kantidára? Don’t you think that amount is s.t.?

lálin v {1} [A2; b6] emigrate, transfer one’s residence to a far place.
Ang pamilya ni Mútuk mulálin ngadtu sa Amirika, Mutuc’s family will
immigrate to America. {2} [A; c1] transfer s.t. to a new location.
Lalínun (ilálin) ang ámung upisína diin adúnay kahílum, Our office will
be transferred to a quiet place. (→) n emigrant.

lális v [AC; ac3] argue about the rightness of s.t., dispute. Dì ku
malális nga may rasun ku, You can’t deny that I’m right. Ngánung
lalísun pa man, sumbagayun na lang, Why argue over it? Just fight it
out. Gilalísan níla ang paági sa pagbáhin, They were arguing about how
it was to be divided up. Dì mamínaw ug rasun ang ákung gikalális, The
man I had a debate with won’t listen to reason. n argument, dispute.
-an(→), -un a quarrelsome. ka- n s.o. with whom one has or had an
argument.

lálug v [A; c] {1} feed slop to animals. Ang mga subra iláwug sa bábuy,
Give the leftovers to the pigs. {2} feed a person (deprecatory).
Gilalúgan na ba sad nímu nang ímung way prubitsung bána? Did you feed
your no-good husband again? (→) n {1} slop to feed animals.
{1a} fodder, feed for animals that graze. Tambúgig lalug nga kumpay ang
kábaw, Give the carabao some hay for fodder. {2} food served
(deprecatory). {3a} fine sediment. Ihuwad nang lawug sa tubà ngadtu sa
sukaan, Pour the sediment from the toddy into the vinegar container.
{3b} slime clinging to the bottom of containers. {4} youngest child in
the family (humorous slang).

lalum a {1} deep, extending far down from the surface. Lalum nga
bangag, A deep hole. Ang subà dinhi lawum, The river here is very deep.
{2} late in the night. Lalum nga kagabhíun, Deep in the night.
{3} deep, low in tone. Lalum nga pangaghu, A deep sigh. {4} profound,
hard to understand. Lalum nga tirminu, Difficult terms. Lalum nga
pinsar, Deep thought. {5} — ug bughat for a relapse after childbirth to
be severe. v {1} [AB; ab] deepen, cause to become deep. Ang kaminíru
mauy mulalum sa mga kanal, The street cleaners will deepen the ditches.
Mulalum (malalum) ang samad ug dílì limpiyúhan, A wound will become
deep if it is not cleaned. Laluma pagbúhù ang lubung, Dig the grave
deep enough. Lalumi pag diyútay ang bulsa, Make the pocket a little bit
deeper. {2} [B25] become late at night. {3} [B2] become deep and low,
reaching from the depths. Milalum ang íyang pangaghu nga nagtan-aw sa
masakitun, Her sighs grew deeper as she looked at the sick man.
{4} [B2; b6] get to be profound. Makalalum (makapalalum) diay ug
pinsamintu ning kalisud, I have found out that hardship makes one think
deeply. {5} — ang bughat [A] for a relapse after childbirth to be
severe. Ang kasagunsun sa pagpanganak mauy makalalum (makapalalum) sa
bughat, Having babies one after another makes one get severe relapses.
{6} — ug dulut see dulut. -g- = lalum, a, v (plural). gi-un, giladmun
n depth. Ang giladmun sa íyang pangútuk, The depth of his intelligence.
ha- a deep. Halawum nga ginháwa, A deep breath. ka- n depth, deepness.
Dílì masukud ang kalalum sa íyang gibátì, The depths of her feeling
cannot be fathomed. kahi-an, kahiladman n depths, the innermost
recesses. i-(←) n underneath, under. Ilálum sa káma, Underneath the
mattress. Ilálum sa gahum sa Katsílà, Under the Spanish regime. Iláwum
sa dágat, Under the sea. pai-(←) v {1} [A3; bc] go under, underneath
s.t. Mipailálum ang isdà sa sapyaw, The fish went underneath the fish
net. Pailadmi sa libru ang mga papil, Put the papers under the book.
{2} [A; a12] assume responsibilities or duties. Akuy mupailálum sa
tanang trabáhu dinhi, I’ll do all the chores around here. {3} [A] be
subject, subservient to. Násud nga nagpailálum sa bandílang langyaw, A
nation that allowed themselves to be subject to a foreign power. hai-
v [B1256] get to be underneath s.t. Lisud kuháun ang libru kay
nahailalum sa uban, It’s difficult to get the book because it’s way
underneath the others.

lálung v [A; a] {1} grow seedlings. Maglálung kug talung rung tuíga, I
will grow eggplant seedlings this year. {2} transplant, transfer from
one place to another as a whole. Maglálung ku íning similya, I’m going
to transplant these seedlings. Ang tanang balay sa iskwátirs lalúngun
ngadtu sa Lahug, All the squatters’ houses will be transferred to
Lahug. -un(→) n {1} seeds for seedlings. {2} seedlings to be
transplanted. {3} houses or things of great bulk to be transferred.

lamà n {1} imprint, stain left behind. Lamà sa ngábil, Mark left by the
lips. Lamà sa kuldun sa íyang háwak, The imprint of the cord on his
waist. {2} stain on one’s character. v [AB2; b] {1} leave a mark, have
a mark left on it. Naglamà sa mantil ang kitsap, The catsup left a
stain on the tablecloth. {2} bring a moral stain or blemish upon. Ang
ímung pagkadisgrasyáda mauy naglamà sa átung kadunggánan sa bánay, You
got pregnant, and it has blemished the honor of our family. {3} become
clearly apparent. Ang kaguul mulamà giyud sa hitsúra, Sorrows show
themselves in one’s countenance. (←) v [A; c1] dye thread or cloth. Ang
usa ka putus tinà makalámà ug tulu ka sinínà, A packet of dye can dye
three dresses. -in-(←) n {1} dyed large cotton threads, usually used
for weaving into blankets or towels. {2} red weft thread. lamàlamà
a smeared, uneven in color. Lamàlamà nga pagpintal, Not evenly painted.
v [B6; a] be, become smeared or uneven in color. Maglamàlamà ang kulur
sa sinínà ug iladlad, Your dress will get all uneven in color if you
bleach it.

lamak, lámak n muddy, watery place. v [B; c1] become, make into a
muddy, watery area. Lamákun (ilámak) sa kábaw ang pilápil úsà tanumi,
The carabaos are made to tramp over the paddy to turn it into a mire
before it is planted. -an n = lamak.

laman, láman = lámang.

lámang short form: lang. only, just. {1} merely, [do] nothing more
than. Naglingkud lang siya didtu ug walà magtingug, He just sat there
without saying anything. Mutsátsu lang siya unyà magbuut, He’s just a
houseboy, but he wants to have the say. Walà ku muanhi arun lang
kasab-an, I didn’t come here merely to get a scolding. Ígù lang siya sa
paghílak, All she could do was cry. (Lit. She was merely up to crying.)
Káwang lang ang ákung pag-antus, My sufferings were all in vain
(nothing more than vain). Barátu ni kay písus lang, This is cheap
because it is only a peso. Tú lang ákung gidá, I only brought three.
{1a} with commands or exhortation: just do [so-and-so]—it’s a small
thing to do. Hulata lang ku sa gawas, Just wait for me outside.
Maglakaw lang ta, duul ra man, Let’s just walk. It’s not far. {1b} sígi
— please [do], it’s just a little favor to ask. Sígi lang. Tugti lang
ku, Come on. Please, let me do it. {1c} with negatives: not bother to
do. Dì lang ta mangatúlug rung gabíi, Let’s not bother going to sleep
this evening. {1c1} walà (dílì) — ... kun dílì ... not only ... but
also ... Dì lang ang inahan kun dì hasta anak maapiktahan, Not only the
mother but also the child will be affected. {1d} basta — just so it
happens, though it isn’t desirable. Iwarì lang nà. Basta lang mawálà sa
ákung panan-aw, Get rid of it. Just so it gets out of my sight.
{1e} karun, bag-u, gahápun — just now, just recently, just yesterday.
Karun lang siya miabut, He just arrived now. Bag-u lang silang
namalhin, They just recently moved. Gahápun lang siya maulì, He just
went home yesterday. {1f} [expression of time] — just do at
[such-and-such time] (and no other time). Mahuybis lang sila mamasúra,
They just collect garbage on Thursdays. {1g} balu, ambut — gee, I don’t
know (I’m only up to saying I don’t know). {1h} dipindi, sigun —, sa
[verb] — depending on. Ákung ibaligyà sa makauna lang, I’ll sell it to
whoever is first. Sigun lang sa prisyu, It depends on the price.
{1i} gáni, gáling — the only thing wrong. Maáyu untà, gáling lang
nasayup ang miskla, It should have been good, only the mixture was in
the wrong proportions. {2} just, take [so-and-so] rather than some
other choice. {2a} with nominal predicate and verb subject: let
[so-and-so] do it. Aku lay dá áni bi, There, let me carry this. Ikaw
lay pangutána, You ask. (Lit. let you be the one to ask.)
{2a1} [pronoun, noun] — [so-and-so] will take the consequences. Ug
ímung buhátun, ikaw lang, If you do it, you take the responsibility.
{2b} with quantities: just make it [so-and-so] much. Trayinta lang ni
ha? Can I have it for thirty? {2b1} anhi, dinhi, nganhi — only up to
here. Anhi lang ku dinhi manáug, I’ll just get off here. {2c} with
verb: take the choice of [do]ing. Ang isdang dílì mahálin gamsun lang,
dílì bularun, If they can’t sell the fish, they just salt it. They
don’t dry it. Ayaw lag anhi ugmà, kay mahímu man sa Huybis, Don’t
bother coming tomorrow because you can do it on Thursday. sígi —
{2c1} never mind. {2c2} well, all right, I’ll agree to it. Sígi lang.
Dì lang ku mudayug palit kay mahal, Never mind. I won’t buy it because
it’s expensive. Sígi lang, itúgut ku na lang nig bayinti, Oh, all
right. I’ll let you have it for twenty centavos. ákù (íya, ímu) — just
let me (him) have it rather than s.o. else. Ákù lang ni. Kadtu lay
ihátag ni Pidru, Let me have this one. Just let Pedro have the other
one. {2c3} can’t help [do]ing. Mahadluk lang ta bisan sa pagpanimátì
lang, We can’t help getting cold shivers, even just hearing about it.
{2c4} mau — {2c4a} it cannot be otherwise. ‘Mu ba siya ang
nakaingun?’—‘Mu lang!’ ‘Is he the one that caused it?’—‘Of course! Who
else could it have been.’ {2c4b} yes, most certainly so. ‘Mukáun kag
surbíti?’—‘Káun mu lang,’ ‘Would you like to eat ice cream?’—‘I sure
would.’ {3} na — {3a} now it is only [so-and-so much] where it was more
before. Sukad sila namalhin aku na lang ang nahibilin, After they moved
away I was the only one left. Human na ang tanan, paglimpiyu na lang,
Everything is done. Only the cleaning remains. Duul na lang ang átung
gidulngan, It is just a little way further to where we’re going.
{3b} just take [so-and-so] rather than some other manifestly better
choice. {3b1} with nominal predicate and verb subject: [so-and-so] will
do it, though it should not be so. Aku na lay tiwas áni, kay madúgay ug
láing táwu, Let me just do this myself because it would take forever if
s.o. else were to do it. {3b2} with quantities: just make it [so-and-so
much] (which is less than what one would ordinarily get). Trayinta na
lang ni, ha? Just let me have it for thirty, this time, all right?
{3b2a} anhi — just here (when I really want to do it elsewhere). Kay
lisud man ug musúd, anhi na lang ku sa iskína manáug, Since it’s
difficult to take a vehicle in, I’ll just get off at the corner.
{3b3} [do] as the best choice under the circumstances. Gamsa na lang
nang isdáa kay wà nay mupalit, You might as well just salt that fish
because there isn’t anybody who’ll buy it. Ayaw na lag dad-a ug
bug-atan ka, Don’t bother taking it if you find it too heavy. sígi na —
= sígi lámang. ákù, íya na — let me (him) have it (although you might
have s.t. better to do with it). Ákù na lang ni, ha? Let me have it,
may I? salámat na — I thank you, since I can’t pay you any other way.
Ug dì ka pabáyad, salámat na lang, Since you won’t let me pay you, just
let me thank you. {3c} can’t help [do]ing. Sa tantung kapungut nalímut
na lang siya sa íyang kaugalíngun, He was so angry he just forgot
himself. {3c1} following expressions referring to time: it’s already
[so-and-so] late and s.t. still hasn’t happened or hasn’t stopped
happening. Udtu na lang ug naglúkun lang gihápun sa banig, It’s already
noon, and he’s still curled up asleep. Gabíi na lang wà gihápun siya,
It’s already night and he still has not come home. {3c2} dayag, kláru
na — obviously, can’t help being that way. Kláru na lang nga muhílak ug
ímung kusiun, Obviously he’s going to cry if you pinch him.
{3c3} salámat na — nga the only saving grace was. Malumus untà ku.
Salámat na lang nga dinhay nakakità nákù, I would have drowned, but
thank God, s.o. saw me. {4} pa — {4a} following expression of time:
{4a1} [such-and-such] was the first. Karun pa lang ku makakità sa
ingun, This is the very first time I ever saw anything like that.
{4a2} if it was so at [such-and-such] a time already, it would be even
worse later. Sa súgud pa lang nahanákan na siya, At the very beginning
he was already out of breath. {4a3} [so-and-so] just happened now.
Karun pa lang siya muabut, He just arrived now. Daw kagahápun pa lang,
It seems like only yesterday. {4b} lest [so-and-so] happen. Dì ku
mudúul sa irù kay paákun pa lang ku, I won’t go near the dog, because I
might get bitten. {4c} if [so-and-so] had been the case. Dì pa lang ka
amígu nákù, ikíha ta ka, If you were not my friend, I would have filed
a case against you. Aku pa lay gipabúhat, gwápu tag ági, if they had
told me to do it, it would have come out nice.

lam-ang_1 v [A; b4] {1} overstep, go over s.t. Nalam-angan ku ang lítir
dyi, I skipped letter g. {2} go beyond what is normally expected.
Milam-ang sa maáyung pamatásan ang ímung pag-ukit-ukit, Your
inquisitiveness has gone beyond the limits of good manners. Hilam-angan
ra sad ang ímung pagkaáyu, Your goodness is far beyond what one would
expect. a taken beyond normal bounds. Lam-ang kaáyu ang íyang
pagpangasábà, Her scolding has gone too far.

lam-ang_2 n name of an Ilocano epic.

lamánu v {1} [AC; ab2] shake hands. Naglamánu ang managkuntra apan
dúmut gihápun, The two protagonists shook hands but they still were
full of hatred. Lamanúhun ku ang bag-ung kasal, I’ll shake hands with
the newly-weds. {2} [A; c1] join two edges of metal sheets with one
hooked into the other. Lamanúhun (ilamánu) ta lang pagsumpay, Let’s
join it bending the two edges around so that one fits into the other.
n {1} handshake. {2} joint of two things whereby the two things fit
into each other. Nabungkas ang lamánu sa baldi, The pail came apart
because the joint where the edges of the metal were made to fit into
each other came apart. {3} powdered milk donated by the U.S. government
which bears a picture of a handshake (slang). †

lamas, lámas_1 v {1} [A; b] spice. Las-ay ang útan ug dì lamásan,
Vegetables are tasteless if you don’t spice them. Ang habubuyna
ikalámas, Mint can be used as a spice. {2} [b] spice s.t. not food.
Gilamásan sa kandidátu ang íyang diskursu ug mga kumidiya, The
candidate spiced his speech with jokes. (→) n {1} spice. {2} s.t. that
lends color or richness. Ang kanta lamas sa kinabúhì, Songs add spice
to life.

lámas_2 v [A; c6] rinse off, wash s.t. to eat. Gadanghag ka lang
naglámas sa kamúti, lapúkun gihápun, You were careless in the way you
washed the sweet potatoes. They are still muddy.

lámat v [A; a1] {1} deceive the eyes with an illusion. Gilámat ra
tingáli ku pagkakità adtung gwápang babáyi, Maybe it was only an
illusion when I saw that beautiful woman. {1a} for supernatural beings
that have taken and hidden a person to put a banana trunk in the
person’s place and make it look like the body of the dead person.
{2} enchant, bedazzle. Usa ra ka pahiyum ang milámat kaníya, One smile
was enough to enchant him. Nalámat siya sa katahum sa kagabhíun, He was
enchanted with the beauty of the night. n thing with which s.o. is
bedazzled. Ang lámat sa bahandì, The enchantment of wealth. ma-un
a enchanting, bedazzling. Malamátung húni, Enchanting melody.

lamaw n {1} slop fed to animals. Lúpig pay lamaw ning sud-ána, This
food is worse than pig’s slop. {2} k.o. sweet made of the meat of young
coconut mixed with its water, milk, and sugar. {2a} k.o. sweet made of
a mixture of the meat of papaya or avocado with milk and sugar. v [A1;
a] make, eat lamaw. (←) v [A1; b6] have lots of lamaw. -in- = lamaw,
n2, 2a. -an n {1} pail for collecting slop. {2} feeding trough for
animals.

lámay_1 v [A; b] for a sickness, feeling, vice to become deep-seated
and take root or for medicine or s.t. else taken in to take its full
effect. Mawad-an siya sa hwisiyu ug mulámay na ang ispiritu sa álak, He
loses his good judgment when the alcohol begins to take its effect. Ang
kalúuy milámay sa íyang kahiladman, A feeling of pity took root in his
innermost being. Ug dílì ka magpatambal lamáyan giyud ka sa sakit, If
you don’t submit to treatment, the sickness will get worse and worse.

lámay_2 v [A; b(1)] join a wake for the dead without sleeping. Ang
nakalámay sa Lúnis sa Myirkulis na sad mubálik, Those who kept vigil on
Monday will do so again on Wednesday. n wake for the dead.

lamba v {1} [A; b5c] slam s.t. long and hard against s.t. Kinsang
pliyíra tung milamba sa bátir sa yútà? Who was that player who swung
the bat hard against the ground? Kupti ang hā́s sa íkug unyà ilamba sa
paril, Hold the snake by the tail and swing it hard against the stone
wall. Nalamba ang sakayan ngadtu sa kabatuan, The boat was slammed
against the rocks. {2} [A; b6(1)] pass a basketball from a distance to
one’s teammate. Lambahi (lambáhi) tung kaúban nátung way gwardiya,
Throw the ball to the teammate that no one is covering. lambalamba
v [B5; c1] be repeatedly thrown or struck against s.t. Naglambalamba
ang sira sa bintánà sa kakusug sa hángin, The window shutters swung
back and forth against the sills with the force of the wind. n the
action of throwing or striking repeatedly.

lambang v [AC; ac] {1} join two things, usually live, to each other.
Nagkalambang ang duha ka hiniktang sunuy nga gidúul paghigut, The two
roosters that were tied too closely to each other got entangled with
one another. Lambánga ang duha ka karabaw, Tie the two carabaos
together. {2} for animals to have sexual intercourse, and, by coarse
extension, for people to do so. Duha ka irù nga naglambang, Two dogs
copulating. À, makiglambang lang nà bisag unsung bayhána, He doesn’t
care who he screws.

lambanug, lambánug n alcoholic drink made from the water taken from the
nipa palm bud that has been fermented and distilled.

lambáruk n k.o. mackerel (small adlù).

lambay_1 = langbay.

*lambay_2 -in- n {1} k.o. stage play, usually about heroic deeds of
past ages, with a dialogue delivered in verse. {2} s.t. put on for the
show of it. Kanang paggúkud kunúhay sa mga dagkung ismaglir usa lang ka
linambay, The drive against the smugglers is nothing but a big show.
v {1} [A1; b(1)] present a linambay stage play. {2} [A23] play in a
linambay.

lambáyaw n k.o. hardwood timber.

lambáyung n creeping vine of seashore with purple morning-glory-like
flowers: Ipomoea pes-caprae.

lambì a for one of two things that should fit together to overlap.
Lambì ang ngábil, ilhánang nanaway, The lower lip is sticking out, a
sign that he is criticising you. v [B6; ac] get to be protruding.
Nalambì ang sira sa kaban, The cover of the trunk jutted out over the
edge.

lambid v [A2C3; a] be wound around in an irregular way. Milambid ang
gaway sa kugíta sa íyang páa, The tentacles of the octopus were wound
around his thigh. Ayaw idúul ang mga hiniktan arun dílì maglambid,
Don’t put the cocks close to each other so that their strings don’t get
all tangled up. -in- n k.o. budbud made with white and violet-colored
sticky rice, such that the dark and light colored rice forms
intertwining streaks. linambíran = linambid.

lambígit v [AC; ac] get entwined, latched on to. Magkítà gánì ming
magsúun maglambígit dáyun mig isturya, When we sisters get together we
get engrossed in conversation with each other. Nagkalambígit ang ílang
mga ngálan tungud sa ílang kasuud, Their names became linked with each
other because they are close to each other. Nagkalambígit ang duha ka
pasul, The two fishing lines got entangled. Kanúnay ilambígit niíni ang
hitabù, Always connect the incident with it. hi-/ha- v [c6] be
involved, tied up in. Wà ka ba mahilambigit sa tikas? Are you not
involved in the swindle? Ag ákung kwarta nahilambígit sa tindáhan, My
money is tied up in the store. ka-an n involvement. Maprísu ka ug dúna
kay kalambigítan sa huld-ap, You will go to jail if you have s.t. to do
with the hold-up.

lambing v [AC; c1] join two things together with a length of s.t.
Lambínga ang duha ka baskit, Tie the two baskets together. Gidúul ninyu
paghigut ang kanding. Dì nagkalambing hinúun, You tied the goats too
close together so they got entangled. n fishing line with two hooks
attached to the main line.

lambiyaw n the fry of a k.o. crevally, silver in color and glossy green
on the back with smooth skin: Selaroides leptolepis (so called from the
color resemblance to the bíyaw beetle).

lambiyug, lambíyug = lambuyug.

lambíyung v [A3P; c1] whirl around, go around in circles. Naglambiyung
ang bintiladur, The electric fan is revolving. Lambiyunga (ilambíyung)
ang ímung buktun, Whirl your arm around. Ang tugpahánan gilambiyungan
sa ayruplánu únà kini mutugpa, The airplane circled the airport before
it landed.

lambu n {1} cord made of cotton strings twisted together. Lambu ang
ibáat sa putus kay lig-un, Use cord for tying the bundle because it’s
strong. {2} fishing line made from such cord. paN- v [A2; b6] catch
fish with a hook and line made of lambu dragged behind the boat.

lambù a growing lush and tall, prospering. v [B3] {1} for plants to
grow lush and tall. Milambù ang tanum nga giabunúhan, The fertilized
plants grew lush. {2} prosper, flourish. Milambù sa ngadtungadtu ang
íyang nigusyu, His business flourished with time. {3} for good feelings
to grow in time. Sa kadugáyan nilambù ang ákung pagbátì níya, With
time, my feelings for her grew intense. -anan n a place where s.t.
flourishes. Lambuánan sa mga yawan-ung hunàhúnà, Place where evil
thoughts flourish. ka-an n prosperity. Álang sa kalambúan sa násud, For
our nation’s progress. ka-an(→) n advancement, growth. Way kalambuan
ang ímung paningúhà kaníya, Your romantic efforts have made no progress
whatsoever. ma-un a growing luxuriantly and tall.

lambud v [AC; c] wind around, get wound around. Milambud ang gaway sa
kugíta sa íyang páa, The tentacles of the octopus wound around his
thigh. Ipalayù ug hikut ang kábaw ug kanding arun dílì magkalambud, Tie
the carabao and the goat far from each other so that their ropes will
not get entwined with each other. Ilambud ang hílu sa karitisan, Wind
the thread around the spool. lamburan, lamburánan n reel or anything on
which s.t. is wound. budbud linambúran n k.o. budbud made of white and
violet colored rice or millet, rolled and wound together.

lambun v [A; c1] broil s.t. in between embers. Pagkúhà ug dáhun kay
maglambun tag kamúti, Get some banana leaves. We’re going to broil some
yams. -in-an a cooked by having been broiled in live coals.

lambúnaw n medium-sized tree of the forest producing bunches of oval,
red fruit, 5 cm. or longer, with an edible pulp and a single pit:
Aglaia everettii.

lambung v [A; b(1)] grow long and thick, clinging or hanging over s.t.
Naglambung na sa tingkuy ang íyang buhuk, His hair is already hanging
thick over his nape. Gilambúngan sa balantiyung ang ílang atup, The
squash grew over their roof, covering it entirely. a hanging long and
thick covering s.t. -ay n mane. paN-ay v [A2] grow profusely in strands
or bunches as if a mane. Maáyung alutan ang ímung buhuk kay
nanglambúngay na, It’s about time to cut your hair because it is like a
mane. -ayun a thick and long like a mane.

lambúnit v [C] fight with one another to get s.t. Naglambúnit ang
babáyi ug ang mangangagaw sa bág, The woman struggled with the
purse-snatcher.

lambus v [A; c1] strike with s.t. heavy, usually in a downward motion.
Mga balud nga milambus sa gamayng sakayan, Waves that lashed at the
small boat. Makalambus ka kahà ánang kaban níya? Do you think you can
slam that trunk on him? Gilambúsan ang kawatan sa alhu, We struck the
burglar with a pestle. Alsáhun tikaw run ug ilambus sa yútà, I’ll lift
you and throw you hard against the ground. n {1} blow with s.t. heavy.
Kusug nga lambus sa íkug sa buáya, Heavy lash inflicted by the
crocodile with its tail. {2} stick used to strike s.o.

lambut v {1} [A2; a2b2] reach a certain amount, length, or distance.
Milambut ug usa ka líbu ang ílang halin, Their sales amounted to one
thousand pesos. Nakalambut ug usa ka gatus ang mga bisíta, The visitors
reached one hundred persons. Lambuta ang syudad sa duha ka úras, Get to
within reach of the city in two hours. {2} [A2; b6] catch up or
overtake. Mulambut pa ta sa únang byáhi, We can still make the first
trip. Gilambutan námù sila sa Karkar, We caught up with them in Carcar.

lambuyud a feeling dizzy. v [B6; b6] feel dizzy. Mulambuyud
(maglambuyud) ang ákung panan-aw ug magsígig libutlíbut sa halígi, I
get dizzy if I keep running around the post. {2} = lambuyug.

lambuyug, lambúyug v {1} [A; ac] whirl s.t. around on a string and
throw it off in a distance. Lambuyugun ku nang langgam nga nagbatug sa
sanga, I’ll sling a rock at that bird perching on the branch.
Gilambuyug níya ang láang úsà pasaplúti ang báka, He whirled the rope
before he lassoed the cow. {2} [B26] for attention, thought to veer off
on a target. Nalambuyug ang íyang mga mata sa nagkiaykíay nga babáyi,
His gaze was diverted to the girl with the swaying hips. n sling for
hurling stones made of a piece of cloth, leather, or palm leaf which
holds the stone and a pair of strings which are whirled around. When
one of the strings is released, the missile flies off.

lamdag a bright. Lamdag kaáyu ang síga sa plurisin, The fluorescent
lamp gives a bright light. Ayaw pagsugà kay lamdag man, Don’t turn on
the light because there’s enough light. Lamdag ug kaugmáun ang táwung
kugihan, An industrious person has a bright future. n {1} illumination.
Ang lamdag sa sugà, The lamp’s illumination. {2} enlightenment. Lamdag
sa Ispiritu Santu, The enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. v {1} [AB; ab]
give light or brightness; be, get bright or well-lighted. Adlaw nga
naglamdag sa kalibútan, The sun that gives light to the world. Dúnay
táwu kay naglamdag mag ílang báy, There must be s.o. home because the
house is lighted. {2} [A; b(1)] enlighten. Pagtulun-an nga milamdag sa
ákung hunàhúná, A lesson that enlightened my mind. {3} [B1; b6] for a
place to be stripped of plants or parts of plants. Ang pagpahit sa
kamaisan sa mga bábuy mauy nakalamdag (nakapalamdag) niíni, The pigs
ate the corn plants and made the area bare. Gilamdágan ku sa mga káhuy
sa lagwirta nga gipamutlan sa mga sanga, The trees in the yard looked
bare to me after some of the branches were pruned. pa- v [A; b] go, put
to a lighted or illuminated area. Ayawg palamdag kay hiilhan ka, Don’t
go under the light because you might be recognized. Palamdági ku ngari
arun makítà ring ákung trabáhu, Give me some light here so I can see my
work. ka-un n clarification. ma-un a enlightening.

lamdaman (coined from lamdag ‘light’ and panumdúman ‘thoughts’—root
dumdum) n inspiration. Ang dalága mauy lamdaman ni Rinaldu sa íyang
pagpanulat, Reynaldo took his inspiration for his writings from the
girl.

lamhun v [B3] for a wound or bruise to get infected and swollen, but
not severely so. Tambáli nang núka sa dì pa makalamhun, Put medicine on
your sore before it gets infected.

lamhung a {1} growing thickly and profusely, esp. such that other
plants are crowded out. {2} choking off or overshadowing, keeping
plants from growing well. {3} swollen and inflamed. v [B3; b6] {1} grow
thick and/or tall such that other growths get stunted. Ang kamukámu
milamhung sa lagwirta, The morning glories spread all over the garden
(and choked other plants). {1a} stunt other plants by choking them off
or overshadowing them. Makalamhang ang dáhun sa kaymítu sa mga tanum,
Star apple leaves are used as a cover to kill off other plants.
Nalamhungan ang mga munggus sa balíli, The grass stunted the bean
plants. {2} [B2346] get inflamed. Milamhung ang pinaakan sa lamuk, The
mosquito bite became inflamed.

lamhuy v [B1236] for bruise to swell and get soft. Nalamhuy ang ákung
tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu, I struck my finger with a hammer and
it became soft. Wà makalamhuy ang buktun nga giiniksiyunan, The arm
that was injected didn’t swell.

lamì a {1} tasty, giving a delicious feeling or taste. Lamì nga
pagkáun, Delicious food. Lamì nga isturya, A pleasurable talk. {1a} —
nga i-[verb] it would be lovely to . . . Lamì rung ikalígù sa dágat,
How nice it would be to go swimming now. {2} beautiful to look at. Lamì
kaáyu siyag kurtína, She has beautiful curtains. n {1} taste, flavor.
Way lamì, Tasteless. Kining isdáa lamig lápuk, This fish tastes like
mud. {2} orgasm. Dúgay siyang abtan sa lamì, It takes her a long time
to come to her orgasm. v [B; a] {1} be, become pleasant to the senses.
Mulamì (malamì) ang sud-an ug bitsinan, The food becomes tasty if
monosodium glutamate is added to it. Ang pagsinabtanay mauy makalamì
(makapalamì) sa panagtiáyun, Understanding is the thing that makes a
marriage pleasant. Lamian kung mubunal ug bátang pilyu, I love to whip
naughty boys. {2} [b4] reach orgasm. — ug kalit v [A23] take a sudden
unexpected turn. Maáyu pa tung ámung isturya unyà milamì lang siyag
kalit, nasukù man lang nákù, We were having a nice talk. Suddenly s.t.
got into her, and she got mad at me. Lúya na ang buksidur, unyà sa
katapúsang ráwun milamì lag kalit, gidabudabuhan ang kuntra, The boxer
had gotten weak. Then suddenly at the last round he seemed to have
gotten his second wind and rained heavy blows on his opponent. v [A13]
become more interesting. Naglámì (nagkalámì) ang ílang isturya human
makainum, Their talk got more interesting after they had had some
drinks. pa-(←) v {1} [A; ac1] do s.t. to add to the taste,
pleasurableness of s.t. {2} [A13] indulge oneself in s.t. nice.
Nagpalámì siya ug katúlug ug wà gánì maghunàhúnàg digámu, She’s
sleeping blissfully without even thinking about cooking breakfast.
n seasoning. palamìlámì v [A] indulge in sexual pleasures of any sort.
n sexual indulgence. -an a delicious. v [B126] get to be delicious.

lamígas = hulmígas.

lamigmig v {1} [A; a] pat successively and shake or massage lightly,
usually on a full and fleshy part of body. Gustu siyang mulamigmig sa
ákung páa, She likes to play with my thigh by patting it, shaking the
hand while pressing down. Lamigmígi ug asin ang hinimulbúlan nga manuk,
Pat some salt into the flesh of the dressed chicken. {2} [a2b2] be
repeatedly hit with s.t., usually not fatal. Hinglamigmigan ka lagi kay
nakigsumbagay kag buksidur, If you pick a fight with a boxer you’ll get
yourself soundly pummelled.

lamili = damili.

lamina n framed picture, esp. of a saint. v [A; a12] make framed
pictures, esp. of saints.

laminasiyun = laminisyun.

láming v [A; c1] {1} confine an animal for the purpose of controlling
its food prior to slaughtering. Lamíngun ang alimángug mga simána únà
lutúa, They keep mud crabs and feed them a special food about a week
before they cook them. {1a} do a similar thing to people. Iláming sa
duktur ang pasiyinti sa dì pa upirahan, The doctor will confine the
patient and put him on a special diet before he operates. {2} keep s.t.
in confinement. Kadtung íyang pagsiyágit didtu ra maláming sa íyang
kinahiladman, He kept his shouts stifled in his innermost being.
Naláming silang tanan sulud sa balay, They were all kept imprisoned in
the house. {2a} in the game of tubigtúbig, imprison players in one of
the squares. n animal that had been kept confined prior to slaughter.
(→) = láming, n. -an(→) n {1} the first two squares the players at play
enter in the game of tubigtúbig. {2} the player guarding these squares.

laminisyun n lamination of plastic over s.t.

laminit v [A; a] laminate with plastic.

lamísa n {1} table, desk. {2} food set out. Náa na bay lamísa dihà kay
musaka mi, Do you have a table set? If you do, we’ll come in.
v {1} [a12] make into a table. {2} [A; c] set the table, put food on
the table. Lamisáhi ang bag-ung abut, Put dishes on the table for the
visitor that just came in. {2a} have a lot of food on the table (usage
taken from the custom among poor people that a table is set only when
there is a decent meal—otherwise people just take what there is and
gobble it down). Basta bag-ung swildu maglamísa giyud mi sa Dinghaw, As
soon as we get paid we’ll have a banquet (lit. table set) at the Ding
Hao restaurant.

lamisíta n small table or desk.

lamiti a smeared with s.t. sticky. v [B1; aP] be, become smeared with
s.t. sticky. Naglamiti ang nawung sa bátà sa tsukulit, The child’s face
is besmeared with chocolate.

lamlam_1 n a k.o. itch affecting the parts between the toes, usually
caused by walking barefoot on ground soaked with horse urine. Katul
kaáyu ang lamlam sa ákung tiil, The itch in my toes is so bad.
v [A123P; b4] get lamlam.

lamlam_2 v [A; c] talk too much, nonsensically or boastfully. Lamlámi
lang si Tátay mu kay aku dì na mutúu, Just hand that line to your
father. As far as I’m concerned, I don’t believe you. Unsa na man say
gilamlam mu didtu sa imnanan? What sort of foolishness did you tell the
boys in the toddy stand this time? n talk, words. Pulus lang lamlam
nang tawhána way nabúhat, That fellow is all talk, no action.

lampaag, lampáag a {1} stout, fat. Kalampáag sa náwung ánang bayhána!
Ikatalakpun, What a broad face that woman has! You could use it as a
shutter for a window. {2} spreading lushly. Lampaag kaáyu ang lambáyung
dapit sa hunásan, The vines are spreading out lushly near the edge of
the tidal flat. {3} for the hair to look bushy. v [B; b6] {1} be,
become broad, flat. {2} get to grow lushly. Mulampáag ang mga balíli ug
muuwan na, The grass will grow lush when the rains come. {3} for hair
to get bushy. Naunsa man ang ímung hirdu nga naglampaag man. Gitís
tingáli, What happened to your hair that it’s so bushy? You must have
teased it.

lampágà = lampaag.

lampakanay nga kúgun n k.o. reed found in marshland.

lampánug v [A2; b3] go out without saying goodbye to escape, get out of
work, in anger. Túa, milampánug kay gikasab-an, There, he ran out of
the house because I scolded him. Ang pagpanglimpiyu sa sílung muy íyang
gilampanúgan, He left the house to get out of helping clean out the
cellar.

lampara n {1} oil or kerosene lamp without a chimney. {2} pressurized
kerosene lantern where the light shines downward, used mainly for
fishing. v [A13; a1] make, use a lamp of this sort. paN- n type of
fishing using a pressurized lantern to attract the fish, used esp. in
shallow waters for catching schools of small fish. v [A2; c] catch fish
by this manner. lamparahan = lampara, 1. lamparista n one who fishes
using the panglampara method. lamparahánan n boat used in panglampara
fishing. lamparilya n a small kerosene or alcohol lamp without a
chimney. v [A13; b6] make, use as a small kerosene lamp.

lampáru v [A; a1b2] slap with the hand, usually at the head. Dílì ku
mulamparu kay piligru kunu sa útuk, I would not slap anyone on the head
because it might hurt the brain. Gilampáru ku sa kusug nga hángin, I
was struck by a strong wind. n slap.

lamparúnis n k.o. pussy, slow-healing abscesses around the neck that
leave large scars. v [B124; a4b4] be afflicted with lamparúnis.

lampas_1 v [AN2; b] cut down, sickle grass and undergrowth with a
swinging motion. Pagsúhul ug mulampas (manglampas) sa kalubihan, Hire
s.o. to cut down the grasses in the coconut grove. n the cutting down
of grass or undergrowth from an area. — tánum v [A; b5] cut down the
plant growths and plant rice or corn at the same time. This is done in
paddies under deep water which cannot be plowed or in second-growth
forests between the trees. Gilampas tánum (gilampas tanúman) ang anut,
The plants were cut down, and at the same time corn was planted in the
second-growth forest. n the process of cutting plant growths, plant
rice or corn at the same time.

lampas_2 = lápas.

lampásu v [A; b] polish a floor by rubbing a half a coconut husk or
s.t. similar over it. Lampasúhi ang sála, Polish the floor in the
living room with a coconut husk. {2} [A; b2c] pummel, shake and throw
to the ground. Ilampásu ku kinsa ninyu magbinúang, If anybody cuts up
I’ll scrub the floor with him. Ilampásu námù ang inyung tím, We’ll give
your team a thorough trouncing. {2a} have s.t. done thoroughly to it.
Hilampasuhan unyà mug kasábà, You’ll get a thorough tongue-lashing.
n s.t. to polish the floor with, esp. a half a coconut husk.

lampay n k.o. small shallow porcelain bowl to eat out of.

lampin n diaper. v [A; c1] put on, make into a diaper. Lampínun
(ilampin) lang ning dáang palda, Just use this old skirt for a diaper.
Lampíni ang bátà, Diaper the baby.

lampíngas n indifference to how s.o. is affected. Ang lampíngas sa
kapalaran, The arbitrariness of fate. -an a indifferent and oblivious
to how other persons are affected. Lampingásan nga táwu nga walà
mabalísa sa íyang gipamabdúsan, A brute, completely indifferent to the
fate of the woman who bore his child. v [B12] be, become indifferent,
oblivious to others.

lampínig n yellow jacket. Ang lampínig sa panúlat nakaúkub sa íyang
tingkuy, He was bitten by the writer’s bug. (Lit. The yellow jacket of
writing bit into the nape of his neck.)

lampírung n {1} white, translucent material taken from the inside of
the shells of certain oysters, used for windows, lampshades and other
ornaments. {2} name of the oyster from which this material is taken.
v [a12] use lampírung shells for windowpanes.

lampis n k.o. small edible crab of streams.

lampuay, lampúay v [B6; b6] flow or spread beyond the limits. Milampuay
ang íyang tiyan sa katambuk, His stomach bulged from excess fat.
Naglampuay ang sabaw sa panaksan (ang panaksan sa sabaw), The soup
spilled over the edge of the bowl.

lampurnas v [A; b6(1)] {1} scrub, wipe with force to clean s.t.
Nalimpiyu ang pansayan human siya makalampurnas niíni, The comfort room
looked spotless after she scrubbed it. {1a} clean s.t. by splashing
water over it. Nakalampurnas na ku sa banyu, I have already splashed
water to clean the bathroom. {2} destroy. {2a} [A13; a12] beat heavily.
Ang way kalúuyng igsúun naglampurnas níya sa gamay lang sayup, His
heartless brother beat him mercilessly for the slightest mistake.
{2b} [c6] badly beaten in games. Ilampurnas lang nang inyung tím nga
bayat sa iláha, Their team will just trounce your inept team. {2c} be
struck by a severe storm. Nangalúad ang káhuy nga gilampurnas sa bagyu,
The trees that were battered by the storm were uprooted. {2d} [a12]
wipe off or out swiftly. Gilampurnas lang ang mga pagkáun nga gidū́t sa
pista, The food that was served at the fiesta was rapidly wiped out.
{2e} [A; c] throw s.t. to the ground with force. Íyang ilampurnas ang
mga kaldírug way sud-an, He’ll smash the pots on the floor if there’s
no food. {2f} [A; a1] pet torridly with a girl (slang). Gilampurnas
níya ang íyang trátu sa sinihan, He petted frantically with his girl
friend in the movie house. n scrubbing. Way lampurnas ang ílang salug,
Their floor has not been scrubbed.

*lampus v [A24] be successful. Milampus ang íyang plánu, His plans
succeeded. ka-an n success. ma-un a successful. Malampúsun nga míting,
A successful meeting. v [A13] be, become successful. Hináut untang
magmalampúsun ka sa ímung tingúhà, I hope you will be successful in
your undertaking.

lampuug, lampúug = dampuug.

lampuyang = luy-aluy-a. see luy-a.

lampuyut, lampúyut a for flesh to be flabby and loose. v [B; c1] be
loose and flabby. Mulampúyut ang átung pus-un ug wà tay iksirsayis, The
lower part of your abdomen becomes loose and flabby if you do not
exercise.

lamù v [A; a] temporarily preserve tiny fish by salting lightly. Lamua
ang subrang tugnus, Preserve the leftover fry by salting them lightly.
-in- n small fish, temporarily preserved with light salt. lamùlamù,
lamùlámù v [A; b5] {1} do s.t. fast in a slipshod and careless way.
Gilamùlamuan (gilamùlamù) lang nímug laba ang mga bisti u, daghan pang
buling, You washed these clothes so fast and carelessly. See, they are
still all dirty. Ayaw lamùlamúag bungat arun makasabut ku, Don’t speak
so hurriedly and indistinctly, so I can understand. {2} done rapidly
and without reserve. Gilamùlamù lang níya ang usa ka panaksang pansit,
He just gobbled down a whole bowlful of noodles. Gilamùlámù níya ang
íyang uyab sa súd sa sinihan, He engaged in a heavy petting session
with his girl friend in the movie house.

lamudlaw n k.o. vine of waste spaces bearing edible fruits, the size
and shape of a hen’s egg with stripes, acrid and pulpy, but with little
juice and lots of tiny seeds.

lamugdung a overcast, gloomy. Lamugdung ang lángit, muuwan tingáli, The
sky is overcast. It will probably rain. Lamugdung siyag nawung mu rag
kahilakun, She has a gloomy expression as if she were about to burst
into tears. v [B; b3c1] become overcast, gloomy.

lamúgay v {1} [A; c1] mix, jumble thoroughly. Kamiy milamúgay
(naglamúgay) sa balas ug simintu, We mixed the sand and cement
thoroughly. {2} [B26C3; c1] for a crowd to mill about in confusion.
Milamúgay ang mga táwu pagkakità sa kaláyu, The people ran about in
confused panic when they saw the fire. a topsy-turvy, in disorder.
Lamúgay ang sála, The living room was topsy-turvy.

lamuglamug n slimy substance. {1} slime which forms where water has
been allowed to stand. {2} slime exuded by certain animals, such as
snails. {3} thin film that forms on the eyeballs of seriously ill
persons. {4} thin, filmy membranes adhering to meat or tendons.
{5} gelatinous substance found under the bark of young trees. {6} oily
substance found on the surface of coconut meat ripened beyond maturity
( = dalínug). — sa tubà sediment in the coconut palm toddy. v [B1246;
a4b4] form slimy substances of these various kinds.

lamugmugan = limugmugan. see limugmug.

lamuk n mosquito. v [a4] {1} be infested with mosquitoes. Ang lugar nga
may lámak lamukun, A place where there is standing water gets infested
with mosquitoes. {2} wait s.w. too long. Gilamuk na lang kug hinuwat,
wà giyud mupatim-aw, I waited for a long time, but he did not show up.
(←) v {1} [A; b6] be present in large numbers with confusion and
bustle. Naglámuk ang mga táwu sa baratilyu, People crowded the bargain
sale. Míting man untà ni, nalámuk na man hinúun, This is supposed to be
a meeting, but it has become a melee instead. {2} [BC3] be, become a
free-for-all, melee. Nagkalámuk ang mga istudiyanti ug mga pulis, There
was a free-for-all between the students and the police. a busy and
chaotic with large numbers of people. n a free-for-all, melee.
lamuklámuk = lámuk, n, v2. -ay(←) see lamúkay.

lamúkat v [B16; a] be, become disorderly, messed up. Naglamúkat ang
íyang nawung sa mik-ap, Her make-up was in chaotic disarray. Nalamúkat
ang mga dáhun sa sular, The leaves were strewn all over the yard. Ayawg
lamukáta nang ímung ásuy arun hisabtan ka, Do not tell your story
incoherently so that you’ll be understood. a all in disorder. Lamúkat
nga administrasiyun, A chaotic administration. ka- (not without l)
v [A; a2] be in chaotic disorder. Nagkalamúkat ang labábu sa mga plátu
ug kaldíru, The sink is a mess with all the kettles and plates piled up
in it. Magkalamúkat ang panimalay kun way pagsinabtanay, Home life is
chaotic when there is no understanding.

lamúkay (from lamuk) a in chaotic disorder, topsy-turvy. Lamúkay ang
kwartu, The room is in chaos. v {1} [A; a] mix, stir things up
thoroughly. Naglamúkay si Ipì sa simintu, Ipe was mixing the cement.
{2} [B] for there to be chaos, things in great numbers in disorder.
Naglamúkay (nagkalamúkay) ang mga táwu sa tyanggihan pagsúnug, The
people in the market were rushing about in all directions when the fire
broke out. ka- = lamúkay, v2.

lamun n {1} k.o. badly infected boil which goes deep and fails to
develop a head. It often leads to blood poisoning. {2} word used in a
curse hoping the one cursed gets a lamun. Wà ka dad-a sa lamun! Damn
you! (Lit. Haven’t you been killed by blood poisoning?) v [b4] be
infected with lamun. Ang bátang gilamunan namatay, The child who was
infected with a lamun died.

lámun v [A; c1] put large chunks of food in the mouth whole. Makalámun
kug usa ka parak bingka, I can put a whole piece of rice cake in my
mouth. Kúlang ka rang lamúnun (ilámun) sa higanti, You’re not even
enough to stuff in the giant’s mouth.

lamuruk a plump in the cheeks. v [B] for the cheeks to become full and
rounded. Nagkalamuruk ang íyang áping sukad maáyu, Her cheeks are
beginning to get rounded now that she has recovered. -un a of a plump
sort.

lamuy v {1} [A; a] take in s.t. by swallowing. Maglamuy kug tablítas
pára katúlug, I’ll take some sleeping pills. Gilamuy si Hunas sa
balyína, Jonah was swallowed by a whale. {1a} eat greedily or
gluttonously (coarse). À, milakaw man lang dáyun human makalamuy, After
he gorged himself, he immediately left the party. {1b} — sa bakunáwa
ang búwan [a12] for there to be a lunar eclipse (for the moon to have
been swallowed by the bakunáwa). {2} [A; a2] swallow words or feelings.
Milamuy ka lang dáyun sa íyang gisulti, You swallowed his story, hook,
line, and sinker. Gilamuy ku ang ákung kasukù arun way masilù, I just
swallowed my anger so that nobody would have hard feelings.
{3} swallowed up in a figurative sense. Galastúhan nga milamuy sa ílang
tinipígan, The expenses which swallowed up their savings. Gilamuy siya
sa kangitngit, He was swallowed by the darkness. n food consumption.
Ang ámung mutsatsu dakug lamuy, Our servant eats too much. walay — poor
as a church mouse (deprecatory). -in-an n manner of eating.

lamúyà v [B] get excessively fat. Naglamúyà siya sa katambuk, He is
bulging with excessive fat. Nagkalamuyà ang tiyan sa palaínum, The
drunkard is getting a beer belly.

lamwas v {1} [A; b6] for water to come in or spread over s.t. Hápit
malúnud ang sakayan nga nalamwásan sa túbig, The boat nearly sank
because water came in it. Gilamwásan ang tugkaran sa túbig gíkan sa
kanal, The water from the drainage ditch flooded our yard. {1a} for
water to run out over a container. Milamwas ang túbig sa planggána,
Water ran out over the basin. {2} [A; c1] extend beyond a certain
limit. Mulamwas ang ákung tiil sa katri kay mubù ra, My feet spill over
the end of the bed because it is too short. Lamwása (ilamwas) sa túhud
ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà, Extend the hem line of my dress beyond the
knees.

lamyat a sluggish, doing things slowly and lazily. v [B; b6] be
sluggish in doing things. Nagkalamyat ang mid nga nagkadugay sa báy,
The longer the maid stays in the house the slower she works.

-l-an alternant for -anan, added to some, but not all, bases which
occur with -anan and usually with the same meaning. Palalítan, Place
one buys things. Halatagan sa limus, Person to whom alms are given.

lána_1 n {1} oil obtained from plants. {2} a concoction of oil and
herbs having special curative properties or power to ward off evil of
supernatural origin. — nga pangulang oil to counteract supernaturally
caused skin ailments. {3} may, walay — have (not have) sexual potency
in old age. Mamána ka ánang tigúlang bálu? Wà na nay lána, Are you
going to marry that old widower? I doubt if he can do it any more.
v {1} [A; a] make oil. Dílì ku mulána ánang lubi kay kápuy ug kagud, I
will not make oil because it is tiresome grating those coconuts.
{2} [b6] put oil in a lamp. {3} — ug pútut v [A13; a12] do the
impossible (lit. extract oil from a very young coconut). Maáyu pay
maglána ug pútut kay sa mulansar nga way kwarta, It would be easier to
squeeze oil out of a young coconut than to win an election without
money. (→) v {1} [A; b] apply oil on. Lanahi ang halígi arun dílì
anáyun, Put oil on the post so the termites can’t get at it.
{2} [B3(1)46] be, become oily, exude oily secretion. Naglana ang íyang
pánit, Her skin is exuding oil. {3} [A; b6] coax s.o. by flattery.
Lanahi siya dì ba húmuk musugut sa ímung hangyù, Give her some sweet
talk. See if she doesn’t give you what you ask for. lanáhan, lanhan
n folk doctor who practices healing with the use of special oils.
lanahan n container for oil. lanahun, lanáhun a full of oil. †

lána_2 = dilána.

lánag n mild, not fatal poisoning. Ang lánag ságad dílì makamatay,
makapabúyud lang, Mild poisoning usually doesn’t kill. It just makes
one dizzy. v {1} [B126; b4(1)] have, be affected by poisoning. Nalánag
ku sa amúting káhuy nga wà maáyung pagkalung-ag, I got food poisoning
from the cassava that wasn’t prepared properly. {2} [B126] be sickened,
nauseated. Nalánag ku sa báhù sa karni didtus ihawan, I was sickened by
the smell of meat at the abattoir. {3} be bored to tears. Nalánag ku
ánang ímung isturya nga gibalikbálik, I am bored to tears by your story
that you keep telling again and again. (→) n s.t. to smoke
(derogatory). v [A; c1] smoke. Naglanag ka na sab nga gidid-an ka man
sa duktur? You’re smoking again when the doctor told you not to.

lanang n watery, slushy ground. v {1} [B; b6] become watery and slushy.
Milanang (nalanang) ang sílung sa ulan, The yard became watery and
muddy in the rain. (←) v [A; b6] for liquid to spread out on an area.
Milánang ang ímung íhì sa salug, Your urine flowed over the floor. -an
n slushy, muddy place. lananglanang v [A] be greasy, oily.
Mulananglanang ang ímung nawung ug dí ka mamulbus, Your face will get
oily if you don’t powder it. Maglananglanang ang sud-an nga labihan
kamantikáun, A dish that has too much fat is greasy.

lánap v [A; b(1)] overflow or flood an area. Ang karsáda nga gilanápan
sa dágat napunù sa mga gapnud, The road that the sea had flooded is
full of driftwood. Sa pagkusug sa ulan, gilanápan ang ámung sílung sa
túbig, Because of the heavy rain, our basement was flooded with water.

lanat v [A; a12] pursue, chase. Dílì ku mulanat níla ngadtu sa
ngitngit, I will not run after them into the dark. Lanata ang kawatan!
Chase the thief. mabà ug — tend to be short-winded, easily tiring out.
Dì siya kaagwanta ug bugtaway kay mabà siyag lanat, He doesn’t last in
a race because he is short-winded. (←) n pursuit, chase, race. Ang
lánat sa kinabúhì, The rat race of life.

lanátad n sea which is flat and even, as for example, at high tide
before it begins to go out again, or water over tidal flats. v [B2] for
a large area to become covered with a smooth surface of water. Ug
magbahà, mulanátad ang túbig sa kaumahan, When it floods, the water
floods over the fields.

lánaw = danaw, dánaw.

lánay v {1} [AB2S; a] melt, become soft Naglánay ku ug tinggà pára
gam-ung pamatu, I am melting lead to make into a sinker. Naglanay ang
mantikilya, The butter is soft. {2} — ang atay [B246] get flattered.
Milánay ang íyang atay pag-ingun nákung gwápa siya, She swelled with
pride when I told her she was pretty. (→) a {1} soft, partially melted.
Itì nga lanay, Soft and watery droppings of fowl. {3} — ug tíngug for
the voice to be flat in tone, not full, as if cracked. Way kaláking
pamináwun ang lanay nga tíngug, A flat voice is not pleasant to listen
to. v [B; b6] {1} for the voice to become flat. — ug sinultihan a way
of speaking characterized by a slow and slurring intonation, not brisk.
v [B] for the manner of speaking to be slow and slurring in intonation.

landa v [A; a] put copra in a tray to dry. Ákù lang landahun ang kupras
kay wà may ínit, I’ll just dry the copra in a tray (and put it in a
kiln) because there’s no sun. landahan, landáhan n {1} tray for drying
copra. {2} kiln where copra is dried.

landag_1 v {1} [A; a2] cook eggs by boiling. Ayaw ug landága ang mga
itlug kay papusaun, Don’t boil the eggs because we are going to let
them hatch. {2} broil bananas or tubers that have been peeled, usually
leftover. Landágun nátù ang báhaw nga kamúti ugmà puhun, We’ll broil
the leftover sweet potatoes tomorrow. -in- n hard-boiled eggs.

landag_2 = lamdag.

landang n {1} a powdered buri palm starch. {2} sweet preparation made
of buri palm starch, sugar, juice of coconut meat to which fruit may
optionally be added. v [A; a2] make the dish called landang.

landasan n anvil.

landay_1 a for female humans or mammals to be sterile. v [B1] be,
become sterile. Ságad sa masakitung babáyi malanday, Most sickly women
tend to be sterile.

landay_2 n a sack that holds more than twenty-five gantas and is of a
strong material, designed esp. for holding heavy contents. Usa ka
landayng kupras, A large sackful of copra.

landig v {1} [A; c] for boats or airplanes to land. Ang idru mulandig
sa Masbáti, The plane will land on Masbate. {2} [B256] come to rest
after falling. Didtu mulandig (malandig) ang awtu sa sapà pagkatambug
sa pangpang, The car fell off the cliff and landed in the stream. †

landing n airfield, airport. v [A; c] {1} for airplanes to land.
Gilanding ang idru sa dáru, The plane landed on the plowed field.
{2} for invasion forces to land. Ang pwirsa sa mga Amirkánu milanding
sa Layti, The American forces landed on Leyte. — bards landing barge.
v [A13] go by landing barge. — pild n airfield.

*landrákas see kalandrákas.

landung n {1} image, replica. Daw landung sa kamatáyun ang íyang
panagway, Her face is a picture of death. Landung giyud siya sa íyang
inahan, She is the image of her mother. {2} shade, shadow. Ang purma sa
káhuy mailhan sa íyang landung, You can tell what a tree looks like
just from the shadow. a shady. Landung kaáyu sa kalubihan, It is nice
and shady in the coconut grove. v {1} [B46] for an image to form
itself, come into the mind. Walà mulandung sa ákung kaisípan nga mau
kiniy mahitabù, It never occurred to me that this is what would happen.
{2} [A1B; b2] be, become shady, overcast; cause to become so. Ang
akasya nga naglandung sa nátad, The acacia tree that shaded the yard.
Naglandung ang kalibútan kay bagà ang pangánud, The world is overcast
because there is a thick cloud covering. Hinglandungan ang misítas sa
lubi, The ornamental plant is in the shade of the coconut tree. pa-
v [AN; b5] {1} think, ponder. Nagpalandung ku sa unsay mahitabù nákù, I
am pondering over what will happen to me. Ang átung pagpamalandung
gikutlù gíkan sa salmus, Our meditation is taken from the Psalms.
{1a} walà, dílì — v {1} [A13; a12] not expect s.t. to happen. Wà
palandúnga sa tanan nga madátù ka, Nobody thought you’d get rich.
{2} [A; b(1)] put or go to the shade. Palandúngi (palandungi) ang kábaw
kay ínit na ang adlaw, Put the carabao in the shade because the sun is
hot now.

landuylanduy v [A; be] gallivant about, bum around (instead of doing
s.t. one should be doing) Maglanduylanduy lang ku kay wà kuy trabáhu,
I’m just bumming around because I have no work. Ayawg landuylandúyi
(ilanduylanduy) ang ímung pagtuun, Don’t spend the time you’re supposed
to be studying in roaming about.

lang = lámang.

lángab v {1} [a12] do all of a set portion of work. Langába ug sanggì
ang tibuuk maisan, Harvest the entire cornfield. Langábun ku pagpintal
ang usa ka bungbung úsà ku musúgud ug láin, I’ll paint one whole wall
before I start the next. {2} [A12; a12] inadvertently work on an area
assigned to s.o. else. Nalángab ug dáru sa sinuhúlan ang nasikbit nga
uma, The hired hand inadvertently plowed the adjacent farm as well.

lángan v {1} [A3P; a2b3] delay, waste time. Naglángan ka sa ámung
byáhi, You are delaying our trip. {2} [A13; b(1)] spend or waste time,
effort doing s.t. Naglángan ka lang ug limpiyu ánang kahun, You are
just wasting your time cleaning that box. n delay. Sa walay lángan
miadtu dáyun siya sa prisidinti, Without delay he went at once to the
President. a wasteful of time. Lángan (langan) kaáyu ning paagíha, This
procedure is very wasteful of time. (→) = lángan. -an(→) a taking a
long time. Langanan kaáyu siyang sugúun, He takes his sweet time about
it when you tell him to go s.w. ka- n delay, waste of time. Ang
kalángan nákù dílì kabayran ug sápì, Money cannot make up for the delay
I suffered. ma-un a wasteful of time.

langas a {1} noisy. Langas kaáyu ka nga magtuun, You are very noisy
when you study. {2} moving about a lot, engaging in horseplay. Langas
kaáyung ikadúlug, He’ll bother you a lot if you sleep with him because
he tosses and turns. v {1} [A; b6] make noise. Dílì mu maglangas kay
matúlug ku, You should not make noise because I’m going to bed.
{1a} [A3] breathe a word. Dílì ka maglangas kang bísan kinsa sa ímung
nakit-an, Don’t you tell anyone what you saw. {1b} shut up! Langas!
Naglamlam ka lang! Shut up. You are talking nonsense! {2} [A] moving
about, not keeping still. Langas! Ayaw paghikaphíkap, Hold still. Keep
your paws to yourself. {3} [A] make a fuss about s.t. Mulangas man ku
ug dílì bahínan, I will make a fuss if you do not give me a share.
n {1} noise. {2} fuss, ado. Mitrabáhu dáyun sa walay daghan nga langas,
He went to work without much ado. -an a noisy, engaging in horseplay.
Kadtung langasan kaáyu dílì dad-un sa sini, Those of you who don’t keep
still will not get to go to the show.

langátad = lanátad.

lángaw n housefly. v (→) [a4] {1} be infested, swarm with flies.
Langawun ang pagkáun, The food will be swarming with flies. {2} get
tired waiting. Dúgay kaáyu siya nga mag-ílis, langawun ka ug pinaábut,
It takes her a long time to dress up. You will get tired waiting.
{3} do not sell, sell little. Gilangaw ang íyang tinda, way hálin, Her
store did poorly—she had no sale. pa- v [A12] attract flies. Ang pálut
sa mangga makapalangaw, Mango peelings attract flies. ambut sa — search
me, I don’t know (and I don’t care much). langawlangaw = abungaw_1.

lángay a wasteful of time. Lángay ka kaáyu sa pagkalígù, You take your
sweet time about taking a bath, don’t you? v {1} [A13] waste time.
Naglángay ka lang kay dílì nà musalir, You are wasting time because
that won’t do. {2} [A13; a12] cause delay. Naglángay ka sa ámung
trabáhu. You’re holding up our work. Dílì mistil langáyun ang kasal
bisan ug wà pa dinhi ang amahan, You do not have to hold up the wedding
just because the father is not here yet. -an(→) a always
dilly-dallying.

langayà = langayan. see lángay.

langbay n edible swimming crabs, found in shallow and deep waters,
rather similar in shape and flavor to the blue crabs sold in the
States. They differ from other crabs in that the shell has two sharp
points on the sides, both claws are the same size and only slightly
larger than the other limbs. Deep-sea specimens may grow as big as a
foot across. paN- v [A2; b6] catch this sort of crab. -an, paN-an
n place where these crabs are found.

langbì = lambì.

langbù = lambù.

langbud = lambud.

langday = landay, 1, 2.

langgà short for palangga.

langgam n bird. -an(→) n a small instrument used to cut rice panicles
during the harvest. -un a bird-like. Ang íyang sunuy mu rag dílì
igtalarì kay langgámun kaáyu ug hitsúra, His rooster doesn’t look like
a fighting cock because it has a bird-like appearance.

langgaw_1 a lukewarm. v [AB2; c1] be, become lukewarm, cause s.t. to
become so. Malanggaw (mulanggaw) ang tubà ug hiinitan, The palm toddy
will become lukewarm if you leave it under the sun. Naglanggaw siyag
túbig pára ikalígù nákù, She’s heating water for my bath.

langgaw_2 n vinegar. v [A13; a12] make, make into vinegar.

langgì v [A3P; a] snap s.t. off from the main part at the joint. Ákung
langgíun ang sanga sa ímung tanum, I’ll break a branch off your plant.

langgíkit v {1} [A; a12] tie or attach things together or side by side.
Mulanggíkit ka ug pila ka bulus kawáyan pára gam-ung gákit, Tie several
lengths of bamboo together to make a raft. Langgikítun nákù ning duha
ka buuk káhuy arun makas-a ug dala, I will tie these two pieces of wood
together so I can carry them all at once. {2} [C23] be near one
another. Sígi sila nga maglanggíkit bisag ása lakaw, They are always
near each other wherever they go. {3} [A; c6] involve s.o. in s.t. Ang
ímung binúang naglanggíkit nákù sa kaúlaw, Your foolishness involved me
in your shame. Ayaw kug ilanggíkit sa inyung tinuntu, Do not involve me
in your shenanigans. n link, means of connecting. Kining suláta mauy
langgíkit sa kagahápun, This letter is a link to the past.

langgilanggi n shrub or small tree with a straight, light-brown trunk
used for fencing. The leaves are alternate, elliptic, with entire
margins, green on top, whitish on the bottom and smooth. It bears
sweet, pea-sized, white berries in axillary clusters.

langgis a high-pitched, screeching noise. Langgis ang ági sa tísà sa
pisára, It’s very spine-tingling the way the piece of chalk scratches
the blackboard. v [A] make a spine-tingling, screeching noise. Ayúha
nang ímung pagkiskis kay naglanggis, Try not to make it so
spine-tingling when you scrape. ka- n the way s.t. is shrill and
screeching.

langgisaw n k.o. fish.

langgíta n loop at the waist of trousers through which the belt is
passed. v [A; b6] make or attach belt loops.

langgíti n anvil.

langgung v [B56; c1] in pool, for the cue ball to go into the hole and
not be counted.

langgus v [A; a12] chafe, injure a wide area slightly. Ayawg hukti ug
alambri kay mulanggus sa pintal, Don’t tie it with a wire because it
will scratch the paint. Nalanggus ákung buktun pagkatumba nákù, I
chafed my arm when I fell.

langgut v {1} [A; a1b2] for a fish to break a line. Nalanggut ang pasul
kay gidawíhag dakung isdà, The fishing line broke because a huge fish
got hooked on it. {2} [AN; a] embezzle, cheat. Nalanggutan
(hilanggutan) ku níyag singku písus, He cheated me out of five pesos.
Íyang langgútun nang inyung kwarta ug siyay inyung pagunítun ánà, She
will pocket your money if you entrust it to her. -íra = langgutíru
(female). -íru a embezzler, swindler.

langgwíta = langgíta.

langì_1 v [A; a2] {1a} loosen s.t. rigid and long from a place it is
embedded. Way makalangì sa pusting maáyung pagkataruk, No one can
loosen the post, it is so firmly implanted. {1b} bend s.t. rigid out of
shape. Nakabuhì ang isdà kay nalangì ang tagà, The fish escaped because
the hook was bent out of shape. {1c} break the finger or toenail.
Malangì ang ákung kuku ug dì hinguk-an, My nails break if I don’t trim
them. {2} twist off a branch from plants. Nakalangì ku ug usa ka sanga
sa íyang san pransisku, I broke a branch off from her croton.
a hangnail, loose in its place. Hustu nang tangung langíun. Langì na
kaáyu, That tooth is about ready to pull out. It has gotten very loose.

langì_2 v [A] {1} ask for affection by making demands. {2} act spoiled
and abusive from having been pampered. Naglangì nà siya kay labánan
man. He has gotten uncontrollable because s.o. always takes his side.
a asking for affection, being spoiled. Kanang íyang pagpangáyug pagkáun
ági lang nag langì, When she asks for food like that she’s just asking
for attention.

langigngig a for foods to be too greasy or oily to digest readily.
v [B; c1] be too greasy and heavy in the stomach. Dì mulangigngig
(malangigngig) ang tiil sa bábuy basta lat-an ug butangag bátung
linata, Pig’s legs won’t be too fatty to eat if you add salted black
beans. Magkalangigngig ang bíku sa tantung káun, The more sticky rice
you eat, the heavier it is in the stomach.

langis v [A2; c] hoodwink s.o. into doing s.t. by giving him sweet
talk. Maáyu siyang mulangis sa íyang apuhan arun tagáan ug kwarta, He
is good in talking his grandfather into giving him money. Gilangisan ku
níyang mupalit ug libru piru íya diayng gipanugal, He hoodwinked me
into giving him money which he said was for a book, but actually it
turned out to be for gambling. n sweet talk, flattery employed to gain
one’s ends. -íru n one who sweet talks people and pulls the wool over
their eyes.

lángit n {1} heaven, sky. Ang lángit gibuti sa mga bitúun, The sky is
pock-marked with stars. {2} joy, happiness. Lángit ka sa ákung
panan-aw, You are a joy to my sight. ikapitung — the last tier of
heaven where perfect happiness is to be found. Dad-un ku ikaw sa
ikapitung lángit, I’ll bring you to the seventh heaven of happiness.
v [B1256] go to heaven. Ikaw kay makasasálà, dílì ka malangit, You, who
are a sinner, will not go to heaven. kità ug — v [A12] experience the
most painful sensation of one’s life, esp. pain in childbirth. Nakakità
na siyag lángit sa íyang pagpanganak, She experienced the most painful
sensation of her life when she gave birth. ka-an n skies. -nun
a pertaining to heaven. Langitnung kaháyag, A heavenly light.
langitlángit n {1} egg white. {2} canopy of an altar or bed. {2a} — sa
muskitíru top of a mosquito net. langitlangit = langitlángit, 1.

langitngit = alangitngit.

langkap v [A; ab7] take over all or part of s.o.’s obligations so that
they be completely fulfilled. Akuy milangkap sa íyang bayranan kay wà
man siyay kwarta, I paid up all her obligations because she had no
money. Langkápa ang ákung báhin sa gunahun, kay may laktun ku, Finish
my weeding work for me because I have to go s.w. Gilangkápan sa uyuan
ang kúwang sa twisyun, The uncle paid the amount lacking in the tuition
fees.

langkat v {1} [A; a] rip off, out, tear forcibly away. Átung langkátun
ang salug, Let us rip the floor out. Ámung gilangkátan sa mga balágun
ang kural, We ripped the vines off of the fence. {2} [A; b6] strip s.o.
of power, rights, or privileges. Gilangkátan siya sa ranggu, He was
stripped of his rank. {3} [A; a2] remove s.t. as if pulled away by
force. Ang ímung paglúib naglangkat sa ákung gugma kanímu, Your
unfaithfulness has killed my love for you. Sukad karun langkátun ku ang
hunàhúnà nga kita manag-amígu, From now on I will banish the thought
that we are friends. {4} [A; a1] slam a basketball that is in the air
above the head in a downward direction. Pag-untul giyud sa búla sa
ring, gilangkat dáyun kini ni Wilyam, As soon as the ball rebounded
from the ring, William slammed it down.

langkaw a tending to loaf on the job, playing hooky. Gamay kag ági kay
langkaw ka sa trabáhu, You haven’t accomplished much because you’ve
been loafing on the job. v [A; b6(1)] loaf on the job, play hooky. Dì
ka makapasar ug sígi kang langkaw, You won’t pass if you keep playing
hooky. Langkáwi ang ímung pagdáru kay minúsan ku ang ímung swildu, Loaf
on the job while you’re plowing and I will take it off your pay. -an(→)
a always loafing or playing hooky.

langkay_1 n {1} dried coconut palm frond. {2} old maid (humorous).
v [B12] become an old maid.

langkay_2 = díwit.

langkì a for teeth to be crooked. Makadisgwápa sa babáyi ang mga
ngípung langkì, Crooked teeth mar a woman’s beauty. v [B; b6] for a
tooth to become crooked. Maáyung pagahilútun ang ngípung magkalangkì,
It’s good to massage into place a tooth that is growing in crooked.

langking n k.o. black pigment shaped into rectangular sticks used for
shoe blacking, drawing, and by the Chinese for writing. v [A; b6]
blacken s.t. with this material.

langkit v [A; ac] join two pieces of material together by sewing,
welding, and the like at the edges. Langkítun ta ang duha ka hábul arun
ta makatulda, We’ll sew the edges of the two blankets together so we
can have a tent. Ilangkit ang usa ka playwud ngari, Join a piece of
plywood to this place. {2} [c] add an affix in grammar. ig-l- n affix.

langkiya, langkiyà_1 n spadefish: Scatophagus argus.

langkiya_2, langkíyà (from kíya) v [B236(1)] for airplanes or kites to
wobble, dart from side to side in losing altitude. Mulangkíya ang
talabánug kun mabugtù ang tugut, The kite will wobble from side to side
and continue losing altitude when the string snaps.

langkub v {1} [AC12; ac1] combine several things, ideas, quantities
into a group at the same time. Akuy mulangkub ug dala áning duha ka
bugkus, I will take these two bundles at one time. Kining duha ka súma
nagkalangkub (gilangkub), The two sums have been put together.
{1a} [A13] include, comprehend. Ang lungsud naglangkub ug lima ka
baryu, The municipality includes five barrios. {1b} [B1256] be included
in a group, identified with. Pagkadátù níya nalangkub siya sa alta
susyidad, After he got rich he was identified with high society.
{2} [A; b5] make s.t. a complete whole. Langkúbi (langkúba) ang kúwang
sa báyad, Complete the amount lacking in the payment. {2a} [A13; a12]
fix one’s decision, decide to do s.t. with no wavering. Naglangkub ku
sa ákung hunàhúnà sa paglikay sa sugal, I am determined to avoid
gambling. -in- n things that are taken together, done collectively.
Linangkub nga sisiyun, A joint session.

langkuy_1 v {1} [A2; b5c] walk or travel around without any particular
purpose. Mulangkuy sila inigpangítag bulad sa tabuan, They walk about
in the market when they look for dried fish. Ilangkuy ang masakitun sa
wiltsir sa plása, Take the wheelchair patient for a walk in the park.
{2} [B2; b6] be, become an idler. Malangkuy (mulangkuy) siya kun dúnay
kwarta, He becomes lazy when he has money. {3} [AC; a12b2] have sexual
intercourse with (slang). Naglangkuy ang magtiáyun súd sa kwartu, The
couple are making love inside the room. a idler, lazy. n sexual
intercourse (slang). langkuylangkuy v {1} = langkuy. {2} [A; b(1)]
dawdle about instead of working. Sukad sa ákung pagsulud ug trabáhu
dinhi wà ku makalangkuylangkuy, Since I started working here I haven’t
dawdled around on the job.

langkuy_2 n cutlass fish: Trichiurus spp. a tall and thin (like the
cutlass fish).

langpus = lampus.

lan-grábir n landgrabber. v [B1256] be, become a landgrabber.

langsa a having a fishy smell or the taste of blood. Bahung langsa ang
mga pasahírag isdà, Fish vendors have a fishy smell. Ang mulmul langsa
nga isdà, The parrot fish has an intense fishy taste. Langsag báhù ang
babáying girigla, Women smell of fish when they menstruate. v [B12; b6]
be smelly from fish or blood.

langsad v {1} [A; b6] run for an elective position or office. Mulangsad
ku pagkagubirnadur, I will run for governor. {2} [A; c] take the
gamecock out of his cage. Ilansad ang sunuy sa silinganan, Tether the
rooster in the yard. {3} [A; c1] take a hen and young chicks out of the
nest and set them on the ground. Ug ilansad (lansárun) ug sayu ang
pisù, patyun sa umígas, If you take the chicks out of the nest too
early, they are likely to get killed by the ants. lansaránan n ground
on which gamecocks are tethered out.

langsi = langsa.

langsub a for an area to be shady and dark, either because it is
depressed below the surrounding land or because it is surrounded by
tall trees. Ságad sa lugar nga langsub bugnaw, A depressed or shaded
area tends to be cool. v [B] for an area to be shady because of its
depressed situation or the trees surrounding it. Ang mga dagkung káhuy
mauy nakalangsub áning inyung sular, The trees make your lot shady.

langtaw v {1} [AN13; a2] see, look at s.t. in a distance. Lantáwa ang
búkid ug gigabúnan ba, Look at the mountain and see if it is shrouded
in mist. Nalantawan ku sa ákung gitindúgan ang pag-abut níya, I could
see him coming from where I was standing. {1a} [A; a12] watch a movie
or stage performance. Mulantaw kag sini rung gabíi? Will you see a
movie tonight? {2} [A; a2b2] look to the future, perceive with
foresight. Lantáwun mu ang kaugmáun ug panagána, Look to the future and
be prepared. Nalantawan ku nga kanang trabahúa walay kauswágan, I have
perceived that that job offers no advancement. {3} [A; a12] look after.
Akuy mulantaw sa bátà ug mulakaw ka, I will look after the child if you
go out. Lantáwa ang ákung sinugba nga isdà arun dílì mapágud, Keep
watching my broiled fish to see that it doesn’t get burnt. -an(→),
-anan n an elevated place which affords a good view. paN- n foresight.
Kanang ímung paági kúlang sa panglantaw, Your procedure lacks
foresight.

langtu a having the smell of green beans, spinach, burned feathers,
hair, nails, and some kinds of plastic. Ayaw pagsúnug ug balhíbu kay
langtu kaáyu ang báhù, Don’t burn feathers because the odor is very
disagreeable. v [B1; b6] get this particular smell. Ang balátung mauy
nakalangtu (nakapalangtu) sa linat-an, The string beans made the stew
taste peculiar.

langtung n the point in the tide where the highest level is reached and
when it is about to start going out again. — sa hunas point in the tide
where the lowest level is reached before it begins to come in again.
v [B3N; b6] for the tide to reach its highest point. Ug mulantung ang
dágat muabut giyud sa ílang tugkaran ang túbig, At the highest point
the tide reaches their front yard.

langù a {1} dizzy due to poisoning. {2} drunk (slang). v {1} [B12; b6]
be, become dizzy due to poisoning. Nalangù ang iring human makakaun sa
hilu, The cat became dizzy after eating the poison. {2} [A1P; a] make
s.o. drunk. Kadtung ikaduhang lungnik mauy naglangù (nagpalangù) nákù,
The second fifth sure made me drunk.

lang-u a having a dank, unpleasant smell. Lan-u ang básung giimnan sa
bátang nagsuwag inun-únan, The glass that the child drank from after he
ate the vinegarized fish has a dank smell. v [B; b6] develop a dank
smell. Mulang-u ang trápung way laba, A rag will develop a dank smell
if you don’t wash it. ka- n foul smell. Ang Láyipbuy makakúhà sa
kalang-u sa láwas, Lifebuoy can get rid of body odor.

lángub n cave. v [B1256; a12] become, make into a cave.

lang-ug a having the putrid smell of severe halitosis. Lang-ug ang bàbà
ug bag-ung mata ug dì makapanutbras, A person that has just woke up has
awful halitosis until he brushes his teeth. v [B] get a foul smell.
Mulan-ug ang túbig sa bangà ug dílì kailísan, The water in the jar will
turn foul if you don’t change it.

lángut v [A2; b] stick to work until it is done. Tiwas dáyun nà ug
langútan nákù ug tulu ka úras, It’ll get done quickly if I stick to it
for three hours.

languy v {1} [A; ac] swim. Gikalambrihan siya samtang naglanguy, He had
an attack of cramps while he was swimming. {2} [A13] float as if
swimming. Ayawg isirbi ang sud-ang naglanguy sa mantíkà, Don’t serve
food that’s swimming in fat. {3} [b8] for soup to be too dilute. Grábi
sab ka makasabaw kalanguyan man, How terrible the soup is! You could
practically swim in it. (←) v [A12] swim for pleasure. n {1} action of
swimming. Ang ámung lánguy niadtung Duminggu, Our swim last Sunday.
{2} swimming contest. linangyan n style of swimming.

langyaw v {1} [A; b6] travel abroad. Mulangyaw ku inigkahíkay sa
paspurt, I’m going abroad as soon as my passport is ready. {2} [A2; b6]
emigrate. Mulangyaw sila sa Mindanaw, They will emigrate to Mindanao.
n foreigner. buhatang, kalihúkang — Department of Foreign Affairs.
{2} extra-marital relations (humorous). Human sa trabáhu dílì pa nà
siya mupaúlì kay dúna pay kalihúkang langyaw nga atimanun, After work
he doesn’t go directly home because he still has some foreign relations
to attend. — nga kalabútan foreign affairs.

lanipgà n forest tree with wood that smells like cedar, used for making
cigar boxes, finger boards for guitars, et al.: Toona calantas.

lanit v [A; a] grab s.t., usually with speed. Milanit siya sa íyang
amirkána ug miadtu sa huspital, He grabbed his coat and went to the
hospital. Gilanit ang íyang pitáka sa kawatan, The thief snatched her
purse. Gilanitan ku níya sa íyang pistúla, He drew his gun on me.

laniw n k.o. small flying fish, smaller than the barúnguy and bangsi.

lankay = langkay.

lanlan v [A; a12] {1} eat food usually taken with rice or corn (sud-an)
all alone. Mulanlan siya sa isdà úsà mukáun sa kan-un, He eats the fish
and then eats his rice afterwards. Mau ra niy bulad, ayaw ug lanlána,
This is all the dried fish we have. Don’t eat it without rice. {2} by
extension, eat s.t. alone that usually accompanies s.t. else. Mulanlan
lang siyag dyam nga way pán, He eats jam all alone without bread.

lanlídi n landlady of a rooming or boarding house. v [A13] be a
landlady.

lansa n launch. v [A13; a12] go or travel by launch. Maglansa mi
pag-adtu sa Buhul, We will travel by launch to Bohol.

lansad = langsad.

lansadíra n {1} shuttle in weaving. {2} case for the bobbin in a sewing
machine. v [A13; b6(1)] make into, attach, use a shuttle.

lansalíra = lansadíra.

lansang n {1} nail. Lansang sa kabáyù, Nail for a horseshoe. {2} dried
anchovies (slang). v {1} [A; c] drive a nail, nail. Dì na ni maukang
kay gilansángan, You can’t get this off because it is nailed down.
Ilansang sa bungbung ang kahun arun dílì mahúlug, Nail the box to the
wall so it won’t fall. {2} [a12] sit or stand rooted to a place, as if
nailed. Gilansang ku sa ákung gilingkúran sa kalísang, I sat nailed to
my seat in fright. {2a} [a3] for the gaze to be fixed, as if nailed.
Ang íyang mga mata nalansang didtu sa dalága, His eyes were glued to
the maiden. {2b} [c6] be fixed at a certain quantity, as if nailed.
Gilansang sa diyis ang ámung iskur, hangtud nahuman, Our score was
stuck at ten points to the very end. {3} [A; b4] get a tire puncture
from nails. Lansángan ang dyip nga dì mubigay, If you don’t give
protection money, they’ll puncture the tires of your jeep.

lansar = langsad, 1.

lansaríra = lansadíra.

lansaru n leprosy. v [a4] be affected with leprosy. lansaruun,
lansaruhun n leper. v [B1256] become a leper.

lansilíra = lansadíra.

lansis v [AN2; b] tell a lie about what one is doing when one is
actually doing s.t. else, make a lying excuse. Nanlansis siya paghulam
ug libru apan namisíta diay, He came on the pretext of borrowing a
book, but he actually wanted to visit my daughter. Unsa may átung
ilansis sa maistru ug pangutan-un ta? What excuse will we give the
teacher if he asks us? n lie told to disguise one’s actions.

lansíta n small launch.

lansíyang = galansíyang.

lanslayid n landslide. v [A; b4] for there to be a landslide. Ang
tibuuk lungsud gilanslayran sa mga dagkung batu ug yútà, The whole town
was buried under a landslide of rocks and earth.

lansu, lansun n thin, white, coarsely woven cotton fabric. v [A; c1]
use lansu. Pubri man, dì maglansu lang, I’m poor, so I wear lansu.

lansúnis n tall, slender tree bearing a fruit of commercial importance.
The fruit is whitish-yellow, up to {6} cm. long, growing in bunches
from stalks which come out of the larger branches and trunk, and has
juicy translucent pulp encasing one or two irregularly-shaped seeds:
Lansium domesticum.

lanta n dressing for open wounds consisting of absorbent cotton soaked
in a mixture of lime, vinegar, and coconut oil. v [A13; a12] make such
a dressing. -in-, ni- = lanta, n.

lantáka, lantákà = luthang, n2. †

lantap_1 a for liquids to have oil or streaks of oil on the surface.
Lantap kaáyu ang sabaw, Soup is full of oil. v [A; b] for the surface
of a liquid to be oily. Naglantap ang dágat sa usik nga gasulína, The
surface of the sea is full of oil because of the gasoline that spilled.

lantap_2 a for the sea to be high and calm, as when the tide is coming
in and there is no wind. v [B2; b6] for the sea to get high and calm.

lantaw = langtaw.

lantay n anything with a top or bottom consisting of bamboo slats: a
bed, table, tray, bench, shelf. v [A13; a12] put, make into a lantay.

lantáyug a growing very tall. v [B] grow very tall. Mulantáyug ang lubi
ug magúlang na, Coconut trees grow very tall when they get mature.
Naglantáyug ka lang nga way buut, You may be tall, but you don’t have a
grain of sense.

lantì a clear, clearly defined with sharp edges and contrasts. Lantì
kaáyu ang makítà diri sa largabista, I see everything very clearly with
the binoculars. v [B2; b6] be, become clear. Mulantì ang ákung panan-aw
ug mag-antiyúhus, My vision becomes clear if I wear glasses.

lanting v [AC; ac] for boats with no anchor or floats to tie up to or
together with another boat. Mulanting ku sa ímung sakayan kay walà kuy
pundu, I will tie up to your boat because I don’t have an anchor.
Lantíngun ta ning duha ka bátang arun makadaug nátù, Let us tie these
two logs together so that they can carry us.

lantip a {1} sharp of blade. Lantip kaáyu ning kutsilyúha, This knife
is very sharp. {2} sharp of mind. Lantip ug salabútan, Having an
incisive mind. v [B2; a2] be, become sharp-edged or sharp of mind.
Kanang ímung binairan dílì makalantip (makapalantip) sa sundang, The
machete will not get sharp the way you are doing it. -in- n a bolo
always kept sharp and not usually used for household chores. ka-
n sharpness, keenness of mind.

lantsa = lansa.

lantugay v [A12] linger, dilly-dally over s.t. or at a place. Dílì
makalantugay ang ákung mga anak sa iskuylahan kay daghag búhat sa ámù,
My children cannot afford to linger around after school because there
are so many things to do at home. pa- v [A; b5c1] linger, dilly-dally.
Hingkaadlawnan kanúnay ang bána pagpaúlì kay adtu man magpalantugay sa
sugálan, The husband used to come home in the wee hours of the morning
because he stayed late in the gambling den.

lantúgì n argument, quarrel. Ang inyung banhà nga lantúgì nakapamata
nákù, Your noisy argument woke me up. v [A2C; a2] argue, quarrel. Dì ku
mulantúgì nímu ánang butánga, I won’t quarrel with you over that
matter. Naglantúgì sila ug unsáun pagpaguwà sa pyánu, They are arguing
about how to take the piano out. ka- n an opponent in an argument.
ma-un a contentious, argumentative. Malantugíun kaáyu siya nga mitubag
sa íyang inahan, He talked back to his mother in an argumentative tone.
mag-r- n debater. mamumulung — orator-debater. -un(→) a controversial.
Lantugiun ang risulta sa iliksiyun, The results of the election are
very much a matter of controversy.

lantung = langtung.

lan-u = lang-u.

lanúbù a {1} grow lush and big. Lanúbù ang tanum dinhi kay tabunuk ang
yútà, The plants grow large here because the land is fertile. {2} be
economical to use because a small amount does the same job as a larger
amount of similar material. Lanúbù kining bugása kay kusug mutúbù, This
rice is economical to use because it expands well. Lanúbù kining
sabúna. Gamay kaáyu ang gawíun, This soap is economical. You just need
to use a little. v [c1] make s.t. go far. Lanubúa (ilanúbù) ug gámit
ang sabun, Use the soap sparingly.

lánug a loud, resonant. Lánug kaáyu íyang tíngug sa pagtawag nákù, He
called me with a very loud voice. v {1} [B2] be, become loud. Mulánug
(malánug) ang ímung tíngug ug magmigapun ka, Your voice will become
loud if you use a megaphone. {2} [A] echo, resound. Naglánug ang íyang
singgit sa dyím, His shout resounded in the gym. n {1} loudness.
{2} echo. Walay mitubag gawas sa lánug sa íyang tíngug, There was no
answer except the echo of his voice. {2a} echoes, reminiscenses of the
past. Kining mga awíta mga lánug lámang sa kanhíay, These songs are but
echoes of the past. pa- v [A; c6] broadcast, disseminate by word or
publicity. Ipalánug ning balitáa sa tibuuk násud, Broadcast this news
throughout the nation.

lan-ug = lang-ug.

lanulin n lanolin.

lan-us a have the bad smell of eating or drinking utensils which have
been used but not well cleaned. v {1} [B; b6] for utensils to develop a
bad smell from not having been properly cleaned. {2} [A; c1] let
coconut milk curdle to use the curds for medicine. Maglan-us kug tunù
nga himúung lanta, I’ll ferment coconut milk to make into a medicinal
plaster. -in- n sediment from fermented coconut milk.

lanut n gelatinous water that develops when rice or beans are boiled.
Lanut ang ipainum sa masusu, Give the baby water from boiled beans.
v [A] develop this substance. Kining humáya húmuk mulanut ug lugáwun,
This rice develops gelatinous water when you make porridge of it.

lánut n {1} hemp from abaca. {2} any k.o. long, tough plant fibers.
Ánang trabahúa ang ímung kinabúhì naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut, Your
job is very dangerous. (Lit. In that job your life walks over a long
thin strand.) v {1} [A; a12] make hemp from abaca. Anus-a man lanúta
ninyu ang pinutul nga abaka? When will you make hemp from that abaca
you cut into pieces? {2} [B5] show fibrous components, become
threadbare. Dáan na kaáyung kalsunísa naglanut na gánì ang panaptun,
These trousers are very old. They are already threadbare. {3} [B456]
for s.t. sticky like syrup, glue, and the like to show fiber-like
portions when stretched. -un a fibrous, having fibers. Lanútun kaáyu ug
unud ang páhù, Páhù is a stringy kind of mango. lanutlanut n fine
fibers of fruits.

lápà v {1} [AC12; a] cut into sizeable chunks. Lapáa ang bábuy unyà
atarúha, Cut the pig in chunks and group them into portions for sale.
{2} [A; a] hack to pieces. Dinhi siya lapáag sundang sa naghuramintádu,
He was hacked to pieces in this place by a man who ran amok.

lapad a {1} flat, level surface. Lapad siyag nawung, She has a flat
face. Lapad ug tiil, Flat-footed or having the toes wide apart.
{2} broad, having considerable width. Lapad nga karitíra, The broad
highway. Lapad nga kayutáan, Vast stretches of land. v {1} [AB; a] be
flat, wide. Mulapad kag baril, mauy ikural, Flatten barrels to make
into a fence. Naglapad lang nang ilung mu, Your nose is so flat.
{2} [APB2; ab7] widen or broaden. Nagkalapad na ang baul nga gihawánan
na, The field has more area now that it has been cleared of bushes.
Lapdan ang lamísa kay gamay ra, The table will be made wider because it
is too narrow. — ang atay v [B26] be, become flattered (lit. for the
liver to expand). Mulapad (malapad) dáyun nang íyang atay basta daygun,
It goes to her head if you flatter her. n flat, pocket-sized bottle for
liquor (slang). pa- n matting made out of woven palm fronds. v [A; c1]
make this matting. pa-(←) sa papil, kaugalíngun v [A; c6] do s.t. so as
to project a good image of oneself. Nagpalápad siya sa papil maung
midunar, He made a donation in order to give himself a good public
image. -g- = lapad (plural). ha- a wide, broad. laparun a flattish in
surface. ka- {1} state of being large, broad. {2} = gilapdun. gilapdun
n width. Kwatru piyis ang gilapdun (kalapad) sa playwud, The plywood is
4′ in width.

lapak_1 n {1} an area differing in color or texture from the
surrounding area: splotch, stripe, spot. Ang sanínà may lapak nga pula
ug itum, The dress has red and black dots (stripes, splotches).
{2} a piece, irregular scrap of material. Paggunting ug lapak sa putì
nga panaptun, Cut a piece of white cloth. v [A; a] put spots, stripes,
smudges on s.t. Milapak ang pintal nga basà sa íyang buktun, His arm
got a splotch of wet paint on it. Nakalapak (nakapalapak) sa salug ang
húgaw nímung tiil, My floor has become splotched with your dirty feet.
Lapakun pagtáud ang mga lainláing kulur sa buluhátung bidsprid, Sew
patches of assorted colors into the bedspread you are making. -in-
n plaid design.

lapak_2 v [A; a1b2] spank s.o. lightly. Sakit ang sinílas nga ilapak,
It hurts if you are spanked with a slipper.

lápak v [A; b(1)] step on s.t. Nabuling ang linadlad kay gilapákan sa
bábuy, The bleached clothes got dirty because pigs stepped on them.

lap-ak n splotch, splatter. Dakung lap-ak sa dugù sa samput, The big
blood stain on the bottom of the dress. v [B6; c1] splotch, splatter.
lap-aklap-ak v {1} [B6; c1] splotch, splatter. Gilap-aklap-ak
(naglap-aklap-ak) ang íyang buktun sa bun-i, His arm has ringworm marks
all over it. {2} [AB; c1] do s.t irregularly, such that the results are
splotched or irregularly spaced spots. Ang bungbung naglap-aklap-ak sa
litrátu, Photos are pasted all over the wall in an irregular fashion
(as if spattered on the wall). Abanira giyud. Ayaw lap-aklap-áka
(ilap-aklap-ak) pagpintal, Paint it a square at a time. Don’t skip
around.

lapalapa n {1} sole, bottom surface of the foot. {2} sole of shoe,
boots, etc. v [A; b6(1)] work on the sole of a shoe being manufactured.

lapánag v [A2S; b4] for s.t. to spread over an area. Milapánag ang
túbig sa daruhan, The water spread over the fields. Ang íyang ap-ap
naglapanag sa íyang tibuuk láwas, His fungus is spreading all over his
body. Wà makalapánag ang balità, The news didn’t get very far.

lapáru = lampáru.

lápas a past, beyond a time or place considered right. Lápas na sa alas
unsi, It’s past eleven o’clock. Lápas na ang dyíp sa átù, The jeep has
gone past our place. v {1} [B2; b6c] go past a certain time or place,
do s.t. beyond, esp. where one shouldn’t. Bayri sa dì pa makalápas sa
tagal, Pay it off before it goes beyond the due date. Dì na makalápas
sa túhud ang sinínà sa átung mga kababayin-an karun, Women’s dresses
these days no longer go beyond their knees. Ayawg lapása (lapási,
palapása, palapási) ang utlánan, Don’t build beyond the boundary of
your land. Ayaw ug ilápas (ipalápas) ang kural sa utlánan, Don’t have
the fence go beyond the boundary. Naminyù na ang ímung manghud ikaw
walà pa, hinglapasan hinúun ka, Your younger sister has gotten married,
but you haven’t. You have been passed over. {1a} — na sa kalindaryu
v [B2356] for a woman to have reached an age greater than the number of
days in the calendar (lit. gone beyond the calendar). Lisud ka nang
maminyù ug mulápas (malápas) ka na sa kalindaryu, You’ll find it hard
to get married if you get above thirty. {2} [A; a12] violate a law, go
beyond certain rules or agreements. Wà pa dungga nga mulápas kug sáad,
I’ve never been known to break a promise. Nakalápas ka sa maáyung
pamatásan, You have gone beyond the bounds of good behavior. (→)
n abalone, so called because the meat tends to extend beyond the shell.
ka-an n violation, actions going beyond a code. Pasaylúa kami Ginúu sa
ámung mga kalapásan, Forgive us, Lord, our trespasses. ma-un a going
beyond the limits of right action.

lapasì = lupasì.

lapat_1 a for the contents of a container to be practically gone. Lapat
na ang bugas, The rice is right down to the bottom of the rice can.
v [B3] be almost to the bottom of the container. Nagkalapat na ang
túbig sa tangki, The water in the tank is getting near the bottom.

lapat_2 n clothes for home wear.

lápaw v [B23; cP] go above or beyond a certain amount. Milápaw na ang
ákung anak nákù, My son has gotten to be taller than I am. Ug malápaw
na sa dus písus ang gantang sa mais, ambut lang, If corn goes beyond
two pesos a ganta, I don’t know. Makalápaw ka bag luksu ánang
gilay-úna? Can you jump beyond that point? Sa íyang abilidad dì ka
makalápaw, You can not surpass his ability. Gilapáwan ang mga atup sa
lúnup, The flood water rose above the rooftops. Ilápaw (ipalápaw) giyud
ang sabaw sa gilung-ag, The water level should be higher than the rice.
a gone far beyond, over. — sa beyond. tagi-, tagi-(→) a high above a
certain level. Ang bahà tagilápaw (tagilapaw) sa túhud, The flood is
above the knees.

lapay n k.o. purple-brown heron of swamps and tidal flats: Ardea
purpurea.

lapdus v [A; b6(1)] lash, whip. Midágan ang kabáyù dihang gilapdúsan,
The horse galloped when it was lashed. Makapahilánat kunu kanang íkug
sa pági kun mauy ilapdus, They say that it will make a person ill if
you whip him with a stingray tail. n lash, a stroke with s.t. pliable.

lapgus n {1} bundle of twine or hemp. {2} standard size by which a
bundle of twine is sold. v [A1; c1] make a bundle of twine.

lápì v {1} [A; a12] bend or fold s.t. over double. Lapía ang panaptun
ug adtu guntínga sa piniluan, Fold the cloth over and cut it in the
fold. {1a} [C3] for two flat surfaces to be close together as if there
were only one. Ábi kug usa ra ni ka písus. Duha man diay, nagkalápì
lang, I thought there was only one peso, but it turned out they are two
bills stuck together. {2} [B3(1)6] double, increase twofold or by
extension, a few folds more. Milápì (nalápì) ang prisyu karun sa tanang
mga palitúnun, The price of everything has doubled. Anam-anamun ku ni
pagbúhat arun dílì maglápì, I will do the work as it comes up so I
won’t have but one thing to do at a time. {2a} [A12; a12] do s.t. to
two where one is usual. Búang ka ug lapíun nímug pangulitáwu ang mga
mag-ágaw, You’re crazy if you court both the cousins at the same time.
{3} [A; a] break s.t. off a plant by bending it over and twisting.
Maglápì lang kug ígù tilaubun, I’ll pick just enough young corn to
broil. Putla, ayaw lapía ang pagkúhà sa sanga, Cut the branch off,
don’t break it off. Malápì nang palwa ug ímung tungtúngan, The frond
will break off if you step on it. n {1} action of folding s.t double.
{2} times in division. Pila ka lápì ang unum sa trayinta? How many
times does six go into thirty? (→) a coconuts with dry, oilless meat
that is easily detached from its shell, and which has failed to sprout.
v [B2; b6] be, become a lapì coconut. -an(→) n k.o. coconut, the fronds
and fruit bunches of which break off easily.

lapida n tombstone. v [A; a] make a tombstone, put a tombstone on.

lapikì n repeated, sharp smacking sounds. v [A; c] make a smacking
sound. Milapikì ang íyang nawung pagtamparus nákù, Her face resounded
when I slapped her. Gilapikig latus sa kutsíru ang kabáyù, The rig
driver cracked his whip on the horse.

lapilapi v [B56; c1] for a liquid to reach the brim or to the top of an
embankment, almost spilling over. Milapilapi na ang subà. Maglúnup man
kahà, The river has risen to the banks. It looks as though it’s going
to flood. Gilapilapi nákù ang tása sa kapi, I filled the cup to the
brim with coffee. a filled up to the brim.

laping v [A23; c1] graze s.t. but not hit it squarely. Swirti kay
milaping lang níya ang batu, Fortunately the stone just grazed him.
Gilapingan lang ku sa bála, The bullet only grazed me.

lapínig = lampínig.

lapis_1, lápis_1 v {1} [A; a12b2] do the same thing to two things at
once. Lapísa ang duha ka langgam sa usa ka tíru, Hit two birds with one
shot. Ayaw lapisa sa paghigugma ang duha ka magsúun, Don’t fall in love
with both sisters. {2} [A; c1] be included in s.t. that happened to
s.o. else. Nalapis ku sa kasábà kúmu kaúban, I was included in the
scolding since I was their companion.

lapis_2 n k.o. leather jacket: Scomberoides spp.

lápis_2 n pencil. v [A1; a12] write with a pencil. Lapísa lang
pagsulat. Usbunun pa bítaw nà, Just write it with a pencil. It has to
be rewritten anyway.

lapiti v [A; b6(1)] make s.t. dirty by bespattering it. Siyay
nakalapiti ug lápuk sa bungbung, He spattered mud on the wall. ka-,
ka-(←) v [A13] get s.t. smeared, spattered all over one. Nagkalapíti
ang bátà sa tái, The child got smeared all over with his stool.

laplap_1 a for clothing to be loose and flapping. Namanus kag sinínà nu
kay laplap man kaáyu nímu, You must be wearing s.o. else’s clothes
because they are so loose on you. v [B; c1] for s.t. to flap or clothes
to be loose. Naglaplap ang bandíra sa hángin, The flag is waving in the
breeze.

laplap_2 v [A; ab7] slice off s.t. from a surface. Mulaplap kug gamay
sa karni pára isugba, I’ll slice off a small piece of meat to broil.
Laplápa ang apdu ug ilábay, Slice off the gall bladder and throw it
away. Laplápi ang lapalapa sa kúbal, Cut the callous off the sole of
your foot.

lapnis n fiber stripped off the outside of a banana or abaca trunk used
to tie things.

lapnut_1 a for liquids to be thick and sticky. v [B; a] be thick and
sticky. Mulapnut (malapnut) ang sabaw sa útan ug dúnay ukra, Vegetable
soup gets sticky if you put okra in it.

lapnut_2 v [AN; ab2] remove s.t. rooted, attached, or sticking fast.
Kinsay milapnut sa papil nga ákung gipilit sa lamísa? Who ripped off
the paper that I had pasted on the table? Íyang gilapnut ang íyang lásu
kay gisáput na man pud, She pulled the ribbon out off her hair because
she was in a bad mood again.

lapnuy v [B2] glide, move through an area smoothly. Milapnuy lag lísu
sa santul sa ákung tutunlan, The seed of the santol slipped down my
throat. Mulapnuy ang kasíli sa kadanglug, The eel is so slippery, it
will come right out of your hands. a moving through an area smoothly.
Lapnuy ianak ang gamayng bátà, You will have a smooth delivery if it’s
a small baby. lapnuylapnuy v [A3; b6] glide up and down on a surface.
Naglapnuylapnuy ang gapnud sa mga balud, The driftwood is gliding over
the waves.

lapris n rabbet plane. v {1} [A; b6] make or smooth a groove with a
rabbet plane. {2} [A13; a12] make into a rabbet plane.

lapsaw a watery, diluted in taste. Lapsaw kaáyu ang ílang litsi kay
giligaban ug túbig, Their milk is watery because they adulterated it
with water. v [B1; a2] get to be watery, have a diluted taste. Kinsay
ganáhan sa ímung sabaw nga naglapsaw ang lamì? Who likes your soup
since it tastes so watery? — ug dugù sluggish, lacking in vigor,
movement. — ug útuk stupid.

lapta a splotchy. Lapta kaáyu ang pagkapintal sa kisami kay nubátus ang
nagpintal, The paint of the ceiling is splotchy because the painter is
inexperienced. laptalapta v [B; c1] be splotchy. Naglaptalapta ang mga
bun-i sa íyang buktun, Ringworms are appearing in splotches on her
arms.

lápu v [A; a1] spank s.o. with the hand or with s.t. long, rigid, and
flat. Lapúhun ta ka íring lipak ug dì ka mutúman, I’ll spank you with
this bamboo slat if you don’t obey.

lapug n k.o. large grouper.

lápuk n {1} mud. {2} derogatory remarks. Nag-iyáhay lag lábay ug lápuk
ang mga kandidátu, Political candidates resorted to mudslinging. — sa
agtang a smear on a man’s reputation incurred when his wife commits
adultery. v {1} [B; a] be, become muddy. Mulápuk (malápuk) lang kita
dinhi kun mag-ulan, This place becomes muddy when it rains. {2} — sa
agtang v [A13; b5] for a wife to smear her husband’s reputation by
committing adultery. lapuklapuk v [A1; b5] make muddy. Gustu giyud
maglapuklapuk ang mga bátà, Children enjoy getting themselves all
muddy. Gilapuklapukan ang salug sa mga bátà, The children made the
floor muddy. ka- v [B1456] be spattered with mud. Nagkalápuk ang tiil
sa irù, The dog’s feet are muddy. -un a muddy. ka-an n places that are
muddy.

lapulápu_1 n commercial name given to groupers (pugápu).

lapung v [AN; c1] involve s.o. in s.t. bad that he should not be
involved in or do s.t. to more members of a group than should have had
it done to them. Siyay naglapung ug pangulitáwu sa tulu námù ka
tindíra, He courted all the three of our salesgirls at one time.
Makalapung kag dakup niánang mga manúka? Could you catch all those
chickens at one time? Gilapung ku níyag áway bísag wà ku makasâ, She
quarreled with everyone, including me, even though I had not done
anything wrong. Nalapung ang ámung balay sa súnug, Our house got burnt
along with the others.

lapus v {1} [A2; ac] penetrate, pierce through the opposite side. Dì
makalapus ang ulan sa atup, The rain can’t penetrate the roof. Nalapsan
sa panà ang isdà, The spear went through the fish. {1a} [b4] have one’s
menstrual blood penetrate to one’s clothing. Gilapsan ku, maung
mag-ílis ku, I got menstrual blood on my dress so I have to change.
{2} [A2; b6(1)] bypass, pass through or beyond a point. Dì na ku
mulapus ngadtu sa píkas bungtud, I won’t go beyond the other side of
the hill. {2a} [A12; b6(1)] finish one’s studies. Nakalapus na siya sa
abugasíya, He has gotten through his law course. {2b} [A2; a1c] go up
to, reach. Milapus ba ning karsadáha ngadtu sa Lilúan? Does this road
go all the way through to Liloan? {3} [C23; a12] for two holes to lead
through to each other. Ang duha ka lángub naglápus, The two caves lead
into each other. {4} [B2] for the foreskin of the penis to get loose so
that the glans can be exposed. Magpatúlì ku kun mulapus nag ákung
tintin, I’ll get circumcised when the foreskin of my thing is loose
enough to pull back all the way. a {1} be finished with one’s course of
studies. {2} turn out to be relatively more beautiful than the others
in a group. Námung magsúun si Nína ray lapus, Nena is the only
good-looking one among us children. (←) a going clear through the other
side. Lápus ba ang lungag sa masig ka dawunggan? Do the earholes go
clear through the head to the other side? lapsanan n place where s.t or
s.o. exits. Dúna bay lapsanan ning pasilyúha? Does this passageway have
an exit?

laput n term for various kinds of fry or tiny fishes caught by the
sanggab.

láput = lap-ut_2.

lap-ut_1 v [B126; b2] get slightly burnt, lightly injured from heat or
acid. Nalap-ut ang ákung tudlù sa asidu muryatiku, My finger got
scalded with muriatic acid. Nalap-ut ákung bukubuku sa ínit, My back
got burnt in the sun. n light burn.

lap-ut_2 a for a liquid to get thick and sticky. v [B3(1)] for soup to
thicken. Mulap-ut ang sabaw sa útan nga sagúlan ug bisul, Vegetable
soup thickens if yautia is stewed with it. Haúna sa dì pa makalap-ut,
Take it out before it gets thick. Ang harína nakalap-ut (nakapalap-ut)
sa sabaw, The flour made the soup too thick. -ay, -ay(→) = lap-ut.

lapuy v [B; a4b4] be weary, fatigued. Nalapuy (milapuy) ang ákung mga
buktun sa pagginúna, My arms have become fatigued from weeding. Gilapuy
(gilapuyan) kug maáyu sa paglinanguy, I was exhausted from swimming so
much. a fatigued. ka- n body fatigue.

lapwa v [A; b6(1)] put s.t. in boiling water, to blanch, sterilize, or
prepare it for further cooking. Lapwái (lapwáhi) ang kutsára sa
masakitun, Sterilize the patient’s spoon in boiling water. Lapwáhi ang
útuk sa túbig nga may asin, Parboil the brain in salted water.

lapya n lapping or dashing of waves, sound of waves coming onto the
shore. Ang lapya sa mga balud sa baybáyun, The lapping of the waves on
the shore. v [A; b6] for the waves to strike the shore. lapyahan,
lapyahánan n the place where the waves strike the shore. -in- n sound
of waves striking the shore.

lapyà a broad in face, flattened out. Lapyag nawung, A broad, flat
face. v [B] be, become flattened out. Nalapyà ang nígu nga naligsan sa
trák, The winnowing tray is flattened out because the truck drove over
it.

lapyat a {1} fat and flabby. Dalágang úlay kunu piru lapyat na ug
dughan, She’s supposed to be a virgin but she has sagging breasts.
{2} slow and languid in movement. Lapyat nga manlihuklihuk, Moving
sluggishly. v {1} [B; a2] be, become flabby or lacking in fullness. Wà
kay iksirsayis maung nagkalapyat ang ímung buktun, You lack exercise.
No wonder your arms are getting flabby. {2} [B; a2] move without
energy. Dì giyud mahuman ang ímung trabáhu ug maglapyat ka, Your work
will never get done if you work slow.

lapyù a young and tender. Ang lapyung bágu mauy maáyung utánun, Young
and tender bágu leaves make an excellent vegetable stew. Lapyù nga
kaisípan, Young and tender minds.

lárag v {1} [B2] for leaves to yellow. Nagkalarag ang mga tanum kay way
ulan, The plants are becoming yellow because there hasn’t been any
rain. {1a} [B12] for leaves or flowers to wither and fall off. Nalárag
ang mga dáhun sa lawus nga kamunggay, The withered kamunggay leaves
dropped off. {2} [B12] be faded. Nalárag na ang íyang kaanyag, Her
beauty has faded. {2a} — ang búlak, pagkabúlak lose one’s virginity
(for the flower to fade). Nalárag ang íyang pagkabúlak sa dihang
gipaangkan siya, She lost her chaste beauty when she became pregnant.
{3} [B] get completely drunk. Sa ílang pag-ínum gabíi si Tunyu ang
únang nalárag, In their spree last night Tonio was the first one to get
under the table. {3a} [B12; a1] be fascinated with s.o. Ang íyang
kaanyag mauy nakalárag (nakapalárag) nákù, Her beauty fascinated me.
(→) a withered, yellowed leaves, flowers, faded beauty, unchaste.
Gipangasáwa siya bísan usa na siya ka larag nga búlak, S.o. married her
even though she was a faded flower (no longer a virgin). n fallen
leaves.

láran v [A12; a12] beat, outdo. Dakù túud si Klí apan walà siya
makaláran ni Prísir, Clay may be big but he couldn’t beat Frazier. pa-
v {1} [A3] allow oneself to be outdone. {2} [A13] allow oneself to get
carried away with his emotions. Magpaláran ka gánis ímung kaguul,
masakit ka giyud, If you allow yourself to get carried away with your
emotions, you will surely get sick.

lárang v [A; c1] {1} stew s.t. with coconut milk and nothing else but
spices. Lamì ang kyampaw ug ilárang (larángun), The best way to cook
ray is by stewing it in coconut juice. {2} reheat s.t. to remove the
fat. Laránga ang adúbu arun dílì kaáyu ngilngig, Heat the adúbu so it
won’t be so greasy. n dish stewed in coconut milk, usually stingray.

láras v [A; b6] saw along the length. Larásun nátù ang átung giputul
nga káhuy, We’ll saw the log into lumber. (→) v [A; c1] {1} do s.t. to
all of a group. Ang huramintádu nga milaras ug patay sa tibuuk pamilya,
The amok who killed all the members of the family. Ayaw mi larasa
(ilaras) ug kasábà kay usa ray nakasâ, Don’t include us all in the
scolding because only one of us did anything wrong. Gilaras ku
pagsuruysúruy ang mga dálan dinhi, I wandered through all of the
streets. {2} do s.t. to a larger number of a group than would
ordinarily be expected. Gilaras níyag pangulitáwu ang duha ka magsúun,
He courted two of the sisters at the same time. n ripsaw, saw for
cutting with the grain. -an(→) n sawhorse. -in- n boards sawed off with
a ripsaw.

láraw v {1} [A; ab] make plans to do s.t. Nagláraw ang prisidinti nga
magdiktadur, The president is planning to become a dictator. Dúna siyay
gilárawng buhátun nímu, He is plotting to do s.t. against you. Ikay
gilaráwan níyang patyun, He is planning to kill you. {2} [A; a2] plan
how and where s.t. is to be built. Magláraw ta sa átung balayan, We’re
going to map out the place where the house is to be built. n plan,
plot. Wà kuy láraw sa pagbiyáhi, I have no plans to travel. -an
n {1} picture. {2} graven image (Biblical). Dílì ka magsimba sa mga
laráwan, Thou shalt not worship graven images. {3} image, likeness of.
Laráwan ka sa ímung inahan, You are your mother’s image. {4} typical
example. Laráwan sa kakúgi ug kabuútan, Paragon of industry and virtue.
Laráwan sa kahimsug, A picture of health. v [A; a] showing clearly,
picture s.t. Ang ílang kahimtang naglaráwan sa túmang kakabus, The
condition shows what utter poverty is. Nalaráwan sa íyang panagway ang
kahadluk, Fear was etched on her face. Larawána kunúhay ang lángit, Try
to picture heaven in your mind.

laray_1 v [A; b6(1)] sing a song with meaningless syllables (la la la).
Naglaray siya sa bátà nga gitū́g, She hummed the child to sleep. n song
sung with meaningless syllables.

láray v [A; c1] be in a row or line; cause s.t. to be so. Siyay miláray
sa mga masitíra sa agiánan, She lined the path with flower pots.
Nagláray ang mga patyunun atúbang sa payring iskwad, The condemned men
were lined up before the firing squad. n line, row. (→)_2 = láray, n.
v [A; ac] display goods for sale on the sidewalks or in open booths in
the public market. Adtu tas tábù tan-áwun tag unsay gilaray, Let’s go
to the market and see what is being displayed.

larga v {1} [B36] for a passenger vehicle to leave. Milarga (nalarga)
ang trák binyáan ang kunduktur, The bus went off, leaving the conductor
behind. {1a} leave for a distant place. Mularga mi ugmà pára Butwan,
We’ll leave for Butuan tomorrow. Ug malarga na mi mahibáwu ka ra,
You’ll surely know it if we have gotten off. {1b} used in commands
only: go ahead, start. Ug muingun kung ‘larga’, dágan ... Na, larga na,
When I say ‘OK’, run ... OK, run! — manuk = larga, 1b. {2} [A3P; b]
allow, permit s.o. to do s.t. freely. Kinsa may naglarga nímu nga
ipatandug nang trabahúa? Who gave you a free hand to touch that work?
{2a} [A; b] meet a price offered, agree to do s.t. for a certain price
offered. Mularga ku ánà sa bayinti, I’ll let it go for twenty. {3} [A;
b7] pay out the line. Ayaw palabii ug larga sa tugut ang tabánug, Don’t
pay out the string of your kite too much. Largahi ang pasul, Pay out
the fishline. {4} [A; bc] let cocks go for a fight. Largáhan na gánì
nang duha ka manuk, súgud na ang búlang, When those two cocks are
released, that means the game is on. {4a} [B; b] set on s.o. Gilargahan
siya sa mga buguy, The bullies set on him. -da n all set to go,
well-prepared, showing confidence as one goes into a fight,
examination, or contest. Hustu sa largáda si Klí. Walà giyud magpakítag
kahadluk, Clay was all set to go with complete confidence. He didn’t
show a trace of fear. -dur(→) n {1} one who releases cocks in
cockfighting. {2} one who formally announces the candidacy of s.o.
running for an elective office.

largabista n binoculars. v [A; b5] look at s.t. with binoculars.

largu lead directly to. Kining dalána largu sa subà, The path leads
directly to the river. v {1} [A2; ac] go straight, take a straight
course s.w. Mulargu lang ku ngadtu sa íla, I’ll just go straight to
their place. {2} [A2; abc] do s.t. directly straight away. Mulargu ka
lang ug hílak bísan gipangutána ka lang, You cry right away even though
I only asked you. Dílì ka makalargu ug sulud, You can’t just go
straight in. Ay na lang ug sukda. Largúha na lang pagputul, Never mind
measuring it. Just cut it right off. Largúhi lang siyag ingun nga wà
kay gustu, Just tell him directly that you don’t like him. Ayaw ilargug
hátag, Don’t give it to him directly. {2a} [A2] happen fast without any
previous indication. Milargu ug butu ang ribintadur ug wà gánì musíyù,
The firecracker exploded right away and it didn’t even sizzle.
{3} [B16; c1] be, become straight. Naglargu lang ning sinináa mu rag
sáku, This dress is straight at the sides like a sack. larguhánan
n short, direct route toward. di-, pantalun di- n long pants.

láring n k.o. sword similar to the kanduwálì but with a slight curve to
the blade.

larínu a speaking clearly and fluently. Larínu kaáyu nang Kanúa
mubinisayà, That American speaks Cebuano very fluently. v [B12; c1]
speak clearly and fluently.

láruk = lagduk, in all meanings except 1a.

larut v [A3P; a] {1} pull up by the roots. Maglarut kug mani pára
lapwáan, I’ll pull up some peanuts to boil. Íyang larutun ning tangúha,
He’ll pull this tooth out. {2} pull s.t. off from its moorings, as if
uprooting it. Bagyu ang nakalarut (nakapalarut) sa mga barungbárung,
The typhoon knocked the shanties over. {3} [B12N; b3] lose one’s hair.
Nanglarut ang íyang buhuk, His hair is falling out. n {1} hair that has
fallen out. Matag kalígù níya dúnay daghang larut, Every time he takes
a bath he loses a lot of hair. {2} bad luck, allegedly brought on by
s.o. Ngánung miduwà pa giyud ka, napildi na núun ta. Ikaw lay nagdá sa
larut, Why did you have to play with us? Now we lost. You must have
brought this bad luck. (←) v [A; ab7] take rice seedlings out from
their bed ready for transplanting. Larútun na nátù ang similya kay
andam na ang basak, Let’s take the seedlings out of the seedbed now
because the field is ready for planting.

laruylaruy, laruyláruy v [A; b6] roam idly, aimlessly about instead of
doing s.t. Gilaruylarúyan níya ang íyang pagtuun maung nahagbung, He
wandered about instead of studying, so he failed.

laryang n meaningless word used in singing a song without words.

las for the last time. Hatági pa ku bi, las na lang, Please let me have
one more. This is the last one, for sure.

lása_1 a oil floating on top of liquids. Lása kaáyu ang sabaw sa
linat-ang manuk, The chicken soup is oily because the chicken is fat.
v [B2S] for oil to appear on liquids. Naglasa ang dágat tungud sa
gasulína, The sea is covered with a film of oil from the gasoline leak.

lása_2 n taste. Tayam ang lása sa ílang túbig imnunun, Their drinking
water has a salty taste. v [B2346; c5] be tasty. Dì mulása ang útan ug
daghan ang sabaw, Vegetable stew does not taste good if there’s too
much water. n spices. (→) v [A; b6c1] add or use spices. Mulasa kug
tanglad sa linat-ang manuk, I use lemon grass to spice chicken stew.

las-ag n puddle, esp. a dirty one.

lasak n money contained in s.t. (slang). Pilay lasak sa pitákang inyung
gilunggub? How much was in the bag you snatched?

lasang n {1} forest, jungle. {2} the trees on such land. v [B2; b6] be,
become a forest. Malasang (mulasang) ning yutáa ug dì nímu trabahúun,
This land will become a forest if you don’t cultivate it. ka-an
n forests. -nun a from the forest. Lasangnun nga mga mananap, Jungle
animals. (←) v [A; b5] clear the forest. Nangahánaw ang mga Suban-un sa
dihang gilásang (gilasángan) na ang ílang lugar, The Subanos
disappeared when their land was deforested.

lásaw v [A; c1] for liquids to flow or spread all over. Mulásaw ang
ámung sílung ug mag-ulan, Water flows under our house when it rains. Mu
rag túbig ang álak nga naglásaw sa kumbira, Wine flowed like water at
the party. (→) a diluted, watery. Lasaw ang miskla sa simintu, The
cement is watery. v [AB; b7] dilute s.t., make a mixture thin. Ayaw
lasawa ang kapi, Don’t make the coffee so weak. — ug dugù a cowardly.
Ang lasaw ug dugù níyang manghud wà muambak, His brother was too
chicken to jump.

las-ay a lacking flavor. Las-ay ang sabaw, kúwag útan, The soup is
tasteless because it lacks vegetables. v [B; c1] get to be tasteless.
Ang manggang ahat pagkahinug las-ayg lamì, Mangoes which are not
tree-ripened have an insipid taste.

lasbi — ug rather than that [so-and-so] happen (s.t. else is better).
Maáyu pa ug bayran nímu ang buhis, lasbi ug mamurúsu ang yútà! Pay your
taxes. It’s better than to have your land foreclosed. Dawáta na lang
ning diyis, lasbig wâ, Just accept this dime. It’s better than nothing.
Gihátag na lang nákù, lasbig kawátun, I just gave it to him. Better
than having him steal it.

lasgas a {1} for a smooth surface to be rough with tiny scratches, such
that it would make a grating sound if s.t. were rubbed over it. {2} for
corn to be mature (for the husks to become dry and rough). v {1} [AB;
a] for a smooth surface to get roughened, cause it to do so. Nalasgas
ang imabaw sa lamísa kay gikuriskurisan, The table top got all
scratched because s.o. rubbed s.t. sharp over it. {2} [A13] get a k.o.
scaly formation on the skin, caused by contact with contaminated water.
Naglasgas ang ákung pánit kay nagtrabáhu mi sa kanal, My skin is
infected with scales because we have been working in the ditch.
{3} [B12] for corn to mature (from the notion that the husks get rough
and wrinkled when the fruit is mature).

lasib v [A; a] slice into long, thin pieces or slice a thin portion off
a larger slab. Lamì ang hamun ug nipsun paglasib, Ham tastes better if
you slice it thin. Aku na lay mulasib íning karni nga ipanugba, I will
slice off portions from this meat to broil. Basta mag-apritáda lasibun
ang karni, Apritáda is made with meat cut into slivers.

lasid v [A; c1] involve, include with the others, esp. in s.t.
unpleasant. Ang kastígu sa Diyus mulasid sa tanan, Everybody gets
involved in God’s punishment. Bísag usa ray makasalà, lasirun (ilasid)
ming tanan ug búnal ni Máma, Mother whips everybody even if only one of
us does s.t. wrong.

lásik v [B26; b8] be thrown off for a distance under a forceful impact.
Milásik (nalásik) ug layù ang búla nga íyang gipatíran, He kicked the
ball and it went far. Hilasikan (nalasikan) siya sa lápuk, She got mud
splashed on her.

lasing a drunk. Kusug na nà siya muisturya ug lasing na kaáyu, He
becomes talkative when he is very groggy. v [A13B12; a] get drunk,
cause s.o. to do so.

laski a be fast, sprightly in doing s.t. Laski mulakaw, A fast walker.
Laski ang láwas, A body that is active and full of energy. Laski siyang
muhímug kálù, He is energetic in making hats. v [B2; b6] be fast or
brisk in doing s.t. Mulaski (malaski) nà siyang sugúun ug suhúlan,
She’ll run an errand with alacrity if you pay her. Nagkalaski na ang
nagluyang mga manuk, The chickens were weak, but they are regaining
their strength now.

laskúta n guy rope: {1} a rope, chain, or rod to guide a carabao in
plowing. {2} a rope tied from the boom of a sail to the stern to
control the sail. v {1} [A; b6(1)] use or attach a guy rope to a
carabao or to a sail. {2} [A; a2] make into a guy rope.

laslas v [A; a] cut s.t. with a sawing motion to make a slash in it or
to remove leaves and small twigs. Gilaslas níya ang mga lukay, He cut
off the leaflets from the palm frond. Gilaslasan sa kawatan ang ákung
bag, The thief made a gash in my bag. Malaslas na lang nang ímung bàbà
ug tinambag, dílì gayud pamatíun, You can give him advice till you’re
blue in the face (lit. you can rip your mouth giving him advice), but
he won’t listen to you. n slash, cracks like slashes.

lasmu a having the fishy odor of stagnant water or a body of a person
who has not bathed in weeks. Lasmu kaáyu ang kabù kay walà kahugási,
The dipper smells bad because it hasn’t been washed. Lasmu kaáyu ang
isdà sa batu, Fishes that live in rocks tend to have a revolting smell.
way — a without making a fuss or bother (colloquial). Wà giyud nay
lasmung amahána. Muhátag dáyun bísag unsay pangayúun sa anak, That
father never makes a fuss. Whatever his son asks for he gets. v [B; b6]
smell fishy or revolting like stagnant water. Mulasmu ang plátung dì
sabunan inighugas, Plates develop a fishy smell if you don’t wash them
with soap.

lasnit v [A; a] tear s.t. that sticks or is attached off with force.
Akuy milasnit sa ngil-ad ritrátu nga ímung gipilit sa bungbung, I
stripped off the indecent picture that you had pasted on the wall.
Gilasnítan níyag pánid ang nutbuk, He tore a page out of his notebook.

laspa v [AB126; c1] do s.t. which brings ill or good to s.t. else
besides the thing for which it was intended. Ang inyung binúang
nakalaspa (nakapalaspa) ug daghang táwu, Your foolishness has involved
lots of people. Kay dihà man ku pagpanghátag sa mga kindi, gilaspa
hasta aku, When they gave out the candy, I also got some because I
happened to be there. Íyang gilaspa ug larut ang tanum uban sa sagbut,
He uprooted the plant together with the weeds.

last_1 n in table tennis, one point away from winning. Ug makapuntus
siyag kausa daug na, kay last na man ang íyang iskur, If he makes one
more point, he wins because he needs only one point. v [B56] be a point
away from winning.

last_2 = las.

lastats n in basketball, the one who was the last to touch a ball which
went out of bounds. Inyu ang búla kay lastats man ang inyung kuntra,
It’s your ball because your opponents touched the ball last. v [B1236]
be the last to touch a ball which went out of bounds.

last díl n last deal in a mahjong or card game before quitting. v [c1]
be the last deal in a mahjong or card game. Last dílun (ilast díl) na
ni nátù kay buntag na, Let’s make this our last deal because it’s
already morning.

lasti v [A; c] {1} carry, ride with s.o. on a bike or other vehicle
meant for one. Dílì ka makalasti kay kúlang ug hángin ang gúma, You
cannot ride double with me because there isn’t enough air. {2} tie a
rock to leaves or fronds which hang down from a raft to keep them from
floating. Ang palwa sa lubi gilastíhag batu arun dílì mulutaw, The palm
fronds have rocks tied to them so they won’t float.

lastiku n {1} rubber band. {2} slingshot made of a rubber strip.
v {1} [b6] bind or fasten with a rubber band. Ákung gilastikuhan ang
usa ka bugkus lápis, I bound the bundle of pencils with a rubber band.
{2} [A; a1] shoot with a slingshot. Lastikuhun lang ang kaimítu, Get
the star apple with a slingshot. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] go hunting with a
slingshot. Manglastiku ku ug manuk ihálas, I’ll go hunting wild
chickens with a slingshot. di- having an elastic garter. Dilastiku ang
ákung panti, I am wearing a panty with an elastic garter.

lastrip n {1} last trip of the day by passenger vehicles or trains.
{2} one’s trip to the cemetery (humorous). {3} last chance to get
married. Nangartig maáyu si Marta arun dì hibyaan sa lastrip, Martha
makes herself up carefully in the hope that she can still make the last
train. Bisag lastrip basta pransit, It does not matter if it’s the last
trip (last chance to get married), so long as it’s the front seat (that
is, a rich husband). v {1} [A; c] take the last trip, be the last trip.
Mulastrip ku rung hápun, I’ll take the last trip this afternoon. Ug
malastrip na ni, musakay na lang ku, If this is the last trip, I’ll
just take it. {2} [B26] die (humorous slang).

lásu n {1} ribbon, bow. {2} lasso. v [A; a] {1} tie into a bow. Lasúha
ang listun, ayawg balitùtúa, Lace the shoelace, don’t tie it into a
knot. Gilasúhan níya ang íyang dalága, She tied a ribbon in her little
girl’s hair. {2} lasso. Lasúha ang kábaw nga nakabuhì, Lasso the
carabao that escaped. {3} [a3] get entangled in a rope or vines. Nalásu
ang mangangayam sa daghang bágun, The hunter got entangled in the
vines.

lasù v {1} [A13] masturbate (coarse). {2} [A; a] misuse s.t. so as to
break it. Hala, lasua nang bisiklíta kay ikaw mauy mupaáyu, OK, fool
around with that bicycle, and you will have to fix it.

las-u v {1} [A; b] heat s.t. by pouring boiling water on it. Wà pa ku
makalas-u sa gikan-an sa pasyinti, I haven’t poured boiling water over
the patient’s eating utensils. {2} [B126; b4] get burnt with s.t. very
hot. Nalas-u (nalas-úhan) ang ákung kamut sa bágang ákung nahikapan, I
burnt my hand with the coals that I touched.

lasugas v [A; ac] expose oneself to the elements. Ngánung naglasugas ka
man íning ulan nga dakù? Why are you going out in this heavy rain? Dì
maáyung lasugasun nátù ang ínit, It is not good to expose yourself to
the sun.

las-ung v [A; a] catch with a noose. Maglas-ung tag tamsi pinaági íning
láang, Let’s catch a small bird with this noose. Las-únga nang kabáyung
idlas, Catch that wild horse with a lasso. n lasso or noose that
tightens when you pull it.

las-ut_1 a {1} bad, ugly. Las-ut kaáyug batásan nang bayhána, That
woman has a very bad character. Las-ut ug dagway, Ugly in face.
{2} shoddy, badly done, poor in quality. Las-ut kaáyung pagkabúhat ning
trabahúa, This piece of work is very badly done. Las-ut nga klási sa
panaptun, A lousy k.o. cloth. v [B12; a2] get to be bad, ugly, poor in
quality, do s.t. badly. Ang kadaghan sa adurnu mauy nakalas-ut
(nakapalas-ut) sa íyang sinínà, Her dress was spoiled by the excessive
decorations. Ayaw las-úta ning ímung ági, Don’t make your penmanship
poor.

las-ut_2 = lap-ut_1.

laswa v [AB; b5] pour boiling liquid on. Ákung gilaswáan (gilaswáhan)
ang giíhaw nga manuk arun himulbúlan, I poured hot water on the
slaughtered chicken to get the feathers off. Pagbutukbutuk sa mantíkà
nalaswahan (nalaswa) ku, When the fat popped, I got burnt.

lasyu n {1} canal for diverting water. {2} grooving plane. v {1} [A; a]
divert water with a canal. Lasyúha (lasyuha) ang túbig sa tubud arun
ipatubig, Divert the water from the river for irrigation. {2} [A; b6]
cut a groove. {3} [A13; a12] make into a grooving plane. lasyadur
n grooving plane.

lat = usab (dialectal).

láta n {1} tin can. Láta sa gátas, Can of milk. {2} a canful of. Usa ka
látang biskwit, A canful of biscuits. -in-(→) n canned goods. Karni nga
linata, Canned meat. v {1} [A1; b1c1] prepare canned food for a meal.
Maglinata lang ta kay kápuy ilútù, Let’s just have canned foods because
I’m too lazy to cook. {1} [A] can s.t. di- = linata. abri- n can
opener. batu- n game of kick-the-can.

latà a {1} for fruits to be extremely soft or rotten. Ipásaw ang mga
latà nga prútas, Feed the rotten fruits to the pigs. {1a} decayed,
rotted. Latà na ang halígi, The posts are rotten. {2} for foods to be
cooked, well-done, and soft, Latà na ang linúgaw, The porridge is soft
now. {3} rotten in character. Ang latà nga pamunúan ni Markus, The
rotten Marcos administration. {3a} for a woman to have been had so
often she is putrid (coarse). {4} slow in action as well as thinking
power. Unsáun nátù pagkadaug nga latà kaáyu ang kuts? How can we win
with a rotten coach? v {1} [B12] become rotten or very soft. Náay ilagà
nga nalatà sa tangki, There’s a dead rat that has rotted in the water
tank. Nagkalatà ang mga nuug nga pirming gihúmul, The cloth is rotting
because it is always kept in water. {2} [A; ab] boil food until it is
tender. Ayawg lat-a paglútù ang kamúti kay mawálà ang lamì, Don’t cook
the sweet potatoes too soft or they will lose their flavor. Lat-i ang
karni úsà adubúha, Boil the meat tender before you fry it. {3} [B12] be
crushed to flatness. Malatà giyud ka ug hiligsan ka sa pisun, You’ll be
crushed flat if you are run over by a steam roller. {4} [A3P; b] maul,
gang upon s.o. viciously with blows. Ang kawatan kun hisakpan lat-an sa
mga táwu, The people will maul the thief if they catch him. {4a} [b1]
defeat badly. Gilat-an ang bangà nílang tím, Their lousy team got a
sound thrashing. {4b} [b] subject to vigorous questions or criticisms.
Gilat-an ang tistígus sa abugádu, The lawyer absolutely pulverized the
witness. Pirming lat-an si Markus sa piryudiku, The newspapers always
lambast Marcos. ka-(←) v [A13] be present in huge quantities. Nagkalátà
lang ang sayup sa íyang papil, There were plenty of mistakes on his
paper. Nagkalátà ang lansúnis didtu sa Misámis, There are plenty of
lanzones in Misamis. nilat-an, linat-an n s.t. stewed.

látab n name given to young samúk: Gerres spp.

látab_1 v [B6; b] for liquids to have oil, usually edible, floating on
top. Ang sabaw naglátab sa mantíkà, The soup has streaks of oil
floating on top of it.

látab_2 v [A13] for liquor to be present in inexhaustible quantities.
Maglátab ang tubà sa ámù maduminggu, The toddy simply flows at our
place on Sundays.

látad v [A; c] spread s.t. out under the sun. Ilátad ang mais (kupras)
arun mauga, Spread the corn (copra) under the sun. Ilátad ang putì,
Bleach the white clothes under the sun. lataran n place one spreads
things out under the sun.

látag = látad.

latagaw (from tagaw) a wanderer, rambling about without destination.
Ang latagaw dílì mahimuyù, A vagabond won’t stay in one place. Latagaw
ang ílang isturya, Their conversation wandered from one topic to
another. Latagaw ug mata, Having eyes which rove all over. v [A13B2;
b(1)] wander aimlessly about, without destination. Mulatagaw
(malatagaw) ang irù ug dílì pakan-un, A dog roves about if you don’t
feed it. Síging yawyaw ang maistra piru naglatagaw ang ákung hunàhúnà,
The teacher kept talking away but my mind wandered. Bisan unsang dapíta
ang íyang gilatagawan karun, He roams about any place he feels like
going.

latak a standing out clear. Latak kaáyu ang panti, You can clearly see
her panties (through her skirt). Latak kaáyu ang litra sa aybiim, The
ibm typewriter types clearly. v [B3(1)] for a mark, outline or imprint
to stand out clear.

látak v {1} [B36] for fruits, flowers, or leaves to fall. Malátak ang
mga mangga kun hinug na, Mangoes fall off the tree when they are ripe.
{2} [AN] lower (not cast) fishing equipment into the sea. Anhi ta dinhi
manlátak sa báling, We’ll lower the net in this place.

latang a soft and ripe to the point just prior to getting rotten.
Tam-is kaáyu ang búngan ug latang na, The green table bananas are very
sweet when they are ripened soft. v [B12] become very ripe.

lat-ang v {1} [A; b(1)] miss or skip a chance in a series. Ug
makalat-ang kag tumar sa tablítas, maburus ka dáyun, If you miss taking
a pill you will get pregnant. Lat-angig duha ka linya úsà isulat ang
uluhan, Leave two lines before writing the title. {2} [A; c] for s.t.
to be placed in between s.t. else. Upisína sa prinsipal ang nakalat-ang
sa ámung duha ka kwartu, The principal’s office is between our two
rooms. Lat-ángi ug munggus ang mga tudling sa mais, Plant mung beans
between the rows of corn. lat-anglat-ang v [A13; c1] for things to be
in a series so that they alternate; put them so. Naglat-anglat-ang ang
mga babáyi ug láki paglingkud, The boys and girls are seated
alternately.

latas v {1} [A; a] cross or pass through. Latasun nímu nang subáa
padúng sa íla, You have to cross that river to their place. {2} pass or
go through experiences. Mga kalisud nga íyang gilatas, Difficulties he
passed through. — sa across. Mipánaw aku latas sa kadagátan, I
travelled across oceans. -unun n s.t. to be crossed.

lat-as v [A2; b5c] {1} go straight across s.t., take a short cut.
Milat-as (nanglat-as) kug ági sa plása arun maapsan ka, I walked across
the plaza to catch up with you. Dílì mahímung lat-asan ang lún, You’re
not allowed to take a short cut across the lawn. {2} go across.
Mulat-as úsà kag subà adisir ka muabut sa íla, You have to cross a
river before you get to their house. -anan n path, road for taking a
short cut.

látay v {1} [A2S; b5c] go over a narrow walkway. Milátay sa andamyu ang
mga pasahíru, The passengers walked over the gangplank. Usa ka gamayng
alambri ang gilatáyan (gilátay) sa sirkadur, It was only a small piece
of wire the acrobat walked over. {1a} — sa usa ka lugas lánut be
precarious (passing over a single strand). Ang kahimtang sa gikidnap
naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut, The kidnap victim’s life is hanging by
a thread. {2} [A2S; b(1)] run, flow through a tube or tube-like thing.
Dúnay dugung Aliman nga naglatay sa íyang kaugatan, There is German
blood running in her veins. {2a} [A2; b(1)] for a feeling to creep
through. Ang kabugnaw sa íyang nahikapan milátay sa íyang tudlù ngadtu
sa íyang buktun, The coldness of what he touched crept from his fingers
up to his arm. {3} [A23; c] add a new debt to one’s current account.
Ilátay na lang ning útang sa ákung ristanti, Just add this debt to my
bill. n small wooden bridge for pedestrian or vehicles. -an(→), -anan
n narrow bridge or passageway to walk over.

latbù a fast-growing. Latbù kaáyug tinubuan ang bátà nga daghang
sustansiya, A child grows fast if he gets good food. v [B2; b6] grow or
develop fast. Mulatbù (malatbù) ang tinubuan sa tanum ug abunúhan,
Plants grow fast if they are fertilized. Nagkalatbù kining syudára,
This city is growing by leaps and bounds.

latbug v {1} [A; c] throw or knock s.t. heavy, using force, usually
with an initial backward swing. Tabangan nátug latbug ang patayng irù
sa dágat, Let’s all help throw the dead dog into the sea. {2} [b6] for
the mind to wander away from the subject or situation at hand. Samtang
nagklási mi, layù ug gilatbúgan ang ákung hunàhúnà, My mind wandered
far while we were in class.

lathang n space between two adjacent teeth which are not close
together. Ayaw ug ngísi kay ngil-ad tan-áwun ang lathang, Don’t smile
because the spaces between your teeth are ugly.

lati = nati.

latíba = labatíba.

látid n {1} line which delineates an area or boundary. Sa taliwálà sa
dálan dúnay látid nga putì, A white line is drawn in the middle of the
road. Sapà ang látid sa duha ka lungsud, A river is the boundary
between the two towns. {2} path, plan by which s.t. is carried out.
{3} rules, laws. Dúnay mga látid ang pagdúlag baskitbul, Basketball is
played according to set rules. v [A; a] {1} delineate an area, esp.
where s.t. is to be built. Pagkúhà ug lambu kay maglátid ta sa ámung
balayan, Get some string because we will stake out where the walls for
the house are to be put. {2} plan or arrange a method to be followed or
done. Ang mga Libiral naglátid sa ílang buhátun sa kampanya, The
Liberals were laying out plans for their campaign. Mauy átung
pagasubáyun ang nalátid sa átung kapaláran, What fate has decreed for
us to do is what we must follow. {3} establish laws or rules.

latigu n {1} whip. Latigu sa kabáyù, Horsewhip. {2} punishment
inflicted with a whip. Nakadawat ug latigu kay nakasalà man, He got a
whipping because he did s.t. {3} k.o. aerial orchid with small, violet
flowers and long, whip-like projections. v [A; ab2] {1} whip. Gilatigu
sa kutsíru ang kabáyù kay misúki, The rig driver flogged his horse
because it balked. {2} attack with scathing criticism. Ang kandidátu sa
upusisiyun milatigu sa kaatbang, The opposition candidate lashed out at
his opponent.

latik n {1} syrup made of sugar and water or sugar and coconut milk.
{2} sweet prepared from seedless breadfruit (kulu) cooked in syrup
mixed with coconut milk. v {1} [A1B23(1); a] make syrup, for syrup to
develop. Ilúnud ang ságing kun mulatik (malatik) na ang gipabúkal nga
kámay, Put in the bananas when the sugar turns into syrup. {2} [b(1)]
put syrup on food. {3} [A; a2] prepare the latik made from breadfruit.
-in- = latik, n2.

látik v [A13] for a school of fish to swim near the surface and disturb
it. Andáma ang inyung pasul kay nía na ang bansíkul naglátik, Prepare
your lines because there is a school of mackerel thrashing around on
the surface.

latin n {1} Latin. {1a} special k.o. prayer with magical effects. May
nakat-unan kung latin nga sumpà sa kasukù, I know of a special prayer
that works against anger. {2} a tongue-lashing. Ayaw paglangaylángay ug
paúlì kay ang latin sa ímung asáwa taas ra ba kaáyu, Don’t tarry on
your way home. Your wife’s tongue-lashings are no joke. v {1} [A; a2]
speak Latin. {1a} utter a special magical prayer. {2} [A1; c] give s.o.
a tongue-lashing. Gilatinan ku ni Máma pagpaúlì nákù, Mother gave me a
good tongue-lashing when I got home.

lating v [A2; b4(1)] for a missile to ricochet. Ang bála dílì
makalating kay húmuk ang yútà, The bullet cannot bounce off because the
ground is soft. Nalatingan ku sa bála, The bullet ricocheted off on me.

láting v [B246] for a wound or other injury to swell because of an
infection. Muláting ang samad ug ibuwad sa ínit, A wound swells if you
let the sun get on it.

látu v {1} [B126; a2] have so much of s.t. that one loses pleasure in
it or it fails to have the normal effect. Latúhun ta kag pakáun ug
mangga, I’ll give you so many mangoes you will get sick of them. Nalátu
na ku sa ímung pangatarúngan, I can’t believe your sob stories any
longer. {2} [A2PB12; a1] feel nauseated from exposure to s.t., cause
s.t. to do so. Dugà sa tabákù ang ilátu sa tamalà, Stupefy the octopus
with tobacco-leaf juice.

latù n a branching, semi-transparent seaweed, greenish in color and
edible. It has small, rounded growths on the branches which pop when
pressed.

latuk_1 v [A3; b(1)] have a blank and stupid look on the face. Naglatuk
lang ang tuntu. Wà makasabut, The idiot just stared blankly. He didn’t
understand. Gilatukan lang ku sa íyang mata dihang ákung gisultíhan,
She just stared at me blankly when I talked to her.

latuk_2 n cassava flour, very fine, white sediment from cassava juice.

latun n {1} cylindrical pail with the mouth as big as the bottom.
{2} drum for petroleum products.

latundan = alitundan.

latung a very ripe, bordering on over-ripeness. Húmuk na kaáyu ang
kapáyas kay latung na man, The papaya has turned soft because it is
very ripe. v [B2; b6] be, become very ripe.

latungdan = alitundan.

latus v [A; a1b2] {1} whip with anything flexible. Dílì giyud tu
mulatus ang ámung amahan apan mahadluk giyud mi níya, My father never
whipped us but we feared him. Ang mga madri maglatus sa ílang
kaugalíngun inigka Byirnis Santu arun pagsakripisyu, The nuns flog
themselves on Good Fridays to mortify themselves. {2} attack, criticize
severely. Kanúnay níyang latusun si Markus sa íyang lindug, He always
criticizes Marcos in his column.

latuy a for edible beans or pea pods to be tender. v [b6] cook s.t.
together with tender pods. Latuyi ang linat-an nga báka, Put tender
string beans into the beef stew.

lau = lalau.

laubláub a increasing and diminishing in intensity periodically.
Laubláub ang hilánat íning batáa, This child’s fever rises and falls.
v [B456] for s.t. to increase and diminish in intensity periodically.
Mulaubláub giyud ang nigusyu, Business fluctuates, as you would expect.
Maglaubláub ang pagguwà íning tabuguk, Tabuguk octopuses appear in
great numbers from time to time. Ang tilíik sa sirína naglaubláub, The
wailing of the siren rises and falls.

laud v [A; c] tie s.t. to s.t. letting the rope go around it several
times before knotting it. Ang kunduktur mauy mulaud sa mga kargamintu
sa stipburd, The conductor ties loads to the running board. Ang táwung
gikastígu gilaud sa halígi ug gipahulmigasan, The offender was tied to
a post and left to the ants.

laug a {1} liking s.t. very much and, therefore, disliking to share it.
Laug kaáyu kug ayis krim, I’m very fond of ice cream. Laug siyag bayli,
She loves to dance. {2} selfish. Laug nga batáa, dílì manghátag, What a
selfish child. She won’t give anything to anyone else. v [B12] get to
be greedy. (←)_1 [B12] take a strong liking to s.t. Nía rag ímung
libru. Way naláug, Here’s your damn book. Who wants it anyway (lit. no
one has taken a liking to it).

láug_2 v [A; a] {1} go out to go about with no particular purpose.
Unsay ímung giláug didtu? Dúna kay gibisitáhan? What did you stroll
over to their place for? Did you visit s.o.? {2} get out of a place,
flee. Miláug ang manuk, The chicken flew the coop. Laúgan ka sa ímung
mga sákup kun mag-inistriktu ka, Your employees will leave you if you
are too strict. -an(→) a tending to go out to roam about. v [B12] get
to be a roamer.

laugdu (from ugdu) v [B; c1] pile, heap up. Nagkalaugdu ang mga sagbut
nga wà kuháa sa mga basuríru, The garbage is piling up because it
hasn’t been collected by the garbage men.

láum v {1} [A; b(1)] expect s.t. hopefully. Nagláum ku nga mausab pa
siya, I still have hopes that he’ll change. Laúmi ang íyang pagbálik,
Hope for his return. {2} [A; bc5] rely. Makaláum ba ku sa ímung sáad?
Can I trust your promises? Kining lúti ang bugtung námung gilaúman sa
panginabúhì, This small lot is our sole means of support. ka-an, pag-
n {1} hope. Nawad-an na siyag pagláum sa kinabúhì, He has lost hope in
life. Kini rang midisináha ang ákung pagláum, This medicine is my only
hope. ma-un a full of hope.

laumlaum v [A1; b(1)] prolong one’s stay in a certain place for a
purpose. Naglaumláum ang mga batan-un human sa pangadyì tungud sa
bayli, The young men who joined the prayers stayed late for the dance.
Gilaumlaúman nákù sa Manílà ang pagpaluap sa ákung apuyintmint, I
stayed in Manila for some time to follow up on my appointment.

laun a aged: {1} for s.t. that gets better as it grows old to be
mature. {1a} mellowed, aged. Bínung laun, Aged wine. Tabákung laun,
Mellowed tobacco. {1b} for a plant or animal commonly found immature to
grow to its full extent and thus improve. Laun nga aháan ang midáwi
kaníya, He caught a full-grown giant snapper. {2} old stock left over
from the previous harvest. Unáhug dispatsar ang laun, Get rid of the
old stock first. {3} old maid (humorous). v [B3; b4(1)] for s.t. to
age. Ang kamúti nga malaun (mulaun) sa uma dagkù ug tam-is, If you
leave sweet potatoes in the ground to maturity, they will be big and
sweet. Wà makalaun ang tabákù kay anam, The tobacco didn’t get a chance
to age because they kept smoking it as it matured. Ug subra ka
kaistrikta, hilaunan kag dalága, If you are too strict, your daughter
is going to turn into an old maid on you.

launduk = taliunduk.

laung = ingun_2 (dialectal).

laus a past one’s peak or popularity. Laus na ang buksidur, The boxer
is past his prime. v [B12] be past one’s peak or popularity.

laúsag v [B4] for undesirable characteristics to worsen. Milaúsag ang
íyang kakiriwan, His thievery got worse. Naglaúsag ang pagkapilyu sa
bátà, The child misbehaved more and more.

lauy a lacking sleep. Lauy ku kay nagbilar ku gabíi, I lack sleep
because I kept vigil last night. v [B126; b6] lack sleep. (←)_1 v [A13]
stay up late at night. Nagláuy siya tungud sa íyang paynals, He is
staying up late to study for his finals.

láuy_2 v [A; c1] go, see to visit or to see how s.t. is doing. Muláuy
(magláuy) ku sa ákung higála sa uspital, I will visit my friend in the
hospital. Laúyun (iláuy) nátù ang kamaisan sa walug kun túa na ta sa
búkid, While we are in the mountains we will go see how the corn we
planted in the valley is doing.

láwà_1 n a spider. lawàlawà n spider web, cobweb. v [b4] {1} be filled
with cobwebs. Gilawàlawaan na lang ang ímung makinilyang way gáwì, Your
typewriter is all covered with cobwebs because it’s never used. {2} for
a dying man’s eyes to become dull and blurred (lit. have cobwebs in
one’s eyes).

láwà_2 (from walà) not have (slang). Láwà nu siyay takwal, He says he’s
out of dough.

lawáan n name given to a number of forest trees producing inexpensive
timber, widely used in construction: Pentacme and Shorea spp. — nga
putì: Pentacme contorta. — pula: Shorea negrosensis.

láwag n k.o. fishing with lights. Several boats illuminate a wide area
and when the fish appear, the boats gradually converge, drawing the
fish into a small area from which they can be scooped up with a net.

lawak n room in a house or building. v [A1; a] make a room. Gilawakan
ku ang sílung pára sa mga gamit, I made a room in the basement for the
tools.

láwang a for an area to be wide, spacious. Mas láwang ang tinisan kay
sa baskitan, A tennis court is wider than a basketball court. n space
across, width. Pila ka mitrus ang láwang sa kalsáda? How many meters
wide is the road? v [B23] be, become wide or spacious. lawanglawang,
lawangláwang v [B4] {1} have too much space for the amount of material
put in. Naglawanglawang ang trák padúlung sa syudad kay way pasahíru,
The truck went to the city nearly empty because there were no
passengers. {2} be in a place which is too spacious. Maglawanglawang ta
sa dakung balay, We’ve got room to burn in that huge house. {3} [c1]
make s.t. wider. Gilawanglawang ang silya sa manidyǐr, The manager’s
chair was given a wider seat.

lawanlawan = lawanglawang. see lawang.

láwas n {1} body of human or animal. taput — the clothes on one’s back.
Ang ákung nasalbǎr sa súnug ang taput láwas, All I could save from the
fire was the clothes on my back. {2} the frame or main part of a
structure. Láwas sa ayruplánu, Fuselage of the plane. Ang láwas sa
angkla, The shank of the anchor. {3} one’s turn in a game where the
players perform one at a time in succession. Sa bíku kamuy páris ug aku
rang usa, apan duhay láwas ku, It’ll be you two against me in
hopscotch, but I get two turns. {4} — ug katarúngan body and reasoning,
all one arms oneself in fighting for justice (as opposed to money,
weapons). Láwas ug katarúngan ang ákung iatúbang sa ímung lantúgì, I
come here not to fight, but to talk it out (offer my reasoning).
{5} one who takes another person’s place, performing his functions in
his absence. Ang kinamagulángang babáyi mauy láwas sa íyang inahang
patay na, The eldest daughter took the mother’s place when she died.
{6} tantamount to, as good as. Sa pag-insultu nímu sa ákung bána láwas
ug aku ang ímung gipasakitan, If you insult my husband it is the same
as if you hurt me. Bisag usa ray ákung anak, láwas gihápun ug tulu kay
duha may ákung binuhì, I have only one child, but it is good as three
because I have two adopted ones. {6a} good for. Miurdir kug pagkáun
láwas ug tulu ka táwu, I’ll order food enough for three persons.
{7a} physical strength, resistance. Tungud niíning ákung sakit walà na
akuy láwas nga ikatrabáhu, Because of my illness I do not have the
strength to work. {7b} one’s single body, all that one has to dispose
of in working (and no more). Ug ákù ang tanan, unsa pa may ákung láwas?
How could I possibly do everything. I don’t have but two hands.
v {1} [B145] have a certain k.o. body. Kaniadtu nagláwas sab kug sáma
kalísun kanímu karun, Formerly, I had as nice a body as you have now.
{2} [A2; c] make a body for some structure. Kining kahúya ígù rang
makaláwas sa píkas kílid sa sakayan, These boards are only enough to
make one side of the boat. (→) n {1} internode, section of a plant stem
between two successive nodes. Tag-as kaáyug lawas kining ímung tubu,
Your sugar cane stalks have long internodes. {2} strands of hair above
the base. paN- v [A] be in the upper part of the strands of hair.
Kasagáran manlawas ang lusà basta mamusà na, Usually nits stay in the
upper part of the strands of hair when they hatch. -in-, -in-(→) n in
person, one’s physical presence. v [A; a1] appear personally. Mulinawas
pagsalída si Súsan Rúsis, Susan Roces will appear personally. hi-
v [ANC12; bN] have sexual intercourse outside of marriage. Dì
mahilangit kadtung manghiláwas, Those who fornicate will not go to
heaven. Dì ka makighiláwas sa mga way bunyag, Lie not with the heathen.
panghi- n fornication. makighi-un a fornicator. -an(→) a physically
well-built, stocky. ka-an n the whole body. paN- n health; general
well-being of a person or animal. tagi-, tag- n one’s person, what k.o.
body one has. Náa ra sa tagiláwas ug makaagwanta ba sa bug-at nga
trabáhu, It depends on the person if he can stand hard work. lawasnun
a pertaining to the body or flesh. Lawasnun nga kalimpiyu, Cleanliness
of the body. Lawasnun nga kahínam, Desires of the flesh.

láway n saliva.  ray puhúnan n persuasive talk (lit. spit was all that
was used). Láway ray ákung puhúnan áni kay ákù siyang giulug-ulúgan, I
got this by fast talk because I soft-soaped him in giving it to me. (→)
v {1} [B46] drool. Milaway dáyun ákung bàbà pagkakità nákù sa hilawng
mangga, My mouth watered when I saw the green mangoes. Maglaway siya
nga matúlug, He drools when he sleeps. {2} [B1456] feel very desirous
of s.t. one cannot have. Maglaway ta áning mga dátù nga makapalit bísag
unsa, All we can do is drool at what rich people have. pa-(→) v [A3;
a1] make s.o. desire s.t. strongly which he cannot have. Dì úsà ku
magminyù, magpalaway ku úsà sa mga laláki, I won’t get married yet.
I’ll just let men drool over me. Ímu lang kung gipalaway sa ímung tíbi,
You were just making me envious of your TV set. -an(→) n {1} a folk
doctor who treats patients with his saliva. {2} k.o. carangoid fish,
shiny-white in color, that spits a transparent, sticky liquid.
lawaylaway n name given to various whelks.

law-ay a offensive to decency, revolting to the taste. Gisinsur ang
law-ay nga libru, The obscene book was censored. Law-ay kaáyung
tan-áwun ang dakù nga magbinátà, It’s disgusting to see a grown-up act
like a child. v [B12; b6] be lewd, obscene. Nagkalaw-ay ang mga sini
karun, Movies are all lewd nowadays. Gilaw-ayan ku sa báhù sa patay,
The odor of the corpse was revolting to me.

lawgaw v {1} [A; ac] touch, stir up s.t. with the bare hands. Panghunaw
kay milawgaw ka man sa pasaw, Wash your hands because you stirred the
slop with them. Ayawg lawgáwa nang túbig imnunun, Don’t stick your
hands in the drinking water. {2} [B1] be all mixed up, confused.
Naglawgaw ang iksplikasiyun. Wà kung kasabut, His explanation was all
mixed up. I couldn’t understand it. {2a} get to be no good. Nalawgaw
ang ílang sáyaw kay yabag ang dúyug, Their dance number was
unsuccessful because the music was out of tune. {3} [AN] mix into s.t.
and disturb its orderly performance. Ngánung gilawgaw man nímu si Pidru
nga nangamural? Why did you butt in on Pedro just when he was
proposing? a {1} falling below good standards. Lawgaw tawhána puru lang
sáad, He is no good. He is all promises. {2} mixed up and chaotic.
Lawgaw tung iliksiyúna, dúnay pálit, The election was chaotic with
rampant vote-buying. {3} creating disturbance or confusion in an
otherwise orderly performance. Ay siyag paintraha sa sáyaw kay lawgaw,
Don’t let him take part in the folk dance because he tends to bungle.
maN-r- n one who habitually creates trouble and confusion in otherwise
smooth and peaceful proceedings.

láwi, láwì n sickle feather, one of the long curved feathers in the
tail of domestic cocks. lawiláwi s.t. like a tail feather. Lawiláwi sa
kúgun, The flower of the cogon grass. lawían, lawíhan n name given to
fish of various families that have filamentous projections, usually
from the fins.

lawig v {1} [A; a] pasture livestock. Ilawig ang kábaw sa lagúna,
Pasture the carabao in the meadow. {1a} give an additional length of
line. Lawigi ang tugut sa tabánug, Pay out more string to the kite.
Lawigi ang kábaw arun daghan ang masabsab, Give the carabao more rope
so that it can graze over a wide area. {1b} [A; b] tie an anchor to a
boat. Lawigi ang sakayan arun dì madala sa sulug, Keep the boat
anchored so the current won’t carry it away. {2} [A; b6] sail. Naglawig
na ang barku pagdasmag sa unus, The boat was on the high seas when a
storm hit us. Kadagátan nga gilawigan sa barku, The seas the ship
sailed across. {2a} travel in general. Bag-u ka pa gánì nahiulì mulawig
na pud ka? You have just arrived and now you are going to take another
trip? n {1} cord tied to s.t. {1a} anchor rope. {1b} tether rope.
{1c} cord wound around the neck. Taas ug lawig ang íyang pag-antus, She
has a long chain of suffering tied around her neck. {2} tentacles. -an
place s.t. is tethered. -l-an(←) n province (lit. place one sails to).
-um-(←) n a slender thread which, in folk belief, attaches the placenta
(inunlan) to the womb (matris) s.w. in the vicinity of the umbilical
cord (púsud) and is the passageway for food from the mother to the
baby. The lumáwig is considered very delicate, and if there is intense
bleeding during childbirth it is believed due to a rupture of the
lumáwig. v [b4] have one’s lumáwig ruptured and then suffer intense
bleeding.

lawiláwi n variety of croton (kalípay).

lawis n spit, a point of low land extending from the shore into the
water. v [B6] jut out. May unud nga daw tudlù ang milawis sa kumagkù sa
táwu, A finger-like growth is sticking out from the man’s thumb.
Nasungkù aku sa naglawis nga kawáyan, I bumped my head on a piece of
bamboo that was sticking out. Gibaligyà ang yútà nga nalawis sa
kinadak-an sa yútà, They sold the lot that was jutting out from the
main portion of their land.

lawiswis = alawiswis.

lawit v {1} [B456] for s.t. almost cut off to dangle. Naglawit ang
ákung tudlù kay nabakgutan sa sanggut, My finger is dangling because I
nearly cut it off with a sickle. {2} [A; b6] hang, cling barely or
precariously to s.t. Naglawit ang kinabúhì sa masakitun sa usa ka lugas
lánut, The patient’s life is hanging by a single thread. lawitlawit
n pieces of tissue hanging from cuts of meat.

lawitan n the two boats holding the ends of the net in a k.o. fishing
with a large net (sinsúru) where the fish are driven into a small area
by small boats (buntúlan) converging.

lawlaw_1 v {1} [A; c1] slacken a line. Maglawlaw ku áning mikubit arun
dì mabugtù ang pasul, I am paying out extra fishing line so the line
won’t break. Ayaw ilawlaw (lawláwa) ang hayhayan, Don’t make the
clothesline so loose it sags. {1a} [B] get to be loose, sagging.
Mulawlaw ang kurtína kun luagun ang hílu, The curtain will sag if you
make the string loose. {1b} [AB] for trousers to be cut loose at the
crotch, wear trousers cut loose at the crotch. Ságad sa tigúlang
maglawlaw ang kinarsunisan, Most old people wear pants loose at the
crotch. {2} [AN; b3] go round the edge of s.t. instead of directly
across or along it. Manglawlaw tag ági diri kay dì man katadlasan ang
ílang baul, We’ll have to go around this way because they won’t let
people cut across their field. a be cut loose at the crotch. pa- v [A;
c1] let time pass idly by. Ang nagpalawlaw sa panahun way maáni, Those
who waste their time doing nothing will have nothing to harvest.

lawlaw_2 n sardines which have been preserved in a large quantity of
salt, such that not all the salt is dissolved in the juices of the
fish, and the result is a dry fish enveloped with fishy grains of salt.

lawngun = lalungun. see lálung.

lawril n bay leaves used as a spice.

lawriyat n k.o. Chinese banquet with ten or more courses tendered on
special occasions.

lawsi {1} poor, sloppy, bad in quality or appearance. Lawsi siya
mamisti, She dresses poorly. Lawsi kadtung pagkáun, That was lousy
food. {2} boring and uninteresting. Lawsing parti, A lousy party. Lawsi
tung salidáha, That was a lousy movie. v [B12; a12b6] be, become lousy.

lawting n attic consisting of a shelf built underneath a roof and which
runs part of the distance covered by the roof. It is used as a storage
place or sleeping area. v [A1; a] make a lawting.

lawud n deep open sea. pitu ka — seven seas. see lábang. v [A2NP; a]
{1} go out into the deep sea, usually to fish. Ug maáyu ang panahun
mulawud (manglawud) ku karung gabíi, If the weather is good, I will go
out to sea tonight. Kinahanglang lawrun ta giyud ang malasugi, You have
to go to the deep to get the sailfish. {2} [A13] = lawudláwud.
lawudláwud v [A] be like a sea. Naglawudláwud ang halapad nga humayan,
The vast rice field is like a sea. i-(←) n place toward town and away
from rural areas. v [AP; ac6P] go, bring s.t. toward town. i- = iláwud,
v. kalawran n seas. kinalawran n deepest part of the sea. lawudnun n of
the seas.

láwug v [A2SB] for stiff and long things to warp or bend. Miláwug ang
tabla human initi, The board warped after having been exposed to the
sun. (→) n long bent things.

láwung n lionfish, a brightly colored fish of coral reefs with very
poisonous dorsal fins: Pterois spp.

lawus a {1} withered. Ngánung lawus ang utanung ímung gipalit? Why did
you buy withered vegetables? {2} withered or wizened from age or
sickness. Lawus na si Glurya Rumíru, gúwang na man gud, Gloria Romero
is faded now. She is quite old. {3} past one’s prime. Lawus nang
pagkabuksingíru si Ilurdi, Elorde is over his peak as a boxer. {4} for
feelings to have faded. Lawus na ang ímung pagbátì nákù, Your love for
me has faded. (←) v [B2S; b6] {1} get withered. Ang búlak muláwus
(maláwus) ug initan, Flowers wither if you expose them to heat.
Nagkalawus na ang tanum kay wà katubigi, The plants are getting
withered because they were not watered. {2} get old and shriveled.
Naglawus ka man. May balatían ka? You look shrunken. Are you ill?
{3} get beyond one’s prime. {4} for feelings to fade. Kanang prisyúha
makaláwus (makapaláwus) giyud sa gána, That price sure throws cold
water on my desire. Nagkalawus ang ákung pagláum nga maulì pa siya, My
hope for his return is wavering.

láwut v [B; a12] for liquids to become thick and gooey. Magkalawut ang
linúgaw madúgayng sinukgay, The more porridge is stirred the thicker
and more viscous it becomes. a thick and gooey. Láwut ning utána kay
náay tugábang, This vegetable dish is gooey because it contains
tugábang.

law-uy a cooked vegetables without fish, meat, or fat. Law-uy lang ning
útan kay way subak, This vegetable dish is cooked just plain because we
have nothing to cook with it. v [A13B; a12] cook vegetables plain, be
plain and tasteless.

láya n a k.o. shallow water cast net, conical in shape, made of fine
sewing thread with a fine mesh. Weights are put on the mouth to spread
the net when thrown, and when the net is lifted the weights cause the
mouth to contract so that escape is impossible. v {1} [AN; a2] catch
fish with a láya. {2} [A; a12] make into a láya. layaláya n very thin
membrane that envelopes the stomach, used as a wrapper for murkun.

*láya see iláya.

layà_1 n k.o. fresh-water fish which grows 2′ long and 6″ wide, with
big, silvery scales, spotted with black.

láyà a dried, withered up. v {1} [B23(1)] dry, become dry or withered.
Unyà ra daúbi ang sagbut kun muláyà (maláyà) na, Burn the leaves when
they become dry. Himalatyun na ning kahúya kay nagkalayà nag mga dáhun,
This tree is going to die because its leaves are withering. {2} [B2;
b6] for the ears of corn to mature. {3} — ang bágà v [B2; a12] for the
lungs to be damaged from drinking too much. n paper money (slang).
(→)_2 a {1} dried up. {2} for ears of corn to be mature. {3} — ug bágà
having inflamed lungs from overindulgence in drinking. {4} dáhung —
paper money (slang).

láyag_1 n sail of a boat. v [A; b6] put up the sail. Mularga na ang
sakayan kay gilayágan na, The boat is ready to sail because they have
hoisted the sails. (→) v [A13] {1} for a sailboat to sail. {1a} lantaw
ug — sit idly by watching people that are working without lifting a
finger to help (as if watching s.o. sailing). Naglantawg naglayag bisag
gikinahanglan kaáyu ang íyang pagtábang, He just sits idly by watching,
even though his help is badly needed. {2} for the ears to stick out.
Naglayag ang dunggan, His ears stick out. -an(→) k.o. volute shell
growing to 3″ by 1½″ with no operculum. Edible but bitter. -in-an
n boat with sails. -un a favorable for sailing. -un ug dátù for a wind
to be slow (lit. good only for rich people with plenty of time to sail
with). -um-an n k.o. small squid, growing to 8″ with a very reduced
internal plate. paN-um-an(→) v [B; c] go to catch lumayágan.
panlumayaganan place one can fish for lumayágan. {2} boat for fishing
for lumayágan.

láyag_2 n the missing of one’s menstruation but not because of
pregnancy. v [b4] miss one’s period. Ábi kug gilayágan ku, burus giyud
diay, I thought I just missed a period, but I was actually pregnant.

láyag_3 v [A; b(1)] join others who have food, drinks, or cigarettes to
mooch off of them. Way makaláyag níya kay adtu siya sa tágù magkaun, He
ate in seclusion because he didn’t want anyone to mooch off of him.

layangláyang n {1} awning or temporary shelter made of four posts and a
cloth or thatch covering. {2} principal rafters placed at the thwart
edges of a roof which, in a thatched roof, hold the thatch in place.
v [A; b] put a temporary shelter s.w.

láyas v [A2; b6] {1} leave a place to avoid s.t. unpleasant. Miláyas
siya sa dagmalan níyang inaína, She escaped from her cruel stepmother.
Gilayásan siyag suluguun, Her servant walked out on her. {2} get out of
a place for any reason. Láyas, animal, Leave this home, you beast. (→)
n escapee. Siya layas sa Bilíbid, He is an escapee from Bilibid prison.

layat_1 v [A2; a] jump to a place: up, down, or over. Milayat ang
kabáyù sa kural, The horse jumped over the fence. Layata lang nang
bintánà nga mubù, Just jump down from that low window. n act of
jumping.

layat_2 n large, edible tree fungus, shiny, dark-brown in color.

láyaw v [A2] for animals to roam about. Muláyaw ang mga háyup nga
buhían, Domestic animals stray if you don’t tether them. (→)
n {1} animal that has been allowed to stray. Kinahanglang lamíngun ang
manuk layaw kay langsag unud, You have to keep stray chickens and feed
them special food before you kill them; otherwise they have a terrible
flavor. {1a} going out when one should not be doing so, person that has
been allowed to stray. Madisgrasya giyud ang babáying layaw, A woman
that gallivants about is likely to get into trouble. {1b} off the mark,
far from correct. Layaw kaáyu ang ímung pangagpas, Your conjecture is
way off the mark. {2} for a mixture to be too weak in consistency.
Layaw nga pintal, Paint that’s too thin. {3} in phrases: — ug dugù
cowardly, lacking guts. — ug hunàhúnà given to sudden whims or fancies.
Way pundu ang táwung layaw ug hunàhúnà, A person who is given to sudden
whims or fancies is unstable. — ug útuk a dull person. Ang táwung layaw
ug útuk gáhing makasabut, A dull person does not understand easily.
v [B1] become a wanderer, one who gallivants around. -an n open land
where animals are allowed to roam and graze. pina- a spoiled, left
alone by parents to do as he pleases. Way trabáhung makat-unan ang
bátang pinalayaw, A spoiled child that has been left to do as he
pleases will not learn a trade.

laybrari n library. -yan n librarian. v [B16] be a librarian.

laygay v {1} [A3P; a12] make s.o. bedridden. Sakit nga milaygay kaníya,
The sickness that incapacitated him. Gilaygay siyag tísis, He was
bedridden with T.B. {2} [a4] be affected with great financial
difficulty. Mga kabus nga gilaygay sa kalisud, Poor people who are
wallowing in difficulty. a incapacitating, leaving one bedridden.
Laygay sakíta nang paralisis, Paralysis leaves one bedridden.

layhan see *lahay.

layi diantigwa n old, outmoded laws or customs. Sunud ka man ánang layi
diantigwa. Kabag-úhan na run! You’re following old, out-moded ways.
We’re in the Twentieth Century now!

láyì n tool for cutting abaca fibers or buri strips, made of a thin,
flat piece of bagákay bamboo, 3″–4″ long.

láyik v [A12] have a liking or crush for s.t. or s.o. (slang).
Nakasabut giyud ku nga nakaláyik nà si Idyun nímu, I realize that Edion
has taken a liking to you.

layiku n layman, laity. Ang buluhatun sa layiku sa iglisya, The role of
the laity in the church.

láyip n life imprisonment. Gisintinsyahan siyag láyip, He got life
imprisonment.

layit wit n lightweight boxer or wrestler.

laylay_1 a {1} tired, drooping from fatigue. {2} for plants to be limp
or drooping. Pangúhag laylay nga mais, itambug sa kabáyù, Get the
drooping corn leaves to feed the horses. {2a} for leaves to be colored
red or yellow. {2b} people at the bottom strata of society. v {1} [BN;
a2b4] be tired. Milaylay (nalaylay) ang ákung abága ug pinas-an sa
baskit, My shoulders got tired from carrying the basket. Wà mu layláyig
tinindug, Aren’t you all exhausted from standing? {2} [AB; c1] droop,
cause s.t. to do so. Naglaylay ang abaga, His shoulders are drooping.
Layláya (ilaylay) ang sanga arun makab-ut ang búnga, Bend the branch so
you can reach the fruit. {2a} [AN; b] gather bent or discolored leaves.
ka- tiredness, feeling of being weak from fatigue. n yellowed leaves on
trees that are about to drop.

laylay_2 v [A; a2] sing with no words other than meaningless syllables.
Naglaylay ang inahan nga nagpakatúlug sa bátà, The mother is singing
the baby to sleep. n song hummed or sung with syllables la, la.

laylu v [A; c1] not do s.t. one would normally do, esp. combat, because
of some danger. Manglaylu tag panágat kay nagdáut ang panahun, We won’t
go out fishing because the weather is bad. Manglaylu lang ku, kay náa
ang amahan, I won’t visit her for the while because her father is home.
Wà na gániy bála, laylúhun (ilaylu) dáyun sa mga girilya ang ílang
kalihúkan, When the guerrillas run out of bullets, they lie low for
awhile.

layning n lining or cloth used for lining. v [A; a] put a lining in
s.t.

laysul n lysol.

Layti n Leyte.

laytir n cigarette lighter. v [b(1)] light with a lighter.

layu v [A; c1] broil unhusked young corn over flames, cooking it
half-way. Layuhun (ilayu) nátù ang linghud arun dalì rang malútù, Let’s
just pass the young corn unhusked through the flames so it won’t take
long to cook it.

layù a {1} far, distant. Layù kaáyu ang Urúpa, Europe is far away.
Paryinti mi piru layù na, We are relatives but rather distant. {1a} far
from being correct. Layù ra kaáyu ang ímung tubag sa dyakpat kwistiyun,
Your answer to the jackpot question was far off the mark. {1b} — ra sa
tinái for mishaps not to be serious (far from the intestines). Gamay
ning samára layù ra sa tinái, It’s a superficial wound. It’s not
serious. {1c} — ra sa tinái sa manuk for answers and guesses to be wide
off the mark. Ang ímung tubag sayup ug layù ra sa tinái sa manuk, Your
answer is wrong and is way off the mark. {2} comparatively far behind
in some good trait. Layù ra si Magsaysay ni Salungga sa abilidad,
Magsaysay can’t hold a candle to Salonga. v [B25C; ab7c] be far. Ug
mulayù ang tugdúnan sa búla, ipakúhà lang, If the ball lands far away
have s.o. go get it. Ug makigláyù ka nákù, mingawun ku nímu, If you
want us to be far from each other, I’ll miss you. Layúun ta mu kay
palaaway mu, I’ll keep you two far apart because you are quarrelsome.
Layui pa kay duul ra nà, Move it farther away because it’s too close.
dílì ig-(←) not distantly related by blood. Dílì ta igláyù magtagsa ang
átung inahan, We are not distantly related because your mother is my
mother’s first cousin. hi-/ha- v [B1256] get to be far away. pa- v [A;
bc] go far away, stay away from a place, hold s.t. at a distance.
Ngánung magpalayù ka man kanámù? What makes you want to keep your
distance from us? Gipalay-an ni pagsiyát arun makúhà ang byú, This
picture was shot from a distance to get the view. pahi- v [A; a3] go
far away. Tungud sa ákung kahiubus, magpahilayù ku, I’m going away
because I was terribly hurt. linay-ánay, linay-anay v [C] be far from
one another. -g- = layù (plural). ha- = layù, a 1. gilay-un, kalay-un
n distance. Usa ka kilumitru ang gilay-un, The distance is one
kilometer. kinalay-an a farthest.

lay-u_1 n a body of standing water in low-lying areas formed by
overflowing floodwaters or heavy rains. Dúnay daghang isdà sa lay-u,
There are lots of fish stranded in the pool.

lay-u_2 v [B; a2] for plants to wither from being in the heat after
being uprooted or damaged by wind. Malay-u (mulay-u) ang mga tanum sa
kusug nga hángin, The plants will wither because of the strong wind.
Lay-úhun nang mga sagínga nga nangatumba sa ínit run, The heat will
wither those plants that were uprooted.

layug v [A2C; a2] {1} grapple with s.o. Giulang ku ang duha ka bátà nga
nagláyug, I intervened when the two boys were wrestling with each
other. Gilayug ku siya kay ákung giílug ang kutsilyu, I wrestled with
him to get the knife from him. {2} wrestle with a woman in foreplay.
Daw may gilayug nga dalága, It seems that s.o. was wrestling with a
girl (to rape her). tig- a {1} fond of wrestling. {2} fond of
mutilating plants by breaking off branches, flowers, etc. as if having
wrestled with them. Kining mga bátà dinhi muy tiglayug sa mga tanum,
It’s the children that destroy the plants here.

láyug a tall and quite straight. Láyug kaáyu nang lubíha, That coconut
tree is very tall. v {1} [B2] become tall. Muláyug (maláyug) nang
kahúya ug dì pul-úngan, That tree will grow tall if you don’t prune it.
{2} [A; b6] fly (usually said of fowls that keep to the ground).
Miláyug ang manuk nga gigúkud sa irù, The chicken flew up when the dog
chased it. Taas ug gilayúgan ang manuk, The rooster flew high up.
n flight of birds or fowl. Gisunud kug tan-aw ang láyug sa mga langgam,
I followed the flight of the birds with my eyes.

lay-ug v [AP; c1] for plants to be badly shaken by a strong wind, such
that they are damaged and likely to die in hot weather. Kusug hángin
ang milay-ug (mipalay-ug) sa mga tanum, A strong wind caused severe
damage to the plants. Ug malay-ug ang mga lubi, madagdag ang mga búnga,
If a coconut tree is shaken by the wind, its fruit will fall off.

layuglayug n k.o. edible brown seaweed with a leaf-like structure.

layun a for bananas to be almost ripe, but still hard. v [B23(1); b6]
for bananas to be almost ripe. Hustung pritúhun ang kardábang malayun
na, Cooking bananas are best to fry when they are nearly ripe.

láyus v [B12; a12] for plants or fruits to wither. Nagkalayus ang mga
tanum kay dúgayng wà ulana, The plants are withering gradually because
it has not rained for a long time. Naláyus ang mga utanun nga wà
mangahálin, The vegetables that were left unsold withered. (→)
a withered (of plants or fruits).

lí n lei, a garland of flowers hung on visitors’ necks as a sign of
welcome. v [A; c1] give, make a lei.

líab n neckline of garment. Ang íyang bistída mabà ug líab, Her dress
has a low neckline. v [A; b6] put a neckline. (→) v [A; a12] grab s.o.
by the collar. Bi, tan-áwun ta ug muliab ba giyud siya nákù! Well,
let’s see if he dares grab me by the collar.

liad v {1} [A2] bend or throw one’s body backward. Dílì makaliad ang
bátà kay ákung gigunítan ang abága, The baby can not throw his body
backward because I’m holding onto his shoulder. {2} [A; a12P] be in a
position with the stomach sticking out and shoulders back. Dílì ka
muliad ug maglakaw ka, Don’t walk with your stomach sticking out a in a
position with the stomach sticking out and the shoulders back.
{3} [B3(1); b6] for lumber to warp or twist. Nagkalíad ang mga káhuy
nga gibulad sa ínit, The pieces of wood they dried under the heat of
sun are getting warped. liadlíad v {1} [A13] writhe about in pain.
Nagliadlíad siya sa kasakit, He is writhing in pain. {2} [A13; c1] walk
with a distended stomach due to pregnancy or obesity. Nagliadlíad ang
mabdus nga naglakaw sa karsáda, The pregnant woman walked down the
street with her stomach sticking out.

líap v [A; c] make a shot from under the goal in basketball. n a shot
of this sort in basketball.

liat v {1} [A2; b(1)] skip over, by-pass. Dì mu makaliat sa ámù kay
mag-atang mi sa bintánà, You could not miss our house because we will
be watching for you at the window. Way giliatan ang íyang láwas sa
labud, His body is covered with welts. Way giliatan sa kaláyu, The fire
got everything. {2} [A2] go, pass by in time or space. Muliat sa duha
ka lungsud ang trín, The train will pass through the two towns. Mubáyad
ku nímu sa dì pa makaliat ang usa ka simána, I will pay you before a
week goes by. {3} [A; a] take time out to go s.w. for a short while.
Muliat giyud nà siyag tábì bísag daghang búhat, She takes time out for
some quick gossip, even if she’s very busy. Liata ang kan-un ug lútù na
ba, Take a quick peep at the rice to see if it is cooked yet. Iliat ni
Nánay ning matam-is, Run to Grandma’s and give her these sweets.

líawt n proper, optimum disposition of things or component parts put
s.w. v [A; c] put things in their proper relative positions. Ilíawt úsà
ang mga kuniksiyun úsà suldáha, Lay the connections out in their proper
disposition before you solder them.

líb v [A2] go on leave from a job. Mulíb siya usa ka simána antis
manganak, She will take her maternity leave one week before she has her
baby. matirniti — n maternity leave. sik — n sick leave.

líbà a {1} ignorant, lacking knowledge of certain ways. {1a} disrupting
by adding confusion to s.t. that is otherwise smooth and orderly. Ay nà
siyag paintraha sa dráma kay líbà, Don’t assign him a role in the play
because he is a great bungler. {2} acting in a socially unacceptable
way so as to cause resentment. Líbà kaáyu nang maistráha, duha ray
gipapasar, That teacher really has a lot of nerve. She failed the whole
class except two. v {1} [B12; b6] be, become ignorant, lacking in
knowledge of certain ways. Malíbà ka sa bag-ung dapit, If you go to a
new place, you will be ignorant of how things are there. {2} [A; a12]
fool, pull a trick on s.o. Nakalíbà silag duha ka sapíang Insik, They
swindled two rich Chinese. Malíbà kahà nà siya sa baráha? Can anyone
pull one over on him in cards?

líbad pa it’s the same thing, it’s just as good. Samu lang ug di ku
makaadtu sa parti. Tutal muadtu man ang ákung páris. Líbad pa, Never
mind if I can’t attend the party. Anyway my husband will attend. That’s
just as good. Dílì na ku makahuwat sa ímung bána. Líbad pa ug ikawy
ákung tagáan sa kwarta? I can’t wait for your husband any longer.
Wouldn’t it be the same thing if I gave the money to you? Bisag ása sa
duha. Líbad pa, Either one of the two. It’s all the same.

libadúra n leaven. Pán nga way libadúra, Unleavened bread.

libagbag = *alibagbag.

libaghà v [A2N; b4N] {1} develop a rash on the skin. Nanglibaghà
(gipanglibagháan) ákung pánit human nákug káun ug bulad, I broke out in
a rash after I ate dried fish. {2} for an emotion to show itself to a
great degree. Sa íyang nawung nilibaghà ang kalísang, A look of terror
erupted on her face. n rash on the skin.

libak v [AN; a1] backbite, say bad things about s.o. when his back is
turned or cannot understand them. Maáyung mudáyig sa atubángan,
manlibak sa luyu, She says nice things to your face, but turn your
back, and you’ll get it. pa- v [A; ac] allow s.o. to backbite. walà,
dílì pa- appear right after being spoken about. Walà palibak si Duruy
ug nakaabut sa ámung ínum, Talk about the devil and there he is — Doroy
arrived at our drinking session just as we were discussing him.
n backbiting. -iru(←), maN-r-(←), ma-un(←) a given to backbiting.
v [B12] be, become fond of backbiting. -ira(←) = -iru(←) (female).

libákag v [A2] stand up on its ends. Mulibákag ang ákung balhíbu kung
makadungug kug irù nga mag-ulang, My hair stands on end whenever I hear
a dog howling. Milibákag ang ákung dalunggan sa pagkadungug ku sa íyang
ísug nga sinultihan, My ears perked up when I heard her commanding
voice.

liban v [B126] {1} overlook s.t. inadvertently. Naliban ku sa pagsukip
sa kwarta, I forgot to include the money in the letter. {2} be
preoccupied and fail to notice s.t. Naliban ku, wà ku kamatngun pag-ági
níya, I was preoccupied. I didn’t notice her going by.

libang_1 n activities or chores to keep one busy. Dì ku makaatiman
niánà kay daghan kug libang sa panimalay, I have no time to take care
of that because I have lots of chores to keep me busy at home. a having
many things to attend to. Libang siya kaáyu mau nga labihan kalimtánun,
She has so many things to attend to, she tends to forget details.
v [B12; b3(1)] be busy attending to s.t.

*libang_2 v [B125] defecate. Nalibang (mikalibang) ku hasta kalima kay
naghibús ku, I defecated five times because I had LBM. — ang bàbà [A]
vomit (humorous and coarse). ka- v [A; c] defecate, move one’s bowels.
Gikalibangan sa bátà ang íyang karsúnis, The child defecated in his
pants. Gikalibang nákù ang lísu sa santul, I expelled santol seeds when
I defecated. ka- ang bàbà [B1236] vomit (humorous and coarse). ka-(←)
v [B146] have diarrhea. n diarrhea. Kalíbang ang namatyan sa bátà, The
child died of diarrhea. súka ka-(←) n vomiting combined with diarrhea.
ka-an(←) n toilet. kina- n stools. ka-un a feel like defecating.

libanta v {1} [B36; b3(1)c1] for a dog’s ears to prick up in alertness.
Mulibanta dáyun ang ámung irù ug náay kasíkas, Our dog pricks up his
ears when there is a slight noise. sinta — see sinta.

libas = alabíhid.

libat a cross-eyed. v [B12; b6] become cross-eyed. Nalibat ang bátà kay
nahagbung, The child became cross-eyed because he had a fall. (←)
v {1} [B12; a2] cross one’s eyes. Nalíbat siya pagkaigù sa ákung kúmù,
His eyes went to the center of his head when I hit him with my fist.
Libáta ímung mata arun ang mga bátà mangatáwa, Cross your eyes to make
the children laugh. {2} [B12] look at s.t. so hard one gets cross-eyed.
Nalíbat kug pangítà nímu, I got cross-eyed looking for you. Ang
kadaghan sa gwápa nakalíbat (nakapalíbat) nákù, I got cross-eyed
looking at the pretty girls.

libaung n potholes in a road. v [B12] get potholes in it. Malibaung ang
dálan ug muulan, The road gets potholes in it when it rains. ka-(←)
v [A13] be full of potholes. -un a having potholes.

libayan n k.o. fish.

libgaw n small anchovy, a kind of bulinaw: Stolephorus commersonii.

libgus n k.o. edible mushroom growing to a height of 3″–4″, having a
conical pileus around 2″ in diameter, usually gray in hue and somewhat
darker at the center. It is a good deal thinner than the úhung and
thicker than the uwáping.

libiláwu = nibiláwu. see nibil.

libílu n libel.

libinta v [B2] for s.t. to give way because what is in it is too big
for it. Nilibinta ang sáku kay gidasuk ug maáyu ang sulud, The sack
ripped open because the contents were stuffed in too tight.

libintadur n firecrackers.

libiral_1 a {1} liberal, generous. Ang pilantrupu libiral kaáyu nga
muhátag, A philanthropist gives liberally. {2} permissive, not strict.
Libiral kaáyu nang amahána nga mudala sa ílang mga anak, That father is
very liberal in bringing up his children. v [B12; b6] be, become
generous or permissive.

libiral_2 n Liberal, member of the Liberal Party. partídu — the Liberal
Party. v [B156] become a Liberal. Ang Nasyunalista nga mayur naglibiral
na, The mayor, who was a Nacionalista, has crossed over to the Liberal
party.

libirasiyun, libirisyun n the period following the ouster of the
Japanese and the achieving of independence (end of 1944–1946).
v [B1256] be the liberation time.

libirtǎd n freedom. Ang ákung bátà way libirtǎd sa pagpílì sa íyang
gustu, She has no freedom to choose what she wants.

libítus = lubítus.

libkas v {1} [APB3(1)] for a trap to spring, for s.t. held back to be
released suddenly; cause it to do so. Milibkas na ang pas-ung, tingáli
nakakuhà, The trap sprung. Maybe it has caught s.t. Milibkas ang kabli
dihang napalus sa ligid, The cable lashed out when it slipped off the
wheel. Hilibkasan ka bayà ánang bawug, The spring pole might snap back
on you. {1a} slip off under weight. Ayúhag bángil ang tiil arun dì
makalibkas, Put the support under the leg carefully so that it won’t
slip off. {2} [B3] for s.t. to slip inadvertently out of the mouth.
Nalibkas sa bàbà ang tinúud, maung nahibaw-an sa tanan, The truth
inadvertently slipped out of my mouth so that everyone found out.
{3} [A23] appear, occur all of a sudden. Usa ka pahiyum milibkas sa
íyang nawung, A smile lit his face. Nakapaúlì siya sa wà pa mulibkas
ang gúbat, He had a chance to go home before the war suddenly broke
out. pa- n slingshot.

libra_1 n pound, a unit of weight. Napúlù ka libra, Ten pounds. -s =
libra (plural). Diyis libras, Ten pounds.

libra_2 n the Libra in the horoscope.

libri_1 a {1} free, not restricted. Libri na ang binilanggù, The
prisoner is free. Way pugsanay, libri sa gustu ang táwu, There’s no
forcing. Each man is free to do as he wishes. {2} without cost or
payment. Libri ang íyang káun, libri siya sa káun, He gets his meals
free. {3} having clearance for passage. Inig-ági sa trák sa gawang,
tan-áwa ug libri ba ang kílid, When the truck passes through the gate,
see if both sides have clearance. {4} safe from destruction. Libri na
ang giupirahan, The patient who was operated on is safe. v [A; a1]
{1} give s.o. free use of s.t. by paying for him or not obliging him to
pay. Íya kung libríhun sa pasáhi, She is going to pay for my fare.
Nalíbri ku sa plíti, I got to ride free. {2} save from s.t. bad. Ang
balanghuy makalibri sa gútum, Cassava can save you from starvation. —
kumída, pasáhi n free meal(s), free passage. Libri pasáhi ka sa barku
kay díay rikumindasiyun iadtu sa kapitan, You get free passage on the
boat because I have a recommendation for you to give to the captain.
librilibri n a k.o. kick-the-can game. v [A12C; b(1)] play
kick-the-can. librihay, librihánay v [C13] do s.t., each man for
himself. Maglibrihay (maglibrihánay) tag plíti, Let’s each pay his own
fare.

libri_2 humorous expression uttered upon hearing s.o. clearing his
throat: ‘spit it out’.

libriríya n library.

libríta = librítu, 2.

librítu n {1} a small book containing magical prayers (urasiyun) which
comes into a person’s possession through the agency of a supernatural
force. The uttering of the prayers by the owner of the book is thought
to have special healing or protective powers. {2} any small booklet. —
sa bangku n bank-*book. — sa tíkit n book of tickets.

libru n {1} book. {2} subject one is enrolled in. Tulu na lang ka libru
ang íyang kúlang pára nga makagraduwar siya, He lacks three courses to
graduate. {3} accounts. tinidur di- bookkeeper. v [A; a12] bind into
books. librulibru = mandunggu.

líbu_1 n one thousand. v {1} [B256] be a thousand. Mulíbu na run ang
sáka sa lubi, The coconut trees now yield one thousand nuts. {2} [c1]
do by the thousand. Libúhun (ilíbu) ni nákù pag-ihap, I’ll count these
by the thousands. libulíbu thousands and thousands. -in-(→), ni-(→)
n by the thousand. Linibu ang ílang gastu matag búlan, They spend by
the thousands every month. v [c1] do by the thousands. kalibúan
n thousands. Kalibúan ang íyang gitabángan, He has helped thousands of
people. libúhay n {1} about a thousand. Libúhay ra ang íyang nagastu,
He spent about a thousand. {2} thousands of. Libúhay ka mga túig,
Thousands of years.

líbu_2 n carry a number in addition. Singku imas utsu, trísi, líbu únu,
Five and eight is thirteen, carry your one. v [c6] carry a number. Ug
pilay ímung ilíbu isulat sa ibabaw sa numiru nga nagsunud, Write the
number you carry above the next column.

líbud v {1} [A; a] go around a place. Libúra úsà ang abúhan únà ka
mulíbud sa kalibútan, Don’t tell me you’re going around the world. You
haven’t even gone in back of your stove! {2} [A; ac] go, bring around
to several places. Ang bangkadur mauy mulíbud sa baráha, The dealer
will distribute the cards. Libúrun ku ang mga saup arun patambúngun sa
míting, I will go around to all the tenants to have them attend the
meeting. Mani ang ákung ilíbud ugmà, I’ll go around selling peanuts
tomorrow. {3} [B12] get to be round about. a round about. Líbud na
kaáyu ug muhapit pa mi sa inyu, It will be a very long way out of the
way if we go by your place first. n {1} church procession. {2} round in
games. (→) = líbud, a. (→)suruy n tramp, one who wanders from place to
place with no particular course or destination. v [B1; b6] become a
roamer. Maglibud suruy na lang ku ug wà na kuy trabáhu, I’ll just
become a tramp when I have no more work. libudlíbud v [A; b6] roam
around aimlessly.

líbug v {1} [A1B1; a2b3(1)] confuse, be confused. Naglíbug kug diin
nákù ikabutang ang kwintas, I’m at a loss to figure out where I could
have put my necklace. Ay kug tudlúi. Naglíbug ka lang nákù, Don’t try
to teach me. You are just confusing me. {2} [AP; a2b3(1)] cause s.o. to
go crazy through supernatural means or from natural causes. Ang mga
kalakíhan makamaung mulíbug (mupalíbug) sa úlu sa táwu, People who
possess supernatural powers can make people insane. {3} [A; a1b8] make
the rounds, attending to each and every member of a group or
assemblage. Akuy naglíbug ug kík sa mga bisíta, I was the one who
passed the cake around to the visitors. Libúga (libga) pagpangutána ang
tanang mitambung sa míting, Ask each and every one who attended the
meeting. a perplexing. Líbug kaáyu ning prublimáha, This is a
perplexing problem. (→) n {1} fuss or ado about s.t. Way daghang libug
mikúut siyag kwarta unyà gibayran ang manunúkut, Without much ado he
took the money out of his pocket and paid the bill collector. {2} be of
mixed blood. Libug kining batáa. Ang amahan Pilipínu ug ang ínahan
Amirkána, This child is of mixed blood. The father is a Filipino and
the mother an American. -an(→), libgánun a prone to get confused.
Libugan (libgánun) kaáyu siya kay húmuk ra mawálà bisan sa kinasayunang
iksplikasiyun, She easily gets confused because she gets lost with the
easiest of explanations. -ay(→) n k.o. work bee wherein the members
work for each other in turn and each member repays the people who
worked for him with an equivalent amount of work. v [C] hold this sort
of work bee. ka- n confusion. ka-an, ka-an(→) n a crossbreed or person
of mixed blood. Ang anay pulantsína ug ang butakal dyirsi. Ang mga
baktin kalibugan na, The sow is a Poland China variety and the boar a
Jersey. The offspring are a crossbreed. v [B126; a2] become a
crossbreed. maka-r- a causing confusion.

lib-ug n pool in the tidal flat, left when the tide goes out.

libun_1 n tick. v [A123P; a4] get infested with ticks.

libun_2, líbun_1 a solid, not hollow. Líbun ang ligid sa íyang
bisiklíta, His bicycle has solid rubber wheels. v {1} [B1256; a] be
solid. {2} [B1256] for a boil not to come to a head. Nalíbun ning
hubága maung nagngutngut, This boil hasn’t come to a head; that’s why
it aches. {3} [AN; a12] in a game of sungkà: to take all of one’s
partner’s stones without giving the opponent a chance to take his turn.
Sayun ang maglíbun ug tuluy sunug, It is easy to get all of your
opponent’s stones when he has three empty holes.

líbun_2 n thicket. v {1} [B] become a thicket. Mulibun (malibun)
pagbálik ang kaíngin nga byáan, The abandoned clearing will revert to a
thicket. {2} [A; c] reforest with small trees or shrubbery. Byatilis
mauy maáyung ilíbun sa mga yútà nga dagul, Ipil-ipil is suitable for
reforesting infertile lands. ka-an(→) = líbun, n, v1.

líbur n amount paid for the labor on a piece of work. Mugastu ka sa mga
matiryális lang. Walay lábut sa líbur, Your only costs will be the
materials. The labor is free. — dí n Labor Day. — yunyun n labor union.

libúrus v [B2S3(1); b6] have rashes or hives. Milibúrus ang ákung
buktun sa pinaakan sa mga namuk, My arms are covered with rash from the
mosquito bites. Til-as ang nakalibúrus (nakapalibúrus) sa ákung nawung,
The hairs of the caterpillar caused my face to break out.

líbut_1 v {1} [A; a12] go, bring, put s.t. around a place. Mulíbut siya
sa punúan sa káhuy, He’ll go around the tree. Siyay milíbut ug batu sa
mga tanum, She put stones around each plant. Libúta ang pusti makalima,
dì ka ba malílung, Go around the post five times. See if you don’t get
dizzy. Ákù siyang ilíbut sa syudad, I’ll take her around the city.
{2} [A2S; b6(1)] surround. Dì makalíbut ning tirása sa líab, This lace
isn’t enough to go all around the neckline. Gilibútan ang mga sundáwu
sa mga kaáway, The soldiers were surrounded by the enemies. n action of
going around. — sa around. Mudágan ku líbut sa plása, I’ll run around
the plaza. pa- n surroundings. Limpiyu kaáyu ang inyung palíbut, Your
surroundings are very clean. ka-an n {1} the world, the earth.
{1a} láing ka-an the next world. {2} sexual activity (euphemism). Ayaw
mu pagpalábi sa kalibútan, Don’t indulge in sexual activity too much.
ka-ánun worldly. Kalibutánung mga kalípay, Worldly pleasures.

*líbut_2 unsay ka-an [gen.] what does [gen.] know about it? Unsay
kalibútan ku kun diin ka paingun? How would I know where you went to?
walay ka-an {1} unconscious. Gidá siya sa uspital nga way kalibútan,
They brought her to the hospital unconscious. {2} unaware. Way
kalibútan ang ákung gipangulitawhan nga minyù na ku, The girl I’m
courting has no idea I’m married.

libutug n small bulge, swelling. v [B; b4] swell, bulge. Mulibutug ang
pinaakan sa lamuk ug kalútun, Mosquito bites swell if you scratch them.

libúu n k.o. edible clam which buries itself into the mud of mangrove
swamps. It has a thin, greyish shell, growing to 3″.

líbuy n {1} handle of a plow. {2} penis (humorous euphemism). v [A13;
a] put, use as a plough.

libwas v [A; b] {1} put a new roof on a house. Íyang gilibwásan ang
tanang atup nga dáan, He replaced all the old roofing. {1a} replace
anything. Maáyung malibwásan mu ang ímung kinaíya, You had better
change your ways. {2} [B126] for one’s savings to be used up (lit. get
to the stage that it must be replenished). Nalibwas ang tanan kung
tinagúan karung Paskúha, Christmas ate up all of our savings. -únun
a needing a change of roof. {3} [B; b] for one generation to replace
another. Maglibwas ang táwu sa kalibútan, A new generation will replace
the old generation of people in the world. libwaslibwas v [A13; b] do
s.t. several times. Walà pa giyud ka mabusug nga naglibwaslibwas man
kag káun? Haven’t you gotten your fill? You have eaten several times.

líd_1 n {1} lead guitar. {2} music performed by the lead guitar. v [A;
b6(1)] play the lead guitar in a combo performance. — gitar = líd, n1.

líd_2 n lead-projectile of a bullet.

lidgid v {1} [A; a] grate. Lidgíra ang kamúti, Grate the sweet
potatoes. {2} [A; a] make the delicacy called lidgid. n sweet made of a
mixture of finely grated cassava or sweet potato mixed with grated
young coconut and sugar which is rolled, wrapped in banana leaves, and
boiled. ni-, -in- = lidgid. lidgiran, lidgíran, lidgiránan n grater.

lidibag n k.o. ladybug commonly found on squash plants.

lídir_1 n {1} ward-leader or other person who can command a block of
votes. {2} leader of a group. v [B156; c1] be, become a political
leader. -atu(←) n political leadership. Kusgánun ang lidirátu ni Duránu
sa Sugbu, Durano has strong political influence in Cebu.

lídir_2 n a go-between or one who is the bearer of communications
between lovers. v [B156; b8] make s.o. a go-between between lovers.

lidirátu see lídir_1.

*lídis — dringk n a drink with only a small amount or no liquor for
ladies to drink at a party. — diyis n a dance number where the ladies
choose the men and the men have to pay ten centavos per dance, which
goes to charity. v [A1; c1] make a dance number, one where the men have
to pay ten cents. — tsuys ladies’-choice-dance number where the girls
choose the partners. v [A1; c1] make a number a ladies’ choice.

lidlid = lidgid.

liga, líga_1 n s.t. added to s.t. to enhance its quality. Táyid nga may
ligang anyil, Detergent with bluing added. v [A; c] {1} put an addition
to s.t. Ligahi ug suwà ang lána, Put citrus juice into the coconut oil.
{2} adulterate. Giligáhan ang tablíyag mani, They adulterated the
unsweetened chocolate with roasted peanuts. — puul a being enough to
give one his fill until he tires of it. Líga puul giyud ang súruy rung
bakasiyun, When I get my vacation I’m going to roam about until I get
sick of it.

líga_2 n tournament. Líga sa baskitbul, Basketball tournament. v [A13]
hold a tournament.

líga_3 n The League of Nations.

lígad_1 v [A2S; c6] for people or animals to lie down. Ayaw ilígad ang
ímung igsilimba, Do not lie in your Sunday clothes.

lígad_2 v [A2S; b5] pass, pass by, go by. Wà kay gibúhat samtang
nagligad ang úras? You did nothing as the time went by? Dì mu makalígad
sa Argaw kun muadtu mu sa Baríli, You do not go by Argao when you go to
Barili. Ligárun (ligáran) ta nang buntúra, We will go beyond that
mountain. (→) a afternoon, the time after the sun has passed the zenith
until sunset. n crops that are left over after the harvest. Nanghagdaw
silag mga ligad sa mais, They are gleaning the few ears of corn that
were missed in the harvest. (→) sa kasarángan excessively, more than
normal. Ligad sa kasarángan ang ímung pag-inum, You drink excessively.

ligadíra = rigadíra.

ligal a legal, within the law. -idad n {1} legality, lawfulness. Ang
ligalidad sa ámut mauy ámung gilalísan, The legality of the
contribution was what we were arguing about. {2} the legal point in
contention. Ang ligalidad nga gikagubtan nagagikan sa pagsabut sa
púlung ‘dupa’, The legal point that is in contention lies in the
interpretation of the word ‘fathom’. †

ligas v [B256; b4(1)] {1} for s.t. to slip off of what it is placed on
or for one’s footing to slip. Bangíla ug maáyu ang tiil sa lamísa arun
dílì muligas (maligas), Wedge the table leg carefully so it won’t slip
off. Naligas ang ákung tiil sa hakhak, My foot slipped out of the notch
in the coconut tree. {2} commit a mistake. Muligas (maligas) ka lang ug
kas-a, itsapuyra dáyun ka, If you make a single mistake, you will be
fired at once. Naligas ang ákung bàbà pagtug-an, The truth slipped out
of my mouth. {3} fail, be unsuccessful. Sáyang, miligas ang átung
plánu, Too bad. Our plan failed. {4} be past the high noon mark.
Musúgud ta pagtrabáhu sa dílì pa muligas (maligas) ang adlaw, We will
start work before the sun gets past high noon. a {1} be past the
zenith. Ligas na ang bulan. Kay daktul, saylu na sa tungang gabíi, The
moon is past the zenith, and since it is full moon, it must be past
midnight. {2} for a pig to be below the accepted standard weight (forty
kilos) for wholesale shipment. (←) v {1} [A13; b] miss a number or
proportion by a small amount. Ug maglígas ang ímung timpla sa abúnu
mamatay ang tanum, If your fertilizer is not mixed in the right
proportions, the plant will die. Ang madaúgun nga tíkit ug ang ákù
naglígas ug duha ka numiru, My ticket was only two numbers off of the
winning number. {2} [b3(1)] have differences over s.t. Gamay ra gud
nang inyung gikaligásan, sultíhun lang gud nà, You are having a quarrel
over such a small thing. You should talk it out. pa- v [A; a12] look
for errors s.o. has made to justify harsh action against him. Gipaligas
ka lang sa ímung manidyǐr arun maháwà ka, The manager is just waiting
for you to slip so he can fire you. pa-(←) v [A; b] provoke s.o. to
provide the excuse to beat him up. -an(←) n the amount or extent to
which one thing differs from another.

lígas n garter to hold the stockings up.

ligásun n ribs in a boat frame to which the boards or steelplates which
form the hull covering are attached.

ligaw v [A12; b8] do s.t. right by accident. Nakaligaw ku ug bungat sa
hustung tubag, I happened to hit on the correct answer. Nakaligaw ku sa
hustung timpla, I hit on the right mixture.

ligay n swollen lymph node. v [B46; b4] get swollen lymph nodes.
Giligayan ku kay giansúyan ang ákung tunuk, I have swollen lymph glands
because my wound got infected.

ligdas v [A3] {1} lie any old place to sleep. Nagligdas sa dálan ang
hubug, The drunk was lying in the road. {2} die. Muligdas mug way
tawutáwug ikakuntra ninyu ang taga Pásil, You’ll be killed without even
anybody knowing who did it if you make enemies with people from Pasil.

ligdung a {1} upright. Ligdung kaáyu siya sa íyang trabáhu. Dì manáwat
ug suburnu, He is very upright in his work. He won’t accept bribes.
{2} keeping in one’s place, proper and refined in deportment. Usa siya
ka táwu nga ligdung ug dílì maakuakuhun, He keeps in his place and is
not presumptuous. {3} serene in demeanor, but dignified and reserved.
Ligdung kaáyu siyang manubagtubag, She answers with very dignified
reserve. v [B1; a12] be upright, refined, and stay in one’s place. ka-
n doing what is proper to one’s station. Ipakítang ímung kaligdung;
pangáyug katahúran, ayaw ipabundak ang ngálan sa ímung isigkatáwu,
ayawg tubagtubag sa mga tigúlang, Show you know how to behave: greet
people, don’t address people without using a title, don’t talk back to
old people.

lighut (from lihut) v [A13; b6] sneak out, leave surreptitiously.
Mulighut ta sa klási, Let’s sneak out of the class. Milighut siya ug
sakay sa ayruplánu, He boarded the plane surreptitiously. Mag-ábut nyà
ta ug makalighut ku sa ámù, I’ll see you later if I can sneak out of
the house.

lígid v {1} [APB2S6; c1] roll, roll s.t. Si Pidru mauy mulígid
(mupalígid) sa búla, Pedro will roll the ball. Lígid dáyun ug masúnug
ang sinínà, Roll (on the ground) if your clothes are afire. Ligírun
(ligdun, ilígid) ku kanà kay nakaáli sa ákung agiánan, I will roll it
out of the way. {1a} [A23] for days, years, etc. to roll by (literary).
Túling milígid ang katuígan, Years rolled by swiftly. {1b} [A] throw a
tantrum by rolling on the floor. Ngánung milígid ang bátà? Unsa na puy
íyang gustu? Why is the child throwing a tantrum? What does he want
now? {2} [A] lie down. Mulígid siya dáyun igkahumag káun, He lies down
as soon as he finishes eating. {2a} — sa banig be bedridden. Tulu na ka
túig siya nga naglígid sa banig, She has been bedridden for three
years. {3} [A; b6] wallow. Ang kábaw sa panahun sa ting-init mulígid sa
tunaan, On hot days the carabao wallows in the pond. Kanang daginutána
naglígid sa bahandì, That miser is wallowing in riches. Naglígid siya
sa kasal-ánan, She is sinking deep in sin. {4} [A; a1] do s.t. to s.o.
mercilessly without letup. Gilígid kug pangutána sa abugádu, The lawyer
cross-examined me. Ang asáwa gilígid ug hawuk sa íyang bána, The
husband smothered his wife with kisses. (→) n wheel. kaligiray v [A13]
roll around. Nagkaligiray si Duman sa túmang kasakit, Duman rolled
around in intense pain. kaligiran v [A13] roll head over heels.
Nagkaligiran ang táwung nadakin-as sa bakilid, The man slipped on the
slope and tumbled down head over heels. pa- n hoop to play with.

ligingliging v [B1456] be bulging all over from obesity. Si Áyik Lusáda
nagligingliging sa katambuk, Ike Lozada is bulging all over from
obesity.

lígings n leggings worn with riding pants. v [A13] {1} wear leggings.
{2} wear stockings (humorous).

ligis v {1} [A; a] flatten or mash s.t. into powder by pressing s.t.
heavy on it. Ligisa (ligsa) ang asin ug kutsára, Pulverize the rock
salt with a tablespoon. {2} [A; b2] for a vehicle to run over s.t.
Dariyut ku maligsi sa taksi, The taxi nearly ran me over. n pestle,
rolling pin, or anything else used for crushing things into fine
particles. ligsanan n s.t. on which s.t. is crushed.

ligitlígit v [A13; a12] knead, roll into a ball with the thumb and
forefinger. Naghunàhúnà siya samtang nagligitlígit sa íyang búngut, As
he was thinking, he twisted his beard with his fingers.

ligngin = língin (plural).

ligpit v {1} [A; b6(1)] fasten s.t. temporarily by pressing it down
with s.t. that holds it in place. Bungbung amákang giligpítag dus pur
dus, Sawali walling that was held in place by two-by-two’s. Ligpíti ug
kumpit ang mga hinayhay, Clip the wash with clothespins. {2} [A; b2]
press down on s.t. Hiligpitan ang ákung tudlù sa sira, My finger was
caught in the door shutter. Bug-at nga batu ang iligpit sa binanggud
balanghuy, Use a heavy stone to press out the juice of the grated
cassava. {3} put pressure on s.o. Gitug-an níya kay giligpítan siya sa
pulis, He revealed the truth because the police pressured him.
n {1} clip to fasten s.t. {2} s.t. used to press s.t. in place.

ligsì v [B26; a12] for bamboo to crack along the grain under pressure.
Ayaw ug ibundak ang sag-ub kay muligsì (maligsì), Set the bamboo tube
water container down gently so it doesn’t crack.

ligsik (from lisik) v {1} [B23(1)46] expel s.t. solid from within with
a sudden force. Muligsik ang lísu sa nangkà ug hugtun paggúnit, The
seed of the jackfruit will jump out if you grab the meat. {2} [B246] be
wide-eyed with fear, amazement, surprise, etc. Miligsik ang mga mata sa
táwu sa kahibúlung, The man’s eyes became wide with amazement.

ligtak v [B26C; a12P] for the skull to crack. Miligtak ang íyang úlu
pagkabunsù sa simintu, He cracked his skull when he fell, striking his
head on the cement. Ligtákun ku nang úlu mu, I’ll crack your skull wide
open.

ligtì v [B26; a12] {1} for brittle things to crack due to sudden change
of temperature. Ang básu muligtì ug butangan ug pinabúkal nga túbig,
The tumbler will crack if you put boiling water in it. Miligtì ang
sundang kay dì maáyung pagkasubu, The sword cracked because it was not
well tempered. {2} [B26; a12] crack s.t. Ligtíun ku nang bagulbágul mu,
I’ll crack your skull.

ligtik v [B26; a12] for s.t. to crack under pressure or sudden change
of temperature. Muligtik nang ímung tiyan ug magpalábi kag káun, Your
stomach will burst if you eat too much. Muligtik (maligtik) ang sag-ub
ug ímung ipusdak, The bamboo water container will crack if you slam it
down hard on the ground.

ligtiw v [B2346; b8] fly off to a distance. Naligtiwan ku sa aligatu sa
nag-ismiril, The sparks flew off from the sharpening stone and hit me.

lígù (from dígù) v [A; a] {1} bathe s.o. Ang inahan naglígù sa bátà,
The mother is bathing the baby. Ligúa ang irù. Bathe the dog.
{2} [B123S56] take a bath, go swimming. Malígù (mukalígù) ta sa
Talísay, We’ll go swimming at Talisay Beach. Dì ta makaligù kay way
túbig, We cannot take a bath because there is no water. {2a} [B1256]
(in proverbs) do s.t. to a certain extent. Puslan mang malígù, manlúgud
na lang giyud, Since we took it on, we might as well go through with
it. (We’re bathing so we might as well rub the dirt off.) Puslan mang
mahumud, malígù na lang, Since you took it on, you might as well go the
whole hog. (Lit. You got wet, so you might as well bathe.) walay (→)
a not having had a bath. Húgaw batáa. Way ligù, What a dirty child. He
didn’t take a bath. ka- v {1} [A2; b6(1)] take a bath. Ayawg kaligúi
ang banyu kay naistak-ap, Do not take a bath in the bathroom because it
is plugged up. Ínit túbig ang ikalígù, Bathe with hot water.
{1a} [A123S] take a bath after being bedridden, and therefore be cured.
Makabalik ka na sa trabáhu kay nakaligù (nakakaligù) na ka, You may go
back to work because you are all better now. {2} [A123S] be wet all
over, as in taking a bath. Nakaligù (nakakaligù) ang nangharánag íhì,
The serenaders were bathed with urine. n action of taking a bath, going
swimming. ka-an(→), ka-anan n place one bathes or goes swimming. †

lig-un a {1} strong, sturdy, durable. Lig-un kaáyu ning baláya kay walà
matumba sa bagyu, This is a strong house because it was not blown down
in the storm. Lig-un ning panaptúna, This is durable cloth. {2} firm in
will or endurance. Dílì ni makapahílak níya kay lig-un siya ug
balatían, You cannot make him cry with that because he is a strong
child. Nagsáad siya sa lig-un nga dì na muusab, He firmly resolved
never to do it again. {2a} — ug kasingkásing a stouthearted. Ang táwung
lig-un ug kasingkásing dílì daling mahadluk ug mawad-ag pagláum, A
stouthearted man is not easily frightened nor easily discouraged.
{3} strong, difficult to defeat. Lig-un nga tím sa baskitbul, A strong
basketball team. way — a weak, not strong. Way lig-un ning báya kay
gabuk na ug halígi, This house is not strong because it has weak posts.
v [AB; a12] be, become strong, durable, sturdy; cause s.t. to become
so. Lig-úna ang ímung kaugalíngun. Ayaw paghílak, Brace yourself. Don’t
cry. ka- n strength, durability, firmness. ka-an n documents as
evidence of a contract, agreement, and the like. Dúna kay kalig-únan
báhin sa íyang útang? Do you have any evidence of her debt? Kining
singsing kalig-únan sa ákung gugma nímu, This ring is a token of my
love for you.

ligung = binga.

ligutgut = aligutgut.

liguy a trying to get out of work. Ang maistrang liguy muatúbang ug
klási nga way lísun plan, The lazy teacher comes to class with no
lesson plan. v {1} [B; b6] get out of work by being absent or simply
not tending to it. Ug dúnay mga bug-at nga buluhatun, muliguy siya,
When there are unpleasant things to do, he bugs out. {2} [A2; b6] play
hooky. Muliguy ku sa klási kay mutan-aw kug sini, I will skip class to
go to the movies. liguylíguy v [A; b(1)] {1} loaf on the job. Mauwaw
kung muliguylíguy sa ákung trabáhu ug náa ang ákung ámu, I am ashamed
to loaf on the job when my boss is around. {2} be absent from school
every once in a while. ka- n being a bug-out.

ligwa n measurement of distance: a league.

ligwan n k.o. small wild honeybee, having black and light orange
stripes, nesting inside trees or walls.

ligwat v [A; b6] pry s.t. off or open. Ligwáti lang ang kaban kay nasúd
ang yáwi, Just pry the trunk open because the key is inside. Náay
lansang sa bungbung muy iligwat sa pipsi, There’s a nail on the wall to
open the Pepsi. n s.t. used to pry s.t. open. pa- ug sulti v [A; b]
make nasty allusions about s.o. Pirmi siyang kakitag áway kay kusug
mupaligwat ug sulti, She tends to pick quarrels because she tends to
make nasty allusions.

líha v [A; b6] rub or smooth down s.t. with sandpaper or s.t. similar.
Ikay mulíha sa tabla ug akuy mupintal, You sand the board, and I will
paint it. n sandpaper or s.t. used like sandpaper. papil di- = líha.

lihang n {1} vertical space made when two long things are not placed
closely. Ang tayùtù nakalusut sa lihang sa bungbung, The lizard went
through the space between the parts of the walling. {2} the space
between teeth that are set somewhat apart.

lihat v [B126] do s.t. inadvertently. Ang kadaghan sa pumapálit mauy
makalihat (makapalihat) nákù sa pagpanuklì, I made mistakes in making
change because there were so many customers. Nalihat ang pulis patrul
sa kutsi nga ílang gisunud, The police patrol inadvertently lost track
of the car they were following.

lihay, líhay v {1} [A2; c] dodge, evade a blow. Ilihay ang ímung
nawung, ayawg atras, Pull your face away, but don’t back off. {2} [A2;
b(1)] evade a question, wriggle out of s.t. Maáyu siyang mulihay ug
pangutána kay abugádu man, He is good in evading questions because he
is a lawyer. Dì ka na giyud makalihay ánang mga pruyba, There is no way
you can wriggle out of it in the face of this evidence. {2a} escape
one’s obligations. Buluhatun nga íyang gilihayan, A job that he
wriggled out of.

lihi v {1} [A; b] inaugurate s.t. with the proper ceremonies or magical
ingredients. Maglihi sila sa iskuylahan, They will have the school
blessed. Kámay mauy ilihi sa mag-anak, When a woman is in labor, give
her brown sugar to insure that she will recover quickly. {1a} bury s.t.
with plants to insure a good harvest. Lihian ug tablíya ang tabákù arun
lugum ug kulur ang dáhun, They plant chocolate together with tobacco
seeds to assure that it will have dark-colored leaves. {1b} begin the
new year with a certain action which is believed will then endure for
the rest of the year. Gilihian níla ang bag-ung túig ug áway, They
began the new year with a quarrel. {1c} use s.t. for the first time
following the proper prohibitions or injunctions. Lihian nátug simba
ang bag-u nátung sapátus arun mulungtad, Let’s wear our new shoes to
church so they will last. {2} [A1; b6(1)] crave s.t. in the first few
months of pregnancy such that the appearance of the thing desired
appears as a birthmark in the offspring. Kun maglihi kag asin, putì
kunu ang ímung bátà, If you crave salt in your early months of
pregnancy, your child will be white. {2a} [b4] for a child to get the
appearance of a certain thing his mother craved while she was
conceiving him. Náay pula nga tap-ing sa íyang nawung kay gilihian
siyag kundíman, He has a purple splotch on his cheek because his mother
craved red cloth in her pregnancy. {2b} [b4] get to have a certain
characteristic by starting out in a certain way. Bag-ung túig gánì,
sayug mata arun dì ka lìhan pagkahingatulug, Get up early on New Year’s
day so you won’t get the characteristic of being a sleepyhead for the
whole year. n {1} injunctions or prohibitions observed upon
inaugurating s.t.; anything used as a magical means to insure success
of s.t. inaugurated. Ang lihi sa pagtanum ug mangga, asúkar, They use
sugar to plant with mangoes to insure sweet fruit. {2} birthmark which
is thought invariably to be due to a mother’s cravings in her early
stages of pregnancy. pistang ig-l-(←) n holiday of obligation in the
Catholic Church.

lihíru {1} doing things with agility and rapidity. Lihíru siyang
sugúun, When you tell him to do s.t. he does it quickly and without
hesitation. Lihíru siyang mulálag banig, She’s quick in weaving mats.
{2} ready to do s.t. Lihíru nga mangusì ning batáa sa íyang kadúlà,
This child is quick to pinch his playmates. {3} skillful. Lihíru siyang
mudúwag ahidris, He’s good in playing chess. {4} bright. Dakù siyag
grádu kay lihíru man, He got high marks because he is intelligent.
{4a} smart, resourcefully shrewd. Dì kang kaliput ánang kumirsiyantíha
kay lihíru nà, You can’t put one over on that shrewd businessman. {5} —
ug kamut a light-fingered. Kinahanglang magbantay ang mga tindíra sa
mga lihíru ug kamut, The salesgirls had better watch out for
light-fingered customers. v [B125] get to be expeditious, skillful.
Malihíru man lang ni si Puduy ug náay diyis, Podoy will move if he
knows he can get a dime out of it.

lihisladur n legislator. v [B1456] be, become a legislator.

lihislatíbu n legislative.

lihislatúra n legislature.

lihiya, lihíya n lye: caustic soda or lye obtained from wood ashes.
v [A; a2] make lye.

líhù v [A; c] guide s.o. while he urinates or defecates. Ang míd mauy
mulíhù sa bátà sa bangkíyu, The maid makes the child sit on the potty.
Ilíhù ang masakitun sa inudúru, Guide the patient while he goes to the
toilet.

*lihug pa- {1} please. Palíhug, ikúhà akug túbig, Please, get me some
water. {2} work bee in which people are not paid for their labor.
v {1} [A; ac] ask s.o. to do s.t. as a favor without pay. Palihúgun ku
siyag húlug ug suwat, I will ask him to do me the favor of mailing a
letter. Dúna kuy ipalíhug nímu, I have a favor to ask of you. Ipalíhug
kug kúhà ánà bisag wà kuy iháwun, Please do me the favor of getting it,
even though I have no pig to roast (from the notion that people who are
asked to do a big job without pay are generally given a good meal).
{2} [AN] hold a work bee in which people work for free except for food
and drinks. Mupalíhug (mamalíhug) kug paalsa sa ákung balay, I’m having
a work bee to move my house. n {1} = -in-. {2} favor asked. pina-
n persons requested to help.

líhuk v {1} [A2S] move. Búhì pa diay ang isdà kay naglihuk, The fish is
still alive because it is moving. {1a} [A; a12] cause s.t. to move.
Kinsay naglíhuk sa hárì áring damahan? Who moved the king here on the
checkerboard? {1b} [A2; a12] betake oneself to do s.t. Dì mulíhuk ug
dílì suburnúhan, They won’t make a move unless you bribe them. {2} [A2;
b4] for a characteristic to make its appearance. Ug mukatursi anyus na
ang láki, mulíhuk na ang gána, When a boy reaches fourteen years or so,
he begins to feel his sexual drives. Milíhuk na pud ang túlis, Robbery
cases are on the rise. Gilihúkan na pud siya sa íyang kabúang, His
insanity is making its appearance again. n {1} action, deed. Katahápan
ang íyang líhuk, His actions are arousing suspicion. {2} one’s turn to
move a piece in a game. hínay ug — a {1} timid, lacking aggressiveness.
Hínay nímug líhuk! Musugut na untà tu ug ímu pang giapríta, You sure
don’t move! She would have accepted you had you pressed her.
{2} slowpoke. Hínay bayà nímug líhuk, wà man nímu mahuman nga udtu na
man, You sure are slow! You haven’t finished and it’s already noon! (→)
n movement, stirring. Basta way irpákit, wà giyuy lihuk ang ayruplánu,
As long as there are no air pockets the airplane will fly smoothly.
a {1} always moving, unstable. Lihuk kaáyung tabanúga, An unstable
kite. Lihuk nga bátà, A restless child. {2} for women to have excessive
sexual desire. Ang mga babáying lihuk bísag minyù na, manguríbut pa
giyud, Women who have excessive sexual desire fool around with men,
even if they are married. v [B12; b6] be, become s.t. that moves around
too much or a woman of excessive desires. pa- v [A23; a12] set s.t.
into motion. Ubang pulitiku mupalíhuk dáyun sa ubras publikas sa
panahun sa piliay, Some politicians will set public works projects into
motion during elections. hag- v [B1256] be able to move. Pwirti nákung
lisánga. Wà ku mahaglihuk, I was so frightened I couldn’t move. -an(→)
a given to moving around, restless. Lihukan siyag kamut sa sinihan, He
has wandering hands in the movie house. -in-an(→) n way one acts. ka-an
n {1} activities. Unsay kalihúkan sa iskuylahan rung gabíi? What is
going on in school this evening? Kalihúkang langyaw, Foreign affairs.
{2} movement, organized activities to gain a certain objective.
Kalihúkan sa pausbaw sa swildu, Movement to increase wages. ma-(→) =
lihuk, a. paN- n {1} the way one carries himself. Mga babáying
artipisyal ang panlíhuk, Women with artificial ways about them.
{2} things to be done, chores to attend to. -un(→) = paN-, n2.

lihut v {1} [A2] take time out to do s.t. for a moment. Bisag daghang
trabáhu, mulihut giyud siyag dúaw dinhi, In spite of all the things he
has to attend to he still takes out time to come here. Makalihut pa
giyud siyag suwat bísan ug bísi, She still found time to write to me
even if she was busy. {2} [A2; c1] do s.t. secretly. Kun maúlaw kang
hidunggan, lihuta (ilihut) lang pagsulti, If you are ashamed to let
anyone hear it, just tell it secretly.

likag n k.o. ray.

likat v [b8] overlook or miss s.t. Nalikatan (hilikatan) níyag ihap ang
usa ka libru, He overlooked one book in counting them.

likay v {1} [A; b6] avoid s.t., s.o.’s company. Mulikay siya sa
buluhatun, He tries to avoid work. Maglikay ka sa sámuk, ha? You must
keep away from trouble, understand? Likayi nang tawhána kay palaaway
siya, Keep away from that man because he is quarrelsome. Dílì kalikayan
ang sayup, You can’t avoid making some mistakes. {1a} [a3] be
delivered, safe from actual or feared evil. Mag-ampù ta básin ug
malikay siya sa kadaútan, Let us pray and hope that he be kept safe
from evil. {2} [A2; c] dodge s.t., duck out of the way. Walà ku
makalikay sa íyang suntuk, I was not able to dodge his blows. Naglikay
sa bága, nahasugba sa síga, Out of the frying pan, into the fire (lit.
avoiding the coals, he got broiled in the fire).

likbung v [A; b6] put s.t. in the way to prevent passage. Ikaw bay
naglikbung ug síya sa pultahan? Were you the one who placed a chair
across the doorway? n anything placed across an opening or passageway
to prevent passage.

likhad v [B3(1); b(1)] for the brim of s.t. stiff and woven to open
out. Mulikhad (malikhad) ang daplin sa nígu ug wà pay liskug, The sides
of a winnowing tray will come out open if there’s no ring to keep it in
place.

likì_1 v [B2] crack. Mulikì ang yútà ug dúgay nga ulanun, The earth
cracks if there is no rain for a long time. Ang ínit makalikì
(makapalikì) sa tabla, Heat can make boards crack. Ang lapalapa mulikì
ug dílì sapatúsan, Your soles will crack if you don’t wear shoes.
n crack. bibingka nga usa ray — female genitalia (humorous—lit. rice
cake with a single crack). — sa kawáyan n of unknown origin.
{a} illegitimate children. Kanang mga anak mung gíkan sa likì sa
kawáyan, Those illegitimate children of yours (lit. who come from the
cracks in bamboos). {b} appearing from nowhere. Mu ra mag gíkan sa likì
sa kawáyan nang tawhána. Nikalit lag tunga dinhi, That man seems to
have appeared out of nowhere. He just appeared in this place. a having
a crack. Sugung nga likì, A bamboo container with a crack. (←) v [a12]
do s.t. to s.o. intensely. Likíun (likiyun) kag búnal ni Pápa mu ug
sakpan ka, Your father will beat you mercilessly if he catches you. pa-
v [A; a] cause a crack or s.t. like a crack to appear s.w. Palikiun ku
ang ákung hinápay, I’ll do my hair with a part (lit. cause my hairdo to
have a crack). †

likì_2 v [A12] take a liking to s.o. (humorous slang). Nakalikì siya sa
íyang bag-ung silíngan, She took a liking to her new neighbor.

líkid v [A2] go around a winding path or road. Kun milíkid na gánì sila
dílì na nímu sila makit-an, If they have already gone around the bend
you won’t see them any more. Dúgay silang miabut sa ibabaw kay milíkid
man sila, It took them long to reach the top because they took the
winding path up.

likida, likidar v [A; a] liquidate, kill. Sinuhúlan ang milikidar sa
kunggrisman, The congressman was killed by a hired goon.

líkids n leakage in a government examination, where the answers are
given to buyers. May líkids matag iksámin sa Síbil Sirbis, There is
always a leakage every Civil Service exam. v [A12] obtain the answers
in advance through leakage. Nakalíkids man maung nakapasar, He got the
answers ahead, and that’s why he passed.

likidu n liquid, not solid.

líkin n {1} cigar made of finely crushed, roasted tobacco rolled in the
lungbuy leaf or some other material formed into a tube. {2} the wrapper
for this sort of cigar. v [A; a12] make, make into this sort of cigar.
(→), -an, -an(→) = líkin, n2. -in- = líkin, n1.

líkis v {1} [A13B; c] be wound around, cause s.t. to do so. Didtuy
dakung sawa nga naglíkis sa sanga, There was a big snake wound around
the branch. Ilíkis ug hugut ang písì sa halígi, Wind the rope tightly
around the post. {2} [A; c] put s.t. all around s.t. Akuy mulíkis aring
mga batu líbut sa punúan sa tanum, I’ll put these stones around the
base of the plants. -an(→) n the beam at the far end of the loom around
which the warp threads are wound.

líkit v [A; a12] roll s.t. flat into a tight tube, or turn a tube to
wind s.t. around it. Maglíkit kug mga papil pára sa rípa, I will roll
pieces of paper up for the raffle. Likta ug maáyu ang ímung tinustus
arun dílì muhungaw, Roll your cigar tightly so it will draw in air
well. n tight roll. Usa ka líkit nga kwarta, A roll of paper bills.
-in- = líkit, n.

liklik v [A2N] go along the edges of s.t. or round about, not straight
across or in the center. Nangliklik ku sa asíras kay nag-ulan, I walked
along the sidewalk (rather than in the street) because it was raining.
Mangliklik lang ta kay náay daghang buguy dihà sa agiánan, Let’s go
around because there are lots of toughs on the road.

likmù v {1} [A; c] conceal s.t. so others will not know it. Ilikmù nákù
ang ákung daug, I’ll conceal the fact that I won. Likmúi ang inahan nga
namatay ang íyang anak, Keep it hidden from the mother that her son
died. {2} [A; a2] cheat s.o. by withholding part of the amount or
number to be handed in. Likmúun nákù ang katungà sa hálin, I’ll keep
half of the proceeds to myself.

liksi v [A2] jump up or aside, usually by reflex action in fright or to
avoid danger. Miliksi siya sa kakurat, He jumped back with fright.
liksiliksi v [A; b6] jump about violently. Paknga ang isdà arun dílì
muliksiliksi sulud sa baskit, Knock the fish on the head so they won’t
thrash around in the basket.

liksiyun n {1} lesson in school. {2} object lesson, an event or
experience that should teach one to do s.t. differently. Kadtung baháa
liksiyun nátù báhin sa pagpanagag káhuy, That flood should be a lesson
to us with regards to deforestation. v {1} [A; a12] assign, study a
lesson. Akuy muliksiyun ninyu run báhin sa paghúbad, I will give you a
translation exercise today. Nagliksiyun mi báhin sa birbu, We were
having our lesson on verbs. {2} [A12; a12] make s.o. know the
disagreeable consequence of an act. Liksiyunun ta ka sa ímung binúang,
I will discipline you because of your foolishness.

liktyur n {1} lecture. {2} scolding (humorous slang). v [A; b6]
{1} give a lecture. {2} scold. Sa sayu sa buntag nagliktyur na siya sa
íyang mga suluguun, It’s early in the morning, but she is already
reading her servants a lecture.

likù, líkù v {1} [A2; c] turn, change directions. Mulikù ka sa wala
padúlung sa pantalan, Turn left towards the wharf. Ilíkù ang dyíp
dihang iskináha, Turn the jeep at the corner. {2} [AB6; c1] bend, be
wound around. Nakalikù siya sa bakus sa líug sa irù, She managed to get
the belt around the dog’s neck. Kining karsadáha naglikù sa bungtud,
This road encircles the hill. (←) v [B; c1] for a way to be, become
round about. Mulíkù ang átung pagkaági ug manúbay ta sa karsáda, Our
way will be round about if we follow the road. a round about way. (→)
n a bent pipe for channelling gas in a lantern. likùlíkù
a {1} zigzagging. {2} not direct to the point, beating around the bush.
v {1} [B456] be, become zigzagging. Mupahínay ka ug mulikùlíkù ang
karsáda, Slow down if the road starts to zigzag. {2} [A; c1] beat
around the bush. Sultíhi ku sa inyung túyù. Ay na lag ilikùlíkù
(likùlikúa), Tell me what it is you want. Don’t hem and haw. n action
of beating around the bush. Sa way daghang likùlíkù mipadayag siya sa
íyang túyù, Without beating around the bush, he disclosed his
intentions. likùlikuan a one who is inconsistent in what he says,
unreliable. Dílì kasalígan ang táwung likùlikuan, A person who doesn’t
say the same thing twice can’t be trusted. v [B12] become inconsistent
and unreliable. -an(→), -anan n {1} curve, bend of a road. Náa ang íla
sa may likúan, Their place is near where the bend is. {2} place one
turns off.

likub v [A; b6(1)] place or put s.t. in the middle or across a path to
prevent or obstruct passage. Akuy mulikub ug batu áning agianána, bir
ug kinsay muyawyaw, I will put a rock in the middle of this pathway.
Let’s see who dares complain. Ang kanal nalikban ug sagbut, The ditch
was blocked with trash. n anything in the way to obstruct passage.

likud {1} behind, at the back of. Ang ámung balay náa sa likud sa
simbahan, Our house is behind the church. Didtu siya maglingkud sa
likud sa trák, He sat in the back of the bus. {1a} one’s back. Palíhug
kalúta ang ákung likud, Please scratch my back. {2} coming after. Likud
sa íyang mga pag-antus miabut ang kalampúsan, On the heels of his
sufferings came success. {3} coexistent with but not readily apparent.
Likud sa íyang pahiyum nag-umidu ang kayugut, There is a seething
rancor behind her smile. Didtuy mistiryu nga nahitágù sa likud sa
kangitngit, There was s.t. mysterious hidden in the midst of the
darkness. v [AN; c1] betray, turn one over to his enemies. Gilikud si
Taruk sa íyang sákup ngadtu sa Písi, Taruc’s men betrayed him to the
P.C. likuran n place in back of s.t. likudlíkud n eve before a wedding.
Mikalit lang siyag kahánaw sa likudlíkud sa íyang kasal, He suddenly
disappeared on the eve of his wedding.

likug v [AB; c1] for s.t. long and thin to get crooked or curled.
Gilikug níla ang alambri sa punúan sa káhuy, They tied the wire around
the trunk of the tree. a crooked, not straight. Dì na magámit ang
rúlir, kay likug na, We can’t use the ruler because it is bent.

likulikuhan = likùlikuan. see likù.

likung, líkung v [A; c1] make into a circle, coil. Likúngun (ilíkung)
ku ning alambri, I will coil up the wire into a circular loop. n s.t.
fashioned into a coil, loop. Dúnay líkung nga gipátung níya sa íyang
úlu silbing hapin sa íyang lukdúun, She has a piece of cloth rolled
into a coil which she placed on her head to cushion what she is going
to carry. Kuháang likung kay maghulahup ku, Get me a hoop. I’m going to
play hulahoop.

likup, líkup v [A2S; a] surround, enclose. Ang mga kaáway milíkup sa
ílang kampu, The enemies surrounded their camp. Daghang mistiryu ang
naglikup niíning hitabúa, The event is shrouded in mystery. Likpa
(likupa, palikpi) ug kural ang balay, Build a fence around the house.
(→) n distance or measurement around s.t. ka-an, pa- n surroundings,
environs.

lik-up v [A; b6(1)] close, cover a passage. Dì mu makalik-up ning
dalána kay agiánan man ni sa publiku, You can’t block this road because
this is a public thoroughfare. Ákung gilik-úpan ang sapà arun muhubas
ang ubus, I’m damming up the brook so that the area below will dry up.

likuplikup n a climbing vine with whitish-yellow flowers and round,
smooth leaves, belonging to the family Dischidia.

líkus v [A; c] be coiled around s.t. Sawa nga nagalíkus sa sanga, A
snake coiled around the branch. Milíkus sa payag ang mga sundálu, The
soldiers surrounded the hut. Dúnay paril nga naglíkus sa simbahan,
There is a stone wall that is surrounding the church. Ílang giliksan sa
púkut ang dakung duut sa isdà, They encircled the big school of fish
with the net. n measurement around s.t., perimeter. (→), likuslikus
n k.o. itchy skin infection where eruptions of watery pustules appear
in splotches around the body and later burst.

likut a slit-eyed. Likut siya kay kalíwat ug Insik, He has narrow eyes.
He is of Chinese extraction. v [B15] be, become slit-eyed.

likuy, líkuy a going in a curve. Líkuy ang dágan sa búla kay walà man
manibil ang mísa, The ball is rolling crooked because the billiard
table is not level. v [B2S] for a ball to curve or swerve. Lisud saw-un
ang búla nga naglikuy, It is hard to catch a curve ball.

likwa v [c] buy stock with the proceeds of a day’s sale. Ígù rang
ilikwa ang halin karung adláwa, Today’s sales are just enough to buy
new stock. likwalikwa n the system of small-time buying and selling in
which the entire capital is tied up in a single day’s sales and the
proceeds go for buying new goods. v [A12; c] operate a business on this
method.

likwad v [AN; c] cleverly deny s.t. or conceal a truth when accused. Dì
ka makalikwad kay nasáyud na ku, Don’t try to be clever and hide
anything because I already know. Ayawg ilikwad nákù ang hustung kítà,
Don’t try to conceal exactly what the proceeds are. a cleverly denying
or concealing s.t. when accused. likwadlikwad v [A; c1] investigate,
cross-examine thoroughly, turning questions inside out. Ug
likwadlikwárun (ilikwadlikwad) ang mga pangutána, tingálig maluba ang
giakusar, If the questions are turned inside out in the course of the
cross-examination, the accused will probably give in.

likwála n k.o. ornamental palm with wide, round, accordion-like leaves
and long, slender stalks lined with thorns at the sides: Licuala spp.

likwang v [A; b2c1] tilt or turn s.t. heavy over. Likwángun (ilikwang)
ku ang batu ug náa bay kinhasun sa iláwum, I’ll turn the stone over to
see whether there are any shells under it. Ilikwang (likwánga) ang
baril arun mayabu ang súd, Turn the barrel over to pour the water out.

likyad v [B23(1); c6] curl up at the edges. Milikyad ang playwud nga
giparka sa sakayan, The plywood they used to wall the boat curled at
the edges. Milikyad ang papil nga gipapilit sa bungbung kay natangtang
ang ngilit, The paper that had been pasted to the walls curled up
because the edges got loose.

líla a violet. v [A13; a12] color s.t. violet.

lílang n k.o. herring.

lílas n {1} long strip, usually of young buri palm leaves, used in
weaving mats or bags. {2} film on which movies are recorded. {2a} the
motion picture industry or art form. Sa kalibútan sa lílas, In the
world of film. {2b} movie. Lílas nga aksiyun, An action film. v {1} [A;
a12] make s.t. into strips for weaving. {2} [A13; a12] make a movie out
of a story. -an n device for cutting s.t. into strips.

lìlì v {1} [A; a2] peep at s.t. while hidden. Ug malígù ka dihà, lìlíun
kang Piduy, If you bathe there, Pidoy will peep at you. {2} [A13; a12]
take a look to see how things are. Lìlía ang kan-un ug nahubsan na ba,
Take a look at the rice to see if the water has evaporated. -un(→)
n small variety of eggplant, so called because one has to look under
the leaves to see it.

lilígan n in a bamboo house, thin bamboo slats to which flooring slats
(salug) or walling slats which hold the walling material (lugpit) are
tied and which serve to hold them in place.

lilinglíling v [A; a2] circle around looking for s.t. Mulilinglíling
ang ayruplánu úsà mamumba, An airplane circles over a target first
before it begins dropping bombs. Lilinglilínga ang ákung singsing nga
nahúlug sa sílung, Look around for my ring that fell under the house.

lílit v [A2S] for s.t. to bulge out through an opening. Mililit ang
tinái sa samad, His guts were sticking out through the wound. Naglilit
ang íyang tiyan sa guut nga karsunsilyu, His stomach is bulging through
his tight shorts.

lilítik = handilítik.

lílù n whirlpool. v {1} [A] form a whirlpool. Mulílù ang túbig ug ang
duha ka sulug magbanggà, A whirlpool forms if two currents meet.
{2} [A12] be agitated as if swirled in a whirlpool. Naglílù ang ákung
pagbátì tungud sa kalíbug, My feelings are all awhirl with confusion.
{3} [A23] for a dimple to form a whirlpool-like depression. Mulílù ang
íyang kandíis ug mupahíyum siya, Her dimples form whirlpool-like
depressions when she smiles. -an n place where there is a whirlpool.

líluk v [A; a] carve. Maáyung mulíluk ug istatúwa ang manlilíluk, A
sculptor carves statues well. Maanindut nga dibúhu ang íyang gilíluk,
He carved a beautiful design in the wood. paN- n occupation of carving.

lílung_1 v [A; c] conceal, hide a true state of affairs. Ayaw kug
lilúngi, duktǔr, Do not conceal the truth from me, Doctor. Ilílung nátù
níya ang nahitabù, We’ll keep what happened from him.

lílung_2 a making dizzy. Lílung sakyan ang tyubíbu, It makes you dizzy
to ride a merry-go-round. n dizziness. Ang táwung makaagwanta sa lílung
puyding maastrunut, A man who can stand dizziness can qualify as an
astronaut. v [B126] be, become dizzy. paN-(→) n dizzy spell, occasional
feeling of dizziness. Kasagáran sa magsabak batíug panglilung, Most
women experience dizzy spells in their early months of pregnancy.
panga- v [A13] be in a state of slight dizziness. Nagpangalilung ku sa
kagútum, I’m somewhat dizzy from hunger.

lima numeral five. v see tulu.

limangkà v [A3; c1] having the legs crossed at the ankles. Milimangkà
siya sa salug, He sat on the floor with his legs crossed in front.
Niambak siya sa túbig nga naglimangkà arun pagtimpasaw, He jumped into
the water with his ankles crossed to make a big splash.

límas v [A; b] bail water out. Ug dílì ka mulímas malúnud ta, If you do
not bail, we will sink. {2} empty a pool or a big container by bailing
the water out. (→) n s.t. used for bailing. -un(→) n water in the
bottom of a boat, bilge water.

limátuk = alimátuk.

lim-aw n small, shallow pool of water. Mga lim-aw nga mahibilin
inighunas, Pools left after the tide has gone out. Lim-aw human sa
ulan, Pools of water after the rain. v [B] form a small pool.

limba v = limbalimba. limbalimba v [A1] toss, roll around. Ug muinum
kug kapi maglimbalimba lang ku tibuuk gabíi, If I drink coffee, I toss
and turn the whole night.

limbag v [A] writhe, wriggle, esp. from stomach pain. Bisag giunsa níya
paglimbag, wà makabuhì, No matter how he wriggled, he couldn’t free
himself. Naglimbag siya kay gisirulan, He was writhing in pain from his
stomach cramps.

limbáhun a having a yellow color with a reddish cast. Ang limbáhung
bidlísiw sa nagsalup nga adlaw, The pink rays of the setting sun.
n fruits that have this color. {a} coconuts that have red or
yellow-orange husks. {b} variety of shaddock (buluungun) with pinkish
meat.

limbákug v [B456; c1] twist and squirm vigorously. Naglimbákug sa
kasakit ang táwu nga gisul-an sa tiyan, The man was writhing in pain
because of his stomach pains. Naglimbákug ang bitin nga naputlan sa
úlu, The snake was writhing because his head was cut off.

limbaruk strong curse word expressing exasperation or irritation.
Limbaruk, dimálas baraháa, Damn! What an unlucky card. v [a4] be
cursed. Mu rag gilimbaruk kining ámung kahimtang, It looks as though
we’re completely out of luck.

limbáruk v [B126; b6] fall headlong. Nalimbáruk ang bátà sa bintánà,
The child fell headlong out of the window.

limbárut = *limbáwut.

limbas = lingbas.

*limbásug paN- v [A; b5] strive hard, exert effort to accomplish s.t.
Nanglimbásug siya nga makabuhì, She struggled to free herself.
Panlimbasúgan (panlimbasúgun) ku nga makapasar, I will try my best to
pass the course. n act of striving hard or exerting effort. Ang
panglimbásug dílì laksut basta dílì lang palabihan, It is not a bad
thing to strive hard as long as you don’t overdo it. mapaN-un
a characterized with assiduous work or effort. Nagpúlaw siya sa
mapanglimbasúgun nga tingúhà sa paglampus, He works till late at night
in his ardent desire for success.

limbatiánun (from bátì_1) a heartfelt, with feeling (literary). Gugmang
limbatiánun, Deeply-felt love.

limbáun = limbáhun.

*limbáwut paN- v [A; b4] for hair to stand on end, get goose bumps.
Nanglimbáwut ákung balhíbu pagkadungug nákù sa isturya, My hair stood
on end when I heard the story.

limbu n {1} whirling current of wind. Nadala sa limbu ang mga dáhung
layà, The dry leaves were whirled about in the wind. {2} place between
heaven and hell to which unbaptized children are consigned. {3} sa — be
up on the air, not certain. Túa pa sa limbu ang ámung plánu, Our plans
are still up in the air. v {1} [A3P] for the wind to whirl around.
{2} [A; c1] be blown about in the air. Mulimbu ang asu ug huypun sa
hángin, Smoke moves rapidly through the air when the wind blows it.
Milimbu ang tabánug nga nakabugtù sa tugut, The kite soared when its
string broke.

limbúkad = alimbúkad.

limbung v [AN; b6] cheat, deceive. Ása gud nà siya mulimbung
(manglimbung) nákù! He would never cheat me! Dílì ku makalimbung
(makapanglimbung) sa paghigugma nímu, I cannot commit deception by
pretending to love you. Gilimbúngan mu aku sa pag-undang mu ug iskuyla,
You deceived me when you stopped attending school. n action of
cheating, deceiving. -an(→) n {1} inclined to cheat or defraud. Dílì ku
makigdúlà nímu kay limbungan kaáyu ka, I will not play with you because
you cheat. {2} giving the illusion of being taller than it really is.
Limbungan ang babáyi nga naghayhil, The woman gives the impression of
being taller than she is because she is wearing high heels. ma-un
a deceptive. Dílì ku mamátì sa íyang malimbúngun nga mga sáad, I will
not listen to his deceptive promises. paN- n deception.

limbu rak n a k.o. dance, the limbo rock. v [A] dance the limbo rock.

limbuwad, limbúwad v [AB26; c] fall headlong, topple over; cause s.t.
to do so. Milimbúwad (nalimbúwad) ang kaang paghángin, The flower pot
toppled over in the wind. Gilimbúwad ni Buy ang lamísa sa íyang kasukù,
Boy toppled the table over in his anger.

limbúyuk v [B126] be in chaotic confusion. Nalimbúyuk ning ákung
kaisípan sa túmang kalíbug, My mind is whirling in confusion.

límin v {1} [A13; b] wrap cloth around the body, swaddle. Lanahi ang
pinútì unyà limíni ug lampin, Put oil on the bolo then wrap it up in a
diaper. Dinhay masúsu nga gilimínan ug mga nuug, There was an infant
that was swaddled in rags. {2} [A; b6] pervade, envelop as if to cover
entirely. Kangitngit nga milímin sa kasilingánan, Darkness that
enveloped the neighborhood. Ang íyang pagbátì nákù gilimínan sa mga
duhadúha, Doubt pervades her feelings toward me.

liminlimin v [B6; c1] be all jumbled, thrown together without order.
Muliminlimin (maliminlimin) nang búla sa hílu ug dì nímu baátan, Those
pieces of string will get all tangled up if you don’t tie them
together. Ákung liminliminun (iliminlimin) ang mga bulingun, I’ll throw
the dirty clothes in a bunch.

límis v [A3P; b5] {1} wrap, envelop. Nagkinahanglan kug dakung papil
nga makalímis (makapalímis) niíning kartun, I need a large sheet of
paper to wrap this box in. Limísa (limísi) sa tualya ang bátà ighumag
kalígù, Wrap the child in a towel after his bath. Duha ka makusgánung
buktun ang gilímis kaníya, Two strong arms embraced her. {2} envelop
completely with. Nangamátay ang mga tanum kay nalímis (nalimisan) sa
mga sagbut, The plants died when they were completely covered with
weeds. {3} shower with affection. Gilímis (gilimísan) ku níyag hawuk,
She smothered me with kisses.

limitar v [A; b(1)] put a limit to. Gilimitahan níya ang úras sa
pagbisíta, She put a limit to the visiting hours. limitádu a given in
insufficient amounts, limited. Ang pagkáun limitádu kaáyu sa kasirahan,
They serve an insufficient amount of food in the boarding house.
v [B1256] be limited.

limiti n limit. Way limiti ug pilay ímung gustung dad-un, There is no
limit to how many you may take. v [A; b6] set limits. Dílì ku mulimiti
sa ímung pagkáun, I will set no limits as to how much you may eat.

limpangug (from pangug) a silly, stupid; lacking good judgment or
common sense. Ayaw na lang pagsalig nga matúman ang tanan mung súgù,
limpangug kaáyu nang tawhána, Don’t expect that man to carry out your
instructions properly, he is so stupid.

limpísa v [A; c] clean a mechanism. Kamau kang mulimpísa ug karburadur
sa awtu? Do you know how to clean the carburator of a car? Limpisáhi
ang pitrumaks arun musíga, Clean the pressure lantern so it will light.
n cleaning of mechanical equipment.

limpiya v [A; b6] polish shoes. Nagkabítun ang ákung kamut kay
naglimpiya ku sa ákung sapátus, My hands have shoe polish on them
because I was polishing my shoes. n {1} shoeshining as a business.
Kusug ang limpiya gikang mag-uwan, After it rains we get plenty of
business shining shoes. {2} materials for shining shoes. way — badly
needing a shine. Way limpiya ang ímung sapátus, Your shoes need a
shine. paN- v [A2; b6] polish shoes for a living. n occupation of
shining shoes. — bútas n bootblack. mag-l-, maN-l- n bootblack.

limpiyáda a for a woman to be neat and clean in her ways. Hinlù ílang
báy kay ang inahan limpiyáda, Their house is clean because the mother
is a demon for cleanliness. v [B1] be habitually neat and clean.

limpiyu a {1} clean, devoid of dirt, sanitary. Limpiyu kaáyu ang salug
run, The floor is very clean today. Limpiyu ang ristawran nga ámung
gikan-an, The restaurant we ate in is sanitary. {1a} clean, without VD.
{2} clear, unsullied. Limpiyu ku ug kunsinsiya kay wà kuy salà, I have
a clear conscience because I am not guilty. n {1} action of cleaning.
Kahúgaw, way limpiyu, How dirty it is! No one cleaned it! {2} clean
clothes. Wà kuy limpiyu isimba, I have no clean clothes to wear to
church. {3} amount gained clear. v {1} [AB; ab] clean, rid s.t. of
dirt, become clean. Hugáwan siyang mulimpiyu sa kasilyas, He thinks
cleaning the toilet is dirty. Malimpiyu ra nang kasilyas ug nía ku, The
only time that toilet is clean is when I’m around to watch you.
Limpiyúhun nátù ang átung trabáhu arun dílì ta maúlaw, Let us do a
clean job of our work so we won’t be put to embarrassment. Limpiyúhi
ang kusína, Clean the kitchen. {2} [A2; a12] make a net gain or income.
Nakalimpiyu kug kinsi sa ákung pamaráda karun, I netted fifteen pesos
in my driving today. ig-l- n thing used in cleaning. mag-l- n one who
cleans.

limu n magical practices used to help a baby go through his various
stages of development easily and successfully or to cure a grown person
of a bad characteristic or to get rid of s.t. undesirable that is s.w.
These practices may consist of having the baby or the afflicted adult
perform an action analogous to the actions one wishes to develop or
stop or may consist of special foods or potions together with magic
words. Ang limu sa bátang magngipun, ang lagus pahírag tái, The ritual
for a child that is teething: feces are rubbed on his gums. v [A; a]
treat with limu. Limuha ug sagu ang palaínum nímung bána, Mix a dead
man’s saliva into your husband’s drink to stop his vice.

limù v [A; a] hide, keep s.t. a secret. Naglimù ba ku nímu sa ákung
makítà? Do I hide my earnings from you? Sa prubinsiya dì ka makalimù
bisan gamayng sikrítu, In the country you cannot keep the tiniest
secret. Ayaw ilimù sa ímung ginikánan ang ímung prublíma, Do not keep
your problems from your parents.

limud v [A; c] deny, conceal s.t. upon being confronted. Mulimud ka pa
giyud nga kláru man ang pruyba! You still dare to conceal it when the
evidence is so clear! Ayaw ug ilimud ang ímung pag-anhi, Don’t deny
that you came here. malimdánun a given to denying or concealing the
truth when confronted.

limugmug v {1} [AN; c1] rinse the mouth out. Mulimugmug (manlimugmug)
giyud ku human ug káun, I rinse my mouth after I eat. {1a} [A; b] slosh
water around in the mouth to warm it and spit it out on s.t. to bathe
it. Limugmúgi ang sunuy matag buntag, Bathe the cock every morning with
water you slosh around in your mouth. {2} [AP; a] take a drink of
liquor, usually in a large gulp (humorous slang). Mulimugmug
(manlimugmug) siyag usa ka básung tubà, He will gulp down a glass of
toddy. {3} [c] be unconcerned about s.t. s.o. says or s.t. embarrassing
that happens. Way kapuslánan ang kasábà, gilimugmug lang, No use
scolding him. It runs off him like water off a duck’s back. (Lit. He
just gargles with it.) -an(→) n {1} the oral cavity. {1a} by extension,
the throat. {2} the outside of this area: the cheeks, including the
lower part of the jaw and the base of the ear. {3} the place in a
monkey’s mouth where he stores food.

*limúhag ka-an n {1} knowledge of how to do s.t. Ayaw ku ug paayúha ug
makina kay wà kuy kalimuhágan ánang mga butánga, Don’t ask me to repair
engines because I have no knowledge of that sort of thing.
{2} knowledge about or of what a thing is. Manukutsukut ta sa
mangingisdà arun makabatun tag kalimuhágan sa mga isdà, Let’s ask the
fishermen so we can learn s.t. about fishes.

limúk v [A2N; b6] give a look of anger or disgust with pursed lips, and
make a humming sound. Milimúk (nanlimúk) siya nákù kay wà man nákù
pakapíha, She gave me a sour look because I did not allow her to copy
my work. Íya kung gilimúkan, mu rag nakasalà ku níya, She gave me a
look of disgust, as if I had offended her.

limukun n k.o. edible shellfish of the depths, finned and similar to a
crab, but without claws.

limúkun = alimúkun.

limulímu v [A; c1] hide, withhold s.t. from s.o. that he ought to know.
Kusug siyang mulimulímu sa íyang kalihúkan sa íyang bána, She is fond
of keeping her activities from her husband. Gilimulímu níla sa ílang
inahan ang kamatáyun sa ílang igsúun, They concealed their brother’s
death from their mother.

limun n k.o. hard candies.

límun v [A; b5] roll and wrap s.t. up to conceal it, facilitate
disposal, carrying, and the like. Limúni (limúna) ang mga bulingun sa
hábul, Wrap the dirty clothes in the blanket.

limunáda n lemonade, usually made of calamondin juice (limunsítu).
v [A13; a12] make lemonade. — ruhi n a k.o. purgative for children,
prepared under physician’s prescription and taken hot.

limunglímung = limulímu.

limunsítu, limunsítus n calamondin, a small citrus tree bearing small,
round, acid fruit, orange-colored when ripe, with an easily separable
peel. It is the most widely sold sour citrus: Citrus microcarpa.

limuruk, limúruk = lamuruk.

limus n {1} alms. {2} a voluntary contribution to the family of a
person who died. v [A; b6(1)] {1} give alms or a voluntary contribution
to the family of a person who died. Mulimus giyud ta inigdúaw sa
namatyan, We ought to give a little s.t. when we visit the family of
the deceased. Limusi ang makililímus nga buta, Give alms to the blind
beggar. {2} give s.t. of great value to the recipient but of little
value to the owner. Intáwun, Kurdaping. Anus-a pa man ku nímu limsig
pahíyum? Have pity, Cordaping. When will you bestow a smile on me?
{3} give s.t. of little value, but unwillingly. Ug dì níya bayran tung
dus, ilimus na lang tu, If he doesn’t give me my two pesos back, forget
it. I’ll write it off as charity. paki- v [A] go begging for alms.
Magpakilimus na lang ta ug wà nay mahímù, We’ll have to go begging if
there’s no other way. linimsan n amount collected by begging.
maka-r-(←), maki-r-(←), paki-r-(←) n beggar.

límut v {1} [B123S6; b8] forget. Nalímut ku sa átung sábut, I forgot
our appointment. Uy, nakalimut ka ug butúnis sa ímung karsúnis! Hey!
You forgot to button your pants! Nalimtan nákù ang ákung pitáka! I
forgot my wallet! Kalimti ang nangági kanátù, Forget what happened
between us. Dílì ku kalimtan tung nawnga bísan ug ása, I will not
forget that face anywhere. {2} [B126] lose consciousness. Nalímut ku
pagkapangkà sa ákung úlu, I got unconscious when my head bumped into
s.t. {3} = limut, v. (→) n {1} anesthetic. {2} k.o. antidote to make
s.o. stop a vice. v [A; a1] {1} give general anesthesia. Dílì mulímut
ang duktǔr ug dúnay sakit sa kasingkásing, A doctor won’t administer
anesthesia to s.o. with a heart disease. Unsay ilimut sa bátang palaihì
magabíi? What antidote shall we use on a child that wets his bed?
{2} hypnotize, dazzle s.o. to make him lose his sense of reason or see
things in a different way. Ingkantu ang milimut (naglimut) kaníya, An
enchanted being led him into a different world. Limutun ka sa íyang
katahum, You will be dazzled by her beauty. limutlímut v [b6] forget
s.t. at every occasion. Íyang gilimutlimútan ug úlì ang bumba sa ligid,
He forgets to return the air pump every time. hika-/haka-(→) v [B1256;
b8] happen to forget. Nahikalimut siya pagpalit ug sibúyas, She forgot
to buy onions. paN- v [b1] {1} lose consciousness. {2} lose control of
oneself. Gipanlimútan siyang misagpà sa íyang asáwa, He lost control of
himself and hit his wife. -a(←) how very forgetful. Labihan nákung
limúta uy! Jesus, how forgetful I am! ka- n action of forgetting s.t.
Way nagtuun sa kalímut, No one learns how to forget. (You’re born with
that knowledge.) ma-un, malimtánun, manggilimtánun, limtánun
a forgetful. v [B12] become forgetful. pa- = limut, n.

limúut = alimúut.

línà_1 v {1} [A13; a12] collect toddy before the normal time to gather
it, most usually take the toddy in the evening instead of the following
morning. Maglínà ku sa dawat kay gustu kung muinum ug tam-is nga tubà,
I will take the toddy this evening because I want to drink sweet palm
toddy. Lináa ang tubà arun tam-is, Gather the palm toddy early so that
it will be sweet. {2} [A; a1] restore s.o.’s health by drinking fresh
unfermented coconut toddy. Gilínà ang bátà kay luyahun, The child was
given fresh toddy as a tonic because he was so weak. n sweet palm
toddy. (→) = línà, n.

*línà_2 pa- n {1} a process of purification in folk medicine whereby
some evil or bad effect is removed by exposing the victim to magical
smoke, obtained from certain plants and compounds. {2} the material
burned in the process of palínà. v [A; b6(1)] administer this
treatment. Gipalináan ug sagbut sa mintiryu ang gilubatan, She became
ill after attending a funeral and was treated with smoke from plants
taken from the cemetery.

línab n woman born with a very narrow or no vaginal opening.

línaw_1 a {1} calm, free of agitation. Línaw ang dágat, The sea is
calm. {2} calm, free from excitement. Línaw átung hunàhúnà ug walà tay
mga suliran, Your mind is calm if you don’t have problems. v {1} [B2S;
b4(1)] be, become calm. Naglínaw ang panahun, The weather is calm.
Dúgay ming naabut kay nalináwan ang sakayan, We arrived late because
the boat was becalmed. {2} [B1; a12] be calm, undisturbed. Dílì
maglínaw ang ímung tanlag, Your conscience will not be at peace. Lináwa
ang ímung kaugalíngun, ayaw ug katarantar, Compose yourself. Don’t
panic. n peace, calm. Walay línaw ning panimuyúa, The way we’re living,
there is no peace and quiet. ma-un a calmly, peacefully. Malináwun siya
nga namatay, He died calmly. ka- n = línaw, n.

línaw_2 n pool, lake. v [A; b6] form into a pool, pond, or lake.
Mulínaw ang túbig sa sílung ug kusug ang ulan, A lake forms under our
house when it rains hard.

lindag v [B456] toss about restlessly in bed. Naglindag ku sa higdaánan
gabíi, wà giyud kung katulug, I didn’t sleep the whole night last
night. I just kept tossing around in bed.

lindug n {1} unbranching trunk of a tree. Lindug sa lubi, The trunk of
a coconut tree. {1a} column in a building. {2} column in a newspaper or
journal. Lindug sa mga bálak, Poetry section. {3} warp threads. mag-r-
n columnist.

linga, línga (from alinga) a inattentive due to preoccupation with s.t.
else. Balikbalíka pag-isplikar kay linga kaáyu, Repeat your explanation
because he is very inattentive. n preoccupation that keeps one from
concentrating. Dì siya makatrabáhu kay daghan siyag linga, He can’t do
work because he has lots of other things to think about. v {1} [B12;
b3] be inattentive. Wà kung kabantay pag-ági níya. Nalinga lang ku, I
didn’t see her go by. I wasn’t paying attention. Subrang dúwà ang
nalingahan ánang batáa, The child has nothing but play on his mind and
thus is inattentive. {2} [A12; a] hold one’s attention. Nalinga kug
tan-aw sa lamígas nga nanag-áway, I was amused watching the ants
fighting each other. Lingaha ang gwardiya kay muipsut ku sa píkas, Keep
the guard occupied because I will slip through the other side.
{3} [B1256] be so occupied. Ang tindíra nalinga ug paninsíyu, The
salesgirl was so busy she couldn’t make change properly. maka-r-(←)
a being easily diverted, distracted. Pangidad nga makalilínga, Age at
which one has a short attention span.

língab a having the congenital defect of a narrow or no vaginal
opening.

lingabngab n yawn. v [AN2] yawn. Mulingabngab (manglingabngab) lang ku
ug katulgun na ku, I yawn when I feel sleepy.

lingag a lacking concentration, preoccupied with many other things so
as to make stupid mistakes. Lingag man maung bisag kurik girúngan, She
is so careless. She marked correct answers wrong. Wà siya makatúman sa
túgun kay lingag man, She didn’t do what she was told because she was
careless. v [B1] be, become careless, preoccupied with other
distracting activities. Nagkalingag na ning draybir námù. Sígi na lang
makabanggà, Our chauffeur is getting careless. He keeps having
accidents.

lingagngag = alingagngag.

lingas a unable to keep still but moving about all the time instead.
Lingas kaáyu ning batáa, dì mahimutang, This boy is always moving
about, he can’t keep still. v [B; b6] be moving about always and not
keeping still.

língat v {1} [AB24] for the eyes to rove, move the eyes. Milíngat lang
ang íyang mata pagsúd níya sa palasyu, Her eyes popped out of her head
when she went in the palace. Naglíngat siya sa simbahan, She looked
around at the people in the church. {2} [A] behave badly, wildly when
one is in a place where formal behavior is expected. Mulíngat lang ning
mga bátà kung túa sa láing báy, My children act wild when they are in
other people’s houses. Naglíngat lang siya didtu sa baylihan kay hubug
man, He acted wildly at the dance because he was drunk. (→)
a {1} careless, not paying attention to what one is about. Hibyaan níya
ang bág kay lingat man, She left her bag because she was careless.
{2} failing to behave modestly and composed in a place where one is
expected to be on one’s good behavior. v [B12; b6] be, become careless.
Nalingat siya kay giapura, She was careless because she was rushed.

lingátung n shrub or small tree having numerous stinging hairs, with
magical uses to drive unglù away: Laportea brunnea. v [b4(1)] get the
stinging hairs of this plant on one.

lingaw v {1} [A; a12] attract one’s interest or attention. Ákung
lingawun si Máma ug ikay kúhà sa dulsi, I’ll keep Mom’s attention while
you get the candy. {2} [A2; a12] entertain, amuse. Ang íyang kumidiya
dílì makalingaw nákù, His jokes don’t amuse me. Nalingaw ang bátà ug
panakup ug apan, The child is amused, occupying himself with catching
grasshoppers. n thing to keep oneself busy with. Ug wà kay lingaw,
pagtuun, If you don’t have anything to do, you could study. ka- v [A3;
b6] do s.t. in one’s spare time, spend one’s time doing s.t. Samtang
nagpaábut ku, magkalingaw kug bása, While I am waiting, I will pass the
time reading. lingawlíngaw v {1} [A13] amuse, divert oneself. Human sa
trabáhu, maglingawlíngaw mi, After work we amuse ourselves. {2} [A13;
b6] spend one’s spare time doing s.t. Human dáyun ni kay ákung
lingawlingáwan ug pintal human sa trabáhu, It won’t take long to get
done painting because I’ll do it in my spare time after work.
n recreation, amusement. Álang kaníya ang panulat usa ka lingawlíngaw,
For him writing is a form of relaxation. palingawlíngaw v [A; b6]
pretend to be occupied or engrossed with s.t. to avoid confronting an
embarrassing situation. Nainsultuhan gud siya piru nagpalingawlíngaw
lag hinábì sa uban, She felt insulted but she just pretended to be
engrossed in her conversation with other people. ka-an(←) n amusement.
Sa karnabalan daghang kalingáwan, In the fair grounds there are lots of
amusements. maka-r-(←) a affording amusement.

lingay, língay v [A2] for the sun to move beyond the zenith and the
shadows to lengthen in the afternoon. Milingay na ang adlaw ug wà pa
sila makapaniudtu, The sun has moved beyond the zenith and they still
have not taken their lunch. Nakalingay ang anínu sa lubi gíkan sa kural
apan ang aláyun wà pa makasúgud, The shadow of the coconut tree has
moved beyond the fence, but the work bee has not yet started.

lingbas n file. — nga língin rattail file. — nga mídiya língin
half-round file. — nga tris kantus triangular file. v [A; a1] {1} file
s.t. down, off. {2} make, make into a file. -in- n filings. -in-an
a for the voice to be cutting and sharp. Gitubag ku níya sa usa ka
tíngug nga linimbásan, She answered me in a sharp and cutting voice.

lingbáhun = limbáhun.

linggà v [B6; a12] for boats to roll. Pag-ági sa barku gilinggà ang
sakayan, The fishing boat rolled in the wake of the ship.

linggalingga v [A; c16] rock a vessel or vehicle from side to side.
Ayawg linggalinggáha ang búti kay mayabu, Don’t rock the life boat. It
might overturn.

linggánay n {1} church bell. {2} ringing of church bells. v [A] for
church bells to ring. -an n bell tower.

linggawas = lingkawas.

linggíru n k.o. soldierfish.

linggúkud n the young of the agápang (k.o. mullet).

lingguwáhi n language.

lingguwista n linguist. v [B156] be, become a linguist.

lingguwita = langgíta.

linghud a {1} immature plants. Aslum ang manggang linghud pa, Mangoes
are very sour when they are young. Dílì maáyung isugnud ang linghud
káhuy, Green wood is no good for fuel. {2} young and immature. Ang
linghud níyang pangísip, His immature mind. ka- n state or condition of
being young and immature.

língì v {1} [A3S; a2b2] turn one’s head to the side to look back.
Milíngì siya nákù, He looked back at me. Ayaw siyag lingía, Don’t turn
to look at him. {2} [A2S; a12] give s.t. the attention it requires.
Ayawg ipanugal ímung kítà, lingía usab ang ímung mga anak, Don’t gamble
away your earnings. You have your children to think of. {2a} [A23; a12]
pay attention to s.t., recognize its existence. Karun nga dátù na siya
dílì na ta lingíun níya, Now that he is rich, he will not take notice
of us. paN-(→) v [A13] keep looking back. Nagpanglingì ku sa pagtan-aw
ug náa bay nagsunud, I kept looking back to see if anyone was following
us.

lingig v {1} [A; b6] bend the teeth of a saw alternately to the side to
widen the kerf and to prevent sticking. Lingigi ang gabas arun dakug
ági, Twist the teeth on your saw so it will have a wide kerf. {2} [B12;
b6] get one’s neck twisted. n {1} saw set, tool to give set to saw
teeth. {2} set, the amount of bend imparted to saw teeth. a for the
neck to be twisted to one side. Mau ra nà siyag kanúnayng maglingì kay
lingig man, He looks like he is always looking to the side because he
has a twisted neck.

língin a round, circular. Língin kaáyu ang singsing (búla), The ring
(ball) is round. — ang búla still in the running, all is not lost.
Língin pa ang búla, puydi pag mabawì nákù sa paynals ang ákung grádu, I
still have a chance. Maybe I can make up for my failing grade in the
finals. n money (slang). v [AB2S; a] form a circle or sphere, cause
s.t. to do so. Naglíngin ku áring tabla pára ligid sa duláan, I am
cutting this board into a circle as a wheel for the toy. Ang naglíngin
níyang mata, Her round eyes. Lingína ang bulabúla, Form the meat into
little balls. Lingíni sa tungà ug human, gabsa ang tungà, Make a circle
in the middle and then saw out the middle portion. n circle. -g- =
língin, a (plural). ma- a {1} round. {2} disgrasyang ma- a most
unlikely misfortune which nevertheless takes place, though the victim
does not deserve it. -un(→) a roundish.

lingiw v [A2] look away. Mulingiw siya ug ákung tan-áwun kay sad-an man
siya, He looks away when I look at him because he’s guilty. Ígù lang ku
nga nakalingiw kay dì ku kaagwanta ug tan-aw, All I could do was look
away because I couldn’t stand to look at him.

lingka v [A; a] uproot vines to clear a place. Lingkáhun námù ning
kamutihána kay tumus na, We’ll uproot this sweet potato patch because
the potatoes have all been gathered.

lingkáang v {1} [B46N] for plants to spread out. Milingkáang
(nanglingkáang) ang lambáyung sa baybáyun, The vines spread out over
the beach. Dákit nga naglingkáang ang mga sanga, A spreading banyan
tree. {2} [BN; a1] for parts of the body to spread like a plant. Tiil
nga nanglingkáang kay dúgay nga wà kasapatúsi, Spreading feet that
hadn’t worn shoes in ages. Lingkaángun (ilingkáang) sa pábu ang íyang
balhíbu ug duúlun, A turkey will puff itself up if you get near it.
{2a} for the ears or hair to stand up upon feeling an emotion.
Nanlingkáang ang íyang dawunggan pagkadungug sa isturya, Her ears stood
up when she heard the story. Hutwang sa irù nga makalingkáang sa
balhíbu, The howling of a dog that can make your hair stand on end.

lingkag a having ears that stick out sidewards. Lingkag kaáyug
dalunggan ang kuníhu, Rabbits have ears that stick out. v [B2] for the
ears to prick up, esp. in surprise. Nalingkag ang íyang dalunggan
pagkadungug sa íyang ngálan, His ears pricked up when he heard his
name.

lingkálang = lingkáang.

lingkáng = lingkáang.

lingkas = lingka.

lingkawas v [APB3(1); b6] escape. Kinsay mulingkawas (mupalingkawas)
nátù niíning kalisud? Who will save us from our poverty? Mulingkawas
siyag dúnay buluhátun, He escapes when there is work to do. Dílì ka
makalingkawas sa sílut sa kamatáyun, You cannot escape the death
penalty.

lingkit a for two things to be joined along their lengths. Ang lingkit
nga ságing isípung usa, They count two bananas joined together as one.
Lingkit ang pán nga grasyúsa, The graciosa bread comes linked. bátà,
kalúha nga — Siamese twins. v {1} [B126C3; b6] be joined along the
lengths. {2} [A; c1] tie two or more coconuts together by joining them
with a small piece of husk slashed from each of them.

lingkúbaw = lintúbaw.

lingkud v {1} [A1; b6(1)] sit down. Ayaw ug lingkúri nang syáha kay
basà pa ang pintal, Don’t sit on that chair because the paint is still
wet. Ayaw ug ilingkud nang ímung bag-ung inutaw nga karsúnis kay
malum-it, Do not sit down in your newly pressed pants because they will
get crumpled. {2} [A; b6] assume, hold office or position. Mulingkud
siya pagkaprisidinti sa kumpaníya ugmà, He will assume office as
president of the company tomorrow. {3} [b(1)] sit to give serious, full
time and attention to a piece of work. Kinahanglang lingkúran ning
trabahúa, This work must be given full time and attention. {4} [A] for
a coconut to grow to the stage that its trunk shows. Sa duha ka tuig
dílì pa mulingkud ang lubi, At two years the coconut still does not
show its trunk. pa- v [a3] fall down into a sitting position.
Nahisabiklan ku sa táwu ug napalingkud ku sa bangkù, The man bumped
into me and I fell down in a sitting position on the bench. lingkuránan
n seat, chair, bench. lingkurun n {1} for an occupation to be
sedentary. {2} the bride’s family and guests at a wedding party (who
sit and are served as opposed to the groom’s friends and relatives, the
tindugun, who do the work). pina- n made to sit down. pina- sa urinúla
toilet trained. Ang bátà nga pinalingkud sa urinúla dílì mangíhì sa
salug, The child that is toilet trained doesn’t urinate on the floor.

lingkung a for s.t. long to be bent so that the middle part is higher
than either end. Lingkung kaáyu ning sundánga, This bolo has a good
curve. Lingkung ang íyang buktun. Dì matuy-ud, He has a bent arm. It
won’t straighten out any longer. Lingkung siyag tiil ug mag-untul-untul
siyang maglakaw, He is club-footed and he walks with a bounce. v [B126]
come out curved.

lingkús v [B; b6] for s.t. long to curl up or come out in knotted form.
Mulingkús ang písì ug madúgay nang gámit, The rope will curl up if it
is used for a long time. Nagkalingkús na ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga
naláyà na, The tobacco leaves are curling up now that they are
withering.

lingla v {1} [A2; a12] deceive. Milingla siya nákù pag-ingun nga
ulitáwu siya, He deceived me by saying he was a bachelor. Gilingla ku
níya sa pagpasugut sa kuntrátu, He deceived me into accepting the
contract. {2} [A; a1] divert one’s attention to achieve one’s purpose.
Akuy mulingla sa tindíra arun makúhà nímu ang sigarilyu, I’ll divert
the storekeeper’s attention while you filch the cigarettes. n deceit.
malingláhun a deceitful.

lingling v [AN; a2] peep. Linglíngun ta ka inigkalígù nímu, I’ll peep
at you when you take a bath.

lingù v [A2; b6] shake one’s head to say no or in hopelessness or
resignation. Dílì tingáli siya musugut kay milingù tu siya, He probably
won’t agree because he shook his head. paN- v [A] keep shaking the head
in hopelessness and resignation. Nagpanglingù ang párì nga nagtan-aw sa
nanagparisparis didtu sa plása, The priest shook his head as he looked
at the people paired off in the park.

linguglingug v [AP; b(1)P] ignore s.t. by pretending not to hear; pay
no attention to s.t. Gilinguglingugan man lang nímu ang ákung
gipangáyù, You just pretend not to hear when I ask you for s.t. Bisag
unsáun nákug tambag mulinguglingug (mupalinguglingug) lang, No matter
how much I advise her, she pays no attention.

lingugngug = alingugngug.

ling-un n {1} a small area. Ling-ung gitamnag mais, A parcel planted to
corn. {2} mass of people in a certain area. Ang ling-un sa mga katawhan
sa plása, The mass of people in the square. {2a} a group of people,
social class. Ling-un sa mga timáwà, The poorest classes.

linimintu n liniment. v [b6] apply liniment to s.t. Linimintuhi ang
pamául mu, Apply liniment on your sore muscles.

línin n {1} linen cloth. {2} stationery having a linen finish. swis —
n k.o. fine cloth.

línis_1 v {1} [A23B2; a12] melt, wear down or eat away. Ang ayis krim
dalì mulínis sa ínit, The ice cream will melt rapidly in the sun.
Nagkalinis ang kutsilyu pagbináid, The knife is being worn down from
being sharpened so often. Linísa sa túbig ang tablítas, Dissolve the
tablets in water. {2} [A123; a3b4(1)] digest food eaten. Wà malínis ang
ákung kináun, What I ate did not dissolve. (→) a worn down.

línis_2 v {1} [AB12; b5] make s.t. clean. Ang dyanitur mauy mulínis sa
mga lawak, The janitor will clean the rooms. Malínis na unyà ning
sapatúsag kalimpyáhan, These shoes will be clean once they are shined.
Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nímu ang báy pirmi, You should always
clean the house. {2} [APB12; b5] cleanse or purify the soul,
reputation, etc.; become cleansed. Ang paghinulsul mauy mulínis
(mupalínis) sa ímung kunsinsiya, Repentance will cleanse your
conscience. Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nátù ang átung banságun, We
must clear our family name. ma- a clean, pure.

linlang v [A; a1] {1} deceive, fool. Naglinlang ka sa mga táwu ánang
pagparìpárì mu, You are deceiving the people by posing as a priest.
{2} distract, divert s.o.’s attention. Dì ka makalinlang níya kun
magtan-aw siyag tilibisyun, You cannot divert his attention when he is
watching TV.

linsa v [A; b6] string a guideline in construction. Akuy mulinsa sa
pagpinsa arun dì maghiwì, I’ll string a guideline for the fence so it
won’t come out crooked. n string used as a guide.

linsúwak v [B1256] fall headlong. Nalinsúwak siya gíkan sa bintánà, He
fell headlong from the window.

lintà n leech.

lintar v [B126; b3(1)c5] lose one’s head, panic. Nalintar siya maung
gasulinadur hinúuy íyang gisikáran, He panicked, so he stepped on the
accelerator instead. Wà pa gánì ka kasab-i nalintar na, You haven’t
even got your scolding and you already panic. lintádu a tending to
panic.

linti n {1} lens, magnifying glass. {2} searchlight. v {1} [b] use a
magnifying glass on s.t. Lintíhi ang mga litra arun sayun nga basáhun,
Use a magnifying glass on the letters so you can easily read them.
{2} [A; b] beam with a searchlight. Gilintíhan sa barku ang pantalan,
The ship beamed a searchlight on the wharf. {3} [A; a] make into a
magnifying glass, searchlight.

lintì n lightning, thunderbolt. v [b4] {1} be struck with a
thunderbolt. Lintian (lintían) kunu ang táwung makigminyù ug paryinti,
They say that a man who marries a relative will be struck with a
thunderbolt. {2} get severe punishment. Kay ímung gidáut nà, lintían
kang Pápa, Since you broke it, you’ll get hell from Dad. {2a} [b4(1)]
be in a very unpleasant situation. Nahutdan ta ug gasulína ug layù tas
lungsud, nalintían na ta áni, We’re out of gas and we’re far from town.
Now we are in trouble. a incorrigible in behavior. Sa piyir náay
daghang mga buguy nga lintì kaáyu, There are lots of incorrigible bums
at the waterfront.

lintihuylas = lintuhílas.

lintúbaw v [B1256] fall down headlong. Nalintúbaw ang bátà ngadtu sa
atábay, The child toppled into the well.

lintuhílas n small sequins or spangles used as ornaments for clothing.
v [A; b] put sequins on s.t.

lintungánay a {1} principal source of s.t. Lawum ug dulut ang gamut nga
lintungánay, Primary roots go deep. Kanang ákung sanggutan mau ang
lintungánay sa ákung katigayúnan karun, Palm toddy is the source of my
current wealth. {2} original. Nagkahanaw na karun ang pinulungan nga
lintungánayng binisayà, The original and native Visayan is fast
disappearing.

lintúwad (from tuwad) v [AB16; a12] {1} fall down, topple over, usually
landing wrong side or tail end up; cause s.t. to do so. Didtu sa kanal
malintúwad ang awtu, The car fell front-end first into the ditch.
Kinsay naglintúwad sa bukag nga gisudlan sa mangga? Who turned over the
basket with the mangoes in it? {2} be in utter disorder. ka- v [A13] be
in utter disorder. Nagkalintúwad lang ang hugasun sa hugasan, The sink
is in utter disorder with all the dishes in it.

lintuwang, lintúwang (from tuwang) v [A; c1] turn s.t. over. Akuy
naglintuwang sa mga lingkuránan pag-uwan, I turned the chairs over when
it rained.

linù v [A; b6] slosh liquid around inside s.t. Naglinù ku ug gasulína
áring butilya arun makúhà ang asíti, I am sloshing gasoline around
inside the bottle to get the oil out. Linui ug ínit túbig ang tirmus
úsà sudli ug ínit nga kapi, Slosh hot water around in the thermos
before you put hot coffee in it. n pieces of dough collected from the
mixing bowl by sloshing water around in it. -in-an = linú, n.

línug n earthquake. v [A; b6] for there to be an earthquake. Ug
mulínug, hugnù giyud ning taytayána, If there is an earthquake, this
bridge will surely collapse. Nangabut ang hinábang sa gilinúgan, Aid
arrived for the earthquake victims.

linulyum n linoleum. v [A13; b6] put a linoleum covering on s.t.

linya n {1} lines drawn or formed by things in a row or column. Ang
linya sa ímung papil hiwì, The lines on your paper are crooked. Ang
linya sa mga táwu miabut ngadtu sa iskína, The queue reached to the
corner. {2} electric, telephone, telegraph lines. Naputul ang linya sa
tilipunu, The telephone line was cut. {3} transportation line. Barátu
ang plíti kay duha ka linya nagkumpitinsiya, The fare is cheap because
the two lines are in competition. {3a} the route served by a line. Ang
ámung dapit may linya sa pasahiruan, Our neighborhood is on a public
transportation line. {4} the field of one’s special knowledge,
interest. Dílì ákung linya ang pagkamagtutudlù, Teaching is just not my
line. {5} line of things similar to each other. Ang bansíkul ug
tulíngan paríhug hitsúra kay mau ra mang linyáha, Tuna and mackerel are
similar in appearance because they belong to the same family. v {1} [A;
c] line s.t. Naglinya ku áring tabla pára damahan, I am making lines
for the checkerboard on this piece of wood. {2} [A; c1] form, put into
lines. Sayu nga mulinya ang mga táwu pagpalit ug tíkit sa sini, The
people queue up early to buy tickets to the movie. Linyáha (ilinya) ang
mga síya diri, Put the chairs in line here.

lipad v [A23P] swerve or veer while in flight or traveling at very high
speed. Sa kusug nga dágan, ang gaan nga awtu mulipad, Light cars swerve
at high speeds. Ang kapii sa bála mauy makapalipad sa íyang ági, The
bullet is deformed, so it won’t go straight.

lipaghà = libaghà.

lipaghung v [A2N] turn red in embarrassment or pique. Nanglipaghung
ákung nawung pagkabatì ku sa insultu, My face flushed when I heard the
insult.

lipak n bamboo slats. v {1} [A; a1] cut bamboo into slats. Lipaka ang
kawáyan pára ikural, Cut the bamboo into slats to use for fencing.
{2} [a12] strike with a bamboo slat. Lipaka ang irù, Strike the dog
with a bamboo slat.

lípak n loud thunderclap. v {1} [A] for there to be a loud thunderclap.
Bantayi ang irù ug mulípak, dì ba mukúrug, Watch the dog when there is
a thunderclap. He’ll quiver. {1a} [b(1)] be struck by a thunderbolt. Wà
lipáki nang amahan nga nag-unay sa kaugalíngun níyang anak! Surely the
father was struck by lightning for having relations with his own
daughter! {2} [b6] get a severe scolding, severely punished. Lipákan
kang Dádi mu ug hibaw-an ka, You will get hell from Daddy if he finds
out.

lipakà n itchy red splotches on the skin from allergies or insect
bites. v [B6; b4] have splotches on the skin. Naglipakà (gilipakaan)
ang láwas sa bátà sa tipdas, The child is covered with rash from his
measles.

lípang v {1} [B6] grow well and profusely. Milípang ang mais human
kaabunúhi, The corn grew lush after it was fertilized. Nanglípang ang
láwas sa bátang pinainum ug litsi, The child grew robust because they
fed it milk. {2} [A3P] for emotions to intensify. Milípang ang ílang
panaghigugmaay human sa panag-úlì, After they were reconciled, their
love for each other grew more intense.

lip-an rayit a giving without discrimination or restraint. Lip-an rayit
silang naglamánu sa mga butanti, They shook as many of the voters’
hands as they possibly could. v [A13; c] give without discrimination or
restraint. Naglip-an rayit ug panghátag ang ahinti sa mga sampul, The
agent gave out samples left and right.

lipárak v [B2] be, become fat, pudgy. Mulipárak giyud ka ug magpatúyang
kag káun, You’ll surely get fat if you eat as much as you like.
Nagkaliparak ang bátà kay naayun sa litsi, The baby is getting fat
because the milk agrees with him.

lípas v [A2; c] not go directly over s.t., pass around. Ilípas ang
kutsi kay gubà ang taytáyan, Take a detour because the bridge is out.
(→) a gone beyond a point in time. Lipas na ang úras sa pagkáun, The
time for eating has passed. v [B2; c1] get beyond a certain point in
time. Nilípas na ang búwan sa udtuhan, The moon has passed the midpoint
in the sky. — ang gútum for one’s hunger to disappear after the time
for eating has passed. Ug kanúnay nímung lipasun (ilipas) ang ímung
gútum ulsirun ka, If you always fail to eat on time, you will develop
ulcers. -an n detour, place a route goes around s.t.

lipat v [B1256] {1} make an error through inattention: lose track or
forget what one was talking about. Sa pag-ihap nalipat ku ug pila na
tu, I was counting, but I lost track how many there were. Nalipat ku ug
diin ikabutang ang hunsuy, It slipped my mind where I put my pipe.
{2} mistake s.o.’s identity. Nalipat ku. Ingun ku ug si Nítuy ka, I was
mistaken. I thought you were Nitoy. {3} [B1256; b8] fail to notice s.t.
Nalipat ku ug walà ku makamatikud sa pag-ági sa bátà, I failed to
notice, and I was not aware of it when the child passed by. Nalipatan
ku ang usa ka linya ug kupya, I missed a line when I was copying.
{4} [A; a12] deceive s.o., causing him to fail to notice s.t. Lipatun
ka lang níya sa mga púlung nga tam-is, He will just deceive you with
sweet words. pa-(←), lipatlípat n {1} sleight of hand, esp. a
thimblerig game where a seed is hidden under one of the three
thimble-shaped cups and is quickly shifted from one cup to another. The
players gamble as to where the seed is located. {2} deception,
chicanery. Ang íyang pagdaug sa kuntrátu nahímù sa palípat, He won the
contract through chicanery. v {1} [A13] have a thimblerig game. {2} [A;
a12] deceive with chicanery.

lipáta, lipátà = alipátà.

lipatpat = alipatpat.

lípay a glad. Lípay kaáyu kung midaug ka, I’m very glad that you won.
v {1} [A2; a12] make s.o. happy. Wà nay láing mulípay nákù kun dílì
ikaw, No one can make me happy but you. {2} [B156; c5] be happy, glad.
Nalípay ku nga nía ka, I am glad that you’re here. Maglípay ta kay
milampus ang átung plánu, Let’s be happy because our plans succeeded.
Gikalípay kug dakù ang ímung kalampúsan, I am very happy at your
success. paha- v [A; b6] congratulate, felicitate. Usa aku sa
mupahalípay nímu sa ímung kadaúgan, I am one of those who will
congratulate you on your victory. n congratulations. Dawáta ang
kinasingkásing kung pahalípay, Accept my heartfelt congratulations.
ma-un a happy. Malipáyun kaáyu siya nga misugut sa ákung hangyù, He was
happy to comply with my request. — nga pasku Merry Christmas. v [A13]
be happy. ka- n happiness. Ang íyang pagkaasáwa walay kalípay, She
knows no happiness as a wife. mag-r- n the Holy Spirit as Comforter.

liphuk n left hook in boxing.

lip-istik = lipstik.

lip-it v [AP; b2] put s.t. in between two flat surfaces. Ilip-it ang
mamísus sa libru, Stick the peso bills in the book. Didtu ra malip-iti
ang dukumintu sa mga inutaw, The document was right there, in between
the ironed clothes.

liplip n k.o. matting used to wrap tobacco in bales or as walling, made
of nípà or coconut leaflets laid flat side by side with some overlap
and stitched together with fiber. v [A13; a12] make into a matting of
this sort.

lipstik n lipstick. v [A; b6(1)] use a certain k.o. lipstick. paN-
v [A; b6(1)] put lipstick on.

lipsut = ipsut.

lipti n painted grunter: Plectorhinchus pictus.

lipting n the violation in dribbling a basketball where the ball is not
hit, but lifted slightly before being bounced. v [B126; b6(1)] commit
this violation.

liptung n lake formed in a river by a dam or similar obstruction.
v [B6, b5c1] gather into a pool, make into a dam, gather in a dam.
Naliptung (miliptung) ang sapà kay naalihan sa dakung káhuy nga
natumba, The water of the brook formed a pool because a fallen log
obstructed its course. Liptúngi (liptúnga, iliptung) ang sapà arun
kalanguyan, Make a dam in the river so we can swim in it.

*lipu kalipuhan v [A13] be hard-pressed by time or quantity of work.
Nagkalipuhan siya didtu sa kusína kay dúnay muabut nga bisíta, She was
very busy in the kitchen because there were visitors coming.

lipudlípud v [A; c] hide s.t. by circumlocution or covering up. Náay
ímung tinagúan kay naglipudlípud ka sa pagtug-an nákù, You must be
hiding s.t. because you are beating around the bush instead of telling
me right out. Gilipudlípud sa inahan ang mga salà sa íyang mga anak
ngadtu sa íyang bána, The mother covered up for her children in front
of the father. n action of concealing s.t. Sa walay lipudlípud nga
pagkasulti tikasan ka! Let’s call a spade a spade. You’re a cheat!

lipulipu v [B16] be hard-pressed to do s.t. because of the quantity of
work or the lack of time. Naglipulipu mi karun kay umaábut ang
supirbisur, We are very busy now because the supervisor is about to
come. ka- v [A13] be very hard-pressed. Nagkalipulipu siya pagpamatúnis
pagbuthù sa mga bisíta, He was in a dither trying to get his pants
buttoned up when the visitors suddenly arrived.

lípung v {1} [B126] be, become dizzy, woozy. Nalípung siya human
makatimahù adtung báhù sa tambal, He became woozy after he smelled the
odor of the medicine. Pwirting makalípung ang argulya, The
merry-go-round can get you real dizzy. {2} [A123P] be enormously high
in price. Biling makalípung, A dizzyingly high price. paN-(→) v [A13]
undergo dizzy spells. Nagpanglipung siya kay masakitun pa siya, He has
dizzy spells because he is still sick. n recurring dizziness. ka-
n dizziness, giddiness.

lipun-ug = tipun-ug.

liput_1 v {1} [A2; b6] go behind s.t. Ang kawatan miliput sa usang
balay ug nawálà, The thief ducked in back of the next house and
disappeared. Maigù untà ku sa batu ug wà pa ku makaliput sa baril, I
would have been hit with a stone if I had not ducked behind a barrel.
{2} [A3; a12] catch s.t. by going the other way. Lingawa siya kay
muliput ku sa píkas arun ákung sakpan, Hold his attention because I
will go the other way around so I can catch him. (←) v {1} [A; b6]
doublecross, betray. Ug mangispíya ka pára sa píkas, naglíput ka sa
átung násud, If you do espionage work for the other side, you are
betraying our country. {2} [AN2; b6] fight unfairly by doing s.t.
treacherous or taking unfair advantage. Gilipútan siyag dugmak sa luyu,
S.o. treacherously stabbed him in the back. n treachery. pa-, pa-(←) ug
pusta v [A13; c6] secretly place a bet on the opposing cock (instead of
one’s own) or simply bet on an opposing cock in addition to one’s own.
ma-un(←) a treacherous, traitorous. paN- = líput, n. ka-an n anus
(euphemism).

liput_2 n k.o. ray.

lip-ut a narrow in space or width. v [B; c1] for a space or width to be
narrow. Nalip-ut ang sayal kay gamay man ang sun-ut sa panaptun, The
skirt was made narrow because it was a narrow piece of cloth. Ang mga
butang mauy nakalip-ut (nakapalip-ut) sa lugar dinhi, The space was too
small because too many things were put in it.

lipuwa paN- v [A23P] blush. Nanglipuwa ang náwung ni Balúduy dihang
giintrudyǔs siya sa usa ka maanyag, How Balodoy blushed when he was
introduced to a beauty.

lipyà n moldboard, a curved iron plate attached to a plowshare (punta)
which lifts, turns, and pulverizes the soil. v [A; b] attach a
moldboard on a plowshare.

líra n lyre.

líraw v [A2; c6P] for the eyes to dart back and forth, roll. Milíraw
ang íyang mga mata sa kalamì, Her eyes rolled because it was so
delicious. lirawliraw v [B456] {1} for the eyes to roll continuously.
Naglirawliraw ang íyang mata mu rag dúnay gipangítà, His eyes moved
back and forth as if he were looking for s.t. {2} for the thoughts to
move rapidly from place to place.

lirì v [B4] {1} split, tear open from fullness. Ayaw nag daska ang sáku
kay naglirì na sa kapunù, Don’t fill the sack further because it’s so
full it’s bursting. {2} get obese as if about to split. Milirì siya sa
katambuk humag panganak, She got terribly fat after she had her baby.

liru = rilu.

liruliru v [A; c1] for the eyes to roll. Miliruliru (nagliruliru) lang
ang íyang mga mata pagkutána nákù, He just rolled his eyes when I
questioned him.

lírung a circular, rounded. Lírung ang pláka, A record is round. n a
shallow circular basket used for winnowing or as a container for
vending fish or vegetables.

liryu n name given to several k.o. ornamental bulbs, some of which also
occur wild: Hymenocallis littorale, Zephyranthis rosea, et al. In
poetry, this flower symbolizes beauty.

lís_1 n lace. v [A1] wear lace. Naglís siyag panti, She is wearing lace
panties.

lís_2 n k.o. kalípay, 2.

lisa v [a3] sprain or dislocate a joint. Nalisa ang íyang túhud
pagkadagmà níya, His knee was dislocated when he fell down. n sprain or
dislocation.

lísang v [A; a12] terrify, frighten severely. Nalísang ku pagkalintúwad
sa kutsi, I was terrified when the car somersaulted. Ayaw kug lisánga
ánà kay dílì na tinúud sawa. You can’t scare me with that because
that’s no real snake. (→) n ailment, usually fever, that results from
intense fright. ka- n terror. maka-r- a terrifying. Makalilísang kaáyu
tung bagyúha kay hasta ang mga awtu nakulub, That was a terrifying
storm because it even turned cars over. 

lisay n lymph node. v [B; b4] have swollen lymph nodes. Naglisay
(gilisayan) ang ákung íluk kay náay hubag ang ákung kamut, I have
swollen lymph glands in the armpits because I have a swollen hand.

lisik v [A] stick out from a hidden or partly hidden position. Milisik
ang íyang mata sa kalágut, His eyes bulged in anger. Ang itlug sa
tigúwang naglisik, The old man’s testicles are hanging out in view.
n testicles. putì ug — cowardly.

lisinsiya n {1} license, a document evidencing permission to engage in
s.t. {2} permission to do s.t. Ayaw ug uban námù kay wà kay lisinsiya
ni Pápa, Don’t go with us because you don’t have Daddy’s permission.
v [AN2; b6] ask permission. Walà ku lisinsiyáhi ug táwu nga magbayli
áning baláya, Nobody asked me permission to hold a dance here in this
house. paN- n s.t. said or used to obtain permission. -du(←) n having a
license. Ribulbir nga lisinsiyádu, Licensed revolver.

lísis n shoelace. v [A; c] tie the shoes. paN- v [A2] tie one’s shoes.

liskad = liskag.

liskag v {1} [B2; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. to come open. Miliskag
ang dáhun sa ságing nga gipustan sa bulad, The banana leaves which the
dried fish were wrapped in came undone. Nagkaliskag ang sáku kay
labihang dasúka, The sack is coming apart because it was filled too
full. Liskága (iliskag) ang baat, Untie the string. {1a} for s.t. woven
to get undone. Naliskag ang banig kay wà masapay, The mat came undone
because the edges weren’t closed up. {2} [B2N] spread out, stick out.
Maliskag ang balhíbu sa pábung duúlun, The turkey puffs up its feathers
if you get near it. Naliskag ang íyang dunggan pagkadungug sa íyang
ngā́n, Her ears perked up when she heard her name. a spread out,
undone. Liskag ug tiil, Spreading feet.

liskug n {1} coil of rattan, wire, or anything stiff. {2} stiff band
attached to the rim of a basket, tray, and the like to strengthen the
rim. v [A; ab] {1} coil up s.t. stiff. {2} make, attach a reinforcing
band on the rim of a basket or tray. {3} [B] for s.t. long to curl up
at the ends. Naliskug ang lipak kay nainitan, The bamboo slats curled
up because they were exposed to the sun.

liskúhag v {1} [B26] move, be stirred from an inactive or suppressed
state. Miliskúhag ang mga lútì sa baskit nga wà kalugpíti, The bamboo
strips on the rim of the basket came open because it wasn’t clipped.
{2} [A23] for a feeling or emotion to spring forth in one’s inner self
(literary). Miliskúhag pagkalit sa ákung kasingkásing ang usa ka
tawhánung pagbátì, Some sort of human emotion emerged within me.

lisngag a having nostrils larger than would be ordinary for a given
size of nose. v [B; c16] for the nostrils to be unusually large.
Naglisngag lang nang ilung mu mu rag kabáyung nasukù, You have nostrils
that are drawn up like the nose of an angry horse.

lisngig v {1} [A; b] turn the face away in scorn, disgust, and the
like. Milisngig dáyun ang kasíra sa pagkakità sa sud-an, The boarder
turned her face away in disgust when she saw the food. {2} [B6; c1]
look, turn the face sideways, usually due to a defect. Nalisngig ang
íyang tinan-awan tungud sa íyang hubag sa líug, She has to keep looking
sideways because of the big boil on her neck.

lispu = pulis (slang).

lista_1 n {1} list. Wà maapil ang ímung ngálan sa lista, Your name is
not on the list. {2} list of debts. v {1} [A; c] list, enumerate in
writing, Ilista ang palitúnun arun way makalimtan, List the things to
buy so we don’t forget anything. {2} [A; c1] charge s.t. to one’s
account in a store, add to one’s list of debts. Hápit tanang pamilya sa
sundáwu naglista sa kantína, Almost all the soldiers’ families charge
all the goods they get from the canteen. Listahun (ilista) lang ni, ha?
Just charge this, O.K.? pa- v [A; c6] enroll s.o. or oneself in a
course. Dílì ku makapalista kay wà kuy kwarta, I cannot enroll because
I don’t have any money. listahan = lista, n1. paN- n enrollment.

lista_2 = alistu (female).

listu = alistu.

listun_1, listǔn n shoelace. v [A; b6] put, tie s.o.’s shoelaces. paN-
v [A2] tie one’s own shoelaces. Huwat úsà kay nanglistun pa ku, Just a
second, I’m still tying my shoelaces.

listun_2 n molding, a strip of wooden material for edging in a building
or boat. v {1} [A; b] put a molding s.w. Ikaw bay mulistun sa mga
daplin sa bungbung? Will you be the one to attach the molding at the
edges of the walling? Íyang gilistúnan ang mga piktiyur prim, He
attached the mouldings (around the sides) of the picture frame.
{2} [a12] make into a wooden moulding. Listúnun ku ning kahúya, I’ll
make a moulding out of this piece of wood.

lísu n seed. makaagpas sa — get the implication of s.t. spoken by
indirection. Wà ku makaagpas sa lísu adtung íyang pasumbíngay, I did
not get what he was driving at. lisulisu, lisuhan a for corn or rice to
be half cooked, as if there were seeds in the center. v [B126; b6] for
rice or corn to come out half-cooked. lisúhan a having seeds.
Kadaghánan sa mga prútas lisúhan, Most fruits have seeds.

lísù v {1} [A; a12b2] turn, cause s.t. to rotate on its axis. Pugngi
ang twirka samtang maglísù ku sa pirnu, Hold the nut in place while I
turn the bolt. Lisúa ang ímung síya ug atúbang diri, Turn your chair
around and face this way. {1a} ma- pay buku sa kawáyan impossible to
change (lit. it would be easier to twist a bamboo node). Malísù pay
buku sa kawáyan kay sa ákung hukum, I’ll stick to my decision come hell
or high water. {1b} [b4(1)] — sa buut, kwirdas, pangísip, twirka, útuk
go off one’s rocker. Ang pubring inahan nalisúan sa pangísip pagkamatay
sa íyang mga bátà, The poor mother went crazy after her children died.
{2} [A2; c6] twist one’s body as if on an axis. Milísù siya ug mitan-aw
nákù, He turned around and looked at me. Ilísù ímung láwas ngadtu arun
makaagi ku, Turn your body that way so I can pass by. {2a} [A2] turn
one’s body over. Ug pukáwun siya mulísù lang ug mubálik ug katúlug, If
you wake him, he just turns over and goes back to sleep. (→) n turning
pegs of musical instrument. -anan n {1} = lísù. {2} knob or switch one
turns to turn s.t. on. lisùlísù v [A13] {1} turn around. Naglisùlísù
siya sa silya nga nangítà nákù, He was turning around in the chair
looking for me. {2} toss and turn. Naglisùlísù siya tibuuk gabíi ug
walà makatulug, He was tossing all night and was not able to sleep.
-ay(→) v [B146] be very busy. Naglisuay (nagkalisuay) ku íning trabáhu
kay wà kuy katábang, I’m up to my neck with work because I don’t have
anybody to help me.

lisud a {1} difficult. Lisud kaáyu ning liksiyúna, This lesson is very
difficult. {2} in short supply, requiring effort. Lisud ang túbig sa
ámù, Water is hard to come by at our place. Lisud ang dálan sa Tulídu,
The road in Toledo is difficult. {3} for a situation to be hard to save
or remedy. Lisud na ang kahimtang sa masakitun, The patient is in
critical condition. v {1} [B2; a2] be, become difficult. Dílì nákù
lisdun ang mga pangutána, I won’t make the questions difficult.
{2} [B145; b6] have, encounter difficulty in doing s.t. Naglisud ku ug
paandar sa makina, I am having difficulty starting the engine. Wà ka ba
lisuri (lisdi) sa pag-ílis ug ligid? Did you have difficulty in
changing the tire? {2a} [a12] put s.o. to great inconvenience. Ug ímu
kung lisdun, muundang ku sa trabáhu, If you make things hard for me, I
will quit this job. {3} [A13] be in bad shape financially or in health.
Naglisud si Lúlu mu, Your grandfather is gravely ill. Naglisud mi run
kay wà kuy trabáhu, We’re hard up because I have no work. n thing that
constitutes the hardship or difficulty. Ang lisud mau nga dílì siya
muadmitir nga utángan siya nímu, The difficult thing is that he won’t
admit that he is indebted to you. (←), ka-(←) v [A13] have a hard time
doing s.t. Naglísud (nagkalísud) kug báyad, I’m having a hard time
paying. ug magka-(←) if need be, if things get bad enough. Ug
magkalísud mubáyad na lang ku arun maariglu ang kásu, If there is no
other way, I’ll just pay up so as to get rid of the case. lisudlisud
v [A13; a12] {1} do s.t. the hard way. Lisudlisurun man nímu ug limbas.
Gabsa! You are doing it the hard way with a file. Use a saw! {2} impose
unnecessary work or difficulty on s.o. Naglisudlisud ka lang nákù
pagpatubig sa tanum nga muulan man run, You are making me water the
plants for nothing when it is going to rain. kalisudlisud v [A13] be
hard up financially. Nagkalisudlisud sila kay walay trabáhu ang amahan,
They are hard up because the father has no work. ka- n hardship. Ang
kalisud nga ímung masagubang, The hardships you will encounter.
kalisdánan n hardships.

lisuglisug v [B46; b4] for the body to have cysts or cyst-like
protrusions. Mulisuglisug ang ákung íluk ug pamlúgan ku, I get swollen
glands in my armpit whenever I get a lymphatic infection.

lísun_1 a filled out, well-built in body. Ang himsug nga bátà lísun
kaáyug láwas, The healthy child has a well-filled-out body. Ságad sa
mga trabahadur lísun kaáyug láwas, Most workers have good bodies.
v [B2; b6] for a body to be well-built, rounded. ka- n state of being
well-built.

lísun_2 n name given to various fleshy carangoid fish.

lisun plan n lesson plan for schools. v [A; b] make a lesson plan.

liswi n {1} = habasan. {2} blood-mouthed conch.

lisyinsiya = lisinsiya.

lít a late, not on time. Diin gud ka! Lít kaáyu ka, Where have you
been? You are very late. v [B126] be late. Ug malít ka sa klási, ay na
lang ug sulud, If you are late for class, don’t attend.

lit-ad a bent or twisted from warping, warped. Lit-ad kaáyu ning
tabláha kay dúgay nga nabulad sa ínit, This piece of wood is all warped
because it was left under the sun. v {1} [A2] get warped. {2} [A] bend
the body backwards or writhe. Ayúhag kúgus ang bátà kay mukalit ug
lit-ad, Hold the child firmly because he’ll just suddenly throw himself
backward. lit-adlit-ad v [A] writhe, wriggle. Naglit-adlit-ad siya sa
kalamì, She writhed in ecstasy.

lit-ag n k.o. snare with a running noose, actuated by a spring pole
which is released when the quarry steps on the cross piece that holds
it down. — nga mubutu booby trap. v {1} [AN; a12] catch with this sort
of snare. Manglit-ag mi sa lasang ug ihálas manuk, We will snare wild
chickens in the forest. {2} [A13; a12] make into a snare.

litaníya n {1} litany. {2} enumeration of things in a series. Túa na,
gibungat ang litaníya sa ímung mga sayup, There he goes, reciting the
litany of all your faults. v {1} [A13] say the litany. {2} [A13; a] say
s.t. in an enumeration. Wà ku katíngug dihang gilitanyáhan ku níya sa
ákung mga salà, I could not say a word when he enumerated my faults to
me.

litì n thunderbolt. Usa ka makabungul nga litì milánug sa kagabhíun, A
deafening thunderbolt echoed in the night. v [A2] for a thunderbolt to
crash. — sa udtung tútuk sudden and unexpected happening (like a bolt
of lightning at high noon, a rare occurrence). Ang pagbali sa sinalígan
sa partídu ngadtu sa píkas mauy usa ka litì sa udtung tútuk, The party
leader’s defection to the other side was a most unexpected move.

litik v {1} [AN; c1] snap one’s finger. Nagpanglitik siya sa íyang
tudlù sa higayun nga nalipatan, He snapped his fingers in annoyance
that he missed the opportunity. Litki (litiki) ang irù arun mudúul,
Snap your fingers at the dog so it will come near. {2} [A; b] flick
s.t. with the fingers. Litkan (liktan) ku nang dunggan mu ug dì ka
mamínaw, I’ll flick your ears if you don’t listen. (←) = litiklitik,
n2, v. litiklítik, litikay, litikánay, litkanay, liktanay n {1} a game
of flicking each other’s knuckles to see who will surrender in pain.
{2} game of detaching or scattering a bunch of knotted rubber bands by
flicking with the thumb and middle finger. v [C] play a finger-flicking
game or game scattering rubber bands.

litiliti a for s.t. in a container to be used up, very close to the
bottom. Litiliti na kaáyu ang túbig sa bangà, The water in the jar is
falling pretty close to the bottom. v [B36] {1} for s.t. to be used up,
usually to the bottom of the container. Nagkalitiliti ang átung bugas,
Our rice is getting close to the bottom of the bin. {2} be reduced to a
very small amount. Naglitiliti ang nanan-aw sa prugráma kay taligsik,
Only a small sparse crowd saw the program because it was drizzling.

litíra = ritíra.

litiral a literal. Litiral nga intirpritasiyun sa Biblíya, A literal
interpretation of the Bible. v [a12] do s.t. literally.

litiratúra n {1} literature. {2} literature carrying advertising or
information.

lítis = litsúgas, 1.

litra n letter of the alphabet. v [A; b6] mark with a letter. Litráhan
ku ning ákung mga punda, I will mark my pillowcases with my initials.

litrátu = ritrátu. litratista = ritratista. see ritrátu.

litru n {1} liter. {2} dry measure for grains and other items equal to
one-third of a ganta. Ipalit ku ug usa ka litru nga asin, Buy me a
liter of salt. v [A13; a12] measure s.t. by the liter. litruhan n a
container used as a liter measure.

litsi_1 n milk. v {1} [b6] put or add milk to s.t. Gilitsihan ba nímu
ang ákung kapi? Did you put milk in my coffee? {2} [a12] raise s.t. or
s.o. on milk other than the mother’s. Litsíhun ku ning itúya kay
namatay ang inahan, I will raise this puppy on canned milk because the
mother died. — plan n k.o. custard baked or steamed in syrup. kulur dí-
a cream-colored. litsihan, litsíhan n a unit of dry or liquid measure
the size of a milk can.

litsi_2 {1} mild cuss word uttered in annoyance or anger (euphemism for
pisti). Litsi! Gibálì na pud nà nímu, Darn! You broke it again.
{2} reference to s.o. one is annoyed at. Giindiyan ku sa litsing dakù,
The son of a gun stood me up. -ng yáwà expression of strong anger.
Litsing yáwà! Aku pay hulaman ug libru ug aku pay pahatdun didtu sa
íla! Shit! He borrows a book from me and then I’m supposed to bring it
to his house as well! litsilitsi v [A13; a12] say litsi to s.o. Ayaw
kug litsilitsíha, Don’t you say litsi to me!

litsúgas n {1} lettuce: Lactuca sativa. {2} mild cuss word uttered upon
being annoyed (euphemism for litsi). Litsúgas ning batáa, kanúnay rang
mangáyù ug singku! This darn child! He always asks for a nickel.

litsun n {1} pig roasted whole over coals. {2} by extension, fowl so
roasted. — dilitsi roast suckling pig. {3} euphemism for litsi, a mild
curse said when one is annoyed with s.o. Litsun ning batáa samukan
kaáyu, Darn this child. He’s such a nuisance. v [A; a2] roast a pig,
have a roast pig or, by extension, a fowl. -in- n animal so roasted
whole over coals. -un(→) n a pig in the stage of growth considered
ideal for roasting.

litu, lítu v [A; a] buy rice or corn for home consumption. Lisud kaáyug
hasta bugas litúhun pa, It’s very difficult if we have to buy rice,
too. pa-(←) v [A; c] {1} sell corn grits or rice. {2} sell corn grits
or rice on a rationed basis. Magpalítug bugas mais ang arsii, The RCA
will sell corn meal on a rationed basis.

litù v {1} [AB; a12] for joints to crack, crack the joints. Kamau ka
nga mulitù sa ímung tudlù? Do you know how to crack your knuckles?
{2} [A; a12] rub a leaf over an angle to make the leaf pliant. Lituun
nímu ang dáhun sa lumbuy sa ngilit sa lamísa arun sayun nga lukútun,
Rub the lumbuy leaf over the edge of the table so it will be easy to
roll. -anan(←) n s.t. one can rub a leaf over to make it pliant.

lítub n k.o. edible arc shell. — sa amù k.o. small arc shell (½″) which
clings to cliffs along the seashore. It is not eaten.

lituglítug v [AN; c1] {1} hide, refuse to tell the truth when asked.
Ayawg lituglítug, tug-an sa tinúud, Don’t try to hide s.t. Tell the
truth. Ayaw kug lituglitúgi. Háin ang kwarta? Don’t try to hide
anything from me. Where’s the money? {2} withhold s.t. which one is
supposed to turn over. Gilituglítug sa pyádu ang abut sa humay, The man
who was in charge didn’t turn over all of the rice crop.

lituk_1 v {1} [A; a12] pronounce. Kamau nang mulituk si Bíbut sa púlung
‘Máma’, Bebot already knows how to say ‘Mama’ distinctly. {2} [A;
b6(1)] express, convey s.t. by speaking. Naglituk siya sa íyang gugma
ngadtu sa dalága, He was expressing his love to the maiden. Litukan ta
ka sa prisyu nga walay makaparíhu, I will quote you a price no one can
match.

lituk_2 n flick with the fingers. v [A; b] hit s.t. by flicking the
fingers at it. Ang tabian gilitukan sa maistru sa ū́, The teacher
flicked the pupil on the head for talking in class.

lítuk a for rice plants to sprout fresh, lush leaves. v [B] for rice
transplants to get lush new leaves. Naglítuk ang íyang humay kay
dinisibi man, His rice plants are sprouting lush leaves because they
are well cared for.

litundan = alitundan.

líu = líhù.

líug n neck. Butilyang taas ug líug, A bottle with a long neck. (→)
v {1} [A123S; a12] hit in the neck. Liugun níya ug pusil ang liyun, He
will shoot the lion in the neck. {2} — sa bitik ni San Markus v [a3] be
hooked into marriage (lit. be caught in the neck by the noose of St.
Mark). Ígù lang kung migraduwar, naliug dáyun ku sa bitik ni San
Markus, As soon as I graduated I got married. paN- v [A2] get thick at
the neck. Nanglíug siyag maáyu, mu rag bábuy, He’s got lots of fat
around the neck like a pig. panghi-(→) v [B2456] for a young bull to
become fully mature, as shown by an enlargement of the neck. Manungag
ra ba nang turíyu nga manghiliug, That young bull will gore you now
that he’s getting mature. paN-(→) n in plowing with a water buffalo, a
rope tied from one end of the yoke to the other, passing under the
animal’s neck, the purpose of which is to prevent the yoke from
slipping off. taga-(→) a up to the neck. Tagaliug ku sa mga útang, I’m
up to my neck in debt. v [B156] get to be up to the neck.

liunduk = taliunduk.

lius v {1} [A2] pass by s.t. unnoticed. Sa luyung pultahan siya mulius,
He passed thru the back door unnoticed. {1a} [C3; b5] fail to see s.t.,
skip over s.t. Naglíus lang sila ug wà magkítà, They passed each other
without seeing each other and they failed to meet. Giliusan (gilius)
námù siya pagsilbi, We skipped her when we were serving. {2} [A3B; a12]
distract s.o.’s attention from s.t. Akuy naglius sa irù; siya usab
nangáwat, I distracted the dog’s attention, while he broke into the
house. {3} [A12] for s.t. to come and go without being given adequate
or passing attention. Pila na ka Sabadu ang milius? How many Saturdays
have come and gone? (←) v {1} [A13] keep coming in succession. Naglíus
na man lang tung mga maáyung tanyag, Those good offers have just been
coming to you one after the other. {2} [A2; b5] wriggle through a tight
opening. Liúsa (liúsi) ang mga táwu arun maabut ka sa altar, Wriggle
through the throng so you can reach the altar. liuslíus v [A; b6]
{1} avoid being caught by changing direction and speed constantly.
Lisud siyang dakpun kay maáyung muliuslíus, He is hard to catch because
he is good in dodging. {2} manage to get through an argument or
interrogation by evasive means. Maáyu siyang muliuslíus sa katarúngan,
He is good at giving evasive reasons.

líut v [A2; b6] {1} squeeze one’s way through. Milíut siya sa daghang
táwu, He squeezed his way through the crowd. Nasámad siya sa alambring
íyang giliútan, He sustained cuts from the barbed wire he squeezed
through. {2} get out of a difficult spot by verbal cunning. Bísag
pit-un siya, makalíut pa giyug pangatarúngan, Even if you push him
against the wall, he will manage to come up with an answer that will
somehow get him out of it.

líwa v [A; a1] destroy mankind and rid the world of evils. Ang lúnup
mauy milíwa sa kalibútan, The great deluge destroyed mankind and rid
the world of evils.

líwag v {1} [A; c1] move s.t. at one end to get it out of the way or
make it change position. Liwágun nátù ngadtu ning tabla arun dílì
magbalabag sa dálan, Let’s push this board to one side so it won’t be
in the way. {2} [B6; c1] face a different direction. Pastilan ug
mulíwag nang kanyun, If that cannon turns in this direction, we’re in
for it. {2a} shift one’s direction in squatting without taking the
soles off the ground. Milíwag siya arun maduul sa íyang tiráhan nga
dyúlin, He pivoted around to get nearer to the target he was shooting
his marble at.

líwas n period after a holiday or big occasion. Sa líwas sa pyista,
After the fiesta. Líwas sa gíra, The post-war period. v [B256; b] for
it to get to be the time after some period. Mulíwas na lang ang pasku
wà giyud kuy pinaskúhan, Christmas will soon be over and I still
haven’t received a single Christmas gift. Giliwásan giyud mi sa
ting-ani didtu sa búkid, We stayed in the mountains until after the
harvest season.

liwat a taking after. Liwat siya sa amahan nga taas ug ilung, He got
his father’s long nose. — sa giliwatan being exactly like the parents,
a chip off the old block. v {1} [B256N; b6] take after s.o. {2} [A12]
obtain or produce an offspring or young. Maáyu na lang ug makaliwat
(makapaliwat) ning sunúya kay dì na ikatárì, This rooster is no good
for fighting any more, but we can still use him as breeder.
n {1} species, breed of. Ang dumánu liwat sa lubi nga inánu, Dumánu is
a species of dwarf coconut. {2} one’s children. Pila nay ímung liwat
karun? How many children do you have now? pa- v [A; b5c] breed s.t.
Paliwatan (paliwatun) nákù ning ákung alumnus, I will use this boar for
breeding purposes. Ug gustu kag maáyung nati, anhà ipaliwat sa ílang
túru, If you want to have a good calf, breed it from their bull. paN-
v [A2] have an offspring. Ug mangliwat ímung bábuy, paambíta ta ug usa,
If your pig has a litter, let me have one. ka-(←) n {1} descendant. Ang
kalíwat ni Busyu mau ang mga adunáhan sa Karkar, The wealthy families
in Carcar are the descendants of Bosio. {2} breed, race, species.
Kining mungaána kalíwat ug hingitlug, This hen is an egg-laying breed.
Lubus nga kalíwat, Purebred. Mau ni ang kalíwat sa úhung nga gagmayun
apan pinangità, This species of mushroom is small but highly prized.
Tabúnung kalíwat, The brown race. †

liwayway n {1} name of a Tagalog weekly. {2} brand of cheap cigarettes.

liwit = diwit.

liyalíya n rocking chair. v [A; c1] sit or be rocking in a chair.
Midiskansu siya, nagliyalíya, He is sitting in his rocking chair,
relaxing.

liyinda n legend, a story handed down from early times by tradition and
popularly regarded as historical.

líyu v [A2; b6(1)] circle around. Milíyu ug katulu ang ayruplánu únà
mutugpa, The airplane circled three times before it landed. n things
located in a circle around an area. Mga balay nga líyu sa simbahan, The
houses surrounding the church.

líyug a for s.t. long and slender to be bent or crooked, warped. Dílì
magsirbi nà pára pálu kay líyug kaáyu, This would not do for a mast
because it is crooked. v {1} [A13] be crooked or bent. Unsang klási sa
mitrusána ni nga naglíyug man? What kind of meter stick is this that it
is so crooked? {2} [B246] for a missile to go crooked. Mulíyug ang
lapad nga batu ug ilábay, A flat stone curves when you throw it.
liyuglíyug v [A] bend back and forth. Ug muliyuglíyug ang lubi, bagyu
na nà, If the coconut sways back and forth, it’s a typhoon.

líyuk v [A2S; c] be, go around s.t. Mga bátang naglíyuk (nagliyuk) sa
nag-ásuy, Children sitting around the storyteller. Makalíyuk ba ning
písì sa paldu? Will this rope go all around the bale? Wà mi makasíbug
dihang giliyúkan mi sa mga Hapun, We were not able to retreat when the
Japanese surrounded us. a being around. Líyuk sa ílang balay may káhuy
nga namúnga, There are trees covered with fruit all around their house.

liyun n lion.

lú_1 n law course. Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan, He is taking up law.

lú_2 v [A; c6] feel weak and with no energy. Mulú lang nang tawhána ug
magdaut, That man feels weak and lazy only if he is ill. Ug ilú nímu
ang plú, musamut, Your flu will get worse if you give in to it.

lúad v {1} [AB126; a12] be uprooted and fall on its side, uproot s.t.
Bagyu Ámi ang naglúad ánang kasya, Typhoon Amy felled that acacia tree.
Nalúad ang pusti nga naagian sa bahà, The post was uprooted when the
flood went through it. {2} [A; a12] for brothers to marry sisters.
Gilúad sa mga Plánas ang mga Bakalan, The Planas brothers married the
Bacalan sisters.

luag a {1} loose, not tightly attached or wound around. Luag kaáyu
pagkabaáta ang písì, The rope is loosely tied. Luag nga sapátus, Shoes
that are too big. {2} having ample space. Ang bangkù luag pára
lingkúran sa lima ka táwu, The bench is big enough for five persons to
sit on it. Luag nga kalubinhan. Large tracts of coconut land. {2a} for
s.t. not to occupy a whole area. Ípun diri ug lingkud kay luag pa mi
kaáyu, Sit with us because there’s plenty of room here. {3} being in a
comfortable situation. Luag na ang átung panimuyù kay may trabáhu na
silas Pápa ug Máma, We have a comfortable life now that Dad and Mom
both have jobs. {4} for emotions or a sickness to be relieved. Luag na
ang ákung ginháwa dihang naulì na ang bátà, My anxiety has been
relieved now that my daughter came home. v {1} [APB; a2] be loose,
loosen. Bi, akuy muluag (mupaluag) sa ímung kurbáta, Here, I will
loosen your necktie. Hugti ug maáyu ang twirka arun dílì muluag,
Tighten the nut very well so it will not loosen. Luagi ug báat ang
ákung kamut, Tie my hands loosely. {2} [B5; b6] be, become wide in
area. Nagkaluag ang ílang kahumayan kay nanáwat silag prinda, They are
getting more and more rice lands because they accept mortgages. {3} for
one’s financial or emotional situation to ease up. ha- = luag, a2.
luaglúag v [B26; b(1)] for there to be a slackening of pressure, treat
leniently. Apikíha siya. Ayawg luagluági ang ímung paghangyù, Pressure
him. Don’t ease up in your pleading. Ug luagluágan nímu ang ímung mga
anak, mangabusar nà, If you are too lenient with your children, they
will become abusive.

luaryang, luaryung (from luag) a for a woman to have a large vagina, no
longer a virgin (coarse). Mangasáwa ka ánang luaryang? Are you going to
marry that fallen woman? v [B126] be a fallen woman.

lúas n tiny sore in the gums or inside of the mouth. v [b4] have tiny
sores in the mouth.

luátan n joints, a place of union between two separate bones.

luay_1 n leader in fishing with a line. v [A; b6(1)] attach a leader to
a line.

luay_2 v [B2; b6] be, become weak and limp. Muluay (maluay) ang láwas
sa táwung kuyapan, The body of a person who faints becomes limp.
Nagluay ang úlu sa bátà nga nakatúlug sa silya, The child’s head was
hanging limply after he fell asleep in the chair. a flexible, limp.
Luay ang alambri, Wire is flexible.

luay_3 = dul-ay.

luba v [B26] give way under pressure, persecution, public opinion. Dì
muluba (maluba) ning ákung pagbátì bísan taliwā̀ sa pagtámay, My love
will not give way no matter how much scorn they may heap on me. Ang
lúhà sa íyang asáwa mauy nakapaluba (nakaluba) sa íyang hugut nga
hukum, His wife’s tears moved him to back down from his firm decision.

lúbà v [A3S; a1] stab. Naprísu siya kay nakalúbà, He was put in jail
because he stabbed s.o.

lubad v {1} [B2] fade. Milubad (nalubad) ang púlu kay gibakhan, The
shirt faded because it was bleached in the sun. Nagkalubad ang singsing
pansi, The imitation ring is fading. {2} [B246; b4] for colors to run.
Gilubdan ang putì nga giságul sa dikulur, When the white and the
colored clothing were washed together, the colors ran onto the white
cloth. {3} [B2] for feelings, traits, etc. to fade. Ang panahun
makapalubad (makalubad) sa panaghigalaay, Time can make a friendship
fade. {3a} [AB] change one’s mind, cause s.o. to do so. Dì giyud siya
maglubad sa íyang hukum, He never changes his decisions. Milubad
(nalubad) ang íyang hunàhúnà pagkabuntag, She changed her mind the
following morning. {4} for the voice to break. Ulitáwu ka na kay
milubad nag ímung tíngug, You are an adolescent now because your voice
has started to break. a faded. Sinínang lubad, A faded shirt. pa- v [A;
c6] shift the topic of conversation. Mipalubad dáyun siya dihang ákù na
untang sukmátan, He changed the subject right away when I was about to
confront him. lubarun a of a faded sort. Lubarun na ning pulúha, dáan
na man gud, This sport shirt is faded because it is already old.

*lubag_1 pa- v [A2; c] change the topic of conversation, take s.t.
back. Mangumidiya siya, apan kun masukù na ang íyang kumidiyáhan,
mupalubag (magpalubag) dáyun siya, He teases, but when the fellow he is
teasing gets angry, he immediately takes it back. Báhin sa gugma ang
íyang gipalubag, He changed the topic of conversation to love.

lúbag v {1} [AB6; ab] twist s.t., wring s.t. out. Lubágun ku nang líug
mu, animála ka, I will wring your neck, you beast. Lubági ang linabhan
arun daling mauga, Wring out the clothes so they will dry quickly.
{2} [A13] for flat boards to be warped. Naglúbag ang tabla kay dúgayng
nabulad sa ínit, The board is warped because it was left in the sun for
a long time. (→)_2 n liquid obtained by squeezing plants for their sap.
Maáyung bubhu ang lubag sa bawnus, The squeezings from the gogo vine
make good shampoo. v [A2; c] {1} exude a juice, taste, color when
soaked in water. Pula ang ilubag sa tungug, Mangrove bark gives off a
red color. {2} for the results of bad behavior to come out. Milubag na
ang íyang pangarmin. Napaangkan siya, Her habit of always making
herself up has borne fruit. Now she got pregnant. {3} [A2N] for dirt to
loosen so that it comes out easily. Ihúmul únà sa sabun nang mga
bulingun bwáhan makalubag ang buling, Soak the dirty clothes in soapy
water so that the dirt can come loose. lubaglúbag v [A; c6] writhe.
Naglubaglúbag siya sa katri sa kasakit, He is writhing in pain on the
bed. -in- n liquid or juice squeezed out of s.t. Waswási pag linabhan
kay lubug pag linúbag, Rinse the clothes once more because the water
you are wringing out is still dirty. pa- v [A; c] cause s.t. to exude
its juice or dirt to come out. n s.t. which can loosen dirt.

lubak v [A; a] pound, beat heavily with s.t. Tulu ka táwu ang mulubak
(maglubak) sa humay, Three persons will pound the rice. Lubakun ku sa
kúmù ang ímung nawung, I will beat your face with my fists.

lubakan n {1} a coconut palm with the defect that its nuts and fronds
easily break or fall off. {2} the way certain coconuts develop with a
husk so thick that the nut looks very much bigger than the ordinary,
but with an ordinary amount of meat. v [B1256] for a coconut tree to
get to be so that the nuts and fronds break off easily.

lubang_1 v [A; c] transplant seedlings. Kamiy mulubang sa mga lubi, We
will transplant the coconut seedlings. n seedling.

lubang_2 v [B246] for pimples or rash to come out. Mulubang ang mga
butuybutuy ug mukáun siyag pasáyan, She breaks out in rash if she eats
shrimps.

lúbang n k.o. upland rice with big, round, reddish grains that ripen in
five months.

lub-ang_1 v [A; c] put all of s.t. in one container. Kinsa may
naglub-ang íning tanang ságing sa kúlun? Who put all the bananas in the
pot? Ilub-ang ang tanang linabhan sa duwang, Put all of the laundry in
the basin.

lub-ang_2 n {1} pothole. {2} hole to plant seedlings in. v [B12] for
potholes to develop. -un(→) n seedling ready for transplanting to holes
dug for the purpose.

lúbas n {1} heartwood of timber. {2} maturity, enough years to become
seasoned (literary). v [b4] have well-developed heartwood. -an
a {1} having well-developed heartwood. {2} seasoned, experienced.
Lubásan nga magbabalaud, Seasoned lawmaker.

lubat n illness caused by a frightening experience, esp. contact with
the dead. The cure is palínà. (see *línà_2) Kanang íyang gibátì lubat
nà niadtung kalit nga pagdawugdug, Her sickness is due to the intense
fright she suffered from hearing the thunder. v [B246; b4] for an
illness to develop or for s.t. that one has to get worse because of
intense fright. Mulubat ang kabahung basta iadtug mintiryu, Sores get
worse if you go to a cemetery when you have them. Gilubatan ang bátà
kay gidúul sa minatay, The child got ill from fright because he was
made to go near the corpse. pa- v [A; c] startle s.o. by s.t. sudden—a
shout or a sudden spring from a concealed position. Palubatan nákù si
Náti inigsúd sa kwartu, I’ll frighten Natie when she enters the room.

lubaung= libaung.

lubay, lúbay a pliant, easily bent. Lúbay ang kawáyan, Bamboo bends.
v [B2; b6] become supple. Mulúbay (malúbay) ímung láwas ug mukúhà kag
bali, Your body becomes supple if you take ballet lessons. (→) n tender
string beans. lubaylúbay v [A1P; c16] move or do s.t. slowly with a
wiggly body. Maglubaylúbay (magpalubaylúbay) giyud nà siyang maglakaw,
mu rag báyut, He walks slowly wiggling his body like a fairy. n k.o.
wrasse.

lubi n coconut: Cocos nucifera. mugbù pa ang — long ago. — nga lupísan
n variety with green husks. — nga ugis n variety with whitish nuts,
used in making coconut oil for medicinal purposes. v [b(1)] mix milk
extracted from coconut meat with s.t. Nindut ang sabaw sa kinhasun ug
lubihan, A chowder of seashells tastes good if coconut milk is added to
it. lubilúbi v [A; ab] weed or clean the area around each coconut
plant. Ug dì nátù matibuuk paglimpiyu, lubilubíhun lang, If we can’t
clean the whole area, just clean under each tree. n {1} name given to
various plants commonly found in coconut groves. {1a} k.o. shrub with
no branches and reddish leaves growing at the tops. {1b} k.o. ground
orchids, e.g. the ornamental orchid: Spathoglottis plicata. {2} name
given to k.o. palm. palubilúbi v [A] play hard to get (from the notion
that coconut meat is hard to extract from its shell). Nagpalubilúbi
siya ábig ákung lugítun, She is playing hard to get. She thinks I’m
going to try to extract her from the shell. kalubihan, kalubian,
kalubinhan n coconut grove. taga- n a system of trading in which the
merchandise, esp. home-made food preparations as cakes, etc., are
bartered for mature coconuts. v [c6] barter goods for coconuts.
Itagalubi ni nákung bibingka, I’ll barter these rice cakes for
coconuts.

lúbid v [AB12; a] twist together, twine. Nagkalúbid íyang dílà
pagsinultig ininglis, His tongue gets all twisted up in trying to speak
English. Lubíra ang duha ka wáyir arun lig-un giyud, Twist the two
wires together to make them really strong. n abaca twine. lubiran
n device for twining rope. lubidlúbid, -in- n k.o. hard, crunchy
pastry, fashioned like twine, sprinkled with flakes of sugar.

lubing n loop or noose of a lasso which tightens when pulled. Dakua ang
lubing kay dakù ug líug ang báka, Make the loop large because the neck
of the cow is large. v [A; c1] {1} catch or ensnare using a lasso or
noose which tightens when pulled. Akuy mulubing (maglubing) sa mga
báka, I’ll lasso the cows. {2} win s.o. through deceit or by fast talk.
Gilubing sa pulitiku ang publiku, The politician had won the public
support through his glib words.

lubintadur = libintadur.

lubítus n very small beads sewn on s.t. for decoration. v [A; b6]
decorate s.t. with lubítus.

lublub v {1} [A;b(1)] bury oneself. Kuykúya ang gilublúban sa
hanlilítik, Dig down to where the scorpion shrimp buried itself.
{2} [A; b6] stay long in a place without much activity. Naglublub lang
siya sa íla kay way kwarta, He just stays home because he doesn’t have
any money. -anan n place where s.o. buries himself or stays long in. †

lúbu_1 v [B26; c1P] for s.t. to be projected upwards at a sharp angle.
Ayawg ilúbu (lubúha ipalúbu, palubúha) inigsirbi kay sayun nang
sagngun, Don’t serve it high because it will be easy to spike it.
a projected at a sharp angle. Lúbu ra nga pagkasirbi, Served too high.
n {1} balloon. {2} hot-air balloon. Misáka ang lúbu human kadagkuti ang
pabílu, The hot-air balloon rose after the wick was lit.

lúbu_2 n wolf.

lúbù v [A; a] {1} remove grains of corn from the cob. Lubúa nang mais
arun ipagaling, Remove the kernels so we can mill them. {2} remove
teeth, serrations, or anything protruding in a series, like the grains
of corn. Malúbù run nang ngípun mug musúpak ka, You’ll be minus your
teeth if you don’t cooperate. hangyù — request made in such a way it
cannot be turned down (so called from the notion that as one is asking
for corn he is at the same time picking at the grains).

lubug v [A; b6] {1} for a person to sit with the rump smack on the
ground or for an animal to sit or lie with its limbs flat on the
ground. Milubug sa sawug ang irù, The dog was stretched out on the
floor. {1a} for the sun to be about to set. Milubug na ang adlaw sa
kasadpan, The sun was about to set (lit. sitting on its rump in the
west). {2} stay in a place for some time, but temporarily. Duha na ku
ka simánang lubug dinhi kay way kasakyan, I have been stuck here for
two weeks because there has been no transportation. {2a} — sa banig
[A13] stay in bed due to illness. Mutúig na siyang galubug sa banig, He
has been bedridden for almost a year. lubganan n place where animals
habitually lie down.

lúbug v {1} [AB2; a] for liquid to get or be made murky with sediment.
Mulúbug (malúbug) ang subà ug mubahà, The river becomes muddy during
floods. Ang nangaligúay mauy naglúbug sa subà, The bathers made the
river all muddy. {2} [AB12] for one’s sight to become, be made blurry.
Bulug sa lúhà nga milúbug sa íyang mata, A torrent of tears that
blurred her sight. {3} [A; a12] make a wild disturbance so as to
disrupt an activity. Tagagawas ang naglúbug sa ámung parti, Some
outsiders disrupted our party. a murky, blurred. (→) = lúbug, a. -un(→)
a of a muddy, murky sort.

lubuk v {1} [A; a] pound with a pestle. Lubka (lukba) lang ang tipasì.
Ayawg ipagaling, Just pound the rice. Don’t have it milled. {2} [A;
a12] rain blows on the body. Lubkun únà sa buksidur ang tiyan sa íyang
kuntra, The boxer pounds his opponent’s stomach first. lubkanan
n {1} place where pounding is done. {2} mortar.

lubulúbu n {1} a bitter, inedible powdery material from buri palm
flour, which is separated from the edible portion (natuk) and disposed
of. {2} thin, white membranous covering on the inside surface of bamboo
stems.

lubun v [B23(1)] sink into s.t. soft. Nalubun ang trák sa lápuk ug dì
na makadúwal, The truck is stuck in the mud and cannot move any
further. Nagkalubun na ning ákung singsing kay nagkadakù man ning ákung
tudlù, My ring is getting embedded more and more deeply in my finger
because my finger is getting fatter. Ilubun (lubunun) pag-áyu ang batu
sa aláhas arun dílì daling mulagput, The stones are set deeply so that
they can’t fall out. a for stones to be set deep. pa- n meat or fish
inserted into the boiled rice one carries s.w. as his lunch (malutù).
pa-(←) n in weaving, a rod stuck into a groove made in the cloth beam
(likisan), the purpose of which is to hold the woven cloth wound around
the cloth beam in place and maintain tension on the warp.

lubung v {1} [A; c] bury. Naglubung silag bahandì sa sílung, They
buried a treasure under the house. Gipamisáhan ang háyà únà ilubung, A
mass was said for the dead man before he was buried. {1a} be beaten by
an overwhelming victory in an election, contest, game. Gilubung ang
Libiral sa Nasyunalista, The Nationalists defeated the Liberals by a
landslide. {1b} bury fish in the sand to make them look fresh.
{1c} embed a charm inside a part of the body. Gilubung níya ang mutyà
sa íyang brásu arun mahímu siyang kublan, He embedded the magical pearl
in his biceps to make himself invulnerable. {2} [AB6; cP] sink, drive
s.t. into the ground; for s.t. to sink into the ground. Milubung ákung
tiil pagtámak nákù sa lápuk, My foot sank when I stepped in the mud.
Naglubung silag mga trúsu sa pundasiyun, They drove logs into the
foundations. — sa kalímut v [c6] forget s.t. completely. Ilubung sa
kalímut ang ímung makauúlawng kaági, Forget your shameful past.
n {1} grave. {2} interment. lubngánan n place of interment. Bawnun ku
sa lubngánan ang ákung pagmáhay, I will regret it to my dying day (lit.
carry my regret to my grave). lubnganan, kalubngan n cemetery.
lubnganánun a appropriate to the cemetery. Lubnganánung kahílum, A
cemetery-like silence. -in- n fish buried in the sand near the shore so
that they would look fresh.

lubus v [AN; a12] acquire a supernatural ability by means of undergoing
a series of difficult tasks (táhas) in preparation for it. Ug mulubus
(manlubus) kag kaláki kinahanglang makatúman ka sa táhas, If you want
to acquire supernatural ability, you must be able to accomplish the
series of difficult tasks. Gilubus sa ákung apuhan ang kaláki ni Dun
Liyun Kílat, My grandfather acquired Don Leon Kilat’s supernatural
ability.

lúbus_1 a {1} entirely of one color and texture. Ang ákung irù lúbus
nga putì, My dog is entirely white. Ang kulur sa bistídu lúbus kaáyung
pula, My dress is colored a very pure red. Lúbus pánit ákung bág, My
purse is all leather. {1a} — kalíwat purebred. Lúbus kalíwat Tiksas
kining manúka, This cock is a purebred Texas. {2} for a decision to be
final. Lúbus na ang ákung hukum, My decision is final. v {1} [B2; c1]
be, become purely one color. Ug usban nímug pintal, mulúbus (malúbus)
ang kulur, If you paint it once more, the color will be pure and even.
{2} [B26; c1] be, become decided.

lúbus_2 a tied, wound around tight. v [a12] tie s.t. tight. Ayaw lubúsa
pagbáat arun sayun badbárun, Don’t tie it tight so it will be easy to
untie. ka- n tightness of a knot or the way s.t. was tied up.

lubut n {1} anus, rump. Lúpig pay lubut sa himungáan sa katabian níya,
She’s more talkative than a hen’s behind (which keeps opening and
closing). walay — having hips and buttocks far too forward. Ayg tak-in
kay wà kay lubut, Don’t tuck in your shirt because you have flat
buttocks. {2} vagina (euphemism). Ang bátà anhà mulusut sa lubut sa
babáyi, A baby comes out through the mother’s bottom. {3} bottom part
of a container or receptacle. Lubut sa baskit, Bottom of the basket.
{3a} — sa básu costume jewelry (lit. made from the bottom of a glass).
Daling mulubad ang singsing nga lubut sa básu, A dimestore ring soon
fades. {4} rear end of vehicles. Ikarga sa lubut sa trák, Load it at
the back part of the truck. {5} — mu {5a} expression of disbelief.
Lubut nímu! Kinsay mutúu, My foot! Who’d believe that! {5b} expression
of disgust. ‘Tagai kug dus ipamúwang.’—‘Dus sa ímung lubut. Hái
kwartáhun?’ ‘Let me have two pesos to go to the cockfights.’—‘Two
pesos. You must be nuts. We don’t have any money!’ {6} nakahikap sa —
s.t. must have happened to [subject] that he did s.t. nice since he
doesn’t usually do that. Nanghátag mag kwarta ang tihik. Nakahikap sa
lubut, Suddenly the miser is giving out money. S.t. must have happened
to him. (Lit. He must have gotten his hand on s.o.’s rear end.)
{7} mabaw ug — easily angered. v {1} [ANC; c1] do s.t. at s.o.’s rear
end. Nanglubut siya ug suntuk, He hit him on the buttocks. Nagkalúbut
mig higdà, We lay with our buttocks touching each other. Lubuta siya
pagtindak, Kick her in the arse. {2} [B; c] get to be at the rear or
bottom. Nagkalubut na man ku sa ámung klási, I am gradually slipping to
the bottom of my class. Inay kay nag-una kug sakay, nalubut na hinúun,
I was the first to get on the bus, but I wound up in the rear end
anyway. Ilubut lang ning ákung karga, Just place my baggage at the
rear. {3} [A12N; a12] enter through the back way. Lubtun lang nátug súd
ang báy arung dì ta makit-an, Let’s go in through the back door so that
nobody will see us. — ug anay n nutmeg shells (lit. sow’s anus) so
called because of the similarity of the lips of this shell to the anal
lips of a sow. lubutlubut v [B4] have more work to do than one can
handle. Nagkalubutlubut kug laba, I’m going crazy trying to do all this
laundry. Dílì man ka mutuktuk, magkalubutlubut man lang tag panábun sa
átung láwas, Why didn’t you knock? I went wild trying to cover myself.
lubutlúbut v [AP; c] follow s.o. around. Ayaw kug lubutlubúti, Don’t
follow me around all the time.

lubyuk v [B] be, become hollow, sunken. Kandíis nga naglubyuk sa íyang
isig ka áping, Dimples that are deeply set on each cheek. Ang húmuk nga
yútà malubyuk kun tumban, Soft earth caves in when you step on it.

lúd n load of courses given to a teacher. v [A; c] have a certain
teaching load. Gamay ra kug makítà kay naglúd lang kug duha, I don’t
earn much because I have only two courses. Pilay ilúd nímu káda
simistir? How many courses are given you per semester?

ludà v [AN; c] spit, spit out. Giludà níya ang íyang giúsap, He spat
out what he was chewing. n spittle, saliva.

ludábi n name of Cebuano writers’ organization, abbreviation of Lúbas
sa Dágang Bisayà, ‘The elite (lit. heartwood) of Visayan literature’.

lud-an see luwà.

ludhan see luhud.

lúgà = lugàlúgà.

lugabu, lugábu n dull hollow sound of impact. Lugábu sa mga táwung
nagsáyaw sa táas, The thumping sound of the people dancing upstairs.
v [A2S3] produce a dull hollow sound of impact. Milugábu ang likud nga
gisumbag, His back resounded with a thump when I slapped him. Naglugabu
ang bawud sa lapyahan, The waves pounded against the shore. -in- =
lugábu, n.

lugabung v [B1456] make a thumping sound. Naglugabung ang mga lamísa ug
síya nga gipatíran sa mga hubug, The chairs and tables made a thumping
sound as the drunken men kicked them.

lugak v {1} [AB; ab7] for s.t. which grips or is tied round s.t. to
loosen. Wà siya mulugak ug gakus nákù sa kahadluk nga byáan, She did
not let go of her embrace for fear of being left behind. Lugaka ang
ímung sinínà arun hayáhay, Loosen your dress so it will be comfortable.
Lugaki ang turniki káda singku minútus, Loosen the tourniquet every
five minutes. {2} [B4; b(1)] abate, slow down from doing s.t. with
energy. Ang bag-ung dálan makalugak (makapalugak) sa trapiku dinhi, The
new street can relieve the traffic here. Ayawg lugaki ang pagpanguyab
níya, Keep courting her for all you’re worth. Don’t let off.
{3} [B2456N] for the knees to give way, for a person to budge from his
convictions. Dì siya mulugak sa íyang barugánan bísag hulgáun, He won’t
budge from his stand even if you threaten him. Nanglugak ang íyang mga
túhud, His knees gave way. {4} [b(1)] loosen one’s control or
discipline over. Ug ímung lugakan ang ímung anak muabusar nà, If you
rear your child leniently he will become abusive.

lugàlúgà v [A13; a12] move s.t. in a hole back and forth. Naglugàlúgà
siya ug lipak sa nabúlit nga túbu, He worked a stick back and forth in
the tube that was stopped up.

lugamak, lugámak v [B456; c1P] fall with a crash, be thrown down with
force. Mulugamak ka giyud ug mahugnù nang ímung gitungtúngan, You will
fall with a crash if that thing you are standing on collapses.
Gilugamakan (gipalugamakan) ang mga búlak sa mga inibut nga sagbut,
They threw the uprooted weeds with force on top of the flowers.
Nalugamakan (nalugmakan) ku sa íyang kasábà, I received the brunt of
his scoldings. Ímu man nang ilugamak (ipalugamak) ang ímung láwas bísag
ása, You throw yourself down anywhere. n sounds of s.t. falling with a
crash. (→) [B126; b8] rush headlong into s.t. Nalugamak siya sa usa ka
byúda nga way kwarta, He rushed into marriage with a penniless widow.
-in- = lugámak, n.

lugan-ub n thundering, reverberating sound. v [A3] produce a thunderous
or loud reverberating sound. Milugan-ub ang kabukíran nga gipabuthan ug
dinamíta, A deafening sound echoed through the mountains when the
dynamite was exploded. n a thundering, reverberating sound. -in- =
lugan-ub.

lugapak, lugápak n banging, slapping, cracking sound. Ang lugapak sa
kawáyan, The cracking of the bamboo. v [A2S; ac] make a cracking,
slapping, banging sound. Milugapak ang pultahan nga gikalit pagsira,
The door was slammed with a bang. Naglugapak ang samput sa íyang anak
sa bakus, The leather belt cracked over his son’s buttocks. -in- =
lugápak, n.

lugar_1 n {1} geographical place. Nakaadtu na ku sa lainláing lugar sa
kalibútan, I have been to various places in the world. {1a} situation
one is in. Ikaw sa ákung lugar ug lalim ba, You try being in my place
and see if it is nice. {2} proper place, occasion for s.t. Ibutang sa
lugar ang ímung pagpangmik-ap, Use make-up at the proper occasion. Walà
sa lugar tung ímung pagsaway níya kay daghang namínaw, It was not the
right time for you to criticise him because there were lots of people
listening. {2a} proper place of vehicles in the flow of traffic. Patuu.
Wà ka sa lugar, Move to the right. You’re not in your lane. {3} vacant
place. Dúna pa bay lugar sa dyíp? Is there room in the jeep?
{4} available time for s.t. Wà kuy lugar pagsúruy run, I don’t have
time to go around now. {5} chance or opportunity to do s.t. Way lugar
pagdúul níya kay gwardiyádu, There is no chance to get near him because
he is guarded. {6} primíru (ikaduha, etc.) — in the first (second,
etc.) place. Ayawg adtu. Primíru lugar istranyu ka, Don’t go there. In
the first place, you are a stranger. lugráha, lugaráha n particular
place, time, chance. v {1} [A; b(1)] give way or space to. Milugar siya
arun makalingkud ang babáyi, He gave his place so the lady could sit.
Lugari ang Prisidinti inigsúut níya sa nanambung, Give way to the
President when he goes through the crowd. {2} [A3; b(1)] give the
chance to do s.t. Musabut giyug íyang pápa kay mulugar man inigpamisíta
nákù, Her father is sure understanding because he leaves us alone (lit.
gives a chance) when I go visiting. Ayaw siyag lugari nga muantug,
Don’t give him the chance to shoot the ball. {3} [A12] {3a} get a
chance to do s.t. Hagki dáyun siya ug makalugar ka, Kiss her as soon as
you get the chance. {3b} have the time to. Buháta ni ug makalugar ka,
Do this if you have the time to. {4} [A2; c6] pull over in a place
proper for stopping a vehicle. Ilugar ang dyip ug muhúnung ka, Pull
over to the side of the road when you stop. a {1} having available
space. Kargáhi pa kay lugar pa kaáyu, Put in more passengers because
there’s still plenty of space. {2} for there to be a chance. Dì ku
mangupya bísag lugar kaáyu, I won’t cheat even if I have a good chance
to do so. pa- v [A; b(1)] give s.o. a chance to come near or touch one.
Dì nà siya magbinúang bísag palugaran, He won’t do anything foolish
even if given the chance. tag- n spirit inhabiting a particular place.
Gidaútan nà siya sa taglugar kay íyang giputul ang káhuy, The spirit of
the place made him ill when he cut the tree down.

lugar_2 = kinta_1.

lugas n {1} grain. Usa ka lugas humay, A grain of rice. Maáyu ang lugas
sa igtalánum nga binhì, The seeds for planting have well-formed grains.
{1a} drops (figurative). Pipila ka lugas nga lúhà, A few teardrops.
{2} strand. Usa ka lugas buhuk, A strand of hair. {2a} — lánut a hair’s
breadth (lit. strand of abaca fiber) by which one is kept from death.
Usa ka lugas lánut ang nakauwang nákù sa kamatáyun, I came within a
hair’s breadth of meeting my death. {3} word counter for people. Pipila
ka lugas táwu ang didtu sa sinihan, There were only a few people in the
movies. {4} word counter for things which can be counted but not
concrete. Pipila ka lugas púlung, A few words. Pipila ka lugas kanta, A
few songs. Pipila ka lugas idíya, A few ideas.

lug-as v [B12; a12] remove husk from rice or other grains. Ang ímung
linubkan dì makalug-as (makapalug-as) sa dáwa, The way you are doing it
won’t get the husks off the millet. a already unhusked. Taphi ang
linubuk kay lug-as na, Winnow the pounded rice because the husks are
off now.

lugátub n deep, loud, hollow sound. v [A] resound with a deep loud,
hollow sound. Milugátub ang baril nga gilábayg batu, The barrel went
bonk when a stone was thrown at it. -in- = lugátub.

lúgaw n porridge from rice or corn grits. v {1} [A; a] make porridge.
Bag-ung humay ang lugáwa, Make porridge from the new rice. {2} [B12]
turn to, become a mud puddle or mire. Malúgaw ang dálan ug mag-úlan,
The path becomes slush during rainy days. -in-, ni- n = lúgaw.

*lugay -nan, -nun n pertaining to politics and elections. Bugnù nga
lugaynun (lugaynan) diin napárut si Kirínu, The political fight where
Quirino lost.

lugbak v [B26] for organic matter to decay. Malugbak ang prútas nga may
tatsa, The fruit will rot if it has been damaged. Bisan malugbak ang
ímung bukug, dílì ka kabalus sa ímung ginikánan, You can never repay
your parents no matter how much time goes by (lit. even after your
bones have rotted). Mauy nakalugbak (nakapalugbak) sa káhuyng halígi
ang kanúnayng paghúmul níini sa túbig, The wooden post rotted because
it was immersed too long in water.

lugbáti = alugbáti.

lugda v [A; b(1)] start, originate some foolishness or mild
misbehavior. Kinsa ninyuy naglugda ug kuriskuris sa bungbung? Which one
of you started making scratches on the wall?

lugdang v [A2; b6] {1} settle to the bottom of a liquid. Wà makalugdang
ang húgaw kay pirming gikútaw, The dirt would not settle because s.o.
kept stirring the water. Dúgayng milugdang ang íyang paun kay súg man,
It took his bait a long time to reach the bottom because there was a
current. {2} for results of bad action to make themselves felt.
Milugdang ang íyang tinuntu. Nakalabus, That is the fruit of his
foolishness. He was sent to prison. {3} [B3(1)4] for tender rice grains
to solidify. Wà pa gánì makalugdang ang humay aníhun na nímu, Are you
going to harvest the rice when the grains haven’t solidified yet? -in-,
ni- n {1} s.t. that settled. {2} results of bad action. Kanang batáa
linugdang sa ímung tinuntu, The child is the fruit of your stupidity.
{3} one’s youngest child (humorous). -in-an = -in-, 1.

lugdat v [B46] for the eyes to bulge. Milugdat ang íyang mata sa
katingála, Her eyes bulged with surprise. Gwápa untà apan naglugdat
lang ang mata, She looks pretty but she has bulging eyes.

lugdum, lugdung a heavily overcast, particularly with rain clouds.
v [B46] be heavily overcast. Dúnay taliábut nga unus kay naglugdung ang
lángit, A rainstorm is coming because the sky is heavily overcast.

lúgì_1 v {1} [A; a] extract dried coconut meat from shell. Hustu nang
lugíun ang gihudnu nga lubi, The coconuts are dried and the meat can be
extracted. {2} [A; a12] process coconut into copra, from harvesting to
drying. Maglúgì mi káda trimistri, We make copra every three months.
n copra. Isulud sa sáku ang lúgì, Put the copra in the sack. (→)
n instrument for extracting coconut meat from the shell.

lúgì_2 a being outsmarted, fooled (slang). Lúgì ka kay mitúu kang
mubáyad siyag útang, You have been fooled for believing that he pays
his debts. v {1} [B126] be tricked into s.t. (slang). Nalúgì ku sa
Múrus pagpalit sa imitasyung rúliks, I was tricked by the Moro into
buying a fake Rolex watch. {2} [B126; a12] for a business to fail, fold
up. Ang kalit nga pagbahar sa prisyu mauy nakalúgì (nakapalúgì) sa
íyang nigusyu, The sudden drop in prices caused his business to fail.
{3} [A; a2b3(1)] defeat in a game or fight. Ang manghud ra nákuy
maglúgí níya sa ahidris, Even my little brother could defeat him in
chess. Ang liphuk ni Prasyir mauy nalugian ni Klí, It was Frazier’s
left hook that defeated Clay.

lúging n logging company, industry. Náa ku sa lúging, I work for a
logging firm.

lug-is v [AB6; a1] split or break into smaller sizes. Maglug-is kug
kawáyan pára ikural, I will split some bamboo for fencing. Naglug-is
ang pintal, The paint is cracking.

lúgit v [A; a] {1} extract s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface
with s.t. pointed or sharp. Gilúgit ang bála gíkan sa íyang páa, The
slug was extracted from his thigh. {2} extract coconut meat from the
shell in making copra. Ang láhing ray lugítun, Extract copra only from
mature nuts. {3} force oneself or s.o. to dig deep for money when he is
financially hard up. Napugus ang pubri paglúgit sa íyang tinagúan, The
poor man was forced to dig into his savings. {4} ask for s.t. in a
forceful way. Milúgit siyag hangyù sa íyang bánang mulakaw siya, She
twisted her husband’s arm to let her go out. (→) n s.t. used to extract
s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface, esp. an instrument to
separate coconut meat from the shell. pa- v [A] act unwilling to make
s.o. trouble himself or plead. Gustu túud siya, piru nagmagáhì kay
magpalúgit giyud, She actually wanted to, but she put up resistance
because she wanted him to implore her.

lugituk v [B46; b6] for cereals to be half-cooked but moist. Naglugituk
ang linung-ag kay wà ayúhag síga, The rice is half-cooked because the
fire wasn’t hot enough.

lugitum (from itum) v [B4] be dark, gloomy because of denseness.
Milugitum ang lángit sa kabagà sa dag-um, The sky got dark with thick
clouds. Ang naglugitum nga kamaisan, The dense and dark cornfields.

lugkab = lungkab.

lugkat (from lukat) v [A; a] {1} pry off things that are nailed or
stuck into s.t. Nakalugkat siya sa dakung lansang nga nagtaup sa káhuy,
He managed to pull the large nail out of the wood. Gilugkat ang mga
dáang baldúsa, They removed the old tiles. {2} uproot, fell, including
roots and all. Nalugkat ang pusti nga nadasmagan sa trák, The truck
rammed into the post and it knocked it over.

luglug_1 v [A; a] thrust s.t. long repeatedly into a narrow opening.
Luglúga ang kasilyas kay nasampúngan, Thrust a stick into the toilet
pipe because it is stopped up. n stick or the like used to thrust into
a narrow opening.

luglug_2 v [A; a1] slaughter an animal by slicing the neck. Way sud-an,
magluglug tag manuk, We have nothing for dinner. Let’s slaughter a
chicken.

*luglug_3 pansit — see pansit.

lugmak v {1} [B2; a1] give way or break in the middle due to force or
weight. Mulugmak (malugmak) nang salúga kun tungtúngan ug daghan, That
floor will collapse if lots of people stand on it. {2} [A; a2] trample
on plants and destroy them. Gilugmak sa bábuy ang mga buwak, The pig
trampled over the flowers.

lugmaw v {1} [A2; b6] show up or appear. Ingug musultis Prisidinti
Markus. Hái Markúsang milugmaw? They said President Marcos would give a
talk. But no Marcos appeared. Gilugmáwan siyag dílì ingun nátù, A
supernatural being appeared to him. {2} [A2] for part of s.t. buried to
be sticking out. Giunsa man ninyu paglubung ang irù nga milugmaw man
ang tiil? How did you bury the dog when its feet are sticking out?
{3} [A2N; b6] for tears to well up in the eyes. Nalúbug ang ákung mata
nga gilugmáwan sa lúhà, My eyes were blurred with the tears that
started to form.

lugmay = lukmay.

lugmuk v [AB26; a2b2] for structures or people to collapse. Ang línug
mauy naglugmuk sa Rúbi Táwir, The earthquake destroyed the Ruby Tower.
Nalugmuk sa simbahan ang táwung nakuyapan, The man who fainted in
church suddenly collapsed. pa- v [A; c] tear down structures. Ipalugmuk
sa gubyirnu ang mga bawungbáwung, The government will tear the shacks
down.

lugmuy = lukmuy.

lugnas v {1} [A23P] for plants to die from disease or from being past
the fruit-bearing age. Gagmay nag búnga ang tamátis kay hápit na
malugnas, My tomato plants are bearing few fruits now because they will
soon wither and die. {2} [B126] be brought to utter ruin. Nalugnas ang
íyang nigusyu kay miintra siya sa súgal, His business was brought to
utter ruin because he took to gambling. {3} [B1256] for structures to
fall apart. Dílì na madúgay nga malugnas ang balay kay dáan na kaáyu,
It won’t be long for the house to fall apart because it is very old.

lugnut v [A2; c6] struggle to free oneself from s.t. that holds one.
Ayawg ilugnut ímung buktun ug gunítan ka paglabang, Do not pull your
arm away when I’m holding on to you to cross the street. paN- v [A1]
struggle vigorously to get free. Nagpanglugnut ang babáying gikidnap,
The girl struggled vigorously to get loose from her abductors.

lugpad v {1} = lupad. {2} [A2] fly up. Milugpad ang abug paglabay sa
trák, Dust flew up when the truck passed by. {3} [A23] send s.o.
reeling as though flying. Mulugpad ka run ug suntúkun ta ka, I’ll send
you reeling if I strike you.

lugpit v [A; b] pin s.t. down tightly or between two things. Tabángi
kug lugpit sa kúgun íring duha ka lipak, Help me fasten the grass
thatch down with those two pieces of bamboo. Lugpíti (lugpiti) ang
libru sa íluk, Hold your book tightly under your arm. Hilugpitan ákung
tudlù pagsira nákù sa húnus, I caught my finger when I closed the
drawer. n {1} s.t. used to clip or pin s.t. tightly down or against
s.t. {2} chord on a guitar formed by pressing the finger straight
across the strings. pa- v [A; ab] cause s.t. to be pinned down. Puting
kamisadintru nga íyang gipalugpítan (gipalugpitan), A white shirt which
he had tucked in.

lugput v [B246; b6] pop up like a jack-in-the-box. Milugput ku sa silya
sa kakurat, I shot up from my seat in my fright. Layù siyag gilugpútan
pagkalingkud níyag dágum, He jumped a mile when he sat on a pin.

lugru n advantage given in betting where the odds are not even. Ang
lugru tris kuntra sa ímung dus, The advantage is three to your two.
v [A; b6] give advantage in betting, not said of tossing coins.
Lugrúhan ta sila ug singku tris arun mudáwat sila sa pusta, We will
give them an advantage of five to three so that they will take the bet.

lugsad v {1} [A; c1] get to the ground or bottom. Milugsad na ang
ayruplánu sa tugpahánan, The airplane has landed at the airport.
Naglugsad sila samtang kami nagtungas, They were coming down the hill
while we were going up. {2} [A; c] bring s.t. down. Adúnay mulugsad
(maglugsad) sa mga abut ngadtu sa lungsud, S.o. will bring the produce
down to the town.

lugsung v {1} [AB36; ac] go, bring downhill, to town. Mantinir lang únà
tag manuk kay wà mi makalugsung, Let’s just put up with chicken because
we haven’t had a chance to go down to town (to buy anything better).
Maglugsung sila sa ílang mga pruduktu ngadtu sa lungsud, They bring
their products down to the city. Unsay ímung lugsúngun maduminggu? What
do you go to town for on Sundays? {2} [A1] eat canned fish (humorous).
n {1} — sa down to. Kining kasagingan gíkan dinhi lugsung sa subà ákù,
This banana plantation from here down to the river is mine. {2} canned
fish (so called from the joke that mountaineers consider canned fish
better than chicken because they have to go down to get it—see the
first sentence under v). -un, -un(→) a downhill.

lugsut v [A2; b8] eject s.t. with force. Milugsut ang lísu dihang
naligsan sa ligid, The seed was ejected when the wheel ran over the
fruit. Milugsut ang ákù sa tantu níyang hamilhámil, I ejaculated
because she kept rubbing and rubbing it. Nalugsutan ku sa asíti paghasù
sa bumba, Oil spurted onto me when he worked the pump.

lugtab v {1} [A; b5] force a door open. Wà nay kawatang makalugtab
áning pultahána, No thief can break this door open. {2} [A; ab2] cut a
string or rope with a long slashing stroke of the blade. Naglugtab siya
sa tahì sa sinínang usbunun, She is cutting the stitches of the dress
she has to alter. Lugtaba ang hukut arun malibri ang kabáyù, Cut the
tether rope to free the horse. Hinglugtaban nákù ang halayhayan, I
accidentally cut the clothesline. {3} [A3P; a12] deprive s.o. of his
power. Unsay íyang pagabuhátun arun malugtab ang gahum sa ingkantu?
What shall he do to overcome the power of the spirit?

lugtas v {1} [A; a] break a rope, thread, string, etc. by pulling on it
with force. Naglugtas pa ku sa tahì sa ákung sinínà, I am ripping out
the stitches in my dress. Kun dì mahúbad, lugtása lang, If you can’t
untie it, just break it off. {2} [A; b4c1] terminate, put an end to
s.t. Kaguul nga mulugtas sa ímung kinabúhì, Sorrows that can terminate
your life. Lugtásun (ilugtas) ba lang nímu ang ímung mga damgu tungud
lang sa usa ka babáyi? Will you destroy your hopes and dreams all
because of a woman? {3} [a12] finish a task or job. Kanang labhanan na
lang ímung lugtásun karun. All you have to finish is that laundry.

lugtì v [AB; a] for s.t. crisp or brittle to break, cause it to do so.
Milugtì ang básu nga gibùbúan sa túbig nga nagbukal, The glass cracked
when boiling water was poured into it. Dì ku makalugtì niíning bukúga.
Gáhì kaáyu, I cannot break this bone. It’s too hard. Lugtía nang
mitrusan, Break that meter stick.

lùgù v [A; a] shake a vessel with liquid in it to slosh the liquid
around. Lùgúi nang butilya kay namilit ang húgaw sa sulud, Slosh water
around in the bottle because there’s dirt sticking to the sides.

lúgud v {1} [AN; a1] rub the eyes. Ayawg lugda ímung mata ug mapúling
ka, Don’t rub your eyes when you get dirt in them. {2} [A; b] rub the
skin with a stone to remove dirt. Lugdi ímung líug kay daghang buling,
Rub your neck because there’s lots of dirt on it. paN- v [A2; c6] rub
oneself with a stone to remove dirt. Panlúgud, unyà human, panabun,
Scrub yourself, and after that, soap yourself. Puslan pa mang malígù
manlúgud gayud, Since I’ve started, I might as well go the whole hog.
(Lit. Since I am bathing I might as well scrub myself.) (→) n stone
used for scrubbing oneself to remove dirt.

luguk, lúguk v [B2456; b6] well up. Milúguk ang dugù sa tudlung
nadukdukan sa martilyu, The blood welled up in his fingers when the
hammer struck them. Lúgus siyang kakità kay gilugúkan íyang mata sa
lúhà, She could hardly see because of the tears which welled up in her
eyes.

lugum v [B2; ab7] make, become dark or deep in hue. Mulugum ang kulur
ug putì ang ipaluyu, A color becomes deeper in hue if it is set off
against a white background. Luguma pagpintal arun matabunan ang
suwatsúwat, Paint it dark to cover the writing. a dark or deep in hue.
Hanap dì lugum ang ági sa drúwing pinsil, Your pencil made light lines,
not dark ones.

lúgum v [B3(1)6] for water to collect and form into a pool. Maglúgum
giyud ang túbig kay wà nay kaagásan, The water will form a pool because
there is no way for it to get out.

lúgus v {1} [A; c1] force, force oneself. Milúgus kug iskuyla bisag
gihilantan ku, I forced myself to go to school even though I had a
fever. Kinsay naglúgus ínig pasuk sa buhù bísag huut, Who forced this
into the hole even though it’s too big? Ayawg ilúgus (lugsa) ímung
láwas ug dì giyud mahímù, Don’t force your body if you can’t manage it.
{2} [A; a2] rape. Gibítay ang naglúgus sa babáyi, The man who raped the
girl was hanged. a hardly, barely. Tíngug nga lúgus mabátì, A barely
audible voice. Lúgus gánì ming makapalit ug bugas, We can scarcely
afford to buy rice. (→) v [A] barely do s.t. under difficult odds.
Naglugus giyug iskuyla bísag walay kwarta, He managed to get through
school despite his poverty. linugsánay, lugsanay, lugsánay = lúgus, a.
paN- n rape. maN-r-(→) n rapist.

lugut n {1} thicket, woods. Miadtu siya sa lugut arun pagkúhag
talibugsuk, He went to the woods to cut down stakes for fencing.
{2} ravine or gully. Túbig nga nag-ambak ngadtu sa lugut, Water that
leaps down into the ravine. ka-an n {1} = lugut, 1. {2} series of
ravines or narrow valleys.

lugwà (from gulà) v [B3(1)6; b6] {1} be forced out. Wà makalugwà ang
bítuk kay giundángan ang pagpurga, The intestinal worms didn’t come out
because he stopped taking his medicine. Mihuphup ang hubag human lugwái
sa nánà, The boil shrank after the pus had come out of it. {2} go out
in general. Way púlung nga milugwà sa íyang bàbà, Not a word came out
of his mouth.

lugway v {1} [A; b] lengthen the rope on a tether. Kinsay naglugway sa
kábaw nga nakaábut man sa maisan. Who gave the carabao enough rope to
get to the cornfield? Lugwáyi pa ang tabánug, Give the kite more rope.
{2} [AB; b] extend, prolong time allotted, for time to be extended. Ug
mulugway ang ákung kinabúhì, If my life is extended. Lugwáyi ang
panahun sa ákung pagbáyad, Give me more time to pay. {3} [A] have
enough of s.t. at one’s disposal. Kun makalugway ka sa pagdágan, If you
can stand to run for a long distance. n {1} length of rope used in
tying s.t. that moves. Mub-i ang lugway sa hiniktan, Shorten the
rooster’s tether. {1a} length of rope in a fishing apparatus used in
connecting one part with another to render moveability. {2} extra time
allowance given. Mangáyù tag lugway ug dì ni mahuman ugmà, We will ask
for an extension if this doesn’t get done tomorrow. {3} length of s.t.
one has at his disposal. Dakù kug lugway sa pasinsiya, I have a great
deal of patience. Bisag gastúhan nimug usa ka gatus, dúna pay lugway
nga ikapalit ug sapátus, Even if you spend a hundred of the money,
there is still enough to buy shoes.

lúhà n tears. — sa bau crocodile tears. (→) v [AN] get tears in the
eyes. Nag-áway sigúru sila kay nagluhà íyang mata, They must have had a
quarrel because her eyes are moist. Nangluhà siya pagkabatì sa
sintimintal nga isturya, She got misty-eyed upon hearing the
sentimental story. -an, -un(→) a with tears. walug sa gin-an n the
world, this vale of tears. — sa dalága n k.o. ornamental hanging vine:
Dischidia oinantha.

luhag a not still, restless. Luhag kaáyung kamut nang ímung uyab, Your
boy friend has restless hands. v [A; c1] move about, not be still. Way
magluhag ug dúnay bisíta, You sit still (lit. nobody move) when the
visitors are here. Ayaw nig luhaga kay igsaktu nang pagkatáud, Don’t
move this an inch because it is just in the right place.

luhàluhà n joints of the human or animal anatomy. v [A; a] cut up a
chicken or slaughtered animal in the joints. Luhàluhaa ang iníhaw nga
manuk, Cut up the slaughtered chicken in the joints.

lúhit v [A; a] remove the meat of a sea shell with a pin or the like.
Luhíti ang bátà ug unud sa kinhasun, Remove some of the meat from the
sea shells for the child.

lúhu a with refinement and elegance in appearance. Mutambung sigúru
siyag parti kay lúhu kaáyug pamisti, He must be going to a party
because he is elegantly dressed. Lúhung pagkabúhat nga tukadur, A
finely built dresser. v [B12(1); c1] be elegant, luxurious in
appearance.

luhud v {1} [A; b] kneel. Nagluhud siya atubángan sa birhin, She is
kneeling before the Virgin Mary. {2} [A; b6] worship. Tahúra ang mga
santus; ayawg ludhi, Venerate the saints; don’t worship them. {3} [A]
surrender. Miluhud ang Hapun human bumbáhi sa atúmik bam, Japan
surrendered after the atomic bomb was dropped. {4} [A; b6] sponsor a
wedding. Daghan nang kasal ang ákung naludhan, I have been a sponsor at
many weddings. pa- v {1} [A; ac] be made to kneel. {2} [a3] be thrown
to one’s knees. Napaluhud siya pagkaigù sa ákung krús, He fell on his
knees after being hit with my cross. linudhan n person sponsored in a
wedding. ludhanan, luhuránan n rail one kneels on. tali- n about to
kneel. tik- see tikluhud.

luhudluhud n a prostrate, spreading herb found in wasteland and open
spaces, bearing small blue flowers in an axilliary, peduncled, leaflike
spathe: Commelina diffusa.

luib n small bits of cooked rice or other burnt or partially burnt food
that stick to the corners and creases of leaves which line the bottom
of a cooking vessel.

lúib v [A2S3S; b(1)] betray, be unfaithful to s.o. Way mapyúsu nga
makaluib sa mapya, No Mafioso can betray the Mafia. Giluíban siya sa
íyang asáwa, His wife was unfaithful to him. ma-un a unfaithful,
tending to betray. n see maluíbun.

luing a having weak knees such that one can’t stand. v [B12] be, become
weak-kneed. Pulyu ang nakaluing (nakapaluing) nang batáa, Polio has
caused that child to have weak knees.

lúka_1 v {1} [A; a] uproot, pull s.t. out by the roots. Átung lukáhun
ang mga tanum nga way hinungdan, We’ll uproot the useless plants.
{2} [a3] for two sisters to be married to two brothers. Ang íyang duha
ka anak dalága nalúka pagkaminyù sa magsúun, His two daughters were
married to the two brothers. {3} [A; a12] dislodge from power, put
one’s reign to an end. Way makalúka ni Duránu sa únang puruk, No one
can dislodge Durano from his hold on the first district. n a case of
marriage where brothers marry sisters. lukahay v [C23] for brothers to
marry sisters.

lúka_2 = lúku (female).

lukà n short piece of bamboo tube, usually used as repository of
documents, jewelry, or anything important. v [A; c] store s.t. in a
lukà for safekeeping.

lúkab v {1} [A; a1] pry open. Hiraminta nga ilúkab sa salug, Tools to
use in prying the floor up. {2} [A; b5] open a door or window shutter.
Nalúkab ang pultahan tungud sa kusug hángin, The door came open in the
strong wind. Íyang gilukában (gilúkab) ang íyang tindáhan ug sayu, She
opened her store early. {2a} burglarize. Gilúkab (gilukában) ang ílang
upisína ug nawad-an silag tayipraytir, Their office was broken into and
they lost a typewriter. n opening. Dakug lúkab ning tarúha, This
kerosene can has a wide opening.

lúkad v [AB26; a1] uproot, dig out from the ground. Dalì malúkad
(mulúkad) nang haligía kay dì lawum ang pagkalubung, That post will get
uprooted because it’s not planted deep into the ground. Naglúkad silag
mga sáhà sa ságing, They uprooted some banana shoots.

lukal n local. Iliksiyun nga lukal, Local elections. (←) — mid
n locally made product.

lukalúka n the groin of animals, the area connecting the upper thigh
and the body of the animal. a detachable. Lukalúka ang mga tiil sa
lamísa, The legs of the table are detachable.

lúkap n nightmare in which a person is unable to move or make a sound.
Failure to wake up is said to lead to death. v [A12; a4] cause, have
such a nightmare. Kanang hilabihang kabusug únà matúlug mauy makalúkap,
Overeating before sleeping causes deathly nightmares.

lukápa v {1} [B26; b6] stumble, be knocked down and hit the ground
hard. Milukápa (nalukápa) ang baksir, The boxer hit the deck hard.
{2} [B26] fail in an exam or course. Milukápa siya sa bár, He flunked
in the bar exam. {3} [B26] fall from power, be ruined. Nalukápa ang
gahum sa ílang punduk sa pagkamatay sa ílang lídir, After the death of
their leader, their party lost its power.

lukas v [A123P; b] for laundry to become clean and white or for skin to
become lighter in complexion. Malukasan ang ímung pamánit ug dì ka
magpainit, Your skin will become lighter if you stay out of the sun.

lukat v [A; a] {1} redeem s.t. pawned or mortgaged. Marimáti ang
singsing ug dì nímu lukatun, The ring will be foreclosed if you do not
redeem it. {2} ransom. Gilukat na ang gikidnap, The man that was
kidnapped has been ransomed. {2a} redeem, save (figurative). Malukat ku
ra gihápun siya sa íyang kalisud, I can save her from her difficulties.
{2b} redeem, compensate for. Ang íyang kaligdung makalukat sa kalaksut
sa íyang dagway, His good manners make up for his ugly face. {2c} — sa
signus v [A1; a12] in folk belief, an occurrence or happening which
spares a person’s life by taking s.o. who dies in his stead. Gituhúan
nga lukatun ang signus sa tag-íya sa íyang mga buhì, It is believed
that domestic animals spare their owners from death by dying in their
stead. {3} pay a fee and get s.t. back that one had fixed or reworked.
Lukata nag gipaáyu nímung rilu, Go pick up the watch you had repaired
now. {4} pay for tokens of privilege like tickets, licenses, etc.
Mularga giyud ku kay nakalukat na kug tíkit, I’m really going to leave
now because I already paid for my ticket. Díay písus ilukat ug sidula,
Here is one peso to pay for a residence certificate. {5} — ug áway,
lális [A12] get involved in a dispute or fight. Ayawg tambag ánang
lantúgì kay makalukat kag lális, Don’t give advice to people who are
arguing because you will just get trouble for yourself. n {1} amount
for redemption or ransom. {2} fee for having s.t. made or repairs done.
-an(←) = lukat, n. Pila may ákung lukátan (lukat) ning sinináa? How
much do I pay to have this dress sewn?

lúkat v [AB12; a1] uproot s.t., prying the roots out of the ground. Ang
bagyu mauy nakalúkat (nakapalúkat) sa lumbuy, The typhoon uprooted the
lumbuy tree. Lukáta nang muhun ug ibalhin, Dig out that buried landmark
and move it.

lukay n coconut palm leaves. lukaylúkay {1} the bridge of the nose,
including the central bony ridge that separates the nostrils. {2} =
hanlulúkay. han-r-(←) see hanlulúkay.

lukba v [AB12; a] uproot a finger or toenail. Nagkalukba ang íyang kuku
nga nalaswahan, His toenail that got scalded is falling off. Tug-an
arun dì lukbáhun ímung kuku. Confess so they don’t pull your
fingernails out.

lukbun see lubuk.

lukdu v {1} [A; c1] carry a load on the head. Mas sayun pag lukdúhun
(lukdúun, ilukdu) nákù ang duwang, It would be easier for me to carry
the basin on my head. {2} [c6] for one to be so many years old. Bísan
pa sa katuígan nga íyang gilukdu batan-un siyang tan-áwun, He carries
his years well. He still looks young. {3} — ug kalbásà [A] be held back
a grade. Makalukdu ka giyug kalbásà ug dì ka magtuun, You will fail the
grade if you don’t study.

lukdulukdu n name given to many species of ornamental ferns.

lukgaw n the slender-billed cuckoo dove: Macropygia phasianella.

lukguk a one-testicled, having one testicle not descended. Ang lukguk
dì kapamabdus, A man with only one testicle cannot get a woman
pregnant.

lukim v {1} [A; c6] tuck in, put in between two hugging surfaces. Si
Nánay pay mulukim sa ákung púlu, Mother tucks my shirt in for me.
Ilukim ang kwarta sa libru arun mahúping, Put the peso bill between the
pages of the book to make it smooth. {2} [c6] give a little money to
s.o. who would naturally refuse it in such a way that he will accept it
(putting it into his pocket). Ilukim lang ning písus dihà pára
panigarilyu, Here’s a peso for cigarettes. {3} [A; b(1)] sew a fold
into a garment. Ákung gilukiman ang ákung sinínà kay taas ra kaáyu, I
sewed a fold in my dress to make it shorter because it was too long.

lukimya = lyukimya.

luking a knock-kneed. Dáan na siyang luking sa íyang pagkatáwu, She has
been knock-kneed since birth.

lukip v [A; c] enclose or insert s.t. in a letter. Ilukip ring bayinti
sa birtdi kard, Enclose this twenty-peso bill in the birthday card.

lukluk v {1} [A3; c] go, put into a tight or hidden place. Sawang
naglukluk sa kakugnan, A snake lurking in the grass. Ilukluk ang kwarta
sa sikrítu, Put the money into your watch pocket. {2} [A; c] get s.o.
into a job (slang). Ang uyuan níyang kungrisman mauy naglukluk níya sa
Kustum, His uncle who is a Congressman got him into the Customs. a put
in such a way that it is hidden or not easy to get at. Lukluk kaáyung
pagkabutang sa tutbrás sa iláwum sa bág, The toothbrush was put way in
the bottom of the bag.

lukmay v {1} [AB12; a12] for feelings to become or be made soft such
that a person is persuaded. Ang íyang tíngug mulukmay sa labing tig-a
nga kasingkásing, Her voice will soften the hardest of hearts.
Nagkalukmay ang íyang balatían sa tantu námung hinangyù, Our imploring
is gradually softening his feelings. {2} [B126N; c1] be dejected.
Nanlukmay si Maryu pagkahibáwung nahagbung siya sa burd, Mario was
dejected when he learned he had failed the board exam. a having a
dejected look. ma-un a having the quality of softening or soothing
feelings.

lukmuy a having a crestfallen, dejected look on the face. v [B126; c1]
get a dejected, crestfallen look on the face. Malukmuy giyud si Nardu
ug makahibáwu siyang nahagbung sa burd, Nardo will surely be
crestfallen when he learns that he flunked the board examination.

luksu v {1} [A; a] jump. Miluksu ang ungguy sa kalípay, The monkey
jumped up and down with joy. Luksúa lag kanal kay way latayan, Just
jump over the ditch because there is no span. Bintánang íyang
giluksúan, The window he jumped down from. {2} [A2] skip a grade in
school. Miluksu kanà siyag grádu mau nga naapsan ku níya, He skipped a
grade in school so he has caught up with me now. n distance or height
jumped. hi-/ ha- v [B1256] jump involuntarily. Nahaluksu siya sa
kakurat, He jumped involuntarily when he was startled.

luktun n young of a locust.

lúku a stupid in action. Lúku. Ngánung mitug-an man ka nga wà ka
pangutan-a? You fool! Why did you let on when nobody even asked you?
v [AN2; a2] make a fool of s.o. Ilára tits. Lukúha si Lúla mu, Don’t
try to fool me, buddy. Fool your grandmother. — diamur a gone crazy
because of love. v [B12] go crazy from love. Nalúku diamur ang ulitáwu
sukad bulagi sa íyang trátu, The young man went crazy after his girl
friend left him. lukuluku a somewhat stupid or foolish. kalukúhan
n foolish doings. maN-r-(→) n one who makes a fool of people.

lúkù v {1} [B6; c1] be curled up. Ilúkù (lukúa) ímung láwas arun masúd
ka sa baril, Curl your body up so you can get into the barrel.
{1a} loaf in bed. Bísag taas na ang adlaw naglúkù lang gihápun siya,
The sun is high in the sky, but he is still lying around in bed.
{2} [B1256] fall down in a curled up position. Nalúkù (nahilúkù) siya
sa kanal human ku patíri, He fell curled up in the ditch after I kicked
him. (→) n piece of cloth formed into a ring used as a cushion when
carrying a load on the head. v [A; b] place a cushion of coiled cloth
on the head. Kinahanglang maglukù ka ug dúna kay lukdúhun, You should
put a cushion on your head when you carry a load on it. lukùlúkù
n inside of the knee joints.

lukub_1 v [A; b] {1} close and lock. Grábi sad nímung nakalukub sa
pwirta dì na man maabli, You sure bolted the door hard. I can’t get it
open. {2} enclose s.t. in an area or by putting s.t. over it. Pagsígig
hílak kay lukban ta ka sa kasilyas, Go on, keep crying and I’ll lock
you in the bathroom. Lukbi ang kan-un arun dì tugdúnan sa lángaw, Cover
the rice so the flies won’t get on it. Gilukban ang lagwirtag paril,
The garden was enclosed inside a wall. n {1} shutter. {2} cover.
{3} space enclosed. Túa si Máma sa lukub sa kwartu, Mother is inside
the room. {4} k.o. fish corral for impounding fish in a receding tide.

lukub_2 n k.o. chisel with a curved (concave-convex) cutting edge. Ang
lukub mauy gamítun sa pagkúlit, The curved chisel is used for carving.

lúkub v {1} [A1; b6(1)] wrap up in s.t. flat. Naglúkub ku sa hábul kay
gitugnaw ku, I wrapped myself up in a blanket because I felt cold.
{2} [A; b] for an atmospheric condition to engulf an area. Milúkub ang
kangitngit sa kalibútan, Darkness engulfed the world.

lukublukub n k.o. starfish with poisonous spines.

lúkud = kulúkud.

lukun n k.o. large shrimp with short and small claws.

lúkun v [AB456; a12] coil up, coil s.t. up, usually in several coils.
Naglúkun siyag nuug arun himúung lukun paglukdu níya sa kahun, He
rolled a piece of cloth into a coil to cushion the box he was carrying
on his head. Dúnay sawa nga naglúkun sa tugkaran, There is a large
snake coiled up in the yard. Lukúna ang hús ug hipúsa, Coil the hose
and put it away. (→) n {1} s.t. coiled. {2} piece of coiled cloth used
as a cushion for carrying a load on the head. — sa búlak n wreath. -an
n inside of the knees. lukunlúkun = -an.

lúkung v [A; a12] make a coil, form a circle from s.t. stiff. Naglúkung
kug alambring gihímung ríng, I coiled a piece of wire to make into a
basketball ring. Lukúnga ang alambri ug isang-at, Coil the wire and
hang it up. (→) n s.t. coiled. — sa búlak n wreath. lukunglúkung
n inside of the knees.

lukup v {1} [AB2; a12] do s.t. to the entire area of s.t. Mulukup sà
kug súruy sa syudad, I will wander all over the city. Dì kang kalukup
ug tanum sa lapad níyang yútà, You can’t plant every inch of his vast
lands. Nagkalukup na sa lungsud ang pisti, The epidemic is spreading
all over the town. Lukpag silhig ang sawug, Sweep the entire floor.
{2} [B1256; a12] do s.t. to each and every one or thing. Nalukup kug
pangutána báhin nímu, I asked just about everybody where to find you.
{3} [B12] be up to the ears in debt. Nalukup na kining átung balhíbu sa
útang, We’re up to the ears in debt (lit. every single hair of our body
is in debt). lukuplúkup v [A12; a12] go over almost the entire area of
s.t. Nalukuplúkup na níyag súruy ang mga dagkung syudad sa Amirika, He
has gone to almost all the big cities in America.

lukut_1 v [A2; b6] leave a mark or cut into the flesh. Milukut ang
patiyan sa kabáyù, The bellyband cut into the horse’s flesh. Naluktan
ang íyang kamut sa gapus, The bonds left a mark on his arms.

lukut_2 n edible excretion from a k.o. sea cucumber called dungsul,
similar in appearance to bean threads, but green, tightly curled up.

lúkut v {1} [AB; ac6] roll up, cause s.t. to do so. Mulúkut ang dáhun
inigkaláyà, The leaf will roll up when it is withered. Lukúta ang banig
inigmata nímu, Roll up the mat when you wake up. Ilúkut ang panaptun sa
káhuy, Wrap the cloth around the wood. {1a} — sa banig v [A; c1] for
political protegees to vacate a position when their political party
loses. {2} [B126] for the body to get rolled over by some force.
Nalúkut siya uban sa bawud, He rolled with the waves. {3} [B126] be
beaten badly in a contest. Nalúkut si Sirhing sa miáging iliksiyun,
Serging was crushed during the last election. paN-, panga-, lukutlukut
v [A3] for dirt on the body to come off in rolls when scrubbed or
rubbed. À, nangalúkut (naglukutlukut, nanlúkut) man lang ágis íyang
tagiptip nga gilúgud, My! How the dirt on his body comes off in rolls
when you rub it!

lúla (not without l) title for grandmother or any woman old enough to
be one’s grandmother. v [A; a12] call s.o. lúla.

lúlan v [A; c] board, put on a vehicle. Ilúlan ang bátà sa bisiklíta,
Put the child on the bicycle. n s.o. or s.t. aboard a vehicle.

lúlaw v [B] wake up late, stay in bed long. Ngánung naglúlaw ka man,
nag-unsa ka man gabíi? Why are you staying in bed long this morning?
What did you do last night?

lulhu v [AN; c1] roll up sleeves or pants. Makig-áway sigúru siya kay
nanglulhu man, He must be preparing to fight because he is rolling up
his sleeves. Lulhúa (ilulhu) ímung karsúnis iniglabang nátù sa subà,
Roll up your pants when we cross the stream.

lúlid n crippled due to a deformity or underdevelopment of the legs.
v [B126] become a cripple. Nalúlid siya kay gitakbúyag pulyu, He was
crippled after his bout with polio.

lulingháyaw v [A; c] take a trip, go out for leisure. Ilulingháyaw nákù
siya sa Hungkung, I’ll take her on a tour to Hong Kong. n leisure.

lulipap n lollipop.

lúlu (not without l) title for grandfather or any other man old enough
to be one’s grandfather with whom one is close. v [A; a12] call s.o.
grandpa.

lùlù v {1} [A; abc] masturbate. Dì na muutug bísan pag lùlúun, I can’t
get an erection, even if I masturbate. Ug dì ka kaiyut níya lùlúi na
lang, If you can’t have her, just think of her while you abuse yourself
(lit. masturbate for her). Ilùlù na lang ang ímung kahígal, Just
masturbate your craving away. {2} [A13; a12] use equipment improperly.
Kinsa na puy naglùlù áning makinilyang nagubà na man pud? Who has been
abusing my typewriter? It’s broken again. Hala, lùlúa arun makailis ka,
Go on abuse it so you can buy me a new one. n {1} penis (coarse). {2} —
mu expression of disgust at a person. Lùlù nímu, ingun kag mukúyug ka,
wà man lagi, You SOB. You said you were coming along, but you didn’t.
Diyis sa lùlù mu! Háin may kwartáhun ta run, Hell, if I’ll give you a
dime. Where am I going to get the money from! {3} expression of disgust
in general. Lùlù! Pirmi lang patay way hárì, Shit! It’s always tails,
never heads!

lúlut a tender eyes or looks. Lúlut nga mata sa inahan, A mother’s
tender eyes. v [b8] for s.o. to be tenderly loved. Nalulútan giyud ning
batáa sa mga ginikánan kay bugtung, The parents love this child dearly
because he’s an only child.

lúluy a sleepy, dull eyes. v [A23B; b6] for the eyes to become drooping
or dull. Mulúluy (malúluy) giyud ang mata ug way túg, Your eyes will
start to droop if you have gone without sleep.

lumà v {1} [A23; b(1)] for a liquid to seep through s.t. and stain it.
Milumà ang dugù sa bindáhi, Blood seeped through the bandage and
stained it. Gilum-an nag buling ang kwilyu, Dirt has stained the collar
where sweat seeped into the cloth. {2} [b6] leave a mark. Milumà ang
banig sa ímung nawung, The mat you were lying on has left marks on your
face. n {1} stain or dirt carried by liquid. {2} mark. pa- v [A; b6(1)]
trace on s.t. to reproduce a copy. Mupalumà ku sa ímung drúwing, I’ll
trace your drawing.

lúmà v [B126] be overshadowed by s.t. else, put into the background
(used by speakers influenced by Tagalog). Malúmà nang púlu nímug
isul-ub ku tung ákung mahalun, Your sport shirt will be relegated to
the background if I wear my expensive one.

lúmad v [A2; b(1)] stay, stick long on. Mulúmad kahà ku niánang
trabahúa kun dì pa maáyu ug súhul? Would I stick to that job if the pay
wasn’t good? (→) n native, natural-born citizen. -nun n of native
origin, make, or quality. Lumadnun nga sáyaw, Native dance.

lumag v {1} [B3(1); b6] for dirt, color to come off s.t. soaked in
water. Mulumag (malumag) ang buling ug ímung ihúmul úsà ang mga
bulingun, Some of the dirt will come out if the clothes are soaked in
water. Naglumag ug kulur úbi ang itum sinínà, The black dress exuded
violet color on the water. {2} [B3] for the results of bad behavior to
come out. Milumag na ang pagsígig súruy, mimabdus na siya, Now her
habits of going out have borne fruit: she got pregnant. n colored juice
that is squeezed out from s.t. that fades.

*lumaluma pa- v [A3] undertake to do s.t. one is incapable of doing.
Ayawg palumalumag áyu sa radiyu kay musamut hinúun nag kadáut, Don’t
take it on yourself to try and fix the radio. It’ll just get worse.
palumalumahun, mapalumalumahun a daring to take on s.t. which one may
not be capable of doing.

lumat n {1} tubers left accidentally in the ground after the harvest
which sprout again. {2} trait that is inherited in a family. {3} highly
contagious skin eruptions or lesions on the soles of the feet which
occur after an eruption of yaws (tabukaw). The lumat are roundish with
small fleshy protuberances and continually emit watery pus. v {1} [A2;
b6] for tubers left in the ground by accident to sprout. Mulumat ra
gihápun ang mga unud sa úbing wà nátù makit-i, The yams we failed to
find will sprout again. {2} [A; b] for a certain trait to be inherited.
Basta kalíwat ug búang mulumat giyud, If insanity runs in the family,
it will sooner or later show in the children. Kinsa may gilumatan
niíning íyang batásang ngil-ad? Who does she take after with her bad
behavior? {3} [A; b4] for a bad character trait in a person to make its
appearance. Mulumat giyud ang íyang pagkamaldítu kun makainum, His
mischievous ways come out when he takes a drink. {4} [a4b4] get lumat.
Gilumat (gilumatan) si Markus, Marcos has lumat.

lumáwig see lawig.

lumay n a magical love potion used to cause s.o. to be irresistibly
drawn to the user. v {1} [A; b5] use a love potion on s.o. Kinsa guy
mulumay ánang húmuk ug ilung, No need to use a love potion on her when
she is so easy to conquer. {2} [A; a1] draw s.o. irresistibly with an
attractive quality. Ang íyang kabuútan mauy naglumay nákù ngadtu níya,
Her good attributes made me irresistibly attracted to her. -an, -an(←)
a having a lumay.

*lúmay ma- a slow and effeminate in speech. Malúmay kaáyung musulti nà
si Lusyu kay bayutun man gud, Lucio speaks slow like a girl because he
is effeminate.

lumbà v {1} [A2C; ac3] race, have a race. Lumbáun nátù. Ang mangíkug
muy mubangka, Let’s race it out. The one who is last will pay. Lumbáun
nátù ang átung bakì, Let’s have our frogs race. {2} [b8] outrace.
Hilumbaan ku níyag kalígù kay wà siya manabun, He beat me bathing
because he didn’t soap himself. {3} [C23] outdo each other, as if to
see who can do it the more. Naglumbà ug katúlug, They are sleeping as
if they were trying to outdo each other. Naglumbà ug isturyag hambug,
Outdo each other in telling tall stories. n race. -anay v [C; c3] race
with each other. Naglumbaánay ang mga balud sa lapyahan, The waves are
racing against each other to the shore. ka- n one’s opponent in a race.
-anan n racetrack.

lumbaglumbag v [ASP] writhe, twist in pain. Naglumbaglumbag siya sa
kasakit sa íyang tiyan, He writhed in pain with his stomachache.

lumbágu n lumbago, a rheumatic pain in the joints of the lumbar region.

lumban n turban shells, k.o. edible univalve. mata ug — the operculum
of turban shells (which resembles an eye).

lumbang n large forest tree, cultivated for its fruit, the seed of
which yields an oil similar to linseed oil: Aleurites moluccana.

lumbay n {1} row or column of units. {2} k.o. tic-tac-toe game for two
players. A square with nine dots (three on each side, one in the
middle) is drawn and the players take turns putting down their stones
on the dots. Whoever gets a row of three stones, wins. v {1} [A; ac]
queue up, fall in line facing in the direction of the line; do, put in
a row. Naglumbay ang daghang pumapálit ug prankíyu, Lots of people were
queuing up to buy stamps. Naglumbay siya sa mga pyísa, He is lining up
the spare parts. Lumbáya ang pagtanum sa humay, Plant the rice in rows.
Ilumbay ning silya sa únang lumbay, Put this chair in the first row.
{2} [AC] play lumbay. -an(→) n a board for playing lumbay.

lumbiya n sago palm, the trunk of which is used to starch and the
leaves for roofing: Metroxylon sagus.

lumbuy = lungbuy.

lúmi n dish of long Chinese noodles, usually served in broth.

lumì n crease, fold, wrinkles. v [A; a] get to be all wrinkled,
creased. Ayawg lumia nang bag-ung inutaw, Don’t wrinkle your newly
ironed shirt. -un a wrinkled, creased.

lúmid v {1} [A; c] wallow or roll in mud, flour, etc. Ang bábuy mulúmid
sa lápuk, Pigs roll in the mud. Ilúmid ang pinirítung ságing sa asúkar,
Roll the fried bananas in the sugar. {2} [B456] roll in sin, vice.
Naglúmid sa salà ang mga babáying nagbaligyà sa ílang dungug, Women who
sell their reputation are wallowing in sin.

luminarya n numerous lighted candles placed along the streets during
religious processions or in the church during services. v [A; b] light
candles for a religious procession or church service.

lúming a tender, soft voice or way of speaking. v [B2; b6] for the
voice to become soft and tender. Mulúming dáyun íyang tíngug ug
ikasulti ang uyab, Her voice suddenly becomes tender when she speaks
with her boy friend.

lumiru = numiru.

lum-it n crease, wrinkle. Ang lum-it sa karsúnis nahíwì, The crease in
the trousers came out crooked. v [AB126; a1] crease, get creased. Ayawg
lum-íta ang bag-ung pinalansa nímung sayal, Don’t crease your skirt.
You just ironed it. a creased.

lumlum v {1} [A; b(1)] sit on eggs. Wà pa mapisù ang gilumlúmang itlug,
The eggs the hen was brooding have not hatched yet. {1a} [b] sit on
papers which need processing or attention. Kadtung aplikisiyun nímu sa
lún gilumlúman lang, They are just sitting on your application for a
loan. {2} [A13] stay inside s.t. Dúgay na siyang lumlum sa íla kay
maúlaw nga mupakítà, He stayed cooped up in his house for a long time
because he was ashamed to show himself. {2a} [A13] for feelings to be
in the breast. Ang kasína nga naglumlum sa íyang dughan, Enviousness
that is stored up in her heart. Naglumlum sa dughan ni Kaluy ang
kamíngaw kang Plúra, Caloy feels loneliness for Flora.

lumpag v [AB12; a] {1} crumble down; cause s.t. to do so. Nagkalumpag
na ang paril, The wall is crumbling. Hilumpagan ku sa kinamádang láta,
The cans that were stacked up neatly came tumbling down on me.
{2} bring to a downfall. Ayawg lumpága ang íyang mga damgu, Do not
destroy her hopes. Lumpágun nátù ang gahum sa impiryalismu, We shall
overcome the power of imperialism.

lumpánug v [A23; b6] flee suddenly and rapidly to a far place.
Milumpánug lagi pagkakità sa ákung pistúla, He sure got out of there
fast when he saw my gun. Layù ang gilumpanúgan sa ákung hunàhúnà
samtang namínaw sa diskursu, My mind wandered as I was listening to the
speech.

lumpat v [A2] bounce up suddenly. Milumpat ákung kasingkásing sa
kahikurat, My heart leaped in sudden surprise. lumpatlumpat v [A; b6]
bounce up and down. Naglumpatlumpat ang dyíp sa batsihun nga dálan, The
jeep was bouncing up and down on the bumpy road.

lumpayat v {1} [A13; b6] jump vigorously up and down. Ngánung
naglumpayat man ang mga bátà sa katri? Why are the children jumping up
and down vigorously on the bed? {2} [A; c] jump up and down to get
free, tug against s.t. that restricts movement. Milumpayat ang ungguy
sa halwa pagkakità sa ságing, The monkey jumped up and down in the cage
upon seeing the banana. Naglumpayat ang irù sa huktanan pagkakità sa
iring, The dog jumped up and down tugging against his leash upon seeing
the cat.

lumpì, lumping a dented, having a dent. v [A3P; a] dent. Ayawg lumpínga
ang táru nga igbabaligyà, Don’t dent the kerosene can we’re planning to
sell. Lumpíngi ang kílid sa láta, Make a dent in the side of the can.
n dent.

lumpiyà n egg roll, a dish consisting of a thin pancake filled with
sauteed meat and vegetables. — nga prisku an egg roll with the pancake
soft and pliant. — nga prítu an egg roll with the pancake fried crisp.
v [A; ac] have, make egg rolls.

lumpu v [B126; a4] feel tired and sleepy after taking a swim. Gilumpu
(nalumpu) ang bátà human malígù, The child felt tired and sleepy after
taking a swim.

lumpù a lame, cripple. Dì siya makalakaw kay lumpù, He can’t walk
because he is lame. v [B12; b5] be, become lame.

lumpung v [AC3; a] {1} for s.t. concave to fit or be made to fit snugly
in s.t. else convex. Lumpúnga ang mga básu arun sayun dad-un, Put the
glasses inside of one another to make them easy to carry. Ilumpung ning
basurahan sa láin, Put this trash can on top of the other. {2} for two
or more things to be or to take place at the same time when they should
not be overlapping. Lisud nang maglumpung átung uyab kay gastu, It’s
hard to have several girl friends at the same time because it’s
expensive. Bísag lumpúngun mung duha, káya gihápun mu nákù, Even if
it’s two against one, I can still beat you.

lumput n home-woven cloth of a checkered design and with a plain weave.
v [A13] wear clothing of this weave.

lumu a tender, gentle in personality. Lumu nga kasingkásing ni Hisus,
Jesus’ tender heart. v [B2; b6] become gentle, tender. Nagkalumu íyang
tíngug samtang nagkabugnaw ang íyang kasukù, His voice got gentler as
his anger cooled off. (←) n tenderloin cut of meat. ma- = lumu, a.

lúmù v [A; a1] crush s.t. out of shape without breaking it. Nalúmù ang
munyíkang ákung natumban, The plastic doll that I stepped on got
crushed out of shape. Ayaw lumúa nang láta kay ákung gamítun, Don’t
crush that can because I’m going to use it.

lumud n k.o. porpoise.

lúmud v [A2C; c1] {1} be together with s.o. in a place designed for
one. Naglúmud silang tulu sa gamayng katri, The three of them slept
together in a small bed. {2} stay with s.o. in the same house.
Nakalúmud ku níla ug unum ka búlan, I have lived with them for six
months.

lumuk a for the hair to be oily after oil has been applied to it. v [B;
a] be, become oily. Ákung lumukun ímung buhuk sa hisù kay ákung
hingut-an, I’ll put lots of hair oil in your hair to get rid of the
lice.

lúmun v {1} [AC; c] live, keep together. Milúmun ang bátang ílu sa
íyang tiyù, The orphaned child went to live with his uncle. Naglúmun
sila bísag wà pa makasal, They lived together even though they weren’t
married. Ayg ilúmun ang dunut nga mangga sa mga maáyu, Don’t put the
rotten mangoes together with the good ones. {2} [A; a12] crumple or
roll up a piece of cloth into a ball. Naglúmun siyag nuug íyang
gihímung tutuytútuy, She made a ball out of the cloth to make a false
breast.

lúmung v [A13; b6] for water to collect and form a pool. Naglúmung ang
túbig sa tugkaran kay way kagwaan, The water formed a pool in the front
yard because there was no way for it to exit.

lumus_1 v {1} [AB16; b1] drown, get drowned. Naglumus siya kay
nadispirádu, She drowned herself because she got frustrated in love.
Gidaghanun sa tubà nga makalumus (makapalumus), Enough toddy to drown
you. Lumsan tikaw sa subà, animála ka, I’ll drown you in the river, you
beast! Subang nalumsan níya, The river he drowned in. {1a} — sa sabaw
v [B1256] disappear into thin air (usually said of a father deserting a
family). Nalumus sa sabaw ang amahan niíning batáa, The father of this
child disappeared into thin air. {2} [B1256] for an engine to get
flooded with fuel. Dì muandar ang makina kay nalumus, The engine won’t
start because it’s flooded. {3} [B126] suffocate, choke in an embrace.
Hápit ku malumus sa íyang gakus, I almost suffocated to death in her
embrace. {4} [A2; b(1)] overwhelm with feelings. Kaguul nga milumus sa
kasingkásing, A heart drowned in grief.

lumus_2 = ung-ung, n1.

lúmut n general term for lichens or algae of the sort that attach
themselves. v [b4] {1} be covered with moss or seaweed. Gilumútan ang
lubut sa tangki, The water tank is covered with algae on the bottom.
{2} be left idle (until moss covers it). Gilumútan na lang siya, dága
lang gihápun, The years have come and gone, but she remains single. -un
a covered with moss or green seaweeds. lumutlumut n tiny lichens which
grow on the trunks of palms and other trees, or on the sides of water
containers not cleaned, greenish in color.

lumuy, lúmuy a soft and delicate, not rigid. Lúmuy (lumuy) ang buktun
sa way trabáhu, One who doesn’t work has soft arms. Lumuy nga tsíku, A
soft sapodilla. v {1} [B2; b6] become soft and delicate, not rigid.
{2} [BN26] become momentarily weak on experiencing a great emotion.
Nalúmuy ku pagkabatì nákung nakadaug ku sa swipstik, My legs gave way
when I heard that I won the sweepstakes. (→) n a breed of pigs that
easily grows fat, and with soft and thin skin. lumyan n variety of
jackfruit (nangkà) the flesh of which is soft, sweet, and juicy with no
dry pulp.

lún_1 n lawn. -máwir lawn mower. v [A; a2] cut the grass with a lawn
mower. Nindut nag lún kay ákung gilunmáwir, The lawn looks good now
because I mowed it.

lún_2 n loan money from the bank. v [A; b6] loan from the bank. Unsang
bangkúha ang ímung gilúnan? What bank did you get your loan from?

-l-un alternant for -unun, added to almost all the bases to which -unun
is added, usually with no difference in meaning from -unun. Kalan-un,
Things to eat. Palalítun, Things to buy.

lúna n canvas. Ang tulda hinímù sa lúna, The tent is made of canvas.

lunà n vacant place or area; piece of land. Dúna pay lunà sa yútà nga
kabalayan, There is still space on the land to build a house. May lunà
pa ba ku sa ímung kasingkásing? Do I still have a place in your heart?
hi-/ha- v [B1256] happen to be in a position. hi-/ha-(←) v [B1256]
{1} be settled down to a place or position. Dì ku mubalhin ug
lingkuránan kay nahilúnà na ku diri, I won’t move to another seat
because I am already settled here. {2} be at ease, not restless or
nervous. Wà siya mahilúnà nga nagpaábut sa nanganak níyang asáwa, He
couldn’t sit still waiting for his wife to have her baby.
pahi-/paha-(←) v [A; c] {1} put oneself or s.t. in proper or convenient
position. Mipahilúnà siyag lingkud únà musúgud ug káun, He seated
himself properly before he started to eat. Ipahilúnag maáyu ang karga
sa bisiklíta, Put the load on the bicycle securely. {2} accommodate
s.o. in a good position or job. Ang manínuy níyang kunsihal mauy
nagpahilúna níya sa sitihul, Her godfather, who was a councilor, got
her a job in City Hall.

lúna dimiyil n honeymoon. v [A; b6(1)] have a honeymoon.

lunag v [A2] for the results of bad behavior to come out. Milunag na
giyud ang kalaag ánang bayhána. Gipamabdúsan, Now that woman’s
propensity for gadding about has borne fruit. She got herself pregnant.

lúnang v {1} [A; b6] wallow. Naglúnang ang gibunù sa kaugalíngung dugù,
The murder victim is wallowing in his own blood. Ang gilunángan sa
kábaw, The place the carabao wallows. {2} [A] be in a bad state to an
excessive degree. Ang kalibútan nga naglúnang sa kasal-ánan, The world
that is wallowing in sin. Ang katawhan nga naglúnang sa katimáwà,
People wallowing in poverty. -an(→) n mud pool for the water buffalo to
wallow in.

lunas n k.o. smooth bamboo with a yellowish-green trunk: Bambusa
vulgaris.

lun-as v [B12] for plants or flowers to become withered, faded, or
dried up. Ang kaínit mauy nakalun-as (nakapalun-as) sa mga rúsas, The
hot sun caused the rose plants to wither and dry up. Ilísi ang mga
búlak nga nagkalun-as na, Replace those flowers since they are
withering and fading.

lunaw v [A; b6] cook chopped sweet potatoes with water. Maglunaw ku
áring kamúti pára miryinda, I’ll boil chopped up sweet potatoes for my
afternoon snack. n chopped, boiled sweet potatoes. -in- = lunaw, n.

lunay v [B2] for pain or illness to subside. Mulunay ang suul sa tiyan
ug tambálan, The stomach ache will subside if you take medicine.

lundag v [B; b] sink to the bottom. Manggáwas ta sa dì pa mulundag ang
barku, Let’s go over the side before the boat sinks.

Lundris_1 n London.

lundris_2 = alundris_1.

lunduk_1 v [B345; b4] for the wind to stop blowing. Human sa bagyu
milunduk ang hángin, The wind stopped blowing after the storm.
Gilundúkan mi sa hángin sa lawud, We were becalmed in the middle of the
sea.

lunduk_2 v [AB3(1)6; a2] for things usually soft and having length to
fall, settle down gathering in a heap; cause them to do so. Milunduk
(nalunduk) sa salug ang kurtína pagkaputul sa higut, The curtain fell
down in a heap on the floor when the string snapped. Siyay naglunduk sa
mga bulingun sa suuk, She heaped the dirty clothes in the corner.
n k.o. affliction where part of the intestine settles down into the
scrotum. a having a large scrotum due to such an affliction.

lunga_1 n sesame seeds used for tidbit decorations or flavoring on
sweets: Sesamium orientale.

lunga_2, lungà v {1} [A2C23; b(1)] give up doing s.t. which one had
been doing with great expenditure of effort. Wà siya mulungag pangítà
sa nawálang anak, He didn’t give up in his search for the lost child.
Ayaw siya lung-i (lunghi) ug sugsū́g hangtud muhílak, Don’t stop your
relentless teasing until she cries. {2} [B26] stop from bothering,
subside. Mulunga lang ang íyang húbak kun mutumar siyag tambal, Her
asthma attacks do not stop until she takes her medicine. a not
persisting in one’s work, working off and on. -an(←) = lungà, a.

lúngab n cave, pit, or any large hole in the ground. v [AB12; b] dig a
cave or pit, become one.

lúngag v [A; b] dig, bore a hole. Maglúngag kug pára kumpus pit, I will
dig a hole for a compost pit. Nalúngag ang atup nga nahulgan sa lubi,
The roof got a hole in it after a coconut fell through it. Lungági ang
láta sa litsi, Punch a hole in the milk can. (→) n {1} hole. Lungag sa
dágum, Eye of a needle. Lungag sa ilung, Nostrils. {2} vagina
(euphemism).

lung-ag v [A; a] boil rice or any carbohydrate until the product is
cooked and dry. Lung-ága nang ságing hilaw pára pamáhaw, Cook the green
bananas for breakfast. -in- n {1} staple being cooked. Sigáig
linung-ag, Turn up the fire under the rice. {2} cereals or
carbohydrates prepared by boiling, as opposed to any other way.
Linung-ag ságing palita ayaw nang minantikaan, Buy the cooked bananas,
not the fried ones.

lungas a {1} given to much playing and moving around. {2} for females
to be lacking in modesty and proper restraint. v {1} [B; b6] move, play
around vigorously. Ayaw mu palábig lungas kay mangadagmà unyà mu, Don’t
keep running about; you might stumble and fall. Magkalungas giyud ang
bátà samtang magtubù, A child gets to be terribly active as it grows
bigger. {2} [B12; b6] for females to become wanting in modesty and
proper restraint. Nalungas ílang anak kay nagpúnayg kuyugkúyug ánang
hustis, Their daughter started to be immodest in her behavior because
of her association with that hostess.

lungay a {1} drooping, hanging loosely. Ang puya lungay ug líug, A very
young baby can’t hold its head up. {2} unable to stand or flex
physically defective muscles, as if without bones. Ang lungay nga bátà
nagsígi lag higdà kay dì man makabángun, A crippled child lies in bed
all his life for he cannot get up. v {1} [B] droop, hang in a drooping
way. Nalungay na ang ákung úlu sa kakatulugun, My head is drooping from
sleepiness. Nagkalungay na ang sanga nga nabug-atan sa búnga, The
branch is drooping down more and more because it is so laden with
fruit. {2} [B126] turn out to have the defect of lungay, a2.

lungbuy n {1} small tree with elliptic leathery leaves 6–12 cm.,
bearing clusters of juicy, oval fruit, dark purple, 1.5–2 cm. long:
Syzygium cumini. {2} the blunt-nosed lead of small-arm bullets which
resemble lungbuy fruits (slang). -in- having the color of lungbuy.
lápis -in- indelible pencil. -un a of the color of lungbuy.

lungdistans n {1} long-distance call. {2} long-distance passenger bus
or trip. Magsakit ákung likud ug byáhing lungdistans, My back aches
when I take long-distance trips. {3} long-distance shooting in
basketball. Maáyu siyang musiyát bísag lungdistans, He is good even in
long-distance shots. v {1} [A; c6] call by long-distance. {2} [A; c6]
make a long shot in basketball. {3} [A; a12] masturbate (from the
notion that one is getting sexual gratification thinking of s.o. not
present). Gilungdistans níya si Maríya nga nalígù, He masturbated
thinking of Maria taking a bath.

lunggù v [A; b] decapitate. Gilunggúan sa mga magahat ang misiyuníru,
The headhunters beheaded the missionary.

lunggub v [A; a2] grab, wrest s.t. away from s.o. Ayawg lunggúba ning
ritrátu kay nagtan-aw pa ku, Don’t grab the picture away because I am
still looking at it.

lunggung_1 v {1} [A3P; c1] keep inside, imprison, lock up. Daghang
trabáhung milunggung nákù sa upisína, Lots of work kept me imprisoned
in the office. Lunggúnga (ilunggung) ang mga bábuy sa álad, Lock the
pigs up in a pen. {2} [A; c1] shake a container in the hand to shuffle
things up. Lunggúnga (ilunggung) únà sa kamut ang dáyis únà iitsa,
Shake the dice in your hand before you throw them. {3} [AC; b(1)] bet
on dice thrown from a container. The one who bets on the number which
comes out wins. n game of dice of this sort. -an(→) n the container in
which the dice are shaken.

lunggung_2 v [AN; a12] cheat to gain. Gilunggung ku sa tindírang
migámit ug gantangang way aríyus, I was gypped by the vendor because
she used uncertified measures. Gilunggung ku nímu kay dì kung kamaung
mupúkir, You cheated me because I don’t know how to play poker.

lúngì v [A; a] wrench s.t. off to detach it. Kinsay galúngì sa buktun
sa munyíka? Who wrenched the arm off the doll? Lungía nang usa ka dawin
ságing, Get me a banana from the bunch.

lúngib n cave. v [B2; b6] form a cave or hole in the side of a slope.
Nalúngib ang kílid sa bungtud nga gikwári, The side of the mountain
that was quarried formed a cave.

lúngis v [A; a] wrench off, twist s.t. off its attachment. Mulúngis kug
usa ka dawin sa ímung ságing, I’ll take a banana from your bunch.

lungkab v [A; a1] break s.t. open by prying so as to get into it.
Kawatan ang naglungkab sa ámung baul, A robber broke our trunk open.
Lungkába ang kandádug way yáwi, Pry the lock open if there is no key.

lungkaub n thumping sound. Ang lungkaub sa mga túnub, The thumping
sound of footfalls. v {1} [A] make a thumping sound. Naglungkaub ang
mga balud nga mihasmag sa mga batu, The waves beat against the stone
with a thudding sound. {2} [A13] throb vigorously in the depths of
one’s feelings. Ang kayugut nga naglungkaub sa íyang dughan, Anger that
is raging in his heart. -in-, -in-(←) n heavy sound of thumping.

lungkì a limping, partially disabled in the leg, usually permanently.
v [B16; c1] walk with a limp. Naáyu túud siya sa pulyu apan nalungkì
giyud intáwun, He recovered from his polio, but now he walks with a
limp.

lunglayin n longline fishing.

lungnik n fifth of liquor. v {1} [B256] be a fifth full. Hápit
mulungnik (malungnik) ang písu nga idibul nga íyang gipalit, He bought
a peso’s worth of cooking oil which nearly filled a fifth. {2} [c1]
make it a fifth of liquor. Lungnikun (ilungnik) na lang kay daghan man
tang manginum, Let us buy a fifth because a lot of us are going to
drink.

lungnus n long-nosed pliers.

lungpli n {1} long-playing record. {2} lengthy monologue in a
conversation. v [c1] record s.t. on a long-playing record. Lungplihun
(ilungpli) ug diritsu ang ímung únang pláka, Make your first recording
a long-playing record.

lungslib n long-sleeved shirt. v [A; c1] wear, make into a long-sleeved
shirt.

lungsud n {1} town. {2} citizenry. Tunug na sa tibuuk lungsud nga
gipaangkan siya, It has been bruited about town that she has had a
child out of marriage. háring — n the electorate, sovereign people.
kalungsúran n towns. lungsuránun n local citizen. katagi- n one from
the same town. -nun a {1} pertaining to s.t. civic. Katungdánang
lungsudnun sa matag lungsuránun, Civic duty of each citizen.
{2} pertaining to the town or municipality. Mamahanding lungsudnun,
Municipal treasurer. maki-, maki-nun a civic-minded.

lungtad v [A2; b(1)] {1} last for a period of time. Makalungtad ug
dúgay ang isdà ug aysan, Fish will last long if you put them on ice. Wà
lungtári ug tris díyas ang ákung puása, My fast didn’t last for three
days. {2} stay with, at s.t. for a long time. Dì mu lungtáran ug míd
ánang inyung taras, No maid will stay long with you, the way you act.
pa- v [A; c1] make, cause to last. Ayaw palungtára (ipalungtad) ug
dúgay inyung dúmut, Don’t allow your desire for vengeance to last long.
malungtárun a durable.

lung tíbul n wedding, with reference to the banquet (colloquial).
Anus-a man ang lung tíbul? When are you getting hitched? v [A13] get
married.

lungùlungù v [B46; c1] for one’s head to sway or shake uncontrollably
as when drunk or in old age. Naglungùlungù na siya sa katigúlang, His
head tremors due to old age.

lungun n coffin. v [c1] bury in a coffin, as opposed to other modes of
burial.

lungutlungut v [B1456; b3] be restless, moving about and talking in
anger, exasperation, impatience to do s.t. Naglungutlungut siyang
makaapil sa banggà, He was restless in his impatience to take part in
the contest. Ang gisibat níyang alkansíya mauy íyang gilungutlungutan,
She rushed about in anger on account of her piggy bank which got
stolen.

lunhat v [B126; a2b3] have a relapse, most often said of sprains or
fractures or illness thought to be derived from them. Nalunhat íyang
piang kay nagpúnay siyag lungas, His sprain came back because he kept
moving around.

lunhaw a {1} for growing things, not fruit, to be green. Lunhaw nga
sibsibánan, Green pastures. {2} recent, young. Sa lunhawng kinabúhì sa
kabatan-un wà pa níya masinátì ang kapakyásan, He was a callow youth,
and had never experienced failure. v {1} [B2; b6] for growing things to
be green and fresh. Mulunhaw (malunhaw) ug bálik ang sagbut inig-abut
sa ting-ulan, The grass will become green again when the rains return.
{2} [a12] bring back s.t. to make it recent, young again. Tam-is
lunháwun ang malipáyun tang kabatan-un, It’s nice to reminisce on our
happy childhood.

Lúnis_1 n Monday. v see birnis. pa-(→) n work bee done on a Monday.
v [A; b6] hold a work bee on a Monday. Palunisi lang nang pagtúkud sa
taytáyan, Have the bridge built by a Monday work bee.

lúnis_2 n odd number.

lúnit v [A; a1b2] tweak the ears. Hinglunitan si Marta sa maistra kay
nagtábì, The teacher tweaked Martha’s ears because she was talking.
n action of tweaking.

lunlun a all of one kind, no mixture. Ang kinabúhì dì lunlun kalípay,
Life is not all happiness. v {1} [A1; c16] have all in one kind, no
mixture. Sagúlig pinágud mais ang tablíya, ayawg ilunlun (lunlúna) nga
kakaw, Mix some roasted corn in the chocolate tablet, don’t make it
pure cacao. {2} [A12C; b] be all together in a place. Dì ta makalunlun
ug lingkud sa píkas lingkuránan kay kúlag hángin ang ligid, We can’t
all stay on one side because the tire lacks air. Dì ta maglunlun dinhis
píkas kay malúnud unyà ta, Let’s not huddle on one side of the boat
because it might capsize.

lunsay a {1} pure, unadulterated. Lunsay nga gátas sa báka, Pure cow’s
milk. Lunsayng kaputlì nga wà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían, Unadulterated
innocence that has not been polluted by experience. {2} simple,
peaceful in way or outlook. Lunsay kaáyu ang kinabúhing banikanhun,
Farm life is very simple and peaceful. v [B1; c1] be simple or peaceful
in ways or outlook. Ang maglunsay sa kinahanglan dílì magápus sa útang,
One who is simple with his needs won’t get himself engulfed in debt.
Malunsay ang átung pamuyù ug mubíyà ka sa súgal, Our life would get
peaceful once you stop your gambling.

lunsing n k.o. very small, yellow banana, particularly delicious and
sweet, but not commercially grown.

lunsud = lungsud.

luntad = lungtad.

luntalunta v [A; c1] leap up and down in joy or to get free.
Miluntalunta ang kabáyù sa pagkakità sa bayi, The horse struggled to
get free when it saw the mare. Mahugnù ang lantay ug inyung
luntaluntáhan, The bamboo bed will collapse if you jump up and down on
it.

luntud v [AC; ac] for two things of about the same size to lie atop one
another, cause them to do so. Dì ka makaluntud ug libru sa Bibliya, You
can’t put a book on top of the Bible. Nagluntud silag higdà sa gip-ut
kaáyung bangkù, They lay on top of one another on the narrow bench.
Luntúra nang duha ka malíta, Put those two suitcases on top of one
another. luntudluntud v [AC23; c1] pile up, be piled up.
Nagluntudluntud ang mga sáku sa bugas, Sacks of rice are piled up.

lunu v [A3N; b6] for an animal to shed its skin or shell. Dinhay
naglunu nga hálas dinhi kay dúnay lunu nga gibyáan, A snake must have
shed its skin here because there’s an empty snakeskin left behind.
n skin or shell shed. linunhan = lunu, n.

lun-ub v [AB2; a12] for s.t. to get a big depression in it, cause it to
do so. Kinsay galun-ub sa palanggána? Gilingkúran tingáli, Who made a
big dent in the basin? S.o. must have sat on it. Húmuk malun-ub ang
hubun sa bátà, A child’s fontanel easily gets sunken. n rather large
depression.

lúnud_1 v {1} [A; a] sink s.t. Ang maldítu mauy naglúnud sa sakayan
nákung papil, The meany sunk my paper boat. {2} [B12; c1] — ang puhúnan
for capital to get used up. Magkalunud ang puhúnan sa nigusyung way
maáyung kwintáda, Business without proper accounting gradually exhausts
capital. — ang buwan n new moon. Hunas run kaáyu kay lúnud ang buwan,
We have an extra low tide today; it’s new moon. (→) v [B26; b4] for an
illness to settle. It is believed that an illness to get better must
come out in hives, rash, or the like, and if it does not do so, it
settles, thus becoming worse. Namatay siya kay nalunud (milunud) iyang
dáp, He died because his measles didn’t come out. Nabákul siya dihang
nalunuran sa íyang buti, He became a cripple after his smallpox sank.
a causing illnesses to sink. Makamatay nang lunud nga hilánat, A fever
that sinks can cause death. udtung — ang búwan half moon of the third
quarter.

lúnud_2 v {1} [A; c] put s.t. together with s.t. else which is being
processed. Lundi nag bugas ang túbig, Put some rice into the water now.
Ilúnud lag ímung bulingun sa ámù nga náa sa wásing masin, Just put your
dirty laundry together with ours that’s already in the washing machine.
{2} [A; c6] put in money, etc. to a pool. Ilúnud ring ákung bayinti sa
ímung pusta, Here’s my twenty pesos to put into your betting pool. —
palit n in cockfighting, a purchase of the cock where the owner is not
paid, but the value of the cock is made part of the bet. The purchaser
then proceeds to fight the cock. If the cock wins, the owner is paid
double the purchase price and the purchaser keeps the cock. If the cock
loses the owner is given nothing (since his purchase price was his
bet). — pátay a die-hard, inveterate. Lúnud pátay (lunud pátay) nga
Libiral, A die-hard Liberal. -in- n way of cooking adúbu such that the
meat is boiled first and then after it is boiled it is put into the
bubbling fat. v [A; c1] make adúbu in this style.

lunuglunug v [B146] for the fat of meat, jelly, or the like to be soft,
flabby, and quivering. Naglunuglunug sa katambuk ang unud, The meat is
soft and shaking like jelly because it’s all fat.

lúnuk n {1} brown, granular residue which remains after the oil has
been cooked from the coconut. {2} an old man who has lost his virility
(humorous). Mamána ka ánang lagas nga wà nay lána, lúnuk na lang, Are
you going to marry that very old man, when he doesn’t have any oil
(sperm) left? He’s all dried up. v [A2B12] form granules like lúnuk.
Sigíhi ug ukay ug mulúnuk na ang tunù, Keep stirring when granules form
in the coconut juice. Nalúnuk ang sabun nga íyang gilútù kay sayup ang
timpla, The soap he cooked formed granules because he had the wrong
mixture.

lúnup v [B456; b(1)] {1} flood. Pirmi lang maglúnup sa Butwan kay
gipamúril ang kakahuyan, There are always floods in Butuan because the
mountains have been deforested. {2} for an emotion to flood over one.
Gilunúpan siya sa túmang kalípay, He was overwhelmed with immense joy.
n flood. Ang dakung lúnup sa tyimpu ni Nuwi, The great flood in Noah’s
time.

lúnus v {1} [AB; a12] for fruits, vegetables, root crops to soften;
cause them to do so. Mulúnus (malúnus) ang tawung nga dílì lutúun
dáyun, Eggplants will soften and wither if you don’t cook them right
away. Maglúnus kug ságing nga isugba, I’ll soften bananas for broiling.
{2} [B126] get burned, heavily tanned from the sun. Ang kaínit sa adlaw
mauy nakalúnus (nakapalúnus) sa pánit sa mag-uúma, The heat of the sun
scorched the farmer’s back. {3} [B16; b4] be starved, extremely hungry
(as if withered). À, lunúsan man sad ta sa gútum ug pinaábut nímu, I’m
famished waiting for you. n starvation. (→) a for fruits to be soft and
withered. Ságing nga lunus, Softly cooked bananas.

lun-us = lusnù.

lun-ut v [A2C; ac] share a small space ordinarily occupied by one or
two people. Makiglun-ut siya nákug higdà kay tugnaw kunu, She wants me
to sleep in her bed because she says it’s cold. Lun-úta lag mga bátà sa
baksit, Just put the children together in the backseat.

lunuy a thoroughly soft and tender to touch. v [B2; a] become, make
very soft and tender. Nalunuy ang hinug ságing nga giban-ug, The ripe
banana got very soft and tender because it got bruised. (←) v [BN]
become weak to the point of near collapse. Mulúnuy (manglúnuy) ku basta
gutmun, I become weak when I’m hungry. Nalúnuy dáyun ku pagkahibalu sa
íyang kamatáyun, I felt weak all over when I learned of his death.

lupa, lupà v [B; b6] be somewhat depressed below the surrounding land.
Giabunúhan níya ang mga dapit sa yútà nga naglupà, He filled up all the
places in his land which were depressed. n land that is below the level
of the surrounding land. Kanúnay bahaan ang íyang baul kay lupà man,
His farm is always flooded because it is located in a depression.

lúpà v [A] for one that is misbehaving to do it all the more. Human
siya tambági sa pagsúgal, milúpà hinúun, After being cautioned about
his gambling, he indulged in it all the more. Ayawg labáni nang batáa
arun dì mulúpà, Don’t take that child’s part or he’ll misbehave all the
more. — ang atay v [B246] swell with pride. Milúpà íyang atay pag-ingun
nákung gwápu siya, He swelled with pride when I told him he was
handsome.

lupad v {1} [A; ac] fly, take a plane, be sent flying. Lupdun lang sa
ubang langgam ang láing kuntininti, Some birds fly from one continent
to another. Pugngi ímung kálù kay tingálig ilupad sa hángin, Hold on to
your hat or the wind will blow it away. {2} [B2456] pass swiftly by.
Túling milupad ang mga túig, The years passed swiftly by. {3} [b8] fly
into a rage. Hingluparan kus maistra kay nayabu ang tintà, The teacher
lost her temper at me because I spilled the ink. {4} [A2] travel, go
s.w. (humorous, mildly derogatory). Mau pa gánì pag-abut milupad sad
dáyun, He just arrived then he immediately went away again. n act of
flying. Kusug ang lupad sa dyit, The jet flies fast. kúyug, uban sa —
v [A; b6] keep up with the latest fad, with the in thing. Dì siya
magpaiwit. Muuban giyud sa lupad (panlúpad) sa mga dátù, She does not
want to be left behind. She keeps up with the rich. mubù ug — see mubù.
(←) n expanse of one’s travel. Taas nag lúpad nang tawhána. Nakaabut
nas Lundun, That man is widely travelled. He has gone to London. taas
ug —, (←) a {1} always be out of one’s home and be at places where he
is not supposed to be. Taas ug lúpad (lupad) bayhána. Ásang bayli túa,
This woman goes out too much. Wherever there’s dance, she is bound to
be there. {2} travelling a lot. Dì ba didtu kas Dábaw, nía na man sab
lagi ka sa Manílà. Taása pud nímug lupad uy, You were in Davao, weren’t
you, and now here you are in Manila. You sure do travel. paN- n act of
flying (plural). †

lup-ad v [AN; b6] spit saliva. Kinsa ninyuy naglup-ad diri sa
panghugasan? Which one of you spat in the sink? Gilup-aran ku níya, He
spat on me. paN- v [A13] keep spitting. lup-aránan n spittoon.

lupak_1 v [A; a] {1} poke or pound repeatedly with the end of a stick.
Naglupak ku sa túbu nga nasampungan, I’m shoving a stick into the pipe
that was stopped up. Lupakun ku kanang ilagà nga náa sa sulud, I’ll
shove a stick into the hole to flush the rat out. {2} pound to mash or
pulverize s.t. Milupak siya sa humay, He pounded the rice. Maglupak tag
ságing, We will mash bananas. {3} make lupak. n a k.o. sweet made out
of pounded, cooked, unripe bananas, mixed with half-matured coconut,
shredded, and sugared. ni-, -in- = lupak.

lupak_2 n the young of the rudderfish (damagan, 1).

lupasì a pallid in complexion. Ang bátang bitúkun lupasì ug pamánit, A
child infested with parasitic worms tends to have a pallid complexion.
v [B] for the complexion to become pale.

lupì n {1} turned down corner of a page. {2} = alupì. v [A; c1] turn
down a corner of the leaf of a book. Gilupian níya ang tumuy sa pahina
nga íyang giundángan, She turned down the corner of the page where she
stopped.

lúpig a inferior, outclassed. Lúpig ku siyag ínum, He is no match for
me when it comes to drinking. Lúpig pa nímuy buguy, You’re worse than a
hoodlum. walay — nothing is better than (lit. outclassed by). Way lúpig
sa mag-amping, There’s nothing better than being careful. Lúpig pa
níyay galingan mukáun, He can consume more than a mill. v {1} [A23S;
a2b2] overpower, outclass. Way makalupig sa íyang katabian, Nobody can
outdo her in talkativeness. Mubangka ku ug lupígun ku nímug bú, I will
treat you if you beat me in arm wrestling. {2} [AN; b(1)] exploit, take
advantage over s.o. by cheating. Kusug siyang mulúpig (manlúpig) sa
uban salig kay abugádu siya, Basing himself on his ability as a lawyer,
he takes advantage of people. ma-un a exploiting in a cruel way.
Malupígun ang mga Katsílà kaniadtu, The Spaniards were oppressive in
former times. paN- n taking advantage of s.o. and cheating him out of
s.t.

lúpir n sport jacket. v [A; c] wear a sport jacket.

lúpis n dried strips of abaca trunk or certain varieties of bananas
which have not been processed into fibers, used for tying and other
similar purposes.

lup-it v [A; b] press s.t. tight between two surfaces. Naglup-it ug mga
dáhung layà ang libru, The book has some dead leaves pressed inside it.
pa- v [A; b] put s.t. in between two flat surfaces so as to press it.
Pusturáwu siyang tan-áwun ug magpalup-it sa púlu, He looks good when he
tucks his shirt in.

lupnis = lúpis.

lupù_1 n k.o. small blackish fish with lightly toxic dorsal spines,
often found on the bottom in fresh or brackish waters: Gymnapistes
niger.

lupù_2 v [A3P; b6(1)] shut off, block a passage or flow. Gúmun sa buhuk
ang nakalupù (nakapalupù) sa labábu, The wash basin was stopped up by
some hair. Ílang gilup-an (gilupuan) ang agiánan arun pagbanhig sa
ílang mga kaáway, They blocked the way so that they could ambush their
enemy. n s.t. used to block the flow or passage.

lúpug_1 a for the eyes to be smarting. v {1} [A123P; b4] for the eyes
to sting. Bùbúig túbig ang bátà kay gilupúgan, Pour water on the child
because his eyes are stinging. {2} [B; b6] for tears to fill the eyes
and blur the vision. Nalúpug ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà, Tears filled
her eyes.

lúpug_2 v [A; a12b2] chase, run after s.t. that is running. Mulúpug
nang irúag mudágan ka, That dog will chase you if you run. Lupúgun ta
ka run ug dílì ka muari, I will run after you if you don’t come here.
Hinglupugan siya kay nangáwat ug mangga, He got himself chased because
he stole some mangoes.

lup-ug v [B26; b6] slump down to one’s feet. Nadismáyu siya ug nalup-ug
(milup-ug) sa yútà, She fainted and slumped to the ground. Dihà ra
hibuntagi ang hubug sa íyang gilup-úgan, Morning found the drunk lying
where he had fallen.

lúpuk n young locust.

lúpus_1 v [B12] for a person to be drenched. Nalúpus siya sa singut, He
was drenched in sweat. Diyútay rang túbig ikalígù. Dì gánì makalúpus,
This isn’t enough water to bathe with. It won’t even get me wet.

lúpus_2 v [A; a12] bully. Lupúsun lang mi nímu kay dakù man ka, You
bully us because you are bigger than us.

luput v [B23(1); b4] {1} leave a mark on or injure the skin after
winding, tying, etc. s.t. tightly on it. Miluput ang písì sa tiil sa
bábuy, The rope was tied so tight around the pig’s foot it left a mark.
{2} leave a crease on a cloth upon folding or pressing. Muluput
(maluput) ang íyang inutawan, She irons creases into the clothes.
n {1} mark left on the skin after tying s.t. tightly around it.
{2} crease, fold on a cloth.

lup-ut_1 = luput, n1, v1.

lup-ut_2 v [AP; cP] tuck s.t. in or under. Ilup-ut (ipalup-ut) ang
ímung púlu, Tuck your shirt in.

lup-ut_3 v [A2C1; b6] share a space for sitting or sleeping with s.o.
Dì ta makalup-ut sa tihíras, We can’t sleep together on one small cot.
Naglup-ut ming duhag lingkud sa usa ka síya, We sat together in one
chair.

lupuy n the fry of andúhaw.

lupyak v [AB2; b6] {1} get, make a dent in s.t. Lupyákig gamay ang táru
ágig timáan, Put a small dent into the kerosene can to mark it. {2} for
earth to sink, cause it to do so. Ang yútang giabúnu sa bangag mulupyak
ug ulanun, The earth that was filled into the hole will collapse when
it rains. a sunken, dented. Lupyak ug áping ang níwang, A thin person
has sunken cheeks.

*lupyù (from puyù) -um-r-, mu- n inhabitant, resident of a locality.
Ang kasagáran sa mga lumulupyù (mulupyù) dinhi mangingisdà, Most of the
inhabitants here are fishermen.

lurang v [B24] {1} for a storm or some other natural force to abate.
Milurang na ang bagyu, The typhoon has let up. {2} for problems, anger,
etc. to abate. Wà giyuy paági nga makapalurang (makalurang) sa kagúbut
sa midul-ist, There seems to be no solution to the trouble in the
Middle East.

lúrat v [A2S; c1P] {1} open the eyes wide. Papyúnga ang mata sa minatay
kay naglurat, Close the dead man’s eyes because they are wide open. Dì
kang kakità? Luráta (ilúrat, paluráta, ipalúrat) ímung mata, You can’t
see? Open your eyes wide. {2} glower at s.o. to show angry disapproval.
Gilurátan sa maistru ang mga istudiyanting nagtábì, The teacher
glowered at the students who were talking. n act of glowering. Sa usa
lang ka lúrat ni Tátay hílum ming tanan, Father can silence us with
just one look. hi-/ha- v [B1256] have one’s eyes pop wide open.
Nahalúrat siya sa kahibúlung, Her eyes opened wide in surprise.

lúray_1 v [B3(1)6] for a top to wobble as it spins to a stop.
n wobbling of a top as it spins to a stop.

lúray_2 v [B2; c1P] for the voice to be affectionate with a slurring
intonation. Mulúray na gánì íyang tíngug dúna siyay ihangyù nímu, When
her voice gets sweet, she has a request to make. a affectionate with a
slurring intonation. pina- a with an affectionate, slurring intonation.
Pinalúray ang íyang tíngug nga mihanggat nákù sa pagpangatúlug, With an
affectionate voice, she asked me to come to bed.

lúrir = rúlir.

luru v [B2N] for hair to fall out. Mangluru (muluru) ang buhuk basta
kaspahun, If you have dandruff your hair will fall out. paN- n falling
hair.

lúrù_1 v {1} [B6] be drooping. Milúrù ang sangang namungíngi sa mga
búnga, The branch was drooping, it was so laden with fruits. Nalúrù ang
babáying gikuyapan sa simbahan, The lady fainted in church and sat
there limp. {2} [B126] become dizzy. Nalúrù ku sa bangkà kay bawud, I
felt seasick in the boat because of the rough seas. Tyubíbu ang
nakalúrù (nakapalúrù) níya, The merry-go-round made her dizzy.

lúrung v [B12; b3(1)] get dizzy from motion or from being poisoned or
nauseated. Nalúrung ku humag tuyuktúyuk nákù, I got dizzy after I
turned myself round and round. Ísug nga sigarilyu nga ákung nalurúngan,
The strong cigarettes made me dizzy.

lús v [A; c1] lower the sail of a boat. Lúsun (ilús) ang láyag ug línaw
ang dágat, The sail is lowered when the sea is calm.

lusa, lusà_1 v [A13] stare unseeingly into space, usually due to lack
of interest, comprehension. Unsay ímung gihunàhúnà nga naglusa na man
lang nang ímung mata? What are you thinking about? You’re just staring
blankly into space.

lúsa n plate made of metal coated with enamel. v [A13; b6] eat from
metal plates.

lusà_2 n nit, the egg of a louse. v [a4] be infested with nits. paN-
v [A2] for lice to lay eggs. -un a full of nits. v [B126] be, become
full of nits.

lúsad v {1} [A; ac] go, bring down, descend, dismount. Lugar bay. Anhi
lang ku lúsad, Stop, Driver. I’m going to get off here. Milúsad siya sa
hagdanan, He went down the stairs. Patábang ug lúsad sa pyánu ngadtu sa
sílung, Let some people help you bring the piano down. Lusára ang búla
sa sílung, Go down and get the ball. Ang walang tiil mauy ilúsad
pag-úna, Descend with the left foot first. {1a} [A2; a1c] go, bring to
the sea to fish, bathe. Mag-íhaw mig bábuy ug maglúsad mig panágat, We
slaughter a pig when we bring our fishing nets to the sea for the first
time. {2} [A; b] launch one’s or s.o.’s political candidacy. Kadaghan
na siya makalúsad, karun pa giyud kadaug, He ran so many times, but
this is the first time he won. lusaránan n place one descends onto or
over.

lusak v {1} [A; a] pound s.t. by hitting it with the blunt end of a
stick or with bombs. Kusga paglusak ang halu nga náa sa lungag, Poke
the monitor lizard that is in the hole hard with the end of the stick.
Lusaka ang inad-ad nga báni pára sa bábuy, Pound the sliced banana stem
with a pestle for the pig. Gilusak ang Hanuy sa mga bumba, Hanoi was
pounded with bombs. {2} [A; a] make linusak. ni-, -in- n k.o. delicacy
made of pounded cooked banana mixed with shredded coconut meat and
sugar.

lusay n swollen lymph node. v [B46; b4] have a swelling in the lymph
nodes. Milusay (gilusayan) ang íyang búgan, She had a swollen lymph
node in the groin. lusaylusay n small swollen lymph nodes. v [B4; b(1)]
have a small swelling in the lymph nodes.

lúsay n seaweed. sáma sa — not firm in one’s convictions (drifting like
seaweeds). ka-an n place where seaweeds abound.

lusbà v {1} [APB2; a12] for s.t. with an area to collapse or cave in.
Bumba ang naglusbà (nagpalusbà) sa atup sa simbahan, The bomb caused
the roof of the church to collapse. Mulusbà (malusbà) ning salúga kun
tungtúngan ug bayinti ka táwu, This floor will collapse if twenty
persons stand on it. Lusbáa ang tayaung lubut sa baril, Knock out the
rusty bottom of the barrel. {2} [A; a1] press s.t. rounded or bulging
to level it off or flatten it. Dì ka makalusbà sa búla sa baskitbul kun
dì kuháan ug hángin, You cannot flatten a basketball if you do not let
the air out.

lusbak_1 v [B26] for a horizontal surface to give way or yield to
pressure above it. Mulusbak (malusbak) ang taklub sa kaban ug
tungtúngan ug bug-at, The trunk lid will get a dent if s.t. heavy is
put on top of it. n shallow depression, dent. Daghang lusbak sa karsáda
kay dílì pinisun, The road has lots of holes because it has not been
rolled.

lusbak_2 v [A; a2] cook very small fish in vinegar and garlic. -unun
n very small fish to be cooked in such a manner. ni-, -in- n dish of
small fish cooked in vinegar.

lusbù v [B16] {1} sink, sag, get a dent on the top or simply give way.
Ayawg lingkúri ang táru kay malusbù, Don’t sit on the can because it
will get a dent in it. Nalusbù ang tánil, The tunnel caved in. Ang
kabug-at sa sulud mauy nakalusbù (nakapalusbù) sa bulsíta, The heavy
contents caused the bottom of the paper bag to give way. {2} for a
person to slump or the bones that hold him to get dislocated. Nalusbù
ákung háwak, I got a dislocated hip.

lusbug v [APB; c] immerse oneself in s.t. Milusbug siya sa túbig ug
milanguy, She immersed herself in the water and swam. Ang lambay
maglusbug sa balas, A sea crab buries itself in the sand.

lusgus v [A1; a] rub s.t. rough vigorously against s.t. to clean it.
Akuy naglusgus sa kasíli arun pagkúhà sa danglug, I rubbed the eel
vigorously to get the slime off. Lusgúsa ug maáyu ang takuling sa
kaldíru, Scrub the soot off the kettle.

lúsì v [A; a1b2] tweak or pinch with a twisting motion. Milúsì kug usa
ka dawin sa sipì nga ságing, I twisted off a banana from the bunch.
Kagáhì mu karug úlu, lusíun ta giyud ka, How hard-headed you are. I’m
going to tweak your ears. (→) v [A1; a1] {1} work on an itchy foreskin
by pinching, twisting and turning it inside out. Ang mga bátang pisut
maglusì kay katlan man, Uncircumcised boys rub their foreskin because
it itches. {2} = lùlù (humorous).

luslus v {1} [A; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. and is attached to it to
slip off, esp. the foreskin. Human na siya makaluslus sa unud gíkan sa
mga bukug, She managed to slip the meat off the bones to which it had
been attached. Naluslus na ang pánit sa íyang tintin, hustu nang
tulíun, He can pull his foreskin back, so he’s ready to be circumcised.
{2} [A; a12] use s.t. in a way that will destroy it. Hala, luslúsa nang
makinilya arun makailis ka, Go on and use that typewriter in such a way
as to break it so you can buy me a new one. {3} [AN; a] swindle, make a
fool of s.o. (coarse). Giluslus ming Pidru. Inay ibáyad sa bangku ang
kwartang gihátag námù, íya hinúung giláyas, Pedro swindled us. Instead
of paying the money we gave him to the bank, he skipped out of town.
n {1} penis (vulgar). — mu, níya {1a} expression of anger at s.o.
Luslus mu! Wà man gánì ku swildúi íni unyà kasab-ankasab-an pa, Damn!
You scold me but I’m working for you without pay! {1b} expression
debunking s.o. Maáyu sa luslus mu, nga húmuk rang mabálì! Good, my eye!
It breaks so easily!

lusnù v {1} [B126; b8] for a structure to collapse, crash down. Nalusnù
ang taytáyan pagbagyu, The bridge collapsed in the storm. {1a} [B1256]
for a person to collapse. Nalusnù siya pagkadungug sa aksidinti, She
collapsed upon hearing of the accident. {2} [B12] for feelings, hopes,
and aspirations to collapse. Nagkalusnù na ang ákung damgu sa kadaúgan,
My hopes for victory are gradually crumbling.

luspad a pale, for a person to have lost his color. v [BN; a] be;
become pale. Nanluspad siya pagkadungug sa hukum, She paled when she
heard the decision. lusparun a of a pale sort. Ang lusparung kaháyag sa
búlan, The pale light of the moon.

luspì a pallid in complexion due to some physical deficiencies or
sickness. Luspì kaáyu ang masakitun, The sick man is very pale. v [B1;
b6] be, become pallid in complexion.

lusù a hypocrite (slang). Ang lusù nga dakù daw santus giyud nga ímung
iatúbang, apan mangtas diay, He is a terrible hypocrite. He looks like
a paragon of virtue, but actually he’s a monster.

lúsù n {1} penis (coarse). {2} — nímu, níya {2a} expression of anger at
s.o. Lúsù nímu, ikay naghulam sa libru unyà akuy paulíun! Nuts to you.
You borrowed the book and you want me to return it! {2b} expression of
disbelief. Lúsù níya. Ayaw ku níyag patuhúa, Hell! Don’t try to make me
believe him.

lúsub v [A; b5] attack, force one’s way into s.t. Gilúsub (gilusúban)
sa milù ang tangkal sa manuk, The civet broke into the chicken coop.

lusug a stout, corpulent, usually said of children. v [B2; b6(1)] grow
stout. Mulusug (malusug) ka ug mukáun kag kusug, You’ll grow stout if
you eat a lot.

lúsug v [AC; c] ride together in tandem, usually on s.t. most often
ridden by one. Unsa! Maglúsug ta ánang pyangguy nga kabáyù? What! Shall
the two of us ride together on that scrawny horse?

lusuk n {1} clove or segment of any fruit that has segments. Usa ka
lusuk áhus, One garlic clove. {2} drops or beads of tears,
perspiration, rain, and the like. Pipila ka lusuk lúhà, Some drops of
tears. Lusuk sa rusaryuhan, Rosary beads. v {1} [A; a] break off s.t.
that comes in sections. Lusuka úsà ang áhus úsà pa paníti, Split the
garlic into cloves first before you peel it. {1a} [A; a] gouge out an
eye. Luskun ku nang mata mu run, I’ll gouge out your eyes. {1b} [A13;
a12] wrench s.o.’s feelings. Gilusuk ang íyang dughan sa túmang
kakulbà, Her heart was wrenched with anxiety. {2} [B2N] form segments
or similarly shaped things. Milusuk (nanlusuk) ang mga lúhà sa íyang
mga mata, Drops of tears formed in her eyes. -in- n dangling earrings
with little pellets at the bottom.

Lusun n Luzon, the largest island in the Philippines.

lusung n {1} large mortar for pounding rice. {2} a mortarful. v [a12]
make into a mortar. (←)_1 v [A; c1] pour grains into the mortar.
{2} lower a coffin into the burial pit. n = lusung, 2.

lúsung_2 v [A; c1] huddle, crowd close together. Dì ta makalúsung íning
gamayng barútu kay súd ra nig duha ka táwu, We can’t all ride in this
small boat because it is only good for two people. Lusúnga (ilúsung)
lang nang mga sinakung humay sa karumáta, Just pile those sacks of rice
in the cart.

lusut v {1} [A3P; ac] pass, go through. Milusut ang kumagkù sa gisiung
midiyas, The big toe came out of the torn socks. Dílì giyud ku
makalusut (makapalusut) ug hílu sa dágum, I can never thread a needle.
Kanang kupúa lutsun gihápun sa tun-ug, Cold air can still pass through
your cape. {2} [A2] go through, come out successful. Magbluáwut ku
basta makalusut sa burd, I’ll have a party if I hurdle the board exams.
{3} [A2; b(1)] in basketball, drive through the defense. Sayun ra
kaáyung lusutan (lutsan) ang inyung dipinsa, It is very easy to drive
through your defense. pa-(←) v [A2; c] squeeze in a witty remark in a
conversation. Maáyung mupalúsut nà siya, He is good in making funny
remarks in a conversation. n the act of squeezing in some witty remarks
during a conversation. lutsanan n a way out.

lusyun n lotion for use as a cosmetic or cleansing the skin. v [A23; b]
use a certain k.o. lotion. paN- v [A2; b6] apply lotion on oneself.

luta_1 n nosepiece that is made to pass through the hole in the nose of
domestic animals to which a tether rope is attached. v {1} [A; a12]
make a nosepiece. {2} [A; b6(1)] tie such a nosepiece onto s.t.

luta_2 n joints in the body. Haplási ang mga luta (lutaluta, lutáhan)
ug lána arun mawálà ang pamául, Rub oil on the joints to relieve the
pain. lutaluta, lutalúta, lutáhan = luta.

lúta, lutà n imprints made by the pressure or weight of s.t. Lúta sa
ligid dihà sa lápuk, Tire marks in the mud. Lúta sa tudlù sa básu,
Finger marks on the glass. v [B6; b(1)] {1} make an impression, mark on
s.t. Milutà (nalutà) ang íyang ngípun sa ákung buktun, Her teeth left
their mark on my skin. {2} be visible through s.t. Milutà ang mamisus
sa íyang nipis nga bulsa, The peso bills were visible inside his shirt
pocket.

*lútab -an, -un a {1} for fruits and sugar cane to be watery, lacking
in sweetness. {2} for nípà or lumber to be too soft or have a tendency
to rot. v [B12] become watery and lacking in sweetness.

lutak n crack, a break usually without complete separation of parts.
Náa nay gamayng lutak sa básu, There’s a slight crack on the glass.
v {1} [B3(1)6] crack. Ang yútà milutak sa paglínug, The earth cracked
in the earthquake. {2} rack one’s brains. Makalutak (makapalutak) sa
úlu ning prublimáha, This problem can crack one’s brains.

lutang v [A2] surface in the water. Ug walà mulutang ang bátang nalumus
dílì untà makit-an, If the body of the boy who was drowned had not
floated on the surface, it would never have been found. lutanglútang
v [A13] float freely in the water.

lútang v {1} [A; a12] heal s.t. completely. Manghihilut mauy naglútang
sa ákung piang, A bone setter set my dislocated bone. Gilútang sa
tambálan ang ákung sakit, The folk doctor completely relieved me of my
ailment. {2} [AB12; a1] solve or clear up a problem, esp. a financial
problem. Ang pagdaug ra sa swipstik ang makalútang (makapalútang) sa
átung mga suliran, The sweepstakes are the only solution to our
problems.

lutaríya n {1} lottery. {2} k.o. bingo game played with many players,
where the cards have the figures of the Spanish cards in place of
numbers, which are covered when the corresponding card is drawn.
v {1} [A] hold a lottery. {2} [A; b6(1)] play lutaríya.

lutas v [A; a12] overcome, surmount. Kinsay naglutas sa ímung
galastuhan sa iskuylahan? Who shouldered all your expenses in school?
Hápit na ku makalutas sa ákung pagtuun, I am almost through with my
studies.

lútas v {1} [A; a1] wean. Lutásun ang bátà ug manghúran na, A baby is
weaned when the next child is born. {2} [A; a12] have a boy or girl
friend five years or more younger than oneself. Ganáhan siyang mulútas
ug hayiskul sa íya nang pagkálids, He likes to go out with high-school
girls though he is in college. {3} [a3] for a husband to be temporarily
deprived of marital relations (humorous slang).

lutaw v {1} [A; b6] float. Ang asyíti mulutaw sa túbig, Oil floats on
water. {1a} [AB] move gracefully as if floating on air. Nindut tan-áwun
ang maglíap nga maglutaw, It is nice to see a basketball shot where the
player just floats up to the basket as he sinks it in. {2} [A2] show,
manifest itself. Usa ka pahiyum milutaw sa íyang nawung, A smile showed
on his face. {2a} for a character trait, truth, and the like to come
out. Milutaw na ang tinúud níyang batásan, His real character now came
out. Mulutaw ra ang tinúud, The truth will eventually come out. {2b} —
ang ganansiya [B3(1)4] for it to be clear that there is going to be a
profit. {3} [A23] for fish to come to the surface. Andáma ang báling
kay hápit na mulutaw ang bansíkul, Prepare the net because the mackerel
are about to surface. {4} [A2] for fever or measles to come out and
fully develop. Walà nay kuyaw kun mulutaw (makalutaw) na ang dáp, There
is no more danger once the measles rash appears. {5} — sa hángin [A13]
a lacking awareness of s.t. Dílì mahímung maglutaw sa hángin ang átung
mga anak sa kalisud sa pangwarta, Our children should know how hard it
is to earn money. b having an uncertain outcome. Naglutaw pa sa hángin
ang ákung numramyintu, My appointment is still up in the air.
n freeboard. Lagmit ta malúnud kay gamay ang lutaw sa sakayan, We might
sink because the boat has a small freeboard. — ug dugù glowing with a
healthy pink color. Lutaw ug dugù ang mga dugung Katsílà, People who
have Spanish blood have a healthy pinkish complexion. — ang ganansiya
clearly affording a profit. Lutaw ang ganansiya sa nigusyung bay-ansil,
You clearly will make a profit in the buying and selling business. (←)
n low-lying place near the shore into which sea water enters, but
separated from the main sea by a bar of dry land. pa- n s.t. to hasten
the coming out of a rash or fever. pina- n a k.o. rice cake (bibingka)
cooked by steam.

lutay a for s.t. long to be supple. Lutay kaáyug láwas ang misáyaw sa
bali, The person who danced the ballet has a very supple body. v [B2;
b6] be pliant, easily bent. Mulutay (malutay) ang lipak ug nipsun ang
paglútì, Bamboo sticks will be pliant if they are stripped thin.

luthang n {1} popgun made of a small bamboo stem which shoots seeds or
paper pellets. {2} bamboo cannon that makes a loud retort using
kerosene, used for noise-making during festive events. v [A; a]
{1} shoot with a native popgun or bamboo cannon. {1a} shoot s.o. with
any gun. Naprísu siya kay nakaluthang, He went to prison for shooting a
man. {2} [A1; a12] make s.t. into a luthang. luthangluthang v [A12C2]
play games with luthangs.

lúti n lot, a parcel of land, usually residential. v {1} [A; a12]
divide land into lots for sale. {2} [A12] obtain a lot.

lútì v [A; a] split a piece of bamboo, rattan, or nítù into narrow
strips. Lutíun ang kawáyan pára himúung búbù, When they make a fish
trap, they split narrow pieces of bamboo for it. -in- n thin strips of
bamboo, rattan, or nítù.

lutiríya = lutaríya, n1, v1.

lutlut v [AB; c6] squeeze s.t. extra into an area which has little
room, be squeezed in. Mulutlut lang ku áring mga karga arun lang
makapaúlì ku, I will just sit here in between the cargo, just so I can
get home. Unsang librúhang ímung gilutlútan sa sulat? What book did you
put the letter in? Ilutlut lang ning lubi sa ilálum sa lingkuránan,
Just squeeze these coconuts under the seats.

lutu, lutù_1 n blister gotten by rubbing. v [B23(1)6; b4] develop or
form blisters. Milutu (giluthan) ang íyang tudlù sa paglinúbù sa mais,
Blisters have formed on her fingers from shelling the corn.

lútu v {1} [A; b3] wear black clothes in mourning. Kinsa may inyung
gilutúhan? Whom are you mourning? {2} [a12] make, sew into mourning
clothes. {3} [b(1)] consider a member of the family or s.o. close to
the family dead because of his rebellious or unforgiveable act.
Gilutúhan si Sunya sa íyang mga ginikánan kay nakigminyù siya sa ílang
draybir, Sonia’s parents simply considered her dead when she married
their driver. n mourning clothes.

lutù_2 v {1} [AB246N; a12P] crack one’s knuckle(s); for the joints to
crack. Mulutù (manglutù) ang íyang lutáhan inigtindug níya, His joints
crack when he stands up. {2} [A13] stay idle doing nothing, twiddling
the thumbs, cracking the knuckles, and the like. Naglutù lang. Walà
makahunàhunà unsay maáyung kurìkuriun, He’s just twiddling his thumbs.
He hasn’t thought of anything worthwhile to do. {2a} [A13; a12] do
things at a slow and lazy pace. Ug lutuun nátù ang átung líhuk
magabin-an ta, If we walk lazily, we will be overtaken by night.
n sound produced by cracking the joints.

lútù v {1} [AB12; a] cook. Humut ang nagkalutung inasal, The roast pig
smelled delicious as it was cooking. Lutúun nátù ang kík, Let us cook
the cake. {1a} [AB12; b6] make ice products. Gáhì na ang áyis, nalútù
na diay, The ice has hardened; it is done. {2} [AP; a1] make s.t.
tender. Súkà ray mulútù (mupalútù) sa kinílaw, Vinegar can get the raw
fish tender. Alkuhul ang naglútù sa atay niánang palaínum, Alcohol is
giving that drunkard a tender liver. {3} — dáan [a12] have the outcome
pre-planned. Ang banggà gilútù dáan sa mga maghuhúkum, The judges
prejudged the contest. {4} [B; c6] become darkened. Mulútù (malútù) ug
samut ang ímung pánit ug magsígi kag painit, Your skin will become
darker if you keep staying in the sun. n {1} cooked rice or corn grits.
Paghúkad ug lútù, Bring some cooked rice to the table. {2} manner of
cooking. Kináham ku ang lútung binisayà, I love Visayan cooking. a
{1} done, cooked. Ug lútù na ang kamúti átung kan-un, If the sweet
potatoes are done, let’s eat them. {1a} for ice to be frozen. {2} dark
in shade. Ang blú sa dágat mas lútù ikumparar sa lángit, The blue of
the sea is darker than the blue of the sky. {3} — dáan prejudged. Lútù
na man dáan ang ákung grádu, My grades are fixed. {4} — nga makaw
{a} dish prepared for short-order cooking. {b} shabbily made. Lútung
makaw ang pagkabúhat sa lamísa, The table was poorly made.
{c} prejudged. Lútung makaw ang kumbinsiyun, The convention was rigged.
(→)_3 a {1} well-fermented fish. {2} = lútù, 1a. v [b3] become
fermented fish paste. Wà pa gánì makalutù ang ginamus nahurut na námug
káun, The fish paste had not even gotten fermented before we ate it up.
ni-, -in- n food bought prepared. Pagpalit ug linútù ug kabsan tag
sud-an, Buy some carry-out food if we run short. ni-an(→), -in-an(→)
n manner of cooking. ma-(→) n boiled rice usually wrapped in banana
leaves carried as one’s lunch. v {1} [A] bring a lunch of this sort.
{2} [A; a2] prepare a lunch of this sort.

lútub v [B2; b6] {1} form a blister from burning or rubbing. Milútub
(nalútub) ang ákung pasù, My burn formed a blister. {2} for blood to
form a black spot under a finger- or toenail that has been injured.
Milútub ang dugù sa ákung tudlù nga hingdukdukan sa martilyu, Blood
formed a black spot on my fingers where I had hit them with a hammer.

lut-ud v {1} [AC23; ac] pile up on top of one another. Naglut-ud ang
mga plátu, The plates are stacked on top of one another. Lut-úra
pagdala nang mga libru, Carry the books in a pile on top of one
another. {2} [B36] pile up, accumulate. Paspas uy kay naglut-ud na ning
ímung mga buluhatun, Faster! Your work is piling up. n {1} s.t. stacked
up. Tulu ka lut-ud nga libru, Three stacks of books. {2} having several
rows of petals. Antuwángang lut-ud, Hibiscus with several rows of
petals.

lutuk v {1} [A; a12] put a finger into an orifice of s.t. living,
usually to get at s.t. Akuy mulutuk sa bàbà sa bátà arun makúhà ang
singsing, I will reach into the child’s mouth to get the ring out.
Luktun ku nang mata mu, I’ll poke out your eyes. {2} [A; a] squeeze and
pull off the edible flesh of jackfruit. Dì ku makalutuk sa súuy sa
nangkà, I can’t take out the edible flesh of the jackfruit.

lútuk v [A; b6] stare at. Namula siyang gisalíhan nákug lútuk, She
blushed when I kept staring at her.

lutung a for fruits to be very ripe, almost overripe. v [B12] be,
become very ripe. Mas lamì kan-un ang nangkà kun malutung na, Jackfruit
is most delicious to eat when it is very ripe.

lútung n contraction of the uterus during labor. v [A2] for the uterus
to contract during labor. Maggahìgáhì ang pus-un sa umaának ug mulútung
na, The stomach of a mother in labor hardens when her uterus is
contracting.

lutup v {1} [A23] for s.t. to show through s.t. translucent that
touches it. Milutup ang íyang tútuy sa nipis níyang bláwus, Her breasts
showed through her flimsy blouse. {2} [A2; b(1)] for s.t. to give off a
reproduction on s.t. that touches it. Milutup ang banig nga íyang
gihigdáan dihà sa íyang bukubuku, The mat he lay on left an impression
on his back. {2a} leave a crease in cloth upon folding or pressing.
Naglutup ang pinil-an sa sinínà, There was a crease left on the dress
where it was folded. n {1} mark, imprint on the skin. {2} crease, fold
on a cloth. pa- n {1} reproduction of a picture made by rubbing it with
a candle and then scratching a sheet of paper over it. {2} tracing.
v [A; b6(1)] reproduce a picture by rubbing or tracing.

lútus_1 v {1} [A; ab2] chase or run after. Daghan kaáyung táwung
milútus sa mangunguut, A lot of people were chasing the pickpocket.
Bísag ása pa mutágù ang kriminal, lutúsun giyud sa baláud, No matter
where the criminal hides, the law will go after him. {2} [A; a12]
persecute. Si Níru naglútus sa mga Kristiyánus, Nero persecuted the
Christians.

lútus_2 n lotus plant cultivated for ornamental purposes, flowers esp.
used for decorating altars: Nelumbium nelumbo.

lútuy v [B2S3(1); b4] for the skin to swell and form a blister from
being burnt with s.t. hot or cold. Milútuy ang ákung buktun nga
napiksan sa ínit nga mantíka, Hot lard spattered on my arm and it
swelled. n swelling on the skin caused by heat or acid.

lutya, lutyà = bisul.

lúub v [A; b(1)] {1} brood on eggs. Luúban sa himungáan ang itlug, The
hen will sit on the eggs. {1a} stay around a place. Dì ka ba pul-an ug
lúub sa balay? Aren’t you sick of hanging around the house? {2} for
emotions to be stored up in one. Kasína nga naglúub sa ákung dughan,
The envy that dwelt in my breast.

luud a nauseous, causing nausea. Luud kan-un ang pagkáung pan-us, Stale
food is nauseous to eat. v [B2; a4] become, feel nauseous. Nagkaluud
ang báhù sa kasilyas, The toilet is getting to smell more and more
nauseous. Lud-un giyud kung mamínaw sa ímung mga pasálig, I really get
nauseated listening to your promises. lud-ánun, lud-unun a easily given
to feeling nauseous.

*lúud paN- v [A2; b3] sulk by refraining from doing s.t. because of an
offense or a wish not granted. Dì na siya mukanta. Nanglúud nga wà
pakpáki, She won’t sing any more. She is sulking because she didn’t get
enough applause. luuray v [C23] take offense at each other and sulk.
Way mahímù ang átung kláb kay nagluuray ang mga upisyális, Our club
won’t achieve anything because the officers are constantly taking
offense at each other and refraining from doing things. luuran a easily
given to sulking, withdrawing from an activity.

luug a {1} savage, uncivilized. {2} ignorant, lacking sophistication
like a savage. Ayg tudlùtudlúa nang mga trák. Luug ka man tingáli,
Don’t point your finger at those vehicles. Are you ignorant? v [B12;
a2] be, become ignorant, unsophisticated. Maluug kag adtu ka magpuyù sa
búkid, You will grow up ignorant if you stay in the mountains. -in-
a in the manner of a savage. Linuug nga búhat ang panglúgus, Rape is a
savage act. v [A; c1] act like a savage. -ing(←) = luug, a2 (humorous
euphemism).

lúuk_1 v {1} [A; a] strangle, esp. with two hands. Luúkun ta ka dihag
musúkul ka, I’ll strangle you if you fight back. {2} [AC2; a12] neck,
pet to the point of or nearly to the point of intercourse (slang).
Gilúuk bítaw nákù, sugut lagi, I got her over-excited, and you bet she
gave in. maN-r-(→) n strangler.

lúuk_2 n bay. Pagbagyu mitágù ang lantsa sa may lúuk, During the
typhoon the launch took shelter in the bay. luuklúuk v {1} [A1] eat
food alone by oneself. Siya ray nagluuklúuk ug káun sa íyang bálun, She
was eating her lunch off in a corner by herself. {2} [A13] do the work
alone by oneself without help from others. Aku ra giyuy nagluuklúuk
niíning trabahúa, I did this work all alone by myself. kina-an(→)
n inmost part of a bay.

lúum v [A; c] put s.t. entirely into the mouth. Íyang gilúum ang usa ka
buuk pán, He put the whole piece of bread into his mouth. (→)
v {1} [A23] hold one’s breath, stifle back one’s breath. Napakung ang
íyang bitíis ug miluum siya sa kasakit, He banged his shins and he held
his breath in pain. {2} [A; c6] repress, keep to oneself or cry in a
repressed way. Miluum siyag hílak dihang ákù siyang gibyáan, She cried
softly when I left her. Ayawg iluum ang ímung kayugut sa ímung amahan,
Don’t repress your resentment at your father.

lúun v [A2C; ac] {1} share a space to occupy it. Naglúun mig sakay sa
kábaw, We rode on the carabao together. Dì mahímung luúnun ang duha ka
himungáan sa usa ka pugaran, You can’t put two hens in one nest.
{2} live together in the same house or room. Ayaw silag ilúun sa ámung
kwartu kay hugawan, Don’t let them stay with us in our room because
they are messy. {3} for an unmarried couple to live together. Gilúun
níyag íyang uyab, He brought his girl to live with him. (→) v [A; b]
put a buffer sheet over the mouth of a vessel between the mouth and the
cover. Lun-ig dáhun ang linung-ag kay hungaw ang takub, Put some leaves
as a buffer for the pot of rice because the cover is not airtight.
n s.t. used as a buffer for a pot top. ka- n one whom one shares a
space with.

luup v [A; b] shut off or block a passage or flow. Ílang gilup-an ang
sapà ug mga dagkung batu, They blocked one end of the stream with
stones. n s.t. used to shut off or block a passage or flow.

luus v [A; b6] {1} be constantly doing s.t. Dílì ka makaluus ug lingkud
dinhi kay binatunan ka, You can’t constantly sit around because you are
supposed to be the maid. Gilus-an níyag bása ang kúmiks, She did
nothing but read the comics. {2} stay long in a place. Dì ku muluus sa
baryu, I will not stay in the village long.

lúuy_1 a pitiful. Lúuy kaáyu ang mga ílung tuwápus, Orphans are very
pitiful. v [B1256; b5c] have pity, mercy on s.o.; give s.t. out of
pity. Ayaw táwun kug patya, malúuy ka, Don’t kill me. Have mercy.
Limus, Dung, kaluy-i (kaluy-a) ang kabus, Alms, lad. Have pity on the
poor. Ihátag lag suklì ikalúuy lang nà sa draybir, Just give the change
to the driver out of kindness. paki-, pakima- v [A; c] {1} beg for
mercy. Nagpakilúuy (nagpakimalúuy) sila sa asindírung hakug, They beg
for mercy from the greedy landowner. {2} plead. Mipakilúuy
(mipakimalúuy) siya nga dì nákù byáan, She begged me not to leave her.
n pleading for mercy. ka- n pity, mercy. Kalúuy sa Diyus, Thanks be to
God. maluluy-un a kind, merciful. makalulúuy a inspiring pity.

lúuy_2 v [B3(1)6; bc1] be, become stagnant. Malúuy (mulúuy) ang túbig
dinhi kay wà may kanal, Water stagnates here because there is no canal.

luwa- see also lula-.

luwa_1 a word of command for a carabao to halt. pa- v [A; a12] command
a carabao to stop. Paluwaha sà ang kábaw arun makapahúlay, Stop the
carabao so it can take a rest.

luwa_2 v [A; ab2] dismember a slaughtered animal. Dalì siya nga
nakaluwa sa kábaw nga giíhaw, He dismembered the slaughtered water
buffalo in no time. n piece cut off of a slaughtered animal.

lúwa n k.o. poem, one of the forms used by the players in the murumúru
play, consisting of short lines of around ten syllables, in rhyming
couplets. v [A; c] {1} recite the lúwa. {2} recite any poem from
memory.

luwà, lúwà v {1} [AN; c] spit or eject from the mouth. Giluwaan
(gilud-an) níya ang sáwug, He spat on the floor. Iluwà nang kindi kay
húgaw, Spit out that candy. It’s dirty. {1a} [AN; b(1)] spit to express
contempt. Nakaluwà (nakapangluwà) ku dihang nanghambug siya, I couldn’t
help spitting when he started to boast. {2} [c6] for a processing
machine to expel a solid by-product. Inigsúd sa tubu, ang iluwà sa
makina bagásu, Sugarcane is fed into the crushers. Then it comes out as
bagasse. n {1} spit, spittle. {2} action of spitting. maabut sa — near
not far. lud-anan, -anan n spittoon.

luwàlúwà n the reed suspender in a loom, two pieces of wood which
suspend the reed (suluran) and allow it to swing back and forth,
holding it in proper position with regard to the warp threads.

luwag, lúwag n ladle. duul sa — be close to influential people such
that one has pull. v [A2; a12] make into, hit with, use a ladle.

luwak, lúwak n the other side of s.t. elevated. Ang ílang dápit luwak
niánang bungtúra, Their place is s.w. beyond that hill. v [A2; ac]
{1} pass over a summit, go up to a pass and then come down, bring s.t.
over a pass. Gíkan dinhi muluwak ka pa ug duha ka bungtud, From here
you have to climb over two hills. {2} climb up and over s.t. elevated
in coming down towards the other side. Makaluwak ang bátà sa abatan,
The child can climb over the railing. Nakaluwak ning baúla ngadtu sa
tapun, This field stretches over the mountain to the other side.
n other side of a mountain or elevation.

luwang n {1} bilge, the rounded lower part of a ship’s hull or hold.
Ákung hinubígan ang luwang sa sakayan, I’ll bail out the water from the
bilge of the boat. {2} quadrilateral section of a rice paddy bounded by
dikes. Tulu ra ka luwang ang ákung nadáru, I have plowed three sections
of the rice paddy. v {1} [A; a2] divide the rice paddy into sections.
{2} [c1] harvest the rice partition by partition. -in- a by the
section. v [A; c1] do by the section.

luwas_1 v [A3P; a1] {1} save, remove s.o. from harm. Tambal ang
nakaluwas (nakapaluwas) nímu, Medicine has saved your life. Ákung
luwasun ang bátà sa balay nga nasúnug, I’ll save the child from the
burning house. {1a} save from sin and death. Maluwas ta sa kalisud ug
makatrabahu na ku, We will escape from our financial worries when I
find a job. a {1} safe from danger. {2} free from debt, discomfort.
ka-an(←) n {1} safety, preservation from destruction. {2} salvation.
{3} freedom from difficulties, problems, etc. maN-r-(←) n saviour, esp.
The Saviour, Jesus Christ.

luwas_2 v = hi-, v. hi-, hilwas v [A12; a12] {1} articulate, pronounce
words or letters. Dì makahilwas ug íri ang Insik, The Chinese can’t
pronounce an r. {2} utter taboo words. Sa íyang kasukù, nakahilwas
siyag mga púlung nga law-ay, In his anger he uttered profanity. a well
articulated. Hilwas na kaáyug sinultihan ang bátà, The child can now
speak very articulately. -in-(←), ka-an(←) n one’s full name. Idut ang
íyang anggà apan Prídu ang íyang kaluwásan (linúwas), His nickname is
Edot but his real name is Fredo.

luwat_1 v {1} [A; b(1)] quit a job. Muaplay ku sa trabáhu nga ímung
giluwatan, I’ll apply for the job you quit. {2} [b2] accidentally let
go of s.t. Hiluwatan níya ang mga plátu nga íyang gidala, She
accidentally let go of the plates. {3} [A2B236; b] let out, cause to
come out from within. Nakaluwat siyag usa ka makahulugánung pahiyum,
She gave forth a meaningful smile. Way usa ka púlung nga miluwat
(naluwat) sa íyang bàbà, Not a single word came out of his mouth.
{3a} [A; b(1)] issue a press release, communiqué. Mau ni ang balità nga
giluwatan sa imbaháda, This is the news issued by the embassy. {3b} [A;
b(1)] issue for a purpose. Miluwat ug kasugúan ang Prisidinti sa
pagpadakup sa mga Huks, The President gave out orders to capture the
Huks.

luwat_2 v [A2; a] climb up and over s.t. elevated and come down to the
other side. Miluwat siyag tulu ka bungtud paingun nganhi, He passed
over three hills to get here. Luwatun sa bátà nang mubù mung abatan,
The baby will climb over that low railing of yours.

luwat_3 too, also (dialectal).

lúwis, lúwist n low waist, a style of trousers in which the waist line
is cut comparatively low. v [A; b6] wear, make trousers in this style.

lū́y = lúluy.

lúya a {1} weak, or lacking in strength of body or muscle. Lúya kaáyu
ku gíkang nasakit, I am very weak after my illness. {2} not active,
aggressive enough. Lúya man gud ka maung láin ang nadáwat, You were
slow. That’s why s.o. else got the job. {3} weak in a subject. Lúya
kaáyu ku sa mát, I’m weak in math. v [A1B12S; a12] be, become weak,
tired out, make s.o. tired. Dì kung katrabáhu kay nagluya ku, I can’t
work because I’m weak. Nalúya kug dinágan, I got tired running. Luyáha
ang isdà úsà kubráha ang pasul, Tire the fish out before you pull in
the line. maluyáhun, luyahun a of a weak sort. Luyahun (maluyáhun) nga
tíngug, A feeble voice.

luy-a n ginger: Zingiber officinale. — nga tapul n k.o. purple ginger
used medicinally. v [A3; b6] flavor with ginger. luy-aluy-a n k.o. herb
similar to ginger: Zinziber zerumbet.

lúyang n sweet prepared of cooked plantains pounded and mixed with
grated coconut and sugar. v [A; a] prepare this dish. -in-, ni- =
lúyang, n.

luyat, lúyat a {1} lacking in fullness and firmness. Luyat ra kaáyu
ning unlána, This pillow is too soft. Luyat kaáyu kug láwas, I’m very
flabby. {2} for bananas to be soft before getting mature. Luyat kaáyu
ang ságing kay linghud pagkapùpù, The bananas are soft because they
were immature when they were cut down. v [B12; b6] {1} get to be soft
and flabby. {2} for bananas to get soft before maturity.

luyluy_1 a drooping, hanging limply. Luyluy na ang íyang buktun sa
túmang kakápuy, His arms are limp from utter exhaustion. v [B; b6] be,
become drooping or limply hanging. Nagluyluy na ang mga sanga sa káhuy
nga nabug-atan sa búnga, The branches of the tree are bending under the
weight of the fruits.

luyluy_2 = byatilis.

luyu {1} at the back of, behind. Tágù luyu sa batu, Hide behind the
rock. Anáa luyu sa pangánud ang adlaw, The sun is behind the clouds.
{1a} behind what is shown, as an action or attitude. Luyu sa íyang
pahiyum anáa ang pagbudhì, Treachery lurks behind her smile. {1b} one’s
back. Kalúta ning ákung luyu, Scratch my back. {2} on the other side
of. Luyu sa panaptun, Reverse side of the cloth. Luyu nga dágat, Sea on
the other side of the island. Luyu nga bulsa, Back pocket. Luyung
dunggan, The other ear. Luyung kwartu, The adjacent room. {2a} — ug —
both sides of. Putì ang luyug luyu sa playwud, The plywood is white on
both sides. {3} despite. Luyu sa ákung pagsakripisyu way bili níla ang
tanan, Despite the sacrifices I had made, they counted it all for
nothing. v [A; c1] assist s.o. in his work. Nars ang miluyu sa duktǔr
pag-upira, A nurse assisted the doctor in the operation. Ikaw lay ákung
iluyu (luyuhun) sa trabáhu, I’ll have you be my assistant in my work.
pa- v {1} [A; c] stay, put at the back. Nagpaluyu ug lingkud ang mga
mayukmuk, The small fry sat at the back. Ipaluyu nang ímung karga, Put
your baggage at the back. {1a} [A13] lurk, be behind s.t. as a cause.
Adúnay kahulugang nagpaluyu sa íyang pahiyum, There is a hidden meaning
lurking behind her smile. {2} [A; b(1)] support from behind the scenes.
Ang kudita gipaluyuhan sa siay-i, The coup d’état was backed up by the
CIA. luyulúyu n assistant. luyhánun, taga- n one living on the other
side of the island. †

lúyung v {1} [A; c] sow seeds in a seedbed. {2} [A; c] transplant.
Ilúyung ang mangga ngadtu sa luyu, Transplant the mango tree in the
back. {2a} [A; c1] dump corpses into a big pit. Mga sundálu ang
naglúyung sa ílang gipamatay, The soldiers dumped the corpses of the
people they massacred. (→) n {1} seedling. Ang átung luyung hustu nang
ibalhin, Our seedlings are ready to be transplanted. {2} s.t.
transplanted. tag- n one who transplants.

lúyut v [B12] for s.t. not firm to sag out of shape under a weight.
Nalúyut ang bakat nga ákung gilingkúran, The hamper I was sitting on
sagged out of shape. Nagkaluyut ang dúyan nga pirming higdáan, The
hammock is sagging out of shape because it is constantly used. (→) a be
out of shape.

lyábi_1 = yábi. -ra, -ru = yabíra, yabíru.

lyábi_2 n {1} lock in judo or wrestling. {2} in Jai-alai, where one
bets as to who comes out first and second place out of six players, bet
twice: once that those numbers come out first and second place,
respectively (e.g. 1 first place and 5 second place), and once that the
same numbers come out in reverse order (i.e. 5 first place and 1 second
place). Thus, one avoids betting on the right combination in the wrong
order. v {1} [A; b4] get a lock on s.o. {2} [A13; c1] make a bet a
lyábi.

lyágay n k.o. flying fish smaller than barúnguy.

lyamáda n home service for a haircut and shave. v [A; c1] request home
service for a haircut and shave.

lyamar v {1} [A; c6] summon, call s.o. to come or for s.t. to be
brought. Mulyamar ku ug lima ka saup arun patrabahúun sa pinsa, I will
summon five tenants to work on the fence. Naglyamar na pagsúgud ang
armi sa mga bayinti anyus, The army is beginning to draft the
twenty-year olds. Ilyamar ku ug taksi, Call me a taxi. {2} [A2; c]
speak to s.o. to ask for s.t. Milyamar si Pidru nga manghulam siya ug
kwarta nákù, Pedro called me to borrow money. {2a} [A] signify one’s
intention. Milyamar ug pangasáwa ang ákung anak, My son signified his
intention of getting married. {3} [A2] for a disease or mania to show
signs of recurring. Milyamar na sad ang ákung mata. Magkibídu na giyud
ku niíni, My eyes are bothering me again. Now I really will have to
wear eyeglasses. {3a} — ang tiyan feel hungry. {4} [A2] for a gear to
engage. Dílì mulyamar ang primíra sa ákung mutur, My motorbike won’t go
into first. {4a} for one’s ability or strategy to produce results. Walà
mulyamar ang ákung lung syát, My long shots did not score. {5} [A2] for
wind to change directions. Milyamar ang hángin paingus habagatan, The
wind changed directions to the south. n summons, order to start doing
s.t. lyamadur n one who calls for bets at a cockfight.

lyáwi = yábi, n1, v.

lyukimya n leukemia. v [B1246; a4] be afflicted with leukemia.

lyúpis = lúpis.
