


=== H ===


ha {1} particle at end of the sentence. {a} asking interlocutor if he
understands. Dì ni sabunan, ha? Don’t wash this with soap, do you
understand? {b} asking interlocutor for his agreement. Singku na lang,
ha? Just let me have it for five pesos, all right? Adtu na lang ku, ha?
I’ll be going now, O.K.? Bálik unyà, ha? Come back later, will you? —
ba particle asking for interlocutor’s agreement in particularly urgent
tones. Malígù ku, Mámi, ha ba? May I take a bath, Mommy, please? O.K.?
salámat — thanks a lot. {2} particle initial in a sentence.
{2a} particle discussing s.t. as not worth thinking about: Humph. Ha!
Ábig mahadluk ku níya, Humph, he thinks I’m scared of him.
{2b} particle asking the interlocutor to repeat (somewhat curt). Ha?
Muusab pa ka? What? You mean you’re going to do it again!

ha-_1 = hi-(→), 1.

ha-_2 adjective forming affix added to adjectives referring to degree.
It has no meaning other than to give a formal flavor to the style.
Hataas, Tall. Halayù, Far. Halapad, Broad.

háa = háin.

háb = hálab.

hába n low-quality corn grits which were sold in times of corn shortage
in pre-war times.

hábà v [A; b(1)] take sides with. Gihabáan siya sa íyang bána, Her
husband took her side. pa- v [A; b6] {1} run to s.o. for sympathy and
ask him to take sides. Túa na pud magpahábà dáyun tung Máma níya, There
she goes, running to her Mama again. {2} say s.t. exaggerated to get a
person to feel a certain way. Nagpahábà siyag sulti sa íyang ámu nga
maáyu siyang mutrabáhu maung giingkrísan, He talked big to his boss to
make him think he worked well and he got a raise. n action of running
to s.o. for sympathy.

hábag n {1} round, black to greyish black, smooth stone found on
beaches, used for bathing. {2} shore area where such stones are found
in abundance.

habágat n strong wind that hits Cebu from the southwest, common from
June to September. v [A; a12] for the habágat to blow. -an(→)
n southwest.

habáhab a having a bitter sour taste similar to that of unripe
grapefruit. Habáhab kaáyu ning buungúna, This shaddock has a very
biting and bitter taste. v [B1; b6] get a bitter, rancid taste.
Naghabáhab na ang sud-an, The food tastes rancid.

habak, hábak_1 v [A; c] wear an amulet. Way dautang mahitabù sa bátang
gihabákan, No harm can come to a child with an amulet. n amulet.

hábak_2 n an area of a farm, usually along its length, that is alloted
to s.o. for him to till. Gibáhin sa lima ka hábak ang baul, The farm
was divided into five portions.

hábal v [AC; b] for animals to mate. Gihabálan ang ákung bigal kaduha,
My sow has been bred twice. {2} for people to fornicate (derogatory).
n act of breeding. pa- [A; b(1)] breed animals. pa-an n male pig for
breeding.

hábas_1 n {1} a growth which develops in horses’ mouths which causes
hardship in eating. It is removed by application of heated iron.
{2} sores that develop on soft tissue: the tongue, corners of the
mouth, palate. v {1} [A123P; a4b4] for horses to develop such a growth.
{2} [B2; b4] develop sores on the tongue or in the corners of the
mouth. Mihábas (gihabásan) ákung dílà sa pagkináug pinya, My tongue got
sores on it from eating too much pineapple.

hábas_2 = halábas.

habasan n general name for cone shells.

habásan n k.o. surgeon fish.

hábaw = hábal.

habay n pigs with yellowish or reddish-brown hair and skin. {2} person
with a spot of lighter colored hair on the head (humorous).

hábay = háin bay. see háin.

habhab v {1} [A; a] for pigs to eat. {1a} for people to eat
(derogatory). Gihabhab sa mga bilat sa ílang ina ang ákung kík, The
bastards ate my cake. {2} [A1; ab2] for pigs to snap at one in anger.
Ayaw pagdúul sa anay kay hihabhaban ka unyà, Don’t go too close to the
sow because she’ll bite you. {3} [A3; b5(1)] take out, eat away
portions from, bit by bit. Túbig ang mihabhab sa kílid sa kanal, Water
ate away bits from the side of the ditch. Balud nga naghabhab sa
pangpang, Waves that are eating away at the cliff. -in- n intake of
food of pigs or persons (derogatory). -ag- v {1} [A; b6] make the noise
of pigs eating. {2} [c1] eat with a loud noise like a pig. -um-r- n pig
that will bite.

hábi n hobby. v [A13; c6] have a hobby.

habig towards the side or direction of. Paghalábas habig sa wala, Cut
down the weeds on the left side.

habilhábil v [A; b6] put up a temporary screen for shelter or in an
unfinished house. Naghabilhábil lang ug mga kartun ang mga nasunúgan
didtu sa parki, The fire victims just put up a temporary screen of
empty boxes for shelter in the park.

habitsuylas n green or wax beans: Phaseolus vulgaris.

habluk v [A; a4] crave, yearn intensely for s.t. Gihabluk ku sa ámung
lugar, I crave to see my homeland. Hablúkun kag isdà sa bukid, You will
develop an intense craving for fish in the mountains. a having a strong
craving or appetite.

hablun see habul_1.

*hablus see humablus.

habù = halbù.

habubuyna = hirbubuyna.

hábug a {1} high, lofty. Hábug nga pangpang, A tall cliff. {2} lofty in
thoughts and aspirations. Hábug kaáyu ang ákung mga damgu álang sa
ákung mga anak, I have high hopes for my children. v [B; c1] be high or
towering, physically or in aspiration. Naghábug lang ang hunàhúnà
pagnigusyu apan way puhúnan, He has great ideas of going into business
but he doesn’t have money. — ug pamarug tall in stature. — manulti talk
as if one were s.o. important, of high standing. Hábug kaáyung manulti
mu rag dì kagíkag pubri, He talks big as if he weren’t from a poor
family. gi-un(→), ka-un(→) n height, altitude.

habuhábu n light rain showers. v [A] shower.

hábuk v [A; b] {1} fertilize plants with compost. Gihabúkan nákù ang
mga tanum, I fertilized my plants with humus. {2} do s.t. to make
personal relations close (lit. nourish your friendship). (→)
n {1} humus, matter made from a compost pile. {2} area made solid by a
hardened mass of garbage. Magbáy ka ibabaw sa habuk? Are you going to
build a house on the mound of hardened garbage?

habul_1 v [A; a] weave with a hand loom. Habla ang lánut, Weave the
abaca fibers in a hand loom. n = hablun, 1. (←)_1 n blanket, sheet, or
anything used as covering for sleeping. v [A; b6(1)] {1} cover s.o.
with a blanket. Habúli ang bátà, Cover the child with a blanket.
{2} envelope, enshroud in an atmospheric condition. Búkid nga gihabúlan
ug gábun, A mountain enshrouded in mist. {3} drink liquor before going
to sleep. Maáyu níyang pagkatúlug kay naghábul na nag tubà, He slept
soundly because he drank toddy before going to bed (lit. took toddy as
a blanket). hablun n {1} hand loom. {2} cloth woven in a hand loom.
v {1} = habul, v. {2} [A; b6] wear hand-woven cloth. halablan,
hagbanan, hagbunan, hablunan, hablanan, halabúlan = hablun, n 1.
habulhabul n {1} thin membrane that separates the skin of the abdomen
from the intestines and stomach. {2} thin membrane between the egg
white and the shell.

habul_2 n seriously injured. v [B1256] be seriously injured.

hábul_2 a dull, not sharp. v [APB; a] make s.t. dull, be dull, not
sharp. Mahábul ang gunting ug gamítun pagputul ug sín, The scissors
will become dull if you use them to cut galvanized iron. (→) = hábul,
a. -an(→) a of a dull sort. v [B12] be, become dull. Nahabulan na man
núun ning gilit, This safety razor blade has become dull.

habun n toilet soap. -íra n soap dish, container for toilet soap.

habwà, habwas v [A; a] {1} remove s.t. from a place, esp. from a
container without tipping it. Habwáa ang kargamintu sa trák, Take the
cargo out of the truck. Bagul lay ihabwà sa túbig, Use a coconut shell
to bail the water out. {2} — ang kináun v [A2P; c1] cause to vomit
(remove what one ate from his stomach). Habwáun (ihabwà) giyud ang
átung kináun ug musakay tas barku ug tinghangin, You surely will vomit
if you sail in stormy weather. {3} [B124; b2] go away from s.w. in
large numbers. Nahabwà ming tanan ngadtu sa lungsud dihang may
naghuramintádu, We left the village and took refuge in town when s.o.
ran amok. Nahabwaan na mi sa balay, Only a few of us are left at home.

habyug v [A; c] cast fishing line. Dílì ku makahabyug ngadtu sa lalum
kay mabà ákung pasul, I cannot cast out into the deep water because my
fishline is short. Ihabyug ug kusug ímung pasul arun muabut sa layù,
Throw your line out hard so it will reach far out. paN- v [A2; b6] fish
by casting a line. n fishing by casting a line.

hád = hálad.

hadag = harag.

hadaw = haraw.

hadígi = halígi.

hadiyung n whizzing, whistling, buzzing sound. v [A; b2cP] whistle or
whiz by. Hángin nga naghadiyung, Whistling wind. Naghadiyung ang buyug,
The bee buzzed. Nahadiyungan akug bála, A bullet just barely missed me.

hadlà v [A; a1] {1} play with a child to make it laugh or divert it.
Hadláa ang bátà arun dì muhílak, Amuse the child so he won’t cry.
{2} engage in horseplay. Naghadlà ang mga bátà sa sála, The children
ran around in the living room. {3} for circumstances to be annoyance,
as if teasing. Dagkung balud mihadlà sa barku, The huge waves played
with the ship. {4} [C] pet, engage in sexual foreplay. n {1} playful
teasings. Wà giyud pabangbang si Turyu sa mga hadlà sa íyang asáwa,
Toryo’s wife failed to overcome his bad mood with her playful teasing.
Ang mga hadlà sa kapaláran, The playful twists of fate. {2} foreplay.
Ang hadlà gikinahanglan sa dì pa manghiláwas, Foreplay is necessary
before the sex act. ma-un a playful.

hadluk v [AN; a1b3(1)c] scare, frighten s.o. Kinsay mihadluk
(nanghadluk) nímu? Who frightened you? Hadlúka arun muhílum, Scare him
to quiet him down. Dì ku mahadluk ánang irúa, I’m not scared of that
dog. Ang táwu nga gikahadlúkan, A man who is feared. Ihadluk
(ipanghadluk) ning bitin ni Manang, Scare Big Sister with this snake.
paN- v [A13] be afraid. Nagpanghadluk kung muadtu, I am afraid to go
there. n means to frighten s.o. -an(→) a easily frightened. ma-un
a fearful. Mahadlúkun siyang musakayg ayruplánu, She is afraid to ride
planes. maka-r- a inspiring fear.

hádung = hárung.

hadus = harus.

hág = hálag.

hagà v {1} [B; a12] for the body to be gaunt and unhealthy with no
energy. Nahagà siya sa pag-útas ug ínum, He became gaunt and unhealthy
from drinking too much. {2} [B2; b6] for the eyes to be deep-set with
dark circles under them. a having deep-set eyes with dark circles. Hagà
ug mata ang mga Katsílà, Spaniards have deep-set eyes with circles
under them.

hagabhab_1 a for a garment to be loose. Hagabhab kaáyu ang íyang
padyáma, Her pajamas are very loose. v [B12; c1] for a garment to be,
become loose.

hagabhab_2 see habhab.

hagad_1 n defective coconut, the meat of which is loosely attached to
the shell and which produces little oil.

hagad_2 v [AN; a] {1} offer to do s.t. Mihagad ku paghatud níya sa íla,
I offered to take her home. {2} invite s.o. to do s.t. Hagdun ta untà
kag pamasíyu, I would like to invite you to go for a walk. n offer to
do s.t. (←)_1 v {1} [AN; a] challenge s.o. to a fight. Ug hagárun kag
sinukmagay, If you are challenged to a fight. {2} [A23; a] make first
move, or touch off. Nagbúlag mi ug akuy mihágad pagpakig-úlì, We
separated and I made the first move for reconciliation. Ayaw ihágad sa
mga laláki ang ímung pagkababáyi, Do not make yourself cheap by making
approaches to men. n challenge.

hágad_2 n highway patrolman.

hagakhak n loud, boisterous laughter. v [A; b3c1] laugh boisterously.

hagal v [B; b6] produce a rasping, guttural sound in the throat or
chest in having a cough or breathing through mucous.

hágal v [A2S] pant noisily, making a sound in the throat. Mihágal siya
sa tantung dinágan, She panted from running so much. n panting.

hagálam see *gálam.

hagalhal a wheezing sound produced in a throat full of mucus when air
passes through. v [A; c1] make a wheezing noise in the throat.
Mihagalhal ang himalatyun pagsulti sa íyang panúgun, The dying man
spoke his final wishes with a wheezing voice.

hagánas v [A2S] for water to make a rushing sound. Naghaganas ang
busay, The waterfall makes a rushing sound. n rushing sound of water.
(→) = hagánas, n. -in- n continuous rushing sound. Hinagánas sa balud,
The swash of the waves.

haganhágan v [A; b5] do s.t. with reserve, not with full strength. Dì
ku muhaganhágan pagbúnal nímu, I won’t hold back in hitting you.
Maghaganhágan tag gastu kay layù pang tingswildu, Let’s be careful with
our money because pay day is still a long way off. Haganhagáni
(haganhagána) nang bínu, kay ísug ra ba, Go slow with that liquor
because it is powerful stuff. Haganhagána (haganhagáni) pagpadágan ang
kutsi, Drive the car slowly.

hágard n large motorcycle of the type used by the police. v [A1] use
this sort of motorcycle.

hagas v {1} [B4] become gaunt and unhealthy. Naghagas siya kay
nag-abusar sa láwas, He has become gaunt and sickly because he does
things that are deleterious to his health. {2} [a4] for one’s
livelihood to fail as the result of a curse wished on him, or brought
on in retribution for a failure to meet one’s obligations. Nalugnas ang
átung kamanukan mu ra tag gihagas, Our poultry business failed, as
though we were under a curse. {3} [a12] do s.t. unpleasant to all
without exception. Gihagas mig latigu ni Tátay, Father whipped us all.

hag-as_1 v [A; a] remove water or s.t. watery from a place for the
purpose of cleaning it. Gihag-ásan nílag lápuk ang kanal, They removed
the mud from the canal.

hag-as_2 v [B246] for s.t. to happen for no apparent reason. Mihag-as
man lang kag kagìkì? What made you giggle all of a sudden? a done
suddenly for no reason.

hagashas {1} dry, swishing sound such as that produced by rubbing
pieces of paper or by a well-starched dress. {2} for s.t. to be coarse
to the touch such that rubbing the hands over it produces a swishing
sound. v [A; c1] producing a rustling sound. Mihagashas ang dáhun
pag-ági sa bitin, The leaves rustled as the snake passed over them.

hagawhaw v [A; c1] speak in a low, hardly audible voice. Hagawháwa
(ihagawhaw) lang pagsulti arun dì silang kadungug, Say what you want to
say very softly, so they can’t hear. n s.t. said in a low voice. -in-
n sounds of low talking.

hagbà v {1} [B26; c] fall heavily with a thud. Nahisalibay siya sa
kabáyù ug mihagbà (nahagbà) sa yútà, She was thrown off her horse and
fell to the ground with a thud. Hihagbaan ug tikì ang lamísa, A gecko
fell with a thud on the table. {2} [APB26; a] fail a course, cause one
to do so. n {1} thudding sound produced by a fall. {2} subject failed.

hagbanan see habul_1.

hagbas = halábas, 1.

hagbay, hagbáya a long time ago, longer than one thinks. Hagbay ra
siyang migíkan, Oh, he left some time ago. Hagbay na tu siyang namatay,
He died a long time ago (not recently).

hagbunan see habul_1.

hagbung v {1} [AB2; c] drop, let s.t. heavy fall with a crash or thud,
for s.t. heavy to do so. Ayaw ihagbung ang sáku kay mabungkas, Don’t
throw the sack down because it will burst open. Nahagbung ang masítas,
The flower pot fell. {2} [A; a2] fail s.o. in school. Hagbúngun ta ka,
I’ll fail you. Pila ka sabdyik ímung nahagbúngan? How many subjects did
you fail? n {1} subject failed. Wà kuy hagbung uy! I didn’t fail
anything! {2} person who failed s.t. Dì makagradwit ang mga hagbung,
Failing students cannot graduate. -in- n crashing noise of things
falling.

hagdan n {1} stairs, ladder. {1a} ladder made of a bamboo pole with
projections left at the nodes used as the footholds. {2} s.t. by means
of which one climbs or improves. Ang paningkámut hagdan sa kalampúsan,
Hard work is the ladder to success. v {1} [A1; b6(1)] climb a ladder.
{2} [A; a] make into, put a stair or ladder s.w. — máya n k.o. tufted
grass. — ug uwak k.o. small tree with pinnate leaves, bearing foot-long
beans. hagdanhagdan a tiered, having a step-like arrangement. Kík nga
hagdanhagdan, A tiered cake. v [B1; c1] be made in tiers.
Naghagdanhagdan ímung tupi kay luhag ka man, Your hair is cut unevenly
(like steps) because you kept wiggling about. -an, -an(→) n stairs.

hagdaw v [AN; a2b2] {1} glean the leftovers after corn or rice harvest.
Wà na kitay hagdáwun, There is nothing left for us to glean.
{2} scavenge for leftovers. Ang makililímus nagpanghagdaw intáwun ug
íyang sarang makáun sa basurahan, The beggar is scavenging for what he
can find in the garbage cans. {3} glean information. Impurmasiyung
nahagdaw sa piryudiku, Information gleaned from the newspapers.
-in-an(→) gleanings. -in-an n place gleaned.

haghag = halaghag.

hagid = hágud, v 2.

hagikhik = agik-ik.

hagílis v [A2] make a high-pitched scream. Mihagílis ang íyang tíngug
sa túmang kalísang, Her voice rose to a scream in her terrible fright.

hagímit n small tree of primary forest with rough leaves: Ficus sp.

hagip-ut = gip-ut.

hágis v {1} [AN; a2] threaten, terrorize people by making trouble for
them. Naghágis ang anak sa pulitiku kay nagsalig na, The politician’s
son is running around threatening people because he knows he will
escape punishment. Gihágis ang ákung anak sa iskuyláhan, My son was
bullied around at school. {2} [A2N; b(1)] be the best in a group. Siyay
nanghágis sa burd, He was the best in the board exam. a be a big bully.
Hágis kaáyu sa baylihan, Acting like a bully, terrorizing everyone at
the dance.

hágit v {1} [ANC12; b5] challenge to a fight or contest. Nanghágit siya
nákug sukmagay, He challenged me to a fist fight. {2} [ANC12; c12]
invite, tempt one to engage in an unwholesome activity. Gihágit ku
níyag ínum, He tempted me to join him in a drinking spree. {3} tempt
(literary). Ang manggang hinug mihágit sa ákung kaíbug, The ripe
mangoes tempted me. ma-un a {1} provocative, challenging. {2} tempting
one to engage in s.t. unwholesome. mahagithagítun a = ma-un, 1.

hagiyung, hagíyung n whizzing, whistling, buzzing sound. v [A] make
such a sound.

hagíyus n a whistling, sibilant, swishing sound produced by a rapidly
moving object. Ang hagíyus sa bála, The whizzing of the bullets. v [A;
b6] produce a whistling sound with rapid motion. Mihagíyus siyag dágan,
He zoomed away.

hagkik n hot cakes. v [A; a] make, have hot cakes.

hagkut a {1} sticky. Ang latik hagkut, Syrup is sticky. Hagkut ang
ákung kamut, My hands are all sticky. {2} agreeing to s.t. with
reluctance. Dì ku sigúru adtung íyang sáad kay hagkut tu siyag
tinubagan, I can’t rely on his promise, because he answered with some
reluctance. {3} for the air to be humid and cool. v [B; a2] {1} be,
make sticky. Mihagkut na ang gwába dyíli, The guava jelly has gotten
sticky. {2} be, make reluctant. †

hagmang n k.o. wild yam having long edible tubers and thorny vines.

hagmángun n large blue-spotted fish similar to the grouper:
Plectropomus spp.

hagmun = sagmun.

hagmuyù = hasagmuyù. see sagmuyù.

hagnaw a uneasy feeling of coldness and emptiness in one’s stomach.
Paimna kug ínit kay hagnaw kaáyu ning ákung tiyan sa pagkawalay káun,
Let me take s.t. hot because my stomach is cold and empty from not
having eaten anything. v [B56] get this feeling. Maung dílì ku ganáhan
magswing kay muhagnaw (maghagnaw) lagi nang ákung tiyan iniglabyug
gíkan sa táas, That’s why I don’t like to play on the swing because I
get a queasy feeling in the stomach when I swing high.

hagnáya n k.o. edible, tiny, reddish fish.

hagpà v [APB; b6] for tall and pliant things to fall flat on their
base, cause them to do so. Bagyu ang naghagpà (nagpahagpà) sa humay, A
typhoon flattened the rice plants. Mihagpà ang mais nga gilanápan, The
corn was flooded and knocked flat.

hagpak v [AB456; c1] slam with a loud bang. Kinsa tung naghagpak sa
sira? Nangítà tug áway? Who slammed the door? Is he looking for a
fight? Muhagpak ang sira ug hampákun sa hángin, The door slams when the
wind blows it.

hagpat v [A; a2b2] {1} pick out s.t. from a larger group. Usa ra ang
nahagpatan sa mga nagdimunstrít nga kastigúhun, They singled out one of
the demonstrators for punishment. Hagpáta ang mga dikulur nga mga
sinínà, Separate out the colored dresses. {2} remove, separate s.t.
useless from the good. Ákù nang gihagpátan ang isdà sa mga bukug, I
have removed the bones from the fish. {3} count ballots. {4} [A; a12]
pick out things from the past to remember and reminisce over
(literary). Gitagsatagsa níya paghagpat ang mga hitabù, He recalled the
various events, one at a time, as they happened. n counting of votes.
Daghang maniubra sa katapusang hagpat sa balúta, There was lots of
chicanery in the final tally of the ballots. -íru n person in charge of
classifying abaca fibers into different grades. v [B16; a2] be, become
a classifier of abaca fibers.

hagpik v [A; a1] slap s.o. fairly hard on the shoulders. Ayaw kug
hagpíka kay dúnay pasù ákung abága, Don’t slap me on the shoulders
because I’ve got a sunburn.

hagpù v [B26] for a line or rope to break under tension. Mihagpù ang
pasul paglugnut sa dakung subad nga isdà, The fishing line broke when
the big fish struggled to get free.

hagsà v [B2; c1] {1} fall heavily onto s.t. hard, cause s.t. to do so.
Nahagsà ang ayruplánu, The airplane crashed. Kinsay naghagsà íning mga
libru? Who slammed these books down? {2} [A; c1] for a younger person
to call an older person by his name without a title of respect. {3} [A;
a] fail s.o. in school. n {1} things that have fallen. {2} subject
failed. -in- n crashing sound. Hinagsà sa dagkung káhuy, The crashing
sound of the falling trees.

hagsak v [AB2; c] fall down hard, but usually not onto s.t. hard.
Ihagsak nang mga pinusù sa tápuk, Throw the ears of corn onto the pile.

hagtak v {1} [A; c] make a cracking or banging sound of objects on
colliding or falling, drop s.t. making such a sound. Mihagtak ang íyang
úlu pagkaigù sa búla, His head went bang when the ball hit it. Ayaw
ihagtak ang mga kinúhang mangga arun dì mabuak, Don’t bang the mangoes
we picked so that they won’t split open. {2} [B246] spend, lose a big
amount in a single instance. Mihagtak ang íyang usa ka líbu sa búwang,
He lost his one thousand in a single bet in a cockfight.

hagtik n sharp clicking sound. Ang hagtik sa íyang mga tudlù, The
clicking sound of his fingers. Ang hagtik sa gátu, The click of the
trigger. Ang hagtik sa kandádu, The clicking of the lock. a for new
paper bills to be crisp. Bag-u pa ning gipagawas kwartáha kay hagtik pa
man, This must be a new bill because it is still crisp (lit. still
clicks). v [A; c16] make a clicking, ticking sound. Mihagtik ang íyang
nawung sa ákung suntuk, His face made a clicking sound when I hit him.
-in- n continuous clicking sound. Ang hinagtik sa makinilya, The
clicking of the typewriter keys.

hagtub n loud thumping sound, sound produced by a blow on a hollow
object. Ang hagtub sa bumbu, The thumping sound of the bass drum. v [A;
a] produce a loud thumping sound. Muhagtub ug maáyu ang báhu sa
istiryu, The bass of the stereophonic record player makes a loud
thumping sound. Muhagtub ka giyud run dihà ug dì ka muhílum, You’ll get
it (lit. you’ll go thump) if you don’t shut up.

hagtuk n loud knocking sound. v [A; c1] {1} produce a loud knocking
sound. Naghagtuk ang urasan katulu, The clock struck three times.
{2} make loud footfalls on the stairs. {3} [A23P] spend, release a
large amount of money at once. Pag-usa ka úras nihagtuk dáyun ang tris
sa abangan, At the end of one hour I coughed up three bucks for the
rent.

hagtus v {1} [AB23(1)] for a line, rope to break under tension, cause
it to do so. Mihagtus ang íyang tabánug dihang mikusug ang huyup sa
hángin, His kite string broke in the heavy gust of wind. Dì makahagtus
ning barútu sa íyang pundu, This boat can’t break away from its
moorings. {2} for emotional feelings to give way. Nahagtus na ang tumuy
sa íyang paílub, His last ounce of patience finally gave way.

hagu exclamation of disgust. Hagu, kakápuy ba ning trabahúa, My! This
work is so tiresome.

hágù v {1} [A; a] exert effort. Naghágù kug limpiyu sa báy, I went to a
lot of trouble to clean the house. Ayaw nag hagúi pagbása, Don’t bother
reading that. {2} [B16; a12] expend one’s effort uselessly. Naghágù
lang kag kupya. Ipasíruks man nà, You’re wasting your effort in copying
that. We’re going to xerox it. {3} [B126; a12] exhaust s.o. with
overwork. Nahágù ku pagpangarga, I got exhausted loading the cargo.
Nahágù hinúun kag hatud íni dà! Thanks! You went to so much trouble to
bring this to me. a {1} requiring effort. {2} tired from overwork. Hágù
kaáyu siya gíkan sa upisína, He arrived home from work exhausted.
n {1} penalty imposed on the loser in a children’s game. {2} = hatsuy.
(→) a = hágù. n walay — failing to put s.t. to good use. Gawía ning
sapátus. Díay ákung way hagù, Use these shoes. I have some here that
I’m not using anyway. ka- {1} effort. {2} exhaustion. -in-an n fruits
of one’s efforts.

hagubhub n prolonged, low, booming sound. Hagubhub ug báhu ang íyang
sista, The bass string on his guitar produces a prolonged, hollow
sound. v [A; b6] make a prolonged, booming sound. Ang naghagubhub nga
mga tíngug sa píkas kwartu, The booming sound of voices in the next
room.

hágud v {1} [A; c] rub material onto strings to impart a desired
property. Hagúri ug kandílà ang hílu nga itahì sa sapátus, Rub wax onto
the thread you will repair the shoes with. {2} [A1; ac] make s.t.
smooth and pliable by rubbing it over the edge of s.t. Naghágud kug
buli arun laláhun, I am softening buri leaves to weave. {2a} [B12] for
rope or similar things to get worn out from use. Nahágud ang higut sa
bábuy sa tantung bag-idbag-id, The pig’s rope got worn from being
rubbed so much. {3} [A; a] for males to masturbate. (→) n {1} substance
to coat strings and lines to impart a desired property. {2} a mixture
of pulverized glass used as a coating for kite strings. hinagúran
a possessing the desired property as a result of having been rubbed
with s.t.

hagudilà = hagurilà.

hagugma = higugma. see gugma.

háguk v [A2S] snore. Muháguk ka bang matúlug? Do you snore when you
sleep? n snores.

hagukà a {1} poorly built. Dalì rang matumba ang balay nga hagukà
pagkagamà, A poorly built house will quickly collapse. {2} loosely
bound, fastened, tied, etc. Hagukà ang pagkahikut sa kátig, The
outrigger of the boat is loosely tied. {3} not firmly packed, flabby.
Hagukang láwas nga naghíting sa katambuk, A flabby body with hanging
folds of fat. Hagukà rang pag-impáki sa paldu, The bale was not tightly
packed. {4} for plans or ideas not to be well thought out. Hagukang mga
plánu sa pagdibisiyun sa ílang balay, The layout of their house was
poorly thought out. {5} for boiled staple to be cooked very soft.
{6} for promises, words to be empty or insincere. Dì na katuhúan ang
hagukà nga mga sáad sa pulitiku, You can’t trust the empty promises of
a politician. {7} weak, having little resistance to disease. Kay hagukà
ka man kaáyug láwas ayaw pagpaduas sa úlan, You get sick so easily, so
don’t expose yourself to the rain.

hagulhul n {1} sound of sobbing combined with crying. {2} sound of
barking. v [A; b6] {1} sob and cry. {2} make a barking sound. Nakamata
ku dáyun dihang mihagulhul ang irù, I woke up instantly at the first
growls of the dog.

hagumáa = agumáa.

hagung, hágung n continuous humming, high-pitched sound. v [A; c1] give
out a humming sound. Kusug kaáyung muhágung ang ímung tip rikurdir,
Your tape recorder makes a loud, buzzing noise. Hagúnga (ihágung) ang
pagpatúyuk sa kasing, Make the top spin with a hum. Maáyu pag ilábay
ang kwarta kay muhagung pa kay sa ipalit ánang butánga, You’d do better
to throw your money away than to buy that, because at least you’ll get
the benefit of hearing it hum.

hagúnub n thundering sound that is loud and prolonged. Ang hagúnub sa
makina sa barku makabúngul, The roar of the ship’s engine is deafening.
v [A] make a thundering sound. Naghagunub ang panun sa dyit nga
milabay, The jet planes roared by.

hagúnus = hagúrus.

hagúnuy n a coarse, herbaceous vine found along tidal streams, the
roots, flowers, and leaves of which are put to various medicinal uses:
Wedelia biflora.

hagupaas n rustling sound produced by s.t. moving through tall grass or
similar growths. v [A] produce such a sound. Naghagupaas ang kamaisan
nga gisuútan sa kábaw, The leaves rustled as the water buffalo moved
through the field.

hagupit n tree with small coarse leaves: Ficus sp.

hagurilà n pancreas of pigs.

hagúrub n a low but steady roar, as of a motor. Hagúrub sa mutur nga
milabay, The roar of a passing motorcycle. v [A] make a steady roar.

hagúrus n wooshing; low, hissing sound of wind, water, vehicles.
v {1} [A2S] make a wooshing sound. Mihagúrus ang pitrumaks, The lantern
made a low hissing sound. Naghagurus ang kusug nga hángin, The wind
roared. {2} [A; b6] move fast so as to produce a rushing sound.
Gihagurúsan ku sa kutsi, The car zoomed by me. -in- n prolonged
wooshing sound.

hagus v [A; b5] polish rough rice or corn grits by pounding. Hagusi
(hagusa) ang mais ug tigúma ang tiktik, Polish the corn grits and save
the corn powder.

hágus = bágus_1.

hagusáhis = agusahis.

hag-ut v {1} [B2; b6] for s.t. to get worn out through constant
rubbing, esp. said of rope. Nagkahag-ut na ang písì sa pundu. Lagmit
mabugtù na nà, The anchor line is getting worn out. One of these days
it’s going to break. {2} [AN; a] strip the outer part of abaca to get
the fibers. {3} = hágud, n 2. -an n abaca stripper. maN-r- n a person
who earns his living by stripping abaca.

haguyag = hágud, v 2.

hagwà = hadlà.

hagwásun = agwásun.

hagyung = hadiyung.

ha ha written representation of laughter.

háhay n {1} sound uttered when yawning or stretching. Háhay, kakápuy!
Ho-hum, how tired I am! {2} sound uttered when sighing in dejection.
Háhay, kapait ning ákung kinabúhì, Oh, what a miserable life I lead.

hái = háin.

háil a for skin to be hard and rough on the surface and soft on the
inside. v [B; b6] come out hard on the surface. Miháil (naháil) ang
bugas sa ibábaw nga wà tabúni, The top portion of the rice turned out
hard because it wasn’t covered. Nangháil ang íyang pánit kay gikagid,
The skin turned hard and rough because of her skin infection.

háin {1} where is, are, does? Háin ka magpuyù? Where do you live?
{2} where (past or future). Háin ibutang ang libru? Where did they put
the book? Háin ka punta? Where are you headed to? {3} which of several.
Háin sa duruha ang ímung palabihun? Which of the two would you prefer?
Bísag háin niíni ang ákung dad-un, I’ll take any one of these.
{4} whoever. Háin ang labing makalulúuy mauy hatágag hinábang, Whoever
is the most needy will be given aid. — bay who says [so-and-so] is the
case, when it’s not at all the case. Háin bay alkansi nga dakù man núun
ang ganansiya, Who says you lost, when you made a huge profit? — pay
[noun]-un there’s no [noun], much as one would expect there to be one.
Háin pay Timyúngun nga hagbáya ra mang milakaw, No Temyong could be
found, for he had already left some time before. Háin bay radiyúhung
dúgay nang nadáut? What radio? It’s been broken for ages.

háit a {1} sharp-edged. Háit nga kutsilyu, A sharp knife.
{2} sharp-pointed. Háit nga mga batu, Sharp-pointed rocks. Háit kaáyu
ang tumuy sa ayis pik, The ice pick has a sharp point. {3} sharp of
intelligence. Háit ug salabútan, Having a quick mind. {4} easily
discerning. Háit kaáyug mga mata, Having sharp eyes. {5} biting in
language. Háit nga mga púlung, Sharp words. Háit nga tinutukan,
Piercing stare. {6} shrill, piercing in voice. Háit ug tíngug,
Shrill-voiced. {7} blinding, glaring light. Háit nga kaháyag, Blinding
light. v [A; a] sharpen s.t., make one’s language sharp, one’s voice
shrill, make a light blinding.

hákà_1 v [AC; b12] {1} for animals to copulate. Gihakáan ang ákung
bigal ug Dyirsi, I had my sow bred to a Jersey boar. {2} for people to
fornicate (coarse).

hákà_2 a boasting loudly. v [B12; b6] become a braggart; consider s.o.
as such. Nagkahákà siya human makadaug sa amatyur, He has been doing
nothing but boasting ever since he won the singing contest.

hákab = abhak. hakabhakab v {1} = hak-abhak-ab. {2} [A1; c1] eat s.t.
ravenously with great eagerness. Kun gigútum pa nà maghakabhakab untà
nag káun, If he were hungry he would have eaten ravenously.
{3} anticipate s.t. with great eagerness. Naghakabhakab ang ákung
ginháwa pagtan-aw sa ákung pinaskúhan, I was very anxious to see what I
got for Christmas.

hak-ab = abhak. hak-abhak-ab v [b5c1] take a little food from a variety
of dishes. Ayaw hak-abhak-ábi (hak-abhak-ába, ihak-abhak-ab) kanang mga
pagkáun kay wà pa muabut ang bisíta, Don’t nibble at that food because
the visitors haven’t arrived.

hakad v [A; c] {1} spread s.t. over s.t. Unsa may hakaran nímu sa
pagkáun nga walà may lamísa? What will you put the food on when we
don’t have a table? Tapdási únà ang tihíras únà ihakad ang bidsyit,
Dust the cot first before you lay the sheet over it. {2} display one’s
goods to the public. Dihà ra ihakad níya sa asíras, natumban lagi
hinúus mga táwu, He displayed his wares on the pavement, so the people
stepped on them.

hákad v [A; ab] take s.t. solid out from inside s.t. Átung hakárun ang
sulud kay limpiyúhan ang kahun, Let’s take the contents out because we
are going to clean the box.

hak-ang v [A; b6(1)] set a vessel over a fire for cooking. Siyay
mihak-ang sa kaldíru sa sug-ang, She set the kettle on the stove.

hakap = haklap.

hakayhakay a somewhat relieved. Hakayhakay na ang ákung sakit sa tiyan,
My stomachache is a bit better now. v [B] get somewhat alleviated.
Muhakayhakay ang pamuyù sa mag-uúma kun ting-ani, The farmers are not
so badly off during the harvest season.

hakbang v [A; ab2] bite with a quick snapping motion. Gihakbang sa irù
ang ákung tiil, The dog snapped at my foot.

hakgum (from kugum_1) v [A; a1] clasp in one’s fist. Gihakgum níya ang
kwarta kay nahadluk siyag mawálà, He clutched the money because he was
afraid it might get lost. Dílì na mahakgum ang ímung buktun tungud sa
kadakù, I cannot get my fingers around your arm any more because it has
gotten to be so big. n a fistful of s.t. Usa ka hakgum balas, A fistful
of sand.

hakhak_1 n {1} notches cut into the trunk of a coconut tree. {2} tubà
nga way —, way — n ersatz palm toddy (made by mixing water, lime, and
coloring). (Lit. Palm toddy gotten without climbing the notches in the
trunk.) v [A; b6(1)] cut notches on coconut trees. Hakháki ang lubi
arun sayun sak-un, Cut notches in the coconut tree so it will be easy
to climb.

hakhak_2 v [A; a2] eat food greedily and in a hasty, unrefined manner.
Kusug kaáyung mihakhak ang bábuy sa lawug, The pig greedily gobbled
down the slop.

haklap v [A13; c] lay out, spread s.t. on top of s.t. Kinsay naghaklap
ug sáku áring pahiran? Who laid a sack over the doormat? Dáhun sa
tabákù ang ihaklap sa hubag, Cover your boil with a tobacco leaf.

haklup v [A; c] lay s.t. on s.t. for medicinal purposes. Haklúpi ug
ayisbag ang ímung agtang, Put an icebag on your forehead. Hinálub dáhun
ang ihaklup sa ímung hubag, Apply softened leaves to your boil. n s.t.
to lay over s.t. for medicinal purposes.

hakmal v [A; b] stuff s.t. into the mouth or an analogous opening. Ang
táwu nga makahakmal sa íyang kinúmù datuun, A man that can put his fist
in his mouth is likely to become rich. Hakmálig kamúti ang bàbà sa
bátà, Stuff a sweet potato into the child’s mouth.

haknut a not slippery, offering hindrance to sliding. Way kaláking
baylíhan ang sawug haknut kay dì ta makapaanud-ánud, A rough floor is
no good to dance on because you cannot glide nicely. v [B] offer
resistance to slipping. Butangig brilyantín arun dì muhaknut pagsulud,
Put vaseline on it so that it won’t be hard to insert. Gámit ug tísas
kun maghaknut na ang táku, Use chalk when the cue gets sticky.

hakùhakù = hatùhatù.

hakug a {1} selfish, greedy, unwilling to share and wanting s.t. for
oneself. Hakug siya kay dílì manghátag bísan diyútay, He is selfish
because he doesn’t give even a little. Hakug kaáyu siya kay gustu
iyáhung tanan, He’s very selfish because he wants everything for
himself. {2} overly fond of s.t. Hakug siyag bayli, He is exceedingly
fond of dancing. v [B12] be selfish, greedy. Ang kangihit mauy
makahakug (makapahakug) sa mga táwu, Scarcity makes people greedy.
hakughakug v [A13; c1] do s.t. greedily, esp. eating. Hilabihan giyud
tingáli níyang gutúma kay naghakughakug ug káun, He must be very hungry
because he eats so greedily. -an a greedy. -un a of a greedy sort.

hakuhak a eating or drinking s.t. greedily, as fast as possible.
Hakuhak kaáyu nang mga batáa kay sígig hungit bísag ínit, Those
children are very greedy. They shove the food into their mouths, even
if it is too hot. v [B12; b6] get to be ravenous.

hakup_1 v {1} [A; a] scoop up with one hand. Mihakup kug usa ka kumkum
nga mais, I scooped a handful of corn. {2} [a12] clasp s.t. with one
hand. Gihakup níya ang ákung kamut ug gilamánu, He took my hand and
shook it. {3} embrace, seize or hold s.t. by encircling it with the
arms. Gihakup níya ang bátag midágan, He gathered the child in his arms
and ran. {4} [A23; b5] be gripped by an emotion or by a condition. Ang
katálaw mihakup sa íyang galamhan, Cowardice gripped him. Gihakup
(gihakpan) ang balángay sa kangitngit, Darkness enveloped the village.
n handful of s.t.

hakup_2 = haklup.

hakut_1 n k.o. large, black ant which inflicts a painful sting, usually
found on coconut trees.

hákut v [A; a] carry or haul s.t. in several trips. Muhákut siyag túbig
sa mga silíngan, He fetches water for the neighbors. Dyip mauy naghákut
sa mga táwu sa simbahan, A jeep took the people to the church in
several trips. Hakúta nang mga batu ngadtu sa gardin, Take those stones
to the garden. n {1} amount taken in one haul. {2} action of hauling.
Usa ka hákut diyis písus, It is ten pesos per truckful or ten pesos
each trip. -anan n {1} place where s.t. one hauls is obtained.
{2} place where things are hauled. {3} s.t. used in hauling things.
-un(→), -únun n things to be hauled. †

hakwat = sakwat.

Hal. n abbreviation for Halangdun, ‘Honorable’. Ang Hal. Gubirnadur,
The Hon. Governor.

hala expression telling s.o. to do s.t. {a} urging. Hala, káun na, Come
on. Eat now. Hala, sumbága, Come on! Sock him. {b} acquiescing. Na
hala, sígi, O.K., go ahead. Hala, bayinti na lang, O.K., twenty is O.K.
c urging in a satirical way. Hala, sígig bilar, arun matísis nang ímung
ubu, Go on, keep on staying up late, so your cough develops into T.B.
v [A23] {1} go along with s.t. unhesitatingly. Ug hangyúun, muhala
dáyun, If you ask him, he agrees to do it right away. Ug hagdun, muhala
dáyun, If you ask him to join you, he agrees right away. {2} urge s.o.
into immediate action. Walay naghala nímu sa kaminyúun ug karun
magbásul ka na, Nobody urged you to get married, and now you are sorry.
halla {1} expression of helplessness, upon watching s.t. happen. Halla,
natumba, There, it’s falling. {2} expression chiding s.o. Halla, káun,
bisag gisakitag tiyan, Go ahead, eat some more even if you got a
stomach-ache from it.

halá warning of s.t. unpleasant impending. Halá, gibuak nà nímung básu,
Watch out! You broke that glass.

hálà v [A; a] gather ears of corn that are maturing ahead of the rest
of the crop. Muhálà kug mais kay nahurut nang bugas, I’ll gather ears
of corn that are already ripe ahead of the rest of the crop because we
have run out of food.

halab v [A13] for the stomach to throb with intense hunger pangs.
Ikahumpay ni sa naghalab nímung tiyan, This will appease your hunger
pangs.

hálab v [A13; a12] for a fish to strike at another fish that is hooked.
Mamsà giyuy naghálab sa ímung kuhà kay largu giyung pagkaputul, It must
have been a large fish that attacked the fish on your hook because he
bit it clear through.

halábas v {1} [A; ab2] cut down s.t. tall with a long swing of a blade.
Habásun ku ning mga sagbut, I’ll cut down these weeds. {2} [A; a12]
wipe out of existence. Habásun sa Diyus ang tanang dautan sa kalibútan,
God will wipe out all evil on earth. {3} [AN; a12] win an election with
a sweeping victory. Si Iyù Hantuy nanghábas sa iliksyun, Uncle Hantoy
won a sweeping victory at the polls.

hálad v [A; c] {1} present s.t. as an offering to spirits, the dead.
Unsay átung ihálad sa Adlaw sa Minatay? What shall we make as an
offering on All Souls’ Day? {2} offer, give up s.t. as a sacrifice.
Ákung gihálad ang ákung panahun ug kahágù álang sa kalampúsan niíni, I
offered all my time and effort for its success. Ihálad níya ang tibuuk
níyang kinabúhì sa pag-alágad sa Diyus, He will offer his life to
serving God. {3} offer s.o. his love. Ang babáying íyang gihaláran, The
woman he adores. n offering, gift. mag-r- n suitor. hinaláran n woman
courted.

hálag n line connecting a bamboo fish trap to an anchor which holds it
in place. v [A1; b6(1)] attach an anchor line to a fish trap. Gihalágan
na ang panggal sa lambay, An anchor line has been attached to the crab
trap.

halaghag a {1} loosely woven. Halaghag ra kaáyu ang muskitíru.
Makasulud na ang lamuk, The mosquito net has gotten very loosely woven
so its fibers are far apart and the mosquitoes can get in. {2} for hair
or s.t. analogous to be thin. Haghag na ang iskúba, The brush has lost
lots of its bristles. v [B; a2] for a weave to get to be loose. Ang
sagúran haghágun pagtúyù, An abaca mat is purposely woven loosely.

hálang a {1a} having a hot, biting taste. Hálang kaáyu ang síling
kulikut, Red peppers are very hot. {1b} for the eyes to sting. Hálang
ákung mata sa asu, My eyes are smarting from the smoke. {2} for words
to be stinging, hurting. v [B2S; a] {1} get to be hot with a biting
taste, for the eyes to smart. {2} [b6] be hurt by stinging words.
Gihalángan ku sa íyang mga pasángil, I was stung by her accusations.
ka- n {1} stinging sensation. {2} biting quality of words.

halanghag = danghag.

halangdun see hangad.

halanggup thin gruel cooked from grains of rice or ground corn.
v {1} [A; a] make thin gruel. Hanggúpi ang masakitun, Just make a thin
gruel for the patient. {2} [A; a] eat gruel. -in- = halanggup.

halanguhag = danghag.

halap a for the eyesight to be weak, blurred. (←) v [B2S; b6] for the
eyesight to get weak. Dì na ku makabasa ug mga gagmayng títik tungud
ning naghalap nákung panan-aw, I can no longer read small print because
my eyes are so weak. halaphálap n blind man’s buff. v [A12C2; b(1)]
play blind man’s buff.

hálas_1 n snake. patay ug — {1} urinate (slang). {2} for males to
masturbate (slang).

*hálas_2 i- see ihálas.

haláwig n k.o. moray eel.

halay v [A; c] hang clothes on the line or s.t. analogous. Ihalay dáyun
ning mga basang lampin, Hang these wet diapers out right away. -an(→)
n clothesline.

halayhálay v {1} [A; b6] spend leisure time, going out. Dì ku
makahalayhálay magabíi kay mag-ubirtayim ku, I can’t go out to relax in
the evening because I work overtime. {2} [A; b(1)] gallivant about
instead of working. Naghalayhálay ka lang mu rag way pamilyang
gipakáun, You just gallivant around as though you don’t have a family
to feed. May andirtayim ka kay gihalayhaláyan lang nímu ang trabáhu,
You haven’t put in enough hours because you’re taking time off from
work to gallivant around.

halayhay = halay.

halbù a full of quicksand, mire; for a place to be muddy such that the
feet get stuck if one tries to walk through it. v {1} [B126; b(1)] sink
into quicksand, become enmired. Ang kábaw nahalbù sa subà, The carabao
got enmired in the creek. {2} [B2; b6] be, become a mire. Nagkahalbù na
ni dinhi tungud sa ulan, This place is becoming a quagmire because of
the rain.

halhag = halaghag.

halhal_1 v {1} [B; b6] for clothing to be loose and oversized. Naníwang
na giyud diay ku kay nahalhal na man ning ákung sinínà, I must have
grown thin because my clothes are hanging loose on me now. {2} be
scatterbrained, have a dopey expression. Nalímut ka sa ímung túyù kay
naghalhal ka man lang, You forgot what you went there for because you
are scatterbrained. Halhálan kaáyu ku níyang musulti, mu rag way buut,
I think she talks like a scatterbrain. Naghalhal lang nang nawung mu,
You have an idiotic expression on your face. a {1} loose and oversized.
{2} brainless talk or expression.

halhal_2 v [A] for animals to pant with their mouth open. Naghalhal ang
kabáyù nga gikutasan, The horse panted because it was out of breath.

háli = sáli.

halígi n {1} post. Ang halígi sa balay, House post. Halígi sa pinsa,
Fence post. {2a} pillar or strong member of an organization. Usa siya
sa mga halígi sa átung partídu, He is one of the mainstays of our
political party. {2b} head, mainstay on which a group rests. Ang amahan
mauy halígi sa panimalay, The father is the head of the family.
{3} outstanding person in a specific field of endeavor. Si Ayinstayin
usa ka dakung halígi sa syinsiya, Einstein is one of the outstanding
men in science. {4} penis (humorous). v [A; c1] use as a post. Ang
yakal maáyung haligíun (ihalígi), Yakal lumber makes good posts.

halìhalì v [A1; c1] when the same food is served in several dishes, to
take a portion from more than one of them. Ayaw halìhalia (ihalìhalì)
ang mga pagkáun arun dì mangil-ad tan-áwun, Take food from just one or
two of the serving dishes, not all of them, so they won’t look like
leftovers.

halíli v [A; c] {1} occupy a place or position just vacated. Way
makahalíli sa usa ka inahan, There is nothing that can replace a
mother. Ug mutindug ka, halilíhan dáyun ang ímung lingkuránan, If you
get up, s.o. will occupy your seat immediately. {2} appear in the place
of s.t. else, cause s.t. to do so. Mihalíli ang pagdumut sa gugmang
inayran, Hatred replaced the love which had been spurned. Kwarta
ihalíli sa primyung walà ikahátag, Money takes the place of the prize
they couldn’t award. {3} [AC; ac] exchange. Nagkahalíli ang ámung
pitáka, We accidentally took each other’s purses. n {1} s.t. which
takes the place of s.t. else. {2} s.t. given in exchange.

halimbawà v {1} [A2N] borrow s.t. to relieve a pressing problem.
Nanghalimbawà si Pidru nákug diyis písus ipalit kunug bugas, Pedro
borrowed ten pesos from me to buy rice. {2} [b3] be relieved from s.t.
pressing. Nahalimbawà na ákung pamínaw, I feel much better now. Karun
nga nakatrabahu nas Pidru nakahalimbawà na ang bánay, Now that Pedro
has a job, his family is not so badly pressed.

halilib-un = gabun_2.

halin v {1} [A2P; b(1)] move away from a place permanently. Dúgay na
silang mihalin sa Mindanaw, They moved to Mindanao a long time ago.
{2} [A2] pass away, die. Dúgay nang mihalin si Máma, Mother passed away
many years ago. n immigrant. Mga halin sila sa Yútà sa mga Sáad, They
are immigrants to the Land of Promise (Mindanao).

hálin v {1} [A; ac] sell s.t. at a certain price. Ug halínun mug míl,
If you sell it for a thousand. {2} [B2] for s.t. to sell. Ang ákung
yútà muhálin na karun ug labaw pa sa dubli, My lot will sell for more
than double the buying price. {3} [a3] for women to be married
(humorous). Mahálin dáyun íyang anak, He’ll have no trouble finding a
husband for his daughter. {4} [a3] come to an untimely end. Kun
magpadáyun ka ánang ímung pag-ínum, mahálin ka, You’ll come to an
untimely end if you keep on drinking like that. Mahálin giyud nang
plátu ug matambug sa simintu, That will be the end of the plate if you
drop it on the cement. n highly salable. (→) n sales, amount of money
realized from a sale. a {1} quick, fast-selling. Halin kaáyu ang
pinirítung ságing sa mga iskuyla, Fried bananas sell fast among
schoolchildren. {2} marriageable. {2a} — pa ba in answer to questions
about how s.t. is: same as ever. ‘Kumusta?’—‘Halin pa ba,’ ‘How are
you?’—‘Just the same.’ (Lit. Can I still be sold?)

halindánaw (from dánaw) n dragonfly.

haling = halin.

háling v [A; a] {1} build a fire. Magháling ku kay mag-ínit kug túbig,
I will build a fire because I am going to heat some water. {2} [A]
stimulate an emotion. Mga púlung nga nakaháling sa ákung kalágut, Words
that aroused my anger. (→) n lighted fire.

halinub-un see túbù.

haliphip v [A; b] mend holes in woven materials, esp. by reweaving the
holes. Maáyu kay gihaliphipan na ang búyut masudlan nag humay, Now that
the holes in the bag have been mended, we can put rice in it.

halithálit v [A; b5c1] do s.t. hurriedly as time permits one to do it.
Muhalithálit kug buwad ug humay mintras náay ínit, I’ll dry rice as
quick as I can while there is sunlight. Halithalítan (halithalítun,
ihalithálit) ku lang paglútù ang sud-an inigkatúlug sa bátà, I’ll cook
the food hurriedly as soon as the baby goes to sleep.

halla see hala.

halsi n Hulsey, a breed of fighting cock.

halu n monitor lizard. a acting nonchalant yet ready to seize every
opportunity, no matter who might get hurt (like the monitor lizard who
stays immobile waiting to seize a prey). Ayawg sálig níya kay háwu
kaáyu nà sa babáyi, Don’t trust him because he is dangerous to women.

halù a fitting loosely. v [B; b6] fit loosely in. Naghalù ang lansang
kay dakù ang bangag, The nail was loose because the hole was too big.
Naghalù ang sapátus sa íyang tiil, The shoes fit her feet too loosely.

hálù v [A13; a12] mix things together in a liquid. Halúa ang tahup ug
kinagud lubi, Mix corn husks and shredded coconut in water. halùhálù
n {1} k.o. fruit cocktail made up of grated ice, milk, sugar and
several k.o. fruit cut to pieces or grated. {2} be a mixture of several
things. Halùhálù ang íyang sinultihan. May Ininsik, may Binisayà, may
Ininglis, She speaks a mixture of languages all at once: Chinese,
Visayan, and English. v [A13; a12] make, make into halùhálù.
panghalùhálù v [A23] go s.w. to eat halùhálù. -in- n a weapon made from
an egg shell which has been emptied of its contents through a small
hole into which a mixture of various itchy plants (from land or water)
has been put and then resealed.

hal-u = alhu.

haluan n snakehead, edible fresh-water fish: Ophiocephalus spp. — tásik
n fish similar to the snakehead but found in the sea.

halub_1, hálub_1 n a k.o. skin disease characterized by white, shiny
splotches on the affected area. v [A3P; a4b4] be afflicted with this
k.o. skin disease.

halub_2, hálub_2 v {1} [A; c1] make leaves pliable by heating them.
Maghálub kug dáhun sa ságing nga pustan sa kan-un, I will soften up a
banana leaf to wrap the rice in. {2} [B2; b6] singe, burn slightly.
Nahálub ang íyang pánit sa adlaw, His skin was scorched by the sun.
{2a} for the lungs to be destroyed by drinking too much alcohol.
Makahálub (makapahálub) sa bágà ang bínu, Liquor will destroy the
lungs. {3} [B; b6] for leaves to yellow prior to drying up. Muhalub
(mahalub) ang tanum kun ulúrun ang gamut, The leaves of plants will
yellow when the roots are eaten by worms.

hálu blak n hollow cement blocks for structures. v [A; c1] make, make
into hollow blocks.

halug v {1} [AC; a2b2] embrace, hug. Bulága ang buksidur ug maghálug,
Separate the boxers if they start hugging. Makighálug siya sa íyang
trátu, He wants to embrace his sweetheart. Ug wà pa ku makahalug sa
kátig ..., Had I not clung to the outriggers .... n hug.

halughug_1 n drawstring in the waistline of clothing to hold it up.
v [A; ac] {1} put a drawstring at the waist. Muhalughug lang kug kurdun
sa panti, I’ll put a drawstring in the waist of my panties. {2} pass a
thread in and out loosely through the edge of cloth in shirring or
basting. Ímu pa bítaw nang usbun pagtahì sa makina. Hughúga lang nà,
You’re going to sew it anyway on the machine again. Just baste it.

halughug_2 (not without l) v [AN; a12] search thoroughly. Dúna giyuy
mihalughug (nanghalughug) sa ákung kaban. Nangabungkag man ang sulud
niíni, S.o. must have ransacked my trunk. The contents are all in
disorder. Halughugun nátù ang tibuuk plása arun makit-an ang nawálang
pitáka, We’ll search the whole plaza thoroughly to find the lost money.

haluk n kiss, sniff, putting the nose next to the person kissed.
v {1} [AC; b] kiss. Nagháluk sila sa ngitngit, They kissed in the dark.
Gihagkan (gihadkan, gihawkan) níya ang bátà, She kissed the child.
Ayawg ihawuk nang bahù nímung bàbà nákù, Don’t kiss me with your smelly
mouth! {2} [A23] drop by s.w. briefly. Ígù ra siyang mihaluk sa ámù, He
dropped by our house for only a short time. {3} [A2; b] do s.t. on a
short and insignificant scale. Gihalukan lang ni Pidru ang sawug. Walà
tiwasag lampásu, Pedro just touched the floor for a while. He did not
really polish all of it. halukháluk v {1} [A3; b] sniff. Naghalukháluk
ang irù sa ákung tiil, mu rag akuy íyang ámu, The dog sniffed my feet
as if I were his master. {2} [A2; b] do s.t. lightly and
intermittently. hagkanan n s.t. in a place, traditionally kissed by
people who come to the place for the first time. v [A1] go s.w. to kiss
s.t. as part of tradition.

halukhuk_1 v [A; c] insert s.t. into s.t. so it is tight, wedge into.
Wà makahalukhuk sa daghang táwu ang bátà, The child was not able to
squeeze into the crowd. Halukhukan ug kwarta ang ímung bulsa, S.o. will
thrust a bill into your pocket. Ihalukhuk sa sakuban ang sundang,
Insert the bolo into its scabbard. a tightly wedged together.

halukhuk_2 n k.o. small biting insects of cornfields which make their
appearance at the same time as the corn tassels. v [a4] be beset with
these insects.

hálum n k.o. herbaceous, ornamental herb bearing dull purplish leaves
which are used medicinally and sometimes eaten as vegetables:
Amaranthus tricolor.

halumhum v {1} [A12; c6] put solid food into the mouth in a bulk.
Gihumhum sa dawù nga bátà ang pán kay nahadluk man nga dúnay mangáyù
níya, The greedy child stuffed the whole piece of bread into his mouth
because he was afraid s.o. would ask him for some. {2} [A; a12]
secretly keep s.t. for oneself which is supposed to be shared. Ang
kurnáwu nga limbungan kusug muhumhum sa ganansiya, A dishonest partner
keeps part of the profits for himself.

halung_1 v [A; b6] reach a door or gate. Sa naghawung pa lang ku sa
nátad, pagsúgat sa mga irù, The dogs ran toward me as soon as I stepped
inside the yard.

halung_2, hálung_1 v [A; b(1)] {1} cast shade over plants so as to
stunt their growth. Wà mutúbù ang rúsas kay gihalúngan (gihalungan) sa
dakung káhuy, The roses didn’t grow because they were in the shade of
the large tree. {2} overshadow in some desirable trait. Ang kaanyag sa
rayna nahawngan sa dáma, The beauty queen was far overshadowed by the
runner-up. {2a} nadaug sa — be overcome by a feeling of inferiority
when approaching s.o. Wà siya makapadayag sa íyang túyù kay nadaug siya
sa háwung, He couldn’t speak out because he was overcome by a feeling
of inferiority.

halung_3, hálung_2 a not burning readily. v [B; b6] burn poorly.
Naháwung ang puspuru human kaumgi, The matches got so that they didn’t
burn well because they got wet.

halup v [A; a] {1} take s.t. by scooping it in the hands. Ayawg halupa
ang kan-un, kutsaráha, Don’t scoop up the food with your hands. Use a
spoon. {2} pick s.t. up with both hands to take it s.w. Gihalup níya
ang bátà ug gibalhin sa katri, He scooped up the child and moved it to
the bed. n amount which can be scooped up with the hands. Usa ka halup
nga bugas, Amount of rice held in both hands.

hal-up v [A; c] {1} fit s.t. over s.t. Dintista ang maghal-up sa úru sa
ngípun, The dentist puts gold caps on teeth. Hal-úpi ug láta ang pusti,
Put a tin can over the post. {2} stuff s.t. into s.t. Nahal-upan ang
grípu ug papil, The faucet had paper stuffed into it. Ayaw ihal-up
ímung tudlù sa ímung ilung, Don’t stick your fingers in your nose.

halupúwint n bullet shaped like a pointed capsule and hollow inside.

hálus {1} can barely do s.t. Hálus (hálus dílì) na siya makaginháwa sa
kakutas, He could hardly breathe from sheer exhaustion. Hálus (hálus
dílì) na makakità ning ákung mga mata, My eyes can hardly see. {2} come
close to having s.t. happen, to doing s.t. Hálus luparun níya ang
ang-ang, He fairly flew down the stairs. Hálus ku mamatay, I pretty
near died. {3} — tanan nearly all. Bag-u hálus tanan ang íyang mga
ginamitun, Almost all of his equipment is new. {4} — dílì = hálus, 1.

halushus v [A1; a] remove the leaflets from a palm frond with a bladed
tool. Halushúsi ang langkay sa lukay, Strip the leaflets off the frond.

hálut = halwut.

haluthut v [A; a12] {1} eat fast with a slurping sound. Ang anay kusug
muhaluthut sa pasaw, The sow gobbles its food. {2} eat s.t. fast
(derogatory). Gihaluthut sa way úlaw ang kan-un, The shameless s.o.b.
gobbled up the rice.

halwa n cage. v {1} [A13; c1] put in a cage. Ihalwa (halwáhun) ang
piríku, Put the parrot in a cage. {2} [A; a12] make a cage.

halwan = haluan.

halwut a {1} having great tensile strength, hard to break. Halwut kaáyu
ang pánit sa litsun, The pigskin is very tough. Halwut ang lastiku,
dílì mabugtù, The rubber band is very strong. It won’t break.
{2} viscous, sticky. Halwut kaáyung ákung kamut sa arníbal, My hands
are all sticky with syrup. {3} of a mellow, smooth texture without
being soggy. Halwut nga kamúti, Smooth-textured sweet potatoes.
{3a} for drinks to be smooth. {4} for music to be sweet and smooth.
Nagbayli sila inubanan sa halwut nga sunáta, They danced to the mellow
music. v [B; a] {1} be, become tough, with great tensile strength. Ayaw
halwúta paglútù ang tiratíra, Don’t cook the taffy so hard. {2} be,
become viscous and sticky. {3} get a smooth, mellow texture.

hámag = hamlag.

ham-ak v {1} [A; c] put things down in a disorderly way. Nagkayamúkat
ang ákung lamísa kay giham-ákan nímu sa ímung mga basahun, My desk is a
mess because you just threw your books on it. {2} [c] put the blame on
s.o. Aku mauy giham-ákan sa tanang pasángil, All the blame was laid on
me.

hamangpang n k.o. bush of the seashore, of the Boraginaceae family.

hamayhámay_1 n estimation of a quantity. Dì madala ug hamayhámay ang
ímung sukud, We can’t just estimate your measurements. v [A; ab] make
an estimate. Gihamayhamáyan ang tulay nga mukábat sa usa ka miliyun, It
is estimated that the bridge will come to one million pesos.

hamayhámay_2 v [A; b5] do s.t. casually and slowly, with no sense of
urgency. Ayawg hamayhamáyi (hamayhamáya) ang trabáhu kay nag-agpas ta
sa panahun, Don’t work so slowly because we are racing against time.

hambabálud n medium-sized tree: Neonauclea spp.

hambabayaw n a small to medium-sized tree with aromatic and velvety
leaves which are used to scent bath water.

hambag n handbag, satchel carried in hand or slung over the shoulder.
v {1} [A; c] use a handbag or satchel. Naghambag siyang nagdala sa mga
libru, He carried his books in a satchel. {2} [A; a12] make into a
satchel.

hambat = hangbat.

hambaw v [A; ab2] strike s.o. with s.t. light in a sweeping motion.
Hambáwa sa silhig ang irù, Shoo the dog away with the broom.

hambil_1 v [A; c] use s.t. as a temporary cover or protection.
hambilhambil v [A; c] utilize miscellaneous things to cover parts of
s.t. open or exposed. Dáhun ray naghambilhambil sa láwas ni Íbà,
Nothing but leaves covered parts of Eve’s body. Kartun nga
ihambilhambil sa nagkagusbat nílang balungbálung, Cardboard to patch up
their dilapidated shanty. n miscellaneous things used as a protective
cover.

hambil_2 v [A; c1] stack s.t. neatly such that the edges are even.
Hambíla (ihambil) ang mga plátu sa aparadur, Stack the plates neatly in
the cupboard.

hambilika = anghilika.

hambin v {1} [A; a2] carry s.t. by folding up the front part of one’s
skirt or shirt and putting it in the folds. Namansa ang palda nga
gihambínan sa lumbuy, Her skirt got stains from the lumbuy fruits she
carried in it. {2} [A13; a2] bear s.t. inside of it. Mga búngang
naghambin ug mga lísu, Fruits bearing seeds. Kinabúhì nga íyang
gihambin, The life she carried within her. {3} [A13; a12] have a
feeling, condition within oneself. Kasákit nga ákung gihambin, The
grief I bear. Dúna siyay gihambin nga kayugut, She is nursing a grudge.

hambubúkag n small flying lizard of dragon-like appearance, but bright
green and dwelling in trees: Draco sp. n liquid drink for treating
asthma which is made from the ashes of this lizard.

hambubuyna = hirbubuyna.

hambug n big talk, most often not quite true. Hambug lang kadtung mga
pasálig. Sa pagkatinúud wà siyay púl, Those promises were pure big
talk. She actually has no pull. v {1} [A12N; c] engage in big talk.
Nanghambug siyang maprumútid íyang bána. Túu ka? She’s bragging her
husband is going to be promoted. Do you believe it? Mau nang
kagangkagánga ímung ipanghambug nákù? Is that jalopy the car you’re
showing off? a boasting, engaging in big talk. -in- a done in a showy,
braggart way. Hinambug nga sinayawan, Dancing in such a way as to show
off. v [AN; c1] doing s.t. in a showy way. Naghinambug siyag pangasábà
sa suluguun, She is showing off, cussing out the servants. n things
said in bragging. -íra = -íru (female). -íru a given to engaging in big
talk, showing off. v [B12; b6] become a braggart, show-off. -iruun,
-iruhun of a sort that tends to show off.

hambugírit a given to talking big, braggart (euphemism for hambugíru).
v [B12; b6] become a show-off.

hambuk v [A; b(1)] loosen or soften soil around the base of plants or
put loose soil or fertilizer at the base. Hambúkan ta ang mga tanum
arun mulípang, We’ll loosen the soil around the plants to make them
sturdy.

hambun a well-rested, fresh from not having been worked. {a} frisky.
Hambun ang kabáyù nga dílì kúlang sa pahúway, A horse that doesn’t lack
rest is frisky. {b} highly ready for sex after not having indulged for
some time. {c} virgin, land or sea that hasn’t been used much. Hambun
pa kaáyu ang kadagátan didtu, The seas there haven’t been fished very
much yet. v [B126; b6] get fresh and rested.

hamburdyir n hamburger sandwich. v [A13; a12] make hamburgers.

hambuy v {1} [A2NB; a2] keep the catch submerged so it stays fresh for
a period of time. {2} [A; a2] hang fish above the stove or fire to dry.
Walà ni ibulad sa adlaw. Gihambuy lang ni sa abúhan, We did not dry
this in the sun. We just hung it over the fireplace. -in- n {1} fish
submerged in water for a period of time. Prisku tan-áwun apan hinambuy
diay, They look fresh but actually they were submerged in the water.
{2} fish dried at the fireplace.

hamì n sores at the corners of the mouth. v [A123P; a4b4] have sores at
the corners of the mouth. Gihamì ang táwung hinabákù, The man developed
sores in the corners of his mouth because he smoked too much. hamiun
a having these sores.

hamil v {1} [A; c1] smooth out abaca fibers and sort them into strands
preparatory to making rope. Naghamil siya ug lánut pára himúung písì,
He is sorting out the abaca fibers to make into rope. {2} [B12; c1] for
plants to be flattened, bent completely at the base. Hamilun (ihamil)
sa kusug nga hángin ang kamaisan, Strong winds will bend and flatten
the corn. (←) v = hamil, 2. a smooth, velvety to the touch. Hámil kaáyu
ang sídang sinínà, A silk dress is very smooth. hamilhámil v [A; c1]
stroke gently. Hamilhamíla (ihamilhámil) ang tíyan sa bábuy, Stroke the
pig’s stomach gently.

hamílì see pílì.

hamilsing_1 = hamílì. see pílì.

hámir n the hammer of firearms.

hámis a {1} smooth, velvety to the touch. Hámis nga pánit, Smooth skin.
Hámis kaáyu ang balhíbu sa kabáyù, The horse has velvety hair.
{2} even-textured surface. Hámis nga kútis, Skin without a blemish.
{3} for the sky to be completely cloudless. n outermost layer of skin.
Nalúkut ang hámis sa íyang buktun nga nabanggud sa batu, He smashed his
arm against a rock and the skin was scraped off. v [B2; a] be, become
smooth.

hamlag v [A12C2; b5] jump playfully on s.o. or on one another. Natumba
ang usa ka bátang gihamlágan (gihamlag) sa usa, One of the children
fell when the other jumped on him. (→) v [A; b5] lunge at in an attack.
Ug hamlagan (hamlagun) ka sa irù, ayaw ug dágan, If a dog lunges at
you, don’t run.

hamlig, hamlug a damp and moist. v {1} [B6; b6] become damp and moist.
Nahamug ang panaptun nga gipabuntagan sa gawas, The cloth that was left
outside overnight got wet. {2} [AB; b6(1)] moisten by sprinkling. Ang
pila ka lugas nga ulan ígù lang mihamug (naghamug) sa yútà, The few
drops of rain just barely moistened the earth. n action of moistening.

hamluy a {1} smooth and slippery. Hamluy ang halwan, The snakehead is a
slippery fish. {2} for a variety of s.t. to be esp. smooth and easier
to eat or drink than the ordinary. Hamluy kaúnun ang mímis, Mímis rice
goes down easily. v [A23] pass through easily due to smoothness and
slipperiness. Mihamluy lang sa íyang tutunlan ang lísu sa santul, The
santol seed just slipped down his throat.

hampak v {1} [A; ab2] strike, slam with force making a noisy impact.
Natukyas ang atup kay gihampak sa hángin, The roof came off under the
battering of the wind. Kining puthaw mauy ihampak sa úlu sa bitin,
Smash the snake’s head with this iron rod. {2} — ang (sa) hángin nga
itum v [A2; a12b2] get a stroke, severe illness (thought to be brought
about by an evil wind). Ayawg hukashúkas tingálig dúnay muhampak nímung
hángin, Don’t go about without your shirt. You might suffer a stroke.
Hampákun ka pa untà sa hángin nga itum, May you get a stroke!
n {1} blow. {2} blow of fate, calamity, or the like. Ug mapildi,
agwantáhun kay hampak nà sa katarúngan, If you lose, just take it.
That’s the way it is. (Lit. That is the blow of logic.) Ang bagyu mauy
hampak sa kapaláran, The typhoon is what fate has brought us. -in- sa
hángin (usually shortened to -in-) a mild curse to refer to the object
of one’s wrath: ‘darned’. Ang mga hinampak! Wà giyud mi imbitaha, Darn
them! They didn’t invite us! {2} a mild curse of annoyance or anger.
Hinampak! Nakalimut ku sa ákung pitáka! Darn! I forgot to take my
pocketbook!

hampang v {1} [AC; a2] play (dialectal). {2} [AC; abc] have intercourse
(euphemism). Kadaghan ku na siya ikahampang, I’ve had intercourse with
her so many times. n {1} game. {2} sexual intercourse.

hampid v [A; c1] put things of the same size with a flat surface neatly
on top of one another. Akuy muhampid sa mga inutaw nga dayapir, I’ll
pile the ironed diapers neatly. Hampíra (ihampid) nang mga libru sa
lamísa, Stack those books neatly on the table.

hampil_1 v [A1; c] {1} attach s.t. to s.t. solid as a patch or sign.
Kinsa may naghampil sa lungag sa salug? Who put a cover over the hole
in the floor? Hampíli nag bandids ang ímung samad, Put a bandage on
your wound. Ihampil ni sa bungbung arung makit-an sa tanan, Put this up
on the wall so that everybody can see it. {2} [A; a] spread s.t. on top
of s.t. else or between two objects as a protection. Hampíli ug hábul
ang banig únà higdái, Spread a blanket over the mat before you lie on
it. n s.t. attached as a cover or patch. hampilhampil v [A; b] put up a
temporary structure. a makeshift, made of temporary patchings.
Hampilhampil lang úsà ning ákung balay, This house of mine is just a
makeshift structure.

hampil_2 v [A; c1] pile flat, flexible things neatly in layers, one on
top of the other. Hampíla (ihampil) ang mga dáhun sa tabákù únà pusta,
Pile the tobacco leaves neatly one on top of the other before you pack
them.

hampílù n {1} saddle blanket. {2} s.t. used to cover a horse’s back
when riding without a saddle. v [A; a] put a saddle blanket on the back
of a horse.

hampul v [A1; b6(1)] put leaves on s.t. for medicinal purposes. Ang
dáhun sa átis maáyung ihampul sa piang, The leaves of the atis make a
good compress for sprains. n leaves prepared to lay over an afflicted
area.

hampuug = dampuug.

hamtang see pahamtang under butang_1.

hamtung a middle-aged, between forty and sixty years of age. v [B2; b6]
be, become middle-aged. Ang kaguul makahamtung (makapahamtung) sa
panagway sa táwu, Worry causes one to look middle-aged.

hamù = gam-ul, 1.

hamug = hamlug.

hámug = yámug, n1, 1a, v.

ham-ug = hamlug, 2.

hamugáway a {1} large and spacious enough to afford ease of movement.
Hamugáway ang kwartu pára sa upat, The room is ample for four people.
{2} for living conditions to be comfortable, with ample financial
resources. Hamugáway ang ílang pamuyù kay dakug swildu ang bána, They
live comfortably because the husband earns a good salary. v [B2; b6]
{1} get to be wide and spacious. {2} for living conditions to become
comfortable.

hamuk = daghan (dialectal).

hámuk n supernatural beings that harass people by frightening them.
They usually assume the form of oversized animals if they show
themselves or may just indicate their presence without showing
themselves. They may be found in any lonely place. v [A3; a4] for these
spirits to frighten one. Pangadyì arun dì ka hamúkun, Recite a prayer
so the spirits cannot harass you. -an(→) n place infested with these
spirits. -un(→) a susceptible to having experiences with hámuk.

hamun_1 n ham. v [A1] have, make into ham. -áda n k.o. meat dish,
usually beef, cooked by browning in fat and simmering it in a covered
pan in its own juice. This is served with a sauce. v [AC12; c1] cook
hamunáda.

hamun_2, hámun v [A; c] take s.t. big and shove it in one’s mouth to
eat it. Ihamun lang níya ang kík arun dì siya pangayúan, He’ll shove
the whole piece of cake into his mouth so no one can ask him for any.

*hamung_1 walay — without a stitch on. Wà siyay hamung nga nagdúlà, He
was playing without a stitch on. way hamunghamung = way hamung.

hamung_2 = hamun_2.

hámus a messy and dirty with s.t. wet. Hámus ang bátang tan-áwun kay
nagkasip-un, The child looks messy with his nasal discharge all over
him. Hámus ang salug sa kusína, The kitchen floor is wet and grimy.
v [B1; b6] get messy and grimy. Nahámus ang íyang nawung kay nagkaun ug
mangga, His face got all messy with the mangoes.

hamútan = humútan. see humut.

hamuy_1 v [A; c1] stick s.t. in the mouth to lick it. Ayaw ihamuy
(hamuya) ímung tudlù kay húgaw, Don’t suck your finger because it is
dirty. — sa tudlù v [A13] be so poor as to have nothing to eat.
Mawad-an gánì kag trabáhu maghamuy na lang ka sa tudlù, If you lose
your job you’ll have nothing to eat but your fingers (lit. you’ll be
sucking your fingers). hamuyhámuy n lollipop.

hamyang v {1} [A; b6(1)] spread out in the open. Naghamyang siya sa mga
baligyà dihà sa asíras, He is displaying his wares on the sidewalk.
Nakahamyang na siya sa humay nga igbubúwad, She has laid out the
unhusked rice outside to dry. {2} [A13; c] throw cloth or anything
pliable carelessly s.w. Kinsay naghamyang áring amirkána sa supa? Who
threw this coat on the sofa? Ihamyang lang nang mga bulingun sa katri,
Just dump those dirty clothes on the bed.

haN- = hiN-_1, 4.

hana (from hanu na) {1} how about it? how is it now? Hana? Wà ka pa
mahubug? Ganína ka ra mang inum, How about it? Aren’t you drunk yet?
You’ve been drinking for hours. {2} there, that’s what you get. Hana.
Dì nahúlug ka kay wà ka man mamátì nga gibuyag, There. Now you fell
because you didn’t listen when I reprimanded you.

hanà v {1} [A; c] get ready to start doing s.t., make motions to do
s.t. Mihanà siyag pátid nákù, He made a move to kick me. Dílì gánì ta
makahanà ug tindug pangutan-un tag ása ta, We can’t even make a move to
get up before he asks us where we’re going. Ayaw ihanà ang pusil kay
mubutu, Don’t aim the gun, because it might go off. {2} [A23] threaten
to happen. Mihanag kapálung ang pitrumaks, The lantern was threatening
to go out.

hanab n k.o. heavy bolo with a pointed tip and curved blade. 12–14″
long.

hanagdung = hinagdung.

hanap a {1} hazy, difficult to discern. Hanap ang mga litra, The
letters are very faint (or blurred). Hanap ang kaháyag sa bitúun, The
star gives off a faint light. Hanap nga pahíyum, A faint smile.
{1a} for s.t. in relief to be so worn that it can hardly be
distinguished. Hanap nga dyís, A worn-out dime. {2} vague, uncertain.
Hanap nga kaugmáun, An uncertain future. Hanap nga pagtúu sa Diyus, A
not very strong belief in God. {3} for one’s vision to be dim. Hanap
ákung panan-aw, My eyes are dim. v [B; a] become faint, blurred, do
s.t. in a blurred way. Muhanap ang ági sa lápis ug dílì nímu iduut, The
pencil makes a very weak mark if you don’t press down on it. Ang
naghanap níyang mga sáad, His uncertain promises.

hanas a proficient, skillful. Hanas na kaáyu siyang mugámit sa pusil,
He handles a gun proficiently now. Hanas siyang musultig Binisayà, He
speaks Visayan fluently. v {1} [B2] be, become proficient, skillful.
Nagkahanas na siyang mudráyib, He is becoming more skilled in driving.
{2} [A1; a12] make oneself proficient. Maghanas ku sa ákung panapuy sa
sista, I will make myself proficient in playing the guitar. hanashánas
v [A1; a12] keep practicing to make oneself proficient. ka-
n proficiency, skill.

hánaw_1 v [B1] disappear, vanish. Unsang tambála ang nakahánaw
(nakapahánaw) sa ímung bugas? What did you use to make your pimples
vanish? Ang ákung kasukù kalit rang nahánaw, My anger quickly faded
away. — sa mápa for s.t. to be wiped out of existence, disappear from
the place one would expect it to be. Humag bumba sa balay nahánaw sa
mápa, The house was bombed and wiped out of existence.

hánaw_2 n way — have no awareness of s.t. or notion of how. Wà siyay
hánaw kun unsay nanghitabù líbut kaníya, She has no notion of what’s
happening around her. Dì ku makaáyu niánà. Wà kuy hánaw niánà, I can’t
fix that. I have no notion of that. paN- n knowledge of s.t.,
awareness. Unsay panghánaw nákù ánà? What should I know about that?

hanay expression uttered with a warning. Hanay, maigù gánì ku,
hilatiguhan ta giyud ka, Watch out! If you hit me, you’ll get it.

han-ay v [A; a] {1} string the warp threads in the loom. {2a} lay out
the format of s.t. to be printed. {2b} lay out the plot of a story.
{3} compose s.t. literary. Si anhing Bin Subíri mauy naghan-ay sa áwit
Mátud Níla, Mátud Níla was composed by Ben Zubiri. {4} arrange, put in
order. Han-áyang mga libru, Put the books in order. n {1} warp threads.
{2} amount of thread used for the warp. -in- {1} threads that have been
strung. {2} s.t. arranged.

hanayak = hinayak.

hanayhay a rolling land; hilly, but not having a steep angle of
elevation. v [B5; b6] be, become rolling. Muhanayhay ang bungtud áning
dapíta, The countryside becomes rolling at this point. Naghanayhay nga
dálan nga dílì kápuyng laktun, A trail that rises slowly and not tiring
to walk over.

hanayun = hinayun, see dáyun.

hanbag = hambag.

handà v {1} [A13; b6] plan to do s.t. Naghandà ming mangalígù sa dágat
rung Duminggu, We are planning to go swimming on Sunday. Gihandáan ka
nga iprumut, You are under consideration for promotion. {2} [A; b4] be
about to do s.t., for s.t. almost to happen to one. Mau giyuy pagbundak
sa ulan sa dihang mihandà na untà ku paglakaw, The rain suddenly
started pouring down just as I was about to go out. Kapila na siya
handái nga mamatay sa dágat, Several times he came close to dying on
the sea. {3} [A; c1] try placing s.t. on s.t. to find out how it fits.
Walà pa gánì mahuman ang íyang sinínà íya nang gihandà, Her dress was
not finished yet she already tried putting it on. handàhandà n plans
for an action. Pulus lang giyud handàhandà ang tanan; wà giyuy aksiyun,
It’s all plans, no action.

handag a slanting, leaning. Handag ra kaáyu ang ímung sinuwatan, Your
handwriting slants too much. Handag ang túri sa Písa, The Tower of Pisa
leans to one side. v [A; c1] for s.t. tall to be leaning to one side.
Mihandag siya sa sandigánan sa lingkuránan, She leaned back in the
chair with her buttocks forward. Handága (ihandag) pagsandig ang
hagdan, Set the ladder in a slanting position.

handalamay, handalámay n small tree: Pipturus arborescens. The white
part of its bark is scraped and placed over dislocated bones to prevent
swelling. The leaves are applied to eczemas.

handalanaw = alindánaw.

handalas a steep and slippery. Handalas ang dálan padúlung sa walug,
The path to the valley is steep and slippery. v {1} [A; b(1)] glide
swiftly down an incline. Mihandalas ang mga bátà sa bakilid, The
children slid down the side of the hill. {2} [A23; b(1)] run downwards,
half sliding, half running. Mihandalas ang mga bátà sa hagdan, The
children rushed down the stairs. {3} [A13] move out of a place at top
speed. Naghandalas mig panágan pag-ulan, We got out of there as fast as
we could when it started to rain.

handalítik = handilítik.

handámay = handalámay.

handánaw = alindánaw.

handay v [A; c1] {1} place s.t. long athwart s.t. long. Akuy muhanday
sa ímung buktun sa unlan, I’ll rest your arm on the pillow. Sanga ang
gihandayan sa sumbuhan sa pagtumung, He rested the barrel of the gun on
the branch as he took aim. Ákung ihanday ang ákung mga tiil sa ímung
páa, Let me rest my legs on your thighs. {2} rest one’s upper back on
s.t. Muhanday ku sa unlan, I’ll rest my back on the pillows.

handig v {1} [A; c] lean, cause s.t. to lean against s.t. Gustung
muhandig ang masakitun sa unlan, The patient wants to rest his back on
the pillows. Ayaw handígi ang basang pintal, Don’t lean on the wet
paint. {2} [B; b6] get to be steep. Ug mahandig ang karsáda, iprimíra
ang kambyu, When the road gets steep, shift to first gear. a steep,
sloping sharply. Kápuyng tangásun nang bungtúra kay handig, It’s tiring
to climb that hill because it’s so steep. ka- n steepness.

handilib-un = gabun_2.

handilika = anghilika.

handilítik n k.o. shrimp around 6″, with small claws and of
scorpion-like appearance. Edible, but not highly esteemed.

handul_1 v [A; a12] {1} handle, take care of a case in court.
{2} teach, handle a class. Pila ka sabdyik ímung handúlun? How many
subjects are you going to handle? {3} handle, deal with s.o. younger or
of lower status. Maáyu siyang muhandul sa íyang mga sákup, He handles
his tenants well. Dì ka kamaung muhandul sa ímung manghud, You don’t
know how to handle your little brother.

handul_2 n handle of a handbag, satchel. v [A; c1] make a handle for
s.t.

handum v [A; a12] {1} recall and think fondly about s.t. memorable, but
forever past. Naghandum ku sa ákung kabatan-un, I remember my youth.
Handúmun ku ikaw kanúnay, I shall always think of you and remember you
with fondness. {2} recall and yearn for s.t. Muhandum ang bátà sa
inahan, A child recalls and yearns for its mother. Ngánung nanarútut
man ka? Naghandum kang magdaut? Why are you blowing that horn? Do you
long to get sick? {3} [A13; c] for s.t. to cross one’s mind, entertain
a thought. Wà ku maghandum nga maduktur siya, I never thought that he
would become a doctor. Walà kuy ikahandum dautang hunàhúnà níya,
Nothing bad has ever crossed my mind. {4} -i think on it, consider!
Handúmi kun unsay dangátan nímug wà ku dinhi, Consider what will become
of you if I am not here. -anan {1} souvenir. Handumánan ni sa ákung
pag-adtu sa Ispanya, This is a souvenir from my visit to Spain.
{2} token, symbol of mutual affection. -in- a word of salutation in
letters. Hinandum kung Nína, Dear Nena. -l-un a memorable. v [B12]
become memorable. -l-un(→) n s.t. which is remembered periodically. Ang
Santa Krus halandumun námù káda tris di Máyu, We remember to perform
the prayers of the Holy Cross every May 3.

handunguy v [A3P] be weak with the head drooping. Hubug na kaáyu siya.
Naghandunguy nang galakaw, He was drunk, and he was all tuckered out,
walking with his head drooping.

handúraw v [A; c16] picture s.t. in one’s mind. Naghandúraw kug unsay
kadangátan sa mga bátà, I can just picture what will happen to the
children. -an {1} picture formed in the mind. {2} the mind where
pictures are formed.

handus v [A; c] {1} push, thrust s.t. long forward. Kun kita lang duha
dì giyud ta makahandus niíning awtúha, The two of us cannot push this
car. Gihandúsan siyag kalit sa usa ka maháit nga kutsilyu, S.o. thrust
a sharp knife at him. {2} submit, pass on for action. Ihandus ang
aplikisyun ngadtu sa pangúlung buhatan, Forward the application to the
head office. {3} carry s.t. sizeable s.w. to deliver it. Ása ninyu
ihandus ning grába? Where are you delivering this gravel? {4} send food
or drinks to a celebration to supplement what is offered by the host.
Naghandus akug usa ka litsun sa ílang kasal, I contributed a roast pig
to their wedding. n {1} push given to s.t. long. {2} haul, delivery.
{3} s.t. contributed to a party.

hang short for hilabihan nga how very! Hang lisúra ning iksamína! What
a difficult examination!

háng = hálang.

hangad v {1} [A; ab2] look up, turn the head up. Dì ku kahangad kay
mitikig ákung líug, I cannot bend my head upwards because I have a
stiff neck. Hangda kunu kun náa bay hinug nga búnga, Look up at the
tree and see if there are any ripe fruits. {2} [A] depend, rely upon
for support, help, etc. Nía kanákù siya maghangad sa íyang adlaw-adlaw
nga mga kinahanglanun, He looks to me for all his daily needs. {3} [B]
for s.t. usually level to tilt upwards. Naghangad ang sakayan kay
nabug-atan sa ulin, The boat has its bow up high because it is loaded
down at the stern. {4} [A; c6] look to God in prayer. Ihangad sa lángit
ang ímung mga suliran, Bring your problems to the Lord in prayer. paN-
v [A2] look upward for a mischievous purpose. Túa siya sa sílung sa
hagdan nanghangad samtang nanáug si Pitra, He’s at the foot of the
stairs looking up while Petra is coming down. hangdanan n place which
one looks through for a mischievous purpose, e.g. a gap in the
flooring. tagi-(←) a one who is fond of asking for help when he is in
need, but keeps to himself when he is in a position to help. Way
hinungdan nang mga tawhánang tagihángad kun walà apan tagidúkù kun
adúna, Those people are no good because they are quick to ask for help
when they need it, but otherwise just keep to themselves. halangdun
n {1} title of respect: honorable. Ang Halangdung Mayur, The Honorable
Mayor. {2} royal, occupying a high office.

hangag = danghag.

hangahang v [A1; b(1)] be ignorant of s.t. important and be
unconcerned. Maistra ka apan naghangahang ka sa baláud, You’re a
teacher, but you’re ignorant of the law. Wà hangahangi sa mga
istudiyanti ang mga prublíma sa gubyirnu, The students are aware of and
concerned about the problems of the government.

hángak v [A2S; a4b6] pant, be out of breath from exertion. Naghangak
siya sa kabug-at sa íyang dala, He was panting because of the weight of
what he was carrying. Gihángak (gihangákan) na lang kug linakaw, I am
already out of breath from walking.

hangal a inattentive to what one is about. Hangal ka giyud. Unsa man
ruy ákung gisulti? You are not with it. Now what did I say? Wà nímu
ipha ang suklì. Hangal ka giyung batáa ka, You didn’t count the change,
you stupid child. -in- v [A13] do s.t. in a careless, inattentive way.
n s.t. done in a careless, wrong way. ka- carelessness,
inattentiveness.

hangas = hanglas.

hangáwa = hingáwa.

hangay, hángay v [A3; b8] do s.t. for no reason, more than is
necessary. Muhángay lang siyag kasukù, He just suddenly gets angry for
no reason. Naharus ang twirka kay gikahayngan nímu ug hugut, You
stripped the nut because you tightened it much too much.

hangbat v [A; a1b2] take a large bite with a snapping action. Gihambat
ang ákung páa sa íhu, The shark snapped at my leg. -um-r- a tending to
bite. ka-un a raring to bite at s.t.

hanggà n chickenpox. v [A123P; a4] get chickenpox. -un(→) a having
chickenpox.

hanggab = hanggap.

hanggap v [A; a2b2] breathe in, inhale deeply. Naghanggap siya sa
alimyun sa búlak, She is breathing in the fragrance of the flowers.
Nahanggap nákù ang báhù sa patayng irù, I got a deep whiff of the smell
of the dead dog. n deep inhalation.

hanggat v [A; a12] have s.o. join in an activity. Hanggáta siya
pagpanihápun sa átù, Bring him home for supper. Hanggáta siyag
sinumbagay, Challenge him to a fight.

hanggaw a be a jerk, without common sense. Hanggaw giyung bayhána.
Bísag kulatáhun sa íyang bána mudukut lang gihápun, What a stupid fool
that woman is. No matter how her husband mistreats her she sticks to
him anyway. Gisugal sa hanggaw ang kwartang igpapálit ug pán, The jerk
gambled away the money he was given to buy bread with. v [B12; b6] get
to be a jerk.

hanggrinid = han-grinid.

hanggup_1 v [A; a] take a hot drink. Mihanggup kug ínit nga kapi antis
kung milakaw, I took a drink of hot coffee before I went out.

hanggup_2 = halanggup.

hanggus v {1} [B12] for s.t. to be abraded due to friction. Ang
lamísang gigúruy mauy nakahanggus (nakapahanggus) sa sáwug, The table
scratched the floor because you dragged it. Nahanggus ang ákung bitíis
nga nabwásut sa salug, My foot slipped into an opening on the floor and
I suffered abrasions on my leg. {2} [A; b1c] smooth a piece of wood,
bamboo strip, coconut midrib, or the like by scraping. Hanggúsi ang
tukug ug gílit, Smooth the coconut midrib with a razor blade.

hanghang v {1} [A; a12] for infants to have their mouth open, yearning
for food. Naghanghang ang gutum nga pisù, The hungry nestlings have
their mouths open. {2} = halhal.

hángin n {1} air. Wà nay hángin ang hásag, The pressure lantern has no
more air. {2} wind, breeze. Mibulhut ang hángin gíkan sa dágat, The
wind blew in from the sea. {3} breath or air as necessary for the body,
stamina. Daling malúya kay kúlang sa hángin, He tires easily because he
has no stamina. {4} mere talk, idle words. Kargádug hángin ang íyang
sinulat, His article is mostly hot air. {5} force, agency that carries
s.t. along or influences s.t. Unsang hangínay nagdala nímu dinhi? What
brought you here? {6} = bintus. {7} in phrases: birdi nga — n a draft
that makes a person ill when his back is exposed to it, esp. when
perspiring. dautan nga — n an ill wind that carries with it certain
evil effects. Muhurus gánì ang dautang hángin, dúnay balatían nga
muabut, When an ill wind blows, an epidemic will break out. itum nga —
ill wind that brings serious pestilence or death. pabur sa — for a sail
to be square before the wind, so as to catch the full force. Túlin ang
sakayan kay pabur sa hángin, The boat is moving fast because it is
catching the full force of the wind. may — crackpot, full of crazy
ideas. a windy. Hángin kaáyu rung adláwa, It is very windy today.
v {1} [B; a12] become windy. Mulawud siya bísag maghángin, He goes out
to sea even if it is windy. {2} [a2] be blown by the wind. Dat-úgi nang
mga papil kay hangínun unyà, Put a weight on the papers because the
wind might blow them away. {3} [B2] get puffed up, conceited.
Nagkahangin siya sukad marayna, She has been puffed up ever since she
was made a beauty queen. {4} [b8] be missed by a hairbreadth.
Nahanginan ang ákung úlu sa bála, A bullet missed my head by a
hairbreadth. {5} [b4] be crazy. Kubad siyang musulti, mu rag gihanginan
siya, He speaks off the subject as if he were crazy. pa-(→) v [A; b4]
expose oneself to the wind draft. Magpahangin ta sa baybáyun, Let’s get
some air at the seashore. Giubu ang bátà nga gipahanginan, The child
was exposed to the draft and caught a cold. -an(→), balat -an(→) n k.o.
sea cucumber that shrinks greatly when taken out of the water. ka-an
n atmosphere, air space. pwirsa sa ka-an n Air Force. -un a crackpot,
characterized by silly and impractical ideas. Hangínun kaáyu siyag mga
plánu. Anus-a gud nà musalir? He’s full of batty ideas. How could that
ever succeed? -un(→) ug útuk a boastful. Lábung manulti kay hanginug
útuk, He exaggerates because he is boastful.

hángir n clothes hanger. v [A; c1] put clothes on a hanger. Hangíra
(ihángir) ang tanang bláwus, Hang all the blouses up. Gustu ku sa
plastik nga mauy hangíran, I prefer to hang my clothes on plastic
hangers.

hangit v [B126] get irked or irritated to the point of anger. Nahangit
ku kadugáyan sa íyang paggaugau, His derision finally got my goat.
a annoying, maddening. Hangit kaáyu ning maglimpiyu ta sa báy unyà ang
uban maglingkudlingkud lang, It is certainly maddening to clean the
house while the others just sit around.

hangitan n selvage edge of s.t. woven, special weave at edge of s.t.
woven to keep it from getting undone.

hangkab = angkab.

hangkub_1 a keen about s.t., much interested in s.t. Dílì kaáyu ku
hangkub sa mga babáyi, I’m not terribly interested in women.
v {1} [B23(1)] be eager to do s.t., enthusiastic about s.t. Muhangkub
pa untà sa trabáhu nang íyang mga anak, If only his sons would interest
themselves in the work. {2} [A23P] inspire enthusiasm. Talagsang
kadásig paggámit sa bag-u níyang prupyidad nihangkub kaníya, A
tremendous desire to use his new acquisition inspired him.

hangkub_2 a fitting well into s.t. v [B2] fit well into s.t. Muhangkub
(mahangkub) ning sapatúsa níya kay paríha mag numiru, These shoes will
fit him well, for they are the right size. Ang luag kung sinínà
nagkahangkub na kay mitambuk man ku, My shirt was loose, but it is
getting snug on me because I’m gaining weight.

hanglas a very smooth to the point of being slippery. Hanglas ang salug
nga bag-ung giispirmáhan, The floor has just been waxed and is very
smooth and slippery. v [B; a] become slippery. Naghanglas ang ákung
kamut tungud sa armirul, My hands are slippery because of the starch.

han-grinid n hand grenade. v [a12] throw a hand grenade at.
Gihan-grinid ang mga tápuk ug daghang namatay, A hand grenade was
thrown into the crowd, and many people died.

hangtud until, up to a point in space or time. Hangtud sa pusti mga
bayinti mitrus, It is about twenty meters up to the post. Mutrabáhu ku
hangtud sa alas dus, I will work up to two o’clock. Gitursi ku íyang
kamut hangtud nga mihílak siya, I twisted his arm until he cried. {2} —
[noun], [pronoun] even, including [noun], [pronoun]. Hangtud ikaw,
nawad-an sa pagtáhud kanákù? Have you lost your respect for me too? —
sa —, kahangtúran forever, till the end of time (said of things that
could terminate but will not). Higugmáun ku siya hangtud sa hangtud
(hangtud sa kahangtúran), I will love her till the end of time. sa —
forever (said of things that cannot terminate). Mipahúlay siya sa
hangtud, He was laid to his eternal rest. v [A2; b4] stay, last long.
Ang baratung klási dílì muhangtud, The cheap kind doesn’t last. Dì ka
hangtúran ug mutsatsa ug mauy ímung dinad-an, No maid will stay long
with you if that’s how you handle them. sa kahangtúran to eternity. Sa
usa ka butu ang kinabúhì nabanlud sa kahangtúran, He was blasted to
eternity with one explosion. walay kahangtúran endless, eternal. Ang
gugma ku nímu walay kahangtúran, My love for you is endless. Kasábà nga
way kahangtúran, Scoldings without end.

hanguhag = danghag.

hangul a {1} be overly desirous of eating s.t. Hangul siyag mangga, He
is crazy about mangoes. {1a} fond of an activity. Hangul siya ug bayli,
He is fond of dancing. {2} selfish, greedy. Hangul kaáyu. Gustu iyáhun
tanan, He is so greedy. He wants everything for himself. Hangul kaáyu
ka, dílì manghátag bísag gamay, You’re very selfish. You don’t even
give a little piece. {3} destitute, needy (Biblical). Ang mga hangul
natigayun, The poor were ministered unto. (←) v [A; b6(1)]
{1} begrudge, not want s.o. to have s.t. one might have for himself.
Kun náa pa lang kuy sápì, dílì ku muhángul nímu, If I had money I
wouldn’t begrudge you any. Gihangúlan ta ba ka sa ímung gipangáyù? Did
I ever begrudge you anything you asked for? {2} [B126; b3] be greedy,
gluttonous. Ang pagdilì makahángul (makapahángul) sa táwu, Not allowing
s.o. to have s.t. makes him more desirous for it than ever. Kanà lay
ákung kahangúlan? Would I ever have a great desire for that? Who wants
that? walay na- who cares about that (lit. no one has ever gotten
overly desirous for that). Nía rag ímung bisiklíta, way nahángul, Here,
you can have your old bicycle. Who wants it? ka- n {1} greediness.
{2} poverty-stricken (Biblical). kahangulhangul v [A13] take to s.t.
greedily. Nagkahangulhangul kug káun ug pán kay wà ni sa ámù, I just
love to eat bread because we don’t have it at home. Kining mga
tagabaryu magkahangulhangul ug sini, Those country hicks are avid about
movies. See also kinahanglan.

hangup v {1} [A2C; a12] embrace or greet with joy, esp. upon arriving.
Muhangup ang bátà nákù inig-abut nákù sa balay, The child greets me
with joy as soon as I get home. Naghángup dáyun sila sa ílang
panagkítà, They immediately rushed into each other’s arms when they saw
each other. Ayaw ku hangpa kay gisip-un ku, Don’t embrace me. I have a
cold. {2} gi- be affected by the sickness hangup. n ailment brought on
by the spirit of a deceased relative whom one failed to remember with a
prayer, mass, or the like. a affectionate in one’s greeting.
Kinasingkásing ug hangup gayud nga pagdáwat, Sincere and joyous
reception. -in- v [B126; c5] be pleased by some action. Nahinangup aku
sa íyang gibúhat, What he did pleased me. Gikahinangup námù ang ímung
sulat, Your letter pleased us. kahinangup n pleasure at some action.
hinalangpun a welcome. Ang balintayins dí mauy usa ka hinalangpun nga
higayun, Valentine’s Day is a welcome occasion. mahinalangpun,
mahinangpánun a with pleasure, enthusiasm. Mahinalangpun kaáyu siyang
miúyun sa plánu, He agreed to the plan enthusiastically.

hángus v [A2S3P; a4] breathe heavily or with difficulty. Minghángus
siya, dáyun namatay, He labored for breath and died. Naghangus
(gihángus) siyang nagtungas sa bakilid, She was breathing hard and
heavily as she climbed the hill. n heavy breathing.

hangut v [AN; a12] bite at, chew s.t. rubbery or sinewy. Milugnut ang
baktin, nagpanghangut sa láang, The wild pig struggled, chewing at the
noose. Hangtun ang sinílas sa ituy, The puppy will chew the slippers
up. (←) v [A2; b5c] endure, put up with. Dì muhángut ning sapatúsa nímu
kay dagkù kag tiil, This pair of shoes will not last long with your big
feet. Hangútun (hangútan) ku na lang ning klasíhas trabáhu kay wà kuy
láing kapaingnan, I have to endure this kind of work because I have
nothing else to turn to.

hangwat v {1} [A; a] lift s.t. heavy from the top. Naghangwat akug
baldi nga punù sa kinálut nga yútà, I lifted the pail of soil.
{1a} lift s.t. to dispose of it. Gihangwátan ang nátad sa mga sagbut,
The trash which littered the yard was taken away. {2} [A; c1] gather
s.t. to dispose of it. Átung hangwátun kining mga tái, Let’s get rid of
all this manure.

hangyù (from káyù) v 1 [A; b5c] ask for s.t., request as a favor.
Hangyúa lang siyang muhulam kag kwarta, Ask him to let you borrow
money. Kinsay átung hangyúan sa kwarta? Who shall we ask for the money?
Dúna kuy ihangyù nímu, I have s.t. to request of you. {1a} beseech,
plead for. Mihangyù ang inahan nga luwasun ang íyang anak, The mother
pleaded for her son’s life. {2} [A; ac] haggle the price down, ask the
seller to let one have s.t. at a lower price. Hangyúa ug písus ang
búlig, Offer a peso for the whole bunch. Lisud hangyúan nang babayhána
kay dì musíbug sa íyang prisyu, That woman is difficult to bargain with
because she never lowers her price. Pilay ímung ihangyù? How much will
you offer for it? {3} [AN; a12] propose to a girl. Giáhak na!
Manghangyù kag bálu! Are you crazy, proposing to a widow? {4} [A23] for
the ball in basketball to make it into the basket after bouncing off
the ring and threatening to miss (as if the ball begged to be allowed
in). Miuntul ang búla sa ring unyà milígid kini ug misúd. Mihangyù pa
giyud, The ball bounced off the ring then rolled into the basket. It
scored, but only after begging to be let in. n {1} request. {2} price
offered. — lúbù see lúbù. -ánan n person from whom one habitually buys
small things on credit. -in-an n s.t. acquired or accomplished in
bargaining. Paubsi ug písus ang prisyu pára may hinangyúan ku, Take a
peso off the price so I have s.t. to show for my pains in bargaining.
-únun n of one who needs to be approached and talked into giving
approval or favors. Dì dáyun nà siya musugut sa ímung pangáyù,
hangyuúnun pa, He does not easily grant requests. He needs to be
begged.

háni_1 {1} = unsa. {2} exclamation of discomfiture upon finding s.t.
out. Háni ba wà na man diay kuy kwarta sa ákung pitáka, Heavens! I have
no more money in my purse.

háni_2 n honey, endearing term of address.

hánib v [A; c1] gather things together in a neat pile. Haníba ang mga
papílis nga napasapása, Stack up the papers that have been scattered.
-in- {1} s.t. gathered in a neat pile. {2} accomplice in doing s.t. Mga
hinánib ku sa parigla, My accomplices in attacking passers-by.

hanig v {1} [A; c] when s.t. is put on top of s.t. else, put s.t.
between the two things as a protection for the thing on top or the
thing on the bottom. Úsà nímu plantsáha, hanigi ug panaptun, Protect it
with a piece of cloth before you iron it. Waks pípar ang ihanig arun
dílì mupilit, Line the bottom with wax paper so it won’t stick. Ug
mupahuut ka sa íhi, hanigig tabla arun way dinukdukan, If you force the
shaft in, buffer it with a piece of wood so there won’t be any hammer
marks. {2} [A; a] take food along with drinks as a buffer. Hanigi ug
adúbu ang ram, Eat some pork before you drink rum. n {1} s.t. put
between two things as a protection. {2} food taken along with drinks to
line the stomach. {3} — sa impiyirnu {a} one who leads s.o. to do
wrong, from the notion that when the wrongdoer lands in hell, he will
be there first to be, so to speak, the buffer. Ikaw muy hanig sa
impiyirnu, kay ikaw may nagtudlù níya pagpangáwat, You’re his buffer in
hell because you taught him to steal. {b} matchmaker between illicit
lovers who will go to hell first to act as a buffer for the couple
which will end up in hell. v [A123P; c1] be made a buffer in hell. Ang
pagtitatíta muy makahanig (makapahanig) sa táwu sa impiyirnu basta may
kabilinggan, Acting as a go-between will land you in hell if one of the
two is married.

hanimun n honeymoon. v [A; b6(1)] spend a honeymoon.

hánip a {1} neatly arranged in stacks according to size. Ayg bungkága
nang mga inutaw kay hánip na nà, Don’t mess up that clothing because
it’s been all piled neatly. {2} for a surface to be flat and even.
Hánip gáning pagkapintal sa átù pa way bugdubugdu, If it is painted
evenly there will be no thick spots. Hánip kaáyu ang pagsimintu basta
may palíta, If you use a trowel, the cementing will be even and flat.
v [A3P; c1] {1} stack s.t. neatly by size. {2} make a surface flat and
even.

haníti a skillful, proficient in s.t. Haníti siya sa iskríma, He is
expert in fencing. v [B; b6] be, become proficient in some activity.
Mahaníti ka na gánì niíning trabahúa, When you become proficient in
this job. ka- n proficiency.

hanlag n floor joists (busaug) made of bamboo.

hanlas = hanglas.

hanlilibun = gabun_2.

hanlilika = anghilika.

hanlilítik = handilítik.

hanlulúkay n a k.o. harmless garden snake, light yellow-green in color,
about a meter long and around 1¼ cm. in diameter. It resembles a
coconut palm leaflet (lukay).

hansak v [A; c] thrust, drive s.t. into s.t. with force such that it
penetrates, using a downward motion. Gihansákan níya ang kaáway sa
bayuníta, He shoved a bayonet into the enemy. {2} hit with a strong
thrust (figuratively). Gihansákan ang íyang kílid ug usa ka makabúngug
nga kúmù, A staggering blow of the fist hit his side. {3} [A; c1] spike
a ball. {a} put a ball in the basket from above. Dì siya makahansak sa
búla kay mubù, He can’t just put the ball in the basket because he is
too small. {b} spike a volleyball.

hantak n gambling game played with three of the old, large one-centavo
coins which are tossed down simultaneously on a stone (antugan). The
one who tosses bets all heads against s.o. who bets all tails.
Bystanders may join in. v [AC; b6] play hantak. -an n stone to throw
the coins on. -an(→) n {1} place where a game of hantak is held.
{2} temporary place of abode. Inig-anhi námù sa Sibu hutil muy ámung
hantakan, When we come to Cebu we stay in a hotel. v {1} [A; b6] hang
around a place. Adtu maghantakan ang mga buguy sa íyang tindáhan, The
loafers hang around her store. Ang ámung nataran mauy gihantakanan sa
mga pidikab, The pedicabs park in our yard. {2} [A; c6] stay, put s.w.
temporarily. Átù lang ning ihantakan dinhig balíkun unyà, We’ll just
leave this here temporarily and come back for it later. -anan(→) = -an,
2. -íru n one who plays hantak.

hantánà v [A12C3] confront each other and get ready for a fistfight.
Naghantánà na ang duha apan wà mahinayun ug sumbagay kay miabut ang
pulis, The two were about to exchange blows when the policeman arrived.

hantatalu n k.o. green caterpillar, esp. fond of calladium and taro
plants, and also found on citrus, turning into a butterfly.

hantatamsi, hantatansi n k.o. large shrub of the secondary forest.

hantik = amimitas.

hanting n k.o. pointed, sharp knife 6–7″ long, thick at the upper edge.
— náyip = hanting.

hantuk v {1} [A3N; a2b2] in a game of sungkà, to hit the jackpot
landing in a hole opposite the hole in which the opponent has a large
number of pieces, thus winning all of his pieces. {2} [A12N; a2] hit
the jackpot by marrying s.o. rich. Magminyù ku apan manghantuk giyud
kug anak ug asyindíru, I’ll get married, but it’ll have to be the
jackpot—a planter’s daughter. n stones gotten from the opponent when
one hits the jackpot in sungkà.

hantung = hamtung.

hanu {1} exclamation of joy preceding a statement which relates a
discovery. Hanu, nakakità kug singsing, Guess what? I found a ring.
{2} exclamation of reprimand at s.o. who failed to follow orders. Hanu,
giingnan tikawng ayawg hilabti. Nabuak hinúun, See! I told you not to
touch it. Now it broke. {3} kay — because you know what I mean ...
Pirmi siyang ubirtayim kay hanu, ang íyang mga kabit, He always works
overtime because you know, his concubines. Mitúman siya kay hanu, ang
íyang útang nákù, He did as he was told because you know, his debts to
me. {4} how are you doing? How is it going? Hanu, nakakità ka na bag
trabáhu? How is it going now? Have you found a job?

hanubuy a for trees, legs, and the like to grow smooth and straight.
Hanubuy nga káhuy ang ihalígi, Get a straight tree for the post. v [b6]
consider a tree or leg straight.

hanúgun = hinúgun.

han-uk v {1} [A; c1] dump s.t. into a corner, or in an enclosed space.
Ayaw han-úka (ihan-uk) sa daplin ang sinilhig mung sagbut, Do not just
dump the trash in the corner. {1a} dump, assign people to a place. Ang
íyang dalágang gúwang mauy gihan-úkan sa mga pag-umangkung nangaílu,
They dumped the orphaned nieces and nephews on their spinster aunt.
Ihan-uk ang mga makililímus sa mga asílu, They dump beggars into the
poorhouse. {1b} shower affection on s.o. Han-úkan sa pagpanggà ang
bugtung anak, An only child gets affection showered on him. {1c} lay
all blame, suspicion on s.o. Gihan-úkan siya sa tanang pasángil, All
the blame was put on him. {2} [A3; b6] flock, crowd into a place. Anhà
giyud muhan-uk ang mga trabahadur ug káun sa íyang tindáhan, The
laborers flock to her store to eat. -anan n hang-out, usual place of
assembly. Nayitklab kanà nga han-ukánan sa mga dátù, It’s a night club
frequented by the rich.

hanum-u n k.o. shrub.

hanunum-u n small tree of secondary forest.

hanut_1 v [B1456] for a dying person to be gasping for breath. Naghanut
siya kay hápit na mamatay, He was gasping because he was about to die.

hanut_2 v [A; b] thin out a cluster of fruits, leaves, plants. Hanuti
ang mga dáwa nga nanuruk kay bagà ra, Thin the sprouting millet because
it is much too thick.

hanuy, hánuy a smooth, gentle in flow or movement due to the absence of
obstacles. Hánuy kaáyu ang ámung pagbiyáhi, We had a smooth trip. Hanuy
kaáyu imnun nang wiski, That whiskey is smooth to drink. v [B2; b6]
move or flow easily without obstacle. Nagkahanuy na ang dágan sa awtu
nga maáyu na ang dálan, The car is running more smoothly now that the
road is better.

hanyag v [A; c] offer s.t. for s.o.’s consideration. Naghanyag siya
nákug yútà, He offered to sell me some land. Gihanyágan ku níyag
trabáhu, He offered me a job.

hanyù = hangyù.

hā́p = hálap.

hapà v [A; b6(1)] throw oneself onto one’s stomach. Mihapà siya sa
tiilan sa hárì, He prostrated himself at the king’s feet.

hapag n {1} a round shallow tray made of woven thin strips of bamboo or
rattan used by peddlers of food. {2} flat or only slightly sloping roof
of nípà or cogon. v [c1] make a nípà or cogon roofing flat or slightly
sloping.

hapak v {1} [A; a1b28] strike s.t. forcefully, with a slapping sound.
Hapaka ang búla inigsirbi nímu, Strike the ball hard when you serve.
{2} [A2; c] invest most or all of a sum right off on s.t. Hapakan ku
giyud nang yutáa sa ákung bakpi, I will invest all my back pay on that
land. n {1} forceful slap. Ang hapak sa lapdus sa íyang láwas, The
stroke of the whip on his body. {2} bat in a ball game. {3} sound made
by forceful striking.

hapas = haplas.

hapathapat v [A; a12] move fast with long strides. Hapathapatun lang sa
tagabúkid ang lungsud, Mountain people come to town just by walking
fast.

hapaw v [A; a] {1} take the uppermost layer off of s.t. Hapawun ku ang
síbu sa sabaw, I will skim the fat off the soup. Íya nang gihapawan ang
kan-un, He took the rice off the top. {2} pass lightly over the top of
s.t. Ígù lang mihapaw ang bála sa íyang úlu, The bullet just grazed the
top of his head. a superficial. Hapaw ang íyang katarúngan, His
reasoning is shallow. -in- n s.t. taken off the top, esp. the top
portion of rice or hominy.

hápay v {1} [B126] for a thick cluster of s.t. long and standing to
fall or be bent at its base. Nahápay ang mga humay, The rice plants
were bent over. {2} [A; a1] comb s.o.’s hair flat to the head. Díay
pamáda. Hapáya ang íyang buhuk, Here’s some pomade. Comb his hair flat.
{3} [B126] go bankrupt. Nahápay ang ílang nigusyu kay gigastu man hasta
puhúnan, Their business went bankrupt because he spent every penny of
it, even the capital. a {1} bent over flat. {2} for a man’s hair to be
neatly groomed flat on the head. -in- n man’s combed hair. v [AN]
{1} comb the hair. {2} be a man (be one who combs his hair flat)
(humorous). Bulagi siya. Maáyu mag siya ray naghinápay, Leave him. He’s
not the only fish in the sea (lit. the only one who combs his hair
flat).

hapdus a stinging, burning pain in a wound, pangs of hunger. n stinging
pain, gnawing from hunger. Hapdus ang tintúra yúdu, Iodine stings.
{2} for words to be stinging. Kahapdus sa ímung mga púlung, Your words
are so painful to me. v [B; b6] sting, burn. Mihapdus (nahapdus) ang
ákung samad nga gidapátag tintúra yúdu, My wound stings because iodine
was put on it. Ang kagútum makahapdus (makapahapdus) sa átung tiyan,
Hunger can make you get a gnawing pain in your stomach. ka- = hapdus,
n.

hápì v [B126] for plants to bend flat to the ground. Ang mga mais
nahápì sa kusug nga hángin, The corn was bent flat to the ground by the
strong wind.

hapihápi v [A; b6(1)] engage in merry-making. Díay ákung gidáng rám.
Maghapihápi ta, Here’s some rum I brought. Let’s have some fun.
n merry-making.

hapíhip v [AB; a] fill a rigid container up to the brim, be full to the
brim. Pagsulud ug asin nga ígù lang muhapíhip sa láta, Fill the can
with salt up to the brim. Wà gánì mahapíhip ang táru. Hapihípa ra gud,
The can isn’t even filled to the brim. Fill it up. a full to the brim.

hapin n {1} s.t. that is laid over or under s.t. Hapin sa lamísa,
Tablecloth. Hapin sa bátà, Baby’s diaper. Hapin sa piryudiku, The
magazine cover. {2} food taken along with drinks as a digestive buffer
(slang). Way ulsir basta dúnay hapin inig-ínum, You won’t get ulcers if
you take in some food before a drinking spree. v {1} [A; b2c1] lay s.t.
over s.t. Hapinun (ihapin) ku ning dáhun sa ságing sa baskit, I will
line the bottom of the basket with this banana leaf. Gihapinan nákù ang
katri ug putì nga hábul, I covered the bed with a white sheet. {2} [A;
b6(1)] take in food as a buffer.

hapit v {1} [A2; b6(1)] drop by, stop in for a short while. Hapit úsà
mu sa balay, Stop in the house for a while. Ang ayruplánu mihapit úsà
sa Haway, Their plane made a stopover in Hawaii. {2} [A; ac] get or
bring s.t. on the way. Akuy muhapit níya sa íla, I will stop in her
house and fetch her on the way. Kinsay maghapit sa libru sa ámù? Who
will stop by our place to deliver (or get) the book? Wà bay nakahapit
sa libru sa inyu? Hasn’t anybody stopped by your place to get (or
deliver) the book? Hapitun níya ang búlù pagkanáug, He will pick up the
bolo on his way out. Gihapitan aku níyag palit ug búwak, He stopped in
s.w. on his way to buy me some flowers. Ihapit kining kwarta
pagdipusitu sa bangku, Stop in the bank on your way to deposit this
money. n stopover. hapithapit v [A; b(1)] make stopovers. Lángan kaáyu
ang barkung maghapithapit ug daghang pwirtu, It takes a long time if a
boat keeps making stopovers in lots of ports. -ánan n place where
stopovers are made.

hápit almost, almost at the point of. Hápit na malútù ang kan-un, The
food is almost done. Hápit na siya muhílak, She is on the verge of
tears. Hápit na mugíkan ang trák, The truck is about to leave. dílì —
hardly, barely. Dílì hápit (Hápit dílì) madungug ang íyang tíngug, You
can barely hear his voice. — madúgay for s.t. expected to be completed
later than the expected time (lit. it is almost going to be a long
time). Usually used as a reply to a query (humorous). ‘Hápit na ba
malútù ang kan-un?’—‘Hápit na madúgay.’ ‘Is the food ready?’—‘It still
needs several minutes.’

haplà v [APB; c1] {1} throw oneself down on the stomach. Midágan siya
ug mihaplà (mipahaplà) sa katri, She ran out and threw herself flat on
the bed. Nahaplà (mihaplà) siya kay nakatunub ug pánit sa ságing, She
fell when she stepped on a banana peel. Átung hapláun (ihaplà)
pagbutang ang banig sa salug, Let’s lay the mat flat on the floor.
{2} defeat s.t., bring it to its downfall. Gihaplà ang indipindinti sa
pulitikanhung makinarya, The political machinery defeated the
independent candidates. {3} [A; c1] fail s.o. in school completely.
Kaduha aku mahaplà sa Aldyibra, I failed Algebra twice. a flat, not
bulging. Haplà siyag súsu, She has flat breasts.

haplak = haklap.

haplas v [AN; c] apply a liquid or viscous material with broad strokes.
Kinsay naghaplas ug lápuk sa bungbung? Who rubbed mud over the wall?
Haplási ang ímung bukubuku ug alkuhul, Rub alcohol on your back. n s.t.
rubbed onto s.t. {2} medicinal rub. paN- v [A; c] rub s.t. on oneself.
Nanghaplas siyag kríma sa íyang nawung, She rubbed cream on her face.

haplù a fit loosely inside of s.t. Haplù ning ákung sapátus, These
shoes are very loose on me. Haplù nga pagkalansang, Nailed so that the
nail wiggles. v {1} [BN] be loose inside of s.t. {2} [c1] for the
string of the top to fly off because of not being tied firmly enough.
Nahaplù ang apus, The top string came off.

haplus (from palus) v {1} [APB12; a] for s.t. which is tied to s.t. or
holds it to come off, cause it to do so. Nahaplus ang íyang sapátus
pagdinágan, His shoes came off as he ran. Nahaplus ákung kamut sa sanga
ug nahúlug ku, I lost my grip on the branch, and I fell. Nahaplus ang
ubud sa ákung kamut, The eel slipped out of my hand. {2} [A12] escape
from restraint. Ang bábuy nakahaplus sa hukut, The pig got loose from
its tether. Haplúsa ang písì sa tiil sa bábuy, Slip the rope off from
the pig’s feet. {3} [A; a1] run the hand over the length of s.t. to
remove s.t. from it, or squeeze s.t. out of it, or just massage it.
Siyay mihaplus sa alambri, He ran his hands over the wire to straighten
it. Haplusa ímung nawung ug katulgun ka, Run your hand over your face
if you feel sleepy.

haplut = haplus.

hapluy v [A; a] rub the flat palm over s.t. Naghapluy siya sa palpag
níyang buhuk, She is smoothening her dishevelled hair. Haplúya ang
ímung nawung ug tulgun ka, Run your hand over your face if you feel
sleepy.

hapnig (from panig) v [A; c1] stack flat things in a neat pile. Ihapnig
(hapníga) ang inutaw sa aparadur, Stack the ironed clothes in the
wardrobe.

hapnut {1} = sapnut. {2} †.

hapsà = hagsà.

hapsay a {1} smooth and without blemish. Hapsay ang pánit sa mangga,
The mango has smooth and unblemished skin. {2} neat and orderly. Hapsay
kaáyung pagkaariglǎr ang ímung lawak, Your room is orderly.
v {1} [APB2; a] be smooth and glossy, make s.t. so. Hapsáyun ta ning
ímung buhuk, Let’s make your hair smooth and glossy. {2} [B12; a] make,
be neatly arranged, make s.t. so. Hapsáya ang ímung pamisti, Wear
clothing that is simple and neat.

hapslip n half slip. v [A; b6(1)] wear, make into a half slip.

hapù v [A; c1] comb the hair straight backward. Hapua (ihapù) ang ímung
buhuk kay limpiyung tan-áwun, Comb your hair straight backward because
it looks neat.

hápù a fatiguing. Hápù kaáyu ning pagpangarga, The job of a stevedore
is very tiring. v [A1PB26; a4b4c1] fatigue, get fatigued. Kanang sayáwa
naghápù (nagpahápù) sa átung láwas, That dance wears you out
completely. Gihápù (gihapúan, nahápù) kug linanguy sa dágat, I am
exhausted from swimming in the sea. Ayaw hapúa (ihápù) nang ímung
láwas, Don’t tire yourself out too much. (→) a fatigued. ka-
n weariness.

hapúhap v [A; a12] stroke gently back and forth with little pressure.
Mihapúhap siya sa ákung bukubuku sa paghumpay sa kasakit, He stroked my
back to relieve the pain. n gentle strokes back and forth. -in- n a
gentle stroke back and forth. Ang hinapúhap sa huyúhuy sa íyang hubù
nga láwas, The gentle caresses of the breeze on her nude body.

hapúlas (from púlas) v [A; c1] {1} smear s.t. over a large area with
the hand. Gihapulásan ang bungbung ug lápuk, The wall had mud smeared
all over it. {2} eat s.t. fast. Mihapúlas lang siya ug tulu ka plátung
tsapsuy, He gobbled down three platefuls of chop suey (as if he was
just smearing it on his mouth).

hapun n {1} Japan. {2} Japanese person. {3} fishing line. isda sa — =
súlid_2. papil nga, sa, di- colored tissue paper. hapunánun n Japanese
citizen. -in- a {1} in the Japanese way. {2} name given to various
methods of fishing introduced by the Japanese. v [A; c1] speak
Japanese, do s.t. the Japanese way. -is Japanese (plural).

hápun n afternoon, early evening. Bag-ung hápun, Early afternoon. — na
it is late (in the afternoon or early evening). Hápun na kaáyu. Adtu na
ku, It is already very late. I’m going now. v {1} [B5] get to be
afternoon. Nahápun na lang wà pa siya maulì, It was evening already and
he still hadn’t come home. {1a} ] do s.t. in the afternoon. Hapúna ang
bunyag, Have the baptism held in the afternoon. {2} [A13; b(1)] do s.t.
until afternoon. Maghápun siyag paninda, She is in the store until
afternoon. {3} [b8] be overtaken by afternoon. Hihapunan ku ug panáud
sa bumbilya, Evening overtook me as I was putting up the electric
lights. hapunhápun {1} every afternoon. {2} = ginamusginámus, see
gamus. v [A1; b5] do s.t. every afternoon. Mahuman nà dáyun ug
hapunhapúnun (hapunhapúnan) ku nag trabáhu, It will soon be finished if
I work on it every afternoon. hiN-(→) v [A13] {1} do in the afternoon.
Naghinghapung kalígù, Swimming in the afternoon. {2} for afternoon to
approach. pa-(→), paka-(→) v [A13; b(1)] stay s.w. until afternoon.
Magpahapun ta dinhi, kay ínit pa kaáyug udtu, Let’s wait here until
afternoon, because it would be terribly hot at noon. panghi- v [A23] be
around afternoon. Muanhi siya, manghiudtu, manghihápun ba, He’ll come
here around noon or around afternoon. pani- v [A2; c] eat supper.
Manihápun na ta kay alas utsu na, Let’s eat supper now because it is
already eight o’clock. n supper. -ánun, ka-ánun late in the afternoon.
Hapunánun (kahapunánun) nahuman ang iliksiyun, The election was over
late in the afternoon. ka-un n {1} afternoon as a phase of time of day.
Ang kaínit sa kahapúnun dumudulut kaáyu, The heat in the afternoon is
very penetrating. {2} the late years of one’s life. tig-(→) n {1} the
eve of an important occasion. {2} banquet held on the eve of an
occasion. v {1} [A1] hold a banquet on the eve of an occasion. {2} [AN;
b6] attend the banquet held on the eve. Manighapun ta sa íla, Let’s
attend the banquet held on the eve at their house. {3} [A2N] go s.w. on
the day before an event. Manighapun ku sa barku, kay sayung mularga,
I’ll go to the boat in the afternoon because it will leave early.
-un(→) n {1} done in the afternoon. {2} palm toddy gathered in the
afternoon.

hapus v [A; b5] {1} strike, usually with s.t. flexible with a long
downward stroke. Gihapsan níya sa sundang ang ságing, He struck the
banana tree with his machete. Ihapus ku ning bakus nímu, I will strike
you with this belt. {2} spin a top. n {1} action of whipping at.
{2} whip. {3} string of a top.

hapuy, hápuy = hapluy.

hapuyhápuy = hapúhap.

hapyud v [A; a] {1} massage gently moving hands in one direction.
Mitindug siya ug mihapyud sa íyang sinínà, She stood up and smoothed
out her dress. Hapyúra ning ákung tiil kay gikalambri, Massage my legs
because I’ve got cramps. {2} squeeze s.t. out of s.t. by massaging in
one direction. Hapyúra ang kulgit arun madagínut, Flatten out the
toothpaste to use up every bit of it.

hára n queen. Nahímu siyang hára sa pangílin sa ámung balángay, She was
made queen of the fiesta in our barrio. — sa panimalay wife as the head
of the house. v [B6; a2] become a queen.

hárab = árab_2.

harabharab v [A1; b5] {1} rush, hurry in doing s.t. Nagharabharab siyag
súgù, She rushed about giving orders. {2} [A; b(1)] for monkeys to
chatter wildly. {3} be aflutter with expectation. Nagharabharab ákung
ginháwa sa pagpakigkítà kaníya, I’m all excited at the thought of
seeing her again.

harábi n k.o. patent medicine used as cough syrup. — ditúlu = harábi.

harag v [B; c1] {1} for s.t. tall to be leaning to one side. Nagharag
ang pusti. Tarúnga, The post is leaning. Straighten it out. Naharag ang
mga balay human hangína, The houses are leaning to one side after the
windstorm. {2} lean back to rest on s.t. Dì ku makaharag ánang siyáha
kay gubà ug sandigánan, I cannot recline on that chair because it has a
broken backrest. a leaning.

harána n serenade, music made beneath a girl’s window by way of
courting. v {1} [AN; b6(1)] serenade, go serenading. Dalága ka na.
Giharanáhan (giharanáan) na ka, You are a young lady now. They’re
already serenading you. {2} sing under a person’s window. Haranáan nátù
siya ugmà sa kaadláwun kay adlaw níya, Let’s serenade him tomorrow
early in the morning because it’s his birthday. paN- n serenading.

hárang_1 n offering of food, smokes, drinks, etc. to supernatural
beings during the planting and harvest seasons, or to the departed
souls during All Souls Day. v [A1; c] make an offering of the hárang.

hárang_2 v {1} [A; b5] block s.o.’s way with hostile purpose. Usa ka
bitin ang mihárang sa ámung agiánan, A snake barred our way. Ang
patrulya gihárang (giharángan) sa mga kaáway, The patrol was ambushed
by the enemies. {2} [A2C; a1] confront s.t. unpleasant or hostile. Dílì
ku makahárang sa mapait nga kamatuúran, I cannot face the hard truth.
Nagkahárang ang duha sa usa ka mainítung lantugiay, The two met in hot
debate.

háras a biting taste which characterizes citrus fruit. v [B46; b6] feel
a biting sensation after eating citrus fruit, having such a taste.
Nagháras na ning tutunlan íning buúngun nga háras, My throat stings
from this sharp pomelo.

harasharas a {1} done carelessly such that if there is a finished
product, it is rough, not well-prepared. Harasharas nga pagkalútù, way
lamì, It is carelessly cooked, tasteless. Harasharas siyang mudrayib.
Mu rag pituy kinabúhì, He drives carelessly as if he had seven lives.
{2} coarse in behavior. v [A; a] {1} do s.t. without much care.
Giharasharas niya pagbúhat ang lamísa, He did a sloppy job in making
the table. {2} fail to behave carefully, without proper circumspection.
Nagharasharas siya sa taliwálà sa sulimning sirimunyas, He was
misbehaving in the midst of the solemn ceremonies. Unsáun nátù pagtígum
ug magharasharas ka paggastu? How can we save if you spend money
without giving it any thought?

hárat = káras_1.

haraw {1} exclamation expressing an earnest wish for s.t. to happen,
either good or bad. Haraw malúnud ang íyang gisakyan, May the boat he
takes sink. Haraw makadaug ku sa rípa, May I win the raffle. {2} —
ka-[root] (confined to verbs of B conjugation) expression of
exasperation and fear for the worst consequences of a rash action.
Giingnang dì padraybun. Haraw kabanggà, I told him not to drive. Watch,
he’s going to crash. Mitabuk giyud sa bahà. Haraw kadá sa súg, He
crossed when the river was in flood. Watch him get carried away with
the current.

harayháray = halayhálay.

harbas = halábas.

hardin n {1} flower garden. {2} place of beautiful emotions (literary).
Sa ákung hardin sa gugma ikay rúsas, You are the rose in my garden of
love. {3} way of playing billiards with numbered pieces set along the
sides and in the center of the table, in which the piece hit represents
a score and the players are obliged to make a certain score as
indicated by a throw of dice. v [A1; a2] have a flower garden. -íru
n gardener.

hardul n {1} hurdle in races. {2} track event using hurdles.

hardwir n hardware store.

hari give me. Hari (ihari) ra nà, Let me have that. i- = hari.

hári, hárì_1 v [A13] do s.t. continuously. Wà siyay ági naghári lag
katúlug, He didn’t accomplish anything. All he did was sleep.

hárì_2 n {1} king. Ang hárì sa Ispanya, The king of Spain. {2} the king
in cards, chess. {3} master, one who has power over. Hárì sa panimalay,
The master of the household. {4} head of a coin. {4a} jocular
expression uttered upon hearing s.t. fall. Dihang nahúlug ang básu
dihay niingung ‘Hárì!’ When the glass fell s.o. yelled ‘Dropped s.t.!
(lit. Heads!)’ {5} one who excels others in s.t. which requires skill
or knowledge. Ang ákung apuhan hárì sa iskiríma sa íyang panahun,
During his time, my grandfather was a master of fencing. — nga gángis
big boss, kingpin, usually of a political party. Nagkinahanglan nig
bindisiyun sa háring gángis, It needs the approval of the boss. — nga
lungsud the sovereign people. Ang kandidátu nangamúyù sa háring
lungsud, The political candidate pleaded with the electorate.
v {1} [B16; b(1)] be a monarch. Usa ka babáyi ang naghárì karun sa
Inglatíra, A woman is the sovereign in England. {2} [A3; b(1)] assume
leadership or command in a bossy manner. Dì ku gustung harían sa ákung
kaugalíngun, I don’t like to be lorded over in my own house. {3} [A12;
b6] get heads in tossing coins. Nakahárì (giharían) siyag kalima, He
got heads five times. {4} [B26] turn out to be heads. Mahárì (muhárì)
lang ning pagkaantúga, If this toss turns out to be heads. {5} [A3;
b(1)] for a condition or emotions to prevail. Mihárì sa íyang dughan
ang kakuyaw, Fear prevailed in his heart. Naghárì ang kahílum, Silence
reigned. harìhárì v [A; b] treat in a bossy way. harìhariun,
maharìhariun a bossy, domineering. -ánun a royal, regal. Hariánun nga
balay, A palatial mansion. Hariánung dugù, Royal blood. gin-an, ging-an
n kingdom.

hárì_3 v [B126] fall with the rump or back hitting the ground first.
Nahárì ku sa dā́n nga danglug, I fell on my back on the slippery road.

hárim n harem. v [A13; c1] have, maintain a harem.

harína n flour. — sa mais n corn starch. v {1} [A1; c1] make flour.
{2} [B256; b6] form into flour. {3} [b(1)] put flour into.

haríning n a princess that is a child.

harsi = halsi.

harsiya n {1} guy rope or cable tied to s.t. vertical to maintain
stability. Harsiya sa pálu, Guy ropes holding the mast. {2} cable or a
strong rope holding the anchor or the hawser used in tying the boat to
the dock. v [A13; a12] attach, make into a hawser or guy.

harug_1 n supports for growing plants or s.t. for them to climb on.
v [A; b5] support climbing plants. Giharug (giharugan) na ang agbáti ug
mga lipak, They used bamboo sticks for the agbáti vine to climb on.

haruhas = harasharas.

harúhay a in a comfortable financial situation. v [B23(1); b6] for a
way of life to become financially comfortable. Kanang swildúha
makaharúhay na giyud ning átung pagpuyù, With that salary we can live a
life of ease and comfort.

harun = arun.

hárung v [A2C; abc1] come face to face with. Dílì siya makighárung sa
mga bisíta, She refuses to greet the visitors. Ang sad-an dílì
makahárung kanákug tan-aw, He’s guilty and cannot look at me straight
in the eye. Harúngan ku siya bísag ása ug bísan anus-a, I’ll take him
on, any time, any place. Wà kuy nawung ihárung níya kay sad-an ku, I
can’t bring myself to face him because I’m guilty. Piligru ikahárung
ang hárì sa dágat, It is dangerous to come face to face with the king
of the sea. n action of facing s.o. Nadaug ku sa hárung, wà ku
makapaháyag, I was overcome by shyness when I tried to face her. I
couldn’t state my purpose.

harus v {1} [A; a] strip leaves off the stem or stalk. Nagharus kug
kamunggay nga iságul sa útan, I’m stripping off kamunggay leaves to use
as vegetables. {2} [B12] for a mechanism that engages to get stripped,
get so it fails to engage. Naharus ang kambiyu maung dì na mukagat, The
gears got stripped so that they won’t engage. {3} [c1] involve all in
doing s.t. Iharus (harusa) ug lábay sa bintánà ang mga butang, Throw
everything out of the window. {3a} [A; a3] destroy, afflict all
practically without exception. Ang lúnup nga miharus sa tanang
kabalayan, The flood that destroyed all the houses. Naharus ming tanan
ug kasakit ug plú, We were all sick with flu. {4} [A2N; a12] make a
sweeping victory, reap all the victories in competitive activities. Ang
ámung iskuylahan mauy miharus (nangharus) sa atlítik mit, Our school
won a sweeping victory in the athletic meet. Giharus kami ni Tínung sa
blakdyak, We all lost to Tinong in blackjack. a for a mechanism to be
stripped. Harus ug gusánu ang ruska, The screw has stripped threads.

haruyháruy v [A1; b6(1)] go about in a relaxed way for pleasure.
Nagharuyháruy ka na man dihà. Tápus ka na ba sa búhat mu? You are
strolling about now. Are you through with your chores?

hás = hálas_1, 2.

hasag v [A; c] thrust a mass forcibly against s.t. else. Akuy muhasag
nímu sa bubung ug ímu kung bakakan, I’ll knock your head against the
wall if you lie to me.

hásag n pressurized kerosene lamp (from the brand name ‘Hasag’). v [A1]
use a pressurized kerosene lamp.

hasàhásà n name given to small andúhaw.

hásan n k.o. land crab a bit smaller than the kágang, generally not
eaten.

hasang v [b(1)] vent one’s anger on s.o. Bísag kinsang mahiduul ang
íyang hasngan sa kasukù, He vents his anger on anyone who goes near
him.

hásang n gills. hasanghásang n an outlet on the side of a ship’s hull
to let the bilge water out. -an a having gills.

hashas v {1} [A; b5c] pound rice a second time to husk the grains that
had been missed the first time around. Hashási ang bugas arun hamluyng
kan-un, Pound the rice a second time so it will be smooth to eat.
{2} [A13; b5] go over s.t. written and polish it. Naghashas ku niíning
sinulat páras pagpamantálà, I am revising the article for publication.
-in-an n {1} piece that has been well-revised and polished. Pakigpúlung
nga hinashásan, Highly polished speech. {2} specially chosen.
Hinashásan nga trabahanti, Specially chosen workers.

hásì v {1} [A; a12] frighten s.o. with threats. Ayaw kug hasía kay dì
ku mahadluk, Do not threaten me because I can not be frightened. Ang
lungsud gihásì sa dakung gútum, The city was threatened with a severe
famine. {2} [A; a1] trouble, vex. Kinsa na man puy naghásì sa bátà nga
naghilak na man pud ri? Who bothered the child that he is crying again?
Gihásì ang mga tanum sa úlud, The worms are a pestilence for the
plants. {3} [A1; b(1)] for s.t. to be rampant, be on, in full swing.
Naghásì ang krímin sa piyir, Crime is rampant on the waterfront.
Maghásì lámang ang pinugsanay sa humay, Rice planting is proceeding in
full swing.

hasindíru n = asindíru. see asinda.

haskan {1} — nga [adjective]-a, ka-[adjective], [verb] how very much!
Haskang kuyáwa nákù uy! My, how scared I was! Haskang pangúrug naku!
My, how I trembled! Haskang nakakáun níya! God! How that child eats.
{2} expression of helpless frustration at s.t. monotonous or boring.
Isdà sa Lúnis, isdà gahápun, isdà sa paniudtu, ug karun haskan mau
gihápun, Fish last Monday, fish yesterday, fish for lunch, and now,
God! The same damn thing.

haslag v [B] look bright and pleasant with neatness and cleanliness.
Mihaslag (nahaslag) ang panagway sa táwung bulingut nga nakaligù, The
dirty man looked neat and pleasant-looking after he washed himself.
Naghaslag nag iskrin human banwási, The screen looks clean and bright
now that you rinsed it. a look bright and clean.

haslir n {1} one who makes his living by petty thievery, swindling, and
the like. {2} gold digger. v [B1] be, become a hustler.

haslù_1 a loose in a place inserted. v [B26; a] for s.t. to slip out of
a place into which it was inserted. Mihaslù (nahaslù) lang ang singsing
sa ákung tudlù, The ring just came off my finger. Haslúa ang sundang sa
sakub, Pull the machete out of the sheath. haslùhaslù v [B6; b6] keep
slipping out of, coming loose. Naghaslùhaslù ang ákung tiil sa luag nga
sapátus, My shoes keep coming off my feet.

haslù_2 a stupidly inept, tending to do things wrong. Haslù ka kay
naglúgaw kag pinatisan, You sure don’t know what you’re doing, putting
soy sauce in the porridge. Haslù nga pagkatupi. Daghang kabang, What an
inept haircut. It was very unevenly done. v [B1456; b6] be, become
stupidly inept.

haslù_3 a taking too much pride in one’s possessions. À kahaslù!
Namungíngi man ang tudlù sa aláhas, My! She wants to show off so she
puts on every ring she has! v [B12] get to be too proud of possessions.
Nahaslù siya sukad nadiswildu, She has started to become stuck up and
to show off since she got a job. ka- n excessive pride in possessions.
Bisag wà nay ihungit nanginstulmin pa giyud ug pridyidir tungud sa
ílang kahaslù, Even though they have nothing to eat, they have to buy a
refrigerator on installment, just to show off.

hasmag v {1} [A; b6(1)] rush, lunge into an obstacle or opposition. Ang
irù mihasmag kaníya, The dog rushed at him. Kausa ra hasmági ang
bakilid sa buldúsir, natumpag dáyun, The bulldozer smashed into the
hillside once and the whole thing came crumbling down. {2} [A23; b(1)]
for emotions to appear in overwhelming suddenness. Gihasmágan aku sa
kamíngaw, I am overwhelmed with loneliness. n action of lunging into.

haspi n k.o. paper used as backing put around the bound edge in book
binding. v [A13; b6] use this k.o. paper.

hasta followed by a subject: even [the subject] has done it or had it
happen to him! Hasta ikaw gitugkag katáhap nákù! Have you, too, lost
faith in me! Hasta mga bátà gipatay, Even the children were put to
death. Hasta pa gánì ang mga bátà maantígu nang mangílad, Even the
little children know how to cheat. — labista goodbye, till we meet
again.

hastilan = pastilan.

hasù_1 v [A; a2] pump, cock the loading and ejecting mechanism of a
rifle. Hasuun nímu ang iskupíta úsà ka makatíru, You must pump the
shotgun before you can fire.

hasù_2 = haslù_1.

hasug v [A; c1] push s.t. into a container and tamp it down to fill it
tight. Hasuga (ihasug) ang kupras sa sáku, Shove the copra tight into
the sack.

hasuk_1 v {1} [A; c1] make a hole to sow seeds in. Ang bakilid hasukan
kay dílì man madáru, They will make holes for the seeds in the hillside
because you cannot plow it. {2} [A; c] insert s.t. into a hole or
sheath. Muhasuk ka gánì sa sundang mu sa sakuban ayawg itipas, Be
careful when you sheathe your bolo. Anhà ihasuk ang halígi sa ímung
gilúngag, Plant the post in the hole which you dug. {3} [A; c] drive
the stakes or pegs. Hasuki ang mga tanum arun dì matumba, Place stakes
near the plants so they will not fall over. n {1a} dibble stick.
{1b} hole dibbled in the ground to sow seeds in. {1c} action of making
a hole. {2} peg, stake.

hasuk_2 v [A; c1] pack inside tight by compacting or tamping it down.
Ug inyung hasukun (ihasuk) ang kupras maígù ang tanan sa usa ka sáku,
If you pack the copra down, it will get into one sack. a compressed and
well-packed inside a container.

hásul v {1} [A; a] bother, give trouble, inconvenience. Muhásul ku
nímug kadiyut ha? May I bother you for a moment? Gihásul ku pag-áyu
niíning sip-un, I am very much bothered by my cold. {2} [A3; a2] bother
to do, take the trouble of doing s.t. Naghásul ka pa mag dala ug ságing
níay daghan, You have taken the trouble of bringing bananas when we
have so many! {3} [A13] for a child to be fussy. Naghásul ang bátà kay
gibutdag tiyan, The child is fussy because he has an upset stomach.
a entailing a lot of annoyance, bother. Hásul kaáyung adtúun, daghang
sakaysákay, It’s a lot of trouble to go there because there’s no direct
transportation. a being a lot of trouble, causing inconvenience. n — sa
katursi {1} World War I. {2} causing very much trouble and bother.
Hásul sa katursi ning batáa, This child is a terrible nuisance. ka-
n trouble, annoyance. ma-un a causing lots of trouble and
inconvenience. Mahasúlung mga hangyù, Requests that entail a lot of
trouble.

haswà v [A2PB12; c1] remove s.t. that sticks, get removed. Maáyu
kaáyung muhaswà (mupahaswà) sa buling ang Tayid, Tide removes dirt
well. Tungud sa kalatà nahaswà ang pánit, After the meat got done, the
skin came off. Haswáa (ihaswà) ning lápuk nga nitaput sa ákung sapátus,
Remove the mud that stuck to my shoes.

hasyinda = asyinda.

hát n {1} music with a hot beat. {2} dance done to hot music. v [A23;
c1] dance to hot music. Kasagáran sa mga batan-un maáyu muhát, Most
young people know how to dance to hot music.

hatà v [A; c] feint, make a move to strike, kick, give, or the like,
without actually intending to do so. Hataa (hatai) ug karmilítus ang
bátà, Act like you’re going to give the child some candy. Hataan sa
wala, butangan sa tuu, Make a feint with the left and hit him with the
right. Ihatà ug syát ang búla, Feint a shot with the ball.
n {1} feinting action. {2} bluffing statement or threat.

hátag v [A; c] {1} give. Lílas nga muhátag maáyung pagtulun-an, A film
which teaches a good lesson. Ang adlaw naghátag kanátug kaháyag, The
sun gives us light. Wà ku makahatag (makahátag) sa abangan, I haven’t
paid the rent. Tagáan (hatágan) ta kag singku, I’ll give you a nickel.
Humwurk nga gihátag sa maistra, The homework the teacher gave. Kinabúhì
nga gihátag álang sa yútang natawhan, A life given for one’s country.
{2} let s.o. have s.t. for a price. Gihátag lang nig singku, He let me
have it for five pesos. {3} give a speech, reply; issue order. Mihátag
ang prisidinti ug pakigpúlung, The President gave a speech. Naghátag
ang iksaminir ug mga instruksiyun, The examiner is giving instructions.
{4} — ug katahúran greet upon meeting, pay one’s respects. Wà gánì
maghátag katahúran, He didn’t even greet me. n {1} s.t. given one.
Kining mga rilip hátag ni sa Amirika, This relief clothing is a gift
from the U.S.A. {2} selling price. Pilay ímung hátag? How much will you
let me have it for? {3} turn to give. Ákù rung hátag, Now it’s my turn
to give. hingatag a generous, fond of giving. -l-an(→), -anan(→)
n {1} s.t. one is obliged to give. Singkwinta písus ang ákung binulan
nga halatagan, I am obliged to give fifty pesos a month. {2} person to
whom s.t. is to be given. ig-r-/l-(→) n thing to be given. -in- n s.t.
which has been given. Dì ni hinátag. Pinalit ni, I didn’t get this as a
gift. I bought it. -in-an n one to whom given. mag-l-, maN-l-, mag-r-,
maN-r- one who gives s.t. out. manggi-un, ma-un a generous. um-l-,
um-l-(→) n one who gives (Biblical). -l-un(→), -unun(→) = -l-an(→), 1.

hátak v [A23B126; c1] for s.t. to fall down from a place it was held or
attached, cause s.t. to do so. Muhátak (nanghátak) ug lubi si Idung,
Edong is knocking those coconuts down. Nahátak sa ubus ang kapáyas nga
hinug na kaáyu, The overripe papaya fell to the ground.

hátaw v {1} [A] appear for a moment on a surface. Ígù lang mihátaw ang
íhu sa dágat, The shark just appeared for a second on the surface.
{2} [A2] appear on a surface. Mihátaw ang mga gamut, The roots appeared
on the surface. hatawhataw v [A13] for one thing or a small number to
be moving in a solitary way over an open area. Aku ra giyuy
naghatawhataw sa awdituryum, I was the only one moving about in the
auditorium. Usa ka sakayan nga naghatawhataw sa kadagátan, A small boat
sailing alone in the sea.

hatay expression preceding a phrase warning s.o. against doing s.t.
foolish: watch out. Hatay ug makit-an kang Tátay nga nagkáp sa íyang
gamitun, Watch out! Father is going to see you touching his tools.
Hatay giyud ug mabughat ka ánang ímung pagsuruysúruy, Watch out! You’re
going to have a relapse going about like that.

hátay a having a long, lean body. Hátay ang láwas sa datsun, The
dachshund has a long body. n length of the body. v [B2] develop a long
body. Kadakù na ba nímu karun! Mihátay (nahátay) ka mag maáyu, How big
you are now. You have grown tall! {2} — sa banig v [A3P; c1] be
confined to bed for a long time due to a sickness. Mihátay sa banig ang
masakitun, The sick man stayed in his sickbed for a long time. pa-
v [A; ac] stretch out to one’s full length. Ipahátay nang láwas mu.
Tan-áwun nátug unsay ímung gitas-un, Stand up straight and tall. Let’s
see how tall you are.

hatdug n hot dog. v [A1; a12] fix hot dogs, have hot dogs as food.

hátì v [A; a] hunt with a dog. Maáyu muhátì nang irúa ug usa, That dog
is good for hunting deer.

hat kík = hagkik.

hatsa_1 a vain and affected in behavior. Hatsa bayà níyang maglakaw, mu
rag mudílu, How affectedly she walks! As if she were a model.

hatsa_2 n = atsa.

hatsit n sumptuous meal (colloquial). Birtdi níya run. Sigúru may
hatsit, It’s his birthday today. There is sure to be a good dinner.
v {1} [A1; b1] hold a sumptuous meal. Unsay inyung gihatsítan? What did
you have your party for? or What did you have for your feast? {2} [AN;
a] attend s.t. where a sumptuous meal is served, feast on. Hatsítun na
nátù ning litsun, Let’s eat the roast pig now.

hatsuy (from mutsatsu, the one who is punished in games) n in a game of
takyan, one who serves the takyan. v [B126; a12] be, become the server
in a game of takyan.

hátub = hagtub.

hatud v {1} [A; c] take s.t. s.w. Hatdan ta kag pagkáun, I will bring
you some food. Ihatud ang bisíta sa íla, See the visitors home. — sa
panan-aw watch s.o. while he goes s.w. Ihatud siya sa ímung panan-aw
hangtud musulud, Watch him until he gets inside. {2} [A3P; c6] make
s.t. reach a certain distance in time or space. Anus-a kahà ihatud
nganhi sa gubyirnu ang karsáda? When will the government ever bring the
road here? Gihatud sa kamatáyun ang íyang kauyámut, He never extracted
himself from poverty until his death. {2a} lead to some bad results.
Kanang ímung pagkagastadúra makapahatud (makahatud) nátù sa kawad-un,
Your extravagance can end us up in the poorhouse. {2b} [c6] bring an
offer down to a certain level, offer odds as great as a certain amount
in betting. Ihatud ang ímung paghangyù sa kinaubsang prisyu, Bargain it
down to the lowest price. n {1} action of delivering. {2} s.t.
delivered. Gamay ra ang ákung hatud, I have a small supply (to
deliver). — sa bargain as low as. — balay windfall. — káwat telegram.
v [A; b] send a telegram. ig-r-(←) n s.t. to be delivered. — sa
mintiryu skin and bones (ready to be brought to the grave).

hatùhatù v [A1; c1] {1} eat greedily or ravenously. Pwirti giyud
tingáli nímung gutúma kay naghatùhatù ka man giyug káun, How famished
you must be judging from the way you are eating so ravenously. {2} take
more of s.t. than one can use. Ayawg hatùhatuag dala nang mga libru,
kay dì man nímu mabása nang tanan, Don’t take all those books because
you can’t read all of them.

hátul v [A; a1c] tease unmarried people by pairing them off as if for
marriage. Átung hatúlun sila si Pidrug Maríya, Let’s match up Maria and
Pedro. Ayaw kug ihátul ánang byúdu, Don’t tease me by pairing that
widower off with me!

hátum = sátum.

haud n leader, a short length of material used to attach a lure or hook
to the end of a fishline. v [A13; a] attach, make into a leader.

haum a {1} fitting well. Haum kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa ímung láwas,
Your dress fits you well. {2} fitting, in accordance. Tulumanung haum
sa Indipindins Dí, Programs appropriate for Independence Day. v [APB3;
c] fit into or around s.t., cause s.t. to do so. Ang makahaum niíning
sapátus mauy katagáan, Whoever this pair of shoes fits can have them.
Ihaum ang ímung pakigpúlung sa pangidarun sa manimátì, Tailor your talk
to the age-level of your audience.†

háun v {1} [A; a] take things off the stove, fire. Igkabúkal giyud
haúna dáyun, When the water boils take it off the fire immediately.
{2} [A; a12] bail one out of difficulties. Ang ímung pagtábang mau ray
makaháun (makapaháun) kanákù sa kalisud ku karun, The only thing that
can get me out of my difficulties is your help. n action of taking
things off the fire. Kada háun mulútù mig usa ka dusínang pán, We bake
a dozen loaves at one time. bag-ung — {1} just recently produced. Way
ikspiriyinsiya ang bag-ung háun, The new graduates have no experience.
Bag-ung háung sista, A guitar just from the factory. {2} new model.
Bag-ung háung kutsi, The newest model car. Bag-ung háung hirdu, The
latest style of hairdo.

hawà a {1} devoid of, lacking s.t. completely. Hawà ang kwartu human
panguhái sa mwiblis, The room was bare after the furniture was removed.
Hawà siya sa kinaadman, He is completely devoid of culture. Hawà ang
ákung tiyan, My stomach is empty. {1a} having an empty feeling in the
pit of one’s stomach from looking down from heights or falling. Hawà
ang tiyan basta mukalit ug dulhug ang ilibítur, You get an empty pang
in the stomach when the elevator goes down suddenly. {2} separated,
isolated out. Hawà na sila sa ílang ginikánan, They live apart from
their parents. {3} different. Hawà ra kaáyu íyang sinultihan sa ubang
babáyi, Her way of talking is very different from other girls.
{3a} feel uneasy or uncomfortable about s.t. that one is not accustomed
to. Hawà kaáyu ning muhigdag way dúlug, It is very strange to sleep
without s.o. else in bed with me. {4} — sa aside from, in addition to.
Hawà sa íyang swildu dúna pay pinsiyun, Apart from his salary he has a
pension. v {1a} [A; c1] separate, isolate from others. Ílang ihawà
(hawaun) ang dagkù sa gagmay, They will separate the large ones from
the small ones. {1b} [AC2] live separately. {1c} [AC2] do s.t.
separately. Naghawà mig higdà, We sleep in separate places. {2} [B2;
c1] be different, differentiate. Nagkahawà ang hitsúra sa kalúha nga
nagdakù, As the twins grew bigger their features became more and more
different. Hawaun (ihawà) untà nímu ang táwung masayunsáyun lang sa
dílì, You should distinguish the people you can take for granted from
those you can’t. {2a} [b4] get an uneasy feeling at s.t. one is not
accustomed to. {3} [B12; a4b4] get an empty pang in the pit of one’s
stomach when one looks down from a height or falls a distance. Muhawà
ang ákung tiyan ug mudúngaw ku sa ayruplánu, My stomach gets a queasy,
empty feeling when I look down from an airplane. (←) v {1} [A23P;
b(1)P] leave, move away from a place. Muháwà (mupaháwà) ku íning baláya
kay buysit, I’ll leave this house because it brings us bad luck.
{2} [a12P] remove, cause to leave. Giháwà (gipaháwà, gipapaháwà) ang
mga iskwátir, The squatters were evicted. pa- v {1} [A2; b(1)] = háwà,
1. {2} [AP; aP] = háwà, 2.

háwak_1 n waist. (→) v [A123P; a4] get backaches. Hawakun ka kun
magpúnay kag tikubù, You will be afflicted with backaches if you are
always bent over. (→) n purlins, the beams in a roof running parallel
to the ridgepole which support the common rafters (katsaw). v [A; a]
attach, make into, use as purlins. panig-(→) v [A2; c] stand with the
arms on the waist as a sign of anger or superiority. Nanighawak siyang
nangasábà, She stood with her hands on her waist as she scolded us.
Ayaw kug panighawaki dihà, Don’t you talk to me with your hands on your
waist! -an a fat around the waist. -an(→) n waistline. taga-(→)
a waist-deep. -un(→) a tending to suffer from backaches.

háwak_2 a having influence, pull in a place (slang). Háwak siya dihà
kay siyay intsards sa pirsunil, He has influence in that place because
he is head of the personnel section.

háwan v {1} [A; b] clear an area. Hawáni ang nataran sa mga sagbut,
Clean the weeds out of the yard. Hawáni ang lamísa, Clear the table.
Hawáni ang kawáyan sa mga tunuk, Clear the thorns off the bamboo.
Gihawánan ang plása sa mga táwu, The people were driven out of the
plaza. {2} [B] for an area to become clear. Miháwan dáyun ang sinihan
dihang may misinggit kaláyu, The moviehouse emptied instantly when s.o.
yelled ‘fire’. a for a place to be emptied or cleared. Háwan ang asíras
basta gabíi, The sidewalks are empty in the evening. Adtu sila
magbaskit sa háwan, They play basketball in the empty area. Háwan ang
mga búkid dinhi, The mountains here have been deforested. n area of
ground that has been cleared. -an(→) {1} living room. {2} floorspace or
anything enclosed.

haw-ang a {1} empty. Haw-ang ang balay nga way mwiblis, A house was
empty because it had no furniture. Haw-ang ang tiyan ug pán ray
ipamáhaw, The stomach feels empty if you only have bread for breakfast.
{2} for a life to be empty. v [B; b6] {1} for a place to become empty.
{2} have a feeling of emptiness in one’s life. Naghaw-ang ang ákung
kinabúhì sukad ka mawálà, My life has been empty since you left. ka-
n emptiness.

háwas n congressman. v [B6] be, become a congressman.

haw-as v {1} [A; c1] remove things from a confined space without moving
the container. Haw-ásun ba ang sinínà gíkan sa mundu? Shall I take the
clothes out of the steamer trunk? Haw-ási ug tulu ka baril nga túbig
ang tangki, Remove three barrelfuls of water from the tank. {2} [B6;
b6] for all of s.t. to go out of a place. Mihaw-as ang ákung kináun
pagsúka nákù, My stomach was emptied when I vomitted. {2a} [A2; a2] for
emotions to come out. Gihaw-ásan ku sa mga kaguul, I was relieved of my
worries. {2b} [AP; c] remove s.o. from a difficult life (literary).
Siyay mihaw-as (mipahaw-as) námù sa kalisud, He lifted us out of our
difficult life. {2c} [A2; b6] go out of the water. Mihaw-as mi sa
dágat, We got out of the water. {3} [B5] for a landmark to disappear as
one moves away from it. Mahaw-as na ang Sikihur ug hápit na ta maabut
sa syudad, Siquijor disappears over the horizon as we get close to the
city. a {1} emptied of contents. Haw-as na ang tanang karga sa barku,
All the goods have been taken off of the boat. {2} freed from emotions.
{3} gone out of the water. {4} out of sight.

haway n {1} Hawaii. {2} k.o. sweet large-sized pineapple. {3} gábi sa —
= bisul.

hawáyà = huláyà.

hawáyan n {1} Hawaiian dress having colorful designs. {2} Hawaiian
music or dance. {3} Hawaiian pineapple. v {1} [A1] wear Hawaiian cloth.
{2} [A] dance Hawaiian dance.

hawhaw_1 a for the stomach to be empty. v [B6; b4] for the stomach to
feel empty. Naghawhaw ákung tiyan kay wà ku mamáhaw, My stomach feels
empty because I didn’t have breakfast. Gihawháwan ku sa ákung tíyan, My
stomach feels empty.

hawhaw_2 = hagawhaw.

hawid, háwid_1 a similar, resembling. Mas hawid sa amahan ang
kamagulángan, The eldest is most similar in appearance to his father.
v [A23; a] resemble, be similar. Muhawid ang gisabak sa panamkúnan, The
baby in the womb will take after what the mother has developed a
craving or liking for. {2} [A; a] imitate, do as others do. Ngánung
muháwid ka man níya pagpúnay ug súruy nga minyù na man ka ug siya dílì?
Why do you roam around as he does when you’re married and he isn’t?
Hawíra ang íyang linalahan sa kálù, Copy the way he weaves hats.

háwid_2 v {1} [A1; b] hold s.t. to prevent forward motion. Hawíri ang
irù arun dì makabuhì, Hold the dog so it can’t escape. {2} [A; b6(1)]
hold rigidly in place, hold on to s.t. Dílì mahuswà ang túbu kay
gihawíran sa ruska, You can’t pull the pipe out because it is being
held in place by a screw. {3} [AN2; b(1)] urge s.o. who is visiting to
stay for dinner, spend the night. Dì ta muadtug udtu kay hawíran giyud
ta, We won’t go at noon because they will surely make us stay for
dinner. {4} [B12N] for a blade to snag. Maáyung pagkatikbas. Walà
mangháwid, It was neatly cut down. The blade didn’t snag. — sa dunggan
v [A2S] for grades to be just enough to allow one to pass. Makaháwid
lang sa dunggan, hustu na, If my grade is enough to allow to pass, I’ll
be happy. — sa pulsu v [c6] eat just enough food to check one’s hunger.
Timù ug ígung iháwid sa pulsu, Take a bite of s.t. to check your
hunger. n s.t. that checks hunger. Hápit na tingpaniudtu. Miúkit na
lang kug mani pára háwid sa pulsu, It’s almost lunchtime. I’ll munch
just enough peanuts to check my hunger. paN- v [A] hold on to s.t. to
avoid falling, keep from being separated. Misulay siya pagtindug
samtang nangháwid sa ákung buktun, He tried to get up while he held on
to my arm. Ang nagkalumus nga táwu nagpanghawid sa bátang, The drowning
man was desperately trying to hold on to the log. hawiránan n s.t. to
hold on to maintain balance.

hawin, háwin v [A; c1] hang s.t. up to dry. Giháwin níya ang íyang
sinínà, She hung her clothes up to dry. Kusáhus nga iháwin (hawínun),
Sliced meat hung up to dry. pa-(←), pama-(←) n k.o. fishing in the deep
sea with a hook and line. pa-(←) v [AN; b6(1)] go line fishing in deep
waters.

hawla = halwa.

hawlut = halwut.

hawsir n the host at a house where a mahjong session is being held.
v [B126; c1] be a mahjong host.

hawu- see also halu-.

hawud a best, tops in a certain field. Hawud siya sa klási, She is the
best in her class. Ang mga radiyung ginamà sa Hapun mauy hawud karun,
The best radios are the ones made in Japan. Kanang bugúya mauy hawud
niíning distritúha, That toughie is the toughest of them all in this
area. v {1} [B2N; b4] be, get to be tops. Nanghawud siya sa kanta, He
is the best singer. Ang átung pruduktu gihawran na sa mga pruduktu sa
Hapun, Our products top the products of Japan. hawudháwud v [A1P] act
as if one were superior.

hawughug = halughug_1.

hawulháwul n k.o. sardine, of particularly tasty flesh with a multitude
of bones going in four directions. Blue on top and silver on bottom,
growing to 8″.

hawus v [B1246; b4] for the body to be extremely tired, exhausted.
Gihawsan kug kinarga ug balas, I am dead tired loading sand.

háwut = halwut.

hawuy v [BN; a4] for a portion of the body to tire from doing s.t. for
too long a time. Mihawuy (nanghawuy, gihawuy) ákung líug ug hinangad,
My neck has gotten stiff from looking up all the time. Gihawuy ákung
kamut pagsinulat, My hand is stiff from writing too much.

háy_1 hi, an exclamation of greeting.

háy_2 v [A; c] set s.t. aside for a special purpose. Magháy tag salapì
álang sa átung kasal, Let’s set aside money for our wedding. Iháy ta
ning prut sálad sa mga bisíta, We will set this fruit salad aside for
the visitors.

háy_3 = halay.

hayà = walà (dialectal).

háyà v [c1] lie in state. Ang patay giháyà sa punirarya, The body is
lying in state at the funeral parlor. n body lying in state. Prusisyun
sa háyà sa átung Ginúu, Procession of the dead body of Christ. (→) a in
a supine state. — ang búlan for the crescent moon to be parallel to the
earth’s surface, considered a dangerous time for childbirth. tig-(→),
ting-(→) v [A; b5] swim on one’s back. Tighayaun (tighayaan) ku nang
distansiyáha, I will swim that distance on my back. n backstroke in
swimming.

hayabhayab v [B46] for s.t. one wears that is loose to be flapping.
Naghayabhayab ang báta sa kaluag, The nightgown flaps because it is
loose.

hay-ad v [B3(1)6; c1] lie flat on one’s back with the arms
outstretched. Ang hubug naghay-ad sa karsáda, The drunk was sprawled
out on his back in the street.

háyag a {1} be light, bright, well-illuminated. Háyag na paggíkan níla,
It was light by the time they left. Háyag kaáyu ang baylihan, The dance
floor is well-illuminated. {2} for the sky to be clear. Háyag na, wà
nay dag-um, It’s clear now. There are no more clouds. {3} for the face
to be bright and happy. v {1} [A1PB2; a] illuminate, become bright.
Miháyag ang kwartu human sug-i, The room became bright after the lamp
was put in it. Mugíkan ta sa dílì pa maháyag, We will depart before it
is light. Hayági siya kay náay gibúlung, Give her some light because
she is looking for s.t. {2} [B2] for the sky to clear. {3} [B256] for a
countenance to brighten. Miháyag (naháyag) ang íyang panagway, Her face
lit up. {4} [A; b] enlighten s.o. with knowledge. Hayági mi sa ímung
diyusnung gahum, Enlighten us through your divine power. n = ka-, 1.
pa- v [A; c] {1} explain why. Mipaháyag siya ngánung ingun tu adtu, She
explained why it had to be that way. {2} disclose one’s purpose. Wà
siya makapaháyag sa íyang túyù, He never got around to expressing what
he wanted. Unsáun pagsugut níya ug dì nímu pahayágan, How can she
accept you if you don’t propose. {3} give one’s opinion. Mipaháyag siya
nga dílì háyan ang gíra, He expressed his opinion that war was not
likely. {4} publish, relate in a newspaper. Ang piryudikuy mipaháyag sa
nahitabù, The newspaper published what happened. pa- {1} explanation
why. {2} disclosure of a purpose. {3} opinion. pa-an(→) n newspaper,
news magazine. ka- n {1} light. Kaháyag sa lamparilya, Light of the
lamp. {1a} namat-an ug — place one was born (lit. place one first saw
light). {2} brightness. {3} brightness of the face. ma- a {1} very
bright. {2} [word referring to time] sa — for an infant to be
[so-and-so] many days, weeks, etc. old. Mag-útas lag katū́g ang bátang
pila pa ka simána sa maháyag, An infant only a few weeks old does
nothing but sleep.

hayaghag = halaghag.

hayáhay a {1a} airy, comfortable and refreshing to the skin. King
kwartúha hayáhay kay atbang sa hángin, This room is airy, cool, and
fresh because it gets the full wind. {1b} a refreshed feeling. Hayáhay
na ang ákung gibátì human makakaligù, I feel very much refreshed after
my bath. {2} for one’s financial situation to be comfortable. Hayáhay
na siya karun kay dakù siyag swildu, He is in comfortable circumstances
now because he has a good salary. {3} feel relieved of a burden or
sickness. Hayáhay na ang íyang pamínaw human katambáli, She felt better
after she took her medicine. Hayáhay nang pamínaw ku kay nabayran na
ang ákung útang, I feel relieved now. I’ve paid off my debts. {4} easy,
requiring little effort. Hayáhay ra tung iksamína, That examination was
easy. {5} for material to do easily for a certain number. Hayáhay rang
duha ka púlu íning panaptúna, This cloth would easily make two shirts.
v [B2; b6] {1} be, become airy, refreshed, relieved. {2} for one’s
financial situation to become comfortable, ease up. pa- v [A; b6(1)]
{1} get fresh air. Magpahayáhay ta sa baybáyun, Let’s get some fresh
air at the beach. {2} go s.w. to amuse oneself, take one’s mind off
troubles. Magpahayáhay ta sa karnabal, Let’s go to the carnival to take
our minds off our troubles. {3} pa- sa bágà go out to amuse oneself.
Magpahayáhay ta sa bágà kay láay kaáyu dinhi, Let’s go out to have some
diversion because it’s boring as heck here. ka- n comfort and ease;
freedom from cares, sickness, etc. pa-an n place to go for relaxation.

hay-alay n {1} jai-alai. {2} an extra bet in mahjong aside from the
ordinary bet in which the player who gets mahjong for the fifth time
gets the extra pot. v [A2; b5] win the jai-alai bet in mahjong. paN-
v [A2; c] go to a jai-alai game to bet. Manghay-alay ku rung gabíi,
I’ll go and bet on the jai-alai tonight.

háyan there’s a possibility that ... Háyan kahutdan kag gasulína, You
might run out of gasoline. Háyan maduktur tà ku run ug musígi pa tà kug
iskuyla, I might have become a doctor by now if I had continued going
to school. Háyan namálik na tu run, Perhaps they have already returned.

hayang v {1} [A; c1P] put s.t. convex down with the convex side down.
Makahayang ka ba áring pawíkan? Could you manage to flip the sea turtle
on its back? Haynga (ihayang, ipahayang) ning mga hapag sa lantay, Put
these shallow baskets on the bamboo shelf right side up. {2} lie on
one’s back, face up. Muhayang lang siya sa bangkù ug matúlug, He will
just lie down on the bench and go to sleep. {3} [B1256] fall and land
on one’s back. Nahayang ku sa lápuk, I fell down on my back in the mud.
— ang kúlun sure to win (lit. the pot is right side up [on the fire]).
Mupusta kug dakù kay áning taría hayang giyung kúlun, I will place a
big bet on this round because it is a sure win. — ang payà v [a3] for
s.o. who is usually morose to become unusually gay (lit. for a half a
coconut shell—smooth and neat on the inside and coarse and scraggly on
the outside, to be lying with the inside up). Unsa mang hangína ang
nihurus nga nahayang man ang payà? What wind is blowing that you are
suddenly so bright and gay? — ang plátu for one’s future to be assured.
Hayang ang plátu sa íyang anak kay nakaasawa siyag milyunarya, The
future of his children is assured because he married a millionaire.
kulub hayang see kulub. pa-/hipa-/hapa- v [B1256] cause to fall down on
one’s back. Nadalin-as ku ug napahayang kus lápuk, I slipped and fell
on my back into the mud. tig-(→) = tighayà. see háyà.

háyaw v [AB26; c] raise, rise into the air. Aku giyuy miháyaw sa imáhin
arun makítà sa tanan, I was the one who raised the image high for all
to see. Miháyaw ang túnu nímu sa kúrus, Your pitch rose on the refrain.
Giháyaw na nákù ang kamut kay sagpáun ku untà siya, I had already
lifted my hands to slap her.

hayblad n high blood pressure. a very angry. v {1} [B146; a4] suffer
from high blood pressure. Kanúnay man ku nímung palagútun, mahayblad
(hayblarun) man lang ta, You always provoke me. You’re going to give me
high blood pressure yet. {2} [B12; a4S] get angry. Nahayblad ku sa
íyang tinubagan, The way she answered made me furious. hayblarun
a {1} having high blood pressure. {2} easily angered.

haybul v [A2] {1} go out to have a good time. Basta tingswildu,
muhaybul dáyun nà sila, As soon as they get paid, they go out to have a
good time. {2} [B; c] for a vehicle to go fast. Hadluk kug muhaybul
(mahaybul) ang trák, I get scared when the bus goes fast. {2a} command
given by conductor as a signal to the driver to get moving. {3} [A23]
go straight without paying attention to anyone along the way. Muhaybul
ka man lang. Dì ka makigsulti nákù? Why do you go straight by me
without greeting me? haybulhaybul v [A; c] gallivant around, go around
from place to place to have fun.

haybuy n a style of men’s sport shirt, close-fitting and with tapering
slits on both sides, similar to ambuys, but not so long at the rear.
v {1} [A] wear a haybuy-style sport shirt. {2} [c1] tailor this sort of
shirt.

haydyam, haydyamp n high jump in an athletic contest. v [A1; b] perform
the high jump.

hayhat a haughty and snobbish. Hayhat kaáyung babayhána kay dílì
makighuyhúy sa mga pubri, She’s very snobbish because she doesn’t mix
with the poor. v [B; b6] act, become snobbish.

hayhay_1 = halay.

*hayhay_2 paN- v [A; b3] sigh in weariness, sorrow, pain, or the like.
Nanghayhay siya sa kakápuy, She sighed with weariness.

hayhil n high heels. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear high heels. Maghayhil ka ba
sa piknik? Will you wear high heels to the picnic?

háyis a {1} be the best in a class. Háyis siya sa Aldyibra, He is the
best in Algebra. {2} be well-versed, most capable in s.t. Kun báhin sa
panganak si Lúling muy háyis, When it comes to childbirth, Loling is
the expert. Háyis siya sa ínum, He is an expert in drinking. v [B1; b6]
get to be the best, an expert.

hayiskul n high school. v [B6; b6] be in high school.

háyit n height. may — tall and attractive. Gwápu ug may háyit pa giyud,
Handsome and tall as well. v [A1] have a height of. Kun magháyit ka
lang mínus sa singku pís, dì ka madáwat sa níbi, If you stand less than
five feet, the navy will not take you.

haylu v [A3P; a1] induce s.o. to do s.t. by offering him s.t. Haylúa
ang bátag dulsi sa pagkatúlug, Entice the child with candy to make him
go to bed. pa- n enticements. Ang ímung mga pahaylu dílì makatarug sa
ákung pagdumílì, All your enticements cannot make me change my mind.
mahaylúhun, mahaylúun a enticing. Mahaylúung tanyag, A tempting offer.

haypay_1 n hi-fi set. a for a voice to be screeching, piercing, and
unpleasant.

haypay_2 v [A; b5] make a person reveal s.t. by squirting carbonated
beverages into his nostrils (slang). Haypáyun (haypáyan) níla ang táwu
arun mutug-an, They will subject the man to the 7-Up treatment to make
him sing. n action of using this method.

hayun, háyun v [A; c] {1} swing the arms in walking. Iháyun nang ímung
kamut ug maglakaw ka, Swing your arms when you walk. {2} not carry s.t.
Ngánung naghayun ka nga nagkapulíkì si Máma mu? Why are you
empty-handed (lit. swinging your arms) when your mother is carrying
more than she can manage? {2a} [A; b5] walk, taking it easy, not
exerting effort. Muagwanta siya sa lákaw kay hayunan ra ang bayinti
kilumitrus, A twenty-kilometer walk won’t bother him because he will
take it easy. n the swinging or swaying of one’s arms. {3} [A; c] raise
the arm in preparation to strike or throw s.t. Ihayun pag-áyu ang búla
úsà ilábay, Raise the ball back before you throw it.

hayung v [B4] for the sun’s heat to be not at its greatest degree of
intensity. Muhayung ang kaínit sa adlaw ug maalas tris, The sun’s heat
lessens at around three in the afternoon.

háyup n {1} domestic animal. {2} a person with base instincts and
desires. Buy-i ku háyup, Let me go, you beast! -an n domestic animals.

haywi n highway. Sa haywi muági ang mga dyipni pára Kunsulasiyun, The
jeepneys for Consolacion go by way of the highway. v [a] make into a
highway.

haywis n style of trousers with a wide waistline, coming to a point in
the rear.

hi_1 n letter G.

hi_2, hì n word to command a draft animal to move forward.

hi- in many forms beginning with hi-, there is a prefix hi- or hiN-.
Look also under the form with hi- or hiN- subtracted.

hi-(→) derivative affix forming verbs which occur with the prefixes
ma-_1 (na-) and ma-an (na-an, ma-i). All verbs with these affixes may
also occur with hi-(→) inserted after the prefixes. {1} referring to an
action which happened to take place or which s.o. did involuntarily.
Nahibungat ku ang dílì ángayng isulti, Words I should not have said
slipped out of my mouth. Kalit ka man lag tunghà dihà. Nahikurug man
lang tag dì tyimpu, My! You gave me a scare appearing like that. I
couldn’t help trembling, though there was no occasion to. Nahidam-agan
siyag irù ug nahipalingkud sa lápuk, A dog jumped on her and she was
knocked down into the mud. {1a} having happened, not necessarily
accidentally, but not anyone’s volition. Nahilunà ang balay daplin sa
dálan, The house is located next to the road. {2} added after the
abstract prefix (pag-) before verbs referring to motion with no meaning
other than to elevate the style. Paghiabut níya, When he arrived.
Paghibalik níya, When he returned.

hi-an(→) inflectional affix, future and past. (subjunctive hi-i)
{1} added to the same bases as the ones to which local passive affixes
are added (see -an_1) with the same meaning except that the action is
accidental. Hilingkuran ku ang íyang kálù, I accidentally sat on his
hat. Hitagaan kag gása, You might be given a present. Kay unaunahun ka,
hihagkan ka lagi, You were so forward, so you got yourself kissed.
Higabhian siya, He was overtaken by night. {2} added to bases to refer
to the direct recipient of the action accidentally done (when the local
passive, -an_1 does not refer to the recipient of the action). Itágù
nang suláta básig hibasahan unyà ni Tátay, Hide that letter because Dad
might read it. Dágan. Hidakpan unyà ka, Run or you will get caught.

hiay v [B; c1] for a part of the body or dress to droop to one side.
Mihiay ang úlu sa nagdukà, The drowsy man’s head tilted to the side.
Naghiay ang ngábil sa paralitiku, The paralytic’s lips droop at one
corner. Ayaw hiaya (ihiay) ang abága sa ímung bláwus, Don’t let your
blouse slip over your shoulder.

hibabuyna = hirbubuyna.

híbag v [B4; b4] for the stomach to be upset. Muhíbag ang tiyan basta
dílì kahilísan, The stomach becomes upset if you have indigestion.
a for the stomach to be upset.

hibág = hibálag. see *bálag.

híbal = híbag.

hibálag see *bálag.

hibalu see balu.

hibangkaágan see *bangkáag.

híbat a unsymmetrical, crookedly done. Híbat kaáyu nga pagkalála ning
baskíta, This basket is crookedly woven. v {1} [B; c1] be, become
unsymmetrical. Nahíbat ang dayandáyan, The decorations were all askew.
{2} [a12] screw up the face. Nahíbat ang íyang nawung paghílak níya,
His face screwed up when he cried. (→) = híbat, a.

hibawu = hibalu. see balu.

híbi_1 n small dried shrimps with the shells removed.

híbi_2 n large deciduous tree bearing sweet amber-colored fruits
similar to siriguylas: Spondias cytherea.

hibì, híbì = tíbì.

hibi dyúti a made for heavy duty. v [B126; b6] be, become capable of
handling heavy duty.

hibìhibì = kipìkipì. see kipì.

hibilya a buckle for a belt or shoes. v {1} [A; b6(1)] put a buckle on
s.t. {2} [A; c1] make into a buckle.

hibiwit a heavyweight in boxing. v [B16] become a heavyweight boxer.

hibubuyna = hirbubuyna.

híbuk v [A2N] {1} for a multitude of s.t. to move in a wriggling
fashion, or for s.t. to have a multitude of things wriggle over it.
Nanghíbuk (mihíbuk) ang úlud ibabaw sa patayng irù or Ang patayng irù
nanghíbuk sa mga úlud, Worms are squirming over the dog’s carcass.
Hastang nakahíbuk sa mga táwung mitábù sa Pápa, My, how the crowd
swarmed to meet the Pope. {2} for the children in a family to be
numerous. Pagkuntrul mu kay nanghíbuk lang nang inyung mga anak,
Practice birth control because you have so many children.

híbul v {1} [A2S] have wet mucous in the nose. Naghibul ang sip-un, His
nose is dripping. {2} [A; c1] sniff mucous up into the nose. hibulhíbul
v [A; c1] for the mucous to come in and out of the nostrils.

hibúlung see *búlung_3.

hibulus n diarrhea. súka — vomiting and diarrhea. v [B14; a4b6] have
diarrhea. Naghibulus (gihibulus) siya sa hilabihang káun, She had
diarrhea from eating too much.

híbun v [B2S; a1] for a depression to get filled up or covered. Muhíbun
ang balikhaw ug manambuk, The collarbone becomes covered with flesh
when one gets stout. Mahíbun ang hubag basta maghungut pa, Boils become
plump and full while they are still in the swelling stage. Nagkahibun
ang lungag nga butangánan ug basúra, The garbage pit is gradually
getting full. Gihíbun níla ang atábay, They covered the well over.

hibung v [A; b5] apply ointment to relieve swelling. Hibungun
(hibungan) nákug ityul ang hubag, I’m going to apply ichthyol ointment
on the boil. n ointment put on swellings.

*hibunghibung ka-an n thickets.

híbus v [A1B12] for a sack or flexible container to puncture, break so
that it loses its contents; cause it to do so. Nahíbus ang bulsíta ug
naúsik ang sulud, The bag burst and the contents spilled out.

hibuylas see *buylas.

híd n chief, boss. Nananghid si Pípi sa íyang híd, Pepe asked
permission to go out from his boss. v [B156; c6] be, become the head of
s.t. — titsir n principal of a school with only three or four grades.

hidban n headband. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear a headband. {2} [A; c1] make
into a headband.

hidhid_1 v {1} [A; c] smear viscous material onto s.t. Hidhírig grása
ang íhi, Smear grease onto the axle. {2} [AC2; b] have sexual
intercourse (humorous). Nakit-ang nakighidhid didtus hutil, Was seen
having sexual relations in a hotel.

hidhid_2 = lidgid.

hidkwartir n headquarters. {2} center of operations. v [A13; c6] have
one’s headquarters, make into headquarters.

hidlaw v [A12; a3b3(1)] long for, feel a strong yearning for. Gihidlaw
akug manuk, I long for chicken meat. Unsay ímung gikahidlawan? What are
you longing for? ka- n yearning, longing. Kining ákung kahidlaw nímu,
My longing for you.

hidlayit n headlights. v [A; c] put headlights onto s.t.

hígà = higkù.

higad n {1} steep slope, place sloping sharply. Higad kaáyu ang hagdan,
The stairs are very steep. {2} shallow part of the sea near the
seashore or shoreline. v {1} [B; c1] get to be steep, make s.t. steep.
Mu rag nagkahigad ang bungtud sa nadúgay nákung túngas, After I had
been climbing for some time, the slope seemed to be getting steeper and
steeper. {2} [AP3; cP] go to the shallows. Muhigad (mupahigad) mi sa
hápun, We go to the shallows in the afternoon.

higal, hígal a having strong sexual desire. v [B12; b6] be, become
highly desirous for sex. Mahígal kag mutumar ka áning tambála, You’re
going to get sexed up if you take this medicine. ka- n sexual lust.

higála n good friend. Higála kaáyu mi si Maríya, Mary and I are very
good friends. v [A23SC; ac3] befriend, be, become friends. Nakahigala
kug Amirkána, I made friends with an American girl. Mahímu bang
maghigála ta? May we be friends? Higaláa ang ímung mga silíngan, Make
friends with your neighbors. Gikahigála ku siya sa Mindanaw, I became
friends with him in Mindanao. kahigaláan n one’s group of friends.
manag- n people who are friends. Ang duha ka managhigála nagkabildúhay,
The two friends were conversing. mahigaláun a friendly. panag-,
panaghigalaay n friendship.

higálam, higám see *gálam.

higanti a {1} giant. {2} of giant size. v [B12; b6] be, become a giant,
gigantic. higantihiganti n figure of a giant for parades and
processions. higantihun a gigantic.

higasbut short form: gasbut. exclamation of disapproval or displeasure
at s.t. Gasbut ba sab nang tawhána uy, ingun muuban, unyà dì diay tu,
Darn that man. He says he will go and at the last moment he says he
won’t. Gasbut sad ning sipíra uy! Dì man masira, Confound this zipper!
It won’t close. Higasbut bayang bayhána! Dì pabayli mu rag gwápa, To
hell with that woman! She refuses to dance. You’d think she was
beautiful or s.t.

hígaw = hígal.

higayun see gayun.

higdà v {1} [A; b6(1)] lie down. Kanang katri mauy higdái, Lie down on
that bed. {2} spend the night. Adtu ku muhigdà sa hutil, I’ll stay in
the hotel. {2a} [b6] stay s.w. to comply with a social obligation.
Higdáan ku sad sila arun way máhay, I’ll also stay a night at their
house, so there will be no recriminations. {3} [a12] put s.t. down in a
lying position. Átung higdáun (pahigdáun) ang pusti kay átung
sipilyáhan, We’ll lay the post down because we have to plane it.
{4} [A13] — sa banig be bedridden. Usa na ka búlan karun nga naghigdà
siya sa banig, She has been bedridden for one month. {5} [A13] — sa
bahandì live on a luxurious, wealthy scale. {6} [A12] — lang ug magdaut
work so hard that one barely rests (lit. lie down only when sick).
Muhigdà lang ug magdaut nang tawhána tungud sa kakusug sa íyang
nigusyu, That man’s business is so good that he barely has time to
rest. {7} [A13] — nga magkaun (nagkaun) have sexual intercourse
(humorous). Basta maghigdà gánì nga magkaun, mumabdus giyud, If you
make love, of course you’ll get pregnant. -ánan n bed, bedroom.

higkù a dirty and wet. Ang tugkaran higkù kaáyu sa tingúlan, The yard
is dirty and wet during the rainy season. v [B; b6] be, become dirty
and wet. Baldiyúhi ang salug kay naghigkù ang húgaw ug túbig, Rinse off
the floor because the dirt and water are making a mess.

higmuyù = hisagmuyù. see sagmuyù.

higpit a {1} narrow, for s.t. to be small such that it restricts
motion, causes difficulty. Higpit nga dálan, Narrow street. Higpit ang
panaptun pára himúung bistída, The cloth is too narrow to make into a
dress. Higpit ang ámung balay pára námung tanan, Our house is too small
for all of us. {2} strict, holding a tight rein on s.t. Higpit siya sa
mga impliyádu, He is very strict with the employees. Higpit kaáyu
mupaguwang kwarta, He keeps tight control over his money. {3} be in
tight financial circumstances. Higpit ang ílang panimuyù, They live in
very tight circumstances. Higpit ang kwarta run. Lisud tang makalún,
Money is very tight now. We will have difficulty getting a loan.
{4} have a sharp rivalry. Higpit ang indigay sa duha, The two were in
sharp competition. Ang higpit kung kaáway sa pulitika, My keen
political rival. v {1} [A; b(1)] be strict with s.o. Higpíti ang ímung
anak kay dalága ra ba, Be strict with your daughter. She is full grown
now. {2} [B2; b4] be in a tight financial situation. Kanang wà usbáwig
swildu higpítan run sa panimuyù, Whoever didn’t get a raise is going to
find life difficult now.

hígup v [A; a] sip, take in liquid by sucking it up with air, take in
air in the same manner. Higúpi ug diyútay kay miáwas ang bír sa básu,
Sip off a little beer because it is running over. -an, -ánan n s.t.
from which one sips a liquid.

higus, hígus v [B2S] for a body to waste away, become thin rapidly.
Mihígus ang láwas sa masakitun, The sick person’s body wasted away. (→)
v [B4] thin out in quantity, output. Mihigus na ang íyang mga súkì, His
customers have dropped in number. Nagkahigus na ang búnga sa lubi, The
coconut trees are yielding less and less.

higut v {1a} [A; b6(1)] tie s.t. up. Higti ang irù arun dì kapaak, Tie
the dog up so it can’t bite. {1b} [A; c] tie s.t. to s.t. Ihigut ang
manuk sa kural, Tie the chicken to the fence. Ihigut ang dúyan sa
káhuy, Tie the hammock to the tree. {1c} — sa pilitína [b(1)] for a man
to be married (lit. tied to the apron strings) (humorous). Gihigtan na
nà sa pilitína, He’s already hitched. {1d} [B126] — sa trabáhu be tied
to one’s work. Wà ku kaduaw nímu kay nahigut ku sa trabáhu, I was not
able to visit you because I was completely tied up. {2} [A13] be coiled
around s.t. Sawa nga naghigut sa sanga, A snake that was coiled around
the branch. {3} [AN; c] raise a gamecock. Manghigut kug mga igtalarì,
I’ll raise gamecocks. {4} tie up money. {4a} [B1256; b8] for an amount
of money to be tied up in s.t. Nahigut ákung puhúnan sa nigusyu, My
capital is tied up in the business. Nahigtan níyag tris ang ákung
diyis, Three pesos of the ten I won belong to him. (Lit. Three pesos of
his are tied up to my ten.) {4b} [AC; b6] have money tied in a common
amount to dispense with making change (as for example, in gambling
where money keeps changing hands). Nagkahígut mi áring diyis, Our money
is all included in that ten peso bill. {4c} [A; b] give an advance
partial payment of the bride price (refundable if the marriage fails to
go through). Mangulitáwu ka ánang bayhána nga gihigtan na? Are you
going to court that woman, when a partial payment of the bride price
has already been given? {5} [A13] hang oneself. Maghigut nà siya ug dì
nímu sugtun, He’ll hang himself if you don’t accept him. {6} [A; a]
make a fishing net. Ang púkut nga íyang gihigut, The net he wove.
n {1} s.t. used to tie up. {2} amount tied up in s.t.: in business, in
a common, fund, in a bride price. {3} noose in hanging. pa- v [A13]
{1} — sa asáwa be henpecked (lit. allow one’s wife to tie him up).
{2} — sa pilitína for a man to get married (allow himself to get tied
to an apron string). Dì ku magpahigut sa pilitína, I won’t get hitched.
higtanan n place s.t. is tied. tigúlang sa higtanan v [B2] get to be a
spinster. Maáyu pang matigúwang sa higtanan kay sa maminyù nímu, I’d
rather be an old maid than marry you. ig-l-(←) n s.t. used to tie s.t.
-in- n s.t. tied to s.t. hinigtan n {1} gamecock. {2} s.t. tied up.
hinigtag lánut money which is not readily dispensed (lit. tied with
abaca fibers). Ang kwarta ni Lúlu hinigtag lánut. Ug muhátag, usa ra
giyud ka dakù, Grandfather squeezes his nickels. If he gives anything
at all, it’s no more than a penny. paN- n occupation of raising
gamecocks.

higwaus v {1} [B16] be uneasy, anxious. Naghigwaus siya kay dúgayng
naulì ang íyang anak, She felt uneasy because her daughter came home
late. {2} [A13] be uneasy because of a desire to do s.t. Naghigwaus
siya ug adtu sa bayli, He is anxious to get to the dance. ka-
n uneasiness, anxiety.

hi hi word used in writing to represent the sound of laughter.

hihin v [B26; a12] flock, move in groups. Mihihin pagpanulud ang mga
táwu sa simbahan sa kalit nga pag-ulan, The people flocked into the
church when it suddenly rained. Áway ang nakapahihin sa mga táwu
pagpanágan, The fight made the people run away en masse. (←) v [A13]
move in great numbers s.w.

Hihúba = hiyúba.

hik n form used in writing to represent hiccoughs or the sound emitted
by a drunk.

hikabhikab v [A13] for the heart to beat fast in excitement at the
thought of achieving a great desire. Naghikabhikab kug pakigkítà sa
ákung trátu, I’m all excited about meeting my girl friend.

híkad = hiklad.

hikadhikad = hikabhikab.

híkap v {1} [A; ab2] touch, feel s.t. with the hand or fingers. Muhíkap
si Máma sa agtang sa gihilantan, Mother would feel the forehead of the
feverish child. Kinsay naghíkap áring bungbung nga bag-ung pinintálan?
Who touched this freshly painted wall? Átù kunung hikápun ug hinug na
ba ning kaymítu, Let me touch this star apple to see if it is ripe yet.
{2} [A3S; a3] use s.t. which requires manual dexterity. Ambut ug antígu
pa ba ku kay dúgayng wà ku makahíkap (makahikap) ug sista, I wonder if
I still can do it. I haven’t touched the guitar in a long time. {3} [A;
a12] touch, use s.o. else’s things without permission. Ayawg hikápa
nang mga butang dílì ímu, Don’t touch other people’s things. {4} [A12]
come to own s.t. Wà pa giyud ku makahikap ug singkwinta písus tibuuk, I
have never gotten my hands on a fifty-peso bill. {5} [A12; a3] get hold
of s.t. to use it. Wà tay mahíkap nga magastu sa uspital, We don’t have
access to any funds to pay for her hospitalization. {6} [A12] — sa dílì
hilikápun scratch a part of the body that doesn’t itch out of
frustration or in not knowing what to do. Bídang apikíha nákù sa
kwarta. Makahíkap ta sa dílì hilikápun, My! I’m so short of money! I’m
scratching my head, even though it doesn’t itch. {7} [A123S] — sa lubut
for s.t. good to happen to s.o. to make him do s.t. unwonted and
particularly nice. Mibangkag paniudtu. Nakahikap dagway sa lubut, He
treated us to lunch. S.t. good must have happened to him. {8} [A2] — ug
túbig get oneself wet. Dì siya muhíkap ug túbig ug náa níya, She
doesn’t bathe when she menstruates. hikaphíkap v [A3] twiddle or toy
with s.t. Naghikaphíkap si Dinsiyu sa íyang búngut, Dencio twiddled
with his beard.

hikat a {1} for the eye to look distorted due to a scar on the eyelid.
{2} be crooked from being buttoned wrong or sewn so that the edges
don’t match up. v [B126; b6] get to look crooked or distorted. Nahikat
ang íyang mata dihang miuwat ang mibutu níyang buwinggit, His eyes got
a distorted appearance when the stye formed a scar. Nahíkat ang íyang
sinínà kay wà magtúngud ang pagkabutúnis, Her dress is buttoned wrong
and is all crooked.

híkaw_1 v [A; c] deny, deprive one of s.t. which he should have. Dílì
ku ikaw hikáwan sa ímung pangayúun, I won’t deny you your request.
Ginúu, ayaw intáwun ihíkaw kanákù ang langitnung kalípay, God, please
don’t deny me heavenly bliss. -in-an a devoid or deprived of s.t., esp.
of very important necessities. Bátang hinikáwan sa inahánung gugma, A
child deprived of a mother’s love. -an(→) a depriving others, selfish.
ka-an(→) n selfishness.

híkaw_2 = hígal.

híkay v {1} [A; a] prepare food. Kinsay muhíkay sa átung pagkáun? Who
will prepare our food? {2} [A; a] hold a banquet, eating party.
Maghíkay mi rung Pasku, We shall have a banquet this Christmas. {3} [A;
a12] process or arrange in preparation of s.t. Mugíkan mi ug mahíkay na
ang ámung pasapurti, We’ll leave when our passports are processed. Ang
tahù gihíkay ni H. M. Kantágu, The report was prepared by H. M.
Cantago. n feast, banquet. -in- n s.t. prepared. -l-un n things used
for preparation. tig-, tag-(→) n {1} cook. {2} person in charge of
preparing s.t.

hikdat v [B; c1] for eyebrows to arch. Muhikdat ang kílay níya basta
masukù siya, Her eyebrows become arched when she is angry. a eyebrows
that are arched.

hikìhíkì = hukùhúkù.

hiklad v [A; c] {1} lay, spread out, usually for display. Ayaw ihiklad
ang inyung baligyà sa asíras, Don’t spread your wares on the sidewalk.
{2} unfold, make known s.o.’s secrets. Gihiklad sa huwis ang íyang mga
tinagúan, The judge laid open all his secrets.

hiklin, hikling v {1} [AB26; c] put s.t. aside and out of the way, step
aside. Ang mga napárut mihikling lang sa daplin, The losers stepped
aside. Ihiklin ang síya sa iskína, Put this chair away in the corner.
{2} [A2; b(1)] take refuge, hide. Swirting nakahiklin siya luyu sa
káhuy, Luckily he was able to hide behind the tree. {3} [A; c] save,
set aside. Maghiklin tag kwarta pára sa átung katigulangun, We should
set aside some amount for our old age. Dúna siyay gihikling nga pagkáun
pára nímu, She has put some food aside for you. {4} transfer one’s
residence to escape s.t. Mihiklin mi pagkasúnug sa ámung balay, We
moved away when our house burnt down.

hiklùhiklù v [AP; c1P] shake the head from side to side in
embarrassment upon asking s.o. for s.t. or when praised.
Nagpahiklùhiklù (naghiklùhiklù) kay naíkug, She was shaking her head
out of embarrassment.

hiknat, hiknit v [A; a12] pull slightly with the fingers as if
stretching s.t. Walà kung kabantay nga kadtung táwung naghiknat sa
ákung dunggan mauy nagkáwat sa aríyus, I did not notice that the man
who was pulling my ears was stealing my earrings.

hiktarya = iktarya.

hiktin a {1} narrower than normal. Hiktin kaáyung dalána. Dì kaagiag
trák, This street is too narrow for a truck to pass through. Hiktin ra
ning panaptúna pára bistidúhun, This piece of cloth is too narrow for a
dress. Labihan kahiktin sa íyang sinínà, Her dress was way too small.
{2} narrow-minded. Hiktin kaáyu siyag mga panghunàhúnà sa pulitika, He
is very narrow-minded about politics. v [B2; b6] be, become too narrow,
small.

híkug v {1} [AB; a] strangle, hang oneself. Diriyut ku mahíkug kay
gibira ang ákung kurbáta, I almost choked to death because s.o. pulled
my necktie. Maghíkug na lang ku kay gibulagan ku, I’ll hang myself
because we broke up. {2} [B146; b6] commit suicide by any means.
Pangpang nga íyang gihikúgan, The cliff where he committed suicide. †

hikùhíkù v [AP; c1P] {1} rock, shake with laughter, dancing.
Naghikùhíkù siya pagkinatáwa, She rocked back and forth with laughter.
Maáyu kaáyu siyang muhikùhíkù sa láwas samtang nagsáyaw, She swayed her
body beautifully as she danced. {2} = hiklùhiklù.

híkum v [A; c2] do s.t. stealthily to avoid being noticed. Mihíkum
siyag súd sa kwartu sa babáyi, He went inside the room of the girl
stealthily. Hikúmi (ihíkum) ug hátag ang kwarta, Give him the money
secretly. a done in a stealthy, furtive manner.

hikut_1 = higut.

hikut_2 a {1} slant-eyed. Hikut ug mga mata ang kasagáran sa mga Hapun,
Japanese are usually slant-eyed. {2} Japanese. Ang mga ayruplánung
hikut, Japanese airplanes. v [B; b6] be, become slant-eyed.

hikutar v [A; a12] attend to s.t. and get it done. Si Pápa ang
muhikutar (maghikutar) pagpangítag balay nga átung kabalhínan, Father
will take care of looking for a house for us to move to. hikutádu
a taking great care, being very concerned. Ang purman hikutádu nga
mahuman dáyun ang trabáhu, The foreman sees to it that the work gets
done right away. v [B12] get to be attentive to s.t.

hikuy v [A; c1] do s.t. stealthily to avoid being noticed. Muhíkuy
siyag biyà sa báy magabíi, He sneaks out of the house at night.

hikyad = hiklad.

hílà_1 v [A; a1] {1} move, do s.t. slowly while at the same time
wiggling the body. Naghílà siya sa dálan, She wiggled as she walked
down the street. Ayaw hiláa (ihílà) ang ímung linihukan kay mu ra kag
báyut, Don’t wiggle while you walk or you will look like a fairy.
{2} wriggle staying in place or wriggle out of s.t. Nagawas ang bátà sa
banig kay mihílà man, The baby wriggled off the edge of the mat. Gihílà
na lang sa ginápus ang íyang láwas arun muiskápu, The man that was tied
wriggled around in order to escape. {3} cheat, swindle s.t. out of s.o.
(slang). Gihílà níla ang katigayúnan sa tigúlang, They swindled the
property out of the old man. (→) n an edible marine slug, usually found
clinging to stones. hilàhilà n general name for slugs and snails, land
and marine. hilahílà v [A; b6] {1} wriggle around. {2} remain seated,
instead of working. Makahilàhílà ka kay daghan kag masúgù, You can
afford to sit on your behind because you have lots of servants.

hílà_2 v [A3P; a1] make a slash in flesh with s.t. sharp. Hiláa ang
pinaakan sa bitin ug padug-a, Slit the snakebite and let it bleed.

hilab, hílab_1 v [A; ab2] slice off a thin flat piece. Akuy muhilab sa
isdà nga ipaun, I’ll slice off some of the flesh from the fish to use
as bait. (→) n the sharp edge of a blade.

hílab_2 n empty or smarting sensation in the stomach caused by hunger,
fear, or acidity. v [B46; a4b4] feel a sharp revolting sensation on the
pit of the stomach due to hunger, fear, etc. Naghílab ang ákung tiyan
sa kagútum, My stomach hurts due to hunger. Mu rag hilábun ang ákung
atay sa kakuyaw, I seem to feel a sharp pang in the pit of my stomach
because of my fear. Muinum kug litsi basta hilában ku sa tiyan, I drink
milk when my stomach hurts.

hilabut see lábut.

hiláda n {1} food put on ice to keep from spoiling. {2} drink made with
scraped ice, sugar, water, and flavoring. {2a} = kahiláda, see kahil_2.
v {1} [A; a12] put food on ice to keep it from spoiling. Hiladáhun ang
mga isdà arun dì madubuk, The fish will be put on ice so they will not
spoil. {2} [A; a] prepare iced drinks. hiladur n one who puts food on
ice.

hílak v [A2S; b3c] cry. Naghilak si Pitra kay gibyáan sa trátu, Petra
wept because her boy friend left her. Dì nà ángayng hilákan, That’s not
worth crying about. Wà na kuy lúhà nga ihílak, I have no more tears to
cry. mag- ang panahun ug dílì [A13] [so-and-so] is sure to happen.
Maghilak ang adlaw ug dílì siya mahubug, That’ll be the day when he
doesn’t get drunk. n {1} action of crying. {2} turn to cry. (→) =
ma-(→). hilakhílak, hinilakay a tear jerker. Ságad sa mga salídang
Tagálug mga hilakhílak, Most Tagalog pictures are tear jerkers. -in-,
pag-in- n action of continuous crying. ka-un(→) feel like crying.
ma-(→) a given to crying easily. Mahilak kaáyu ning batáa, It doesn’t
take much to make this child cry. v [B1456] be in constant tears. Ang
nagmahilak kung kasingkásing, My heart which is constantly crying.
pala-(→) a crybaby.

hílam v {1} [A; a12b2] search for s.t. by feeling about with the hands.
Gihílam níya ang íyang pusil sa uluhan, He felt about for his gun on
the headboard. {2} [A; a12] feel a surface in detail with the
fingertips. Hiláma ákung úlu dì ba náay búkul, Feel my head and you
will find a bump. {3} [c3] be at one’s disposal, available for an
emergency. Wà giyud tay mahílam nga bugas, We can’t get our hands on
any rice. paN- v [A13] feel one’s way around in the dark. Misulud siya
sa kwartu nagpanghilam sa ngitngit, He went into the room groping
around in the dark.

hilamun n weeds growing in a cultivated field. Ang mga hilamun
makasáwut sa humay, Weeds stunt the growth of the rice.

hilam-us v {1} [A; b6(1)] wash s.o.’s face. Akuy muhilam-us sa bátà, I
will wash the child’s face. {2} [c] take insults, shame with equanimity
without being unduly perturbed. Ihilam-us ku na lang ang ílang mga
pangyúbit, I won’t pay any attention to their hoots of derision. paN-
v [A2; b6(1)] wash one’s face. Manghilam-us siya únà matúlug, She
washes her face before going to bed. -ánan, paN-an n vessel for washing
the face.

hílan a {1} for an uncultivated, unpopulated area to be
disease-infested or infested with supernatural beings. Hílan nga dapit
ang gihátag sa gubyirnu, The land that the government gave was
disease-infested forest land. Misum-uk sila sa hilan nga lasang, They
came into a lonely and frightening forest. {2} place that is dangerous
because of the type of people that live there. Hílan kaáyu ang Tundung
puy-an. Daghang naglukluk nga kriminal, Tondo is a dangerous place to
live. There are so many criminals around. v [B126; b6] {1} for a forest
or thicket to become disease-infested. {2} for a place to become
dangerous because of the bad types that infest it.

hilánat n fever. Taas kaáyu ang íyang hilánat, His fever is very high.
v [B46; b4] have a fever. Gihilantan (mihilánat) ang bátà ganína sa
buntag, The child had a fever (developed a fever) this morning.
hilantan v [A13] have a fever. Naghilantan ang bátà, The child has a
fever. -un(→) a feverish, about to have a fever.

hilang a for things in a row or woven to be further apart than they
should be. Hilang ug ngípun, Having teeth far apart. Hilang pagkalála,
Woven too loosely. Hilang pagkatanum ang mais, The corn was planted too
far apart. v [B; b6c1] be too far apart. Muhilang ang mga lugas sa mais
ug way abúnu, The corn will bear ears lacking in kernels if it isn’t
fertilized.

hilangyud = hulangyud.

hílap v {1} [A; a] cut a wide slice off s.t. Akuy muhílap sa karni nga
kusahúsun, I’ll slice the meat to make it into jerked meat. {2} [A3P;
a12] affect one’s feelings deeply. Daw hilápun ang ákung kasingkásing
nga magsud-ung sa mga binyáan, I was touched to the depths of my heart
looking at the abandoned children. ma-un a touching deeply.

hilas v [AN; c] give s.o. a small share of s.t. one has obtained.
Gihilasan mig tagsa ka sipì sa íyang ságing, He gave us each a hand of
bananas.

hílas a obscene, lewd. Hílas nga sini, Obscene movies. Hílas kaáyu kang
manulti, You talk terribly lewdly. v {1} [B12; b4] be, become lewd,
find s.t. so. Gihilásan kung nagtan-aw ánang law-ay nga salída, I was
revolted looking at that dirty movie. {2} [A13; b4] make oneself
revolting, ridiculous by doing s.t. improper. Naghílas kag kanta mu rag
dílì yabag, You are making yourself ridiculous singing off key like
that. Gihilásan ku sa íyang hambug, I find it revolting the way he
brags.

hilaw a {1} uncooked, raw. Hilaw pa nang kan-un, The rice is still
uncooked. {2} unripe, green. Aslum ang manggang hilaw, Green mangoes
taste sour. {3} pale, light in color. Hilaw nga pagkapula ang pintal sa
ílang balay, Their house is painted a pale red. {4} for one’s facial
expression to be artificial and unnatural. Hilaw ang íyang pahiyum kay
sad-an nákù siya, She gave me a forced smile because she had a guilty
conscience for what she did to me. {4a} having an embarrassed
expression on the face. Hilaw ang ílang dagway sa nasakpan sila, They
had an embarrassed expression on their faces when they were caught.
{5} in phrases: bibingka nga — n woman’s genitalia. budbud nga —
n penis. — nga ayis ice that hasn’t frozen well, having a white soft
part in the middle. v {1} [A13B16; a12] be halfway cooked, cook s.t.
halfway. Kinsay naghilaw sa paglútù sa kan-un? Who cooked the rice that
is half done? {2} [B6; a12] get an artificial, forced expression on the
face. {3} [B16; a12] get an embarrassed expression on the face.
{4} [B1256] be unripe, green. Ug mahilaw ang mangga ayawg ipakáun sa
bátà, If the mango is green, don’t give it to the child to eat.
tagilhaw a not yet fully ripe.

*hílay ka-an n carnal vices. balay sa ka-an n house of prostitution.

hilbas n k.o. herb, cultivated for medicinal uses: Artemisia vulgaris.

hilhig a for s.t. woven to have threads displaced. Hilhig nga pagkalála
ang banig, A poorly woven mat, such that some threads are out of place.
v [B; a2] for the threads in a piece of cloth to get pushed far apart.
Dalì rang mahilhig ning muskitíru, The threads of the mosquito net
easily get loose.

hilhil v [A; a] slice a piece off of s.t. which has bulk. Hilhíla ang
kunggu sa ímung suwang, Cut the wart off your chin.

hilíbis v [A; ab] saw or cut thin pieces off the edge of s.t. flat.
Naghilíbis kug lubi pára usap-usápun, I sliced off the edge of the
coconut meat to munch. -in- n thin strips sliced off the edges.

hílig v {1} [B; a] be leaning, tilted to one side. Mihílig ang sakayan
nga gihapak sa balud, The boat leaned to one side as it was battered by
the waves. {2} develop a tendency, inclination. Nahílig siya sa panúgal
kay nakadaug man siyag kausa, He developed an inclination for gambling
because he won once. n inclination, liking. Wà kuy hílig sa pangwarta,
I have no interest in making money. (→) a tilted. n counterbalance in
kites attached to the wing to make the wing tilt upwards and stabilize
the flight. v [a] put such a counterbalance on a kite. ma-, ma-un fond
of.

hilihud = hulihud.

hilikuptir n helicopter. v [A13; a12] ride on a helicopter.

hilimásaw v [A; b] rinse the body off. Hilimasáwi si Dyunyur sa sabun,
Rinse the soap off of Junior. paN- rinse oneself off. Nanghilimásaw ku
gíkan sa pagkalígù sa dágat, After I went swimming in the ocean I
rinsed myself off.

hiling v {1} [AN; a12] examine s.t. carefully, touching it to see what
is there. Gihiling níya ang irù ug may libun ba, He examined the dog to
see if there were any ticks. {2} [A; a12] examine one’s health. Ayawg
píyung ug hilngun ang ímung mata sa duktur, Don’t close your eyes when
the doctor examines them.

hilíra n line of objects. v [A; c1] put, be in a line or row. Naghilíra
sa kadaghan ang íyang sapátus, She has rows upon rows of shoes.

hílis v [AB2; aP] {1} for s.t. to lose part of its bulk by melting,
friction, dissolution; cause s.t. to do so. Ang batuung karsáda muhílis
ug gúma, A rough road wears tires down. Muhílis ang yílu ug hiinitan,
Ice melts if you leave it in the sun. Ang ihirsisyu makapahílis
(makahílis) sa tambuk, Exercise gets rid of fat. Hilísa (pahilísa) ang
tablíta sa túbig, Let the tablet dissolve in the water. {2} digest. Wà
ku kahilísi sa ákung gikaun, I didn’t digest my dinner. {3} [B1256]
feel small. Nahílis ku sa kaúlaw, I felt small on account of my shame.
(→) {1} worn down, having part melted away. Hilis ug tikud ang sapátus,
The shoes are worn down at the heels. {2} backing down in a fight.
Hilis ming tanan ánang bagísa, We’re all scared of that toughie.
{3} expression promising harm to s.o. Hilis giyud mu nákù ug inyu kung
sulayan, You’ll see what I’m like (lit. you’ll be worn down) if you
test me. v [AB; a12] back down in a fight, cause s.o. to do so.
-in-an(→) n fatty flesh cooked until the fat melts and only a hard
crust remains.

hilit a secluded, isolated in location. Hilit ning lugára kay layug
silíngan, This place is secluded because there are no near neighbors.
v [B1256] be a secluded place. Ug mahilit ang lugar, háyan alabtan, If
the place is secluded, there are likely to be ghosts. pa- v [A; c] go
to a secluded place. Nagpahilit sila arun makalugar, They went to a
secluded place to do it. ka-an, kahilithilitan n isolated, secluded
places. kina-an n most isolated, secluded place.

hilmit n helmet. v [A; b6(1)] wear a helmet. hilmithilmit n glans penis
(humorous).

hilt sintir n public health clinic. v [a12] make into a health clinic.

hilu n poison ingested. v {1} [A; b] poison s.t. or s.o. Kinsay naghilu
sa irù? Who poisoned the dog? {1a} poison s.o. by magical means.
Manghilu sila pinaági sa tayhup, They poison people by blowing on them.
{2} [A; b(1)] give s.o. bad or wrong ideas about s.t. Kinsay mihilu
nímu bátuk nákù? Who poisoned your mind against me? Gihiluan níya ákung
hunàhúnà báhin sa pagpalit ug awtu, He gave me the bad idea of buying a
car. {3} [A13] commit suicide by taking poison. Naghilu siya kay
gibulagan sa trátu, He poisoned himself because he was jilted. (←)
v {1} [A12] kill with poison. Ang tubli makahílu sa isdà, The derris
plant kills fish by poisoning them. {2} [B126] be physically affected
by a stench. Báhung makahílu, A stench that knocks you over. hilúan
n one who practices magical poisoning. One becomes a hilúan only by
killing a member of his own family and must continue killing at a
specified rate to stay alive and healthy.

hílu n thread. — dikaríta n spool of thread. — nga pinalus n skein
thread.

hilú n expression used upon answering the phone: hello. v [A2] say
hello on the phone.

hílug v {1} [AN; b6(1)] rub oil on the skin. Hilúgi ug linimintu ang
pamául, Rub liniment on the sore muscles. {2} [A; b5] give the extreme
unction. Gihílug (gihilúgan) siya sa párì, He was given the extreme
unction by the priest. — sa himalatyun n extreme unction.

hílum a {1} silent, quiet. {2} secret, not overt. Hílum nga gugma,
Secret love. Naghilak siya sa hílum, He cried in secret. v {1} [B; aP]
be silent, quiet. Kun dílì mu muhílum sa klási, If you do not keep
quiet in class. Nahílum ang mga trabahadur pag-abut sa purman, The
workers stopped talking when the foreman arrived. {2} [ac] keep s.t.
secret, hush s.t. up. Hilúma lang ang nahitabù, Hush up the incident.
Ihílum ning ákung isulti nímu, ha, Keep what I’m going to tell you for
yourself. Hustu na ning dus syintus ihílum sa pulis, Two hundred pesos
is enough to shut the cop up. {3} [aP] for a court case to peter out.
Ambut ngánu, apan nahílum man lang tung ílang kásu, I don’t know why,
but their case was just sort of fizzled out. {4} [A; c1] do s.t.
secretly or in silence. Mihílum siya paggawas sa kwartu, He sneaked out
of the room. Hilúma pagkúhà ang yáwi ni Máma, Get the key from Mother
on the sly. (→) Shut up! Hilum dihà! Shut up! paka-(→) v [A13] keep
quiet, remain silent. Nagpakahilum na lámang si Míla sa usa ka suuk,
Mila just remained silent in a corner. ka- n silence. ma-un a peaceful
and quiet. -un(→), ma-un(→) a not given to talking.

hilus v {1} [B26; c1] for s.t. tied securely in place to slip off, move
out of place by sliding. Nakabuhì ang kanding kay mihilus ang
sinumpayan sa písì, The goat escaped because the knot which tied the
two pieces of rope slipped off. Nahilus ang ákung pagkuput sa sanga, I
lost my hold on the branch. {2} [A1B12; b] for the skin to get burnt by
heat or chafing action. Nahilusan (nahilus) ákung buktun sa túbig ínit,
My arm got burnt with the hot water. Nagkahilus ákung pálad pagpinugung
sa pasul, My palm is getting chafed from trying to hold the fishing
line. {3} [A; c] peel off s.t. hard after loosening it by dipping it in
boiling water. Dì pa makahilus nang tubíga sa kuku sa bábuy kay dì pa
búkal, That water can’t get the pig’s hooves loose because it is not
boiling. {3a} [B126] for one’s whole being be scorched (literary).
Midukù si Magda kay daw nahilus siya sa tinan-awan ni Migil, Magda
seemed to melt under Miguel’s fiery gaze. n inflammation of the skin
caused by burning or chafing. Hilus gumíkan sa hapin, Diaper rash. paN-
v [A] for the skin to peel as the result of burning or chafing. -in-
water taken off of boiled rice before it is fully cooked.

hílut v {1} [A; a12] massage, pull the bones for medicinal purposes. A
wide variety of symptoms are treated by hílut ranging from swellings
and fractures to fevers and pains. Maáyu siyang muhílut ug piang, He is
good in setting dislocated joints. Kamau siyang muhílut ug bátang suhì,
He knows how to massage a baby that is upside down in the womb. Hilúta
ang tampihak, Massage the temples. {2} [a12] repair personal relations.
Kadalì rang mahílut ang gikabangían sa duruha, It will be easy to
settle their differences. {3} [a12] repair a defect with makeshift
methods. Dílì mahílut ning dipiktúha kinahanglan ilísan ang písa, There
is no way to take care of this defect without replacing the part.
{4} [A2; a12] stretch a failing grade near the borderline to allow the
student to pass. n action of massaging. Dílì madá sa hílut, Massage
can’t take care of it. maN-r-, mag-r- n folk doctor who treats by
massaging.

hiluy v [B; c] for the eyes to droop. Naghiluy na ang íyang mata sa
kakatulgun, Her eyes are drooping from drowsiness. a droopy-*eyed.

hilwas_1 n shoemaker’s instrument used to cut and shape material for
soles or heels, or to smoothen rough edges in footwear. v [A; b6(1)]
trim, cut with a hilwas.

hilwas_2 = hiluwas. see luwas_2.

himábaw see babaw.

hímag n oil with magical healing properties obtained from a special
k.o. leech. When it is applied to wounds it causes them to close up
such that no trace remains.

himalang v [AN; b4] inflict malicious or unnecessary damage on. Giprísu
na ang naghimáng sa dalága, The man who raped the woman was put in
prison. Gihimángan sa kanding ang ákung mga masítas, The goats
destroyed my potted plants.

himalingka v [B126; b3(1)c5] be angered and surprised by s.t. that
comes unexpectedly. Nahimalingka ku pagkahibalu nákung gitikásan ku
níya, I was taken aback in anger when I knew that he cheated me. Ayawg
ikahimalingka ang ákung isulti nímu, Don’t react angrily to what I’m
going to tell you.

himámat v [AC; ac] {1} for people to find out how they are related to
each other. Makighimámat aku nímug unsa kang pagkauyuána nákù, I would
like to find out by what relationship you are my uncle. {2} meet and
get to know one another. Himamáta ang Amirkána, Meet the American lady
and get to know her. {3} [A; a] meet s.o. who is arriving and pay him
attention. Himamáta ang bisíta, Greet the visitor and entertain him.
Gihimámat siya sa masípang pakpak, He was greeted with loud applause.
{3a} [a3] meet one’s sight. Mauy nahimámat sa ákung pagtan-aw, What
greeted my eyes.

híman_1 n tools, utensils. v [A; b] {1} supply equipment. Ang ákung
bána mauy naghíman sa kusína, My husband equipped the kitchen with
utensils. Himáni ang ímung anak nga nagtunghà, Equip your child with
what he needs to study. {2} process, make ready for a purpose. Naghíman
ku sa ákung mga dad-unun, I’m preparing the things I’m taking with me.
ka-an n equipment, tools, for doing s.t.

híman_2 a masculine, he-man. Híman kaáyu kanang barbiládu, That
muscle-man is a real he-man. v [B126; b6] become a he-man.

him-an(→) optional alternant of hing-an before bases beginning with b
or p.

himangnù see mangnù.

himangud v [B126; c5] feel slighted, hurt by s.o.’s actions. Nahimangud
ku nímu kay nahibalu ka man diay sa tinúud apan wà giyud ku nímu
sultíhi, I feel hurt because you knew the truth, but you didn’t let on
to me. ka- n hurt feelings, resentment.

himanhíman as it turned out, [so-and-so] is not true despite
allegations. Miiskuyla kunu siya, apan himanhíman diay tu didtu sa
sini, She said she went to school, but the truth is that she went to
the movie. Ingun kang dì kamau, himanhíman bansay, You said you didn’t
know, but it turned out you’re real good.

*himaráut (from dáut) pang- v [A; ac2] scorn s.t., say it is no good.
Ug magpasuburnu siya panghimaraútun siya, If he lets himself be bribed,
people will scorn him. Gipanghimaráut ku ang ákung pálad, I cursed my
fate. Dílì maáyung ipanghimaráut (panghimaraútan) ang pamisti sa usa ka
táwu, It isn’t right to look down on a person for his clothes.

himásaw = hilimásaw.

himáyà n spiritual joy, glory. Tugub sa himáyà ang ílang kaminyúun,
Their marriage was full of bliss. mistiryu sa — the Glorious Mystery,
one of the three Mysteries of the Holy Rosary. v [A13; a12] be
glorified. pa- v [b(1)] be blessed. Gipahimayáan ka sa Ginúu ug usa ka
masulundun nga anak, You are blessed by God with an obedient child.
ka-an n glory, joys. Giánud aku sa díwà sa húni ngadtu sa kahimayáan, I
was drifted by the spirit of the melody to the heights of joy. ma-un
a glorious, joyful. Mahimayáung tulimbang sa mga linggánay, Joyful
ringing of the bells. Mahimayáung kamatáyun, Glorious death.

himbà v [B2; b6] decrease considerably in quantity or volume. Ngánung
nahimbà (mihimbà) ning bugas? Nakuháag dakù, Why do we suddenly have so
little rice left? S.o. took a lot away from it.

himbangkaágan = hibangkaágan. see *bangkáag.

himbay a slow-moving, without energy in walking. v = himbayhimbay.
himbayhimbay v [A1P; c1] dilly-dally in walking. Ngánung
naghimbayhimbay (nagpahimbayhimbay) ka mang naglakaw nga gipadalì ka
man? Why are you dilly-dallying when I told you to hurry? {2} be
wobbly. Naghimbayhimbay ang ligid kay luag ug búha, The wheel is
wobbling because the sleeve bearing is loose.

himbis = hingbis.

himì_1 a cry-baby. v [B2; b6] be, become a cry-baby. himìhimì
n whimper. v [A; b3] whimper, whine.

hímì n dirt. a dirty. Hímì kaáyu kag trabáhu. Usba, Your work is very
dirty. Do it again. v [B12S; a] make s.t. dirty. Maghímì ta basta
magkaun tag ayisdrap, You get dirty if you eat popsicles. Gihimían kus
íyang nilútù maung walà ku mukáun, I felt that the food she cooked was
dirty so I didn’t eat. (→)_2 = hímì, a. himìhimì v [A; b] make s.t.
dirty. -an(→) a fond of getting dirty.

himidyà v [AN; b(1)] look down on. Gihimidyáan siya nga mubù, He was
looked down on with derision for being short. -an a tending to despise
others.

hímil v [A; a1] touch s.t. with the hands. Masukù giyud siyag himílun
ang íyang tinda, She gets mad when s.o. touches her goods. himilhímil
v [A] take care of s.o. intimately as a nurse does.

himílu n cufflinks. v [A; c] wear cufflinks.

himisik see pisik.

himnu n hymn.

himpit = hingpit.

himpus v [A13] {1} be of use, do for a purpose. Dílì maghimpus nang
haligía sa dakung balay, That post won’t do for a large house.
{2} continue to be of service. Dílì maghimpus ang tihíras ug punáyan
mug luksuluksu, The cot won’t last if you keep jumping on it. {3} for
s.t. to come of s.t. Dílì maghimpus ang trabáhu ug byàbyáan, Nothing
will come of the work if you don’t stick to it.

himsug a robust and full. v [B2; b6] become robust and full. Muhimsug
(mahimsug) ang mga tanum kun pirming abunúhan, The plants will grow
robustly if you always put fertilizer on them. ka- n robustness. Ang
bitamína makahátag ug kahimsug sa láwas, Vitamins make the body robust.

hímu, hímù v {1} [A; a] make, construct. Kamau kang muhímù ug
talabánug? Do you know how to make a kite? Himúun kung palu ning
kahúya, I will make this piece of wood into a mast. {1a} make s.o. into
s.t. Himúun ta kang kapitan, I’ll make you a captain. {2} [A; a2] do,
perform. Ayawg himúa tung ímung panghulgà, Don’t carry out your
threats. {2a} conduct or hold an activity. Adtu himúa ang míting sa
iskuylahan, The meeting will be held at the schoolhouse. {3} [B12] turn
into, become. Ang kawad-un mauy nakahímù (nakapahímù) níyang kawatan,
Poverty caused him to become a thief. Nahímung batu ang gikuptan ni
Mídas, The thing which Midas touched turned into stone. Nahímung
sumsúman sa mga tabì, It became the subject of conversation for the
town gossips. {4} [A12; a3] be capable of doing s.t. not usual, allow
to do s.t. Dì ku makahímù paghingílin níya, I can’t bring myself to
evict him. Mahímù ka nang mupaúlì, You may go home now. Walay mahímù,
Nothing can be done about it. {4a} — nga [a3] be possible. Mahímù kaáyu
nga bulagan ka, You might just possibly be jilted. {4b} [a3] for a
woman to be easily had. Mahímù nang bayhána, You can easily get a piece
off that woman. {5} [a3] happen, occur. Mau kadtuy kinadak-ang súnug
nga nahímù sa syudad, That was the biggest fire that happened in the
city. n make. Lig-un ni kay hímù man ni sa Amirika, This is strong
because it is of American make. paka- v [A13; a12] {1} turn oneself,
s.t. into s.t. Nagpakahímù siyang kataw-anan, He made himself a
laughing stock. {2} to be capable of doing s.t. Unsáun nákù
pagpakahímug pasulud nímu nga dílì ku háwak? How could I give you a job
when I have no power? ma- v [B1256] become (Biblical). Ang tanan
mamahímù nga yútà human mamatay, All will be transformed into dust
after death. -in- {1} s.t. made. Ákù nang hinímù, That was of my own
make. {2} s.t. made of. Balay nga hinímù sa batu, House made of stone.
ka-an n accomplishments, results. Gibatbat sa pamúnù ang mga kahimúan
sa íyang administrasiyun, The president enumerated the accomplishments
of his administration. {2} possibility. May kahimúan usab nga kitang
mga táwu kalíwat gíkan sa láing planíta, There is also a possibility
that man is descended from beings from another planet. {3} activities
in general. Unsa may kahimúan sa inyung pista? What are the activities
in your fiesta? mag-r-, mag-l- n maker, producer, manufacturer, etc.

himughat see bughat.

himugsù (from bugsù_2) v [c] deliver, give birth to. Nahimugsuan si
Bíki ug usa ka bátang laláki, A baby boy was born to Vicky. Si Kristu
gihimugsù sa usa ka pasungan, Christ was born in a manger. {2} [B1256;
a] be brought into being (literary). Ang bag-ung nahimugsù nílang
lungsud sa kalasangan, The town they just created in the forest. Ubra
maistra nga nahimugsù sa íyang kakúgi, The masterwork which his labors
brought forth. {3} result from (literary). Panimalus nga nahimugsù sa
íyang pagdumut, The revenge that his hatred gave rise to.

himul v [A1; b] wipe the face around the mouth. Himuli ang bátà kay
nagkamumhu ang simud, Wipe the child’s face because he has crumbs all
over him. paN- v [A; b] wipe one’s face.

himulálung v [A12; a3b8] {1} have a clear picture of s.o.’s appearance.
Nahimuladngan (nahimulálung) nákù ang íyang nawung dihang nahayagan
siya, I got a clear view of his face when the light fell on him.
{2} remember a face vaguely but not be able to place it exactly.
Nakahimulálung tu ku nímu. A si Dyan diay ka, I seem to remember you—Oh
yes. You’re John, aren’t you? {3} be aware of s.t. Nakahimulálung ku
nga may táwu, piru hángin dagway tu, There seemed to be s.o. there, but
probably it was the wind. Dílì nímu mahimuladngan ang pagtúbù sa ímung
mga bátà, Your children grow up on you without your noticing it.

himuláut (from dáut) v [B145] be dying. Gilawàlawaan na ang mata sa
naghimuláut, The dying man’s eyes are blurred.

himúlus see pulus_1.

himungà (from búnga) n mother hen. v [A1; a] raise a mother hen.
Nakahimungà na siyag wayit lighurn, She has already raised white
leghorn mother hens. -an(←) = himungà.

himungáwung see *mungálung.

himungáyà n consciousness, awareness. May himungáyà pa siya sa pagdala
námù níya sa uspital, He still was conscious when we brought him to the
hospital. v {1} [AB; c1] come to consciousness, bring back to
consciousness. Mihimungáyà ang bátà sa paghuman ug indiksiyun, The
child awakened after the injection. Dakung butu ang naghimungáyà sa mga
táwu sa kaadláwun, A loud burst awakened the people at dawn. {2} [B123;
b(1)] become awake to a fact. Nakahihimungáyà sila nga dautan ang ílang
gihímù, They became aware that what they were doing was bad.
Nagkahimungayà ang katawhan ug hinayhínay sa mga nahitabù, The people
are gradually becoming awake to what is going on. Nahimungayáan siya sa
ákung pagpatin-aw, He finally understood what it was all about after my
explanation.

himungsíyù v [B126; b3] be hurt by s.t. s.o. close did without
nurturing resentment on that account. Nahimungsíyù ku níya kay wà siya
paútang, He hurt me because he didn’t lend me money.

himurids n hemorrhage. v [B16; a4] have a hemorrhage, cause hemorrhage.
Naghimurids ang íyang matris, She had a hemorrhage in her uterus.
Gihimurids si Bíti, Betty had a hemorrhage.

himus a cuddly and plump. v [B12; b6] for a child to be cuddly and
plump. Gihimusan ku nang batáa. Kaáyung paákun, That baby is so cuddly.
How I’d love to bite it.

himutákal see butakal.

himut-uk see put-uk.

himuylas see *buylas.

Hin. n abbreviation for hiniral, 1a.

hiN-_1 derivative affix forming verb bases. {1} to words which refer to
a state or time of day to form verbs which mean ‘be almost
[such-and-such] a state, time of day’. Verbs of this sort usually have
a short penult and occur with mag-_1 (nag-, etc.) and ma-_1 (na-). Sa
naghinigulang na si Tátay, As Dad was moving toward old age. Sa
naghinapus na ang pangadyì, As the prayers were about to end.
{2} forming verbs referring to an intense action. Naghinud-ung sila ni
Maríya hangtud siya midukù, The people kept staring at Maria until she
bowed her head. {3} added to nouns to form a verb meaning ‘get the
[noun] out’. Nanghingìkì siya humag káun ug karni, He picked his teeth
after he ate the meat. Hingut-an ta ka, I will pick your lice.
{4} added to a few verb bases to form verbs referring to an accidental
or involuntary action. Ang balay túa mahimutang daplin sa dágat, The
house is situated next to the sea. Paghigut arun dì ka mahimulag sa
sakayan, Tie yourself so you won’t get separated from the boat.

hiN-_2 affix added to verbs or nouns to form adjectives which mean
‘fond of [noun], [doing verb]’. Hingáun ug lútù, Fond of eating rice.
Hinábung, Fond of cockfights.

hinabdus, hinablus = humablus.

hinabù see tábù.

hínag a sparse, loosely woven. Hínag pagkahablun, Woven loosely. Hínag
ang buhuk, Sparse hair. Hínag ang mga táwu sa baylihan, There were very
few people on the dance floor. v [B2; b6] be, become sparse. Nagkahinag
na ang dáhun sa tanum kay nagkamatay, The leaves of the plant are
getting sparse because it is slowly dying. Muhínag ang kamaisan ug dì
punáan, The cornfield will lack plants if you do not reseed the places
that fail to sprout.

hinagdung n k.o. small tree of thickets. A fluid which is blown out of
the wood is used as a poultice for swellings. The leaves are mixed with
water for bathing babies: Trema orientalis.

hinagiban n {1} weapon. {2} instrument used in bringing about a desired
result. Ang kuntrátu mauy ákung hinagiban sa burúka, The contract is my
best weapon in the case. v {1} [c6] use s.t. as a weapon. Gihinagiban
ni Matahari ang íyang kaanyag, Mata Hari used her beauty as a weapon.
{2} [A12] have a weapon.

*hináhin pa- v [A3] {1} for s.o. over-eager to do s.t. to be restrained
or dissuaded. Dì na giyud siya magpahináhin sa pagpaúlì, She can’t be
dissuaded from going home. {2} allow oneself to be left out of s.t.,
miss out on s.t. (usually in the negative). Dì ku magpahináhin. Muuban
giyud ku, I won’t let myself be left out. I’ll go along. {3} allow s.o.
to get an advantage. Ása man ku magpahináhin. Unhan ku giyud siya, I
won’t let him get an advantage. I’ll beat him to it.

hinalam, hinálam = higálam. see *gálam.

hínam v [B126; b3(1)] be eager, intensely desirous. Ang lamíang pagkáun
nakahínam (nakapahínam) kanákù, The delicious food made me eager (to
eat dinner). kulbà — a anticipated with eagerness and fright. Kulbà
hínam sila nga nagpaábut sa risulta, They were in great suspense as
they awaited the outcome. hinamhinam v [B146] be overcome by eagerness.
Naghinamhinam siya sa pag-abut ni Santa Klawus, He is eagerly
anticipating Santa’s arrival. ka- eagerness to do s.t. ma-un a full of
eager anticipation.

hin-an(→) optional alternant of hing-an before bases beginning with d,
e, and s.

hinangiban = hinagiban.

hinangkan see anak.

hinánib see hánib.

hinánuk v [B126] {1} be sound asleep. Nahinánuk na ang mga bátà.
Makalugar na ta, The children are sound asleep. We can do it now.
{2} be dormant (literary). Gipúkaw mu ang nahinánuk ku nga pagbátì, You
brought my dormant emotions to life.

hínas v [A3P; c1] clear an area by burning. Muhínas (maghínas) ku sa
baul ug muínit, I’ll burn the plants I cut down when it gets sunny.
Nahínas ang mga balay sa iskwátir, The slum area was levelled by the
fire.

hinásà a familiar, acquainted with s.o. or s.t. Hinásà kaáyu nákù ning
nawnga, This face looks very familiar to me. Hinásà ku kaáyu sa
kinabúhing Manilan-un, I’m very familiar with what life in Manila is
like. v [B126C13; b6c5] be, become familiar or acquainted with.
Nagkahinásà mi sa tantung agiági níya sa ámù, We became acquainted
because she constantly passed by our place. Gihinasáan ku ánang
tawhána, That person looks familiar to me.

*hináut (from dáut) — nga I hope that ... Hináut untang magmalampúsun
ka, I hope that you succeed. v [A2; c1] hope for s.t. to happen.
Panghinaútan (ipanghináut) námù ang ímung kadaúgan, We hope you will be
victorious. paN- hopes for s.t. good to happen.

hinaw v [A2; b] wash the hands. Hinawi ang bátà, Wash the child’s
hands. paN- v [A2; b] {1} wash one’s hands. Manghinaw ta, Let’s wash
our hands. {2} paN- sa matag bagul find oneself without money (from the
idea that if one washes with a half a coconut with the eyes punched
out, there is hardly any water). Manghinaw ka sa matag bagul ug dílì
nímu ampíngan ang ímung kabílin, You’ll find yourself without money if
you’re not careful with your inheritance. {3} [A2] disclaim
responsibility. Dì ka makapanghinaw sa ímung sáad, You can’t go back on
your promise. -an(←), -l-an(←) n washbasin. -in-an n washed hands.

hinawnaw see nawnaw.

hínay_1 a {1} slow. {1a} lacking in speed. Hínay kaáyu ang íyang mga
lákang, She walked slowly. {1b} taking long to happen. Hínay ang umintu
sa swildu sa maistra, The teacher’s raise in salary is slow in coming.
{2} soft. {2a} low, not loud. Hínayng tíngug, Soft voice. {2b} light,
not strong. Hínay ra ang ákung sagpà níya, I gave her a very light
slap. {2c} gentle. Nabátì ku ang hínay nga dápat sa íyang mga ngábil sa
ákung áping, I felt the gentle touch of his lips to my cheeks.
v {1a} [B; b5] do s.t. slowly, become slow. Nahínay (mihínay) ang
dinaganan sa bangkà kay daghag karga, The boat has slowed down because
of the heavy load. Hináyi (hináya) pagpadágan ang kutsi, Drive the car
slowly. {1b} [B; c1] become soft, gentle; do s.t. quietly. Nagkahinay
ang radiyu kay nagkadiskarga na ang batiríya, The radio is becoming
weak because the batteries are running down. Hináya (ihínay) pagbutang
ang bátà, Put the baby down gently. hinayhínay a {1} rather slow, soft.
{2} bit by bit. Ang usa ka lungnik sa hinayhínay nahurut giyud níya,
Bit by bit he finally finished a whole fifth. v [A; b5] do s.t. slowly,
gradually. -an(→) tending to move slowly by nature. Hinayan kanà. Dì
mahímung padaliun, He’s a slow sort. You can’t rush him. ka-
n slowness, softness. -un(→) a slow in movement. Hinayun siyang mulíhuk
kay masakitun, He moves slowly because he is sickly.

hínay_2 v [A13P; b] always do s.t. Ngánung naghínay ka na lang núug
katúlug dihà? Why do you do nothing but sleep? hinayhínay v [A; b]
{1} continue to do s.t. Naghinayhínay lang mig káun samtang nagpaábut
sila, We continued eating while they waited. {2} leave, get going.
Maghinayhínay na lang ta kay hápun na man, Let’s get going because it’s
late.

hinayak v [B1236C13; b] {1} get oneself so far committed that it would
be awkward to back out. Sígi na lang kay nakahinayak na kug káun bisag
dì pa tingkaun, Since I started, I might as well just eat properly even
if it isn’t time yet. Kay nahinayak ka nag pakigtrátu níya, pangasaw-a
na lang, You’ve gone so far as to get engaged, you might as well marry
her. Humana lang nà kay nahinaykan na nímug tábas, Just finish it
because you already started cutting it. Nagkahináyak ang duha, búsa
nag-ípun na lang, The two have got too deeply involved with each other,
so they just set up house together. {2} [B1236; b] do s.t. in excess or
longer than necessary. Bídang nakahinayak nímug asin sa sabaw, You put
too much salt in the soup. Nahinaykan nákug duut, dì nabuak, I pushed
it too hard and it broke. {3} [B126] do s.t. for nothing, in vain.
Nahinayak akug anhi, I came here for nothing. pa- v [A; b] {1} cause
s.o. to push through with s.t., do s.t. in excess for nothing. {2} do
s.t. in excess purposely, allow oneself to get too deeply involved. Ug
magpahinayak kag inum, If you drink excessively. Nagpahinayak siya sa
gugma, She allowed herself to get too deeply involved in a love affair.

hinayhay = hanayhay.

hinayun {1} see dáyun. {2} see hínay_1.

hindà {1} baby talk for higdà ‘go to sleep’. Hindà na ta dung. Túlug
na, Come on. Let’s go sleepy-by, son. {2} word uttered upon reaching
home base in hide-and-seek. v [A12] go home free. -anan n place used as
home base.

hindang n k.o. small tree: Myrica javanica.

hindian a particular, choosy about food. Níwang nang batáa kay hindian
sa pagkáun, That child is thin because he is very choosy about his
food.

hindik a neat, orderly, clean. Hindik siyang mamistibisti, She dresses
neat and trim. v [A; a1] make s.t. neat and trim. Hindíka ang kwartu
kay nagkalamúkat lang, Straighten up the room because it’s a mess. pa-,
paN- v {1} [A; c6] make oneself neat, clean. Dugáya sad nímung
manghindik (magpahindik) uy, My! How long it takes you to get yourself
ready! {2} primp oneself up. n cosmetics. -an a tending to keep oneself
neat.

híngag v [B2] interested, enthusiastic over. Híngag siya sa mga
pahindik, She’s very interested in cosmetics.

hingahinga v [A3P] pant rapidly from exertion, overeating.
Naghingahinga ang tambuk human patungása sa bungtud, The fat man was
panting rapidly after he was made to climb the hill.

híngak v [A2; b4] breathe deeply and rapidly. Gihingákan ku ug bugtaw
nímu, I ran out of breath running after you.

hingalhingal v [A13P] pant with the mouth open and tongue hanging.
Naghingalhingal ang kábaw nga gidáru sa ínit, The carabao is panting
with its tongue hanging out because it plowed in the sun.

híngan v [B256] have enthusiasm, interest for s.t. Dì kaáyu ku muhíngan
(mahíngan) sa pagbása, I don’t have a great interest in reading. dílì —
for s.t. undesirable not to be in a bad degree. Bintáhang managána.
Mapildi sa dílì híngan, It’s better to be prepared because if
misfortune befalls you, it won’t be so bad. Maldítu siya, apan dílì
híngan, He’s naughty, but not terribly much so.

hing-an(→) = hi-an(→).

hingaphingap v [A13P; b3] be excited, restless in expectation.
Naghingaphingap giyud kung nagpaábut kanímu, I am very excited in
waiting for your arrival.

hingári v [A13; b(1)] always do s.t. Ayaw hingaríhi (hingaríi) nag
túyuk, Stop that constant twirling.

hingatag see hátag.

hingáwa, hingáwà v [B126; b3(1)] feel highly worried about s.t.
Gikahingawáan ku ang dilikádu níyang kundisiyun, I am worried about his
delicate condition. ka- n worry, anxiety. ma-un a full of worry.

hingbangkaágan = hibangkaágan. see *bangkáag.

hingbis n {1} scale on fishes, reptiles, birds’ legs. {2} type of
character (taken from the notion that the fighting cock is judged on
the basis of the scales on his legs). Unsa kahà ang hingbis sa íyang
pagkababáyi? What type of a woman is she? v {1} [AN; b6(1)] remove the
scales. Human na nákù hingbísi ang mga isdà, I already removed the fish
scales. {2a} [AN; b(1)] select a fighting cock according to the scale
formation on its legs. Manghingbis kug manuk pára itárì, I will select
a cock for the cockfight. {2b} size up a person. Gihingbísan kug maáyu
sa ákung uganganun, My future father-in-law sized me up very carefully.
-un(→) a having scales.

hingì v [A; c] ask for s.t. from s.o. (slang). Muhingì pa kug takwal ni
Irpat, I’ll have to ask Father for money. n action of asking.
hingìhingì v [A1; b3] whimper in asking for s.t. or attention.
hingìhíngì n action of whimpering.

hingílin v [A; b] {1} dismiss s.o. from his abode or job. Gihinginlan
siya sa íyang mga ginikánan, His parents drove him out of the house.
{2} drive away a feeling, atmosphere. Ang huyúhuy dílì ígung
makahingílin sa kaígang, The breeze was insufficient to drive out the
heat. {3} [A3P; b] drive away or expel evil spirits from a place or
from a person’s body. Páring maghingílin sa mga ispiritu malignu, A
priest that will exorcise the evil spirits. n the ritual of freeing a
person or place of evil spirits. n ceremony of exorcism.

hingiting = alingiting.

hingkud a {1a} for a person to be full-grown, completely matured.
Hingkud nga dalága, A fully grown young lady. Sini álang sa mga
hingkud, A movie for adults. {1b} be exactly at a certain age, around
the age of maturity. {1c} — ang salabútan have an adult’s
understanding. {2} for fruits borne by plants that bear fruit once and
die to reach maturity. Hingkud na ang púsù. Maáyu nang sanggíun, The
corn is full-grown now. We should harvest it. {3} for a stretch of time
to be just long enough. Hingkud na ang panahun sa panimalus, The time
is ripe for revenge. v [B] {1} get to be matured, a full [so-and-so]
many years old. Muhingkud kung bayinti anyus ugmà, I will be exactly
twenty years old tomorrow. {2} for time to get matured.

hinglit v [A; a1] stretch and press cloth or paper with the hands to
smooth it out. Gihinlit níya ang gum-us nga papil nga íyang sulatan, He
smoothed the crumpled piece of paper out with his hand because he was
going to write on it. Hinlíta ang ímung sayal kay way utaw, Smooth over
your skirt with your hands because it was not ironed.

hinglù v [AB12; a] clear s.t., get cleared off. Hinglúi ang lamísa,
Clear the table. Nahinlù na ang masitasan sa sagbut, The flower bed has
been cleared of weeds. Nagkahinlù ang plása sa hápit na ang tungang
gabíi, The plaza was getting cleared as midnight approached. a cleared.

hingpit a {1} complete, nothing lacking. Hingpit ang kahimánan, The
equipment is complete. Hingpit nga ulitáwu, A young man, completely
grown. Himáyà nga hingpit gayud, Complete and utter bliss. Dì pa siya
hingpit nga abugádu kay wà makabár, He is not a full-fledged lawyer
because he hasn’t taken the bar exams. Haúna kini sa hingpit nga alas
dúsi, Take this out no earlier than twelve o’clock. {2} complete,
without reservations. Hingpit nga gugma, Complete, whole-hearted love.
Hingpit ang ákung hukum, My decision is final. {3} — nga babáyi woman
complete with female virtues. n tools, utensils. Hingpit sa panupi,
Equipment for cutting hair. v [B; a12] get to be complete with nothing
lacking or without reservations. ka-an n tools, utensils. Kahingpítan
sa panimalay, Furniture and utensils for the household. ka-un(→)
n reaching completion. Walay kahingpitun ang paghímug diksiyunariyu,
There never seems to be any end to making a dictionary.

híngù v [A3P; a] pull a tooth or break off one of several projections
which are like teeth in a row. Kanang ímung sinudlayan makahíngù
(makapahíngù) ug sudlay, The comb is going to break the way you are
using it. Wà ka pa kahingúi? Haven’t you lost any teeth? (→) n loose
tooth. Átung ibtun nang ímung hingù bi, Let’s pull out your loose
tooth. a having been pulled out. Hingù na ang íyang bag-ang, He has
lost a molar. paN- v [A23; b4] for the milk teeth to fall out.
Nanghíngù (gipanghingúan) na si Irna, Erna is losing her baby teeth.

hínguk = hínuk_1.

híngus v [A23] sniffle, draw the snot up into the nose. Mihíngus si
Lulu nga namáhid sa íyang lúhà, Lulu sniffled as she wiped her tears.
n sniffle.

hingushingus = ingus-ingus.

hinguy = hunguy.

hinhin_1 = hilhig, v.

hinibra n gin. v {1} [A1] have, serve gin. {2} [a12] make into gin.

hiniral n {1} general officer. {1a} title of address for a general.
{2} kastígu — punishment given to both parties in a quarrel. intráda —
general admission in a theater. {3} k.o. imported gamecock. v [B16; c1]
be, become general.

hiniru n types of course served. Pila ka hinirung sud-an ang átung
andámun? How many kinds of dishes shall we prepare?

hínis v {1} [A; b] remove dirt that clings to s.t., polish by scouring
or chemical action. Ímu bang gihinísan ang kubyirtus? Have you polished
the silverware? {2} [A] — sa túbu for males to masturbate (polish the
tube). n (→) {1} preparation used for scouring or polishing. {2} walay
— unpolished.

hiníti_1 n jockey, one who rides a horse in a race.

hiníti_2 = haníti.

hinlas v [A; b(1)] clean by bathing or with a washcloth. paN- v [A2;
b6] clean oneself.

hinlawan n coarsely ground corn grits which require remilling or are
fed to animals. v [B126] for corn grits to come out coarse.

hinlit = hinglit.

hinlù = hinglù.

hintil n Gentile, non-Jew.

hintulhintul v [A13] for a mixture to come out lumpy. Naghintulhintul
ang labadúra kay walà maáyu nga pagkamiskla, The batter was lumpy
because it was not well mixed.

hinù v [B126; b3] develop a craze for doing s.t. after s.t. nice
happened to one doing it once. Makahinù (makapahinù) ang pagdúlà sa
madyung, Once you have tried playing mahjong, you can easily develop a
craze for it. Ang pagpangáwut ug bahanding lunubung mauy gihinúan
(gikahinúan) sa mga táwu run, Nowadays there is a craze to dig for
buried treasure.

hinug a {1} ripe. Hinug na ang mga ságing, The bananas are ripe.
{2} for a cold to be at a late stage, when the mucous gets thick.
{2a} for acne or small pimple to come to a head. {3} for a time to be
just right for s.t., for plans to be developed to the point that only
realization is lacking. Hinug na ang mga plánu sa ákung panimalus, The
ground is fully prepared for my revenge. n any variety of banana eaten
uncooked when ripe. Palbangáan pa ang hinug nga ílang gipalit, The
bananas they bought are still a bit green. v {1} [B2] be, become ripe
or for cold to mature. {1a} — ang úlu for the head to get bumped so
much it is as if it had softened. Nahinug na ning ákung úlu sa
pagpinakungpákung, My head has become soft because I’ve bumped it so
often. {2} [B25] for the time to become ripe, for the preparations for
s.t. to reach a state of completion. hinggan n bunch of fruit, some of
which are ripe. Gúlang na ang ságing kay hinggan, The bananas are
mature because there are some ripe fruits in the bunch. v [B1256]
become mature with some ripe fruits in it.

hinúgan see túlug.

hinúgay see dúgay.

hinug-u see sug-u.

hinúgun v [B1256; b5c5] feel that it is a great pity that s.t. is gone.
Nahinúgun kaáyu mi sa sayung kamatáyun ni Kinidi, We felt it was a
great loss that Kennedy died so young. Gihinugnan nga mugastu ang
tihik, The miser considers every penny he spends a loss. Dílì ángay
ikahinúgun (kahinugnan, hinugnun) ang usa ka gamay nga butang, A small
thing is nothing for which one should feel regret. -in- a s.o. whose
passing engenders a feeling of great loss. Kadtung ámung igsúung
namatay hininúgun kaáyu, That dead brother of ours was very dear to us.
ka- n sense of loss. mahinugnánun a feeling a great sense of loss.
Mitangdù siya sa paghátag sa ituy sa mahinugnánun nga tíngug, He
consented to give the puppy away with a sad voice.

hínuk_1 v [A; ac] do s.t. stealthily or without anyone’s noticing it.
Mihínuk siya pagdúlug sa babáyi, He stealthily lay down beside the
woman. Hinúka ug kúhà ang búla ug dì siya pahulam, Get the ball away
from him when he’s not looking if he won’t lend it. Ihínuk nig gawas sa
Kustum, Spirit this away from the Customs area.

hínuk_2 n k.o. fish.

hinuklug v [B126; b3(1)] be affected by a great emotion, esp. grief.
Nahinuklug ang mga táwu sa masulub-ung balità, The people were stricken
with grief at the sad news. ma-un a {1} causing great emotion. {2} full
of grief. ka- n deep emotion, grief. Sa túmang kahinuklug nanalinghug
sila sa nasudnung áwit, With deep emotion they listened to the national
anthem.

hinuktuk see tuktuk_2.

hínul v [A; a12b2] {1} feel s.t. with the tips of the fingers. Hinúla
ang lapalapa, dì ba náay bildu, Feel your sole. There’s a piece of
glass in it, isn’t there? {2} feel for, grope around for s.t. Gihínul
ni Kulas ang puspuru sa iláwum sa íyang unlan, Colas fumbled for the
matches under his pillow. {3} [a3] available to one. Wà siyay nahut nga
mahínul, He did not have a cent to his name.

hinulsul v [AN; b(1)] repent for sins. Hinulsúli ang salà mung nabúhat,
Repent your sins. paN-, pag- n repentance.

hinultul see tultul.

hinulung, hinúlung v {1} [B16; b3(1)] look at s.t. with fascination or
with surprise. Naghinulung kung nagtan-aw sa sirkadur, I was fascinated
watching the acrobat. Nahinulung mi sa gipakítà níyang kausában, We
were amazed at how he had changed. Dílì ikahinulung ang íyang líhuk sa
nakaila na níya, Her actions don’t strike people who know her as
surprising. {2} [A12; b(1)] notice s.t. Wà mahinulngi námù nga nanáug
ang bátà, We didn’t notice that the child went downstairs.

hinumdum see dumdum.

hinungdan see tungud.

hinunúa but, on the contrary (literary). Ayaw kami ug itugyan sa
panulay hinunúa luwasa gíkan sa kadaútan, Lead us not into temptation
but deliver us from evil.

hinúun short form: núun {1} instead, however, rather. Ug ímu siyang
patrabahúun magdúlà núun, If you put him to work, he just plays
instead. Hinúun, ug magtuun ka, makapasar pa ka, However, if you study,
you still can pass. Dílì akuy nagkúhà. Ikaw núun, I didn’t take it.
Rather it was you. {2} but [so-and-so] is good anyway. Dì ni mau ang
ímung giingun, bulubaratu núun ning klasíha adtung usa, This isn’t what
you asked for, but it’s a bit cheaper. {2a} [so-and-so] may or may not
be right, good, etc., but this definitely is. ‘Wà tay láin gawas áring
puwa.’—‘Maáyu núun. Mas gwápu núun ni,’ ‘We don’t have any except this
red one.’—‘Oh, that’s fine. That’s even better (than what I had asked
for).’ Wà ku kaila níla. Prid núun, I don’t know them. But Fred, I do.
{2b} to be sure [so-and-so] is the case, but ... Hinúun, gwápu siya,
apan way trabáhu, To be sure, he’s handsome, but he doesn’t have a job.
gayud — [so-and-so] is more than you allege or would think. Unsay
barátu? Mahal giyud núun, What do you mean cheap? It is expensive, more
than you would think. Kabayad ka giyud núun pud, You can very well
afford it, anyway. {3} [so-and-so] is contrary to my desire. Manday
nagtirnu na ku, miulan na núun, Just the one time I wear a suit, it
starts to rain. na — it’s too late, but it could have been done
earlier. Dinhi tà ka gahápun. Wà na núun, You should have come
yesterday. Now they’re all sold out. {4} with imperatives: you might as
well do it under the circumstances, since you’ve got the chance. Adtu
man kahà ka sa lungsud. Dad-a núun ni, You’re going to town, anyway.
You might as well bring it with you. Upat man ta. Dúlà núun ta, There’s
four of us. We might as well play. {5} ra — it is only [so-and-so],
said sarcastically or jocularly when whatever it is, is actually a lot.
Singku písus ra núun ang kílu sa kamátis, Tomatoes are ‘only’ five
pesos a kilogram. Mil písus ra núun ang ákung daug, I ‘only’ won a
thousand pesos. {6} mau ra pud — that’s just the one thing that’s wrong
with it. ‘Nindut ning sinináa, galing luag nákug diyutay.’—‘Mau ra pud
núun.’ ‘This is a nice dress, but it’s a little too big.’—‘That’s just
what’s wrong with it.’

hinyu n genius. v [b6] consider s.o. a genius.

hip {1} interjection of warning s.o. {a} that he’s going to hit s.t.
Hip! Maigù nang bumbilya, Watch it! You’re going to hit the light bulb,
{b} that he’s doing s.t. wrong and he’s being observed. Hip, ayawg
hilabti nà. Nagtan-aw bayà ku, Watch it. Don’t touch that. I’m watching
you. {2} interjection expressing the desire for s.t. to hit s.t. Hip.
Hip. A, nasulud giyud sa bangag! Easy does it. Now it’s in the hole.

hipálag see palag.

hipanhipan (from ulahípan) n small red or brown worms resembling small
centipedes, used as bait. They are of two kinds: — sa bás kind found in
sand, — sa batu kind found inside stones or boulders.

hiphip v {1} [A; a] insert in between s.t. or into a tight place or
container. Nakítà kung mihiphip siyag papil dibangku sa libru, I saw
her insert a bill in the book. Naghiphip siyag pistúla sa íyang háwak,
He tucked a pistol into his waist. {2} [AN; b6(1)] bribe. Mihiphip
(nanghiphip) siyag táwu nga mupalúsut sa íyang papílis, He bribed a
person who could work out on his papers. Gihiphipan níya ang pulis arun
dílì siya dakpun, He bribed the policeman so he wouldn’t be arrested.
n bribe. -an(→) {a} fond of giving bribes.

hípi_1 n {1} chief, person of highest authority. Hípi sa kapulisan,
Chief of Police. {1a} title for a chief. {2} — dibyáhi {a} the ship’s
officer charged with the ship’s trading and business transactions.
{b} the head of a cargo truck sent to buy farm products wholesale.
v [B16; a12] be, become a chief.

hípi_2 n hippie. v [B1; b6] be, become a hippie.

hipì (from hiplì) v [AP; b6P] {1} move behind s.t. to hide. Magpahipì
(maghipì) ku sa sira, I will hide behind the door. {2} for s.t. to lurk
behind what appears. Luyu sa íyang pahiyum nagpahipì ang kayugut,
Behind her smile lurks hatred.

hipíhip = hapíhip.

hiplì v [ABP; c] {1} move out of the way, cause s.t. to do so. Aku na
lay muhiplì áning mga pintul, I’ll get these pieces of wood out of the
way. Nagpahiplì (naghiplì) lang sa suuk ang mga ibis, The kids hid
themselves in the corner. Ihiplì úsà ang trabáhu kay mangáun ta, Put
your work aside for the moment because we’re going to eat. {2} [A; b6]
dodge, duck out of the way. Nakahiplì siya sa dihang giistrítan siya sa
íyang kuntra, He ducked to the side when his opponent swung at him.

hiplig = hiplì.

hiplus = haplus.

hiplut = haplus.

hipnù v [A; a12] fill s.t. to the brim with a liquid. Ayaw hipnúa ang
baldi arun dì mukibà, Don’t fill the pail to the brim so it won’t spill
over.

hipsut = ipsut.

hípun n {1} tiny shrimp. {2} tugnus fish preserved in salt.

hípus v {1} [A; a12] gather s.t. up and put it away. {1a} [A1; a12] put
s.t. away so as not to lose it. Nakahípus ka ug sulat didtus lamísa?
Did you put away a letter that was on the table? {1b} [A; a12] save
money. Maghípus tag diyutayng kwarta pára sa byáhi, Let’s save some
money for the trip. {2} [A2; a12] make up beds. Kamuy muhípus sa inyung
katri, dílì aku, You make your beds, not me. {3} [AN; a12] put things
away for the night. Kinsa may muhípus sa mga kanding didtus lagúna? Who
will bring the goats in from the pasture? Hipúsa ang gibulad nga mais,
Gather up the corn that was dried in the sun. Sa nahípus na ang mga
bátà, When the children were put into bed. {4} [a12] fold up, draw in
the limbs or their analogues on manufactured objects. Mikáyaw ang
ayruplánu nga walà mahípus ang ligid, The airplane took off without
retracting its wheels. Hipúsa ang ímung tiil, ayawg ipasayà sa agiánan,
Draw in your feet. Don’t let them spread out into the walkway.
{5} [a12] collect, gather and form a composite whole. Mau ni ang balità
nga nahípus karung adláwa, These are the news we gathered today.
{6} [a12] kill, do away with. Kay siya may nagbalità ngadtu sa pulis,
gihípus siya sa mga ismaglir, Because he sang to the police the
smugglers did away with him. {7} [A2] take in a certain amount. Sa
pamaligyà muhípus mi ug dyis mil adlaw-adlaw, We take in ten thousand
in sales every day. {8} [B1256] become neat and orderly. a neat and
orderly. Hípus kaáyu ang kwartu, The bedroom is tidy. — ug nawung
a have a grave and composed expression. v [B2N] for the face to become
composed. Nagpanghipus (nagkahipus) na ang nawung sa himalatyun, The
dying man’s face is gradually becoming composed. paN- {1} v [A2] get
ready for a trip. Nanghípus ku pára sa byáhi ugmà, I am preparing for
the trip tomorrow. {2} [A12S3] for a womb to make preparations for
childbirth with false pains and a small discharge of blood. Manghiugmà
pang ianak ning tiyána, Nagpanghipus pa lang ni, This baby won’t be
born before some time tomorrow. It’s only making preparations at this
point. hipushípus of a sort that can be folded up and stored. Síyang
hipushípus, Folding chairs. -ánan n place for storing things for the
night or for a while. -l-un(→), -un(→), -únun n things to be kept, put
out of the way, or gathered up for the night. kahipsan, kahilipsan
n tools or instruments for a certain trade. manggi-un a tending to put
things away where they are safe.

hip-ut = gip-ut.

hiráda v [B126] {1} be unsuccessful, fail. Nahiráda ang ákung nigusyu
sa súnug, My business failed because of the fire. Nahiráda ku sa
iksámin kay walà ku makatuun, I failed in the test because I didn’t
study. Nahiráda ku sa tárì gahápun, I incurred a great loss in the
cockfight yesterday. {2} fall a victim to sickness, tricks, bad luck,
and the like. Nahiráda ku sa trangkásu, I came down with the flu.
Nahiráda ku sa mangingilad, I was victimized by the swindler. {3} [A;
c] in pool, shoot the cue ball to a place where it will prevent the
opponent from getting a good aim at the target. Ihiráda ku ang bulimánu
arun dì níya masúd ang utsu, I’ll shoot the cue ball into a position
where access to number eight is blocked. {4} [A2N; b] court a girl
(colloquial). Kun akuy muhiráda anang bayhána, sugut nà dáyun, If I
court that girl, it won’t take her long to say ‘yes’. n hit a cue ball
making a carom.

hirag v [A; b6] {1} lean to one side. Naghirag ang pusti, The post is
leaning to one side. {2} lean on. Ayaw ug hiragi ang kural kay matumba,
Don’t lean on the fence because it will give way.

híral a for males to be highly inclined to have coitus. Híral kaáyu
ning kabayúa kay muúlag dáyun sa bayi, This horse is very highly sexed.
It readily takes to the female. v [B12; b6] be, become highly sexed.
ka- n sexual appetite. Bísag unsa nímu kahíral, pagkuntrul, No matter
how strongly you feel the urge to have sex, don’t.

híram = hílam.

hiraminta, hiramintas, hiramyinta, hiramyintas n tools for engaging in
some handicraft. Hiraminta sa pamanday, Carpenter’s tools. v [A12] have
or obtain tools.

hirbabuyna = hirbubuyna.

hirbubuyna n k.o. mint: Mentha arvensis.

hirbularyu = arbularyu.

hirdu n hair-do, coiffure. Unsa may ngán ánang ímung hirdu? What do you
call your hair-do? v {1} [A; a] do the hair. Ang báyut mauy mihirdu sa
ákung buhuk, The homosexual did my hair up. {2} [A1; c6] wear a
hair-do. Maghirdu kug Prins twist sa bayli, I’ll wear a French twist
hair-do to the dance.

hirig a in a leaning position. Hirig ang ílang balay human sa bagyu,
Their house was tilted to one side after the typhoon. v [B] lean over
to one side. Muhirig ang búti ug usa ka kílid ray kargáhan, The boat
will list to one side if you load only one side. hilirgan a for kites
to be unbalanced in flight. v [B125] be, become unbalanced.

hiringga n apparatus used to give an enema. v [A; b6(1)] give an enema.

hiringgilya n hypodermic syringe.

hiringgíru n k.o. fish.

hiringhiring v [B46] for the stomach to be bursting with fullness.
Naghiringhiring ang ákung tiyan sa kabusug, My abdomen is bursting with
fullness.

hírit v {1} [A; b(1)] aim blows at s.o. Ug maghinambug ka dinhi,
hihiritan ka giyud, If you keep on with that big talk, you’ll get a
sound boxing. {2} [A; b6(1)] take an additional card in games where the
player has an option of so doing. Muhírit ku kay gamay ra ang ákung
numiru, Hit me. I still have a small total. n the act of asking or
giving an extra card.

hirniya n hernia. v [A123P; a4] have a hernia.

hirpin n hairpin. v [A; b6(1)] use a certain hairpin, pin the hair. Dì
ku muhirpin ánang tayaun, I refuse to use those rusty hairpins. paN-
v [A; b6] put hairpins in one’s hair. Dì na ku manghirpin kay
mag-isprínit ku, I won’t use hairpins because I will use hairspray.

hirsáyans n beautician’s course.

híru n postal or telegraphic money order. — pustǎl postal money order.
— tiligrapiku telegraphic transfer. v [AP; c] send money through postal
or telegraphic services. Ipahíru (ihíru) dáyun ang báyad, Send a money
order for the payment at once.

hirushirus v [A1] suck in one’s breath in pain or displeasure.
Naghirushirus (nangpanghirushirus) siya sa kasakit, He sucks in his
breath in pain.

hisà = isà.

hísà v [A; b(1)] for animals to mate. Mumabdus na dì madúgay ang átung
báka kay gihisáan na, Our cow will soon become pregnant because she has
been bred.

hísang v [B6; ab4] for skin diseases, inflammations to come out in
profusion. Hisángun giyud ang dā́p arun dílì makalunud, Measles should
be made to come out profusely in order to avoid complications. a skin
ailment coming out thickly.

hisgut v {1} [A; b(1)] mention, say s.t. in passing. Walà siya muhisgut
báhin sa sábut, He didn’t say anything about the agreement. {2} [AC;
bc] talk about s.t. Gipanaghisgútan níla ang nahitabù, They talked
about what had happened. n {1} s.t. said in passing. Hisgut lang tu
níya nákù, He just said that to me in passing. {2} talk. May hisgut nga
mulansad si Imilda, There’s talk that Imelda is going to run for
president. -l-an, -ánan n subject of conversation.

hisi = ási.

*hislung wà, dì — v [A23; b(1)] not give up doing s.t. until one
succeeds. Dì ku muhislung sa ákung pagtuun hangtud maduktur, I won’t
give up my studies until I become a doctor. Wà nákù hislungi ang
nakautang nákù, I persisted in my efforts in collecting my debts.

hislut v [B2; a12] {1a} for a string or incasing around s.t. to slip
off, cause it to do so. Nahislut ang sapátus pagdinágan, His shoes came
off as he was running. Ayaw ug badbára ang lambu. Hisluta lang ang
balù, Don’t undo the knot. Just slip off the loop. {1b} [A12] escape by
slipping out of the tether. Ang kanding nakahislut sa íyang hukut, The
goat has slipped out of its tether rope. {2} peel off. Nahislut ang
kúbal sa íyang pálad, The callous on his hand came off.

hísù v [A; c] apply an oily substance to the hair. Dílì siya muhísù ug
baratuhun, He won’t use cheap hair oil. (→) n preparation for the hair.
paN- v [A2; b6(1)] apply oil to one’s hair. Dì ku manghísù kay dagul
ku, I won’t use hair oil because my hair is short.

Hisukristu n Jesus Christ.

hisúpu n hyssop (Biblical).

Hisus n {1} Jesus, name of Christ and a popular Christian name.
{2} mild interjection: {a} uttered upon discovering that s.t. is to a
greater extent than expected. Hisus kamahal, My! How expensive.
{b} uttered when s.t. happens that can’t be remedied. Hisus! Nahúlug
ang bátà, Jesus! The baby fell. {c} making little of s.t.: oh, heck,
that’s nothing. ‘Mahal man ni’—‘Hisus, kabayad nà sila,’ ‘This is
expensive.’—‘Oh hell, that’s nothing. They can afford it.’
{d} indicating disbelief, feigned or otherwise (used by women and
children). Hisus! Túu ka gud. Hambug lang nà, Hmm, you believe that?
That’s just big talk. {e} expressing distaste. Hisus, kabáhù, Jesus!
What a smell! v [AN; b6] utter the prayers said for a dying man.
Hisusan siya sa dì pa mamatay, Say the prayers over him before he dies.
paN- v [A] exclaim Hisus! Nakapanghisus ku pagkadungug ku sa nutisya, I
couldn’t help exclaiming at hearing the news.

Hisusmaryusip (from Hisus, Maríya i Husip) n rather strong interjection
expressing fright or discomfiture. Hisusmaryusip! Nakuyawan ku nímu,
Jesus Christ! You scared me. Hisusmaryusip! Makauúlaw, Jesus Christ!
How embarrassing!

hiswíta, hiswítas n Jesuit. v [B16] be a Jesuit.

hit n hit, a popular or obvious success. v [B26] be, become a hit.
Sigurádung muhit basta pilikulang law-ay, It is sure to become a hit if
it’s a dirty picture. sung- n {1} popular tune at a certain period. Ang
Munlayit Sirinid sunghit sa panahun sa gíra, ‘Moonlight Serenade’ was
popular during the war. {2} pamphlet in which the hit tunes are
printed. Kuháa ang sunghit kay manganta ta, Get the song book so we can
sing. v [B1256] be, become a hit tune.

hitabù see tábù.

hítad = huyátid.

hítak v {1} [A13] for s.t. to present in greater amounts than usual.
Naghítak ang kwarta sa súgal, There’s lots of money around at the
gambling game. {2} [B; b6] become a mire, for a place to turn to mud.
Muhítak (mahítak) ning dapíta ug dì bunbúnan ug balas, This place will
become a mire if you don’t put sand over it. a be a mire. Hítak kaáyu
ning ubus sa panghugasan, The ground beneath the sink is all mud.†

hital v [B] for a child to have constant indigestion. Ang bátang
taudtaud káun mahital, A child that doesn’t eat on a regular basis
develops digestive disorders. a having constant diarrhea and a
distended stomach.

hit-anmis a done in a hit and miss way.

hit-anran n {1} hit-and-run. {2} hit-and-run tactics in boxing.

hiting a full to the point that pressure is being exerted. v [BN] be,
become swollen with fullness. Nanghiting ang íyang tútuy kay mabdus,
Her breasts were full because she was pregnant. (←) a extremely full.
v [B2N] become extremely full. Naghíting ákung tiyan sa kabusug, My
stomach is filled to bursting. hitinghiting = hiting.

hitsas = hitsu.

hitsu a {1} complete, having all parts intact. Dílì bitsu ning baráha,
This is not a complete deck of cards. Hitsu nag ngípun ang bátà, The
baby has all its teeth now. {2} having been fully furnished. Hitsu
kaáyu ang ílang balay sa mga galamitun, Their house is fully furnished
with utensils. Hitsu siya sa íyang libru, He has been furnished with
all his books. — diritsu a manner of ordering clothes from the tailor
whereby the tailor supplies the cloth and the labor. Ang lukat sa tirnu
nuybinta písus hitsu diritsu, The suit will cost ninety pesos, cloth
included. kuntra — a for a body or structure to be ill-proportioned.
Kuntra hitsu siya kay tambuk unyà gamayg batíis, She is
ill-proportioned; she is fat but has thin legs. v [A13; a] complete a
set, furnish complete. Kaanúgung giíhaw wà pa gánì mahitsu ang balhíbu,
What a pity to kill it before it even grows big enough to have all its
feathers. kahitsúhan, kahitsuan n complete set of equipment for some
occupation.†

hitsúra n {1} appearance of the face. Paríha mu si Túnig hitsúra, You
and Tony have the same facial appearance. Nagmug-ut íyang hitsúra kay
walà siya kabahini, He has a sulking expression because he hasn’t
gotten his share. {2} shape, form that presents itself to the eyes. Ang
ubud paríha ug hitsúra sa sawa, The eel has the same shape as a snake.
{2a} walay — having come out without any recognizable shape. Way
hitsúrang pagkatupíha, Haircut without shape. {3} may, (walay) —
good-looking (ugly). {4} the nerve! short form: tsura. Ag hitsúra sa
minì nga musulti nákù sa ingun! The nerve of the fool to say that to
me! v {1} [A12] have the face of. Ug aku pay nakahitsúra ánang ímung
kagwápu, If I had a handsome face like yours. {2} [a12] take shape.
Nahitsúra na ang balay kay may atup ug bungbung na, The house has taken
shape because it has a roof and walls. Hitsuráun nákù ang pul-an mu rag
úlug sawa, I will shape the handle into the form of a snake’s head.
{2a} dílì, walà ma-, mag- become irrecognizable. Nabuthan siya sa
dinamíta ug ang láwas walà mahitsúra, The dynamite exploded on him, and
the body became unrecognizable. {3} [a3] be realized as a result of
effort. Walay ági nga mahitsúra áning paagíha, You’re not going to
realize any output in this way. hitsuráan, hitsuráhan a handsome,
good-looking person. v [B12] be, become good-looking.

hitudhítud v [B6N] be full and move because of fullness. Nanghitudhítud
ang úlud sa katambuk, The worm is fat and wriggly with fullness.

híwà v {1} [A; a2] cut s.t. into smaller pieces or slices. Hiwáa ang
karni sa gibag-un ingun ug tudlù, Cut the meat up into slices as thick
as a finger. Hiwáa ang úbud ug gagmay, Cut up the bamboo shoots in
little pieces. {2} [a12] for the emotions to be deeply affected. Gihíwà
ákung kasingkásing nga nagtan-aw sa makililímus, It moved my heart to
look at the beggar. n slice, piece cut off of s.t. -ánan n cutting
board. -in- n cut up.

híwal = hiwalhíwal. hiwalhíwal v [A; c1] writhe, wriggle. Naghiwalhíwal
ang úlud, The worm is wriggling.

hiwasa, hiwasà = aliwása.

hiwátid = huyátid.

hiwaus = higwaus.

hiwì a {1} crooked, winding or twisting, slanting to one side or askew.
Hiwing dálan, Crooked road. Hiwì pagkabutang ímung kálù, Your hat is on
crooked. Hiwì kaáyu ang tinidur sa bisiklíta, The bicycle fork is badly
bent. {2} crooked, dishonest. Ang paági sa pagsubasta hiwì kaáyu, The
procedure of the bidding was very irregular. {3} deformed. Hiwì siyag
nawung, He has a deformed face. v [B126] turn out crooked. Ug mahiwì
ang linya, ipausab, If the line comes out crooked, redo it. (←)
v {1} [A1B; a12] become crooked, make s.t. crooked. Ayaw ug hiwía ang
láray sa síya, Don’t put the chairs in a crooked row. {2} [b6] make a
face at s.o. paN-(←) v [A2] make a face at s.o. Nanghíwì siya nákù kay
wà siya tagái nákù ug mansánas, He made a face at me because I did not
give him an apple. ka-an(←) n misdeed. Ang kahiwían sa mga pulitiku,
The misdeeds of the politicians.

híwid = huyátid.

hiyá getty-up, word used to prod a horse to start running or to run
faster. (←) v [A; b(1)] do all at once, at the same time. Naghíyag
pamumba sa syudad ang mga bámir, The bombers bombed the city all at the
same time. Gihiyáan kug bíyà sa ákung tanang binatunan, All my servants
quit at one time.†

híyà see hiyà.

hiyak v {1} [B246] for a surface to get a chasm or trough formed in it.
Mihíyak ang yútà paglínug, The earth opened up into a chasm in the
earthquake. Nabundak ang sakayan dihang mihíyak ang dágat paglabay sa
dakung balud, The boat lurched downwards in the wake of the huge wave.
{2} [A2; c1] pull in the stomach. Hiyáka (ihíyak) ang ímung tiyan arun
masirhan ímung sípir, Pull in your stomach so we can close the zipper.
{3} [B246] feel a hollow sensation in the pit of the stomach. Mihíyak
ang tiyan ku pagdulhug sa ilibítur, I got a hollow feeling in the pit
of my stomach when the elevator went down.

híyas n good qualities, virtues not inherent in s.t. Mga híyas nga
pagabatunan sa usa ka pangúlu, Qualities that a leader must possess.
pa- n s.t. used to make a woman beautiful. v [A; c] use jewelry or
make-up. Nagpahíyas siyag aríyus, She wore earrings as jewelry. Ipalit
na lag bugas ang ímung ipahíyas, Why don’t you buy rice with what you
spend on personal adornments?

hiyawasa = aliwasa.

Hiyúba n Jehovah. Saksi ni — n Jehovah’s Witness.

híyud_1 v [A; a12] {1} squeeze s.t. soft to make s.t. come out of it.
Hiyúra ug maáyu ang hubag arun muguwà ang tanang nánà, Squeeze the boil
so all the pus comes out. Sudlig túbig ang tináig hiyúra, Run water
into the intestines and squeeze them (to clean them). {2} squeeze s.t.
that is long with the fingers to straighten it out. Hiyúrun ku ang
alambri arun mutánus, I will squeeze the wire with my fingers to
straighten it out.

híyud_2 v [B] get curled up from dampness, heat. Nahíyud ang tabla nga
nainitan, The lumber curled because it was left in the sun. {2} =
hiyudhíyud. hiyudhíyud v [A13; b6] undulate, wiggle about with an
undulating motion. Naghiyudhíyud ang kílid sa tulda nga gidasmagan sa
huyúhuy, The wall of the tarpaulin tent undulated as it was blown by
the breeze. n undulation.

híyum v [A; c1] press the lips tight. Inay mutíngug mihíyum na hinúun
sa bàbà, Instead of talking she pressed her lips tight. hiyumhiyum =
kipìkipì. see kípì. pa-, pa-(→) v [A; c] smile. Mipahiyum kanímu ang
kapaláran, Lady Luck smiled on you. Pahyúmi ang bátà, Smile at the
child. n smile. mapa-un a smiling.

híyung v [B; b6c1] for the eyes to squint, close, particularly to see
s.t. better. Mihíyung ang mata ni Imuy nga mitútuk kanákù, Emoy
squinted as he looked at me. (→) a slit-eyed, having a piece of
epidermis over the eyes so that they look very narrow. -un a somewhat
squint-eyed. hiyunghiyung, hiyunghíyung = kipìkipì. see kípì.

híyus v {1} [A; b4] for air to leak out. Dì makahíyus ang hángin kay
maáyug balbula, The air can’t escape because it has a good valve.
Nahyúsan mi, We had a flat tire. {2} [B; b7P] become deflated, decrease
in size like s.t. deflated. Nahiyus ang pabúrut, The air came out of
the balloon. Nagkahiyus ang hubag, The boil is subsiding. Pahyúsi
(hyúsi) nang háwak mu, Take s.t. off your waist. {3} [B2] become
decreased in amount. Bag-u pa gánì kung nagpalit ug usa ka bákid bugas
nahíyus lang dáyun, I bought a cavan of rice only recently and how
quickly it was consumed. Nagkahiyus na ang bahà, The flood is going
down now. {3a} [B2; b7] for the amount of food in the stomach to
decrease through digestive action. Wà pa gánì mahíyus ang paniudtu,
paínit na pud, Before we’ve even digested our lunch, they serve tea.
a broke, without money. (→) a {1} leaky, letting air or gas out. Hiyus
ang búla, Leaky ball. {2} s.t. from which some or all gas has come out.
Hiyus ang ligid, One of your tires is soft.

hiyut = húsud.

hmm_1 n onomatopoetic representation for humming.

hmm_2, hmp expression of annoyance, anger, disregard. Hmp, ábi níya
mukupus ku, Humph, he thought I would back down. Hmp, tsúra níya,
Humph, the nerve of him.

hú n {1} whoa, a command for a horse to stop (pronounced with a long,
low tone). {2} hey, a call to get attention from way in a distance
(pronounced with a high pitch). {3} shout uttered when one is called to
acknowledge that he has heard the call.

húbad v {1} = hulbad. {1} a [A2; a12] break out of a hold in wrestling
or judo. Way makahúbad ning gwarníha, No one can break out of this
lock. {2} [A; c1] translate into another language. Ihúbad (hubárun)
nátù sa Ininglis ang Binisayà, Let’s translate the Visayan into
English. — ug damgu interpret dreams. {3} [A; a12] solve a problem.
Lisud hubárun ning gumunhápa, This is a difficult problem to solve.
n {1} move to free oneself from a lock in wrestling. {2} translation.
hubadhúbad v [A13; a3] justify to oneself why things are as they are.
Naghubadhúbad siya sa íyang kaugalíngun nga hustu, bisag gipakasayup sa
uban, He justified to himself that it was proper, even if others
misunderstood. mag-r-(→) n translator, language interpreter. tag-(→)
n translator of some specific piece.

hubag n {1} boil. Hápit na mubutu ang hubag, The boil is about to come
to a head. {2} any swelling, usually reddish, on and beneath the skin.
Daghag hubag ang náwung sa pinaakan, He has swellings all over the face
where he was bitten. {3} magical expression uttered repeatedly by an
unglù that has gotten injured as he immerses himself in a river in
order to get cured instantly. v {1} [b4] get a boil. Gihubagan siya sa
lubut, He has a boil on his buttocks. {2} [B3(1)46] swell. Mihubag ang
ági sa íyang indyiksyun, The region on his arm which was injected
swelled. Naghubag ang íyang mata sa paghinílak, Her eyes are swollen
from constant crying. — sa bábuy = dáti. (←) n newly harvested grains
which haven’t been dried. Dì magaling ang húbag nga mais kay mapusà
lang, Fresh corn kernels cannot be milled because they will just get
squeezed. see also kulub. †

húbak n asthma. v [B46; a4] have an asthma attack. Muhúbak (hubákun) nà
siya basta mahágù, He has an asthma attack when he gets overworked.
Naghúbak nang batáa tibuuk gabíi, That child had an asthma attack the
whole night. -un a having asthma.

hubas v [B23(1); a] {1} dry up or drain liquids out. Mihubas na ang
linung-ag, The rice water has evaporated. Nahubas ang sapà, The creek
dried up. Hubsun nímu ang ákung lúhà, You’ll make me cry till I run out
of tears. Nahubsan mi. Wà nay túbig ang tangki, We ran out of water and
the tank is empty. {1a} maka- ug danaw having big feet (lit. that can
dry up a pond by stepping into it). {2} for patience, luck to run out.
Nagkahubas ang ákung paílub, My patience is wearing thin. Nahubsan ku
sa pálad, My luck ran out. pa- n method of catching fish by setting a
trap in a place where water runs out, either in a tidal pool or in a
stream where the flow is diverted. v {1} [A13; b(1)] catch fish by this
method. {2} [A; a12] take care of rice, corn grits until they get
cooked dry. Ikay pahubas sa linung-ag, Take care of (lit. let dry) the
rice I am cooking.

hubaw = hubawhubaw. hubawhubaw v [B46N; b4] for a part of the body to
swell so that the flesh is soft and pudgy. Mihubawhubaw
(gihubawhubawan) ang íyang mga mata ug hinílak, Her eyes swelled from
crying. Naghubawhubaw ang íyang bitíis tungud sa biribíri, Her legs got
swollen due to beri-beri. a swollen, such that the flesh is soft.

hubhub v [A; b5] devour food greedily. Gihubhub (gihubhuban) sa mga irù
ang manuk, The dogs tore and devoured the chicken.

húbit v [A; a] describe in words. Ákung hubítun ang nahitabù, I’ll
describe what happened. n description.

hubkas n celebration offered by a family on the first anniversary of a
relative’s death. v [A1; b(1)] {1} observe the first anniversary of
s.o.’s death. Unyà ra ta magminyù ug kahubkásan ang ákung bána, We’ll
wait to get married until my husband has been dead a year (has had the
first death anniversary celebration). {2} come out of one year’s
mourning.

hublag v [B46; b(1)] {1} for a crowd to do one thing together with
vigor. Mihublag ug pangatáwa ang mga tumatan-aw, The onlookers all
broke into laughter. Gihublagan ug pangáun sa mga bátà ang kík, The
children swarmed over the cake. {2} for crowds to run in every
direction. Mihublag (nanghublag) ang mga táwu sa singgit nga ‘kaláyu!’,
The people ran in every direction at the shout of ‘fire!’.

hublut = hulbut.

húbù v {1} [A; a2] take off s.t. one wears. Hubúa ang ímung sapátus,
Take off your shoes. Gihubúan níla ang bag-ung pyánu sa íyang tabun,
They took the cover off of the new piano. {2} [A13; b] — sa
katungdánan, sutána resign from one’s duties, be relieved of duties.
Maghúbù siya sa íyang sutána únà magminyù, He will resign from his
priestly duties before he marries. Gihubúan siya sa íyang katungdánan,
He was relieved of his duties. — sa Santu Ninyu n the Friday following
the feast of the Holy Child (held on a Sunday) during which the
elaborate attire of the image is changed. pa- n the dress that a bride
wears after taking off her wedding dress. (→) a {1} bare, naked. Hubung
láwas, A naked body. {2} devoid or wanting in. Hubù sa mga mwiblis,
Bare of furniture. Hubù sa pagláum, Devoid of hope. {3} simple, plain.
Dì siya musúruy tungud sa hubù nga katarúngan nga wà siyay kwarta, He
won’t go out for the simple reason that he has no money. hubùhúbù
n showing off nakedness. Salídang hubùhúbù, Film full of nude scenes.
v [A3; c1] show off nakedness. -in-an(→) n clothes that are too soiled
to wear. Ihayhay ang ímung mga hinubuan arun mamala ang singut, Hang
your soiled clothes up so that the perspiration will dry out. ka-(→)
n barrenness, being unadorned. Ang kahubù sa kinaiyáhan, Unadorned
nature.

hubug a drunk, intoxicated. Hubug kaáyu ang táwu kay nagsusapinday na,
The man must be very drunk. He is staggering. Hubug sa kalípay,
Intoxicated with happiness. Hubug sa báhù, Whoozy from the stench.
v {1} [A3P; a] make drunk. Hubgun ku si Pípi, I’ll get Pepe drunk.
{1a} [A13] make oneself drunk. Maghubug ku arun malímut, I will get
drunk in order to forget. {2} [B126] be groggy from some outside cause.
Nahubug ang buksidur sa nagpungasing kúmù sa kuntra, The boxer became
groggy from the blows his opponent rained on him. Ang anghit nímu
makahubug, Your stench can make one pass out. {3} [A23PB126; a1] excite
greatly, overcome with powerful emotion. Nahubug siya sa gahum nga
gisángun kaníya, He was intoxicated by the power entrusted to him.
Hubgun ku ang babáyi sa mga pasálig, I’ll intoxicate the girl with
promises. (←) [C2] engage in drunken revelry. Maghúbug sila kay
nakadawat ug bakpi, They will go on a spree because they received their
back pay. hubgánun a easily getting intoxicated with liquor, smoke,
nauseating odors. Dílì ku makasustinir ug panabákù kay hubgánun kaáyu
ku, I can not stand smoking because I easily get intoxicated by the
smoke. hubughúbug v [A13] get drunk habitually. Dílì ka maghubughúbug
samtang mag-iskuyla ka, You should not drink while you are attending
school. -in- v [A1; b(1)] act or do s.t. as a drunk would. pala-(→)
n drunkard.

hubun n fontanel, the soft, boneless areas in the skull of a baby or
young animal which are later closed by the formation of bone.
hubunhubun = hubun.

hubung v {1} [A; b6] hide, keep out of sight. Mihubung ang adlaw luyu
sa búkid, The sun hid behind the mountain. Lasang nga ámung gihubngan,
The jungle we hid in. {1a} for s.t. different to lurk behind what
appears. Ang íyang pahiyum gihubngan sa pagdumut, Hatred lurked behind
his smile. {2} [A] for the one who is ‘it’ in hide-and-seek to cover
his face. Samtang maghubung ka, ayaw ug lìlì, When you cover your face,
don’t peek. n turn to hide one’s face in hide-and-seek. pa- v [A; c]
put s.t. out of sight. pina- n weapon hidden for emergency purposes.

húbung a full and plump. Húbung ning mga síku, These sapodillas are
nice and plump. v [B2] full and rounded. Magkahúbung ang láwas sa
babáying maghinága, The body of a girl becomes full and rounded as she
approaches adolescence.

húbut {1} = hulbut. {2} = bulhut, 1, 2, 3.

húbuy v [A2S; b6(1)] swell from a bruise. Mihúbuy ang agtang níyang
napangkà, His forehead bumped against s.t. and swelled. hubuyhubuy
a very plump and soft to the touch. v [B; b6] be, become soft to the
touch. Ug maghubuyhubuy na gánì ang hubag hápit na nà mubutu, When a
boil gets soft and tender, it is about to erupt. Naghubuyhubuy na ang
tsíkus sa kahinug, The sapodillas are soft from ripeness.

hubyà a lazy (dialectal).

hubyas n k.o. boat hollowed from a single log.

húd = hulud.

húdas n Judas Iscariot or St. Jude Thaddeus. a betrayer.

hudhud v [A; c] scrape off, chip, uproot s.t. shallow by pushing it
with a knife or some instrument. Naghudhud siya sa káhuy pára sungsung,
He’s whittling a piece of wood with a chisel to make a stopper. Hudhúra
ang mga sagbut sa daplin sa dálan, Scrape out the weeds growing at the
edges of the road. {2} [A; c] bury in a shallow way. Gihudhud lang ang
gibunù, They just put the murder victim in a shallow grave. {3} [a12]
catch with a hudhud net. n {1} instrument for scraping, chipping.
{2} k.o. dip net used in shallow waters for catching small fish and
crustaceans. paN- v [A2; b6] catch with a hudhud net. n fishing with a
hudhud.

hudir v [A; a1] {1} bother, disturb the peace. Ang inyung áway
nakahudir sa mga silíngan, Your quarrel has disturbed the neighbors.
Gihudir ang mamumúnù sa íyang kunsyinsiya, The murderer was bothered by
his conscience. {2} make s.o. suffer discomfort or misery. Ang ímung
bisyu mauy maghudir nímu, Your vices will make you miserable. Gihurut
níyag káun ang sud-an. Akuy nahudir ug sulag asin, She ate all the
food. All I had left to eat was rice and salt.

Hudíya n Judea.

hudiyákà n noisy merriment, a rejoicing. Ang Pasku punù sa hudiyákà,
Christmas is full of noisy merriment. v [A12C2; c5] rejoice, make
merry. Gihudiyákà níla ang nahitabù, They were noisily merry over what
had happened. ma-un a full of noise and merriment.

hudíyu n {1} Jew. {2} s.o. regarded as evil, cruel. Hudíyu kaáyu nang
tawhána. Wà giyuy kalúuy, That man is a demon. He has no mercy. Ikawng
hudiyúa ka, ay na giyug bálik diri, You s.o.b.! Don’t you ever come
back here!

hudlat n idle threat made to frighten s.o., but which one has no
intention of carrying out. Dì lang ni hudlat. Tinud-un giyud, This is
no mere threat. I mean to do it. v [AN; a1] frighten with an idle
threat. Hudlátun níla ang isdà paingun sa báling, They are frightening
the fish into going to the net.

hudnu v [A; c] {1} put into the oven to cook. Naghudnu siya sa kík, She
is baking the cake. {2} dry coconut meat in a wood-fired drier.
Hudnúhun (ihudnu) lang ang lubi ug tingúlan, We simply dry coconut meat
in the drier during the rainy season. n {1} oven. {2} coconut drier
made of bamboo flooring under which there is a pit where fire is kept
going. hudnuhan = hudnu, n. paN- n baking.

húg = hulug. see húlug.

hū́g = húlug.

húgà = hulgà.

hugádu a for machine and structure parts to fit too loosely. Hungaw ang
tangki kay ang balbula hugádu, The tank is leaky because the valve is
loose. v [B12] be, become loose.

hugadur a a habitual gambler. v [B12; b6] be, become a gambler.

hugalbù n {1} loud popping, plopping sound. Ang hugalbù sa pag-ibut sa
bakíta sa luthang, The popping sound when you pull the plunger.
{2} swampy place, mire. v {1} [A; c1] make a hollow, plopping sound.
Maghugalbù ang túbig nga mag-ambak, Water dropping from a height
produces a loud plopping sound. {2} [B2; b6] fall with a plop.
Naghugalbù ku sa bínug, I fell into the mire.

hugalbung n heavy pounding or thumping sound. Ang hugalbung sa bawud,
The pounding sound of the waves. v [A] make a heavy pounding or
thumping sound. Mihugalbung ang usa ka búlig lubi nga nahū́g, The bunch
of coconuts fell and hit the ground with a loud thumping sound. -in-
n continuous or off-and-on pounding or thumping sound.

hugalbut v [A] make a popping or plopping sound. Mihugalbut ang luthang
dihang gikalit ug hulbut ang bakíta, The popgun popped when the plunger
was suddenly pulled out. Naghugalbut ang íyang sapátus sa lápuk, His
shoes went plop plop in the mud.

hugangkul v [A] {1} clank, clatter. Mihugangkul ang kaldíru nga nalígid
sa hagdanan, The pot clattered as it rolled down the stairs. {2} land
in jail. Mihugangkul siya sa prisuhan kay nangáwat man, He landed in
jail because he stole.

hugan-ub = lugan-ub.

hugar_1 v {1} [A12] get the chance to do mischief by being momentarily
free from s.o.’s watchful eyes. Nakahugar mi sa balay kay wà ang íyang
ginikánan, We had a chance to do mischief because her parents were
gone. {2} [A] impose one’s wishes on s.o. Ngánung maghugar ka sa ákung
kaugalíngun? Why do you tell me what to do in my own house?

hugar_2 n k.o. institution during pre-war times that gave out mortgages
on real estate. Naimbargu sa hugar ang ílang balay, The bank foreclosed
the mortgage on their house. v [c] be mortgaged to the hugar. Ihugar
nátù ning átung yútà pára ipuhúnan, We’ll mortgage our land to the
hugar to get capital.

húgas v {1} [b6(1)] wash anything but clothes. Hugási ang prútas únà
kan-a, Wash the fruit before you eat it. {2} [A; b6(1)] make clean in a
religious or moral sense, purify. Hugási ang ímung kangil-ad pinaági sa
pagbag-u, Cleanse yourself of your immoral deeds by reforming. {3} [A;
a] exterminate, rid a place of s.t. Wà mahúgas ni Hitlir ang mga
Hudíyu, Hitler did not succeed in exterminating the Jews. (→) n s.t.
used to clean, esp. the swab for cleaning palm toddy dregs out of the
tube in which it had been gathered. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] wash oneself.
-in- n dishwater. -un(→) n dishes to be washed. -an(→) n {1} place for
washing. {2} = hugasun. paN-an(→) = hugasan, n 1.

húgaw a {1} dirty, unclean. Húgaw na ang íyang sinínà, His shirt is
soiled. Húgaw kaáyu nang kan-anána, That eatery is terribly unclean.
{2} dirty, of questionable morality. Ayg panarátu ánang bayhána kay
húgaw nà, Don’t court that girl. She is of questionable morals. Húgaw
kaáyu ang kagamhánan, We have a corrupt government. Húgaw kaáyu muáway
tung baksíra, That boxer fights dirty. {2a} — ug batásan having bad
traits, ugly ways of conducting oneself. Húgawg batásan kay isipan, He
has a bad character because he counts favors he did for people. v [AP;
b] {1} soil, make s.t. dirty. Ayaw hugáwi ang ákung ngálan, Do not
besmirch my name. {1a} [A; a] do s.t. in a dirty way. Ayaw hugáwa ang
inyung pagdúlà, Don’t play dirty. {2} [A13] make oneself ridiculous by
doing s.t. one is not capable of accomplishing. Naghúgaw kag aswat
ánang batu, mu ra kag kusgan, You are making yourself ridiculous
lifting that stone as if you were strong. n {1} dirt. {2} — sa laláki
semen (euphemism). {3} waste matter. Ang húgaw ánang pabrikáha anhà ra
áwas sa subà, The waste products from that factory go into the river.
Bátang nagdúlà sa kaugalíngun níyang húgaw, A child playing with his
own feces. -an(→) a given to dirty habits. v [B12] be, become given to
dirty habits. ma- = húgaw, a. ka- n {1} dirtiness. {2} corruptness.
hugawhugaw v [A13] 1 dirty oneself up. Ngánung naghugawhugaw man ka
dihà sa yánang? Why are you dirtying yourself in the mire? {2} = húgaw,
v 2.

hugay n device consisting of strings to which noisemakers are hung to
scare away birds that feed on rice. v [A; b] put up such a device.

hugáyaw = hugyaw.

hughug = halughug_1.

hugità v [B6; a12] for corn grits that are supposed to be cooked dry to
come out wet and unevenly cooked. Maghugità ang kan-un ug dílì nímu
sugkáyun, Corn grits will not cook evenly if you don’t keep stirring
them. a corn grits that are wet and unevenly cooked.

hugkal (from hukal) v [B2; b6] {1} for s.t. that is spread over a
surface and stuck to it to loosen. Mihugkal na ang kupras, The coconut
meat is loose in the shell now. Nagkahugkal na ang manikiyur sa ákung
mga kuku, My nail polish is getting loose. {2} for a cough to loosen.
Tambal nga nakahugkal (nakapahugkal) sa ákung ubu, Medicine that
loosened my cough.

hugkas = hubkas.

hugkat (from lúkat) v [A; a1b2] dig up s.t. out from under s.t. else.
Daghang nahugkatan (hihugkatan) nílang mga karáang kabtángan sa Maktan,
They have unearthed lots of old treasures on Mactan. {2} dig out to
find s.t. not known. Ímu pa bang hugkátun ang nangági? Do you still
have to dig to find out about what has long since been water over the
dam?

hugmad v [A; c1] clean rice and let it dry part way before storing it.
-in- n rice cleaned and half-dried, ready for storing.

hugnà n one of a series of events or subdivisions in a sporting event.
Únang hugnà sa lumbà sa bisiklíta, The first lap of the bicycle race.
Ang únang hugnà sa íyang pánaw, The first leg of his trip. Ang
ikaduhang hugnà sa súlung, The second phase of the assault. hugnàhugnà
v {1} [A1; a2] do s.t. by laps, installments. Hugnàhugnáun nátug túkud
ang taytáyan, Let’s construct the bridge in phases. {2} [A13; b(1)]
make repeated attempts. Gihugnàhugnáan na nákung iprinda ning
singsínga, I’ve made repeated attempts to pawn this ring (without much
success). {3} [B13] for rain to fall heavily at short intervals. Ayaw
na lang panghayhay kay naghugnàhugnà ang ulan, Don’t hang out the wash
because it is showering. n s.t. that comes at intervals, e.g., rain
showers.

hugnù v [A3PB12; a1] for structures to collapse, cause them to do so.
Mahugnù ang taytáyan ug mabug-atan, The bridge will collapse if too
heavy a weight passes over it. Nagkahugnù na ang balayng karáan, The
house is about to collapse because it is so old. {1a} for a person to
collapse. Nahugnù siya pagkadungug sa balità, She collapsed when she
heard the news. {1b} for hopes, peace, life to collapse. Nahugnù ang
ílang kalípay pagkamatay sa bátà, When their child died, their
happiness was destroyed. Hugnúun ku ang íyang pagláum sa ákung balíbad,
I’ll refuse him and destroy his hopes. Nahugnù ang kagamhánan tungud sa
mga kumunista, The government was toppled because of the communists.
{3} [AP; bc1] harvest coconuts. Maghugnù (magpahugnù) mi sa lubi káda
trimistri, We harvest the coconuts every four months. n yield of
coconuts. Dyis míl ang hugnù sa kalubinhan, The coconut plantation has
a yield of ten thousand nuts.

hugpà v {1} [A; b6] alight in a swarm. Mihugpà ang dúlun sa maisan, The
locusts alighted on the cornfield in a swarm. {2} [A; b(1)] descend on
s.t. like a swarm. Mihugpà ang kangitngit, Darkness settled over the
area. Gihugpáan sa gútum ang tibuuk prubinsiya, Famine descended on the
province.

hugpit v [A; a] extract s.t. by picking it off with the tip of the
fingers. Hugpítig madyung ang ímung sinínà, Pick the sand-spurs from
your dress.

hugpung v {1} [A; a6] take long things in the two hands and bunch them
together. Hugpúnga ang ímung buhuk, Tie your hair into a bunch.
{1a} [A; c1] do s.t. by the whole bunch. Hugpúngun (ihugpung) pagtanyag
ang tulu ka mátang sa tablíta, The three kinds of tablets are offered
as a group. {2} [A12C; c16] unite together in a group. Hugpúngun
(ihugpung) nátù ang mga mamumuu, Let’s organize the laborers into a
union. n {1} bunch, a number of long things of the same kind tied in a
bunch. Usa ka hugpung nga sibúyas, A bunch of green onions. {2} a group
of people having a common purpose or interest. Hugpung nga
pulitikanhun, A political faction. ka-an n group of people having s.t.
in common.

hugpuy a having a downcast, depressed look from a feeling of
disappointment, guilt, or humility. Hugpuy kaáyu siyang midúul sa íyang
amahan kay may salà man, She came to her father with her head bowed,
because she had done him wrong. v [B; b6] for the face to assume such a
look.

hugsaw a {1} mischievous, moving about all the time. Hugsaw nga
pagkabátà, gitágù níya ang antiyúhus sa íyang lúlu, He is a mischievous
child. He hid his grandfather’s eyeglasses. Ang hugsaw nga bátà dì
mahimutang, A restless child will not sit still. v [B; b1] be
mischievous, moving about all the time.

hugù a frail, emaciated. Hugù kaáyug láwas ning batáa kay walay maáyung
káun, This child has a very frail body because it doesn’t get good
food. v [B24; b3] lose weight, become thin, esp. due to sickness.
Mihugù si Bin gíkang nauspital, Ben had lost weight considerably when
he returned home from the hospital.

hugung v [A3P] get away in great speed. Mihugung (mipahugung) ug dágan
ang mangunguut, The pickpocket ran away at top speed.

húgung v [A2S3] produce a steady humming sound. Unsa rung naghugung sa
radiyu? What’s that humming sound in the radio? hugunghúgung n a
humming device installed on the top part of a kite, shaped like a small
bow and strung with a strip of dry buri leaf, which is raised and hums
in the onrush of wind.

hugunhúgun n talk about doing s.t., speculation or plans. Adúnay
hugunhúgun nga dismisun ang ílang kásu, There is talk that their case
will be dismissed. v [b15] for there to be talk about s.t.
Gihugunhugúnan (gihugunhúgun) nga sugdan na gayud ang taytáyan, There
is talk that at last they will begin work on the bridge.

hugup, húgup v [A; b(1)] go s.w. in a large group, throng s.w. Mihúgup
ang mga táwu sa artista, The people all thronged around the actress.
(←) v [A13] be united in a desire. Naghúgup sila pagpalagput sa ílang
kapitan dil baryu, They were unanimous in their call to dismiss the
barrio captain.

húgus v [A; a1] {1} raise or lower s.t. with a string or rope over a
stick or pulley. Siyay mihúgus sa bandíra, He raised the flag. {2} pull
pursing strings. Hugúsa ang písì pagsira sa bág, Pull the purse strings
to close the bag. n {1} action of raising or lowering s.t. carefully or
on ropes. {2} name given to the súgat ceremony of Easter Sunday, so
called because at the point that Christ and the Holy Mother meet,
angels (alilúya) are lowered. {3} the name given to the procession in
the evening of Good Friday which represents the carrying of the body of
Christ to the grave. (→) n string used for raising or moving s.t. Hugus
sa tilun, The curtain string. hugushúgus n s.t. manipulated by pulleys
or drawstrings.

hugut a {1} firmly tied, attached, closed. Hugut kaáyu nga pagkasira sa
garapun, The jar lid is closed very tight. Hugut níya ang sinínà, Her
dress is tight on her. {2} taut, holding tight. Ang kwirdas sa sista
hugut kaáyu, The guitar strings are very taut. Hugut nga ginaksan, A
firm embrace. Hugut ang íyang impluwinsiya sa gubirnadur, He has a
strong influence on the governor. {3} firm in belief, purpose, feeling.
Hugut ákung pagtúu, I am of the firm belief... Hugut íyang pagsúpak,
She was strongly opposed. Hugut kaáyu ang ílang paghinigugmaay, They
love each other very deeply. {3a} — ang puása for there to be intense
fasting. {4} be in a tight situation financially. Hugut ang íyang
kahimtang kay way trabáhu, He’s in a tight situation because he lost
his job. {5} for the voice to be strained in trying to reach a high
note. Ug muhugut ang batingting, mangugat ang magkanta, If the singer
strains to reach a high note, his veins stand out prominently.
v {1} [AB; b5] become tight, firm, taut; cause s.t. to be so. Mihugut
ang íyang apapángig kay nasukù, His jaws tightened in fury. Luktan ang
tiil sa bábuy ug muhugut ang hukut, The pig’s feet will have rope marks
if the tether rope is too tight. Átung hugtun (hugtan) ang sira sa
butilya, Let’s tighten the bottle cap. {2} [B2C; b8] be intent on,
sincere about doing s.t., become sincere. Mihugut siya pag-ampù, He
prayed intensely. Naghúgut sila paghinigugmaay, They were deeply in
love with each other. Hugti (hugta) pagdisiplína ang ímung anak, Keep
your child under tight discipline. {3} [B; b6] for one’s financial
situation to become tight. {4} — ang, sa bakus {a} [A1C12; b5c1]
sacrifice in a difficult financial situation (lit. tighten the belt).
Hugti (hugta, ihugut) inyung bakus kay dì ku kasúd ug trabáhu, You’ll
have to make sacrifices because I cannot find a job. {b} [b(1)]
intensify a drive against s.o. Gihugtan na sa bakus sa písi ang mga
ismaglir, The P.C. is now intensifying their drive against smugglers.
{c} [a12] resolve firmly. Hugta ang ímung bakus ug mangasáwa ka ba,
Resolve firmly to do it if you get married.

húgut v [A; a] {1} pull in rope or the like. Kinsay naghúgut sa pasul
nga ákung gituntun? Who pulled in the fishing line that I lowered? Ayaw
hugúta ang lagdà sa sinínà, Do not pull out the temporary stitches in
the dress. {2} pick nits from a strand of hair. Hugúta ang mga lusà
arun dì makapanguyamad, Remove the nits so they won’t hatch.

húguy = huguyhúguy. huguyhúguy v [AC; c] pal around with s.o. in a
spirit of camaraderie, associate with s.o. for purposes of fun. Paúlì
dáyun. Ayawg huguyhúguy sa ímung kaúban, Come straight home. Don’t pal
around with your friends. Dì makighuguyhúguy sa íyang sákup, He won’t
pal around with his workers. n palling around, association for
pleasure.

hugyaw v [A; b3] for a crowd to roar in laughter, excitement, and the
like. Mihugyaw pagpangatáwa ang mga táwu, The people roared in
laughter. n roar from a crowd.

hugyun v [A; c1] do s.t. together in a group, en masse. Gihugyúnan aku
pagbíyà sa ákung mga sákup, All my employees walked out on me en masse.

huhungíhung = hulungíhung.

huhu n word used in writing to represent the sound of slightly nasal
laughter.

hùhù v [A; c] empty a container of its contents by turning it upside
down and agitating it. Hùhúag maáyu ang butilya arun muági ang kitsup,
Shake the bottle hard so the catsup will come out. Ihùhù ang sinapilya
didtu sa kanal, Empty the shavings into the ditch.

huk_1 n Huks, a dissident guerilla group or a member thereof. v [B16;
b6] be, become a Huk.

huk_2 n hook, a closing device on a garment. — an ay n hook and eye,
device to close a garment. v [c6] use a hook.

hukà_1 a loosely packed. v [B12; b6] for things of various sizes not to
be firmly packed. Ug mahukà ang ímung pagsulud sa kamúti gamay ray
masúd, If you pack the sweet potatoes loosely like that, you won’t get
many in.

hukà_2 v [A; a1] take, serve more food than can be consumed. Ayaw hukaa
ang sud-an arun dì mapan-us, Don’t serve more food than we can eat so
that it won’t spoil.

húkà v [B46; a4] have a vigorous coughing fit. Hukáun (maghúkà) ka sa
ubu ug magpatun-ug ka, You’ll have a coughing fit if you expose
yourself to the draft.

hukab v [A3P; a] open, remove a cover through forceful or nonhuman
action. Ang hángin ang mihukab sa íyang sayal, The wind raised her
skirt. Mahukab nang malíta ug ímung ibundak, That suitcase will burst
open if you throw it down. a open with the cover removed. Hukab na ang
kartun sa pag-abut niíni, The cardboard box was torn open when it
arrived. (←) v [B12; b6] for an opening to become big and wide. Nahúkab
ang íyang kílid nga natigbasan, S.o. hacked him in the side, and he had
a gaping hole in it.

hukabhukab v [A13] be stimulated in expectation of doing s.t.
Naghukabhukab ang ákung ginháwa nga nagtan-aw sa mga lamíang mga
pagkáun, My appetite was stimulated as I looked at all the appetizing
foods.

hukad, húkad v [A; a] {1} take s.t. out of a container by lifting it
out. Akuy muhúkad íning mga butang sa íyang malíta, I’ll take the
things out of his suitcase. Hukára ang kan-un, Take the rice out of the
pot. {1a} gi-, -in- sa ginhawaan born of one’s own flesh, not adopted.
Kini ang ákung anak nga gihúkad sa ákung ginhawaan, This is my child,
born of my flesh and blood. {2} express emotions. Usa ka láwum nga
pangaghu ang íyang gihúkad gíkan sa íyang dughan, He let out a deep
sigh from inside his breast. {3} [A23; b6] give s.o. an occasion to do
s.t. Gihukáran siya sa babáyi sa lawasnung pangindáhay, The girl
offered him the opportunity to relieve his carnal desires. n {1} food
taken out of the pot. {2} — sa ginhawaan one’s own child.

hukahuk a greedy, having an intense desire to possess. Ang táwung
hukahuk gustung íya tanan, An avaricious person wants to have
everything. v [B12; b6] become greedy.

hukal v [APB3(1); c1] {1} for a cough to loosen, make it loose. Muhukal
ang ubu sa tambal, The cough will be eased by medicine. Kining tambála
muhukal sa ímung ubu, This medicine will loosen your cough. {2} = ukal.
n phlegm. a {1} for phlegm in a cough to be loose. {2} for two flat
surfaces to be adhering loosely.

húkas v {1} [A3P; a2] take clothing off of the top part of the body.
Hukása na nang púlu mu, Take off your shirt. {2} [A1; a] expose a
secret. Ang kaatbang níyang pulitiku ang mihúkas sa íyang kangil-ad,
His political opponent exposed his shady deals. {3} strip or deprive
s.o. of his position, duty, rights. Gihukásan siya sa íyang katungud
pagpakahilum, He was deprived of his right to remain silent. Gihukásan
siya sa íyang pagkaabugádu, He was debarred. hukashúkas v [A] keep
taking off clothes. n stripping scenes in a show.

hukaw = hukal, v1; n; a.

húkaw v [A3P; a1] awaken s.o. by disturbing his sleep. Mahúkaw ang bátà
ug maglangas ka, You’ll wake the child if you make noise.

hukbaláhap n the name of the Communist organization in the Philippines
and its members. v [B1256] be, become a hukbaláhap. ka-an n the
community of huks.

hukdung v [A; b6] rest one’s chin or forehead on s.t. usually in
meditation or grief. Mihukdung siya sa lamísa sa kakápuy, He rested his
head on the table because he was tired. Naghukdung siya sa bintánà, She
is resting her chin on the window sill. Gihukdungan níya ang lamísa sa
íyang pagtuun, She rested her chin on the table as she studied.

hukhuk_1 v {1} [A; b5] get money or valuables from s.o. for nothing in
return. Hukhukun (hukhukan) ta sa ímung mga paryinti, Your relatives
will just milk us dry. {2} [A; a] eat greedily (contemptuous or
humorous usage). Ikaw bay naghukhuk sa ákung kík? Did you eat my cake?
-íru v [B12; b6] be, become a milker of persons. -íra = hukhukíru
(female).

hukhuk_2 = halukhuk_1, 2.

hukhuk_3 n k.o. nutmeg shell.

hukihuk n k.o. fish very similar to the súlid in appearance and flavor,
but smaller.

hukip v [A; b6(1)] include s.t. in a package or letter that is sent to
include it. Wà ku makahukip ug litrátu sa ákung sulat nímu, I didn’t
enclose a picture in my letter to you. Hukipi ug diyis písus ang ímung
aplikasiyun, Include a ten-peso bill in your application.

húkip v [A; bc] bribe. Kadtu rang muhúkip ang dawátun sa supirbisur,
Only those who give bribes are accepted by the supervisor. Pilay átung
ihúkip sa aprísir? How much are we going to bribe the customs
appraiser?

huklub n k.o. sorcery using a doll dressed in red and black which is
struck. The parts of the doll’s body that are struck correspond to the
parts of the victim’s body that are afflicted.

hukmuy = lukmuy.

huks = huk_1 (plural).

hukùhúkù v [B46; b3] be doubled over in suppressed laughter.
Naghukùhúkù mig katáwa sa maistrung wà makapamutúnis, We practically
died trying to hold back our laughter because our teacher forgot to
button his pants.

hukum v {1} [A; b(1)] pass judgment, give a verdict. Gihukman siyang
sunúgun sa silya iliktrika, He was sentenced to death in the electric
chair. {2} [A2] decide to do s.t. Mihukum siya sa pag-apil sa banggà,
She decided to participate in the contest. {3} have one’s say about an
unresolved matter. Ug akuy muhukum sa pagbáhin, tung-un lang ang yútà,
If I were to get my say, my advice would be just to divide the land
between us. n judgment, verdict, decision. hukmánan n court. hukmánan
sa únang lakbang n Court of First Instance.

hukut {1} = higut, v, n. {2} n a keepsake or token of relationship
between lovers. Panyù ang hukut sa ílang panaghigugmaay, A handkerchief
was the keepsake of their love.

*hukyaw — ang dughan, ginhawaan, kabúhì v [B46] get an intense pang in
the stomach and rapid beating of the heart at some horrifying
experience. Mihukyaw ang ákung ginhawaan pagkakità nákù sa bátang
naligsan, I was overcome with horror when I saw the child run over by a
truck.

Hul. n abbreviation for Hulyu, July.

húlab v [AN2; b6] boast by telling a lie. Gihuwában mi níyang dakù
siyag swildu, He boasted that he had a huge salary (when he didn’t).
n lying boast. -un boastful.

húlad v {1} [A13; c] describe, depict. Mihúlad (nahúlad, gihúlad) sa
íyang panagway ang túmang kabaláka, Extreme anxiety appeared on her
face. {2} [c] publish s.t. in the newspapers and magazines. Ang
gisangpútan sa piniliay mauy ihúlad sa tanang mantaláan dinhi, The
results of the elections will be published in all the papers here.
{3} [A; c] copy s.t. on the pattern of s.t. else. Kining dibuhúa mauy
hulári sa ímu, Pattern your drawing after this one. Ihúlad sa Katidral
ang kapilya, Pattern the barrio chapel after the Cathedral. {4} [A; c1]
translate. Hulára (ihúlad) ning bálak sa Ininglis, Translate the poem
into English. n {1} s.t. which is exactly like s.t. else. Ang átung mga
batan-ung nagpataas sa ílang buhuk mauy húlad sa mga hípi sa Amirika,
Our young men who wear their hair long are just like the hippies in
America. {2} copy, full reproduction. {3} an issue of a magazine or
newspaper. (→) = huwad.

hulagway (coined from húlad plus dagway) n {1} picture, portrait.
{2} image, mental picture of s.t. v {1} [AB23; b4c1] portray, picture,
be shown. Ang íyang mga sinulat mihulagway sa kangil-ad sa kahiladman
sa táwu, His writings portray how evil men are deep down inside them.
Mihulagway sa íyang nawung ang túmang kabaláka, Extreme worry showed in
her face. Hulagwáya (ihulagway) sa mga namínaw ang mga taras sa mga
Muslim, Describe the traits of the Muslims to the audience. {2} [A12;
a3] imagine, picture for oneself. Makahulagway ku kun unsa ang íyang
kalípay, I can just picture how happy she is. {3} [A; b] take s.o.’s
picture. Hulagwáyi nang nindut nga talan-áwun, Take a picture of that
beautiful scenery.

hulahúla (not without l) n hula-hula, a Hawaiian dance performed by
women. v [AC12; c1] dance, do the hula-hula.

hulahup (not without l) n hula hoop. v [AC12; b6(1)] play with a hula
hoop.

húlak v [B246] for the delicious taste of food to come out. Muhúlak ang
lamì sa tinap-ánan basta utánan, The delicious taste of smoked fish
comes out if you cook it with vegetables.

hulam v [A; b(1)] {1} borrow s.t. Gihulaman (gihugman, gihudman) nákù
ang íyang lápis, I borrowed his pencil. {2} adopt, take over as one’s
own. Ang mga Pilipínu daghang gihulaman (gihugman) nga kinaíya, The
Filipinos have adopted many foreign traits. pa- v [A; ab] lend. Pilay
ímung pahuwaman? How much are you going to lend? n loan. -anan(←) n one
one borrows from. Kinsa may ímung hulamánan ug kwarta? Who do you
borrow from? -in-an a {1} s.t. borrowed. {2} adopted, taken over as
one’s own. {2a} affected, put on. Wà ku kaangay sa batásan níyang
hinulaman, I don’t like her affected manners. †

hulangyud v [B126; b6] slip and fall. Nahulangyud ku sa sínaw nga
salug, I slipped and fell on the slippery floor.

hul-ap = huld-ap.

hular = hurar.

hulas v [A13P] {1} feel uneasy and restless. Naghulas ang bátang
gitulug, The child is fidgety because he’s sleepy. Ang íyang pagpatay
mauy nakahulas (nakapahulas) níya, The murder he had committed caused
him to feel uneasy. {2} restlessly eager to do s.t. Naghulas giyud nang
bayhána nga muadtu sa bayli, That girl is itching to go to the dance.

hulat v [A; a2] {1} wait, don’t do s.t. now but do it later. Huwat únà,
kay wà pa malútù, Wait a minute. It’s not done. {2} wait for. Huwata
únà ang paghunas únà ka manginhas, Wait for the tide to go out before
you gather seashells. {3} [A13; a12] expect s.t. to happen. Naghulat ku
nga mubutu tung granáda, I expected that the grenade would go off.
-anan(←) n place one waits. †

hulaw, húlaw n drought, prolonged period without rain. Ang mga sapà
nangaúga tugnud sa hulaw, The brooks dried up in the drought. v [B6;
a4b4] be a drought. Ang mga tanum mangamátay kung huwawun (huwawan),
The crops will wither if there is a drought. ting- n dry season.
v [B256] be the dry season.

húlay v [b(1)] be given respite, an interval of rest. Ang daruhan nga
gihuwáyan sa mais naulian, The field that was given a respite from corn
regained its fertility. Huwáyi sà ang inyung pagpúnayg harána, Leave
off your nightly serenading for a while. n interval of rest. Trabáhu
nga way húway, Work without respite. pa-, pa-(→) v {1} [A; c2] rest,
take a rest. Ipahuway (pahuwayun) níya ang íyang láwas, He will give
his body a rest. {2} [A; b(1)] have eternal rest. Dúgay nang mipahuway
ang íyang Lúlu, His grandfather has long been laid to his eternal rest.
{3} [A2; c] retire from work. Mipahuway na ang tigúwang nga maistra,
The old teacher has retired. lawak pa-an n place one rests. igpa-r-,
igpa-l- n time to rest. Igpapahúlay (igpalahúlay) na rung urása, It’s
now time to rest.

huláyà n k.o. woody, erect herb of open wastelands, of two species: —
bayi edible sort of huláyà, the leaves of which are eaten fermented:
Gynandropsis gynandra. — laki inedible, smelly type: Polanisia
icosandra.

hulbà v [AB126] for the bottom or a piece of s.t. horizontal to give
way. Ang lamísa muhulbà ug tungtúngan ug bug-at, The table-top will
give way if you put s.t. heavy on it. Ang lubut sa kahun nahulbà kay
bug-at ang gisulud, The bottom of the box gave way because s.t. heavy
was put inside it.

hulbad v [A; a2] undo s.t. tied, untie. Akuy mihulbad sa íyang gapus, I
untied his ropes. Hubára nang panyù mung may súd nga kwarta, Undo your
handkerchief which has the money in it.

hulbaw v [A; b(1)] shout loudly at. Hulbáwi ang táwu nga túa sa tapun
sa sapà, Shout to the man who is at the opposite bank of the river.
n loud shout. ka-un a feel like shouting.

hulbù v [APB2; a1b2] give way, collapse under pressure. Sapnáya nang
sáku kay nagkahulbù na, Carry that sack under your arms because the
bottom has just about broken through. Hulbúun ku nang hubun mu niíning
bunal, I’ll smash your fontanel with this club. {2} [A; a12] break the
nodes inside a bamboo. n particles of broken bamboo nodes.

hulbut v {1} [AC2; a] pull out s.t. long from a place it has been
inserted. Paghulbut ug baráha, Take a card. Mihulbut siyag sigarilyu,
He pulled out a cigarette. Ayaw hulbúta ang hílu, Don’t pull the thread
out. Hulbúta sa dì pa ka gul-an, Pull it out before you have your
orgasm. {2} [A; a12] pick s.o. out from a group. Hulbúta lang siya sa
kumpirinsiya. Dì lagi masukù, Just call him out of the conference. He
won’t really mind. {3} abduct secretly, usually for liquidation.
Gihulbut ang inpurmir sa mga Huks, The Huks abducted the informer.
hulbuthulbut n {1} drawing of lots. {2} a gambling game of drawing out
rolled-up pieces of paper which are pasted to cardboard. A number is
printed on each rolled piece of paper to be matched with winning
numbers. v [AC12; b6(1)] play this game. †

huldam n k.o. craps played with three dice. v [A13; b6] play this k.o.
craps.

huld-ap v [AN; ab2] hold up, rob. Huld-apun ka giyug muági ka sa
ngitngit, You’ll be held up if you go through a dark area. n a hold-up.
-ir one who pulls hold-ups. v [B16; b6] become a hold-up artist.

hulding a holding in volleyball. Hulding kaáyu siyang mutús sa búla, He
holds a lot when he hits the ball. v [B12; c1] commit the offense of
holding in volleyball. Nahulding siya maung gipitúhan sa ripiri, He was
holding the ball so the referee blew the whistle on him.

huldir n one who is most influential and feared in a certain place for
his power and toughness (slang). Si Nardung Pútik mauy huldir sa
Bilyagunsálu, Nardong Putik is the number one tough in Villagonzalo.
v [A1; b(1)] become the number one tough in a place (slang). Ang tibuuk
Pásil mauy íyang gihuldíran, He is the acknowledged number one tough in
the whole Pasil district. istak — n stockholder.

hulgà n threat. v [A; a1] threaten. Ang ulan mihulgà pagbundak, The
rain threatened to pour down. Gihulgà mi sa dakung gútum, We were
threatened with starvation. ma-un a threatening. Mahulgáung púlung,
Threatening words.

hulhug v {1} [A; b] urge s.o. to do s.t. bad, stir s.o. up. Ang
wilgista gihulhúgan sa mga istudiyanti, The students egged the strikers
on. {2} give s.o. bad ideas. Kinsa may naghulhug sa bátà sa pagpangáyug
dulsi? Who gave the child the bright idea of asking for candy?
n urging, incitation.

hulhul v {1} [A; a12] bark. Gihulhul ang kawatan sa irù, The dog barked
at the thief. {2} [A; a] shout halt. Mihulhul ang sintiníla sa táwu,
The guard shouted for the man to halt. n {1} barking. {2} shout to
halt.

hulì (short form for hiulì) v [a3] go home, return to the place one
lives or stays. Tagdugay giyud nà siyang mahulì sa balay, He always
goes home late. pa-(←) v [A; c] place s.t. back in its proper place or
form. Kamau kung mupahúlì sa makinang distrungkahun, I know how to
assemble the machine if it is dismantled. Ipahúlì sa kahun ang gigámit
nímung gabas, Put the saw that you used back in its box.

hulíbis = hilíbis.

hulihud n awl-like device which is heated and used for making holes in
burnable materials. v [A13; a12] make holes with this device.

hulíkab v [B126; a12P] {1} make a huge hole in s.t. with an explosion
or violence. Ang tuung kílid sa barku nahulíkab sa bumba, The starboard
side of the ship had a huge hole in it after the bombing. {2} take a
huge portion of s.t. forcefully, leaving a hole. Hulikábun lang nà sa
mga pumapálit ang pinatungpátung nga mga sáku, The customers will
considerably reduce that pile of sacks. n large hole resulting from
violent removal of s.t. Ang hulíkab sa bukubuku nga gilapsan sa bála
ingun sa pálad, The hole in the back where the bullet emerged was as
big as the palm of the hand.

húlin = dyúlin.

huling v {1} [AN; a12] examine s.t. carefully touching it to see what
is there. Akuy mihuling (nanghuling) sa kúlun ug náa pa bay kan-un, I
examined the pot to find out if there was still any food left. {2} [A;
a12] do a physical examination. Hulingun usab ug apil ang ímung
kinatáwu, Your genitalia will also be examined.

húlip v [A; b6(1)] fill in for, cover up s.t. vacant or lacking. Akuy
muhúlip níya samtang nagbakasiyun siya, I’ll fill in for her while she
is on vacation. Íyang gihulípan ang gisì sa banig, He patched up the
holes in the mat. Kinahángan hulípan ang ímung napaltahan, You have to
make up for your absence. Wà siyay kwartang ikahúlip sa kantidad nga
íyang nadispalku, He had no money to replace the amount that he had
embezzled. n s.t. that fills up or covers for what is lacking. Ang
pag-inum-ínum dílì paígung húlip sa kaguul nga ákung gibátì, My sorrow
is too great to drown in drink. -anan n s.t. that needs to be filled
in, covered up, filled in for.

hulma v {1} [A1B2; a2] mold, take form. Mihulma (nahulma) sa íyang mga
ngábil ang usa ka matam-is nga pahíyum, A sweet smile formed on her
lips. Naghulma mig bíku nga ipamaligyà, We molded sweetened rice cakes
to sell. {2} [A23; b6] leave an imprint. Ang túnub mihulma sa basà nga
simintu, The footstep left an imprint on the wet cement. {3} [A] for a
shape to show through s.t. that covers or contains it. Ang tútuy
muhulma sa íyang hugut nga sinínà, Her breasts stood out clearly in her
tight dress. n s.t. molded. Pila ka hulma sa bibingka ang ímung
nabúhat? How many rice cakes have you made? hulmahan, hulmahánan
n mold.

hulmígas n small biting red ants. (→) v [a4] infested with red ants.
-an, ka-an n anthill.

hulpà v [B2] for a surface to lower. Mihulpà ang kík, The cake fell.
Nahulpà ang lubung, The grave sank. Nagkahulpà ang túbig sa línaw, The
water-level in the lake is dropping. n lowering of a surface. Ang hulpà
sa hubun timáan nga gibutdan ang bátà, A concavity in the fontanel is a
sign that the child has a digestive upset.

hulsil n wholesale. v [A; c1] buy, sell by wholesale. Muhulsil mig mga
manggad, We will sell dry goods wholesale.

hult call to stop s.o. approaching: halt! v [A; a12] call ‘halt!’
Húnung basta hultun mu sa gwardiya, Stop when the guard shouts halt at
you.

hulu_1 (not without l) a {1} strong in character, not affected by
emotions or sadness. Hulu ug balatían ning batáa kay walà muhílak
paglubung sa íyang inahan, The child has a strong character because he
did not cry when his mother was buried. {2} not afraid of danger. Hulu
ka giyud ug mutubagtubag ka níya, You really are brave if you talk back
to him. {3} able to eat sickening food or in a sickening environment.
Hulu kaáyu siyag ginháwa kay mukáug ilagà, That man has a strong
stomach. He can eat rats.

hulu_2 (not without l) paN- v [A2] molt, shed off skin or shell.
hinulhan n cast-off skin or shell.

hulud, húlud v [A; b6c1] place a barrier around plants to prevent
animals from eating the leaves of the trees or persons from stealing
the fruits.

húlug v {1} [A; c] drop, fall freely, cause s.t. to do so. Usa ka hinug
nga búnga nahúlug, A ripe fruit fell. Nahulúgan siya ug lubi, A coconut
fell on him. Ihúlug ta ka run sa hagdanan, I’ll throw you down the
stairs. {1a} [B12] for s.t. one wears to slide downwards. Síging
kahúlug ákung antiyúhus, My glasses keep slipping down my nose. {2} [A;
c] deposit s.w. a mail a letter. Ihúlug ning suláta, Mail this letter.
{b} deposit in bank. Dílì ku muhúlug rung bulána, I will not deposit
any money this month. Ihúlug ang sinsíyu sa alkansíya, Deposit the
change in the piggy bank. {c} pay installments, buy on installment.
Naghúlug kug pyánu, I’m paying installments on a piano. {3} give money
to carolers. Hulúgan ta mug písus ug mukanta mug usab, I’ll give you a
peso if you sing again. {4} [B1256] fall, come under a group or
classification. Kining isdáa nahúlug sa klási nga mga mulmul, This fish
is in the family of the parrotfish. {4a} result in being called. Ug mau
nay ímung buhátun mahúlug ka sa pagkaturut, If you do that, you will
wind up being called a fool. {4b} turn into s.t. worse. Kanang mga
kinalutána mahúlug sa kabahung ug dílì tambálan, Those scratches will
turn into sores if you do not treat them. Nahúlug sa walay hinungdan
ang ákung pangandam, My preparations turned into nothing. Ug mabálì ang
ímung kamut mahúlug ka sa pagkainútil, If you break your arm, you will
become an invalid. {5} [A; c] for a coconut grove to yield a certain
number of nuts. Muhúlug ning kalubihána ug líbu, This coconut
plantation yields one thousand nuts. {6} [B12] fall into sin or
disgrace. Nahúlug si Adan tungud ni Íbà, Adam fell because of Eve.
{7} [c] hold a festive activity on a certain date or occasion. Pitsa
kinsi ang gihulúgan sa pista, The feast falls on the fifteenth. {8} [A;
c1] fail s.o. in school. Ihúlug (hulúgun) ta ka ug magliguylíguy ka,
I’ll fail you if you are absent all the time. {9} — sa kamut [B126]
fall captive, victim to s.o. Mahúlug ka sa kamut sa palikíru, You’ll
lose your chastity (fall into the clutches of the philanderer).
{10} [B1256] in hantak, for the three coins to turn out to be tails.
Ganíha ra giyud nà níyang umantug, walà pa giyud mahúlug, He has been
tossing the coins for quite a time, but he still hasn’t gotten all
tails. {11} [A23PB126; c1] lose a game in gambling. Gihúlug níya ang
primírung dúwà arun musakay ang kuntra, He threw away the first game so
his opponent would be trapped into playing with him. n {1} deposit.
{2} installment. {3} money given to carolers. {4} yield of coconuts.
(→) n weft. v [A; c1] use s.t. as weft. Maáyung ihulug ang naylun sa
hablun, Nylon makes good weft thread in weaving. tig-(→) v {1} [A23P]
move downward. Mitighulug (mipatighulug) ang ayruplánu, The plane moved
downward. {2} go on down to a place after having gone s.w. else. Gíkan
sa kapitulyu mutighulug (mupatighulug) ku sa pantalan, From the capitol
I will go on down to the waterfront. ka-an n {1} day of festivities,
celebration. {2} meaning. Unsa may kahulúgan áning pulúnga sa ininglis?
What is the meaning of this word in English? Ang kahulúgan sa isturya,
The moral of the story. (→) n = kahulúgan, 2. v [A13N] mean. Ang
pagmahal sa gasulína nagkahulugan (nangahulugan) sa pag-usbaw sa plíti,
The rise in the price of gasoline means the fare will rise. ka-ánun,
maka-ánun, makahulgánun a meaningful.†

húlum = húmul.

hulunghúlung v [A; a2] {1} look for s.t. very intently. Gihulunghúlung
ang bátà nga nawálà, The people were searching for the lost child.
{2} look around for s.t. without publicising that one is looking
around. Naghulunghúlung kug láing trabáhu kay tagdugay ming swildúhan
sa ákung gialagáran karun, I’m secretly looking around for a new job
because we’re always late in getting our pay where I’m working now.

hulungíhung n rumors. May hulungíhung nga patyun ang prisidinti, There
are rumors that the president will be assassinated.†

húlup v {1} [A2; b6] alight on. Ang sanga nga gihulúpan (gihudpan) sa
mga langgam, The branch the birds are perching on. Pagkáun nga
hihulupan (hihudpan) ug lángaw, Food that the flies alighted on.
{2} [A; b(1)] for a bird to swoop down on its prey. Mihúp ang banug ug
nakadagit ug pisù, The hawk swooped down and got a chick.

hulus_1 v {1} [A; a12] strip leaves off the stem. Paghulus ug dáhun sa
kamunggay kay utánun, Strip off some malunggay leaves to cook. {2} =
hurus.

hulus_2 v [A; c1] lower s.t. attached on a string which passes through
a pulley. Hulusun (ihulus) nátù ang láyag kay mudunggù na ta, Let’s
lower the sail now because we are going to drop anchor.

húlut v [A; b5c] threaten s.o. with an instrument or, by extension, to
do s.t. serious to him. Muhúlut nang banáha ug sundang ug mag-áway ug
ang asáwa, That husband threatens his wife with a bolo when they
quarrel. Ang maistrung naghúlut sa paghagbung sa mga istudiyanti, The
teacher who threatened to fail the students.

huluy = hiluy.

Hulyu n {1} July. see abril for verb forms. {2} time of the year when
there is little to eat, so called because the year’s big harvest, the
panúig, comes just after July, and the previous harvest does not last
until the panúig. Ang mga datù wà makailag hulyu, The rich haven’t
experienced hard times.

hulyut a lax in carrying out a course of action. Ang mga ginikánan nga
hulyut kaáyu ug disiplína tubagun ug anak, Children answer back if
parents are lax in their discipline. v [A; c1] be easy-going, relaxed
about doing s.t. Klási ni sa trabáhu nga dílì ka makahulyut, With this
sort of work you can’t just take it easy.

húm n {1a} home base in games. {1b} shout uttered upon reaching home.
v {1} [A23; b6] run for home. {2} [A12] reach home base, make a home
run. {3} [A12] engage in sexual intercourse (humorous). Wà makahúm ang
bána gabíi kay hubug, The husband couldn’t do it last night because he
was drunk. -anan(←) n place used as home base.

humabdus = humablus.

humablus, humabus n stepchild.

humad v [A; c1] clean rice and let it dry partially to store it. Humara
(ihumad) ang humay úsà hipúsa, Clean the rice and let it dry partially
before you store it.

humagbus = humablus.

human a {1} finished, done. Human na ang lamísa, The table is finished.
Human na nag laba, (I) already washed it. Human dáan nga sinínà, A
ready-made dress (finished beforehand). Ibítay ang ímung human, Hang
the things you have finished up. {2} initial in phrase: {a} after.
Human (inigkahuman) sa klási adtu mi sa sini, We will go to the movies
after the class. Namatay siya human (pagkahuman) sa dúgayng sakit, He
died after a long sickness. {b} after doing [so-and-so], after
[so-and-so] happens. Human níya kan-a, After he ate it. Human siya
mulakaw, After he left. {3} following the word it modifies: looking
completely like s.t. Sa mau nga sinínà makililímus ka nga human, With
such clothes, you look exactly like a beggar. v {1} [B126; a12] finish
doing s.t. Humanun (humnun) ba nímu ang ímung trabáhu u dílì? Are you
going to finish your work or not? Mahuman tingáli ang prugram sa mga
alas nuybi, The program will probably be over at around nine o’clock.
{2} [B126] be through with s.t., have had enough of s.t. Nahuman na ku
ánang ímung paníkas, I’ve had enough of your cheating. {3} [B126] for
s.t. to get broken, done for. Ug ímung ibundak ang duwáan, mahuman, If
you throw the toy down, it will be done for. Nahuman ang mga tulisan
dihang gimasinggan, The bandits were wiped out in the machinegun raid.
{4} [A12; c1] lift s.t. heavy from the ground. Ayawg humana paglúgus
nang baul, Don’t force yourself to lift that trunk. humanhúman v [B125]
be almost finished. Nahumanhúman (nagkahumanhúman) na ang ámung
sakayan, Our boat is almost finished. ka-an(←), ka-un n reaching a
conclusion. Walay kahumánan (kahumanun) ang trabáhu, There is no end to
the work.

humay n general term for rice. — sa bantuk, kamad-an n upland rice.
a two-faced (slang—on analogy of milled rice grains which are pointed
at both ends). Humay nang bayhána, paayuáyu sa atúbang, apan nanglibak
diay inigtalikud, That woman is two-faced. She is nice to your face,
but when you turn your back, she talks against you. v {1} [A] have rice
for a meal, cook rice. Gihumayan nákug lúgaw ang bátà, I cooked rice
porridge for the baby. {2} [A; c1] plant rice and not some other crop.
Humaya (ihumay) na lang nang parsiláha, Just plant that parcel to rice.
humayhúmay n {1} ersatz rice made of dried cassava shreds, eaten in
place of rice or corn. {2} k.o. plant similar to cattails: Typha
capensis. v [A; a2] make ersatz rice. -an, ka-an n rice field. -ánun
n rice magnate. ting- n harvest season for rice. -únun n piece of land
intended to be planted to rice.

humbà n a dish made of pork hocks, feet, and fat cooked long in a sauce
of salt, vinegar, and condiments to soften and preserve it. v [A1; a2]
prepare, eat this dish.

humbíngay v [B46N; b6] for s.t. to be hanging and drooping in large
quantities. Mihumbíngay (nanghumbíngay) ang búnga sa mangga (sa búnga
ang mangga), The mango tree is laden with fruit. Gihumbingáyan
(nanghumbíngay) sa búnga ang káhuy, The tree is laden with fruits.

humbíngil v [A; a1] touch s.t. with the thumb and forefinger.
Naghumbíngil siyang nag-ihap sa papil dibangku, She fingered the
banknotes in counting them. Ayawg humbingíla ang ákung trabáhu, Keep
your hands off my work.

humbis n home base in baseball, also in children’s games. v [A12] reach
home base. Ug nakahumbis pa ta, daug tà ta, Had we made it home, we
would have won.

humhum_1 = halumhum.

humhum_2 = latù.

humígas = hulmígas.

humil a soft, pliant, and supple. Ug dílì humil ang tabákù, dílì
matustus, If the tobacco is not soft, you can’t roll it into cigars.
v [B12] get soft. Ug sigíhan mug dukduk nang pánit sa káhuy, magkahumil
pud, If you continue to pound that bark, it will gradually become soft
and pliant. ka- n softness, suppleness.

humisayid n homicide. — pulis section of the police that is charged
with investigating murders.

humpal a long and heavy of stride. v [B; c16] for the steps to be long
and heavy. Muhumpal ang átung linaktan ug luag tag sapátus, We have to
take long and heavy steps if our shoes are too big. Naghumpal ang
linaktan sa sundálung gikápuy, The soldier is tired, and he is taking
long and heavy strides.

humpay v [A3PB2; a1] assuage, relieve. Álak ray muhumpay sa ákung
kaguul, Only liquor can relieve my sorrow. Muhumpay (mahumpay) ang
kasakit kun manghaplas kag linimintu, The pain will be relieved when
you rub liniment on it. paN- n s.t. that gives relief. Panghumpay sa
mga iritasiyun sa pánit, Medicine to relieve skin irritations. ka-
n relief. Kahumpay sa panakit, Quick relief from pains. ka-an, ka-un(→)
n relief, assuagement as an end effect. Walay kahumpayun (kahumpáyan)
ning íyang kaguul, There is no end to her sorrows. ma-un, maka-r-
a soothing.

humpid v [A; c1] {1} arrange, stack things in a neat and orderly way.
Akuy mihumpid (naghumpid) sa mga basíyung butilya, I arranged the empty
bottles in order. Íyang humpírun (ihumpid) ang íyang mga papílis, He’ll
stack the papers neatly. {2} smooth out, flatten out. Pisun ang
nakahumpid sa sín, A steam roller flattened out the galvanized iron
sheets. a neatly arranged, flat. Humpid kaáyu ang íyang buhuk, His hair
is neatly groomed and flat.

humpil = humpid.

humran n home run in baseball. v [A2; c1] make a home run. tig- a one
who usually hits a home run.

humrum n homeroom in school. — pitii n organization of the parents of
children in a certain homeroom and their teacher.

humtáwun disisyun n fraudulent decision in boxing made in favor of a
boxer who is a native of the place the match is held. v [A23] make a
hometown decision in boxing.

humud a wet. — ug papil having a ruined reputation. Humud ug papil nang
tawhána pagkakiriwan, That fellow has the reputation of being a thief.
v {1} [A; a12] make s.t. wet. Humda ang trápu úsà inusnus, Wet the rag
before you wipe. {2} [A13; a12] wear s.t. in bathing. Walà siya
maghumud nga nalígù sa dágat, She went swimming without anything on.
humdunun n thing worn for swimming. -in- n thing put on during one’s
bath.

húmuk a {1a} soft, not rigid or hard. Húmuk nga yútà, Soft earth. Húmuk
nga unlan, A soft pillow. {1b} tender, not tough or hard. Húmuk na ang
linat-an, The stewed meat is tender now. {2} easy to do s.t. to. Húmuk
mabálì, Easy to break. Húmuk siya tudlúan, It’s easy to teach her.
Húmuk siyang dad-ug baylíhan, She is easy to lead in dancing.
{2a} easily affected by s.t., easily made to do s.t. Húmuk ra nang
bayhána pasugtun, That girl is easy to win over. Húmuk siyang masukù,
He easily gets angered. Húmuk ug balatían nang tiguwánga. Manggihatágun
kaáyu sa mga pubri, That old man is kindhearted. He is very generous to
the poor. {3} supple in mind, easily adaptable. Húmuk kaáyu ug láwas
nga bayhána. Maáyung musáyaw, The lady is graceful. She dances well.
Húmuk siyag salabútan; dalì rang musabut, She is intelligent; she
easily understands. {4} í nga — {a} letter a as opposed to e (in
English). {b} letter e as opposed to i (in Spanish). — ug ilung
{1} easily influenced, told to do s.t. Húmuk siyag ilung kay bísag
kinsa ray musúgù, He lets himself be led around by the nose. He does
whatever anyone tells him to do. {2} for girls to give in easily to the
advances of men. v {1} [A2SB; a2P] {a} soften; become soft. {b} [a12]
do s.t. in a soft way. Humúka kanà paglútù, Cook it soft. {2} [A1PB2;
a2] make s.t. supple, adaptable. pahumukhúmuk v [A3; b6] pretend to go
along with s.t. Nagpahumukhúmuk ang administrasiyun sa mga dimanda,
balubálu wà diay, The administration pretended to go along with the
demands, but when the time came, nothing was granted. paN- n s.t. used
to soften s.t. -un(→) a of a soft, supple type.

húmul v {1} [A; b(1)] soak, steep. Nakahúmul ka sa mga nuug nga átung
labhan? Have you soaked the rags we are going to wash? Humúli ang isdà
sa súkà, Marinate the fish in vinegar. {2} [A13; b(1)] immerse, put
oneself or s.t. in water so as to cover most of it. Ug maghúmul ka sa
túbig dílì lagi tugnaw, Once you get in the water, it is not cold after
all. Humúli ang kábaw sa túbig, Put the carabao in the water. {3} [A;
c] pack s.t. in ice for preservation. Ihúmul ang isdà sa yílu arun dì
madubuk, Pack the fish in ice so that it won’t spoil. (→), -in-an
n fish packed in ice for preservation.

humulhúmul a soft, fluffy. Alpumbrang humulhúmul, A fluffy rug.

humut a {1} sweet-smelling. Humut nga búlak, Fragrant flowers. Humut
nga bàbà, Sweet-smelling mouth. Humut nga pagkáun, Good-smelling food.
{2} for s.o. to be dear to one despite his bad traits. Daghan siyag
bisyu apan humut siya gihápun kanákù, He has lots of vices, but I love
him all the same. v [B2; b6] be, become pleasant-smelling. pa- v [A;
b6(1)] make s.o. or s.t. pleasant-smelling. Magpahumut ta kay mangadtu
tas bayli, Let’s put on perfume because we’re going to a dance. Pahumti
ang kík ug banilya, Flavor the cake with vanilla. n s.t. used to make
s.t. pleasant-smelling. -an(←) k.o. aromatic herb, similar in
appearance to sangig but sweeter in smell. ka- n pleasant smell. ma-
a very sweet-smelling. -un a of a sweet-smelling sort.

húmut v [A; b6] {1} seriously plan to do s.t. of a momentous nature.
Aku gánì makahúmut pagpatay, tinuúrun giyud nákù, If I plan to kill,
I’ll kill, believe me. {2} seriously think about buying s.t. Dúgay na
kung naghúmut ánang rilúha, I have long been obsessed by the thought of
buying that watch.

Hun. n abbreviation for Hunyu, June.

hún v [A; b(1)] for birds, esp. poultry to roost to sleep. Kilumkílum
na gánì muhún dáyun ang mga manuk, When it’s twilight, the chickens
roost for the night.

húnad v [A; b(1)] wash wounds, sores. Hunári ug alkuhul ang langgus
arun dílì ansúyan, Wash the abrasions with alcohol so they won’t get
infected. n s.t. used in cleaning wounds.

hun-ag_1 v [B12; a1b2] {1} for a structure to collapse. Nahun-ag ang
Rubi Táwir sa paglínug, The Ruby Tower collapsed in the earthquake.
{2} for hopes, ambitions, etc. to collapse.

hun-ag_2 v [APB2] {1} for s.t. dark, dirty to become clear and white,
cause it to do so. Mihun-ag (nahun-ag) ang linabhan nga giladlad sa
ínit, The clothing became white when it was bleached in the sun.
{2} for the face to brighten. Mihun-ag ang íyang nawung sa kahimuut,
Her face shone with pleasure. {2a} [B1245] for dawn to break
(literary). Nagkahun-ag nga kaadláwun, The breaking dawn. a free from
dirt, shining of face.

hunàhúnà v {1} [A3S; a2b2] think about s.t. Ug hunàhunáun tug maáyu,
sayup giyud tu, If you think about it, it was a grave mistake.
{2} [A3S; b8] think of doing s.t. Walà ka ba makahunàhunà ug hulam?
Have you not thought of borrowing some? {3} [A3; a12] think of s.t. or
s.o., consider. Hunàhunáa ang ímung mga bátà unsay dangátan níla, Think
of what will happen to your children. {4} [a12] think s.t. over,
ponder. Ákù sang hunàhunáun. Dì úsà tikaw tubagun, I’ll think it over.
I won’t give you an answer yet. n {1} belief, opinion. Unsa may ímung
hunàhúnà (panghunàhunà) báhin ánà? What is your opinion about that?
{1a} decision. Dì giyud mausab ang ímung hunàhúnà? Is your decision
completely irreversible? {2} thought, idea. Púru mga hunàhúnà
(panghunàhunà) nga bastus ang náa sa íyang úlu, He has nothing but
indecent thoughts in his head. {3} thoughts regarding s.o., attitude.
Wà kuy maáyung hunàhúnà níya human sa íyang gibúhat, I don’t have a
good attitude towards him after what he did. paN-(→) n {1} = hunàhúnà
1, 1a, 2. {2} the process of thinking. Tin-aw pa ang panghunàhunà ni
Lúlu, Grandfather can still think clearly. manggi-un, ma-un
a thoughtful, marked by consideration for others.

hunas n {1} low tide. {2} = kinhasun. see kinhas. v {1} [B3(1)4; b4]
for the tide to go out. Manginhas ta kun muhunas, Let’s gather
shellfish when the tide is out. Nagkahunas (naghunas) na ang dágat, The
tide is going out. {2} [b8] be stranded in low tide. Sayun dakpun ang
isdang nahunsan, Fish are easy to catch when they are trapped by the
low tide. pa- v [A; b6] allow s.t. to be trapped in the low tide.
n method of catching fish by getting them trapped in the low tide. paN-
= panginhas. see kinhas. -an(←) n tidal flats, the part of the seashore
which is exposed to low tide. kinahunsan n the lowest part of the tidal
flat. kinhas listed under kinhas. -un(←) n the ebbing of the sea. Sulug
iniglíhuk sa hunásun, The current is strong during the ebb tide.
v [B56] for the sea to be ebbing.

hunat v {1} [A; a1c] for horses to run fast, gallop. Wà ku níla hiapsi
kay mihunat ang kabáyù, They did not overtake me because the horse
galloped. Ayawg kahadluk bisag ihunat kas kabáyù, Don’t get scared even
if the horse gallops away with you. {2} [A2; bc6] go into action
exerting one’s fullest efforts. Tápus makahunat, íyang giluksuan ang
alíwas, Gathering all his strength he jumped at the gorilla. n impetus,
force exerted in starting s.t. Kusgánung hunat, Having a strong
starting motion. pa- v [A; a12] exert pressure on s.o. to come to a
decision. Ísug siyang nagpahunat sa íyang kuntra, He challenged his
enemy (pressured him to decide whether or not to fight). Gipahunat ni
Hiktur ang dalága kun kinsa ang íyang sugtun, Hector put pressure on
the girl to decide whom she was going to choose. -in- force mustered.
Hinunat ang tanan níyang kusug, Mustering all his strength. ma-un
a demanding, putting pressure on.

hunaw = hinaw.

hunda n motorcycle (so called from the brand Honda). v {1} [A1; b5]
ride a motorcycle. {2} [A12] obtain a motorcycle.

hundunghundung v [A3P; a12] walk with the head hanging and swaying from
side to side. Naghundunghundung ang hubug sa karsáda, The drunk walked
on the street with his head drooping and swaying.

hungakhúngak = hingakhíngak. see híngak.

hungaw v {1} [A; b8] for wind to blow. Dílì ta makalawud ug muhungaw
ang amíhan, We can not go to sea if the northwind blows. {2} [A] for
air to leak out. Muhungaw ang hángin kay daut ang balbula, The tank
will leak because the valve is defective. {2a} [A3] for the ground to
exude a stench after rain. Naghungaw ang yútà human sa ulan, The ground
is exuding a stench after the rain. {3} [A2; b6] for body heat to
escape, lending relief. Kalígù arun hungawan ka sa kaínit, Take a bath
to get relief from the heat. {3a} [A1BP; b4] be affected by the disease
hungaw. Gihungawan siya kay natúlug nga basà ang buhuk, She got hungaw
because she went to sleep with her hair wet. {3b} [A2; b6(1)] for anger
to be vented and cooled off. Dalì nga mihungaw íyang kasukù, His anger
easily cooled off. a tending to leak gas. Ang ímung bumba sa hángin
hungaw kaáyu, Your air pump is very leaky. n name of an affliction
leading to blindness caused by the escape of hot air through the eyes.
It is brought on by prolonged exposure to the sun or sleeping with wet
hair. pa- v {1} [A; a2] give vent to one’s emotions. Mipahungaw siya sa
íyang kaguul sa paghílak, She gave vent to her sorrows by crying.
{1a} relieve one’s emotions. Nagpasupásu siya sa kwartu nagpahungaw sa
íyang kasukù, She paced the room, working off her anger. {1b} get
relief from boredom, drudgery. Suruysúruy ta sa pwinti, pahungaw sa
átung kaláay, Let’s take a walk in the park to relieve ourselves of
boredom. — sa angsu get respite from drudgery, boredom (lit. from the
smell of urine). {2} [A13] leave the body or part of the body uncovered
(as if to give it air—humorous). Nagpahungaw síyang naglingkud, She is
sitting so as to give her crotch a breath of air (i.e. exposing herself
indecently). -anan(→) n {1} a person upon whom one vents his anger.
{2} hole where air or gases leak. -l-an n = -anan, 2. -in- n {1} gas or
air exuded. {2} natural effect or repercussions. Ang íyang ulsir
hinungaw sa subrang pag-inum, His ulcer is the result of drinking too
much. Kining kanúnayng pag-ulan dinhi hinungaw ni sa bagyu sa láing
lugar, The rain here is the effect of a typhoon elsewhere.

hungay a loose, not firmly embedded. Hungay kaáyu ákung tangu, My tooth
is very loose. v [B] get, be loose. Naghungay ang halígi. Pakáli ug
batu ang lungag, The post is loose. Put more stones into the hole.

húngay v [A; c] set s.t. aside for a special purpose. Dì siya
magpakasal kun dì ka makahúngay ug salapì nga gastúhun, She will not
marry you if you do not set aside money for the expenses. Ihúngay nátù
ning kík sa mga bisíta, We will set this cake aside for the visitors.

hunggal v [B] {1} make a hollow, empty sound. Mihunggal ang basíyung
kahun nga nahúlug, The empty box that fell went bonk. {2} [B2; b6] for
s.t. normally solid throughout to be, become hollow. Muhunggal
(mahunggal) ang pán ug palabian ug butang ug patúbù, The bread will
become hollow inside if too much baking powder is added. a for s.t.
usually solid to be hollow. n hollow space, void.

hunggaw = hunggal.

hunghung v [A2; c] {1} whisper into the ear, say s.t. privately.
Mihunghung siya nákù nga muhuwam siyag kwarta, She whispered to me that
she would like to borrow some money. {1a} say s.t. in a whisper.
{2} cure an illness by whispering a prayer or formula over the affected
area. n {1} whisper. {2} method of treating an illness by whispering.

hungíhung = hulungíhung.

hungit v [A; ac] {1} put s.t. into the mouth. Hungita ang bátà, Put the
food into the child’s mouth. Hungiti siyag linúgaw, Feed him some
porridge. {1a} [b5c] spoon-feed a lesson to. Hungiti sila sa liksiyun
iyáwat makasabut, Spoon-feed the lesson to them. Maybe they’ll
understand. {1b} [c6] have s.t. to eat. Wà nay ikahungit apan manan-aw
pa giyud ug sini, They don’t have anything to eat, but they have to go
to the movies nevertheless. {2} [A; c] feed, put materials into a
machine. Hungiti ang makina ug káhuy, Feed lumber into the planing
machine. {2a} [c6] put a limb into machinery. Naputul ang íyang tudlù
kay íya mang gihungit sa makina, He lost his finger because he stuck it
into the machine. {3} pass on gossip, rumors. Kinsay mihungit nímu
ánang mga tabía? Who passed that gossip on to you? n {1} amount put
into the mouth, machine at one time. {1a} food one eats for
subsistence. Ang kwartang ámung makítà dílì gánì paigù sa hungit, We
don’t even earn enough money for food. {2} passing on of gossip.
ig-r-(←), ig-l-(←) n utensil used to put s.t. into the mouth.

hungkad = hukad, v1.

hungkag v [B] {1} for s.t. spacious to look empty. Nagkahungkag ang
balay kay gianam pagpamaligyà ang mga kabtángan, The house gradually
became empty when the things were sold one by one. {2} have an uneasy
feeling of emptiness. Naghungkag ang ákung tiyan, My stomach feels
empty.

hungkagul, hungkarul = hugangkul.

hungkiyang = kungkiyang.

hungkung n {1} Hong Kong. {2} name of notorious red-light district in
Cebu City, so called from the name of its principal street, Junquera.
paN- v [A2; c] go to Junquera St. to a house of prostitution.

hunglus_1 = aláyun, n, v1.

hunglus_2 = hunlus.

hungù = nguhù.

hungug a stupid, lacking in intelligence and capacity to perceive,
learn. v [B2; b6] be, become stupid. ka- n stupidity. Sa ímung kahungug
nabuak ang básu, Because of your stupidity the glass broke. sa ímung
ka- expression of disgust at s.o. for saying s.t. stupid. Dag-an sa
ímung kahungug. Pildi bayà ku, What do you mean I won? You ass, I lost.

hungus = hunglus_1.

hungut v [B4] for a boil to swell. Talibutu ang hubag nga maghungut,
The boil that is swelling is about to erupt.

húngut n bowl made out of three-quarters of a coconut shell. nawung ug
— round faced, like a húngut. dílì — ang kalibútan there are plenty of
fish in the ocean (lit. the world is not a coconut shell). Sahug dì ka
mangasáwa nákù. Maáyu mag húngut ning kalibútan, So what if you don’t
marry me. Fine, if this world were a coconut shell (but it’s not).
v [A13; a12] make, make into a coconut-shell bowl.

hunguy v [A; ac] do s.t. stealthily without anyone’s notice. Muhunguy
lang mug pangáun dì mu mangagda? Are you going to eat by yourselves in
secret without inviting us? Nakahunguy ang mga girilya pagsulud sa
garisun, The guerrillas were able to sneak into the garrison. Ihunguy
ning sulat pagtúnul níya, Give her this letter secretly.

hunhun v {1} [A3P; c1] pull down s.t. which wraps or encloses s.t. Duha
ka táwu ang nagpugung sa íyang buktun ug láin ang mihunhun sa íyang
panti, Two men held her arms while another pulled her panties down.
{2} [B; a12] for solids (grains, sand, powder) to settle, sink
gradually to a level. Muhunhun ang bugas kun uyúgun ang gisudlan niíni,
The rice grains will settle if you shake the container. Naghunhun ang
bungdù sa lubung, The mound of the grave is gradually settling.
{3} [B2; b6] for the hair to fall out. Mihunhun (nahunhun) ang ákung
mga buhuk nga kaspahun, I lost lots of hair because of dandruff. n hair
which has fallen out. Daghang hunhun nga nadá sa ákung pagsudlay, My
comb was full of hair after I finished combing it.

húni n song, musical sounds. Ang paburítu kung húni, My favorite song.
Ang húni sa busay, The song of the waterfall. v [A] make melodious
sounds. Naghúni na ang mga mangliw, The katydids are singing. mag-r-
n musician. mahuníun a melodious. paN-, panúni n {1} quality of
singing, intonation and pitch. {2} tone of voice. May dalang kasukù ang
panúni sa íyang tíngug, His voice carried a note of anger. v [B1456]
for the voice to sound a certain way.

húnit a {1} tough and resilient. Húnit ang tsitsarun, lisud usápun,
These pork rinds aren’t crisp. They’re tough and resilient and
difficult to chew. {2} being strong and firm, resistant to breakage.
Húnit kaáyu ning plastíka, Dì man mabuak ug dukdúkun, This is tough
plastic because it doesn’t break when you pound it. {3} difficult to
come by. Húnit kaáyu ang trabáhu run, Work is hard to come by these
days. {4} resistant to doing s.t. Húnit nga mga dalikdik, Stubborn
streaks of dirt that won’t come out. Húnit siya nga musugut, It is
difficult to get her to accept the marriage proposal. v {1} [B; b6] be
tough and resilient. {2} [B2; b6] become tough, resistant to breakage.
{3} [B4; b6] put up resistance to doing s.t. Naghúnit ku sa
pagrikumindǎr níya, I am hesitant to recommend him. {4} [A2] hold s.t.
nearly severed by a thread. Gamayng pánit na lang naghúnit sa ákung
tudlù nga natigbasan, A little bit of skin was all that was holding my
finger when it chopped off. ka- n strength to resist tension, tensile
strength. -un a having great tensile strength.

hunlak v {1} [A; c] throw, knock s.t. down from the place it is
resting. Nahunlak siya sa lubing íyang gisak-an, He fell from the
coconut tree he climbed. Ihunlak ang mga kargang baril ug mukusug ug
bawud, Throw the gasoline drums overboard if the waves grow big.
{2} [A23P; b4] for a plane to collapse. Nahunlak ang salug tungud sa
kadaghan sa bisíta, The floor gave way because of the many visitors.

hunlus v [B12; c1] {1} lower s.t. that is attached on a rope at a
higher point. Ihunlus (hunlúsun) ang bandíra mahápun, The flag is
lowered in the afternoon. {2} for anything attached s.w. to come down.
Nahunlus ang íyang karsúnis, His pants slipped down.

hunsuy n {1} pipe for smoking. {2} pistol (slang). v {1} [A23; a12]
make into a pipe. {2} [AN] smoke s.t. with a pipe. hunsuyhunsuy n name
for auger shells: long, slender shells which resemble cigarette
holders.

hunta n board of directors of a civic unit or enterprise. Hunta
munisipal, Municipal board. Ang hunta sa maghuhukum, The board of
judges. Hunta diriktíba, Board of directors.

huntà n section of structures arranged on top of one another or behind
one another. huntàhuntà n sections of s.t. Duha ka huntàhuntà ang ílang
balay, Their house has two stories. Ang huntàhuntà sa sayal sa
baylirína, The tiers of the ballerina’s dress. Ang huntàhuntà sa káha,
The sections of the till. v [A13; c1] be sections or divisions arranged
one above or behind another. Naghuntàhuntà ang húnus sa lamísa, The
drawers are stacked on top of each other on the table.

hunub v [A; b6] {1} seep through pores. Mihunub ang túbig sa yútà, The
water seeped into the ground. Nabasà ang lamísa kay gihunuban sa túbig
sa tadyaw, The table got wet because the water seeped out from the jar
onto it. {2} leak through small holes. {3} affect slowly, as if seeping
in. Mihunub sa íyang hunàhúnà ang usa ka mayugtánung panimalus, Dreams
of angry revenge seeped into his mind. Mihunub ang madutlánung katugnaw
sa íyang kinahiladman, A penetrating cold seeped into his innermost
bones. a leaky, allowing to seepage. n leak, seepage.

hunulhúnul = humulhúmul.

húnung v [APB2S3; c1] {1} stop, cease forward motion, cause s.t. to do
so. Kinsay naghúnung (nagpahúnung) sa dyip, Who stopped the jeep?
Gihunúngan mi sa dyip, The jeep stopped for us. {2} stop, discontinue
functioning or operating, cause s.t. to do so. Kinsa may muhúnung
(mupahúnung) sa ámung dúlà? Who will stop our game? Naghunung ang ákung
rilu, My watch has stopped. {3} [A2; a12] stop doing s.t. Mihúnung siya
ug hílak, He stopped crying. way — continuous, unceasing. -anan n bus
stop.

húnus_1 v [A; a] take a human life. Ulípun siya ug mahímung hunúsun ang
íyang kinabúhì bisan anus-a, He is a slave, and his life may be snuffed
out at any time.

húnus_2 n drawer. v [A; a1] pull a drawer out. Nakadungug ku nga dihay
mihúnus sa ákung lamísa, I’ve heard s.o. pulling the drawer in my table
out. hunushúnus n = húnus, n.

Hunyu n June. v see abril.

húp = húlup.

hupà = hulpà.

hupak v [B246] develop a crack such that the separated pieces are no
longer in contact. Mihupak ang simintu paglínug, The concrete cracked
in the earthquake. n crack.

hup-ak v [AB2; a12] peel, flake off, cause s.t. to do so. Ang pintal
muhup-ak basta dáan na, Paint peels off when it is old. n s.t. that has
peeled or flaked off.

hupas v {1} [B] for s.t. to lose its aroma, powers, flavor, and the
like by being left uncovered. Mihupas ang sigarilyu, The cigarette lost
its flavor. Nagkahupas na ang lamì sa bínu, The wine is losing its
bouquet. {2} [B] for land to lose its fertility. Sa púlù ka túig
muhupas ang yútà, In ten years the soil will lose its fertility.
{3} [B2; b6] for a feeling to wane. Nahupas na ang ákung gána
pagbiyáhi, I’ve lost my appetite for travelling. Nahupsan na kug
paílub, I’ve run out of patience.

*hupaw paN- v [A] sigh. Nanghupaw siya kay gikapuy, He is sighing
because he is tired. n sigh. ma-un a done with a sigh.

hupay = humpay.

huphup v [A2; b6] subside, sink down to a lower level. Ug muhuphup na
ang túbig sa linung-ag hináyi ang síga, When the rice water goes down,
lower the fire. Mihuphup na ang hubag pagbutu, The boil went down after
it came to a head.

húping v {1} [A; a] put long things carefully and neatly together to
make a thin flat grouping. Kinsay muhúping sa mga tabákù nga manutúhun?
Who will flatten out and pile the tobacco leaves neatly together?
Hupínga ang nagkalkag mung buhuk, Smooth out your hair. It’s all
disheveled. {2} [A; a1] flatten s.t. out by rubbing the hands over it.
Hupínga nang mantil nga kunut, Smooth out the tablecloth. a smoothed
out, piled and pressed together neatly. pa- v [A; a] groom the hair
flat. n preparation for grooming the hair.

húpit v {1} [B1; b6] have s.t. sticking to it such that it is hard to
get off. Naghúpit ang samput sa tái, Feces are sticking to his rump.
Nahúpit (gihupítan) ang buhuk kay napitlan sa tsuwinggam, Her hair is
all stuck together because chewing gum got into it. Naghúpit ang
papílis kay basà, The papers stuck together because they were wet.
{2} [B126] be soaked through so that the clothing, hair, feathers stick
to the body.

hupù v {1} [A; b6] crouch down to stay hidden. Mihupù ang kawatan likud
sa kural, The thief crouched behind the fence. {2} [A2; b6(1)] duck,
lower the head. Wà ku maigù sa búla kay mihupù ku pagkalit, The ball
didn’t hit me because I ducked suddenly.

hupukhupuk v [B46N] for the body to be pale and swelling slightly.
Muhupukhupuk (manghupukhupuk) ang ákung bitíis ug mukáun kug bábuy, My
legs swell slightly and get pale if I eat pork.

hupung, húpung n sickness characterized by swelling or puffiness all
over the body. v {1} [B3N; a4] swell with this disease. Mihupung
(mihúpung) ang íyang áping ug túhud. Gihúpung tingáli siya, Her face
and knees are swollen. She probably has húpung. {2} [B] become full of
an emotion or feeling. (→) a {1} swollen with this sickness. {2} full
of an emotion. Hupung sa pagmáhay ang íyang tubag, Her answer was full
of regrets. paN- = húpung.

huput v {1} [A; b6] obtain, possess s.t. abstract or s.t. rare and
especial. Wà pay nakahuput ánang matánga sa aláhas dinhi, No one here
has ever come to possess that sort of jewelry. Talagsaung katakus nga
íyang gihuptan, The extraordinary ability that he possesses. {2} have
dominion, rule over. Ang Ispanya mihuput sa Pilipínas ug kapin sa tulu
ka siglu, Spain ruled the Philippines for more than three centuries.

húpuy v [B26] for s.o. visibly angry to cool off. Nahúpuy ku sa ákung
kasukù paghílak níya, I cooled down when she cried. (→) a having a
subdued, not excitable disposition. Gáhì suk-un ang hupuy nga táwu,
It’s hard to provoke a mild person.

hupyà n hopia, a k.o. Chinese rounded pastry consisting of a flaky
crust with a bean or meat filling. v [A; a12] make or prepare hopia.

hupyak a sunken. Hupyak kaáyu ang dughan sa tisísun, He has T.B. and
has a sunken chest. v [B1; a12] become sunken. Muhupyak ang áping basta
matigúlang na, The cheeks become sunken when one gets old. Nahupyak ang
kík, The cake fell.

hurabhurab, hurabhúrab v [A; b6(1)] make angry, threatening gestures
and words. Kusug siyang muhurabhurab nátù ug masayup ta, He threatens
and frightens us when we commit mistakes. n angry and threatening words
and gestures.

hurádu n judge for contests. Gitimbangtimbang sa hurádu ang mananáug sa
banggà, The board of judges is deciding on who will be the winner of
the contest.

hurahura_1 v [A; b(1)] hurry s.o. up in a bossy manner. Gihurahurahan
sa purman ang mga kamaníru, The foreman hurried the street cleaners up.

hurahura_2 v [B1456] be eager and excited. Naghurahura siyang
nagpakisáyud sa risulta sa burd, He was eager and excited asking about
the results of the board exams.

hural = hurar.

huraminta = hiraminta.

huramintádu v [A13] run amok. Maghuramintádu ku ug dì ku nímu sugtun, I
will run amok if you do not accept me. n one who runs amok.

huramintu n {1} oath-taking. {2} pledge a soldier makes as to the
number of years he will serve. {3} term of office. v [A] pledge to
serve a number of years. Mihuramintu ug tulu ka túig ang rikulúta sa
armi, The army recruit pledged to serve three years.

hurar v {1} [A2; c] surrender, give oneself up to another’s power or
control. Ug ikay makigláyug nákù dì ku muhurar nímu, If you want to
fight me, I will not surrender to you. {1a} [A23; b6] make attempts at
reconciliation by being the first to speak. Nag-úlì na mi kay mihurar
siya nákù, We have made up now because she spoke to me. {2} make an
oath to do s.t. Mihurar ang tistígu sa pagtug-an sa tinúud, The witness
swore to tell the truth. Mihurar siya pagkamayur, He took the oath of
office to become mayor. n one who has surrendered.

húrat v [A; b(1)] look at s.o. fiercely or show s.t. to s.o. to
intimidate him. Gipaguwà níla ang ílang armalayits arun sa paghúrat sa
mga butanti, They brought out their rifles to intimidate the voters.
Mikúrug ku dihang gihurátan ku sa bágis, I trembled when the toughie
glowered at me. n display of s.t. that threatens.

húraw v {1} [A; a12] drive s.o. or s.t. away. Huráwa ang bábuy nga
nangáun sa kamúti, Drive away the pig that is eating the sweet
potatoes. {2} [A; b6(1)] scold s.o. severely and loudly using abusive
language and, usually, gestures. Ang inahan sa dalágang ámung
gibugalbugalan mauy mihúraw námù, The mother of the girl we made fun of
scolded us severely. {3} [A; a1] threaten gravely. Gihúraw sa blakmílir
nga itug-an ang asáwang naglaki, The blackmailer threatened to divulge
the wife’s illicit relations. {4} [A; a12] drive s.o. into working
faster. Ayaw kug huráwa kay magkasáyup hinúun, Don’t hurry me because
I’ll only botch it up. n threat. hurawhúraw v [A1; b6] for a person of
lower station to make an improper joke with a person of higher station.
Gihurawhuráwan ku sa bátà nga nakísì nu ákung karsúnis kay giut-an, The
child made a disrespectful joke when she asked me if my pants were torn
because I broke wind. n disrespectful banter. hurawhurawan a given to
disrespectful jokes.

huríkì n k.o. lizard fish.

hurimhurim n magical prayers said to give supernatural powers or
protection from harm (slang).

hurisdiksiyun n jurisdiction.

hurnáda n {1} work bee where the members may or may not be paid.
{2} round in a contest, e.g. boxing. Sa únang hurnáda natikíu dáyun
siya, He was felled by a T.K.O. on the first round. v [A2C; abc3]
{1} do s.t. by a work bee. Mihurnáda ang tanan paghinlù sa plása,
Everybody participated in a work bee to clean the town plaza. {2} do
s.t. in a large group. Naghurnáda silag ínum pagkadawat sa búnus, They
went together on a drinking spree upon receiving their bonus.

hurnu = hudnu.

hurs n {1} horse in a chess piece. {2} one’s girl friend or mistress
(from kabáyù, n 2—slang).

hurspáwir n horsepower. v [A13; b(1)] have, provide with [so-and-so]
much horsepower.

huruhuru n {1} a throbbing, continuous sound of ‘broom broom’.
{2} action which could be characterized by this sound. v do actions
which cause this sort of sound: {1} [A] shiver with cold. Naghuruhuru
siya sa katugnaw, He was shivering with cold. {2} [A13] burn with a
roaring flame. Naghuruhuru ang dakung dáub, The big bonfire is roaring.
{2a} for one’s love to be intense. Naghuruhuru giyud tingáli ang
pagbátì sa duha kay nalímut man sa ílang kaugalíngun, The two must have
fallen uncontrollably in love, for they have forgotten themselves.
{3} [A; b(1)] scold severely and abusively. {4} [A; b(1)] drive s.o. to
work in a hurry. Naghuruhuru siya nga ipahuman ang trabáhu, He rushed
us up to finish the job. {5} [A] be eager to do s.t. Naghuruhuru siyang
mupaúlì sa bakasiyun, She waited eagerly to go home for the holidays.

hurung a slow of understanding, not possessing much sense. Dì ka pa
hurung, gipangáyù tà tu nímung suklì, If you were not stupid, you would
have asked for the change. v [B135; b6] be, become stupid.

hurus v {1} [A] for the wind to blow hard. Ug muhurus ang hángin
mapadpad ang balay, If the wind blows hard, the house will be blown
down. {2} [B1256] be blown off from an attachment as if stripped.
Nahurus ang dáhun sa káhuy sa makusug nga hángin, The leaves of the
tree were blown away by the strong wind. 3, 4 = harus 1, 3.

hurut v {1} [A; a12] consume, use up all of s.t. Tulu ka kílung asúkar
ámung mahurut káda búwan, We consume three kilograms of sugar every
month. {1a} [b4(1)] run out of. Nahutdan mi ug gasulína, We ran out of
gas. {2} [A; ac] do s.t. to everything or everybody. Hutdun ta mu ug
latigu, I will whip every one of you. Hutdan tag kúhag búnga ang
mangga, Let’s take all the fruits on the mango tree. Ihurut ug hátag
ang mga ituy, Give all the puppies away. (←) v [A13; b6] for everybody
to go s.w. at one time. Naghúrut ang ámung mga mutsátsag pamista, All
of our maids left us to go to the fiesta. -in- mustering, gathering.
Hinurut ang íyang kusug gitikbas níya ang sawa, Mustering all his
strength, he slashed at the snake. hutdanay, hinutdanay, hutdánay,
hinutdánay n s.t. done to the end. Gustu ka diay ug láyug nga hutdanay
sa kusug, So you want a fight to the finish. Hinutdánay giyud sa
puhúnan nang ílang súgal, They gamble until one of them runs out of
money. ka-un(→), kahutdanun n state of being used up as an end effect.
Walay kahurutun (kahutdanun) sa túbig kay kusug ang tubud, There’s no
using up of the water because the spring flows strong.

hús_1 n hose to convey liquids. v [c1] use a hose.

hús_2 = hulus.

husà v [B146] for children to be restless and fidgety. Naghusà ang bátà
kay gihilantan, The child is restless because he has a fever.

húsà v [A; b3c] mumble words of anger or displeasure loud enough for
the affected party to hear. Naghúsà ang tigúwang kay wà bayri, The old
man muttered angrily because they didn’t pay him. n word mumbled,
action of doing so.

húsay a {1} orderly, without confusion. Húsay kaáyu ang dimunstrisyun
gahápun, The demonstration yesterday was very orderly. {2} well
arranged with everything put in its designated place. Húsay kaáyu ang
íyang kwartu, His room is very well arranged. Húsay kaáyu ang íyang
buhuk, His hair is very well groomed. n {1} hearing in court or court
trial. Sa húsay namatud-an nga tulu ka ripli nawálà, In the hearing it
came out that three rifles were lost. Human sa húsay ang sinumbung
gisintinsiyahan sa kamatáyun, At the end of the trial the accused was
sentenced to death. {2} settling of accounts. Mahibaw-an unyà nátù ug
pilay ákung útang human sa húsay, After we have settled accounts, we
will know how much I owe. v {1} [B2] be peaceful. Mahúsay lang ang
balay ug mubíyà siya sa ínum, The house will only know peace if he
quits his drinking. {2} [A13; a12] put in order. Naghúsay ku sa ákung
mga papílis pára sa lún, I am putting the documents for the loan in
order. Husáya nang mga pamantaláan ug ayúha ug hapnig, Put the
newspapers in order and stack them up. {3} [A; a2] untangle, unsnarl.
Husáya ang pasul kay ikay nakagubut, Unsnarl the fishline because you
tangled it up. {3a} comb or brush the hair. Muhúsay ku ánang ímung
buhuk nga nagkulipíti pag-áyu, I’ll brush out your hair. It’s all
matted. {4} [A; a12] hear out two opponents to judge them. Akuy muhúsay
ninyu arun mahibalu ku ug kinsay sad-an, I will hear both of you out so
I will know who is guilty. {4a} conduct a court hearing or trial.
{5} [AC; a12] settle up accounts. (→) a done with great ease and
convenience. Husay kaáyu kung manarbáhu dinhis balay kun walà ang mga
bátà, I can work with ease here in the house if the children are not
around. ka- n {1} peace, calmness. {2} order. -in-an n threads from
which entangling threads have been removed. -únun n {1} rope, thread to
be unsnarled. {2} protagonist to be heard out and culpability
determined. {3} accounts to be settled.

husgǎr v [A; b6] pass judgment. Muhusgǎr ang huwis human sa bista, The
judge passes judgment after the hearing. Makasalà ta ug maghusgǎr ta sa
átung isig ka táwu, We sin if we judge our fellowman. Si Maríya
Magdalína gihusgahang usa ka dakung makasasálà, Mary Magdalene was
adjudged a great sinner. n judgment. husgádu n court. v [B126; c] be
brought to court. Mahusgádu giyud ka, You will certainly be hailed into
court. Ngánung ihusgádu pa man ninyu ang inyung kásu? Why must you
bring your case to court?

hushus v [B12; c1] for s.t. fitted around the body or limbs to slip
down. Nagkahushus ang karsúnis sa bátà, The child’s pants are slipping
down.

húsi n a fine, plainly woven fabric from pineapple leaf fibers.

huslà v [AB2; a] for s.t. to come out of a place it is stuck in, cause
it to do so. Muhuslà ang unud sa kinhasun kun supsúpun, The flesh of
the seashell will come out if you suck on it. Siya ray naghuslà sa
udyung nga nagtaruy sa íyang buktun, He pulled out the arrow that
pierced his arm by himself. {2} [A3P; b8] remove an affliction. Kining
tambála muhuslà sa nirbiyus, This medicine relieves nervous tension.
Human gwai nahusláan siya sa hígal, After his orgasm his sexual desires
were relieved.

huslir = haslir.

huslù v [AB12; a12] {1} for s.t. that is loosely fitted around s.t. to
come off, cause it to do so. Huslúa ang didal, Take the thimble off.
{2} take off anything that is fitted around or take s.t. out of s.t.
that fits around it. Nagkahuslà na ang pul-an sa sundang, The handle of
the sword is coming off.

huslut v [B12; a2] take s.t. that is tightly fitted around s.t. off
usually with a jerking motion. Dì na mahuslut ning singsing kay nanagkù
ákung tudlù, This ring won’t get off any more because my fingers have
gotten too big.

huspital n hospital. v {1} [A123P; a3] hospitalize. Nahuspital kug lima
ka adlaw, I was hospitalized for five days. {2} [a2] build a hospital.

hustis n {1} hostess in a night club. {2} hostess at a party.
v {1} [B16; b6c1] be a hostess in a night club. {2} [A; b(1)] host a
party. Si Máma ang muhustis sa ílang dispidída, Mother will host a
going-away party for them.

hustisya_1 n {1} justice. {2} = husgǎr. v = husgǎr.

hustisya_2 n an ornamental potted shrub bearing orange or deep pink
flowers: Crossandra infundibuliformis.

hustiyas = ustiyas.

hustu {1} proper in time. Hustu na rung ilarga, Now is a good time to
leave. {2} enough, sufficient. Duha ka buuk pán hustu pára pugung sa
gútum, Two pieces of bread are enough to stave off hunger. Hustu sa
kaínit ang kapi, The coffee is just hot enough. {3} fitting. Hustu ba
ang sukud? Is it the right size? {4} right, correct. Hustu ang ímung
tubag, You gave the right answer. {5} having reached exactly
[so-and-so] much. Hustu nang usa ka dusína, This makes it exactly one
dozen. {5a} be complete. Íning instulmína, hustu na ang báyad, With
this installment the payment is complete. Hustu pa ba ang baráha? Is
the deck still complete? v {1} [A2] fit. Muhustu ba sa ímung tiil ning
sapatúsa? Will these shoes fit you? {2} [B126; a12] be correct.
{3} [A2; a12] reach a certain number. Makapanunud ka ug mahustu ka na
sa idad, When you reach legal age, you can claim your inheritance.
{3a} [A] for a debt to be paid off entirely. kahustúan n completion or
arrival at a quantity as an end. Way kahustúan sa átung bihilya kay
pirming kabuk-an, We can never complete our china set because s.t. or
other always breaks.

husù_1 v {1} [A2C; c1] pull out s.t. that is fitted tightly into s.t.
Wà maghúsù ang irù nga naghábal, The two dogs that were copulating
couldn’t get apart. Gihus-an ku níya sa íyang sundang, He pulled his
bolo out at me. {2} [B; b4] for s.t. fitted tightly into s.t. to work
loose. Nagkahusù ang pul-an sa kutsilyu, The handle of the knife is
coming loose. {2a} [b4] for the blade of an instrument to fly off on
one and hit him. Hihus-an siya sa prákul, The head of the axe came off
and injured him. a loose inside s.t.

husù_2 a bearing a close resemblance to one’s parents or forebears.
Husù kaáyu ka sa ímung inahan, You look exactly like your mother.
v [B26; b6] look exactly like one’s parents.

husud v [A; b] for several persons to take turns carrying a load to a
distant place in relays. Kay layù mag huspital husuran lang nátug
dáyung ang masakitun, The hospital is far away, so we’ll take turns
carrying the patient.

húsud v [A; b6] buy part of s.o.’s purchases from him, esp. food. Way
makahúsud ning sud-ána kay pára ni sa masakitun, I won’t sell any of
this food I bought because it is for the patient.

huswà_1 v [ABN; a2] slowly pull off s.t. that is around s.t. else; pull
off, come out. Kinsay naghuswà sa pánit nga gúma áring alambri? Who
slipped the insulation off of this wire? Muhuswà (manghuswà) usáhay ang
pánit sa bátang mga usa ka búlan sa maháyag, An infant’s skin sometimes
peels off a month after it is born. Ug huswáun (ihuswà) ku ning ákung
antipára, bulanun ang ákung tinan-awan, If I take my eyeglasses off, my
vision will get dim. —ang katahum for a dressed-up woman to lose her
beauty by doing s.t. to spoil her looks. Muhuswà ang ímung katahum ug
maglampásu kang nakaílis na, You won’t look nice any more if you scrub
the floor after you have put on your good clothes.

hut expression said to incite a dog to attack: sic him.

hút v [A; c] set food aside for s.o. Naghút kug isdà pára ra giyud
nímu, I set aside some fish just for you.

húta n letter J.

hútak v [A1P] do s.t. to excess. Ayaw dihag pahútak ug káun kay náa pay
wà kakaun, Don’t eat so much. Other people haven’t eaten yet.

hutay n line hung for drying. v [A; c] string a line for drying. Kining
alambri ákung ihutay pára sa hayhayan, I’ll string this wire up for a
clothesline.

hútay a s.t. crisp that has softened due to exposure to air. v [B] for
s.t. crisp to become soft and soggy. Mahútay ang inarmirulan ug
matun-ugan, Starched clothing will lose its crispness if you don’t keep
it out of the damp.

hutbà v [B256] for a surface to give way under weight. Nahutbà ang kát
sa síyang íyang gitungtúngan, He stepped on the caned seat and it gave
way.

hutbaw v [B246; b6] for the eyelids to swell from too much crying,
sleeping, or overindulgence in salty foods. Mihutbaw ang íyang mata ug
hinílak, Her eyes swelled from crying so much.

huthut_1 v [A; b5] drain, exhaust s.o.’s wealth. Muhuthut sa
katigayúnan ang súgal, Gambling drains off one’s resources. Gihuthut
(gihuthútan) lang ka ánang babayhána, That woman is just sucking your
money.

huthut_2 n {1} the coo of the turtledove or imitation of such a sound.
{2} barking of a dog. v [A; b6] {1} coo or imitate cooing by blowing
through the hands formed into a hollow cone. {2} [A; a] bark.

huthut_3 v [B12] collapse under heavy weight. Mahuthut ang salug ug
palabian sa mga bisíta, The floor will collapse if there are too many
visitors.

huthut_4 = haluthut.

hutik v {1} [A; b5] for fish to snap at the bait. Ígù lang hutikan sa
isdà ang paun. Mau nga dílì giyud matag-an, The fish just snap at the
bait. That’s why you can’t hook them. {2} [A; b] slightly hurt s.o.
Gihutikan nákù ang bátag latigu, I struck the child once lightly with
the whip. {3} [A; b] engage in petting or making love (humorous). (←)_1
{1} = hutik, 2. -ay v [c] pet or have intercourse. n action of
snapping.

hútik_2 a be all mud. Hútik ang tugkaran, The front yard is all mud.
v [B; b6] for an area to turn to mud. Muhútik (mahútik) nang dapíta ug
dì butangag balas, That place will become muddy if you don’t put sand
on it.

hutil n hotel. v [A13; a12] stay at, make into a hotel.

hutináni n name of a modern dance. v [A] do this dance.

hutluk a drunk. v [B12; a12] be, become drunk or intoxicated with
liquor. Nahutluk siyag ininum sa lambanug, He became intoxicated from
drinking the nipa alcohol.

huts = hut.

hutúhut n cool breeze. v [A23] for a cool breeze to blow. Mihutúhut ang
hángin gíkan sa búkid, A cool breeze came down from the mountain.

hutukhutuk v [A1; b3] stay motionless, staring into space and blinking
the eyes. Naghutukhutuk ka man. Nagdamgu ka? Why are you staring into
space? Are you daydreaming?

hut-ung n {1} layer or section. Kík nga duhay hut-ung, A cake in two
layers. Hut-ung sa dag-um, A layer of clouds. Kinahitas-ang hut-ung sa
katilingban, The highest layer of society. {2} section of an
organization. Ang mga kadíti nagmartsa sa parid sa ikaduhang hut-ung,
The cadets are marching in the parade in the second section. {3} a
quantity of s.t. usually set apart from others. Usa ka hut-ung sa mga
bátà nagdúlà pud sa sísu, A group of children also played on the
see-saw.

hutútay n k.o. Chinese soup with wanton noodles in it.

hútuy_1 n heavy, prolonged coughing. Gihútuy ku sa pagkinatáwa, I broke
into a coughing fit from laughing so much.

hutwang_1 v [B6; c1] for the rumps to be exposed. Nahutwang ang lubut
kay nawalis ang sinínà, Her behind was exposed because her skirt was
blown upwards.

hutwang_2 v [A; b6] for dogs to howl. Muhutwang ang irù ug makakitag
panulay, Dogs howl when they see devils. n howl.

huum v [A] put a mouthful of food into the mouth to eat. Muhuum kug
diyútayng kan-un kay gigútum ku, I’ll stick a mouthful of food into my
mouth because I’m hungry. n mouthful.

húum v {1} [B16] be confined such that air, gas cannot escape. Naghúum
ang nagkalainláing báhù sulud sa sinihan, Various odors were stored up
in the theater. Mihubag ang íyang núka kay nahúum kini iláwum sa
plastir, His boil swelled because the plaster kept the noxious gas in
it. {2} [B156; c6] for s.t. that provokes an intense unpleasant feeling
to be pent up. Ang suliran nga naghúum sa íyang dughan, The problems
that have been suppressed in her breast. Ayawg ihúum ang kayugut, Don’t
repress anger.

huung v [A2; a12] {1} get food that hasn’t been served. Hung-un sa
iring ang tinúlang isdà, The cat will get at the fish stew. {2} eat
s.t. right out of the pot. Maghuung na lang ku diri kay kapuy nang
magkúhag plátu, I’ll just eat from the pot, because it’s too much
trouble to get a plate. {3} [A; a12] do illicit acts with another man’s
wife. Dúnay muhuung sa asáwa inigbyáhi sa bána níyang kapitan, S.o.
takes over after the husband, who is a ship captain, goes off.

huut_1 a {1} tight in fit. Huut kaáyu ang ákung sapátus, My shoes are
very tight. Huut ang takub. Gáhing tangtángun, The cover is on very
tight. It’s hard to get it off. {2} tight in feeling. Huut kaáyu ang
ákung tunlan tungud sa kahadluk, My throat was tight with fear.
{3} crowded. Huut kaáyu ang sinihan, The moviehouse was very crowded.
v {1} [A23; acP] stuck or wedged tight. Ang bábuy mihuut sa imburnal,
The pig got stuck in the culvert. Ihuut ang kálù sa úlu, Put the hat
tightly on the head. {1a} [B4] for the chest, throat to tighten.
{2} [A2] fill up a space entirely. Ang íyang nawung mihuut sa ritrátu,
Her face filled up the photograph. (←) a very crowded. v [A13] be
jampacked. Naghúut ang mga pumapálit sa baratilyu, The buyers jampacked
the bargain sale. pa- v {1} [A; c] jam s.t. in s.w. {2} [A; a12]
practice pahuut sorcery on s.o. n k.o. sorcery causing swelling and
rapid death. The leaves and bark of a tree with magical properties are
caused to come into contact with the skin of the intended victim either
by hanging them in his path or by rubbing them onto him.

huut_2 = huung.

huwà v [A; b] separate things from each other by distance or by a
division. Ang ámung lúti gihuwaan ug subà, Our lots are separated by a
river.

huwa- for words with huwa- see also under hula-.

huwad (from húlad) v [A; b6(1)] {1} pour s.t. off into a container or
some place to be kept. Kinsay naghuwad sa mais diri sa salug? Who
poured the corn grains here on the floor? Ihuwad ang súkà sa butilya,
Pour the vinegar into the bottle. {2} pour money into an area. Ang Sibu
gihuwaran ni Markus ug duha ka milyun, Marcos poured two million into
Cebu. {3} [A2] for an image or likeness to appear in one’s offspring or
on s.t. it was transferred to. Ang ímung kaguwápa mihuwad ngadtu sa
ímung bátà, Your daughter has inherited your beauty. Ang hulagway sa
palutup wà makahuwad kay dílì hustug ínit ang plansa, The image didn’t
transfer because the iron was not hot enough. (←) n action of intense
pouring. huwaránan n receptacle, dumping place.

huwag, huwaghuwag n slender vine, the split stems of which are used for
tying purposes: Flagellaria indica.

Huwan name John. — dila krus the Filipino John Doe, name given to
represent the average Filipino. — Púsung character in folk tales of low
position but great cleverness who succeeds in getting the better of
people in high positions.

húwap v [A; b5] stroke gently. Natúlug ang bátà nga ákung gihúwap
(gihuwápan), The child that I stroked gently went to sleep.

huwas_1 v [A2PB; b4] {1} bring relief, be relieved. Kining tablitása
daling muhuwas (mupahuwas) sa hilánat, These tablets quickly relieve
fever. Mihuwas (nahuwas) na ákung sakit, My pain has been relieved.
Nahuwasan na siya sa kahadluk, He has recovered from his fear.
{1a} [b(1)] vent one’s anger on. Siyay gihuwasan sa ákung kalágut, I
vented my anger on him. {2} get over some bad character trait.
Nahuwasan na siya sa binúang human hikastiguhi, He got over his
foolishness after he got punished. pa- n s.t. used to relieve.

huwas_2 n k.o. catfish.

huwásay = wásay, n.

huwásù a shoddily made. Huwásù nga pagkaáyu sa sapátus, daling naukab,
The shoes were poorly repaired. They came apart again. v [B1; c1] for
workmanship to be poor.

huwat (from hulat) expression commanding a draft animal to stop: whoa.

huwátid = huyátid.

huwi- for words with huwi- see also huy-.

huwis n judge. v {1} [B16] be, become a judge. Huwisun siya sa Bugu, He
will be made a judge in Bogo. {2} [A; b(1)] autopsy a murder victim to
gather evidence. Gihuwisan únà ang minatay únà dad-a sa punirarya, The
body was autopsied before it was brought to the funeral parlor. —
dikutsilyu n massacre of all civilians caught in an area. Tungud kay
gipatay ang upisyal mimandù ang mga Hapunánun ug huwis dikutsilyu,
Because an officer was murdered, the Japanese put out the order for a
mass murder. v [A1; c] conduct a massacre. — dipas n justice of the
peace. †

huy_1 exclamation used upon greeting s.o. with whom one is intimate.
Huy, Abil! Kumusta ka! Hey, Abel! How are you! huyhúy v [C] associate
in a friendly way with (be on huy greeting terms). Dílì siya
makighuyhúy sa íyang silíngan, She keeps aloof from her neighbors.
n friendly association. panaghuyhúy n having feelings of amity toward
one another.

huy_2, hùy n {1} exclamation to attract immediate attention: hey! Hùy,
nag-unsa ka man dihà! Hey! What do you think you’re doing?
{2} exclamation uttered upon being provoked. Huy! Ngánung manghíkap man
ka! Hey! What do you think you’re doing touching me!

húy = hiluy.

huy-ab v [A2N] yawn. Nagpanghuy-ab kung nagpaábut nímu, I kept yawning,
waiting for you. paN- = huy-ab.

huyad v [A; c] raise the arms preparatory to striking. Gihuyad níya ang
pinútì, He brandished his sword. n action of doing so.

huyamì_1 a {1} poorly built, rickety in build. {2} fragile in health.
v [B; c1] come out poorly built. Mahuyamì (muhuyamì) ang ímung lamísa
ug dì butangan ug brís, Your table will be weak if you don’t put braces
on it.

huyamì_2 a {1} clumsy, awkward in movement. {2} moving lazily, without
energy. Dúgayng makapanlimpiyu ang táwung huyamig linihukan, A person
who moves lazily takes forever to get the cleaning done. v [B; a12] be
wanting in gracefulness and agility. Magkahuyamì ang linihukan sa usa
nga hápit nang maulitáwu, A youth nearing adolescence gets awkward in
his body movements.

húyang a {1} rickety, shaky. Húyang nga hagdan, Rickety staircase.
{2} lacking in firmness, resolve, or will power. Húyang siya kaáyu. Dì
makabalíbad, He’s weak-willed. He can’t say ‘no’. Ang táwung húyang
húmuk matintal, A weak person easily gets tempted. {3} weak, not said
with conviction or persuasiveness. Misugut siya sa usa ka húyang nga
tangdù, He agreed with a weak ‘yes’. Húyang kaáyung pangatarúngan,
Shaky arguments. v [B1; b6] for s.t. built to be or become rickety,
shaky or for s.o.’s will, argument to become weak. n {1} weaker sex,
women. Ang mga húyang nagpabílin sa báy, The weaker sex remained at
home. {2} homosexual, man affecting effeminate behavior. (→) {1} =
húyang, a. ma- a very weak. ka- n weakness, shakiness.

huyátid v [AN] stretch the body or limbs. Pagmata nákù mihuyátid
(nanghuyátid) ku, When I woke up, I stretched.

Huybis n Thursday. see birnis for verb forms. — Santu Maundy Thursday.

huygu_1 v [A; b(1)] {1} do s.t. in a lively and uninhibited way.
Mihuygu ug panáyaw ang mga batan-un pagtukar sa kumbu, The young people
danced animatedly when the band played. Dílì mi makahuygug tábì basta
náa ang prinsipal, We can’t gossip freely if the principal is around.
{1a} have freedom to do s.t. Dì nang bayhána makahuygug pangílad dinhi
sa Sibu kay nutádu na nà, That woman can’t get away with her swindling
in Cebu because she is well known. {2} [A12] perform an action, make a
move. Naghulat lang ang babáyi nga makahuygu ang ulitáwu, The woman is
just waiting for her suitor to propose. n {1} freedom to do what one
wants. Hatágan kug huygu ang ákung anak sa pagpílì sa babáying íyang
pangasaw-unun, I will give my son the freedom to choose whoever he
wishes to marry. {2} animated portion of the kuratsa dance.
{2a} exclamation encouraging brisk movement, esp. in the kuratsa.
{3} baby’s trick. Dúna na say bag-ung huygu nga nakat-unan si Dyí.
Matas dága na sad, Jay learned a new trick—blinking his eyes. — túdu
v [A; a] do s.t. as much as one can or wants to. Mihuygu túdu kug dágan
pagkakità ku sa anínu, I ran as fast as I could when I saw the shadow.
Wà mi makahuygu túdu ug ínum kay kúlang ang ámung kwarta, We could not
drink to our hearts’ content because we didn’t have enough money.

huygu_2 n gambling game. paN- v [A2; b6] engage in gambling. Nanghuygu
na pud ka bisag way kwarta, There you are gambling again, even though
you have no money. n the activity of gambling.

huygu_3 n complete set of utensils or equipment. Huygu nga plátu, Set
of china. Huygu sa sála, Living room set.

huyhuy_1 a for the shoulders to slump. Huyhuy ang abága nga miulì si
Nistur tungud sa kapakyas, Nestor went home with drooping shoulders
because he failed. v [BN; c1] for the shoulders to droop.

huyhuy_2 n sound of repeated huy’s said to make a horse get going.
v [A; a12] command a horse to go. Mitarúti ang kabáyung gihuyhuy sa
kutsíru, The horse trotted when the rig driver said getty-up.

huyhúy see huy_1.

huyù a compassion, tender. Huyù ang panagway ni Hisus nga nakigsulti sa
mga tinun-an, Jesus talked to his disciples with a tender look on his
face. {2} soft, courteous. Mibalíbad siya sa huyung tíngug, She refused
in a soft and courteous tone of voice. v {1} [B126] be tender,
soft-tempered. Way makahuyù sa gáhì níyang kasingkásing, Nothing can
soften his hard heart. ka- n state of being compassionate.

huyúhuy n breeze.

húyung, huyunghúyung n mire, a place which looks like solid ground but
is deep mud.

huyup v {1} [A; a] blow air. Tugnaw basta muhuyup ang amíhan, It’s cold
when the northeast wind blows. Huypa ang ákung samad, Blow on my wound.
{2} [A3; a2] blow s.t. away. Gihuyup sa hángin ang mga papílis, The
wind blew the papers away. Gihuypan níya ang libru sa abug, He blew the
dust off the books. {3} [A2; a] treat an ailment by huyup. n {1} action
of blowing. {2} folk treatment of illness whereby the doctor whispers
magical words on the ailing portion of the body and blows softly on it
three times. (←) n a children’s game of blowing rubber bands with the
mouth. v [AC; a] play this game. huypanay = húyup.

huyut v [B] for s.t. to bend in the middle under weight. Húyang ang
salug kay muhuyut kun tumban, The flooring is weak because it sags when
you step on it. Mihuyut (nahuyut) ang kisami, The ceiling sagged in the
middle. Nagkahuyut ang salug nga húyang, Loose floor is becoming
wobbly. {2} [B2] sink, as objects do in the sand or mud. Muhuyut
(mahuyut) ang ímung tiil kun itunub sa lápuk, Your feet will sink if
you step in the mud. a {1} tending to sag. {2} allowing the feet to
sink when stepped in.

húyut = húsud.

hwasa, hwasà = aliwása.

hwisyu n {1} sense, judgment of right and wrong. Walay hwisyu ang
paggastu sa tibuuk puhúnan, It was showing poor judgment to spend all
the capital. {2} state of consciousness. Gianistisyáhan ku, piru wà
giyud ku mawad-i sa hwisyu, I was anesthetized, but I did not lose
consciousness.
