


=== B ===


ba {1} question marker used in questions with no interrogative. Muanhi
ka ba ugmà? Will you come here tomorrow? {1a} with indirect questions:
whether. Pangutan-a si Husi ug nahinumdum ba siya, Ask José if he
remembers it. {1b} was it [so-and-so]? Písus ba tu ímung gihátag nákù?
Was it a peso you gave me? {2} dì, dílì — {2a} isn’t that the case?
Mulikù ta sa tuu, dì ba? We turn right, don’t we? {2b} [so-and-so] is
surely going to be the consequence. Hilabti nang makinilya. Dì ba
latiguhun tika, Just touch that typewriter. You think I’m not going to
smack you one? {3} with interrogatives: particle indicating impatience
or a strong questioning tone. Pila bay plíti? How much is it now? unsa
— what do you say? how about it? Unsa ba, palitun nátù tung awtu? How
about it? Shall we buy that car? — gud particle indicating disbelief.
Mangáwat ba gud ku? Do you think I would steal? {4} shall we say?
Muanhi ka ug sayu ugmà, mga alas sayis ba, Come here early tomorrow,
shall we say, six o’clock? {5} X — Y — either X or Y. Muanhi ka dáyun.
Pagkaugmà ba, sa sunud adlaw ba, Come here as soon as possible. Either
the next day or the day after that. {6} particle asking if the hearer
understands. Si Mistir Krus tu, ag maistru ba, That was Mr. Cruz, the
teacher, you know. Sugkáyun, pára ba maáyung pagkaságul, Stir it so,
you know, it will get well-mixed. {7} in exclamations: {7a} how
unbelievable that it is that way! Pagkabúang ba gayud nákù, How could I
be so foolish! {7b} though. Itusmaw sa ínit nga túbig? Pagkamakalulúuy
ba sab, Throw it into boiling water? How pitiful! laliman ka — can you
beat that! Laliman ka ba niánà! Bayran ang tulu ka awtu ug kás! Can you
beat that! Paying cash for the three cars! tíaw mu — Just imagine. Tíaw
mu bay latiguhun sa publiku! Imagine! Being whipped in public! ra — see
ra.

bá {1} = báli, 2 (dialectal). {2} = bála_2.

*bà (from sábà) — dihà it is not true, despite what you say. Bà dihà!
Gustu lagi ku nímu, Oh, come on. I do so like you! Bà dihà uy. Wà ka
man lagi manghúwat, Oh, shut up! You did not wait for me.

báag_1 v [APB; c1] {1} make, become embers. Nagbáag (nagpabáag) akug
igpaplantsa, I’m making embers for the iron. Nabáag na ang tibuuk
balángay únà mahiabut ang bumbíru, The whole village was already in
embers before the firemen arrived. {2} heat s.t., become hot. Nagkabáag
ang kaínit sa mga táwu nga nagkaduul ang iliksyun, The people are
becoming more and more heated up as the election approaches. Baága
(ibáag) ra ning gátas, Please heat this milk. n heat. Ang báag sa adlaw
mauy nakaitum kanákù, The heat of the sun has made me black. (→),
baagbaag v [B; c] for actions to become incoherent, aimless. Nabaagbaag
(nabaag) ang íyang diklarasiyun, His declaration became senseless and
incoherent. Nagkabaagbaag siyag panghangyù ug pakitábang, She went
around everywhere asking for help. baagbaagun a of an incoherent sort.

baang, báang_1 v {1} [B3; c] plug up a hole. Sagbut ang nakabaang sa
imburnal, Garbage has choked up the sewer. {2} [A; c] stuff s.t. into
the mouth. Pakit-ag kan-unun dì ba mubáang dáyun, Show him s.t. to eat
and he’ll shove it into his mouth instantly. n action of opening the
mouth to shove food into it.†

báang_2 v [A; a] extract starch from the buri palm. (→) n buri starch.

báat = baláat.

báb = babhir.

baba, bába = bála_2.

bàbà n {1} mouth. {2} any mouth-like opening. Bàbà sa lángub, Mouth of
the cave. Bàbà sa butilya, Mouth of the bottle. — sa atay pit of the
stomach. v {1} [A12; a12] hit in the mouth. Bàbaun (bàbáun) ku siyag
pátid, I’ll kick him in the mouth. {2} [A; b6(1)] put a mouth-like
opening. Bàbáan ku ang alkansíya, I’ll saw a slit on the piggy bank.
{3} [b2] utter a truth without even knowing that one is doing so.
Hibàbaan nákù siya nga nangáwat, I hit on him as the thief without even
knowing it. paN- v {1} [A1; b6] rant at or scold s.o. in a loud voice.
Nagpamàbà na sad ang maldíta níyang asáwa, His termagant wife is
ranting at him again. {2} [A23] say words glibly. Maáyu siya mamàbà mau
nga daghang trátu, He is glib. That is why he has many girl friends.
{3} [A2; b6(1)] say special prayers to ward off evil. Manágan giyud ang
mga dautang ispiritu ug pamàbáan nákù, The evil spirits will run away
from me if I utter special prayers against them. n {1} ranting.
{2} gift of gab. {3} prayers to ward off evil. -in- n oral. Nahagbung
ku sa pasúlit nga binàbà, I failed in the oral examination. -an, -un
a tending to rant in a loud voice. tigpaN- n spokesman, press relations
officer. Ang tigpamàbà sa wilgista abugádu, The strikers have a lawyer
as their spokesman.†

babad v [A; c1] {1} turn around on its axis. Wà makababad ang pála sa
pambut kay nagápus sa sámù, The boat propeller would not turn because
seaweeds were entangled in it. Ibabad (babara) ang ímung kayril, Twirl
your key chain. {2} brandish. Nagbabad ang pildírung kaáway sa
bandírang putì, The defeated enemy waved the white flag.

bábad_1 v {1} [A; c1] make a torch by binding dry strips of coconut
leaves, coconut sheaths, or similar materials together. {2} [c1] swing
a torch made in this way to cause it to flare up. Ibábad (babára) ang
sû arun mudakù ang síga, Swing the torch to fan up the light.

bábad_2 v [A; c] immerse or soak in liquid. Dì ku mubábad sa túbig kay
dalì ra kung tugnawun, I won’t immerse myself in the water because I
easily catch chills. Gibábad ang karni sa túyù, The meat was soaked in
soy sauce.

bábag_1 = balábag, v1, 2, 3, n1, 3.

bábag_2 a for meals to be irregular and scanty. v {1} [A] eat meals on
an irregular and scanty basis. Mahibalu bayà gud ku mubábag ug káun, I
know how to make do with irregular and scanty meals. {2} [B] for meals
to become irregular and scanty. Nabábag ang ílang káun sa nasakit ang
amahan, Their meals got to be irregular and scanty when their father
got sick.

babaw n place up s.w. hiN-/haN-(←), hiN-/haN- v [B5] get to be almost
full. Muhimábaw (muhimabaw) na gánì ang baldi, sirhi ang grípu, When
the pail is almost full, close the faucet. i-, i-(←) n {1} place high
up. Si Guryu túa sa ibábaw nangáhuy, Goryo is in the hills gathering
firewood. {2} place on top of s.t. Ibabaw (ibábaw) sa lamísa, On top of
the table. Ibabaw sa patay kung láwas, Over my dead body. i- a high.
Ibabaw ra ang inyu sa ámù, Your place is higher than ours. Ibabawng
balay balauránan, Senate. — pa niánà in addition to that. v [b6P]
{1} put s.t. on top of s.t. else. Giibabwan (gipaibabwan) ku sa ákung
sinínà ang ímung libru, I placed my clothes on top of your book.
{2} put s.t. higher. Ibabwi (paibabwi) lag diyútay, Just elevate it a
little. pai- v {1} [A] soar up. Mipaibabaw ang uwak nga gilútus sa
banug, The crow soared up because it was pursued by the hawk.
{2} [B125] be the part on top. Ang nawung sa panaptun mauy maibabaw,
The right side of the cloth should be on the outside. tig-(←) v [A23P;
b6P] {1} go to surface. Mitigbábaw (mipatigbábaw) ang submarínu sa
dágat, The submarine surfaced in the sea. {2} came out distinctly.
Mitigbábaw (mipatigbábaw) giyud ang íyang tíngug bísan sa kasábà, His
voice came out distinctly despite the noise. {3} prevail. Sa katapúsan
mutigbábaw (mupatigbábaw) gayud ang katarúngan, In the end justice
prevails. Ang gibátì níya kang Túni gitigbabáwan (gipatigbabáwan) sa
gibátì níya kang Prid, Her feelings for Fred prevailed over her
feelings for Tony. patig- v {1} = tig-. {2} [A; c] air out a sentiment,
heave a prayer, etc. to s.o. above. Ipatigbábaw ang inyung pasalámat
ngadtu kang Hiyúba, Offer your prayers of thanksgiving to Jehovah.

bábay bye-bye. v [A; b6] for a child to say bye-bye. hiN- a fond of
waving bye-bye.

babáyi see bayi.

babaylan = baylan.

babha n slash. v [B; b5] have a wide slash in it. Nagbabha ang íyang
kílid, His side was slashed wide open.

babhir n bobbed hairstyle. v {1} [A; c] bob hair. {2} [A13] wear one’s
hair bobbed.

babil a be bothered with s.t. s.o. is carrying. Ayaw pagdalag mga bátà
kay babil ka unyà kaáyu, Don’t take the children. They’ll be a
nuisance. (←), babil v [A; a] be a burden. Nakababil (nakabábil) sa
ákung paghigdà kining pistúla sa ákung luyu, This pistol in my hip
pocket bothered me as I lay down to sleep. ka-(←) v [A13] {1} have
difficulty in carrying more than one can. Nagkabábil kug dala sa mga
kartun, I was having a hard time carrying all the different cartons.
{2} be in great disorder. Nagkabábil ang kwartu kay way nanghípus, The
room was in great disorder because no one picked it up.

bábit_1 n heavy metal or stone used by a deep-sea diver to weigh him
down. v [A; c6] use a weight in diving. Ang mga mananawum ug pirlas
magbábit inigsáwum níla, The pearl divers use a weight when they dive.

bábit_2 n female sex organ (slang).

bábul gam n bubble gum. v {1} [A1] chew, get bubble gum. {2} [A13; b6]
put bubble gum s.w.

babung, bábung a good-looking girl (slang).

babuy v [a4] have an epileptic fit. Mibuwà íyang bàbà dihang gibabuy
siya, He was frothing when he had an epileptic seizure. -un
n epileptic.

bábuy_1 n pig, pork. Mahal ang bábuy karun, Pork is high now. — ihálas,
sulup wild pig. v {1} [A12] obtain a pig. Nakabábuy aku ug tulu ka buuk
sa pagbatun ku sa íyang anay, I got three pigs for taking care of his
sow. {2} [AP; a2] {a} corner, pin down. Nakabábuy (nakapabábuy) ang mga
Písi sa mga Múrus sa pulù, The P.C. blockaded the Moros on the island.
Nabábuy kami tungud sa dakung bahà, We were blocked in because of the
great flood. {b} checkmate (in chess). Babúyun nákù ang ímung piyun,
I’m going to checkmate your pawn. {c} [AP; c1] tie up capital. Ang
ákung kwarta nabábuy sa nigusyu, My money is tied up in business.
a piggish, dirty. — ug balatían swinish, having no moral qualms. paka-
v [a12] consider, treat like a pig. Gipakabábuy lang ku nímu, You just
treat me like a pig. -an(→) n piggery. v [A1] have, obtain a piggery.
-in- a {1} like a pig. {2} for a scolding to be abusive. v [A; a12]
{1} treat like a pig. Gibinábuy ku nílag hikut, They hog-tied me.
{2} be mercilessly scolded. Gibinábuy ku níyag kasábà, He scolded me
abusively. mag-r-(→) n pig-dealer.

bábuy_2 n bulge in a muscle which results from a blow. v [B246] have a
muscle bulge. Mibábuy ákung buktun, My arm got a charley horse.

babuybabuy n {1} k.o. louse which hides in crannies and lives in damp
places. {2} k.o. cowrie. v [a4] infested with wood lice. Gibabuybabuy
ang hugasan, The sink is infested with wood lice. {3} = bábuy_2.

bad-ay v {1} [B1] be placed transversely across. Nagbad-ay ang buktun
sa bána sa tiyan sa íyang asáwa, The husband’s arm lay across his
wife’s stomach. {2} [AN] appear prominently in a bulge along the
surface. Mibad-ay (namad-ay) sa yútà ang gamut sa akasya, The roots of
the monkeypod tree stick out along the ground. Barikus nga namad-ay
(mibad-ay) sa bitíis, Varicose veins appearing prominently on the legs.
paN- v [A23] be strewn about. Pagkahū́g sa trák namad-ay ang daghang
patay, When the truck fell, dead bodies were strewn all about.

badaybaday = baraybaray.

badbad_1 v {1} [AB123; a] untie, get untied. Nakabadbad ang bábuy sa
íyang gihigtan, The pig got loose from where he was tied. Badbára na
ang bindáhi, Undo the bandage. {2} [A; a] liquidate a debt. Badbárun
(badbarun) ku ang ákung útang, I will pay off my debts. {3} [A; a]
solve a problem. Badbárun ra nátù ang prublíma, We’ll solve the
problem. {4} [A; a] translate. Ang ubra ni Línin wà pa mabadbad sa
Binisayà, The works of Lenin have not been translated into Visayan.
a resolved, paid off. badbaran n skein holder, a device to hold a skein
of thread as it is being reeled.

badbad_2 n k.o. thorny tree.

badigard n bodyguard. v [B; b] {1} be, become a bodyguard. {2} watch
over. Gibadigaran si Tasyug maáyu sa asáwa kay himabayi, Tacio’s wife
watched him closely because he is fond of women.†

badingding n term of endearment to a baby. Kumusta ang ákung
badingding? How is my little darling? a very dear. Badingding kaáyu
ning ákung anak, This baby is very dear to me. v [A23; a12] make s.o.
his little darling.

badlipánis a {1} badly punished in boxing. Badlipánis siya sa siks
ráwun, He was badly punished in the sixth round. {2} have undergone
sexual intercourse. v [AP; a12] {1} maul s.o. in boxing. {2} have heavy
sexual activity with a woman. Nabadlipánis siya sa íyang bána, Her
husband gave her a good sexual going over.

badlis v {1} [AB3; a] draw a line, for a line to show itself. Mibadlis
sa íyang agtang ang dagkung ugat, His forehead was prominently lined
with veins. Mibadlis sa íyang nawung ang kahadluk, Fear was written all
over his face. Kinsay nagbadlis sa átung bungbung? Who drew a line on
our wall? {1a} cross out the mark made by a bettor in cockfighting as
an indication that the bet is taken on. Misulud aku sa galyíra ug
gibadlísan ku ang naglugrug tris-idus, I went into the arena and I took
on the bet of three to two. {2} [A; b6] set limits to a person’s
behavior. Badlísan ku ning tawhána kay nagdahan ang batásan, I will put
a stop to this guy because he’s getting worse and worse. n {1} lines in
the skin. {1a} — sa pálad, kinabúhì n fate. Mau tingáli giyuy badlis sa
íyang pálad nga maminyù siyag kriminal, Perhaps it was her fate to
marry a criminal. {2} line drawn. {3} Ash Wednesday. — Myirkulis, ting-
= badlis, 3. -an a {1} having lines. {2} name given to k.o. danggit and
sapsap that have light vertical lines on the upper sides.

badlit = kadlit.

badlun n name given to various k.o. crevalles and pompanos: Caranx
compressus, stellates; Gnathanodon speciosus, etc.

badlung v [A; a12] tell s.o. to stop doing s.t., admonish. Ang kanáway
mubadlung sa tímug, The west wind makes the east wind stop blowing.
Badlúngun nímu ang himabáyi nímung bána, You should admonish your
husband because he chases after women. n admonishment not to do s.t.
pa- v [A; ac] {1} allow s.o. to admonish one. Dì giyud nà siya
pabadlung, He won’t obey (allow anyone to tell him to stop). {2} act in
such a way as to cause admonishment. Nagpabadlung na pud ka, You’re
making a nuisance of yourself again. -un(→) a deserving to be told to
stop, troublemaker. ma-un a admonishing. Mabadlúngung tinan-awan, An
admonishing look.

badmintun n badminton. v [A; a] play badminton.

badúduy n children’s word for genitalia.

bad-un = balad-un. see balà_1.

badung n k.o. long sword made by Muslims.

badut = barut.

badútu = barútu.

badyang_1 n k.o. tuberous plant with arrow-shaped leaves reaching 4′
and more. Edible but itchy root, grown as ornamental and wild: Alocasia
macrorrhiza.

badyang_2 = báyang_1.

badyángun n k.o. fish, a small bulgan.

badyi = bayi.

badyibadyi = bayingbaying.

badyikdyik a for a girl to be sexy (slang). Badyikdyik kaáyu, She’s
very sexy. n s.o.’s mistress. v {1} [B2; b6] become sexy. {2} [a12]
make into one’s mistress. -an a keeping a woman. Badyikdyíkan siya kay
kwartáhan, He keeps a woman because he’s got lots of dough.

badyit_1 n budget. Ang badyit sa Pilipínas mikábat nag duha ka bilyun,
The budget of the Philippines has reached two billion. v [A] budget,
allocate money. Kamau ka bang mubadyit sa ímung kítà? Do you know how
to budget your income?

badyit_2 = kadlit.

badyù a for sweet potatoes to have a rotten, sour taste. Badyù ang lamì
sa kamúti nga giúlud, Sweet potatoes that are infested with worms taste
rotten. v [a4] get infested with rot. Gibadyù ang tanan nílang mga
kamúti, Their sweet potatoes are all infested with rot. -un a of a
rotten and sour quality.

badyung n prolonged humming, droning, buzzing sound. v {1} [A] make a
droning sound. Magdalì ta kay mibadyung nang ayruplánu, Let’s hurry
because the airplane has started to drone. {2} [A; b6] strike close to
s.t. so as to cause a whizzing sound without actually hitting it.
Badyúngan ku sa ákung kúmù ang ímung nawung, I’ll make your face feel
the whizzing sound of my fists.

bag word used in writing to indicate the sound of a blow.

bág n {1} bag, pocketbook. {2} kitty in a mahjong game. {3} = indibág.
v [A] have, obtain a bag. Babáying nagbág ug putì, A lady with a white
bag.†

bága n embers. mukáug — be a tough character (eat live embers).
v {1} [AB; a2] make, become embers. Nabága (mibága) ang úling, The
charcoal turned into embers. Bagáha ang úling kay mangutaw ku, Make
embers because I’m going to iron. {2} [A2S] glow. Nagbaga ang plantsa,
The iron is glowing. (→) v [A; b56] broil small dried fish by putting
them in a plate with embers and shaking them. Bagaha (bagahi) ang
bulinaw, Broil the anchovies. (→) n k.o. red fish. bagabaga n {1} name
given to various k.o. fish with bright red scales; soldier fish, esp.
Holocentrus spp. and Myripristis spp. {2} k.o. centipede with bright
red body. bagahan a having live coals. baghanan n grill.

bagà a {1} thick in dimension. Ang ámung lamísa hinímù sa bagà nga
tabla, Our table is made of thick wood. {2} dense. Bagà kaáyu ang duut
sa táwu, A dense crowd of people. {3} rich (from — ug bulsa ‘fat
walleted’). — ug búang misbehaving in an unusual way. Bagà ug búang si
Línu kay nanglìlì samtang nalígù ang íyang maistra, Lino is very
naughty because he peeped while his teacher was taking a bath. — ug
gwatsi making subtle pranks which are not easily seen through. — ug
nawung brazen. Bagà ug nawung ning tawhána. Bisan ug wà gustuhi
mangulitáwu lang gihápun, This man sure has a lot of nerve. Even though
she does not like him, he still continues to court her. v [B; a]
{1} thicken. Undángi ug mubagà (mabagà) na ang pintal, Stop when the
paint thickens. {2} become dense. Mibagà ang panun sa táwu pag-abut sa
prisidinti, The crowd became dense when the president arrived.
{3} become rich. Nabagà (mibagà) siya pag-intra níya sa pulitika, He
became rich when he entered politics. {4} — ang búang misbehave
seriously. Mubagà ang íyang búang kun mahubug, He misbehaves seriously
when he is drunk. {5} — ang nawung be completely brazen. Nagbagà lang
ang nawung ánang bayhána. Bisag dílì kaíla pangayúan, That woman is
completely shameless. She asks for things from complete strangers.
pa-(←), pa- sa nawung v [A; c] do s.t. despite the shame it might
bring. Nagpabágà lang siya ug hangyù nga papangasáwa, She swallowed her
pride and begged him to marry her. kabalag-un, gibag-un n thickness.
kinabag-an n thickest.

bágà n lungs.

bagaang v [B156] be burdened, loaded with a heavy responsibility. Aku
ang nagbagaang ug gastu sa ímung pagtuun ug pagbuguybúguy hinúuy ímung
ibálus? I bore the burden of your schooling, but how do you repay me?
You bum around. Ikaw ang nabagaang sa tanang mga buluhatun, All the
household responsibilities are shoved onto you.

bagáang v [B1256] {1} feel a burning pain upon eating hot, spicy food.
Nabagáang ku sa síli pagkáun nákug sálad, When I ate the salad I felt
the hot sting of the peppers. {2} be stung by insulting words which are
true. Nabagáang ku sa insultu sa maistru, I was stung by the teacher’s
insulting remarks.

bagàbà n edible seaweed found clinging to offshore rocks, roughly
cylindrical, branching and hard as bone cartilage. paN- v [A2; b]
gather this seaweed.

bagákay n k.o. thin bamboo with long internodes in yellow and green
varieties, used for baskets, flutes, etc.: Schizostachyum lima and some
other non-climbing species. -un a {1} having a yellowish color.
{2} long and thin like bagákay. {3} = bugawísan.

bagal_1, bágal_1 a {1} lumpy. Bagal kaáyu ang yútà pagdáru níla, The
soil was very lumpy when they plowed the field. {2} have s.t.
protruding in a lump. Bágal ang íyang kílid kay dihà may pistúla, There
was s.t. protruding on his side because he had a pistol. {3} = bagul,
a. n impacted, chunky earth. Dagkù kaáyu ang bagal sa yútà sa daruhan,
The lumps of earth in the fields are very big. v [B] {1} become lumpy.
{2} be protruding. {3} = bagul, v. bagalbagal v [B] become lumpy. Ang
kapi mibagalbagal kay ang túbig wà pa man mubúkal, The powdered coffee
was full of lumps because the water was not boiling.

bagal_2, bágal_2 n shell of eggs, cartridges, and all shellfish but
shrimps. Bagal sa mga kinhasun, Shells from the sea animals. Bagal sa
blastingkap, Empty shells of a dynamite blasting cap. (←), -an(←)
n k.o. shrimp of tidal swamps, growing to 3″ with a thick transparent
shell.

bagalnga n small tree of thickets: Melia azedarach.

bagamundu a {1} vagrant. {2} a variation of the game kulilísi in which
two groups, each with their own leader, complete in verse, the one
group trying to gain the privilege of being admitted to the wake where
they can join the other group in the game. v {1} [B16] become a
vagabond. Nabagamundu si Uskar kay way pirmaninting pinuy-ánan, Oscar
became a vagabond because he has no permanent place to stay. {2} [A;
b6] play the game bagamundu.

bagan = mau ra ug (dialectal). see mau.

bagánaw n pool of water left after rain or after water has been washed
over a dry area. v [B; c] become a pool of water. Ang kusug nga ulan
nakapabagánaw (nakabagánaw) sa túbig, The heavy rain has turned the
puddle into pools.

bágang n {1} k.o. beetle found on coconuts. {2} k.o. brown beetle
commonly found in the Australian pine (agúhu).

bag-ang n molars. Mikágut ang íyang bag-ang sa labihang kalágut, He
gritted his teeth in extreme anger. v {1} [a12] hit in the molars.
{2} [a3] be hit by the truth of a statement that hurts. Nabag-ang siya
sa ákung sulti kay hingmatud-an, My words hit him in a vital spot
because they happened to be true. -an a {1} having molars. {2} be
completely outstanding because of some possessions. Siya mauy
bag-ángang dátù sa ámù, He is well-known for his wealth in our town.
v [B12] become rich, powerful.

bag-ángan n {1} spotted eagle ray: Aetobatus narinari. {2} k.o. red and
black porgy: Lethrinius rhodopterus.

bagansiya n vagrancy. v [a3] charged with vagrancy. Nabagansiya si Rus
kay nasakpan nga namampam, Rose was charged with vagrancy because she
was caught engaging in prostitution.

bag-as v [B12] {1} for animal tissue to decay and dry up. Ug mabag-as,
dílì na bahù, Once it has decayed and dried, it doesn’t smell. {2} for
tough guys to die (slang). Nabag-as na ang matun, The tough guy kicked
off.

bagási, bagásu n bagasse, dried pulp of the sugar cane. bagasíru
n employee in a sugar mill who gathers the pulp. v [B6; a2] be, become
a pulp-gatherer.

bágat v {1} [AC; ac] meet, esp. on the sea. Nagbágat ang duha ka barku,
The two ships met on the sea. Adtu níla ikabágat ang matahum nílang
kaugmáun, There they will meet their rosy future. {2} [AC; ac2] barter
products (from the notion that one goes to meet a fisherman and
exchanges s.t. for his fish). Átung bagátun ang isig nátù kaabut, We
will exchange our products with each other. Bagátan (ibágat) ku ning
ákung humay ug isdà, I will barter my rice for fish.

bagatúngul = balbangáan.

bagaw_1 as if (dialectal).

bagaw_2 = bagal_2.

bag-aw v [B1256] be kept waiting. Nabag-aw man lang kug pinaábut nímu,
You kept me waiting for a long time.

bágay a {1} befitting, becoming. Bágay kaáyu sa íyang nawung ang
antipára, His glasses are very becoming on his face. {2} for
instruments to be in tune. Bágay na nang ímung sista, Your guitar is
tuned now. {2a} for voices to be blended. Bágay kaáyu ang ílang mga
tíngug, Their voices are well blended. v {1} [B2C] harmonize with,
match. Mibágay sa kurti sa íyang láwas ang íyang sinínà, Her dress is
very good for her sort of body. Nagbágay ang íyang bag ug sapátus, Her
bag and shoes match. {2} [A; a] tune musical instruments. Mubágay pa ku
sa sista, I’ll tune the guitar first. {3} [B2; a1c3] for words to
rhyme. Ang púlung ‘úlud’ dílì mubágay sa ‘pálad’, The word ‘worm’
doesn’t rhyme with ‘palm’. paN- n rhyming, verse-making.

bagaybay n fat in a fish that develops into eggs. v [B34; b4] develop
bagaybay. Mau rung panahúna ang bangrus mubagaybay, This is the time
the milkfish develops egg fat. -un a {1} having bagaybay.
{2} big-stomached. Bagaybáyun ug tiyan ang mga táwung tambuk, Obese
people have big stomachs.

*bagbag pati- = alibagbag.

bagdal a for a face to be too chubby to be pretty. v [BN] be, become
too chubby. Mubagdal nang ímung nawung ug manambuk ka, Your face will
be too chubby if you grow stout. Ang íyang nawung namagdal sa hupung,
Her face swelled with edema.

bagduk v {1} [A; b5] puncture, make a small hole in. May mibagduk
tingáli sa ligid kay mihiyus man, S.t. must have punctured the tire
because it is flat. {2} [AB] for s.t. with a pointed tip to pierce and
stick into s.t., cause it to do so. Ang tumuy sa kutsilyu nga nahúlug
mibagduk sa yútà, The knife fell and the tip stuck into the ground.
n {1} puncture. {2} s.t. pierced into s.t.

*bagduy táwung — one who roams about without purpose. bagduybagduy
v [A; b1] roam around purposelessly instead of doing what one is
supposed to do. Nagbagduybagduy lang nà siya. Wà giyud nà siyay nahímù,
He just roams about. He hasn’t done anything. -an a fond of roaming
about.

baghak n k.o. medium-sized grouper.

baghas_1 = hashas, 1.

baghas_2 a having offensive, rude manners. v [B2; b6] get to be crude,
offensive. Nagkabaghas siya sukad muintrag ínum, He has become cruder
since he took to drinking.

baghud a tough, hard in feelings, character. Ang íyang pahíyum mudani
bísan kinsa nga baghud ug balatían, Her smile wins over the hardest of
hearts.

baghut v {1} [A; b6] prompt s.o. to think ill about s.t. Kinsay
nibaghut sa átung ámu nga ipabalhin ku? Who talked against me to have
prompted the boss to transfer me? {2} [A; b3c] rant loudly in anger or
complaint. Pangutána únà unsay hinungdan. Dílì kay mubaghut ka lang
dihà dáyun, Find out what the matter is before you go ranting and
raving right away. n s.t. said to s.o. against s.o. else to influence
him.

bagìbì v [A; b6] talk foolishly, rant often with no one present.
Nagbagìbì si Maríya kay walà pa gihápun ang íyang bána, Mary is ranting
because her husband still isn’t home. -an(→) n given to ranting and
raving. v [B1256] become a ranter.

bag-id v [AB46; ac] rub back and forth against. Mibag-id ang bábuy sa
batu kay gikatlan, The pig brushed itself against the stone because it
itched. Kamau ka bang mubag-id ug kawáyan arun mukáyu? Do you know how
to rub two sticks together to make fire? Nabag-iran ang ákung dyíp,
Some car grazed my jeep. Gibag-id níya ang íyang áping sa ákù, He
rubbed his cheek against mine. n sticks to make fire.

báging v [A; a12] work out with a punching bag. Bagíngun ta ning ímung
pansing bag, I’ll have a workout on your punching bag.

bágis_1 a {1} be completely careless of all rules of decorum, esp.
proper dress. Bágis kaáyu siya kay magtiniil lang ug musimba, He is a
hippy because he goes to church barefooted. {2} be grossly misbehaved
in general. {3} be a tough, ruffian. v [B12] get to be grossly
misbehaved. -in- v {1} [A; a2] appear unkempt. Bisan ug makabinágis ka
ug kausa itsapuyráhun ka, If you appear unkempt just once you will get
kicked out. {2} [A] act as if one doesn’t care what others say. Ug aku
diay binagísan níya, hilatiguhan giyud, If he misbehaves toward me,
I’ll give him a beating.

bágis_2 = badlis.

bagit v {1} [A13] invite or provoke a bad outcome. Nagbagit ka giyud sa
ímung kadaútan, You are certainly courting disaster for yourself.
{2} [AP] cause to be aroused or stimulated. Kining pamisti nímu
nagbagit (nagpabagit) sa yawan-ung hunàhúnà sa mga laláki, The way you
dress arouses devilish passions in a man. bagitbagit v [A13; a12]
provoke s.o. into action. Nagbagitbagit ka giyud sa ímung bána niánang
ímung pagkasabaan, You’re provoking your husband to anger with your
nagging. mabagitbagitun a provocative. Pahíyum nga mabagitbagitun,
Provocative smile.

bagíyus n loud hissing or whizzing sound. v [A; b6] whizz loudly.
Mibagíyus ang hángin tungud sa bagyu, The wind whizzed because of the
typhoon. Nagbagíyus ang trák nga kusug kaáyung nagdagan, The truck
roared as it moved rapidly.

baglis = badlis.

bagnas = bagnus.

bagnid v [A; c1] shred papaya, cassava, and things of similar
consistency. Bagníra (ibagnid) na ang kapáyas kay átung kiláwun, Shred
the papaya because we are going to pickle it.

bagnud v [A; b6(1)] rub s.t. solid against s.t. hard and even. Kinsay
nagbagnud ug plurwaks sa sawug? Who applied wax to the floor?

bagnus v [A; c] rub s.t. on s.t. with force. Nagbagnus mi ug kandílà sa
plantsa arun dílì tay-an, We rub a candle against the iron so it won’t
get rusty. Ayawg bagnúsi ang ákung bukubuku, paghíri lang, Don’t rub my
back hard, just wipe it on gently.

bagnut v [A; a] pull out by the roots with great force. Nagbagnut siya
sa dakung káhuy, He pulled a big tree out by the roots. n weeds. Adtu
ang mga manuk mangitlug sa tag-as nga mga bagnut, The chickens lay
their eggs in the tall weeds. a {1} weedy. {2} of no use, a parasite.
Bagnut siya sa ílang pamilya. Dílì siya mutábang sa buluhatun, He is a
parasite in their family. He doesn’t help with the chores. -un(→)
a {1} weedy. {2} untidy. Bagnutun kaáyu ang íyang hitsúra. Walay sudlay
ang buhuk, Her appearance is very untidy. She didn’t comb her hair.

bagransiya = bagansiya.

bagrung n racing sound of engines, wind. v [A] roar. Mibagrung ang
awtu, The car roared. Nagbagrung ang hángin mu rag bagyu, The wind is
roaring like a storm.

bagsak_1 v [B; c] {1} fall heavily on the ground. Mibagsak ang lubi sa
ákung tungud, A coconut fell in front of me. Ibagsak ku ning ákung
gidala sa ímung tiil, I will drop this thing I’m carrying on your feet.
Nabagsak ang dyít sa lasang, The jet plane crashed in the forest.
{2} fail in school. Nabagsak siya kay way tuuntúun, He failed because
he did not study.

bagsak_2 v [A; c] give a bribe. Bagsáki lang ang supirbisur arun ka
masulud, Just give the supervisor a bribe so you can get a job. n s.t.
given as a bribe. hiN- a fond of giving bribes.

bagsak_3 n scare lines in fishing gear to drive the fish back into the
net.

bagsang = balagsang.

bagtak n calf of the leg. -un a having prominent calves.

bagtas_1 = baktas.

bagtas_2 n part of the beach with a broad strip of sand usually not
reached by the tide. -un = bagtas_2.

bagtì a bone-dry. Ang bagtì nga káhuy maáyung isugnud kay sigaun,
Bone-dry wood is good for fuel because it burns easily. v [BN] become
very dried out because of heat. Namagtì (mibagtì) ang yútà sa kaínit,
The earth is cracking with heat. -an n place where earthenware is fired
for final seasoning.

bagtik a hard because of being full. v [B; a] get hard. Bagtíkun nátù
ang búla arun kusug muuntul, Let’s pump the ball hard so that it
bounces well. n {1} hardened sap of the píli tree (Canarium luzonicum)
used for caulking in the walling of small boats. {2} = balaw, 1. -an
a of a hard sort.

bagting n ringing noise. Ang bagting sa rilu nakapúkaw nákù, I was
awakened by the alarm clock. dì kadungug, kabatì ug — easily insulted,
quick to take offense. Dì nà siya kabatì ug bagting, dáyun siyag
kasukù, He can’t take it. He gets angry if he hears s.t. he doesn’t
like. — sa kampána, lángit point in childbirth where the baby crowns
and the mother feels the most intense pain. v {1} [APB; a] ring, make
s.t. ring. Akuy mubagting (mupabagting) sa kampána sa tingpamúhì, I
ring the bell for dismissal. Mubagting ang kampána sa alas diyis, The
bell will ring at ten. {2} [B246] reach the point of highest pain in
childbirth.†

bagtuk a hardened, crystallized. v [APBN] become, make hard. Namagtuk
(mibagtuk) ang lápuk, The mud hardened. Ang túbig bugnaw mubagtuk
(mupabagtuk) sa aníbal, Cold water will make the syrup crystallize. -un
n a k.o. corn in which the young grains harden instead of developing.†

bagtus n small children. Duha na ka bagtus ang ákung pakan-un, I have
two children to feed.

bágu n small wild tree the leaves of which are used as a vegetable:
Gnetum gnemon.

bagù_1 n disease characterized by general debility, swelling in the
region of the stomach, and yellowish skin. It commonly occurs in swampy
areas and is thought to be caused by snails or mosquitoes. v [a4] get
bagù.

bagù_2 n responsibility, lookout. Ulahi ka man, wà nay pagkáun. Ímu
nang bagù, You are late and the food is gone. That’s your problem. Dakù
kug bagù sa bangku, I owe a lot of money to the bank.

bag-u a {1} new. -ng Túgun New Testament. {2} modern. Ang mga batan-un
sa bag-ung panahun agrisíbu, The youth nowadays is aggressive. -ng túbù
the modern generation. -ng túig New Year. {3} recently, just now. Bag-u
siyang abut, He is a new arrival here. Bag-u pa siyang milakaw, He just
left. Bag-u pang gabíi pagsaka sa kawatan, It was early evening when
the thief entered. karung — recently, of late. Gidugù siya karung
bag-u, She recently menstruated. v {1} [B2] be, become new. Mubag-u
(mabag-u) nga tan-áwun ang sapátus basta limpiyáhan, Shoes will look
new if you clean them. {2} [AP1B1; a] change s.t. for the better,
become better. Dì ka gánì magbag-u, If you don’t reform. Nagbag-u sila
sa ílang panagway, They made their faces over anew. {3} [A12; c] obtain
s.t. new. Nakabag-u siyag awtu pagkadaug sa swipstik, He got a new car
when he won the sweepstakes. Bag-úhan (baghúan) kug ligid ang ákung
dyíp, I’ll buy new tires for my jeep. Unsa mang gumáha ang ímung
ibag-u? What brand of tires are you going to replace them with?
{4} [b4] feel strange, unaccustomed. Naglísud pa siya kay gibag-úhan pa
sa trabáhu, He’s having a hard time because he’s unaccustomed to the
work. {5} -ng túig [B256; b4(1)] for it to be New Year’s. paN- nga túig
v [A2; c] celebrate New Year’s. Didtu mi sa Hungkung mamag-ung túig, We
celebrated New Year’s in H. K. -in- a modern. Ang binag-ung paági sa
panguma, The modern way of farming. v [B15] change. Nagbinag-u nga
nadátù, He changed when he became rich. mabinag-úhun a fond of modern
things. bag-úhay a short while ago. Bag-úhay pa lang giyud tung nilakaw
si Ramun, Ramon left just a while ago.†

bagubhu n deep, hollow sound produced by rapping s.t. v [B46] make a
deep, hollow sound. Mibagubhu ang ákung bukubuku nga íyang gipukpuk, He
pounded me on my back with a thump.

Bagúbu, Bagúbù, Bagùbù n Bagobo tribe of Davao and their language.

bagudlus n a roaring sound of the sea or wind. v {1} [A] roar.
Inighurus sa tímug, magbagudlus ang hángin, When the east wind blows,
the wind roars. {2} [A1] run fast. Nagbagudlus kug dágan sa dihang
gigukud kug irung búang, I ran fast when the mad dog chased me.

bagukbuk n k.o. weevil that eats lumber and secretes round and very
fine waste matter.

bagul_1 n {1} coconut shell. {2} head (slang). Gamíta ang ímung bagul,
Use your head. a uncomfortable to have weigh on one or put one’s weight
on because of things which protrude. Ang lantay bagul higdáan, It is
uncomfortable to lie on bamboo slats. v [B] become uncomfortable. Ug
butangan nímug kamúti ang sáku mubagul lukdúhun, If you put sweet
potatoes into the sack, it will become uncomfortable to carry. (←) n a
child’s game played with coconut shells or slippers where one child
puts his shell on the ground and the other child (under various
impediments) throws his own shell and tries to hit the first child’s.
v [AC; ac] play bágul. bagulbágul n skull. Buk-un ku ang bagulbágul
nímu, I’ll crack your skull. ka-an n place where there are many
scattered coconut shells. sam-(←) n = bágul.

bagulbul v [A; b3c5] grumble, complain about a grievance. Ngánung
magbagulbul ka man nga giángay ta man mug hátag? Why are you grumbling
when I gave you all the same amount? n grumbling. Ang mga bagulbul sa
katawhan nakapabalísa sa pamúnù, The grumbling of the people had the
President worried. -an(→) a given to grumbling.

bagumbáyan n snack made of old bread, sugared and fried.

bagun n {1} wheelbarrow. {2} railroad freight car. Tulu ka bagung tubu,
Three freight cars full of sugar cane. v [c1] transport in a
wheelbarrow, freight car. Bagunun (ibagun) ta lang ning balas, Let’s
carry this sand in the wheelbarrow.

bágun = balágun.

bagunbun a for containers to be bulging. v [B46] become bulging with
content. Nagbagunbun ang íyang bursa sa kwarta, His pocket is bulging
with money.

bagunbúnun n k.o. grey and brown coloration of chicken feathers, cock
having that color feathers.

bagung_1 = bagun, 2.

*bagung_2 pa- v [A13] fail to show reaction to s.t., stay put and be
unmoved. Bisan ug unsáun nákug búnal ang kabáyù, nagpabagung na lang,
No matter how much I struck the horse, it just stayed put.

bag-ung = balag-ung.

bagungun, bagúngun n k.o. small edible cerith shell of swamps. v [A12]
obtain bagungun. paN- v [A2] get this shellfish.

bagunul a for a surface to be lumpy. Bagunul ang karsáda kay walà
mapisun, The road is not smooth because it hasn’t been rolled. v [B]
become lumpy.

bagurus = bagudlus.

bágus_1 v [A; b(1)] smooth a piece of wood with a knife. Bagúsan ku ang
kawáyan sa kurta, I’ll smooth the bamboo with the knife. -in-, -in-an
n s.t. smoothed.

bágus_2 n {1} tong, protection money. {2} one who dodges or evades the
payment of s.t. Bágus nà siya. Wà mubáyad ug buhis, He is a tax evader.
He did not pay taxes. v {1} [A12N; b6c1] get money by extortion. Ang
pulis mamágus sa tindáhang Insik, The police extorts protection money
from the Chinese stores. {2} [A12N; a] avoid payment, enjoy s.t.
without paying. Nakabágus (nakapamágus) siya sa trák kay pulis man, He
didn’t have to pay bus fare because he is a policeman. paN- v 1, 2 =
bágus, v. {3} [A2] play truant. Nahagbung siya kay pirming mamágus, He
flunked because he is always truant. maN-r-(→) n truant.

bagutbut v [A; b3c5] mumble under one’s breath in complaint. Ígù ra
siyang makabagutbut. Dì man siya makaáku sa pagtubag, All he could do
was grumble under his breath. He didn’t dare answer. n mumbling. -an(→)
a tending to grumble under one’s breath.

bagúud v [B12S46] be heavily burdened. Nagbaguud siya sa usa ka alat
nga mangga, She was staggering under the load of a basketful of
mangoes. Nagbaguud ku sa mga útang, I’m staggering under the burden of
my debts.

bagúung n salted and fermented fish paste.

bagwísan n k.o. fish.

bagyang = badyang_1.

bagyu n typhoon. v [A; a4] for there to be a typhoon. Nagbagyu run sa
Batánis, There’s a typhoon now in the Batanes Islands. Bagyuhun gánì
ta, manglúpad giyud ang átung nípang atup, If a typhoon hits us, our
thatched roof will surely be blown off. talibagyu, bumabagyu,
balagyuhun n about to have a typhoon.†

bagyu bins n green and wax beans, the pods of which are eaten:
Phaseolus vulgaris.

*báha kamara — Lower House of Congress.

bahà n flood. v [B46; b4] {1} flow in a flood, flood over. Mibahà ang
sapà sa kakusug sa ulan, The river flooded over because of the heavy
rain. Gibahaan (gibaháan) ang ámung sílung, The lower portion of our
house was flooded. {2} come in great quantity, experience in great
intensity. Mubahà ang sápì karung iliksiyun, Money will flow this
coming election. Gibaháan ang ákung galamhan sa túmang kalípay, I was
overwhelmed with joy. {3} [a4] sneeze. Bahaun (bàhun) ka ug mutan-aw
kas adlaw, You will sneeze if you look at the sun. bahàbáhà v [A1] go,
come in throngs and swarms. Nagbahàbáhà ang mga táwu sa kadalánan kay
musúgat sa Santu Pápa, People are flooding the streets to meet the
Pope. balaháan, bahaánan n subject to floods.

báhad v [A; bc] {1} threaten to do s.t. Nagbáhad síyang ikíha ka, He
was threatening to sue you. {2} make up one’s mind to do s.t. one is
really not in a position to do. Dúgay na nákung gibaháran nang awtúhang
palitun, I have been threatening to buy that car for the longest time.
n {1} threat. {2} mutual agreement to meet s.w. for a fight or contest.
May báhad silang magsumbagay sa plása, They have an agreement to have a
fight in the plaza. mabahárun a threatening.

baháda a {1} downhill grade. {2} for a price to be low. Baháda ang
prisyu sa mais run, The price of corn is low now. v {1} [A] go downhill
on a road. Kusug kaáyu ning dyípa kun magbaháda, This jeep runs fast
when it goes downhill. {2} [B] go down in price.

bahádu a {1} below normal, low. May bagyung umalábut. Bahádu ang
barumítru, A typhoon is coming. The barometer is below normal. Bahádu
ang prisyu sa kupras, The price of copra is low. {2} in a bad mood.
Pagbantay mu. Bahádu bayà ang átung maistra run, Better be careful. Our
teacher is in a bad mood today. v [B2] be in a bad mood, go down below
normal.

bahag n G-string. Dì masaghirag bahag bayhána, That woman is terribly
fertile. (Lit. You can’t brush a g-string against her without her
getting pregnant.) v [A; a] wear, make a g-string. Gibahag níya ang
íyang kamisin, He made a g-string out of his undershirt. — ang íkug
v [B] {1} tuck the tail between legs. Mabahag ang íkug sa irù basta
daug, A defeated dog tucks his tail between his legs. {2} run away in
cowardice. Mibahag ang íyang íkug nga gigúkud sa íyang kaáway, He
turned tail when his enemy pursued him. bahagbahag n harmless k.o. long
thin jellyfish, semi-transparent, resembling a snake. Used in sorcery
called sampal.

baháhà n bleat of sheep and goats. v [A; b6] bleat.

báhak {1} = baláhak. 2†.

bahakhak v [A] laugh boisterously. n boisterous laughter.

bahal n palm toddy one or two days old. v [A1PB26; a2] make, become
bahal. Ibaligyà ta ning tanan kay bahalan unyà ta, Let’s sell all of
this, otherwise, our toddy will turn into bahal on us. a for palm toddy
to be aged two or three days. — nga syíti birnis = síti birnis. see
birnis.

bahálà n in charge of, responsible for. Aku nay bahálà sa tanan, I’ll
take care of everything. — na I don’t care what happens, come what may.
Bahálà nag unsay mahitabù basta makabawus lang ku, I don’t care what
happens as long as I can get even. paN- v [A2] {1} say one doesn’t
care. Ákù siyang giingnan ayaw pagminyù, namahálà lang, When I told him
not to get married, he just said he didn’t care. {2} assume
responsibility for. Akuy mamahálà sa balayranan, I’ll take charge of
the payments.

bahalína n coconut toddy aged for several months. v [A1; a12] make aged
palm toddy. Bahalináun ta ning tubáa, Let’s have this palm toddy age.

báhan n {1} team of militia workers. Tulu ka báhan sa písi, Three teams
of constabulary men. {2} type of net fishing with a large group of
people. v [A; a12] tie in a row, large groups. Itángag ang púkut didtu
sa búkung ug bunut. Unyà bahánun, Put the net on top of the shells and
husks; then tie them in a row to the net. bahanbáhan v [C] gang around.
Nagbahanbáhan na pud ang mga batan-un sa átung baryu, The youngsters
are running around in gangs in our neighborhood. Dílì ku mutúgut nga
makigbahanbáhan ka sa mga buguy, I don’t like you to gang around with
those good-for-nothing fellows.

bahandì n wealth, treasure. maN-, maN-r- n treasurer. Mamahandì
(mamamahandì) sa lungsud, The treasurer of the town. -ánun a wealthy.
Kun dì ka bahandiánun, dì ka mapílì, If you are not wealthy, you will
not get elected.

bahar a be low-priced at a certain season. Bahar ang mangga ug maabril,
In April the price of mangoes is low. v [B] go down in price. pa-
v [ab7] lower the price. Pabaharan ang prisyu unyà, The price will go
down after a while.

bahas = bahasbáhas. bahasbáhas v [A3; cP] go back and forth over an
area rapidly. Ang dyit mibahasbáhas sa nahagsáan, The jet flew back and
forth swiftly over the crash site. Dílì ka makakità sa tubag ug ímu
lang ibahasbáhas (ipabahasbáhas) ang tinan-awan sa panid, You will
never find the answer if you just let your eyes roam over the page.

báhas v [A; c1] {1} put an end to. Áway ang nagbáhas sa bayli, A
quarrel ended the dance early. Sila ang nakabáhas sa pagkáun sa walà pa
muabut ang mga bisíta, They consumed all the food before the visitors
arrived. {2} cancel. Mubáhas giyud siya sa ímung lisinsiya, He will
cancel your license. Ibáhas (bahásun) ang mga byáhi kun magbagyu, They
cancel the flights if there is a storm.

bahaulu = bahuulu.

báhaw_1 v [A; c1] put food out to eat. Pagbáhaw na, Serve the dinner
now. Ibáhaw (baháwa) ang kan-un sa panay, Put the rice on the clay
plate. -an(→) n {1} plate for an individual serving. {2} home plate in
tubigtúbig game, the area behind the last guarded line or pair of
squares. v [A1; c] use s.t. as a plate.

báhaw_2 a {1} left over from before and not quite fresh. Ayaw aku
sirbíhig báhawng pán, Don’t serve me old bread. Alisdi kanang túbig kay
báhaw, Change this water. It’s left over from before. {2} old, stale
news. Báhaw na nang balitáa, That’s old news. {3} fighting cock set out
to fight a second time within a day or two after having fought. Báhaw
na nang manúka. Lagmit bun-un nà, That cock is stale. Most likely he’ll
be defeated. v [A1; a2b4] reserve food for some later time. Baháwun ta
ning bibingka, Let’s put these rice cakes aside for later. Kanúnay lang
ming baháwan káda káun, We always have food left over each meal. paN-
n {1} breakfast. {2} late afternoon snack consisting of rice or corn.
v [A2; c6] eat breakfast, late afternoon meal. pamahawbahaw v [A2; c2]
take a snack from the leftovers. Dúna ba tay ipamahawbahaw dihà? Do we
have any leftovers to have as a snack? bahawbahaw n k.o. small insects
that swarm over leftover food or garbage. v [a4] be infested with this
sort of insect.

bahay_1 n rice which got wet before having been threshed. Bahay nga
gilung-ag búsà dílì mutúbù, You cooked slightly spoiled rice, so it
won’t rise. v [B2; a] become spoiled through getting wet.

bahay_2 n k.o. forest tree, the tuberous roots of which are eaten in
times of famine.

bahayan n {1} rope sewn to the edge of a net to make it stiff and as a
place to attach floats. {2} longline in longline fishing (palangri) to
which several leaders with hooks are attached. v [A3; c1] put rope on
edge of net.

báhì n {1} the hard portion of a palm trunk. {2} cane or club made of a
palm trunk.

bahig v [A; a12] sort, separate according to different classes or
sizes. Bahigun nátù ang lubi sa tulu ka grúpu, We will sort the coconut
into three groups.

bahignit a flirtatious, trying to attract a man’s attention. Bahignit
kaáyu. Mangúnag kablit, She’s flirtatious. She nudges men to get their
attention. n term of endearment of infants.

bahíhì, bahihì, bahìhì n {1} neighing of a horse, bleating of a sheep
or goat. {2} sound like neighing. v [A; c1] neigh, bleat.

bahikhik v [A; b3] high-pitched, somewhat restrained laughter.
Mibahikhik sila nga namátì sa malaw-ay nga isturya, They snickered as
they listened to the dirty stories.

bahilya n complete set of dishes.

báhin v {1} [A; ac] divide into shares. Bahínun ta ni sa upat, Let’s
divide this into four pieces. Gibahínan ku níyag upat ka isdà, He
shared four fish with me. {2} [A3S] get a share. Makabahin kag daghang
isdà ug magbuntag ka, You get a larger share of fish if you stay until
morning. n {1} share. Átung hiwáun sa upat ka báhin, Let’s cut it into
four shares. {2} section, portion. Dúnay báhin nga binisayà ang Príman,
The Freeman has a Visayan section. Báhin sa tulumanun, Section in the
program. {3} turn. Ákung báhin nga pakantáhun, My turn to sing.
{4} role in a play. Kumidiyanti ang ákung báhin sa dráma, My role in
the play is that of a comedian. {5} regarding. Unsay ímung ikasulti
báhin niánà? What do you have to say concerning that? sa ákung — for my
part. Sa ákung báhin wà kuy ikasulti niánà, As for me, I have nothing
to say about that. sa láing (luyung) — on the other hand. Mupatúu siya
apan sa láing (luyung) báhin magpadáyun sa pagluib, He makes you
believe he is loyal, but behind your back he continues his treachery.
-ay(→) n the manner of sharing. Nalípay ang mga saup mahitungud sa
bahinay sa bag-ung baláud, The tenants are happy about the division of
the crops under the new law. ka- n {1} person with whom one shares s.t.
Kabáhin ka sa ákung kalípay ug kasákit, You share my happiness and
sorrows with me. {2} = báhin, 5. ka-anan n inheritance. Ang pinaangkan
may katungud sa kabahinánan sa ílang ginikánan, Illegitimate children
have a right to an inheritance from their parents.

bahirig a tilted, leaning to one side. v [B; c1] lean to one side.
Nagbahirig ang mga tanum tungud sa kusug nga hángin, The plants are
leaning because of the strong wind. Ayaw ibahirig (bahiriga) pagtáud
ang halígi, Don’t install the post in a leaning position.

bahis v [A2] go back and forth. Nagbahis ang mga pulis sa dálan nga
nangítà sa mga tulisan, The policemen are going back and forth over the
streets looking for the bandits. (←) v [A13] go back and forth without
regard to anyone or anything else. Nagbáhis na ang buáya; walà siyay
gikahadlúkan, The crocodile went about where he chose. He feared no
one.

bahista n bass fiddle, guitar player. v [A] be a bass player.

bahíya n bay. Ang bahíya sa Manílà, Manila Bay.

báhu_1 no wonder, it is not surprising considering that [subject] is
what it is. Báhu ning tapulan, diyútay rag ági, No wonder this fellow
doesn’t accomplish anything. He’s so lazy.

báhu_2 n {1} bass singer. {2} bass instrument. v [A; b6(1)] play, sing
bass.

báhu_3 see abáhu.

báhu_4, bàhu = baw-u.

bahù a {1} odorous, ill-smelling. Limpiyúhi ang kasilyas kay bahù
kaáyu, Clean the toilet because it stinks. {2} having been ‘it’ in a
game for a long time. (←) n smell, odor. Ang báhù sa litsun abut sa
ámù, The smell of the roast pig reaches our place. — nga smell of.
Báhung singut, Smell of sweat. — nga paryinti having some sort of
distant tie of kinship. Walà miy báhù nga paryinti. Nagkaparíha lang
ang ámung apilyídu, We are not related. We just happen to have the same
name. v {1} [B; a2] be, become smelly. Mubahù ang banig kay giihían man
sa bátà, The mat will become smelly because the child urinated on it.
{2} [A12] a smell. Nakabahù ka ba átung humut nga rúsas? Did you smell
the fragrance of the roses? {b} = paniN-, 3. {3} (→) {1} [B12; a] for
meat and fruits to rot, spoil. Nabahù ang karni kay walà nímu malútù
gahápun, The meat became spoiled because you did not cook it yesterday.
{2} [a12] cause coconut milk to ferment in making oil. Bahúa úsà ang
túnù unyà lanáha, You first ferment the coconut milk, then make it into
oil. tiN- v [A12; b8] perceive odor. Nakatimahù ka ba ug patay nga
ilagà? Do you smell a dead rat? paniN-(←) v {1} [A23] emit odor.
Nanimáhù kang nangkà, You smell of jackfruit. {1a} -ng kandílà death is
near (lit. the odor of candles is being emitted—facetious usage). Lúya
na kaáyu ang masakitun. Nanimáhù nang kandílà, The patient is weak. You
can smell the funereal candles. {2} [A] smell, perceive odor. Midágan
ang lagsaw dihang nakapanimahù ug táwu, The deer ran when it perceived
the odor of man. {3} [A2] find out, get wind of. Nanimáhù ug unsang
kumbiráha maáyu níyang suhútan, He’s finding out what party is good to
attend. Ag tuntu nakapanimahù (nakabahù) sa ámung mga plánu, The fool
got wind of our plans. ig-(←) n — nga paryinti be in any way a relative
of. Dílì ka igbáhù nga paryinti ni Títa. Makaminyù mu, You are in no
way related to Tita. You two can get married. ka- n stench. Ang kabahù
sa yánang dílì maagwanta, I can’t endure the stench of the pool of
mud.†

báhud v [B2] for wounds to swell and redden. Mibáhud ang íyang núka kay
hiinitan man, His wound became swollen because it was exposed to the
sun. Ug musúd kag mintiryu mubáhud ang ímung kabahung, If you go into a
cemetery your wound might swell and redden.

bahug v [A; c] {1} put liquid or fat into the staple food. Mubahug lang
siyag mantíkà kay dì mukáun ug útan, He mixes lard with his corn
because he doesn’t eat vegetables. {2} feed leftovers to. Ibahug na
lang ang pán ngadtu sa ítik, Toss the bread to the ducks. -in-, -in-an
n food mixed with soup, lard, or water. Ang íyang binahug (binahugan)
gikaun sa irù, The dog ate his food mixed with soup. bahugbáhug v [A;
b] {1} do s.t. in large amounts. Nagbahugbáhug kamig katáwa sa íla, We
had a barrel of laughs at their house. {2} have a free-for-all fight.
n {1} s.t. done in plentiful quantities. Bahugbáhug ang ínum sa kasal,
There was drinking done on a large scale at the wedding.
{2} free-for-all fight.

bahùlu = bahuulu.

bàhun see bahà, v3.

bahut a boastful, talking about one’s accomplishments or abilities in
too obvious a manner. Kadaghan ku nang nabátì kanang bahut nímung
isturya, How many times have I already heard your boastful stories!
v [B12] become boastful.

bahuulu n k.o. crevally: Caranx melampygus.

báid v [A3P; a] {1} rub s.t. on s.t. else to sharpen it to make it
shiny. Baírun ku ang sanggut, I’ll sharpen the scythe. Ibáid sa simintu
ang batu arun masínaw, Rub the stone on the cement floor so that it
will get shiny. {2} perfect s.t. Nagbáid siya sa mananayaw sa hustung
panlíhuk, He helped the dancer perfect her steps. Ang diksiyunaryu mauy
nakabáid (nakapabáid) sa ákung ininglis, The dictionary sharpened my
English. bairan n s.t. to sharpen s.t. baidbáid v [A13C; c] brush or
rub s.t. against s.t. lightly as if sharpening. Nagbaidbáid siya sa
íyang mga kamut, He rubbed his palms together.

baíid v [A; c1] brush one’s body or part of the body lightly against
s.t. Gibaiíran ku sa ákung iring, My pet cat rubbed itself on me.

bail a for fruit or root crops to be hardened due to exposure to heat
or mishandling. Bail ang kamúti kay nabuwad sa ínit, The sweet potatoes
are hard because they were left in the sun. v [B2; b6] get hardened. —
ug náwung a shameless. Bail ug náwung bayhána kay dì lang mubáli ug
insultu, That woman certainly is shameless because she doesn’t mind
insults. pa-, pa-(←) v [A; b6c1] do s.t. despite the shame it brings.
Nagpabail (nagpabáil) siyag pangáyug hinábang kay way kadangpan, He
swallowed his pride to ask for help because he has no one to turn to.

bais n k.o. large, edible fresh-water eel of brown color, growing to 4′
and more: Anguilla sp.

baíwas v [C3] for two persons to fail to meet because one had left when
the other arrived. Nagkabaíwas ta kay pag-abut nákù mu say paglakaw
nímu, We missed each other because when I arrived, you had left.

baka v [A; b(1)] bleach clothing under the sun. Gibakhan (gibakahan)
níya ang mga hábul, She spread the sheets under the sun to bleach.

báka_1 n cow, beef. -ng túru bull. bakahan n cattle ranch. — (ng)
litsíra n {1} source of financial support. Ang iyaan kung sapían mauy
báka litsíra sa ákung pagtuun, My rich aunt supported me in my studies.
{2} one who constantly gives money to s.o. who is playing him for a
sucker. v [B1256] become a provider or be played for a sucker.

báka_2 {1} it doesn’t matter, never mind if. Báka mu lang ug pilay
magastu mu sa uspital basta maáyu ka lang, It doesn’t matter how much
you will spend for your hospitalization, as long as you are cured. Báka
ug dì ka musugut nákù. Náa may daghang babáyi, I don’t care if you
don’t accept me. There are plenty of fish in the ocean. {2} = baláka.

bákà v [A13] walk with the legs apart. bakàbakà v [A] walk with the
legs apart.

bakaang v [B] walk with legs spread apart. Nagbakaang siya tungud sa
hubag, He walked with his legs spread apart because of his boil.
a having legs spread apart in walking.

bakabáka= kinalabaw, 1. see kábaw.

bakag = baklag.

bakagan n k.o. bony, reddish, flat fish, as wide as the palm and about
1′ in length. v [B2] become thin and bony. Nabakagan siya sa
pagkapilian sa pagkáun, She is thin and bony because she is choosy in
her food.

bakak a be a lie, false. Bakak kaáyu nang íyang diklarasiyun, His
allegation is a big lie. v [A; c] tell a lie. Dì ku mubakak nímu, I
won’t tell you a lie. Ang mga numiru dílì mamakak, Figures don’t lie.
panghiN- v [A; b15] deny, show s.t. to be false. Mapanghimakak
(kapanghimakakan) nákù ang ímung tabì, I can prove your gossip false.
-un(←) a liar.

bakalaw n codfish. panimáhung — v [A23] smell bad. Nanimáhù kang
bakalaw, You smell terrible.

bakáling n k.o. ring-like contrivance used to steady round-bottomed
pots when put s.w. v [A13; a] make into a steadying ring. Bakalíngun
nímu ang sáku arun katungtúngan sa kúlun, We’ll fix this sack so that
you can put the round-bottomed pot on it.

bakan n k.o. fish. bakanbákan n k.o. goatfish.

bákan n k.o. tree important for driving away the unglù: Litsea sp.

bakanan = balakanan.

bakang a {1} bowlegged. {2} deprecatory term for the Japanese. v [B]
become bowlegged. Mabakang (mubakang) ang bátà kun punáyan ug tambid, A
child becomes bowlegged if he is always carried astride. (←) v [B125]
get tired out from looking for s.t. Diin ka ba nga nabákang man kug
pinangítà nímu? Where have you been? I’ve gotten so tired (lit. become
bowlegged) looking for you.

bakanti n {1} vacancy. Wà na mi manáwat ug bag-ung kawáni kay way
bakanti, We’re not accepting new employees because there’s no vacancy.
{2} vacant place. Nangítà mig bakanting lingkuránan, We were looking
for a vacant seat. {3} piece of land left to lie fallow. v {1} [B126;
b(1)] for a vacancy to open up, leave s.t. vacant. Magubà ang balay nga
bakantíhag dúgay, A house that is left vacant for a long time will go
to pieces. {2} [B126] for a piece of land to lie fallow.

bak-ap v [A; b5] shoulder expenses. Bak-apan (bak-apun) ku ang tanang
balayran, I’ll take care of all the expenses.

bákas n one who contributes capital to a venture. Ang ákung bákas dakug
gipuhúnan sa ámung nigusyu, My partner has chipped in a sizeable
capital to our partnership. v [C; ac] be partners. Dílì na sila
magkumpitinsiya. Bakásun níla ang ílang nigusyu, They will join their
businesses in a partnership. Kanang ímu usa ka líbu ibákas na lang sa
átung puhúnan, Add your one thousand to our capital. ka- = bákas, n.

bakasi = balakasi.

bakasiyun n vacation. v [A; b6] take, spend vacation. Adtu ku sa
Hungkung bakasiyun, I will spend my vacation in H. K. -ista n one who
is taking a vacation. Ang Bagyu nagsugwak sa mga bakasyunista, Baguio
is crowded with vacationers.

bakat n k.o. hamper, a woven container about 2′ high with a top. -in-
k.o. large, round, smooth tomato.

bakatin n wild pig.

bakatya v [A; a1] {1} subject s.o. to hard, severe treatment. Kusug
mubakatyag súgù nang agalúna, That master drives (his servants) to work
very hard. Gibakatya siyag bukbuk sa mga buguy, He was severely mauled
by the roughnecks. {2} discipline s.o. wild, unruly. Mabuútan ang irù
ug dúnay makabakatya íni, A dog will become meek if s.o. disciplines
it.

bakawan = bakhaw_1.

bákay v [A2; c] {1} move the line from which one starts, shoots, puts,
etc. in a game. Mubákay siya kay ang íyang dyúlin simpig man sa
bungbung, He moved his shooting line because his marble was right
against the wall. Ibákay lang níya ang búla sa gulp kay natambug man sa
línaw, He will just move his golf ball because it landed in a pond.
{2} move, move s.t. from its place. Mibákay siya dihang dihay miági, He
moved to make room when s.o. passed by. Layù silag gibakáyan ug puyù,
The place they have moved to now is far away.

bakaybakay n k.o. dark brown and brittle starfish with narrow rays.

bakbak_1 n frog, toad.

bakbak_2 n path of hardened dirt. v [B1256] harden from being trod
upon. Nabakbak ang tugkaran sa ímung pagbinalikbálik, The yard got all
trampled down the way you kept going back and forth through it.

bakbak_3 n abaca hemp made from the outer stalks of the abaca.

bakbak_4 n {1} piece of metal or precious stone used to ornament a
surface, usually a comb. {2} sole of footgear. Pánit ang bakbak sa
íyang sapátus, His shoes have leather soles. v [A; b] {1} inlay with
precious metal, stones. Sudlayng binakbákan ug sinúbung, A comb plated
with gold. {2} put soles on footgear.

bakbak_5 = balakbak.

bakgráwun n {1} background, past experience, origin. Sutáa únang íyang
bakgráwun únà sugta, Verify his background first before you accept his
proposal. Wà kaáyu siyay bakgráwun. Dì siya makaapas sa liksiyun, He
doesn’t have a very good background. He cannot catch on to the lesson.
{2} background of painting or picture. {3} one who is staying out of
the limelight. {4} one who assists in a performance in a lesser role.
Mas maáyung mukanta ang bakgráwun kay sa istar, The background sings
better than the star. {5} attendant on a public performer, manager of a
sportsman. Gitunúlan ang buksiadur ug tualya sa íyang bakgráwun, The
manager gave the boxer a towel. {6} one who supports another in a
fight, provides fire cover for another. v [A; b1] be the background in
performing, attending a public performer, support s.o. in a fight.
Bakgrawnan ta kag mukanta ka, I’ll accompany you if you sing. Bakgrawni
aku inigtabuk nákù, Cover me when I cross over to the other side of the
street. pa- v [A] stay out of the limelight. Pabakráwun lang siya kay
maúlaw siya níla, He will just stay in the background because he is
shy.†

bakgut v [A; b5c] cut s.t. off with a motion in the direction of the
agent, usually with a sickle. Dì ka makabakgut sa búlig sa ságing, You
cannot cut the bunch of bananas down. Bakgutan (bakgutun) ku nang líug
sa irù, I will slit that dog’s neck. n stroke, action of cutting.

bakhad v [B1; b6] for s.t. tied to get undone. Mabakhad ang higut ug dì
nímu ayúhun ug bángan, The string will get undone if you don’t tie it
tight.

bakhaw_1 n mangrove tree: Rhizophora spp.

bakhaw_2 n k.o. dish made of blanched greens or raw meat or fish
garnished with onions, tomatoes, and vinegar. v [A; a] make bakhaw.
-in- = bakhaw_2.

bakhù v [A; b36] sob. Gibakhúan ku níya sa íyang mga kaguul, She
sobbingly poured out her sorrows to me. n sob. ma-un a full of sobs. Sa
mabakhúung tíngug, In a sobbing voice.

bakhuy n doll of cloth or plastic.

bakì n frog.†

bákid n cavan, a measure for grain equivalent to 25 gantas
(approximately three bushels).

bakig a very thin, emaciated. v [B] become emaciated.

bakik joking euphemism for bakak.

bakikaw a awkward, graceless. Ang walhun bakikaw tan-áwun nga manahì, A
left-handed person looks graceless when he sews. v [B1; a] become
clumsy, do s.t. clumsily, awkwardly. Bakikawun gánì nímug kúgus ang
bátà mahúlug giyud nà, You’ll drop the child if you carry it in such a
clumsy way.

bakíki = balakíki.

bakilid a steeply sloping. Bakilid kaáyu ang ámung gitúngas, We’re
climbing a very steep slope. n slope. kabakildan n slopes.

báking_1 n backing, material put in back of s.t. to give it support.
v [A; a] provide with a backing.

báking_2 v [A; c] back up, put a vehicle in reverse. Ibáking ang dyíp,
Back the jeep up.

bakintul v [B] miss one’s step, walk with a limp because s.t. is wrong
with one’s shoe or the path one is traversing. Mibakintul ku kay
nakatunub kug gamayng batu, I missed my step because I stepped on a
small rock. Nagbakintul kug lakaw kay nawálà ang píkas kung tikud, I
walk unevenly because one of my heels got lost. Culu- v [A1] walk
unevenly.

bákir n backer in an application, financial undertaking. Bákir siya
nákù sa ákung nigusyu, He is my backer in my business. v [B6; b(1)]
become a backer, back s.t.

bakíru v [A; b6] pasture. Gibakirúhan nákù sa uma ang kanding, I
pastured the goat in the fields. n shepherd, cowherd.

bakíta n plunger of a child’s toy as, for example, of a popgun.

bakíya n young female carabao or cow ready to reproduce.

baklà a homosexual. v [B] be a homosexual. Ug makig-uban-úban kag mga
baklà, mabaklà sad ka, If you pal around with fairies, you’ll become
one, too. paN- v [A23] engage in male prostitution.

baklag a having a putrid odor of rotten food or decayed flesh. v [B2]
become putrid. Nabaklag na lang ang ilagà wà gayud níla ilubung, They
did not bury the rat even though it has become putrid.

baklarit n stew made from dog’s meat, spices, and vegetables. v [A; a]
make, obtain dog stew. Baklaritun ta nang inyung irù, Let’s butcher
your dog and make him into stew.

baklaw n bracelet. v [A; a] wear, make into, get a bracelet.

baklay v [A; ac] go on foot. Bakláyun ta lang ang piyir, Let’s just
walk to the pier.

bakliad, baklíad v [B; c1] bend one’s body far backward. Mubaklíad gánì
ang bátà hayan mahúlug, If the baby bends too far back, it is likely to
fall. Ibaklíad (bakliára) ug maáyu ang ímung láwas, Bend your body far
back.

baklid v [A; a12] pin s.o.’s hand behind his back. Siyay mibaklid sa
ákung kamut samtang gikuláta ku sa íyang mga kaúban, He pinned my arms
behind me while his companions pummelled me. panghiN-, paniN- = -in-, v
1. -in- a folded behind the back. Milakaw siya binaklid ang íyang mga
kamut, He walked away with his hands folded behind his back. v {1} [A]
fold one’s hands behind one’s back. Mibinaklid (nanghimaklid,
nanimaklid) siyang nagpasupásu sa hawanan, He paced the courtyard with
his hands folded behind his back. {2} [a12] = baklid.

baknal a {1} too big for the thing it was put in. Baknal kaáyu ang
pistúla sa háwak, There is no room for the pistol in the waist. {2} be
too big for the situation. Baknal ang kaniyun nga gigámit didtu sa
Bitnam, The cannons they use in Viet Nam are too big for the job they
have to do. v {1} [AB; a2] bulge out, make s.t. bulge out. Unsa man
nang nagbaknal sa ímung bulsa? What is making your pocket bulge?
{2} [A; c] put s.t. which juts up on a road to block it or cause
passers-by to stumble. Átung baknálan ang agiánan ug dakung batu, We’ll
block the road with a huge stone. {3} [b6] consider s.t. too big.
n s.t. bulging or which prevents easy passage. -an = bakal, a2.

baknit n k.o. wild, thorny vine with yellowish, inedible berries. ka-an
n thicket. v [B12] become a thicket. Nakabaknitan ang uma nga gibyáan,
Our abandoned farm grew into a thicket.

bakpi n back pay. v [A12] collect one’s back pay.

bakráyid v [A; c] ride at the back of a bicycle or motorcycle.
Gibakráyid níya ang íyang anak, He carried his son on the back of his
bicycle.†

baksan see bakus.

baksidur n boxer. v [B16; a12] become a boxer. Magbaksidur ka gánì
kinahanglan lig-un kag túhud, If you want to become a boxer, you must
have strong legs.

baksing n boxing. v {1} [A; b6] have a boxing match. {2} [a12] box s.o.
Baksingun ta ka run, I’ll box you one now. -an n boxing ring.

baksir = baksidur.

baksiwà a contrary, nonconforming. Baksiwà nga pagkabátà, A contrary
child. v [AC; c1] {1} be contrary to, be not in conformity. Mubaksiwà
giyud nà siya sa gustu sa ámung inahan, She always does s.t. contrary
to our mother’s wishes. Nagkabaksíwa ang ílang pangatarúngan, Their
reasons did not tally. Baksiwaun (ibaksiwà) man gud nímug sabut ang
ákung sulti, You always place a wrong meaning on what I say. {2} put in
a head to toe arrangement. Nagbaksíwà sila paghigdà, They lay down
beside each other with their heads on opposite ends. Ibaksiwà
(baksiwáun) nákù ang pagpahimútang sa káhuy, I will arrange the wood so
that the bigger ends are next to the smaller ends. {3} [C13] pass by
one another without seeing each other. Wà sila magkítà kay nagkabaksíwà
lang sila sa dálan, They did not meet because they just passed each
other on the road. (←) [B] be intertwining. Bágun nga nagbaksíwà,
Intertwining vines.

baktas v [A; a2] {1} traverse on foot. Taas pa ang ákung baktásun arun
matúman ku ang ákung ginadamgu, I still have a long road to traverse if
my dreams are to be realized. {2} cut across. Gibaktásan ku ang
daruhan, I took a short cut across the plowed field. -ay(→)
n walkathon. Siyay nakadaug sa baktasay, He won the walkathon. v [C]
have a walkathon.

baktin_1 n {1} piglet. {2} children, kids (familiar usage). Nag-iskuyla
na ang ákung mga baktin, My kids go to school now. v [A12] obtain
piglet. Nakabaktin kug duha pagbatun ku sa íyang anay, I got myself two
piglets for rearing his sow. -ay v [C] bet with piglets. Baktinay ta,
kinsay mudaug, Let’s bet piglets as to who will win.

baktin_2 v [B46; b6] get a charley horse. Namaktìn (mibaktin) ákung
buktun, My arms got a charley horse. baktinbaktin n bulging part of the
calf or biceps.

baktirya n bacteria.

bakù a stoop-shouldered. v [B; a] become hunched. Makabakù (makapabakù)
nímu ang magsígig dúkù nga magsulat, You’ll become stoop-shouldered if
you bend like that when you write.

bakud v [AC2; c1] run in a gallop. Mibakud ang kabáyù, The horse
galloped away. Nakigbakud siya sa mga bátà, He ran around with the
children.

bákud_1 v [AB25; ac1] {1} get up from lying position, make s.t. lying
erect. Mibákud siyag sayu, He got up early. Dì ku kabákud sa halígi, I
cannot raise the post. Bakúrun sa nars ang masakitun, The nurse will
make the patient get up. Wà ku ibákud (bakúra) ang halígi, I did not
raise the post. {2} — ug nigusyu v [A; c1] start a business. Dì ta
makabákud ug nigusyu ug way puhúnan, We cannot start a business if we
don’t have capital. {3} [AP; a12] save one’s name or honor from public
humiliation. Kamung mga anak mau na lay mubákud (mupabákud) sa átung
apilyídu nga gihugawhugawan ug maáyu sa inyung amahan, Only you, the
children, can save our family name which your father has sullied.

bákud_2 v [A; c1] tie s.t. together, fasten to s.t. Nakabákud na siya
sa mga káhuy, She has tied the firewood into bundles. Gibákud siya sa
halígi, He was tied to the post. Bakúra (ibákud) ang mga papil, Tie the
papers in bundles. (→) n bond, fetters.

bakudbakud n k.o. wrasse.

bakukang n {1} k.o. large rhinoceros beetle, found in coconut trees.
{2} name given to small brown beetles or to june bugs (= daging). {3} —
sa úlu have difficulty in understanding. Bakukang ang sulud sa ímung
úlu kay dì ka kasabut, Your head is full of beetles because you can’t
understand. v [a4] be infested with beetles.

bakúku n k.o. fish.

bakúkun v [AB; c1] coil, roll into a loop. Mibakúkun akug lukay arun
dúna kitay ikasulù, I coiled up some palm fronds to give us s.t. to use
as a torch. Mibakúkun ang baksan, The python coiled itself up. n coil.

bakul a crippled in the leg. v (←) [B126] become crippled.

bákul n belt buckle. v [A; b] put a buckle on s.t.

bakúlan n k.o. mullet with small scales.

bakulaw n ugly-faced supernatural being said to abduct small children
and hide them from their parents. Ayaw pagsábà kay tingálig dad-un ka
sa bakulaw, Be quiet or the bakulaw will get you.

bakulkul n trap to catch wild fowl with a noose. paN- v [A2] catch
chickens and birds with a bakulkul.

bakulud n rounded stone found in the sea and exposed at low tide.

bakulung n a loop, usually made of cloth, put under things carried on
the head. v [A; a] make into a buffer, put a buffer on the head.

bákun = bákud_1.

bakúna v [A; b] vaccinate. Akuy mubakúna sa mga bátà, I will vaccinate
the children. n vaccination. -dur(→) n one who administers vaccine.
v [B156] be the one who innoculates.

bakunáwa n a monster that is said to swallow the sun or moon during an
eclipse. The bakunáwa is said to be disturbed by noise and will release
the sun or moon if noise is made.

bákung_1 n k.o. common rice with white grains of average length.

bákung_2 = pagiyun.

bakúngan n k.o. sea cucumber (balat).

bakúngun n k.o. talisáyun-colored cock with dark green feathers
interspersed with yellow feathers on the wings, sides, and breast.

bakus n {1} belt. {2} champion’s title in sports like boxing. Upat ka
túig níyang kuput sa bakus pagkakampiyun, He held the championship
title for four years. — sa amù n a belt believed to be worn by female
monkeys during pregnancy and shed after delivery. A woman who happens
to find it should wear it during pregnancy to give her an easy
delivery. hugut sa — v [A1C12; c1] take measures to meet a difficult
situation, tighten the belt in the face of financial difficulties.
Hugtun (ihugut) nátù ang átung bakus, kay naapikihan ta sa kwarta,
Let’s tighten our belts because we’re short of money. v [A; c] {1} wear
a belt. {2} tie around the waist. Gibakus níya sa háwak ang íyang
bálun, He tied his provisions around his waist. {3} [A; ab2] whip with
a belt. Baksun ka gayud ni Tátay, Father will surely whip you with a
belt. baksan n k.o. python with bands.

bàkus n small rope used to prevent a yoke from slipping. It is tied to
both ends of the yoke and runs under the neck.

bákut = gipakaingun (dialectal). see ingun_1.

bakutut v [B46] {1} stagger under a load that is too heavy. Makabakutut
(makapabakutut) man sad ang kabug-at niíning baskíta, The weight of
this basket can make one stagger. {2} stagger under the burden of
debts.

bakwì v [A2; a12] take back what one said. Bakwía ang ímung gisulti,
Take back what you said. n retraction. Ang bakwì ni Risal mahitungud sa
tinuhúan, Rizal’s retraction of what he said about religion.

bakwit v [A; b2c] flee s.w. in war time. Didtu mi mubakwit sa búkid, We
evacuated to the mountains. n war refugee. Napunù sa bakwit ang kampu,
The camp is full of war refugees.

bakyà_1 n {1} k.o. slipper with wooden sole. {2} k.o. boxfish.
v {1} [A; a] wear, make into wooden slippers. Nagbakyà siya ngadtu sa
tyanggihan, She wore wooden slippers to the market. Kining kahúya
maáyung bakyáun, This wood is good for bakyas. {2} [A; a12] beat with a
wooden slipper. Bakyaun siya sa asáwa ug mahubug, His wife beats him
with wooden slipper when he’s drunk.

bakyà_2 a appealing to the bakyà crowd (the proletariat). Bakyà kaáyung
salidáha, A movie very appealing to the proletariat. v [B12; b6] get to
be appealing to the proletariat. — krawud n proletariat (those wearing
bakyà).

bakyánu a skillful, adept. Bakyánu nang batáa sa pamakak, That child
fibs pretty well. v [B1] be skillful, adept. Magbakyánu ka sa
pagmakinilya arun makaimpliyar ka dáyun, Get adept at typing so you can
find a job right away.

bakyaw v [A; c] swing the arm to strike a blow.

bala, bála_1 (not without l) n {1} bullet. {2} staples. {3} money.
v [A; c] {1} load gun, stapler. Maáyu lang kang ibála sa kaniyun, You
are just good for cannon fodder. {2a} put s.t. in s.t. to make it
appear bigger or weightier. Ang kupras baláhag balas, The copra was
mixed with sand. {2b} mix s.t. in with s.t. else to hide it. Ang
pinaldung panaptun gibaláhag sigarilyu, The bales of cloth had
cigarettes hidden inside of them. balahan a loaded. Pagbantay kay
balahan nang pistúla, Be careful. That pistol is loaded.

bála_2 v [A; a12] carry s.t. on the back, not tied. Akuy mubála nímu
inigtabuk sa sapà, I’ll carry you piggy-back when we cross the river.
Baláha (balha) kanang sáku, Carry that sack on your back. gi- gilukdu
full of happiness, mischief, worries, and other emotions (lit. carried
on the back and on the head). Ang gwatsi ánang tawhána gibá gilukdu,
That man is chock-full of mischief.

balà_1 (not without l) v [A; a12] find out information about an event
that has happened (who stole s.t., where s.t. stolen or lost is, who
committed a crime, etc.) by means of an egg. The egg is made to stand
on its end on the edge of a tumbler. Then a yes-no question is put to
it. If the answer is yes, the egg remains upright. If the answer is no,
the egg falls. Balaun ang bábuy kay sigúrung gikáwat tu, We’ll divine
information about the pig, because it surely was stolen. balad-un
n omen, a sign which prophesizes s.t. Ang kumíta mauy usa ka bad-un nga
may umaábut nga kagúbut, A comet is a sign of a forthcoming war. tiking
balad-un phrase used to address the gecko (house lizard) in asking him
to foretell whether s.t. will happen. The question is put to the gecko
before he sounds. After he sounds the question is repeated. If the
gecko sounds an odd number of times the answer is affirmative. If even,
the answer is negative. Tiking balad-un, muulan ugmà? Prophet gecko,
will it rain tomorrow?

balà_2 = balálà.

bálà (not without l) v [A; c] warn so as to prohibit certain actions.
Gibaláan na man mu, You have been warned and prohibited. Úsà ka mamusil
sa háyup ibálà úsà, Before you start shooting stray animals, make a
warning prohibiting it. n warning that prohibits.

baláan a holy, sacred. Gahum sa mga baláan, Power of the saints. paka-
v [a12] considered sacred. Gipakabaláan sa mga bumbay ang báka, The
Hindus considered the cow a sacred animal. -un saintly. Balaánun ang
ákung tingúhà kanímu, I have noble intentions toward you.

baláat v [A; a] tie s.t. around s.t. Baátun ta ning sugnud, Let’s
bundle the firewood. Baáti íyang bàbà arun dì kasyágit, Gag her mouth
so she can’t shout. n s.t. tied around s.t.

balábag v [A2S; c1] {1} lie across a path. Balabágun (ibábag) nátù
pagbutang ang káhuy, Let’s put the tree across the road. Gibabágan ang
agiánan sa mga batu, The path was blocked by rocks. {2} block s.o.’s
way. Ikaw ray nakabábag sa ákung kalípay, You are the only one who
stands in the way of my happiness. {3} for a fetus to be in a
transverse position. Naglísud siya pag-anak kay nagbalábag (nagbalabag)
ang bátà, She had a hard labor because the child was in a transverse
position. n {1} a piece of wood or metal which lies across s.t. Ang
balabag mauy naglambing sa duha ka kasku, The crossbeam holds the two
hulls of the boat together. {2} cross (not without l in this meaning).
Gilansang si Hisus sa balábag, Jesus was nailed to a cross. {3} s.t.
which bars the way. Dílì balábag sa hangtúray nílang panaghigála, It is
not a bar to their eternal friendship. (→) n = balábag, n. -an(→)
n fishes with a transverse line, e.g., k.o. snappers.

balabála n a children’s game played by hitting a ball one tosses
himself with a stick. If another player catches the ball, he comes up
to bat. v [A1] play this game.

baladaw = balaraw.

baladbad = badbad_1.

baládin (not without l) n wooden container for palm toddy in the shape
of a tapered cylinder. v [A13; a12] make a wooden container for palm
toddy.

balad-un see balà_1.

bálag v {1} [A123S; b8] find s.t. by running across. Nakabalag silag
mga ismaglir sa lawud, They ran into some smugglers on the high seas.
{2} [AC; a] go meet s.o. Balága siya didtu sa piyir, Go meet him at the
pier. balagbalag v [A13] go around everywhere looking for s.o. or s.t.
Nagbagbág ang inahan ug pangítag kwarta, The mother went around
everywhere looking for money. hi- v [A2C; ac] encounter, meet s.o.
Nahibálag ku na gayud siya, At last I found him. Maghibálag ra gayud
ta, We will certainly meet.

balaghuy a lanky, ungracefully tall and thin. v [B] be lanky.
Nagbalaghuy ang láwas sa tin-idyir, Teen-agers have lanky bodies.

balagsang a for like things in a row to lack pieces, having pieces
missing. Balagsang ang mais kay pagawpaw ang gitamnan, The ears of corn
lacked grains because the land was infertile. v [BN] for pieces in a
row to fall out, come out having pieces missing. Kanang baratuhung
klási sa sudlay dalì rang mamagsang, It doesn’t take long for the teeth
to fall out of cheap combs. -un(→) a characterized by having members
missing.

balagtásan (not without l) n contest of reasoning between two men
consisting of spoken dialogue in high-flown language. v [AC2] hold such
a contest.

balagtuk n rat.

balagúlà, balagúlan (not without l) n three quarters of a coconut shell
used as container for water to wash the vagina.

balágun n vine. v [B2S46] grow like a vine.

balag-ung n animal trap that clasps, snares, or encloses the animal.
v [A; ab2] {1} catch with, set a balag-ung. Ákung gibalag-úngan ang
sawa, piru wà mabalag-ung, I set a trap for the snake, but I did not
catch it. {2} entrap s.o. into doing s.t. Bantay kay balag-úngun ka sa
pagpatug-an, Watch out! You’ll be trapped into revealing it. {3} [a12]
make s.t. into a balag-ung.

baláhak n deep festering sore, bigger than a kabahung. v [B12; a4] get
to be, get a large sore. Nabáhak ang íyang samad, His wound became a
festering sore. Gibáhak siya kay wà níya tambáli ang íyang samad, He
developed a festering sore because he left his wound unattended.

balahálà n gods and goddesses (poetic).

balahíbu = balhíbu.

bálak v [A; c1] recite verses. Balákun (ibálak) nákù ang ultimu adiyus
ni Risal, I am going to recite Rizal’s ‘Last Farewell’. n poem. paN-
v [A23] write poetry. n poetry. mag-r- n poet. -nun a poetic. v [B12]
become poetic.

baláka v [B1256; b3c5] be concerned, worried. Ayaw kabaláka kay akuy
mahibalu sa tanan, Don’t worry because I’ll take care of everything.
Unsa may ímung gikabalak-an? What are you worrying about? mabalak-un,
mabalakhun a characterized by concern, worry. Mabalakhung tíngug,
Worried voice. — ku, ka what do I care. Baláka kug mabaklag siya. Dílì
giyud aku muápas níya, I don’t care if she rots. I won’t run after her.

balakanan n doorsill.

balak-ang n = balat-ang. v [B; c1] stand, squat with the thighs apart.
Nagbalak-ang ang tindíra ug mani sa íyang paglingkud, The peanut vendor
squatted with her legs apart.

balakasi n k.o. small eel. Husi balakasi, tadtárun muliksi. Tadtárun
mukubul, paryintis tubul, José is an eel, strike him with a knife and
he will jump. If you strike him and he tautens up, he’s akin to hard
feces. (Teasing rhyme said to children named José, in reference to the
actions of the balakasi when struck.)

balakbak n {1} cloth or similar material to lie, walk, sit on. Duguun
ang bakbak nga giangkan, The sheets on which she lay when she gave
birth are all bloody. {2} diaper. v {1} [A; a] put material under s.o.
to be on. Gibakbákan ug puting panaptun ang tumbanan sa bag-ung
kinasal, The newly-weds had a white cloth spread for them to walk over.
{2} underlay, be the thing in which s.t. is rooted. Ang íyang panáad
gibakbákan ug mga pasálig, His promises were backed up by assurances.
Lúhà ug singut ang gibakbak sa ákung paglampus, My success is rooted in
sweat and tears. {3} put a diaper on. Bakbáki ang bátà, Put a diaper on
the baby.

balakíki n a chicken colored black with white speckles, and sometimes
with other colors. balakikíhun n fish colored black with speckles
(sharks, rays, et al.)

balalà a {1} slow to comprehend. Balà kaáyu siya sa klási, He is very
dull in class. {2} very inferior in quality, roughly or hurriedly done.
(←) v {1} [B2] become dull. Mubalálà (mabalálà) kag dì ka magtuun,
You’ll become dull if you do not study. {2} [B1] get to be inferior in
quality. Nagkabalà ang íyang tinahian nga nagkadaghan ang íyang súkì,
Her sewing is getting to be more and more inferior in quality since she
started to get lots of customers.†

balalantì n small tree, the leaves of which have a medicinal use. The
wood is of magical importance, esp. in sorcery. If food cooked by its
fire is stolen, the thief suffers.

balalátuk n k.o. woodpecker.

balalaw (not without l) n stiff loop or hoop. v [A; a12] make, make
into, put a loop.

balanà n crack in s.t. that has absolutely no give. Walà na nay dáta
ang íhi kay may balanà, That axle is useless because it has a crack.
v [B] get a crack in it. Mubalanà (mabalanà) ang básu basta butangan ug
ínit túbig, The glass will crack if you put hot water in it. -un
a having a crack.

balának n general name for large mullets: Mugilidae. -un a flat-headed,
like a mullet: term for fishes, snakes, people.

balanban_1 n k.o. half beak: Hemirhamphus spp.

balanban_2 n a branching reed, the main stem of which is split and used
in weaving and in sewing nipa shingles: Donnax cannaeformis.

balandra (not without l) n {1} barrel with rounded sides. {2} large,
flat-bottomed boat mainly used for carrying logs or rocks. {3} fat
woman shaped like a barrel. {4} wooden slippers (bakyà) which are
poorly made and clumsy to wear. Balandra man nang ímung bakyà, Your
slippers are like a boat. v [BN] become fat like a boat or barrel.

bal-ang = lab-ang.

balángas n mange, skin disease of dogs. v [a4] have mange. -un(→)
a mangy. v [B125] become mangy. Mabalangasun ang irù ug pakan-un ug
alukabhang sa kasag, The dog will become mangy if you feed it crab
shells.

balángaw (from dángaw) n rainbow. v [AN; b6] for there to be a rainbow.
Dílì na mag-ulan basta mamángaw (mubángaw), It will not rain any more
if there’s a rainbow. -an n {1} k.o. leech with a rainbow-like stripe
on its back. {2} bulinaw (anchovy) with a stripe through the middle.

balángay (not without l) n {1} barrio, the smallest unit of
self-government. {2} k.o. large boat. -nun n pertaining to the barrio.
tagi- n resident of a barrio. katagi- n fellow resident of a barrio.

balangbalang (not without l) v [A; a12] pummel by several persons.
Gibalangbalang sa mga silíngan ang kawatan, The neighbors pummelled the
thief.

balangbálang n a child’s game played by two groups whereby they try to
capture each other by a process of guessing.

balanghitaw n small crocodile.

balanghútan n k.o. lizard fish, family Synodontidae.

balanghuy = bulanghuy.

balangúbang n k.o. medium-sized soft wood tree, the bark of which is
used for walling: Shorea negrosensis.

balangus (not without l) v [A; c] eat voraciously. Ayaw ibalangus ang
ímung pagkáun arun dílì ka hituk-an, Do not gobble your food or you’ll
choke.

baláni_1 n {1} trunk of a banana or abaca plant. {2} pieces of the
banana trunk.

baláni_2 see batu_1.

balansi (not without l) n {1} accounting. {2} balance. Nawad-an siyag
balansi, He lost his balance. v {1} [A; a2] make an accounting of.
Balansíhan ta ka sa ímung útang, I’ll make an accounting to you of your
debts. {2} [A] {2a} maintain one’s balance. {2b} sway from side to side
in keeping in an upright position. Nagbalansi ang barku sa dakung
balud, The ship rocked back and forth in the high waves.

balansíkul n k.o. small tuna.

balantak n a small woven fish or eel trap with inwardly slanting tines
to allow entrance but no exit. v {1} [A12; a12] catch with a balantak.
{2} [A; a12] make into such a trap. {3} [c] put out a balantak. paN-
v [A2] fish with a balantak. Namantak sila sa sapà, They are trapping
fish in the river.

balantì = balalantì.

balantígun n k.o. bird.

balantíyung n varieties of climbing squashes, long, sausage-shaped or
jar-shaped: varieties of Lagenaria leucantha.

balanus (not without l) v {1} [A13; b(1)] mourn. Kaming mahabilin
magbalanus, Those of us who are left behind will grieve. {2} [A1]
repent. Magbalanus ka sa kaulahían, You will repent in the end.
n {1} grief, mourning. {2} repentance.

balaraw n k.o. dagger. v [a12] make into, strike with a dagger.

balas n sand. v {1} [A3; b6] put sand s.w. {2} [B3(1)] form sand-like
particles. Mubalas ang dugù ug dugáyun sa káyu, Blood stew forms grains
if you leave it over the fire too long. ka-(←) v [A13] have sand all
over it.

balasbas v {1} [AN; cP] go along parallel to s.t. Ibalasbas
(ipabalasbas) pagdala ang káhuy sa asíras, Go along the sidewalk when
you carry the wood. {2} [A; c1] put s.t. in a row parallel to s.t.
Ibalasbas (balasbása) ug tanum ang kapáyas sa ímung kural, Plant
papayas along your fence. n ornamental planted along walks ( =
atay-átay. see atay.)

balaslúkun a naughty, mischievous. Balaslúkun kaáyu ning batáa. Kusug
kaáyung mupahílak sa íyang mga manghud, The naughty child enjoys making
his younger brothers and sisters cry. v [B12] be, become naughty.

balasúbas (not without l) n one who avoids meeting his obligations.
Balasúbas kaáyu siyang muswildu. Utsu ang sábut, dus ray báyad, He is
immoral in the way he pays wages. He promises eight pesos, but two is
all you get. v [B12] be a person who avoids meeting obligations.

balat n {1} sea cucumber. {2} one considered not to count for anything.
Ngánung wà man ku nímu bahíni? Unsa ku, balat lang? Why didn’t you give
me any? Don’t I count for anything? — hanginan k.o. sea cucumber that
shrinks up when taken out of the water so much that it seems to
disappear. — úwak n k.o. black sea cucumber edible when dried.

balat-ang n the hips and pelvic region. v [a4] have pains in the pelvic
region. Balat-ángun siya ug magrigla, She has pains in the pelvic
region when she menstruates. -un a having prominent hips.

balátik_1 n trap consisting of a trip rope which releases a spear.
v {1} [A; ab2] catch with, set a balátik. Hingbalatikan ang irù, The
dog got speared in the trap. {2} [A; b6] set a balátik. Balatíkan nákù
ag maisan, I will put a trap in the cornfield. {3} [a12] make a
balátik.

balátik_2 n name of a constellation having three stars in a row.

balátung n k.o. string bean, reaching more than a foot and less than an
inch around. The most commonly grown string bean: Vigna sesquipedialis.
sintas — n a variety longer than ordinary balátung. batungbatung n k.o.
wild vine with a bean similar to the balátung, but inedible. -in-(→)
n k.o. banana the fruit of which is light yellowish green, long and
thin, eaten raw when ripe.

balatwánun n k.o. small sea fish: Gerres sp.

baláud v [A; c] {1} issue an order. Gibalaúran kung Tátay sa dílì na
pagtabakù, Father ordered me not to smoke. {2} give a warning.
Gibalaúran tang may bagyung taliábut, We have been warned that there’s
a typhoon coming. n {1} (not without l) law, rules and regulations.
Ayaw supáka ang baláud, Do not break the law. {2} warning. batakang —
constitution. balauránan n place where laws are passed. Ubus, ibabaw
balauránan, Lower, upper house. mag-r-(→) n lawmaker, -un(→), balaurun,
balaudnun n bill, future law.

balaúngun = buluungun.

balaw (not without l) n {1} a resinous preparation used to caulk and
waterproof a boat, obtained from the sap of the apítung and almasíga.
{2} k.o. timber tree, light species of trees called apítung.
{3} reddish-brown color in feathers of fowls. v [A; c] waterproof a
boat with balaw. Balawan nímu ang tibuuk kílid, Caulk the seams and put
resin all over the sides.

bálaw v {1} [B12] get tired of doing s.t. which takes a long time.
Nabálaw kug pinaábut nímu, I got tired of waiting for you. {2} [B1] be
satisfied to the point of not desiring any more, do as much as one
wants to. Magbálaw akug bayli karung gabíi, I will dance to my heart’s
content this evening. Nabálaw na kug kináug karni, I got tired of
eating meat. ka-an, ka-un(→) n ending up by being completely satiated.
Walay kabaláwan ang íyang kagútum, There is no satisfying his hunger.

balawbaw v {1} [A; c] put s.t. over s.t. else. Ang kík gibawbáwan ug
aysing, The cake was topped with icing. Ibawbaw ang báhaw sa bag-ung
kan-un, Put the leftover rice on top of the newly-cooked rice. {2} [A;
a] skim off the topmost portion of s.t. Bawbáwun ku ang ispúma sa
sabaw, I’ll skim off the foam from the soup.

balay n {1} house. — alampuánan house of worship. — sa lawàlawà
spiderweb. — sa ligwan, putyúkan beehive, hornet’s nest. — lungsud city
hall. — patigáyun business firm. {2} home base in games. v [A; b] build
a house. Nagbalay siya daplin sa baybáyun, He built a house near the
shore. Balayan kung ímung lúti, I’ll build a house on your lot. (←)
v [A; a] form a thought, compose a song. Mubálay kug bálak, I’ll
compose a poem. Baláya ang ímung tubag sa ímung hunàhúnà, Work your
answer out carefully in your mind. -an n {1} home base in a game of
hide and seek or in baseball. {2} network of bamboo strips mounted like
a platform for climbing plants. v [A2] reach home in baseball, touch
base in hide and seek. Ug mubayan kag úna sa búang, libri ka, If you
reach the goal ahead of the one who’s it, you’re free. -anan
n {1} matchbox. Isulud ang palítu sa bayanan, Place the matchsticks in
the matchbox. {2} shell of eggs, sea animals. Bayanan sa itlug, Egg
shells. Bayanan sa pawíkan, Turtle shell. Bayanan sa kinhasun, Clam
shell. {3} = -an. 4 — sa utut female genitalia (humorous slang). ka-an
n group of homes. paN- n {1} housing project, group of homes. Ang
pruyiktu sa pamalay álang sa mga kabus, The housing project for the
poor. {2} s.t. used in the house. Pamalay na lang ning sinináa, This
dress is only for house use. {3} roof framework of a house. paniN-
n {1} household. Buluhatun sa panimalay, Household chores. {2} home.
Ang asáwa mauy hára sa panimalay, The wife is the queen of the home.
tag-, tag-(←) n owner of the house. tig-un(←) n {1} framework of a
house. Hápit na mahuman ang tigbáyun sa ákung balay, The framework of
my house is almost finished. {2} framework of one’s thoughts. Natumpag
ang tigbáyun sa ákung mga damgu, The framework of my dreams collapsed.
gam-(←) see gambálay. panum- see tungbálay.†

balaybay v [A; c1] put in a row. Balaybáyun (ibalaybay) nátù ang
misitíra sa agiánan, Let’s put a row of flower tubs along the walk.
n things put in a row. paN- v [A2; b6] go in, along a certain line.
Namalaybay sila sa asíras, They walked on the sidewalk.

baláyung n large hardwood tree with a short trunk and long branches.
The wood is deep, dark cordovan and is very hard and highly resistant
to deterioration.

balbag v [A3P; a12] break into pieces due to an impact. Nabalbag ang
bagul nga gimartilyu, The coconut shell got smashed when I hammered it.

balbakúwa n dish composed of beef or carabao legs, tails, ears, and
skin, stewed with bones and with spices and peas. v [A; a] make beef,
carabao stew.

balbal n k.o. possessed person (unglù) that has a need to go after sick
people’s blood or livers. paN- v [A2] for the balbal to go out and
perpetrate his evil deeds.

balbangáan a for fruits to be in the stage where they are just about to
ripen but still hard. v [B] reach the ripening stage.

balbas n {1} beard. {2} instrument for shaving. v {1} [A; b6(1)] shave
s.o. Balbásan ta nang ímung bigúti, Let’s shave your mustache off.
{2} [A12] shave oneself. Makabalbas kag way saminsámin? Can you shave
without a mirror? paN-, panghiN- v [A2] shave oneself. Wà pa ku
mamalbas (manghimalbas), I haven’t shaved yet.

balbíru = barbíru.

balbula = barbula.

balda v [A; a] {1} disable, maim. Baldáha ang tiil arun dì kadágan,
Break his legs so he can’t run away. Gibaldáhan ang táwu nga misúkul sa
pulis, The man who resisted the policeman was maimed. {2} disturb,
prevent s.o. from doing s.t. properly. Ang mga tin-idyir mubaldag
apil-apil sa sáyaw, The teenagers that get into the act keep us from
dancing properly. Baldáhun ku sa makadiyut ang inyung panagsulti, May I
disturb your conversation a minute? n s.t. that disturbs. -du
a crippled, maimed. Pagkatáwu níya, baldádu na siyag kamut, He was born
with a crippled hand. v [B12; a] get maimed, maim. Baldadúhun ta ka
run, I’m going to cripple you, you damn ...

baldi n {1} pail. {2} storm signal consisting of a cone made of canvas
raised by day in combination with a ball. v [A; b6] fetch water in a
pail. Magbaldi aku didtu ug túbig, I’ll go there to fetch a pail of
water.

baldíyu v [A; b6] flood with water for the purpose of cleaning.
Nagbaldíyu mi sa kusína, We flushed water over the kitchen.

baldúsa n tile. v [a12] make s.t. of tile. Baldusáhun ta ning átung
salug, Let’s have a tile floor.†

balhas n {1} perspiration. {2} prickly heat. v [B24; a4] perspire.
Mubalhas ku ug mulampásu sa sawug, I’ll perspire if I scrub the floor.
Gibalhas ku human pag-inum sa aspirin, I sweated after taking aspirin.

balhíbu n hair on the body, but not pubic hairs, hair of animals,
feathers. Bagà ang balhíbu sa íyang íluk, He has thick hair in his
armpits. Hámis ug balhíbu ang iring, The cat has soft fur. Putì ang
balhíbu sa ákung hiniktan, My fighting cock has white feathers. sámag,
paríhug — similar in traits. Ang mga táwung susámag balhíbu magkaúyun
giyud, Birds of a feather flock together. (→) v [A12; b8] {1a} better
in feather coloration. Ang tubaung parísag buyugun makabalhibu,
Toddy-colored feathers win over honey-colored ones. {1b} beat
invariably in a competition. Nabalhibuan mung mga tagabaryu námung mga
tagasyudad, We city people can outdo you country people. {2} overawe,
impress s.o. to the extent that he gets flustered or completely eats
out of one’s hands. Nabalhibuan ku niánang bayhána. Dílì ku makabungat
sa ákung túyù, I was overawed by that woman. I couldn’t say what I
wanted to. {3} for one’s heart to soften to one. Nabalhibuan ku ánang
tihíka. Aku ray makapangáyù níyag kwarta. Way láin, That old skinflint
has a soft spot in his heart for me. I can ask him for money, but no
one else can. paN- v [A2] {1a} select fighting cocks on the basis of
feather coloration. Mamalhíbu ku sa ímung bayungbáyung kay maghukut kug
igtalarì, I’ll make a selection from your young cocks to raise into a
fighting cock. {1b} size up an opponent’s cock by the feathers.
{2} [A2S] grow feathers. Namalhíbu na ang kuyabug, The nestlings are
growing feathers now. lúpig sa balhibuay come off the worse when it
comes to comparing feathers. Lúpig ka sa balhibuay kun itárì nímu ang
ugis sa tubaun, Don’t pit your white cock against a toddy-colored one
because you lose just from the color combination. balhibuun a hairy.
-un ug dílà tending to backbite. -un ug kamut tending to swipe things.

balhin (from halin) v {1} [A; c1] {1a} move s.t. from one place to
another. Balhínun (ibalhin) ta kini didtu sa kusína, Let’s transfer
this to the kitchen. {1b} move domestic animals to the shade, to a new
grazing area. Talina, ang kábaw balhína (ibalhin), Move the carabao,
Talina. {2} [AP] move, emigrate from one place to another. Mibalhin
kami sa dakbayan, We moved to the city. {3} [B] become changed.
Nabalhin (mibalhin) ang íyang taras sa nagkadakù siya, His character
changed as he grew older. ka-an n change. May kabalhínan ang íyang
kinaíya sa nadátù na, His character changed after he became rich. ma-un
a changeable. Ang babáyi mabalhínun sáma sa bagyu, Women are fickle
like typhoons. -un(→), balhinbalhin n k.o. movable fish corral.

balhug v {1} [A; c] insert s.t. long in a place under s.t. or between
s.t. Akuy mibalhug niánang linipak ngadtu sa binugkus, I inserted those
bamboo slats into the bundle. Ibalhug iláwum sa katri ang malíta, Slip
the valise under the bed. {2} [A3P; a] put into an enclosure. Akuy
mibalhug sa manuk sa tangkal, I put the chicken in the cage. Gibalhug
siya sa karsil, He was thrown in jail.

balhun n {1} rope tied from one end of the yoke to the other end,
passing below the neck, so the yoke won’t slip off. {2} bellyband of
harness. v [A; b] apply, use as bellyband or yoke rope.

bali_1 a reversed, backwards. Bali ang pagkasul-ub nang ímung sapátus,
You put your shoes on backwards. v {1} [A; a12] turn s.t. over. Balihun
nátung sinugbang isdà, Let’s turn the fish we’re broiling over. {2} [A;
a12] plow the field the second time to turn the clods over (in place of
harrowing—pagkaras). Magbali ta run arun kapugas ta ugmà, Let’s plow
the field the second time so we can plant tomorrow. {3} [A2] for wind
to change direction, switch party loyalty. Mibali ang hángin, The wind
changed direction. Kun wà ku makabali sa Libiral, pildi ku, If I hadn’t
changed to the Liberal Party, I would have lost. {4} [a12] be reversed,
wrong side out, backwards. Dì na mabali ang ákung hukum, My decision
cannot be reversed. Nabali na ang kalibútan kay ang babáyi mau nay
mangulitáwu, The world has turned upside down because it’s the women
who court the men now. Nabali na ba nímu ang punda? Have you turned the
pillow cases inside out? {5} [A23] — ug pangutána respond to a question
with another question instead of answering it. {6} [C; a] be placed in
opposite directions from each other. Nagbáli silag higdà, They were
lying head to foot. Balíhun nátù pagbutang ang sapátus sa kartun, Let’s
put the shoes tip to toe in the box. paN- v {1} [A23] put clothes on
wrong side out or shoes backwards. Namali ka man sa ímung sinínà, You
have your clothes on inside out. {2} turn cloth wrong side out. Namali
ku sa mga linabhan arun dílì hilubaran, I turned the wash inside out so
it wouldn’t fade. balibáli v [A; a12] do first on one side and then on
the other. Ang íyang amahan mauy mibalibálig sagpà níya, Her father
slapped her on both cheeks. Gibalibáli níyag pas-an ang sag-ub, As he
carried the water container he kept shifting it from shoulder to
shoulder. — ug kasábà scold severely. Balibalíhun bítaw siyag kasábà wà
katíngug, He never said a word when he was scolded severely.
a reversible. Ang ákung dyákit balibáli, I have a reversible jacket.
-in- v [A; a] speak in secret code, way. Antígu ka ba nga mubinali? Do
you know how to speak Hog Latin?†

báli a {1} be worth it (not used negatively). Písus ang palit nímu sa
isdà? Báli sad, You paid a peso for the fish. It was worth it. — walà
unimportant, worth ignoring. {2} serves one right. Nadagmà ang bátà.
Báli, The child fell. Serves him right. {3} — ug worth, in the amount,
quantity, duration of. Bálig písus nga bugas, One peso’s worth of rice.
Pabukálag bálig tungà sa taknà, Boil it for half an hour. {4} — nga
with exclamation: how very much! Báling buánga nímu, How very naughty
of you. mas — nga it would be better if. Mas báli nga mamatay, It would
be better to die. walay — it doesn’t matter. Way bálig mahal, basta
maáyung klási, It doesn’t matter if it costs a lot, as long as it is
good. v {1} [a12] {1a} dílì, walà, ayaw — not pay s.t. any mind. Ayaw
balíha ang mga tabì, Don’t pay attention to the gossip. {1b} gi- walà
ignored, treated as insignificant. Gibáli walà na siya ni Armi, Armi
just ignored her from then on. {2} [A; ab1] {a} sign a chit for goods
taken in a store. Mubáli lang kug bugas, I’ll just sign a chit for some
rice. {b} ask for an advance. Si Uskar ang átung balíhan, Let’s ask for
an advance from Oscar. n {1} a chit signed for goods taken in a store.
{2} amount taken in advance from wages. May báli kung trayinta písus sa
ákung ámu, I had an advance of thirty pesos from my boss.†

bálì v [A; a] break s.t. long. Mibálì siyag sanga, He broke off a twig.
Nabálì ang ákung buktun, I broke my arm. Túhud lay ibálì ánà, Break it
off with your knee. — ang súngay put s.o. in his place. Balían ku siya
sa íyang súngay arun dílì na mag-abusar, I’ll put her in her place so
she won’t be so abusive any more. (→) a {1} for an elongated thing to
be broken. {2} s.o. who is new at s.t., ignorant. Balì ka pang
mumaníhu, You’re still just learning how to drive. Balì siyag linaktan,
He carries himself like a greenhorn. {3} foolish in trying to do s.t.
one doesn’t even know how to do. Balì ning tawhána. Midrayib sa dyíp,
unyà dì diay kamau, He’s a fool. He tries to drive the jeep when he
doesn’t even know how to. balìbálì n {1} k.o. rifle that is bent when
cocked, usually a double-barreled gun. {2} = bulinaw.†

baliad a in a motion with the back bent. Baliad na run ákung daybing,
Now I will do a back dive. v [B3; c1] bend one’s body backward with a
rapid motion, do s.t. on one’s back. Nagbaliad siya paglanguy, He was
swimming on his back.

baliálà (not without l) n the Malaysian fantail, a small bird that
moves its tail up and down while perched: Rhipidura javanica. -un
a characterized by constant moving around or changing positions,
fidgety.

balíbad v {1} [A2S; c] refuse s.o. or s.t. Balibáran gánì ku nímu,
patyun ta ka, If you turn me down, I’ll kill you. {2} [AN2] give an
excuse for not doing s.t. Mibalíbad (namalíbad) siyang dì musulti kay
pagaw siya, He got out of giving the speech with the excuse that he was
hoarse. n {1} refusal. Ang ímung balíbad way kapuslánan kun tiúnan kag
pusil, No use trying to refuse when s.o. points a gun at you.
{2} excuse. Nakadawat mig balíbad níya nga dì siya makaanhi, We already
received his excuse that he couldn’t come. paN- v [A] say s.t. is not
the case. Namalíbad siya nga wà siya mahigugma kaníya, She said she did
not love him. balibaran a fond of giving excuses.

balibag v [A; c] throw s.t. away, get rid of, throw. Ayaw nag ibalibag.
Magámit pa man, Don’t throw it away. We can still use it.

balibay = balibag.

balíbud_1 v [A3P; ab16(1)] wind s.t. around s.t. Ibalíbud (balibúra)
ang hílu sa káhuy arun dì magubut, Wind the thread around the stick so
it will not get tangled up.

balíbud_2 v [A; c] scatter grains, small solids over an area. Balibúrig
sibúyas ang sabaw, Sprinkle onions on the soup. Ibalíbud ning pulbus sa
salug, Sprinkle this powder on the floor.

balibul n {1} volleyball. {2} volleyball style of playing billiards:
the table is divided into two territories, and each player must make a
carom inside his territory. v [A; b6] play volleyball. -an n volleyball
court.†

balibung v [A; c] cover the space between the upper edges of the roof
at the ridge. Sín ang maáyung ibalibung sa atup, Galvanized iron is a
good material to put over the ridge of the roof. -an n {1} ridge of the
roof. {2} the material which covers the ridge.

balidbid v [A; b6] trickle down in drops, clinging to s.t. Íyang
gipahíran ang lúhà nga mibalidbid sa íyang áping, She wiped the tears
that trickled down her cheeks.

balidikturyan n {1} valedictorian. {2} one who excels in s.t. Basta
mahitungud na gánì sa babáyi, balidikturyan siya ánang buháta, He’s an
expert when it comes to women. v [B3; a12] become the valedictorian.

balighù n different from the expected. Dakung balighù, gipusil siya
apan wà dutli, How strange! He was shot but was not hurt. Siya ray anak
nga balighù sa ginikánan, He is the parent’s problem child.

balighut n bow, loop, that can be easily untied by pulling one end of
the string. v [A; b6(1)] tie a knot on s.t. Akuy mubalighut sa listun
sa bátà, I’ll tie the child’s shoelace. Balighúti ang kumingking arun
dì malímut, Tie a string around his little finger so he won’t forget.

baligkawang = balat-ang.

baligkus = balighut.

baligsálà = balinsálà.

baligtad a {1} wrong side out, up. Baligtad nang pagkatahì kay nailáwum
ang karaygan, It was sewed with the wrong side out because the material
that was meant to face is on the inside. {2} contrary to what is
expected. Baligtad ang nahitabù kay inay silútan, gigantíhan na hinúun,
Just the opposite happened: instead of being punished, he was rewarded.
v [A; c1] put wrong side up or out. Nagbaligtad ang kahun ay, básig
mahùhù ang sulud, The box is upside down. The contents might fall out.
Ayaw ibaligtad (baligtára) pagladlad ang mga magasin, Do not display
the magazines upside down.

baligtus n {1} tight knot that won’t come undone. {2} thumb-sized
bundle of sorted abaca fiber for weaving, knotted at one end. v {1} [A;
c1] tie in a knot. Baligtúsa (ibaligtus) makaduha arun masigúru, Tie
the knot twice to make it secure. {2} [A; a12] tie abaca fiber into a
bundle as thick as one’s thumb by knotting the end. Baligtúsa ang
sinudlay nga iskuhídu, Bundle the sorted fine abaca fiber.

baligwat v {1} [A13; c6] use s.t. as a crowbar to move s.t. else. Ayaw
ug ibaligwat ang páyung sa ríhas, Don’t use the umbrella as a crowbar
to move the grill. {2} [a12] break one’s arm or leg by moving it
accidentally after it has been wedged tight in place (i.e. having it
act like a crowbar). Nabálì íyang tiil kay nabaligwat sa pagkabulásut
níya sa bangag, He broke his leg when he stepped into the hole because
when he fell, his leg was wedged on the edge of the hole. n crowbar.

baligyà v [A; c] sell. Gibaligyáan ku níyag sigarilyu, He sold me some
cigarettes. n merchandise, wares for sale. Nagpátad ang daghang baligyà
sa asíras, The sidewalks are teeming with things for sale. Dílì kini
baligyà. Ákù ni, This is not for sale. It’s mine. palit — buying and
selling. Nanginabúhì ku sa palit baligyà, I make my living by buying
and selling. maN-ay, maN-r- n one who sells for a living.

bálik v {1} [A2; b5] go, come back, come back to get s.t. Kanus-a ka
man mubálik? When will you come back? Balíkun (balíkan) nákù ang ákung
nahikalimtan, I’ll come back for the things I forgot. {1a} [A13; c]
put, give s.t. back. Ibálik ra ni ngadtu, Put this back. {2} [B23; b6]
return to his former state. Mibálik (nabálik) na ang kangayà sa íyang
panagway, Her happy expression returned to her face. Balíkan ang yútà
sa íyang katambuk kun abunúhan, The soil will regain its fertility if
you add fertilizer. {3} [b4] have a relapse. Gibalíkan siya sa íyang
sakit kay nangalsag bug-at, He had a relapse because he carried s.t.
too heavy for him. {4} [A; b5c] [do] again. Balíki (balíka) nig tahì,
Sew this over again. Balíkun ku ikaw ug pangutána, I will ask you
again. Maúlaw ku ug ibálik nag pangutána, I would be embarrassed if
that question were asked a second time. {4a} [a12] revive. Naghandum
sila nga untà balíkun ang pilikulang Binisayà, They’re thinking about
reviving Visayan movies. n subject repeated in school. balikbálik
v [B2; ac2] {1} do again. {2} come back again. Balikbálik unyà mu, ha?
Bye. Come back and see us again, will you? balikbalik n {1} k.o. small
tree used in countersorcery because of its magical powers to cause evil
to return to the perpetrator. {2} k.o. small bird. sum-(→), tum-(→) see
sumbalik.

balíkas n curses. v [A; a1c] curse. Mubalíkas giyud aku nímu ug
mahitabù, I’ll curse you if it happens. Ayawg balikása (balikasa) ang
mga binatunan, Don’t curse the servants. -an(→) a foul-mouthed, fond of
uttering indecent words. v [B126] become foul-mouthed.

balikawang = balat-ang.

balikhaw n collarbone. v [BN2] have prominent collarbones. Namalikhaw
siya pagguwà níya sa uspital, You could see his collarbones when he got
out of the hospital.

balikid = balilikid.

balikig {1} euphemism for balikug, 2 (= balikù, 2). {2} = balikù.

balíkis v [A; c] coil, put around s.t. else. Mibalíkis ang baksan sa
bábuy, The python coiled around the pig’s body. Nakabalíkis ang íyang
kamut sa ákung háwak, He managed to put his arm around my waist. Ayaw
ug ibalíkis ang písì sa halígi, Don’t coil that rope around the post.
n k.o. itchy and fast-spreading skin disease which spreads around the
body in the area of the hips.

baliktad = baligtad.

baliktus v {1} = baligtus. {2} [B] be wrapped around, coil oneself
around. Mibaliktus (nabaliktus) ang hálas sa sanga, The snake was
coiled around a branch. Ang íyang mga buktun nagbaliktus sa líug sa
kawatan, He wrapped his arms around the thief’s neck. n bundle. Paliti
akug usa ka baliktus káhuy, Buy me a bundle of wood.

balikù a {1} crooked, not straight. {2} crooked, dishonest. Balikung
pulitiku, Crooked politician. v [AB; a12] be, make s.t. crooked.
Balikuun ta ning túbu, Let’s bend this water pipe. — nga lyábi n wrench
with a socket head to fit over a bolt.

balíkud v [A3; b6c1] coil, make a circular loop of. Ibalíkud (balikúra)
ang alambri, Coil the wire up.

balikug = balikù.

balikugkug a for wires or string-like things to be curled or twisted
inwards at the end. Balikugkug ang udlut sa paku, The fern frond is
curled at its tip. v [APB; a] curl or twist s.t. at the tip with a
general direction pointing to the base, be curled or twisted at its
end. Mibalikugkug (nabalikugkug) ang dáhun sa túmang kaínit sa adlaw,
The leaves curled in the intense heat of the sun.

balíkus = balíkis.

balikutkut v [AB3; a] bunch, fold, curl up in an irregular way, cause
s.t. to do so. Ang úlud nga gihíkap mibalikutkut, The worm curled up
when s.o. touched it. Ayaw balikutkúta ang písì. Ibalibud ug káhuy,
Don’t just bunch up the rope. Wind it around a stick. a folded up in an
irregular way. Dì ku mupalit niánang balikutkut nga sín, I won’t buy
that wrinkled galvanized iron sheet.

balikutsa n candy made of the hardened syrup obtained from coconut milk
and sugar. v [A; a2] make balikutsa.

balikwaut a lacking in grace, balance, euphony. Balikwaut pamináwun ang
litiral kaáyung pagkahúbad, A literal translation lacks euphony. v [B6;
a2] be awkward. Mibalikwaut (nabalikwaut) ang linaktan sa dalágang
gitihulan sa kalakin-an, The girl walked awkwardly when the boys
whistled at her. Balikwautun ku pagtágik unyà han-áyag maáyu, I’ll
compose it in a rough way, then rearrange it well.

balikwit = bakwit.

balíla n wolf herring: Chirocentrus dorab.

balíli n general name for grasses that do not grow tall. — tsína k.o.
purple ornamental grass grown popularly in hanging pots. kabalilinhan
n grassy area.

balilikid, balilíkid v [A; b5] {1} turn around, look back. Gibalilíkid
(gibalilikdan) nákù ang táwung mitawag nákù, I turned back to the man
who was calling me. {2} look back to one’s past or people behind, below
in rank. Ug masapían ka na, dílì ka na mubalilikid sa ímung gigikánan,
When you become rich, you won’t turn back to where you came from.

balimbúgay n k.o. bivalve.

balimbing = balingbing.

báling n large fish net operated by several people. v {1} [AN; a] catch
fish with a large net. Makúhà ang bansíkul ug balíngun, Mackerel can be
caught with a net. {2} [A12; b8] catch in a police dragnet. Sa
katapúsan nabalingan ra gayud ang tulisan, At last the robbers were
caught in the dragnet. {3} [A2N3PC; a1] trap, capture by stratagem. Ang
ímung sinultihan mauy makabáling (makapabáling) kanímu, Your speech
will entrap you. {3a} [A3SN; a12] for two parties to make a secret
agreement in gambling in order to bilk a third player. Dakù ang ákung
pildi kay nabáling man ku, I lost heavily because they duped me.
{4} [A23PC; ab2c] capture one’s attention, affections. Nagkabáling ang
ílang tinan-awan, Their eyes met. Balíngun níya ang ímung pagtagad, He
will capture your attention. Wà níya ibáling ang íyang pagtagad ngadtu
sa uban, He did not turn his affections to the others. (→) n = báling.
paN- v [A; b6] fish with nets. n fishing with nets. hiN-, maN-r-(→) a
one who likes to ensnare people. Dalì rang ikítà ug áway, himáling
(mamamaling) tuhù, She looks for trouble. She likes to ensnare people.
n {1} fish caught with nets. {2} s.t. captured by stratagem.

balingag a careless, inattentive to what one is about. Balingag ka man
gud, mu nang nakalimtan nímu ang malíta, You’re careless. That’s why
you forgot the suitcase. v [B1] {1} be careless and forget s.t.
{2} mistake s.o. for s.o. else. Nabalingag ku nímu kang Husi, maung
gisampit ta ka, I mistook you for José. That’s why I called you.

balingay v [A; bc1] hook s.t. at the back of the shoulder, esp. the
bamboo palm-toddy container (kawit). Balingaya (ibalingay) ang kawit,
Carry the toddy tube hooked on your shoulder.

balingbing n carambola, a small cultivated tree with oblong fruit
having longitudinal angular lobes. The fruit is fleshy and acidic and
consumed fresh or pickled: Averrhoa carambola.

balíngit = tukaw.

balingkágas v [B2; b6] become skinny because of overindulgence in vice.
Makabalingkágas (makapabalingkágas) nang pagsilábig pamutakal,
Overindulgence in women can make one skinny.

balingkawang = balat-ang.

balingkút a hard to please. Pagkabalingkút bayang tawhána. Dílì madalag
paayun-áyun, How stubborn he is. No matter how hard you try, you can’t
persuade him. v [B] become hard to please.

balingug = balingag.

balinsalà, balinsálà n k.o. small edible bivalve clam.

balinsay n k.o. game of tossing a handful of small objects, usually
cowries, to be caught by the back of the hand, and then tossed again
caught on the palm. The pieces that fall to the floor are paired off.
In each pair one is made to hit the other by flicking it. If the player
misses or hits more than one piece, he’s burnt (pasù) and loses his
turn. The object is to get rid of the pieces without losing one’s turn.
v {1} [C2; ac] play balinsay. {2} [A] toss things in the air as if
playing balinsay. Dì balinsáyun ang kwarta kay makagábà, Don’t flip
money in the air because it will bring you divine retribution.

balinsáyaw = sayaw.

balinsiyána n {1} Arroz a la Valenciana. {2} type of stitch whereby the
seam is sewn twice in such a way that it won’t frazzle and is
invisible. v [A; a] {1} make into Arroz a la Valenciana. {2} sew with a
double stitch.

balinsuguan see súgù.

balinsúngag v [B1; c1] be placed with the ends in a random disorderly
way. Ayaw balinsungága (ibalinsúngag) pagbutang ang mga sugnud arun
dílì muílug ug lugar, Don’t stack the firewood in any old way so it
won’t occupy too much room. ka- v [A13] be completely topsy-turvy.
Nagkabalinsúngag ang mga patayng sundálu sa nataran sa panggubátan, The
soldiers were lying about in every which way on the battlefield.

balintang = balintung_2.

balintawak n {1} a woman’s dress consisting of a blouse with puffed
butterfly sleeves, a long striped skirt, and a piece of cloth overlaid.
v [A; a] wear, make into a balintawak. {2} = linambid. see lambid.

balintayins n one’s Valentine on Valentine’s day. — dí n Valentine’s
Day. — kard Valentine’s greeting card. — parti Valentine’s party.
v [A1; c6] hold a Valentine’s party.

balintung_1 n k.o. mackerel or tuna.

balintung_2 v [A1B2; c1] get knocked down, fall down from a standing
position with force. Mibalintung (nabalintung) siyang naigù sa ákung
kúmù, He came down with a crash when I hit him with my fist. Kinsay
nagbalintung sa mga síya? Who knocked the chairs down? Culu- v [A13]
{1} turn over writhing. Unsa bay nakáun mung nagbulubalintung ka man
dihà? What did you eat that makes you writhe? {2} somersault.

balintúwad v [B] {1} fall headlong on the face. Pagkasángit sa ákung
tiil sa bágun, nabalintúwad ku, My foot tripped on a vine, and I
tumbled forward. {2} [a] pick s.o. up by the feet and hold him upside
down. Musúkul ka gánì balintuwárun ta ka, If you defy me, I’ll turn you
upside down.

balirung_1 n fishing trap of tidal flats consisting of stones piled
waist-high arranged in a large rectangle, with a hole for entrance but
no easy exits, such that when the tide goes out the fish are bunched in
the tidal pools. v [A; a] make a balirung. paN- v [A; b1] catch fish
with the balirung.

balirung_2 v [A; ac] throw a stick such that it spins in flight. Ug
dílì nímu maabut ang búnga, balirunga lang, If you cannot reach the
fruit, throw a stick at it to get it down. Ibalirung kining putput sa
irù, Throw this stick at the dog. n stick used for throwing at s.t.

balirúsu a stubborn, not open to advice and reproach. v [B12; b6]
become stubborn; consider s.o. as such. Nabalirúsu nang batáa kay way
disiplína, That child became wilful because of lack of discipline.

bal-is n hand tool used to strip abaca. v [A; c1] make an abaca
stripper.

balísa v [B126; b3(1)c5] be anxious, apprehensive. Ang wà níya pag-ulì
nakabalísa (nakapabalísa) nákù, His failure to come home worried me.

balisádà, balisálà = balinsálà.

*balisbis -an n {1} eaves, overhanging portion of a roof. {2} place
beneath the eaves where rain drops to. Kanali ang balisbísan, Make a
canal beneath the eaves where rain drops to. {3} narrow yard close to
the house. paN- v [A12] walk along the sides of a house. Mamalisbis
lang ta arun dílì mahumud sa ulan, Let’s walk along the sides of the
houses so we won’t get wet. paN-an = paN-.†

balísing v [A; c1] {1} transfer an activity elsewhere. Ibalísing
(balisíngun) ni nátung átung ínum, Let us move our drinking spree s.w.
else. {2} move a piece in a game of marbles from an obstructed place to
s.w. else the same distance from the goal. {3} [A; b4(1)] have s.o.
take a base in baseball. Nagbalísing ba ang ampáyir sa bátir? Did the
umpire tell the batter to take a base? Nabalisíngan ang ílang pitsir ug
upat ka bátir, That pitcher had four batters take a base on him.
{4} [A2; b6] for a husband to turn his attention elsewhere. Hustis sa
nayitklab ang gibalisíngan sa bána, The husband turned his attentions
to a night club hostess. hiN-, hiN-(→) a inclined to move one’s piece
in a game.

baliskad v [A; a1] {1} turn inside out. Akuy mibaliskad sa linabhan, I
turned the wash inside out. Binaliskad ang baráha, Cards, face up on
the table. {2} undo a knot. Baliskára ang higut, Untie the knot.

baliskug v [B2] become curled up, rolled. Ang ínit ang nakabaliskug
(nakapabaliskug) sa pláka, The heat has caused the record to curl.

balista v {1} [B26; a] flip over backward. Mibalista siya pagkaigù sa
ákung kúmù, He fell over backward when he got the full force of my
blows. Balistáha siya, makahímù ka ba, Flip him over backward if you
can do it. {2} [A; c1] turn s.t. inside out. Bisag balistáhun
(ibalista) pa ning ákung bulsa, wà giyuy tayà, You may turn my pocket
inside out, but you won’t find a penny.†

balísung_1 a exactly the contrary. Balísung kanà sa ákung nadungug,
That is just the opposite of what I heard. Balísung ang ílang paghigdà,
They were lying head to foot. Dakung balísung: ang babáyi magkarsúnis
ug ang laláki magbistída, It’s completely backwards: the women wear
pants and the men wear dresses. v [AB; c1] become just the opposite,
turned around; turn s.t. around. Kun mubalísung ang íyang buut, dì siya
muanhi, If he changes his mind, he won’t come. Mubalísung ang dáut sa
nagpadala niíni, The sorcery will boomerang on the person who sent it.
Ayaw balisúnga (ibalísung) ang húnus sa lamísa, Don’t put the drawer in
the table backwards.

balísung_2 n jackknife. v [a] make into a jackknife, stab with a
jackknife. Gibalísung siya sa íyang asáwa, His wife stabbed him with a
jackknife.

balità n {1} news. {2} bad omen, esp. portending death. {2a} oath: it
is true (lit. may it be a bad omen). dakù nga — sensational news.
v {1} [A; c] tell news. Ikaguul mu kining ákung ibalità, You will feel
sad about the news that I’m going to tell you. {1a} [A12] receive news.
Nakabalità ka nga minyù na ku? Have you heard that I’m married now?
{2} [A13; b(1)] appear as a bad omen. Nagbalità si Pidru kay sa walà pa
mi masáyud sa íyang kamatáyun dihay nagpat-akpat-ak nga dugù sa salug,
Pedro appeared to us with a bad omen, because before we learned of his
death, we saw spots of blood on the floor.†

balit-ad a inside out, belly-side up, front-side back. Balit-ad
pagkasul-ub ang ímung kamisin, You have your undershirt on backwards
(or inside out). v [ABN; a] be, make wrong-side up, out. Ang hiwing
pulitiku mubalit-ad sa tinúud, The crooked politician twists the truth.
Mibalit-ad (nabalit-ad, namalit-ad) ang atup sa kusug nga hángin, The
wind turned the roof upside down.

balitang n {1} short piece of wood or metal. Also the name given to
pieces of wood which serve a purpose. {1a} whippletree of a plow.
{1b} wood used in stripping abaca, around which the end of the abaca is
wound and which is pulled to force the abaca through the stripper.
{1c} wood used in fishing with a net that is pulled: the people who
pull the net hold on to the balitang and hold it in a vertical position
so that the top edge is directly above the bottom edge of the net.
{2} piece of bone, vein, or tendon supposed to lie across the vagina
which obstructs the easy birth of a child. v {1a} [A; a] hurl a short
stick at. Balitanga ang manuk, Hurl the stick at the chicken. {2} [A;
a] make into wood used as whippletree, net holder, etc. {3} [A123P;
a4b4] have an obstructing bone in the vagina. Gibalitang (gibalitangan)
man si Títa, galisud ug anak, Tita had an obstruction in her vagina so
that she had a difficult delivery. {4} [AN; a] make a whippletree for a
plow or piece of wood for a net.

balítang n female sexual organ.

balítaw a {1} an improvised courtship song consisting of stanzas sung
alternately by a boy and the girl he is asking the hand of (in practice
by their spokesmen). The stanza consists of four rhymed lines, in any
rhyme scheme, with the last two repeated. Each line ideally consists of
twelve syllables, though this number is often not strictly adhered to.
In modern times the balítaw is not used in courtship, but for social
occasions where people show their skill at improvisation. {2} = bítaw.
v [A; a] sing a balítaw.

balíti = dalakit.

balituk v [A; b6] {1} do a back somersault, flip over backwards.
Maáyung mubalituk ang sirkadur, An acrobat flips over backwards with
ease. {2} go back on a promise. Mibalituk siya sa íyang sáad, He took
back his promise. {3} switch party loyalty. Ang Nasyunalista mauy íyang
balitukan, He’ll defect from (or defect to) the Nacionalista Party.
{4} [B26] for a contribution to be returned to the author. Mibalituk
ang íyang tampu, His article was rejected.

balitùtù a very tightly tied. Bugtúa na lang kay balitùtù
pagkabaligtus, Just cut it because it is knotted tight. v [A; c1] make
a knot very tight. -in- n knot tied in such a way that it is hard to
undo.

baliug (from líug) v [A; c] wear s.t. around the neck. Nagbaliug siyag
panyù, He wore a handkerchief around his neck. n band around the neck.

balíus v [C13; c3] pass one another going in different directions.
Nagkabalíus mi kay pag-abut nákù mu say íyang paglakaw, We missed each
other because when I arrived, he had just left.

baliw n {1} k.o. tall pandanus, the leaves of which are used for coarse
mats and baskets: Pandanus copelandii. {2} mat made from this pandanus.

báliw n divine punishment, usually for incest, consisting of being
struck by lightning and turned into stone. Báliw ímung maánig
pahimuslan mung ímung anak, You’ll earn divine wrath if you make love
with your daughter. v [a4] {1} be struck with lightning and turned into
stone. {2} be hit by lightning. Gibáliw ang lubi, The coconut was hit
by lightning. {3} be crazy. Wà ka balíwa. Tigúwang ka na makigminyug
diyisisayis? Are you out of your mind? At your age you want to marry a
sixteen-year-old?

baliwag, balíwag a inverted, inverse, in the opposite direction, not
straight. Baliwag man kag tinan-awan, You are shifty-eyed. v [AB; c1]
shift, turn to opposite direction, be shifted. Nagbaliwag ang íyang
tubag sa ámung gipanagsultíhan, Her answer was far from the subject of
what we were talking about. Baliwagun (ibaliwag) ta ning láyag, Let us
shift the sails.

balíwas = balíus.

baliwliw v [AB3; ac1] turn around on itself in the air, cause s.t. to
do so. Mibaliwliw (nabaliwliw) ang ayruplánu sa hángin sa pagkamatay sa
makina niíni, The plane spun in the air when its engine stopped.
Ibaliwliw (baliwlíwa) nang káhuy, Throw that stick so that it whirls.
Baliwlíwun tika, I will throw a stick at you. n stick thrown in a game
of sátung.

baliyug_1 a crooked, not straight. v [B1; a2] be, become crooked, not
straight. Nagkabaliyug na ang punúan sa lubi samtang nagkataas, The
coconut tree trunk is getting more and more crooked as it grows taller.

baliyug_2 n necklace (coined word). v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear a necklace.
{2} [a12] make into a necklace.

balkun n front porch. v [A; b6] put a front porch to s.t.

balkunáhi = balkun.

balkuni n balcony in a moviehouse.

balsa n {1} sled consisting of a shaft hitched to a draft animal and a
platform dragged along the ground. {2} raft. v {1} [A; ac1] bring s.t.
with a sled or raft. Balsáha ang mabdus sa lungsud, Let the pregnant
woman ride the sled to town. Ibalsa (balsáha) ang lubi sa tabuk, Send
the coconuts across on a raft (or by tying them together into a raft).
{2} [A] do work with a sled or raft. {3} [A1; a] go s.w. on a sled,
raft. Mabalsa ba ang tabuk? Can you reach the other side with a raft?
{4} [A; a] carry or lift a load. Makabalsa giyug daghang makáun si
Tátay basta makadaug sa búwang, Father brings home a load of goodies
when he wins at the cockfights. Gibalsa sa bána ang asáwa ug gibundak
sa katri, The husband lifted his wife and threw her on the bed.

balsamu n ointment for the muscles of the type sold through SE Asia
under the brand ‘Tiger Balm’.

balsi n waltz. v [A; a] waltz.

balu I don’t know. Balu lag háin siya, I don’t know where he is. v =
hi-/ha-. hi-/ha- v {1} [B1236; b] know s.t., how to do s.t. Kahibalu ka
bang mulanguy? Do you know how to swim? Nakahibáwu ku nga nagdaut ka, I
found out you were sick. Dì ku gustung hibaw-an (hibal-an) ang
tinagúan, I don’t want the secret to be known. {2} [B1236] take care of
a problem. Akuy mahibalu sa tanan, I’ll take care of everything.
hibal-anay, hibaw-anay v [c3] know s.t. about each other. Naghibaw-anay
kami sa ámung sikrítu, We know each other’s secrets. pahi- v [A; ac]
inform, announce. n announcement. May pahibalu nga walay klási, There’s
an announcement that there’ll be no classes. kahi- n knowledge. May
kahibalu aku sa makina, I have knowledge about engines. manggihibalúun
a learned.

bálu_1 n widow, widower. v [B126] lose one’s spouse. manggibalúhan a
widow or widower that tends to lose her or his spouse.

bálu_2, balù_1, bálù_1 v [A12] feel shame and hurt from not being given
s.t. Nabálù ku kay aku ray wà tagái, You hurt me because you gave some
to everybody but me. ka- feeling of shame and hurt for not being given
s.t.

balù_2 n garfish with upper and lower beaks of approximately the same
size: Ablennis hians, Tylosurus crocodilus.

balù_3 n a knot that easily comes undone by pulling at one end of the
string. v [A] tie into a slip knot. Baluun kug higut ang listun, I’ll
tie the lace in a slip knot.

bálù_2 v [A; a1] for supernatural beings, or persons acting like such
to appear suddenly to frighten people. Baw-un nátù siya sa may dákit,
Let’s scare him near the banyan tree.

baluarti = balwarti.

balubálu {1} [so-and-so] seemed unlikely, but that is what happened.
Maáyu nátung libak níya. Balubálu dinhà ra sa átung luyu, We were
talking about him. We didn’t expect it, but there he was in back of us.
{2} actually, when in fact, the truth is otherwise. Pasukùsúkù kaáyu,
balubálu nahigugma diay, She pretends to be angry when in fact she’s in
love. Kusug kaáyung manulti, balubálu talawan, He talks big, but
actually he is a coward. {3} despite the fact. Balubálung dakug grádu
way batásan, You might be highly-educated, but you are ill-mannered.

balùbalù, balùbálù = balubálu, 3.

balud n waves. a curved, curled in a single upward curve. Balud siyag
piluk, She has curly eyelashes. v {1} [a] be struck by waves. Malúnud
nang sakayánag balurun ug kusug, That boat will sink if it is struck by
big waves. {2} [A; a] curl s.t. upwards. Balura ang ímung kamut, Make
your fingers bend upwards. (←) a having high waves. Bálud run kay dúnay
bagyu, There’s a huge surf because there’s a storm. v {1} [B; b6] for
there to be huge waves. Magbálud kag maglínaw manágat giyud siya, He
goes to sea, whether there are huge waves or whether it is calm.
{2} [a4] be caught in high seas. Gibálud kami didtu sa kinalawran, We
were overtaken by high seas far out from shore.

bálud n k.o. cream-colored wild pigeon: Ducula bicolor.

balug a s.t. elongated that is bent or curved. Bawug kanang tubúha,
That water pipe is bent. Ang balug mung piluk, Your curly eyelashes.
n s.t. that is characteristically bent: a bow, the crosspiece of a
kite, spring for a trap. (←) v {1} [AB3(1); a] bend into a curve, be
bent. Magbáwug ku ug uway, I’ll bend some rattan. Mubáwug (mabáwug) ang
káhuy basta hibug-atan sa búnga, The tree becomes bent if the fruits on
it are too heavy. {2} [A; a] make, use a bow or crosspiece of a kite,
spring for a trap.

balugbug n k.o. small tree bearing pods with three to six marble-sized
and shaped seeds. v [BN5] be like marbles in size. Namawugbug ang íyang
singut sa pagtinarbáhu, He was sweating marbles from working so hard.

báluk n {1} layer of fluffy fibrous material that sticks to the lower
end of the palm frond, used as a compress for open wounds or tinder.
{2} tinder consisting of this material and charred coconut husks.
v [b(1)] put báluk on s.t.

balúkag n {1} bristle from plants or animals. Balúkag sa bábuy, Pig’s
bristle. {2} pubic hair (vulgar). {3} corncobs.

balukanad n k.o. forest tree.

balúkat v {1} = lúkat, v. {2} [AN; a12] dig into one’s past. Dílì ku
gustung mubalúkat (mamalúkat) sa ímung mapait nga kagahápun, I do not
like to dig into your bitter past.

balukbáluk n k.o. shade tree of the seashore.

balukbuk_1 v [A; b] dig up the soil around the lower portions of a
small plant. Bukbúki ang rúsas, Dig up the soil around the roses.
n soil dug up around a plant.

balukbuk_2 v {1} [A; a] pound s.t. into very fine particles or powder.
Bukbúkun ku ning bugas nga iamirul, I’ll pound the rice for starch.
{2} [A; a1b2] maul, rain blows on s.o. Hibukbukan siya sa mamarigla,
The hoodlums mauled him.

balukbuk_3 n {1} k.o. weevil that bores in grains, like corn. {2} k.o.
worm that bores into root crops. v [A123P; a42] be infested with these
insects. -un of a type infested with these insects. v [B126] become
infested with balukbuk.

balukbuk_4 n {1} finishing touches. Balukbuk na lang ning átù kay human
na ang trabáhu, All we have to do is the finishing touches because the
work is done. {2} seasoning for foods. Mulamì ang sud-an bísan way
balukbuk kun maáyu kang mulútù, Food tastes good even without seasoning
if you are a good cook. v {1} [A3; b(1)] do finishing touches. {2} [A3;
b(1)] add a little to s.t. to enrich it or season it. Balukbúkan tag
balas ang simintu kay húmuk da, Let’s add sand to the cement because
it’s too watery.

baluktut a hunchbacked. v [B1; a2] {1} make, become hunchbacked. {2} be
overly burdened. Nabuktut akug pinangítà ug inyu rang inúmun, I have
been staggering under the burden of earning money, and all you do is
drink it up.

balúkun = bakúkun.

balúkut v [A3P; b6] {1} wrap up in a blanket, mat, or the like.
Nagbúkut kug hábul kay tugnaw, I wrapped myself in a blanket because it
was cold. Balukúti ug bakbak ang bátà, Wrap the child in a diaper.
{2} for darkness, silence, and the like to surround or cover one
entirely. Gibukútan sa kahílum ang sam-ang, The cemetery was enveloped
in silence.

balúlang (not without l) n breed of fighting cock which runs away when
wounded. a one who quits when hurt. Balúlang nang baksidúra kay
muundang ug masámad, That boxer is chicken because he quits when he is
hurt. mistísu — ugly person of mixed blood.

balun_1 (not without l) n {1} balloon. {2} wide bicycle tire of
American type bicycles. — tayir = balun, 2.

balun_2 n pad of paper.

bálun n food, money to take along on a trip. Ma, ambi na ang bálun, bi,
Mom, can I have my spending money for school? v {1} [A; a] take along
food or money. Mubálun ku sa trabáhu, I bring my lunch to work.
{2} [A1; a] harbor emotions. Balúnun ku sa lubngánan ang átung gugma,
I’ll carry our love to the grave. pa- v [A; ac] {1} give s.t. to s.o.
to take along. {2} give s.t. in addition to s.t. else which was already
sufficient. Humag sagpà gipabalúnan pag kasábà, Not only was he
slapped, he was administered a sound scolding as well. n {1} thing
given to s.o. who leaves, or to a retiring employee. Ang pabálun sa
tigúlang bayinti mil písus, The old man was given twenty thousand pesos
as retirement pay. {2} prayer said for the soul of the dead on the
night of the day of burial. {3} food brought by the Chinese to the
cemetery at funerals or on special days for the use of the departed
soul. balunbálun = pa-an. -anan(→), -anan n lunch box, picnic basket.
r-an, pa-an, -anan(→) n {1} sides of the monkey’s mouth where food to
be chewed later is stored, crop of fowls. {2} stomach (slang).
balunbalúnan n Adam’s apple.†

balunábid n k.o. dwarf herring: Dussumieri sp.

balúnas v [A; c] clean s.t. by flushing water on it and scrubbing it.
Ákung gibalunásan ang banig nga giihían, I washed the mat that the
child wet.

balunbalúnan see bálun.

balungag n hunk of s.t. paN- v [A2; c6] mouth a large hunk of food. À!
Ipamungag man lang nímu ang karni! My! You sure eat your meat in large
hunks.

balúngan n k.o. banana similar in flavor to the bángan but longer and
green when ripe: Musa sapientum var. suaveolens.

balungbálung n shanty, roughly built wooden house. v [A1; a] build a
shanty. Nagbalungbálung sila daplin sa dálan, They built a shanty at
the edge of the street.

balúngus n pubic hairs. kuskus — see kuskus_1. -un a adult, big enough
to have pubic hair.

balúnus n {1} k.o. forest liana, the bark of which is used as shampoo:
Entada phaseolides. {2} name also given to other vines which have bark
containing saponin.

balur n value. Pilay balur ning singsínga? How much is this ring worth?
v [A] be worth [so-and-so] much. pa- v [A; c] show off. Ipabalur dáyun
nang íyang pagkaabyadur, He boasts about his ability as an aviator.†

bálus v {1} [A3S; b1c] do back to s.o. what he did to the agent.
Mibálus akug pahiyum, I smiled back at her. Wà pa ku makabálus
(makabalus) sa ímung suwat, I haven’t had the chance to answer your
letter. Balúsan (baslan) ku ang ímung kaáyu, I will repay your
goodness. Balúsan (baslan) ku ikaw, I will repay you. Pagka walay
igabálus mu, How ungrateful (repaying nothing) you are! {2} [A; a] for
s.t. to happen one way and then the opposite way. Balúsa pagtahì ang
kílid, Sew the seams twice: once inverted and then the right way
around. Ang kalípay balúsan (baslan) ug kasákit, Happiness is followed
by sorrow in turn. {3} [C3] for a brother and sister to marry people
that are also brothers and sisters. n {1} thing done in return or
response to s.t. {2} person whose sibling of the opposite sex is
married to a sibling of the spouse. paniN-(→) v [A2; c] take vengeance
on, avenge. Panimaslan ku ang kamatáyun sa ákung igsúun, I’ll avenge my
brother’s death. n revenge. pamalusbálus v [A23S; c] return a favor,
repay a moral obligation. balaslan, baslanan, pamaslan n {1} things to
be done to repay a debt. {2} days owing in the aláyun. -in-an n plaid
in design. paN- n hind toe of a fowl which is bent backwards. Ang
langgam nga way pamálus dì makabátug, A bird that has no hind toe
cannot perch.

balusbus v [A3P; c1] rip, slit s.t. open. Nabusbus ang sáku kay gidasuk
ang sulud, The sack burst open because it had been stuffed too full.
Busbúsi ang sáku, gilit ang ibusbus, Slit the sack with a blade.
n place s.t. has been ripped open.

baluskag v {1} [A; a] unravel, loosen s.t. Kinsa ang mibaluskag niíning
putus? Who untied this bundle? Nagbaluskag mi ug midiyas arun gamítun
ug usab ang hílu, We unraveled socks to use the thread again.
Baluskagun nátù ang íyang bakus, Let’s loosen her girdle. {2} [B] for
flowers to blossom forth.

balut (not without l) n duck eggs that have been allowed to develop,
but not hatch, and then cooked. v [A1; a] cook, make into balut.

balúta n ballot for election, contest.

balútu (not without l) = barútu.

baluybuy n general name for olive shells.

balúyut n bag made of straw (buli or tíkug). v [a] make into a straw
bag.

balwarti n {1} political stronghold, place where a politician gets most
of the votes. {2} territory of a gang, turf. Balwarti sa mga buguy,
Territory belonging to the ruffians.

balyákag n wild vine with a tuberous, edible root, in the same genus as
apáli, said to be the food of supernatural people that inhabit the
forest: Dioscorea esculenta. paN- v [A2] gather balyákag. Ang
mamalyákag maghílum, When you gather balyákag keep silent.

balyína n whale.

balyu = baylu.

bám n bomb. atúmik, haydrudyin, kúbalt — atomic, hydrogen, cobalt bomb.

bamba a for women to be fat. Bamba kaáyu nà siya kay way tihiktíhik nga
mukáun, She is very stout because she eats without restraint. v [B2;
b6] for a woman to become very stout.

bamban = banban_1, 2.

bambu_1 n bamboo, one of the suits in mahjong that has a design
consisting of two bamboo nodes, colored green.

bam-i n k.o. dish made of fine noodles, chicken, shrimps, and spices.
v [A; a] make bam-i.

báming v [A; ab2] rain blows on s.o. Bamíngun nátù ang kawatan, Let’s
rain blows on the thief.

bámir_1 n one whose position in a volleyball game is to spike the ball.
v [B1256; c6] be the spiker.

bámir_2 n bomber. a for a woman to be extremely obese like a bomber
(humorous). Bámir kaáyu ang íyang trátu, His sweetheart is extremely
obese. v [B2] be, become extremely obese.

bampir n bumper of a motor vehicle. v [A] make into, put a bumper.

bampíra n vampire. v [B156] become a vampire.

bámus come on, let’s go. Bámus mga bátà, adtu ta sa simbahan, Come on,
children. Let us go to church.

bána n husband. v [A123S; a12] get, take for a husband. Si Dína
nakabana ug Nigru, Dina was married to a Negro. Usa ka hingpit nga
laláki ang ákung banáhun, If I get married, it will have to be a
complete gentleman. paN- v [A23S; a] for women to get married. Uy
Pilar, mamána ka na, Pilar, you should get married now! pamanhunun
n husband-to-be. banabána n common-law husband. v [A12; c1] have, take
a common-law husband.

*banà_1 ka-, paka- v [A13; c] dílì, walà — fail to pay attention,
remain unconcerned. Walà siya magkabanà (magpakabanà) sa ákung mga
prublíma, He did not pay any attention to my problems. Walà giyud níya
ikabanà (ipakabanà) ang nahitabù nákù, He remained unconcerned about
what happened to me. banàbánà n estimation. Sa ímung banàbánà, maáyu ba
siyang táwu? Do you size him up as a good man? v [A; a12] make an
estimate. Banàbanáa kun pila, Estimate how much it will cost.†

banà_2 = balanà.

banáag n ray of light. Ang banáag sa adlaw, The sun’s rays. v [A2S; c]
give a bright light. Sulù ang gibanáag níya sa dálan, He lighted the
way with a torch. a bright. Banáag kaáyu ang síga sa pitrumaks, The
petromax gave off a bright light.

banaba n medium-sized tree of the secondary forest, also planted for
its lilac or pink flowers. The leaves are commonly used as a tea for
kidney and stomach disorders: Lagerstroemia speciosa.

banag n k.o. woody, spiked vine found in thickets, the tips and fruit
of which are used medicinally: Smilax bracteata.

banagan n lobster. paN- v [A2] catch lobsters.

banagbánag n daybreak. v [AN] {1} daybreak. Mibanagbánag (namanagbánag)
nang kabuntágun, The day broke. {2} for a solution to dawn upon one.
Mibanagbánag (namanagbánag) nang kasulbáran sa ákung suliran, The
solution of the problem dawned on me.

banáhaw = anáhaw.

banahían n {1} entrails of a human. {2} human genitalia (coarse term).

bának = balának.

banal a hardened, pressed solid. Banal na ang dálan nga kanúnayng
agiagíag sakyanan, The road that the vehicles keep passing over has
been pressed down hard. v [B; a2] be hardened, pressed solid and firm.
Banala ang ímung láwas sa bug-at nga trabáhu, Harden your body by heavy
work.

banásay n k.o. small, brightly-colored fish.

banáta n {1} section, flat piece cut from a whole. Nanglatas kami sa
lagpad nga banáta sa pilapilan, We traversed the wide sections of the
rice field. {2} division in a cabinet or room. Sa kinaubsang banáta sa
aparadur, On the lowest shelf of the cabinet. Ang banáta nakapangitngit
sa kwartu, The partition made the room dark. {3} sheet of woven cloth,
a fathom wide. v [A; c1] {1} divide into sections, partition. Arun way
sámuk ibanáta (banatáha) ang yútà, So there will be no disagreement,
divide the land. {2} do s.t. by pieces. Banatáhun (ibanáta) ku pagpalit
ang panaptun, I will buy the cloth cut into pieces. {3} [A; c] put a
shelf, section.

bánaw v {1} [APB; c] for liquids to be spread over an area, spread
liquids. Daghang dugù ang mibánaw sa kalsáda, The road was streaming
with blood. Kinsay nagbánaw (nagpabánaw) sa túbig sa salug? Who poured
the water over the floor? -an(→) n container of water for fowl to drink
or bathe in.

banawug, banáwug_1 n k.o. coral that looks like a leafless shrub. The
body is sponge-like in consistency and tough. The color varies: black,
red, orange, dark brown.

banáwug_2 n {1} strand of hair that grows by itself in a place where
there is no other hair. {2} a similar characteristic of chickens, a
wire-like feather that is said to give a cock special fighting
abilities. {3} the vine of the balyákag which climbs up bamboos and
other tall plants. banawgan a possessing a banáwug.

bánay_1 n tassel of plants. paN- v [A] growing tassels. Namánay na ang
mais, The corn is growing tassels now.

bánay_2 n {1} immediate family consisting of parents and their
children. {2} family consisting of ascendants, descendants, and lateral
relations as well. ka- n one who is related by blood. ka-an n group of
people related by blood.

bánay_3 = ubánay. see uban.

banban_1, 2 = balanban_1, 2.

banbánun_1 a {1} a white and brown striped color of cats. {2} cats
tending to steal food. {3} persons going to parties and taking as much
food as they can get at. Banbánun sad nímug simud! Wà may pistang
palabyun, You sure are greedy! You don’t miss a fiesta. {4} be greedy
for women. Banbánun sad nang lakíha. Bísan kinsa man lang, What a sex
maniac he is. Anyone will do.

banbánun_2 n k.o. centipede with a light green body.

banda_1 v [B3(1); c1] for s.t. heavy to strike and bounce off s.t.
Nabanda (mibanda) ang batu sa bungbung, The stone bounced off the wall.
tris bandas n shot in billiards in which the ball bounces three times
against the edges of the table before hitting the ball aimed at.
bandabanda v [B1] bounce back and forth, reverberate. Nagbandabanda ang
íyang tíngug sa dapit nga mamíngaw, His voice reverberated in the
lonely place.

banda_2 n band of musicians. v [a2] make a band.

banda_3 n band, strip of cloth. {1} cloth worn diagonally in front of
one as a mark of having obtained a certain honor or rank. {2} band
wound around a sack filled with s.t. v [A; c] put a band on s.t.
binandáhan n banded sack full of copra.

bandála (not without l) n similar items stacked neatly, usually in
staggered fashion. v [A; a12c] stack into neat piles. Ibandála ning
tabakúa didtu sa iskína, Stack this tobacco up at the corner.

bandána n bandana or scarf worn over the head as a protection. v [A; a]
wear, make into a bandana.

banday = bangday.

bandì n large, closely woven bamboo hamper with or without a cover for
clothes or farm produce. v [a12] make into a hamper.

bandída = bandídu (female).

bandídu n bandit, highwayman. v [B; a12] be, become a bandit.

bandíha n {1} food or drinks brought to a party. Magdala giyud kag
bandíha sa pagpangunggu, You must bring food when you go to ask for a
woman’s hand. {2} food given to the leader of prayers by the family
sponsoring the prayers. {3} = bandihádu. v [A; c] contribute food to a
feast, give food to a prayer leader. Píkas sa bábuy ang ílang gibandíha
sa katapúsan, They brought half of a pig to the feast concluding the
novena. -du large platter, large shallow serving dish. -wu
n {1} precious stone, oval in shape (like a platter). Bandiháwu ang
íyang singsing brilyanti, The diamond in her ring is shaped like a
platter. {2} one who receives the food offering after leading prayers
for a family. Bandiháwu giyud ang mananabtan, The person who leads a
novena receives some gifts.

bandi klak n time clock.

bandílà = bandíra.

bandilyu v [A; c] cry out an announcement. Nagbandilyu ang písi nga
kurpyu alas nuybi, The P.C. announced that the curfew was at nine.
n public announcement.

bandíra n {1} flag, banner. {2} s.t. flapping like a flag, visible for
all to see. Bitára ang ímung kamisun kay nagdayag ang ímung bandíra,
You pull your slip up because it (lit. flag) shows. v {1} [a] make into
a flag, put a flag on. {2} [AB6; c] put s.t. in view; brandish a
weapon, be in full view. Bandiráhan ku bítaw sa pinútì, dágan lagi, He
ran away when I brandished my sword at him. Ímu mang gibandíra ang
ímung kadautan, You are brandishing your wickedness for all to see.
{2a} [B6] be very much above, ahead of everyone else. Labihan siyang
namandíra (mibandíra) sa indigay, She was very much in the lead in the
contest.

bandíra ispanyúla n ornamental tuberous plant, name given to species of
sagingsaging (Canna spp.) which have large orange, red, or white
flowers.

bandíyu = bandyu.

bandmidyurit n band majorette. v [B; a12] become a band majorette.

bandu_1 v [A; ac] spin a top, throw a spinning top. Ayaw bandúha ang
ákung kumagkù, Don’t throw the top on my toe.

bandu_2 n group of people united for a common purpose.†

bandul n bundle of things tied together. Tagpíla ang bandul sa rilip?
How much does a bundle of second-hand clothing cost? v [A; a] tie in a
bundle. Bandúlun tang sugnud, Let’s bundle the firewood. -in- n bank
roll.

bandung_1 n large boat to bring the net and fishermen out to the
fishing grounds, consisting of a pair of smaller boats or a wide boat
so made that a platform can be placed across it.

bandung_2 n k.o. spotted sea eel.

bandurin = banduríya.

banduríya, bandurya n {1} stringed instrument with 4 to 8 pairs of
strings, played with a plectrum, with a long neck, a round steel-rimmed
sound box covered with skin, and with a wooden resonator. {2} k.o.
fish. v [A; a] play a banduríya. banduryáhun n k.o. shark that
resembles a bandurya when viewed from above.

banduy = bagduy.

bandyu n musical instrument similar to the banjo, but with 6 double
strings and a shorter neck, about 10″ long. v [A] play this instrument.
bandyubandyu n k.o. fish with long spines and a roundish body that
resembles a banjo: Argyrops spinifer.

bang n word used in writing to indicate the sound of an explosion.

banga a boring. v [B1246; a4b4] become bored, be fed up. Makabanga ning
búhat nga mau ra gihápun adlaw-adlaw, Doing the same thing day after
day makes one bored. Gibanga (gibanghan) na kaáyu kug kináun niíning
isdà sa tibuuk simána, I am fed up eating this same fish the whole week
long. ka- n boredom, weariness.

bangà_1 a {1} slow in comprehension, incompetent. {2} poor in quality.
Bangà ning awtúha, This car is no good. v [B; b6] be of poor quality.
Ngánung mibangà (nabangà) man ang íyang inawayan karun? Why is his
style of fighting lousy today?

bangà_2 n k.o. water jar with an obovate body and a narrow neck.

bangáag v [A2S] cry loudly with the mouth wide open. Mibangáag ang bátà
nga giindiksyunan, The child howled when he was given a shot.

bángag v [AB2; a] make a hole, have a hole in it. Nabángag (mibángag)
ang íyang ngípun kay sígig káug karmilítus, He got lots of holes in his
teeth because he keeps eating hard candies. Mibángag ang ilagà sa
bungbung, The rat made a hole in the wall. (→) n {1} hole into s.t. or
through s.t. {2} woman’s genitalia (coarse). — sa ímung ina, ubù, Damn
you! (Lit. You are your mother’s cunt.) -un a having holes.

bángal_1 v [A12; b8] come across s.t. in the sea. Hibangalan ang mga
pasahíru sa barkung nalúnud, They came across the survivors of the ship
that sunk. paN- v [A2] go to the sea to look for s.t. Namángal silag
lubi human sa bahà, They went to the sea to look for coconuts after the
flood. Mamángal tag sud-anun, Let’s meet the fishermen to buy s.t. for
dinner (lit. look for s.t. on the sea for dinner).

bángal_2 v [A; c] shove s.t. big into the mouth. Ibángal lang níya ang
usa ka buuk kamúti, He will just shove a whole sweet potato into his
mouth.

bangalga = bagalnga.

bángan_1 v [A; a] {1} tie a bunch of long things together. Bangánun
nátù ang lipak arun sayun pas-ánun, Let’s tie a string around the
bamboo slats to make them easy to carry. Bangáni ang ímung buhuk kay
hángin, Tie s.t. around your hair because it’s windy. {2} tie s.t.
around s.t. long. n long things tied together. Tagpíla ang bángan sa
káhuy? How much does a bundle of wood cost? (→) string used to tie
around s.t. Ang bangan nga ímung gibugkus nabugtù, The string you tied
it with snapped. bangnanan n makeshift roofed shed into which small
boats are placed.

bángan_2 n k.o. sweet yellow banana, longer than alitundan, very much
like those sold in the States. It is eaten raw and more difficult to
digest than the alitundan: Musa sapientum var. lacatan.

bangánga v [A1; c1] open one’s mouth wide. n distance the mouth opens.
Dakù siyag bangánga kun manghuy-ab, He opens his mouth wide when he
yawns.

bángas_1 n hair on the chest, arms, and cheeks. v [a4] get hair on
these parts. -un a hairy.

bángas_2 {1} interjection directed at s.o. who does s.t. disgusting or
annoying, said good-naturedly. Bángas ka! Nasakpan na hinúun ta niíni
dà! Darn! Now we’re caught. {2} good-natured expression of disbelief.
Bángas ka! Ikaw na lay mupasar sa bár? What! The likes of you pass the
bar exam?

bangáti n k.o. wild tree.

bángaw_1 = balángaw.

bángaw_2 n party with lots of food. v {1} [A2N; a2] attend a feast. Ása
man ka mamángaw (mubángaw) inigpista? What parties are you going to
during the fiesta? {2} [A1] hold a feast. -an(→) n place or house where
a feast is held.

bangawug n a small valley with an easy slope, a low, flat area between
hills. v [B1256] be at a valley.

bangaybángay v [A13; b(1)] dilly-dally, work slowly and lazily. Daghan
ang mga buluhatun unyà bangaybangáyun pa, There is so much work to do,
but you are only dilly-dallying. -an(→), -un(→) a slow and lazy.

bangbang v [A2; a12] {1} control s.t. Dílì na mabangbang ang íyang
kahimabayi, His fondness for women cannot be controlled. {2} come face
to face with s.t. in hopes of overcoming it. Mubangbang giyud siya sa
kasukù sa íyang amahan, He’ll stand up to his father’s anger.
Bangbángun ba ninyu ang bagyu? Will you go out in the storm?

bangday v [AB] be placed, place s.t. transversely across s.t. or pile
up in criss-crossing fashion. Inig-abut níya mubanday dáyun siya sa
kátri, As soon as she arrives she throws herself across the bed.
Nagbanday siya sa íyang tiil sa silya, He is putting his foot across
the chair. bangdaybangday n snack consisting of fried sliced bananas
(kardába or sab-a) laid one over the other with a thick dough.
v {1} [A; a] make bangdaybangday. {2} be criss-crossing.†

banggà n {1} contest of any sort for a winner. Akuy midaug sa banggà sa
áwit, I won the singing contest. {2} crash of vehicles bumping into
each other. Duhay patay sa banggà dihà sa iskína, Two people died in
the crash on the corner. v {1} [C; a] hold a contest. {2} [AC; ab2]
bump into s.t. with force. Mibanggà ang bátà níya, The child bumped
into her. Ang barku nakabanggà ug búya, The ship crashed into a buoy.
{3} [AN2; a2] meet goods before they reach the market to get them
cheaper. Adtu ta sa paradahan kay mamanggà ta ug utanun, Let’s go to
the bus stop and get vegetables. maN-r-, maN-ay n buyers who meet and
buy from a source before the goods reach the market.

banggì v [A3; a] break s.t. off with a snap. Mibanggì siyag sanga, He
broke a branch. Nabanggì ang íyang lápis, His pencil broke in two.

banggiítan a {1} notorious. Banggiítang magdadaut sa mga panágat, A
notorious destroyer of fishing traps. {2} well-known for some skill.
Banggiítang abugádu, Well-known lawyer. v [B12; b6] become notorious,
well-known for a skill.

banggíra n projection in the window which holds the eating utensils in
daily use. v [A1; a] make, provide with a banggíra. banggirahan =
banggíra.

banggis v [A; b] scrape, scrub s.t. off a surface. Kutsilyu ang íyang
ibanggis sa húgaw sa lamísa, She’ll use a table knife to scrape the
dirt off the table.

banggud v [A; a] rub s.t. with pressure against s.t. else causing it to
get chafed, shredded, grated. Akuy mubanggud sa mais, I will shred the
corn. Nabanggud ang ákung abága pagkasalibay nákù sa mutur, My shoulder
got chafed when I was thrown off my motorcycle. banggúran, bangguran
n shredder.

banggun_1 n k.o. blight that infests banana and cacao fruits. The fruit
gets hardened with brown spots all over, rendering it unfit for
consumption. v [a4] be infested with this blight. -un
a banggun-infested.

banggun_2 a idiotic.

banggus v {1} [A; c1] rub s.t. against a rough surface, but not with
great pressure. Magbanggus ku sa kapáyas nga salárun, I’ll shred the
papayas to make into a salad. Nabanggus ang ákung túhud sa ákung
pagkadagmà, My knee got chafed when I stumbled. {2} [A; b6(1)] scrub to
clean. Ákung gibanggúsan ug lugud ang buling sa íyang likud, I scrubbed
the dirt off his back with a stone.

banghag v {1} [A; a12b2] snap at s.o. Mamanghag nang irúa ug duúlun,
That dog will snap if you approach it. {2} [A; b5] snap, speak sharply
and curtly. Ayaw siyag duúlag may trabáhu kay banghágun (banghágan) ka,
Don’t go near him when he’s doing s.t. because he’ll snap at you.†

banghat = hangbat.

banghaw a having the sour smell which develops in cooking starches
which are waterlogged, e.g., corn which has been ground without being
fully dried, yams which got waterlogged in rain-soaked ground, etc.
v [B; a2] have this sour smell. Mibanghaw (nabanghaw) ang kamúti kay
nahúmul ug tulu ka adlaw, The sweet potatoes developed a rotten smell
because they soaked for three days.

banghilig, banghílig a sloping (sharply or not sharply). Lugsánay
makasáka ang trák kung banghilig, The truck hardly can make it up a
slope. v [B; c1] be sloping. Nagkabanghilig ang ámung gibaktásan, The
place where we hiked slopes gradually.

banghitaw n = balanghitaw.

banghutin, banghuting = balanghutan.

bángì v [AC; abc3] be on bad terms with each other. Nagbángì mi
mahitungud sa kwarta, We had a misunderstanding about money. ka-an
n reason for bad feelings.

bángig = bángì.

bángil v {1} [A; b5c] put s.t. beneath or next to s.t. to keep it from
jiggling, rolling, sliding, etc. Bangíli (bangíla) ang ligid sa trák,
Put a block against the wheels of the truck. {2} [a] eat s.t. before a
drinking bout (prop up one’s stomach). Unsay ímung gibángil únà muinum?
What did you eat before you drank? {3} [A; c] use a charm to insure
success in business or gambling. {4} [A; b5] induce s.o. with a bribe.
Bangílun (bangílan) ta siyag tubà arun maabtik sugúun, Give him some
toddy to get him to work a bit faster. {5} [A; b] trip a player while
running or jumping. (→) n {1} s.t. placed beneath to keep a thing
steady or in position. Butangig bangil ang silya arun mupundu, Put a
prop beneath the chair so it will be steady. {2} food to stave off
hunger. {2a} food taken before drinks (slang). {2b} — sa tinggutum food
eaten in place of rice or corn in famine times. {3} charm for gambling
or business. {4} s.t. given as an inducement to goad s.o. into action.
paN- v [A2] use a charm in gambling or in business. bangilbángil v [A;
b] support, fill in the gaps. Ang kamúti ibangilbángil sa pagkáun,
Sweet potatoes aren’t the principal food. They are s.t. extra to fill
in when there isn’t enough other food. n s.t. that supports.
Bangilbángil nà siya nákù sa trabáhu, He is my helper in my job.

bangilid = bakilid.

bángin [so-and-so] might just happen. Ayaw paglihuk bángin mabughat ka,
Don’t move. You might have a relapse.

bangingi a nagging, scolding repeatedly. v [B] nag, keep making the
same complaints. Mubangingi dáyun siyag higabhian kug paúlì, She starts
nagging the moment I arrive home late.

bangíngi v [A2; a12] turn back to bite or fight with s.o. Mubangíngig
páak ang iring ug gunítan sa íkug, The cat will turn its head to fight
if you hold it by the tail. Ayaw lang nà siya pahunúnga arun dì ka
bangingíhun ug áway, Don’t try to stop her or she’ll turn on you, too.

bangis a fierce. v [B2; b4] become fierce. Mubangis (mabangis) ang irù
ug higtan, A dog becomes fierce if it is kept tied. -un a of a fierce
sort. ma- a very fierce. v [B1456] be fierce. Nagmabangis ang kapaláran
kaníya, Fate was very cruel to him.

bangitaw = balanghitaw.

bangka v {1} [A; c] treat, pay the bill for entertainment or food
consumed in entertainment. Bangkáhan ta mu ug panihápun, I’ll treat you
to dinner. {2} [A; a] deal cards, throw dice, or act as a banker in a
gambling game. Bangkáha ang baráha, Deal the cards. n banker or dealer
in a gambling game. -dur(→) n = bangka, n.

bangkà n banca, a one-piece dug-out between 5 to 15 meters optionally
with one or two masts and/or a motor, and/or outriggers. v [A13; ac1]
{1} ride a banca. Bangkáa lang ang Líti, Just take a banca to Leyte.
Bangkáa (ibangkà) ang karga, Take the cargo in the banca.

*bangkáag hi-an/ka-an n {1} knowledge about a certain field or skill.
Wà kuy hibangkaágan (kabangkaágan) sa radiyu, I have no understanding
of radios. {2} awareness. Wà kuy hibangkaágan sa súnug gabíi, I have no
knowledge about the fire last night. hi-an v [B1256] be learned, found
out about. Wà siyay nahibangkaágan sa íyang tulu ka túig nga
paglangyaw, He didn’t learn a thing from his three years abroad.

bangkal n large tree of the secondary forest, hollow in the lower
portion of the trunk: Nauclea orientalis.

bangkarúta a bankrupt. v [B12; a2] be bankrupt. Nabangkarúta siya
pag-intra sa pulitika, He became bankrupt when he entered politics.

bangkarúti = bangkarúta.

bangkat = bakat.

bangkaw_1 n {1} spear which is thrown. {2} piece in mahjong with the
image of a dagger. v [A; a1b2] throw, thrust a spear at. Bangkáwun ta
ang usa, I’ll throw a spear at the deer. Hibangkawan ang kawatan, The
thief was hit with a spear. paN- v [A2] hunt with a spear.

bangkaw_2 = bangkal.

bangkawbangkaw n end of the spinal column. v [A12; a12] hit s.o. at the
end of the spinal column.

bangkay n corpse (slang). Bangkay na dihang nakit-an si Pidru, Pedro
was a corpse by the time they found him.

bangkbuk n bankbook.

bangkil n canine tooth, fangs. -an a with prominent fangs. Bangkilan na
ang bábuy nga ámung giíhaw, The pig that we slaughtered had long fangs.

bangkiling n k.o. small, deciduous, cultivated tree which has a
rounded, light green fruit, fleshy and sour, used as a flavoring for
vinegarized dishes or eaten pickled: Cicca acida.

bangkilya_1 n percentage of the amount won, given to the owner of a
gambling place or equipment after each game. v [A; b6(1)] give the
owner of a gambling equipment a percentage of the winnings for each
game.

bangkilya_2 n helper, assistant in doing s.t. v [A; c1] serve as
helper, assistant in s.o.’s work. Bangkilyáhun (ibangkilya) tikaw sa
pag-asal ug bábuy, You will be my assistant in roasting the pig.

bangkíru_1 n {1} = bangka, n. {2} banker. Mga bangkíru ang naghuput sa
puhúnan sa nigusyu, The bankers hold the capital in business. v [B16]
be a banker.

bangkíru_2 n one who operates a banca. v [B16] be a banca operator.

bangkíti n banquet. v [AC12; b6(1)] hold a banquet. paN- v [A2; b6] go
to a banquet.

bangkítu n stool. v [a12] make into a stool.

bangkíwà n stem of a boat.

bangkiwag a awkward. Bangkiwag nga linihukan, Awkward movement.
v {1} [B; c1] be awkward. {2} [AN3PB; a] put things s.w. awkwardly such
that they stick out or are in s.o.’s way; be awkwardly put s.w.
Nagbangkiwag ang mga palítu pagkahúlug, The toothpicks fell so that
they were sticking out every which way.

bangkíyu n {1} toilet seat. {2} toilet seat for children to sit on or
to put on a toilet. v [a12] make into a toilet seat.

bangkiyud (from kíyud) = baliálà.

bangkrap = bangkarúta.

bangku n bank. papil di- bank notes, paper money. v [c1] deposit money
in the bank. Ibangku (bangkúhun) ku ning ákung pinangitáan, I’ll
deposit my earnings in the bank. paN- n banking activities.†

bangkù n bench, three-, four-legged stool. v {1} [a12] make into a
bench. {2} [A; c1] keep a player on the bench. Bangkuun (ibangkù) lang
siya kanúnay kay dì man pirs páyib, He’s always kept on the bench
because he is not one of the top five players.

bangkulísan n k.o. fish.

bangkulíya n despondency over love. v [A123P; a4] be despondent over
love. Gibangkulíya ang babáying wà makasulay ug trátu, The woman became
despondent because she had never had a lover.

bangkung_1 v [A; c1] dry, thinly sliced bananas, sweet potatoes,
cassava, and other root crops. -in- n sun-dried slices of banana and
root crops.

*bangkung_2 v [a4] gone crazy. Muiskuyla kang Duminggu karun,
gibangkung ka? Have you gone crazy? Going to school when it’s a Sunday!

bangrus = bangus.

bangs n bangs. v [A1; c] wear, form into bangs. Angayan kang magbangs,
You look beautiful with bangs.

bangsi n general name for various k.o. flying fish. paN- v [A2] go
fishing for flying fish.

bangu = banga.

bangúbang = balangúbang.

bangug_1 a {1} groggy, drunk. Bangug pa ang buksiyadur sa kastígung
nadáwat, The boxer is groggy from the punishment he received.
{2} stupid, unable to understand, no matter how carefully explained to.
v [B2; a12] get groggy, drunk. Nabangug (mibangug) ang isdà sa butu sa
dinamíta, The fish got groggy from the dynamite explosion. Gustu ba ku
ninyung bangugun niíning tubà? Do you want to make me groggy with this
toddy?

bangug_2 n {1} hog cholera, an infectious disease of swine. {2} epithet
or curse word. Bangug! Unsa ba ni! Damn! What is this! v [a12]
{1} suffer from hog cholera. Gibangug nang babúya, That pig is
suffering from hog cholera. {2} [a12] damn you! Bangugun ka pa untà, I
hope you go to hell.

bang-ug a foul smell of liquids that have stagnated or food that has
spoiled because it has not been freely exposed to air. v [B; b6]
{1} become smelly due to stagnation. Mabang-ug ang kík ug dúgay nga
gitaklúban, Cake which has been left covered tight too long develops a
bad smell. Nagbang-ug ang túbig sa akwaryum, The water in the aquarium
is stagnant and smelly. {2} be pent up too long and thus get rotten.
Nabang-ug na lang ang íyang pagbátì kay wà níya ikapaháyag, She kept
her feelings bottled up inside too long (lit. till they rotted).

bangun_1 n k.o. úbi.

bangun_2 n main floor beams of a house to which the joists (busaug) are
nailed.

bángun v {1} [A2; b2] get up from a lying position. Mubángun kug sayu,
I’ll get up early. Hibangunan ta gánì ka, búnal giyud, As soon as I can
get up I’ll spank you. {2} [AP; c1] make s.t. lying erect. Mabughat kag
mubángun (mupabángun) ka ánà, You’ll have a relapse if you lift that.
{3} redeem one’s honor. Bangúna (ibángun) ang kanhing kadunggánan sa
átung kalíwat, Redeem the former honor of our race. {4} [a12] revive
the name of a deceased relative by naming s.o. after him. Bangúnun ku
ang ngálan ni anhing lúlu pinaági sa ákung anak, I will bring
grandfather’s name to life again through my son. (→)_3 v [A; c1] put a
boat on a small elevated platform or wedges when it is beached to
prevent it from getting rotten or infested with shipworms. n wedge used
to put a boat on.

bangúngut n a nightmare which is said to frighten its victim to death.
v [a4] have an attack of bangúngut.

bangus n milkfish: Chanos chanos.

bangut v [A; b6(1)] tie up s.o. or s.t.’s mouth or the lower part of
the face. Bangútan ku ang kábaw arun dílì makakaun sa mais, I’ll tie up
the carabao’s mouth so it can’t get at the corn. (→) n {1} muzzle, rope
tied around an animal’s mouth, gag. {2} face covering. Ayaw siya kuhái
sa bangut arun dílì makasinggit (mailhan), Don’t take off her gag
(mask) so she cannot shout (be recognized). -an(→) v [A13] be in
mourning. Nagbangutan ang bánay sa namatay, The family of the deceased
was in mourning.

bangyaw v [A; c] spread information, publicize s.t. Siya ang nagbangyaw
nga si Linda gilúgus, She told the whole world that Linda was raped.
Gibangyáwan níla ang mga pagánu mahitungud sa Ginúu, They preached
about God to the pagans.

bangyáw n sound made by children in war games to imitate the sound of
bullets.

banhà {1} noisy in a loud way. {2} exclamation telling s.o. to shut up
or to stop making noise. Banhà! Dì ni mirkádu, Be quiet! This is not
the market, you know. Banhà! Wà kay lábut, Shut up! It’s none of your
business. v {1} [A1; a2] make noise, consider s.t. noisy. Dì ta
magbanhà sulud sa simbahan, Let’s not make noise inside the church.
{2} [A3; c] divulge s.t. Wà ku magbanhà ning sikritúha sa uban, I never
said a word about this secret to anyone. n loud voice. ka- n = banhà,
n.

banhal n a k.o. machete about 20″ long with a blade, the top and bottom
of which curve together into a point. On the top edge about
three-quarters of the way toward the end there is a hook.

banhaw v [A3; a2] bring back to life. Kanang awíta mibanhaw sa ákung
kabatan-un, That song brings me back to my youth. Si Kristu ang
nagbanhaw ni Lasarus, Christ resurrected Lazarus.

banhig v [A; b6] {1} lie in wait to kill or maul. Ug Bitkung ang
makabanhig way mabúhì, When the Vietcong ambush, no one survives.
{2} waylay s.o. bringing produce to the market to buy from him
directly. Way mulapus mangga dinhi basta hibanhigan sa babaw, No
mangoes reach here if s.o. buys them on the way. {3} lay in wait for
one’s girl to take her home. {4} ask to join s.o. in his food or s.t.
else he has bought s.w.

banhud a numb from loss of circulation or anesthesia. v [BN; a4b4]
become numb, for limbs to fall asleep. Mibanhud (nabanhud, namanhud,
gibanhud) ákung samput pagliningkud, My buttocks became numb from
sitting too long. Nagbanhud pa ákung lagus, My gums are still
anesthetized. Gibanhúran ku, Part of me is numb.

banhutin, banhuting = balanghutan.

báni = baláni_1.

ban-id n band-aid. v [c] put a band-aid on.

banidad n {1} indulgement in personal vanity, usually in a conceited
manner. Subra ra ang banidad ánang bayhána bísag pubri, magpakadátù,
That girl puts on too much. She pretends to be rich though she’s poor.
{2} a woman’s self-respect.

banig n woven straw sleeping mat. higdà, lígid sa — be bedridden (lit.
lie on the mat). Dúgay na si Ilisabit Tílur nga naglígid sa banig,
Elizabeth Taylor has been bedridden for a long time. v {1} [A; ac]
spread, make a mat. Maáyung banigun ang tíkug, Tikug is good for making
mats. Gibanigan ang bátà, The child had a mat spread for him. {2} [B]
form a layer, spread profusely over an area. Mibanig sa yútà ang dáhung
layà, The leaves formed a layer on the ground.

banika n {1} area suited for dry farming, not for wet rice cultivation.
{2} rural region. v [A1; a12] engage in dry farming, cultivate into a
farm. Banikahun níya ang bakilid, He will cultivate the slope.
banikanhun a rural, from the country. kabanikahan n fields.

baníku (from abaníku) n {1} a sailboat, usually used for fishing, the
sail of which is rolled and unfurled like a fan. {2} a boat like a
landing barge, one end of which opens and closes like a fan. v [b(1)c1]
make a boat of the baníku type.

banílad n k.o. large tree.

banilya n vanilla. v [c] put, use vanilla.

banitlung n k.o. hardwood tree.

baniug a very much of public knowledge. Baniug kaáyu ang pag-adtu níla
sa búwan, Their trip to the moon is very well known. v [A1PB; c]
become, make s.t. of public knowledge. Ang tabì mubaniug (mabaniug) sa
tibuuk lungsud, The gossip has become known throughout the town. Wà
ikabaniug dinhi ang ímung kaminyúun, Your marriage was not made public
here. see also tíug.

bankil = bangkil.

bankíyu = bangkíyu.

banlag n small but for temporary shelter or rest. v [A; c1] build a
rest hut.

banlas v [A3P; c16] {1} for water to carry s.t. Kusug baháa kay
nakabanlas (nakapabanlas) ug payag, It was a bad flood. It washed a hut
away. {2} wash away (figuratively). Banlásun (ibanlas) niánang awíta
ang ákung kaguul, That song will wash away my grief. n s.t. washed up.
Kining mga batúha banlas kini sa ibabaw, These rocks have been washed
down from above.

banlaw v [A; b] rinse, clean with water. Nakabanlaw na ku sa kusína, I
have rinsed the kitchen floor. Banláwun ku na ang linadlad, I will
rinse the clothes which have been bleached. panghiN- v [A2; b7] rinse
oneself off with water. Humag kalígù manghimanlaw ka, After bathing,
rinse yourself off. Ímung túbig ákung gipanghimanláwan, I took some of
your water to rinse myself off. -an(→) n vessel used for rinsing
clothes in. -anan(→), -unun(→) n things to be rinsed.

banlud v [A3P; c] {1} put, toss s.t. into an enclosed space. Akuy
nagbanlud sa kargamintu sa ráning burd, I dumped the baggage into the
space under the floor boards. {2} put s.o. into a difficult situation
or condition. Ang kapalahúbug mauy nagbanlud (nagpabanlud) níya sa
kadáut, His alcoholism got him into trouble.

banlun n {1} ban-lon. {2} shirt made of ban-lon. v [A] wear, get a
ban-lon shirt.

banlus v [A; ac] rub s.t. on or against s.t. Kinsay nagbanlus ug batu
sa bildu nga nagaras man? Who rubbed a stone against the glass? There’s
a scratch on it. Bíks ang gibanlus níya sa dughan sa bátà, He rubbed
Vick’s ointment on the child’s chest. Ibanlus (banlúsa) nang buling sa
lamísa ug basang panaptun, Get the dirt off the table by rubbing it
with a wet cloth. n rubbing oil, ointment.

banlut v {1} [A; b] clean the skin of a dressed chicken of prickles or
slimy substance. Asin ang ibanlut niánang manúka, Use salt to clean the
chicken’s skin. {2} [a4] have the sickness banlut. n k.o. skin disease
where a white crust is formed which peels off, exposing red skin and
leaving a scar, commonly affecting the feet and hands.

bansa_1 n k.o. half beak (fish).

bansa_2, bansà n a territorial unit, state. v [a12] be a state. Sukad
mabansà ang Haway, Ever since Hawaii became a state. Tinípung —
n United States.

bansag n name. Kandalaw ang bansag sa ámung baryu kaniadtu, Our village
was formerly named Kandalaw. v [A3; c] call s.t. or s.o. with a certain
name. Gibanságan siyag bakì, He was nicknamed ‘frog’. ka- n having the
same family name. Markus ang íyang ngálan, kabansag sa ámung pangúlu,
Marcos is his name, the same name as the President’s. v [c3] be of the
same family name. -un n family name. v [A; c1] have the surname.
Nagbanságun siyag Ríyis, His family name is Reyes.

bansalan (not without l) n rudder of a boat.

bansay a skillful, proficient. Bansay kaáyu siyang mudúlag ahidris, He
plays chess expertly. v {1} [AP; a] train s.o. Akuy mubansay sa
buksidur, I’ll train the boxer. {2} [A; a] practice, rehearse.
Nagbansay siya sa áwit, She is practicing the song. paka- v [A13] make
oneself adept at s.t. Nagpakabansay siya sa karáti tungud sa trabáhu
níyang kuyaw, She made herself an expert in karate because of her
dangerous job. bansaybansay n annual military training. ma-in-un a in
an expert way.

bansíkul = balansíkul.

bansil n gold cap on a tooth. v [A; a] put, make into a gold cap on a
tooth.

bansíli v [C; ac] {1} swap, barter. Magbansíli ta. Ímu ring lápis, ákù
ang bulpin, Let’s swap. Take the pencil and give me the ball-point pen.
Ayaw ipúnang átung hiraminta arun dílì magkabansíli, Don’t put our
tools together so they won’t get mixed up. Bansilíhan nákug mais ang
isdà, I’ll barter corn for fish. {2} put s.t. in the place of s.t.
else. Ibansíli ning lamísa adtung pasistur, Let’s put this table where
the small table is.

bansiwag v [B346; c1] for long things to stick out prominently.
Mibansiwag ang báraw sa íyang bulsa, The knife stuck out prominently
from his pocket. Ayaw bansiwaga (ibansiwag) ímung síku iniglayat nímu,
Don’t stick out your elbows when you jump.

bantà v [A3P; a] {1} warn s.o. not to do s.t. Ang pahibalung ‘pagbantay
sa irù’ mauy mubantà sa mga táwu, The notice ‘beware of dogs’ will warn
the people off. {2} [A; b4] plan to do harm to s.t. Gibantáan nga
sunúgun ang lungsud sa mga Húks, The Huks are planning to burn the
town. bantàbantà v [A; a12] make an estimate of a quantity.
Bantàbantáun kug makaganansiya ba ku, I will make an estimate of
whether I’ll make a profit or not. n estimate, calculation.

bantáaw a be situated in clear view from the distance. Bantáaw kaáyu
ang syudad didtu sa búkid Manunggal, You get a good view of the city
from Mount Manunggal. v [B3] be, become clear in view from the
distance. Ihigut ang kábaw niánang nagbantáaw nga lubi, Tie the carabao
to the coconut tree which we can see clearly from here. n the clear
view of s.t. from a distance. Sa bantáaw lang sa liyun mahadluk aku,
Just the sight of a lion from the distance scares me.

bantak = balantak.

bantal v [A; a] bundle s.t. Bantála ang mga bulingun, Bundle the dirty
clothes. Písing lig-un ang ibantal sa magasin, Use a strong string to
bundle the magazine. n bundle.

bantam a bantam, compact car. v [b6] consider a car a bantam.

bantam wit n bantamweight.

bantang a in plain view and recognizable. v [B3; c1] come into view.
Kablítang gátu ug mubantang (mabantang) ang langgam, Pull the trigger
when the bird comes into clear view. Nagbantang ang páa sa babáyi, The
woman’s thighs are in full view. n bearing. Gidáyig ku ang bantang sa
íyang hinigtan, I admire the bearing of his fighting cock.

bantawan n stage or platform.

bantay v [A; b(1)] {1} watch s.t., keep watch over. Wà siyay ági,
nagbantay lang sa úras, He doesn’t work. He just watches the clock.
Pag-iskápu sa binilanggù kinsay nagbantay? When the prisoner escaped,
who was on guard? Dílì siya kasiyut ug daghan ug akuy makabantay, He
can’t shoot the ball if I guard him. Bantayi ang linung-ag, Watch the
rice. {1a} take care of plants, esp. coconuts. Nagbantay sila sa
kalubihan, They were tending their coconut plantation. {2} notice, be
aware of s.t. impending. Nadunggaban siya kay walà siya makabantay sa
usa ka handus, He got stabbed because he was not aware of the thrust.
{3} watch out for, beware of. Pagbantay sa mangunguut, Watch out for
pickpockets. Bantayi ni nga dílì maumgan, Take care so it won’t get
wet. {4} watch for s.t. to pass. Ibantay kug taksi, Watch for a cab for
me. n guard. Namúga ang mga prísu kay natúlug ang bantay, The prisoners
escaped because the guard fell asleep. bantaybantay, — sa balutbut,
talikud various species of colorful fish that lurk in the reefs and
snap at prey: e.g. Diploprium bifascatium. -l-an n guardhouse, guard
post. Butangig bantay kanúnay ang balantayan (bantayan), Always keep a
guard in the guardhouse. -l-an, -anan a needful of careful watching.
Ang bátang bag-u pang mulakaw bantayánan kaáyu, A child who is still
starting to walk needs careful watching. hiN-un a minding other
people’s business. ma-in-un, ma-un a watchful. Ang mabinantáyung
(mabantáyung) mata sa Diyus, The watchful eyes of God. mag-r-, mag-l-
n {1} one who watches over s.t. Magbalantay sa tindáhan, Storekeeper.
Magbalantay sa sam-ang, Cemetery caretaker. {2} sergeant-at-arms.
anghil — see anghil. — sa kalínaw guardian of peace.

bantáyan = batáyan.

bantáyug n monument. v [b] put a monument s.w.

bantì = balalantì.

bantigì n good-luck charm. v [A; c1] use a good-luck charm. Ang síngin
nga lísu sa nangkà mabantigì sa paninda, Twin seeds from jackfruits can
be used as a good-luck charm when one sells things.

bantílis n hard, fine-grained stone with a smooth surface, gray in
color and spots of white. Bantílis kag kasingkásing, You have a heart
of granite.

banting n {1} rope or chain tied to s.t. to steady it, hold it down.
Hugti ang banting sa balay kay talibagyu, Tighten the rope holding the
house because a typhoon is coming. {2} fetter placed on the feet of
prisoners. v [A; ac] secure or steady s.t. by fastening s.t. to it;
make into a fastening rope. Ug nakabanting ka pa sa bungsud, dílì untà
maánud, Had you secured the fish corral, it wouldn’t have been washed
away. Lambu ang ibanting sa tabánug, Use a string to balance the kite.†

bantingbanting v [A; a12] for boats to rock from side to side, rock
like a boat. Magbantingbanting siyag lakaw kun hubug, He walks with a
rocking gait when he is drunk.

bantíyung n {1} oval-shaped squash, a variety of Lagenaria leucanthea.
{2} = balantíyung. -un a have sagging breasts like oval-shaped squash.

bantug a famous, notorious. Bantug kaáyung ngálan sa nátad sa pulitika
ang Usminya, Osmeña is a well-known name in the field of politics. — ra
no wonder [such-and-such] a particular thing happened. Bantug rang dílì
kasulti kay amang diay, No wonder he couldn’t talk. He’s a deaf-mute. —
na man just because. Bantug na mang nagkinahanglan kug kwarta patas-an
nímug tantu, Just because I need money you increase the interest.
v [B12; c1] become famous, notorious. pasi- v [A; c] boast about one’s
ability, skill. Maúlaw ku magpasibantug sa ákung kadátù, I’m ashamed to
brag about my wealth. n bragging. ka- n fame, honor. Ang kabantug ni
Ilurdi sa pamuksing, Elorde’s fame as a boxer. -an a famous, notorious.
Bantúgan nga mananambal, A well-known doctor. v [B12] become famous,
notorious.

bantuk a {1} hard and compact. Bantuk kaáyung unud sa gábi, Taro meat
is very firm. {2} for muscles to be firm. Bantuk kaáyu siyag kaunuran,
He has firm muscles. Bída, bantuk giyung busúga, My, I’m filled to
bursting! {3} — sa dughan filling the breast. Kalípay nga bantuk sa
dughan, Happiness that fills the breast. — ug nawung shameless,
hardened to others’ opinions. — ug úlu {a} thick-skulled. Bantuk kag
úlu. Kápuy itudlù nímu, You are thick-skulled. It’s terrible to try to
teach you. {b} stubborn. v [APB3; a] {1} make s.t. harden, harden.
Mibantuk (nabantuk) ang basakan sa kataas sa húlaw, The rice field
hardened because of the long drought. Bantúkun nátù ang nataran kay
himúung baylihan, Let’s tramp the yard down so we can use it as a dance
floor. {2} inure, get inured to s.t. Nagbantuk na ning ákung nawung sa
mga biaybíay, I have become hardened to their taunts. Nagkabantuk na
ang ákung dughan sa kaguul, My heart has become hardened to grief.†

bantul_1 n k.o. small, excellent eating fish with poisonous spines, not
deadly but very painful, and a frog-like face.

*bantul_2 gi- has [subject] gone crazy! Gibantul ka ba dihà? Have you
gone crazy?

bantúlay v [A; b6] pound buri palm strips in a wooden trough-like
mortar to get the starch out. -an(→) n a trough in which strips of buri
palm are laid lengthwise and pounded.

bantulinaw a {1} daytime weather conditions where there is a light
cloud cover: the sun shines but its heat is mitigated. {2} for the sea
to be rippling slightly, but on the whole calm. v [B; b6] {1} be,
become lightly overcast. Nagkabantulinaw na man, maáyu nang iduwà, Now
that it is gradually clouding over lightly, it is a good time to play.
{2} for the sea to be rippling slightly.

bantulínaw n k.o. shiny black or greyish-black olive shell, or a
species with jet-black speckles.

bantut n light thudding sound of a falling object. v [B26] {1} make a
light thudding sound in falling. Nahúlug nga pútut tung mibantut, That
thudding sound was a coconut bud that fell. {2} for a top to fail to
spin. {3} [B2; c1] for a business to fail. Ang súgal makapabantut sa
nigusyu, Gambling can cause a business to fail. -un(←) a {1} having
tendency not to spin well. Bantutun ang kasing gaan, Light tops tend
not to spin well. {2} having a tendency to fail in business.

bánu v [B126] for work or an undertaking to come out good. Nabánu
tingáli ang íyang pagpaninda kay midakù man ang íyang tindáhan, Her
business must have been successful because she has enlarged her store.

banug n k.o. large hawk with chocolate-brown feathers and a
white-colored breast. v [b6] consider a hawk. (←) call to drive away
chickens. -un n {1} brown and white combination of chicken feathers.
{2} name given to rays with wide wing-like extensions of the body which
flap as they move through the water, esp. the eagle ray: Aetobatus
narinari. banugbánug, tala-(←) n kite. v [A2SN; a2] fly, make into a
kite. Magbanugbánug (magtalabanug) ta sa plása, Let’s fly a kite in the
plaza.

bánug, ban-ug a for fruits to be bruised. v [AB2; a] {1} soften fruits,
for fruits to get bruised. Muban-ug (maban-ug) ang kapáyas ug sigíhag
híkap, The papaya will get bruised if you keep touching it. {2} bruise
by pounding. Ban-úgun giyud nang tulisag hisakpan, They will beat up
that robber if they catch him.

ban-uk_1 n sickness caused by a spirit of the woods (banwaánun) which
intrudes sand, feathers, and hairs into the body. The sickness results
from bathing in streams or bathing anywhere on Tuesdays and Fridays or
may be on the instigation of a sorcerer. The symptoms are stomach pain
followed by intense itchy rashes. The cure is túub. v [A; a4b4] cause
to get ban-uk.	

ban-uk_2 a {1} lush, plentiful in growth. Ban-uk kaáyu ang sagbut sa
ákung pilapilan, Weeds are growing lush in my rice field. {2} for a
mass to be well-packed. Pwirting ban-úka sa baráha sa kahun. Maglisud
ta paghulbut ug usa, The cards are very tightly packed into the box.
We’ll have a hard time taking one. v {1} [B26; c1] get packed in tight.
{2} [B; aPb] become lush. Nagkaban-uk ang buhuk ni Bal nga nagkadakù,
Bal’s hair is becoming thicker as he is growing bigger.

banus_1 a implanted close to each other. v [B2; c16] for standing
things to be implanted close to each other. Mibanus (nabanus) ang
humayan nga giabunúhan, The field which was fertilized grew densely.
Banusun (ibanus) gánì pagtanum ang mga lubi dílì mubúnga, Coconut trees
planted too close to each other will not bear fruit.

banus_2, bánus v {1} [A2; a2] for s.t. to happen after s.t. else
happened. Mibanus ang kaínit human muulan, The sun shone after the rain
shower. Bansun gánì ang tímug, mukalma ang bagyu, The typhoon abates
when the east wind lets up. {2} [A; a12] take over after s.o. Bansi ku
dinhi sa kusína kay gikápuy ku, Take my place in the kitchen because
I’m tired. {3} [AN; b5] put on or wear s.t. which belongs to s.o. else.
Mamanus ku sa ímung tráhi kay wà kuy ikapatahì, I’ll wear your suit
because I don’t have money to have one made. Maluag ang midiyas ug
bansan (bansun) sa dakug tiil, The socks will loosen if s.o. with big
feet wears them first. banusbánus v {1} [C; b5] take turns in doing
s.t. Magbanusbánus tag dala sa baskit, Let’s take turns in carrying the
basket. Banusbanúsi (banusbanúsa) ninyug pas-an ang kawáyan, Take turns
in carrying the bamboo on your shoulders. {2} [A3] occur repeatedly one
after the other. Magbanusbánus ang kalípay ug kasákit, Joys and sorrows
follow one another repeatedly.

banúut n sheath of a coconut blossom.

banwa_1 n thicket. Adtu ta maggapud ug igsulugnud sa banwa, Let’s cut
firewood in the woods. v [A1PB; a2] become a thicket, let s.t. revert
to the forest. Nagbanwa (nagpabanwa) kug usa ka iktarya, I purposely
allowed a hectare of my farm to revert to thicket. banwaánun {1} from
the forest. Banwaánung sunuy, Wild rooster. {2} = tagabanwa. taga-,
tagi-, banwaánun n supernatural beings which inhabit woodlands,
victimize people by rendering them invisible, and are capable of
inflicting diseases. Sometimes they show themselves and even make love
to women.

banwa_2 n {1} fatherland. Pilipínas ang ngán sa ámung banwa, Our
country is called the Philippines. {2} town, village. Ang banwa sa
Mandáwi mauswágun, The town of Mandaue is progressive.

banwag v [A; b6(1)] {1} illuminate a place. Banwágan kung agiánan sa
súlù, I’ll light the way with a torch. {2} enlighten s.o. Ang ímung
tambag mu ray makabanwag sa íyang kaisípan, Only your counsel can
enlighten his mind. n illumination.†

banwági n k.o. tree.

banwas = balúnas.

banyágà n rascal, scoundrel. Pangitáun kung banyágà nga nag-ílad nákù,
I’ll look for the rascal who swindled me. v [B2; b6] be a scoundrel.

banyak v [A; b6(1)] kick or shove with the sole of a foot. Banyáka
(banyáki) ug kusug ang bisiklíta, Pedal the bicycle hard.

banyira n tub or big basin for children to take a bath in or for
washing clothes. v [a12] make into a tub or big basin.

banyu n bathroom. v [A; a] construct, add a bathroom. — publiku
n public bath.

banyumaríya n double boiler.

banyus n medicine rubbed on one. v [A; b6(1)] rub medicinal materials
on s.o. paN- v [A2] rub medicinal materials on oneself.

bápul, bápuls n baffle in a loudspeaker.

bapur n steamship or any large ship propelled by machinery. v [A1; b4]
take a boat. Nagbapur ku padúlung sa Sibu, I took a boat in going to
Cebu. — digíra n battleship. — mirkantil n merchant ship. bapurbápur
v {1} [A1; c1] smoke cigars. {2} [C] have sexual intercourse (riding on
each other like on a boat) (humorous).

bár_1 n bar examination for would-be lawyers. v [A] take the bar
examination.

bár_2 n the B.A.R., Browning automatic rifle.

bár_3 n cocktail lounge, usually of the sort which have bar-girls of
ill-repute.

bara_1 v {1} [A; a2] put a boat in dry-dock. {2} [B12; a2] run aground.
Nabara sa píliw ang barku, The boat ran aground in shallow waters.
-díru n be in dry dock. v [A3P; c1] put a boat in dry dock. baradiruhan
n dry dock.

bára n {1} steel bar, rod. — dikabra crowbar. {2} frame of a bicycle.
{3} measurement, the span from the shoulder to the tip of the opposite
hand with the arm extended. {4} — i — eye for an eye and tooth for a
tooth. Pamaslan tikaw bára i bára sa ímung gibúhat kanákù, I will repay
you eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth for what you have done to me.
{4a} punishment sent to a philanderer that his daughter falls victim to
a philanderer. Bára nà níya nga gipaangkan ang íyang anak kay himabáyi
man, It’s his punishment for being a philanderer that his daughter was
made pregnant. v {1} [A13; a12] make into a bar. {2} [b4] for a girl to
suffer at the hands of a philanderer as a punishment to her father.
Baráhan ang átung anak ug magsígi kag pamabáyi, Our daughter will
become a victim herself if you keep chasing women. {3} [A2C; c1] for a
brother and sister in one family to marry a brother and sister in
another. Gibára sa mga Kurtis ug Sansis ang ílang mga anak, A son and
daughter of the Corteses’ married a son and daughter of the Sanchezes’.
barabára n shaft for a horse carriage. v [a] make into a shaft for a
carriage, put a shaft on. barabara n shaft in a pressurized kerosene
lantern which holds the needle controlling the width of the orifice
through which the vaporized kerosene passes. barahan n {1} yard-*stick.
{2} criterion for measuring s.t. -in-(→) n k.o. cloth of cheap quality
with big, checkered prints. v [A; b6] wear this sort of cloth.†

baradíru n see bara_1.

bárag v [B256; a12P] lose one’s footing, stagger from a blow or
drunkenness. Mibárag (nabárag) siya pagsumbag nákù, He staggered when I
boxed him. Barágun (pabarágun) ta ka niíning usa ka básung tubà, I’ll
make you stagger with this glass of palm toddy.

baragbárag v [A] pace back and forth in front of s.o., usually with a
purpose. Mubaragbárag ang amahan ug pamisitáhan ang íyang dalága, When
s.o. visits the daughter, the father paces back and forth conspicuously
in front of them.

baráha n playing card. bistu ang — it is clear what you (he, etc.) has
up his sleeve. — nga dunut highly improbable excuse for doing s.t. Ayaw
kug sugali ánang ímung baráha nga dunut, Don’t hand me those phoney
excuses. {1a} mahjong piece. v [AC2; a1] play cards. Nakigbaráha nákù
ang duha ka sugarul, The two gamblers asked me to play cards with them.
Mánu ta. Baraháun, Let’s decide who will be first with cards. -dur(→)
n dealer in cards. v {1} [B16; a12] be the dealer. {2} [A12] hire, have
as a card dealer.

barak n leg muscles.

bárak n barracks. v [a2] make into barracks.

baráka n a room added to a house as an extension. v [A1; b6(1)]
construct an extension to a house. -in- n hip roof with sloping ends
and sloping sides. v [c1] construct a hip roof.

barandilya, barandilyas n fence or balustrade made of rails and posts.
v [A1; c1] put, make into a railing.

bárang n {1} k.o. sorcery whereby insects are introduced into the
intended victim. {2} insect, usually a mutant specimen, with which
bárang sorcery is performed. v [A; a12] practice bárang on s.o.
Barángun siya ni Danílu, Danilo will inflict his sorcery on him. -an(→)
n sorcerer.

baranggay n {1} a unit of government of the pre-Spanish Filipinos, the
titular head of whom was the dátù or sultan. {2} = balángay. {3} a
nightly rosary held by turns in the houses in a certain neighborhood.
Átù rung turnu sa baranggay, Tonight, the nightly rosary of the
baranggay will be held in our house. v {1} [A2C23] hold a baranggay.
{2} [A13] go to one’s girl friend’s house, as the members of a prayer
group go to s.o.’s house for the baranggay (colloquial).

barasbáras = barabára. see bára.

barásu = brásu.

barat a {1} cheap, petty: refusing to pay a reasonable price and
heeding matters not worth one’s attention. {2} cheap, vulgar. Barat na
kaáyu nang bayhána, bísan kinsa lang ang ubanan, That woman is very
cheap. Anybody can have her. v {1} [B; b6] for a person to become
cheap. Mauy ibarat nímu ug ímu siyang ashan, You will come to be vulgar
if you attach importance to what she says. {2} [B; c1] for things to be
of little value, inferior, make s.t. in an inferior way. Mibarat
(nabarat) ang písu, The peso has become devalued. Ayúha pagtahì. Ayawg
barata (ibarat), Sew that dress well. Don’t put out s.t. cheap. -íra
a fond of bargaining prices down too much. v [B12] be a haggler.
Makabastus ang labihang pagkabaratíra, It is degrading to bargain too
hard. -íru = baratíra (male).

baratíha n piece of wood about 1″ thick, 2″ wide and anywhere from one
foot up in length, usually used for flooring. v [a] make into
floorboards.

baratilyu n bargain sale. v [A1; c1] hold a bargain sale. Baratilyúhun
(ibaratilyu) níla ang ílang uld istak, Their old stock is going to be
on sale. paN- v [A2; b(1)] buy s.t. on sale. Mamaratilyu kug sapátus,
I’ll buy shoes that are on sale.

baratíru see barat.

barátu_1 a low price. Barátu kaáyu ang palalítun ug sirbisyu sa
Hungkung, Goods and services are very cheap in H. K. v {1} [B; a2]
become, be cheap. Mubarátu (mabarátu) ang bugas kun ting-ani, Rice gets
to be cheap during harvest time. {2} [AP; b6] cheapen, make
contemptible. Ang babáying mukúyug ug láki bísan ása nagbarátu
(nagpabarátu) sa íyang kaugalíngun, A woman who goes just anywhere with
a man cheapens herself. baratuhun a of a cheap sort. Sinínang
baratuhun, A cheap shirt.

barátu_2 n cut from one’s winnings. Tagái kug barátu sa daug nímu sa
búlang, Give me a cut from your winnings in the cockpit. v [A; c] give
s.o. a cut from one’s winnings.

baraw, báraw_1 v [A; a12b2] interrupt the tossing of the coin in
gambling to annul that particular toss. Baráwa nang antugun kun
suspitsádu ka sa inantugan, Interrupt the toss if you are suspicious
about the way the coins are being tossed. (→) expression used to
squelch a friendly request for s.t. ‘Daúgan ka man. Paliti kug sapátus,
ha?’—‘Baraw. Píla ra guy daug.’ ‘You won in gambling. How about buying
me a pair of shoes?’—‘Just hold your horses there. That much I didn’t
win.’

báraw_2 v {1} [C] for fighting cocks to hit each other with their gaffs
while in the air.

báraw_3 = balaraw.

barawan n k.o. large squid (núkus).

baraybaray v {1} [A; a12] pile s.t. up. Baraybaraya ang mga kahun
simpig sa bungbung, Pile the boxes against the wall. {2} [AB36; c1]
fall, put in line. Mibaraybaray sila atubángan sa maistru, They lined
up before the teacher.

barbahan n wooden container for coconut palm toddy in the shape of a
rectangle 3′ by 4′.

barbas_1 v [A; bc] wash infected skin with boiled leaves of medicinal
herbs. Mu rag nagamay ang kabahung nga nabarbasan, The ulcer seemed to
get smaller after it was cleaned and washed. n the water and boiled
leaves of medicinal herbs used in washing sores, ulcers, and other skin
diseases.

barbas_2 = balbas.

barbikiyu n food barbecued on a stick. v [A; a] barbecue s.t.

barbil n bar bell. v [A; a12] exercise with a, make into a bar bell.
-ádu, -áwu a having a well-developed physique of the sort that results
from exercising with a bar bell. v [B126] become well-built.

barbir n barber. — siyap = barbiríya. -íya n barbershop.

barbíru n barber. v [B16; a12] become, make into a barber. barbiruhan
n barbershop.

barbityurits n barbiturates.

barbula n valve in a pipe or tire.

barbun v [A12; b(1)] go to a banquet only for the sake of eating.
Mamarbun si Isku sa bunyag sa anak ni Uduy, Isko will certainly be
there for the food when Odoy’s son is baptized. n act of attending a
banquet for eating alone. Kung pamarbun na gánì ang hisgútan way
katupung ni Alù, Talking of going to parties just for the food, no one
can beat Alo. -íru a attending banquets for the sake of food alone.

barda = balda.

bardádu n = baldádu. see balda.

bards_1 n barge. v {1} [A1; a12] take a barge. {2} [A2; a12] make into
a barge.

bardut a prostitute (slang). v [B126; b6] be, become a prostitute. paN-
v [A2; b6] patronize a prostitute.

bargas n k.o. plow made of steel (so called after the brand name
Vargas).

barì n a k.o. sickle for cutting long and thick grass, with the blade
at the outside edge, and fastened to a wooden handle about 3′ long.
v [A; a] cut grass with a barì.

barikus n varicose veins. v [a4b4] have varicose veins. Barikusun
(barikusan) kag maghayhil ka, You’ll get varicose veins if you wear
high heels.

baril_1 n barrel, drum.

baril_2 v [A; ab2] shoot s.o. or s.t. with a gun. Si Risal dihà barila
sa Luníta, Rizal was executed at the Luneta.

barílis_1 n k.o. blue-finned tuna which grows to 3′.

barílis_2 n metal drums for oil.

barína n screw auger for making holes. — dimánu n a screw auger with no
brace, gimlet. v [A; b] bore a hole with a drill. Barináhi ang káhuy
úsà twirkáhi, Drill a hole in the wood before you put in the screw.

barínis n water container made of an internodal section of bamboo.
v [A13; a12] make, make into a water container of this sort.

barinúgan a stubborn, refusing to yield or comply. Barinúgan kaáyung
igsuúna kay dílì mupatúu sa ákung tambag, He is a stubborn brother
because he refuses to heed my advice. v [B12; b6] be, become stubborn.

barinuhan = barinúgan.

bárit n barrette for holding the hair in place. v [A; a] wear, make
into a barrette.

baríta n bar of soap, chocolate, etc. Tagsingkwinta na ang baríta sa
sabun, Soap costs fifty cents a bar now. v [A; a] form, make into a
bar. Baritáhun ta ning tsukulit, Let’s form this chocolate into bars.

baritun n {1} = baritunu. {2} baritone musical instrument. {2a} brass
wind instrument: the baritone. {2b} baritone saxophone.

baritunu n a baritone voice or s.o. with a baritone voice. v [B; a] be
a baritone; sing in the baritone. Mubaritunu (mabaritunu) tingáli ning
ákung tíngug ug maulitáwu na ku, I will probably have a baritone voice
when I reach adolescence. Magbaritunu ku kay kúlang sila, I’ll sing
with the baritones because there’s not enough of them. Baritunúhi nang
íyang kanta, Sing the baritone part to the song.

barkáda n people one goes around with. Giimbitar kung ákung mga barkáda
sa ákung adlaw, I invited my cronies to my birthday party. v [C1; a1c3]
go around together. Way kaláki ning magbarkáda, It’s no good to go
around with a gang. mag- n people who are gang mates. Nadáhig siya sa
imbistigasiyun kay magbarkáda man sila sa nakapatay, He was also
investigated because he was in the same gang as the murderer. ka-
n gang mate. barkadur a fond of going around with one’s gang.

barkilyus n baked sweet made from flour, eggs, sugar and rolled into
crisp hollow tubes. v [A; a] make barquillos.

barku n large ship. hibyaan sa — {1} not catch the boat. {2} failed to
get married. walà kuy — I’m poor. v [A1; a] take a ship.

barnáti v {1} [A; a12] drive s.o. to work very hard. Gibarnáti
pagpagúna ang sinuhúlan, The hired laborer was made to work hard
weeding. {2} [B16] become skilled in s.t. after constant, strenuous
training. Ang pagtrabáhu níya sa talyir nakabarnáti (nakapabarnáti)
níya sa makina, His work in the shop made him skilled with machines.

barnis n varnish. v [A; b6(1)] varnish s.t. Barnísan kung ímung
sungkud, I’ll varnish your cane.

barpin n an ornamental pin with a clasp. v [A; c1] wear an ornamental
pin.

bartíha n {1} plank, board. Gilugkat ang usa ka bartíha sa bungbung,
One plank was torn off the wall. {2} parcel, block of land. Bahínun sa
tulu ka bartíha ang ílang yútà, Their land will be divided into three
parcels. {3} share. v {1} [A; a1] make, or cut into planks or boards.
{2} [A; b6(1)] put a board between two things. Bartihái ang kanal arun
makalabang ang kutsi, Place some planks over the canal so the car can
pass over it. {3} [A; a] divide, cut up into pieces or sections. Hukum
ang mubartíha (magbartíha) sa yútà nga iapud-apud sa mga anak, A judge
will apportion the land that will be distributed among the children.
Bartiháa ang kík sa walu ka bátà, Divide the cake among the eight
children. {3a} [A] get a share or a part of. Nakabartíha siyag duha ka
gatus sa usa ka byáhi, His share in one trip was two hundred pesos.

bartindir n bartender, one who acts as a bartender. v [B36; a] be the
one who mixes the drinks.

bartulína n cell for the solitary confinement of a prisoner. v [A; c1]
place in solitary. Ayaw panguláta arun dì ka bartulináhun (ibartulína),
Don’t fight with anybody or you will get put in solitary.

bartuníku n k.o. fish, the climbing perch: Anabas testudines.

baru, báru n large cylindrical water or rice container made from tin
plate or an empty petroleum can, having a capacity of around 5–6
gallons. v [a12] make into such a container.

barug v {1} [APB36; c1P] stand, stand up, cause to do so. Mubarug kita
inigtugtug sa nasudnung áwit, Let us stand when the national anthem is
played. Mibarug ang íya pagbása níya ug librung law-ay, He got a bone
on (lit. his stood up) when he read the dirty book. Nagbarug
(nagpabarug) siya sa masakitun, He helped the sick man get to his feet.
{1a} [B3(1)46; c1] for a building to stand, be built. Sa katapúsan
nagbarug nang balay nga ákung gitúkud, At last the house I constructed
was built. {2} [A2; c2] stand up for one’s opinions or principles.
Makabarug ra giyud sa katapúsan ang matúud, Truth prevails in the end.
Barugi (ibarug) ang katinúud sa ímung gipanulti, Stand up for the truth
of your statement. {3} [A; b6] stand for, act as proxy for s.o.,
guarantee for s.o.’s obligations or rights. Akuy nagbarug sa íyang
útang sa bangku, I stood as guarantor for his debts to the bank.
Gibarugan ku ni tiyù pagpamaláyi nákù kay wà si Tátay, My uncle stood
for my father when I made the formal marriage proposal. {4} [B12; c1P]
get standing in a community. Ang makabarug (makapabarug) sa táwu ang
íyang prupisyun, A man’s profession gives him dignity. {5} [B2] look
good in s.t., for s.t. to become one. Dì ka mubarug sa míni kay tag-as
kag tul-an, You don’t look good in a mini because you have long legs.
n {1} height. Mubù ug barug, Of a short height. {2} bearing and
features. Ang íyang barug daw istadista, His bearing is statesman-like.
paN- n {1} stature and/or features of a person. Ambúngang pamarug,
Handsome features. {2} one’s standing in a profession or any group.
-ánan n principle. Táwung way barugánan, A man without principles.
(←)-an a for a person to have a good bearing. Barúgan nga pagkalaláki,
Good-looking man.

barumbáda v [A; c] squander s.t. valuable. Nagbarumbáda lang ka sa
ímung kabílin, You are squandering your inheritance. Ibarumbáda lang
níyang íyang nindut nga sinínà, gihímung pambáy, She wastes her
beautiful dress, using it around the house.

barumbádu a {1} ill-mannered. Barumbádu nang anáka kay dì mangáyug
katahúran sa íyang katiguwángan, That child is ill-mannered because he
doesn’t greet his folks. {2} careless in dress; wearing clothing
untidily or in such a way as to destroy it. Barumbádu siyang mamisti.
Lúpig pay buguy, He dresses terribly, worse than a tramp. {3} vagabond,
vagrant. v {1} [B2; b6] become ill-mannered. {2} [B3(1)6; c] become
careless of one’s dress, treat clothes carelessly. Ayaw ibarumbádu
kanang ímung púlung putì sa tubaan, Don’t ruin your white shirt wearing
it to the toddy stand. {3} [B1; b6] become a vagabond. Nagbarumbádu
siya sukad mapapha sa trabáhu, He became a tramp after he lost his job.

barumitir, barumitru n barometer. v [b6(1)] measure s.t. with a
barometer.

barung n fancy, embroidered shirt with long sleeves used for formal
wear. It slips over the head and is worn outside of the trousers. —
púlu short-sleeved version of the barong with buttons all the way down.
— Tagálug, Pilipínu = barung. v [A; a] wear, make into barong.

barungbárung = balungbálung.

barúnguy n k.o. flying fish, name given to several smaller species.

barut n tobacco that is of the lowest class. Ibaligyag kinilu ang
barut, The cheapest k.o. tobacco is sold by the kilogram.
a {1} inferior in quality. Dalì rang mulubad ang panaptung barut, A
cloth which is inferior in quality easily fades. {2} ugly to look at.
v [B; a] be, become inferior in quality or ugly. Mibarut (nabarut) ang
lamì sa tabákung wà maputus, The tobacco lost its flavor because it
hadn’t been wrapped. Nagkabarut ang átung dapit kay midagsang ang
iskwátir, This place is turning into an eyesore because of the
proliferation of the squatters.

bárut n the inedible pulp of the jackfruit which surrounds the edible
flesh.

barútu n small boat with a dug-out bottom, plank or sawali sidings, and
usually with outriggers. v [A13; c1] ride a small boat. Magbarútu ta
paingun sa Sámar, Let’s take a boat to Samar. Barutúha (ibarútu) ang
masakitun sa píkas pulù, Transport the patient to the other island on a
boat. paN- v [A2C12; b6(1)] go boating. Nakigpamarútu nákù ang ákung
trátu, My boy friend asked me to go boating with him.

baryabli a changeable, fickle. Ning tyimpung baryabli ang dátù mapubri,
ang pubri maadunáhan, In these uncertain times the rich become poor and
the poor, rich. v [B2] be variable. Ang bili sa palalítun kanúnayng
mubaryabli (mabaryabli), Retail prices are constantly fluctuating.

baryu n {1} barrio, the smallest territorial unit of government.
{2} the country as opposed to the city or town. Láay ang kinabúhì sa
baryu, Life in the country is boring. v [APB26; a12] be, become, make
into a barrio. Kining urdinansáha ang mibaryu (mipabaryu) sa Pásil,
This ordinance made Pasil a barrio. — nga way kaldíru, kū́n n a barrio
without pots, a humorous allusion to the place where a person heads
after death. — kapitan n captain of the barrio, the barrio chief. —
kawunsil n barrio council, the lawmaking body of the barrio. tininti
dil — n barrio lieutenant, the title formerly given to the head of a
barrio. baryubaryu v [c] {1} stay in separate groups, not mingling with
the rest. Nagbaryubaryu ang mga dátù ug musimus nga bisíta, The rich
visitors were in separate groups from the poor visitors. {2} for each
to do his own, not work cooperatively. Magbaryubaryu lang tag plíti,
Each of us pays his own fare. Ug makigbaryubaryu mu, maglain lang pud
mi, If you want to do it on your own, then we’ll do ours on our own,
too. baryuhánun n {1} resident of rural areas. Kadaghánan sa baryuhánun
dinhi magbabául, Most of the barrio folk here are farmers. tagi-
n resident of a barrio. katagi- n barrio-mate.

bás = balas.

bása v [A3S; ab2] {1} read. Dílì ku makabasa, I cannot read. Wà ku
kabasa ánà, I haven’t had a chance to read that. Basáha ang Biblíya,
Read the Bible. Basáhi siya, Read to him. Hibasahan gánì ni Tátay ang
sulat sa ímung trátu, If Father reads your boy friend’s love letter.
{2} interpret signs, omens. Inighuman ug urasiyun sa básu, basáhun
dáyun sa tambálan ang ímung mga sakit, After the shaman says the magic
words into a glass, he will read your sickness in it. {3} [a3]
understand, get the meaning. Nabása ku sa ímung mata nga gihigugma mu
siya gihápun, I can read in your eyes that you still love him. hiN-(→)
a fond of reading. kabasahun a feel very much like reading. balasahun
n reading matter. mag-r-/l-(→), um-r-/l-(→) n the readers of a certain
publication. tig- a in the habit of reading.†

basà a {1} wet. {2} watery, soft. Dì ku gustug kan-un nga basà ang
pagkalútù, I don’t like rice with too much water in it. {3} — ang papil
ruined reputation. Walay musugut níya kay basà na ang íyang papil sa
pagkapalikíru, Nobody has accepted his marriage proposals because he
has a bad reputation as a philanderer. {4} — ang tíngug raspy voiced.
v {1} [APB12; b5] wet s.t., become wet. Ang ulan mauy mubasà (mupabasà)
sa pilapilan, The rain will wet the ricefields. Bas-i (bas-a) kanang
ímung túhud, Wet your knee a little. Mabasà lang nà siya kun malígù, He
doesn’t have intercourse. (Lit. He only gets wet when he takes a bath.)
{2} [A; b5] wash s.t. Si Pitra mubasà áning húgawng lamísa, Petra will
wash this dirty table. {3} [a] cook, using more water than usual.
Gibasà níya paglung-ag ang kan-un, She cooked the rice soft (with more
water than usual). {4} [A13] bathe with s.t. on. Bísan sulud sa banyung
sirádu nagbasà gihápun, Even in the privacy of her bathroom, she bathed
with s.t. on. {5} [B1256] — ang papil for reputation to be ruined.
hiN-(←) v [A; b] wash s.o.’s feet. Himasái ang mga bátà únà pakatulga,
Wash the children’s feet before you put them to sleep. panghiN-(←)
v [A2] wash one’s feet. Nanghimásà ka na? Have you washed your feet?
-un a watery.

básag_1 n large, rectangular bamboo hamper for storing dirty clothes.
v [a1] make into this k.o. hamper.

básag_2 v {1} [AB126; a1] for s.t. not thick to split or shatter, split
or shatter s.t. Kinsay nagbásag sa pinggan? Who broke the plate?
Nabásag ang sista, The guitar cracked. {2} [B12] for the voice to
crack. Mabásag ang tíngug kun bayungbáyung na, When you reach
adolescence, your voice cracks. (→) a {1} cracked, shattered. Ayaw
gamíta nang sag-úba kay basag na, Don’t use that bamboo container
because it is cracked. {2} cracked in voice.

basagbasag n k.o. garfish.

basagbásag n glabella, the part of the frontal bone between the two
eyebrows, extending a little above and below.

basak n field of wet-cultivated rice. v [A; a1] cultivate a rice field.
Basakun ku nang usa ka iktariya, I will make that one hectare into a
rice field. -an n rice field.

basal v [A; a] bang on s.t. to produce noise. Basalun námung táru ug
may iskilipsi, We’ll beat the kerosene cans when there’s an eclipse.
n anything used in banging. Basal sa bumbu, The drumstick.

basalyu, basalyus_1 n vassal. v [a12] make into a vassal.

basalyus_2 n loyal circle of followers (colloquial). Ang basalyus sa
pulitiku, The inner circle of the politician’s followers. v [B126] be,
become loyal followers of ...

basangag, basángag a a toothless mouth that is wide open. v {1} [B56;
c1] for a toothless mouth to be wide open, as in laughing. {2} [B2] for
the gum to lose a row of teeth leaving a large gap. Nabasangag íyang
lagus, There was a big gap in his gums.

basar n a shop or department store that sells various kinds of goods.
v [a12b6] make into a bazaar.

basas, básas v [A12; b(1)] have the upper hand, be on the winning end.
Wà kay basasan ánang bayhána, You have no chance of getting the upper
hand with that woman.

basbas_1 v [A; b] chop off nodes, lumps, etc. in wood or bamboo.
Gibasbásan níya ang mga lipak pára sa ílang sáwug, He cleaned and
smoothed the bamboo strips for the flooring. -in- n chips, particles
removed from wood that has been cleaned. -in-an a {1} carefully
smoothed wood. {2} carefully selected words. Binasbásan ang íyang mga
púlung, His words are carefully selected.

basbas_2 v [A; b] husk corn. Basbasi ang mais, Husk the corn. n husks
of corn.

basbas_3 v [A; a12] train with constant repetition. Akuy mibasbas níyas
ínum, I taught him to drink. Nabasbas ku sa trabáhu human mamatay si
Pápa, I learned how to work after Papa died. Gibasbas níya ang irù
pagsáyaw, He trained the dog to dance.

basbas_4 = balasbas.

basdak v [B6; ac] be tight and bulging due to fullness, esp. the
stomach. Basdákun tang átung tiyan, Let’s fill our stomachs chock-full.
Ginabas ang átung ibasdak sa pansing bag, Let’s fill the punching bag
full of sawdust.

bashuy = bas-uy, 1.

bási_1 n {1} rice wine. {2} wine made from sugar cane. v [a1] make into
rice or sugar cane wine.

bási_2 n military base. — nabal naval base. v [A2; a2b6] establish a
military base.

bási_3 v [A; c1] base a conclusion or course of action on s.t. Ang
maáyu mauy basíhi sa ímung kinabúhì, Base your life on what is good.
Ayaw giyud ibási (basíha) ang ímung paghukum sa íyang sulti, Don’t base
your decision on what she says. n basis.

bási_4, básì = básin.

basíbas v [AN2] daybreak. Mibasíbas (namasíbas) nang kabuntágun,
Morning was breaking.

basilika n basilica.

basilin n vaseline. v [b6(1)] rub vaseline on.

básin {1} [so-and-so] might happen but I hope not, lest [so-and-so]
happen. Pagdala ug páyung, básig muulan, Take along an umbrella. It
might rain. Buháta dáyun, básin ug malímut ka, Do it the first thing.
You might forget to do it. {2} I hope [so-and-so]. Básin pag manwildu
sila run, I hope they will give us our salary today. Básin ug mahúlug
tà ka ánang káhuy, I hope you fall out of that tree. paN- v {1} [A2;
b6] try one’s luck. Pamasíni ug paningil, mubáyad tingáli siya, Try
your luck collecting from him. He might just pay up. {2} [A2; b8] pin
one’s hopes on s.o. Mamásin ku sa ákung kamanghúran nga maduktur, I am
pinning my hopes on my youngest child’s becoming a doctor. panghiN-
v [A2; b8] hope for s.t. to happen. Nanghimásin lang ku nga dílì ulúrun
ang mais, I am just hoping that my corn won’t get infested with worms.
pamasinbásin v [A; b6] try one’s luck with pretty slender chances of
success. Mamasinbásin lang ta. Piláhay ug swirtihun, Let’s try a long
shot. Who knows, we might be lucky.

basiyar v [A; c] transfer the contents of a container to another
container. Sáku ang basiyari sa bugas, Transfer the rice to a sack.

basiyu, basíyu n {1} empty container. {1a} empty cartridge shell.
{2} empty plate to eat off of. Panghatágig basíyu ang mga bisíta, Give
the visitors empty plates. v {1} [B2; a12] for containers to be empty.
{2} [AN; c] set the table. Pamasíyu na, Set the table now. Ang plátung
bag-u mauy ibasíyu, Set the new plates on the table. {3} for machinery
(gears, propellers, etc.) not to engage. Mubasíyu ang kadína sa
bisiklíta, The bicycle chain fails to engage. Ug mubasíyu ang pála sa
bangkà muusab ang inandaran, When the propeller of the boat gets out of
the water, the noise of the motor changes in quality.

baska_1 a for corn or rice to be cooked dry and loose. v [B6; a12b6]
for rice to be cooked dry and loose. Mubaska (mabaska) ang linung-ag
nga mais kun kúlang ug túbig, The corn grits will be dry if they lack
water.

baska_2 v [APB; c1] for things not liquid to fill s.t. to capacity, be
filled. Undángi pagtakus sa bugas kung mabaska (mubaska) na ang sáku,
Stop pouring the rice into the sack if it is already filled to
capacity. Nagbaska ning ákung tíyan, My stomach is full to capacity.
n chock-full, bulging due to fullness.

baskad = buskag.

baskag = buskag.

baskit n {1} basket. {2} = baskit bul. v [A1; a] {1} make into a
basket. {2} [A; c6] {a} intercept correspondence before it reaches its
destination. Gibaskit sa inahan ang suwat sa íyang anak, The mother
intercepted the letter for her daughter (and threw it away). {b} throw
away correspondence. Gibaskit lang intáwun ang ákung aplikasyun, My
application was just consigned to the circular file.

baskit bul n basketball game. v [AC; b6] play basketball. -an
n basketball court.†

baskug a strong and healthy, vigorous in movement. Baskug kaáyu siyang
manglihuklihuk kay batan-un pa, He is full of pep because he is still
young. v {1} [B2; a] be strong and healthy. Ang gátas makabaskug
(makapabaskug) sa láwas, Milk makes you strong. {2} [A; b7c1] do in a
brisk and vigorous manner. Baskúga (ibaskug, baskúgi) ang pagsíkad sa
bisiklíta, Pedal the bicycle more briskly. {3} — ang kabúhì v [B3(1)]
for the pit of the stomach to palpitate rapidly in pain due to kabúhì.
Mabaskug ákung kabúhì basta mukáun kug útang tinunuan, The pit of my
stomach palpitates fast if I eat vegetable stew cooked in coconut milk.

baskula n scales for weighing, where the fulcrum is not in the middle,
e.g., steelyard.

baslan see bálus.

basngag v [A; b5c] utter sharp words in anger or impatience. Mamasngag
siyag samuksamukun kun magtrabáhu, He snaps at people when he is
disturbed while working.

basnig n a haul seine net, round in shape, for catching fish which run
in schools and can be attracted by light. paN- v [A2; b] fish with the
basnig.

basta {1} provided that, if and only if. Ihátag ku ning risíbu basta
bayran ku nímu, I will give you the receipt provided that you pay me.
Bísag magabin-an ka, basta na lang madala ákung gitúgun, Even if it
takes half the night, so long as you do what you were told to do.
{2} [so-and-so] is the case, no matter what anyone says. Na, basta, náa
lagi, Well, that’s the way it is. There is, believe it or not. {3} with
commands reminding a person to keep his promise: don’t forget! Basta
ayaw giyud ug pakítà dinhig usab, Mark this, don’t ever show your face
here again. Basta ha? Muuban ku, Don’t forget now. I want to go along.
— nga, kay — to make the story short, suffice it to say that. Basta nga
(kay basta) pagpanganti níya, nangatágak ang buláwan, Anyway, when he
made a wish, gold pieces fell out. — kay = basta, 1, 2. bastabasta
a not very exact, accurate. v [c1] do s.t. in an inaccurate way. Ug
bastabastáhun (ibastabasta) nímu, alkansi ta, If you do it any old way,
we will lose money. dílì — not just ordinary. Dílì bastabasta tung
kasála, That was no ordinary wedding.

bastanti sufficient in amount for a certain need. ‘Ígù ning
lima?’—‘Bastanti.’ ‘Will these five do?’—‘Yes. They’re just enough.’
v [B126] be sufficient. Ang diklarasyun sa tistígus mauy nakabastanti
(nakapabastanti) sa ibidinsiya, The declaration of the witness was
enough to make the evidence sufficient.

bastar v [A2; c5] be enough, sufficient. Dílì makabastar (ikabastar)
nang kwartáha sa ákung kinahanglanun, That money is not enough for my
needs.

bastarda_1 v {1} [B; c1] set, be placed across s.t. diagonally.
Nagbastarda ang hubug sa dálan, The drunk was lying diagonally across
the road. Bastardáha (ibastarda) pagtáud sa rayna ang banda, Put the
band diagonally across the queen. {2} [B; c1] be crooked, not straight.
Nagbastarda ang linya sa mga kadíti, The cadets’ line is crooked.

*bastarda_2 íha di- illegitimate daughter.

bastardu_1 a for a course or direction to be off to the side and not
directly into. v [B56; a1] be off to one side. Nagbastardu ámung ági
tungud sa sulug, Our course was off to one side because of the current.

*bastardu_2 íhu di- illegitimate child.

bastid a {1} for a bulb to be burnt out. {2} be out in blackjack.
v {1} [A; a12] spurn a suitor (slang). Gibastid si Husi sa íyang
gipangulitawhan, The girl Jose is courting spurned him. {2} [B126] for
a bulb to burn out. {3} [B126] go over twenty-one in blackjack. Wà ka
ba mabastid? Didn’t you go over twenty-one?

bastidur_1 = birsu_1.

bastidur_2 n rounded frame for use in embroidery. v [A1; a] use, make
into an embroidery frame.

bastika n the hard core of thick abaca rope which remains when the rope
is worn out. Ayaw ilábay ang písì. Magámit pa ang bastika niíni, Don’t
throw the rope away. The hard core can still be used.

bastipul = bustipul.

bastiyan n {1} man’s name. {2} euphemism for bastus.

bastruk v [A; a1] strike s.o. with the butt of a gun. Bastrúkun ku siya
ning karbin, I’ll strike him with the butt of this carbine.

bastun n {1} walking stick, usually polished and sometimes with carved
designs. {2} package, bar, long like a cane. Usa ka bastung sabun, A
long bar of soap. Usa ka bastung sigarilyu, A carton of cigarettes. —
di San Husi = kilála. v {1} [A; a] use, make into a cane. {2} [A2; a]
hit with a cane. {3} [A; a12] make into long bar-shaped cakes or
packages. -íru n jailer. v [A1; a12] be a jailer.

bastus_1 a acting in a morally reprehensible way. Kabastus, mangílad ug
buta, How reprehensible! Cheating a blind man! Nagkalingaw ug isturyag
bastus, They were amusing themselves telling dirty stories. [B2; b6] to
be morally reprehensible. paka- v [A13; a12] act in a reprehensible
way, treat, regard s.o. as reprehensible. Nagpakabastus ka ánang ímung
pangitsúra, The way you’re dressed, you look reprehensible.

bastus_2 n clubs in the Spanish cards. v [B12; b4(1)] for a club to be
drawn. Hibastusan ang ákung karta, I drew a club, or My cards were
beaten by a club.

básu n {1} drinking glass. {2} the Virgin Mary (Biblical). Básung
ispirituhánun, The Spiritual vessel (of God’s grace). v [a12] make into
a drinking glass. binasúan n dance with glasses on the hands and head.
v [A3] dance the glass dance.

bas-ug v [A; c] heave a load onto the shoulders. Siya ra ang mibas-ug
sa dakung bukag, He heaved the large basket onto his shoulders by
himself.

basúka n bazooka. v [A; a] fire a bazooka at.

básul_1 v {1} [A2; bc3] blame s.o. for a fault. Mubásul aku nímu, I
will blame you. Ang draybir ang gibásul (gibasúlan) sa aksidinti, The
driver was blamed for the accident. Unsa may ikabásul nímu nákù nga
nagtúman man ku? What are you blaming me for, since I did what you
said? {2} [A13; b3] repent, regret having done s.t. Nagbásul kung walà
mupadáyun pagtuun, I regretted that I did not continue my studies. Wà
kuy kabasúlan sa ákung gibúhat, I did nothing I regret. pag-
n repentance.

básul_2 n k.o. hairy caterpillar with hair that produces an itchy
prick. v [a4b4] have básul on it, be pricked by a básul. Gibásul ang
bayábas, The guava tree has caterpillars on it. Hibasulan ku, I was
pricked by a básul.

básul_3 n whitlow, an inflammation at the edge of the finger- or
toenails. v [B126; a4b4] become, have a whitlow. Mabásul nà ug dílì
tambálan, That will turn into a whitlow if you don’t put medicine on
it. Dì ku makatayip kay gibásul (gibasúlan) ang ákung tudlù, I can’t
type because I have an inflammation on my finger.

básun = básin.

basúni n {1} thorn lodged in the flesh. {2} s.t. which causes a sharp
emotional pain. Basúni sa ákung dughan ang ímung pag-ayad, It was a
thorn in my heart that you spurned my love. v [B3(1)6] for a thorn to
be lodged in the flesh. Mubasúni ang tunuk sa tuyum sa ímung tiil, The
sea urchin’s thorn will lodge in your foot. Nabasúni sa láwas ang bála,
The bullet was lodged in the body.

basúra n {1} garbage. {2} one’s dirty secrets, kept from the public.
Nangahúkad ang ílang mga basúra, They washed their dirty linen in
public. v [a12] {1} make into a garbage container. {2} [A; c] throw
s.t. into the garbage. basurahan n receptacle for garbage.

basuríru n garbage collector. v [B156; a2b] be, make into a garbage
collector.

bas-uy n {1} simple stew made of pork flesh and innards, fried in
spices and thrown in boiling water, usually prepared at feasts to be
given to the helpers. {2} stew made from bananas or tubers boiled in
water and sweetened. v [A; a2] make bas-uy.

baswat v [A; a] lift or carry s.t. heavy, usually by holding the
bottom. Gibaswat sa nubyu ang nubya padúng sa naghulat nga awtu, The
bridegroom carried the bride to the waiting automobile.

basyaw v [B26] for a depressed area to gather water. Mubasyaw
(mabasyaw) ang nátad inig-ulan, The yard becomes a pool when it rains.
n standing water that gathers on a depressed area.

bat n baseball bat. v [A; a1] bat a ball.

bát_1 n butt of a gun. v [A1; a] make a butt.

bát_2 = bátir_1.

bát_3 = balat.

báta_1 v [A; a] divide into equal groups or portions for sale. Batáha
sa dúsi ka bugkus ang kamunggay, Divide the vegetables into twelve
equal bundles. n portion for sale. batabáta v [A; a12] estimate the
quantity of s.t. Batabatáha ang íyang pangidarun, Estimate how old she
is.

báta_2 n woman’s nightgown. — dibanyu bathrobe. v [A; a] wear, make
into a nightgown. Dì siya mubáta ug nipis, She won’t wear a flimsy
nightgown.

bátà n {1} child. {2} son or daughter. {3} mistress, concubine.
{4} bodyguard, protege of s.o. of high rank. Nag-abusar ábi bátà man sa
prisidinti, He’s abusive because he’s the president’s protege. — nga
lintì tough, ruffian. kanay — attaboy, that’s the way you should be.
a {1} young, in the early period of life or growth. Bákang bátà, Young
cow, heifer. Matul-id nímung hiwing káhuy kun bátà pa, You can
straighten a crooked tree while it’s young. Bátà siyang tan-áwun, She
looks very young. {2} a novice in the field. Bátà pa íyang pagkaduktur,
He’s still a novice at practicing medicine. {3} for the hour to be
early. Bátà pa ang kagabhíun, The night is still young. v {1} [B2; a]
get to be young-looking. Mibátà kang tan-áwun niánang sinináa, You look
young in that dress. {2} [A12; a12] make s.o. his mistress or protegee.
Nakabátà kug mistísa, I had a mistress with a Spanish blood. Matun
íyang gibátà, He made a goon into his protege. (→) v {1} [A; a12] rear
s.o. from childhood. Gibátà ku ni Tiyù pagkamatay ni Tátay, My uncle
took care of me after my father died. {2} [B1; c1] grow up in a certain
atmosphere. Nagbatà aku sa kakabus, I grew up in poverty. Bataa (ibatà)
siya sa kabuútan, Rear him in an atmosphere of honesty. paka- v [A13;
a12] act like, consider, treat like a child. Ayaw ku pakabatáa. Antígu
na bítaw ku, Don’t treat me like a baby. I know how already! batàbátà
n {1} right-hand man. {2} bodyguard. {3} protege. {4} errand boy,
right-hand man. v [A2; a1] request s.o. to run an errand for him.
Ibatàbátà ra kug palit ug bínu, Do me a favor and get some wine.
batàbatà n younger. v = binátà. batàbataun a {1} childish. {2} fond of
children. -in- a acting like a child. v [A; c1] act like a child. Ayawg
ibinátà (binatáa) ang ímung sinultihan, Don’t talk in a childish way.
Ug binatáan ku níya, mawálà ákung kasukù, When she acts like a little
child to me, my anger vanishes. binat-an n way s.o. takes care of
children. ka- n childhood friend. ka-an n children. batan-un a young,
youthful. Batan-un pa siyang naminyù, He got married while he was still
quite young. kabatan-un n {1} the days of one’s youth. Kun handúmun
nátù ang átung kabatan-un, When we reminisce about our youth. {2} state
of being young. -ut(→) n naughty child, usually used as a term of
address. Uy bataut ka, Hey, you naughty boy! a childish in behavior.
Dalága ka na piru bataut gihápun, You’re grown-up, but you act like a
child. v [B12] become childish.

Bataan n Bataan, a province in Southwestern Luzon. — dí n Bataan Day.

batad n sorghum, k.o. coarse grass used for forage: Andropogon sorghum.

batadbátad n the space between the anus and the genitalia.

bátak v {1} [AB12; a] split s.t. long or break s.t. open; be split,
broken open. Nagbátak siyag kawáyan, He is splitting bamboo. Ayaw
batáka ang nangkà kay hilaw pa, Don’t split the jackfruit open because
it is still unripe. Palakul ang ibátak sa káhuy, Split the wood
lengthwise with an axe. {2} [b(1)] pay off debts by splitting coconuts
or bamboo. (→) a cracked, broken. Batak ang dakung kaldíru, The large
kettle is cracked. -an(→) n board where s.t. is sliced, esp. in
circumcisions. l-an(→) n {1} clumps of bamboo from which bamboo stems
are usually taken. {2} debt to be paid off by splitting bamboo or
coconuts open.

batakan n {1} measuring stick, ruler. {2} principle by which judgment
of s.t. is gauged. Ang púlung sa Diyus mauy batakan sa kinabúhì, Our
lives are based on the word of God. — nga baláud n basic law, the
Constitution.

batakbatak n {1} k.o. frog that croaks very loudly. {2} loquacious
person.

batal n hardened part on an otherwise soft or medium-soft surface.
Dúnay batal sa abukádu, There was a hard spot in the avocado. Dúnay
batal sa kutsun, There was a hard lump in the mattress. Mga batal sa
samad, Clots of blood in the wound. v [B6] {1} be s.t. hard in an
otherwise soft area. Mibatal ang pistúla sa íyang bulsa, One could feel
a hard place in his pocket where his pistol was. {2} be, become brazen.
Mibatal (nabatal) na ning náwung kug síging pangútang, I have become
shameless from constantly borrowing money. — ang náwung a shameless,
hardened to insults. pa- v [A; b6(1)] stay put, refuse to move or budge
from a position. Nagpabatal lang siya sa íyang gilingkúran bísag
gipasíbug, He did not budge from his seat even when he was asked to
move a little. -an n flat floor of wood or stone raised above the
ground found at the back of the kitchen, used for storing water jars,
and washing. It usually has steps going down. v [A; c1] make, add a
batalan.

bataliyun = batalyun.

batalya n {1} battle. {1a} fight (humorous usage). {2} soldiers arrayed
for battle. {3} any large group of persons going s.w. or grouped
together. v [A13] have a fight, conflict, or battle. Kasayu ninyung
nagbatalya ganína, How early you were at it this morning! -dur(→) a one
who fights for principles, causes, etc. Batalyadur kaáyu nang bayhána,
That woman is a great fighter.

batalyun n battalion. v [a2] make into a battalion.

*batánas way — ill-bred, no manners (euphemism for way batásan).

batang_1 n = apáli.

batang_2, bátang_1 v [A; c] lie prostrate. Nagbatang na ang masakitun
ug pila ka búlan sa banig, The patient has been bed-ridden for several
months. Ibatang ang ímung láwas sa baybáyun, Lie down on the beach.
v {1} [A; c1] keep still without moving. Ipabatang (pabatanga) ímung
tuu, suntuk sa wala, Keep your right arm in place and hit with your
left. {2} stay in a place permanently. Pabatangun ku nímu dinhi hangtud
sa hangtud? Will you make me stay in this place forever? {3} stick
around s.w. without doing anything. Nagpabatang ka dihà nga daghan man
tag trabáhu? Why are you sitting around there doing nothing when there
is so much to do? pa-(←) n k.o. longline fishing, usually for sharks.

bátang_2 n log. tulud — see tulud.

bat-ang = balat-ang.

batangbátang n hook of an earring.

batanggas n things that originate in the province of Batangas.
{1} jackknife. {2} a breed of chicken popularly used in cockfighting
because of its remarkable strength and fierceness. v [A1; b6] stab
with, make into a jackknife.

batangginya n native of the province of Batangas (female). v [B126] be,
become a Batangueña.

bátas v [A; a] {1} cut down bamboo poles. {2} split bamboo poles.
{3} [b(1)] pay off a debt by splitting or cutting down bamboos. Ákù
lang batásan ning ákung útang nímu, I’ll pay off my debt to you by
cutting bamboos down.

batásan n {1} custom, usual way of acting. Batásan námung mangadyì únà
mangáun, It’s our custom to pray before eating. {2} one’s manners, way
of dealing with s.o. Maáyung batásan, Good way of dealing with people.
Way batásan, Having no manners. v [A23; c1] make doing s.t. a habit.
Nabatásan na sa mga kutsíru ang pagpílì sa ílang sakay, The rig drivers
have gotten into the habit of choosing their passengers. Ibatásan
(batasánun) ku sa ákung mga anak ang kamatinahúrun, I will train my
children to be respectful. paN- n proper behavior, the social
conventions. Pamatásan sa mga militar ang pagsaludar, Saluting is a
part of military courtesy. n set of customs.

bátaw = bulay.

batáyan n a bird trap made of bamboo with a bait or bird decoy. The
bird is caught when it alights on the trigger mechanism which snaps a
noose as the bird perches on it. v [a] make into a batáyan. paN- v [A2;
a] catch birds with a batáyan.†

batbat v [A; c1] relate or describe an event in detail. Batbáta
(ibatbat) sa hukmánan ang ímung nasaksihan, Explain to the court what
you saw.

bathálà n {1} God. Makagagáhum ang (si) Bathálà, God is all powerful.
{2} a god. Ang salapì nahímung bathálà álang kaníya, Money became his
god. v [c1] worship like a god. Ikaw ang ákung bathaláun (ibathálà)
hangtud sa hangtud, I will worship you like a god forever. paka-
v [A13; a12] act like a god, treat like a god. Ángay nga pakabathaláun
ang bána sa asáwa, It is only right that a wife treat her husband like
a god. Culu- n false gods, idols. v [A; a] worship false gods.

bathay v [B3(1)46N; b6] s.t. which appears prominently on part of one’s
body. Mibathay (namathay) ang ugat sa íyang agtang, Veins stood out
prominently on his forehead.

batì a {1} inferior in quality. Ayaw pagpalit ug sinínang batì, Don’t
buy clothes which are inferior in quality. {2} ugly (derisive). Batig
dagway, Ugly in face. v {1} [B; a2] for s.t. to get to be of poor
quality. Mabatì ang lamì sa tinúlang isdag kaugmaan, Fish stew develops
a bad flavor if you keep it till the following day. {2} [B; a1] get to
be ugly. Mauy nakabatì (nakapabatì) sa átung syudad ning mga
balungbálung, These shacks are what makes our city ugly.

bátì_1 v {1} [A23; a12] feel s.t., have symptoms of a sickness. Dì ka
mubátig kasakit íning dagúma, You won’t feel anything from this needle.
Gibátì ba nímu ang kahapdus? Did you feel the pain? {2a} [a4] feel s.t.
that affects the whole body. Gibátì siya ug katugnaw, She felt cold.
{2b} be sensitive to, emotionally disturbed by. Batíun kug kamíngaw, I
feel lonely. {3} [A123S; a2b2] hear. Dì siya makabatì kay bungul, He
cannot hear because he is deaf. Nabátì níya ang dahúnug sa litì, He
heard the rumbling sound of the thunder. Hingbatian kung ílang
panagsulti, I overheard their conversation. {4} [A23] sympathize with.
Mubátì sa ímung kalisud ang ímung kadúgù, Your kin will sympathize with
you in your hardship. a audible. Bátì kaáyu sa ámù ang ímung katáwa, We
can clearly hear your laughter from our house. (→) v [A13; a12] be in
labor. Nagbatì na siya. Dad-a sa matirniti, She’s in labor. Bring her
to the clinic. Hináut nga láki nang íyang gibatì, I hope it’s a boy she
is in labor with. paN- v {1} [a1] perceive s.t. through physical
sensation. Pamatía ang ákung pulsu, Feel my pulse. {2} [A2S; a] listen.
Wà ka ba mamátì sa ákung sulti? Weren’t you listening to my story?
Pamatíun ta ning plakáha, Let’s listen to this record. n {1} feeling,
state of the body. Láin ang ákung památì karun, I feel rather unwell
today. {2} opinion. Unsay památì mu báhin niánà? What is your opinion
about that? paniN- = paN-, 2. pabatìbátì v {1} [A; ac] say s.t. bad
within s.o.’s earshot. Pabatìbatíun ku níyag mga púlung nga pahiubus,
He says hurting words within my hearing. {2} say or ask for s.t. by
hints with indirection. Mupabatìbátì siya nímu kay nakagustu siya sa
ímung rilu, He will give you hints (lit. let you overhear) because he
likes your watch. -in- n a beloved person. Binátì nga asáwa, Beloved
wife. -l-an n {1} feelings, sensitivities. Gisamáran mung ákung
balatían, You hurt my feelings. {2} sickness. Balatían nga tísis, The
sickness of T.B. ma-in-un a sympathetic, showing one’s sufferings. pag-
n feelings toward s.o.†

bátì_2 n {1} hog cholera, a deadly disease affecting pigs. {2} by
extension, fowl cholera. v [a4] be infected with hog cholera.

batibáti v [A; a2] do s.t. severely and repeatedly to s.o. Akuy
nagbatibáti ug kuláta sa kawatan, I rained blows on the thief. Pastilan
níyang nakabatibáti ug kasábà, My! How mercilessly she scolded them!
Gibatibáti silag dril, They were drilled mercilessly.

batid a skilled, having specialized training. Batid kaáyu siya sa
makina, He’s an expert on engines. v [AB12; a2] get to be an expert or
a specialist. Akuy mibatid (mipabatid) níya sa pangisdà, I made him an
expert in fishing. paka- v [A13] make oneself expert in. Nagpakabatid
ku sa pyánu, I made myself expert in piano playing.

batíis n {1} leg, esp. the lower leg. {2} legs of pants. v [A; c1] make
a leg for toys, trousers, etc. Kining bulpin ang batiísun (ibatíis) sa
munyíka, Make these ballpoint pens into the legs for your doll. hiN-
v [A; b] wash s.o.’s legs. Himatiísi ang bátà, Wash the child’s legs.
panghiN- v [A1; b] wash one’s legs. Manghimatíis ku únà matúlug, I’ll
wash my legs before I go to bed. -un a having good strong legs.

batikan, batíkan a for a person to be famous. Ang batíkang aktur sa mga
lílas dramátik, The famous movie actor. v [B2; c1] become famous.

Batikánu n Vatican.

batikubra n k.o. snake.

batikúla n crupper, part of saddle or harness which goes around the
tail. v [A; c1] put on, make into a crupper.

batikúlun n {1} gizzard, the second stomach of a bird. {2} stomach
(humorous usage). Dì musakit ang batikúlun kug musugut kag sa dílì, It
won’t bother my stomach (lit. gizzard) whether you accept me or not.

batil_1 n full-bodied cargo boat without outriggers. It moves by means
of a sail or an engine.

batil_2 v [A; a] beat or whip eggs, cream, etc. Batila ang sikwáti úsà
iságul, Whip up the chocolate before mixing it in. Tubag batilan sa
tungug, sa úlu námù makahúngug, Toddy with mangrove bark mixed into it
goes to the head. n utensil for beating.

batimbátim = batinbátin_2.

bátin_1 n k.o. hide and seek played by teams. v [A12C2; b6] play bátin.
batinbátin_1 = bátin_1.

bátin_2 v [A; ac2] call a pig. Batína ang bábuy arun kalawgan, Call the
pigs so I can feed them. n the call or summons for a pig. -an, -an(→)
n s.t. beaten to call pigs.

batinbátin_2 n fruit of fruiting trees or vegetables in the early
stages of formation. Daghan nang mga batinbátin ang mangga, There are
lots of young fruits on the mango tree. v [A; b6] grow into young
fruits. Mibatinbátin na ang mga búnga sa tsíkus, The sapodilla fruits
have made their appearance now.

báting v [A1; a] go swimming. Magbáting ta sa Talísay, Let’s go bathing
in Talisay. — sut, siyut n bathing suit. san — v [A1; b6] take a
sunbath.

batingaw n k.o. mousetrap with a trigger mechanism that snaps.
v {1} [A; a] catch with a mousetrap. {2} [A2; c1] make into a
mousetrap.

batinggílan = batinggúlan. see batinggul.

batinggul a headstrong, stubborn, not listening to advice. -an a =
batinggul. v [B12; b6] get to be stubborn. ka-an n stubbornness.

bátir_1 n {1} baseball bat. {2} one at bat. {3} one’s turn in batting.
v [A; a1] strike with a bat.

bátir_2 n butter. v [A3; c] put butter on.

batiri, batiríya n battery. v [A; a] use a battery, put a battery in.

batirplay urkids n k.o. orchid.

batirul n tall pot made of clay or metal for cooking chocolate. v [A;
b6] cook in the chocolate pot. -in- v [A; c1] put one’s hands on the
hips like the handle of a chocolate pot. Nagbinatirul siyag bantay sa
nagtrabáhu, She stood with her hands on her hips while she watched the
workers. n medium-sized fish corral in the shape of a chocolate pot,
put in 1 to 3 fathoms of water.

batis n batiste, a fine, thin linen or muslin.

batiwtiw n tailor bird, the song of which is popularly said to be,
‘Dakug putus’, ‘Having a large penis’: Orthotomus atrogularis.

batiyà n a shallow and wide basin usually with a crumpled side for
laundry. v [a1] make this sort of wash basin.

batsi_1 n potholes in streets. v [B2; c1] for roads to have potholes,
make potholes. Mubatsi (mabatsi) ang kalsádag síging lunúpan, A road
that gets flooded will get full of potholes. batsihun a full of
potholes.

batsi_2 (slang, from sibat) v {1} [A2; c] get out of s.t., run away.
Mibatsi si Títù sa íyang buluhatun, Tito bugged out of the chores.
Nakabatsi ang mamumúnù sa prisuhan, The prisoner escaped from the jail.
Batsíhan pa nà nímung ímung asáwa, If you just run away from your wife.
Ákung ibatsi ang ákung trátu, I will run away with my girl friend.
{2} [A; ac1] steal, get s.t. by foul or illegal means. Si Pilu ang
mubatsi sa ilimnun, Pilo will steal the drinks.

batsíhì n k.o. edible marine nerite snails.

batsilyir n {1} B.A. degree. {2} one who holds the B.A.

batu_1 n {1} rock, stone, pebble. {2} precious stone, kidney stone.
{3} s.t. that has hardened. Batu na ang kukakúla, The coca-cola has
frozen solid now. {4} piece used in a game of checkers, chess, sungkà,
or any game that uses pieces. {5} flint in a lighter. {6} -ng búhì
n k.o. stone which is heavy, compact, hard, whitish, and which pops
when heated. v {1} [B; a1P] harden into stone. Ayaw paulani ang simintu
kay mubatu nà, Don’t expose the cement to the rain because it will
harden. Batuhun pagpagáhì ang balikutsa, Let the coconut candy harden
like stone. {2} [AP; a2P] {a} stand stock-still like a stone. Mubatu
(mupabatu) man lang ug sugúun, He just stands there when he’s told to
do s.t. {b} harden oneself to s.t. Nabatu na ang nawung niánang
bayhána, That woman has become hardened to insults. {3} [A; c] put a
stone in jewelry. Úpal ang ibatu sa singsing, Use opal for a stone in
your ring. {4} [A; b] put as an anchor or sinker. Batuhi ug dakù, Use a
big stone for sinker. {5} [b6(1)] put a flint in a lighter. — baláni
n magnet, lodestone. v [B12; a1] become a magnet, impart magnetic force
to s.t. batubalaníhun a magnetizing. Batubalaníhung pahiyum, A magnetic
smile. (←) v {1} [A; b5] to throw stones at. Batúun (batúan) nátù ang
irung búang, Let’s stone the mad dog. {2} [A; a] line, pave s.t. with
stones. Batúhi ang karsáda, Pave the road with stones. n the action of
stoning. paN- n {1} anchor, sinker. {2} anchor man in a relay. Si Grig
ang ílang pamatu (pangbatu) sa lumbà, Greg is their anchor man in the
relay. {3} a person who can be relied upon in emergencies, the best bet
in a contest. {4} spending money. Náa bay pamatu nímu? Do you have any
money to spend? v [c1] {1} use or make as anchor or sinker. {2} be
anchor man, best bet. {3} use for spending money. batubátu
n {1} anchor. {2} sinker on a fishing line. {3} stone used for
artificial jewelry. v [A; c1] {1} put, use as a sinker. Batubatúhan ang
iring nga lumsan, Put a sinker on the cat you are going to drown.
{2} pelt with stones. {3} put in a stone in fancy jewelry. -in- n k.o.
úbi that is firm and round or oval-shaped. batuun a {1} full of rocks,
stones. {2} pimply-faced. {3} fruits of seeds or hardened parts.†

batu_2 v [A; a2] borrow money, buy s.t., usually basic commodities, on
credit. Mubatu kug duha ka gantang bugas, I’ll buy two gantas of rice
on credit. Magbatu kug kinyintus kang Dun Pakítu kay magbáy ku, I’ll
borrow five hundred pesos from Don Paquito to build my house.

batúan n good-sized basket of any shape, but shallow, usually loosely
woven, with no cover, used as a container for farm produce. v [A12; a1]
make or use a batúan.

batubára n boom, a spar extending along the bottom of the sail attached
to the mast. v [A; ac1] make into, attach a boom of this sort.

batud n k.o. fish.

bátud n grub of a coconut beetle (bakukang). v [a4] {1} be infested
with bátud. {2} be crazy. Gibátud ka dihà? Are you crazy?

bátug_1 v [A2S; b6] {1} perch on s.t., alight to perch. Mibátug ang
tulábung sa bukubuku sa kábaw, The heron landed on the carabao’s back.
Ang panan-aw ni Husi didtu magbatug sa gwápang babáyi, Joseph let his
gaze rest on the beautiful woman. Tabúning pagkáun arun dì batúgan sa
lángaw, Cover the food or the flies will get on it. {2} for children to
go home at supper time. Uy! Památug na mu! Urasiyun na, Hey! You kids
go home now. It’s time for prayers.

bátug_2 = bat-ug.

bat-ug n k.o. barracuda.

bátuk_1 against, versus. Ang áway ni Balug bátuk Di Liyun, The fight of
Balug versus De Leon. Tambal bátuk sa sip-un, A medicine against colds.
v {1} [A23C12; b(1)] oppose. Dì aku mubátuk sa ákung mga labaw, I will
not oppose my superiors. Ayaw batúki ang pagbuut sa ímung ginikánan,
Don’t oppose the wishes of your parents. {2} [A; b] respond to a hurt
by being cold or silent to the perpetrator. Dílì maáyung magbátuk sa
ginikánan kun kasab-an, It’s no good to feel resentment against your
parents if they scold you. ma-in-un a resentful, tending to respond to
slights by coldness.

bátuk_2 n a small area different in color or texture from the
background. Ang irù dúnay itum nga bátuk sa masigkakílid, The dog has a
black spot on either side. v [A; a] dye s.t.

bátuk_3 = balalátuk.

batul_1 a {1} for smooth or soft surfaces to have hard spots. {2} hard,
brazen in character. v {1} [B4] get to have rough spots. Nagkabátul man
ning manggáha, This mango is full of hard spots. {2} [B3N] get to be
hard or brazen in character. Mibátul ang íyang nawung, She got to be
shameless. Nagkabatul na ang kasingkásing níya, Her heart is becoming
hardened.

batul_2 n k.o. seaweed.

bátul_1 n {1} = bátud. {2} = básul_2. {3} slow-moving or slow-witted
person. v = bátud, v.

bátul_2 v [a4] {1} for everything to go wrong at once. Gibátul ning
ákung pagkabutang. Nabuthan ku ug nahutdan pug gasulína, Everything has
been going haywire. I got a flat and ran out of gasoline. {2} be crazy.
Gibátul ka nga sagúlan nímug tubà ang kapi? Have you gone crazy mixing
palm toddy into the coffee?

bat-ul n hard lumps found in fleshy fruits. v [a4] for fruits to get
lumps in them. Gibat-ul ang ságing, The bananas have lumps in them. ka-
v [A13] be full of lumps. Nagkabat-ul ang mangga, The mangoes are full
of lumps.

batulang = batúan.

batun_1 v {1} [A1; b(1)] have or possess s.t. Nagbatun siya ug dakung
hibalu, He is deeply learned. Ayaw batuni ang pagdumut, Do not nurse
your hatred. {2} [A; b(1)] have a servant. Nakabatun kamig kiriwan
kaáyu, We had a thieving servant. {3} [A; b(1)] take care of s.t.
Kinsay mibatun sa bátà pagkapíang niíni? Who was looking after the
child when he broke his leg? Batuni kinig maáyu kay handumánan ni nátù,
Take good care of this because it is a souvenir. {4} [AN; b(1)] raise
and take care of s.o. else’s domesticated animal for a consideration,
usually for half the offspring. Siyay namatun sa ákung anay, He raised
my sow for half the litter. -in-an n servant. v [B1256] become a
servant. binatnan n {1} animal raised for s.o. {2} foster child.

batun_2 n baton. v [A; b] {1} conduct an orchestra, choir, etc.
Inig-áwit ninyu, ákung batunan, When you sing, I’ll conduct. {2} [A; a]
make into a baton.

batung n net used for trapping animals by placing it across the path or
dropping it over the animal. (←), batung v {1} [A1; ab2] trap animals
with a net. Batunga ninyu ang bakatin, Catch the wild pig in a trap.
{2} [A; ab2] make into a net trap.

bátung = balátung.

batúnis = butúnis.

bátus n {1} claquer, a person or group of persons hired to clap or
root. Mga bátus kadtung namakpak níya, Those who applauded for him were
paid claquers. {2} follower, person who defends s.o. or is on his side.
Wà dihà ang tanang bátus sa bágis, Not all the ruffian’s followers were
there. {3} underlings, protege of a politician. Bátus siya sa mayur, He
is one of the mayor’s boys. v {1} [B56; a12] be, make into claquer,
defender, protege of a politician.

bat-us n stomach discomfort due to overeating. v [A3P] {1} cause
stomach discomfort. {2} [a4] suffer from over-satiation. Kun gibat-us
ka ligdan ug gantang, If you feel discomfort from overeating, roll a
quart jar over your stomach.

batúta n {1} baton. {2} policeman’s billy. {3} penis (slang). v {1} [A;
b] conduct an orchestra. {2} [a12] make into, strike with a nightstick
or baton.

batuwang n = batúan.

batuytuy n k.o. conch.

batwan n k.o. small tree of the secondary forest.

batwánun = balatwánun.

batyà = batiyà.

batyag v {1} [A; b8] notice, be aware of s.t. Wà ku makabatyag sa ulan
kay nahinánuk aku, I didn’t notice the rain because I was sound asleep.
Nabatyagan ku siya nga milabay dinhi, I noticed him passing by here.
{2} [A3P] make s.o. aware. Ang paghut sa irù nakabatyag (nakapabatyag)
kanákù nga dinhay misulud, The dog’s barking made me aware that s.o.
had come in. {3} [A2N; a12Nb2] have physical sensations. Mubatyag ka
gánì sa kutukutu mu, risulta na nà sa ínum, If you feel pain in the pit
of your stomach, it’s the result of drinking. Pamatyágun (batyágun)
nímu ang kasakit unyà, You will feel the pain later. n feeling,
sensation. Pamatyag sa kaluud, A sensation of vomiting.

bau n land or fresh-water turtle. paN- v [A2; b6] catch turtles. Mamau
ta sa humayan, Let’s catch turtles in the rice fields. baúhay, baúay
Mr. Turtle (in stories).

baubau n k.o. bug infesting squash, bright red in color, about a
centimeter long.

báud = baláud.

baug_1 v [A; a1] spank, whip to discipline. Gibaug sa kutsíru ang
kabáyù, The rig driver beat the horse.

baug_2 a {1} for eggs to be addled or old. {2} for a house to be no
good. Baug nga balay, A ramshackle house. {3} sterile, incapable of
producing offspring. v {1} [B; b6] for eggs to get old and addled.
Ayawg ug-úga ang itlug. Mabaug unyà, Don’t shake the eggs. They’ll get
addled. {2} [B16; b4] be, become incapable of producing offspring.
(←)_1 v {1} [B126] for an infection to putrify. Nabáug ang íyang hubag,
His boil putrified. {2} = búug.

báug_2 v [B6; a4] be constipated. Mabáug (mubáug) ang bátà ug
hidaghanag painum ug sikwáti, A child will get constipated if it drinks
too much chocolate. Gibáug aku, I’m constipated.

baul_1 n cultivated dry field. Gidáru nákù ang baul, I plowed the
field. v [A1; a2] engage in farming, cultivate a field. Baulun nákù ang
pátag, I’ll cultivate the plain. binal-an, -in-an n {1} parcel of land
cultivated for farming. Kakugnan na karun ang binal-an (binaulan) níya
kanhi, Thick cogon grass is growing in what used to be his farmland.
{2} products from one’s farm. {3} way of farming. kabal-anan
n farmlands. mag-r-(←) n farmer. paN-, paniN- n farming. Ang pamaul
(panimaul) mauy kasagárang pangítà dinhi, Most of the people here live
by farming.

baul_2 n trunk. — mundu n trunk with an arched top.

baul_3, bául a {1} out of shape, poorly proportioned. Bául ug nawung,
Having an ill-proportioned face. {2} not resonant in sound. Bául nang
sistáhag tíngug, That guitar has a poor sound. v [B1; b6] become
ill-proportioned or of poor resonance. Nabául ang lamísang íyang
gihímù, dakug tiil, The table he made turned out ugly. It had such big
legs. see also pamául.

baulu = bahuulu.

báung n drinking cup made of a half of a coconut shell. v [a12] make a
báung.

baungun, baúngun = buluungun.

báus n severe inflammation of the lymph nodes in the groin. v [b6] have
a severe groin inflammation of this sort.

baut v [A; a12] keep s.o. beaten in a game without allowing him a
chance to win back. Bautun tikaw sa tsís arun mutagam ka, I won’t let
you win a single chess game so you’ll learn your lesson.

báut_1 v [B123] get satisfaction, convinced. Walà ku mubáut sa íyang
pangatarúngan, I was unconvinced by his reasoning. Dílì ku mabáut
hangtud makabunal ku níya, I will not be satisfied until I can give him
a beating.

báut_2 if only [such-and-such] a thing had happened. Báut mibálik pa,
dílà ra untay way labud, If only he had come back. He would have gotten
it. (Lit. The only thing that would have escaped my pummeling would
have been his tongue.) Báut pag napalit nákù tung yutáa, dátù na tà ku,
If only I had bought that land, I would be rich now.

báut_3 = gipakaingun (dialectal). see ingun_1.

baúu = bau.

báwang n {1} k.o. red onion, the size of a marble used medicinally and
as a spice. {2} garlic bulb. {3} triangular-shaped firecracker, of
greater intensity than the ordinary firecracker.

báwas a [b7c] deduct s.t. from s.t. Bawási nang túbig sa táru, Remove
some of the water in the can.

bawbaw_1 = balawbaw, 2. v [c1] place the gaff higher on a fighting cock
so as to give the opponent an advantage. — sa tuu fighting with a
special gaff on the right to give the opponent an advantage.

bawbaw_2 = balbal.

bawbu n k.o. tree.

bawhag a {1} doing things unthinkingly. Bawhága níyang milabang sa
dálan way lingìlíngì, How careless of her to cross the street without
looking to the right or left. {2} unthinking in speech. Bawhága nímu,
magpalumaluma ka mag sáad, You talk too much. You make promises you
can’t possibly fulfill. Bawhága nímu. Nabungat tu nímu nga wà tà tu
siya kahibalu, How careless of you. You let it slip out when he
wouldn’t have even known about it. v [B] be unthinking in what one
does.

bawhinya n orchid trees, small or ornamental trees of the genus
bauhinia, bearing flowers resembling orchids.

báwì v [A; a2] {1} take back s.t. lent or given. Ug dì ka mubáwì sa
ímung gisulti, If you don’t take back what you said. Dì na mabáwì kay
binayran, You can’t get it back because it’s been paid for. Gibawían
ang saup sa íyang uma, The tenant had his land repossessed on him.
{2} save, deliver (Biblical). Bawíun mu kami sa mga panulay, Deliver us
from evil. (→) v {1} [A2; a12] recoup one’s losses, recover one’s
investment. {2} [A; ac] recompense, make up for s.t. Way makabawì sa
ímung salà kanákù, Nothing can make up for the wrong you have done me.
Bawia ang ímung kalaksut pinaági sa kabuútan, Compensate for your
ugliness by being nice. Kining kwarta ibawì sa ímung giantus, This
money is to compensate for your sufferings. {3} [AB236; c1] bring s.t.
back onto course by pulling it in the opposite direction; get back on
course. Aku ang mibawì sa manubíla, I turned the steering wheel to the
opposite direction to get the car on course. Ug dílì mubawì ang barútu,
If the boat doesn’t right itself. Inigkíling sa sakayan ibawì (bawia)
sa tuu, When the boat tilts, pull it to the right.

báwis n k.o. fish.

bawkag = balúkag.

bawnsir n bouncer. v [B136; a1] be, make into a bouncer.

bawnus = balúnus.

bawtismu n baptism. v [A; b6] baptize s.o.

bawù = balù_2, 3.

baw-u n dish made of stewed lean meat cooked dry in a pan over fire and
constantly stirred so that it comes out like pieces of string in a
bunch. v [A; a] make baw-u.

bawud = balud.

bawug = balug. bawugbáwug n piece of pliant bamboo used as lever for a
bucket used to draw water. v [A; b6] make into a bamboo lever of this
sort, put such a lever on a well.

bawugbug = balugbug.

báwuk = báluk.

bawukbáwuk = báluk.

báwun = bálun.

bawunas = balúnas.

báwund v [A; a1] bind s.t. into a book.

bawungbáwung = balungbálung.

bawungkut n k.o. brown turban shell, the delphinula snail.

bawúnù n k.o. mango tree: Mangifera caesia.

bawúnus = balúnus.

báwut a evenly matched. v [C2] be evenly matched. Báwut kaáyu ang duha
ka intranti sa banggà, The two contestants were very evenly matched.
walay — unevenly matched. Walay báwut ug kanà ipárang sa ákù, They’re
poorly matched if you set that one off against mine.

bay n see abay.

báy = balay.

bayà_1 {1} particle giving an admonitary tone. {a} with an imperative:
make sure that, better do. Hinumdumi bayà, You’d better remember.
Sigurúa bayà ha, Make sure you do it! {b} with a statement: watch out.
Mamáak bayà nà, Watch out! He bites. Ikaw bayà ang nanghilabut, ayaw
pamasángil, You touched it. Don’t try to make excuses. {c} = bayáay.
{2} particle with a statement or exclamation: [so-and-so] is different
than it should be. Tiawtíaw ka bayà, You’re joking, though you
shouldn’t be. Bayà, nagbinátà ka dihà, Hmm, you’re acting like a child.
Kabuútan bayà nímu, How good of you, but you shouldn’t have. Bayang
kusúga níyang midágan, mu rag unsáun siya, God! How he ran away. As if
I were going to do s.t. to him. ‘Panginum mu áning kúk, u.’—‘Busug pa
bayà ku, bay,’ ‘Here, drink this coke.’—‘No thanks, I’m still full.’
{3} why should that be the case when ... Wà nay bugas? Nagpalit bayà
aku gahápun, There’s no rice? Why? I just bought some yesterday.
{4} particle conceding that s.t. is the case which one didn’t think to
be so. Nákug dì ka kamaung mulútù. Lamì bayà, I thought you didn’t know
how to cook. But I must say it’s good. Pagkadakù bayà sa Manílà, I did
not know Manila was this big. -ay(←) particle with a condition: a
feared consequence will happen if the condition happens (had happened,
were to happen). Bayáay (bayà) na man ug nasakpan pa ta. Prísu giyud,
God! If we had been caught. It would have meant jail.

bayà_2 v [A; c6] leave s.t. exposed. Mga babáying bigáun nga mubayà sa
ílang láwas sa kadaghánan, Lewd women who expose their bodies in
public. Kinsa may nagbayà íning asúkar sa lamísa? Who left the sugar
uncovered on the table? pa- v [B46; b4(1)] pay s.t. no mind. Mupabayà
gánì ka sa ímung nigusyu, maalkansi ka giyud, If you neglect your
business, you will surely lose. Pabay-i na lang ang ílang insultu,
Don’t pay their insults any mind.

bayábas n guava: Psidium guajava. paN- v {1} [A2; bc] gather guava
fruit. Adtu ta sa sapà mamayábas, Let’s gather guavas near the river.
{2} [A23C12; c] have sexual intercourse (humorous). Ipamayábas ku ning
ákung trátu arun dì makabuwag nákù, I’ll have sexual intercourse with
my girl so she won’t break off with me. {3} [A23] monkey around instead
of doing s.t. seriously. Mamayábas ning batáa ug sugúun, This child
plays around when he is told to do s.t. -an n place where guava trees
abound. -in- pidgin, broken language. v [A; c1] speak or write a
language this way.

báyad v {1} [A2S3S; b1] pay for s.t. Nagbayad mig kinyintus káda búlan,
We paid five hundred a month. Bayran ku lang ug písus ang gantang, I’ll
just pay one peso for a ganta. Bayran ku ra siya, I’ll pay him. Pilay
ibáyad? How much shall we pay? {2} [A13S; b1] pay a moral debt.
Magbáyad ka sa ímung pag-insultu nákù, You’ll pay for your insults to
me. n {1} fee, charge. Way báyad ang gamayng bátà, There is no charge
for small children. {2} amount which serves as payment. Pilay báyad sa
bibingka? How much do we owe for the rice cakes? Báyad sa ímung kaáyu,
In return for your goodness. balayranan, balayran, balaydan, balaydanan
n things to be paid for. ig-l/r-(→) n amount to be paid. kabayáran
n recompense. Ang kwartang nasunud níya kabayáran sa íyang paghágù, The
money she inherited was a recompense for her trouble. {2} retribution,
punishment. paniN- n just desert. Ang ímung pagkabilanggù panimáyad sa
ímung kamaldítu, You got your just deserts when you went to jail. — sa
útang a man’s daughter (humorous usage—from the notion that a man pays
for his sins against women by what happens to his daughter: if he
commits a sin against a woman, the same thing will happen to his
daughter as punishment to him). balayrunun (balaydunun, bayrunun)
n amount to be paid off. Líbu pang balayrunun ku sa bangku, I still
have one thousand pesos to pay off to the bank.

bay-ad v [B3(1); c1] lie on the back. Dì kung katúg ug magbay-ad.
Tikungkung giyud, I can’t sleep on my back. I have to curl up. Ayaw
bay-ára (ibay-ad) ang halígi sa agiánan, Don’t put the post down in the
way.

bayamban = balanban_1, 2.

bayanan = balayanan. see balay.

bayang_1 v [AB; bc] go, put s.t. where it is exposed to view or to the
elements. Mibayang na siya sa íyang baráha, He has already spread his
cards open for everyone to see. Nagbayang sa ulan ang mga bátà, The
children were exposed to the rain. Gibayang sa lamísa ang inasal, The
roasted pig was placed on the table where everyone could see it.
Mabayang sa katilingban ang pulitiku, A politician’s life is exposed to
public view. Pagtárug lingkud. Ayaw pagpabayang, Sit properly. Don’t
expose yourself to public view. (←)_1 v [A; b5] set food on the table.
Gibayángan (gibáyang) na ang lamísa, The table has been set.

bayang_2 n k.o. marine fish, wide as it is tall.

báyang_2 n the flag-raising ceremony (so called from the Tagalog words
of the Philippine national anthem: Báyang Magíliw ‘Beloved Country’.)
v [A13] hold the flag-raising ceremony.

bay-ang n k.o. tree.

bayang-ang v [A; b6c1] be displayed, exposed to others’ eyes. Dílì
maáyung tan-áwun ang dalága ug mubayang-ang lang paglingkud, dílì
manapu, It’s unbecoming for a young lady to sit down carelessly without
covering her front. Bayang-ánga (ibayang-ang) ang ímung tinda, Lay out
all the items for sale.

bayangbáyang n k.o. small round-shaped marine fish.

bayáni n hero. v [B16; b6] be a hero. bayaníhun a heroic.

bay-ansil n small-scale business of buying and reselling, usually
elsewhere, with a profit. v [A] engage in this business.

báyas n {1} bias, a cut diagonal to the cloth. {2} piece of cloth cut
diagonally about 1½″ wide to be used as facing. — tip a prepared cloth
tape for facing necklines, armholes, or hems. v [A; a] cut cloth
diagonally, cut a bias tape. Bayása ang kwilyu sa ákung sinínà, Cut the
collar of my dress diagonally.

bayat a {1} worn-out, dilapidated, esp. clothes. {2} poor in quality.
{3} slovenly in dress. Bayat ang ákung pamisti run kay magtrabáhu man
ku sa uma, I’m slovenly dressed because I am going to work in the
field. {4} mentally slow, stupid. Kabayat. Dúgay kaáyu nga nakat-un,
How dull he is. It took him forever to catch on. {5} sluggish,
slow-moving. {6} poor in doing things. Bayat kaáyu nang musiyat, He is
a poor shot. (←) v [B2; b6] {1} for things to get worn out and
dilapidated. Nabáyat (mibáyat) na lang ning ákung sapátus sa
pagkanúnayng gináwì, My shoes have become ragged and worn-out from
constant use. Nagkabayat na ang ílang payag, Their shack is gradually
falling into ruin. {2} be poor in quality. Mabayat (mubayat) giyud nang
ímung trabáhug ímung kiátan, Your work will turn out shoddy if you go
about it carelessly. {3} be slovenly. {4} get to be dull, stupid.
{5} get to be sluggish, slow-moving. {6} get to be unskilled in doing
things. kabayatbayat v [A13] be hard put to do s.t. because of the
large number of things that have to be done at once. Nagkabayatbayat
mig panghípus sa wà pa muabut ang mga bisíta, We were in a dither
trying to clean up before the visitors arrived.

bayaw n brother-, sister-in-law. v {1} [A12] get for a brother- or
sister-in-law. {2} [c] be brothers- and sisters-in-law. Dì ku gustung
makigbáyaw níya kay palahúbug siya, I don’t want to have him as a
brother-in-law because he’s a drunkard. {3} [a12] make s.o. a brother-
or sister-in-law.

báyaw v [APB236; c1] raise, rise into the air. Ang hánging kusug mauy
nagbáyaw (nagpabáyaw) sa papil, The strong wind blew the papers into
the air. Dì makabáyaw dáyun ning tabanúga, This kite won’t soar up
right away. Ang pagbáyaw ni Kristu, The ascension of Christ. Ibáyaw
(bayáwa) ang túung kamut sa baksir, Raise the boxer’s right hand.
n elevation of the host in the mass.

bayáyat a {1} slovenly in dress or appearance. {2} dilapidated,
worn-out. Balay nga bayáyat, A dilapidated house. v [B; b6] {1} get
slovenly in dress. Nagkabayáyat na karun ang íyang pamisti nga naminyù
na siya, She has become slovenly in her manner of dressing now that
she’s married. {2} get worn-out or dilapidated. Mubayáyat (mabayáyat)
ang sapátus ug sigíhag sul-ub, The shoes will get all worn-out if you
keep wearing them.

baybay_1 n beach. paN- v [A2; b6] {1} go along the beach. Namaybay ug
lawig ang bapur, The boat sailed close to the shore. {2} = pamalaybay.
see balaybay. -un = baybay. kabaybayúnan n seashores.

baybay_2 = bábay.

bayhun n {1} carriage, bearing of a person. Gikaibgan kung ambúngan
níyang bayhun, I admire his handsome posture. {2} gait in walking.
{3} outline, appearance of s.t. Makítà gíkan sa lungsud ang bayhun sa
payag ibábaw sa bungtud, The outline of the shack on the top of the
hill is visible from the town. {4} having the form of (Biblical usage).
Ang láwas ug dugù ni Kristu sa bayhun sa pán ug bínu, The flesh and
blood of Christ in the form of bread and wine. v [AN; c6] swing the
arms in walking. Ibayhun ímung paglakaw, Walk swinging your arms. paN-
n {1} way of walking. Ilhan ta ka bisag layù sa ímu lang pamayhun, I
know you from afar by your carriage. {2} appearance.

bayi n {1} female animal or plant. {2} descriptive term given to
plants, where the same name is given to different species or varieties.
The smoother and usually larger variety or species is described as bayi
whereas the thornier or smaller variety is called laki ‘male’. Kudyapà
nga bayi, The smooth kudyapà (Amaranthus viridis) as opposed to the
kudyapà nga laki, the armed kudyapà (Amaranthus spinosus). (←) human
female. Báyi ákung anak, My baby is a girl. bayhána particular,
exclamatory woman. Patyun ta ka bayhána (babayhána) ka, I’ll kill you,
you woman. Kinsang bayhána (babayhána)? Which woman? v [B1256; c1] turn
out to be a girl. Ug mabáyi, átù siyang nganlag Ána, If she turns out
to be a girl, we’ll call her Anna. babáyi n {1} woman. {2} = báyi.
babayhána = bayhána. -ng búhat a woman of proper deportment. Dílì
muláag ang babáying búhat, A lady doesn’t roam about. {3} mistress.
Gipusil sa asáwa ang babáyi sa íyang bána, The wife shot her husband’s
mistress. v {1} = báyi, v. {2} [A12; a12] have, make into a mistress.
paba-(←) v [A1] fool around with women. pama- v [A2] take a mistress.
Gastúsu kining mamabáyi ta, It’s expensive to keep a mistress. hima-,
hiN- a fond of women. panghima- v [A13] chase after women. binabáyi,
binabayi a {1} effeminate. Binabáyi siyag panlíhuk, He is effeminate in
his motions. {2} — nga ulan lingering drizzle. {3} cock with hen-like
feathers. {4} adapted for a woman’s use. Bisiklítang binabayi, A
woman’s bicycle. v [A; c1] do s.t. like a woman. Nagkabayù ug binabáyi,
Riding sidesaddle. Binabayha (ibinabáyi) ímung tingug, Make your voice
sound like a woman’s. makiba-(←) = hima-, a. babayin-un a = binabáyi,
1, 2. bayin-an, babayin-an, tagbayin-an, tagbabayin-an, tagbayi
n people on a bride’s side in a marriage. kababayin-an n women as a
group. Dì makabutar ang kababayin-an, The women cannot vote. baláyi
n parents of one’s children-in-law. v [C] be in the baláyi relation,
parents of children that married each other. binaláyi
n daughter-in-law. v [A12; a12] make, get as daughter-in-law. pamaláyi
v [A2; b] ask a girl’s hand from her parents. Kinsa may dakung táwu sa
ímung pamaláyi? When you asked for her hand in marriage, who was the
spokesman? Gipamay-an na siya, S.o. has already asked for her hand in
marriage. babayíru = himabáyi.†

bayibáyi_1 n bayingbaying.

bayibáyi_2 n shin. v [a12] hit in the shins. Nahitakingking siya kay
ákung gibayibáyi pagpátid, He hopped in pain when I kicked him in the
shins.

bayin v [A; a] bind a book.

bayingbaying n praying mantis.

bayinti number twenty. v see tris for conjugation. bayintihun
n {1} twenty-centavo coin, twenty-peso bill. dya- n twenty-peso bill. —
únu, dus, trís, etc. n twenty-one, two, three, etc. bayinti dus
n twenty-two rifle. bayntisingkuhun n twenty-five cent coin. bayinti
utsu a lacking in intelligence (like the month of February which has
fewer days than other months. People who are born in February are
thought to have a tendency to act foolishly.)

baykarb n sodium bicarbonate.

baykawun, baykawunt n the Viscount aircraft. v [A13P; b6] take a
Viscount.

baylákag = balyákag.

baylan n a person supposed to have close and friendly relationships
with supernatural beings, evil or good, such that he can deal with them
on behalf of other people: he can ask them to bring illness or cure
illnesses of any sort, natural or supernatural in cause. He officiates
at offerings (diwáta) and at folk weddings and other ceremonies in
relation to supernatural beings. v [B156] be, become a baylan.

bayli n dance, ball. v {1} [AC; b1c3] do ballroom dancing. Gibaylíhan
(gikabayli) nákù si Rús, I danced with Rose. Dúm kaáyu ang ílang
gibaylíhan, The place where they are dancing is very dim. Kining
sunatáha maáyung baylíhan, This song is a good one to dance to.
{2} [A1; a12] hold a dance. baylíhan, baylihánan n dance hall, floor.
-rína n {1} woman fond of, skilled in dancing. {2} taxi dancer.
{3} ballerina. v [B16; a12] become skilled in dancing, a ballerina or a
taxi dancer.

baylu v {1} [C; ac1] exchange. Magbaylu tag lápis, Let’s exchange
pencils. Baylúi ug manuk ang ákung mais, Barter my corn for a chicken.
Ayaw ibaylu ang ímung sapátus sa íyang pantalun, Don’t swap your shoes
for his pants. {2} [AN; a2] take s.t. with the understanding that one
will give it or its equivalent back. Bayluun kung ímung dus písus, I
will borrow your two pesos. {3} [A; b6(1)] buy things for immediate
household use. Pagbaylu ngadtug sigarilyu, Go buy some cigarettes.
n s.t. one borrowed from s.o. else. Ang baylu mung kwarta nákù wà nímu
ilisdi, You did not repay the money you borrowed from me. bayluay,
baylúay v [C] exchange with one another.

bayna n the sheath of a gaff. v [A; c] {1} sheath the gaff. {2} [a12]
make into a sheath.

baytamins n vitamins.

bayu, báyu_1 v {1} [A; ab6] beat to a pulp or powder. {2} [A; a1b2]
rain blows on s.o. Bayuhun takag ilárun ku nímu, I’ll rain blows on you
if you swindle me. -in-(→) n homemade dynamite consisting of a wick,
fuse, and gunpowder pounded compactly inside a can or bottle.

báyu_2 n a coat coloration of horses: light yellowish tan to a deep
reddish brown.

bayùbáyù (from kabáyù) name given to various fish with a diagonal
posture in the water or horse-like appearance, esp. pipe fishes.

báyud a discolored, bruised, esp. fruit. v [B; a] for fruit or other
crops to become discolored or bruised. Nabáyud ang kamúti nga gibyáan
sa ínit, The sweet potatoes became discolored because they were left
exposed to the sun. Nagkabáyud ang ákung láwas sa binunalan, My body
has become black and blue from being beaten.

bayúdang = bayúrang.

bay-ug v [AB; a] {1} shake, rock s.t. Mubay-ug siya sa dúyan,
magdung-ag pa, She rocks the cradle and still has to do the cooking.
Nabay-ug ang tibuuk Batanggas pagbutu sa Taal, The whole province of
Batangas shook when Taal erupted. {2} shake out of complacency, break
the peace and quiet. Nabay-ug ang tibuuk balángay sa balità, The whole
village was shaken up by the news. {3} [B12; a1] get bruised, rattled
by being rocked or bumped into s.t. Nagkabay-ug ang bábuy sa kataas sa
ámung byáhi, The pig was all bruised and shaken after our long journey.
Ayawg bay-úga nang mga mangga, Do not bruise the mangoes.

bayugbayug = balukbáluk.

bayugbug = balugbug.

bayukáwi n k.o. smooth climbing bamboo of the forest, woven into
baskets: Dinochloa scandens.

bayukbáyuk = balukbáluk.

bayukbuk n natural fertilizer composed of dead leaves and manure.
v {1} [A; b] apply compost. {2} [a12] make into compost.

bayukut = alúla.

bayulin n violin. v [A; a2] play, play on the violin. -ista
n violinist. v [B1; a12] become, make into a violinist.

bayulit n violet in color. v [B2; c1] be, make violet in color.

bayumbu n movable screen, room divider. v [A; a] put, make into a
divider. Bayumbúhan kung ákung kusína, I’ll make a divider for my
kitchen.

bayung n {1} adolescent cock. {2} adolescent boy. v [B25; b6] {1} get
to be a cockerel. {2} get to be an adolescent boy. bayungbáyung n a
pre-adolescent boy.

báyung_2 = dáyung.

bayungad a {1} for s.t. long to be bent or sagging. {2} protruding
upper lip. v [B] {1} be sagging, bent. Nagbayungad ang bukubuku sa
kabáyù sa kabug-at sa karga, The horse’s back is sagging under the
heavy load. Nabayungad ang atup tungud sa kabug-at sa sín, The roof is
sagging under the weight of the iron sheet. {2} for the upper lip to be
protruding in an ungainly way.

bayuníta n bayonet. v [A; ab2] stab with a bayonet. -in- n hunting
knife shaped like a bayonet.

bayupsi v [A; b5] take a biopsy.

bayúrang n {1} a k.o. bolo about 22″ long having a straight blade with
a straight back which curves down to the blade near the tip. {2} a k.o.
bolo around 18″ long with a shallow convex curve two-thirds way to the
top edge and upward curve on the bottom edge meeting the top edge in a
point.

báyut n {1} sissy. Báyut ka. Nahadluk ug lawàlawà, You’re a sissy
because you’re afraid of spiders. {2} male homosexual. Báyut ang ákung
kusturíra, My dressmaker is a homosexual. {3} small light plane.
v [B126; b6] become sissy or homosexual. paN- v [A2; b6] hire oneself
out to a male homosexual. -un(→) a sissyish, effeminate. Bayutun siyang
manglihuklihuk, He acts in an effeminate manner. -i {1} = -un(→).
{2} nagging, complaining sort. v [B126; b6] be a whining grumbler.

bayuuk, bayúuk n mumps. v [a4b4] be affected with mumps. Dì mabukang
ákung bàbà kay gibayuuk ku, I cannot open my mouth because I have
mumps. Gibayuukan ang wala kung áping, I have mumps in the left cheek.

bayúus n {1} bud from which a fruit or flower develops. {2} a girl who
is about to blossom into full womanhood. v [B] grow buds. Katahum sa
búwak nga mubayúus na, How lovely the budding flower is.

baywantikwan n a k.o. bargain sale in which a buyer gets free an extra
item of the same class as the thing he buys. v [A13; c6] hold a
buy-one-take-one sale. Ibaywantikwan níla ang uld istak arun
madispatsar, They are selling their old stock on a buy-one-take-one
basis in order to dispose of it.

bi_1 {1} = ambi. {2} particle coming at the end of sentences expressing
a request, meaning ‘please’ a in requesting an action to be done in
direction of the speaker. Itudlus ra nang butilya, bi, Hand me that
bottle, please. Dad-a ngari bi, Please bring it over here. Dì ku bi,
Yes, please (Lit. I don’t want any, let me have it). {b} in requesting
an action to be done for the benefit of the speaker when the speaker is
situated close to the person requested. Imakinilya ku ári, bi, Please
type this up for me.

bi_2 n letter B.

bí {1} (from híbi) expression of teasing to a child to heighten its
embarrassment (paghíbì). Bí, dì ka tagáag kindi, Nah, nana nahna,
you’re not going to get any candy. {2} expression used in calling
goats.

bias n water container made of one internode of a bamboo tube. v [a12]
make into a bias.

bíaw v [B; b6] {1} for water to gather s.w. Gibiáwan ámung sílung
pagbahà, Our ground floor was filled with water when it flooded.
{2} for tears to well up in the eyes. Mga lúhà nga nabíaw sa íyang mga
mata, Tears that welled up in her eyes. (→) n large, loosely woven
basket where farm produce is gathered. -an(→) n container for holding a
supply of water. Biawan sa túbig baláan, The font of the holy water.

biaybíay v [A; a1] deride s.o., say s.t. to humiliate s.o. Ayaw siya
biaybiáya tungud sa íyang pagkabakul, Don’t humiliate him just because
he is hunchbacked. Ibiaybíay níya ang mahúgaw níyang kagahápun, Deride
her with her evil past. n derision. Giantus ni Kristu ang tanang
biaybíay sa mga Hudíyu, Christ suffered the derision of the Jews. ma-un
a derisive. Mabiaybiáyun nga mga pangutána, Humiliating questions.

biaypi n V.I.P.

bíba {1} cheerful and jolly in a talkative way. {2} particle: Long
live! Bíba si Usminya! Bíba ang Pilipínas! Long live Osmeña! Long live
the Philippines! v [B26; c1] be, become cheerful. Mubíba (mabíba) ang
íyang kinaíya ug may kwarta, He gets a cheerful disposition when he
gets money. bibahut a endearingly cheerful, jolly. ka- n endearing
cheerfulness. Dì ku maúlaw muadtu sa íla tungud sa ílang kabibahut, I’m
not afraid to go to their house because they are so warm and friendly.

bíbi_1 n small duck with colored feathers. v [b6] raise ducks. bibihan
n duck farm.

bíbi_2 n k.o. lucine clam.

bíbi_3 n {1} baby. {2} nickname for a girl. v [A; a12] nickname a child
‘baby’.

bibingka n {1} rice cake made from finely ground rice mixed with
coconut milk, sugar, and sometimes with other ingredients as flavoring.
{2} woman’s genitalia (humorous usage). — nga usay likì n woman’s
genitalia (lit. rice cake with a single crack). — nga hilaw n woman’s
genitalia. v {1} [A; a2] make rice cakes. {2} [A123P; a12] put between
the devil and the deep blue sea (from the idea that the bibingka is
baked in between two fires). Ug mupaúlì ku kasab-an. Ug dílì, kasab-an
sad. Nabibingka ku, If I go home, I’ll be cussed out. If not, I’ll be
cussed out, too. I’m between the devil and the deep blue sea.

bibirun n {1} baby’s feeding bottle. {2} woman’s breast (humorous).
v [AB16; a1] {1} feed with a bottle, take the bottle. Nagbibirun ka ba
sa ímung bátà? Are you bottle-feeding your baby? Magbibirun lang
gihápun ning batáa, This child still drinks from a bottle. {2} [A; c1]
make into, use as a feeding bottle.†

bibisítir v [B6] take care of s.o.’s child, usually in contexts talking
about the States. Dad-a ku sa istits, aku lay mubibisítir sa ímung
anak, Take me to the States and I will be your child’s nursemaid.

bibliya, biblíya n the Holy Bible.

bibliyutika, bibliyutíka n library. v [A13; a2] make into a library.

bíbu a for a place to be lively, full of fun. Bíbu kaáyung syudad kun
mapasku, The city is full of life at Christmastime. v [B2; a] get to be
lively.†

bíbut n {1} an endearing term for a baby. {2} girl (slang). {3} one’s
girl (slang). v [A12; a12] have, make s.o. his girl. Insik ang íyang
gibíbut, He took a Chinese girl for his girlfriend.

bída_1 n {1} adventure, experiences of a person in his lifetime.
{2} role in a drama. Kinsay nagdá sa bída ni Maríya Klára? Who plays
the role of Maria Clara? {3} one who plays the leading role. Muintra ku
basta akuy bída, I’ll participate as long as I am the leading lady.
v {1} [AC; a] tell one’s experiences, adventures. {2} [B2356; a2] be
the leading player, make the leading player.

bída_2 short for purbída.

bidbid n {1} k.o. small sprat or herring. {2} net used to catch the
bidbid. paN- v [A2; b6] catch bidbid. n fishing for bidbid.

bíding_1 n bead-like embroidery on cloth. — nga makina n machine for
doing beading. v [A; b6(1)] do beading on cloth.

bíding_2, bídings n mattress, sheets, etc. to sleep on. v {1} [A1; b6]
put bedding s.w. {2} [c1] use as, make into bedding. Bidínga (ibíding)
ning mga hábul, Use these sheets for your bedding.

bidiyù = bidyù.

bidlak v [A; a] tear, rip apart with force. Nabidlak ang íyang sinínà
nga nasángit sa alambri, Her dress got ripped when it got caught on the
wire.

bidlì n feeling of nausea or heartburn due to eating heavy foods.
v [B146; a4] develop such a feeling. Magbidlì ang ákung ginhawáan ug
mukáun kug tambuk, I get nauseated when I eat pork fat. Gibidlì aku
pagkáun nákug kamúti, I felt heartburn after I ate sweet potatoes.

bidlísiw n rays of the sun. v {1} [A2; b6] for the rays of the sun to
shine. Mibidlísiw nang adlaw pagbángun nákù, The sun was shining when I
woke up. {2} [A2S] for a liquid to spurt continuously. Nagbidlisiw ang
túbig sa likì sa túbu, The water is spurting out of the crack in the
water pipe.

bidsit, bidsiyit n sheet or blanket used as a cover. v [A; c1] put,
make into a bed cover.

bíduk = bíruk_1, 2.

bidyù n {1} spear, the size of a coconut midrib, used as a probe for
crabs and other slow-moving things. {2} spear of this size, shot like
an arrow for small fish, crabs, etc. v [A; a] shoot or stab s.t. with a
bidyù. paN- v [A; a] catch things with the bidyù.

bígà_1 n plant cultivated for its edible corms, member of the Araceae
family, similar in appearance to the bagyang (Alocasia macrorrhiza),
but smaller and growing in dry fields.

bígà_2 n great sexual desire. Tigúwang piru may bígà gihápun, He may be
old, but he still has strong sexual urges. v [A123P; b4] stimulate
one’s sexual desire; have sexual desire. Makabígà (makapabígà) ang
sibúyas bumbay, Onions can increase one’s sexual desire. Gibigáan ka
dihà nga manghaluk ka man? Why are you kissing me? Are you possessed of
an uncontrollable sexual desire? paN- v {1} [A2; b6] have sexual
desires. Namígà nang ákung anay, My sow is displaying sexual desire.
{2} [A23] go find sexual adventures. Ang pampaman ang maáyung pamigáan,
The whorehouse is the best place to unleash your sexual urges. pa-
n aphrodisiac. -un a libidinous, oversexed. v [B12; b6] be, become
libidinous. May mga táwung mabigáun ug mahubug, There are people who
become oversexed when drunk.

bigal n {1} sow, mother pig. {2} a woman who has given birth (humorous
usage). Bigal siya apan dílì asáwa, She is a mother (lit. sow) but not
a wife. v [a2] make into a sow. Bigalun ku ning babúya, I’ll raise this
pig into a sow. -l-un(←) n pig intended to be raised into a sow.

bigamya n bigamy. v [B126; a3] be a bigamist, be charged with bigamy.
Ang sumbung imbis adultiriya, nabigamya, The charge was changed from
adultery to bigamy. Nabigamya siya kay kaduha magpakasal, He was
convicted of bigamy because he contracted two marriages.

bigatlà humorous euphemism for bigatlun.

bigatlun = bigáun. see bígà_2.

bigay v [A; c] {1} give s.t. which has been extorted. Ug dì ka mubigay,
dì ka kapasar, If you don’t give a bribe, you won’t pass. Bigyan giyud
ang mga dispatsir, You have to pay protection money to the dispatchers.
{2} deliver a blow to s.o. Bigyan ta kag ímu kung ilárun, I’ll hit you
one if you swindle me. {3} allow s.o. to make sexual advances (slang).
Mubigay nà siyag íyang uyab ang kasáyaw, She will give herself freely
if her boyfriend is her dancing partner. {4} [A12; b6] have sexual
intercourse with (slang). Bigyan nákung ákung hinigugma, I’ll have
sexual intercourse with my girl. {5} purposely lose a point in jai-alai
to enable the opponent to get it. Ug ibigay nà níya run, dì na kadaug,
If he purposely loses this game, he can’t win any more. n a point
purposely defaulted in jai-alai in order to let the opponent have it.
a giving one’s self fully to sexual advances (slang).

bigiw v [A2; b3] run fast for a reason. Mibigiw ug dágan ang ilagà nga
nakakità sa iring, The rat ran away fast on seeing the cat. Nakabigiw
kug dágan sa pagkahibalu nákung naligsan siya, I ran as fast as I could
when I found out she was run over. n k.o. small canoe designed for
getting s.w. fast. It consists of a single piece with outriggers,
sloping upwards sharply in the front and the back. bigiwbígiw = bigiw,
n.

bigkas v {1} [A1B26; a12b2] for string, rope, cloth, etc. to snap apart
under tension, make s.t. snap. Walà may nagbigkas ánà. Nabigkas lag
íya, Nobody broke it. It snapped by itself. {2} [A2B26; b5] rip
stitches apart. Gibigkas (gibigkasan) sa sastri ang hawakan, The tailor
took it apart at the waist.

bigking = bíking.

bignì v [A12C; b3] {1} for animals to fight with lots of noise but
little action. Gibignían sa mga baktin ang lawug, The piglets fought
over the slop. {2} have petty quarrels (derogatory usage).

bigsà a {1} with high spirits, tending to be noisy and uninhibited in
speech and manner. Aligri nà siyag makainum kay bigsà, He is fun when
he is tipsy because he is lively. {2} flirtatious, not passive or
reserved towards men. v [B] get to be in high spirits or flirtatious.
Mubigsà (mabigsà) nang bayhána basta náay mga láki, That woman gets
coquettish when there are men around.

bigsyat n big shot (slang). v [B126; a2] get to be a big shot.

bigtas v [AB2; c1] for stitches or bonds which hold things together to
snap; cause them to do so. Kinsay nagbigtas sa kawu sa bag? Who made
the handle of the bag come off? Nabigtas (mibigtas) ang tahì sa sáku sa
paghasuk sa kupras, The seams on the sides of the sack came open when
the copra was pounded to stuff it full.

bigting v [A; b] strike an animal in the leg to disable it, usually in
preparation for butchering it. Nagsaguyud ang tarian sa manuk ingun
kini sa hibigtingan, The cock’s fighting leg is dragging, as if it got
slashed.

biguk v [A1; a] cheat out of, steal s.t. Kinsay nagbiguk sa kuliksiyun?
Who pocketed the collection?

bigunya n begonias, k.o. ornamental annual flowers: Begoniaceae spp. —
dibumbilya hairy species of begonia with white flowers and small
reddish leaves. — dikalbásà a hairy species of begonia with large
squash-like leaves. — dikurasun k.o. begonia with heart-shaped flowers.

bigut_1 n s.o. having ugly, knotted scars at the neck. v [B126] for the
neck to be ugly with knotted scars. Nabigut ang íyang líug sa
lamparúnis, His neck was all scarred with skin eruptions.

bigut_2, bígut_1 v {1} [A; b5] sew s.t. with large, rough stitches.
Gibígut (gibigutan) lang íning tapulan ang íyang muskitírung nagísì,
The lazy girl just sewed her torn mosquito net with large stitches.
{2} [A; bc] fasten s.t. with a pin. Ibigut ang ríbun sa ímung púlu, Pin
the ribbon on your shirt. (→) n s.t. that has been pinned or stitched
with large stitches.

bígut_2 a for a woman’s or child’s body to be compact and well-rounded.
Angayan ang batingsut sa mabígut níyang láwas, She is well-built, and a
bathing suit looks good on her.

bigúti n mustache. v [A1] wear a mustache. pa- v [A1] grow a mustache.
bigutíhun a {1} have a mustache. {2} descriptive name given to various
k.o. fish with barbels. -lyu n small thin mustache. v [A1; b6] have,
wear such a mustache.†

bigwis_1 v [B46] have loose bowel movements, light diarrhea. Mubigwis
ka gyud ug magpatakà kag káun, You will get loose bowel movements if
you eat just anything.

bigwis_2 n offspring. Daghan silang bigwis, There’s a lot of kids in
their family. paN- v [A2] bear young. Mamigwis na sad ang iring, The
cat is going to have a litter again.

bíhag v [A; a12] {1a} bring into captivity. Mga múrus ang mibíhag sa
mga Bisayà, Muslims who captured and carried away Visayan people.
{1b} attract the attention. Makabíhag sa átung pagtagad, Can attract
our attention. Bihágun ku ang ímung kasingkásing, I’ll captivate your
heart. {2} for fowls to attract another fowl not belonging to the
flock. Nabíhag ákung sunuy sa ílang himungáan, My rooster was attracted
to stay at their place by their hen. {3} [A3P; b4] defeat in a contest
such that the loser is given to the winner, most commonly in
cockfighting. Gibihágan mig duha, We lost (had defeated on us) two
cocks. (→) n {1} person captured. {2} fowls attracted to another flock.
{3} s.t. lost in a contest where the winner takes the loser, esp. the
defeated cock. bihagay v [C; a12] for keeps, such that the winner gets
the loser’s thing. Nagbihagay silag húlin, They are playing marbles for
keeps. maka-r-, ma-un a attractive, captivating. maN-r- n s.t. that is
a steady winner, and wins over the loser. Mahal kining sunúya hay
mamimíhag, This is a valuable cock because it is a steady winner.

bíhì n k.o. small univalve.

bihìbihì, bihihì = bahìhì.

bihikulu n motor vehicle.

bihilya n a day of abstinence from meat. v [A1] observe abstinence from
meat.

bíhis v [A; b] wipe off the dirt from s.o.’s body with a damp cloth.
Bihísi ang bátà únà pakatulga, Wipe the child’s body with a wet cloth
before putting him to sleep. paN- v [A2; b] wipe oneself or s.o. with a
damp cloth.

bíhu a adept, skillful. Bíhu kaáyu siyang mamakak, She’s very good at
lying. v [B12] get to be skillful, adept. Nabíhu ku sa
pagpangindiksiyun, I became adept in giving shots.

bíhud n {1} roe. {2} one’s children (humorous). Pila nay bíhud mu
karun? How many children do you have now? paN- v {1} [A2] have roe.
Namíhud nang bansíkul nga ákung nakúhà, The mackerels I caught were
full of roe. {2} [A23] become pregnant (humorous). Namíhud ka lang nga
way banabána? You became pregnant without a husband? bidhan n {1} fish
having roe. {2} pregnant woman (humorous). tingpamíhud n spawning
season.

bihúku = uway.

bíhun n k.o. Chinese noodle, translucent, coarser than the miswa but
finer than tanghun. v [A1C12; b6] prepare a dish with bíhun.

bíi short for Maáyung gabíi, Good evening.

bíka n {1} potsherd. {2} s.t. worth as much as a sherd. Unsa man ang
sápì ku, bíka, nga dì mu dawátun? Is my money worthless that you don’t
accept it?

bikabika n k.o. fish.

bíkag v [AB126; a12] prod, urge s.o. to do s.t. Bísag giunsag bíkag,
dílì giyud siya mukúyug, No matter how much we prod him, he won’t go.
Ang íyang trátu mauy nagbíkag níya paghímug dautan, Her lover prodded
her to do s.t. bad. (→) a having the urge to do things in imitation of
theirs. Bikag nga pagkatáwu. Unsay buhátun sa uban íyang sundun, He is
a copycat. Whatever other people do he wants to do, too.

bikàkà_1 = bikangkang.

bikàkà_2 n k.o. hopscotch played on a rectangular figure divided into
two rows, each row of which contains four frames. v [A; b(1)] play this
k.o. hopscotch.

bikang_1 a {1} busy, preoccupied because of too many things to do at
once. {2} encumbering, causing extra work. v [B12] get encumbered, too
busy with many things. Makabikang (makapabikang) ning mga silya sa
ákung paglampásu, These chairs make it all the harder to get the floor
scrubbed. Nagkabikang ku sa trabáhu nga nagkadaghan na ning mga táwu
dinhi, I have so much work now that there are so many people staying
here.

bikang_2, bíkang a having the feet spread apart, front to back or
sideways. Bikang íyang linaktan, He walked with his feet spread apart.
v {1} [A2; c1] take a stride, take a long step. Dì siya makabikang kay
guut íyang palda, She cannot take big steps because she has a tight
skirt on. {2} [c1] set one’s feet apart. Napukling kay walà man
mabíkang ang mga tiil, He fell because he had not set his feet well
apart. n large stride. -in- a for the legs to be widely spread apart.

bikangkang v [A; c1] spread one’s legs apart. Ug dì ka mubikangkang,
dúgay kang kahimugsúan, If you don’t spread your legs, you’ll have a
hard time giving birth.

bikarbunátu n sodium bicarbonate.†

bikaryu n officer of the church.

bikil v {1} [A; c1] nudge, move s.t. out of its position. Kinsay
nagbikil sa kwadru nga naharag man? Who moved the picture, that it is
tilting? Ibikil (bikila) ang tupad mung natúlug, Nudge the fellow
beside you. He fell asleep. {2} [B; c1] {a} protrude, stick out. Kun
magtanum ug kamúting káhuy ibikil (bikila) ang píkas tumuy sa yútà,
When you plant cassava stems, let one end stick out of the ground.
{b} encumber by protruding. Mubikil ang bátà sa íyang tiyan iglakaw
níya, The child in her stomach sticks out and makes it hard for her to
walk. {2c} [A; ab2] trip s.o. Nabikil ku sa tuud, I tripped over the
stump. {3} [B126] suddenly twisted so as to get sprained. Nagtakiang
siyang naglakaw kay nabikil ang íyang tiil, He walked with a limp
because his foot got twisted. {4} [AC3; ac3] {a} be contrary, opposed.
Ang íyang anak mauy nakabikil sa íyang pagminyù ug usab, Her child made
it difficult for her to remarry. Nagbíkil ang ílang mga hunàhúnà, Their
opinions differed. {b} provoke a quarrel, annoy s.o. with the purpose
of angering him. Bísag unsa na lay ílang buhátun nga ibikil sa bátà,
They never run out of ways to make the child cry. a contrary, adverse.
Bikil kaáyu ning batáa. Bisag unsay átung isulti, lalísun giyud, This
child is very contrary. He gives back talk to whatever we say. (→)
n quarrel, provocation to a fight. Wà pa mahílut ang ílang bikil, Their
quarrel hasn’t been settled. biklunun, biklúnun, bikilúnun
a {1} needing prodding. Biklunung batáa mabáwu kag paayun-áyun únà
mulíhuk, The child needs to be prodded. You go wild trying to get him
to do s.t. {2} very sensitive, easily disturbed. Biklunun si Pidru.
Sabdan lag gamay, masukù dáyun, Pedro is sensitive. Just nudge him, and
he gets angry right away.

bíking_1 v [A; a12] carry s.t. hanging down in the hands. Nagbíking ug
baskit, Carrying a basket. Ayaw bikínga ang bátà, Don’t carry the child
by the arms.

bíking_2, — pawdir n baking powder.

bikíni n bikini. v [A1; c1] wear, make into a bikini.

bikiri n bakery. v [A12; a12] get, make into a bakery.

biks_1 n Vicks, brand name for mentholated medicines. — inhílir n Vicks
inhaler.

biks_2 = bíku_1.

biktima n victim of foul play. v [a12] be made a victim. Nabiktima ku
sa mamarigla, I was a victim of the thugs.

bikturi n the money used after the war, so called because of the legend
‘victory’ on the bill.

bikturya v [A12] win the love of s.o. Dì ka na ángay mangabughù sa
dáang trátu sa ímu nga bána. Tutal, ikaw may nakabikturya níya, You
shouldn’t be jealous of your husband’s former girl friend. Anyway, you
were the one who landed him.

bikturyúsu a victorious.

bíku_1 n hopscotch. v [AC; b6] play hopscotch. bikubíku = bíku.

bíku_2 n sweet made of sticky rice cooked with coconut milk and
sweetened, popularly eaten between meals. v [A; a2] make bíku.

bikug v [APB26; a1] move s.t. fastened, bend s.t. firm out of place, be
moved, bent. Dì ni mabikug kay gilansang, You can’t budge it because
it’s nailed. Ang íyang disisiyun dílì mubikug (mabikug), His decision
cannot be changed. Bikuga siya sa íyang gilingkúran, Dislodge him from
where he is sitting.

bíkug_1 n cramp in the muscles. v {1} [BN246; b4] get a cramp. Mibíkug
(namíkug, nabíkúgan) ákung bitíis, I have a cramp in my legs.
{2} [b(1)] cause cramps.

bíkug_2 n a coconut or nípà midrib. silhig nga — n broom made of
coconut or nípà midribs. (→) v [A; ab2] beat s.o. with a coconut or
nípà midrib.

bíkul n variety of white rice, recently introduced because of its high
yield.

*bikusbikus ka- v [A13] be miserably poor and hard up.

bikwad a bent backwards, flat on its back, twisted askew. Tukúri nang
pusti. Bikwad man, Straighten out the post. It is leaning over
backwards. v [AB; ab2] lean backwards, be bent askew; cause s.t. to do
so. Mibikwad siya arun dílì hiig-an ang íyang nawung, She ducked
backwards so that her face would not be hit. Nagkabikwad ang tiil sa
lamísa, The legs of the table are getting all bent out of shape.

bikwang v [A; a12] cause s.t. to fall or turn over by pulling the feet
or some appendage upwards. Bikwánga lang ang batíyà arun mayabu ang
túbig, Turn the basin over to spill the water out. Bikwánga ang bábuy
dáyun gapúsa, Pick the pig up by the legs and bind it.

bikwing = bíking.

bíla v [A; b1c1] spread the legs apart to the sides. Ngánung mubíla ka
mang maglingkud? Why do you spread your legs when you sit? bilahan
n crotch. bilabila n name given to grasses which have tassels
consisting of three or more spikes growing in at greater than 90°
angles from each other (like legs spread apart), e.g. Eleusine indica.

bílà, biláan n ethnic group in Southern Mindanao. ka- n Bilaan region
in Southern Mindanao.

bílad v [AB; c1] widen, spread out, spread s.t. out. Ang bulad núkus
mubílad kun ihúmul sa túbig, Dried squid will spread out when soaked.
Nagbílad sila sa báling arun mauga, They are spreading the net to dry
it. Gipamutul níya ang mga tanum arun mabílad ang agiánan, He cut the
trees down to widen the path. n width, spread. Hiktin ang bílad sa
banig, The mat is narrow across. a wide, broad. Bílad kaáyu ang ílang
uma, Their farm stretches over a broad area. biladbilad = baliálà.

biláda_1 n program of musical and literary numbers, usually held in the
evening. v [A1; a] hold such a program.

biláda_2 n extension of a room or of a house. v [A; c1] make an
extension, add an extension to a room.

bilag-ung = balag-ung.

bilakà_1 v [A1; c1] sit squat with legs crossed. Nagbilakà siyang
naglingkud daw Budha, He is squatting with legs crossed like Buddha.

bilakà_2 n a variety of dwarf coconut, so short that sometimes its
fruit touch the ground, with a trunk as big as the ordinary variety of
tree, but with slightly bigger fruit.

bílang v [A2; c1] consider, treat s.o. as. Dì ku mubílang nímung igsúun
tungud sa pakauwaw nga ímung gipátik sa átung ngálan, I won’t recognize
you as a sister because of the disgrace you brought upon our name.
Gibílang kung inahan ang ákung gikasiráhan, I consider my landlady a
mother. n in the capacity of. Bílang mananambal sultían tikaw sa
makadáut nímu, As a doctor I’ll tell you what is harmful for you.

bilangbílang n k.o. cactus-like plant of the strand, the stems and
leaves of which are used as a condiment and vegetable: Sesuvium
portulacastrum.

bilanggà n infection affecting the vaginal lips, characterized by
reddening and intense itching. v [a4b4] for vaginal lips to become
reddish and itchy. Malagmit bilanggaun (bilanggaan) kag dílì ka
manghúgas sa ímung binday, You’ll get an infection in your vagina if
you don’t wash it.

bilanggù v [A3P; c1] imprison. Bilanggúun (ibilanggù) ka sa ímung
lawak, You will be confined to your room. -in- n prisoner. -an(→)
n prison.

bilanggutánan expression of surprise or discomfort, mild euphemism for
bilat sa íyang ina. Bilanggutánan, hikalimtan kung ákung yáwi, Damn! I
forgot my keys. v [a12] say bilanggutánan to s.o.

bilangkad, bilangkat v [A; c1] have the legs spread wide apart.
Nagbuy-ud siya nga nagbilangkat sa katri, She was sprawled on the bed
with her legs apart. -ra n broad, woman who is cooperative in sexual
matters.

bilar n vigil, esp. one of the dead. Dúnay bilar basta dúnay mamatyan,
A vigil is always held if the dead person has relatives. v {1} [A; b]
keep a wake. Gibilaran níla ang minatay, They kept vigil over the
corpse. {2} [A; b] do s.t. late into the night. Magbilar kug tuun rung
gabíi, I will stay up late studying tonight. {2a} [B156] stay up late.
Nabilar ku gabíi kay hilabihang pagsákit sa bátà, I stayed up late last
night because the baby was very sick.

bilas n the husband or wife of one’s husband’s or wife’s sibling. v [C;
a12] be bilas. Magbílas na ta kay gipakaslan kung igsúun sa ímung
asáwa, We’re bilas now because I married your wife’s sister.

bílas n eye infection, conjunctivitis. v [A123P; a4] have sore eyes.
Gibílas ákung mata, I have conjunctivitis.

bilásun n k.o. fish, the name given to the broad species of Caesio,
esp. Caesio erythrogaster.

bilat n {1} cunt of a person or animal (coarse). {2} profane
exclamation. {a} expression indicating disbelief. Bilat! Ása man ku
mutúu adtu, Hell! You think I’d ever believe that. {b} expression
indicating exasperation at s.t. which happened contrary to one’s
desires. Bilat! Nasipyat pa giyud dà, Shit! I missed again. — sa ímung
(íyang) ina, inahan {1} profane exclamation used upon experiencing
annoyance. Ikawng bilat sa ímung ináha ka, You son of a bitch, you.
Gikaun sa bilat sa íyang ina, The son of a bitch ate it.
{2} watchamacallit, a filler word. Ag kadtung unsa gud tung bilat sa
íyang ináha tu—íyang íhi, That—um, what was that son of a bitch there
called, the axle. bilatbilat v [B1245; a12] have more work to do than
one can manage (coarse word). Nagkabilatbilat ku sa trabáhu dinhi, I’m
swamped with work here. Akuy ímung bilatbilatun ug pabáyad ning utánga?
You trying to drive me crazy paying these debts. -ra n broad, a
derogatory word referring to a woman.

bilaug n k.o. fair-sized, edible clam.

bilay n hanging screen. (←) v [A; a] hang a protective screen.
Gibiláyan ku ang bátà arun dì mainitan, I hung a screen up for the
child so it wouldn’t be in the sun. bilaybílay v [A; a] hang a
temporary walling for a temporary shelter. Magbilaybílay ta samtang
walà pa tay balay, We’ll put up a screen as a temporary shelter as long
as we have no house.

bilbátum n bell-bottom pants.

bilbaw see surísu.

bilbig n k.o. white, edible clam, growing to 2″.

bilbiki = milibiki.

bilbil v [A123P; a12] make, be overly obese. Ang ímung kadakug káun
mauy nakabilbil (nakapabilbil) nímu, Your voracious appetite made you
overly obese. -un a overly obese.

bilding n building. v [b6] erect a building.

bildu n glass. Bildu sa bintánà, Glass in the window. v [A; b6(1)] fit
s.t. with glass. Bildúhan tag bag-u ang ímung antiyúhus, Let’s fit your
glasses with new lenses.

bildúra n vegetables, root crops cooked in stews and soups with meat.
v [A; b6(1)] cook vegetables with soup or stew.

bildyun n k.o. bread in loaf, around 6″ long with a fine, soft texture.

bilgas n Belgian nuns. Ang kulihiyu sa Santa Tirísa gipadágan sa mga
bilgas, St. Theresa’s School is run by Belgian sisters.

bilhad v [A; a12] pull two vertical things apart. Bilhára ang birha
arun makalusut ta, Pull the railings apart so we can get through.

bili n {1} price. Ang bili sa palalítun, The price of commodities.
{2} worth. Wà nay bili ang kinabúhì ug mawalà ka, Life is worthless
without you. hátag ug — v [A; b(1)] not value s.t. Ang ákung tambag
dílì hatágan ug bili, He does not value my advice. v {1} [A23] cost.
Mibili nag písus ang gantang sa mais, A ganta of corn costs one peso.
{1a} cost s.o. s.t., result in. Kanang ímung binúang mubili nímug
kastígu, Your foolishness will cost you a spanking. {2} [b6] quote a
price to s.o. Bilhan ta kag singku, I will offer it to you for five.
bililhun a valuable, precious.

bilib be impressed by s.o. Bilib ku nímu dà, antígu giyud kang mukanta,
I’m impressed by you. You sure know how to sing. v [B23(1)46; b3] be
impressed. Mibilib ang babáying sapían siya kay dúnay awtu, The woman
was impressed, thinking he was rich, because he had a car. Ang biliban
nákù ánang buksidúra ang íyang liphuk, What impressed me about that
boxer is his left hook. pa- v [A; a12] put on an act to impress s.o.
Nagpabilib na sad ang hambugíru, The braggart is trying to impress us
again.

bilíbid_1,2 = balíbud_1,2.

bilíbid_3 n national penitentiary. v [B126] be put in Bilibid Prison.
pa- v [A; c] be put in Bilibid.†

bilíbud_1,2 = balíbud_1,2.s

bilíbul = bulíbuy.

biligyà = baligyà.

bílik v {1} [AB2S6; a] turn on its axis, spin s.t. Mubílik nang
manubílag íya ra, That steering wheel turns by itself. Siyay mibílik sa
timun, He turned the steering wheel of the boat. {2} [A; a12] twist
individual strands to be made into rope. Dílì nímu bilíkun ang lugway
ug hugut arun dílì mukulus, Don’t twist the strand tight so that it
won’t kink. n turning. -an n device for twisting strands into rope.

bilíkis = balíkis.

bilin n nativity scene depicted in a crèche. v [A13; b6] make, put a
crèche s.w.

bílin v {1} [A; c] leave s.t. behind. Kinsay nagbílin ning baskit
dinhi? Who left this basket here? Binlan ta kag bugas, I’ll leave you
some rice. Ibílin ang bátà, Leave the child behind. {2} [b6] for a wife
to be left pregnant when her husband dies. Gibinlan siya pagkamatay sa
íyang bána, She was pregnant (lit. had s.t. left in her) when her
husband died. {3} — ug púlung, sulti [A] leave word. Nagbílin siyag
sulti nga ipatiwas ang ímung trabáhu, He left word for you to finish
your work. n {1} one’s turn to be left behind. Ákung bílin run, It’s my
turn to stay behind this time. {2} words, orders left by s.o. Ang bílin
ni Tátay únà mamatay, Father’s last words before he died. {3} s.o. who
stays behind. Akuy bílin sa balay, I’ll stay in the house. pa- v [A]
{1} stay behind. Akuy magpabílin, I’ll remain behind. {2} remain in the
same way. Nagpabílin silang malipáyun, They remained happy. Dì
makapabílin ug dúgay ang báhù ning agwáha, The smell of this perfume
won’t remain long. hi-/ha-(→) v [B1256; b4] {1} be left behind.
Nahibilin ku paglarga sa barku, I was left behind when the boat left.
Ang samad nahibinlan ug mga sugsug, Small slivers were left in his
wound. {2} be the amount remaining. Písus ray nahabilin sa súhul nákù,
Only one peso was left from my salary. {3} — sa daplin for a girl to
fail to get married. pamilinbílin v [A] {1} go around saying goodbye.
Namilinbílin siyag pamisíta úsà mulangyaw, She’s making her goodbye
visits before she emigrates. {2} leave needlessly. ka- n inheritance.
Giparíhas pagbáhin ang ámung kabílin, Our inheritance was divided
equally. v [c] for an inheritance to be left to s.o. Dì mamatay ang
úngù ug dì ikabílin ang íyang kaláki, The witch can not die if the
source of his power is not left to s.o. else. binlunun = bílin, n3.

bil-is n k.o. tall, slender, ornamental palm with pinnate leaves, the
fruit of which are similar to the Areca and may also be chewed:
Heterospathe elata.

biliyun n billion. v [A23] reach the billion mark. -in- a by the
billions.

bilt-in n built-in cabinet and shelves. v [A; a] construct, put
built-in furniture s.w.

biltubil n fight which endures the entire round—from the opening bell
to the closing bell. Ang biltubil nílang áway, Their fight which lasted
from bell to bell.

bílu n veil. v [A; a] {1} wear, make into, put on a veil. {2} [A; b6]
be a veil sponsor in a wedding ceremony, the one who puts the veil over
the shoulders of the couple in the course of the ceremony.

bilug, bílug n matchsticks.

bilungbilung n moonfish: Mene maculata.

bílus n k.o. outriggered sailboat, reaching 20′ in length. dus —
n two-masted sailboat. v [A1; b6] ride this sort of sailboat.

bilwa v [B16; c1] for the legs to be spread in falling. Nabilwa ang
íyang tiil pagkahū́g maung nalisa, He fell down with his feet stretched
apart, and they were dislocated.

bilya_1 n belt buckle. v [A; ac] put a buckle on s.o., make into a belt
buckle.

bilya_2 n k.o. game of marbles where the marbles are shot into four
holes arranged in a square.

bilya_3 n villa, suburban mansion. v [A1; b6] make a villa.

bilyáka = bilyáku (female).

bilyáku a pranking, mischievous, but not of a malicious sort. Gisúling
sa bilyáku ang maistra, The naughty boy peeped up the teacher’s dress.
v [B126; b6] be, become mischievous. -in-(→) v [A13; c1] act in a
mischievous way.

bilyanu n tossing coins, heads or tails. v [AC; c3] toss coins.

bilyar n billiards. v [AC; c3] play billiards.

bilyíti n {1} a note, a short letter. {2} love letter.

bilyu n strands of fiber twisted together into a string. v [A; c1]
twine hand-twisted strands into a thin rope (písì). bilyuhan,
bilyuhánan n device for twining strands into rope.

bilyun a crazy, doing crazy, foolish things. v [B126; b6] go crazy.
Culu- a somewhat crazy. -in- n crazy antics. -aryu n billionaire.

bimul n flat in music. v [AB26; b6c1] {1} play a diminished chord, for
a chord to be diminished. Siyay nagbimul sa katapúsang báhin sa kanta,
He played the finale with a diminished chord. {2} play a note too low,
flat in pitch. Mibimul (mabimul) ang túnu, mau nga ius-us ang ímung
tudlù, The notes are flat, so lower your fingers.

binag v [A; c] set s.t. aside to give it away or donate it. Káda adlaw
sa minatay magbinag giyud kug kwarta pára ipamísa, Every All Souls’
Day, I set aside a small amount for the mass. Ibinag nátù níla ring
ubang humay, We will set aside the rest of this rice for them.

binagri n sour vinegar from pineapple, apples. v [A; a12] make vinegar.

binagsáan (from usa) n any outriggered single-seater canoe.

binakháwan = bakhaw_2, n.

binalatung see balátung.

binangkal n delicacy made of leftover bread or cookies with sugar made
into a ball, covered with sesame seeds and fried.

binaw n deer.

bindáhi n bandage. v [A; a] {1} bandage s.t. Bindahían tang ímung
hubag, Let’s bandage your boil. {2} [A; a] make into a bandage.

binday n child’s talk for female genitalia.

bindisiyun n {1} blessing, benediction. Bindisiyun sa párì, The
priest’s benediction. Bindisiyun sa mga ginikánan, Parental blessing.
Ang ílang pagdaug mag-agad sa bindisiyun sa prisidinti, Their victory
depends upon having the president’s blessings. {2} approval. May
bindisiyun na ba sa mayur ang ímung papílis? Do your papers bear the
mayor’s approval? v [A; b1] {1} give a benediction. {2} give approval
to s.t.

bindíta n holy water. agwa — holy water. — sa lukay Palm Sunday. v [A;
b(1)] sprinkle holy water on. binditahánan {1} place where holy water
is kept. {2} thing to be blessed. -du n s.t. that has been blessed by a
priest.

bindítu v [A; c6] clasp the hands on the breast as in prayer.

binga, bingà, bingag n k.o. baler (volute) shell, used to crush cocoa
seeds.

bingal n a slit or opening in a garment made for convenience in putting
it on. v [A; b6(1)] put a slit in a garment. Bingali ang luyu sa ímung
blúsa, Put a slit in the back of the blouse.

bíngat v [A; a] {1} widen the angle of opening. Mibíngat siya sa
balisung, He opened his jackknife. Bingátag maáyu ang tiiltíil sa
kamira, Spread out the camera tripod. {2} stretch the sides of a hole,
pull an elastic string. Ayaw bingáta ímung bàbà, Don’t stretch your
mouth at the sides. Gibingátan ku bítaw siyag tiradur, midágan lagi, As
soon as I stretched my slingshot, aiming at him, he ran away.

bingaw = bingal.

bingbing v [A; a12b2] tweak a part of the body with the thumb and
forefinger, usually the ears. Akuy mubingbing ninyu ug magsábà mu, I’ll
tweak your ears if you make noise.

bingga (slang form) v [A2; b] {1} go ahead and do s.t. involving
danger. Bingga. Suklì, Come on, fight him. Ug hanggátun ka binggáhi, If
he threatens, go ahead, get into it. {2} come on, step on it. Bingga.
Maapsan ta, Step on it. They’re about to overtake us. {3} maul s.o.
Gibinggáhan aku sa mga bágis, The toughs mauled me.

binggadúra a {1} saying bad things about others with malicious intent.
{2} vengeful. v [B12] be a malicious gossip. Nabinggadúra siya kay
gustung mangamung, She became malicious in her talk because she wants
other people to suffer her fate.

binggála n sparkler, k.o. fireworks that emit sparks.

binggansa n vengeance of a severely harmful sort.

binggar v {1} [A2; a12] harm others by speaking ill of them. Naminggar
kay nasína, She is saying evil things because she is envious. {2} [A;
b(1)] beat up (slang). Gibinggaran ang tigúlang, The old man was
mauled. n s.t. bad said of s.o. designed to harm him.

binggu n bingo. v {1} [A; b6] play bingo. {2} [A23] get bingo. Kaduha
ku makabinggu gabíi, I got bingo twice last night. {3} [B26; b6] for a
card to go bingo. Hápit na mubinggu ang ákung kard, My card is about to
go bingo.

bingit n throat infection. v [a4b4] have a sore throat. Gibingit
(gibingitan) ku, I got a sore throat.

bingka = bibingka.

bingkas v [AB; a] rip stitches apart, for stitches to get ripped apart.
Kinsay nagbingkas niíning sinináa? Who ripped this dress apart at the
stitches? Ayaw ináta arun dílì mabingkas ang tahì, Do not pull at it or
the stitches will get undone.

bingkil v [C; b3] small quarrel, misunderstanding. Natural sa mga bátà
nga magbingkil sa mga duláan, It’s only natural for children to fight
about toys. ka-an n difference, reason for misunderstanding.

bingkung n tool resembling a small pick or axe with blade placed at an
angle to the handle, used to dig up the soil shallowly, hollow out
dugouts, trim logs, etc. v {1} [A; a12] work on s.t. with this
instrument. {2} [A13; a12] make into this instrument. paN-an n name
given to the hammerhead shark, so called because its flattened head
with its oculonarial expansions is positioned to the body as the blade
of a pick is to its handle.

bingwit_1 v {1} [A1N; a12b2] catch fish in shallow waters with a hook
and line, usually using also a fishing rod. {2} [A12; a12] trap s.o.
into marriage. Nakabingwit si Tikla ug sapíang Insik, Tecla snared a
rich Chinese.

bingwit_2 = bingit.

binhamin n youngest man or boy in a group of men or boys.

binhì n seed. Migítib nang binhì nga gipugas ku sa ímung sabakan, The
seed which I planted on your womb is now beginning to grow. v [c16]
{1} use as a seed for seedlings. Binhía (ibinhì) ang lísu niánang
kapayása kay dumadagkù, Use the seeds of that papaya for seedlings
because it is a large variety. {2} implant in one’s mind. Binhía
(ibinhì) sa íyang kaisípan ang kabuútan, Instill honesty in his mind.

binhud = banhud.

binibuy n homosexual man.

binignit n k.o. sweet soup eaten as a snack, made of root crops and
bananas cooked in coconut milk together with various other starchy
ingredients, jackfruit, and flavoring. v [A; a2] make, make into
binignit.

binipisyu n {1} activity held to raise money for charity. {2} charity,
pecuniary help. Nangáyù ang alkaldig binipisyu sa mga nasunúgan, The
mayor asked for charity for the fire victims. v [A1; b6] hold a
benefit, etc. Magbinipisyu ta arun makasapì ang pangílin, Let’s hold a
benefit ball to raise money for the fiesta.

bínit v [A; a1] carry s.t. heavy by holding it at the top or at one end
and letting it dangle. Ayaw biníta ang bulsíta kay mabusbus, Don’t
carry the paper bag by the top because the bottom will give way.

binlad = binulad. see bulad.

binlangan n container for holding food or water for animals. v [A1; a2]
make s.t. into a feeding container.

binlud n {1} finely ground corn grits. {2} small child who is allowed
to participate in a game just to humor it.

binrubyum n k.o. orchid.

binsul n stinger of a ray fish.

binta_1 n sale of s.t. Kusug ang binta sa karmilítus kun duul sa
tulunghaan, Candy sells fast near a school. v [A2; c] offer s.t. for
sale. Ang ílang pinalit sa Sandákan ibinta sa Hulu, The things they buy
in Sandakan they sell in Jolo.†

binta_2 n advantage given in a game or contest. v {1} [A2; c] give s.o.
an advantage. Pila ka puntus ang ibinta mu nákù? How many points will
you give me as advantage? {2} [A123; b8] get an advantage. Ug makabinta
kag duha ka puntus, dì na siya kaapas, If you get two points advantage,
he won’t be able to catch up.

binta_3 n vinta, k.o. speedy sailboat used by Muslims, with colorful
sails and with one or two outriggers. v [A1; a12] take, make into a
vinta.

bintáhà n {1} advantage in competition. Bintáhà kaáyu nga may titulu
ta, It is a great advantage to have a degree. {2} for a condition to be
somewhat better. Bintáhà run kay bubaratu ang baligyà, Conditions are
better now because food is cheaper. Bintáhà run ang íyang hilánat, His
fever is better now. v {1} = binta_2. {2} walà — [C3] be evenly
matched, such that no one has an advantage. Wà magbintáhà ug dakù ang
inyung duhang láwas, Your two bodies are evenly matched. {3} [B246] for
conditions to improve. (→) = bintáhà, n2. paN- v [A2; b6] take
advantage at the expense of another. Namintáhà ang magulang pagbáhin sa
kindi, The oldest child took advantage of the others when the candy was
divided. bintahadur, bintahúsu a one who takes advantage of weaker
people. v [B126; b6] become a person of the sort that takes advantage.

bintánà n window. v [A; c1] make, add a window. paN- v {1} [A2; b] sit
by or look out of the window. Pamintanái ang nagtawag nímu, Look out of
the window at the man calling you. {2} [A2] show as if appearing in a
window. Namintánà íyang pikuy, His penis peeped out.

bintang_1 n {1} distance between. Duha ka dupa lang ang bintang sa duha
ka balay, The two houses are only two fathoms apart from each other.
{2} advantage, edge in a race or contest. Kun ikaw lay makiglumbà nákù
tagáan ta pa kag bintang, I’ll give you an advantage if it’s just you
that’s going to race with me. v [AC; c1] {1} be at a distance, be ahead
of s.o. Nagbintang sila pagpanglingkud, They sat far from each other.
Ibintang (bintánga, bintanga) pagbutang ang mga kaang, Place the flower
pots far apart from each other. {2} give an edge in a contest.
Bintangan ta kag dus kartas, I’ll give you an advantage of two cards.

bintang_2 v [AN; b6(1)] accuse, lay the blame on s.o. Dílì maáyu nga
mubintang (mamintang) ta ug salà kun dílì kita sigúru, We must not lay
blame on s.o. if we are not sure about it. Akuy nabintangan sa sayup, I
was blamed for the mistake.

bintanilya n small window, e.g. a porthole. v [b6] put a small window
in.

bintarug n male genitalia (humorous euphemism). Kadakù níya ug
bintarug, How big his penis is!

binti = bayinti.

bintì_1 n mixer, soft drink or water to dilute liquor. v [A; ac] mix
drinks. Bintíun níya ang lambanug ug sibin-ap, He will mix the seven-up
and the nipa palm toddy together.

bintì_2 v [BN] for the veins to be, become prominent. Mibintì ang ugat
sa íyang nawung sa kasukù, The veins in his forehead stood out in his
anger.

bintiladur n electric fan. v [A13] {1} use an electric fan. {2} [A; b]
install an electric fan.

bintilasyun n ventilation.

bintul_1 n k.o. large fish corral made of bamboo slats placed in a
circle. A light placed in the middle attracts fish which are then
caught with a net. v [AC12; b6(1)] {1} fish with a bintul. {2} [A; c1]
make into a bintul corral.

bintuláwu a ungainly or awkward-looking because of poor proportioning.
Bintuláwu siyang tan-áwun kay gamayg úlu, He looks ungainly with his
small head. Bintuláwu nang baláya kay hábug piru gamay, That house
looks unbalanced because it is tall but very small.

bintus n mahjong pieces which represent the winds. Occasionally, the
pieces which represent the grasses, daggers, and mirrors also are
called bintus. v [A12; b(1)] have, draw bintus in mahjong. Ug dì ku
bintúsan (bintusan) mapúru ang ákung karta, If I don’t draw any bintus,
my cards will be all of one kind.

bintúsà n method of relieving muscular aches by placing a glass on the
skin and burning a wick in it to create a vacuum and draw the flesh
into the glass. v [A; b6] administer dry cupping. Íyang gibintusáan
dáyun ang íyang pamául, He applied dry cupping to his sore muscles.

bínu n wine or hard liquor. v [a2] make into wine. — tintu red table
wine.

bínug n wet spongy ground. Dì muayun ang mais dinhi kay bínug, Corn
won’t do well here because it is swampy. v [B12] become boggy.
Nagkabínug ang nataran sa síging ulan, The yard is becoming all swampy
because of the continuous rain. -un a of a boggy quality.†

binulábid = balunábid.

binúnga n k.o. small tree of secondary forest, the sap of which is used
as glue for musical instruments: Macaranga tanarius.

binyal n venial sin. Ang salang binyal mapasaylu, Venial sins are
forgiveable. — pa expression used in swearing, that one will do s.t.
Magbag-u na ku, binyal pa, I’ll change my ways, may I commit a venial
sin if I don’t.

bipíay n acronym for the BPI, Bureau of Plant Industry.

bip-istik n a k.o. dish consisting of thinly sliced beef fried with
spices and soy sauce. v [A; a2] make, make into this dish.

bir_1 n beer.

bir_2 = abir.

bira_1 v {1} [AC2; c1] pull, tug at s.t. while standing still. Nagbira
sila sa písì, They are having a tug-of-war with the rope. Biraha
(ibira) nà sa wala, Pull it to the left. {2} [A3; a12b2] attach
property to repay a debt. Bayri ímung útang arun dì birahun ímung yútà,
Pay your debts so your land won’t be foreclosed. {3} [A2; b6] make an
extension to a structure (pull on the dimensions). Birahi ang kusínag
duha ka mitrus sa luyu, Add two meters to the kitchen in the back.
{4} — ang kawit [a12] for a winner to treat to a drink of toddy.
Nakadaug lagi ka, sígi biraha ang kawit, Since you won, you treat (lit.
grab for the palm toddy container). {5} — sa kunut [a12] be wrinkled
due to age (humorous). Gibira na siya sa kunut piru maminyug usab, She
is old but she’s going to marry again. {6} [A; a2] strip fiber from
abaca. n {1} the extent or length of action of pulling s.t. Gimab-an
nákù ang pasul ug tulu ka bira, I shortened the fishing line by three
arm lengths. {2} single act of hauling s.t. Kining kargáha madala sa
usa ka bira, This cargo can be taken in one trip. {3} command given to
a driver to get moving. U sígi. Bira. All right. Let’s get going.
birabíra n line fishing in which one keeps pulling the line out
repeatedly rather than just waiting. v [A; b] fish in this way. -da(←)
n a single trip or haul that a vehicle takes. Madá tas usa ka biráda,
We can all be taken in one trip. v [A12] make [so-and-so] many hauls.
Makabiráda tag daghang pasahíru kay tábù, We can haul lots of
passengers because it’s market day.

bira_2 v [A2; b] punch, beat up s.o. (slang). Birahun nákù nang hubug,
I’ll beat up that drunk.

biradur n {1} screwdriver. {2} one who strips abaca fiber.

biranda n veranda. v [A; c1] make, make into a veranda.

biránu n summer time (March, April, May). v [A; b(1)] spend one’s
summer vacation.

birbal n verbal, not written. Kuntrátung birbal, Verbal contract.
v [a12] make an agreement verbal.

birbiki = biribiki.

birbína n name given to numerous genera of ornamental and wild
herbaceous members of the Verbenaceae.

birbu n {1} verb. {2} word, logos (Biblical). Ug ang birbu nahímung
unud, And the word became flesh. v [A; c16] conjugate a verb.

birdadíru a real, genuine. Birdadíru nga batu, Real precious gems.

birdi a {1} green. {2} dirty, off-color story. {3} name given to a
mahjong piece with a green grass design: green dragon. — butilya bottle
green. — mansánas apple green. v [B; c1] {1} be, become green in color.
{2} be off-color. Gibirdihan siya niánang isturyáha, He considers that
story to be off-color. {3} [A12B1256; b8] draw a green dragon in
mahjong. Ug makabirdi ku, makakáng giyud ku, If I get a green dragon,
I’ll get a set of four.

birds-ay n bird’s-eye, brand of cloth used for diapers, napkins, etc.

bird ub paradáyis n bird of paradise, an ornamental banana-like plant:
Strelitzia reginae and Heliconia latispatha.

birdúgu n executioner. v [a12] make into an executioner.

birgansúsa = kipìkipì. see kípì.

birgat a for a woman to act so as to attract men’s attention and give
them to understand that she is easy to approach. Birgátag kinataw-an.
Nagdalag kamhir, What a flirtatious laughter, full of come-on’s. v [B;
b6] be, become a flirt.

birgatinya = birgat.

birgum kárum = kipìkipì. see kípì.

birha n grating, grillwork over an opening to avoid entry or exit.
v [A; c1] install, make into a grille.

birhin n {1} Virgin Mary. {2} statue of the Virgin Mary. {3} a woman
who has not had sexual intercourse. v [b6] consider a woman a virgin.

biribiki n brace, a carpenter’s tool for holding auger bits.

biribiri, biribíri n a sickness, beri-beri. v [A123P; a4] be affected
with beri-beri.

bírig v [A2; b6] {1} for a male fowl to perform the courtship dance
with the female. Gibirígan sa sunuy ang himungáan, The rooster courted
the hen. {2} for a man to make a pass at a woman. Bísag sitinta anyus
na mubírig pa gayud, He’s seventy years old, but he still makes passes.
-ay v [A13] for fowls or people to prance about preparatory to
attacking each other in a fight. Nagbirigay ang duha ka baksidur, The
two boxers were prancing around. birigbírig v [A; b3] hang around s.o.
to get s.t. from him. Nagbirigbírig siya nákù kay dúna siyay
ipamaráyig, He has been courting me because he is going to ask for s.t.

biriking n automatic drill.

bíring n bearings of a machine. v [b6(1)] put bearings in s.t.

birisbiris = wiriswiris.

birlína n automobile having an enclosed compartment in the back and the
driver’s seat open. v [A1] take such a car.

birmúda_1 n Bermuda shorts. v [A; a] wear, make into Bermuda shorts.

birmúda_2 n Bermuda grass.

birnakular, birnakyular n vernacular.

birnis n Friday. v {1} [B256; b4] be Friday. Nagbirnis (mibirnis) na
lang wà gihápun siya muabut, It is (got to be) Friday and he has not
arrived yet. Hibirnisan kug ulì tungud sa bagyu, It was already Friday
when I arrived because of the typhoon. {2} [B1256] do things on
Fridays. Mabirnis ray íyang ianhi, He’ll come only on Fridays.
birnisbirnis every Friday. Birnisbirnis ang tinglímus sa simbahan, They
beg at the church on Fridays. — Santu n Good Friday. nawung ug — long
faced. v {1} [AN1] spend Good Friday. {2} [B] get a long face.
Nagbirnis ang íyang nawung kay wà paubana, She has a long face because
she wasn’t allowed to go along. síti — well-aged palm toddy.

birsikulu n verse in the Holy Bible.

birsiyun n version, particular variation of s.t.

birsu_1 n k.o. detonating device used formerly to set off loud
explosions during gala or religious festivities.

birsu_2 n metrical verses. v [A23C; c1] debate in verse. Nagbirsu sila
sa kulilísi, They had a debate in verse at the wake.

birsus versus. Si Ilurdi birsus di Liyun, Elorde versus de Leon.

birta = bwilta.

birtdi n birthday of a living person. v [A1; bc(1)] celebrate one’s
birthday. Birtdíhan kung ákung kamagulángan, I’ll give a birthday party
for my eldest child. paN- v [A23] attend s.o.’s birthday party. — parti
n birthday party. — kík n birthday cake.

birtibra n vertebra.

birtikal n vertical. v [c16] make s.t. vertical.

birtkuntrul n birth control. v [A13] practice birth control.

birtud n {1} special, often magical powers of s.t. Dúna siyay birtud
kay sugtun dáyug babáyi, He has special powers because he is
irresistible to women. Táwu nga may birtud sa usa, Man that has the
swiftness of a deer. {2} virtuous deed. Ang kabuútan mauy birtud nga
angayang sundun, Honesty is a virtue that is worth emulating.

birtúsu n virtuoso. v [B26] become a virtuoso.

bírù v [B12; abc] be worried, concerned about s.t. Unsa na say ímung
gibírù sa ímung inahan? What did you bother your mother with again? Ang
inadlaw nga galastúhan mauy ákung nabirúan, The money to meet daily
expenses is what is worrying me.

bíruk_1 n a penetrating, deeply nauseous body odor. v [A123P; a] have
B.O. Gibíruk siya kay hugawan, He has B.O. because he’s dirty. -un
n person with B.O.

bíruk_2 n {1} sterile male. {2} male with only one testicle. -un a of a
sterile type.

bís_1 n base in baseball. v {1} [A12] reach a base. Wà makabís ang
únang mihapak, The first batter never reached first base. {2} [A12]
succeed in the first step of anything. Dì makabís kanang dagway mung
batì niánang bayhána, With your face you won’t get to first base with
her.

bísa n visa.

bisagak = busagak.

bisagra n hinges. v [A; c1] install, use as a hinge. Bisagráhan nákung
pultahan, I’ll put hinges on the door.

bisan, bísan {1a} even, including. Ang tanan nalísang, bisan aku,
Everyone was terrified. Even me. Bisan sa bátà pa, kusgan na, Even as a
child he was strong. Wà ku tagái bisan usa, He didn’t give me any, not
even one. {1b} even [so-and-so] is all right. Bisan pubri, basta dílì
dawù, It doesn’t matter if he is poor, so long as he is not greedy.
Bisan gamay, dawátun ku, I’ll accept it, even if it is small. {2a} no
matter if, even though, nevertheless. Bisan pubri, manggihatágun
gihápun, Even if he is poor, he is generous. Bisan gisakitan midúlà
lang gihápun, He continued playing even though he was in pain. Bisan
pa, dì ku muadtu, Even so, I will not go. — na lang even if it is only
[so-and-so]. Tagái ku, bisan na lang singku, Give me s.t., even if it
is only five cents. Wà miy makáun, bisan na lang ságing, We have no
food, not even bananas. {2b} — sa despite, in spite of. Bisan pa sa
ákung hinábang, wà gihápun musalir, He wasn’t successful despite my
help. {3} — [interrogative] {3a} no matter where, who, how, when, how
much, etc. Bisan maása siya, pangitáun ku siya, No matter where he
goes, I’ll find him. Bisan pila, palita, Buy it, no matter how much it
costs. {3b} anybody, where, etc. at all. Bisan diin lang niya byái ang
sinílas, He used to put his slippers any old place. Bisan kinsa
makaapil, Anyone may take part. Mahímù bisan anus-a lang, You can do it
any time. — ug, kun = bisan.

bísap n bishop in chess.

bisayà n {1} Visayan. Bantúgan siyang bisayà, He is a famous Visayan.
Tambal nga bisayà, Visayan medicines. {2} a smaller, ordinary mongrel
variety of s.t., esp. domestic animals or cultivated plants. Manuk
bisayà, Mongrel chicken. Sibúyas bisayà, Small, green onions. Sabun
bisayà, Laundry soap in bars. -in- {1} the Visayan way. Panambal nga
binisayà, Visayan type of folk healing. {2} Visayan language.
Binisayang putúput, tuganus, Pure Visayan with no admixture of foreign
words. v {1} [A; c1] speak Visayan. Binisay-i lang ku, Just speak to me
in Visayan. {2} [A; a12] translate into Visayan. Kinsa tung paríang
nagbinisayà sa biblíya? Who was that priest who translated the Bible
into Visayan? bisayista n Visayanist. kabisay-an n the Visayan Islands.

bisbis = bisíbis.

bisbul n baseball game. v [A; b6] play baseball. -ista n baseball
player. v [B156; a12] be, make into a baseball player.

bisgù v [B; b6] for children to be fussy and troublesome. Mubisgù ang
bátà ug dúnay sakit nga batíun, A child will be fussy if it is not
feeling well.

bísi_1 n the vice- or lieutenant governor, mayor, president, consul,
etc. Kun mamatay ang pamúnù pulíhan kini sa íyang bísi, When a
president dies the vice-president will take over. v [B36; c1] be s.o.’s
lieutenant. Siya ang bisíhi, Run as his vice-mayor.

bísi_2 a {1} busy with activity. Bísi kaáyu rung mga piliunun kay hápit
nang piliay, The candidates are very busy now because it’s election
year. {2} a busy telephone. Bísi gihápun ang tilipunu, The telephone is
still busy. v [B26] for the telephone to be busy.

bisíbis v [AN; c] sprinkle water on s.t. Bisibísi ang lub-angun, Water
the seedlings. paN- v [A23] for it to sprinkle. Ígù lang namisíbis ang
ulan, It just sprinkled.

bisiklíta n bicycle. v {1} [A; a] ride a bicycle. Dì ku mubisiklíta ug
gubà, I won’t ride a broken bicycle. Magbisiklíta ku padúlung sa
syúdad, I will ride a bicycle to the city. Dì makabisiklíta ang bakul,
The cripple cannot ride a bicycle. Bisiklitáha lang ang Talísay, Take a
bicycle to Talisay. Lisud ning agianánang bisiklitáhan, This path is
difficult to ride a bike over. {2} [A; c1] take s.t. s.w. by bicycle.
Bisiklitáha (ibisiklíta) ang utanun ngadtu sa mirkádu, Take the
vegetables to the market on a bicycle. {3} [A12] get a bicycle.
Nakabisiklíta ku sa banggà, I won a bicycle in the contest. {4} [A; a]
make into a bicycle. Kanang ímung wísir bisiklitáhun na lang kay
dautang makina, Make your motor-bike into a bicycle because the motor
is shot. {5} [A] exercise lying flat on the back and kicking the feet,
as if riding a bicycle. — nga tuluy ligid n tricycle. — nga binabáyi,
sa babáyi n girl’s bicycle.

bísis n times, instances of an event. Daghan nang bísis nga hikit-an ta
kamung nagkúyug, There were many instances when I saw you going
together. Duha ka bísis (dús bísis) aku níya binuángi, He fooled me
twice.

bisíta n {1} visitor, guest. Abiabíha ang átung mga bisíta, Entertain
our visitors. {2} monthly menstruation (slang). Gitunghà ka na sa
bisíta mu karung bulána? Has your ‘visitor’ arrived this month?
v {1} [A3N; b5] go visit s.o. Bisitáhi (bisitáha) siya, Visit him.
{2} [b4] for the menstruation to come (slang). Gibisitáhan tingáli siya
kay pungtánun, She must be on the rag because she is in a bad mood. —
iglisya n walking to the different churches in a town and praying in
the evening of Maundy Thursday. v [A; b6] perform the church visit.

biskù = bisgù.

biskundi n viscount.

biskutsu n stale bread that is toasted with a little sugar sprinkled on
it. v [A; a2] make a biskutsu.

biskwit n biscuit. v [A; a2] make, make into biscuits.

bisnis n {1} business. Bay-ansil ang bisnis níya karun, He is engaged
in the business of buying and selling. {2} prostitute (euphemism). —
manidyir n business manager. — wúman = bisnis, 2. v [B16; c] engage in
prostitution. Nagbisnis na si Rus, Rose is ‘in business’ now.

bispiras n evening or day before an event. Bispiras sa Pasku, Christmas
Eve. Bispiras sa tábù, The day before market day. v {1} [B56; b4] be an
evening or day before an event or holiday. Mibispiras (nabispiras,
nagbispiras) na lang sa pista wà gihápun siya muabut, It’s already the
eve of the fiesta, and he has not arrived yet. {2} [B1256] do things on
the eve of an event or holiday. Mabispiras sa Pasku ray íyang ipaúlì,
He returns home only on Christmas Eve. {3} [A1] spend the eve of a
holiday.

bista_1 n hearing or trial in court. Giabsuwiltu siya niadtung bistáha,
He was acquitted in that trial. v [A; a2] hear a case. Bistáhun karun
ang sumbung kuntra nímu, The case against you will be heard today.

bista_2 = purbista.

bisti n clothing. Dunut nga bisti, Ragged clothes. v {1} [AN; c] wear,
put on clothes. Unsay ibisti nímu sa ímung kasal? What will you wear to
your wedding? {2} [A] put clothes on s.o. {3} [AP; cP] provide with
clothes. Pabistíhan (bistíhan) ka námù ug swildúhan pa, We will provide
you with clothing and a salary.†

bistída, bistídu n woman’s dress of one piece. v [A; a] wear, make into
a dress. bistidahun n dress material. Maáyung bistidahun ang lís, Lace
is good as dress material.

bistig = bip-istik.

bistipul = bustipul.

bistu a {1} visible. Bistu kaáyu ang Kanlaun gíkan dinhi, You can
clearly see Mt. Canlaon from here. {2} for a secret to be very much of
public knowledge. Bistu kaáyung pagkapalikíru nímu, Your philandering
is an open secret. v {1} [B1256] get to be visible. Mabistu sa karsádag
ibílin dinhi, If you leave it here, it will be visible from the street.
{2} [AB126; c16] make s.t. open knowledge, for s.t. to become open
knowledge. Ikaw bay nagbistu nga minyù ku? Were you the one who let out
the secret that I’m married? Nabistu ang ímung kaláki, Your doings are
now an open secret. — ang baráha, bulitin = bistu, v2.

*bísug pakig- v [A23; b(1)] {1} struggle against in order to attain
s.t. Makigbísug ku sa mga kalisdánan sa kinabúhì, I will struggle
against life’s difficulties. pangin-, pangim- v [A2; b(1)] strive
against obstacles. Nangimbísug ang hubákun ug ginháwa, The asthma
victim struggled to get a breath.

bisukut = pisukut.

bisul n yautia, k.o. arum, the roots of which are branching tubers and
the lateral branches of which are eaten: Xanthosoma violaceum.

bisung n woman’s genitalia. hiN-(←) v [B46] for women to blossom forth
and be robust (humorous). Makapanghimísung diay ning gugma, Love makes
a woman blossom forth.

bisyu n {1} vice. Bisyu sa babáyi, The vice of chasing women. {2} mau
ra gihápun nga — it’s the same process, the same words as had been
explained before. Ihúmul sa túbig, butangag asin, kutílun, basta mau
gihápung bisyúha, Soak it, add salt, stir, and so forth. v {1} [A1;
c16] indulge in vice. Ayaw bisyuha (ibisyu) ang pagtabakù, Don’t make
smoking a vice. {2} [A1; c16] do s.t. always. Nagbisyu siyag
kantakanta, He has the habit of singing. -sa, -su(←) a fond of
indulging in vice. v [B12; b6] become full of vices. Mabisyúsu ang
bánag layù sa asáwa, A husband tends to indulge in vice when he is
separated from his wife.

bítad v [A; a1] pull, usually in the direction of a stationary agent.
Bitára nang katri diri, Pull that bed over this way. — ug hábul [A12;
c6] afford a scanty amount of nourishment (provide just enough strength
to pull a blanket over oneself). Ang panihápun nga ákung gikaun ígù ra
giyung ibítad ug hábul, I had a very scanty supper. paN-(←) v [A23] be
at the tail end in a race or contest. Namítad siya sa lumbà, He
finished last in the race.

bitaki n Vitamin K.

bitamin, bitamína n vitamins.

bitan-ag n k.o. tree of wet areas.

bitang n bench. Palingkúra sa bitang ang átung bisíta, Give our visitor
a seat on the bench. v [A; a] make into, install a bench.

bítas v [A; a] lacerate, rip. Ang lansang mauy nakabítas sa ákung
sinínà, The nail ripped my dress. Ayaw bitása ang kurtína, Don’t rip
the curtain in two. Bitási ang kinatáwu níya arun katawhan dáyun, Make
a laceration in her vagina to facilitate the birth. (→) n {1} rip,
slash, tear. {2} unmarried young woman who has had sexual experience.

bitaug n k.o. tree of strand: Calophyllum inophyllum.

bítaw {1} particle affirming interlocutor’s remark. ‘Mahal ra
kaáyu.’—‘Bítaw,’ ‘It’s too expensive.’—‘It sure is.’ ‘Dì ba tu ikaw si
Usting?’—‘Aku bítaw,’ ‘Aren’t you Osting?’—‘Yes, I am.’ ‘Tugnaw kaáyu
run.’—‘Nagswítir bítaw ku,’ ‘It sure is cold.’—‘Yes, it is. Why do you
think I’m wearing a sweater?’ {2} particle giving assurance.
{2a} [so-and-so] is the case anyway. Ayaw paghílak. Muabut na bítaw si
Máma nímu, Don’t cry. Your mother is coming anyway. {2b} stop
complaining because [so-and-so] happened, is happening in any case.
‘Sígi ming pangítà nímu dà.’—‘Nangítà bítaw pud ku nímu,’ ‘We have been
looking for you.’—‘Well, I have been looking for you, too.’ ‘Ngánung wà
ku nímu binlig kík?’—‘Niingun bítaw kang dì ka gustu,’ ‘Why didn’t you
leave me any cake?’—‘Well, you said you didn’t want any.’ {2c} don’t
worry about it, [so-and-so] is the case with s.o. else and it’s all
right. Ayaw paghílak. Aku bítaw, wà ku tagái, Don’t cry. I didn’t get
any either, so there. {2d} don’t worry about it. I’m just joking. Ambi
nà bi. Ayaw bítaw. Nagkumidiya lang bítaw ku, Give that to me. Don’t
really. I’m just joking. {2e} seriously now, please do [so-and-so].
Sígi bítaw. Adtu na ta, OK. OK, let’s go now. Ayaw bítaw ku dad-a sa
lawum, Oh, stop now. Don’t pull me into the deep water. Usà pa bítaw.
Unsa tuy ímung túyù pag-anhi? Seriously, though, what did you have in
mind in coming here? {3} see, [so-and-so] had to happen. ‘Sakit ákung
úlu.’—‘Bítaw. Giingnan ta bítaw kang dì magsígig ínum,’ ‘I have a
headache.’—‘See, I told you not to drink so much.’ Aligri man tà tu
silang duha. Naabtan bítaw nas amahan, They were just having fun, but
would not you know it, their father caught them.

bítàw = bítaw (before a pause).

bítay v [AB12S; c1] {1} hang s.t. up suspended, be hanging. Kinsay
nagbítay sa parul? Who hung the lantern up? Ang ímung ranggu nagbitay
sa usa ka lugas lánut, Your rank is hanging by a single thread (i.e.
you are in imminent danger of demotion). Bitáya (ibítay) sa bintánà ang
bandíra, Hang the flag in the window. {2} [A; c1] execute. Bitáya
(ibítay) siya sa silya iliktrika, Execute him in the electric chair.
{3} [A123P; a3] {3a} be beneath the other cock when fighting on the
wing. Nabíhag ang ákung manuk kay nabítay man paglupad, My cock was
defeated because it was beneath its opponent when they fought on the
wing. {3b} be far behind in a game or contest. {4} [A1; a] perform the
bítay ceremony in the súgat (see bítay, n3). n {1} death by hanging or
execution. {2} distance one is behind in a contest. {3} the lifting of
the alilúya in the súgat ceremony. (→) a tending to droop. Bitay siya
ug ngábil, She has drooping lips. v [B4] become drooping. Wà na siya
ganáhi. Nagbitay na lang, He didn’t feel like it any more. It (the
penis) just drooped. bitaybítay n the hanging part of dangling
earrings. -an(→) n place of execution. maN-r- n executioner. paN-
n {1} the lower wattles of a chicken. {2} hanging decorations in a
window. tingbitay sa irù, iring n the month of July when food is scarce
(and they hang dogs up to butcher them), or the period just before
payday. -únun, -un n condemned person. kulum- see kulumbítay.

bitbit v [A; a] carry or hold s.t. in the hand. Bitbíta ang baskit,
Carry the basket.

bitì n {1} snapping, popping sound. {2} popcorn. {3} white speck on the
iris. v {1} [A2] make a rather soft, snapping sound. Mibitì ang íyang
tiil pagkabálì, His foot snapped when it broke. {2} [A; c1] make
popcorn. {3} [A2B; b4] get a speck on the eyeball. Gibit-an ang ákung
mata, My eyes got a white speck on them.

bitíis = batíis.

bitik v {1} [A; a] catch with a noose or lasso. Bitika (bitka, bikta)
nang irù, Catch that dog with a lasso. {2} [A123P; a123] become
entangled or caught in. Nabitik ákung tiil sa bágun, My feet got
entangled in the vine. {3} [A; a2] trap a person into saying s.t. Maáyu
nang abugadúha mamitik ug bakákung saksi, That lawyer is good in
tripping up lying witnesses. {4} [a12] become a victim of s.o.’s clever
manipulation. Nabitik ku sa matam-is níyang sáad, I was entrapped by
his sweet promises. — sa hunsuy v [A13] do s.t. else rather than engage
in s.t. useless. Magbitik na lang ku sa hunsuy ug magnigusyu kug
alkansi, I’ll do better to trap my pipe than go into business and lose.
— sa utut v [A13; a12] do s.t. impossible (humorous). Bitkun kung ákung
utut ug kadama ka níya, I’ll eat my hat (lit. trap my fart) if you can
make it with her. n any flexible device for trapping animals that snaps
shut tightly when stepped on or jiggled.

bitikbitik v [A2N; b6] give a hint as to what one is about to do. Wà
man ka magbitikbitik (mamitikbitik) námung magminyù ka, You never gave
us a hint that you were getting married.

bitin n snake. v [a4] be bitten by a snake. Mu ra ka mag gibitin
(gibítin) kun musyágit, You scream as if you had been bitten by a
snake. -an n infested with snakes. Bitinan kanang langúba, That cave is
infested with snakes.

bítin = bíking.

bitiránu n {1} war veteran. {2} having long experience in s.t. Bitiránu
kaáyu siyang panday, He’s a veteran carpenter. Bitiránu kaáyu ning
báraw ku sa dinunggábay, This knife of mine is veteran of many knife
fights. v [B2] become experienced in s.t. Nagkabitiránu ku sa ínum, I
am becoming a veteran drinker.†

bitirinaryu n veterinarian. v [B16; a12] become, make into a
veterinarian.

bitlì n tiny growths on the face, like pimples, cysts. paN- v [A2] for
shoots, buds, leaves to sprout. Namitlì na giyud ang mga sáhà sa
ságing, At last my banana shoots have sprouted.

bitlig = bitlì.

bits_1 n beets.

bits_2 n bates, k.o. plain, finely woven cotton cloth.

bitsikurnu = pitsikurnu.

bitsin n monosodium glutamate food seasoning. v [A; bc] flavor with
monosodium glutamate.

bitsubitsu n delicacy consisting of shredded sweet potatoes, fried and
sugared. v [A; a] make bitsubitsu.

bitsukuy n k.o. pancake consisting of flour, sugar, and eggs, deep
fried and sprinkled with sugar. v [A13; a12] prepare, make into this
k.o. pancake.

bitsuylas n = habitsuylas.

bítu n a cave with a small opening but with a very large and spacious
interior. Dúnay bítu sa tiilan niánang bungtúra, There is a cave at the
foot of that mountain. v {1} [AB126; a] dig a hole, become a cave or
deep pit. Mubítu ang sundálu ug way kapasalipdan, Soldiers dig a hole
if they have no place to stay. {2} [A; c] throw in a hole. Ibítu ang
mga sagbut, Dump the garbage in the pit.

bitudbitud n tiny lumps formed when s.t. is mixed into s.t. else and
the mixing is not well done. v [B; a] be, become lumpy. Mubitudbitud
ang písì ug dílì ángay nga pagkalúbag, The rope will turn out lumpy if
you don’t twist it evenly. Ayaw bitudbitura ang ímung pagtimpla sa
litsi, Don’t mix the milk so that it comes out lumpy.

bitugul = tibugul.

bítuk n roundworm in the digestive tract. May bítuk nang batáa kay
dakug tiyan, That child has worms because he has a big belly. v [A123P;
a4] have worms. -un a having roundworms. bitukbítuk n k.o. children’s
game played by two teams. Each team is formed into a line and the team
that reaches the goal first wins. v [AC; b6] play this game. bitukbituk
n name given to pipefishes of worm-like size and appearance.

bitulbitul v [A; b6] form lumps. Mubitulbitul ang litsi ug madugayan,
Milk will curdle if you let it stand. Ang inagian sa iniksiyun
nagbitulbitul, The place they injected me is all full of lumps.

bítuls n {1} The Beatles singing group. {2} Beatles’ hairstyle. v [c16]
arrange the hair in the Beatles style. Bitúla (ibítul) ang buhuk mu,
Let your hair grow long like the Beatles. pa- v [A13] get a Beatle
hairdo.

bitun n shoe polish in solidified form. v [A; c] apply shoe polish.
Bituni (bitni) ang sapátus, Apply shoe polish to the shoes.

bitut n female genital organ (humorous euphemism).

bitúun n {1} star. {2} star in a movie. {3} star-shaped Christmas
lantern. {4} k.o. tree of strand, the star-shaped fruits of which are
used as fish poison: Barringtonia asiatica. {5} — sa dágat starfish.
v [A; c1] star in a movie production. Ang salídang íyang gibituúnan,
The picture he starred in. (→) = bitúun 4. paN- v [A2] {1} for stars to
be out. Mamitúun gánì, lagmit dì muulan, When there are stars, it is
not likely to rain. {2} for oily spots to form on the surface of a
liquid. Mamitúun ang sabaw basta tambuk ang lutúun, The soup sparkles
with fat if you cook fat in it.†

bíu n body odor. Bahúang bíu nímu uy, Jesus, what strong b.o. you’ve
got. v [B126] have b.o. Mabíu (biúhun) ka ug dì ka malígù, You’ll have
b.o. if you don’t take a bath. biúhun a having strong b.o.

biúung n female genitalia (euphemism for bisung).

bíyà v {1} [A; b(1)] leave a place, s.t. behind. Ngánung mibíyà ka man
dinhi? Why did you leave? Kinsay nagbíyà ning libru diri? Who left this
book here? Dì ku makabíyà sa ákung búhat, I can’t leave my work. Byái
ang pagtabakù, Quit your smoking habit. Hibyaan siya sa trin, She
missed the train (i.e., failed to get married). Gibyáan na nà nákù sa
buut, I have already forgotten that insignificant matter. Ang ímung
pamisti hibyaan na sa urug, Your clothes are way out of style (have
been left behind by the styles). {2} [A; b(1)] abandon, desert. Mibíyà
ang bána sa asáwang yawyawan, The husband deserted his nagging wife.
{2a} [A23] die. Gagmay pa mi sa dihang mibíyà si Tátay námù, We were
still kids when our father died. {3} [A12; b26] win by a certain
distance, amount. Dílì makabíyà si Usminya ni Markus ug usa ka gatus ka
líbu dinhi sa Sugbu, Osmeña can’t garner a majority of one-hundred
thousand votes over Marcos here in Cebu. Hibyaan siyag duha ka dupa sa
mananáug, He was behind the winner by two arm’s lengths. {4} [a3]
become the underdog. Nabíyà siya kay Ilurdi ang kuntra, He was the
underdog because Elorde was his opponent. {5} [a3] become leftover
waste material. (→) {1} amount by which s.o. is behind in a contest.
{2a} be left behind. Biyà na kaáyu sa panahun, You are very much behind
the times. {2b} things not in use, cast off. Átung ihátag ang biyà nga
sinínà sa mga pubri, We’ll give our old clothes to the poor.
{2c} by-products. Ang biyà sa pamanday magámit nga sugnud, The
leftovers from carpentry work can be used as fuel. {3} the underdog in
a fight. Ug parángan ang bisayà ug tiksas, biyà ang bisayà, If a
Visayan cock is matched with a Texas, the Visayan is the underdog.
{4} homely. Biyag nawung, Homely looking. {5} poor in quality. Biyang
panaptun, Poor quality cloth. {6} s.o. who behaves in a bad way. Biyà
ug batásan. Isipan, He is an awful sort. He counts favors he renders.
v {1} = bíyà 4. {2} get to be poor in quality. Nagkabíyà ang íyang ági
nadúgayng sinuwat, His penmanship got worse and worse the longer he
wrote. pa- v {1} [A; b] allow oneself or s.t. to be left behind. Dì ku
magpabíyà sa íyang buut, I won’t allow her to forget me (to be left out
of her thoughts). {2} [A] bet on the underdog. Ug pabíyà ta, dakù tag
daug, If we bet on the underdog, we will win more. -um-r-(→) a given to
deserting one’s family.

biyaw n k.o. small shiny beetle found in trees.

biyin expression denoting approval of s.t. done which is necessary for
the next thing to do. Biyin, sunud ímu nang lat-an hangtud mahúmuk,
Fine. Next, boil it until it becomes tender. u — or else. Nanglampásu
tà ka u biyin nanglaba ba, You should have polished the floor or else
washed the clothes.

bíyu v {1} [AB; c1] twirl or whirl on its axis, cause s.t. to do so.
Nagbíyu nga lílù, A whirling whirlpool. {2} [AB; c] go around an area.
Ibíyu ang sakyanan sa syudad, Take the car around the city. {3} [C;
ac3] have a contest spinning tops. Byúhun nátù, kun kinsay mauna, Let’s
have a top-spinning contest to see who goes first.

blag n word used in writing to represent a thudding sound.

blak-anwayit n black and white shoes.

blak-áwut n blackout in wartime. v [B6; c1] have, cause a blackout.
Átung iblak-áwut (blak-awtun) ang tanang sugà sa syudad, We will black
out all the lights in the city.

blak-ay n black eye. v [AB26; a1b2] give, have a black eye. Miblak-ay
(nablak-ay) íyang mata, He got a black eye.

blakbins n name given to salted black beans (tahusyu) sold in cans.
v {1} [A13] eat salted black beans with the staple food. {2} [b6] cook
with salted black beans.

blakbur, blakburd n blackboard. v [c16] make into a blackboard.

blakbúting n block voting. v [A1; c1] engage in block voting.

blakdyak n {1} game of blackjack. {2} blackjack in cards. v {1} [A23;
a] play blackjack. {2} [A12] get blackjack. Nakablakdyak ku, I got a
blackjack. {3} [B26] for cards to be blackjack.

blakhart n spades in cards. Ilábay ang blakhart nga alas, Discard the
ace of spades.

bláking v [A; b6(1)] {1} blocking in games. Dì ku makabláking sa íyang
kúmù kay hilabihang kusúga, I couldn’t block his blows because they
were so fast. {2} block the progress of s.t. Giblakíngan ang ákung
apuyíntmint sa mayur, The mayor blocked my appointment.

blakmarkit n black market. v [c6] sell s.t. on the black market.

blakmil, blakmíling n blackmail. v [A; a1] blackmail s.o.

blak plin n a carpenter’s plane for cutting across the grain on board
ends.

blakrámi n way of playing rummy in which one can meld all the sets of
cards at once. v [A2; c1] go ‘block rummy’.

blaktin n the combination of an ace and ten in blackjack, sometimes
given higher value than other combinations totalling twenty-one. v [A2;
a2b2] make an ace-ten combination.

blangku a blank, empty. Daghan kag blangku. Malagmit kang mahagbung,
You left lots of blanks. You’ll probably fail. Blangkug nawung,
Blank-faced. Butangi ang blangku sa hustung tubag, Put the right answer
in the blank. v [A2; b6] leave a blank. Blangkúhi lang ang pangutánang
wà nímu hikamahui, Leave the questions you don’t know blank.

blap n s.t. false said to make s.o. act in a desired way. Ang búnus nga
gitahù blap lang, The bonus he kept talking about was all a hoax. v [A;
a2] make s.o. believe s.t. to obtain compliance. Blapun nátù siyang wà
tay kwarta, Let’s hoax her into thinking that we don’t have any more
money.

blátir n {1} blotting paper. {2} a police blotter. Naintra na sa blátir
ang ímung kásu, Your case has been entered in the police blotter.
v {1} [A; c] enter in the police blotter. Iblátir nákù ang inyung mga
ngálan, I’ll enter your names into the police blotter. {2} [b6(1)] blot
s.t.

bláwus = blúsa.

blid v [A] bleed. Gablid ákung samad, My wound is bleeding. -ing(←)
v [A13] have bleeding after an operation or delivery. Nagblíding ang
íyang upirasyun sa paglíhuk níya, He bled where he had been operated
when he moved.

blíd n razor blade.

blits v [A; c1] bleach one’s skin or hair.

blú a blue in color. v [AB; bc1] become, make s.t. blue.

bluáwut v [A; b6(1)] give a party with substantial food and drinks in
celebration of s.t. Magbluawut kug makapasar ku sa bár, I’ll give a big
party if I pass the bar.

blúbuk n booklet with a blue cover for answers to examinations.

blúki n {1} large solid piece of ice with a flat surface. {2} town or
city block. {3} market stall. {4} political block, faction. v [c16]
form, divide into blocks. Blukíha (iblúki) nang yílu, Form the ice into
blocks.

blúmir n bloomers. v [A; a] wear, make into bloomers.

blúsa n blouse. v [A; c1] wear, make, make into a blouse.

blúsil n {1} American smuggled cigarettes (named from their blue seal).
{2} American or European person (slang). Nakaasawa siyag blúsil, He
married a blue seal (American).

blúwir n blower, ventilating fan. v [b(1)] install a blower.

bra n bra. v [A; c] wear a bra.

brad n {1} intimate term of address to a man. Mangáun ta, brad, Come
over here and eat with me, friend. {2} term of address to a brother.

brádir n brother in a fraternity.

brandi n brandy.

brandilya, brandilyas = barandilya.

bras, brás n brush. v [A; b6(1)] brush s.t. Brasi ang makinilya, Clean
the typewriter with a brush.

brása, brásas n measurement the length of an arm. Usa ka brása
(brásas), One arm-length. Kwatru brásas, Four arm-lengths.

brásu n biceps. brasúhun a having well-developed biceps.

*brásus — dimirsídis n k.o. dessert made from cake baked in a thin
layer, rolled up and filled with a sweet mixture of egg yolk and
condensed milk.

bráwun a brown in color. v [AB; c1] dye s.t. into, become brown.

brayids míd n bridesmaid.

brayit a mentally quick, clever. Púrus mga brayit nà sila, They are all
intelligent. v [B2; b6] become mentally quick, clever.

bríd v [A; c6] breed animals. Nagbríd kug mga manuk dirása, I’m
breeding imported fighting cocks. Ibríd ang manuk mung bisayà ug
lighurn, Breed your native chickens with leghorns.

*brid amirikan — n bread baked in a box-shape like what is usually
packaged in the States.

brids n bridge of teeth, a device for securing artificial crowns where
teeth are missing, by anchoring it to the natural teeth. v [A] put in a
bridge.

brik n ice-cream brick.

brík_1 n break from work. v [A] take a break.

brík_2 n brakes of a vehicle. v [A; b6(1)] {1} apply the brakes. Bríki
ang awtu, kay dulhugun, Brakes! We’re going down on a steep incline.
{2} stop a vehicle.

brík_3 v {1} [A123PC; c3] break off a relationship between two lovers.
Bríki nang ímung trátu, Break up with your sweetheart.

brík_4 v [A; a12] separate two boxers. Kun maggákus ang buksidur,
bríkun, When boxers clench each other, they are separated.

brík_5 n in bowling, the action of downing the ten pins on the third
throw. v [A12; c16] make a break. Kinahanglang bríkun (ibrík) nímu
kining labáya arun ka makaigwális, You must make a break on this throw
if you want to even up the score.

brikdáwun v [B2; c16] have a breakdown. Nalángan mi kay nabrikdáwun ang
trák, We were delayed because the truck had a breakdown. nirbus —
nervous breakdown.

brilyanti n diamond polished to a high brilliance.

brilyantin n brilliantine.

brilyu n brilliance, sparkle of precious stones. v [A; b] be
glittering, sparkling. Brilyúhi ang sapátus mu, Make your shoes shine
with brightness.

brinda n bridle. v [A; b6] put a bridle on a horse.

bringhawus n food given to a guest at a party, feast, etc. to bring
home. v [A; c1] for a guest to take food home. Bringhawsan ta kag
inasal sa pista, I’ll bring you some roast pig home from the fiesta.

bríp n brief or panty underwear. v [A] wear briefs. Nagbríp lang kung
nalígù, I went swimming in my briefs.

bris, brís n brace. v {1} [A; b] brace. Makalakaw lang siyag magbrís,
She cannot walk without her brace. Gibrísan nákung mga síya, I
strengthened the chairs with braces. {2} [A; a] make into a brace.

briskas = buriskas.

brislit n bracelet. v [A; a] wear, make into a bracelet.

britsis n short pants. v [A1; a] wear, make into short pants.

brudkas v [A; c6] {1} broadcast a radio program. Gibrudkas sa radiyung
mibutung Hibukhíbuk, It was broadcast over the radio that Mt.
Hibokhibok erupted. {2} spread information, gossip. Ayaw ibrudkas sa
mga silíngan ang mga nahitabù, Don’t broadcast what happened here to
the neighbors.

brudklut n broadcloth.

brunda n veil worn by women to church. v {1} [A; a] wear, make into a
veil. {2} [A12] get a veil.

brungkítis n bronchitis. v [B26; a4] become bronchitis, get bronchitis.
Patambáli nang ubu sa dì pa nà mabrungkítis, Treat your cough before it
turns into bronchitis. Gibrungkítis ku, I got bronchitis.

brungkurab n Broncho Rub, trade name for a medicated rub.

brunsi n bronze. — dulsi n bronze that is reddish in color. — pína
n bronze that is golden-yellow in color.

brutsa n brush. Brutsa sa pagpintal, sapátus, Paint, shoe brush.
v {1} [A; b] brush s.t. Gibrutsáhan níya ang sapátus, He brushed the
shoes. {2} [A; b5] lick a woman’s sexual parts to induce excitement. Dì
mubulag ang babáyi basta brutsáhun (hibrutsáhan), As long as you lick a
girl, she’ll never break off from you. {3} [a12] make into a brush.
paN- v [A2; b] brush one’s hair. Mambrutsa ku, I will brush my hair.

brútu a like a brute, cruel and gross in behavior. Gihagkan ku dihàdihà
sa brútu, The brute kissed me then and there.

brúwa, brúwas n spongy cookie, ladyfingers. v [A; a2] make ladyfingers.

bú_1 v [A; b5] boo. Gibú (gibúhan) sa mga táwu ang disisyun sa kuymi,
The crowd booed the umpire’s decision. n booing.

bú_2 = búlu_1.

buad a bulging, stretched outward in fullness. Táwung buad, Man with
his stomach sticking out. Ang panà buad, A bow is bent forward. v [B;
c1] bulge, bend, curve outward in fullness. Mubuad (mabuad) ang sákung
punù, A sack that’s full will bulge. Hángin ang nakabuad (nakapabuad)
sa láyag, The wind caused the sail to balloon. pabuadbúad v [A1] walk,
sit with the stomach sticking out. Nagpabuadbúad ang mabdus sa íyang
linakwan, The pregnant woman is walking with her stomach sticking out.

buágas v [A2S; b6] flow profusely. Nagbuagas ang túbig, Water is
flowing profusely.

buagsa, buagsà v [B26; b2] for several things to fall and be scattered
in every direction. Pagkabuak sa alkansíya, nabuagsà ang kwarta, When
the piggy bank broke, the money fell all over the place. a scattered
because of falling or having been dropped.

buagya a be scattered all over the place. Buagya ang mga butang sa
ímung kwartu, The things in your room are strewn all over the place.
v [AB; a] scatter, be scattered all over the place. Way láin nga
mubuagya niánang balità, si Síta ra, No one but Zita would broadcast
that news. Wà na gániy inahan magbuagya (mabuagya) na giyud ang mga
anak, If the mother is gone, the children will scatter. ti- see
tibuagya.

buak v [A3; a] {1} break s.t. open, to pieces; for s.t. to break.
Nakabuak siya sa alkansíya, He broke the piggy bank open. {2} [A; a12]
break the silence. Usa ka singgit mibuak sa kahílum, A shout broke the
silence. {3} [A; a12] change money. Átung buakun (buk-un) ning diyisun,
Let’s break this ten-spot. {4} [A; a12] break in a virgin. {5} [B2] for
the voice to break. Mibuak ang íyang tíngug sa tantu níyang sinyágit,
His voice broke after shouting so much. a {1} broken open, with a piece
broken off. Dì maáyung gamítun ang sáming buak, It’s no good to use a
broken mirror. babáyi nga — a woman who is no longer a virgin.
{2} broken in voice. buak, (←) v [A1C12; a] split coconuts to make
copra. Buk-an tung ákung útang, I will repay my debt by splitting
coconuts. (←) n season for making copra. ting-(←) = búak, n. pa- v [A]
make s.t. break. Ang pagbanggà sa awtu nakapabuak sa bildu, The crash
caused the car’s window to break.

búang a {1} insane, crazy. Gigaugáu sa kabatáan ang búang, The children
are making fun of the insane person. Irung búang, A rabid dog.
{2} lacking sense. Búang nímung mubáyad kag diyis, You must be crazy to
pay ten pesos! Ayaw ku tudlúi. Dì ku búang, You don’t have to show me.
I’m not stupid. {3} naughty, pranking. Búang kaáyung bat-ána kay
manglìlì, What a naughty child! He peeps at people. {4} the one who is
‘it’ in games. {5} defective coconut with no water and no meat.
v {1} [B126; b3] go crazy. Hápit ku mabúang dihang ímung gitalikdan, I
almost went crazy when you left me. {1a} [A; a12] make s.o. insane.
Gibúang siya sa bugsikan, The sorcerer inflicted madness on him.
{2} [a2] fool s.o., think s.o. a fool. Ayaw kug buánga kay nasáyud ku
sa nahitabù, Don’t try to fool me because I know what happened.
Gibuángan ka ba nákù? Do you take me for a fool? {3} [B12; b3(1)] go
crazy about s.t. Nabúang siya sa súgal, He’s crazy over gambling.
Babáying íyang gikabuángan, The woman he was crazy about. {4} [B125;
a12] have a hard time doing s.t. for which one has little time.
Nagkabuang kug pinangítà nímu, I was going crazy looking for you.
{5} [B1245] do s.t. in an irrational, crazy way. Nagkabuang ang mga
táwug dágan pagbutu, The people ran every which way in panic upon
hearing the explosion. (→) a = búang, 5. buangbuang v {1} = búang, v 4,
5. {2} [A12C; b6] play a game of tag hide-and-seek. n tag
hide-and-seek. pabuangbúang v [A] pretend to be a fool, crazy.
Magpabuangbúang ug pangutan-un. Mu rag dílì siya, You ask him and he
pretends not to know. As if it wasn’t him. paka- v [A13; a12] act,
treat like a fool or crazy person. Ayaw pagpakabúang dihà. Gamítang
ímung úlu, Don’t act like a fool. Use your head. -in- n {1} stupidity,
unreasonable foolishness. Usa ka binúang ang pagpakamatay tungud sa
gugma, It’s stupid to kill oneself for love. {2} foolish prank. Binúang
sa mga iskuyla kining pagsuwat sa bungbung, This writing on the wall is
just one of the children’s pranks. v [A; b(1)] do foolish mischief. Way
mubinúang nímu dinhi samtang nía ku, No one will do you any mischief as
long as I am here. Ayaw kug binuángi, ha, Don’t try any foolishness on
me, understand! ka- n {1} insanity. {2} serious mischief. Mu nay
sangputánan sa ímung kabúang, That’s where your mischief will end you.
kina- = ka-, 2. kina-(→) a not done in seriousness. v [A1; b6(1)] do
s.t. without being serious about it. Nagkinabuang mig aplay ug nadáwat
mi, We just applied for the fun of it, and we were hired. -un(→)
a acting insane, stupid.†

buaw v [BN] for the eyes to get swollen. Mibuaw (namuaw) íyang mata ug
kinatúlug, Her eyes got swollen from sleeping too much.

búaw v [B126] for a part of the body to swell after being struck.
Nabúaw ang kumagkù níyang natudturan sa martilyu, He accidentally
struck his thumb with a hammer, and it swelled.  particle: magical
expression used to qualify a statement which praises s.o., said for the
purpose of avoiding harm to the person praised. Maáyu búaw kang mulútù,
You cook well, evil spirits beware. Gwápu búaw kag anak, You have a
beautiful child, evil spirits beware.

buáya n {1} crocodile. {2} lend or gamble in such a way that there is
no chance of getting any but huge returns. Buáya nà siyang mupahulag
kwarta. Dakug garantíya. Dakug pátung, He is a real crocodile in his
money-lending. He demands a huge security and huge interest. Buáya nga
mupúkir, He plays poker ruthlessly. {3} hogging the ball in basketball.
{4} = dispatsir. v [B12; b6] get to be greedy in lending, gambling, or
with the ball. paN- v {1} [A2; b6(1)] catch crocodiles. {2} [A2; a12]
for s.o. to entrap s.o. into playing against him by pretending not to
know how. Gipamuáya kug ahidris níya, He trapped me into playing chess
with him. {3} = dispatsir, v. buayáhun a having a configuration in the
lines of the palm resembling a crocodile and which signifies that the
bearer will never have living children and further his brothers and
sisters will not live to maturity. This configuration can be changed by
magical means.

búba n = búbu_1 (female).

bubhu v [A; b] {1} wash the hair. Bubhúig bawnus ang ákung buhuk,
Shampoo my hair with gogo. {2} put s.t. in the hair as dressing.
n {1} s.t. to wash hair with. {2} hair dressing. paN- v [A2; b6] wash,
dress one’s hair. Mamubhu kug lubi, I will rinse my hair with coconut
juice.

bubhuan = abubhuan. see *abubhu.

búbu_1 a deeply stupid, idiotic. Búbu ang íyang anak. Dì gánì
makasulti, Her child is a moron. It cannot even talk. v [B2; a12b6]
turn out to be an idiot.

búbu_2, búbù n box-like trap woven from bamboo slats allowing entrance
but no egress, used to catch fish or monkeys. v {1} [A; a] make, make
into such a trap. {2} [A2N; a] catch things with the búbu. Bubúun
(bubúhun) nátù ang ungguy arun búhing dakpan, Let’s trap the monkey
with a búbu so he can be taken alive. Kining sapáa maáyung bubúan, This
river is a good place to set a fish trap.

bùbù v {1} [A; c] pour s.t. out, into s.t. Namayur siya kay mibùbù mag
kwarta, He became mayor because he poured money out for it. Bùbúi ang
lub-angun, Pour water on the seedlings. Ibùbù ang túbig sa akwaryum,
Pour the water into the aquarium. Ibùbù ku kanímu ang tanan kung
pagmahal, I will shower all my affection on you. Ibùbù ku sa trabáhu
ang tanan kung kabudlay, I will pour my every effort into the job.
{2} [b(1)] flush a land crab out by pouring water in its hole. n action
of watering. Kuwag bùbù ang rúsas, The roses haven’t been watered
enough. paN- v [A2] catch land crabs by flushing them out. -anay,
-ay(→) v [C; c6] for employees to put a fixed amount in a kitty each
month. The kitty goes to each member in turn. Magbùbuay tag tagbayinti
káda kinsína, We chip in twenty for the revolving kitty every two
weeks. -anan n place into, through which liquid is poured.

búbud = budbud.

bubun = hubun.

bubung n {1} covering at the ridge of the roof. {2} household unit
living under one roof. Paamútun nátung káda bubung ug singku písus,
Every household shall contribute five pesos. {3} house, home. Nag-ípun
mig puyù sulud sa usa ka bubung, We live together under one roof. v [A;
c] cover the space between the upper edges of the roof, at the ridge.
-an n = bubung, n 1, 2.

búd_1 = búlud.

búd_2 = bátud, n.

búda n formal gown. Daw rayna siyang tan-áwun sa íyang búda, She looks
like a queen in her wedding dress. — dipláta silver wedding
anniversary, or silver jubilee in the priesthood. — diúru golden
wedding anniversary or golden jubilee in the priesthood. v [A; c1]
wear, make into a wedding dress.

budabil n {1} vaudeville. {2} combination of mahjong pieces consisting
of dagger, mirror, and grass pieces. -ay v [C] play with extra money on
the budabil combination.

búdas diúru, pláta golden, silver wedding anniversary or jubilee in the
priesthood.

budbud v {1} [A; c] wind string, wire, strips, etc. around s.t. or into
a ball. Budbúri nag bandids ang ímung samad, Wind a bandage around your
wound. Ibudbud ang lúbid sa lápis, Wind the rope around the pencil.
{2} [A; c1] make a stick of dynamite out of. {3} [A; a2] make the
delicacy budbud. n {1} coil, spoolful. Usa ka budbud hílu, A spoolful
of thread. {2} stick of dynamite. {3} sweet prepared from crushed
ingredients (rice, corn, pili nut, millet, etc.) formed into sticks,
wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed. budburan n reel, spool. budburun
n k.o. small cylindrical mackerel.

budhì_1 v [A; b] betray a faith or trust. Patyun ta kag budhían ku
nímu, I’ll kill you if you betray me. ma-un a {1} traitorous.
{2} unfaithful.

budhì_2 v [B46] for s.t. to be not thoroughly cooked in the center.

budíding = buríring.

budíga n {1} warehouse for holding heavy materials. {2} place in the
hold of a ship for cargo, often open. {3} cargo compartment of a plane,
truck, car, etc. {4} stomach of a person (slang). Dakug budíga kay
dakug káun, He has a big stomach because he eats a lot. v {1} [a12]
make into a warehouse. Budigáhun kung katungà ning bildínga, I’ll make
the other half of this building into a warehouse. {2} [b] make a cargo
compartment in s.t. budigíru n one who works in a warehouse.

budígus n earthen jug with a long slender neck and a small opening.

budlat a bulging eyes. v [BN6; b6] for the eyes to bulge. Mibudlat
íyang mata sa kasukù, His eyes bulged in anger. -an n name given to
fishes with bulging eyes, e.g. k.o. slipmouth (palutput) with this
appearance: Gazza minuta. -un(→) a having bulging eyes.

budlay a tiring, tiresome. Budlay kaáyu ning magguna sa ínit, It’s
tiring to cut grass in the sun. Budlay kaáyu ang magpaábut, It’s
tiresome to wait. v [A; a2b3] {1a} be inconvenienced, put to great
effort. Mibudlay giyud ku pag-anhi, I took the trouble of coming here.
Ayaw kug budláya sa ímung mga prublíma, Don’t trouble me with your
problems. {1b} toil. Nagbudlay siya arun mabúhì, He toils in order to
live. {2} [A; a12] tire. Ayaw budláya ang masakitun, Don’t tire the
patient. {3} [b6] consider s.t. tiresome. Gitilipunuhan ta ka kay
gibudláyan kung muanhà, I phoned you because it’s easier than going to
your house. ka- n effort exerted to get s.t. done. Nasalbar siya tungud
sa kabudlay sa duktur, The doctor’s efforts saved him. -in-an, kina-an
n s.t. earned by labor. hiN-, haN- v [ANP; b6] take a rest. Anhà ku sa
landung sa mangga manghimudlay (muhimudlay, magpahimudlay), I’ll rest
under the mango tree. tinghiN- n rest period.

budlis n long, thin mark, stripe, smear. Lagmit buláwan ang dág nga
budlis sa batu, The yellow streaks in the stone are probably gold.
v [A3P; b6(1)] mark with streaks or stripes. Ayaw budlísi ug úling ang
salug, Don’t streak charcoal on the floor. -an n name given to fishes
with streaks.

budlísiw = bidlísiw.

budlung_1 v [A; a12] dig out plants with deep-running roots.
Kinahanglan budlúngun gayud ang kúgun kay lawum ug dulut, You have to
really dig out the cogon grass, because it runs deep. n heavy metal bar
for digging out weeds with deep roots.

budlung_2 n sweet made of cornstarch (tik tik), brown sugar, shredded
coconut meat, wrapped in banana leaves to form a stick and steamed.

budlut a sticking out, protruding. Budlut ug simud, Lips that stick
out. v [B46N; b(1)c16P] bulge, protrude. Mibudlut (namudlut) íyang
kaunuran pag-alsa níya sa barbil, His flesh bulged when he lifted the
barbell. Nagbudlut ang íyang mata, His eyes bulge.

budluy n k.o. mackerel scad or round scad: Decapterus macrosoma.

búdu = búru_1.

budyas = bugyas.

budyung n {1} helmet shells, conchs, or any large univalve with a
pointed caudal apex. {2} horn for signaling made from the budyung or
one similar in appearance made from a carabao horn. {3} horn or whistle
blown as a signal. Wà ku makabatì sa budyung sa alas síti, I didn’t
hear the seven o’clock whistle. v [A; a] sound a budyung or any warning
device. — kamwà n tuns. — lungga n true conchs. — sa lubut sa anay
n frog shells, so called from their openings which resemble a pig’s
anus. — tambúlì n helmet shells. — tangali n tritons.

búg = bulug_1, 2, 3, 4.

buga v {1} [A; c] emit s.t. with force or in great quantity. Ang adlaw
mibuga sa íyang naglagiting nga kaínit, The sun emitted its stinging
rays. Nagbuga ug átà ang kugíta, The octopus spewed out his ink. Tugtug
nga gibuga sa amplipáyir, The song which the amplifier blared out.
{2} [A; a] treat an illness by expectorating chewed medicinal herbs on
a sore spot or at the person. Naáyu ang nagsakit nga tiyan nga
gibugahan, His stomach ailment got better after the herbalist spat on
it. {3a} [A; b] do s.t. with force or energy. Ug bugahan nig trabáhu,
human dáyun, If you do this with energy, it will get done right away.
{3b} hit s.o. hard with the fist (slang). Ang íyang úlu mauy gibugahan
pag-áyu ni Ilurdi, Elorde kept smashing at his head.

búgà n side arm (slang). v [a1] shoot s.o. with a side arm.

bugaguy n stupid, having little or no judgment or common sense. Ang mga
bugaguy nagtangà lang. Maung nakaiskápu ang dinakpan, The idiots were
so careless, so the prisoner escaped. v [B2; a2] be, become a person
with little common sense. Mubugaguy (mabugaguy) nang ímung anak kun dì
tagáag rispunsibilidad, Your child will never develop common sense if
he is never given responsibilities. Gibugaguyan kaáyu ku níya nga
mukatáwa lag walay sinugdánan, I consider her a fool because she laughs
for no reason whatsoever.

bugáis n k.o. ringworm, k.o. skin disease marked by circular scaly
patches. v [B1246; a4b5] infect with ringworm. Gibugáis (gibugaisan)
ang ákung búgan, My groin got infected with ringworm.

bugal a braggart, boastful. Ang táwung bugal magdáyig sa íyang
kaugalíngun, A braggart extols himself. v [B2; b6] get to be a
braggart. -un a braggart in one’s ways. bugalbugal, bugalbúgal
n ridicule, a comment about s.o. that is humorous and disrespectful.
v [A; b5] deride, make s.o. the object of contemptuous laughter.
Bugalbugalan aku sa usa ka bungì? Me, be ridiculed by a harelip? ma-un,
-un a fond of ridiculing.

búgan (from bulug) n groin. (→) v [a12] hit s.o. in the groin. Bugana
siya pagpátid, Kick him in the groin.

bugang n name given to various tall tufted grasses and reeds (tangbù,
taláhib, et al.). -in- a pidgin. v [A; c1] speak a language brokenly.
Nagbinugang siya pag-ininglis, He spoke bamboo English.

bugarak v [B46; c] gush, flow out with a rush. Mibugarak ang túbig sa
sandayung, The water gushed out of the spout. n gushing, rushing flow.
Bugarak sa bahà, The onrush of the flood.

bugarut a giving an impression of weight or ponderousness, having thick
heavy features. Bugarut ug nawung, mu rag alíwas, He has coarse
features, like an ape. n k.o. fish that looks ugly.

bugas n {1} husked rice or corn. {2} pimple, cyst. Dì makáun ning
babúya kay may bugas, You can’t eat this pig because it is infested
with cysts. v {1} [A; a] husk rice or corn. Pínu kaáyung mubugas ning
galingána, This mill produces fine grains. {2} [B1246; a4] get pimples,
cysts. Gibugas íyang nawung, She has pimples on her face. — mais corn
grits. — humay husked rice. -an(←) n {1} container for husked rice or
corn. {2} rice or corn mill. -ánan n rice or corn mill. -íru n one who
engages in the buying and selling of husked corn or rice. paN-
n {1} money to buy rice with. {2} s.t. done in all seriousness as if it
were the source of one’s livelihood. Pamugas nang íyang pagpusta, His
betting is strictly for the money. v [A12; c6] buy husked rice or corn.
Ígù ra gayung ikapamugas ning sapía, This money is just enough to buy
husked rice (or corn). -un a pimply.†

bug-at a {1} heavy. {2} difficult to accomplish, onerous. Bug-at nga
taríya, Difficult task. Bug-at nga kaakúhan, Heavy responsibility.
{3} heavy punishment, sorrows. Bug-at nga sílut, Heavy punishment.
{4} grave, serious accusation. Bug-at ang pasángil nga gipahamtang
kanímu, A grave accusation has been leveled against you. {5} for the
muscles to be fatigued. Bug-at ning ákung buktun pagkinúgus nímu, My
arms are exhausted from holding you. {6} — ang balatían dislike s.t.
strongly. Bug-at ang balatían nákù ánang nangulitáwu sa ákung anak, I
dislike the man that is courting my daughter very much. {7} — ang buut
{7a} = — ang balatían. {7b} be against one’s will. Gitugtan ku níya
bisan bug-at sa íyang buut, He allowed me to do it even if it was
against his will. — ang dughan be heavy-hearted, depressed. — ang dugù
= — ang balatían. — ang kúmù pack a heavy punch. — nga masúgù gives
commands in such a way that they must be accomplished rapidly and well.
— ang nawung long-faced, unsmiling. v [B; b6] {1} become heavy,
onerous, grave. {2} — ang balatían, buut, dughan, dugù, nawung be
disgusted, against one’s wishes, get a heavy heart, long-faced, etc. Ug
manamkun ang ákung asáwa mubug-at ang íyang dugù magtan-aw nákù, When
my wife is in the early stages of pregnancy, she can’t stand to look at
me. Mubug-at íyang nawung ug sugúun, She gets a long face when I tell
her to do s.t. paN- v [A2] {1} lift heavy things. Nabughat siya kay
namug-at man, He had a relapse because he lifted heavy things. {2} to
stiffen in order to become heavier. Lisud kang sakwátun kay mamug-at
ka, You are hard to lift because you make yourself rigid. panghiN- v =
paN-, 2. pahiN- {1} = paN-, 2. {2} [A; b6] load s.t. on s.o. else.
Gipahimug-atan ang mutsatsa sa trabáhu maung mipaúlì, The work was
loaded on the maid, so she returned home. pa- n weight to weigh s.t.
down. ka-un(→), gi-un(→) n {1} weight. {2} importance, influence. Ayawg
tagáig gibug-atun tung kasabáa, Don’t give his reprimands any
importance. see also tumuy.

bug-átan n k.o. cockles.

bugáud n k.o. fish of the type called gunggung: Therapon sp.

bugáung n k.o. fish, the jarbua: Therapon jarbua. -un resembling the
bugáung. {1} k.o. bird, a cuckoo shrike: Lalage nigra. {2} fish
resembling the bugáung.

búgaw v [A; a] drive s.t. s.w., drive away. Ang musika makabúgaw sa
kaláay, Music can drive away boredom. Bugáwa ang isdà ngadtu sa púkut,
Drive the fish into the net. Bugáwi ku sa lángaw, Drive the flies away
from me. {2} [AN; b] act as a pimp. (→) v = búgaw, 2. n {1} s.t. used
to drive s.t. away. {2} pimp. ka- n one who assists s.o. in driving
away animals or birds.

bugawísan n k.o. large salt-water fish.

bugay_1 n bride price; gift originally given to the bride’s family, but
now often to the bride. v [A; c] give a bride price. Bugayan man gánì
untà kadtu siyag duha ka gatus, She could have gotten a dowry of two
hundred pesos.

bugay_2 = buguy (female).

bugbug = balugbug.

bugdu a bulging, full and round. Ang bugdu níyang dughan, Her full and
round breasts. v [B; c1] be, become bulging. Nagbugdu ang íyang likud
kay buktut man, His back bulges because he is a hunchback.

bughà v {1} [A; a] split, chop wood lengthwise. Mubughà kug káhuyng
igsusugnud, I’ll split some wood for firewood. {2} [B12] for s.t. long
to break. Nagkabughà ang sakayan nga gihampak sa balud, The boat was
gradually breaking apart as it was being beaten by the waves. {3} [a12]
hit with a piece of firewood. n piece of firewood.

bughat n k.o. sickness which results from leaving a sickbed or rising
from childbirth too early, or from the return of a disease. v [B12; a1]
have a relapse (bughat). Nabughat siya kay nagkáug danggit, He had a
relapse because he ate danggit fish. Bughátun ku nímug patrabáhu? You
want me to have a relapse with all the work you’re making me do? paN-,
hiN-, taliN- n medicine for bughat.

bughaw a {1} faded, pale in color. Bughaw nga itum, A faded black
color. {2} light blue in color. Pinintálag bughaw, Painted light blue.
v [B; c1] for colors to fade, get to be dull. Nabughaw ang íyang sinínà
kay gihayhay sa ínit, Her dress faded because she hung it in the sun.

bughuan = abubhuan. see *abubhu.

búgi n boogie. v [AC; c1] dance the boogie.

bugì n k.o. skin disease characterized by intense itching and
development of scales. v {1} [B1246; a4] get infected with scabies.
Bugiun ka ug makighagwà ka ánang irù nga pulgasun, You will be infected
with scabies if you frolic with that flea-infested dog. {2} [a4] light
curse expressing irritation. Gibugì man ning trabahúa, wà magkadimáu,
Damn this work. It’s done all wrong.

bugimbilya, buginbilya = bumbil.

buging n small ear of corn.

bugírit a boastful, putting on airs (euphemism for hambugíru). v [B;
b6] become boastful.

bugkas = bugtas.

bugkus_1 v [A; a1] tie a piece of string or s.t. similar around s.t.
long, usually to tie it together with s.t. else. Bugkúsa ang mga lipak,
Tie the bamboo slats into a bundle. Bugkúsi ug panyù ang ímung samad,
Tie a handkerchief around your wound. n {1} s.t. used to tie around
s.t. Alambri ang gamítang bugkus, Use wire to tie it up. {2} bundle.
Tagtrayinta ang bugkus sa káhuy, Each bundle of firewood costs thirty
centavos. -in- n s.t. tied into a bundle.

bugkus_2 a slender around the stomach. v [B12] be, become slim in the
abdominal region. Ug sígi kang ihirsisyu, mabugkus ímung tiyan, If you
keep exercising, your stomach will get trimmed down.

bugkut v {1} [A; c] tie s.t. around s.t. to secure it. Bugkúta nang
sugung dinhà arun dì matumba, Tie s.t. around that bamboo tube
container so that it won’t fall over. {2} [A; a12b2] for supernatural
beings to kidnap a person rendering him invisible. This is usually done
in the thickets, rocks, etc. where these spirits are thought to dwell.
n s.t. tied around s.t. to secure it.

bugnà_1 n Book of Revelations. Ang bugnà usa ka basahun sa Bag-ung
Túgun nga nagsaysay sa umalábut, The Book of Revelations is a book in
the New Testament that reveals s.t. about things to come. hiN- see
mugnà.

bugnà_2 v [A; c1] rub bark scrapings into a fishing line to strengthen
it. Bugnáa (ibugnà) nang pasúla arun malig-un, Dye that fishing line to
make it strong.

bugnaw a {1} cold or cool to the touch. Bugnaw nga imnun, Cool if you
drink it. Bugnaw nga panahun, Weather that makes you feel cool.
{2} gentle, low in sound, not loud or harsh. Bugnaw kaáyung tíngug nang
mag-aawíta, That singer has a mellow voice. {3} cool in temper. Ang
táwung bugnaw ug hunàhúnà dúgayng masukù, A cool-tempered person
doesn’t get angry easily. {4} cool, indifferent. Bugnaw kaáyu siyag
tinagdan sa íyang inaína, She is cold toward her stepmother. — ug
mantíkà lazy (humorous). — ug simud widower (lit. one whose lips are
not so ardent) (humorous). v {1} [AB3(1)N; a] cool s.t., be, become
cold. Idálit ang sálad ug mubugnaw (mabugnaw, mamugnaw) na, Serve the
salad when it cools. {1a} [b8] be exposed to cold, draft. Hibugnawan
gánì ku, ubhun dáyun, Whenever I’m exposed to the cold, I readily come
down with a cough. {2} [A3P; a1] dampen one’s enthusiasm for going
ahead with s.t. Dì ka makabugnaw (makapabugnaw) nákù pagminyù, You can
not discourage me from getting married. {3} [B2; b6] for a sound to
become soft. {4} [AP; a12] cool s.o. down, pacify his anger. Ang mga
asáwa mau giyuy mubugnaw (mupabugnaw) sa kasukù sa ílang mga bána,
Wives are the ones who know how to calm their husbands down. pa- v [A;
c] {1} cool oneself, s.t. off. {2} take refreshments. n s.t. taken for
refreshments. Dalítig pabugnaw ang mga bisíta, Serve the visitors some
refreshments. pa-an, pa-anan n refreshment parlor. paN- v [B2346] have
the chills, be chilled all over. May hilánat ka kay namugnaw man, You
(must) have a fever because you have the chills. Namugnaw ku sa
kahadluk, I felt cold due to (my) fright. ma-un a calm, cool-headed.

bugnay n k.o. small tree: Antidesma bunius.

bugnù v [AN; ab3] {1} fight at close quarters. Walay kukalísang ang
irung mibugnù (namugnù) sa bitin, The dog fought the snake bravely.
Bugnúun ka nákù, I will fight with you. {2} struggle with. Ang
masakitun nakigbugnù sa kamatáyun, The sick man is struggling against
death. n {1} fight at close quarters. Duguun kaáyu ang bugnù sa duha ka
rislir, The fight between the two wrestlers is so bloody. {2} a
struggle. {3} contest. Kinsay midaug sa bugnù tálì ni Markus ug
Usminya? Who won in the contest between Marcos and Osmeña? maN-r-
n fighter.

bugnúsun n rope attached to a sail to raise it.

bugnut v {1} [A; a12] pull s.t. with a hard jerk. Ikaw bay nagbugnut sa
buhuk ni Pilang? Were you the one who pulled Pilang’s hair? Ímung
bugnútun (bugnutun) ug kalit ang láang arun dílì makalikay ang manuk,
You pull the noose all of a sudden so the chicken cannot escape.
{2} [A; b8] hastily impress s.o. to run an errand. Akuy hibugnutan
níyag súgù kay aku ra may didtu, I got trapped into running the errand
because I was the only one there.

bugsay n oar, paddle. v {1} [AN; b] row, paddle. Mibugsay (namugsay)
siya padúlung sa lawud, He paddled toward the open sea. {2} [A; a] make
into a paddle, oar. -an(←) n the place in the boat where the one who
paddles sits. maN-r-/l- n one who does the paddling.

bugsù_1 v {1} [A; c] drive s.t. long into the ground or some other
surface. Ibugsù ang mga lipak, Drive the stakes into the ground.
{2} throw s.t. down with force, as if to ram it into the ground. Ibugsù
ta kag ilárun ku nímu, I’ll ram you into the ground if you cheat me.
{2a} [B1256; b6] fall headlong, landing hard. Nabálì íyang líug dihang
nabugsù siya sa yútà, He broke his neck when he fell headlong to the
ground. n piece of wood or metal used as a stake. Bugsù sa bungsud, The
stakes of the fish corral.

bugsù_2 v [A23; b26] appear, show up suddenly or unexpectedly. Mibugsù
siyag pamisíta námù, He appeared unexpectedly to pay us a visit. hiN-
see himugsù.

bugsuk = bugsù_1. pa- v [A3] dive with a straight body with either head
or feet first. Nagpabugsuk siyang miambak sa swíming pul, He dove into
the swimming pool headlong. tali-, ta-_2 n stakes.

bugtai n k.o. small tree of waste places.

bugtak v [B; a2] {1} for clothes to be drooping or loose as if wet or
because of s.t. damp sticking to them. Nagbugtak ang íyang sapátus kay
namilit ang lápuk, His shoes looked heavy on his feet because of the
mud that stuck to them. {2} look untidy because of loose clothing.
Nagbugtak siya sa íyang karsúnis nga dakù níya, He looks a mess in the
pants that are too big for him. -un a wearing ill-fitting clothes.

bugtas v [B126; a] for string or stitches to snap, break suddenly.
Nabugtas ang báat sa pakíti, The string of the package snapped. Bugtása
ang tinahian, Rip the stitches apart.

bugtaw_1 v [A; a1] chase, run after. Bugtáwa ang kábaw nga nakabuhì,
Chase the carabao that got loose.

bugtaw_2 v [A; a] call out to s.o. at night. Bugtawa lang unyà kug
mangadtu na ta, Just call me when it’s time to go. n calling out to
s.o. at night.

bugtaw_3 v [A; b(1)] keep vigil over s.t. at night. Nagbugtaw kug
bantay sa nanganak námung bábuy, I kept awake watching over my pig that
was giving birth. n vigil, keeping watch over.

bugtaw_4 a for muscles to be numb from fatigue. Bugtaw kaáyu ning ákung
kamut sa pagsinuwat, My hands are numb from writing so much. v [BN;
a12] be numb from fatigue. Mibugtaw (namugtaw, nabugtaw) ákung buktun
ug kinúgus sa bátà, My arms grew numb from carrying the baby.

bugtì v [AC; c] swap, barter on a one-to-one basis. Bugtíi ug kabáyù
ang ákung awtu, Give me a horse for my car. Wà kuy ikabugtì sa ímung
kaáyu, I have nothing to give you in return for your goodness. n thing
given in exchange for s.t. else. Kini bugtì unyà sa ákung báka, I will
take this in return for my cow.

bugtik v {1} † {2} [B46] for the stomach to be distended. Bitúkun
tingáli nang batáa kay nagbugtik man ang tíyan, That child must have
intestinal worms because his stomach is distended.

bugtù v [AB12; a] {1} for string, rope, wire, etc. to break with a
snap, make a string snap. Nakabugtù ang irù sa higut, The dog broke the
tether. Mabugtù ang lastiku ug ímung inátun, The rubber band will break
if you stretch it. {2} — ang ginháwa [B12; b4] stop breathing (die).
Nabugtù na ang gininháwa sa masakitun, The patient has died. {3} [A3PC;
c1] cut off ties or relationship. Dílì aku ang makabugtù (makapabugtù)
sa átung panaghigála, I cannot break up our friendship. Bugtúun tang
átung kasal, Let’s not go through with (lit. break off) our wedding.
walay — without a break. Gipasundáyag ang pilikula nga walay bugtù, The
film was shown without interruptions.

bugtuk n k.o. disease that infects the fruit of bananas and cacao
whereby the fruit gets hard spots. v [a4] be infected with this
disease.

bugtung n sole, lone. Pinanggà ku kaáyung bugtung kung anak, I love my
only child very much. — lubi n a coconut which grows all alone and not
in a bunch. The oil of such a coconut is said to be highly medicinal.
v = -in-. -in- v [A1C; a12] do s.t. alone, single-handedly, do s.t.
with another in singles. Binugtúngun (binugtungun) ku nig dárung umáha,
I’ll plow this field single-handedly. -an n lone scale encircling a leg
of a chicken. If a cock has such a mark it is believed to be a sign
that it is to be a likely winner.

bugtus n sweet potatoes produced from the first harvest.

bugu n k.o. tree.

búgù_1 a {1} slow in comprehension, dull. {2} poor in doing things.
Búgù kaáyu ku ánang sáyaw, I’m a poor dancer. v [B1; a2] {1} be, become
dull. {2} be poor in doing things. Nagkabugù ka na man run. Dì na man
kang kasiyat sa búla, You’re getting poorer and poorer. You can’t even
shoot the ball.

búgù_2 n k.o. fish. {1} name given to various k.o. gobies. {2} name
given to snakeheads.

buguk_1, -in- a {1} for an egg to be rotten. {2} rotten in character.
Dì maantígung malúuy ang táwung binuguk ug kasingkásing, A man with a
rotten heart doesn’t know pity. v [B2; b6] for eggs to fail to hatch,
addle.

*buguk_2 -in- n youngest child (humorous).

buguk_3, búguk_1 = búgù_1.

búguk_2 v [A; c1] take a mouthful of liquid to gargle, rinse out the
mouth. Makabúguk ba kug duha ka lab-uk sa ímung tubà? Can I get a
mouthful of your toddy to rinse out my mouth? Bugúka (ibúguk) ning
tambála, Gargle with this mouthwash.

bugul, búgul a {1} rounded and full, in a lump. Ang búgul nímung áping,
Your full and rounded cheeks. Makaiíbug tan-áwun ang búgul mung dughan,
Your full breasts are entrancing to look at. v [BN; b6] {1} be, become
full and rounded like a lump. n lump. Butangig yílu ang búgul sa agtang
mu, Apply ice to the lump on your forehead. Búgul sa kan-un, A lump of
rice. ka-(←) n {1} fullness, roundness.

bugun n {1} lump. Bugun sa yútà, Clods of earth. Bugun sa kan-un, Lumps
of rice. Bugun sa kaláyu, Balls of fire. {2} cyst or any lump growing
in the body. Naingun kag táwung nakalamuyg búla nang ímung bugun, You
look like a man who has swallowed a ball with that goiter of yours.
v [B3(1); c1] get full of lumps. Mubugun (mabugun) ang gátas kun
mabáhaw, Milk gets curdled when it is sour. -an n having a goiter,
cyst.

bugung a very quick and fast in going. v [A23P; a12] move in a hurry.
Mibugung (mipabugung) ug dágan ang awtu, The car sped away.

bug-us_1 a {1} final, resolute. Bug-us na ba ning ímung hukum? Is this
decision of yours final? {2} given with entirety, nothing held back.
Higugmáa ang Diyus sa bug-us mung kasingkásing, Love God with all your
heart. v [A123P; a12] {1} resolve with finality. {2} make s.t.
complete. Ihátag ang ímung láwas arun mabug-us ang átung gugma, Give
your body to make our love complete. {3} [A; a12] be a godparent to a
child both in baptism and confirmation or wedding. Suud kaáyu mi. Aku
gánì nagbug-us ug kúgus sa íyang bátà, We are close friends. In fact I
sponsored his child in baptism and confirmation. ka- n {1} the state of
being complete. {2} full moon. Háyag kaáyu rung gabhiúna kay kabug-us
man, This evening it’s bright because there’s a full moon. ka-an
n finality. Ihátag ku nímung kabug-úsan sa ákung hukum ugmà, I’ll let
you know what my final decision is tomorrow.

bug-us_2 v [a4] for s.o. to be taken by a supernatural being to its
unearthly abode and have substituted for his body a banana trunk which
takes the appearance of his dead body. Wà tu siya mamatay. Gibug-us
diay, He wasn’t dead but was taken by a supernatural being.

buguy n {1} hoodlum, hooligan. Buguy ang nagkuláta níya, He was mauled
by a hoodlum. {2} a loafer, idler. Gagmay siyag núta kay buguy mang
pagkatinun-an, His grades are low because he’s a bum student. v [B; a2]
be, become a bum. -in- v [A; b6] act, look like a hoodlum. Ug dílì siya
atngan, magbinuguy sa íyang pagtuun, If we don’t keep an eye on him,
he’ll start bumming around instead of studying.

bugwad = bugwal.

bugwak v {1} [AN; b6(1)] spit, blow s.t. out of the mouth. Ayaw ibugwak
ang tambal, Do not spit the medicine out. {2} [AN; b1] gush forth, spew
out. Namugwak ug kaláyu ang bulkan, The volcano spewed fire. n s.t.
spewed, puffed out. Nagkalidádis ang buluk sa bugwak sa túbig sa
pawntin, The fountain emitted a multicolored stream of water. Mailhan
nákung klási sa sigarilyu sa usa lang ka bugwak, I can tell the brand
of cigarette by just one puff.†

bugwal v [A; a] turn over the earth, usually with a bar, to prepare the
ground for cultivation. Bugwálun ku ang baul, I’ll dig the field up.
Bugwálan ku ang ákung útang nímu, I’ll pay off my debt by digging your
field up.

bugway n {1} spike of flowers or fruit that branches out. {2} s.t.
plaited together in a string or garland to make a unit for sale. Palit
ug usa ka bugway áhus, Buy a string of garlic. {3} anything long
resembling s.t. plaited into a strand. Bugway nga asu, A column of
smoke. Bugway sa kaháyag, A shaft of light. v {1} [A] flower or fruit
in spikes. {2} [A; a2] plait s.t. into a string to form a unit.

bugyas n k.o. small square-bottomed basket made of bamboo or rattan
strips, woven into a square mesh. v {1} [A; c1] make this sort of
basket. {2} [c16] put s.t. in such a basket. Bugyásun (ibugyas) ku ning
mga pisù pagdala, I’ll carry these chicks in a small basket.

bugyung = budyung.

búha n sleeve bearing for wheels. v [A; a2] attach, make into, use a
sleeve bearing.

buhágay v [A2S; b6] pour forth in large quantities. Pagkabuak sa
sakayan mibuhágay ang túbig sa sulud, When the boat broke, the water
rushed into it. Mibuhágay ang kaháyag sa kwartu, Light flooded the
room. Nagbuhagay ang pasì sa buslut sa sáku, The grains poured out of
the rip in the sack. n profuse flowing of s.t.

buhahà, buhàhà a {1} talking or laughing loudly. {2a} loud-mouthed,
talking boastfully. {2b} blabber-mouthed, unable to keep secrets.
Patákà lag tabì nang buhàháa, That blabber-mouth just prattles on
without discretion. v {1} [A; b3] break into loud laughter. Mibuhàhà
lag katáwa ang búang, The maniac burst into wild laughter. {2} [B2; b6]
{a} get to be a loud-mouthed braggart. {b} get to be a blabber-mouth.

buhakhak = bahakhak.

buhalhal_1 v [B6; c1] left open, unbuttoned, unfastened. Nabuhalhal ang
íyang sinínà, Her dress was unbuttoned. Nagbuhalhal nga basurahan, An
uncovered garbage can. Sa ákung pagdinálì nagbuhalhal na lang ning
ákung sapátus, In my hurry I left my shoes unlaced. Ayaw buhalhala
(ibuhalhal) ang ímung núka, Don’t leave your sore exposed.

buhalhal_2 = buhàhà.

buhang = bulhang.

buhanghang = buhalhal_1.

búhat_1 v {1} [A; a2] do s.t., do work. Dì ka pakan-un dinhi ug dì ka
mubúhat, If you do not work, you don’t get anything to eat here. Buháta
ang tanan arun aku mabúhì, Do everything in your power so that I may
live. Ngánung buhátan man ku nímu niíni? Why do you do this to me?
{2} [AC12; a] make, construct. Buhátun kung tangkal kining kawayána,
I’ll make this bamboo into a cage. {3} [A; a12] create. Wà pay
nakabúhat ug tambal pagpugung sa katigulangun, No one has created a
drug to prevent aging. Gibúhat sa Ginúu si Íbà, God created Eve. v [A;
b] perform the búhat ceremony (búhat, n 5). Kinahanglan nang buhátan
arun mamaáyu, We have to perform a búhat ceremony for him so he will
get better. n {1} s.t. made, make. Ang radyu búhat sa Hapun, The radio
set is of Japanese make. {2} work. Anad ku sa búhat, I am accustomed to
work. {3} job. Unyà na pagminyug may búhat ka na, Don’t get married
until you have a job. {4} deed. Ipakítà sa búhat ang gugma mu, Show
your love by deeds. {5} ceremony of offering s.t. cooked with no salt
to spirits to insure harvest, give thanks, diagnose an illness. The one
who performs this ceremony is the diwatahan. anak sa — n laborer.
babáying — n lady, a female acting in a way appropriate to her role as
a woman. laláking — n man acting in a way appropriate to a man.
Laláking búhat mag-apil-apil sa mga tabì, You, a man joining in the
women’s gossip. buhatbuhat v [AN2; a12] do a variety of different,
small chores. Namuhatbúhat siya sa balay, He putters around the house.
mabuhatbuhatun a fond of puttering around. pamuhatbúhat n food prepared
for the búhat ceremony (cf. búhat, n 5). -an(→) n place of work,
office. gim-un(→) n = -l-un. a entailing lots of work. Gimbuhatun kaáyu
kaning pagrilyínu, It’s a lot of trouble to make stuffed chicken. -in-
{1} = búhat, 1. {2} creature. Mga binúhat sa Ginúu, The Lord’s
creatures. -in-an n deeds performed. Dautan nímung binuhátan, Your evil
deeds. -l-un, -l-un(→) n things to do, work to be done. mag-r- n The
Creator, God. mag-r-(→) {1} Protestant layman who performs ministral
duties. {2} = MAN-R-(→). maN-r-(→) n one who makes things. manggi-un,
manggim-un a hard-working, industrious. paN- n business of making s.t.
Maáyung nigusyu ang pamúhat ug mwiblis, Furniture making is a good
business. pina- n s.t. made to order. Sapátus nga pinabúhat,
Made-to-order shoes. tali-, -um-r- a preparing to make s.t.†

búhat_2 v [A; a1] lift. Buháta ring kahun ug itungtung sa lamísa, Lift
this box, and put it on the table.

buháwi, buháwì n waterspout, heavy squall, cloudburst.

búhay v [A13; a12] be permitted to live and thrive. Dílì magbúhay sa
dágat ang kasíli, Fresh-water eels will not survive in the sea.

búhì_1 a {1} alive, living. Kun búhì pa si Tátay, If Dad were only
alive. Búhì pa ang ákung pagláum, My hopes have not died. {2} vivid.
Búhì pa sa ákung panumdúman, Vivid in my memories. Búhì kung pagtúu nga
wà pa siya mamatay, I firmly believe he is still alive. — ang búlan
phase of the moon the first day after the new moon. Búhì ang búlan
ugmà, The moon will enter the first quarter tomorrow. — nga dugù blood
that has freshly issued from a wound. — ug dugù active, not phlegmatic.
Búhì siyag dugù. Listung sugúun, She is an energetic person and follows
orders in a lively way. v {1} [B126] live, come to life. Nabúhì si
Kristu sa Duminggu di Glurya, Christ came to life on Easter Sunday.
Dílì mabúhì ang isdà ug way túbig, A fish cannot live out of the water.
{1a} ma- pay ginamus [so-and-so] is sure to die (literally, preserved
fish is more likely to come to life). Mabúhì pay ginamus nímug maligsan
ka sa pisun, If the steam roller runs over you, you’ll be dead. {2} [A;
a1] bring to life, cause to thrive. Akuy nagbúhì sa patay níyang
pagláum, I revived his dying hopes. Ang ulan nakabúhì sa mga tanum, The
rain revived the plants. Buhía ang kaláyu, Kindle the fire. (→) v [A;
a] {1} raise animals. Ang bábuy nga ákung gibuhì, The hog I am raising.
{2} support, raise a family. Wà kuy ikabuhig asáwa, I don’t have the
means to support a wife. n {1} pet, domestic animal kept. Ang buhì kung
kanding, The goat I am keeping. {2} animal kept by a supernatural
being. {3} penis (humorous). Dakug buhì, Having a large penis. -in-(→)
n {1}  = buhì 1. {2} adopted child or raised by s.o. buhìbúhì v [A13]
do s.t. without being told, help oneself. Magbuhìbúhì na lang kug káun
diri, I’ll help myself to the food here. pa- v [A; a] {1} cause s.t. to
be brought to life. {2} — sa dugù make s.o. active, energetic. paka-
v [A13; b3] {1} live for s.t. Nagpakabúhì ku sa ákung mga anak, I live
for the sake of my children. {2} [A; a12] allow s.o. to live. Unsay
dílì nákù isáad ug pakabuhíun lámang siya, What wouldn’t I give, if
only he be allowed to live. paniN- v [A2; b6] {1} lead one’s life. Buut
kaming manimúhì sa ámung kaugalíngun, We want to live our life on our
own. {2} = pangina-. ka- n see kabúhì. v [b(1)] have a livelihood from
s.t. Gikabuhían námù ang gamay námung yútà, We lived off of our small
piece of property. panga-, pangina- v [A; b6(1)] earn a living. Adtu
sila mangabúhì (manginabúhì) sa Mindanaw, They will go to earn their
living in Mindanao. Pangabuhían (panginabuhían) ba kanang trabahúa? Can
you earn a living from that work? kagi- n biography. kina- n life.
Láwas nga walà nay kinabúhì, A body without life. {2} life span. Taas
ug kinabúhì, Long-lived. {3} mode of life. Lisud nga kinabúhì, A
difficult life. manggi-an a good at raising things. manggi-un a growing
well. maN-r-(→), maN-r- n one who raises things. -l-un n {1} animals to
be raised. {2} family to support. Daghan kug buluhíun, I have a big
family to support. paN-(→) n occupation of raising animals. Makasapì ta
sa pamuhig manuk, We can get money by raising chickens.†

búhì_2 v {1} [AB12346; b6(1)] set free, get free. Kinsay nagbúhì nímu?
Who freed you? Nakabuhì ang bigal sa tangkal, The sow escaped from the
pen. Buhíi (buy-i) ang kanding, Set the goat free. Wà pa buhíi ang
klási, The class has not been dismissed. {2} [AN; b6] release one’s
hold on. Maáyu siyang mubisiklíta kay mamúhì (manimúhì), He rides a
bicycle well because he can let go. Buhíi (buy-i) ang ákung bag, Let go
of my bag. {3} [b] {3a} release one’s emotions. Gibuhían níya ang íyang
paghílak, She let herself go crying. {3b} let a vehicle go to a certain
speed. Gibuhían kug utsinta ang mutursiklu, I let the motorcycle go up
to eighty. {4} [A; b] spend money from a certain fund. Walà pa buhíi
ang sáping itúkud sa dálan, The money for the road has not been
released yet. {5} [A1; b(1)] draw in a lottery. Buhían ang rípa ugmà,
The drawing of the lottery will be held tomorrow. {6} [A; b6] set off
dynamite. Gibuhían ug dinamíta ang duut, They set off dynamite on the
school of fish. n {1} setting of s.t. free, esp. cocks in a fight. Pila
ka búhì ang ímung nadag-an? How many cockfights (lit. settings free)
did you win? {2} holding of a lottery. {3} setting off of dynamite. (→)
= búhì, v 1, 2. paniN- v [A2] = búhì, 2. -in-an n {1} animal that is
let to go free. {2} unrestrained. Binuhían nga katáwa, Unrestrained
laughter. {3} fish caught by setting off dynamite. in-an(→), binuy-an =
in-an, 1. maN-r- n fisherman who uses dynamite. paN- n dismissal of a
group. tingpaN- n dismissal time.

buhiláman n civilization.

buhimyu a philanderer, chasing after women. Daghan ang gipaangkan sa
buhimyung dakù, The philanderer has made lots of girls pregnant. v [B1;
a2] be, become, make into a philanderer.

buhis n {1} taxes, license fee. {2} = paN-. v {1} [A; b] pay taxes,
tribute. Gibuhisan na ba nímu ang ímung balay? Have you paid taxes on
your house? Walà níya buhisi ang hárì, He did not pay his tribute to
the king. {2} [A; c] offer as tribute (poetic). Ibuhis ku ang ákung
kinabúhì sa inahan kung yútà, I’ll offer my life as tribute to my
motherland. -l-an(←), -l-an n taxes levied. mag-r-(←) n taxpayer. paN-
n system of taxation.

buhíyas n watts, volts. Pila ka buhíyas nang bumbilyáha? How many watts
is that bulb? Ang linya dinhi dus syintus bayinti buhíyas, The current
here is 220 volts.

buhù_1 v [A] do s.t. in one’s own way, do one’s own thing. Magbuhù man
giyud kag ímu bisag nakahibawu ka na sa hustu, You insist on doing
things your own way even if you know the right way. Ayaw mug buhug inyu
ug dapítun mu, When you’re called to join us don’t go off and do your
own thing.

buhù_2, búhù v [A; b6] dig, bore a hole. Nagbúhù silag lubngan sa irù,
They dug a hole to bury the dog in. Buhúi ang kawáyan, Bore a hole in
the bamboo. (→) n hole. Buhù sa bungbung, A hole in the wall. Buhù sa
yútà, A hole in the ground. binùhan, binuhúan n hole made s.w.

buhuk n hair on the head. buhukbúhuk n s.t. like hair. Buhukbúhuk sa
mais, Corn tassel. -an a having hair. v [B1256; a12] get to have hair
on it. -an(←) n name given to fishes having filament-like ventral
and/or dorsal growths.

Buhul n the island of Bohol. Bul-ánun n one from Bohol. v [B126] become
a Boholano. v [A; c1] do, speak like the Boholanos.

buhunbúhun v [C; c3] go in a group or gang. Nagbuhunbúhun sila sa
simbahan, They went to church as a group. n going around together in a
group. Nakaundang siyag iskuyla tungud sa buhunbúhun, He quit school
because he spent his time running around with his cronies. ka- n member
of one’s gang.

buhung a provided in abundance. Buhung sa kalípay ang ámung kaminyúun,
Our marriage had an abundance of happiness. v {1} [A3P; a1] supply s.t.
in abundance. Makabuhung (makapabuhung) nga panihápun, A sumptuous
meal. Buhungun ta ka sa gugma, I’ll shower love on you. {2} [b4] be
surfeited to the point of losing desire. Gibunghan na kug kináug bábuy,
I’m fed up with eating pork. ka- n having things in abundance,
affluence. Laráwan sa kabuhung ang táwung adunáhan, A rich man is a
picture of affluence.

buhus, búhus v [A; c] {1} pour s.t. out. Ibúhus ang pasì ngadtu sa
bularan, Pour the grain out into the drying bin. {2} pour one’s
feelings out on s.o. Gibuhusan aku sa íyang kalágut, He poured his
anger out on me. {3} [A; b(1)] for rain to pour. Mibúhus ang ulan, It
poured.

búhut = bulhut, 1, 2, 3.

buka v {1} [APB3(1); bc1] for the eyes or mouth to open, cause them to
do so. Ang kalisud mauy mibuka (mipabuka) sa íyang mga mata sa sayup
nga íyang nahímù, Hardship opened his eyes to the error of his ways.
Nakabuka na bang mga mata sa ituy? Are the puppies’ eyes opened yet?
Bukha (ibuka) ang bàbà sa punaw, Open the mouth of the clam. {1a} for
the earth to crack open, as in an earthquake. {2} [A; b] add width to
space. Bukhi (bukahi) ang balay, Widen the house. n opening, aperture.
Buka sa pultahan, The amount the door is opened. — sa balay the width
of the house (lit. the amount of opening between the sides).

búka n muzzle of a firearm. — insindiyu n {1} fire hydrant. {2} verbal
attacks. Nagpungasì ang mga búka insindiyu sa duha ka partídu sa
pulitika, The two political parties rained verbal abuse on each other.
— abyirta = bukabyirta.

bukabularyu n vocabulary.

bukabyirta a prone to revealing secrets. v [B1] tend to reveal secrets.

bukabyirtu = bukabyirta (male).

bukad v [AB3(1)6; c1] {1} = bukhad. {2} for an infection to grow in
area. Mibukad ang núka, The infection spread out. — ang atay for one’s
pride to swell. Mibukad ang atay níyang gidáyig, His pride swelled from
all the praise. {3} [B3(1)] for grains or beans to expand and crack
open when cooked. a {1} = bukhad. {2} spread out. Bukad ang sayal níya,
She has a flaring skirt. — ug ngábil thick-lipped.

búkad_1 v [A; a2] get the fish from a trap. Bukára nang mga isdà sa
bungsud, Gather the fish caught in the fish corrals.

búkad_2 v [A3S; ab2] dig up s.t. from under the ground. Nagbúkad kug
úbi, I am digging for yams.

bukádu_1 n bit put in a horse’s mouth.

bukag n general term for baskets with a large mesh. v [A; a] make, make
into a basket with a large mesh. mag-r- n maker of bukag’s.

búkag n corncob. v [A; c16] use corncobs for fuel. Magbúkag lang mi ug
wà nay laíng sugnud, We just use corncobs if we have no other fuel.

bukagay, bukaghay a for grains to be loose so that they do not adhere.
Ang sabaw ampay sa kan-ung bukaghay, Soup goes well with rice cooked
dry. v [B6; a12] for grains not to adhere because of dryness. -un a of
a dry sort. Yútang bukagháyun, Sandy soil.

bukagkag v [A; c1] break s.t. lumpy into fine particles and give it a
uniform consistency. Bukagkága (ibukagkag) ang harína úsà taksa, Break
up lumps of flour before measuring it.

bukàkà v 1, 2 = bukìkì. {3} †.

bukal n member of the board of councilors of the province. v [A; a12]
make s.o. a provincial board member.

búkal_1 v {1} [APB2S3(1); a2P] boil s.t., for s.t. to boil. Nagbúkal
(nagpabúkal) kug túbig, I boiled some water. Nagbukal nga arníbal,
Boiling syrup. {2} [B2S46] be agitated. Ang nagbukal nga dágat, The
seething waters. {3} — ang dugù {a} [B2S46; a12] seethe with anger.
Mubúkal ang ákung dugù ug makakità ku sa táwung nag-ílug sa ámung
humstid, I seethe with anger when I see the man who stole our
homestead. {b} [A12] feel a strange attitude of kinship for a stranger
who turns out to be a relative. Bantug ra nga mibúkal ang ákung dugù
pagkakità nímu. Paryinti man diay ta, No wonder I felt close to you
when I saw you. You are related to me. — sa dugù sa kasingkásing
{c} [b4] suffer a fatal heart attack. Kalit ang kamatáyun sa táwung
bukálan sa dugù sa kasingkásing, Death from a fatal heart attack is
instantaneous. -in-, pina- n s.t. boiled or boiling.

búkal_2 n k.o. tall, tufted grass of open waste places: Roitboellia
exaltata.

bukána n area where the waters of a river merge with the open sea.

bukarilyu n k.o. sweet made from young shredded coconut meat, sugar,
and flavoring boiled with a syrup and hardened. v [A; b6c1] make
bukarilyu.

bukas_1 v [AB13(1); b] open s.t., be opened. Ang kusug nga hángin
mibukas sa íyang sayal, The strong wind made her skirt fly up. Nagbukas
ang pwirta, The door is standing open. Buksi ang sulat, Open the
letter. a open. — ang pultahan always welcome, the door is always open.
Bukas kanúnay ang ámung pultahan álang kanímu, Our door is always open
to you.

bukas_2, búkas = buklas.

bukasyun n vocation.

bukasyunal n vocational training course. v [a12] make into a vocational
school.

bukatut_1 a ugly in face. v [B; c1] be, become ugly-faced.

bukatut_2 n term used to refer to animals that eat crops as a means of
avoiding reference to the animal itself. It is believed that pests are
raised by supernatural beings and referring to them by name will cause
them to multiply.

búkaw_1 = búkal_1.

búkaw_2 n k.o. owl: Ninox philippensis. bukawbukaw n name given to
flat-bodied fishes with large owl-like eyes.

bukáwi = bayukáwi.

búkay = abúkay.

bukáyù = bukháyù.

bukbuk = balukbuk_1, 2, 3, 4.

bukdu = bugdu.

bukgay n k.o. edible fresh-water shell similar to the nerite shell but
with sharp projections, dark gray to whitish gray in color.

bukhad v [AB3(1)6; c1] spread out, unfold s.t. which is rolled or
folded up, for s.t. to open up. Mibukhad na kug banig pára nímu, I’ve
already spread a mat for you. Mibukhad (nabukhad) nang búlak, The
flower has opened. Ang nagbukhad níyang pálad, His open hand. Bukhára
(ibukhad) ang papil nga nalúkut, Unfold the roll of paper. a opened up
and spread out. — ug pálad generous (lit. open-palmed).

bukháyù n candy made from shredded coconut cooked with brown sugar.
v [A; a2] make, make into coconut candy.

buki n {1} bouquet of flowers. {2} set of four consecutive mahjong
pieces of the flower design (búlak, 2a). v [A; c1] make, make into a
bouquet.

búkì = bukìkì.

búki digíra n warship.

búkid n mountain. Taas kaáyu nga búkid, High mountain. a deep in the
mountains. Búkid kaáyu tung ámù, Our place is high in the mountains. —
sa buut, hunàhúnà {1} be far from one’s thoughts. Búkid sa buut níya
ang pagsungkip sa atup, He never thought of fixing the roof.
{2} against one’s will. Gipugus siya pagminyù nga búkid sa íyang buut,
She was forced to marry against her will. v [c5] {1} be far from one’s
thoughts. {2} against one’s will. Gikabukid ba sa ímung buut ang
pagpasaylu nákù? Is it against your will (have you not thought) to
forgive me? pa-(→) v [A; c] go, bring to the mountains. Nagpabukid sila
arun pagtágù, They went to the mountains to hide. bukiran
n {1} mountain range. {2} farm. kabukíran, kabukídan, kabukílan n the
mountains. taga- n mountaineer. bukirun a mountainous. bukidnun a from
the mountains. Bukidnung linaktan, Way of walking like a mountaineer.

bukìkì v [A; a1] {1} push things apart, esp. those which offer a
certain amount of resistance. Mibukìkì ku sa íyang pitákag may kwarta
ba, I looked in his wallet to see if there was any money. Nagbukìkì ka
ba sa mga pinusù? Have you pushed the husks of the ears aside to
examine the grains? Bukìkía ang íyang buhuk kung náa bay kútu, Look in
her hair if there are any lice. Ayaw ibukìkì ang ímung kamut sa kúgun,
Don’t push the cogon grass apart with your hands. {2} reopen a subject
no longer discussed. Gibukìkì ang íyang kagahápun sa kaatbang níya sa
pulitika, His political rival brought up his past.

bukilya n {1} spout, nozzle, small opening through which liquids are
poured. {2} mouthpiece of a brass instrument.

buking a euphemism for buku_1.

búking úpis n booking office.

bukinggan n annual ornamental flowers similar to but smaller than
bachelor’s buttons: Gomphrena globosa.

bukiskis_1 a {1} ignorant, unfamiliar with things. Giasinan sa bukiskis
ang kapi, The ignorant girl put salt in the coffee. v [B12; b6] be
ignorant, unfamiliar with things.

bukiskis_2 n k.o. skin disease, usually of the legs, characterized by
whitish splotches. v [B1246; a4] get this skin disease. -un a having
the splotches of this disease.

bukisyunal = bukasyunal.

bukitkit = bukìkì.

bukitlà v {1} [A; a1] open s.t. flexible by pushing the sides apart.
Human nímug híwà sa bát, bukitláa ug iniwniw sa dágat, After you have
cut the sea cucumber open, pull it apart at the sides and rinse it in
the water. Gibukitlà ku ang íyang mata kung may puling ba, I pushed her
eyelids apart to see if there was s.t. in her eyes. {2} = bukìkì.

buklad_1 v {1} [A; c1] spread s.t. out flat. Mubuklad na ku ug banig
kay matúlug na ku, I will spread the mat because I am going to sleep.
Ibuklad (buklára) ning sáku didtu sa ínit arun mamala, Spread this sack
out in the sun to dry. {2a} for a girl to grow to maidenhood (poetic).
{2b} for a blossom to open. Mingbuklad na ang mga rúsas, The roses are
starting to open. tingpaN- n year (lit. season of blooming) (poetic).
Dalága nga napúlug pitu ka tingpamuklad, A girl of seventeen summers.

*buklad_2 taga- euphemism for tagabúkid, ‘mountaineer’. see búkid.

buklas v [AN; a12] take the wash in. Buklása ang linadlad, Take in the
laundry you have left out to bleach.

buklat v [A; c1] {1} pry s.t. open that has a slit in it. Bukláta
(ibuklat) ang imbaw, Pry the clam open. {2} [B3(1)] for the eyes to
open.

bukni n k.o. edible white mushroom (black when dried).

buknul n {1} lump, s.t. bulging. Unsa ning buknul sa ímung bulsa? What
is this bulging in your pocket? {2} bunch of fibrous materials.
Gisagúlan ug dílì iskuhídu ang buknul sa lánut, The bunch of abaca
fibers has lots of second-class fibers mixed in with it. v {1} [B]
bulge, be lumpy. Ang unlan nagbuknul kay daghang pánit sa duldul, The
pillow is lumpy because it has a lot of kapok peels. {2} [A; c1] tie
into a bunch. Ibuknul (buknúla) ímung buhuk, Tie your hair into a
bunch.

buksidur = baksidur.

buksing = baksing.

buksiyadur = baksidur.

buktu n k.o. biting sand flea, orange with black spots.

buktun n {1} arms, esp. the lower arms. Ang taknaan sa íyang buktun,
The watch on his wrist (arm). {2} sleeves. Sinínang way buktun,
Sleeveless dress. v [A; c] add sleeves to a garment. -in-an n garment
with sleeves.

buktut {1} = baluktut. {2} name given to humpbacked fish, e.g., the
Philippine jack: Hynnis momsa. {3} k.o. humpbacked shrimp.

buku_1 v [A; a1] reveal s.o.’s character, true identity, be found out.
Bukhun ta ka nga minyù ka, I will reveal that you are married. Nabuku
siyang mangingilad, It was revealed that he was a swindler.

buku_2 n node of a stem. Malísù pay buku sa kawáyan, Impossible. (Lit.
A bamboo node would sooner get twisted.) v [a12] chop s.t. at the node.
Dúgay kang makaputul nang kahúyag bukhun mu pagtigbas, It’ll take you a
long time to cut that tree if you hack it on its node. bukubuku n the
back of a person or animal. v [a12] hit s.t. in the back.

bukubar n popsicle made of young coconut. v [A; c1] make, eat bukubar.

bukùbúkù n k.o. small cuttlefish.

búkud a plump, round due to fullness. Búkud ug áping, Round-cheeked.
v [A13PB2; a2] be plump and full, make s.t. full. Kinsay nagbúkud
(nagpabúkud) sa sáku? Who filled the sack until it was round? Mabúkud
ang mga úbas sa ting-ulan, The grapes will become round and full during
the rainy season.

bukug n {1} bone. {2} gun, usually sidearm (slang). v [B126; b3] for a
bone to stick in the throat. Dílì makabukug ang ginamus, The small
grates of salted fish can’t choke you. Nabukug ku, I got a bone in my
throat. Unsang isdáa ang nabukgan nímu? What k.o. fish did you choke
on? — sa buut, kabubut-un a contrary to one’s principles. Táwu nga
bukug kaáyu sa ákung buut, A person completely repulsive to me. — ug
pánit n skin and bones—i.e., thin. walay — without anything getting in
the way. Way bukug ang íyang diskursu, His speech was fluently
delivered. Musyát pirmi lang way bukug, He shoots cleanly (his shots
never touch the basket). walay — ang dílà speaking unrestrainedly
without any consideration. hiN- v [b(1)] take the fish grates out.
Himukugi ang isdà únà kan-a, Remove the fish grates before you eat it.
ka-an n bones. Nanakit ákung kabukugan sa pagtinarbáhu, My bones ache
from too much work.

bukul, búkul n {1} protruding lump. Unsa nang bukul sa ímung úlu?
What’s that lump on your head? {2} lump, clump. Búkul sa kan-un, Lump
of rice. Búkul sa yútà, Lumps of soil. v [B26; aP] {1} get a lump.
Mibúkul ang úlu nga nabunalan, His head swelled where I had struck him.
{2} form lumps. bukulbukul v [B14] be full of lumps. Dautan ning litsi
kay nagbukulbukul man, This milk is no good because it is full of
lumps. paN- v [A2; b6] for the breasts to develop in adolescence. Unsa?
Manarátu ka na nga wà pa ka gánì pamukli (pamukúli)? What is all this
about boy friends when your breasts have not even started to develop?

búkung_1 n husk and shell of a coconut split lengthwise without the
meat.

búkung_2 n freeloader, one who gets s.t. for free, either by mooching
or by not paying the bill, buying a ticket, etc. Naglabi ang búkung sa
pasahíru ning tráka, There’s more freeloaders than passengers on this
bus. paN- v [A2; b6] freeload. Mamúkung ta nímug sigarilyu, May I mooch
a cigarette off of you? Namúkung ku sa sini, amígu man nákù ang
takilyíra, I got in the movie for free because the ticket seller is a
friend of mine.

bukut n swarm of black wasps that build nests in trees. v [b6] have a
hornet’s nest built in it. Gibukutan ang santul, The santol tree has a
hornet’s nest in it.

búkut = balúkut.

bukwas = buklas.

bukway v [B; c1] {1} for long, thin things to stretch out: tendrils,
flowers, sunrays, etc. Nagbukway na ang mga bánay sa mais, The corn
tassels are spreading out now. Wà pa makabukway ang sílaw sa adlaw ug
nakaligù na siya, He took his bath before the sun had spread its rays.
{2} for the arms, tentacles to spread out and wave or wiggle. Mibukway
ang mga gaway sa kugíta pagkakitag kaáway, The octopus spread his
tentacles in all directions when he spotted an enemy. {3} [B1256] in a
game of takyan, to fail to hit the shuttlecock squarely and thus lose
one’s turn to be served. n {1} taro shoots before they develop leaves.
{2} failure to return the serve in takyan.

bukya n k.o. white, transparent jellyfish, round, growing to 9″ in
diameter, with tentacles that inflict a slight sting.

bukyàbukyà = bukya.

búl n mason jar, used as a measure for toddy.

búla_1 (not without l) n {1} ball. {2} game of ball. — dimánu n cue
ball in billiards. v {1} [A; c1] form s.t. into a ball. {2} [A26; b6]
play a ball game. bulabúla v [A; c1] {1} make meat balls. {2} be
bounced around like a ball. Ang sakayan gibulabúla sa dagkung balud,
The boat was tossed about like a ball in the high seas. {3} for several
persons to maul s.o. bouncing him around among themselves. n {1} dish
consisting of little meat balls. {2} plimsoll line, indicating the load
line of a ship. -dur(→) n ball player.

búla_2 (not without l) v [A; c1] heave s.t. heavy onto s.o.’s
shoulders. Ibúla (buláhun) ni nátù sa íyang abága, Let’s heave this
onto his shoulders. n action of heaving s.t. onto one’s shoulders. Káda
búla makadá kug siyin kílus, I can take one hundred kilograms on my
shoulders at one time. -da = búla_2. -dur(→) n one who heaves heavy
things onto others’ backs.

búla_3 (not without l) n flattery. v [A; b5] flatter. Ug ímu siyang
buláhan (buláhun) túgut dáyun, If you flatter him, he’ll let you do it.
-da = búla_3.

búla_4 (not without l) n drawing in a lottery. v [A1; c1] hold a
drawing in a lottery.

bulà n bubbles, foam. a foamy, forming bubbles. Bulà kaáyu ning sabúna,
This soap forms lots of suds. v [B346] form bubbles, foam. Nagbulà ang
láway sa kabáyù, The horse is foaming at the mouth. — ang bàbà pagkáun
eat one’s fill. Mibulà ang íyang bàbàg kináus kík, He had his fill of
cake.

bul-a n k.o. fish.

bulábid = balunábid.

bulábung = bungabung.

bulad v [A; c1] {1} stay out in the sun. Nagbulad siya pagbantayg trák,
He waited for the bus in the sun. Ayawg bulara (ibulad) nang bátà sa
ínit, Don’t expose the child to the heat of the sun. {2} dry s.t. in
the sun. Bulara (ibulad) ang kupras, Dry the copra. {3} [A13; c1] be,
put out under the moon. Nagbulad siya sa búlan nga nagdáru, He stayed
out plowing under the moon. {4} [A; c1] expose one’s body brazenly.
Láwas nga gibulad sa kadaghánan, A body exposed to public view.
{5} [A1; c1] lay down an open card, esp. the starting card in a game.
Nakabulad na ang naglíbud, The dealer has opened. n {1} dried fish.
Bulad lay ámung isuwà, The only thing we have for lunch is dried fish.
{2} card laid open, esp. the starting card. binlad, -in- n unhusked
rice or corn set out to dry under the sun. Naningáun ang manuk sa
binlad, The chicken is feeding on the rice you have left out to dry.

buláda_1 (not without l) n the portion of a roof which projects beyond
the wall. v [A; b6(1)] provide a building with an overhanging roof.

buláda_2, 3 = búla_2, 4.

buladur see búla_1, 2.

bulag v {1} [A2B2; bc] separate from, get separated. Adtu ku mubulag
nímu sa iskína, I will leave you at the corner. Mibulag ang úlu sa
íyang láwas, His head got cut off (separated from his body). Dílì siya
bulagan ug basahun, She is never without s.t. to read (lit. left by
reading matter). Ibulag ang anak sa inahan, Separate the child from the
mother. {2} [A2; b(1)] desist, cease doing s.t. Wà siya mubulag
paglìlì, He didn’t take his eye off the peephole. Bulagi nang bisyúha,
Cease that vice of yours. (←) v [A123PC; a] separate from each other,
cause to separate. Nagbúlag ang managtrátu, The engaged couple
separated. Bulága ang hilawg hinug, Separate the unripe and the ripe
ones. haN-/hiN- v [a3] {1} get separated from involuntarily. Nahimuwag
siya sa grúpu, He got separated from the group. {2} [b8] have s.o.
close die (be left involuntarily). Nahimulagan kami sa usa ka buuk
anak, One of our children died.

bulagaw a hair lighter in color than black, ranging from blond to
reddish brown. v [B; b6c1] be, become this color. Mubulagaw ang ímung
buhuk ug hingári kag sálum, Your hair will get reddish brown if you
keep diving in the sea.

bulagsak (not without l) = bagsak_1.

buláhan_1 a blessed, fortunate. Buláhan ka sa mga babáyi nga tanan,
Blessed art thou above all women. Buláhan ka kay dátù ka, You are
fortunate because you are wealthy. {2} in order to, so that. Musulud
tag sayu buláhan makaundang ug sayu, Let’s go to work early so we can
quit early. v {1} [B126] be fortunate, blessed. Ang ákung anak ang
mabuláhan ning ákung kasapían, My child will be benefited from my
wealth. ka-an n welfare.

buláhan_2 n = lansúnis.

bulahug v [B1256; b8] step inadvertently into a hole. Nabuwahug ku sa
bangag sa salug kay ngitngit, I inadvertently stepped into a hole in
the floor because it was dark.

búlak n {1} flower, blossom. {1a} woman (metaphor). Ikaw ang búlak nga
ákung gipangítà, You are the maid (lit. flower) I have been looking
for. {2} suit of cards. {2a} suit in mahjong composed of eight pieces
which have pictures of flowers on them. v {1} [B2345N; b6] flower.
Mibúlak (namúlak) nang rúsas, The rose plant is flowering. {2} [A; b]
put a flowery design on s.t. {3} [B236N; b6] get moldy. Namúlak ang
kan-un, The rice is all moldy. ka- v [A13] be bestrewn with flowers.
bulakbúlak n {1} sweet things in life. Bulakbúlak sa kinabúhì ang
pagpanugal, Gambling adds spice to one’s life. {2} flowery design.
{3} ad lib, cadenza in a musical piece. v {1} [b(1)] add spice to life.
{2} [A3; b6(1)] add a flowery design. {3} [A; b6(1)] play ad lib music.
Nindut ang sunátang gibuwakbuwákan sa trumpíta, It was a beautiful song
with the ad lib trumpet. -ay(→) n game of cards wherein a card is
placed face up and bets are made as to the number of the next card of
the same suit turned up. v [A12C] play this game. -an = payil sa búlak.
see payil. hiN- a bearing flowers in abundance. Himulak kaáyung tanum
ang rúsas, Roses tend to bear flowers in abundance. ka-an n a patch of
flowering plants, young women, women collectively. ma-un a flowery.
tingpaN- n {1} season of flowers. {2} years. Sa ikanapúlug walu níyang
tingpamúlak, In her eighteenth year.

bulákaw n {1} k.o. harmful supernatural being that takes the form of a
ball of fire, with trailing sparks. If it brushes or gets close enough
to smell the skin, it makes a permanent white spot. {2} ball of fire
used as transportation for unglùs.

bulakbul (not without l) a {1} slow in comprehension, dull. Nahagbung
ang tinun-ang bulakbul, The dull student flunked. {2} loafing, truant.
Bulakbul kaáyu sa trabáhu, A slacker on the job. v {1} [B; a2] be dull.
{2} [A; b] loaf, play truant.

bulalakaw v [B46; a4] for the juice squeezed from coconuts to be in a
condition such that it yields very little oil when boiled, but instead
turns to foam. Way nalána sa túnù kay gibulalakaw (mibulalakaw), We
didn’t extract any oil from the coconut milk. It just foamed.

bulalákaw (not without l) n shooting star.

bulalhug = bulahug.

bulálu, bulálù_1 n {1} general term for good-sized or large cowries.
{2} unit of measure {2a} for a rice cake (bibingka). Tagbayinti ang
bulálu sa bibingka, The bibingka are twenty cents each. {2b} a
small-sized ball of cotton sewing thread. v [a12] make into the size of
the bulálu measure, sell by the bulálu.

bulálù_2 (not without l) a {1} stupid, dull. Bulálù ka kay dúgay nga
makasabut, You’re stupid. It takes you long to catch on. {2} poor,
unskillful in doing or executing things. Bulálù siya nga musyát.
Pirming musipyat, He is a lousy shot. He always misses. v [B12; b6] be
stupid or poor in doing things.

bulálung (not without l) = bulálù_2.

búlan n {1} moon. {2} month. phases of the moon: patay, lunud ang — new
moon. bag-u, bag-ung subang ang —, búhì ang —, bulhut sa punúan,
primírung subang first day of the waxing crescent. subangsúbang,
ikaduhang (ikatulung) subang waxing crescent. udtu nga — half moon,
usually of the waxing moon. lákad second quarter (lit. going toward the
noon position—so called because the moon is in the east when darkness
falls). dail, daktul, takdul ang — full moon. primíru, ikaduhang piluk,
dulum nga — first and second days of the third quarter. udtung lunud,
kátin ang — half moon of the third quarter. himatayun ang — third
quarter (lit. dying moon). bispiras sa himatayun last day before the
new moon. shapes of the moon: inúlug amù waxing gibbous moon (lit.
monkey’s head). hayà ang — crescent in a horizontal position. páyung sa
— ring around the moon. v [B236; b4] be a month. Mubúlan nang wà mi
magkítà, It’s been a month since we last saw each other. Wà pa mabúlan
sukad si Tátay mamatay, It hasn’t been a month since Father died. Wà pa
gánì makabúlan sukad pagtrabáhu nákù giumintuhan ku, It wasn’t even a
month after I had started working that I was given a raise. Wà pa gánì
ka buláni dinhi mupaúlì ka na? You haven’t been here a month and you
want to go home already? Ugmang adláwa mauy ibúlan nákug puyù dinhi,
Tomorrow it will make exactly a month that I have stayed here. (→)
{1} [A3; b] hire a servant. Magbulan akug bátà pagtrápu sa kutsi, I’ll
hire a child to keep the car washed. pa-(→) v [A; ab] hire oneself,
s.o. out as a servant. -in-(→) once a month, monthly. Binulan nga
sakit, The monthly sickness (menstruation). v [A; c1] do on a monthly
basis. Ákù lang binulanun (ibinulan) ang ímung swildu, I’ll pay your
salary once a month. -in-an(→) n household help. -un a {1} moonlight.
{2} having weak vision (as if looking at things by moonlight).
bulanbúlan {1} every month. Pila ímung dawátun bulanbúlan? How much do
you receive every month? {2} k.o. tarpon: Megalops cyprinoides.
{3} k.o. moon shell with edible flesh.

bul-an n corn at the stage where it is almost but not quite mature and
where the kernels are no longer soft. Maánag pa ang mais nga bul-an,
Corn at the bul-an stage can still be roasted. v [B1] for corn to reach
the nearly mature stage.

bulandus v [APB12; c] push s.t. into going forward, slip and fall down
with feet forward. Nabulandus siya kay nakatunub ug pánit sa ságing, He
slipped and fell because he stepped on a banana peel. Ibulandus ang
kaban ilálum sa hagdan, Shove the trunk underneath the stairs.

búlang_1 n event (fiesta or market) at which a cockfight is held. v [A;
b] hold a cockfight. Magbúlang dinhi ug tábù, They hold cockfights here
on market day. (→) n gaff on a gamecock. paN- v {1} [A2; b6(1)] attend
a cockfight and bet. {2} [A2; b6(1)] for a cock to win in a fight.
Pwirting pamúwang sa ákung manuk, My cock wins wherever he fights.
{2a} for a man to win several wives in succession after his previous
wife died (humorous). Giayran ang byúdu. Pwirti nang pagpamúwang, The
widower has gotten himself a wife many times, but this time he was
spurned. n action of betting, attending cockfights to bet. Way kaláki
ang pamúlang. Way daug, The betting at the cockfights was no good. We
didn’t win a thing. -an(→) n cockpit for holding cockfights. -ig-r-,
ig-l- n fighting cock.

búlang_2 v {1} [AC; ac] smash a hard object against s.t. hard. Ang
hubug mauy mibúlang sa básu dihà sa sáwug, The drunk smashed the glass
on the floor. Nagbúlang ang duha ka trák, The two trucks smashed into
each other. Bulángun ku ang inyung mga úlu, I’ll knock your heads
together. {2} [A12C; a] for two people to have a contest of hitting two
examples of s.t. against each other, each person hitting his against
the other person’s in turn, to see who can break the other person’s.
Makigbúlang ku nímug lubi, I will engage in a coconut-breaking contest
with you.

bulanghug = bulahug.

bulanghuy (not without l) n general term for all varieties of cassava:
Manihot esculenta.

bulanglang n dish of various vegetables and meat originating in Tagalog
regions.

bulangsud = bulandus.

bulanit, bulánit v [A; a12] pull s.t. out or away from s.t. Ímung
gibulanit ang hábul sa ímung pagkatúlug, You pulled the blanket away
from me in your sleep.

bulansud = bulandus.

bulanti (not without l) n {1} flywheel of a machine. {2} business not
set in one place. tindáhan nga — small mobile store on wheels.

bulanting n color combination of red, black, brown, and white in
chickens.

bulantis (not without l) n printed advertisements scattered from the
air. úhas — = bulantis.

bularat n k.o. soldier fish.

búlas (not without l) n smegma, white odorous accumulation found under
the foreskin. hiN- v [A; b6] remove this accumulation. panghiN- v [A2;
b6] remove this accumulation from one’s penis.

bulásut v [B126; b8] accidentally step into a hole. Nabulásut ang ligid
sa trák sa gawang sa taytáyan, The wheels of the truck ran into a rut
on the bridge.

bulátik (not without l) v [A; b6] flatter s.o. n flattery.

bulatsíra a female habitual drunkard. v [B1; b6] for a woman to become
a habitual drunkard. Ug magbulatsíra ka, hala sawum sa tubà, If you
want to be a sot, all right, swim in the toddy!

bulatsíru = bulatsíra (male).

bulaus, buláus a boastful, braggart. Mutúu ka níya nga buláus kaáyu?
Would you believe him when he is such a braggart? -in-(→) a in a
boasting manner. v [A13] act in a boasting manner. Nagbinulaus siya
atubángan sa mga babáyi, He is showing off in front of the women.

bulaw a bronze color of pigs, brownish green color of army blankets or
cloth of similar color. -an(←) n gold. Mahalun nga batu ang buláwan,
Gold is a precious stone. v [B1256] become gold. paN-an(←) v [A23] be
like gold. -ánun a {1} golden in color. {2} noble, golden in value.
Bulawánun ang ákung tingúhà nímu, I have only noble intentions toward
you.

buláwis (not without l) n k.o. danggit fish: Teuthis java.

bulay n {1} k.o. cultivated bean, the seeds and young pods of which are
eaten: Dolichos lablab. {2} = patánì_2. v [A; b(1)] cook bulay or s.t.
with bulay.

bulay-ug (not without l) n k.o. small bird found in bunches in bushes:
Dicaeum bicolor. a {1} small and frail like this bird, weakling.
{2} poor in doing things. Bulay-ug nga sinayawan, Dancing in a poor
way.

bulbug n k.o. jellyfish with a brown color and blueish spots.
a sluggish, slow-moving. v [B12; b6] get to be sluggish.

bulbul n {1} pubic hair. {2} name given to the green dragon piece in
mahjong. v [a4] grow pubic hairs. Gibulbul ku pag-idad kug kinsi, I
grew pubic hairs when I was fifteen. hiN- v [A; b7] {1} dress fowl or
birds by plucking the feathers. {2} clean s.o. out, take all his money.
Ang íyang asáwa mauy mihimulbul sa íyang pitáka, His wife cleaned his
wallet out. Gihimulbúlan (gihimulbulan) siya sa íyang babáyi, His
mistress milked him dry. {2a} — ang swildu for a salary to be the sole
source for a large number of expenditures. Ang ákù rang swilduy
himulbúlan sa tanang galastuhan, They get all of the money for the
expenses from my salary. {3} strip machines or vehicles of spare parts
to be used elsewhere. Himulbúli ang ayruplánu arun makalupad ang uban,
Strip the airplane of spare parts so the others can fly. {4} look over
a person to size him up. Gihimulbulan sa inahan ang pamanhunun sa íyang
anak, The mother inspected her daughter’s fiancé carefully.

buldu = burdu.

buldug n bulldog. a {1} big and stout in comparison to one’s age group.
{2} fat like a bulldog. {3} having the ugly face of a bulldog. v [B]
get to be fat or ugly like a bulldog.

buldúsir n bulldozer. v [A; a12] work on s.t. with a bulldozer,
bulldoze s.t. Gibuldúsir ang mga payag sa iskuwátirs, The squatter
shanties were bulldozed.

buldyak v [A2; ac] throw s.t. at a downwards angle by raising the hand
over the head. Buldyáka tung íyang gipatirúhan, Throw your marble at
the marble he aimed at. n a throw executed in this manner.

bulgan n k.o. fish with bulging eyes.

bulgar a {1} secret which has become public knowledge, an open secret.
Bulgar na kaáyu ang ílang panaghigugmaay, Their love affair is public
knowledge. {2} vulgar, coarse. (→) v [A3P; c16] reveal a secret. Ayaw
bulgara (ibulgǎr) nang tabía, Don’t bring that gossip to public
knowledge.

bulhang v [AB6; b] burst open with a great gaping hole, make a great
opening in s.t. Gilunúpan ang dapit dihang mibulhang ang díki, The area
was flooded when the dike burst. Bulhángi ang lubut sa táru, Make a
wide hole in the bottom of the can.

bulhay a for s.t. packed in a solid to be loose and dry so that it
could crumble easily. Bulhay kaáyu ang báy sa umígas, The ant hill is
very dry and loose. v [B; b6] become dry and loose so as to crumble
easily. Nagkabulhay ang yútà nga wà maulani, The soil became dry and
loose after it hadn’t rained for a long time.

bulhug n {1} blinded because of cataracts. {2} partially blinded.
v {1} [B12; a1] get cataracts. {2} [B126; a1] get to be, make s.o.
partially blind. Nabulhug siya dihang hibuthan sa dinamíta, He became
partially blind when a dynamite charge exploded on him.

bulhun n = aláyun.

bulhut v {1} [A; ac] blow s.t. out of s.t. Bulhúta ang kandílà, Blow
out the candle. Gibulhútan aku níyag túbig, He spurted water at me from
his mouth. Ibulhut nang asu, Puff out the smoke. {2} [A2; b1] for the
wind to blow. Mibulhut ang amíhan, The northeast wind blew. {3} [A; b]
treat a sickness, usually of stomach, by blowing cigar smoke on the
affected area. Bulhútan sa mananambal ang nagbutud kung tíyan, The folk
doctor will blow smoke on my stomach because I have gas. {4} [A; c6P]
move at great speed. Bulhut! Step on the gas! Nakabulhut ug dágan ang
kawatan, The thief ran away on the double. n action of blowing. pa-
v [A; a2] puff on a pipe or cigar. -ay n game involving blowing. v [c]
play this game.

buli n buri palm: Corypha elata. The fibers from the unopened leaves
are used in weaving hats, baskets, etc. It is also a source of toddy
(guhang), vinegar, and sugar. The shoots are used as a vegetable and
the trunk is a source of starch.

bulì n {1} penis of man or animal. {2} exclamation expressing contempt
or disgust. Bulì, ay kug patuúha ánà, Hmm, don’t try to make me believe
that. {3} — mu, sa ímung — irked statement of denial. Bulì mu! Mahímu
pa giyud ni! What do you mean! This is still in good shape. Barátu sa
ímung bulì! Trayinta písus ni, Cheap my foot! This costs thirty pesos.
bulìbulì v [B125; a12] be hard-pressed to do s.t. because of the large
amount it is. Nagkabulìbulì kug báyad sa ákung mga útang, I’m going
crazy trying to pay my various debts.

bulibard n boulevard.

bulíbud_1, 2 = balíbud_1, 2.

bulibul = balibul.

bulíbul = bulíbuy.

bulíbuy n {1} cowlick. {2} person’s temper (said to be indicated by the
presence of a cowlick). Manguláta siyag mulíhuk íyang bulíbuy, When his
temper is provoked, he’ll maul people. -an n a person with a cowlick.

búlig_1 v [A; b] help. Bulígi ku, Help me. ka- n helper.

búlig_2 n bunch of large fruit, coconuts, or bananas. v [B12346N] form
a bunch of fruit. panghiN- v [A2] grow forth in bunches. Nanghimúlig
(namúlig) nang ságing, The banana tree has a bunch of fruit on it. hiN-
a producing lots and lots of bunches.

bulíkat v [A; a] {1} spread the labia of the vagina apart with the
fingers. {2} = bukitlà. {3} = bukìkì.

bulílis n weed of medicinal value: Biophytum sensitivum.

bulilit a small child, small and short person. v [B126; b6] become
small and short.

bulilyus n bowling pin.

bulimánu = búla dimánu. see búla, 1.

bulinaw n k.o. anchovy commonly eaten in Cebu: various Engraulidae,
esp. Stolephorus indicus. útuk ug — n bird-brained, stupid.

buling n {1} dirt on clothes, face, etc. {2a} smear on one’s
reputation. Way buling ang ákung kadunggánan, My reputation is
spotless. v {1} [AB12; b5] dirty s.t., become dirty. Nagkabúling íyang
karsúnis, His pants got covered with dirt. Ayaw bulingi (bulinga) ákung
sinínà, Don’t get my dress dirty. {2} [A; b6(1)] smear one’s
reputation. Gibulingan ang íyang dungug, His reputation was sullied.
-un n {1} s.t. dirty, esp. clothes ready for washing. {2} dirty deeds
of the past. Ang mga pulitiku isig yagyag sa ílang mga bulingun, The
politicians are washing their dirty linen in the public. -it, -ut
a covered with dirt, dirty in appearance. v [B; a2] get covered with
dirt.

búling n bowling. v [AC; b6] go bowling. -an(→) n a bowling alley.

bulinga n female egg or egg cell.

bulinggit n stye in the eye. v [A123P; a4] have a stye. Gibulinggit
ákung mata, I have a stye in my eye.

bulingit see buling.

bulingut see buling.

buliníyu = buluníyu.

bulintang = balintung_2.

bulíraw v [B12] be hazy, not clear about s.t. Nabulíraw ku ug unsay
ángay kung buhátun ning ákung prublíma, I am confused as to what to do
about this problem. Ang ímung katin-áwan nakabulíraw nákug samut, Your
explanation has gotten me all the more confused. a hazy, blurred.
Bulíraw ákung panan-aw, I see only hazily.

bulíring = buríring.

bulíru n {1} bolero music. {2} bolero vest. v {1} [A12; c16] set the
rhythm of a song to the tempo di bolero. {2} [A; c1] wear, make into a
bolero vest.

búlis n k.o. mackerel.

buliskad = baliskad.

búlit_1 v {1} [A; a] caulk, plug up a hole or crack with viscous
substances. Bulíti ug simintu ang likì, Fill up the crack with cement.
{2} [A; b6(1)] put paste on s.t. Bulíti ang likud sa kalindaryu, Put
paste on the reverse side of the calendar. (→) n {1} s.t. used to plug
up holes or caulk s.t. {2} paste.

búlit_2 v [a12] {1} cover over completely with s.t. Nabúlit ang íyang
nawung sa kinawrarasan, His face was covered with scratches. Gibúlit ku
siya sa hawuk, I covered her with kisses. {2} burden with problems,
debts, etc. Nabúlit mi sa mga útang, We are burdened with debts.

bulítas n ball bearings. v [b(1)] put ball bearings on s.t.

bulitik n k.o. pitch used for caulking.

bulitin n dice. bistu ang — be on to s.o.’s tricks, evil doings. —
upisyal official bulletin.

bulitsi n k.o. raffle with Spanish cards. One set of cards is spread
out on the table for the bettors to place their bets on. Another set of
the same cards are rolled up individually and inserted into a small
metal cylinder. The cylinders are placed in a large metal drum, jumbled
about, and one cylinder is drawn. The card in the cylinder drawn is the
winner. There are variations using balls with numbers to replace the
cards in the cylinders. Usually the dealer sings out verses while
rolling the drum and waiting for the bettors to place their bets.
v [A1; b(1)] play bulitsi.

bulíyus n k.o. flying fish.

bulkan n {1} volcano. {2} fifty-peso bill (slang).

bulkas = buklas.

bulpin n ballpoint pen. v [A1] use a ballpoint pen.

bulsa n {1} pocket. Rilu dibulsa, Pocket watch. {2} cavity in a fishing
net which holds the fish. {3} an external pocket-like cavity s.w. on
one’s person (said to bring good fortune to the possessor). {4} isulud
sa — fool s.o. into doing s.t. Tuntúha dù. Dílì na ku nímu masulud sa
bulsa, Don’t try to fool me, boy. You can’t pull anything on me.
v {1} [A; c1] put a pocket, make into a pocket. {2} [A; c16] pocket
dishonestly. Ug ibulsa (bulsáhun) nímu ang ganansiya, sigúrung ikíha
ka, If you pocket the profit, you surely will be brought to court.
bulsáhan a having a pocket-like cavity on any part of the body. Such a
person is believed likely to become rich.

buls-ay n bull’s-eye. v [A12; a12] make a direct hit.

bulsíta n small bag. Pagpalit ug usa ka bulsíta nga pán, Buy a bagful
of bread. v [A; a] make, make into paper bag.

bult n bolt. — trídir n bolt threader.

bultáhi n voltage.

bultimitru n voltmeter.

bultu n {1} large and bulging. Bultu kaáyug dughan, Having large
breasts. n mass of s.t. that has been put together or is in one piece.
Bultu sa paldu, The mass of a bale. v [B46] be, become bulgy. Mibultu
sa íyang kílid ang pistúla, The pistol is bulging on his hips. -in- in
bulk, great volume. v [A12; c16] do s.t. by bulk. Binultúha (ibinultu)
pagpalit arun barátu, Buy them in bulk so it will be cheaper.

búlu_1 n k.o. Indian wrestling, where the elbows are placed on a table
and the opposing partners try to force each other’s arms to bend.
v [A12C; b6] engage in Indian wrestling.

búlu_2, búlù_1 n heavy weeding knife with a blunt rectangular end. —
bataliyun n group of volunteer guards without firearms.

búlù_2 n k.o. unarmed, thin-walled bamboo with straight smooth stems:
Schizostachyum lumampao.

bulúbud = budbud, v1, 2; n1, 2.

búlù v [A; b6] begin bubbling. bulùbulù v [A] bubble. Ug mubulùbulù ang
tinula, haúna, Take the stew off when it simmers. Nagbulùbulù ang túbig
sa tubud, The water at the spring is bubbling.

búlud n low hill. v [B1256; a12] be, become a hill. Búrun man kunu nà
arun gamítun sa syúting, They will make a hill there for shooting
films.

bulug_1 n groin. v [a12] pinch s.o. or hit him in the groin. Bulgun ta
ka ug buk-un nímu nang básu, I’ll hit you in the groin if you break
that glass. paN- n an infection of the lymph gland in the groin.
v [a4b4] have an infection of the lymph gland in the groin. -an, -an(←)
= bulug_1.

bulug_2 (not without l) v [A; a12b2] cheat, fool. Kinsay nagbulug nímu
íning kwartang minì? Who cheated you with this counterfeit money?
Gibulug ang agáwun sa impliyádu nga pista upisyal run, The employee
hoodwinked his boss into believing it was a holiday today. n s.t. used
to fool, cheat s.o.

bulug_3 n whitish growth on the eyes which eventually causes blindness.
v [b4] get such a growth.

bulug_4 n a k.o. bolo around 20″ long with a flat end and curved blade
having a pronounced concave bend on both top and bottom edges
two-thirds of the way from the end.

bul-ug v [A; b] {1} for water to rush in a flood. Naánud ang balay
dihang hingbul-ugan sa túbig sa bahà, The house was washed away when it
was caught in the onrush of the floodwaters. {2} for emotions, masses
of things to surge forth. n {1} rush of water in a flood. {2} rush of
emotions, masses of things. Bul-ug sa kalúuy, A surge of pity. Bul-ug
sa mga kaáway, The onrush of the enemy. ma-un a onrushing. Mabul-úgung
lúhà, Rushing tears.

bulúgan = bulug_1.

buluk_1 a {1} slow in comprehension, dull. v [B; a2] be, become dull.
Mubuluk (mabuluk) kag dì ka mutuun, You’ll become dull if you don’t
study. {2} being hard to understand. Kabúk gud nímu. Ganíha úu, karun
dílì. Dì kung kasabut, How hard it is to understand you. First you say
yes, then no. I don’t understand.

buluk_2 (not without l) a rotten. v [B2] rot, decompose. Giaysan ang
isdà arun dì mabuluk, They put the fish on ice so this would not rot.

buluk_3 n a young coconut bud that can be tapped for toddy. v [AN; b6]
for coconuts to put forth or develop buds.

buluk_4, búluk n {1} color. Putì ang paburitu kung búluk, White is my
favorite color. {2} quality, tone of voice. v {1} [b] dye cloth red.
Gibugkan ang íyang sinínag pula, Her dress was dyed red. {2} [B6; c1P]
for the voice to change in quality. Nagbuluk ang ákung tíngug kay giubu
ku, My voice changed because I caught cold.

bulukbuluk v [A3P; c] for liquid to bubble continuously due to presence
of gas, make a bubbling sound. Nagbulukbuluk ang túbig nga íyang
gitidlúman, The water was bubbling where he was swimming under the
water.

bulúkut = balúkut.

bulung, búlung_1 v [A; b6(1)] treat with medicine. Bulnga ang samad,
Treat the wound. n medicine. mag-r-(→) n s.o. who treats illnesses.

búlung_2 v [A; a] look for, search. Nagbúlung ku sa kwarta kung nawálà,
I’m looking for the money I lost.

*búlung_3 hi- v [B126; b3(1)c5] be surprised, perplexed at s.t.
Nahibúlung siyag ngánung napildi sa piliay, He wondered why he had lost
the elections. Gikahibudngan kung ílang panag-áway, Their fighting
surprised me. ka- n wonderment at s.t. one cannot understand.
kahibudngan, kahibudngánun, kahi-an n surprising, bewildering.
Kahibudngánung nahitabù, A perplexing thing that happened.
mahibudngánun {1} = kahibulúngan. {2} full of bewilderment.
Mahibudngánun nga tinan-awan, A bewildered look.

búlung_4 v [B126; a2] get tired of s.t. partaken or done with
monotonous regularity or frequency. Nabúlung na ku sa íyang hitsúra,
I’m sick of seeing him. Nabúlung na ku sa buwad, I’m tired of dried
fish. Gibulúngan na kug pamínaw sa isturiya, I’m sick of listening to
her talk.

búlung_5 v [B1256] have a difficult time doing s.t. Nabúlung kug
pangítà sa inyung báy kay wà may numiru, I had a hard time looking for
your house. It had no number.

bulúngan n k.o. sweet banana with a green peel, similar in flavor to
the type sold in the U.S.: Musa sapientum var. suaveolens.

buluníyu (not without l) n long wooden device with a lacerated tip for
stirring the chocolate in the chocolate pot (batirul). v [c16] use as a
chocolate stirrer.

buluntǎd (not without l) n voluntary act. Buluntǎd kining ákung
gibúhat, What I’m doing is a voluntary act. v [A2; c6] volunteer,
present oneself voluntarily. Mibuluntǎd siyag tubag sa pangutána, He
volunteered to answer the question.

buluntǎr (not without l) = buluntǎd, v. -yu n {1} volunteer, esp. the
civilian soldier volunteers during the Japanese occupation.
{2} voluntary act. Ang pagpirma ku sa kuntrátu buluntaryu, My signing
of the contract is a voluntary act. v {1} = buluntǎd. {2} [A1; b] hold
a work bee with work contributed on a voluntary basis. Gibuluntaryúhan
sa lungsud ang paglimpiyu sa plása, The people of the town had a work
bee to clean the plaza.

buluntǐr (not without l) = buluntǎd, v.

bulus_1 n bamboo or sugar stem.

bulus_2 (not without l) a a great burden. Bulus kaáyu kining daghang
anak, It’s a burden to have so many children. v [B16; a12] overly
burden oneself. Ngánung magbulus kag lútù nga dúna kay kusiníra? Why do
you burden yourself with cooking when you have a cook? Ngánung buslun
siya nímug anhi? Why do you make him trouble himself to come here?

bulut n the shiny black crown of thorns which covers the tubers of the
Dioscorea esculenta (apáli), esp. the wild varieties (balyákag).

buluungun n pomelo, a k.o. widely grown citrus bearing large spherical
or irregularly-shaped fruits, larger, drier, and sweeter than the
grapefruit: Citrus grandis.

búluy n k.o. halfbeak.

bulwang_1 a for s.t. enclosing an area or an enclosed area to be wide.
Bulwang ra ning sayála níya, This skirt is too wide for her. v {1} [B6;
c1] be wide in space. Ang pagkawalay mwiblis mauy nakabulwang
(nakapabulwang) sa hawanan, The absence of furniture made the room
appear wider. {2} [bc1] add to the width of s.t. n = ka-. ka- n width
of an enclosed space or s.t. enclosing an area.

bulwang_2 n strong rush of water. Ang bulwang sa túbig mauy nakaánud
níya, The rush of the water carried her away. v [A2] for a liquid to
rush out forcefully.

bulyum n {1} volume of sound. {2} volume of a set of books. v [b(1)P]
increase the volume of sound.

búm n boom of a ship.

bumba_1 n {1} bomb. Bumba atumika, Atomic bomb. {2} spike or a hard
drive downwards in a volleyball, pingpong, and like games. {3} blows.
{4} vicious personal attack on s.o. in public. v {1} [A; b6(1)] bomb
s.t. {2} [A; c1] spike a ball. {3} [A; b6(1)] hit s.o. with hard blows.
{4} [A; b6(1)] lambast s.o. before the public. Ang mga Amirkánu kanúnay
níyang bumbáhan sa íyang lindug, He constantly lambasts the Americans
in his column. maN-r- n bomber. ig-r- n thing for which s.o. can be
lambasted in public.

bumba_2 n pump. Pagkúhag túbig sa bumba, Go get water at the pump. Ambi
ang bumba kay daghang lamuk, Give me the spray gun. There’s lots of
mosquitoes. Bumba sa pitrumaks, The air pressure mechanism of a lamp.
{2} erotic show. v {1} [A; c1] pump. Bumbáha (ibumba) ang púsu, Pump
the well. {2} [A; b] engage in sexual intercourse (slang). di-, ripling
di- n air rifle. bumbíra n actress that appears in erotic shows.
bumbíru n {1} fireman, fire department. {2} = bumbíra (male). v [B156;
a12] be, become a fireman. bumbiruhan n fire station.

bumbardíyu n bombardment. v [A; c] bombard. Pastilan nakabumbardíyu
níyag pangutána sa saksi, My! How he bombarded the witness with
questions. Gibumbardiyúhan úsang baybáyun, First the beach was shelled.

bumbay n {1} Indian, Hindu. {2} k.o. large goat with a long beard and
curved horns. {3} sibúyas — large onions. -in- v [A; c1] speak the
Indian language.

bumbil n bougainvillea.

bumbilya n light bulb. v [b6(1)] install a light bulb.

bumbu n {1} drum. {2} pregnant woman (humorous). Bumbu nang ákung
asáwa, My wife is already pregnant. v {1} [A] beat a drum. {2} [A; c1]
make into a drum.

buna n {1} forehead. {2} analogous structure in the body above the
genitalia. bunabúna = buna, 2.

bun-ag v [A; c] for s.t. in a container to be thrown out and scattered
in a downward motion. Bun-ági ug túbig ang káyu, Throw water on the
fire. Ibun-ag ang mga sinakung kupras sa budíga, Empty the sacks of
copra into the warehouse.

búnak v [A2; b1] wash clothes. Bunáki ang mga bulingun, Wash the dirty
clothes. -an(→), -un(→) n laundry.

búnal v {1} [AN; b6(1)] strike with a club or whip. Ayaw ku bunáli,
Don’t beat me. {2} [A; b(1)] for a fighting cock to deliver a blow with
its legs. {3} [B126] for a person to fall heavily with a thud. Nabúnal
ku sa hagdan, I fell with a thud down the stairs. andir di-
a henpecked. (→) n {1} club, whip. {2} blows of a fighting cock.
{3} penis (slang).

búnaw = bunal.

bunáyus a shapeless figure. v [B; a2] for the body or dress to be
lacking in curves and full shape. Mubunáyus ang tútuy basta way bra,
The breasts sag if you don’t wear a bra. Sayun rang tahiun ang mga
sinínà karun kay bunayúsun man lang, It’s easy to sew dresses nowadays
because they are just cut straight.

bunbun n fine sand. v [B1245] be filled with, covered with sand. paN-
v [A23] be defeated, lose overwhelmingly in a race or contest.

bun buyids n bon voyage.

bundak v {1} [A; c] let s.t. fall with force. Ngánung nabuak ang kúlun?
Kinsay nagbundak niíni? Why is the clay pot broken? Who threw it down?
Ayaw ibundak ang tilipunu, Don’t bang the telephone receiver down.
{1a} — sa salà lay the blame on s.o. Gibundákan siya sa salà nga dílì
íya, They blamed him for s.t. that was not his fault. {2} [A; c1] stomp
one’s feet. Ayaw bundáka (ibundak) ang tiil mug manáug ka sa hagdan,
Don’t stomp your feet as you go downstairs. {3a} [B346; b2] for the
rain to fall heavily. Mibundak ang ulan, The rain came down in sheets.
{3b} for s.t. heavy to come down by itself. Mibundak ang gawang sa
garáhi, The garage door came down with a bang. {4} [A; b6(1)]
{4a} speak with a gruff voice. Pinabundak ang tíngug, mitawag siya sa
íyang suluguun, He called his servant in a sharp voice. {4b} call s.o.
by name with no title of respect. Ayaw ibundak ang ngálan sa ímung
magulang. Tawga siyag manang, Don’t just call your elder sister by
name. Give her the title manang. n {1} crashing down of s.t., stomping
of feet. {2} downpour.

bundù_1, 2 = bungdù_1, 2.

bundul = bungdul.

búng = búlung_1, 2, 3.

búnga_1 n {1} fruit. {2} result, outgrowth. Búnga sa kahakug, The
result of your greed. — sa katúlug s.t. trivial. Ang púlung nga búnga
sa katúlug ángay kalimtan, Trivial words should be forgotten. {3} — ug
singut prickly heat. {4} -ng káhuy fruit tree. v {1} [A2N; b2c] bear
fruit. Mibúnga (namúnga) nang bayábas, The guava tree has borne fruit.
Gagmay kaáyu ang ibúnga íning klásiha sa ukban, This k.o. tangerine
bears small fruit. {2} [A2N; b6(1)] produce results. Gibungáhan ug duha
ka buuk anak ang ílang panagtípun, Their life together was blessed with
two children. hiN- n mother hen. v [A13; a12] raise into a hen.
himúnga, himungáun, himungáhun a bearing fruit proliferously. v [B12]
get to bear proliferously. mabungáhun a fruitful, producing good
results. Mabungáhun nga paningkámut, Striving which produced good
results. ting-(→) n season a plant bears fruit. Tingbunga sa mangga,
The mango season.

búnga_2 n {1} betel nut palm: Areca catechu. Name also given to other
palms of similar appearance. — di Tsína n ornamental palm which is
similar in appearance to the búnga: Adonidia merrillii.

bungabung, bungábung n the long feathers around the neck of male fowl,
often used as lures in fishing. Pulang bungabung nga mu rag kwintas
tan-áwun, Red hackles that look like a necklace. v {1} [B456N] grow
feathers around the neck. Magbungabung na gánì ning manúka, hiktan ku
na ni, When this cock starts to grow his hackles I’ll tie him up.
{2} [b6] pluck the neck feathers off.

bungàbungà v [B1245; b(1)] stammer. Nagkabungàbungà siyang mitubag kay
hisakpang namakak, He stammered his answer because they caught him in a
lie.

búngad v [B126; c6] stumble headlong onto the face. Ayaw ibúngad ímung
nawung sa simintu, Don’t fall on your face on the concrete floor.

bungag = balungag.

bungáhuy n fruit tree.

bungálun n k.o. creeping reed of rice paddies, used for horse feed.

búngan = bulúngan.

bungánga v [B3; c1] for s.t. to be open wide or ajar. Nabungánga íyang
bàbà sa dakung katingála, His mouth came open with great surprise.
Nagbungánga nga pultahan, Door that is ajar. Pagtárug lingkud. Ayaw
ibungánga (bungangáha) ímung atubangan, Sit with your legs together.
Don’t expose your genitalia.

bungarul = pyápi.

bungat v [A; b6(1)] state, express s.t. Bungati siya sa ímung gugma,
Express your love to him. Ibungat unsay ímung gustu, State what you
want. n price quoted by a buyer or seller.

bungatngat v [A; c1] open s.t. wide by pushing the sides away.
Bungatngáta (ibungatngat) ang bág arun isúd ri, Open the pocketbook
wide and put this in it. Bungatngáta ang sagbut kay muági ku, Move the
weeds out of the way so I can get by.

bungátud n small hill, hillock.

bungaw (from abungaw) a absent-minded, forgetful, esp. due to old age.
v [B1; a4] be absent-minded. Nabungaw lang ku sa panuklì, My mind was
elsewhere when I gave her the change. Gibungaw ka man tingáli. Gidad-an
mu akug baskit nga baldi man ang ákung gisúgù, You must be getting old.
You brought me a basket when I sent you to get a pail.
n absent-mindedness, forgetfulness.

bung-aw n chasm, narrow gorge. Natumpáwak siya sa bung-aw sa kasákit,
She underwent a great emotional crisis. (Lit. She fell headlong into
the chasm of sorrow.)

bungáwu n k.o. fish.

bungáwuy = pyápi.

bungay = bunglay.

bungbung_1 n {1} wall of a building. {2} side covers of any box-like
thing. v [A; c1] {1} enclose with, make into a wall. Bungbúngi ang
parul ug papil hapun, Put rice paper on the sides of the lantern.
{2} for adverse weather or some other barrier to confine people s.w.
Ang bahà nga mibungbung námù sa tabuk, The flood that confined us to
the opposite bank. Nabungbung sila sa isla tungud sa hángin, They were
confined to the island because of the wind. paN- n cut of meat
underneath the short ribs, the plate.

*bungbung_2 — kawáyan = búlù_2.

bungdù_1 n {1} pile or a heap of s.t., a mound. Bungdù sa yútà, Pile of
dirt. Ang bungdù sa sinsilyu sa lamísa, The pile of money on the table.
{2} grave. Marmul ang bungdù ni Risal, Rizal’s grave is of marble.
{3} woman’s genitalia (humorous slang). v [B3(1); a] for s.t. to pile
up or form a mound. Nagbungdù ang dughan, She has bulging breasts. Dì
makabungdù ang labhanan ug amnun, The laundry can’t pile up if you take
care of it as it comes along. -un a bulging outward.

bungdù_2 v [A; c] make s.t. hit against s.t. with a big impact. Kinsay
nakabundù sa dyíp sa pusti? Who bumped the jeep into the post? Nabundù
ang ákung samput sa simintu, I hit the cement with my rump.

bungdul v [A; ab2c] {1} strike s.t. stationary by poking s.t. at it.
Bungdúla ang búnga ug dílì nímu masaka, Poke at the fruit if you can’t
climb up to get it. Ibungdul ang ímung sungkud sa kisami arun sila
muhílum, Knock your cane against the ceiling so they will shut up.
{2} for a vehicle to crash into s.t. not fixed in place. Nibungdul ang
taksi sa karumáta, The taxi crashed into the cart. {3} [A; a2b2] have
sexual intercourse with (slang). n {1} instrument to poke s.t.
{2} action of poking s.t.

bunggalu n bungalow. v [A12; c1] construct a bungalow.

bunggu n bongo drum. v [A; a] play the bongo, make into a bongo.

bunggù v {1} [A3P; a] break off s.t. rigid with pressure. Hángin ang
mibunggù sa mga sanga sa káhuy, The wind broke the branches off of the
tree. {2} [A; a12] reveal s.t. which s.o. had kept secret for a
purpose. Bunggùun ta kang dúna kay láing trátu ug ang ákung ig-ágaw ang
ímung pangulitawhan, I’ll reveal that you already have a girl friend if
you try to victimize my cousin.

bunghan see buhung.

bungháyag a voluntary aid or service. Salámat sa inyung bungháyag nga
kuntribusiyun, Thank you for your voluntary contribution. v [A; c]
offer help, services voluntarily. Ibungháyag níya ang íyang sirbisyu sa
simbahan, He will offer his services to the church.

bunghug v [A; b6(1)] tell malicious things about s.o. to s.o. else with
a purpose. May nagbunghug nákung gipamabáyi mu kunung ímung súhul, S.o.
is trying to get me mad at you by telling me that you’re spending your
salary on women. n malicious things told about s.o. for a purpose.

bungì a {1} harelip. {2} for a bottle or jar to have a chip in the
mouth. {3} for s.t. projecting to be broken off. (←) v [A3P; a]
{1} make s.o. into a harelip. {2} make a break in a mouth-like opening
or dent in the front of s.t. Siyay mibúngì (nagbúngì) sa awtu kay
gidasmag sa pusti, He was the one who dented the front of the car when
he smashed it against the post. {3} break s.t. projecting off. Ang
inggranáhi gibungíag tangu, The gear had a tooth broken off it.

bungíngi v [A; b4] for s.t. to have an abundance of s.t. on it or in
it. Mangga nga nagbungíngi sa búnga, A mango tree, laden with fruit.
Namungíngi ang mga isdà sa púkut, The net was full of fish. Sanínang
gipamungingíhag mga adurnu, A dress laden with decorations.

bungìngì v [A] {1} for a surface to develop a crack and curl at the
edges. Ang nangkà nakabungìngì na sa kahinug, The jackfruit broke open
when it got overripe. {2} = bungíngi.

bungisngis n supernatural being, tall and hairy with a wide mouth, said
to be grinning literally from ear to ear or laughing boisterously.
v [A; c1] grin widely, laugh like a bungisngis. Mibungisngis íyang
dagway, His face burst into a wide grin.

bungiut, bungíut v [A; c1] {1} for the face to assume a frowning,
disapproving expression. Sapútun gánì siya mubungíut íyang nawung, His
face frowns when he is not in a good mood. {2} for the sky to get
heavily overcast (metaphorical). Nagbungiut ang kalibútan, The sky is
heavily overcast. a frowning face.

bungkag v [A; a] {1} take s.t. apart, break s.t. up into its
constituent parts. Kinsay nagbungkag sa rilu? Who took the watch apart?
Bungkága ring písus, Change this peso bill. {2} break up a group,
disarrange s.t. in a group. Kinsay nagbungkag sa ákung sinínà? Who
disarranged my clothes that had been stacked nicely? Nakabungkag si
Magsaysay sa mga Huks, Magsaysay broke up the Huk rebellion. Nabungkag
ang tígum pag-ulan, The gathering broke up when it rained. {3} break up
a relationship. Ikay nakabungkag sa ámung pagpuyù, You broke up our
home. {4} arrange music (slang). Ang Bítuls ray magbungkag sa ílang
kantáhun, The Beatles arrange their songs themselves. {5} break the
soil in a field that has never been cultivated or not cultivated for
some time. Nagbungkag siya sa kaíngin, He plowed the clearing in the
forest. -ay n children’s game in which a bunch of rubber bands is
separated. v [A12; c] play this game.

bungkal v {1} [A; ab2] dig up the surface of the earth. Dílì
kinahanglan bungkálun ning yutáa kay húmuk, This soil need not be
broken up because it is soft. Hibungkalan níya ang usa ka dakung kahun
sa nagdáru siya, He turned up a big box as he was plowing.

bungkaliw = bungkawil.

bungkas v [A3P; ab7] undo s.t. sewn. Nabungkas ang tahì sa ákung
karsúnis, My pants came apart at the seams. Bungkási ang sákug usa ka
dángaw, Open the sack a couple of inches where it was sewn.

bungkawil n k.o. edible shell: the bubble conch.

bungkig n the amount by which s.t. exceeds a certain set. Ug angáyun
nátug báhin ang karmilítus, duhay bungkig, If we divide these candies
up evenly, there will be two left over. v [B126; a12] become uneven in
number, not in complete sets. Ayawg bungkíga ang plátung baligyà.
Hinuygu giyud, Don’t sell the plates in odd lots. Sell them by the set.

bungkug n the very end of the spinal column, esp., in man or animals,
but also said of birds.

bungkul n {1} place where the bones bulge in the knuckles, ankles, etc.
{2} knot in a tree. {3} cyst. {4} = búkul. v {1} [a12] hit in the ankle
bone, knuckles. {2} [B1256; b6] turn into a cyst.

bungkut v [A; b12] suck money from s.o. Bungkútan lang nang byúdáha sa
íyang bánang batan-ún, The young husband is just going to suck money
out of the widow.

bunglay v [A; a2] remove weeds by using a bolo square at the end.
Bungláyun ku nang sagbut, I’ll remove the weeds with a bolo.
n blunt-ended bolo used to remove weeds. -un(→) n weeds to be cleared
out.

bungsì = busngì.

bungsud n general term for fish corrals. v {1} [A1; c1] make, make into
a fish corral. {2} [A; a12] catch in a fish corral. {3} [A; c] drive
s.t. elongated into the ground, dash s.t. straight to the ground. Ang
yútang gibungsúran níya sa talibugsuk, The soil where he drove the
stakes into. Ibungsud ta kag ímu kung samúkun, I’ll smash you into the
ground if you bother me. bungsuran n fish corral. bungsuránan n place
where fish corrals are built. binungsúran n fish caught in a fish
corral.

bungtud n {1} hill. {2} anthill. hiN- v [B236; b8] reach a place one
has gone up to. Nakahimungtud na siya sa kadunggánan, He has arrived at
the height of his fame. kabungtúran n hills.

búngug v {1} [B126] be deafened, stunned. Makabúngug nga butu,
Deafening explosion. Mabúngug kag maigù ka sa ákung kúmù, You’ll be
stunned if my fist hits you. {2} [B1246] stunning because of size or
the amount, usually said of food. Makabúngug nga bangkíti, A banquet of
stunning proportions. Páa nga makabúngug, Thighs that bowl you over by
their size. (→) n yellowish secretion from an infected ear. v [a4] have
this yellowish secretion. Gibungug ang íyang dunggan, He has pus coming
out of his ears. -un a having a pussy infection.

bungul_1 a {1} deaf. buta — blind and deaf. Táwung buta bungul, A deaf
and blind man. {2} for a musical instrument or money not to be
resonant. v {1} [B16; a] be, become deaf. {2} wà maka- be not able to
hear (joking use for makadungug). Wà ku makabungul sa ímung gisulti, I
didn’t hear what you were saying. {3} [B1; b6] for instruments or money
to be, become unresonant. — nga lubi a coconut at the stage just prior
to ripening where the fruit is still so full of water it does not
produce a sound when you shake it. (←) [A123PC; b(1)] not to be on
speaking terms.

bungul_2 n unopened flower bud of a coconut. Ang dugà sa bungul mauy
himúung tubà, The sap of the coconut bud is what is made into palm
toddy. paN- v [A; b6] for coconuts to develop flower buds.

bungul_3 n k.o. shark (pating).

bungulan, bungúlan = bulúngan.

búngun n space directly underneath the house or tree. Ang kanding túa
gihukut sa búngun, The goat is tethered under the house. v [c6] put or
place s.t. under s.t. else. Gibúngun ba nímu ug tanum ang mga ságing sa
mga lubi? Did you plant the bananas under the coconut trees?

búngut n {1} beard, mustache. {2} pubic hairs (euphemism). {3} =
bulbul, 2. v {1} [a4] for a beard to grow on one. {1a} have pubic hairs
(euphemism). Gibúngut na lang mu piru magbinátà gihápun, You already
have pubic hairs, but you are acting like children. {2} [c] put a beard
on s.t. pa- v [A1] allow one’s beard, mustache to grow. hiN- v [A; b6]
pluck or shave a beard or mustache. panghiN- v [A2] pluck or shave
one’s beard, mustache. bungutbungut n {1} wooly, hairy material.
{2} name given to grasses of waste places with numerous spikes: Chloris
spp. bungutbúngut {1} = bungutbungut, 1. {2} n tassel fish (Polynemus
spp.), fishes with filamentous rays coming from under the head. -an
n general term for catfish. bungtan n name given to goat fish
(timbúngan) with long barbels on the face. hiN- n s.t. used to pluck or
shave the beard or mustache. -un a {1} bearded. {2} goon. Mudagsang ang
mga bungútun panahun sa piliay, There are goons in droves during
elections. v [B1456] be a goon. bungutbungutun a hairy.

bunguy = bungul_1.

bunhayag = bungháyag.

bunhuk n mites infesting fowl. v [a124] for fowl to be infested with
lice. -un(→) a infested with fowl mites. babáying -un(→) n prostitute,
esp. one infected with venereal disease.

búni v [A3P; ac] {1} fill a hole to the top. Nabúni ang bangag sa
lápuk, The mud filled the hole. {2} obliterate the traces of s.t. Ang
panahun mubúni sa kaguul, Time heals the wounds of sorrow.

bun-i n ringworm. v [B1246; a4] be affected with ringworm.

buníta = bunítu (female).

bunítu a for a man or boy to be good-looking. v [B12; a1b6] be, become
handsome. see also ninyu.

bunkawil = bungkawil.

bunkul = bungkul.

bunlaw v [AN] rinse. Akuy mibunlaw (namunlaw) sa lapúkung salug, I
rinsed the muddy floor off. Kinsay nagbunlaw sa sinabunan? Who rinsed
the soapy clothes? Bunláwi ang kúlun únà lutúi, Rinse out the pot
before you use it. n s.t. to rinse with.

bunlay = bunglay.

bunlud = bátud, n.

bunlut v [A; a2] pull with force. Gibunlut níya ang ákung buhuk, She
pulled my hair. n act of pulling with force. -ay sa tukug n drawing
lots by sticks. Whoever gets the longest is ‘it’. v [C2] draw lots by
sticks.

bunsákà, bunsíkà a for hair, spines, and the like to be spreading wide.
Ngil-ad tan-áwun ang bunsíkà nga buhuk, Hair that is spread out in all
directions is ugly to look at. v [B3(1); b6] spread out in all
directions. Wà pa makabunsíkà ang dáhun sa pugas, The leaves of the
corn seedlings have not spread out yet.

bunsálù (not without l) = aguting, n 2.

bunsù v [A; c6] throw s.t. forcefully downwards. Gibunsù siya sa matun
sa asíras, The ruffian smashed him down to the ground.

bunsud = bungsud.

bunsudbunsud (from bungsud) n murex shells.

buntag n morning. v {1} [B5] be morning. Hápit na mubuntag (mabuntag)
kay mituktugáuk nang manuk, It is almost morning because the cock
crowed. Musimba siyag mabuntag, She goes to church in the morning.
{1a} [a12] do s.t. in the morning. Buntága ang kasal, Have the marriage
performed in the morning. {2} [A13; b(1)] do s.t. until morning.
Nagbuntag kug bása, I read until morning. Gibuntágan nákug bayli, I
danced until morning. {3} [b4] be overtaken by morning. Nabuntagan mi
didtu sa lawud, Morning found us in the open sea. pa-, paka- v [A13;
b(1)] stay s.w. till morning. Magpakabuntag ta sa barku, Let’s stay in
the boat until morning. Pakabuntagi ang kinútil nga itlug úsà imna, Let
the beaten eggs set until morning before you eat them. buntagbuntag,
Culu- mornings. Malígù siya buntagbuntag, She takes a bath every
morning. ka-un n morning viewed as a phase of the day. Ang ínit sa
kabuntágun, The morning heat. -un(→) n {1} being in the morning.
Buntagung mantaláan, Morning paper. {2} palm toddy gathered in the
morning.

buntal n {1} fine, white fiber obtained from the stalks of unopened
buri palm leaves, used for making hats. {2} hat made from buntal.
v [A1; a] wear, make into a buntal hat.

buntas a famished, half-starved. v [B12; a4] get to be famished.
Nabuntas siya kay wà may káun gabíi, She is half-starved because she
didn’t have anything to eat last night. Mu ra man nà siya ug gibuntas
nímu, He must be famished for the sight of you.

buntaug a towering, looming huge. v [A3] {1} loom. Dakung búkid nga
nagbuntaug sa unáhan, A huge mountain that loomed in the distance.
{2} for silence to reign. Kahílum nga nagbuntaug sa lawud, Silence that
reigned over the seas.

buntaw v [A; c] toss, throw s.t. lightly. Nabuak ang plátu kay gibuntaw
man lang, The plate was smashed because he just threw it down.
{2} address an older person without his usual title of respect. Ayaw
ibuntaw íyang ngálan. Tawga siyag manang, Don’t just call her by her
name. Call her ‘big sister’. paN- v [A2; b6] go hook and line fishing,
usually in the shallow part of the sea. n hook and line fishing.

buntay a heavy in weight, weighty. Buntay ang ákung dala kay sa íya,
The thing I carried was heavier than his. v [A1PB; a2] weigh s.t. down.
Ang usa ka pirásung puthaw ang nagbuntay (nagpabuntay) sa putus, The
piece of iron made the package heavy. Nagbuntay ang mga búnga, The
fruits are weighing down (the branches of the tree).

buntis_1 n pregnant woman. v {1} [B26; b6] be, become pregnant. {2} [c]
be carried in the womb. Ang gibuntis ni Inday karun ikaunum níyang
anak, Inday is pregnant with her sixth child.

buntis_2 n k.o. tiny fish.

buntud = bungtud.

buntug_1 v [A; a1] {1} overcome s.t. Makabuntug ka ba niánang dakung
trúsu? Can you lift the large log? Buntúgun ku ang mga kagul-ánan, I’ll
overcome my sorrows. {2} [A; c] throw s.t. into the water to sink it.
Gibuntug sa kriminal ang pistúla sa dágat, The killer threw the pistol
into the sea. hiN- v [B1256; b8] be set s.w. Ang ílang balay didtu
mahimuntug sa pátag, Their house was located on the plain. Ang arka
didtu mahimuntug sa Arárat, The ark was set down on Mt. Ararat. -un
n {1} anchor made of a forked stick with a stone tied in the fork.
{2} k.o. wrasse found in reefs.

buntug_2 n quail. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] catch quails. -un(→) a quail-like
in appearance. v [B12; b6] get to be small and round like a quail.

buntug_3 n general name for gobies.

buntúgun see buntug_1.

buntul_1 n {1} small hill. {2} top of a hill.

buntul_2 = bungdul.

buntul_3 v [b6] = pa-. pa- v [A; b6(1)] take liquids, usually spirits,
to follow or wash down food. Nagpabuntul silag bír sa ílang gikaung
baklarit, They drank beer to go with their dog stew. n liquor to take
with food.

buntung = butung_2.

bunù_1 v [AC; ab24] kill. Nagbúnù sila, They killed each other.
Nakabunù ang ákung manuk, My cock killed its opponent. Hibun-an kug
duha ka manuk, I lost two roosters. (←) n a fight to the death. -an(←)
place in fish corral where the fish is trapped and taken. mamumúnù
n killer, murderer. palaN-(←), talaN-(←), taliN-(←) killer cock.

bunù_2 v [A; a1] throw s.t. at s.t. Bun-un ka nákug batu, I will throw
a rock at you. n action of throwing.

bun-u n fat of fowls. paN- v [A2] for fowl to have lots of fat. Namun-u
ang manuk nga ákung giíhaw, The chicken I slaughtered had lots of fat.

búnug n general name given to small, somewhat slender-bodied fishes
with extensive dorsal and ventral spines and tail fins in one piece:
gudgeons and gobies. bunugbúnug n general name for snakeheads.

bun-ug_1 n {1} bruise. {2} expenses, loss of money (slang). Pilay
bun-ug nímu sa bangka gabíi? How much did you spend when you treated
us? a {1} bruised. {2} for a woman’s chastity to be ruined. {3} s.t.
which has been repeated till it bores. Bun-ug nga áwit, A tired tune.
{4} misused, over-used. Bun-ug nga pláka, A worn-out record. Bun-ug na
ang bátà sa hináwuk, The baby was smothered with kisses. v [A; a1b2]
{1} inflict bruises on. Ayaw bun-úga ang kamátis, Don’t bruise the
tomatoes. {2} ruin a girl’s chastity. Gibun-ug níya ang dalága únà
bulagi, He robbed the girl of her chastity before he left her.
{3} cause s.o. to spend a large amount (slang). Gibun-ug aku nílag
dakù, They made me spend a heck of a lot. {4} [B126] over-use, misuse.
Dílì giyud undángag gámit ang makinilya hangtud dílì mabun-ug, He won’t
stop using the typewriter until it gets completely broken. {5} — ang
hilánat v [B12; a12] for fever to recur a number of times after partial
recovery. Mabun-ug ang hilánat nga dílì idiskansu, If you do not rest,
your fever will recur. {6} — ang tulug v [B12; a12] for one’s sleep to
get interrupted a number of times. Nabun-ug ang ákung tulug sa
paghilakhílak sa bátà kagabíi, My sleep was interrupted last night
because the baby kept crying. maN-r- n one who inflicts bruises.

bun-ug_2 = bul-ug.

búnuk v [B; b2] for rain to fall in torrents. n the torrential falling
of the rain.

búnul v [A; a] {1} bruise s.t. Ayaw bunúla ang kamátis, Don’t bruise
the tomatoes. Nabúnul na ang íyang láwas, His body is badly bruised.
{2} make soil, clay, firm and compact. Nabúnul na ang daruhan nga
inyung giagían kanúnay, The field you keep walking over has become
hard. (→) n infected subcutaneous injury due to a blow. v {1} [B26] for
a bruise to become infected. Nabunul ang ákung bun-ug, My bruise turned
into a boil. {2} [a4b4] get an infected bruise. Gibunul (gibunulan)
ákung pálad, The palm of my hand got an infected bruise.

bunulun a for draft animals to be sluggish. Bunulun kaáyu ning kabáwa
nga idáru, This carabao is too sluggish to use for plowing. v [B12; b6]
be, become sluggish.

búnus_1 v [A; a12] tie fibers end to end to form a continuous strand.
Bunúsun sà nímu ang abaka parabir hablúnun, Tie the abaca fibers into
long strands before weaving it. -an(→) n a shallow woven tray or basket
where the strands, joined end to end are kept coiled before weaving.

búnus_2 n bonus. v {1} [A; b] give a bonus. {2} [A12] get a bonus.

búnus_3 = balúnus.

bunut n coconut husk and shell. Nusnúsig bunut ang salug, Scrub the
floor with a coconut husk. v {1} [A; b6(1)] husk a coconut. {2} [A; b]
scrub the floor with a coconut husk. Bunuti ang salug, Scrub the floor
with a coconut husk. {3} [A; b] punish or maul one severely. Ílang
gibuntan ang kawatan, They mauled the thief (lit. husked him).

búnut v {1} [A; ab2] pull s.t. that is in between s.t. Hináyag búnut
ang húnus, Pull the drawers out slowly. Ákung bunútun ang madyungan,
I’ll draw a piece from the mahjong set. {2} [A; a] pull out s.t.
rooted, stuck in s.t. Bunúta ang lansang, Pull out the nail. {2a} [A;
c1] pull s.t. out as if uprooting weeds. Ayaw ibúnut (bunúta) pagkúhà
ang igtalánum, Don’t just rip out the seedlings. {3} [AC12; a] draw a
weapon. Makigbúnut ku nímug pistulahay, I’ll duel you with pistols.
n action of drawing. — lábay n action of drawing and discarding what
was drawn in a game in order to allow the game to continue without
anyone’s dropping out. — madyung in mahjong, the action of getting a
piece which enables one to go mahjong. — paníngit see singit. — supu
n {1} manner of betting in mahjong whereby a player bets that his next
draw will cause s.o. (himself or any other player) to get mahjong.
{2} amount bet in this manner of betting.

bunyag v {1} [A; b6] baptize. Ugmà bunyági ákung anak, My child will be
christened tomorrow. {1a} acknowledge s.o.’s new clothing or hair style
by hitting or knocking the new thing. {2} [A3; c] name s.t. Mga katsílà
ang mibunyag sa átung násud ug Pilipínas, It was the Spaniards who
called our country the Philippines. n baptism. Way bunyag, Unbaptized.
Inanak sa bunyag, Godchild in baptism. -an n baptismal font. -an(→)
n garment worn by a child when baptized. -in-an n {1} christian,
baptized person. {2} christian name. Pidru ang ákung binunyágan, My
christian name is Peter. maN-r- n one who baptizes.

bunyun n a protrusion of the bone outwards at the base of the big toe.

bupanda = pupanda.

bupíti n law offices. v [A1; a2] establish, make into a law office.

burábug_1 a short and pudgy. Bátang burábug, A pudgy child. v [B; a]
be, become pudgy.

burábug_2 a extraordinarily tall. Burábug nga manuk, A chicken taller
than ordinary chickens. Burábug nga táwu, Man taller than ordinary men.
Burábug nga balay, House taller than ordinary houses.

buradur n {1} draft, rough draft. {2} eraser.

burak n fleshy back part of the leg below the knee, the calf of the
leg, esp. when it is overly prominent.

burakburak = bulukbuluk.

burarà a indiscreet, tactless in one’s ways. v {1} [B; b6] do s.t.
indiscreetly or tactlessly. Akuy naúlaw dihang miburarà siya atubángan
sa bisíta, I was embarrassed when she talked tactlessly in front of the
visitors. Nakítà íyang panti kay nagburarà siyag lingkud, You could see
her panties because she sat in an indiscreet way.

buraska a abundant, available in limitless quantity. v [A13B; c] be
present in limitless quantities, do s.t. in plenteous quantities.
Maburaska (muburaska) ang búnga sa mangga kun paasuhan, The mango tree
will bear huge quantities of fruit if you fumigate it. Magburaska tas
káun, Let’s eat plenty. Nagburaska ang kan-unun sa íla, They have food
in limitless quantities.

buraw a stupid, having no sense. v [B12; b6] be, become stupid.

buraybúray n k.o. coral fishes (Pomecentridae), similar to ipus-ipus.

burd_1 v [A; b6] board in s.o.’s house. -ir n boarder. burding hawus
n boarding house.

burd_2 n board examination. v [A] take a board examination.

burda v [A; b6(1)] embroider, put a lace edge. n embroidery, lace
edging. -in- s.t. written or drawn with embroidery. binurdáhan
n {1} embroidered cloth. {2} a face with smallpox scars (humorous). -du
a embroidered. Burdádung (binurdang) dibúhu, Embroidered design.
Burdádung (binurdáhang) panyù, Embroidered handkerchief. -dur(→)
instrument for embroidery. -díra n woman who embroiders.

burdag = buldug (female).

burdáhi v [A; b6] travel in a certain direction. Háin man tu siya
miburdáhi? Where did he head for? Culu- v {1} [A1] travel back and
forth. Kanúnay siyang magbuburdáhi sa Manílà kay nigusyanti, He travels
back and forth to Manila because he is a businessman. {2} [A13] pace
back and forth. May prublíma siya kay nagbuluburdáhi man sa sála, He
must have a problem because he is pacing in the living room.

burd pit n board feet. v [a12] measure in board feet. Burdpíta nang
yakal, Measure that lumber in board feet.

burdu v [A; c1] {1} go s.w. in a roundabout, not direct way. Muburdu ta
arun dì ta masagatà sa mga buguy, Let’s go round about so we don’t run
into the ruffians. Iburdu (burdúhun) ang prusisyun sa tibuuk lungsud,
They will take the procession around the whole town. {1a} for a
sailboat to go at a zigzag or diagonal course to ride against the wind.
{2} roam, walk about. Nagburdu silag panangkù, They went out to steal
palm toddy. Iburdu ning mga tinda, Go around to sell these goods.

burdug = buldug.

burdun n string in a string instrument which has fine magnetic copper
wire wound around it. v [A; c] put in such a bass string.

burgahuy a wandering, bumming around, esp. in a shiftless carefree way.
v [B1] wander, usually in a shiftless, carefree way. Nagburgahuy lang
siya kay nawad-an sa trabáhu, He is just roaming about because he lost
his job. Nagburgahuy ákung hunàhúnà. Wà ku kapamatì sa liksiyun, My
thoughts were wandering. I didn’t listen to the lesson. Magkaburgahuy
ning batáag patuyángan sa gustu, This child is going to get more
shiftless if he gets whatever he wants.

burgis n tough, thug. Mga burgis ang gipanuhúlan sa pulitiku, The
politician hired thugs. v [B12; b6] be, become a tough.

burídu = aburídu.

burilyus n bowling pin.

buringug a dumb, stupid. Buringug ka tingáli kay dúgay mang makasabut,
You must be dumb because you can’t understand easily. v [B1; b6] be,
become dumb, stupid.

buringut a for the face to be ugly. v [B2; b6] be ugly. Nagkaburingut
íyang dagway sa nagkalagas siya, She is getting uglier as she gets
older.

buríring n general name for puffer fishes.

buriskas n k.o. card game similar to whist, but played by any number of
people and in which the deck is dealt out bit at a time rather than all
at once. v [A2C2; a2] play buriskas.

búrit a braggart, offensively boastful. v [B12; b6] be, become
offensively boastful.

burlas n artificial tassel. v {1} [A; a12] make into a tassel. {2} [A;
b6(1)] ornament with tassels. Giburlásan níya ang bandíra, He
ornamented the flag with tassels.

burlis n burlesque. v {1} [A1; b6] do burlesque. {2} [A1] be naked.
Nagburlis siyang nalígù, She took a bath naked.

burnay n k.o. edible, small white venus clam. ismayling — grinning
stupidly (so called because the burnay are often slightly open even
when alive). Unsa ka gud dihà nga nagngisi ka man. Mu ra ka lag
ismayling burnay, Why are you grinning there like an oaf (with a smile
that looks like a clam)?

burnir n burner of a stove, lamp, etc.

burniyu = buluníyu.

bursa = bulsa.

bursigi n army boots. v [A; a] wear, make into army boots.

búru_1 v {1} [A; b5] cover s.t. all over with salt, sugar, flour, etc.
Burúha (burúhi) sa asin ang karni, Put a lot of salt on the meat.
{2} [A1; b(1)] serve, eat fish with lots of salt. n small dried fish
with more salt than the ordinary. -in- = búru, n. †

búru_2 n bureau, governmental department.

burud n k.o. fresh-water fish.

burúka n {1} court case. {2} trouble, argument. Unsay ímung
gilahugláhug dinhi. Burúka? What are you roving around here for? You
want trouble? v [C; a2b3] {1} have, make a court case. Ayaw burukáha
ang inyung disgustu, Don’t make your quarrel into a court case.
{2} make a fuss about s.t. Pára kindi, inyu pa giyung burukáhan? Are
you going to make a federal case out of the candy? {3} [A; a3] bring
out some wrong-doing. Miburúka ang bátà nga naghilabut ang mutsatsa,
The child informed us that the maid had been touching our things.

burukburuk = bulukbuluk.

burukinta = burukintu (female).

burukintu a quarrelsome, quick to take offense. v [B2; b6] be, become
quarrelsome, troublesome.

burul_1 a {1} dull, not sharp. {2} dull, stupid. v [B12; a2] for an
instrument to become dull. n round-tipped, dull-bladed knife for
weeding.

burul_2, búrul v [A13; b5] shave the hair on the head off. Burúlun
(burúlan) nátù ang ímung úlu, Let’s shave your head. (→) a bald, devoid
of growth. Ang táwung burul way buhuk, A bald-headed man has no hair.
Burul na ang kabukíran nga gisigíhag kaíngin, The mountains have been
denuded by slash and burn agriculture.

burunda = brunda.

burung a {1} shy and introverted. {2} ignorant of the ways of the
world. Tungud sa kaburung giílad siya, He was swindled because he was
so ignorant. {3} stupid. v [B; b6] {1} be shy. Nagburung ka lang dì ka
kamaung makig-atúbang ug táwu, You’re nothing but a wallflower. You
don’t know how to face people. {2} be ignorant. {3} be stupid.

buruníyu = buluníyu.

burus a {1} pregnant. {2} for rice to form grains in the panicle.
{3} for borrowed things to have been kept too long. Burus na ang
librung ímung gihuwaman, You’ve kept the book you borrowed till it got
pregnant. v {1} [B; b6] be, become pregnant. Patakáling anay arun
muburus (maburus), Mate the sow so she will become pregnant. {1a} — sa
pasálig be fooled by assurances. Daghan na ang miburus sa pasálig
niánang pulitiku, Lots of people have been fooled by the promises of
that politician. {2} [A1; c] have in one’s womb. {3} [B; b6] for rice
to form in the panicle. {4} [B] keep borrowed things too long.

búrut v {1} [B2S3] inflate, swell, esp. into a rounded shape. Mibúrut
ang láyag sa sakayan, The sail of the boat billowed out. Pistúla nang
nagburut sa íyang kílid, That is a pistol that is bulging at his side.
Butangig yílu ang bun-ug arun dì makabúrut, Put ice on the bruise so it
won’t swell. {2} [B246] be, become pregnant (slang). Mibúrut nang ákung
asáwa, My wife is pregnant. {3} [B46] be, become rich (slang). Mubúrut
kag dalig mag-ismaglir ka, You’ll soon get rich if you engage in
smuggling. pa- v [A; ac] {1} blow s.t. up, make s.t. swell.
{2} flatter, inflate s.o.’s pride. Nagpabúrut na sad siya sa íyang
kaugalíngun, He is blowing himself up again. n balloon. burutburut
n crevalles with a pronounced curve outward on the ventral portion:
Caranx gymnostethoides.

burúwas = brúwa.

búruy n {1} k.o. purple jellyfish, hemispherical in shape, reaching 8″
in diameter. {2} general name for jellyfish.

bus_1 n bus. v [A; a12] take a bus.

bus_2 n {1} boss (slang). Si Máma muy bus sa ámù, Mother is the boss in
our family. {2} familiar term of address. v {1} [A3; a12] call s.o.
boss. {2} [A12; a12] have a boss. Pait kaáyu ning makabus tag
daugdaugan, It’s awful to have a mean boss.

bus_3, bús n {1} exclamation used to drive away pigs. {2} exclamation
used to drive s.o. away (joking or derogatory). v [a12] say bus to
drive away.

bús_2 = bulus_1.

búsa, búsà therefore, consequently. Mamatay ka. Búsà, pag-ampù, You are
going to die. So pray.

busagak, buságak n {1} sound of liquid flowing. {2} flowing liquid.
v {1} [A; c16] for liquids to flow with noise. Nagbusagak ang
sandayung, The gutter is making a rushing sound. {2} flow in plentiful
amounts, spoutingly or continuously. Mibuságak ang dugù sa kílid sa
gidunggab, Blood flowed from the side of the man that was stabbed.

busak a be all over s.t., abundant in quantity. Busak sa isdà ning
dagáta, Fish abound in these seas. Ang ámung yútà busak sa lubi, All of
our land is planted with coconuts. v {1} [A; a1] fill s.t. to capacity
or cover s.t. all over with s.t. Gibusak námug kamúti ang sáku, We
filled the sack with sweet potatoes. {2} [B; b6] for s.t. to grow in
abundance. Mibusak (nabusak) ang sagbut tungud sa ulan, The weeds grow
lushly because of the rain. (←) v [B] be abundant. Nagbúsak run ang
mais búsà barátu, Corn is abundant now. That’s why it’s cheap. hiN-(←)
[B3N; b6] for plants to bear in abundance. Wà makahimúsak
(makapanghimúsak) ang humay kay wà man abunúhi, The rice did not bear
in abundance because it wasn’t fertilized. n time when plants bear the
most, height of the harvest season.

busal n muzzle. v [A; b6] apply a muzzle. Busali ang kábaw arun dì
kakaun sa mais, Put a muzzle on the carabao so it can’t eat the corn.

busaug n floor joist. v [A; c1] put, make into a floor joist.

búsaw_1 a glutton. v [B12; b6] become a glutton. Nabúsaw siya human
makatilawg gútum, He became a glutton after having experienced hunger.

búsaw_2 v [A; a12] do s.t. to make a magical trick fail. Dúnay nagbúsaw
sa mádyik kay wà man makwarta ang papil, S.o. is spoiling the magic act
because the paper didn’t turn into money.

bus-aw n condition of frequent, urgent urination but by small
quantities. v [A123P; a4] get this condition. Ságad bus-awun ang
mabdus, Pregnant women tend to have frequent urination.

busáwus = dusáus.

busay n waterfall.

busbus_1 = balusbus. paN- v [A2; b6] defecate (slang). Iplás ang
kasilyas humag pamusbus, Flush the toilet after using it.

busbus_2 = alibusbus.

busdak = pusdak.

busdik v {1} [A; b5] break open a sack or the like that is filled.
Nabusdik ang balun, The balloon burst. Busdíki ang sáku. Tan-áwa kun
unsay klási sa humay, Punch a hole in the sack and see what k.o. rice
it is. {2} [b126] be filled to satiety. Makabusdik giyud ang inyung
gidálit, You served a most filling dinner. a full to bursting after
eating.

busdù = pusdù.

búsi v [B1256] survive, last to be of some value. Dílì mabúsi ang
kaminyúung way pagsinabtanay, A marriage without understanding cannot
survive. Usa ray nabúsi sa mga baktin, Only one piglet survived. Way
mabúsi sa íyang swildu kay gastadur, Nothing is left of his salary
because he is a spendthrift. Dílì mabúsi ang trabáhung biyàbiyáan, Work
that you don’t keep after will not result in anything.

busíad, busíkad v [B23(1)4] for s.t. to spread open and out leaving a
gap. Mibusíkad íyang sinínà kay huut ug nakítà íyang púsud, His shirt
was half open in the front because it was too tight, and you could see
his navel. Haúnang papkurn ug makabusíkad na, Take the popcorn off the
fire when it has burst open. Mibusíkad ang sumbuhan sa paltik pagbutu,
The barrel of the rifle burst when it was fired. (→) n small grass
bearing several spread out spikelets: Cyperus spp. The spikelets are
used as medicine for fever.

busílak v [A2S] radiate light, esp. the sun. Mata na kay mibusílak na
ang adlaw, Wake up because the sun is shining brightly. Nagbusílak sa
kalípay ang íyang nawung, His face was beaming with happiness. n light
radiated, sun’s rays.

busína n {1} auto horn. {2} sound produced by such a horn. v [A; c]
honk the horn. Ibusína ug kusug arun mabátì sa ímung ikasúgat, Blow the
horn loud so anyone coming your way will hear it.

*búsing na-, gi- be out of one’s mind. Gibúsing (nabúsing) ka dihà? Are
you out of your mind?

busing-ut a having a long face. n sour expression on the face. v [B346;
c1] have a long face because of displeasure. Ayaw busing-úta
(ibusing-ut) nang hitsúra mug makig-atúbang nákù, Get that frown off
your face when you talk to me.

busíru see búsu.

busìsì v {1} [A; a] make a laceration, esp. in a surface that is tight
due to fullness. Busìsíun sa duktur ímung hubag, The doctor will slit
your boil. Busìsía ang sáku arun muágas ang humay, Slit the sack so the
rice will spill. {2} lay out in the open some malicious gossip that has
long lain buried. Gibusìsì níya ang húgawng kagahápun sa íyang kaáway,
He dug out the dirty secrets of his enemy’s past. {3} [A; a12] pressure
s.o. to speed up work. Busìsía siya arun mahuman, Hurry her up so it
will get done. busìsíru a always putting pressure on people to speed up
the work.

buskad_1 v = bukhad. — ug ngábil thick-lipped. -íra a given to
spreading gossip. v [B125] get to be a gossip.

buskad_2 = buskag.

buskag v {1} [AB26; a] undo, untie s.t., esp. so that the contents
spread; for s.t. wrapped or tied up to open. Mibuskag ang tákung ug
migímaw ang mga bungul sa lubi, The coconut sheath opened and its buds
spread out beneath. Nabuskag ang íyang bálun, His lunch broke open
allowing the contents to spread out. Makabuskag ka ba sa balitùtù? Can
you untie the knot? {2} for hair neatly groomed to get dishevelled.
Nabuskag íyang hinápay sa hángin, Her hair got all dishevelled in the
wind. {3} [A; a12] expose s.o.’s secret. Akuy mubuskag sa makauúlaw
mung tinagúan, I will expose your shameful secret.

busla v [A; b5] confront s.o. to belie his assertion. Ákù siyang
gibusla (gibusláhan) arun matin-aw ang tanan, I confronted her so that
everything would be cleared. buslahay v [C] confront each other to
disclaim what each said.

buslung v [A2; ab5] look at s.t. squarely without hiding that one is
looking. Si Ána ra giyuy nakabuslung kay nag-antipára mag dikulur, Ana
was the only one who was able to get a good look because she was
wearing dark glasses. Buslungi (buslunga) arun makahibalu mug unsay
riaksiyun níya, Look at him square in the face so you will see what his
reaction is.

buslut v {1} [A3P; b5] make a hole. Ayaw buslúta ang púyu, Don’t punch
a hole in the paper bag. Buslúti ang láta sa gátas, Punch a hole on the
milk can. {1a} knock down bowling pins in a row, thus making a hole in
the set-up. {2} [A123P; a12] — sa bulsa make one flat broke. Buslútun
nímu ang ákung bulsa? You want to drive me to the poorhouse? {3} [A]
break in a virgin. n {1} hole through s.t. Dakug buslut ang ákung
midyas, My socks have a big hole in them. {2} knocking down of pins in
a row in bowling. — sa íyang ina euphemism for bilat sa íyang ina. (→)
{1} having a hole in it. Buslǔt nga takurì, Kettle with a hole in it.
{2} — ug bulsa penniless. {3} no longer a virgin. {4} failing to catch,
return a ball, failing to strike the mark. paN- n instrument for
punching holes.

busngal v [A; a12] cut short s.o. talking by asserting the contrary,
often in an impertinent way. Patákà ka lang dihag pamusngal, How dare
you interrupt like that? Busngálun nátù ang íyang hambug, Let’s cut his
big talk short.

busngì a buck-toothed. v [B1; b6] get buck teeth. Ang pagsinupsup sa
kumagkù mauy nakabusngì (nakapabusngì) sa bátà, Thumbsucking made the
child buck-toothed.

bustipul n pith helmet. v [A; c] wear a pith helmet.

bustu n bust. v [c16] make a representation in bust.

búsu v {1} [A; a] dive, esp. using diving paraphernalia. Busúhun níla
ang nawálang káha diyíru, They will dive for the steel safe that sunk.
{2} [A13; a2] be a diver in net fishing. {3} [AN; a2] peep to get
sexual pleasure. n {1} paraphernalia for diving. {2} = busíru. busíru
n {1} person in net fishing operations who dives to keep the net
repaired and collect the catch. v [AN; c1] be, become the busíru.

busug_1 a full, sated. Busug na ku. Dì na ku layhang mukáun, I am full,
I don’t feel like eating any more. Busug run ang íyang pitáka kay
bag-ung giswilduan, His wallet is full now because he has just received
his salary. v [B1; a] fill oneself to satisfy. Magbusug ku kay lamì ang
sud-an, I’ll eat my fill because the food is tasty. Busgun kung ákung
mga mata pagtan-aw sa ímung katahum, I’ll let my eyes have their fill
in gazing at your beauty. way ka-un, kabulusgun without ever getting
satiated.

busug_2 v [A; a12] fluff up cotton or kapok in preparation for further
use. -an n {1} fluffer of cotton or kapok fibers. {2a} bow for shooting
arrows (so called from the cotton fluffer which is a small bow). {2b} a
tube with a tie at the end which propels a spear in spear fishing.

búsug n downward movement of the baby during labor. v [A] for the baby
to move downwards during labor. Nagbúsug na ang bátà. Dad-a siya sa
uspital, The baby is struggling to come out. Bring her to the hospital.

bus-uk a {1} compact, dense of flesh. Bus-uk ug brásu, With firm
muscles. {2} for rice or corn to be cooked into hard clumps from lack
of water. v [B6; c1] {1} be compact, full. {2} for rice or corn to be
cooked into clumps. ka- n {1} firmness, compactness. {2} old variety of
paddy rice producing white, round grains. {3} variety of round úbi with
white and firm flesh.

busun n mailbox into which mail is dropped for collection. v [A; c6]
drop a letter in a mailbox. Gibusun nákung sulat, I dropped the letter
in the mailbox.

búsung n the punishment inflicted by God on s.o. for misusing the
blessings bestowed on him. The punishment usually consists of
deprivation of the thing which had been bestowed by God. v [A123P; a4]
{1} earn God’s punishment for being wasteful. Busúngun ka sa Diyus sa
ímung kausikan, God will punish you for being wasteful. {2} get stomach
pains from overeating. Busúngun kag magpalábi kag káun, You will have
stomach pains if you overeat.

buswak v {1} [B46] for the pod containing grains to open prior to the
development of the grains. {2} [B236] burst forth, show itself from a
place where it was covered. Inigbuswak sa adlaw gíkan sa luyung
bungtud, When the sun comes out from behind the mountain. Mibuswak sa
íyang mga ngábil ang kalit nga pahiyum, A sudden smile flashed onto her
lips. {3} for a girl to grow to full womanhood.

buswang n strong and sudden rush of water. v [A2; b6] flood out
strongly. Mibuswang ang túbig sa pagkagubà sa dakung tangki, The water
rushed out when the tank broke.

buswat v [A; a1] lift s.t. heavy by putting the arms underneath it.
Duha ka táwu ang nagbuswat sa samarun, Two men lifted the wounded
person. Ákù siyang buswátun pagtabuk sa sapà, I’ll carry her across the
river.

busyad a sticking-out stomach. v [B; c1] for the stomach to stick out.
Ayaw busyára (ibusyad) ang ímung tiyan, Don’t let your stomach stick
out.

busyu n goiter. v [A123P; a4b4] have a goiter. Gibusyuhan (gibusyu)
siya, She has a goiter.

bút = balyákag.

búta v [AP; b] blind. Gibutáan sa gugma, Blinded by love. (→) a blind.
(→) bungul blind and deaf. paka- v [A13; b(1)] pay no heed to s.t. Ayaw
pakabutabunguli ang ákung tambag, Do not disregard my advice. -in-(→)
a in a blind manner. butabúta k.o. small swift commonly nesting in
buildings and caves, producing edible nests: Collocalia troglodytes.
butabuta {1} k.o. tree of open waste places with milky sap which causes
blindness. {2} k.o. sorcery which causes the victim to go blind.
{2a} k.o. seashell used in performing this sorcery. {3} k.o. rock
shell.

bútad = bítad.

butáka_1 n chaise lounge. v [a12] make into a chaise lounge.

butakal n {1} male pig. {2} man with a voracious sex appetite. {3} — sa
gubirnu man who will have sex with any woman at all. v {1} [A1; a12]
raise a male pig for breeding. {2} [B12] run after women voraciously.
paN- n action of being a philanderer. -in-, hiN-(←) n piglet given to
the owner of a stud as his share.

butalhag a one who can’t see things under his nose. Náa ay! Kabutalhag
nímu, There it is! You must be blind. v [B12] unable to find things
right in front of the eyes.

butalid n k.o. sea cucumber (balat).

butálid v [B6; b(1)] fall down flat, be lying flat after falling.
Mibutálid (nabutálid) ang kuntra, The opponent was knocked down. Hubug
nga nagbutálid sa karsáda, A drunk lying in the street.

butaltal v [A] for s.t. bulky to be lying in an ungainly way.
Mibutaltal si Tambuk sa katri, Fatso is sprawled on the bed. Kuháa ang
kaban nga nagbutaltal sa hawanan, Get rid of this trunk sitting in the
middle of the room.

butalù (not without l) a poor shot. Butalù siya. Dì makaigù bísag duul,
He’s a poor shot. He can’t hit a target even if it’s near. v [B2; b6]
get to be a poor shot.

butang_1 v [A; c] {1} put down, in, on. Ikaw bay mubutang sa ákung
lip-istik? Will you put my lipstick on me? Butangan nátug utlánan ang
átung pagkaamígu, Let’s set limits to our friendship. Súkang gibutangag
lamas, Vinegar with spices put in it. Ibutang nà, Put that down.
Ibutang sa lista ang ákung útang, Put my debts in the list. Walà
ikabutang si Lína sa bayli, Lena could not sit down at the dance.
{2} pay for s.t. in advance. Arun dílì ibaligyag láin gibutangan kug
diyis, I put ten down so that he wouldn’t sell it to anyone else.
{2a} put up money or goods for the harvest or anything else produced.
Magbutang kug panaptun pára sa panúig, I put up cloth to be repaid from
the harvest. {2b} put up capital, money for a bond. Usa ka líbu ákung
gibutang sa tindáhan, I invested one thousand in the store. {3} ibutang
ta, nátù supposing it’s like this way. Ibutang tag kinyintus, palitun
ba nímu? Let’s say it’s 500 pesos. Will you buy it? {4} ibutang sa
lugar do at the proper time. Ibutang sa lugar ang pag-inum, Drink at
the proper time. {5} [A; b] hit. Butangan ku siya sa nawung, I will hit
him in the face. n money put down as advance payment. butangbutang
v [A; c] make false accusations. Gibutangbutángan ba ku nímung
nangáwat? Are you trying to accuse me of stealing? n false accusations.
paN- v [A; c] {1} put things. {2} put s.t. on oneself. Mamutang kug
lip-istik, I will put lipstick on. hiN-/haN-, hiN-/haN-(←)
v {1} [AP1B1256; b6] be situated, located. Si Bíbi naghimútag
(nagpahimútag) lingkud sa silya, Bebe settled down comfortably in the
chair. Ang ílang balay náa mahimutang sa ámung duul, Their house is
situated near ours. {2} [B1256] be classified as. Kining suwáta
mahimutang sa sikun klas, This letter is classified as second class.
{3} [B1256] be in peace. Dílì ku mahimutang hangtud dílì mahuman ang
ákung trabáhu, I won’t be in peace until I finish my work.
pahiN-/pahaN-(←) v [A; c] {1} put s.t. s.w. carefully. Gipahimútang ang
mga pagkáun sa pridyidir, The food was put away carefully in the
frigidaire. {2} place s.o. in a job. Gipahimútang siya sa munisipyu, He
was given a job in City hall. pahamtang v {1} [A; c] impose a
punishment. Pahamtángan kag bug-at nga sílut, Heavy punishment will be
imposed on you. {2} [b] spend money on s.t. Unsay ímung gipahamtángan
sa ímung sápì? What did you spend your money on? {3} [A; b6(1)] make
charges or accusations, usually maliciously. n {1} punishment imposed.
{2} malicious accusation made against s.o. Ang ílang mga pahamtang
kanákù walay kapasikáran, Their charges against me are without basis.
butangíru n ruffian, toughie. ka- = pagka- 2, 3. kahimtang n {1} way
things are, situation. Pait ang kahimtang sa ámù human sa bagyu, Very
difficult conditions obtained in our town after the typhoon.
{2} circumstances. Ang kahimtang sa kásu, The circumstances surrounding
the case. pagka- n {1} way s.t. is situated. {2} financial situation.
Lisud ang ámung pagkabutang karun, We are in a bad financial situation
now. {3} one’s situation in general. {4} unsang -a how did it come
about. Naunsang pagkabutánga nga wà ka mamatay? How did it come to be
that you didn’t die?†

butang_2 n thing. Usa ra ka butang ang kúwang: kwarta, Only one thing
is lacking: money. usa ka — sexual action (euphemism). Ampíngi giyud
ang usa ka butang, Be very careful with sex. kabtang, kabtángan
n possessions, property. v [A12] acquire property. pagka- = kabtángan.

butanika n botany.

butaniku n botanist. v [B156; a12] become a botanist.

butanti n voter. v [B126] become a voter.

butar v [A; b(1)] cast a vote, ballot for.†

bútas_1 n boot. v [A; a] wear, make into boots. limpiya — n bootblack.

bútas_2 n ceremony similar to the diwáta where unsalted food is offered
to the spirits to insure good harvest, give thanks, or diagnose an
illness. It differs from the diwáta in that the participation of the
people affected is part of the ceremony. v [A; b] perform this
ceremony.

butasiyun n vote, act of voting. v [c16] put to a vote. Ug butasyunun
(ibutasiyun) ni sigúrung dì mahinayun, If it is put to a vote, it won’t
go through.

butay_1 n stalk to which coconuts attach.

butay_2 n bow tie. v [A; ac] make, wear a bow tie.

butay-ad v [B6; c1] be lying flat on the back. Butay-ára (ibutay-ad)
paghigdà ang bátà, Lay the baby on its back.

butbut_1 n lie, boast of s.t. untrue (coarse). — pula a glaring lie (so
called from the homonymy with butbut_2). Miuk-uk ang — back out from a
lie (lit. for the hemorrhoids to recede). Miuk-uk ang butbut pagdumílì
níya sa pagkanta, He was proven a braggart when he refused to sing.
v [c] tell a lie. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] tell a lie. Ayaw kug pamutbúti
(butbúti), Don’t lie to me. -un(→) a liar.

butbut_2 n {1} the red flesh of the rectum which comes out in
childbirth or when one has constipation. {2} = búwà_2. {3} sea anemone,
black with red center. v {1} [A123P; a4] suffer from butbut.
{2} [B1236] defecate. Nakabutbut siya sa íyang karsúnis, He defecated
in his pants. Nagbutbut siya sa kasilyas, He’s defecating in the
bathroom.

butbut_3 = balusbus.

buthù v [A23; b6] {1} appear from nowhere. Mu ra kag gibuthuag
(gibuthúag) kalag, You look as if you saw a ghost. {2} have one’s
monthly period.

buti n {1} smallpox. {2} k.o. contagious swine disease characterized by
high fever and tiny eruptions at the base of the tongue exuding a
sticky fluid. v [A123P; a4] {1} get smallpox. {2} get swine disease.
{3} [a4b4] be covered with s.t. like smallpox scars. Mau nay dátù nímu
nga gibuti sa útang? Do you call him rich when he has debts left and
right? Lángit nga gibuti sa mga bitúun, Skies full of stars. butihun
a having lots of pockmarks in the face.

búti_1 n rowboat. v [A1; a12] take a rowboat s.w. Ang mga pasahírung wà
makabúti nangalúmus, The passengers who couldn’t get into the lifeboats
drowned.

búti_2 maybe, probably. Muanhi búti si Insi, Maybe Auntie will come.

butíbut v [A; b6] sprinkle powder on s.t. with the thumb and
forefinger. Butibútig sulpa ang samad, Sprinkle sulfa on your wound.

butig_1 = butlig.

butig_2 = bisul.

butígis n tiny, white bivalve, triangular in shape with longitudinal
striae.

butíka n drug store. v [A; c1] establish, make into a drug store.

butikaryu n pharmacist. v [B16; a12] be, make into a druggist.

butíkug = buríring.

butíkul n {1} k.o. corn disease characterized by rust-like spores on
the kernels, rendering the grain powdery. {2} tiny grains that grow in
the intestines of pigs, hampering their growth. v [a4] be afflicted
with corn rot, intestinal tumors. -un a of a type having corn rot,
intestinal tumors. v [B126] be, become corn or a pig of this sort.

bútil a full, sated in eating (coarse). v [B1; a2] fill oneself up, be
full. Magbútil kug maáyu arun dì ku gutmun dáyun, I’ll fill myself up
so that I won’t feel hungry early. Wà pa ka mabútil, ganíha ka pang
kumáun, You are not satisfied yet? You have been eating for some time
now. pagka-, ka-un(→) n satiation. Mu ra siyag way kabutilun
(pagkabutil) kay sígi lag káun, He never seems to get satisfied. He
just eats and eats.

butilus a doing things poorly. Dì ka giyud makaigù sa ímung targit?
Butilus gud nímu! Can’t you ever hit your target? What a poor shot you
are!

butilya n bottle. v [A; a12] put s.t. in bottles. -in- n {1} s.t.
bottled, esp. alcoholic drinks. {2} name of plants that are
bottle-shaped.

búting v [A12C2; b6] go boating. n boating for leisure.

butingting a for rice sheaths to be enlarged prior to blossoming. paN-
v [A] for rice sheaths to swell prior to blossoming.

butírik a having an expanded stomach. Butírik kaáyu siyag tiyan kay
dakug káun, He has a big stomach because he eats too much. v [B6]
{1} for the stomach to be expanded. Mibutírik man si Kurding. Kinsa
kahay nakapaburus? Cording’s stomach is sticking out. Who got her
pregnant? {2} grow rich. Kay nakapangawkaw sa surplas, mibutírik dáyun,
Because he got his hands on some army surplus he grew rich.

butirus a bulging of stomach. Butirus ug tiyan ang bátà nga bitúkun, A
child with intestinal parasites has a bulging stomach. v [B; b6] for
the stomach to become distended or bulge. Mibutirus (nabutirus) na ang
tiyan níya unyà dì pa giyud nà mabdus? Her stomach is already sticking
out and still you insist that she isn’t pregnant?

butíti n general name for pufferfishes. paN- v [A] for rice sheaths to
swell prior to blossoming.

butku = buktu.

butkun = buktun.

butlig n small cyst-like skin eruption. v [a4] get cysts on skin.

butlug n swelling, small bulge. v [B46N] form a small bulge. Mibutlug
(namutlug) ang íyang buktun human sumbága, A bulge appeared in his arm
after it was hit. Singut nga namutlug sa agtang, Sweat that formed
beads on his forehead.

butsáka term used in playing pool for a certain agreed-to score, where
part of the score is made by drawing a numbered marble. n container
used for the numbered marbles. a even in score in this k.o. pool. Way
daug, way pildi námù, butsáka ra mi, Neither of us lost; we came out
even. v {1} [A2N] get even in this k.o. pool. {2} [A2] draw a marble
from the container. {2a} [c6] return the marble back into the
container.

butsi n k.o. sweet made of flour, filled with mongo beans, sweetened
coconut meat, et al and optionally other ingredients, fried brown.
v [A; a] make butsi.

butsing = baksing.

butsir n voucher asking for payment. v [A; b(1)] make a voucher.

butsu n s.t. used for dry scrubbing the floor. v {1} [A; b6(1)] scrub
the floor when it is dry. {2} [A; c1] make a coconut husk for scrubbing
the floor.

butsukuy a philanderer. Bísag kinsa lay pangulitawhan. Butsukuy kaáyu,
He courts any girl he meets. What a philanderer!

butu_1 n {1} explosion. {2} blister. v {1} [B246; b4] explode. Mibutu
ang bulkan nga Taal, Taal Volcano erupted. Ug buthan kag ligid may
ikarisirba ka? In case you have a blowout, do you have a spare tire?
{2} [A23] for s.t. to swell and rupture. Mibutu ang íyang hubag, His
boil burst. Wà pa mubutu ang tumatub, Her bag of waters hasn’t broke
yet. {3} [A23] fall or hit s.t. with a bang. Ang libru mibutu sa salug,
The book fell to the floor with a bang. Mubutu ka rug suntúkun ka nákù,
I’ll bang you one when I hit you. {4} [b4] get blisters. Nabuthan ákung
pálad pagbinughà, I got blisters on my palms from chopping wood.
{5} [B246] flunk an exam, esp. board or bar. Mibutu siya sa bar, He
failed the bar. {6} [A2] give birth (humorous). pa- v [A; ac] fire,
make s.t. explode. Pabutha ang ripli, Fire the rifle. Daghang kug
ribintadur nga ipabutu sa Bag-ung Túig, I have lots of firecrackers to
explode for New Year’s. paN- v [A2; b4] {1} get blisters. Namutu ang
ákung pálad, My palms were blistered. {2} get one’s just deserts after
accumulating too much wealth, esp. illegally or at the expense of
others. Mamutu ka bayà sa kataas niánang ímung tantu, You’ll get your
just deserts from charging such usurious rates of interest. buthanan
n head of a boil.†

butu_2 n hair that looks lighter than the surrounding hair. Butu nà,
dílì úban, Those are light-colored strands, not gray hairs. v [B246]
for strands of hair to look lighter in color than the rest. Mubutu ang
mga lugas sa buhuk basta sapírun nga basà, Hair gets a light look if
you braid it when it is wet.

bútu n vote. v [A; b] cast vote for. Butúhi si Usminya, Vote for
Osmeña.

bútù n {1} female genitalia. {2} testicles. sipsip, supsup — n ass
kisser (coarse). (→) n {1} male of the species, esp. animals.
{2} castrated male pig raised for meat purposes. v [A1; c1] raise a
castrated male pig. hi-, hiN- v [A; b6] castrate animals. Hibut-an
(himut-an, himutúan) ku run ang bàbuy, I’ll castrate the pig now.
butùbútù n {1} clapper of a bell. {2} bob of a plumb line.

butùbútù n k.o. black biting ant living in the earth.

bútud v [B123] swell with water or gas. Mubútud ang balun, The balloon
filled with air. Mibútud ang patay nga gidagsà, The body that was
washed ashore was bloated. (→) n {1} gas pains. {2} = butíti. v [B146;
b4] suffer gas in the stomach. Nagpurhisyu ang bátà kay gibutdan, The
baby is crying because he has gas pains. butdánun n colicky.

butuk_1 v [A; a] make bundles of rice seedlings. Butuka (butka) ang
lawngun nga igtalánum, Bind the seedlings to transplant into bundles.
n sizeable bundle of rice seedlings for transplanting.

butuk_2 v [A; a12] cut down bamboos. Butkun kug hurut ang kawáyan, I am
going to cut down all the bamboos. n bamboo pole. Usa ka butuk kawáyan,
A bamboo pole. butukbutuk v [A; a] cut bamboo or timber into several
pieces.

bútuk v [B2346] {1} for a burn to form a blister. Mibútuk ang ákung
pánit nga nalaswaan sa nagbukal nga mantíkà, My skin was blistered when
the boiling fat splashed on it. {2} for rice or corn or pork to swell
in cooking or for dough to rise. {3} [A] for rice or corn to boil
gently with a low simmering sound when the water is practically gone.
{4} [B2] for the grains of rice or corn to get soft after cooking. Walà
pa makabútuk ug maáyu ang mais, maung adúna pa kiniy lísu, The corn
grits didn’t get soft and so they still have uncooked grains in the
middle. butukbutuk v [A] make a throbbing, bubbling sound.
Nagbutukbutuk ang linung-ag nga hápit na mahubas, The rice made a
popping sound as it was about to evaporate. n = -in-. -in- n throbbing,
bubbling sound. Binutukbutuk sa kasingkásing, Throbbing of the heart.

but-uk_1 v [b8] be choked and coughing from swallowing s.t. the wrong
way. Hibut-ukan ku pag-inum nákù sa manyan, I choked when I drank the
liquor. hiN- see mut-uk.

but-uk_2 v [B46; c1] bulge, swell. Mibut-uk ang ímung kinusian, The
skin swelled where you pinched it. Unsay sulud niánang bulsa nga
nagbut-uk man? What is inside your pocket that it is bulging?

butul a slow, unintelligent, poor in doing things. Butul kaáyu, dúgayng
makasabut, He is stupid. It takes him forever to understand. Butul nga
musiyat, He’s a terrible shot. Butul nga kabáyù kay gamay rag ági, A
slow horse because it hardly accomplishes anything. v [B12; b6] be slow
and inefficient, unskillful or unintelligent.

butun n button of a switch. v [A; c1] push the button of a switch.

butung_1 n {1} young coconut at a stage where the meat has just begun
to form. {2} other young nuts that are soft and sweet. {3} young
fiber-bearing parts of plants. Abaka nga butung pag tugdan, Abaca with
immature stems. v {1} [B236; b6] develop into the butung stage.
{2} [b6] mix with young coconut. {3} [A12] get some young coconut. paN-
v [A2] eat young coconut.

butung_2 n k.o. thick, straight, and smooth bamboo: Gigantochloa levis.

butúnis n buttons. v {1} [AN; b6] button s.t. {2} [AN; b6(1)] sew
buttons on. {3} [a12] make into a button. Culu- k.o. grass of waste
places: Kyllinga spp.

bútuy v [B2S3(1)4; b4] for flesh to swell. Mibútuy ang pinaakan sa
buyug, The bee sting swelled. Gibutúyan ang agtang kay napakung, He
bumped his head causing his forehead to swell. n swelling.

butyag v [A; c6] make s.t. known that was not known before. Nianhi si
San Huwan Bawtista arun pagbutyag sa maáyung púlung, John the Baptist
was sent to reveal the good news. Ayaw ibutyag ang ákung tinagúan,
Don’t reveal my secret.

búud v [A; b6] sulk, be sullen. buúran a prone to sulking.

búug v [A13] {1} be confined and become foul. Nagbúug ang hángin sulud
sa kwartu, The air in the room is stagnant and foul. {2} for wounds to
rot in the absence of air. Nagbúug ang samad nga walà kuhái sa bindáhi,
The wound is rotting because the bandage hadn’t been taken off. {3} =
buug, n, v. (→) n an infection characterized by a smelly yellow pus.
v [a4] get this infection. -un(→) a having this sort of infection.

buuk n piece, single one. Usa ka buuk ságing, A banana. Upat ka buuk
bátà, Four children. Tutú ka buuk báy, Three houses. -an a of imposing
size. Ang táwung buukan katahaan, A person of imposing size is held in
respect. v [B12] be imposingly big.

buulbúul n {1} anklebone. {2} adam’s apple or any bulge in the area of
the neck.

buun n k.o. white dove.

buung v [A13] commit suicide. Ug dì ku nímu sugtun magbuung ku, I’ll
kill myself if you don’t marry me.

búung v {1} [A3P; c1] break glass or masonry to pieces. Buúngun
(ibúung) nà nákù ang tanang mga plátu, I’ll break all the plates to
pieces. {2} ruin s.o.’s reputation. Nabúung na ang íyang pagkababáyi,
Her chastity has been destroyed. -in-an half a coconut split lengthwise
without the meat.

buungun, buúngun = buluungun.

búus n storehouse for farm produce. v [A; c] keep in a storehouse.

buut want, would like to. Buut siyang makig-isturya nímu, He wishes to
talk to you. Unsay buut níyang isulti? What does he wish to say? Dì
siya buut sa liguylíguy, He does not care for this messing around.
n {1} one’s desires. Kuntra sa ákung buut, It is against my will.
kaping — strings attached, ulterior motives. Ihátag ku kini way kaping
buut, I give you this with no strings attached. {1a} walà sa — not
meaning to do s.t. Walà tu sa ákung buut pagsultíha, I really didn’t
mean to say that. {2} thoughts, mind. Línaw na ang ákung buut kay
nasulbad na, My mind is at rest now, because it is solved. Búkid sa
ákung buut, Far from my thoughts (it never occurred to me). Wad-un ta
sa buut ang átung kabingkílan, Let’s forget our quarrels.
{2a} consciousness, awareness. Didtu siya sa uspital makamatngun ug
buut, She regained consciousness in the hospital. Sukad sa pagkatim-an
níyag buut, From the time he reached the age of awareness. {2b} walay —
{2b1} unaware, innocent of knowledge. Walay buut nga bátà, An innocent
child. {2b2} unaware of proper social conduct. Walay buut nga tawhána.
Magkarsunsilyu lang sa sílung, What an ignorant man! He wears his
undershorts downstairs. {3} mood, disposition. Magláin ang íyang buut
ug mapildi sa súgal, He gets in a bad mood if he loses in gambling.
Mabaw kaáyu siyag buut, She is very short-tempered. walà sa — it didn’t
hurt [so-and-so]’s feelings. Wà tu sa ákung buut ang ímung gisulti, I
didn’t take to heart what you said. {4} útang — {4a} debt of gratitude.
{4b} please, it would be a big favor. Útang buut. Ayaw pagsulti niánà,
Please don’t say that. v {1} [A1; b(1)] have one’s way, decide how s.t.
is to be. Ikaw lay magbuut kun pila, You decide how much. Ang baláud
nagbuut nga ..., The law stipulates that ... Dì ku makagbuut (makabuut)
niánà kay dílì nà ákù, I can’t make a decision concerning that because
it isn’t mine. Mau nay gimbut-an sa baláud, That is what is stipulated
by the law. Ang tanang kinabúhì gimbut-an sa Diyus, All life is at
God’s discretion. Ayaw akug but-i, Don’t dictate to me. {1a} unsa pay
but-un? what does [so-and-so] want, anyway? Unsa pay but-un nímu? What
in the world did you expect? {1b} [A23] be unmindful, uncomplaining
about s.t. unfavorable. Mubuut kug way kaunkáun. Anad kug puása, I
don’t care if I miss meal. I’m used to doing without food. {2} [A23;
a12] accept a marriage proposal. Walà pa siya but-a ni Maríya, Maria
has not accepted him yet. (←) v [AP] do s.t. freely without restraint,
to one’s heart’s content. Nagbúut (nagpabúut) ang bátag kundat kay wà
didtu si Máma, The child had a ball playing around because Mother
wasn’t there. buutbúut v {1} [A1] impose one’s will where one doesn’t
have the right. {2} [A1; b] take it on oneself to do s.t. Ngánung
nagbuutbúut kag palit ánà? Why did you take it on yourself to buy that?
mabuutbuútun a tending to impose one’s will, take it on oneself to do
things. but-anay v [C23] impose each other’s will on each other. Way
but-anay kun ása ági, We’ll each go our own way (we won’t impose our
wills on each other where to go). pa- v [a12] allow s.o. to have the
say. Ug pabut-un (papagbut-un) aku nímu, If I am allowed to have the
say in this matter. paka-, pa-(←) v [A1; b1] take it on oneself to do
s.t. forbidden as much as one likes. Mangingisdà nga magpakabuut
(magpabúut) pagpabutug dinamíta, Fishermen who allow themselves to do
as much dynamite fishing as they like. Gipabut-an níla ang mga bátag
káun ug dulsi, They allowed the children to eat as many sweets as they
liked. pasi- v [b] allow s.o. to decide. Gipasibut-an lang siya sa
kursung íyang kuháun, He was left to decide what course he would take.
hiN-/haN- v [B126; b3(1)c5] be pleased. Nahimuut siyang nagtan-aw sa
íyang anak, He took pleasure in observing his daughter. Wà níya
ikahimuut (kahimut-i) ang ímung gibúhat, He wasn’t pleased with what
you did. kahiN- n pleasure. kahimut-anan n s.t. at which one can take
pleasure, be amused. mahimut-un, mahimut-ánun, maham-utun a feeling
great pleasure. but-an a possessing reason, sense. But-an ba siya u
búang? Is he sane or mad? {2} = -an(←). -an(←) good, well-behaved.
Buútang bátà, A good child. Ang buútan niyang asáwa, His good wife.
v [B12; b6] get to be well-behaved. -in-an in a well-behaved way.
v [A1] act in a well-behaved way. ka-(←) {1} intelligence, ability to
perceive. {2} consideration for one’s fellowmen. kabubut-un n specific
feelings toward s.o. or s.t. útang kabubut-un debt of gratitude to be
repaid. ma-(←) a {1} having a requisite amount of intelligence.
{2} thoughtful, considerate of one’s fellowmen. Ang mga mabúut nga táwu
dílì mangdinamíta, Civic-minded people don’t dynamite fish. mag-r-(←)
n one who has the say. pag- will. Pagbuut sa Diyus, God’s will.
paniN-(←) n {1} consciousness, awareness. {2} degree of intelligence.
Ang íyang panimúut sáma sa bátang tris anyus, His mental age is like a
three-year-old child’s.

búut v [A; b5] confine in a narrow place so that no air can get in or
out. Napan-us ang bíku nga gibúut (gibuútan), The sticky rice spoiled
because it was wrapped up too tightly. -in- n fruit placed in a tight
container to hasten ripening.

buútan_1 see buut.

buútan_2 = ambuhútan. see ambúhut.

buúti = búti.

buwa expression said in driving away pigs: scram! v [A; a12] drive away
pigs by saying buwa.

buwa- see also bwa- and bula-.

búwà_1 n spongy growth inside a coconut shell which is produced prior
to sprouting. It is good to eat.

búwà_2 n prolapsed uterus. v [A123P; a4] suffer a prolapsed uterus.
buwàbuwà = butbut_2 n, 3.

búwà_3 n lying boast. -un a braggart.

buwal n voile.

buwang_1 v [B24] cease to bear fruits.

buwang_2, búwang = bulwang.

buway = bulay.

búy_1 n male servant, helper to another employee. Búy ku sa bikiri, I
am a helper in the bakery. pa- v [A3] hire out as a helper or servant.

búy_2 = búluy.

búya_1 n {1} float, buoy. v [A; a] make, make into, mark with, use as a
buoy.

búya_2 n agreement between parents to betroth their young or unborn
children. v [A; ac] betroth unborn or young children. Buyáhun nátù ang
mga bátà, Let us betroth our children. Atung ibúya ang ímung gisabak sa
ílang masusu, We will betroth the child you are carrying to their
infant.

buyag v [AN2; a12] {1} make a comment on s.t. Kusug siyang mamuyag ug
gwápa, He makes lots of comments when he sees a good-looking girl. Wà
kay katungud sa pagbuyag sa ákung pamisti, You have no right to comment
on the way I dress. {2} call one’s attention to a fault. Buyaga siya
kay nangurtína, Tell her her slip is showing. {3} admonish s.o. to stop
doing s.t. Buyaga ang mga bátang nagsábà, Tell those noisy kids to be
quiet. {4} [b8] be affected by buyag. n {1} disease afflicting a person
or his possessions brought on by a compliment given by a buyágan or by
a supernatural being. {2} — sa túbig k.o. skin eczema. interjection =
puyra —. puyra — magical formula uttered to ward off the disease buyag
said where a compliment has been made or is about to be made. pa-
v {1} [A3] do s.t. to make s.o. admonish one. {2} allow s.o. to tell
one to stop. -an(→) n {1} s.o. with an inherent supernatural power
which causes any living thing he compliments to become ill.
{2} sorcerer who can cure buyag. -l-un(←) a requiring admonishment.

buyagan n = bunsudbunsud.

buyang n k.o. bright-colored paper umbrella, in vogue before World War
II.

buyang-ang a {1} wide open. Buyang-ang nga pultahan, Wide open door.
{2} for s.t. to be open to view in a brazen or ungainly way. Ang
nangalígù nagbuyang-ang (nagpabuyang-ang) sa ílang láwas, The bathers
are exposing their bodies. Ayaw buyang-ánga (pabuyang-ánga,
ibuyang-ang) ímung balunan, Don’t let everyone see your lunch box.

buyangyang = aguyangyang_2.

buyasyas a dressed sloppily in such a way that s.t. is exposed. v [A13]
be sloppily covered so that s.t. is exposed. Nagbuyasyas lang siya nga
natúlug. Kítà ang páa, She didn’t cover herself well when she slept.
You could see her thigh. Buyasyas lang ang ímung púlu, Your shirt is
half-open.

buybuy v [AN; b5] count favors one has done to s.o. Gibuybuy ku níya sa
íyang gihátag nákù, He kept mentioning the things he had given me.
n action of counting favors. paN- = buybuy, n. -an(→) a tending to
count favors.

buyinggit = bulinggit.

buykutíyu n boycott. v [A; b(1)] boycott.

*buylas hi-, hiN- v [C3; c3] pass by and miss seeing each other. Huwata
lang siya kay maghibuylas (maghimuylas) unyà mu sa dā́n, Just wait for
him here because you might miss seeing each other on the way.

buylu n momentum. v {1} [A2] gain momentum, accelerate. Mibuylu ang
dyip sa pagsubída, The jeep accelerated on the upgrade. {2} [A12] move
with freedom and ease. Dì ta makabuylu sa mga tígum nga purmal, We
cannot move with ease in formal gatherings. tina- see tinabuylu.

buylug v [A; b7] speed, rush forward. Mibuylug ang túbig pagkagubà sa
liptung, The water gushed out when the dam broke. Buylúgi (pabuylúgi)
arun makaapas ta níla, Give it more speed so we can catch up with them.
n fast, onrushing forward speed. v [C2; c3] do s.t. together in a
group. Sígi silang magbuylug bísan ása paìngun, They are always
together, wherever they go. hi-/ha- v [B126] be included in s.o.’s
misfortunes. Ang tibuuk níyang bánay nahibuylug sa kadáut, His whole
family suffered from the misfortune. ta- see tabuylug.

*buyna_1 — mánu n {1} first sale of the day, thought to stimulate
further sales. The price is usually reduced to push the buyna mánu sale
through. Sígi lang, hay buyna mánu ni, All right, I accept your offer,
since this is the first sale of the day. {2} a person who buys the
first sale. Napalit nákug barátu kay buyna mánu man ku, I managed to
get it cheap because I was the first customer. nutsi — see nutsi.

buynas a lucky, fortunate. v [A123S; a12] be lucky. Mangabir ku, básig
buynásun, I’ll take a try. Perhaps I’ll be lucky. — díyas, nutsis Good
day, night, said to people who are thought to be Spanish-speaking, di-
= buynas.

buynu {1} particle conceding a situation: ‘well’. Buynu, ug dì ka, ay
na lang, Well, if you don’t want to, you don’t have to. {2} particle
terminating a conversation: ‘well, all right now’. Buynu, mau na lang
tu. Dad-a dinhi ugmà, Well, that’s all. Bring it here tomorrow. Buynu,
sanggía ang mais ugmà, All right. Harvest the corn tomorrow.
{2} particle in a story preceding a summary of the situation. Buynu,
kay nakapangasáwa sa prinsísa, siyay nahímung manunúnud, All right,
since he married the princess, he became the heir to the throne.

buyprind n boy friend.

buysit n bad luck that is permanently associated with a person or
thing. Kanang ímung nawung mau rag mauy nagdala sa buysit, Your face
brings bad luck with it. a having bad luck associated with it. Buysit
kining baláya. Pirming kamatyan, This house brings us bad luck. Lots of
people have died here. interjection Buysit! Gikuútan ku, Damned! S.o.
picked my pocket. v [B12] be constantly beset by bad luck. Nabuysit
ákung panágat human nákù mapatay ang íhung putì, My fishing was beset
by misfortune after I killed the white shark.

buyu, buyù v [A; a12] win over, entice s.o. to do s.t. Buyuhun ta ka
pagtrabáhu sa ámù, I’ll entice you to work for us. Ayaw pabuyu sa íyang
mga sáad, Don’t let yourself be hooked by his promises. n enticement.

búyù n betel pepper, a cultivated and wild vine, the leaves of which
are used together with búnga_2 as a chew: Piper betle.

búyud v [B12; a12] be, become dizzy. Nabúyud siya tungud sa kagútum, He
is dizzy from hunger.

buy-ud v [A; b6] be prostate and motionless, with arms parallel to the
body. Minatay ang nagbuy-ud sa asíras, A corpse lying on the sidewalk.

buyug_1 n {1} k.o. solitary bluish-black wasp common near the house,
nesting in the soil. {2} k.o. solitary bee, colored black with reddish
overtones. -un n feather coloration of cocks which is black with
reddish overtones.

buyug_2 v [A23P; c] leave or depart instantly, in a hurry. Dílì maáyung
mubuyug ug lakaw nga way pananghid, It’s not good to leave instantly
without permission. Ayawg ibuyug ug dágan ang búla ni Dyunyur, Don’t
run away with Junior’s ball.

búyuk_1 v [A; b6] cook cereals by pouring into water boiled beforehand
(the manner of cooking corn grits or large quantities of rice which
otherwise would take long to cook). Buyúka paglung-ag ang mais, Cook
the grits by throwing them into boiling water. -an(→) n pot with
boiling water for cooking in this manner. -in- n corn or rice cooked in
this manner.

búyuk_2 v [B126; a4] feel nauseous, dizzy and weak, almost to the point
of fainting. Buyúkun (mabúyuk) siya kun mudúngaw ug lawum, She feels
dizzy and weak when she looks down from heights.

buy-uk = bayúuk.

buyun n k.o. shrub of thickets: Mussaenda philippica.

búyun v [C; c] be situated beside and, usually, in line. Nagbúyun ang
mga balay sa subà, The houses are in a line along the river. Makigbúyun
siyag higdà nákù, She wants to sleep beside me. n next to. Ang ámung
kusína búyun ra sa balay, Our kitchen is located next to (or right in
back of) the house.

buy-un n fat on the stomach. Buy-un sa bábuy, Fat on the pig’s stomach.
v [B1246] get fat on the stomach. Maáyu ka tingáli rung pagkabutang kay
namuy-un ka man, You must be doing well now, as I see by your spare
tire. a having rolls of fat on the stomach. v [B12] get to have rolls
of fat.

buyung n highwayman. v [A; a12] {1} for a highwayman to hold s.o. up.
Ayaw pagbaktas didtu sa awáaw básig mabuyung ka, Don’t go on foot
through deserted areas, you might get held up. {2} steal (humorous).
Átung buyungun ang íyang alkansíya, Let’s steal her piggy bank. {3} [A;
a12] trick s.o. into doing s.t. Nabuyung ka lang pagpaútang níya, You
were tricked into lending her money.

búyung = búyud.

búyut = balúyut.

bwabuwa = lansúnis.

bwágas v [A] for liquids or fine things to flow out profusely from a
container. Mibwágas ang túbig sa pagkabuslut sa bangà, The water flowed
out rapidly when the jar got a hole on it. Dì makabwágas ang bugas sa
sáku ug sap-úngan ang lungag ug papil, The rice will not flow out if
you cover the hole with paper.

bwáhan = lansúnis.

bwáhat v [A2S; c] open one’s eyes wide. Mibwáhat ang íyang mata sa
katingála, Her eyes opened wide in surprise.

bwanbúwan (from búlan) n moles on the face appearing in large numbers,
so called because they are believed to become darker when the moon is
full.

bwáus = buláus.

bwi- see also buy-.

bwilta v {1} [A; b5c] come, go back, go back to get s.t. Ákù pang
bwiltáhun (bwiltáhan) si Míri, I still have to go back for Mary.
Ibwilta ni ngadtu, Take this back to them. {2} [c1] repeat, do again.
Bwiltáhun (ibwilta) ta nig pangutána, Let’s ask that again.
bwiltabwilta v [A; b5] go back and forth. Mubwiltabwilta ka giyud kay
dílì makas-a nag dala, You have to go back and forth because you cannot
take all of that at once. Ngánung nagbwiltabwilta ka man, unsay suliran
mu? Why are you pacing back and forth? What’s your problem? ida-
n round trip. Milukat ku ug tíkit sa barku nga idabwilta, I bought a
round trip boat ticket.

bwinggit = bulinggit.

byábas = bayábas.

byáhi n {1} trip, journey. Bálud tung byahía uy! That was a rough trip.
{2} trip, single run of a vehicle between two points. Alas dúsi ang
katapúsang byáhi, The last trip is at twelve. v {1} [A; b6] take a
trip. Nagbyáhi sila sa Amirika, They took a trip to America. {2} [A; c]
for a public conveyance to make its run. Ayaw ibyáhi ang dyip ug dì pa
punù, Don’t dispatch the jeep before it is full. byahian v [A13] take a
run s.w. regularly. byahidur n one who travels often. †

byakrúsis n way of the cross. v [AC12; b6] do the way of the cross.
Magbiyakrúsis ku inigmahal nga adlaw, I’ll do the way of the cross
during the Holy Week.

byamban = balanban_1.

byanggas n mange. v [A123P; a12] be afflicted with mange. -un(→)
a mangy. Kinsa man nang byanggasun nga irù? Who does that mangy dog
belong to?

byantì n k.o. smooth shrub occasionally planted as ornamental which
exudes a milky sap irritating to the skin: Homalanthus populneus.

byásung n k.o. yellow lemon-shaped citrus of pungent odor and somewhat
sour, used as a hair rinse or for flavoring salted fish.

byáta = byátu (female).

byatiku n Holy Communion given to a dying person. v [A; b6] give the
viaticum to s.o.

byatilis n k.o. small rapidly growing tree of waste places or
cultivated, extensively used for firewood. The leaves are used as
animal feed and medicinally. It bears beans also used medicinally:
Leucaena glauca.

byátu a pious, devout man. v [B; b6] become pious, devout.

byinbinída n welcome party. v [A; b6] hold a welcoming party.
Magbiyinbinída mi pasidungug sa ímung pag-abut, We’ll hold a welcome
party when you arrive. — parti = byinbinída.

byínis person’s things. Gibaligyà íyang mga byínis ibadbad sa útang, He
sold his property to pay off his debts.

byintus = bintus.

byirnis = birnis.

byú n {1} view, scenery. {2} way — have lost its nice look. Wà nay byú
ákung sapátus kay nagkalápuk, My shoes look awful because they’re all
muddy. v [B126] get to be poor-looking. pa- v [A; b6] make oneself
conspicuous s.w.

byúda n widow. — nga búhì a wife who has been separated from a husband
still living. v [B26; a2] become a widow. † Nabyúda siyang búhì sukad
mamabáyi ang bána, She became a widow of a live man after her husband
started taking up with women.

byúdu n widower. -ng búhì husband separated from his wife. v [B26;
a2b6] be, become a widower.

byugul, byúgul a {1} dull, slow in comprehension. Nahagbung siya kay
byúgul man, He flunked because he’s dull. {2} five-centavo coin. v [B;
b6] become slow in comprehending.

byulin n violin. v [A; c1] play, make a violin.

byulíta n low perennial flowering ornamental with violet flowers:
Barleria cristata.

byumbu = bayumbu.

byúti parlur n beauty parlor.

byúuk = bayúuk.

byúus = bayúus.
