


=== P ===


pa_1 {1} still, yet: up to now, up to a specific point in the past.
Natúlug pa si Pidru, Pedro is still asleep. Si Huwan pay naabut, So far
only John has arrived. {1a} with measurements: only [so-and-so much] up
to now. Tungà pa ug túbig ang baril, The barrel is still only half full
of water. {1b} dílì, walà — {1b1} not yet. Ang linung-ag nga ságing
walà pa malútù, The boiled bananas are not cooked yet. {1b2} before.
Hipúsa ang libru sa dílì pa si Pápa muabut, Put the book away before
Dad arrives. Sa wà pay gíra, Before the war. {2} else, in addition.
{2a} with future verb: [so-and-so] will still happen. Sulatan pa nákù
si Husi, I still have to write to José. {2b} with a past verb: [did]
besides. Human siya sagpáa, gisultían pa ug pait, He was slapped and
bitter words were said to him as well. {2c} with existential:
[so-and-so] also is in existence. Náa pa bay túbig sa baril? Is there
any more water in the barrel? {2d} interrogative —: {2d1} what, where,
why, etc. else. Kinsa pay muadtu? Who else will go? {2d2} what, where,
why, etc. could it be. Unsa pa ug dílì kwarta? What could it be if not
money? Ngánu pa nga ikaw giyud? Why, oh why, was it you, of all people?
{2d3} unsa, háin -y [noun]-un what [noun] are you talking about? Unsa
pay radiyúhun nga dúgay nang gikáwat, What radio are you talking about
when it was stolen long ago. {2e} in phrases bringing up a new subject:
láin —y átù by the way, to change the subject. Láin pay átù, minyù ka
na ba? By the way, are you married? mau — diay átù by the way, I just
thought of it. Mau pa diay átù, wà ta kadág abridur, It just occurred
to me. We didn’t bring a can opener. úsà, ísà, tayim — excuse me a
second (lit. one more second). Ísà pa kay ákung pagngun ang radiyu,
Excuse me. I am going to turn off the radio. {2f} in phrases meaning in
addition: bísan — even ... too, despite. Bísan pa ang mga bátà giapil,
Even the children were included. Bísan pa niánà, dì ku muadtu, Despite
that, I won’t go! gawas, lábut — besides. Gawas (lábut) pa niánà, unsa
pa may púlung níya? Besides that, what else did he say? labaw — in
addition to. Labaw pa niánà tagáan tikag primiyu, And in addition, I
will give you a reward. {3} [predicate] is superfluous; [do] when one
shouldn’t or shouldn’t have to. Ug nagbayadbáyad pa siya nga wà man tu
kinahanglána, And he was paying for it when there was no need. Sus!
Ipakítà pa giyud níya mu rag dílì baratuhun, Heavens! She has to show
off, as if it weren’t s.t. cheap. {3a} [do] some more so that
[such-and-such] a bad thing will happen again. Nasagpaan ka. Panabì pa,
You got yourself a slapping. Go on. Blabber some more. Nadagmà ka núun.
Sígi, dágan pa, You fell down. Go on. Keep on running around (so you
can fall again). {3b} that’s what happens when you do [so-and-so].
Minyù pa. Mu ra na kag irung panit, That is what you get for getting
married. You’re no better off than a mangy dog. {3c} walà nay [doubled
verb] — didn’t even do [so-and-so] though it is customary. Gipalit níya
ang kutsi dihàdihà nga wà nay hangyùhangyù pa, He bought the car, then
and there, without even bargaining. {3d} mau —y [verb] [so-and-so] was
the case, which was bad enough, but then ... Mau pay kisì, ímu pung
iuran ug sígi, nadúnut, It was already torn. You kept wearing it, so it
was ruined. {3d1} mau —y [verb, adj.] ... mau —y [verb, adj.] he [did,
does] and yet dared, dares to do [so-and-so] in addition. Mau pay
sad-an mau pay mangísug, He is at fault, but he dares to get mad. Mau
pay nangáyù mau pay mipílì, He is asking the favor and yet he is
choosy. {4} [subject] is still in a group with other things mentioned.
Ang íhu isdà. Isdà pa ba ang pági? Sharks are fish; are rays also
considered fish? {4a} málu — nà that’s not so bad, is it? Sígi málu pa
nà ug makadiyis ka, Go ahead. If you make ten bucks on it, that ain’t
bad. {5} in comparisons: even more. Gwápa pa ka kang Maríya, You are
more beautiful than Mary. {5a} [adj.] pay [subject] [subject] is more
[adj.] than ... Lamì pay lamaw niíni, This is worse than garbage. (Lit.
Garbage is more delicious than this.) Lisud pay magkaug mani, It’s
harder to eat peanuts than do this. {6} in quotations, preceded by
gen.: [gen.] said. Ug mau tu ang nahitabù, níya pa, And that is all
what happened, he said. {6a} mátud — [gen.] [gen.] says, said. Mátud pa
níla aku dílì ángay, They say I am not worthy. {6b} siya — he said. Kay
na, siya pa, unsáun man nákù? Well, said he, what can I do? {6c} sa átù
— in other words. Aw, sa átù pa diyis ákung ibáyad nímu, Oh, in other
words, ten is what I pay you. {7} with the apodosis of a condition
contrary to fact. Ug walà pa nímu kawáta, ngánung náa man nà nímu? If
you hadn’t stolen it, why do you have it? {7a} [noun] —y [noun,
pronoun, adj.] if [noun] were [noun, pronoun, adj.]. Aku pay Huwan, If
I were John. Aku pay ikaw (aku pa nímu), If I were you. Aku pay dátù,
If I were rich. Aku pa nímu, níya, If I were you, him. Kami pa ninyu,
níla, If we were you, them. {7b} [predicate] —y ímu! [so-and-so] is
stupendous in quantity, quality (lit. if you could only see
[such-and-such]). Mais pay ímu, sus kadaghan! If you could only see my
corn. My! There’s a lot. Si Pidru pay ímu, káun giyud tug irù, Believe
me, Pedro will eat dog meat, and how! {7b1} [noun] —y ákù I never
thought [so-and-so] was what he was. Si Pidru pay ákù may kirída diay
nà siya, I never thought it was possible, but Pedro has a mistress.
{7c} — lámang see lámang, 4b, c. {7d} agad, maáyu — it would be, would
have been better if, it would have been good. Maáyu (agad) pa untà ug
átung napintálan ang kahun úsà gawía, It would have been better if we
had painted the box before we used it. Agad (maáyu) pa ug magtuun ka
kay sa magkantakanta, You would do better to study than just sit around
singing. {7e} hináut, básin, básun — I hope that. Hináut pang dílì
muulan, I hope it won’t rain. {8} modifying a phrase referring to time:
[so-and-so] recently happened, won’t happen until ... Dílì madala ug
bálik ugmà, Huybis pa, I cannot bring it back tomorrow. Not until
Thursday. Bag-u pa siya nga milakaw, He left just now. Gíkan pa siya sa
Manílà, He is just back from Manila. Karun pa siya muabut gíkan sa
Buhul, He arrived just now from Bohol. {8a1} ayhà, anhà — only then
[will so-and-so] happen. Ayhà (anhà) pa siya mulíhuk ug pakit-an ug
latigu, He only moves if he sees a whip. {8a2} dihà — only then
[so-and-so] happened. Dihà pa siya mutuun nga hápit na ang iksámin, He
only started to study when it was nearly exam time. {8b} mau —y
[abstract form] or [instrumental passive] that is the first time
[abstract] happened, [instrumental passive] will happen. Mau pay
pagkadungug nákù niánà, That is the first time I heard that. Mau pay
ilung-ag ug mudtu na, Don’t cook it until noon. (The first time to cook
it when it’s noon.) {8c} [future verb abstract form] — but then when
[so-and-so] was done. Dúgay nákung limpiyu sa salug. Baldiyúhan pa
nákù, human dáyun, It took me a long time to clean the floor. But then
when I hosed it down, it was finished right away. Pag-abri pa nákù sa
subri, wà diay sulud, When I opened the envelope, there was nothing in
it after all. dáan — [subject] knew [so-and-so] in advance. Dáan pa
lagi ku, I knew that long ago! {9} much less [do]. Dì gánì aku
makasulti, kanta pa, I cannot even talk, much less sing. Dì gánì aku
makahímù niánà, ikaw pa, I can’t even do that, much less you.

pa_2 short form for pápa_1. Pa, háin man si Máma? Pa (Dad), where is
Mommy?

pa_3 n fa. — mayur F major. — minur F minor. — sustinídu F sharp.

pá n k.o. tiny ant, smaller than the utitud, pale yellow in color and
does not bite, found swarming over food. v [a4] for food to get pá over
it. Cf. pala.

pā̀ = pálà_1.

pa- derivational verb-forming affix to which inflectional affixes are
added without morphophonemic alternation. {1} referring to actions one
has caused s.o. to do (either to s.t. else or to oneself). Palútù ta ug
sud-an, Let’s have s.o. prepare (lútù) some food. Palutúun nátù si
Maríya, Let’s have Maria cook. Ipalútù ang sud-an, Have the food
cooked. Patupi ta, Let’s get a haircut (cause s.o. to cut hair [tupi]).
{1a} added to adjectives. {1a1} have s.o. make s.t. [adj.]. Ipaitum ang
ákung sapátus, Have s.o. dye my shoes black. {1a2} have s.t. become
[adj.]. Patambúkun ta ka sa uma, We’ll fatten you up on the farm.
{1b} added to nouns: cause s.o. to do [the action that verbs derived
from the noun refer to]. Gustu ka ba pabakyà? You want me to hit you
with a wooden slipper (cause me to use the bakyà)? Dì ku paulípun, I
will not let myself be made a slave. {2} added to doubled adjectives:
pretend to be. Ayaw pasakitsákit dihà, Don’t pretend to be sick!
Nagpadiyusdiyusnun ang sungáyan, The devil is pretending to be saintly.
{3} added to nouns: go to [noun]. Padaplin ug dì ka gustung hiligsan,
Get out of the way if you don’t want to get run over. Papiliw ba ang
ímung sakayan run? Is your boat headed for the shallow waters now?

páa n thigh, legs from the knees up. v [A12] obtain a thigh for one’s
effort in slaughtering domestic animals. (→) v [a12] hit in the thighs.
paN- n the way the thighs are. Hastilag pamáa ning bayhána. Makabúngug,
My, how huge this woman’s thighs are. They’re absolutely amazing (lit.
deafening). paahan n the upper leg of a pair of pants.

paagpaag a staggering, tottering walk. v [B6; c1] stagger, totter.
Nagpaagpaag ang hubug, The drunk staggered in his walk.

páak v {1} [A; ab2] bite, sting. Gipáak aku sa bátà, The child bit me.
Hipaakan ku sa kasag, I got bitten by the crab. {2} [b2] be caught in
s.t. Hipaakan (napaakan) ákung karsúnis sa kadína sa bisiklíta, My
pants got caught into the bicycle chain. {3} [A; a] charge high prices
on s.t. sold. Ayaw sad kug paákag maáyu íni, Don’t charge me too much
for this. {4} [A] buy or ask for a small amount of s.o. else’s
purchase, just enough to meet one’s needs. Mupáak kug singkwinta stábus
sa ímung isdà, Let me buy fifty centavos worth of the fish you have
bought. (→) n claw, pincer of crustaceans. Paak sa kasag, Crab’s claw.
pa- v {1} [A; ac] allow to bite. {2} [c] hold s.t. with pliers. Ipapaak
ang twirka sa alikáti samtang hugtan ang pirnu, Hold the bolt with the
pliers while you turn the screw. paN-(→) v [A13] {1} be biting with
heat. Nagpamaak ang kaínit sa adlaw, The heat of the sun is scorching
(biting). {2} bite one’s lips or tongue. Nagpamaak siya sa íyang ngábil
sa kasukù, He is biting his lips in anger. -in-ay(→) v [C23] biting
each other, kissing lovingly. Lábing kaáyu sila nga nagpinaakay, They
were very loving and kept kissing each other. -in- n s.t. acquired from
the things s.o. has just bought. -in-an(→) n bite. Wà muskitirúhi si
Bungbung. Dì daghag pinaakan sa lamuk, Bongbong wasn’t given a mosquito
net, so he got lots of mosquito bites.

paas, páas a having a tired voice, hoarse from overuse. v [B; c1] for
the voice to be tired and hoarse from overuse. Mupaas (mapaas) ímung
tíngug ug magsígig tábì, Your voice will become hoarse if you keep
talking too much.

páaw_1 v [B12] be anxious about s.t. over which one has no information
or over which one has little control. Mapáaw giyud ku níya ug wà siya
sa balay sa alas nuybi, I get worried about him if he isn’t home at
nine. Napáaw ang amahan kay diyútay na lang ang bugas, The father got
worried because there was little rice left. ka- n {1} need of s.t.
which one cannot do without. Way nakatábang sa ákung kapáaw. Wà kuy
masangpit, No one helps me in my great need. I have no one to turn to.
{2} anxiety for s.t. over which one has a great concern.

páaw_2 = pálaw.

pabalúnan see bálun.

pabhas = pahubas, n, v1. see hubas.

pabílu n {1} wick of a lamp. {1a} drainage, sterile gauze inserted into
a wound. {1b} fuse of dynamite. {2} cause, agent of intensity. Siya ang
pabílu sa kasámuk sa ámung balay, She is the cause of the troubles in
our house. v {1} [A; b6(1)] put a wick in a lamp, fuse in dynamite,
drainage in a dressing. {2} [A; b6] give a cause for a quarrel or
misunderstanding. Wà tà tu siya mangísug apan ímu pung gipabilúhan, He
wouldn’t have gotten angry if you hadn’t given him cause.

pablik n {1} public school. Paiskuyláhun ku siya sa pablik, I’ll have
him attend public school. {2} in phrases: — bíding public bidding. —
disturbans public disturbance. — iskúl public schools. — markit
government-run market. — sirbis government service.

pablikar = publikar.

pabliku = publiku.

pablísir n publisher. v [B156] be, become a publisher.

pablisiti n publicity.

pablum n pablum, cereal for children.

pabrika n factory. v {1} [A; b6] put up, operate a factory. {2} [a2]
make into, put up a factory. {3} [A; c1] manufacture goods in a
factory.

pábu n turkey. — riyal n peacock.

pabur a {1} advantageous to. Ang kasabútan pabur kanátù, The agreement
is advantageous to us. — sa hángin have the wind at one’s back. Túlin
ang sakayan kay pabur sa hángin, The boat sails fast when the wind is
in back. {2} in favor of, on the side of. Ang disisiyun pabur kang
Rimutígi, The decision was in favor of Remotigue. {3} within easy
reach. Pagbantay! Kay pabur ka ra ba sa ákung tuu! Watch out! You’re in
easy reach of my right hand! {4} move towards. Iirug-irug ang lamísa
pabur sa tuu, Move the table more to the right. n {1} advantage,
concession. Nangáyù siyag pabur sa kumpári níyang mayur, He asked a
favor from his friend who was the mayor. {2} port, left side of a ship.
v {1} [A12] {a} have the edge or winning trend. Kusug ming musyágit ug
makapabur nag ámung manuk, We shout boisterously when our cock gets the
edge. {b} be in a position to hit, strike well. {2} [A; b6] favor, take
sides. Ayawg paburi ang bísag háing grúpu, Don’t take sides with either
group. pa- v [A; c] turn a boat to the left side. pur- please (said in
asking a favor). Purpabur ayaw na kug samúka, Please, don’t bother me
any more. Purpabur ikúhà kug túbig, Please, get me a glass of water. †

paburíta n k.o. salt cracker.

paburitismu n favoritism. Dúnay paburitismu ang pagdumálà sa ámung
prinsipal, Our principal practices favoritism in the way he runs the
administration.

paburítu a favorite. Ang adúbu mauy paburítu kung sud-an, Adobo is my
favorite dish. v [B126] become one’s favorite.

pad n pad of paper.

pád = pálad.

padayugdug see dayugdug.

páding n {1} padding. {2} padding of the payroll. v {1} [A; a] put,
use, make into padding. {2} [A; a] pad the payroll. Mipáding sila sa
pírul, They padded the payroll. -in-an n having padding.

padir n cemented fence.

pádir n title for a priest. (→) vocative.

padlak n padlock. v [A; b] padlock s.t. Padláki ang kusína, Padlock the
kitchen.

padlas v {1} [A; a12] drive s.o. out of the house. Ímu gánì kung
padlásun (padlasun) dì ku magduhadúha paglakaw, If you ask me to leave,
I will not hesitate to do so. {2} [A; b5] fish in the padlas way.
n k.o. fishing in shallow or moderately deep waters where a rectangular
net is set, into which fish are driven.

padpad v {1} [A; c] for wind or water to carry s.t. in the current. Ang
dag-um nga walà makabundak ganíha gipadpad, The rain clouds did not
fall a while ago and were dispersed. {1a} bring s.o. s.w. Unsang
hangína ang mipadpad nímu nganhi? What (wind) brought you here? {2} [A;
a] remove s.t. from whatever it was mixed with or stuck to. Padpára ang
amursíku sa ímung sinínà, Pull the burrs from your dress. Padpárig pasì
nang bugas, Pick out the unhusked grains from the rice.

padpád = paladpalad. see pálad.

padri n title for a priest. Si Padri Rudrígis Hiswíta, Father Rodriguez
is a Jesuit. (→) vocative. short form: dri.

padrǐ short for kumpadri, vocative.

padri dipamilya n male head of the family. Ang amahan mauy padri
dipamilya sa balay, The father is the head of the family in the house.

padrínu n sponsor in marriage, baptism, or other religious ceremony.
v [AC; a2] become the sponsor in baptism or marriage.

padri nwistru n the Lord’s Prayer.

padrun_1 n {1} pad of paper. {2} padding, lining. Butangig padrun ang
abága sa amirkána, Put padding in the shoulders of the coat. {3} dress
pattern. v [A; b] {1} put a lining or padding. Siyay mipadrun ug gápas
sa lingkuránan, He put cotton padding on the seats. {2} make a pattern
for s.t. Ákung gipadrúnan ang tahiúnun, I made a pattern for the dress.

padrun_2 n registry books for newly-born babies of a parish, town, or
locality.

padyáma n pajamas. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear, use pajamas. {2} [A; a12]
make into pajamas.

pag- prefix added to most bases which take the verbal inflectional
affixes. {1} forming imperatives (used esp. after ayaw ‘don’t’). short
forms: g, or ug. Ayaw paglakaw (ug lakaw, glakaw), Don’t go away. Ayaw
siya pagpatya, Don’t kill him. {2} forming infinitives. Gisugdan níya
pagtágik ang íyang bálak, He began to compose his poem. Arun sa
pagbutyag sa íyang tinagúan, In order to make his secrets public.
{3} forming nouns meaning the action of [do]ing. Dílì maáyu ang
pagpalabi, It’s no good to do things to excess. Nakabungkag sa ílang
pagpúyù, Destroyed their life together. Ang pagburunda sa simbahan dì
na kinahanglan, It is no longer necessary to wear a veil to church.
{4} forming words which mean ‘when [so-and-so] was done’. Pag-abut nákù
sa balay, mau say íyang paglakaw, When I arrived at the house, he left.

pág = palag.

paga, pága_1 exclamation shouted in a game of marbles or for other
kinds of pieces, when a player has hit a piece not intended, thus
nullifying the game for the player. v [A; a12] to commit paga.

pága_2 v [A; b] pay in full. Gipagáhan na nákù ang bayranan sa
iskuylahan, I have paid the tuition fees in full. — distínu = pagádu
distínu. midiya — half fare. -du n paid off. Pagádu na ang útang, The
debt has been paid off. v [B125] get paid up. -du distínu for a
passenger’s fare to be paid on arrival. Pagádu distínu ang ákung
paglakaw, My trip was on the payment-upon-arrival basis. v [A] travel
on the payment-upon-arrival basis. -díru distínu = pagádu distínu. -dur
n paymaster. v [B156] become the paymaster.

pága_3 n {1} shelf put above the stove. Limpiyúhi ang mga kúlun ug
ibutang sa pága, Clean the pots and place them on the shelf.
{2} platform built close to the roof forming a loft but not extending
the entire length of the house. v [b6] put a shelf, loft in a house.

paga-a see paga-un.

paga-an local passive durative affix, future. (Past: gina-an.
Subjunctive: paga-i.) For the use of the durative passive forms see the
entry under paga-un. Pagabantayan ang dáwang anihun, Millet that is
ready for harvest should be looked at every so often. Ingun sa
pagahitan-awan sa íyang hunàhúnà, It was as if it kept appearing in his
mind. Ang maung hitabù nahímung ginahisgútan sa mga táwu, That event
became the subject of conversation for these people. Pagaabunuhi ang
lubi, Keep putting fertilizer to the coconut trees every once in a
while.

paga-i see paga-an.

pagakpak n {1} sound produced by clapping, clapping of wooden sandals,
clopping of horses, and the like. Limpiyang pagakpak, Shoeshine done by
slapping a piece of cloth over the shoes with a popping sound.
{2} instrument for making a clapping sound. v [A; c1] make a clapping,
clip-clop sound. Ikaw bay mupagakpak sa humayan? Will you sound the
clapper in the rice field? Nagpagakpak ang ílang bakyà pag-ági níla,
Their wooden sandals made a clapping sound as they passed by.
Pagakpákan nátù ang nakadaug, Let’s applaud the winner.

págal v [B12] be broke (slang). Miundang siyag súgal sa dihang napágal
na siya, He stopped gambling when he went broke. (→) a flat broke.

pagan, págan = paga. (←) v [A; a12] involve s.o., cause s.o. to be
included in a misfortune. Kanang ímung tinuntu mupágan sa uban, That
mischief of yours will likely involve the others. Pagkasúnug sa dakung
balay napágan ang mga balay nga silíngan, When the large house burnt,
the neighboring houses were included.

pagang a for hair to be dry and lack oil. v [B] for hair to become dry
and lose its gloss. Mupagang (mapagang) ang buhuk kun sabunan, The hair
will lose its luster if you wash it with soap. -un a easily getting dry
and losing luster.

paganti a paid off. Paganti na ang útang, The debt has been paid off.

pagánu n pagans.

pagapak = palagupak.

pagari n {1} s.t. payable on an installment basis. Mukúhà kug tíbi nga
pagari, I will get a T.V. set on an installment basis. {2} promissory
note. Pirmáhi ring pagari arun masigúru, Sign this promissory note to
be sure. v [A; b6] sell, pay for s.t. on an installment basis.
Nakapagari aku ug sininaun, I got a piece of dress material on an
installment basis.

págas n hardened crust on top of a wound. v [B3] form a crust on top of
a wound.

pagatpat n k.o. tree of mangrove swamps: Sonneratia caseolaris and
acida.

paga-un direct passive durative affix future time. (Past: gina-.
Subjunctive: paga-a.) Literary style except in Southern Leyte and Bohol
where it is colloquial (with the dialectal prefix a- substituting for
paga-). Forms with paga-un are used to refer to actions repeated at
intervals or after preposed forms meaning ‘it is good, proper,
necessary,’ and the like. Ságad pagabasáhun níya ang Biblíya sa dì pa
matúlug, She usually reads the Bible before she goes to sleep. Unsay
ángay nátung pagabuhátun? What is the proper thing to do? Forms with
gina- refer to an action which goes on in time. Ginapasundáyag pa
gihápun ang mga dúlà ni Piyuks, Piux’s dramas are still performed. The
forms with paga-a are used when the subjunctive is required, or for the
imperatives, in contexts referring to repeated or enduring actions. Ang
humay adtu pagadagamíha sa búus, They take the rice on the stalks to
the granary, and there they get the rice grains (as they need them).

pagaw a hoarse. v [BN] become hoarse. Mipagaw (napagaw, namagaw) ang
ákung tíngug sa pagsinyágit, My voice got hoarse from shouting. ka-(←)
v [A13] be very hoarse. Undang na lang ug kanta dihà uy. Nagkapágaw
lang ang ímung tíngug, Stop singing. Your voice is hoarse. -un a of a
hoarse sort.

pagáwal see gáwal.

pagawpaw a for soil to be used up. Ang yútang pagawpaw gamay nag abut,
Leached-out land has a low yield. v [B] be, become barren. -un(→)
a worked-out k.o. soil.

pagba v {1} [A; a] fire objects in a kiln. Ikaw bay mupagba sa mga
kúlun? Will you fire the pots? {2} [B; a12] tan, darken the skin in the
sun. Napagba siyag kinalígù sa dágat, His skin got dark from bathing in
the sea so much.

paghid (from páhid) v {1} [A; b(1)] put s.t. on by spreading. Ikaw bay
nagpaghid ug mantikilya sa pán? Did you spread butter on the bread?
{2} [A12; b8] brush against momentarily. Nakapaghid kug bátà sa ákung
pagdalìdalì, I brushed against a child because I was rushing about.

paghut v {1} [A; a12] bark. Gipaghut mu sa irù kay sábà man mu kaáyu,
The dog barked at you because you were very noisy. {2} [A] cough
(humorous). Nagpaghut ka lang ánang tantu nímung pag-inubu, You are
coughing so much, you sound like you’re barking. n {1} barking.
{2} action of coughing (humorous).

pági n general term for rays.

pagiyun n k.o. ornamental bulb, the spider lily: Crinum asiaticum.

pagka-_1 affix added to most bases which occur with the verbal
inflections in one or more of the following usages. {1} forming a noun
meaning the action of having had [so-and-so] done or happen to it.
Maáyu ang pagkalútù níya sa kík, He baked the cake well. (Lit. The
action of his having baked the cake was good.) Ang kabílin wà maángay
pagkabáhin, The inheritance was not divided fairly. Dalì rang
pagkamatay, He died quickly. {1a} forming a noun meaning ‘having done
[so-and-so]’. Hustu ra giyud ang pagkaabut ninyu kay dáyun na námung
paniudtu, You arrived just in time because we are about to eat lunch.
{2} forming a word meaning when [so-and-so] had happened, had been
done. Pagkapalit níya sa pán, When he had bought the bread (lit. when
the bread was bought). Pagkakità níya niánà, When he saw that.
{3} forming an infinitive referring to completed action or the coming
into a state. Walà maángay pagkabáhin ang kabílin, The inheritance had
not been fairly divided. Misamut siya pagkahubug, He got all the more
drunk.

pagka-_2 prefix added to adjectives to form exclamations. Pagkadakù
bayà niíning syudára, Gee! What a huge city this is! Pagkabuútan giyud
nímu, How awfully nice of you!

pagka-a(←) forms with the prefix pagka-_1 and pagka-_2 to which -a(←)
has been added. {1} prefix added to adjectives to form exclamations,
with a greater degree of emotion or intensity of the exclamation than
pagka-_2. Pagkadakúa sa ílang bag-ung balay! Their new house is
absolutely tremendous! {2} form meaning particular action of having
done [so-and-so]. Hustu giyud tung pagkaabúta ninyu, Your arrival (lit.
that particular arrival of yours) was just at the right time.

pagkang = pakgang_1.

pagkut = pakgut.

pagpag a for hair to be dishevelled. v {1} [BN; c1] for hair to be
dishevelled. Mipagpag (napagpag, namagpag) ang ákung buhuk sa hángin,
My hair became dishevelled in the wind. {2} [A; b6(1)] agitate to
remove dust. Íyang gipagpágan ang ílang mga butang sa abug, She shook
the dust out of their things.

pagtung v {1} [BN; a12] burn, scorch. Napagtung siya sa kaínit sa
adlaw, He got burned by the heat of the sun. {2} [B12; a12] for popcorn
to fail to pop. Napagtung ang bitì ug walà mubukad, The corn turned
brown and did not pop. a thoroughly burnt from baking or being
otherwise exposed to heat. Pait ang ságing nga pagtung pagkasugba,
Burnt bananas taste bitter.

pagu a burnt to a crisp. Dì na ni makáun kay pagu na kaáyu, You can’t
eat this any more because it has been burnt to a crisp. v [B] be burnt
to a crisp.

págu v [A; c1] welsh on a bet, delay payment. Kinsay nagpágu sa tanang
pusta nga nahánaw man lang? Who ran away without paying the bets? Ákù
lang úsà ning pagúhun (ipágu) nga pusta, I won’t pay my bet for the
time being. n {1} amount which one failed to pay. Pilay ímung págu
kaníya? How big an amount did you welsh on? {2} comeuppance, just
deserts. Mau kanay págu nímu, That’s what you get!

pagù n a small brownish bird of the bush, with a body about 2″ in
length.

págud v {1} [AB12; a12] burn, burnt. Baliha ang adúbu arun dílì
mapágud, Turn the fried meat to the side so that it will not get burnt.
Ínit sa adlaw muy nakapágud (nakapapágud) sa ákung pánit, The heat of
the sun burnt my skin. Nagkapagud na ang pán. Dalia pagháun, The bread
is burning. Take it out quickly. {2} [A; a] roast cereals black.
Magpágud tag mais pára ikapi, Let’s roast some corn grits for coffee.
(→) a burnt. Akuy káun sa pagud nga pán, I’ll eat the burnt bread.
Kasagáran sa mga mananagat pagud ug pánit, Most fishermen have deeply
tanned skin. -in- n cereal roasted black, esp. corn grits. Pinágud ra
giyuy ámung kapi, All we have for coffee is burnt corn grits.

pag-ud a tough, strong, hardy. Pag-ud ang simintu kay sa káhuy, Cement
is stronger than wood. v [B2; a12] become tough, strong. Nagkapag-ud na
ang íyang láwas, He is getting stronger now.

pagudpud a crumbling, but hard; brittle. v [B; a12] be brittle.
Mupagudpud (mapagudpud) ang tiratíra ug butangan ug mani, Taffy becomes
brittle if you put peanuts in it.

pagúha n k.o. wild banana with yellow fruit when ripe, with sweet but
seedy flesh: Musa errans.

pag-uk a grayish, darkened due to dirt. v [B] be, become grayish or
darkened due to dirt. Nagkapag-uk na ang mga bisti nga wà ikaladlad,
The clothes that are not bleached are becoming discolored.

pag-ulíngun n k.o. small tree or shrub of the secondary forest:
Cratoxylon blancoi and celebicum.

pag-umangkun (from anak) n niece, nephew: son or daughter of one’s
siblings or of a cousin of one’s own generation of any degree. — sa
pag-agáwan (panag-agáwan) child of a cousin of one’s own generation.

pagupak n clapper made from bamboo, banana, or wood. v [A; c1] make
such a clapper.

pagúrut see *gurut.

pagut a for a woman to be forward in making advances to men. Ug
manghagad kag láki, pagut ka, If you make advances to men, you are
forward.

pagutput n {1} put-put sound. {2} croaking sound of frogs. v [A] make a
put-putting or croaking sound. Mupagutput giyud ang makina basta may
dipirinsiya, The machine goes put-put if s.t. is wrong with it.

pagya, pagyà n way of referring to s.o. in a humorous, but indirect
way. Layágun ug dunggan si Pidru mu nay nahímung pagyà, Pedro has large
ears so that became the way they used to refer to him. v [A; b5c] refer
to s.t. by making a joke about it but not naming it. Napagyà karun nga
ang dalágang mamatay pabawnan ug alhu, It is a common joke to say that
when a spinster dies, they should put a pestle at her side. Gipagyà
(gipagyáan) námù siyang pahak, We used to refer to him as scar head.

páha n girdle or abdominal binder. v [A; c] wear a girdle, binder; make
into a binder.

páhak v [A; a3b] make a gash, slash or gorge a piece out of s.t. Ang
kalabaw mauy nagpáhak sa ámung tágud, The carabao consumed a portion of
our seed bed. (→) n {1} the space left in an area after a piece has
been removed. May pahak ang ímung agigísing, There’s a spot on your
temples with very short hair. Dakug pahak ang kík, mu rag gikan-an,
There’s a piece missing in my cake. I think s.o. touched it. {2} scar
on the head. Nipsa pagtupi ang buhuk arun dílì makítà ang pahak, Just
trim the hair off so you can’t see the scar.

pahamtang see butang_1.

pahang, páhang v [B] smell of food beginning to rot. Napahang na ang
sud-an sa paradur úsà níya hikit-i, The food got rancid in the pantry
before he found it. (→) a having the smell of s.t. rotting. Kapahang sa
pípì sa bátà, wà hugási, The baby’s vagina smells terrible because no
one washed it.

páhat v {1} [A3S; ac] divide food, property, money into allocations.
Ang gubyirnu mupáhat nímu ug dúsi iktariyas, The government will
allocate you twelve hectares. Paháta ang kík sa lima ka báhin, Divide
the cake up into five portions. {2} [A12; b6] get a portion,
allocation. Nakapahat (napahatan) siyag dakùdakù kay sa ákù, He managed
to get a slightly larger allocation than mine. n allocation, portion.
-anan n mail section in the post office where mail is sorted and placed
in different bags.

pahaw = pagaw.

pahawin see háwin.

páhi n personal valet, servant to wait on hand and foot. v [A; c1] be a
personal valet.

páhid v {1} [AN; c] rub on, apply by wiping. Akuy mupáhid ug mantikilya
sa pán, I will spread butter on the bread. Pahírig túbig ang inasal,
Wipe water over the roasted pig. Ipáhid kini sa tutunlan, Rub this on
the throat. {1a} — ug salà lay the blame on s.o. else. Ayaw ipáhid ang
ímung salà nákù, Don’t put the blame for what you did on me. {2} [A;
ab1] wipe slightly to remove s.t. Pahíra ang mumhu sa lamísa, Wipe the
morsels off the table. Pahíri ang ímung lúhà, Wipe your tears. Pahíri
ang lamísa arun mauga, Wipe the table lightly so that it will get dry.
(→) n s.t. used to wipe. paN- v [A2; b1] wipe oneself to remove s.t.
Namáhid siya sa lúhà, She wiped her tears away. pahiran, pahiránan
n {1} doormat. {2} rags to wipe the hands.

pahilihíli bágu kíri set phrase from Tagalog: saying one doesn’t want
to, but actually be dying to do it.

pahimangnù see mangnù.

pahimulus see pulus_1.

pahimús = pahimulus. see pulus.

pahína_1 n page, leaf of a book. v [A; b] mark, number pages.
Gipahináhan ku na ang ripurt, I have already numbered the pages of the
report.

pahína_2 v [C2; a2b] for a group to work on s.t. without compensation.
Magpahína pagpatay sa ilagà ang tibuuk baryu káda Sabadu, The whole
village works on a project to exterminate rats every Saturday.
Gipahinahan sa Pitii ang pagtrabáhu sa iskuylahan, The P.T.A.
volunteered to work on the school building. n work bee to accomplish a
certain project.

pahináhin see *hináhin.

pahinanti n worker that does heavy unskilled labor, esp. hauling.
v [A1; a12] do heavy unskilled labor. Íya kung pahinantíhun sa ílang
trák, He’ll put me to work as a laborer on their truck.

pahinar v [A; c1] fix the hair. Dì ku makapahinar sa ákung buhuk ug aku
ra, I don’t know how to fix my hair alone. pahinadur, pahinadúra n one
who fixes the hair. v [B156] become a hairdresser.

pahit v [AN; a2b7] {1} bite using the front teeth, for insects or
animals to bite. Gipahit ku sa mga umígas, The ants bit me. Pahitan
nákug gamay ang ímung pán, I’ll take a bite from your piece of bread.
{2} for animals to go at young corn. Gipahit sa irù ang mais sa anagun
pa, The dog went at the young corn. paN- v [A] {1} bite one’s lips.
Nakapamahit ang sarhintu sa íyang ngábil sa kasukù, The sergeant bit
his lips in anger. {2} for heat to be biting. Nagpamahit nga kaínit sa
adlaw, The scorching heat of the sun. -in-an n bite inflicted on one.
Pinahitan sa lamuk, Mosquito bites.

pahiyum see híyum.

páhù n k.o. small, fibrous mango: Mangifera altissima.

pahugpahug a somewhat stupid. Dílì siya makahímu niánang buháta kay
pahugpahug, He is not capable of doing the work because he is such a
stupid fellow. v [A; b] roam around aimlessly. Tibuuk adlaw nákung
pahugpahug sa syudad, I roamed around the city the whole day.

pahúlì see húlì.

pahung a a person who acts strange or does things people would consider
stupid. Báhu ning pahung nagyasyas lang nang kinarsunisan, Of course
he’s a fool, he wears pants too big for him. v [B1] become foolish.

pahunpáhun n general appearance, actions. Mu rag giputul nang batáa sa
amahan kay amahan giyud ang pahunpáhun, That child is a chip off the
old block. He acts and looks just like his father. paN- v [A23] {1} for
the hazy outline of s.o. or s.t. to appear at a distance. Mamahunpáhun
ang kabukíran sa sayung kabuntágun, The mountains loom clear in the
early morning light. {2} carry oneself. Mu ra giyud nà siya sa íyang
inahan nga mamahunpáhun, She moves just like her mother. n general
outline, contours.

pahut v {1} [A; b] lace shoes. Pahuti sa listun ang sapátus sa bátà,
Lace the child’s shoes. {2} [A; ac] tie with any interweaving knot.
Pahuta ang písì pára dílì mabadbad, Make the rope into a looped knot so
it won’t come undone. n knot which is interlooped so that it cannot
slip, like a square knot or a slipknot. pahutpahut v {1} [A; a] darn a
tear with big temporary stitches. Dalìdaliag pahutpahut ang gising
hábul, Stitch the torn blanket quickly. {2} [A; b6] travel in and out
across s.t. as if describing the course taken by a needle in darning.
Nagpahutpahut sa kabukíran ang mga girilyíru, The guerillas traveled
across the mountains.

pahuy n {1} scarecrow. {2} a person who is manipulated by others. Insik
ang tag-iya niánà. Pahuy lang nà siya, A Chinaman owns that. He’s just
a dummy. Si Markus usa ka pahuy sa mga impiryalista, Marcos is an
imperialist lackey. v [AN; c1N] put up a scarecrow.

páig v {1} [A; a2] roast s.t. till it becomes charred. Magpáig kug
bugas nga kapihun, I will roast some rice to make into coffee.
{2} [B12] scorch the skin. Ang adlaw nakapáig (nakapapáig) sa pánit sa
mananagat, The sun burnt the fisherman’s skin. {3} for a business to
fail or go bankrupt. Nagsígi mag paútang maung napáig ang ílang
tindahan, Their store went bankrupt because they allowed so many people
to credit. (→) a totally burnt with only charred remains. Ang kík paig
kaáyu, The cake was completely burnt. -in- n s.t. roasted till charred,
esp. corn grits, for making into coffee. -un(→) a dark in complexion.

paílub n patience. v [A; c] endure, be patient with. Nagpaílub siya
bísag kápuy ang trabáhu, He is patient although his work is wearisome.
ma-un a patient, enduring.

pais v [A; b6] cook s.t. by wrapping it in leaves and burying it in
live coals. Gustu kung paisan lang ang útuk, I want the brains prepared
by broiling them in leaves. -in-an n s.t. cooked broiled in live coals.

paisánu n one’s compatriot, s.o. from the same town or village.

pait a {1} bitter in taste. {2} bitter in situation. v [B; a2] {1} be
bitter in taste. Mipait (napait) ang atay kay napusà ang apdu, The
liver became bitter because the gall bladder broke. Paita ang timpla sa
ákung kapi, Make my coffee strong (lit. bitter). {2} be a bitter
situation. Ang nakapait nímu kay dì ka mamátig katarúngan, What’s bad
about you is that you don’t listen to reason. -an(←) a {1} for pork
liver to taste bitter on account of what was fed to the pig. {2} k.o.
1″ vase shell, the meat of which tastes bitter. v [B12] for liver to
get bitter in taste. pa-(←) n dish of Ilocano origin made from
goatskin, cut into tiny pieces, and cooked in vinegar with spices and
made to taste very bitter by mixing spleen into it. v [A1; a12] prepare
papáit.

pak n word used in writing to represent the sound of a slap, or
explosion of firecrackers.

paka n pincers of shellfish.

páka v [AB12; a] break s.t. off from the thing to which it is attached,
become broken off. Mapáka giyud ang pul-an sa kutsilyu ug itigbas sa
bukug, The handle of the knife will surely break off if you use it to
chop bones. n cuttings for planting, usually of sugar cane. Ákung
itanum ang mga páka sa tubu, I’ll plant the cuttings of the sugar cane.

pakà = palakà.

pákà n loud cracking sound like that of guns, wood cracking, slapping
sound. v {1} [A] make a cracking sound. Mupákà giyud nang ímung nawung
ug dílì ka patúu, Your face will resound with a crack if you don’t
listen. Mipákà ang butu sa pusil, The gunshot resounded with a crack.
{2} [A; b6P] for a language to be spoken fast and fluently like a
machine gun. Mupákà lang ang ininglis kay Amirikánu siya, His English
comes fast and fluent because he is an American. — ang inamang not
talking in a situation where conversation would be normal. (lit.,
talking like the mutes). Pulus man gud sila mauwáwun, pákà lang ang
inamang, They were both shy and they just sat there in silence.

paka- derivational verb forming prefix. {1} added to adjectives or
nouns referring to a person in a certain capacity, forming verbs which
occur with the durative active affixes (mag-_1) and the direct passive
affixes (-un_1). With the durative active affixes, verbs with paka-
mean ‘pretend to be, act like [so-and-so]’ and with the direct passive
affixes they mean ‘consider as [so-and-so]’ or ‘treat like
[so-and-so]’. Nagpakadakung asyindíru, Pretended to be a big plantation
owner. Nagpakatigúlang, Acted like an old man. Ángayng pakabathaláun
ang bána sa asáwa, A wife should consider her husband a god.
Gipakasayun lang nímu ang kaminyúun, You think marriage is an easy
thing. {2} added to most verbs to form verbs with potential meanings
(see maka-_1) to which the durative active affixes (mag-_1) are added.
This form is literary and usually refers to several agents.
Nagpakapusta sila sa manuk nga napildi, They bet on a cock that lost.
Nagpakabatì sila apan nagpakabungulbúngul, They heard but remained
silent. {2a} added to a few verbs meaning see, hear, smell, sense, and
the like to form verbs which mean ‘cause s.o. to hear, etc.’. Verbs
with paka- of this sort occur only with the potential active affixes.
Suntuk nga nakapakakità ug aniníput, A blow that made him see stars.
{3} added to roots referring to a state to form verbs meaning ‘bring
oneself or s.o. else into [such-and-such] a state purposely.’ Verbs
with this paka- occur with the active durative and local passive
affixes. Nagpakabúhì siya álang sa íyang mga anak, He lived for his
children. Nagpakaúlaw kug panghangyù, I lowered myself to beg.
Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan, He gave his life (lit. caused
himself to die) for the sake of his country. {3a} added to roots
referring to a time of day or life: stay s.w. until [such-and-such] a
time. Usually with (→). Magpakatigulang ku dinhing dapíta, piru adtu ku
magpakamatay sa ámù, I will stay here until my old age, but I will go
home to die. Didtu sa barku pagpakakaadláwun, Stay on the boat until
daybreak. †

pákal v [A; c] {1} put a large piece into the mouth. Ayaw ipákal ug
hurut ang kan-un sa ímung bàbà, Don’t put all the food into your mouth.
{2} stuff a hole. Pakálig batu ang lungag sa ilagà, Put rocks into the
rat hole.

pakang_1 v {1} [AC; ab2c] hit with s.t. fairly good-sized. Nagkapákang
ang ílang úlu, Their heads slammed into each other. Pakngag hínay ang
silsil, Tap the chisel lightly. {2} [A; a] rap s.o. on the head. Sira
sa kabinit ang nakapakang sa ákung úlu, I bumped my head on the cabinet
door. Pakngun ta ka run ug dílì ka mutúu, I’ll rap you on the head if
you don’t obey me. n s.t. used to tap or drive s.t. in. (←) v [C; ac]
set off one’s debts against each other. Átù na lang pakángun ang átung
útang. Ang ímung singku kuntra sa ákung usa ka lungnik, I owe five
pesos and you owe me a fifth, so let’s just say we’re even. hiN-(←)
a fond of rapping.

pakang_2 n flat, pocket-sized bottle of liquor holding 350 cc. (slang).

pak-ap v [A; a12] pack up. Nagpak-ap na mi kay mularga, We’re packing
up because we are about to leave.

pákas v [A; a] {1} slice a fish in two, lengthwise, to dry it. Ákù lang
pakásun ning subrang isdà kay ákung ibulad, I’ll split the extra fish
to dry them. {2} break s.t. in two. Pakása ang pán, Break the loaf in
two. {3} [c] share in a bet. Nagpákas sila sa usa ka tíkit, They went
in together on one ticket. n half of a pair. Pákas sa karsúnis, One of
the trouser legs. -in- n dried fish.

pakat v [A2; b8] snag s.t., catch. Ayúha ug lábay ímung pasul kay
hipaktan ta sa tagà, Throw your fishline carefully because the hook
might snag me.

pakaw a {1} bowlegged, pigeon-toed. {2} have an inarticulated elbow,
such that one can not straighten his arm. v [B] be bowlegged,
pigeon-toed. Mapakaw giyud ang bátà basta pirming sap-ángun, A child
will become bowlegged if it is always carried astride.

pákaw_1 n {1} corncob. {2} handle stuck into a frying pan with a
rounded bottom (kaláhà).

pákaw_2 n {1} buoy or float made of a long bamboo node 1½″ to 2′ used
principally as a marker for fishing equipment. {2} the part of a
floating anchor (paladyaw) that offers a drag, consisting of woven
coconut fronds. v [A; c] tie this sort of float to s.t., buoy.

pakdul v [B126; b8] {1} knock s.o. on the top of the head. Sakit ákung
úlu nga napakdul sa halígi, My head hurts because I bumped it against a
post. {2} stub one’s toes. Mapakdul giyud kag mulakaw ka sa ngitngit,
You will stub your toes if you walk in the dark. {2a} [B1256]
mispronounce a word in speech due to haste in speaking or due to the
difficulty of pronouncing the word.

pakgang_1 v [A; a12] stop s.t. short. Way nakapakgang sa íyang batásan
nga laksut, No one has put a stop to his ugly ways. Gipakgang ku ang
íyang pamakak, I put a stop to his lies.

pakgang_2 n {1} dried sugar cane leaves. {2} frond of a buri palm.

pakgut_1 (from gákut) v [A; c] tie s.t. tightly around several things
or over an opening so that nothing can budge. Pakgúti ug maáyu ang
kináhuy, Tie the firewood together securely. n s.t. to tie around. Ang
uway maáyung pakgut sa kartun, Rattan is good for tying around boxes.

pakgut_2 v {1} [A; ab7] cut, slice with a sickle. Pakgútan sa
manananggut ang buluk káda buntag, The toddy gatherer slices a piece
off the young coconut blossom every morning. {2} [A; a] strip an abaca
trunk into fibers. Ayaw pakgúta kanang abaka nga butung pa ang tugdan,
Don’t strip an abaca plant with a young stem. n action of cutting.

pakha n Chinese woman whose feet have been bound from birth to make
them tiny.

paki- prefix added to nouns to form adjectives meaning ‘extremely fond
of [noun]’. Paki Núra giyud ning mga batan-un run, The youngsters these
days are very fond of Nora Aunor. Pakiayiskrim, Very fond of ice cream.

páki, pakì_1 n {1} a bar made of bamboo or other light wood put between
the upper and lower sail in two- or more-piece sails. {2} the lower
sail in a two- or more-piece sail, which is rolled up when the skipper
wishes to reduce the amount of wind which can hit the sail. v [A; ac1]
{1} roll up the lower sails. {2} make or attach a páki bar or lower
sail.

pakì_2 a {1} stiff. Pakì ra ning sinináa pagkaarmirul, This shirt has
been starched too stiff. {2} recently dead, stiff. Pakì na siya
pag-abut nákù, He was dead when I arrived. v [ABN; c1] {1} be stiff,
cause s.t. to become stiff. Namakì ang karni nga gisulud sa prísir, The
meat in the freezer became stiff. {2} be dead.

pakíbut v [c16] send letters by the paquebot mail service, formerly
provided by the Post Office, whereby a mailbox was placed on a boat in
which letters destined for the port of call or interior ports are
placed.

pákids n package, esp. sent by mail.

pakig-(←) (see makig- for illustrations of the tense forms of the
active voice.) Derivational verb forming affix, added to almost all
roots which refer to an action and also to bases with -ay, (-anay) to
form verbs which mean ‘engage s.o. in [such-and-such] an action’. Ayaw
pakigkítà níyag usab, Don’t go see him again. Dakù ang ákung tingúhà
pakiglákaw níya sa plása, I am very intent on taking her for a walk in
the plaza. Ayaw pakigsumbagay ug gamay, Don’t pick a fight with s.o.
smaller than you.

pakig-an(←) local passive future prefix added to some bases with a
prefix pakig-. (Past: gipakig-an(←). Subjunctive: pakig-i.)
Pakigsabútan ku siya, I will make an agreement with him.
Gipakigbungúlan ku siya, I got onto bad terms with him. Ayaw siya
pakigkitái, Don’t go to see her.

pakig-i see pakig-an.

pak-il a hard and compacted. Pak-il ang kamúti kay wà nímu tabúni
paglung-ag, The sweet potatoes came out hard because you boiled them
without a cover. v [B; a] become hard and compacted.

páking_1 n packing plant. Nanarbáhu didtus páking sa Dil Munti,
magdilatag pinya, Working at the Del Monte packing plant, canning
pineapples. -an(→) n = páking.

páking_2 v [A; b] apply packing to a hemorrhage. Duktǔr ang mipáking
níya kay nagdugù man siya humag panganak, The doctor applied packing
because she had a hemorrhage after her delivery.

pákit n {1} pocket in billiards. {2} = pákit sáyis. v [AN; c1] pocket
money dishonestly. Kinsay nagpákit sa inyung swildu? Who pocketed your
salary? Pakítun (ipákit) kunu sa tisuríru ang kwarta sa kapunúngan,
They say the treasurer will pocket the money belonging to the
organization. — buk n a paperback book. — máni petty cash one has for
s.o.’s sundry expenses. — sáyis n flat bottle of liquor holding 350 cc.
sayid — n side pocket of a billiard table. sikrit — see sikrit.

pakíti n package. Usa ka pakíting sigarilyu, A pack of cigarettes.
v [A; c1] put in a package.

paklang n petiole of a buri palm frond.

paklay n dish made from goats’ or dogs’ entrails and blood, cut up and
sautéed with spices. v [A; a12] make paklay.

paklì v [A3P; c1] turn s.t. that is flat. Ang kusug hángin mauy
nakapaklì (nakapapaklì) sa páwud sa atup, The strong wind turned the
shingles of the roof over. Paklía ang sunud panid, Turn the next page.

paklid (from kílid) v [A; c1] remove a thick, heavy sheet which has
been attached to or lodged against s.t. Ang kawatan ang nagpaklid sa
mahalung kwadru nga gilansang sa bungbung, The thief knocked off the
expensive frame that was nailed to the wall. Gipaklid níyag hínay ang
tabun sa bugásan, He opened the cover of the rice container slowly.

pakling v [A3P; c1] knock over s.t. erect and not rooted, usually to a
lower place. Kinsay nagpakling sa masitíra? Who knocked the flower pots
over? Napakling ang makililímus kay nasabdan sa irù nga milabay, The
beggar was knocked down by a passing dog that brushed against him.

pakluy a {1} tending to loaf, take it easy when not watched.
{2} lacking the energy to improve one’s lot. v [B; b] {1} idle, be
loafing. Mahímu rang paklúyan nátù ning buháta, walà bítaw tay súhul,
We can take it easy on this job. We’re hardly paid anyway. {2} be slow
and unaggressive. Ug magpakluy ka sa kinabúhì, dì ka madiyus, If you
are not sufficiently aggressive, you’ll never succeed.

paknit (from aknit) v [AB; a] peel off s.t. thin with care, flake in
small bits, peel. Akuy mupaknit sa mga silyu arun dílì madáut, I’ll be
the one to take the stamps off so they won’t get damaged. Napaknit ang
pintal sa bungbung, The paint on the walls peeled off.

pakpak_1 n {1} husk, bark of trees. Pakpak sa mais, Corn husks. {2} by
extension, peels. v [ABN; a2] peel off, shell. Nagkapakpak ang íyang
pánit tungud sa ínit, He is peeling because of his sunburn. Isirbi ang
mani nga gipakpákan, Serve the peanuts that we shelled. -an(→), -un,
-un(→) n nearly ripe tamarinds, the peelings of which are loose.

pakpak_2 = palakpak.

pakshul n foxhole. v [A; b6] dig a foxhole. Nagpakshul dáyun ang mga
sundálu, The soldiers dug foxholes right away.

paksì, paksit v [A; a] rip off s.t. flexible that is adhering firmly to
s.t. Kinsang buánga ang nagpaksì (nagpaksit) sa anunsiyu? Who is the
fool that ripped off the announcement? Paksíun (paksítun) ku nang
ngábil mung nagbagà, I will rip your thick lips off your snout.

paksiw n dish of meat or fish cooked with vinegar and spices. v [A; a2]
make paksiw. Paksíwun nátù ang subrang inasal, We’ll make paksiw of the
extra roasted pig.

paksiyun n faction.

paksul = pakshul.

paksut v [AB12; a] peel off s.t. which is adhering in a film or layer
over s.t. else. Akuy mupaksut sa mga ritrátung ímung gipapilit sa
bungbung, I’ll peel the pictures off that you pasted on the wall.
Napaksut ang íyang túhud sa pagkadam-ag níya, His knees were bruised
when he stumbled. n place s.t. was peeled off. Dúnay paksut ang káhuy
nga napingsan sa bala, There is a slight bruise on the tree that the
bullet grazed.

paktaw = patánì_2.

paktu n pact, an agreement between two or more parties. — diritru sale
of land subject to repurchase within a period of time. v [c1] execute a
deed of sale with the right to repurchase.

paktul v {1} [A; a2b2] knock the head with s.t. Paktúlan ku nang ímung
úlu arun makasabut ka, I will conk you on the head so you can
understand. {2} [b4(1)] have paktul practiced on one. n k.o. sorcery
whereby s.t. is done to a skull, doll, or some other representation of
a person, and the person against whom it is practiced feels the effects
of whatever is done to the image. paN- v [A2] practice paktul. maN-r-,
maN-l- n sorcerer who practices paktul.

paktúra n {1} invoice of goods bought. {2} label attached to
merchandise indicating the price in code. v [A; b(1)] make price tags
for goods to be sold.

paku_1 n k.o. fern, the young leaves of which are eaten as a salad:
Athyrium esculentum.

paku_2 n plaster of belladona: k.o. plaster applied locally for
muscular aches. v [A; c] apply a plaster of belladona.

pakù n {1} wings. {2} ventral fin. {3} means or instrument to achieve
s.t.: money, credentials, ability (colloquial). Dì ku makapamyista kay
wà man kuy pakù, I can’t attend the fiesta because I don’t have the
money for the fare. Dì ka mauwaw nga murikumindǎr níya kay hustu nà sa
pakù, You need not be ashamed to recommend her because she has the
qualifications. {4} armpit (humorous euphemism). v [A; b6] put wings
on. pakùpákù n upper part of back just below the shoulder. paN- v [A;
b6] grow wings. pak-an a {1} winged. {2} devilish. Pak-an bayà nímung
dakù! You are a devil.

pákù v [B126; a12] be frustrated in one’s efforts to accomplish s.t. Wà
ku mapákù sa ákung pagpanágat gabíi kay nakadá kug diyútay, It was
worthwhile going fishing last night because I managed to catch some.

pakug v [AC; c] bang the head against s.t., bang heads together.
Pakúgun ta mu kay paríhu mung sad-an, I’m going to bang your heads
together. You are both guilty. Íyang ipakug ang íyang úlu sa halígi ug
sapútun, He bangs his head against the post when he is angry.
pakugpákug v [B46; c1] for things hanging loosely to bang repeatedly
against each other. Magpakugpákug ang mga buwad nga binítay ug
hangínun, The dried fish which are hung up knock against each other
when the wind blows.

pakul n name given to good-sized triggerfishes with a larger mouth than
the pugut.

pákul = pagúha.

pakúma n FACOMA, the acronym for Farmers’ Cooperative Marketing
Association.

pakung v [AC; ab2c] give s.t. a light rap with s.t. else, bump a small
part of the head against s.t. Kanang maistrang saputun ang nagpakung
nákù, That irate teacher rapped me on the head. Napakung ang ákung úlu
sa nag-abring sira, I knocked my head against the open door. v [A; ac]
bang repeatedly.

pakupak = palagupak.

pákut_1 v {1} [A; a] bind s.t. tightly. Tulisan ang nagpakut níla sa
halígi, The robber bound them to the post. Pakúta ang mga bulus sa
kawáyan arun sayun dad-un, Bind the bamboo stems together so they will
be easy to carry. {2} [A13; c1] be of all different kinds, do s.t. to
all different kinds. Ug pakútun (ipákut) ninyu ang prútas nga inyung
kan-un maimpatsu giyud mu, If you eat all different kinds of fruit at
one time you’ll surely have indigestion. (→) n bond. ka- a of various
kinds put together. Kapákut lang ang ímung pamalíbad, You have run the
full gamut of excuses. v [B1456] be of various kinds put together.
Nagkapákut ang íyang sinínà sa mga tapak, Her dress was all patches of
every sort and shape.

pákut_2 n wild boar.

pakwan n {1} watermelon. {2} dried watermelon seeds.

pakyas a failed, come to nothing. Pakyas na ang ákung panganduy, My
dreams have come to naught. v {1} [A; a] fail, make s.t. fail. Dílì aku
mupakyas nímu, I will not fail you. Dílì ka mapakyas, You cannot fail.
Ayawg pakyása ang ákung tingúhà, Don’t cause my aspirations to fail.
{2} [A2; b5] fail to do s.t. Gipakyas (gipakyásan) níya ang íyang
pagsimba, He missed going to church. ka-an n failure.

pakyaw v {1} [A; a12] hire for the whole job, buy the whole lot.
Nagpakyaw mig usa ka trák pára sa ámung ikskursiyun, We chartered a bus
for our excursion. Magpakyaw tag panday paghímug aparadur, Let’s hire a
carpenter to make the cabinet, paying him for the job. Pakyáwun ku ang
pagtúkud sa balay, I’ll have the house constructed, paying a lump sum
for the whole job. Pakyáwun ku ang tanang ságing basta itúgut ug
barátu, I’ll buy all your bananas if you let me have them cheap.
{2} [A2; a12] finish a game by making all the points consecutively
without changing balls or hands. Ug aku nay makasirbi, pakyáwun giyud
nákù, If I serve, I’ll do it to the end of the game (the other side
won’t get the ball again). {3} [a12] skip doing s.t. one regularly
does. Way bugas, pakyáwun na lang nátù ang átung paniudtu, We don’t
have any rice. Let’s just skip our dinner. n s.t. hired or paid for as
a whole. Dílì ni inadlaw. Pakyaw ni, We are paid for doing the whole
job, not on a daily basis. maN-r-, maN-ay n whole lot buyer or worker
of jobs under agreement.

pál_1 n one’s pal. v [C; c] be pals.

pál_2 n acronym for Philippine Air Lines. v [A13] take a PAL flight; by
extension, take a plane.

pala n k.o. black ant, the size of an ordinary red ant (hulmígas)
infesting fruits. It does not bite but secretes an acid which can sting
the eyes. v [a4] be infested with black ants. see also pa.

pála_1 (not without l) v [A; c] flatter, sweet talk. Akuy mupála ni
Nánay arun ta palitan ug bag-ung sinínà, I’ll sweet talk Mother into
buying us new dresses. n flattery. palapála = pála_1.

pála_2 (not without l) n spade, shovel. v [A; ac] move s.t. with a
shovel. Paláha nang balas dihà, Shovel that sand away. Ipála ang balas
ngari, Shovel the sand over here. (→) = pála_2, v.

pála_3 (not without l) n propeller.

pálà_1 v [A; a] erase. Mam, akuy mupálà sa blakburd, Ma’am, I’d like to
erase the board (for you). Lisud kang pad-un (paláun) sa ákung
panumdúman, It’s difficult to erase you from my mind. -an(→) n eraser
for pencil or typewritten figures. -in-an, pinad-an n erasure. Daghan
rag pinalaan (pinad-an) ang ímung tinayip, Your typing has too many
erasures. †

pálà_2 v [A12; a3b2] get s.t. as a result of one’s actions or behavior.
Makapálà kag maáyung kapaláran ug magtinarung ka, You will get good
fortune if you are a good and upright person. Way láing hipaláan sa
táwung burukintu kun dì áway, A troublemaker gets nothing but trouble.

palábad see *lábad.

palabangáhan, palabanghan = balbangáan.

palabra (not without l) n {1} word of honor. Wà siyay palabra kay dílì
mutúman ug sáad, He has no word of honor because he does not hold to
his promises. {2} talk as opposed to action. Palabra lang, way nabúhat,
It’s all talk, no action. — diunur word of honor. -s see síti.

palábu see lábu_1.

pálad n {1} palm of the hand. {2} one’s fate. Dì ku madátù kay mau nay
ákung pálad, I will not get rich because it’s my fate not to.
{2a} pilay — who knows? Ayaw siyag sawaya. Pilay pálad ug maprisidinti
siya, Do not scorn him. Who knows, he might one day become president.
{2b} walay — unfortunate. Mis — name Miss Palm, the hand as used in
masturbating (humorous). Napildi kung Mis Pálad gabíi, I gave my all to
Miss Palm last night (i.e. masturbated). (→) n {1} general name given
to various flatfishes: flounders, brills, soles. {2} k.o. creeping
grass: Cynodon dactylon. paladpalad {1} = palad, 1. {2} = bilabila.
panim- v [A; b(1)] venture, try one’s luck. Adtu ku sa Manílà
manimpálad, I will go to Manila to try my luck. Panimpalári ug hangyù
si Pidung básig musugut, Try your luck in asking Pedong to do it. He
might agree to. hiN- v [AN; b(1)] read the palm. Human siya kahimadli
naghingári lang siyag hinuktuk, Ever since he had his fortune read, he
has moped. panghiN- n palmistry. manghihimalad n palmist.

paláran a fortunate. Paláran ka kay ikay napílì, You’re lucky you were
chosen. kapaláran n fate, destiny. Súgù sa kapaláran ang nahitabù, What
happened was the decree of fate. Balud sa kapaláran, The cruelty of
fate. palárun a turning out lucky, successful. Ug palárun ang plánu, If
the plan is successful.

paladyaw (from layaw) n k.o. floating anchor attached to a line,
consisting of a float and s.t. tied to it to offer resistance (pákaw),
the purpose of which is to slow down s.t. drifting or hold back s.t.
moving. v [A13; a2] attach a paladyaw. Paladyawi ang palíhan arun
malúya dáyun ang íhu, Attach a float to the harpoon line so the shark
will tire easily.

palag v [A12] = hi-. hi-(←) v [A12C3; b8c3] meet with, run into.
Nakapalag (nakahipálag) na ku sa hustung tubag, I found the right
answer. Hipalgan sa mga pulis ang patayng láwas sa nalumus, The
policemen found the dead body of the drowned person. Gikahipálag ku
siya didtu, I ran into him there.

palagpag_1 n {1} tray made of bamboo latticework that is hung s.w. for
various uses, e.g. in the kitchen as a storage place for food, or hung
in the garden as support for vines, et al. {2} bamboo stretcher for
carrying corpses, the flooring of which is made of bamboo slats.
Palagpag ang gikargáhan sa minatay, The corpse was carried on a bamboo
stretcher. v [A1; a] put in, make into a tray of this sort or in a
bamboo stretcher.

palagpag_2 v [A; ac2] agitate s.t. to remove dust. Ipalagpag
(palagpági) ang sinínà arun makúhà ang abug, Beat or shake the dresses
to remove the dust.

palagupak n clapper made of bamboo or a banana leaf stalk. v {1} [A;
b6] sound the palagupak. {2} [A; a12] make a palagupak.

palahúta = plawta.

pal-ak n a leafstalk and its leaf. v [A1; a] remove the leafstalk from
the mother plant. Pal-áki kug pila ka dáhun sa pitsay, Take some
Chinese cabbage leaves off of the plant for me.

palakà n frog.

palakáya n k.o. trawling with a V-shaped net (púkut) usually in deep
waters. v [AN; a2] trawl, catch by trawling.

palakíru = palikíru.

palakpak n applause. v [A; b] clap. Ang gipalakpákan ug maáyu mauy
nakadaug, The one who got the most applause won.

palakpalak n {1} croaking of frogs, flapping of wings of fowls,
clacking of wooden slippers. {2} = palagupak. {2a} lesbian, so called
from the bamboo clapper which consists of two like-shaped pieces of
bamboo. v {1} [A; c1] make the palakpalak sound. {2} [C] engage in
lesbian behavior.

palakul, palákul (not without l) n hatchet. (→) v [a12b2] hit with a
hatchet. Palakulun ku nang irúa, I’ll hit that dog with an axe. -un
a like a hatchet. -un ug tiil having feet with spreading toes.

palakupak = palagupak.

palamban = pangtamban. see tamban.

palamingku (not without l) n long, sharp, pointed knife, of light
weight, about 8″ long, used for slaughtering or slicing meat. v [A;
ab2] strike, stab with a palamingku.

palanas n {1} flat, smooth rock or stone cliff. {2} eroded untillable
area where large stones stick out. v [B2] for the soil to become
barren, eroded. Mupalanas (mapalanas) ang yútà ug mabahaan, A piece of
land becomes infertile if it is subject to floods.

palandung see landung.

palanggà (from danggà) v [A; a12] love and care for s.o. Mupanggà ku sa
bátang buútan, I’ll love a good child. Palanggáun ku ikaw hangtud sa
kahangtúran, I will love and care for you till the end of time.
n dearest, darling. short form: langgā̀. Natúlug ka na ba, palanggà?
Are you asleep, darling? ma-in-un a bestowing loving care, full of
love. -in- = palanggà, n.

palanggána, plangganíta = planggána. plangganíta.

palangging, palanggingging n form of endearment for palanggà. Unsa may
gustu nímung kan-un palangging? What do you want to eat, little dear?

palangka_1 (not without l) n religious offering or pledge in the form
of prayers, sacrifices, and penance for the success of a kursilyista
(see kursilyu). v [A; c1] make a palangka.

palangka_2 = plangka.

palangkì = pulangkì.

palangri n general name for longline fishing in deep waters. v [AN; b6]
go longline fishing.

palanhay (not without l) a sloping gradually. v [B1; a12] be, become a
gradual slope. Abunúhig yútà sa ubus arun mapalanhay ang baháda, Put in
filling in the part below so that it will be an easy grade.

palansa = plantsa. -in- n flat-topped haircut with short sides.

palantig v [A; ab2] throw s.t. at s.t. Gipalantig nákung manuk nga
mituktuk sa binlad, I threw stones at the chicken that was pecking at
the rice.

palantígun = balantígun.

palàpà = palàpálà.

palapag n {1} strong, permanent trellis, with posts, usually made of
metal or hardwood, used as a support for climbing plants or as a
screen. {2} matting made of closely woven bamboo slats. Katága sa
palapag ang kupras, Spread the copra on the bamboo slats. {3} a round
winnowing tray.

palápag n {1} improvised litter. Ang masakitun gibutang sa palápag ug
gibayúngan ngadtu sa tambalánan, The sick person was placed on the
improvised carriage and was taken to the hospital. {2} = palagpag_1.
v [A; a2] {1} carry in a litter. {2} make a litter.

palapála = palàpálà.

palàpálà_1 n {1} horizontal trellis for plants to grow on.
{2} temporary shed without walls with a flat roof. v [A; b6(1)] make
such a shed or trellis for climbing plants. Magpàpà lang tas sílung nga
pára kan-anan sa bisíta, We’ll make a pergola in the yard for the
dinner guests.

palàpálà_2 n advantage given an opponent whereby the stronger player
agrees to make a certain multiple of the score gotten by the weaker,
e.g., he must make five points for every one point of his opponent.
v [A; c] give this advantage.

palaríti (not without l) = plaríti.

pálas_1 (not without l) v [A3P; a] erase writings, memories. Ákù ta
kang palásun sa ákung listahan, I’ll erase your name from my list. (→)
n eraser. -in-an n erasure.

pálas_2 (not without l) v [A; a12b2] summon people to work. Palásun ku
ang mga silíngan kay maglálung ta sa balay, I will go notify the people
to come because we’re going to move the house.

pálas_3 (not without l) v [A; a12] continue weaving s.t. already
started. Nasugdan ku na man, ikaw na lay magpálas, I started it. Now
you continue weaving it.

palásan n k.o. rattan with a stem as big around as the arm, and the
nodes approximately 1½″ apart. The heart stem is edible but bitter. The
stalk is used for furniture and the split stems for tying.

palasíbu (not without l) = plasíbu.

palastǎr (not without l) v [AB; c1] {1} lay flat, lie down flat. Kinsa
man nang nagpalastǎr dihà sa katri? Who’s that lying down on the bed?
Ipalastǎr (palastára) ang panaptun sa lamísa úsà nímu tabása, Lay the
cloth flat on the table before you cut it. {2} set in proper place.
Palastáran ku sa ákung tinda kining ímung lamísa, ha? May I set my
goods up here on your table?

palásu {1} = plásu. {2} = palatsu.

palasyu (not without l) n {1} palace. {2} archbishop’s residence.
v [a12] make into a palace.

palata n k.o. fish found around rocks in shallow waters, not
particularly good eating.

palatik (not without l) n outrigger boom to which the float (kátig) is
attached. v [A; a] make or attach an outrigger boom.

palatíru (not without l) = platíru.

palatsu n k.o. flowing gown for women consisting of a flaring, full
skirt modified to form two pant legs. v [A; a2] wear this sort of gown.

palátu (not without l) = plátu.

palatun n {1} plate, 9″ to 12″ in diameter, made of enamel-coated
tinplate, round and deep like a shallow soup plate. {2} any plate.
v [A; c1] {1} use a palatun. {2} make into a palatun. a eating a lot.

palaw (not without l) v [B1256] feel disappointment tinged with
embarrassment at the failure of s.t. to happen. Napalaw ang mangunguut
kay way sulud ang pitáka, The pickpocket was disappointed because the
wallet contained no money. Napalaw mi pagkanta námug hápi birtdi kay dì
diay adlaw níya, We were embarrassed when we sang happy birthday
because it wasn’t his birthday.

pálaw n k.o. large, vigorous growing aroid, the tubers and leaves of
which are eaten, esp. in times of scarcity: Cyrtosperma merkusii. v [A;
b6] plant pálaw. -an(→) {1} = pálaw. {2} name for a similar aroid.

palaw-a = palwa.

paláwir (not without l) n female genitalia. paN- v {1} [A2; b6] adorn
with flowers. {2} [A2; b3] make oneself up pretty, dress to kill
(humorous). {3} [A2; a12] for a young girl to do s.t. appropriate to
grown-ups. Ngánung nangmik-ap ka? Namaláwir ka na ba? Why are you
putting make-up on? You want to act like a grown-up? {4} [A23] gather
fallen coconuts, esp. from plantations not one’s own (humorous—word
play on pamúlak ‘gather fallen coconuts’ which looks as though the root
is búlak ‘flower’ [whereas actually the root is púlak]).

palaypay v [A; c] spread s.t. out or hang it up to air, dry. Didtu sa
gawas ipalaypay ang hábul, Spread the blanket out outside. -an(→)
n place where laundry is hung out to dry.

palbangáan, palbangáhan = balbangáan.

palda n skirt. v [A; a] wear, obtain, make into a skirt. — iblúsa
n skirt and blouse. v [A; c] wear a skirt and blouse.

paldíyas n {1} brim of a hat. {2} part of the leg of the trousers from
the knees to the cuffs. v [A; b] make the brim of a hat.

paldu v [A; a12] pack into bales. Átung paldúhun ang mga pamantaláan,
Let’s bale the newspapers. n bale, bundle. -in- n s.t. packed in bales.

palhi a for a place to be inhabited by supernatural beings that can get
easily angered and inflict diseases on the object of their ire. Giila
ra ba ning yutáang palhi. Buháti únà úsà darúha, This land is notorious
for the supernatural beings that guard it. Make an offering before you
plow it.

palhug v [A; c] slip s.t. long under or in between s.t. else, usually
not tightly placed. Ayawg palhúgi ug malíta ang ilálum sa hagdanan,
Don’t keep a suitcase under the stairs.

palì_1 n large scar. v [B; b4a4] form, have a scar. Mupalì ang kabahung
ug mataptan ug mík, The infection will form a scar if you treat it with
a coin.

palì_2 v [B126] for the upraised hands to be bent back with some force.
Kusug ra kaáyu tung pagkapasáha sa búla, makapalì (makapapalì) man pud
sa magsáwù, You really threw the ball with force. It can bend the hand
over backwards.

palias a having pale and very dry lips. (←) v [B26N; b4] for the lips
to be, become pale and very dry. Ang táwung masakitun mipalías
(namalías) ang ngábil, A sick man’s lips turn pale and get dry. -un
a of a pale and powdery sort.

palibkas see libkas.

palid_1 n {1} sheet of paper, metal. Duha ka palid nga sín, Two iron
sheets. {2} door or window shutter. {3} installment of a story. Dì ku
saypan ang matag palid sa sugilánun, I won’t miss a single installment
of the story.

palid_2, pálid_1 — sa luwag n handle of a ladle. v [A; c1] make the
handle of a ladle.

pálid_2 v {1} [A; c1] for the wind to blow s.t. away. Gipálid sa hángin
ang hinayhay, The wind blew the laundry away. {1a} [c6] be blown off
course. Didtu ipálid ang sakayan sa Buhul, The boat was blown over to
Bohol. — ug hangínun [c] be so thin the wind could blow it away.
Gisumbag pa sa salbáhis nga bána ang íyang asáwa nga ipálid gánig
hangínun, The wife was so thin she could have been blown over by a gust
of wind, but that didn’t stop her brute of a husband from boxing her.
{2} [A; b6] winnow, throw grains in the air so the wind can carry them
off or winnow with a machine. Magpálid mig humay sa baybáyun, We’ll
winnow rice at the seashore. (→) = pálid, v2. palidpálid v [AB; c1]
sway back and forth in the wind, make sway. Nagpalidpálid ang kurtína
sa hángin, The curtains waved in the wind. Ang hángin nagpalidpálid sa
íyang buhuk, The wind blew her hair in all directions.

palidpid v [AN; b6] pass close along the side of s.t. Namalidpid
(mipalidpid) kug ági sa karsáda, I walked along the side of the street.

palíhan n rope tied to a harpoon or arrow with which the quarry can be
held after it is speared. v [A13; a] attach, use for a harpoon rope.

paliháru n k.o. large sweet potato having soft, yellowish meat.

palíhug see *líhug.

palikíru a philandering. — ug mata being flirtatious with women, using
the eyes.

palinà n k.o. small sugar cane that has a dark maroon color and is
decidedly sweeter than the commercial variety. The stem is soft and
easily chewable.

palínà n {1} k.o. fumigation practised for medical treatment or for
various rites, the purpose of which is always purification or
nullification of s.t. {2} materials used for this treatment. v {1} [A;
b] give s.o. this treatment. Magpalínà ku sa bag-ung balay, I will have
my new house purified by magic smoke. {2} [AN; b] give oneself this
treatment. Namalínà ku gíkan sa mintiriyu, I exposed myself to
fumigation after I left the cemetery.

paling v [AB126; c1] for s.t. not rooted or fixed at the base to fall
over to its side; cause it to do so. Iring ang mipaling sa masitíra,
The cat knocked the flower pot over. palingpaling a having no strong
convictions and easily yielding to influence. v [B56] be not firm, an
easy prey to influence. Way íyang kaugalíngung panghunàhúnà,
mupalingpáling (mapalingpáling) pa, He can be swayed in his decision.
He has no mind of his own.

palìpì v [AN; b6(1)] place thorns around the base of plants to keep
them from animals or thieves. Ug wà pa ku makapalìpì sa ákung mangga,
mahurut untà sa káwat, If I hadn’t put thorns around the base of the
mango tree, the fruit would have all been stolen. n thorns placed
around plants.

palinpinun n a narrow road with a sharp turn having a high cliff on one
side and a deep precipice on the other side.

palis n early afternoon, between noon and 4 P.M. v [B5; b4(1)] be in
the afternoon. Napalisan kug laba sa mga bulingun, I washed the clothes
until afternoon. Palisan ku ang ímung bábuy, I will pay for your pig
with an afternoon’s work.

pális = pálid_2, v2.

palispis v [AN] for leaves to start sprouting. Sa tulu ka adlaw
mupalispis (mamalispis) na ang pugas, In three days the corn seeds will
be sprouting. Nagpalispis na ang sanga nga íyang gitisuk, The branch of
a tree that she planted is beginning to grow leaves. n {1} short, thin
sprouting leaf, not fully grown. {2} sheath of a stem of the bamboo
plant. {3} sheath wings, usually of insects. {4} caudal fin of the
squid. -in- n a fraction of s.t. Pinalispis lang kini sa ímung
abilidad, This is only a fraction of your ability.

palit v {1} [A; a] buy. Akuy mupalit ánag diyis, I’ll buy it for ten
pesos (lit. if it’s ten pesos). Kinsay nagpalit sa ímung awtu? Who
bought your car? Nakapalit mig barátung kutsi, We managed to buy a car
cheap. Palitun ku ning tambála, I will buy this medicine. Kinsay ímung
gipalitan sa kutsi? Who did you buy the car from (or for)? Wà kuy
kwartang ipalit ug awtu, I have no money to buy a car with. {2} [A;
a12] — ug áway, burúka get into trouble with s.o. with whom one had no
quarrel simply because of too much meddling. Sa ímung tábì nakapalit
kag áway, You bought yourself a quarrel with your gossip. n amount paid
to buy s.t. Pilay palit nímu sa isdà? How much did you pay for the
fish? — baligyà n buying and selling. Ang íyang patigáyun palit baligyà
sa mais, He is in the business of buying and selling corn. (←) n sales.
Kusug ba ang pálit sa ímung tinda? Are your goods selling fast? a
selling well. v [b5] {1} sell in large quantities. Bulad mauy gipálit
(gipalítan) run sa mga táwu kay mahal ang lab-as, Dried fish sells well
now because fresh fish is dear. {2} [A13] for a farmer who raises his
own to buy when his stock runs out. Nagpálit na run mi kay nahurut na
ang abut námù nga mais, We are buying corn grits now because we used up
our stock of corn. hiN-(←) a fond of buying. Himálit kaáyu siyag
prútas, She is fond of buying fruits. hiN-an, hiN-an(←) a selling well.
Himalitan (himalítan, pálit) ang ímung tinda kay bubaratu, Your goods
sell well because they’re cheaper. †

palíta n {1} brick trowel. {2} a flat paddle for removing baked foods
from an oven. v [A3; ab2] {1} smooth with a trowel. Palitáha ang
pinising, Smooth out the finishing cement. {2} use a paddle, hit with a
paddle. -da = palíta, v1.

palitaw, palítaw n sweet made of finely ground sticky rice patties
boiled in water and covered with sugar and shredded coconut. v [A; a]
make palitaw.

palítu_1 n toothpick, matchstick. v [a12] make a toothpick. paN- v [A2]
use a toothpick. Namalítu siya human ug káun, He picked his teeth after
he ate.

palítu_2 see lítu.

paliya, palíya n widely cultivated vine producing an elongated fruit
with wart-like skin, eaten unripe as a vegetable, having a bitter
taste: Momordica charantia.

paliyar v {1} [B6; b4(1)] for an engine to malfunction. Sus, nagpaliyar
na pud ning kagangkagang! Darn! This rattletrap is breaking down again!
{2} [B6] for a plan to fail to come out successfully. Mipaliyar ang
ámung sábut nga mangalígù kay nag-ulan, Our plans to go swimming didn’t
materialize because it rained. {3} [A2; c1] default in payment.
Nakapaliyar kug usa ka instulmin sa pagdaut nákù, I failed to pay one
installment when I got sick. {4} [B36] for one’s health to fail.
Mipaliyar ang íyang láwas tungud sa síging bilar, She kept staying up
nights and it ruined her health. palyádu, palyáwu a {1} malfunctioning.
{2} failing to come out. {3} defaulting in payments. {4} failing in
health. v [B12] break down.

paliyu n flat, pointed stick, usually bamboo, used as a needle to
string tobacco leaves together. v [A; a12] make into a paliyu. (←)
n {1} match stick, toothpick. {2} swab of cotton on a thin stick. v [A;
c] swab s.t. Paliyúhan giyud ang búug arun dì mudalítay, Swab the thick
ear discharge so that it won’t ooze out.

palku n {1} balcony of a theater or a house. {2} small improvised hut
built fronting a stage as a box for viewers. palkupalku n a raised
flooring or stage for a performance.

palma n palm plant or any part thereof. Ang palma simbulu sa kadaúgan,
The palm is a symbol of victory. — ulíba olive palm, a palm of the same
genus as the pitúgu, but somewhat smaller.

palmíra n any of a number of small pinnate-leafed palms, potted or
planted for ornamental purposes.

palmíta n {1} rod for punishment. {2} punishment with a rod. v [A; a]
administer the rod. Kusug mupalmíta ang mga páring Katsílà, The Spanish
priests were fond of punishing the children with a rod.

palmu n a game of marbles in which marbles are made to bounce off a
board. The first player shoots and the second player tries to hit the
first player’s marble or get within a certain distance. If he fails,
the first player throws again, and so forth. v {1} [AC; c] play a game
of palmu. {2} [c6] in basketball, shoot the ball into the basket by
making it bounce off the board first.

palmug = pamulug. see bulug_3.

palpag a disheveled. v [B; c1] be disheveled. Ang íyang buhuk mipalpag
tungud sa hilabihang kauga, Her hair was disheveled because it was so
dry.

palpagu n k.o. herbaceous ground cover with creeping stems also grown
in pots: Pellionia daveauana.

palpal v [A; a1b2] {1} hit s.o. on the open palm. Palpálun ku run nang
ímung kamut, I’m going to slap your palms. {2} knock s.t. with the flat
palm. Si Martiris ang nakapalpal sa búla gíkan kang Plurinsiyu,
Martirez knocked the ball out of Florencio’s hands. {3} [B1] for the
feet to get flat. a flat of feet. -un(→) a somewhat flat-footed.

palpara n a ruffle or frill attached to the neckline or to the sleeves
of a dress. v [A; c] decorate a dress with ruffles or wear a dress
decorated with ruffles.

palsipikar v [A; a12] falsify papers or documents; forge s.o.’s
signature. palsipikádu a forged, counterfeit document, forged
signature. palsipikasiyun n falsification of documents.

palsu a {1} false, incorrect. Palsu ang ímung pangatarúngan, Your
reasons are wrong. {2} failed. Palsu ang ílang tingúhà, Their endeavors
came to naught. v [B2; a12] fail, not come to fruition. Mipalsu
(napalsu) ang ílang plánu, Their plans failed.

palta v {1} [A; a2] fail to do s.t. Walà pa ku makapalta sa ákung
klási, I never missed a class. Napalta ug hatud run ang Tayims, The
Times wasn’t delivered today. {2} [A; a12] break up people fighting.
Gipalta sa pulis ang duha ka batan-un nga nagsinumbagay, The policeman
separated the two youngsters who were engaged in a fist fight.
n {1} failure to attend some function. {2} fail to do s.t. Way palta
ang íyang pagbisíta magabíi, He never failed to visit her in the
evening. {3} amount less in a score, amount lacking in a count. Palta
úna ug tabla na kamu, One more point and you’ll be even. Ang ímung ihap
kúlang. Palta ug duha, You counted wrong. You lack two. kúhà ug —
v [b(1)] be held culpable. Makuháag palta ang mga ginikánan nga
kinamatayun nga mukastígu ug anak, Parents can be held culpable if they
punish their children too severely. hiN- a tending to be absent.

paltik n {1} homemade firearms. {2} fake money. {3} in baseball, foul
ball. {4} s.o. who rides s.t. or enters without a ticket. Daghang
paltik sa ílang pasahíru, There were lots of non-paying passengers.
paN- v [A2] go s.w. without a ticket. Náay ákung amígu sa sini.
Mamaltik ta, I have a friend that works in the theater. Let’s sneak in.

paltus v [B26] fail in one’s plans or strategy. Mipaltus ang íyang
plánung manúlis kay hipanid-an man, His plans for the robbery were
foiled because s.o. had observed him.

palu (not without l) v [B1256] {1} be disappointed and embarrassed due
to the failure of one’s expectations. Napalu siyag hátag ug gása kay
dílì pa diay mau ang adlaw, He was embarrassed when he gave his
birthday gift as it turned out it was not the man’s birthday. {2} for a
top to fail to spin. †

pálu (not without l) n {1} mast. {2} pole. v [a] make a mast, pole, put
a mast on. Káhuy nga palúhun sa bangkà, A piece of wood to make into a
mast of the boat. — Maríya = bitáug. — síbu n name of a game in which
s.o. tries to climb a greased pole to get a prize on top. palupálu
n paddle used in pounding clothes. v [A; b5] beat with a paddle.

palù v [A; ab2] hit, slap in punishment. Paluun ku ang ímung nawung, I
will slap your face. Hipaluan siya sa sinílas, He got slapped with the
slippers. n s.t. used to slap with. hiN- a fond of hitting.

pálù a infatuated (slang). Misugut dáyun kay pálù man siya nákù, She
accepted me right away because she has a crush on me. v [B12; b3] get a
crush on s.o.

paluap v {1} [A; a] follow up one’s orders or request to see if they
have been acted on. Madúgay ang aplikisyun ug way mupaluap, The
application will take forever if no one follows it up. {2} [A; c] in
basketball, knock the ball into the basket after it bounces from the
ring or board. Ug dì masyát ang búla ipaluap dáyun, If the ball doesn’t
get in the first time, knock it in by hitting it again. n act of
knocking a ball which bounces off the ring or board into the basket.

pálud n shingle of palm thatch, usually nípà but also lumbiya, used for
roofing or walling. It is made by wrapping the leaflet around a piece
of bamboo and sewing it. v [A; a] make into, provide with shingles of
this sort. palawran n piece of bamboo around which the shingle is wound
and sewn.

palug_1 n half a buck (slang).

palug_2 n a k.o. fresh-water fish, about 3″ long, blackish and scaly.

palumar n dovecote. v [A1; b6] construct or put up a dovecote s.w.

palung_1 (not without l) = palaw.

palung_2 v {1} [A; b] whittle the end of s.t. to make it taper or
smooth it. Gipalungan níya ang pasamánu sa hagdan, He made the edges of
the bannister rounded. {2} [A; a] cut the ears so that they hang.
Gipalung ang dalunggan sa bábuy ági ug timailhan, They cut the pig’s
ear as a mark. {2a} cut the cockscomb. {3} [A; b] move the end of a
line to make it parallel or directly vertical to s.t. Gipalungan níya
ang linya dapit sa tuu, He moved the line a little to the right. a
having an ear that hangs due to injury. Si Huwan palung, Juan has a
dangling ear. n deformations on the ear. paN-(←) n stempost or
sternpost of small outrigger boats. pinaN-(←) n k.o. small outrigger
boat, the stempost and sternpost of which are exactly alike.

pálung v {1} [A; a] extinguish a fire, turn off a light. Bumbíru ang
nakapálung sa kaláyu, The firemen put out the big fire. Pagnga ra gud
ang sugà, Please turn the light off. {2} [B126] for the vision to
become blurred. Nagkapáwung ang ákung panan-aw sa kagútum, I can hardly
see, I’m so hungry. {3} — ang kasukù v [B126; a1] for anger to die down
or subside. Dílì mapáwung ang ákung kasukù nímug dì ka mangáyug
pasaylu, Nothing can quench my anger unless you apologize. paN-
n instrument for snuffing out candles.

palungpung_1 n cluster or bunch. Misuksuk ang manuk sa palungpung, The
chicken hid itself in the cluster of bushes. Palungpung sa lyábi, A
bunch of keys. v [AB; a12] be in cluster or bunch, bunch s.t.
Mupalungpung ang búnga sa úbas, Grapes come in bunches. Pungpúnga ang
ímung buhuk arun dílì magwarung, Tie up your hair so it won’t get
dishevelled.

palungpung_2 n toddy container made of a bamboo tube, two or three
nodes long, with no handle. v [A; a2] make into a palungpung.

paluphu v {1} [A; b] scrub cooking utensils. {2} = puphu, v1. n s.t.
used to scrub cooking utensils, usually coconut husks. Paluphu ang
ákung ilimpiyu sa dukut sa kaldíru, I’ll clean the rice stuck to the
pot with coconut husks.

palúrus = parúlus.

palus_1 v [A; c1] {1} cause s.t. loosely tied or attached to slip off.
Palusa (ipalus) ang baskit nga gisab-it sa ákung abága, Slip the basket
off my shoulder. {2} slip the foreskin back. Ug mapawus ang yámis hustu
nang tulíun, If the foreskin can be pulled back, it is ready to
circumcise. a a foreskin that can be slipped back.

palus_2 n measurement of a skein of thread one hundred fathoms in
length.

pálus_1 (not without l) n {1} score in a game. {2} advantage in score
given in billiards to a weaker opponent. v {1} [A; c1] score in a game.
Ipálus (palúsa) nang syíti, Make seven points (knock the seven into the
hole). {2} [A; c] give s.o. an advantage in score. Kining tiradáha
ipálus ku nímu, I will give you the score of this shot.

pálus (not without l) v [A; b7c] pay out additional length of line.
Gipalúsan níya ang tugut arun musákag maáyu ang tabánug, He paid out
more line so that the kite would climb higher.

pálut v {1} [A; b] peel skin off. Gipalútan ku na ang mansánas, I
peeled the apple. {2} [B2] for the skin to get chafed. Napálut
(mipálut) ang líug sa kábaw tungud sa yúgu, The yoke chafed the water
buffalo’s neck. {3} [AB12] for land to become bare. Napálut ang
kaumahan kay way ulan, The fields became bare from lack of rain.
{3a} [A; b5] shave the head bald. Akuy mupálut sa ímung úlu ug dì ka
magpatupi ánang ímung bítul, I’ll shave your head bald if you don’t get
rid of your Beatle cut. n peelings. a bare of vegetation. Kanúnay
kitang bahaan kay pálut na ang kabukíran, We have constant floods
because the mountains have been denuded. — ságing banana peel, said
esp. in stating that s.t. is of no more worth than a banana peel.
Ngánung wà man ku kunsultahi. Unsa man ku, pálut ságing? Why was I not
consulted? What am I around here, anyway? Just a piece of furniture?
(→) n {1} sorely chafed area. {2} scar on the head. Nakítà ang palut sa
íyang úlu, You can see the scar on his head. a having a bald spot on
it. Ang sal-ing palut ug úlu, The coleto bird has a bald spot on the
head.

palutput n k.o. fish, general name for slipmouths: Leiognathus spp.

paluy = pakluy.

palwa n {1} petiole of a palm frond, banana leaf, or similarly-shaped
leaves. {2} the whole palm frond, banana leaf. {2a} the leaf (petioles
and leaflets) of the kalamunggay. Duha ka palwang kalamunggay, Two
branches of kalamunggay leaves. — sa kadaúgan n palm of victory. paN-
v [A2; b8] {1} grow fronds. Namalwa (gipamalwáhan) na ang pitsay, The
Chinese cabbage has grown leaves. {2} gather palm fronds. Mamalwa tag
isugnud, We’ll gather palm fronds for fuel. palwáhun a like a frond.
Palwáhun ug ilung, Flatnosed.

palya = paliyar. -du, -wu see paliyar.

palyu n canopy covering the bishop in religious services or
processions.

pam- for forms beginning with pam- see also B- and P-.

pamáda = pumáda.

pamaláyi see bayi.

pamálung {1} see palung. {2} see pálung.

pamául n muscle ache. v [A2; b4] for muscles to be sore.

pambul n violation of fumbling in basketball, consisting of hitting the
legs or the feet of one’s opponent while he is dribbling.

pambut n pump boat, a small motorized boat. v [A; a12] go by pump boat.

pamili — sayis a family-sized packaged products. pil indi — wi feel at
home (humorous—from the English ‘be in the family way’ meaning to be
pregnant). Ayaw lag kaúlaw pil indi pamili wi, Don’t be shy. Just feel
at home.

pamilínu see pilínu.

pamilya n {1} immediate family, group of closely related people who
live together. {2} large group of related people with the same name.
Ang mga Lúpis dátung pamilya sa Pilipínas, The Lopezes are a rich
family in the Philippines. {3} belonging to a class or a family. Kining
isdáa pamilya sa mga pági, This fish is in the ray family. v [B1256]
become a member of a certain family by virtue of marriage. Ayaw lag
kaúlaw kay mapamilya ka na námù, Don’t be shy because you are soon
going to become a member of our family. di- n {1} family man. Lisud sa
usa ka dipamilya kun way kapangwartáhan, It is terrible for a person
with a family if he has no work. {2} man’s undershorts, cut in boxer
style. {3} of a large size, designed for two or more people in a
family. Muskitírung dipamilya, A large-sized mosquito net. {4} s.t.
done together by all the members of a family. Dipamilya manan-aw ug
sini, See the movie with the whole family. v [A13] wear boxer-style
underpants. padri di- n head of a family.

pamilyar a familiar with s.o. or s.t. v [B12] be familiar with or close
to s.t. or s.o. Wà pa ku makapamilyar nímu, I’m not familiar with you
yet.

pamimislun = amimislun.

pamínaw v {1} [A2S; ab2] listen, hear. Mamínaw ta sa nyús, Let’s listen
to the news. {1a} [A23; a12] listen, heed. Dì ka untà maingun ug
namínaw pa ka, If you had listened, that wouldn’t have happened to you.
{2} [A12; a12] feel, think. Pamináwun ku lang ug makaadtu ku, I’ll see
if I can go. {3} [A2S; a12] watch, keep an eye on. Pamináwa ra ang
balay samtang wà ku dinhi, Watch the house while I’m away. {4} [A2S;
b5] look to find out. Pamínaw didtu ug dúna ba silay bakanti, Go find
out if they have any openings. n {1} feeling. Kumusta ang ímung pamínaw
karun? How are you feeling now? {2} observation. Sa ákung pamínaw dílì
siya kasalígan, As far as I have noticed, he is not to be trusted. †

pamingkúngan see bingkung.

pamingwit see bingwit.

paminta = pimyinta.

paminti, pamintì (from bintì_2) v [B46N; b(1)] be angry so that the
whole body is trembling. Mibathay ang ugat sa ákung agtang sa dihang
naminti ku, I was fuming with rage and the veins stood out on my
forehead.

pamintun n spicy red seasoning, sold packaged. v [A; b7] mix pamintun
into food.

pamisliun {1} = amimislun. {2} region of the body around the kidneys.

pamlug = pamulug. see bulug.

pampam n prostitute (slang). v [B5N] become a prostitute. Nagpampam
lang siya kay gustu siyag kwartang sayun, She just became a prostitute
because she wanted easy money. paN- v [A2; b6] patronize a prostitute.
Daghan ang mamampam run kay bag-ung swildu, Lots of people will go to
the prostitutes tonight because it’s payday. -an(→) n {1} whorehouse.
{2} red light district.

pampangginya = pampangginyu, n1.

pampangginyu n {1} a native of Pampanga, a province in Central Luzon.
{2} the language of Pampanga.

pampbut = pambut.

pamplit n pamphlet. v [A; c1] make a pamphlet.

pamúg = pamulug. see bulug.

pamulígi v [A2; b3c5] for s.o. to be hurt and envious because of s.t.
good which happened to s.o. else but did not happen to him. Kinsa guy
dílì mamulígi nga si Turyu ra may gihatágan ug gása? Who won’t be hurt
and envious when Torio was the only one that got a present?
Gipamuligíhan ku níla kay dakù kug grádung nadáwat, They were hurt and
felt envious of me because I got good grades (and they didn’t).

pamúu v {1} [A2] work for s.o. in seasonal work in order to be paid in
kind. Mamúu kug mais ug humay sa Mindanaw karung ting-ani, I’ll go to
Mindanao to help with the harvest to earn some rice and corn. {2} [A2;
b6] labor for wages. n labor, work accomplished. Kinahanglan giyud nga
kaangáyan ang pamúu, Labor should be given a fair recompense. maN-r-(→)
n {1} laborer. {2} employee. †

pamúuk = panúuk. see suuk.

pamyinta = pimyinta.

pán n bread. — amirikánu n bread in a rectangular loaf. — disal n k.o.
hard roll. v [A; a12] make bread. -adíru n baker. v [B156] be a baker.
-adiríya n bakery. v [A1; b6] have a bakery. †

pan- for forms beginning with pan- see also S, T, and D.

paN- (see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol N. see maN- for
illustrations of the tense forms of the active voice.) {1} derivational
verb forming prefix. {1a} forming verbs that refer to plural actions:
action done by one or more agents to several things, or several agents
to one thing, or one (or more) agents to s.t. more than once. Pangáun
na, mga bátà, Come eat, children. Ikay pangúhà sa mga hinayhay, You be
the one to bring the laundry in. Hinúgay na ug pangusì ánang bat-ána,
You’ve been pinching that child for long enough now. {1a1} added to
nouns referring to living beings to form verbs meaning ‘catch
[such-and-such]’. Pamangsi, Go catch flying fish (bangsi). Nanginabúhì
sila sa pagpangisdà, They live by catching fish. {1a2} do [so-and-so]
as an occupation. Dúgay na níyang pangutsíru, He has been a rig driver
(kutsíru) for a long time. Dì ka makakwarta sa pagpangáhuy lang, You
cannot get rich by gathering firewood (káhuy). {1b} forming verbs
referring to an energetic action or happening. Nagpanlugnut ang dalága
nga gikidnap, The girl that was being kidnapped struggled to get free.
Gipaningut ku, I am completely drenched with sweat. Nagpangamay siya
iyáwat makit-an, He waved for all he was worth in hopes that he would
be seen. {1c} added to verbs referring to the action of cleaning,
beautifying, and the like to form verbs meaning ‘[do] to oneself’.
Panipilyu uy! Brush your teeth! Panabun ug maáyu, Soap yourself well.
Ayaw pangìkì, Don’t pick your teeth. {1d} added to nouns referring to
an event or a place to form verbs meaning ‘attend [such-and-such] an
event, go to [such-and-such] a place’. Pamirnis Santu sa inyu, Spend
Good Friday (Birnis Santu) at home. Pangarbun na, Go to the Carbon
market now. Pamista sa ámung lungsud, Come to the fiesta in our town.
{1d1} added to other nouns to form verbs. Ayaw úsà pamána, Pirla, Don’t
get married (lit. take a husband—bána), Perla. Hápit siya mamatay
pagpanganak, She practically died in childbirth. Ginadílì ang
pagpangíhì dinhi, It’s forbidden to urinate here. {1e} added to adj. to
form verbs meaning be [adj.]. Nag-inánay pagpamula ang íyang náwung,
His face gradually started getting red all over. Pagpangínit na sa
íyang bukubuku mibákud siya, When his back was warm, he got up.
{1f} verb forming affix with no ascertainable meaning. Pangáyù didtu
níyag kwarta, Ask for (káyù) money from him. Pananghid úsà ka mulakaw,
Say good-bye (sanghid) before you leave. {2} noun forming affix.
{2a} added to roots which form verbs taking paN-: action of [do]ing.
Way kaláki ang pangisdà dinhi, Fishing is no good here. {2b} instrument
for [do]ing. Panlaba, S.t. to wash with. Panágat, Fishing equipment.
Panápì, Means of obtaining money. {2c} sense of. Panimhut, Sense of
smell.

panà n arrow, spear projected. v {1} [A; ac] shoot an arrow, spear.
Panàa ang dakung isdà, Spear into the huge fish. Ipanà ang udiyung
ngadtu sa irù, Shoot the arrow into the dog. {2} [A; a12] make into an
arrow, spear. igù sa — ni Kupidu v [a3] fall in love (lit. hit with
Cupid’s dart). Si Idyun naigù na sa panà ni Kupidu sígi nag iskulbus,
Edion is in love because he is always escorting s.o. home. igù sa —
v [a3] be drunk from drinking Kulafu, a brand of cheap liquor which
shows a hunter aiming with a bow and arrow on its label (slang).
Nagpiraypiray na siya kay naigù sa panà, He is staggering because he
had one too many shots of Kulafu. (←)_1 v = panà, v1. paN-(←) v [A; a]
hunt with bow and arrow, go spear fishing. Ayawg lubúga kay náay
namánà, Don’t stir the water because s.o. is spear fishing (a humorous
phrase uttered in the presence of s.o. wearing sunglasses—likening him
to a spear fisherman). n hunting with bow and arrow, spear fishing.
pinaN-an(←) n s.t. caught with a bow and arrow or by spear fishing.

pánà_2 a crazed. Uy! Pánà kang tawhána ka, gahúbù ka man, You’re mad!
Why are you going around naked? v [a4] be crazy. Nawung ka man ug
gipánà, sígi ka man lag katáwa, You seem to be crazy, the way you’re
laughing all the time. -in- cuss word to express mild annoyance. Ang
pinánà wà uruy kan-a sa kílat, The devil! Why doesn’t lightning strike
him? Pinánà! Diyut ku mapásù, Darn! I nearly got burned.

panábu = gwayabanu.

panabúgan (from tabug, 2) n puffer fish.

panagána see tagána.

panag-ing = panig-ingun. see ingun_1.

panahun, panáhun n {1} weather. Dì ta mularga kay dautan ang panahun,
We cannot travel because the weather is bad. {2} season, recurring
time. Panahun sa ting-ulan, Rainy season. {3} time s.t. happened or
happens. Sa panahun sa libirasiyun, In the liberation period.
{3a} times of s.t. Mahinumdum ka lang sa Diyus panahun sa kalisud, You
remember God only in times of hardship. Natigúlang ku sa dì pa sa ákung
panáhun, I became an old man before my time. {3b} — dì átù we are not
the masters of our fate (lit. time is not our own). Magpaábut ta sa
pagbuut sa Ginúu, ang panahun dì átù, Let us wait for what God ordains.
We are not the masters of our fate. {4} time to do s.t. Wà na kuy
panahun paghulat nímu, I have no more time to wait for you. {5} chance,
occasion. Daghan ka pang panahun pag-usab, You still have a lot of
chances to reform. v {1} [B1456; b8] come at a certain season.
Magpanahun ang mangga; dílì kanúnay, Mangoes come in season. They
aren’t always available. {2} [A12] have a chance, time to do. Ug
makapanahun ka, pamisíta sa ámù, If you have time, come visit us.

panaksan see takus.

panákut see sákut.

panalamban = pangtamban. see tamban.

panálang see tálang.

panalángin n {1} prayer. Ang ákung panalángin nga makapasar untà ku
walà dungga, God did not answer my prayers to let me pass.
{2} blessings, benediction. Pangayúa ang panalángin sa Diyus, Ask for
God’s blessings. v {1} [A2; c] pray. {2} [A; b] bless.

panama n panama hat, made from select leaves of buri palm. v [A1; b]
wear a panama hat.

panamban = pangtamban. see tamban.

panamílit v [A2; b6] bid farewell. n bidding farewell.

panangítan (from sángit) n general name for biting eels with teeth that
curl inwards, snagging on the prey.

panaptun see saput.

pánas_1 v {1} [A; a] erase, make s.t. unclear. Ang maung hitabù dílì
mapánas sa ákung panumdúman, That incident cannot be erased from my
memory. Panása ang sulat sa blakburd, Erase the writing on the
blackboard. {2} [B2] for s.t. engraved, s.t. raised to become worn down
and unclear. Mupánas kanang salapì ug isígi nímug bagnus, That
fifty-cent piece will get worn down if you keep rubbing it. (→)
a {1} erased, not clear. {2} worn down.

pánas_2 = palanas.

panatiku n religious fanatic.

panatismu n religious fanaticism.

pánaw n {1} travel, journey. {2} regularly scheduled trip. v [A; b5c]
make a travel or journey. Layù kaáyung dápit ang ámung gipánaw
(gipanáwan), We traveled to a place far away. — sa láing kalibútan
[A23] die, pass away into the other world. -an(→) v [A12] go to a place
regularly.

panay n earthenware vessel, usually hemispherical but shallow, used to
hold liquids.

pandak a short and stout. v [B] be short and stout. Mupandak ku ánang
tabása, I’ll look short and stout in that cut.

pandan = pangdan.

pandanggu n name of a folk dance. -in- a like the Fandango.

panday v [AN; a] {1} forge. Walu ka ispáda ang íyang gipanday, He
forged eight swords. {2} build s.t. from wood. Kinsay namanday
(nagpanday) sa inyung balay? Who made your house? {3} circumcise
(colloquial). Ang mga Ilunggu hadluk kunu papanday, They say the
Ilongos are afraid to get circumcised. n {1} blacksmith. {2} carpenter.
— (sa) pandaut, dáut inept in carpentry or blacksmithing. -an(→)
n {1} blacksmith shop. {2} bátà pa ang -an be early in one’s
child-bearing years (lit. the blacksmith shop is still young—humorous).
Sayung sundan ang kamanghúran kay bátà pa ang pandayan, They’ll soon
have another baby after this one because the baby-factory is still
productive. paN- n occupation of blacksmithing or carpentry.

pandíta n muslim preacher. v [B5; a] become a muslim preacher.

pandul = pangdul.

pandung n {1} s.t. held over the head as protection. {2} reflector of a
pressurized kerosene lantern. v {1} [A; c] cover the head, esp. to
protect it. Karun dílì na kinahanglang magpandung sa simbahan, Now it
is no longer necessary to cover the head in church. Pandúngi nang bátà
kay náay ulan, Cover the child’s head because it’s raining. {2} [A12;
a] attach, make into a lantern reflector.

pang- for forms beginning with pang- see also k-, and initial vowel.

panga n {1} forked stick. {2} forked handle of a slingshot. v [A13;
a12] make, attach a forked handle of a slingshot. pang-an n having an
extra finger branching from the side of the hand.

pangadyì v [A2; a] pray. Átung pangadyíun ang Santus nga Rusaryu, Let
us pray the Holy Rosary. n {1} action of praying. {2} period of nine
days in which the novena is said. -un, -un(→) n prayers.

pangag a lacking one or a few teeth. Pangag nga sudlay, A comb with
teeth missing. (←) v [AB12; b] knock out, lose teeth. Makapángag kining
anagúnang gáhì, This hard corn can make you lose your teeth. -un(→)
a lacking teeth.

pangaghu n sigh noisily. v [A; c] sigh with strong aspiration. Nangaghu
siya sa kakápuy, He went ‘whew’ because he was exhausted.

pangágud see kagud.

pangáhas see káhas.

pangalíya v [A2; c] cry out in supplication. Pangaliyáhan ta ang
Makagagáhum básin pa ug pamatíun ta, Let us implore the Almighty to
hear us. n supplication. — panalángin invocation offered at the
beginning of a religious service.

pangalwan = panghalwan.

pangalyúpu, pangalyúpù = pangilyúpù.

pangampis n saddle feathers of roosters.

pangamúyù v [A2; b6] {1} beg, pray for with humility. {2} ponder,
meditate. Gipangamuyúan ku ang pagkamatay sa átung Ginúu, I am
reflecting on our Savior’s death. n humble plea, prayer.

pangan, pángan n k.o. fresh water scavenger fish.

pang-an a expert, experienced and practiced. Pang-an nga abugádu, An
highly experienced lawyer. v [B1256] become outstanding in s.t.
Napang-an ra giyud siya sa nátad sa áwit, He became an outstanding
singer.

*pangandak see andak.

panganduy n great desire, craving. v [A; c1] crave, desire s.t. very
much. Nanganduy ang balbal ug dugù, The vampire craves blood. Ayaw
pangandúya (ipanganduy) ang kinabúhing harúhay, Don’t wish for an easy
life.

panganti v [A; c1] wish for s.t. to happen. Nanganti siyang manimalus
sa nagpatay sa íyang amahan, He cried out for revenge on his father’s
killer. Kamatáyun ray ákung gipanganti, I wish only for death. n wish.
Káwang lang ang tanan mung panganti kun dì ka mulíhuk, It is no use
wishing if you do not act as well. pangantihan n s.t. to make a wish
on. Singsing pangantihan, Wishing ring.

pangánud see ánud.

pangapang, pangápang v [A2S3P; b6] for leaves to become lush and
vigorous in growth. Mipangápang (nangápang) ang mga tanum sa pag-uwan,
The plants grew lots of leaves when it rained. a growing lush and
vigorous leaves.

pangarmin see karmin.

pangáwan = panghalwan.

pangáyam see áyam.

pangáyaw v [A2; c] go to another place to do or get s.t. Túa sila sa
Lilúan mangáyaw ug pananggì, They went to Liloan to help with the corn
harvest. Ipangáyaw nátù ning banig sa Manílà, Let’s sell the mats in
Manila. n persons coming from other places. Nía sila kay mga pangáyaw
sa súgal dinhi, They came here to do some gambling.

pangdan n pandanus, any of the plants of the genus Pandanus, esp.
tectorius. — nga humut, tsína a small species with fragrant leaves,
used to line the bottom of containers for cooking rice, grown as
ornamental: Pandanus odoratissimus.

pangdul v [B12; b8] {1} stub one’s toe. Pagtan-aw sa ímung laktan arun
dílì ka mapangdul, Look where you’re going so you don’t stub your toes.
{2} mispronounce a word in speech due to haste or difficulty in
speaking. Basta magpaspas tag sulti mapangdul usáhay ta, We are bound
to mispronounce once in a while if we speak fast. pangdulpangdul
v [B145] {1} keep stubbing the toes. {2} be hard up financially.
Nagkapangdulpangdul na sila nga wà na ang ílang amahan, They are in bad
financial straits now that their father is dead. a hard up financially.
ka-an n obstacle.

panggà = palanggà.

panggal n {1} k.o. fish or crab trap, made of thin woven bamboo,
rounded in form, with a hole in the top to afford easy entry but no
exit. {2} a woven container shaped like the fish trap to hold chickens.
v {1} [a12] make a panggal. {2} [A12; a12] catch fish or crabs with a
panggal. {3} [c] put in a panggal-shaped basket. paN- v [A2] go fishing
with a panggal trap. n action of fishing with a panggal.

panggalatuk n the language of Pangasinan.

panggasininsi n people from Pangasinan.

panggaw = panggal.

panggi- {1} prefix added to almost all verb bases to form verbs which
refer to an action carried out by more than one person. (See manggi-
for illustrations of the tense forms of the active voice.) This affix
is productive in Leyte and in other regions, but elsewhere almost
unknown. Ayaw mu panggiáway, Don’t fight among yourselves. {2} dead
prefix added to a few roots with no plural meaning. Ayaw panggilábut sa
ílang mga prublíma, Don’t mix into their problems.

panggus n small abrasion. v [B126] be chafed. Napanggus ákung túhud kay
nadam-ag ku, I scraped my knee because I stumbled.

pangguun n ornamental shrub with thin linear leaves, bearing yellow,
bell-shaped flowers: Thevetia peruviana.

panghak a smelling bad as, for example, salted fish in an advanced
stage of fermentation or clothes wet with urine that weren’t rinsed
out. Panghak na ning ginamúsa. Dì na maáyung kan-un, This salted fish
smells awful and is unfit for human consumption. v [B1; a12] be, become
bad-smelling.

panghaw n chimney. v [A; b6] put a chimney s.w.

panghit v {1} [A; b1] take a bite. Gipanghítan ni Bíbi ang ákung kindi,
Baby took a bite of my candy. {2} [A; a2] snap at, bite with force.
Mamanghit nang irúa, That dog snaps.

panghupaw n sigh without much noise. v [A; b3] heave a sigh. Nanghupaw
kug dakù dihang nakit-an ang ákung brilyanti, I heaved a big sigh of
relief when my diamond was found.

pangilába see kilába.

pangílin n fiesta, the annual celebration in honor of a patron saint.
v {1} [A2] attend a fiesta. {2} [A13] hold a fiesta. Ángay silang
magpangílin, They should celebrate the fiesta. mangingílin n people who
go to the fiesta.

pangilyúpù v [A2; b6] ask for, pray with humility. Mangilyúpù ku ug
diyútay nga hinábang sa mayur, I entreated the mayor to grant a little
help. n entreaty, prayer. ma-un a self-effacingly humble.
Mapangilyupúun siyang mihangyù, He asked in an imploring, humble tone.

pangimbig = pangimbid. see kimbid.

pangimbísug v [A2; b(1)] strive, do one’s best. Nangimbísug ku sa
pagpangítà ug trabáhu, I am doing my best to find a job. Sa kapubri
makapangimbísug ku sa ákung pag-iskuyla, I was so poor I had to
struggle to get through school. n action of striving.

panginánu v [A; a2] care about s.t., bother about s.t. Wà lang
manginánu si Isku kun háin ang íyang asáwa, Esko didn’t care about
where his wife was. Ngánung wà ninyu panginanúhag pangítà ang mga
papílis nga nawálà? Why didn’t you bother looking for the papers that
you lost?

pangindáhay n wishful longing, desire. v [A2; b6c1] dream of s.t.
wishfully, long for s.t., asking for it. Kun magbulhut kag turútut
lukay mangindáhay kag sakit, If you blow a horn made of coconut leaves,
you are asking to get sick. Makapangindáhay giyud ang kabus sa mga
mahalung butang, A poor man can’t help dreaming of luxurious things.
ma-un a wishfully desirous.

pangit v [A; a2b2] bite, take a bite. Mipangit kug gamay sa íyang
mansánas, I took a small bite off his apple. Pangita ang tansan sa
butilya, Bite off the bottle cap.

pángit a ugly (slang). Dílì angay magrayna. Pángit ug hitsúra, She’s
not fit to be a queen. She’s ugly. v [B2; a2] be ugly.

pang-it = panghit.

pangítà see kítà.

pangkà v [AC; ac] bump against s.t. Mipangkà aku kanímu, I bumped
against you. Nagkapangkà mi apan wà giyud ku makaila níya, We bumped
against each other, but I don’t know her. a be in dire financial
straits. Pangkà na sila sukad mamatay ílang amahan, They are in bad
straits since their father died. pangkàpangkà, pangkaay v {1} [A] keep
bumping against s.t. {2} [B1] go from place to place to get s.t. one
vitally needs. Nagkapangkàpangkà akug panghulam, I went from place to
place trying to borrow money. {3} [B1] be in dire poverty.
Napangkàpangkà ku kay wà kuy trabáhu, I was in desperate financial
straits because I had no job.

pangkay n child’s word for the female genitalia.

pangkì = pulangkì.

pangkù_1 v [A; c1] knot the hair. Pangkúa (ipangkù) lang ang ímung
buhuk, Tie your hair in a knot. -in- n hair tied in a knot.

pangkù_2 n k.o. large sailing ship used by Muslims. v [A1; ac] ride on
a pangkù.

pangkug n single step, stair. Walu ka pangkug ang ámung hagdánan, Our
stairway has eight steps. v [A; c] lay steps in place.

pangkul n handle of a hand-powered corn or rice mill.

pangli, panglin v [A; ab2] harvest root crops. Panglíhun na nátù ang
gábi, We’ll harvest the taro. n dull knife, bar, or stick, pointed on
one end, used to gather root crops.

pangpang n cliff. v [B2; a12] become a cliff, make a cliff. Mupangpang
(mapangpang) nang lugára ug sigíhag kúhà ang yútà, The place will
become a cliff if they continue taking soil away. -anun a cliff
dwellers. hiN-un(→) n a section of road cut into a side of a steep
slope. Paghínay ug maníhu kay nía ta sa himangpangun, Drive slow
because we are at the place where the road has been cut into the
hillside. ka-an n {1} cliffs. {2} the province Pampanga, its people,
and its language. -un(→) a characterized by having cliffs. Pangpangung
baybáyun, Shore with cliffs going to the sea.

pangsud n offensive odor in the armpits. v [B12] have bad-smelling
armpits.

pangsut {1} = pangsud. {2} smelling like urine. Pangsut kaáyu ka kay dì
ka man manghúgas inig humag pangíhì, You smell because you don’t wash
yourself after you urinate. v [B; b6] have a pangsut smell.

pángu, pangug a stupid, tending to do the wrong thing unthinkingly. Ang
pangug giapil ang baskit paglábay sa basúra, The idiot threw the basket
away with the garbage. v [B2; b6] be somewhat stupid. -un a a stupid
sort.

pangulílang see ulílang.

pangulípas see kulípas.

pangunggu_1 v [A23] try to pull a fast one. Dílì ni diyamanti uy. Lubut
ni sa básu. Nangunggu sad ka dà, This is no diamond. It’s a glass.
You’re trying to pull a fast one on me. Tagdiyis ra ni uy! Nangunggu
sad, What do you mean, it’s only worth ten cents. Are you trying to be
funny?

pangunggu_2, 3 see kalunggu, unggu.

pángus = panggus.

pang-us v [A; a1] chew on a stalk, or stick. Mupang-us kag tubu? Will
you chew sugar cane stalk? Ayaw pang-úsa ang ímung lápis, Don’t chew on
your pencil! -in-an n bagasse, the pulp of sugar cane.

pangusmu see kusmu.

pangut v [A; a1] bite, chew on s.t. Pangtun sa bábuy ang íyang higut,
The pig will chew on the rope.

pangyas = ílas.

pangyáwan n climbing fleshy vine of thickets, the bitter sap of which
has wide medicinal application; used as an aborticide: Tinospora
rumphii. pait pa sa — more bitter than the pangyáwan. Haskang kasabáa,
pait pa sa pangyáwan! What a cussing out. It was harder to take than
the pangyáwan.

panid_1 v [A; c1] arrange, do s.t. in the proper order. Siyay mupanid
sa mga insayklupidiya, She will arrange the encyclopedia in
alphabetical order. Panira ug kúhà, ayawg laktawlaktawa, Take it in
order. Don’t skip around.

panid_2, pánid n {1} panel, sheet. Duha ka pánid playwud, Two panels of
plywood. {2} page. {3} section in a publication. Pánid sa bálak sa
Bisayà, The poetry section in Bisaya. v [A; a12] cut into panels, small
sheets.

pánig n {1} side. Pánig sa wala, On the left side. {2} group faction.
Mitapun siya sa ámung pánid, He joined our group. v [A23P; b(1)] take
s.o.’s side. Ug kasab-an ang anak, mupánig dáyun ang inahan, If they
scold the child, the mother takes his side right away. Panígan ta ang
mga dinaugdáug, Let us take the side of the oppressed.

paníga n a unit of dry measurement containing one-third of a cavan
(eight gantas and one liter). v [a12] measured by paníga’s. Panigáha
lang pagtakus ang humay, Measure the rice by the paníga.

panígù see ígù.

pánil n panel truck or car, mostly the closed type for delivering
goods. v [A1; a12] use, ride in a panel truck or car.

paniN- derivational verb forming prefix forming verbs with a number of
meanings or nouns referring to the action of doing s.t. in this way.
Not a live prefix. Makabungkag sa panimúyù, Can destroy one’s family
life. Ayaw paninágad sa mga tabì, Don’t pay attention to the gossip.

paningud see singud.

pánis see badli pánis.

panit n k.o. tuna.

pánit n {1} skin. {2} peelings. {3} bark. {4} leather, s.t. made of
leather. {5} shell of a shrimp, egg. bukug ug — skin and bones.
v {1} [A; b6] skin, peel s.t. Sayun ang ukban panítan, It is easy to
peel a tangerine. Paníti ang itlug, Take the shell off the egg.
{1a} [B1256; b6] for a barber to take too much hair off. Gipanítan ku
sa barbíru, The barber butchered my hair. {2} beat s.o. in gambling.
Gipanítan ku sa madyung gabíi, I lost in mahjong last night. {3} be
trounced in a fight. (→) mu rag irug panit miserable poor (like a dog
with no fur). Kung wà tay kwarta mu ra tag irug panit, If we don’t have
money, we are miserable. paN- n complexion. Is-is siyag pamánit, She
has smooth, white skin.

pankik_1 n pancake. v [A; a] make, have pancakes.

pankik_2 n pancake make-up. v [A; b1] use pancake make-up.

pans n fans, usually of people in show business.

páns n facial cream (so called from the brand name Pond’s).

pansak v [A; c] {1} drive or stuff s.t. forcibly into s.t. Ipansak ang
sungsung sa bàbà sa butilya, Shove the cork into the mouth of the
bottle. {2} in basketball, put the ball into the ring from above. Basta
taas ipansak lang ang búla, A tall player simply places the ball in the
ring.

pansat n prawn. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] catch prawns.

pansayan n outhouse. v [A1; b6] make a comfort room.

pansi n costume jewelry.

pansil n place with rocks. Didtu kami mamánà sa pansil (kapansílan), We
went spear fishing in the coral reefs. a eroded. v [B] become rocky,
eroded. Nagkapansil na ning yutáa, This land is becoming eroded. -un(→)
a rocky. ka-an n place where there are rocks.

pansing_1 v [A3; b4] punch a hole into s.t. Gipansíngan na mig tíkit sa
lantsa, Our ferry tickets have been punched. n punch to make holes.

pansing_2 n punch in boxing. — bag n punching bag.

pansir n paper punch.

pansis n punches, thrusting blows with a fist.

pansit n dish of míki noodles. — kantun k.o. pansit with crisp noodles.
— luglug pansit in broth. v [A; a] have, make pansit. Magpansit ta
karung panihápun, We’ll have pansit for supper. -an(→), -iríya, -irya
n an eatery specializing in short order Chinese dishes.

pansiyadur n in a sawmill, the person who spots planks to edge.
v [B456] be a spotter.

pansu_1 n punch to make holes. v [A; b6(1)] {1} punch a hole. Pansúhan
ku ning buklit arun matuhúgan ug ríbun, I’ll punch holes in the booklet
so I can tie it with a ribbon. {2} punch one’s time in a Bundy clock.

pansu_2 n k.o. thick unsweetened roll with a crust.

pansud = pangsud.

pansung a for a nose to be flat and turned up at the end. v [B12; a12]
for the nose to flatten. Mapansung ang ilung basta iduut sa bildu, Your
nose gets flattened and turned up if you press it against the window
pane.

pansut_1 = pangsud.

pansut_2 n pantsuit, a set of clothes for women composed of a pair of
long pants and blouse of the same material. v [A1; a] wear, make into a
pantsuit.

pantalan n wharf.

pantalun n pants. v [A13; a] wear, make into long pants. Ang bátà nga
ringbírir sa kasal nagpantalun ug itum, The ring bearer in the wedding
wore long black pants. — dilargu n long pants. — dipuntu n short pants.

pantalya n {1} shade reflector put over a lamp to diffuse light.
{2} facade, cover for s.t. Ang nigusyung bay-ansil pantalya sa íyang
ismagling, His buying and selling business is just a facade for his
smuggling. v [A; b] {1} put a reflector on a lamp. {2} put up a false
front, cover. Dì na mapantalyahan ang kahimtang sa íyang láwas, She
can’t hide it that she’s pregnant any longer. {3} [c] show, display.
Ayaw ipantalya kanang law-ay nga mga ritrátu, Don’t display those dirty
pictures in public.

pantasma n terrifying apparition.

pantat n {1} k.o. fresh water catfish. {2} = pansat.

pantaw n porch which may or may not be roofed and/or walled. Usually in
back of a house. v [A3; b6] make, add a porch. -an n = pantaw.

pantaypantay a more or less equal in ability (slang). Pantaypantay ra
mi sa klási, We have about the same standing in class.

panti_1 n panty, briefs. v [A; b1] wear, make into a panty.

panti_2 n k.o. nylon fishing net for deep water. paN- v [A2; b6] go
fishing with this k.o. net.

pantíhan n manta rays, esp. Mobula eregoodoo-tenkee.

pantilit n pantalettes, drawers edged with lace, sticking out from
under a skirt. v [A; c] wear pantalettes.

panting n palace, castle.

pantiyun n grave consisting of a rectangular concrete box raised above
the ground, or building used as a tomb. v [B; b6] make a tomb.

pants n punch, beverage consisting of a mixture of water and sweet
drinks often with liquor. v [A; a12] make, have punch.

pantsak = pansak.

pantug n urinary bladder of man and animals.

pantuk v [A; c] knock s.t. against s.t. else. Ipantuk ang pul-an sa
simintu arun matáup ang gítung, Bang the handle on the cement so that
the tang will go all the way in.

pantun v [A; a12] {1} discipline, correct s.o. to be good. Pantúna ang
mga bátà nga gagmay pa, Discipline children while they are young.
{2} train s.o. or s.t. to do s.t. Si Huwan ang mupantun sa gamayng
piríku pagsulti, Juan will train the young parrot to talk. {3} form
s.t. in a desired shape. Gipantun nákù ang sanga sa tiradur, I bent the
slingshot at the fork to shape it properly. a amenable to formation.
Pantun ang íyang buhuk. Sayung sudláyun, His hair is not unruly. It is
easy to comb.

pantuplas n pantofles, k.o. slippers for outdoor wear with a solid toe
and hard sole. v [A; b6] wear pantofles.

panuku see tuku.

panukus = panuklus. see tuklus.

panulindaw = tulindaw.

panúlung (from dúlung) n {1} bow of ship. {2} fascia board providing
facing for the rafters underneath the eaves of a roof.

panumbálay see *tungbálay.

panumbaling see tumbáling.

panun n large group of people, birds, planes, or other animals. v [AC;
c1] go in a group. Ngánung nagpanun kamug anhi? Why have you come in a
group? (←) = panun, v.

panúni n = panghúni. see húni.

panurámik n wide movie projection. — bilt n webbed belt with a metal
buckle.

panurúsu see trúsu.

pan-us a for food, wash, or the body to get a rancid smell from having
been wet and not allowed to dry out well. Pan-us ang kík nímu, Your
cake is spoiled with a sour smell. v [B] get spoiled, sour in smell.

panut a bald-headed.

panutsa n penuche, a k.o. fudge made of unrefined sugar, cream, and
nuts. v [A; a] make penuche.

panuylu n a kerchief consisting of a square cloth folded triangularly
and worn over the neck like a collar. v [A; a] use, make into a
panuylu.

panuyù see túyù_2.

panyas = ílas.

panyáwan = pangyáwan.

panyù n handkerchief. v [A; a] use, make into a handkerchief.

panyulítu n small handkerchief. v [A; a] use, make a small
handkerchief.

panyulun n square shawl worn over the shoulder folded into a triangle,
larger than the panuylu. v [A; c] use a panyulun.

pápa_1 n father, term of address to one’s father, father-in-law, or
godfather. v [A13; a12] call s.o. pápa. (→) voc. Short form: pa.

pápa_2 n Pope. Santu — = pápa_2.

pápà v [A; a] child’s talk for eat. Unsay ímung papáun, gà? What are
you going to eat, sweetheart?

pàpà v [A; a] {1} bite s.t. or grab it with the teeth without tearing
or wounding it. Maáyu ning irúa sa pangáyam. Dílì mupàpà sa kuhà, This
is a good dog for hunting because it just takes the game in its mouth
without tearing it. {1a} for a pig to chew on s.t. without eating it.
Pàpáun sa anay ang íyang pasawan ug dì dáyun mapasawan, A pig will chew
at its trough if it is not fed on time. {2} slurp up greedily, eat s.t.
completely. Mipàpà ang kaláyu ug ubay-ubayng balay, The fire consumed
quite a number of houses.

pàpā́ = palàpálà_1.

pápal nunsiyu n Papal Nuncio.

papan n stone slab.

pápang n address of respect for a father or an old man closely related
to one.

pápap n sound of a low-pitched car horn. Wà siya mudayun ug labang kay
nakadungug ug pápap, She did not cross the street because she heard a
horn.

pápas v [A; a] erase, obliterate s.t. Dílì siya mapápas sa ákung
hunàhúnà, I cannot erase her from my mind. Ang ulan sa kadugáyan
makapápas sa mga kinulit sa lapida, With the passage of time the rain
will obliterate the engraving on the tombstone. (→) n eraser. -in-an
n erasure.

pápay n child’s talk for snack. Mukáun ug pápay si Inday parísan ug
pitsi, Baby is going to eat some snacks with her Pepsi.

pap-ay n hand in mahjong where only an ay_4 is needed to get mahjong.
v [A3; a12] have a pap-ay hand.

papha v {1} [A; a] brush away dust or particles from a surface with the
open palm. Papháa ang mumhu, Wipe away the bits of rice. {2} [A; a12]
fire s.o. from a job. Papháun ka sa trabáhu ug dì ka magtárung, You’ll
be fired if you don’t do your work right. — sa mapa v [a12] annihilate
a place. Napapha sa mápa ang Hirusíma, Hiroshima was wiped from the
face of the earth. paN- v [A] brush off dust from oneself. Nagpamapha
siya kay giulmigas íyang karsúnis, He keeps brushing himself off
because he got ants all over his pants.

papil n {1} paper. {2} role. Dakù ang papil nga gidala sa Amirika sa
Asya, America has a big role in Asia. súgù sa — according to the
script. {2a} basà ang — lose one’s good name, reputation. Mabasà átung
papil ug sakpan tang maníkas, You will lose your reputation if you are
caught cheating. {3} paper in a game of pik (hammer, paper, scissors).
— intirmidiya ruled pad paper. v [A; a] make into paper, use paper. —
dibangku paper money. — dihapun, hapun thin, colored tissue paper for
wrapping, kites, lanterns, decorations, and the like. — dilíha
sandpaper. di- a strict, stickler for the rules. Dì ka makadalìdálì
niánang tawhána. Dipapil kaáyu nà, You can’t approach him easily just
like that. He is a stickler for proper rules.

papílis n documents, papers.

papilíta n small piece of paper bearing one’s record of birth issued by
the civil registrar for presentation to the priest during baptism.

papilítus n {1} a dose of powdered medicine wrapped in a piece of
paper. {2} a piece of paper on which an urasiyun has been written.

papkurn n popcorn. v [A; a] make popcorn.

paplin n a k.o. coarse cotton cloth, plain woven, sometimes printed.
v [A13; b(1)] wear a dress made of poplin cloth.

paprika n paprika.

papsikul n popsicle. v [A; a] make a popsicle.

pár n {1} a pair of s.t. of the same kind. Mupalit kug tulu ka pár
tsinílas, I’ll buy three pairs of slippers. {2} bottle of liquor and a
bottle of soft drink which will be mixed together. {3} being of the
same color or cut. Pár silag kurbáta, púlus pula, They have matching
ties, both red. v [C; ac] {1} wear s.t. which is of the same color or
cut as s.o. else’s. Dì ku mupár nímug sinínà, I don’t want to wear a
dress the same style as yours. {2} be a pair, match. Maáyung párun ang
ítik arun musánay, It would be good to make it a pair of ducks so they
can multiply. Kining bága mauy ipár sa ímung sapátus, This is the bag
you should match your shoes with. parpár n a hand in mahjong containing
two pairs. v [A; c1] have two pairs, either one of which may allow one
to go mahjong.

para v [b(1)] result in. Ug unsay ímung parahan, wà kuy lábut, Whatever
happens to you, I won’t be responsible. Unsa may giparahan sa inyung
nigusyu? What happened in the end to your business venture? n chance of
winning or succeeding. May parahan kahà ning átung tím? Think our team
has a chance of winning?

pára_1 {1} — sa, [dat.] for. {1a} for the sake or benefit of. Nagdala
kug isdà pára nímu, I brought some fish for you. {1b} in the direction
of. Mau ba ning barkúha pára sa Manílà? Is this the boat for Manila?
{1c} in the estimation of. Pára nákù paríha ra ang duha, For me, it’s
all the same. {1d} as change for money. Dúna ka bay sinsíyu pára sa
diyis písus? Do you have change for ten pesos? {1e} with an end to.
Gáwig Isu Tayudyan pára sa mas daghang maáni, Use Esso Thiodian for a
better harvest. {2} — [verb] for the purpose of, in order to, so that.
Ímung sigáhan pára malútù dáyun, Turn the heat up so that it will get
done right away. {2a} — [noun referring to action] to be used in
[doing]. Ákung gawíun ning kardburd pára paypay, I will use the
cardboard for a fan. {3} — alas ([so-and-so] many minutes) before
[such-and-such an hour]. Karun bayinti minútus pára alas singku, It is
now twenty minutes to five o’clock. {4} — [noun] all it is is [noun]
and yet ... Pára dalugdug ug unyà matarantǎr ka dáyun, All it is is
thunder and you get wild with fright. {4a} just because [so-and-so] is
the case. Pára gamayng sayup ímung papahawáun dáyun? For such a small
mistake you want to fire him right away? {4b} [such-and-such] a bad
thing is nothing. Maáyu siyag láwas. Pára nawung ray dipirinsiya, She
has a nice body. The only thing wrong with her is her face.

pára_2 v {1} [A; a2b2] hail a vehicle or ask the driver to stop. Pára
bay, Stop, driver! Paráha ang bús kay musakay ku, Stop the bus because
I want to get on. {2} [A123P; c1] discontinue a course of action. Dílì
siya makapára sa íyang pag-inum, He can’t stop his drinking. Paráhun
(ipára) ang átung pinsiyun ug mamatay na aku, If I die my pension will
be cut off. {3} [A23; b5] hesitate doing s.t. (usually in negative
sentences). Dílì mupára ug súkul nang batáa bísag kinsa, That child
doesn’t hesitate to fight back, no matter who it is. Wà kuy gipára
(giparáhan) sa mga kan-unun, There is no food I hesitate to eat. -da_1
n two-wheeled, horse-drawn rig that plies the streets and takes up to
four passengers who sit facing each other. v [A; c] park a vehicle in a
certain place. Ang íyang giparadáhan gidilì, He parked in a no-parking
zone. pamaráda v [A2; b6(1)] operate the paráda. n rig-driving
occupation. paradahan n vehicle terminal. -dista n one who drives a
paráda. v [B156; a12] be in this occupation.

parabir — [verb] before [doing]. Parabir ka mukáun panghunaw úsà,
Before you eat wash your hands first. Parabir siya milákaw (mulakaw)
nagbílin ug kwarta, He left some money before he went out.

parabula n parable. Ang parabula sa parasan, The parable of the
vineyard.

paráda_1 see pára_2.

paráda_2 n parade. v [A1; c] {1} have a parade. {2} display s.t. before
the public. Ayaw iparáda ang gisiun nímung sinínà, Don’t parade around
in your torn shirt.

paráda_3 n bet involving a large amount of money. v [A; c] place a bet
of major size.

paradista see pára_2.

paradur = aparadur.

paragátus n slippers made of braided abaca. v [A; a] wear, make this
sort of slipper.

paragáyu = kalípay, 2.

paragparag a tottering. v [B; c1] walk unsteadily, zigzagging.
Nagparagparag ang hubug nga naglakaw sa karsáda, The drunkard is
staggering down the street.

paragù = pagù.

paragwa n forge, place or furnace where metals which are to be worked
are heated.

paraísu n paradise.

parak_1 n counter for things that come in large lumps. Dakung parak nga
pagkababáyi, A huge hulk of a woman. Mupalit kug bibingkang duha ka
parak ug kalamayng usa ka parak, I will buy two rice cakes and one
piece of sugar candy. a being fat and large. Parak siyag nawung, She
has a fat and round face. Antaw kaáyu ang parak ánang nagbáting siyut,
You can clearly see the bulges in the genital region on that girl
wearing a bathing suit. (←) v [B2S5] get large and round. Mipárak
(napárak) na ang íyang nawung pagkináun ug tambuk, His face got fat and
round because he kept eating fat. -in- v [c1] [do] by the piece.

parak_2 n cop (slang).

parakayda n parachute. v [A; ac] use a parachute.

parakul = palákul.

parakyut = parakayda. -ir n paratrooper. v [B156; a12] be a
paratrooper.

paraláyis v [B12] be, become paralyzed.

paralisar v [B16; c1] paralyze, immobilize activities. Maparalisar ang
trabábu kun madáut ang makina, The work will be paralyzed if the
machine breaks down. Paralisahun (iparalisar) ang nigusyu sa mga
impliyádu nga nagwilga, The business will be paralyzed by the employees
who are on strike. paralisádu a paralyzed.

paralísis n paralysis. v [B126; a4] become a paralytic, paralyzed.
Dúgay na siyang naparalísis, He has been a paralytic for a long time.
Dì na siya makalakaw kay giparalísis, He can’t walk because he is
paralyzed.

paralitiku n paralytic. v [B126; a4] be a paralytic.

párang v [AC; ac] pair off with s.o. in a contest, fight, dance, or
anything else where people oppose one another. Mupárang kag sinumbagay
níya? Do you want to be his opponent in boxing? Nagkapárang giyud ang
duha sa tabiay, The two gossips made a pair. Nindut silang tan-áwun ug
parángun sa kuratsa, They look nice when they dance the curacha
together. Kinsa may ímung ipárang sa ákung manuk? Who are you going to
put up against my protege? ka- n one’s opponent in s.t. or dance
partner. Kinsay ímung kapárang sa ahidris? Who was your opponent in the
game of chess?

parapara n frills, lace trimmings. v [c] put frills or lace trimmings
on a dress.

parapin n paraffin. v [A; b6(1)] apply paraffin to s.t.

parapirnalya n groups of things used for a specific purpose: tools for
a trade, items worn with a uniform. Hitsu ka na sa parapirnalya sa
ar-utísi? Do you have all the items for your ROTC uniform complete?

parapu n paragraph.

páras_1 n grapes, raisins. v [b6] make into a vineyard. Maáyu ning
lugára parásan, This is a good place to plant grapes. ka- n raisin.
-an(←) n vineyard.

páras_2 v [A; c1] split a fish lengthwise to dry it. n dried fish. -in-
= páras_2, n.

parasparas_1 v [A; b5] do s.t. hurriedly, usually with shoddy results.
Kun parasparasan (parasparasun) mug lútù ang sud-an dì mulamì, If you
cook food hurriedly, it won’t taste good.

parasparas_2 a acting uncouthly without taking time to think. v [AB;
b5c] act or do s.t. in a coarse way. Ang bínu ang nakaparasparas
(nakapaparasparas) sa íyang linihukan, Alcohol made him rough in his
behavior. Giparasparas níyag súgù ang mga kargadur, She ordered the
porters around in a rough and rapid way.

parat, párat a salty. v [B; a2] be, become salty. Ayaw paráta ang
sud-an, Don’t make the food too salty. (→) ang — [A12] what makes it
bad, the thing that is wrong. Ang nakaparat nímu kay dílì ka mamínaw ug
tambag, What’s wrong with you is that you don’t listen to advice. hiN-
a fond of eating salty foods or making foods salty.

paraw n a large sailboat with two or more masts, one rigged in the bow
and one in the stern.

paráwu n stiff triangular kerchief worn around the shoulders as an
accessory to the mistísa dress. v [AN; a] wear a paráwu, make into a
paráwu.

paray n {1} truck with compartments used for transporting pigs (so
called from the name of a pig merchant who used these trucks). {2} any
truck used as a bus for passengers. v [A1; a12] ride on a truck, make
into a truck.

paráyig (from daláyig) v [A; b6] asking for affection, usually by
showing affection. Nagparáyig nang batáa maung gasígig hílak, That
child is crying because he is asking for attention. Ákung giparaygan si
Máma arun paadtúun ku sa bayli, I played up to Mother so she would let
me go to the dance. paN- v [A2; c] ask for s.t. in an endearing way.
Mamaráyig aku níyag sapátus, I’ll ask her for shoes in a sweet way.
Dúna kuy ipamaráyig nímu, Pri. Ipasúd ring ákung umágad, I have a
little favor to ask of you. Help my son-in-law get into the company.
paraygun a affectionate, demanding of affection. Paraygun kaáyu ang
sinultihan sa mga Ilunggu, The Ilonggos speak in an affectionate tone
of voice. v [B2] be affectionate, demanding of affection. Maparaygun
ang bátà ug sigíhag kúgus, A child gets to be demanding if you keep
picking him up. parayganay v [C] be affectionate with each other.

pardnir = part.

pardu = paldu.

pardun n pardon granted to a convict. v [a12] give or grant pardon to a
convict.

pári n {1} = kumpadri. (→) term of address to one’s kumpadri. {2} term
of address used by men who are close friends. v [AC; a12] call s.o.
pari, be kumpadri’s.

párì n {1} priest. {2} cop (slang). {3} mi-/muguwà ang — for cuts to
bleed. Way kásung tadlása. Wà muguwà ang párì, That cut was nothing. It
did not bleed. v [B156; a12] be, become a priest. -an(→) n {1} group of
priests. {2} area in the city of Cebu, so-called because during the
Spanish times it was inhabited by the Spanish friars. parìpárì n person
in the game of balaybálay who acts as the go-between between the
opposing teams. -un(→) a being like a priest.

parid = paráda_2. v [A13] go s.w. in droves as if on parade. Nagparid
ang mga táwu nga nanagbù sa artista, The people trooped out to meet the
actor. Nagparid ang mga hulmígas nga nanúguk sa kan-un, The ants
swarmed over the food.

parigla see rigla.

paríha a similar, identical to another. Sigi lang, paríha ra nà, It’s
all right, it makes no difference. (It’s all the same.) Paríha kaáyu
ang nawung sa kalúha, The twins look exactly alike. n pair. Píla ka
paríhang sapátus? How many pairs of shoes? v {1} [B13C; ac] be the
same. Maparíha kahà ang átung grádu? Will our grades come out the same?
Way makaparíha sa ímung kaáyu, No one could equal your goodness.
Nagkaparíha ang ámung sinínà, Our dresses happened to be similar. Ayaw
kug iparíha nímung tabian, Don’t say I’m like you, a gossip. {2} [AC;
ac] pair up with. Akuy muparíha níya sa kuratsa, I will pair off with
her in dancing the curacha. Nagkaparíha sila sa patigáyun, They teamed
up in business. Pariháun nátù ang átung sunuy, Let’s pair off our
cocks. ka- n partner. Culu-, pari- a somewhat similar. Puparíha
(pariparíha) sa kang Risal ang ímung sinudlayan, The way you comb your
hair looks s.t. like Rizal.

paríhas, paríhu = paríha, a, v1.

paril n tall stone or concrete wall enclosing or at the edge of an
area. v [A; b5] {1} put a stone or concrete wall around. {2} k.o. stone
fish corral in tidal flats in which fish are trapped by the receding
tide.

parilya n grill bars for broiling. v [A; a] broil on a grill.

parinhayit n Fahrenheit.

parinti = paryinti.

páris n {1} pair. Duha ka páris nga kapling, Two pairs of cuff links.
{2} the other one of a pair. Háin man ang páris niíning sapátus? Where
is the other shoe of this pair of shoes? {2a} the thing that matches
s.t. else. Kining bága páris sa ákung bistídu, This bag is the one that
matches my dress. {3} partner in doing s.t. {4} spouse. {5} food or
drink served with s.t. else. {6} even in number. Lúnis u páris ba? Odd
or even? v {1} [A3SC; ac] pair off, go with, match. Nagpáris silang
nanglákaw, They were walking in pairs. Maáyu untà ug makaparis kug
kugihan, It would be good to get an industrious girl for a helpmate.
Ákung parísan ang barung Tagálug ug karsúnis itum, I’ll match my barong
with black trousers. {2} [C13; c] eat or drink together with s.t. else.
Mangga ang maáyung ipáris sa budbud, Mangoes go well with rice sticks.
{3} [B; c1] be even in number, [do] by two’s. Ug mupáris mudaug ka.
Akuy pildi, If it comes out even you win and I lose. parispáris v [C;
c1] be in several pairs. Parisparísun (iparispáris) sa Ginúu ang mga
maáyug batásan, The Lord will pair good people up with each other.
parisparis n a game of cards, usually of four players, each dealt five
cards. The players draw and discard in turn with the object of getting
three pairs (where the last card drawn making the third pair is not
discarded). -an(→) n pair. ka- n partner. -un(→) a things that fit
together. Parisun kaáyu silang duha, They are a good pair.

parisíyu n pharisee (Biblical).

parka n {1} wallings of a small boat made of planking or sawali
(amákan) waterproofed with tar. {2} wooden siding added to the sides of
a boat to lend more freeboard. v [A; b6] make or put walling on a small
boat.

parki n park.

parking v [A; c] park vehicles. Dílì mahímung iparking ang ímung kutsi
dinhi, You may not park your car here. nu — n notice of no parking.
-an(→) n parking place.

parliyamint, parliyamintu n parliament.

parlur n {1} beauty parlor. {2} refreshment parlor. v [A1; b6]
construct, make a beauty or refreshment parlor.

parmasya n drugstore. v [A1; b6] make a drugstore. parmasyutika =
parmasyutiku (female). parmasyutiku n pharmacist. v [B156; a12] be a
pharmacist.

parnásu n Parnassus, the mountain sacred to the Muses (literary).
Niadtung higayúna wà pa siya mag-ampù sa Parnásu, At that time he had
not begun writing poetry (worship at Parnassus).

parsíla n parcel of land. v [A; a12] divide land into parcels.

parsir = pursir.

parsiyar v [B] for eyesight to fail or be impaired. Na, ug muparsiyar
ug súgud ang átung mata, lisud na ta makabasa, When your eyesight
starts to get impaired, you can hardly read. parsiyádu a for the vision
to be weak.

part n term of address among men of the same age, usually among
friends. Mangharána ta unyang gabíi part, Let’s go serenading tonight,
partner.

partayim a part-time work, working part-time. v [A; b] work part-time.
Nagpartayim kug tyútur samtang nagmaistra, I worked part-time tutoring
while I was teaching. -ir n one who works part-time. v [B1456] work as
a part-timer.

parti_1 n party, a social gathering. v [A; b] have, throw a party.
Ámung gipartíhan ang bag-ung nanggraduwar, We held a party for the new
graduates. — layin n party line of a telephone. v {1} [C; c] be on the
same party line. {2} [A12] get as one’s party line. partiparti
n parties collectively, esp. dance parties. Túa siya kanúnay ug ása
tung partiparti, Wherever there is a party you’ll be sure to see him.
Daghang partiparti sa Disimbri, There are lots of parties in December.

parti_2 n {1} share of s.t. Tagáan ta kag usa ka parti, I’ll give you
one share. Kwarta parti, A quarter part. {2} part assigned to s.o. in a
play, program, and similar activity. Unsay ímung parti sa dráma? What’s
your part in the drama? {3} a specific part of a certain location or
place. Háin kang parti sa Mindanaw puyù? In what part of Mindanao do
you live? {4} concerning about. Nangutána siya parti sa nahitabù, He
asked about what happened. Parti sa ímung anak ayaw kabaláka, Don’t
worry about your son. v [A; c] {1} divide s.t. {2} relay a message;
report. Iparti ni nátù dáyun, Let us report this immediately. -da_1
n {1} message, report. -da dibawtismu baptismal certificate. {2} share,
part of s.t. divided. v = parti, v.

partída_1 see parti_2.

partída_2 (from parti_2) n {1} s.w., in a certain part of some place.
Adtu ku maninda sa partída sa Mindanaw, I sell things in some places in
Mindanao. {2} place one goes outside of the home on business.
{3} amount paid for goods bought wholesale or in big quantities.
v {1} [A; ac] migrate, travel. Gipartída námù ang mga dagkung syudad sa
Urúpa, We visited the big cities of Europe. {2} [AN; c] peddle. Túa
siya sa kabukíran nagpartídag bulad, She is in the mountains peddling
dried fish. {3} [AN; a] buy in great quantities. Nakapartída kug barátu
kaáyung isdà, I managed to buy a big quantity of fish cheaply. {3a} [c]
sell wholesale. Íyang ipartída pagbaligyà kay sámuk ug minudúhun, He
will just sell it wholesale because it is too much trouble to sell it
in small quantities.

partída_3 n {1} advantage given in a game. Dakù ang partída nga ílang
gihátag sa kaatbang, They gave their opponents a big advantage. {2} in
billiards or games of pool where dice are thrown to give the player
part of the score, the points the player must make to win in addition
to the number rolled on the dice. {2a} have made the requisite number
of points in billiards. Makakuhir lang kug dus puntus, partída na ku,
If I can get two points, I win. Dus puntus na lay ákung partída, I need
only two points to win this game. v {1} [A; ac] give an advantage to
the opponent in games, contests, etc. Kun partidáhun ku ning ákung
manuk, musúkul ka? If I have my cock give you an advantage, would you
bet against it? {2} [A; a12] need [so-and-so] many more points to win
in billiards.

partidista see partídu_1.

partídu_1 n political party. — Libiral Liberal Party. — Nasyunalista
Nacionalista Party. partidista n one engaged in partisan politics.
v [B12] get engaged in partisan politics.

partídu_2 n person related to another, usually said only of blood ties.
v [B126C; b] be related by blood, said occasionally of relations by
affinity. Mapartídu na ta inigkaminyù ninyung manang, We will be
relatives if you marry my sister. ka- n person with whom one is related
by blood. paN- v [A2C12; b6] claim, try to establish kinship with s.o.
Ang kandidátu namartídu nákù, The candidate claims that I’m his
relative. -s = partídu (plural).

partikular n {1} peculiarity, characteristic act. Partikular sa manuk
nga mubátug matag gabíi, That’s the way chickens are. They roost in the
evening. {2} specific, the very one. Ngánung kanà mang partikular nga
bran sa rilu ang gustu nímu? Why do you like just that particular brand
of watch? Ang partikular nga táwu mauy tagáan giyud sa sulat, The
letter should be given to the man himself. {3} ordinary in looks or
ways. Milyunaryu, apan mu ra lag táwung partikular nga musúruy, He’s a
millionaire, but you’d think he was an ordinary person when he goes
out. {3a} mga — unimportant matters, nothing of special concern. A, mga
partikular lang tung ámung gipanaghisgútan, Oh, all we talked about
were trivial things. {4} place outside of the home one goes to on
business. Ang mga nigusyanting bulanti náa pirmi sa partikular,
Traveling salesmen are always away from home on business. a exacting,
fussy about things. Partikular kaáyu ku sa ákung sapátus, I’m very
particular about my shoes. v {1} [a3] become a trait. {2} [A; c1] for
s.o. who is expected to be in uniform to wear civilian clothes. Dì
magpartikular ang sundáwu sa patrulya, A soldier does not wear civilian
clothes on patrol.

partíra n midwife who hasn’t undergone any formal training in assisting
in childbirth. v {1} [B16] become a partíra. {2} [c1] hire a partíra.
Wà may kásu ug partiráhun (ipartíra) ug maáyu lang ang pag-anak, I
don’t mind having a baby with an untrained midwife if it’s a normal
delivery.

partisipasiyun n {1} participation in a business. {2} the amount one
has put into a business with other people. Dakù ang ákung
partisipasiyun sa susyu, I have a large share in the partnership.

partisiyun n partition, room divider. v [A; a] {1} partition a room.
{2} partition land. Partisiyunun ta ang yútà samtang búhì pa si Tátay,
We’ll partition the land while Father is still alive.

parts = part.

párù v [A; a] cook rice or corn grits dry. -in- n rice or corn grits
cooked dry. parùpárù v [A; c1] cook a small amount of rice, enough for
a couple of people. Magparùpárù ku ug aku rang usa sa báy, I just cook
a little rice when I’m alone in the house. n cooking of a small amount
of rice.

paruk v {1} [AC; c] bang the head against s.t. Akuy muparuk nímu sa
bungbung, I’ll bang your head against the wall. {2} [B16; a4] be sleepy
with the head nodding. Giparuk kung namínaw sa diskursu, I started to
nod listening to the speech.

parúku, parukya n parish. v [B1256; a12] be a parish. parukyánu
n {1} parishioner. {2} a person who buys regularly from s.o. {3} a
person who frequents a place regularly. v {1} [B1256] be a parishioner.
{2} [AB126C; a2] be a regular customer. Pahangyúa ku básin pag
maparukyánu ku ninyu madúgay, Let me bargain. Maybe I’ll become your
steady customer. {3} [B126] become one who frequents a place on a
regular basis. Nagparukyánu ku sa tubaan, I started to hang around the
toddy stand.

parul_1 n hanging lantern. — dikumbáti n barn lantern. v [A; b6] use,
have a lantern. -íru n one whose job is to light the lanterns in the
street.

parul_2 n parole. v [A; a12] be a prisoner out on parole. -i(←)
n parolee. v [B1256] be a parolee.

parúla n lighthouse. v [b6] {1} put up a lighthouse. {2} glass jar of
palm toddy (slang). Daghan kaáyung parúla sa imnanan, There are lots of
jars of palm toddy in the stand. parulíru n lighthouse keeper. v [B156;
b6] be a lighthouse keeper.

parulíru {1} see parul_1. {2} see parúla.

parúlus n long, heavy horizontal beam that supports the framework of a
bridge, bottom of a building, or a roof. v [A; ac] make or put
horizontal supporting beams.

parúni v [A; a] cut a ripe jackfruit into pieces. Nakaparúni siyag walu
sa usa ka búnga, Each ripe jackfruit she cut into eight pieces.

parús = parúlus.

párut v {1} [B12; b5] be utterly defeated. Sa pulitika mapárut giyud
ang way sápì, In politics the person who has no money is sure to get
defeated completely. {2} go bankrupt. Ang íyang pagsúgal nakapárut
(nakapapárut) sa íyang nigusyu, His business went bankrupt because of
his gambling. (→) n a hand in mahjong or cards that lacks a card or has
one card too many and thus cannot win. v [B12] get in the parut
situation. ka- n defeat suffered by s.o. ka-an n utter defeat. Dawáta
ang ímung kaparútan, Accept your utter defeat.

parutput = palutput.

páruy v [A; a12] call s.o. in a sing-song manner. Ábi nákug nagkanta
siya, íya diay nga gipáruy ang íyang anak, I thought she was singing.
She was just calling her son.

paruyparuy v [B; c1] be unsteady, tottering on one’s feet.
Nagparuyparuy ang hubug, The drunk is tottering as he is walking.
a staggering, tottering.

paryinti n {1} relative, related by blood or by affinity. {2} as good
as, not much different from. Paryinti na man nas pangáyù ang ímung
hinangyuan, The way you haggle over the price you might as well ask for
it for nothing. {3} people having similar defects or sicknesses
(humorous colloquial). Mikúyug siyag pakilimus sa íyang paryinti nga
bakul sab, He went begging together with his fellow-cripple. v [A12NC]
be related by blood or by affinity. kaparyintíhan n group of relatives.

pas, pás_1 v [A; c] in drinking sprees where only one glass is used,
let one’s turn to drink pass onto the next person. Mupás sà ku íning
tagáya kay kasukaun ku, I will pass this drink onto the next person
because I feel like vomiting.

pás_2 n pass giving free access to places where tickets are required.
v [A1] get a pass.

pás_3 = pastíkum.

pás_4 v [A; c] hand in. Ipás na ang tispípar, Pass in your test papers
now.

pasa_1 n abdominal binder for an infant, the purpose of which is to
press down the navel, or an abdominal binder put around a mother when
she has just given birth. v [A; b] put on a binder on s.o. pasahan =
pasa, n.

pasa_2 v [A; b] press clothes which have not been laundered. Pasahan ku
ang sinínang ákung gisul-ub ganína, I’ll iron up the shirt I had on a
while ago. pasahánan n clothes to be pressed.

pása v [A; c] pass s.t. to s.o. Abtik siyang mipása sa búla, He passed
the ball quickly. Palíhug ipása ang kan-un, Please pass the rice.
pasapása v [A; c] pass s.t. around from one to the other. Gipasapása sa
mga mangangagaw ang pitákang ílang sinabnit, The purse snatchers passed
the bag they had snatched on to their comrades. — banda = pasburd.
pasapasa v [B16; c1] be scattered around in disarray. Napasapasa ang
mga anak sukad mangaílu, The children were scattered after they were
orphaned.

pásad v [AB6; c] scatter s.t. all over a place; be scattered. Siyay
nagpásad ug mais álang sa manuk, He scattered corn for the chickens.
Nagpásad ang mga butang sa kwartu, The things are scattered all over
the room.

pasádu see pasar_1.

pasadur n sanitary napkin. Labhi ang pasadur, Wash out the sanitary
napkin. v [AN; a1] wear, make into a sanitary napkin.

paságad see *ságad_2.

pasáhi_1 n fare on public transportation. v [A; c] pay one’s fare.

pasáhi_2 n {1} introduction, prelude to a musical rendition. {2} hints
and words said before one gets around to his real purpose. v [A; b]
{1} play or sing the opening part of a musical composition. {2} give
indirect words and hints by way of introducing the real purpose. Pasáhi
úsà. Ayawg diritsug abla, Make some opening hints first. Don’t propose
right off.

pasahíra n {1} a woman fish peddler. {2} female passenger. paN- v [A2]
peddle fish. Si Tikay namasahíra ug isdà sa mga balay, Tikay is
peddling fresh fish from house to house.

pasahíru n passenger. v [A12B156; b8] get passengers, be a passenger.
Nakapasahíru kug wà mubáyad, I got a passenger who did not pay. paN-
v [A2; c] drive a passenger vehicle to pick up passengers. Mamasahíru
ku káda human sa klási, I drive a passenger jeep after classes.
pasahiruan n passenger vehicle. v [a12] make into a passenger vehicle.
di- n a passenger vehicle, boat. Ayaw pagsakay ug dipasahíru kay
daghang hapitan, Don’t take a passenger vehicle because it makes many
stops. v [A; a12] convert a vehicle into a passenger vehicle.

pasakalyi, pasakayli v [B; b6(1)] {1} do the introduction to a musical
number. {2} give a long prologue before getting around to one’s real
subject. {3} [A; b] pass the time away by strolling around. Mipasakalyi
ku sa plása, I was passing the time strolling in the park.
n {1} introduction to a musical number. Mauy nindut ang pasakayli kay
sa kanta, The introductory portion was nicer than the song itself.
{2} round-about speech in preparation for saying s.t. else difficult.
Hinúgay nang pasakalyi mu. Sulti na, That’s enough of your beating
around the bush. What do you want?

pasakpasak v {1} [A; c1] spatter, splatter s.t. soft or liquid. Ayawg
pasakpasaka (ipasakpasak) ang pintal sa sawug, Don’t let the paint
spatter on the floor. {2} [A1] make a pattering sound. Nagpasakpasak
ang uwan sa atup, The rain makes a pattering sound on the roof.
n {1} spatter, splatter. {2} pattering sound.

pasamánu, pasamánus n {1} handrail of a staircase. {2} window sill.
v [A1; a] make, put a handrail.

pásan = palásan.

pas-an v {1} [A; a1] carry s.t. over the shoulders. Nagpas-an siya ug
ripli, He was carrying a rifle over his shoulder. {2} [A; a12] assume
the burden of s.t. Pas-ánun ku ang tanang buluhatun sa balay, I will
shoulder all the housework. {3} [A13; a12] bear, endure a burden or
problem. Tigúlang kansang kurayut nga láwas nagpas-an sa suliran sa
kinabúhì, An old man, whose shrunken body bore the problems of life.
-l-un, -unun n s.t. to be carried, burden to be shouldered by s.o.
mag-l-, mag-r- n s.o. who carries things on his shoulders or shoulders
burdens. n action of carrying or amount carried on the shoulders.
Kining kantidára madá sa usa ka pas-an, You can carry this amount on
your shoulders in one trip.

pasángil see *sángil.

pasanib see *sanib.

pasápul v [A; b(1)] take or assume the responsibility for doing s.t.
Mupasápul kug hímug kík basta dúnay katábang, I will take the
responsibility for making the cake as long as s.o. helps me.
n assurance of getting s.t. done. Sa mga pasápul nga gisáad walay
natúman, He gave lots of assurances but accomplished nothing.

pasapurti n {1} passport. {2} s.t. that leads to s.t. Sakit nga mauy
íyang pasapurti ngadtu sa lubngánan, An illness that leads to the
grave.

pasar_1 v {1} [A2; a2b2] pass an exam, screening, or the like. Mipasar
siya sa iksámin sa sirbisyu sibil, He passed the Civil Service test.
{2} [A2] pass a certain time, deadline. Nakapasar na nang tagal sa
pagbáyad, The term to pay me has expired. {2a} [B2] for canned or
packaged foods to spoil after being kept too long. Nagkapasar na ning
tablitása kay nalánay na, These tablets must be expired because they
have already melted. {3} [B2] go out of style or fashion, be not with
the times. Napasar na ang tag-as nga múda sa palda, The long skirt is
out of fashion. {4} go through, go by s.t. (used in set phrases).
{4a} — ang gútum, káun v [A2; b4] fail to eat at the proper time and
lose one’s desire to eat. Makapasar gánì ang ákung gútum dì na ku
gustung mukáun, If I fail to eat during meal times, I lose my appetite.
{4b} — ang gána v [B2] lose one’s fondness for s.t. Mipasar (napasar)
na ang ákung gána sa mga kalingáwan, I have lost my interest for
amusements. {4c} — sa kamut v [A2; c6] for s.t. to pass through one’s
hands. Mipasar nang bayhána sa ákung kamut únà maminyù, That girl
passed through my hands before she got married. Ipasar ang papílis sa
ákung kamut únà idusù, The papers go through my hands before they are
passed forward. — [noun, pronoun] [so-and-so] has a passing mark. Pasar
ka sa sibil sirbis tist, You passed the Civil Service test. pasádu
a {1} successful in an exam. Pasádu tanan kay may líkids, Everybody
passed because there was a leakage (the test questions were known to
the examinees). {2} past a certain time. Pasádu alas dúsi na, It’s past
twelve o’clock now. {3} canned foods, packaged products which are so
old that they have become spoiled. v {1} [B126] be successful in an
examination. {2} [B6; c16] be past a certain hour. {3} [B] for canned
foods or other packaged products to spoil from being too old. Mupasádu
(mapasádu) na gánì ang sardínas, ilábay na lang, If the can of sardines
is already spoiled, throw it away.

pasar_2 = pasa_2.

pásas n raisins. v [b6] put, mix with raisins.

pasatyimpu n {1} pastime. {2} girl with whom one is just passing time
without being serious. Pasatyimpu lang nang bayhána nákù. Dì nákù
pangasaw-un, That girl is just for the pleasure of the moment. I have
no intentions of marrying her. v [A; c6] {1} pass, spend one’s time
doing s.t. Nagpasatyimpu lang kug bása ug nubíla, My pastime is reading
novels. {2} have a temporary affair with a girl.

pásaw v [A; b] feed food mixed with water to domestic animals. Aku ray
mipásaw sa bábuy, I’ll feed the pigs. (→) n feed for domestic animals
mixed with water. -an(→) n trough for feeding the animals.

pasáyan n shrimp. paN- v [A2; b6] gather, catch shrimp. n occupation of
catching shrimp. pasayanpasáyan n fishing lure which is formed like a
shrimp.

pasaylu see saylu.

pasburd n shot in basketball made by bouncing the ball off the board
and into the ring. v [A2; c6] make a goal in this way.

pasgung n trap for land crabs and mice made out of a node of bamboo
having an opening with a trap door at one end. v [A; a] catch mice or
land crab with this k.o. trap. paN- v [A2; c] catch land crabs or rats
with a pasgung. -in-an n s.t. caught with a pasgung trap.

pasì n rice in the husk or corn grains with a shell. -un a having
unhusked rice or corn grains mixed in it. ti- see tipasì.

pasiatab see átab_1.

pasig n shoals, a shallow place in a body of water. v [B2; a] for a
water-covered area to become shallow. Mupasig (mapasig) ang bukána sa
subà ug kusug ang bahà, The mouth of the river will become shallow if
there is heavy flooding.

pasignunut see nunut.

pasíkat see síkat.

pásil n place near the seashore which becomes rocky due to the action
of the sea. v [B12; a12] get to be a rocky shore.

pasilyu n corridor, covered passageway. v [b6] put a passageway,
corridor.

pasinsiya n patience. v [A; b6] be patient with s.o. for doing s.t.
Gipasinsiyáhan ku lang ang idlut níyang púlung, I just endured his
painful words patiently. pasinsiyúsa a having lots of patience
(female). v [B12] get to be patient and long-suffering. pasinsiyúsu =
pasinsiyúsa (male).

pasinti = pasyinti.

pasipála v [A; b6] {1} mistreat, treat s.t. roughly, abusively. Ayaw
pasipad-i ang mwiblis, Don’t mistreat the furniture. {2} abuse a woman.
{3} — ug sulti mistreat s.o. by saying s.t. inconsiderate and painful
to him in a light, unthinking way. Ngánung nagpasipála ka mag
pamasángil nga dì ka man sigúru? Why do you accuse me unthinkingly if
you are not sure? 4 dare do s.t. dangerous. Dì ku mupasipála ug labang
ánang kusug nga bahà, I don’t dare cross the river because it is so
high. mapasipaláhun, mapasipad-ánun n {1} abusive, maltreating.
{2} careless with things that are dangerous.

Pasipiku n Pacific Ocean.

pásis_1 = pás_1.

pásis_2 explanation indicating surrender, accompanied by raising the
hands. Pásis. Dì na ku, I give up. I quit. v {1} [A2] raise the hands
in surrender or as in a stick-up. Ayaw ug pusila kun mupásis na sila,
Don’t shoot if they raise their hands. {2} [B126C; c16] settle personal
differences. Makigpásis ku sa ákung kuntra, I’d like to settle my
quarrel with my enemy. †

pasistur n table with a top that flips for storage. v [A12; a] make or
obtain such a table.

pasitib n positive result of a medical test.

pasiugda see ugda.

pasiuna see úna.

pasiyal v [ANC12; b6(1)] take a leisurely stroll or ride s.w. Ug
mupasiyal (mamasiyal) ka diri, hapit sa báy, If you take a stroll this
way, drop in the house.

pasiyu, pasíyu v [A; c] {1} take a leisurely walk, stroll, ride.
Mupasíyu ku sa parki mahápun, I take a stroll in the park in the
afternoon. Ipasíyu nang bátà arun mainitan, Take the child for a stroll
to get some sun. {2} drop by a place to see s.o. Pasyúhan ku siya matag
Duminggu, I drop by her place every Sunday. pasyuhan v [A13] take a
stroll habitually in a certain place. Magpasyuhan ku ngadtus íla ug
maduminggu, I usually take a stroll to their place on Sundays.

*pasiyu ba — it is highly impossible that [such-and-such] happen (said
as if addressing s.o. named Pacio). ‘Mipasar ka sa iksámin,
Ting?’—‘Pasar ba, Pasiyu!’ ‘Did you pass the exams, Ting?’—‘Hell, no!’
‘Musugut ka ba?’—‘Musugut ba, Pasiyu!’ ‘Do you agree to do it?’—‘Are
you kidding? (No!)’

pasiyun n {1} Passion of Jesus Christ. {2} hymns relating the Passion
of Jesus Christ sung during the Holy Week. v [A; b6(1)] sing the
Passion of Jesus Christ.

paskan exclamation at the high degree s.t. is. Paskang iníta run! How
hot it is today! — nu it would be terrible. Paskan, nu, ug mahibalu ánà
ang Prisidinti! What if the President should come to know about it!

paskin n {1} notice or announcement displayed publicly. {2} s.t. bad
about a person written anonymously in a public place or an anonymous
poison-pen letter. v [A; c] {1} put up as a public announcement.
Nagpaskin si Lútir sa pultahan sa simbahan, Luther posted his theses on
the church door. {2} post an announcement ruining s.o.’s reputation.
Kinsay nagpaskin nga si Pidru pisut? Who wrote on the wall that Pedro
is uncircumcised? {2a} send an anonymous poison-pen letter. Gipaskínan
ang ginikánan nga kidnápun ang ílang anak, The parents received an
anonymous letter that their baby would be kidnapped. {3} [A; a12] play
a game in which the letters of the name of a man and a woman are
compared to find out if they will fall in love, be married, and the
like.

Pasku n {1} Christmas season, day, or Easter. Maáyung Pasku, Merry
Christmas! — sa kalípay n Christmas. — sa kasákit n Lenten season. — sa
labadúra Feast of the Passover. — sa pagkabanhaw Easter. v {1} [A; b2]
spend Christmas day. Nagpasku ang mga sundálu sulud sa ílang pakshul,
The soldiers spent their Christmas in their foxholes. {2} [B3; b8] for
it to be Christmas. Mupasku na lang wà pa kuy kwarta, It will be
Christmas and I still have no money. {3} [b8] get a Christmas present
from s.o. paN- v [A2; c] {1} spend or celebrate Christmas. Didtu ku
mamasku sa prisuhan, I spent my Christmas in jail. {2} go caroling.
Mamasku ta sa kumbintu, Let’s go caroling at the rectory. pinaskúhan
n Christmas gift. v [A12] get a Christmas present. †

paskuwas n poinsettia.

paslag v [A; ab2] {1} drive s.t. away by poking or throwing s.t. at it.
Akuy mupaslag ug batu sa mga bábuy nga misúd sa gít, I’ll drive the
pigs that entered the gate away by throwing rocks at them. {2} throw a
lot of things at s.t. Gipaslag ang balay gabíi, S.o. threw rocks at the
house last night.

paslak v [A; bc] stuff s.t. into s.t. with force, not carefully.
Pasláki ang lungag arun way mabulásut, Stuff s.t. into the hole so
nobody will fall into it. Gipaslak lang sa nars ang pítu sa labatíba
ngadtu sa ákung lubut, The nurse just shoved the enema nozzle into my
behind.

paslang v [A; a12] exterminate, defeat a great number of people or
things. Ang usa ka iring dì makapaslang sa mga ilagà dinhing baláya,
One cat is not enough to get rid of the rats in this house. Gipaslang
níla ang mga sagbut sa uma, They got rid of all of the weeds in the
field.

paslayit = plasláyit.

pasluk = pasuk.

paslut v [B26; b8] chafe the skin from scalding or friction. Ug mubutu
ang lutu, mupaslut ang pánit, If the blister bursts, the skin will come
off. Ang ínit kaáyung kapi makapaslut (makapapaslut) sa dílà, Hot
coffee will blister your tongue. Mapaslutan ang ímung kamut ug magsígi
kag gúna, Your hands will get chafed if you keep on weeding.

pasmu n ailments characterized by a feeling of weakness and dizziness,
or in debility in a single limb, or by swollen veins, from two causes:
{1} failing to eat at one’s meal time, eating s.t. at the wrong time.
{2} exposing the body to water after having done heavy work. v [B126;
a12] get pasmu. Napasmu ang ugat sa íyang tiil kay nanghimásà human
magbaskit, He got swollen veins in his feet because he washed them
after playing basketball. Makapasmu usáhay ang pagpuása, Sometimes
fasting can cause pasmu. — ang, sa bítuk v [B126] starve (lit. make the
roundworms get pasmu from not eating). Napasmu ákung bítuk sa kagamay
adtung rasyúna, We got so little to eat my roundworms began to starve.
— sa pasálig v [A123P; a12] frustrate s.o. through promises (humorous).
Napasmu siya sa pasálig sa íyang trátu, She became frustrated with her
boy friend’s promises. — sa gútum = pasmu, n, v1. — sa kusug = pasmu,
v2. hiN- v [AN; b] treat pasmu. Gihimasmu nákù ang itlug nga lab-as, I
treated my pasmu with fresh eggs. n s.t. to treat pasmu.

paspas_1 a fast in motion or doing s.t. Paspas siyang mukáun, He eats
fast. Paspas siyang mudrayib ug awtu, He drives fast. Paspas siyang
musulti, He speaks rapidly. v [AB2; b5] do s.t. hurriedly, get to be
fast. Mupaspas kug káun kay tayim na, I’ll eat hurriedly because it is
already late. Mupaspas (mapaspas) ang ákung pulsu ug kulbaan ku, My
pulse beats fast if I’m scared. Paspásig (paspásag) bugsay, Row fast.
-in-an n {1} anything gotten or obtained illegally. Kanang kwartang
gigastu sa tagakustum pinaspásan nà, The customs examiner is spending
ill-gotten money. {2} magic food left s.w. (e.g. fish in a fish trap)
by an unglù which will cause the eater to become an unglù or develop
some sort of ailment, usually losing his teeth.

paspas_2 n {1} duster. {2} stick with strips of paper at the end to
chase away flies. v [A; b] {1} dust off s.t. with a duster. Paspási ang
bangkù, Dust off the benches. {2} drive flies away with a fly whisk.
{3} [A; ab2] hit s.o. with a duster or a fly whisk. Hingpaspasan siya
nákù kay labihang nakapanugsū́g, I hit him with a duster because he
teased me too much.

paspasanan n a batten running under the eaves of a roof.

paspáyit v [A; b5] do s.t. with utmost vigor. Pastilan níyang
nakapaspáyit ug káun sa pansit, My! How he laid into the noodles!
Paspaytan (paspaytun) ta nig trabáhu arun daling mahuman, Let’s work
hard on this so it will get done right away.

paspurt n passport. v [A12] obtain a passport.

paspuru = puspuru.

pasta_1 n filling for a tooth. v [A; b] {1} fill a tooth. {2} fill s.t.
like a tooth. Gipastáhan na ang lungag sa bangà, They filled the hole
in the jar.

pasta_2 n {1} mixture of flour or starch and water used as paste.
{2} foodstuff pounded or ground until fine and creamy, made into a
sauce. Pastang tamátis, Tomato paste. v {1} [A; a] make pasta. {2} [A;
c] paste with pasta. Pastáhun (ipasta) ku ning ritrátu sa ákung nutbuk,
I’ll paste this picture in my notebook.

pasta_3 n a k.o. grass with long lanceolate leaves which is used for
horse feed.

pastang = paskan.

pastidiyar v [A; a1] discipline, train, break in. Ayaw luagluági ug
magpastidiyar ka ug kabáyù, Don’t be lenient when you break in a horse.
Ug pastidiyáhun ang mga bátà magtubù nga matinahúrun, Children grow up
to be obedient if you discipline them.

pastidiyu a bothersome, annoying. Pastidiyu kaáyu ning mga sayup sa
tím, These mistakes in the compositions are annoying. v [A; a1] be
bothersome, annoying. Dì makapastidiyu sa maistra ang mga pangutána,
Questions won’t annoy the teacher. Aku na say pastidiyúhun ning batáa,
This child is going to annoy me again.

pastíkum n {1} the custom of the Roman Catholic church of carrying the
image of the Infant Jesus lying on a crib by two acolytes from house to
house for people to adore, for which people usually give money as an
offering. The pastíkum begins on the 25th of December and ends on the
2nd of February. {2} the words uttered by the acolyte when the image
has been kissed.

pastilan short form: tilan {1} expression of great worry or grief.
Pastilan ang ákung bátà naligsan sa trák, Heavens! My son got run over
by a truck! {2} expression of feigned surprise or concern, with a
disdainful tone: what are you worrying so much for? Pastilan, Tiryú,
kasayun niánà ug mahadluk kang mubúhat! Goodness, Terio, that’s so easy
and you’re scared to do it? {2a} expression of scorn or derision at
s.o. trying to tell a lie. Tilan nímu uy, bísag klárung bakak patuhúun
gihápun ta ánà! You sure are s.t.! It’s such an obvious lie and you
expect me to believe it! {3} expression of pain or annoyance. Tilan
ning mga batáa, pagkasabaan! My these children, how noisy they are!
Pastilang labára sa ákung úlu! Oh! How my head aches! {4} exclamation
of how intense s.t. is. Pastilang gwapáhang bayhána! What a beautiful
woman!

pastiliríya n frosting or decorations on a cake. v [A13; c] put
frosting or decorations on a cake.

pastilyas n {1} k.o. pastilles for deworming. {2} name of various
confections cooked, rolled, and sliced into pastille shape. — dilitsi
k.o. sweet made from condensed milk. — dimani sweet made from peanuts.
— diúbi k.o. sweet made from ground úbing kinampay.

pastiyurisádu a pasteurized milk.

pastu n pasture. Túa sa pastu ang báka, The cows are out in the
pasture. v {1} [A13; a12] raise animals that are put to pasture, make a
cattle farm. Íyang pastúhun ang yútà níya nga pagawpaw, He will
transform his barren land into a cattle ranch. {2} [A; c] put out to
pasture. Ipastu ang kábaw, Put the carabao out to pasture. pastuhan
n pasture lands.

pastǔr_1 n herdsman. v [A; b(1)] attend to a herd.

pastǔr_2 n minister of a Protestant congregation. v [B156; a12] become
a minister.

pastúra n a shepherd’s play put on in the Christmas season by players
going from house to house. It depicts the visit of the shepherds to the
Christ Child and consists of song and dance sequences. v [AN; c] go
s.w. to put on the shepherd’s play.

pastúris n {1} herdsmen. {2} participants of a pastúra. v = pastúra, v.

pasu v [B26; b8] commit certain violations in games: get a score of
more than the winning number of points and therefore be out of the
contest, step on the demarcation line in hopscotch, et al. Mapasu
(mupasu) ka na ug mulápas nang ímung puntus sa bayinti únu, You lose if
you get more than twenty-one points. n violation of this sort.

pásu v {1} [A; c1] walk slowly and deliberately. Mipásu siyag lakaw kay
dihay natúlug, He walked slowly because there was s.o. asleep. {2} [A;
c] march before a crowd in a ceremony. Mipásu na ang mga intranti sa
banggà sa kaanyag, The beauty contestants marched before the judges. Wà
kuy sinínà nga ipásu sa gradwisyun, I don’t have a dress to wear when I
march in the commencement. {3} [A2; c] walk in front and in view of
many people as if on parade. Mupásu giyud ta íni kay nagsúgud na ang
klási, Now we are going to have to pass in front of the whole class
because the class has already started. a for one’s walk to be refined
and slow, not rough or erratic. Pásu ang linaktan sa rayna, The beauty
queen walked elegantly. n manner of walking, esp. a graceful walk.
Nausab ang pásu sa babáyi nga gitaghúyan, The woman lost her poise when
the men whistled at her. pasupásu v [A; b6] pace to and fro.
Nagpasupásu siya samtang nagbatì ang íyang asáwa, He paced to and fro
while his wife was in labor.

pásù v {1} [AB126; b4] injure s.t. by burning it or subjecting it to
s.t. that gives similar effects. Ang asidu makapásù, Acid can burn you.
Napásù ákung tudlù sa tangsi pagbinira sa kubit, I burnt my hand
pulling on the nylon rope when I caught a fish. Gipasúan níyag
sigarilyu ang ákung áping, He burned my cheek with a cigarette. {2} =
pasu, v. (→) n {1} burnt part of the skin. {2} = pasu, n. {3} in
sungkà, the hole that is not in use because the player lacks requisite
pieces to use it. -an = pasù, 3.

pasugbu see sugbu_2.

pasuk v [A; c] stuff or place s.t. in a small enclosed place. Gidalì
níyag pasuk ang sinínà sa bulsíta, She hurriedly put the dress in the
paper bag. Paski (paksi) ug gápas ang ilung sa minatay, Stuff cotton
into the nose of the corpse. paskanan n place where things are stuck or
dumped into.

pásuk n peg, short stake to which animals can be tethered. v {1} [A; a]
put a stake in the ground. {2} [a1] use, make into a short stake.

pasul n fishing line. v {1} [A12] obtain a fishing line. {2} [a12]
catch with a fishing line. Sayun ra paslun nang isdáa, It’s easy to
catch that k.o. fish with a hook and line. paN- v [A2; b6] go fishing
with a hook and line. pamaslanan, pamaslánan n {1} fishing place.
{2} fishing boat. pinaslan n fish caught with a hook and line.

pasulábi (from sulábi) see labi.

pasúlit n test or exam. v [A13] hold or give a test. Ang gubyirnu
magpasúlit pára sa mga aplikanti, The government will hold a test for
the applicants.

pasumánu = pasamánu.

pasunding n civic or military parade. v [A; c] parade. Mipasunding sa
íyang alimpatakan ang mga nindut níyang kaági, He could see the
memorable experiences of his past parading before his mind’s eye. Ang
mga bisíta gipasundíngan sa Rusya sa íyang mga rákit, Russia paraded
her rockets before the visitors.

pasung n cockscomb. v [AN; a] trim a cockscomb. paN- v [A23] grow a
cockscomb. Wà pa ang mga pisù mamasung, The chicks have not developed
combs yet. pinasngan n rooster with a trimmed cockscomb.

pásung n {1} trough, originally made of a hollowed-out log, but now of
anything fashioned into a long but rather shallow open vessel, used as
manger or for pounding stripped palm trunks. {2} a unit of dry measure
for unhusked rice more or less equal to ​5⁄7​ of a bushel, with a good
deal of local variation. v [A12; a12] make into a manger or trough.
-an(→) = pásung, n.

pas-ung = pasgung.

pasunud see sunud.

paswurd n password. v [A1; c1] have or use as a password.

pasyinsiya = pasinsiya.

pasyinti n patient, sick person. v {1} [A12; b8] have a patient.
{2} [B125] be s.o.’s patient.

pasyunarya = sayúti.

pasyun syú n fashion show. v [A; c] {1} hold a fashion show. Nakapasyun
syú na sila, They have had their fashion show. {2} parade oneself to
show off a dress and other personal apparel. Mupasyun syú nà siya basta
makabag-ug sinínà, She parades herself around whenever she has a new
dress.

pat. n abbreviation for patrulman ‘patrolman’.

páta = palata.

pátà v [A3] fall with a plop. Mupátà ang tái sa báka, The bowel
movements of a cow fall with a plop.

patad, pátad_1 v [A; c] bet, place a bet. Diyútay ray nagpatad sa ugis,
Only a few people bet on the white cock. Ayaw ipatad ang tanan mung
kwarta, Do not bet all of your money. n bet, betting. Way pátad ning
duláa, No betting this game.

pátad_2 v [AC; ac] pair off in a contest or in love. Nagkapátad ang
duha ka pulitiku sa miáging piliay, The two politicians were pitted
against each other in the last election. Patárun ta ang átung isig ka
bátà, Let us match your daughter and my son. Ayaw kug ipátad ug dakù,
Don’t pair me up with s.o. big. a evenly matched, well paired off.
Pátad kaáyu ang duha ka igtatarì, The two cocks were evenly matched.
n action of matching, pairing off.

pátad_3 v [B3(1); c1] lie scattered all over a place, such as things
for sale, things in disarray, dead bodies, litter. Mipátad ang patay
nga Bitkung sa pilapilan, The bodies of the Vietcong lay scattered over
the rice fields. Nagpátad ang tinda apan mínus ang pumapálit, There
were things for sale displayed everywhere but there were few buyers.

patadyung n k.o. loose wrap-around skirt worn overlapping in the front,
made of hand-woven cloth together with a native blouse (kimúna). v [A;
a] wear a patadyung, make into a patadyung.

pátag a for an area to be flat and level. Pátag ang ibabaw ánang búkid,
The top of that hill is flat. v [AB12] for an area to become level,
cause it to be so. Patágun ang yútà úsà gam-ang pilapilan, They level
the land before they make it into rice paddies. Patágun ku nang likud
sa buktut ug magbinúang siya, I’ll flatten that hunchback’s back if he
makes trouble. (→) n flat level land, plains. ka-an n plains.
kina-an(→) n place that is most level.

pátak v [B46; b6] for a large number of things to be scattered over an
area. Daghang bitúun nga nagpátak sa lángit, A myriad of stars dotting
the sky. patakpatak v {1} [B6; a] be scattered or strewn over an area.
Nagpatakpatak ang tái sa bátà, The baby’s stools were scattered all
over the place. {2} [AB6; a1] break, tear to pieces, get broken, torn
to pieces. Nagpatakpatak na sa katagù ang ákung sinínà, My dress is
almost tattered into pieces, the fabric is so weak. Patakpatakun ku
ning hunub nga kúlun, I’ll break this leaky pot into pieces.
{3} produce a pitter-pattering sound like falling rain. n pitter-patter
of falling rain.

pat-ak v [A; c1] splotch, spatter all over s.t. Nagpat-ak ang buling sa
salug, The floor is splotched with dirt. Ayaw pat-áka (ipat-ak) ang
ímung pagpintal, Don’t paint so that it splotches all over everything.
pat-akpat-ak v [A; c1] do at random and irregularly with blank spaces
in between. Nagpat-akpat-ak ang ap-ap dihà sa íyang dughan, Her breasts
had fungus splotches all over them. Ayawg pat-akpat-aka (ipat-akpat-ak)
ang pag-iskuyla arun dì ka hagbúngun, If you do not attend classes on a
regular basis you will be dropped.

patal a fatal, usually said of a wound or blow. v [a] fatal.

patálas (not without l) n knife or any sharp instrument used as a
weapon (slang). v [a1] stab with a knife. Namatay ang buguy nga
gipatálas, The ruffian who was stabbed died.

patánì_1 n {1} k.o. chicken which has dark-colored meat and bones.
{2} a very dark-skinned person. gíra — {1} civil war. 2 all-out quarrel
among people residing together. v [B126] be dark-skinned.

patánì_2 n lima bean: Phaseolus lunatus.

pátas v {1} [AC; b5] even up a score, debt, wrong. Nagkapátas ang duha
ka tím, The two teams were tied. Mapátas na gánì átung iskur dì na ku
mudúlà, I’ll quit as soon as the score is tied. Patásun (patásan) ku
giyud ang insultu, I’ll get even for the insult. {2} [A2S; b6] match,
be the equal. Way makapátas nímu sa ímung kamaldítu, There is no one as
mean as you are. a {1} even in score. Pátas ang ílang puntus sa
tungàtúngà, Their score was even at half time. {2} of equal ability or
achievement. Pátas giyud ang duha ka manuk, The two fighting cocks are
exactly even in ability. {3} have an equal share of s.t. unpleasant.
Pátas tang tanan. Púlus gikasab-an, We’re even. We were all scolded.
paN- v [A2; c6] for a person who has suffered to harm others, innocent
or not, so that they too will suffer as he has. Mamátas na lang ku kay
gidaugdáug kug maáyu, I’ve been oppressed enough. Now I will raise hell
for everybody.

patátas_1 n k.o. flaky brown cracker. v [A1] serve, have patátas.

patátas_2 n potatoes.

pataw n buoy tied to s.t.: buoy used to hold up fishing nets, used to
mark a fish trap in the sea, used to mark an unattended fishing line
tied to a rope with a harpoon (paladyaw) to hold the fish back, et al.
v [A; b] use a float, fasten a float to a rope. Ang ámung púkut
gipatawan ug gúma, We tied rubber floats for our fishing net. -an
n {1} place a pataw has been put. {2} = pataw, n.

patay v [A; b7] {1} kill, slay. Dì makapatay ning sakíta nímu, This
sickness won’t kill you. Patyun ku siya, I’ll kill him. {2} put an end
to s.t. as if killing it. Ang pagkapakyas makapatay sa kadásig, Failure
can destroy one’s enthusiasm. Adtu sa Kamara Báha patya ang balaudnun,
The bill will be killed in the Lower House. Angay patyun nang balitáa,
That news should be suppressed. {3} shut off an engine, light; put out
a fire. Patya nang sugà, Turn off the lights. {3a} neutralize chemicals
or colors. Putì ang ipatay niánang pula nga kulur, Neutralize that red
color with white. {3b} consume time. Maáyu ning duláa ipatayg úras,
This game is good for killing time. {4} [A; b] whittle s.t. down to
reduce its size or smoothen it. Patyi ang ngilit sa lamísa, Round off
the edges of the table. {5} [a3] be all tails in a game of tossing
coins. Mapatay na ni rung antúga, This toss will be all tails. {6} in a
game of sungkà, drop the last stone in an empty hole. {7} in set
phrases: a — sa báhù [A2P; a1] mask a pungent smell. Lamas ang ipatay
sa báhù sa isdang langsa, Spices can cover the fishy taste of fish. —
ug hálas b1 for men to urinate. b2 for men to masturbate. c — sa
kabugnaw [A; a1] heat water until it becomes tepid. Patya úsà ang
kabugnaw sa túbig nga idígù sa bátà, Warm the baby’s water before you
bathe him. a {1} dead. Patay na si Tátay, My father is dead. {2} for
s.t. to have been killed, deadened. Patay ang ákung pagláum, I have no
more hope. Patay ang makina, The engine is dead. {3} for coins to come
out tails. {4} for the last stone to have been dropped in an empty hole
in a game of sungkà. {5} new moon. Himatayun ang buwan run. Dì na
madúgay patay na, We are in the last quarter now. Pretty soon it will
be the new moon (no moon). {6} for nits to be hatched (lit. for the
eggshell to be dead). {7} be head over heels in love. Patay siya nákù,
She’s head over heels in love with me. {8} in phrases: — ug dugù do
s.t. in an unenthusiastic way. Hinay siyang mangulitáwu kay patayg
dugù. Kinahanglan hulhúgun, He isn’t doing a very good job in courting
the girl. He is unenthusiastic and needs prodding. — gútum poor as
church mice. Asa gud sila makapaiskuyla sa ílang mga bátang patay gútum
man nà sila? How could they send their children to school when they are
poor as church mice? — nga irù miserable, wretched. Patayng irù ang
táwung way kwarta, A man who is penniless is miserable. — ug lamì
having excessive sexual desires. Patay kaáyu ug lamì nang bayhána maung
kuyawng pangasaw-un, It’s dangerous to marry that woman because she has
excessive sexual desires. — ug limud an inveterate liar. (←) n intense
action of killing. v {1} [A13] for several killings to be going on.
{2} [C; a12] fight it out with killing. Patáyun nátù ang átung dúmut,
We’ll settle our hatred by fighting it out to the death. lunud, lúnud —
die-hard, inveterate. Lúnud pátay nga sugarul, An inveterate gambler.
-an(←) v {1} [C23; c6] for roosters to fight it out to the death.
{2} [A; a] play patáyan. n game of betting on heads or tails played by
twirling a coin. pataypátay v {1} [A; c] do s.t. intensely.
Pataypatáyun (ipataypátay) nákù ning ákung láwas sa trabáhu arun ku
mabúhì, I wear myself out working just to live. {2} [A; b(1)] do, act
slowly without energy or enthusiasm. Ug magpataypátay ka, mabyaan ka sa
trák, If you take so long, you’ll miss the bus. {3} [AP] pretend to be
poor when one is rich, be a nobody when one is s.o. Nagpapataypátay
nang tawhána apan unásis diay, That man acts like a nobody but actually
he’s an Onassis. patyanay, pinatyánay = pátay. palatyanan n {1} place
s.t. is killed. — sa utug girl used to satisfy one’s sexual desires
(lit. s.t. to kill one’s erection on). {2} total part of the body,
place in the body which will cause instant death if struck. paN- n s.t.
used to kill. Maáyung pamatay sa kágaw kanang sabúna, That soap is a
good germicide.

pathaw v [A3; b6] do s.t. suddenly without sufficient reason, warning,
or propriety. Mipathaw lag katáwa ang búang, The madman suddenly burst
into laughter.

pat huldir n pot holder.

pati_1 ang [noun], [nom.] it happened to [so-and-so] as well. Gibunù
tanan. Pati ang mga bátà, They were all killed, including the children.
Pati aku naapil sa kasábà, I was included in the scolding, too.

pati_2 = salampáti.

pátid v {1} [A; b] kick at. Kusug mupátid ang plíyir sa sákir, A soccer
player kicks hard. Patíri ang itlug sa kuntra, Kick your opponent in
the balls. {2} [c6] move s.t. s.w. by kicking it. Ipátid ra ákung
sinílas diri, Kick my slippers over to me. n {1} kick. {2} kick of
drinks (humorous). Pwirtig pátid ning tubáa dà, This toddy packs quite
a kick. paN- v [A1; a] kick with intensity. Nagpamatid siya sa kasukù,
He was kicking in anger. patidpátid v [A; b] go on foot in a leisurely
manner. Magpatidpátid lang ku inigpaúlì, I’ll walk home leisurely. — sa
láta = patidpátid, v1. {2} play patidpátid. n children’s game of
undoing knotted rubberbands with the feet. The one who separates one
from the rest wins all of them.

patig n {1} army fatigues. {2} colored olive drab. Karsunsilyung patig,
Olive-drab undershorts. v [A1] wear fatigues.

pátik_1 v [A; c] {1} tattoo, mark with a brand. Ákù siyang gipatíkan ug
agila, I tattooed an eagle on him. {1a} implant kisses. Patíkan kug
hawuk ang ímung dughan, I’ll cover your breasts with kisses. {2} print
or publish. Napátik ang íyang hulagway sa mantaláan, Her picture was
published in the newspaper. {2a} [c6] be fixed indelibly s.w. Napátik
sa ákung kasingkásing ang ímung pangalyúpù, Your pleas have been
imprinted in my heart. (→) n {1} implement used for marking animals.
{2} tattoo, brand. May patik nga iks sa samput, There is an X branded
on the rump. {3} explanatory annotation on a land title that it has
been made collateral for a loan. v [b(1)] be so annotated. Napatikan na
giyud ang ákung titulu, I finally had to borrow on my land. (Lit. My
land has finally gotten an annotation.) -ánan n printing press. -in-an
n one who has been tattooed, esp. ex-convicts. mag-r-(→), mag-l-(→)
n {1} publisher, printer. {2} one who brands or tattooes.

pátik_2 a terrific in execution, appearance (slang). Pátik kaáyu siya
sa íyang amirikána dà, He sure looks terrific with his coat. Pátik sag
sinayawan nang bayhána dà, That girl can really dance.

patikan = aníbung.

patilya n sideburns, growth of hair next to ears. v [A; b(1)] wear,
leave sideburns.

pátin n paten, the plate used to hold the host in the mass. v [c] use
as a paten.

pating n general name for small sharks. — nga bungul {1} k.o. shark.
{2} deaf as a door post (lit. like a pating). a unconcerned about what
is right or wrong (from the notion that one acting this way is being
deaf to what people say just as the pating is called bungul ‘deaf’).
Pating giyud nang batáa. Dì giyud magtamud bísag unsáug pína, That
child doesn’t care to be good. He won’t obey no matter how much you
tell him. v [B46; c] not give a damn about whether an action is right
or not. pa- v {1} [B1346; c16] be deaf to s.t. Nagpapating lang siya sa
ákung pagpakiluuy, He was deaf to my pleas. {2} [A; c16] do s.t.
regarded as wrong no matter what people think. Nagpapating ang bigáun
bísag bulgǎr sa kadaghánan, The over sexed woman didn’t care what
people said any more. She went right ahead even though everybody knew
about it. patingpáting v [A12; b(1)] ignore, pretend not to hear.
Ayúhag pamínaw kining ákung súgù. Ayaw kug patingpatíngi, Listen
carefully to what I tell you to do. Don’t just ignore me.

patínga n make a down payment on s.t. bought or ordered. v [A; c] make
a down payment. Gipatingáhan ug singku písus ang ákung pinatahì, I put
down five pesos as deposit on the trousers as I was having made.

patinti_1 n container for measuring liquids, esp. palm toddy, that has
been registered and licensed. -ru n {1} palm toddy dealer. {2} any
merchant. v [B156] become a dealer in palm toddy.

patinti_2 n patent. May patinti siya paggamà ánang klasíha sa dáru, He
has a patent to manufacture that k.o. plow. v [A; b] issue a patent.

patipati n weed of waste places: Acalypha indica.

pátirn n dress pattern. v [A; c6] make a dress pattern.

pátir nustir n the Lord’s Prayer.

patis n {1} liquified preserved fish paste. {2} soy sauce. v {1} [A;
a2] make patis. {2} [A12; b] add patis to s.t.

patriyúta n patriot. v [B126; b6] be a patriot.

patrǔl n {1} police patrol, esp. in vehicles or boats. {2} boy scout
patrol. v = patrulya. -man n patrolman. Patrulman Ruhíru, Patrolman
Rogero.

patrulya v [A; b6(1)] {1} go on patrol. Gipatrulyahan (gipatrulyáhan)
sa mga Písi ang mga prisintu sa pag-iliksiyun, The P.C. patrolled the
precincts during the elections. {2} go out for a walk. Magpatrulya ta
sa plása, Let’s go out for a walk to the plaza. n patrol.

patrun, patrǔn n patron saint of a place or occupation. v [A23; c1]
take a saint as one’s patron. -a(←) n female patron saint. †

patsáda a good to look at, good in quality. Kapatsáda ning batáa, What
a pretty child. Patsáda silag baul, They have a first class farm.
v [B2; a12] be, become good. Mapatsáda ang ímung tíngug ug makakaun kag
úlud, Your voice improves if you eat worms.

patsi n medicinal plaster for headaches or muscular pains. v [A; b6(1)]
{1} patch s.t. by laying it on top. Ang buslut gipatsíhag gúma, The
hole was patched up with rubber. {2} wear a medicinal plaster. Nagpatsi
ku kay labad ákung úlu, I am wearing a medicinal plaster for my
headache.

patsing n {1} cement binding. {2} decorative patching on material.
v [A; b6(1)] {1} bind stones with cement. Patsíngi ang batu sa paril
arun dì matumpag, Bind the stones forming the wall with cement so it
can’t collapse. {2} put a decorative patching on s.t.

pátu n general name for ducks.

pátù v [A; c16] pair s.o. teasingly with s.o. else. Kinsay nagpátù nímu
kang Pidru? Who wanted to pair you off with Pedro?

pat-ud = pat-ul.

patuk a having a protruding bulge in the front or back of the head.
Patuk ug agtang, Having a bulging forehead. v [B26] for the front or
back of the head to protrude. Mapatuk ang úlu sa bátà ug sigíhag
patakílid, The child’s head will develop a bulge if he is always put
down on his side.

pátul n k.o. fit characterized by convulsions and foaming of the mouth.
v [B246; a4] suffer a seizure of this sort. -l-un n one who is subject
to these seizures.

pat-ul_1 v [A; c] {1} put s.t. where it can be chopped, hit, or broken.
Kining tadtaran mauy pat-úlan inigtadtad sa bukug, Put the bone on this
chopping block, when you chop up the bones. {2} put s.t. on top of s.t.
for a short period of time. Íyang gipat-úlan ug ínit nga hampul ang
íyang bun-ug, He put a hot compress on his bruises. {3} put the blame
on s.o. Íyang gipat-ul nákù ang tanang salà, She put all the blame on
me. -ánan n chopping block.

pat-ul_2 v [A2N; cN] match s.o. with s.o. else with the purpose of
marrying him or her off. Ngánung ipamat-ul man nímu nákù nang
tiguwánga? Why are you trying to pawn that old geezer off on me?

patúla n {1} k.o. squash: Luffa acutangula. {2} by extension, name also
given to the sikwa, a similar vegetable.

patung = butung_2.

pátung v [A; c] place s.t. on top of s.t. else. Ang lángaw nga
makapatung sa kábaw magpakakábaw sad, A fly that alights on a carabao
thinks he, too, is a carabao (becomes swell-headed). Patúngi ang mga
papil arun dì manglúpad, Put a weight on the papers so they won’t get
blown away. n {1} pile. Natumpag ang pátung sa mga diláta, The cans
that were stacked up neatly came tumbling down. {2} interest on money.
Pilay pátung sa kwartang ímung gihulaman? How much interest did they
charge on the money you borrowed? patungpatung v [AB6; c1] pile, be
piled up, accumulated. Nagpatungpatung ang ákung trabáhu, maung sígi
kug ubirtayim, My work is piling up, so I keep having to work overtime.
hi-/ha-(→), hi-/ha- [B1256] {1} be at the top of s.t. Paghipátung níla
sa bungtud, When they reached the top of the mountain. {2} reach a
certain height of affluence. Nahipátung ku sa kahamugáway kay nakadaug
kus swipstiks, I was on easy street when I won the sweepstakes.

patùpátù v {1} [A; a12] compose lines, extemporaneously, to form a
rhyme. {2} [A; c] fabricate insidious gossip against others. Maáyu kang
mupatùpátù sa mga butang nga wà mahímù sa ímung isig ka táwu, You are
good at inventing gossip about other people, things they couldn’t
possibly have done. n {1} rhymes composed extemporaneously. Sa balítaw
ang ditsu patùpátù, In the courtship poems, the verses are
extemporaneous. {2} fabrication made up against s.o.

paturágas see *turágas.

patúru see túru.

patyu, patyù n {1} open, round booth built in the center of a plaza.
{2} patio, grounds enclosed within a building.

paud v [A; bc] {1} put s.t. against or over s.t. hard to steady it.
Pad-i ang libru sa ímung pagsulat, Write on top of the book. {2} press
s.t. against s.t. hard with one’s weight. Gitabangan nílag paud ang
búang sa bungbung, They all pressed the lunatic against the wall.
Napaud ku sa pusti pagtulud niya, I was knocked against the post when
he pushed me. {2a} press part of the body against s.t. Íyang gipaud ang
íyang dughan sa ákung likud, She pressed her breast against my back.
{2b} fix the sight on s.t. Gipaud ku sa kisami ang ákung mga mata, I
fixed my eyes to the ceiling. {3} [b] put the blame on s.o. Ngánung aku
may pad-an sa ímung salà? Why do you put the blame on me for what you
did? pad-anan n buffer for s.t. one writes or applies pressure on.

páuk = páyuk, a, v1.

paun n bait. subad nga way — butt in on a conversation where one has no
business doing so (lit. bite when there is no bait). Dílì ikaw ang
ákung gisultíhan. Ngánung musubad ka man dihà nga way paun? I wasn’t
talking to you. Why do you butt in? subad ug way — believe s.t. just
because s.o. said it (lit. bit an unbaited hook). Dì kakumidiyáhan siya
kay musubad ug way paun, You can’t kid him because he will take you
literally. v {1} [A; b] bait s.t. Gipan-an ku ang ilagà ug pán, I
baited the rats with bread. Kwarta ang ipaun sa kiriwan, Use money to
lure the thief. {1a} [c1] make, use as bait. {2} [A; c6] use s.o. else
as a means to deflect danger from oneself. Ipaun man lang ta nímu sa
piligru, You are exposing me to danger to protect yourself.

paúruy n liquor distilled from nipa or coconut toddy. v [A; a2] make
paúruy.

paus, páus a severely hoarse. Páus kaáyu ákung tíngug sa pagkinanta, My
voice is very hoarse from singing so much. (←) v [B] get severely
hoarse.

páw = pálaw.

páwà n size of area cleared by weeding or plowing. Dakug páwà ang ákung
gisuhúlan paggúna, The man whom I hired to weed covered quite a large
area.

paw-ak v [A; ab7] take a large part or chunk off of s.t. Ang mga ungguy
dakug gipaw-ak sa kamaisan, The monkeys consumed a large part of the
corn in the field. n chunk taken off of s.t.

paw-ang n {1} gap between things that are normally solid or close to
each other. Daghang paw-ang ang pinugsan sa mais, The way they planted
the corn the plants are too far apart. {2} distance in time. Dakù ang
paw-ang sa idad sa magtiáyun, The couple are quite far apart in age.
v {1} [B; c1] have spaces in between. Ang bungbung mupaw-ang
(mapaw-ang) ug dílì pakupsun ang káhuy, Cracks will develop in the wall
if the wood is not aged beforehand. Nagpaw-ang ang pultahan maung
nakasulud ang ilagà, The door was ajar and so a mouse managed to get
in. {2} [A12; c1] miss, skip. Nakapaw-ang siyag usa ka linya, He
skipped a line.

pawdir milk n powdered milk.

pawíkan_1 n sea turtle. v [b4] be affected by a sea turtle—i.e. be
unable to come apart in intercourse (from the k.o. sorcery where the
penis of a sea turtle is hidden in the clothing of an adulterer so that
he can not disengage when he has intercourse). Wà kunu mag-úkang ang
mga mananapaw. Gipawíkan (gipawikánan) tingáli, They say the adulterers
could not come apart. No doubt they were victims of sea turtle sorcery.
-in- a crying with a profuse flow of tears (like a sea turtle is said
to do). -un a tending to cry easily. Kadaghánan sa mga babáyi
pawikánun, Most women are crybabies. v [B12] get so one cries at the
slightest provocation.

pawíkan_2 = guyungguyung.

páwir v [b(1)] be given a power of attorney. — ab aturni n power of
attorney.

páwis n shark fins.

pawla = palwa.

pawpaw v [A; ab7] scoop s.t. off the surface of s.t. to remove it.
Pawpáwa ang nanglútaw nga buwà sa tubà, Scoop off the foam from the
toddy. Pawpáwi ang kan-un úsà sukára, Remove the upper part of the rice
before you serve it. n {1} the sweet upper layer of the surface of
coconut meat, scraped off from the rest. {2} container for liquids made
of approximately half a coconut shell (shallower than the húngut and
deeper than the payà).

pawu- see also palu-.

páwud = pálud. palawran see pálud.

pawug = kagwang, 2.

páwul n foul committed in sports. v [A; a12] commit a foul, in sports.
Giwarníngan ang buksidur kay gipáwul níya ang kuntra, The boxer was
warned because he committed a foul against his opponent. {2} [B126] not
be able to do what one had planned to do. Napáwul ang ámung ikskursiyun
tungud sa dautang panahun, We had to call off our excursion because of
the bad weather. dúbul — n double foul, the situation in which two
players bump into each other, such that both have technically committed
a foul. — láyin n foul line. — syát n foul shot, given to a player
against whom a foul has been committed.

pawundirs dí n Founder’s Day celebration in a private school. v [A13]
celebrate a school’s Founder’s Day.

pawuntin n {1} fountain. {2} fountain pen. v {1} [b6] make a fountain.
{2} [A1] use a fountain pen. — pin fountain pen.

pay n pie. pig — n pie made of stale crackers with pork fat and onions.

payà n shallow bowl or scoop made of a third of a coconut shell. v [A1;
a12] make or use a coconut shell as plate or bowl. Magpayà mi sa ámù
kay wà man miy plátu, We use coconut shell plates because we don’t have
dishes.

payadpayad v [B; c1] be unsteady, staggering in one’s walk.
Nagpayadpayad siya human sa dúgay níyang paglubug sa banig, She was
unsteady on her feet because she had lain in bed for a long time.

payag n hut, small house constructed of light materials. may táwu na
ang — for a girl to have a sweetheart. Way tsans ang ímung gugma kaníya
kay may táwu na ang payag, You don’t stand a chance with her because
she already has a beau. v [A1; a] make a hut.

payakpak a for the stomach to be so empty as to sag and form a hollow
on the sides. Payakpak kaáyug tiyan ang bábuy nga wà hipasáwi, The pig
has a hollow stomach because they forgot to feed it. v [B3(1)N] for the
stomach to be, become sagging inwards. Namayakpak ang ímung tiyan, Your
ribs are sticking out (lit. your stomach is hollow).

payanpayan v [A; b(1)] do s.t. half-heartedly or do s.t. with just
enough motion to give the appearance of working. Gipayanpayanan lang
ang pagdáru maung wà mahuman, He didn’t put any effort into his
plowing, so it never got done.

payas a for a pig’s abdomen to be thin, not filled. v [B] be thin, not
filled. Ang bábuyng dílì maáyung mukáun magpayas lang ang tiyan, A pig
that doesn’t eat well has a sunken stomach.

payásu n clown, jester. v [B6; a12] play the part of a clown. Mangítà
ku ug mupayásu sa dráma, I’ll look for a person who will act as a clown
in the play. -in-(→) v [A; c1] act, dress, speak like a clown.

payat a very meager and small in amount. Alang kaníya payat kaáyu ang
duha ka gatus nga gastúhun sa usa ka adlaw, For him it is chicken feed
to spend two hundred pesos in one day.

páyaw n a k.o. bamboo raft used in fishing, used to attract fish. It is
left in deep waters with weighted coconut fronds suspended from it, on
which algae develop and attract fish which can then be caught with a
net. v [A; a12] make a páyaw. paN- n fishing with a páyaw.

paybut v [A2; c6] in basketball, for a player to pivot on one of his
feet. Mipaybut únà siya sa wà pa musyát arun mawā̀ ang gwardiya, He
pivoted before shooting the ball to give him a clear shot. see also
tsindying.

payhag v [A; a1] destroy s.t. by knocking it to pieces, consume or
scatter s.t. as though destroyed. Ang bumba mipayhag sa mga balay, The
bomb destroyed the houses. Tiradur ang ipayhag sa balay sa putyúkan,
Smash the beehive with a slingshot.

payhaw n {1} a characteristic shout or cry in calling s.o. at a
distance. {2} a shout or cry to ease the tightness in the chest due to
panting, uttered esp. when one climbs a steep hill. v [AN; c1] let out
this sort of shout, calling s.o. at a distance or to ease up shortness
of breath. Pamináwa náay nagpayhaw (nagpamayhaw) sa píkas buntud,
Listen. S.o. is yelling on the other side of the hill.

payì a lame from having a defect in the articulation of the bones of
the foot or arms. Si Ingkar magtakiang paglakaw kay payì, Encar limps
when she walks because she is lame. v [B126] get a dislocation and thus
become lame. Napayì siya sa íyang pagkahúlug, She was crippled when she
fell down.

payib kúlum n fifth column.

payib pinggir v [A; c1] masturbate (slang). Payib pinggíra (ipayib
pinggir) kun muutug, Masturbate when it erects.

payil_1 n pile of mahjong pieces from which the hand is drawn. — nga
ininsik Chinese way of piling mahjong pieces, 9 double decks and 16
single decks. — sa búlak the pieces on the right hand side of a
player’s pile stacked in pairs. How many pairs are in the payil sa
búlak depends on the number rolled on the dice at the beginning of the
game. v [A1; c1] pile the mahjong pieces.

payil_2 v {1} [A; c] file papers and the like. Ipáyil kini sa a, File
this under a. {2} [A; c] file a complaint in court for an offense or
misdeed. Ipáyil ku ang kíha ngadtu sa hípi, I’ll file the complaint
with the chief of police. n file in which s.t. is kept.

payin tri n pine tree.

payir {1} a command to commence firing: fire! {2} a signal to start
doing s.t.: come on, go ahead (colloquial). Sigi, payir, sugdan na
nátug inum nà, Come on, let’s go. Let’s start drinking. v [A; c] have
sexual intercourse. Payri siya kanúnay arun dì ka awáyun, Have frequent
intercourse with her so she won’t quarrel with you.

payir tri = arbul_2.

payit n {1} boxing. {2} sexual intercourse. v {1} [A; a] fight in a
boxing event. Mupáyit si Balug karung Sabadu, Balug will fight this
Saturday. {1a} have a fist fight. {2} [A; a2b2] have sexual
intercourse. Dílì siya pilian. Mupayit bísan ug tigúlang, He’s not
choosy. He will go to bed with anybody, even an old woman. -unun a be a
perfect match, go well together (colloquial). Paytunun kaáyu sila si
Ális ug si Kulas, Colas and Alice make a perfect pair. Paytunun kaáyu
ang tubà ug ang Pipsi, Pepsi goes well with toddy.

payla = paliya.

paylas n infectious inflammation of the skin on the legs, accompanied
by fever. v [a4] get this sickness.

*payling — kabinit n filing cabinet. — klirk n filing clerk. v [B156]
be a filing clerk.

*paylut harbur — n {1} small motorized boats which serve as a guide for
vessels in the harbor. {2} pilot for the pilot boat. — háwus n office
of the harbor pilot. — sa lubi, — sa kukunat, kukunat — n palm toddy
gatherer (humorous).

payn-ápul n pineapple. — dyús n pineapple juice.

paynar v [A; a2] dress the hair. paynadúra n hairdresser, one who
arranges a woman’s hair. v [B156; a2] be, become a hairdresser.

paypay_1 n {1} fan. {2} k.o. thin, fan-shaped bivalve, found in sandy
seabeds, of no food value. v [A; b] fan s.o. paN- v [A; c6] fan
oneself. Nagpamaypay ku sa kaalimúut, I fanned myself frantically, it
was so hot.

paypay_2 = palaypay.

payramid n {1} pyramid in gymnastics. {2} the Pyramids of Egypt. v [A1;
b6] form a pyramid in gymnastics.

payr-awut v [A; a2] dismiss s.o. from a job or position. Payr-awtun ang
mga kaswal, All casual employees will be dismissed.

payriks n pyrex, a k.o. heat-resistant glassware.

payring v [A1; b(1)] fire on s.o., for there to be gunfire. Manlukluk
ta sa dì pa magpayring, Let’s get out of the way before the firing
starts. — layin n firing line. — pin n firing pin in a rifle. — iskwad
n firing squad.

payta = palata.

payting ispírit n will to fight or play under stress or against odds.
Lúpig siya, piru may payting ispírit, He was outclassed but he had a
fighting spirit.

payting pis n {1} fighting fish. {2} pornographic movies.

paytir a having a fighting spirit, esp. in defending one’s position or
what one thinks is right. Paytir kaáyung sinadúra. Wà mag-apas nga
pasublì, That senator is a great fighter for his cause, because he
isn’t interested in reelection. v [B126] become a fighter for what one
thinks is right.

payud n {1} the shoulder blades, scapula. {2} = dapìdápì.

payudpayud v [A13] walk with unsteady steps due to weakness.
Nagpayudpayud nga naglakaw ang apyugun, The convalescing patient walks
with unsteady steps.

páyuk a for s.t. light in color to get darkened. Páyuk ang tísirt nga
way ladlad, A T-shirt comes out greyish if you don’t bleach it.
v {1} [AB] become darkened or discolored, cause s.t. to do so. Mipáyuk
ákung pánit sa ínit, My skin got black in the sun. Háin na tung táwung
nagpáyuk sa ímung nawung? Where’s that man who made your face black and
blue? {2} [B236; b4] for the skin to become black and blue. Mipáyuk ang
binunalan, He turned black and blue where he was whipped. (→)
a discolored, dark and dirty. Payuk siyag linabhan, Her wash comes out
grey. n bruise. Dúgayng naáyu ang mga payuk sa íyang láwas, It took a
long time for the bruise on her body to heal. v [A12] inflict bruises.
Hínay kaáyu siyang manukmag, walà gánì makapayuk nákù, He didn’t even
hit me hard enough to inflict a bruise. ka-(→) [A13] get bruises all
over one. Nahúlug siya ug nagkapayuk ang láwas, He fell and he got
bruises all over his body.

pay-uk = páyuk, a, v1.

páyung n umbrella. — sa búlan n ring around the moon. — sa libgus,
úhung pilleus of mushrooms. v {1} [A; b] use an umbrella, shelter under
an umbrella. Payúngan ta ka kay ínit kaáyu, I’ll shelter you with an
umbrella because the sun is hot. {2} [A12; b(1)] stretch arms over s.o.
in basketball in guarding a teammate or in preventing an opponent from
passing or shooting the ball. (→) = v1. payungpayung n {1} — sa santus
artificial halo around the statues of saints. {2} k.o. limpet which
looks like an umbrella found clinging to stones.

payúpas n fan, any device used for fanning. v [AN; b] fan s.o. Payupási
ang bátang natúlug, Fan the child as he sleeps. paN- [A2; b] fan
oneself. Namayúpas kug kardburd, I’m fanning myself with a piece of
cardboard.

payuphu = paluphu.

payuríya n pyorrhea, infection of the gums. v [a4] be infected with
pyorrhea.

payus v [A; b5] cut a piece off ears, usually of animals as a marker.
Napayus (napayusan) ang dawunggan sa buksiyadur, The boxer had
cauliflower ears. a having the ears or a piece of the ears cut off.
Hiilhan ang ámung bábuy kay payus man, I can easily identify the pig
because of the way its ears are cut. -in-an a having a piece of an ear
cut off.

páyut = pay-ut_1.

pay-ut_1 a for skin to be wrinkled and sagging. Maáyu untag kurti nang
bayhána apan pay-ut ug nawung, She has a nice face, but it is wrinkled
and sagging. v [B12; a2] for skin to become wrinkled and sagging. Ági
sa kaláyu ang nakapay-ut (nakapapay-ut) sa íyang láwas, Scars from
burning caused wrinkles on his body.

pay-ut_2 a for clothes to be discolored, darkened with dirt. Pay-ut na
kaáyu nang sinínà nga dúgay nang wà hubúa, You have been wearing that
dress so long it is black with dirt. v [B2; c1] get discolored with
dirt.

pi_1 n letter P. — dibawtismu baptismal certificate (acronym for
partída dibawtismu).

pi_2 may láin — humorous euphemism for may láin pa. see láin, 1a.

pí = pyi.

píang v {1} [A; b] dislocate, sprain, fracture s.o. Napíang ku
pagkadakin-as nákù, I got a sprain (fracture) when I slipped and fell.
Kaáyung piángan nang ímung kamut nga kiriwan, How nice it would be to
break your thieving hands. {2} [A; b6] make s.t. crippled, be at a
disadvantage because of a loss or absence of s.t. indispensable.
Napíang ang nigusyu pagháwà sa kasusyu, The business was crippled when
one of the partners withdrew. Gipiángan na mi dáan kay nasakit ang
ámung sinalígan nga magdudulà, We are already on a disadvantage because
one of our important players is sick. (→) n {1} general term for
dislocation, fracture, or sprain. It may manifest itself in other ways
than in the sprained or fractured limb, e.g. respiratory ailments are
commonly thought to result from piang. {2} lacking. Piang tag usa sa
kúrum sa madyung, We’re lacking one to play mahjong. -an(→) n = piang,
n2. -un(→) a having a sprain, dislocation, or fracture.

píar n acronym for P.R., public relations. Dì siya mulampus kay kuwag
píar, He won’t succeed because he is bad in dealing with people (lit.
lacks public relations).

píay n dump truck used by the Bureau of Public Highways (from the PI
mark on its plate number).

Pib. n abbreviation for Pibríru, February.

píbak v [A; c] pay back an overpayment. Nasubrahan kag swildu. Magpíbak
ka niánà, They overpaid your salary. You have to pay back the extra
amount.

Pibriru n February. v see abril.

píbur v [A2; b(1)] be partial to s.o., playing favorites. a partial,
playing favorites. Píbur kaáyu námù ang ripiri, maung midaug mi, The
referee was partial to us, so we won.

píd v [A; c] make assists in basketball by passing the ball to a free
teammate near the goal. Dakug puntus ang purward basta náay maáyung
mupíd, The player who plays forward will make a high score if he gets
good assists.

pídal n {1} pedal. {2} pedal pushers. v {1} [A; b] pedal s.t. {2} [A;
a] make, wear pedal pushers. — púsir n pedal pushers. (→) = pídal, n1.

pidásu = pirásu.

pidbak n feedback in electronic equipment. v [A2] produce a feedback.

pídi n payday. v [B156; c6] become, have it be payday. Unsa mang adláwa
ang ipídi? On what day do you receive your pay?

pidídu n one’s order of dry goods. Día ang pidídu sa ákung
gikinahanglan, Here is the order for the things I need. Ihatud sa inyu
ang pidídu mung káhuy, They’ll deliver the lumber you ordered to your
house. v [A; c] order dry goods. Kining klasíha mauy ipidídu, This is
the kind to order. -s = pidídu.

pidikab n pedicab, a bicycle or motorcycle with a side car for
passengers. v [A1; a] ride in, bring by pedicab.

pidikiyur n pedicure. v [A; b] get, give a pedicure. -ista n one who
gives a pedicure.

pidirasiyun n {1} labor union. {2} member of a labor union.
{2a} stevedore (so called because they were among the earliest workers
to have unions). v [B156; c1] {1} be, become a member of a labor
organization. {2} be, become a stevedore.

pídir rud n feeder road going from remote areas to the main highway.
v [A1; b6] build a feeder road.

pídir wit n {1} featherweight boxer or jockey. {1a} any lightweight
person. {2} the amount a featherweight weighs. v {1} [B156; c1] become
a featherweight boxer or jockey. {2} [B2] be very much reduced in
weight. Nagdiyíta ka nga mipídir wit (napídir wit) na man ka? Are you
on a diet that you’ve lost so much weight?

pidistǎl n pedestal on which a flower pot, vase, lamp, etc. is put.
v [A; c1] make into, use a pedestal.

pidíyus n k.o. egg noodles of the same material as macaroni but made
into various shapes: shells, stars, half-moons, etc. v [A; b] cook s.t.
with pidíyus.

pidlà v [A; c] {1} spurt, for liquid to be ejected with force for a
short period of time. Inig-abut sa lamì mupidlà ang tús (útin), When
you have your orgasm, the sperm spurts out (the penis spurts). Magpidlà
gánì ang lungag, dúnay tamalà sa iláwum, If liquid spurts out of the
hole, that means there is a small octopus inside. Gipidlà níya ang
túbig sa ákung nawung, She spewed the water in my face. {2} treat a
sickness by chewing herbs and spitting on the joints of the patient,
usually following massage and prayers. n this medical treatment.

pidlasut v [A; b6] for liquids to come out in a long, thin spurt.
Hipidlasutan ku sa túbig, The water spurted on me.

pidlut = pidlasut.

pidpid a very near or close. Pidpid ra kaáyu ang ímung paglingkud
kanákù, You took a seat too close to me. Ibutang ang katri pidpid sa
bungbung, Put the bed against the wall. v {1} [A2; c] put, stay very
close along s.t. Mipidpid ku sa paril arun dì himatikdan, I stayed
close to the wall so no one would notice me. {2} [AN; b6] travel close
along s.t. Namidpid ang sakayan sa baybáyun, The boat sails close to
the shore.

Pidru n {1} Peter, man’s name. {2} si — one’s penis (euphemistic
slang). Paghúbù níya, mitindug dáyun si Pidru, When she started to
undress, my peter stood up.

pidsbuy n pageboy bob. v [A; c16] wear a pageboy haircut, cut the hair
in the pageboy style.

pid-uk_1 v {1} [AB; b7c] make or grow dim. Mupid-uk ang sugà ug wà nay
gás, The light will get dim (or flicker) if there’s no more gas.
Pid-úki ang sugà kay matúlug na ta, Dim the light, because we’re going
to sleep now. {2} [AN3; b6] for a light or the eyes to flicker.
Mipid-uk (namid-uk) siya nákù nga dílì paubanun níla, She winked at me
not to go along with them. n wink of the eye.

pid-uk_2 v [N; b6] look out of the corners of the eyes with suspicion
or disdain. Ngánung namid-uk ka nákù? Why are you looking at me with
disdain?

pigà v [A; a12] press, squeeze s.t. Akuy mupigà sa kinagud lubi, I will
press the juice out of the grated coconut. Gipigà níya ákung kamut sa
kahinangup, He squeezed my hand in welcome.

pigádu a {1} for an area to be too small for s.t. Pigádu kaáyu ning
baláya pára ninyu, This house is too small for you. Pigádu ra ning
baláya sa dálan, This house is too close to the street. {2} hard up
financially. Pigádu mi kay wà kuy trabáhu, We are hard up because I
have no work. {3} for there not to be enough time. Pigádu na rung
ipaúlì, There is not enough time to get home any more. {4} in
billiards, for the cue ball to be touching another ball or be touching
the edge of the billiard table. v {1} [B12; c1] get to be too small in
space or area. Nagkapigádu ang ákung mga sinínà nga nanambuk na ku, My
dresses are getting too tight as I gain weight. {2} [B12] get to be
hard up financially. {3} [A] give s.o. little time to do s.t. Mipigádu
siya ug paningil kay nanginahanglan giyud, He pressed his debtors for
immediate payment because he needed the money.

pigal v [A; c1] roll s.t. into a cylinder by turning it over and over
on itself or s.t. else. Magpigal kug panaptun nga ákung suksúkan sa
báraw, I will roll up a piece of cloth to insert the knife into. Ayaw
ipigal (pigala) ang kwartang papil, Don’t roll up the paper money. n a
cylindrical mass of s.t. — pang dáhun n young leaf buds or shoots
rolled into a cylinder. -in- n cigar rolled and pressed flat.

pígat v [A12; a12] squash, squeeze s.t. soft out of shape. Siyay
nakapígat sa kartun nga íyang natumban, He stepped on the box and
squashed it. Napígat ang ságing nga nalingkuran, He squashed the
bananas when he sat on them.

pigáwu = pigádu.

piging n party with sumptuous food. v [A; b] give a banquet.

pigiri n piggery. Daghan na ang bábuy sa íyang pigiri, He has lots of
pigs in his piggery now.

pigis v [AB; c1] crush or mash s.t. fine with a rolling pin or in a
mortar. Pigisa (pigsa, ipigis) ug maáyu ang kakaw, Crush the cacao
fine. pigsanan n flat board where s.t. is crushed. pinigsan n pork fat
cooked to extract the lard and then squeezed in a squeezer into rounded
slabs. v [A] make, have pinigsan.

pigit a {1} for the string of a musical instrument not to sound well
because of s.t. that impedes proper vibration. Ang tíngug sa íyang
sista pigit kaáyu, His guitar doesn’t give a full sound. {2} for the
voice to be cracked. Pigit kaáyu ang íyang tíngug ug mutaas ang kanta,
Her voice cracks in the upper register. {3} for rounded things not to
be true, out of shape. Ang íyang kasing pigit kaáyu, His top is very
much out of true. v [B] be, become cracked, out of shape; fail to
vibrate properly.

pig-it_1 a narrow, tight. Pig-it nga sinínà, A tight dress. v {1} [B;
a12] become tight-fitting, be narrow. Napig-it ang ákung sinínà kay
mikúlù, My dress became tight because it shrunk. Ug pig-itun ang
kalsáda dílì makaági ang trák, If the road is made too narrow, the bus
won’t be able to use it. {2} [A; a1] press s.t. tightly in one’s hand
or embrace. Ang mga kandidátu kusug mupig-it ug kamut, The candidates
are shaking hands for all they are worth. Ayaw pig-íta ang bátà
pagkúgus, Don’t hold the baby too close. {3} [A; a] pressure s.o. into
doing s.t. Pig-íta arun musugut, Exert pressure on her so that she will
accept you. {4} [A; b5] subject s.o. to strong disciplinary constraint.
Kinahanglan pig-ítan ang anak nga dalága, It is necessary to keep tight
reins on one’s daughter. -in-ay v [A13] press, shake each other’s
hands. Nagpinig-ítay sa kamut ang mga bisíta, The guests were shaking
each other’s hands.

pig-it_2 = pigit, a1, 2.

pignit v [A; a12] pinch, pick off with the thumb and the forefinger.
Pigníta ang íkug sa ilagang patay, Pick up the dead rat by the tail.
Gipignit ku ang íyang áping, I pinched her cheek. n a pinch of s.t. Usa
ka pignit nga asin, A pinch of salt.

pigsà v [A; a] mash, squash s.t. not dry into a fine pulp. Magpigsà kug
nilung-ag patátas, I’ll mash the potatoes.

pigsang v [B] {1} for flowers to be in full bloom. Mipigsang ang mga
búlak sa hardin, The flowers in the garden bloomed. {1a} for s.t. to
manifest itself to a great extent. Nagpigsang ang íyang nawung sa
kaúlaw, His face became flushed with shame. {2} for a sickness to be
developing to a stage where a rash or skin inflammation will burst out.
Mipigsang na ang íyang tipdas, His measles is in the incubation period.
{3} [AB; a] for pus to come out of infections; cause to do so.
Mupigsang nang hubag mu ug pislítun, The pus will come out of your boil
if you press it. a {1} flourishing, manifesting itself in great
quantities or to a great extent. {2} full of pus.

pigsat v [A; a12] mash, squash into a pulp, usually a large quantity or
s.t. large.

pigsik v [AB246; a2] squeeze s.t. to cause it to squirt out; for liquid
to squirt out when pressed or squeezed. Mupigsik ang balat kun hikápun,
Sea cucumbers will squirt out liquid if you touch them. Gipigsik níya
ang bugas sa íyang ilung, She squeezed the pimple on her nose to get
the acne out. -an a for rice grains or coconut to be mature enough to
squirt out white juice if you press the grains or meat.

pigsit, pigsut v [A; b2] spurt out through a tiny, narrow opening.
Mipigsut ang nánà pagpislit sa hubag, Pus spurted out when the boil was
pressed. Hingpigsutan ku sa átà sa nukus, The squid spurted ink at me.
n spurt.

pigting v [A; b] {1} hit briskly with the end of a stick. Gipigtíngan
nákù sa sungkud ang íyang kamut, I whacked him on the hand with my
cane. {2} hack an animal’s tendon prior to slaughtering it so that it
cannot escape when it is stabbed.

pigtul = pintul.

pígung v [A; b] grip or hold s.t. firmly. Ayúhag pígung ang baktin kay
makabuhì unyà, Hold the piglet tight or it will get away. Pigúngi ning
káhuy kay ákung gabsun, Press this board tight because I’m going to saw
it.

pigúra n {1} figure, contours of a body, esp. of a woman. {2} a drawing
or representation of a figure. {3} figures in statistics.

pigurin n {1} a figurine. {2} a framed picture of a saint.

pigus a smallest animal in a litter and, by extension, among children
in a family.

pig-ut (from piut) a {1} narrow, not affording enough space. {2} hard
up financially. Pig-ut ang ámung kahimtang, We are in a tight financial
situation now. {3} ugly. v [B12; a] {1} become small, narrow in space.
Napig-ut ang kwartu sa mga butang, The room was crowded with so many
things inside it. Nagkapig-ut ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid, The trail into
the mountain gets narrower and narrower. {2} get financially hard up.
{3} become ugly. {4} [A; b] subject s.o. under one’s care to tight
restrictions. Dì ku mupig-ut ninyu basta magtárung mu, I won’t be too
strict with you as long as you behave. {5} [A; b5] pressure s.o. into
s.t. Dílì siya mubáyad ug dílì pig-útun (pig-útan), She won’t pay if
you don’t press her.

pihádu see pihar.

pihak v [B6] for a child’s fontanel to get depressed. Mupihak ang hubun
sa bátà ug masakit, The baby’s fontanel becomes depressed when it’s
sick. a for the fontanel to be depressed. pihakpíhak = tampihak.

pihar v {1} [A12; b8] notice s.t. Wà ku makapihar nga miági siya, I did
not notice that he passed by. {2} [A12; a12] make sure of s.t. Pihara
ug náa ba giyud siya, Make sure if she is really there. {3} [A12] have
the edge or advantage in doing s.t. Nakapihar siya sa tanang aplikanti
kay paryinti man, He had the edge over the other applicants because he
was a relative. pihádu be certain. Pihádu kaáyu kung kawatan siya, I’m
certain he is a thief. v [B1256; a12] make, become sure of s.t. Pihadúa
úsag túa na ba siya, Make sure he’s gone first.

pihaw a {1} embarrassed, self-conscious. Pihaw kaáyu ang íyang
linihukan, She acts in a very self-conscious manner. {2} out of tune.
v {1} [A; a12] embarrass slightly. Napihaw ku kay hisakpan kung
nagpasiklap, I was embarrassed because she caught me stealing a glance
at her. {2} [B12; a1] get out of tune, off-key. Mapihaw ku ug mutaas
ang núta, I go off-key on the high notes.

pihig a {1} slanting, not straight. Ang halígi pihig sa tuu, The post
is tilted to the right. {2} favoring. v {1} [B; a] become leaning or
slanting. Napihig man nang ímung hinápay, The part in your hair is
crooked. {2} [A; c1] show partiality in favor of. Dì ku mupihig kang
bísan kinsa, I won’t play favorites with anyone. {3} separate according
to class or kind. Pihigun (ipihig) ang gagmay nga lísu, Separate out
the small seeds. -in- n one discriminated against.

pihing a being not quite spherical, irregular. Ságad sa buungun pihing,
Most pomelos are not quite spherical. v [B; c1] become uneven or
irregular, not quite round. Mupihing ang úlu sa bátà ug pirming
magtakilid, The child’s head will grow uneven if you always have it lie
on one side.

píhu, píhù a sure, certain. Píhu kaáyu nga siya ang sad-an, It is
certain that he is the culprit. — na lang obviously. Píhu na lang nga
mangísug siya ug mamakak ka, Of course he will get mad if you tell
lies. prisyu — n fixed price. Wà nay hangyù, prisyu píhu na, You can’t
bargain. It’s fixed price. v {1} [B] become certain. Nagkapíhu na ang
kadaúgan sa ákung kandidátu, My candidate’s victory is getting more and
more certain. {2} [A; a] verify, see if s.t. is true. Pihúa usà ka
musumbung, Make sure it’s true before you report it.

pihuk = pilhuk_2.

pii a be not perfectly spherical or circular. Pii ang ligid kay
nadusmug ang mutur sa paril, The wheel is not round any more because
the motorcycle crashed into a wall. v [B; a2] be out of true. Mupii
(mapii) ang yanta ug hugut kaáyu ang radiyus, The rim will be out of
true if the spokes are too tight.

píi n acronym for P.E., Physical Education. v [A1; b6] hold p.e.
activities.

píis n acronym for P.S., postscript. v [A1; c] write a postscript.
Ipíis ku na lang nang ímung panúgun, I’ll put your request in the
postscript.

piit a {1} too narrow. Piit kaáyu siyag sinínà, She has a very tight
dress on. Piit kaáyung dálan, Too narrow a street. {2} close, not
affording proper distance. Piit kaáyu siya nga mubayli, He dances too
close. v {1} [B; a] for an area to be too narrow or small, get into too
narrow a place. Napiit ang ilagà sa káhuy, The mouse was wedged tight
in the firewood. {1a} [A; a] hold s.t. tightly, in a close embrace.
Gipiit ni Inting ang láwas ni Tabúra, Inting held Tabora’s body in a
close embrace. {2} [A; a] compel s.o. to do s.t. with pressure. Pit-un
gánì ku, mutug-an na lang ku, If I’m pressed, I’ll tell the truth.
{3} [B; c1] for a singing voice to be tight and forced on a high pitch.
Mupiit ang tíngug ug taas kaáyu ang núta, The singing voice becomes
tight on very high notes. -an n contrivance to squeeze juice out of
s.t. slowly, made of two pieces of wood, the top of which is weighed
down.

pík n a game of hammer, scissors, paper, used esp. to decide who is it
in games. v [A12; a] play this game. Píkun giyud arun way bagulbul,
Let’s decide it by playing hammer, scissors, paper so that no one will
grumble.

pika v [A; b] {1} beat, strike. Human makapika sa táwu, nanágan sila,
After beating the man, they fled. Pikhi nang tawhána, Give that fellow
a beating. {2} berate s.o. with stinging words. Gipikahan ni Maryu ug
insultu ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun, Mario insulted the opposition
candidate with stinging criticisms. {3} take a picture. Gipikhan ku
níya samtang nagsáyaw, He took a picture of me dancing. {4} [A; b] have
sexual intercourse (euphemism). Makapika ka bag kalima? Can you do it
five times? n {1} blow delivered. {2} action of having intercourse.

píkak n peacock.

pikal, píkal n irritability, bad temper. Ayaw paubani ug pikal ang
ímung trabáhu, Don’t work in a bad mood. (Lit. Don’t bring irritability
to work with you.) Pikal kaáyung tan-áwun ang íyang nawung, Just to
look at his face is enough to make anybody angry. ka- n bad mood, state
of being annoyed. Tungud sa ákung kapíkal wà gánì ku makapanumbaling
níya, I was in such a bad mood I didn’t pay any attention to her. ma-un
a characterized with or having irritation or anger. v [B12; a12] get in
a bad mood. Mapikal siya kun samúkun, He gets angry if you bother him.

pik-ap_1 n pickup, acceleration. Maáyug pik-ap ang íyang dyip kay bag-u
ang makina, His jeep has excellent pickup because it is new. v [A] pick
up speed. Mubagrung ang awtu kun mupik-ap na, The car zooms the moment
it picks up speed.

pik-ap_2 n a small passenger bus plying unscheduled routes. v [A; ac]
take a pickup, bring in a pickup bus.

pik-ap_3 n contact microphone for guitars. v [A23] for a microphone to
pick up sound. Kusug mupik-ap sa sáwun ning maykrupúna kay sinsitib,
The microphone picks up sound well because it is sensitive.

pik-ap_4 v [A2N; a2] {1} pick s.o. up on the way s.w. Kun makapik-ap ka
nákus upisína, pik-ápa na lang ku kay dúna ka may sakyanan, If you can
pick me up at the office, please do so, as you have a car. {2} pick up
girls of easy virtue in public places. Namik-ap mig babáyi sa pwinti,
We found some pickups at the park.

píkas v {1} [A3P; a] split, cut s.t. into halves lengthwise. Siyay
mipíkas sa kawáyan, He split the bamboos. Pikása ang isdang ibuwad,
Split the fish you are going to dry. {2} [C2; a2] share half of s.t.
with s.o. else. Magpíkas ta áning pán, Let’s split this piece of bread.
Pikási siyas ímung gikaun, Split what you’re eating with him.
n {1} half of s.t. sliced in two. Usa ka píkas kík, A piece of cake.
{2} the other one of a pair. Dakù ang íyang píkas tiil, His one foot is
bigger than the other. Píkas tumuy, The other end. {3} the other side.
Píkas kwartu, The next room. {4} the other place (said of people who
may be in either one of two places). Túa siya sa píkas báy, He is in
the other house. (→) v [B456; a1] get to be half undone, half the wrong
thing. Mupikas ang linung-ag ug dílì maángay ang kaláyu, The rice will
get cooked on only one side if the fire is uneven. Nagpikas ang ímung
sapátus, You’re wearing shoes of two different pairs. Nagpikas ang
sawug kay katungà ray gilampasúhan, The floor is unevenly cleaned
because only half of it was polished. a for s.t. to be uneven and
half-done or in pairs. Pikas nga linung-ag, Unevenly cooked rice.
n general name for flatfishes (soles, flounders, et al.). -in-
n {1} part in the hair. Náa sa tungà ang íyang piníkas, His hair is
parted in the middle. {2} combing the hair with a part. Piníkas ang
íyang sinudlayan, He wears his hair parted. a {1} split, cut. {2} for
physical characteristics to be similar, alike. Kanang ímung anak mu ra
ug piníkas gíkan nímu, Your son is a chip of the old block (lit. like a
half cut off of you). ka-, — sa kinabúhì n spouse. — dughan,
kasingkásing one’s loved one, sweetheart. pikaspikas v [A; a] divide
into pieces. Gipikaspikas ni Hisus ang pán, Jesus broke the bread into
pieces.

pikat_1 v {1} [AN; a2] draw down the lower eyelid either to get s.t.
out of it or to make faces at a person in a gesture of disrespect. Ug
dì ka mupikat sa ímung mata unsáun man pagkúhà sa puling, If you do not
pull the lower eyelid down, how can I get the particle out. Pikatan ta
ka ug dílì musalir nang ímung kaláki, I will make faces at you (by
pulling my eyelid down) if your idea does not work right. {2} [B] for
the eyelids to get deformed. Mapikat ang mata ug hubagan ang
tabuntábun, The eyes will get deformed if the eyelids have a boil.
a {1} for the eyes to be slightly deformed. {2} interjection used to
embarrass s.o. who made a mistake or who has been denied s.t., uttered
together with the gesture of putting the index finger to the lower
eyelid and drawing it down. Pikat! Wà siya tagáig kwarta, Nma! You
didn’t get any money.

pikat_2 v [A; a] push tall grass or s.t. flexible to the sides in order
to clear a path, get a clear view. Ang mag-una mauy mupikat sa mga
tag-as sagbut, The one in front has to push the tall grass to the
sides. Pikata (ipikat) ang kurtína kay ngitngit, Push the curtains to
the side because it’s dark in here.

pikatúrum expression denoting sudden, mild surprise. Pikatúrum. Ímu
pung gimab-an ang sukud nga wà ku pahibaw-a, Humph! You gave me less
without telling me you were going to do so.

pikbung n {1} sound produced by the Japanese infantry rifles of World
War II. It fires with a tick followed by a bong. {2} the rifle
producing this sound.

pikdul, pikdung v [A; b2] rap s.o. with s.t. long and rigid with a
short jerk of the forearm (not with the whole arm raised above the
head). Hingpikdungan si Nik sa sungkud sa amahan sa dalága, The father
of the girl rapped Nick on the head with his cane.

pikdut a cute, cuddly. Pikdut kaáyu nang batáa, That child is very
cuddly.

piki n pique, k.o. cloth.

pikì_1 = pitì.

pikì_2 n margin shells, small colorful seashells of numerous species
and designs.

píking v [A; a12] play a guitar by plucking the strings a note at a
time. Nindut siyang mupíking sa ‘Báya Kun Díyus’, He plays ‘Vaya Con
Dios’ beautifully, plucking the strings. n playing the guitar by
plucking the strings.

píkit_1 v {1} [A; c1] hold s.t. by clipping or joining it in some way.
Pikítun (ipíkit) nátù nang ímung sinínà ug alpilir, Let us fasten your
dress with a pin. Pikíti ang ímung buhuk arun dílì ilupad sa hángin,
Put a clasp in your hair so it will not fly in the wind. {2} [AC; c1]
glue s.t., stick together. Pikíta (ipíkit) nang nagísing mápa, Paste
the torn map back together. Nagkapíkit núun ning mga silyu, The stamps
are all stuck together. {3} [AC; c1] make s.t. close, tight. Nagkapíkit
mig lingkud, We sat too close to each other. Ug ímung pikítun (ipíkit)
ang ímung sinínà mulakra ang ímung samput, If your dress is too tight,
your buttocks will show. (→) n {1} clip or ferrule tied around s.t. to
hold it together: handle of knives, swords, and the like, hoop of a
barrel, loop to hold the outriggers to the body of the boat. {2} glue
or s.t. used to fasten things in place or together. {3} ring (slang).
Gitagáan siya sa iyang bána ug pikit nga diyamanti, Her husband gave
her a diamond ring. a sticking, stuck. v {1} [B6] become stuck. Mupikit
ang buling ug dì ka malígù, The dirt will stick to you if you don’t
bathe. {2} [C; c] wear a ring (slang).

píkit_2 v [A; b1(1)] picket. Gipikítan níla ang kumpaníya, They
picketed the company. n {1} picketing. {2} picket line. — layin picket
line. -ir n one who pickets.

piknat v {1} [A; a] twist and pull at s.t. with the thumb and
forefinger. Piknátun ku nang dalunggan mu ug dílì ka mamínaw, I will
tweak your ears if you don’t listen. {2} [A; a12] pull and fluff up
cotton fibers and loosen them from the seeds prior to putting them in a
deseeding device. Nagpiknat kug gápas pára ilúnud sa dutdutan, I am
fluffing up the cotton before I put it into the deseeding device.

piknik, piknit n picnic on the beach. v [A; b] hold a picnic.

pikpik v {1} [A3; a12] pat, tap lightly on the body. Dinhay nagpikpik
sa ákung abága, S.o. tapped me on the shoulder. Pikpíka ang tiyan sa
bátà ug dì ba butud, Tap the child’s stomach to see if he doesn’t have
gas. {2} [A; a] make pottery by tapping with a flat wooden paddle.
{3} [A13; a12] hammer out dents in a car. Kinsay nagpikpik sa mga
lumping sa tapalúdus awtu? Who hammered out the dents in the car
fender? n {1} small and short wooden paddle used by the potters in
shaping pots. {2} k.o. sorcery inflicted by tapping s.o. on the back,
counteracted by tapping the person who sent it on his back. maN-r-
n {1} potter. {2} person who removes dents from an automotive vehicle
body. maN-l- n sorcerer who causes illness by means of pikpik.

piktus v [A; b] hit with a chopping blow. Gipiktúsan nákù íyang kamut
nga naggunit sa kurta, I hit the hand that was holding a knife with a
chop.

piktiyur tíking n taking pictures at parties or other events. v [A1]
for a group to have their picture taken. Magpiktiyur tíking ta sa átung
piknik, Let’s have our pictures taken at our picnic.

píku_1 n pick axe. v [A; a12] dig with a pick axe.

píku_2 n picul, a measure of around 63 kilograms. v [A; b6(1)] weigh
s.t. heavy on a steelyard.

pikù v [AB; a] for s.t. pliant to bend into a position where it stays,
cause it to do so. Magpikù tag kartun himúung kálù, Let’s bend some
cardboard to make hats. Nagpikung alambri, A bent piece of wire. Pik-a
ang hábul, Fold the blanket. a folded, bent. pikùpíkù v [A; a] be
doubled up, bent over. Nagpikùpíkù mig katáwa, We were doubled up with
laughter. — nga páyung folding umbrella. — nga síya folding chair.

píkuls n pickles. v [A1] make, have pickles.

pikun a sensitive, easily provoked to anger or hurt. Ayawg sugsúga nang
pikun, Don’t tease s.o. who is too sensitive. v [B126] become easily
provoked or sensitive. -an a of a sensitive, easily provoked sort.

píkut_1 v {1} [AB; a12] close a long, narrow opening, get closed.
Nagkapíkut na ang samad, My wound is gradually closing up now. Pikúta
ang bàbà sa sáku, Sew the mouth of the sack. {2} [B] for the eyes to
become mere slits. Napíkut ang íyang mata sa paghinílak, Her eyes
became mere slits from crying. (→) n {1} having slant eyes. {2} name
given to the Japanese during World War II.

píkut_2 v [A; a12] corner a man into marriage (slang). Gipíkut si Luis
sa tigúwang dága, Luis was trapped into marriage by the old maid.

pikuy {1} = piríku. {2} child’s word for the penis.

píl_1 v [A; ab8] fail a student. Mupíl ku sa bátà nga dílì makamau,
I’ll fail a pupil who doesn’t know anything. Napíl si Birting sa klási,
Berting failed in his class.

píl_2 v [A; a] peel moles off the face chemically.

pila {1} how much, how many, to what extent. Pila ka buuk ímung
palitun? How many are you going to buy? {1a} how much does it cost.
Pila man ni? How much does this cost? {1b} -y pálad who knows. Pilay
pálad ug madátù ku, Who knows, I might get rich. {2} = pipila. {3} in
phrases: {3a} — ra gud it’s nothing, what does it amount to anyway?
Pila ra gud nà ug buut buhátun? What does it amount to anyway if you
put your heart into it? {3b} — may sugílun to make a long story short.
Pila may sugílun, si Binut nahímung magsusúlat ug nabantúgan, To make a
long story short, Binot became a writer and became famous. v [b6]
consider s.t. to be very little. Gipilahan ka ba íni nga daghan kaáyu
ni? You think this isn’t very much, when it is so much? (←) {1} =
tag-(←). {2} = pila, 3a. piláhay {1} only recently, not so long ago.
Piláhay pa tung naminyù si Buduy, Bodoy got married not so long ago.
{2} a few. Piláhay na lang ang nanghibilin sa ámung buungun, Only a few
of our pomelos are left. {3} = pila, 3a. ika- which [number] is it?
Ikapila na nà ka (nga) básu nang ímung giinum? That makes how many
glasses that you have drunk? ka- {1} = pila, 3a. {2} = maka-. kapiláhay
= piláhay, 1. kapid-an a group of many. Kapid-an na ka adlaw walà pa
mahiulì ang amahan, For several days now, the father has not returned.
maka-, ka- how many times? Makapila nímu hugási ning imbaw? How many
times did you wash these clams? tag-(←) how much apiece? Tagpíla man
nang mansánas? How much are those apples each? tinag- v [a12] do s.t.
in lots or multiples. Gitinagpila man nímug dala ang káhuy? How many
pieces of wood did you bring at one time? piláun, pilahun, tagpilahun
n the kind that cost how much. Pilahun (tagpilahun) man tung íyang
gipalit? What kind (the kind costing how much) did he buy? r-
{1} several. Human sa pipila ka úras, haúna, Take it out after a few
hours. {2} a few. Pipila na lang ang nahibilin, Only a few are left.

píla n queue. Taas kaáyu ang píla sa manan-áway sa sini, There was a
long line of people waiting to get into the show. v [A; a2P] queue up.

pílak n {1} silver. Ang pintúrang pílak many ságad ipintal sa puthaw,
They usually use silver paint to paint metal. {2} money. Daghan siyag
pílak apan dalù, He has plenty of money, but he is stingy. v [b6] plate
with silver. Gipilákan ang kuptanan sa pultahan, The door knob is
silver-plated. a silvery, silver-coated. -nun a silvery.

pilantrupu n philanthropist. v [B156] be or become a philanthropist.

pil-ap v [A; b] fill out forms. Pil-ápi ang ímung purma, Fill out your
forms.

pilápil n rice field; rice paddy. v [A1; a12] prepare a piece of land
for planting rice. -an(→) = pilápil, n.

pílas v [B6; b4] {1}">get chafed. Mupílas (pilásan) ang bukubuku sa
kabáyù ug way hampílù, The back of the horse will get chafed if you
don’t use a saddlecloth. Gipilásan ang ákung páa pagsinakay sa kabáyù,
My thighs got chafed from too much horseback riding. {2}">n chafe,
sore. (→) = pílas, n.

piláta a snooty, stuck up. Ang piláta bayà wà na giyud patim-aw dinhi
sukad nakadyakpat ug Amirkánu, Now that she landed an American she’s
too damn high class to come around here any more.

pilátu a rowdy, naughty, mischievous (from Pilátu, Pontius Pilate).
Magubut giyud ang punduk ug musalga na ni si Pilátu, The whole group
becomes disorderly when this ruffian (Pontius Pilate) joins them.
Kapilátu bayà íning batáa. Magpakúgus, What a naughty child this is. He
wants to be carried all the time.

pilaw n vigil. Dúgay kaáyu ang ámung pilaw sa minatay, We held a long
vigil for the dead. a {1} drowsy, sleepy. {2} not having sleep.
v {1} [A123P; a4] become drowsy or feel sleepy. Makapilaw (makapapilaw)
man ning trabahúa, This work makes you sleepy. Gipilaw na ku, I’m
sleepy. {2} [A] take a nap, snatch sleep. Mipilaw kug kadalì únà
mutrabáhu, I took a quick nap before I went to work. {3} [A; b] go
without sleep, have a vigil. Pilawan námug bantay ang kawatan, We will
stay up all night watching for the robber. tag- v [A2] take a quick
nap. Mutagpilaw ku kadiyut, I’ll take a quick nap. hatag-, hitag-
v [B1246; b8] doze off. Nahitagpilaw ku sa sinihan, I dozed off in the
movies.

pílay v {1} [B2S6; a] bend or droop at its base limply. Nagpilay ang
bátà nga nahikatulug sa silya, The child drooped his head when he fell
asleep in his seat. Nagpílay ang humay nga naagian sa bahà, The rice
plants were bent double after the flood rushed over them. {2} [A; a]
fell trees. Mangadtu ta sa lasang magpílay ug káhuy, Let’s go to the
forest to cut trees. pilaypílay v [A; a] be swaying to and fro.
Nagpilaypílay ang uhay, The rice stalks are swaying. a spineless, as a
person without conviction. Pilaypílay nà sa pulitika, He has no
convictions in his politics. †

pilbaks n k.o. homemade bomb used in street demonstrations.

pildi v {1} [A3P; a] lose in a contest. Mupildi siyag nilibu, He loses
by the thousands. Wà pay nakapildi sa kampiyun, No one has beaten the
champion yet. Mu ra ka mag napildi sa sugal, You look as if you lost in
gambling. Gipildi ang ílang kandidáta sa ámù, Our candidate beat
theirs. {2} [B126; a4] die of a sickness. Pildíhun (mapildi) ka sa
tísis ug dì ka mupatambal, You’ll die of TB if you don’t get treatment.
{3} [A; a12] cause a woman to lose her virtue. Ang uyuan ray mipildi
ánang bayhána, That woman was despoiled by her own uncle. n {1} loser.
Kinsay pildi? Who lost? {2} loss, as in gambling, business, crops. Dakù
ang pildi sa ákung humay pagbagyu, The rice field suffered a big loss
because of the storm. a {1} outclassed. Pildi kaáyu ang tím ninyu, Your
team was severely beaten. {2} an exclamation of disgust,
disappointment. ‘Pildi!’ nakasinggit si Isku. ‘Gihabhab ang ákung
karsúnis sa bábuy,’ ‘Damn!’ shouted Esco. ‘The pig ate my trousers.’
kapildíhan n loss, defeat. Angkúna ang ímung kapildíhan, Concede your
defeat. -ru n loser (male). Pildíru sa iliksiyun, The losers in the
election. -ra = pildíru (female). †

pildir n outfielder in baseball. v [A; c1] be an outfielder.

pildúra = pildúras (singular).

pildúras n medicinal pills.

pilhuk_1 v {1} [A2; c1] take a catnap. Mupilhuk kug kadiyut kay dúna
kuy pamuwáwan, I’ll take a catnap because I have to work all night
through. {2} [B1] for the eyes to droop in drowsiness. Katū́g na kay
nagpilhuk na nang ímung mata, You’d better go to sleep now because your
eyes are drooping.

pilhuk_2 n deep dent, fairly deep hollow made in a surface. v {1} [A;
b5] dent s.t. rather deeply, but not too broadly. Kinsay nagpilhuk sa
tapalúdu sa bisiklíta? Who made a dent on the bicycle fender? {2} [B;
b6] for the eyes to be sunken. Nagkapilhuk ang mata nga masakitun, The
diseased eye is gradually becoming sunken.

pilhung n large shallow dent in the surface of s.t. v [A; b5] make a
large shallow dent in the surface of s.t. Napilhungan (napilhung) ang
planggána nga natumban, The basin got dented when s.o. stepped on it.

píli n the pili nut tree of the primary forest also cultivated for its
almond-like nuts. The sap is used for waterproofing boats: Canarium
ovatum.

pílì v [A3S; a] {1} choose, pick a choice. Pílì háiy ímu, Choose which
one you want to have. Nakapilì kug barut, I happened to choose an
inferior kind. {1a} elect s.o. to office. Mupílì tag maligdung nga
pangúlu, We should elect a leader of integrity. {2} sort out the good
or bad. Nagpílì ang kumpradur sa mga mangga, The wholesale buyer is
sorting the mangoes. Pilíi ang bugas kay daghang tipasì, Clean (lit.
sort) the rice that has lots of unhusked grains in it. {3} walay ma-
all the same. Tapulan ang íyang mga anak way mapílì, Her children are
all lazy. pa- v [A; c] be a candidate. Mupapílì si Mádu pagkamayur,
Mado is running for mayor. -an(→) a = hiN-(→). -ay(→) n election. haN-
a noble, highly-esteemed. Kagíkan siya sa hamílì nga bánay, He comes
from a noble family. Hamíling katilingban, maáyung gabíi, Friends
(highly-esteemed people), good evening. kahaN- n state of being noble.
hiN-(→), hiN-an(→) a choosy, finnicky. -in- n {1} s.t. or s.o. elected
or chosen. {2} s.t. select, especial, select k.o. large-grained rice.
-in-an n s.t. left over after choosing. -um-r-(→) n elector, voter.
-unun(→) n candidate for election.

pilígis n {1} a pleat, fold sewn in s.t. {2} crease. Ayúhag plantsa ang
pilígis, Iron the crease carefully. Daghang pilígis sa íyang agtang, He
had lots of wrinkles on his forehead. v {1} [A; c1] make pleats,
creases in s.t. {2} [B4N] get creases. Namilígis ang nawung sa
katigúlang, His face was creased with age.

piligru a offering or exposed to danger. Piligru ang kahimtang sa
masakitun, The patient’s condition is critical. Piligru ang kinabúhì sa
ismaglir, A smuggler’s life is full of danger. Piligru ning baláya,
This house is unsafe. n danger. Ginúu ilikay ku sa mga piligru! Lord,
keep me safe from danger. paN- v [A2] be in danger. Mamiligru ku
dinhing masakpan, I am in danger of getting caught in this place. -su =
piligru, a.

pilígu n a sheet of galvanized iron, plywood, paper. v [c16] count by
the sheets.

pilíik v {1} [A2S; c1] cry loudly in a high-pitched voice, squeal.
Mipilíik ang bátà nga íyang gikusì, The child he pinched shrieked.
Nagpiliik na ang mga bábuy. Pasáwi na, The pigs are squealing. Feed
them. {2} [A2S] for the tires to screech on braking or negotiating a
curve. n high-pitched screeching or squealing sound.

pilik v [A2; b] spatter liquid by shaking s.t. or flipping. Gipilikan
ku ang inarmirulan, I sprinkled water on the clothes to iron.
pilikpilik_1 v [AN; a] shake the body, flap the wings, such that water
gets spattered. Mupilikpilik (mamilikpilik) ang bábuy human siya
makalúnang sa lápuk, The pig shakes the mud off its body after it
wallows.

pilikpilik_2 v [A; a] choose a person to do s.t. by flipping coins,
drawing lots, counting off (pinpin), etc. Magpilikpilik ta ug kinsay
muúna, Let’s count potatoes to see who goes first. Pilikpilikun lang
nátug kinsay makatag-íya sa kábaw, We will just draw lots to determine
who will get the carabao.

pilikpilik_3 n k.o. night bird. When it shows itself it is thought to
indicate that s.t. bad is happening in the vicinity.

pilikula n motion pictures. paN- n film industry.

pilínu v {1} [AN; b6] drive an animal or car. Rás ang namilínu sa
kutsi, The person who is driving the car is reckless. Dì na pilinúhan
ning kabáwa kay katultul na, You don’t have to drive this carabao
because he knows the way. {2} [A; a] make s.t. spin. Akuy únang
mupilínu sa ákung kasing, I’ll make my top spin first. n the rope used
for leading a draft animal. a spinning wheel.

pilípig n roasted young rice grains. After being roasted the grains are
pounded, winnowed, and used for making sweets. v [A; a] make pilípig.

Pilipína n Filipino woman.

Pilipínas n Philippines. pilipinismu n Filipinism.

pilipinista n {1} the Philippine Independent (Aglipayan) Church. {2} a
member of this church. v [B156] become a member of the Aglipayan
church.

Pilipínu n {1} Filipino person. {2} the national language of the
Philippines. pilipinhun n Filipino, from the Philippines. Laráwan sa
Pilipinhung mithì, A picture of the Filipino virtues.

pilípit v [A; a] roll or twist s.t. small between the fingers or with
the palm of the hand. Pilipítun paghugut nang lumbuy, Roll that lumbuy
leaf tight (for a cigar). — ang dílà v [BN] get tongue-tied. Mupilípit
nang íyang dílà ug magsulti siyag Binisayà, She gets all tongue-tied
when she speaks Visayan.

pilipíti v [A; a] roll or twist s.t. very small in the hands or between
the fingers. Pilipitíha ang hílu arun masulud sa dágum, Twist the
thread to make it easy to pass through the eye of the needle. Pilipit-i
(pilipitíhi) ug balhíbu ang ímung dunggan, Twirl a feather around in
your ears.

pilípug n k.o. dwarf coconut, growing no more than three meters,
producing small fruits. -un a of the pilípug sort.

pilípul n crown of the head where the hair forms a whorl. Duhay pilípul
ánang batáa, That child is double-crowned.

pílir n loose-leaf paper filler for a notebook.

pílir gids n feeler, a thickness gauge consisting of a thin, narrow
strip of metal of a given thickness.

pilis n a pinch of s.t. fibrous as cotton, fiber, thread, etc. v [A1;
b] get a pinch of s.t. fibrous. Pilisi kug gápas nga ákung ihúnad, Get
me a pinch of cotton to dress the wound with.

pilit v {1} [AC3; b6] stick on. Mipilit ang tikì sa ákung tangkúgù, The
gecko stuck to the nape of my neck. Nagpílit ang mga silyu, The stamps
got stuck to each other. Pitlan tag istíkir ang kutsi, Let’s stick a
sticker on the car. {2} [A23] stick to one’s lover (slang). Mupilit nà
siya nímu ug ímung makúhà, She’ll stick to you once you manage to get
her to go to bed with you. {3} [A; b6] for one’s gaze to be fixed.
Mipilit ang ákung panan-aw sa íyang atubangan, My gaze rested on her
front (genital region). a sticky so as to adhere. Pilit kaáyu ning
papilíta, This paste is very sticky. n sticky rice, used for sweets. —
mais n k.o. corn that produces sticky grits, used for making desserts.
— ug kamut thieving. — ug dílà having difficulty pronouncing. (←)_1 —
ang dílà v [A13] have difficulty pronouncing. Nagpílit ang ákung dílag
pangatarúngan, I got all tongue-tied trying to explain. pa- v [A; c]
paste, stick s.t. to s.t. Mipapilit siyag pahibalu sa bungbung, She
pasted an announcement on the wall. n paste. pilitpílit a having
difficulty enunciating. Walay pilitpílit nga pamatíun, He speaks
glibly. (Lit. You don’t hear the tongue sticking.) †

pílit_2 v [A; a] insist on doing s.t. or that s.o. else do s.t. Mipílit
siya pagsulud sa kwartu nga ngitngit kaáyu, He insisted on getting
inside the very dark room. Ayaw kug pilíta sa pagpasulti sa tinúud,
Don’t force me to say the truth. ma-un a insistent.

pilíti = plíti.

pilitína n {1} drawstring in the waistline used instead of a garter.
{1a} apron strings. pahikut sa — for a man to get married (lit. allow
himself to get tied to the apron strings). {2} belt worn around the
waist. v [A; a] make into a drawstring or belt.

píliw a area of the sea near the shore, but still covered at low tide.
v [B25; c] go to the sea near the shore. Akuy dalas timun ug mupíliw na
ang lansa, I’ll take the wheel when the launch gets in close to the
shore. Nagkapiliw na ta. Palawri ug diyútay, We are slowly moving
toward the shore. Steer toward the deeper waters. pa-(→) v [AP; b1] go
toward the sea near the shore. ka-an n portion of the sea near the
shore. kina-an(→) n part of the sea nearest the shore (but covered at
low tide).

pilkag n acronym for the Philippine Civic Action Group, a group of
soldiers sent to South Vietnam in the mid 1960’s.

pilm n film for cameras.

pilpil v [A; ab2] slap s.o.’s hands lightly. Pilpílun ang kamut sa
bátang hugawan, Any child that plays with dirt, I will slap his hands.
n slapping the hands.

píls n contraceptive pills. v [A13] take contraceptive pills.

pilt n felt.

piltir n {1} filter tips of cigarettes. {2} filter. v [A; a] put, make
a filter. Kinsay nagpiltir sa tangki sa túbig? Who put a filter in the
water tank?

pilu v [A12; b8] look down on, have a low regard for s.o. Dílì ángay
kapiluhan ang kapubri sa táwu, It isn’t right to look down on s.o. just
because he’s poor.

pílu n the cutting edge of a saw.

pilù v {1} [A; a12] fold s.t. flat. Pil-a (pilua) ang mga lampin, Fold
the diapers. {2} [A; a] crease, get creased. Napilù ang litrátu kay
gipasuk lang sa subri, The photo got creased because it was just
stuffed into the envelope. {3} [A; b] make a crease in; turn a hem up.
Nahíwì man pagpilù ang sidsid, The hem is crooked. Ayawg pil-i ang
karsúnis, Don’t put a crease in the trousers. {4} [B25; a12] be
doubled, multiplied several times. Patubúun kini hangtud mupilù ang
gidak-un, Let it rise until there is double the amount. Katulu piluun
(pil-un) ang ákung gastu kay sa imúha, My expenses are three times
greater than yours. {5} — sa, ang túhud [A3; c1] bend one’s knees to
ask forgiveness. Dì ku pasaylúun ang ákung asáwa bísag magpilù pa siya
sa íyang túhud, I will never forgive my wife even if she crawls to me
on hands and knees. {6} [B3] for the eyes to close in falling asleep.
Duyána ang bátà kay nagpilù na ang mata, Put the baby in the cradle
because it’s asleep. n {1} the hem or fold in s.t. {2} the crease.
{3} the number of times s.t. increases. Pila ka pilù ang pagdaghan sa
liwat? How much has the stock multiplied by now? — sa — to the fullest
extent. Pilù sa pilù ang ákung pagbásul, paghigugma, pag-úyun, pagláum,
I regret, love, agree, hope (etc.) with all my heart and soul. pilùpilù
v [B456; a] be doubled or multiplied several times. Mupilùpilù ang
panalángin ug manggihatágun ka, Your blessings will be multiplied if
you are generous. pinil-an n {1} the crease or mark made by folding.
{2} s.t. on which a hem or fold has been made.

piluk n {1} eyelash. {2} fringe, trimming of cords or threads hanging
like eyelashes. — sa nípà end tips of nipa shingles. {3} wink or blink
of an eye. {4} first few days of the third quarter (so called because
only the width of the eyelash has been taken away from the moon).
Primírung, ikaduhang piluk, The first, second day of the third quarter.
v {1} [A2N; c1] wink or blink the eyes. Ayawg ipiluk (piluka) ímung
mata ug han-an ka, Don’t blink when he raises his fist to strike you.
{2} [A; b] put eyelashes, a fringe on s.t. -in-an n {1} s.t. adorned
with fringes. {2} way of blinking the eyes. paN- n a wink of an eye. Sa
usa ka pamiluk nawálà siya, He vanished in the blink of an eye.

pilúka n wig, wiglet, false hair. v [A; b] use a wig or false hair.

piluk maríya = agúhù.

pilung a for a pointed instrument to be bent out of shape at the tip.
v {1} [A; a12] bend the point of an instrument. Napilung ang tumuy sa
pín pagkahúlug, The pen point was bent out of shape when I dropped it.
{2} [A; b6(1)] cut the ear or part of it so that it dangles, usually as
an identifying mark.

pilus n k.o. cloth with a soft, furry surface.

pilusupíya n philosophy.

pilusupu a {1} philosopher. {2} argumentative, given to meticulous
argumentations on trivial points. Pilusupu kaáyung tawhána kay
lantugíun bísag gagmayng butang, He is a very argumentative person
because he argues on even the most trivial of things. v [B1; a12]
become argumentative. Culu- v [A1] acting argumentative on trivial
points where one shouldn’t do so. Dì siya makapupilusupu nákù kay
suphun man dáyun, He can’t start subjecting me to his spidery logic
because I’ll cut him short.

pílut v [AB; a] sew up, patch a hole permanently, become so. Akuy
mupílut sa gisì sa ímung sinínà, I’ll mend the tear in your dress.
Mapílut ang lungag sa dawunggan ug dílì ariyúsan, The holes in your ear
will close if you do not wear earrings. Pilútun ang mga lungaglungag
úsà silákan, The tiny holes are filled before you apply shellac. (→)
a {1} slit-eyed. {2} for seeds or fruits to be thin, compressed. Dílì
maáyung itanum ang mga lísung pilut, It is no good to plant scrawny
seeds. v [B25] for seeds or fruits to be too thin or scrawny.

pilutári n jai alai player. v [B156; a12] be a jai alai player.

pilútu n pilot of a plane or boat. v {1} [A] pilot s.t. {2} [B156; a2]
be, become a pilot.

pilya = pilyu (female).

pilyu a naughty, mischievous. v [B12] become naughty, mischievous.
Napilyu siya kay pinatuyángan sa kapritsu, He became a naughty child
because they catered to his caprices. — sa babáyi a philanderer. -in-
v [A; c1] behave mischievously, usually at s.o.’s expense. Mangasábà
ang maistra ug pinilyuhun (ipinilyu) nímu pagpangutána, The teacher
will scold you if you ask questions in a naughty way.

píma n cloth made of pima cotton. v [A13] wear s.t. of pima.

pimbríra = timbríra.

piminta = pimyinta.

pimríra = timbríra.

pimyinta n black or white pepper. v [b6] put pepper in s.t.

pín_1 n pen point of a fountain pen. — puyint pen point of a dip pen.

pín_2 v [A; c] pin a ribbon or badge of honor, an ornament, and the
like. Pínan ang balidikturyan ug midalya, They’ll pin a medal on the
valedictorian.

pina- prefix consisting of pa- plus -in-_2.

pína_1 v [A; c] tell s.o. not to do s.t. Nagpína si Tátay nga dì ta
pagul-un, Father told us not to go out. Gipináhan ang dinakpan sa dílì
pagpamakak, The suspect was told to tell the truth. Tumána ang ákung
gipína nímu, If I tell you not to do s.t., don’t do it.

pína_2 v [A; c1] hit s.t. at an angle instead of directly. Pináhi ang
burilyus arun mapingkian ang tupad, Hit the bowling pin obliquely so
that it will knock the other pins over, too. a grazing a target or
hitting it obliquely.

pinal v [B1456] be laboring for breath on one’s deathbed. Nagpinal pa
gánì ang amahan, nag-ílug na sila sa katigayúnan, The father was still
laboring for breath on his deathbed, and they were already quarreling
about the inheritance. kudigu — n {1} penal code. {2} = kudigu, n2, v.

pináli n finale, the closing of a show.

pinápul n a k.o. ornamental cactus which has pineapple-like leaves with
thorny margins and pinkish tips.

pinatbátir n peanut butter. v [A; a] make, use peanut butter.

pinay n Filipina (colloquial).

pinbuy n pin boy in a bowling alley. v [B156; a12] be a pin boy.

pindaypinday v [A; c16] move in a wobbly way. Nagpindaypinday ang
kabáyung bag-ung nahimugsù, The horse that was just born is tottering.

pindì v [A; a2] {1} remove unhusked rice or corn grains or pebbles from
a batch of rice or grits one is about to cook. {2} select good ears of
corn from a group. Pindía ang mais nga pára binhì, Select the good ears
of corn for seeds. -in-an n {1} rice from which the unhusked grains or
pebbles have been culled. {2} ears of corn not selected.

pinding n pending, unacted on as of yet. Pinding ang kásu, The case is
pending.

pindir n a fielder in baseball.

pindisítis n appendicitis.

pindulu, pindulum n pendulum in a clock.

pindulun n king post supporting a roof.

ping n word used in writing to represent the sound of a bullet hitting
s.t.

píngag v [A; b5] chip the edge. Napíngag ang daplin sa pinggan, The
edge of the plate chipped. (→) a chipped. v [B1256] be a chipped one.
Ug mapingag ang tadiyaw ayawg palita, If the jar is chipped, don’t buy
it.

pingak a flat-nosed, esp. at the bridge. v [B12; b6] be, become
flat-nosed.

pingakpíngak v [A] breathe laboriously with a wheezing sound in the
breast, as in stifling a sob or in an asthmatic spasm. Mupingakpíngak
dáyun nà siya ug kasab-an, She starts sniffling when she’s scolded just
the slightest bit. Nagpingakpíngak ang hubákun, The asthmatic is
breathing laboriously.

pingay n child’s talk for female genitalia.

pingga v [A; a] carry s.o. in a chair with poles attached to it.
Gipingga ang Santu Pápa, The pope was carried seated on a throne.
n chair used to carry s.o. pinggahan n = pingga, n.

pinggan n dinner plate, usually china. v [A1; a2] eat from china
plates. Dì ta magpinggan kay kápuy paghúgas, We won’t use plates
because it’s tiresome to wash them. pingganpinggan = bukinggan:
Gomphrena globosa.

pinggiring n fingering in playing an instrument or operating a
typewriter. Unsay pinggiring íning nutáha? What’s the fingering for
this note?

pinggir prin, pinggir print n fingerprint. v [A; b6] take s.o.’s
fingerprints.

pinghuy a disappointed and downhearted. Pinghuy ang nawung sa pildíru,
The man who lost in gambling had a dejected look on his face. v [BN;
c1] be disappointed and downhearted. Naminghuy siya sa pagkahibalu nga
wà siya dawáta, He was disappointed when he discovered he was not
accepted.

pingis v [A12; ab] fail to hit s.t. directly or right on the mark.
Gipingsan sa bála ang ákung agtang, The bullet grazed my forehead. a
not hit directly. Pingis rang pagkaigúa maung nakalupad, I just grazed
it so it managed to fly away.

ping-it v {1} [B; c1] grimace, usually in pain or suffering. Miping-it
siya sa kasakit, He grimaced in pain. {2} [A13] suffer in much misery
or difficulty. Nagping-it ang tanan sa kamahal sa palalítun, Everybody
is suffering from the high prices of commodities.

pingk a pink-colored.

pingkaw = singkaw, n2, v.

pingkì v [AC; ac] knock lightly, esp. s.t. that produces a clinking
noise. Hináyag pingkì ang duha ka básu, Clink the two glasses together
lightly. Pingkíun ku unyà nang inyung úlu, I think I’ll knock your
heads against each other. a knock-kneed. Pingkì ang babáyi nga íyang
naasáwa, He married a knock-kneed woman. n clinking, clanking sound.
Ang pingkì sa yílu sa básu, The clinking of the ice against the glass.
-in- = pingkì, n.

pingkit a for things that are alike to be joined by some part of
themselves. Pingkit ang tiil sa bíbi, Ducks have webbed feet. Pingkit
nga ságing, Two bananas joined together as one. v [A; a] tie things
together using a part of them to do the tying. Nagpingkit siya sa mga
butung nga dad-un, He tied the two young coconuts together for us to
take home. -in- n things joined in this way.

pingpung n {1} ping-pong. {2} ping-pong ball. v [A2C; b6] play
ping-pong. -an n place to play ping-pong.

pinguspingus v [A13] make quick sniffs at intervals as in sobbing or
simply drawing mucus back into the nose. Naghilak tingáli ang bátà kay
nagpinguspingus man, The child must have been crying because he is
sniffling. n sniffling.

píngut a irritated, slightly angry. Píngut kaáyu ug makakità kug bátang
húgaw, I get very annoyed if I see a dirty child. v [B; ab3c5] get
annoyed, irritated. Nagpíngut ning ákung úlu sa kasábà, My head is
buzzing from the noise. Kinsay dílì mapíngut sa kabúgù nímu? Who
wouldn’t be irritated by your stupidity? ka- n irritation, anger.

ping-ut a for the nose to be stuffed. v [B6; b4] have a stuffed nose.
Muping-ut (maping-ut) ang ákung ilung ug hitun-ugan ku, I will get a
stuffed nose if I expose myself to the draft.

pinguypinguy v {1} [A; a3] let one’s head hang limply, as in being
sleepy, drunk, feeble, and the like. Nagpinguypinguy siya kay gitulug,
His head is hanging limply because he is so sleepy. {3} [AP; b6] hang
one’s head in shame. Mupinguypinguy (mupapinguypinguy) lang nà siyag
kasab-an, He just hangs his head when he is reprimanded.

pingwit v {1} = bingwit, v1. {2} [AN; a] pick pockets, filch (slang).
Gipingwit ang mga sinínà nga gihayhay sa kwartu, The clothes that were
hung in the room were stolen. Pingwíti ang íyang bulsa, Pick his
pocket. {3} fish for a compliment, gossip, and the like. n the
equipment for hook and line fishing in shallow or moderately deep sea
waters. -in-an n {1} fish caught by hook and line in shallow or not too
deep waters. {2} thing stolen or pickpocketed. {3} talk gathered.

pinhuldir n {1} penholder for a dip pen. {2} dip pen. v [A; ac] use,
write with a dip pen. Magpinhuldir mi sa ámung tim rayting, We’ll use
dip pens for writing our themes.

pinid v [A; a] {1} separate things out by class. {2} do s.t. in proper
order, not skipping around. Pinira ang paglimpiyu sa salug arun dì ka
magbalikbálik, Clean the floor square at a time so you don’t keep
having to go over the same things again and again. Akuy mupinid sa mga
maáyung púsù sa dì maáyu, I’ll separate the good ears of corn from the
bad ones. Pinira ang mga piryudiku sa tinuig, Separate the newspapers
out according to years.

pinig v [A; c1] {1} put aside. {2} sort or separate according to kind.
Nagpinig kug dagkung lubi pára ibinhì, I put aside the large coconuts
for seedlings. {3} exclude from. Gipinig siya sa iksǎm, She was excused
from the exam. {4} favor, show partiality to or discrimination against.
ma-un(←) a showing discrimination. Mapinígun siyag higála, He is choosy
about who he makes friends with.

pinikáda n k.o. disinfectant solution. agwa — = pinikáda.

pinikítu v [A; b5] enforce rules or collect debts in a strict manner.
Dúnay mga kumirsiyanti nga kusug mupinikítu ug paningil, Some business
people are merciless when it comes to collecting their debts.
Gipinikítu (gipinikitúhan) na run sa gubyirnu ang mga ismaglir, The
government is tightening the reins on the smugglers.

*píning maáyu ang — throwing the ball in bowling so that lots of pins
are knocked over. Dakù siyag puntus kay maáyu ang íyang píning, He has
a large score because he knocked lots of pins over.

pinípig = pilípig. — krans n ice cream on sticks with chocolate coating
that has pilípig embedded in it.

pinipíta = sirbilyíta_2.

pinisilin n penicillin.

pinising, pinísing n finish, final coating. v [A; b] apply finish.
Hámis ang simintung pinisíngan, The concrete floor will be smooth after
it has been finished. (→) n k.o. nail without a head used to nail
things in such a way that it is invisible.

pinitinsiya n penance. a involving difficulty or suffering. Pinitinsiya
kaáyu, kita pay mulíhuk nga nagsakit ta, It is purgatory to do
household chores when you’re not feeling well. v {1} [A; b6] impose
penance. Gipinitinsiyáhan kug usa ka nubína, I was given the penance of
performing a novena. {2} [A13; a12] annoy or burden s.o. with
sufferings. Pinitinsiyáhan ta ka arun ku makabalus, I’ll make you go
through hell so I can get even with you.

pinkaw = singkaw.

pinkusyun n pincushion. v [A; c] use a pincushion.

pinpal n pen pal. v [A2C; c3] have a pen pal, be pen pals. Makigpinpal
ang tigúlang pinsiyunádu ug Pilipína, The old pensioner wants to engage
in correspondence with a Filipina (for the purpose of marriage).

pinpin n game of eeny, meeny, miny, mo. One version of the rhyme:
Pinpin sirapin, kutsilyu dialmasin. Hawhaw dikarabaw, bá tú tin.
Another version: Pinpin sarapin dilmun. Bayintisingku kapun. Kulikulik
bastun. v [C2; a12] choose by pinpin.

pinsa n {1} fence of wood or bamboo slats. {2} space fenced with slats
under a house which is raised on posts. v [A; b5] {1} fence s.t.
{2} fence the part under a house. -in- n rough walling made of bamboo
slats, groups of two vertical slats woven through groups of three
horizontal slats.

pinsar, pinsǎr v [AN; a12] think of a way, solution. Pinsárun
(pinsarun) ta nig maáyu ug unsay maáyung paági, Let’s think hard about
this, what the best solution is. n one’s way of thinking, thought
processes. Hínay kaáyu ang íyang pinsar, apan pulus hustu, He thinks
slowly, but it is always correct. paN- = pinsar. pinsáda = pinsar.
pinsamintu, pinsamyintu = pinsar, n.

pinsil_1 v [A; b] treat a puncture with drops from a burning tobacco
midrib dipped in coconut oil. Kinahanglang pinsílan ang tunuk sa
lansang, The way to treat that wound from the nail is to apply tobacco
and coconut oil drops.

pinsil_2 n skirt, cut like a sheath, straight, narrow at the hips and
all the way down to the hem. v [A; c1] wear, make a skirt of this type.
— kat = pinsil_2.

pinsing n the sport of fencing. v [A2C; b3] fence.

pinsit n dish made of ground meat, wrapped in triangular pieces of
dough and fried crisp. v [A; a] make pinsit.

pinsiyun n {1} pension. {2} allowance given to a son or daughter with a
family of his own. v [A; c] give or support a daughter or son with a
family of his own. Gipinsiyunan mi sa ákung ginikánan samtang wà kuy
trabáhu, My parents are sending us an allowance until I find a job.
-áda = pinsiyunádu (female). -ádu n {1} one who receives a pension.
{2} person whose studies are subsidized by the government. v [B126]
become a pinsiyunádu.

pinta_1 v [A; abc] {1} do s.t. all at once. Pintáha paghákut ang káhuy,
Carry the firewood all together. Pintáhig báyad ang iskuyláhan, Pay the
school fees all at once. {2} do s.t. in large quantities. Pintáhag
palit arun mabarátu, Buy it in large quantities so it will be cheap.
{3} [A2; a12] hit s.t. squarely such that it has complete effect. Ug
mapintag búnal ang irù mamatay giyud, If you hit the dog squarely,
you’ll kill him. a be hit squarely. -da = pinta.

pinta_2 v [A2; a1] guess the value of an inverted mahjong piece by
feeling it with the finger tips. Pintáhun ku ang ímung witingan, I’ll
feel the piece to see which one is the one you are waiting for. -da =
pinta_2.

pintakási_1 v [A; b] work in a group without pay on a public project.
Gipintakasíhan sa tagibaryu ang iskuylahan, The people in the village
held a working bee to construct the school. n free group work on a
public project or the action of taking part in this k.o. group work.

pintakási_2 n licensed cockfight of champion fighting cocks. v [A1; c]
hold, have a champion cockfight. Magpintakási sa ámung baryu mapista,
They hold champion cockfights in our village during fiestas.

pintal n paint. v {1} [A; b] paint s.t. Pintáli ug asul ang lantsa,
Paint the launch blue. {2} [A2N] put lipstick on. Mamintal lang ku
iniglakaw, I put lipstick on when I go out. {3} [B1256] for one’s
feeling to show in the face. Napintal sa ílang nawung ang dakung
katingála, Their great surprise showed on their faces. -in-
n paintings. -in-an n s.t. that has been painted. maN-r- n painter:
{1} artist. {2} painter of houses, furniture, etc. paN- n {1} style of
painting. {2} occupation of painting.

pintas a ferocious, cruel and merciless. Pintas kaáyu ang liyun, A very
fierce lion. Ang pintas nga mga balud, The raging waves. v [B12] become
cruel and ferocious. ka- n ferocity, brutality. Ang kapintas sa mga
kaáway mauy gikahadlúkan sa mga sibilyan, The civilians feared the
merciless enemy.

pintik_1 n slingshot. v [A; a2b2] shoot with a slingshot. Pintíkun nátù
ang hinug nga búnga, Let’s knock the ripe fruit down with a slingshot.

pintik_2 = puntik.

pintikustis n Whitsunday.

pintuk_1 a terse, to the point. Památig maáyu kay pintuk ning ákung
túgun, Pay close attention because I’m going to tell you in a couple of
words what I want you to do. v [B26; c16] talk or answer in a terse
manner. pintukpintuk v [A; b(1)] do s.t. once in a while in short,
irregular periods of time and usually not whole-heartedly. Wà mahuman
ang trabáhu kay pintukpintúkan lang, The work never got done because he
didn’t stick to it and he didn’t have his heart in it.

pintuk_2 v [A12; b8] hit s.o. in back of one accidentally. Ayaw ug
barug sa ákung luyu kay hingpintukan unyà kas atsa, Don’t stand in back
of me because you might get hit with my axe.

pintil pin n felt-tip pen.

pintul (from putul) n pieces of wood left over after carpentry. Magámit
pa ning pintul pára sa bangkítu, We can use these pieces of wood for a
stool. v [A; a] {1} cut wood into short lengths, chop logs crosswise.
Nagpintul siya sa mga sugnud, He is cutting the firewood into lengths.
{2} shorten or stub s.t. by cutting off a length. Gipintúlan níya ang
mga tabákù, She cut off the tops of the tobacco. a cut off short, into
short lengths. Irù nga pintul ug íkug, A dog with a stubbed tail.

pintur, pintǔr n painter: {1} artist. {2} painter of houses and the
like. v [B156; a12] be, become a painter.

pintúra n paint. v [A; b] paint s.t. Nabag-u ang balay nga
gipinturáhan, Their house looks new because it was just painted. ka-
v [A13] get paint all over it.

pintus n {1} sweet made of shredded young corn mixed with condensed
milk or coconut milk and sugar, wrapped in husk and steamed (= alupì).
{2} the same sort of sweet made with fine corn grits (tiktik) or sweet
potatoes or cassava and wrapped in coconut or banana leaves. v [A; a]
make pintus.

pínu_1 a {1} refined, not coarse in manners. Pínug linihukan, Refined
in movement. {1a} fine, of delicate composition. Pínug lís, Fine lace.
{2} fine, not coarse in texture. Pínug kútis, Soft skin. Pínug buhuk,
Fine hair. Pínung pagkagaling, Milled finely. {2a} done in small
pieces. Pínung pagkahíwà, Cut up fine. {2b} closely spaced. Ang súlud
usa ka sudlay nga pínug tangu, The comb for lice is a very fine-toothed
comb. {2c} very tiny. Pínung kinusian, A small and sharp pinch.
n children, as opposed to grown-ups. Ilain ug lamísa ang mga pínu, Set
another table for the children. v {1} [B12; a12] become refined, do
s.t. in a refined way. {2} [A; a] make s.t. fine. pinupinu v [A13; a1]
break, reduce into tiny bits. pinuhan n a whetting stone of fine
texture used for the finishing touches.

pínu_2 n pine tree.

pínul v [A; a] press hard on the muscles with the tips of the thumb and
fingers to massage them.

pin-ut = ping-ut.

pinúun n a k.o. ginger plant similar to alimpuyang, producing small,
sweet berries.

pinuy_1 n Filipino, esp. one who is a resident abroad.

pinuy, pínuy n duck’s eggs cooked after they have began to develop.
v [A; a] make, have pinuy.

pinya n {1} pineapple. {2} cloth woven from the fibers of the pineapple
leaves. pinyahan n pineapple plantation.

pinyátu n peanut brittle. v [A1; a1] make peanut brittle.

pípa n {1} cigarette holder. {2} pipe. v [A; c6] smoke a pipe or
cigarettes with a cigarette holder. Magpípa ku arun dì madág ang ákung
tudlù, I use a cigarette holder so that my fingers don’t get yellowed.

pípar bag n large paper sack with a handle.

pípì n child’s word for female genitalia.

pìpì v [A; a12] hammer or pat s.t. into shape. Nagpìpì siyag kúlun,
He’s shaping a pot by patting it. Pìpíun nátù ang tapalúdung nalumping,
Let’s hammer the dented fender back into shape.

pipínu n cucumber.

pípir n canned white or black pepper in powder form. v [b] use or put
pepper.

pípir bag = pípar bag.

pipis n a small bundle of abaca fibers (about the size of a finger)
used for tying s.t. v [A; a2] make abaca fibers into such a bundle.
Pipisun nákù ning lánut kay ákung ibángan sa sugnud, I’m going to
bundle up this abaca fiber to use it to tie up the firewood.

pípis n cotton bud that is about to open. v [A1] for cotton buds to be
about to open.

piplum n peplum, a short flared skirt attached at the waist of a dress,
blouse, or jacket, and extending around the hips. v [b(1)] add a peplum
to clothing.

pipsi n pepsi cola. v [A13; b(1)] have, offer pepsi cola. paN- n money
to buy a pepsi.

pipti v [AC2; b6] share s.o.’s cigarette or drink with him. Mupipti ku
ánang ímung gitangag, ha? Let me share your cigarette with you, may I?
piptipipti a equal, even (colloquial). Piptipipti ang ílang báhin sa
ginansiya, They share the profit equally.

pír n pier.

pira n k.o. bladed hand weapon 18″ to 24″ with a blade that curves
upwards slightly toward the tip and flat at the tip.

píras n pear.

pirásu v [A; c] cut s.t. to pieces. Pirasúhun ang nangkà arun ibaligyà,
Cut the jackfruit into pieces to sell it. n a piece of s.t. Usa ka
pirásung karni, A piece of meat. -in- n s.t. cut into pieces. Ang
pinirásung karni dílì na mahímung hamun, You can’t use the meat for ham
once it has been cut up. -in-(→) a by the piece. Pinirasu ang íyang
iniphan sa labáda, She charges for the laundry by the piece. v [A; c1]
pay or charge by the piece.

pirat v {1} [B146; a4] be sleepy. Gipirat (nagpirat) na kug binása, I’m
sleepy from reading so much. {2} [A] dilly-dally, take time in doing
s.t. Nagpirat sila sa ílang trabáhu kay wà swilduhi, They worked slowly
because they didn’t get their salary. n lazy, loafer. Ang pirat nga
trabahadur wà umintuhi, He was a lazy worker so he didn’t get a raise.
piratpirat v {1} [A; c1] blink the eyes. Nagpiratpirat pa ang íyang
mata nga mibángun, He was still blinking his eyes when he got out of
bed. {2} [A] for a flame to flicker. Gási ang sugà kay nagpiratpirat
na, Put kerosene in the lamp because it is flickering.

piráta n pirate. v [B156] become a pirate.

piraypiray, piraypíray v [B46; c1] move unsteadily as if about to
collapse. Nagpiraypiray ang masakitun, The patient walked on unsteady
feet. sam- see sampiray.

pir bay pir a being paired off, esp. boys with girls. v [A12C; c16] do
s.t. paired off, be paired off. Nagpir bay pir ang mga nagdít sa
Pwinti, The couples dating in the park are paired off.

pir dayim n per diem. v [A13; b(1)] give or have a per diem allowance.
Magpirdayim (pir dayman) mig diyis písus ang adlaw, We get a per diem
of ten pesos. Ang kumpaníya magpirdayim námug diyis, The company gives
us a per diem of ten pesos.

pirdi = pildi. -da a for a woman to have lost her virginity.

pirdigána n game of chess, checkers, or the like in which the object is
to make the opponent win all the pieces. v [C2; c1] play pirdigána.

pirdigun, pirdigúnis n {1} air rifle or shotgun pellets. {2} seeds of
the mung bean (humorous). Nag-útan mig pirdigúnis, We’re having mung
bean stew.

pirdisiyun n loss or destruction. v [B46; b4(1)] cause loss or
destruction. Napirdisiyunan mig diyútay sa ámung mga lubi sa pagbagyu,
We lost a few of our coconut trees during the typhoon.

pirdǔn n {1} release from temporal punishment or from punishment for a
soul in purgatory. {2} candle blessed on February 2 in the kandilarya
celebration together with the kandilarya candles. The pirdǔn candles
are lighted to ask forgiveness for the sins of a dying man. kandílà sa
— = pirdǔn, 2.

pirgula n pergola. v [b6(1)] make a pergola.

pirhisyu = pirhwisyu.

pirhwisyu a making a nuisance of oneself. Pahatud ka sa iskuylahan.
Pakúhà. Pirhwisyu ka kaáyu, I have to bring you to school and get you.
You’re a nuisance. v {1} [B; a2] make a nuisance of oneself.
Nagpirhwisyu ang bátà kay giinítan, The child is crying in an annoying
way because he feels hot. {2} [a12] be put to useless effort or
inconvenience. Napirhwisyu kug adtu sa Karkar kay wà didtu ag ámung
túyù, I went to a lot of trouble for nothing when I went to Carcar
because the person we wanted to see was not there.

piri v [A12; b2c3] surpass in ability or possessions. Dílì giyud nang
bayhána mapiri sa mga istayil, That woman has to keep up with the
latest styles at all costs. Dì nà siya hipirihan sa pagkagwápa, She is
second to none in her beauty. pa- v [A13] allow oneself to get
surpassed in ability or possessions. Ug sukmatan, dì siya papiri.
Mutubag pud, If you scold him, he won’t let you get the last word. He
talks back.

píri n ferry. v [A; ac] ferry; go, take on a ferry. — but n ferry boat.

pirigpirig v [B46; c16] wobble, move unsteadily. Dì pa ku manáug kay
nagpirigpirig pa ku, I won’t go out yet because I still feel wobbly.
Nagpirigpirig siya sa hagdan nga nagkurugkurug, He was walking gingerly
on the wobbly steps.

pirigrínu n pilgrim. v [A1; c] make a pilgrimage. pirigrinasiyun
n pilgrimage.

pirigula = pirgula.

pirihisyu = pirhwisyu.

piríku n {1} parrot, esp. the blue-naped parrot: Tanygnathus
lucionensis. {2} one who mouths and repeats things without
understanding them. — pikuy {1} parrot. {2} male genitalia (child’s
talk). — táwu phrase uttered to a parrot to make him answer the same
thing. pirikúhun a parrot-like. Taas untà siyag ilung apan pirikúhun,
He has a long nose; only it’s like a parrot’s.

pirimyu = primyu.

pirinda = prinda.

piris wil n ferris wheel. v [A] ride in a ferris wheel.

pirítu = prítu.

pirkal n percale, k.o. closely woven cotton, usually with large flowery
designs. v [A; b(1)] wear clothing made of percale.

pirlas n pearl. paN- v [N2; b6] dive for pearls. n pearl diving. mag-r-
n pearl diver.

pirma_1 n signature. v [A; b] affix one’s signature. Pirmáhi ang tsíki
sa luyu, Sign your name on the back of the check.

pirma_2 = kumpirma, n, v1.

pirmaninti a permanent. Kaswal lang ku. Dílì pirmaninti ning ákung
trabáhu, I’m just a casual employee. My work is not permanent. v [B;
c1] be permanent, make s.t. permanent. Maáyug magpirmaninti ning ákung
dibuynas, It would be nice if my luck were a permanent thing.
Pirmanintíhun (ipirmaninti) na nátù ang átung kapilya, We’ll build a
permanent chapel.

pirmi a {1} always. Pirmi ka lang malít, You’re always late.
{2} steadily, consistent. Ug pirmi ang inandaran sa mutur, way daut, If
the motor runs steadily, there’s nothing wrong. v [A; ac] do s.t.
always or regularly all the time. Nagpirmi lang siyag katúlug, He is
sleeping all the time. Pirmíha ang ímung maáyung gáwì, Maintain your
good ways. Ipirmi ang ímung kamut sa ákung tiyan, Keep your hand on my
stomach. — ang táku {1} hold on to the cue in billiards—i.e., not lose
the play. (When one misses, the cue is passed to the next players.)
{2} go steady with a girl. {2a} have intercourse steadily. {3} be
employed steadily in one job. v {1} [AB6; c16] keep the cue in
billiards. {2} go steady with s.o. Mupirmi (mapirmi) ang táku nátù kun
pahagkun ku nímu, I will go steady with you if you will let me kiss
you. {2a} [A; c16] have sexual intercourse regularly. Nagpirmi ang
ílang táku kay nahigám, They always make love because they have come to
learn how much fun it is. {3} [B6; c16] become permanent in a job.
Mapirmi ang ímung táku basta maáyu ang ímung ági, I will keep employing
you if you do well.

pirmíru = primíru.

pirmísu n permission, permit. Dúnay pirmísu ang ílang bayli, They have
a permit to hold their dances. Milakaw silang way pirmísu sa inahan,
They went out without their mother’s permission. v [A; b6] give
permission.

pirmisyas = primisyas.

pirmit n permit, license to do s.t.

pirnu n bolt. v [A; b6] make, use a bolt s.w.

pirpiktu a perfect. v [A12; a12] make s.t. perfect.

pirpitwa see kadína.

pirpúmi n perfume. v [A; b] use perfume.

pirs = pirst.

pirsigir v [A; a3c] force oneself or s.o. to do s.t.; do s.t. with
persistence and determination. Mipirsigir ang masakitun pagtindug, The
patient forced himself to get up. Pirsigiha siya pagpakasal sa íyang
gipirdi, Make him marry the woman he disgraced.

pirsing kap n cap with a visor in the front, of the type worn by army
officers. v [A13] wear such a cap.

pirst n {1} first place in a competition. {1a} one who is first place,
first-placer. Akuy pirst sa ámung klási, I’m the best in my class.
{2} the one before the second. Ang ímung ngán pirst sa lista, Your name
is at the top of the list. — bis n first base in baseball. v {1} [A2;
b4(1)] reach first base. Hingpirstbisan ta sa átung kuntra, Our
opponents managed to reach the first base. {2} [A12] get to first base
with a girl, get a favorable reaction. Gidatungan kug maáyu ang inahan
piru wà giyud ku makapirst bis sa anak, I bribed the mother, but I
still couldn’t get to first base with the daughter. — hap n first half
of a basketball game. -id n first aid. v [A; b6] give first aid.
Pirst-íri dáyun ug dúnay makuyapang kadíti, If a cadet faints, give him
first aid immediately. — klas n first class. Pirst klas nga pasahíru,
First-class passenger. Púru mga pirst klas ang ákung saput, My clothes
are all of the best quality. v [A] go by way of first class, get first
class things. — lídi n first lady, wife of the top official. v [B1256]
be the first lady. — prayis n first prize. v [A12] win the first prize.
— plur n ground floor. — ran n first-run movie. v [B1256] be a
first-run movie. — trip the first trip of the day of a passenger
vehicle. v [A] go on the first trip.

pirsúna n one of the three persons of the Holy Trinity.

pirsunáhi n {1} participant in a movie or play. {2} important persons.
Mga pirsunáhi sa nátad sa kasinihan, Important personages in the movie
world.

pirsunal a {1} in person. Gustu kung makítà si Núra Unur sa pirsunal, I
want to see Nora Aunor in person. {2} personal, pertaining to one’s
private life. Ayawg basáha ang sulat kay pirsunal kanà, Don’t read that
letter. It’s personal. v [A2; c16] do s.t. in person. Pirsunalun
(ipirsunal) nákù paghátag ang rigálu, I’ll give the gift in person. —
apírans n personal appearance. v [A] make a personal appearance.
Mupirsunal apírans sa istudiyu ang Mis Yunibirs, Miss Universe will
make a personal appearance at the studio. -minti = pirsunal, a1.

pirsunalidad n personality, personal charm or attraction. Wà giyud
siyay pirsunalidad, He has no personality.

pirtilaysir n fertilizer. v [A; b] use fertilizer.

piru, píru but. Mahal piru maáyu, It’s expensive, but good.

pirù = piruk.

piruhwisyu = pirhwisyu.

piruk v [B6; c1] for the eyes to blink once. pirukpiruk v {1} [A; c1]
for the eyes to keep blinking. Dì na mupirukpiruk ang ákung tabuntabun
sukad ákung gihílut, My eyelids don’t blink anymore after I massaged
them. Nagpirukpiruk lang siyang gipangutána, She simply blinked her
eyes when she was interrogated. {2} [A] for a flame or light to
flicker.

pirukpiruk n k.o. bird with light brown feathers and black speckles,
inhabiting meadows, usually staying perched, singing a rhythm which
sounds pirukpiruk.

pírul n {1} pay roll. {2} amount of money to make the pay roll. v [A1]
make out the pay roll.

pirut, pírut n {1} a small bird of meadows, the grass warbler:
Cisticola sp. {2} the smallest person in a group.

piruypiruy v [B6; c1] be unsteady and trembly on one’s feet.
Magpiruypiruy pa kug mubángun ku, I’m very wobbly if I try to get up.

pirwil parti = dispidída. see dispidir.

pirwisyu = pirhwisyu.

pirya n {1} fair, carnival. {2} booth in a fair. Daghang pirya sa
karnabal, There are lots of booths in the carnival. v [A; b6] hold a
fair.

piryud n {1} period, punctuation mark. {2} period, there’s no more to
be said about. Dì ka makalakaw. Piryud, You can’t go, and that’s all
there is to it. Piryud na mi kay hustu ra ang tulu, We’re not going to
have any more children. Three is enough. v [b6] put a period.

piryudikal n periodical test given prior to the grading period. v [A]
have, take a periodical test. — tist = piryudikal.

piryudiku n newspaper.

piryudista n journalist. v [B156; a12] be, become a journalist.

pís = pyis.

písa_1 n {1} spare parts of a machine. {2} bolt or roll of cloth.
v [c16] buy cloth by the bolt.

písa_2 n music, musical score. v [A13; b6] use the music in playing.
Maáyung magpísa arun dì masayup ang pagtukar, Better use the music so
you won’t make a mistake.

pisà, písà v [A2S; a] press down s.t. hard and move back and forth over
it to crush or mash it. Magpisà kug ságing ipakáun sa bátà, I’ll mash a
ripe banana for the child. Pisaa ang lisay hangtud mawálà, Press down
hard on the swollen lymph node until it disappears.

pisáda_1, pisadur see pisar_3.

pisáda_2 n the measurement or distance between the frets of stringed
instruments. v [A; a12] measure the fret distance.

pisak, písak a muddy ground, mire. Pisak kaáyu ang dálan kay nag-ulan
man, The street has turned to mud because it was raining. v [B; c6]
become a mire. Mupisak (mapisak) nang silung ug pirmihag yabu sa
hinúgas, The ground underneath the kitchen will turn into a mire if you
keep throwing the dishwater on it. pisakpisak v {1} [A; c1] spatter or
splatter dirt or liquid. Nabasà ang sawug kay nagpisakpisak ang bátà sa
banyu, The floor got wet because the children were splashing around in
the bathtub. {2} [A; c16] make a spattering sound. Hilabihan nga
nakapisakpisak ang ulan sa gawas, How the rain went pat, pat, pat.
n {1} spattering, wet spot caused by spattering. {2} spattering sound.

pis-ak v [A; a] split wood along the grain, or by extension, split
similar materials. Nagpis-ak ka na ba ug káhuy isugnud? Have you split
wood to use for fuel? n piece chopped off.

pisami = kisami.

pisan v [AN; a1] buy s.t. in bulk. Pisánun ku ang ímung pitu ka alat
mangga, I’ll buy your seven basketfuls of mangoes. maN-r- n one who
buys in bulk.

pisar_1 v [A; a] press down on. Nagpisar kaniya ang daghang prublíma,
Numerous problems weigh down on him. Pisara siya arun mutug-an, Press
him so he will tell. Napisar siya sa duha ka dagkung batu, He was
pressed between two huge boulders.

pisar_2 v [A; a12] think about, weigh s.t. in the mind. Gipisar niya
kun muadtu ba siya u dílì, He is weighing it in his mind whether to go
or not.

pisar_3 v [A; a] for a dealer to weigh goods he is going to buy. Átung
pisarun ang ímung bábuy, I’ll weigh your pig (to buy it). pisáda
n computation of how much s.t. weighs and is worth. pisadur n the one
who weighs produce being bought, usually copra. v [B156; a12] become a
weigher.

pisára n blackboard. v [A13] use, write on the blackboard.

pisat v [A; a] mash, squash s.t. Napisat ang kamátis nga natumban, He
squashed the tomato when he stepped on it. a crushed, flattened.

pisaw n a k.o. kitchen knife usually with a metal handle.

písi n acronym for P.C., the Philippine Constabulary. v [B156; a12] be,
become a member of the P.C. pa- v [A; bc] have the P.C. arrest s.o.
Ipapísi (papisíhan) nang hubug, Have the P.C. arrest (watch) that
drunk. — kuntrul n P.C. control. v [a4] put under the control of the
P.C. Gipísi kuntrul ang lungsud kay gubut pirmi, The town was placed
under P.C. control because of the frequent outbreaks of violence.

písì n rope consisting of two or three strands (lúbid) twisted
together, usually made of fiber. v [A; a] make a rope, twist s.t. like
a rope. -an n a device for twisting rope. -in- n tidbit, made of a
heavy dough twisted like a rope and fried until it is brown and
crunchy. v [A; a12] make, have pinísì. mag-r-, maN-r- n rope maker.
-un(→) n fiber to be made into a rope.

pisik v {1} [A; b2c1] spatter, splatter. Hingpiksan kug lápuk, I got
spattered with mud. {2} [A; b2c] channel s.t., cause a little bit of
s.t. to come to certain people. Kinsang kandidatúhay nagpisik ug kwarta
pára sa átung lungsud? Which candidate was it that cornered a little
bit of money for our town? Hingpiksan kug diyútay sa íyang daug, I
managed to get my hands on a little of his winnings. a spattering,
shooting off of droplets. Pisik duul sa bintánà ug mag-uwan, The water
splashes next to the window if it rains. hiN-/haN- v {1} [B1256] for a
small amount to be channeled off to s.o. Way sud-ang nahimisik sa mga
mutsatsa. Gihurut ug káun sa bisíta, Not a bit of food seeped to the
servants. The visitors ate every bit. {2} walà, dílì — not spared. Way
mahimisik sa kaligutgut sa Diyus, No one is spared God’s wrath.

pisikal n {1} pertaining to the body as opposed to the mind.
{2} physical education class. {3} physical examination. v {1} [A1] have
a physical education. {2} [A] give a physical examination.

písiks n physics course or class. v [A13] have a physics class.

pisil, písil v {1} [A; ab2] squeeze s.t. with the tips of the fingers
fairly far apart. Pisíla (pisla) ang mangga ug humuk na ba, Squeeze the
mango to see if it is ripe yet. {2} squeeze with the fingers to massage
or convey a feeling. Kamau kang mamísil (mupísil) sa gilabdan ug úlu?
Do you know how to massage a headache? Gipisil níya ang kamut sa
dalága, She gently squeezed the girl’s hand.

piskadur n fisherman. v [B156; a12] be, become a fisherman.

piskal n fiscal, district attorney. — sa simbahan n church clerk or one
in charge of keeping the records of the church. v [B156; a12] be or
become a fiscal. -íya n office of the district attorney.

piskanti n {1} box in a carriage where the driver sits. {2} balcony on
the outside of a house. Didtu siya magdiskursu sa piskanti, He made a
speech from the balcony. {3} davit, a crane projecting over the side of
a ship for hoisting lifeboats.

piskat_1 (euphemism for pisti) {1} expression of disgruntlement. Piskat
ning kinabuhía kay kanúnay lang tang gidimalas, What a hell of a life
this is. We always have bad luck. {2} expression of surprise after
having done s.t. inadvertently or failing to have done s.t. Piskat
nabyaan ang ákung pitáka, Heavens! I forgot my wallet.

piskat_2 = mitmit.

piskay a {1} alert, active and full of energy. {2} full of life. Piskay
ang plásag maduminggu, The plaza is lively on Sundays. {3} good-looking
or well-dressed woman. {4} pretty in general. v {1} [B2] active and
full of energy, sprightly. Mupiskay ang átung láwas basta hustug túlug,
You are full of vim and vigor if you get the right amount of sleep.
Nagkapiskay na ang masakitun, The patient is getting stronger.
Gipiskáyan ku sa ákung gibátì karun, I feel sprightly now. {1a} [AB; a]
do s.t. briskly or hurriedly. Nagkapiskay ang ámung paglakaw
pagtaligsik, We walked faster when it started to rain. Piskáya ang
pagkuwinta kay naghulat siya, Hurry up with your counting because she
is waiting. {2} get lively and bright. Kining mga búlak ang nakapiskay
sa ámung panimalay, These flowers made our home lively. {3} [B12; a1]
get nice looking, pretty. -un a of a lively, alert, cheerful sort.

piskul = piskat_1.

piskur n U.S. Peace Corps volunteer. v [B156; a12] be a Peace Corps
volunteer.

piskut, piskuy = piskat_1.

pislà v {1} [A; b6c1] spurt s.t. out. Ang mga táwung dilì idukádu
mupislà lang sa bungbung ug manlúwà, Uneducated people go out and spit
their saliva against the walls. Magpislà ang núkus sa íyang átà ug
matugaw, Squids spurt out ink if you disturb them. {2} [A3P; c1]
produce a splattering, plopping sound. Mupislà ang lápuk ug
tunubtunuban, Mud produces a plopping sound when you step in it.

pislangù a {1} having a stuffy nose. {2} flat-nosed. Madaníhun nang
bayhána bísag pislangù, She’s charming even if she’s flat-nosed.
{3} ugly in manner or looks. Wà tay pagaunúhan kay gawas nga pislangù
ug dagway, pislangù pa giyud ug batásan, She doesn’t have a single
redeeming feature because aside from being homely she has an unpleasant
disposition as well. n light disease of chickens similar to colds.
v [B1; a4] have a nasal voice due to cold. Nagpislangù (gipislangù) ku
kay giulanan, I have a bad cold because I got caught in the rain.

pislat v {1} [A; a12] squash, flatten and mash s.t. Pisláta ang ságing
nga ipakáun sa bátà, Crush the banana to feed to the baby. {2} [B16;
b6] have a flat nose. Ug ang mga ginikánan pislat, mapislat pud ang
anak, If the parents are flat-nosed, the offspring will also be
flat-nosed. a flat-nosed. Ayaw ug panaway kay pislat ka man sad kaáyu,
Don’t ever criticize for your nose is flat, too.

pislayit = plasláyit.

pislit v {1} [A; a2b2] press s.t. hard with the fingers. Kinsay
mipislit sa timbri? Who pushed the buzzer? Ayaw pislíta ang mangga kay
mabun-ug, Don’t squeeze the mango because you will bruise it. {2} [AN;
a12] massage s.o. by pressing with the finger tips. Pislítun ta ka arun
mawā̀ ang ímung pamául, I’ll massage you so that your muscle pains will
disappear. — layit n flashlight (humorous).

pisluk v {1} [B26] go to sleep (said in anger). Mupisluk (mapisluk) ka
na ba sad nga buntag na man? Are you going to go back to sleep again
when it’s morning already? {2} [B12; b6] be dark, be getting dark (said
in anger). Nagkapisluk na núun mau pay ipangáhuy! Why do you wait until
it begins to get dark to look for firewood!

pislun n a brand of strong synthetic thread used in line fishing and in
weaving into fishing nets.

pislung n dent, a slight depression, small hollow. a dented. Pislung ug
ilung, Having a flat nose. v [AB126; a1] dent s.t. on the surface.
Kinsay nagpislung sa takurì? Who dented the kettle?

pislut = pidlasut.

pismil n fish meal, ground dried fish used as feed for poultry. v [A1;
a12] make fish meal.

pisngà, pisngag, pisngi, pisngì, pisngig mild cuss word expressing
disgust (euphemism for pisti). Pisngì! Ngánung nalimtan man nákug dala,
Darn! Why did I forget to bring it?

pisngù = pislangù.

pispan n fishpond. Kasagáran sa pansat gíkan sa pispan, Most prawns
come from the fishpond. v [A; a12] make a fishpond. Magpispan ku sa may
katunggan, I’ll make a fishpond near the mangrove swamps. Pispánun níya
ang swíming pul, He will convert the swimming pool into a fishpond.

pispis n k.o. green tree insect that makes a shrill sound at night (so
called from its sound). It is believed that a pispis in the house is
the voice of a departed one who has come to ask for help in the form of
prayers for his salvation. aN-r- = pispis.

pista n {1} feast in honor of a patron saint. — upisiyal public
holiday. — sa simbahan church holiday. {2} expression meaning ‘your
slip is showing’ (humorous—from the notion that people hang out
curtains during fiesta and another way of calling a woman’s attention
that her slip is showing is to use pangurtína which literally means,
‘hang out curtains’). v {1} [A1; b(1)] hold or celebrate a feast day.
Magpista mi sa tris di Máyu, We hold our celebration on the third of
May. {1a} [A13] — sa inyu your slip is showing (they’re celebrating the
feast day in your place). {2} [A13] it would be a miracle if
(such-and-such an unlikely thing) were to happen. Magpista ug muanhi pa
tu siya, It would be a miracle if he ever were to come here. Magpista
ug sugtun ka ni Maríya, It would be a miracle if Maria were to accept
you. paN- v [A2; c] attend the celebration of a feast day. Nakapamista
sila sa pista sa Santu Ninyu, They attended the celebration of the
feast of the Holy Child. ikapaN- presentable, look good enough to take
to a fiesta. Bubintahag nawung ang bána ni Nilya, ikapamista man sab,
Nelia’s husband is good-looking enough. You wouldn’t be ashamed of him.
-in- a eating in large quantities like at a feast. maN-r-, mamistáhay
n fiesta goers.

pistayim n the period immediately after the war. Pistayim na kug
maminyù, I got married after the war. v [B126C] be in good terms after
a quarrel or misunderstanding, usually said of couples. Nagkapistayim
na ang magtiáyung nag-áway, The quarreling couple are in good terms
again.

pisti n {1} pestilence. {2} s.o. or s.t. who causes a pestilence.
Tambal bátuk sa mga pisti, Medicine against germs. {3} strong curse
expressing anger or disgust. Pisting yáwà gikáwat ang mga búnga, God
damn it to hell. They stole the fruits. Pisti ning kinabuhía. Kanúnay
lang way kwarta, What a goddamned life! We never have money. -ng yáwà
n strong curse expressing anger or disgust. v [a4] {1} be affected with
pestilence. Ang ginharían nalúpig dihang gipisti ang mga ginsakpan, The
kingdom was vanquished when a pestilence hit the people. {2} go to
hell. Pistihun ka pa untà, Go to hell! (Lit. I hope a pestilence takes
you.)

pistud = pistul.

pistul (euphemism for pisti) exclamation of disgust. Pistul! Nalimtan
ku ag bálun, Darn! I left my lunch home. — (nga) yawáa euphemism for
pisting yáwà exclamation of disgust.

pistúla n {1} pistol, revolver. {2} prominent hipbone (humorous). v [A;
a12] shoot or hit s.o. with a pistol. Gipistúla ang kaáway, He shot the
enemy (or he hit the enemy on the head) with a pistol.

pistun_1 n piston. — ring piston ring. — rad piston rod.

pistun_2 n home-made detonator put into dynamite, made of a little
cigarette-sized roll of tin plate, filled with gunpowder. v [A; c3]
attach or use a detonator of this sort.

písu_1 peso, the Philippine unit of currency (singular). Un písu, One
peso. {2} peso bill. Duha ka písu, Two peso bills. {3} — kuntra usa ka
dakù [so-and-so] is nothing (a penny) as compared with s.o. else who is
s.t. (a peso). Ngánung ashan pa nímug súkul nà nga písu ka man kuntra
usa ka dakù? Why do you have to bother fighting with that bum who’s
nothing but so much trash compared to you? -s peso. Pila ni? Písus? Dus
písus? How much is this? A peso? Two pesos? v {1} [B56; a2] cost a
peso. Nagpísus na ang kílu sa kamátis, Tomatoes cost a peso a kilogram.
Pisúsa lang ni, Let me have it for a peso. {2} [A123S] receive a
scolding. Makapisus ka sa ímung gibúhat, You’ll get a scolding for what
you did. maN-, maN-(→) costing a peso each. v [a12] {1} price s.t. at a
peso. {2} change s.t. into one-peso notes. maN-un n {1} the one-peso
kind. {2} one-peso bills.

písu_2 n storey of a building. Náa sa ikaduhang písu ang íyang klási,
Her class is on the second floor.

pisù n {1} chick or young of other birds. {2} endearing reference for
one’s children. {3} novice, s.o. new to s.t. Pisù pa lang siya sa
panuwat, He is new to the writing profession. v [AN; a] hatch an egg.
Ang ubang himungáan dì mupisù sa ílang itlug, Some hens won’t hatch
their eggs. (←)_1 n birdling. pis-an n {1} hen or bird that has chicks.
{2} an egg that has a chick in it.

písù_2 v {1a} [A; ab2] press the tip of one’s fingers over a part of
the body to massage it. Magpísù pa ku sa ákung buktun nga namanhud,
I’ll massage my arms because they are numb. Hipisuan ku ang íyang
hubag, I accidentally pressed her boil when I massaged her.

pisuk, písuk v [A; a] {1} push s.t. small into a depressed position.
Pisúkun ku nang mata mu, I will push your eyes into your head. {2} hit
a certain small point right on the head (as if it were being pushed
inwards). Pisúkun ku nang batu sa ákung kasing, I will hit the stone
directly with my top. {3} make a dent in s.t., covering only a small
area. (→) a {1} for s.t. small to be depressed, sunken. Maglisud
pagtútuy ang bátà kay pisuk ug atngal ang inahan, The child has
difficulty suckling because the mother has inverted nipples. {2} being
hit right at the spot aimed for.

pisukut n {1} inflammation of the eyes characterized by watery and
mucal secretion. {2} disease of poultry characterized by watery eyes,
eruptions, and debility. v [B16; a4] {1} get this eye infection.
Nagpisikut (gipisikut) ang íyang mata, His eyes are infected. {2} for
chickens to get this sickness.

písul = písù_2.

písun n steamroller. v [A; b5] steamroller. Hámis ang dálan kay human
na man pisuna (pisuni), The road is smooth because it has been
steamrollered.

pisut_1 a {1} uncircumcised. {2} not having holes in the ears. {3} an
inexperienced beginner. Ikaw nga pisut pa ánang tárì, dílì ángay nga
mupusta ug dakù, You’re just a greenhorn so you should not bet great
amounts. v [B126] turn out to be uncircumcised.

pisut_2 n k.o. small edible sea cucumber, dark brown to black in color.

pisyat= pislat.

pisyu (from upisyu) v [A13; abc] always, keep on doing s.t. Ngánung
nagpisyu siyag hilak? Why is he always crying? Pagminatarung. Mau nay
gipisyug maymay sa ákung mga ginikánan, Be good. That’s what my parents
always remind me to do.

pisyútis n the tiller in small boats. v [A13; a12] attach, make into a
tiller.

píta n an ordinary variety of rice with white grains.

pità n ground which is muddy and dirty. Ang bábuy milúnang sa pità, The
pig wallowed in the mud. v [B2] become muddy and dirty. Mupità (mapità)
nang sílung ug sigíhag yabu ug hinúgas, The ground underneath the
kitchen will become a dirty mire if you keep throwing the dishwater
there.

pitáda n the sound of a loud and sharp whistle blast or siren.

pitak n muddy area, mudhole full of water. n muddy place. Ayaw tumbi
ang pitak, Don’t step in the mud puddle. (←)_1 v [B12; b6] become muddy
or a mud puddle. Napitak ang nataran nga gisigíhag uwan, The yard
became a mire because it kept raining all the time.

pítak_2 v [A; a1] for s.t. fragile to be crushed into pieces. Napítak
ang ákung bulpin nga natumban, My ball-point pen was broken because
s.o. stepped on it. v [AB12; c1] squash s.t. flat leaving it intact.
Dagkung makina ang mupítak sa mga awtung gubà, Huge machines will
flatten the old cars. Napítak ang mga kamátis, The tomatoes got
squashed flat.

pitáka n purse, wallet, pocketbook. v {1} [A; b6] use a purse, wallet,
pocketbook. Nagpitáka ku bisan ug way sáping ikasulud, I was carrying a
purse even though I didn’t have any money to put inside it. {2} [A12]
obtain a purse, wallet, pocketbook. {3} [A; c] put s.t. in a purse,
wallet, pocketbook. Ipitáka nang ribulbir, Put the revolver in a
pocketbook.

pitáti n k.o. mat (banig) made of heavy straw woven through fine
fibers. v {1} [A; c] use a pitáti mat. {2} [A; c1] obtain, make into a
pitáti mat.

pítay n loose hanging skin or cock’s wattles: the loose skin on the
underside of a circumcised penis, the skin hanging under the chin or on
the upper part of the neck.

piti_1 a for the body to be wet and dirty with things sticking to it.
v [B] get dirty and sticky. Nagpiti ang ímung buhuk, Your hair is all
sticky with oil.

piti_2 = pitiw, n1.

pitì n slapping, crackling, or popping sound. v [A] resound with this
sound. Mipitì ang íyang nawung kay nagtubagtubag man, She received a
slap because she answered me back. Mipitì ang papkurn, The popcorn
crackled. Nagpitìpitì ang kakugnan nga nasúnug, The grass field was
crackling as it burnt. (←) n intense action of producing this sound.
Pítì lang ang ílang kinatsilà ay, They’re rattling off Spanish. v [A]
make this sound intensely.

pitibut n PT boat. v [A1; ac] take a, go by PT boat.

pitii n PTA, acronym for the Parent-Teachers’ Association. v [A1] have
a PTA meeting.

pitik v {1} [A; b] flick s.t. with the thumb and forefinger. Kinsay
nagpitik sa ákung dawunggan? Who flicked my ear? Gipitkan níyang ákung
kúmù, He flicked my knuckles. {1a} [A; c] flick s.t. away with the
fingers. Anhà sa astri ipitik ang sigarilyu, Flick your ashes into the
ash tray. {1b} [A; b] in carpentry, mark a line on a piece of wood by
stretching a string soaked in dye or soot and letting it snap onto the
wood. {1c} [A; ab2] shot with a slingshot. Pitkun ku nang manuk ihálas,
I’ll shoot that wild chicken with a slingshot. {1d} [A; b6] whip s.o.
with s.t. small, making a snapping sound. Ákung gipitkan ang íyang tiil
ug tualya, I flicked a towel at his legs. {2} [A] for the heart or
pulse to beat. Nagpitik pa ang íyang pulsu, His pulse is still beating.
{2a} [A] for the heart to beat for s.o. Mupitik lang ang ákung
kasingkásing kang Artúru, My heart beats only for Arturo. {3} [A; c1]
make a click, as when a mechanism is released. Mipitik lang ang
pistúla. Wà nay bála, The pistol clicked. There were no more bullets.
Pahíyum kay ákù nang pitkun (ipitik) ang kamira, Smile because I’m
going to snap the camera now. n {1} s.t. which flicks or snaps:
slingshot, chalk line in carpentry, et al. {2} beating of the heart.
{3} clicking, snapping sound. {4} action of flicking or snapping. -in-
n {1} continuous sound of the heartbeat. {2} the dictates of the heart.
Sunda ang pinitik sa ímung kasingkásing, Follow the dictates of your
heart.

pitikut n petticoat. v {1} [A; b] wear a petticoat. {2} [A; a12] make
into a petticoat.

pitimini n k.o. rose with very tiny pink, red, or white flowers.

píting a tight-fitting clothes. v {1} [A23] sew s.t. that fits well.
Maáyu nang sastríhang mupíting, That seamstress sews clothes that fit
well. {2} [B2; a12] become, make tight-fitting. Mupíting (mapíting)
nang pulúha ug mukū̀ nà, That shirt will be tight if it shrinks.
Pitíngun nátù ning karsúnis nímu pagtahì, Let’s cut your pants in a
tight-fitting style. {3} [A13] wear a tight-fitting outfit. {4} [A; c]
have a fitting of s.t. sewn. Dì na lang ku mupíting kay hustu lagi nà,
I don’t need fitting because I’m quite sure it fits. — rum n fitting
room.

pitisyun n petition. v [A; c3] petition for s.t. Ipitisyun sa pamúnù
ang inyung prublíma, Make a petition to the President about your
problems.

pitiw n {1} trigger device in a trap which actuates a spring.
{2} clitoris (humorous). v [A; b6] put a pitiw in a trap. pitiwpítiw =
pitiw, n1.

pitla v [A; a1] untangle hair or fibers, separate things that are stuck
or crumpled together. Nagpitla mi sa mga pahína sa librung nagpílit, We
are separating the pages of the book that got stuck together. Ákung
gipitla ang hílu nga nagubut, I untangled the thread.

pitlà = pidlà.

pitlag v [A; c1] turn sheets of paper or pages of a book over one by
one. Ipitlag (pitlága) nang únang lima ka dahun, Leaf through the first
five pages.

pitlagung n {1} bamboo stick with a tufted end used to clean the palm
toddy containers left in the tree (sugung) (so called from the sound
produced by using it). {2} sound produced by using the pitlagung. v [A;
b] clean a toddy container.

pitlud v [A; b] {1} pluck off the ends of young stems to make the plant
spread. Pitluran ang tabákù arun managkù ang dáhun, They pluck the tops
of the tobacco plants so that the leaves will grow big. {2} break off
of young stems in general.

pitluk v {1} [A; ab2] strangle s.o. with the hands. Pitlúkun ta ka ug
mutug-an ka, I’ll strangle you if you tell. {2} [A; a12] swipe fowls
(slang). Limbaruk! Gipitluk ang ámung sunuy gabíi, Damn! They swiped
our rooster last night! {3} [a12] thrust the finger in s.o.’s eyes.
Bísag pitlukun pa ang mata sa tudlù dílì makítà tungud sa kangitngit,
It’s so dark you couldn’t see a finger thrust into your eyes.

pitnit = piknik.

pitpit_1 v {1} [B46N] be wet through so that clothing, hair or feathers
stick to the body. Nagpitpit siyang miabut sa balay, She was dripping
wet when she arrived in the house. {2} [BN; a4] for the eyes to get
sticky with yellowish discharge. Mupitpit (mapitpit, pitpítun) ang
ímung mata ug tagimatahun ka, Your eyes get filled with yellowish
discharge if you have sore eyes. {3} [A2N; b(1)] for the strands of
hair to be thick with nits. Mupitpit (mamitpit) ang buhuk sa lusà ug
dílì hugútan, The hair gets thick with nits if you don’t get rid of
them. -un a having pussy eyes.

pitpit_2 n {1} k.o. swift. {2} the mahjong piece with one bamboo that
resembles the pitpit bird. v [A123; b6] get a pitpit.

pitpit_3 v [A; c] squeal about a crime or tattle (slang). Mipitpit na
ang dinakpan, The suspect that was arrested squealed. Kinsay nagpitpit
sa maistra nga nangupya ku, Who told the teacher that I copied?

pitpíta n chicken ailment characterized by the development of a thick
rough epidermis on the outer layer of the tongue rendering it difficult
for the chicken to eat. Dílì mukáun ang manuk kun may pitpíta, A
chicken with pitpíta will not eat. pitpitáhun a of a sort having this
disease.

pí trap n P-trap, an S-shaped tube for the escape of water or gas that
prevents the water or gas from returning. v [b6] put a P-trap s.w.

pitrulyu, pitrulyum n {1} petroleum. {2} kerosene. v [A1; b6(1)] fill
up with kerosene. Gipitrulyuman ang kusinilya, They put kerosene in the
pressurized stove.

pitrumaks n a pressurized kerosene lantern (so called from the brand
name petromax). v [A; b6(1)] use a petromax.

pits_1 n peaches.

pits_2 n pitch of a note.

pits_3 v [A; c6] pitch in a baseball game.

pitsa n date. Unsang pitsáha run? What date is it today? v [c] put or
write the date. Núlu kanang kuntrátu kay wà pitsáhi, That contract is
null and void because it wasn’t dated.

pitsas n {1} mahjong pieces. {2} chips in poker. {3} money (slang).
v {1} [A12; b8] have a particular mahjong piece in one’s hand. {2} [A1;
a12] use chips in playing a game. -an a moneyed, rich (slang). Pitsásan
nang bayhána maáyu pangasaw-un, That woman is well-heeled. She’d make a
good wife. v [B1256] become moneyed.

pitsay n Chinese cabbage, a vegetable cultivated for its long, whitish
leaves, eaten cooked: Brassica pekinensis. — bisayà n k.o. pitsay with
darker leaves: Brassica chinensis.

pitsbuy = pidsbuy.

pitsi = pipsi.

pitsikurnu n brass knuckles. v [A; ab2] use brass knuckles.

pitsil n pitcher, a container for holding and pouring liquids. v [a12]
place s.t. in a pitcher.

pit sinyur exclamation shouted when dancers dance the sinulug in front
of the image of the Holy Child (Santu Ninyu). v [A] exclaim pit sinyur.

pitsipitsi n {1} miscellaneous sundry goods. Mga pitsipitsi ra ning
ákung baligyà, I just have small, sundry goods here. {2} miscellaneous,
trivial things. Mga pitsipitsing balità gikan sa barbiríya, Bits of
trivial news and information from the barber shop. {3} s.t. trivial,
not worth paying attention to. Pitsipitsi ang inyung gikaawáyan, You
are quarreling over nothing. v [a1b] buy or sell s.t. in small amounts.
Pitsipitsihun (ipitsipitsi) nákù ang pagpalit sa ákung mga
kinahanglanun, I’ll buy the things I need a little bit at a time.

pitsir_1 = pitsil.

pitsir_2 n pitcher in baseball. v [B56; c1] be, make s.o. the pitcher.

pitsu n {1} breast of fowl or birds. {2} chest bones, sternum. Balíun
ku ang ímung pitsu ug magbinúang ka, I will break your ribs if you do
foolishness. v [A; a12] hit s.o. in the chest. punta — see punta_2, n5.

pitsukurnu = pitsikurnu.

pitu n seven. labangun ug — ka láwud see labang. v see tulu. ika-
seventh. Ang ikapitu ka (nga) táwu, The seventh man. Ikapitung lángit,
Seventh heaven, bliss. kapituan seventy. ka-, maka- seven times.
tag-(←) seven at a time.

pítu_1 n {1} whistle. {2} whistling sound. v [A; b6(1)] blow a whistle,
usually as a signal. Mipítu ang barku paglarga, The ship blew its
whistle as it left port. Gipitúhan ka sa ripiri, The referee blew his
whistle on you.

pítu_2 = pitúru.

pitúgu n k.o. ornamental plant with pinnate leaves resembling a palm.
The male plant produces once a year an enormous cone at the tip of the
stem: Cycas rumphii.

pituk_1 v [A; b] {1} flick the fingers. {2} [A12; b8] for an instrument
to hit s.t. accidentally. Paháwà dihà kay hipitukan ka sa sundang, Get
out of there because the bolo will hit you. {3} [A; a] hit with a
sudden, sharp blow. Gipituk níya ang babáyi sa martilyu, He hit the
woman with a hammer. n {1} flick of the fingers. {2} sharp, sudden
blows.

pituk_2 v [A13] for the eyes to stare blankly into space. Nagpituk ang
íyang mata kay lawum ang íyang gipinsar, He stared blankly into space
because he was absorbed in deep thought. pitukpituk v {1} [A3; c1]
stare without thought, blinking the eyes. Mupitukpituk lang nang batáa
ug latiguhun, dílì muhílak, The child will just stare and blink his
eyes if you whip him. He won’t cry. Nagpitukpituk lang ang búang nga
gisultíhan, The deranged man just kept staring and blinking his eyes as
they talked to him. {2} [B46] for a light to blink on and off.
Mipitukpituk ang síga sa lamparilya kay wà may gas, The light of the
kerosene lamp is flickering because it has no more kerosene.
Pitukpitukun (ipitukpituk) gánì níya ang plaslayit, kanà libri na ta
pagsulud, When he blinks the flashlight, that will mean that we are
free to enter.

pítul v [A; a1] impose punishment to discipline. Dì na siya magpabuyag
kay napítul na siya nákù, He won’t make a nuisance of himself any
longer because I gave him a good whipping.

pitupitu n {1} mosquito wrigglers. {2} tadpole. (←) game played with
small children where the child puts the fingers on the palm of the
adult’s hand who recites or sings a rhyme closing the fingers on the
child’s hand. One version: Pitupítu santubud, kan-un púru budbud,
Putdang sanggutan, ang bílin kawatan, Pitupítu santubud, all he eats is
budbud, Cut the toddy-producing tree down, Whoever is left is the
thief. v {1} [a4] be infested with mosquito wrigglers or tadpoles.
Gipitupitu ang danaw, The pond is full of mosquito larvae (tadpoles).
{2} [B256] become mosquito wrigglers, tadpoles.

pitúru n enema tip.

pit-us a {1} not affording enough space. Pit-us nga kwartu, A room that
is too small. Pit-us ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid, It’s a narrow road that
goes into the mountains. {2} hard up financially. Pit-us kaáyu mi kay
wà kuy trabáhu, We’re very hard up because I don’t have a job.
v {1} [B12; a] make s.t. narrow. Nagkapit-us ang asíras sa mga tinda,
The sidewalks are getting jammed because of all the goods for sale.
{2} [B12] be hard up financially. {3} [b8] be in a difficult situation,
in a tight corner, etc. Musúkul ku ug mapit-usan, I’ll fight back if I
am cornered. ka- n tightness, esp. of one’s financial condition.

pitut n act of derision made by expelling air with the two lips
allowing them to vibrate a couple of times and punctuating it with a t.
paN- v [A23; b(1)] make this sound. Sagpáun ku siya ug pamitutan ku
níyag usab, I will slap her if she says ‘ptt’ to me again.

pitwurk n footwork of a boxer.

piud v [A; c6] hold, press close to oneself. Gipiud níyag maáyu ang
libru arun dílì mabasà sa ulan, She held the book close to her so it
wouldn’t get wet in the rain.

píud v [A; b6] weave the edges of s.t. made of straw in such a way that
it won’t come undone. Gipiúran ku pa ang banig, I’m still weaving the
edges of the mat.

piug v [A; a1] {1} forcibly keep s.t. from moving. Way nakapiug sa
búang nga nangísug, No one can control the violent madman. {2} keep
under control. Mapiug lang nátù ang bátà kun mulatus ta, We can keep
the child under control only if we whip him. pa- v [A13] allow oneself
to be prevailed upon. Dílì giyud nà siya magpapiug. Gustu giyung
manimawus, He can’t be prevailed upon. He wants to take revenge.

piut= pig-ut.

píward n ward in a hospital where the patient is charged, as opposed to
a private room or charity ward. v [c6] stay in a pay ward.

píyad v [B; c1] for the back to become bent and, by extension, the
stomach. Nagpíyad ang bukubuku sa kabáyù sa kabug-at sa íyang dala, The
horse’s back sagged under the burden of his load. Ipíyad (pyára) ang
ímung tiyan arun magtakdù ang bakus, Pull your stomach in so the belt
will go all the way around. (→) v [A; c1] stick out the stomach. Ug
ímung pyarun (ipiyad) ang ímung tiyan mu ra kag mabdus, If you stick
your stomach out, you’ll look like a pregnant woman. piyadpiyad v [B46;
c1] walk and writhe at the same time. Mupiyadpiyad ang magbatì, A woman
that is in labor will writhe as she walks.

piyak_1, píyak n cheeping sound of chicks or young birds. v [A; b3]
{1} peep, cheep. Pangitáa rung pisù nga nagpiyak, Look for the chick
that is peeping. {2} [A12] stand a chance to win (lit. get a chance to
cheep). Wà makapiyak ang ákung singku písus nga gidúlà, I bet five
pesos, but they didn’t get a chance.

piyak_2 a for the stomach or flank of an animal to be thin, not full.
Pasabsába ang kábaw kay piyak kaáyug tiyan, Put the carabao out to
pasture because its flank is very thin. v [B] having an empty stomach.

piyal v {1} [A2] trust. Way mupiyal ánang tawhána kay bakákun, No one
trusts that man because he is a liar. {2} [A; c] entrust s.t. to s.o.
Ayawg ipiyal ang mga bátà sa binatunan, Don’t entrust your children to
the maid. Kapyalan kaáyung tawhána, A very trustworthy person. -in-an
n a person who is entrusted with a responsibility of caring for,
looking after s.t.

piyangpiyang, piyangpíyang n {1} cymbal, a musical instrument which is
a pair of metal concave plates that ring when struck together. {2} a
lesbian (humorous metaphor). v {1} [A; b6(1)] play a cymbal. {2} [A;
a12] make into cymbals. {3} [C1; b2] do lesbian acts; be a lesbian.

píyas a for s.t. which was full to be without its contents and flat and
crinkled. Dì na píyas ang tiyan sa bátà nga nakakaun na, Now that the
child has eaten, his stomach isn’t sunken. v {1} [B; c1] cause s.t.
that was bulging to flatten out. Mapíyas ang ligid sa awtu ug way
hángin, The tire of the car goes flat when there is no air. Nagpíyas
ang sáku nga way sulud, The empty sack was crinkled. {2} [A; c1] split
s.t. laterally or peel around the edges. Gipíyas níya ang íyang pitáka
ug gipakítà ang sulud, He opened his wallet to show the contents.
Gipíyas níya ang ságing nga mantikaan, She cut the bananas in half to
fry them.

piyatpiyat n variation of poker with up to four players, each of which
is dealt thirteen cards, which are divided into three groups, two with
five cards each, and one with three cards. The players’ three different
hands are pitted against each other, and the player who has two winning
hands gets the pot. v [A; c] play this sort of poker.

píyu see prisyu.

píyù n k.o. edible fresh water crab about 2″ by 3″ in size.

píyuk v [B2S3; ab7P] for lamps or lights to grow dim. Nagpiyuk man ang
sugà. Limpiyúhi ang túbu, Why is the light dim? Clean the chimney.

piyun, píyun n {1} common laborer, esp. the lowest-ranking. {2} pawn in
chess. v [B156] be, become a common laborer. Mapíyun giyud kag dì ka
mulampus, You’ll become nothing but a common laborer if you don’t
succeed in your studies.

píyung v [A2S; c1] close the eyes. Pyúnga (ipíyung) ang ímung mata;
unyà tag-ána ni, Close your eyes; then guess what it is. {2} [A12; b6]
for one to be so good at doing s.t. he can do it with the eyes closed.
Pyúngan nà nákug áyu, I can fix that with my eyes closed. {3} [A; a12]
close one’s eyes to s.t. bad, tolerate it. Kadtung nagpíyung sa ílang
mga mata sa mga kasaypánan sad-an pud, Those who close their eyes to
the irregularities are also guilty. (→) a for the eyes to be closed.
tag-(→) v [B; c1] take a short nap. Mutagpiyung lang kug kadiyut, I’ll
just take a short nap. Natagpiyung tingali siya kay naawahi man sa
trabáhu, He must have dozed off because he was late to work.

plág n electrical plug. v = plag-in.

plag-in v [A; c] plug in an electrical plug.

plagpul n flagpole.

plagrísing n flag-raising ceremony before the day’s activities start.
v [A1] hold the flag-raising ceremony.

plagritrǐt n flag retreat ceremony at the end of the day’s activities.
v [A] engage in a flag retreat ceremony.

plagsirimúni n flag-raising ceremony. v [A1] hold a flag-raising
ceremony.

plagsut v [B246; b8] pop out when squeezed, be propelled from a
confined space when pressed. Muplagsut ang lísu ug pislítun nímu ang
búnga, The seed will pop out if you squeeze the fruit. Naplagsutan
siyag asíti pagbumba nákù sa tangki, When I pumped the tank, oil
spurted out on her.

plahúta = plawta.

pláka n {1} phonograph record. {2} plate from which a photograph is
made. {3} plaque. {4} license plate of a vehicle. v {1} [A; b] record
s.t. on a phonograph record. {2} [b] use a plate in a camera. {3} [A]
get, give, have a license plate.

plakul = palakul.

plamingku = palamingku.

plámir n plumber. v [B156; a12] be a plumber.

plán n custard. v [A; c] make, have custard.

planggána n wash basin.

plangganíta n small basin.

plangka n service switch, the switch on a service box used to connect
or disconnect electricity to a house. v [b6] put a service switch s.w.

plangkíru n one who saws timber into planks or controls the machine
doing so.

planhay a sloping gradually. Planhay ang ílang yútà dì bakilid dì sad
pátag, Their land is a gradual slope. It is not steep, nor is it level.
v [B; c1] slope slightly or gradually. Iplanhay (planháya) pag-atup,
Make the roof at a slight slope.

planíla = praníla.

planíta n planet, esp. as a source of astrological information.

plansa = plantsa.

planta n plant, factory, powerhouse. v [A12; b6] put up a plant.

plantáda a in plain, unobstructed view. Plantáda kaáyu ang ílang balay
gíkan sa iskína, You can see their house clearly from the corner.
v [AB; c6] be in full view, cause s.t. to be so. Miplantáda siyag
lingkud arun makit-an sa tanan, She sat where everybody could see her.
Kanang munumintung nagplantáda dihà, The monument that you see there.

plantasiyun n plantation. v [A1; b6] have a plantation.

plantilya n {1} list of permanent employees. Wà ka sa plantilya kay
kaswal pa ka, You are not in the roster because you are a temporary
employee. {2} cut-out pattern, sheet pattern. v {1} [A; b6] make a list
of employees. {2} [A; c1] make, make with a pattern. Plantilyaha
(iplantilya) ning dáan nga sín, Use this old iron sheet for your
patterns. Plantilyáhi ang panaptun arun sayun ra tabásun, Use a pattern
on the cloth so that it will be easy to cut.

plantsa n {1} flatiron. {2} trowel. {3} crew cut. a for iron sheets to
be flat and smooth. Plantsang sín ang itaptap sa lamísa, Cover the
table with smooth sheets of tin. v [A; a] {1} iron s.t. Plantsáha ri
day, Please iron this for me, Miss. {1a} flatten out metal sheets that
are corrugated or wrinkled. {2} smooth out cement. {3} [A; c1] give a
crew cut. plantsahan n ironing board. -du, -wu n ironed clothes.
-dur(→) n presser. v [B] become a presser. -in- n {1} s.t. ironed.
{2} crew cut. plantsahun, plantsahúnun, plantsaduhun n clothes to iron.

plánu n {1} plan of s.t. constructed on a piece of ground. {2} plan,
program of what one is going to do. {2a} plan, intention. Wà kuy plánu
paglangyaw, I have no plans to go abroad. v {1} [A; b6] make a plan of
s.t. {2} [A; ab] make plans, devise a plan for s.t. Akuy muplánu sa
kasal, I’ll make the wedding plans. Giplánu giyug maáyu ang pagtúlis sa
bangku, The bank robbery was well planned. {2a} plan, intend to do s.t.

plaríti n ribbing of a boat to which the walling is attached. v [A; b]
make the ribbing for a boat.

*plas — [number of English origin] [so-and-so] many points advantage.
Hatágan níyag plas payib ang bangà níyang kuntra, He will give his
weaker opponent a five-point advantage.

plás_1 v [A; b1c] flush the toilet, flush water over an area. Iplás ang
kasilyas humag gámit, Flush the toilet after using it. Giplásan níya ug
túhig ang húgaw sa salug sa banyu, She flushed water over the bathroom
floor to get rid of the dirt. n flush mechanism.

plás_2 n flash equipment of a camera. v [c6] flash news over the radio
or on the screen. Ang kalit nga kamatáyun sa prisidinti sa násud giplás
sa radiyu karun, The sudden death of the president was flashed over the
radio now. -ing_1 n {1} appearance of the characters on stage before a
play begins. {2} short advertisement flashed on the screen in the
movies before the show begins.

plása n plaza, a public square or market place in a city or town.
v [ac] make a plaza.

plas balb n flash bulb.

plasíbu n {1} feast celebrated in the evening before All Souls’ Day
where food is prepared as an offering to the departed. Originally it
was unsalted and put at the altar or before a grave. It marks the end
of a novena. {2} the food prepared for this occasion. {3} funeral rites
preceding a burial accompanied or followed by a solemn tolling of
bells. Human sa plasíbu dad-un sa mintiryu ang minatay, After the
church ceremony the body will be taken to the cemetery. {3a} the
tolling of the bells for the dead. v [A; b] hold this feast or funeral
ceremony. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] partake of this feast. Mamlasíbu ta karung
gabíi sa íla, We will participate in their All Souls’ Eve celebration.

plásing_2 n flashing at the edge of a roof. v [A1; c] put up the
flashing at the edge of a roof.

plásis n {1} hand in mahjong consisting of only one unit: sirkuls, or
bambu, or karaktir with any other combination of wind pieces (bintus)
or dragons (drágun). {2} flush hand in a card game. Lúpig ang plásis sa
pulháwus, A flush can’t beat a full house.

plaskíya n long, wooden straightedge of no standard length.

plasláyit n flashlight. {v} [A; b] shine a flashlight on, use a
flashlight.

plasta, plastǎr = palastǎr.

plastik n {1} plastic. {2} plastic surgery. v [A; a] perform plastic
surgery. — surdyiri n plastic surgery.

plastir n medical plaster or adhesive. — ab paris n plaster of Paris. —
kast n plaster cast. v {1} [A; b6(1)] use, put a plaster to cover a
wound or s.t. {2} [A; c1] apply a plaster cast to s.o.

plásu n extension, postponement of the agreed deadline, esp. of
payment. v [A; b6] give an extension or postponement. Giplasúhan lang
kug usa ka búlan paghátag sa bugay, I was given a month’s extension to
give the bride price.

plat n garden plot. v [A; a] divide a garden into plots.

plát a {1} flat, not having depressions or elevations on it. Plát ug
dughang bayhána, A flat-chested woman. {2} completely without money,
penniless. Plát kaáyu ku run, I am completely broke. {3} flat tire.
{3a} tire without enough air. Bumbáhi pa kay plát pa, Put more air in
it because it still is flat. {4} flat-heeled shoes. {5} be knocked
flat. Naigù sa ákung liphuk, dà plát lagi, I hit him with my left hook
and he was knocked out flat. v {1} [B] get to be flat. Maplát ang
bisiklíta ug sakyan ug tambuk, The bicycle tires will get pressed down
flat if a fat person rides on it. {2} [B; a] get a flat tire. Naplátan
mi, maung nadúgay mi, We had a flat tire, and so we were delayed.
{3} [A1] wear flat shoes, slippers. {4} [A2; a12] refuse s.o. flatly.
Giplát ku níya dáyun nga wà kuy ispiransa, She told me flatly that I
had no hope. — syus n flat-heeled shoes. — tayir n flat tire. — tap
crew cut. v [A; c16] get a crew cut.

pláta n {1} silver. {2} silver coin. v [b] alloy s.t. with silver. búda
di- see búda.

plátap = plát tap. see plát.

platapurma n {1} stage, platform. {2} platform of a political party.
v [A; b6] make a stage or platform.

platik = palatik.

platínu, platínum n interruptor of an internal combustion engine.

platiríya n goldsmith shop. v [A; a] put up a goldsmith shop.

platíru n silver-, goldsmith.

platítu_1 n saucer. v [a2] put a saucer or small plate.

platítu_2 n k.o. ornamental bush: Polyscias scutellaria.

platnus a flat-nosed.

plátu, platun_1 n general name for plates of any material, flat or
deep. v [A; a2] eat from plates. hayang ang — see hayang.

platun_2 n platoon in the military. — lídir n platoon leader.

pláwir n {1} female genitalia (euphemism). {2} minor characters in a
play, insignificant performers in a game. {3} = búlak, 2a. v {1} [A;
a12] be a minor character in a play or game. Napláwir ku adtung duláa
kay wà ku hipasahi, I didn’t do anything in that game because they
never passed the ball to me once. {2} [A12; b6] draw a búlak in
mahjong. — bis n vase. — gil n flower girl. v [B56; c16] be a flower
girl. — pat n flowerpot.

plawta n flute. v {1} [AN; a] play the flute, make into a flute.
{2} [A23N2; a12] eat s.t. long as if playing the flute. Kusug siyang
muplawta (mamlawta) ug inánag, He really eats broiled corn on the cob
fast.

*play mu-(→) a = unglù (humorous—so called from the ability of the
unglù to fly). kan-(→) = muplǎy.

play-awi n hair style of shoulder-length hair hanging down loosely.
v [A1; c1] fix, wear the hair in this style.

playing súsir n flying saucer.

pláyir= playis.

playis n pliers. v [A; a2] use pliers.

playit n scheduled flight of an airplane. Unsang urása ang ímung
playit? What time is your flight? — atindant n flight attendant.

playwit n flyweight boxer. v [B126] be in the flyweight class.

playwud n plywood. v [A1; a12] use, make s.t. of plywood.

plí_1 n exclamation uttered to make a game start. Nakatágù na mu? Plí!
Are you all hidden? Coming ready or not.

plí_2 v [AC; ab5c2] have sexual relations (euphemism). Káda gabíi
magplí sila, They have sexual intercourse every night.

plibisítu n referendum, special election over a single issue. v [A13;
c] hold a referendum.

plíbul v [A23] go along s.o. else’s proposal or decision just to gain
or stay in his good graces. Kay mau may íyang gustu, muplíbul lang ta,
If that’s what he wants, let’s just go along with it.

plíbuy_1 n short-sleeved sport shirt. v [A; a] wear, make into a sport
shirt.

plíbuy_2 a philanderer, one who plays around with lots of women.
v [B12] be a philanderer.

plígis = pilígis.

pligráwun n {1} playground. {2} a set of activities such as dances,
calisthenics, gymnastics, and the like, performed en masse on an open
area. v [a2] make a playground. — dimunstrisyun = pligráwun, 2.

plígu = pilígu.

plíma n phlegm.

plimíru = primíru.

plín_1 n airplane. v [A1; a1c] take, bring in an airplane. Magplín ku
paingun sa Manílà, I’ll take a plane to Manila.

plín_2 n cloth that is unfigured, untwilled.

plirayid n unofficial player in a game or gambling, participating as
filler so that there is a full contingent of the required number of
players. His scores are not counted and he cannot take part in betting.
Daghan untà kug puntus apan walà ikwinta kay plirayid ra man ku, I got
lots of points, but they were not counted because I just filled in.
v [A] fill in to make a full contingent.

plirt a for a woman to be flirting or coquettish. v [A; b6] flirt with
s.o.

plísing v [A; c] in ball games, played with a net, place the ball in a
certain spot in the opponent’s side. Iplísing sa wala ang búla ug náa
siya sa tuu, Place the ball in the left side if he is on the right
side. a hitting in a place that is difficult to return the ball from.

plismat n placemat for putting under dishes. v [A; c] use placemats.

plít = pilígis.

plíti n {1} fare. Pilay plíti ngadtus Manílà? How much is the fare to
Manila? {1a} fare money. Díay ímung plíti, Here’s the money for your
fare. {2} rental. v {1} [A; c] rent. Muplíti ra kug libru kay wà kuy
ipalit, I’ll just rent my books because I don’t have enough money to
buy them. {2} [A; c] pay the rent, fare. Siyay nagplíti nákù, He paid
my fare.

plitína = pilitína.

plitnambir n vehicle plate number. walay — palm toddy which is
artificially made (slang). Way plitnambir ning tubáa, magkalíbang ta
íni, This is an artificial palm toddy. We’ll get diarrhea from it.
v [A; b6(1)] issue a plate number to a vehicle.

plíts = pilígis.

plitsa n a four-wheeled horse-drawn carriage used in former times.
v [A3; a12] ride in this sort of carriage.

plú n flu. v [B12; a4] be sick with flu. Plúhun gánì ka, pahúlay dáyun,
Go immediately to bed if you get the flu.

plúhu = pulúhu.

plúma n {1} ornamental feathers. {2} fountain, or dip pen, quill.
{3} the graphite in pencils. v {1} [A; b(1)] adorn s.t. with feathers.
Giplumáhan ang mga kálù sa mga sundálung bitiránu, The veterans adorned
their hats with feathers. {2} [A1; a12] use, write with a fountain pen
or dip pen. Magplúma ta inigsulat sa átung tím, We’ll use a dip pen for
writing our themes.

plumáhi n ornamental feathers. v [b] adorn s.t. with ornamental
feathers.

plumíru_1 n feather duster. v [A; a] dust s.t. with a feather duster,
make a feather duster.

plumíru_2 = plámir.

plúmu n {1} lead. Plúmu ang gihímù níyang pamatu, He used lead for his
sinker. {2} washer put under nails. v [A; b6] nail s.t. with a washer.
Ang lansang sa sín plumúhan arun dì mutúlù, They put washers under the
roof nails to prevent it from leaking.

plur n floor, storey of a building. Unsang plúra ang ímung upisína, sa
pip plur? What floor is your office, on the fifth floor?

plúral upiring n flower offering put on a monument or given to a beauty
queen with a ceremony. v [A1] hold such a ceremony.

plurdilis n zinnia.

pluríra n flower vase. v [A; c1] use s.t. as a flower vase.

plúris {1} = búlak, 2a. {2} — di Máyu season in the month of May when
flowers are offered to the Virgin in the church. v {1} [A12; b6] draw a
búlak in mahjong. {2} [A1] hold the celebration of the May flowers.

plurisin n fluorescent lamp. v [A1; b(1)] use, install a fluorescent
lamp.

plurlídir n {1} floor leader in the legislature. {2} the one of a group
that sleeps on the floor (humorous). Kay kúlang ug katri, ikay
plurlídir, There’s not enough beds so you sleep on the floor.
v {1} [B156; c16] be made the floor leader. {2} [A2B6; a12] be the one
to sleep on the floor, cause one to be such.

plurwaks n floor wax. v [A; b] apply floor wax.

plút n float in a parade. v {1} [A2] ride on a float. Magplút ang rayna
nga iparáda, The beauty queen will be paraded around on a float.
{2} [A; a12] make s.t. into a float.

plúting n k.o. dance wherein a dancer appears to float. v [A] do this
dance.

plúting rít n floating rate of currency. Ang plúting rít mauy
nakapamahal sa prisyu sa mga palalítun, The floating rate is the reason
prices have gone up. v [B1456] for the floating rate to be in effect.

plúwid n a cigarette lighter fluid. v [A; b] fill with lighter fluid.

prá (from pára) cry to get horses to stop: whoa.

prabir = parabir.

pragáta n frigate with sails. v [A; a12] ride, load s.t. in a frigate.

pragátus = paragátus.

pragmin n frogmen.

prak_1 n formal evening gown for women. v {1} [A1; b6] wear such a
frock. {2} [a12] make into a frock of this sort.

prak_2, prák n onomatopoetic sound of exploding firecrackers.

prakásu v [A; a12] fail to carry out an agreement. Makasálig ka nákù
kay dì ku muprakásu ug sábut, You can count on me because I do not
break agreements.

prakayda = parakayda.

praktikal a practical, simple but useful. Praktikal kaáyu ang sinínang
dastir pára sa balay, A duster is a very practical dress to wear in the
house. v [c1] do s.t. in a practical way.

praktis v {1} [A; a2] rehearse, train s.o. Akuy mupraktis sa mga bátà
ug kanta, I’ll train the children how to sing. {2} practice, rehearse.
Magpraktis ta sa átung drama, Let’s practice our drama. {3} [A; b6]
practice one’s profession. Mupraktis kug makapasar ku sa bár, I will
practice law if I pass the bar. n practice or rehearsal. Lisdan ku
magkinatsilà kay wà na kuy praktis, I have a hard time speaking Spanish
because I don’t have practice. walay — {1} unskilled (as if lacking
practice). {2} rough, accustomed to inflicting pain (derived from the
sarcastic usage where s.o. good in fighting refers to himself as walay
praktis ‘unpracticed’). Makatilaw ka giyud íning kúmù kung way praktis,
If you don’t watch out, I’ll smack you one with my ‘unpracticed’ fists.
— titsing n practice teaching. v [A; b(1)] do practice teaching.
praktisádu a 1 proficient from having practiced. Praktisádu nà siya sa
karáti, He is proficient in karate. {2} brawny due to constant
body-building. v [B126] be, become well-practiced or trained in s.t.

prákul = palakul.

prangha v [A1; c] decorate; dress up smartly, esp. with jewels. Dílì
musimba nang tigulánga ug dílì makaprangha, The old woman never goes to
church without her jewels. Pranghái ang sakyanan sa bag-ung kinasal,
Decorate the automobile of the newly-weds.

prangka a frank, saying exactly what one thinks. Prangka pud kaáyu
nímu, How very frank of you! v [A; c1] tell s.o. frankly. Ákù siyang
giprangkáhan nga wà kuy gustu níya, I told him frankly that I don’t
like him.

prangkísa n franchise.

prangkisíya n franchise.

prangkíyu n postage stamp. v [A; b6(1)] put a postage stamp on s.t.
Giúlì ang sulat kay wà kaprangkiyúhi, The letter was returned because
they didn’t put stamps on it.

prangku_1 n day off. Dílì siya mutrabáhu karun kay prangku man níya, He
will not go to work today because it is his day off. v [A2] take a day
off from work. Muprangku ku sa trabáhu ugmà kay magpagíkan ku sa ákung
anak, I’ll take the day off tomorrow because I’ll see my child off at
the airport.

prangku_2 = prangka.

praníla n flannel. v [A; b6] wear, make of flannel.

pransis n an elongated loaf of bread with pointed tips and a cut at the
center.

Pransiya n France.

prantáda = plantáda.

prantsit = prunsit.

prásis v [A; a2] process papers or documents. Madúgay pang prasísun ang
mga papílis, It will take time to get your papers processed. -ing(→)
{1} preparation of s.t. {2} processing of papers.

prasku n tall wine bottle with four sides, holding more than a liter.
v [c16] put s.t. into a bottle of this sort.

prawud a {1} proud and arrogant. Prawud kaáyu nà sila ábi sapían man,
They are arrogant just because they have money. {2} proud of s.t.
Prawud kaáyu ang ginikánan sa balidikturyan, The valedictorian’s
parents were mighty proud. v [B12] {1} become proud and arrogant.
{2} become proud.

praybasi n privacy from view. Dì ku malígù dinhi kay way praybasi, I
won’t take a bath here because there’s no privacy.

praybit n {1} private, not for public use. Praybit dyíp, Private jeep,
not used for public transportation. {1a} private, not publicly
maintained. — iskul private school. — rud road maintained by the owner.
{1b} private, for the exclusive use of s.o. or a group. — nars private
nurse. — rum private room in a hospital. {2} private rank in the
military. v [B156; c1] be a private enlisted man. Magpraybit lang ku,
I’ll content myself with being a private.

prayid rayis n fried rice. v [A; a] make, have fried rice. Prayid raysa
ang kan-un, Make fried rice of the food (rice).

prayid tsíkin n fried chicken. v [A; a] make, have fried chicken.

prayli n Spanish priest that is a member of a religious order. v [B156;
a12] become a Spanish friar.

praymari see primarya.

pri = pari. see pári.

prí a {1} free to do as one likes. {2} without cost or free. Kining
tanan gihátag kanímung prí, All these things are given free to you. Prí
ka sa pagkáun, You don’t have to pay for your food. {2} in a game, free
to make a shot unhindered. v {1} [A; a1] allow s.o. to do s.t. free.
{2} [B1256; b(1)] get a chance to take a shot unhindered.

pribáda, pribádu a private, not for public use or not financed by the
government. Dì nà dihà pasudlan kay pribádu, You cannot go in there
because it is private. v [B1256; c1] become private.

pribilids {1} = isplǐt_2. {2} — ispits privilege speech allowed to a
member of Congress during its session.

pribilihiyu n privilege. v [A12] enjoy a privilege. Tagsa ray táwung
makapribilihiyu ug sáma sa átung naangkun karun, It’s rare for a person
to get privileges of the sort we are enjoying now.

pribinir v [A; b6(1)] set s.t. aside for a purpose. Nakapribinir ka nag
kwarta pára sa ímung pagpanganak? Have you set anything aside for your
delivery? Pribinihi kug dagkung púsù pára binhì, Set some big ears of
corn aside for me for seedlings. pribinídu n s.t. set aside. Pribinídu
ning pagkaúna pára sa kasíra, This food has been set aside for the
boarder.

pribyu n a showing of a movie before its normal run. v [A; c6] see a
preview showing of a movie. Mga kadagkúan sa punduk sibiku mauy
mupribyu niánang salidáha, The heads of civic organizations will
preview that movie.

prídi n a k.o. popular dance. v [A] do this dance.

pridikar v [A; c] preach the gospel. Mupridikar ang Murmun bísag
lingiwlingíwan, The Mormons preach even if no one listens to them.

pridiktǎr v [A; a2b2] foretell, predict. Íyang hingpridiktahan ang
súnug sa wà pa mahitabù, He predicted the fire before it happened.

pridyidir n refrigerator. v {1} [A] use, own a frigidaire. {2} [A; c]
put s.t. in a frigidaire. Maprisirbǎr ang pagkáun ug ipridyidir, Food
keeps in the frigidaire.

prigunta v [A; ac] ask s.o. a question, inquire. Priguntahun ka gánì,
sulti sa tinúud, If they question you, tell the truth. Unsa pay inyung
iprigunta? What else will you ask? n question.

príhu = paríhu.

prilansir n free-lancer. v [B156] be a free-lancer.

prílim n preliminary exam in school. v [A1] have a prelim. Magprílim ta
karun tápus sa búlan, We will have our prelims at the end of this
month.

priliminári n preliminary games or bouts in boxing, prior to the main
event.

prilimináris = priliminári (plural).

príma = prímu (female).

primarya n primary grades, from grades one to four. v [A] study on the
primary level.

primatiyur a premature in birth. v [B126; b4(1)] have a premature
delivery, be prematurely born. Iingkiyubítur ang bátang maprimatiyur,
They put premature babies in the incubator.

prí mid n {1} pre-medical course leading to a B.S. degree. {2} girl who
is just a servant (humorous). Mangasáwa ka lag usa ka pri mid nga
prupisyunal ka man? You want to marry a mere maid when you work at a
profession? v [B156] be a pre-medical student.

*primir short for primíru — grádu first grade. — kumuniyun first
communion. v [A; c] take first communion. — ministru n prime minister.
v [B56; c1] be, become a prime minister.

primíra a first. — dáma n {1} First Lady, wife of the highest official.
{2} a beauty princess next in rank to the reigning beauty queen. —
klási first class. n first gear in an automotive transmission. v [A;
c1] put into first gear. — kumuniyun n first communion. v [A; c] have
one’s first communion. di- klási, marka n of the first rank in s.t.
bad, number one. Palaaway siyang diprimíra marka, She is number one
when it comes to picking fights.

primíru n {1} first, firstly. Daghan kug balayran: primíru, ang
iskuylahan, sunud, ang kasíra, I have lots of payments to make: first,
the school, then, my board. {1a} — nga [verb] the first one that did,
had [so-and-so] happen to it. Ang primírung makakità níya, The first
one to see him. Ang primírung masakpan, The first one caught. {2} first
day of a month. Prímiru sa Marsu, The first of March. — anyu first year
of college or high school. — grádu first grade. — upisiyal chief mate
on a boat. v [B56] be, become first. Nagprimíru na ang Marsu ug wà pa
si Makuy, Here it is the first of March, and Macoy still hasn’t come.†

primisyas n celebration in thanksgiving for success attained or safe
recovery from a disastrous event or illness. v [A13; b] give thanks
with some sort of celebration. Nagprimisyas kay nakadaug siyas
iliksiyun, He is celebrating because he won the election. paN- n s.t.
to celebrate a thanksgiving with. v [c] celebrate a thanksgiving with.

prímu n male first cousin. v {1} [A12; b8] have a male cousin.
{2} [AC2; a] call s.o. ‘cousin’. (→) vocative.

primyu n reward, prize, or premium. v {1} [A; c] give a reward, prize,
premium. Muprimyu ku sa makasalbǎr sa ákung anak, I’ll give a reward to
whoever rescues my child. {2} [A12; b] get a reward. Nakaprimyu
(naprimyuhan) siyag radiyu, She got a radio as her prize.

prinátal n prenatal care. v [A; b5] give prenatal care.

prinda n {1} mortgage of land whereby the mortgagee uses the land in
lieu of interest. {2} mortgage or pawn in general. — indúnu see indúnu.
— pálit a mortgage where the mortgagee has the option to buy the thing
mortgaged. v [A; c] mortgage, pawn s.t. Nakaprinda siyag yútà tungud sa
madyung, He mortgaged a lot to pay for his mahjong debts. Iprinda ring
rilu sa ahinsiya, Pawn this watch to the pawnshop. prindahánan
n pawnshop. -du, -in-, pinirinda n s.t. pawned.

prinsa_1 n {1} printing press or a printing establishment. {2} the
press: newspapers, magazines in general or the persons who write for
them. Kagawásan sa prinsa, Freedom of the press.

prinsa_2 n plant for pressing abaca hemp into bales. v [A; c1] press
abaca hemp into bales.

prinsipal_1 n {1} principal in a school. {2} lead role in a drama.
{3} instrument that plays the lead, person who plays a lead instrument.
v [B156; a2c1] be a school principal, player of a lead role, lead
instrument in a band.

prinsipal_2 n {1} capital invested. Ígù ra kung nakabawì sa prinsipal,
I barely recovered the capital. {2} amount of money for a large
expense. Wà silay prinsipal nga ipatunghà námù, They have no funds to
send us to school. v {1} [A12] obtain capital. Magnigusyu ku kun
makaprinsipal, I will go into business if I can secure capital. {2} [A;
a] provide capital. Láway ray giprinsipal námù, All we could capitalize
on was our gift for words (lit. spit). Prinsipali ug dus míl, Provide
two thousand pesos capital.

prinsipi n {1} prince. {2} preeminent person in a class or group. Si
Pirnandu Pu mau ang prinsipi sa pilikulang Pilipínu, Fernando Poe is
the prince of the Philippine film. v {1} [B156; a2] be, become a
prince. {2} [A12] get a prince (as offspring). — digális n {1} the
Prince of Wales. {2} a man who is handsomely and smartly dressed.

prinsipyu n principle, rules of conduct adhered to by persons of right
conduct.

prinsísa n princess. v [B156; a2] be a princess. prinsisíta n little,
young princess, esp. in festivities where people chosen as royalty take
part in the program. v [B156; a2] be made a little princess.

prinsis kat n princess cut, a one-piece, close-fitting women’s garment,
gored and unbroken at the waistline. v [A; c1] wear, make into a
princess cut dress.

prinspus n the prince post supporting a roof.

printing pris n printing press.

prínu n brakes. v [A2; b6(1)] {1} put on the brakes. Prinúhi ang dyíp
ug buut kang mupahúnung, Apply the brakes if you want to stop.
{2} restrain one’s actions or movements. Ayawg húnung apan prinúhi lang
ang ínum, Don’t stop but put a limit to your drinking.

prípab n pre-fabricated building. v [A; c1] build a pre-fabricated
building. Pripábun (iprípab) na ang mga bag-ung iskuylahan karun, The
schools are all going to be pre-fabs.

priparar v [A; a] {1} prepare, get s.t. ready. Priparaha ang pagkáun sa
bisíta, Prepare the food for the visitors. {2} [A] hold a feast.
Magpriparar giyud mig adlaw nákù, We always hold a dinner party on my
birthday. priparádu a prepared. Priparádu na mi kaáyu pára sa byáhi, We
are all prepared for the trip. v [B1256] get prepared. priparasiyun
n {1} preparation. Kining duláa nagkinahanglan maáyung priparasiyun,
This play requires a lot of preparation. {2} preparations for a
banquet. {3} in billiards, shooting the cue ball in such a manner that
it knocks the target ball into the pocket and at the same time is in
perfect position to hit the next target ball. Hináya lang pagtíra ang
utsu arun priparasiyun sa nuybi, Hit the number eight ball lightly so
that the cue ball will be in vantage position for hitting the number
nine. v [A12; b6] = priparar, 2.

priparatúri a preparatory course preparing for a higher course.

pris n press. Miguwà sa pris ang maung balità, The news came out in the
press.

prís n freeze, a game of statue telling the players not to move. v [AB;
c1] freeze s.t., get frozen. Maáyu kaáyung muprís ang ámung pridyidir,
Our frigidaire makes ice well. Wà pa maprís ang ayisdrap, The popsicles
haven’t frozen yet.

Pris. abbreviation for prisidinti.

prisidinsiya n town hall.

prisidinsiyal a presidential. — tíbul n presidential table where the
honored guests are seated.

prisidint = prisidinti.

prisidinta = prisidinti (female).

prisidinti n president. v [B156; a] be a president.

prisidiyu_1 v [A; a12] put to hard labor, make s.o. do heavy work.
Makamau giyung muprisidiyu nang bayhána sa íyang mga suluguun, That
woman certainly knows how to make her servants do heavy work.
Prisidiyuhun ka giyud sa kalabúsu ug hisakpan kang mangáwat, You’ll be
sentenced to hard labor in prison if you are caught stealing.

prisidiyu_2, prisidiyum n a local chapter of the Legion of Mary.

prisintabli a suitable for presentation. Dì prisintabli ning sinináa,
This dress is not presentable. v [B12; c1] be presentable.

prisintǎr v [A; c] {1} present oneself for a job or to help do s.t.
Dúnay miprisintǎr pagkasuluguun, A girl came to apply as maid. Way usa
ninyu nga miprisintǎr paglampásu, Not one of you came forward to
volunteer to polish the floor. {2} present an idea or a person.
Iprisintǎr nang ímung mga idíya sa kadaghánan, Present your ideas to
the public. prisintáda = prisintádu (female). prisintádu a speaking
when not spoken to, offering one’s services unasked. Prisintádu siyang
mutábang apan way nahímù, He is great in volunteering his services, but
what has he ever accomplished? Ngánung mutubag ka mang dì ikay
gipangutána? Prisintádu kaáyu ka, Why do you answer when I didn’t ask
you? You’re very forward. v [B126] become rash to offer one’s services,
forward in speaking.

prisintu n {1} precinct for election purposes. {2} a polling place.
{3} police precinct. v [a2] make into a polling place, police precinct.

prísir n freezer. v [A; c1] put in a freezer.

prisirb v [A; c1] preserve food in jars. n preserves.

prisirbing dyar n jar for preserves.

prisiyun n {1} blood pressure. {2} prison sentence handed down by a
court. v {1} [A] have [such-and-such] blood pressure. Miprisiyun siyag
mubù, He had low blood pressure. {2} [A; c] mete out a prison sentence.
Kamatáyun ang prisiyun sa manlulugus, The rapist was sentenced to
death. alta — n high blood pressure. v [A123P; a4] have high blood
pressure.

priska = prisku, a2, v2 (female). litsi — n fresh milk. Mas lamì ang
litsi priska kay sa linata, Fresh milk tastes better than canned milk.

priskráyib v [A; c] prescribe medicine. Mau ning tambála ang
gipriskráyib sa duktǔr, This is the medicine the doctor prescribed.

priskripsiyun n doctor’s prescription. v [c] give a prescription.
Gipriskripsiyunan ka ba sa duktǔr? Did the doctor give you a
prescription?

prisku a {1} fresh. {1a} not spoiled or stale. {1b} fresh air. Prisku
nga hángin, Fresh air. {1c} fresh in feeling. {2} fresh in behavior.
Prisku nà siyang manubagtubag, He answers in a fresh way. v {1} [B26]
be, become fresh. Muprisku (maprisku) ang átung památì human malígù, We
feel fresh and vigorous after we take a bath. {2} [B1; b6] be, become
rude or ill-mannered.

pristihiyu n prestige.

prísu n prisoner. v {1} [A3P; a2] put in jail. Unsang saláay nakaprísu
(nakapaprísu) nímu? What crime did you commit that you went to jail?
Prisúha ang nakapatay, Send the murderer to jail. {2} [AB16] confine,
be confined. Siyay nagprísu sa bábuy sa álad, She locked the pig in the
pen. Nagprísu siya sa kwartu tibuuk adlaw, She locked herself in her
room the whole day. Naprísu ang mga isdà sa bungsud, The fishes got
caught in the fish corral. — kabalyíru n {1} trustee in a prison.
{2} person under house arrest. prisuhan n jail.

prisupwistu n money or goods allocated for a certain purpose. Dakù ra
ang prisupwistu álang sa dipartamintu sa dipinsa nasyunal, The
department of defense gets much too large an allocation. v [A; c]
allocate money or goods for s.t. Kinahanglan magprisupwistu álang sa
katigulangun, It is necessary to set s.t. aside for one’s old age.

prisyat n {1} foul shot in basketball. {2} free shot for a photograph.
Ang síkan prayis dúnay prisyat gíkan sa Bínus Istudyu, The second prize
winner receives a free shot from Venus Studios. v [A; c] make a foul
shot.

prisyu n price. a high-priced. Prisyu kaáyu ang isdà karun kay nihit
man, Fish is high-priced today because it is scarce. v {1} [AB456; c]
set a price on s.t., have a price. Ug muprisyug barátu palita, If it is
priced cheap, buy it. Dì ku makaprisyu ug ubus pa niánà, I can’t give a
lower price. Mahal ra tung ímung giprisyu nákù, The price you quoted me
was a bit high. {2} [A12; b] get s.t. for a certain price. Wà ku
makaprisyu (maprisyuhi) ug barátu niánà, I couldn’t get a low price on
that. — píhu, píyu fixed price. pa- v [A] for a woman to conduct
herself as if she were very high class in order to make a good
marriage. Ug magpaprisyu, lagmit dì ka mahálin, If you set a high price
on yourself, no one is going to buy you.

pritindǐr v [A; c] show s.t. off. Gipritindihan ku níya sa íyang mga
pundang binurdáhan, She showed her embroidered pillow cases off to me.
Ipritindǐr ang maáyu, itágù ang dautan, Show off the good; hide the
bad.

pritru = prisyat, n1, v.

prítu v [A; a] cook s.t. in deep fat. Pritúhun (iprítu) ta ang ságing,
Let’s cook the bananas in deep fat. n fried food. -in- = prítu, n.

príwar n pre-war, from before World War II.

príward n free ward in a hospital. v [A13; c] stay, put in a free ward.

príwur = príwar.

prubar v {1} [A; bc] try s.t. out. Muprubar kug hímù ánang risipíha,
I’ll try making that recipe. Ákù siyang giprubahan (giprubaran) ug
musugut ba, I only tried her out to see if she would give in to me.
Prubahan ka lang ug makaapas ka sa trabáhu, I’ll try you out to see if
you can do the job. Iprubar lang nag haum ug masúd ba, Try putting it
in and see if it fits. {2} [A; c6] prove s.t. Dì ku makaprubar sa ákung
tyuríya, I can’t prove my theory.

prubidinsiya n Divine Providence.

prubinsiya n {1} province, a political division of a country. {2} area
not in the big city. Daghang tagaprubinsiya muiskuyla sa Sugbu, Lots of
people from the province come to Cebu to study. v [B126; a12] be a
province, be made into a province. -na = prubinsiyánu (female). -nu,
-nhun n {1} from the rural areas. {2} like s.o. from the rural areas,
bumpkin. v [B12; c1] become like one from the country. -l a provincial,
on the provincial level. Bilangguang prubinsiyal, Provincial jail.

prubinsyal a provincial, on the provincial level (used only in set
phrases from English). — burd n provincial board. — dyil Provincial
jail.

prubisung n school supervisor (humorous).

prubisyun n clause in a contract, provision of a law.

prubisyunal a temporary. Prubisyunal lang ning kural tang kawáyan. Átù
unyà ning ihalublak kun makakwarta ta, This bamboo fence is just
temporary. We’ll replace it with hollow blocks when we can afford it.
v [c] have s.t. temporary. Prubisyunali lang nag atup myintras tantu,
Just put up temporary roofing for the time being.

prubitsǎr v [A; a] avail oneself of some benefit that presents itself
on occasion. Kami ang nagprubitsǎr sa íyang balay samtang wà siya
dinhi, We availed ourselves of his house while he was gone. Prubitsahi
siyag súgù samtang nía pa siya, Use him for your errands while he is
still here. prubitsáwu a useful. Karáan túud nig dagway, apan
prubitsáwu kaáyu ni kanákù, It looks old, but it is useful to me.

prubitsu v = prubitsǎr. n use that can be made of s.t. Way prubitsung
pagkatáwu ang tapulan, A lazy person is useless. Unsay prubitsu ánang
gubà na man? Of what use is that since it is broken?

prublíma n problem. Ímu nang prublíma. Sunud ayaw na pangútang, That’s
your problem. From now on, don’t borrow money. Daghang prublíma ang
migawas sa pasúlit, Many problems came out in the exams. a being a
problem. Prublíma kaáyung anáka kay buluyágun, That child is a terrible
problem because he is mischievous. v [B12; a12] get to be a problem.
Nagkaprublíma na ning ákung alap-ap, My rash is turning into a real
problem.

pruduksiyun n {1} yield, output. Gamay ra ang pruduksiyun sa pabrika sa
kámay, The sugar refinery has a small output. {2} stage or movie
production.

pruduktu n {1} product, output, yield. Dakug pruduktu ang ámung yútà,
Our lands have a high yield. Ang pruduktu niíning pabrikáha, The
products of this factory. {1a} item of manufacture. Ang kinabag-uhang
pruduktu muabut niíning lugára, The latest products reach this place.
{2} one’s children (humorous). Duha nay ílang pruduktu, They have two
kids now. v {1} [A; b6] yield, have [so-and-so great] an output.
Nakapruduktu na ning anáya ug kinyintus písus, This sow has yielded
five hundred pesos (worth of piglets). {2} [A12; b8] have children
(colloquial).

prudyúsir n producer of a play or movie. v [B156; a12] be, become a
movie producer.

prugram = prugráma, n1, v1.

prugráma n {1} program of entertainment or ceremony. {2} program
listing the details of an entertainment. Naimprinta na ang prugráma,
The program has been printed. {3} plans. Ang prugráma sa gubyirnu sa
panguma, The government’s agricultural program. v {1} [A; c] have a
program. {2} [A1] make out a written program. Magprugráma pa ku sa
tulumanun sa pista, I’ll make out the program of the events during the
fiesta.

prugrisista n a short-lived third party of the nineteen sixties, the
Progressive Party of the Philippines, or a member thereof. v [B156] be
a PPP member.

prugrísu n improvement from a state, condition, or station. Way
prugrísu ang átung lungsud kay naghítak ang pamulitiku, The town never
makes progress because everything is politics.

pruhibir v [A; a2] prohibit s.o. from doing s.t. Dì ku mupruhibir ug
unsay ímung buhátun, I won’t stop you from doing what you want.

pruklamar v [A; c] announce s.t. officially. Ang mayur mauy mupruklamar
sa rayna, The mayor will proclaim the beauty queen. Wà ipruklamar nga
pista upisiyal ugmà, Tomorrow hasn’t been proclaimed a public holiday.
pruklamasiyun n proclamation, s.t. announced officially. v [A; b6] hold
a program to proclaim s.t. Magpruklamasiyun sa rayna rung gabíi, The
queen will be proclaimed in a program tonight.

prumininti a of high standing in society. v [B126] be, become of
prominent social standing. Naprumininti sila tungud sa ílang
pagkasapían, They become prominent because of their wealth.

prumísa n promise relating to s.t. important, not trivial. v [A; c]
make a solemn promise. Iprumísa nákù Ginúu ug buháyun ku nímu, I
promise, Lord, if you prolong my life ...

prumusyun n promotion to a higher position. Wà nà siya maapil sa
prumusyun, He was passed over for promotion. v [A1; b8] promote s.o. to
a higher position.

prumusyun síl, prumusyunal síl n special sale to promote products.
v [A1; c6] hold such a sale.

prumut v [A; c6] promote to a higher position in a job or grade. Kinsa
guy nagprumut ánang buluk? Who promoted that stupid child? -id(←)
v [a3] be promoted to a higher grade or position. Maprumútid (maprumut)
ka pagkapurman, You will get promoted to foreman.

prumútir n boxing promoter. v [B16; a2] be a boxing promoter.

prunáwuns v [A; a12] pronounce s.t. articulately. Dílì siya
makaprunáwuns ug ip, She can’t pronounce an f.

prunsit, pruntsit n front seat. v [AP; c6P] sit, put in the front seat.
Dì ku mupruntsit (mupapruntsit) ug lingkud sa trák, I won’t sit in the
front seat of the bus. Ipruntsit (ipaprunsit) pagsakay ang bátà, Let
the child sit on the front seat. bísag maulahi basta — don’t mind being
the last (to get on) as long as I get the front seat—said of an old
maid that gets married late but makes a good marriage or a person that
eats last but gets the best.

pruntu a on time, punctual. Pruntu kanúnay ang ámung swildu, Our salary
is always on time. v [A2; c1] do s.t. on time, promptly. Kasab-an ka
giyug dì ka mupruntu pagtambung sa upisína, They’ll surely call your
attention to it if you don’t report to the office on time.

pruntun n fronton for jai alai.

prunumbri n pronoun.

prup n galley proof or proof of photos. v [b6] make proofs. Prúpi ang
ritrátu arun mi makapílì, Make proofs of the pictures so that we can
make a choice.

prupidad = prupyidad.

prupaganda n {1} propaganda. {2} advertisement over the radio or in the
form of leaflets or billboards. Prupaganda sa sini, Leaflets
advertising the movie. v [A; c] {1} spread propaganda. {2} advertise.
Dì ta makaprupaganda sa radiyu ug way báyad, We can’t advertise free
over the radio. Ayaw ug iprupaganda ang ímung pagkaignuranti, Don’t
advertise your ignorance. prupagandista n one who disseminates
propaganda or advertisements. v [B156; a12] be, become a propagandist.

prupagar v [A1; c6] display, show off for all the world to see.
Nagprupagar sila sa ílang kaadunáhan, They are showing off their
wealth. Kun mau nay ímung buhátun magprupagar ka lang sa ímung kaignuy,
If you do that, you will just be displaying your ignorance.

prupisiyun n profession. v [a12] study s.t. as a profession. -al
n {1} one who is trained for a profession. Prupisyunal na ang ákung mga
anak, My children are all trained for a profession. {2} professional in
some field. Prupisyunal nga kantúra, Professional singer. v [B156]
become a professional s.t. or a person who has been trained for a
profession.

prupisur n {1} teacher at an institution of higher learning. {2} music
or art teacher. v [B156; c1] become a college, music, or art teacher.

prupisúra = prupisur (female).

prupíta n prophet. v [B1256] be, become a prophet.

prupitaryu n one who owns a landed estate. v [A13] be an estate owner.
Ug magprupitaryu ka, dakù na pud ang buhis, If you are a landowner, you
also have a big tax.

prupursiyun n {1} well-proportioned. Prupursiyun kaáyu ang ímung láwas,
You have a well-proportioned body. {2} mixture, ratio of constituent
ingredients. Pilay prupursiyun sa balas ug simintu? What is the ratio
of sand to cement? v [B; c1] become well-proportioned.

prupusisiyun n proposition, proposal. Ang prupusisiyun nga bahínun ang
Sibu ángay tun-an, They should study the proposal to divide Cebu.

prupyidad n real and personal property.

prúsa n prose.

prusikusiyun n the prosecution in a criminal case. Pruyba nga gipakítà
sa prusikusiyun, Evidence offered by the prosecution.

prusisiyun, prusisyun n religious procession. Bísag unsa kataas sa
prusisyun, mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan, No matter how long the
procession, it always winds up back at the church,—i.e. no matter how
far the husband wanders, he returns home. v [A; c] {1} hold a
procession. {2} go s.w. in a long line, as if in a procession.

pruspik n prospective customer or candidate. Gilista sa ahinti ang
gituúhan níyang pruspik, The agent listed his prospective customers.
Gwápa ang íyang pruspik, He is eyeing a beautiful girl. v {1} [A; a2]
prospect for minerals. Nagpruspik silag buláwan, They are prospecting
for gold. {2} [A12; a3] get as a prospect, make a prospect out of s.o.
Básig makapruspik ta níla sa pagpalit ug insiyúrans, We might get them
as prospective customers for insurance.

pruspiktus n prospectus of a school.

pruspirar v [A23] prosper. Wà mupruspirar ang ílang láraw, Their plans
did not prosper.

prusúsu = *pursúsu.

prutagunista n {1} protagonist in a story. {2} opponents in an
election. v {1} [B156; c1] be, become a protagonist. {2} [C] be
opponents in an election. Nagprutagunista ang duha ka magsúun
pagkamayur, The two brothers were opponents in the race for mayor.

prútas n fruit. v [A] eat, have fruits.

prutihir v [A; b(1)] protect. Átung prutihian ang átung katungud, We
will protect our rights. prutihídu a s.o. or s.t. protected. Ang mga
táwu prutihídu sa batakang baláud, The people are protected by the
Constitution. v [b6] be protected by. Ang mga ismaglir giprutihidúan sa
mga pulitiku, Smugglers are protected by politicians.

prutiksiyun n protection. v [A; b6(1)] give protection. Prutiksiyuni
ang ímung mata sa sulaw sa adlaw, Protect your eyes from the glare of
the sun.

prutína n protein. Tugub sa prutína ang karni sa báka, Beef is rich in
protein.

prutíra n fruit bowl. v [A; c1] use, place s.t. on the fruit tray.

prutista v [A; b3c] protest against, make an objection to s.t. Ang mga
Libiral miprutista sa iliksiyun, The Liberals protested the election
results. Wà kuy ikaprutista sa bag-ung riglamintu, I have no objections
to make against the new regulation. n action of protesting. Prutista sa
hukum, Protest against the decision.

prutistanti n Protestant church or a member thereof. v [B6; a12] be,
become a protestant.

prut kik n fruit cake. v [A; a] make, have fruit cake.

prúwa n prow, the forward part of a ship or boat. v {1} [A; a] make a
prow of the ship. {2} [c6] put at the prow. Iprúwa pagbutang ang mga
karga, Put the cargoes at the prow.

pruyba n {1} proof tending to establish the truth of s.t. {2} galley
proof or proof of a photo. v {1} [A; a1] prove s.t. true, use s.t. as
proof. Pruybáhun ku nà arun ka maprísu, I’ll prove it to get you put in
jail. Kining sundánga ipruyba sa pagbunù, Show this bolo as proof of
the murder. {2} [A; c1] make galley proofs or proofs for photographs.
{3} [A; b5] proofread. Magpruyba pa ku sa katapúsang pahina, I still
have to proofread the last page.

pruyiktu n project, a proposal to do s.t. v [A; c1] make a project.
Nagpruyiktu sila pagpanindut sa plása, They have a project to beautify
the plaza.

P.S. see píis.

P.S.K. abbreviation for pahúlay sa kalínaw ‘rest in peace’, engraved on
tombstones.

pū́ = púlu_2.

pû = pulù.

pū̂ = púlù.

púan = pul-an. see púlu_2.

puángud n compassion, tender regards. Tungud sa puángud sa Mahal nga
Birhin, Through the compassion of the Blessed Virgin. Pirmi siya nga
gidagmálan sa íyang walay puángud nga inaína, She was constantly
maltreated by her merciless stepmother. mapuangúrun
a {1} compassionate, tender. Mapuangúrung kasingkásing, Compassionate
heart. {2} patient, bearing with others’ faults. Mapuangúrung kalabaw,
The patient water buffalo.

púas walay — there’s no end or stopping. Walay púas ug ági ang mga trák
tibuuk gabíi, The trucks kept coming by without end, the whole night
through.

puása n {1} fasting. {1a} abstinence from anything. {2} a day or period
of fasting. v [A; b3] {1} fast. Magpuása ku sa Simána Santa, I’ll fast
during Holy Week. {1a} abstain from anything. Mupuása únà ku sa
paghilabut sa ákung asáwa, I’ll abstain from having relations with my
wife. ting- n day or period of fasting.

púay v {1} [B6; b5] spill over, overflow. Mipúay ang bínu sa kupíta,
The wine spilled over the goblet. {2} [B; a1] sag, droop listlessly.
Nagpúay ang búlak sa pláwir bis kay way túbig, The flowers in the vase
drooped for lack of water. puaypuay, puaypúay v [BN] filled to
overflowing; bursting at the seams. Namuaypúay ka na sa katambuk,
You’re bursting at the seams, you’re so fat. Mga bátà ang nakapuaypúay
sa dyíp, The children filled the jeep to its seams.

publasiyun n {1} town proper, the place in a town where there is a
concentration of houses. {2} town as a political unit. v {1} [a12] make
into the town proper. {2} [B; a12] be, become a town. Publasyunun na
ang ámung baryu, Our village will be made into a town.

publikar v [A; c] {1} make known to the public. Gipublikar sa radiyu
ang kadaúgan, The victory was announced over the radio. Gipublikar na
ang risulta sa bár, The results of the bar examination have been
published. {2} publish s.t. Ámung imprinta ang mupublikar sa ílang
piryudiku, Our printing press will publish their newspaper. publikadur
n publisher. v [B156; a12] be a publisher. publikasiyun n publication.

publiku n {1} public. Makiglantúgì ku nímu sa publiku, I want to debate
you in public. {1a} public, not private. Salakyanan nga (sa) publiku,
Public transportation. {2} audience. v {1} [B1256; c1] be, become s.t.
for public use. Napubliku na ang ílang bumba tungud sa kadaghang
mugámit, Their water pump has become public property since so many
people use it. {2} [A12; a3] have an audience; be an audience.
Nakapubliku siyag ubay-ubay, She drew a large audience.

publisidad n publicity. Kinahanglan ang publisidad sa dráma, We need
publicity for the play.

pubri a {1} poor, not having money. Pubri apan ligdung, Poor but
honest. {2} poor, unfortunate. Pubring mga ílu, Poor orphans. v [APB12;
a12] make s.o. poor; become poor. Súgal mauy nagpubri (nagpapubri)
námù, Gambling made us poor. mata — see mata. -ng káhuy n k.o. shrub
with fleshy, green, smooth branches but no leaves: Euphorbia tirucalli.
pubrihun a destined to be poor. Taas nang adlaw, natúlug gihápun. Mau
nang táwung pubrihun, He’s still asleep even at this hour. That’s the
way it is with people who are destined to be poor. -síta a poor little
thing (female). Pubrisíta intáwun ang bátà nga gilábay sa gáhung, The
poor little thing was thrown into the pit. Kapubrisíta sa mga pisù nga
inyung gikúhà, You took the poor little birdlings. -sítu = pubrisíta
(male).

pud = upud.

pū́d = púlud.

puday = puray.

púding n pudding. v [A; a] make, have pudding.

pudir n {1} rights one has over another person to regulate or order
him. Ang kumandanti may pudir sa pagdisiplína sa mga kadíti, The
commander has the right to discipline the cadets. Agálun ku apan wà kuy
pudir pagpugung sa íyang kwarta, I am her boss, but I have no right to
hold her money back. {1a} place one has control or rights over. But-an
ba ku nímu sa ákung pudir? You dare to order me around in my own house?
Kay miláyas kas ákung pudir, dì ku manggilábut nímu, You left my house
so I have nothing more to do with you. Karun kay midaug tas piliay, náa
na tas pudir, Now that we won the election, we are in power. -úsu
a powerful, influential. Ang mga Duránu pudirúsu kaáyus pulitika, The
Duranos are very powerful in politics. túdu -úsu n all powerful,
almighty. Ilikay kami sa kadaútan, Diyus nga túdu pudirúsu, God
Almighty, deliver us from evil. v [B12] be, become powerful.

pud kuluring n food coloring.

pudlung v [A; a1] destroy plants completely, uprooting everything.
Kainginíru ang nagpudlung sa lasang, The slash and burn cultivators
destroyed the forest. Pudlunga ang mga balágun nga mikáput sa atup, Get
rid of the vines that are growing over the roof.

pudlus_1 v {1} [A2; b6] run away fast from s.t. usually in a temper
tantrum. Mipudlus siya pagkakità sa dintista, She fled when she saw the
dentist. {2} [A] for animals that are tied to run about restlessly in
excitement. Mupudlus ning ákung túru ug makakitag bayi, The bull that
is tied keeps running back and forth when it sees a female.

pudlus_2 n clothesline. v {1} [A; a2] make a clothesline. {2} [A; c]
hang up on the clothesline. Ayaw nà ihayhay sa kural. Ipudlus giyud,
Don’t hang it over the fence. Put it over the line.

pudlus_3 v [A; ab2] beat or whip vigorously. Ang táwung nagkastígu sa
íyang anak mu rag nagpudlus ug bitin, The man is beating his child as
if he were clubbing a snake. n s.t. to beat s.o. with.

pudngan n k.o. bird, the yellow-breasted fruit dove: Ptilinopus
occipitalis.

pudpud_1 v {1} [APB1; a12] wear down or decay at the ends or tips,
become so. Dulsi ang nagpudpud (nagpapudpud) sa íyang ngípun, Her teeth
decayed from all the candy. Nagkapudpud ang halígi sa ulan ug ínit, The
post is getting decayed from the rain and the sun. Nagkapudpud na ang
íyang bakyà, His wooden slippers are becoming worn out. {2} [A; a]
knock the ashes off s.t. burning slowly. a worn down or decayed.

*pudpud_2 -in- n dried malangsi fish.

púdul n poodle cut, hair cut like a poodle. v {1} [A; c1] give s.o. a
poodle cut. {2} [A13] wear a poodle cut. Angayan siyang magpúdul, She
looks becoming with a poodle cut.

pudyut v {1} [A; a] pick up s.t. or pinch s.t. Gipudyut níya ang íkug
sa ilagà, He carefully picked up the rat by the tail. Kaáyu giyung
pudyútun nang ilung mu, How nice it would be to pinch your nose.
{2} [A; a2] give or take a small quantity of s.t. Syáru dì giyud ka
makapudyut nákug dyútayng isdà, Surely you can give me a little bit of
your fish. Pudyútig asin, Add a pinch of salt. n small amount, amount
which could be grasped in the tips of the fingers. Pipila ka pudyut nga
bugas, A few pinches of rice.

púg = pulug.

púga_1 v [A2; b26] escape from prison. Nakapúga ang bitayúnun, The
prisoner escaped from death row. n escapee from a prison. (→) = púga,
n.

púga_2 a for a woman to be beautiful (slang).

pugà v {1} [A; a] squeeze to extract juice. Pugaa (pug-a) ug maáyu ang
limunsítu, Squeeze the calamondin dry. {1a} — sa útuk [A135; a12] rack
one’s brains. Nagpugà ku sa ákung útuk ug unsay itubag, I’m racking my
brains to think of how to answer. {1b} kapug-an ug singut dripping wet
with sweat. {2} [AN; a12] force s.o. to do s.t. Kinsay nagpugà nímu
pagpahátag sa kwarta? Who compelled you to give the money? Dì ka
makapugà (makapamugà) nákù pagbutar nímu, You can’t force me to vote
for you. Gipugà siya pagpatug-an sa mga pulis, The cops forced him to
confess. -in- n s.t. squeezed out.†

púgad v [A; a12] {1} put fowl away for the night. Si Núnuy nagpúgad sa
mga manuk gabíi, Nonoy was the one who put the chickens away for the
night last night. {2} put newly hatched baby chicks down from the nest
for the first time. Ug sayung pugárun ang pisù háyang lamigasun, If you
take chicks out of the nest too early, the ants are likely to get at
them. n action of gathering fowl. pugaran n chicken’s nest.

pugáhan = aníbung.

pugápu n general name for groupers, except for extremely large ones.

pugapúga v [A; b5] do s.t. in a rush. Nagpugapúga silag pangarga kay
lumalarga nag barku, They loaded the cargo as fast as they could
because the boat was about to leave. Pugapugáha (pugapugáhi) ninyug
hípus ang binulad kay hápit na muulan, Gather the rice quick because it
is about to rain.

pugas v [A; c] plant grains or seeds in a hole. Akuy nagpugas ánang
lísu sa kapáyas dihà, I was the one who planted the papaya seeds there.
Íyang gipugsan ug munggus ang usa ka parsíla, He planted one lot to
mung beans. n {1} seed that has been planted. Giánud ang mga pugas sa
bahà, The seeds were washed away in the flood. {2} the amount of seeds
planted to a given area. Pugas ug tulu ka gantang ang ákung baul, I can
plant three gantas of grain in my field. pugaspúgas v [AN; c1] do s.t.
with the expectation of a return in the future. Kanang íyang paghátag
namugaspúgas nà arun hiayunan sa ginikánan, His gift is actually an
investment so that her parents would like him. pugsanan n place to be
planted. iga-, ig-r-(←), ig-l-(←) {1} thing to sow. {2} = ting-l-.
ting-l-(←) n sowing season.

pug-aw = pughaw.

pugáwù n k.o. small grouper, found in shallow waters, with dark spots
all over the body.

pugdaw_1 v [B125; a12P] be burned to ashes, burn oneself out. Ug
mapugdaw ang sugnud, hipúsa ang abu ug paglihíya, When the fuel burns
itself out, gather the ashes and make lye out of them.

pugdaw_2 = pukdaw.

pugdul a trimmed, cut short. Pugdul ang íkug sa irù, The dog has a
stubbed tail. Pugdul ang íyang buhuk, She has short hair. Pugdul ang
mga tanum sa kadaplínan, The plants along the sides have been trimmed
down. v [AP; ab] trim s.t. down. Ang bagyu mauy nakapugdul
(nakapapugdul) sa lubi, The typhoon ripped the tops off the coconut
trees.

pughad a {1} for root crops to have a fine, mealy consistency when
cooked. {2} for a woman to be good-looking (slang). v [B2] be tasty
with this smooth consistency.

pughak n egg yolk.

pughaw a for s.t. colored to be faded. v [B] get faded. Mupughaw ang
sinínà ug ibulad sa ínit, The dress will fade if it is dried in the
sun.

púgi a for a boy to be handsome (slang). Púgi apan dihin gúli, He may
be handsome but he’s dirty. v [B2; a1P] be, become handsome (slang).

pugì v [A; b(1)] be the first to do s.t. to s.t. Akuy mupugig sakay sa
ímung kutsi, Let me be the first one to ride in your new car. Akuy
mupugì ánang dalagáha, Let me be the one to break that virgin in.
-in-an n first use made of s.t. new. Pinugian ning linung-ága sa átung
abut humay ning aníha, This is the first rice we cooked from the rice
we harvested this season.

púgis, pug-is v [B; ac] having too much powder on the skin. Nawung
nagpúgis (gipugísan) sa pulbus, A face with face powder caked on it.
(→) a faded to the point of whiteness. v [B] become faded to the point
of whiteness. Mupugis (mapugis) ang sinínà ug isígig ladlad, The dress
will turn white if it’s always put in the sun. pugispugis a streaks or
spots of whitish or grayish substances which form on the skin or may
come from external sources. v [B] for skin to get pugispugis on it.
Magpugispugis ang pánit sa sabun ug dílì hugásan ug maáyu, The skin
will get streaks of soap if you don’t rinse it off.

pugnit v [A; a12] pick, pinch with the tips of the fingers and the
thumb. Gipugnit níya ang bugas nga naúsik, He picked up the rice that
had spilled.

pugpug v {1} = pulpug. {2} [BN] be covered with dust. Namugpug ang
ákung tiil sa abug, My feet are covered with dust.

pugsak v [A; bc] drop or dash s.t. downward so that it lands with
force. Ang tuntu mauy nakapugsak sa básu, The fool let the glass crash
to the floor. Gipugsakan níyag dakung batu ang hás, He bashed the
snake’s head with a huge stone. Napugsak ang baskit ug nangabúak ang
itlug sa súd, He put the basket down hard and the eggs in it broke.

pugsit v [A13] have loose bowel movements in spurts. Nagpugsit ku kay
wà ku kahilísi, I have diarrhea because I had indigestion.

pugtas_1 v [B126; a12] get exhausted from doing s.t. strenuous, get out
of breath. Napugtas ang bátà ug dinágan, The child exhausted himself
running. Makapugtas ang hilabihang kabusug, Eating too much can get you
out of breath. -an, ma-un a prone to fainting spells.

pugtas_2 v {1} [AB; ab8] snap or break off suddenly. Pagpílì ug alambri
nga dílì tayaun arun dílì mapugtas, Choose a wire that’s not rusty so
that it will not break easily. {2} kill, cause s.t. or s.o. to die with
suddenness and force. Si Dyíma nagpugtas sa íyang kaugalíngun, Gemma
killed herself. Ang kasukù dílì ígù makapugtas sa ákung gugma nímu,
Anger cannot kill my love for you.

pugtud (from putud) v [AB26; a] break into separate pieces, esp. things
which easily come apart, due to age, wear. Napugtud ang kaptanan sa
tása, The handle of the cup broke off. Ákung pugtúrun ning hilúa arun
wà nay mugámit niíni, I’ll break this thread into pieces so that no one
can use it anymore.

púgu n k.o. bird.

púgud v [B] for a bud to form and swell. (→) n infected pimple on the
face. pugudpugud v [B6; a4b4] for the face to get little bumps from
infected acne. Nawung nga nagpugudpugud (gipugudpugud, gipugudpuguran)
sa mga bugas, A face with bumps all over it from acne. pugurun a acne
infected.

pug-uk v [A3P; a12] {1} hold s.t. back to prevent growth or
development. Ang maung baláud nagpug-uk sa átung nasudnun nga
pag-uswag, Such a law stifles the progress of our nation. Gipug-uk sa
Insik ang kámay arun silay magbuut sa prisyu, The Chinese hoarded the
sugar so that they could determine the price. {2} cut a branch too
close to the trunk. Ug ímung pug-úkun ang sanga pagputul, madáut ang
tanum, If you cut the branch too close to the trunk, it will ruin the
plant. {3} acquire s.t. surreptitiously. Nakapug-uk ang lídir ug
daghang kwarta, The politician managed to get his hands on a lot of
money. {4} manipulate cards one is dealing. Maáyu kaáyu siyang mupug-uk
sa baráha, He is very good in manipulating the cards. {5} [a12] be
stung by the truth of what s.o. says. Napug-uk siya sa ákung gisulti
kay namatud-an, He was stung by what I said because it was true.

púgul v [B; c1] for s.t. to be massed in a small area. Mipúgul ang
túbig kay nasap-ungan ang bangag, There’s a pool of water because the
outlet got stopped up. Nagpúgul ang asu sa kwartu, The room is full of
smoke. Nagpúgul ang mga babáyi sulud sa kwartu, The women were all
huddled together in the bedroom. Dugung nagpúgul sa inunlan, Placenta
filled with a big clot of blood. Gipugúlan siya sa kasukù, She is
filled with anger.

pugun n range for cooking, baker’s oven, kiln or oven for drying s.t.
v {1} [A; c1] use a range in cooking. {2} [A12] obtain a range. -íru
n one who operates the baker’s oven or the kiln drier.

pugung v {1} [A; b] hold or keep in place, restrain the movement of.
Gitabangan pagpugung ang búang nga gustung mugawas, The people held the
lunatic that wanted to escape back. Pugngi ang hagdanan kay musaka ku,
Hold the ladder because I’m going up. {2} [A; a2b2] keep s.o. from
doing s.t. Dílì ku ikaw pugngan sa ímung buut buhátun, I won’t prevent
you from doing what you want. {2a} [A1] control oneself. Nagpugung lang
ku arun way mahitabù, I’m just keeping myself under control so nothing
happens. {3} [A; b] clip, tie the hair in place or clip clothes to the
line. n clip or safety pin. paN- v [A2S] clip, tie one’s own hair in
place. n s.t. to tie the hair with or clothespins. pinugngan
a suppressed. Pinugngang katáwa, Suppressed laughter. mapugngánun
a tending to be strict, having a restrictive attitude. v [A13] be
restrictive.

pugus v {1} [A3PN; a1cN] compel s.o. to do s.t. Dì untà ku mupalit,
apan mamugus giyud ang ákung asáwa, I didn’t want to buy any, but my
wife insisted. Way nagpugus nímu pagpakasalà, No one is forcing you to
commit a sin. {1a} pugsun ug — it cannot be helped that [such-and-such]
is the case. Pugsun ug daghang mangulitáwu nákù, Can I help it if lots
of men fall for me? Pugsun ug nasayup ku, I couldn’t help making a
mistake. {2} [A; c1] force s.t. to give way. Ayaw pugsa (ipugus)
pagpasulud kay mabúngì, Don’t force it in or you might break it.
Mabugtù nà ug pugsun pag-ínat, It will snap if you stretch it too far.
pugsunun a needing to be urged or told to do s.t. Ang mutsatsang
pugsunun maáyung ikurindu, You might as well get rid of a maid that you
have to keep telling to get to work. pugsunun ug útuk a slow in
comprehension. Intirisádu siya muiskuyla apan pugsunun kaáyug útuk, He
likes to study, but he is very slow. mapugsánun, mapinugsánun
a insistent (literary). Usa ka mapugsánung maghahálad, He is a
persistent suitor. -u(←) a insistent, demanding of oneself or others.
Pugúsu ka man gud. Ímung pugsun bísag dì mahímù, You are highly
demanding. You try to force people to do things they can’t do. Pugúsu
nang pliyíra, mulusut bísag blakíngan, He is a persistent player. He
forces his way through to the basket even if he is blocked. v [B12]
become insistent, persistent in doing s.t.

pugut n name given to trigger fishes, esp. species with very small
mouths (as opposed to the pakul, which have larger mouths). -un ug bàbà
having a small mouth.

pugwat v [A36; a1] startle s.o. that is asleep or so engrossed in s.t.
that he is oblivious of his surroundings. Napugwat ang bátà sa pagbutu
sa libintadur, The child was startled out of his sleep when the
firecracker exploded. Pugwátun ku siya sa íyang paghinuktuk, I’ll
startle her out of her deep thought.

púhag v [A; a] {1} scatter a large group of s.t. Napúhag ang mga táwu
sa plása pag-ulan, The people in the plaza scattered when it started to
rain. {2} destroy completely. Napúhag ang syudad sa bumba, The city was
destroyed by bombs. {3} get honey from a beehive (for which one must
destroy the hive). Ang mipúhag sa putyúkan wà hipaaki, He got the honey
but he was not bitten.

puhal v {1} [A; b(1)] undersell s.o. or bid a higher price for s.t.
than a rival. Ákù tà tung palitun, apan gipuhalan giyud sa babáyi, I
was going to buy it, but a lady came and bought it from under my nose
(by offering a better price). Puhali ang kumpaníya arun kitay makapalit
sa awtu, Outbid the company so we can buy the car. {2} [A12; b8] be
outclassed or outstripped in comparison. Hipuhalan ang átung dyíp sa
bag-ung awtu sa átung silíngan, Our neighbor’s new car quite outclasses
our jeep. n higher bid than s.o. else offered or lower than s.o. else
asked. -in-ay n competition or rivalry in selling or bidding. v [ANC]
be in competition.

puhaw a {1} for a color or voice quality to be lacking its full
intensity. Puhaw na kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa tantung linadlad, Your
skirt is all faded from being put under the sun. Puhaw ang íyang
pamánit kay bag-ung naáyu sa sakit, His complexion is pale because he
has just recently recovered from his illness. Ang puhaw ug tíngug dílì
mahímung mag-aawit, One with a weak voice cannot become a singer.
{2} become embarrassed. v {1} [B; c1] get to lose its full quality.
Napuhaw ang buhuk pagkinalígù sa dágat, His hair turned blond from
swimming so much. {2} [A3P; ab3(1)] embarrass s.o. Napuhaw siya kay wà
tagda sa íyang gikutána, She was embarrassed because the man she asked
didn’t pay any attention to her. pamuhawpuhaw v [A2] for the face to
change colors in embarrassment. Namuhawpuhaw ku dihang giingnan ku
níyang wà kuy batásan, My face turned all colors of the rainbow when
she told me I had no manners.

puhun in the future, God willing. Puhun, ug may kinabúhì pa, mulangyaw
ku, Someday, God willing, I will go abroad. Mugíkan ku ugmà puhun, I’m
leaving tomorrow, God willing. puhunpúhun v {1} [AN2; a12] say that one
will do s.t., God willing. Mupuhunpúhun (mamuhunpúhun) ta kay dì ta
makasigúru sa ugmà, We should say ‘God willing’ because we cannot be
certain of the future. {2} [a12] for it only to be a matter of days for
s.t. expected to happen to s.o. Puhunpuhúnun na lang ang gilaygay. Dì
nà madúgayng mamatay, It’s only a matter of days till the patient dies.
He’ll pass away soon.

puhúnan n {1} capital invested in a business or gambling. {2} any
source of profit. Láway ray ákung puhúnan kay maáyu kung muulug-úlug, I
had no capital other than my gift of gab because I’m good at flattery.
v {1} [A] for an investment to reach a certain amount. Dílì gamay ang
nigusyu nga mupuhúnan ug nuybinta mil, A business that has ninety
thousand for capital is not small. {2} [A12] get a certain amount as
capital. Nakapuhúnan na ku pára sa súgal, I was given some money for
gambling. {3} [A; c] put down a certain amount as capital. Pilay
ipuhúnan ninyu sa susyu? How much will you invest in the partnership?
paN- v {1} [A2; c6] use s.t. as an asset or means to accomplish s.t.
Ubang babáyi mamuhúnan sa ílang kagwápa sa panghantuk, Some women use
their beauty to land a husband. {2} [A2; c] rest up in anticipation of
work or activity. Namuhúnan kug katúlug pára sa pagbilar rung gabíi, I
got some extra sleep because I’m going to stay awake all night tonight.
mag-r-(→) n one who capitalizes.

puhúun see púu.

puk onomatopoetic word for a rapping sound. Bunálan bítaw nákù siya sa
ū́, puk, dà tuwad lagi, I struck him on the head, and puk, he fell
flat.

púk n a low foresail rigged in front of the mast and ahead of the
mainsail. v [A; a] put up, make into this k.o. sail.

puka v [A; a] break s.t. that is attached to s.t. by holding tight to
it. Siyay mipuka sa ákung singsing, She broke my ring. Mapuka nang
pul-an sa ímung sundang ug ímung ibughà, The handle of your bolo will
break if you use it to split firewood. a broken and thus loose.

pukak n child’s word for female genitalia.

pukakha a fluffed up, not tamped or packed down. v [B; a12] be fluffed
up, for s.t. in small pieces or powder to be loose and not packed down
so that it looks like a large quantity. Diyútay ra apan mu rag daghan
kay nagpukakha, It isn’t very much, but it looks like a lot because it
is fluffed up.

púkan v [AB12; ab2] {1} topple s.t. tall and erect. Hángin ang mupúkan
ánang kahúya, The wind will uproot that tree. {2} bring to a downfall
in a struggle. Mga Amirikanhun ang nakapúkan sa ribulusiyun, The
American forces crushed the revolutionary movement. Mapúkan ra ang
hiwing pamunúan, The crooked administration will some day be brought
down. {3} [A; ab3(1)] dishonor. Ang íyang ámu ang mipúkan sa íyang
kaputlì, Her own master violated her. ka-an n downfall, fall from power
or loss of honor. Ang kapukánan sa Impiryu sa Rúma, The fall of the
Roman Empire. (→) n trees that have fallen.

pukang n child’s word for female genitalia.

pukas v {1} [AB6; c1] lift up s.t. that covers or hides s.t., become
uncovered. Mipukas (napukas) ang tabun sa pagkáun, The cover of the
food was blown open. Gipukas sa maldítu ang sayal sa mutsatsa, The bad
boy pulled up the maid’s dress. {2} [A13] for a girl’s dress to creep
upwards uncovering her legs. Kítà íyang páa kay natúlug nagpukas, You
could see her thighs, because her skirt crept up as she slept. hiN-
a allowing the dress to creep up in one’s sleep, exposing the body in
the process.

pukat, púkat = puklat.

púkaw v {1} [AN; ab2] wake s.o. up. Pukáwa kug sayu, Wake me up early.
{2} [A3; a12] awaken an emotion that had become inactive. Pukáwun nátù
ang nindut nátung kagahápun, Let’s revive our happy past.†

pukay n child’s word for female genitalia.

pukdaw, pukgaw n k.o. fowl pestilence that is characterized by drooping
of the limbs and head, causes the flesh to turn yellow, and generally
kills all the fowl in one place. v [A3P; a4] get this pestilence. ting-
n season when this disease strikes.

pukgù v [A; a1] {1} put the hands around a sack to clasp it before
tying it firmly. Dì na ku makapukgù sa sáku kay punù na kaáyu, I cannot
gather and tie the mouth of the sack because it is too full. Pukgúa
nang buhuk mu íning lastiku, Gather and tie your hair with this rubber
band. Gipukgù níya ang tiil sa manuk, He grabbed the chicken by the
feet. {2} nip in the bud, cut s.t. short. Ang ákung pagkasakit mauy
nakapukgù sa ákung pagtuun, My illness has prevented me from studying.
Pukgúa ang íyang pagpanugal sa dì pa siya mahigám, Nip his gambling in
the bud before he gets accustomed to doing it.

púkì n {1} female genital organ (euphemism). {2} k.o. ornamental herb,
the leaf and flower of which are reminiscent of the female genitalia:
Rhoeo discolor.

púkir n game of poker. v [AC; a] play poker.

puklat v {1} [A3B36; c1] open the eyes. Nars mauy nagpuklat sa mata sa
babáying mitumar ug islíping tablit, A nurse pried open the eyes of the
woman that had taken sleeping tablets. Mipuklat lag kadiyut ang ákung
mata apan napilù lang sad dáyun, My eyes opened for a short time but
they closed right away. {2} [B26] awaken due to a disturbance. Mipuklat
ang bátà sa syágit, The shout woke the baby up. puklatpuklat n eyelids.
paN- v [A] start to wake up. Wà pa giyud nílay namuklatpuklat pagsubang
sa adlaw, Not one of them had begun to wake when the sun rose.

puklid, pukling = pakling.

puklu n base of the abdomen just below the pus-un, but above the
genitalia.

puknit = pugnit.

pukpuk_1 v {1} [AN; ac] pound with the fist or s.t. held in the fist,
not necessarily with force. Mipukpuk siya sa lamísa sa kalágut, He
pounded on the table in anger. Nagpamukpuk siya sa íyang dughan nga
nangadyì, She kept striking her breast while praying. {1a} [A; a2]
masturbate (slang). Nagpukpuk na sad ka? Have you been beating it
again? {2} [A12] get a good profit from the sale of s.t. Nakapukpuk
siya sa pamaligyà ug kupras, He made a killing in the sale of copra.
n {1} action of pounding or hammering. {2} drumstick. -in- n k.o. cloth
made from fine abaca fiber that has been pounded after weaving.
v {1} [A1] wear, use pinukpuk cloth. {2} [A; a] make pinukpuk cloth.

pukpuk_2 n pin. v [b(1)] fasten with a pin. Ákung pukpúkan ang ákung
tahian, I’ll put pins where I’m going to sew.

puksì v [A; a] tear off s.t. pasted or attached onto s.t. Kusug nga
hángin ang nakapuksì sa mga sín sa ílang atup, A strong wind tore the
corrugated iron sheets off their roof. Ayaw puksía ang silyu sa subri,
Do not tear the stamp off the envelope.

pukù_1 n k.o. infectious yaws characterized by lesions of the skin
which are resistant to any topically applied medicine. v [b4] have this
infection.

pukù_2 n k.o. basket coming in various shapes and sizes characterized
by a tapering mouth. v [A; c1] make this sort of basket.

púku mas u mínus more or less. Púku mas u mínus mga singkwintahun ka
táwu ang mitambung sa parti, Fifty persons more or less attended the
party.

puk-ung v [A; b6] sit on one’s haunches. Ayawg puk-úngi ang inudúru,
Don’t squat on top of the toilet.

pukupúku v [A; b5c1] do s.t. on a small, restrained scale. Ug dì ka
mupukupúku sa ímung ínum, musamut ang ímung ulsir, If you don’t control
your drinking, your ulcer will get worse. Pukupukúha ang túbig, Use the
water sparingly. Pukupukúha ang ímung kalágut básig mahayblad ka, Take
it easy on your anger lest you have a heart attack.

púkut n general term for fish nets put s.w., into which the fish are
driven and caught by the gills or which are used in trawling. paN-
n fishing with a púkut. salim-, salim-(→) n rope netted around the
edges of the púkut to give it strength.

pukuy n = pulukuy.

pukwang v [A3P; c1] turn s.t. over on its side. Ang awtu gipukwang sa
mga rayutir, The rioters overturned the car.

pukwat = puklat.

pukway = bukway.

púl_1 n pull, influence wielded by a person, usually to obtain favors.
v [A12] have pull. Ug dì ka makapúl dì ka makatrabahu, You can’t get a
job without pull.

púl_2 n pool, k.o. pocket billiards played with a cue ball and object
balls numbered from 1 to 15. v [AC; c] play pool. -an n pool hall.

pula a {1} red. {1a} any color ranging from dark yellow through orange,
red, and brown. {1b} — ug sáya palm toddy, esp. inside a transparent
glass container where the redness shows (slang). Puwa ug sáya ang ílang
giinum, They drank palm toddy. {2} not true, lie (so called from the
color of the butbut_2 which is homonymous with a word meaning lie,
butbut_1—colloquial). Anus-a ku mutúu nga pulus man nà pula? Don’t
expect me to believe that when it’s all lies. {3} = dágir, 2.
v {1} [ABN; ab7] become red, cause s.o. to do s.t. Akuy mupula sa ímung
sapátus, I’ll make your shoes red. Mipula siya kay gisugsū́g, She
turned red because they teased her. Napula ang íyang kamut sa dyúbus,
Her hands got red with dye. Namula ang ákung nawung sa kaúlaw, My face
was red with shame. Nagpula ang langit pagsawup sa adlaw, The sky was
all red at sunset. Nagkapula ang binágang puthaw, The iron that was
heated is turning redder and redder. Pulahun ta nang putì mung sapátus,
I’ll make your white shoes red. Gipulahan ku sa ímung sinínà, Your
dress looks red to me. Pulahi pa nang ímung ngábil, Put more red on
your lips. {2} [B126] for the voice to crack and become discordant.
Napula ang íyang tíngug sa kalísang, His voice went off pitch
discordantly in fright. {3} háin bay na- expression to show
contemptuous disbelief. Ingun siya dúna na siyay awtu, háin bay napuwa?
He said he got a car. That will be the day that I believe that!
pulapula n scattered red spots or dots. puláhan (not without l)
n {1} the name given to the Filipino fighters for independence against
the Spaniards and then the Americans (so called from their red badges).
{2} types of fish with predominantly red hues. puláhay n infant. ka-
redness. pa- n lipstick. pulahun a reddish. n = puláhay.

púlak v [AB; c1] {1} fall down from a height, cause s.t. to do so.
Magpúlak kug mga tambis, I’ll knock some tambis fruits down. Mupúlak
(mapúlak) ang prutas ug labihan na sa kahinug, Fruits will fall when
they are overripe. Napúlak ang misitíra gíkan sa bintánà, The potted
plant fell from the window sill. {2} fail in an examination or subject.
Sa nangúhà sa iksámin usa ray napúlak, Of those that took the exam,
only one failed. (→) n {1} a nut, fruit that has fallen. {2} coconuts
that have fallen off the tree. paN- v [A2; a2] gather fallen fruits,
esp. coconuts.

pulákì a {1} odd, not evenly divisible by a given number. Duhay pulákì.
Tulu mi, unyà limay inyung gihátag, There are two left over. There are
three of us and you gave five. {2} be the leftover when s.t. is
divided. Ang pulákì ámù na lang pikásun, Let’s just divide the one left
over. v [B126; c16] come out not evenly divisible.

pulákut v [B; c1] be lighted and burning. Dì mupulákut ang tinustus kay
basà ang tabákù, The cigars won’t burn because the tobacco is wet.
Pulakúta (ipulákut) úsà ang káyu úsà sugnúri, Let the fire start
burning before you add fuel.

pulálak, pulálay n = puray (humorous euphemism).

pul-an {1} = púlu_2. {2} see puul.

pulána = pulánu (female).

pulang n k.o. sharp machete with a round or square tip for heavy-duty
work. v {1} [A1; a2] make a machete of this type. {2} [A12] acquire
this k.o. machete.

púlang_1 v [A] for a baby to learn to jump, bounce up and down when
held. Mupúlang na ang bátà, The child is now learning to jump. Dì pa
makapúlang si Bíbi, Baby can’t jump yet. {2} [A; c1] put a child in a
pulangan. -an(→) n chair attached to a spring pole in which a baby is
placed so that it can jump up and down.

púlang_2 v [A; a12] die from intense cold, feel as cold as if one was
about to die. Ang katugnaw mauy mupúlang sa mga háyup, The cold will
kill the animals. Gipúlang ku, I’m freezing to death.

pulángì = pulangkì_2.

pulangkì_1 n {1} space under the roof parallel to the ridge pole
immediately beneath it. {2} the space including a platform just below
it which forms an attic.

pulangkì_2 red (humorous). À, kapulangkì nímug sinínà, What a red dress
you’ve got on!

pulánu n name given to a hypothetical male. Bísag si Pulánu pay
muimbitar nímu, ayaw pag-uban, Even if it’s Mr. So-and-so that invites
you, don’t go with him.

pulas, púlas v {1} [A; c1] remove s.t. from s.t. that covers or
encircles it, or remove the covering thing. Napulas ang kálù paghurus
sa hángin, The hat was blown away in the wind. Ug ímung pulasun
(ipulas) ang ímung kamut sa púsas, muhugut hinúun kini, If you try to
slip your hands out of the handcuffs, they’ll just tighten. {1a} [A; b]
remove the tie from the coconut palm bud to stop the toddy flow and
allow the bud to develop fruit. Pulasi ang sanggutan arun mamúnga,
Untie the coconut bud so it will bear fruit. {2} allow s.t. to run over
the face to remove s.t. Puwasa ang dágat sa ímung nawung, Let the sea
water run over your face. {3} [B23(1); c1] for s.t. to wear off,
disappear. Mipúlas ang adlaw sa búkid, The sun disappeared behind the
mountains. Wà pa makapulas ang ispiritu sa bínu, The effect of the
liquor hasn’t worn off yet. {4} papulaspúlas v [AN; c1] rub the hands
over the face. Namulaspúlas ku pagpawálà sa katulúgun, I rubbed my
hands over my face to get rid of my feeling of sleepiness.

pulásik (from lásik) v [B2S3(1)N; b2c1] fly apart in various directions
because of force. Mipulásik (namulásik) ang lápuk pag-ági sa trák, The
mud spattered in all directions when the truck passed by. Pagkahúlug sa
búlig, namuwásik ang mga lubi, When the bunch of coconuts fell, the
coconuts flew off in all directions.

pulaspulas v [A; b5c1] do s.t. with hurried motions. Dì ka
makapulaspulas ánang ímung líhuk kay dilikádu nang ímung búhat, You
can’t do that work hurriedly because it is a delicate piece of work.

pulaw, púlaw v {1} [AN; b] stay up very late at night or the whole
night through. Nagpulaw ku sa bátà gabíi, I stayed up all night to
watch the child last night. Dì ku mupulaw (mamulaw) ug tuun, I won’t
stay up late studying. Gipuláwan (gipamuláwan) sa sastri ang ákung
sinínà, The seamstress stayed up late finishing my dress. {2} [A; b]
keep a fire or lamp going the night through. Magpúlaw ku arun dúna tay
káyu kanúnay, I’ll keep a fire burning so that we’ll always have fire.
{3} [A3] for a feeling to be kept alive. Ang tingúhà sa pag-adtu sa
Amirika nagpúlaw sa íyang dughan sukad sa bátà pa, The desire to go to
America has been kept burning in his breast since his childhood. (→)
n = -an(→). -an(→), ka-an n {1} small lamp that is left lighted
throughout the night. {2} log that is kept burning day and night.

pulaw-as (not without l) v [AN; c6] sell s.t. at a lower than usual
selling price. Namulaw-as ku ug baligyà sa ákung awtu kay daghan kug
útang balayran, I had to sell my car cheap to get money to pay off my
debt. n sold at a sacrifice. Maáyu ni nga pagkapalíta kay pulaw-as nga
pagkabaligyáa, This is a good buy because it was sold at a sacrifice.

pulay = puray (humorous euphemism).

pulaynas (not without l) n leggings to protect the lower legs. v [A;
ab] use, make leggings.

pulbíra n powder case. v [A1; a] use a powder case.

pulbu = pulbus.

pulbura n explosive powder.

pulburun n k.o. candy made of powdered milk, flour, sugar, and butter
and roasted. v [A; a] make, serve pulburun.

pulbus n {1} powder. Patúbung pulbus, Baking powder. (Lit. yeast that
is powder). {2} face powder. v [A; b] wear face powder, powder s.t.
Nagpulbus kug tablítas nga itambal sa samad, I am pulverizing a tablet
to put on the wound. paN- v [A2] put face powder on. Ayaw pamulbus sa
kadaghánan, Do not powder your nose in public.

puldir n file folder.

pulgáda n inch. Duha ka pulgáda, Two inches. v [A; c1] measure s.t. by
inches. Panday ang mipulgáda sa káhuy, The carpenter measured the piece
of wood. Pulgadáha (ipulgáda) pagsukud ang íyang láwas, Measure her
body by the inches. pulgadahan n a stick or tape graduated in inches.
-s = pulgáda (plural—used only with numbers of Spanish origin). Dus
pulgádas, Two inches. pulgadíra n carpenter’s measuring tape wound in a
case or a folding meter stick. pulgadirista n in logging, the person
who marks the dimensions of the log or lumber to be cut or edged.

pulgas n flea. v [a4] be infested with fleas. Nagpangilkil ang irù kay
gipulgas, The dog is always scratching because he is infested with
fleas. -un(→) a flea-ridden.

pulhawus a full house, full to capacity. Pulhawus pagsalída sa Binhur,
There was a full house when they showed Ben Hur. n full house in poker.
v [B12] for there to be a full house, get filled to capacity.

pulhù v [A; b6(1)] shuck off the outer husks of an ear of corn leaving
the white inner leaves. -in-an n ears of corn with the outer husks
removed.

puli v [A; b] chop the bottom of a coconut to make it easy to husk.
Pulihi ang lubi únà bunti, Chop the coconut’s bottom before you husk
it.

púli n replacement, one who spells s.o. Aku ang púli nímu, I am your
substitute. — [noun] vice-. Púli pangúlu, Vice-president. v [A; c]
{1} take the place of s.t. else. Kinsay mupúli nímug magbakasiyun ka?
Who will take your place when you take your vacation? Ang kasadyà
gipulíhan sa kaguul, Now his mirth changed to sorrow. Munggus ang ipúli
pagtanum sa mais, Plant mung beans after the corn. {2} (by extension)
replace. Pulíhan tu nátung pawuntin pin nga nawálà, Let’s replace the
fountain pen that got lost. pulipúli v {1} [A; b] take turns in doing
s.t., do s.t. alternately. Gipulipulíhan nílag bantay ang masakitun,
They took turns keeping watch over the patient. {2} [A; a] do s.t. to
s.o. by turns. Pulipulíhun lang sila nákug kasábà, I’ll give them a
scolding alternately. ka- n substitute or replacement. kapulíhay in the
long run. Sa kapulíhay masáyud ra siya, In the long run, he will surely
find out the truth.

pulída a done with craftsmanship, doing good work (female). Pulída
kaáyung trabahúa, Well-executed piece of work. Pulída siyang manahì,
She sews with skill.

pulídu a for workmanship to be neat and well-done. Pulídu kaáyu ning
íyang baskit, The basket he made is of excellent workmanship.
v {1} [B12] for s.t. to come out excellently done. {2} [A12] do s.t.
with good workmanship.

pulíkì a extremely busy. Pulíkì ku run sa báy kay daghan mig bisíta,
I’m extremely busy in the house because we have lots of visitors.
v [B14] be extremely busy doing s.t. as much as one can. Nagpulíkì kug
tubag sa íyang mga pangutána, I had a hard time answering all his
questions. Nagkapulíkì siyag sagang sa latigu, He was busy trying to
shield himself from the lashes.

púling n foreign body or matter in the eye or eyes. v [A12; a3b4] have
a foreign body in the eye. Makapúling ang abug, Dust can get into one’s
eyes. Napúling ku, napulíngan ákung mata, I got s.t. in my eyes. Way
dakung makapúling, There are some things a small person can do that a
big person can not do. (Lit. S.t. big cannot get into the eyes.) — sa
mata v [A12; a3] offend one’s moral sense. Salídang law-ayng makapúling
sa mata, A dirty film offensive to the morals.

pulípug = pilípug.

púlir n tweezers for plucking hair out. hir — = púlir.

pulis n {1} policeman. — sa bantuk a two-bit cop (lit. policeman from
the uplands). {2} a wife who checks on her husband (humorous). {3} —
klírans n police clearance. v {1} [B156; a12] be, become a policeman.
{2} [AN2; a12] check up on one’s husband or children like a policeman
(humorous). pa- v [C6] report s.o. to the police. Láyas na kay ug dílì,
ipapulis ta ka, Get out of here or I will report you to the police.
-íya {1} = kapulisan. {2} = pulis, n1, v1. paN- n occupation of being a
policeman. ka-an n police.

pulísa n policy, written contract. Pulísa sa insyúrans, Insurance
policy. v [b6] issue s.o. a policy.

pulitika n politics. v [b(1)] {1} do s.t. only as a matter of
formality. Ákù lang siyang gipulitikahan ug imbitar, I invited him for
formality’s sake. {2} say s.t. in the hopes of obtaining s.t. for it.
Pulitikahi lag hangyù si Máma, básig musugut, Try your luck asking
Mother because she might agree to it. paN- v [A2; c6] engage in
politics or electioneering. Namulitika lang gihápun bísag tápus nang
iliksiyun, They are still engaging in politics even though the
elections are over. {n} politicking, electioneering. pulitikanhun
a political. Partídung pulitikanhun, Political party.

pulitiku n {1} politician. {2} one who promises but accomplishes
nothing. Ayawg sálig ánang pulitiku nga musáad ug bísan unsa, He’ll
promise just about anything, but don’t count on it. v [B156] be a
politician.

pulka n polka dance or music.

pulkas v [A; a] {1} annihilate, destroy utterly. Ang mga girilya
nagpulkas sa usa ka trák nga Hapun, The guerrillas annihilated a
truckload of Japanese soldiers. Mahinánuk na ku nga napulkasan na sa
dughù ang ákung katri, I sleep soundly now that my bed has been rid of
bedbugs. {2} remove a fish corral from the sea. Pulkása nag inyung
bungsud kay tinghabagat na, Remove your fish corral now because the
windy season is setting in. {3} [A; a] pay off debts. Nakapulkas siya
sa útang pagkadaug níya sa swipstik, He managed to pay off his debts
when he won the sweepstakes.

pulkum n acronym for pulis kumisyunir, member of the Police Commission.

pulmun, pulmunya, pulmuníya n diseases of the lungs, esp. pneumonia.
v [B126; a4] get pneumonia or other pulmonary diseases.

pulpitu n pulpit. v [A; b6] make the pulpit in the church.

pulpug v {1} [A; a] break s.t. brittle into tiny pieces. Napulpug ang
básung nahagbung, The glass fell and broke into smithereens. {2} [A; b]
tap, knock off fine particles. Akuy mupulpug sa ágiw sa ákung
sigarilyu, I’ll knock off the ashes of my cigarette. Ákung gipulpúgan
ug sulpanilamáyid ang ákung samad, I tapped sulfanilamide powder onto
my wound. -an(→) n cave under a river bank where crocodiles make their
abode (and bring their prey to destroy them).

pulpul a {1} not bright. Pulpul kaáyu nang batáa sa klási, That child
is very dull in class. {1a} unskillful in doing or executing things.
Pulpul kaáyung mikaniku kay wà kaáyu sa dyíp, The mechanic was no good.
He could not repair the jeep. {2} for vehicles or animals to be slow in
running speed. Pulpul kaáyung mudágan nang kabayúa, That horse runs
very slow. v [B12] be, become mentally slow, unskilled, slow in
movement.

pulríra = pluríra.

pulsíras n bracelet. v {1} [AN; c] wear a bracelet. {2} [A12; b8] get a
bracelet.

pulsu n {1} pulse. {2} wrist. maáyu ug — a having steady hands. Hantir
kaáyu nang tawhána kay maáyu man kaáyug pulsu, That man is a
sharpshooter because he has steady hands. pugung sa — n {1} s.t. to
stave off hunger (lit. hold back the pulse). {2} s.t. done temporarily
in the absence of s.t. better. Náay íyang trabáhu apan pugung lang nà
sa pulsu kay wà may láin, He has a job but it is just temporary because
he doesn’t have anything else. v [AP; c] {1} stave off hunger. Mupugung
(mupapugung) sa pulsu ang kindi, Candies will stave off hunger.
{2} make do with s.t. Ígù pang makapugung sa pulsu ning diyútayng
gasulína sa gasulinahan, This little gasoline is enough to get us to
the gas station. hiN- v [AN; b6] take s.o.’s pulse. Ang duktur ang
muhimulsu (manghimulsu) nímu, The doctor will feel your pulse. rilu di-
n wrist watch.†

pulta n {1} door, doorway. — mayur main door. {2} admission fee. {3} =
pwirtu_2. v [A; c] pay admission. Akuy mupulta nímu sa sini, I’ll pay
your way to the show. pultahan n {1} doorway. {2} store space used as a
retail establishment. Duha ka náyung pultahan ang ílang giabángan, They
rented two adjacent store spaces. pultíra = pultíru (female). pultíru
n doorkeeper, usher who collects admission tickets. v [B16; bc1] be a
ticket collector.

pultri n {1} one’s fowls and the equipment to maintain them. Nasúnug
ámung pultri gabíi, Our chicken coop burnt down last night. v [A; c1]
{1} operate a poultry business. Magpultri ku arun ku makabaligyag mga
itlug, I want to raise poultry so that I can sell eggs. {2} set up a
poultry house. Magpultri kug kabutangan sa mga manuk, I’ll make a coop
to shelter the chickens.

púlu_1 (not without l) n short-sleeved sport shirt. — barung, barung —
short-sleeved barung. v [A; ac] get, make into a púlu. puluhun
n material to make into a púlu.

púlu_2 n {1} handle of bladed instruments. {2} butt of a pistol or a
revolver. v [A; c1] make, supply the handle of a bladed instrument. Íya
nang gipulúan (gipul-ánan) ang ímung sundang, He has made a handle for
your bolo. puluan, pul-an = púlu, n, v. mag-/nagdáyig ug pul-an ug guna
extolling the virtues of one’s own possessions. Ang amahan nga nagdáyig
sa kagwápa sa íyang kaugalíngung anak mu rag nagdáyig ug puluan ug
guna, A father who praises his own daughter’s beauty is like a man who
praises a bolo handle he made himself.

pulù n island. ka-an, kapupud-an n archipelago. Ang kapupud-an sa
Pilipínas, The Philippine Islands.

púlù numeral ten. v see pitu. n ten-peso bill. ika- a the tenth. ka-,
maka- ten times. na- = púlù.

pulud, púlud v [A; a] cut down plants, esp. large and tall ones.
Magpulud mig usa ka púnù nga lubi, We’ll cut down a coconut tree.
n trunk of a plant that has been cut down. Usa ka púlud nga káhuy, A
log.

pulug n {1} dye. {2} color. Musíga na ang pulug nga pula sa sugà sa
trapiku, The traffic light is red. {3} power or strength to do s.t. or
produce an effect. Pila ra may pulug sa linúgaw nga ipanihápun? There
is nothing to a dinner of mere rice porridge. v {1} [A; a] dye, color
s.t. with a dye. {2} [A; a12] give s.t. its appearance by its very
presence. Mga púlung nga gipulug sa pagmáhay, Words that were fashioned
by her deep remorse. Ang tibuuk palíbut gipulug sa langitnung katahum,
Heavenly beauty that bathed the surroundings. {3} [a12] picture,
describe s.t. in words. Dì mapulug ang ílang gibátì, What they felt was
beyond description. {4} [A; a12] consider s.t. carefully in the mind.
May mga púlung nga manlugwà sa bàbà nga dì pulugun sa hunàhúnà, Words
that come out of the mouth without having been carefully thought over
in the mind.

pulúhu (not without l) a {1} lazy, not eager or willing to work or
exert oneself. {2} mentally slow. Pulúhu kaáyu nang batáa sa klási,
That boy is very weak in class. {3} not knowing how to do anything.
Pulúhu nang bayhána. Dì gánì kahibáwung mulung-ag, That woman has no
skills. She doesn’t even know how to cook rice. v {1} [B12] be, become
lazy. {2} [B12] become slow in learning. -in-(→) a done in a lazy,
indolent way. Pinuluhu man nang ímung linaktan! Hurry up! You are
walking so lazily. v [A; b5] do s.t. in a lazy and indolent manner.

pulukuy child’s word for male genitalia.

púlun v [A; c1] wind a string or rope into a ball.

púlung n {1} word. Maáyu ka lang sa púlung, You are only good in
talking. {1a} Word, as used in theology. Sa sinugdánan mau ang Púlung,
In the beginning was the Word. {2} statement or message. Unsay íyang
púlung? What did he say? — [gen.] [gen.] said. ‘Asa ka?’ púlung níya,
‘Where are you going?’ said he. {3} word received as a point of honor.
Bakákun ka kay wà kay púlung, You’re a liar because you didn’t keep
your word. v [A12C; c] have a dialogue, conference. Nagpúlung ang mga
tinugyánan sa duha ka násud, The representatives of the two nations had
a conference. Gipulúngan námù ang ímung suliran, We discussed your
problem in a conference. pulungpúlung v [C; bc] engage in a
conversation. Wà siyay ikapulungpúlung sukad mabálu, He had no one to
talk to after his wife died. paN- v {1} [A2; c6] deliver a speech, say
s.t. before an audience. Siya ang únang namúlung, He was the first one
to speak to the group. {2} [A2; c] say s.t. about s.t. Unsay ímung
ikapamúlung niánà? What can you say about that? {3} [A2; b] speak to
the parents asking for their daughter’s hand. Nakapamúlung na siya sa
ginikánan sa babáyi, He has already asked the parents for the girl’s
hand. n celebration held in asking a girl’s hand from her parents.
tigpaN- n {1} speaker in a program. {2} one who speaks for others.
-in-an(→) n {1} language, way of speech. {2} word of honor. maN-r-
n speaker, orator. pakig- n speech. -un(→) n saying. Dúnay pulungun nga
nag-ingun, ang nagputak mauy nangitlug, There is a saying that goes,
the one who cackles laid the egg (i.e. whoever complains the loudest
must be the culprit).

pul-ung v [A; a] lop off with one or two strokes. Nagpul-ung ang
hardiníru sa mga balasbas, The gardener is trimming the hedge.
Gipul-úngan sa líug si Karlus Únu, Charles I was beheaded. -in-an
n pruned or trimmed.

pulúris = plúris, 2. paN- v [A2] attend a flowers of May celebration.

pulus_1 v [A1; b8] be of use, do. Kining kahúya dílì magpulus sa
halígi, This piece of wood will not do for a post. Láing táwu ang
makapulus sa kwarta, S.o. else can make use of the money. Kining likì
nga tadyaw dì na kapuslan, This jar is of no use any more because it is
cracked. walay — there is no use, benefit. Wà na nay pús. Ilábay nà,
That is no good any more. Throw it away. pahiN- v {1} [A; b6] make use
of. Pahimusli (pahimudsi) ang mga taknà sa pagbása, Make use of the
hours by reading. {2} [A; b6] take advantage of. Dílì ku mupahimulus sa
kahúyang sa uban, I will not take advantage of others’ weaknesses.
Pahimudsi ang tanyag, Take advantage of the offer. {3} [A; b(1)] take
advantage of a woman sexually. Gipahimuslan ang íyang pagkababáyi
samtang gikuyapan siya, She was molested while she was unconscious.
puslan (pudsan) man inasmuch as [so-and-so] has happened,
[such-and-such] might just as well happen, too. Puslan (pudsan) man nga
nahumud ku maáyu pa ug malígù, Now that I got wet, I might as well go
in all the way (i.e., since I started it, I might as well go the whole
hog). kapuslánan n use or benefit that can be gotten from s.t. Unsa may
kapuslánan ánang ímung paglakwatsa? What good is it for you to roam
about? mahimuslánun, mapahimuslánun a inclined to avail oneself of any
opportunity that comes one’s way. mapuslánun, mapudsánun a useful.
v [A13] be useful. Ihátag nà nákù kay magmapuslánun (magmapudsánun) ra
gihápun nà, Give it to me because it is still of use.

pulus_2, púlus_1 (not without l) be all s.t. Pulus babáyi mi dinhi, We
are all women here. Pulus ka lang balíbad dà, You always say no. Pulus
dáan ang ákung libru, My books are all old. v [B1256; c16] be covered
all over with, be all full of s.t. of one kind. Napulus patik ang
buktun sa prísu, The prisoner’s arms are all covered with tattoos.

pulut (not without l) = KAPULUT.

púlut v {1} [A; a1b6] pick up s.t. with the hand(s). Mipúlut kug batu
pagdúul sa irù, I picked up a rock when the dog came toward me.
{2} [A12; b8] come across s.t. by accident. Íyang giúlì ang pitáka nga
íyang hipulutan, She returned the wallet that she had found. paN- [A2;
b6] gather by picking up. Mamúlut kug dalag sa lumbuy pára líkin, I
will gather yellowed lumbuy leaves for cigars.

pulyitu, pulyítus n leaflet, handbill.

pulyu n polio. v [A123P; a4] get polio.

pumáda n pomade. v [A; a2] make into, apply pomade. paN- v [A2; b6] put
pomade on oneself.

pumpung = palungpung.

púna = púlung níya. see púlung, n2.

púnà_1 v {1} [A; bc] replant spaces in a field where a seed or plant
failed to grow. Íya nang gipunáan ang dapit nga wà tugki, She has
already replanted the places where nothing sprouted. {2} [A; c] repair
a fishnet. Gipunáan pa ang púkut, They’re still mending the net.

púnà_2 v [A; a] dye and strengthen a fishline or net by rubbing it with
the scrapings from the bark of a k.o. mangrove (tabígì). (→) n bark
scrapings from mangrove for fishlines.

púnas v [A; b6] wash the face and limbs with a soapy washcloth. paN-
v [A2; b6(1)] wash oneself off with a washcloth. Mamúnas lang ku kay
diyútay ra ang túbig, I’ll just wipe myself off with a washcloth
because there isn’t very much water. (→) a {1} having no pubic hair.
{2} in the game of balinsay, failure to catch s.t. on the back of the
hand. Kurug man gud kaáyu ang ákung kamut mau nga kanúnay lang punas
inigbalinsay nákù, My hands are shaky. That’s why I always catch
nothing at the back of my palm (get a bald head) when I play balinsay.

punaw n k.o. edible clam about 1½″ in diameter. It is a dark
reddish-brown color.

púnaw v {1} [B126; a4b4] feel faint. Gipúnaw (gipunáwan) ku sa kabúhì,
I felt faint from my stomach pain. {2} [b4(1)] be overcome by a strong
emotion. Napunáwan siya sa hilabihang kasubù, She was overcome with
grief. {3} [B126] be overcome by shame. Mu rag napúnaw ku sa íyang
tinutukan, The way he stared at me, I wanted to sink into a crack in
the floor. punawpúnaw paN- v [A] go far away from s.o. to the horizon
or upper spaces where the image is blurred. Namunawpúnaw ang langgam sa
kahitas-an, The bird soared up to the highest reaches of the sky.
kapunawpunáwan n {1} horizon, upper reaches of heaven. {2} deepest
recesses of one’s consciousness (literary). Ang íyang tíngug mikulíkut
sa kapunawpunáwan sa ákung katúlug, Her voice pierced into the depths
of my slumber.

punay, púnay_1 v [A13; ab36c] do s.t. always, keep on doing s.t.
Ngánung nagpúnay ka mag tan-aw níya? Why are you always looking at
(keep on looking at) her? Unsay ímung gipunáyan ug hílak? What are you
always crying about? Ayaw ipúnayg kalígù sa dágat ang ímung hubag,
Don’t keep going swimming in the ocean with that boil of yours.

púnay_2 n k.o. bird, the pink-necked green pigeon: Treron vernans.

punda n pillow case. v [A; a] put on, use, make into a pillow case.

pundadur n k.o. imported liquor.

pundahan n small variety store that also sells food and drinks.

pundǎr v [A; c1] found or set up an organization. Nagpundǎr sila ug
kaugalíngun nílang iskuylahan, They founded their own school.

pundasiyun n foundation, supporting material. v [A; c] {1} apply a
foundation before putting cosmetics on. Nahámis ang íyang náwung kay
nagpundasiyun man, Her face is smooth because she is using a
foundation. {2} make a foundation for a structure. Malig-un ang balay
ug pundasiyunan, The house will be strong if it has a foundation.

pundídu see pundir_1, 2.

pundilyu = pundíyu.

pundir_1 v [A; a2] melt and cast metal. Pundíhun ni námung brunsig
kampána, We will cast this bronze slab into a bell. pundihan,
pundihánan n foundry. pundídu n cast iron. Ang gigáwì sa paghímù sa
kaláhà pundídu kay muagwanta ug ínit, They use cast iron for frying
pans because it can take heat.

pundir_2 v [AB12; ab4(1)] {1} burn out a bulb, use up a battery,
machine; become burnt out or used up. Ilísi ang bumbilyang napundir,
Replace the bulb that burnt out. Nagkapundir ang mga makina kay dáan na
man, The engines are going out of commission one after another because
they are so old. {2} knock s.o. out of commission. Uy, makapundir sa
láwas ning álak, This liquor can put you out of commission. a burnt out
of commission. pundídu v [B12] get burnt out.

pundíyu n length in pants from the waist along the fly to the crotch.
pundiyúhan = pundíyu.

pundu n {1} anchor. {2} deposit, amount paid to guarantee the return of
s.t. {2a} funds, money set aside for s.t. {2b} stock, amount of s.t.
set aside. v {1} [A; a1] make an anchor. {2} [A; c] drop anchor.
Mupundu ta dinhi, Let’s drop anchor here. Gipundúhan na ang sakayan,
The boat dropped anchor. {2a} [A; b6] stay s.w. for a while. Mupundu ta
sa landung kadiyut, Let’s rest in the shade for a while. {2b} [A; b6]
settle down, stop doing s.t. Nagpundu na ang íyang pagtambuk, He has
stopped putting on weight. {2c} [A; b] put animals away for the night.
Gipundúhan na ba nímu ang kabáyù? Have you put the horse away for the
night? {3a} lay a vehicle or machinery aside. Ámung gipundu ang ámung
kutsi samtang nagbakasiyun mi, We stored our car while we were on
vacation. {3b} [A; c] deposit s.t. as guarantee. Ang butilya gipundúhan
ug diyis, They deposited ten cents for the bottle. {4} [A; c] fund a
project. Usa ka miliyun ang gipundu álang sa ubras, A million pesos
have been funded for public works. {4a} set aside stock for s.t. Bangà
ang gipundúhan sa túbig, They stored the water in a jar. punduhánan
n {1} anchoring place. {2} place one stays for a while, animals are put
away for the night. {3} place s.t. is stored, deposited.

punduk v {1} [AC; b6] gather, assemble together in a group. Dì kita
makapunduk sa pasilyu, We can’t gather in the passageway. Plása ang
ílang gipundúkan, They gathered in the town square. {2} [A; c1] gather
s.t. Pundúka (ipunduk) ang mga sagbut arun daúban, Pile the trash up to
burn it. n {1} group. {2} pile. {3} political party. Mubali ku sa
punduk Libiral, I’ll cross to the Liberal party. pundukpunduk
n {1} social gathering. Sa pundukpunduk dì pud siya mapiri, She would
not be out of place in social gatherings. {2} k.o. small cerith shells
(daludalu), so called because they are found gathered in bunches.

pundul = pungdul.

pundyi n pongee, a k.o. thin cloth of raw silk.

pung_1 n onomatopoetic word for an exploding sound, used in children’s
games. Pung, patay ka na! Bang, you’re dead!

pung_2, púng_1 n {1} in mahjong, the making of a set of three like
pieces (tríyu) by adding a discarded piece to one’s hand (káun, 3a).
{2} = tríyu. túdu — a hand consisting of all tríyus and an ay_4 (and
thus wins). túdu — plásis a plásis hand which also is a túdu pung. túdu
— ul-ap a túdu pung hand where no tríyu has been laid open on the
table. túdu — uldáwun n a túdu pung hand where the tríyus have all been
laid open on the table. v [A; b2c1] {1} make a set of three like
pieces. {2} make a tríyu hand in card games.

púng_2 = púlung.

punga_1 n operculum, a shelly plate attached to the foot of gastropod
mollusks which covers the mouth part of the shell when the animal
retracts its foot.

punga_2 = pungángu.

púnga a experiencing difficulty in breathing from having too full a
stomach or being pregnant. v [B; b4] experience difficulty in breathing
from these causes. Mupúnga (mapúnga) ang pagginháwa ug malabian ug
káun, You will experience difficulty in breathing if you overeat. Hala
palabiig káun arun pungáhan ka, Go ahead. Eat too much so you’ll have
difficulty in breathing.

pungag, púngag v [A; a] break off a projection, usually s.t. hard, but
said also of the part of the water buffalo’s nose where the rope is
passed or a person’s nose. Napúngag ang ákung tangung nasukmagan, My
teeth got knocked out when s.o. hit me. (→) a having s.t. broken off.
Pungag ang básu, The glass is chipped. Dì na magámit ang kábaw nga
pungag, You can’t use a carabao any longer if his nose has been ripped
open.

púngal v [A3P; a] break off s.t. from its place of attachment, usually
s.t. firmly attached. Binúkal túbig ang nakapúngal (nakapapúngal) sa
kuku sa báka, We got the hoofs off the cow’s feet with boiling water.
Pungála lang ang ruska ug dì na maibut, Break the screw off if you
can’t get it out.

pungángu n pedicel or peduncle of flowers and fruits, the stalk which
attaches the fruit or flower to the larger peduncle or to the branch.
Lig-un ug pungángu ang nangkà, The jackfruit is attached to the branch
with a strong stem. punganguhan n place where the pedicel attaches to
the branch or peduncle.

pungàpungà v {1} [A] gasp for breath in drowning or in a heavy wind or
onrush of water. Nagpungàpungà ang bátà nga gipaatubang sa bintiladur,
The baby was gasping for breath because it had been placed in front of
an electric fan. {2} [A13] having difficulty eluding a flurry of
punches or strokes. Nagpungàpungà ang buksidur sa kúmù ni Ilurdi, The
boxer had his hands full dodging Elorde’s blows. ka- = pungàpungà.

pungasì v [A13] be coming in fast and in rapid succession. Nagpungasì
ang mga bala sa masinggan, The machine gun bullets are coming in rapid
succession. Nagpungasì ang ulan, The rain is coming down relentlessly.
Nagpungasing kaínit, The relentless heat.

pungdul a blunt-ended. Lisud itahì ang dágum nga pungdul, It is
difficult to sew with a blunt needle. v [AB1; b5] be, become
blunt-ended. Gipungdul (gipungdúlan) ku ang mga tumuy sa kural arun way
matúsuk, I cut the sharp ends off of the fence posts so no one could
get hurt on them.

pungga n game of shooting pebbles into holes using a stone to knock the
opponent’s stones (pangának). v [AC; b6] play this game.

punggak v {1} [A; a1b7] knock s.t. down by breaking it off at its base
or from its attachment. Makapunggak ka ba ánang manggag pusil gamítun?
Can you knock that mango down with a gun? Punggakun (punggákun) ta nang
balay sa lapínig, Let’s knock the beehive down. {2} [B12] for the seat
of the pants to be worn out. Nagkapunggak na ang lubut sa ákung
karsúnis, The seat of my trousers is gradually wearing out. a worn-out
at the seat.

punggit v [A; a1b2] {1} hit s.t. with a missile to knock it down or
off. Wà siya makapunggit sa iruplánu sa kaáway, He was not able to
shoot down the enemy plane. Batu ray ákung ipunggit ánang bayábas, I’ll
knock that guava down with a stone. {2} hit s.t. directly. Punggíta ang
úlu sa manuk, Hit the chicken in the head. {3} break, cut s.t. off. Ang
hitabù nakapunggit sa íyang ambisiyun, The event cut down his soaring
ambition. {4} mark s.o. for s.t. bad. Ug mapildi ang Libiral punggítun
siya sa ubus nga pwistu, He’s marked for demotion to a low position if
the Liberal Party loses.

punggud = pugud. see púgud.

punggut v [AN; a] behead. Ayaw punggúta ang líug sa inusinti, Don’t cut
off the head of an innocent man.

púngì, púngil v [A; a12] detach or break off s.t. from an attachment or
joint, esp. s.t. delicate or breakable. Akuy nagpúngil sa lugpit sa
pawuntin pin, I broke the clip off the fountain pen. Ayaw pungíla ang
mga gihay sa mga búlak, Don’t pluck the petals off the flowers.

pungíngi = bungíngi.

pungkay_1 n {1} summit. Naabut na ang pungkay sa Mawunt Ibirist, They
have reached the top of Mount Everest. {2} highest degree of s.t. Ang
pungkay sa kalampúsan, The highest point of success. kina-an(→)
a topmost part, as of a summit, highest degree of s.t. Kinapungkayan sa
lamì, At the highest point of ecstasy.

pungkay_2 n child’s word for female genitalia.

pungkù v [A; b6(1)] {1} squat. Nag-alírung silang nagpungkù nga
nagtan-aw sa hantak, They were squatting in a circle watching the
tossing of the coins. {2} sit down. Mahugnù ang lamísag inyung
pungkúan, The table will collapse if you sit on it. {3} sit idly doing
nothing. Ang ímu dihang gipungkù ug gihinayhínay pa nímug trabáhu may
ági ka na, The time you wasted sitting around, if you had used it to
start work little by little, you would have had s.t. to show for it by
now. {4} [b(1)] — sa bilangguan be willing to go to prison just so s.t.
is accomplished. Pungkúan lang nákù ang Bilíbid, basta lang mapatay
siya, I’m willing to go to Bilibid prison as long as he dies.†

pungkul n {1} lacking a limb. Ang pungkul makasulat gihápun, The
amputee can still write. ságing — k.o. short and thick banana growing
closely packed in large bunches, eaten when ripe: Musa sapientum var.
humilis. {2} short pants. v {1} [B126; b4] get amputated. Gipungkúlan
(napungkul) ang kamut sa kawatan, The hand of the thief was cut off.
{2} [A; c1] wear, make short pants.

pungkuy n child’s word for the penis.

pungli n aspiration to become a certain sort of person, reach a high
degree of virtue in s.t. Adúna siyay pungli sa pagkasantus, He has the
aspiration to become a saint.

pungpung = palungpung_1, 2.

pungpungáya n game played with a baby where one takes the hands and the
feet, bunches them saying a rhyme and letting them go: pungpungáya,
pungpungáya, bukhad iláwum, Pungpungáya, open underneath. v [A; b5c1]
play pungpungáya with a baby.

pungpung lálung = pungpung pyángaw, n, v. v [A12C2] have sexual
intercourse (humorous). Bag-u tingáling nakapungpung lálung kay
gipaningut man, He probably played pungpung pyángaw because he is
perspiring.

pungpung pyángaw n a game of the hands played by children wherein the
players put their fists one on top of the other. A child not
participating is the leader (abat) and recites a verse after which the
fist at the bottom opens; the verse is repeated and the next fist
opens, and so forth, until everybody has opened his fist. Then the
leader inserts his index finger into the pile of hands letting the
players guess in turn if his finger have touched bottom. The verse
recited goes: Pungpung pyángaw, Bukadbukad iláwum, Kulítug kulítug,
Lagbas na ba? Pungpung pyángaw, Open up the lowest hand, Thrust the
finger in, Has it reached the bottom? v [AC; c1] play pungpung pyángaw.

pungtud n {1} hill, a natural raised part of the earth’s surface often
rounded, smaller than a mountain. {2} anthill. {3} shoal or sandbar, an
island-like formation in shallow seas, visible during low tide.
Manginhas ku sa pungtud inighunas, I’ll gather shells at the shoal
during low tide. v [B126; b6] be formed into a hill. kapungtúran
n hills. kinapungturan n topmost part of the hill.

pung-ul = pul-ung.

pungun n sharp object (spine, thorn, and the like) that has pricked and
is lodged into the body. v {1} [A2; a3b4] prick and be lodged in the
body. Mupungun gayud ang mga tunuk sa tuyum, The spines of the sea
urchins will surely be lodged in the skin if they prick you. {2} [b]
for a woman to be had for sexual intercourse (humorous). Kay natúlug
siya uban sa íyang trátu, sigúru giyud ku nga gipungnan siya, Because
she slept with her lover, I’m sure she had sexual intercourse with him.

púngus v [A; c1] {1} gather the hair and tie it in a knot. Mupúngus ku
sa buhuk ug inítan ku, I’ll knot my hair when I feel warm. {2} tie up
the hair with a ribbon or wig, wiglet. Magpúngus lang ku arun mapangkù
ning ákung buhuk, I’ll use a wig so that I can wear my hair in a
chignon. (→) n wig or a piece of cloth worn with the hair knotted or
swept up.

pungut a irritating, maddening. Pungut bayà kaáyu nímu nga mukatáwa lag
kasab-an, It’s maddening the way you simply laugh when you are scolded.
pila ray — how badly did [so-and-so] want to eat it, when he only eats
very little (said of things s.o. wanted to eat very much and then when
it was served, he didn’t eat a great quantity). Manganduy tag inasal
apan kun náa na, pila ra giyuy pungut, One yearns for roasted pig, but
when it’s there, you can only eat so much. v [B126; a2b3] be, become
angry, highly irritated. Kanang sayúpa ang nakapungut (nakapapungut)
nákù nímu, That mistake made me mad at you. Unsa may ímung napungtan
nákù? What made you mad at me? Gipungtan ku ning trabahúa, I hated this
k.o. work. pungutpungut v [B1456; a12] be in an irritable mood.
Nagkapungutpungut ku run sa ákung trabáhung wà magkadimáu, I am in a
bad mood now because I didn’t do my work properly. paN- v [A2] fly into
a rage, fury. Namungut ang buksidur dihang nagdugù ang íyang ilung, The
boxer flew into a rage when his nose was bloodied. n fit of rage, fury.
pahiN- v [A; b(1)] vent one’s anger on. Aku lay íyang gipahimungtan sa
áway sa íyang trátu, He took his anger at his girl friend out on me.
ka- n anger. pungtánun, pulungtánun, mapungtánun a irritable, easily
getting angry.

púngut v {1} [A; c1] join things together by tying or pasting them.
Magpúngut kug písì nga hayháyan, I’ll join together pieces of rope for
a clothesline. {2} [C; c1] for two people to have a claim on part of a
piece of money for lack of loose change. Ang ímung singkwinta nagpúngut
sa písus nga gibáyad nákù, Your payment is included in the peso bill
which he paid me. {3} [A13] for a thicket to form with intertwining
weeds. n thick cluster of intertwining shrubs and grasses. Ságad ang
buntug mulukluk sa púngut, Usually the quail hides in the underbrush.
-ay(→) v [C] have intercourse (coarse, but not very much so).
kapupungtan, kinapungtan n {1} the endmost part of s.t. long where it
joins to s.t. else. Putla ang tinái dihà sa íyang kapupungtan sa
túngul, Cut the intestines at the place where they join the stomach.
{2} the endmost part of anything very long or high. Didtu níla hiapsi
ang kawatan sa kapupungtan sa sapà, nag-inum, They came across the
thief at the head of the river, drinking. Ang payag túa gitúkud sa
kinapungtan sa búkid, The shack was built at the top of the mountain.

pungyut v [B; c1] for an area of s.t. to sag so as to hang unevenly or
make a bulge. Nalibang tingálig bátà kay nagpungyut ang panti, The
child must have dirtied his pants because they are bulging. Ayawg
pungyúta (ipungyut) ang ímung bulsa sa húlin, Don’t let your pocket sag
with marbles.

puni n tablecloth. v {1} [A1; b6(1)] cover with a tablecloth. {2} [a12]
make into a tablecloth.

púni v [A; b6(1)] replant a part of a field where seeds failed to
sprout or where plants are damaged. Ákù nang gipuníhan ang mga mais nga
gikaun sa kábaw, I replaced the corn plants that the water buffalo ate.

punirarya n funeral parlor. v [A1; c1] make, put up a funeral parlor.

punit v {1} [A; ab2] pick up with the hands. Punita nang ímung duláan
sa salug, Pick your toys up from the floor. {2} [A12; b8] find s.t.
Nakapunit kug daghang kwarta, I found a large sum of money. {2a} [A;
a12] pick up a lesson, take s.t. and steal it. Makapunit kag daghang
pagtulun-an niíning sugilambúnga, You can pick up a lot of lessons from
this novel. {2b} choose a girl. Kinsa guy mupunit nákung laksut man ku?
Who would ever choose me when I’m so ugly? {n} action of picking s.t.
up. (←) v [A3P; b3(1)4(1)c1] abort, miscarry. Ang midisína nga íyang
giinum mauy nakapúnit (nakapapúnit) sa íyang gisabak, The medicine that
she took caused her to abort her child. Napunítan siya kay nangā́ unyà
wà matúman, She lost her baby because she didn’t get the things she
craved. -in- n s.t. picked up. -in-an n s.t. found. Gisagup sa rayna
ang bátang pinunitan, The queen adopted the child that s.o. found.

punitil n ponytail style of tying the hair up and letting it hang down
loose. v [A; c1] do one’s hair in this style.

puniyal n dagger. v {1} [a12] stab s.o. or s.t. with a dagger. Ang
táwung gipuniyal sa kasingkásing namatay dáyun, The man who was stabbed
in the heart died immediately. {2} [c1] make into a dagger.

punlas v {1} [A; b1] rinse washed clothes with citrus juice and water,
esp. pineapple fiber cloth to stiffen it. {2} [AN; b] apply aromatic
leaves, citrus and the like, to the hair after bathing. Mupunlas kug
suwà sa ákung buhuk, I rinse my hair with lemon.

punpal n person whom one calls up regularly to talk to on the phone,
but whom one does not know in person. v [C1; a12] be, become a phone
pal. Ug makigpunpal ka ayaw gawía ring ákù, If you are calling just to
make friends with s.o., don’t use my phone.

punpun v {1} [A; a12] gather powder, grains into a heap by scooping
them together with the hands. Punpúna ang ímung giníuk humay sa taliwā̀
sa banig, Pile the rice you threshed in the center of the mat. {2} [A3;
a12] compile, collect. Gipunpun ang tanang mananáug nga sugilánun sa
usa ka bulyum, All the winning entries of stories were compiled in one
volume. {2a} [B; a12] accumulate, pile up. Ug sa matag adlaw nga
milabay láing kahásul ang mipunpun dihà sa íyang kaisípan, And each day
that passed another worry accumulated in her mind. {3} [A; c1] in
weeding, knock off the soil and heap up the weeds for disposal.
Mamunpun (mupunpun) ku sa ímung ginúna, I will knock the soil off the
weeds you pulled up and heap them at the side. n {1} pile of s.t.
powdered or in grains. {2} compilation. {3} accumulation.

punsi v [A; b6(1)] {1} mix an alcoholic beverage with another drink
(but not water). Tubà nga gipunsíhag pitsi, Toddy mixed with pepsi.
{2} [A; a] make punch. Punsíhun nákù ning diyútay nga bínu ug ang
limunsitu, I’ll make a punch of this little bit of wine and calamondin
juice. n {1} beverage used as a mixer. {2} punch.

punsísuk a for vertical things to be situated packed very closely and
tightly. Punsísuk ang púsù sa bukag, The ears of corn were crammed into
the basket. n crowded mass of s.t. v {1} [A2S; b6] crowd closely around
s.t. or in s.t. Nagpunsísuk (nagpunsisuk) ang mga táwu sa sini, The
people packed the movie house. {2} [A; c1] pack things close together
tightly.

punsiyun n social function: gathering, reception, banquet. Makabuhung
nga punsiyun ang gidálit níla, They served a most satisfactory banquet.
v [A13N; b] wear s.t. decorative in one’s hair. Babáyi nga nagpunsiyun
(namunsiyun) ug rúsas sa íyang buhuk, A girl wearing a rose in her
hair.

punsiyunaryu n high-ranking government official.

Punsiyu Pilátu n Pontius Pilate. a wicked. Bísag pakan-un pa nas pád,
punsiyu pilátu giyud nang dakù, You might feed him from the palm of
your hand, but he’s a wicked beast.

punsu_1 n poncho, usually a rubberized one against rain. v [A; b6(1)]
wear, use, make into a poncho.

punsu_2 n {1} = punsun. {2} the dent mark made by a prick punch.

punsun n {1} a long piece for hammering a bolt or bar. {2} various
kinds of punches: {2a} center punch for making holes in sheet metal.
{2b} nail set. {2c} prick punch. v [A; b5] use a punch on s.t.

punta_1 v {1} [A; b6] head towards a place. Diin siya punta, Where was
he headed? {2} [A; ac] head s.t. s.w. Kanang kahúya mauy puntáhun, Head
toward that tree. Ipunta ang sakayan ngadtu, Head the boat in that
direction. {3} [B12356] end up with a certain husband or wife. Namílì
siyag dátù, nahipunta núug buguy, She tried to get a rich husband but
wound up with a tramp. hi-/ha- [B1256] end up s.w. Nahapunta siya sa
bilangguan, He ended up in jail. -da n destination. Basta mag-ispúting,
nasáyud na kug ása ang puntáda, I can readily tell where you are headed
for when you are dressed up like that.

punta_2 n s.t. pointed: {1} fluke of anchor. {2} the pointed end, tip
of s.t. Nadasmag siya sa punta sa utáwan, He bumped into the pointed
end of the ironing board. {3} plow-*share. {4} cape, pointed piece of
land that projects into the sea. {5} — pitsu n brisket of beef.
v {1} [A; b6(1)] attach or put a plowshare s.w. {2} [APB26] turn into a
cape, cause a place to do so. kinapuntahan n the tip of pointed or
tapering things.

punta blangku n shooting competition or target practice. v [A1C; a2]
hold a shooting competition or target practice.

puntaríya n s.t. at which one aims. Wà kuy puntaríya nga naglakaw, I
walked with no fixed direction. v {1} [A; a] aim s.t. or head towards
s.t. Kinsa nang nagpuntaríya sa íyang pusil ngari? Who is that fellow
aiming his gun this way? Dílì ta makapuntaríya sa píliw, We can not go
towards the shore. {2} [A; c6] direct one’s remarks at s.o. Dílì ku
mupuntaríyag táwu kay ang kasábà páras tanan, I am not referring to
anyone in particular because the scolding is for everyone.

puntik n spot, dot. v [A; b(1)] get tiny spots on s.t. Siyay nagpuntik
ug pintal sa salug, He was the one who splattered paint on the floor.
puntikpuntik v [B6; b6c1] be covered with dots, spots. Nagpuntikpuntik
(gipuntikpuntíkan) sa mga búlak nga lainláin ug kulur ang lagúna, The
meadow was dotted with flowers of all colors. -in-an n s.t. that is
dotted or spotted. -un(→) a dotted or spotted.

puntil n small bag of cloth, paper. v {1} [A; c1] put into a bag.
Ipuntil ang mga sinsilyu, Put the change into a pouch. {2} [A; c1] make
a bag.

punting v {1} [A; a] hit a target. Ákung puntíngun nang langgam nga
nagbatug sa sanga, I’ll shoot the bird that’s perching atop the branch.
{2} [A; a1] aim at s.t. Didtu níya ipunting ang íyang panan-aw sa
gwápang dalága, He directed his eyes towards the beautiful woman.
{2a} direct one’s remarks at s.o. Siyay gipunting sa maung biaybíay,
She is the one alluded to in the ridicule. n in games, action of
hitting s.o.’s piece. Ákung punting run kay human na mu, It’s my throw
now because all of you have finished.

puntinpin = pawuntin, n2, v2.

puntiríya = puntaríya.

puntíru n pointer which indicates the reading on clock, meter, and the
like. v [A; b6(1)] attach a pointer or indicator on s.t. Ákung
puntirúhan ug luminus ning ákung rilu, I’ll have a luminous dial
attached to my watch. puntiruhan = puntíru.

puntíyas n lace. v [A; c] edge s.t. with a lace.

puntu n {1} point, the important or main idea. Klarúha ang puntu sa
buut mung ipasabut, Clarify the point that you want to make. — dibista
point of view. {2} period in writing. {2a} — ikúma semicolon.
{2a1} speaking slowly. Puntu ikúma kaáyug sinultihan, Speaking slowly
and tediously. {3} accent, pronunciation. Puntu sa Dalagit ang íyang
sinultihan, She talks with a Dalaguete accent. {3a} tune of a musical
piece. Dì nà mau ang puntu, That’s not the tune. {3b} timing, rhythm.
Maáyug puntu ang íyang sinayawan, She dances in a good rhythm.
a {1} fitting, mixed to the right proportion, done at the right time,
right for the purpose for which it is meant. Puntu kaáyu ang timpla sa
sabaw, The soup is perfectly seasoned. Puntu nang aníhun ang humay, Now
is just the time to harvest the rice. Dílì puntu ang midisína nga
nadápat sa duktur, The doctor did not administer the right medicine.
Dílì puntu ang ímung tubag, Your answer is not exactly to the point.
{2} doing s.t. regularly. Dílì puntu ang ílang pagpangáun, They don’t
eat regularly. v {1} [A; b6(1)] punctuate with a period. {2} [A2B16;
c1] sing with the correct tune and rhythm. Kamau ming mupuntu ug náay
musúgud, We know how to get the correct tune if s.o. starts. Ipuntu
(puntúha) ang ímung sinayawan sa sunáta, Dance in time to the music.
{2a} [C; ac] in harmony. Nagkapuntu ang ílang tíngug, They sang in
harmony. {2b} [A; a] in pounding rice, when s.o. wants to join in
pounding together with s.o. else, to tap the side of the mortar each
time the other person’s pestle is out in order to get the rhythm prior
to pounding, so that when the two are pounding together the pestles
will not collide. Puntúhi úsà antis ka muásud, Tap your pestle on the
mortar to get the rhythm before you enter in. {3} [A2; c1] add
seasoning in the right consistency. Lamì ang sálad ug puntúhun (ipuntu)
ang asin, súkà, ug asúkar, The salad will come out nice if the salt,
vinegar, and sugar are added in the right proportions. {3a} [A; a] do
s.t. at the right time or in the right way. Mipuntu giyud síyag adtu
arun dílì sila magkabaíwas, He went just at the right time so they
wouldn’t miss each other. {3b} [A2] make a point in an argument, answer
to the point. Mipuntu siya niadtung tubága, He hit the point with that
answer. {3c} [A2N; b(1)] score a point. Siyay mamuntu sa baskit kay
hingígù, He makes a lot of baskets because he is a crack player.
{4} [C1] do s.t. on a regular schedule. {5} [c] — ikúma speak slowly.
panghiN- = puntu, v2b. di- n short pants. v [A; b6] wear short pants.
puntíru n one who blends the sugar being refined. paN- n regional
pronunciation.

puntud = pungtud.

puntun n pontoon. Ang ílang pantalan hinímus puntun, Their wharf is
made of pontoons.

puntus n {1} points in a game. {1a} blow in boxing as reckoned as a
criteria for winning a game. {2} mahjong player. Dì sila makadúlà ug
madyung ug kúlang ang puntus, They can’t play mahjong if there are not
enough players. {2a} regular player at a certain gambling joint.
a {1} superior in any way (slang). Usa ray ákung uyab piru puntus man
sab, I have only one girl but she really is s.t. Ang puntus nga mga
bisíta ispisyal giyud nga pagkatagad, Important visitors should be
given special treatment. {2} for a statement or opinion to be loaded
with bright ideas. Diyútay ra siyag sulti, piru ug mutíngug, puntus
pud, He doesn’t have much to say, but when he speaks, it is to the
point. v {1} [A] score. {1a} [A2N; b2] land a good blow at s.o. Bísag
gamay si Tiryu nakapuntus sab sa íyang kuntra, Though Terry is small he
managed to land a blow on his opponent. {2} [A; c1] have a player or
players for a mahjong game. -ay(→) n game played for points. v [A13;
a12] play for points.

púnu n phonograph or radio-phono.

punù a {1} filled, full. Punù ang ímung úlu sa binúang, Your head is
filled with all sorts of foolishness. {2} covered with s.t.
v {1} [AB56; a2] fill up a container or space. Siyay nagpunù sa baldi
ug balas, He filled up the pail (with sand). Ang lawak napunù sa mga
táwu, The room was filled with people. {2} [B1246; a12] be full of
s.t., all covered with. Napunù sa kawras ang íyang mga bitíis, Her legs
are all covered with scratches. {3} [A; c] add s.t. to. Íyang gipun-an
ang ámung swildu ug tagdiyis písus, He added ten pesos each to our
salary. {3a} [A23; c] say s.t. further in a conversation. Wà na kuy
ikapunù sa ákung gisulti sa úna, I have nothing further to add to what
I said before. {3b} [b(1)] [so-and-so] is true on top of s.t. else.
Gipun-an pa sa íyang pagkadátù ang íyang pagkabrayit, He is rich and
also smart. n {1} amount added or thrown into a bargain. Pila may ímung
punù sa pagbugtì sa ímung báka sa íyang kabáyù? How much money did you
throw in when you bartered your cow for his horse? {2} things said in
addition to. ‘Kaáyu untang ipuyù dinhi,’ punù níya nga nanghupaw, ‘How
nice would it be to live here,’ he added, sighing. maka- n a variety of
coconut, filled with meat which remains soft even when mature.
pulun-an, pulun-anan n amount to add. pun-unun, pulun-un n container to
be filled up.

púnù_1 n trunk of a tree, main stem or body of a tree, apart from the
limbs and roots. -an n {1} = púnù. {1a} the tree as a unit for
numeration. Tulu ka punúang mangga, Three mango trees. {2} base, lowest
part of s.t. Balay nga náa sa punúan sa bungtud, A house at the foot of
the hill. Punúan sa hagdan, Foot of the stairs. {2a} point of
attachment of a part of the body. Gihubagan ku sa may punúan sa ákung
páa, I have a boil right at the base of my thigh. Punúan sa buhuk, The
roots of the hair. {3} officials in charge of an office. Punúan sa
lungsud, The town officials. {4} main office of a company. paN-
n president, governor. paN- lalawígan governor of the province. paN-
násud president of the nation. v {1} [A2; b6] be the president.
{1a} [A12] get as one’s president. {2} [A2] govern. Gibutáan tas mga
Katsílà sa dihang silay mipamúnù (namúnù), The Spaniards blinded us
when they governed us. paN-an n {1} administration of a certain regime.
{2} way of administering. paN-an nga kumpaníya head office, mother
company. v {1} [A2; b6] govern. Ug ikay mamunúan, wà kay mahímù, If you
are in power, you won’t be able to do anything. {2} [A12] get a certain
regime as one’s government.

púnù_2 n k.o. ulcerated scalp infection. v [B12; b5] get this
infection.

punugrapu n phonograph. v [AC12; b6] have a phonograph to supply music.
Magpunugrapu ta sa átung parti, We’ll have a phonograph for our party.

punuk n bruise, a discoloration of the body resulting from a contusion.
(←) v [B2; b(1)] for the blood to congeal under the skin in a
contusion. Mipúnuk ang dugù sa íyang tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu,
He hit his finger with a hammer, and the blood congealed.

púnung n fishpond for raising fish to eat. v [A; a2] make, dig a
fishpond. ka-an n organization or association of people. v [A13]
organize people into an association.

punyal = puniyal.

punyímas euphemism for punyíta: an expression of anger or discomfort.
Punyímas! Ngánung ímu mang gisilihan ang súkà? Darn! Why did you put
hot peppers in the vinegar?

punyíta_1 light curse expressing sudden anger. Punyíta! Ímung gipatay
ang makina ínay pakusgan, Darn. You killed the motor instead of making
it run faster. v [a2b2] shout punyíta to s.o. Gipunyíta (napunyitahan)
ku sa ákung ámu kay nakapildi kug istanti, My boss shouted ‘darn’ at me
because I broke a display case.

punyíta_2 = punyíti.

punyíti v [A; a1] strike s.o. with the fist in the face. Kaáyu giyung
punyitíhan ánang bugasun mung nawung, How I’d love to smash your pimply
face in.

punyitíra = punyitíru (female).

punyitíru light curse expressing anger, addressed to a male. Punyitíru
ning tawhána, ngánung ímung gikuháan sa tabun ang pagkáun? Darn this
man. Why did you uncover the food? v [A; a12b2] call s.o. punyitíru. -s
= punyitíru (plural). Mga punyitírus! Ihúnung na ang inyung
pagsyagitsyágit, Stop that shouting, you punks!

punyu v [A; b6] reduce the intensity, amount of what one does.
Makapunyu ka ba sa ímung gastu? Can you reduce your expenditures?
Punyúhi ang pagkáun sa tambuk, Reduce your intake of fat. Gipunyúhan ni
Bín ang andar sa makina, Ben reduced the speed of the engine. a doing
s.t., but in restricted quantities. Káun nga way punyu, Eating without
restraint. — siráwu a doing s.t. on any extremely restricted scale.

punyus n cuffs of the sleeves. v [A; c1] make, attach the cuffs of the
sleeves.

púpa n {1} stern of boats. {2} = apúpa. v {1} [A] go toward the stern.
Mipúpa ang hángin, The boat sailed into the wind. {2} [A; a] make or
build a stern for a boat. pa- v {1} [A; c] head the stern of a boat
s.w. {2} [A; a] go near. Mipapúpa man gud ka sa nag-áway, naapil ka
hinúun, You went near the persons quarreling, so you got involved.

pupanda n rectangular piece of cloth worn by women around the shoulders
as a shawl. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear a shawl. {2} [c1] make s.t. into a
shawl.

puphu v {1} [AN; a] scoop up with the hands. Siyay mipuphu (namuphu) sa
bugas nga naúsik, She scooped up the rice that spilled. Magpuphu ku sa
mga sagbut nga ákung sinilhig, I’ll pick up the trash that I swept.
{2} [A12; a3] gather information, earnings. Nakapuphu ang pulis ug
dúgang kasayúran báhin sa túlis, The police have gathered additional
information on the robbery. Íyang napuphu ang íyang minilyun gíkan sa
íyang patigáyun sa trúsu, He earned his millions from his logging
business. {3} [A; a12] annihilate, wipe out of existence en masse.
Sakit mauy mipuphu sa tanang pumupúyù, Pestilence wiped out the whole
population. puphuay = bùbuay, see bùbù. see also paluphu.†

púpù n title or address to grandparents. v [A; a12] call s.o. púpù.

pùpù v {1} [A; a] pick fruits, leaves, flowers from a tree by breaking
off the peduncle. Pùpúun ku tung hinug nangkà, I’ll pick that ripe
jackfruit. {2} [A12; a12] gather, obtain s.t. from one’s efforts.
Nakapùpù kug mga kasayúran báhin sa íyang kagahápun, I have gathered
information about his past. Wà kay mapùpù sa pagsúruy, There’s nothing
you can get out of roaming about. {3} [A23] yield fruits as produce.
Usa ka punúang mangga mupùpù ug usa ka líbu ka búnga, A mango tree
yields a thousand fruits. {4} [B12; b8] — ang púsud for the umbilical
cord to break off (shortly after birth). Sa ikaupat ka adlaw magkapùpù
na ang púsud, On the fourth day the umbilical cord begins to fall off.
-in- n s.t. picked or excerpted. Basáha kining mga pinùpù sa Baláang
Kasulátan, Read these excerpts from the Holy Bible.

púpug = pulpug.

pupular a popular, beloved of the people. Pupular kaáyu si Núra Awnur,
Nora Aunor is very popular. Pupular nga sáyaw, Popular dance. v [B12;
b6] become popular.

pupulasiyun n population, number of people s.w.

púpus v [B12; c1] coming to its end. Napúpus ang tugut sa íyang
tabánug, The string of his kite is giving out. Napúpus na ang pabílu sa
ákung paílub, My patience is running out. Sa nagkapúpus na ang íyang
gininháwa, nisulti siya sa tinúud, When he was about to breathe his
last, he told the truth. ka-an, ka-un(→) n coming to an end. Kaguul nga
way kapupusun (kapupúsan), Sorrows without end.

púpuy = púpù.

pupúyu = bartuníku.

pur word used in reckoning dimensions: ‘by’. Dus pur kwatru nga káhuy,
Piece of wood two by four. Kwatrung diyis pur katursi piyis, A room ten
by fourteen feet.

pur- {1} per, by the. -díya by the day. Purdíya ámung swildu, We are
paid by the day. Utsu písus purdíya, Eight pesos a day. -úra by the
hour. {2} prefix for exclamations. -bída short form: bída a exclamation
of surprise. Purbídang lisúra, My God! How difficult it is. Purbídang
gwapáha, Jesus! How beautiful she is. {b} exclamation chiding. Purbída
sab ka! Wà ka makapakáun sa bátà? Heavens! You mean you didn’t feed the
baby? -pabur see pabur. -diyus see purdiyus. in other phrases: pur-abir
{a1} testing s.t. out, not necessarily in earnest. Wà kuy disíyu nga
mupalit íning awtúha. Pur-abir lang tung ákù ug itúgut ba sa ákung
hangyù, I did not intend to buy this automobile. I was just trying to
see if it could be gotten for the price I offered. {a2} trying s.t. on
a long gamble where there is nothing to lose. Pur-abir ning pagpaupira
sa kansir, kay ug dílì upirahan, sigurádu man giyung patay, The cancer
operation is just a gamble. If you don’t operate, the man will die
anyway. {b} -ihimplu for example. {c} -ingkásu = ingkásu. see also
pur-ísu, purlumínus, purmidyu, *pursikásu.

purà v [B1; a] indulge in s.t. to the point of satiety, where one does
not desire any more. Nagpurà mig káun sa usa ka batúang mangga, We
indulged ourselves eating a large basket of mangoes. Gipurà námù ang
ámung mata sa makaiíbug nga talan-awun, We feasted our eyes on the
lovely landscape. Napurà na kug babáyi, I’ve had women until I am sick
of them.

púrang v [A; c] cut fish into halves neatly along the vertebrae and
bone structure, usually for drying. Purángun únà ang isdà nga
igbubúwad, The fish to be dried should first be cut in two.

púras n {1} policeman’s billy. {2} penis (humorous). v [A; a1] {1} beat
with a billy or the like. Túbu ákung ipúras níya, I’ll bludgeon him
with a pipe. {2} make into a club.

purawundir n boxer who fights in four-round bouts preliminary to the
main event.

puray n woman’s genitalia (euphemism). panghiN-(←) v [B236] bloom into
full womanhood. Nanghimúray na ang íyang anak nga dalagíta, His
adolescent daughter is now blooming into full womanhood.

purba = prubar, 1.

purbída see pur-.

purbinggay, purbingguy, purbisgut, purbista euphemism for purbída. see
pur-.

purbitsu = prubitsu.

purdiyus expression of utter discomfiture, disgust, or disagreement
with s.t. over which one has no control. Purdiyus, ngánu gud nga mau
niy gidangátan ku, Heavens! Why, of all things, did this have to happen
to me! a making things difficult, giving s.o. a hard time. Purdiyus
kaáyu nang tigulángang hangyúag kwarta, That old man gives you a hard
time if you ask him for money. v {1} [A13; a12] give s.o. a hard time.
Gipurdiyus ku nímu pagpangítà nímu, You gave me a hard time looking for
you. {2} [A13] have a hard time doing s.t. Magpurdiyus giyud tang
maghungit íning batáa kay magdagandágang pakan-un, It’s an ordeal to
feed this child because he runs about when you’re trying to feed him.
Culu-(←) v [A1; b6] make an honest appeal, plead. Nagpulupurdíyus ang
inahan sa bitayun ngadtu sa prisidinti, The mother of the condemned man
pleaded to the president for her son’s life. — ipursantu exclamation
over s.t. overwhelmingly surprising or causing intense discomfiture.
Purdiyus ipursantu, ngánung gibúhat mu man tu? For God’s sake, why did
you do that?

purga n purgative. Purga sa bítuk, Purgative for intestinal worms.
v {1} [A; a1] administer a purgative. {1a} [A] take a purgative.
{2} [A] eat s.t. which is unpalatable because it has been served so
often. Háy. Ginamus gayud ang sud-an nátù adlaw-adlaw ug magpurga na
sad sa tangkung, All we have to eat is fish paste every day, and
kangkong vegetable as a purgative. {2a} [B1256] have so much of s.t.
one is sick of it. Dalùdalù mag mangga. Pasagdahan bítaw nákug pagkáun,
napurga lagi, He just loved mangoes, so I let him have as many as he
wanted and he got sick of them. -nti n purgative.

purgáda = pulgáda. -s = pulgádas.

purgas = pulgas.

purgaturyu n {1} purgatory. {2} place of hardship like purgatory.
v [B126] be in purgatory.

purhan n forehand stroke in tennis or pingpong.

purhisyu, purhwisyu = pirhwisyu.

purigit a watery bowel movements. v {1} [A3P] have loose bowel
movements. Mupurigit ka giyud ug ímung sagulsagúlun ang ímung kan-un,
You’ll get diarrhea if you eat all different kinds of food at once.
{2} [B; b6] for bowel movements to get watery. Nagkapurigit ang tái sa
bátà nga giilísan ug litsi, The child is getting loose bowel movements
because they tried a new brand of milk on him.

purikit n a k.o. small banana about 3 by 6 cm., orange in color when
not ripe and darker orange when ripe: eaten boiled or raw.

puríku n packaged lard (so called from the brand name Purico). v [A;
b(1)] use packaged lard.

púril v [A; ab7] {1} cut down plants to exterminate them. Ákung purílun
ang mga kawáyan kay magtanum kug ságing, I’ll cut down the bamboos to
replace them with bananas. {2} fell trees. {3} [A3P; a12] destroy, kill
en masse. Dángan ang mipúril (nagpúril) sa mga tanum, The pest wiped
out the plants. Ang dinamíta makapúril (makapapúril) sa mga isdà,
Dynamite will wipe out the fishes.

purin term of address used only in the expression manyána ka. see
*manyána.

puririt v [A13] for soft, watery feces to be discharged in a spurt. Wà
pa gánì siya makalingkud sa bangkíyu, nagpuririt na ang tái, Before he
could even get seated on the toilet, the feces spurted out.

púris rindyir n forest ranger.

purísu, pur-ísu {1} therefore, in that case, then ... Pur-ísu magtuun
ka arun ka makapasar, Therefore, you must study if you want to pass. Wà
ka magtuun. Purísu nahagbung ka, You did not study. Therefore, you
failed. {2} that’s exactly what must happen (said in a context where
the interlocutor has said, ‘If [so-and-so] does not happen,
[such-and-such] a bad outcome will follow’). ‘Midalì siyag báyad arun
dílì maimbargu’—‘Purísu.’ ‘He paid right away to avoid having it
repossessed.’—‘Exactly. That’s what he had to do.’

purk an bins n baked beans. v [A1; c1] have baked beans.

*purki ang — v [A12] the only thing wrong. Ang nakapurki ning tawhána
kay dì mamínaw ug tambag, The only thing wrong with this fellow is that
he won’t heed advice.

purk tsap n pork chops. v {1} [A1; bc] have pork chops. {2} [a13] make
it pork chops.

purlumínus {1} at the very least. Purlumínus misangpit tà giyud ka
nákù, The least you could have done was call me. Ug dì ku kaadtu
purlumínus magpadá kug kwarta, If I can’t go at least I’ll send some
money.

purlun n hearse to convey the dead to the grave. v [A12; c16] transport
in a hearse.

purma n {1} form, outline: the way s.t. looks. {1a} wooden structure
used to hold wet cement in place. {2} a printed document to fill in.
v [AB2; c1] take form, shape; cause s.t. to do so. Ígù lang kung
mupurma sa balay, I’ll just form the framework of the house. Mupurma
(mapurma) ug maáyu ang ímung dughan ánang brá nga ímung gigámit, Your
breasts will get a nice shape with the bra you are wearing.

purmal a {1} behaving properly according to one’s station. Purmal kaáyu
siyang manglihuklihuk, She is very formal in her ways. {2} formal,
according to ceremony. Purmal kaáyu ang ílang kasal, Their wedding was
a very formal one. {3} formal clothing. {4} done formally, not off the
record. Ang purmal nga pagtiman-anay, Formal signing ceremonies.
v {1} [B3(1); c1] be, behaved properly according to one’s station.
Magpurmal ka. Dì ka magpabuyag, Act properly. Don’t misbehave. Dì ku
makapurmal uban sa ákung mga gang, I can’t behave prim and proper when
I’m with my gang. {2} [c1] make s.t. formal. {3} [A13] wear formal
attire. {3a} [c1] make it a party with formal attire. {4} [c16] do s.t.
formally, not off the record. -idad(→) n formality, as a matter of
form. Purmalidad lang nang íyang pagpangimbitar kanátù. Dì giyud
kinasingkásing, He invited us only for formality’s sake. He didn’t
really want us to go.

purmalin, purmalína n formalin, k.o. disinfectant solution. v [b6]
preserve with formalin solution.

purman n foreman of a group of workers. v {1} [B3(1)6] be a foreman.
{2} [A; c16] make s.o., have a foreman. {3} [A12; b(1)] have as a
foreman.

*purmidiyu — sa by [such-and-such] means. Nidilantu sila purmidiyu sa
ílang kakúgi, They prospered by working hard.

purmula n {1} formula for the composition of s.t. {2} formula in
mathematics. v [A; c1] {1} compose s.t. by means of a formula. Dì na
mistil purmulahan ang paghímù sa gátas sa bátà, You needn’t use a
formula to prepare the baby’s milk. {2} solve a problem by using a
formula.

purpulyu n portfolio, a flat portable case. v [A; c16] use, put in a
portfolio. Ipurpulyu (purpulyúha) pagdá ang mga papílis, Carry the
papers in a portfolio.

pursigir = pirsigir.

*pursiakásu, pursikásu — ug, kun just in case. Mag-andam lang ta kay
pursikásu ug muanhi siya dúna tay tagána, Let’s prepare extra food so
that just in case he comes, we have s.t. ready.

pursilána n enamelware dishes. v [A; c16] use enamelware dishes.

pursilína = pursilána.

pursintu = pursiyintu.

pursip n forceps or tongs to hold s.t. v [A; c1] use forceps or tongs,
get out with forceps. Magpursip ku iniglimpiyu sa íyang samad, I’ll use
tongs to clean his wound.

pursir n purser on a boat. v [A; c] be, become a purser.

pursíras = pulsíras.

pursisyun = prusisiyun.

pursiyintu n per cent v [A; c] {1} give a rate of interest.
Pursiyintúhan ku ang íyang kwartag diyis ang búlan, I’ll pay him (or I
will charge him) ten percent interest a month. {2} get or give a
percentage commission. Mupursiyintu mig singku káda hálin, We get (or
give) five percent commission on each sale. {3} give or get a
percentage of the winnings to the owner of gambling equipment.
Mupursiyintu silag gamay káda daug, They get (or give) a small
percentage of the winning as a fee to the owner of the house. paN-
v [A2; b6] borrow money with interest. Mamursiyintu lang ku kay wà kuy
láing karimidiyúhan, I’ll borrow money because I have no other place to
get money from.

*pursúsu — nga anak n legitimate child. Tuluy ákung pursúsung anak ug
upat sa gawas, I have three legitimate children and four illegitimate
ones.

pursyut n fighter plane.

purtáda n s.t. in the front: front of a house, cover of a magazine,
front row of people, or the like. Namungíngi ang purtáda sa balay sa
mga bumbilyang dikulur, The front of the house was covered with colored
lights. bálak, sugilánun nga — feature poem, story. v [A; c] use as
feature story, put on the cover. Mupurtáda sila ning sugilanúna? Will
they publish this as their feature story? Nagpurtáda silag babáying
naghúbù, They used a picture of a nude woman as cover.

purtamunída n {1} portfolio, attaché case. {2} purse. v [A13; a12] put,
make into a portfolio.

purtintúsu a portending a major event. Purtintúsu kunu kining kumíta.
Basta musubang, mugíra kunu, They say that this is a portentous comet.
Whenever it appears, there’s going to be war.

purtipayib n {1} forty-five r.p.m. record or record player.
{2} forty-five caliber pistol or revolver. — arpíim = purtipayib, 1.

purtíru = pultíru. see pulta.

purtis = prutistanti.

purtúna it is a good thing; it is a fortunate occurrence. Purtúna nga
miabut ka kay gikinahanglan ta ka, It is a good thing you came because
I need you. n fortune, fate. Ang purtúna sa táwu dílì matag-an, A man’s
fate cannot be foretold. v [A12; a3] have the luck to have a certain
k.o. spouse. Nakapurtúna siyag dátù, She had the fortune to marry a
rich man.

púru_1 a {1} pure, free from adulterants or impurities. Púru giyud ning
tabliyáha, This chocolate is pure. {2} pure of breed. Púrung halsi,
Pure Halsey (cock). v [B2; b6(1)] be pure, devoid of adulterants or all
of the same kind. Ug mapúru bastus ang ímung baráha, If your hand is
all clubs.

púru_2 = pulus_2.

puruhan n probability that s.t. will happen. Dakù kag puruhan nga
mudaug ning iliksiyúna, There’s a great likelihood that you’ll win in
this election.

púruk n district, a geographical or political division made for a
specific purpose.

purúkù a {1} stocky and short. Purúkù na kaáyu siya sa katambuk, He is
very short and thickset because he is so fat. {2} s.t. low and short
like a short person. v [B; b6] be, become short and thickset.

purul n short pants or drawers. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear, use short pants
or underpants. Magpurul run ang mga babáyi, Women wear short pants
nowadays. {2} [A; c1] make into short pants.

purung, púrung n cloth wrapped around the head like a turban or
bandana. v [A; b6(1)] wear s.t. wrapped around the head. Ságad sa mga
sabungíru magpurung ug panyù, Cockfighters usually wrap a handkerchief
around their heads. purungpúrung v [A; b6(1)] crown s.o. Ang mayur ang
nagpurungpúrung sa rayna, The mayor crowned the beauty queen. Si Hisus
gipurungpurúngan sa mga maidlut nga mga tunuk, Jesus was crowned with
sharp thorns. n s.t. worn around the head like a crown. Purungpúrung sa
mga dáhun, A wreath of leaves worn as a crown.

purus, púrus = pulus_2.

puruspurus v [A; a12] hurry up doing s.t. or s.o. into accomplishing
s.t. Anam-anamun nátù ni arun dílì ta magpuruspurus sa katapúsan, If we
do it little at a time, we won’t be rushed at the end.

purward_1 n forward in games where there are players positioned toward
the front. v [B3(1); c1] play the position of forward.

purward_2 v [A; c6] forward to a new address. Wà níla ipurward ang
ákung sulat, They didn’t forward my letter.

purya = puyra.

puryut = pudyut.

pús_1 = pulus_1.

pús_2 v [A; b(1)] strike a pose for a picture. Nagpús na bayà siya nga
wà pa ang mangungúdak, My, you are posing even if there is no cameraman
around.

pusà v {1} [A; a] crush or squash s.t. soft. Sabaw nga gipus-ag síli,
Soup into which crushed chili was added. {2} [A; a1] break s.t.
fragile. Akuy mipusà sa plátu, I broke the plate. {3} [A; b6c1] hatch
an egg. Ang himungáan mauy mipusà sa mga itlug sa bíbi, The hen hatched
the duck’s eggs. {3a} [b8] for eggs to break in the hen’s womb.
Napus-an (hipus-an) nang manuk nga nagbasà ang lubut, That hen that has
a wet bottom had an egg break in its womb. a broken, esp. eggs.

pusak, púsak v [A2S; a] break s.t. hard. Ikaw bay nagpusak sa pinggan?
Were you the one who broke the plate into pieces? Másu ang ipusak sa
simintung salug, Use a hammer to break up the cement flooring. hiN-
v [APN] {1} come in abundance. Muhimúsak (muhimusak) na gánì ang ulan,
malígù ku, If the rain falls in torrents I’ll bathe in it. Naghimusak
ang búnga sa mga mangga run, Mangoes are plentiful now. {2} for flowers
or young fruit to come out. Ígù lang nakahimusak ang púsù sa mais
dihang gidagsángan sa mga dúlun, No sooner had ears of corn developed,
when the locusts descended on them. a being crowded, numerous. Himusak
sa táwu ang lungsud sa baryu, The town has more people in it than the
village.

pusamánu = pasamánu.

púsas n handcuffs, shackles. v [A; b6(1)] handcuff or shackle.
Gipusásan sa pulis ang mga binilanggù, The policeman put handcuffs
(shackles) on the prisoners.

pusaw n bud of a coconut tree from which the cluster develops. v [AN;
cN] for coconuts to develop. Mipusaw (namusaw, gipusawan) na ang lubi,
The coconut tree is developing buds now. Ang primírung ipusaw
(ipamusaw) ánang lubíha way búngang mahímù, The first bud that coconut
tree will bring forth will not develop fruit.

pus-aw v [B; b6] {1} for a color to fade. Mipus-aw (napus-aw) ang
sinínà sa dúgay nga uran, The dress faded after long use. {2} for
liquids to become clear, less murky. Mupus-aw ang túbig kun papundúhun,
Water will become clear if you let the mud settle. a {1} faded in
color. {2} light-colored. Angayan ka sa pus-aw ug kulur nga sinínà, You
look becoming in a light-colored dress.

pusbútun n push button, done by push button. Pusbútun na ang pagpalákaw
íning pabrikáha, Everything is done in this factory with push buttons.

pusdak v [A; c] let s.t. fall with a crash either by slamming it down
or just dropping it if it is heavy. Ákung gipusdákan ug dakung batu ang
úlu sa hálas, I bashed the head of the snake with a big stone. Ayaw
ipusdak nang usa ka sákung kamúti, Don’t slam that sack of sweet
potatoes down. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] stamp one’s feet. Mamusdak na gánì
nà, sukù na nà, If she stamps her feet, that means she is angry.

pusdù v {1} [A13; c6] put s.t. down with considerable force. Ayaw ug
ipusdù ang sag-ub arun dì mabuak, Do not put the bamboo water container
down hard or it will break. {2} [bc] invest all of a sum on s.t.
Gipusdù ni Tátay ang íyang ritayirmint ug yútà, Father invested all of
his retirement pay on a piece of land.

pusgay v {1} [A3PB12; c16] break into many pieces, shatter. Napusgay
ang búlig paghiantug sa yútà, The coconuts broke off the stem when the
whole bunch hit the ground. Mapusgay na gánì ang kristal, dì na maúlì,
Once the glass is shattered, it can’t be repaired. Nagkapusgay na ang
mga simintu sa dáyik, The cement on the dike is slowly crumbling.
{1a} [B1256] for liquid to splatter against s.t. Napusgay ang mga balud
sa kabatuan, The waves broke on the rocks. {2} [A; c16] ruin one’s
reputation, good name. Tabì nga makapusgay sa kadunggánan, Gossip that
can ruin one’s reputation.

pusgù a for sacks to be filled up to the neck so that only a small bit
can be gathered at the top to tie. v {1} [B2; c16] for sacks to be
filled up with a little part left for tying. {2} [A2] hit the jackpot
in business, fishing, or any endeavor. Ug mupusgù ning ákung bungsud
rung tingbungsud mupalit kug dikarga, I’ll buy a cargo truck if I hit
the jackpot with my fish corral. Nikalit nag kasapíang tawhána kay
nakapusgù nà siya sa ismagling, He got rich suddenly because he made a
killing in smuggling.

pusibilidad n possibility. Dakù ang pusibilidad nga mahagbung ku, There
is a great possibility that I will fail.

pusibli a possibly happening. Pusibli kaáyu nga mitan-aw tu sa sini,
It’s very possible that she went to the show. v [B126; b6] may possibly
happen. Mapusibli nga milakaw sila, It may be possible that they went
out. Pusiblíhan ku nga siya mauy mikúhà sa kwarta, To me it’s possible
that she stole the money.

pusil n firearm. v {1} [A; a] shoot. {2} [A23; a1c] shoot a question or
an answer in a classroom (colloquial). Ug pusilun si Nílu ug pangutána
mupusil man sag bawus, If a question is fired at Nilo, he fires back an
answer. {3} [A; a] masturbate (slang). (←) [A1] have a question and
answer session in a class (colloquial). Magpúsil run, unyà wà ra ba ku
katuun, There will be a question and answer session in class now, and I
have not studied my lesson. n question and answer session in class.
paN- v {1} [A2C12; b6(1)] go hunting with firearms. Makigpamusil siya
nákug langgam, He wants me to go hunting birds with him. {2} [A23]
shoot as a character trait. Ayawg pangingkwintru níya kay mamusil,
Don’t tangle with him because he shoots. pusilpúsil, Culu- n {1} toy
gun. {2} spear, powered by a rubber sling, the general form of which
resembles a rifle. {3} anything shaped like a rifle. Pulupúsil
(pusilpúsil) nga laytir, A pistol-shaped lighter. di- n armed with a
gun. -in- n a cut in men’s trousers which is tight on the legs (like a
rifle). v [A1; c1] wear, make trousers in this style.

púsing v [A; b6] strike a pose, pose to have one’s picture taken.
Mupúsing giyud nang bayhána ug náay láking mutan-aw, That woman will
strike a pose whenever there’s a man looking at her. n action of
striking a pose.

pusísit v [A2S] for watery feces to jet out in a thin stream
continuously. Mupusísit ang tái basta mag-ígit, If one has loose bowel
movements, his feces jet out in a thin, continuous stream.

pusisiyun n {1} position, the manner in which s.t. is placed. Hiwì ang
pusisiyun sa ritrátu, The photograph has been pasted in crooked.
{2} position in which one is employed. Taas siyag pusisiyun ánang
kumpanyáha, He has a high position in that company. v {1} [A; c1] move
into position. Magpusisiyun na gánì ang mga bátà sa ílang sáyaw, isúgud
dáyun ang sunáta, When the children are in position for their dance,
start the music. {2} [A12] get a position in a firm.

pusit n k.o. small squid.

pusitib = pasitib.

pusitíbu n positive pole of batteries.

pusiyun n fusion of two political groups. v [C] for two political
groups to form a fusion.

puskay = pusgay.

pusmastir = pustmastir.

pusngà v {1} [A3P] gasp for breath. Mipusngà siya sa dihang naigù sa
kutukutu, She gasped for breath when she was hit in the pit of the
stomach. {2} [AN; b6(1)] squirt liquid out through a small opening.
Pagbantay mu kay mupusngà (mamusngà) nà rung núkus ug átà, Watch out!
The squid will squirt ink at you. paN- v [A1] gasp for breath
frantically.

puspas n dish composed of rice porridge together with chicken and
optionally other ingredients. v [A] have, make puspas.

puspun v [A; c16] postpone, put off until later. Ayaw na ipuspun
(puspúna) ang kasal, Don’t postpone the wedding further.

puspuru n box of matches. v [A; b6(1)] use, make matches. bilug, bílug,
gúngì, palítu sa — n matchstick.

puspus v {1} [AN; b(1)] strike hard with s.t. stiff and long. Puspúsan
ku siyag alhu, I’ll beat him with a pestle. {2} [c6] be dashed onto
s.t. Giísa ang sakayan sa balud ug napuspus sa batu, The boat was
lifted by a wave and dashed onto the rocks. {2a} [B1256] fall heavily.
Nadalispang siyas pálut ságing ug napuspus sa asíras, He slipped on a
banana peel and fell to the sidewalk with all his force. {3} [ABN; a12]
for leaves to be violently torn to shreds; cause them to be so.
Mipuspus (namuspus) ang mga dáhun human sa bagyu, The leaves were torn
to shreds after the typhoon. {4} [B2N] for leaves to wither and fall,
leaving only the stalk or trunk. Mupuspus (mamuspus) ang dáhun sa gábi
basta magúlang na, The leaves of taro wither when the plant matures.
n club, staff, stick, and the like.

puspuygu n match (word play on puspuru and puygu—humorous).

pusta n {1} bet, wager. Pilay ímung pusta? How much do you bet? {2} —
ku sa think [so-and-so] is likely to happen. Pusta ku sa muulan, I bet
it’s going to rain. v {1} [A1; c] bet. Kabáyung ákung gipustáan
(gipustáhan), The horse I betted on. Pilay ímung ipusta? How much will
you bet? {2} [A] think s.t. is likely to happen. — dirikta direct bet.
-da = pusta. ig-r-, ig-l- n money to bet.

pustal n postal. — aydi n identification card for a post office.
v {1} [A; b6] issue a postal ID. {2} [A12] get a postal ID. — kard post
card. híru — money order.

pusti n post. Pusti sa iliktrisidad, Electric light post. v [A; a] put
up, make into, use a post.

pustir n poster. v [A; c16] make, put up posters.

pustísu n false teeth. v {1} [A; a12] make false teeth. {2} [A; c] fit
with false teeth. {3} [B126; c16] be false teeth. Ug mapustísu gánì ang
ímung ngípun, lisud nang ikáun, It is hard to eat with false teeth.

pustmastir n postmaster, person in charge of a post office. v [A; c1]
become postmaster.

pustri_1 n s.t. served for dessert. v [A; c1] have, make s.t. for
dessert.

pustri_2 n electric light, telephone post.

pust-úpis n post office. v [A; a2] make, install a post office.

pustúra n the way s.o. looks all dressed up. Nindut tag pustúra run.
Mamisíta ka? You are all dressed up. Going s.w.? paN- v [A2; b6] get
all dressed up. Mamustúra ka gánì, magwápa kag samut, If you dress up,
you’ll look more beautiful. n way of carrying oneself. Mu ra sa inahan
ang pamustúra ánang bayhána, That girl has her mother’s bearing. -wu
a chic and smart-looking. Pusturáwu kaáyu ka sa ímung hirdu, You look
very chic with your hairdo. v [B1256] look smart, chic. Mamusturáwu ang
balayg pintálan, The house will look nice when it is all painted.

púsu n {1} artesian well, naturally flowing or operated with a pump.
{2} hand pump used to draw water from under the ground. — artisyánu =
púsu, n1. v [A; b6] construct an artesian well.

púsù n {1} banana blossom including the petals. {2} ear of corn.
v [A2N; b(1)] for corn to have ears or bananas to develop their
blossoms. Daling mamúsù (mupúsù) ang mais nga masurku, Corn will
quickly bear ears if the soil around it has been dug up. (→) n {1} rice
cooked in woven coconut leaves formed like a banana blossom.
{2} woman’s breast (euphemism). v {1} [A; a12] make, have rice of this
type. {2} [AN; b6(1)] gather, get banana blossoms for food. pusùpúsù sa
bitíis n biceps or the muscles of the lower legs. -in- n by the ears.
v [c16] count, share corn by the ears. -in-(→) n large ears of corn.
Ipanglain ang mga pinusù sa mga buging, Separate the large ears of corn
from the small ears.

púsud n {1} navel. {2} center point of s.t. Púsud sa syudad, The center
of the city. {3} the filament-like structure found at the tip of
bananas. hiN- v [AN; b] cut the umbilical cord. n instrument for
cutting the umbilical cord. kinapusuran n {1} centermost portion. Didtu
siya dágan sa kinapusuran sa lasang, She ran deep into the innermost
part of the forest. {2} s.t. at the very heart. {3} core, innermost;
heart of the thing. Abtun giyud íning tambála ang kinapusuran sa sakit,
This medicine will reach down to the heart of the pain.

pus-un n the outside region of the body in the front, just below the
stomach, and by extension, the part underneath. Musakit ang pus-un ug
dúgay tang walà kaihì, Your lower stomach hurts if you go long without
urinating. v [b4] have a prominent belly. pus-únun a having a prominent
belly. v [B12] get to have a prominent belly.

púsung a a person who is good in putting up a front of innocence when
committing mischief, so called from the character Huwan Púsung of folk
tales who is always getting the better of people in high places. Púsung
kaáyu siya ug hitsúra mu rag dílì mauy nagtágù sa ákung sapátus, He
looks innocent, as if he did not hide my shoes. papusungpúsung v [A1]
pretend to be innocent. Nagpapusungpúsung siya, mu ra ug walà ku
makakità sa íyang gibúhat, He is pretending to be innocent as though I
had not seen what he did.

pus-úpis = pust-úpis.

pusut v [A; b26] for liquid to spurt out. Mipusut ang dugù sa ákung
tudlù nga naputul, Blood spurted out from the cut in my finger. (←),
pusutpusut v [B46; c16] come in rapid succession, come thick and fast.
Mipusutpusut ang mga pangutána sa abugádu, The lawyer fired off his
questions in rapid succession. Nagpusutpusut lang ang íyang anak, Her
children came one after another in rapid succession.

put n bribe (slang). Dílì sila mutrabáhu sa mga lún kun walay put, They
won’t act on the loan application unless they are given a bribe.
v [A23; c] bribe.

pút = púlut.

púta_1 n {1} whore (coarse). {2} curse word to express anger, disgust.
Púta, ngánung aku pa ang nadisgrasya, Damn! Why did it have to be me
that had the accident! v [B12; b6] be, become a whore, prostitute. paN-
v [AP; b6] engage in prostitution. íhu di- son of a bitch; reference to
s.o. whom one wishes to curse or a curse expressing anger (coarse).

púta_2 v [A1] shatter, crush s.t. to bits. Krásir ray makapúta niánang
mga dagkung batu, Only a stone crusher can crush those large rocks. Way
mapunit sa butilya kay napúta giyug maáyu, No one can pick up that
bottle because it was smashed to smithereens.

*putablis see agwas.

pútad a squat because of short legs. Ang pútad níyang payag, His shack,
elevated only slightly above the ground. v [B126; b6] be squat. Ngánu
kahang napútad man ang anak nga tag-as man ang ginikánan? I wonder why
the child is squat when the parents are tall.

putáhi n {1} a dish consisting of meat as a main ingredient.
{2} especial treat, anything that gives great or unusual pleasure.
v [A; c1] have, eat a meat dish.

putak v [A; b3] {1} for chickens to keep squawking, as when laying
eggs. Ayaw ug pakurati ang mungáan kay muputak, Don’t frighten the hen
because it will squawk. {2} complain, talk, or protest loudly. Muputak
dáyun siya basta maalkansi sa báhin, She complains loudly right away if
she doesn’t get her share. {3} nag, scold by babbling. Milakaw dáyun
ang bána dihang giputakan na siya sa íyang asáwa, The husband went out
immediately when his wife started to nag him. {4} [A2] talk or butt in
in a conversation which is not one’s business. Muputak ka man lang
bísag wà kay lábut, Why do you butt in when I’m not talking to you?

putaputa v {1} [B12] be easily torn or tattered from age or decay.
Naputaputa na ang mga papílis sa kaban, The papers in the trunk are all
brittle with age. {2} [c16] tear paper or cloth into pieces.

putbul n soccer. v [A; a12] kick s.o. out. Putbúlun ka dinhi ug
magtinapulan ka, You will be kicked out if you are lazy in your work.

puthaw n iron, steel. Taytáyang puthaw, A steel bridge. v [c16] make
s.t. of iron or steel.

púti v {1} [A; a12] break off, but not with a snap. Kinsay nagpúti sa
gítung sa sundang? Who broke the tongue of the knife? Napúti ang dágum
sa makina, The needle of the sewing machine broke. {2} [AB126; ab4]
abort a fetus. Arun dì mainahan ílang putíhun ang ílang giburus, To
escape motherhood they abort the life they are carrying in the womb.
Bag-u nà siyang naputíhan, She just had a miscarriage. n aborted fetus.
Gilábay sa basúra ang púti, They threw the fetus into the garbage.

putì a {1} white. {1a} in plant description, green varieties of plants
that have green varieties and red or brown varieties. Síling putì,
Green peppers. Mandalúsang putì, The mandalúsa with green leaves (as
opposed to the species with red leaves). {2} white race. Ságad sa mga
putì taas ug ilung, Most white people have long noses. — pay agipu,
lubut sa kúlun, urasiyun dark skinned (lit. a firebrand, the bottom of
a kettle, the evening prayers [said after dark] are whiter). Putì pay
agipu ning bána mu, Your husband is darker than the tip of a firebrand.
n {1} white vaginal discharge. {2} = ispíhu. v {1} [APB; b6] be, become
white, cause s.t. to become so. Klúruks ang muputì (mupaputì) sa ímung
sinínà, Chlorox will make your dress white. {2} [A1; b6] wear s.t.
white. Magputì ang mga nars, Nurses wear white. {3} [b(1)] tell s.o.
frankly of his anger or hurt feelings toward him. Giputian (gipaputian)
ku siyag sulti nga naglágut ku sa íyang gibúhat, I had it out with her
because I was angry at what she did. — ug itlug, lisik a cowardly.
v [B2456] chicken out. Miputì ang itlug ni Krustsib dihang naninuud si
Kinidi, Khrushchev chickened out when Kennedy showed that he meant
business. — ang kiting, tiil v [B246] run away in fright. Miputì ang
íyang tiil pagkakità níya sa íyang kuntra, He turned tail when he saw
his adversary. — nga tábil movies. Bitúun sa puting tábil, Movie star
(lit. star of the white screen). -anay v [C; c3] have it out with s.o.
-an(←) n variety of coconut and pineapple more orange in color than the
ordinary. -in-(←) long, slender, sharp sword. ka- n whiteness. -un
a whitish, fair-skinned.

putik n rectum. v [c16] put, insert s.t. into the rectum. Putika
(iputik) ang tirmumitru pagbutang, Insert the thermometer into the
rectum.

putikar v [A; a] mortgage one’s property as security, usually to a
bank. Miputikar mig yútà sa bangku nga gipalit ug láing yútà, We
mortgaged a piece of land to the bank to buy another lot. putikádu
a mortgaged, esp. to a bank.

púting n footing, the cement base in which a post is set. v [A; a] make
the footing of a post.

pútis = pulaynas.

putítu tri n potato tree, an ornamental shade tree bearing violet
inflorescences with yellow centers: Solanum macranthum.

putlì a {1} pure, free from sin or guilt. Putlì kaáyug kasingkásing
ning bayhána, This woman is pure-hearted. {2} immaculate, chaste. ka-
n purity, virginity. Íyang gimahal ang íyang kaputlì, She treasures her
chastity.

putput_1 n {1} piece of wood or stick which has been cut from a larger
piece. {2} person of no consequence in society (just as a putput is a
piece of wood not good for anything except fuel). v {1} [A; a] cut into
pieces, esp. for firewood. {2} [B1256; b6] be a person of no
consequence. (→) v [a12] hit with a stick. Putputun tikaw run, I’ll hit
you with a stick.

putput_2 = palutput.

putput_3 euphemism for púta_1.

putris mild cuss word, euphemism for púta_1. Ay, putris! Nasayup na sad
ku, Darn! I made a mistake again.

putru n adolescent colt. Muúlag na ning kabayúa ánang bayi kay putru
na, This horse will cover that female because it is an adolescent now.†

putsíru n {1} dish of stewed beef and vegetables. {2} the fleshy part
of the leg between the knee and the ankle of a cow. Linat-ang putsíru
ang sud-an nátù karun, We have stewed beef shanks for dinner today.
v [A; c1] prepare putsíru.

pútu_1 n cake made of steamed starches, coconut, and other optional
ingredients. — nga balanghuy pútu made from shredded cassava. — nga
binangkung pútu made from cassava flour. — kutsinta pútu made from
ground rice mixed with brown sugar. — máya pútu made from pilit rice
and coconut extract. — nga pinalutaw steamed rice cake. — sulut pútu
made from cassava flour with water or milk and fried. v [A; c1] make
pútu. paN- v {1} [A] engage in the business of selling pútu. {2} [A;
b6] go s.w. to eat pútu. n business of selling pútu.

pútu_2 a bankrupt. v [B12; a12] be, become bankrupt. Putúhun man ta
ánang ímung bisyu, Your vices will send us to the poorhouse.

pútù v [A; a] break, cut into lengths. Putúun ku ning káhuy pára sa
halígi, I’ll cut this timber into lengths for the posts. n a length of
s.t. cut from a bigger or longer piece.

putud = putul.

putugrapiku n photographer. v [B16; c16] be, become a photographer.

putugrapu n photograph.

putuk n small arms, esp. a handgun (slang).

pútuk = tútuk_2.

put-uk v [B126; b8] swallow air or jump involuntarily from surprise.
Naput-uk ang ákung buut sa íyang gisulti, I was dumbfounded with what
she said. Hiput-ukan (himut-ukan) ang maistra sa kalit nga pagbisíta sa
supirbisur, The teacher was taken aback by the unexpected visit of her
supervisor. Nahimut-ukan aku sa íyang pirsunal nga pangutána, I was
dumbstruck by his personal question.

putukputuk n rapid beating or throbbing of the heart. v [B456] for the
heart to throb. Nagputukputuk ang íyang dughan sa kalípay, Her heart
was throbbing with joy.

putul v {1} [A; a1] sever with a bladed instrument or by snapping. Dì
makaputul ang ákung ngípun sa hílu, My teeth can’t break the thread.
Putlag kaduha arun matulu ka pútù, Cut it twice to make three pieces.
{1a} [A; a12] cut down. Kinsay nagputul sa mangga? Who cut the mango
tree down? {1b} [A; b7] cut s.t. out of s.t. Ákung giputlan ang pálu
kay taas ra, I cut a length from the mast because it was too long.
{1c} [A; a] cut s.t. out of s.t. Giputul sa sinsur ang mga báhing
law-ay, The censors cut out the lewd parts. {2} [A; a2] break a
connection. Giputlan mig sugà, Our electricity was cut off. {3} [A12;
a] cut s.t. short. Naputul ang ámung isturya pag-abut sa mga bisíta,
Our conversation was cut short by the arrival of the visitors.
{3a} [A12; a1] put an end to s.t. Putlun ku ang ímung ngil-ad nga
batásan, I’ll put a stop to your bad manners. a {1} s.t. cut off from
s.t. or s.t. which had s.t. cut off of it. Putul ug íkug ang irù, The
dog has a stubbed tail. {2} the other one of two things which had been
cut from one piece. Háin man ang putul ári? Where is the other piece of
this stick that had been cut in two? — sa adlaw half a day. — sa píkas
a quarter. {3} s.t. said in cutting in. (←) v [C; c16] divide s.t.
into, between two. Magpútul ta ánang isdà, Let us divide that fish
between us. n — ug tinái sibling. Pútul mu ug tinái, búsà ayaw mu
pag-áway, You are sisters, so don’t quarrel. putulputul v [A; a] cut
into small pieces. putulpútul v [B16] be intermittently discontinuous.
a intermittent, discontinuous. Putulpútul man tung salída nga sikan
ran, The second-run movie kept being interrupted. ig-(←) ug tinái
n relative. Igpútul ku siya ug tinái, She is my relative. ka-, ka-(←)
n the other half of a piece cut off.

putung a {1} quick-tempered, immediately resorting to violence when
provoked. {2} [verb] lang ug — do s.t. in a rage without the slightest
thought of changing one’s mind. Kun mulagiw ka, kágiw lámang ug putung,
kay kun mubálik ka patyun ta ka, If you run away, run away and don’t
ever think of coming back, for if you do, I will kill you.

pútung v [A; a1] tie s.t. around the head. Nagpútung ug tualya ang
draybir, The driver tied a towel around his head. Gipútung sa babáyi
ang íyang buhuk, The woman knotted her hair at the top of her head. (→)
s.t. worn wrapped around the head. v [A; c1] make s.t. into a headband,
bandana, or the like. -in- n s.t. tied around the head.

put-ung v {1} [A; c16] pile things up. Put-únga ang mga mangga sigun sa
ílang gidak-un, Pile the mangoes into heaps according to their size.
{2} [C; b6] gather together in a group. Dì ta makaput-ung dinhi sa
daplin sa dálan kay abug kaáyu, We can’t gather here at the side of the
road because it is too dusty.

putuputu n the smallest pieces of banana located at the tip of the
bunch, usually the last two or three hands. a persons that are short in
height and small in build (humorous colloquial).

putus n {1} wrapper. {1a} membranous covering of organs or parts of
organs in the body of animals. {2} small bundle, package. {3} male
genitalia (humorous). Mihulma nang putus mu ánang hugut nímung
karsúnis, Your pants are so tight they show your genitals. {4} an
infant born wrapped inside a thin membranous covering which must be
pinched open to save the infant from suffocating. A baby born in this
manner is said to be likely to grow into a strong and quick-tempered
adult. v {1} [A; a] wrap s.t. Unsa may ímung gipustan (giputus) sa kík?
What did you use to wrap the cake? {2} [B1245; c1] be full of or
covered with. Naputus ang bátà sa núka, The child is covered with
sores. Pustun tikag haluk, I will smother you with kisses. paN- [A2]
pack up for a journey. Mamutus na ku pára sa byáhi, I’ll pack up for
the trip.

putustǎt n photostat. v [A; b6] make a photostatic copy.

putut a full-grown person that is short. v [B12; b6] be, become a short
person. Naputut ku kay putut man ang ákung nánay, I am short because my
mother was short. (←), ka-(←) v [A13] be short (said in derision).

pútut_1 n {1} a small coconut. Maáyu pay maglána kag pútut, It is about
as easy as extracting coconut oil from the small fruit (i.e.
impossible). v {1} [A2N; b(1)] bearing forth small coconuts. Mipútut
(namútut) na ang lubi. Dì na madúgay may butung, The coconut tree has
nuts. We’ll have young coconut to eat soon. {2} [A] for flowers to form
buds. Musúgud nag pangalimyun ug mupútut (mamútut) na ang búwak, A
flower begins to smell sweet when it begins to form buds. -un a young,
inexperienced, and uninitiated (literary). Sa putútung salabútan, In
the young, innocent mind.

pútut_2 = bantut, v2. -un = bantutun, a1.

putyúkan n a k.o. bee forming hives hanging from the branches of trees,
fiercer than the ligwan. -un a slim-waisted like a wasp.

púu v [AB12; a1] {1} exterminate all things of a certain kind. Ang
iring ray nagpúu sa mga ilagà ning baláya, It was the cat that
annihilated the rats in this house. Nagkapuu na ang tamaraw, The
tamaraw is becoming extinct. Puúhan ang syudad sa mga buguy, They will
get rid of the thugs in the city. {2} get rid of completely. Ngil-ad
nga batásan nga ángay puhúun (puúhun), Bad manners that should be
gotten rid of. {3} ruin a business. Ang ímung pagkasugarul mau ray
makapúu sa ímung nigusyu, Your gambling is enough to ruin your
business. puuhun nga apilyídu a family name that is disappearing
(because of lack of males).

púuk v {1} [A1; c16] cut s.t. short close to the base. Ang mga úlud
nagpúuk ug putul sa mga turuk nga pugas mais, The worms cut the corn
sprouts right down to the ground. {2} [AP2B2SN; c1P] drive s.t. so deep
that the end is level. Akuy mupúuk (mupapúuk) ánang lansánga, I’ll
drive that nail all the way in. Lisud pag-ibut sa nagpuuk nga lansang,
It is difficult to pull out a nail that is driven all the way in. Ákung
puúkun (papuúkun, ipapúuk, ipúuk) ang gasulinadur arun kusug ang dágan,
I’ll push the gas pedal to the floor to go full speed. {3} [BN] for the
nits to be right at the roots of the hair. a cut close to the base,
driven down even with the base. (→) a {1} = púuk, a. {2} for nits to be
located right in the scalp at the base of the hair. Wà ka katli nga
puuk man kaáyu ning ímung mga lusà? Isn’t it itchy? Your nits are right
in your scalp. v [A; b] tie, hold a tethered animal close to the
attachment. Nagpuuk ku sa kábaw sa káhuy arun dì siya makaabut pagkáun
sa mga gagmayng lubi, I’m tying the carabao close to the tree so that
it can’t reach the small coconut plants. Ákung puk-an ang irù inig súd
ninyu, I’ll hold the dog close to me when you enter the house.

puul a boring, wearying by being dull and uninteresting. Puul kaáyu
ning kinabúhì ug wà kay lingawlingaw, Life is very boring if you have
no leisure. v [B12C3; b4(1)] be, become boring. Nagkapuul na man ning
trabahúa, This work is becoming boring. Nagpúul na sila kay nag-áway na
man, They must be sick of each other because they are already
quarrelling. Wà siya pul-i ug tan-aw sa íyang katahum, He never got
tired looking at her beauty. pul-ánun a easily bored.

púung = pul-ung.

púut a {1} airless, lacking fresh air. Púut ning kwartúha kay usa ray
bintánà, This room lacks air because it has only one window. {2} for
gases or some other congesting thing to be s.w. or for a place to be
congested with s.t. pent up in it. Púut kaáyu ang asu sa kusína (or
Púut sa asu ang kusína), The kitchen is full of smoke. Púut kaáyu ning
ákung ilung sa sip-un, My nose is congested with mucus. {3} for an
emotion to be pent up s.w. or for the breast to have an emotion pent up
in it. v {1} [B3] be, become airless or having s.t. pent up in it.
{2} [A1; c16] be, become pent up. Kaguul nga nagpúut sa ákung dughan,
Sorrows pent up in my breast. {3} [A; b(1)] put a dog’s nose into a
container filled with burning feathers in order to make it come to hate
the smell of chickens. Puútun ku ning irúa arun dì na manukub ug manuk,
I will asphyxiate this dog with burning chicken feathers so it won’t
prey on chickens.

puwa- see also pula-.

puwak n tonsure. v [A; b6] tonsure s.o.

puwi sound used to represent spitting, said as a gesture of scorn.
Puwi, nagpauluininglis pa nákù ag dakug bàbà arun mahibalu ang uban nga
antígu siya, Phooey, the big mouth has to go speaking English just to
show everybody that he knows how.

puwi- see also pwi- and puy-.

púwin, púwint n point in a score. v [A23P; a2] score a point in a game.
Matabla silag mupúwint ang nagpawul syát, They will be in a tie if they
make a point with this foul shot. Wà pa makapúwint ang ámung magdudulà,
Our players have not scored a point.

puwis = pwís.

puwit = puyit.

puwíta n poet. v [B12; b6] be, become a poet.

puya n {1} infant, esp. a newly born baby. {2} child, offspring. Wà
siyay natígum sa íyang kinitáan kay daghan siyag puya nga buhiun, He
has not saved anything because he has so many children.

puyasut a {1} weak, thin. Puyasut ug tíngug, Weak-voiced. Puyasut ug
láwas, Thin-bodied. {2} for seeds, fruits to be stunted and lacking
fullness. {2a} for a child to be thin and stunted in growth from
malnutrition. v [B] {1} be, become weak and thin. Nagpuyasut man ang
ímung mga buktun, Your arms are mighty thin. {2} come out thin and
stunted. Nagpuyasut ang búnga sa ságing kay walà ulana, The bananas are
undersized because they didn’t get enough rain.

púyat v [A3P; a] flatten s.t. soft into a soft mass. Puyátan ta kag
kamúti ipakáun sa bátà, I’ll squash cooked sweet potatoes for you to
feed the child. (→) a bananas that are thin and lacking in flesh from
improper development, and by extension, other fruits and vegetables.
Puyat ning sagínga kay búnga sa ting-init, These bananas are fleshless
because they grew in the dry season. v [B2; b6] come out thin and
lacking in flesh.

puyay n {1} name given to Japanese money during the war. {2} any fake
money. {3} money that is all wrinkled and dirty. v {1} [b6] look like
funny money. Gipuyayan ku sa mga bag-ung kwarta karun, The new type of
notes issued recently look funny to me. {2} [B126] for money to get all
crumpled and dirty.

puydi {1} it is all right to do. Káun, puydi apan way ínum, It is all
right to eat. But no drinking. {1a} — nga may do. Puydi ba nga makagawì
ku sa ímung tilipunu? May I use your phone? {2} be very possible. Puydi
kaáyung muanhi siya, He may well come here. nu- it is not possible.
Nupuydi, kay ginadilì ang pagsúgal dinhi, You can’t because gambling is
not allowed here. Nupuydi, dílì nà mahitabù, Never. That will never
happen. Nupuydi katabuk dundi gabahà, You can’t have intercourse when
your wife is menstruating. (Lit. You can’t cross a river in flood.)

puydut = pudyut.

puygu n matches. Nangáyù siyag puygu nga iháling, She asked for matches
to build the fire. see also *apuntin.

puyit n {1} first grade child. {2} being last in line or coming in last
in a contest. {3} anus. — sa anay = lubut sa anay. see lubut.
{3a} female genitalia (euphemism). v {1} [B56] be, become a first
grader. {2} [B126N; c1] come out last in a contest, be last in line.
Naúlaw ku kay namuyit ku sa banggà, I was embarrassed because I came
out last in the race.

puypuy v {1} [B24N; c16] for the muscles to become weak from fatigue or
nervousness. Mipuypuy (namuypuy) ang ákung mga buktun, My arms grew
heavy with fatigue. {2} [A3P; c16] placate, calm s.o. down. Puypúya
(ipuypuy) ang ímung kasukù pinaági sa pagsuruysúruy, Let your anger
calm down by taking a walk. {3} [A23P; c1] relieve, alleviate pain.
Puypúyun (ipuypuy) sa hílut ang ímung pamául, Massage will relieve your
muscle pains. a weak, lacking strength. Puypuy kaáyu ang ákung mga
tiil, My legs are very weak.

puyra n place away from home. Kúlang sa disiplína ang mga anak nga may
mga ginikánan nga atúa kanúnay sa puyra, Children lack discipline if
their parents are always away from home. in phrases: {1} get out!
Puyra! Dì ku gustu nga náay hubug dinhi sa balay! Out! I want no drunks
in this house! {1a} — bisíta all ashore that’s going ashore. {1a1} bell
announcing that the visitors must get off the boat. {1a2} after
visiting hours in a hospital. {1b} [so-and-so] keep away, may
[so-and-so] not happen despite the fact that s.t. is being said to make
it happen (said in the belief that the mention of s.t. may cause it to
happen unless the formula puyra [so-and-so] is said). Puyra báliw ang
duha ka manag-ágaw nagminyù, May lightning not strike them, the cousins
married. Puyra búsung, natumban ang kan-un, May you not get divine
punishment. You stepped on the rice. Puyra buyag nindut kaáyu kag mata,
Evil spirits keep away. You have beautiful eyes. Puyra dámag, hisgútan
nátù ang kamatáyun ni Pulánu, Pulanu, keep away. We will talk about
your death. Puyra damgu, si Pulánung namatay nagdiwal ang dílà, Pulanu
died with his tongue hanging out, may we not dream of him. Puyra gábà,
May you not reap divine punishment. Puyra handum (hisgut), labaw pa tu
ka grábi ang ákung sakit kay sa ímu karun, Sickness keep away despite
our talking about it, I was even sicker that time than you are now.
Puyra patrun, pubri kaáyu nang lungsúra, May the patron saint not get
angry at us. That is a terribly poor town. Puyra pungag nakabahù kug
humut agwa sa taliwā̀ sa lasang, May my nose not be knocked off, I
smelled a most delicious odor in the middle of the forest. {2} — sa
{2a} aside from, in addition to. Puyra sa panaptun náa pay balayran sa
butúnis ug sípir, Aside from the cloth, you still have to pay for the
buttons and zipper. {2b} excepting. Púrus mga tapulan puyra sa pipila
ka lugas, They’re all lazy except for a couple. {2b1} — lus buynus
except for a few good ones. Puyra lus buynus, kábaw ray but-an sa taga
Líti, With some exceptions, only the water buffaloes in Leyte have good
morals (from the notion that formerly prostitutes in Cebu used to say
they were from Leyte). {2b2} — dáyig modesty aside. Puyra dáyig akuy
nangháwud sa ámung klási, Modesty aside I am at the top of my class.
{2b3} — uluúlu no kidding. Puyra uluúlu tinúud kang gwápa, No kidding.
You’re very beautiful. {3} únu —, dus —, tris —, kwatru — in tallying
by fives, the number in addition to the groups of five. Singku kahúnis,
tris puyra. Sa átù pa, bayinti utsu, There are five blocks of five and
three extra. In other words, twenty-eight. itsa — see itsa. v {1} [A;
c1] eliminate, dismiss. Huwis ang nagpuyra sa íyang sumbung kay way
ígung kamatuúran, The judge dismissed his complaint for lack of
evidence. Puyráha (ipuyra) sila sa átung punduk, Eliminate them from
our group. Napuyra ang maung tápad kay gamay ra ug pusta ang kuntra,
The fight was cancelled because not enough people bet on one of the
cocks. {2} [AP; c1] dismiss s.o. from his job. Dì ku mupapuyra
(mupuyra) nímu sa ímung trabáhu, I won’t dismiss you from your job.

puyrut = pudyut.

puyu = bartuníku.

púyu n {1} bag, sack, or anything that can be put together at the ends
and closed. {2} hammock tied up like a sack to hold a baby. v [A; c1]
{1} make a púyu. {2} put s.t. in a bag or in a hammock. Puyúha (ipúyu)
ang bulingun sa hábul, Wrap the dirty clothing in a sheet. Puyúha
(ipúyu) ang bátà, Put the baby in its hammock.

puyù v {1} [A; b3] live, reside s.w. Unsa pay ákung gipuy-an ning
kalibutána? What am I in this world for? Balay nga ákung gipuy-an, The
house I am staying in. {2} [A; b6] stay s.w. Mupuyù ku sa báy ug dúna
kuy trabáhu, I’ll stay home if I have s.t. to do. {3} [A] be, become
still. Ug dì ka mupuyù, latiguhun ta ka, If you don’t keep still, I’ll
whip you. {4} [b(1)] be willing to go to prison just to get s.t. Puy-an
ku ang prisuhan basta lang makabalus ku, I am willing to go to prison
just so I can get revenge. (←) v 1 [C2; ac4] live together with s.o.
Dílì ku makigpúyù ug táwung palaaway, I don’t want to live with a
quarrelsome person. Lisud kang igpúyù, You’re a hard person to live
with. {2} [C; a1c] live with s.o. as husband and wife. Nagpúyù lang mi
ug wà lang pakasal, We just lived as husband and wife and we didn’t get
married. puyùpúyù n common-law husband, common-law wife. v [C; a1c]
live together as common-law spouses. hiN-/haN- v [B126] {1} stay in a
place. Dì ku mahimuyù sa balay kay pul-an ku, I can’t hang around the
house because I get bored. {2} dílì, walà — be restless. Walà siya
mahimuyù kay dúgayng naulì ang íyang anak, She was restless because her
daughter stayed out late. paniN-, paniN-(←) v [A2; b6] {1} reside and
have one’s livelihood in a certain area. Adtu sila sa Mindanaw
manimuyù, They are going to Mindanao to live. {2} live in a certain
style. Malináwun silang nanimuyù, They live a peaceful life. n one’s
family life. Ang sugal mauy nakabungkag sa ílang panimuyù, Gambling
destroyed their home life. higN-, hagN-, sagN- see sagmuyù. puy-anan,
puluy-ánan, pinuy-anan n residence, dwelling place. paN- = paniN-, n.
pag- {1} action of staying s.w. {2} = paniN-, n. maN-r-/l-, -um-r-/l-,
mulupyù, lumulupyù, tagpúyù n residents, inhabitants.

púyù = púyu.

puyuk_1 v [A; ab2] get a favor or a favorable reaction by saying the
right thing. Gipuyuk nákug kindi ang ákung anak arun magpatupi, I
bribed my son with candy so that he would agree to get his hair cut.
Hipuyukan ku sa ákung anak maung milugwag ákung diyísun, My son talked
me out of a ten-peso bill.

púyung v [A; c1] {1} gather the ends of a sack or bag to close it up or
take s.t. flat and fold up the ends to put s.t. inside it. Ákung
gipúyung ang mga daplin sa bàbà sa puntil, I closed the sack by
gathering the upper edges. {2} pull one’s hair back, gathering the ends
and tying or clipping them. n clip, ribbon, or the like to hold the
ends of gathered hair in place.

púyus v [A; a2] {1} carry s.t. in a piece of cloth or paper by pulling
up the edges. Gipúyus níya ang siriguylas sa íyang sayal, She carried
the small fruits in the folds of her skirt. {2} carry a child in the
womb (humorous). Nagpúyus na siyag tulu ka búlan pagkasal níya, She was
three months pregnant when she was married. {3} harbor emotions, rain
(literary). Dag-um nga hingbug-atan sa gipúyus nga ulan, Clouds
weighted down with the rain they were carrying.

puy-us = bayúus.

pwí, pwì = puwi.

pwídi = puydi.

pwintsitya = paskuwas.

pwinti_1 n {1} fountain. {2} a short-spanned stone bridge with thick
stone walls dating from the Spanish era. {2a} the bridge of a boat.

pwinti_2 n k.o. treatment for rheumatism whereby the impurities which
are thought to cause it are drained from the afflicted area by making a
wound and wrapping it with a banana trunk and other medicinal herbs.
v [A; b] treat a patient with pwinti. Naáyu ang riyúma sa tigúlang
human pwintíhi ang bitíis, The old man was cured of his rheumatism
after he was treated with pwinti. paN- v [A2] get this treatment.

pwíra = puyra.

pwirsa a {1} strong in intensity, force. Pwirsa kaáyu ang hángin sa
miáging bagyu, The last typhoon brought very strong winds. {2} plenty
in quantity. Pwirsang táwu sa plása, There are lots of people in the
plaza. — rimidiyu a with the utmost effort. Ang pagpaiskuyla ug siyam
ka anak pwirsa rimidiyu giyud, Seeing nine children through school
takes the utmost effort. v {1} [BN(1); b47] become strong. Mupwirsa
(mapwirsa, mamwirsa) na gánì ang ulan, mubahà giyud, If the rain pours
down hard it is likely to flood. {2} [AN2; ab] force s.t., do s.t.
forcibly. Ayaw pwirsaha pag-abri (pwirsahag abli) kay mabúngì nyà,
Don’t force it open because it might break off. Ayaw pwirsaha (ipwirsa)
ang pag-ukang sa bindáhi arun dì mudugù ang samad, Don’t take off the
bandage forcibly so the wound won’t bleed. {3} [b8] be overworked.
Hipwirsahan siya sa trabáhu mau nga nalúya, She was overworked. That’s
why she is fatigued. n {1} strength. Way pwirsa ang ákung buktun, My
arms have no strength. {2} armed force. — militar military force. —
nabal naval force. — sa kahangínan air force. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] exert
effort. Dì ku makapamwirsa kay bag-u pa kung naáyu, I should not strain
myself because I have just recovered from an illness. -du
a {1} working, forcing oneself to exert more than proper effort. Daut
siya kay pwirsádu siya sa trabáhu, He is skinny because he works harder
than he should. {2} strong, possessing great strength.

pwirta_1 = pulta, n1.

pwirta_2 = pwirtu_2.

pwirti {1} doing s.t. vigorously, to a great extent, existing in great
quantities or being to a great degree. Pwirting hílak sa bátà, The
child cried hard. Pwirting mukáun ning batáa, The child eats a lot.
Pwirting mahála sa isdà run, Fish is terribly expensive these days.
Pwirting pagkadusmúa sa dyíp sa pusti, How hard the jeep smashed into
the post! Pwirting ulána gahápun, How it rained yesterday! {2} do s.t.
very well. Pwirting mubayli si Pidru ug tanggu, Peter dances the tango
very well. {2a} having s.t. that enhances one’s standing, terrific.
Sigúrung madáwat si Míli kay pwirti siya ug rikumindasiyun, Millie will
surely get the job because she has terrific recommendations. Pwirti
siyag tútuy, She has magnificent breasts.

pwirtu_1 n {1} port, harbor. {1a} a city or town that is a port. v [c1]
make a place into a port of call, make a port for a place.

pwirtu_2 n the opening in the vagina through which the baby passes in
childbirth.

pwís so, therefore, for that reason. Pwís, átung buhátun arun mahuman,
So, let’s do it so that it will be finished. Kun tinúud kang nahigugma,
pwís, dawáta, If it is true you like him, accept him.

pwistu n {1} place, position. Ang mga gwardiya mitultul dáyun sa ílang
pwistu, The guards found their posts. {2} position, job. Dúgay na siya
ánang pwistúha, He has been employed in that job for a long time. — sa
f.o.b., reckoned at [such-and-such] a price at a certain place. Kanang
prisyúha pwistu sa pabrika, That price is what you pay at the factory.
v [A12; b6] get a job. Gipwistuhan man gáling kug trabáhu apan túa sa
búkid, I was given a job, but in the mountains.

pyádu n caretaker of lands, estates. v [AB156; a2] make s.o. the
caretaker or overseer, become such.

pyahuk, pyáhuk a depressed, sunken. Pyahuk ug mata, Sunken-eyed. Pyahuk
ug hubun, Having a sunken fontanel. Pyahuk ug áping, Sunken-cheeked.
v [B; b6] get depressed or sunken. Nagpyahuk ang tiyan sa munyíkang
hitumban, The doll’s stomach is all squashed because s.o. stepped on
it. -un a having s.t. depressed or sunken.

pyáit v [A3P; b6(1)] squeal to the authorities, betray a secret about a
crime. Mipyáit ang kaúban sa mga tulisan nga hidakpan, The accomplice
of the robbers squealed when he was arrested.

pyakpak = payakpak.

pyamríra = timbríra.

pyangà a flat-nosed (humorous). v [B12] be flat-nosed. Siya ray
napyangà nílang tanan, She is the only one in the whole family that has
a flat nose.

pyangaw n yellowish-green insect about 1″ long, that is a rice pest,
preying on the sheaths before the grain develops. They have an
unpleasant odor which permeates the rice field. v [a4] be infested with
pyangaw.

pyangguy a tall and thin, lanky. Musalir tingáli kas baskit kay
pyangguy kaáyu ka, You might do for basketball because you are lanky.
v [B12; b6] be, become lanky.

pyanghaw n a winning hand in mahjong with no flower piece (búlak, 2a.).
— mídul kard n a pyanghaw composed entirely of mídul kard’s. búnut — a
pyanghaw in which the piece one is waiting for is drawn.

pyanguk n = †pungaw.

pyangut a having a look of distaste on the face. Pyangut ang íyang
dagway kay gibahuan siya, He has a look of distaste on his face because
it stinks here. v [B; c1] get a look of distaste on the face. Mauy
ipyangut ug kasab-an ku, I get a sour look on my face if I’m cussed
out.

pyanista see pyánu.

pyansa n bail, financial guarantee for a released prisoner. v [A;
b6(1)] {1} put up bail. {2} guarantee s.o.’s debt. Dílì ku mupyansa
nímu kay wà kuy ikabáyad ug mupalya ka, I won’t guarantee your debt
because I will not be able to pay if you default. -du a be out on bail.
Nakasuruysúruy gihápun ang kriminal kay pyansádu man, The criminal
still roams around because he is out on bail. -dur(→) {1} one who posts
bail. {2} one who guarantees s.o. else’s debts. Ang pyansadur pagadur,
The one who guarantees winds up paying the debt.

pyánu n piano. v [AN; c1] play the piano. pyanista n pianist. v [B16;
a12] be a pianist.

pyanúnu n jelly roll. v [A; a12] make, have jelly rolls.

pyapi a be flat instead of round as it should be. Pyapi ug píkas úlu
ang ímung anak, Your son’s head is flat on one side. (←)_1 v [AB12; a]
come out flat, flatten s.t. Ang bumba mipyápi sa tibuuk balángay, The
bomb levelled the whole village. Napyápi ang bibingka. Wà makatúbù, The
rice cakes came out flat.

pyápi_2 n tree of saltwater swamps: Avicennia officinalis.

pyásà = pyásat.

pyásat v [AB16; a] smash, crush or flatten s.t., be crushed, mashed or
flattened. Dì ku makapyásat sa láta, I can’t flatten the can. Íyang
pyasátun ang hinug ságing úsà ipakáun sa bátà, She’ll mash the ripe
bananas before feeding them to the child. (→) a fruit of any plant with
a shell or husk that has failed to develop. Pyasat man lagi ning mais.
Way unud, This corn is defective. There are no grains.

pyasut = puyasut, a2, v2.

pyaus_1, pyáus_1 = bayúus.

pyaus_2, pyáus_2 a for the voice to be grating and weak, usually as a
result of strain. v [B2S; c1] for the voice to be hoarse in this way.
Nagpyaus nag íyang tíngug sa paghinílak, She lost her voice from crying
so much.

pyí n a measure, about a foot. Duha ka pyí, Two feet. v [b6c1] buy,
measure s.t. by the foot. di- foot-powered, esp. by means of a treadle.
-s = pyí (plural—used only after Spanish numbers). Dus pyís, Two feet.
pyís dil pátu n k.o. ornamental palm around 2′ high with semi-circular
leaves, slit nearly to the base: Rhapis excelsa.

pyimríra = timbríra.

pyirdi = pildi.

pyirdigána = pirdigána.

pyirnu n bolt, a threaded metal pin. v [A; a] fasten with a bolt.

pyís = pyí (plural).

pyísa = písa_1, 2.

pyista = pista.

pyunggut = pyungkut.

pyungkù v [A; b] sit on one’s haunches. Pyungkúi ang inudúru, ayaw
lingkúri, Squat on the toilet, don’t sit on it.

pyungkut v [AB6; c16] get bunched up, gathered into folds and wrinkled,
cause s.t. to become so. Mupyungkut (mapyungkut) nang ímung buldáhan ug
dílì ka mugámit ug bastidur, You are going to sew wrinkles into your
embroidery if you don’t use an embroidery frame. Pyungkúta (ipyungkut)
lang ang bàbà sa sáku arun dì mayabu ang bugas, Bunch up the mouth of
the sack and tie it so the rice won’t spill.

pyúr a {1} unadulterated, pure. Pyúr tablíya ang ákung palitun, I’ll
buy pure chocolate. {2} virgin, chaste. Pyúr siyang pagkababáyi, She is
a virgin. {3} the genuine, unmixed breed. Pyúr nga danggit, The genuine
danggit fish (not the one that looks similar to it and which may still
be so called but is not the real one). v {1} [A2; c16] drink liquor
straight. {2} [B126; c1] be pure, unmixed. Ug mapyúr ang ímung tubà
mailhan ku, I can recognize unadulterated toddy. n winning hand in
mahjong consisting of only one design.

pyuríya = payuríya.

pyúrus = bayúus.

pyuus, pyúus = bayúus.
