


=== T ===


ta_1 see kita.

ta_2 = tala_2.

tà_1 short for untà.

tà_2 short for tátà.

táak v {1} [A; b6(1)] step on, tread. Ngánung gitaákan man nímu ang
ákung sabud? Why did you step on my seedbed? {2} [A2; a] come to a
place for the first time. Nakatáak (nakataak) na kug Amirika, Now, I
have set foot in America. Taákun ku bisag impirnu pagpangítà nímu, I’ll
go to hell and back in my search for you.

taal a genuine, pure. Sáyaw nga taal Pilipínu, Native Filipino dance.
Taal nà siyang Árab, He is a full-blooded Arab. {2} mellow and
well-aged. a said of root crops that have been left to mature in the
ground. Kamúting taal, Mature sweet potatoes. b said of wine or
vinegar. Súkà nga taal, Fully-aged vinegar. v [B3(1); a2] become
well-aged.

taan v [AN; c] set a trap of any sort. Itaan ang búbu, lit-ag, Set the
fish trap, the noose. taantáan n method of fishing with a hook and line
in shallow waters where the fisherman looks in the water with a silip
or goggles at the same time as he holds his line and maneuvers his
boat. v [A; c] fish in this way.

*taantaan pa- v [A13; b6] let s.t. happen to s.t. or oneself a while
longer. Magpataantaan pa ku ug bulad sa adlaw, I’ll stay out in the sun
just a bit longer. Ákung gipataantaanan ang lúgaw sa kaláyu, I let the
porridge cook on the fire just a little longer.

taas a long, tall, high. — ug ilung not see s.t. right in front of
one’s nose. Taas kag ilung kay wà ka kakità sa lápis sa ímung
atubángan, You’re blind because you didn’t see the pencil right in
front of your nose. — ug tinuntu extremely naughty. — ug lupad see
lupad. v {1} [B3(1); b6] grow, appear long, tall. Mutaas ka kun
maghayhil, You’ll appear tall if you wear heels. Wà makataas ang káhuy
kay giawngan, The tree didn’t grow tall because it was stifled by other
trees. {2} [A; b] add more length, height. Tas-i ang lamísa, Make the
table higher (longer). {3} [a] do s.t. in a long way. Ayaw tas-a ímung
ampù, Don’t make your prayers long. {4} [B23(1)4; b6] rise in
temperature, pressure, and other quantities. Nagkataas ang íyang
hilánat, His fever is getting higher and higher. n fifth bottle
(slang). (←) v [B3(1); a1] be stretched long, tall. Mitáas íyang líug
ug pinangítà nákù, She craned her neck looking for me. n = i-. pa-
v {1} [A; c] raise. Magpataas sa kamut ang dúnay pangutána, Anyone who
has a question should raise his hand. {2} [A; b(1)] lengthen, increase
the length. n {1} upward. Isíbug ang kwadru pataas, Move the picture
upwards. {2} length-*wise, -g- high, tall, long (plural). gitas-un
n height, length. ha- a very long, high. Hataas nga panahun, A very
long time. i-, i-(←) n upstairs. katas-an n uplands. kahitas-an
{1} sky, heavens. {2} God. Ihangad sa kahitas-an ang ímung suliran,
Look to God for the solution to your problems. mapahitas-un,
mahatas-un, mahitas-un a haughty. Mapahitas-un ang mga dátù, The rich
people are haughty. v [B16] become haughty. kamapahitas-un, kahatas-un
n haughtiness.

taay = tayà_2.

tā́b = tálab.

tabà n pork fat.

tabaghak = baláhak, n, v.

tabagnul n a disease of bananas and root crops characterized by the
appearance of hard masses of dark spores which sometimes break up into
fine dust. v [a4] be affected with rust. -un(→) a blighted with fruit
rust.

tabagsak n k.o. sardine, slightly fatter than the tagnípis: Sardinella
sp.

tabagsuy = tibagsuy.

tabak v [A13P; b6P] give, furnish s.o. with s.t. that can be worn on
one’s person for a purpose. Kinsay nagtabak (nagpatabak) nímu ánang
tráhi? Who furnished you that suit? Walà siya mahadluk kay gitabakan
(gipatabakan) ug pistúla, He was not afraid because he was furnished a
pistol.

tab-ak v [A; c] cover s.t. or s.o. by heaping or dumping s.t. onto it.
Daghan kaáyung trabáhu ang gitab-ak ni bus sa sikritarya, The boss
heaped a pile of work on the secretary.

tabakalíra n large warehouse belonging to the Tabacalera organization
where farmers sell their products.

tabákù n {1} tobacco. {2} piece of tobacco rolled for smoking. (→)
v [A; a12] smoke. Ang dáhun sa lumbuy maáyu tabak-un sa hubákun,
Lungbuy leaves are good for asthmatics to smoke. paN- v [A2; c6] be
smoking. Wà gánì tay ipanabákù, sini na núun, I don’t even have money
for smoking much less for movies. tabakun-an, -an(→) n tobacco field.

tabal v {1} [A; a] preserve large fish by salting but not drying under
the sun. {2} [a12] keep a piece of gossip. Gitabal nákù ang íyang
pagkadisgrasyáda, I kept it a secret that she once had a baby out of
wedlock. -in- n fish preserved with salt.

tabal-ak n a k.o. large woven sack, usually made of buri leaves,
commonly used for holding brown sugar or salt. Usa ka tabal-ak kámay, A
buri bag full of brown sugar. a for a woman to be fat and shapeless
like a tabal-ak. v {1} [A; a2] make this k.o. container. {2} [c1] do by
the tabal-ak. {3} [B1256] get to look like a tabal-ak. Lawásan pa nà
run, apan manghinapū̂ ka túig karun matabal-ak na pud nà, She may have
a good body, but give her ten years and she will look like a sack. -in-
n put in the tabal-ak. v = tabal-ak, v2.

tában (from talában) v {1} [AC; a12] elope. Nagtában ang duha ug wà na
lang pakasal, The two eloped and did not get married formally. {2} =
talában. pa- v [A; c] {1} give, put s.t. miscellaneous along with the
thing of primary interest. Magpatában siyag kwarta matag sulat níya, He
encloses money each time he writes. Gipatabánan ug midiyas ang gipalit
kung sapátus, A pair of socks went together with the shoes I bought.
{2} do s.t. additional, do s.t. but not without making unwanted
remarks. Muhátag lagi, apan patabánan ug sirmun, Sure, she’ll give you
some but not without reading you a lecture. n s.t. enclosed or put
along with.

tabanaw n {1} whore, prostitute. {2} fake. Dì ku mudáwat niánang
tabanaw nga kwarta, I won’t accept that fake money. v [B16; a1c1] be a
prostitute.

tábang v [A; b6(1)] help, give a hand. Tabángi siya, Help her. Kun may
ikatábang ku sangpit lang, If I can do s.t., just call on me. (→) v [A;
a12] {1} rescue, attend to s.o. suddenly ill. Tabanga siya kay hápit na
malumus, Rescue him because he’s drowning. {2} [a] be helped, remedied.
Matabang pa kahà ning dakù mag sayup, Can this big error still be
corrected? {3} manage to do all of s.t. Dì na matabang ning
kadaghanúna, I can’t manage to do this much work. {4} [A3; b(1)] gang
up to do s.t. together. Napū̂ ang mitabang nákug sumbagay, Ten people
ganged up to fight against me. Tabangan nátù nig káun kay daghan, Let’s
all of us help eat this because there’s so much. {5} [A; a1] hook in a
big catch with a gaff. Tabanga ang íyang kuhà arun dì makabuhì, Hook in
his catch with a gaff so that it can’t get away. n a gaff attached to a
handle used to help pull in a big fish caught on a fishline. paN-
v [A2; b6] assist in child delivery. Akuy nanábang pagpanganak níya, I
delivered her baby. n help, aid. -ay, -in-ay v [C2] help each other.
hiN- v [A; c5] send aid (usually material assistance). Gihinabángan ang
Byapra sa Ridkrus, Biafra is receiving aid from the Red Cross. n aid,
assistance sent. paki- v [A2S3] ask for help. Nakitábang (mipakitábang)
ang kundinádu sa kinataliwad-an sa íyang kaguul, The condemned man
called out for help in the midst of his sorrows. Nagpakitábang
(nagpakitabang) ang babáying gilúgus, The woman who was being raped
cried for help. singgit paki- n cry for help. maN-r-(→) n medically
untrained midwife. maN-r-(→) ug sanggì harvest help. tabangtábang, ka-
n helper, assistant. ma-in-un, pahiN-un a helpful.

tab-ang a flat in taste, lacking sugar or salt. Pun-ig kámay ang kapi
kay tab-ang ra, Put more sugar in the coffee because it tastes flat.
Ang isdà sa dágat dílì mabúhì sa túbig tab-ang, Marine fishes do not
live in fresh water. v {1} [B; a2] be flat in taste. {2} [b4] for a man
or woman to feel cool toward his sweetheart. Nagbúlag ang managtrátu
kay gitab-angan na ang usag-usa kaníla, The sweethearts separated
because they got tired of each other. -an(→) a mentally deficient. Wà
giyud magtúnu ang íyang gipanulti, mu ra giyug táwung tab-angan, The
things he says do not make sense. He seems to be a stupid fool.

tabangkà = kagùkù_2.

tabangkù n young barracuda (rumpi kandádu see rumpi).

tabánug = talabánug. see banug.

tábas v {1} [A; a1] cut lengthwise or through s.t. flat. Gitábas ang
trúsu nga himúung tabla, The log was cut into boards. {1a} go over a
surface as if cutting it. Ang gamayng sakayan nitábas sa mabalud nga
lawud, The small boat plowed through the stormy seas. {2} [A] make a
dress. — sa nawung n shape of the face. Nindut kaáyug tábas ang íyang
nawung, She has a finely-shaped face. (→) n {1} style of dress. Minugbù
ang tabas sa sinínà karun, Short dresses are the style now. {2} k.o.
cock feather coloration of a splotch of darker color on a light field.
-in-an(→) n the style of a particular article of clothing.

tábaw n joist, parallel board to which the floor boards are nailed.
v [A3; c] put in joists. Ang báhì sa pugáhan lig-un itábaw, The core of
the pugáhan palm make strong joists.

tabawung n trunkfish: Ostracion spp.

tábay = atábay.

tabáyag n k.o. edible squash, round in shape with a knob-like
protrusion at the top. The shell becomes hard when mature and is used
as a container: Lagenaria leucantha var.

tabì v [AN; c6] gossip, spread secrets. Ayaw siya suginli kay mutabì
(manabì) dáyun, Don’t tell her because she gives away secrets. Ayaw ni
itabì (ipanabì) kay makauúlaw, Don’t gossip about this because it’s
embarrassing. n {1} talk, chat. {2} unpleasant gossip. (←)_1, hiN-(←)
n action of gossiping or chatting. Tábì (hinábì) ray inyung mahímù ug
wà matiwas ang trabáhu, All you can do is blah-blah, and you never
finish any work. v [A13C] engage in gossip or chatting. Túa na ang
duha, nagtábì (naghinábì) na pud, There they are, shooting off their
mouths again. -an a {1} talkative, loquacious. {2} gossiper.

tábì_2 {1} particle of courtesy used to ask permission to leave for a
second, ask a question, pass in front of s.o.: excuse me. Tábì, kinsay
ímung ngálan? Excuse me, what’s your name? Tábì úsà, byáan tikawg
kadiyut, Excuse me, I have to leave you a second. {2} particle telling
s.o. to get out of the way rather brusquely. Tábì diha u sikáran tika,
Get out of the way or I’ll kick you. — iskína n {1} name of news column
and radio program that exposes anomalies. {2} child that has a young
sibling (and thus is shunted off to the corner). {3} woman beyond her
prime (and not yet married). v {1} [B1256; a12] be aired in this
program or column. {2} [B35] wind up a spinster. paN- v [A2; b6] say
excuse me.

tabíbì = tíbì.

tabid_1 v [B346; c1] trickle, drip, flowing down a side. Magtabid nang
íyang láway ug matúlug, Her saliva trickles from her lips as she
sleeps.

tabid_2 v {1} [A; a12] braid the hair. Tabira nang buhuk mu, ayaw
ipunitil, Braid your hair instead of having it in ponytail. {2} [A13;
a12] make into a tabid. n k.o. hamper for containing clothes woven from
bamboo strips around 20′ by 20′, with a cover. -in- n braided hair.

tabig = tabid_2, v2, n.

tabígì n k.o. mangrove, the bark of which yields a red dye used for
strengthening fishlines, nets or coloring the floor of a house:
Xylocarpus granatum.

tabíki n houses in Spanish times made of stones evenly piled and
plastered smoothly with lime. v [A; c1] build structures of tabíki.

tabikung v {1} [A3; c1] sit on s.t. straddling it. Mitabikung siya sa
baksit sa bisiklíta, She sat on the backseat of the bicycle, straddling
it. {2} [A; b(1)] have sexual intercourse (euphemism). Mihanà ang laki
pagtabikung sa bayi, The male set out to mount the female.

tábil v [A; c] {1} put up a curtain in order to conceal s.t. Gitabílan
ang katri sa pasyinting gilígù, They put a curtain around the bed of
the patient while he was being given a bath. {2} blanket, engulf
(literary). Ang kangitngit mitábil na sa kalibútan, Darkness covered
the earth. n curtain for covering s.t. puting — n {1} movie screen.
{2} world of the movies. (→) = tábil, n.

tabiláwan (coined from tábil and laráwan) n stage curtain, backdrop.

tabili n k.o. lizard, about 1½′ long with shining yellow and green
skin, found out-of-doors. — sa dágat n lizard fish, a k.o. fish around
6″ long, living on sandy bottoms of shallow waters.

tabílis v [A2S] flow, drip continuously. Mitabílis ang túbig sa
tangking nabuslut, Water flowed continuously from the water tank that
had a hole in it. -in- n continuous flow, dripping, trickling.

tabilung n k.o. rounded slipmouth of two species: one with fine, black
scales which peel off easily, and the other a smooth, rounded and
silvery species: Leiognathus spp.

tabilus n k.o. slipmouth with a small mouth which could be elongated
when stretched: Leiognathus sp.

tabing = marbas.

tabírak = binignit.

tabirnakulu n tabernacle.

tabirwak n vagina, said of women who have given birth to one or more
children.

tabisay v [A; b6] flow down vertically in a thin stream, usually
touching a surface. Nagtabisay ang dugù gíkan sa kílay nga nasìsì,
Blood flowed from the cut eyebrow. Ang íyang suwang gitabisayan sa
láway, Saliva dribbled down his chin.

tabíwis = tabílis.

tabla_1 a {1} draw, tie. Tabla ang risulta sa iliksiyun, The election
ended in a draw. {2} having experienced an equal amount of s.t.,
usually unpleasant. Tabla ta. Púlus hilatusan, We both came out the
same. We both got a whipping. {3} just like, just as if. Ang ímung
pagluib nákù tabla ra sa ímu akung gipatay, When you betrayed me it was
just as though you had killed me. Tabla ka ug búang ánang ímung taas
nga buhuk, You are like a madman with your long hair. v {1} [A13; a12]
declare a game a draw, end in a draw. Tabláhun ta na lang ni kay
ngitngit na, Let’s call the game a draw because it’s getting dark.
{2} [A12] play s.o. to a draw. Maáyu nag makatabla kag kampiyun, It
would be good enough if you could play a champion to a draw. paN-
v [A2; c6] give one’s life to get revenge. Kay nadisgrasya na ku
manabla na lang ku níya, Because he has violated me, I’ll give my life
to kill him.

tabla_2 n {1} board, a piece of sawed lumber, made of lumber.
Muskitírung tabla, coffin (lit. mosquito net of wood). {2} pieces of
cloth cut ready for sewing. Upat ka tabla ang karsúnis, Trousers are
sewn from four pieces of cloth cut according to the measurements.
v {1} [A; a12] saw into boards. {2} [a12] cut cloth for sewing. -in-
a gore, a style of skirt. v [A; c1] wear, make into a gore style skirt.

tabla_3 v [A; a2] make off with s.t. that belongs to s.o. else.
Nakatabla siyag duha ka líbu nga kubransa, He made off with two
thousand pesos that he had collected.

tabládu = intabládu.

tablaw v [B126; a12] get a big enough quantity of s.t. pleasant not to
desire any more. Dì ku matablaw pagtinan-aw nímu, I can’t get enough of
looking at you. Makatablaw (makapatablaw) sad tung inyung híkay, Your
dinner was more than filling.

tablíta, tablítas n tablet, capsule.

tablíya n ground cacao pressed into solid pieces. v [A; a1] mold cacao
into pieces. -in- n molded into cubes or bricks. Nangismágul siyag
tinablíyang buláwan, He smuggles gold bullion. Tinablíya nga batu,
Stone blocks.

tablug v {1} [AB; c] swing, make a swinging motion. Mutablug ang
kawáyan kun hangínun, The bamboo poles swing to and fro when the wind
blows them. Siyay nagtablug sa dúyan nákù sa gamay pa ku, She rocked my
cradle when I was young. {2} [A; c] throw s.t. out with a swinging
motion. Gitablug níla sa barku ang mga patay, They threw the dead men
overboard. Tablúgan ta unyà ka ug inínit, I’ll throw hot water on you,
if you don’t watch out. (→) n rope or cloth that holds up a hammock.
tablugtablug v [A] dangle as a result of almost being cut off.
Nagtablugtablug ang íyang tudlù nga hápit maputul, His finger that was
almost cut is dangling.

tablun n a log squared off and ready for sawing into boards. v [A; a]
square off a log.

tabtab v [A; a1] hack s.t. off with several blows. Siyay nagtabtab sa
písing gibugkus sa kaban, He cut off the rope that bound the trunk.

tábù v {1} [A; ac] meet s.o. Tabúun nátù siya sa piyir, We’ll meet him
at the pier. Pirmi lang kasábà ímung itábù inig-abut nákù, You always
meet me with nagging when I come home. {1a} [C; c3] meet each other on
the way. Ambut ása siya. Gikatábù man tu nákù, I don’t know where he’s
going. We met on the way. {1b} [AC; a2] assemble, meet, cause people to
do so. Ang mayur mauy mitábù sa mga draybir, The mayor assembled the
drivers. Magtábù ta sa simbahan, We will assemble in church. {2} [C3;
c1] for two ends to meet, make them meet. Tabúa (itábù) ang masig ka
tumuy arun glúhan, Make both ends meet so they can be glued. {3} [A13]
converge at a place for market. Magtábù dinhi malúnis, They hold market
here on Mondays. n periodical converging to hold market. paN- v [A2;
b6] go shopping, esp. at a periodical market. Manábù ku sa Mantalúngun,
I’ll attend the market day in Mantalongon. hi-(→) v [B1256] {1} happen,
take place. Nahitabù nga nagkasákay mi, It so happened that we rode on
the same vehicle. {2} for s.t. bad to happen. Ug magpadáyun kag paíbug
nákù mahitabù ra man ta, If you keep on flirting with me s.t. will
happen between us. Dúna tingaliy nahitabù sa báy kay gikulbaan man ku,
S.t. bad must have happened at home because I feel uneasy. n incident,
happening. Gisaysay níya ang hitabù, He told about the incident.
ha-/hiN-/haN-(→) = hitabù (but not as frequent). hiN- v [C3; c3] meet
s.o. by chance. Na, kay naglikay ku, nagkahinábù na hinúun mi, I was
trying to avoid him, but instead we ran into each other. tabùtábù
n small market. tabuan n place where periodic markets are held. -in-an
n gift given by s.o. who arrives from a trip.

tabudlung = budlung_2.

tabudyus a cylindrical. Tabudyus ang panghaw sa barku, The ship’s
chimney is cylindrical. n {1} the fry of the gisaw. {2} sweet made of
starch from the trunk of buri palm mixed with grated coconut meat,
sugar, and water, wrapped in banana leaves and rolled to cylinders the
size of a child’s arm, about 7″ long, and roasted. v {1} [A; c1] roll
into a cylinder, tube. Nagtabudyus siyag sín nga himúung túbu sa túbig,
He rolled a galvanized sheet into a cylinder to make a water pipe.
{2} [A; a] prepare tabudyus.

tabug n {1} = tablug, n. {2} beehive hanging from a tree branch shaped
like a mammary gland. tabugtabug = tablugtablug. see tablug.

tábug_1 v {1} [A; 1] drive, send away. Tabúga ang bábuy nga misulud sa
kural, Drive the pig that got into our yard away. {2} [A; c] throw s.t.
away to dispose of it. Itabug tikas bintánà, I’ll throw you out the
window.

tábug_2 v [AP; b6] {1} do s.t. in excess, way beyond reasonable bounds.
Nagtábug (nagpatábug) ka man lag prisyu sa ímung baligyà! You are
pricing your merchandise ridiculously high! Nakapatábug kug sulti
tungud sa ákung kalágut, I said a lot of things I should not have
because of my anger. {2} do s.t. without forethought. Nagpatábug lag
tíru, lagmit makaigù, The way he is just shooting so carelessly, he
might just hit s.o. {3} do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. Dì ku
makapatábug ug lútù sa sud-an, I can’t cook the food hurriedly and
poorly.

tábug_3 = tablug.

tabugsuk_1 n k.o. large spider conch.

tabugsuk_2 see bugsuk.

tabuguk n k.o. small octopus, larger than the tamalà, smaller than the
kugíta.

tabuk v {1} [A; ac] cross over, bring s.t. across to the opposite side.
Mutabuk na ta sa karsáda, Let’s cross the street. Kuyaw tabukun ning
subáa kay sulug, This river is dangerous to cross because the current
is strong. Itabuk ning asin sa píkas pū̂, Bring the salt across to the
other island. {1a} [A2; a] emigrate to another island. Mitabuk siya sa
Mindanaw pamásin nga muasinsu, He migrated to Mindanao in the hope that
he would be successful there. {2} [A2; b6] move from one group or
affiliation to a rival one. Ang Libiral nga diputádu mitabuk ngadtu sa
Nasyunalista, The Liberal congressman crossed over to the Nacionalista
Party. n area on the other side, across the street. Túa siya manarabáhu
sa tabuk, He works on the other island (other bank). -anan(←)
n {1} ferryboat. {2} small, make-shift bridge. -anun(←) n people from
across the street, the other island. -l-un a to be reached by crossing
a body of water.

tabukaw n k.o. yaws, swelling with an oozing opening in the center,
growing to 1″, after which sungkil develops.

Tabúli n a pagan ethnic group of Cotabato.

tábun_1 v [A; c] {1} cover s.t. to protect or conceal it. Tabúni ang
kan-un arun dílì langawun, Cover the food so it won’t get flies on it.
{2} cover up for s.o.’s mistakes. Nagdasà siya kay mutábun ang
ginikánan sa íyang binúang, He is abusive because his parents cover up
for his foolishness. {3} drown out a sound. Hápit tabúni ang íyang
tíngug sa makusug nga áwit, Her voice was almost drowned out by the
loud song. n — sa láyag Passion Sunday, the second Sunday before Easter
when it was the custom to cover the tabernacle and statue with a piece
of purple cloth. (→) n cover. Hápit walay tabun ang íyang dughan, Her
breast was almost uncovered. tabuntábun = tábun, v2. tabuntábun,
tabuntabun n eyelid.

tábun_2 n = tulábung.

tábung = tulábung.

tab-ung v [A; ac1] keep fruits in a dark, warm place to hasten
ripening. -in-an n {1} fruit ripened in this way. {2} unsavory secrets
about one’s past experiences.

tabunuk n fertile. Tabunuk ang yútà sa pátag, The soil in the plains is
fertile. Káda túig man manganak, tabunuk giyung matrísa, She gives
birth every year. She has a fertile womb. v [B] become fertile.

tabúnun a brown-skinned. n the brown race. Si Risal garbu sa yútang
tabúnun, Rizal is the pride of the land of the brown race.

tabunus n a covered receptacle esp. for soiled clothes about 2–3′ long,
made of sawali.

taburíti n wooden or rattan chair with a backrest.

tabuylug_1 v [AB; b2c1] swing, spin around; cause s.t. to do so.
Mitabuylug ang bátà sa písì, The child hung to a rope and swung around.
Nagtabuylug ang tyubíbu, The merry-go-round is spinning around.

tabuylug_2 v [AC; c1] go together. Magtabuylug ta ngadtu sa sini, Let
us go to the show together. Gitabuylug níya paghigut ang mga bábuy, He
tied the pigs together on one peg. n constant companion. Íyang anak ang
ákung tabuylug, His son is my constant companion. -in- v [A1] walk
together in groups; walk side by side together. Dílì kita
makatinabuylug sa pagpanglákaw niíning pit-us nga dálan, We can not
walk abreast on this narrow path.

tabyáyung = balantíyung.

tabyug v [AB456; a1] swing s.t. suspended. Mitabyug ang písing ákung
gikumbibátan, The rope I was clinging to swung. Kinsay nagtabyug sa
dúyan? Who swung the hammock? Tabyúga ang butùbútù sa kampána, Swing
the clapper of the big bell. n s.t. used to swing a hammock, such as a
string.

tabyun = kulabyun.

tabyus = kadyus.

tád n k.o. small, slippery fishes of various colors, with large scales,
found in seaweeds.

tadhan see tahud.

tadiyà v [A; a12] throw a knife such that the point sticks in at
impact. Hingígù ka giyud ug makatadiyà ka ánang irung nagdagan, You’re
really a marksman if you can sink a knife into that running dog.
n knife throwing.

tadiyaw n large earthen jar to hold liquids. -in- a shaped like a
tadiyaw. Ang íyang kasing tinadiyaw, His top is egg-shaped.

tadlas across an area. Midágan siya tadlas sa uma, He ran across the
farm. v [A; a] go across a broad area. Tadlásun ku ang kadagátan
pagpangítà nímu, I’ll cross the oceans searching for you. -an(→)
n center player of the defensive team in tubigtúbig.

tadlip = adlip.

tadluk n coconut seedling. Pilía ang tambuk nga tadluk, Choose a
healthy seedling. v [A; a12] let coconuts sprout for seedlings.
Mutadluk (magtadluk) tag pila ka buuk, We will let a few coconuts
sprout into seedlings.

tadlung v [A23; a12] go or walk straight to a place. Tadlúnga lang tung
kahúya kay hilabyan mu ang tábay, Just walk straight to that tree and
you will pass the well.

tadlungan n black-finned shark: Carcharias melanopterus.

tadluy n {1} small funnel for solids, used to get rice out of sacks to
see what the contents are. {2} a k.o. fish with a round, tapered body
growing about 5″ or 6″ in length, about an inch in diameter, white
belly and darker back, with fine scales. a straight, in line with.
Syárug dílì ka kapasulud sa numiru dyís nga tadluy man ni kaáyu ngadtus
bangag, Surely you can get the number ten ball in because it is
directly in line with the hole.

tadtad v [A; a] chop into bits. Nagtadtad siyag tinái arun himúung
dugùdugù, He is chopping entrails into bits for the blood stew. {2} [A;
a2b2] have sexual intercourse (slang). n {1} action of cutting.
{2} sexual intercourse. maáyu lang tayáda way — all talk and no action.
tadtaran n chopping board. -in- n dish consisting primarily of chopped
entrails and blood.

tadyak v [A; b] kick hard with the foot. Tadyáki ang irung náa sa
iláwum sa lamísa, Kick that dog under the table.

tadyaw = tadiyaw.

tadyus = kadyus.

tadyùtù = tayùtù.

tág n tag, a piece of paper identifying s.t. v [b6(1)] put a tag on
s.t.

tag-_1 affix forming nouns which refer to the agent of a particular
action or to the particular person concerned. Si Risal ang tagsúlat
(tagsulat) sa Núli Mi Tanghiri, Rizal was the author of Noli Me
Tangere. Ang tagsalà, The one who committed the sin. Tagbalay
(tagbálay), Owner of the house.

tag-_2 {1} prefix added to numbers and numerals to form numerals which
mean [so-and-so] many apiece. Tag singku ang pan disal, Rolls cost five
cents each. Tagsa ka sáku, tagurha ka sáku ang palitun káda palit níya,
He buys a sack, two sacks at a time. {2} added to other parts of
speech: [such-and-such] each time. Tagdugay siyang mupaúlì, He comes
home late each time. Taglagyù siyag byáhi, He travels long distances
each time.

tagà_1 n fishhook. v [a3b2] caught, snagged on a fishhook. Hitag-an na
bayà apan nakabuhì, It was already caught on the hook, but it broke
free. paN- v [a12] catch with a hook and line.

tagà_2 v [A; a12] cut down trees. Siyay nagtaga sa ímung tanum, He cut
your plant down. Tagaa ang punúan sa ságing, Cut the trunk of the
banana tree down. n action of felling trees. maN-r-(←) n woodcutter.

*tágà suppletive form for hátag used optionally for suffixed forms.
Tagáan (hatágan) ta ka ug dulsi, I will give you candy. Pagbinuutan kay
básig hitagaan kag gása, Be good because you might get a present.
-l-an(→), -anan n {1} s.t. one is obliged to give. {2} person to whom
given. -in-an n one to whom s.t. is given. -in-an(→) n manner of
giving. ka-un a on the verge of giving. ma-in-un a generous, liking to
give. -l-un, -unun(→) = tagaanan, 1.

taga- prefix added to words that refer to a place to form nouns which
mean: {1} one who is from [such-and-such] a place. Tagamanílà diay ka,
So, you are from Manila. Tagaámù, One who is from my hometown. {2} one
who is associated with a certain group. Tagakustum, People in the
Customs. Tagakíim, One of the members of the K.M.’s (Kabatáang
Makabáyan, Patriotic Youth).

taga-(→) prefix added to words referring to parts of the body to form
words meaning ‘up to [so-and-so]’. Tagaliug ku sa útang, I’m up to my
neck in debts.

tagábung_1 n strands of hair formed into a wig to reinforce a chignon.
v [A1; a] make into a hairpiece of this sort.

tagábung_2 = tugábung.

tagad v {1} [A; a1] give attention to, mind. Wà na siya magtagad sa
íyang pangláwas, She stopped paying attention to her health. Wà ku
makatagad nímu dáyun, I wasn’t able to attend to you at once. Walà ni
Li tagda ang ákung pakilúuy, Lee did not heed my pleading. {1a} [A; c]
pay attention to s.o. showing warmth, concern. Mutagad lang siya kun
unáhan, He is friendly to others only when they speak to him first.
Nagtagad pa giyud kag andam dà, You shouldn’t have bothered fixing
anything to eat. {2} [A; a2] wait for. Ása ta magtagad ug sakyanan?
Where shall we wait for the bus? n action of caring. Wà siyay tagad sa
íyang pagkáun, He is not particular about his food. (←) = tagad, v2.
tagdanay, tinagdanay v [C2] be on friendly terms with each other. -in-
a looked up to, respected, considered important. Usa siya sa mga
tinagad nga táwu sa lungsud, He is one of the respected people in the
town. v [A13N] treat s.o. as worthy of attention. Magtinagad
(maninagad) ka man niánang bastus, Why do you mind those rowdy fellows?
-anan, tagaranan n waiting place. tinagdan n manner of attending to
s.t. Lahì ang íyang tinagdan (pagtagad) kanákù karun sa kaniadtu, She
treats me differently from the way she used to. matinagdánun
a attentive. pag- n {1} attention. Ang íyang líhuk nakadani sa ákung
pagtagad, The way she acted caught my attention. {2} = tinagdan.

tagadtad a for the meat of fleshy fruits and tubers to have hardened
parts. Tagadtad kaáyu ang kamúti nga guwang, Matured sweet potatoes
have hardened portions. v [B2] get to have hardened portions. Sakit ang
nakatagadtad (nakapatagadtad) sa ságing, A blight caused the bananas to
develop hardened lumps.

tagak_1 v [A; a2] join strands of abaca at the ends to make a long
thread. -an, -an(←) n k.o. basket, cylindrical in shape and with a
large mouth, used to hold joined strands of abaca. -in- n joined abaca
fibers.

tágak v {1} [A1; ac] cause s.t. to fall straight down. Matágak ang mga
dáhun, The leaves will fall. Tagákun ku nang langgam sa usa ka tíru,
I’ll knock that bird down in one shot. Namatay siya kay hitagakan sa
lubi, He died because a coconut fell on his head. Itágak nang sapátus
kay naglisud ka pagsaka, Kick off your shoes because you’re having
trouble climbing. {2} [A; a12] fail in school. Tagáka siya kay
absiníru, Fail him because he’s always absent. {3} [A2; c1] for
coconuts to yield. Kanang kalubihána mutágak ug usa ka líbu, That
coconut plantation yields one thousand nuts. {4} [B1267; b8] suffer a
miscarriage. Natagákag makaduha, She has had two miscarriages. {5} [a3]
for the curtain to fall signifying the end of a presentation
(metaphorical). Ug dinhi natágak ang tabil sa átung sugilánun, And so,
here our story ends. {6} — ang kwarta [a3] spend money. Natágak ang
kwarta sa way hinungdan, The money was just wasted. n yield of
coconuts. (→)_2 n {1} fallen leaves of fruits. {2} fallen pieces,
pieces which fell or spilled out of a container. Tagak sa kupras, mais,
Extra pieces of copra, corn grain. tagaktagak v {1} [B6; c16] drop down
in spurts or drips. Nagtagaktagak ang tái sa bátang nagkalíbang, The
child with the diarrhea kept having his BM’s in spurts. {2} [A13; b6]
drop things around, mess. Mauy musilhig sa sawug ang nagtagaktagak ug
kan-un, Whoever throws rice all over the floor is going to have to pick
it up. {3} [B145; c1] fail to do s.t. in unison. Dungána pagrisayit.
Ayaw tagaktagaka (itagaktagak), Recite it together in unison, not
raggedly. a not in unison. -in-(→) = tagaktagak, 3.

tagaktak_1 n clacking or banging sound, but not resounding, e.g. that
of slapping s.t. with wood. v [A2; c6] make such a sound. Mitagaktak
ang sín pagbundak sa ulan, The metal roof made a banging noise when the
rain came down hard. Ayawg itagaktak ang bakyà sa simintu, Don’t bang
your wooden slippers on the concrete.

tagaktak_2 n k.o. crunchy sweet made of a thick dough of ground rice or
sweet potatoes and sugar passed through a sieve to form fine threads,
fashioned into triangles or other shapes, and fried brown. v [A; b6]
make tagaktak.

tagal n stipulated length or period of time to do s.t. Ang tagal sa
pagbáyad sa útang tulu ka búlan, The stipulated period for paying the
debt is three months. Ugmà ang íyang tagal nga mubálik, He set tomorrow
as the day he’ll be back. v [A; c] stipulate a period of time within
which or at which s.t. is to be done. Gitagalan ang masakitun ug lima
ka adlaw, The patient was given five days to live. Daghang burúka ang
gikatagal niánang adláwa, Many cases had been set for that day.

tagála n a woman from the Tagalog region.

tagalubi see lubi.

Tagálug n Tagalog language, people. -in-(→) n Tagalog language, way.
v [A; a] speak Tagalog.

tagalúla n k.o. rattan used in tying bamboo floor slats.

tagam v [B25; b2] refrain from repeating an act as a result of an
unpleasant experience previously undergone. Mitagam (natagam) siyag
pangáwat human maprísu, He didn’t steal again after he was put in
prison once. Balikbálik, ayaw pagtagam, Come see us again (lit. don’t
learn a lesson). Hitagman kag bisíta kun dì ka mutagad, People will not
come to visit you again if you don’t entertain them. káun ug — v [A12]
experience s.t. bad so as to feel that one doesn’t ever want to repeat
it. Nakakaun ka bag tagam nga dì na ka muadtu sa ámù? Did s.t. bad
happen to you that you don’t want to come back to our place? katalagman
n calamity. Nahiágum sa katalagman ang Pilipínas paggúbat, The
Philippines experienced great calamities during the war.

tagamtam v [A12; a12b2] have a taste, experience, feel of s.t., usually
s.t. abstract. Nakatagamtam kug lángit uban nímu, I have tasted heaven
with you. Tagamtáma ang ákung panimalus, Get a taste of my revenge.

tag-an v [A; a2b2] {1} guess. Akuy tag-an sa sulud sa bangà, I’ll guess
what’s inside the jar. Hitag-anan nákung ikaw tung nagmaskara, I
guessed right that you were the one wearing a mask. {2} foretell.
Tag-ánun níya ang ímung kapaláran, He will tell your fortune.
n {1} guess. {2} fortune told. tag-antag-an n {1} any k.o. guessing
game. {2} guesswork. v {1} [C] play a guessing game. {2} [A; a12]
conjecture, guess. Wà ku makasigúru sa íyang panuígun. Átù lang
tag-antag-ánun, I can’t be sure of her age. Let’s just guess it. hiN-
a good guesser. maN-r- n fortune-teller.

tagána v [A1; c] set s.t. aside for future use, prepare s.t. beforehand
for s.t. Nagtagána kug aslúnun pára sa pista, I reserved a pig to be
roasted for the fiesta. Itagána ku ang kwarta sa inyung pagtuun, I am
setting this money aside for your studies. Ulì na kay gitagan-an kag
latus ni Tátay, Come home because Father is preparing a whipping for
you. a prepared. Andam ug tagána na síya sa iksámin, He is ready and
prepared for the examination. (→) n s.t. prepared for s.o. esp. for a
special occasion. Dakung bábuy ang ákung tagana sa pista, I prepared a
huge pig for the fiesta. paN- v {1} [A2; b3c] do s.t. as a precaution
just in case. Pagdág pistúla. Maáyu nang managána, Bring a gun. It’s a
good precaution. {2} [A2S3; b3] hesitate to do s.t., have reservations
about doing s.t. Nagpanagana kung mamisíta níya kay istrikta, I
hesitate to visit her because she’s a difficult person. mapanagan-un
a characterized with cautious hesitation.

taganas n k.o. small waterfall where the water glides along a sloping
stone cliff, or the smooth, stone slope the water glides over.

tágas v = tágak. n {1} = tágak, n. {2} egg accidentally laid by a hen
while walking.

tagasak, tagásak v [A; b6] make the sound of cascading water hitting
s.t. Nagtagasak ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung, The rain made a splashing
sound as it poured from the gutter. -in- n splashing sound.

tagasanta, tagasantu see *istígi.

tagáuk = tuktugáuk.

tagaw v {1} [A; ac] wander, roam. Nakatagaw na siya sa íyang mga saup,
He has already made the rounds of his tenants. {2} [B; c6] deviate
from, go separately. Sa pag-ikskursiyun námù mitagaw silang duha,
During our excursion the two of them got separated from us. Mangulitáwu
gánì nà siya, itagaw ang sulti, If he begins talking about love, change
the subject. {3} [B] be boorish, ignorant in one’s ways. Makatagaw man
diay ning subra ra sa paghigpit, I found out that being too strict with
a child makes him develop into a shy, socially poor sort. {4} [A; b3c]
talk, speak out loudly. Mitagaw siya sa mikrupunu, He spoke loud over
the microphone. a ignorant and boorish. Giinum sa tagaw nga dakù ang
patis, ábi níyag kukakúla, The oaf drank the soy sauce thinking it was
coca-cola. n vagabond, wanderer. Dì ku mamánag tagaw, I won’t marry a
vagabond. (←) v [B; a] be in confusion. Mutágaw (matágaw) ang
panagsulti ug muintra na siya, If he takes part, the conversation will
get utterly confused. Tagáwun ku ang ílang panimuyù, I’ll cause
confusion in their home. la- see latagaw.

tagawtaw v {1} [A1; c6] talk nonsense to oneself. Kabuangun nà siya kay
síging magtagawtaw, He is going crazy because he keeps talking nonsense
to himself. {2} [A] nag and scold in a long rambling way. Nagtagawtaw
ang asáwa kay nahubug siya, His wife kept nagging him because he was
drunk. n {1} nonsense one speaks. {2} uninterrupted nagging talk.
-an(→) a nagger.

tágay v {1} [A; c] pour alcoholic drinks into a drinking vessel. Ikay
tágay kay ímu ning silibrasiyun, You pour the drinks because it’s your
celebration. {2} [C2; c3] drink together. Makigtágay aku níya, I will
drink together with him. {2a} indulge in sensual pleasure together.
Nagtágay sila sa kinawatkawat nga kalípay, They shared stolen moments
of joy. {3} [b6] be proffered s.t. Gitagáyan siyag madaníhun nga
pahíyum, He was proffered a winsome smile. n {1} drink poured.
{2} drinking party. -an(→) n vessel one drinks liquor from.

tagaylu v [AC] barter, exchange one commodity for another. Nakatagaylu
kug humay ug rilip, I bartered some relief clothes for rice. n act of
bartering.

tagaytay (from taytay) n mountain ridge. paN- v [A2] go along the
mountain ridges. Managaytay lang ta kay gibahaan ang ubus, Let’s travel
along the ridge because the valleys are flooded.

tagbagu = talagbagu.

tagbak_1 n k.o. herring: Ilisha hoevenii.

tagbak_2 n k.o. herbaceous plant of cool, damp places, with lanceolate
leaves, similar to banana, growing to 1½–2 meters: Kolowratia elegans.

tagbaw v [AP1B16; a12] {1} satisfy to the point of satiety. Didtu siya
sa Rílis, nagtagbaw (nagpatagbaw) sa kaugalíngun, He was in the red
light district, satisfying his sexual needs. Manggáwas ta kay natagbaw
na kug tíbi, Let’s go out. I’ve had enough TV. {2} get enough of s.t.
to make one tired of it. Ang nawung ni Imilda dílì makatagbaw, One
can’t get tired of looking at Imelda’s face. ka- n state of being
satisfied, having had enough. ka-an n {1} satisfaction at s.t. done.
Pagsirbisyu nga makahátag dakung katagbáwan, Service that can give
great satisfaction. {2} = ka-un(→). ka-un(→) n satisfaction reached.
Way katagbawung bayhána, An insatiable woman.

tagbaya_1 n ulcer in the corners of the mouth. v [A123P; a4] have a
mouth ulcer. Gitagbaya siya kay way kalígù, He has sores in the corner
of his mouth because he hasn’t bathed. tagbayahun a having ulcers in
the corners of the mouth. v [B1256] develop this condition.

tagbaya_2 n k.o. bird, the Philippine bulbul: Hypsipetes philippinus.

tagbù n {1} work bee on a community project. Tagbù sa pagpúu sa ilagà,
A work bee to exterminate mice. {2} = súgat, n. v {1} [A; b6] hold a
work bee. {2} = tábù, v1, 2. hiN- = hinabù. see tábù. tagbùtagbù
v {1} [A12C2; c1] meet in a clandestine manner. Dì na sila
makatagbùtagbù kay nasakpan na ang ílang rilasiyun sa bána, They can no
longer continue with their trysting because the woman’s husband found
out about it. {2} [C3] keep passing by one another. Magtagbùtagbù lang
ang nagkalainláing mga sakyanan sa kadalánan, All different vehicles
keep passing each other on the streets. -anan n trysting place. -in-an
s.t. s.o. brings when arriving from a trip.

tagduk v [A46; c] {1} for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t.
Gitagduk níya sa punúan sa káhuy ang bára, He stuck the iron bar into
the trunk of the tree. Tagdúki ang yútà ug kahiktan sa báka, Plant a
stake into the ground to tie the cow to. {2} prick, make a small hole
like a dot. Siyay mitagduk sa pabúrut, He punctured the balloon.
n puncture, prick. Pilía ang síng walay mga tagduk, Choose iron sheets
that have no punctures.

tagduy v [A; c] for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t. Mitagduy
ang panà sa íyang dughan, The arrow pierced and stuck in his breast.
Gitagdúyan sa tunuk ang íyang lapalapa, He got a thorn stuck in his
sole.

tagdyaw = tadiyaw.

taghap v {1} [A2; a] guess. Taghápa ang ákung ngálan, Guess my name.
{2} [A12; b8] hit on the right thing accidentally. Unsay kahibáwu!
Hitaghapan ku lang, I didn’t know! I just guessed it. n guess. paN-
v [A2; b6] do s.t. in a guessing way. Gipanaghapan níyag áyu ang
radiyu, He took a stab at fixing the radio. n guess, wild try.
taghaptaghap n hit and miss procedure. v [A1; b8] do s.t. by a hit and
miss procedure.

taghud v [A; c] throw s.t. bulky s.w. with the intent of keeping others
from finding out about it. Diin nímu itaghud ang nangkà nga ímung
gikáwat? Where did you dump the jackfruit that you stole?

taghuy v [AN; ac] whistle, whistle at s.o. Taghúya ang túnu ánang
kantáha, Whistle the tune of that song. Nasukù siya kay gitaghúyan, She
got angry because s.o. whistled at her. n whistling.

tagibanwa see banwa.

tagidiyut see diyut.

tágik v {1} [A; ac1] tie things together carefully in construction.
Nagtágik siya sa mga nípà didtu sa katsaw, He was tying the nipa strips
to the rafters. Gitágik níya ang duha ka bulus kawáyan, He tied two
bamboo poles together. {2} [A; a] create s.t. literary or musical.
Maáyu siyang mutágik ug sugilánun nga kulbà hínam, He is good in
composing suspenseful stories. {2a} [a12] organize or arrange words or
ideas. Tagíka (itágik) únà pag-áyu ang ímung mga púlung nga igsusulti,
Compose what you are going to say carefully. (→) n s.t. used to tie
things together. -in- n s.t. constructed by tying. mag-r-(→) n composer
of poems or songs.

tagiktik n ticking, clicking. Tinagiktik sa rilu, Ticking of the clock.
v [A; c1] make the sound of tick-tick, pink-pink, or click-click.
Mitagiktik ang bildu nga nahúgan sa lansang, The glass went pink-pink
when the nails fell on it. Hastang nakatagiktik sa íyang makinilya, My!
Her typewriter went clickety-clack.

tagilhus = tagulhus.

tagilhaw see hilaw.

tagilma see lima.

tagilpù = takilpù.

tagiltil n short, high-pitched somewhat resonant sounds: clink-clink.
Tinagiltil sa kutsára, Clinking of spoons. v [A; c1] make a clinking
sound. Mitagiltil ang tigib nga gimartilyu, The chisel went clink-clink
when he hit it with a hammer.

tagilumbuy n k.o. tree of the second growth forest: Eugenia sp.

tagiluyluy = byatilis.

tagíma = tagilma.

tagimata see mata.

tagimtim_1 n {1} discoloration of teeth or surface roughness on metals,
concrete, stone, due to exposure to the elements. {2} very tiny
seashells found attached to stones or the bottoms of logs that have
lain in the sand for a long time. v {1} [b4] be discolored and dirtied
by the elements. Munyumintu nga gitagimtiman na, A monument that has
been discolored by the elements. {2} [a4b4] stay long s.w. (as if long
enough to develop tagimtim). Gitagimtim (gitagimtiman) na lang ang
lubut ug paninda, apan wà giyud muirug, He has been in business for a
long time, but he has never prospered.

tagimtim_2 n k.o. tiny oyster found adhering in clumps on rocks along
the shore, similar in flavor to sisi.

tagingting n {1} jingling or clanging sound. {2} resounding, ringing of
voice. Tagingting ang mandù sa sultan, The sultan’s command resounded.
v [A; c1] go ting-ting or clang-clang. Nabátì níya ang tinagingting sa
panagsingkì sa duha ka kris, She heard the cling-clang of the two
swords. Tagingtínga (itagingting) ang kwarta kun minì ba, Make the coin
jingle to see if it’s fake. paN- v [A23] for harsh words to ring in
one’s ears. Nanagingting sa íyang dalunggan ang kasábà sa amahan, Her
father’s scolding rang in her ears.

taginhus v [A13] go away from or arrive at a place, one by one or in
small numbers. Nagtaginhus pag-abut ang mga mananagat sa baybáyun, The
fishermen arrived at the shore one by one. Culu- = taginhus.

tagiptip n dirt, grime that is stuck hard on s.t. v [b4] have dirt
sticking hard on s.t. Gitagiptipan ang labábu, The sink was covered
with grime. -un(→) a dirty, grimy with dirt stuck to it.

tagitági v [A; a] do s.t. little by little. Madúgayng tagitági ug búhat
ánà, mahuman ra man nà, That work will get done if you do it little at
a time. Tagitagíhun nákù pagbáyad ang útang, I’ll pay the debt off a
little at a time.

tagìtì n tartar that sticks on the teeth or tobacco tars formed from
smoking. v [B6N; a4b4] be incrusted with tartar or tobacco tars.
Nanagìtì ang hunsuy sa hinabákù, He smokes constantly so his pipe is
incrusted with tars.

tagiwálu see walu.

tag-íya see íya.

tagkus = takgus.

tagmaya = tagbaya_1.

tagming = tagning.

tagmuk = tagnuk.

tagnà v [A; a12b2] {1} predict, prophesy. Si Amus nagtagnà nga mahúlug
ang Samarya, Amos prophesied that Samaria would fall. Hitagnaan níya
nga patyun si Kinidi, She predicted that Kennedy would be killed.
{2} guess. Tagnáag unsay ákung surprísa, Guess what my surprise is.
n guess, prediction, prophecy. maN-r-/l- n one who has power to
predict, prophet. paN- n guesswork. Púlus lang panagnà ang íyang
panambal, His treatment was pure guesswork. paN-l- n prophecy.

tagning a resonant and high-pitched quality of voice. v [B] become
resonant and high-pitched. Nagkatagning ang íyang tíngug kay síging
praktis, Her voice is getting resonant and high-pitched because she
constantly practices.

tagnipà = sirbilyíta_2.

tagnípis see nipis.

tagnuk n k.o. gnat, tiny swarming insects of rice fields that bite.
v [a4] be infested with this k.o. gnat.

tagpas v {1} [A2; a2] permeate, penetrate through material. Mitagpas
ang ulan sa tulda, The rain permeated through the tent. {2} [b1] be
splotched with menstrual blood from menstruation. Wà mutindug ang
babáyi kay gitagpasan diay, The woman didn’t want to get up because her
menstrual blood had seeped through her skirt.

tagpilaw see pilaw.

tagpis v {1} [A1; c1P] slice s.t. thinly. Tagpísun (itagpis) nákug hiwà
ang kasahusun nga karni, I’ll slice the meat thin to make it into
jerked meat. {2} [B12; b6] be skinny and slim. Natagpis nà siya kay
masakitun, He is skinny because he is sickly.

tagpud a crisp, brittle and easily breaking into small pieces like
glass or like dry and mealy sweet potatoes. Ang tagpud nga kamúti kun
lútù, uga ug unud nga húmuk mapulpug, A powdery sweet potato is dry
when it is cooked and has meat that crumbles readily. Ang biskwit nga
bag-ung lútù tagpud, Newly baked biscuits are crisp. v [B; a] become
crisp or brittle. Nagtagpud ang íyang ngípun, His teeth are crumbling.

tagsa see usa.

tagsaun n k.o. thick rattan used as a rope.

tagsikan n coconuts that are beginning to turn brown, but not
completely matured.

tagsip v [A; ab7] cut s.t. off of s.t., cut in thin, long pieces
(narrow or broad). Halus makatagsip sa pánit sa káhuy ning sundánga,
This machete can hardly cut the bark off a tree. Tagsípa ang kamúti,
Slice the yams into thin pieces. -in- n {1} only a few of a large
number. Tinagsip lang ang makapasar sa bár, Only a small percentage
passes the bar. {2} thin chippings or slices.

tagsuk v {1} [AB16; ac] pack elongated things tightly in an upright
position using every bit of space. Nagtagsuk ang mga táwu sa trak
dikarga, People were jampacked into the truck. Tagsukun níya ang
butilya sa sáku, He will pack the bottles tightly into the sack.
Itagsuk ang putput sa alat, Pack the sticks tightly in an upright
position into the basket. {2} [A; c] pierce, plant into but not
through. Kinsay nagtagsuk ning sundang sa báni? Who stuck the bolo into
the banana trunk?

tagù a for fibrous materials to be weak, not strong and durable. — ug
kasingkásing, balatían a easily moved emotionally. Tagù ug kasingkásing
(balatían) ang mga babáyi. Dalì da kaáyung madala sa pakilúuy, Women
are soft-hearted. They easily get carried away with pity. — ug mata
a shedding tears easily. Tagù siyag mata. Bísan diyútay lang kaguul,
muhílak dáyun, She cries at the slightest provocation. Let anything go
wrong and she bursts into tears. v [B2] for fibrous materials to become
weak. Mutagù (matagù) ang sinínà kun sigíhag klúruks, Clothes become
weak if you keep washing them with chlorox. -un(→) a of a weak sort.

tágù a hidden from view. Tágù kaáyu ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda, Their
house is well hidden from view from the road. sa — in secret. Nahigugma
siya nímu sa tágù, She loves you in secret. v {1} [B1256] be hidden
from view. {2} [AB3; b5c2] hide, keep away from view or knowledge.
Didtu siya mutágù luyu sa kamálig, He hid behind the barn. Makatágù ka
bag sikrítu? Can you keep a secret? Walà ku tagúa (tagúi, itágù) ang
sulat, I did not hide the letter. {3} [A; b5c2] put away in a safe
place for future use. Nagtágù ka ug sud-an pára ugmà? Did you put away
some food for tomorrow? tagùtagù v [A] hide away in fear, do in secret.
Nagtagùtagù silag panagtagbù kay minyù man ang babáyi, They have their
meetings secretly because the woman is married. tagùtágù, tagùtaguay
n game of hide-and-seek. v [A; b6] play hide-and-seek. -anan n hiding
place; hideout. -in- n s.t. hidden. Kristung -in- a religious sect, the
ceremonies of which are strictly private. -in-an n  {1} secret. Nasáyud
na ku sa ímung tinagúan, I know your secret. {2} s.t. kept from being
lost or used up. Gastúha na lang ang ímung tinagúan, Just spend your
savings. ma-in-un a secretive. ka-un(→) a feel very much like hiding
oneself. -um-r-, -um-l- n be about to hide.

taguangkan (from tágù and anak) n womb, esp. of animals.

tagubtub n deep, resonant, thumping sound produced by pounding. v [A]
emit a boomp boomp sound. Mitagubtub ang íyang likud nga gisumbag, His
back went thump when it was struck. Bul-ánung — n pure Boholano
(humorous). Bul-ánung tagubtub, pakisabaw, pakibahug, usa ka buuk
itlug, sabwag pitu ka sag-ub, A pure Boholano is so fond of soup and
food mixed with soup that he uses seven bamboo containers full of water
to boil one egg.

tágud_1 v {1} [A; c] plant in a seedbed, esp. rice, but also other
plants. Magtágud na ta pára pangulílang, Let’s plant the seedbed now
for the second crop. Itágud sa kahun ang kamátis, Plant the tomatoes in
the box. {1a} [B2456] for a rice field to have a certain capacity.
Mutágud ning basáka ug usa ka bákid, This rice field is big enough to
have one cavan planted on it. {2} [A; c] drop in several numbers.
Nagtágud siyag lima ka pasul, He dropped four hooks and lines. Gitágud
ang mga bumba sa syudad, The bombs were dropped on the city. {3} [B125]
be covered with wounds, sores. Natágud sa núka ang makililímus, The
beggar is covered with sores. n rice seedlings. taguran n seedbed.†

tágud_2 v {1} [A; a] cut or slice into small, but not fine, pieces.
Gitágud ang kamúti nga giságul sa kan-un, The potatoes that were boiled
with the rice were sliced into small pieces. {2} [AB125; a] tear into
pieces. Bátà ang mitágud sa piryudiku, It was the child who tore the
newspaper into pieces. Nagkatagud ang tualya, The towel is being
reduced to tatters. tagudtagud v [A; a] {1} cut s.t. small into many
pieces. {2} cut s.t. with short, fast chopping strokes. Tagudtagurun ta
ka rung tikasána ka! I will chop you to bits, you cheat, you!

tagudtud a having the quality of being rubbery when bitten by the teeth
but yielding when subjected to increased pressure. Ang unud sa budyung
tagudtud apan lamì, The meat of the conch shell is rubbery but
delicious. Tagudtud kan-un ang hilawhílaw nga linung-ag, Inadequately
cooked rice is not soft enough. v [B; b6] be rubbery in consistency.

taguk n {1} sticky sap of plants and fruits. {2} sticky, thin,
membranous substance that sticks on the body of a newly-delivered
child. v {1} [A; b8] give off sap. Mutaguk ang kapáyas ug tigbásun, The
papaya will give off sap if it is cut. Hingtagukan ang ákung sinínà, My
shirt got smeared with sap. {1a} [A2; b6(1)] for s.t. to be sticky with
sap. Dì na nà makataguk kay uga na, That sap won’t stick because it is
dry. {1b} [B] for sap to get sticky. {2} [A; ab2] catch s.t. with a
sticky substance, esp. the sap of a plant. Tagukun ku nang langgáma,
I’ll catch that bird with sticky sap. {3} [b(1)] remove, gather the
sticky sap. Ákung tagukan ning púsù úsà utánun, I’ll remove the sap
from this banana blossom before I cook it. ka-(←) v [A13] have sticky
substance all over it. Nagkatáguk ang bátà nga bag-ung natáwu, The
newborn baby had sticky substance all over it. -un a {1} a child having
thin sticky substance on him at birth. {2} producing plenty of sticky
sap. Tagukun kaáyung gumáha, Rubber tree producing lots of latex.
{3} having lots of sticky sap on it.

taguktuk (from tuktuk) n knocking, thumping sound. v [A; c] make a
knocking sound. Mitaguktuk ku sa pultahan apan way miabli, I knocked at
the door, but nobody opened. Ayawg itaguktuk ang sapátus, Don’t let
your shoes thump.

taguláki = taguraláki.

tagulhus (from ulhus) v [A1; c1] do s.t., come out in turns or
alternately. Nagtagulhus ang háguk sa duha ka táwu, The two men were
snoring alternately with each other. Itagulhus (tagulhusun) sila
pagpabantay sa masakitun, They will be assigned to watch the sick man
in turns.

tagulílung (from tágù and lílung) n {1} k.o. charm which enables a
person to appear and disappear at will, said to be the egg of a k.o.
bird (the tuktur) which flies only after dusk when he can be heard but
not seen. The egg is also invisible but obtainable through magical
procedures. {2} person who possesses this charm. {2a} one who
disappears as suddenly as he appeared. Mabáwu man tag pangítà nímu. Mu
ra man kag tagulílung, I’ve been going crazy looking for you. You are
harder to find than a tagulílung. {3} name also given to the tuktur
bird.

tagultul_1 n {1} a signalling device made of a nodule of bamboo having
the nodes covering both ends and a slit on the side. {2} thonking
sound. v [A; a2] beat this bamboo resounder or produce a similar sound.
Mutagultul siya arun pagtawag sa mga silíngan, He sounds the bamboo
resounder to call the neighbors. Mutagultul ang likiun nga kawáyan kun
dukdúkun sa káhuy, A cracked bamboo tube will make the sound of
thonk-thonk if you beat it with a stick.

tagultul_2 = tagawtaw.

tagul-ul n k.o. bird.

tágum n indigo: Indigofera suffruticosa. panimáhung — for leafy
vegetables to develop a fetid smell when they wither. Ngánung nagpalit
ka ánang kamunggay nga nanimáhù nang tágum? Why did you buy kamunggay
that isn’t fresh? v {1} [A; a] dye s.t. dark or stain s.t. Ang nayabung
tintà mitágum sa mantil, The ink spilled and blackened the tablecloth.
Gitágum níya ang pughaw níyang sinínà, She dyed her faded dress black.
{2} [B] become dark, black. Mutágum ka kun magpúnay kag kalígù sa
dágat, You will become dark if you keep going swimming. Nagtágum ang
lángit, muulan tingáli, The sky is getting dark. Maybe it is going to
rain. -un a {1} having the smell of indigo leaves (not fresh).
{2} dark, gloomy, dirty-looking.

tagumbul v [B3(1)46; a12] produce a deep, thudding sound. Mitagumbul
ang bungbung nga naigù sa lamísa nga gitulud, The wall made a thud when
the table was pushed against it.

tágun a patient, long-suffering. v [A; a12] endure with patience.
Mitágun giyud siyag bantay bísag gikapuy siya, He endured the long
hours of the vigil even though he was very tired. Tagúna lang ang
kasakit, kadalì ra lagi, Just endure the pain. It won’t last, I assure
you. ka- n patience, endurance.

tagungtung n short, vibrant, low-pitched sound, such as that produced
by a small closed gong. v [A; c1] make a tung-tung sound. Tagungtúngun
(itagungtung) ni pára sa sáyawng Muslim, This gong will be clanged
during the Moslem dance.

taguntun_1 n half the value of a domestic animal. Bayinti písus mauy
taguntun sa ákung bábuy nga íyang gibatunan, He took care of my pig for
which I gave him half the value, twenty pesos. Baktin mauy ákung
taguntun sa katungà sa litsun níya, I exchanged a piglet for one-half
of his roast pig. v [A; c1] give one-half the value of a domestic
animal. Ákù na ning bábuy kay nakataguntun na ku, I’ve given for half
the value of this pig for raising it, so it is all mine now.

taguntun_2 n swellings around the legs or swollen glands in the joints,
groin, axilla. v [AN; b4N] suffer this sort of swelling.

taguraláki (from laki) n male papaya (that bears no fruit, but bears
male flowers).

tagurha see duha.

tag-usà = talagsa. see usa.

tagustus v {1} [AB; c1] for rope to unwind, get undone. Usba pagbúbud
ang písì kay nagtagustus na, Wind the rope again because it is
unreeling. Itagustus (tagustúsa) ang mga lánut nga gibugkus, Undo the
abaca fibers that had been tied in place. {2} [AP; c1P] pay out a line
slowly. Ikay tagustus (patagustus) sa láyag inigkusug sa hángin, Lower
the sails slowly when the wind begins to blow hard. Tagustúsi ang
tabánug. Taas bítaw ang lambu, Give the kite more line. Anyway it has a
long line.

tagùtù_1 v [A; a] chop rapidly with short strokes so that the result
comes out finely minced. Átung tagùtúun ang dabung nga iságul sa
kinílaw, Let’s chop the young bamboo shoots into fine pieces to mix
them with the salad. -in- n s.t. minced finely.

tagùtù_2 n {1} clicking of the tongue. {2} = talùtù. v [A] click the
tongue. Kahibáwu kang mutagùtù? Do you know how to click your tongue?
paN- v [A; b3] click the tongue in exasperation, dejection, anger.
Nagpanagùtù siya kay napildi, He kept clicking his tongue in dejection
because he lost. n action of clicking the tongue.

tagùtù_3 = talùtù_1.

tagutungan = dutù.

tagyaw = tadiyaw.

tagyum = lalum 1, 3, 4 (dialectal).

tahà v [B1256; b3(1)] feel shyness or inhibition in the presence of
s.o. who commands distant respect. Matahà siyang mudúul ug dagkung
táwu, He is afraid to approach big shots. Paríhu ra nátù nang ímung
gikatahaan, You feel shy in his presence, but he is just like us.
panahàtáhà v [A23] hesitate to do s.t. due to reservation, tact, or
shyness. Manahàtáhà pa giyud nà siyag sampit sa ákung ngā́n, Why does
he hesitate to address me by name? ka- n shyness due to respect. ka-an,
ka-an(←) a worthy of distant respect. ma-un(←) a shy due to respect.

tahal v [A; b6(1)] sharpen a pencil. Talhi (tahali) ang lápis, Sharpen
the pencil. n pencil sharpener. talhanan n pencil or s.t. which needs
sharpening.

tahan v [A; c6] {1} offer part of the body in anticipation. Íyang
gitahan ang náwung níya arun hagkan, She put her face forward to be
kissed. {2} offer, render up, offer up in trust. Itahan ku kining
kinabúhì sa kahitas-an, I’ll entrust my life to the Almighty. {3} offer
without reservation. Itahan sa kaáway ang pagpasaylu, Offer forgiveness
to the enemy. {4} for bets to be placed or handed over usually before
the start of the game. Itahan nang ímung pusta arun sugdan ang dúlà,
Place your bets so that the game may start. {5} [A; c] offer a bond,
security. Itahan ku ang ákung yútà sa salapì nga hulaman ku nímu, I
will put up my land as security for the money that I will borrow from
you. n bond, guarantee. Ímu na kining singsing silbing tahan sa ákung
pagmahal nímu, Take this ring as a guarantee of my love for you.

táhap v [B1256N; b3(1] be suspicious. Nanagána siya kay natáhap sa
ákung túyù, She hesitated because she was suspicious of my motives.
Siya ang gikatahápang tulisan, He is the suspected robber. paN- v [A2;
b6(1)] assume s.o. to be guilty without good evidence. Kung manáhap ka,
tinúa únà, If you presume s.o. guilty, be sure to ascertain the facts
first. n suspicion. Ang ákung panáhap nga minyù tung tawhána natinúud
giyud, My suspicion that that man was married came out true. ka-an =
paN-, n. ma-un, manggi-un a suspicious.

táhas n {1} task or duty one must fulfill prior to acquiring possession
of supernatural powers. Dúnay táhas únà makahuput ug urasiyun, You must
perform a task before you may acquire a magic formula. {2} mission one
is bound by vow or otherwise to accomplish. Matag táwu adúnay táhas sa
kalibútan, Each man has a mission on this earth. v {1} [A1; c5] make a
vow to accomplish s.t. Tahásun ku ang pagtúman sa íyang túgun, I will
make it my mission to fulfill her commands. {2} [c] assign as a
mission. Akuy gitahásan pagpatay nímu, I was entrusted with a mission
to kill you. {3} [A12] able to be in some place alone without fear.
Makatáhas ka bag mintiryu? Do you dare go to the cemetery alone?

tahì v [A; a] sew, stitch. Kinahanglang tahiun ning samad, This wound
requires stitches. Gitahian ku níyag birmúda, He sewed a pair of
bermuda shorts for me. n stitches. -anan(←) n dress, tailor shop.
maN-r-(←) n seamstress, dressmaker. -unun(←) n pieces of cloth to be
made into s.t.

tahirig (from hirig) v [B; c1] lean, tilt to one side. Nagtahirig ang
lubi padúlung sa karsáda, The coconut tree is leaning towards the road.
Tahiriga (itahirig) pagtanum ang páka sa tubu, Plant the cuttings of
sugar cane stalks in a leaning position.

tahisyan, tahisyan bird n k.o. dance wherein the buttocks wiggle like
the tail of a bird. v [A] perform this dance.

tahu, tahù_1 n ginger tea. v [A1] have ginger tea.

tahù_2 v [A; c] notify, inform. Itahù kini níya arun siya mahibáwu,
Inform him of this so that he will know. n reports about an event.
tahùtáhù n idle gossip, reports passed around to instigate a quarrel.
Nagpalákat silag tahùtáhù arun magkadisgustu ta, They are spreading
idle gossip to make us quarrel.

tahud n spur of fowls and birds. v [b4] {1} get one’s spurs. Walà pa
tadhi ang sunuy, The rooster hasn’t gotten his spurs yet. {2} become
experienced. tadhan a experienced and authoritative in one’s line of
work. Tadhan siyang kusiníru, He is an experienced cook. tahudtahud
n {1} growths on the body, usually near the joints, which look like the
spurs of the rooster. {2} small boils on small children’s heads.

táhud v {1} [A23; a12] obey. Tahúra úsà ang ákung gipabúhat úsà
magdúwà, Do what I tell you to before you play. {2} [A; a12] respect.
Tahúra ang ímung ginikánan, Respect your parents. {2a} [A3; c6] use an
address of respect to an elder. Nagtáhud siya nákug Tiyù, He addresses
me as Uncle. n {1} respect. {2} address of respect. Púpuy ang ámung
táhud níya, We addressed him as Grandpa. pa-(→) v [A] be arrogant,
demanding of more respect than one has the right to. À, mu pay muhangyù
mau pay mupatáhud! Hm, here you go acting as if you want me to kiss
your feet when you are asking me for a favor! tahuray v [A13] respect
each other. Ángay magtahuray ang managsúun, Brothers must respect each
other. katahúran, pangatahúran n words of greeting. Nangáyù mig
pangatahúran (katahúran) apan way mitubag nga tagbalay, We called out
greetings but no one in the house answered. pangatahúran v [A2] say
words of respect or greetings. Nangatahúran sila paglabay sa párì, When
the priest passed by they greeted him. matinahúrun a {1} respectful.
{2} short for kanímu matinahúrun in the complimentary closing of a
letter: ‘Respectfully yours’. talahúrun n term of address to a person
of distinction. Duha sila ka táwu, talahúrun, There were two of them,
sire.

tahum a beautiful. v [B24; a12] be beautiful. Mutahum ka pa kun
mangarmin, You’ll be more beautiful if you wear make-up. Nagkatahum ang
kalibútan sukad ku ikaw makítà, The world has become a more beautiful
place since I met you. pa- v [A; a] make oneself up. pa-, pangpa-
n beauty products. ka- n beauty, loveliness. ka-an n great beauty
(literary). ma- a beautiful, lovely.

tàhung v [A; c] put s.t. over and around s.t. else or hang it over.
Akuy nagtàhung ug kawit dihà sa palwa, I was the one that hung a toddy
container over the palm frond. Gitàhúngan níya ang kingki, He put a
shade over the kerosene lamp. Láta ang itàhung sa pusti arun dílì dáyun
magabuk sa ulan, Slip paint cans over the posts so they will not rot in
the rain.

tahup n chaff of cereals. v [A; b6(1)] separate the husk from husked
grains. Taphi nang linubuk, Winnow the pounded rice. -un a full of
chaff, chaffy. Ayúha paglimpiyu ang bugas kay tahupun, Clean the rice
well. It’s still full of chaff. taphanan n {1} ground cereals to be
winnowed. {2} place where winnowing is done.

tahur a having the imposing posture of s.o. rich or of high rank. Tahur
kaáyu siyang tan-áwun, apan nanghulam ra diayg bisti, He looks very
imposing, but in reality he’s wearing borrowed clothes. n big-time,
professional gambler. sugarul nga — = tahur, n. pa- v [A1; c] make
oneself look imposing so as to appear rich or of high rank.

tahuri, tahúri, tahurì, tahúris n k.o. edible bean slightly bigger than
the mung and rusty brown in color, growing wild and cultivated:
Phaseolus calcaratus. v [A13; b6] have tahuri.

tahusyu n soy beans preserved in soy sauce. v {1} [A; a2] cook with
preserved soy beans. {2} [A1] have tahusyu as the only food to eat with
the staple.

tahuy_1 v [A; a12] make a clay pot nonporous by heating it and then
putting shredded coconut or vinegar in it. Kinahanglan tahuyun úsà ang
kúlun únà gawía, You must treat the pot before you use it.

tahuy_2 n soup made of sweet potatoes cut into small pieces boiled in
water with nothing else. v [A; a] fix this soup.

tái n {1} feces of people and animals. {2} in the game of bíku, the act
of stepping on the line. {3} dross from molten metal. Tigúma ang tái sa
kalbúru kay ipintal ta sa batu, Keep the dross of melted carbide
because we can use it to paint the stones. dakung — see dakù. v [b4(1)]
get feces on it. Mataíhan (mataihan) nang hapin ug iságul sa taíhun,
That diaper will get feces on it if you put it with the dirty ones.
taitai v [B145S; c1] {1} do s.t. with difficulty and turn out poor
results. Nagtaitai kus iksámin. Hagbung ku adtu, I found the
examination hard. I’ll probably fail it. {1a} — ang búhat do one piece
of work after another and leave most everything unfinished. Dì ku
gustung magtaitai ang ákung búhat, I don’t want to begin another job
before I finish the work at hand. {2} for a pen not to function well,
resulting in dirty penmanship. {3} [B; b6] for plants to be growing at
different heights in one field or bed. Init ang nakataitai
(nakapataitai) pagtúbu sa mga mais, The heat of the sun caused the corn
plants to grow at different heights. hiN- v [A; b] {1} take out
entrails of animals. {2} clean the entrails of feces. Paghinái nákù sa
bábuy, napisà ang apdu, When I took the pig’s entrails, I squashed the
gall bladder. {3} have a woman for sexual intercourse. ka- v [A13] get
feces all over it. taíhun a dirty with feces. -in- see tinái.

taka v {1} [A2; b4] get tired of doing s.t. and thus cease. Mitaka na
siya, wà na maghilak, He got sick of crying so he stopped. Gitak-an kug
hinuwat nímu, maung mipaúlì lang ku, I got tired waiting for you so I
just went home. {2} [c5] not like to do s.t. Kun dì mu ikataka palíhug
buháta kini, If you don’t mind, please do this for me. ka- n feeling of
boredom or of being fed up. ma- a boring, tiresome, tak-ánun,
matak-ánun, matalak-un a easily bored, tending to lose interest.

*takà, *tákà pa- v {1} [A1; b6] do s.t. without really knowing how to
do it, without regards as to how he is doing it. Maghibús ka kun
magpatákà (magpatakà) kag káun, You will have diarrhea if you eat
indiscriminately. Patakai lag ansir. Sambahan lagi, Just answer them at
random. You’ll guess some right. {2} [A1] tell s.t. untrue, inaccurate.
Nagpatákà lang bisag siyay nánguna, He’s lying. He started the fight.

takaba, takabà v [A; c] {1} wrap a piece of cloth or the like around
the body, esp. the torso. Human kag kalígù magtakaba kag tualya kay
musihag ang sinínà, After you swim, you should put a towel around you
because you can see through your dress. {2} use as a shield or cover
for any part of the body. Nagtakaba siyag papil tungud sa ínit, She put
a piece of paper over her head to protect her from the heat of the sun.
{3} [A; c1] carry s.t. on the back or shoulders by tying it. {3a} carry
s.o. on the back or shoulders not tied. Gitakaba ni Mulit ang íyang
manghud, Mulit carried his little brother pick-a-back. {4} [A; aP] for
animals to mate. {4a} have intercourse (derogatory). Mitakaba ka uruy
ánang mubug lupad, You went to bed with that pig of a woman.
n {1} wrap-around cloth. {2} s.t. to cover one’s head or shoulders.

takad v [A; b(1)] step on a line or specific area. Dì ka mutakad sa
bágis kay páwul ka, If you step on the line, you are foul. Kining
batúha ímung takaran (takdan) arun makaabut ka sa búnga, Step on this
stone so that you can reach the fruit. takdanan n in games, the line on
which one steps at the start or any phase of the game.

tákal_1 n volume, contents. Ang garapun dakug tákal kay sa básu, A jar
holds more than a glass. v {1} [A; a] measure out in a certain volume.
Gitákal níla sa bukag ang kamúti, They measured the sweet potatoes by
baskets. {2} [AB; c] for a measure to become full, cause it to do so.
Lainláing butang ang nagtákal sa íyang pitáka, Her bag was filled with
all different things. Nagkatakal ang baldi sa hinayhínayng túlù sa
túbig, The pail is slowly filling up with water dripping into it.
-an(→) n a measuring box, basket, or can of any convenient size.

tákal_2 v [AC2; b(1)] for male pigs to mount another animal; by
extension, for humans to do so (derogatory). Kaduha takáling anáya únà
mumabdus, This sow was mounted twice before it got pregnant. bu-(→) see
butakal.

tak-al v [B; c16] for a cover not to be closed tight, door to be ajar.
Ang kaban nga labihang kapunù mitak-al, The trunk was part open because
it was too full.

takam, tákam a ravenous. Ang táwung takam mukáun bísan unsa, A ravenous
person will eat anything. v {1} [B] be hungry, ravenous. Kinsay dílì
mutakam (matakam) nga tulu ka adlaw wà miy káun gawas sa prútas, Who
wouldn’t become ravenous when for three days we did not have anything
to eat except fruits. {2} [A; c1] take a large bite, chew. May nagtakam
sa kík kay gamay na lang ang nahibilin, S.o. took a big bite from the
cake because only a small portion of it is left. Itakam (takama) ug
maáyu ang kan-un únà tunla, Chew the food well before you swallow it.
takamtakam v {1} [A13; c16] smack the lips. Nagtakamtakam ang bátà kay
miángay sa lamì sa gátas, The child is smacking his lips because he
likes the milk. {2} [A13] await eagerly. Nagtakamtakam na ku sa lamì sa
mga sud-an, I am eagerly anticipating the delicious food.

takandal v {1} [A3P] for vehicles to run with a jouncing, bouncing
motion. Mutakandal na pud ang trák kun mulabang sa kabatuan, The truck
will bounce again when it crosses the stony area. {2} [B46; c1] make a
clacking, banging sound. Mitakandal ang bakyà sa simintádung dálan, The
wooden slippers went clickety clack over the cemented walk. Ang táru
nga way sulud mitakandal kay ákung hipatiran, The empty can rattled
when I kicked it.

tákang = lákang.

tak-ang v [A; c] put a pot or kettle on the stove. Itak-ang na ang
lung-agúnun, Put the rice on the stove. tak-angánan n {1} stove.
{2} pot or kettle rest.

tákas v [A2S; ac] {1} go up an incline. Takásun pa nátù ang pitu ka
bungtud úsà muabut sa píkas baybay, We still have to ascend seven hills
before we get to the other side of the island. Kining bakilíra dílì
katakásan ug gamayng awtu, A small car cannot negotiate this slope.
{2} go ashore. Ang pawíkan mutákas arun mangitlug, The sea turtles go
ashore to lay their eggs. Dì ta makatákas kay balud kaáyu, We can’t go
ashore because the sea is very rough. {2a} [A; b6] land from a sea
attack. {3} [A2; b(1)] escape from prison. Tulu na ka prisuhan ang
ílang gitakásan, They have already escaped from three prisons.

takba v {1} [A; b] lean forward on s.t. or s.o. and cling to it.
Mitakba siya sa bukubuku sa íyang bána nga nagkaun, She leaned on her
husband’s back while he was eating. Maáyu kay nakatakba siyag bátang
pagkalúnud sa barku, Luckily he was able to cling to a log for support
when the boat sunk. {2} [A; a12] carry a child closely in one’s arms
with the child facing one. Takbáha ang bátà kun butdan sa tiyan, Carry
the child with his stomach pressed against you if he has gas in the
stomach. {3} [AC; b(1)] mount for copulation, as if for copulation.
Mitakba na ang butù apan dì gustu ang bayi, The male mounted, but the
female did not like it. {3a} for humans to have intercourse (coarse).
{4} [A; b] wrap a part of the body with s.t. Gitakbahan níyag dyákit
ang bukubuku sa dalága, He covered the girl’s back with a jacket.

takbas v [A; a] {1} swing a bolo or a similar bladed instrument.
Mitakbas siyag bálus apan lúya na siya, He swung a bolo to retaliate
but he was already too weak. {2} sever with a swing of the bolo. Si
Simyun ang mitakbas sa gamayng punúan sa ságing, Simeon cut down the
small banana trunk in one stroke.

takbuy v {1} [A; b] hug, cling closely in order not to fall. Mitakbuy
ang tikì sa bukubuku sa manananggut, The gecko clung tightly to the
toddy gatherer’s back. Nakatakbuy ang anak sa láwas sa inahan dihang
midugdug, The child clung to his mother when it thundered. {2} [A2; b4]
infect with a disease. Tíbi ang mitakbuy níya, He contracted T.B.
{3} [A23P; b(1)] stay with s.o., usually as a dependent. Siyay ákung
gitakbúyan ug dúgay kay kwartáhan man, I stayed long at her house
because she was wealthy.

takdà v {1} [A; c] schedule, set a date. Átung itakdà ang sunud nátung
tígum, We will set the date for our next meeting. {2} [A; c] sign, put
a mark on. Siyay mitakdà (nagtakdà) sa sulat, He signed the letter.
Takdái ug íkis ang punúan sa lubi, Mark the trunks of the coconut trees
with an X. n {1} signature, mark. {2} reminder; s.t. that is used as a
reminder. Ang anínu sa pusti mauy ákung takdà sa úras, The shadow of
the post is my reminder of the time. -an(→) = takdà, n.

takdang v [A; ab2] {1} hack or lodge a blade laterally into s.t. Ang
amul wà makatakdang sa punúan sa káhuy, The dull bolo did not cut the
trunk of the tree. {2} make notches, nick. Ang bátà mauy mitakdang sa
tiil sa silya, The child made notches on the legs of the chair. {3} [A;
b] strike the forehead with s.t. heavy. Akuy mutakdang ug puthaw sa
ímung agtang, I’ll strike your forehead with an iron rod.

takdù exactly, no more and no less. Takdù karung diyis anyus ang átung
kaminyúun, We have been married for exactly ten years today. Takdù sa
gikasabútan, In exact accordance with their agreement. Takdù giyud sa
nahitabù ang íyang tahù, His report turned out to be exactly in
agreement with what had happened. — ang búwan for the moon to be full.
v [AB256C3; c1] {1} for things that are joined to fit exactly at their
point of junction, make s.t. fit. Walà mutakdù ang takub sa kaban, The
cover of the trunk doesn’t fit squarely. Takdúa (itakdù) ang duha ka
iskína arun tíkup, Have the corners meet and fit to make it tight.
{2} coincide, be in agreement with each other; make things be in
agreement. Ang íyang kamatáyun ug ang ímung damgu nagkatakdù lang, His
death and your dream were just a coincidence. Itakdù ang ímung bakak sa
akúa arun katuúhan, Make your lie be in accordance with mine so they
will be plausible. {3} be appropriate. Kinahanglang mutakdù ang ímung
isul-ub sa ukasiyun, Your attire must fit the occasion. {3a} [C3] be on
compatible terms with each other. Nagkatakdù ang duha ka buringug, The
two fools hit it off nicely. -in-an n point of junction, place s.t.
meets.

takdul_1 = daktul.

takduy = tagduy.

takgus v [A; ac] {1} fasten s.t. to s.t. with a knotted cord. Palíhug
rag takgus sa ríbun sa ákung buhuk, Please tie my hair up for me with a
ribbon. Takgúsun na silang duha sa talikálà sa kaminyúun, They are
going to be bound together in wedlock. Ang salug nga kawáyan takgúsan
ug uway ngadtu sa busaug, The bamboo flooring is tied to the joists
with rattan. {2} tie into a loop that easily gets undone. Takgúsa ang
listǔn sa ákung sapátus, Tie my shoelace. {3} tie s.t. around s.t.
Nagtakgus siyag sundang sa háwak, He strapped a bolo around his waist.
Itakgus ang tarì sa tiil sa hiniktan, Tie the gaff around the cock’s
leg. n s.t. that is fastened to s.t. else by entwining or the like.
-in-an(→) n the knotted part of s.t. tied. Tan-áwa nga dílì mailhan ang
tinakgusan, See to it that the knotted part does not show.

takiang (from kiang) v [A; c16] walk limpingly. Nagtakiang siya kay
nalisa ang tiil, He is limping because he sprained his foot.

tákig n {1} malaria. {2} any disease characterized by chills and
shaking. {2a} fit of shivering due to illness. v [A123P; b4] {1} be
afflicted with malaria. {2} have the chills. Gitakígan ang masakitun,
The patient had the chills. -un(→) n one afflicted with malaria.

takigrapíya n stenography, shorthand.

takigrapu n stenographer. v [B156; a2] be, become a stenographer.

takihud, takíhud (from kihud) v [A13; c1] limp. Nagtakihud siya tungud
sa pulyu, He limps because he had polio.

takílid (from kílid) v [A2S; c1] {1} tilt, turn over on the side.
Nilísù siya kay mutakílid siya paghigdà, He turned over to lie on his
side. Ang agúkuy magtakilid nga maglakaw, The fiddler crab walks
sideways. Ayaw itakílid (takilíra, takilda), mayabu, Don’t tilt it. It
might spill. {2} veer, change directions. Mitakílid ang barku sa tuu,
The ship veered off to the right. {3} [A23] get money from one’s pocket
(lit. lean over to stick the hands in the pocket). Mutakílid siya dáyun
ug pangayúag kwarta, He immediately reaches in his pocket if anyone
asks him for money.

takilpù v [B126] for one’s foot to slip to its side, ankles to give
way. Natakilpù siya sa íyang bag-ung hayhil, Her foot slipped on its
side on her new high heels.

takilya n box office, a place where admission tickets are sold. Si
Klint Istwud gihugúpan pag-áyu sa takilya, Clint Eastwood is very
popular at the box office. takilyíra n ticket seller (female). v [B156;
a2] be a ticket vendor. takilyíru n ticket seller (male).

takin v [A; c] strap s.t. around the waist. Nagtakin siya ug sundang
kay mangáhuy, He’s strapping a bolo on his waist to gather firewood.
Itakin ang baskit kun mangáni, Strap the basket around the waist when
you harvest rice. n basket fastened to the waist, used in harvesting
rice.

tak-in v [A; c] tuck-in one’s shirt. Angayan kang magtak-in kay dì
sapyut, You look nice with your shirt tucked in because your buttocks
are not flat.

takinding v [A3] roll with a clatter. Pagkahúlug níya ang plátung íyang
gidala mitakinding sa ubus, When he fell, the plates he was carrying
rolled with a clatter.

takingking v [A; a] hop on one leg. Takingkínga kútub ngadtu, Hop up to
there on one leg.

takinhud = tangkihud.

takip v {1} [A; c6] include along with, do to s.t. at the same time as
one does it to s.t. else. Kinsay nagtakip sa ákung ngálan sa lista? Who
included my name in the list? Nagtakip kug ritrátu sa ákung sulat, I
enclosed a picture in my letter. Gikatakip nákug gastu ang ímung
kwarta, I spent your money along with mine. (←) v [A; a1c] join flat
things one on top of the other or at their edges. Takípa nang duha ka
papil arun madakù (mabagà), Join those two sheets of paper to make them
bigger (or Paste them on top of one another to make them thicker).

taklà v [A; b6] make a clicking, clacking noise with the tongue. Taklái
siya kay mau nay ámung sinyas, Clack your tongue at him because that’s
our signal. n {1} clacking of the tongue. {2} a k.o. small, dark-hued
shrimp 2–3 cm. long which emits a loud clicking sound similar to tongue
clacking. paN- v [A; b3] make a clacking noise with the tongue in
exasperation, dejection, or admiration. Nanaklà siya kay hibyaan sa
bus, He clacked his tongue because he missed the bus.

taklap v {1} [A; c] spread, lay s.t. flat over s.t. so as to cover it.
Itaklap ring hábul sa lamísa, Spread this blanket over the table.
{2} [B2456] cover as if enveloping. Mitaklap ang kangitngit sa
kalibútan, Darkness covered the world. n s.t. spread over s.t. to cover
it.

taklas v {1} [A; b6] for dogs to jump all over s.o. Nabuling ang ákung
sinínà kay gitaklásan ku sa irù, My clothes got dirty because the dog
jumped all over me. {2} [A; b5] climb, clamber up on s.t. not affording
a good foothold. Hipaakan tà ku sa irù ug wà pa ku makataklas sa kináma
nga mga kahun, I would have been bitten by the dog had I not clambered
on the stacked boxes.

taklay v [A13; c] hang s.t. loose around the neck. Dílì maáyu nga
magsuruysúruy sa kalying magtaklay ug tualya, It is not good to go
around the streets having a towel draped around one’s neck.

taklì v {1} [B2] draw one’s attention away from where it should be
focused. Ang nakataklì (nakapataklì) sa íyang intiris sa panulat mau
ang súgal, Gambling drew away his interest from writing. Nataklì ang
atinsiyun ni Míla ngadtu sa íyang katúpad, Mila’s attention was drawn
away from me towards her seatmate. {2} [c] transfer temporary ownership
of land from one mortgage-holder to another. Ang pinirindang yútà
gitaklì pagprinda diri kanákù, The mortgaged lot was transferred to me.

taklíad (from liad) v [A2; c1] bend the body backward to the extent
that the head is at the same level as the chest or lower. Bantáyi nga
dì mataklíad ang bátà, Watch out that the baby doesn’t throw himself
backwards. Ákung itaklíad (takliárun) ug maáyu ang ákung láwas sa
sáyawng limburak, I bend way back when I dance the limbo rock.

taklid v [A; a12] pin, tie s.o.’s hands behind his back. Gitaklid ang
mga dinakpan, The prisoners had their hands tied behind their backs.
hiN- v {1} [AN] fold one’s hands behind the back. Mihinaklid siyang
nagdiskursu, He folded his hands behind his back while speaking.
{2} [AN; bN] do s.t. difficult with ease. Panghinaklíran (hinaklíran)
lang níya nang bungtúra, He will climb that mountain with ease.

taklíma v [B126] wrench the ankle or the foot. Nataklíma ang ákung tiil
sa danglug nga batu, I wrenched my foot on a slippery stone.

taklub v [A; c] cover s.t. over with s.t. enclosing it. Akuy mutaklub
sa basurahan, I’ll put the lid on the garbage can. Ingun kug nawálà ang
ituy apan natakluban diay sa kahun, I thought the puppy got lost, but
actually it had just gotten under the box. n {1} lid. {2} basket-like
pen for fowl.

taklúbu n giant clams, esteemed for food, large specimens of which
furnish shells for baptismal fonts.

taklung v [b8] be caught by being covered by s.t. which falls. Ang
iring nataklungan sa kahun, The cat was caught by a box that fell on
it.

taklus = takgus.

takmag v [A; b(1)] for a male animal to mount on the female. Basta
mangúlag ang anay, mutakmag giyud ang butù, If the sow is in heat, the
male will mount her.

takmù_1 v [a3b8] hit one’s chin on s.t. Natakmù ku sa kurdísu
pagkatumba nákù, I hit my chin on the window sill when I fell down.

takmul a drawing the lips in or biting the lower lip in defiance,
anger, or when making an effort. v [A13; b6] for the lips to purse.
Nagtakmul ang íyang simud, He drew in his mouth. paN- v [A; b6] draw in
the lips, bite the lower lip. Nanakmul siyang nag-alsa sa kahun, He bit
his lower lip while heaving the box.

takna = taknà, n2, 2a.

taknà n {1} identifying mark. Ang sáku nga may taknà átù, The sack that
has an identifying mark on it is ours. {1a} notch as an identifying
mark. {2} hour. {2a} moment. Sa taknang pul-an ka, byái siya, The
moment you get tired of her, leave her. v [A; b] {1} put an identifying
sign or label. Kinahanglang taknáan ang mga garápa sa tambal, We should
label bottles containing medicine. {2} put a notch as an identifying
mark. -an(→) n timepiece, watch.

taksay n k.o. fishing net, cast in shallow water and dragged by four
people towards the shore. paN- v [N] go fishing with the taksay net.

taksi n taxi. v [A13; a12] {1} take a taxi. Mataksi ang pantalan gíkan
dinhi, We can take a taxi to the wharf from here. {2} make into a taxi.

taksì_1 n a game in which objects placed inside a circle are knocked
out of the area. The ones displaced from the circle belong to the
player that hit them. v [A13; b6] play taksì.

taksì_2 v [A; a] strip abaca, buri palm leaves, and the like of
vegetable matter to get the fiber. n instrument for stripping. -an
n abaca stripper. -in- n stripped stalks.

taksikab = taksi.

taksinilya n humorous word for tartanilya, used in contexts where one
says he doesn’t have money to take the taxi. v [A; a] take the
tartanilya. Taksinilya lang ta, Let’s just take the tartanilya brand of
taxi.

taktak v {1} [AB26; ac] for small things or s.t. fastened or stuck to
s.t. to detach and drop; cause to drop. Kinsay nagtaktak ug ágiw sa
sawug? Who knocked cigarette ashes on the floor? Nataktak ang íyang
pilukpíluk sa sawug, Her false eyelashes fell to the floor. Taktáka ang
mga tambis, Knock the fruits off the tree. Wà kataktákig balhíbu, It
was unharmed. (Lit. Not a feather was knocked off of it.) {2} [b4(1)]
have a miscarriage. Nataktakan siya sa dihang nadakin-as, She had a
miscarriage after she slipped and fell. {3} [A; c] cast a fishing net.
Itaktak ang púkut kay dúnay duut, Cast the net because there’s a school
of fish. {4} [A; c1] drop from a list. Taktáka (itaktak) sa listahan
ang mining bitiránu, Drop the fake veterans from the list. {4a} fire
from a position. Mutaktak nà siyag impliyádung tapulan, He fires lazy
employees. {4b} drop a charge. Ang sumbung gitaktak sa huwis, The
accusation was dropped by the judge. n {1} s.t. which has been detached
and dropped. {2} action of casting a fishing net. -an(→) n designated
place where the fishing net is emptied of catch. -un(→) a for coconuts
to be mature enough for harvesting. Hustu na sak-un nang mga lubíha kay
taktakun na, Now is the time to gather the coconuts because they are
mature.†

taktakun n a k.o. edible starshell having a thin dark brown operculum.

taktika n {1} strategy, tactics. {2} scheme, ruse. Taktika lang tu nákù
arun malipat siya, It was just a ruse to deceive him. v [a12] make a
clever plan. Taktikaha giyug maáyu nga makumbinsǐr siya, Make a clever
plan to convince him.

taktikal n examination given by military officers to cadets. v [A13]
have a tactical inspection. — inspiksiyun = taktikal.

táku n billiard cue.

takúan = takúgan.

takub n a cover or lid of s.t. which has a different shape from the
thing it is put over and is not attached. Ang takub sa pawuntin pin,
The fountain pen cover. (←) v [A13; b6] put a cover on. Kinsay nagtákub
sa kahun? Who put the lid on the box? -an n {1} pseudonym, alias. Ang
‘O. Henry’ takuban ni Wilyam Sidni Purtir, ‘O. Henry’ is the pen name
of William Sidney Porter. {2} disguise. v [A13; c6] {1} use an assumed
or pen name. {2} wear a disguise. Nagtakuban nga makililímus ang
ditiktib, The detective disguised himself as a beggar. -an(←) = -an, v.

takúb = takúgan.

takubu n s.t. used to cover the roof ridge. v [A; c] put a cover over a
roof ridge. Sín itakubu, Use galvanized iron sheets to cover the ridge
of the roof.

takúbu = taklúbu.

takubù = tikubù.

takud v {1} [AC; ac] attach s.t. to s.t. else, put it right next to
s.t. so that it touches. Nagtákud ang duha ka daplin sa lamísa, The two
edges of the table are touching each other. Takúra ang duha ka daplin
sa panaptung himúung hábul, Attach the two pieces of cloth at the ends
to make them into a blanket. Itakud ang kwadru sa bungbung, Attach the
picture to the wall. {2} [A; b6] harness an animal, hitch it for work.
Ayaw takdi nang bakáha ug balsa kay gamay pa nà, Don’t harness the cow
to a sled because it is still too small. {3} [A2; b4(1)] infect with
disease. Makatakud nang hanggà, Chicken pox is contagious. Hitakdan kag
mudúul sa tibíhun, You’ll get infected if you go near a tubercular
person. {3a} [C3] contaminate each other. Nag-úsa lang mug unlan
magtákud giyud nang inyung mga kútu, You’re both lying on the same
pillow, so you’ll get each other’s lice. {3b} [A12] arouse or spread to
s.o. else as if a contagious disease. Nahimuut siyang namínaw sa
makatakud nga katáwa ni Rúsi, He was amused listening to Rosie’s
contagious laughter. {3c} [A12; b4(1)] influence so as to become like
one. Natakdan ku sa kahinúun níya, I was influenced by his diligence in
study. pa- v [A13; b4] pass a supernatural attribute on to another
person upon death. Úngù na siya kay gipatakdan sa tigúlang úngù, He is
a vampire now because the old man passed his supernatural power on to
him. takdanan n an animal trained to take the harness. maN-r-(←),
matakdánun a contagious, tending to spread from person to person.

tákud v [A12] manage to do s.t. that requires strength or money. Dì na
siya makatákud ug alsa ug bug-at, She can’t manage to lift heavy
things. Makatákud kahà kag patunghà sa ímung anak? Can you manage to
send your child to school?

takúg = takúgan.

takúgan n k.o. chiton of rocks in tidal flats.

takúkung = saruk, n1, v.

tákul v [B46] for the chin to tremble causing the teeth to chatter.
Nagtákul ang ákung suwang sa katugnaw, My chin is chattering with cold.

takuláhaw {1} all of a sudden. Sa takuláhaw lamang siya natumba,
Suddenly he collapsed. {2} not very long, just a few minutes ago.
Takuláhaw pa tu siyang milakaw. Maapsan pa tingáli nímu kun ímung
sundan, He left just a few minutes ago. You might still catch up with
him if you go after him.

takuling_1 n k.o. stout vine commonly found on coconut trees, with
glossy, deep green, runcinate leaves and dark brown roots that anchor
the plant to the tree: Rhaphidophora merrillii.

takuling_2 n burned food particles sticking to the insides of cooking
utensils. v [a4] have burnt food particles. Ug sigáhan nímu ug kusug,
takulingun ang kaldíru, If you turn the fire high, the pot will have
burnt particles. -un a encrusted with burnt food particles.

tak-um v [B46; a12] close the mouth or lips. Gihagkan ku ang nagtak-um
níyang ngábil, I kissed her tightly pursed lips. {2} keep silent.
Kwarta ray makatak-um (makapatak-um) sa íyang bàbà, Only money can keep
his mouth shut. a closed mouth or lips.

takumba n {1} lean-to, hut. {2} roof of a single pitch. v [A; c1] pitch
s.t. as a protection. Nagtakumba silag hábul ug didtu sila mangatúlug,
They pitched a blanket and slept under it. Gitakumbáhan níyag playwud
ang irù arun dì mahumud sa ulan, He set up a piece of plywood for the
dog to get under to keep out of the rain. -in- n lean-to or s.t. set up
with a single-pitched roof.

takun n heel of shoes. v [A; c] put a heel on shoes.

tákung n {1} sheath of coconut fruits. {2} sheath-like covering similar
to that of coconuts. takungtákung {1} = tákung, 2. {2} the sheath-like
covering on the back of grasshoppers and similar insects or the wing
sheath of coleopterous insects.

takup = tak-up. talakpun n shutters.

tak-up v [AB26; b] {1} close, be closed. Kinsay nagtak-up sa pultahan
nga mipákà man? Who closed the door banging it? Tak-úpi ang bintánà kay
tugnaw, Close the window because it’s cold. {2} for schools or business
establishments to close. Mutak-up ang klási karung Abril, Classes will
close in April. n lid that fits flat over or a shutter. a closed.

takúpis n an oval-shaped, large but not tall basket with a cover, made
of pieces of bamboo and rattan or nítù vine, used as a container for
clothing.

takurì n kettle.

takus v {1} [A; a] measure with a measuring vessel. Taksa ang bugas
arun hibaw-an pílay gibaylu, Measure the rice so we’ll know how much
they borrowed. {2} [A; a12] measure s.o.’s capability. Gitakus níya ang
ákung kahibalu kun madáwat ba, He tested my knowledge to see if I was
qualified. (←) v [C; c3] vie with one another, fight it out in a test
of strength. Makigtákus ku nímu kun kinsay hárì dinhi, Let’s fight it
out to see who’s the king here. n a measureful. Gái kug duha ka takus
kámay, Give me two measures of sugar. a worthy. Dì ku takus sa ímung
gugma, I’m not worthy of your love. paka- v [A13; a12] claim to be,
consider worthy. Nagpakatakus aku sa pagdápit kanímu, May I invite you?
(Lit. I presume to consider myself worthy of inviting you.) ka-
n capability. panaksan n bowl. talaksan, taksanan n measuring vessel.
tinaksánay n test of strength. v [C] = tákus, v.

tákut n coral reefs. -un a full of coral reefs.

takuyan, takúyan n {1} a seed container used to hold corn when
planting, usually from a short length of bamboo, and worn around the
waist. {2} round-mouthed cylindrical container for farm products woven
from buri strips. v [A13; a12] make into a takuyan.

takwáhaw = takuláhaw.

takwal, takwar n money (word play on kwarta, kwalta).

takway = bukway, n1.

takyab v [A; c] {1} cast a small fishing net into the sea, usually in
the shallows. Dakung duut sa isdà ang íyang gitakyában sa láya, He cast
the net on a big school of fish. {2} throw s.t. on and over s.t. as if
casting a small net or throw s.t. with a similar motion. Ákung
gitakyában ug hábul ang káma, I spread a blanket over the bed. Ákù ta
kang takyában sa tahup ug anhà ka lingkud dihà, The chaff will fall off
on you as I winnow it, if you sit there. {3} flap s.t. to shake s.t.
off it. Gitakyab níya ang sinínà kay abugun kaáyu, She flapped her
dress because it was so dusty.

takyan n {1} toy which is similar to a shuttlecock in badminton and
kicked with the instep of the foot. {2} game played with this
shuttlecock which involves kicking it with the instep of the foot. A
server is chosen by kicking the takyan a required number of times
without missing. The one who misses is the server. The other player (or
team) has to kick the takyan when it is served. If the server catches
it, he serves the next player, and so forth, until all the players have
been served, at which point the game starts again. If he fails to catch
it he must serve the same player again. If he is able to return the
takyan kicking it, the person whom he returned it to must take his
place. v {1} [A; b6] play takyan. {2} [A2; a12] kick as one would a
takyan.

takyap v [AB2456; c] spread over so as to cover. Mitakyap ang
kangitngit sa kalibútan, Darkness covered the earth. Wà ka bisag
tualyang ikatakyap sa ímung láwas? Don’t you even have a towel to cover
your body?

tál full-fledged, genuine, through and through. Tál nà siyang abugádu
kay nakapasar sa bar, He is a full-fledged lawyer because he passed the
bar. Tál nà siyang Árab, He is a full-blooded Arab. Mau nay tál nga
amígu, muúnung, That’s what I call a real friend. He stands by you.

tala_1 let’s go. — na short forms: tána, tana let’s go now. Tala na
(tana) kay malít ta, Let’s go now. We’ll be late.

tala_2 (not without l) a out of one’s right senses. v [B12] get to be
crazy. Natala ka. Ngánung asin may ímung giságuls kapi? Are you crazy?
Why did you put salt in the coffee?

talà n a small surface depression on a toy top made by the nail tip of
another top, pit mark. Way kaláki ang ímung kasing kay daghan ug talà,
Your top is no good because it has lots of pit marks. v [b8] for a top
to get a pit mark in it.

tálà_1 v {1} [A2; b4(1)] set foot in a place. Nakatálà na ba ka ánang
bukíra? Have you set foot on that mountain? {2} [A; c] step, tread on.
Dì ka mutálà sa lápuk, ha? Do not step on the mud puddle, O.K.?

tálà_2 v [A; c] list down. Itálà ang mga ngálan sa aplikanti, List the
names of the applicants. pa- v [A1] enroll. Ása man kang iskuylahána
magpatálà? In what school will you enroll? -an n list. talaadláwan
n diary.

tálab n pen shells.

talaba n k.o. oyster.

talában v [A3P; c1] for a force to carry s.t. along with it. Nalumus
siya kay natában sa sulug, He drowned because he got carried away by
the current. see also tában.

talabánug n see banug.

talábun, talábung = tulábung.

tálad (not without l) n {1} table. {2} table in parliamentary usage. Si
Husi P. Lawril mauy nangúlu sa tálad, José P. Laurel was the presiding
officer.

taladru (not without l) n {1} k.o. drill with grooves along which a
handle is pushed up and down, causing the bit to turn. {2} a wooden
eggbeater made like the taladru drill. v [a12] use a taladru drill or
eggbeater.

talagabung = tugábung.

talagbagu n k.o. delicious salt-water fish, yellowish-brown in color.
It is flat-shaped and is as big as a palm, similar in appearance and
taste to the kítung.

talagsa see usa.

talaguy (not without l) n one who keeps going out and neglects the
chores at home. v [B12] become fond of going out. Natalaguy siya tungud
sa barkáda, He started going out and neglected his duties because of
his gang.

taláhib (not without l) n coarse, erect perennial grass with snowy
white panicles which, like cogon, takes over lands denuded of forest
cover: Saccharum spontaneum.

taláid (not without l) v [A; a12] do s.t. in an orderly manner covering
progressively the area worked on. Talaíra ug sanggì ang mais arun walay
hisayluan, Harvest the corn methodically, covering it square by square,
so that you miss nothing.

talakítuk (not without l) n k.o. fish, name given to jacks and other
good-sized carangoid fish.

talalak (not without l) n k.o. bird: the white-billed hornbill: Aceros
leucocephalus.

talampad v {1} [A13; a1] place things in a row across s.t. Magtalampad
tag butilya sa paril kay magpunta blangku ta, Let us arrange bottles in
a row because we will have target practice. Italampad ning mga batu sa
yanang arun náay átung katumban, Arrange these rocks in a row across
the mud puddle so we have s.t. to step on. {2} [A; ac] compare.
Tampárun nátù sila ug kinsay kinagwapahan, Let us compare them and see
who is the prettiest. Ayawg itampad ang ákung pinintal sa kang
Amursúlu, Don’t compare my paintings with those of Amorsolo. tamparay
v [C; c3] compare with each other. Makigtamparay siya sa ákung núts, He
wanted to compare notes with me.

tálang v [B1256] {1} be embarrassed. Natálang ku sa ákung tubag kay
sayup kaáyu, I was embarrassed because my answer was completely wrong.
{2} blunder or lose one’s way into. Natálang siya ngadtu sa iskuylahan
sa mga babáyi, He blundered into a girl’s school. paN- n trick coin
with two heads. v [a12] make into a trick coin.

talangígù = hingígù. see ígù.

talantar (not without l) = tarantǎr.

talantun (not without l) n talent, the unit of weight (Biblical).

talapya (not without l) = tilapya.

tálas = patálas.

talatala (not without l) a foolish, slightly crazy. Talatala, ngánung
giusíkan nímu, Stupid! Why are you wasting it? n {1} k.o. small frog
about 2″, of marshy areas, often seen in trees. {2} one who is
constantly chattering about unimportant things sounding like the
talatala frog. v [B126] become crazy. Natalatala siya human bulagi, He
became crazy when his girl left him.

taláuk v [A] crow. Sayu pa tu; nagtaláuk pa ang mga manuk, It was still
early; the cocks were still crowing. n the sound of crowing. Ang taláuk
sa manuk timailhan nga saylu na sa tungang gabíi, The cock’s crow means
that it is past midnight.

tálaw (not without l) v [B456] back off, be afraid to do s.t. for
lacking nerve. Mitálaw siya maung wà musúkul, He was afraid, so he
didn’t fight back. paN- v [A23] be cowardly. Dì siya mangamural ni
Biyay kay nanálaw siya, He can’t bring himself to propose to Biyay
because he is a coward. -an(→) a cowardly. v [B1256] be, become
cowardly.

talay (not without l) v [A; c] put or sit next to. Kinsa man tu nga
nagtalay nímu? Who was that who sat beside you? Italay ni sa baril, Put
this beside the drum. n {1} a loaf of bread made of easily separable
sections baked together in a row in one mold. {2} one beside s.o. else.
Kinsa man tung ímung talay sa sini? Who was it you were sitting next to
in the movies? (←) v {1} [C; a] sit, set next to each other. Nagtálay
mi ug lingkud sa bátang, We sat beside each other on the log. Taláyun
ta ning duha ka lamísa, Let’s put these two tables next to each other.
{2} [A; ac] fall, put in line. Nagtálay ang mamalítay ug arsii, Buyers
of RCA rice are forming a line. Gwápa siya kun itálay sa mga maksut,
She’s pretty if you put her next to the ugly ones. n line, row of
people or things. hi- v [B1256] belong to a distinct group. Nahitálay
siya sa hataas nga katilingban, She belongs to the upper class.

tálay n in hopscotch or basketball, the violation of stepping on the
line. v [B126] step on the line.

talaytay (from taytay) v [A; c1] arrange things in a row. Talaytáyun
(italaytay) ta ning mga batu sa daplin, Let’s arrange the stones in a
row along the edges.

talayung (not without l) n a length of tubing used to convey water from
a spring that flows out from a slope. v [A; a] attach, make into a tube
spout for a spring.

talhà a {1} splitting easily due to its parallel grain. {2} root crops
that are dry and crumble easily in the mouth.

talhung a shady, so as to retard the growth of trees. v [A13P; b4(1)]
shade s.t. over. Ang mangga mutalhung (mupatalhung) sa kamaisan, The
mango tree will shade the cornfield. Natalhungan ang ákung sibuyasan sa
mga ságing, My onion bed is in the shadow of the banana plants.

tali v [A23; a12] for fowl to wean their chicks, letting them go off on
their own. Ug sayu nga mutali ang mungáan sa pisù, dalì pud nga
mangitlug, If a hen lets her chicks get independent early, she will
also lay eggs sooner. n chick that has gotten independent of the
mother.†

táli_1 a for root crops and the flesh of fish to be soft and moist.
v [B] get to be soft and moist. Mutáli (matáli) ang kamúti basta itanum
sa yútà nga basà, Sweet potatoes become soft and watery if they are
planted in wet ground.

táli_2 = tálì_2, n.

táli_3, tálì_1 v {1} [A; c] tally, mark. Dì ku makatáli kay kandidátu
ku, I can’t do the tallying because I’m a candidate. Gitálì ku ang
ímung palta, I have recorded your absences. {2} [A13; a3] have a note
of a certain emotion. Ang íyang pagtubag daw sa nagtálì ug kasukù, His
reply seemed to have a note of anger.

tálì_2 v [A; c] tie, bind. Mga kawatan ang mitálì kaníla sa halígi, The
robbers tied them to the post. Nakatálì na siya sa mga putus, She has
bound the packages. n {1} between, concerning two people or groups.
Tandugun ang rilasiyun tálì sa Amirika ug Pilipínas, The relations
between the U.S. and the Philippines are touchy. {2} concerning, with
regards to. Gisukutsukut siya níla talì sa nahitabù, They interrogated
him about the incident. (→) n bond, tie.

tali- prefix to a verb forming adjectives meaning ‘about to [do]’.
Talilarga na ku sa Amirika, I’m ready to leave for America. Taliának,
About to give birth.

taliadlaw (from adlaw) n hot season. v [B56] be the hot season.

tálib v [A; b6] trim off or smooth around the end or the mouth of a
container. Talíbi ang bàbà sa plastik nga sudlanan, Trim the mouth of
the plastic container to make it even. (→) n walay — untrimmed around
the mouth or at the ends.

talibud (from líbud) a fond of going about the neighborhood. v [B126]
be fond of going about the neighborhood. Ang pagkatabian mauy
nakatalibud (nakapatalibud) níya, She is fond of going about because
she likes to spread gossip.

talibugsuk see bugsuk.

talibwag (from bulag) v [A13P] disperse, run in different directions.
Nagtalibwag pagdágan ang kabatáan kay nahadluk sa búang, The kids ran
in all directions because they were afraid of the mad man.

talidhay n loud, prolonged, high-pitched laughter. v [A; b3c] laugh in
a loud, high-pitched way. Mitalidhay ang mga babáyi sa kataw-anan
níyang isturya, The ladies laughed at his funny stories.

talidngan = talirúngan.

talidúngan = talirúngan.

taligamà v [b8] overlook. Dúnay mga sayup sa íyang tím nga ákung
hitaligam-an, There were lots of mistakes in his theme that I
overlooked.

taligátus (from gatus) n {1} k.o. small mouse with a long snout.
{2} k.o. roundish sweet potatoes with light pink skin and yellowish,
sweet meat (so called because it produces an abundance of tubers).

taligmata n hallucination or vision where one sees s.t. not actually
present. Nakit-an nákù si Pidru apan walà man siya dinhi. Taligmata
diay tu, I saw Pedro, but he is not here. So it was just a
hallucination. v [b5] have a vision or hallucination.

taligngan = talirúngan.

taligráma = tiligráma.

taligsik n large raindrops which fall in a scattered way, usually
before or after a tropical rainstorm. v [A3; b4] rain in large
scattered drops. Bukasa ang hinayhay kay mitaligsik na, Bring in the
laundry because it is raining. paN- v [A2] fall in large scattered
drops. Manaligsik íyang láway kun musulti, He sprays saliva when he
speaks.

taligsuy a long and tapering. Taligsuy kaáyu ka ug ilung, You have a
long, tapering nose. v [B3; b6] be, become long and tapering.
Mutaligsuy ang pálu ug usa ka tumuy ra ang sipilyáhan, The mast will
come out long and tapering if only one end is planed.

talíis = tilíis.

talikála, talikalà, talikálà (from tálì) n chain, fetter. Hugut ang
talikalà sa ámung pagminahalay, Our love is held together by a strong
bond.

talikìtikì (from tikì) = tabili sa dágat.

talikud_1 (from likud) v {1} [aP1] turn the back, turn s.o. around.
Gwápa siyag magtalikud, pirug mag-atubang pastilan, She’s pretty when
she turns her back, but when she’s facing you, ouch! Italikud
(ipatalikud, talikda) nang ispíkir kay mabúngul ta, Turn that speaker
around or it will deafen us. {1a} (←) [C2; c6] stay, put two things
with the backs against each other. Nagtalíkud silag lingkud arun isig
sandig sila, They are sitting with their backs against each other so
they can lean on each other. {2} [A2; b(1)] go away from. Bag-u pa
siyang mitalikud pag-abut níla, She had just left when they arrived.
{2a} pass away, die. Maanyag nga bálu ang íyang gitalikdan, He left
behind a beautiful widow. {2b} abandon, turn one’s back on. Talikdan ku
ang bisyu, I will abandon my vices. {3} [A; b6] decline a good
opportunity. Ug mutalikud ka ánang trabahúa dì ka na makakità ug láin,
If you do not take that job, you will not find another one like it. (←)
n eye of a fish hook to which the leader or line is attached, facing in
a direction opposite to the barb.

talikud_2 n a variety of banana, smooth-skinned, similar in form to the
alitundan but bigger, consumed uncooked and particularly tasty.

talimughat see bughat.

talínga n ear (dialectal). (→) v [A; a12] {1} notice, pay heed.
Gisampit ku níya piru wà ku mutalinga, He called me but I didn’t pay
him any mind. Nakatalinga ku nga dinhay táwu sa ákung luyu, I noticed
there was s.o. in back of me. {2} look after, pay attention to. Kinsay
mutalinga sa mga manuk kun wà ka, Who will take care of the chickens
while you’re away?

talinggab v [A; a12] cut, chip or saw off s.t. long at an angle so that
the end is pointed. Talinggába pagsapsap ang káhuy arun mutalínis ang
tumuy, Cut the piece of wood at an angle so the end will come out
pointed. n {1} a cut made so that the result is pointed. {2} s.t. cut
at a diagonal with a pointed tip.

*talinghug pa- v [A; b] listen, heed. Patalinghúgi ang púlung sa
tigúlang, Listen to the words of your elders.

talingting v [A; c1] separate the very fine corn starch (tiktik) from
the grits by shaking in a winnower, or separate the very fine grains
from coarser ones. Nagtalingting pa ku sa ginaling, I’m still
separating the corn starch from the grits. n the very fine corn starch
that sticks to the winnower.

talingtíngun_1 n long-legged, medium-sized bird frequently found in
tidal flats. It feeds on small fish.

talingtíngun_2 n k.o. stinging fish of shallow waters.

talínis a {1} sharp-pointed. {2} shrill in voice or sound. {3} — ug
luyug luyu one who reports whatever gossip he hears from one person and
then relays it to others (lit. sharp at both ends). Ayawg kumpiyansahi
nang bayhána kay talínis nà ug luyugluyu, Don’t trust that woman
because she’s a snake. — maglúyu n two-faced, double-dealing. n pointed
portion of s.t. v [A; b] make s.t. sharp pointed. Talinsi nang lagduk
únà itagsuk, Sharpen the peg before sticking it into the ground. -un
a of a pointed type.

talintu n talent, ability.

talinugù (from dugù) n uterine hemorrhage. v [b4] suffer a uterine
hemorrhage. Talinug-an giyud ka basta mangusug ka human ug anak, You’ll
suffer a uterine hemorrhage if you exert effort too soon after
delivery.

talínum n k.o. small shrub with thick, lanceolate, pale-green leaves,
planted as an ornamental and for its leaves which are used as a
vegetable: Talinum triangulare.

talinupsan see tupus_1.

talinùtinù = alundris_2.

tálip v [A; a] slice root crops into thin strips to dry them under the
sun. Talípa ang kamúti arun ibulad, Slice the sweet potatoes to be
dried in the sun.

talipsay_1 v [B356; b4] {1} glance off. Mitalipsay ang bála nga mitámà
sa puthaw, The bullet glanced off when it hit the metal. Hitalipsayan
ku sa pákul pagbughà nákù, The hatchet glanced off on me while I was
chopping firewood. {2} slip in talking. Mitalipsay giyud sa íyang bàbà
ang matúud nga kantidad, He let the actual price slip out of his mouth.

talipsay_2 = tulipsay_2.

taliptip n {1} tip or peak of a roof or mountain. {2} tip of s.t.
pointed. v [A; a] sharpen s.t. to make it pointed. Way mitaliptip sa
mga káhuy nga himúung bagduk, Nobody sharpened the wooden sticks to
make into pegs. Taliptípun ku ang mga tumuy, I will make the tips
pointed.

talirúngan (from dúngan) n people of the same age. v [C23] be of the
same age. ka- n one who is the same age as s.o. else.

talis n maggots, larvae of housefly. v [a4] be infested with maggots.
Gitalis ang patay nga irù, The dead dog has maggots crawling over it.

talísay n k.o. large tree similar to an almond tree, growing by the
seashore, bearing edible nuts: Terminalia catappa. -un n rooster with
black, dark green, and dirty white splotches.

talisik = taligsik.

talithi, talithì n very fine drizzle. v {1} [A3; b4] drizzle. Tána,
nagtalithi ra bítaw, Let’s go, it’s just drizzling. {2} [AN; b6] spit
with force, usually in derision. Gitalithian (gitalithían,
gipanalithían) lang ku níya pag-abla nákù, She just spat derisively at
me when I proposed to her.

taliti = talithi.

talìtì n encrustation of sediments, tartar sticking to a surface.
v [B2; a4b4] be encrusted with sediments. Gitalìtian (gitalìtì) ang
takurì tungud kay gisigíhag gámit nga way hugashúgas, The kettle is
encrusted with sediment because they kept using it without washing it.
Ngípun nga nagkatalìtì sa tantung tinabakù, Teeth covered with tartar
from smoking so much. -un a encrusted with tartar and tobacco tars.

taliunduk (from unduk) v [B3(1); c1] be heaped up. Nagtaliunduk ang
labhanan, The soiled clothes are piled up high. Ayawg italiunduk
(taliundúka) ang kan-un sa ímung kutsára, Don’t put so much food on
your spoon at one time. Akuy nataliundukan sa tanang búhat sa balay,
All the housework was heaped on me. n heap of s.t.

taliwálà n {1} middle, center part. Ig-a ang taliwā̂ sa targit, Hit the
center of the target. Taliwálà sa kakuyaw nangaliyúpù siya, In the
midst of her danger, she prayed. — sa kámay in the height of excitement
or ecstasy, esp. sexual intercourse. Bahálà nang mamatay basta taliwálà
sa kámay, I don’t care if I die as long as it’s at the height of sexual
excitement. v {1} [b6] be situated in between, the middle of.
Gitaliwad-an kug lingkud sa ákung mga badigard, I was seated in between
my bodyguards. {2} [c1] do s.t. to s.t. at its center, in its middle
part. Taliwáa (taliwad-a) ug bángag ang kwarta, Make a hole in the coin
at the center. pa- v {1} [A; c6] go, stay at the center or middle.
Mipataliwálà sila sa baylihan ug nagsáyaw, They went to the center of
the floor and danced. Ipataliwā̂ siya paglingkud arun way makatupad,
Seat her in between us so that no one else can sit beside her. {2} [A]
put oneself between people fighting. Mipataliwā̂ ang amahan paghúnung
sa áway, The father cut in to stop the fight. kinataliwad-an n very
middle of s.t.

talíwan v {1} [a3] for work to be disposed of or finished. Ayaw ug
súgud ug láin ug dì pa matalíwan kanang ímu rung gitrabáhu, Don’t start
anything else as long as you haven’t finished what you started there.
{2} [A23] for feelings to vanish (literary). Mitalíwan kanákù ang
kalípay pagtalikud nímu, When you left, all the joys of life departed
with you. {3} [B2346] for a person to pass away. Mitalíwan na ang ákung
mga ginikánan, My parents have passed away. -um-r- a about to disappear
or vanish. Tumatalíwan nga kaháyag sa kahapúnun, A fading afternoon
sunlight.

taliwtiw a elongated and pointed with tapering sides. v [B26] become
pointed with tapering sides. Mutaliwtiw (mataliwtiw) ang tumuy sa
wating mag-aginud, The end of the earthworm becomes pointed and
tapering when it stretches forward. -un a pointed and tapering. paN-
v [A2; b4] for the nose to become narrower and pointed. Manaliwtiw ang
ilung sa táwung himatyun, The nose of a dying person gets narrow and
pointed.

taliyir n {1} repair shop. {2} tailor, dressmaking shop.

taliyuk v [A2] turn the body around. Taliyuk kunu. Átung tan-áwun ug
haum ba nímu ang amirkana, Turn around. Let’s see if your jacket fits
you.

talyir = taliyir.

talku n talc.

taltag v [A; c] {1} set out, forth several things in order, one at a
time. {2} deduct a debt from one’s wages. Bayinti ang italtag sa ákung
swildu, Deduct twenty pesos from my salary. {3} [A; b] tap s.t. off,
esp. the ashes. Aku ray mutaltag sa bága sa agipu, I’ll tap off the
embers from the firebrand myself. -an(→) n {1} raddle, a rod with pegs
used to separate the warp threads and guide them into the desired
position around the warp beam. {2} ash tray.

taltal v {1} [A; a] knock off s.t. that is attached or set. Taltáli ang
ligid sa karitun sa yapak nga nakakápal niánà, Scrape off the mud from
the wheels of your pushcart. {2} [A; c] deduct from one’s wages to pay
for a debt. Taltálig diyis ang íyang swildu arun siya kabayad, Deduct
ten pesos from his salary so that he can pay his debt. {3} [c] divide
land, property informally among prospective heirs without legal papers.
Ang tibuuk datag tampi sa subà mauy báhin nga gitaltal álang kanákù,
All the level land along the riverbank was my share of the inheritance.

*talu (not without l), talutalu, talúun a having or showing little
sense or judgment. v [B12] become stupid.

tálu (not without l) n tallow, the hard fat in animals or the wax from
beehives, used for making candles, soap, et al. v [A; b(1)] gather or
obtain tallow. talúun n sticky, like tallow. Yútang talúun, Clay soil.

talù (not without l) n {1} scratch, dot, impression made by scratching
lightly. {2} marks made to keep a record of petty purchases on credit.
Tan-áwa sa listahan ug pilay ákung talù, Look it up to see how much I
owe. v [A1] {1} make scratches, dots. Kinsang kasing nakatalù niíni?
Whose top made the impressions on this one? {2} make small purchases on
credit. Nakatalù ku sa tindáhan gabíi, I bought s.t. on credit at the
store last night. -un(→) a marked with dents all over.

talubig (not without l—from túbig) n {1} small yellowish pustules
appearing individually on the skin. {2} other watery and itchy
eruptions on the skin. v [b4] have a pustule of this sort. Dílì ku
makasulat kay gitalubigan ang ákung tudlù, I cannot write because my
finger has a pustule on it.

taludtud n the lower portion of the human spinal column. Sakit ákung
taludtud kay nahapalingkud ku sa asíras, The bottom part of my spine
hurts because I fell down on my buttocks on the sidewalk.

talukbuy_1 v [A; c6] hand s.t. to s.o. Italukbuy ra ning suwat níya,
Please hand this letter to her.

talukbuy_2 = baluybuy.

taluktuk n {1} peg, stake. Gilibutan níyag taluktuk ang bag-ung turuk
nga lísu, He put stakes all around the bed of the newly sprouted
seedlings. {2} bar for gathering sweet potatoes. {3} in dugout boats,
reinforcing studs stuck into the sides to which additional planking is
nailed to make the hull higher. {4} top of a hill, cliff. v {1} [A1;
b6(1)] enclose stakes. {2} [A1; a2] make a peg or stake. {3} [A; a]
attach studs into the sides of a dugout. {4} [B; c1] be, become steep.
Ug mutaluktuk ang dálan, dílì na makaági ang dyíp, If the road gets too
steep, the jeep won’t go any further. a steep. Taluktuk nga pangpang, A
steep cliff. -an n summit.

*talulu = *talu.

talumbang (not without l) n a length of bamboo with holes at both ends
used to keep a pig from getting his tether rope hopelessly entwined.
One end of the bamboo is attached to a short piece of the rope tied to
the feet, and the other end of the bamboo is attached to a rope tied to
the stake. v [A; b6] put, make into a talumbang.

talumtum n {1} mildew. {2} freckle. v [b4] get mildewed. Gitalumtuman
ang hinamugan kay wà tiwasag utaw, The moistened clothes got mildewed
because they were left unironed. -un(→) a mildewed, freckled.

talumus (from lumus—not without l) n anything used to cover the body
when bathing. v [A; c1] put on s.t. during bath. Dílì magtalumus ang
mga bátang mangalígù, Children don’t put on anything when they swim.

talun n {1} pad of paper. {2} booklet of s.t. Gihurut kug palit ang usa
ka talun nga tíkit sa swipstik, I bought a whole booklet of sweepstake
tickets.

talung n eggplant: Solanum melongena. -an n eggplant patch.
talungtalung n k.o. shrub planted for its ornamental orange or yellow
fruit: Solanum mammosum. -un n wild shrub similar to eggplant,
producing a spiked inedible fruit, used as a protection around the
trunk of the coconut tree (hulud): Solanum sp. -un(→) = katyubung.

talungan (not without l) n pipe stem. v [A; a] make a pipe stem.
Makatalungun ka sa bukug nga may lungag sa tungà, You can make a pipe
stem out of a bone that has a hole in its center.

talúnung (not without l) v [A2S; b3] momentarily stop from one’s work
to give close thought or attention to s.t. Usa ka manánuyng sunáta ang
gitalunúngan sa mga trabahanti, The workers stopped to listen to the
sweet music. hi- v [BP1256] stop, pause when taken back. Nahitalúnung
(nahipatalúnung) aku pagkakità sa abling kaha, I was taken aback when I
saw the open safe.

tal-up v [A; b6(1)] cover or block the opening of a tube-like
structure. Lápuk ang nagtal-up sa imburnal, Mud is blocking the end of
the culvert. Tal-úpi ang íyang ilung arun malumus, Cover his nose so
he’ll suffocate. n trumpet mute.

talupì (not without l) = tubigtúbig.

talusì n k.o. hornbill: Penelopides panini.

talùtalù (not without l) v [AN; b(1)] flatter s.o. to get him to do
s.t. for one. Dì ka makatalùtalù (makapanalùtalù) ánang tigulánga sa
íyang kwarta, You can’t flatter money out of that old man. Kahibáwu
kung mutrabáhu nag talùtaluan, I know he will work if you give him
sweet talk. a mentally weak, stupid.

taluthu v [AN; c] {1} spit out what one has in the mouth in an
explosive manner. Ayaw nag italuthu nang ímung gikaun dihà sa salug,
Don’t spit what you’re eating out on the floor. {2} shoot with a pellet
from a blowgun. {3} [A; b(1)] cure s.o. with taluthu. n {1} treatment
for skin ailments or swellings of natural or supernatural origins
whereby a sorcerer chews ingredients and spits them out on the
afflicted area as he utters magical prayers. {2} pellet from a blowgun.
maN- n sorcerer who can cure with taluthu.

talùtù_1 n k.o. house lizard.

talùtù_2 n k.o. large tree of secondary forests.

taluut n k.o. large spreading ficus tree.

talyáda n {1} putting on a lot and highly made up. {2} effeminate,
homosexual. Ang mga talyáda dinaugdáug sa katilingban, Society treats
fairies with contempt.

tama v [A123P; b4] be, become tired, sick or fed up with. Natamhan
(hitamhan) na tingáli sa íyang pagkaulitáwu maung nagminyù, He must
have become tired of being single so he finally got married. Gitamhan
na kug kináug inasal, I’m sick of eating roast pig all the time.

tamà n {1} imprint or mark left on. Kining uwáta ang tamà sa ímung
pagkatampásan, This scar is a mark of your cruelty. {2} identifying
sign or mark. {3} = tamlà. v [A; b6(1)] leave a mark on. Mitamà ang
latigu níya sa ákung láwas, His whip left a mark on my body. (←)_1
{1} put an identifying mark on. Akuy mitámà sa ámung kargamintu, I
marked our cargoes. {2} = tamlà, v. -an n marker or identifying sign.

támà_2 v {1} [A23; c1] for s.t. to hit squarely on s.t. Mitámà ang
suntuk sa apapángig sa buksiyadur, The fist hit the boxer squarely on
the jaw. Tamáa (itámà) pagdukduk ang martilyu sa lansang, Hit the nail
squarely on the head. {2} [A23C3; c1] be just exactly on time. Mitámà
ang pyista sa ámung lungsud sa ákung adlaw, The fiesta of our town fell
exactly on my birthday. {3} [c1] make s.t. fit. Tamáa (itámà) pag-áyu
ang sinínà sa ákung sukud arun dì ku magyàyà, Fit my dress according to
my measurements so that it won’t hang loosely on me. {4} [c1] stop
doing s.t. bad. Tamáa (itámà) na nang ímung pagpamabáyi, Put a stop to
your romantic exploits. a squarely hit, on time, fitting perfectly. —
na that’s enough. Támà na ánang ímung binúang, That’s enough of your
foolishness.

tamâ see tamalà.

tamad v [b4] feel too lazy to do s.t. Gitamaran kung muadtu sa
dawuntáwun kay ínit, I don’t feel like going downtown because it is too
hot. tamaran a lazy. Tamaran, gustu lag síging katúlug, He is lazy. All
he likes to do is sleep. v [B12] become lazy and indolent.

tamáing = ligwan.

támak v {1} [A3S; b] step on s.t. Aruy! Ímung gitamákan ang ákung
kalyu, Ouch! You stepped on my corn. {2} [A23S; a12] come to, set foot
on a place. Wà matámak sa mga Katsílà ang kamurúsan, The Spaniards
never set foot on Muslim soil. {3} [A; b(1)] trample down by abuse of
position or authority. Tamákan ka kun magpaubus ka, People will step on
you if you don’t assert your rights. — sa dungug v [A; b(1)] dishonor,
insult. Ang ímung pagkadisgrasya nagtámak sa átung dungug, Your
pregnancy has brought dishonor to us. pa- v [A; b] place s.t. beneath a
religious image in the belief that the saint will do to the owner of
the object whatever the person who put the object there prayed for him
to do (good or bad). -in-an n s.t. placed beneath a saint’s image in
this belief. -l-an(→) n doormat.

tam-ak_1 v [A; c] {1} dump, throw a large quantity of s.t. in a heap
s.w. Dì ka makatam-ak ug sagbut sa agiánan, You can’t dump the rubbish
in the street. {2} fill up a hole in the ground. Íyang gitam-ákan ang
atábay ug mga sagbut, He filled the well with trash. {3} heap work,
blame, abuse on s.o. Akuy natam-akan sa tanang kasábà, All the abuse
was heaped on me.

tam-ak_2 v {1} [A2; b5] wind up s.w. one would not expect to be.
Ngánung mitam-ak ka ning dapíta? How come you wound up in this place?
Sa panahun sa kampanya gitam-ak (gitam-ákan) níla ang kinahilitang
baryu, During the campaign they penetrated to the remotest villages.
{2} [A12; b8] come across by chance. Nakatam-ak siyag bahandì pagkálut
níyag lubung, He discovered a treasure while digging a grave.
Hitam-akan námù ang duut sa isdà, We came across a school of fish.

tamalà n very small octopus the head of which is less than an inch in
diameter. paN- v [A2; b6] go catch tamalà.

tamális n dish of ground roasted rice and peanuts mixed with coconut
milk, meat, eggs, and other ingredients, wrapped in a banana leaf and
boiled. v [A; a] make, have tamális.

táman {1} until, up to a certain part. Lakaw táman sa kural, Walk up to
the fence. Butangi ug túbig táman sa pagkapunù, Fill it up with water
until it is full. — sa ginháwa, kusug to the limit of one’s capacity.
Dágan táman sa ginháwa, Run as fast as you can (lit. your breath
allows). {2} be only up to doing s.t. less than one wants to. Táman ra
ka sa tan-aw ug dì ka mudíga, You’ll only get to look if you don’t
propose. {3} — na it is enough. Táman na ang usa ka bukag, One basket
is enough. Táman na sa paghílak, That’s enough crying. {4} [verb] ug —
[do] exceedingly. Mikáun ug táman sa útan, He ate lots and lots of
vegetables. v [b(1)] do more than what is usually necessary. Íyang
gitamánan ug kálut íyang buktun, He scratched his arm too much.

tamaraw n tamaraw, a k.o. wild water buffalo.

tamarindu n tamarind preserves. v [A1; a] make tamarind preserves.
tamarinduhun n tamarinds good for making into preserves.

tamarung n k.o. carangoid fish with a tuna-shaped body, green dorsal
and white ventral portion.

*támas panamastámas v [A; b] {1} despise, insult. Daghang nanamastámas
sa bag-u níyang tinuúhan, Many people heap insults on him for his new
faith. {2} molest physically. Naghíkug ang babáying gipanamastamásan,
The girl that was raped committed suicide. n {1} slander, insult.
{2} physical molestation. mapanamastamásun a slandering, molesting.

tamasak = tambasákan.

tamásuk n {1} rot affecting jackfruit caused by insect larvae. {2} k.o.
worm that infests the wooden parts of ships. v [a4] be infested with
rot or shipworm. a infested with this sort of rot.

tamátis = kamátis. (→) v [A3] for a baby’s feces to be like squashed
tomatoes. Mutamatis ang tái sa bátà ug magngipun, The baby’s b.m. is
like tomato juice when it teethes.

támay v [A3S; a12] despise, look down on, usually with derision.
Gitámay siyang pubri, He was despised because of his poverty. -l-un
a contemptible. Talamáyun ang ímung pagpanápaw, Your adulterous affair
is shameful. ma-un a scornful, contemptuous.

tamba = tangba.

tambag v [A; c] advise. Mitambag ang duktur nga mupahúlay siya, The
doctor advised him to rest. n advice, counsel. paki- v [A3] ask for
advice. Nagpakitambag siya báhin sa íyang suliran, He asked for advice
about his problem. -l-un, paN-un n piece of advice. mag-r- n giver of
advice.

tambagísa, tambagísà n k.o. shrub of waste places, the leaves of which
are used as a poultice: Cassia sp.

tambak v [A; c] dump a large number of things in or over s.t. Siyay
nagtambak sa basúra sa ámung duwaánan, She dumped garbage over our
playground. Gitambakan ug yútà ang atábay, The well was filled with
soil. Itambak ku ning mga kartun nganhà nímu, I’ll push this pile of
cardboard boxes over on you. -an(→) n {1} dumping ground. Ang Hungkung
mau ang tambakan sa mga upyum, Hong Kong is the dumping ground of
opium. {2} gathering place. Ang bwangan mauy tambakan sa mga táwu matag
Duminggu, The cockpit is where the people gather on Sundays.

tambal v {1} [A; b] treat an illness, wound. Tambáli (tambali) nang
ímung samad, Dress your wound. {2} [A; b2] reform, correct s.o. Unsay
itambal ning íyang katapulan, What remedy is there for his laziness?
{2a} [b8] get punished as a cure for being naughty. Hingtambalan ka
lagi human ka latiguhi, Your whipping was just what the doctor ordered.
n {1} medicine. {2} remedial measures. paN- v [A2] practice medicine.
maN-r- n {1} medical doctor. {2} = tambálan. -an n folk doctor,
specializing in diseases of supernatural origin. v [B156] become a
tambálan. -anan n hospital, clinic. ma-un a medicinal.

tambalígay = balantíyung.

tambaliyug n k.o. blenny, greyish in color with large eyes, which jumps
about.

tambalíyung n club-shaped, edible squash: Lagenaria leucantha var.

tambalùlù, tambaluslus (from lùlù and luslus) n {1} supernatural being
in human form that has lips so large that they turn inside out covering
the face when he laughs. {2} jerk, a stupid, contemptible guy.
Pagkadakung tambaluslus nímu. Wà nímu syáta, You jerk! You didn’t make
the basket.

tamban n name given to sardines of several species. -in- v [A13; c1]
solve a problem by counting or by looking at and manipulating s.t.
representing the thing counted (analogous to the way tamban are sold—by
counting out each piece individually). Tinambana (itinamban) pagkwinta,
Reckon it by tallying or counting on your fingers. n method of counting
by manipulation of pieces. paN- v [A2; b6] fish for tamban.
n occupation of fishing for tamban. panalamban, pangtamban = paN-, n.

tambangúngu n k.o. large, fleshy catfish living in marine estuaries.

tambasákan n mudskipper, a k.o. small fish that lives in shallow water,
salt or fresh, with protruding eyes and spiny fins. It crawls out of
the water, may travel considerable distance over land and is often
perched on mangrove branches: Periophthalmus sp.

tambaúlì n {1} k.o. magic oil for open wounds which is said to make the
wound close instantly. {2} condition in which a circumcised penis gets
covered over again.

tambaw = tambal.

tambawu n k.o. frog that thrives on land.

tambayáwan n k.o. spider found in and inhabiting thickets, 3″–5″ in
diameter including the feet, mottled green and black in color.

tambayáyung (from yáyung) v [A1C; b(1)] work together sharing the
labor, share in expenses. Dílì siya mutambayáyung sa buluhatun sa
balay, He does not help out with household chores. Nagtambayáyung mi sa
ábang, We each pay a share of the rent. n one whom one works together
with to accomplish s.t. ka- = tambayáyung, n.

tambid v {1} [AC2; c] lay s.t. long across s.t. else. Nagtambid ang
duhang nangatúlug, The two put their legs over each other as they
slept. Itambid nang lipak sa láin, kurus na, Lay a stick across
another, and you get a cross. {2} [A1; c] carry a child astraddle one’s
side. Ayawg itambid nang bátà kay mapakaw, Don’t carry the child on
your hips. He might become bowlegged. -in- v [A; c] sit with an ankle
crossing each other or one on the other knee. Makítà ang gising midiyas
ug magtinambid ka, Everyone will be able to see your torn socks if you
sit with your ankle on your knee. -in- ságing n fried banana fritters
consisting of bananas cut lengthwise and laid across one another. hiN-
v [A; c] sit with legs crossed at the knees. tambiray n game of rubber
bands in which one band is flicked with the fingers over another band.

tambilagaw = tagilhaw.

tambilágaw a for the vision to be blurred. Tambilágaw íyang panan-aw sa
lúhà, Her vision is all blurred from the tears. v [B; b6] for the
vision to become blurred.

tambis n k.o. fruit tree with bell-shaped, pinkish fruits, about 2″
long: Eugenia aquea. — nga putì variety with white fruit. v [B56] for
the external genitalia of a sow that is in the heat to redden like a
tambis fruit. -un n full and pinkish. Tambísun ang íyang ngábil, She
has full and red lips.

tambiyúlu = kambiyúlu.

tambling n tumbling. v [A; b6] do tumbling. Maáyu siyang mutambling
kúmu sirkadur, He’s good in tumbling being an acrobat. Gitamblíngan
lang níya ang íyang pagkahúlug, He broke his fall by tumbling.

tambù_1 v [AN; c] appear, lean out of a window or s.t. similar. Mitambù
(nanambù) siya sa bintánà, He was in the window. Lúhà nga nanambù
(mitambù) sa íyang mga mata, Tears that formed in her eyes. Itambù ang
bátà sa bintánà, Put the child in the window. -l-an, -anan n window.

tambù_2 = tangbù_2.

tambúbu n a building used for storing ears of corn. v [A13; a12]
construct, make into a granary.

tambubúan n k.o. large wasp.

tambubúkag = hambubúkag.

tambud = tabili sa dágat. see tabili.

tambug v [A; c] {1} throw s.t. heavy or bulky into s.t. deep. Silay
mitambug sa gipatay sa dágat, They threw the murder victim into the
sea. Maáyu itambug sa pangpang ning gubaung kutsi, Better throw this
rickety car over the cliff. {2} give animals feed or fodder. Tambúgi
lang ug pakpak ang kábaw, Just give corn husks to the carabao.
{2a} drop a coin into a piggy bank. {3} [B12; b8] fall. Ubang búnga
matambug ug mahinug, Some fruits fall when ripe. Natambug ang bátà sa
hagdanan, The child fell down the stairs.

tambuk_1 a {1} fat. Bábuyng tambuk, A fat pig. Paridyǔs kay tambuk ka
ra, Go on a diet because you’re too fat. Tambuk pay dyís, miswa,
Thinner than a dime, a noodle. {2} fertile soil. Tambuk ang yútang
daplin sa subà, The soil near the riverbank is fertile. {3} growing
vigorously, lush. Tambuk ang tanum inabunúhan, Fertilized plants are
vigorous. v {1} [BN; b3(1)] get fat. {2} [B; b3(1)] become fertile,
vigorous in growth. Makahayblad ang pagsingárig káug tambuk, You can
get high blood pressure from eating fat all the time. — nga nagdág luib
a fat but sickly person. — ug, ang sulti, manulti a exaggerating,
bragging. Dílì katuúhan nang tawhána kay tambuk nà ug sulti, You can’t
believe him because he is a braggart. v [A12; a12] brag or exaggerate.

tambuk_2 v [A; b6] throw s.t. out. Kinsay nagtambuk ug basúra dinhi?
Who disposed of his garbage here?

tambukàkà, tambukákà n fat (derisive). v [B] become obese.
Nagkatambukàkà siya human maminyù, She turned into a fat slob after she
got married.

tambukíkuy a plump and chubby. v [B12; b6] become plump and chubby.

tambúku n k.o. grass of waste spaces bearing white tassels: Kyllinga
monocephala. see also bulubutúnis under butúnis.

tambul_1 n {1} bass drum. {2} pregnant woman (humorous). v [B26; b6]
become pregnant. -in- a s.t. made in the shape of a bass drum, more or
less. -iru(←) n {1} drumbeater. {2} one who beats the drums (is an
apologist) for a politician. Kanang kumintadúra tambulíru sa
administrasiyun, That radio commentator is an apologist for the
administration.

tambul_2 v [A; c] dam, put s.t. across a stream to stop the flow of
water. Ayaw ug tambúli ang sapà kay mawalay túbig sila sa ubus, Don’t
dam the brook because they will have no water downstream. n dam.

tambula n {1} k.o. play performed during Christmas depicting the
Nativity, performed by an all-male cast wearing masks. It is in verse
and accompanied by music. {2} participants of such a play.

tambúli, tambúlì n {1} melongena, k.o. conch. {2} horn made from the
horn of a water buffalo or a conch. v {1} [A; b6(1)] call with a
tambúlì. {2} [A; a2] make a tambúlì horn.

tambulingaw (from lingaw) v [B126] overlook s.t. due to preoccupation
or distraction. Natambulingaw siyag panuklì tungud sa kadaghan sa
mamalítay, She got mixed up in giving change because there were so many
customers.

tambúluk n the hackles of roosters.

tambun v [A; b6] cover over, fill up with soil. Ayúhag tambun ang gamut
arun sigúrung mutúbù, Cover the roots well so that they will be sure to
grow. Tambúni ang písak arun dílì maghítak, Throw sand in the puddle so
it will not turn into a mire. -an n k.o. small bamboo fish trap placed
on the sea floor with its top covered with corals and stones. paN-an
v [A2] catch, trap fish using such a fish trap.

tambung v [A2; b] attend a gathering. Mutambung ta sa íyang lubung,
Let’s attend his funeral.

tambur n {1} = tambul. {2} cylinder of a revolver. pistúla nga di-
revolver.

tamburábug = tambukàkà.

tamburabuy = babuybabuy, 1.

tamburábuy = tambukàkà.

tamburin n {1} tambourine. {2} round fancy earrings or necklace in
tambourine shape or highly ornate filigree. v [A] wear earrings of this
sort.

tambutsu n exhaust pipe of motor vehicles. v [A; a] use, attach an
exhaust pipe.

tam dyuns n men’s long hair style patterned after the singer, Tom
Jones. v [A13] wear one’s hair in the Tom Jones style.

tamhan see tama.

tamhang a carelessly inattentive, neglectful. v {1} [A; b(1)] be
careless, neglectful. Labihan nímung nakatamhang sa ímung pamilya! How
you have been neglecting your family! Gitamhángan níya ang íyang
pagmaníhu maung nadisgrasya, He was careless when he drove so he had an
accident. {2} [A; b] damage, destroy maliciously. Gitamhángan sa mga
ilagà ang mga libru, The rats destroyed the books. -an(→) a bent on
destroying, breaking things. Ang dúlun tamhangan sa tanum, Locusts are
destructive to plants. v [B12] become destructive.

tamhung v [A1; b2] make a plant be in the shade. Dakung káhuy nga
nagtamhung sa mga tanum, The tall tree that shades the plants.

támì a {1} sticky and moist. Támì nga armirul, Sticky laundry starch.
Támì nga panahun, Humid weather. {2} dirt-soaked. Támì nga sinínà,
Soiled clothing. {3} wet and muddy. Támì ang ílang tugkaran kun
mag-ulan, Their yard becomes wet and muddy when it rains. v {1} [B; b5]
become sticky and moist, dirt-soaked, or muddy. Mutámì (matámì) ang
kalámay kun hitun-ugan, Brown sugar becomes moist and sticky when
exposed to damp. {2} [A] for rain to fall. Nagtámì na sad, It’s raining
again. -un a moist or partially melted brown sugar.

tamíaw v [A; b5] visit s.o. or a place. Gitamiáwan (gitamíaw) nákù ang
ákung apuhan, I visited my grandparents.

tamíhid v [AN; b] stick out the lower lip in derision. Nahiubus ang
nangulitáwu nímu kay ímung gitamihíran, Your suitor was hurt because
you stuck out your lower lip at him. matamihírun, matinamihírun
a characterized with derision. Napikal ku sa íyang matamihírun nga
katáwa, I got irked at her derisive laughter.

tamilì = himilì. see pílì.

tamíluk_1 n {1} shipworms, edible marine mollusks that bore into wood.
{2} k.o. edible insect grub, usually found in rotten logs. v [a12] be
infested with shipworms.

tamíluk_2 n mucous discharge when one has colds. v [A123P; a4] have a
cold.

taming n {1} shield. {2} s.t. used as defense. v [A13; c6] use a
shield. Naigù siya kay wà magtaming, He was hit because he didn’t use a
shield.

tam-is a sweet. v [B26; a2] become, make sweet. Mutam-is (matam-is) ang
prútas kun lihian kinig kámay, Fruits become sweet if sugar is injected
into the tree when young. n sweets, such as candy, jam, et al. paka-
v [a12] consider an unpleasant experience sweet (literary).
Pakatam-ísun kung mamatay álang sa bulawánung tingúhà, I would consider
it sweet to die for a lofty cause. ma-un a sweet in a figurative sense.
Matam-ísung yuhum, A sweet smile.

tamislat n {1} k.o. brachiopod found burrowing in the sand, used in
soup. {2} facetious term for s.o. with a flat nose. Tamislat kaáyu ning
ákung palangging, My little darling has a flat nose.

tamlà n fingerprint, thumbprint. v [A; b6(1)] affix the thumbprint.
Gawas sa pirma tamláan pa giyud, You have to sign and affix your
thumbprint as well.

tampa, tampà_1 v [A; a1] put a ladle into s.t. that is boiling over to
settle it. Way nitampà sa linúgaw pagbúkal, Nobody came to take care of
the porridge when it boiled over.

tampà_2 v {1} [A; c] cover or patch an opening with a flat sheet.
Tampái lang ug kartun ang lungag, Just cover the hole with a piece of
cardboard. {2} [A3P; c1] lay s.t. flat over another flat surface. Ang
lubut sa aparadur wà mutampà sa salug, The bottom part of the cabinet
did not lay flat on the floor. {3} [A; a1] flatten or strike with the
palm of the hand. Tampáun ta ang íyang dughan kun nagginhawa pa ba, Let
us press the palm of our hands to his breast to see if he is still
breathing.

tampà_3 n bride price. v [A; b6(1)] give, pay the bride price.
Gitampáan siya ug usa ka balay ug usa ka lunà nga yútà, They paid a
house and a piece of land for her.

tampad = talampad.

tampak a square, straight on the path or focus of. Nahúlug ang butung
tampak sa íyang úlu, The coconut fell smack on his head. Tampak sa
habágat ang baybáyun sa Talísay, The southwest wind blows squarely
across the beach at Talisay.

tampal v [A; b] overlay a patch on clothing at places of great wear to
add strength. Gitampálan nákù ang samput sa purul, I put a patch on the
seat of the short pants.

tampálas v [AN; b(1)] maltreat severely. Mutampálas (manampálas) sa
asáwa ang bánang palahúbug, A drunkard husband maltreats his wife. -an
a {1} s.o. who maltreats. {2} foul-mouthed, obscene in speech. Tampásan
siyang manulti báhig babáyi, He speaks obscenely about women. v [B12;
b6] {1} become severely abusive toward s.o. Nagkatampásan ang way uwaw
nga inaína, The shameless stepmother is getting more and more abusive.
{2} become foul-mouthed.

tampaling v [A; ab2] slap the face. Walà kay katungud mutampaling nákù,
You had no right to slap me in the face. Kaáyu giyud níyang
tampalingun, How nice it would be to slap her in the face. n {1} slap
in the face. {2} insult like a slap in the face.

tampalung = tampaling.

tamparus v {1} [A12; c1] do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. Ug
tamparusun (itamparus) ninyu pagtáud ang bungbung mangatangtang lang nà
dáyun, If you put the wall up hurriedly and carelessly, it will get
loose right away. {2} [A; ab2] slap the face hard. Tamparusun ta kag
magtubagtubag ka, I’ll slap you in the face if you talk back.
n {1} hard slap in the face. {2} insult. Tamparus álang kanátù ang
íyang pagbalíbad, His refusal is a slap on the face.

tampi n {1} bank of a body of water. {2} edge of a surface.
a {1} nearby, close by. Ang kumbintu tampi sa simbahan, The convent is
near the church. {2} close to the edge. Tampi ra kaáyung pagbutang mu
sa básu sa lamísa. Mahū́g, You put the glass much too close to the edge
of the table. It’s going to fall.

tampì_1 = tampi, n1, 2.

tampì_2 v [A; c1] tuck a piece of cloth into another to hold it in
place, e.g. a shirt that sticks out or s.t. wrapped around the waist.
Tampía (itampì) ang karsúnis kay luag ang hawakan, Fold your trousers
and tuck in the folds because they are loose at the waist.

tampihak (from pihak) n {1} temple of the head. {2} severe headache on
one side of the head. v [a4b4] get a headache of this sort.

tampil n milled or pounded rice. v [A; a] cook rice. Nakatampil ka nag
ipaniudtu? Have you cooked rice for lunch? Dì nátù tampílun ang
paniudtu kay dì paígù ang usa ka litru, Let’s not have rice for lunch
because a liter isn’t enough.

tamping n flat cake made of fine corn flour (tiktik) or buri flour
(unaw) mixed with coconut milk and sugar. It is either fried in coconut
oil or wrapped in banana leaves and put over live embers. v [A; a] make
this sort of cake.

tampípì n a covered wicker suitcase. v [c1] make into a wicker
suitcase.

tampiri v [B; c1] lean, tilt. Mitampiri (natampiri) ang lubi sa
paghángin ug kusug, The coconut tree tilted during the strong wind. Kun
magtanum kag kamúting káhuy, tampiriha (itampiri) ang láwas sa yútà,
When you plant cassava, plant the stem into the ground at an angle.

tampu v {1} [AB3C; ac] join in a group, put together. Kinsay nagtampu
íning bulingun sa inutaw? Who put this dirty laundry together with the
ironed things? Tampúha lang ang tanan arun usa ray sudlanan, Put them
all together so there will be just one container. Itampu nang bakláa sa
mga babáyi, Put that sissy together with the girls. {2} [A; c] give a
contribution. Magtampu (magtampuhay) ta pára sa parti, Let’s contribute
for the party. {3} [A; c] contribute to a publication. Sugilánun ákung
itampu sa sunud gulà, I’ll contribute a short story for the next issue.
{3a} [A; c] send in an entry to a contest. Gitampu námù ang basíyung
káha sa sigarilyu, We sent the empty cigarette packs as entries to the
contest. n {1} contribution. {2} entry in a contest. tampuhan v [A13]
contribute to s.t. regularly. Magtampuhan siya sa Bisayà, He
contributes regularly to Bisaya. tampuhay v = tampu.
matampúhun a generous in contributing.

tampuk_1 v {1} [AB2456; ac] stab so as to make the instrument stick, be
sticking in. Akuy mitampuk ug lápis sa báni, I stuck a pencil into the
banana trunk. Báraw nga mitampuk sa dughan, A knife sticking into the
breast. {2} [A; a] beat s.t. with the inside of the fist (as if
sticking a dagger into it). Mitagubtub ang ákung likud nga íyang
gitampuk, My back resounded when he hit it with his fist. -in-an
a jewelry having precious stones embedded. †

tampuk_2 v [A; c1] gather and dump into s.t. Ang mutsatsa mauy
nagtampuk sa mga bulingun sa planggána, The maid put the dirty laundry
into the basin. Tampúkun (itampuk) ku ang mga basíyung láta sa dakung
kahun, I will dump the empty cans into the big box.

tampulung v {1} [B56] loom, stand out large. Dúnay dakung batu nga
nagtampulung daplin sa likuánan sa dálan, There is a huge rock looming
at the side of the road at the bend. {2} [A; b6c1] pile or heap stones.
Magtampulung siyag mga batu líbut sa ílang balay, He will pile stones
around their house as a wall. n {1} large rock or pile of stones that
stands prominently in the middle of the sea, protruding or immersed
under shallow water. {2} a dike of piled stones in the sea, constructed
to trap fish behind it when the tide goes out.

tampúng = tampulung.

tampuug v {1} [A3] loom large, stand out prominently. Nagtampuug sa
dálan ang buldúsir, The bulldozer is looming large on the road.
{2} [B6; c1P] be piled in a large heap. Nagtampuug ang sagbut sa búngun
sa ílang balay, There is a huge pile of garbage beneath their house.
Ngánung gipatampuug (gitampuug) nímu ang makinilyahúnun únà mu buháta?
Why did you allow the typing to pile up before working on it?

tampuuk = tampuug, v2.

tampúung = tampulung.

tampuy v [A; c] lay s.t. over sores, boils as a compress. Tabákù
itampuy sa ímung hubag, Put a tobacco leaf over your boil. n compress.

tamsi n k.o. small bird with yellow plummage and black on the head,
wings, and breast, the olive-backed sunbird: Nectarinia jugularis.
tamsitamsi n k.o. snapper with yellowish coloring and a blackish
blotch. -in- n manner of fighting of a gamecock characterized by
hovering above the opponent with fluttering wings. v {1} [A; c1] for a
gamecock to fight in this way. {2} [A23] for the hair on the nape to
come to a point. Mutamsi ang buhuk sa tingkuy ug taas na, The hair on
the nape comes to a point when it gets long. tamsíhun a having hair at
the nape coming to a point.

tamstak = tamtaks.

tamsun n Thompson submachine gun. v [a12] shoot s.o. with a Thompson
submachine gun.

tamtaks n thumb tacks. v [A; b6] fasten with thumb tacks. Tamtaksi nang
kalindaryu sa bungbung, Fasten the calendar on the wall with thumb
tacks.

*tamtám paN- v [A23] do s.t. with restraint. Manamtám kug káug bábuy,
I’ll limit the amount of pork I eat. Dílì manamtám ug gastu, Spend
without restraint.

tamud v {1} [A; a12] obey; perform s.t. in obedience. Ang Kristiyánus
magtamud giyud sa súgù sa Diyus, A Christian must obey the law of God.
Tamdun ku ang tanan mung pagmandù, I will obey all your orders.
{1a} abide by one’s word, fulfill one’s promises. Kinahanglang magtamud
ka sa átung gikasabútan, You should abide by our agreement. {1b} [A3;
a12] give respect to s.t. by heeding it. Ángay ka nga magtamud sa
pahimangnù sa ímung mga ginikánan, You must respect the advice of your
parents. {1c} [A; a12] observe a custom, feast day. Uban nga mga táwu
dílì magtamud sa adlaw nga iglilíhi, Some people do not observe
holidays of obligation. {2} [A13; a12] respect. Magtinarung ta arun
tamdun sa átung isigkatáwu, We must deport ourselves in an honest
fashion if we are to be respected by our fellowmen. {3} [A; a12] gaze
at s.t. with attention or intent. Ug magkupya ka, tamda sígi ang
pahina, When you copy, keep looking at the page. {4} [A; b(1)] guide
oneself by s.t. Sa mísa karun dílì na kinahanglang mutamud ug misal,
Nowadays, it is not necessary to read the missal during the mass.
Nagtamud siya sa margáti sistim, He is following the margate system of
planting. Tamdi ang libru inigtubag nímu, Refer to the book when you
recite. {4a} [A13; b(1)] copy, trace off from. Ayaw ug tamdi ang libru
kay mulamà ang ági, Don’t trace on top of the book because it will
leave a mark. {4b} [b(1)] mark s.t. for easy reference. Sayun ra nga
bulúngun ang dápit sa sugilánun kay ákung gitamdan ang pahina, It is
easy to locate the part of the story because I marked the page.
{4c} [b(1)] remember, make a note of. Tamdi ni, Wà pa giyud aku masayup
niíning mga butánga, Take note of this: I have never made a mistake in
these matters. -in- a respectable person. Tinamud nga mga dinápit,
Respected guests. talamdan, tamdanan n basic guide, rules, and
regulations to follow. Mau niy talamdan ug maggansilyu ka ug bidsprid,
This is the instruction sheet to crochet a bedspread by. talamdun
a worthy of being respected, revered. matinamdánun a characterized with
faithful and regular observance of customs. Rilihiyúsa siya ug
matinamdánun sa mga pista sa simbahan, She is religious and keeps good
observance of church holidays.

támug v [B126] be soaking wet. Natámug ang íyang púlu sa singut, His
shirt is soaking wet with perspiration.

tam-ug a paper or cloth that is slightly moist. not very dry. Tam-ug pa
ang hinayhay. Dì pa ikasul-ub, The wash is still moist. You can’t put
it on yet.

tam-uk = tam-ak_1.

tamulù (not without l) a ugly, unpleasant to look at. Tamulù ang ímung
trabáhu, Your work came out ugly. v [B12; b6] be, become ugly-looking.
Dáan pa ku nga matamulù giyud kug samut niíning ákung hirdu, See,
didn’t I tell you I’d look uglier in this hairdo?

támus v [A; b(1)] ingest s.t. by sucking and licking. Ug mutumar ka
áning tambála ayaw ug usápa, tamúsi lang, If you take this medicine,
don’t chew it, just suck on it. — sa tudlù v [A12S] be penniless. Kamu
kay gastadur kaáyu magtámus ra giyud mu sa tudlù sa kaulahían, You are
such spendthrifts you will end up poor as church mice.

tamuy = támus.

tan n {1} short for kapitan. {2} an honorary title of address for
prominent citizens in former usage. — Birínu a person who assumes
financial responsibilities for a group. v [A; a12] become a Tan Birínu.
Ipadáyun lang kay akuy mutan birínu sa kumbira, Go ahead with it
because I will foot the bills for the feast.

tana, tána short for tala na. see tala_1.

tanáman n flower garden. v [A1] make a flower garden.

tanan (from ngatanan) {1} all, everyone. Tanan tsukuláti ang kík, The
cake is all chocolate. {2} in all. Dúsi tanan ang ákung anak, I have
twelve children in all. Ginadápit ang tanan sa prugráma, Everybody is
invited to the program. sa — most, greatest in degree, magnitude (but
less than sa ngatanan). Maldítu siya sa tanan, He’s the naughtiest of
the naughty. Tabian sa tanang tabian, The most talkative of all
talkative ones.

tan-aw v [A; ab2] {1} see, look at. Mutan-aw kug sini karung gabíi,
I’ll go see a movie tonight. Ispisyalista ang nagtan-aw níya, A
specialist is examining her. Tan-áwa ang íyang ríkurd kun madáwat ba,
Examine his records to see if he’s acceptable. {2} size up, form an
opinion on s.t. Ayawg tan-áwa ang libru sa íyang tabun, Don’t judge a
book by its cover. {2a} [b8] see in s.o. Unsay ímung natan-awan ni
Piyuks? What do you see in Piux? {3} look after. Gipítul kamu kay
nagtan-aw mi sa inyung kaugmáun, I’m disciplining you because I’m
thinking of your future. {4} [a12] wait and see what turns out.
Tan-áwun ta lag kinsay mudaug, Let’s wait and see who wins. n way one
regards s.t. Sa ákung tan-aw (panan-aw) igat nà siya, She is a flirt,
the way I look at her. hi-/ha- v [B1256P] look at s.t. because of
outside influence. Nahitan-aw (nahipatan-aw) siya nákù sa kahibúlung,
She looked at me in surprise. hiN- v [ANB156] stare at, observe s.t as
if unable to do anything about it. Naghinan-aw lang ang mga táwu sa
naligsan, The people just looked at the traffic victim. -in-ay v [C;
c6] look at one another. Nagkatinan-áway sila, They looked at each
other. ig-r-/l- n eyes. -in-an(→) n {1} manner of looking. Ang íyang
tinan-awan may kahulúgan, He gives you too meaningful a look. {2} =
paN-, 2. pag- n {1} opinion one has. Dakù ang ámung pagtan-aw nímu, We
have a high opinion of you. {2} = tan-aw, n. {3} concern, care. Walà
siyay pagtan-aw sa íyang amahan, She has no feeling for her father.
{3a} liking, crush. Sugut nà dáyun kay may pagtan-aw nímu, She’ll
accept you right away because she has a crush on you. paN- n {1} sense
of sight. Maáyu pa siyag panan-aw, He has good vision. {2} gaze. Walà
níya ibulag ang íyang panan-aw sa ákung nawung, He did not take his
gaze from my face. {3} = tan-aw, n. paN-un n vision, s.t. seen in a
trance. Nakakità kug panan-áwun sa lángit, I saw a vision of heaven.
-um-r- n audience, spectators. -l-un n scenic attraction or s.t. on
display. Makalingaw ang talan-áwun sa karnabal, There’s lots of
interesting things to see at the carnival.

tandà_1 v [A; a12] {1} go to inspect, take a look at s.t. one is taking
care of. Tandáa tung linung-ag básig mihubas na, Go take a look at the
rice. It must be cooked now. {2} visit s.o. Mutandà ta níya sa uspital,
Let’s visit him in the hospital. {3} [A; b] report s.w. to do work.
Nagtandà man tingálig aláyun si Tátay kay wà man diring íyang sanggut,
Father is probably at the work bee because his scythe is not here. paN-
v [A2; b6] go and attend a feast. Didtu ku gíkan nanandà ug kasal, I
have just come from a wedding party. maN-r- n party or feast goers.

tandà_2 n sign or mark which indicates s.t. Ang búlak nga íyang gihátag
mauy tandà nga siya nagmahal, The flower that he gave is a sign that he
cares. v {1} [A; b6(1)] mark, put a mark on, esp. for identification.
Si Pápa ang nagtandà sa mga lubi nga amúa, Father marked the coconut
trees that were ours. Tandái ang átung mga dalhunun, Put identifying
marks on our baggage. {2} [A12] remember, recollect. Wà ku makatandà
nga nag-áway mi, I don’t remember a time that we quarrelled. -l-an
n indicator. Ang rilu mauy talandaan sa úras, A watch is an indicator
of time.

tandang v {1} [A; b26(1)] for the sun or moon to shine. Bísan dì pa
mutandang ang adlaw, túa na siya sa uma, The sun hadn’t shone yet but
he was already in the field. {2} [A] for light to hit or shine upon.
Pulis ang nagtandang sa ímung nawung, It was a policeman who beamed a
light in your face.

tanday = tangday.

tandáyag = andáyag.

tandì = tangdì.

tanding = tangdì, v 1.

tandù = tangdù.

tandug v {1} [A13; a1b2] touch s.t. lightly to disturb it. Dinhà giyuy
nagtandug sa rúsas kay nabálì ang sanga, S.o. must have brushed against
the rosebush because a branch is broken. Ayaw siya tandúga kay natúlug
na, Don’t touch her because she is asleep. {1a} touch a wound. Ayaw ug
apil sa dúlà kay hitandugan (hingtandugan) nyà ang ímung samad, Don’t
take part in the game because s.o. might strike your wound. {1b} [a3]
produce an effect, affect. Bísan ug kusugkusug tung hangína, ang barku
walà matandug, The wind was quite strong, but it did not affect the
boat. {1c} [A; a2] for fish to bite a line. Gitandugan siya, apan wà
makúhà, A fish bit his line, but he didn’t catch it. {2} [A12; a12]
touch s.t. in the process of using it. Wà gánì siya makatandug sa íyang
pagkáun, He hasn’t even touched his food. {3} [A; a12] do s.t. to
interfere with one’s thoughts, decisions, plans. Ang disisiyun sa kuymi
dílì matandug, The umpire’s decision is final. {3a} [A3P; a3] move s.o.
to have sympathetic feelings or pity. Way kasingkásing nga dílì
matandug adtung mga pulúnga, No heart could fail to be touched by those
words. {4} [A13; a12] touch on past events. Dílì tà ángay nga magtandug
sa inyung miáging kabangían, You ought not to touch on what you
quarrelled about long ago. {5} [AP; a2b8] cause a relapse of an illness
or injury. Natandug ang piang, His broken bone broke again. n pull on
the line when fish bite. -l-un(→) a {1} critical, grave in health or
condition. Ang masakitun náa sa talandugun nga kahimtang, The patient
is in a grave condition. Tandugun ang kahimtang sa Mídul Ist, The
situation in the Middle East is critical. {1a} prone to sickness.
Tandugun siya. Hilantan lang, magkumbulsiyun dáyun, He is prone to
sickness. Even if he has just a slight fever, it turns to convulsions.
{2} touchy, temperamental. Paabúta nga maáyu siya kay tandugun nang
íyang kinaíya, Wait until he is in a better mood because he is a bit
temperamental right now. {3} subject to question, reconsideration.
Hukum nga talandugun, A decision open to question. pag- n {1} test,
trial. Kadtung hitabúa mga pagtandug lámang sa usa ka táwu nga
gikasináhan, That event is just a trial for you because you are the
object of envy. {2} strike, act of taking the bait. Sa ikaduhang
pagtandug napaktan sa bàbà ang isdà sa tagà, On the second strike, the
fish was hooked in the mouth.

tanduktanduk n top shells.

tánga n {1} scorpion. {2} cockroach.

tangà a inattentive, doing even simple things incompetently. v {1} [B1]
stay put when one is supposed to do s.t. at hand. Nagtangà ka mang
daghan tang trabahuun, You’re just standing around when we have so much
work. {2} [b6] consider s.o. incompetent. Gitangaan ku níya kay dúgay
kasabut, I consider him stupid because he takes forever to understand.

tángà v [A; a] climb up an incline. Gitángà níya ang hagdan sa tulu
lámang ka lákang, He climbed the stairs in only three steps. -un a on
an upgrade.

tangad, tángad = tanglad.

tangag, tángag v {1} [A; a] hold s.t. between the teeth, vise, and the
like, or on s.t. pointed. Nagtangag ug papil ang makinilya, There is
paper in the typewriter. Tagà nga nagtangag ug paun, A hook with bait
on it. Gitangag sa iring ang tinap-ánan, The cat has got the smoked
fish in its mouth. {2} [A13] for the key to be left in the lock or
keyhole. Nagtangag ang lyábi sa yawihánan, They left the key in the
keyhole. -an(←) n litters with teeth at birth.

tangali, tangáli n {1} a funnel-shaped holder made from coconut or
banana leaves into which leaf tobacco or a cigarette is placed.
{2} turrid shells (which look similar to a cigarette holder). v {1} [A;
a] make a tobacco or cigarette holder of this sort. {2} [A; b6(1)]
smoke with this device.

tangantángan n castor-oil plant, the seeds of which produce castor oil:
Ricinus communis.†

tángas v {1} [A2S; a12] go up a slope or incline. Namatay ang makina
samtang nagtangas ang trák, The motor quit while the truck was going up
the slope. {2} [A23] step on, go to dry land. Sa tingpangitlug ang
pawíkan mutángas sa mamala ug mangitlug sa balas, During the egg-laying
season, the sea turtle goes on land and lays its eggs in the sand.
-un(→) a upgrade, ascending slope. Tangasun kaáyung dalána, A very
steep path. v [B125] be, become steep.

tangay_1 v [A; a1] bribe s.o. into doing s.t. Akuy mutangay sa ímung
bátà ug tsukulit arun dì muuban nátù, I’ll bribe your child with
chocolate so that she will consent not to come with us. Dì ta
makatangay ning irúa kay mupáak giyud, This dog will bite even if we
give it food to keep away. tangaytángay = tangay_1.

tangay_2 v [A23] take a great liking to s.o. Mutangay dáyun ang babáyi
níya kay gwápu, A woman will immediately take a liking to him for he is
handsome. a taking a liking to s.o., easily won over.

tangba v [A3P; b8] inspire fear mixed with respect. Dílì mutangba ang
mga istudiyanti ug dì mag-inistriktu ang magtutudlù, Teachers should be
somewhat strict to inspire fear and respect from the students.

tangbid = tambid.

tangbù_1 = tambù_1.

tangbù_2 n k.o. coarse grass of swamps with a hollow stem, used for the
manufacture of brooms and hats: Phragmites vulgaris.

tangday v {1} [AB36C3; cP] for s.t. not wide to rest on top of s.t.
else not wide. Kinsay nagtanday ánang tukun sa trúsu? Who laid that
pole on the log? Purmag kurus ang nagtanday nga lápis, The crossed
pencils looked like a cross. Itanday (ipatanday) ang lápis sa ngilit sa
libru, Rest the pencil against the edge of the book. {2} [AC; c] rest
one’s leg on s.t., rest with one’s legs on each other. Natúlug siyang
nagtanday sa bána, She slept with her leg over her husband’s. -in-ay,
-anay, -ay v [C; c3] have their legs resting on each other’s. -an
n type of cushion for putting the leg over.

tangdì v {1} [AC2; ac] compare which is greater in degree, quality or
size. Way makatandì (makagtandì) sa íyang kaanyag, Nothing can compare
with her beauty. Makigtandì ka nákù sa katas-un? You want to compare
your height with mine? Tandía ang duruha kun háin ang mas putì, Compare
the two to see which one is lighter in complexion. Way sarang ikatandì
(ikagtandì) kang Risal, There is no one who can be compared with Rizal.
{2} [A12C; c1] match fighting cocks for a cockfight. Natandian ang
íyang ugis ug buyugun, His white-feathered cock was paired with a
honey-colored one. -ay v [C; c3] compare with each other.

tangding = tangdì, v1.

tangdù v {1} [A; b6] nod the head. Mitandù siya ingun sa miúyun apan
nagdukà diay, He nodded as though in approval, but in reality he had
dozed off. Tandúan gánì ka nákù, byái mi, When I nod at you, leave us
alone. {2} [A2; a2] consent to, accept. Tandúa nang íyang paghálad,
Accept his proposal. n {1} consent, assent. {2} click or snapping
beetle, a black or dark brown beetle growing to ⅔″ that moves its head
with a clicking noise when trying to extricate itself from s.t.
tangdùtangdù = tangdù, n2.

tanggab v [A3P; a1] cut s.t. down clean, usually with one stroke.
Nananggab ang mag-uúma sa kasagingang gialkuhíris, The farmer is
cutting down the bananas that are infected with a mosaic disease.
a winning a card game with the first card that opens. Ang íyang kard
wíting dáyun, unyà tanggab pa giyud siya kay ang íyang wíting mau say
úpin kard, His hand needed only one card to make rummy on the deal, and
then he won with the first card because the open card was the card he
was waiting for.

tanggal v [AB12; a] detach, remove s.t. from where it is held firmly.
Ug matanggal gánì nà, ipasulda lang, If that comes off, have it
soldered. Lyábi túbu ang itanggal sa kupling, Use a pipe wrench to get
the joint of the pipe off. see also anananggal.

tanggíli_1 n k.o. large timber tree.

tanggíli_2 = tangígi.

tanggu n tango. v {1} [A; b6] dance the tango. {2} [A; c1] play, dance
in tango rhythm.†

tanggu_3, tanggub_1 n k.o. small, easily maneuvered, two-man fishing
boat.

tanggub_2 = tangkub.

tanggung v {1} [A; c1] incarcerate. Itanggung ang kriminal arun
pagpanalípud sa susyidad, Criminals are jailed to protect society.
{2} [A; b1] raise an animal for slaughter on a special occasion.
Magtanggung kug bábuy pára sa sunud pista, I’ll raise a pig for next
fiesta. Tanggúngi nang baktin pára sa inyung kasal, Raise that piglet
for your wedding. {3} [B126; b8] be stranded, maneuvered into a place
with no exit. Sulug mauy nakatanggung (nakapatanggung) námù sa isla,
The strong current caused us to get stranded on the island. Ang
batalyun natanggung sa kimba, The battalion was trapped in the gully.
-an(→) n place one keeps an animal he is raising.

tanghag = danghag.

tanghágà n riddle, mystery. v [A; c] give a riddle, puzzle. Way
makatubag kun akuy mutanghágà, No one can answer if I give a riddle.

tanghal v [A13] stare blankly. Wà ka makakità sa pag-ági sa bátà kay
nagtanghal ka man lang, You did not see the child pass by because you
were just staring blankly.

tanghun = sutanghun.

tangì v [A3P; a] break off, detach s.t. attached. Makatangì
(makapatangì) ug tangu ang íyang suntuk, His fist can loosen your
teeth. Ayaw tangia ang kaptanan sa bág, Do not detach the handle of the
bag.

tangígi n k.o. Spanish mackerel, silvery white and black color, with no
scales, popularly eaten raw: Scomberomorus commersoni and guttatus, and
others.

tangil n charm worn for protection, e.g. by a fighting cock to keep it
from being badly cut. v [A; c1] wear, make into a protective charm. Ang
tangu sa buáya mauy maáyung tangilun (itangil) památuk sa buyag, A
crocodile’s tooth is said to be an effective charm against buyag. paN-,
paN-(←) = tangil.

tangíngi = tangígi.

tangis v [A; b3] cry, weep. Mitangis siya sa pagkamatay sa íyang
inahan, She wept when her mother died. n cry, weeping.

tangítang n stalk of a banana bunch.

tangkà v {1} [A; b6] set to do s.t. Mutangkà kug alas syíti sa buntag
sa ákung trabáhu, I set to work at seven o’clock in the morning.
Gitangkaan níla ang usa ka litsun ug nahurut, They set to eating a
roast pig, and they finished it off. {1a} [AN; b] go s.w. to do work,
usually the aláyun. Tangkái intáwun kug usa ka adlawng dáru, Please
come to my place to plow for one day. {2} [A] reach an entrance,
vicinity of a place. {2a} [C23] agree to meet to do s.t. Nagtangkà
silang mangalígù sa Sabadu, They agreed to meet to go swimming on
Saturday. {3} [A; c] place on, set upon. Nakatulug siyang nagtangkà sa
bangkíyu, He fell asleep sitting on the toilet. Tangkái únà ang sug-ang
sa kaldíru únà dagkuti, Place the pot on the stove first before you
light it. n {1} one’s turn to do work in communal rotational work
(aláyun). {2} feast, banquet. Makabuhung nga tangkà ang gidúlut níla,
They served a sumptuous banquet. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b2] happen on s.t.,
come to a place by chance. Hitangkaan níya ang kawatan nga nangabli sa
húnus, He came upon the burglar opening the drawers. pa- v [A; ab] have
s.o. come to work. n one’s turn to have people come to work in communal
rotational work. paN- = tangkà, v1a, n1.

tangkag a sticking out of ears. v [B; b6] for ears to stick out, prick
up. Natangkag ang íyang dunggan kay gipanamkun siyag inasal, His ears
stick out because his mother had a desire for roast pig when she was
pregnant with him. Mitangkag ang íyang dunggan pagkadungug níyag
isturyang hílas, His ears pricked up when he heard the dirty story.

tangkal n cage, covered enclosure. v [A; c1] {1} put in a cage. Malúuy
kung mutangkal sa langgam, I pity the bird too much to put it in a
cage. {2} jail. Tangkálun (itangkal) ang sinumbung, The accused will be
put in jail.

tangkalù = tuktur.

tangkas v [A; a] {1} rip open the seam, rip off hinges, and the like.
Nagtangkas siya sa sinínang guut, She’s ripping open the seams of her
tight dress. Natangkas ang pultahan nga gilúgus pag-abli, The door was
ripped off its hinges when s.o. forced it open. {1a} [B1256] burst at
the seams. Natangkas ang sáku ug naúsik ang pasì, The sack burst at the
seam and the grain spilled out. {2} unfasten, unhook. Gitangkásan níya
ang kábaw sa yúgu, He took the yoke off the water buffalo.

tangki n {1} tank for water, fuel, et al. {2} military tank used in
warfare. {3} tank, artificial pool for fish. May tulu ka tangki ang
ílang pispan, Their fishpond has three tanks. v [A13; c1] keep, raise
in a fishpond. Daghang nagtangki ug bangus niíning dapíta, A lot of
people here raise milkfish in fishponds.

tangkig n k.o. harmless freshwater snake, growing up to 2′ and 2″ in
circumference.

tangkihud (from kihud) v [B16; b6] limp. Arun dì siya sugúun
gitangkihuran ku níya, She walked with a limp in front of me so I
wouldn’t send her on an errand.

tangkil v [A; c] {1} attach to s.t. so that it dangles. Tangkíli ug
gamayng krus ang kwintas, Attach a small crucifix on the necklace.
Gitangkílan ang patayng irù ug batu ug gitambug sa dágat, They attached
a rock to the dead dog and tossed it into the sea. {2} carry s.t.
attached to the body. Itangkil sa ímung háwak ang pistúla, Carry the
pistol around your waist. {3} carry a baby while one is doing s.t.
Bísag magmadyung, túa nagtangkil ug bátà, She carries her baby even
while she plays mahjong. {3a} for a man to drag along a woman wherever
he goes. Dì nà siya mutangkil sa íyang asáwa kay ábi dì man gwápa, He
doesn’t bring his wife along with him because she’s not beautiful.

tangkiyu thank you. Tangkiyu kaáyu sa gása, ha? Thank you very much for
the gift. v {1} [A2; a2] say thank you. {2} [A23; a2] just say thanks
without giving money. Dimálas giyud kun tangkiyúhun lang ang átung
panaygun, We are out of luck if all we get is a thank you for our
caroling.

tangkù v [AN; a2] take water for toddy from the coconut tree without
the owner’s permission. Tangkúun námù ímung sanggutan ug magdináwù ka,
We’ll steal the water from your coconut tree if you are so selfish.
-an, maN-r- a one who steals palm toddy right from the tree.

tangkub n silverfish, a silver-colored insect that attacks papers and
starched clothes. v [a4] be infested with silverfish.

tangkuban n the reed holder in the loom which holds the reeds (suluran)
in place.

tangkud a exactly to date. Tangkud kung diyis run, I’m exactly ten
today. v [B246] be exactly to date. Ugmà mutangkud nang túig, It will
be exactly one year tomorrow.

tangkúgù n nape of the neck. (→) v [A; a12] hit in the nape. hi-/ha-(→)
v [B1256] be hit where it hurts. Nahitangkugù ang mga insik kay
gidid-an pagtindag bugas, The Chinese merchants were hit where it hurts
because they were prohibited from selling rice.

tangkul_1 n {1} a slender bamboo tube, about a foot or two in length,
tied to an animal’s neck and to a tether rope, the purpose of which is
to prevent the animal from biting the tether rope. {2} shackle,
manacle. v {1} [A; b6(1)] tie with a shackle or with a piece of bamboo
between the tether and the neck. {2} [a12] make into a shackle, or
bamboo tether-guard.

tangkul_2 n coral reef under 3–4 fathoms of water. -an(→) n place where
there are corals under deep water.

tangkung n leafy vegetable of swamps and stagnant pools, cultivated and
wild: Ipomoea aquatica. v [A13; b6] make, have tangkung.

tanglad n lemon grass, a k.o. tall grass that smells of lemon and is
used as a spice: Andropogon citratus. v [A; b6] season with tanglad.

tanglas a smooth to the throat when drunk or taken as medicine. Maháwut
ug tanglas nga tubà, Mellow and smooth palm toddy. ma- = tanglas.

tangpi = tampi.

tangsà_1 v [B; b6] be, become very thin, emaciated. Magtangsà
(matangsà) ka giyud ug dì ka mukáug maáyu, You’ll grow thin if you
don’t eat well. a emaciated, thin.

tangsà_2 = tingsì.

tangsi n strong monofilament of nylon or catgut, used for guitar
strings, fishline, and the like.

tangsù v [AB16; a1] be loosened from its socket or detached from its
place, cause s.t. to be so. Kinsay nagtangsù sa tiil sa silya? Who
loosened the legs of the chair? Natangsù ang kab-ing sa kibídu, One
side of the eyeglass frame came off. Tangsúa úsà ang ngípun únà ibta,
Loosen the tooth first before you pull it. tangsùtangsù v [B16] be
wobbly after being loosened at its base. Nagtangsùtangsù ang pasamánu,
The handrail is wobbly.

tangtang v {1} [AB123; a] take off, remove s.t. fastened or tied.
Tabángi kug tangtang sa yúgu sa kábaw, Help me take off the carabao’s
yoke. Nakatangtang ang bábuy sa íyang gihigtan, The pig worked himself
loose from the place it was tied. Tangtánga ímung pustísu kun manutbras
ka, Remove your false teeth when you brush them. {2} [A; a] pay off
debts, free from obligation. Tangtángun ku ang útang, I will pay off
the debt.†

tangu n {1} canine tooth. {2} fang of animals. Maáyung anting-anting
ang tangu sa buáya, A crocodile’s tooth is a powerful charm. {3} cog of
gears. — sa báliw, lintì n in folk belief, the tooth of a thunderbolt
that gets lodged in places where it strikes. It possesses a magical
power. tang-an a {1} highly unscrupulous. Pahiphip giyud kanang mga
tang-an sa sitihul, Those unscrupulous people in City Hall have to be
bribed. {2} tops in one’s field due to experience. Tang-an siyang
magsusúlat sa Binisayà, He is one of the top Visayan writers. {3} rich,
wealthy. Nagparti ang mga tang-an sa Maníla Hutil, The oligarchs are
having a party at the Manila Hotel.

tangud v {1} [APB26; a1] attract s.o. with s.t.; be attracted. Ang
balhíbu sa manuk makatangud (makapatangud) ug mga isdà, Chicken
feathers will attract fishes. Karmilítus ang itangud níla sa mga bátà,
They use candies to attract the children. Mutangud ang mga kwaknit sa
mga búlak sa duldul, Bats are attracted to the flowers of the kapok
tree. {2} [A; a12] heed, obey. Ang magtangud sa púlung sa Diyus
malangit, Those who follow the words of the Lord will go to heaven.
Gitangud ku ang tanang pahimangnù mu, I followed all your advice.

tang-ug = tan-ug.

tángul v [A2; b2] be, get lodged between the teeth. Sakit ang ákung
bag-ang kay hitangulan ug gamay nga bukug, My molars hurt because a
piece of bone got lodged between them. n particle of food stuck between
the teeth.

tangul-ul n k.o. bird, the yellow-vented bulbul: Pycnonotus goiavier.

tang-un v [B23(1); b4] {1} for liquids to stop flowing. Mutang-un ang
dugù kun baátan siyag turniki, The bleeding will stop if we tie a
tourniquet around it. {2} come to a stop. Kun mutang-un ang pulsu wà
nay kinabúhi, When one’s pulse ceases to beat he is dead. Mitang-un ang
kasukù, His anger subsided. Wà pa giyud makatang-un ang kasábà sa
gawas, The noise outside has not stopped. Kining tambála makatang-un
(makapatang-un) sa sakit sa ngípun, This medicine can stop a toothache.

tangunan = talungan.

tangway v {1} [AN; a] buy coconut palm toddy. {2} [A; a] buy things in
small quantities for consumption. Diin ka makatangway ug asin? Where
did you manage to buy salt? Gitangway na ang tanan nílang utanun, Their
vegetables were already all bought up. -anan n place where one
habitually buys things in retail or palm toddy. maN-r- n buyer of palm
toddy in large quantities.

tangyad = tanglad.

taniag a {1} for the day to be bright after being cloudy. {2} for glass
to be shiny and clear. {3} clear, vivid in outline. Taniag kaáyu ang
litra kun maggámit kag antiyúhus, The letters become very clear when
you use spectacles. v {1} [B] for a gloomy day to brighten. Mutaniag
gánì run, pangarmirul giyud, As soon as the sun shines, starch the
clothes. {2} [B; c16] for the face to brighten. Unsa kahang balitáa
nakataniag (nakapataniag) sa íyang nawung? What news could have
brightened her face? {3} [APB; c1] for glass to be, become transparent
and clear; cause it to become so. Túbig lang ang magtaniag
(magpataniag) ánang lapúkung bildu, Only water will make that muddy
pane of glass transparent and clear. Mutaniag ang básu kun hugásan ug
tayid, The glass will become transparent and clear if you wash it with
detergent. {4} [A; c1] foretell the past, present, and future. Taniagun
(itaniag) ku ang ímung kaugmáun pinaági sa pagtan-aw sa ímung pálad, I
will foretell your future by looking at the palm of your hand. {5} [A;
c1] peer, peep through s.t. at s.t. else. Mitaniag siya sa lungag sa
yawihánan, He peeped through the keyhole. n s.t. to peer into to
foretell the future.

tánil n tunnel. v [A; b] make a tunnel.

táning v [C3; c3] for two to die together. Nagtáning ang magtiáyun
pagkalúnud sa barku, The couple died together when the boat sank.

tanlad = tanglad.

tanlag n conscience. Pamináwa ang ímung tanlag únà ka muhukum, Listen
to your conscience before deciding.

tanlak n one’s child. Iyang gikúgus ang íyang tanlak nga naghilak, She
carried her child in her arms as it cried.

tanlas = tanglas.

tansan n bottle cap.

tansil n {1} tonsils. {2} tonsilitis. v [a4] have swollen tonsils.

tantan_1 v [AB126; c1] shake a container up and down to let the
contents become more compact, settle. Walà matantan ang íyang kináun,
His food did not settle in his stomach. Tantána (itantan) ang sáku arun
daghang masúd, Shake the sack well so we can get lots in it.

tantan_2 v [A3P; c] pay off a debt partially. Gikuháag bayinti písus
ang swildu kay gitantan sa útang, Twenty pesos was deducted from the
salary to pay off part of the debt.

tantiya, tantíya, tantíyar v [A; a] estimate. Tantiyaha lag pilay
magastu, Just make an estimate of how much it will be. n estimate. Sa
íyang tantiya ang gúbat sa Biyit Nam mulungtad ug napū̀ ka túig,
According to his estimate the war in Vietnam will last for ten years.

tantu_1 sa — nga [verb base] do [verb] to such an extent that s.t. else
happens. Sa tantu nákung hinílak gilunúpan ang sáwug, I cried so much
the floor was flooded. dílì — not very. Grábi piru dì tantu, It’s bad
but not too much. myintras — for the time being, while. Paglípay
myintras tantung bátà pa, Be merry while you are still young.

tantu_2 n interest on money loaned. v {1} [A2N; b6(1)] borrow money
with interest. Ug way kwarta, panantu lang, If you’re out of money,
borrow. Tantúhan námù ímung kwarta, dílì libri, We will borrow your
money with interest, not for nothing. {2} [cP] charge interest. Pilay
ímung itantu (ipatantu)? How much interest do you charge? {2a} [A; b6]
give, pay interest. Mutantu kug kinsi pursintu ug pahulam ka nákù, I
will pay fifteen percent if you lend me money. Nagtantu kus singsing
nga ákung giprinda, I am paying off the interest on the ring I pawned.
pa- v [A; bc] lend money for interest. Nagpatantu siyag kwarta, He
lends money for interest. maN-r- n one who lends for interest or
borrows on interest.

tanud_1 a {1} tame. Tanud ang íyang langgam maung binuhían, His pet
bird is tame so it is not caged. {2} for things which are normally
elusive to approach, be submissive. Tanud nímu ang kapaláran, Good
fortune does not elude you. v [B126] become tame, submissive. Kining
lumáya makapatanud (makatanud) sa mga babáyi nímu, This potion can make
girls submissive to you.

tanud_2 n sewing thread. v [A; b6] thread a needle or sewing machine.
Tanuri ang makina, Thread the sewing machine.

tánud v [A; b(1)] {1} keep watch over s.t. that needs care. Nagpulipúli
mig tánud sa masakitun, We took turns keeping watch over the patient.
{2} stay, live with s.o. Way makatánud nímu tungud sa kalas-ut sa ímung
kinaíya, Nobody can live with you because you are so wicked. n s.o. who
keeps watch over s.t. which needs care.

tanug = tanud_2.

tan-ug v {1} [A; b1] store mature fruits in such a way as to hasten
ripening. Tan-úgi nang ságing sa sáku, Store the bananas in the sack to
ripen. {2} [A; b5] keep unused, dormant. Dúgay natan-ug ang yútà, The
land was left unused for a long time. Ayaw tan-úgi ang ímung puhúnan,
Don’t keep your capital unused. {2a} [A; c] keep coconut juice for a
time to ferment it before cooking into oil. Itan-ug ug mga usa ka adlaw
úsà lanáha, Keep and ferment it for about a day before cooking it into
oil. {3} harbor s.t. in secret. Dúgay na siyang nagtan-ug ug gugma, He
has been harboring a secret love for a long time. -in- n raw oil which
floats to the surface after the coconut juice has fermented. -in-an
n {1} fruits kept for ripening. {2} things kept in secret. Sa ílang
áway, nabutyag ang mga tinan-úgan sa kadaghánan, In their quarrel they
exposed their secrets to the public. {3} = -in-.

tanuk v [A; a] boil starchy foods, but not rice: ears of corn, root
crops, bananas. -in- a cooked root crops, bananas, or corn.

tanum v [A; c] {1} plant, grow plants. Katamnan nag sibúyas ang ímung
líug, Your neck is so thick with dirt you could plant onions on it.
{2} implant, nurture in the mind. Ayaw pagtanum ug kayugut sa ímung
dughan, Don’t harbor hatred in your heart. Itanum sa ímung kaisípan ang
ákung pína, Implant my admonition in your mind. n plant. (←) v [A; c]
plant a large crop. Makatánum ta kun dúnay ígung ulan, We can plant our
crops if there is enough rain. talamnánan n area prepared for planting.
mag-r- n s.o. engaged in planting. paN- n planting, farming. Pananum
ang ílang panginabúhì, Agriculture is their source of livelihood.

tanungan = talungan.

tánus v {1} [APB; c1] straighten; be, become straight. Siyay mitánus
(mipatánus) sa sangang báwug, He straightened the bent branch. Nagtánus
lang nang ímung bukubuku, Your back is certainly straight. {2} [A; a12]
discipline, impose disciplinary measures. Ang amahan ray makatánus
ánang batáa, Only the father can discipline that child. {2a} [B1256] be
chastened. Natánus ang maldítung bátà human malatiguhi, The mischievous
child was chastened after he got his whipping. a = tanus. (→)
a straight, not curved or bent. Tanus nga karsáda, Straight road. Tanus
nga bára, Straight bar.

tan-us n a yellowish swelling in the skin caused by an infection of a
wound or sore. Gitusdikan níyag dágum ang íyang tan-us, He pricked the
yellow swelling next to the scratch on his skin with a needle.
v [B3(1)46; b4] develop a yellow-colored infection under the skin next
to a wound. Gitan-usan ang íyang núka, His skin ulcers developed yellow
swellings on the sides.

tanyag v [A; c] {1} offer s.t. for s.o.’s consideration. Mitanyag
siyang ihatud ku, He offered to escort me. Gitanyagan aku níyag
trabáhu, He offered me a job. Pilay gitanyag sa balay? How much did
they offer for the house? {2} offer an opportunity, entertainment.
Kining dúlà itanyag álang sa inyung kalingáwan, This play is offered
for your enjoyment. n offer.

táp v {1} [A2; a2] be the tops in an exam. Siya ang mitáp sa bár, He
topped the bar exam. {2} [A; a1] buy all of s.t. Akuy mutáp sa ímung
mangga, I’ll buy all of those mangoes. Ákung baratúhun kun tápun nímug
palit, I’ll give them cheap if you buy all of them. {2a} [A; a12] take
on all of s.o.’s bet. Tápun ku bísag pilay inyung pusta, I will take
you on no matter how much you bet. n one who is tops in an exam.

tapa v {1} [A; a2] smoke fish. Makatapa kug isdà ug náay ginabas
ipaasu, I can smoke fish if there is some sawdust to smoke it with.
{1a} [A; c6] broil fish not close to the embers. Bagul itapa sa isdà,
Use coconut shells for broiling the fish. {2} [A; b(1)] kiln-dry copra.
Magtapa mi sa kupras kay way ínit, We’ll kiln-dry the copra because
there is no sun. n smoked fish. tapahan n {1} copra kiln-drier.
{2} grate for broiling. -in- n = tapa, n. see also tap-an.

tápa v [A; b6] make jerked meat. Magtápa kug unud sa kábaw, I’ll jerk
some carabao meat. -in- n {1} jerked meat. {2} canned fish in small,
thin tin cans.

tapad, tápad v [A3SC; ac] {1} stay, put beside s.t. Nakatapad kug gwápa
sa dyíp, I sat beside a pretty girl in the jeep. Ayaw sila tapára,
Don’t put them next to each other. Itapad nang diksiyunári kun magbásag
librung lisud, Put the dictionary beside you when you read a difficult
book. {2} stay next to s.o. to keep him company. Bisan dì ka mukáun,
tapari ku diri, Even if you don’t eat anything, sit here to keep me
company. n {1} s.o. sitting beside s.o. else. {2} next. Ang ámung báy
tápad (tapad) sa íla, Our house is next to theirs. (←) v {1} [C; ac]
compare so as to match. Gwápa ka kun tapáran ug maksut (maksut ang
itápad nímu), You are pretty if you are compared with an ugly person
(if an ugly person is put next to you). {2} [A2; ab2] match a cock with
another for a cockfight. Way mutápad sa ákung manuk nga maáyu mulabuk,
No one will match his cock with mine because it is good in fighting.
n comparison. Dì siya maiwit sa tápad, He does not lose out in
comparison. taparan n place where cocks are usually matched for a
cockfight. ka-(←) seatmate. Siyay ákung katápad sa klási, He is my
seatmate in class.

tápak v {1} [A; b] patch. Tapáki ring gisì sa kurtína, Patch the tear
here in the curtain. {2} [A12; c6] cover one’s debts. Karung swildúha
ígù rang ikatápak sa mga bayranan, This salary is just enough to pay
for the bills. {3} [A; c] cover up for undertime. Magtápak ku sa ákung
naabsinan, I’ll make up for the time I lost when I was absent.
{3a} cover over a bad feeling. Ang pag-inum-ínum ray íyang itápak sa
íyang mga kaguul, He drowns his sorrows in alcohol. (→) n patch on s.t.
torn. -in-an(→) n s.t. patched. -un(→) a having patches.

tap-ak v [A13; b6] step on. Hingtap-akan nákù ang ímung ituy, I
accidentally stepped on your puppy. Ngánung gitap-ákan man nímu ang
ákung irasan? Why did you step on my seedbed?

tapal v [A; b1] {1} pay, make up for s.t. lost or short. Makatapal
giyud kag wad-un nímu nà, You’ll have to pay for it if you lose it.
Tapli tung adlaw nga naabsin ka, Make up for the day you were absent.
{2} pay s.o.’s bills for later reimbursement. Tapli lang ku kay
nahibilin ang ákung pitáka, Pay for me because I left my wallet.
n amount of s.t. made up.

tápal v [A; c] lay s.t. over a small area and stick it. Nagtápal siyag
itsiban sa íyang payuk, He laid a medicinal plaster over his bruise.
Itápal ning inúsap dáhun sa samad, Chew the leaves and spread them over
the wound. n s.t. laid and stuck over.

tapalúdu (not without l) n mudguard, fender of a vehicle. v [A; a] put
a fender on.

tápan v [A; c1] do s.t. for a successive period without interruption.
Wà ku makatápan ug trabáhu karung bulána kay nagdaut ku, I was not able
to report for work steadily this month because I was ill. Natápan nákù
ang adlaw karung simanáha sa pagpanglaba, I spent the whole week doing
the laundry.

tap-an (from tapa) v [b5] broil fish not close to the embers. Tap-áni
ang isdà ayaw isugba, Broil the fish, but don’t charcoal broil it.
-in-an n s.t. broiled but not close to the fire.

tapang v [A12; b2] hit or do s.t. right, out of sheer luck. Nakatapang
siyag syát sa búla bísag layù, He put the ball into the basket from a
good distance by sheer luck. Hitapangan (hitapngan) níya ang tubag sa
pangutána, He guessed the answer to the question correctly out of sheer
luck. †

tapangku n {1} lean-to roof, a single-pitched, sloping roof constructed
at the sides or end of a building without the floors or walls.
{2} awning. v [A13; b6] put, construct a lean-to roof or awning.
Tapangkúhi ang inyung balay arun adúnay kabutangan sa awtu, Put a porte
cochere next to your house so you will have a place to keep your car.

tapar = tapal.

tapas v [A; a1] {1} dress yarn for weaving by starching and combing it
to eliminate fluff or lint and give it a degree of stiffness. {2} cut
sugar cane and clean it of its leaves. Nagtapas mis tubu pára galingun,
We are cutting sugar cane to mill. maN-r- n one who cuts sugar cane.

tapat v [A13] {1} be true and loyal to s.o. Sálig kay magtapat aku sa
ákung sáad, Trust me because I’ll be true to my promise. {2} resolve
oneself to reform. Nagtapat siyang dílì na mangáwat, He resolved not to
steal any more. a {1} loyal. Tapat ang irù sa íyang agálun, The dog is
loyal to its master. {2} sincere. Tapat ang íyang paghinulsul, He is
sincere in his repentance.

tápay_1 n {1} cock’s comb. {2} pula ang — for ears to be red from
drinking (humorous). Daling mamuwa ang íyang tápay ug makainum. His
ears grow red easily when he drinks. -an a {1} having a comb.
{2} having a crest. Sawang tapáyan, Crested snake. tapaytapay n k.o.
harmless insect resembling a spider but not spinning a web. tapaytápay
n annual ornamental with red (or also white or yellow) flowers in
panicles which resemble a cock’s comb: Celosia argentea var. cristata.

tápay_2 v [B12; c1] for roasted rice grains to be pounded flat.
Nagkatápay na ang pinípig sa tantung linubuk, The pinípig is becoming
flat from constant pounding.

tapdagan n k.o. sweet banana with green peelings, growing to about 4″,
similar to búngan. It is eaten uncooked.

tapdagay n k.o. light colored cerith found clinging to small stones.
Upon sensing danger they draw back into their shells and release their
hold thus falling down.

tapdas v [A; ab2] {1} brush off briskly with the hand or an instrument.
Hadluk siyang mutapdas sa uk-uk sa íyang sinínà, She’s afraid to brush
the cockroach off her dress. Hitapdasan níya ang básu pagkab-ut níya sa
kan-un, He knocked the glass off the table when he reached for the
food. {2} dust off by whisking. Tapdási sa kálù ang lingkuránan, Dust
the bench off with your hat. {3} [A; b6] for waves, wind to dash
against s.t. Makamig nga hángin mitapdas sa ákung nawung, A chilly wind
swept my face.

tapdawun n a convertible with the top down. v [A; c1] have the top of a
convertible down. Mutapdáwun lang siya sa íyang awtu ug way ínit, He
will have his car with the top down when the sun is not out.

taphaw a {1} shallow, not well-based. Taphaw ra kaáyu kanang
katarungána, That reasoning is too shallow. Gidakup siya bísan taphaw
lang ang katáhap, He was arrested on very shallow suspicion.
{2} insincere, superficial. Taphaw ang pahíyum nga pinugus, A forced
smile is artificial. {3} silly. Dì ba taphaw nang babayhána, mukatáwa
lag kalit nga walay hinungdan? Isn’t she silly the way she laughs
suddenly without reason?

tapi_1 a crooked, slanted, not well-rounded, off the mark. Tapi ning
pagkasulat kay way linya ang papil, The lines are not straight because
the paper has no lines. Tapi siyag úlu, His head is not well-rounded.
Tapi man, wà mabuls-ay, It’s off the mark, not a bull’s-eye. v {1} [AB;
c1] come out crooked, off the mark; cause s.t. to do so. Mutapi
(matapi) ang úlu sa bátà ug pirmi takildun, A child gets an
irregularly-shaped head if he is put down on his side. {2} [A; a1] fend
off a blow with a sideward motion of the arm or club. Tapihun nímu ang
duslak kay mau nay labing piligrúsu, You must fend off the forward
thrust because that is the most dangerous. tapitápi v [A; c1] do s.t.
unevenly, zigzaggedly. Nagtapitápig lakaw ang hubug, The drunk walked
in a zigzag way.

tapi_2 n piece of cloth wrapped around the waist or upper body as a
skirt. v [A13; c] wear a tapi. Nagtapi ang babáying nanglaba, The woman
who was washing clothes was wearing a skirt that covered her bosom down
to her knee.

tápig v [A; b1] {1} hide s.t. Tapígi iyang sapátus arun dì siya
kalakaw, Hide his shoes so he can’t go out. {2} put s.t. where people
can’t get at it. Akuy nagtápig sa midisína arun dì duláan, I put the
medicine away so no one could play with it. {3} hold for safekeeping.
Akuy tápig arun dì mawā̂, I’ll keep it so it can’t get lost. {4} keep
in secret. Ang kagahápun nagtápig ug mga katáwag kasákit, The past
hides joys and sorrows. -anan n hiding place. -in-an n s.t. kept
hidden.

tapigas = dapigas.

tapik n one who is related to a family through marriage. v [B236] be,
become an in-law to a family.

tápik n topic. áwut-ub — see áwut.

tap-il v [A; c] teasingly match s.o. with s.o. else. Ganáhan siyang
itap-il nákù kay nakagustu siya nákù, She likes people to pair her off
with me because she does like me. n pairing people off in a teasing
way. Tap-il ang sinugdánan sa ílang pagkatrátu, They were teasingly
matched and it led to serious courtship. -ay(→) n matching people off
in a group with each other teasingly.

tapindas v [B126] slip, sliding and losing one’s balance, but not
falling. Natapindas ku kay dangug ang ákung gilaktan, I lost my balance
because the path I was walking on was slippery, but I didn’t fall.
Culu- v [B] tip to the sides repeatedly because of unsteady footing.

táping n tap-dancing, dance with fancy footwork and tapping of the
feet. v [A] tap dance.

tap-ing n {1} an animal with a solid-color coat and a splotch on the
face of a different color. {2} big birthmark or splotch on the face.
v [B126; b8] have a big splotch. Natap-ing (natap-ingan) ang íyang
píkas nawung tungud sa sanla, Half of her face had a big splotch on it
from leprosy.

tapiri = tampiri.

tápir wír n tupperware.

tapis, tápis n piece of cloth worn around the waist or upper body as a
skirt. v [A; c] wear s.t. wound around the body. Hubù siya gawas sa
tualya nga gitápis, She was naked except for a towel she wore around
her waist. (→) v [B1456] be at the stage of developing a sheath around
the trunk. Lubi kun magtapis na, A coconut when it gets its sheath.

tapíta n taffeta, a fine, rather stiff, silk cloth with a sheen. v [A;
a] use taffeta cloth.

tapíti n {1} billiard table carpet. {2} sewing machine cover.
v {1} [b6(1)] carpet a billiard table. {2} [A; a] use, make into a
sewing machine cover.

tapiun v {1} [A; c] press or lay one’s hand on a part of the body.
Itapiun ang kamut sa nag-agus nga samad, Press your hand down on the
bleeding wound. {2} [A; b(1)] stifle progress, prevent from developing.
Imbis tabángan arun muasinsu tapin-an na hinúun níya, Instead of
helping her improve, he stifles her progress. {2a} sit on an
application or papers, pigeonhole them. Ug way mutapiun sa aplikisiyun,
madáwat ka, If nobody pigeonholes your application, you will be
accepted. {3} [A2; c6] play a chord by pressing it with the fingers.
n chord of a guitar or any stringed instrument which is played by
pressing with the fingers.

taplud n luggage carrier on top of vehicles. -ing n = taplud.

tapnatsir n top-notcher, one who is tops in an examination. v [B126;
b6] be the top-notcher. Ang miáging bár mauy íyang gitapnatsíran, He
was in first place in the bar examination last year.

tapsay n a triangular fishnet into which the fish are driven, operated
by one or two people holding the V-shaped frame and two people working
the scareline. paN- v [A2; b6] go fishing with a tapsay.

tapsing v {1} [A2; b8] sideswipe, graze. Ígù rang nakatapsing ang bála
sa úlu, The bullet only grazed his head. Padaplin kay hitapsingan kag
trák, Stay on the side. You might get sideswiped by a bus.

taptap v [A; b] cover s.t. by laying s.t. over it, putting s.t. flat on
top of it. Usa ka táwuy mitaptap nákù arun dì ku makadumdum sa agiánan,
A person blindfolded me so I wouldn’t know the way. Nagtaptap ug panyù
ang mga tulisan, The robbers covered their faces with handkerchiefs.
Taptápig puwa ang tabánug, Cover the kite with red paper. Ang lángit
gitaptápan sa mabagang dag-um, The sky is covered with thick clouds.
n s.t. lain over as a covering.

taptin n the first ten from the top. Nahiapil ku sa taptin sa ámung
klási, I am among the top ten in our class.

tápù v {1} [A; ac6] put all together. Kinsay nagtápù íning tanan sa
sáku? Who put them all in the sack? {2} [A2C3; c16] for one end of s.t.
tied around the body to meet the other. Nagtápù ang higut apan dì
mabalighut, The two ends of the bond meet but you can’t tie them.
Matápù nímu ang duha nímu ka kamut sa íyang páa, You can encircle her
legs with your two hands. {2a} join, connect. Gitápù ang ílang kamut,
They joined hands. hi-/ha-(→) v [B1256] {1} be put together with the
rest by chance. Ngánung nahitapù ning ákung butang sa imúha? Why are my
things mixed with yours? {2} happen to join, live with a group. Maáyung
nahitapù ku sa inyung grúpu, It’s a good thing that I joined your
group.

tapuk a for fibrous materials to be weak, easily torn. Kining klasíha
sa panaptun tapuk kaáyu, This k.o. cloth is very weak. v [B2] be weak,
easily torn. Ang bisti nga ihúmul sa klúruks matapuk, Clothes soaked in
chlorox get weak.

tápuk_1 v [AC3; a2] {1} make a pile of s.t. scattered. Nagkatápuk ang
mga pangánud, The clouds gathered. Tapúka ang mga dáhun, Pile the
leaves up. {2} gather people, be gathered. Nagkatápuk uruy ang mga
búang, A bunch of fools have gotten together in one place. Tapúka ang
mga saup kay ákung pakigsultíhan, Get the tenants together so I can
have a talk with them. n {1} pile of things. {2} crowd gathered.
tapuktápuk v [A1; b6] form cliques within a larger group. Kinahanglang
úsa tanan, way magtapuktápuk, All must be in one group, no forming of
cliques. n {1} clique. {2} social gatherings, parties. Sa mga
tapuktápuk náa giyud ang susyalayit, The socialites are sure to be
present at gatherings. tapuktapuk = pundukpunduk. see punduk.

tápuk_2 v [A; c] dump, throw away waste materials. Itápuk nang patayng
ilagà sa kanal, Dump the dead rat into the canal.

tapukù = tipukù.

tapul n any variety of root crop, grain, or beans that is dark violet
in color.

tápul v [B46; a4b4] be, become lazy. Mitápul siyas trabáhu kay gamayg
swildu, He became lazy in his work because he got a small salary.
Gitápul (gitapúlan) na sad siya maung miabsin, He felt lazy again so
he’s absent. -an(→) a lazy. -in-an(→) v [A1] do lazily. a lazily done.
-in- v [A13; b6] do in a lazy way. Gitinapúlan lang níya ang ákung
súgù, He just ran my errand in a lazy way.

tapun_1 v [A2; c] {1} move to another house or place. Kung mag-áway ang
magtiáyun ang asáwa adtu dáyun mutapun sa íyang ugángan, If the couple
quarrels, the wife immediately goes to stay with her mother-in-law.
{2} move, bring to a nearby location separated by some k.o. barrier.
Mitapun ang langgam sa láing sanga, The bird moved to another branch.
{3} cross to the opposing party. Daghang mutapun sa partídung daúgan,
Many people will cross over to the winning party. n area across s.t.
Kining kaingína muluwak sa tapun íning búd, This clearing stretches
over to the opposite slope of this hill.

tapun_2 n s.t. used as a cover for a valve.

tap-ung v [A; b] cover, close an opening or passage. Manap-ung ka sa
bàbà ug muubu ka, Cover your mouth when you cough. Natap-ungan ang
kanal kay mikáwas ang túbig ngari, The canal is clogged up because the
water overflowed this way. Tabla ang itap-ung sa lungag, Use a piece of
wallboard to cover the hole. n s.t. used to cover an opening or
passage.

tapun-ug = tipun-ug.

tapuruk n k.o. ark shell.

tápus_1 v {1} [A; a1] put an end to, finish. Dakung kumbíti ang mitápus
sa silibrasiyun, A big feast concluded the celebration. Tapúsa na siya
arun mahílum, Kill him (lit. finish him off) to silence him.
{2} [A2B12; a12] do to the end, come to an end. Wà ku mutápus sa sini
kay way lamì, I didn’t finish the movie because it was no good. Mutápus
(matápus) ang prugráma inig-aríya sa tilun, The program will come to an
end when the curtain comes down. pagka- afterwards, after that.
{3} [A13] hold the tápus feast. n {1} after, at the end of. Tápus sa
gúbat, After the war. {2} the feast which is prepared on the ninth day
of the prayer for a deceased person. (→) that’s all, that will do it.
Kun masukù siya hagki lang. Tapus, If she gets angry, kiss her. That
will do it. — dáyun n a story in a periodical or on radio or TV
complete in one installment. hiN-(→) v [A13] coming to an end. Atangi
ang naghinapus tang sugilánun, Watch for our story that’s nearing its
conclusion. paN- v [c] make as a concluding point, part or finale. Ang
sáyaw mauy ipanápus nátù sa prugráma, We will make the dance number the
last part. n s.t. that concludes. Maáyung panápus tung bálak sa ímung
diskursu, That poem made a good ending to your speech. paN-(→) a final,
no matter what the consequences might be. Ibundak ku ning uska libu.
Panapus ning sugála kay nagkapildipildi ku, I ran out of luck, but I’ll
gamble this one thousand pesos, come what may. ka-an n {1} end,
termination. {2} = tápus, n2. v [A13; b6(1)] hold the tápus feast.
-um-r-(→) n about to end or finish. Tumatapus na ang prugráma ug
mamaulì na ta, The program is about to end, and we will go home.

tápus_2 = tulápus. see ílu.

tap-us v [A; b6(1)] plaster medicinal leaves on an afflicted portion.
Gitap-úsan níyag dáhun sa tubatuba ang piang, She put a plaster of
tubatuba leaves on the sprain. n medicinal plaster.

tapusuk n wentletrap, k.o. edible univalve.

taput v {1} [AC3; b] stick, be firmly attached to s.t. Mitaput giyud
ang buling sa sinínà, The dirt sure stuck to the clothes. Nagtáput ang
láwas sa sayamis tuwins, The bodies of the Siamese twins are stuck to
each other. Gitaptan ug sisi ang gapnud, Small oysters were attached to
the driftwood. {2} [A2; b] for a disease to infect s.o. Dì makataput
ang sakit sa himsug nga láwas, Disease cannot infect a healthy body.
{3} [A2; b6] remain very close and loyal to s.o. Mutaput siya nímu kun
ímu siyang makúhà, She will stick to you once you have had her.
{4} [b4] be somewhat affected by an unpleasant feeling. Gitaptan siyag
kalísang, Fear came over him. a {1} tight-fitting clothes. Taput kaáyu
sa láwas ang sinínà ni Marilin, Marilyn has a very tight-fitting dress
on. {2} sticking to the spot as if stuck. Kasing taput, A top that
whirls without wobbling. — láwas see láwas. — sa pamilya one who has
become a member of a family through marriage. Wà kay lábut sa panunud
kay taput lang kas mga Ríyis, You do not get an inheritance because you
are related to the Reyeses only by marriage. pa- n thin tissue paper
used to make lanterns or kites. taptanan n joist in a roof to which the
galvanized iron sheets are attached.

tapuy v [A; c] finger the strings or the keys of a musical instrument
and the like. Bungul ang tíngug sa sista kay luag kang mutapuy, The
guitar sounds dull because you’re not holding tight enough to the
chords. Gitapuy níya ang íyang mga tudlù sa tikla, He let his fingers
move over the keyboard. n fingering of chords. tapyanan n finger board
or a fret of a stringed instrument.

tapwak v {1} [A3P; c] drag, push s.o. to danger or sin. Ikaw ang
nagtapwak níya sa kadaútan, You drove her to danger. {2} [A; b(1)]
dive, dash forcefully towards. Kinsa tung mitapwak sa ákung likud, Who
was that who jumped on my back? {3} [a3b8] meet the eyes. Mauy natapwak
(natapwakan) sa ákung panan-aw ang babáying naghúbù, A stark naked
woman met my eyes. {4} [A; c] splash onto. Usa ka dakung balud ang
mitapwak sa íyang náwung, A big wave splashed his face. Hitapwakan ug
íhì ang nangharána, The serenaders got splashed with a potful of urine.

tapya v {1} [A; c1] for waves to dash against the shore. Tapyáhun
(itapya) nang gapnud sa baybáyun, The waves will dash that driftwood
against the shore. {2} [A; a12] fend off blows with the palm or with an
instrument. Tapyáha íyang duslak sa ímung bangkaw, Fend off his thrust
with your spear. n dashing of waves. tapyahan n seashore where the
waves break.

tapyas v {1} [A2; b] graze, rub against slightly. Gitapyasan sa panà
ang íyang áping, His cheek was grazed by the arrow. {2} [A; a1]
deflect, hit with a swinging arm. Makatapyas ka íning dunggába? Could
you parry this thrust? Tapyasa ang mga lamuk, Drive the mosquitoes away
by swinging your arms. {3} [A; a] wipe s.t. off s.t. by sliding the
palm of the hand over it. Tapyása ang mga sagbut sa lamísa, Sweep the
scraps off the table.

tarà v {1} [A; cP] put s.t. where it is easy to get at, can easily be
hit. Mitarà siya sa íyang nawung sa táwu nga nag-ingung musagpà, She
put her face forward when the man threatened to slap her so he could
hit her squarely if he dared. Kinsay nagtarà ug usa ka plátung mani sa
mga bátà? Who put a plate of peanuts in front of the children where
they could get at them? {2} [A; c] point at, train upon. Wà pa gánì
siya makatarà, mibutu na ang pusil, The gun went off even before he
could take his aim. Itarà ang ímung nawung sa adlaw, Face directly to
the sun. a {1} in fighting, exposing the body and not parrying or
ducking. Tarà muáway manúka, dì mulihay, That rooster exposes itself
when it fights and fails to parry. {2} for a woman to be motionless,
sexually unresponsive. Tarà babayhána, dì mubálus kun dyangdyángun, An
unresponsive woman. She does not react to sexual play. pa- v [A; c6]
fail to move and thus expose oneself instead of defending oneself or
hiding. Ayawg patarà sa pinusílay, Don’t expose yourself to the line of
fire.

tarabáhu = trabáhu.

tarabisíya = trabisíya.

taráha = tráha.

tarák = trák.

taraktarak_1 v [A1; b6] put several blade marks on s.t. Ákung
gitaraktarakan ang punúan sa nangkà arun muági ang taguk, I put blade
marks in the trunk of the jackfruit so the sap would flow.

taraktarak_2 v [A1] make noisy footfalls. Gisabáan ang mga burdir sa
sílung kay may nagtaraktarak sa táas, The boarders on the ground floor
were disturbed by the person walking noisily upstairs.

táral v [A; a2] {1} force s.t. to come along by dragging. Gitáral nákug
bábuy ngadtu sa ihawan, I dragged the pig to the slaughterhouse.
{1a} coax s.o. into coming along. Ayaw pagkúyug ug dúnay mutáral
pagpangharána, Don’t go if s.o. coaxes you into going serenading.
{2} bring before the court for trial. Tarálun sa hukmánan ang
gikatahápan, The suspect will be brought to court. {3} drag s.o. to
misery. Tarálun ta ka sa kauláwan uban nákù, I’ll drag you down to
shame with me. Tarálun ka sa kamatáyun niánang labihan mung
paghingaguul, You’ll be dragged to death with your excessive grief.
taraltáral v [A3; a12] carry or take along where s.o. is. Ang íyang
amígu mauy nagtaraltáral níya sa syudad, His friend took him out and
around the city.

tarangka = trangka.

taranta, tarantǎr v [B126; b3(1)c5] {1} lose one’s head due to fright,
panic. Natarantar siya dihang nagpúsil na, He panicked when the
shoot-out started. {2} get rattled, lose one’s presence of mind.
Natarantǎr siya dihang gipangutána siyas abugádu, He got rattled when
the lawyer questioned him. tarantádu a {1} panicked. {2} stupid in
one’s action. Katarantádu nímu! Ngánu gung ímung gihíkap ang pintal nga
basà pa, You fool! Why did you touch the wet paint? v [B12; b6]
{1} panic. {2} become stupid.

taras n one’s character trait in regards to the way he deals with other
people. Gidáyig ku ang íyang taras pagkamaabiabíhun ug pagkamaluluy-un,
I admire his trait of character, his hospitality and his ability to
sympathize.

tarbáhu = trabáhu.

tardang_1 v [A; c] strike at a trunk or branch of a tree with a bladed
instrument with moderate force and without intention of cutting it off.
Nagtardang ku sa punúan sa nangkà nga ákung gikuháan ug taguk, I
chopped a mark in the jackfruit trunk to get sap.

*tardang_2 pa- v [A; c] {1} expose s.t. or oneself to the elements or
for others to see. Gipatardang ni Rúsa ang íyang páa arun ku
makaalinggat, Rosa exposed her legs to catch my attention. {2} allow
s.o. or oneself to do as much of s.t. as he wants. Ayaw patardánga ug
pakáun ang bátà, Don’t let the child eat as much as he wants.

targit n {1} target. Aku bay targit sa ímung insultu, Am I the target
of your insult? {2} skill in throwing the knife. {3} bull’s eye hit.
Syátir giyud ka kay targit man, You must be a sharpshooter because it’s
a bull’s eye. {4} children’s game in which the object is to hook rubber
bands which have been laid on the ground with an arrow projected by a
rubber band. {4a} toy arrow made of coconut midribs used in a game of
targit. {5} manner of shooting in basketball wherein the ball is made
to go straight into the basket instead of describing an arc. v {1} [A;
a1] hit the target. Makatargit ku ánang láta, I can hit that can.
{2} [A; a] hit by throwing a knife. Ayaw siyag pusila. Targíta lang,
Don’t gun him down. Just hit him with a knife. {3} [C; b6] play targit.
{4} [A; a] make a targit shot in basketball. {5} [A; a12] have s.o. for
sexual intercourse. — praktis n target practice. v [A1; b6] have target
practice. targittargit = targit, n4.

tarha v [A; c] deduct tare weight. Ang Insik mitarhag singku kílus sa
usa ka sákung kupras kay basà, The Chinese deducted five kilos from the
total weight of the sack of copra to make up for its being wet. n tare
weight deducted.

tarhíta n card, tag. v [A; b6] put a tag on s.t. Tarhitái ang pákids
arun dì mawā̂, Put a tag on the package so it won’t get lost.

tárì v {1} [AC; a] enter, fight a cock in a cockfight with gaffs.
Tarían ku nang ugis mu sa ákung pula, I’ll pit my red cock against your
white one. {1a} [A1C; b6] have, hold a cockfight. Magtárì rung Birnis,
There will be a cockfight this Friday. {2} [A; b] tie the gaff on the
cock’s leg. Hapini ang tiil únà taríi, Pad the leg before tying the
gaff on it. (→) n gaff. Naunay ka sa kaugalíngun nímung tarì kay ang
ímu hinúung irù ang nahílu imbis ang sa silíngan, You fell into your
own trap (lit. got cut with your own gaff) when your dog was poisoned
instead of your neighbor’s. pa- v [A13] be in a fighting mood or shape
(lit. wants to be made to fight). paN- v [A2; c6] go to the cockfights.
Kuháa ang hiniktan kay manárì ku, Get the cock, I am going to the
cockfights. n cockfighting. ig-r-/l- n cock for fighting. maN-r-(→)
n cockfighting enthusiast. -un(→) a a perfect match, ideal for pairing
off in marriage. Ikaw duktur ug siya nars; tariun giyud mu kaáyu,
You’re a doctor and she’s a nurse; you are a perfect match.

tarik n {1} outrigger boom, the poles to which the floats are attached.
{2} penis (slang). v [a] put, make into an outrigger boom.

taríkì = turíkì.

taríma n {1} movable platform on which cargo is placed in loading or
unloading a ship. {2} vending stall, stand. Dúnay napúlù ka taríma sa
isdaan, There are ten stalls in the fish section of the market. v [A;
a] {1} make into, put up a movable platform. {2} make, put up a vending
stall. Gitarimáhan na ang bag-ung tabuan, Stalls have already been
installed in the new marketplace.

taringtaring a flirt. Dalì nang bayhána paangkan kay taringtaring, That
girl will surely get pregnant because she is a flirt. v [B; b6] flirt;
be a flirt. Kusug siyang mutaringtaring sa mga laláki maung daghang
uyab, She flirts a lot. That is why she has lots of boys interested in
her.

tarípa n customs duties.†

tarírit n a guide for the cue in billiards on which the cue is laid
when one has to shoot a ball which is too far from the edge of the
table for the hand to prop the cue.

tariya, taríya n assignment, allotment of work. v [A; c] assign a piece
of work to s.o. Si Tatay nagtaríya nákug kawus, Father gave me the
chore of fetching water. Gaan ang itaríya sa luyahun, Assign an easy
job to weak persons.

tarsan name: Tarzan. -in- v [A; b6] act like Tarzan: climb and jump in
a risky way. Ayawg tinarsan dihà kay mahúlug ka, Stop playing Tarzan.
You might fall.

tarsin short for murtar sin. = murtal_1, a2.

tartanilya n two-wheeled, horse-drawn rig. v [A13; a12] ride on a rig.
Tartanilyáhun nímu nang duul kaáyu, Do you have to ride a rig for such
a short distance?

táru n large cubical tin can made to contain kerosene and hold five
gallons. v [B256] get to be one táru full. Wà ra mutáru ang nainum
námung tubà, We didn’t even consume five gallons of palm toddy.

tarug v {1} [A; a12] budge a little. Ígù lang natarug ang kutsing ákung
gitúlud, The car I was pushing just barely budged. {2} [B12; a1] for
s.t. implanted to become loose. Manghíngù na ang bátà kay nagkatarug na
íyang ngípun, The child will soon lose his teeth now that they are
getting loose. {3} [B126] for feelings to be moved, softened. Bisan
lúhà dì makatarug (makapatarug) sa íyang balatían, Even tears cannot
move his feelings. a s.t. planted that is loose. Húmuk na ibtun ang
lansang kay tarug na, It’s easy to pull the nail out now because it’s
loose. n a loose tooth. Ipaibut na ímung tarug, Have your loose tooth
pulled.

tarughuy = tarugsuy.

tarugsuy a tapering to a point. Daw tudlung nagsudiyà ang tarugsuy
níyang dughan, Her breasts are pointed like an accusing finger. v [B6]
be pointed. Nagtarugsuy lang ang mais kay wà ulana, The cornstalks
stood like pointed sticks because there was no rain.

tarúgu n {1} a peg or rod to hold s.t. in place or provide support.
{2} penis (slang). v [A; b6(1)] put a peg. Tarugúhan ug dakù ang halígi
arun makadaug sa busaug, Put a large peg in the post to support it so
it will hold up the joists.

táruk v [A; c] {1} plant a post or s.t. large. Lawma kun magtáruk kag
pusti, When you plant a post make it deep. {2} erect a structure.
Magtáruk tag bunggalu inigkaminyù nátù, We’ll construct a bungalow when
we get married. taruktaruk v [AP] sit or stand motionless, not saying a
word. Ang táwung hilumun nagtaruktaruk (nagpataruktaruk) lag lingkud,
The quiet man was sitting without saying a word.

tárung a {1} straight, not curved. Tárung nga dálan, Straight path.
{2} straight, not tilting or slanting. v {1} [A; a1] set upright or
level s.t. slanting or tilting. Tarúnga nang pusting naghirig,
Straighten up that leaning post. {2} [A; a12] do s.t. seriously and
properly, not playfully or improperly. Káun ug tárung, Eat properly.
{3} [B6] be reformed. Nagtárung (nagtarung) na siya gíkang giparul, He
has reformed since he was paroled. {4} [B456] behave well. Magtárung ka
kun dúnay bisíta, Behave when we have visitors. {5} [A; c1] do, put in
a proper position. Ug mutárung tag higdà, masulud tang tanan dinhi sa
sála, If we arrange ourselves properly we can all sleep in the living
room. (→) a {1} right and proper. Wà kay mabúhat nga tarung kun
matarantǎr ka, You won’t do anything right if you panic. {2} sane, not
crazy. Tarung pa ba nang táwung síging tagawtaw, Could you call s.o.
who keeps talking nonsense to himself sane? tarungtarung a quite
presentable. Usa ra ka parisan ang ákung sapátus nga tarungtarung, I
have only one pair of shoes that is presentable. ka- n right, justice.
Ang katárung mudaug giyud sa dautan, Right triumphs over wrong. ka-an
n {1} reason. Matag búhat dúna giyuy katarúngan, Every action must have
a reason. {2} justice. Labánan ang katarúngan, Defend justice. láwas ug
ka-an see láwas. v [c6] give as a reason. Milális giyud siya bisag way
ikatarúngan, He argued even if he had no argument to make. panga-an
v [A2; c6] give an explanation or defense, justify oneself.
Pangatarúngan kun hustu ka, Explain yourself when you’re right.
n argument given in defense, explanation for justification. maka-anun
a {1} reasonable. Makatarungánun ang íyang hangyù, Her request is
reasonable. {2} just, fair. Makatarungánun ang Diyus, God is just. ma-
a righteous. Wà siyay diyus, apan matárung siya, He knows no God, but
he is righteous. mina-(→) a in a righteous way.

tarúngan a crested, having a circular growth of flesh or feathers on
the crown or head. Ang tarúngan nga manuk dúnay balhíbu nga mag-ulbu sa
úlu, A crested chicken has a puff of feathers forming a circle on the
top of its head.

tarúrut n {1} paper, leaf rolled into a cone. Usa ka tarúrut mani,
Peanuts in a piece of paper rolled into a cone. {2} k.o. squid
characterized by its long tapering tail. {3} any musical instrument or
noisemaker blown with the mouth. {3a} drumbeater, publicity man.
Gisangyaw dáyun sa mga tarúrut sa mayur nga siya ang nakapasimintu sa
dálan Kulun, The mayor’s publicity men immediately broadcast that he
was responsible for cementing Colon St. {4} cuckold. a short and stout.
Tarúrut tan-áwun ang mubù nga mutambuk, A short person looks like a
cone when he grows stout. v [A; a2] {1} roll s.t. into a cone.
Nagtarúrut si Tátay arun ipúli sa íyang nawálang hunsuy, Father rolled
a leaf into a cone to smoke with when he lost his pipe. {2} play a wind
instrument. {3} for a wife to make a fool of her husband by taking up
with other men. Gitarúrut siya sa íyang asáwa, His wife made him a
cuckold.

tarúti n trot, a gait of a horse in which the legs are lifted in
alternating diagonal pairs. v [A; a2] trot. Maáyu mutarúti ning
kabayúa, dì kaáyu lihuk, This horse trots well. It does not bounce so
much.

tarútut = tarúrut.

tarútuy = turútuy.

táruy = tagduy.

tása, tásà n cup. v [A13; a12] use a cup. Tasáa lang ang sabaw kun way
yahung, Use cups if there are no soup bowls.

tasadur n assessor, a person who sets valuation on property for
taxation purposes. v [B156] be, become an assessor.

tasal v [A; c] set a date or time to do s.t., or for s.t. to happen. Dì
ku mutasal anus-a ku mubálik, I won’t set a date as to when I’m coming
back. Gitasalan ang masakitun sa kansir ug usa ka búlan, The cancer
patient was given a month to live. Lúnis ang gitasal nga adlaw sa
kasal, Monday was the day set for the wedding. n date fixed for s.t.
expected. tasádu n a fixed date, term. Way tasádu kun anus-a ang ílang
kasal, There’s no date fixed for their wedding. v [A; b(1)] give a
date, term or period. Mutasádu kag úras kun anus-a ku ikaw hapita, You
have to set a fixed time as to when I shall pick you up.

tasar = tasal.

tasasiyun n valuation; assessment of s.t. v [A13; c] assess, value s.t.
at. Gitasasiyunan lag mínus arun dì ku mabuktut sa buluhísan, My
property was given a low valuation so I could escape the taxes.

tásik n {1} the liquid residue of sea water that has been crystalized
in salt making. {2} liquid residue left after milling sugar. haluan —
n snakeheads found in salt water.

taslak v [B3(1); b2] loaf, go about lazily in one’s work. Mutaslak ang
mga trabahadur ug way magtan-aw níla, The workers loaf in their work if
no one watches them. -an(→) a {1} lazy, fond of loafing. Taslakan kaáyu
siya ug náay masúgù, She is very lazy when there’s s.o. to do the
household work. {2} cowardly. Taslakan kaáyu nang bayhána, dì makatáhas
sa báy nga mau rang usa, That woman is very cowardly. She is afraid to
stay in the house alone. v [B12; b6] {1} become a lazybone. {2} become
cowardly. ka- n fear, cowardice.

taslup (from salup) v {1} [A; c] penetrate, sink into. Mitaslup ang
tinggà sa túbig, The sinker sunk into the water. Walà makataslup sa
íyang buktun ang dágum sa indiksiyun, The hypodermic needle didn’t
penetrate into his arm. {2} [A2; b(1)] penetrate deep into s.t.; impart
s.t. into the thing penetrated. Mitaslup na ang kaparat sa isdà, The
saltiness has penetrated deep into the flesh of the fish. Nakataslup na
ang kahumut sa panákut sa kasahusun, The taste of the spices has
penetrated deep into the jerked meat. {3} [A2] for the sun to disappear
behind s.t., set.

tasngà v [A13] grin idiotically. Nagtasngà lang siyang gikasab-an, He
just grinned stupidly as he was scolded.

taspuk v [A3P; b6] laze, loaf. Nagtaspuk siya sa íyang trabáhu, He is
loafing on his job. -an(→) a lazy. v [B12; b6] become lazy. ka-
n laziness.

tastas v [A; a] undo stitches. Tastása ang tahì sa sákung himúung
hábul, Undo the stitches of the sacks to make them into a blanket.
a stitches that came undone.

táta n {1} father, address of respect to a father, esp. among Muslims.
{2} address of respect to an old man, esp. a close relative. v [A; a]
address or call s.o. táta.

tátà short form: tà n a pet name for boys or girls.

tàtà_1 v {1} [B12; b6] worn out, damaged due to rough or constant use.
Natàtà ang karsúnis ug ginámit, The pants are worn out after long use.
{2} [B126; a12] badly bruised by blows. Tàtáun ku ang simud ánang
pisti, I’ll pulverize that s.o.b.’s snout.

tàtà_2 v [A; c1] {1} empty a container of its contents by turning it
upside down and banging it downwards. Nagtàtà ku sa mga síli áring
butilya, I’m pushing the chili peppers out of this bottle. Itàtà
(tàtáa) ang mga sulud sa sáku, Shake out the contents of the sack.
{2} pour, take out catch from a fish net or fish trap. {3} empty
coconut-palm toddy in a container. {3a} sell coconut-palm toddy to a
permanent customer. Mutàtà kug tubà nímu káda buntag, I’ll sell you
fresh coconut-palm toddy every morning. {4} [A; b] lap at a liquid. Irù
ang mitàtà sa litsis bátà, The dog lapped the baby’s milk. -an n {1} a
shed where catch from different bancas are put together for division
into shares. {2} place where palm toddy is kept. {3} person who sells
palm toddy on a regular basis.

tatak (slang) n {1} label indicating the make of s.t. {2} tattoo. v [A;
c] attach a certain label. Dílì tinúud mahalun nang íyang sinínà.
Gitatakan lang ug Kristiyan Díyur, It’s not really an expensive dress.
She just sewed a Christian Dior label into it.

tátang n an address of respect given to an old grandfather or
great-grandfather; sometimes used to address an old and well-respected
leader in a community. v [A13; a12] call s.o. tátang.

tátaw a {1} clearly visible, not covered. Tátaw sa bintánà ang ílang
rinubuhay, You could see them necking clearly through the window.
{2} obvious. Tátaw kaáyu siyang nag-inartista, She’s obviously faking.
v [B12; b6] {1} be clearly seen. Matátaw nímu ang dágat ibabaw sa
búkid, You can clearly see the sea from the top of the hill. {2} be
obvious. Minuri kay matátaw kaáyung gustu ka níya, Slow down. It’s
obvious that you like him.

tatay, tátay n term of address to one’s father and sometimes uncle or
grandfather. v {1} [A; a12] call s.o. father. {2} [B1256] become a
father. (→) voc. short form: tay.

tatha v [A; a2] cut or lop off branches with a bladed tool. Tatháun ku
ning sangáha nga nagdaplay sa alambri, I will cut off the branch that
hangs across the electric wires.

táting n {1} tatting, knotted lace. {2} shuttle for making tatting.
v [A; a2] make tatting.

tatsa v {1} [A12; b4(1)] mark or blemish on an otherwise smooth
surface. Wà giyud makatatsa ang buksidur sa íyang kuntra, The boxer was
not able to make a single mark on his opponent. Natatsahan ang íyang
puting barung, His white barong has a spot on it. {2} [A2N; b5c]
criticize; find fault with s.t. Kusug siyang mutatsa (manatsa) sa búhat
sa uban, He is fond of criticizing others’ work. n mark, blemish. Way
tatsa ang íyang pagkababáyi, Her womanhood is unblemished. -dur a fond
of criticizing or despising. -dúra = tatsadur (female).

tatsǎr = tatsa.

tatsing v [a12] touch the net in volleyball. n {1} the violation of
touching. {2} one who commits the violation. Tatsing ka. Ákung sirbi,
You touched the net. My serve.

tatsu n a k.o. rounded, shallow brass or clay pan having two handles,
used primarily in making sweets. v [A; a] use a tatsu.

tatu, tatù v [A; b] mark with a tattoo. Tatuhan tag kurus ímung buktun,
Let’s tattoo a cross on your arm. n tattoo marks.

tátut = bí, 1.

tatuwa = lunaw.

táub a high tide. Táub (taub) kaáyu ang dágat run, The tide is high
now. v [B45; b4] be high tide. Láwum ang pantalan kun mutáub, The
harbor is deep when it’s high tide. n tide. Ang táub gaagad lang sa
búlan, The tide depends on the moon. -un n {1} sea at high tide.
Misíbug na ang taúbun, The tide is going out now. {2} high tide. Abtun
giyud nang sináug nga barútu kay milíhuk na ang taúbun, When the high
tide rushes in it will surely reach the boat that has been beached.

táud v {1} [A; c] put s.t. up or on by fastening, attaching, or
inserting. Pagtáud ug muskitíru, Put up a mosquito net. Itáud ang
singsing, Put the ring on. {2} [C2; c3] have sexual intercourse.
Nagtáud sigúru sila kay nahílum, They must be having intercourse
because they’re silent. {3} [A; a12] make a plow. n plow. Bargas karun
ang ákung táud, I use a Vargas plow now. (→) n a trimming of lace
attached to a garment as a frill.

taudtaud {1} after a while. Mihigdà ku, unyà taudtaud nakatúlug, I lay
down, and after a while fell asleep. {2} be for some time. Taudtaud ka
nang wà mubisíta nákù, It’s been some time since you visited me.
{3} [do] every now and then. Taudtaud lag pangíhì ning táwung gibus-aw,
This man with a bladder ailment keeps having frequent urination.
v {1} [B246; b] done some time ago. Mutaudtaud na karung wà kung kakità
ug sini, It’s been some time now since I’ve last seen a movie.
Pataudtauri (taudtauri) nà sa káyu únà haúna, Let it stay over the fire
for several minutes before you take it off. {2} [A13] do s.t. every now
and then. {3} [b8] taking a rather long time. Mataudtauran pa dagway
úsà siya muulì, It will probably be some time before he comes home.

táuk = taláuk.

taun v [A; c] {1} set a trap or fishline in place. {2} offer a part of
the body to receive blows or abuse. Gitaun sa irù ang íyang líug arun
kahiktan, The dog offered its neck to let us tie it. {3} place s.t. as
a bet. Ayaw itaun ang buakung húlin, Don’t put broken marbles down as
your bet. n bet put together with others in a game.

taunduk = tausduk.

táup v {1} [A; P] pierce deep. Mitáup ang udiyung sa íyang dughan, The
arrow pierced deep into his breast. {2} [B125] for the sound of s.t.
one cannot see to fade away. Natáup ang tíngug sa nagkalayung
ayruplánu, The sound of the airplane faded as it got further and
further away. paN- v [A23] {1} sink, disappear below the level of.
Nanáup ang barku sa pagkalúnud niíni. Bisan pálu wà makítà, The ship
was completely hidden when it sank. Even the mast could not be seen on
the surface of the water. Nanáup ang bátà sa daghang táwu, The child
disappeared in the midst of the crowd. {2} for a score to be at the
lowest, or at the bottom. Sa lima ka tím, íla rang iskur ang nanáup, Of
the five teams, their score was the lowest.

tausduk v [B4; c1] be piled or heaped high. Nagtausduk ang labhanan sa
palanggána, The laundry is piled high in the basin. Ayawg tausdúka
(itausduk) ang kan-un sa plátu, Do not heap the food on the plate.

tawa a jovial of face or visage. Ang táwu nga tawa (matawa) ug
panagway, A person of joyful mien. ma- = tawa. ka-(←) v [A2S; b3C5]
laugh. Nagkatawa sila sa múut kaáyung sini, They were laughing at the
funny picture. Gikataw-an ang bukidnun, They laughed at the bumpkin.
Dílì ikakatáwa kanang hitabúa, That incident cannot be laughed off.
n laughter. hika-/haka- v [B1256] laugh despite oneself. Nahikatawa ku
pagkadalin-as níya, I couldn’t help laughing when he slipped.
kataw-anay, kinataw-anay v [C3] smile at each other. hinga- a gay,
easily aroused to laughter. kataw-anan a funny. kalataw-an n laughing
stock. kinataw-an n manner of laughing. kataw-unun a feel like bursting
into laughter. mataw-ánun a laughingly, jokingly. Mataw-ánung
pangutána, A joking question.

tawà n k.o. fishing with a drift line for moderately deep seas. A
swivel is attached between the leader and the line which is in turn
attached to a bamboo float having a coconut frond stuck into it as a
marker.

tawag v {1} [A; a12b2] call, call on. Tawga siya kay mangáun na, Call
him. Lunch is ready. Pagtuun básig hitawgan kang mám, Study because the
teacher might call on you. {1a} [a12] consider one as s.t. Daw ikaúlaw
níya nga tawgun silang magsúun si Dúris, Apparently she was ashamed to
be called Doris’ sister. {2} [A3; a1c] call s.o. s.t. Tawga lang kug
Suping, Just call me Sofing. Bahálà nag unsay ímung itawag nákù, I
don’t care what you call me. {3} [A; b5] call up. Tawga (tawgi) ku
inig-abut nímu, Call me up when you arrive. n {1} way one calls s.t.
Unsay tawag nímu nang táwung hambugun? What name do you give to a
braggart? {2} action of calling out. (←) v {1} [A; a12] call out the
marriage bans. {2} = tawag, 3. n the call of marriage bans in church.
paN- v [A13] {1} for a dead person to call the relatives to follow him
shortly after his death. In folk belief, if a corpse fails to stiffen,
it is a sign that he is calling for his relatives to follow him, and it
must be warded off with a sumpà. Ang minatay nga húmuk mu rag búhì,
magpanawag sa mga kaparintíhan, A corpse that is soft as if it were
alive is calling his relatives to follow him in death. {2} — ug nánay,
tátay, ginikánan call out in great distress or pain (lit. say ‘Máma!’).
Nagpanawag ug nánay ang gisirulan, The man had stomach cramps and
yelled ‘Mama!’ in pain. talawgun a {1} frequently called on for
services. Talawgun kaáyu nang duktúra, That doctor is very busy.
{2} requiring repeated calls to make him come. Talawgun nang batáa. Dì
muanhi ug dì sigíhag tawag, That child needs to be called a lot. He
doesn’t come unless you keep calling him. -l-un(←) n errand boy or
girl. paN-an(←) n place where one makes a call, esp. for an assembly.
pala-, pala-(←) n s.t. that calls. Ang bagting sa kampána mauy
palatáwag sa mga manuk níla, The ringing of the bell gathers their
chickens. a fond of calling on others. panawagtawag = pamutingting. see
butingting.

tawak n a k.o. black fungus beetle that infests mung beans and stored
cereals. v [A12; a4] be infested with this sort of beetle. -un
a beetle-infested beans or cereals.

tawal n treatment in folk medicine consisting of betel nut spit on the
afflicted area and a magical prayer. v [A; b] treat with tawal.
Gitawalan ang íyang pinaakan sa hálas, His snakebite was treated with
betel nut spittle.

tawas n alum.

tawatawa = mangágaw.

tawgi n mung bean sprouts, used as vegetable. v [A1; a2b6] cook with or
make into bean sprouts.

tawhay a {1} orderly, well-arranged. Tawhay ang mga butang sa lamísa,
The things on the table are well-arranged. {2} relaxed, with the mind
free from trouble or worries. {2a} face looking fresh and relaxed, free
from worry or pain. {3} work that is light and easy to do. Tawhay kaáyu
ang trabáhu kay íhap lang, The work is very light because it’s just
counting things. v [B2; c1] {1} be, become orderly, well-arranged.
{2} be peaceful and free from trouble or worries. Mitawhay ang íyang
buut pagkatápus sa mga bátà sa ílang kursu, He felt relaxed and
relieved after his children had finished their courses. Tawháya
(itawhay) ang mga trabahadur, Calm the laborers down. {2a} for the face
to look fresh and relaxed. Mitawhay (natawhay) ang náwung sa bag-ung
nanganak, The face of the woman that had just delivered her baby looked
relieved and relaxed. {3} become light. Mutawhay ang trabáhu ug hingpit
ta sa kasangkápan, The work becomes easy if one has all the tools one
needs.

tawid v {1} [A; a] cross; go over to the other side. Nagtawid na sa
taytáyan ang trák, The truck is crossing the bridge now. Kining barkúha
dì makatawid ug dagkung lawud, This boat cannot cross large seas.
{2} [A2; b(1)] leave, go away from a place. Mitawid ang mga tulisan
pag-abut sa písi, The robbers vanished when the P.C. arrived.
n opposite side, place across.

táwid n meadow, uncultivated grassland for pasturing. Adtu nákù itugway
ang mga báka sa táwid, I’ll pasture the cows in the meadow. v [B12; b6]
be, become a meadow. Natáwid ang ámung yútà nga wà kultibaha, The piece
of land that wasn’t tilled turned into a meadow.

tawiltawil v [A12] dangle to and fro. Lagmit sakmitun nang ímung kayril
nga nagtawiltawil sa ímung bulsa, S.o. is likely to grab the watch
chain that is dangling from your pocket.

tawngun n k.o. thorny vine of thickets, similar to the bougainvillea
but sharper, with small leaves in three lobes and small white flowers.

tawsì n small, brown k.o. sunbird, similar to tamsi, white in front
with a brown spot.

Tawsug n {1} the Muslims of Jolo. {2} their language.

tawsyu = tahusyu.

táwu n {1} man, person. {1a} man, fellow. Naunsa mag táwu! Nanghawuk
man! What’s gotten into the man! Kissing me like that. Kanà gung
tawhána, That guy ... {2} follower. Táwu nà siyang Markus, He is one of
Marcos’ men. {3} face card. Nindut íyang baráha kay púlus táwu, He has
good cards, all face cards. {4} s.o. left to watch the house. Kinsay
táwu run sa balay, Who’s left to watch the house? {5} visitor. Dì ku
makalakaw kay náay táwu sa ámù, I can’t leave the house because we have
visitors. {6} in phrases: anak sa — the son of man (Biblical). -ng
Matúud Jesus Christ. dakung — see dakù. tawhána particular man. Kanang
tawhána, That man. Kinsang tawhána? Which man? v {1} [A; b6] stay and
watch the house. Taw-i ang báy samtang manábù ku, Watch the house while
I go marketing. {2} [B1256; b8] be born. Natáwu siya sa pasungan, He
was born in a manger. Unsang pitsáha íyang natawhan? On what date was
he born? Yútang natawhan, Native land. {3} [AN] prepare for guests on
special occasions. Manáwu sila unyà sa pista sa ílang baryu, They will
prepare for visitors when it is the feast day in their village. {4} [A]
attend an affair or special occasion. Mutáwu ta sa kasal níla, We will
attend their wedding. Nagtáwu sila sa mísa sa kaadláwun, They are
attending the early morning mass. {5} [AN; a12] pay a visit. Gitáwu
níla ang mga prísu, They visited the prisoners. pa- v [A; ac] {1} have
s.o. stay in a house. {2} give rise to a feeling. Mupatáwu sa
talagsaung kadásig, Gives rise to an unusual enthusiasm. paka-
v {1} [A13; a] come, bring into the world. Ngánung gipakatáwu pa aku?
Why was I brought into this world? {2} [A13] take the form of man,
pretend to be man. Magpakatáwu ang ingkantu kun mangulitáwu, The
enchanted beings take the form of man when they go after women. hi-/ha-
v [B1256] be left in a house to watch it. Siya na lay nahitáwu sa
balay, She was the only one left in the house to watch it. tawutáwu
n figurehead. v [A1B12; c16] make s.o. a figurehead, become a
figurehead. taw-an n {1} not unoccupied. Taw-an nang payága kay dúnay
sugà, That hut is not unoccupied because there’s light. {2} inhabited
by supernatural beings. Magdiwáta sila sa káhuyng taw-an, They’ll offer
offerings to the tree that is inhabited by spirits. tawhánun
a characteristic of humans, earthly. Gibyáan sa mungha ang mga
tawhánung tingúhà, The nun put away earthly desires. Masayup kita
tungud kay tawhánun, We commit mistakes because we are human.
makitawhánun a humanistic, humanitarian. Makitawhánun siya, dílì
manaugdáug sa láin, He is humanitarian. He does not oppress other
people. -in- a done in a human way. Ang ímung gibúhat dì na tináwu,
linuug na, What you did was no longer human but beastly. n paid by
individuals, not by the whole vehicle, service, etc. Tináwu ang báyad
sa dyíp, dì pakyaw, The amount of fare depends on the number of people.
It’s not for the whole car. v {1} [c1] pay for individually, not for a
whole. {2} [c1] do s.t. manually, use bare manpower on as compared to
the use of machines. Kun tinawhun (itináwu) nà pagbúhat madúgay giyud,
If you do it by hand it will take time. {3} [A13; b6] give a banquet.
Dì ka ba magtináwu rung pyista? Aren’t you going to prepare a banquet
this coming feast? katawhan n people, masses. Kabus ang átung mga
katawhan, Our people are poor. pagka- n {1} character, personality.
Kasalígan siyang pagkatáwu, He has a trustworthy character. {2} birth.
kina- n {1} nature, inborn character or inherent tendencies of a
person. Kinatáwu nà níla nga mga dagkù sila kaáyu, It runs in their
family that they grow to be large people. {2} genitalia (euphemism).
tawutáwu n {1} s.t. like a person, e.g. scarecrow or the like.
{2} pupil and iris of the eye. tinawutáwu n comic strips. Unáhun kug
bása ang tinawutáwung sugilánun, I’ll read the comic strips first. uli-
see ulitáwu.

tawu- for forms with tawu- see also talu-.

tawugtawug v [A13] for s.t. long and thin that is standing with the
base firmly attached to wave back and forth. Antína sa awtu nga
magtawugtawug inighúnung sa awtu, An automobile antenna that waves back
and forth when the car stops.

tawun v [A2; c] {1} move to a place to take shelter or refuge.
Nakatawun na mi sa simbahan pagbahà, We moved to the church when there
was a flood. {2} move to another place. Nakatawun na sila sa Mindanaw,
They have already moved to Mindanao. tawuntáwun v [A; b5] transfer, go
over from place to place. Nagtawuntáwun lang ang mga manaygúnay sa
kabalayan, The carolers caroled from house to house. Gitawuntawúnan
(gitawuntáwun) sa bátà ug paráyig ang íyang máma ug pápa, The child
went back and forth between his mother and father asking for affection.

táwun short for intáwun.

tayà_1 v [A; c] {1} place a bet. Adtu ku tayà sa hárì, I’ll bet on
heads. Ayawg itayà ang tibuuk puhúnan, Don’t stake all the money you
have. {2} stake one’s life, honor. Nagtayà ang sundálu sa íyang
kinabúhì álang sa násud, The soldier puts his life on the line for his
country. Ákung itayà ákung dungug paglában sa sinumbung, I’ll stake my
name to defend the accused. {3} [A; b6(1)] pay for the others in a
treat (slang). Akuy magtayà sa átung inúmun, I’ll pay for the drinks.
n {1} bet. {2} treat, turn to pay (slang).

tayà_2 n rust. way — ang bulsa be broke (slang). Wà giyud bisag tayà
ákung bursa, My pocket doesn’t have a thing (lit. not even rust [from
money]). v {1} [A2; b4] become rusty. Tay-an ang gamitung dì lanahan,
Tools get rusty if you don’t oil them. {2} [b4] be rusty from lack of
practice. Natay-an na ku sa pagtukar kay dúgay na kung wà kahikap, I’ve
gotten rusty because I haven’t picked my instrument up in ages. -un
a rusty.

tayáda v {1} [A23; b6] engage in the action of doing s.t., make the
motions of doing s.t. Wà pa gánì mubagting ag kampána mitayáda dáyun
ang usang buksidur, The bell had not even rung when one of the boxers
started swinging his fist. {2} [A23] put on a big show, make
ostentatious motions of doing s.t. Mitayáda dáyun siya sa íyang
nakat-unan nga tanggu, He immediately set out to show off the tango
steps he had learned. n act of making motions, esp. ostentatiously.
Púrus lang tayáda, way natúman, They just put on, but accomplish
nothing.

tayakan n a makeshift stall in a marketplace.

tayam, táyam a a little bit sweet or salty. Ang atábay nga duul sa
dágat tayam ug túbig, The water of a well near the sea is a bit salty.
v [AB; a] have a faint taste of sweetness or saltiness, make s.t. so.
Wà na tay kámay maung ígù lang mitayam ang kapi, We’re out of sugar.
That’s why the coffee is just slightly sweetened. Ígù rang mitayam
(gitayam) ang asin sa íyang pagkáun, He used just enough salt to make
his dinner slightly salty.

taydal wib n tidal wave. v [A; a4] have a tidal wave, be affected by a
tidal wave.

taygir see urkid.

tayhad a having an erect posture with the abdomen thrust out. Tayhad
kaáyu siya nga nagtindug, He is standing tall and straight. v [A]
{1} stand erect. {2} stand around doing nothing when s.t. should be
done. Nagtayhad ka man lang dihà nga daghan mang buluhatun, You are
just standing around when there is so much to do!

tayhup v [A; b6(1)] {1} blow through a tube to build a fire. Magtayhup
ku sa háling, I will blow on the fire I’m building. {2} treat sickness
by blowing on the crown, nape of the neck or the spot that ails.
Tayhúpi ra ring pinaakag hā́s, Would you treat this snake bite by
blowing on it? n tube through which one blows to build a fire.

tayid n detergent (from the brand name Tide).

tayils n tile. v [a12] make s.t. tile. Gitayils níya ang sawug sa
banyu, He made the bathroom floor a tile floor.

tayim n {1} time, o’clock. Unsay ímung tayim, What time do you have?
{2} time at which s.t. is scheduled to begin or end. Daliag human kay
hápit na ang tayim, Finish it quickly because it’s almost time.
{3} time, chance. Wà kuy tayim pagrilaks, I don’t have time to relax. —
pa {1} time out, let me have some more time. Tayim pa. Wà pa kung
katágù, Time out. I haven’t hidden yet. {2} just a minute. Tayim pa kay
tawgun ku siya, Just a minute. I’ll call her. {3} just a second, I’ll
be right back. Tayim pa. Ákung kuháun, Just a second. I’ll get it.
{4} excuse me, let me interrupt or change the subject. Tayim pa ra gud,
kinsa tu? Excuse me. Who did you say it was? {5} excuse me (correcting
oneself). Muabut sa Lúnis. Tayim pa diay, sa Martis, He is arriving on
Monday, I mean, on Tuesday. — awut = tayimpa, {1}. v {1} [A; b]
ascertain the time, rate. Taymi kung magtayip, Time me typewriting.
{2} [B256] be time to start or end. Buhíi ang klási kay hápit na
mutayim (matayim), Dismiss the class because it’s almost time. {3} [A2]
say ‘time out’, ‘wait a second’. Sa ríng dì ka makatayim ug kupúgan ka
na sa kuntra, In the ring you can’t ask for time-out when your opponent
mauls you.

tayim-áwut v [A; c] call for time-out. Itayim-áwut sà kay manginum ta,
Call time-out so we can get a drink. n time-out.

tayimkípir n timekeeper at work, in a game. v [B156] be the timekeeper.

táyip v [A; a1] typewrite. Taypa inyung tirmpípar, Type your term
papers. -in- n s.t. typed.

tayiprayting n typewriting paper.

tayipraytir n typewriter.

taylan = bígà_1.

tayming n {1} timing, the way s.t. is made to coincide with s.t. else.
{2} timing in music, rate of beating. {2a} tempo. Rumba ang tayming
íni, dì tanggu, This is a rumba beat, not tango. {2b} sense of rhythm.
Maáyug tayming nang batáa sa íyang pagkanta, That boy sings with very
good timing. a {1} well, opportunely timed. Tayming kaáyu ang ámung
pag-abut sa íla kay nagbinignit sila, We timed our arrival perfectly
because they were serving binignit. {2} in time, rhythmical. Tayming
kaáyu ang istíping sa íyang sáyaw sa ákung kanta, His dance steps are
in time with my song. v {1} [A2NC3; b2c1] synchronize, do s.t. so as to
make it correspond with s.t. else. {2} [A12; b2] happen on, get a
chance to. Nakatayming siyag baylig gwápa, He happened to dance with a
pretty girl. paN- v [A2] take a chance on. Panayming lag ansir.
Siliksiyun tayip bítaw, Take a chance on your answer. Anyway it’s a
multiple-choice exam.

taypist n typist. v [B156] be a typist.

taytay n {1} mountain range. {2} bridge. v {1} [A; b6(1)] make a
bridge. Ákung gitaytáyan ug kawáyan ang ámung labnganan, I made a
bamboo bridge for us to cross on. {2} [A; a] start weaving a hat or a
mat, weaving the fundamental portion (the crown in the hat) from which
the rest is continued. paN- v [A2; b6] travel along the mountain ridge.
Manaytay ta arun makítà ang luyug luyu sa búkid, Let’s travel along the
ridge so we can see both sides of the mountain. -an n {1} bridge.
{2} means by which s.t. is attained.

taytul n {1} title. {2} title, championship. {3} law title. — payit
n title fight in boxing. v [A; c] give a title to. Unsay maáyung
itaytul ning baláka, What would be a good title for this poem?

tayúbung n starch made from cassava. v [a2] make into starch. Ilain ang
dyábang tayubúngun, Set aside the cassava to be made into starch.

tay-ug v [AB6; a1] {1} shake s.t. large and tall, be shaken. Natay-ug
(mitay-ug) íyang láwas sa pag-inubu, Her body shook with coughing.
Tay-úga ang káhuy arun mangataktak ang búnga, Shake the tree so the
fruits will fall off. {2} shake, affect the emotions with intensity.
Ang túmang kalísang ang mitayug kaníya, Great fear shook him. pa- =
paúyug. see úyug.

táyun n {1} row. Kining tayúna sa lubi tag-un arun kapadak-an ang
karsáda, This row of coconut trees will be cut down so the road can be
widened. {2} length or span of s.t. Nagkinahanglan pa ta ug usa ka
táyun nga túbu, We still need a length of water pipe. v [a12] put or
arrange several things in rows. Tayúna pagpamutang ang mga misitíra,
Put the flower pots in rows.

tayúpì v [A; a2] cheat, defraud. Gitayúpì ta sa matadíru pinaági sa
timbangang dílì hustu, The butcher cheated us with inaccurate scales.
a cheat, defrauder. Ayaw pagsálig níya kay tayúpì kaáyu nà, Don’t trust
him because he is a cheat.

tayùtù n {1} = talùtù. {2} = tagùtù_2. v = tagùtù_2.

TB see tíbi_2.

ti n {1} letter t. {2} the seventh note in a musical scale. — minur B
minor. {3} = tidyúwin.

tì short for itì (vocative).

tiad a with the back arched. v [A2; c6] bend one’s body backwards. Dì
ku makatiad kay musakit ang piang sa bukubuku, I cannot bend backwards
because it will hurt the sprain in my back.

tiágak v [A23] {1} for chickens to make the sound of being disturbed.
Mitiágak ang sunuy kay ímung gisámuk, The rooster squawked because you
bothered it. {2} yell, esp. when about to be punished. Mitiágak siya
dáyun dihang gihanaan ku siyag latigu, He shrieked when I got set to
whip him. n the action of squawking.

tiamtíam v [A2S; a] move one’s mouth slightly in mumbling, chewing,
smacking to get the taste. Dúna siyay gihínuk pagkáun kay nagtiamtiam
siya, She’s eating s.t. secretly because her mouth is moving. Tiamtiáma
úsà ang tubà usà ka mupalit, Taste the coconut toddy first before you
buy it.

tiámu short for tíaw mu. see tíaw, n2.

tiaw n k.o. goatfish.

tíaw v [A; b] tease, play a joke on. Ayawg túu kay gitiáwan ka lang
níya, Don’t believe him. He’s just teasing you. {1a} for supernatural
beings to cast a spell on s.o. Gimínù siya kay gitiáwan sa ingkantu; He
couldn’t find his way because a spirit cast a spell on him. n {1} joke,
prank. dílì — no small thing. Dì tíaw nga búhat, No small job. Dì tíaw
ang ákung kakurat, I was really frightened. {2} — (ba)y, nga; — mu
(ba)y, nga just imagine! Tíaw bay limay íyang kabit, Just imagine, he
has five mistresses. Tíaw mu nang diyut mi mabuku, Imagine, we were
almost exposed. {2a} — mu ugud nga, y can you beat that, [so-and-so]
happened despite everything. Tíaw mu guy nakapasar ug bár, Imagine, he
passed the bar despite everything. {2b} — mu kanà I warned you, now see
what happened. Tíaw mu nà ug mipatúu ka pa, I told you so. If you had
only listened. (→) v {1} [a4] be punished by the soul of a departed
relative for engaging in merry-making activities too soon after the
person’s death. The victim usually behaves odd but only temporarily.
{2} [A123P] cause to grow gray hairs early. Makatiaw kunu nang magkanta
sa abúhan samtang naglung-ag, You will get grey hair before your time
if you sing while standing before the stove and cooking. tiawtíaw v [A;
b(1)] {1} be joking. {2} toy with an opponent in a contest.
Gitiawtiáwan lang sa kampiyun ang tsalindyir, The champion just toyed
with the challenger. -l-an n one who is the usual object of ridicule.
Ang bungì gibúhat lang tiliáwan sa iskuylahan, The harelip was made the
butt of ridicule in school. v [B126] be, become the object of ridicule.
-an(→), pala-, ma-un a fond of making jokes.

tiáyun (from ayun) v [C3; a12] be married to each other. Gustu giyud sa
ílang mga ginikánan nga tiayúnun ang ílang isig ka anak, It was the
parents’ wish that their children be married to each other. mag-
n married couple. Way anak ang magtiáyun, The couple is childless.
panag- n marriage, the state of being married. Sa ámung panagtiáyun wà
giyud mi magkaáway, During our marriage we never once quarrelled.

tibà v [A; b8] for liquid contents to spill out from a container. Dì
makatibà ang tubà ug butangag sungsung, The palm toddy won’t spill out
if s.t. is stuffed in the mouth.

tibadtibad v [A; b6] talk back in a grumbling manner. Dílì maáyu sa usa
ka anak nga magtibadtibad kun kasab-an, It isn’t good for a child to
talk back when scolded. tibadtibaran a given to back talk.

tibagnul a for root crops and fruits to have hard lumps in the flesh.
v [B2; b6] having hard lumps in the flesh. Sakit ang nakatibagnul
(nakapatibagnul) sa mga búnga sa tsíkus, Blight has caused the
sapodillas to get lumpy. -un(→) a of a lumpy sort of fruit.

tibagsuy v [A2] go out straight without minding anything or anyone.
Mitibagsuy lang siya, wà ku hulata, She went straight away without
waiting for me.

tíbak_1 n a k.o. rot causing decay in portions of jackfruit (nangkà).
v {1} [a4; b4] be affected with jackfruit rot. Tibákun ang nangkà ug dì
pustun, The fruits of jackfruit will get affected with rot if you don’t
wrap them. {2} [B26; a4b4] for a body to be covered with sores. Natíbak
ang íluk sa pamutu, The armpit is full of skin eruptions. -un a fruits
affected with this rot.

tíbak_2 = tíbin.

tibaknul = tibagnul.

tibalas n the Schach shrike: Lanius nasutus.

tíbas v {1} [A; a12] take the rest of s.t., finish doing the remaining
portion. Akuy mitíbas ug pamutul sa mga káhuy sa maisan, I cut the rest
of the trees in the cornfield. Kinsay nagtíbas ug palit sa ímung mga
mangga? Who bought the rest of your mangoes? Tibása nang kan-un sa
ímung plátu, Eat the rest of the food on your plate. {2} [B23; b6] for
crops or fruits to be past their season. Hápit na matíbas (mutíbas) ang
mga mangga, Mango fruits will soon be out of season. Nagkatibas na ang
áni sa mga humay, The rice harvest season is starting to be over.

tibás = tibalas.

tíbaw v [A; a12] {1} visit, usually to see how s.t. is. Aku ray mutíbaw
sa ákung nangkà ug nahinug na ba, I’ll take a look at the jackfruit
that I kept and see if it’s ripe yet. Tibáwun na sad níya ang íyang
tinagúan, He will visit his mistress again. {2} inspect a trap to see
if there is a catch. Way kuhà ang gitíbaw kung lit-ag, The trap I
inspected had no catch.

tibáwas (from báwas) v {1} = tibás. {2} [A; a12] finish, bring to
completion. Ang hiniluang indiksiyun mauy nagtibáwas sa nagpinal, The
poisoned injection finished off the dying man. {3} go all the way to
marriage. Tibawása (ipatibáwas) na lang sila. Tutal, nag-ípun na man,
Marry them off. Anyway they are living together. impas — v [B1256] be
destroyed, done away with with irrevocable finality. Nabuak ang
katapúsan. Naimpas tibáwas na ang huygu, The last of them broke. Now
the set is completely gone.

tibhang v [A; b7] {1} remove a portion of a whole. {1a} cut off a piece
to make s.t. Ákung tibhángan ang pára sa bàbà sa sag-ub, I will chip
off a piece of the end of the bamboo to serve as a mouth. {2} lessen,
diminish. Way makatibhang sa ákung pagbátì nímu, Nothing can make me
love you less. Matibhang ákung trabáhu kun mutábang ka, My work will be
less if you help me. n {1} deduction from, lack. Gihátag níya ang
swildu ngadtu sa íyang asáwa nga way tibhang, He handed his salary
intact to his wife. {2} space left after s.t. was removed. Ang tibhang
sa yútà nga giagian sa karsáda mga siyin mitrus kwadrádu, About 100
square meters were taken off the land for the road. tibhangtibhang
v [A; b] chop the outer part of a tree trunk to leave open marks.

tibhung = tib-ug.

tíbi_1 n TV. v [A1] watch TV.

tíbi_2 n TB. v [B126; a4] become, get TB. Makatíbi nang subrang kahágù,
Overwork causes TB. Matíbi ang ubung pinasagdan, A cough may turn into
TB if you let it go. Gitíbi siya, He got TB. tibihun, tibíhun n one
with TB.

tíbi_3 n acronym for Tinípung Bansa (U.S.).

tíbì v [B46; c1] screw up the lips as if about to cry. Muhílak nà run
siya kay mitíbì na, She is going to cry because she’s screwing up her
lips. n action of screwing up the lips. pa- v [A; a12] tease a baby
until it cries. Ang mupatíbì sa bátà mau say mupahílum, Whoever teases
the baby is going to have to quiet him down.

tíbin n twenty pesos or twenty centavos (slang). v {1} [A12] secure
twenty pesos or twenty centavos. {2} [B26] be, become twenty pesos or
twenty centavos. Hápit mutíbin (matíbin) ang íyang daug, His winnings
come to nearly twenty pesos.

tíbis v [A; a] {1} pour water on s.t. to rinse it off or sprinkle it.
Túa siya sa gardin nagtíbis sa mga tanum, He is in the garden watering
the plants. Bi, tibísan nátù ug túbig arun makapanghinaw ka, Here,
let’s pour water on your hands so you can wash them. {2} pour liquid
into a container. Aku lay mutíbis sa tubà arun dì mayabu, I’ll pour the
palm toddy into your glass so that it won’t spill over.

tibíwis = tabílis.

tibtìb v [A; b] chip off, cut off small pieces with repeated strokes.
Akuy mutibtib sa butung arun makainum tag sabaw, I’ll chip off the top
of the young coconut so we can drink the water. Tibtíbi ang kawáyan sa
buku arun mahámis, Chop off the nodes from the bamboo pole to make it
smooth.

tibu n k.o. edible, dark-grey spindle shell, between one and two inches
long, found in shallow bays.

tibù v [B126; a2] do s.t. in large quantity rather than little at a
time, be in a large quantity. Natibù ang labhunun kay nasakit ku, My
laundry piled up because I was sick. Kusgan giyud ang makatibù ínig
hákut, Whoever can carry all of this at once must be strong. Tib-ag
báyad ang útang. Ayawg datadatáhi, Pay the debts all at once, not bit
by bit. (←) v [A2C; c1] group or join together. Nagtíbù sa usa ka dápit
ang mga bantúgang mamumulung, All the best orators grouped in one
place. Dílì makatíbù ang mga kabus ánang kapunungána, The poor cannot
join that organization. tinib-anay, tinib-ánay a putting everything one
has into it at once. Tinib-anay tung ílang panamílit, They poured all
of their emotions into their farewell.

tibuagsà (from buagsà) v [B246; b3] move rapidly in various directions,
be dispersed. Mitibuagsà ang punduk nga giitsáhag libintadur, The group
scattered in all directions when firecrackers were thrown in their
midst. Nagtibuagsà ang mga anak sa dihang nangaílu, The children were
scattered when they got orphaned.

tibuagya (from buagya) = tibuagsà.

tibud n small clay jar.

tib-ug v [A; c] add a liquid to another liquid, usually to adulterate
or dilute. Akuy mitib-ug ug túbìg sa payn-ápul dyús arun madaghan, I
added water to the pineapple juice to make it go a long way.

tibugsuk (from bugsuk) v [A23; a3b6] dive or fall headlong. Mitibugsuk
ang tikaruy ngadtu sa dágat arun pagdágit sa isdà, The kingfisher dove
into the water to snatch fish. Natibugsuk siya sa íyang pagkahū́g sa
hagdan, She fell headlong down the stairs.

tibug-uk (from buuk) a beads of sweat or drops of tears formed s.w.
Tibug-uk nga mga lúhà, Drops of tears. v [B46N; b6] for beads of sweat
to form or tears to well up. Mitibug-uk (nanibug-uk) ákung singut
dihang gikasab-an kung Tátay, I got beads of sweat on my forehead when
Father scolded me. Hápit na mutúlù ang nagtibug-uk níyang lúhà, The
tears that welled up in her eyes are about to come streaming down.

tibugul (from bugul) n lump. Tumur nang tibugul sa ímung súsu, The lump
in your breast is a tumor. Gilábay ku siyag tibugul nga yútà, I threw a
clod of earth at him. v [B] be formed into lumps. Natibugul ang litsi
kay dì maáyung pagkakútaw, The milk came out all lumpy because it was
not well mixed.

tibug-ul = tibugul.

tibugun (from bugun) n lump, cyst. v [B3(1)] be formed into lumps or
cysts. Mitibugun ang ági sa ákung indiksiyun, My injection formed a
lump. Nagtibugun ang brásu sa buksiyadur, The muscles of the boxer are
hard and firm. Dì makatibugun ang pawdir milk ug ayúhun pagkútaw,
Powdered milk does not form lumps if you stir it well.

tibukul (from bukul) n lump, a mass of indefinite or irregular shape.
v [B6; c1] be, become lumpy, form into a lump. Mitibukul ang harína nga
ákung gikas-a paglúnud, The flour formed lumps because I poured it into
the liquid all at once. Tibukula ang kan-un nga ímung ihátag sa bátà,
Form the food into a lump before you give it to the baby.

tibuk-ul = tibugul.

tibul v [A; c] {1} pour liquid into a vessel with a narrow opening.
Daghang úsik kun ikay mutibul sa lamparilya, You waste so much when you
pour kerosene into the lamp. {2} pour a liquid over another liquid.
Tibuli ug gás ang kanal arun mamatay ang wayawaya, Pour kerosene over
the ditch so that the wrigglers will die. {3} have intercourse
(humorous). Magbagulbul ang asáwa ug dílì katiblan káda gabíi, The wife
complains if she doesn’t have bit of sex every night. -anan(←),
tiblanan n {1} pouring vent or hole. {2} s.t. which needs to have
liquids poured into it. Ayaw sag dagkuti nang sugáa kay tibulánan
(tiblanan) pa nà, Don’t light that lamp yet because it has not been
filled with kerosene.

tíbul v [A; c1] have a hostess sit at one’s table in a night club. Ug
kwartáhan siya magtíbul siya ug duha ka hustis, If he is in the money
he has two entertainers sit at his table. n in phrases: madyung,
pingpung — mahjong, pingpong table. multiplikisyun — multiplication
table. see also lung tíbul.

tib-ul = tibul.

tibuláag v [AC3] go in various directions. Mitibuláag ang mga táwu
pagkadungug sa butu, The crowd ran to all directions upon hearing the
gunshot. Nagkatibuláag ang mga Hudíyu human mabíhag, The Jews were
scattered after their captivity.

tibùtibù v [A; c1] mumble words unintelligibly. Musúkul ang anak nga
magtibùtibù ug kasab-an, It is a sign of defiance if your own child
mumbles under his breath when he is scolded. Nagtibùtibù ang íyang bàbà
sa pangadyì, Her mouth mumbled as she prayed.

tibuuk (from buuk) {1} whole, all of s.t. Gidúngug sa tibuuk lungsud
ang ílang pagtában, The whole town knew about their eloping. Simbáhun
ku ikaw sa tibuuk kung kasingkásing, I’ll adore you with all my heart.
{2} whole, unfragmented. Sinsiyúi ring tibuuk písu, Change this whole
peso bill. Palita nang tibuuk, ayaw nang píkas, Buy the whole piece,
not just a half. {2a} whole grain, not ground. Unsa man nang maísa,
tibuuk u ginaling? What kind of corn is that, whole grain or ground?
{3} solid tires, not pneumatic. Sa karáang mga trák ang gúma sa ligid
tibuuk, The old trucks had solid rubber wheels. a resonant in timbre of
voice. Máayu siyang mukanta kay tibuuk kaáyu siya ug tíngug, He sings
well because he has a very resonant voice. v [A; a2] make whole, in one
piece. Tibuk-a ning dyigsu pásul, Put the jigsaw puzzle together. Wà
siya katibuk-ig báyad, He hasn’t been paid in full. — ang hunàhúnà,
hukum v [B126] be resolved, decided. Natibuuk ang ákung hunàhúnà nga
magmadri (Natibuuk sa ákung hunàhúnà ang pagmadri), I have decided to
become a nun. kinatibuk-an n {1} absolutely undivided whole.
{2} aggregate, total sum.

tibwáag = tibuláag.

tibwagsà = tibuagsà.

tibway v [A; a12] {1} complete s.t. unfinished. Kinsay mutibway sa
gibyáan nímung daruhun? Who’ll finish plowing the rest of the field?
{1a} buy the remaining portion of s.t. Tibwáya ring nahibilin kay ákung
baratúhun, Buy all that’s left, and I’ll let you have it cheap. {2} put
to an end. Kining hilu mauy mutibway ning kinabúhì, This poison will
end my life. — ug should have [done], would rather [do] than what is
the case now. Tibwayg mikúyug tu, malingaw untà ku, I should have gone
with them. I would have had a good time. Tibwayg mamatay kay sa
mag-antus, I’d rather die than suffer the way I am. tibwanay v [C2] put
an end to each other. Ug wà ulánga magtibwanay ang duha, If they had
not been separated, they would have killed each other.

tidisin = disinti (slang).

tídit = títit.

tidiyum, tidíyum n Te Deum, a religious service of thanksgiving.

tidlum (from lalum) v {1} [AP; cP] dive under water, sink. Mitidlum ang
angkla, The anchor sank. Mitidlum (mipatidlum) ang mamamánà sa lawum,
The diver dove into the deep. Itidlum (ipatidlum) ang submarínu kay
dúnay kaáway, Submerge the submarine because there’s an enemy. {2} [A;
b6] for the sun to set. {3} [A] sink into the mind or feelings
(literary). Ang sirmun wà makatidlum sa íyang pagbátì, The message of
the sermon did not sink into his feelings. hi-/ha- v [B1256] sink
involuntarily. Nahílum si Lúlu, nahitidlum, Grandfather sank into
silence.

tidlung = tidlum.

tidlup v {1} [AP; cP] dive sharply. Mitidlup pagkalit ang tabánug sa
yútà, The kite suddenly nose-dived to the ground. Mipatidlup (mitidlup)
ang langgam, The bird dove sharply downwards. {2} [A; b6] for the sun
to set.

tidyúwin n T-joint. v [A; bc] join things in a T-joint.

tig- prefix added to most verbs which refer to an action to form nouns
which mean one who usually does [so-and-so]. Siyay tiglampasu sa ámù,
He is the one who usually scrubs the floor in our house. Irung tigkaun
sa mga subra, Dog that eats the leftovers.

tig(←) prefix, short form for nakig- and makig-.

tig-a a hard, not soft. Tig-a daw puthaw, Hard as steel. Tig-a giyug
balatían ang dì malúuy kaníya, You have to be heartless not to pity
her. v [B24; b6] become hard, not soft. Mitig-a ang karning gibulad,
The meat which was dried under the sun got hardened. ma- a very hard.
v [A13] be hard. Nagmatig-ang kasingkásing, A hard heart. patig-atig-a
v [A13] pretend to be unyielding. Nagpatig-atig-a siya kay magpalúgit,
She pretended to be unyielding to give him a hard time.

tigáan = tagáan. see *tágà.

tig-ab v {1} [A2] make a jerky gasp for breath. Namatay lag diritsu, wà
gánì makatig-ab, He was not even able to gasp for breath because he
died suddenly. {2} = dug-ab.

tigalbung v [B26; b6] {1} fall hard, usually with a sound. Kinsa tung
mitigalbung (natigalbung) sa katri gabíi? Who fell from the bed last
night? {2} fail in an exam. Unsang iksamína ímung gikatigalbúngan? What
test did you fail? n sound of s.o. falling with a thud.

tigáman v [A; b(1)] remember, keep s.t. in one’s mind thinking about
it. Nagtigáman kug singsing nga ákung palitun inigswildu, I had my eye
on a ring which I wanted to buy on payday. Nakatigáman ka kung unsang
adláwa ang kasal ni Bíbi? Can you recall the date of Baby’s marriage?
Tigamni ang ákung pahimangnu nímu, Always bear in mind the precautions
I gave you. n sign to help recall s.t. Dúna kuy tigáman nga gikúlit sa
mga káhuy arun dì ta mawā̂ sa lasang, I carved some signs on the trees
so we won’t get lost in the jungle.

tigas a {1} tough, fearless. Tigas nà siya, dì madág hulgà, He’s tough
and cannot be threatened. {2} exceptionally good in s.t. Tigas kaáyu nà
siya mubaskitbul, He’s very good in playing basketball. v [B126; b6]
{1} become tough or a toughie. Matigas ba ang baklà? Can a sissy become
a tough guy? {2} be exceptionally good in s.t. Ang kaáyu níyang
mulantúgì mauy nakatigas (nakapatigas) níyang abugádu, His skill in
debate made him a very good lawyer. paka- v [A13; a12] act like a
tough, treat like a tough. Ang tigas magpakatigas, A toughie will act
like one. patigastígas v [A13] pretend to be tough. Nagpatigastígas
uruy ang báyut, There goes the sissy pretending to be tough.

tigasub, tigásub = tikasub, tikásub.

tígaw_1 v [A; a1] disturb, break up the quiet, serenity, or stillness
of. Ang butu mauy mitígaw sa kamíngaw sa kagabhíun, The explosion
disturbed the stillness of the night. Ayawg tigáwa ang duut sa isdà,
Don’t disturb the school of fish. n {1} s.o. considered responsible for
misfortune, trouble. Siyay tígaw adtung pagkakisas sa plánu, He’s the
one responsible that the plan misfired. {2} dala sa — bring misfortune.

tígaw_2 = áwuy.

tigayun (from gayun) v [B123(1)6] have good fortune, become prosperous.
Matigayun ang táwu nga kugihan, A diligent man will prosper. pa-(←)
v {1} [A; c6] put up a business. Magpatigáyun tag puthaw, We will put
up a scrap iron business. {2} [A13] manage to do s.t. on one’s own
without assistance. Nagpatigáyun ang bátà ug hímù ug duwáan, The child
is making a toy on his own. n business, commerce. Muuswag ang patigáyun
kun maáyung pagkadala, A business well-managed prospers. magpapa-
n businessman. ka-an(←) n holdings, properties.

tigbábaw see babaw.

tigbak v {1} [A; a12] kill instantly on the spot. Maay rag tigbákun
nang manúka áning taría, I hope this cock is killed instantly in this
fight. {2} [B126] die (coarse). Maáyu rang natigbak ang animal, Served
that beast right that he died. -ay(→) n unlicensed cockfight.
v {1} [A13; c] hold an illegal cockfight. Magtigbakay sa buwangan kun
mahiphípan ang pulis, We’ll hold an illegal cockfight if the police can
be bribed. {2} [A12C; c3] have illicit sexual intercourse (humorous
metaphorical). Nakatigbakay giyud ang duha kagabíi, The two managed to
have illicit intercourse last night.

tigbas = tikbas.

tigbáyun = tigbaláyun. see balay.

*tigbung -in- = tinikbung. see *tikbung.

tighayà see hayà.

tighik a very skinny. v [B; b6] become skinny. Nagkatighik siya kay
gitíbi, He’s getting emaciated from tb.

tighud v [B134] for the tide to begin to ebb. Sulug kaáyu ang bukána sa
subà ug mutighud ang dágat, The current at the mouth of the river is
strong when the tide ebbs.

tighulug see húlug.

tigi n a small anchovy of shallow waters, 4–5″, darkish brown in color
on the dorsal part of the body and silvery sides: Thrissocles spp. and
Scutengraulis spp. tigihun = tigi.

tígì_1 v {1} [AC; a1c3] pit persons against each other to determine who
is the best in s.t. Ang prinsísay mutígì sa buut mangasáwa níya, The
princess will have the people that want to marry her vie with each
other. Magtígì (magtigiay) ta kun kinsay taas ug utung, Let’s have a
contest to see who can hold his breath longest. Palaínum sad tung
gikatígì nákug ínum, The one I had a drinking bout with was also a
drunkard. {2} [A; a12] diagnose an illness by a marble placed at the
edge of a glass. A yes-no question is put by the sorcerer, and if the
marble falls, the answer is ‘no’. Tigíun nátù ang sakit, We will divine
the sickness. n contest between two people or teams. -ay(→) v [C] vie
with one another. n contest. panag- n a vying with one another. Ang
kulilísi panagtígì sa mga birsu, The kulilísi is a contest in making
verses.

tigib n chisel. v [A; a1] chisel. Tigiba (tigba) kun magtábas kag sín,
Use a chisel when you cut iron sheets. -in- n k.o. toy top with a
chisel-shaped nail point.

tigidig word used in imitation of the sound made by a galloping horse.
— bangbáng n a western movie. Ang salída run sa Uryinti tigidig
bangbáng, A western is playing in the Oriente.

tig-ik v [A; b3] make a high-pitched, suppressed cry. Nakatig-ik ku
dihang natumban ákung kalyu, I let out a short cry when s.o. stepped on
my corn. n a high-pitched suppressed cry.

tígis v [A; a] pour liquid into a drinking receptacle. Nakatígis ka na
bag ímung ilimnun? Have you poured some drinks for yourself?

tigistígis v [A; c1] do a little or a part at a time. Bísag
mutigistígis ka lag báyad arun maimpas sa kadugáyan, Just pay me little
by little. Eventually your debt will be paid off. Tigistigísa
(itigistígis) ninyu paggáwì ang papil, Use paper sparingly.

tigkul v {1} [B26] turn deaf ears to an order or to pleadings. Mitigkul
lang si Huwan nga gipakabù ug túbig, Juan just turned deaf ears when he
was told to fetch water. {2} [B2] be, become stubborn. Mutigkul hinúun
siyag buyagun, He’ll become more stubborn if he’ll be reprimanded.
a {1} stubborn, unwilling to do as told. {2} turning a deaf ear to
pleadings. Tigkul siya sa nangamátay, He is the stingiest of the
stingy.

tigkung a stooped and thin. v [B] become stooped and thin. Nagkatigkung
siya sa íyang sakit, She’s wasting away with her sickness.

tig-l- alternant prefix to tig-r-, but of more limited distribution.

tigma = tingba. see tingub, v1.

tigman (from tígum) v [A; a12] do several things together at one time.
Mutigman ku nímu ug báyad sa ákung mga útang sa Lúnis, I will pay you
all my debts on Monday. Tigmanun ku ug dala ang mga hiraminta arun wà
nay balíkun, I will bring all the tools together at once so I won’t
have to go back for anything.

tigmaya = tagbaya_1.

tigmì = tignì.

tigmù v [A; c] give a riddle. Tag-ána ning ákung itigmù, Guess the
answer of the riddle I’m going to give. n riddle.

tignì a {1} filthy. Tignì kaáyu ang ílang kasilyas, Their toilet is
very filthy. {2} for floors or the ground to be wet. {3} chilly. v [B;
b6] {1} be, become filthy. Nagkatignì ang lagúna kay síging gibalibayan
ug sagbut, The meadow is becoming filthy because they always throw
trash there. {2} become damp or moist. Mutignì ang tugkaran kun
mag-ulan, The yard will become wet when it rains. {3} become chilly.
Ang hángin sa búkid mauy nakatignì (nakapatignì) sa gabíi, The mountain
breeze made the night chilly.

tigpud a {1} food that has been cooked crisp and brittle. Tigpud
pagkaprítu ang isdà, The fish has been fried until it is crisp and
brittle. {2} for teeth or other things with sharp points to be broken
off. Talhi ring tigpud nga lápis, Sharpen the pencil because it is
broken. v [B26] {1} get cooked brittle. Mutigpud (matigpud) ug bálik
ang sitsarun ug inítun pag-usab, The pork rinds will get brittle if you
reheat them. {2} be, become weak and easily broken, chip off easily.
Ang karmilítus makatigpud (makapatigpud) sa ngípun, Candy ruins your
teeth. Nagkatigpud ang ákung bag-ang, My molar is chipping off.

tig-r- alternant prefix to tig- but added only to some verbs which take
tig-.

tigri n tiger. -in- a striped.

tigritigri = ispáda diúru. see ispáda.

tigsik v [B246; b4] grow gray hairs. Mutigsik ang úban kun matigúwang
na ang táwu, A man gets grey hair when he grows old. -an
a {1} grey-haired. {2} = tagsikan.

tigsù_1 n game of tag played by two teams in which the object is to
reach the base without getting tagged. Team A sends out a player to try
to reach the base and team B sends out a player to catch him. Then team
B sends out a player to reach the base and team A sends out s.o. to
catch him, and so forth. v [A13] play this game.

tigsù_2 n a k.o. bird that looks like a chick and lives near rivers and
wet places so that it is always wet.

tigsuk = tisuk.

tigsun a {1} firm-fleshed. Tigsun nga ságing, Firm-fleshed bananas.
Tigsun ug buktun, Firm arms. {2} for soil to be dry and hard. v [B2;
b6] become firm of flesh.

tígul n {1} dried young leaf of a nipa or buri palm filled with
tobacco, used as a cigarette. {2} anything made of dried buri leaves.
Tígul nga banig, Mat made of buri leaves.

tigúlang see gúlang.

tígum v {1} [AC; a2] assemble, gather. Nagkatígum ang mga tabian sa
barbiruhan, The gossipers are assembled in the barber shop. Tigúma ang
mga iskuyla, Have the pupils assemble. {2} [A3S; a2] save up. Nakatigum
(nakatígum) kug diyútay sa ákung paglangyaw, I have saved a little from
my work abroad. Tigúma ang mga basíyu kay átung ibaligyà, Save the
empty bottles so we can sell them. n meeting, conference. (→) n stored
coconut palm toddy that has had fresh toddy added continually for
several days. -in- n savings. tigumtígum n social gatherings. ka-an
n meetings.

tigway = tugway.

tihad v [A2; a] stand erect, and straight. Dì makatihad ang taas nga
táwu kay ubus ang kisami, A tall fellow cannot stand straight because
the ceiling is low. a vertically erect, straight. Tihad ang mga
sundálu, Soldiers are erect.

tihap n interest payable in kind (usually farm products) for money
borrowed. The interest is paid continuously until the principal in cash
is repaid. v [A; c] pay interest in kind for money borrowed. Mutihap
kug tulu ka bákid sa ímung dus syintus písus, I’ll pay three sacks of
palay as interest on your two hundred pesos.

tihaw a unnatural smile given to cover up a feeling of embarrassment.
Tihaw kaáyu siya ug pinahiyuman kay sad-an siya, He is smiling with
discomfiture because he is guilty. v [B1256; a12] get a funny
expression on the face in embarrassment. Natihaw ang íyang nawung
dihang nahibaw-an nga siya ang nangawkaw sa sápì, He got a strange
expression on his face when it was discovered that he was the one who
stole the money.

tihaytíhay v [AN; c16] straighten or stretch one’s back. Magtihaytíhay
pud ta sa átung likud human sa dúgayng pagsinúlat, You should stretch
your back after writing for a long time.

tihib v [A; b] make a hole in s.t. round by chopping off part of the
surface. Tihibi (tibhi) ring lubing kuháag sabaw, Punch a hole in this
coconut to get the water.

tihik a cheapskate. v [B12; b6] become tightfisted. Matihik ka kun
síging kwinta sa gastu, You’ll become tightfisted if you keep counting
expenses. Tihikan ku níya kay dì mutíp, I consider him a cheapskate
because he doesn’t give a tip. tihiktíhik a done on a niggardly scale.
Kasal nga way tihiktíhik, A wedding with no expenses spared. v [A; a12]
{1} do s.t. in a niggardly way. {2} dílì, walà, ayaw tihiktíhik do s.t.
extravagantly, without restraint (slang). Dì ka man magtihiktíhik
mangasábà, You scold without restraint. Ayaw siyag tihiktihíka
paghaluk, Kiss her without restraint.

tihíras n canvas cot. v [a12] make into a cot.

tihìtihì n edible meat of the sea urchin (saluwákì).

tihul v [AN; a2] whistle. Tihula kunu ang túnu ánang kantáha, Whistle
the tune of that song. Tihuli ang irù arun mudúul, Whistle at the dog
to make it come near. n whistling.

tiid v [A12] observe, observe in secret. Nakatiid ka bag katingad-an
gabíi? Did you observe anything strange last night? paN-(←) v [A; b(1)]
observe, observe in secret. Ayawg sábà kay dúnay naníid nátù, Be quiet.
S.o. is watching us. Panid-ig muus-us bag íyang hilánat, Observe him
and see if his fever goes down. n opinion based on observations. Sa
ímung paníid mudaug kahang Libiral? As far as you have observed it, is
the Liberal Party going to win? tigpaN-(←) n s.o. who makes
observations as a profession or task. maN-r- n spy. mapaniírun
a critically observant.

tiil n {1} foot. Sakit ang ákung mga tiil, My feet hurt. Lima ka tiil
ang gitas-un, Five feet tall. {2} leg. {3} leg of a table or other
furniture. v {1} [a12] hit in the leg or foot. Tiila lang siyag pusil
kun muikyas, Shoot him in the leg if he escapes. {2} [A; b] put legs on
furniture. paN- v [A2; c] fight with the legs. Nakabunù ang ugis kay
maáyung maniil, The white cock won because it fought well with its
legs. n {1} legwork, as in a cockfight. {2} a short length of rope tied
to an animal’s foot and in turn attached to the tether rope to prevent
it from kinking. -in- v [A; b6] {1} go barefoot. Magtiniil ku kun
magsakag lubi, I climb a coconut tree barefoot. {2} do with the hands
(humorous). Nagtiniil mig káun, We ate with our hands. -an n place at
the foot: foot of mountain, bed, etc.

tíing v {1} [AC2; b1] pour liquid out for drinking. Nagtíing siyag tubà
pára nákù, He poured me a glass of palm toddy. {2} [C2; c3] share joy,
pleasure with s.o. Nagtíing sila sa dugus sa gugma, They are sharing
the honey of love. -an(→) n container drinks are poured into.

tiíya n {1} small cup for chocolate. {2} small saucer.

tik_1 n {1} sound made to get fowl to approach. {2} graphic
representation of sound produced by clicking the fingers.

*tik_2 — wan, tu in basketball, take one, take two foul shots. Tik tu
basta pawlun ka, You will have two foul shots if you get a foul.

tika contraction for ta and ikaw. see ikaw.

tíka a for s.t. to be sticky. Tíka ra kaáyu ang almirul, The starch is
too sticky. v {1} [B3; a12] solidify into s.t. sticky. Dugayng nakatíka
ang gilútung kalamay, It took a long time for the coconut candy to
become sticky. {2} [A13] for s.t. to become sticky from having come in
contact with s.t. sticky. Nagtíka ang íyang buhuk sa pamáda, His hair
is sticky with pomade.

tíkà n long, drawn-out coughing (as if one is about to vomit). Dì na
man nà urdinaryung ubu. Tíkà na man nà, That is no ordinary cough. That
is a churchyard cough. v [A13] cough in a hard, drawn out manner, as if
vomiting. tikàtíkà v [A] breathe with difficulty due to suffocation or
choking.

tikab n k.o. full-bodied tamban (sardine). tikabtikab v [A; c1] for the
mouth to open and close in rapid succession in speaking, eating or any
other activity. Mutikabtikab ang bàbà sa halu ug makakità ug manuk, The
mouth of a monitor lizard moves up and down when he sees a chicken.
Mutikabtikab siya kun dúgay kung muulì, She cusses me out good when I
come home late.

tíkad v [AB124; a] cultivate, develop land, industry, mining. Kamiy
mitíkad sa ámung kaugalíngung yútà, We developed our own land. Langyaw
ang nagtíkad sa átung kamináhan, Foreigners are developing our mines.
Nagkatikad na ang átung industriya, Our industry is gradually
developing.

tikalbù = tigalbung.

tikalbung = tigalbung.

tikang v [A; a] place a foot on a step, rung, or any foothold. Mitikang
siya sa istríbu arun musakay sa kabáyù, He stepped on the stirrup to
get on the horse. Katulu ra níya tikanga ang hagdanan, He climbed the
stairs in three steps. n act of stepping. -an(←), -anan(←), -l-an(←)
n step, stirrup, place one gets a foothold. -in-an(←) n {1} first mass
in a series of nine masses said at dawn for nine days before Christmas.
{2} fine paid an older brother or sister by a younger brother or sister
who marries ahead of him.

tikangkang v [B36; c1] lie or lean on one’s back and spread the legs,
fall into such a position. Mitikangkang dáyun ang pampam, The
prostitute immediately raised her legs and spread them apart.
Natikangkang (mitikangkang) siya dihang ákung gibastruk, He fell down
with his legs in the air when I hit him.

tikarul_1 n the white-collared kingfisher: Halcyonchloris sp.

tikaruy = tikarul.

tikas v [AB12; ab2] raise s.t. which covers s.t. else into the air.
Natikas ang ámung atup pagbagyu, The roofing was lifted off the house
in the storm. Tikasa ang kurtína, Raise the curtain.

tíkas v [AN; a2] cheat, swindle. Ísug siyang maníkas (mutíkas) sa
sugálan, He has got the guts to cheat in gambling. Gitíkas níya ang
kwarta sa bangku, He swindled the bank’s money. n fraud. Ang tíkas nga
nahímung isyu nasyunal, The fraud that made the national headlines.
-in-an n s.t. gotten by swindling. -an(→), -íru n cheat. -íra =
tikasiru (female). maN-r-(→) n swindler. paN- n graft, rampant fraud.

tikasub, tikásub v [A] fall into the water with a big splash. Mitikásub
ang táwung nahúlug sa pantalan, The man fell from the wharf with a big
splash. n splashing sound made when s.t. falls into the water.

tikaw contraction of ta and ikaw. see ikaw.

tikawtikaw v [A; b3] move about doing s.t. in a deserted place. Talagsa
ray táwu nga nagtikawtikaw sa kadalánan, Only a few people were moving
about in the streets. Unsay ímung gitikawtikáwan ganínang kaadláwun,
What were you doing up and around at dawn?

tikay-ang v [B16; c1] fall on the back, overturn with the belly up.
Natikay-ang ku dihang nabálì ang sandigánan sa silya, I fell on my back
when the back of the chair broke. Tikay-ánga (itikay-ang) ang bisiklíta
arun ilísan tag ligid, Turn the bicycle over so we can change the tire.

tikayhang = tikay-ang.

tikbà = tikwà.

tikbas v [A; a] slash or hack with a machete or similar long knife.
Naputul dáyun ang kamunggay nga íyang gitikbas, The tree he slashed at
was cut down. n action of slashing, hacking with a machete. -ay(→),
-in-ay(→) n bolo duel. v [A23] have a bolo duel.

tikbil v [A; a12] stir up a sensitive feeling. Kadtung buháta mitikbil
sa gitagúang kahiubus, What you did stirred up the feelings of
humiliation which he had kept hidden. Ayaw tikbíla ang átung kagahápun,
Don’t stir up the past.

tikbù v [B23(1)6; c] spill over the side of a vessel. Matikbù ang
sabaw, The soup will spill over. Ákung tikbúan sa bulà ang sirbisa,
I’ll knock the foam off the top of the beer.

*tikbung -in- n style of swimming where the feet are kicked. v [A; c1]
{1} swim kicking the feet. {2} for a baby to produce a thudding sound
by kicking its feet in the cradle.

tikdul v [A; b] rap, knock s.t. lightly. Kinsay mitikdul sa ákung úlu,
Who rapped me on the head? Tikdúli lang ang búla ayaw batíra, Bunt the
ball, don’t bat it. n light rapping. tikdultikdul v [A; bc1] do s.t.
intermittently or once in a while or occasionally. Mutikdultikdul lang
siyag tunghà arun ingnung nag-iskuyla pa, He goes to school once in a
while so that people will say that he is still a student.
Tikdultikdúlan lang nà nákug trabáhug makalugar ku, I’ll just work on
it off and on, as I get the chance. a done off and on, little at a
time.

tíki acronym for Tinípung Kanasúran, United Nations.

tikì n {1} gecko. matag — things which resemble a gecko’s eyes:
{a} large pustule filled with pus similar to talubig, 1, but larger.
{b} round blemishes on tobacco leaves. {2} baby in the womb (humorous).
Pisti, dúna nay tikì ang tiyan sa ákung uyab, Damn! My girl is pregnant
(lit. has a gecko in her womb). tikìtíkì = tabili sa dagat.†

tikig v [B; b6] become stiff. Mitikig (natikig) ámung líug ug hinangad,
We got stiff necks from looking up. Nagkatikig ang bagung minatay, The
body is getting stiff. a stiff. — ug líug a haughty. v [B; b6] become
haughty. Ang kalampúsan makatikig (makapatikig) sa líug, Success makes
one haughty. pa- v [A; c1] act haughty. Ayawg patikig sa líug, Don’t be
haughty.

tikiltíkil v [A13; b] do s.t. little by little at intervals.
Magtikiltíkil gánì ka niánang trabahúa, ambut lang anus-a nà mahuman,
If you keep on working like that, a little at a time, God knows when
you’ll get done.

tíkit n ticket. v [b4] be issued a ticket for violating s.t. Tikítan
ka, You’ll get a ticket. paN- v [A2] issue tickets. Ang kunduktur mauy
maníkit, dì ang draybir, The conductor issues the ticket, not the
driver. pa- v [b4] hold an affair with admission. Patikítan nátù ang
dráma, Let’s charge admission for the play. maN-r- n one who issues
tickets. -íra n one in charge of the ticket counter.

tikitíki n k.o. liquid vitamin preparation.

tikiu n acronym for TKO, a technical knockout in boxing. v [A; a12]
beat with a TKO. Gitikiu sa tsalindyir ang kampiyun, The champion was
TKO’d by the challenger.

tikla n key of piano, organ, or typewriter. -du = tikla.

tikláub_1 v [A2SB12S6; c1] turn a bowl, plate, or s.t. concave with its
opening downward. Siyay nagtiklaub sa dúwang, He turned the basin over.
Miabay mi sa nagtiklaub nga sakayan, We clung to the overturned boat.

tikláub_2 v [B2456; c3] step or fall into the mud with a plop.
Mitikláub (natikláub) ang ákung tiil sa lápuk sa kangitngit, In the
darkness I stepped into the mud puddle with a plop.

tikling n k.o. long-legged bird, the barred rail: Rallus torquatus.
a long-legged and lanky. Kasagáran sa mga mudílu mga tikling, Most
models are long-legged and lanky. -in- n a dance in which dancers dance
between two bamboo poles banged together in time to the music (in
imitation of the tikling bird). -un(→) = tikling, a.

tiklù_1 v [A; ab2] {1} catch s.t. by encircling the neck with a band or
loop attached to an end of a pole. Mutiklù siyag ubud, He catches eels
by grasping them by the neck. {2} steal s.t. petty (slang). Tiklúun ta
nang íyang manuk karung gabíi, Let’s swipe his chicken tonight.
{3} catch s.o. committing a petty crime. Maáyu nang pulísa mutiklù ug
mangunguut, That policeman is good in catching pickpockets. {4} [A;
ab2] kill, esp. violently (slang). Nakatiklù na siyag duha ka kuntra,
He has killed two enemies. {4a} have a girl for sexual purposes for the
first time. Minyù ang únang mitiklù ánang bayhána, A married man had
sexual intercourse with that woman for the first time.

tiklù_2 = takilpù.

tikluhud, tiklúhud (from luhud) v [B26] go down on one’s knee(s).
Mutikluhud siya sa usa ka túhud, He will genuflect. Natikluhud siya sa
dihang ákung gipigtíngan sa tuwaytúway, He fell on his knees when I
switched him on the knees.

tiklup v [A; c16] close by folding. Kinsay nagtiklup sa páyung nga basà
pa? Who folded the umbrella while it was wet? Itiklup (tiklúpa) ang
tanang libru, Close all your books. tikluptiklup n collapsible.
Tikluptiklup nga silya, Folding chairs.

tikmìtikmì v [A; b6] eat slowly, pecking at one’s food. Ngánung
nagtikmìtikmì ka man? Wà ka ba gutma? Why are you pecking at your food?
Are you not hungry?

tiknik, tiknika n {1} technique. {2} cunning means of attaining s.t.
Maáyu siyag tiknik kay nagpabúy arun makapaniktik, He was pretty smart,
becoming a houseboy in order to spy on them.

tiknikal n {1} technical. Hinábang tiknikal ang itanyag sa yúin, The un
offers technical aid. {2} = tiknikal nak-áwut. {3} = tiknikal pawul. —
nak-áwut n technical knockout in boxing, where one of the boxers is
still conscious but not able to continue fighting. {3} — pawul
technical foul in basketball, committed against a player who does not
have the ball. v {1} [A; ab3] beat by a T.K.O. {2} [A; a12] slap a
technical foul on.

tikniku n technician.

tiknikúlur n technicolor movie. a brightly colored like technicolor.
Tiknikúlur ang íyang púlu, His shirt is brightly colored. v {1} [c16]
make a movie with technicolor. {2} [A; c1] do s.t. in colors.

tiknisyan n technician. v [B156; a12] be a technician.

tiknuludyi n school course in technology.

tiksas n {1} k.o. fierce gamecock (said to be bred from stock imported
from Texas). {2} girl who is sexually aggressive. Tiksas nang bayhána
kay mugukud giyug láki, That girl is aggressive because she runs after
men.

tikstu n text of the Bible.

tiktak n {1} tick-tock sound of a clock and the like. {2} two pieces of
wood clapped against each other to produce a tik tak sound, used as
percussion in a combo.

tiktik_1 v [AN; b4(1)] spy on, discover by snooping. Akuy maniktik
(mutiktik) sa kalihúkan sa átung kuntra, I’ll spy on our enemies’
activities. Natiktikan siyang may laláki, She was discovered with a
paramour. n detective. paN- n detective work.

tiktik_2 n {1} portion of the corn grain that comes out powdery when
the corn is ground into grits. {1a} by extension, the similar
by-product of rice. {2} dirt under the foreskin of the penis. v [B12]
become dirt under the foreskin. Makatiktik nang way kalígù, If you
don’t bathe you get dirt under your foreskin. — ug it’s impossible that
[so-and-so] could happen (coarse). Tiktik pug magbag-u siya, I doubt
that he’ll ever reform. -un(→) a {1} having dirt under the foreskin of
the penis. {2} uncircumcised.

tiktik_3 v {1} [A; c1] tap lightly on a hard surface, producing a sound
of tick-tick. Tiktíka (itiktik) ang linung-ag nga itlug sa lamisa, Tap
the hard-boiled egg gently on the table. {2} [AN; b6(1)] chip off rust.
Tayaun na gánì ang barku tiktikan dáyun sa mga tripulanti, When the
sides of the ship become rusty, the crewmen chip off the rust. paN-an
sa bakì n out-of-the-way, hardly accessible place (place where the
frogs go tick-tick). Túa ku magmaistra sa paniktikag bakì, I’m teaching
in the backwoods.

tiktik_4 n {1} call for chickens to come near in feeding them. {2} call
of the mother hen for her chicks. v [c1] call newly hatched or small
chicks.

tikúb = tikulub.

tikubù, tikúbù (from kubù) v {1} [A2S; c] bend over as if to pick s.t.
up. Mitikubù siya pagpunit ug batu, He stooped down to pick up a stone.
Itikubù ímung láwas inigsumbag níya, Bend low when he swings at you.
{2} [B2S; b6] be, become bent. Nagtikubù ang táwu sa katigúlang, The
man is bent with age.

tikud_1 n {1} heel of the foot. {2} heel of shoe. Pagtaas ug tikud,
Wear high-heels. v {1} [A; b] put heels on shoes. {2} [A12; a12] hit
s.o. on the heel.

tikud_2 v [A; c] push back the lower part of the vaginal opening in
delivery to prevent laceration.

tikug_1 a selfish, ungiving and unsharing. Tikug kaáyu nà. Ayaw na lag
pangáyù bísag unsa, He is very selfish. Don’t waste time asking
anything from him. v [B12; b6] be selfish.

tikug_2 a stoop-shouldered. Tikug na siya kay tigúwang na, He is
stoop-shouldered because he’s old. v [B] be stoop-shouldered.

tíkug n {1} k.o. thin-bladed grass of swamps growing to 3 m., used for
mats and hats: Fimbristylis globulosa. {2} sleeping mat made from the
tíkug plant.

tikúgas n k.o. rail found in rice fields or marshy areas, 5–6″ high,
and used for food, the white-breasted swamphen: Amaurornis phoenicurus.

tikugkug a for the body to be very bent. Tikugkug ka na kaáyu tungud sa
tísis, You are very haggard and bent because of your tuberculosis.
v [B6] for the body to become bent. Nagtikugkug na siya sa kaníwang,
She has grown bent from extreme thinness. -un(→) a having a bent body.

tikúkà v [A] retch in choking or prior to vomiting. Nagtikúkà siya
dihang nabut-ukan sa túbig, He coughed hard rapidly after he choked on
the water. hi-/ha- v [B1256] retch.

tikùkù v {1} [A; c1] curl up tight, be bent over. Nagtikùkù siya
paghigdà, He lay down curled up. {2} [B; b6] be curled up.

tikulub, tikúlub (from kulub) v [A3P; c1] turn over and lie on one’s
belly; overturn. Makatikulub na ang bátà nga upat ka búlan, A
four-month-old baby can turn over and lie on his belly. Tikulba
(itikulub) ang mga kún, Turn the pots face downward.

tik-um = tak-um.

tikung = butíti.

tikungkung v [A; c1] curl up the legs. Nagtikungkung siyang natúg sa
katugnaw, It was so cold that he slept with his legs curled up.
Tikungkúnga (itikungkung) ímung tiil arun masúd ka sa kaban, Curl up
your legs so you’ll fit in the trunk.

tikup n door or window shutter. v {1} [b6(1)] close an opening in a
room or an enclosed area. Ákung gitikupan ang bintánà ug banig, I
covered the window with a mat. {2} [c1] make into a shutter to cover an
opening.

tíkup a closed tight, without holes or spaces in between. Tíkup
pagkalála ning baníga, This mat was tightly woven. v {1} [A; c1] make
s.t. tight. Kadaug kang mutíkup ug siklat ánà, Are you strong enough to
weave the bamboo slats tight? {2} [A; a1] close up the opening of a
hollow area or a hole in s.t. that wraps around s.t. else. Akuy mutíkup
sa púyù, I’ll sew up the pouch. Tikúpa na ang kural líbut sa balay,
Make the ends of the fence around the house meet.

tik-up v [AB46; b2c1] {1} cover over an opening with s.t. that moves
over it and fits it. Gidalì níyag tik-up ang bintánà, She shut the
windows at once. Mutik-up ang kurtína human sa káda isína, The curtain
will close after each scene. {2} close up, be folded, cause s.t. to do
so. Ganíha ra nà siyang tábì wà pa giyud mutik-up ang bàbà, She has
been chattering for quite some time now. Her mouth never seems to shut.
Nagtik-up pa ang biyúus, The bud is still unopened. Dì siya makatik-up
sa páyung kay gáhì, She can’t fold the umbrella because it is stuck.
{3} [A2] for the sun to set. Mingitngit ang kalibútan dihang nakatik-up
na ang adlaw, The earth became dark after the sun had set.

tikus_1 v [A; c] strap s.t. to the waist. Nagtikus ug sád ang
mananggíti, The toddy gatherer straps a sickle to his waist. Itikus ang
bukag inigpangáni nímu, Strap the basket to your waist when you harvest
rice.

tikus_2 n k.o. small triggerfish with a protruding mouth and no dorsal
spine. nawung ug — having a snout that protrudes.

tikuskus v [AB; c1] curl up tightly, draw into itself. Nagtikuskus siya
paghigdà, She lay curled up in a tight ball. Ínit mauy nakatikuskus
(nakapatikuskus) sa dáhung tagak, The heat made the fallen leaves curl
up.

tikutkut = tikuskus.

tíkuy_1 v [A2; b3(1)] for s.t. baked to fall, settle and harden while
baking. n {1} fallen cake. {2} dough left over, not enough to make a
whole cake, but at least enough to form into s.t. {2a} the youngest
child in a family, still comparatively small in size (humorous—from the
notion that tíkuy is a cake, not full-sized, made from the leftovers).

tíkuy_2 v [A; a12] filch, swipe s.t. usually of small value. Kinsay
nagtíkuy sa ákung mansánas diri sa lamísa? Who swiped my apple from the
table?

tikwà v [A; a2] for a liquid to spill over. Hináyag dala ang tásà kay
mutikwà ang kapi, Carry the cup carefully so the coffee does not spill.
Ayawg tikwáa inigkáwus nímu, Don’t spill the water when you fetch it.

tikwang v [A; a2] tip over to the side. Dakung balud mitikwang sa
sakayan, A big wave tipped the boat over to its side. Tikwánga ang
barsahan arun mayabu ang sulud, Tip the sled over to get the load off.

tikwì_1 n {1} sound made by a hawk. {2} name given to hawks or buzzards
which sound tikwì: the ananangkil and the banug. v [A; b6] {1} produce
such a sound. Mutikwì ang banug inigkakitag madágit, The hawk goes
tikwì when he spies a prey. {2} fondle a baby by imitating a hawk’s
sound raising the hand and letting it fall in some part of the body to
tickle it in imitation of a preying hawk.†

tikwì_2 v [B] get stiff in death (slang). Nagtikwì na ang táwung
naghíkug sa dihang hindiskubrihan, The man who committed suicide was
already stiff when they found him.

tikyáub = tikláub_1 2.

tikyup v {1} [B456] close gently. Mutikyup ang hibìhibì kun makahilan,
The leaves of the touch-me-not close when you touch it. {2} [B2456;
b(1)] for darkness to close in. Mitikyup ang kagabhíun binyáan ang
láing adlaw, Night came leaving behind another day. {2a} [AB; b5] for
lights to dim, cause them to do so. Tikyúpi (tikyúpa) ang sugà kun
matúlug ka na, Turn the lamp down when you go to sleep. {3} [A; c1]
fold s.t. flat over haphazardly once or twice. Tikyúpa (itikyup) lang
ang banig arun dì kan-un ang humay sa manuk, Fold the mat so that the
chicken won’t get at the rice on it.

tíla n cloth, textile. — mitalika wire screen of fine mesh. v [b6]
screen s.t. with screening wire.

tílà v {1} [A; b] lick s.t. (normally not the lips). Hápit mutílà sa
ímung tiil kanang nanguyab nímu, Your suitor nearly licks your foot.
Gitiláan sa irù ang íyang núka, The dog licked his sores. {2} [a3] get
s.t. out of s.o. or s.t. Daghan kag amígu kun dúna pa silay matílà
nímu, You’ll have lots of friends if there is s.t. they can get out of
you. {3} obtain, get s.t. out of s.t. Wà tay matílà dinhi? Isn’t there
anything to get out of this place? {4} — ug háp v [b] for a certain
quantity to be consumed entirely. Gitiláag háp ang ákung swildu tungud
sa daghang bayranan, The bills completely ate up my salary.

tílab v [A; b5] slice off the flesh of fish close to the bone, usually
lengthwise. Magtílab kug ipaun, I’ll slice some fish off for bait. -in-
n fish sliced thin.

tilabhù (from buhù) v [B126; c] for the foot to slip into a hole, deep
mud or the like. Natilabhù ku sa gabuk námung sáwug, The floor gave way
where I stepped on it. (Lit. I stepped through the rotten floor.)
Itilabhù ímung tiil sa lápuk kun unsa kaláwum, Stick your foot into the
mud to see how deep it is.

tilad n mixture of betel nut, bettle-pepper leaves, and lime for
chewing. v [AN; a] chew betel. tilaran n container for the betel
chewing equipment.

tiladtilad n k.o. dark-brown millipede about 1¼″ long which coils up
when touched.

til-ag v [A; b] thoroughly clean rice of chaff, bran, unhusked grains,
etc. Til-ági ang bugas únà lung-ága, Clean the rice before you cook it.

tilagak v [A; b6] drip in long drops. Nagtilagak ang íyang láway, His
saliva is drooling from his mouth. Gitilagakan ang sawug sa dugus,
Honey dripped on the floor.

tilambù n young coconut fruit at a stage where it is full-sized but the
meat has not developed, and only the soft shell and water are found
within the husk.

tílang v [A12; a3] be pierced with a sharp, pointed object. Lansang ang
nakatílang sa íyang tiil, It was a nail that pierced his feet. Natílang
ang íyang páa pag-ikid níyas kural, Her thigh got spiked when she
jumped over the fence.

tilangù n k.o. sea cucumber.

tilap, tílap v [A; b] {1} lick. Makahílu nà bísag makatilap ka lang,
That’s poisonous even if you only lick it. Tilapi ímung wait, Lick your
lips. {2} lap at, cover (literary). Gitilapan ang bungtud sa sílaw, The
sun’s rays are touching the hill now. paN- v [A; b6] lick the lips in
anticipation. Nagpanilap siyang nagtan-aw nákù, He was licking his lips
looking at me.

tilapya n {1} k.o. fresh-water fish with a dark color, 6–8″ in length,
commercially raised in ponds: Tilapia mossambica. {2} prostitute
(slang). — sa mamala = tilapya, 2.

til-as n k.o. worm having hairs that cause a severe itch, commonly
found in monkeypod (akasya) trees. v [b4] be stung by such a worm.

tilaub n boiled young corn on the cob. v [A; a2] boil young corn. Saktu
tilaubun ning maísa, These ears of corn are just right to boil. -un
n young ears of corn ready to boil.

tiláuk n region of the upper back of the mouth in the vicinity of the
uvula. Maáyung pagkatáup ang tagà sa tiláuk sa isdà, The hook was well
lodged in the fish’s throat. -an n esophagus, gullet.

tilaw v [A; b] {1} taste. Tilawi ang sabaw kun parat ba, Taste the soup
to see if it’s salty. {2} try, experience. Mutilaw kug sakayg dyít, I’d
like to experience riding a jet. {3} [A12; b2] get a beating, scolding,
etc. Makatilaw ka giyug muusab ka, You’ll get it if you do it again.

tilhung = talhung.

tílib v [A; ab7] take a thin slice off of s.t. Tilíbi pag ákung kalyu
kay bagà pa, Slice some more off of my corn because it’s still thick.
Tilíban ug dakù ang bàbà sa sag-ub arun sayun pagtíing, Slice a fairly
good-sized piece off the bamboo toddy container so that it will be easy
to pour water out of it.

tilibisyun n television.

tiligráma n telegram. v [A; c] send a telegram. (→) n {1} line for
telegraph transmission. Nabugtù ang tiligrama maung dílì ka na
makatiligráma, The telegraph wire is cut, so you can’t send a telegram.
{2} telegraph post. Kabáyù nga gihukut sa tiligrama, Horse that was
tethered to the telegraph post.

*tiligrapiku híru — n telegraphic money order.

tiligrapista n telegraph operator.

tiligrapu n telegraph.

tilíis a shrill, high-pitched voice. v [B; c1] be shrill, high-pitched.
Mitilíis ang singgit sa gilúgus, The girl let out a shrill scream as
she was raped. Natilíis ang íyang tíngug tungud sa dipiktu sa tutunlan,
Her voice became shrill due to some throat defect.

tílik v [A; a12] spin coins for gambling. Pusta úsà parabir nákù
tilíkun ang usa ka dakù, Put your bet first before I twirl the penny.
pa- n a betting game twirling a coin, usually the big centavo piece,
and the bettor chooses heads or tails. v [A] play a game of patílik.

tilim = lunas.

tilimad-un (from balà_1) n {1} sign which portends s.t. (not
necessarily sent or known to an individual). Dautang tilimad-un ang
kumíta, A comet is a bad omen. {2} indication, symptom. Musumpà sa mga
tilimad-un sa kasagárang sip-un, Stops the symptom of the ordinary
cold. v [A13] signify, show as a sign or omen of. Ang lapad nga agtang
nagtilimad-un sa pagkautukan, A wide forehead signifies high
intelligence.

tilingtiling v [A; a12] ring with the sound of tiny bells or the
telephone. Tilingtilinga ang kampanilya, Ring the bell. n {1} ringing
sound. {2} tiny bell.

tílip n k.o. ornamental similar to the kilála.

tilipunu n telephone. v [A; b] phone. Tilipunuhi ku, Call me up.
tilipunista n telephone operator. v [B156] be a telephone operator.

til-is_1 = tilíis.

til-is_2 v [AN; b] for liquids, usually urine, to stream out with
force. Kinsay mitil-is (nanil-is) sa ákung tanum? Who urinated on my
plants? n urine.

tiliskupyu n {1} telescope, binoculars. {2} eyeglasses. v {1} [A; a2b]
use, view through a telescope, binoculars. {2} [A13] drink from an
upraised container (from the notion that the face is in the same
position as when peering into a telescope—humorous). Sígi nang pangáun
ang mga bisíta. Nagtiliskupyu na gánì ang uban, The people are eating
in full swing now. Some have started making like a telescope with their
bottles.

tilitayip n teletype machine.

tilitul = tulitul.

tiltil_1 v {1} [A; b(1)] rap, tap lightly. Tiltíli, ayawg paknga ang
íhi, Tap it gently. Don’t strike the axle hard. {1a} [A; b] chip off
s.t. small from s.t. hard by tapping on it. Tiltíli ang simintung
sapáwag pinising, Roughen the concrete that we will put the finish on.
{2} [A23; b(1)] make slightly biting or insulting remarks or allusions.
Ug mapikal siya mutiltil pud, He makes slight digs when he’s irked.

tiltil_2 v [B3(1)4N; b6] sink straight to the bottom. Nagkatiltil ang
sakayan, The boat was sinking. Nakatiltil na siya pag-itsa sa
salbabída, He had already sunk when the lifesaver was thrown to him.

tílù = tíluk.

tílub v [B1256] be, become deaf (said in scolding or in a mild curse).
Nagsinggit na man gánì ku unyà walà gihápun ka kadungug. Unsa man?
Natílub ka? I shouted at you, but you didn’t hear me. What is the
matter with you anyway? You deaf? patilubtilub v [A; b(1)] pretend to
be deaf, ignore. Gipatilubtiluban ku níya sa ákung gikinahanglan, He
turned deaf ears to my needs.

til-ug n food prepared esp. for s.o. recuperating from s.t. v [A; ac]
feed health food to s.o. Ug nahadagat pa, dì ikatil-ug, Terribly
homely. (Lit. If it were a fish, it could not be used to feed a person
recuperating from an illness.) Maáyu itil-ug ang mayamáya, Red snapper
is good for s.o. recuperating from an illness. — sa hilánat n boil that
comes out after one is cured of fever. v [b4] have a boil as an
after-effect of fever. Gitil-úgan ang ákung hilánat, I had a boil as an
after-effect of my fever. -un(→) n k.o. food good for convalescents.

tíluk v [A; a12] remove, consume to the last bit. Ang iring mauy
nagtíluk sa salin, The cat got all of the leftovers. Tilúkag punit ang
mga sagbut, Pick up all of the refuse.

tilun n {1} curtain on stage. {2} movie screen. abri — in stage
presentation, expression meaning ‘curtains up’. búka — the main curtain
that covers the whole stage. sira — in stage presentations, expression
meaning ‘curtains down’. v {1} [a12] make into a stage curtain. {2} [c]
put a stage curtain. Hábul lay átung itilun sa dúlà, We’ll just use
blanket as a curtain for the play. {3} [A3; b6] hang like a curtain
(literary). Nagtilun ang lasangnung kasagbutan, The jungle vines hung
like curtains. -iru(←) n person in charge of opening or closing the
curtain.

tiluring n tailor shop. v [A13] run a tailoring shop. May hílig ka sa
pagpanahì ug karsúnis. Maáyu pag magtiluring ka, You have an interest
in making trousers, so you will do well running a tailoring shop.

tilus n a spoon made out of a coconut shell. v [A; a2] make, use a
coconut-shell spoon.

tím_1 n team. Usa ka tím sa písi ang nagguwardiya níya, A p.c. team is
guarding him. v [B1256C2; c3] form, be a member of a team.

tím_2 n theme, a short composition required in school. v [A1] write a
theme.

tima n a makeshift bit for a horse, made from a length of tether rope,
usually in the form of a clove hitch, passed over the lower jaw. v [A;
b6] put such a bit on a horse.

tíma_1 n theme, subject. Kasína mauy tíma sa sugilánun, Envy is the
theme of the story. v [c6] use as a theme.

tíma_2 v [A; b(1)] plan, intend to. Nagtíma ming magpiknik ugmà, We
plan to have a picnic tomorrow. Mau kini ang gitimáhan níla, This is
what they plan to do.

tíma_3 be done doing s.t., for s.t. to be finished. Tíma ka nas ímung
humwurk, Are you through with your homework? v [AB126; a12] finish
s.t.; be through with s.t. Aku nay mitíma sa íyang trabáhu, I finished
his work. Matíma na gánì ang trabáhu, When the work is done.

timáan v [A3S; b(1)] {1} remember, take note. Maáyu siyang mutimáan ug
ngálan, He’s good in remembering names. Nakatimaan ka ba sa átung
giagían niadtu? Do you remember the road we took before? Timan-i unsáun
pagbúhat íni, Take note how this is done. {2} keep, bear in mind.
Magtimáan ka sa íyang panambágun, Keep his advice in your mind. Timan-i
nga sinagup ka lang, Bear in mind that you are just a foster child.
{3} [A; c] mark, indicate. Way kurus nga nagtimáan sa íyang lubung, No
cross marks his grave. {4} [A13] mean, be an indication of. Ang
pagpasákit nagtimáan sa gugma, Sacrifice is an indication of love.
{5} [A; b] affix a signature or thumbmark. Ubligádu ka pagtúman kun
mutimáan kag kuntrátu, When you sign a contract, you are obliged to
abide by it. n {1} sign, mark. {2} indication. {3} signature or
thumbmark. (→) — ug buut v [A12] {1} regain consciousness. Nagkatimaan
nag buut ang nautas, The person who fainted has regained consciousness.
{2} reach the stage in life where one is aware. Ílu na kung dáan
pagkatimaan nákug buut, From the time of my earliest consciousness I
have been an orphan. timan-anay v [C2] for two or more parties to sign
papers agreeing to s.t. Nagtiman-anay sila sa kasabútan, They signed
the agreement.†

timailhan n sign, symbol or mark to indicate s.t. v [A13] indicate, be
a sign of. Ang kadautan sa panahun nagtimailhan sa umaábut nga bagyu,
The bad weather is a sign of an approaching storm. n birthmark.

tim-an (from tíma) v [B126] for rumors, gossip to die out. Natim-an ang
huhungíhung paglutaw sa tinúud, The rumors stopped when the truth came
out.

timang v {1} [A2; b6(1)] change the topic or course of a conversation;
digress. Makatimang ku usáhay sa ákung pagliktiyur, Sometimes I
unwittingly digress in my lecture. Ayawg itimang ang inyung kabildu ug
láin ug iksplikaran ka, Don’t change the topic of the conversation when
a man proposes to you. {2} [A2; c] give an additional remark to
supplement what has been said. Nanglibak sila kanímu ug gitimángan sab
dáyun sa ímung karibal, They were talking against you and your rival
quickly joined in with more information. n s.t. said in digression.

timàtimà v [A; a12] keep eating a little now and then, be munching on
s.t. Wad-an kag gána kun pirmi kang magtimàtimà, You’ll lose your
appetite if you keep nibbling on food. Pagdág matimàtimà sa sinihan,
Bring s.t. to nibble on in the movies.

timaud v [A13] keep one’s word as to s.t. promised, Walà giyud siya
magtimaud sa ámung sábut, She did not keep her word as per agreement.

tim-aw v [A23P; a12] appear, show up. Wà mutim-aw (mupatim-aw) ang
nubya kay gitában, The bride didn’t show up because s.o. eloped with
her. Wà siya tim-áwa sa íyang dít, Her date didn’t show up to get her.

timáwà n {1} poor, destitute. Timáwà pa sa ilagà, Poorer than a church
mouse. {2} unfortunate and humble person. Dungga intáwun ning timáwang
hinikáwan sa gugma, Hear the pleas of an unfortunate being deprived of
love. v [B126] become destitute.

timayud, timáyud v [A1; a12] {1} recognize, be aware of the importance
of s.t. Mutimayud lang ka nákù kun dúna kay kinahanglan, You bother
about me when you want s.t. from me. Nagtimáyud ku níla ísip ákung mga
ginikánan, I recognize them as my parents. {2} notice, be aware of s.t.
Nakatimáyud kung may misaka sa balay, I noticed s.o. entering the
house. {3} pay attention to, watch s.t. Timayúra ang ímung manghud kun
túa ba sa iskuylahan, See if your brother is in school. Itimáyud ku sa
balay kun wà mi dihà, Please watch the house for us while we are away.
{4} do s.t. well putting one’s full attention to it. Mitimáyud na siyag
trabáhu, He now works consistently well. Timayúra ug bása ang libru,
Read the book carefully.

timbà v [A; ab1] fetch s.t. by dipping from a well, scooping from a
pit, or the like. Magtimbà ku sa atábay, I’ll go fetch some water from
the well. Timbáa ang kinubkub kay láwum nag buhù, Bring the earth up
because the pit is deep now. n {1} pail, dipper, scoop. {2} pail-,
dipperful. Gái kug usa ka timbà, Give me a dipperful.

timbakúwas v [A2; c] get up quickly from a lying position. Mitimbakúwas
siya sa íyang higdaan, He got up instantly from his bed.

timbálung v [B26] fall headlong. Walà siya makabrík ug ang awtu
mitimbálung sa pangpang, He didn’t get a chance to apply the brakes and
the car fell headlong down the cliff. Íya kung gitulud ug natimbálung
ku sa túbig, He pushed me and I fell headlong into the water.

timbang v {1} [A; a12] weigh s.t. Akuy mutimbang sa kupras, I’ll weigh
the copra. Timbánga ang bábuy, Weigh the pig. {1a} [A] weigh, have the
weight of. Mutimbang siyag sisinta kílus, He weighs sixty kilos.
{2} [AC3; a] make s.t. balance. Matikwang ang sakayan kung way
makatimbang sa píkas, The boat will capsize if nobody stays on one side
to balance it. Ang pagsálig ángay timbángan sa pag-amping, Trust must
be balanced with carefulness. {3} [A; b] help. Timbángi ra ku, Help me.
Mahímù siyang ikatimbang sa panimalay, He can be used as a helper in
the household. {3a} — ug kúgus (pangúgus), luhud (panglúhud) v [AC; c]
be a sponsor in a wedding or baptism of a person of the opposite sex.
Nagtimbang mig pangúgus sa pyista, We were co-sponsors of a baptism
during the town feast. n {1} weight. {2} helper. {2a} male sponsor of a
female in wedding or baptism or the female sponsor of a male.
a balanced. paN- v {1} [A] maintain balance. Nanimbang siyang milátay
sa písì, He maintained his balance as he walked on the rope. {2} [A2]
engage in the buying and selling of things by weight. Nanimbang siyag
kupras, He is engaged in the buying and selling (lit. weighing) of
copra. n balance. Nawad-an siya sa panimbang, He lost his balance.
Culu-, timbangtimbang v [A; a12] ponder. Nagtulutimbang siya kun kinsay
íyang sugtun, She is considering who to accept. Timbangtimbánga kun
magpárì ka ba giyud, Think it over if you really want to be a priest.
hiN- = paN-, v1. ka- n helper, assistant. Siyay ákung katimbang sa uma,
He’s my farmhand. -an(→) n scale to weigh things.

timbaruk v [B6] stand unmoving, rooted or frozen on one’s feet.
Mitimbaruk ang babáyi pagkakità sa hálas, The woman froze on her feet
when she saw the snake. Ngánung nagtimbaruk man mu? Hala trabáhu! Why
are you standing around like a bunch of statues? Get to work!

timbaya, timbayà v [A2; a12] greet. Mutimbaya siya káda súgat námù, She
greets me each time we meet. Timbayahun diay nákù nang dì kaíla, Do I
have to greet s.o. I don’t know? n greeting.

timbri_1 v [A; b] {1} put an official stamp or seal on. Nutaryuy
nagtimbri íning apidábit, A notary stamped this affidavit. Magámit ning
istáma kay wà timbríhi, You can use this stamp because it doesn’t have
a postmark. {2} affix one’s thumbmark. Timbríhi ang ímung balúta, Put
your thumbmark on your ballot. n stamp affixed, seal, thumbmark.

timbri_2 n pushbutton or the bell or buzzer the pushbutton manipulates.
v [A; b] push a button or ring a bell or operate a similar
contrivance.†

timbríra n k.o. food container consisting of several covered bowls
which are hooked together.

timbul_1 v {1} [AC; ac] mix s.t. into s.t. else in order to change the
composition. Maáyu siyang mutimbul ug ilimnun, He’s good in mixing
drinks. Nakigtimbul ang mga tigúlang sa mga tin-idyir, The old folks
mixed with the teen-agers. Lamì timbúlun ang lambanug ug sibin-ap, Nipa
wine and seven-up are good mixed together. 2, 3, 4 = tibul. n s.t.
added to mix with the dominant element.

timbul_2 n thimble. v [A; b6] wear a thimble. Natupukan ang íyang tudlù
kay wà timbúli, She pricked her fingers because she didn’t wear a
thimble.

timbúngan n general name for goatfishes.

timbúwad v [B1256] fall headlong. Natimbúwad siya ngadtu sa túbig
pagkatambug níya sa taytáyan, He fell headlong into the water when he
fell from the bridge.

timbuy v [A; c] 1, 2 = tibul, 3. {3} add a little amount of s.t. to
s.t.; contribute a little. Mitimbuy (nagtimbuy) siyag písus sa ílang
kapunúngan, He contributed one peso to their organization. Nakatimbuy
ning librúha pagkúhà ku sa iksámin, This book helped a little when I
took the examination. Gitimbúyan níyag asin ang sabaw, He added salt to
the soup. {4} [A; b] have sexual relations with a married woman.
Nakatimbuy ka ánang batáa? Have you contributed s.t. to the making of
that child?

timgas a {1} neat, clean and white with a clear and fine texture.
Timgas kang tan-áwun gíkang nalígù, You look clean-complexioned after
bathing. {2} enunciated with clarity and determination. ‘Ipanimalus ku
ang ákung asáwa,’ timgas ug maisúgung pamúlung ni Sultan Saranggáni, ‘I
will avenge my wife,’ Sultan Saranggani averred firmly. v [BN] be
clear, white and smooth in texture. Magtimgas ang lugas sa humay nga
maáyung pagkauga, The grains of well-dried rice are smooth and clear.
-un a of a fair and clean sort.

timhung = tamhung.

*timì timìtimì v [A1; b6] pick at food, eat without appetite. -an
a prone to be having no appetite, just picking at the food.

timik walà — v [A3] keep completely silent, tight-lipped. Wà lang siya
magtimik dihang giimbistigar, He didn’t say a word when he was
interrogated. walay — totally silent. Way timik ang mintiryu magabíi,
There’s not a sound in the cemetery at night.

timing n small, square or oblong fish trap made of basket work, set in
shallow waters. paN- v [A2; a] catch fish with this trap.

timpag = lumpag.

timpasaw v [A; b6] {1} splash heavily and resoundingly into the water.
Mitimpasaw ngadtus túbig pagkahúlug níya gíkan sa pantalan, He fell off
the wharf and landed in the water with a splash. {2} be hit by the
aptness of what s.o. might say about one. Ug átung buhátun mutimpasaw
ta niadtung pagyà nga nag-ingun nga maáyus tayáda, way ági, If that is
what we do, they’ll be able to apply that old saying to us—that we’re
all talk and no action.

timpiramintu n temperament. Bisan ang managkalúha lahig timpiramintu,
Even twins have different temperaments.

timpiratúra n temperature.

timpla v {1} [A; c] add s.t. so as to season, flavor. Himarat ang
nagtimpla sa sabaw, Whoever seasoned the soup likes salt. Maáyung
itimpla ang kámay sa kapi, Sugar is good to put into coffee. {2} [A;
a2] prepare things in which s.t. is mixed or added. Timpláhi si Bíbig
gátas, Mix some milk for Baby. {3} [A13; a12] weigh, consider carefully
before deciding. Ikaw lay magtimpla kun mukúyug ka ba sa piknik, You
decide for yourself if you are going to the picnic. n {1} flavoring,
seasoning. {2} the proportions of a mixture. Layaw ra ang timpla sa
mása, The concrete mixture is too watery. Unsa may timpla sa minása?
Tris dus u kwatru dus? How is the dough to be mixed? Three to two or
four to two? -da n {1} the solution or mixture that results. Layaw ra
ang timpláda sa litsi, The milk is too watery. {2} temperament (slang).
Dì sila magkadúul kay nagkaláhì silag timpláda, They can’t go together
because their temperaments clash. -du n s.t. already seasoned,
flavored. Ayaw nag kamayi ang sampurádu kay timpládu na, Don’t put
sugar in the chocolate porridge because it is already sweetened.
-dur(→) n one who is in charge in mixing. paN- v [A2; b6] size up s.o.
Kamau siyang manimplag táwu, He knows how to size people up.
Panimpláhan nátù siyag ángay bang pangasaw-un, Let’s size her up to see
if she is worth marrying. n opinion reached on sizing s.o. up.

timplit n registration plate of vehicles.

timplíti n k.o. small pavilion built for special church services.

timplu n temple.

timpránu a {1} early. {2} just in time for s.t. Timpránu giyud
pag-abúta nímu, talilákaw ku, You got here just in time, because I was
about to go. v [A2; a2] do s.t. early or ahead of schedule. Timpranúhag
human pagdáru arun timpránu tang makapugas, Finish the plowing early so
we can plant early.

timpu n {1} time, chance. Wà kuy timpu ihalayhálay, I have no time for
relaxation. {2} time, schedule. Timpu sa tingkaun ra mi magkitaay, We
meet only at mealtime. {3} weather. Mubyáhi ka bísag dautag timpu? Are
you travelling even in bad weather? {4} season. Timpu sa pagpangáni
karun, It’s harvest season now. {4a} propitious time to do s.t. Timpu
na run sa íyang himbis, According to the scale configuration on its
legs, now is the time to fight it. {5} era, period. Timpu sa Katsílà pa
nang ímung purul, Your shorts go back to the Spanish times. {6} tempo.
Swít ang timpu íning sunatáha, This dance is in a slow tempo. paN-
v [A2; b6] do s.t. at the best time. Manimpu siyag súgal, kanà lang
dibuynasun, He gambles only when the time is right, when it’s his lucky
day. n doing s.t. at the best time. timputimpu v [c16] do s.t. at the
right season. Itimputimpu (timputimpúhun) ang pagtanum kun way patubig,
Planting is done in the right season if there’s no irrigation. a from
time to time. Timputimpu nga musáka us-us ang prisyu, Prices fluctuate
from time to time.

timpuraryu a temporary. n s.o. temporary in a job or position. v [c]
put on a temporary basis. Patrabahúa siya bísag itimpuraryu lang únà,
Give him a job even if it is only on a temporary basis.

timríra = timbríra.

tíms n small bus with the motor not in the front, accommodating twenty
or so passengers and plying the provincial highways. (So called from
the brand Thames.)

timsung n {1} theme song. {2} song chosen by lovers as their song.
v [A; c] make as one’s theme song.

timtim v [A; b] taste or sample liquid. Timtími ang sabaw kun hustu bag
timpla, Taste the soup to see if it is all right.

timtisyun n temptation, k.o. fast dance. v [A] dance the temptation.

timù n snack. v {1} [A; c1] have a snack. Bastanti nang itimù (timuun)
ring biskwit, This biscuit is enough for a snack. {2} [A; c] put into
one’s mouth. Arun dì masakpan gitimù nákù ang sigarilyu, To avoid being
caught, I stuffed the cigarette into my mouth. timùtimù v [A; c1] eat
snacks casually between meals.

tímug n wind that hits Cebu from the east.

timun n {1} rudder. {2} clitoris (humorous euphemism). v [AN2; b] steer
a boat with a rudder, or with a paddle used like a rudder. Lihíru
siyang mutimun (manimun) kúmu mananagat, He steers the rudder well
since he is a fisherman. Timuni ang sakayan, Steer the boat. paN-
v [A2; b6] steer, guide, lead a group. Ang Prisidinti mauy manimun sa
násud, The President steers the nation. Ang punduk nga ímung
gipanimunan, The group you are the leader of. -il n helmsman. v [B156;
a2] be the helmsman.

timúna = kimúna.

timuri n a k.o. secret talk where certain phonemes are substituted for
others: u for a, t for d, p for d, r for l, n for m, and y for s, the
rest remaining. The word timuri is derived from binali (‘done
backwards’). v [A; a2] speak in timuri. Kumuu kung nutimuri? (Kamau
kang mubinali?) Cangre yougre speakgre Hoggre? (Can you speak Hog
Latin?)

timus n k.o. light, brownish grasshopper less than 1″ found in bushes
and tall grasses.

tim-us a pure, sincere. Ang gugmang tim-us dì mulubad, Pure love
doesn’t fade.

timwurk n teamwork. Lawgaw ang ámung grúpu kay way timwurk, Our group
is no good because it lacks teamwork. a have teamwork, right
coordination. Timwurk kaáyu ang bahista ug ang pyanista, The bass
player and the pianist coordinated beautifully. v [B12C; c3] team up
with, do s.t. harmoniously together in coordinated effort. Nagkatimwurk
ang duruha sa ílang pag-ílad sa sapian nílang iyaan, The two made a
perfect team in swindling their rich aunt.

tin. abbreviation for tinyinti ‘lieutenant’.

tína n a child born with the umbilical cord wound around the neck.
According to folk belief such a child will turn out hot-tempered.

tinà n k.o. brown-colored rot that affects rice plants stunting their
growth or killing them.

tínà v [A; a] dye. Tináa ang milubad nga karsúnis, Dye the faded pants.
Natínà sa dugù ang bindáhi, The bandage is stained with blood. (→)
n dye. -an n dyeing vat.

tinabal see tabal.

tinabuylu (from buylu) n the rapid whirling motion of a body, as a
propeller, motor, etc. Ang tinabuylu sa pála sa barku, The whirling
motion of the propeller.

tinái (from tái) n intestines. — sa kawáyan n the inner sides of
bamboo, stripped off from the hard outer part to use for weaving. layù
sa — {1} off the target. {2} for a wound to be minor (humorous). Ayawg
hílak layù ra nà sa tinái, Don’t be a sissy. It’s a minor cut.
igsumpay, kasumpay ug —, igpútul, kapútul ug — n brother, sister.

tinápa n fish packed in small 2″ by 4″ cylindrical can. v [A1] have
such fish for one’s meal.

tinápay n {1} bread. {2} pastry. v [A1] have bread.

tinatína n a k.o. children’s ball game mainly for girls where the ball
is dribbled in a court made up of ten squares and the object is to
dribble the ball in each square a specified number of times. v [A; b]
play such a game.

tin-aw a {1} clear, not turbid or muddied. Tin-aw ang limpiyung túbig,
Clean water is clear. {2} clear, definite. Tin-aw ang íyang báhad, His
warning was clear. {3} clear-voiced. Tin-aw íyang tíngug kay dì siya
muinum, He has a clear voice because he doesn’t drink. — ug íhì a a
woman who can have intercourse again after having had a baby (lit.
having clear urine). v {1} [B2; b6] become clear, not muddled or
hoarse. {2} [AP; a2] clarify. Tin-áwun nátù nga akuy masunud dinhi,
Let’s make it clear: you’re supposed to obey me here. Patin-áwig maáyu
ang mga labhanan, Rinse out the clothing till the water becomes clear.
(Lit. Make what is from the clothing clear.) -ay(→) v [C; c3] confront
each other so as to iron out differences. Makigtin-away ku níya báhin
niánang tabía, I’ll have it out with her about that gossip. ka-an
n clarification, explanation.

tináwu see táwu.

tinda v [A; c] sell s.t. which is displayed in a store or on the
sidewalk. Mutinda siyag báhawng pán, The bread he sells is not fresh.
Gipanakup ang naninda sa asíras, The people that were selling things on
the sidewalk were arrested. n goods for sale in a store. paN- v [A2;
c6] go into the selling business. Ang lisinsiyádu ray makapanindag
álak, Only licensed dealers can sell liquor. n selling business.
tindáhan n store. tindíra, tindíru n salesgirl, salesman. v [B156; a2]
be a salesman, salesgirl.

tindak v [A; c] push, kick with the sole of the foot; stamp the feet.
Kusug siyang mitindak sa bisiklíta, He stepped hard on the bicycle.
Itindak ang tiil iniglanguy nímu, Kick your feet when you swim. n kick.
-an, -anan n treadle, pedal. -in- n two coconut trees planted right
next to each other so that it looks as though one is kicking the other.
Coconuts planted this way usually mark a boundary. v [c1] plant coconut
trees in two’s.

tindaw v [A; a] visit a fish corral and find out if there is a catch.

tinday n adolescent female horse.

tindǐr v [A; c] expose, show openly. Mutindǐr sa ílang láwas sa
kadaghánan, Expose their bodies in public. Gitindihan mi níya sa tanang
sud-an, He laid all the dishes in front of us. tindída n in card games,
a card placed face-upwards in the stack of discards.

tindíra, tindíru see tinda.

tindug v {1} [APB346; c1] stand, cause s.t. to stand. Kinsay nagtindug
(nagpatindug) sa pusti, Who set the post up? Nagtindug ang ubang
pasahíru, Some of the passengers were standing. Tindúga (itindug,
ipatindug) ang butilyang natumba, Set the bottle that toppled back up.
{2} [A; b6] act as a wedding sponsor. Mayur ang mitindug sa ílang
kasal, The mayor acted as their wedding sponsor. {3} [A2; b] stand on,
back up one’s word, idea, etc. Tindúgi giyud nang ímung pasángil, Be
sure to back up your charges. {3a} take responsibility for s.o.’s
expenses for him. Akuy mutindug sa ímung matrikula, I will take care of
your school obligations. n {1} height (said of living beings and
objects). {2} a bride-to-be’s wedding ensemble, everything she wears on
her person during the wedding ceremony. Namalit na ang mga ginikánan ni
Idyun ug tindug álang sa íyang pangasaw-unun, Edion’s parents have
bought his bride’s wedding ensemble. pa- v [A; ac1] construct a
building. Íning sapía makapatindug na tag balay, With this money we can
now construct a house. n stake set under beams to add support when
there is a considerable distance between the supporting posts. hi-/ha-,
hipa-/hapa- v [B1256] stand up involuntarily. Nahatindug (nahapatindug)
ku sa kakurat, I stood up in shocked surprise. -in-an n wedding
ensemble, including the accessories. -um-, -um-r- n original
inhabitants, natives. Talagsa ray tumitindug (tumindug) sa syudad,
There are few people originally from the city. -un(→) n the family,
relatives, and friends of the groom. They serve the bride and her
family (lingkurun) at the wedding festivities. Kita kay tindugun, átù
ang tanang trabáhu unyà sa adlaw sa kasal, We are in the groom’s party
so we have to do the work at the wedding party.

tinduk_1 n k.o. cooking banana, a foot or more long, somewhat curved
and about as big as a man’s arm: Musa paradisiaca var. magna.

*tinduk_2 -um-, -um-r- n people indigenous to a certain area. Ang mga
tuminduk (tumitinduk) sa Misamis mga Suban-un, The Subanos are the
natives of Misamis. v [B1256] be a native.

tinduktinduk n shrub of seashore: Prosopis vidaliana.

ting- prefix added to roots which refer to s.t. which happens
seasonally to form nouns which mean ‘season or time of the day that
[so-and-so] takes place’. Most forms with ting- have short penults.
Sayung buntag nga mauy tinglusad sa manuk, The early morning hours when
the chickens come down from their perches. Tingbunga (tingpamunga) sa
mangga, The mango season. Tingadlaw (ting-adlaw), The hot season.
Tingbálud, The wavy season.

tinga n {1} food particle lodged between the teeth. {2} k.o. reddish
breast tumor believed to be caused by eating any k.o. shellfish with
nipple-like growths, and treated with steam from those k.o. shellfish.
v [A123P] {1} have food particles lodged in the teeth. Makatinga
(makapatinga) ang karni sa ngípun, Meat sticks in the teeth. {2} get
this k.o. tumor.

*tínga pa- v [A; c] give advance partial payment. Mupatínga kag katungà
kun magpakudak ka, You must pay half in advance if you have your
picture taken. Tirsiyu lay ipatínga, Give one third of the cost as
advance payment. n partial payment given in advance.

tingà v [A13] be in the throes of death. Pagkúhag párì kay nagtingà nag
pasyinti, Get a priest because the patient is in the throes of death.

ting-ab v [A; b6] open the mouth to gasp for breath. Nagting-ab intáwun
ang hubákun, The poor asthma patient is gasping for breath.

tingabngab v [B; c1] be gaping with a huge opening or hole.
Mitingabngab ang bakilid nga gidinamíta, The hill had a big gape in it
after it was dynamited. Ayawg tingabngába (itingabngab) ang ímung bàbà
kay sudlag lamuk, If you open your mouth wide mosquitoes are going to
come in.

tingag v {1} [B36; c] catch, snag or hold by piercing. Mitingag
(natingag) sa íyang tutunlan ang bukug sa isdà, The fish bone got
snagged in his throat. Nagtingag pa sa íyang bukubuku ang báraw, The
knife was still sticking in his back. Gitingag níya sa kalindaryu ang
dágum, He ran a needle through the calendar. {2} [A12; a] knock a piece
of the circle in the game of taksì_1. {3} [B126] suffer the relapse
called tingag. Ang kalísang mauy nakatingag (nakapatingag) sa bag-ung
nanganak, The intense fright caused the woman who had just given birth
to have a fatal relapse. n fatal relapse suffered by a woman who has
recently had a baby, caused by overstrain or emotional disturbance.
bughat — = tingag, n.

tíngal v {1} [A; a1c] force s.t. into s.o.’s mouth. Tingálun ang bátang
purgahun, If you give a child a purgative, you have to force it down
his throat. {1a} force a pig’s mouth open by sticking s.t. into it.
{2} [A; c] bribe. Mamakak ang saksi ug dúnay mutíngal níya, The witness
will lie if s.o. bribes him. Itíngal ni sa gwardiya, Give this as a
bribe to the guard. {3} [A; c] for s.t. to be brought onto one
(literary). Dílì ku na hápit maantus ang kapaítan nga gitíngal kanákù
sa kapaláran, I can hardly bear the bitter experiences which fate has
bestowed on me.

tingála v {1} [B1256; b3(1)c5] be surprised, mystified at s.t.
unexpected. Natingála ku sa íyang pagkausab, It surprised me at how he
had changed. Gikatingad-an ang butu sa laburaturyu, People were
mystified by the explosion in the lab. Dì ikatingála ang íyang pagdaug,
It’s not amazing that he won. {2} [B26N] for one’s body processes or
health to be upset from being subjected to s.t. to which one is not
accustomed. Naningála ang ákung tiyan sa pagkáun ug nangkà, The
jackfruit upset my stomach. Natingála ang íyang láwas sa kabugnaw sa
irkundisyunir, His body can’t seem to adjust to the air conditioner.
paN-(→), paN- v [A23] {1} = tingála, 2. {2} be ill at ease from being
new to s.t. Naningala ku áning bag-ung kambiyu, I find it hard to
adjust to this new gearshift. ka- n state of being surprised.
katingaláhan n {1} s.t. mysterious, wondrous. Katingaláhan ang búhat sa
Diyus, God’s ways are wondrous. {2} enchanted, with magical power.
Pangáyù bisan unsa sa katingaláhang singsing, Wish for anything at all
from the magic ring.

tingalaw (not without l) v [A; b6] prepare food for people who are
working on the farm. Nagtingalaw kus nagdáru, I’m preparing meals for
the men who are plowing.

tingáli probably, maybe. Tingálig muulan run kay nanag-um, It will
probably rain because the clouds are gathering. Ikaw tingáli ang
nagsumbung, nu? You’re the one that told on me, weren’t you? Dílì
tingáli mahímù kay ..., I don’t think I can do it because ... paN-
v [A2] say ‘perhaps’ to signify uncertainty. Dì ku manigúru. Maningáli
lang ku, I am not sure. Maybe I can. Culu- v [A13] = paN-.

tingalngal v [AB; c1] for a cover or shutter to open wide, cause it to
do so. Nagtingalngal ang kaban tungud sa kadaghan sa sulud, The chest
came open because so many things were inside it. Tingalngála
(itingalngal) ug maáyu ang pultahan arun masúd ang bangkù, Open the
door shutter wide so that the chair outside can be taken in. a opened
wide.

tingàngà v [AB; c1] for a cover or shutter to be slightly open or ajar;
cause it to do so. Nagtingàngà ang pultahan. Sirhi, The door is ajar.
Close it. a opened a little way.

tingáyi = tingáli.

tinggà n metal, lead. -un a lead-like, heavy. -un ug kamut a clumsy,
tending to break things easily.

tinggalung = singgalung.

tinggàtinggà n k.o. small wrasse of rocks in shallow waters.

tinggil n {1} clitoris. {2} mild curse word, expressing frustration or
exasperation. Tinggil! Napalus na pud, Darn! It slipped off again.

tinggu n debt (slang for útang). v [A; c] buy s.t. on credit (slang).

tinghab v [A] gasp one’s last few breaths in dying. Nagtinghab na ang
irù nga naligsan, The dog that the car ran over is now gasping for its
last breath.

tinghágà = tanghágà.

tinghak v [A] be panting, gasping for breath. Nagtinghak siya human sa
lumbà, He was panting after the race.

tinghuy n small oil lamp made of a wick of tightly rolled cotton
blossoms floating in the oil, used as a wake lamp, kept burning the
night through.

tingi v [AB26; b3] put s.o. to shame or deep embarrassment. Ang uyab
níyang baklà mauy nagtingi níya sa kadaghánan, His homosexual lover put
him to a great shame in public. Natingi ku pagpahalípay níya kay dì man
diay adlaw níya, I was very embarrassed when I wished him happy
birthday because it turned out it was not his birthday.

tingil = singil.

tingkad v [A; a12] do s.t. to the whole of s.t. Wà nímu matingkad
paglimpiyu ang sular, You just cleaned part of the yard.

tingkag = tangkag.

tingkagul, tingkágul v [B6; b6] {1} make a loud banging noise.
Mitingkagul ang silyang giitsa sa alkúba, The chair thrown to the attic
made a heavy thud. {2} be in prison. Ang pagkakiriwan mauy
nakatingkagul (nakapatingkagul) níya sa prisuhan, His thievery got him
thrown into prison. {3} be thrown into a miserable situation. Anía
akung aláut, nagtingkagul sa kagul-ánan, Here I am, wretched and
suffering in grief. n banging noise.

tingkal n loosely twisted cotton thread made from low-grade cotton used
for blankets, wicks, or twisted into fishing lines.

tingkálag v [B456N; b4N] for hair to stand on end. Mitingkā́g ang ákung
balhíbu nga namínaw sa kaági ni Drakula, My hair stood on end while I
listened to the story of Dracula. Nagtingkā́g ang balhíbu sa sunuy nga
naggukud sa hingangkan, The feathers of the cock were standing on end
while he chased the hen.

tingkalù = tuktur.

tingkap n enamel-coated tin cup. v [A; a2] use an enamel cup.

tingkarul_1 v 1, 2, 3 = tingkagul. {4} [A1] light one’s way with a
tingkarul torch. {5} [A; a] make a tingkarul torch. n k.o. kerosene
torch made from bamboo or a bottle into which a tube nearly as big
around as the mouth is inserted. So called from the noise this torch
makes, and also from the fact that in the k.o. fishing with which it is
used, a banging noise is made to draw the fish (cf. dagukduk).

tingkas = tangkas.

tingkiri = kingkiri.

tingkiyu = tangkiyu.

tingkù n, v {1} = tagultul_1, n1, v. {2} pound rice in a mortar at the
same time as s.o. else is pounding rice and in rhythm with him.

tingkubù v [A; a12P] hunch one’s shoulders forward. Nagtingkubù siya
tungud sa íyang kagúlang, He is hunched over because he is old.

tingkuy n hollow space in nape of neck. lalum ug — greedy, ungiving or
not sharing what one eats.

tingsì v [A; b6] draw the lips back in amusement or to smile. Nakapasar
dagway siya kay nagtingsì, He must have passed the test because he is
smiling to himself. Tingsíi lang sila kun kabsan kag isulti, Just smile
at them when you run out of things to say. n a weak smile. hi-/ha-
v [B1256] draw the lips back involuntarily in amusement.

tingsían n k.o. forest tree producing a dark-reddish hardwood.

tingting v {1} = talingting. {2} [AC; b(1)] have sexual intercourse
(slang).

tingub v {1} [A; c1] do s.t. all at once. Tinguba (tingba, itingub)
paglaba ang bulingun, Wash all of the clothes at once. {2} [B126C23] be
combined in one, be entirely devoted to s.t. Magtingub tag pangadyì,
Let’s all pray together. Kining mga híyas natingub sa íyang pagkatáwu,
All these qualities were combined in his person. Natingub ang tanang
pagpanggà sa bugtung nílang anak, They devoted all of their love and
affection to their only child. Ang nasakpan mauy natingban sa tanang
pasángil, The one who was caught got all of the blame. n s.t. complete
in one. Ang tingub ánang idiyáha maúmul sa usa ka púlung, The entirety
of that idea can be expressed in one word. a complete, covering
everything. Usa ka mubù apan tingub nga pangutána, A short but
all-embracing question. tingbanan n storage, reservoir. katilingban
n society, community. katilingbánun a having to do with society,
community. -in- a done all at once. tingbanay a {1} = -in-. {2} done to
the fullest extent possible. Tingbanay giyud ning átung pag-ínum, Let’s
not just drink. Let’s get completely soused.

tíngud = síngud.

tíngug v {1} [A2S] produce a sound. Ayúha nang tiklang dì mutíngug, Fix
the piano keys that don’t sound. {2} [A2S; b3c] speak, speak up. Unsa
pay tinggan nákù nga dì ka man mamínaw? What should I talk for, since
you won’t listen? Tíngug sa míting ug dúna kay ikatíngug, Speak up in
the meeting if you have s.t. to say. {3} [C; b6] be on speaking terms.
Walà mi magtíngug (magtingganay), We aren’t on speaking terms.
n {1} sound, voice. {2} one’s say or word in the proceedings of. Ang
ákung tíngug mauy matúman, They will do whatever I say. pa- v [A; c1]
turn on radio, TV, make s.t. sound. Patingúga (ipatíngug) ang radiyu,
Turn the radio on. tingganay = tíngug, v3. paN- n the way the voice
sounds, the manner of speaking. Subù ang paníngug sa namatyan, The
bereaved person spoke in a sad tone of voice.

tingúhà (from kúhà) v [A13; a12] aim for, seek to possess. Matag baksir
nagtingúhà sa kampiyunátu, Every boxer aims at the championship.
Gitingúhà níyang magbúlag sila, It was her intention to separate them.
n s.t. one intends, aspires to do. Wà kuy tingúhang dautan nímu, I do
not have wicked intentions against you. Ang mga tingúhà sa bayánì álang
sa násud, The hero’s aspirations for the country. paN- v {1} [A2; a12]
give one’s utmost in doing s.t. Muasinsu ang táwung maningúhà, He who
strives hard will succeed. Paninguháa nga mutáp ka sa tís, Try hard to
top the exam. {2} [A2] court a woman. Naningúhà ku níya piru gibastid
ku, I courted her for all I was worth, but I was turned down.
n striving, trying hard. Káwang ang paningúhà nga dì nuntan ug kaabtik,
It is futile to try hard if you don’t couple it with shrewdness.

tingusbáwan see usbaw.

tiniblas n the Wednesday before Easter.†

tinidur_1 n {1} table fork. {2} forked bars that support the front
wheel of a bicycle. {3} — sa yútà spade shaped similar to a pitchfork
used to turn the soil. v [A; a] use a fork.

tinidur_2 see tinir.

tin-idyir n teen-ager. v [B256; b6] be a teen-ager.

tininti_1 = tinyinti.

tininti_2 = tinuntu (humorous euphemism). see tuntu.

tinir v [A; c] {1} keep, have in possession. Nagtinir siyag babáyi,
He’s keeping a mistress. Wà ku magtinir ug sapátus nga daghan, I don’t
have many shoes. Magníwang kag itinir nímu nang kaguúla, You’ll grow
thin if you harbor that sorrow. {2} detain. Itinir siya ug dì
makapiyansa, Detain him if he cannot post bail. tinidur dilibru
n bookkeeper. v [B156] be a bookkeeper.

tínir n thinner for paints, lacquers.

tínis n {1} tennis. {2} tennis or canvas shoes. v {1} [AC; b6] play
tennis. {2} [A13; b6] wear tennis shoes. — kurt tennis court. — plíyir
n tennis player. v [B156] be a tennis player. -an(→) n {1} tennis
court. {2} dancing space out in the open.

tinrawundir n boxer who qualifies for ten-round fights. v [B1256] be a
boxer who qualifies for ten-round fights.

tinsiyun = atinsiyun.

tintà n {1} ink. {2} ink of squids or octopuses. v [A; b4] put ink in a
pen or on s.t. Palíhug rag tintà sa pawuntin pin, Please fill the pen
with ink. Natintaan ang mantil, The tablecloth got ink spilled on it. —
sa lumayágan, núkus, tamalà, etc. ink of squid, cuttlefish, octopus.
tintíru n inkwell. tintiruhan, tintirúhan = tintíru.

tintal v [A2; a] {1} tempt, entice. Wáyis manintal (mutintal) ang yáwà,
The devil tempts in a shrewd way. Ayaw kug tintála ánang ímung páa,
Don’t entice me with your legs. Mau nang bukíra ang gitintálan ni
Hisus, Jesus was tempted on that mountain. {2} bother so as to
distract. Gitintal siya maung nagkasáyup, S.o. distracted him so he
made errors. n temptation. maN-r- n tempter, temptress. ma-un
a enticing. tintasiyun n temptation.

tintin_1 n child’s word for penis (útin).

tintin_2 = talingting.

tintíru see tintà.

tintu n red table wine. — dulsi sweet red wine, usually served as a
lady’s drink. Gisirbíhan ang mga babáyi ug tintu dulsi, The women were
served sweet red wine. — síku strong liquor. Ang mga láki ra ang
gisirbíhan sa tintu síku, Only the men were served the strong liquor.
bínu — = tintu, n.

tintúra n tincture of iodine. — arnika n tincture of arnica. — diyúdu,
yúdu = tintúra.

tinù, tínù_1 n insects which make a tiny ticking sound when squashed.
v [B246] make a tiny popping sound when squashed. Mutínù ang búhì nga
lusà kun tusdun, Unhatched eggs of head lice will make a tiny popping
sound when you press them between your thumbnails.

tínù_2 v [A; a12] ascertain, verify. Tinúang way bantay inigsulud nátù,
Be sure there’s no guard when we break in. a absolutely certain. Tínù
nang kadaúgan. Dílì malális, We most certainly will win. There is no
dispute about it.   ka-an n {1} certainty. Way katinúan nga magnúud ang
ákung pangagpas, There’s no certainty that my guess will prove right.
{2} s.t. that proves, verifies. Nagkinahanglag ígung katinúan arun
mahukman siya, We need sufficient evidence if he is to be convicted.

tinur n {1} tenor voice. {2} tenor part in a choral group. {3} tenor
instrument. — saks tenor saxophone. v [A; b6] sing tenor.

tinuryu n a Don Juan.

tinùtinù n k.o. herb of waste places: Physalis lanceifolia.

tinutuwa = lunaw.

tinúud see túud.

tinyaplába n {1} = alap-ap. {2} medicine for alap-ap. v [A123P; a4] be
infected with tinea flava.

tinyinti n lieutenant in rank. v [B156] be a lieutenant. Dì ku gustung
maultimu, magtinyinti ku, I don’t want to be a private but a
lieutenant. — dil baryu n barrio chief. v [B156] be a barrio chief.

típ_1 n tip, gratuity. v [A; c] give, get a tip, gratuity. Nakatíp
siyag písus, He got a peso tip. Diyis pursiyintu ang hustung itíp, Ten
percent is a big enough tip to give.

típ_2 n tip, secret information. v [A; b(1)] tip off, give, get secret
information. Nakatíp ang písi báhin sa túlis, The p.c. got a tip about
the robbery.

típ_3 v [A; b] fasten with, apply adhesive tape. Típi ang dinugtungan
sa wayir, Tape the wire joints. n {1} adhesive tape. {2} magnetic tape.
iskats — Scotch tape. — ríkurd tape, tape recording. v [A; c] make a
tape recording. Akuy mutipríkurd sa íyang diskursu, I’ll make a tape
recording of his speech. — rikurding n {1} tape recording session.
{2} tape recording. v [C23] have a tape recording session.
Nagtiprikurding mi sa ámung ispits klas, We had a tape recording
session in our speech class. — rikurdir n tape recorder. v [A12] obtain
a tape recorder.

tipak v {1} [A; ab7] break, chip a piece from. Natipak ang bàbà sa
kupíta, The rim of the goblet is chipped. Ayawg tipki ni kay gamay na
lang, Don’t break anything off of this piece. It’s already small as it
is. {2} [A; b7] take away from one’s money, time, etc. Mutipak kug
tirsiyu sa swildu pára sa buhis, I chip in one-third of my salary for
taxes. Tipki kug diyútay sa ímung panahun, Spare me a little of your
time. {3} [AB12; a1] crack. Kinsay nakatipak sa tibud? Who cracked the
jar? Nagkatipak ang sag-ub nga pirming nabulad, The bamboo bucket is
getting cracked because it is constantly left in the sun. Ayawg tipka
nang básu, Don’t crack the glass. {4} [A; a3] get a profit from s.t.
Dakù kug natipak sa gúmang ákung gibaligyà, I made a lot from the tires
I resold. n {1} piece broken from s.t. {2} s.t. taken, deducted from.

tipaka, tipakà n {1} fragments, small broken pieces. Ang tipaka sa
saang nahaságul sa unud, The pieces of the shell got mixed with the
meat. Tipaka sa átung napusgay nga kaminyúun, The fragments of our
broken marriage. {2} hard outer hull, husk, or shell of fruits and
nuts, eggshells, shells of crustaceans. {3} k.o. land snail introduced
by the Japanese for food purposes.

tipal-u n k.o. worm with legs, about 1″ long, that tends to seek dark
places and gives off phosphorescence when crushed.

tipanu n bamboo flute.

tipas v {1} [A2; c] veer, go in a new direction. Mitipas siyag láing
dálan arun dílì siya hikit-an, He turned off onto another road, so they
wouldn’t find him. {1a} take off the way, turn away from one’s goals.
Ayawg itipas ang ímung panganduy ngadtu sa kahiláyan, Don’t let your
ambitions veer to lustful pleasures. Inay idiritsu níyag hatud ang
babáyi gitipas sa awáawng dapit, Instead of taking the girl directly
home, he took her off to a deserted place. {2} [A23] for a conversation
to take a new tack. Mitipas ang ílang panagsulti ngadtus pulitika,
Their conversation shifted to politics. hi-/ha- v [B1256] be caused to
veer, deviate. Nahitipas na nà sa maáyung pamatásan, That is far from
good manners. -anan(←), -l-an(←), -an(←) n fork in a road, place where
one turns off in a new direction.†

tipasak v [A; c] splash hard against s.t. Mitipasak ang ulan gíkan sa
sandayung, Rain splashed from the gutter. n splashing against s.t.

tipasaw = timpasaw.

tipasì (from pasì) n {1} unhusked rice. {2} a nobody compared with s.o.
big. Mangimbitar kag tipasì sa parti? You’re inviting a bunch of
nobodies to the party? -un a for rice or corn to have lots of unhusked
grains mixed in with it.

tipay n {1} k.o. pearl oyster with a thin, black shell and brittle,
tooth-like projections at the mouth. It is a source of mother-of-pearl.
{2} mother-of-pearl. Tipay ang gunitánan sa pistúla, The pistol has a
mother-of-pearl handle. paN- v [A2; b6] dive for this sort of oyster.

tipdas_1 n k.o. measles. v [A123P; a4] have tipdas.

tipdas_2 v [A2; b8] hit lightly, just barely graze. Nagaras siya. Ígù
lang nakatipdas ang panà, He was scratched. The arrow just grazed him.
Way kásu, hitipdasan lang siya sa bála, It’s nothing serious. The
bullet just grazed him.

típì v [A; a] kill (slang). Tipía ang saksi kun mupyáit, Liquidate the
witness if he sings.

típig v 1, 2, 3 = tápig, v1, 2, 3. {4} [A1; b(1)] save money. Maáyu
nang magtípig pára sa pagkatigúlang, It’s good to save for your old
age. Tipígi ang subra sa galastúhan, Save whatever you haven’t spent.
-in-an n {1} savings. {2} s.t. kept hidden. Dúna siyay tinipígang
pagbátì nímu, She has a secret love for you. -anan n hiding place.

tipik v [A; b] take a bit off s.t. Dì giyud ka makatipik ánang kík pára
nákù? Can’t you break a bit of that cake off for me? Tipki sad ku sa
ímung pagtagad, Let me have a moment of your attention. n {1} small
portion, a fraction of s.t. Ang íyang hinábang tipik lang sa íyang
bahandì, His donation is only a fraction of what he has. {2} integral
part. Tipik ka na sa ákung kaugalíngun, You’re already a part of my
being. ka- n s.t. that forms a whole together with s.t. else. Ang yútà
nga ákung gipalit katipik niadtu sa asyinda, The land I bought was
formerly part and parcel of the hacienda.

tipíyu n acronym for Truck Public Utility, a group of vehicles classed
for vehicular licensing purposes.

tiplas v [b8] graze slightly. Natiplasan lang íyang agtang sa bála, The
bullet just grazed his forehead lightly. pa- v [A2; c1] aim s.t. so
that it just grazes the target. Patiplasa (ipatiplas) lang ang pagtíru
sa púga, Just graze the escapee when you shoot him.

tipmisyur n tape measure.

tipríkurd see típ_3.

tipsing v [A2; b8] hit s.t. at the edge. Natipsingan ra níya ang
targit, He just hit the target at the edge. walà sa — nothing as
compared to. -in- n {1} slivers of wood left after chopping. Ang
tinipsing sa káhuy nga átung gisapsápan maáyung idumálig, The slivers
of wood that we chopped are good to use as kindling. {2} small amount
as compared to s.t. else. Ang ímung natampu tinipsing lang (walà sa
tipsing) sa akúa, Your contribution is nothing compared to mine.

tiptip v {1} [A; b] cut the tip of s.t. with scissors or shears. Ang
mutiptip sa balíli gantíhan, Whoever clips the grass will get s.t.
{1a} [AP; c1] cut close to the surface or ground. Ákung gitiptípan
(gipatiptípan) ang íyang buhuk kay gikutu, I cut his hair very short
because he has lots of lice. {2} [A; a1] break s.t. with the teeth.
Kalabaw níla ang nagtiptip sa ámung mais, Their carabao chewed up our
corn. a cut close to the surface. Tiptip kaáyung pagkaputul ang mga
tuud sa nataran, The stumps in the yard were cut close to the ground.

típu_1 n a liquid measure of various amounts depending on the locality.
{1} for palm toddy, usually containing six liters. {2} containing about
a ganta (3 liters). tipuhan n container holding a típu, usually one or
two nodes of bamboo.

típu_2 n {1} contours, shape of face. Daw diyúsa ang típu sa íyang
nawung, Her profile is like a goddess’. may — having an attractive
appearance. May típu giyud nang tawhána dà, That man is sure
good-looking. {2} type of person, personality. Ang típu sa babáying
ákung gustu kanang igat, I like the type of girl that is a flirt.

típu_3 n weight, registered weight on the scale. Pilay típu nímus
timbangan? What is your weight? (Lit. How much do you register on the
scale?) v [B256; c1] balance the scales by placing the rider on the
zero mark. Tipúha (itípu) ang timbangan úsà manimbang, Place the rider
on the zero mark before you weigh s.t.

típù v [A; ac] put together. Kinsay nagtípù sa mga tutbras? Bayag
magkabaylu, Who put the toothbrushes together? Suppose they get mixed
up? Tipúa ang tanang ináni únà bahína, Put all the harvest together
before apportioning it. -an(←) n a crank-operated device for twisting
strands into a rope.

tipug-uk a lumpy. v [B] be, become lumpy. Mutipug-uk (matipug-uk) ang
harína ug dì ayágun, The flour will become lumpy if it is not strained.

tipuk v [A; a] rub out, liquidate (slang). Íyang gitipuk ang háwak sa
Karbun silbing panimawus, The chief tough of the Carbon market area was
killed in revenge.

tipuknul = tibugul.

tipuksul n lumps bulging out of a surface. Mga tipuksul sa nawung,
Lumps on the face. v [A; a12P] bulge out of a surface, form a lump on.
Ayaw ug ibutang ang pistúla sa bulsa kay mutipuksul, Don’t put the
pistol in the pocket because it will bulge.

tipukù v [A; b(1)] {1} get on top of s.o. or s.t., hugging and bending
it down. Gitipuk-an níya ang bábuy, He jumped on the pig and pinned it
down. {1a} have a woman for intercourse (euphemism). {1b} use s.t. one
sets oneself on. Maay ka lang mutipukù ánang bisiklíta apan dì ka muáyu
ug madáut, You are good at using the bicycle, but are you good at
fixing it if it breaks? {2} crowd around s.o. or s.t. Mitipukù ang mga
táwu sa labasíru, The people crowded around the fish peddler.
Gitipuk-an sila sa mga lángaw, A swarm of flies set on them.

tipuk-ul = tibugul.

tipúli n the monkey-eating eagle: Pithecophaga jefferyi.

tipúlu = atipúlu.

típun v {1} [A; ac] put, be together, join in a group. Dì siya mutípun
sa mga pundukpunduk, He doesn’t mingle with groups. Iniglaba ayawg
tipúna ang putì ug dikulur, In doing the laundry don’t put the white
and colored clothes together. Malatà nang prutása ug itípun sa lataun,
That fruit will get rotten if you put it together with rotten ones.
{2} [A2C; c5] live together. Pait ikatípun ning kusug muháguk, It’s
terrible to live with s.o. who snores. {3} [C; c3] live as a common-law
couple. Magtípun lang ta, way kasalkásal, Let’s just live together
without getting married. n being together. Típun mi niadtug kwartu, We
were roommates formerly. tipuntipun n k.o. edible cerith shells, ½″–1″
long, mud-colored or black, found on rocks or mangrove trees. -in-
n s.t. that has been put together. Tinípung Bansa, United States.
Tinípung Kanasúran, United Nations. ka- n housemate. ka-an n the
Katipúnan, a secret revolutionary society which aimed at independence
from Spain. katipuníru n a member of the Katipúnan. v [B156] become a
katipuníru. panag- n {1} living together, esp. as a couple.
{2} gathering, coming together.

tipun-ug v [B3(1); c1] be piled up into a big heap. Nagtipun-ug ang
hugasan human sa parti, There was a huge stack of dishes after the
party. Siya ang gitipun-ugan sa tanang pagbásul, The blame was all
dumped on him. Tipun-úga (itipun-ug) lang ang mga sagbut dihà arun
dabúkan, Heap the trash there to burn it. n pile, heap of.

típus n typhus. v [a4] be sick with typhus.

*tipúsa, *tipúsu balay, túri nga — n name given to the Blessed Virgin
in prayers.

tipuy n money (slang). Arang run mi kaambuy, way tipuy, We’re flat
broke. Completely busted. v [A; ac1] have some money, have s.t. to use
as money. paN- v [A; b5] get hold of money. Makapanipuy gánì nà siya,
pasíkat dáyun, If he gets his hands on money he starts to show off.

tipyas = tiplas.

tíra v [A; b] {1} shoot. Tiráhi dáyug langgam inigbátug, Shoot the bird
as soon as it lands on the branch. {2} dynamite fish. Tiráhi bísag duut
sa gagmayng isdà, Blast it even if it’s a school of small fish. {3} go
after a girl (slang). Mutíra siya bísag kinsa basta manimáhung babáyi,
He courts anybody as long as it smells like a woman. {4} have a woman
for sexual purposes. Mutíra nà bísag kúkuk, He will have sexual
intercourse even with prostitutes. {5} [A; c] publish, appear in print.
Itíra nang balitáa sa pamantaláan ugmà, That news will be published in
the papers tomorrow. n shooting. — pula in a variety of billiards where
only three balls are used, the condition that the player must hit the
red ball first whenever he tries to make a carom. — paságad
n hit-and-miss, at random. Diplánu ang ámung panúlis, dì tíra paságad,
Our robberies are planned, not merely hit-and-miss. Dì siya makaigù kay
tíra pasàgad siyang manumbag, He can’t hit the mark because he shoots
at random. v [A3P] do s.t. thoughtlessly or indiscriminately. Ayawg
tíra paságad. Pilía ang laláking buútan, Don’t pick just anybody.
Choose a good man to marry. -da n {1} a single photographic exposure,
shot. Kining tiradáha didtu makúhà duul sa taytáyan, This shot was
taken near the bridge. {2} shot in a billiard game. biyin — good shot.
{3} attack, verbal or physical. Kusug nga tirádang nakapalukápa níya, A
hard blow that sent him reeling. {4} the way one tries to persuade or
approach s.o. (slang). Sayup ímung tiráda hay imbis musugut, nasukù na
hinúun, Your approach was wrong because instead of consenting he became
angry. v [A; b(1)] attack s.o. verbally or physically. Mutiráda ku
bísag kinsa, I’ll sock anyone. Gitiradáhan sa pastǔr ang mga maut, The
minister lashed out at the hypocrites. -dur(→) n {1} slingshot. {2} one
who lures victims into some sort of swindling operation. Tiradur kanang
nagpatúung giáyu sa tambálan, The man who is pretending the doctor
cured him is just there to lure victims. {3} one who engages in
dynamite fishing. v [A; a12] shoot with a slingshot. Tiradura ang manuk
nga nanuktuk sa binlad, Shoot the chicken that is pecking at the rice
with a slingshot. paN- n dynamite fishing.

tirána n k.o. love song in a minor key of melancholy character. míngaw
pay (pa sa) — a lacking in noise and gaiety. Ang ílang pyista míngaw
pay tirána (pa sa tirána), The feast in their place was more mournful
than the tirána love song.

tiranti n {1} high waistline. Human sa lúwis úsu na sad ang tiranti nga
karsúnis, Pants with a high waistline became the fad following the
low-waist. {2} suspenders. v [A; c] wear suspenders.

tirar v [AN; b] take s.o.’s picture. Pangítà ug táwu nga mutirar
(manirar) kay nindut dinhi ug byú, Look for s.o. to take our pictures
because there’s a nice view here.

tíras n lace used as trimming. v [A; c] put ornamental lace on s.t.
Tirási ang sinínà arun manindut, Put lace on the dress to make it
pretty.

tirása n terrace, an extension of the flooring of a house enclosed with
a balustrade.

tirasis n terraced land or a piece of level land on the top of a mound
for planting. v [b5] build terraces.

tiratíra n pull taffy. v [A; a2] make taffy.

tirbis v [AN; b(1)] for men to engage in illicit physical enjoyments
with girls on a short term basis. Mutirbis ang bána ug manganak ang
asáwa, The husband engages in extra-marital relationships when his wife
is in the maternity hospital. paN- n act of playing around with girls
illicitly. tirbistirbis = tirbis.

tirbisíya v {1} [B26; b8] miscarry, result in failure. Ug dílì
mutirbisíya (matirbisíya) ang átung plánu, madátù giyud ta, If our
plans don’t miscarry, we will surely be rich. Ang dagkung swildu mauy
nakatirbisíya (nakapatirbisíya) sa átung nigusyu, Our business failed
because we gave too big salaries. {2} [B126; b8] suffer a misfortune.
Natirbisíya siya ug karun lúgus na makabisti sa íyang mga anak, He
suffered a misfortune and now he can hardly clothe his children.

tirdrap n an encased pearl pendant in the shape of a teardrop. v [A]
wear a teardrop pendant.

tiribli a {1} horrible. Tiribli ang nahitabù sa gilunúpang baryu, What
happened to the flooded barrio was horrible. {2} unusual in ability,
intensity, degree. Tiribli siyang mubaskitbul, He plays basketball
terribly well. Tiribli níyang pagkagáhig úlu, He’s terribly stubborn.

tiriktirik v [A; b] mark with dots. Mga uwat sa buti mitiriktirik sa
íyang nawung, Pock-*marks dotted his face. Ang birding panaptun
giritiktirikan ug putì, The green cloth is dotted with white dots.
n dots all over s.t.

tirírit = tarírit.

tíris n {1} an open terrace on top of buildings usually utilized as an
open-air eating place. {2} = tirása.

tirituryu n territory.

tirmina = tirminar.

tirminal_1 n passenger terminal.

tirminal_2 n term in mahjong: {1} one of the end numbers (one or nine).
{2} a sequence of three one’s or three nine’s of different designs. -is
= tirminal_2, 1 (plural).

tirminar v [A; b(1)] {1} give a specific date or time for. Wà siya
mutirminar kun anus-a mubálik, He did not give a specific date for when
he would come back. {2} predict that s.t. will happen. Way makatirmina
sa dadangátan sa kalag sa táwu, No one can predict what will happen to
a man’s soul. Gitirminahan nang dáan sa mga maistru nga mulampus siya,
The teachers have predicted that he would be a success.

tirminit v [A; c1] fire s.o. from his job. Tirminitun (itirminit) ka
giyud dáyun kun musúkul ka, You’ll surely be fired if you are
insubordinate.

tirminu n {1} term, word. {1a} meaning, nuance. Púlung nga nagdalag
láing tirminu, Words that have a meaning other than what is usually
understood. {2} limit, end. Adúnay tirminu ang tanan. Ang tanan
lumalábay lámang, Everything must come to an end. Everything is
transient. {2a} term, tenure in office. {2b} specific date or day. Way
tirminu ning ákung byáhi kay nag-agad sa panahun, My trip has no fixed
date. It depends on the weather. v [A; c] give a term, name. Unsay
maáyung itirminu ánang sakíta? What would be a good term for that
disease?

tirmumitru n thermometer.

tirmus n thermos bottle.

tirnu n {1} man’s suit. {2} formal woman’s native dress, of floor
length and one piece. {3} outfit consisting of two or more pieces
matching in color. v {1} [A1; a12] wear or make a suit or terno dress.
{2} [A12] for different articles of apparel to match. Nagatirnu ang
ímung bág ug sanínà, Your bag and your dress match. a matching, of the
same color.

tirsíra n {1} third gear of a motor vehicle. {2} — klási third class.
v [A2; c] put into third gear. Wà ku makatirsíra sa hustung higayun, I
wasn’t able to put it into third gear on time.

tirsíru n {1} third in rank, grade. {2} one who is a third grader.
v [B256] be in the third grade. Mutirsíru na siya karung abli, He’ll be
in the third grade this year.

tirsiya parti n one-third.

tirsiyu n one-third. Tirsiyu ang báhin sa tag-íya sa yútà, The owner
gets a third as his share. v [C2; a12] divide s.t. into three equal
shares.

tirsiyupílu n velvet. v [A; b6] wear, put velvet on s.t.

*tirtin — kards n a manner of playing mahjong using 13 pieces for each
player. — tils n a winning mahjong hand that has four iksibisiyun
combinations.

tíru = tíra, v1, 2, 5. paN- = paníra.

tírung n a supernatural being of dwarfish proportions with a strong
body of iron or stone, said to inhabit isolated cliffs and caves. It is
popularly said that the machinery in sugar mills is under the control
of a tírung and it will not function unless he is fed. Hence, children
are popularly threatened to be fed to this monster. Hílak arun iláwug
ta ka sa tírung, Keep crying and I’ll feed you to the monster.

tirungan = tulungan. see túlung.

Tiruray n an ethnic group in Upi, Cotabato.

tirurismu n terrorism. v [A; a1] terrorize. Mudaug lang siya kun
tirurismúhun níya ang butanti, He will win only if he terrorizes the
voters.

tirus v [A; a] squeeze nits or lice with the thumbnail or an itchy part
of the body between the thumbnails. Tirusa ang mga katul sa ákung
likud, Squeeze the itchy places on my back between your nails.

tirúti = tarúti.

tís_1 v [A; a1] tease the hair. Tísa ákung buhuk, Tease my hair.

tís_2 n test in school. v [A; a] have a test. Ákù mung tísun báhin sa
asayinmint, I’ll give you a test on the assignment.

tísà_1 n k.o. single-seeded fruit, the size and shape of a small pear
with bright yellow, inedible skin and flesh which is sweet and fleshy
but dry: Lucuma nervosa.

tísà_2 n roofing tile.

tísà_3 = tísas.

tisar v [A; c] sit or stand straight; have a bent back straightened.
Mitisar ang kadíti dáyung salúdu, The cadet stood straight and executed
a salute. Matisar pa nang ímung pagkabakù, Your bent posture can still
be corrected. a straight in posture.

tísas n chalk. v [A; c1] use, apply chalk on s.t. (→) = tísas, v.

tisay (from mistísa) n woman with some Caucasian blood or features
(slang).

tisiku n one who has tuberculosis. v [B126] be, become a tubercular.

tísirt n a sport shirt that slips over the head: T-shirt, polo shirt.
v [A1; b6] wear a T-shirt.

tísis_1 n tuberculosis. v {1} [B12] for a sickness to become
tuberculosis. Matísis ang ubung pinasagdan, A cough that is not treated
will turn into tuberculosis. {2} [a4] get T.B. Gitísis siya kay kúlag
káun, He got tuberculosis because he didn’t eat enough. -un a
tubercular person.

tísis_2 n thesis, dissertation for a degree. v [A1] write a thesis.

tiskug v [B46] stiffen so as to lose a pliant quality. Mitiskug ang
íyang líug sa kalísang, Her neck stiffened in fear.

tiskwir n T-square.

tislang v [B; c1] stand erect. Dì na mutislang ang kinatáwu sa
tigúlang, An old man’s penis will no longer erect. Magtislang ang buhuk
kun dì pamadáhan, Your hair will stand on end if you don’t put pomade
in it.

tislaub, tisláub v [B26; b6] {1} fall into s.t. with a splash.
Natisláub (mitisláub) siya sa tunaan, He fell into the mudhole. Mau
nang basáka ang íyang gitislaúban, That’s the rice paddy she fell into.
{1a} fall into a state viewed as bad. Mitisláub sila sa bung-aw sa
pulitika, They plunged into the sinkhole of politics. {2} [B126] for an
area to get a depression in it. (→) n shallow depression.

tislub = tunlub.

tislup = taslup.

tisngì = tingsì.

tispípar n papers for a test.

tist = tís_2.

tistamintu n testament, will. Bag-ung — New Testament. Dáang — Old
Testament.

tistǎr v [A; c] make a will. Ang kamanghúrang anak mauy gitistahan sa
karáang balay, The ancestral home was bequeathed to the youngest son.

tistígus n witness in court. v [A; c] act as a witness in court. Way
mutistígus kay mahadluk nga maapil, Nobody wants to testify because
they are afraid of getting involved.

tistimunyu n testimony. Ang tistimunyu sa tistígus, The witness’
testimony. v [A; c] give testimony, profession. Gitistimunyu níya ang
íyang pagkakábig, She testified as to her conversion.

tisting v {1} [A; b] test, try s.t. Nagtisting pa gánì ta nadáut na,
All we were doing was testing it and it broke. Tistíngi ang brík, Test
the brakes. {2} [A; b(1)] try s.t. new to have a taste of it. Mutisting
kug LSD kun unsay mahitabù, I’ll try LSD and see what it leads to.

tistir n tester used to detect electric, electronic problems.

tistis v [AN; c] joke. Mu ra kug gitíkun kun siya nay manistis
(mutistis), It is as if he tickles me when he tells jokes. Dúna siyay
bag-ung itistis káda prugráma níya, He has new jokes for each of his
programs. n joke. -an(→) a given to joking. ma-un a joking. Matistísung
kulukabildu, A joking conversation. -ay(→), -anay v [C2; c3] exchange
jokes. Nagtistisay (nagtistisánay) ang mga hubug sa tubaan, The drunks
are exchanging jokes at the toddy stand. n {1} exchanging jokes.
{2} art of telling jokes. paN- = -ay(→), n2.

tísu a erect in posture. Ang suldádu tísu kaáyu ug láwas, A soldier has
a very erect body. v {1} [B] be, become erect. {2} [A; c] carry one’s
body straight and erect. Itísu ang láwas inigkaman ug atinsiyun, Stand
straight at the command of attention.

tisuk v [A; c] {1} plant seed into the ground. Nagtisuk kug nangkà sa
nátad, I planted a jackfruit seed in the yard. {1a} thrust a sharp
object on the ground. Gitisuk sa manggugubat ang íyang bangkaw sa
atubángan sa rayna, The warrior planted his spear before the queen.
{2} implant in the mind. Itisuk sa hunàhúnà ang ákung pahimatngun,
Implant my advice firmly in your mind.

tisun = tísu.

tisuríra = tisuríru (female).

tisuriríya n treasury.

tisuríru n treasurer. v [B156; a2] be, make a treasurer. Tisurirúhun
nímu nang kiriwan? Are you going to make that crook the treasurer?

tisuy = tisay (male).

tisyirt = tísirt.

títa = títu (female). titatíta = kitakíta, 2, v2. see kita.

titanus n tetanus. v {1} [B126] for s.t. to become tetanus. {2} [a4]
get tetanus.

tithi v [A; c] spit out in a tiny squirt. Naíkug kung mutithi sa bínung
labihang isúga, I was ashamed to spit out the strong wine.

títi n breast. v [A; b] suck the breast. Malináwung nagtíti ang masúsu,
The infant is peacefully sucking the breast.

titì, títì_1 a dirty (child talk). Titì kaáyu ang nawung nímu, Your
face is very dirty. v [B126; b6] be, become dirty.

títì_2 n address of respect to an elder brother or a close male
relative. v [A; a12] call s.o. títì.

títì_3 = títi.

tìtì v [A; a12] {1} drain, consume to the last drop or bit. Ang íyang
bisyu mauy nakatìtì sa ílang tinígum, His vice exhausted their savings
entirely. Ákung gitìtì ang katapúsang túlù sa kukakúla, I drained the
last drop of Coca-Cola. {2} use s.t. up in a figurative sense. Natìtì
na ang ákung paílub, My patience is exhausted. ka-un(→) n state of
being used up entirely.

títik v [A; c] write, print letters or words. Ngálan sa kandidátu ang
gitítik sa karatula, The candidate’s name is printed on the billboard.
n letter of the alphabet. paN- n spelling. ka-an n writings,
literature. Inila siyang magsusúlat sa Katitíkang Bisayà, He is a noted
writer in Visayan Literature.

titip, títip a very steep. Way makasáka ánang titip nga pangpang, No
one can climb that very steep cliff. v [b6] consider s.t. steep.

títit v [A; a] say beep-beep in pretending to blow one’s horn. Mutítit
gánì ku, manlarga na kunúhay ta, When I say beep-beep, let’s pretend
we’re leaving. n horn (child’s talk).

tits_1 a humorous, impolite term of address to a man, usually used when
negating s.t. he says: buster, buddy roe. Ilára tits. Úna pa ku nímu sa
dúyan, Don’t try to fool me, buster! I wasn’t born yesterday. Hadlúka
tits, You can’t scare me, buddy roe. v [a12] call s.o. by this title.
À, gitits lang níya si prupísur, He dared call the professor ‘buddy’.

tits_2 v [A; b6] teach in school. Nagtǐts dáyun ku humag graduwar, I
taught right after graduation. praktis -ing n practice teaching. v [A;
b6] do practice teaching. Ang mga búgù ang ákung gipraktis titsíngan, I
have dull students for my practice teaching. -ir(←) n teacher.
v [B1256] be a teacher.

títu n address of respect for an uncle. v [A; c12] call s.o. títu.

tituláda = tituládu (female).

tituládu n one who has a degree. Dílì ka makasulud ug trabáhu ug dì ka
tituládu, You can’t get a job if you don’t have a degree. {2} land
having a Torrens Title. v [B1256] have a degree.

titulu n {1} professional degree. {2} title, name of literary works.
{3} document certifying legal ownership of a piece of land. humstid —,
pripatin — homestead, free patent title. v {1} [A; c] entitle, name a
work. Ang maung lílas gitituluhan ug Tintal, The movie is entitled
Temptation. {2} [A; b(1)] make documents certifying to legal ownership
of land. Makalún lang ta kun tituluhan nátù ang yútà, We can make a
loan only if we have a title prepared for the lot. — túrins n Torrens
Title.

titurun n tetoron cloth.

tiudtiud = taudtaud.

tíug v [c] be known and talked about. Wà matíug ang ílang panagtrátu
kay tinagùtagù man, People don’t know that they are engaged, for they
meet in secret. Gikatíug nga aku awuk, They say around here that I’m a
vampire. a thing talked about. baN-(→) see baniug.

tiuk v [A; a12] choke s.o. by putting s.t. around his throat. Ayawg
hugta ang kurbáta kay matiuk ku, Don’t tighten the necktie so tight or
I will choke.

tíun v [A; c] point a weapon at close range. Íyang gitiúnan ang ákung
agtang, He took aim at my forehead. Ayawg itíun nà nákù, Don’t point
that thing at me.

tiúnay (from unay) n {1} s.t. deeply imbedded in the flesh such that
one must dig to get it out. Gikúhà sa duktur ang tiúnay sa ákung
dughan, The doctor removed the arrowhead from my chest. {2} true,
sincere. Salígi king gugmang tiúnay, Trust this sincere love (of mine).
{3} inherent, natural property of. Ang kabangis tiúnay sa tawhánung
kinaíya, Pugnaciousness is inherent in human nature. {4} = kasya_1.
v [B] be deeply imbedded. Gugmang nagtiúnay sa dughan, A love that has
penetrated deep into my breast.

tiúruk (from úruk) v {1} [AP; cP] dive, go down headfirst. Mitiúruk
(mipatiúruk) ang ayruplánu, The airplane took a nose-dive. Itiúruk
(ipatiúruk) ang tabánug unyà ipasáka na sad, Have the kite nose-dive
then let it climb up. {2} [B1246] fall headfirst. Nabálì ang íyang líug
kay natiúruk pagkahúlug, He broke his neck when he fell headfirst. — sa
búhat v [A; b] do s.t. conscientiously, work without lifting the head.
Dì nà siya mutiúruk sa búhat, He is not conscientious in his work.
hi-/ha- v [B126] be caused to bow one’s head. Nahitiúruk siya sa dihang
nauláwan siyag maáyu, He bowed his head in shame.

tiúrus v [B46; a] {1} continue going on, speed away. Mitiúrus siyag
lakaw bisan gitawag, He continued walking away even though s.o. was
calling him. Gitiúrus níya ang dágan sa trák, He sped away with the
truck. {2} slide down, swoop down. Mitiúrus ang ayruplánu ngadtu sa
kaáway, The plane swooped down on the enemy. Labihan níyang nakatiúrus
sa káhuy sa pagkakità níya sa bitin, How quickly he got down from the
tree when he saw the snake.

tius-us v {1} = daílus. {2} = us-us, v1.

tiwangwang v [B6; c1] spread or open apart from a vertex or hinge-like
joint. Nagtiwangwang ang mga basahun sa lamísa, The books are laid open
on the table. Gitiwangwang níya ang íyang páa, She spread her thighs
apart.

tiwas v {1} [A; a12] finish, complete. Wà ku makatiwas ug káun kay
nabukug ku, I didn’t finish eating because a bone got stuck in my
throat. Tiwasa úsà ang iskuyla únà ka magminyù, Finish your studies
first before you get married. {2} [A3P; b] give a finishing blow, kill
in the end. Ang kaguul mauy nakatiwas (nakapatiwas) sa masakitun, Grief
finished off the sick man. Ug mulíhuk pa gánì tiwasi (tiwsi), If he
still moves, deliver him the coup-de-grace. {3} [C2] conclude a
conflict by fighting it out to the death. Huy animal! Kanáug diri arun
magtíwas ta, Hey you! Come on down here so we can fight it out to the
death. n finished. Tiwas na ang ákung pípar, My paper is all done. pa-
v {1} [A; ac] have s.o. bring s.t. to an end. {2} [c] have s.o. get
married. Ipatiwas na sila si Tabúra ug si Tunyu, Have Tonio and Tabora
get married.

tiwsan see tiwas.

tiwtiw_1 v [A; b6] wave a finger at s.o. to scold, accuse. Sa íyang
pagbuybuy nákù, gitiwtíwan ku, He waved his fingers at me as he listed
all the good things he had done for me. -an(→) a {1} nagging, scolding
by shaking a finger at. {2} gossiping. v [B126; b6] {1} be a nag.
{2} be gossiping.

tiwtiw_2 = batiwtiw.

tiyà, tíyà n term of address for one’s aunt or the female cousins of
one’s parents, or by extension any woman older than the speaker. v [A;
a1] call s.o. aunt. Tiyaa nang tindíra ágig táhud, Call the woman in
the store auntie as a sign of respect.

tiyan, tíyan n {1} stomach. {2} pregnancy. Pila na ka búlan ang ímung
tiyan? How many months along are you (lit. is your stomach)? (→)
v [a12] hit in the stomach. Gitiyan nákù siyag sumbag, I hit him in the
stomach. -un(←) a having prominent stomach.

tiyù, tíyù n term of address for one’s parents’ brother or male
cousins, or by extension, any man older than the speaker. v [A; c12]
call s.o. uncle.

tl written representation of a dorso-palatal imploded click used in
urging a horse to move.

tling written representation of the sound made by strumming a guitar.

trabáhu v {1} [A; b6(1)] work, go to work. Nagtrabáhu siya sa kapitul,
He is working at the Capitol. Ámung tindáhan ang íyang gitrabahúan, She
is working in our store. {1a} [A123S] obtain employment. Lisud
makatrabahu ang ikskanbik, An ex-convict has a hard time finding
employment. {2} [A; a] work on s.t. Trabahúa ang íyang sinínà, Work on
her dress. {3} [A; a2] have sexual intercourse (euphemism). Ayawg
trabahúa ímung asáwa ug nagrigla, Don’t have intercourse with your wife
when she menstruates. n {1} piece of work. {2} job. trabahadur n manual
laborer. a one who works hard on manual labor. v {1} [B156] be a
laborer. Natrabahadur siya sa gihímung karsáda, He was a laborer on a
road-building project. {2} [B126; b6] be a hard worker (usually said of
manual work). Ang tingúhang muuswag mauy nakapatrabahadur
(nakatrabahadur) níya, He was a hard worker because of his desire to
prosper. -a(←) n = trabahadur (female). trabahanti n laborer, employee.
a hard worker. Ang táwung trabahanti dì gustung mupahúway, A hard
worker does not want to rest. v [B156] be a laborer, employee.
Natrabahanti siya sa ákung upisína, He was an employee at my office.

*trabiling — bag n traveling bag. — nga sinihan n commercial movie that
moves from place to place.

trabilirs tri n traveller palm, an ornamental palm with leaves like a
banana spread in a fan-like arrangement: Ravenala madagascariensis.

trabisíya v {1} [A; c] go around s.t., go the long way around instead
of directly to one’s destination. Nakatrabisíya na ang gwardiya sa
prisuhan, The guard has made the rounds of the prison. Itrabisíya ang
sakayan kun sungsungun ang hángin, Let the boat go round about if you
have to go against the wind. {2} [AN; c] place a private bet against a
member of the crowd in the cockpit. Itrabisíya únà ang kwarta arun
mutúbù, First bet the money around among the onlookers so it will grow.
{3} [A13; c1] lie diagonally across s.t. Kun magtrabisíya kita paghigdà
masulud kitang tanan niíning katri, If we lie diagonally across the
bed, we can all get in it. n {1} place for onlookers, crowd, etc.
around a cockpit. Anhà siya sa trabisíya, He stays in the place for the
onlookers. {2} cockpit audience or crowd. Ang trabisíya nanghugyaw, The
crowd in the cockpit yelled.

trabungku n in folk belief, a glowing, round stone which confers
magical powers on whoever gets hold of it. It is said to be found in
the possession of certain snakes.

tradisiyun n traditional customs. v [B1256] become traditional.
Natradisiyun na dinhi ang pagpanaygun mapasku, It has become a
tradition here to go caroling at Christmas.

tráha n {1} threads of a screw, pipe, and the like. {2} mechanical
device for forming threads. v [A; b6(1)] make threads.

tráhi n {1} a complete men’s suit. {2} an article of clothing that is
part of a suit. Kining karsunísa tráhi sa amirkána, This is the pair of
pants that goes with the suit. v [A13; b6(1)] wear a suit. — dibayli
n ball gown. — dibúda, sa kasal n wedding dress.

trahidiya n tragedy.

trák n {1} motor vehicle. {2} bus. v [A13] go by bus or truck. Mas dalì
ang magtrák kay sa magbarku, Going by bus is faster than by boat. —
dikarga cargo truck. — dipasahíru passenger bus. -ing n trucking, the
business of trucking. Dúna siyay tráking ug láging nga kumpaníya, He
has a trucking and logging company. v [A13] go into the trucking
business.

traktur, traktúra n farm tractor. v [A13; a12] use a tractor.

trakúma n trachoma, an infection of the eyes. v {1} [B126] become
trachoma. {2} [a4] have trachoma.

trambíya n tramway.

trambutsu = tambutsu.

trampas n trick set to deceive, fix s.t. Way trampas tung madyíka.
Tinúud giyung madyik, There was no trick in the act. It was a real
magic.

trampit n trumpet with pistons. v [A; b6] play a trumpet. Kinsay
nagtrampit adtung sunatáha? Who played the trumpet in that piece?
-ir(→) n trumpeter.

trangka v {1} [A; b] bolt a doorway, shutter, close with a crossbar.
Trangkahi (trangkáhi) ang bintánà kay dúna unyay kawatan, Bolt the
window, because a robber might come. {2} [AN2] bolt oneself in a room,
house, etc. Nasukù siya maung nanrangka (nanarangka, nagtrangka) sa
kwartu, She was angry and bolted herself in the room. n bolt or
crossbar. trangkahan n gate or door fastened with a bolt. Giúyug sa
prísu ang trangkahan, The prisoner shook the gate. -du a locked.†

trangkásu n influenza. v [A123P; a4] cause, have influenza.

transaksiyun n transaction. v [C2; c3] have a transaction with s.o. Dì
ku makigtransaksiyun ug tikasan, I won’t do business with a cheat.

transistur n {1} transistor. {2} transistorized radio.

transkrip n a transcript of academic records.

transmisyun n {1} automotive transmission. {1a} transmission of power.
{2} radio, TV transmission.

transmit v [A; c] transmit a message by radio, telegraph, etc.
Itransmit dáyun nang tiligráma kay dinalian, Transmit that cable right
away because it’s urgent.

transmítir n {1} radio, TV transmitter. {2} transmitter site.

transpigurasiyun n transformation of the bread and wine in the mass
into the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

transpir v [A; c] transfer from one school to another, from one job to
another. Mutranspir ku sa Yúbi sunud túig, I’ll transfer to u.v. next
year. Itranspir dáyun sa publasiyun kadtung duul sa luwag, Workers
close to the officials (lit. ladle) don’t take long to get their
transfer to town. n order or authorization of transfer.

transpurmir n electrical transformer. v [b6] use a transformer on.
Transpurmíri ang tíbi arun magáwì sa dusbayinting bultáhi, Use a
transformer with the television so we can plug it into 220 volts.

transpurtasiyun n transportation, mode of travel. Wà nay
transpurtasiyun ngadtu human sa bagyu, There was no way to get there
after the storm.

transpurti n transport, troop ship. Galamitun sa gíra nga gikargas
dagkung transpurti, War equipment that was loaded on big transports.
v [A13; c1] travel, convey in a troop ship.

trantádu = tarantádu. see taranta.

trapal n tarpaulin. Trapal ang gawíun sa paggamag tihíras, They use
canvas to make cots. v [A13; b6(1)] cover s.t. with tarpaulin.
Gitrapalan ang mga sinakung simintu pag-ulan, They covered the bags of
cement with tarpaulin when it rained.

trápik n {1} traffic. {2} street intersection with a traffic light in
it. {3} policeman directing traffic. {4} way — lacking manners. Wà kay
trápik. Mulatas ka man sa taliwálà sa mga táwung nagsultihánay, You
have no manners. You pass between people talking. a heavy traffic.
Trápik kaáyu ug alas dúsi, The traffic is heavy at twelve o’clock.
v {1} [A; b(1)] direct traffic. {2} [B156] be a traffic policeman.
{3} [B6] for traffic to be heavy, congested. Magtrápik ang karsáda ug
dúnay parid, Traffic is congested if there’s a parade. {4} [a12] be
caught in a traffic jam. Natrápik ku sa Kulun, I was caught in a
traffic jam on Colon Street.

trapiku = trápik, n, v2.

trápu v {1} [A; b1] wipe a large area. Nagtrápu siya sa singut sa bátà,
She’s wiping off the child’s sweat. Trapúhi ang lamísa únà basyúhi,
Wipe the table before setting it. Trapúhi ring lipstik sa ákung ngábil,
Wipe the lipstick off my lips. {2} [A; b] clean s.o. by rubbing with a
wet cloth. Trapúhi lang ang bátà kay kahilanatun, Just wash the child
off with a wet cloth because he’s feverish. {3} [c6] in games: be badly
beaten. Sa baskit gitrápu mi sa San Karlus, We were badly beaten by San
Carlos in basketball. {4} [B1256; c1] make old garments into rags for
wiping. Trapuha (itrapu) na lang ning gisiun nga bláwus, Make this old,
worn-out blouse into rags. {5} [A1; c16] finish a big quantity of food.
Duha ra ka táwu ang nagtrápu sa usa ka kū́ng linúgaw, Two people
finished off the whole potful of porridge. (→) n rag or anything for
wiping. paN- v [A2; c6] {1} wipe oneself dry. Nanarápu (nanrápu) siya
human kalígù, He dried himself after he took a bath. {2} clean oneself
with a washcloth. Dì ku malígù. Manarápu lang ku, I won’t take a bath,
I’ll just wash myself with a washcloth.

traski [so-and-so] is bad enough, but in addition [such-and-such] must
happen. Traski lisud ang kwartang pangitáun, náa sab kamu nga kusug
mag-usik-usik, Money is hard enough to come by without your all having
to go and waste it.

traspiri, traspirir v [A; c] {1} move, change residence. Mutraspirir mi
sa bag-ung balay ugmà, We’ll move to the new house tomorrow.
{2} transfer from one document to another. Itraspirir sa ímung ngálan
ang kabtángan sa namatay, The deceased’s property will be transferred
to your name.

traspurti n vessel used in transport. Miabut na ang traspurting
hinábang álang sa Byapra, The transports with aid for Biafra have
arrived.

tratádu n treaty between states.

tratar v [A; a12] {1} treat, bear oneself toward. Maáyung mutratar
kaníla ang ílang inaína, Their stepmother treats them well. {2} attend
to s.t. Mitratar dáyun ang mayur sa prublíma sa mga iskwátir, The mayor
immediately attended to the problem of the squatters. {3} treat, deal
with a question. Unsay gitratar sa párì sa íyang sirmun? What did the
priest talk about in his sermon? tratamyintu n {1} treatment accorded
to one. Maáyu ang íyang tratamyintu sa mga míd, He treats the maids
well. {2} treatment, dealing with s.t. that needs attention.
{3} treatment, discussion of a question.

tratsi n fret of a stringed instrument. v [A; c] put, use as a fret.

trátu n sweetheart. v [a1c3] be sweethearts. Musintinyal nákung
panguyab níya únà mi magkatrátu, I courted her for nearly a century
before we became sweethearts. (→) v [A12] get for a sweetheart.
Nakatratu siyag bungì, He had a harelip for a sweetheart. paN- v [A2;
c] go get a sweetheart. Unyà ka ra manarátug ugpas ka na? Do you intend
to have a sweetheart only after you’ve become all used up? manag-
n sweethearts. Managtrátu sila, They are sweethearts. panag-
n relationship of being sweethearts.

tráyal v [A; b] try s.t. or s.o. out. Nagtráyal kug duha ka klási nga
ripridyirítur, I have tried out two different brands of refrigerator.
Pila na ka buuk ang gitrayálan álang niíning trabahúa, They have tried
out several applicants for the job. n trial.

trayanggul n {1} triangle. {2} triangle, k.o. percussion instrument.
v [A; c1] make, form a triangle. Trayanggula (itrayanggul) ang
purmisyun sa banda, Form the marching band into a triangle.

trayanggulu = trayanggul.

trayinta number thirty. v see disiutsu.

trayintaydus n thirty-two caliber gun or cartridge.

trayintay-utsu n thirty-eight caliber gun or cartridge.

trayir v [A] betray. Nasáyud si Hisus nga si Húdas mutrayir kaníya,
Jesus knew that Judas would betray Him. Kinsay nagdamgu nga mutrayir
siya kanímu? Who ever dreamed that she could deceive you?

traydǔr a {1} traitor. {2} sickness that attacks without warning.
Traydǔr kaáyung sakíta nang hayblad, High blood pressure is a
treacherous disease. v [B156; b6] become a traitor. Natraydǔr siya
tungud sa pasálig sa kaáway, He became a traitor because of the enemy’s
promises.

traysikul n tricycle, pedicab. v {1} [A1; a1c] ride, bring on a
pedicab. {2} [A; a] make into a pedicab.

tráyu = tríyu_1.

tríbu n tribe.

tribukar v [A; c] divulge. Ang míd mauy nagtribukar sa paglúib sa
asáwa, The maid divulged the wife’s infidelity. Ayaw itribukar nga
partíhan nátù siya, Don’t say a word that we are giving him a party. 2
[B1256] be found out, brought out into the open.

tribunal n tribunal court of justice.

tribusun v [AB156; a1] have, set the hair in ringlets. Ang byutisyan
mauy nagtribusun sa íyang buhuk, The beautician set her hair in
ringlets. Nagtribusun ang taas nga buhuk sa bátà, The child’s hair
hangs down in ringlets. n ringlet, long hanging curl.

tridayminsiyun n three-dimensional movie. v [c16] make a movie in three
dimensions.

trid-in v [A; c] trade in for s.t. better. Itrid-in nang ímung uyab nga
bughuan, Trade your jealous girl friend in for a new one.

trígu n wheat.

trím v [A; b] trim, cut to even lengths. Akuy mutrím sa antuwánga, I’ll
trim the hibiscus plants. Trími lag ákung buhuk. Ayawg mubui, Just trim
my hair. Don’t cut it short.

trimistral n done every three months. Trimistral ang báyad sa
lisinsiya, You pay for your license once every three months. v [A; c1]
do s.t. on a once-in-three months basis.

trimistri n period of three months.

trín_1 n railway train. Byáan ka sa trín, You won’t get married (lit.
miss the train). v [A13; a12] ride on the train.

trín_2 v [A; a2] {1} train, teach to make proficient. Trína siyag
maáyu, Train him well. {2} train, discipline. Gitrín sila sa ílang
inahan ug trabáhu, They were trained by their mother to work. -i
n trainee in military training. v [B1256] be a trainee. -ir n trainer.
Akuy gitrínir sa bag-ung tím, I was made the trainer of the new team.

tringka v [A; a] fasten s.t. securely by binding it fast. Tringkáhan
nátù ang átung dala arun dì kawátan, We’ll tie up our baggage securely
so nothing can be stolen from it.

trinsas n U-shaped black hairpin for a top-knot or the like. v [AN;
b6(1)] use this sort of hairpin. Manrinsas pa ku sa ákung pinangkù, I’m
still putting hairpins in my chignon.

trinsíras n military trench. v [A; b6(1)] make trenches.

*trip pirst, last — n first or last trip of the day made by scheduled
transportation. las — n funeral cortege to the cemetery (humorous).

tripilya, tripilyas n the small intestines of a pig.

triplikádu n triplicate. v [B126] be made in triplicate.

triplit n triplets. v [B1256] turn out to be triplets.

tripulanti n crew on a ship, member of a ship’s crew. v {1} [B156; b6]
be a member of the crew. Barkung istranghíru ang ákung gitripulantíhan,
I was a crew member on a foreign ship. {2} [A12] have as a member of
the crew.

trís number three. v {1} [B256; c1] get to be three, make s.t. three.
Mutrís na siya karung Marsu, He’ll be three this March. Hápit na siya
matrís, di pa gihápun kalakaw, He’s almost three and he still can’t
walk. Trísa (itrís) lang ning isdà, Let me have this fish for three
pesos (lit. make it three pesos). {2} [A1] give or get three (pesos,
centavos, etc.). Kinsang maistráha nagtrís nímu? Which teacher gave you
a grade of three? Nakatrís ku sa paglinimpiya, I earned three pesos
polishing shoes. {3} [b] incur expenses amounting to three. Hitrísan ku
sa búlang, I lost three pesos in the cockpit. alas — three o’clock. —
andánas n three-storey building. — anyus three years. tris-adus
a {1} vision that is cross-eyed. {2} three-to-two odds in betting.
v [A1] be cross-eyed. Nagtris-adus ang ímung panan-aw, You are
cross-eyed. — bandas n three-sided billiards, where the ball is made to
bounce off three edges. tris-idus = tris-adus. — kantus n three-edged
blade, file, or anything that can have three edges. — kwartas
three-fourths. — nuybis n in mahjong, a combination of three nines of
different designs, one of the iksibisiyun combinations. — únus an
iksibisiyun combination in mahjong of three one’s. -ay n betting for
three (centavos, pesos) each time. v [C] bet three each play. Magtrisay
tag baráha, Let’s play cards with three-peso bets. -un a of the three
(peso, centavo) kind. Trisun man nang gidak-úna, That size costs three
pesos each. tag- a three centavos (pesos) each. tag-un a of the type
that costs three centavos (pesos).

trisahiyu n {1} a devotion offered to the Blessed Trinity for
thanksgiving. {2} a k.o. rosary usually said or sung in Spanish for the
souls of children under three years of age: prayed for seven nights in
the case of children one or two years old, and three nights for
infants.

trísi number thirteen. v see disiutsu. — kartas = *tirtin kards. —
klásis n k.o. Chinese medicine, a drink made of thirteen kinds of herbs
or barks, commonly taken during pregnancy for ease in delivery.

tri síkans n in basketball, the violation of having the ball inside the
foul line next to one’s goal for more than three seconds. v [B1256]
commit a three-second violation in basketball.

trisiklu, trisikulu = traysikul.

trisipílu = tirsiyupílu.

trísir n tracer used in dressmaking. v [A; b] trace with a tracer.
Trisíran úsà nà unyà subáyug gunting, Trace it, then cut it out with
scissors. — búlit n tracer bullet.

tris maríyas = alundris_2.

tristi a sad. (literary). Pagkatristi ning ákung dughan, How sad this
heart of mine is.

trisuríra = tisuríru (female).

triyanggulu = trayanggul.

tríyu_1 n vocal trio. v [C; ac3] sing a vocal trio. Nagtríyu ang
Litirmin, The Lettermen sang a trio. Triyúha lang kun way báhu, Make it
a trio if there is no bass part.

tríyu_2 n in mahjong, a set of three cards of the same design and
number.

trubinayis, trubináyus n stiff-collared shirt. v [A1; a2] wear, make
into a stiff-collared shirt.

trúbul v [A; a] stir up trouble so as to disrupt a proceeding. Trubúlun
nátù ang míting, Let us disrupt the meeting by creating trouble.
n fight, brawl (slang). — syúting n troubleshooting, looking for
defects in a machine. — syútir n troubleshooter.

trúkis v {1} [AC] for two things to cross each other’s path but not
meet; be facing each other but not squarely. Magtrúkis sila sa ílang
ispáda, They will cross swords. Magtrúkis ang duha ka trín, The two
trains will pass each other. Upat ka lamísa nga gatrúkis pagkabutang,
Four tables placed facing each other in a disorderly way. {2} [AC;
a2c3] trade two things for each other that are exactly in opposing
functions or positions. Makigtrúkis aku nímu. Pusta ka sa ákung manuk,
aku sa ímu, OK, I’ll trade with you. I bet on your cock and you bet on
mine. Trukísun ang ílang gúl sa haptayim, They traded goals at
half-time. Itrúkis ímung rákit sa iyáha, Trade your racket for his.
{3} [C; c3] have a clash of ideas or exchange of words. Nagtrúkis mi si
Sír báhin sa ákung swildu, I had a quarrel with the boss regarding my
salary. Amígu gihápun ta bísag nagkatrúkis átung idíya, We will remain
friends even if our ideas clash. {4} [C3] for ideas to contradict each
other. Namakak ka kay nagkatrúkis ang ímung katarúngan, You are lying
because your reasoning is self-contradictory. n {1} being in a crossed
position. Trúkis kanang duha ka lubi, Those two coconut trees are
growing so that they form an x relative to each other. {2} argument.
Walay kahusayun ang inyung trúkis, There’s no solving of your argument.

trúling n trawling. Way trúling nga gitúgut sa dapit nga mabaw sa átung
kadagátan, Trawling is not permitted in shallow waters. v [A; a2] do
trawl fishing.

trumbun n trombone. v [A; b6] play the trombone.

trumpa n trumpet, funnel-shaped device used for amplifying or directing
sound.

trumpit = trampit.

trumpíta n {1} trumpet with or without pistons. {2} triton trumpets,
k.o. large univalve. v [A; b6] play a trumpet.

trumpíti = trumpíta.

trunsal n tuck or fold stitched into a garment for a better fit or for
decoration. v [A; c] make a fold or dart in a garment. Ákung
gitrunsalan ang háwak arun mahustu, I made a dart in the waistline in
order to make the dress fit your body.

trúnu n {1} throne. {2} high position, top post (humorous). Maáyu ka na
man giyung pagkamuntǎr dihà sa ímung trúnu, ayaw táwun mig kalimti ang
día sa ubus, Now that you are nicely established on your throne, don’t
forget those of us left down here below. v [B1456] be seated at a
higher level than the others in watching an event (humorous).

trúpa n {1} troop of soldiers. {2} troupe of entertainers, actors.

trúpi n trophy. v [A12] win a trophy. (→) = trúpi, v.

trupiku n tropics.

trupíya, trupiyu = trúpi.

trúsu n log. mag-r- n logger. panurúsu n logging business. Panurúsu ang
ákung pangítà, I’m engaged in logging.

tsá n tea. v [A13] have tea. Magtsá ta ug way kapi, We will have tea if
there is no coffee. -ríra n teapot.

tsalíku = salíku.

tsalit n small bungalow. v [A; a] make a bungalow.

tsamba = samba_1.

tsampáka n k.o. small ornamental tree grown for its fragrant flowers:
Michelia alba and champaka. — sa insik k.o. cream-colored magnolia:
Magnolia coco.

tsampiyun n champion. v [B126; b6] become the champion. Natsampiyun ang
ámung tím, Our team became the champion.

tsampurádu = sampurádu_2.

tsampuy n = kyamuy.

tsáns n {1} chance, possibility for s.t. to happen. May tsáns kahang
mabúhì siya, Is there a chance that she will live? {2} chance,
opportunity. Mangupya ang istudiyanti kun dúnay tsáns, The student
cheats if he gets the chance. {3} chances of attaining s.t. Dakug tsáns
kang madáwat, You have good chances of getting the job. Wà kay tsáns
níya, You don’t have a chance with her. v [A12] get a chance,
opportunity. Makatsáns lang mig háluk sa sinihan, We get the chance to
kiss only in the movie house. — pasindyir n stand-by passenger without
reservations. v [A13; c] go on a stand-by basis. -ing v [A2] touch s.o.
with the intention of making sexual advances (humorous). Dílì kaduúlag
babáyi nis Abil. Mutsansing giyud siya dáyun, No woman dares get near
Abel because he’ll try her out if she does.

tsápa n {1} badge. {2} washer, a ring made of metal or other materials.
v [A; c] {1} wear, put a badge. Tsapáhi ímung púlu arun mu ra kag
sírip, Put a badge on your shirt so you look like a sheriff. {2} put a
washer on s.t. Tsapáhi ang ruska arun dì mulubung, Put a washer around
the screw so it will not sink in.

tsapirun n chaperon. v [B3; b(1)] be accompanied by a chaperon.

tsaplin n chaplain. v [B156; a1] work as, become a chaplain.

tsapstik n chopsticks. v [A; a] use chopsticks.

tsapsuy = sapsuy.

tsaptir v [B256] have a wreck. Dalì dang mutsaptir (matsaptir) ang mga
sakyanang gaan basta kusgun pagpadágan, Light vehicles will easily meet
an accident if you drive them fast. Nabálì ang kamut ni Pidru sa dihang
natsaptir siya sa íyang mutur, Pedro broke his hand when he had a wreck
with his motorcycle.

tsardying n {1} charging, an offensive foul called on a player who
charges into a guard. {2} one who commits this foul. v [B1256] commit
this foul.

tsaríra see tsá.

tsarlistun n Charleston dance. v [A] do the Charleston.

*tsarming pa- v [A13; b(1)] do s.t. to look beautiful, make oneself
charming. Magpatsarming giyud ta sa ritrátu, We’ve got to make
ourselves beautiful for our pictures. -un(→) a charming,
beautiful-looking. Nadani siya sa babáying tsarmingun, He was attracted
to the charming girl.

tsart n chart.

tsarul n {1} patent leather. {1a} patent leather shoes. {2} spit shine.
v {1} [A; b6] wear, use patent leather. {2} [A; a1] give a spit shine.

tsatsa n cha-cha-cha. v {1} [A; b6] dance the cha-cha-cha. {2} [A; c1]
play, dance in cha-cha-cha rhythm.

tsatsuy = hatsuy.

tsáw, tsáwu = siyà.

tsaynamut n k.o. commercial preparation of the mixture called trísi
klásis. see trísi.

*tsaynis — bambu n small ornamental bamboo: Bambusa multiplex. — bras
n brush for writing Chinese. — guld n twenty-four-carat gold in
jewelry. — gwába n variety of large guava with few seeds. — payil n way
of arranging one’s pieces in mahjong. — pitsay n variety of pitsay that
is esp. long and whitish: Brassica pekinensis. — tsikir n Chinese
checkers.

tsi {1} = tsipi. {2} expression denoting contempt for s.o. Tsi, hitsúra
níyang mangulitáwu nákù, Huh, imagine a guy like that courting me.
v [b6] snort at s.o. in contempt. Gitsíhan lang ku níya kay wà man kuy
barku, She just snorted at me because I’m not rich (lit. have no ship).

tsì = sì.

tsík_1 v [A; b] {1} mark with a check. Tsíki ning brákit kun muurdir
ka, Put a check in the bracket if you want to order. {2} check, correct
s.t. written. Gitsíkan nag átung tirm pípar, Our term papers have been
checked. n check mark.

tsík_2 v [AC2; bc3] share a cigarette. Magtsík lang ta kay wà nay láin,
Let’s just share this cigarette because I haven’t got any more.

tsík_3 v [A; a12] say ‘check’, put an opponent’s king in danger of
being checked. Mutsík giyud ka basta muatáki ka sa hárì, You have to
say ‘check’ when you attack the king.

tsikà, tsikalà n meal, refreshment (slang). Mutambung ta sa kasal kay
dúnay tsikà, Let us go to the wedding party because there is going to
be a feed. v [A; c] eat a meal or refreshment (slang). Adtu ta mutsikà
sa ristawran, Let’s eat in the restaurant.

tsik-ap v {1} [A; a] check up, examine. Ispisyalista ang nagtsik-ap
nákù, A specialist examined me. {2} [A; a12] check up on s.o.’s
activities. Nagtsik-ap ku ug nagsígi bag tunghà ang ákung bátà, I am
checking up to see if my son is attending classes.

tsik-awut v [A; b6] {1} check out from a place of work. {2} check out
from a hotel. n check-out time. Alas singku ang átung tsik-áwut, We
check out at five o’clock.

tsíki n check. Kás, dílì tsíki ang ámung dawátun, We accept only cash,
no checks. v [A1; b(1)] issue a check. Kinsa may nagtsíki nímu nga
miuntul? Who issued you a bouncing check?

tsíkin_1 a for a male to be chicken. Tsíkin kaáyu ka. Ngánung dì man
nímu kumplimintuhan siya? You sure are chicken. Why don’t you
compliment her? v [B2; b6] be, become chicken.

tsíkin_2 a good looking (slang). Tsíkin pa níya ang íyang manghud, Her
younger sister is more beautiful than she.

tsíkin_3 n k.o. dance characterized by a scratching-like motion of the
feet. v [A] dance the tsíkin.

tsik-in v [A; b6] {1} check in to one’s place of work. Kinahanglan tang
mutsik-in únà musúgud ug trabáhu, We have to check in before we start
work. {2} check into a hotel. {3} check in for a flight. n check-in
time.

tsikiníni n telltale toothmark or scratch on the skin as a result of
torrid necking.

tsíkin pid a {1} for a large amount to be negligible in cost to a
person with lots of money. {2} for s.t. hard to be easy for a person
with great capability. Kanang bár tsikin pid ra nà nímu, The bar exam
is too easy for you. v [b6] consider a large amount negligible or
consider s.t. difficult quite easy.

tsíkin sálad (not without l) n chicken salad. v [A; a] make, have
chicken salad.

tsíkir_1 v [AC; b6c3] play checkers. Magtsíkir ta palabay sa panahun,
Let’s play checkers to pass the time. n checkerboard.

tsíkir_2 n checker, person who checks incoming or outgoing things.
v [B156; a2] be a checker.

tsíkird n checkered cloth. v [A1] wear s.t. of checkered cloth.

tsikitilya n vest. v [A; b6(1)] wear a vest.

tsiku n familiar term of address to male, usually to one’s peer or
younger. Basta ikaw, tsiku, arigládu, So long as it is you, my friend,
it will be done. v [a12] call s.o. chico.

tsíku n sapodilla, a small tree cultivated for its sweet, juicy fruit:
Achras zapota. (→) — karabaw = gwayabanu. — kapúti = tsíku. tsíkus =
tsíku, n.

tsikut = kutsi (slang).

tsimaníya n chimney or stack, esp. of a ship. v [A; c] make, put a
chimney s.w.

Tsína n {1} China. {2} Chinese (female).

*tsindying — gips v [c2] exchange gifts, as at Christmas. n exchanging
gifts. — paybut n in basketball, the violation of pivoting and then
stepping. v [B1256] commit this violation.

tsinílas = sinílas.

tsíning v [A; b6(1)] chin oneself. Managkù átung buktun ug magtsíning
ta, Your arms will grow large if you chin yourself. n chinning
exercise. — bar n chinning bar.

tsínu see kamísa.

tsíp n chief, head of an office. v {1} [A; a12] call s.o. chief. Ayaw
kug tsípa kay paríhu ra ta, Don’t call me chief because we are the
same. {2} [B1256; b6] become, be chief. (→) term of address to s.o.
superior in authority, particularly a law officer. Wà táwun ku mangáwat
tsip, I didn’t steal anything, officer.

tsipi short form: tsi. expression used to drive away cats. Tsipi!
Nagpanan-aw na pud ning irínga sa pinirítung isdà, Scat! That cat is
looking at the fried fish.

tsipun n {1} chiffon fabric or cloth material. {2} chiffon cake.

tsíris = siráli.

tsirman n chairman. v [AB56; c1] be chairman.

tsís_1 = tsísir. -ir n chaser taken after liquor. v [A13; c] have a
chaser. Túbig lay átung itsísir kay way kúk, We will just have water as
chaser since we do not have Coke.

tsís_2 v [AC; b6c3] play chess. Balà siyang mutsís, He plays chess
poorly. Makigtsís ku nímu kun dúnay pusta, I’ll play chess with you if
we bet. n chess. — burd n chessboard.

tsís_3 n cheese. v [A13] have cheese.

tsismis n idle gossip. Nagpakasal na lang sila paglikay sa tsismis,
They got married to stop the gossip. v [A12C; c] engage in idle gossip.
Bísag unsa lay itsismis níya nákù báhin sa ílang bag-ung silíngan, She
tells me everything about her new neighbors.

tsismúsa a given to gossip. v [B12; b6] be, become a gossipmonger.

tsismúsu = tsismúsa (male).

tsitsà, tsìtsà v [A; c] take light refreshments or snacks (slang).
n eating.

tsitsiríka = sitsiríka_1, 2.

tsitsiríyas = sitsiríyas.

tsk spelling to represent the sound produced by clicking the tip of the
tongue against the alveolar ridge with an implosion. {1} in calling
animals. {2} in expressing an adverse reaction to a mistake. Tsk, tsk,
dì na ni mahímù, Tsk, now we can’t do anything about it.

*tsu mau diay — (humorous for mau diay tu) So that’s the way it is! Mau
diay nasuud sila kay uyab man. Mau diay tsu, Oh, I see. They are close
because they are sweethearts.

tsù = tsuy.

tsug word used in writing to represent the sound of an arrow piercing
an object.

tsuk word used in writing to represent the sound of s.t. darting and
piercing into s.t. like an arrow.

tsúk_1 n chalk. ka- v [A13] be covered with chalk marks. Nagkatsúk ang
bungbung, The wall is covered with chalk marks.

tsúk_2 v [A; b] choke a motor or engine. Ug dílì muandar tsuki, If it
doesn’t start, choke it.

tsúkir n choker, a short necklace that fits closely around the neck.
v [A; b6(1)] use, wear a choker.

tsuktsuk v [A; a] masturbate (slang). Gitsuktsuk níya ang ákung útin,
She banged away at my penis.

tsukuláti (not without l), tsukulit n chocolate drink. v [A; a2] have,
make a chocolate drink. ka- v [A13] get chocolate all over it.
Nagkatsukuláti ang mantil, The tablecloth has chocolate all over it.

tsulítas n k.o. dish of breaded pork chops, where the meat is pulled to
the bottom of the rib bone. v [A; a] make chuletas.

tsunggu n small monkey.

tsup n word used in writing to represent the smacking sound of a kiss.

tsupà v [A; a1] suck off (coarse slang). Dì ku musugut nga tsupaun ang
ákù nga way báyad, You’re going to have to pay me if you want to suck
me off.

tsupir n driver, chauffeur. v [B156; a2] work as a driver, chauffeur.
Natsupir siya sa ámung dyíp, He was the driver of our jeep.

tsupun n rubber nipple of a bottle or pacifier. v [A1; c6] suck on a
pacifier.

tsúra see hitsúra.

tsurísu = surísu.

tsuwinggam = swinggam.

tsúwit n child’s word for chocolate candy.

tsuy (from atsuy) n term of address to male, suggesting familiarity or
informality. Ása ta run mag-ínum tsuy, Where are we going to have a
drink, pal? (←) v [A; a12] call s.o. pal.

tu_1 (from tuu) command for a carabao to turn right.

tu_2 see kadtu.

tú_1 (from kadtu) those (pointing to s.t. far from both speaker and
hearer).

tú_2 = tulu.

túa = atúa.

tuab v [B26] for a group to burst into loud and boisterous laughter.
Natuab (mituab) ug pangatáwa ang íyang giisturyáhan ug kataw-anan, The
group broke into boisterous laughter when he told them s.t. funny.

túab n neckhole or armholes in a dress. v [A; b6(1)] cut the neckhole
or armhole of a garment.

tuagsik = tuásik.

tuak v [A; a12] strangle. Mu rag mutuak nákù ning huut nga kwilyu, This
tight collar is about to choke me. Gituak sa manyak ang íyang biktima,
The maniac strangled his victim. tuaktúak v [A; c1] eat so greedily one
seems to choke. Ayawg tuaktuáka (ituaktúak) nang ímung pagkáun kay
mabukug ka, Don’t eat your food greedily because you might choke on a
small bone.

tuáli v [AB2S3(1)6; c1] be, turn upside down. Kinsay nagtuáli íring
bangà? Who turned this jar upside down? Magtuali ang kabug kun maghúp,
Bats hang upside down when they perch.

tualya n towel. itsa sa — see itsa.

tuang v [A23P] for rain, flood, flow of blood to let up or stop.
Manlákaw ta ug mutuang ang ulan, We are going out when the rain stops.
Tambal nga makapatuang (makatuang) sa pagdugù, Medicine to stop the
flow of blood. tuangtúang v [B456] keep raining off and on, stopping
and starting.

tuáruk v [B256; b6] fall headfirst. Patay untà kun simintu pay
gituarúkan sa bátà, The child would have died if it had been concrete
he had landed on with his head.

tuásik v [A2S3; b6] spatter, for little things to fall in all
directions. Mituásik ang bawud nga misúgat sa pambut, The waves dashing
against the motorboat splashed in all directions. Nagtuasik ang mga
bála dihang gimasinggan mi, We were machine-gunned, and bullets fell
all over the place. -in- n spattering given off by s.t.

tuaw v {1} [A2] exclaim in surprise or wonderment. Nakatuaw ug
nakapanghisus siya sa kahibúlung, She exclaimed and uttered ‘Jesus’ in
amazement. {2} [A] cry out. Náa siya nagtuaw sa gawas naghangyù nga
mubálik ka, He is outside, crying out, imploring you to come back.

tuay v {1} [B456; c6] for s.t. attached to hang limp from its base.
Nabálì sigúrug íyang buktun kay nagtuay man, His arm must be broken
because it is hanging limp. Ituay ímung úlu ingun sa patay ka, Let your
head hang limp as if you were dead. {2} [B123(1)] become bent over in
maturity. Ug matuay na ang mga mais, aníhun na nátù, If the corn is
quite bent over, we can harvest it. a for corn to be bent over when it
is mature.

túba n k.o. croton plant: Croton tiglium. — nga bákud = tubatuba.
tubatuba n k.o. shrub, the leaves of which are used as a poultice and
the seeds of which produce oil for soap: Jatropha curcas. tubatubang
murádu n k.o. tubatuba with reddish leaves: Jatropha gossypifolia.

tubà_1 n fermented and processed toddy from coconut palms. v {1} [A; b]
give water for toddy. Ang buluk dílì mutubà pag-áyu sa ting-init, The
flower bud doesn’t produce much water during the hot season. {2} [b8]
get toddy all over it. Natubaan ang ákung púlu, My shirt got toddy all
over it. {3} [b8] be the one who has to treat others to toddy.
Hingtubaan ku kay napildi ku sa pustahánay, I had to pay for a round of
toddy because I lost the betting. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] go out to get
toddy. n s.t. for buying toddy. Gái kug diyis, panubà ba, Let me have
ten centavos to buy a glass of toddy. ka-(←) v [A13] get toddy all over
it. -an n stand which sells toddy. hiN-, hiN-(←) a fond of toddy. -un
a for a cock to be colored like red palm toddy.†

tubà_2 v [A; a1] cut down a banana stalk for the fruit. Tub-a na nang
saginga kay gúwang na, Cut down that banana because the fruits are
mature.

tubag v {1} [A; a1c6] answer. Akuy mutubag sa pangutána, I’ll answer
the question. Tubaga ang nangutána, Answer the person who asked a
question. Pahiyum lay íyang itubag sa ákung hangyù, The only answer she
gives to my plea is a smile. {1a} [A; b5] answer correspondence. Wà ku
makatubag dáyun sa ímung sulat, I couldn’t answer your letter right
away. {1b} [A2; a12] talk back, retort. Hisagpaan siya kay mitubag sa
inahan, She got a slap in the face because she talked back to her
mother. {1c} [C3; c36] exchange heated words. Nagkatúbag mi dihang
giinsultuhan ku níya, We exchanged heated words when he insulted me.
{1d} [A23; b5] for an uncommon event to recur or be followed by s.t.
similar (in folk belief, a not-so-common event is followed by s.t.
similar). Tubagun (tubagan) pa nang ímung swirti sa láing táwu, S.o.
else will have good luck in response to your good luck. {2} [A2N; a12]
answer for, take responsibility. Ángayng tubagun nimu ang dadangátan sa
ímung kirída, You ought to take responsibility to whatever happens to
your mistress. {2a} [A2; a1] bear s.o.’s expenses. Tubagun sa sigúru
ang bayranan nímu sa uspital, The insurance will cover your hospital
bills. n {1} answer. {2} s.t. which happens after s.t. in response to
it. — pangutána, úyun, etc. question, agreement, etc. given in answer.
‘Náa ka na diay?’ tubag tuksù ni Kulasing, ‘Are you really there now?’
asked Kulasing in answer. paN- v [A2; c6] answer questions. Pasar siya
sa intirbiyu kay maáyu siyang manubag, She passed the interview because
she answered the questions well. Unsay ákung ipanubag ug imbistigarun
ku? What shall I answer if I am investigated? tubagtubag v [A; a12]
talk back insolently. Ayawg tubagtubaga ang ímung magulang kay gabáan
ka, Don’t talk back insolently to your elder brother or you will get
divine retribution visited on you. matubagtubagun a inclined to talk
back insolently. tubagtúbag v [A; a1c] sing, read s.t. alternatingly or
with a responsive reading. Tubagtubágan ta pagbása ang kasulátan, Let
us read the scriptures responsively. -in-ay(←) v {1} = tubag, v1c.
{2} = tubagtubag. n {1} heated exchange of words. {2} responsive or
alternate making of sound. Ang tinubágay sa mga langgam mabuntag, The
alternating sounds of birds in the morning. -in-an n manner of
answering. -l-un(←) n {1} responsibility that one has to answer for.
Tulubágun sa tsapirun ug unsay mahitabù níla, It is the chaperon who
has to answer if s.t. happens to them. {2} material from which a
responsive reading or singing is read.

tubas n off-season for fruit-bearing trees. v {1} [B23] for trees to
stop bearing fruit. Nagkatubas na ang pamúnga sa kaimítu, The
fruit-bearing season for star apples is coming to a close. {2} [B2]
stop raining. Ug mutubas na ang ulan, dì na ta magpáyung, If the rains
stop, we won’t need an umbrella any more. {3} [b4] get, be rain-soaked
(lit. be in the rain till it stops). Gitubasan (hingtubasan) ku sa
ulan, I got soaked by the rain.

tub-as v {1} [B23] for the season of a certain fruit or crop to be
over. {2} [b4] be drenched with rain. n off-season for crops or fruits.

túbaw v [B12; a] for the husks to come off of pounded grains. Gáhì
matúbaw ang humay nga pínug lugas, It is difficult to get the husk off
fine-grained rice.

túbay v [A2C; b(1)] keep on doing s.t. Dì siya mutúbay ug trabáhu kay
pul-ánun, He does not keep working for long because he gets bored
easily. Aku ray nakatúbay ug pamínaw sa taas nga sirmun, I was the only
one left that kept on listening to the long sermon. Nagtúbay silag ínum
hangtud sa buntag, They kept their drinking spree going until morning.
ma-un a s.o. capable of keeping on doing s.t. Matubáyun sa trabáhu, One
who sticks to a piece of work.

túbig n {1} water. buyag sa — see buyag, n2. — sa butung water in the
young coconut. Túbig sa butung ang ákung gustung imnun, I want to drink
water of the young coconut. {2} score in a game of tubigtúbig.
v {1} [B2] become water. Natúbig ang ayis drap, The popsicle melted.
{2} — sa úlu [a12] master in one’s mind. Tubíga sa ímung úlu kining
kúd, Master this code. (→) v {1} [A; b] put, mix with water. Tubigi ang
wiski ug ísug ra, Add water into the whiskey if it is too strong.
{2} [AP; bP] irrigate. Gipatubigan (gitubigan) ang basak, The rice
paddy was irrigated. {3} [B456] water, produce liquid. Mutubig ákung
bàbà ug makakità kug sambag, My mouth waters if I see tamarinds.
Nagtubig ang íyang núka, His sore is watering. paN-(→) v {1} [A2; b6]
fill glasses with water. Panubig diri, Give us some water. {2} [A2;
b6(1)] get one’s water s.w. Ang mga taga isla adtu manubig sa unay,
People from small islands get their water from the mainland. hiN-
v [AN; b] bail water out. Sígi kung hinúbig kay milikì ang luwang, I
kept bailing water out because the bilge leaked. n instrument for
bailing. hiN-an(→) n place water is bailed out from. pa-(→)
n irrigation system. tubignun n water spirit. tubigtubig n k.o. skin
disease characterized by itchiness and tiny pustules with watery
discharge. v [B146; a4b4] have tubigtubig. tubigtúbig n child’s game
played with two teams of an offensive and defensive side. Two rows of
adjacent squares are drawn, two squares for each defensive player. The
offensive team aims to get in and back through the series of squares
without being touched by the defensive team whose movements are
restricted. A point, called túbig, is made when a player gets in and
back through the squares untouched. v [A1; b6] play tubigtúbig.
tubigtubigan a well-to-do; s.o. having much money on hand. v [B126; b8]
become well-off.

túbil v [A; c] {1} pour fuel in a tank or container. Íya nang gitubílan
ug gás ang sugà, He has already poured kerosene into the lamp. Trayinta
litrus ang itúbil sa trák, Fill the truck with thirty liters. {2} pour
drinks for s.o. (colloquial). n {1} liquid poured into a container.
{2} drink poured.

tubitubi, tubìtubì, tubiltubil v [A; b6] answer back when one is
reprimanded. Íya kung gitubiltubilan, maung ákù siyang gilúsì, He
talked back, so I pinched him. ma-un, -un a given to answering back
when reprimanded.

tublag v {1} [A; b6] dilute s.t. Ákung gitublágag túbig ang súkà, I
diluted vinegar with water. {1a} [A12] for a food ingredient added as a
seasoning or sweetening to be well diffused. Dílì makatublag ang
diyútayng asúkar sa usa ka tásang kapi, A little sugar cannot sweeten a
cup of coffee. {2} [B126; c5] for everybody to get some of s.t.,
usually food. Dílì makatublag sa tanan ug maglútù lang kug gamay, If I
don’t prepare but a little, not everyone will get s.t. to eat. Natublag
ang tanan sa ákung gilútù, I prepared enough to take care of everybody.

tubli n k.o. shrub growing along streams and in secondary forests, the
leaves and branches of which are used as fish poison: Derris elliptica.
v {1} [A; a2] poison fish with tubli. {2} [A2; a12] give off a terrible
odor, enough to make one groggy. Ang báhù sa íyang utut makatublig
búnug, When he breaks wind it could kill a goby. {3} [B126] be tired of
the same old thing: hearing the same story, music, etc. Natubli na ku
ánang ímung isturyang balikbálik, I’m tired hearing the same story over
and over again. paN- v [A1; c6] catch fish with tubli. tinublíhan
n fish caught with tubli.

tubluk = tulbuk.

tubtub_1 v {1} [A; a1b7] cut s.t. at its base, very close to the
surface. Tubtúba pagputul ang ságing arun sayun ang pagpanáhà, Cut the
banana stalk close to the ground so it will readily grow suckers.
{2} [A; b5] cut around s.t. cylindrical, usually bamboo poles, little
by little with short hacks, resulting in a clean finish. Tubtúbi
(tubtúba) ang tumuy sa kawáyan arun malimpiyu, Cut around the tip of
the bamboo pole so it will be clean. {3} [A; a] make a toddy container
out of a length of bamboo. a being cut close to the surface. Tubtub
rang pagkaputúla ang íyang buhuk, Her hair was cut too close to the
roots. n {1} section cut from a long piece. Usa ka tubtub nga láwas sa
lubi, A section of a coconut tree trunk. {2} one node length of bamboo,
usually used as a container, esp. for palm toddy.

tubtub_2 v [A; b] for chickens to charge, flapping the wings and
kicking the feet. Mutubtub ug táwu ang íyang hiniktan, His gamecock
will charge at people. n action of charging.

tubu n sugar cane. -ng palinà, pula red sugar cane. — lumhan, putì
green sugar cane. paN- v [A2] cut sugar cane for milling. Manubu ku sa
ílang asyinda, I shall apply as a laborer to cut sugar cane stalks on
their hacienda. katubhan n sugar cane plantation.

túbu n {1} tube. {2} water pipe. {3} chimney of a lamp. Gianuúsan ang
túbu sa lampara, The lamp chimney is covered with soot. hínis sa — see
hínis.

túbù_1 v [A2S; b17] {1} grow, become larger. Mutaas pa siya kay nagtubù
pa, She will grow taller because she is still growing. Dus pulgádas ang
ákung gitubúan, I grew two inches taller. Gitubúan na ang sinínà, She
has outgrown her dress. Ang gitubúan sa dákit, Where the banyan tree
was growing. {2} earn interest. Mutúbù ang kwartang ibangku, Money put
in the bank earns interest. {3} [b(1)] develop feelings. Gitubúan kug
kasína sa íyang paglampus, I grew envious over his success. {4} [A2S]
for water, dough, land to rise. Hurnúha ang harínang gimása ug mutúbù
na, Put the dough in the oven when it rises. Síging magtubù ang dágat
ug dì pa makalantung, The sea continues to rise until it reaches its
highest point at high tide. n {1} growth. Kusug ang túbù sa tanum, The
plant grows fast. {2} interest on loan. bag-ung — see bag-u. pa- v [A;
b] lend money with interest. Patubúan diay nímu tung ákung gibaylu? Are
you going to charge interest on the money I borrowed? n {1} leavening
agent. {2} wall stud of bamboo. pina- n grown, raised. Sankis nga
pinatúbù sa Kalipurníya, California-grown sunkist. -in-an, -in-an(→)
n outgrown outfit. tubùtúbù n growth on the skin. Mu rag áwum nang
íyang tubùtúbù piru nagkadakù, Your growth looks like a mole, but it is
getting bigger. halinub-un a having a tendency to grow fast even with
no care. Halinub-un ning sagbúta, pirmi lang hagbásan, This k.o. grass
grows fast. It has to be trimmed frequently.†

túbù_2 n k.o. edible white mushroom that grows on decaying trees. It
has a tougher stipe and pileus than the úhung.

tubud v {1} [A; b6] flow in a steady stream. Mitubud ang dugù sa dakung
samad, Blood flowed from the big wound. Sandayung ang tuburan sa ulan,
The rain flowed out of the gutter. {2} [B46] for liquid to leak out of
a container or boat. Nagtubud ang sakayan maung sígi kung gahinúbig,
The boat sprung a leak so I kept bailing out water. n {1} water spring.
{2} leak. pa-, pa-(←) sa úhung v [A] make people believe s.t. about
oneself which is impossible (lit. make a water flow from a mushroom).
Nagpatúbud na sad sa úhung ang hambugíru, The boaster is bragging
again. Ayaw pagpatúbud dinhi kay suhítu mi sa ímung kaláki, Don’t try
to talk big around here because we know what you are. tuburan
n {1} spring. {2} source of s.t. that gushes in abundance. Diyus nga
tuburan sa kalúuy, All-merciful (lit. giver of all mercy) God. tinubdan
n source, origin. Tinubdan sa sapà, The brook’s source. Tinubdan sa
balità, Source of news.

tubug n k.o. medium-sized tree having small, round, green, inedible
fruits in bunches growing directly from the trunk and branches: Ficus
sp.

tubuk v [A; b36] commit suicide. Mau nang pangpánga ang íyang
gitubukan, That is the cliff he jumped to his death from.

túbuk = tulbuk.

tubul n hard stools. v {1} [B] for stools to become hard. {2} [a4] have
constipation. Gitubul siya maung dúgayng nalibang, It took him long to
have his bowel movement because he is constipated.

tubung v [A; a] cut down abaca plants at the base before stripping off
the outer stalks.

tubus v {1} [A; a1] redeem, save from. Ang ímung bahandì dì makatubus
sa mahúgaw mung ngalan, Your wealth cannot redeem your filthy name.
Gitubus sila ni Muysis gíkan sa kaulipnan, They were saved from slavery
by Moses. {2} [A; a2b2] in games where several people play in turns,
take a player’s turn for him to keep him from losing his turn (e.g.
when a player is in a difficult position, for s.o. better to play for
him for that one move). {2a} take s.o. else’s place in his absence or
in the event of his inability. Akuy mutubus ug káun sa ímung báhin kay
dì ka man muadtu, I’ll eat your share because you aren’t going. Dì ku
makatubus sa ímung trabáhu kay mulakaw man ku, I can’t take your work
over for you because I’m going out. katubsánan n redemption. maN-r-(←)
n redeemer; Christ the Redeemer.

tub-us v [A; c1] cut down off the main part with a sharp cutting
instrument, esp. in one stroke. Ang hábul sundang dì makatub-us ug
ságing, A dull machete can’t cut a banana plant down.

túbuy v {1} [A; c16] hold, put upward and above the rest. Makatúbuy ku
ánang barbil, I can raise that barbell above my head. Daw tubúyun
(itúbuy) siya sa lángit kun pahiyuman siya ni Adilayda, It was as
though he was being raised to the heavens when Adelaida smiled at him.
{2} [C; c6] put up for election. Itúbuy nátù siya pagkakunsihal, We
will put him up as councilor.

túda a {1} fast, rapid. {2} hard, with much force. {3} doing to a high
degree or in excess. Túda siyang mukáun, He eats ravenously. Túda
siyang matúlug, He sleeps soundly. Túda siyang mangasábà, He scolds
very severely. v {1} [A2; b(1)] do s.t. fast, rapidly. Ayaw tudáhig
lakaw, Don’t walk too fast. {2} [A; b5] do s.t. with much force.
Tudáhag (tudáhig) lísù ang takub, Turn the cap with a good deal of
force. pa- v [A; b(1)] drive fast. Gipatudáhan sa kapitan ang dágan sa
yáti, The captain made the yacht go fast.

tud-an see tula.

túdas v {1} [AB; a] be totally lost or used up, cause s.t. to be so.
Akuy mutúdas ánang ímung baligyà basta barátu, I’ll take all of your
wares if you let me have them cheap. Ang ákung mga anak nga kiat mauy
nagtúdas sa ákung mga básung tarungtarung, The children played around
and broke all my decent glasses. Natúdas ang ákung singsing nga
mihiplus sa ákung tudlù, The ring slipped off my finger and is lost.
{2} [A2; a2] draw the card that makes the hand complete. Búnut na kay
tudásun ku na ni, Draw a card because I am going to go out now.
{3} [AB126; a1] murder (slang). Tudásun nátù nang hambugírung dakù, We
will kill that bigmouth. a completely used up, lost, killed. Hansákan
ku bítaw sa tris kantus, túdas lagi, I stabbed him with a three-bladed
knife. That was the end of him. n the card in a game of tudasay that
completes the last pair. paN- v [A2; c] for s.o. who is desperate, and
sure to die anyway to kill s.o. to die along with him. Manúdas na lang
ku kay wà na man kuy mahímù, I’ll just kill s.o. to die along with me
because I am at the end of my rope. tudastúdas n k.o. coin-tossing game
where three coins are tossed up and the bettors win only if it is three
heads or three tails. v [AC2; b6(1)] play tudastúdas. -an(→) n card
that allows one to go out in tudasay. walay -an(→) be no match for s.o.
Haníti kaáyu nà. Wà kay tudasan ug musúkul ka, He is very skillful. You
won’t have a chance if you play against him. -ay(→) n card game with
drawing and discarding in which the object is to compete to get three
pairs from a hand of five cards. v [A2; c] play tudasay.

tudkan = tugkan. see turuk.

tudling v [A; a] furrow the field for planting. Magtudling ta arun
katamnan ang uma, We will furrow the field so we can plant on it.
Tudlínga ang daruhan humag sudlay, Furrow the field after harrowing.
n {1} a furrow in the field. {2} row of plants. {3} column in a
periodical. — púlung n sentence.

tudlis v [A; a1] prick with a needle to get s.t. out. Akuy mutudlis sa
ímung tunuk sa tiil, I will prick your foot to get the thorn out.
Tudlísa ang hubag arun mugulà ang nánà, Prick the boil so the pus can
come out. n needle or the like to get s.t. out. — sa tabákù = paliyu.

tudlù v {1} [A; a1] point at, out. Kun mutudlù si Sír nímu sulayi lag
tubag, If the teacher calls on you just try to answer. Tudlúa ang
sinumbung, Point out the one who did it. {2} [A; c6] point, give
directions. Kinsay gatudlù nímung nía ku magpuyù? Who told you that I
live here? {3} teach. Nagtudlù siya sa pablik, She is teaching in the
public schools. {4} [A; c16] appoint. Ang prisidinti nagtudlù níya
pagkahuwis, The president appointed him judge. n {1} index finger.
{2} the fingers in general. hamuy sa — see hamuy. {3} [numeral] ka —
[so-and-so] many fingers wide. {4} — sa tiil toes. {5} — dalága, dátù
see dalága_2, dátù_2. tudlùtudlù n eatery where the food for sale is
put in a case on display. -in- n appointee. ka-an n appointment. mag-r-
n teacher.

tudluk = tusluk.

tudlun dátù = tudlù dátù. see dátù_2.

tudlus v {1} [A; c] hand s.t. to s.o. Tudlúsi ku diri ug lansang, Hand
me some nails up here. {2} [A3; c6] extend one’s hand to give a
handhold. Mitudlus siya sa íyang kamut nákù ug nanggúnit ku, He
extended his hand to me and I held on to it. {3} [A2; b6] give aid or
small things. Tudlúsan nátù ug diyútayng inasal ang átung mga silíngan,
Let us give a little roast pig to our neighbors.

tudtud v [A; ab2] hit on the fingers or toes. Tudtúrun ku nang ímung
tudlù ug mangáp ka, I will rap your fingers if you touch anything.
Hitudturan ákung kumagkù paglansang nákù, I hit my thumb while I was
driving a nail.

tuduk = turuk.

tudulukyíri a woman who is promiscuous. v [B126] be, become
promiscuous. Natudulukyíri nang bayhána human byái sa bána, That woman
became promiscuous after her husband left her.

tudu pudirúsu a All-Powerful. Ang Diyus tudu pudirúsu, God is
All-Powerful.

túdus_1 all, everyone, everybody. Bíi, Tay, Nay, Ingku Imuk, túdus,
Good evening Father, Mother, Uncle Imuk, and everybody. — lus Santus
n All Saints’ Day.

túdus_2 n in a game, to double the bet by placing the entire amount or
quantity won from the preceding game. v [A; c] bet all the preceding
game’s winnings.

tudútut n = turútut. see tarúrut.

tudyuk v [A; b] prick, pierce with s.t. large and pointed. Kinsay
nagtudyuk ug dinágum sa ákung pabúrut? Who pricked my balloon with a
pin? Lúya na tung ihúa kay natudyukan ku na tu sa sápang, That shark
must be weak by now because I have pierced it with my spear. n prick in
a piercing action with s.t. pointed.

*tuga pa- v [A] dare do s.t. in unreasonable disregard of one’s
capacity to do it. Magpatuga siyag minyù bísag way pangítà, He dares to
get married without a job. magpatugatuga = patuga.

túga_1 v [A; c] for God or nature to bestow, endow. Gitugáhan siyag
diyútay nga kaísug, He has been endowed with a little courage. Ang
kaálam itúga sa Diyus niadtung nagtáhud kaníya, God bestows wisdom on
whoever shows Him reverence. n s.t. esp. given, directly from God. Túga
sa lángit nang ímung anak, Your child is a gift from heaven. v [b6] be
given s.t. exclusively by a supernatural being. Si Hárì Artur gitugáhan
ug usa ka ispáda, King Arthur was given a sword by a supernatural
being. n s.t. presented exclusively to s.o. by a supernatural being.

túga_2 n cap and gown worn for graduation. v {1} [A; b6(1)] wear a cap
and gown. {2} [A2; a2] make a cap and gown.

tug-ab = dug-ab.

tugábang = kukug banug. see kuku.

tugábung n artificial chignon. Úsu niadtu ang tugábung, Chignons used
to be in vogue. v [A; c] wear, make into an artificial chignon.

tugahálà (from túga ni Bathálà) n {1} s.t. done or sent by divine will.
Usa ka dakung tugahálà nga nahibalik na ang kurúna sa úlu sa Birhin, It
was a great gift of the Lord that the crown was restored to the
Virgin’s head. {2} miracle. Usa na lang ka tugahálà ang makaluwas
kaníya gíkan sa silya iliktrika, Only a miracle can save him from the
electric chair.

tugáhuk n clitoris.

túgal v [A3N; b5] disturb, bother order or peace. Way mutúgal (manúgal)
ug wà kay útang, Nobody disturbs you if you don’t have any debts.
Gitúgal (gitugálan) ang baryu sa mga tulisan, Robbers disturbed the
peace of the village.

tugalbung = tigalbung.

tugalhab (from galhab) a {1} having a gaping tear or wound. {2} no
longer a virgin. Tugalhab na nang babayhána kay kadaghan na paangki,
That woman is no longer a virgin for she has had several illegitimate
children. v {1} [B1; b] get torn wide open. Nagkatugalhab ang gisì kay
wà dáyun sursíhi, The tear became a gaping hole because she didn’t darn
it at once. {2} [B126] lose one’s virginity.

túgan see túlug.

tug-an v [A; c] {1} reveal, report s.t. revealing. Mitug-an ang
sinumbung sa íyang saláud, The accused confessed his crime. Tug-áni ku
sa ímung sikrítu, Tell me your secret. Itug-an tikawng Tátay nga ímu
kung gisumbag, I’ll report you to Father that you hit me. {2} confess.
Ug dílì ka mutug-an, kastigúhun ka, If you don’t confess, I will beat
you.

tugas n molave, k.o. wood producing extremely hard timber: Vitex
parviflora. v [a12] make s.t. out of molave. Tugasun nátù ang sáwug
arun lig-un, Let us make the flooring out of molave so it will be
durable.

tugastugas n k.o. small marine crab, poisonous to eat.

tugasub, tugásub v [A2S; b6] fall into the water with a deep sound.
Mitugasub ang batu nga gilábay sa dágat, The stone was thrown into the
water and fell with a loud splash. n deep sound, like one produced by a
heavy object falling into water.

tugáuk = tuktugáuk.

tugaw a disturbed from a peaceful state. Tugaw na ang mga bábuy sa
pangayam maung namalhin, The hunting has disturbed the wild pigs so
they have gone elsewhere. walay — there’s nothing to disturb. Maáyu
dinhi isturyáhan kay way tugaw, This is a good place to talk because
there is nothing to disturb us. v [A; a12] disturb one’s peace. Manira
ku arun way makatugaw sa ákung pagtuun, I will lock myself in the room
so no one disturbs my study. Ayawg tugawa ang natúlug, Don’t disturb
the man sleeping.

tugbábaw = tigbábaw. pa- = patigbábaw. see babaw.

tugbang v {1} [A2; c] give s.t. as counterpart; match. Ug muámut ka ug
kanding sa kumbira mutugbang ku ug ámut ug bábuy, If you give a goat
for the feast, I will give a pig to match it. {2} [C; b6] sit across or
in front of each other. Nagkatugbang mi ug lingkud sa dyip, We happened
to sit across from each other in the jeep. {3} in activities where
people are paired off: be s.o.’s opposite. Dílì ku makigtugbang nímu sa
kuntis kay maáyu ka, I don’t want to be matched against you in the
contest because you’re good. n {1} thing given as counterpart.
{2} one’s opposite in a contest. {3} s.t. which happens which makes up
for s.t. else. Kining átung mga pag-antus run tugbang sa átung kalípay
niadtu, Our sufferings now are exact payment of our happiness formerly.
{4} s.t. commensurate in degree or weight. Ang tugbang sílut sa
pagpatay mau ang pagbítay, Hanging is the punishment appropriate for
murder. {5} = ka-. — púlung antonym. Ang tugbang púlung sa ‘layù’,
‘duul’, The antonym of ‘far’ is ‘near’. ka- n analogous, counterpart.
Ang inbiay tugbang sa ipbiay sa istíts, The NBI is the counterpart of
the FBI in the States.

tugbaw a lofty, high up. Tugbaw kaáyung miuntul ang búla, The ball
bounces high. Hilabihang katugbaw sa garbu! What a great pride!
v {1} [B246; a3] rise to a considerable height. Mitugbaw ang tíngug ni
Níning sa kasukù, Nening’s voice rose in anger. Natugbaw sa íyang
hunàhúnà ang mga hudlat ni Maks, Max’s threats came to his thoughts.
{2} [c1] put s.t. high up or way up. Itugbaw (tugbáwa) pagdala nang
isdà arun dílì maabut sa irù, Lift the fish you are carrying high so
the dogs can’t reach it. ma-un a lofty (literary). Matugbáwung damgu,
Lofty dreams. {3} [A12C1; a2] match in height, popularity, or ability.
Walay makatugbaw sa kataas ni Pidru, No one is as tall as Pedro.
Tugbáwun ku ang kaálam níya sa makina, I’ll try to learn as much about
machine as he knows.

tugbù (from túbù) n new sprouts of leaves. Utána ang tugbù sa alugbáti,
Make a soup of the alugbáti sprouts. v [B46] for leaves to sprout.
Mitugbù (nanugbù) nag mga dáhun sa kamunggay nga gipul-úngan, The
leaves of the pruned malunggay are now sprouting.

tugbung v [A; a2c] go, bring to the town or coastal area from the
mountains or country. Mitugbung siya kay mipalit ug ginamus, He went
down to the town to buy fish paste. Kinsay nagtugbung sa utanun? Who
brought the vegetables to town?

tugdà n stumps of cornstalks left in the field after cutting off the
stalks.

tugdan n {1} a pole or stem-like handle. Ang tugdan sa latigu sa
kabáyù, The handle for the horsewhip. Tugdan sa timbà, A bamboo pole to
which the bucket for drawing water is attached. {2} cornstalk.

tugdang v {1} [AB23(1); c1] sink to the bottom of water, cause s.t. to
do so. Mitugdang na ang lawug, ug tin-aw na ang túbig, The mud in the
water has settled, and it is clear now. Natugdang na ang bapur digíra,
The battleship has sunk. Nakatugdang na ka sa taliwálà ánang línaw?
Have you gone to the bottom in the middle of that lake? {2} [A2; b6]
land hard after being projected or dropped. Didtu siya mutugdang sa
bunbun pagluksu níya, He landed on the sand when he jumped.

tugduk v [B1256; ab2] for s.t. pointed to pierce or thrust into, not
necessarily sticking. Natugduk ang tumuy sa bangkaw sa bukubuku sa
túru, The end of the spear pierced the back of the bull. Hingtugdukan
ang ákung tiil sa tumuy sa kutsilyu, The knife hit my foot when it
fell.

tugdun v [A; c] alight, set down from the air. Mitugdun ang buyug sa
búwak, The bee alighted on the flower. Gipálid siya sa alimpús. Diin
siya itugdun? The whirlwind carried her away. Where was she set down?
-anan n place where s.t. lands. Tugdunánan sa ayruplánu, Airplane
landing field.

tughang v [A; a1] break and pulverize hardened soil for planting. Lisud
pagtughang sa yútà kay nabantuk na kaáyu, It is difficult to break up
the soil because it has gotten very packed down. a no longer a virgin.

tughaw a lukewarm. v [AB2; a] be, become lukewarm, cause liquids to do
so. Magtughaw kug túbig para ikalígù, I’ll heat some water for bathing.

tughù = dughù_1, n2.

tughuk_1 v [A23; b(1)] appear suddenly, unexpectedly. Walà ku damha nga
muanhi siya, mitughuk lag abut, I never expected him to come. He just
arrived suddenly. Trabáhu kay tughúkan unyà tag dúaw sa átung agálun,
Keep working. Our boss might come without notice.

tughuk_2 n formal asking of a girl’s hand by the groom’s parents,
always accompanied with food brought by the groom’s delegation. v [A2;
b5] formally ask for a girl’s hand. Mutughuk gihápun ta bísag burus na
ang babáyi? Do we still have to make a formal proposal when the girl is
already pregnant?

tughung v [A; a] cook leftover cooked staple which stuck to the pot by
adding water and usually boiling it with sugar. Tughúnga nang dukut,
Recook the leftover rice stuck to the pot. -in- n food prepared by the
process of tughung.

tughuy = tarugsuy.

tugkad v {1} [A; a12] touch the bottom standing in water. Makatugkad ka
ba dihà? Can you stand there? {2} [B456] for the feet or s.t. dangling
to reach the ground. Dílì makatugkad ang íyang tiil sa salug ug kanang
siyáhay lingkúran, His feet don’t touch the ground if he sits in that
chair. Nagtikwangtikwang ang lamísa kay wà magtugkad ang usa ka tiil,
The table is jiggling because one of the legs isn’t touching the
ground. {3} [A; a12] fathom, comprehend s.t. mysterious. Way makatugkad
sa ákung hunàhúnà, Nobody can read my mind. Lisud tugkárun ang
sumbíngay sa páras, It is hard to understand the meaning of the Parable
of the Vine. tugkaran n {1} yard of a house. {2} foot of a hill.
tulugkárun n s.t. that takes deep understanding.

tugkalan = tugkaran, 1. see tugkad.

tugkay n stalk of a leaf or flower.

tugmadan = tugkaran, 1. see tugkad.

tugnà v [A; c] dip, dunk into liquid. Dì pa ku malígù, apan mutugnà
lang úsà ku sa túbig, I won’t swim yet, I’ll just immerse myself
quickly. Ang balanghuy laming itugnà sa mantíkà, Cassava tastes good if
you dip it into pork fat.

tugnaw a cold to the touch, feel. Tugnaw kaáyu sa Bagyu, It’s very cold
in Baguio. v {1} [B] become cold weather. Mutugnaw (matugnaw) ang
panahun inigka Disimbri, The weather gets cold in December. {2} [a4]
feel cold. Gamítag hítir kun tugnawun ka, Use the heater if you feel
cold. {3} [b8] be exposed to the cold. Gisip-un siya kay hitugnawan, He
caught cold because he was exposed to the cold. n cold. Dì kung
kaagwanta sa tugnaw, I can’t take the cold. ka- n state of being cold.
Nagkuray siya sa katugnaw, She is shivering with cold. paN- n chills.
Ang panugnaw mubálus sa hilánat, Chills come right after fever. v [a4]
get the chills. ting- n cold season.

tugnub v [A; c] dip s.t. or oneself into a liquid. May disinpiktanti
ang gitugnúban sa mga hiraminta sa duktur, The liquid the doctor dipped
his instruments into has disinfectant. Itugnub ang plúma sa tintiruhan,
Stick the pen into the inkwell.

tugnus n k.o. small anchovy with a silver stripe, which comes
seasonally in great abundance, most commonly eaten preserved in salt.
ting- n season for tugnus fish.

tugpa v {1} [B346; b6] for s.t. that flies to land. Mitugpa ang
salampáti sa atup, The dove alighted on the roof. Nagtugpa na ang
ayruplánu, The airplane has landed. {2} [A2; b6] jump from a high
place. Ang tulay nga íyang gitugpáhan, The bridge he jumped off from.
tugpahánan n {1} place where airplanes land: airport or runway.
{2} place where persons jump off, diving board.

tugpù_1 v [A; c6] {1} toss s.t. up in the air. Itugpù ang búla kay akuy
mubumba, Toss the volleyball and I will spike it. {2} put up s.o. as
candidate. Siyay átung itugpù pagkamayur, We will put him up as
candidate for mayor. n {1} a coin-tossing game with three coins where
one wins when all heads or all tails appear. {2} one’s turn to toss the
coin.

tugpù_2 v [A; a1] tease unmarried people by pairing them off. Ug akuy
mutugpù, magkadáyun giyud pagkaminyù, If I tease people by pairing them
off in marriage, they end up getting married.

tugsad v [A2; b6] hit, reach the ground from an elevated position.
Milayat siya ug didtu mutugsad sa píkas tampi, He jumped and landed on
the opposite bank. Gibukhárag panaptun ang gitugsáran sa rayna gíkan sa
hagdanan, A cloth was laid over the area the queen stepped on when she
came down from the stairs.

tugsaw v [A; a3b] plunge into water, dunk s.t. straight into a liquid.
Nagtugsaw ang íyang tiil sa dágat samtang nagdagan ang pambut, His feet
were immersed in the water while the boat was moving. Natugsaw siya sa
kanal, He fell into a ditch.

tugsuk v {1} [A; ab2] strike s.t. pointed into s.t. Nagtugsuk siyag
káhuy silbing timáan, He planted a stake as a marker. Tugsukun níya ang
linung-ag ságing sa tinidur, He will stick a fork into the boiled
banana. {2} [A; b6(1)] stick one’s finger into liquid and immediately
remove it. Ang binditahan nga ákung gitugsúkan sa ákung tudlù, The font
of the holy water into which I dipped my finger. n skewer, s.t. to
stick into s.t. Ambi ra ang tugsuk kay átung isuway sa amúti, Let me
have a stick so I can see if the sweet potatoes are done.

tugsuy v [B46; b6] for s.t. to appear as an elongated shape. Unsa nang
mitugsuy sa ímung bursa, ságing? What is that thing protruding in your
pocket, a banana? Nagtugsuy lang nang níwang mu rag kawáyan, That
skinny person looks tall and thin like a bamboo pole. a thin and
elongated. Tugsuy ug simud, Long-snouted.

tugtug v [A; a2] play a piece of music, an instrument. Mitugtug ang
urkistra, The orchestra played a piece. Tugtúga ang ‘Lawra’, Play
‘Laura’. n music piece being played. maN-r- n s.o. that provides the
music.

tugub a full, having s.t. in abundance. Tugub sa sustansiya ang gátas,
Milk is full of nutrients. Tugub na ang barku sa pasahíru, The boat is
full of passengers. Tugub nga áni, Abundant harvest. v [B2; a2] become,
make full, rich. Natugub siya sa kalípay, She was filled with joy.

tug-ud n stem of large, grassy plants or trunks of palm trees. — sa
buli n unopened buri palm frond together with its stem.

túgun v [A; a1c6] leave or send s.o. with instructions to do s.t. Tugna
siya pagpalit ug asin inigtugbung níya, Give him the message to buy
some salt when he goes to town. Unsay ímung itúgun inig-adtu nákù sa
Manílà? What do you want me to do for you when I go to Manila?
n {1} word of instruction to do or get s.t. {2} final message of a
dying man. Bag-ung — New Testament. Dáang — Old Testament. paN-
v {1} [A2S; b6] ask s.o. to get and bring s.t. back. Nagpanugun tus
Búbuy sa íyang duláan, Boboy keeps asking you to bring him a toy.
{2} [A2; c] give final instructions, will at deathbed. Nanúgun na ang
himatyun, The dying man is giving his final instructions.

túgut v {1} [A; b] pay out line. Tugúti ang lambu hangtud malúya ang
isdà, Pay out the line until the fish gets weak. {2} [A; c] permit,
allow. Mulangyaw untà ku kun mutúgut ka, I would like to go abroad if
you permit me. Dílì itúgut ang paghulam íning librúha, No one is
permitted to borrow this book. {3} [A; c6] sell s.t. at a price lower
than that quoted. Ákù ning palitun ug itúgut nímug písus, I’ll buy it
if you give it to me for one peso. (→) n line which one pays out, esp.
a kite string.

tug-ut v [A; a12] tie hemp fibers end to end to form a long strand for
weaving. Magtug-ut ka ug bayinti ka bituul pára ihulug, Tie up twenty
skeins of hemp to use as warp threads.

tugway v {1} [A; b] lengthen a tether. Tas-ig tugway ang kábaw, Give
the carabao more rope. Tugwáyi ang kanding arun makapanabsab, Give the
goat more rope so it can graze. {2} [AN; c] pasture an animal by
lengthening or untying the tether. Manugway kug kábaw mahápun, I
pasture the carabao each afternoon. n {1} rope used to tether animals.
{2} length of tether allowed. -anan n place where animals are tethered.
maN-r- n one who pastures animals with a tether.

tugyan v [A; c] entrust, put into s.o.’s power or disposal. Ang hárì
gustu nang mutugyan sa trúnu ngadtu sa íyang anak, The king wants to
abdicate the throne in favor of his son. Ayawg itugyan níya ang ímung
kaugalíngun antis mu makasal, Don’t surrender yourself to him until you
are married. -in-an n one to whom s.t. has been turned over. — sa
baláud policeman. — sa lungsud public servant, specifically,
congressman.

túhab v {1} [A; a] peck a piece of s.t. Dílì makatúhab ang langgam sa
búnga nga giputus, The bird could not peck at the fruit that was
wrapped. {2} [A; b6] cut a large opening or swath. Kinsay maistráhang
nagtúhab sa úlus ákung anak? Which teacher was it that cut a wide swath
into my son’s hair? Bistídu nga mu rag sáku nga gituhában pára agiánas
buktun, A dress like a sack with pieces snipped off for armholes.
{3} [A23; a12] affect s.t. as though diminishing it. Sígas plaslayit
nga mitúhab sa kangitngit, A flashlight beam that pierced the darkness.
n {1} large hole left, large portion removed. {2} large opening in a
dress. (→) n a woman who is no longer a virgin (humorous). -in-an
n place s.t. was pecked off. Makáun pa ning kapayása. Abisa lang nang
tinuhában, You can still eat the papaya. Just cut out the holes.
-in-an(→) n fruits that have peck marks.

tuhak v [A; ab] {1} peck at. Kwaknit ang nagtuhak sa mga prútas, Bats
pecked at the fruits. Gituhak sa manuk ang íyang mata, The chicken
pecked at his eyes. {2} strike with a pecking-like motion. Mituhak ang
dakung sawa, The big snake struck. n feed of chickens, fowls or birds.
kakha — see kakha. -l-an(→) n dish for feeding chickens.

tuhaw v [B23(1)6] {1} spring forth unexpectedly, appear suddenly, pop
up. Mituhaw lang pagkalit ang anak hung nawálà, My lost son suddenly
appeared in our house. Mituhaw sa íyang hunàhúnà ang usa ka maanindut
nga láraw, A beautiful plan popped into his mind. {2} do s.t. suddenly
and without cause. Nabúang kang mituhaw ka man lag kasukù, Have you
gone crazy, flaring up like that? a done or appearing suddenly and
unexpectedly.

tuhay v [B2; c1] {1} for the mind to be at peace. Matuhay (mutuhay) pag
ákung hunàhúnà ug manláyas mu, I’ll have peace of mind only if you all
get out of here. {2} do or accomplish s.t. to the finish without any
hitch or disturbance. Dì matuhay (mutuhay) ang ákung trabáhu ug samúkun
ku, My work won’t go smoothly if I am disturbed.

tuhi sound imitating spitting to show contempt. Tuhi! Hitsúra lang,
Pff, the nerve of him. v [b6] say tuhi to s.o.

tuhib, túhib v [A; b5] {1} peck at s.t., esp. food. Mga langgam nga
nagtuhib sa hinug kapáyas, The birds pecking at the ripe papaya.
{2} nibble, bore a hole in s.t. Ang ilagà mauy mitúhib sa kísu, A mouse
nibbled at the cheese. (→) n bill, beak. -in-an n place pecked at, hole
nibbled into s.t.

tuhik, túhik v [A; ab] peck with a sharp, pointed beak to eat or
inflect a wound. Nagtuhik ang manuk sa wati, The chicken is pecking at
an earthworm. Ilábay ang gituhikan nga prútas, Throw away the fruits
that have holes pecked in them. maN- n k.o. fish that is particularly
vicious.

tuhil v [A; a1] poke or tap s.t. small or a tiny portion of s.t. so as
to move it. Ayaw punáyig tuhil ang itlug sa irù kay mapaakan ka, Don’t
keep poking the dog’s testicles. He might bite you. Mataktak ang búwak
bísag ígù lang tuhilun, The flowers will fall off even if you just
touch them lightly. n s.t. used to poke.

tuhu, tuhù particle following the first word of the predicate, used in
negating s.o.’s statement and stressing the contrary. Namutbut siya.
Mutan-aw tuhù nà siyag sini, She is lying. She is so going to the
movies. Dílì tuhù nà siya indyinir, No, he’s not. He is not an
engineer.

tuhud = tulud, v.

túhud n knee. v {1} [a12] hit in the knee. Gitúhud siyag búnal maung
napaluhud, He was whipped on his knees and it made him fall to his
knees. {2} [B2456] reach nearly as high as the knees. Mutúhud na ang
túbig sa dálan, The water in the street is nearly up to the knees. (→)
v {1} = túhud, v1. {2} [A2; a1] ask for a girl’s hand from her parents,
not necessarily in a formal way with ceremony and bargaining. Mituhud
na siya kay disidídu giyung mangasáwa, He asked the girl’s parents for
her hand because he really is determined to marry her. taga-(→) up to
the knees.†

túhug v {1} [A; ac] pierce through with a string, stake, or s.t. else,
hang s.t. on s.t. long. Magtúhug kug pirlas arun ímung ikwintas, I’ll
string some pearls for you to wear as necklace. Natúhug ang isdà sa
panà, The fish got impaled on the spear. Tuhúga sa uway ang kubit,
String the catch by passing a rattan strip through it. Tuhúgi rag hílu
nang dágum, Thread that needle. Siyay nagpas-an sa bugsay diin itúhug
ang bukag, He carried the paddle over his shoulder and hung the basket
over it. — sa ilung lead around by the nose. Matúhug ka ba lang níya sa
ilung? Can she lead you about by the nose? {2} [A123S] follow or put in
memory the thread of a story, idea, lecture. Way nakatuhug sa isturya
níyang naglikùlíkù, Nobody could follow his incoherent story.
{2a} understand, comprehend. Bísag bungul siya, makatuhug siya sa ímung
isulti nga magtan-aw lang sa ímung ngábil, Even if he is deaf, he can
understand what you are saying by just reading your lips. (→)
n {1} string or s.t. used to string or pierce through s.t. Nabugtù ang
tuhug sa dunggan sa bábuy, The string that was fastened through the
pig’s ears broke. {2} hole punched into the nose or ears. {3} quantity
contained on a string of s.t. Tagpíla ang tuhug sa isdà? How much is a
string of fish? tuhugtúhug n children’s game, taking a coconut midrib
and fishing out in turns rubber bands buried in the sand. -an(→) =
tuhugtúhug.

tuhuktuhuk v [B456; b6] have tiny marks (like pin marks) all over.
Tawumtum nang nagtuhuktuhuk sa panaptun, That is mildew that has made
tiny spots on the cloth. Gituhuktuhukan ang íyang náwung sa úwat sa
bugas, His face is pockmarked by pimple scars. n tiny marks all over
s.t.

tuhup v [A2; b5] {1} permeate. Mituhup ang katugnaw sa sinínà, The cold
seeped through the dress. {2} for s.t. wet to seep through, permeate.
Gituphan sa kabasà ang yútà, Moisture permeated the earth. {3} be
affected with a feeling or emotion. Tuphun kug kahingáwa matag byáhi
níya, I get anxious whenever he goes on a trip. ma-un(←) a penetrating.

túhus = túlus.

tuhuy v {1} [A2] get out of s.w. suddenly and with haste. Dì pa gánì
mahuman kug súgù, mutuhuy dáyug lakaw, I can’t even finish giving my
orders before he rushes up to get going. {2} [B; b3cP] be sticking out
straight. Mituhuy ang túbig sa hús, The water from the hose is spurting
out far. Nagtuhuy ang tintin sa báta. Básig kaihiun, The child has an
erection. He probably has to urinate. Ayawg ituhuy (ipatuhuy) nang
ímung buhuk dapit sa agtang. Mu ra kag tin-idyir, Don’t let your hair
stick out over your forehead. You look like a teen-ager. a {1} carrying
oneself in a straight but artless way. {2} sticking out.

túig n year. v [B56; b4] be almost, last for a year. Mutúig nákung
pinaábut nímu, I waited for you for almost a year. Nagtúig ang ámung
pagbúngul, It’s been one year now that we haven’t been on speaking
terms. Dì na matuígan ang ímung kinabúhì, Your life won’t last for
another year. tuigtúig a every year; yearly. v [B; c16] be, become
yearly, do s.t. on a yearly basis. -in-(→) annual. Tinuig nga tígum,
Annual meeting. ka-an n {1} years. Nanglábay ang daghang katuígan, Many
years passed. {2} Easter obligation, the obligation of every Roman
Catholic to go to confession and Holy Communion once a year on a
definite period specified by the church—that is, in the period between
Easter Sunday and November 2, All Souls’ Day. paN-(→) n {1} first
planting season in the calendar year (during June and July); crops
planted during this season. Aníhun sa Disyimbri ang humay sa panuig,
The first crop of rice is harvested in December. {2} extraordinarily
big. Panuig man pud nang librúha, dílì man madaug ug bátà, That sure is
a big book. A child couldn’t lift it. paN-un n age. may — {1} be old
enough to do s.t. May panuígun na si Lítang muiskuyla, Lita is old
enough now to go to school. {2} be no longer young. May panuígun na
siya pagkaminyù, She was well along in years when she got married.
paN-un(→) v [A13] be of [such-and-such] an age. Nagpanuigun siyag
diyis, He is ten years old.

tuis v [A; a1] {1} twist. Siyay nagtuis sa ákung buktun, He twisted my
arm. {2} distort a fact or truth. Way mutuu nímu kay maáyu kang mutuis
sa tinúud, Nobody believes you because of the way you distort the
truth. — sa pálad, kapaláran n turn of fate. Usa ka tuis sa kapaláran
nga ang kanhi banyágà karun nagpakilúuy na, It is a turn of fate that
the ruthless scoundrel now has to beg for mercy.

tuk n {1} word used in writing to indicate a knocking sound. {2} in
bowling, a hit scored through the center, opening up a clear path.
v [B26] for a hit to turn out to be of this sort.

túk v [A; c] stick a stick into s.t. to serve as a marker. n {1} marker
stuck into s.t. Gibutangan nákug túk ang gilubngan sa bahandì, I stuck
a stick to mark the spot where I buried the treasure. {2} clitoris
(slang).

tukà_1 v {1} [A; a1] strangle with the hands. Tuk-un ta kag musinggit
ka, I’ll choke you if you scream. {2} [A123P; b4(1)] choke on s.t.
ingested. Makatukà nang tag-as nga bíhun, You can choke on long
noodles. Hituk-an ku pag-inum nákù sa wiski, I choked when I drank the
whiskey. {2a} get jammed or stuck into s.t. as if choking on it. Papil
ang nakatukà (nakapatukà) sa kasilyas, Paper clogged the toilet up. Ug
matuk-an ang makina gáhì na tuyúkun, If a sewing machine gets stuck it
is hard to turn.

tukà_2 v [A; a12] peck at to eat. Gustung mutukà ug tibuuk mais ang
manuk, Chickens like to peck at whole kernels. Dúna pa bay tukaun ang
sunuy? Are there any grains left for the rooster to peck at?
n {1} beak, bill. {2} feed for fowls or birds. kakha — see kakha. pa-
v [A; ac] feed fowls.

túkab v [A; b5] open by pushing s.t. aside, lifting a cover. Kinsay
nagtúkab sa kúlun? Who took the cover off the pot? Tukába ug dakù ang
bintánà kay galhà, Open the windows wide because it is warm. n distance
s.t. opens.

tuk-ab = dug-ab.

tukabtukab v [A3P; c1] gasp for breath, pant. Nagtukabtukab ang íyang
gininhawaan sa pagdinágan, He panted for breath after running so much.

tukad v [A; a2c] go, bring up to the mountain, or country from town.
Mutukad ku karung tingsanggì, I’ll go to the country this coming
harvest. Butung ray ákung tukarun, I’m going to the country just to get
young coconuts. Itukad ring abúnu, Bring this fertilizer to the
country.

tukadur n {1} dresser, a chest of drawers with a large mirror and a
flat space for cosmetics. {2} a plain mirror of considerable size.
v [b] look at oneself in a mirror. Tukaduri ra nang nawung mug tan-áwag
angayan ka ba, Look at yourself in the mirror and see if you look nice.
paN- v [A2] look at oneself in a mirror.

tukag, túkag v {1} [AB2S6; cP] place s.t. long in a position vertical
or crosswise relative to s.t. else; cause it to be so. Ayúhag butang
ang gabas kay mutúkag sa kahun, Lay the saw down carefully crosswise in
the toolbox. Nagtukag ang bukug sa íyang tunlan, A bone is lodged
cross-ways in his throat. Itúkag (ipatúkag) ang lipak sa takup arun
dílì mutak-up, Prop the shutter open with a stick of bamboo. {2} [B2S6]
for s.t. slender to be jutting out. Ang mga tiil sa dakung bátà mutukag
kun kugúsun, The legs of a big child dangle if he is carried. (→)
n {1} s.t. placed athwart s.o. {2} sticking out. Tukag siyag dawunggan,
He has ears that stick out.

tukal n gap formed as a result of shrinkage between two juxtaposed
materials, esp. wood. v [B3(1)] form a gap. Mitukal (natukal) ang mga
sawug paglúbag, Cracks developed between the floor boards when they
shrunk. tukaltukal v [B; b6] hang loosely from a loose attachment.
Nagtukaltukal ang bungbung sa báy, One side of the walling of the house
is hanging loosely.

tukámud v [B126; b8] fall face first to the ground. Nasapiti siya ug
natukámud, He tripped and fell face first to the ground.

tukang = tuklang.

tukar v {1} [A; a2] play a musical instrument, piece. Hanas siyang
mutukar sa marimba, He plays the marimba well. Tanggu tukara, Play a
tango. {1a} [A; b(1)] for a musical group to perform. Dúna silay
tukaran nga parti karung gabíi, They will perform at a party tonight.
{2} [A2] have an attack of a recurring illness or undesirable behavior.
Mutukar ang riyuma kun ting-ulan, Rheumatism flares up on rainy days.
n {1} music played. Magsáyaw ta inigsúgud sa tukar, Let’s dance when
the music starts. {2} performance by a musical group. pa- v [A; ac]
turn on a phonograph, radio for music. Patukara ang púnu, Turn on the
phonograph. Bítuls ang ipatukar, Play a Beatles record.

tukarul = tingkarul, 4.

tukas = tuklas.

tukaw_1 v [A; b(1)] stay awake at night doing s.t., keep vigil.
Magtukaw ku karung gabíi paghuman sa tirm pípar, I’ll be awake all
night finishing my paper. n wake. Sa tukaw nagdala silag baráha arun
dílì sila tulgun, They brought a deck of cards to the wake so they
wouldn’t feel sleepy.

tukaw_2 v [A; b(1)] tower over. Mga pipila ka túig mutukaw na siya
nákù, In a few years he will be towering over me. Usa ka lubing láyug
ang nagtukaw sa ílang payag, A tall coconut tree is towering over their
hut.

tukaw_3 n a unit of length reckoned from the tip of the thumb to the
tip of the index finger extended. v [A; a1] measure s.t. in tukaws.

tukáya = tukáyu (female).

tukáyu n one who has the same name as s.o. else. Tukáyu siya nákù kay
Dyun usab íyang ngán, He’s my namesake because his name is John too.
v [AC2; ac3] call s.o. or each other tukáyu. (→) n term of address to
one’s tukáyu.

tukbil v {1} [A; ab2] touch slightly. Wà siyay gána ug ígù lang
mitukbil sa kan-un, She had no appetite and barely touched the food.
Mutak-up dáyun ang hibìhibì ug tukbílun, The touch-me-not plant closes
as soon as you touch it. {2} [A; a12] touch the emotions or on s.t.
that provokes feelings. Ikaw pay nakatukbil sa ákung dughan, You were
the first to have touched my heart. {3} [A; a12] mention s.t. in
passing. Sa íyang diskursu mitukbil siya sa pulitika, In his speech he
mentioned politics in passing. -l-un, -l-un(→) a delicate, engendering
arguments or hard feelings. Kanang mga paagíha tulukbilun (tulukbílun)
kaáyu, That procedure is very much open to argument. — ug buut
short-tempered.

tukbù v [A; a1] {1} grasp by encircling the fingers around. Nagtukbù
siyag ságing, He is grasping a banana. Tukbúa ang buktun sa bátà kun
matukbù ba, Put your fingers around the child’s arm if they can go all
the way around it. {2} bundle long things together to form a bunch big
enough to be clasped in one or both hands. n bundle of s.t. that can be
clasped in one or both hands.

tukbuy = talukbuy_1.

tukdab v [AN; a] cut s.t. down at the base with one stroke. Kining
dapíta ang ákung gitukdaban sa mga tuud sa mga gagmayng káhuy, This is
the place where I cut the stumps of the small tree down.

tukdug v [BN46] for s.t. to stand out straight and bare. Mitukdug
(nanukdug) ang mga mais human hugpái sa dúlun, The corn plants stood
straight and bare after a swarm of locusts settled on them. n ribs of
umbrella.

tukgaw = lukgaw.

tukhi, tukhì n toothpick. v [a12] make into toothpick. Maáyung tukhíun
ang tukug, Coconut midribs make good toothpicks. paN- v [A2; c6] pick
one’s teeth.

tukì v [A; a12] {1} investigate, examine. Ang kumiti mauy mutukì sa
anumalíya, The committee will investigate the anomaly. Madiskubrihan
ang tíkas kun tukiun ang libru, They will discover the embezzlement if
the books are examined. {2} ask, interrogate. Gitukì siya apan wà
mutug-an, He was questioned but he didn’t tell. {3} discuss with the
idea of analyzing, explaining. Unsay tukiun sa míting? What is going to
be discussed in the meeting? ma-un(←) a characterized with persistent,
methodical, and detailed application of a procedure. Kining
instruksiyun sa libru masabtan sa matukíung pagbása, The instructions
in the book can be understood only if you read it with care and
analysis.

túkib a detailed, complete, and well-described. Túkib kaáyu ang íyang
isturya sa aksidinti, His account of the accident is complete to the
minutest detail. v [A; a1] delve into s.t. so as to have a thorough
knowledge of it. Buut kung tukíbun ang tanghágà sa íyang kinabúhì, I
want to delve into the riddle of his life. Dì matúkib ang kaguul sa
namatyan, The grief of the bereaved one cannot be described. -l-un
a that which hides a mystery, riddle. Tulukíbun ang pahiyum sa
katingaláhang istranyu, The mysterious stranger has a sphinx-like
smile.

tukig a stiff. v [B; b6] be, become stiff. Mitukig ang kasáhus nga
gibulad, The jerked meat is stiff. Ang ispísu nga amirul mauy nakatukig
(nakapatukig) sa muskitíru, The thick starch made the mosquito net
stiff. Nagkatukig ang ákung líug, My neck is getting stiff.

tukíkà = tikúkà.

tukikì, tukìkì v [A; b3] laugh with a partly suppressed high-pitched
laughter. Mitukikì siya sa ákung tistis, He snickered at my joke. Unsay
inyung gitukìkían? What are you snickering about?

túkis n talkies, talking movies. Dì pa túkis ang sini sa panahun ni
Púpuy, There weren’t any talkies in Grandpa’s day.

tuklang v [A; b5] {1} put a piece of wood s.w. to inhibit motion,
either by propping s.t. under it and keeping it from falling or by
laying it in the way and stopping it from proceeding. Tuklángun
(tuklángan) ang takup sa dúlung arun dílì musira, Prop up the hood so
it won’t slam shut. Ituklang nis bintánà arun dílì matúkab, Wedge the
window shut with this so it can’t come open. {1a} prop s.t. up. Taas
nga káhuy ang ituklang sa hayhayan arun dì masagyad ang hinayhay, Use a
long bamboo pole to hold the clothesline to keep the wash from touching
the ground. {2} [AN3; b6] put up the hands to keep s.o. at arms’
distance, as if bracing oneself. Nanuklang siya kay gipiit siya sa
ílang pagbayli, She kept her hand up because her partner danced too
close to her. paN- v [A1] brace oneself or keep s.o. away from one’s
body. Kun wà pa siya makapanuklang mahaplà untà siya, Had she not
braced herself she would have fallen flat. n stick used to prevent
motion.

tuklas v [AB; a1] open a shutter, curtain or s.t. that covers, be
opened. Natukas ang atup pagbagyu, The roof was blown off in the storm.
Natukas ang íyang sayal paghángin, Her skirt was lifted up by the wind.
Inánayng nagkatukas ang tilun, The curtain slowly opens. a be open. May
nangáwat kay tukas nag paradur, There has been a robbery because the
cabinet is open.

tuklì v [A; a12] turn a page. Tuklía ang mga dáhun ug hínay arun dílì
mu hinglaktawan ang litrátu, Turn the pages slowly so you will not miss
the picture.

tukling = tuklid.

tuklid v [A; c6] give s.o. a sudden push. Kinsay nagtuklid nímung
nahayang ka man? Why did you fall? Who pushed you? Wà ka ituklid,
hibanggaan ka lang, Nobody pushed you. S.o. just accidentally bumped
into you.

tuklù v {1} [A; a2] steal by catching s.t. at the neck, esp. chicken.
Gituklù ang manuk sa nangharána, The chicken was swiped by the
serenaders. Gituklù sa naglágut nga bána ang líug sa asáwa, The husband
was so angry he grabbed his wife’s neck and squeezed it. {2} [A2; a1]
dart or strike instantly with the head. Pagbantay kay ang bitin mutuklù
lag kalit, Watch out for a snake might just strike out suddenly. Ang
manuk nakatuklù ug duha ka bakì, The chicken has caught two frogs
pecking at them.

tuklud = tuklid.

tuklung a for rice or corn to have overripe grains. Tukung na kaáyu ang
humay nga wà maáni dáyun, The rice in the fields is bent over now
because it was not harvested right away. v [B12; b6] get grains that
are overripe.

tuklus v {1} [A; c] hand s.t. to s.o. Ituklus ang suwat, Hand over the
letter. {2} [b5] = paN-. paN- [A; b] {1} go to a banquet with the
primary purpose of eating. Manuklus ta sa íla kay dakù silag híkay,
Let’s go to their house for a free meal, because they have prepared
quite extensively. {2} attend any k.o. entertainment without
invitation. Manuklus tag bayli sa ílang iskuyláhan, Let’s go attend the
dance in their school.

tukmà a {1} exact, exactly. Náa sa libru ang tukmà nga tubag, The exact
answer is in the book. Tukmà nga alas syíti ang pagsúgud sa prugráma,
The program starts at exactly seven o’clock. Tukmà sa gikasabútan,
Exactly as agreed. Tukmang usa ka búlan ugmà sukad sa íyang paggíkan,
It will be exactly one month tomorrow since the day he left. Kining
ruskáha tukmà kaáyu ánang pirnúha, This nut fits that bolt very nicely.
{2} suitable, appropriate. Tukmà ang tíma sa ukasiyun, The theme fits
the occasion exactly. Kining tanúma tukmà giyud sa bugnawng klíma, This
plant is perfectly adapted for a cold climate. v {1} [B26C; c]
coincide, correspond with. Mitukmà ang ákung pangagpas sa nahitabù, My
guess coincided with what actually happened. Nagkatukmà ang pista ug
ang ákung adlaw, The fiesta and my birthday fall on the same date.
{1a} [C3; c6] for edges to fit, abut perfectly. Itukmag maáyu ang mga
ngilit, Make the edges abut perfectly. {2} be, make suitable,
appropriate. {3} [b8] come upon s.o. quite unexpectedly. Hitukmaan níya
ang bátà nga mikúut sa kúkis, She came upon the child getting some
cookies. hi-/ha- v [B1256; b8] {1} come out to be the same as or
appropriate. {2} come upon s.t. in a place. Sa íyang paglatagaw
nahitukmà siya sa usa ka payag, In his wandering he came upon a hut.
pahi- v [A; c] make s.t. coincide. Kinahanglang ipahitukmà ang prugráma
sa gubyirnu sa kinahanglanun sa násud, The government’s program must be
made to correspond with the country’s needs. -in-an(→) n joint. Ang
tinukmaan sa túbu tulù, The pipe joint is leaky.

tukmu n the Philippine turtledove: Streptopelia bitorquata.

tukmud v [A; c] {1} push abruptly and hard. Nasarásay siya dihang ákung
gitukmud, He reeled when I pushed him hard. {2} goad, prod. Ang
kaugalíngung kahígal mauy mitukmud kaníya sa panlúgus, His own lust
goaded him to rape. -in- n spurred, urged. Tinukmud sa tingúhang
mulampus nanlimbásug siya, He strove hard under the goad of the drive
to succeed.

tuknul v [A; c] hand s.t. to s.o. Dawáta ug dúnay kwarta nga ituknul sa
lídir, Accept it if the political leader hands you some money.

tukpaw v [A; c] {1} push s.t. upward. Akuy mutukpaw nímu ngadtus atup
arun ka makasaka ngadtu, I’ll give you a boost onto the roof so that
you can climb up there. {2} induce s.o. to do s.t. bad for him. Ang
íyang mga amígu nakatukpaw níya sa mga bisyu, His friends induced him
into a life of sin. Ayaw siya itukpaw ngadtu ni Satanas, Do not lure
him into the ways of the devil. {3} jump from one point to another. Ang
ági sa makina mutukpaw, The sewing machine skips. Gitukpaw níya ang
isturyag láin, He skipped over to s.t. else to change the subject.
Ingun ug magatukpaw ang átung sulti, wà diay makapasar si Tunyu sa
búrd, To change the subject, so Tony didn’t pass the board examination.
tukpawtukpaw v {1} [A; c1] work skipping about, not systematically.
Gitukpawtukpaw níya pagpintal, man nga nagkábang ang ági, He did not
paint it square at a time and so it came out splotched. {2} [B; b6]
move with a jerky up and down motion. Nagtukpawtukpaw ang sakayan sa
bawud, The boat bounced up and down in the waves.

tuksì v [A; a] slice or prod off the outer layer of s.t. Pagtuksì ug
lapnis nga ibugkus sa kináhuy, Pull off some of the outer strips of the
abaca to tie the firewood up with. Tuksía ang pakpak sa mais, Loosen
the corn husks. n instrument used to prod an outer layer loose.

tuksu, tuksù v [A; a] query in a pressing way. Akuy mutuksù níya kun
tinúud tung ímung gisulti, I will ask him if what you said was true.
n query. Makalíbug ang mga tuksù sa abugádu, The lawyer’s questions
were confusing.

tuktugáuk v {1} [A] for cocks to crow. Mutuktugáuk na gánì ang mga
manuk, sa átù pa duul na ang kabuntágun, When the cock crows, we know
morning is near. {2} [A; c] vomit due to excessive drinking of
alcoholic beverages (slang). Kanang ímung kan-un ímu ra sang ituktugáuk
ug magpalabi kag ínum, You will vomit out what you are eating if you
drink too much. n cock’s crow or noise of a similar sort.

tuktuk_1 v [A; a] {1} knock on. Tuktúka ang pultahan únà musúd, Knock
on the door before you go in. {2} peck at repeatedly. Gituktuk sa sunuy
ang íyang higut, The cock pecked at its tether. n {1} knocking.
{2} feed for chickens. pa- v [A; ac] feed grains to. Patuktuka ang
sunuy ug tibuuk mais, Feed whole kernels to the cock. Tipasì lay
ipatuktuk sa himungáan, Feed unhusked rice to the hen.

tuktuk_2 v give enlightenment to (confined to set phrases). Tuktúkan
kay may salabútan, Enlighten him because he can understand. hiN-
v {1} [A; b3] keep still as if in deep thought. Naghinuktuk si Pidru
kay wà tugúti, Pedro is brooding because they didn’t let him do it.
{2} [b(1)] ponder s.t. Hinuktúki kini pag-áyu únà ka magpárì, Consider
it carefully before you enter the priesthood.

tuktuk_3 (from taluktuk) v {1} [B346] for s.t. long to stand on its end
unsupported. Mutuktuk ang lipak kun maáyung pagkabalansi, A bamboo
stick will stand on its end if it is well balanced. Makatuktuk na ang
bátà, hápit nang kalakaw, The child can stand alone now. It is about to
walk. {2} = taluktuk. a {1} = taluktuk. {2} straight above in the sky.
Alas dúsi na kay tuktuk na ang adlaw, It is twelve noon because the sun
is at its zenith.

tuktur n k.o. bird, a night jar, which flies after dusk, the eggs of
which are the source of the tagulílung charm: Eurostopodus macrotis.
The name derives from its call: ‘trrk-trrk’.

tuku n prop stick or post. v [A; b] prop up with a pole or post.
Magtuku mi sa báy nga naghirig, We are going to prop up the house which
is leaning. Tukhi ang hayhayan arun dì magtuntun, Prop up the
clothesline so it doesn’t sag. paN- v {1} [A2] for a girl to push her
partner at arm’s length in dancing. Maáyu si Tirya nga baylíhan kay
dílì manuku, It’s nice to dance with Terry because she does not keep
you at arm’s length. {2} [A3] be hesitant to do s.t. mainly due to
rules of propriety. Nagpanuku ang nubyu paghaluk sa nubya, The groom
was hesitant to kiss the bride.

tukù = tikì.

tukub v [A; a12] for a beast of prey to devour. Makatukub ug bábuy ang
higanting sawa, A giant snake can devour a pig. tukbunun n prey.
maN-r-(←) n beast of prey.

túkud_1 v {1} [A; ac] brace, prop. Tukúra ang kapáyas kay malúad unyà
inigbagyu, Brace the papaya. It might fall when the storm comes. Itúkud
ímung kamut sa bungbung unyà barug sa usang tiil, Prop your hand
against the wall. Then stand on one leg. {2} [A; c1] erect a house,
building. Anhi tukúra (itúkud) ang munisipyu, The municipal hall will
be erected here. {3} [A; a] form, found an organization, establishment.
Kinsay nagtúkud sa Siliman? Who founded Silliman University? Gitúkud
ang buluntaryu panahun sa Hapun, Volunteer troops were organized during
the Japanese occupation. {4} put up a business. Ang nigusyung tukúrun
kanang gikinahanglan sa lungsud, The business you put up should be one
which the town needs. (→) n s.t. used to prop or brace s.t. tag-(→)
n founder, organizer. katukúran n founding, establishment. Nagsaúlug
sila sa katukúran sa syudad, They are celebrating the founding of the
city. mag-r- = tagtukud. patukuránan n foundation, basis. Way
patukuránan ang ímung pasángil, Your charges are without foundation.
tukudtúkud v [A; b(1)] fabricate a story, esp. one with a dubious
motive. n fabrication, concoction. Pulus tu tinukudtúkud (tukudtúkud)
ang ílang isturyang naglaki ang ímung asáwa, Those stories about your
wife’s carrying on with other men are all fabrication anyway.
tinukudtúkud = tukudtúkud, n. paN- v [A2; b(1)] hold oneself at arm’s
length when dancing.

túkud_2 v [A; a] cut a style of dress. Tukúra lag yánu ning ákung
sinínà, Just make my dress in a simple style. n style of dress. Ang
túkud sa sinínà nagbalikbálik lang, The same dress styles keep coming
back again. (→) = túkud_2, n.

túkud_3 n plow. v [A; a12] make a plow.

tukug n midrib of a coconut or buri palm leaf.

túkug v [A2N; b6] bulge or stick out, sometimes causing slight
inconvenience. Nanúkug ang mga bukug sa síku tungud sa kaníwang, He is
so thin his elbow is sticking out. Nabuslut ang sáku nga gitukúgan sa
pusil, The sack developed a hole where the gun was sticking out.

tukul_1 v [A3] nurse a grudge. Mauy nakaáyu kanímu kay dì giyud ka
mutukul kun buyagun ka sa ímung sayup, One thing good about you is you
never nurse a grudge against people who call your attention to your
mistakes.

tukul_2 v [A; b6] disobey by keeping silent and failing to act. Dílì
ángayng tukulan ang tambag sa ímung ginikánan, You should not disobey
your parent’s advice. paN- v [A13] be hesitant in doing s.t. Nagpanukul
ku ug uban ninyu sa piknik, I am hesitant about going with you on the
picnic.

tukun v [A; a] {1} prop up. Tukna ang ságing kay harag na kaáyu, Prop
the banana tree up because it is leaning way over. {2} propel oneself
by pushing on a pole. Nagtukun mi sa baybay kay nabálì ang bugsay, We
poled ourselves toward the shore because the paddle broke. Tukna ang
dágat kun lawum ba, Put the pole to the floor of the sea to see if it
is deep. n pole for propelling or for supporting.

tukung_1 = tuklung.

tukung_2 n tailless bird or fowl. Ilhan ku ra tung ákung piríku kay
tukung, I will recognize my parrot because it lost its tail. v [B1256;
a12] become tailless.

tuk-ung v [A; b6] {1} squat or lie with the knees bent up double
against the body nearly touching the chin. Nagtuk-ung ang bátang
nagdúwag húlin, The child playing marbles is squatting. {2} be s.w.
looking as though it were squatting (literary). Ang pitrumaks
nagtuk-ung dihà sa bangkíwà, The petromax lantern was located squatting
atop of the mast.

túkuy n word used to call dogs. v [A; a12] {1} call a dog, saying
‘túkuy’. Tukúya ang irù arun pakan-un, Call the dog so it can eat.
{2} draw irresistibly toward s.t. Ang kadalù mauy mutúkuy sa táwu
pagpaníkas, Greed leads a person to cheat. {3} in folk belief, induce a
person to walk in his sleep by tying a string to a finger and pulling
it rhythmically. Kamau siyang mutúkuy ug táwung natúlug, He knows how
to make a person walk in his sleep. (→) n puppy.

tukwa n bean curds done to a dough-like consistency. v [A13; a12] make,
cook with bean paste.

tukwang_1 = tuklang.

tukwang_2 = tikwang.

tukway = bukway, n1.

túl n tulle, a fine, silk, open-meshed material used for veils.

tula (not without l) v [A; c] {1} set food or drinks aside for s.o.
Tud-i (tulahi) ug sud-an ang ulahing mukáun, Set some food aside for
those who are going to eat later. {2} bestow certain feelings on one.
Tud-ig diyútayng kalúuy ang mga bátà, Show the children a little pity.

túla v [A; a] stew fish or chicken. Magtúla ta kun dúnay lab-as, We can
have stewed fish if there are fresh fish. -in- n stewed fish or
chicken.

tulà v [A; c] feed fowls and pet animals. Akuy magtulà sa mga manuk
mabuntag, I feed the chickens each morning. Gitulaan ang irù ug karni,
They fed meat to the dog. n feed for pets or poultry.

tulabhù = tilabhù.

tulábung n a small, white heron often found perching on the backs of
water buffaloes, eating insects.

túlag v [B14; a12] be in a disorderly, topsy-turvy condition. Panghípus
mu kay nagkatúlag lang ang kwartu, Fix the room because it’s a mess.

tulak v [A; b4(1)] stop raining. Pil-a nag páyung kay mituwak nag uwan,
Fold the umbrella now because the rain has stopped. Didtu mi hitulaki
sa ulan sa Karkar, The rain stopped falling when we got to Carcar.

túlak v [A; c] {1} push or move s.t. with the arm. Kami mauy mitúlak sa
awtu nga nalubung, We were the ones who pushed the car that got stuck
in the mud. Íya kung gitúlak ngadtus swíming pul, He pushed me into the
swimming pool. {2} lift s.t. up to one’s head or higher and throw to an
elevated place. Kami mutúlak sa sáku ngadtu sa tinumpì, We will throw
the sack up onto the pile. Itúlak ang kahun sa istanti, Throw the box
up onto the top of the shelf. {3} [B126; b8] fall from a height
accidentally when one loses his hold, slips, support is taken away, and
the like. Ayawg padaplin kay matúlak ka unyà, Don’t sit too close to
the edge or you might fall. tig-(→) n person who tosses or pushes s.t.
heavy upwards onto s.t.

tulakhang n {1} = kaling. {2} woman who has lost her virginity
(derogatory). v [B126; b6] have lost one’s virginity.

tulakì, tulákì, tulakig = ísul.

tulala, tulála (not without l) a idiot. v [B12; b6] be a moron or like
one.

tul-an n {1} knee joint of human beings or large animals. {2} legs or
lower limbs of man or animals. Maglatà mig tul-an pára karung udtu,
We’ll boil beef shanks for dinner.

tulandus = bulandus.

*tulápus ílu nga — see ílu_1.

túlas (not without l) n tongue irritations caused by hot spices.
v [A123P; b4] have tongue irritations, as when burned.

tulawug n spring pole. Kusug mulibkas ang balag-ung kay gáhì ug
tulawug, The trap springs fast because the spring pole is stiff.
v [A13; a12] make, attach a spring pole.

tulay (not without l) n bridge. v [A13; b] put a bridge. Kinsay
nagtulay ug lubi sa kanal? Who put a coconut trunk across the canal?
Kinahanglang tulayan ning subáa kay dì malabang, This river needs a
bridge over it because no one can get across it.

túlay = bantúlay.

tulbuk v {1} [A; a] poke at a point. Nakatulbuk ka na bag bilyar? Have
you tried your hand at (lit. poked at) billiards? Tulbúka ang timbri,
Push the doorbell. {2} [A; b] put a period or dot. Tulbúki nang ímung
ay, Put a dot over your letter I. n period or dot. Náay gagmay nga
tulbuk ang ímung nawung, There are small spots on your face.

tulbung v [A2; b4(1)] rise, ascend to appreciable height or level.
Gidagkutan ang kwítis, misíyuk, unyà mitulbung, The rocket was lit,
sizzled, and then rose straight up.

tulda n tent. v [A; a] pitch a tent. Nagtulda ang mga kampirs, The
campers pitched a tent. Hábul lay itulda, Use a blanket as a tent. paN-
v [A23] for pants to bulge due to erection of the penis (humorous).
Ngánung nanulda ang ímung karsúnis? What is that pole sticking out in
the front of your pants?

túlì v {1} [A; a1] circumcise. Tambálan ang nagtúlì nákù, A folk doctor
circumcised me. Tulía ang bátà pipila ka adlaw human ianak, Circumcise
the child a few days after it is born. {2} [a3] get one’s comeuppance
or just deserts. Natúlì ang mangingilad dihang gihatágan siya ug minì
nga kwarta, The con-man got his just deserts when he was given fake
money. (→) n {1} one who has been circumcised. {2} action of having
been circumcised. — andaw n s.o. born with the glans penis exposed.
maN-r- n s.o. who circumcises.

tulibag a diverging, going off at an angle. Tulibag ang ímung
tinubagan. Dílì tukmà, Your answer doesn’t get at what I asked. It’s
not to the point. v [B; c1] go off at an angle. Mutulibag ang íyang
tinan-awan ug mahakalit, He becomes cross-eyed when he looks at s.t.
suddenly. Nagtulibag man ning ímung tinahian, You sewed your seams
crooked.

tulibagbag = tulibag.

tul-id a {1} straight. Tul-id nga linya, A straight line. {2} straight
towards. Lakaw lag tul-id ánang dálan ug musangkù ka sa simbahan, Just
walk straight on that street and you will reach the church. v {1} [APB;
a] straighten. Akuy mutul-id (mupatul-id) sa balikug nga alambri, I’ll
straighten the crooked wire. Mitul-id siya sa íyang pagyukù, He
straightened up after he had bent over. {2} [AB; a2] reform, correct.
Dì na matul-id ang dautan níyang pagkatáwu, His bad ways cannot be
reformed. katul-íran n reform, amendment.

tulílik v [B2S46] reel around unsteadily. Mitulílik ang ayruplánung
nawad-ag kuntrǔl, The plane that lost control turned round and round.
Nagtulilik ang kasing nga taliundang nag túyuk, The top which is about
to stop whirling is reeling unsteadily. -ay(→) = tulílik.

tulimbang v [AB56; c] for bells to toll, peal, toll bells. Ang
kampaníru mauy mutulimbang sa kampána, The sexton will toll the bell.
Human nag mísa kay nagtulimbang nag kampána, The mass is over because
the bells are ringing. n pealing or tolling of bells.

túlin v [A2; b6] {1} move forward. Pagbulhut sa hángin mitúlin ang
sakayan, When the wind blew, the boat moved forward. {2} cover a
certain distance. Mutúlin ang dálan ug kilumitru úsà mulikù sa tuu, The
road will go on for a kilometer before it turns to the right. Pila may
tulínan sa usa ka baril nga aspaltu? How far can a barrel of asphalt
go? {2a} accomplish a certain amount. Dí ta mutúlin ug kanúnay kag
sámuk, I won’t accomplish anything if you keep making a nuisance of
yourself. {2b} [A2] expand, take space in the direction of. Ámù nang
yútà ang gitulínan sa gihímung karsáda, The road they made has
encroached on our land. {3} [B2; b6] become fast, swift. Mutúlin
(matúlin) ang pambut kun habwáag karga, The motorboat will move fast if
we take the cargo off. n {1} accomplishment, distance covered. Gamay ra
siyag túlin kay naglangaylángay man, He made little progress because he
was just loafing. {2} speed, forward motion. Hínay ang túlin sa bangkà
kun way hángin, The sailboat’s speed is slow if there is no wind.
a fast and swift. Túlin nga nanglábay ang katuígan, The years passed
swiftly. pa- v [A; b(1)] {1} extend measurements in constructing s.t.
Ug padak-an ang balay, adtu patulíni sa luyu, If you enlarge the house,
extend the construction to the rear. {2} increase the speed of s.t.
moving forward. Magpatúlin ta arun sayu tang maabut, Let’s increase our
speed, so we arrive early.

tulindaw v [AN; b6] go caroling during the Christmas season to the
house of s.o. who made preparations to treat the carolers. Manulindaw
(mutulindaw) ta sa íla kay nagbingka sila, Let’s go carol at their
house because they made rice cakes.

tulíngan n k.o. mackerel: Rastrelliger kanagurta, Katsuwonus pelamis,
and others.

tulíngì, tulíngig (from língì) v [B26] turn the head sharply to one
side, as when slapped. Natulíngì (mitulíngì) siya dihang gitamparus,
She snapped her head to one side from the force of the slap she
received. (→) a for the neck or s.t. similar to be twisted to one side.
v [B1; c6] become twisted to one side. Nagtulingì ang gunitánan sa
gunting, The handle of the scissors is twisted.

tulipsay_1 v [A2; b8] for s.t. thrown or that flies away to swerve off
its path. Ang batung lapad mutulipsay ug ibunù, If s.o. throws a flat
stone it will go in a curve. Hitulipsayan siya sa káhuy nga ákung
gibughà, A piece of the wood that I split flew off and swerved onto
him.

tulipsay_2 n Asian moon scallop, a smooth-surfaced, golden scallop,
white on the inside.

túlis v [A; a2] rob, steal with force and intimidation. May yáwi giyud
ang nagtúlis sa tindáhan, The one who robbed the store must have had a
key. Tulísun ku nang dátung Insik, I’ll rob that rich Chinaman.
n robbery. Wà pa masulbad ang túlis, The robbery has not been solved
yet. paN- n robbery in general. -an(→) n robber, bandit. -anis
n robbers, bandits.

tulísuk v {1} [A; a1] scold, reproach by pointing a finger. Yawyaw
lang. Ayaw kug tulisúka, Just keep scolding, but don’t shake your
finger at me. {2} [A; a12] reproach severely. Gitulísuk sa kaugalíngung
tanlag, Reproached by his own conscience. ma-un a reproachful, usually
accompanied with blame.

tulitul n {1} hemorrhoid. {2} an infected puncture in the cheek. (←)
v [B126; b5] become, get a tulitul.

tulíyuk v [APB46; aP] spin, whirl. Akuy nagtulíyuk (nagpatulíyuk) sa
sabad, I made the propeller spin. Ingun sa mutulíyuk ang kalibútan, It
was as if the world was spinning about. n spinning, whirling.

tulmà v {1} [AC3; a] let s.t. touch on s.t. Itulmà ang ímung tudlù sa
ínit sa plansa, Touch your finger to the hot iron. {2} [A; c] make an
imprint or impression on. Gitulmáan níyag ‘risib’ ang sulat, He stamped
the word ‘received’ on the letter. n {1} imprint, mark, impression.
{2} horizon, place where the land or sea and the sky seem to meet.
{3} boundary.

tulpuk v [A; a] {1} prick or poke at with s.t. pointed. Dágum nga
mitulpuk sa ákung buktun, A needle that pricked my arm. Tulpúka ang
timbri, Push the doorbell button. {2} make, put a dot on s.t. Tulpúkan
nátug itum ári pára mata, We’ll put dots here for the eyes. {3} press
the keys of a piano, typewriter, and the like. n pricking, poking,
injection with a hypodermic needle. Dús ang ipabáyad sa duktǔr káda
tulpuk, The doctor charges two pesos for each shot. tulpuktulpuk n dots
in cloth design. Bistídung may tulpuktulpuk nga pula, Dress with red
dots.

tultug v [A; b6(1)7] knock off the ashes or embers. Nakatultug siyag
bága sa agipu didtu sa mga papil, He accidentally knocked an ember off
from the firebrand onto the pieces of paper.

tultul v {1} [A; b(1)] tell, lead the way s.w. Kinsay gatultul nímu sa
ámung hayd-áwut? Who led you to our hideout? {2} [A12; b8] find one’s
way s.w. Pangutána lang kun dì ka makatultul sa íla, Just inquire if
you can’t locate their place. hiN- v [B1236] manage to do s.t. in the
way that is normal, started. Nalintar siya ug dì na makahinultul ug
unsay buhatun, She panicked and couldn’t do what had to be done. Kinsay
mahinultul sa búhat kun magpúnay kag sámuk? Who can do his work right
if you keep making a nuisance of yourself?

tulu numeral three. Pirmi giyung magkúyug ang tulu, The three always go
together. v [B256; a12] be in or about three in number. Mutulu ka búlan
na siyang gasabak, She is about three months pregnant. Natulu ang ákung
panan-aw pagkahubug nákù, I had triple vision when I got drunk. Tulua
pagrisirba kay ang tsapirun diay, Make three reservations, an extra one
for the chaperon. r- three. ika- third. ka-, maka- three times. -in-
into three, in three’s. katluan n thirty. tinulutulu n k.o. rope of
three strands, tag-(←), tag-, tagutlu three each. v [A; c1] do s.t. by
three’s.

túlù n drop. Bisan usa ka túlù nga lúhà, Even one single teardrop.
v {1} [A2S] leak so as to cause dripping. Sungkípi ang atup kay
nagtulù, Fix the roof because it is leaking. {1a} [A2S; b28] drip, leak
through. Ug dúnay malígù sa táas, ang túbig mutúlù námù diri, If s.o.
takes a bath upstairs, water drips down on us. {2} [A12; b6] for drops
to fall. Hápit makatúlù ákung lúhà sa kahiubus, I almost shed tears in
humiliation. (→) a leaky. Tulù ang atup kay gibagyu, The roof is leaky
because it was hit by a storm. pa- v [A; c] {1} let drip. Nagpatúlù
siya sa íyang lúhà, She shed tears. {2} — sa singut labor hard.
Nagpatúlù sa singut ang ímung amahan arun ka makatunghà, Your father is
working hard just so you can study. -in- v [A] drip plentifully.
n {1} drops. Tinúlù sa ulan, Raindrops. {2} shedding of tears, blood,
or anything in drops. {3} noise of dripping. Makadisturbu ang tinúlù sa
ulan, The noise of the dripping of the rain is disturbing.

tulud v [A; c6] {1} push. Itulud ang kutsi kay dì muandǎr, Push the car
because it won’t start. {2} goad, incite. Daw sa may mutulud nákù sa
pagpaúlì, As if s.t. were urging me to come home. tuludtúlud v [A; c6]
pass work, blame onto one another. Nagtuludtúlud lang sila dihang
gipangutána kinsay nakasalà, They just kept passing the blame onto each
other when I asked them who the culprit was. Ayawg ituludtúlud ang
trabáhu, Don’t keep trying to pawn off the work on each other. — bátang
n the period from August to October when the wind direction is not
fixed (the time when a log [bátang] is pushed in one direction and then
another).

túlug v {1} [B123S6; a2] go, put to sleep. Ang yáya mauy pirming
magtúlug sa bátà, The baby’s nurse usually puts him to sleep. Natúlug
na ba siya? Is he asleep yet? Dì ku makatulug ug dì ku kainum, I can’t
sleep without drinking s.t. first. Tulga ang bátà, Put the baby to
sleep. {2} [B126] for lard and oil to congeal. Natúlug ang mantíkà sa
katugnaw, The lard congealed due to the cold. {3} [B126] for tops to
spin steadily without a wobble. Mu rag walà maglihuk ang kasing kay
natúlug, The top seems not to move because it is spinning steadily.
n sleep. Wà kuy túlug gabíi, I had had no sleep last night. (→) a sound
asleep. Tulug na kaáyu ang bátà, The child is sound asleep. v [A123P;
a4] be sleepy. Makapatulug ning tambála, This medicine can make one
sleepy. Gitulug aku pag-áyu sa ímung diskursu, Your speech made me very
sleepy. ka- v [A2] sleep. Mikatúlug (natúlug) siya, He went to sleep.
Dì ku makakatúlug, I can’t sleep. Sawug lay katulgi, Just sleep on the
floor. paka- v [A; c] induce, put to sleep. Makapakatúlug ang ímung mga
isturya, Your stories make me fall asleep. n s.t. that induces sleep.
Tablítas nga pakatúlug, Sleeping pills. hika-/haka-(→) v [B1256; b8]
fall asleep. Nahikatulug na ang ákung pinalanggà, My darling has
finally fallen asleep. Hikatulgan ku siyang nag-isturya, I fell asleep
on him as he was talking to me. pakuluka-, patulugtúlug v [A13] pretend
to sleep. Didtu siya sa káma magpakukatū́g (magpatugtū́g), piru wà
diay, He was lying on the couch pretending to be asleep, but he really
wasn’t. túgan, hinúgan a top that spins smoothly and rapidly without a
wobble. v [B126; b6] become smooth-spinning. ka-un n sleep. Wà ku duáwa
sa katulúgun, Sleep did not come to me. kina-, kinatulgan n sleep
slept. Maáyu ákung kinatúlug (kinatulgan) kagabíi, I had a good sleep
last night. katulganan n place one sleeps. v [A13] sleep habitually
s.w. Anáa ku magkatulganan sukad sa ákung pag-anhi, I have been
sleeping there since my arrival. ka-un(→), katulgun a sleepy. Katúgun
(katulgun) kaáyu ku, I’m very sleepy. hinga-un(→), hingatulgun, ma-(→),
ma-un a fond of sleeping, always sleeping. Ang táwung matulúgun way
kaugmáun, A person who is always sleeping has no future.

tulugtulug n a k.o. bush bearing clusters of reddish fruit: Breynia
rhamnoides.

tuluk = turuk.

tulun v {1} [A; a12] swallow. Mitulun siyag dakù únà musulti, He
swallowed hard before speaking. Tunla ang tablítas, Swallow the pill.
{2} [a3] endure s.o.’s temperament, hurting words, etc. Dì matulun ang
íyang taras, I can’t take her ways. — lamuy a eating s.t. without
bothering to chew. Hingtuk-an kay tulun lamuy mag mukáun, He choked
because he eats without chewing. tunlan, tutunlan n throat.

túlung v [A; a] skewer. Tabángi kug túlung sa aslúnun, Help me skewer
the pig we are roasting. -an(→) n skewer.

tulunggun see tunug.

túlus_1 n semen (not coarse, but avoided). pa-(→) n enhancing sperm
production. Patulus nang mga pagkaúna kay daghan ug sustansiya, Those
foods will give you lots of sperm because they have nutritive value.
v [A13] enhance semen production.

túlus_2 v [B126] get into the habit of doing s.t. the whole year
through by doing it on a special holiday or on a day it should not be
done (whether intentionally done or not). Makatū́s (makapatū́s) sa
pagkahingatúgun ang pagdúgayg mata sa bag-ung túig, It will make you
get up late the whole year through if you get up late on New Year’s
Day.

túlut v [AP; b6P] pay out rope or string. Dílì ku mutúlut (mupatúlut)
sa pasul kay musángit unyà sa ilálum, I will not pay out the fishline
because it might snag at the bottom. n length of line paid out. pa-
v {1} = túlut, v. {2} [A; c1] sail smoothly, swiftly with the wind.
Mupatúlut ang sakayan basta pabur sa hángin, A boat sails smoothly and
swiftly if it goes with the wind.

túluy_1 v [A; b6] be caught in a net. Ug mutúluy ang isdà dì na kabuhì,
If the fish snarls in the mesh it can’t get away. Nitū́y ang bábuy
ihā́s sa batung, The wild pig was caught in the net. (→) n s.t. caught
in a net.

túluy_2 n k.o. tamban 4–5″ long, with a greenish back and white belly.

túma n body louse, similar to the head louse (kútu) in appearance and
habits, but found in clothing. v [a4] be infested with body lice. hiN-
v [AN; b6(1)] remove body lice. tumahun a infested with body lice.

túmà n drinking of alcohol (slang). v [AC; a2] drink alcohol. Hubug
man, nakatúmà sigúru, You’re drunk. You must have come from a drinking
spree.

túman_1 v [A; a12] {1} obey. Matag lungsuránun kinahanglang mutúman sa
baláud, Each citizen must obey the law. {2} fulfill, realize. Natúman
ra ang íyang tingúhang maabugádu, His ambition to become a lawyer has
finally been realized. {3} [A13] stubbornly have one’s own way. Náa ra
nímu ug magtúman ka, It’s up to you if you insist on your own way.
{4} [b(1)P] indulge, or permit s.o. his way. Tumáni (patumáni) lang ang
bátà arun way gubut, Just indulge the child so there won’t be any
trouble. tulumanun n {1} obligation to be carried out. {2} program.
Tulumanun sa administrasiyun, The program of the administration.
Tulumanun sa radiyu, Radio program. ma-in-un a obedient. ma-in-un sa
gustu stubbornly wanting one’s own way. ka-an n realization,
fulfillment. Ang katumánan sa damgu, The realization of a dream.
ka-un(→) n fulfillment reached. Walay katumanun sa ímung tingúhà, There
is no hope of fulfilling your dreams. pinaan n one who is granted his
way. Bátang pinatumánan, A spoiled child.

túman_2 a the utmost of, extreme. Túmang kalípay, Extreme happiness.
Túmang kamíngaw, Utter loneliness. Túmang kahílum, Absolute silence.

tuma pusisiyun n {1} inauguration. Ugmà ang tuma pusisiyun sa
prisidinti, The president’s inauguration is tomorrow. {2} taking over
of ownership. Ang tuma pusisiyun sa balay, Taking over possession of
the house. v [A13] {1} carry out inauguration ceremonies. May tuma
pusisiyun sa irpurt ugmà, They will inaugurate the airport tomorrow.
{2} take over ownership.

tumar v {1} [A; a2] take medicine. Tumaha (tumara) nang tablítas, Take
those pills. {2} [A2] afford, have the means for. Ang sapían ra giyuy
mutumar (makatumar) niánang ímung prisyu, Only a millionaire could
afford the price you are setting. {3} — ug aksiyun [A; b] take action
on s.t. Ang kíha wà katumahig aksiyun, They didn’t act on his
complaint. — ug nutisya, libak, et al. {4} [AN; c1] pick up gossip,
rumors. Ang mga radiyu balágun adtu matumar sa tubáan, You can pick up
rumors at the toddy stand.

tumatub n bag of waters.

tumaw v [B23(1)6] pop up, come out, surface, esp. s.t. unexpected,
secret, or little known. Mutumaw giyud ang matúud, The truth always
comes out. Ug dì ka makatumaw sa inyung kásu, prisúhun ka giyud, If you
do not appear in court, you will surely be imprisoned. Kanang ímung
pagrilaks mau nay makatumaw (makapatumaw) sa sulbad sa prublíma,
Relaxation can make the solution to your problem pop up. n mutant.
Tumaw nang batáa kay nigru man untà ang mga ginikánan ug ngánung putì
man nà siya, That child is a mutant, because the parents are black, but
he is white.

tumba_1 v {1} [AB12; a] for s.t. upright to fall over, cause it to do
so. Kinsay nagtumba sa bisiklíta? Who made the bicycle fall over?
Natumba ang bátà, The child fell. {2} [A; a] slaughter an animal for an
occasion. Magtumba tag báka sa ímung kasal, We will slaughter a cow on
your wedding. {2a} — ug kandílà [A; b] light a candle as an offering.
Nakatumba na siyag kandílà pára sa kalag sa mga minatay, He has already
lighted a candle for the departed souls. {2b} [A; a12] consume a liquor
container full of drink. Kanang grupúha mutumba ug usa ka tárung tubà,
That group will consume one kerosene can of palm toddy. — lúbu
a unbalanced: {1} for a vehicle to have its load unevenly distributed.
{2} for a building or ship to have a top floor that is too high in
proportion to its bottom floor. Kusug kaáyung mukíling ang barku nga
tumba lúbu, A ship which has an unproportionately large upper deck
easily lists. v [B1256] develop a lack of balance. tumbatumba
v {1} [A13] offer various reasons for doing or not doing s.t., keep
changing one’s mind. Nagtumbatumba ka ánang pangatarúngan nímu. Ug
buhátun nímu, buhata na, You keep changing your reasons. If you want to
do it, do it already. {2} [A] play ball with the politicians, not stick
to one or the other but going along with whoever is in power. {3} [A;
c1] for capital in a business to be so small that it is entirely
invested in merchandise and new goods are bought with proceeds. Dì
paútang ang tindáhan ug magtumbatumba ang puhúnan, A store that has all
its capital invested in goods cannot afford to give credit. a having
flexible politics. Kinahanglan tumbatumba ang nigusiyanti, A
businessman has to be flexible when it comes to politics. n = liyalíya.

tumba_2 n {1} an empty coffin laid on a platform with lighted candles,
placed in the center front of the church where a requiem mass is being
celebrated. {2} tomb.

tumbága n {1} copper or a copper alloy that is still copper-colored.
{2} = amurádu. -in- {1} = amurádu. {2} — nga kampána n bell made of
bronze.

tumbálay = tungbálay.

tumbalik = sumbalik.

tumbáling v [a12] pay attention. Tumbalínga ang ákung tambag, Heed my
advice. Ngánung tumbalíngun ka nákù? Si kinsa man ka? Why should I obey
you. Who are you anyway? Ayaw tumbalínga ang íyang mga sugsúg, Don’t
pay attention to his teasing. paN-, paN-(→) {1} = tumbáling. {2} [A12]
notice, be aware. Wà ku makapanumbáling ug dinhà bay niági, I did not
notice if anyone passed by.

tumbas v [A2C; b6] equal in comparison. Way makatumbas sa íyang
kaanyag, Nothing can equal her beauty. Magtumbas giyud ang inyung
pagkadawù, You both are equally greedy. Ang íyang kamaksut gitumbásan
sa íyang kadautan, He is as ugly as he is mean. a equivalent, worth.
Tumbas sa napúlù ka bútus ang maung balúta, The ballot is worth ten
votes. ka- n s.t. equivalent to. Mau ni ang katumbas sa ganti nga Uskar
sa Amirika, This is the equivalent of the Oscar in America.

tumbayà (from bayà) v {1} [AP; cP] leave s.t. to the care of s.o. Ayaw
itumbayà sa sulugúun ang mga bátà, Don’t leave the children to the care
of the maids. {2} [AP; b(1)P] fail to care for. Kanang inahána
nagpatumbayà lang sa íyang mga anak, That mother is neglecting her
children. Nagkagubà ang karáang balay nga gipatumbayáan (gitumbayáan)
lang, The old neglected house is getting dilapidated.

tumbuk_1 v {1} [A; a] poke a finger or s.t. pointed at s.t. Mitumbuk
siya sa makinilya arun pagtisting niíni, She poked a finger at the
typewriter keys to try them out. Aku na say tumbuk sa bilyar, It is my
turn to strike the billiard ball. {2} [A; c1] point out, pinpoint. Dì
ku katumbuk sa iksaktung hinungdan, I cannot point to the exact reason.
Tumbúka ang utlánan sa mápa, Point out the boundaries on the map.
{3} [A; b] put a dot s.w.

tumbuk_2 n container, usually a tin can, 2″ by 2″, with a handle used
for measuring out kerosene for retail sales.

tumbuy_1 v [AN; a1] reproach s.o. while mentioning the benefits given
him. Ayawg tumbúya nang nangípun ninyu, bisag tapulan, Don’t tell the
people who are living with you that they are ingrates, though they are
lazy.

tumbuy_2 n female homosexual, active lesbian; woman who acts like a
man. v [B12] become a lesbian or tomboyish. a having the
characteristics of a lesbian, tomboyish.

tumindug see tindug.

tumitusus n tomato sauce.

tumpag = lumpag.

tumpang v [AC12; b] answer back, even up the score in a quarrel or
argument. Ug ang táwung idukádu magtumpang ug lális ug bastus, labaw
siyang bastus, If an educated man stoops to quarrel with a low person,
he just degrades himself. Mu ra mug búang tan-áwun ug tumpángan ninyu
nang giyawyaw sa hubug, You’ll look like fools if you try to answer
that drunk’s ranting.

tumpáwak v {1} [B1256] fall from a higher elevation. Ang labandíra
natumpáwak sa atábay, The washer woman fell into the well. {2} [B126;
b6] fall, be drawn into s.t. undesirable. Natumpáwak siya sa bisyu sa
upyu, He fell into opium addiction.

tumpì v [AB156; c1] pile s.t., usually neatly, on top of s.t. else.
Akuy mutumpì sa mga hugasan, I’ll pile the dishes up. Nagtumpì ang
daghang inutaw, The huge number of ironed clothes are piled up. n a
neat pile of things one on top of the other. Usa ka tumpì nga kwarta, A
stack of bills.

tumpil = tumpì.

túmu n a volume of a set of books.

túmud v [A; c] transport goods from the place of production to market,
export. Nakatúmud na tag bugas sa láing násud, We have exported rice to
other countries. Itúmud ning isdà sa tabuan, Deliver these fish to the
market to sell them. n transporting of goods from place of production
for sale; export. tumuran n vehicle or boat used to transport or
deliver goods.

túmug, túmuk v [B2] be soaked with. Lúhà nga mitúmug sa mga mata, Tears
that filled the eyes. Natúmug ang bindáhi sa dugù, The bandage is
soaked with blood.

tumung, túmung v {1} [A; c6] aim s.t. at s.t. Ayawg itumung nákù nang
pistúla, Don’t point that gun at me. {2} [A; acP] go to the direction
of s.t. straight. Tumúnga nang baláya, Go in the direction of that
house. Itumung (ipatumung) ang dáru ánang káhuy arun tul-id ímung ági,
Aim your furrow at that tree, so it will be straight. {3} [a1] direct a
statement, joke, etc. Aku bay gitumung sa ímung insultu? Was your
insult directed at me? Wà nákù itumung ang insultu nímu, I didn’t aim
the insult at you. {4} [A12; a2] get s.t. (good or bad) as one’s lot.
Nakatumung siyag asáwang bagìbian, He ended up with a nagging wife.
n {1} direction. Way tumung sa átung lákaw run, We are not going any
particular place. {2} purpose for which s.t. is done. Unsa may tumung
sa íyang pagsukitsukit? What was the purpose of his asking around?
{3} straight toward. Miatubang siya tumung sa bandíra, He faced toward
the flag.

tumur n tumor. v [B126; b4] become, have a tumor. Pusibling matumur ang
bun-ug, A bruise may turn into a tumor. Gitumuran ang íyang tútuy, She
got a tumor on her breast.

tumus n {1} second growth of the edible roots of a sweet potato. Gagmay
ning amutíha kay tumus ni, These sweet potatoes are small because they
are second-growth roots. {2} a coconut with a leaf sprout. paN- v [A2;
b6] gather second-growth sweet potatoes. Manumus ka pára lung-águn pára
pamáhaw, I will gather second-growth sweet potatoes to cook for
breakfast. patumsan n coconut seedling. v [A; c6] grow coconut
seedlings. Mupatumsan mi ánang klásiha sa lubi, We will grow that k.o.
coconut for seedlings. n katumsan, pinatumsan = patumsan, n.

túmus v [A; b6(1)] draw in the juice of s.t. placed in the mouth. Ang
mga bátà mitúmus (nagtúmus) sa santul, The children were sucking on a
santol seed.

tumutub = tumatub.

tumùtúmù v [A; b] fabricate, make up a story. Gitumùtumúan si Risal ug
pasángil sa mga Katsílà, The Spaniards fabricated charges against
Rizal. n fabricated tale, report, etc. -an(→) a given to fabricating
stories. v [B12] be, become given to fabricating stories.

tumuy n {1} tip, end, top. Tumuy sa búkid, Top of the mountain. Tumuy
sa sundang, Tip of the knife. Tumuy sa karsáda, End of the road.
{2} glans penis (euphemism). bug-at ang — not having indulged in sexual
acts for quite a long time (humorous euphemism). v [C; a1c3] do s.t. at
the end, tip of s.t. Nag-áway sila maung nagtúmuy paglingkud sa bangkù,
They had a quarrel; that is why they are sitting on opposite ends of
the bench. Tumuya paggúnit ang pulbult, Hold the pole vault at the
end.†

tuna_1 n stammerer. v [B12] be a stammerer. Ang kahadluk níya sa íyang
amahan mauy nakatuna (nakapatuna) níya, His being scared of his father
made him a stammerer.

tuna_2 n small, glossy-black, worm-like snake, deadly poisonous, found
in moist places in grasses and weeds.

túnà_1 v [A; b6] wallow. Mitúnà ang kábaw sa tunaan, The water buffalo
wallows in the puddle. pa- v [A; a2] put a water buffalo in a puddle to
have him wallow in. Magpatúnà úsà ku únà magsúgud pagdáru, I will let
the carabao wallow a while before starting to plow. -an(→) n puddle for
water buffalos to wallow in.

túnà_2 v [A23; c6] {1} use a thumbmark for signature. Itúnà ang kumagkù
sa mga táwung dì makamaung mupirma, People who don’t know how to write
use a thumbmark for their signatures. {2} have coitus (humorous
euphemism). a illiterate. Ispúting kaáyu apan túnà diay, He is
well-dressed but he’s illiterate (he uses thumbmark for his signature).

tunáda n {1} tune of a musical piece. {2} tone, tenor of voice or
statement. Nagdalag kasukù ang tunáda sa íyang tíngug, The tone of his
voice is tinged with anger. Kláru ang íyang túyù sa tunáda lang sa
suwat, Her object is obvious just by the tenor of the letter.

tun-as v {1} [APB12] decompose entirely, cause s.t. to do so. Way báhù
ang patayng láwas nga matun-as, A dead body that is totally decomposed
is odorless. {2} [B12] fall into complete ruin. Natun-as na ang karáang
báy nga wà puy-i, The old, uninhabited house has fallen into ruin.
{3} destroy dreams, hopes, etc. Nagkatun-as na ang ákung mga damgu, My
dreams are gradually crumbling down. a totally decomposed.

túnaw v {1} [AB123(1); a2] melt, dissolve. Nagtúnaw kug kandílà pára sa
sawug, I melted some candles for the floor. Kutáwa ang kapi arun
matúnaw ang kámay, Stir the coffee so the sugar will dissolve. {2} [a3]
be mortified, melt with shame (literary). Natúnaw siya sa hilabihang
kaúlaw sa dihang gibinábuy siyag kasábà sa kadaghánan, He was mortified
with shame when he was given a dressing down in public. {3} — ug gátas
[A; b] mix a baby’s formula. Kinahanglan maampíngun ang mutúnaw ug
gátas sa bátà, One who mixes a baby’s formula must be careful.
a melted. (→) a half-melted. Ayawg palit ug ayis drap nga tunaw, Don’t
buy a half-melted popsicle. -an(→) n vessel for melting s.t. by
heating. pang- n instrumental in melting s.t. Sambúgan sa hustung
timpla nga pangtúnaw niíni, Dilute it with the right mixture which will
let it dissolve.

túnay a {1} real, genuine (slang). Dì ni imitisyun uy. Túnay ni, This
is not imitation. This is genuine. Maáyu siyang mudá mu rag túnay
giyud, He acts well, as though it were actually real. {2} true;
faithful to one’s sweetheart (slang). Ayaw siyag binuángi kay túnay nà
siya nímu, Don’t deceive her because she is true to you.

tunáyit v [A13] hold a dance until late hours. Magtunayit sarà ang
bayli basta dì muuwan, We’ll continue the dance till late if it doesn’t
rain.

tundaan n small boat usually towed behind the stern of a larger boat,
used for putting into shore where the larger boat can’t put in.

tundag v [AB; c1] sink, be on the way to the bottom; cause s.t. to be
so. Mitundag na ang nasúnug nga bapur, The boat that burnt has begun to
sink.

tundan = alitundan.

tundù v [A; a2] engage in s.t. conscientiously. Primyúhan tikawg
magtundù kag tuun, I’ll give you a reward if you study conscientiously.
Tundua nang ímung pagpangimplíyu, Be conscientious in your job. -in- =
tundù.

tunduk v [A; c] poke, hit or strike s.t. with the end or tip of s.t.
Ang hálas nga nakatunduk níya, The snake that struck him. Gitunduk níya
sa lamísa ang ayis pik, He stuck the icepick in the table. n {1} thrust
with the end of s.t. Ang hínay nga tunduk sa bára, The gentle thrust of
an iron bar. {2} a spot on an animal’s body or head. May tunduk nga
itum ang awman, The spotted snapper has a black spot. -an(←) n animal
having a spot.

túng n {1} rake-off given by gamblers to the owner of the gambling
paraphernalia used. {2} bribe given to a policeman to avoid arrest.
v [A; b6(1)] pay the tung. Ngánung dì ka man mutúng nga ikaw may
nakadaug? Why didn’t you pay the rake-off when you won the game? Ug
túngan nímu ang pulis, papamaligyáun ka nas asíras, If you pay the cops
off, you’ll be allowed to hawk on the sidewalk. -ir n the one who
collects the rake-off in a gambling den.

tunga v {1} [A; b6] come out from under water. Layù siyag gitungahan
gíkan sa íyang gisawman, The place he came up was far from where he
dived. {1a} [c6] pause to breathe while drinking a whole container of
spirits. Dílì nákù itunga ang usa ka búl nga tubà, I’ll drink a jar of
coconut palm toddy without pausing to breathe. {2} [A2; a12] show up or
see s.o. as per appointment or agreement. Wà na mutunga ang nakautang
nákù, The person who owed me money didn’t show up.

tungà n {1} half. Tungà sa taknà, Half an hour. {2} middle, center.
Tungà sa karsáda, Middle of the road. {3} vagina (euphemism).
{4} stomach (coarse). Bísag napunù na ang tungà, gabagulbul nga walay
lamì ang pagkáun, He filled his gullet, but he grumbles that the food
was no good. [so-and-so] sa ímung (íyang) — [so-and-so] is not true
(said in denying s.t. vigorously and with resentment). Dátù sa íyang
tungà. Wà man gánì kuy ikapalit ug bugas, Rich my foot! Here I don’t
even have money for food! tungang gabíi n midnight. v {1} [B256; c16]
be at about half of s.t. Mutungà sa kilumitru ang ákung gibaktas, I
walked for about half a kilometer. {2} [c16] hit at the middle or
center. Itungà (tung-a) giyud pag-igù arun buls-ay, Hit the center to
get a bull’s-eye. {3} [B126; a12] consume, reduce to half. Tung-un ku
nang usa ka galun nga tubà, I’ll consume half of that gallon of palm
toddy. {4} [b(1)] place between two or more others. Gitung-an siyag
higdà sa íyang Nánay ug Tátay, She was laid between her mother and
father. {5} [AC; abc3] divide, share into halves. Akuy mutungà arun way
áway, I’ll divide it so there will be no quarrel. Magtúngà ta sa
ganansiya, We will split the profit equally. Tungáa (tung-a) nà ninyung
duha, Divide it equally between the two of you. tungàtúngà n the
halfway or mid-point. Tungàtúngà sa átung lákaw, Mid-point of our trip.
v [A; a] divide equally among. Tungàtungáa ninyu nang usa ka buuk kík,
Divide that one cake equally among yourselves. hinungàtungà v [B1356]
be about halfway through. Nahinungàtúngà (nanungàtungà) na ang mísa
pag-abut námù, The mass was about halfway through when we arrived.
panungàtúngà v [A13] = hinungàtúngà. hiN- v [B156] be halfway done.
Walà pa gánì mahinungà ang kan-un niíni, mitindug na kini, She got up
before the rice was even halfway consumed. -in- a by half. Tinungà ka
manghangyù, You bargain things down to half-price. v [A; c] do by
halves or two to one. Way musúkul nímu bísag itinungà ang pusta, No one
will challenge you even if the bet is two to one. kinatung-an
n centermost, middlemost. — silangan Middle East. ka- n one-half of
s.t. Ibangku ang katungà sa ímung swildu, Deposit half of your salary
in the bank. v [B236] be at about halfway. Nakatungà na ku sa libru,
I’m halfway through the book. Wà pa ku makakatungà sa tísis, I have not
reached the halfway point in my thesis. tulung-an n palm toddy measure,
a bamboo tube container which holds one-half a típu_1, 1. tulung-un the
Wednesday of the Holy Week where work is done half day.

túngab v {1} [A2S; c] put the mouth to the edge of a vessel, as in
drinking. Mitúngab siya sa pawpaw arun pag-inum, He brought the half
coconut shell to his mouth to drink. {2} [c6] put the mouth near s.t.
as in drinking. Ayawg itúngab ímung bàbà sa ákung dunggan ug musulti
ka, Don’t put your mouth right on top of my ear when you talk.

túngan = tulungan. see túlung.

túngas v [A; a] go up a mountain, uphill. Mutúngas ta ánang bakilid, We
are going up that slope. Tungásun ku ang kabukíran pagpangítà nímu, I
will climb mountains to look for you. -un(→) a {1} uphill. {2} uphill
fight. Tungasun ang íyang kahimtang sa iliksiyun, He has an uphill
fight in the election. v [B125] be uphill or steep. Pahináyi ang awtu
kay nagkatungasun ang karsáda, Slow the car down because the road is
becoming steep.

tungaw n k.o. very minute, red mite that abounds in bushes, producing
an itchy bite and hiding in skin pores. Madakup pay tungaw nga dílì
gayud kini musayup paghapit kanámù, It’s more likely that you could
catch a mite (i.e. highly unlikely) than that he would fail to stop in
our place. v [b4] be infested with such fleas.

tungay v [B] hang down on a weak or loose attachment. Nagtungay ang
sanga sa káhuy nga wà malahus ug kaputul, The branch of the tree is
hanging because it was not completely cut through.

*tungbálay (from datung balay) paN- v [A2] {1} go to s.o.’s house.
Manumbálay ta sa átung bag-ung silíngan, Let’s visit our new neighbor’s
house. {2} haunt one’s mind. Nanumbálay sa ákung hunàhúnà ang átung
kagahápun, Our past haunts my mind. {3} [A2; a] go to farmhouses to
barter commodities. Manumbalay mi sa búkid káda tingsanggì, We go
bartering to the farmhouses during harvest season. maN- n a k.o.
fine-grained white rice with a savory, permeating smell.

tungdan = alitundan.

tunggà v [C; c] have a drinking spree (slang). Makigtunggà sila nákù
karung ákung adlaw, They want to have a drinking spree with me on my
birthday.

tunggal v [A; a] prod s.t. with a stick to drive or push it out of a
small place. Gitunggal níya ang sagbut sa túbu, He pushed the dirt out
of the pipe with a stick. Tunggála ang ilagà sa kisami, Poke at the
mice in the ceiling to drive them out.

tunggul a stupid, having no common sense. Tunggul kaáyu nímu uy nga dì
ka man makasabut ug sugúun, How stupid you are! You don’t understand
when you are told to do s.t.!

tungguy n {1} any growth that protrudes from the body. {2} a swelling
or protuberance on a tree. v [B46] protrude. Mutungguy ang sábà úsà
mugulà, The sucker protrudes first before coming out. tungguytungguy
n a knoblike protrusion, e.g. a pommel. Isab-it lang ang rinda sa
tungguytungguy ánang muntúra, Just loop the reins around the pommel of
the saddle. v [A13; a2] make, attach a knoblike protrusion.

tunghà v {1} [A2; b6] appear. May kumíta nga mitunghà sa lángit, A
comet appeared in the sky. Gitungháan siyag ingkantu, A supernatural
being appeared to him. {1a} [A2; a12] show up for a date. Nagsábut mi
nga magkítà sa alas dus apan wà ku níya tungháa, We agreed to meet at
two o’clock but he didn’t appear. {1b} [b8] come upon s.t. Sa pagtúngas
námù sa búkid ámung hingtunghaan ang usa ka talagsáung talan-áwun, When
we climbed up the mountain we came upon a spectacular view. {2} report
to work. Mutunghà kug sayu, I’ll go to work early. {3} [A; b6] attend
school, classes. Nagtunghà siya sa kulihiyu, She is attending college.
{4} [A23; b1] for s.t. to occur periodically. Sakitan giyud siya sa
tiyan basta mutunghà na kaníya ang íyang sakit, She gets a stomachache
when she has her period. — ang bisíta v [A2; b5] menstruate
(euphemism). pa- v [A; a1] send to school. Magwurking gud ku ug dì mu
makapatunghà nákù, I will work my way through if you can’t support my
studies. -l-an(→) n school.

tunghak v [A23; c6] stop drinking to catch one’s breath. tunghaktunghak
v [A13] stop every now and then while drinking to catch one’s breath.
Ísug kaáyung ilimnúna. Magtunghaktunghak kang muinum, The drink is too
strong. You have to stop every now and then to catch a breath when you
drink it.

tungína_1 n misfortune or suffering inflicted on s.o. by a supernatural
being in retribution for some infraction or at the behest of a
sorcerer. Kini ang tungína sa ákung pagkamakasasálà, This is my
retribution for being a sinner. v [A; b6(1)] send tungína to s.o.
Tungináhan ka, I’ll send divine punishment on you. tunginahan
n sorcerer who can have divine retribution sent.

tungína_2 v [A; c] needlessly deprive s.o. of s.t. Dì mutungína ang
inahan sa kinahanglanun sa anak, A mother does not deprive a child of
its needs. Ang kagawásan nga itungína nátù sa Kumunismu, The liberty
that Communism will deprive us of.

tungkà v {1} [A2C3; c1] meet, join, come together. Kining karsadáha
mutungkà adtung karsadáha, This road will meet that road. Nagtungkà ang
duha ka tumuy sa alambri, The two ends of the wire meet. Tungkáa
(itungkà) ang duha ka pidásung panaptun, Join the two pieces of cloth.
Dúgay nang wà mi magkatungkà, We haven’t gotten together for a long
time. {2} [AC; a2] hold a drinking spree, drink alcoholic beverages.
n drinking spree (slang). -an n place for drinking alcoholic beverages.
-in-an n joint, connection, seam.

tungkáhal v [B46N; c] for projections to stick out. Mitungkáhal
(nanungkáhal) ang mga sílik sa isdà, The fins of fish are sticking out.
Gitungkahálan sa mga lansang ang salug, Nails are sticking out from the
floor.

tungkalù v [A1; c6] sit down idly. Makatungkalù ka uruy dihà nga náay
daghang buluhatun sa ímung atubángan, nu? How can you just sit around
idly when there’s so much work to be done?

tungkì n dustpan. v [a12] do s.t. with a dustpan. Tungkía nang sinilhig
ug ilábay sa basúra, Sweep the waste into the dustpan. Then throw it to
the garbage can.

tungkù_1 v [A; ac] step, set on top of s.t. Tungkúa ang binítay arun ka
kaabut, Step on s.t. to reach the thing we had hung up. Itungkù ang
básu sa láin, Put the glass on top of another.

*tungkù_2 tabla ug — appear like a fool (euphemism for tabla ug tuntu).
Tabla lang tag tungkù íni. Naghuwat ta dinhi, naghuwat pud diay siya
didtu, We’re just like a bunch of fools. We wait here, and all the time
he was waiting there.

tungkù_3 = tuk-ung.

tungkud = sungkud.

tunglu v [A; a12] curse bringing evil effect. Ang Ginuu nagtunglu nga
magkamang ang hálas, The Lord condemned the serpent to crawl on the
ground. Ayawg tunglúha siya kay matinúud unyà, Don’t curse him, for it
might come true. n curse that brings evil effect. ‘Malatà pa untà ímung
tinái!’ tunglu níya, ‘May your intestines rot!’ he cursed. paN-
v {1} [A; c] utter curses. Daw makítà ku siya nga nagpanunglù kanátù,
It was as if I could see her cursing us. {2} [A2] do s.t. not serious
which will bring a curse on one. Ngánung nanilhig kag gabíi? Nanunglu
ka? Why are you sweeping after dark? You want to bring a curse on
yourself? matunglúhun a cursing.

tungtung v {1} [A; c] step, put on top. Mitungtung siya sa tabládu arun
pagdiskursu, He stepped on the stage to speak. Itungtung ang silya sa
lamísa, Put the chair on top of the table. {2} [A; b6] reach an age,
grade in school. Karun hinúun nga mitungtung na aku ning ákung
panuígun, Now that I have reached this age. Primarya ra ang íyang
hitungtungan, He didn’t get any further than the primary grades.
{3} [A; c] put interest on a loan. Grábi sad kang makatungtung ug túbù,
You sure charge a high interest. n interest on a loan.

túngu = tunglu.

tungud {1} because, due to. Napúkan si Samsun tungud ni Dilayla, Samson
fell because of Delilah. Tungud kay nalísang ku, Because I was afraid.
{1a} in set usage in prayers: ‘in the name of’. Tungud sa timáan sa
Santa Krus, sa ámung mga áway bawíun mu kami, Ginúung Diyus námù..., By
the sign of the Holy Cross deliver us from our enemies, our Lord God
... {2} by, at a place. Ihúnung ang dyíp tungud ánang balay, Stop the
jeep by that house. {3} directly beneath. Dúnay subwi tungud ning átung
gitindúgan, There is a subway directly beneath where we are standing.
v {1} [AP; cP] put directly beneath. Kinsay nagtungud (nagpatungud) ánà
sa bintánà? Hilud-an hinúun, Who put that beneath the window? S.o. spat
on it. Itungud (ipatungud) ang baldi sa grípu, Put the pail directly
under the faucet. {2} [AN; a12] go under the house to peep. Kinsa guy
gustung mutungud ug tigúlang, Who likes to peep at an old woman?
{3} [B1256] be at, near, or directly beneath s.t. Sirbátu kun matungud
na ta sa taw-ang dákit, Blow your horn when we get near the enchanted
banyan tree. {4} [b4] be concerned, referred to. Álang niadtung
hitungdan, To whom it may concern. Kadtung hitungdan sa ákung sulti,
Those referred to by my words. {4a} [a12] aim at s.t. or s.o. Ngánung
mau man puy inyung tungdun ug insultu ang hilumun? Why do you aim your
insults to one who does not even talk? n {1} the place directly below,
directly across. {2} niadtung tungúra at that particular juncture,
moment. Niadtung tungúra pagkadisgrasya níya gipangulbaan ku, That
instant when he met his accident I was terrified. (←) v {1} [AC; ac3]
put, arrange one exactly beneath or opposite the other. Akuy mutúngud
sa naghiwì nga dubul dik, I will put the double-deck beds exactly
beneath each other. Wà magtúngud ang butúnis ug uhális, The buttons and
the buttonholes are not exactly opposite each other. {2} [A1; a12] look
down searchingly into the sea for fish. Nagtúngud ang mananagat ug
maáyung panaun, The fisherman is looking into the sea for a good fish
to spear. tungudtúngud v [AP; b6P] make a pass at a girl or boy. Dúsi
pa siya piru daghan nang nagtungudtúngud (nagpatungudtúngud) níya, She
is only twelve but lots of boys are making passes at her. pa- v [A] go
beneath, near. Mipatungud siya sa ákung lawak, He went directly under
my room. pahiN- v [A; c] {1} give s.o. s.t. by way of thanks. Kay
mitábang man ka mupahinungud ku nímu ug diyis písus, Because you helped
I will give you ten pesos as thanks. {2} dedicate, do s.t. in honor of
s.o. Nagpahinungud ang lungsud ug mísa álang sa minatay, The town
offered a mass in honor of the dead. Kining kantáha ákung ipahinungud
nímu, This song I dedicate to you. n s.t. offered as thanks or as a
dedication. ka-, ka-(←) n right, privilege. May katungud (katúngud)
kang mahibalu kúmu asáwa, You have the right to know, being the wife.
katungdánan n {1} duty. Katungdánan sa anak ang pagsirbi sa ginikánan,
It is a child’s duty to serve his parents. {2} office, position. Taas
siyag katungdánan sa gubirnu, He holds a high office in the government.
pangatungdánan v [A] hold a position. tag-, tag-(←) n s.o. who owns,
has responsibility over s.t. Gustung ipalubung dáyun sa tagtungud
(tagtúngud) ang minatay, The family (lit. concerned party) wants to
have the body buried at once. hinungdan n cause of, reason for. Unsay
hinungdan nga miundang ka? What is the reason you quit? way —
a good-for-nothing, useless. Way hinungdan tawhána gipabantay, natū́g
na hinúun, He is useless! He is supposed to stand guard but he is
sleeping. v [A12P] cause. Ang mga pabrika mauy nakapahinungdan sa
pag-uswag sa dápit, The factories brought about progress in the place.
pakahinungdan v [A13; a12] consider s.t. important. Dì nátù
pakahinungdánun ang milabay na, Let’s not give importance to what has
already passed. hinungdánun, mahinungdánun a important. Hinungdánun nga
túyù, Important business. mahi-/maha- about. Magsulti ta mahitungud sa
Biyitnam, Let us talk about Vietnam. nahiN- n thing pertaining to. Mau
ray ílang gihisgutan ang nahinungud sa nigusyu, All they talked about
was matters of business. tungdunun n stars, constellations, or
landmarks used by fishermen, navigators, as a guide.

tungug n {1} k.o. mangrove, the bark of which is used for dyeing and as
an ingredient of coconut palm toddy. {2} bark of this mangrove. v [b4]
apply tungug. tulunggan, tungganan n container made of a bamboo node to
hold powdered material from this plant. katunggan n mangrove swamp.

tunguk v [B456] stay immobile, staring blankly. Nagtunguk siya.
Nagdamgu sigúru, He is staring blankly. He’s probably daydreaming.
Natunguk siya pagkadungug sa dautang balità, He sat motionless after he
heard the bad news.

túngul n {1} stomach of animals. {2} human stomach (humorous).
[so-and-so] sa ímung (íyang) — [so-and-so] is not true. Magminyù sa
íyang túngul. Náa pa gániy gátas sa bàbà! He is going to get married?
The hell he is. He isn’t even weaned yet!

tungup v [B6; a1] be exactly a certain quantity, time. Mutungup giyud
sa úras ning ákung rilu, My watch gives the exact time. Tungpa lag
lung-ag bálig lima ka táwu, Cook exactly enough rice for five people.
tunguptúngup v [A; a12] calculate the time or measurements.
Nagtunguptúngup lang ku sa úras kay wà man kuy rilu, I’m just
estimating the time because I don’t have a watch.

tung-uy v [A; c1] set cooking utensils over the fire. Nagtung-uy kug
lung-agan, I’m putting the rice on the fire now.

tunhay_1 v {1} [B26] prosper, be successful. Mutunhay ang nigusyu kun
kuntintu ang mga trabahanti, The business will prosper if the employees
are contented. Way kapulisan nga makatunhay (makapatunhay) sa kalínaw
inig-iliksiyun, No police force can guarantee peace and order during
elections. {2} [A23; a2P] endure, last. Mutunhay ning sapatúsa kay
lig-un, This pair of shoes will last because they are sturdy. Dílì ka
tunháyan ug butang ánang ímung ginamitan, The way you are using your
things, nothing is going to last. pa- v [A; c6] promote the success or
endurance of s.t. Salapì nga mupatunhay sa kinabúhing hamugáway, Money
that will allow one to have a life of leisure. ka-an, ka-un(→)
n success achieved. mag-r- sa kalínaw n sergeant-at-arms. ma-un
a lasting, enduring for a long time (literary). Matunháyung kalípay,
Everlasting happiness.

tunhay_2 a for the weather to be clear and bright. — ang ugat
a straight-grained wood. Ang káhuy nga tunhay ug ugat sayun limpiyúhan,
Straight-grained wood is easy to plane. v [B25; b6] be, become fine
weather. Ug matunhay (mutunhay) ang panahun, mularga ta, If the weather
is good, we can leave.

túnik n k.o. perfumed lotion (from the brand name, Tonix). v [A; b]
apply this lotion. Tuníki siya arun mahumut, Put perfume on her so she
will smell good. paN- v [A2; c6] apply this lotion to oneself.

*tuniku bínu — istumakal n an old medicinal liquor.

tunil_1 n bamboo palm toddy container of two nodes.

tunil_2 = tuniláda.

tunil_3, túnil n tunnel.

tuniláda n ton. Mutimbang ug usa ka tuniláda, It weighs one ton.

tunlù v [A; c] dip part of s.t. in a liquid or solid. Gitunluan námù
ang sikwátig pán, We dipped the bread in the hot chocolate. -an, -anan
n s.t. where one dips s.t.

tunlub v [A; c] stick, dunk s.t. completely or partially into a liquid
or solid. Nagtunlub siyag mga saput sa amirul, She is dipping clothes
into the starch. Itunlub ang plúma sa tintíru, Dip the pen into the
inkpot.

tunlud (from lúnud) v [A; c] submerge in a liquid.

tunsil = tansil.

tuntu a stupid, silly. Tuntu! Ngánung kining klasíha ímung gipalit,
Stupid! Why did you buy this kind? v {1} [B12; b6] become stupid,
silly, consider s.o. as such. Sa nagkadugay ka ning trabahúa nagkatuntu
ka sab, The longer you are on this job, the dumber you get. {2} [AN;
a12] deceive, make a fool of. Way kalúuy ang laláking nagtuntu nímu,
The man who deceived you was heartless. Manuntu ka man nákung mas wayis
man ku nímu, Don’t try to make a fool of me. I’m a bit smarter than you
are. Gituntu ka lang ánang mananag-an, That fortuneteller just hoaxed
you. -in- v [A; b(1)] {1} abuse, do s.t. mean or bad to s.t. Ug dúnay
mutinuntu nímung buguy, tawga lang ku, If some ruffian is mean to you,
just call me. Kinsay nagtinuntu ring ákung tigib nga nagíbang man, Who
abused my chisel? Somebody nicked it. {1a} abuse sexually. Ayaw siyag
tinuntuhi samtang dì pa mu minyù, Don’t abuse her so long as you are
not married. {2} do s.t. in a careless way, somewhat playfully. Ayawg
tinantug dúwà kay mapildi ta, Don’t fool around in this game. We might
lose. Gitinuntuhan níyag drúwing ang ákung tsárt, He was just fooling
around with the chart that I had him draw. {3} fool around with women.
Nagtinuntu ang íyang bána, Her husband is fooling around.
n {1} fooling, horsing around. {2} bad, illicit practices. Daghan
kaáyung tinuntu sa gubirnu, There is a great deal of corruption in the
government.

tuntun v {1} [A; c] lower s.t. Mitábang kug tuntun sa lungun sa buhù, I
helped lower the coffin into the hole. Ituntun ang baldi sa atábay,
Lower the pail into the well. {1a} [B6] sag loosely. Mituntun íyang
súsu nga wà bráhi, Her breasts sagged without a bra. Nagtuntun ang luag
níyang karsúnis, His pants are sagging because they are loose. {1b} [A;
b(1)] pay out a fishline. Tuntúni ug mga lima ka dupa ang pasul, Pay
out five fathoms of line. {2} [AB2; b6(1)] for s.t. weighted down to
sink; cause it to do so. Magtuntun siya sa iring nga ilábu sa dágat,
He’ll weight the cat down to throw it into the sea. Mutuntun (matuntun)
ug dalì ang pasul ug lagdúngan, The fishing line will sink easily if
you attach a sinker. {2a} [A13; b6] use a plumb to test whether things
are vertical. Magtuntun kus halígi arun dílì maghirig, I am using the
plumb line on this post so it won’t lean. n {1} string or rope used to
lower s.t. {2} heavy object attached to s.t. to make it sink. {3} plumb
line. paN- v [A2; b6(1)] fish in deep waters with a hook, line, and
sinker. n fishing with a hook, line, and sinker in deep waters.

túnu_1 n {1} tune of music pieces. Tudlúi ku sa túnu ánang kantáha,
Teach me the tune of that song. {2} intonation, tone. Nindut ug túnu
ang sinultihang Ilunggu, The Ilongo language has a pleasant intonation.
Malumu ang túnu sa párì nga nagsirmun, The priest preached with a
tender tone. — ug pasiyun v [AC3; a2] sing the passions of Jesus Christ
during Lent. Súgud sa Martis Santu magtúnu nag pasiyun sa ámù, Starting
with Holy Tuesday they sing the Passion of Jesus Christ at our place.
paN- n tone, manner of speaking. Sa íyang panúnu sukù kaáyu tu siya, By
the tone of his voice he was very angry.

túnu_2 v [B6; a12] for an undertaking to come out well or all right. Wà
mutúnu ang ákung bibingka kay kúlang ang lubi, My rice cakes did not
come out good because they lacked coconut. Tunúha ang ímung pagtuun
arun ka mulampus, Study consistently and carefully so you will succeed.

tunù, túnù n juice extracted by squeezing coconut meat. v [A; a12]
extract juice from coconut. (→) v [A; b] prepare food with coconut
extract. Tunui ang útan nga kalbásà, Stew the squash with coconut
juice. -in-an(→) n s.t. cooked with coconut extract. -un(→) a coconut
meat having plenty of juice.

tunub v {1} [A; b] step on. Nagtunub ka sa ákung prupyidad, You are
stepping on my property. Ayawg tumbi ang sáwug kay basà pa, Don’t step
on the floor. It’s still wet. {2} [A2; b2] set foot on, in. Dì na ku
mutunub ning inyung báy, I will never set foot in your house again.
{3} [A12] have attended some school. Amin na lang kay nakatunub nà
siyag unibirsidad, Just give in. He has gone to college, you know.
{4} [A; b6] dishonor, desecrate s.o.’s name or honor. Ayawg tumbi ang
dungug sa átung pamilya, Don’t dishonor our family’s name. (←)
n {1} footprint. {1a} the k.o. life one led. Sunda ang túnub sa ímung
amahan, Follow in your father’s footsteps. {2} footfalls. Kinsa nang
dagkug túnub sa táas, Who made that loud noise upstairs? — ug kasíkas
n sound effects in a radio play (lit. footfalls and noise). Ang mga
túnub ug kasíkas kinahanglang itayming giyud sa lakaw sa dúlà, The
sound effects should be coordinated with the progress of the play.
tumbanan n place one puts the feet when sitting.

túnud v {1} [A; c] convey below the surface of the water or into a pit.
Nagtúnud kug patayng irù sa lawud, I threw the dead dog into the deep
part of the ocean. Itúnud na ang lungun sa lungag, Lower the casket
into the hole now. {2} [B245; b6] for the sun to set. Nagkatúnud
(nagkatunud) na ang adlaw sa kasadpan, The sun is sinking in the west.

tunug n sound of a musical instrument. Manánuy ang tunug sa mga
tulunggun, The musical instruments make a sweet sound. a {1} resonant,
producing a distantly loud sound. Tunug ning sistáha dà, dì bungul,
This guitar is sure resonant. It is not dull. Tunug kaáyu dinhi ang
sinultihánay sa píkas kwartu, You can clearly hear the conversation in
the next room. {2} widely known. Tunug na nga mupaúlì ka, Everybody
knows that you’re going home. v [B2; b6] {1} become resonant, consider
s.t. so. Sa magkadaan ang byulin, magkatunug sab, The older a violin
gets, the more resonant it becomes. {2} be distinctly audible. Mutunug
ímung tíngug kun pabur mi sa hángin, Your voice is very audible if the
wind comes towards us. {3} [B12] be widely known. Natunug na sa lungsud
ang inyung kasal, Everybody knows that you’re getting married.
tulunggun n musical instrument.

tun-ug n {1} cold air, atmosphere. Panira arun dì musulud ang tun-ug,
Close the windows so the cold won’t get in. {2} dew. v [b4] be exposed
to cold drafts. Giubu siya kay natun-ugan, He has a cough because he
got exposed to the cold. pa- v [A; b(1)] expose s.t. or oneself to the
cold. Ayawg patun-ugi ang kutsi kay dúgayng muandar, Don’t expose the
car to the cold because it will be hard to start. paN- v [A] for the
odor of s.t. to spread all over. Dílì makapanun-ug ang búwak ug dì pa
mamuklad, Flowers don’t give off fragrance before the blossoms open.

tunuk n {1} thorn. Tunuk sa rúsas, Rose thorns. — sa isdà sharp spines
on a fish. {2} a sliver or thorn which has pricked the foot and gotten
lodged. Tudlísa ang tunuk, Get the splinter out with a needle.
{3} prick Tambáli ang tunuk, Put medicine on the prick. v [B126] get a
sliver or nail into one’s foot. Natunuk siyag lansang maung gititanus,
He got tetanus because he stepped on a nail. Makatunuk nang tuyum, Sea
urchins can prick you. hiN- v [A; b4(1)] cut the spines from fish.
Piligru ang ítu ug dì hinungkan (hinunukan) kay lā́, It is dangerous if
you don’t cut off the spines from the catfish because they are
poisonous. -un, tungkun a thorny. alambri nga -un n barbed wire.

túnul v [A; c] convey s.t. to s.o. by hand. Mitúnul siya sa kamut arun
pagpahalípay nákù, He offered his hand to congratulate me. Itúnul ra
nákù nang libru, Would you hand me that book?

tunung directly at a point. Naigù ang langgam tunung giyud sa
kasingkásing, He hit the bird right in the heart. v {1} [AC3; ac6] zero
in on a mark, go directly to s.t. Dihà mutunung sa íyang úlu ang
napúwak nga lubi, The coconut fell right on his head. Dì kung katunung
sa buhù sa dágum kay kurug ku, I cannot get the thread into the eye of
the needle because I’m shaking. Wà magtúnung ang mga batúnis ug uhális,
The buttons and buttonholes don’t exactly align. {2} [B1256; c16]
happen at a particular time, coincide with a certain other event.
Natunung nga bakasiyun ang pagkasakit nákù, I got sick just when it was
vacation time. Itunung (tungna) sa Anyu Nuybu ang inugurasiyun, The
inauguration is set for New Year’s day. {3} [A12; a2] get s.t. (good or
bad) as one’s lot. Nakatunung kug silyang tughuun sa sinihan, Of all
the seats in the theater I had to pick one that was infested with bugs.
Tungna nang asáwang paraygun, Pick a wife that asks for affection.
{4} [A12] have the presence of mind to do s.t. Hastang kulbáa nákù. Wà
ku katunung ug dágan, How shaken I was! I didn’t have the presence of
mind to run. n s.t. aimed at. Milakaw siyang way tunung, He walked out
without going anywhere in particular. Láin siyag tunung, He has an evil
purpose.

túnuy a fully ripe, well-ripened. v [APB3(1); c1] be, become fully
ripe, make s.t. ripe. Karbúru mauy mutúnuy (mupatúnuy) sa ságing,
Calcium carbide will make the fruit fully ripe. Matunuy na ning mga
prútas inigabut nátù sa Manílà, These fruits will be fully ripe when we
arrive in Manila.

tunyu nu (from tuntu nu) would I be foolish enough to do that?
Nagdúngan mig swildu apan akuy íyang pabayrun sa sini. Tunyu nu? We
were both paid at the same time, but he wants me to pay his way to the
show. He must think I’m stupid or s.t.

tupà v [A23; b8] alight, settle down or land without effective control.
Ang ayruplánu mitupà sa humayan, The airplane crash-landed in the rice
field. Ang balay nga natupaan sa kwítis nasúnug, The house on which the
rocket fell caught fire.

tupad = tapad.

túpas n topaz.

tupay v [a4] become unconscious with the pupils of the eyes moving
upward and with twitching of the fingers. Idalì ang bátà sa huspital sa
dílì pa tupayun, Bring the child at once to the hospital before it
becomes unconscious. n state of being unconscious.

tupi v [A; b] give haircut. Kinsang barbirúha nagtupi nímu, Which
barber gave you a haircut? n haircut. pa- v [A; b] get a haircut.

túpi v [B26C3; c] be flush with. Sipilyáhi ang bagà nga tabla hangtud
magtúpi ang duha, Plane down the thick board until the two boards are
exactly even. Abunúhi ang karsáda hangtud matúpi sa daplin, Put fill in
the road until it is flush with the edge. Pun-a ang tangki hangtud ang
túbig matúpi sa ngábil, Fill up the tank until the water is flush with
the rim.

tupiku n topic. Pirmi lang pulitiku ang tupiku nga ílang hisgútan,
Politics is always the topic of their conversation.

tupit v [B; c16] speak with mispronunciations from speech defects,
similar to lisping in English, but with a substitution of /s/ for /t/.
(The tongue is said to stick to the roof of the mouth.) Nagtupit ang
dílà sa nagdiskursu tungud sa nirbiyus, The man who was giving a speech
was so nervous he started to lisp.

tuplak v [A; c6] {1} push s.o. or s.t. away. Gituplak sa bátà ang básu
sa bintánà, The child pushed the glass out of the window. {2} push a
cock toward another to induce the second cock to fight. Ituplak ning
sunúya sa usa arun masakmalan tung usa inig-áway níla, Shove this cock
toward the other one so that I can grab it when they fight.

tuplas = pantuplas.

tupluk_1 a mischievous, full of pranks. Gibutangag íhì sa tupluk dakù
ang pláwir bís ni Mám, The prankster put urine in the teacher’s vase.
v [B12; b6] be, become mischievous.

tupluk_2 = tulpuk (but not doubled).

tuptup v [A; a] {1} cut s.t. from its base or stem. Tuptúpa ang pakù
kay dì nà iapil paglútù, Cut the wings off. Don’t include them with
what you are cooking. {1a} cut s.t. with long strokes at the base.
{2} cut s.t. straight across, not tapering. Kinsay nagtuptup ug tupi
nímu? Who cut your hair evenly all around your head? a being cut
straight across, not tapering. pina- v [A; c] make s.t. cut straight
across.

túpù v [A; ac6] pair a boy and a girl off half jokingly. Kusug siyang
mutúpù piru nagpabíling dága, She loves to match others off, but she
herself stays single. Tupúa sila labun parisun, Match them up. They
make such a good pair. tupùtúpù n matching couples.

túpuk = tulpuk. (→) n {1} hole in the ear for earrings. {2} holes in an
animal’s ears through which a rope is passed.

túpung a {1} of the same height, even along the top or bottom. Túpung
ang íyang mga ngípun, Her teeth are all of the same height.
{2} reaching an equally high state of excellence. Si Magsaysay walay
túpung, No one is as great as Magsaysay. v {1} [A23S; a2b2] reach to a
certain height or level. Ang ákung kalágut mitúpung na sa lángit, My
anger reaches the heavens. {2} [A; a] make things even. Tupúnga ang
tiil sa silya arun dì magkindangkindang, Even up the chair legs so it
won’t wobble back and forth. Dílì na siya hitupngan sa pagkapalikíru,
No one is as great a philanderer as he is. {3} [C; a] be of the same
height. Nagtúpung sila, They are of the same height. Tupúngun nátù ang
mga tanum, Let’s cut the plants even along the top. — ang tiil v [C3]
be dead (humorous). {4} [C; c] compare height, ability. Dílì ikatúpung
ang íyang abilidad, There is nothing that can compare to his ability.
see also alinupung.

tupus_1 v [A; b(1)] {1} suck on s.t. in the mouth to eat it or get the
juice out. Nagtupus kug biksdrap kay árat ákung tunlan, I am sucking on
a cough drop because I have a sore throat. {2} toy or play with s.t.
with the mouth. Madaníhung ngábil nga íyang gitupsan sa pagháluk níla,
The attractive lips he played with as they kissed. tinupsan n pulp or
juiceless flesh after eating. Silhíga ang mga tinupsan human mug pangus
ug tubu, Sweep away the pulp after you’re through eating your sugar
cane. talinupsan a for clothes to be moist, almost dry after having
been wet. Mabulkas na ang hinalay kay talinupsan na, You can take in
the clothes now because they are almost dry. v [B125] be, become almost
dry.

tupus_2 v {1} [A; a12] take over the task of s.o. incapable or
unavailable. Kinsa may mutupus sa ímung trabáhu ug mulakaw ka, Who
takes over your chores when you go out? Tupsa ring ákung buhatun kay
kahilanatun ku, Take over my work because I feel feverish. {2} [A; b]
make up for the time lost or missed. Buhían mu run kun tupsan ninyu ang
klási sa Sabadu, I will dismiss you now if you make the class up on
Saturday. {3} [A; a12] make up for s.t. lacking by s.t. very good.
Púlus sila burung piru gitupus sa ílang anak nga utukan, They are
mostly imbeciles, but their one brainy child made up for it. n {1} time
used for make-up. Ang trabáhu run tupus sa pista upisiyal gahápun,
Today’s work is to make up for yesterday’s holiday. {2} s.t. just as
much so in exactly the opposite way. Dátù mi niadtu, tupus pud run nga
kakha tukà, We used to be just as rich as we are poor now.
Pagkagarbúsang bayhána, tupus sa íyang bánang labihan kamapaubsánun,
She is just as stuck up as her husband is modest.

tupwak v [A; b6(1)] push s.t. into a place below in one motion. Wà pa
hibaw-i kung kinsay mitupwak sa Dun didtu sa pangpang, The person who
pushed the Don over the cliff has not been identified yet.

*turágas pa- v [A] do s.t. indiscriminately without any aim or
connection and in unrestrained amounts. May katarúngan nà siyang
mupaturágas ug gastu kay kwartáhan man sab, He has a reason to spend
his money carelessly. He has plenty anyway. Pangutan-a nang piríku dì
ba mupaturágas nà rug tubag, Address the parrot and it will answer you
with a stream of random talk. Nagpaturágas lag pamusil sa kabalayan ang
mga bandídu, The bandits sprayed the houses with bullets
indiscriminately. pina- n {1} s.t. done carelessly and without
restraint. {2} extemporaneous dialogue. Nalingaw kaming namínaw sa mga
pinaturágas ni Karpu ug ni Bituy sa radiyu, We had great fun listening
to the extemporaneous dialogue of Karpo and Bitoy over the radio.

tural see natural.

turátuy v [P; b4] go directly s.w. without paying attention to the
surroundings because of anger, embarrassment or some other emotion.
Mipaturátuy (miturátuy) siyag lakaw bísag ámung gitawag, She walked
straight ahead even though we called her.

túray v [A; a12] scold s.o. heavily. Mutúray nà siyag kasábà ug dì nímu
tumánun ang íyang súgù, She really scolds you if you don’t do what she
says.

turban n turban or similar headdress. v [A; c] wear a turban.

turdbis n third base in a ball game. v [B36] be on third. Wà giyuy
nakaturdbis námù, Not one of us got to third base.

túri n {1} tower. {2} rook in chess. v {1} [A; c] confine in a tower.
Gitúri sa hárì ang bigáun níyang anak, The king shut his promiscuous
daughter up in a tower. {2} [A13] stay high above from a vantage
position overlooking the view below. Nagtúri ka man giyud dihà. Maáyu
kaáyu ang ímung paglantaw sa byú, nu? You are up high over there. You
sure get a good view, don’t you?

túrik = kuslad.

turíkì v [AC; b5] have intercourse with (humorous). À, muturíkì ka níya
bísag gadaut siya, My! You’d have intercourse with her even if she is
menstruating?

turil n corral for a herd. v [a1] enclose herd in a corral.
Kinahanglang turilun ang mga báka arun way makabuhì, The cows must be
fenced in so that none can escape.

túrins n Torrens Title, a document attesting full legal ownership of a
piece of land. titulu — = túrins.

turíru n jeans, women’s tight-fitting trousers that look like matadors’
trousers. v [A; c1] make jeans.

turista n tourist. v [B16] be, become a tourist.

turíti n male calf of a cow or carabao.

turiyal v [A; a12] disturb, bother s.o. Way muturiyal nímu ug wà kay
útang, Nobody disturbs you if you don’t owe anybody anything. Way
makaturiyal nákù ug akuy matúlug, Nobody dares disturb me when I’m
asleep.

turíyu_1 n adolescent or young bull or male water buffalo. v [B1256;
b6] for a male calf to get to be full grown. Ikadáru na nang nati ug
maturíyu, You can use the calf for plowing when it gets to be nearly
full-grown.

turíyu_2 n bullfight.

turka = turku (female).

turku n Indian or Pakistani.

turnilyu_1 n bolt, screw. v [b6] use a screw or bolt on s.t. Turnilyúhi
na lang nang kaptanan arun malig-un, Just use a screw on that handle so
it is strong. lísù sa — = lísù sa buut. see lísù. turnilyadur n screw
driver. v [a] use a screw driver on s.t.

turnilyu_2 n k.o. finger wrestling where the players join their middle
fingers with their arms resting on a table and the one who succeeds in
turning the other’s hand over wins. v [B; b6] have finger wrestling.

turníru see turnu.

turniyu, turníyu n {1} tournament. {2} sports tournament. Turníyu sa
baskitbul, Basketball tournament. {3} = turnilyu_1. v {1} [A13; ab3c]
have a tournament. Turniyúhun (turniyúhan) nátù ang kamut sa prinsísa,
We will have a tournament for the princess’ hand. Ug iturníyu ang kamut
sa prinsísa, sigurádung ikay únang mapárut, If the princess’ hand is
offered in a tournament you would surely be the first to get beaten.
{2} [A13] have a sports tourney. {3} = turnilyu_2.

turnu_1 v {1} [A; a12] turn or cut s.t. in a lathe. {2} [A; b6] thread
screws or bolts. n {1} lathe or machine for threading screws and bolts.
{2} thread on a screw or bolt. turnuhan = turnu, n1. turníru n lathe
operator.

turnu_2 n turn to do s.t. Ímu nang turnu paglútù karun, It’s your turn
to cook now. v [A; c] assign turns to do s.t. Kinsay gaturnu nímu
paggwardiya sa Duminggu? Who assigned you to stand guard on Sunday?
turnuturnu, turnuhay n rotation system or by turn. Turnuturnu ang
paglimpyu sa simbahan ug átù karun, Cleaning the church is done by
turns, and it’s our turn today. v [A1; c] do by turns. Magturnuturnu
(magturnuhay) tag báyad sa sugà, Let’s take turns paying the light
bill.

turnus = tugnus.

turpáda v [AC; b5] attack, encounter in a fight. Kausa ra nang kasúha
ug abugádung dikampanilya ang muturpáda ánà, You’ll have no trouble
getting your case dismissed if you have a good lawyer fighting it for
you. Ang mga girilyang nagturpáda sa garisun sa Hapun, The guerrilla
who attacked the Japanese garrison. Ug mga bátà ang makaturpáda íning
makaúna, mangurímaw ni dáyun, If the children attack this food, nothing
will be left of it. Ug makigturpáda kag bastus, mabastus kag apil, If
you fight with low people, you bring yourself down to their level.

turpi a acting stupid. v [B12; b6] become stupid. Nagkadugay ka ning
trabahúa nagkaturpi sab ka, The longer you are on the job the dumber
you act. — ang dílà v [B12; a12] for the tongue to be twisted, as after
a heart attack, or when a person is in the throes of death.

turpídu n torpedo. v [A; a12] torpedo. Giturpídu ang bapur ug natundag,
The ship was torpedoed and sank.

tursi v {1} [A; a12] twist a limb, wring a neck. Buhíi nang kurta arun
dì ku tursíhun nang ímung buktun, Drop that knife or I’ll twist your
arm. {2} [A; a12] turn, rotate s.t. Tursihag hínay ang manabíla, Turn
the steering wheel slowly.

turta n k.o. thick, heavy cake made from flour and eggs. v [A; a2]
make, have turta.

turtilya, turtilyas n egg omelette, s.t. cut up fine and fried with a
beaten egg. v [A; a2] have, make an omelette.

turtur = tuktur.

túru n {1} male carabao or bull. — nga báka bull. {2} male in a paid
sex show. {2a} = pa-, n2. v {1} [B1256] become a bull. Kusgan kaáyu
ning turiyúha ug matúru na, This young bull will be very strong when it
gets to be a full-grown bull. {2} = pa-, v1a. {3} [A; c16] make s.o.
work like a horse. Kusug nang agalúnang mutúru ug súgù, apan dílì
maáyung manwildu, That employer makes his employees work like a horse
but he doesn’t pay them well. pa- n {1} bullfight. {2} sexual
intercourse displayed for a fee. {3} fraudulent coin-tossing game where
the coins have two heads. v [A; a] {1} hold a bullfight. {1a} have a
sex exhibition. {1b} cheat with fraudulent coins. {2} have sexual
intercourse (humorous). turutúru n = pa-, n2. v {1} = pa-, v1a. {2} [A;
c16] work hard like a horse. Giturutúru nákù ang trabáhu apan wà ku
swildúhi, I worked like a horse, but I wasn’t paid. paturutúru v [A13]
pretend to be brave like a bull.

turuk v {1} [B23(1)46; b(1)] sprout, grow from the surface. Wà
makaturuk ang similya tungud sa húlaw, The seeds did not sprout because
of the drought. Uy gitugkan ug buhuk si Upaw, My, old Baldy has grown
hair. {2} [B246; b(1)] for a feeling to develop. Makapaturuk
(makaturuk) sa katáhap ang íyang linihukan, His behavior arouses
suspicion. n {1} sprout. Pandúngi ang mga bag-ung turuk arun dì maláyà,
Cover the new sprouts so they don’t wither. {2} sprout on coconut
fruit. Tul-id giyud ang turuk sa binhiun nga lubi, The sprouts of the
coconuts for planting are really straight. {3} penis (humorous
euphemism). — banwa n {1} s.t. growing without being planted and taking
space, like a weed. {2} a person who is useless and occupies space.
Turuk banwa nà siya sa pamilya; dílì mutábang sa buluhatun, That person
just occupies space in the house. He does not help with the chores.
tugkan n coconut having a sprout. turukturuk n tiny growths which
emerge. Unsa nang mga turukturuk sa ímung náwung, bugas? What are those
growths on your face, pimples?

turun n confection made with chopped nuts mixed in honey or sugar
paste. — diman peanut nougat. — dipíli pili nut nougat. banána — sweet
made of bananas wrapped in thin pastry and fried. v [A; b6c1] make a
nut nougat. -is(←) = turun (plural).

turung n s.t. worn as a head covering. Pagdalag turung kay tingálig
muulan, Bring s.t. to cover your head with. It might rain. v [B6; c1]
protect the head, wear a head covering. Nagturung siyag dáhun sa ságing
arun dì mahumud sa ulan, He protected his head with a banana leaf to
avoid getting wet in the rain.

turungturung n small top shells reaching 1″.

turúrut = tarúrut.

turus v [A; a12] {1} squash s.t. between the two thumbnails. Turusa
(tudsa) dáyun ang kútu arun dílì mawálà, Squash the louse immediately
with your thumbnails before it disappears. {2} defeat or crush helpless
opposition in a fight. Ipakítà ku kaninyu unsáun pagturus nang ámung
mga kaáway, I’ll show you how we will crush our enemy.

turut a exhibiting a lack of judgment or propriety in doing s.t. or
speaking; silly. Manginhas magpáyung mu rag si turut, You are a dodo!
You want to take an umbrella to go shellfishing! v [B126] be, become
silly.

turútut = tarúrut.

turútuy a a person much shorter than normal. Taastaas sad ang turútuy
kay sa inánu, A very short person is taller than a dwarf. v [B12; b6]
become a very short person.

tús_1 v [A; c] set up a volleyball. -ir n one whose job is to set up
the ball for the spiker. v [B1256; c1] be the one who sets the ball up
for the spiker.

tús_2 = túlus.

tusak = tuslak. (←) v [B13; a12] pierce s.t. with several holes. Kinsay
nagtúsak áring tilun? Who put a lot of holes in the screen? Tusákun kag
dunggab ug hisakpan ka sa tulisan, The bandits will stab you all over
if they catch you. tusaktusak = tusak.

tus-ap_1 v [A; c16] put up a candidate. Musugut kag tus-ápun (itus-ap)
kang kandidátu? Are you amenable if they put you up as a candidate?

tus-ap_2 = tús_1.

tusdik v [A; a12] prick a pustule. Ayaw ug líhuk samtang nagtusdik ku
sa ímung talubig, Don’t move while I prick your pustule.

túsik_1 n drinking party (slang). Ági unyà sa ámù karung gabíi kay may
túsik didtu, Come by the house tonight because we’re holding a drinking
party. v [AC; c1] have a drinking party or drink alcoholic beverage
(slang).

túsik_2 v {1} [A; b5] peck at. Nabúta siya kay gitúsik íyang mata sa
langgam, He became blind because a bird pecked at his eyes. {2} [AC;
a12] start a cockfight by letting the cocks peck each other once.
Kinahanglang tusíkun ang mga manuk arun maglábuk dàyun, The cocks must
be set to pecking at each other so that they will fight at once.
n {1} pecking. {2} setting of cocks to peck at each other.

tuskig a stiff, crisp. Tuskig nga papil dibangku, Crisp banknotes.
v [B; b6] stiffen. Ang nagtuskig níyang karsúnis, His well-starched
trousers. Nagkatuskig na ang minatay, The body is getting stiff. — ug
líug be haughty. pa- v [A; c1] act haughty. Nagpatuskig lang siya sa
líug dihang gipangayúag hinábang, She acted haughty when I asked her
for a contribution.

tuslak v [A; a1] drive s.t. into s.t. so as to pierce it. Kinsay
nagtuslak sa prútas ug kutsilyu? Who stuck a knife into the fruit?
Gituslak níla ang mata sa higanti, They pierced out the giant’s eyes.

tuslù v [A; c] dip part of s.t. into s.t. for a short period of time.
Ígù ra kung mituslù sa túbig. Walà ku magdúgay kay tugnaw, I just
dipped into the water for a minute. I didn’t stay long because it was
cold. Nagtuslù ug asin nga nagkaug mangga, He is eating mangoes dipping
them in salt.

tuslub = tunlub.

tuslud (from sulud) v [A; c] dunk s.t. in a liquid or solid, partially
or completely. Maputì ang karning ituslud sa inínit túbig, Meat gets
pale if it is dunked into hot water. Ituslud ang mangga sa asin, Stick
the mango in the salt.

tusluk v {1} [A; ab2] prick or poke s.t. by driving s.t. pointed into
it. Kinsay nagtusluk íring kík nga nabúhù man? Who poked a finger in
the cake? It has a hole in it. Tuslúka ang mata sa kuntra, Poke your
finger into your opponent’s eyes. {1a} [b8] be had for sexual purposes.
Hituslukan na nang bayhána sa íyang uyab, The girl has had relations
with her boy friend. {2} [A; b6(1)] plug into a socket. Itusluk únà ang
kurd únà mamalantsa, Plug the cord in before you iron. n electric plug.
-anan n electric outlet, socket for plugging s.t. into.

tusmaw v [A; c] get into a pool of liquid, completely or partly.
Natusmaw ku sa lápuk, I fell into a muddy pool. Ang mga nagámit nga
kubyirtus mauy itusmaw sa túbig ínit, The silver they used should be
immersed into the boiling water.

tusmud v [A; c] {1} push s.o. forward. Natumba ang bátà nga íyang
gitusmud, The child that he pushed fell down. {2} dip, immerse s.t. big
in water. Siyay nagtusmud sa katring dughuun didtu sa dágat, He
immersed the bed that was full of bugs into the sea. Natusmud siya sa
kanal, He fell into the ditch. {3} [A] wade, immerse oneself in the
water.

tusnub v {1} [A; c] dip, dunk or sop in liquid, esp. s.t. which absorbs
and becomes soft. Alkuhul nga gitusnúban sa gápas, Alcohol the doctor
dipped the cotton in. Itusnub ang dúnat sa kapi, Dunk the doughnut in
the coffee. {2} [A2] wade, swim in water.

tusnud v [A; c] dip, immerse a part of s.t. or s.t. held. Kinsa tung
nagtusnud sa ákung ū́ sa túbig? Who held my head under the water?
Natusnud sa lápuk ang íyang sapátus, He stepped into the mud puddle
with his shoes.

tustǎr v [A; c1] toast bread or noodles. n s.t. toasted. tustádu
n toasted bread or noodles. v [A13; a12] toast bread or noodles.

tustus v [A; a2] roll up a tobacco leaf. Tustúsa dáan nang tabákù arun
dì ka na magtustus pa sa uma, Roll the tobacco beforehand so you won’t
have to roll any in the field. n rolled tobacco leaf, -in- n rolled up
tobacco leaf. v [A] smoke rolled tobacco. Magtinustus gihápun siya
bisag makapalit nag abánu, He insists on smoking rolled tobacco even
though he can afford cigars now.

túsu a clever in deceiving others. Túsu kaáyu si Baúhay maung
nakalingkawas siya gíkang Amúay, Mr. Turtle was very clever so he
managed to escape from Mr. Monkey. v [B12; b6] become clever in
deceiving. patusutúsu v [A; b6] pretend. Nagpatusutúsu kung hubug arun
agákun ku níya, I acted drunk so she would help me walk.

tusud = turus.

túsug v [A12; a4] for s.t. sharp to pierce and get stuck into s.t.
Bildu mauy nakatúsug sa ligid, A glass splinter got stuck into the
tire. Natúsug ang íyang kamut sa dágum, He pricked his hand with a
needle. (→) n a sliver stuck into s.t.

túsuk v {1} [A; ac] pierce s.t. through s.t. else, skewer. Tusúka ang
isdang tap-anan, Skewer the fish you are going to broil. {2} [A; b]
make a hole in the earlobe. (→) n {1} skewer. {2} a hole in the ear for
earrings or in animals for the tether rope.

túsup v [A; b] suck the juice out of s.t. Tusúpi ang lísu únà iluwà,
Suck the juice out of the seed before you spit it out.

tusuy = sutuy.

tutal it does not matter, in any event [so-and-so] is the case. Pahagka
ku bi. Tutal, kaslúnun na man ta, Let me kiss you. Anyway, we are going
to get married. Ákù lang gibilin. Tutal, mubalik pa man ku, I just left
it. Anyway, I was going to come back for it. Ngánu bag mag-úlan? Tutal,
díay ákung páyung, What if it rains? Anyway, I have my umbrella.

tútal v {1} [A; a12] add up. Búgù giyug aritmitik ang nagtútal íni, The
one who added this up must be slow in arithmetic. {2} [a12] sum up
advantages and disadvantages, pro’s and con’s, etc. Ug tutálun nátù,
ikaw ang alkansi sila ang nak aganansiya, If we analyze it, you are on
the losing end and they gain.

tutbras n {1} toothbrush. {2} action of brushing the teeth. Ngípun nga
walay tutbras, Teeth which haven’t been brushed. v [A; b] brush s.o.’s
teeth for him or false teeth. Tutbrási nang ímung marpil uy, Brush your
false teeth! paN- v [A2; c6] brush one’s teeth. Ayawg panutbras kay
anúgun ang kìkì, Don’t brush your teeth because it’s a waste of food
particles.

tuthu = taluthu.

tutpik n {1} toothpick. Mu ra ka mag tutpik kaniwánga, You are as thin
as a toothpick. {2} variety of croton (kalípay, 2) with very slender
leaves. paN- v [A2; c6] pick one’s teeth.

tútù title for a male a little older than the speaker, used also as a
nickname.

tùtù_1 v {1} [A; a] crush, pound s.t. until it is soft or tender but
without breaking it into pieces. Magtùtù kug anghilika itampuy sa
nagsakit kung ngípun, I’ll crush bryophyllum leaves to use as a
compress for my teeth. Ákung tùtúun ang karning bipstikun, I’ll pound
the meat for beefsteak. {2} [A; c1] bruise a part of the body, the
lips, with a violent impact.

tùtù_2 = talùtù_1.

tutub v [A; b5] cover the mouth of a container securely by laying s.t.
over it and tying it. Ákung tutubun (tutbun, tutuban, tutban) ang
ginamus, I’ll cover the salted fish securely. n cover tied around the
mouth of a container. -in- n vessel or container which is covered
securely.

tutug = tultug.

tútuk_1 v [A2] stand upright unaided or on one’s own. Dì pa mutútuk
ning batáa, This child can’t stand unsupported yet. Dì pa ku makatútuk
kaáyu kay lúya pa ang ákung láwas, I can’t stand alone very well yet
because I’m weak. udtung — n high noon.

tútuk_2 v [A; b6] stare. Nagsiga íyang mata nga mitútuk nákù, He stared
at me with his eyes blazing. Itútuk ímung mga mata sa kahitas-an, Fix
your eyes to the heavens. -in-ay v [C; c3] stare at each other.

tutul, tútul v [A2; b(1)] object. Ug way mututul, aprubádu na ang
musiyun, If no one objects, the motion is approved. Unsang partíha sa
risulusiyun ang ímung gitutúlan? What part of the resolution are you
objecting to? ma-un a characterized with reluctance or disobedience.

tutunlan see túlun.

tútut = títit.

tútuy v {1} [A2S; b] suck the breast. Nagtutuy pa siya pagkamatay sa
íyang inahan, He was still sucking his mother’s breast when she died.
{2} [A13] be at the sucking stage. Dì pa mabulag ang ituy sa inahan kay
nagtutuy pa, You can’t take the puppy away from its mother because it
is still suckling. {3} [A23] lick s.o.’s boots. Kusug kaáyu ang íyang
pag-usbaw sa katungdánan kay maáyu mang mutútuy, He easily got to the
top because he never hesitates to lick his superiors’ boots. n breast.
tutyan, tutyanan n feeding bottle.

tuu, túu_1 n {1} right hand, right side of a pair. Kusgan ang tuu (túu)
nákung kamut kay sa wala, My right hand is stronger than my left. — nga
kamut {a} right hand. {b} right-hand man. Siya ang túung kamut sa dátù,
He is the right-hand man of the Datu. {2} right side. Likù sa tuu, Turn
to the right. wala ug — see wala. pa-(→) v [A; c6] go to keep to the
right side. Ipatuu ang kutsi labinag likuun, Keep to the right, esp. on
the curves. tuuhun, tuhuun, tùhun n {1} right-handed. {2} implement
made to be used by a right-handed person. Ayawg gámit sa tuuhun nga
sundang ug walhun ka, Don’t use a right-handed bolo if you are
left-handed.

túu_2 v {1} [A; b(1)] believe. Mutúu ka bag anting-anting? Do you
believe in amulets? Tuhúan (tuúhan) ba gud nang pulitiku? Should you
believe that politician? {2} [AP; b(1)] heed. Dì ka man gud mupatúu
(mutúu) ug tambágan, It’s because you don’t listen when you’re given
advice. Sultíhi siya kay ikaw ray íyang tuhúan, Tell him because you’re
the only one he listens to. Mitúu Aku n The Apostles Creed. short form:
mituáku. Mangadyì kitag Mitúu Aku, Let us pray the Apostles’ Creed.
v {1} [A13] return, come back to a place after having supposedly left
it for good (from the portion of the Apostles’ Creed that reads, ‘And
He will come back ...’). Anía mibálik na sab ku mu ra ug nagmitúu aku,
Here I am back again, like it said in the Apostles’ Creed. {2} [A13P]
keep going back and forth. Magmituáku ang kalag pagtúman sa
pinitinsiya, A soul keeps coming back on earth to do penance. Ang
pagkalimtánun mauy makamituáku (makapamituáku) nákù sa balay, I’m so
forgetful I keep going back and forth to the house. tuutúu
n superstitious belief. Tuutúu lang nga taw-an nang dakíta, It’s
nothing more than superstition that that banyan is inhabited by
spirits. patuutúu v [A; c] deceive by pretending to be s.o. or teaching
s.t. false. Nagpatuutúu siyang asindíru apan diay musimus nga dakù, He
pretends to be a big landowner when he’s nothing more than a beggar.
Unsa na say íyang gipatuutúu? What k.o. foolishness is he trying to
make you believe now? n false ideas which s.o. is disseminating.
Patuutúu lang nà sa mga panatiku, That’s nothing but baloney that the
fanatics try to make you believe. matuutuuhun, matuhùtuhuun
a superstitious, given to false beliefs. tinuhúan, tinuúhan n beliefs,
religious or otherwise. tuluhúan n article of belief. pag- n belief,
feeling of certainty that s.t. is a certain way. matuúhun a having
faith.

tuub, túub_1 n {1} k.o. treatment by steam whereby the patient is set
before a pot of boiling water with herbs or a representative of
whatever caused his illness, and a blanket is put over him so that he
can breathe in the steam; or if it is just a part of his body that is
ailing, the ailing part is exposed to the steam. {1a} a similar
treatment with tobacco smoke instead of steam for stomach ailments.
{2} the material which is thought to have caused the illness, used in
the tuub treatment. (←) v [A; b5] treat with tuub. Gitúub (gituúban) ku
ang katul sa ákung tiil, I treated the rash on my foot with steam.

túub_2 n unopened palm fronds, esp. coconut. Nagkúhà siyag túub pára sa
bindíta sa lukay, He gathered some unopened coconut fronds for Palm
Sunday.

tuud n {1} stump of tree or post. 2 unextracted stump of a tooth.
v [B1256] get worn down to stumps.

túud_1 {1} particle indicating agreement with an explanation or after
being reminded. Túud nu, pídi man diay run, That’s right, isn’t it? It
is payday today, isn’t it? {2} particle indicating that s.t. is in
accordance with what happened before. Túud man, ílang gilúkat ang
ságing, And so, they uprooted the banana plant (after having discussed
doing so). {3} particle used to disprove s.t. that was negated:
actually, in reality. Wà kunu siyay áluy, dúna túud, He said he does
not have a penny, but actually he does. {4} is it true that? Muanhi
túud ang mayur ugmà, Is the mayor really coming tomorrow? {5} to be
sure [so-and-so] is the case, but ... Barut túud ni apan barátu man
sab, This may be a poor kind but it is cheap anyway. (→) v [A23C23;
a12] get to be serious about a game or joke, make s.t. serious. Ayaw
palábig kundat níya kay mutuud nà siya, Don’t fool around too much with
him because he will take it seriously. Ang ílang háluk sa maung isína
nagtúud kay giganáhan na sila, Their kiss in that scene became real
when they both got stimulated. Muundang nà siya nímug sugsúg ug ímung
tud-un, He will stop teasing you if you treat him seriously. paN-(→)
v {1} = -in-(→), v. {2} [A23] get emotionally agitated in a game or
argument. Manuud siyag ikalális, He gets agitated if you argue with
him. -in- a {1} true, correct, genuine. Tinúud nga kaági, True-life
story. Tinúud nga diyamanti, Genuine diamond. {2} do well. Háwid ug
tinúud arun dì ka mahúlug, Hold on tight so you don’t fall. v [B1256]
become true, correct, genuine. Pastilag matinúud tung ákung damgu! My!
What if that dream of mine were to come true! (→) v {1} [A2; a12] make
true a statement, threat. Pastilan ug tinud-un níya tung íyang hulga!
My! What if he makes his threat come true! {2} [AN; a12] do s.t. in a
true or serious way, not jokingly or half-heartedly. Wà muy dag-anan ug
mutinuud (maninuud) na kug dúwà, You haven’t a hope if I play
seriously. -inin-(→) a in a genuine, serious way. Tininuud tung íyang
paningkámut, It was an honest-to-goodness effort of his. tinud-anay,
tinud-ay, tinuuray a {1} sincere. Tinud-anay (tinuuray) nga pagbásul,
Sincere regret. {2} serious, not playfully. Tinud-anay tung ílang áway
dì dráma, Their fight was real, not just a put-on. v [C] get to be
serious from mere joke or play. kamatuúran n {1} truth. Dúnay
kamatuúran ang íyang gisulti, There is some truth in what he said.
{2} proof. Ayawg kíha ug wà kay kamatuúran, Don’t sue if you have no
proof. ma- a true. Mau kini ang matúud nga hinungdan, This is the true
reason. v [A; bc1] prove. Kini ang mumatúud sa ímung salà, This will
prove your guilt. Namatud-an siyang sad-an, He was proven guilty.
Imatúud (matuúra) kanà sa hukmánan, Prove that in court. pakama-
v [A13; a12] consider s.t. true. matinud-ánun a sincere, true.
Matinud-ánun siya sa íyang sáad, He is true to his promises. pagka-in-
n truth, reality. Sa pagkatinúud wà kuy pagsálig nímu, In reality I
don’t trust you. †

túud_2 v [A3S; a1b] know how, show s.o. how to get to a place. Nakatuud
ku sa ílang hayid-áwut, I know where their hide-out is. Tuúra ang
gitagúan nákung kúkis, Locate the place I hid the cookies at. Tuúri kug
háin ang sikrítung agiánan, Lead me to the secret passage. pa- v [A; c]
show s.t.; show off s.t. Mipatúud ang bátà sa íyang samad sa íyang
inahan, The child showed his mother his wound. Nagpatúud ang hambugíru
sa íyang bag-ung kutsi, The braggart is showing off his new car.

túug n the young unopened leaf of a buri palm, esp. processed into
strips to be used in weaving mats and bags.

tuuk v [A; ab2] choke. Kusgánung kamut ang mituuk níya, Strong hands
choked her. Natuuk ang manuk sa kaugalíngung hukut, The chicken choked
on the string that tied it.

tuun_1 v [A; b(1)] {1} teach. Si Mánuy nagtuun nákug bisiklíta, My
brother taught me how to ride a bicycle. Tun-i siyag languy, Teach her
how to swim. {2} study. Dì na nà tun-an kay sayun da, You don’t have to
study that because it’s easy. {2a} [A; b(1)] study, put s.t. under
consideration. Tun-an pa nákù tung ímung tanyag, I will still put your
offer under consideration. {3} attend school. Ayawg intra sa ínum kay
nagtuun ka pa, Don’t take up drinking because you are still studying.
{4} [A12; b8] learn from. Didtu siya makatuun ug panúlis sa munti, He
learned about robbery in prison. -anan n s.t. to be studied. hiN-(←)
a studious. Hinúun siya, buguk lang, He studies hard, only he is
stupid. matulun-ánun a educational, giving lessons. Matulun-ánun nga
lílas, An instructive movie. v [B146] be instructive, educational. pag-
n {1} studies, schooling. Nahúnung ang íyang pagtuun paggíra, His
studies were interrupted by the war. {2} action of putting s.t. under
analytic consideration or advisement. pagtulun-an n {1} teachings,
moral lesson. Pagtulun-an sa sugilánun, The moral lesson of the story.
{2} lesson in school. see also kat-un.

túun v {1} [B3] be directed towards a focus. Wà ku makakità nímu kay
didtu magtúun ang ákung mata sa ladlad, I didn’t see you because my
eyes were focused on the wares that were on display. Dì matúun ang gás
sa bàbà sa butilya ug way imbúdu, Kerosene will not get directly into
the mouth of the bottle if there is no funnel. {2} [A; c] put a child
on the patty. (→)_2 v [c6] happen coincidentally with s.t. else. Wà mi
magsábut kay natuun lang sa pag-abut, We had no agreement. We just
arrived at the same time by coincidence. Ituun ug Duminggu ang kasal,
Have the wedding on a Sunday.

tuung n a raised frame of wood or iron placed around an opening to
prevent foreign materials from getting in. Butangi ug tuung ang bàbà sa
atábay arun dílì mubálik ug sulud ang túbig, Put a coaming around the
mouth of the well so that water will not get back in. v {1} [A13; b6]
construct a coaming around s.t. 2 — ang tutunlan [B46] get a lump in
the throat from emotion. Mutuung ang ákung tutunlan nga magtan-aw sa
mga bátang manligdas lang sa asíras magabíi, I get a lump in my throat
when I see children sleeping on the sidewalks at night.

túuy v [A13; b6(1)] press a hot object over s.t. Nasúnug ang panaptun
nga íyang gituúyan sa ínit kaáyung plantsa, The cloth got burnt when
she pressed it with a hot iron.

tuwa = tula. tuwatúwa, tinuwatuwa = lunaw.

tuwad v {1} [A; b6] be in position with the rump stuck out and the body
downward. Ilúhi nang bátà kay nagtuwad na, Wipe the child now that he
is thrusting out his rump. {1a} [A3P] for s.t. horizontal to be lower
at the tail end. Nagtuwad ang sakayan kay bug-at sa prúwa, The boat is
low at the bow because too much weight was put in front. {2} [A; c1]
overturn s.t. bottoms up. Tuwara (ituwad) ang bisiklíta kay átung
ilísag ligid, Turn the bicycle upside down because I will change the
tire. {3} [A; a12] scrutinize s.t. carefully to find a mistake or
falsity. Bísan pag tuwarun ninyu siya, mudukut giyud siya sa íyang
diklarasiyun, No matter how well you cross-examine him he will stick to
his declaration. (←) n (colloquial — somewhat coarse) {1} fruit or
product of one’s effort or endeavor. Nabúhì siya sa dílì íyang túwad,
He lives on the fruit of others’ efforts. {2} children. Akuy musúgù sa
ákung mga anak kay ákung túwad, I’ll tell my children what to do
because they are my own. {3} work. Ákù ang tanang túwad sa balay, I do
all the work in the house. (←) tuáli v {1} [B; a12] be in complete
disorder, disrupted. Usba nang trabahúa kay nagtúwad tuáli, Redo that
work because it’s all a mess. Dì ku mangilábut ninyu bísag túwad
tualíhun ninyu ang inyung kinabúhì, I won’t interfere. You may make a
mess of your life if you like. {2} = tuwad, v3. ka-(←) tuáli v [A13] be
in complete disorder. tuwadtúwad v {1} = tuwad, v3. {2} [A1] expend a
great deal of effort in s.t. Nagtuwadtúwad ug hílak, Crying for all he
was worth.

túwag v [B1; b6] be disarranged, in disarray. Matúwag (magtúwag) ang
mga butang sa báy ug náay mga bátà, The things in the house will be in
disarray when there are children around. a in disarray.

tuwak v {1} [A; b5] cross over the summit of a hill and come down on
the other side. Mutuwak kag pitu ka bungtud úsà ka muabut sa
gilagíngan, You have to cross over seven hills before you reach the
logging area. {2} [A2] for rain to stop. Manlákaw ta kun mutuwak na ang
ulan, We will go if the rain stops.

tuwang_1, túwang_1 v [AB; c1] tilt s.t. over on its side, for s.t. to
tilt. Hináyag tuwang ang táru ug maghuwad kag túbig, Tilt the can
slowly when you pour water out. Twangun (ituwang) ku ning lamísa kun
manihúun nímug baráha, I’ll turn the table over if you manipulate the
cards. a tilted. Tuwang kaáyu ang tartanilyang gisakyag tambuk, The
cart was tilted very much to one side when a fat man got on it.
tuwangtúwang v [AB1456; a12] {1} rock, make s.t. rock from side to
side. Nagtuwangtúwang ang barku sa kadagkù sa balud, The boat was
rocking from side to side in the big waves. v [A; c16] carry water
using the tuwangtúwang. n strong strip of bamboo for carrying cans of
water which are suspended from it. — nga silya n rocking or swivel
chair. -an(→) = tuwangtúwang, n.

tuwang_2, túwang_2 v [B234] for rain or a storm to stop. Nagkatuwang na
ning bagyúha kay mihínay na ang hángin, This storm is abating now as
the wind has subsided.

túwang_3 v [A; b] help s.o. work. Tulu kaming mitúwang kaníya ug dáru,
Three of us helped him plow. Dì siya makatúwang nímu pag-alsa sa kaban,
He cannot help you lift the trunk. ka- n helper.

túwang_4 a having a big gap in age or financial state. Adunáhan siya ug
kabus ku. Túwang kaáyu ang ámung kahimtang, She’s wealthy and I’m poor.
We come from very different social positions.

tuwas v {1} [B6; b6] be dislocated, displaced. Mituwas (natuwas) ang
íyang síku sa pagkahúlug níya, His elbow was dislocated when he fell
down. {2} [A; c1] unlodge, unwedge s.t. lodged in a place. Ikaw bay
nagtuwas sa ali sa agiánan? Did you remove the bar that blocked the
passageway? Átung twasun (ituwas) nang punúan sa lubi nga nasángit sa
káhuy, We’ll remove the coconut trunk that is wedged in the branches of
the tree.

tuwatúwa = lunaw.

tuwaw v {1} = tuaw, 1. {2} [A; b3] weep, cry. Unsay gituwawan nímu, ang
sintimintal nga salída? What are you crying about? The sentimental
movie?

tuway_1 n vaginal secretion having an extremely foul odor. v [a4] have
such secretions. Gituway sigúru siya kay bakag kaáyug ági, She must
have a vaginal disorder because she leaves behind a very foul odor.
-un(←) a having a very odourous vaginal secretion.

tuway_2, túway n k.o. edible clam about 3″ in width. paN- v [A2; b6] go
clamming. Nanúway mi sa katunggan, We gathered clams in the mangrove
swamps. tuwaytuway_1 n k.o. clam.

tuwaytuway_2 v [B4] for s.t. to be almost cut off and dangle loosely.
Nagtuwaytuway ang íyang tudlù nga hápit na maputul, The part of his
finger that is almost cut off is dangling loosely. Ang pagkadugmuk sa
íyang bitíis mauy nakatuwaytuway (nakapatuwaytuway) niíni, His leg is
now dangling loosely because it was crushed.

tuwaytúway_1 n kneecap. The kneecap of a dead person is believed to
give a person special powers, e.g. invisibility.

tuwaytúway_2 n k.o. annual, erect and branched herb of open waste
spaces: Bidens cynapiifolia.

tuwittuwit n chirp of birds. Makalingaw pamináwun ang mga tuwittuwit sa
mga langgam, It’s amusing to listen to the birds chirp. v [A] for birds
to chirp.

túy_1 n simplified version of takyan where the players pass the takyan
around in a circle and whoever misses gets punished by having to serve
all the players in turn. v [A; b6] play túy.

túy_2, 3 = túluy_1, 2.

túya n freak. Túya nà siya kay dakù kaáyug úlu, He is a freak because
he has a very large head.

túyà v [AB234; c16] sway, move in a rocking-like motion. Mga balud nga
mutúyà sa sakayan, Waves that rock the boat. Kusug mutúyà ang sakayan
ug way karga, An empty boat rocks a lot. n swaying. tuyàtúyà v [AB46;
c1] rock, sway. Nagtuyàtúyà ang dáhun nga natágak, The leaves are
waving back and forth as they fall.

*túyang pa- v [A; b(1)] keep on doing s.t. on a lavish scale. Kun
magpatúyang kag ínum, lagmit ulsirun ka, If you don’t curb your
drinking, you will surely get an ulcer. Gipatuyángan siya sa gustu, She
was allowed to do what she wanted to do without restraint. pina-an
n one who is allowed to have his way. mapa-un a immoderate, lavish in
quantity.

tuyarug v [A; b(1)] stand erect, motionless, and speechless. Sa ákung
kalísang mituyarug na lang ku sa daplin nga hálus muginháwa, Due to my
fright I stood motionless in the corner, hardly daring to breathe.

tuyátuy = turátuy.

tuybù v [B6; b6] project from the surface, stick up into the air.
Mituybù lang ang isla nga bag-ung nahimugsù, The newly-born island just
sprang up. Súngay nang nagtuybù sa ímung úlu? Is that a horn protruding
from your head? n projection, mound, or the like.

tuyhad v {1} [A; c1] straighten up the body, stay erect. Tuyhad ug
panagsa kun maglingkud kag dúgay, Stretch out once in a while when you
sit for some time. Ituyhad (tuyhára) ímung láwas kanang mu rag kadíti,
Carry your body straight like a cadet. {2} [A1] arrive from s.w.
empty-handed (lit. not bent under a load). Miabut gíkan sa byáhi walà
giyuy dala. Nagtuyhad lang, He arrived from his trip empty-handed.
a straight, erect of the body.

tuyhákaw v [A; c] crane one’s neck, pull oneself up tall. Mituyhákaw
ang tanang líug paglabay sa artista, They all craned their necks when
the actress passed by. Nagtuyhákaw ang kubra nga pumapaak, The cobra
pulled itself up when it was preparing to strike.

tuyhud a straight, not bent or crooked. Tuyhud kaáyu ning kahúya, This
piece of wood is very straight. v [AB3; c1] stretch out straight.
Nagkatuyhud na ang ákung buktun nga napíang, I can gradually begin to
straighten out the arm I had sprained. Nagtuyhud lang nang tawhánang
nagbayli, That man is dancing straight and stiff.

tuytuy_1 n fruit bud, small immature fruits. paN- v [A2] grow small
fruits. Ang bungáhuy makapanuytuy ug dalì ug daúban, A fruit tree will
develop fruit buds if you expose it to smoke.

tuytuy_2 v {1} [A; a12] make a sound to call chickens. Ánad kaáyung
manúka kay mudúul dáyug tuytúyun, What a tame chicken! As soon as you
go ‘toytoy’ to it, it comes. {2} = túkuy, v1. n {1} sound for calling
chickens. {2} = túkuy.

tuytuy_3 n {1} any small clay jar. {2} one-node bamboo tube container
for water or palm toddy. {3} small-mouthed, thick, dark-green glass jug
holding about six gallons, used for storing coconut palm toddy. A
network of rattan with a handle on both sides is fitted around the
body. -an(→) = tuytuy_3.

túyu n soy sauce. v [b] put soy sauce in s.t.

tuyù n wound esp. one which is inflicted in a contest. Ang sunuy
nakadaug sa tárì nga walay tuyù, The rooster won in the cockfight
without a wound. v [A12; b8] inflict a wound. Padag-un ku ang ímung
manuk ug makatuyù sa ákù, I will let your cock win if it can inflict a
wound on mine.

túyù_1 = túyu.

túyù_2 n purpose, intention. Unsay ímung túyù dinhi, What is your
purpose in being here? — kay [so-and-so] happened because s.t. else was
or was not done. Gihilantan ka túyù kay nagpasinguwan, You got a fever
because you went and played in the rain. v {1} [A3; a2b] do s.t. on
purpose. Pasaylúa ku kay wà nákù tuyúa, I’m sorry. I didn’t do it
intentionally. {2} [A13; b(1)] do s.t. for a specific purpose. Nagtúyù
mig bingka pára sa ímung pag-abut, We made rice cakes esp. for your
arrival. {3} [A13; b(1)] with full awareness of what one is doing.
Agwanta ka kay gituyúan nímu ang pagpangasáwa níya, You have to put up
with it because you married her on purpose. {3a} [A13; b(1)] do s.t. to
provoke trouble for oneself, ask for it. Ngánung dì ka man mutúug
sugúun? Magtúyù ka lang giyud, Why do you not do as you’re told? You
are asking for it. Ngánung misaka ka dihà? Nagtúyù kag mahúlug? Why are
you climbing up there? You want to fall or s.t.? paN- = pamaláyi. see
bayi. paN-(→) v [A2; b6] get angry. Nanuyù si Pápa kay dúgay kang
naulì, Daddy is angry because you went home late. -in-
n {1} intentional. Dì tu aksidinti. Tinúyù tu, It was no accident, it
was intentional. {2} esp. done. Tinúyù nga gulà sa pasku, Special
Christmas issue. {3} arranged marriage. Ang kaminyúung tinuyù lagmit
dílì mutunhay, Arranged marriages rarely last. -in-an n s.t. done
intentionally. Wà ku magbásul kay tinuyúan man tu nákù, I don’t regret
it because I did it on purpose. ka-an n aims, purpose. Gibatbat ang
katuyúan sa kumpirinsiya, They explained the aims of the conference.
pina- n specifically made or designed. Pinatúyù nga lingkuránan sa
bátà, Chair esp. designed for children. -un(→) a place not conveniently
accessible. Tuyuun ílang balay kay náa sa intiriyur, Their house is not
convenient to get to because it is far from the road.

túyub n k.o. itchy and painful fistula growing under the skin in the
rectum, penetrating deeply, eventually reaching the intestines.
v [A123P; a4] get túyub.

tuy-ud v [APB3; c16P] straighten s.t. out, be straight. Sayun dang
pagtuy-ud (pagpatuy-ud) sa kulut nga buhuk, It’s easy to straighten out
curly hair. Dì kung katuy-ud sa mubung katri, I can’t lie with my legs
straight on a short bed.

túyuk v [APB2S3; aPc] spin, turn around, go around s.t.; make s.t. spin
or go around. Pagnga ang púnu kay nagtuyuk pag turntíbul, Turn the
victrola off because the turntable is still turning. Isakay siya sa
bisiklíta ug itúyuk sa plása, Put him on your bicycle and take him
around the plaza. nag-(→) pa ang búla nobody can be sure (lit. the ball
is still rolling). Bísag dakù na tag bíyà, ayaw mug kadiskárids kay
nagtuyuk pa ang búla, Even if we are way behind, don’t get discouraged
because the game isn’t over. pa- v [A; c] have s.o. turn or spin s.t.
around. Ipatúyuk ning istinsil sa tigmimyugrap, Have the mimeographer
run this stencil off. -an(→) n axle. Nabálì ang tuyukan sa garapinyíra,
The axle in the ice-cream freezer broke. tuyuktúyuk nga silya n swivel
chair. tuyuktúyuk ug pangítà v [B1] search here and there. Timan-ig
maáyu ása mu nà ibutang arun dì ka magtuyuktúyuk (matuyuktúyuk) ug
pangítà ug kinahanglánun na, Make a note of where you put it so you do
not go around everywhere looking for it when you need it. -un(→)
n general term for cone and olive shells.

twagsik v [AN; c] for a liquid to fly and scatter. Ngánu bang mutwagsik
(manwagsik) man nang íyang láway igsulti níya, Why does his saliva
spray out when he talks? Palayù ta kay nagpanwagsik ang túbig gíkan sa
panghugasan, Let’s keep out of the way of the water splashing from the
drain.

twakdug n bamboo wall stud. v {1} [A; b6] attach the bamboo studs.
{2} [c1] use s.t. for bamboo wall studs.

twásik = tuásik.

twilb-uklak n twelve o’clock in the sight of a weapon.

twirka n screw. v [b] fasten with a screw. lisù sa — see lísù.

twis, twist n twist, name of a dance. v [A] dance the twist.

tyábaw v [A2S; b3] {1} cry out in pain, grief, and the like. Nagtyábaw
ang nanganak sa kasakit, The woman delivering is hollering in pain.
Unsay ímung gityabáwan? Namatyan kag iring? What are you hollering
about? A cat of yours that died? {2} complain for being unable to bear
s.t. Mityábaw nang lungsud sa kamahal sa palalítun, The people are
beginning to scream at high prices. {3} for animals to make their
normal loud noise. Nagtyábaw ang kábaw, The carabao lowed.

tyágù (from Tyágù, short for Santiyágu, a name of a person)
a poker-faced when making jokes. Tyágù kaáyu ning tawhána kay dílì
mukatáwa bísag kataw-anan, He really is poker-faced because he makes
the funniest jokes without cracking a smile. — nu exclamation of
discomfiture when one is the butt of a joke or prank. Tyágù nu! Labi
nag dílì ikay tumung sa kumidiya! It sure is funny, isn’t it, esp. when
the joke is not on you!

tyáli n inch. Walu ka tyáli ang gilapdun sa papil, The paper is eight
inches wide.

tyának = mantiyának.

tyangaw = pyangaw.

tyanggi n marketplace. paN- v [A2; c] go marketing. Tagái kug kwartang
ipanyanggi, Give me some money to go marketing with. tyanggihan
n marketplace and its vicinity.

tyatru n theater.

tyimpu = timpu in all meanings except n6.

tyinda = tinda.

tyubíbu n merry-go-round. v [A; b6] ride, construct a merry-go-round.

tyúning purk n tuning fork.

tyúpì = tayúpì.

tyuríya n theory. v [a12] apply a certain theory, hunch, technique of
diagnosis. Átung tyuriyáhun ning makináha, bir ug dì ba muandar, Let’s
try my hunch on this machine and see if we can’t get it to start.

tyusupíya n theosophy.

tyútur n tutor. v [AB156; b(1)] tutor s.o., be a tutor. Sayun siyang
tyutúran kay brayit, It’s easy to tutor him because he is bright.
