


=== D ===


da {1} = ada. {2} = ra. {3} — man = mau ra (dialectal).

dá = dala.

dà {1} particle at end of a clause: {1a} used upon noticing s.t. new,
remembering s.t. one had forgotten. Mu ra kug gitugnaw dà, I feel cold!
Grábi ning bátà dà, I notice the child is in serious condition. Lamían
tung ímung sud-an dà! Your food was delicious! {1b} particle of apology
for doing s.t. poorly, that one was pressed into doing: don’t blame me
if things don’t work out right. Dì ra ba ku kamau nga mubayli dà, I
don’t know how to dance. {2} initial in a clause: there, I told you so!
Dà, nasámad ka hinúun, There, now you have hurt yourself.

dâ = dà, 2.

daabdaab v [A] crackle in flames. Magdaabdaab ang mga dáhung layà basta
daúban, Dry leaves crackle when burned.

dáan a {1} old, not new. Dáang sinínà, An old dress. — Nga Túgun Old
Testament. {2} the one before, previous. Ang dáan nílang gikakasabútan,
Their previous agreement. {3} already, beforehand. Didtu na siyang dáan
pag-abut ku, He was already there when I arrived. Dáan na siyang
natáhap nga nagluib siya, He had already suspected before that she was
being unfaithful. bag-ung — s.t. one has for the first time but not
new. Ákung kutsing bag-ung dáan, My new car which is old. — pa
[subject] just as [subject] thought. Nagminyù sila. Dáan pa lagi ku,
They got married, just as I suspected they would. Gidakup siya sa
pulis. Dáan pa giyud kung púga siya, He was arrested by the police. He
was an escaped convict, just as I thought. v [B2; b6] become old. Dalì
mudáan (madáan) ang balay nga way limpiyu, A house gets old easily if
it is not taken care of. pasi-(→) v [A; c] forewarn, caution. Ipasidaan
kaníya nga dúgay tang muabut, Forewarn him that we will arrive late.
n warning. ka- n state of being old. Milubad na sa kadáan, It faded
when it was old. karáan a {1} olden times. Sa karáan dílì maáyung
malígù ug hápun, In the olden times they thought it wasn’t good to
bathe in the afternoon. {2} very old, leftover from an olden time.
Karáan kining galingan, gigámit pa sa ákung apuhan, This spinning wheel
is very old. My grandmother used it. — nga gantang {a} old-fashioned.
{b} old maid. Nabyaan sa trín ang karáan nga gantang, The old maid
missed the boat (in getting married). — nga kansiyun an old song, s.t.
so often repeated it can no longer be believed. kinaraan
a old-fashioned. Sinayawang kinaraan, Dancing in an old-fashioned way.
pangaráan v [A2] be engaged in s.t. over a long period of time.
Nangaráan na siya niíning buháta, He is an old hand in this job.

daánà = niánà. see kanà_1.

daáni a root crops that are fibrous and lacking moisture because they
have been left in the ground too long. v [B] get to be fibrous and
lacking moisture. Ug dúgayng kalútun ang kamúti mudaáni (madaáni), If
sweet potatoes are left in the ground too long, they become fibrous and
dry.

dáat n k.o. grass with a square-shaped, sharp-edged stem having
saw-edged leaves. The shoots mixed with grains of mung, corn, and rice
are given for teething or measles.

daay = diay (humorous slang).

dába n wide-mouthed clay pot used for stewing vegetables. dabahan n =
dába.

dabdab v [A1; b] set fire to s.t. with a torch. Nagdabdab siya sa
kakugnan, He burned the saw grass field. Gidabdaban ku ang gagmayng
balhíbu sa manuk, I singed the fine feathers off of the chicken. -un
a burning easily, esp. tobacco. Ang tabákung dabdabun daling mahurut,
Tobacco that burns easily gets used up quickly.

dabudabu, dabudábu n successive blows. Nalúnud ang barku gumíkan sa
dabudábu sa kaáway, The battleship sunk from the enemy bombardment.
v [A; b5] {1} bombard, rain blows upon. Dabudabúha (dabudabúhi) siyag
pátid, Bombard him with kicks. {2} for the chest to throb. Nagdabudábu
ang íyang dughan sa kakulbà, His breast throbbed in fear.

dábuk_1 v [A; a] {1} make a fire. Pagdábuk dihà kay magdigámu ta, Make
a fire because we’re going to fix dinner. {2} fumigate an area. Dabúkan
ta ang mangga arun mudaghan ang búnga, Let’s subject the mango tree to
smoke so that there will be lots of fruit. (→) n {1} fire in an open
place. {2} place where an open fire is built. Duul ra sa balay ang
dabuk (dabukan), They built the fire too close to the house. -an(→) =
dabuk, 2.

dábuk_2 v [A; a] crush by pounding. Dabúka ang mani pára sa kaykay,
Pound the peanuts for the cookies. (→) n crushed to fine bits,
crumbled. Dabuk sa pán, Bread crumbs.

dabul bid n double bed. v [A1] use a double bed.

dabung a {1} young, immature. Malímut pa siya sa kamatáyun sa íyang
inahan kay dabung pa ang íyang kaisípan, He will forget his mother’s
death because his mind is still young. {2} unripe fruits and
vegetables. Dabung mangga, Green mangoes. {3} metal tempered in such a
way that it is too soft. Daling nagíbang ang sundang kay dabung
pagkapanday, The machete knicks easily because it has not been tempered
long enough. n bamboo shoots. v [b6] cook s.t. with bamboo shoots.

dádi title for a father. v [A; a12] call s.o. ‘Daddy’.

dága_1 n dagger. punta — = dága_1.

dága_2 = dalága_1, 2.

dagà = ilagà.

dagáang n {1} heat, warmth given off, usually by s.t. solid. Ang
dagáang sa ílang duha ka láwas, The warmth given off by their two
bodies. Ang dagáang sa nasúnug nga balay, The heat from the burning
house. {2} warmth of emotion. Ang dagáang sa ílang pagbátì, The warmth
of their love. v [B25] {1} become warm. Midagáang na ba ang plantsa? Is
the iron hot yet? {2} shimmer in the heat. -in- n = dagáang.

dagabdab n {1} disease of tobacco where the leaf turns rough and stiff
and gets white spots all over it. {2} k.o. skin ailment characterized
by rough and discolored spots. v {1} [a4] for tobacco to get this
disease. {2} [B146; a4] for skin to get this ailment. -un(→) a of a
diseased sort.

dagáhay n noise made by the stomach when the digestive system is
disturbed. v [A1] for the stomach to make a rumbling sound.

dagámi n stalk that is left after grain or sugar has been harvested.

dágan = dalágan.

dagánas n prolonged sound of water or wind. Dagánas sa busay, The sound
of the waterfall. v [B2S4] make such a sound. Nagdaganas nga dagkung
balud, The thundering waves.

dagandang = dalagangdang.

dagang n ring made of corncobs or similar material to set a pot on when
it is off the stove so that it will not tilt. v {1} [A13; c1] make a
pot rest. {2} [A; b5c1] use a pot rest. -an n = dagang.

dágang n {1} the long feathers on the wings of fowls that enable them
to fly. {2} pen for writing literature (poetic usage). mag-r- n writer
of fine literature.

dagangdang n {1} k.o. snapper. {2} = dalagangdang.

dagasdas_1 v [B2] skid on a flat, hard surface. Pagkurbáda sa
mutursiklu midagasdas (nadagasdas) kini, The motorcycle skidded on the
curve.

dagasdas_2 v [A3; b6] force one’s way into a crowd. Midagasdas siya
padúlung sa taliwálà sa dakung tígum, She forced her way into the
center of the crowd.

dágat n {1} sea. {2} sea water. v [A123P; a4] feel sick to one’s
stomach, seasick. Makadágat (makapadágat) pamináwun ang íyang mga
hambug, It’s sickening to listen to his boasting. Gidágat ang bátà
tungud kay mabalud, The child felt seasick because it was wavy. (→)
v [A13] for sugar, salt, or dried fish to become damp. Magdagat ang
kámay ug hitun-ugan, If you let the sugar get exposed to the damp, it
will get sticky. paN- v {1} [A2; a] fish in the sea, catch fish. Dílì
sila makapanágat, They cannot go out fishing. Panagátun námù ang mga
bangsi sa lawud, We will catch the flying fish in the deep waters.
{2} [A; a] fish out information. Napanágat na giyud sa pulis ang
ibidinsiya, The police finally fished the evidence out. -in-, -in-(→)
n fish dried with sea water as the only preservative. maN-r-(→)
n fisherman in the sea. paN- n {1} way of fishing. {2} equipment for
fishing in the sea. pinaN-an n fish caught in the sea. -um- see
dumágat. -un(→) a prone to seasickness. -nun a pertaining to the sea.
Dagatnung mananap, Marine creatures. †

dagaw n thoughts which come to the mind. v [a4] be daydreaming,
absent-minded. Gidagaw ka man tingáli. Láin man ang ímung gitubag sa
ákung pangutána, You must be daydreaming! You gave me a funny answer to
my question. -in- a absent-minded. Mitangdù siya sa dinagaw nga
pagtangdù, He nodded an absent-minded assent.

*dagáyà ka- n abundance. Magpasalámat ta sa Ginúu tungud sa kadagáyà
nga átung nadáwat, Let us thank the Lord for the abundance we have
received. pa- v [A1; c] provide in abundance. Mga kaáyu nga gipadagáyà
sa Diyus, The blessings the Lord has bestowed upon us.

dagayday v [A; b5] flow in trickles or little rivulets. Midagayday ang
mga lúhà sa íyang mga áping, Tears trickled down her cheeks.
n trickling. Ang dagayday sa túbig dílì maatu ug páhid, We cannot wipe
the water away fast enough as it streams down.

dagdag v {1} [B12; c1] fall, make s.t. fall from the place where it is
growing. Uyúga ang punúan arun madagdag ug hurut ang búnga, Shake the
tree so that all the fruit will fall. Idagdag (dagdága) ang búnga sa
kayimítu, Shake the fruit from the star-apple tree. {1a} [BN4] for hair
to fall. Ayawg gámit ug tayid arun dílì mudagdag (managdag, mangdagdag)
ang ímung buhuk, Don’t wash your hair with detergent or it will fall
out. {2} [A; c1] pick coconuts. {3} [A2] for coconut trees to yield.
Ang íyang kalubihan mudagdag hasta tagdiyis mil káda saka, His farm
yielded as many as 10,000 nuts per harvest. n yield of coconuts. ting-
n season when a particular tree loses its leaves.

daghan a much, many. Daghang mga batan-un karun nga walay trabáhu,
There are lots of young people today who are out of work. v [B; a]
become, make plentiful. Midaghan (nadaghan) ang ákung núka, My sores
increased greatly in number. Dì ta na lang ni daghánun ug sulti, Let’s
not say much about this. -an a very many. gi-un(→) n quantity. ka-an,
karaghánan a {1} owned by many people. Kining yutáa dílì mabaligyà kay
sa kadaghánan, This land cannot be sold because it is titled to many
people. {2} public. Maúlaw ta sa kadaghánan, We’ll be put to shame in
public. {3} most. Kadaghánan sa íyang libru gíkan sa Amirika, Most of
his books come from America. maka-, ka- many times. Kadaghan
(makadaghan) ku na siya sultíhi, I’ve told her many times. -um-r-
n tending to come in large quantities. Dumadaghan silang pamilyáha,
Theirs is a prolific family.†

daghung n groan. v [B3; a2] groan. Midaghung ang masakitun sa kasakit,
The patient groaned in pain.

dagil v {1} [A; a] cut a little bit off of s.t. Dagili rag gamay ning
ákung patilya, Remove a little from my sideburns. {2} [A; b6(1)] cook a
little extra staple for s.o. not prepared for. Idagil ang anglit ug
dalìdalì kay díay ákung kúyug, Cook a small potful of extra rice
because I have a visitor. {3} [A1; c] string an extra small string
along the bass string of the guitar pitched to the same note. n guitar
string of this sort. {4} [A; b6(1)] put a small magical amulet on s.t.
esp. a cock. n amulet.

daging n k.o. June bug.

dagínut v [A; a] {1} use sparingly. Daginúta ang bugas arun muhangtud,
Use the rice sparingly so it will last. {2} use the last bit of s.t.
Mudagínut kug mga tinábas, I will use up the remnants. {3} save money,
be economical. Makadagínut ka kun mupalit kag dinusina, You can save if
you buy by the dozen. {4} heed things not worth heeding. Daginútun pa
giyud nà níyang pitsipitsi? Does she really care about those worthless
things? {4a} heed and spread small details of gossip not worth heeding.
{5} [A12S3S] masturbate, save money by self-gratification (humorous
slang). -an(→) a thrifty, frugal. -an ug sulti tending to gossip about
things not worth gossiping about. -in- a done slowly, usually to make
s.t. last to put it off. Dinagínut ang íyang mga lákang arun dúgayng
muabut, He walked home slowly so it would take long to get back. ma-un
a economical, inexpensive to use. Madaginútung panlaba, An economical
soap for washing. -un(→) a be little in quantity, intensity. Daginutun
ang kaháyag sa ispat kay gastádu na ang batiríya, The flashlight gave
off a weak light because the batteries were down. -un(→) ang bulsa have
little money. a thrifty, frugal.

dágir n {1} dagger. {2} name given to the red dragon (drágun) piece in
mahjong. v [ab2] stab with a dagger.

dágit v [A; a] {1} swoop down and seize a prey. {2} kidnap, abduct.
maN-r-(→) n kidnapper. pina- n a short fuse used in dynamite fishing so
that the explosion will be near the surface.

dagítab n {1} electric current. {2} stimulation as if by electricity.
Ang dagítab sa íyang kamadaníhun nakapakúrug sa ákung tibuuk nga láwas,
Her electric charm made my whole body tremble. -nun a electric. Sugang
dagitabnun, Electric lights.

dagkut v [A; b6(1)] {1} light a flame, lamp, fire, etc. Dagkuti ang
sigarilyu, Light the cigarette. Unsay ákung idagkut sa parul? What
shall I light the lantern with? {2} [AN; cN] light a candle as an
offering to a saint and pray to him to do s.t. good or bad or give
thanks. Idagkut (ipanagkut) tikag dì ku nímu pakaslan, I’ll light a
candle to a saint to curse you if you don’t marry me. -ay a for s.t.
lighted to be burning. Dagkutay pa ang lampara pag-abut námù, The lamp
was still lighted when we arrived. -um-l-, um-r- n one who lights
candles as an offering.

dagmà v [B126] stumble and fall. Ayaw pagdágan kay madagmà ka unyà,
Don’t run, you might fall.

dagmal v [A; b] {1} maltreat, treat cruelly. Gidagmálan níya ang íyang
asáwa, He maltreated his wife. {2} cause suffering. Dakung gútum ang
midagmal sa mga mag-uúma, A great famine tortured the farmers.
n maltreatment. -an(→), ma-un a cruel.

dagmuk v [A; c] throw s.t. anywhere in a disorderly way. Sila ang
mudagmuk sa basúra ngadtu sa baybáyun, They dumped the garbage on the
seashore. Ayaw idagmuk sa karsáda ang mga káhuy, Don’t just dump the
wood on the street. n garbage.

dagnay n nickname. v [A; c] give a nickname. Gidagnáyan kug Inday ni
Máma, Mother nicknamed me ‘Inday’.

dagpak v {1} [A; ab2] slap hard enough to make a noise. Dagpáka siya
kay nagdahan, Give him a spanking because he is getting to be too
naughty. {2} [A; c] cover a hole in any sort of material by laying s.t.
over it and attaching it. Kinsay nagdagpak sa kisì sa ákung karsúnis?
Who patched up the tear in my pants? Playwud ang idagpak sa buhù sa
bungbung, Patch the hole in the wall with plywood. {3} [A; ac] join two
flat pieces together by making two of their edges overlap. Nagdagpak ku
sa duha ka hábul, I joined two blankets together. {4} [B126; b8] — sa
pamilya marry into a family. Nadagpak siya sa mga pamilyang way nahut,
She married into a family poor as church mice. n {1} ranking. {2} =
dagpǎk. (→) n {1} piece used in covering up a hole. {2} — sa pamilya
one who has become part of a family by virtue of marrying into it.

dagpal_1 v [A; c] plug, caulk. Ang bátà mauy midagpal ug lápuk sa
grípu, The child was the one who plugged the mud into the faucet. Ang
panday nagdagpal ug simintu sa mga likì sa paril, The carpenter patched
the cracks of the wall with cement.

dagpal_2 v [A; a12b2] slap with the palm of the hand. Íyang gidagpal
ang bukubuku sa kabáyù, He slapped the back of the horse.

dagpas v [A; a] swat s.t. to remove s.t. from it. n broom made out of
coconut midribs. — sa abug duster made of chicken feathers. n {1} s.t.
used to brush s.t. away. {a} broom made of coconut midribs. {b} feather
duster. {c} fly swatter. {2} action of swatting to remove s.t. Wà
mapapha ang húgaw sa usa ka dagpas, He didn’t get rid of the dirt with
one swat.

dagpì (from dapì) v {1} [AN; ab2] slap with the palm of the hand. May
kamut nga midagpì (nanagpì) sa ákung áping, A hand slapped my cheek.
{2} [b6] whip with woman’s hair to relieve the skin disease called
ugáhip. Ang ugáhip maáyu kun dagpían sa buhuk, The kind of sores called
ugáhip get better if you whip them with hair. {3} = dagpak {2}, {3}.
n {1} slap. {2} a k.o. sorcery whereby a sorcerer inflicts harm by
tapping the victim. The victim counteracts the sorcery by tapping the
sorcerer back. {3} application for skin diseases consisting of herbs
cooked in banana leaves over live coals. The cause of the disease is
thought to appear in the compress after it has been applied. — timù
a small in size or quantity (humorous). Matawag ba gud tu nímug píging
nga dagpì timù ra man ang pagkáun? Could you call that a banquet when
only a small amount of food was served? -in- n k.o. pancake made from
ground starch. maN-r- n sorcerers who practice the sorcery called
dagpì.

dagsà v [B2; c] wash to the shore. Midagsà ang dakung isdà, The big
fish drifted ashore. Didtu siya idagsà, He was washed ashore in that
place. n {1} s.t. washed ashore s.w. {2} one who happens to be in a
place. Namána siyag usa ka dagsà, She married a person who happened to
be in that place by chance. -um-l- = dagsà, n 2. -um- n name of wind
that hits Cebu from the Northeast.

dagsang v [BN3(1)] become abundant. Nanagsang (nagdagsang) ang mga
ilagà sa Kutabátu, Cotabato is being overrun with rats. Kinahanglan
sumpúun ang krímin únà makadagsang, Crime should be stopped before it
becomes rampant. pa- v [A; c1] propagate, raise in plentiful
quantities. Padagsánga (ipadagsang) ang ságing sa inyung yútà,
Propagate bananas on your land.

dagsay n cymbals.

dagtum a dark grey, gloomy. Ang dagtum sa lángit nagtilimad-un ug ulan,
Dark skies are a sign of rain. v [B] be, become dark. Midagtum ang
íyang nawung pagkadungug sa nutisya, pagbinulad, His face became gloomy
when he heard the news; his face got tanned dark from being in the sun.
Nagdagtum ang íyang karsúnis sa buling, His trousers were black with
dirt.

dagubdub n k.o. gudgeon.

dagúhub n hollow, rumbling sound. Ang dagúhub sa ayruplánu, The roar of
the airplane. a loud in a hollow, rumbling way. Dagúhub kaáyu nang
ímung pagtambul, Your drumming is very loud. v [A; b6] make hollow,
rumbling sounds.

dagúhung n howling sound of the wind. v [B4; b6] make howling sound.
Nagdagúhung ang hángin sa bagyu, The wind howled in the storm.

dagukduk_1 (from dukduk) n hammering, knocking sound. v [B4] make
hammering, knocking sound. Ug mudagukduk ang makina náay dipiktu,
There’s s.t. wrong with the machine if it knocks. {2} [b(1)] go fishing
in shallow waters with a hook and line at night using a tingkarul lamp
(so called because the fish are attracted by knocking the side of the
boat with the paddle). paN- v [A2] go hook and line fishing in shallow
waters using a tingkarul lamp. -an n the lamp used in this k.o. fishing
(= tingkarul).

dagul a {1} close cut or cropped or shaven head. {2} for soil to have
nothing growing on it. v {1} [A; a] cut hair closely, shave the hair
off the head. Dagulun ta lang ning ímung alut, Let’s make your haircut
a crew cut. {2} [B; b6] for land to become unproductive. Nadagul ang
yútà kay dúgayng wà ulana, The land became barren because it hadn’t
received rain for a long time.

dágum n needle. Dágum pára tahì, Sewing needle. Dágum pára indiksiyun,
Hypodermic needle. -in- n {1} pin. Ang mga papil gialpiliran ug
dinágum, The papers were fastened together with a pin. {2} needle-like
thorns on plants. alpilir -in- = -in- 1.

dag-um n rain cloud. v [ABN3; b6] {1} cloud over. Mudag-um (manag-um)
na gánì ang lángit, If the sky clouds over. Gidag-úman ang lángit, The
sky was covered with clouds. {2} make s.o. feel gloomy. Midag-um dihà
sa íyang kahiladman ang dakung kasákit, A great pain made him feel
gloomy. {3} — ang lángit v [B3(1)4; b4] be on the verge of tears.
Hunúnga na ang inyung sulugsúlug sa dalága kay midag-um na ang lángit,
Stop teasing the poor girl because she’s on the verge of tears.

dagun n amulet, charm for good luck or defense. v [A; c] attach a charm
to. Gidagunan ni Tikyu ang íyang igbubulang, Tikyo has attached a charm
to his fighting cock.

dagundagun v [B; a12] come or happen one after another. Nagdagundagun
ang mga bagyu rung panahúna, We’ve been having typhoons one after
another. Ayawg dagundaguna ang ímung prublíma sa pagsingárig pangútang,
Don’t let your problems pile up by incurring so many debts.

dagundun_1 a {1} half-hard, half-soft, lumpy texture of raw bananas,
sweet potatoes. {2} deep rumbling of distant thunder, distant motor
with insufficient muffling.

dagundun_2 n drinks to go with food. v [A; b6] take drinks with food.
Gidagundunan níyag tubà ang kinílaw, He washed the raw fish down with
toddy.

dagundung, dagungdung v [B6N; b6] be thick with leaves, fruit.
Midagundung (nanagundung) ang káhuy sa dáhun, The tree is thick with
leaves. Ang káhuy gidagundúngan sa búnga, The tree is full of fruits.†

dágut a {1} completely removed, used up. Dágut na ang mga káhuy sa
bakilid, Every single piece of wood has been removed from the slope.
{2} completely rotten so that it cannot rot any further. Dágut nang
sinínà, dílì na mapunit, A dress so rotten that you can’t even pick it
up. Dágut nga nangkà, A completely rotten jackfruit. v {1} [A; a] use
to the last grain, bit; take away every bit of s.t. Kining pán mauy
idágut sa dyam nga namilit sa butilya, Use this bread to wipe up the
last bit of jam sticking to the jar. {2} [B12] rot completely to the
point that it will not hold together. Nadágut ang papil sa libru, The
paper in the book has turned completely to dust.

dagúuk n steady roaring sound made by the rushing of water, machines in
a distance, roar of a crowd, the sound of an empty stomach. v [A2S; b4]
make a roaring sound. Midagúuk ang ákung tiyan sa kagútum, My stomach
is rumbling from hunger. Nagdaguuk ang ulan nga hápit na muabut, The
rainstorm made a roaring noise as it drew near. -in- = dagúuk, n.

dagway n {1} face. {2} appearance, looks. Ang namiyáhuk níyang áping
dagway sa kagútum, Her sunken cheeks portray hunger. {2a} — táwu human
form. Nawálà ang ílang dagway táwu ug nahímu silang irù, They shed
their human form and turned themselves into dogs. {3} perhaps,
probably. Muulan dagway karun, It probably will rain now. {3a} — ug it
looks as though. Dagwayg muulan, It looks as though it’s going to rain.
-an a pretty, handsome. ka- n similar in appearance to s.o. else.
Kadagway mu siya, He looks like you. paN- n countenance. Ang kasubù sa
íyang kahiladman makítà sa íyang panagway, The sadness in her heart can
be seen in her countenance.†

dagyaw n day’s work done by a group without pay for landlord or for a
communal project (usually on a Monday). Dagyaw ang pagtúkud sa
iskuyláhan, The school was built by communal work. v [A; b5] do
communal work.

dahan v {1} [B4; b4] for s.t. bad to persist, get worse. Nidahan ang
íyang kabúang sa madiyung, Her madness for mahjong got worse. Gidahanan
siya sa hilánat, His fever is persisting. {2} [A12; a12] keep up with.
Dílì ku madahan ang trabáhu sa balay, I cannot keep up with the work in
the house. manga it is ridiculous, incredibly stupid that [so-and-so]
happened. Madahan ba gud nímu nga gidisdísan siyang way anistisya,
Imagine! They operated on him without anesthesia. ma- ug it would have
been ridiculous if [so-and-so] had happened. Madahan ug dì ka mutambung
sa kasal sa ímung anak, You surely could not fail to attend your son’s
wedding! pa- v [c1] allow s.t. to persist, get worse. Dílì maáyung
padahanun (ipadahan) ang íyang batásan, It’s not advisable to allow
this behavior of his to go on.

dahay n sighs, bewailing of misfortune. v [A; b3] moan, bewail one’s
misfortune. Midahay siya sa dautan níyang gidangátan, She sighed
mournfully over her misfortune. Dílì angayang dahayan ang ímung
kakabus, It’s not right to bewail your poverty. {2} [A13] behave for no
good reason in an unusually jolly, high-spirited manner, laughing gaily
and easily. Such behavior is believed to portend s.t. bad for whoever
engages in it. Ngánung nagdahay man mu bísag nagngíub ning kalibútan?
Why are you boisterously mirthful with such gloomy weather?

dáhig = daláhig.

dahik = dalahik.

dahil v {1} [A; b] iron s.t. over quickly to smooth it out. Dahili úsà
kanang sinináa kay gigámit na man nímu, Iron out the creases in that
shirt because you wore it once. {2} [A; a] iron a few things. Mu ra niy
ímung dahilun, This is all you are to iron.

dahilì n k.o. dwarf coconut, not more than 10′ tall, with thin-husked
nuts the size of a grapefruit. — humay n k.o. small-grained rice with
white husk and grains, considered desirable for consumption as staple.

dahílì v [B2S3; c] {1} for solids in small pieces (grains, small rocks,
etc.) to slip, slide down touching a surface; or for liquids to move.
Singut nga midahílì sa íyang kalawásan, Sweat that rolled down his
body. Nagdahilì ang grába, The gravel was slowly falling out of the
truck. {2} for solids in small pieces to be abundant. Magdahilì ang
mangga sa Sibu sa ting-init, Mangoes are abundant in Cebu in the
summer. Gidahilían ang Sibu ug kwarta ni Markus, Marcos flooded Cebu
with money.

dahilug n small venomous snake-like creature, shiny black in color, 3″
long.

dahílug v [B5; b6] slip off downwards, slide down. Midahílug lang ang
kasíli gíkan sa ákung kamut, The eel just slipped out of my hand.
Nagdahilug sa bakilid ang mga trúsu, The logs slid down the steep
slope.

dahílus v [B5; c] for things in one piece to slide over a surface
having continuous contact with it. Dalì kaáyu kung nakadahílus sa lubi,
I slid down the coconut tree fast. Maáyu mang dahilúsan ang sínaw
ninyung salug, What fun to slide on your shiny floor.

dahinggay v [AN; b6] for liquid to flow downwards without leaving the
surface over which it is flowing. Nagdahinggay ang ímung sip-un, Your
nose is running. Ang kamisin nga gidahinggáyan sa singut, A shirt that
had sweat flow down into it.

dahiraw = dawíraw.

dahis v [A; b6(1)] press clothes hastily and without much care. Kadalì
ra ug akuy mudahis sa mga ig-ulúran, It won’t take long to iron clothes
to wear around the house.

dahug v [A; b5] urge s.o. to do s.t. not to his advantage. Siya ang
midahug sa duha ka bátà arun magsinumbagay, He was the one who egged
the children into having a fistfight. Gidahugan (gidahug) siya sa
pagsulud sa util, She was talked into going to a hotel. n incitement to
do s.t. disadvantageous. -un a urging people to act against their best
interest.

dáhug v {1} [A; b6(1)] play a practical joke on s.o. {2} [A3; b4] for
an evil spirit to work his power (through an intermediate sorcerer or
not). Mibúrut ang íyang láwas kay gidahúgan sa mga dílì ingun nátù, His
body is swelling with an affliction sent by a supernatural being.
n affliction suffered by s.o. through the workings of a supernatural
being or his agent. Dáhug ang namatyan ni Kulas, Kolas died of a
disease inflicted by a supernatural being. -an(→) a {1} one who is fond
of making practical jokes. {2} one who inflicts diseases of
supernatural origin.

dahul a {1} coarse-grained, for thread to be coarse. Dahul ra kining
hilúha pára sa ákung sinínà, This thread is too coarse for my dress.
{2} coarse in manners. v [B; c1] become coarse, grind s.t. coarsely.
Dahulun (idahul) ku paggaling ang kapi, I will grind the coffee coarse.
dahuldahul v [B23(1); a2] be, become bigger. Makadahuldahul pa ning
prutása ug wà pa pùpúa, This fruit would have grown bigger if it had
not been picked so quickly. Dahuldahulun ku ang ímung páhat, I’ll give
you a bigger share. a bigger.

dahúlug = dalhug.

dahum v [A13; a12] expect, hope for s.t. to happen. Wà ku magdahum nga
maglúib ka, I didn’t dream you would stab me in the back. Ayaw damha
nga mubálik pa ku, Don’t expect me to come back. paN- n expectation,
supposition. Sa ákung panahum tigúlang siya, piru batan-un diay, I
expected him to be an old man, but it turned out he was actually quite
young.

dáhun n leaf. v [A] grow leaves. Kusug mudáhun ang agbáti, Agbáti tends
to grow lots of leaves. — ug lagpad v [AN; c5] improve financially
(lit. grow wide leaves). Mudáhun (manáhun) tag lagpad ug magkúgi, We
will improve financially if we work hard. — tubu, — sa, ug tubu n k.o.
long thin flat fish with green bones and fins all round the body. (→)
{1} leaf of a book. {2} cured tobacco. paN- v [A] sprout leaves. n leaf
arrangement. Ang panáhun sa káhuy nga tagiluyluy nag-atbang, The
ipil-ipil tree has bipinnate leaves. dahundahun n any insect that looks
like a leaf. v [B6; a4] be more thick with leaves than fruits or
grains. Mudahundahun (dahundahunun) ang humay basta lutábun ra ang
yútà, Rice plants have more leaves than grains if the soil is too
boggy. -in-, -in-(→) n sold by the leaf. Tagái kug tabákù nga dinahun,
Give me some leaf tobacco. ka-an n leaves.

dahúnug n continuous rumbling, roaring sound. Ang dahúnug sa mga
dagkung trák, Loud rumbling sounds of the trucks. v [A2S3] make
rumbling sound. Midahúnug ang makusug nga silbátu sa barku, The loud
blowing of the foghorn resounded.

dáhup v [A; a12] 1 close the mouth of a bag or net by pulling a
drawstring run through a casing in the edge. {2} haul in a fishing net
by pulling the edges together in a bunch. Káda dáhup daghang makúhà,
Each time you pull in the net, you get a lot of fish.

dahut a {1} close-fisted to an intense degree. Ang táwung dahut dílì
manggihatágun, A stingy person is not generous. {2} completely
poverty-stricken. v [B2; b6] {1} be, become stingy or miserly. {2} be,
become poor or penniless. Mudahut (madahut) ka kun magpúnay ug sugal,
If you keep on with your gambling, you’ll wind up in the poorhouse.

dahúyag a nonsense word used to fill out a line in rhymes. Dayun,
dayun, dahúyag/ Walay makagsantà ug makagbábag/ Ning palasyu námung
payag, Come-in, come-in dahúyag, No one can bar your way, Into this
palace of a hut.

dáig v [A; b] {1} set s.t. on fire. Unyà na lang daígi ang mga layang
dáhun, Set these dried leaves on fire later on. {2} light s.t. Tagái
kug idáig sa ákung sigarilyu, Give me s.t. to light my cigarette with.
n (→) fire in the open. Wà giyud mapálung ang ámung daig sa ulan, The
rain did not put our fire out.

dáik v [A; b6(1)] start s.t. burning by putting s.t. glowing to it.
Gidaíkan nákù ang sigarilyu, I lighted the cigarette.

dail n full moon. Inigsáwup sa adlaw mau say isubang sa dail, The full
moon rises as soon as the sun sets. v [B; b6] for the moon to become
full. -un a moon that is full.

daílus v {1} [A; b6] move, slide or trickle slowly across or down on a
surface. Inigsaylu sa balud mudaílus pud pagbálus ang sakayan, When the
wave passes by, the boat in turn moves slowly down. Inánay ang túbig
nga nagdaílus sa bungbung, Water is trickling slowly down the wall.
{2} [AP; b6] move, let oneself slide s.w. Kun walà magtan-aw ang dalága
mudaílus (mupadaílus) pud si Pidru sa duul, When the girl wasn’t
looking, Peter would slide closer. {3} [A; ab3c] come from the village
to town. Daílus na mu sa lungsud sa pista, Come to the town during the
fiesta.

daít v [C1] have good personal relationships. Makigdáit kita sa átung
silíngan, We should have good relations with our neighbors. ma-un,
makig-un a in a manner inspiring good personal relationships. panag-,
panag-ay(→) n good relations.

daitul, daítul v [A; c] touch a small part of s.t. against s.t. else.
Midaítul siya sa íyang ngábil sa akúa, She pressed her lips against
mine. Gidaitlan níyag binágang puthaw ang pinaakan sa hálas, He touched
red-hot iron to the snake bite. Íyang gidaítul ang tilipunu sa íyang
dalunggan, She pressed the telephone receiver to her ears.

*daiya ka- v [A13] varied, of all different kinds. Nagkadaíya ang ámung
bálun, We took along all kinds of food.

dak n Doc, nickname for a doctor.

dakaldakal n things which make a road rough. -un a rough road.

dakan = arun (dialectical).

dakbálay n large building, house.

dakbayan n city. pa- v [A] go to, live in the city. ka-an(←) n cities.
-un(←) a having to do with the city.

dakbut n k.o. amphibious boat, boat that can go on land.

dakdak v {1} [B12; b8] fall down with a bang. Pisti ning pálut sa
ságing, mau niy nakadakdak (nakapadakdak) nákù, Damn this banana
peeling. That is what made me fall. {2} [ANB12; c] throw s.t. down with
force that is heavy; fall down with a bang on the rump. Nadalispang ug
nadakdak, He slipped and fell on his rear end. Ayaw ug idakdak ang lubi
sa asíras. Hidakdakan unyà ang ímung tiil, Don’t smash the coconut on
to the sidewalk. It might hit your foot. {3} [AN; b] wash clothing by
hitting it against a flat surface. Dakdáki ang hábul ug maáyu arun
malimpiyu, Beat the blanket thoroughly so it will become clean.
{3a} [A; b6(1)] knock s.o. on the head. Dakdákan ta ka ning kabù, I’ll
knock you on the head with this dipper. {4} [A; c] spend a large amount
to win an election. Pila kahà ang idakdak ni Markus dinhi? How much
money do you think Marcos will pour here? {5} [A2; b4] — ulan for a
rainstorm to break. {6} [AN; c] heap blame, abuse, etc. on s.o.
Gidakdákan aku níya ug daghan kaáyung trabáhu, He heaped a huge amount
of work on me. Pait nga panimalus ang íyang idakdak kanímu, He will
wreak bitter revenge on you. -an(→) n a piece of flat stone or anything
where one beats his laundry on in washing.†

dakdákan n k.o. branching edible seaweed, dark-green in color, soft and
spongy in texture, and about ¼″ thick. It tends to be flat on both
sides.

dakinas, dakin-as v [B2] slip and fall. Paghínay, madanlug. Madakin-as
ka unyà, Be careful. It’s very slippery. You might fall.

dákit = dalakit.

daklap = daplak.

daklit (from kalit) a for a very short time. Daklit nga panagkítà, A
momentary meeting. Nakadisidir siya sa daklit, He made up his mind in
an instant. v [A2; b5c] do s.t. for a second. Daklítan (daklítun) kug
tan-aw ang libru, I’ll look at the book for a second. Mahímu ning
idaklit nímug hatud? Can you take out a second to deliver it?

dakrun n dacron fiber.

daktil n hair style for women in which the hair about 2″ below the nape
is cut like a duck’s tail. v [A; c16] cut hair into a duck-tail style,
wear hair in this style.

daktul a full moon. Háyag karun kay daktul ang búlan, It’s bright
tonight because there’s a full moon. — ug nawung round-faced. v [B3;
b4] for the moon to get to be full. Gidaktúlan na lang sila sa búlan wà
pa gihápun kahumag dáru, The full moon was upon them before they had
finished plowing. -um-r- n moon about to be full.

dakù a {1} big, great. Dakù na ang íyang anak, Her child is grown up
now. — ug anínu prominent person. Gamay túung táwu si Rumulu píru dakug
anínu, Romulo may be small in stature, but he is a very important man.
— ug bàbà having tendency to tell secrets. — ang dágat be high tide. —
nga kábaw be already grown up, but still doing things inappropriate to
adults. Kadakù na nímung kábaw magdúwà ka pa gihápug dyúlin, You still
play marbles at your age! — nga mamsà bigwig. — nga táwu {a} important
person. {b} spokesman in asking a woman’s hand of her parents. — nga
tái a big wheel. {2} very much (modifying forms which refer to a
person’s condition, mood, or status). Mangasáwa siya nímu bísan búhì
pang dakù ang íyang asáwa. Minyù nà siyang dakù, He will marry you even
though his wife is very much alive. He is very much a married man. Dì
na nà siya kapasar kay dakù na kaáyu ug palta, She cannot pass because
she has been absent many times. Dakung masakitun ang íyang asáwa, His
wife is gravely ill. Gikalípay kug dakù ang nahitabù, I am very happy
about what happened. Magulang siyag dakù nákù, He is much older than I
am. adlaw nga — broad daylight. — ang hunàhúnà be anxious to do s.t.
Dakù kaáyu ang ákung hunàhúnà pag-adtu sa Kanada, I’ve been thinking
very much about going to Canada. — ang tingúhà be intent on doing s.t.
Dakù ang ákung tingúhà pagtábang nímu, I’m moving heaven and earth to
help you. {3} usa ka — one centavo coin (so called because formerly it
was a large coin). {4} — nga [word referring to an action] it’s highly
improbable [such-and-such] an action would be done. Dakung palit nákù
ánà nga náa may barátu, You think I’d buy that when there are so many
inexpensive ones available? Dakung hátag níya nátù nga dawù man nà
siya? You think that greedy guy would give us any? v [B; a] become,
make big. Nagdakù siyang walay inahan, He grew up without a mother.
Gidaku níya ang íyang tíngug arun madungug, She made her voice loud
enough to be heard. Gidak-an (gidakuan) ra aku sa ábang, I consider the
rent too high. — ang atay, úlu for s.t. to go to one’s head. Midakù ang
íyang atay (úlu) kay gibulatíkan, He was flattered and it went to his
head. pa- v {1} [A; a] raise animals, children. Padak-a (padakua)
kining batáa sáma sa tinúud mung anak, Raise this boy like your own
child. Ang tangkal padak-an kug bábuy, I will raise pigs in the pigpen.
{2} [A; b5c1] make s.t. bigger. Padak-a (padak-i, ipadakù) ra gud ang
síga, Turn the light up, please. {3} [a12] allow s.t. to grow big.
Padak-a (padakua) ang kamúti, Let the sweet potatoes grow big. dakùdákù
n chief, head, foreman. Kinsay dakùdákù niíning upisína? Who is the
head of this office? -an(←), -ay(←) a very great. Dakúan (dakúay)
uyámut ang íyang kaúlaw, Her shame was indeed great. -g- a big
(plural). Púlus dagkù ang íyang gipalit, He only bought big ones.
paN-g- v [A] become great. Nanagkù ang ílang mga mata, They became
wide-eyed. ka-g-an n higher officers, authorities. Púrus mga langyaw
ang kadagkúan niíning kumpaníya, The top officers of this company are
all foreigners. -in-g- a on a large scale. Ang dinagkù nga pagpamalit
barátu, It is cheap to buy wholesale. dumalagkù, dumalagkuun a variety
of a plant or animal that tends to be bigger. Dumalagkuung maísa píru
gagmayg púsù, The corn is of a large variety, but the ears are small.
gidak-un n size. kadak-an n living room, largest room in the house.
kinadak-an n {1} biggest. {2} the whole world. Ang nahitabù gisibya sa
kinadak-an, The event was broadcast to the whole world. maN-(←),
tag-(←), tagmaN-(←) n costing one centavo. Manákù (tagdákù, tagmanákù)
ang tundan, Small bananas cost one centavo each.

dakul v [AN; b5] rap s.o. on the head with s.t. Dakla (dakula, dakli)
siya kay nagdahan, Rap him on the head because he is acting up too
much. n rapping. dakuldákul v [A; a] rap s.t. to make noise.
Dakuldakúli ang máya, Rap empty cans to chase away the birds.

dákun = kanákù (dialectal). see aku.

dakung = dakul.

dakup v [A; ab2] {1} catch. Nadakup (hingdakpan) na ba ang kabáyù nga
nakaguwà sa kural? Did you manage to catch the horse that broke out of
the enclosure? {2} apprehend, arrest. Dakpun ka ug mamúhì kag dinamíta,
You will be arrested if you go dynamite fishing. {3} [A2; a12] catch
fire. Dakpun ang káyu sa gasulína, The gasoline will catch fire. (←)
n period of time that arrests are being made. Dákup run sa mga draybir
nga walay lisinsiya, They’re arresting drivers without licenses these
days. -in-, dinakpan n suspect. Ang mga dinakup (dinakpan) ibalhug sa
bilangguan, The suspects will be put in jail. maN-r-(←) n arresting
officer. dakupdákup, dakpánay n game of tag. v [A1; a12] play tag.

dakúyung v [A23] stay put meekly, usually with the head bowed.
Mudakúyung dáyun ang ámung irù basta sutsútan, Our dog stays put meekly
when you hiss at him.

dakyup v [A; b6] {1} for things that fly to swarm, fly around close to
s.t. Ang anunugba mudakyup sa sugà, The moths will fly around the lamp.
{2} appear suddenly. Gidakyúpan ang ákung panumdúman sa ímung hulagway,
Your picture appeared suddenly to my thoughts. {3} envelop with an
atmosphere. Mga mabagang dag-um nagdakyup sa kabungtúran, Dark clouds
enveloped the hills. Kun dakyúpan ka sa kamíngaw, When loneliness
envelopes you.

dál n {1} doll. {2} term of endearment for a small child.

dala v {1} [A; a2] take, bring, carry. Magdala ba kug rigálu ngadtu?
Shall I bring presents there? Bug-at na kaáyung dad-un (dalhun, dal-un)
ang táru, The can is too heavy to carry. {1a} for an illness to take.
Dad-un ka untà sa kulira, Drop dead! (Lit. I hope cholera takes you!)
{2} [A; a12] play a role. Ang papil ni Husi Risal ang gidala ni Rumíyu,
Romeo played the role of José Rizal. {2a} sing a certain voice in
choral groups, play an instrument in an ensemble. Akuy mudala sa báhu,
ikay kanta sa túnu, I’ll sing the bass while you sing the melody.
{2b} — ug hílas [A23] fake s.t. without showing it. Maáyu siyang mudág
hílas kay dì muusab ang íyang dagway ug mamutbut, He can really fake
it, because when he tells a lie his face remains unchanged. {3} [A;
a12] drive a vehicle, make s.t. go. Maáyu diay kang mudalag sista, You
sure play the guitar well! Impála ang íyang dad-un sa paráda, He will
drive an Impala during the parade. {4} [A; a12] treat, manage s.t. or
s.o. Ang táwu nga nagdala sa upisína maáyung mudala sa íyang mga
kawáni, The man who manages the office treats his employees well.
{5} [A12; a3] endure, bear. Madala pa sa kábaw ang kaínit sa adlaw, The
carabao can bear the heat of the sun. {6} [A12; a3] be of some help.
Ang ímung grádu dílì na madala ug ínat. Hagbung ka giyud, Stretching
your grade won’t be of any help. You failed, period. {7} [A13; a2]
include with, be together with, accompany. Ang íyang tíngug nagdala ug
kahadluk, There was fear in her voice. {8} [A] carry clothes, personal
belongings well, poorly. Maáyu siyang mudala ug bisti, She carries her
clothes well. n s.t. brought, carried, taken along as a load.
Nagsangkiig aku sa ákung dala, I staggered under my load.
a {1} together with. Mikalagiw ang inahan dala ang gamay níyang bátà,
The mother fled together with her small child. {2} carried along with,
influenced by. Dala sa ákung kalágut nakahílak aku, Influenced by my
anger, I burst out crying. {3} the accompaniment of. Kining ákung
hilánat dala sa ákung húbak, My fever came on with my asthma. {3a} — sa
pagkatáwu inborn. Ang íyang pagkabúta dala sa íyang pagkatáwu, He is
blind from birth. {4} included. Ang singkuwintang plíti dala na ang
túbig, Water is included in the fifty pesos rent. (←) v [B125] be
influenced by, carried along. Nadála aku sa íyang kakúgi, I was
influenced by her industriousness. daladála v [A; a12] bring
repeatedly, wherever one goes. Kining ímung pagkasaksi mauy mudaladála
kanímu sa pagpaatúbang sa husgádu, If you are a witness it will keep
bringing you back to court. Daladaláun gayud nákù kining batáa, I will
surely take the child with me wherever I go. Hápit na mutúig ang
pagdaladála níya sa íyang sakit, He has been going around with his
sickness for almost a year. n female genitalia (humorous). pa- v [A; c]
send. Ipadala níya ang ímung urdir kun padad-an mu siyag kwarta, He
will send the order if you send him money. -um-(←) v [A; a2] manage.
Nagdumála siya sa usa ka bangku dinhi, He managed one of the banks
here. kadumaláhan, dumaláhan n management. Ang Urmuk ubus gihápun sa
íyang kadumaláhan, Ormoc is also under his administration. -in- a =
dala, a 1, 2. n {1} male genitalia (humorous). {2} children of a former
marriage brought into a new marriage. {3} idiosyncrasies a woman may
experience during conception. Ayaw tagda ang kapungtánun sa ímung
asáwang burus kay dinala nà, Don’t mind your wife’s irritability.
That’s part of her pregnancy. dinad-an, dinalhan n treatment. Ang
ngil-ad nga dinad-an sa íyang bána, The bad treatment her husband gives
her. dalad-unun, dad-unun, dalhunun n things to be brought. a needing
care because of sickness or needing tact because of touchiness.

dalag_1 a light yellow. Dalag ang íhì, Urine is yellow. n yellowed or
brown fallen leaves. Dalag sa lumbuy himúun ug líkin, Yellowed lumbuy
leaves are made into cigars. v [BN; a] {1} become, make s.t. yellow.
{2} for the voice to get off pitch. Nadalag (midalag) ang íyang tíngug
tungud sa hilabihang kahadluk, She was so frightened her voice went out
of key. {3} [A1] wear s.t. yellow. ma- a yellow. v [A13] be yellow.
Nagamadalag ang pangánud sa matahum buluk sa buláwan, The clouds were
yellow with beautiful hues of gold.

dalag_2 = haluan.

dalága_1 n {1} unmarried woman. Anak sa pagkadalága, A child born to an
unmarried woman. Dalágang lagas, An old maid. {2} young girl who has
reached maturity. Sus! Dalága ka na kaáyung tan-áwun, My! You look very
much a young lady. v [B12S] {1} for a girl to grow up, act like a
grown-up. Ang ímung inahan ug aku dúngan nga nadalága, Your mother and
I grew up at the same time. {1a} [B126] reach womanhood by virtue of
menstruating. Nadalága ku sa idad nga katursi, I had my first
menstruation at fourteen. paN- v [A2; a2] get to a girl’s bed to have
intercourse with her. Panagáun ta ka karung gabíi, I’ll sneak into your
bed tonight. hiN-(→) v [B145] grow into full womanhood. Nanindut ang
íyang láwas dihang naghinalaga na, She developed a beautiful body as
she grew to maturity. kadalagáhan n maidens. Ang mga kadalagáhan atúa
sa sayáwan, The girls are at the dance. -um- n female animal just about
ready for reproduction, esp. chickens. v [B12S] {1} be old enough to
reproduce. Ígu giyung nagdumalaga na, gidúnguy ang tanan kung manuk, My
chickens got diseased just as they were about to start laying. {2} for
a girl that is too young to act like a teen-ager. Nagdumalaga ka nag
pulupanglipstik, You think you’re grown-up already wearing lipstick.
dalagíta n a girl close to maturity but not yet mature (ten to thirteen
years old). Dalagíta na giyud si Gríta kay gipamukúlan na, Greta has
indeed reached puberty because her breasts are beginning to develop.
v [BS] become a young girl. dalaginding n term for endearment for a
small girl. Grid wan na ákung dalagingding, My little darling is in the
first grade.†

*dalága_2 tudlù — n k.o. banana, eaten as is when ripe, growing 6″
long, tapering and narrow. The peel is light green and the meat white
when ripe.

dalágan v {1} [A2S; ab3c] for a person to run. Midágan siya kay
nahadluk, He ran away because he was afraid. Kinsa tung nagdagan dihà?
Who is that running over there? Dì na ku kadágan kay gikutasan ku, I
can run no further because I am out of breath. Dagána ang táwu kay wà
pa siya kabayad, Run after the man. He didn’t pay. Unsay ímung
gidagánan? What are you running away from? Bantáyi kanang karni, kay
idágan sa irù, Watch the meat because the dog will run away with it.
{2} [A2S] for a machine to run, function. Dì mudágan ang makina, The
machine stopped running. {3} [A2] run for office. Katulu na siya
mudágan pagkamayur, He ran for mayor three times. {4} [A2; b8] run for
help. Wà siyay láing kadagánan, He has no one else to turn to. {5} [A2]
extend a certain time or distance. Ang pilikula mudágan ug tulu ka
úras, The show lasts for three hours. Gíkan dinhi ang karsáda mudágan
ngadtu sa subà, From here the road runs toward the river. Usa ka baril
nga aspaltu mudágan ug unsi mitrus, A barrel of asphalt lasts eleven
meters. n {1} speed, velocity. Singkuwinta milyas káda úras ang dágan
sa awtu, The car is traveling at fifty miles per hour. {2} running,
functioning condition. Maáyu pa ang dágan sa awtu, The car is still in
good running condition. {3} time elapsed during which s.t. happened.
Pila ka úras ang dágan sa idru ngadtu? How many hours is the trip there
by plane? {3a} passing of time. Wà ku makaalinggat sa dágan sa panahun,
I failed to notice the passing of the time. {4} circulation. Kusug ang
dágan sa dugù sa hayblarun, A person with high blood pressure has rapid
blood circulation. {4a} — sa hitabù flow of events. (→) v [A; ac] go
hurriedly s.w. for a purpose. Dagna (dagana, dagána) ang ímung igsúun,
Run and get your brother. Idagan (idágan) ni ngadtu, Run, bring this
there. pa- v [A; c1] {1} operate a business, machine. Hínay siyang
mupadágan sa kutsi, He drives the car slowly. Didtu sa kadagátan sa
Mindanaw padagána (ipadágan) ang ímung panágat, Operate your fishing
equipment in the seas around Mindanao. {1a} run the woof to a certain
point in the warp. {1b} — sa dágang create a literary work. {2} allow
to circulate, advertise. Mau kanà ang tabì nga gipadágan níya, That was
the gossip she circulated. {3} create a literary work. pina- n job not
well done. Pinadágan ang pagkatahì niíni, This was hastily sewn.
{2} literary creation. tag-, tag-(→) n one sent on errands. Siya mauy
tagdágan sa kinahanglánun sa balay, He is the one who is sent to run
after the things we need in the house. -an n run-*way in an airport.
-in-ay(→) n wartime (when people ran away). tali- n about to run away.†

dalagangdang n k.o. shrub of waste places with alternate bipinnate
leaves, used as a local medicine: Acacia sp.

daláhig v {1} [A; c1] implicate in a bad action, be influenced. Ayaw
dahíga (idáhig) ang ákung inahan sa átung panaglális, Don’t bring my
mother into our quarrel. {2} [c1] be brought to ruin, embarrassment by
what s.o. else did.

dalahik v [A; c1] {1} drag s.t. that slides along the ground, usually
said of boats. Idahik (dahika) ang sakayan sa baybáyun, Drag the boat
onto the beach. {2} drag oneself along on the buttocks. Kanúnayng
mahúgaw ang lubut sa bátà kay nagdahik na man pud, The child’s buttocks
are always dirty because he drags himself around.

dalakit n name given to various species of Ficus which start as
epiphytes and strangle their host, assuming tree form. They are much
feared as being haunts of various supernatural beings.

dálam (not without l) n Congress.

dalambà n scaffolding.

dálan n {1} street, road, way. Giaspaltu ang tanang dálan, All the
streets are paved. Nagbúlag silag dálan, They parted ways. {2} way,
means. Ang pagbása dálan sa kinaadman, Reading is a way to knowledge.
{3} the way one acts, lives. Giampíngan ang ímung dálan, Your behavior
is being observed. {4} hátag ug — give a hint of the answer. Gitagáan
ka nag dálan dì gihápun ka katubag? You were given a hint and you still
can’t answer? sin-(→) v [A; b5c1] {1} do s.t. else while walking.
Sindalanun (sindalanan, isindalan) nátug káun ang mansánas, Let’s eat
the apples along the way. {2} do s.t. at the same time as one does s.t.
else. Nagsindalan siyag hílak samtang nagkanta, She cried as she sang.

dalángin see panalángin.

dálap n k.o. measles with eczema, affecting the eyes. v [a4] have
measles.

dalapúgan n k.o. sea fish growing to a foot in length.

dalaput n k.o. small tree, the leaves of which have medicinal use.

dálar n dollar.

dalaurà n k.o. shrub with dark green leaves, wild and cultivated, the
leaves of which produce a red dye. v [A13; b6] dye with dalaurà.

daláyig v [A; a] {1} admire, praise. Gidáyig sa tanan ang íyang
katahum, Everyone admired her beauty. {1a} gi- for a child to do s.t.
all the more when he is told to stop, as a way to get attention. Manday
gibuyag, misíaw. Gidayig, We told him to stop and he did it all the
more. He’s asking for attention. pa- v [A] show off, ask for praise.
mag-r- admirer, fan. daygun Christmas carols. v [a] sing carols about
s.t. paN- v [A2] go caroling. n caroling. dinaygúnan proceeds from
caroling. mananaygun carolers.

daldag = dagdag.

daldal v {1} [A; a12] influence s.o. to do s.t. objectionable. Ayaw
siyag daldála sa súgal, Don’t initiate him into the vice of gambling.
{2} [A; c] reveal a secret in idle gossip. Nag-áway sila kay gidaldálan
na usab ang asáwa, They’re quarrelling because s.o. probably told the
wife about it. n idle gossip. -ira, -iru a spreading gossip, repeating
idle rumors about others.

dalhap v [A; b6] move with intermittent sudden pushes of the body.
Midalhap siya sa halígi, He shimmied up the post. Nagdalhap na ang
ákung apu, My grandchild is already on the crawling stage.

dalhig = dalhug.

dalhug (from húlug) v [APB2; c1P] slide down, bring down by sliding.
Midalhug lang sa bakilid ang palwa nga ákung gisakyan, The coconut
frond I rode on just slid down the slope. Akuy nagdalhug (nagpadalhug)
sa kargamintu dihà sa andamyu, I brought the cargo down by sliding it
on the gangplank. Nalingaw ang bátang nagpadalhug sa bakilid, The child
had fun sliding down the slope.

dáli v [AN; b5] deceive s.o., take one in. Hápit ku madáli sa kwartang
minì, I was almost taken in by the fake money. Ayaw kug dalíhi (dalíha)
sa ímung pangatarúngan, Don’t try to fool me with your excuses.

dalì_1 a {1} easy. Dalì ra kaáyu kanang buhátun, It is very easy to do
that. {2} quick, immediate. Dalì nga kahuwásan, Quick relief.
v {1} [B14] be in a hurry. Dì ku kahuwat kay nagdalì ku, I can’t wait
because I am in a hurry. {2} [A2; c1] do s.t. quickly. Gidalì pagpáhid
ni Dúris ang íyang lúhà, Doris quickly wiped her tears. dalìdalì v [A;
a] {1} do s.t. hastily. Ayaw siyag dalìdalía paghangyù, Don’t ask her
hastily. Dalìdalii lang siyag sulat, Just write him hastily. {2} [a12]
be the first person to whom s.t. is likely to happen. Aku ra giyuy
madalìdalig tawag ni mam, I’m the most likely person for the teacher to
call on. dinalìdalì n work done hastily. madalìdalíun a fond of rushing
up things, impulsive. dalìdálì v [A; a] {1} approach s.o. directly
without formality. Bisag dalìdalíun na siyag hangyù, musugut lang, Even
if you ask him without preparing him beforehand, he’ll go along with
it. {2} [a12] be overcome readily. Dílì siya madalìdálì kay bansay man
sa dyúdu, You can’t overcome him just like that because he is good in
judo. hiN-r-(←) a happening on the spur of the moment, suddenly.
Hinanálì ra kaáyu ang íyang kamatáyun, His death was so sudden. -in-an
a urgent, in a hurry. Dinalian ang ákung sulat kaníya, My letter to him
is urgent. n k.o. short term rice which ripens in three months. ka- for
a moment. Gustu ku makigsulti nímu kadalì, I would like to talk to you
for a second.

dalì_2 come here! Dalì ra, Please come here!

dalid n large root which is flat and projects above the ground.

dalidáli n name given to some species of flat fishes (flounders, soles,
brills).

daligdig v [A; b6] trickle slowly. Midaligdig ang mga singut sa íyang
agtang, Sweat trickled down his forehead. n trickling.

dalikdik n rolls, blobs of dirt on the body, esp. in the folds of the
skin. v [a4] have folds of dirt.

dalikyat v [A; b5c] do s.t. for a short time, go s.w. for a short time.
Mudalikyat ku sa íla, I will stop in to see them for a moment.
Dalikyátun (dalikyátan, idalikyat) ni nátù paghisgut, Let’s take out a
second to talk this over. Idalikyat ra ni sa íla, Drop this off for a
second to their house.

dalílang n k.o. supernatural being, a small white woman that does no
harm.

dalin-as = dakin-as.

dalinúan n = karbalyas.

dalínug n soft, whitish, oily substance on the surface of the meat of a
mature coconut which is forming buwà (the sponge-like growth which
precedes the sprout).

dalipanus, dalipánus v [B2; c] slip by sliding. Midalipánus lang ang
ubud sa ákung kamut, The eel just slipped from my hand. Gidalipánus
nákù ang ákung kamut sa háwak sa babáyi, I slid my hand down the
woman’s hips.

dalipsang = dalispang.

dalipsù v [B26; c1P] slide. Midalipsù ang bátang ákung gikúgus, The
child I was carrying slipped out of my arms. Nadalipsù ang dyip sa
danlug nga karsáda, The jeep skidded on the slippery highway.
Nagkalingaw ang mga bátag padalipsù sa bakilid, The children amused
themselves sliding down the hill.

dalipsut síhì = síhì.

dalipunga, dalipungà = alipunga.

dalísay a {1} pure and unmixed, esp. coconut juice. {2} for emotions to
be pure. Dalísay nga gugma, Unsullied love.

dalispang v [B26; b6] {1} slip, lose one’s footing. Midalispang siya sa
pálut sa ságing, He slipped on the banana peel. {2} lose one’s honor,
fall into disrepute. Nadalispang siya sa mapasalígung sáad, She lost
her honor because of reassuring promises. {3} [A; b6] for wind or water
to brush against s.t. Ang dágat midalispang sa kílid sa barútu, The sea
slid off the edge of the boat. Gidalispángan ang ákung nawung sa
huyúhuy, A breeze brushed against my face.

dalispù = dalipsù.

dálit v [A; c] {1} offer food, refreshments, expressions of good
feeling to guests. Mudálit giyud nà silag pagkáun human sa pangadyì,
They will surely serve food after the novena. Dalíti usab siyag
pahíyum, Greet her with a smile. {1a} offer for entertainment. Kining
prugramáha gidálit ninyu sa ..., This program has been presented to you
by ... {2} offer food to spirits in the búhat ceremonies. n {1} s.t.
offered to visitors. {2} food offered in the búhat ceremonies.

dalítik = handilítik.

dalius-us = daus-us.

dalù a {1} selfish, disliking to give things. Dawù nà siya kay dì man
muhátag bísag gamay, He’s selfish, he won’t even give a little bit.
{2} eagerly desirous to do s.t., esp. eating. Dawù kug mangga, I’m
crazy about mangoes. Dawù siyag bayli, She is fond of dancing. v [B14;
b6] become selfish. (←) v {1} [A; c] begrudge giving s.t. Kun náa lay
ákù dì giyud ku mudáwù nímu, If I only had any, I wouldn’t begrudge you
any. Ngánung gidawúan mu man ang kaugalíngun mung anak? Why do you have
to begrudge your own child? {2} [A; a] tease by offering s.t. and then
taking it away. Ayaw akug dalúa. Ug ihátag, ihátag, Don’t take away
what you have given me. If you’re going to give it, O.K. kadalùdalù
v [A13] be overly fond of. Nagkadawùdawù ku sa lab-as isdà kay tagsa ra
ku kakaun, I like fresh fish too much because I rarely get it.

daludalu n k.o. slate-gray, edible cerith shell, about 1½″, common in
saltwater marshes.

dalugdug n thunder. v [AN] thunder. Mudalugdug (manalugdug) na gánì
buklása ang mga hinayhay, If it thunders, take in the wash.

daluk-an v [b8] be caught unaware. Hidaluk-an sila nga nangáwat, They
were caught stealing.

dálum (not without l) a beneath, below. Daghang sagbut sa dálum sa
ílang balay, There is lots of rubbish beneath their house.

dalundalun v [A] for the fish to go in schools.

dalundun = dagundun_2.

dalungdung = gunù.

dalunggan see dungug.

dalúpang n k.o. shrub, the leaves of which are used topically for
rashes and stomach ailments: Urena lobata. — ginting variety with
palmately-lobed leaves, considered the best for medicinal use. — kukhan
n variety with serrate but not lobed leaves, shaped like a fingernail.

dalupápa n k.o. squid with a body growing to a foot in length.

dalupúgan = dalapúgan.

dal-us v [APB; c1P] {1} drag or slide slowly in a downward direction.
Ang íyang nigusyu nagkadal-us sa kapútu, His business gradually slipped
into bankruptcy. Idal-us (dal-úsa, padal-úsa, ipadal-ús) na lang ang
sáku sa kupras pagkanáug, Just put the sacks of copra off by letting
them slide. {2} move forward slowly (figurative usage). Ang sakayan
midal-us sa línawng dágat, The boat moved slowly over the calm sea.
{3} [APB; c1P] move the eyes down over s.t. Midal-us ang íyang
pagtan-aw gíkan sa líug ngadtu sa bitíis, He let his gaze move over her
from her neck to her legs. -an(→), -anan(→) n slide.

dalus-us v [APB; c1P] slide down. Mahadluk siyang mudalus-us
(mupadalus-us) sa gabayan sa hagdanan, He’s afraid to slide down the
bannister. Kinsay nagdalus-us (nagpadalus-us) sa sáku sa harína? Who
slid the sack of flour down? -an(→) n slide, children’s playground
equipment.

daluyduy v [B4; a4] {1} cough hard continuously, have such a cough.
Nagdaluyduy ang ubu sa bátà, The child’s cough was hard and continuous.
{2} for tears to come fast and furious. Nagdaluyduy ang íyang mga lúhà,
Her tears flowed copiously.

dalwak n hernia in the groin. v [A123P; b4] have, cause hernia in the
groin.

dalyang v [A; c1] for s.t. solid to be in such large quantities it
hangs out beyond its area. Midalyang ang íyang tiyan, His stomach hangs
out over his belt. Nagdalyang lang ang pagkáun sa lamísa, The food on
the table is in overflowing quantities.

dam n dam.

dáma_1 n demijohn. — hwána = dáma_1. v [B256; b6] be a demijohn full.
Wà ra ni mudáma (madáma) ang tubà nga nahurut námù, The toddy we drank
wasn’t even a demijohn. damahan = dáma_1.

dáma_2 n {1} lady-in-waiting. {2} runner-ups in a beauty contest who
attend the winner in the coronation.

dáma_3 n {1} game of checkers. {2} king in checkers. {3} a furrow which
crosses the main furrows (tudling). After harrowing (pagsudlay), a
furrow is made for the seeds (pagtudling), after which a cross furrow
is made (pagdáma) to mark where to put the seeds. v {1} [AC; a2] play
checkers. Ug gustu kang tigpaabilidaray, damáhun lang nátù, If you want
to have a contest, let’s have it out playing checkers. {2} [B23; a12]
become a king in checkers. Bantay kay tulu nay nakadáma sa ákung batu,
Watch out because three of my men have become king. {3} [A; b] plow a
field across the main furrow to mark where the seeds are to be placed.
(→) v [A12] {1} get to first base with a woman. Naglángan ka lang kay
dì giyud ka makadama kang Maríya, You’re wasting your time because you
can’t get to first base with Mary. {2} convince, have an effect on. Ang
mga hulgà dílì giyud makadama kanákù, Threats can have no effect on me.
damahan n checker board.

dáma dinutsi n a climbing ornamental shrub bearing numerous, slender,
scented, yellow-green flowers which open at night: Cestrum nocternum.

dámag_1 v {1} [A; a12] for ghosts to molest people causing them to get
sick or disturbed. Kalag nga wà kabinditáhi ang midámag níya, An
unblessed soul haunted him. {2} gi- are you crazy, doing s.t.
unthinkable. Gidámag ka dihà nga nangulitáwu ka mag minyù? Are you
crazy (lit. molested by a ghost) courting a married woman?

dámag_2 = damlag.

dam-ag v {1} [BC1; b6] crash, bump into. Nadam-ag ku sa lamísa kay
ngitngit, In the darkness I bumped into the table. Nagkadam-ag mi, We
crashed into each other. {2} [AN2; b6] lunge at, attack. Gidam-ágan
dáyun sa asáwa ang kirída sa íyang bána, The wife lunged at her
husband’s paramour. {3} [A23] do s.t. impulsively without much thought.
Mahal ra níyang pagkapalíta kay midam-ag man dáyun, She paid too high a
price because she rushed into buying it.

damagan_1 n k.o. rudderfish: Kyphosus spp.

damagan_2 n beautiful woman (slang).

damahwána = dáma_1.

damak a careless in attending to small, trivial things. Damak. Way
panudlay, way pamatúnis, He’s careless. He doesn’t comb his hair, he
doesn’t button his pants. Damak, bisag ása biyái ang hunsuy, He’s
careless. He leaves his pipe any old place. Damak. Húgaw kaáyug ági,
He’s very careless. His handwriting is untidy. v [B1] be, become
careless.

daman_1 v {1} [B14; a4] talk, walk in one’s sleep. Unsa nang ímung
gipanulti? Nagdaman ka man tingáli, What are you saying? You must be
talking in your sleep. Kanúnay siyang damnun run. Unsa may nakasámuk
níya? What’s bothering him that he always walks in his sleep? {2} [A;
a] dream. Unsay ímung gidaman? What did you dream? n walking, talking,
crying in sleep. damandaman v {1} = padamandáman. {2} [BN; b5c1] appear
vaguely to one’s senses. Damandamanun (damandamanan) ku sa manánuy
níyang tíngug káda gabíi, Her sweet voice comes back vaguely to me
every evening. Ngánung idamandaman (damandamanun) nímu pagpakítà? Why
don’t you show it clearly? n {1} pretense of walking, talking in sleep.
{2} vague sense of s.t. padamandáman v [A; b6] pretend to walk or talk
in sleep.

daman_2 = mau ra (dialectal). see mau.

dámas n small, narrow dug-out boat which may or may not have
outriggers.

dambà = dalambà.

dambil n dumbbell. a stupid. v [B12; b6] be dull and stupid. Gidambílan
kaáyu kung nagtan-aw sa ímung míd, Your maid seems to me to be a
terrible dumbbell.

damgu n dream. Ákung mga damgu nga maduktur ku, My dreams of becoming a
doctor. v [A1; a12] dream. Damgúhun ku ikaw, I’ll dream of you.
madamgúhun a dreamy, dreamily.

damhuy v [B14; a4b4] be sleepy. Kanúnay siyang magdamhuy sa klási, He’s
always sleepy in class. Katū́g na, kay gidamhuy (gidamhuyan) ka na man,
Go to sleep because you’re sleepy.

dámids n expense in a treat, compulsory contribution, and the like
(slang). Ang dámids sa ikskursiyun tris káda táwu, The damages for the
excursion are three pesos a person. Pilay ímung dámids sa blu-awut? How
much did you spend for your party?

damig n small amount of food eaten with staple. v [A; c1] eat a small,
simple side dish together with the staple. Asin lay ílang gidamig, The
only thing they had to go with their rice was salt.

damikà, damíkà v [A1; b3] sit around doing nothing. Nagdamikà
(nagdamíkà) lang mi kay way buluhatun, We are just sitting around
because we have nothing to do.†

damili a dirty and sticky. v [B; b6] get, become dirty. Nagdamili ang
lamísa kay gitrapúhan ug húgaw, The table is sticky because it was
wiped with a dirty cloth.

damlag n {1} future. Wà siya maghunàhúnà kun unsay damlag, He is not
thinking about his future. {2} day after tomorrow. Ugmà dì, apan sa
damlag, Not tomorrow, but on the next day. {3} tomorrow morning. Dì na
lang ta manggíkan karun kay hápun na. Damlag na lang, Let’s not leave
today because it’s late. Let’s leave tomorrow morning. ugmà — {1} in
the future. Mahímu siyang abugádu ugmà damlag, He will become a lawyer
in the future. {2} tomorrow, God willing. Mularga ku ugmà damlag, I’ll
leave tomorrow, God willing.

dampilas = dampiyas.

dampiyas v [A2; b6] for a bladed instrument to glance off. Pastilan ug
dampiyasan gánì sa sundang nang ímung tiil, ikaw lang, Goodness, if the
bolo glances off onto your feet, don’t say I didn’t warn you.

dampug v [A; c] put s.t. s.w. carelessly. Idampug lang sa daplin ang
bulingun, Just throw the dirty clothes to the side.

damput_1 = dangput.

damput_2 = dampug.

dampuug n large amount of s.t. piled up. Dampuug sa basúra, Large heap
of garbage. v [A; ac] pile up, form a heap. Nagdampuug na ang átung mga
bulingun, The laundry is piled up now.

damù = daghan, a (dialectal). (←) v = daghan, v (dialectal).

dámù = kanámù. see kami.

dam-ug v [A; b(1)] sprinkle water on s.t. to moisten it. Dam-úgan ta ug
dágat ang kupras, Let’s sprinkle sea water on the copra. {2} spurting
water from the mount on a fighting cock in order to strengthen it. It
is also massaged at the same time.

dam-uk = dan-uk.

damulmug, damulug = dalínug.

dámung v [A23; b5] for s.t. to persist and intensify despite attempts
made against it. Midámung ang pátay sa dihang nangusug ug kampanya ang
kapulisan, The killings are on the rise despite the intensified police
campaign. Damúngan (damúngun) ka núug hílak sa bátà ug ímung pahilúmun,
The baby will persist in crying if you hush him up.

damurhaw v [B1456] be blank in the mind, unthinking about what one is
doing. Nagdamurhaw lang nang batáa. Dì katunung, That boy doesn’t pay
attention to what he’s doing. He never does it right.

damúsing = dumísing.

dam-ut v [A1; b] wash around the mouth. paN- v [A2] wash one’s mouth
off. Panam-ut dihà. Nagkamulitsing ang ímung bàbà, Wash your mouth;
it’s covered with dirt.

damyang v [A; c] spread s.t. out, usually grains or small objects.
Idamyang ang bás sa nátad, Spread the sand over the front yard.
Gidamyángan sa ahinti ang salug sa íyang mga gibaligyang duwáan, The
salesman spread the toys on the floor. pa- v [A; ac] {1} have s.o.
spread s.t. out. {2} lie spread out. Nagpadamyang giyud siyag higdà mu
rag nagpauga, She is lying with her arms and legs spread out like
laundry spread out to dry.

damyu = andamyu.

dan particle which warns the interlocutor that what is going to be said
is connected with what immediately follows it. {1} preceding a
statement which describes the reason for what follows: so ... Dan, kay
walà man siya mutuun, nahagbung, So, since he didn’t study, he failed.
Dan, nía kami arun pagbisíta ninyu, Well, we came here to visit you.
{2} preceding a question with a condition: so then, if [so-and-so] is
the case, what will happen? Dan, ug walà ka dinhi, kinsa may muhíkay sa
pagkáun? So then, if you’re not here, who will prepare the meals?
{3} particle to hold a narration together: now then. Adlaw tung
Duminggu. Dan, sa sunud adlaw, Lúnis kadtu, It was Sunday. Then, the
next day, it was Monday.

dán = dálan.

dánag a half-conscious. Dánag na lang ang tinan-awan sa táwu nga hubug
kaáyu, That drunkard looked at us as if he were only half-aware of what
was going on. v [B45] be half conscious. Nagdánag na lang ang pamínaw
sa himatyun, The dying man is only dimly aware of what is going on.†

dan-ag n light given off. Dan-ag sa daktul, Light of the full moon.
a {1} bright. {2} well-illuminated. Dan-ag ang baylihánan, The dance
floor is well-illuminated. v [A; c] give off light. Gidan-ágan ang
íyang nawung sa háyag sa ispat, His face was illuminated by the light
from the flashlight.

danakit = dalakit.

dánas = gánas.

danasdánas v [A1; c6] use a vehicle or wear clothes going through a
place it might get damaged. Kinsay nagdanasdánas sa bisklíta nga
nagkagarasgaras man? Who treated the bicycle so rough? There are
scratches on it. Kining maung idanasdánas sa kakugnan, Wear the denim
in going through the saw grass.

dánaw v [A; b6] form a pool in, flood. Magdánaw (danáwan) ang nátad
basta muulan, The yard gets flooded when it rains. Nagdánaw ang túbig
sa nátad, The water is forming a pool in the yard. (→) v = dánaw.
n pool of water.

danay it is likely to happen. Danay man ta hibyaan sa dyip ning ímung
pagkalanganlanganun, We are likely to miss the jeep because of your
dilly-dallying.

danga v [A2; b4] for a failure to do s.t. to lead to misfortune.
Nakadanga ang ímung pagkatabian. Naapil ka sa kasámuk, Your big mouth
got you into trouble. Now you’re involved in the quarrel. Gidangahan ka
sa ímung pagkagáhig úlu, What happened to you is the result of your
stubbornness.

dangàdangà v [A; b6] approaching. Nagdangàdangà na si Máma. Tabángi sa
íyang dala, Mother is approaching. Help her carry her things. (←) v [A;
b6] approach for help. Dì siya madangàdangáan kay kuríput, You cannot
approach him for help because he is tight.

dangag = danghag.

dángan_1 n {1} any pest that destroys crops. Ang mga tanum nadáut sa
dángan, The plants were destroyed by the pests. {2} destruction caused
by pests. Tungud sa dángan sa ilagà gamay mig áni, Because of the
destruction wrought by the rats, we had a small harvest. a destructive.
Dángan kaáyung bataána. Manggisì sa balasahun, What a destructive
child. He rips up the magazines. v [A; b5] for pests or s.t. comparable
to destroy. Ang súgal ug ínum makadángan sa pagpuyù, Gambling and
drinking are destructive to family life. Gidangánan (gidángan) ang
ámung humayan, Our ricefield was destroyed by pests.

dángan_2 n k.o. palutput fish.

dangarag v {1} [B46; b(1)] be careless, heedless, heedless of detail.
Ug magdangarag kang mulabang sa karsáda, maligsan ka giyud, If you are
careless in crossing the street, you will get run over. Ayawg dangaragi
nang inyung búhat arun dílì magkasáyup, Don’t be careless with your
work so that you won’t make mistakes. {2} [A3] come suddenly s.w. for a
reason. Mudangarag dáyun nà siya dinhi kun may kasuk-an sa íla, She
runs here if anything goes wrong at home. a careless.

dangarang v [A3; b6] {1} approach. Maung nagláin ang panahun kay náa
may nagdangarang nga bagyu, The weather is rather bad because a storm
is approaching. {2} come into view. Ang nagdangarang nga bapur, The
boat coming into view.

dangas_1 a having a receding hairline. v [B] have a receding hairline.
Mudangas (madangas) ang ímung agtang ug magsígi kag kálù, You will get
bald on your forehead if you keep wearing a hat.

dangas_2 v [B1; c1] be inattentive to what one is supposed to be doing.
Nagdangas siyang nanáug. Nahúlug hinúun, She wasn’t paying attention
when she went down the stairs, so she fell.

dángas, dangás = danglas.

dángat v {1} [A2; b] reach, arrive at a place. Midángat mi sa ámung
distínu, We arrived at our destination. Walà pa ku dangáti ug kwarta,
No money has reached me yet. {2} [A23; b5] happen to s.o. Ayaw giyud ku
basúla kun may mudángat nímu, Don’t ever blame me if s.t. happens to
you. Mu nay ímung gidángat (gidangátan), That’s what happened to you.
{3} [A2; b4] for time to elapse. Wà makadángat ang tulu ka adlaw
namatay ang pasyinti, The patient died before three days had elapsed.
Gidangtan sila ug tulu ka búlan sa Sibu, They’ve been in Cebu for three
months. {4} [A2] go to a woman’s house for the purpose of proposing
marriage. Mudángat ta run sa íla arun mamáyi, Let’s go to their house
to make the marriage proposal. pa- v {1} [A; c] state s.t. by letter,
cable, etc. Ipadángat ang ímung urdir sa ámung upisína, Send your order
to our office. {2} [A; a12] cause to get s.w. {3} [a12] wait for s.t.
to happen. Padangátun ang takdul únà itárì ang manuk, Wait for the full
moon before you allow your cock to fight. r-an n what happens to one.
Dautan ang ímung dadangátan, You will come to grief.

dángaw n measurement, the distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip
of the middle finger extended. v [A; a12] measure s.t. in dangaw’s.
dangawdangaw n k.o. inchworm, caterpillar that moves by lifting the
center of its body, about 2″. It turns into a butterfly. v [a4] be
infested with this sort of inchworm.

dangay n {1} = danglay. {2} dried palutput fish.

dángay = danglay.

dangdang v [A; c1] heat s.t. slightly near fire or under the sun.
Idangdang (dangdánga) ang túbig sa ínit, Leave the water in the sun to
heat it.

danggà_1 a for a child to be spoiled to the point of being abusive.
v [B] be spoiled, be abusive from being spoiled. Mudanggà (madanggà)
siyag patumánan sa íyang gustu, He will become spoiled if his every
wish is granted.

danggà_2 = anggà.

danggas a {1} running a slight fever. {2} warm. Danggas pa ang plantsa,
The iron is still warm. v [B; a4] have a slight fever. Walà man gánì
danggása (magdanggas) ang bátà, The child doesn’t even have a fever.

danggit n small, smooth-skinned and flat fish with thirteen poisonous
dorsal spines. {1} name given to the species of Teuthis which have
dots. {2} by extension, name given to other small fishes that are
species of Teuthis. -in- a move toward s.t. sideways or do s.t. with
the side facing the goal of the action. Dinanggit ang íyang initsahan
sa búla, He shoots the ball with his side facing the basket. v [A; c1]
do, move with the side towards the goal of the action.†

danghag a inattentive to what one is doing. Danghag siya nga naglakaw,
mau nà nga nabulásut, He wasn’t paying attention to what he was doing,
so he stepped into a hole. v [B146] fail to pay attention. Nagdanghag
ka tingáli pagpanuklì maung naalkansi ta, You were probably careless in
making change. That is why we are short now. Nagdanghag nang ímung
nawung, You’re looking everywhere but where you are supposed to be.

danghal a lacking alertness and attention. Danghal nga iksplikahan.
Dílì manimátì, She has a dopey expression on her face when you explain
s.t. to her. She doesn’t listen. v [B] be dopey, unalert. -an(→) a of a
dopey sort.

danghili n fish similar to and of same genera as danggit (and loosely
also called danggit) but which have a mosaic pattern: Teuthis spp.

dangílag n kindling. v [A; c] set a fire with kindling. Sinipilya ang
idangílag pagháling, Set the fire by using wood shavings.

dangili = danghili.

dangka v [A; c1] warm s.t. gently by placing near a fire, usually in
order to dry it. Idangka (dangkáha) ang mga basang sinínà, Put the wet
dresses near the fire.

dangkalan n k.o. edible jellyfish, to 20″ in diameter, dome-shaped,
violet, fading toward the edges, with short tentacles that inflict a
mild sting.

dangkit = langkit.

dangkúlus v {1} [A; b5] jump playfully on s.o. Gidangkulúsan
(gidangkúlus) sa dakung irù ang ituy, The big dog leaps about playfully
on the puppy. {2} [C2; c3] frolic with physical intimacy. Láin tan-áwun
ang babáying makigdangkúlus ug mga laláki, It looks terrible for a
woman to engage in horseplay with men.

danglas v {1} [A; a] clamber over, climb up on s.t. vertical. Dílì
madanglas ang paril kay dangug, You can’t climb up that wall because
it’s slippery. Danglásan aku sa mga bátà ig-abut nákù, The children
clamber all over me when I get home. {2} [B2; c] run boats onto the
beach. Midángas (midangás, midanglas) ang sakayan sa lapyahan, The boat
was beached on the shore. a for one’s forehead to be wide and sloping
due to a receding hairline.

danglay n k.o. large slipmouth with a protracted mouth: Leiognathus
equulus.

danglug a slippery from being wet or having s.t. slimy on it. v [B; b6]
become, make slippery. Mudángug (madángug) ang kalsáda kun muulan, The
road will become slippery when it rains. n slime emitted by snails. pa-
v [A; c] {1} make s.t. slippery. Tubà ang átung ipadángug áring litsun,
We’ll wash the roast pig down (lit. make it slippery) with toddy.
{2} bribe. Magpadángug siya úsà mulíhuk, He waits for a bribe before he
gets moving. n grease money.

dangput n room partition. v [A; c1] make a room partition.

dangs n fairy, homosexual that acts effeminate.

dangug, dángug = danglug.

dangulngul = danguynguy.

dangup v [A2; c] {1} go s.w. for safety. Ang mga tulisan midangup sa
búkid, The bandits took refuge in the mountain. {2} resort to s.t.
Midangup sila sa hukmánan, They resorted to the courts. {3} go, turn to
s.o. for help. Walà siyay láing kadangpan, He has no one else to turn
to. Ayaw ug idangup ang ímung prublíma diri nákù, Don’t bring your
troubles to me.

danguynguy v [A; b3c1] wail, cry with deep sorrow. Gidanguyngúyan níya
ang ámung panagbúlag, She wept profusely because we broke our
engagement. n crying, wailing.

dani v {1} [A; a2] persuade, win over, convince. Rasun nga dílì
makadani (makapadani) nákù, Reasons that cannot convince me. Dílì
madani ang mga Múrus sa átung tinuúhan, You can’t convert the Muslims
to our religion. {2} [A; a12] induce s.o. to do s.t. along with s.o.
Mudani aku níya sa pagpangalígù, I’ll invite her to go swimming.
{3} [A2; a12] captivate, allure. Pahiyum nga makadani, An alluring
smile. madaníhun a {1} convincing. Madaníhung pangatarúngan, Persuasive
reasoning. {2} alluring. Madaníhung tíngug, An alluring voice.

danlak n rupture immediately above a man’s genitals such that the
intestines or bladder descend into the scrotal sack. v [A123P; a1b4]
have rupture of this type.

danlug = danglug.

dansbul n dodge ball game. v [A13; a2] play dodge ball.

dansir n dancer in a nightclub, dancer on stage. v [B156] be a dancer.

dansuy n k.o. boy’s shirt similar to the T-shirt in form, but with an
opening partway down the front, made of calico or other cheap woven
material. v [A; a] make, wear a dansuy.

danug = ban-ug.

dan-uk v [A13; c] {1} dump s.t. s.w. carelessly. Ayaw idan-uk sa suuk
ang inyung mga bulingun, Don’t just dump your dirty clothes in the
corner. {2} dump blame on s.o. Aku ang gidan-úkan sa pagbásul, They put
the blame on my shoulders.

danyus n damages awarded by court in a lawsuit. — piruhisyus n punitive
damages in a court case.

dáp = dálap.

dapà_1 n storage place (hut or large box) for corn and rice.

dapà_2 v [A; c] lie on the stomach. Gidapà sa mga mungha ang ílang
láwas atubángan sa Santu Kristu, The monks lay prostrate before the
crucifix.

dapà_3 n shoes (slang). way — name given to the guerillas during the
Japanese occupation because they were mostly barefoot.

dap-ag n k.o. poisonous sea urchin, similar to tuyum but with white
spots on the spines.

dapak v [A2] for a top to fail to spin.

dápak n k.o. fish similar to a spotted snapper in shape, but much
smaller.

dápal n measurement equal to the width of the palm with the fingers
outstretched and together reckoned from the middle of the thumb to the
base of the little finger. (→) v {1} [A; a12b2] strike with the palm of
the hand. Dapalun ku ang ímung úlu, I’ll slap your head. {2} [A; a1c]
put s.t. in the mouth with the palm of the hand. Ayaw idapal ug hurut
ang kík, Don’t shove all of the cake in your mouth at once.
n flat-footed. dapaldapal n person who is unusually short.

dap-as_1 v [A; a2] climb up s.t. using both hands and feet. Dap-ásun
lang níya ang lubi ug way hakhak, He’ll shin up the coconut tree if
there are no steps.

dap-as_2 = daplas. — sa kapáyas = kalatkat sa kapáyas. see kalatkat.

dápat v {1} [A2SC; ac] bring s.t. into contact with s.t. else. Nagdapat
sa yútà, Touching the ground. Dapátun ta ang duha ta ka kamut, Let’s
let our hands touch each other. Idápat ang ímung tiil sa sanga, Let
your feet touch the branch. {2} [A; c] administer medicine. Nahikatúlug
siya human kadapátig tambal, He fell asleep after the medicine had been
administered to him. {3} [A; b(1)] lay hands on one, hit. Anad giyud nà
siyang mudápat sa íyang asáwa, He is used to hitting his wife. {4} [A;
c] use in building s.t. Dì ku mudápat ug lawáan sa salug, I won’t use
lauan wood for the floor. Ang balay gidapátan ug kawáyan, The house was
built of bamboo. {5} [c] money spent on. Unsay ímung gidapátan sa ímung
kwarta? What have you done with your money? a suitable, fitting (used
by speakers influenced by Tagalog). Dì dápat kanang kulúra nímu, That
is not a good color for you. Dílì nà dápat pagabuhátun, You shouldn’t
do that. walay — useless, inapplicable. Way dápat nang kahúya kay
gabuk, That wood is useless because it’s rotten. (→) n material used to
make s.t., usually a house. Lig-un ug dapat kining baláya, This house
is made of strong materials. a flat-footed. v [B2] become flat-footed.
ig-r-(→) = dapat, n.

dápaw_1 n {1} hair on plants that causes itchiness. {2} rash resulting
from contact with plants that have itchy hair. v [b4] be affected with
dápaw. dapawdapaw n k.o. sea urchin with fine, whitish needles. -un
a covered with itchy hair-like growths.

dápaw_2 a {1} boastful, egotistic. {2} prone to tattling and gossiping.
v [B12; ab6] be boastful, egotistic. Madápaw man ka lagi ug iatubang ug
dága, You become boastful when you are with a young lady.

dapay = dapal, v 1.

dapdap n k.o. small tree of the seashore, widely planted as an
ornamental for its numerous bright red flowers: Erythrina variegata.

dapì v [A; ab2] slap with the open palm or s.t. flat. Bantay kay
hidapian unyà ka, Watch out, or you’ll get slapped. Kining rulíra ákung
idapì sa ímung samput, I’ll spank you with this ruler. dapìdapì n top
part of the buttocks.

dápig v [A2; b6] take sides in a quarrel. Midápig kami kaníya kay hustu
siya, We took sides with him because he is right. Walà akuy gidapígan,
I am not taking sides with anyone. ka-, -um-r-(→), um-l-(→) n political
supporter.

dap-ig = dip-ig.

dapigas v [B26; b8] loose one’s footing, slip off its footing.
Midapigas (nadapigas) ang íyang tiil sa ang-ang, His foot slipped off
the step. Nadapigas ang tiil sa lamísa sa bangil, The leg of the table
slipped off the edge.

dapilus, dapílus v [BP] slide straight downward. Nadapílus ang bátà sa
íyang kamut, The child slid out of his hands. Nagdapílus siya sa túbu,
He slid down the pole.

dápit v [A; a] {1} attract s.o. or s.t. to go s.w. Ang budyung
makadápit sa mga báka sa pagtígum, The call from the horn will make the
cows gather. Dapítun ku ikaw sa ámù, I’ll invite you to our place. Sugà
nga ikadápit ug isdà, A light to attract the fish. {2} attract notice,
attention. Ang íyang kaanyag makadápit sa ílang pagtagad, Her beauty
drew their attention. {3} divert water s.w. Unsáun ku pagdápit sa túbig
sa busay? How shall I divert the water from the spring? n {1} place.
Ang dápit níyang natawhan, The place where she was born. {1a} position,
relative standing. Ikatulu ra siyang dápit sa lumbà, He is third place
in the race. {2} direction, vicinity of. Dápit sa baybáyun, Near the
beach. (→) = dápit, n. pa-(→) v [A; b7c] put s.t. at some place.
Nagpadapit aku sa tumuy sa prusisiyun, I stayed at the head of the
procession. Ipadapit ang mga bíbi sa túbig, Have the ducks stay near
the water. hiN- a fond of inviting people s.w. -in- n guests.
mag-r-(→), maN-r-(→) n host.

dapíyas v [B126; b6] slip suddenly over or downwards. Nadapíyas ákung
tiil sa kanal, My foot slipped into the ditch.

dapíyu v [AN; a1b2] slap or strike s.o. heavily on the face or head.
Hidapyuhan ta man kag dì ka muhílum, I might slap you if you don’t shut
up. n slapping, a heavy slap or strike.

daplà v {1} [A3P; c1P] press s.t. arched out flat on a surface.
Kinahanglan giyung idaplà (daplaun, ipadaplà, padaplaun) ang ímung pád
sa sáwug kung magpus-ap ka, You have to place your palms flat on the
floor if you do push-ups. {2} [B; b6] be, become flat-footed. Mudaplà
(madaplà) kunu ang tiil basta tapulan, They say laziness makes you
flat-footed. a {1} for s.t. arched to be pressed flat against a
surface. {2} flat-footed.

daplak v [A] {1} cover s.t. over by putting s.t. flat on top of it.
Siyay nagdaplak sa playwud dihà sa lungag sa bungbung, He is the one
who covered the hole on the wall with a piece of plywood. Idaplak ku
karing kík sa ímung nawung, I’ll throw this cake into your face. Maung
ang idaplak sa gisì sa íyang karsunis, Patch the tear in his pants with
denim. {2} dump, throw s.t. in one heave. Dapláki ug balas ang lungag
sa yútà, Dump sand into the hole in the ground. Idaplak lang ang mga
papil dihà, Just dump the papers there. {2a} [AP; c1] throw oneself
s.w. in a sprawled out way. Midaplak (mipadaplak) siya ug lingkud, She
sat sprawled on the floor. n patch.†

daplas v [A; b6] clamber over s.t. Ayaw pagdaplas dihà ánang mga
tinápuk nga batu, Don’t go clambering over that pile of rocks.
Nagkalápuk ku kay gidaplásan ku sa irù, I have mud all over me because
the dog clambered over me.

daplay v [A1PB3; c1] hang down loosely over an edge, make s.t. hang
without being fixed. Sudláya nang buhuk mung nagdaplay sa nawung, Comb
that hair of yours. It is hanging down over your face. Kinsay nagdaplay
(nagpadaplay) sa hábul sa bintána? Who hung the blanket over the window
sill?

daplin n {1} side, edge. Sa daplin sa subà, On the river bank.
{2} beside. Daplin giyud sa karsáda, Right next to the road. {3} walay
laing — there is no other alternative. Wà giyud tay laing daplin kun dì
pag-upira, We have no other choice than to operate. {4} get out of the
way! (short for padaplin). pa- v {1} [A; ac] move, put to the side.
Padaplína ang mga táwu, Have the people move to the side. Ipadaplin ang
mga bangkù, Move the benches to the side. {2} [A3; c] move to the
background. Nagpadaplin lang ku kay wà man kuy lábut adtung ílang áway,
I just stayed in the background because I didn’t have anything to do
with their quarrel.†

daplus v [A2PB23; aPc1] slip, move slowly down, make s.t. slip down.
Mudaplus ang písì kay walà maáyung pagkahukut sa pusti, The rope will
slip slowly down because it’s not well tied to the post. Kinsay
nagdaplus (nagpadaplus) sa halayan? Who moved the clothesline down?

dapsut v [A2; a3] slip from the grasp, hold. Ug makadapsut nang isdang
ímung nagunitan, dì na gyud nà nímu hidakpan ug usab, If the fish
you’re holding slips from your grasp, you’ll never catch it again. Ang
tásang nadapsut sa ákung kamut, nasinsíyu, The cup slipped from my hand
and broke into pieces.

dapu, dapù v [A; a] touch s.t. lightly with the hand. Dapua ang úlug
gihilantan pa ba, Touch him on the head to see if he is still feverish.
Dapua ang duha nímu ka kamut, Place your hands together, palm to palm.
(←) v [A; c] {1} treat a supernaturally caused skin affliction by
putting a bundle of herbs wrapped in leaves which has been heated on
the afflicted area. {2} touch s.t. lightly with the hands. Idápù ang
ímung kamut sa utaw, Touch the iron with your hands. {3} [A; b] for
animals to be attracted s.w. Mudápù ang amígas sa asúkar, Ants will be
attracted to sugar. Mabungáhung sanga ang gidapúan sa mga langgam, The
birds alighted on the fruiting branch. n preparation for applying the
dápù treatment.

dapug_1 n place in the kitchen where the cooking fire is built. -an(←)
= dapug_1.

dapug_2 v [A; ac] strike, usually the head, with s.t. bulky. Dapuga
siya íning batu, Strike him with this stone. Idapug ku ning libru sa
ímung úlu, I’m going to slam this book on your head.

dápug v [A; c1] pile things of the same kind in an orderly fashion.
Dapúga (idápug) ang mga pinusù, Pile the ears of corn up in an orderly
way.

dapúgan = dalapúgan.

dápul n holdup man (slang). paN- v [A23] hold up. Nangdápul ang mga
matun sa draybir, The ruffians held the driver up. -íru n holdup man.

dapúlas (from púlas_2) v {1} [A; c] rub the hand lightly, usually over
the face, occasionally, also over other parts of the body. Kinsay
nagdapúwas ug lápuk sa ímung nawung? Who spread mud on your face?
Dapulása ang singut sa ímung agtang, Brush the sweat off your brow.
{2} [A; c] eat s.t. with utmost speed as if just rubbing the hand over
the mouth. Gidapúlas lang níya ang usa ka plátung pansit, He wolfed
down a whole plate of noodles.

dapya v [AB23(1); c] splash, be splashed. Ang balud midapya sa
baybáyun, The waves splashed onto the shore. Kinsay nagdapya ug túbig
sa bintánà? Who splashed water through the window? Nakadapya ang tubà
kay punù ang sudlanan, Some of the toddy splashed out because the
container was filled to the brim.

dapyas v [A2; b6] glance off, graze off s.t. Midapyas lang ang bála sa
íyang úlu, The bullet just grazed his head.

darámi n piece of meat sliced off by the butcher of an animal without
the owner’s knowledge. v [A; a] for a butcher to steal the owner’s meat
in this way.

dariyut = diriyut. see diyut.

darling n {1} darling. {2} having lesbian relations. Darling nà sila si
Líta ug si Pína, Lita and Pina are going steady. v [A; a12] call s.o.
‘darling’.

dáru v {1} [A; a] plow. Unsay itanum ninyu sa inyung gidarúhan? What
will you plant in the area you are plowing? {2} [A; a12] have sexual
relations (somewhat coarse). Gidáru aku sa ákung bána gabíi, My husband
had relations with me last night. {3} [B126] fall down and scrape the
ground. Pagkasukámud níya nadáru ang íyang nawung sa asíras, When he
stumbled, his face scraped the sidewalk. n plow. (→) n young water
buffalo, just big enough to use for plowing. mag-r-(→) n farmer.
daruhan n field that is planted with s.t. ig-r-/l-(→) n {1} animal used
for plowing. {2} s.t. worn for plowing, used in plowing.†

darudaru n k.o. olive shell.

das n dash, hyphen. v [b6] put a dash.

dasà v [B46] become spoiled due to overindulgence. Pitúla ang bátà arun
dì magdasà, Discipline the child so he won’t get spoiled.

dasag v [A; c] thrust a mass forcefully against s.t. else. Siyay
nagdasag nákù sa bungbung, He pushed me hard against the wall.

das-ag a {1} abounding, swarming around. {2} scattered, spread.
{3} wandering, roaming aimlessly. n stranger, wanderer. v {1a} [B; b5]
swarm, crowd around. Gidas-ag (gidas-ágan) ang artista sa mga táwu, The
people swarmed around the movie star. {1b} [B; a] abound. Nadas-ag ang
mga tatlung sa ílang uma, There were snails all over their field.
{2} [AB; c1] scatter, be scattered. Piligrung madas-ag ang káyu, It
would be dangerous if the fire were to spread. Das-águn (idas-ag) ku
ning mga binhì, I will scatter these seeds. {3} [B3; b6] wander
aimlessly about. Sa lasang nakadas-ag (nadas-ag) mig dakung lángub, In
our wanderings in the forest we came across a large cave.

dasdas v [A; a12b2] advance to attack. Midasdas ang mga sundálu sa
ílang kaáway, The soldiers advanced toward their enemies.

dásig a lively, full of action. Dásig pamatíun ang mga kanta sa Bítuls,
The Beatles’ songs are lively to hear. Dásig kaáyu siyang manlíhuk, She
is lively in her movements. v [AP; a] {1} make s.t. lively. Ang
kumparsa nakadásig sa pista, The string band made the fiesta lively.
{2} encourage, inspire s.o. to do s.t. Ang ímung mga púlung midásig
(mipadásig) kaníya pagtuun, Your words encouraged him to study. Nadásig
siya sa pagsulat ug bálak, He was encouraged to write poetry. mag-r-
n one who inspires. ka- n enthusiasm. ma-un a {1} lively.
{2} inspiring, arousing enthusiasm. dasigdásig v [A1; b5c2] divert
s.o.’s attention by being lively. Dílì giyud kini mamilíti.
Dasigdasígan lang níya ang kuliktur ug hinábì, He never pays. He just
diverts the conductor with his stories.

dasmag v {1} [B26C; b6] bump into, crash into. Ang awtu didtu mudasmag
(madasmag) sa lubi, The auto crashed into the coconut tree. Nagkadasmag
ang duha ka trák, The two trucks collided with each other. {2} [AN; b6]
lunge at, rush in to attack. Kun mudasmag (manasmag) siya, dì ku giyud
siya sibúgan, If he lunges at me, I’ll not move an inch. {3} [A23] rush
into doing s.t. Mahangyù tà tu, apan midasmag ka man dáyun gud, We
could have gotten the price down, but you had to rush into it!
{4} [B12] fall down. Nadasmag siya ngadtu sa lápuk, He fell into the
mud. n attacks.

dasngag_1 a careless, inattentive to what one is doing. v [B46; a] be
careless and inattentive to one’s work. Subra ang ímung gisuklì kay
nagdasngag ka man, You gave him too much change. You sure are careless.

dasngag_2 v [A2N; b5c1] push s.o.’s face into s.t. or s.t. into s.o.’s
face, bump the face. Ngánung gidasngagan (gidasngag) ka man sa íyang
kúmu? Why did he thrust his fist at you? Ángay giyud kang idasngag, You
deserve to have your face pushed against s.t.

daspan n dustpan. v [A; a] pick up dirt with a dustpan.

dastir n {1} duster, loose house dress. {2} duster to clean with. v [A;
a] wear, make into a duster.

das-ug v {1} [AB; c1] move over, downward, cause s.t. to do so. Ug
mudas-ug mug diyútay makalingkud pa ang usa, If you move over a bit,
one more can sit down. Nadas-ug siya sa kawad-un, He slipped down into
poverty. {2} advance, make progress, flourish. Midas-ug ang íyang
kaálam, His knowledge increased. n {1} movement to s.w. {2} advance,
progress.

dasuk a compressed, compact. Dasuk kaáyu ang ginamus sa táru, The can
was stuffed full with salted fish preserves. Dasuk ang katubhan, The
sugar cane field was thickly planted. v {1} [A; ac] compress, push into
a tight place. {2} [A3P; c] shove s.t. into a place forcefully. Nadasuk
siya sa suuk dihang ákung gitulud, He was shoved into the corner when I
pushed him. (←) v {1} [C] crowd, squeeze a place. Nagdásuk ang balay sa
Pásil, The houses in Pasil are jammed together. {2} [B1] be chock-full
with s.t. Nagdásuk sa mga táwu ang trák, The truck was chock-full with
people.

dasun v {1} [A2; c] say s.t. immediately after s.o. else says s.t.
Gidasunan ku níyag tubag sa wà pa ku makatiwas ug pangutána, He
answered me immediately before I finished asking the question. {2} [A2;
a2] follow an action immediately with another action. Nakadasun pa
siyag pátid human makapatámà ug sumbag, After he inflicted a cruel
blow, he followed it up with a kick. Dasunun nímug silhig ang ginabas
arun dílì magkátù ang húgaw, Sweep up the sawdust right away so the
dirt won’t pile up. {3} [A; b(1)] approve of, endorse a plan or idea.
Gidasunan dáyun níla ang gahin pára sa unipurmi, They at once approved
the allocation for uniforms. dasundasun v [A; b5] happen in rapid
succession, one after another.

dáta_1 v [A; b1c] pay off partially. Wà nákù bayri tanan. Gidatáhan ku
lang, I did not pay it all off. I just paid a part. {1a} [A; b(1)] for
men to have sexual intercourse with s.o. on a regular basis (humorous).
Datáhan níya ang íyang babáyi káda Sabadu, He has intercourse with his
mistress every Saturday. {2} pay off a debt partially or entirely with
goods. Datáhan nákug lubi ang kúlang, I’ll pay off what’s lacking by
giving you coconuts. n {1} installment. {2} s.t. given in lieu of money
to pay off a debt entirely or partially. datadáta v [A; b1c] pay for
s.t. in installments, buy on an installment basis. Mudatadáta kug
pridyidir, I will buy a frigidaire on installment. n {1} installment
basis. {2} = dáta_1, n1.

*dáta_2 walay — no good. Walay dátang panaptúna, kay húmuk mulubad, The
cloth is no good. It fades quickly.

datag a level land. ka-an n plains.

dáti n k.o. small blister with water inside, often accompanied by
fever.

dáting v [A2; b6(1)] not be shy to speak a language one doesn’t know
well or recite s.t. memorized. Gidáting nákù ang amural nga ákung
bag-ung hingkat-unan sa ákung giulitawhan, I tried out the line I
memorized on my girl friend. Datíngi sa ímung pila ka lugas nga
ininglis ang Murmun, Talk to the Mormon with the few English words you
know.

datslan n buffet. v [A1; c1] hold a buffet dinner.

dátu = dátù_2.

dátù_1 a rich, wealthy. v [B1; a2] be, become rich, wealthy.†

dátù_2 n title of a chief, now said only to Muslim leaders. tudlù —
n {1} k.o. long, slender banana. {2} jackknife clams, k.o. long,
slender clams. -in- v [A; a] sit with the buttocks flat on the ground
and the ankles crossed, tucked in under the body (like the dátù in the
presence of his subjects). Nagdinátù siya sa lantay, nagdúlag baráha,
He sat on his buttocks on the bed, playing cards.

dat-ug v [A; c] {1} put s.t. on s.t. to weigh it down. Aku ang
nagdat-ug ug batu sa papil, I laid a stone on top of the paper. Namatay
ang táwu nga nadat-ugan sa trúsu, The man died because he was pinned
down by the log. {2} put the blame on s.o. Dat-úgan unyà aku sa
pagbásul, The blame will be put on me. n weight put on s.t.

dat-ul v [A; c] {1} put s.t. on top of s.t. to strike or work on it.
Kwanggul ang nagdat-ul ug sulat áning libru, Whoever wrote on top of
this book must be a fool. Ayaw idat-ul ang káhuy sa ang-ang ug magbughà
ka, Don’t lay the wood on the stairs when you split it. {2} put s.t. on
top of s.t. else for a second. Íyang gidat-úlan ang íyang samad ug ínit
nga dáhun, He put hot leaves on his wound. {3} put blame on s.o. Siya
ang nagdat-ul nákù ning saláa, He put the blame on me. n block on which
s.t. to be struck is laid. -an(→) = dat-ul, n.

dátum v [A2; c] {1} for s.t. pointed to be driven into, penetrate.
Midátum ang punyal sa dughan, The dagger penetrated into the breast.
Dágum nga idátum sa buktun, A needle to inject into the arm. {2} [A;
a4b4] for an emotion to penetrate into one’s inmost being. Gugma nga
nakadátum na, A deeply-rooted love.

datung_1 v [A; a] give s.o. a gift to get a favor from him. Gidatungan
sa insik ang inahan sa íyang gipangulitawhan, The Chinaman gave
presents to the mother of the girl he was courting. n gift given to win
a favor.

datung_2 see tungbálay.

dátus n data, facts.

dau n k.o. large hardwood tree.

dáub v [A; b(1)] {1} burn, set s.t. on fire in the open. Dì ta makadáub
run sa átung kaíngin, We cannot burn our clearing. {2} smudge. Daúban
ta ang mangga arun mudaghan ang búnga, Let’s smudge the mango tree so
that the fruits will become plentiful. n {1} open fire. {2} place where
an open fire is usually built. (→) = dáub, n 1. -anan = dáub, n 2.

daug v {1} [A2; a12] outdo, overcome s.o. Dì giyud ka makadaug níya,
You can never beat him. Gidaug ku sa kaíkug, I was overcome by my
shame. {1a} [a12] give way, yield under weight or pressure. Ang
salagunting gidaug sa atup, The rafters gave way under the weight of
the roof. Madaug sa hángin ang talabánug nga húmuk ug bawug, A kite
with a weak crosspiece will give way under the force of the wind.
{1b} [A; c] place a weight on s.t. to hold it in place. Wà ilupad sa
hángin ang papil kay gidaugan, The paper wasn’t blown away because a
weight was put on it. {1b1} dump blame on s.o. Ikaw unyay daugan sa mga
pagbásul, They’ll dump the blame on you. {1c} dag-un pa it is better
for [so-and-so] to happen and get some benefit (than to miss out on the
benefit). Sígi lang, ibaligyà, dag-un pag may kwarta, Go on, sell it.
It’s better to have money (than perhaps to lose it and not have money).
Sagdi lag muuban siya, dag-un pag may kúyug, Let him come with you.
It’s better to have s.o. with you (than not to). {2} [A12; a3] be able
to carry, lift, or move s.t. heavy. Madaug ba ni nímung lamísa? Can you
lift this table? {2a} for one’s body to manage. Madaug pa sa ákung
láwas kining trabahúa, My body can still manage this work. {2b} support
one’s studies, existence. Dì na nákù madaug ug gastu ang mga bátà, I
can’t afford to support the children. {3} [A2; ab3] win money, prize.
Dag-un giyud nátù ni kay dakù ang pusta, We must win in this bet
because we have big stakes. Pilay ílang gidaug nímu? How much did they
win out of you? a {1} defeated, bested. Nahisáma siya sa irung daug nga
mibahag ang íkug, He went off like a defeated dog with its tail tucked
between its legs. {2} be unable to stand up to s.o. Daug siya sa íyang
asáwa, He is henpecked by his wife. {3} — pa be more than [subject]
(lit. [subject] is bested by). Daug pa nímuy buguy, You’re worse than a
tramp. n {1} winnings. Pila may ímung daug sa swipstik? How much did
you win in the lottery? {2} weight put on s.t. (←) v {1} [C] have it
out as to who wins. Magdáug ang duha ka sunuy. Ang usa mutung ug ang
usa manálaw, The two cocks will have it out. One will be the winner and
the other will run away. {1a} [a12] call a game quits. Daúgun nátù ning
átung dúlà, Let’s declare s.o. the winner of this game (put an end to
it). {1b} [b] determine the winner by reaching s.w. Maglumbà ta.
Kadtung káhuy átung daúgan, Let’s race. Whoever gets to the tree first
wins. {2} [A13; a12S] for two people under the same roof to be racing
against each other as to who dies first. It is thought that when two
people under the same roof are ill at the same time, one is bound to
die. Lisud kaáyu ang kahimtang sa inahan ug anak, magdáug tingáli ang
duha, The mother and daughter are both seriously ill. They are racing
against each other as to which one will die. Gidaug ang inahan sa anak.
Bísan pa sa paningkámut sa duktur ang anak ray naluwas, The mother lost
her life to the child. Despite the doctor’s efforts only the child was
saved. daugdáug v [A; a12] maltreat, step on s.o. Inaína nga midaugdáug
kaníla, A stepmother who maltreated them. madaugdaúgun a tending to
maltreat. -an, dag-an n having won money. Mangáyù ta níyag barátu kay
dag-an, We’ll ask for a little cut because he won. dag-anan {1} amount
needed to win. Upat ra ka puntus ang dag-anan, We only needed four
points to win. {2} chance to win. Wà kay dag-anan ug dì ka paluyhan sa
Partídu, You have no chance of winning if the Party does not back you.
ka-an(←) n victory, success. maN-r-(←) n winner. ma-un(←) a victorious,
successful. -um-r-(←) n having the makings of a winner. Dumadáug ug
kalíwat kining manúka, The cock has the winner’s blood in him. dag-unun
ug lamas easily becoming tasty if spices are added. Dag-unun kaáyug
lamas ang karning irù, Dog meat is fine as long as you put spices with
it.

dául n dried sheath of the coconut blossom.

dáup v [A13B2S346; c] fold the hands together and place them over the
breast. Natúlug nga nagdaup sa íyang kamut, Sleeping with her hands
over the breast.

daurà = dalaurà.

daúrus v [AP2; b(1)] slide down an incline. Midaúrus siya sa ubus
dihang nahúg sa banghilig, He slid down when he fell on the slope.
Nindútang mudaúrus (mupadaúrus) sa bátà sa islayid, The child enjoys
sliding down the slide.

daus-us v [APB; c1] climb down, move down, bring s.t. down. Gíkan sa
ápir baks nidaus-us siya tupad kanákù sa lúwir baks, From the upper box
he climbed down and sat beside me in the lower box. Aku na lang ang
mudaus-us niánà, I’ll bring it down myself. Daus-úsun (idaus-us) nátù
paghínay ang baldi, We’ll lower the pail carefully.

dáut v {1} [A; a12] destroy, make inoperative. Nadáut ang makina kay wà
kabutangig asíti, The machine was ruined because it wasn’t oiled.
{2} [A; a12] harm, have bad effects on. Kining sabúna makadáut sa
kamut, This soap can harm your hands. Nadáut ang karni kay wà ayúha
paghípus, The meat spoiled because it wasn’t properly stored.
{2a} [A12] ang — what’s wrong with it. Ang nakadáut nímu, wà kay
kalígù, What’s wrong with you is that you don’t bathe. Ang nakadáut
niíning kutsíha kay dakug kunsúmu, What’s wrong with this car is that
it takes too much gas. {3} [A12; a3] get s.o. into trouble. Ayaw ug
sultig ingun kay madáut ta ánà, Don’t say that because we can get into
trouble on account of it. {4} [AB16] be in bad health, cause bad
health. Ang pagsígig bása mudáut sa ímung mata, If you keep reading it
will ruin your eyes. Nagdáut ákung tiyan, I have stomach trouble.
{4a} [B146] — ang buut be in a bad mood. Nagdáut ákung buut kay kúlang
sa katúlug, I’m in a bad mood because I didn’t get enough sleep.
{4b} [A12] give s.o. venereal disease. Kanang bayhána makadáut, That
woman will give you venereal disease. {4c} [A; a12] harm s.o. with
sorcery. Gidáut siya sa barángan, The sorcerer inflicted illness on
him. {4d} [A; b(1)] for a supernatural being to inflict an illness.
Gidaútan siya sa ingkantu, kay gitagà man níya ang dákit, The
supernatural being inflicted illness on him because he chopped the
banyan tree down. {5} [A3; a12] speak ill of s.o. Sigúru ka giyung
daútun sa mga tabian, The gossipers will surely speak ill of you.
{6} [B14] for the weather to get bad. Ug magdáut ang panahun, ayaw úsag
byáhi, If the weather is bad, don’t travel for the while. panday — one
whose handiwork is full of defects. Panday dáut ang naghímu niíni kay
daghang dipiktu, A poor carpenter made this. There are so many defects.
(→) a {1} sickly, thin. Daut ka man. May sakit ka? You’re thin. Are you
sick? {2} for an engine, appliance, etc. to be in bad condition. Ang
daut mung dyip, Your beat-up jeep. n defects. King mga tubúha walay
likì, ug walay daut, These tubes have no cracks and no defects.
v {1} [B5] be, become sick, thin-looking. Mudaut kag dì ka mukáug
tárung, You’ll get sick if you don’t eat properly. {2} [B1456] be
menstruating (euphemism). Paggámit ug pasadur ug magdaut ka, Use a
Kotex when you menstruate. dautdáut v {1} [A13] keep malfunctioning.
{2} [A3] keep getting sick. {3} for the weather to start getting bad.
aláut see aláut. -an(→) n sorcerer. a bad in character or effect, not
auspicious. Dautang túyù, Evil intention. Dautan ang panahun, The
weather is bad. Dautang samputánan sa íyang pag-inum, The evil results
of his drinking. Dautan rung ibyáhi, Now is a bad time to travel.
Dautang pálad, Bad luck. -in-an in an evil way. v [B; a2] behave in an
evil way. hiN- see *hináut. himaráut see *himaráut. himuláut see
himuláut. -ig-r-, ig-l- n things used in practicing sorcery. ka-
n extent of damage. Ang kadáut sa bagyu, The damage the storm caused.
ka-an n ruin. mag-r-(→), mag-l-(→) = -an(→), n. mang-r-(→) n one who
destroys maliciously. Ang magdadaut dayag nga nasína, Clearly the one
who destroyed your things maliciously was envious. pangdáut n s.t. used
to harm s.t. panday pang- = panday dáut. see panday.

daw {1} seem, like. Daw subù siyang nanamílit, He seemed sad to bid
goodbye. Daw kasábà tung íyang tambag, His advice was like a scolding.
{2} — [adjective, verb] be rather [adjective, verb]. Daw nalíbug siya
dihang nakadawat sa sulat, He was rather confused upon receiving the
letter. {3} go ahead, do [so-and-so]. Abir sumbága daw ku! Go ahead,
try striking me. Tilawi daw ug lamì ba, Go on, try it. See if it’s
good. {4} he, she said. Maghíkug daw siya, He said he was going to kill
himself.

dáwa n millet: Setaria italica. Widely cultivated, it is most commonly
made into budbud. dawadáwa n k.o. tall grass bearing spikes similar to
millet in appearance: Echinochloa crusgalli.

dawal v [A] stick out of an opening, hang out. Nagdawal ang pistúla sa
bulsa, The pistol stuck out of his pocket. Padawala ang dílà, Stick
your tongue out.

dáwat v {1} [A3S; a1] receive, accept. Mudáwat ba nà siyag suburnu?
Does he accept bribes? Mudáwat mig kasíra, We accept boarders. Mudáwat
siyag labáda, She takes in laundry. Dílì aku makadáwat niánà, Sorry, I
cannot accept that. Nakadawat ka ba sa ákung suwat? Have you received
my letter? {2} take, receive s.t. conveyed. Dawáta ning ákung itúnul
nímu, Take this thing I’m going to hand you. {3} take hold of the hand
that delivers a blow or fend it off. Dawáta ang íyang kamut ug
musukmag, Fend off his arm if he delivers a blow. {4} [A3SN; a2] gather
palm toddy. Walà siya kapanáwat karun, He hasn’t gathered toddy today.
n amount the lender gives for s.t. pawned. Trayinta písus ang dáwat
ánà, You can only pawn that for thirty pesos. (→) n palm toddy. Ang
íyang dawat ganíhang buntag tam-is kaáyu, The palm toddy he gathered
this morning was very sweet. dawatdáwat v, n {1} = bùbuay. see bùbù.
{2} uvula. hiN-(→) a fond of accepting. Hinawat ug suburnu, Fond of
accepting bribes.

dawdaw_1 v [A; a12] tinker with s.t. without any definite purpose.
Dawdáwa ang plansang gubà básin pa ug makumpunir nímu, Try tinkering
around with this broken iron. Maybe you can fix it.

dawdaw_2 v [A2N; a2] gather leftovers, the last remaining things. Wà
pay makadawdaw sa nasunúgan, Nobody can salvage the leftovers from the
fire. Wà diyuy madawdaw bísag bukug, There’s nothing to get, not even
bones.

dawhug = dalhug.

dáwi v [A2; b6] for a fish to bite on bait. Gidawíhan siyag mamsà, A
large crevally bit his line. n fish that bit. (→) = dáwi, n.

dawin n a single banana. Mikúhà siyag lima ka dawin nga tinanuk, He
took five boiled bananas. v [A; a1] separate bananas into pieces. -in-
n bananas sold by the piece.

dawíraw v [B2S; c16] {1} grope about, as in the dark. Magdawiraw ang
buta ug mulakaw, A blind man gropes about when walking. {2} for the
mind to wander without concentration. Wà kung kasabut sa liksiyun kay
nagdawiraw lang ákung hunàhúnà, I didn’t get the lesson because my mind
was wandering.

dawpang = dalúpang.

dawu- see also dalu-.

dáwun_1 a be knocked down in boxing. v [A; a12] knock one’s opponent
down in boxing.

dáwun_2 n down payment. v [A; c] make a down payment.

dawuntawun n {1} downtown. {2} a light passenger vehicle which plies a
certain route and picks up passengers. — ikspris = dawuntawun, 2.

day see inday.

day-a v [B; b6] for s.t. to hang out from a place in which it is
contained. Miday-a ang íyang tinái, His guts were hanging out. Prútas
nga nagday-a sa baskit, Fruits hanging out of the basket. a sticking,
bulging out from the place that contains it. Day-a na nang ímung tiyan,
Your stomach is hanging out.

dayabítis n diabetes. v [a4] have diabetes.

dayag a clearly visible, obvious. Dayag dinhi ang Buhul, Bohol is
visible from here. Dayag ang íyang gugma nímu, His love for you is
obvious. Dayag na ang íyang kadaúgan, His victory is clear now. — na
lang of course. Dayag na lang nga mulában ku kay igsúun ku siya,
Naturally, I’ll take his side. He is my brother. v {1} [B] be visible,
seen. Nagdayag ang ímung kamisun, Your slip is showing. {2} [c] tell
s.o. frankly. Daygan ku siya nga wà ku siya higugmáa, I’ll tell him
frankly that I don’t love him. pasun-(←) v [A; c] exhibit, show before
an audience. Nagpasundáyag ang sinihan ug malaw-ay nga salída, The
movie house showed pornographic movies. Kadásig nga íyang gipasundáyag,
The enthusiasm he showed. n presentation. pasun-an n place where s.t.
is shown. pa- v [A; c] reveal, make s.t. clear. pina- n {1} s.t. made
known. {2} Book of Revelation. dinayganay v [C] be frank with each
other. madinaygánun a open and frank.

dayagnus v [A; b6] for a doctor to diagnose a sickness. n diagnosis.

dayagram n diagram, sketch. v [A; c1] diagram, make a diagram.

dáyak v {1} [A; b6] engage in a group activity with clamorous
merriment. Magdáyak ang mga bátà panahun sa pisikal, The children revel
during the physical education period. Tubaan nga gidayákan sa mga
palaínum, The toddy stand where the drinkers are making merry. {2} [B6]
be in extravagant quantities. Magdáyak ang pagkáun sa íla basta pista,
There’s all kinds of food at their place during fiestas.

dáyal n dial of a watch, telephone. v [A; a2] dial. Unsang numirúha ang
ímung gidáyal? What number did you dial?

dáyal tun n dial tone. v [A23] give a dial tone. Midáyal tun ba? Was
there a dial tone?

dayalug n {1} dialogue. {2} dialogue between opposing parties.
v {1} [A; c16] act s.t. out in a dialogue form. {2} [C] have a
dialogue. Wà magkadayalug ang administrasiyun ug ang istudiyanti, The
administration and students didn’t get together in a dialogue.

dayalugu = dayalug, n 1.

dayamanti = diyamanti.

dayamitru n diameter.

dayamun n {1} baseball diamond. {2} diamonds in playing cards.

dayan v [A; b] be a decoration, adorn. Ang kurtína nagdayan sa ílang
balay, The curtains add beauty to their house. dayandáyan v [A; b]
decorate, adorn. Ang kurúna gidayandayánan ug buláwan, The crown was
adorned with gold. n decoration, adornment.

dayána n noise made early in the morning of a gala celebration to wake
the people. v [A1; b(1)] make noise on the morning of the celebration.
Tulu ka banda ang nagdayána sa ámung pista, Three bands played to wake
the people during our town fiesta.

dáyang n title given to a Muslim princess.

dáyap n k.o. small citrus tree producing small spherical, yellow
fruits, juicy and sharply acid: Citrus aurantifolia.

dayapir n diaper. v [A; a] make into a diaper, put a diaper on.

dayari n diary. v [A] keep a diary.

dayaríya n diarrhea. v [a4] have diarrhea.

day-as a foreign to a place. Kalihúkan nga day-as sa kinabúhing
Pilipinhun, Ways which are so foreign to the Filipino way of life.
v [AN23P; c] go to live in a far place, bring to a far place. Manay-as
siya pag-áni, He goes to other places to help with the harvest. Iday-as
na lang ang panaptun sa prubinsiya kay dì mahálin dinhi, Bring the
cloth to the province because it won’t sell here.

dáyaw v [A; a12b3] praise, comment favorably on. Wà si Nánay makadáyaw
niadtung ímung gibúhat, Mother did not comment favorably about what you
did. Wà tay dayáwan ánang ímung trabáhu, There’s nothing to praise in
your work. n praise.

dayban n divan.

dayday v [A; b6(1)] put a landmark along a boundary line. Gidaydayan
kug nangkà ang utlánan, I marked the boundary with jackfruit trees.
n landmarks planted along a boundary. pa- v [A] travel along the edge
of s.t.: alongside landmarks, fields, rivers, etc. Wà siya musulud,
nagpadayday (nanayday) lang sa utlánan, He wasn’t tresspassing. He was
just walking along the boundary. paN- v [A2] = padayday. -an(→), -an
n the top rim of the side of a boat.

daygun see daláyig.

dayhag a {1} sloping downward. Gíkan dinhi dayhag na púlus ang dálan,
From here on out the trail will all be downhill. {2} be wide and
sloping at an angle. Mutúlù ang ílang balay kay dayhag kaáyu ang atup,
Their roof leaks because the roof slants. v [B; c1] be sloping
downward, place s.t. in a slanting position. Dayhaga (idayhag)
pagsandig ang bisiklíta, Lean the bicycle in a slanting position.
-an(→) n top of a slope, place where a downward slope begins. -un(→)
n sloping gradually.

dayhard a diehard follower of a politician or certain party. Dayhard
nga Usminyista, A diehard follower of Osmeña.

dáyib n diving. v [A2; ac] dive. Didtu siya mudayib sa húgawng túbig,
He dove into the dirty water. Idayib ning sungsung sa iláwum ug
isap-ung sa bangag, Dive down with this plug, and plug up the hole with
it.

dáyig = daláyig.

dáyik n dike. v [A; a2] build a dike.

dáyis n {1} dice. {2} a game played with a dice. {2a} turn to throw the
dice. {3} s.t. tricked out of s.o. else. {4} profit from sales (slang).
v {1} [A1C; c3] throw dice. Kinsang dáyis run? Whose turn is it to
throw the dice? Magdáyis lang ta, Let’s play a game with dice. {2} [A;
b] get s.t. by cheating or tricks (slang). Nakadáyis mi ug tris sa
tigúwang, We tricked the old man for three pesos. {3} [A1] masturbate
(slang). -ir n one who throws the dice or plays a dice game. v [A2] be
the one to throw the dice.

dayis-ul v [A13] throw the dice to determine who will be the one to
throw in a mahjong game. n action of throwing the dice to determine the
deal.

dáyit n diet. v [A] be on diet.

daylang = dalyang.

daynámu n dynamo.

daysik v [A; a] dissect in a laboratory.

day-u n foreigner, from another place. Batásang day-u, Foreign customs.
v [AN23; b6] {1} migrate to. Manay-u (muday-u) siya sa Mindanaw, He
will migrate to Mindanao. {2} visit a distant place. Daghan ang mga
turista nga muday-u (manay-u) dinhi, Many tourists come here for a
visit.

dayugdug v [AP3; c1] go straight s.w. without paying any heed to one’s
surroundings. Nanáug siya sa balay ug midayugdug (mipadayugdug) paingun
sa lungsud, He went out of the house and walked straight toward town
without looking left or right.

dayuk n preserved salted fish intestines. v [A; a2] make dayuk, put
dayuk into s.t.

dáyun {1} immediately, at once. Milakaw siya dáyun, He immediately
walked away. Walà dáyun níya himatikdi ang ulitáwu, She did not notice
the young man at once. Karun dáyun, This very instant. pútung — = -in-,
2. {2} do as the next thing. Mikáun siyag maáyu, dáyun natúlug, He ate
a good dinner and then went to sleep. {2a} sa — [gen.] nga [verb base]
[gen.] was (will be) about to [do]. (Sa) dáyun ku nang káun miabut
sila, As I was about to eat they arrived. Iságul ang tunù sa dáyun na
nímung háun, Mix in the coconut milk just before you take it off the
stove. {3} eternity. Ang dáyung pahúlay, Eternal rest. v {1} [A23] do
s.t. immediately. Ngánung mudáyun ka man lang ug kasukù? Why do you
flare up immediately? {1a} [a2] be killed at the first cockfight.
Kanang túbù niánang báya dì giyud nà dayúnun, The cocks that are raised
at that house will not be killed in the first cockfight. {2} [B36]
remain as it is for long. Hináut nga magdáyun ang íyang kabuútan, I
hope his good behavior will remain unchanged. {3} [a12] get possession
of s.t. borrowed by keeping it forever. Íya na giyung gidáyun ang íyang
gihulamang sapátus nákù, He took over the shoes that he borrowed from
me. {4} [C; a12] push through in marriage. Nagkadáyun sila, They got
married. {5}, {6} = dayun, 1, 2. (→) {1} [a3b4] for s.t. bad to come
into being, be pushed through to reality. Ayaw pagdunggabdunggab nákù
kay madayun (madayunan) unyà nà, Don’t pretend to stab me, because you
might just end up doing it. {2} [B23; c1] proceed to carry s.t. out. Dì
ku mudayun (madayun) paglarga kay hápun na, I will not proceed to leave
because it’s already late. Dayunun (idayun) ba ni nímug baligyà? Will
you push through with your plan to sell it? {3a} [A2; b6] go into a
house. Dayun lang, Come on in! Dì na lang ku mudayun, I won’t come in.
{3b} stay at a house. Háin ka karun dayun? Where are you staying now?
pa- v [A; c1] continue doing s.t. Padayúna (ipadáyun) ang ímung kakúgi,
Continue your industriousness. hiN-/haN-(→) v [a4] be pushed through.
Wà sila mahinayun sa Karkar, They ended up not going to Carcar. Wà
mahinayun ang balay pagbaligyà, In the end the house wasn’t sold after
all. gilayun do s.t. immediately. Gilayun siyang milarga, He
immediately left. -in- n {1} process of cooking coconut oil where the
juice is cooked off at once and not set aside to ferment. {2} pútung
-in- n pútu made from cassava or sweet potatoes without drying the
meat. dumaláyun a lasting, eternal. Dílì dumaláyun ang kalípayng
lawasnun, Earthly happiness is not eternal. ka-an n eternity. †

dáyung v {1} [A3SC; bc3] for two or more people to accomplish s.t.
together, most commonly carrying. Dayúngi lang nà ninyu kay bug-at,
Carry that together because it is heavy. Dayúngan lang nílag bugsay ang
surambáwan, The fishermen just row their large fishing boat together.
{2} [A2C2; bc3] share joys and sorrows. Magdáyung gayud ta sa kalípay
ug kasákit, We will share our happiness and sorrows with each other.
{3} — ug túig v [C3] for siblings (not twins) to be born in the same
year. Nagdáyung mig túig sa ákung manghud, My younger brother and I
were both born in the same year. -an(→) n stick or pole used for
carrying s.t. hanging by holding on to each end. ka- n person with whom
one carries s.t. or shares sorrows and joys.

dayungyung v [B6; c1] be hanging down loosely over the face.
Gipadayungyung níya ang íyang buhuk (kálù), She let her hair (hat)
cover her face.

Dga. abbreviation for dalága, unmarried woman.

di n letter D.

dì = dílì.

di- prefix, usually followed by nouns of Spanish origin. {1} having a
[noun] where it is s.t. special to have one. Púru dikutsi ang ámung
silíngan, Our neighbors all have cars. Diamirkána pa ba diay muadtug
upisína? You mean to say they wear jackets to the office? Diayskrim
giyud ang ámung pabugnaw, We had refreshments with ice cream.
{2} characterized by having being made of [noun]. Sapátus digúma,
Rubber shoes. Kísu dibúla, Cheese shaped like balls. Dialta ílang mga
amígu, Their friends are high society. Manuk dirása, Special breed of
chicken. {3} having [noun] as a source of motion. Plantsa dikuryinti,
Electric iron. Makina dimánu, dipiyi, Hand-, foot-operated machine.
Dinútang pagtukar, Playing from the notes. Ripling dirapidu, dibumba,
Automatic, air rifle. {4} intended for the use of [noun]. Rilu dipulsu,
dibulsa, A wrist, pocket watch. Tráhi dibayli, Dancing costume. Bapur
digíra, Warship. Trák dipasahíru, Passenger bus. {5} -kampanilya
{a} abugádu -kampanilya first class lawyer (one that calls his helpers
with a bell). {b} anything high class. Dikampanilya na kanang
pamilyáha, That family is high class. {6} -kumbáti nga parul, sugà barn
lantern.

día = adía.

diadtu {1} = didtu. {2} = niadtu. see kadtu (dialectal).

dialta see alta.

dialtamar see alta.

diánà {1} = dihà. {2} = niánà. see kanà_1 (dialectal).

diáni = niáni. see kini_1.

diay {1} particle indicating speaker has received new information.
{1a} making a statement of new information a question: ‘so,
[such-and-such] is the case, is it?’ Mau diay nay hitsúra sa salíkan,
So, is that what a hammerhead shark looks like? Lítu diay ímung ngálan,
Oh, so your name is Lito, is it? Diay? Musúkul ka diay, So you want to
rebel, do you? {1b} I see that, ... as it turns out ... Namatikdan aku
níya kay diay wà matúlug, He noticed me as he wasn’t asleep after all.
Maáyu ka man diay nga mulútù, I see you cook well. {1c} You mean to say
[so-and-so] is going to happen? Mutan-aw diay kag sini bisag way
kwarta, You mean to say you’re going to the movies even though you
haven’t got any money? — ba? Is that so? Diay ba? Ingun kug nabayran ku
na nà, Is that so? I thought I had already paid it. {2} in questions
with an interrogative. {2a} particle indicating deep curiosity. Ása man
diay ka, Nang? Where are you going, Ma’am? {2b} if it isn’t
[predicate], what (where, etc.) is it then? Ug dílì kini, unsa man
diay? Which one is it then if it is not this one? {2c} of course, what
else (where else, who else, etc.) could it be? Unsa man diay ug dílì
asúkar mauy ibutang sa kapi, Of course, what else do you put in coffee
except sugar? {3} particle indicating that the speaker realizes s.t.
about which he was previously unaware or pointing out s.t. to the
interlocutor. Kanà giyud diay ákung dad-un, Oh, yes, that I will take
along for sure. Aku diay, wà ku tagái, What about me? You didn’t give
me any. Unsay way sapátus? Ag ímung putì diay? What do you mean, you
don’t have shoes? How about your white ones? ísà, úsà pa — excuse me
(bringing up a new topic). Ísà pa diay, nakapamahaw ka na? Excuse me.
Have you had your breakfast yet? {4} particle in statement correcting
oneself. Upat, aw, lima diay. Four, oh, I mean five.

díbal a in utter disarray, noisy confusion. Díbal kaáyu ang ákung
hunàhúnà, My thoughts are all in disarray. v [APB4; b6] be in utter
disarray, confusion. Mudíbal ang tibuuk syudad sa tungang gabíi sa
Bag-ung Túig, The whole city is noisily chaotic at midnight, New Year’s
Eve. Nagkadíbal na ang kwartu, dúgayng way limpiyu, The room is in
complete chaos because it hasn’t been cleaned in ages.

dibaldi v [A; c16] fail to compensate s.o. for his services or efforts.
Wà nákù dibaldíha (idibaldi) ang ímung kahágù kay gibayran tikaw, I
gave you s.t. for your effort. I paid you.

díban n divan.

dibáti n debate, argument. v [AC; ab3] debate, argue about s.t. Dì ni
nátù kinahanglang dibatíhun (dibatíhan), It’s not necessary for us to
make an argument out of this (argue about this). -sta debater. v [B16;
a] be, make into a debater.

dibaydibay v [A] {1} do division. {2} divide s.t. up. Dibaydibaya ninyu
kining kík, Divide this cake among yourselves. n inheritance (slang).
Maáyu siyang pangasaw-un kay dakù nag dibaydibay, Marry her because she
is going to come into a large inheritance.

dibaydir n {1} room divider. {2} an instrument for dividing s.t.

dibayid = dibaydibay.

dibidind n dividend.

dibidindu n {1} dividend. {2} one’s children (humorous).

dibílap v {1} [A; c1] develop a picture from a negative. {2} [B26; aP]
for love to develop. {3} [A; a] compose an essay. Padibilápun mig tím,
We have been told to write themes. {4} [B12; a12] develop, grow big. Wà
pa madibílap ang Maktan, Mactan hasn’t grown very much yet.

dibilapir n {1} real estate developer. {2} chemical developer for
photographs.

dibílup = dibílap.

dibirsiyun n diversion, recreation. v [A] have some recreation.

dibisiyun n {1} division, branch of government or business.
{2} partition, compartment. {3} division in an army. v [A; b6(1)] put
up a partition or division.†

dibisyun n division in mathematics. v [A] do division.

dibítir n debater.

dibu n debut in high society. v [A1; b6] have, give a debut.

dibúhu v [A; a] draw, make a design. n drawing, design. dibuhista
n artist, designer.

dibultu = ribultu.

dibumba see bumba_2.

dibursiyáda, dibursiyádu n divorced person.

dibursiyu n divorce. v [C; b1] divorce, get a divorce.

dibusiyun n devotion to a saint. v [A1; b6] have a devotion to a saint.
Magdibusiyun ku kang San Húdas Tadíyu arun ku maminyù, I’ll have a
devotion to St. Jude so that I can get married.

dibutanti n debutante.

dibútu, dibútus {1} = dibusiyun. {2} religious devotee. Sa Byirnis
mangaláwat ang mga dibútu sa Mahal nga Birhin, On Friday the devotees
of the Blessed Virgin will take communion.

dibuynas = buynas.

didak v [AN; b6] deduct from a salary or grade. Gididakan ímung swildu,
grádu, They deducted some from your salary, grade.

didaksiyun n amount deducted from grades or salary. v [A; b6] make a
deduction.

didal n thimble. v [A; c] use a thimble.

didbul n {1} dead ball, when the ball in a ball game is not in play or
when the game is at a stop due to a referee’s call. {2} killed
violently, dead (slang). Didbul ka na, matúna ka, Now you’re dead, you
thug, you. v {1} [B16; a12] be a dead ball. {2} [B126; a1] be a goner,
dead.

dídi v [A; a2] suckle the breast (children’s talk). Mudídi na si
Dyingdying, Jingjing wants to take the titty now.

dìdì v [A; b6] cut a slit in s.t. Gidìdían níyang sáku arun makakuhà
siyag bugas, He cut a slit in the sack so he could get some rice. Dìdíi
lang ang hubag ug gamay, Cut a small incision into the boil.

didikisyun n dedication of a song or other entertainment to s.o. v [A;
b6] dedicate s.t. to s.o.

didikit v {1} [A; c] dedicate a song, poem, entertainment to s.o.
Kining awíta ámung ididikit sa átung halangdun bisíta, We dedicate this
song to our honored guest. {2} [A; b6] masturbate (humorous slang).
Nahugù siya sa hinubra níyang pagdidikit, He got thin from masturbating
too much (making too many dedications).

didiyut = diriyut. see diyut.

didlayin n deadline. v [b6] set a deadline to s.t.

didtu {1} there (far from speaker, far from addressee). Didtu ibutang,
Put it over there. Didtu níya ibutang, She put it there. Ug didtu siya,
nagpaábut ni Maríya, And there he was waiting for Mary. {1a} — nga
[noun]-a in that [noun] as opposed to other places. Didtung baláya siya
mamatay, He died in that house. {2} there (at a point in time in the
past). Didtu ku makat-un sa paghigugma níya, It was then I learned to
love him. {3} —y there was, there were. Didtuy táwu sa asíras, There
was s.o. there on the sidewalk.

diduksiyun = didaksiyun.

didúsu = dudúsu. see dúda.

díga v [A; b6] {1} ask for a definite answer to a proposal. Digáhan ku
siya sa ámung sábut, I’m going to ask for his final answer to our
agreement. {2} speak to a woman about love. Gidigáhan sa tigúlang ang
dalága, The old man declared his love to the girl. {3} [A2; c1] lay
one’s cards (mahjong pieces) open to determine who wins. Digáhan tikaw.
Duha kuy king, I’ll see you. I’ve got two kings. n action of asking for
an answer, laying open the cards.

dig-ab = dug-ab.

digámu v [A; ac2] prepare a meal. Akuy digámu sa pamáhaw, I’ll prepare
breakfast. -in- n prepared food.

digása n stiff cotton gauze fabric out of which butterfly-sleeve
kamísa’s and panyulítu’s are made.

digastu a {1} for one’s personal, not business, use. Digastu ning
dyípa, dílì dipasahíru, This jeep is for family use, not for
passengers. {2} one who fails to get married and stays home doing
chores (reserved for family use) (humorous). v [B126; c16] become an
old maid around the house.

digkit = díkit.

digmì v = bignì.

dignidad n dignity.

dígù v {1} [A; a] bathe s.o. Nakadígù ka na ba sa irù? Have you bathed
the dog? Digúun ku siya sa ákung mga haluk, I will bathe him with my
kisses. {2} [a3] be bathed in sweat, blood, etc. Nadígù siya sa singut,
He is bathed in sweat. (→) n {1} way — not having had a bath. Way digù
ning batáa, pan-us, This child smells. He hasn’t had a bath.
{2} medicinal preparation with which one bathes. {2a} one’s favorite
drink (slang). ‘Muinum kag tubà?’—‘Inum? Mauy ákung digù,’ ‘Do you
drink coconut palm toddy?’—‘Do I drink toddy? I bathe in it.’ -un
n {1} impurities on a newborn baby which are washed off by bathing.
{2} convalescing patient about to take his first bath.

dígum n colored black all over.

digwà v [A3; c6] retch, vomit a small amount. Midigwà aku sa kabahù, I
retched due to the foul odor.

digwat = ligwat.

digyas = duyas.

digyù a small in size. Digyù nga bátà, A small child. v {1} [B; b6]
become small. Ang ayruplánu nagkadigyù samtang nagkalayù, The plane got
smaller as it got further and further away. {2} [A; a1] break s.t. up
into small pieces. Gidigyù níya ang kík álang sa íyang mga anak, She
divided the cake up into small portions among her children. -um-
a tending to run small. Dumigyù silag kalíwat, Their family tends to be
small in stature.

digyut see diyut.

dihà {1a} there (near addressee, far from speaker). Dihà ibutang, Put
it down right there. Dihà tu nímu, You had it. (It was there.)
{1b} there (not far and not near). Unsa man ang náa dihà sa unáhan?
What is that up there ahead? {1c} there (at a place just referred to in
a narration). Ug ang báka miluksu sa búlan, nag-unsa man siya dihà? If
the cow jumped over the moon what was she doing there? {1d} kumusta ka
— How are you? sábà — {a} Shut up! {b} Stop your kidding. Bà dihà.
Kumidya ka man dà, Come on, you’re kidding. {1e} — nga [noun]-a in this
part of the [noun] (as contrasted with other places). Dihang dapíta
siya ilubung, He is buried in that place. {2} —y there was. Dihay táwu
nangítà nímu, S.o. was looking for you. — ka lang, ra you stay there.
{3} then (at a point not far the past). Nag-ípun kami, ug dihà ku
mahibalu kun unsay kalípay, We lived together, and that’s when I
learned what happiness was. Dihà pa siya makaamgu nga..., Only at that
point did he realize that.... — nga plus [clause] when [so-and-so]
happened. Sa dihang miabut ang amahan, nangahílum sila, When the father
arrived, they became quiet. dihàdihà {1} instant, ready at all times.
Ang linabhan malimpyu sa dihàdihang gahum sa Tayid, The instant power
of Tide will clean the wash. {2} right then and there. Dihàdihà dáyun,
Right then and there. v [A12; a12] do s.t. right then and there. Dílì
ka makadihàdihà ug dáwat sa báyad, You cannot receive your payment
right then and there.

dihádu {1} negligent, careless of one’s things. Dihádu siya sa íyang
mga butang. Bisag ása lang byái, He is very negligent with his things.
He leaves them anywhere at all. Dihádu siya nga magbantay sa bátà, mau
nga magkahulughulug, He is negligent in watching the child. That’s why
it keeps falling. {2} less-favored bet. Ang dihádung tíkit mauy
nakadaug, The least-favored ticket won. {2a} unpopular, not much
bought. Ang simintu nga gíkan sa Danaw dihádu karun, Danao-produced
cement is not popular now. {3} guitar accompaniment to extemporaneous
folk songs, sung in a set pattern, where beats are left out at the
points where the words don’t fit the music exactly. Dihádung dúyug nga
gawía ug magbalítaw, Use a free accompaniment for the balítaw.
v {1} [B] get to be negligent, less favored. {2} [A; c1] play a guitar
in a dihádu style.

díhin gúli needing a bath (slang—word play on pidgin Tagalog hindì
lígù). Nanimáhù siya, díhin gúli man gud, He smells because he needs a
bath.

díhug v {1} [A; c] rub, spread s.t. over an area. Líug nga dihúgan ug
agwa, Neck with perfume applied to it. Ispirma ang idíhug sa plansa,
Rub wax over the iron. {2} annoint. -in- n s.o. annointed to assume a
God-ordained position.

diin_1 {1} where (past)? Diin man nímu ibutang ag ákung kálù? Where did
you put my hat? — nga [noun]-a in which [noun] of several. Diing siníha
sila manan-aw? Which movie did they go to? {2} which one of the several
places or things. Diin man íning duha íyang gipílì? Which of these two
did he select? {3} where (relative). Mau nà ang lungsud diin misurindir
ang mga sundálu, That is the town where the soldiers surrendered.
diindíin v [B125; a12] be at, go or travel to several places.
Nadiindíin (nahadiindíin) ku ug langyaw, wà kuy nakítang ingun, I have
travelled everywhere, but I have never seen the like. Diindiínun kug
dúaw básin pag makit-an ku si Bíbing, I will travel any and everywhere
so I might find Bebing. Nagkadiindíin kug búlung nímu. Diin man ka?
I’ve been everywhere looking for you. Where were you?

diin_2 n the end of a movie, interview, stage-play. Layù pa ba ang diin
niíni? Is it still long to the end? v [B2] come to the end.

diíni = niíni. see kini.

dík n word used to call pigs. v [A; a12] call a pig.

dikabra see bára.

dikakaw n variety of croton (kalípay).

dikampána n {1} bell-bottom pants. {2} bell-shaped sleeves. v [A; a12]
wear, make bell-bottom pants, bell-shaped sleeves.

dikánu n dean.

*diki, *dikì walay — a easy to please, not tending to have objection.
Way diking agálun, An employer who is easy to please. Wà kuy dikì kun
kinsay íyang pangasaw-un, I won’t raise any objections to whoever he
chooses for his wife. dikìdíki, dikìdíkì v [AP; b6] put up a pretense
of not liking s.t. Nagdikidíki (nagpadikidíki) uruy, balubálu gustu, He
pretends he doesn’t want to, when actually he does.

díki n dike.

dikit n {1} hip of a roof. {2} the material which covers the hip. -an =
dikit. v [A; c] cover the space between the upper edges of a roof and
the hip.

díkit v [A2C; c1] be close so as to touch, put s.t. close to touch it.
Nagdíkit ang masig ka áping níla samtang nagsáyaw, Their cheeks touched
while they were dancing. Dikíta (idíkit) pagpahilúnà ang mga silya,
Place the chairs so that they are close to each other.

diklamar v [A; c1] declaim.

diklamasiyun n declamation.

diklarar v [A; c] make a formal statement: declare, testify. Midiklarar
ang saksi nga kítà giyud níya, The witness testified that he saw it. Wà
pa idiklarar nga pista upisyal, It hasn’t been declared as a public
holiday.

diklarasiyun n {1} declaration, formal statement. Diklarasiyun sa
tistígus, The witness’s testimony. Diklarasiyun sa gíra, Declaration of
war. {2} tax declaration on land. Wà ku kabayri ang ákung diklarasiyun,
I haven’t paid my land tax yet.

diklim = diklamar.

diklímir n declaimer.

diklimisyun = diklamasiyun.

dikstrus n dextrose. v [A; b5] administer dextrose to s.o. Kinahanglang
dikstrúsun (dikstrúsan), Dextrose must be administered to him.

diksiyunaryu n dictionary. v [A1; a12] make a dictionary.

dikta = diktǎr.

diktadur n dictator. v [B1] be, become a dictator. -íya n dictatorship.

diktadúra = diktadur (female).

diktǎr v [A; c] {1} dictate for transcription. {2} dictate, impose
one’s will on. Wà kay katungud sa pagdiktǎr kinsay pilíun, You have no
right to dictate who to choose.

dikulúris n word of greeting among people who have gone through the
kursilyu, as a sign of peace.

díkun n deacon. v [B16; a2] be, become a deacon.

dikurar v [A; b6(1)] decorate. Gidikurahan námù ang káru pára sa
prusisiyun, We decorated the carriage for the religious procession.
dikurasiyun n decoration. v = dikurar.

dikurisyun = dikurasiyun. see dikurar.

dílà n {1} tongue. Dílà ra ang way labud, Thoroughly whipped (lit. only
the tongue escaped welts). balhibuun ug — being a gossiper. itumun ug —
having a black spot on the tongue as a sign of being a buyagan (a
person whose praises inflict illness). {2} language. — nga kaláyu
n Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire. — sa irù = dilàdílà sa
irù. dilàdílà n {1} reed of a wind musical instrument. {2} dilàdílà sa
sapátus tongue of the shoes. dilàdílà sa irù name given to two species
of hairy herbs with medicinal uses: Elephantopus mollis and E.
spicatus.

diláab v [A2S; b6] {1} for a fire to be blazing. Atup nga gidilaában sa
káyu, Roof that was licked by the flames that flared up. {2} for
emotions to become intense. Nagdilaab ang mata ni Lasarus sa kapungut,
Lazarus’ eyes flamed with anger. n flaring of fire, emotions.

dilabári n k.o. syrup used to rub against the gum of a teething baby
(from the brand named Delabarre).

dilamíta = dinamíta.

dilána n wool, woolen. v [A] wear woolen clothing.

dilantádu = adilantádu.

dilantar = adilantu.

dilantáwu v [A; c1] pay in advance, make an initial partial amount.
n advance or initial payment.

dilantíra a {1} toward the front of s.t. {2} having a frontage on a
place where people pass. Ang ílang balay dilantíra kaáyu sa kalsáda,
Their house has a good frontage on the road. v [B1256] get to have
frontage, move toward the front. pa- v [A; c] take a place at the
front. Padilantiráha (ipadilantíra) siyag lingkud, Let her sit to the
front.

dilantu = adilantu.

dilap v [A2; b6] for fire to catch on to s.t. Nadilapan sa sugà ang
ákung kílay, The flames from the lamp singed my eyebrows.

dilatar v [A13P; bc] delay. Ayaw idilatar ang pagbáyad, Don’t delay
payment.

dílì short form: dì {1} no, not (negates predicates with heads
consisting of future verbs, nouns, adjectives, numerals, pronouns).
Dílì ku muadtu, I won’t go. Dílì si Hwan, siya, It wasn’t John, him.
Dílì pula, It’s not red. Dílì ingun nátù, Supernatural being (lit. not
like us). {1a} with second person pronoun and verb with mag- active
affix or pag- plus passive form: don’t ever do. Dílì mu paghilabtan,
Don’t ever, ever touch it. Dì ka maglakaw, Don’t you leave. {1b} don’t
want, like. Dì ka ba áni? Don’t you like this? {1b1} — ku bi expression
used jokingly in accepting s.t. offered. (Lit. I don’t want any, please
let me have some.) ‘Gustu kag kík?’—‘Dì ku bi’, ‘You want any
cake?’—‘No thanks, please.’ {1c} — ba tag question: Isn’t it so? Dílì
ba human na man ni? Wasn’t this already done? Muadtu ka, dì ba? You’re
going, aren’t you? {1d} — ba or, alternatively [so-and-so] is the case.
Manini ta, dì ba mangnayit klab, Let’s go to the movies or to a night
club. Pábu, dì ba ítik ang ákung ihátag, I’ll give him either a turkey
or a duck. (see also dílì ba under dílì, 3) {2a} following an
interrogative plus pa: if not. Ása pa man nà hipúsa dì anhà dihà sa
paradur, Where the hell are you going to put it if not in the cabinet.
Kinsa pa man diay dì ikaw? Who else if not you? {2b} kun — = dílì, 2a.
{2c} — kay ... kun — not just ... but ... Dì lang kay inum-ínum kun
dílì ínum giyud, Not just a drink, it was a spree. Dì kay ikaw lang,
kun dílì si Husi pud, Not just you, Jose did, too. (Also without kay
and/or kun dílì: Dílì lang inum-ínum kun dílì ínum giyud. or Dílì lang
inum-ínum, ínum giyud.) {3} therefore, [so-and-so] was inescapable.
Namugus man, dílì gihátag lang nákù, He insisted, so of course, I gave
it to him. — ba don’t you think the consequence will be. Sígi hilabti
nà dì ba latiguhun tika, Go ahead, touch it. See if I don’t hit you.
v [A; ab3] refuse. Midílì siya sa pagkanta, She refused to sing. Unsay
gidilían nímu? Why do you refuse? mu rag naka-, maka- ug bahù refuse
s.t. with all one’s heart and soul. Mu ra man kag nakadílig bahù sa
trabáhung giuprisir nímu, Why did you refuse absolutely the job you
were offered? n mu rag naghatud ug — make one’s visit short (from the
notion that when a person asks for a woman’s hand, if the parents
refuse, they send the single word dílì to the door and the visit ends
then and there). Kadalì gud nímu. Mu ra ka mag naghatud ug dílì, Why
are you going so fast. Your visit was so short. (→) v [A; c] prohibit.
Dì ku makagdilì nímu, I cannot forbid you. Ginadilì ang pagpangíhì
dinhi, It is forbidden to urinate here. did-an [subject] may s.t.
happen to [subject] (Lit. It is not forbidden for [subject] to ...).
Kusug manunglu, did-an ug siyay mamatay, He sure likes to curse. I wish
he were dead. ‘Paúlì kung Máma.’—‘Did-an ka?’ ‘I’m going home to
Mother.’—‘Who’s stopping you?’ padilìdílì v [A; b6] pretend to refuse.
Nagpadilìdílì uruy, labun gustu, She’s putting on a show of refusing
but she wants some. -um- v [A2S; c] {1} = dílì. {2} object to doing
s.t. Nagdumílì na ang mga táwu pagbáyad sa tantung kamahal, The people
object to paying such an outrageous price.

dilíbir v [A; c] deliver, bring s.t. s.w.

dilibiri buy n delivery boy.

diligádu n delegate to a convention. v [B1256] be a delegate.

diligar v [A; c] delegate work, responsibility (on or to). Gidiligahan
ka sa pag-atiman sa mga bátà, You’re entrusted with taking care of the
children.

diligasiyun, diligisyun n delegation.

dilihinsiya n protection money demanded to avoid harm. v [A; b6]
{1} collect protection money. Hínay pag pamasahíru dúna pay
mudilihinsya nátù, We get only a few passengers, and to make matters
worse, there are people who mulct us. {2} ask money from parents
(slang). Mudilihinsya pa kung Pápa pára ipanini, I’ll ask Father for
some money to go to the movies.

dilikáda = dilikádu (female).

dilikadísa n good sense of propriety. Way dilikadísa. Nagdigúma lang sa
simbahan, He has no sense of propriety. He just wears rubber shoes to
church.

dilikádu a {1} perilous, in danger. Dilikádu ang íyang kahimtang. Háyan
mamatay, His condition is serious. He will probably die. {2} needing
careful handling. Dilikádu ang súd íning kartun, The contents of this
cardboard box are fragile. Dilikádu kaáyu ang kásu nga ímung giatúbang,
The case you are involved in is a delicate one. {3} finicky, choosy
about one’s things or what one has about him. Dilikádu ku sa pagkáun,
pamisti, ug sa ákung mga butang, I’m choosy about my food, how I dress
myself, about my things. v [B12; b5] be unsafe, in danger.

dilikinti a touchy, likely to take offense easily. Dilikinti. Dì
makaagwanta ug kumidiya, He’s touchy. He can’t take jokes. v [B12] be
touchy.

dilinyadur n draftsman, instrument for drafting. v [B156; a12] be a
draftsman.

dilinyanti n draftsman.

dílir n {1} trader, dealer in goods. {2} dealer in card games or
mahjong. v [B1] get to be a dealer, the dealer.

diliryu n delirium. v [B146; a4] be in delirium. Nagdiliryu (gidiliryu)
siya, He was in a delirium.

dilitayim n daily time record. — ríkurd = dilitayim.

dilítu n evidence of a crime. v [A; c6] present as evidence.

dilútu a diligent in what one is doing. Dílì siya dilútu sa íyang
pagtuun, He is not diligent in his studies. v [A; bc1] engage in s.t.
diligently and religiously. Dilutúhi ang patigáyun arun muuswag, Run
the business with industry so that it will prosper.

dilyábi n k.o. garfish.

dím a dim. v [AB; c1] for lights to become dim.

dimálas (not without l) n bad luck. a unlucky. Dimálas kaáyu nang
tawhána, That man is very unlucky. — lang too bad, tough luck. Dimálas
ka lang. Wà giyuy musugut nímu, Tough luck. Nobody accepted you.
v [B12; a4S] be unlucky. Nadimálas lang ang ákung kwarta nga niabay kug
pusta nímu, I had bad luck with my money when I joined in your bet.
Gidimalas giyud ku run, I am very unlucky. -un(→) a bringing bad luck.

dimanda v [A2; c6] {1} sue s.o. in court. Gidimanda siya kay wà
mubáyad, She was sued because she wouldn’t pay. {2} [A; a] make a
demand. Gidimandáhan ang Israil sa pagsíbug, They demanded that Israel
withdraw. n demands. Ang dimanda sa mga radikal, The demands of the
radicals.

dimangga n variety of crotons (kalípay) with mango-like leaves,
lanceolate green to yellowish blotches and a red midrib.

dimánu_1 v [A2; c] turn right. Mudimánu ta pag-abut sa iskína, We turn
right when we reach the corner.

dimánu_2 n powered by hand machine.

dímas = rímas.

*dimáu walà, dílì magka- be all wrong, incorrect. Wà magkadimáu ímung
ági, Your work is all wrong. Ug dílì magkadimáung pagkatahì, átung
ipausab, If she sewed it all wrong, we will have her do it again.

dimdim v {1} [A2; a2] experience a certain feeling for the first time.
Gustu kung mudimdim sa katam-is sa ímung ngábil, I would like to taste
the sweetness of your lips. {2} [A; a] taste a liquid. Dimdími ring
tubà, Take a taste of this toddy.

dimírit n demerit in military training. v {1} [A; b(1)] give demerits.
Mudimírit ang kumandanti ug walay tupi ang kadíti, The commandant gives
demerits to cadets who need a haircut. {2} [A12] get a demerit.

dimisiyun n resignation from a position. Ang dimisiyun sa mga mimbru sa
gabiníti, The resignation of the cabinet members.

dimitir v [A; c2] resign, quit a job. Mudimitir (magdimitir) ku
pagkamaistra, I will resign from my teaching job.

dimitudu n s.t. done by s.o. according to the book; methodical. Kanang
íyang sinayawan dimitudu gayud, He dances by the numbers.

dimúdu so, therefore. Giingnan kang dílì magsábà. Dimúdu maghílum ka,
You were told not to make noise. So, keep quiet.

dimukrasya n democracy.

dimukrata n democrat. {a} a believer of the principles of democracy.
{b} a member of the former Democratic Party of the Philippines. v [B56]
be a member of the Democratic Party.

dimukratika = dimukratiku (female).

dimukratiku a democratic, allowing people freedom of action.

dimul_1 v {1} [A; c6] have a little taste of s.t. (slang). Mudimul kug
gamay ánang ímung tubà, Let me have a taste of your palm toddy. {2} [A;
a2] obtain s.t. from s.o. (slang). Mudimul kung Nánay ug písus ipanini,
I’m going to get one peso from Mother for the movies. {3} = dímul, 2.

dimul_2 n bad luck (slang). v [B12; a] bring bad luck to s.o., be
unlucky.

dimul_3 n in music, a change from one key to another or from a major
chord to the minor chord. Lisud duyúgang kantáha daghang dimul, The
accompaniment of the song is difficult, it has so many changes in
chords. v [A23; c1] change the key or from major to minor chords in
musical accompaniment. Dihà sa kúrus idimul, Change chords at the
refrain of the song.

dímul v {1} [A; c1] play a musical instrument with the fingers. Maáyu
siya mukaskas ug mudímul usab, He strums chords well and plays notes as
well. {2} [A; c1] swipe, steal (slang). Kinsay midímul sa ákung bulpin?
Who swiped my ball point pen? Gidímul ang tanan, hasta ang karsúnis
dunut, Everything was stolen, even his worn out pants.

dimungkug n {1} expression of disgust or dismay: darn! (euphemism for
dimunyu). Dimungkug! Níay bisítag wà tay sud-an, Darn! We don’t have a
thing to eat, and here we have visitors! {2} term of address used as a
mild reprimand with affectionate overtones. Dimungkug nímu uy. Namíyà
ka man lang! You little devil! You just left me at the party! v [A; a]
say dimungkug to s.o.

dimunstradur n demonstrators, participants in a public show of opinion.
v [B16] be a demonstrator.

dimunstrasiyun n {1} display of athletics or gymnastics. {2} strike,
public show of opinion. {3} demonstration, display of how s.t. is done
or works. v [A1; b3] demonstrate, give a show of opinion.
Nagdimunstrasiyun na sad sa iskuylahan. Unsa na puy gidimunstrasiyunan
run? They are having a demonstration again at the school. What are they
demonstrating about this time?

dimunstrit v = dimunstrasiyun, v.

dimuntris = dimungkug.

dimunyu n {1} demon, devil. Unsang dimunyúha ang nasulud sa ímung úlu?
What sort of devil has gotten into your head? {2} person or thing
regarded as evil, cruel, etc. Hubug ka na sad dimunyúha ka, You’re
drunk again, you devil. {3} curse word used as an expression of extreme
frustration or anger at s.o. Dimunyu. Ímu na sang gibálì nà, Damn you!
You broke it again! v [B126; b6] be, become a devil in one’s looks or
manners, etc.

dimusdímus v [A; ab2] shower s.o. or s.t. with kisses. Midimusdímus
siyag haluk sa íyang anak, She showered kisses on her child.

dinágum see dágum.

dinamíta n dynamite. v [A; a] dynamite s.t. dinamitíru n one who uses
dynamite, most commonly a dynamite fisherman. dinamitáhan n fish caught
by dynamite.

dingag v [B1; b6] be carelessly inattentive in doing s.t. Nagdingag ka
lang nga nagbantay sa tindáhan. Mau nga gikawátan, You were not
watching the store carefully. That’s why you were robbed. -un
a carelessly inattentive.

dingas a {1} careless, not keeping one’s mind on what one is doing.
Dingas kaáyu siyang milabang. Diriyut hiligsi, She wasn’t watching what
she was doing when she crossed the street. She was nearly run over.
{2} natural phenomenon which makes its appearance at an unusual time
(poetic usage). Usa ka dingas nga ulan, An unseasonable rainshower.

díngat, díngaw v [A; c1] look all around in restlessness, curiosity.
Mudíngat lang ang nawung sa bukidnun inighilugsung sa syudad, The
mountaineers look everywhere in wonderment when they come to the city.
Dílì magdíngat sa nawung sa simbahan, Don’t keep looking around when
you are in church. (→) a inattentive and looking in every direction.

dingding_1 n {1} wall. {2} side covers of any box-like thing. v [A1;
c1] enclose, make into a wall.

dingding_2 a for a woman to be delicately refined. Sáma kadingding sa
usa ka búlak, As delicate as a flower. v [B] be, become delicately
refined.

dinghal v [A3P; c16] let one’s tongue hang out, esp. when panting.
Nagdinghal ang irù tungud sa kaínit, The dog’s tongue is hanging out
because of the heat. a always having the tongue hanging out. Dinghal
nga kulangù, An idiot with his tongue hanging out.

dingíli = danghili.

dinguldingul, dinguldíngul v [AP; b(1)] pretend not to notice, hear.
Magpadinguldíngul (magdinguldíngul) kun sugúun, She pretends not to
hear when we tell her to do s.t.

dinhà = dihà.

dinhi {1} here (near speaker and hearer). Dinhi ta magtindug, Let’s
stand here. Dinhi siya higdà, He slept here. Nía ba siya dinhi? Is he
here? — nga [noun] in this part of the [noun] (as contrasted with
others). Dinhing bungtúra matupà ang ayruplánu, It was on this hill
that the plane crashed. {2} —y there was (were) here. Dinhiy táwu
nangítà níya, There was s.o. here looking for him. {3} sa — in former
times. Sa dinhi, sa dátù pa na sila, ... In former times, when they
were rich, ...

diníru n {1} money, s.t. to be spent. Daghan siyag diníru, He’s got
lots of money. {2} full payment in cash. mutsu — having lots of money.
Mutsu diníru ku run, I’m rich today. v {1} [A12; a12] get hold of
money. Makadiníru ta ánà, We can get money from that. Unsay átung
dinirúhun, wà man kuy pangítà? What money could I have when I have no
job? {2} [A; bc1] pay cash. Ug ímung idiníru (dinirúhun), bubaratu
giyud, If you pay cash, it’s cheaper.

dintist, dintista n dentist. v [B16; a] become, make into a dentist.

dintistri n dentistry.

dintru = kamísa dintru.

dinuminasiyun n {1} denomination of money. {2} denomination of a
religious sect.

díp n dip in ballroom dancing. v [A2; c] execute a dip.

dipalíta a {1} affording a square hit. Ang lagsaw dipalíta kaáyu diri
nákù, The deer is where I can hit it squarely. {2} be hit squarely. Ang
Manílà dipalítang pagkaigù sa bagyu, Manila was hit squarely by the
storm. {3} enormous in quantity or intensity. Dipalíta ang káun sa
pista sa íla, The food was available in huge quantities at their house
during the fiesta. v {1} [a12] be hit squarely. Ug madipalíta gánì kag
kaigù, mamatay ka, If you are hit squarely, you’ll die. {2} [B126; c1]
get to be enormous in quantity.

dipapil n {1} doing things in a pedantic way, strictly according to
what is written. {2} notorious in some vice. Palahúbug nga dipapil, A
professional drunk. v [A; a] do s.t. strictly according to what is
written. Kining kantáha dipapila giyud, ayg ridúha, Sing this strictly
according to the notes. Don’t go singing your own version.

dipara, diparal, diparar v {1} [A12; b8] notice, become aware of s.t.
Hidiparahan ku siyang nangilù nímu, I noticed him winking at you. [A;
a12] {2} pay attention to, mind. Walà ku magdiparar sa íyang mga
bagulbul, I did not pay attention to his grumblings. {3} watch over,
take care. Diparaha ang binlad nga dílì kan-un sa manuk, Watch the corn
that the chickens don’t eat it. {4} focus one’s attention on (literary
usage). Gidiparal ku ang bag-u kung kalibútan, I put my attention to
this world that was new to me.

dipartamintu n department, division of an office.

dipásit = dipusitu, v 1, 2, 3, 4; n 4.

dipdip v [A; a] cut s.t. close to the base. Dipdípi ang tingkuy, Cut
the hair at the nape short. Ug dipdípun ang sagbut háyan mamatay, If
you cut the grass short, it will die.

dipi = dipyí. see pyí.

dip-ig v [AC; c] put s.t. with some height close to s.t. else so that
it is touching or nearly touching. Ayaw kug dip-ígig lingkud, Don’t
take a seat right next to me. Idip-ig ang lamísa sa bungbung, Move the
table against the wall.

dipiktádu = dipiktúsu. see dipiktu.

dipiktu n defect. v [A12] the thing that’s wrong. Ang nakadipiktu nímu
kay mugib-ap ka lang dáyun, What’s wrong with you is that you give up
right away. -su a defective, have s.t. wrong with it. v [B12; a] be,
become defective. Laina ang dunut nga mangga kay madipiktúsu unyà ang
ubang maáyu, Separate the rotten mangoes because they might spoil the
good ones.

dipindi it depends on whether [so-and-so] is the case. Dipindi ug dì
muulan, muadtu ta, It depends. If it doesn’t rain we will go.

dipindǐr_1 v [A; c] {1} take sides in an argument, defend in a court
case. Dikampanilya giyud ang mudipindǐr nákù, A first-rate lawyer will
defend me. Wà kuy dipindihan ánang awáya, I won’t take sides in this
quarrel. {2} uphold one’s honor. Dipindihi ang ímung pagkababáyi,
Defend your chastity. {3} defend, protect. Kining pistúla ákung
idipindǐr sa ákung kinabúhì, I’ll defend my life with this pistol.

dipindǐr_2 v [A; b6] depend on s.o. for maintenance or support. Kun
maminyù nà, dì na mudipindǐr sa mga ginikánan, When one is married, he
mustn’t depend on his parents for support. Mauy ákung gidipindihan ang
íyang sáad sa pagtábang, I was depending on the help he had promised.

dipinsa n {1} instrument for defending. {2} barrier that serves to
protect a structure. Dipinsa sa awtu, Bumper of the car. {2a} pilings
against a wharf. {3} argument prepared in defense. v {1} [A; b] defend,
protect. Gidipinsáhan ku lang ang ákung anak, I was protecting my
child. {2} [b] provide with a protective structure. {3} [A; b] defend
with an argument. Abugádu nga midipinsa níya, The lawyer that defended
him.

dipirinsiya a different from what is expected. Dipirinsiya na run ang
íyang panlíhuk, Her ways are very different nowadays. n {1} difference.
Dipirinsiya ug dus písus ang prisyu dinhi kay sa didtu, The price here
is two pesos more than there. {2} quarrel. Husáya ang inyung
dipirinsiya, Settle your quarrels. {3} defect. Unsa may dipirinsiya nga
dì mudágan? What’s wrong with it that it won’t run? v {1} [B] be,
become different. Wà na magdipirinsiya ang pamisti sa babáyi ug laláki
karun, Women’s and men’s clothing don’t differ any more. {2} [C; b3]
{1} have a quarrel, misunderstanding. Magkadipirinsiya giyud usáhay ang
magtiáyun, A married couple will always have petty quarrels at times.
{3} [B] become defective. †

dipísit n deficit, shortage of money. v [B2] have a deficit or shortage
of money.

dip-it = dip-ig.

dipiyi see piyi.

diplúma n {1} diploma. 2 one’s child (slang). v [A12] {1} get a
diploma. {2} have offspring (slang).

diplumasíya, diplumasya n {1} diplomacy. {2} knack of saying s.t.
tactful to smooth personal relations.

diplumatiku n diplomat.

dipluy v [A2; b6] for troops to deploy.

diprimíra see primíra.

diprinsiya = dipirinsiya.

diprisisiyun n depreciation in value. Walà lang diay diprisisiyun? You
mean you’re not giving an allowance for depreciation? v [b] give s.t. a
lower rate.

dipudáta = alipáta.

dipudipu = lipulipu.

dípung = gípung.

dipurt v [A; c] deport. Idipurt unyà ka ug dì ka kabayad sa buhis, You
will be deported if you don’t pay your taxes. -asiyun, -isyun
n deporting of s.o.

dipúsit = dipusitu, v1, 2, 3, 4; n4.

dipusitu n {1} place of depositing s.t. Dì maabli ang dipusitu ug dì
úras, You can’t open the vault at any odd time. {2} storage tank for
water. Dúnay kaugalíngung dipusitu ning baláya, This house has its own
water tank. {3} stomach (humorous usage). {4} amount deposited in a
bank. {5} deposit on s.t. to be returned. v [A; c] {1} deposit money in
the bank. {2} turn over for safekeeping. Gidipusitu níya ang aláhas sa
káha di yíru, He deposited the jewelry in the safe. {2a} store s.w.
Idipusitu ang mais sa kamarin, Store the corn in the corncrib.
{2b} deposit goods, not paid for in full with the loan company when
payments cannot be met. Idipusitu na lang nákù ang rilu hangtud
makabakpi ku, I will return my watch to the store until such time as I
get my backpay. {3} put down a partial payment. Pilay ímung gidipusitu
sa makina? How much of a down payment did you make on the sewing
machine? {4} make a deposit on s.t. to be returned. {2} defecate
(slang). Túa pa sa kasilyas nagdipusitu. He’s still in the bathroom
making his deposit. dipusituhánan n {1} = dipusitu, 1, 2. 2 comfort
room (slang).

diputádu n congressman. v [B156; a] become, make s.o. a congressman.

dipwat = ligwat.

dirà = niánà, dinhà (dialectal), see kanà, dihà_2.

dirámi n {1} leftover food. {2} grains spilled out of a sack at the
place where sacks of grain are transported. {3} action of making things
in sacks spill out so as to steal them. v {1} [A12; a3] obtain leftover
food, be left over. Nakadirámi mig ígù námung gikaun, We obtained
enough leftovers for our dinner. Ug madirámi na nà, dalì rang mapan-us,
If it is left over, it will get spoiled quickly. {2} [A2; a12] get
clothes cast off. Ug makadirámi mi sa ímung bisting biyà, If we can get
your castoff clothing. {3} [A; a] steal things in sacks by doing s.t.
to make some spill out. Kusug mudirámi sa kupras ang ubang kargadur,
Some longshoremen steal plenty of copra. {4} [A; a12] steal part of
revenues or goods being moved in trade. Daghan kaáyu ang tinda nga
gidirámi niánang tindíra, That storekeeper stole lots of things.

diri_1 {1} here, nearer speaker than interlocutor. Día siya diri, He is
over here, by me. Diri lingkud, Sit over here. Diri siya lingkud
ganína, He was sitting over here a while ago. — nga [noun]-a in this
[noun] here, as opposed to others. Diri kung dapíta maigù, I was hit in
this place. {2} -y there was over here. Diriy duha ka buuk ganíha,
There were two of them here a minute ago.

diri_2 n command given to a carabao to make him turn to the left. v [A;
b5c1] command the carabao to turn left.

dirihir v [A; b6(1)] {1} direct a business, tell s.o. how to do s.t.
Kumpaníya nga gidirihian sa usa ka Amirikánu, Company directed by an
American. Pilikula nga gidirihian ni Bargas, A movie directed by
Vargas. {2} tell s.o. how to get s.w.

diriksiyun n {1} direction, management. Kumpaníya ubus sa diriksiyun sa
usa ka Amirikánu, Company under the management of an American.
{2} instructions for doing s.t., to get to the place. Tumána giyud ang
diriksiyun, Follow the directions. {3} direction to a place. Unsay
diriksiyun sa sakayan pagkasúgat ninyu? What direction did the boat
take when you met? {4} address. Ang diriksiyun sa suwat, The address on
the letter. v [A; c] {1} give directions to a place, to do s.t.
{2} address a letter s.w.

dirikta a {1} frank, speaking to the point. {2} be directly from, go
directly to. Radiyu nga ismágul dirikta gíkan sa Hapun, Radios,
smuggled directly from Japan. v {1} [A; b5c] go straight to the point,
be frank. Diriktáha (diriktáhi) siyag sulti nga wà ka mahigugma níya,
Tell her frankly that you don’t love her. {2} [A; ac] go, take s.w.
directly. Mudirikta kug adtu sa iskuyláhan, I will go directly to
school. Idirikta nà siya sa util, Take her directly to a hotel. {3} [A;
c] direct s.o. s.w. Kinsay nagdirikta ninyu nganhi? Who directed you
here? {3a} [A; b] direct traffic. Gidiriktahan sa mga buy iskawut ang
trápik, The boy scouts directed the traffic. -minti {1} directly,
outright. Sultíhi ku diriktaminti, Tell me frankly. Gidilì sa usa ka
langyaw ang pagkampanya diriktaminti u indiriktaminti, It is forbidden
for foreigners to campaign directly or indirectly.

diriktíba n {1} board of directors, the governing body of s.t.
{2} directive, general instructions. hunta — n = diriktíba.

diriktu = dirikta.

diriktǔr n {1} director of a department. {2} director of a play.
v [B16; a2] be, become director of a company or play.

diriktúri, dirikturyu n telephone directory.

diris = tubli.

díris n strong, offensive odor of a singgawung (k.o. civet).

dir-is n one’s monthly period. v [a4] be menstruating. Gidir-is siya
maung gisáput, She is having her period. That’s why she is moody.

diritsu {1} directly, straight. Diritsu ngadtu sa syudad, Going
directly to the city. {2} directly after s.t. else. Gíkan sa trabáhu,
diritsu siyag kalígù, From work he takes a bath directly. hitsu —
clothing purchased with the cost of the tailoring included in the
price. v {1} [A; b5] do s.t. immediately. Midiritsu siyag tindug, He
got up immediately. {2} [A; ac] go, bring s.t. directly s.w. Diritsúha
nag kúhà, Go get that directly. Idiritsu siyag paúlì, Bring her home
directly.

dirúsas v [A12] the only thing that is wrong (humorous euphemism). Mau
nay nakadirúsas nímu. Masukù dáyun ka, That’s what’s wrong with you.
You get angry right away.

Dis. n an abbreviation for Disyimbri ‘December’.

dís n fixed desk of the type used in elementary schools, composed of a
table top and a folding seat attached to the front.

dis-a = diin_1.

disapíyu v [C; c1] fight a duel with a sword. n duel.

dis-arma v [A; b] disarm.

disbár v [A; a1] {1} not allow s.o. to take the bar examination.
Nadisbár siya kay nakapaanak, He was not allowed to take the bar
because he made a girl pregnant. {2} disbar a lawyer.

disdi from [such-and-such] a time on. Disdi pa niadtu, From that time
on.

disdis = dìdì.

disgáyis n disguise. pa- v [A; ac] disguise oneself, s.o. Nagpadisgáyis
siyang párì, He disguised himself as a priest.

disgrasya n {1} accident, unfortunate in result. Disgrasya ang íyang
namatyan, He died in an accident. Disgrasya tung ákung paglakaw kay
nakahibálag ku ug isnatsir, I had bad luck when I took my walk because
I ran into a purse-snatcher. {2} unexpected, unintended. Disgrasya tung
pagkadaúga nákù, My winning was completely unexpected. — nga malíngin
very much unexpected, for s.t. to have happened which had a very remote
chance of happening. Nakagurdu kug primíru primyu sa swip-istik.
Disgrasyang malíngin! I won the first prize in the sweepstakes. How
very unexpected that was! v {1} [B123(1)6; b6] meet with an accident.
Nakadisgrasya (nadisgrasya) ang dyip, The jeep met with an accident.
{1a} [B126] for s.t. to turn out unhappily. {1b} [B126] get lost.
Nadisgrasya ang tanan níyang swildu sa súgal, He lost all his money in
gambling. {2} [a3b2] have s.t. happen to one unexpectedly. Palit ug
tíkit básig disgrasyahan kag gurdu, Buy a ticket, you might just win.
{3} [A12; a3] bring a woman into disgrace by making her pregnant. -da
n woman who has been disgraced by having a child out of wedlock.
v [B126] get disgraced. -du a accident-prone. v [B12] get to be
accident-prone.

disgustádu a {1} disliking s.o. Disgustádu ku sa ímung naasáwa, I
dislike the person you married. {2} be fed up with a situation.
Disgustádu ku niíning kinabuhía, I’m fed up with this life.

disgustáwu a doing s.t. one dislikes doing. Miadtu ku píru disgustáwu
tung pagkaadtúa, I went, but I didn’t want to.

disgustu n ill will between two or more persons. Ang ílang disgustu
mahitungud sa yútà misangkù sa hukmánan, Their quarrel over the land
ended in court. v [C1; b3] be on bad terms.

disgwápa, disgwápu v [B126] spoil one’s good looks (humorous slang).
Nadisgwápa na lang hinúun nang artistáhun mung nawung sa pagpamaligyag
úling, It’s a shame that a person with the face of a movie actress
should be selling charcoal. It makes you look so ugly.

disi v [B146; b6] be greasy such as to make one’s appetite disappear.
Nagdisi ang plátung gihugásag way sabunsábun, The plates are all greasy
because they were washed without soap. Nagdisi nga samad, A wound which
makes one lose one’s appetite.

dísi v [A23] resist efforts vehemently. Bísag giunsa námug gúyud ang
bábuy, mudísi giyud dílì musunud, No matter how much we pulled the pig,
it resisted and would not follow.

disibi = risibi.

disidídu a determined, bent on doing s.t. Disidídu na giyud siyang
mangasáwa, He is really determined to get married. v [B12; b6] get to
be determined to do s.t.

disidir v [A2; b(1)] make up one’s mind to do s.t. Disidihi kanag
palit, Make up your mind to buy it.

dísil n Diesel.

disilya v [A; c] turn left. n left direction.

disimal n decimal point. v [A; b6] place or put a decimal point.

Disimbri n December. v see abril.

disimitru, disimitrus n decimeter. v [B256; c1] be a decimeter in
dimension.

dis-impikta, disimpiktǎr v [A; b5c1] disinfect a place.

Disimri = disimbri.

disimuladu = dismular.

dis-inpikta = dis-impikta. -nti n disinfectant.

disinti a respectable, conforming to social standards. Disinting
pamisti, Decent dress. Disinting balay, A presentable house. Disinting
ristawrant, A decent restaurant. Disinting trabáhu, A respectable job.
v [A1; c1] respectable in one’s behavior.

disintiríya n dysentery. v [A23P; a1] have dysentery.

disintralisasiyun, disintralisisyun n decentralization.

disinuybi n nineteen. v see disiutsu.

disinyu n design of s.t. constructed.

disiplína n discipline. v [A; a12] discipline, punish. Disiplináha nang
ímung ulitáwu kay tingálig makurnir unyà, Discipline your son before he
is forced into a marriage. -da = disiplinádu (female). -du
a well-disciplined. v [B12; b6] become well-disciplined. -ryan a be a
strict disciplinarian. v [B12] get to be strict.

disipulu n disciple of Christ. v [B1256; a12] become a disciple of
Christ.

dis-iridar v [A; b5c1] disinherit.

disirt n dessert. v [A1; c1] have dessert.

disisayis n sixteen. v see disiutsu. — kartas mahjong game with sixteen
pieces (instead of the usual thirteen).

disispirádu = dispirádu.

disisyíti n seventeen. v see disiutsu.

disisyun n decision.

disiutsu n eighteen. v {1} [B5; c16] do s.t. on the eighteenth (of the
month), reach the age of eighteen. Mudisiutsu (madisiutsu) ku rung
pitsa trayinta sa Uktubri, I will be eighteen on the 30th of October.
Dibuhan ta ka ug magdisiutsu ka na, I will give you a debut on your
eighteenth (birthday). Nagkadisiutsu ka na lang wà pa giyud ka gihápuy
buut, You are turning eighteen but still you are irresponsible.
Disiutsúhun (idisiutsu) na lang nátù ang átung parti, Let’s have our
party on the eighteenth (of the month). {2} [A12; ac1] acquire or give
eighteen (pesos, dollars, etc.). Nakadisiutsu ku sa búwang, I won
eighteen (pesos) in the cockpit. Ákung palitun ug ímung disiutsúhun
(idisiutsu), I’ll buy it if you let me have it for eighteen pesos.
Nadisiutsuhan ta man ka, I won eighteen (pesos) from you. Nadisiutsuhan
ku sa Tabuan, apan gamay ra ang ákung napalit, I got rid of eighteen
pesos, but I bought very little.

disíyu n plan which one intends to carry out. Wà kuy disíyung
magnigusyu ug sakyanan, I do not have plans to invest in
transportation.

disk = dís.

diskansǎr = diskansu, v2, {2a}, {b}, {c}. diskansádu, diskansáwu
a {1} rested, having rest. Diskansádu kaáyu ku human sa katúlug, I am
very well rested after my sleep. {2} relieved, free of pain, worry,
suffering. Diskansádu na ang masakitun kay nakatumar na ug tambal, The
patient is relieved because he has taken his medicine. v [B126] {1} get
rested. {2} get respite.

diskansu n {1} front porch. Adtu ta magpahayáhay sa diskansu, Let’s get
a breath of fresh air on the front porch. {2} rest. v {1} [b6] add a
front porch to a house. {2} [A] rest. Mudiskansu kug kadiyut kay
gihangákan ku, I will rest for a while because I’m out of breath.
{2a} [AB; c2] give s.o. or s.t. a rest. Nagdiskansu ku áring kabáyù,
I’m giving my horse a rest. {2b} [A12] be free of, have a respite from
pain or suffering. Makadiskansu lang siyas bun-ug ug wà dinhi ang bána,
She won’t get any respite from her beatings as long as her husband is
around. {2c} — sa dáyun [A2] die (lit. rest forever). Pasaylua siya
samtang dì pa siya mudiskansu sa dáyun, Forgive him before he goes to
his eternal rest. diskansuhánan, diskansuhan n resting place.
diskansuhánan sa dáyun cemetery (lit. final resting place).

diskarga v {1} [A; c1] unload, take out of a vehicle. Idiskarga
(diskargáha) ang mga malíta gíkan sa awtu, Take the suitcases out of
the car. {1a} defecate (slang). Túa siya sa kasilyas nagdiskarga, He’s
in the bathroom, defecating. {1b} [A; b(1)] have sexual intercourse
(humorous). Didtu ku sa pampaman magdiskarga, I was in the red-light
district, unloading. {2} [B23(1); c1] for a battery to become
discharged. Dì musíga ang mga sugà ug makadiskarga ang batiríya, The
lights won’t shine if the battery loses its charge.[A]

diskárids v [A3P; a12] discourage. Nadiskárids ku kay wà giyud ku
makapuntus, I got discouraged because I hadn’t gotten a single point.
Gidiskárids ku siya pagkúhag abugasíya, I discouraged him from taking
up law.

diskaril v {1} [A13B26; c16] derail, be derailed. Mga tulisan ang
nagdiskaril sa trín, The bandits derailed the train. Mudiskaril
(madiskaril) ang trín, The train will be derailed. {2} [B126; b3(1)]
faint (colloquial). Nadiskaril siya pagkakità sa kalag, She fainted
when she saw the ghost.

diskarni v {1} [A; a] butcher an animal, slaughter it and cut it up.
{2} kill s.o. with a bladed weapon. Madiskarni tikaw rung traydúra ka,
I’ll slaughter you, you traitor. {3} eat all of s.t. (colloquial).
Gidiskarni sa mga bátà ang kík nga nahibilin, The children ate up all
of the leftover cake. {4} rape a woman (slang).

diskás = diskási_1.

diskási_1 v [AC; b5c3] engage in a discussion about a particular topic.
Gidiskási ku siya báhin sa rilihiyun, I discussed religion with him.

diskási_2 v {1} [A2C; c16] call off, take back a bet. Idiskási
(diskasíhun) níla ang ílang pusta kay dì mahinayun ang lumbà, They will
call off their bets because the race will not be held. {2} [A1; c16]
stop any activity for the while or call it quits. Diskasíhun (idiskási)
úsà nátù ang átung paggúna, Let’s take a break from our weeding.

diskasyun n discussion. v [C] hold a discussion. Nagdiskasyun mi sa
klási mahitungud sa liksiyun, We held a discussion in class about the
lesson.

diskitar v [A12; b28] find out s.t. by accident. Nadiskitahan nga
nawálà ang singsing, It was discovered that the ring was stolen.
{2} [A; a12] check up on s.o. to see if he is doing anything wrong.
Diskitahun ku ang ákung mga anak ug dúna bay mga minalditu, I check up
on my children to see if they are naughty.

diskrayib, diskribir v [A; c1] describe. Diskrayba (idiskrayib) ang
langgam nga ímung nakítà, Describe the bird you saw.

diskubri v [A; a12b2] discover, find s.t. Wà pay nakadiskubrig tambal
sa kansir, No one has found a cure for cancer yet. Nadiskubri
(hidiskubrihan) ang asáwa nga may laláki, The wife was discovered with
another man.

diskumpiyar v [A2] be suspicious, distrusting. Ug mudiskumpiyar ka
nákù, tagáan ta kag risíbu, I’ll give you a receipt if you distrust me.
diskumpiyáda = diskumpiyádu (female). diskumpiyádu a suspicious and
distrustful. Diskumpiyádu ku ánang timbangána, I don’t trust those
scales. Diskumpiyádu siya sa pagbáhin sa kabílin, He questions the
division of the inheritance. v [B12; b3] get to be suspicious and
distrustful.

diskuntintu a discontented. Diskuntintu ku íning kinabuhía, I’m
discontented with this life. Diskuntintu ku sa ímung ági, I’m
dissatisfied with your work. v [B12; b3] be, become discontented,
desiring for more.

diskursu n speech. v {1} [A; b(1)] deliver a speech. {2} [A; c] give a
scolding in such a way that the public can hear it. A, nagdiskursu na
pud nang tiguwánga, Oh, the old woman is giving a speech (cussing out)
again. Ug magkasábà ka ayaw idiskursu, If you give a scolding, don’t do
it so everyone can hear.

diskusyun = diskasyun.

diskutik n {1} discothèque. {2} private party in which the house is
made to look like a discothèque. v [A1; c1] hold a discothèque party.

diskutir v [AC; b35] discuss or argue with s.o. over a certain point.
Ang tíma nga ámung gidiskutir, gidiskutihan, The subject we discussed.

diskuwalipáyid v [A; a12] disqualify s.o. from participating in a
sport, election, etc. Nadiskuwalipáyid siya kay húgaw siyang midúwà, He
was disqualified because he played dirty. Diskuwalipáyid nang kandidátu
kay andir ids, The candidate was disqualified because he was underage.

diskuwintu n discount. v {1} [A; b7] give a discount. Diskuwintúhan
nákù nig gamay kay súkì man ta, I’ll give a little discount on this
because you are a good customer. {2} [A1; c] get a discount.
Diskuwintúhan (makadiskuwintu) ka basta daghang palitun, You get a
discount if you buy in quantities. {3} [b1] credit a certain amount
owing s.o. to a debt he has. Diskuwintúhan ang ímung útang sa ímung
suklì, Your change will be credited to your debt.

dismayar v {1} = dismáyu. {2} [B126] get discouraged. Wà siya
madismayar bísag gitabángan sa mga sapían ang íyang kapárang, He wasn’t
discouraged even though his opponent was helped by wealthy people.

dismáyu v [B126] faint, lose consciousness. Nadismáyu siya kay naigù sa
kutukutu, She fainted because she was hit in the pit of the stomach.

dismǐs v {1} [A; bc1] dismiss a class. Dúgayng gidismisan ang mga bátà,
The children were let out late. {2} [A; c1] dismiss a case in court.
Idismǐs (dismisun) unyà kining kasúha kay kúwang sa ibidinsiya, This
case will be dismissed because there is insufficient evidence. {3} [A;
c1] dismiss from an office. Gidismǐs ang pulis kay nanguliktag tung,
The policeman was fired for collecting protection money.

dismísal n honorable dismissal issued by a school to an outgoing
student, indicating he is clear of all obligations, financial or
otherwise.

dismular v [A; a] hide s.t. by drawing attention away from it. Mikatáwa
siya arun pagdismular sa íyang kaúwaw, She laughed to hide her
embarrassment. Ipaibabaw ang mga maáyu arun madismular ang mga latà,
Put the good ones on the top so that the rotten ones will be concealed.
dismuládu s.t. done in such a way that the truth is concealed.
Dismuládu ang íyang pagpaningil kay nagpasángil siyang mangáyug tanum,
He hid his attempts to collect by pretending to ask for plants.

dispalku v [A; a2] embezzle. Gidispalkúhan níya ang kubransa, He
embezzled some of the money he collected. n amount embezzled.
dispalkadur n embezzler. v [B156; b6] become an embezzler. dispalkadúra
= dispalkadur (female).

dispanta = ispanta.

dispasir v [A; a] manage to do s.t. not easy to do. Kining ákung kítà
dílì makadispasir sa ímung pagtuun, With my salary I can’t afford to
pay for your tuition. Dì na madispasir sa ákung láwas ang tanang
trabáhu sa balay, I don’t have the strength to do all the household
chores.

dispatsadur = dispatsir.

dispatsadúra n salesgirl in a bazaar or department store. v [B156; a2]
be, become a salesgirl.

dispatsǎr v [A; c1] {1} get rid of s.t. Dispatsaha (idispatsǎr) kining
mga bátà. Sámuk kaáyu, Get rid of these children. They’re a nuisance.
{2} discharge from a job. Maáyung dispatsahun ang impliyádu nga dílì
kamaung mutrabáhu, Better get rid of an employee that doesn’t know how
to work. {3} kill, liquidate. Gidispatsǎr ug hurut ang tistígus, The
witnesses were all liquidated. {4} sell s.t., esp. s.t. one must get
rid of. Idispatsǎr na lang nátù ang yútà kay umaw na, Let’s get rid of
that piece of land because it has lost its fertility.†

dispatsir n {1} dispatcher of public transportation. Dispatsir sa trák,
The dispatcher at the bus station. {2} person who goes on a boat and
takes over all the sleeping places and sells them to the passengers.
Pagparisirbag tihíras sa dispatsir, Have the dispatcher get you a cot
beforehand. v [B16; b(1)] be, become a dispatcher of a public utility
vehicle.

dispatsu = dispatsǎr.†

dispidir v [A; b6] bid farewell. Mudispidir ku sa ákung mga amíga sa dì
pa ku mularga, I’ll bid goodbye to my friends before I leave. dispidída
n a farewell party. v [A1; b(1)] hold a farewell party. Átù siyang
dispididáhan iniglarga níya, We’ll give him a farewell party when he
leaves.

dispinsa_1 n pantry, storeroom for foods. v [A12; b6] make a pantry.

dispinsa_2 n {1} forgiveness, excuse. Dispinsa lang úsà. Wà kuy
ikahátag, Forgive me. I have nothing to give you. Nangáyù siyag
dispinsag milakaw, He asked to be excused and left. {2} dispensation in
the church.

dispinsaryu n dispensary, place for treating small sicknesses, wounds.

dispinsasiyun n dispensation in the church.

dispinsisyun = dispinsasiyun.

dispiráda = dispirádu (female).

dispirádu a in despair. Dispirádu siya kay dúgay nang way trabáhu, He
is desperate because he has been without a job for a long time. v [B12]
get to be in despair.

dispiras = bispiras.

dispirinsiya, disprinsiya = dipirinsiya.

dispisiyar v [A; a12] despise, scorn. Ángay bang dispisyahan ang táwu
tungud sa kakabus? Should a person be despised on account of poverty?

dispras n mask for a masquerade or as part of a costume. v {1} [A; b6]
wear a mask. {2} [AC12; c1] hold a masked party.

dispuga n k.o. stitch where the thread is pulled back under itself,
used in hemming, making buttonholes, and wherever a sturdy stitch is
desired. v [A; b5] sew a hem. -díra n one who sews a hem. v [B156; a2]
be a hemmer.

dispunir v [A; b] take care of s.o.’s financial obligations for him. Wà
kuy gidáng kwarta, Dispunihi ku úsà íni, I didn’t bring any money.
Please take care of this for me.

dispusisiyun n decision, judgment of what to do. Unsay ímung
dispusisiyun báhin sa yútà? What do you think we should do about the
land? Wà kuy dispusisiyun nga ákù. Mag-agad ra ku sa ákung bána, I
don’t make any decisions. I leave everything up to my husband. v [A; b]
take a decision on s.t. Ug ímu ning dispusisyunan karun, ikaw na, If
you make a decision on this, it is your responsibility.

dispuwis the next thing after that. Hugási. Dispuwis lat-i, Clean it.
Then stew it.†

distansiya n distance. Ang distansiya sa ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,
The distance of their house from the street. may — be somewhat far from
s.t. May distansiya ang ámù sa lungsud, Our place is located at
somewhat of a distance from the town. v [BC; acP] be at a distance, at
a distance from each other. Sa nakadistansiya na siyag duha ka
kilumitrus, When he had gotten two kilometers away. Distansyáhun nátù
ang duha ka balay pagtúkud, Let’s build the two houses at a distance
apart. Idistansiya (ipadistansiya) ang ímung tihíras sa ákù, Set your
cot up at a distance from mine.†

distiliríya n distillery.

distinádu a destined by fate to s.t. Distinádu siya sa pagkapubri, She
is destined to be poor.

distinasiyun n destination. Ása ímung distinasiyun. Sini u simbahan?
What is your destination. The movies or church?

distínu n destination, place one is headed for. Ása man ang ímung
distínu run, simbahan u sini? What is your destination? The movies or
church? pága, pagadíru — n s.o. who rides s.w. with the passage to be
paid on arrival. v [A; c] assign s.o. s.w. for employment. Túa ku
madistínu sa Lutúpan, I’m assigned to work in Lutopan.

distiyíru v [A; ac] exile. Gidistiyíru si Risal sa Dapítan, Rizal was
exiled to Dapitan.

distribuwir v [A; c] distribute, divide and give out in shares. Wà pa
námù idistribuwir ang mga rasyun, We have not distributed the rations
yet.

distribyútur n agent who sells a certain product in a place.
Distribyútur sa mga bulad, A dried fish wholesaler. Distribyútur sa mga
traktúra, Distributor of tractors. v [B16; a2b6] be, become a
distributor.

distrítu n congressional or school district. v [B126] become a
congressional district.

distrusar v [A; a1] destroy, cause physical destruction. Ang súnug mauy
midistrusar sa tibuuk syudad, Fire destroyed the whole city.

distrúsu n physical destruction.

distsards v {1} [A; c] remove s.o. from his position. Nadistsards ang
maistra kay hingabsin, The teacher was discharged because she was
always absent. {2} [B13; c1] for a battery to get discharged. {3} [A;
c] discharge from a hospital, armed forces. Nadistsards na ba siya sa
uspital? Has he been discharged from the hospital? {4} [A13] have
discharge prior to labor. n {1} discharge papers. {2} vaginal discharge
prior to labor.†

disturbǎr v [AN; a12] bother, disturb. Ayaw kug disturbaha kay natúlug
ku, Don’t bother me. I’m sleeping.

disturbu v [B6P; a] n nuisance, s.t. that disturbs. Disturbu kaáyu
kining pagsígig íhì, It is a nuisance to have to urinate all the time.
Nadisturbu ang ílang panimuyù tungud sa íyang pinaangkan, The
tranquility of their home was disturbed on account of her illegitimate
child.

disturnilyadur n screwdriver.

distursiyun n electrical device which gives a grating effect to the
sound of the electric guitar.

dis-ug v [AB3; c] {1} move over, upward, or ahead; cause s.t. to do so.
Midis-ug (nadis-ug) siya sa ngilit sa katri samtang natúlug, He moved
to the edge of the bed as he slept. {2} improve, reach a higher level.
Dakù siyag tingúhà nga mudis-ug ang íyang kahimtang, He had a strong
desire to improve his situation.

dis-úras a very late at night, too late to be proper. Dis-úras na kaáyu
sa pagpangharána sa mga ulitáwu, It was already very late when the
young men serenaded. v [B5] be very late at night.

diswildu a spending a lot, as if one had a salary.

Disyimbri = disimbri.

disyirtu n desert.

dit. n an abbreviation for ditiktib ‘detective’.

dít n date with a girl. v [AC; c] have a date with. Makigdít ku nímu,
I’d like to ask you for a date. Bísag kinsay íyang idít, She will date
anyone.

dità n k.o. big tree with a light wood used for making wooden slippers,
the bark of which is medicine against malaria: Alstonia scholaris.

ditalyi n details of an incident, etc. Íyang gibutyag ang tanang
ditalyi sa ílang rumansa, She related the complete details of their
love-making.

ditiktib n detective. — aksiyun n detective movie. v [B156; a2b6]
become a detective.

ditirminasiyun n determination. Ditirminasiyun pagtápus sa íyang
pagtuun, Determination to finish his studies.

ditsu n extemporaneous verse recited in the kulilísi, consisting of
stanzas of four lines, at least two of which are rhymed, in a free
meter. The participants in the kulilísi recite one or more stanzas and
each person’s recitation is so fashioned as to be a witty response to
the preceding recitation and a challenge to the recitation following.
The subject is usually courtship. v [A; c] recite ditsu’s.

díwà n {1} mind, soul. Natúlug ang ákung mata, apan nagmata ang ákung
díwà, My eyes are asleep, but my mind is awake. {2} spirit that
pervades s.t. Ang díwà sa Pasku, Christmas spirit. Ang díwà sa íyang
tugtug, The spirit of his song. diwanhun a pertaining to the soul.
Diwanhun nga kauhaw, Spiritual thirst.

díwal = diwalwal.

diwalwal v [APB3(1)6; c1P] for the tongue to stick way out, cause it to
do so. Mudiwalwal ang dílà sa búang, An idiot’s tongue hangs out.
Idiwalwal (diwalwála) ímung dílà, Stick out your tongue.

diwánag (word coined from díwà plus sánag) n inspiration, the light
that animates the soul.

diwáta n {1} k.o. supernatural beings that are associated with certain
places, esp. trees. {2} ceremony of offering food cooked with no salt
to spirits to insure harvest, give thanks, diagnose an illness. v [A;
b(1)] perform a diwáta ceremony. Diwatáhi ang lugar únà tarúkig balay,
Make an offering before you construct the house. Sakit nga gidiwatáhan,
A sickness for which the diwáta ceremony was performed. diwatahan
n {1} medium who performs the diwáta ceremony. {2} one who believes in
diwáta and the diwáta ceremony. diwatíru = diwatahan, 1.

diwindi n {1} k.o. small supernatural people, most commonly thought to
live in the space between the roof and the ceiling. They do good to
those to whom they show themselves, but are also said to play practical
jokes. {2} a dwarfed person.

díwit n k.o. cutlass fish: Trichiurus spp. diwitdíwit = díwit.

díya n {1} day (length of time). Un díya aku didtu, I was there one
day. Dus díyas, Two days. Midiya díya ang trabáhu run, We work only
half-day today. {2} pay for the day’s work. Walà kay díya madáwat karun
kay walà ka mutrabáhu, You won’t receive any pay today because you did
not report to work. v [A3S; b] earn a certain amount for a day’s work.
Mudíya kug utsu písus, I earn eight pesos a day.

diyabítis = dayabítis.

diyablu n {1} devil. Usa ka diyablu mipakítà níya, A devil appeared to
him. {2} devil, said as a mild curse to s.o. Kiat mung mga diyablúha
mu, You’re being naughty, you little devils!

diyakunu n {1} ceremony with three priests officiating. Diyakunung
mísa, Special mass. {2} priest that assists a high-ranking priest who
says mass. {3} a layman elected by the congregation to help the
minister in Protestant churches. v [B16; a2] become a deacon who aids
in the mass or a deacon in a Protestant church.

diyamanti n diamond, not as fine in quality as the brilyanti.

diyamitru = dayamitru.

diyána = dayána.

diyaryu_1 n daily paper.

diyaryu_2 n diary.

diyaryu_3 a for ordinary, casual wear. Dúna siyay aláhas pára diyaryu
ug láin sab tung pára ispisyal, She has jewelry for daily wear and
other jewelry for special occasions. v [A2; c1] wear, use s.t. for
daily, casual wear.

díyas = díya, n 1 (plural).

diyatilis = byatilis.

diyíta n diet. v [A] go on a diet.

diyù n a half centavo. a {1} small in amount. Diyù nga súkà, A little
vinegar. {2} small in size. Diyung bátà, A small child. v [B12; a2] be
little, make s.t. little. Ug madiyù na ang túbig, When there is little
water left. Diyua pag-asin, Just put a little salt in it. diyùdiyù =
diyutdiyut. see diyut. paka- v [A13; a12] humble oneself before s.o.,
consider s.t. little. Nagpakadiyù aku sa íyang atubángan, I humbled
(lit. lowered) myself before him. Gipakadiyù ba nà nímung usa ka galun?
Do you consider a gallon little? -g- see digyù. diriyù, dariyù =
diriyut. see diyut. maka-, ka- just a second. Migawas siyag kadiyù, He
went out for a second. maN-(←), tag-(←) costing a half a centavo.
tag-(←), tagi-, tinagi- = tagidiyut. see diyut.

díyung v [A3P; c1] {1} close the eyes to a slit. Midíyung ang íyang mga
mata sa kasúlaw, His eyes squinted in the light. {2} [B] for a light to
be, become dim. Midíyung (madíyung) ang sugà kay wà nay gás, The light
grew dim because the kerosene was all gone. {2a} for the sky to get
overcast during the day. Nidíyung ang kalangítan, The sky became
overcast.

diyus n God. Anak sa Diyus, Son of God. pur- see pur-. way —
{1} atheist, nonbeliever. {2} godless, full of sin. v [B1256] become
very successful in a certain endeavor. Nadiyus siya sa nigusyu, He
became very successful in business. diyusdíyus n false gods. -in-
{1} honest, according to God’s precepts. {2} earnestly with honest
effort. Diniyus ang íyang pagtuun, She studied with complete
seriousness. v [A; b6] {1} do s.t. honestly. Gamay kag ginansiya ug
magdiniyus kag nigusyu, You won’t have a good profit if you do business
honestly. {2} do s.t. with complete earnestness. Dinyusi (dinyusa)
pagsag-úlu ang liksiyun, Memorize the lesson earnestly. maki-
a God-loving, fond of worshipping God. -nun a {1} pious, living
according to God’s precepts. {2} divine. Bátang diyusnun, The Holy
Infant. v [B12] get to be pious. padiyusdiyusnun v [A13] pretend piety.

diyúsa n goddess.

diyusísis n diocese.

diyut n small in size. Diyut nga bátà, A tiny child. n half-centavo
coin. way — penniless. makadiyut, makariyut {1} to be done for a short
time. Makadiyut lang ku ngadtu, I will just go there. {2} was done for
a short time. Makadiyut lang kung niadtu, I just went there for a short
time. ka-, kariyut {1} = makadiyut. {2} done a second ago. Kadiyut
(kariyut) lang siya nga nanáug, He just left a second ago. naka-,
nakariyut = makadiyut, 2. (←) = diyut. n tag-(←), maN-(←) coin worth
half a centavo. diyutdiyut v [A13; b(1)] do s.t. many times at small
intervals. Nagdiyutdiyut siyag pangíhì, He keeps urinating every few
minutes. Gidiyutdiyutan ku níyag pangáyug ámut, He kept asking me for a
contribution every few days. -ay(←) a {1} few, small in amount.
Diyútayng kwarta, Little money. {2} small in size. Diyútayng bátà, A
small child. v [B12; a2] get to be little, make s.t. little. Diyutáya
ang asin, Just use a little salt. Nagkadiyutay na ang túbig, The water
is getting to be less and less. paka-ay(←) v [a12] consider s.t. little
in amount. Gipakadiyútay ba nímu ang usa ka galun? Do you consider a
gallon to be a small amount? diriyut, dariyut [subjunctive verb]
{1} [so-and-so] almost happened. Diriyut ku hiligsi, I was almost run
over. {2} s.t. of little importance. Diriyut lang tung ílang
gikaawáyan, They quarrelled over nothing. tagdiyútay = tagidiyut. -g-
a small (plural). Umúla sa digyut nga búla, Form it into small balls.
v [A; a] divide s.t. into small shares. -um-g-, dumaligyut a tending to
run small. Dumigyut (dumaligyut) ang ílang kalíwat, Their family tends
to be small in stature. tagi- a in small amounts at a time. v [A; abc]
[do] a little at a time. Tagidiyútag palit, Buy it little at a time.
Tagidiyúti ug sábud ang mga manuk, Feed the chickens a little at a
time. Itagidiyut kini ug timpla, Mix it in a little at a time. tinagi-
= tagidiyut.

diyuy n a half-centavo copper coin. maN-(←) apriced at half centavo.

Dr. n abbreviation for duktur.

Dra. n abbreviation for duktúra.

drágun n {1} dragon. {2} name of one of the suits in mahjong. It
consists of three sets of four identical pieces, each set a different
color: red (dágir), green (bulbul), and white (ispíhu). -is dragons
(plural).

dram_1 n drum, a percussion instrument. v [A; b(1)] play the drum.

dram_2, drám n drum, a container for oil, gasoline, etc. Lima ka dram
nga gasulína, Five barrels of gasoline.

dráma v {1} [A; a] put on a play or stage a broadcast. Gidráma níla ang
kamatáyun ni Risal, They dramatized Rizal’s death. {2} [A; c] put on an
act, pretend s.t. to mislead. Ayaw kug dramáhi ánang ímung
paghilakhílak, Don’t put on an act pretending to cry in front of me.
n {1} drama on stage, radio or TV broadcast. {2} act put on to fool
s.o.

dramátik a dramatic, full of emotional action. Dramátik nga panagkítà,
An emotional meeting. Dramátik nga lílas, A dramatic film. — intrans
a dramatic entrance. v [A] make a dramatic entrance.

dramaturga = dramaturgu (female).

dramaturgu n {1} actor on stage or in a radio or TV drama.
{2} playwright. v [B16; a12] be, become an actor, playwright.

drámir n drummer. v [B16; a2] be, become a drummer.

drams n set of drums.

dráp v [A; c1] {1} drop a course. Pila ka libru ang ímung drápun
(idráp)? How many courses are you planning to drop? {2} kick s.o. out
of a course. Ákù na lang idráp (drápun) nang palaabsin, I’m just going
to kick that habitual absentee out of my course.

drap-awut n drop-outs from school. v [A; b4] drop out from school.
Gidrap-awtan mig ubay-ubay, Quite a number of students dropped out on
us.

drápir n medicine dropper. v [c1] use a medicine dropper.

drayib v {1} [A; b(1)] drive a motor vehicle. {2} [A; c1] drive a ball
in tennis or pingpong. Idrayib (drayba) ug kusug ang pingpung, Slam the
pingpong ball. {3} [A; b6(1)] drive a basketball. {4} [A; b6] be the
active partner in sex play (slang). Lamì ba ug ang babáyi mauy
mudrayib? Is it fun if the woman is on top? n {1} drive in tennis,
pingpong. {2} action of driving a tennis, basketball. draybir
n {1} driver, chauffeur. {2} the sexual partner who is on top (slang).
v {1} [A12] have as a driver. {2} [B; a12] be a driver.

dráyir n dryer for hair, copra, etc. v [c16] dry by machine. Drayíra
(idráyir) ang kupras ug ting-úwan, Dry the copra in the machine during
the rainy season.

dri short for diri_1, 2.

dríbul v [A; c1] dribble a ball. n action of dribbling.

dríl_1 n drill, repetitive exercise in school, in athletics, etc. v [A;
ab2] do a drill.

dríl_2 n a coarse linen or cotton cloth with a diagonal weave, used for
work clothes, etc.

dripwud n driftwood used for ornamental purposes.

drísing rum n dressing room.

drísir n dressing table with a mirror.

drismíking n dressmaking, course or business of making dresses.

drisrihirsal n a final rehearsal of s.t. to be performed. Dris rihirsal
sa píi, Final rehearsal of the P.E. performance. v [A12; c1] hold a
final rehearsal of a play, an operetta, etc.

dristukil a dressed up for a purpose, usually more than necessary
(colloquial). Dristukil siya kay mag-aplay sa trabáhu, She’s all
dressed up because she is applying for a job. v [A] be dressed to kill.

drú v {1} [A1; c1] hold a lottery drawing. May drú sa Duminggu, They
will hold the drawing on Sunday. {2} [A; b6] draw a card. {3} [AC; a]
draw a revolver. Diriyut mi magkadrú. Púsil giyud untà tu, We nearly
drew our guns on each other. It would have been a gunfight. n drawing
of lottery, cards.

drúwing v {1} [A; a] draw a picture. Gidrúwing níyang ákung dagway, He
drew my face. {1a} dílì ma- words can’t describe. Dílì madrúwing ang
íyang kalípay, Words cannot describe her happiness. {2} [A; b] put
eyebrow pencil on. -ánan n drawing table, board.

drúwir n drawer, desk, bureau. v [A; a] make, put a drawer.

du n the note do. way — have no knowledge of music.

dù short for undù or dudù.

duas a exposed to everybody’s view, to the elements. v [B] be exposed
to public view, to the elements. Nagduas ang dughan sa baylarína, The
dancer’s breasts were bare. Naduas ang mga tanum sa kaínit sa adlaw,
The plants lay exposed under the heat of the sun. †

dúaw v {1} [A; a2b2] pay a visit. Duáwun nímu ang ímung trátu? Are you
going to see your girl friend? — ang katulúgun v [A12; a12] fall asleep
(literary). Wà siya duáwa sa katulúgun, He did not fall asleep. {2} [A;
a12b2] go s.w. and see how things are. Duáwa ang kábaw ug nainitan ba,
Take a look at the carabao to see if it is in the sun. -um-r-/l-
n visitor.

dúay = dul-ay.

duay-ay v [B3(1); b6c1] for the head to hang limp. Nagduay-ay ang úlu
sa manuk pagkaigù sa bulang, The cock’s head hung limp after it was
struck with the gaff.

dubdub v [A; b6(1)] burn s.t. by putting a torch to it. Dubduban ang
pánit sa kanding arun makúhà ang balhíbu, They singe the goat’s skin to
get the hair off. Dubduban nátù ang mga uhut, Let’s burn off the rice
stalks.

dubla v {1} [AC; c] do two things in rapid succession or simultaneously
to a recipient; for two agents to do the same thing in succession to a
recipient. Midubla kug suntuk sa pátid, I boxed him and then kicked
him. Nagdubla mig tíru sa liyun, We both fired at the lion. Human na
siya kasab-i. Ayaw idubla ang ímu, He has gotten his scolding. Don’t
you do it, too. {2} toll the church bell for the dead, done with two
bells in a set rhythm, or toll the bells in the same way at eight P.M.
n tolling of the church bells at eight P.M.

dubli a double, twice as much. Dubli ang báyad basta istranghíru, You
pay double if you’re a foreigner. — u n letter w. v [AB6; a1] double
s.t., be doubled. Mudubli ku sa ímung swildu ug takus ka, I’ll double
your salary if you’re worth it. Mudubli ang abut kun gamítan ug abúnu,
The yield doubles if fertilizer is applied. Nagdubli man kag báhin, You
have a double share. — antsu n cloth of extra width. Dus mitrus paígù
kay dubli antsu man, Two meters are enough because it is extra-wide
cloth. — bista n bifocals. — dus n twenty-two caliber rifle, pistol
(slang). — kára n not living up to one’s word of honor. Dubli kárang
pulitiku. Dúru kung kampanya níya piru wà ku pasudlag trabáhu, He’s a
two-faced politician. I worked like hell for him, but he didn’t give me
a job.

dubudúbu v [B24C3] be about the same in capacity, condition, age.
Mudubudúbu mig panuígun kay nagdúngan man mi pagkapuwit, We could be of
the same age because we were in first grade together. Magdubudúbu lang
ning ámung kinitáan, We have about the same income. ka- n people of
about the same age.

dubuk a {1} for fish not to be fresh. {2} tending to get sick easily.
Dubuk kaáyu kug láwas. Dì ku kaagwantas tun-ug, I am susceptible to
illnesses. I can’t take drafts. v {1} [B] get old or spoiled. Nadubuk
kay wà aysi, It did not keep because it wasn’t put on ice. {2} [B1256]
for the body to be badly bruised due to severe maulings. Gitabangan
siya hangtud nadubuk ang láwas, They ganged up on him and mauled him
until his body was badly bruised.

dúbul n {1} sleeping equipment good for two. Maglála kug banig nga
dúbul, I’ll weave a double-bed-sized mat. {2} doubles, a game with two
persons on a side. v [C; c3] be s.o.’s partner in doubles. Makigdúbul
aku nímu sa tínis, I’ll be your tennis partner for doubles. {3} in
phrases: — bádi n {a} k.o. tongue-shaped cookie consisting of two
cookies with a filling. {b} a pregnant woman (humorous). — bid double
bed. double ... — dayis a method of determining the dealer in mahjong
with two dice. v [A; c16] determine mahjong dealer with two dice. — dik
double-decked bed. v [A; a] construct a double-decked bed, put a
double-decked bed s.w. — krus double cross. v [A; b5] double-cross.
Gidúbul krúsan (gidúbul krus) siya sa íyang trátu, His fiancee
double-crossed him. — krúsir n double-crosser. v [B16] be a
double-crosser. — parking double parking. v [A; c] park double. Ákù
lang úsà idúbul parking, I’ll just park double for the while.

dúbun a very dark in hue; almost black. Gwápa untà siya apan dúbun lang
kaáyu sa kaitum, She is pretty, only she is very dark. v [AB12; a]
darken or blacken. Ayaw dubúna pag-anyil ang linabhan, Don’t put too
much bluing in the clothes.

dúda v [A; bc] {1} doubt. Nagdúda kung muulan, I doubt it will rain.
{2} suspect. Gidudáhan ku siya nga mauy nangáwat, I suspect him to be
the one who stole it. n {1} doubt. Dakù ang ákung dúda nga makapasar
ku, I very much doubt that I can pass. {2} suspicion. Dakù ang ákung
dúda nga naglúib ka, I am very suspicious that you are unfaithful.
dudúsu a suspicious, doubting. Dudúsu man gud siya sa íyang katakus, He
was doubtful of his ability. Dudúsu ku ánang táwung ganíha rang
naglabaylábay sa báy, I am suspicious of that man. He’s been going back
and forth in front of the house. v [B12] be suspicious.

dudhu v {1} [A; c] thrust s.t. at s.o. that he doesn’t want, give s.o.
s.t., imposing it on him. Ngánung nagdudhu ka pa man nákug tubà nga wà
kuy gustu? Why do you thrust toddy at me when I don’t want any? Gidudhu
ang bungì ngadtu sa dalága, She tried to force the hairlipped boy on
the girl. {2} [A3P] push s.o. into a bad situation. Ang ímung
pagkapalahúbug mauy makadudhu (makapadudhu) nímu sa kaparútan, Your
drunkenness has thrust you into your misery.

dùdù v [A; c] {1} press s.t. hard over s.t. Idùdù sa linúgaw ang asin
nga binatu, Press the chunk of salt onto the porridge. {2} force s.t.
on s.o. Dùdúig bibirun ang bátà, Press a bottle to the child’s lips.
Idùdù giyud ang kwarta ug dílì siya mudáwat, Force the money on him if
he refuses to accept it. {3} dip, dunk. Idùdù ang kaling sa súkà, Dunk
the dried anchovies into the vinegar.

dúdung short form: dung {1} term of address for a male of the same age
or younger than the speaker. {2} nickname popular for boys. v [A; a12]
call s.o. dúdung.

dudúsu see dúda.

dū́g = dulug.

dugà, dúgà n {1} juice, sap from a plant, juice coming from inside
meat. Dugà sa agridulsi, Calomondin juice. Ang dugà sa alipáta
makabúta, The sap from the alipáta tree can blind you. Karning nalútù
sa íyang dúgà, Meat cooked in its own juices. {2} oozings from
infections. {3} semen (humorous euphemism). Wà nay dugang tigúlang, An
old man with no more sperm. {4} a man’s children (humorous). Kinsay
mubuhì sa ímung dugà kun patay ka na? Who will raise your children when
you are gone? v [A3P] exude sap or juice. Nakadugà na ba ang hubag? Has
any pus come out of the boil? -un(→) a juicy.

dug-ab v [AN; c1] belch. Nakadug-ab na ba ang bátà? Has the baby
burped? n belch.

dugámis (coined from dugà and tam-is) n honey, sweet juice (literary).
Dugámis sa mangga, Sweet juice of the mango. v [A12S3] drip with sweet
juice. Kansang ngábil nga nagdugamis sa kabatan-un, Whose lips are
dripping with the honey of youth.

dúgang v [AB2S4; c] add to s.t., increase in amount. Magdúgang ba tag
palit? Shall we buy more? Nagdugang (nagkadugang) ang kasakit, Her
illness is getting worse. Dugángi ang ákung báhin, Add to my share,
please. Pilay idúgang? How many shall we add? n s.t. given in addition.
Dúgang kasayúran, Additional information. {2} — sa in addition to.
Dúgang pa niánà, pubri siya, Furthermore, he is very poor. paki-,
paki-(←) v [A13] ask for more. Nagpakidugang (nagpakidúgang) pa siyag
kan-un kay gigútum pa, He asked for more food because he was still
hungry. ig-r-, ig-l- n s.t. to add to s.t. Balas nga igdudúgang sa
abúnu, Sand to be added to the filler. 

dugap v {1} [A; b6] intervene, take part in others’ affairs uninvited.
Midakù ang áway kay gidugapan sa ugángan, The quarrel got worse because
the mother-in-law joined in. {2} [A2; c] do s.t., usually unnecessary,
as a sideline to one’s main business. Gidugapan níyag panlabáda ang
súhul sa íyang bána, She took in wash as an addition to her husband’s
salary.

dúgay a {1} taking a long time. Dúgay nga intirbiyu, A lengthy
interview. Dúgay ang kaayuhun sa sangla, It takes long for leprosy to
heal. Dúgay siyang nag-ílis (mag-ílis), It took (takes) her long to
change. {2} late. Dúgay ang ámung paniudtu, Our lunch was late. Dúgay
ming natúlug, We went to sleep late. {3} — na long ago. Dúgay na nà,
That was long ago. Dúgay nang nalútù ang sud-an, dúgay nang pagkalútù
sa sud-an, The food has been ready for some time. v {1} [B3(1); b3c1]
take a long time. Dì siya madúgayng pirma, He doesn’t take long to
sign. Ug madúgay pa kining sakíta, ... If this sickness lasts much
longer ... Wà madúgay, namatay siya, It didn’t take long before she
died. Dì ku magdúgay dinhi, I won’t stay here for long. Dì ka
makadúgayg tubag, You may not take long to answer. Dugáya (idúgay) ug
tágù, Put it away for a long time. Unsay gidugáyan ninyug isturya? Why
are you talking so long? {1a} [B4] last long. Dílì magdúgay kining
klasíha sa sapátus, This type of shoes doesn’t last long. {2} [B2] get
to be late, delayed. Ug mudúgay tag adtu, mudúgay sag paúlì, If we go
late, we’ll come home late. Nadúgay ang suwat, The letter was delayed.
{3} [B12] — na get to be a long time. Sa nadúgay na níyang trabáhu
didtu, After he had worked there for a long time ... Sa nagkadugay na,
As time went on ... dugaydugay a {1} taking some time. {2} somewhat
late. {3} — na some time ago. -an(→) a tending to take long to do
things. Dugayan siyang sugúun, He takes long to do things he is told to
do. gi-un(→), ka-un(→) n length of time. hiN- it’s been long enough
now. Hinúgay na niánang ímung paghilakhílak, You’ve been crying long
enough now. (Stop it.) v [A13; b] keep doing s.t. too long and too
much. Ayaw ug hinugáyi ug lisùlísù ang siradúra, Don’t keep turning
that lock. ka-an the long run. Sa kadugáyan maáyu ra nà, In the long
run it will surely get better.

dugbak a for s.t. firm to be thoroughly rotten. Dugbak nga káhuy, A
piece of wood completely rotted. Dugbak na kaáyu ang patay, The body
was in an advanced state of decomposition. v [B12; b6] rot.

dugdug = dalugdug.

dughan n {1} chest, breast. Ipahigdà ang bátà sa íyang dughan, Lay the
child on its chest. Bugdu nga dughan, A full bosom. {2} breast, as seat
of emotions. Mikúba ang ákung dughan, My heart beat rapidly. {2a} sakit
ang — be deeply worried about some situation. Nagsakit ang ákung dughan
ánang batáa kay dì magtuun, I’m worried about that child because he
doesn’t study. {3} part around the chest of a garment. Guut ang dughan
sa ákung sinínà, My dress is narrow around the chest. v [A; a12] hit in
the breast. -un a full-breasted, buxom. -un ug tiyan a pot-bellied
(humorous).

dughang = dugsak.

dughit v [A; a] poke at things high up to dislodge them. Dughíta na
lang ang búnga, ayawg sak-a, Knock the fruits down with a pole, don’t
climb up after them. (→) n pole to poke things down.

dughù_1 v {1} [A; a] poke at s.t. that is up high with a pole. Dughúa
ang kisami arun muhílum ang tagatáas, Thump on the ceiling so the
people upstairs will quiet down. Dughúi kug tambis, Knock some fruits
down for me. {2} [A123P; a12] get infested with bedbugs. Dughuun ka
(ang átung silya) kun adtu ka manini sa barátu, You (our chairs) will
get infested with bedbugs if you go to cheap moviehouses. n {1} pole to
poke with. {2} bedbugs, lice in furniture (so-called from their
propensity to bite from beneath). -un a infested with bedbugs.

dughù_2 n k.o. small black poisonous snake.

dugkal v {1} [A; a] dig up the earth with a pole or bar and, by
extension, with a spade. Dugkálun ang yútà nga dì madáru, They dig the
earth up with a pole where they can’t plow. {2} [A; a1] thrust at,
strike with a long pointed instrument. Gidugkal níya sa sundang ang
punúan sa káhuy, He thrust a machete into the tree trunk. n pole to pry
the earth up with.

dugmak v [A; ab2] stab. Punyal tung gidugmak nákù, It was a knife that
I was stabbed with. -in-an(→) n stab wounds.

dugmil v {1} [AB; c1] roll, wallow in dirt, sand, sugar and the like,
cause s.t. to do so. Nagdugmil ang anay sa lápuk, The sow wallowed in
the mud. Nadugmil sila sa salà, They wallowed in sin. Idugmil ang
ságing sa asúkar, Roll the banana fritters in the sugar. {2} [A; b6]
for an animal to gather stuff to give birth on. Nagdugmil ang anay kay
taliának na, The sow is gathering material because she is going to
deliver. {3} [A; a12] crumple, rough s.t. up vigorously to the point of
mangling it. Hastang nakadugmil sa úsu sa táwu, My! How the bear
mangled the man!

dugmù_1 v [B126; b6] fall forwards with the knees hitting the ground
first. Nadugmù ku sa nagbansiwag nga gamut, I tripped and fell on the
root that was sticking out.

dugmù_2 v [ANC; b5] wrestle, fight with grappling. Gidugmù (gidugmúan)
sa asáwa ang babáyi sa íyang bána, The wife fought with her husband’s
mistress.

dugmuk v [A; a] {1} crush into small pieces or powder. Nadugmuk ang
súpas sa garapun, The crackers in the jar got all broken to pieces.
Dugmúka ang pasáyan úsà iságul, Crush the shrimps before you put them
in. {2} change a bill. Dugmúka nang dyasingku, Please change this
fiver. n {1} s.t. crushed into bits. {2} the little pieces of bread and
pastry left over when baked goods have been cut for sale. sulting —
statement not worth giving credence. Ayaw tuhúi kanang mga tabì. Púru
nà sulting dugmuk, Don’t believe that gossip. They’re just stories.

dugmun n {1} rags. {2} things gathered by an animal to prepare its bed
for giving birth. v [A; b6] {1} lie down in the midst of disorder.
Didtu siya magdugmun sa suuk, He lay down in the dirt in the corner.
{2} spread rags for an animal to give birth on. Nagdugmun ang anay kay
taliának na, The sow gathered stuff because she was about to give
birth. {3} [B1256; b6] get enmeshed in a net. Sa pagdasmag, ang isdà
madugmun sa báling, In lunging, the fish enmeshes itself in the net.

dugnas v [B23(1); b6] for the leaves of annuals which yield roots or
vegetables to wither when the crop has been gathered or is ready for
gathering. Mudugnas (madugnas) na gánì ang dáhun sa úbi, kanà panglihun
na, When the leaves of the yam die out, it means the tubers are ready
for gathering.

dug payit n dogfight between fighter planes. v [C; c3] engage in a
dogfight.

dugsak v [A; a12] thrust s.t. long at s.t. with force. Dugsáka ang halu
sa bangag, Thrust a pole at the monitor lizard in the hole. Idugsak ang
ísi sa íhu, Thrust the harpoon into the shark. n thrust with s.t. long.
Dì pa madutlan sa usa ka dugsak, You can’t pierce it with one thrust.

dugsang = dugsak.

dugsib v [A; b6(1)] set fire to s.t. with a burning torch. Dugsíbi ang
ílang balay, Set fire to their house.

dugsù n k.o. fish.

dugtà a worn out to shreds, rotten and badly decomposed, completely
decayed. Dugtang banig, A mat worn to shreds. Dugtang láwas sa patay,
Completely decayed body of the corpse. Dugtang balay, A house that is
rotted through. v [B12; b3] get completely rotten, or worn out.
Gidugtáan siyag tulu ka buuk karsúnis, wà gihápun kaswilduhi, He has
worn three pairs of pants to shreds, and he still hasn’t received his
pay.

dugtung v {1} [A; ac] join end to end. Dugtúnga ang duha ka kadína,
Join the two chains together. Dugtúnga ang duha ka lamísa arun dúna kay
kahigdáan, Put two tables end to end so you have s.t. to sleep on.
Idugtung ring tabla niánà, Join this piece of wood to the end of that
one. {1a} [A13; a12] link with a structure or opening. May pultahan nga
nagdugtung sa duha ka lawak, There is a door connecting the two
adjacent rooms. Ang duha ka línaw dugtúngun sa usa ka kanal, The two
ponds will be linked together by a canal. {1b} [A12; a12] unite, link
together. Ang kaminyúun sa duruha nagdugtung sa duha ka bantúgang
bánay, The marriage of the two joins the two famous families. {2} [A]
say s.t. after s.o. else has spoken. Ang íyang kasábà gidugtúngan níyag
maymay, He added a piece of advice after he scolded me. {3} [A23C23]
overlap into the succeeding period, season. Ang ámung mais mudugtung sa
sunud sanggì, Our corn will last into the next harvest. Ang duha ka
sanggì magdugtung, The product from one harvest lasts to the next.
{3a} [C] — ang hunàhúnà have similar opinions on s.t. Nagdugtung ang
ámung hunàhúnà báhin niánà, Our opinions coincide on that point. {3b} —
ang dálan v [c13] for people estranged to be reconciled. Nagbúlag sila
ug walà na magkadugtung ang ílang dálan, They separated and each went
his separate way. n {1} a piece that joins another piece. Háin man ag
dugtung áning kayril? Where is the other piece of this watch chain?
{2} the continuation of s.t. foregoing. Kadtung awáya dugtung sa ílang
lális, That fight is the continuation of their quarrel. {3} installment
of s.t. that appears in a series. Atangi ang dugtung, Read the next
installment. {4} the knot which joins two ends of a rope or chain. Ang
dugtung lig-un, The knot is strong. — ug púsud n siblings. Ayaw mu
pag-áway kay dugtung ra mug púsud, Don’t quarrel. You are brothers (of
the same umbilical cord). — ug tinái one’s husband or wife (humorous).
Nía na ang ímung dugtung ug tinái, Your wife is here. -in-an(→) n place
two things are joined. ka- = dugtung, n.

dugù n {1} blood. May dugù siyang Katsílà, He has Spanish blood.
{2} blood from menstruation. Kusug kug dugù human kakuhái, I have been
having profuse menstruation since my miscarriage. {3} — sa láki semen
(euphemism). {4} the part of one’s being that supplies aggressiveness
and vitality. Misúruk ákung dugù, My blood boiled. — sa — one’s
offspring. -ng putì {a} semen (euphemism). {b} white discharge after
menstruation. {c} people of the white race. batan-un nga — {a} young
people. {b} having youthful drive and aggressiveness. Ang batan-un
níyang dugù nagtukmud níya sa pagpakasalà, Her youthful drive led her
to sin. bug-at ang — having a strong antipathy toward s.o. hínay, lúya,
patayg — slow, lacking in vitality and aggressiveness. ínit ug —
hot-tempered. ísug ug — brave, courageous. {b} having smelly blood
during menstruation. {c} for traits to be dominant. kúlang ug — having
low blood pressure. subra ug — having high blood pressure. v {1} [A;
b6] bleed. Wà na magdugù ang samad, The wound isn’t bleeding any more.
Nadug-an ang ákung sinínà, My shirt got blood on it. {2} [A23] give
money. Wà siya mudugù sa dihang gipangayúan, He did not give any money
when he was asked. Tihik kaáyu. Mudugù pay úhung, He is stingy. It is
easier to squeeze money out of a rock. (Lit. A mushroom will bleed
sooner.) {3} — ang balatían, kasingkásing {a} be deeply touched by s.t.
sad. {b} have hurt feelings. {4} [a4b6] menstruate. Gidugù siya, maung
salaptun, She is menstruating; that is why she is easily angered. Labhi
ang dinug-an, Wash the clothes you got menstrual blood on. (←) v [A3]
have heavy bleeding. Magdúgù kag makuháan ka, You will bleed heavily if
you have a miscarriage. -in-(←) v [A13] = dúgù. ka-(←) v [A13] get
blood all over one. dugùdugù, -in-an n dish prepared from the blood and
the innards of a pig. v [A; a12] prepare, eat blood dish. ka-(←)
n {1} blood relative. {2} compatriot. Daghan sa átung kadúgù ang
namatay sa gíra, Many of our compatriots died in the war. ma-(←)
a place that emits blood profusely when cut. Madúgù ang líug ug mauy
masámad, The neck bleeds profusely if it is wounded. san-(←) see
sandúgù. taliN- see talinúgù. -un having a lot of blood. Duguung isdà
ang mangkù, The mackerel is a fish with lots of blood. -un(←)
a {1} bloody, covered with blood. {2} involving bloodshed. Dugúung
bugnù, A bloody battle.

dúguk v [A; b5] go, be attracted to a specific thing, most often in
great numbers. Mudúguk ka sa kumbira bísag walà imbitaha? Will you
attend the banquet even if you’re not invited? Way taga Rid Krus nga
midúguk sa nasunúgan, No one from the Red Cross visited the burnt-out
area. Dugúkun (dugúkan) ang íyang tindáhan sa mga táwu, People flock to
his store. Gidúguk (gidugúkan) ang artista sa íyang mga pans, The fans
crowded around the actor. pa- v [A; ac] attract people to come to a
specific thing. n s.t. to attract s.t. s.w. Padúguk sa isdà, S.t. to
bring the fish near. Barátug baligyà ágig padúguk, Goods sold cheap as
a loss leader. -an n {1} longitudinal spar which serves as the
centerpiece or main member to which crosspieces are attached. Dugúkan
sa talabánug, Centerpiece of the kite. Dugúkan sa batugánan, Post to
which sticks are attached for fowls to perch on. {1a} chassis for a
vehicle. {2} backbone. {3} plot of a story, main subject of an article.
-l-un(→) attractive, drawing s.t. to come to it. Búwak nga dulugukun sa
alibangbang, Flowers that attract butterflies.

dúgung n dugong, k.o. sea cow.

dugus n {1} honey, nectar. Dugus sa gugma, The sweetness of love. v [A;
b6] put honey on s.t. ka-(←) v [A13] get honey all over it. dugusdugus
k.o. mealy bug, covered with whitish substance, which infests plants,
so called because it exudes a nectar-like substance. dugusnun
a honey-like.

dugwà = digwà.

dugwat = ligwat.

duha numeral two. v {1} see tulu. -y nawung = dubli kára. duruha n two.
tagurha two at a time. Tagurhay sulud áning mga kahúna, Each of these
boxes has two in it. igtagurha one’s second cousin. magtagurha be
second cousins. tinagurha by two’s. v [A] do by two’s. Magtinagurha
silag linya, They will line up in two’s. ika- n second. walay ikaduha
without equal. Bakákun nga walay ikaduha, A liar without peer. kalúha
see kalúha. kaluhaan, kaluwaan, kawhaan twenty.†

duhadúha a {1} doubtful, unlikely. Duhadúha nga muabut siya, It’s
unlikely that he will arrive. {2} suspicion. {3} hesitation. v [A; bc3]
{1} doubt. Nagduhadúha silang mabúhì siya, They doubt he will live.
{2} suspect. Mau nà siyay ákung giduhàduháan (giduhaduháan) nga
kawatan, That is the man I suspect of being a thief. {3} hesitate, not
do s.t. because of doubts. Ayaw na pagduhadúha. Palita dáyun, Do not
hesitate. Buy it immediately. maduhaduháun, maduhàduháun a full of
doubts, suspicions.

duhal a {1} somewhat mentally retarded. {2} not careful in doing
things. v {1} [B12] become mentally retarded. {2} [A13; b(1)] be
careless. Ug duhalan mug dala nang kwartáha, háyan mawálà, If you carry
that money around carelessly, you’re likely to lose it. duhalduhal
v [A; b(1)] treat s.o. without proper care or without respect.
Giduhalduhalan lang níya ang ákung súgù, She didn’t take my orders
seriously.

duháwit (coined from duha and áwit) n duet, in singing. v [A1C] sing a
duet.

dúhig v [A; c] apply liquid or viscous substances to a surface. Duhígig
lána ang agtang, Rub the forehead with coconut oil. {2} [A; a3] smear
one’s reputation. Nadúhig ku sa kaúlaw sa ímung gibúhat, I am
besmirched with shame for what you have done. (→) n {1} s.t. applied.
{2} applicator.

duhiras v [A3P] do, attend to many things with haste under pressure.
Magduhiras mig silbi kun daghang mangáun, We will be rushing about
serving when there are lots of customers in the restaurant.

duhiraw v {1} [A13] grope, walk uncertainly. Nagduhiraw siya sa dálan
tungud sa kangitngit, He groped his way because it was dark. {2} [B4]
be, become delirious. Magduhiraw siya kun hilantan, She becomes
delirious when she has a high fever. a having wandering thoughts. Ang
mga duhiraw wà makakat-un, The scatterbrain did not learn.

dúhul = túnul.

dū́k = dúluk.

dukà v [B146; a4b6] be drowsy and have one’s head nod. Nagdukà (gidukà)
aku sa sinihan, I felt drowsy in the movie. Gidukaan lang sa tuntu ang
ákung klási, The fool was drowsy in my class. n drowsiness. (←) n k.o.
click beetle, the head of which droops and clicks when its back is
held.†

dukandukan v [B16] totter, move with uncertain faltering steps. Ang
dukà mauy nakadukandukan (nakapadukandukan) sa ákung linaktan, I was so
sleepy I was tottering instead of walking.

dukduk_1 v {1} [A; ab2] pound s.t. repeatedly. Dukdúka ang áhus úsà
iságul, Pound the garlic before you put it in. Ayaw idukduk nang ímung
kúmù sa lamísa, Don’t pound your fist on the table. {2} [A; bc] for
males to masturbate (slang). n s.t. to pound with.

dukduk_2 n fowl cholera. v [a4] be affected with fowl cholera.

dúki n duke. v [B16; a2] become a duke.

dukìdukì, dukìdúkì v [AN; a12] {1} ransack s.t. in search of s.t.
Nanukìdukì ang makililímus sa mga basúra kun unsay makit-an, The beggar
ransacked the garbage can to see what he could find. {1a} investigate,
question in detail. Ang syinsiya nagdukìdukì sa makaingun sa kansir,
Science is searching for the cause of cancer. Gidukìdúkì siya sa pulis,
The police questioned him in detail. {2} tinker with. Ákung dukìdukíun
ning rilu básig muandar, I’ll tinker with this watch in hopes that I
can get it to run. {3} [A; b(1)] putter around, do small odds and ends,
unimportant things. Unsay íyang gidukìdukían sa kusína? What is she
puttering around within the kitchen? ma-un a inquisitive, inquiring
deeply. paN- n investigation, research.

dukiruk a {1} gate crasher, attending affairs uninvited, horning in on
getting things where one has no right to them. {2} playing around with
women. Dukiruk nà siya kaáyu. Hayan dì mangasáwa, He just plays around.
It’s unlikely he will get married. v [B12; b6] play around with women.
paN- v [A2; b6] attend uninvited, horn in on some distribution one has
no right to. Nanukiruk siya sa panghátag rilip, He horned in on the
distribution of relief clothing.

dukísa n duchess. v [B16; a2] become a duchess.

dukla, duklà v [A12; b6] come upon, catch s.o. unaware. Naduklahan sila
nga nagháluk, They were caught kissing.

duklap v [B146] be slow, lethargic. Nagduklap ang buta nga naglakaw,
The blind man walked slowly with hesitation. Nagduklap ang nigusyu run,
Business is slow these days.

duktrína n doctrine. — Kristiyána n rudiments of the Roman Catholic
religion.

duktur n {1} doctor, physician. {2} title of a physician. {3} — láway a
folk healer that treats by application of saliva. {4} — rural rural
doctor. v {1} [B16; a2P] be, become a doctor. Maduktur kag magtuun ka,
You will become a doctor if you study. Magduktur siya damag, He hopes
to be a doctor. Ang dakù níyang hílig sa pagpanambal muy nakaduktur
(nakapaduktur) níya, His great inclination to treat sick people made
him a doctor. Duktúrun (paduktúrun) ku ang ákung pangánay, I’ll have my
eldest child become a doctor. Mau nang uspitála ang íyang giduktúran,
That is the hospital where he works as a doctor. {2} [A; b] doctor
information. Dukturan nátù ang mga ansir arun makahandrid ka, We’ll
doctor the answers so you get a hundred. {3} [b4] be treated by a
physician. Gidukturan na siya piru wà maáyu, He was treated by a
physician but he didn’t get well. (→) = duktur, n 1, v. pa- v [A; b]
have a doctor treat s.t. Magpaduktur ku ning ákung ubu, I’m going to
the doctor for my cold. Padukturi siya kay nagkaluspad, Have a doctor
treat her because she is getting pale. Wà tay kwartang ipaduktur, We
have no money to get medical treatment. paka- v {1} [A13; a12] pretend
to be a doctor, treat like a doctor. {2} [A13] strive to become a
doctor.

duktúra = duktur (female).

dukù v {1} [A; c1P] bow the head, bend over. Mudukù lang siyag
kasab-an, He just bows his head if they cuss him out. Idukù (dukua,
ipadukù, padukua) ang ímung úlu arun makaagi ka, Bend over so you can
pass. {1a} [A23] — ug paalut submissive, allowing people to do whatever
they want to one without complaint. {2} [A] for plants to bend. Sanga
nga nagdukù tungud sa daghang búnga, A branch weighted down with fruit.
Nagdukù na ang humay, The rice is nearly ripe now (lit. the stems are
bent with grains). (←) v [A; b3] be bent over one’s work in extreme
concentration. Magdúkù tag tuun kay tís ugmà, Let’s engross ourselves
in our studies, because we have a test tomorrow. padukùdúkù v [A13]
pretend to be working seriously. Magpadukùdúkù siyag makinilya ug
bantayan, She pretends to be busy with her typing if s.o. watches her.

dukul v = dakul. n stone used in fashioning clay pots. The stone is
knocked on the inside at the same time as the outside is knocked with a
paddle.

dukumintu n written document in proof of s.t. Way dukumintu ang
pagpalit ku sa yútà, There was no document made when I bought the land.
— sa pálit n deed of sale. v [A; b(1)] prepare a document for s.t.
dukumintádu a documented.

dukung = dakul.

dukut v {1} [B2; b6] get stuck in or to s.t. Midukut (nadukut) ang trák
sa lápuk, The truck got mired in the mud. Ang tíkug húmuk duktan ug
pulug, Dye sticks readily to that kind of reed. {2} [A2] not move from
a place, stick to a job. Ngánung midukut ka ánang palahúbug? Bulagi,
Why do you stick to that drunkard? Break off from him. Pastilan
nakadukut níya sa íyang trabáhu! My, how he concentrated on his work!
{3} [B4; b6] for starchy foods to form a crust at the pot. Midukut na
ang nilung-ag, The rice has formed a crust. n crust of boiled starches
formed on the pot. (→) v {1} [B1456] stick to an intense degree.
Nagdúkut ang buling sa kwilyu, The dirt is sticking terribly to the
collar. {2} [C; ac] adhere to each other. Magdúkut ang pinyátu, The
pieces of peanut brittle stick to each other. {3} [AC; c1] be close to
one another. Nagdúkut silag lingkud, They sat close to one another.
{4} [B; b6] for fire to catch to s.t. Nagdúkut ang káyu sa atup, The
fire is spreading to the roof. Naduktan ang silíngang balay, The
neighboring houses caught fire. duktanan ug buling tending to get dirty
easily. Ang puting sinínà duktanan ug buling, White dresses get dirty
easily.

dula a for animals to be shy and not allow anyone to approach them.
Lisud dakpun ang sunuy nga dula kaáyu, It’s hard to catch a rooster
that is very shy. v [B1; b6] be shy. Nagkadula ang mga ungguy sukad
napusilan ug usa, The monkeys are becoming shier now that one of them
was shot.

dúlà v {1} [AC; abc] play, play a game. Ang bátà nagdúwà sa íyang tái,
The child is playing with its feces. Makigdúlà aku nímug tínis, I’ll
play a game of tennis with you. Duláun nátù ang Píi run, Let’s make our
P.E. class into a play session. Ása man duláa ang inyung baskit? Where
will you hold your basketball game? Ayawg dulái nang makinilya, Don’t
play with that machine. Dúgay nang wà sila nátù igdúlà, We haven’t
played against them in a long time. {2} [A; c1] stage a performance.
Makbit ang sunud nílang duwáun (idúwà), The next thing they will put on
is ‘Macbeth’. {3} [A] gambling, esp. in a table game. Túa siya sa
madyungan nagdúlà, She is in the mahjong den, gambling. {4} [C13; b6]
pull s.t. on s.o. Nagkadúlà giyud ang ílang pagkahambugiru, They tried
to impress each other with their tall stories. Giduláan níya si Nánay
sa íyang paráyig ug gitugtan, She pulled a fast one on Mama by playing
up to her, and Mama allowed her to go. n {1} game. {2} drama. Dúlà sa
kinabúhì, Drama of life. -an n {1} toy. {2} musical instrument. -ánan
n 1, 2 = -an. {3} playground. {4} gambling den. ka- {1} playmate.
{2} one whom one plays a game with.

dulámug = dalínug.

dúlang n {1} round wash basin dug out from a single piece of wood.
{2} depression in the ground which fills with water when it rains like
a dúlang. v {1} [A; a12] make into a dúlang. {2} [B1; b5] become, make
a depression which fills with water.

dular_1 = durar_2.

dular_2, dúlar = duliyar.

dulaw n turmeric, an herb resembling ginger, the rootstock of which is
used as a yellow-colored spice for stews: Curcuma longa.

*dúlaw gi- know s.t. about s.t. Wà kuy gidúlaw báhin sa makinilya, I
don’t know anything about typing. Way gidúlaw ang ginikánan nga
nakigtában ang ílang anak, The parents had no idea their children
eloped.

dul-ay v [A; c] spit up, for a baby to vomit up excess food taken in.
Ug iug-ug ang bátà, mudul-ay nyà, If you shake the baby, he will spit
up. Idul-ay níya ang kináun, She spits up what she had eaten.
n material spit up by a baby. -un(→) a tending to spit up.

duldug v [A; c1] squash and mash into fine pieces. Iduldug (duldúga)
ang patátas, Mash the potatoes. -in- n {1} dish of squash cooked in
coconut. {2} any food which was squashed or mashed. {3} sweet soup made
of any starchy food cooked in coconut milk.

duldul n kapok fiber or tree: Ceiba pentandra. The pods produce a
cotton-like fiber which is used as furniture stuffing. There is a
belief that insanity can be cured by shackling a person’s ankles to a
stock made of a kapok log. The person imprisoned with a kapok log may
sit or lie down, but cannot stand or move, and often may be kept that
way for years. Duldul na lay kúwang nímu, The only thing that can help
you is a kapok stock. (I.e., you’re crazy.)

dulhug v [A; acP] go, bring s.t. downwards. Sukad dinhi nagdulhug ang
dálan, From here on the road goes downhill. Duna kuy dulhúgun sa
syudad, I have s.t. to go down to get in the city. Idulhug (ipadulhug)
ang mga pruduktu sa mirkádu, Bring the crops down to the market.
Gidulhug (gipadulhug) níya ang íyang panan-aw gíkan sa úlu ngadtu sa
tiil, He let his gaze move over her from her head to her feet.

duling a cross-eyed. v [B126; b6] get to be cross-eyed.

dulipanus = dalipanus.

dul-it v [A; ac] touch the tip or end of s.t. to s.t. Dihay midul-it
(nagdul-it) ug báraw sa íyang likud, S.o. poked a dagger in his back.
Dul-ítun ta ning duha ka lamísa, Let’s join the two tables at their
ends.

duliyar n dollar.

dulsi n candy, sweets, fruit preserves. Dulsing nangkà, Jackfruit
preserves. v [A; a26] make sweets, fruit preserves. -ra n candy dish.

dul-u v [A13; c] deliver, take s.w. Idul-u ni ngadtu, Bring this there.

dulug v [A2C; ac] sleep together with s.o. Dulúga ang mga bátà, Have
the children sleep together. Dulgi siya karung gabíi, Sleep with her
tonight. Ayaw idulug ang inyung bátà, Don’t have your baby sleep in the
same bed with you. ka-(←) n bedmate.

dul-ug v [A; b6(1)] help s.o. lift a load to carry it on his head or
shoulders. Kinsay nagdul-ug nímu sa usa ka sákung bugas, Who helped you
lift the sack of rice to carry on your back?

dúluk v [AC12; b6] make a clearing and burn it off for agricultural
purposes. Nagdúluk ku sa baul nga tamnan sa mais, I made a clearing for
the field to plant corn.

dulum a {1} for a night to be dark and moonless. Dulum ang gabíi kay
patay ang búwan, The night is dark because there’s no moon. {2} for the
atmosphere to be gloomy, dark. Dulum ang kaugmáun sa táwung tapulan, A
lazy man has a gloomy future. {3} for the vision to be failing. {4} the
moon of the third quarter. Primírung dulum, The first day of the third
quarter. v [B; b4] {1} get dark, gloomy. Buklása ang hinayhay kay
nadulum na ang lángit, Bring the wash in because it has gotten
overcast. Nadulman mi sa dálan, Darkness overtook us on the way.
{2} for the eyesight to fail. {3} — ang pangísip, hunàhúnà get to be
blind with rage, sorrow. Nadulum (gidulman) ang íyang pangísip
pagkahibáwu níya, He became blinded with rage (sorrow) when he found
out.

dulun n choking because of inability to swallow, difficulty in
swallowing. Ang dulun makamatay sa bátà, A child can die if he eats
s.t. he cannot swallow. a difficult to swallow. Dulung kan-un ang
amúti, Sweet potatoes are hard to get down. v {1} [A123P; b4] get
choked from inability to swallow. {2} [B146] for the throat to get
choked up. Magdulun kug mutan-aw ku sa íyang litrátu, I get all choked
up if I look at her picture.

dúlun n locust. v {1} [a4] be attacked by locusts. {2} [A; b5] swarm
s.w. like locusts. Dulúnun (dulúnan) sa mga táwu ang maung salída,
People will flock to that particular show.

dulúnà (not without l) n boundary. Kinahanglang may dulúnà ang átung
pagkaamígu, There must be limits to our friendship. v [C; c3] for
pieces of land to be adjacent. Nagkadulúnà mig yútà, Our lands are
adjacent to each other.

dúlung n {1} front end of a vehicle. Ang dúlung sa kutsi, sakayan, The
front part of the car, boat. {2} s.t. analogous to the front end of a
vehicle, e.g. the anterior end of bamboo tie beams in a house. (→)
v [B14; b5] go near. Nagkadulung ang pista, The fiesta is approaching.
Ang búkid nga íyang gidulngan (gidulung), The mountain that he was
approaching. pa-, pa-(→) go to. Padulung ba ni sa Lahug? Does this go
to Lahug? v [A; c] go to. paN- n bow of a ship.

dul-ung v {1} [A; b6] go up to a place. Nagdul-ung ang barku sa
pantalan, The boat was about to dock. {2} [A; c] deliver, take s.t. to
a place. Harbur paylut muy mudul-ung sa barku sa pantalan, The harbor
pilot steers the boat to the dock. Idul-ung ning suwat sa íla, Bring
this letter to their house. hi-/ha- v [B1256] reach a place.
Paghidul-ung ku sa balay nagdilaab na, When I reached the house, it was
in flames.

dulurúsa = dulurúsu (female). mátir — the Virgin Mary after the death
of Christ. v [A1] have a devotion to the Mater Dolorosa. Magdulurúsa ku
ug magtúman ka sa ímung gustu, If you do as you like, I will take up a
devotion to the Mater Dolorosa (in hopes of saving you).†

dulurúsu a sad, sorrowful. mistiryu — the Sorrowful Mystery, one of the
Mysteries of the Rosary. v [B; b6] become sad.

dulut v [A2; b6] {1} cut or pierce deeply. Báraw nga midulut sa
kasingkásing, A knife that penetrated his heart. Gidutlan ang abága ug
bála, A bullet penetrated into the shoulder. {2} penetrate. Midulut ang
tugnaw sa íyang kaunuran, The cold penetrated his body. Ang Kinatsilà
dílì mudulut sa ákung úlu, Spanish won’t penetrate into my head.
{3} affect s.o.’s emotions. Kinsang kasingkásing dílì dutlan sa íyang
pakilúuy? Whose heart wouldn’t be moved by his pleas for pity?
{4} [A12] have the stomach to eat s.t. Dì ku makadulut ánang ngilngig,
I can’t manage that greasy stuff. n depth of penetration. Pilay dulut
sa lansang? How deep did the nail penetrate? lalum ug — {1} having
lasting effect. Lalum ug dulut kanang íyang tambag, His advice
penetrated deeply (had lasting effect). {2} have more to it than what
is visible on the surface. Lalum ug dulut nga mga púlung, Words which
have more to them than is at first apparent. — sa bukug deep-rooted,
penetrating the bones. Dulut sa bukug nga kayugut kang Krus, Anger at
Cruz felt to the depths of his bones. Dulut sa bukug nga Nasyunalista,
Dyed-in-the-wool Nationalist. Dulut sa bukug nga mananárì, A rabid
cockfighter. — sa kasingkásing coming from the heart.

dúlut v [A; c] {1} serve food to visitors. Taglakin-an ang magdúlut sa
bangkíti, The relatives of the bridegroom will serve the visitors at
the wedding banquet. {1a} make an offering of food in the diwáta
ceremony or on All Souls’ Day. {2} bring happiness or sadness.
Gidulútan níyag usa ka matam-is nga pahíyum ang ulitáwu, She gave the
young boy a sweet smile. Kagul-ánan lang ang idúlut mu sa ímung mga
ginikánan, You only give worries to your parents. n {1} food offered in
the diwáta ceremony. {2} food offered at a tomb during All Souls’ Day.
{3} food offered to visitors.

dulyum n k.o. tun shell of deep seas, edible and large in size.

dúm = dulum.

dúma = lagutmun. see lagutum.

dumágat n {1} water from the bag of waters. {2} material that is inside
a baby when it is born. v [A13; b6] for the bag of waters to break.
Nagdumágat (gidumagátan) na siya. Dì na madúgay magbúsug, Her bag of
waters has ruptured. She’ll go into labor shortly.

dumagsà see dagsà.

dumála see dala.

dumalága see dalága_1.

dumálig = dangílag.

dumaligyut see diyut.

dumánu n k.o. dwarf coconut.

dumar v [A2; a12] keep s.o. disciplined. Maáyung mudumar ang ákung bána
sa ámung mga anak, My husband keeps our children well under control.

dumay a worn-out, but not badly so. v [B126; b6] get worn. Gidumayan ka
man kahà ning sinináa, ákù na lang ni, If you consider this dress old,
how about giving it to me?

dumbay = lumbay (dialectal).

dumbul v {1} = bungdul. {2} [A2C; b6(1)] play billiards or pool
(slang).

dumdum v {1} [A; a12] go to a specific place for a purpose. Nagdumdum
ku sa maisan ug naunsa na, I went to the cornfield to see what became
of it. Átung tagúan ug dumdúmun nátù unyà, We’ll hide it and come back
for it later. {2} [A3] go to a usual place. Ang manuk mudumdum sa
batugánan, The chicken finds its way to the roost. Ang ákung labad sa
úlu mudumdum káda palis, My headache sets in every afternoon.
{2a} [A12; a12b2] know how to go s.w., locate s.t. Nakadumdum ka ba sa
ámù? Do you know your way to our house? Dumdúmun nátù ang utlánan,
Let’s locate the boundary. Dì nákù madumduman, I cannot locate it.
{2b} [A3; b(1)] show s.o. the way. Dumdúmi siya dinhi, Show him how to
get here. {3} [A12] remember to do s.t. Nakadumdum siyag hátag nákù, He
remembered to give me some. {4} [A12; a12] think s.t. would happen.
Nákug kumidiya tu. Wà ku magdumdum nga tinud-un níya, I thought he was
joking. I didn’t think he was really going to do it. hiN-/haN-
v [B1236; b(1)] remember. Hinumdumi ang ímung sáad, Remember your
promise. pahiN-/pahaN- v [A; c] remind. Pahinumdumi siya, Remind him.
n reminder. ma-un a not forgetting easily, not needing reminders.
paN-an n mind. Wà sa ákung panumdúman ang ímung gisulti kanákù, I did
not implant your words in my mind. -l-un(→) n {1} thanksgiving
celebration in the form of a nine-day prayer during the planting and
harvesting season. {2} any regularly observed religious celebration.
Dumdumun námù ang kamatáyun sa ákung inahan, We regularly observe the
anniversary of my mother’s death with religious services.

dumílì see dílì.

duminar v [A; a12] dominate, hold control over. Wà siya kaduminar sa
íyang anak, She was unable to exercise control over her son.

Duminggu n Sunday. Sa Duminggu na aku mubisíta nímu, I will visit you
on Sunday. — dirámus n Palm Sunday. — diglurya n Easter Sunday. v see
birnis.

duminu n {1} domino. {1a} game of dominoes. {2} domino costume for
masquerades. v {1} [A2C; b(1)] play dominoes. {1a} [A13; a12] make a
domino set. {1b} [A12] get a domino set. {2} wear a domino costume.

dumísing v [A; a] get s.t. dirty by bespattering or besmearing it.
Nakadumísing na kug pulbus sa ákung nawung, I smeared powder over my
face. ka- v get dirt all over it. Nagkadumísing ang bátà sa nilúgaw,
The child got porridge all over him.

dumistik sáyans n domestic science, home economics course.

dumpaug v [B146; b6] stumble as one walks, as from drunkenness. Daw
hubug nga nagdumpaug ang linaktan, He walked like a drunkard tottering.

dumpil n k.o. fish corral that is set permanently in the sea.

dumpu, dumpul = pungdul.

dúmug_1 v {1} [AC; a] wrestle to the ground. Nagkadúmug ang duha ka
kábaw, The two carabaos were engaged in combat trying to knock each
other over. Dumúgun ku siya. Mabuntug giyud siya nákù, I’ll wrestle
him. I can get him down. {2} [AC; c] perform coital activity
(humorous). {3} = dam-ag, 1, 2. pa- n k.o. net into which the fish are
driven such that they snag their gills.

dúmug_2 n dish made of ripe cooking bananas boiled in banana leaves
with sugar and shredded coconut. v [A; c1] make dúmug. -in- = dúmug, n.

dum-ug = dam-ag, 1, 2.

dúmul v [AC; c] put s.t. near the face or the face near s.t. Nagkadúmul
ang ílang duha ka ngábil, They brought their lips to each other. Ayaw
idúmul ang butilya sa bàbà, Don’t put the bottle to your mouth.

dumut v {1} [AC3; b3(1)] hate s.t. enough to do s.t. against it.
Nagdúmut ang duha ka pamilya, The two families are feuding. Ang táwu
nga ákung gikadumtan, The person I hate with a vengeance. {2} [A; b6]
have one’s mind set on doing or having s.t. Náay sapátus nga ákung
gidumtan. Karun na lang swildu, There’s a pair of shoes I want very
much. I’ll have it on payday. n hatred. (←) n hatred felt by people for
each other. madinumtánun, madulumtun a full of vengeful hatred.

dumyang = damyang.

dun_1 title before Christian names, used to address or refer to rich
gentlemen, esp. those of Spanish blood. n rich landowner. Mga dun nga
walay kalúuy sa saup, Rich landowners that have no pity for their
tenants. v [A; a12] call s.o. ‘don’.

dun_2 = karun.

dún = dúlun.

dúna = adúna.

dun-ag_1 = lung-ag.

dun-ag_2 = bun-ag.

dunar_1 v [A; b6(1)] donate. Midunar ug lunà si Dun Ansilmu pára sa
simbahan, Don Anselmo donated a lot for the church.

dunar_2 v [A23] exist, remain for some time or forever. Ang táwu dì
mudunar sa kalibútan, Man will not exist on earth forever.

dunasiyun n donation.

dúnat n doughnut. v [A; a2b6] have, make doughnuts.

dunat intir n a one-way street.

*dundi used only in the phrase: Nupuydi katabuk dundi gabahà, Can’t
have intercourse because the wife is menstruating. (Lit. You can’t
cross because the river is flooding.)

dundun_1 a for a surface to offer a braking effect to s.o. trying to
walk over it. Dundun kaáyung laktan sa baybáyun, It is very difficult
to walk on sand.

dundun_2 = dagundun_2.

dundúnay = alisiwsiw.

dung see dúdung.

dúng = dúlung.

dúngag = dúgang.

dung-ag = lung-ag.

dungálig = dangílag.

dúngan a done or happening at the same time. Dúngan kaáyu ang pag-alsa
sa ílang mga tiil, They lifted their feet very well in unison. Dalugdug
dúngan sa pagkílat, Thunder together with lightning. v [A2C; c1] do
s.t. together or at the same time. Mudúngan ku nímug káun, I’ll eat
(together) with you. Magdúngan ang salída sa Risal ug Madyistik, The
show will be played simultaneously at the Rizal and Majestic theaters.
Ayaw dúngána pagdala dinhi, Don’t bring them both at the same time. (→)
n {1} person about the same age as one (mostly used in expressions of
anger). Naghagsà ka lang nákù. Dì ku nímu dungan, You used my name
without a title. You’re not my age, you know. {2} — sa together at the
same time. Dungan ka nákù sa pagkáun, ha, Eat together with me. ka-
n one who was together with s.o. at a certain time. Kadúngan mi
paggraduwar, We graduated at the same time. tali- see talirúngan.

dungandúngan n temples.

dungas = duas.

dúngaw v {1} [A2SP; ab2b3] direct one’s sight downwards. Dungáwa
intáwun ning nag-umbangul sa kasákit, Look out of the window at the
wretch moaning and suffering. {2} [A; a2] scan reading matter to find
s.t. Gidúngaw nákù ang lista. Wà didtu ang íyang ngálan, I checked the
list, and his name wasn’t there. {3} = dung-aw. {3a} v [b(1)] be much
shorter than s.o. (lit. be looked down on). Dungawan na ku sa ákung
anak, My son towers over me.

dung-aw v [A; b6] {1} be taller or higher up than s.t. else. Pangpang
nga nagdung-aw sa subà, A cliff that towers over the river. {2} looking
down on from an elevation.

dungáwug v [C3] be of the same age. Magdungáwug mi kay dúngan mi
pag-iskuyla, We are of the same age since we went to school together.
ka- n s.o. of the same age with another.

dungdung_1 n head covering of cloth or any flexible material. v [A;
b6(1)] cover the head with s.t. flexible. Dungdúngi ang bátà arun dílì
mainitan, Cover the child’s head with a piece of cloth to protect it
from the sun.

dungdung_2 a for the sky to be overcast and gloomy. Ayaw ihayhay ang
linabhan ug mudungdung (madungdung), Don’t hang the laundry out if the
sky gets overcast.

dunggab v [A; a1] stab. Dunggábun ku ang huld-ápir, I will stab the
hold-up man. n {1} action of stabbing. {2} = dágir, 2. -in-an(→) n stab
wound.

dunggan see dungug.

dunggù v {1} [A2; ac] for a boat to come to shore, wharf. Unsay inyung
dunggúun didtu? What are you pulling in to shore for? Didtu níla
idunggù ang barku sa Úpun, They docked the ship in Opon. {2} [A2] — ang
bisíta for menstruation to set in (slang). dunggùdunggù v [B1] go here
and there in search of s.t. Nagkadunggùdunggù kug panghulam, I went all
over the place looking for money to borrow. -an(→) v [A13] for a boat
to go to some port habitually. -ánan n place a boat docks.

dunggut n cutting tool having a short, curved blade, the outer edge of
which is sharp. It is attached to a pole and used to clear dried leaves
off of banana and abaca plants. v [A; a] cut away the dried leaves of
abaca and banana trees.

dunghay v [A; a2] {1} for hair to be hanging down over s.t. Nagdunghay
ang lambúngay sa kabáyù, The horse’s mane hung down over his back.
{2} for sweat to flow down like hair. Nawung nga gidungháyan sa singut,
A face streaming with sweat.

dungilù v [B46; c16] hang limp from its base. Nagdungilù na lang ang
íya human sa ikatulung ráwun, His penis is all drooping after the third
time.

dungkà_1 v [A; b6(1)] light a lamp, cigarette and the like by putting
fire to it. Dungkái na ang parul, Light the lantern.

dungkà_2 v [A; b8] arrive at a door, dock. Nagdungkà na sa pantalan ang
barku, The ship was moving into port. Mauy hingdungkaan ku sa pulta ang
makalilísang talan-áwun, I came upon a gruesome sight at the door.

dungkul a person who doesn’t give a tip (slang).

dungluy v {1} [B46; c1] droop. Midungluy ang mga dáhun sa mga mais
tungud sa ínit, The leaves of the corn plants are drooping from the
heat. Karsúnis nga nagdungluy sa hayhayan, The trousers that are
hanging on the line. Kun dunglúyun (idungluy) mu ang ímung úlu mu ra
kag subù tan-áwun, When you let your head droop you will look sad.
{2} [a4] for fowls to have the disease called dungluy. n sickness of
fowl characterized by a drooping head and a hunched up body. (→)
a drooping.

dungpul = pungdul.

dungsul n k.o. sea cucumber with a hard outer edge, the waste of which
(lukut) is eaten and which emits a purple-colored liquid when touched.
It is used in a k.o. sorcery which makes persons bleed. nawung ug —
very ugly.

dungù v {1} [A; c1P] bow the head. Namátì siya sa kasábà pinadungù ang
úlu, He listened to the scolding with his head bowed. {2} [A] for
plants to bend. Nagdungù ang mga humay human sa hángin, The rice plants
were bent over after the wind storm.

dungug v {1} [A12; a3b2] hear. Nakadungug ka sa kasábà? Did you hear
the noise? Wà nákù madungug ang íyang tawag, I didn’t hear him calling.
Ayawg sábà. Hidunggan ta unyà, Don’t make any noise. S.o. will hear us.
Hidunggan nákù ang ílang hunghung, I overheard what they were
whispering about. {2} [A23; a12] listen. Dungga ra gud ku úsà, Hear me
out. {2a} heed one’s requests. Gidungug ang ákung pangalyúpù, He heard
my prayers. {2b} dì na mudungug ug tawgun be distantly related (won’t
heed if you call on them). Paryinti mi apan dì na mudungug ug tawgun,
We’re related, but very distantly. a audible. Dungug kaáyu ang inyung
tábì diri, I can hear your chattering here. n {1} action of having
heard s.t. Sa ákung dungug, dus sintus lang tu, The way I heard it, it
was only two hundred. {2} reputation, honor. Dungug sa pamilya, The
honor of the family. Panalípud sa ímung dungug, Defend your honor. (←)
v {1} [a12] be bruited about, widely known. Gidúngug siyang pinaangkan,
It is widely known that she has had a child out of wedlock. {2} [C3]
hear one another. Magkadúngug pa mi ánang distansiyáha, We can still
hear one another over that distance. {3} [c4] hear from. Dúgay na
siyang walà igdúngug, He hasn’t been heard from for a long time.
{4} ig-, dungga, walà — [such-and-such] a case has never been. Wà
igdúngug (dungga) nga may mamumúnù sa ílang pamilya, There has never
been a murderer in their family. dinunggánay v [C] for siblings or
close kin not to communicate directly but rather to hear from each
other through letters or from other people either because of distance
or because of bad personal relations. Nakigdinunggánay mi sa ámung
igsúung bintahúsu, We broke off relations with our brother who took
advantage of us. padungugdúngug v [A; a12] say s.t. in s.o.’s earshot
to embarrass him or give him a hint. Nagpadungugdúngug siyag
pinaskúhan, He talked about Christmas presents where I could hear him.
Gipadungugdúngug ku níya nga kawatan ku, He let me overhear him calling
me a thief. paka- v {1} [A13] hear many things. {2} [A12] cause s.o. to
hear. Duktur nga nakapakadungug ug bungul, A doctor that enabled a deaf
person to hear. pasi- v [A; b6] honor s.o. for an accomplishment.
Gipasidunggan ang mananáug, The winner was given a victory celebration.
n honor bestowed on one for his accomplishment. pinasidunggan
n honoree. panunggan v [A23] heed advice, instructions, and the like.
Gáhì ug úlu. Dílì manunggan ug tambag, He’s stubborn. He won’t listen
to advice. dunggan, dalunggan n {1} ears. {2} ear-like projections on
the end of sacks formed when the mouth of the sack is tied up. {3} ígù
rang nakagunit sa — just barely made the grade. dalunggandalunggan,
dalunggan sa amù = layat. dinalunggan n {1} shaped like the ear.
{2} k.o. ear-shaped cookie. dunggánan a famed, widely honored. ig-l-(←)
n s.t. to hear with. kadunggánan n honor. madunggánun a honorable.
pang-, pan- n sense of hearing.†

dúnguk v [A; b(1)] do, devote one’s entire attention to s.t., do s.t.
intently. Nagdúnguk siyag tuun kay iksámin na, She studied intently
because it was exams time. Gidungúkan níyag usa ka adlaw ang
pagpanglaba, She devoted an entire day to washing clothes.

dúnguy = dungluy.

dunluk_1 n k.o. acute chicken cholera. v [A123P; a4] be afflicted with
chicken cholera.

dunluk_2 n heavy, continuous rain. v [A; b(1)] for there to be a heavy,
continuous rain. Kadunlukun run kay ngitngit man, It looks like we’re
going to get a heavy rain because it is so dark.

dunsal v [A; ac] thrust the end or tip of s.t. at s.t. or strike with
it. Lubut sa awtu ang midunsal sa pusti, It was the hind end of the car
that struck the post.

dunsilya a {1} virgin. Sa taga Sibu pisù ray dunsilya, The only virgins
in Cebu are baby chicks. {2} too small in opening (like the vagina of a
virgin). Dunsilyag líab ning sinináa, The neck opening in this shirt is
much too small. v {1} [B1256] turn out to be a virgin. {2} [A12; a3]
get oneself a virgin for intercourse. {3} [b6] consider an opening
small. {4} [A12] break in a virgin. Aku ang nakadunsilya ánang bayhána,
I broke in that woman.

dunsul = dungsul.

dúnul = túnul.

dúnut v {1} [AB12; a2] wear s.t. out, become worn out. Dì ka makadúnut
áning sinináa sa usa ka túig kay lig-un, You can’t wear this dress out
in one year because it’s strong. Nadunútan kug upat ka pár nga sapátus
sa usa ka túig, I’ve had four pairs of shoes wear out on me in one
year. {2} [B12; b6] spoil, rot slightly. Nagkadunut na ang mangga, The
mangoes are going bad. (→) a {1} worn-out. {2} somewhat rotten,
spoiled. {3} lousy in situation. Dunut ang ákung kapaláran, I have a
lousy fate in life. {4} for manners or personality to be evil, wicked.
Dunut nga kinaíya, Bad in character. {5} — nga baráha {5a} lousy cards.
{5b} unbelievable excuse. Ayaw ku patuhúa ánang ímung dunut nga baráha,
Don’t try to make me believe your improbable excuses.

dunya {1} title before Christian names for rich ladies, esp. those of
Spanish blood. {2} names given to varieties of the ornamental plant,
buyun. — awrúra white flower. — imilda pink flower. — lílang pink and
white flower. — lus dark pink flower. — tríning red flower.

dunyang = damyang.

dupa v {1} [A; c16] extend the arms out sideways. Si Hisus nagdupa sa
krus, Jesus is nailed to the cross with his arms extended sideways.
{2} [A; b6] bar the way with outstretched arms. Ngánung ímu mang
giduphan ang pultahan? Why are you barring the way with your arms
outstretched? {2a} [A12; b8] prevent an occurrence. Dì maduphan ang
pálit sa iliksiyun, You can’t stop vote-buying in the election. {3} [A;
b] take over all of s.t. Giduphan sa mga insik ang pamaligyag asúkar,
The Chinese have taken control over the sugar market. {3a} [A12; b8]
take s.o.’s problems over for him. Maduphan ra nákù ang ímung
galastúhan, I can take care of your expenses for you. {4} [A1; a]
measure s.t. by fathoms. Dupha ang písì, See how many fathoms the rope
is. {4a} [A; c] pay, take out [so-and-so] many fathoms. Duphi kini ug
upat, Take out four fathoms from the rope. pa- v [A; a12] punish s.o.
by making him extend his arms. Paduphun nátù ang pilyu, We’ll make the
naughty boy stand with his arms stretched out. n fathom, the length
from the finger tips of one hand to the finger tips of the other,
measured with the arms outstretched.

dup-ádik a dope addict. v [B126] be, become a drug addict.

dupang n hives, itchy swellings caused by allergy. v [A123P; a4] get
hives.

duplikádu n duplicate, replica.

duplikit n duplicate key.

dupung n k.o. short-bodied and very venomous snake.

duput a working assiduously, with constant and careful attention.
v [A2; b(1)] work diligently with attention. Ug makaduput siya sa íyang
pagtahì, hikalimtan ang káun, When he is concentrated on his tailoring,
he forgets to eat.

durabli a durable. v [B2; c1] be, make durable. Durablíha paghímu ang
baskit, Make the basket durable.

durádu n k.o. fish.

duranti a {1} durable, long-lasting. Ang maung mas duranti kay sa sída,
Denim is more durable than silk. — sa during the time that. Duranti sa
gúbat didtu ra mi sa bukiran, We stayed in the mountains for the
duration of the war.

durar_1 v [A2; b4] last, remain for some time. Mudurar pa ning sapatúsa
ug duha ka búlan, These shoes will last for two more months. Ang gíra
dì na makadurar ug dúgay, The war cannot last much longer. Gidurahan
sila sa ílang mga binatunan, Their maids stayed with them for some
time.

durar_2 v [A; a] plated with metal. durádu a plated. Durádug pláta,
Silver plated.

duraw = duldul.

durbil n doorbell.

durmilúna n style of round earrings, single or bunched, that doesn’t
hang but hugs the lobe of the ear.

durmituryána n a girl that stays in a dormitory or lodging house for
women.

durmituryu n dormitory or rooming house for students. v [A; a] make,
put up a dormitory.

*dúru_1 — nga [root referring to an action] do very hard. Dúru níya
(siya)ng káug mangga, My! How he ate the mangoes. Dúru níya (siya)ng
kawut! My! How he scratched. v [A23; a12] do [verb] all the more.
Midúru hinúun siyag katáwa human buyaga, He laughed all the more when
he was admonished. Durúha ang ímung tíngug kay dì mabátì, Speak louder.
I can’t hear you.

dúru_2 = duldul.

dúrug v {1} [B12] break up, crumble into small pieces. Lamì ang ginamus
kung madúrug na, Salted fish that has fermented and broken up into fine
pieces tastes good. Nagkadurug na ang láwas sa patay, The corpse has
started to decompose. {2} = duldug. -in- = dinuldug. see duldug.

duruha see duha.

duruk_1 v [A; b2c1] immerse, soak s.t. in a liquid. Duruka (iduruk) na
ang linílas nga buli sa tinà, Immerse the buri strips into the dye now.

duruk_2 n variety of pig that yields lean meat.

dúrul = duldul.

duryan n durian. It is not grown except in Southern Mindanao and Jolo
and not widely known.

dus number two. — pur — n two by two board. see tris for verb forms.

dusáus, dusáhus, dusáwus v [A23; b6] for a baby to have its head crown
in childbirth. Mityábaw ang babáying gidusawúsan, The woman screamed
with pain as the baby started coming out.

dusdus v {1} [A; ab2] strike repeatedly with s.t. using a forward
thrusting motion, usually said of a knife or s.t. small. Nagdusdus ang
kusiníra sa dukut sa kaldíru, The cook is scraping off the rice crust
in the pot. Dusdusa ang tayà sa plantsa, Scrape off the rust on the
iron. {2} [A3; ac] shove, push s.t. close towards or against s.t.
Dusdúsa ang duha ka katri, Push the two beds together. Idusdus ang sulù
sa balay sa putyúkan, Shove the torch against the beehive. {2a} [A2]
push one’s way. Midusdus ang mga táwu pag-abut ni Imilda, The people
pushed their way forward when Imelda arrived. {3} [A3; c] hand thrust
s.t. at s.o. to force him to take it. Midusdus siyag singku písus, apan
wà nákù dawáta, He tried to force the five pesos on me but I didn’t
take them. n {1} blunt-ended instrument for removing weeds with a
thrusting motion. {2} action of thrusting in small strokes.

dúsi number or numeral twelve. Dúsi písus, Twelve pesos. Dúsi ka
apustulis, Twelve apostles. — páris {1} the Douzepers of Charlemagne.
{2} elite organization of self-defense named after the Douzepers. v see
tris.

dusib v [A; b6(1)] put a live ember or s.t. aflame to s.t. to set it
afire or singe it. Naugdaw ang balay nga íyang gidusiban, The house
that he set ablaze was burnt to the ground. Íyang gidusiban ang pínung
balhíbu sa manuk, He singed the fine feathers off of the slaughtered
chicken.

dusil v [A; c] set s.t. burning to s.t. Dusilan ku nang bàbà mu ug
mamalíkas ka, I’ll put a firebrand to your mouth if you cuss.

dusína n dozen. Duha ka dusínang itlug, Two dozen eggs. v {1} [B26; b6]
be a dozen. {2} [c16] buy s.t. by the dozen.

*dusíngut see singut.

dusipil n {1} the devil, Lucifer. {2} s.o. wicked or malicious like
Lucifer.

duslak v [A; ab2] {1} stab s.t. light and long at s.t. Duslaka nang irù
arun mupaháwà, Poke the dog so he’ll move. {2} for a feeling to stab
one. Udiyung sa kamíngaw ang miduslak sa íyang dughan, The arrow of
loneliness stabbed his breast. n a thrust with s.t. long.

duslib = duslit, 1.

duslit v [A; b] {1} set s.t. ablaze. Duslíti ang mga sagbut nga ákung
gitápuk, Set the trash I piled up on fire. Duslíti ang ribintadur, Set
off the firecrackers. {2} light s.t. Muduslit ku áring ákung sigarilyu,
I’ll light my cigarette. {3} = dusil.

duslug a glutton, esp. one who never misses a fiesta. Duslug kaáyu nang
tawhána kay hái gánì tung kumbira, túa, That man is a glutton because
wherever there is a feast, he is sure to be there.

dusmù v {1} [B1256] fall flat on one’s face. Nadusmù siya sa simintu,
He fell flat on his face on the cement. {2} [B1256; c6] crash or ram
head-on against. Nadusmù ang dyip sa pusti, The jeep rammed into a
post.

dusmug v [A; ab2c] bump, crash into, usually in a horizontal direction.
Gidusmug siya sa kanding, The goat butted him. Ayaw idusmug nang dyip
sa pusti, Don’t ram that jeep into a post.

dusù v [A; c2] {1} push. Idusù (dus-i) ang paradur sa wala, Push the
cabinet to the left. {1a} stab. Dus-an tika run áning ayispik, I’ll
stab you with this ice-pick. {2} endorse, pass papers forward to a
superior for approval. Wà pa idusù ang ákung apuwintmin ngadtu sa
supirbaysur, My appointment hasn’t been endorsed to the supervisor yet.
{3} hand over s.t. in payment of a large debt. Kini lang bábuy ákung
idusù pára sa ákung útang, I will turn over this pig in payment of my
debt. {4} haul in a truck. Mudusù ka rug balas? Are you going to haul
sand now? n action of pushing, endorsing, paying, or hauling. Pila ka
dusù nga balas ang ímung gipahatud? How many trucks full of sand did
you have delivered?

dusud = dusù (dialectal).

dus-ug v [A; c] shove s.t. heavy over. Idus-ug níya ang makina tapad sa
lamísa, She’ll shove the sewing machine next to the table. Ayaw ku
idus-ug kay wà nay lugar diri, Do not push me. There is no more room
here.

dusul v [A; b6] bulge, stick out with a bulge underneath. Midusul na sa
lagus ang ngípun sa bátà, The teeth in the child’s gums are about to
push through. Nagdusul ang ribulbir sa iláwum sa ímung sinínà, Your
revolver is bulging under your shirt. Yútà nga gidusulan sa kamúti,
Soil bulging with sweet potatoes.

dút = dulut, dúlut.

dútà = yútà (dialectal).

dutdut v {1} [A; a12] move close in through obstacles. Mudutdut ta
ngadtu sa intabládu, Let’s push our way forward near the stage.
{1a} for troops to close in. Gidutdut mi sa mga Hapun, The Japs were
closing in on us. {2} [A2C; ac] crowd close to s.o.; put, be crowded
together. Lisud basáhun kay nagdutdut ang mga litra, It is difficult to
read because the letters are crowded together. Ayawg dutdúta ang táwung
masukù, Don’t go too close to a person who is angry. Ayaw dutdúta
pagbutang ang lingkuránan, Don’t put the chairs too close. {3} [A3; c]
stuff s.t. into an opening. Dutdútig nuug ang lungag sa tangki, Stuff a
rag into the hole in the tank. {4} [A] deseed cotton by running it
through a small wringer through which the fiber, but not the seeds, can
pass. a crowded close, close together. Kinabúhing dutdut sa Diyus, A
life close to God. -an(→) n wringer for deseeding cotton.

dutù n porcupine fish: Diodon spp.

dut-uy v [A; c] press s.t. to s.t. else to leave a mark. Nakadut-uy ka
na sa mga papílis? Have you thumbmarked the documents? Ayawg idut-uy
ang ímung kamut sa basà nga simintu, Don’t leave a hand mark in the wet
concrete.

dúug = dul-ug.

duugduug v [B6] feel giddy, usually from a hang-over or nausea.
Nagduugduug ang íyang ū́ kay naigù gabíi, He feels light-headed because
he was very drunk last night. n feeling of light-headedness.

duuk, dúuk v [A; c] dunk, press s.t. under the water. Planggánang ákung
giduukan sa mga bulingun, The basin in which I squashed the dirty
clothes. Idúuk ku nang úlu mu sa baril, I’ll dunk your head in that
barrel.

dúul_1 v {1} [A; ac] go, put where s.t. is. Ayaw siya duúla ug masukù,
Don’t go to him if he is angry. Idúul diri nang asin bi, Please pass me
the salt (put the salt here). {1a} [A; b6] approach, come near. Ang
isdà dílì madúul run, You can’t get near (pay the price of) fish these
days. Langgam nga giduúlan sa iring, A bird that the cat was coming
near to. {1b} [C; ac] be, put close together. Nagdúul ang ílang
lingkuránan, Their chairs are close together. {1c} [C; c1] be close in
personal relationships. Ang maáyung manidyir makigdúul sa íyang mga
sákup, A good manager is close to his staff. {2} [A; ac5] approach s.o.
with a request. Lisud kaáyu siyang duúlun. Maíkug lang ta, He is a
difficult person to approach. I’m ashamed to go ask him. Ang ákung
idúul níya? Manghangyù lang ku sa uban, I would never approach her to
ask for it. I will just ask s.o. else. {3} [A; a12] have sexual
intercourse (most frequently used euphemism). Ang bána dílì paduúlun sa
asáwa basta riglahun, A husband is not allowed to have relations with
his wife when she menstruates. {4} [A23; b6] for a child to let himself
be approached by s.o. Mudúul nyà siya nímu ug maánad na, He will let
you pick him up once he gets used to you. (→) a {1} near. Duul na lang
ang Pasku, Christmas is near now. Duul ra dinhi ang karsáda, The road
is near here. Duul pang parinti ang igtagsa, Your first cousin is still
a close relative. {2} be almost [so-and-so] much. Duul na alas dúsi
siya maulì, It was nearly twelve when she got home. {3} — sa kusína,
luwag close to s.o. in power. Dì musayup ang aplikisyun kay duul ku sa
luwag, The application won’t fail because I’m close to s.o. in power.
v {1} [B12; c] be, become near. Ug maduul na ang bakasyun, When
vacation time is near. Nagkaduul ang bagyu, The storm is drawing nearer
and nearer. Iduul nà pagbutang sa kaláyu, Put that near the fire.
{2} [B2; b(1)] be nearly [so-and-so] much. Dul-an (muduul) na sa usa ka
gatus ang ganansiya, The profit is nearly a hundred. pa- v [A; a] allow
s.o. or s.t. to approach one. pa-(→) v [A; c] go, put near s.t. Laksut
siyag padul-an, She is ugly if you get close. Ipaduul ang sugà nákù,
Put the lamp near me. -g- near each other. ha- very near. kinadul-an
closest.

dúul_2 n {1} the air (‘breathing’) roots of the pagatpat tree.
{2} cork, so called because it is similar in substance to the air roots
of the pagatpat. v [c1] stop up with a cork.

duum v [A; c] {1} put s.t. in the mouth and eat it hastily. Giduum sa
bátà ang tanang kindi arun dì makapanghátag, The child tossed all the
candy in her mouth so she would not have to share it. {2} eat s.t.
which usually accompanies s.t. else to eat or drink all alone. Nagduum
lang mi sa kísu kay way pán, We ate the cheese alone because we didn’t
have any bread. Ayaw iduum nang pulbus litsi. Kutáwa, Don’t eat the
powdered milk just like that. Mix it with water. {3} bribe. Íla lang
dum-an ang mga dagkung mamsà sa ílang kásu, They just bribed the
influential persons in their case.

duun v [A; c6] press, bear down heavily. Kinsay nagduun pagsulat sa
pawntinpin? Nadáut hinúun, Who wrote bearing down on this fountain pen?
Now it’s broken. Iduun giyud ang kumagkù arun kláru ang támà, Press the
thumb hard enough to get a clear fingerprint.

dúung {1} = dunggù. {2} = dul-ung. duungduung = dunggùdunggù. see
dunggù. -um-r- n a transient s.w.

duut v [A; c] {1} put, push on to s.t. Iduut ang ímung dunggan sa
bungbung, Put your ears to the wall. Ímu kung giduut sa bungbung, You
pushed me against the wall! {2} press down on s.t. Iduut ang lápis
pagsuwat, Bear down on the pencil when you write. Iduut ang timbri,
Press the bell. {3} press s.o. to do s.t. Ug dì siya nímu iduut, ása
man nà siya mubáyad? If you don’t press him, do you think he’ll pay?
{4} [A] for fish to be in large schools, birds or insects to be in huge
swarms. Nagduut ang mga dúlun, The locusts are in swarms. Nagduut ang
mga táwu nga misúgat sa Santu Pápa, The people came in huge swarms to
meet the Pope. n swarm of birds, insects, throng of people, school of
fish. (←) v [A13] swarm in huge numbers.

duwa- see also dula-.

duwahug = bulahug.

duwáhut v [A; c] fasten s.t. with a pin or s.t. similar. Duwahútig
tukug ang papil nga giputus, Fasten the wrapping paper with a twig.

dúwal v {1} [A; a] drive with both the front and rear wheels. Duwála
arun makakáwas ang trák, Put it into dual drive so the truck can get
out. {2} [A; c1] push or pull a vehicle over an obstacle or elevation.
Dílì makadaug nga mudúwal ang karabaw sa karumáta kay bug-at ang karga,
The carabao can’t pull the cart over the elevation because it has a
heavy load. n having front and rear-wheel drive.

duwílu n duel. v [C; b3c] have a duel.

dúwit n duet. v [A2C; c1] sing or play a duet.

duy short for uduy or unduy.

dúy v [A13; a4] for s.t. to happen at a very inopportune time. Magdúy
sag pangáyù ning anak kug wà kuy kwarta, My child asks money from me
when I am broke. Dúyun man sag dimálas ning átung tindáhan inay pang
gamay ra tag puhúnan, My! Our store is beset with bad luck at the very
time that we have very little capital.

duyà v [B46] be nauseated. Muduyà ang ákung ginhawaan ug makakaun kug
ngilngig, I feel nauseated when I eat greasy foods.

dúyan n hammock. Ayaw kug ihása. Úna ku nímu sa dúyan, Don’t try to
fool me. I was not born yesterday. (I was in the cradle before you.) —
sa dughan bra (colloquial). v {1a} [AB16; a] rock s.o., oneself in a
hammock. Nagdúyan siya sa bátà, She rocked the baby in the hammock.
Nagdúyan ug kusug ang bátà, The child rocked back and forth hard.
Duyána siya, Rock him. {b} [A; c] put in a hammock. {2} [A; a] swing
back and forth. Mudúyan sa hángin ang mga búlak, The flowers wave back
and forth in the breeze. {2a} [A; a] for an emotion to sway one.
Duyánun dáyun siya sa dì matúkib nga pagbátì, He will be swayed by an
incomprehensible feeling. {3} [A; a] make a hammock.

duyas v {1} [B2] slip, lose one’s footing. Miduyas (naduyas) ang ákung
tiil mau nga nabulásut ku, I lost my footing. That’s why I stepped into
a hole. {2} [B6; b6] for s.t. to slip loose from the place it was put
over or across. Ilansang nang tabla kay nagduyas na sa nahimutangan,
Nail that board because it has slipped down from the place where it was
put. {3} [B26; a] glance off and strike s.t. else. Miduyas (naduyas)
ang sundang pagtigbas ku sa káhuy, The bolo glanced off the wood as I
was cutting down the tree. {4} [B26] for words one didn’t really mean
to say to slip out of the mouth. Naduyas ku pagsulti. Sikrítu man untà
tu, I let it out inadvertently. It was supposed to be a secret.

duyduy = duldul.

duydúy v {1} [A13; b6] go from place to place to look for s.o. or s.t.
very much needed. Nagduydúy kug pangítà ug kwarta, I went from place to
place to look for money. {2} [A1; b6] roam around aimlessly. Nagduydúy
lang ku nganhi, I’m just roaming around here aimlessly.

dúyug n musical accompaniment. v {1} [AC; b] accompany s.o. with a
musical instrument. Duyúgi ku kay mukanta ku, Accompany me. I’m going
to sing now. {1a} accompany, as if music. Nagdúyug ang hagurus sa
hángin ug ang ulan, The rain and howling wind accompanied each other.
{2} share, sympathize with s.o.’s feelings, for two feelings to be in
harmony. Nagkadúyug ang duha ka kwanggul, The two fools hit it off. Ang
kasubù nga giduyúgan sa tanang katilingban, Sorrow which the whole
community participated in. Pag-antus dinuyúgan sa hinulsul, Suffering
accompanied by repentance. {2a} participate in an action and thus share
the same feeling. Mudúyug ku sa pag-ampù, I will join in the prayers.
Mudúyug ku sa ímung trabáhu, I will share your suffering and work with
you. {3} [A; a] tune an instrument. Duyúga ang sista, Tune the guitar.

duyum, dúyum (from dulum) n evening, night (dialectal). v [B125; b5]
be, become evening or night.

dúyung = dúgung.

dwindi = diwindi.

dwítu = dúwit.

dy- for words with dy- see also y-.

dya- dyasingku n five-peso bill. dyabayinti n twenty-peso bill.

dyà = unyà (dialectal).

dyáb v [A; b6(1)] jab, punch in boxing. n jab.

dyába n variety of cassava.

dyablis n jobless, unemployed.

dyáds n judge in court, of a contest. v [A] be a judge.

dyadyis = dyads (plural).

dyag v [A; b6] jog, run at a jog.

dyag-aw v [A3; a12] to talk loud in a bad mood. Nabuak ang básu maung
midyag-aw si Máma, The glass broke, and that’s why Mama is ranting.
Nagdyag-aw siya kay nawā̀ ang singsing, He is ranting and raving
because he lost his ring. -an(→) a having a tendency to talk loud in a
bad mood.

dyáging = dyag.

dyak n {1} jack, knave in playing cards. {2} jack to raise s.t. v [A;
b] {1} raise s.t. with a jack. Dyáki (dyaki) ang kutsi, Lift the car
with a jack. {2} strike with an upward thrust of the knee. Gidyákan
siya sa suwang, He was kicked with the knee in the jaw. {3} [A12] draw
a jack.

dyáki n briefs. v [A; a] wear briefs.

dyakimpuy, dyakinpuy = pík.

dyákit n {1} jacket. {2} jacket of a book. v [A; a] wear, make into a
jacket.

dyakpat n jackpot, huge prize. a being financially very rewarding for
the effort put into it. Dyakpat kaáyu nang trabahúa nímu, You got
yourself a soft job with a huge salary. v {1} [A12; b8] hit the
jackpot, strike it lucky. Nakadyakpat didtug barátu kaáyung radiyu, I
hit the jackpot by getting a very cheap radio. {2} [A2N; ab2] make a
good marriage. Midyakpat (nanyakpat) siyag byúdang sapían, He managed
to get a rich widow for himself.

dyakstun n {1} game of jacks. {2} jack, jackstone used for playing
jacks. v [AC; b6(1)] play jacks.

dyalusi n jalousies. v [A; a] make jalousies.

dyam n jam, marmalade. v [A; a] make jam.

dyambul v [A2C; c1] jump ball in basketball. n action of tossing a jump
ball.

dyamburi n boy scout jamboree. v [A1; b(1)] have a jamboree.

dyáming = dyamsisyun.

dyamp daspáyin = dyamp dispáyin.

dyamp dispáyin n children’s game of jumping over obstacles. v [A1C; a2]
play jump-the-spine.

dyampingkuy = pík.

dyampir n a sleeveless dress for wearing over a blouse or sweater.
v [A; c1] wear, make into a jumper.

dyamsisyun n informal get-together, usually in the afternoon, with
dancing and refreshments. v [A12C2; c1] have an informal dance party.

dyamu = yamu.

dyamuntris = dimungkug.

dyanà = kanà_1 (dialectal).

dyandi n rare ability, sparkle of genius. May dyandi siya sa pag-áwit,
She has a rare talent for singing.

dyángk v [A; c] drop a political candidate from a ticket. Gidyángk si
Ispína ni Sirhing pabur kang Búris, Serging junked Espina in favor of
Borres.

dyangkimpuy = pík.

dyanitur n janitor. v [B16; a2] become a janitor.

*dyapan dyapandyapan, dyapanis = ginamusginámus.
see gamus.

dyapinis = byatilis.

dyár n jar. Usa ka dyár nga pínat bátir, A jar of peanut butter.

dyás n jazz. v [A; c1] play jazz, play s.t. in jazz time. Ang Dáhil sa
Iyu nga idyás (dyasun), Dahil sa Iyo played in jazz time.

dyaski a mild, half-affectionate oath used to curse s.o. Nagkadúngan pa
ang mga dyaski, The devils arrived at the same time.

dyatilis = byatilis.

dyíd n jade. v [A1; a] wear jade.

dyikni n k.o. jitney transportation used before the war, light
passenger trucks plying certain routes taking passengers for five
centavos anywhere along the route. v [A; a12] take a dyikni, make s.t.
into a dyikni.

dyiktin = hiktin.

dyíli n jelly. v {1} [A; a2] cook, make into a jelly. {2} (→) [A;
b6(1)] eat jelly. Dì ku mudyili kay gidilì nákù ang tam-is, I will not
eat jelly because I am not allowed to eat sweets.

dyilirul n jellyroll. v [A; c1] make jellyrolls.

dyilusi = dyalusi.

dyím n gym, gymnasium.

dyimnastiks n gymnastics. v [A1; b(1)] do gymnastics.

dyimnasyum n gymnasium. v [a12] make into a gymnasium.

*dyiniral — admisyun, — manidyir, — Makartur general admission,
manager, MacArthur, et al.

dyíns n thick long trousers for women. v [A; a] wear jeans, make into
jeans.

dyintul man a gentlemanly, for a man to be courteous. v [B1; b6] be,
become gentlemanly in behavior.

dyinuwin a genuine. Lamì ang tubà kun dyinuwin nga tungug ang gamítun,
The toddy tastes nice if genuine mangrove bark is used. v [b6] consider
genuine.

dyíp n {1} jeep. {2} = dyipni. v [A; a] take a jeep or jeepney s.w.

dyipni n jeep made into a passenger vehicle. v [A1; a2] ride a jeepney.
Makadyipni ta ngadtu, We can get there by jeep.

dyip-ut = gip-ut.

dyirk n dance called ‘the jerk’. v [AC; c1] dance the jerk.

dyirman kat n crew cut, haircut with the sides shaved clean and only a
little hair left on the top. v [a12] cut hair in the crew cut style.

dyirsi n jersey, a k.o. cloth of an elastic weave. v [A; b(1)] wear
jersey.

dyíru n zero. v {1} [AN; b5] give a zero in school, not let an opponent
get more than zero in games. Nangdyíru ang taga Yúbi námù, We got zero
in our game against U.V. (Lit. The U.V. team gave us a zero.) Nadyíru
(nadyirúhan) ku sa mat, I got a zero in Math. {2} [B3; c1] for a gauge
to reach zero. Ug mudyíru ang tirmumitru, maáyis na ang túbig, Water
will freeze when the thermometer reaches zero.

dyís_1 number ten. see tris for usage.

dyís_2 n odds of five to four in betting. v [A3; a1c2] give 5 to 4 odds
in betting. Idyis (dyísan) lang nátù ang átung kuntra, We will just
give 5 to 4 odds in our bets to our opponent.

dyisinuybi = disinuybi. For words with dyisi- see disi-.

dyismus n tithe. v [A; c] give one’s tithe.

dyít n jet plane. v [A1; ac] take a jet plane.

dyitplin = dyít.

dyíwil n {1} jewel of a watch. {2} walay — having no money or no
education. Ayg súkul ánang way dyíwil, Don’t fight with that ignoramus.

dyúbus n any powdered dye.

dyuditsu n ju-jitsu.

dyúdu n judo. v [A; a] apply judo to s.o. Ákù bitaw siyang gidyúdu,
haplà lagi, I judoed him, and he fell flat. dyudista n one who does
judo. v [B16] become a judo expert.

dyúk = dúki.

dyukbaks n juke box. v [A12] obtain a juke box.

dyúkir a {1} fond of making jokes. {2} one who goofed, made a ludicrous
mistake. Kadyúkir nímu. Ngánung gikandadúhan nímung yáwi sa kaban? You
goof. Why did you lock the key in the trunk? n {1} joker card.
{2} situation in mahjong where any one of three different pieces would
let the person go mahjong.

dyúlin n {1} marbles. {2} game of marbles. {3} expression uttered when
making a hole. v {1} [AC; a] play marbles. {2} [A12; b5] put a marble
in a hole. Dyulínun (dyulínan) ku ang síkan, I will shoot for the
second hole.

Dyún n June. v see disimbri.

dyunbráyid n June bride.

dyunsun n outboard motor, so called after the brand name ‘Johnson’.
v [A1; a12] take a motorboat.

dyunyur n {1} son who bears the father’s name. {2} member of the Junior
class. {3} ákung, íyang, etc. — my, his penis (colloquial). v {1} [A;
a] name a child after the father or call him ‘Junior’. {2} [A12] have a
baby boy (colloquial).

dyús n fruit or vegetable juice. v [A1] drink juice.

dyúti v [A; b6] for guards, nurses, or the like to have duty. Akuy
nagdyúti dihang gikawátan ang budíga, I was the one on duty when the
warehouse was burglarized. n one’s turn to have duty. híbi — s.t. that
can be used for heavy-duty work.

dyúwil = duwílu.

dyúwit = dúwit.

dyuy rayding v [A1C; b6] go for a ride for pleasure. Nagdyuy rayding mi
didtu sa riklimisyun, We went for a ride in the reclamation area.
n ride.
