

<pb n=1038>


<b>ERRATA</b>

(<b>MGA SAYUP</b>)


<i>P. Panawóng, page.

D. Dinalán, line</i>.

"----" <i>Sa idálum sang tinag_á nga</i> "----", <i>under</i> "----".

       *       *       *       *       *

/*
 P.| D.|    "----"       |    Ginsilíng. Written.      | Dápat kúnt_a igsilíng. Read.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XII| 17| Abbreviations   | Frequentive.                | Frequentative. 
  1|  6| "a, 3.)"        | $ginosokób$                 | $ginasokób$ 
  2|  3| "$abák-abák$"   | upon other,                 | upon another, 
  4|  2| "$abitsuélas$"  | -beans                      | -bean; beans 
  5|  4| "$ab_ó$"        | Pook!                       | Pooh! 
  5|  3| "$abó-ábo$"     | litte                       | little 
  5|  3| "$aborído$"     | $gan_i$                     | $gán_i$
  7|  9| "$ábut$"        | rhe                         | the 
  8|  2| "$ádgaw$"       | posses                      | possess 
 11|  7| "$ágday$"       | $agdáyon$                   | $agdayón$ 
 11|  1| "$agíw, ágiw^"  | $gíw, ágiw$,                | $agéw, ágew$, 
 11| 10| "$ági$"         | $dalán$                     | $dálan$ 
 23|2-9| "$aláplag$"     | $lága--paalaplága--karnero$ | $lagá--paalaplagá--karnéro$ 
   |   |                 | --spead--$naalaplágan$      | --spread--$naalaplagán$ 
 26|  1| "$alimán[~g]o$" | steemed                     | esteemed 
 29|  1| "$aliwána$"     | breath,                     | breadth, 
 31|  9| "$alóghog$"     | $pís_í$.                    | $pís_i$. 
 39|  7| "$ámog$"        | $Naamogán$                  | $Naamógan$ 
 42|  2| "$ananáy$"      | quility;                    | quillity; 
 50|  6| "$antor_ó$"     | como                        | come 
 51|  4| "$áohog$"       | $Aohógi$                    | $Aohogí$ 
 51|  6| "$ápang$"       | $in_í$,                     | $iní$, 
 53|  5| "$ápol$"        | Read                        | Red 
 54|  8| "$árag$"        | $magárag$                   | $maárag (magaárag)$ 
 54|  1| "$aragóy$"      | A                           | An
 55|  4| "$aráo-aráo$"   | $ind_í$                     | $índ_i$
 56|  1| "$arímo$"       | $$arrrimo$$)                | $$arrimo$$) 
 58| 16| "$arót$"        | $suguilánon$.               | $sugilánon$. 
 59|  3| "$asáwa$"       | My                          | May 
 62|  8| "$át-at$"       | $Ind_í$                     | $Ind_i$ 
 69| 14| "$báak$"        | $lúm_a$).                   | $lum_á$). 
 69|  2| "$báb_a$"       | chatterbox!                 | chatterbox. 
 69|  3|   "             | tel.                        | tell 
 74|  3| "$bagónbon$"    | $bina$--                    | $biná$-- 
 76|  5| "$bahól$"       | $so$                        | $sa$ 
 76|  4| "$báhot$"       | $Nabahotán$                 | $Nabahótan$ 
 79| 12| "$bak_í-bák_i$" | $sib_ósib_o, b_inágbínag$    | $sib_ósíb_o, binágbínag$, 
 81|  5| "$baladlísan$"  | he                          | be 
 82|  6| "$balák_i$"     | $Ginabalák_i$               | $Ginbalák_i$ 
 83|  2| "$balándra$"    | $magbalándra$               | $mabalándra$ 
 85|  3| "$balatasón$"   | suffer edor                 | suffered or 
 86|  5| "$balayán$"     | is is                       | it is 
 89|  8| "$balikw_á$"    | thi splank                  | this plank 
 90|  9| "$balin[~g]á$"  | impresion                   | impression
 90|  3| "$balin[~g]ág$" | did have                    | did you have                   
 90|  3| "$balin[~g]ón$" | $ginbalin[~g]ón$            | $ginabalin[~g]ón$ 
 91|  6| "$balióg$"      | $sía$                       | $siá$ 
 94|  4| "$balúnd_o$"    | that "$áswang$"             | that the "$áswang$" 
 95|  2| "$banát-bánat$" | excercise,                  | exercise, 
 96|  4| "$bán[~g]ag$"   | $ban[~g]agán$               | $ban[~g]ágan$ 
100|  3| "$baníklan$"    | $nílaks$,                   | $níslak$, 
100|  1| "$bani-ól$"     | perss,                      | press, 
105|  1| "$baráw$, (B)   | $baráw$,                    | $bara-úd$, (B) 
<pb n=1039>
105|  2| "$baráw$"         | form                     | from 
106|  7| "$baríri$"        | $dil_í$                  | $díl_i$
111|  1| "$batikóla$"      | (Sp. $$batíkola$$)       | (Sp. $$baticola$$) 
113|  2| "$báwang$"        | ar                       | are
118|6-8| "$bigóng$"        | $Bigón[~g]a,--pabigónga$ | $Bigon[~g]á--pabigon[~g]á$
   |   |                   | --$Bigón[~g]i$           | $Bigon[~g]í$
119|  2| "$bíkal$"         | disscussion              | discussion 
119|  1| "$bíknoli$"       | $bíknoli$,               | $bíknol$, 
119|  2| "$bíla$"          | $bíla$,                  | $béla$, 
120| 10| "$bilí$"          | $tám_á$.                 | $tám_a$
121|  8| "$bílin$"         | $biníli$)                | $bilíni$) 
122|  1| "$binabáye$"      | of hen.                  | of a hen. 
122|  1| "$binan[~g]í$"    | $binan[~g]í$,            | $binan[~g]_í$, 
122|  2| "$bináryo$"       | tow                      | two 
124|  6| "$bính_i$"        | $bináton$)               | $bináto$). 
125|  1| "$bínting$"       | Heddled,                 | Heddle, 
130|  2| "$bóg-oy$"        | adventages               | advantages 
131|  2| "$bokóg$"         | thoat.                   | throat. 
132|  8| "$bokóng$"        | $bokón[~g]on$            | $bokon[~g]ón$ 
137|  3| "$bugá$"          | rub if                   | rub it 
139| 13| "$bug_ó$"         | $soól$                   | $sóol$
139| 12| "$búg-os$"        | $m[~g]a apó$             | $n[~g]a apó$
141|  4| "$búhat$"         | $binan[~g]ón,            | $binán[~g]on$, 
143|  1| "$bukárong$"      | $bukárong$,              | $bukárong$, (B)
143|  1| "$bukás$"         | $bukás$, (B)             | $bukás$, 
146|  1| "$bulgon$"        | $bulgon$,                | $búlgon$, 
148|  2| "$bulkát-búlkat$" | $kátbulkáta$             | $kátbulkatá$
152|2-3| "$bungkát-búngkat$| ($Bungkátbungkáta--      | ($Bungkátbungkatá--
   |   |                   | bulkátbulkáta$).         | bulkátbulkatá$). 
153|  1| "$búngkras$"      | $búngkras$,              | $búnkras$,             <!-- odd correction, as the corrected form occurs nowhere -->
158|  3| "$búsyad$"        | $bny_á$).                | $buy_á$). 
158|  2| "$but-ánan$"      | will-behaved,            | well-behaved,
159|  9| "$bútiag$"        | $pabántud$               | $pabántug$
159|  1| "$butig$"         | $butig$,                 | $butíg$, 
159|1-2| "$butíti$"        | baloon-fish.             | balloon-fish.
165| 11| "$dagándan$"      | $kawayán$                | $kawáyan$. 
169|1-2| "$dahón-dahón$"   | insict;                  | insect; 
170|  4| "$dákin$"         | $linagárí$.              | $linagár_i$. 
172|  1| "$dalángpan$"     | (A)                      | (H) 
175|  5| "$dalísay$"       | $Nagadalísay$            | $Nagdalísay$
177|  9| "$damilí$"        | jabbler.                 | jabber. 
179| 10| "$dán[~g]at$"     | $sía$                    | $siá$
182| 13| "$dápl_i$"        | $pagpanyáya$             | $pagpanyága$
183|  1| "$dápya$"         | $dáypos$,                | $dápyos$,                
185|  1| "$dátilis$"       | date-paim, a kind        | date-palm, a kind 
185|  1| "$dát-ol$"        | $dát-on$                 | $dát-ol$,				<!-- unclear correction -->
       | "$dát-on$"        | $dát-ol$                 | $dát-on$,				<!-- unclear correction or should the order change??? -->
187|  2| "$dayán-dáyan$"   | $Ind_í$                  | $Ind_i$ 
188|  1| "$diadéma$"       | $diádema$,               | $diadéma$, 
190| 23| "$diín$"          | tnese                    | these 
191| 20| "$dimát$"         | $dirá$                   | $dir_á$
193| 15| "$diótay$"        | $paghulúg$)              | $pagkahúlug$) 
198|  9| "$dúaw$"          | me favour                | me the favour
199| 19| "$dúgang$"        | $ísa$                    | $isá$
199| 11| "$dugáy-dugáy$"   | not a good               | not good 
200|  7| "$dúgmok$"        | $bat_ó$,                 | $bató,$ 
204| 10| "$dúlug$"         | $mulúsad$                | $malúsad$ 
211|  2| "$dúrup$"         | verp                     | very 
215| 22| "$entiénde$"      | $íban$                   | $ibán$
217|  3| "$estámpa$"       | $Paestampáhi$            | $Paestampahí$ 
218|  7| "$extraordináryo$"| $makatalanhága$).        | $makatalanhág_a$). 
219|  3| "$firmaménto$"    | canopoy                  | canopy 
223|  9| "$gábut$"         | egglant--                | eggplant--
227|  7| "$galó$"          | Giva a me                | Give me a 
231|  1| "$garápa$"        | $$garrapa$$)             | $$garrafa$$) 
232|  1| "$garotílyo$"     | Quincy,                  | Quinsy, 
235| 10| "$gáwhak$"        | $nagáwhak$               | $naggáwhak$     <!-- One change only one occassion of this word? (different prefix?) -->
<pb n=1040>
238|  9|"$gimáw$"         |$makíta$              |$makít_a$
247|  2|"$gúnaw$"         |arrand                |errand 
248|  2|"$gúng-an$"       |practiced             |practised 
248|  5|"$gúng-an$"       |$amád$,               |$anád$, 
248|1-2|"$gúod$"          |$gúop--góop$,         |$guóp,--goóp$, 
251| 14|"$gúyud$"         |$Pagayúdi$            |$Paguyúdi$
257|  5|"$hág_o$"         |tireout,--wearout,    |tire out,--wear out,		<!-- correction on line 1-2! -->
257|  9|"$hágok$"         |(cr.                  |(cf. 
259|8-9|"$hákad$"         |$Ihákad ánay$         |$Ihákad akó ánay$
262|  4|"$halandúmon$"    |gratitute.            |gratitude. 
263|  6|"$haláw$"         |$daán$                |$dáan$
267| 11|"$hámgud$"        |flowere               |flowers 
268|  4|"$hamóy$"         |$pagbútwa$            |$pagbútw_a$
269|2-5|"$hamóy$"         |$Hamóyi--mahígko$.    |$Hamoyí--mahígk_o. 
270|  2|"$hamulús$"       |$himúlus$             |$himulús$
271| 10|"$hánas$"         |buffallo              |buffalo 
272|  2|"$hándus$"        |thrush                |thrust 
273| 10|"$hánggud$"       |$ibalígyá$            |$ibalígy_a$
274|  2|"$han[~g]ilóng$"  |nosy.                 |nosey. 
275|  4|"$han[~g]uyús$"   |$tatáy$               |$tátay$
275|  6|"$hánhan$"        |$ya$                  |$ga$
275| 11|"$hánhan$"        |$pumádayon$           |$pumadáyon$
277|1-6|"$háon$"          |cualdron              |cauldron 
286| 11|"$hiás$"          |ang                   |and 
289|  6|"$hilánat$"       |$hilanatón$)          |$hilanáton$) 
291|  6|"$hilitóon$"      |orher                 |other 
292|  2|"$hilós$"         |carrode               |corrode 
293|  2|"$himálad$"       |persou's              |person's
294|  6|"$himatúod$"      |$Ind_í$               |$Ind_i$   
294| 13|"$hímbon$"        |$hinúbonhúbon$,       |$hinubónhúbon$, 
299| 11|"$hin[~g]ában$"   |$sulúd sa$            |$sulúd sang$
301|  5|"$hin[~g]óto$"    |$Hin[~g]otohí$, ($hin[~g]otoí$,  |$Hin[~g]otóhi (hin[~g]otói$, 
303|  7|"$hinúlsul$"      |$salá$                |$sal_á$
305|1-3|"$hirípo$"        |take in- $kari, pón$  |take in, $kari-pón$,   <!-- fixed, but also removed eol hyphen -->
308|  9|"$hoh_ó$"         |$Ginhohó$             |$Ginhoh_ó$
309| 15|"$hónhon$"        |$tátl_o$              |$tátlo$ 
313|  5|"$húgnit$"        |$Fuláno$              |$Fulána$
315|  6|"$húk_o$"         |$nughúk_o$            |$naghúk_o$
321| 10|"$huní$"          |known                 |know 
324|  2|"$hús_a$"         |noice,                |noise, 
327|  9|"$_i$"            |this pot.             |this spot. 
228|  8|"$íbok$"          |smout                 |snout 
329|  6|"$igá-igá$"       |$si_á$                |$siá$
333|  3|"$iláwod$"        |are going             |are you going 
335|  2|"$ílo$"           |$ámay$                |$amáy$
336|  7|"$ími$"           |one                   |on the 
337|  2|"$inág$"          |diaphonous;           |diaphanous; 
340|  9|"$ín-in$"         |$nasimbúgan$          |$nasimbugán$
342|  5|"$inót-ínot$"     |$kiníkíni$).          |$kin_íkín_i$). 
345|  2|"$isáis$"         |$iyá$                 |$íya$
351|  3|"$kaalayohón$"    |$kalayohón$).         |$kalaayohón$). 
362|  1|"$kaduhá-kuháan$" |$kaduhá-kuháan$,      |$kaduhá-duháan$, 
365|  7|"$kágkag$"        |$bukágkag$,           |$bukágkag$, <!-- No correction: I don't see the difference. -->
365|  2|"$kagúd$"         |$kapayás$,            |$kapáyas$, 
368|  3|"$kahilinoklogán$"|terdly                |derly 
369|  2|"$kahínl_o$"      |$katínlo$).           |$katínl_o$). 
370|  2|"$kahún-og$"      |hnmidity,             |humidity, 
375|  4|"$kalagháan$"     |$makakalágha$).       |$makakalágh_a$). 
383|  3|"$kalomó$"        |fioppiness            |floppiness, 
385|  1|"$kaluyáan$"      |$kalúya$.             |$kalúy_a$. 
391|  2|"$kanánday$"      |$gro$                 |$gr_o$. 
393|  2|"$kantíl$"        |tout                  |tous 
395|3-4|"$kapás$"         |$sámpaton, ikasárang$,|$sampáton, ikasaráng$,
397|  5|"$kapuslánan$"    |$kit_á$               |$kitá$
401|  2|"$karósa$"        |road.                 |roads. 
411|  2|"$katín-aw$"      |perlucidness,         |pellucidness. 
411|  2|"$katíngban$"     |$tín[~g]ub$).         |$tin[~g]úb$). 
413|  1|"$katumánan$"     |$katumanaán$,         |$katumanán$
<pb n=1041>
414|  2|"$kaugalín[~g]on$"   |pecular,            |peculiar, 
415|  4|"$káwas$"            |$bíntána$.          |$bintán_a$. 
418| 10|"$kibít$"            |tne                 |the 
419|  3|"$kibút$"            |$siná$.             |$sin_á$. 
422| 11|"$kinahánglan$"      |$magkinanánglan$    |$magkinahánglan$
423|  1|"$kinárbaw$"         |Se                  |See 
423|  3|"$kinatúb_o$"        |$kintúb_o$          |$kinatúb_o$ 
424|  1|"$kín_i$"            |$kíni$,             |$kín_i$, 
426|  1|"$kirikót$"          |$kirikót$,          |$kiritót$,			<!-- Change should apply to entire entry, not made yet. -->
427|  2|"$kít_a$"            |ro                  |to 
428|  1|"$kógkog$"           |Barehaded,          |Bareheaded, 
431|  1|"$komyanyéro$"       |$komyanyéro$,       |$kompanyéro$, 
432|  3|"$kónd_i$"           |The is              |This is 
434|  1|"$koríkot$"          |$koríkot$, To       |$korítot$, To		<!-- Not made change yet, see correction on page 426 -->
435|  1|"$hos_i-kós_i$"      |$hos_í-kós_i$,      |$kos_í-kós_i$, 
435|  1|"$kosípak$"          |$kosípak$,          |$kosípad$, 
436|  5|"$kótkot$"           |takeout             |take out 
437|  2|"$kúdaw$"            |ficultiies,         |ficulties, 
437|  2|"$kúdlit$"           |shar por pointed;   |sharp or pointed; 
441|  2|"$kúmus$"            |crumpie             |crumple 
446|  1|"$kutíhut$"          |$kutíhut$,          |$kutíkut$, 
449|  5|"$labád$"            |$paínoíno$          |$painóíno$ 
449|  5|"    "               |panghún_ahún_a      |panghun_áhún_a 
449|  2|"$labadór$"          |sland,              |stand, 
451| 23|"$labí$"             |$malípot$           |$malíp-ot$ 
458|  1|"$lákot$"            |$lákot$,            |$lágot$, 
458|  1|"$láksam$"           |$láksam$,           |$lágsam$, 
464|  1|"$lakúb-lákub$"      |$ilalakúd$,         |$ilalakúb$, 
465|  4|"$lalás$"            |Tear of             |Tear off 
467|  3|"$lamás$"            |flonr.              |flour. 
467|  3|"$lámba$"            |throw               |threw 
471|  1|"$laná$"             |$laná$, To oil, etc.|$laná$, To make oil, extract 
   |   |                     |                    |oil from coconuts. 
   |   |                     |                    |$Lanahá iníng m[~g]a lubí$.
   |   |                     |                    |Make oil from these coconuts.
   |   |                     |                    |$Lanahí akó sing duhá
   |   |                     |                    |ka botílya (n[~g]a lána$).
   |   |                     |                    |Make two bottles of coconut
   |   |                     |                    |oil for me. $Diín si
   |   |                     |                    |Puláno?--Nagalaná siá$.
   |   |                     |                    |Where is N.N.?--He is
   |   |                     |                    |making coconut oil.
   |   |                     |                    |
   |   |                     |                    |$lána, To oil, treat with
   |   |                     |                    |oil, ingratiate oneself
   |   |                     |                    |with. $Lanáhi ang mákina
   |   |                     |                    |(makiná) sa tah_í, agúd
   |   |                     |                    |magtánlas$. Oil the sewing
   |   |                     |                    |machine in order that it
   |   |                     |                    |may run smoothly. $Maglána
   |   |                     |                    |ka sa íya--, Lanáhi
   |   |                     |                    |siá--, agúd pasúgtan níya
   |   |                     |                    |ikáw$. Ingratiate yourself
   |   |                     |                    |with him, so that he may
   |   |                     |                    |allow you to have your
   |   |                     |                    |will. (cf. $^laná^$).
474| 19|"$lángkag$"          |news have           |news I have 
478|  6|"$lapád-lápad$"      |filat-sided         |flat-sided 
481|  8|"$lás-ay$"           |$nasimbúgan$        |$nasimbugán$ 
484|  2|"$laúg$"             |$lándolándo         |$landólándo$ 
485|  1|"$laús$,"            |$laús$              |$láus$,				<!-- odd, as entry has both -->
486|  2|"$láwhan$"           |$lawhán$            |$láwhan$ 
487|  3|"$layág$"            |$húyup$             |$huyúp$ 
488|  8|"$lay_ó$"             |$minuró$            |$minur_ó$ 
489|  1|"$liáb$"             |The collar,         |To collar, 
494|  2|"$lígon$"            |$Ligoná$            |$Ligóna$ 
494|  3|"$lígs_a$"           |$Nalígsa$           |$Nalígs_a$ 
496|  6|"$likát-líkat$"      |see                 |seen 
<pb n=1042>
498|  6|"$limá$"          |($báklón$,         |($báklon$, 
499|  9|"$límas$"         |$tígpas$.          |$típgas$. 
509|  2|"$lítag$"         |enroach            |encroach 
511|  1|"$lobóy-lóboy$"   |$labólóbo$         |$lobólóbo$ 
512|  1|"$lólos$"         |$lólos$,           |$lolós$, 
514|  5|"$lóslos$"        |$nasakán$          |$nasakáan$ 
514|  2|"$lótlot$"        |on's               |one's 
514|  7|"$lóyloy$"        |$pakó$,            |$pak_ó$, 
519|  6|"$lúgt_i$"        |$óway$,            |$owáy$, 
520|  1|"$lukáb-lúkab$"   |severeb oil,       |severe boil, 
520|  1|"$lúk-ad$"        |gauge (gage) out,  |gouge, gouge out, 
527|  2|"$lúnud$"         |fc.                |cf. 
528|  9|"$lup_ó$"         |if were            |if I were 
529|3-4|"$lúsiat$"        |$luyát$).          |$lúsyat$). 
530|  6|"$lusút$"         |$dirá$             |$dir_á$ 
531|  2|"$luth_ólúth_o$"  |$pagluth_óluthóon$ |$pagluth_óluthoón$ 
531|  3|"$lútos$"         |autdo              |outdo 
531|  2|"$lúya, lúy-a$"   |seeds              |roots 
533|  7|"$ma$-" 3)        |$balák_a$,         |$baláka$, 
536|  1|"$maápgot$"       |swailor            |swallow 
538|  3|"$mabát-al$"      |$bát-at$           |$bát-al$ 
541|  3|"$madinalóon$"    |$mapinalangáon$).  |$mapinalanggáon$). 
541|  1|"$madinamgóhon$"  |Deamer,            |Dreamer, 
541|  2|"$mdúrup$"        |$mdúrup$,          |$madúrup$, 
543|  1|"$magápa$"        |$magápa$,          |$magáp_a$, 
544|  1|"$magsusúlat$"    |$masusúlát$,       |$magsusúlat$, 
545|  2|"$mahágbong$"     |shelterered        |sheltered 
546|  2|"$mahanús$"       |$hús$).            |$nús$). 
548|  1|"$mahíning$"      |(B)                |(H) 
550|  1|"$mailóm-lóm$"    |$mailóm-lóm$,      |$mailóm-ilóm$, 
551| 12|"$mái-om$"        |$hun_áhúna$,       |$hun_áhún_a$, 
552| 17|"$maka$-"         |$túnug$            |$tunúg$ 
555|  2|"$makasisílaw$"   |spendid.           |splendid. 
556|  3|"$makinabudláyon$"|seduluos.          |sedulous. 
556|  4|"$makísdong$"     |preevish.          |peevish, 
560|  2|"$maláwig$"       |sustaiued,         |sustained, 
565|  7|"$man$"           |yon                |you 
571|  4|"$manúbad$"       |$manúkub$).        |$manunúkub$). 
572|  3|"$manunúkub$"     |$tubúk$).          |$tukúb$). 
574|  3|"$mapatumbayáon$" |$báya$:            |$báy_a$; 
576|  7|"$marámad$"       |$Karámad$          |$Kamarámad (makamarámad)$
578|  3|"$masámbol$"      |$samból$).         |$sámbol$). 
578|  1|"$mgsángkad$"     |$mgsángkad$,       |$masángkad$, 
578|  5|"$masápnot$"      |especialy,         |especially, 
579|  2|"$masiók$"        |jungle-liky,       |jungle-like, 
584|  1|"$matínggas$"     |flesy.             |fleshy, 
585|  8|"$matitík$"       |$pagpan[~g]íta$    |$pagpan[~g]ít_a$ 
600|  3|"$nakú$"          |On mother!         |Oh mother! 
601|  1|"$nanag-$"        |frefix             |prefix 
610|  1|"$odók-odókon$"   |at case,           |at ease, 
611|  3|"$ógyo$"          |dersion            |derision 
611|  3|"$óhot$"          |$úhay$--           |$uháy$-- 
612|  1|"$oktúbre$"       |$octúbre$,         |$oktúbre$, 
612| 12|"$ólbo$"          |$dirá$             |$dir_á$ 
613|  2|"$olób$"          |$Lolob$            |$Iolób$ 
614|  3|"$ómoy$"          |swiming,           |swimming, 
615|  1|"$ón[~g]_i$"      |here-lipped.       |hare-lipped. 
617|  2|"$oróng$"         |It was             |I was 
618|  2|"$ospitál$"       |$balúln[~g]an$).   |$bulúln[~g]an$). 
620|  8|"$pa-$" N.B.      |other the          |other than the 
623|  2|"$paámbi$"        |$Ind_í$            |$Ind_i$ 
624|  4|"$paándam$"       |carefulnes.        |carefulness. 
625|  2|"$paatón-áton$"   |oneselves          |ourselves 
625|2-4|"$paawasán$"      |$paawásan--(páwas$). |$paawasán$--($paáwas$). 
625|  6|"$paáyaw$"        |$paayawá$          |$paayáwa$
625|  3|"$paayón$"        |$Pinayonán$        |$Pinaayonán$ 
626|  1|"$pabakasáy"      |Competion,         |Competition, 
627|  1|"$pabílo$"        |Lamp-wick of       |Lamp-wick; wick of 
<pb n=1043>
627|  6|"$pabór$"                 |$han[~g]ín$            |$hán[~g]in
639| 16|"$pabútyag$"              |$pas_áyod$,            |$pasáyod$, 
633|  1|"$padúgay$"               |$anká$                 |$anák$. 
637| 12|"$pagw_á$"                |$Ipagwá$               |$Ipagw_á$
639|  4|"$pahán[~g]in$"           |$ang hu$--             |$ang ímo hu$- 
640|6-7|"$pahaúl_i"               |$Mapalíwalíwa$         |$Mapaliwálíwa$ 
641|  7|"$pahilít$"               |withdraw               |withdrew 
641|  3|"$pahóan$"                |growing abundance      |grow in abundance 
645|  2|"$pairám-irám$"           |$pain[~g]ásin[~g]ás$). |$pain[~g]ás-ín[~g]as$). 
649|  3|"$pakib_ó$"               |Thi was                |This was 
651|  1|"$paktákon$"              |$paktákon$, Riddle--   |<b>$paktánay, paktanáy$, To play</b>--    <!-- TODO: unclear what needs to be changed in this and following entry -->
651|  1|"$paktánay$"              |$paktánay, To play-    |<b>$paktánon$, Ridle,[**typo in the Errata: Riddle] etc. etc.</b>
654|  4|"$palák-pálak$"           |corvulsively           |convulsively 
654|  2|"$pal-ákpál-ak$"          |$pal-ák$.              |$pál-ak$. 
656|  3|"$palandulúm$"            |Nagapalandúlum         |$Nagapalandulúm$ 
665|  6|"$paliwá-líwa$"           |$n[~g]aw, palu$--      |palu- 
677|  4|"$pamúgon$"               |Be                     |He 
677|  1|"$pamugták-púgtak$"       |o                      |of 
678|  2|"$pamulún[~g]on$"         |flow; of               |flow of 
681|  2|"$panád-an$"              |weaviug                |weaving 
681|  2|"$panagáp_a$"             |$panúgap_a$,           |$panugáp_a$, 
682|  3|"$panagítlon$"            |$nagitlóna$            |$nagitloná$ 
683|  8|"$panág_o$"               |--$panagóan$           |--$ginpanagóan$ 
684|  2|"$panahúp$"               |rounded                |pounded 
684|  4|"$panakár$"               |$báta$                 |$bát_a$ 
687|  2|"$panámpok$"              |fighe                  |fight 
687|  2|"$panan-áwon$"            |scenecshow,            |scene, show,
687|  3|    "                     |f                      |cf. 
687|  6|"$panánglit$"             |imrgine,               |imagine, 
688|  1|"$panapún[~g]ol$"         |$panapún[~g]ol$,       |$panapulánga$,   <!-- that is, change order -->
688|  1|"$panapulán[~g]a$"        |$panapulán[~g]a$,      |$panapún[~g]ol$,  <!-- that is, change order -->
689|  2|"$pand$-"                 |insted                 |instead 
690|  3|"$pándak$"                |tature                 |stature 
690|  1|"$pándong$"               |canopyr                |canopy, 
690|  2|    "                     |fo,                    |for 
690|  3|    "                     |helmet--               |helmet, 
690|  4|    "                     |ladle.                 |ladle, 
690|  6|    "                     |pan,                   |pan- 
692|  2|"$pan[~g]ágas$"           |measless,              |measles, 
695|  9|"pan[~g]anínaw"           |wnat                   |what 
696|  1|"$panarángkang$"          |panarángkang,          |pan[~g]arángkang, 
698|  3|"$pan[~g]ayóngkong$"      |epilieptie             |epileptic 
699|  4|"$panggo_í$"              |vaters                 |waters 
704|  5|"$panglaráwan$"           |of painter,            |of a painter, 
705|  1|"$panglibáng-libáng$"     |$planglí$--            |$pangli$- 
705|  1|"$panalin[~g]áw-lín[~g]aw$|$panalin[~g]áw-lín[~g]aw$ |$panglin[~g]áw-lín[~g]aw$, 
713|  2|"$panin[~g]uh_á$"         |$ni[~g]uh_á$.          |$nin[~g]úh_a$. 
723|  1|"$parókpok$"              |flow,                  |flow- 
728|  3|"$pasayáng-sayáng$"       |$magpasayánsayáng$     |$magpasayángsayáng$
732|  7|"$pasók$"                 |cf. $ta$-              |cf.
734|  5|"$patabíd$"               |$kakáyo$.              |$kabáyo$. 
741|  4|"$patsóy$"                |$is álang$             |$isá lang$
747|  3|"$peskísa$"               |$pan[~g]usísa$).       |$pan[~g]usís_a$). 
749|  6|"$píking$"                |apread                 |spread
749|  2|"$píknik$"                |piknic.                |picnic.
752|  7|"$pil_ó$"                 |$panin[~g]úha$.        |$panin[~g]úh_a$. 
753|  1|"$pinarásko$"             |bot e                  |bottle 
754|  3|"$pín[~g]as$"             |$túb_o$,               |$túbo$, 
754|  3|"$pinilipínhon$"          |$Pilípinas$,           |$Pilipínas$,
757|  2|"$pís-an$"                |$Mun[~g]á$             |$Mun[~g]_á$
757|  2|"$písan$"                 |$siduos$,              |$siduous$, 
761|  2|"$plastado$"              |fiting.                |fitting. 
762|  5|"$pógo$"                  |$Pagóha$               |$Pogóha$
763|  1|"$pólka$"                 |Sp. $$polka$$)         |Sp. $$polca$$) 
763|  1|"$pontipikál$"            |pontifical             |pontifical) 
769|  2|"$pulák$"                 |nipped, in             |nipped in 
769|  5|    "                     |grow                   |grown 
770|  1|"$púlo$"                  |Se                     |See 
<pb n=1044>
770| 10|"$púlong$"          |$hambál$).            |$hámbal$). 
771|  3|"$púlpug$"          |$agúg$                |$agúd$
773|  2|"pun[~g]_í$"        |$lún[~g]i$,           |lún[~g]_i$, 
787|  1|"$ribusól$"         |Se                    |See 
787|  7|"$rikobíkos$"       |$padúgi$,             |$padúg_i$, 
788|  3|"$rim_ó$"           |dirtled               |dirtied 
789|  3|"$rír_i, rír_í$",   |anima.                |animal. 
799|  3|"$sagiwat_á$"       |mostiy                |mostly 
799|  5|"$ságsag$"          |mnch                  |much 
801|  1|"$sagw_á, ságw_a$", |"$sagw_á, s_ágw_a$",  |"$sagw_á; ságw_a$",
809|  8|"$saláp_o$"         |attack dysente-       |attack of dysente- 
815|  5|"$sámb_a$"          |$Sombaí$              |$Sambaí$
817|  7|"$sámpok$"          |two cock              |two cocks 
821|  1|"$san[~g]yaw$"      |$san[~g]yaw$,         |$sán[~g]yaw$, 
828|  2|"$saróso$"          |strangers to          |strangers, to 
830|  5|"$sayúp$"           |to error              |to err 
835|  2|"$sigáy$"           |plaly                 |play- 
835|  3|    "               |hande-                |handle 
838|  2|"$siláb$"           |$liáb$).              |$iláb$). 
839|  5|"$sílong$"          |$Pasllón[~g]a$        |$Pasilón[~g]a$
840|4-5|"$símbog$"          |$Simbóga              |$Simbogá$
840|  7|   "                |$Simbógi$             |$Simbogí$
843|  2|"$sínggit$"         |$agaás$,              |$pagaás$, 
844|  2|"$sinsínggam$"      |di.                   |id. 
863|  6|"$súlput$"          |$Ginasúlput$          |$Ginsúlput$
868|  3|"$sunggarót$"       |$laróng$,             |$lárong$, 
872|  1|"$súy_a$"           |loath,                |loathe, 
873|  6|"$tabak_ó$"         |sía.                  |siá. 
876|  6|"$táboy$"           |bending               |bending of 
879|3-4|"$tágbong$"         |$mapatáy--ginatágbong$|$napatáy--gintágbong$
881|  3|"$tágp_o$"          |you                   |your 
887| 12|"$takóp$"           |$háon$,               |$háom$, 
899|  1|"$támon$"           |addresed              |addressed 
901|  6|"$tampú-támpu$"     |$tnrapók$).           |$turapók$). 
903|  1|"$tangkóg_o$"       |$tangkúk_o$,          |$tangkúg_o$, 
911|  4|"$tardón$"          |$nánan$,              |$nan$, 
915|  1|"$táyho$"           |$táyho$,              |$táyh_o$, 
919|  8|"$tíbiong$"         |$ar_á$                |$ár_a$
922|  1|"$tibaléu$"         |$tibaléu$,            |$tigbaléu$, 
922|  9|"$tigíb$"           |ot                    |of 
922|  7|"$tígis$"           |$ar_á$                |$ár_a$
930|  1|"$tinágik$"         |sr                    |or 
935|  2|"$tin[~g]úha$"      |grcat                 |great 
940|  3|"$tirík-tírik$"     |liate,                |late, 
941|  1|"$tódas$"           |$A todo$)             |$todo$) 
942|  3|"$tohók$" (H)       |$Tokohí$              |$Tohokí$ 
943|  3|"$toklalód$"        |of bones              |the bones 
943|  4|     "              |the cloth             |of cloth 
944|  2|"$tolóy$"           |a away                |a way 
947| 10|"$toró-tóro$"       |bet him               |beat him 
951|  1|"$túbas$"           |(spoit)               |(spoilt) 
955| 12|"$túgbong$"         |morg-                 |morn- 
957| 11|"$tuháng$"          |$buháng$;             |$búhang, buhan[~g]án$; 
958| 22|"$tukíb$"           |scientist             |scientists 
961|  7|"$túltul$"          |tian?                 |tion? 
963|  1|"$tulungkáron$"     |conceib-              |conceiv- 
967|  1|"$tungkóan$"        |sgotted,              |spotted, 
968| 13|"$tun[~g]úd$", 2)   |yon                   |you 
970|  2|"$turá$"            |of scraps             |of a meal, scraps 
973|  5|"$túyang$"          |$níya$                |$níya n[~g]a$ 
973|  3|"$túy_o$"           |scheme to             |scheme; to 
980|  3|"$ulás$"            |transmision           |transmission 
983| 16|"$ulút$"            |$útl_i$               |$útli$ 
987|  1|"$ún[~g]al$"        |jelp,                 |yelp, 
<pb n=1045>
 993| 10|"$úsung$"      |$íloy$                   |$ilóy$
 994|  5|"$útud$"       |$Nag$-                   |$Naga$- 
1005|  2|"$yámat$"      |$yáwa$.                  |$yáw_a$. 
1006|  1|"$yámat$"      |that!                    |that
1008|  6|"$yúbit$"      |$Ind_í$                  |$Ind_i$
1012|  3|"$alin[~g]áut$"|$hóhot$;                 |$bóhot$; 
1019|  1|"$hagála$"     |$hágala$,                |$hagála$, 
1020|  1|"$hátdan$"     |$hatdan$,                |$hátdan$, 
1020|  1|"$hát-ob$"     |$hat-ob$,                |$hát-ob$,
1020|  2|"$hilíng$"     |so                       |to
1021|  3|"$huyó-huyó$"  |$huyúthúyút$.            |$huyúthúyut$. 
1023|  3|"$kaalángtan$" |dependance----$an[~g]ot$,|dependence----$an[~g]ót$,
1025|  4|"$kina$-"      |$budlay$                 |$búdlay$
1028|  2|"$manunúdl_o$" |$panúdlo$                |$panúdl_o$
1030|  1|"$pamag_á$"    |of                       |Freq. of
1030|2-3|"$pamatúod$"   |$testi$,----corroborate- |$testi$- ----corroborate,
1033|  2|"$platílyo$"   |on who                   |one who
1033|  4|"$pugát_i$"    |$maláy_ó$?               |$malay_ó$? 


*/