

<div1 type=Letter n=A>
<head>A</head>



A-a-A.

Aba-inter.-Alas.

Aba-a-Miserable; wretched; dejected.

Aba Po (ang)-Prayer to the <corr sic=Virgen resp=e>Virgin</corr> Mary.

Abahin-v-To tell; say.

Abala-n-Obstacle; impediment; hindrance;
obstruction; nuisance; clog;
arrest.

Abalahin-v-To obstruct; impede; hinder;
block; bother; clog; arrest; baffle;
vituperate.

Abay-n-Companion; retinue.

Abo-n-Ashes.

Abogado-n-Lawyer.

Abot-inter.-There; well; what.

Abuloy-n-Help; assistance; aid; succor;
favor.

Abuluyan-v-To help; assist; aid; succor;
furnish; provide.

Abutan (Abutin)-v-To reach; overtake;
arrive; obtain; amount to; (ang masid)
discover; disclose; show.

<corr sic="Adyañgaw">Adyan~gaw</corr>-n-Pitch; rosin.

Agad-adv.-Soon; immediately; instantly;
presently; right away; betime; betimes.

Agadagad-adv.-Immediately; instantly;
very soon; speedily; in a trice; in an
instant; without delay; in a moment.

Agagan-n-Cloth sieve or strainer.

Agagin-v-To sieve or strain through
cloth.

Agahan-n-Breakfast.

Agamagam-n-Foreboding; scruple; doubt.

Agap-n-Activity; haste; diligence; anticipation.

Agawin-v-To snatch; grab; take by force.

Agipo-n-Charcoal; half burnt wood.

Agiw-n-Soot.

Aglahi-n-Feast; festivity; rejoicing.

Agnat-n-Space; or distance of time.

Agos-n-Current or course of a river.

Agpang-a-Opportune; convenient; right.

Aha-n-Imagination; conception; fancy;
purpose; design.

Ahas-n-Snake; serpent.

Ahit-n-Shaving.

Ahitin-v-To shave.

Akala-n-Opinion; idea; design; object;
intent; intention; mind; notion; end;
plan; perception; outline; scheme;
view; purpose.

<pb n=16>

Akalain-v-To think; scheme; plan; devise;
consider; contrive; imagine.

Akay-n-Brood.

Akayin-v-To lead; guide; teach; train;
instruct; conduct.

Akin-pro-My; mine.

Akma-a-Fit; proper; appropriate; convenient;
suitable; opportune; fair; just;
apt; due.

Akma-adv.-Properly; suitably; intentionally;
purposely; designedly.

Ako-pro-I.

Akoin-v-To promise; go bail; stand good.

Aksayahin-v-To <corr sic=Waste>waste</corr>; mis-spend; lavish.

Akyat-n-Ascension; acclivity; rising;
mounting.

Alaala-n-Remembrance; recollection; memory;
<corr sic=momento resp=e>memento</corr>; gratification.

Alabok-n-Dust; powder.

Aladalad-n-Echo; resonance.

Alagaan-v-To watch; take care of; heed;
keep; guard; protect.

Alahas-n-Jewelry; ornament.

Alak-n-Liquor; grog.

Alakin-v-To distill.

Alalahanin-v-To remember; recollect;
bethink; mention; remind.

Alalayan (alalayin)-v-To sustain; maintain;
<corr sic=assert resp=e>assist</corr>; support; endure.

Alam-n-Knowledge; publicity; vulgarity.

Alam nang madla-a-Public; vulgar; common;
general.

Alampay-n-Kerchief; large handkerchief.

Alang-alang-n-Politeness; regard; respect;
veneration; kindness.

Alan~gan-a-Questionable; irresolute; undecided.

Alan~ganin ang loob-a-Neutral.

Alapaap-n-Cloud.

Alapaap nang loob-n-Jealousy; suspicion.

Alay-n-Offering; oblation; offer; gift;
contribution; obligation; homage;
present; gratification.

Alayan-v-To offer one's love.

Ale-n-Aunt.

Ale sa pakinabang-n-Step-mother.

Alibadbad-n-Nausea.

Alibugha-n-Jealousy; <corr sic=Decrial>decrial</corr>; slander.

Alikabok-n-Dust; powder.

Alila-n-Scullion; servant; page; valet.

<pb n=17>

Alilang babayi[**matched scan]-n-handmaid; handmaiden.

Alilisan-n-Sugarmill.

Alilisin-v-To grind; mill.

Aliman~go-n-Sandcrab; crab.

Alimasag-n-Crab.

Alimurahin-v-To insult; abuse; outrage;
offend; revile; curse.

Alin-pro-Which.

Alindog-n-Caress; petting; fondling.

Alinduguin-v-To caress; pet; fondle; humor;
wheedle; coax; jollify.

Alin~gasn~gas-n-Dispute; noise; rumor.

Alin~gawn~gaw-n-Rumor; noise.

Alinman-pro-Which so ever; who so
ever; anyone; someone; each; every
one.

Alintana-n-Disregard; disobeyance; gibe;
disrespect.

Alintanahin-v-To disobey; disregard;
gibe; look down upon.

Alipin-n-Slave; serf; bondman; thrall.

Alipinin-v-To enslave; subject; oppress;
overpower; crush; enthrall.

Alipun~ga-n-Chafe.

Alipusta-n-Insult; injury; wound; obloquy;
fleer.

Alipustain-v-To insult; offend; malign;
flout; fleer; wound.

Alisaga-a-Inconstant; fickle; idle; lazy;
loitering.

Alisan-v-To take off; take away; remove.

Alisin-v-To take away; remove; subtract;
extract; lessen; scratch out; divest;
abolish; oust.

Alitaptap-n-Fire fly.

Alitiit-n-Squeak; creak.

Alituad-n-Echo.

Aliw-n-Delight; pastime; comfort; satisfaction.

Aliwalas-a-Open; clear; <corr sic=plaint>plain</corr>.

Aliwan-n-Sporting place; sport; diversion;
pastime.

Aliwin-v-To console; comfort; cheer;
amuse; entertain; solace.

Alkagüete-n-Ruffian.

Almanake-n-Almanac; calendar.

Almirol-n-Starch.

Almirolin-v-To starch.

Alok-n-Presentation; offering; proffer;
overture; proposition.

Alon-n-Wave.

Alquetran-n-Tar; pitch.

Alulod-n-Eavestrough; conductor; gutter;
drain; spout.

Alulong-n-Echo.

Alupong-n-Snake; serpent; viper.

Aluyan-n-Cradle.

Ama-n-Father.

Amag-n-Mold; mildew.

Amágin-v-To become moldy; mildew.

<pb n=18>

Amagín-a-<corr sic=moldy>Moldy</corr>; musty; mildewed.

Amain-n-Uncle.

Amain sa pakinabang-n-Step father.

Amala-n-Delay; detention.

AMA NAMIN-n-THE LORD'S PRAYER.

Ama nang nuno-n-Great grand father.

Ambag-n-Contribution; assistance; aid;
subscription.

Ambon-n-Mist; drizzle.

Amihan-n-Breeze.

Amil-n-Stuttering; stammering.

Amo-n-Flattery; caress; love; liking.

Amoin-v-To tame<corr>;</corr> flatter; coax; wheedle.

Amoy-n-Smell; scent; stink; stench.

Amoyan-v-To smell; scent.

Ampatin-v-To stop; check.

Ampon-n-Support; protection; patronage;
shelter; aid.

Amponin-v-To support; protect; aid;
shelter; patronize; provide; defend;
help; assist.

Amuyan-v-To smell; scent.

Anak-n-Child; descendent; off spring;
progeny; posterity.

Anak sa asawang kauli-n-Stepchild.

Anak sa ligaw-n-Bastard; <corr sic=illigitimate>illegitimate</corr>
child.

Anak sa pagka dalaga-n-Bastard; <corr sic=illigitimate>illegitimate</corr>
child.

Anas-adv.-Softly; gently.

Anasin-v-To talk softly or gently.

Anat-n-Artery; ligament.

Anayad-a-Soft; delicate; docile.

Anayad-adv.-Softly; delicately.

Andukha-n-Defence; protection; <corr sic="hel paid">help;
aid</corr>; assistance; patronage.

Anim-a-Six.

Anim-n-Six.

Anim na daan-n-Six hundred.

Anino-n-Shade; shadow; spirit; ghost.

Anis-n-<corr sic=Anis>Anise</corr>.

Anis mascado-n-Nutmeg.

Anitin-v-To strop.

Anito-n-Idol.

Ankin-n-Usurpation; fraud; cheat.

Ankinin-v-To usurp; defraud; cheat;
arrogate.

Anluague-n-<corr sic=carpenter>Carpenter</corr>.

Ano-pro-What.

<corr sic=Aco>Ano</corr>-adv.-How; as; if.

Ano ang dahilan-Since when; why; what
<corr sic=in>is</corr> the reason.

Anoman-pro.-What so ever; whosoever.

Anoman-n-Something; any thing.

Anoman,y, wala-None; not one; neither.

Ano pa-What else.

Antak-n-Pain; ache.

Antala-n-Delay; deference; retardation.

Antalahin-v-To defer; delay; retard; dally;
obstruct; omit.

<pb n=19>

Antok-n-Sleepiness; drowsiness; somnambulance;
somnambulancy.

Anyahan-v-To invite; stand treat.

Anyaya-n-Invitation.

Anyo-n-Civility; custom; habit; outline;
plan; scheme; project; means; form;
manner; shape.

Apad-n-Colic; cramps.

Apat-n-Four.

Apat na daan-a-Four hundred.

Apat na panulukan-a-Four cornered;
quadrangular.

Apat na puo-n-Forty.

Apawan-v-To submerge; inundate; over
flow.

Apdo-n-Bile<corr sic=",">;</corr> gall.

Apellahan ang usap-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To appeal.

Apo-n-Grand child; <corr sic="descondent" resp=e>descendant</corr>.

Apog-n-Lime.

Aporo-n-Lining.

Apo sa talampakan-n-Great grand
child.

Apoy-n-Fire; conflagration.

Apuhapin-v-To feel or grope one's
way.

Apuyan-n-<corr sic=Heart>Hearth</corr>; fire place<corr>;</corr> stove.

Aral-n-Doctrine; teaching; instruction;
exhortation.

Aralan-v-To instruct; teach; advise;
educate; drill; inform; apprentice.

Aral na patnugot-n-Maxim; axiom.

Araro-n-Plow.

Ararohin-v-To <corr sic=Plow>plow</corr>; <corr sic=furow>furrow</corr>.

Araw-n-Day.

<corr sic=Aarawaraw>Arawaraw</corr>-adv.-Daily.

Araw nang kapan~ganakan-n-Birthday;
day of birth.

Araw nang fiesta-n-Holiday.

Araw sa lan~git-n-Sun.

Ari-n-Fortune; farm; state.

Ariin-v-To own; use.

Ariin ang di kaniya-v-To usurp.

Ari nang sarili-n-Fortune; property;
state.

Aropel-n-Tinsel; tinfoil.

<corr sic=Areglahin>Arreglahin</corr>-v-To organize; arrange;
regulate.

Arzobispo-n-Archbishop.

Arokin-v-To try; fathom; sound.

Asa-n-Hope; expectancy.

Asahan-v-To hope for; expect; await.

Asal-n-Custom; habit; mode; style; action;
fashion.

Asal bata-n-Actions of a child.

Asamasam-n-Anxiety; hankering; anguish;
longing.

Asamasamin-v-To hanker; long for;
desire.

Asarol-n-Hoe.

Asawa-n-Spouse.

Asawang babayi-n-Wife; helpmeet.

Asawang lalaki-n-Husband.

Asim-n-Crudity; crudeness; sourness.

Asin-n-Salt.

Asinan-v-To salt; corn; <corr sic=pikcle resp=e>pickle</corr>; cure<corr>;</corr> season;
brine.

Aso-n-Dog.

Asó-n-Smoke; steam; vapor.

Asong ulól-n-Mad dog.

Asukal-n-Sugar.

At-conj.-And.

Ataho-n-Partition wall.

Ataul-n-Coffin; casket.

Atay-n-Liver.

Atimin-v-To bear with patience.

Atip-n-Thatching; thatch; roof.

Atipan-v-To thatch; roof<corr>;</corr> cover.

Atuhin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To weigh; poise.

Auspicio-n-Asylum.

Awa-n-Mercy; clemency; condolence;
leniency; ruth; generosity; pity.

Awak-n-Crow; raven.

Awasan-v-To deduce; subtract; take
away; lessen.

Awatan-v-To separate; part.

Awatin ang hayop-v-To wean animals.

Away-n-Dispute; quarrel; fight; riot;
tumult; strife; affray.

Awit-n-Song-legend; fiction.

Ay ano-What else.

Ayaw-a-Loth; unwilling.

Ayaw magbait-a-Incorrigible.

Ayon-prep.-According to; about; <corr sic=persuant>pursuant</corr>;
coincident.

Ayos-a-Fit; proper; elaborate; to the
purpose.

Ayos-n-Symmetry; aptitude; pertinence;
array; opportunity.

Ayunan-v-To restore friendship.

Ayunan ang iba-v-To second; <corr sic=suscribe resp=e>subscribe</corr>;
consent; promise.

Ayup-n-Sarcasm; abuse.

Ayupan-v-To abuse; ridicule.

Ayusin-v-To conform; arrange; proportion;
array; police; marshall; methodize.

Azogue-n-Mercury.

Azul-a-Blue.

Azul ang mata-a-Blue eyed.



<div1 type=Letter n=B>
<head>B</head>

B.-B.

Baakin-a-Fissile; capable of being split.

<pb n=20>

Baakin-v-To split; break.

Baba-n-Chin.

<pb n=21>

Babag-n-Tumult; strife; contest; riot;
quarrel; fray; scuffle; fight; dispute;
setto.

Babagin-v-To scuffle; fight; dispute; offend;
irritate; hurt; injure.

Babala-n-Admonition; omen; advice;
alarm; threat.

Babala sa madla-n-<corr sic=Programme resp=e>Program</corr>; announcement.

Babalam-(babalan)-v-To imitate; induce;
request; require; investigate.

Babasagin-a-Weak; delicate; brittle; frail;
fragile; thin.

Babayi-n-Woman; female; lady; mistress;
concubine.

Babaying abay sa pagkakasal-n-Bridesmaid.

Babaying alila sa bahay-n-House keeper.

Babaying banal-n-Virgin.

Babaying Guinoo-n-Lady; damsel.

Baboy-n-Pig; hog; barrow.

Baboy ramo-n-Wild hog.

Balulusan-n-Bellows.

Badya-n-Mockery; mimicry; tease.

Badyahin-v-To tease; mock; mimic;
imitate.

Bàga-n-Lung.

Baga-n-Live coal; ember.

Bagá-n-Abcess; tumor.

Bagabag-n-Vexation; mortification; disgust;
disturbance.

Bagabagin-v-To vex; mortify; afflict;
disgust; disturb.

Bagal-n-Tediousness; prolixity; delay;
laziness; tardiness; sloth.

Bagaman-<corr sic="prep.">adv.</corr>-Yet; as yet; still; over;
never the less; though; however; not
with standing.

Bagang-n-Back tooth; grinder; molar.

Bagaso-n-Bruised sugar cane.

Bagay-n-Object; thing; item; <corr sic=desig resp=e>design</corr>; end;
circumstance.

Bagay-a-Fit; proper; adequate; apt; competent;
seasonable; appropriate; <corr sic=usefur resp=e>useful</corr>;
deft; profitable; convenient; suitable;
natural; punctual; exact; applicable.

Bagay lupa-a-Earthly; worldly; terrene.

Bagabagin-v-To farm; plow; till.

Bagkus-prep. and conj.-If not; but; except;
only; besides; excepting.

Bago-a-New; recent; modern; young;
novel; first.

Bago-adv.-Before; immediately; presently;
right away; here to fore; rather.

Bagongbago-a-Very new.

Bagong binyagan-n-Convert; neophyte.

Bagong labas sa Colegio-n-Graduate.

Bagong nag-aaral-n-Beginner; novice;
learner; tyro; freshman.

<pb n=22>

Bagong tawo-n-Single man; youth.

Bagong tawong may edad-n-Bachelor.

Bagot-n-Displeasure; disgust.

Bagok-n-Mud hole.

Bagsik-n-<corr sic=stricness resp=e>Strictness</corr>; strenuousness; sternness;
severity; rigidness; rigor; <corr sic=narshness resp=e>harshness</corr>;
tyranny.

Baguhin-v-To renew; remodel; alter;
change; modify; deviate; vary; amend;
reform; convert; make over; retract;
take back; recall; annul; revoke.

Bagwis-n-Quill; quill pen.

Bagyo-n-Storm; tempest.

Baha-n-Flood; inundation.

Bahag-n-Truss or bandage for ruptures;
gee string

Bahag hari-n-Rainbow.

Bahagi-n-Piece; part; portion; share;
division; section; segment; quota;
fragment.

Bahagi n~g isang hukbo-n-Squad.

Bahagihin-v-To divide; part; share.

Bahagya-adv.-Scarcely; hardly.

Bahang bigla at malaki-n-Torrent.

Bahawin-v-To wound; sear; scar.

Bahay-n-House; habitation; edifice.

Bahay bata-n-Womb.

Bahay gagamba-n-Cobweb; spiderweb.

Bahay ginikan-n-Hayloft; strawloft.

Bahay na pinagtitinaan-n-Dyeshop.

Bahay n~g hari-n-Palace.

Bahay pukyutan-n-Beehive.

Bahid-n-<corr sic=mark>Mark</corr>; <corr sic=sing>sign</corr>.

Bahin-n-<corr sic=sneeze>Sneeze</corr>.

Bahô-n-Stench; stink; corruption; pollution;
infection.

Bahog-n Mixture; medley; mortar; compound.

Bait-n-Sense; prudence; intelligence; ability;
mind; will; skill; knowledge;
knack; circumspection; spirit; understanding;
disposition; standard; judgement;
continence; continency.

Baiki-n-Mumps.

Baitang-n-Step of a flight of stairs; <corr sic=Rung>rung</corr>
of a <corr sic=ledder resp=e>ladder</corr>.

Baka-n-Cow; kine.

Bakal-n-Iron.

Bakal <corr sic="ñg">n~g</corr> kabayo-n-Horse shoe.

Bakam-n-Groove; hack; mortise.

Bakas-n-Track; footprint; rut; sign; furrow;
mark; blot; vestige.

Bakat-<corr sic=adv>a</corr>-<corr sic=not>Not</corr> alike; unequal; rough.

Bakbakin-v-To unglue.

Bakia-n-Wooden shoe pattin.

Bakin (bakit)-adv.-Why; how.

Baklad-n-Fish corral.

Bakman-n-Sheep fold.

Bakod-n-Fence; inclosure; yard; play
ground; court.

<pb n=23>

Baktasan-n-Shortcut.

Bakuran-n-To <corr sic=Fence>fence</corr>; inclosure; court;
playground; railing.

Bakuran-v-To fence; inclose.

Balâ-n-<corr sic=Theart resp=e>Threat</corr>; surprise; fright.

Bala-n-Bullet.

Balabatohin-a-<corr sic=stony>Stony</corr>.

Balahibo-n-Hair; fleece; feather.

Balahibo <corr sic="ñg">n~g</corr> tupa-n-Wool.

Balaho-n-Mud; mire.

Balak-n-Proffer; proposition; estimate;
computation; calculation; supputation;
account.

Balakang-n-Loin.

Balakilan-n-Crosspiece; cross timber.

Balakin-v-To compute; proffer; reckon;
calculate; count; estimate; notify.

Balakubak-n-Dandruff; scurf.

Balang-pro.-Each; every; someone.

Balan~ga-n-Round earthen pot.

Balan~gaw-n-Arc; bow.

Balang buan-adv<corr>.</corr>-Monthly.

Balang lingo-adv.-Weekly.

Balang na-adv.-<corr sic=some>Some</corr> what; in a manner.

Balang na-pro.-Some one; whichso ever.

Balan-n-Piles.

Balantok-a-Arched; bowed.

Balat-n-Peel; rind; crust; skin; pelt; hull.

Balat kayo-n-Fiction; falsehood; stratagem;
strategy.

Balawis-a-Hot headed; quick tempered.

Balayi-n-Marriage;

Baldokin-n-Canopy.

Balbas-n-Beard; whiskers; barb.

Bali-n-Granary; mow.

Bali-n-Break; fracture; crack.

Balibul-n-Auger; gimlet; bit.

Balibulin-v-To perforate; drill; bore.

Baliin-v-To break; fracture; crack; crash;
shatter; disrupt.

Balikat-n-Shoulder.

Balikatan-a-Firm; fast; hard; resolute.

Balikatin-v-To shoulder; carry on the
shoulders.

Balik-a-<corr sic=reversed>Reversed</corr> inside out.

Balikin-v-To overthrow; reverse; overturn;
crush.

Baliktad-a-Reverse; refractive.

Baliktarin-v-To overthrow; overturn; reverse;
crush.

Balilisin-v-To raise; lift.

Balindang-n-Canvas; sailcloth.

Balintuna-adv<corr>.</corr>-Against; backward.

Balisa-n-Restlessness; hankering; anxiety.

Balisa-a-Restless; anxious.

Balisahin-v-To vex; disturb; perturb;
harass.

Balisaksakin-a-Strong; robust; corpulent.

Balisunsong-n-Wrap; <corr sic=Stingy>stingy</corr> person.

Balisunson~gin-v-To twist; wrap.

<pb n=24>

Balisuso-a-Curly; curled.

Balisusuin-v-To ring; curl; encircle.

Balita-n-News; notice; message; omen;
information; report.

Balita-a-Famous; celebrated; renowned;
accredited: distinguished.

Balitang mainam-n-Evangel.

Baliw-a-Furious; frantic; mad; crazy.

Baliwin-v-To mope; fool; <corr sic="be come">become</corr> demented.

Balok-n-<corr sic=Pellicule>Pellicle</corr>; cuticle; inner skin of
fruits.

Balon-n-Well; <corr sic=Cistern>cistern</corr>.

Balot-n-Bundle; parcel; pack; cover; covering.

Balot n~g Kalawang-a-Rusty.

Balot n~g sulat-n-Envelope.

Baltak-n-Haul; pull; tug.

<corr sic=Balubaluman>Balunbalunan</corr>-n-Crop; maw.

Balukan-v-Clean; husk; strip off husks.

Baluktot-a-Curved; bent; bowed; curvate.

Baluktutin-v-To bend; curve; turn;
clinch; rivet.

<corr sic="Baluñgoyñgoy">Balun~goyn~goy</corr>-n-Nosebleed; <corr sic=Hemorrhage>hemorrhage</corr>
of the nose.

Balutan-v-To wrap up.

Balutan-n-Parcel<corr>;</corr> envelop.

Balutan <corr sic="ñg">n~g</corr> papel-n-Pad of paper.

Balutan <corr sic="ñg">n~g</corr> sapot-v-To enshroud.

Balutin-v-To wrap up; embale; cover;
envelop; pack; screen.

Baluti sa dibdib-n-Nightmare.

Bambo-n-Gallows; bamboo cane.

Bambohin-v-To cane.

Banakal-n-The wood around the heart
of a tree.

Banal-a-Virtuous; pious; holy; pure;
<corr sic=virgen>virgin</corr><corr>;</corr> simple; just; merciful.

Banat-a-<corr sic=tense>Tense</corr>; tight; stiff.

Banatin-v-To stretch; lengthen; expand;
haul tight; <corr sic=thwarl>thwart</corr>; tug; unfold; adjust;
enlarge.

Banayad-a-Moderate; modest; circumspect;
cautious; slow; sluggish;
tardy.

Banday-a-<corr sic=impious>Impious</corr>; irreligious; profane.

Bandila-n-Flag; standard; banner; colors;
pennant; ensign.

Bandeja-n-Tray; salver.

Bandejada-n-Platter.

Ban~ga-n-Narrow necked olla.

Ban~ga-n-Combat; fray; knock; collision;
clash; fight; encounter.

Ban~gain-v-To fight; assail; attack; assault.

Ban~galin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To cut off at the root; chop
off; maim.

Ban~gan-n-Granary; mow.

Ban~gaw-n-Horsefly.

Bangbang-n-Canal; drain.

Banban~gin-v-To dig a canal or drain.

<pb n=25>

Ban~gang gatasan-n-Milk pail.

Ban~gin-a-Rough; corduroyed.

Ban~ginban~gin-a-Rough; cragged; rude;
rugged.

Ban~gis-n-Tyranny; severity; ferocity;
wildness; cruelty.

Ban~gis-a-Tyrannical; severe; cruel; wild;
fierce.

Bangit-n-Record; reference.

Bangitin-v-To mention; relate; refer;
touch; treat of; record; report; direct.

Ban~gun~got-n-Nightmare.

Ban~guyn~goy-n-Hemorrhage; flux of blood
from the nose.

Ban~go-n-Sweet smell; redolence.

Ban~gos-n-Shad. <!-- shad is a kind of fish like milkfish (ban~gus) -->

Banhain-v-To frame; begin work.

Banka-n-Boat; canoe; shallop; bark.

Bankay-n-Corpse.

Bankero-n-Boatman; ferryman.

Banko-n-Bench; <corr sic=Bank>bank</corr>.

Banlian-v-To scald.

Banlik-n-Mud; mire; slime.

Bansag-n-Nickname; alias.

Bansagin-v-To nickname; ridicule.

Bantay-n-Guard; watch; sentry; vigil;
sentinel; custody.

Banta-n-Idea; notion; fancy; admonish;
forward; premeditate; permonish;
have a <corr sic=nntion resp=e>notion</corr>. <!-- entry is mix of noun and verb defn. -->

Bantain-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To intend; design; fancy;
admonish; forward; premeditate; permonish;
have a notion.

Bantayan-n-Guard; watch; patrol.

Bantayin-v-To watch; keep guard; keep;
protect; preserve.

Bantog-a-Celebrated; famous; noted;
renowned; illustrious; notorious; distinguished;
accredited; noble; honorable.

Bantog sa kahambugan-a-Blown; notorious.

Bantuan-v-To assuage; tune; <corr sic=pour>mix</corr> cold
water with warm.<!-- sic -->

Bao-n-Widow; widower.

Baog-a-Barren; sterile; unfruitful.

Bao n~g Hari-n-Queen dowager.

Bao n~g ulo-n-The crown of the head.

Bao sa buhay-n-Grass widow; grass
widower.

Bara-n-Yard stick; shaft.

Baraha-n-Playing cards; pack of cards.

Barahin-v-To measure by yards.

Barak-a-<corr sic=pale>Pale</corr>.

Baraka-n-Market; market-place.

Barak sa takot-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Pale with fright.

Barandillas-n-Baluster.

Barazo-n-Arm.

Barazo n~g dagat-n-Bay; gulf; sound;
arm of the ocean.

<pb n=26>

Baria-n-Coppers; pennies; cents.

Bariles-n-Barrel; keg; cask.

Baro-n-Shirt; jacket.

Barongbarong-n-Hut; cottage; shack.

Barrena-n-Gimble; auger.

Barrio-n-Suburb.

Basá-a-Wet; damp; moist<corr sic=.>;</corr> (n~g hamog)
dewy.

Basabasahin-v-To read; peruse.

Basabasain-v-To dampen; moisten; wet.

Basag-a-Broken; fractured; destroyed.

Basag-n-Break; <corr sic=fractered resp=e>fracture</corr>; crack.

Basagin-v-To break; fracture; bust; destroy;
crack; crash; shatter.

Basag ulo-n-Puzzle; perplexity; dissent;
dissention; quarrel; dispute.

Basahan-n-Rag; fragment of cloth.

Basahin-v-To read.

Basahin n~g patakbo-v-To peruse; read
swiftly.

Basahin muli-v-To reread; read again.

Basain-v-To wet; dampen; moisten; water;
dabble; sprinkle.

Batisan-v-Ford.

Bastos-a-Coarse; rude; indecent; illbred;
tough; rough; disreputable; fell; immoderate;
contumelious; rustic; unbecoming;
gross; unpolished; noisy;
blowzy; boorish; clamorous.

Bastos na ugali-a-Abusive; insulting;
illbred.

Bata-n-Child; boy; girl; lass; lad.

Batahin-v-To maintain; suffer; sustain;
tolerate; endure; resist; abide; oppose;
repel; comport.

Batak-n-Tug; pull; haul; (na bigla)
jerk.

Batakin-v-To pull; tug; touse; lengthen;
stretch; (nang pabigla) jerk.

Batang maganda-n-Cherub; (maliit) <corr sic=Infant>infant</corr>;
babe.

Batasan-n-Short-cut.

BATHALA-n-GOD.

Bati-n-Salute; greeting; salutation; curtsy;
observation; remark; note.

Batia-n-Wash tub; tub; laver.

Batibatihan-v-To beat; knock.

Batibot-a-Strong; robust; sound; stout;
firm; solid; inflexible; hard; rigid;
arduous; tight; entire; complete;
stubborn; just; informed.

Batiin-v-To salute; greet; halloo; reprimand;
rebuke; chide.

Batik-n-Stain<corr sic="-">; </corr>spot; blot; blemish.

Batikbatik-a-Spotted; speckled; mottled;
brindle.

Batikola-n-Crupper.

Bato-n-Stone; rock; cliff.

Batobalani-n-Magnetism; loadstone.

Batohin-v-To stone.

<pb n=27>

Batong Marmol-n-Marble.

Batong Maliit-n-Cobble; cobble-stone.

Bato n~g katawan-n-Kidney.

Batugan-a-Lazy; indolent; inattentive; indifferent;
idle; slow; tardy.

Batugan-adv<corr>.</corr>-Lazily; indolently; tardily;
inattentively; slowly.

Batulang-n-Basket; hand-basket; pannier.

Batya-n-Washing place; laundry.

Batyag-n-Listening; hearing.

Batyagin-v-To hear; listen; hearken;
understand; comprehend.

Baul-n-Trunk; locker; coffer.

Baunan-n-Place of burial; grave; sepulcher.

Bawal-a-Furtive; clandestine; prohibited.

Bawang-n-Garlic; chives.

Bawas-n-<corr sic=reduction>Reduction</corr>; subtraction; deduction.

Bawasan-v-To subtract; reduce; lessen;
discount; deduct; deduce; pare; clip;
lighten; cut away.

Bawat-a-Each; every; (buan)-adv<corr>.</corr>-monthly.

Bawiin-v-To recover; win back; regain.

Bayad-n-Pay fee; stipend; salary; compensation;
wages; retribution; payment;
satisfaction; reward.

Bayag-n-Testicle; (nang campana)-bell;
clapper.

Bayakan-n-Bat; vampire.

Bayan-n-Town; city.

Bayani-a-Valiant; courageous; brave; intrepid;
audacious; strong; gallant;
vigorous; noble; famous; celebrated;
illustrious; renowned; distinguished;
noted.

Bayani-n-Champion; combatant.

Bayang tinubuan-n-Birth-place.

Baybay-n-Shore; strand; limit; border;
edge. (dagat)-n-Shore; beach; sea shore;
sea-coat; sea side.

Bayaran-v-To pay; recompense; compensate;
retribute; indemnify; reward;
fee; liquidate a debt. (muli)-v-Repay;
pay again. (<corr sic="n~glagpos">n~g lagpos</corr>)-v-Overpay.

Bayaw-n-Brother-in-law.

Bayawak-n-Guana; large lizard.

Bayawang-n-Waist; (n~g damit)-Waist
band girdle.

Bayong-n-Sack; bag; sac.

Bayubuan-v-To turn the ground; weave
the edge of a tray or basket.

Bayugo n~g tuhod-n-Kneecap.

Bayuhan-n-Place of flailing; mall; mallet;
flail.

Bayuhin-v-To pound; flail; mall; drive
with a mall or mallet.

Bayumbo-n-Screen.

Belis-n-Half cent.

Benditahan-n-Holy watering pot.

<pb n=28>

Benditahin-v-To consecrate.

Biak-n-Half; crack; fracture; piece.

Biakin-v-<corr sic=to>To</corr> have; break; crack; fracture.

Bianan-n-Father or Mother in-law.

Bibi-n-Goose.

Bibig-n-Mouth; chaps; orifice.

Bibin~ga-n-Tile; piece of burnt clay.

Bigas-n-Rice.

Bigasan-n-Place where rice is threshed;
building in which rice is threshed
or hulled.

Bigat-n-Weight; gravity; heaviness;
heft; importance; consequence; toil;
burden; trouble; cross; moment.

Bigatan-v-To poise; load; oppress; mortgage;
try the heft.

Bigay-n-Gift; present; donation; grant;
gratuity; keepsake.

Bigay lamang-a-Gratis; free of cost;
for nothing.

Bigkisin-v-To pronounce; express; name.

Bigkis-n-Bundle; parcel; pack; <corr sic=forgot>fagot</corr>;
sheaf.

Bigkisan-v-To bundle; parcel; bind; tie; gird.

Bigkisin-v-To bundle; pack; bind; <corr sic=tiegird>tie; gird</corr>.

Bigla-a-Unexpected; <corr sic=unforseen>unforeseen</corr>; quick; sudden;
rapid; cursory; injudicious;
<corr sic=indescreet>indiscreet</corr>.

Bigla-adv<corr>.</corr>-Hurriedly; unexpectedly; rapidly:
suddenly; quickly; hastily.

Bigla-n-Error; mistake; hurry; <corr sic=suddeness>suddenness</corr>;
quickness.

Biglaan-a-Urgent; pressing; executive.

Biglabigla-a-Unexpected; sudden.

Biglain-v-To precipitate; hurry; hasten;
press.

Biglangbigla-a-Sudden; hurried; precipitate;
unexpected.

Bigti-n Suicide; hanging.

Bigtihin-v-To hang; commit suicide.

Bigyan-v-To give; present.

Bigyan <corr sic=ang>n~g</corr> kahulugan-v-To <corr sic=signif resp=e>signify</corr>;
mean; declare.

Bigyan <corr sic=ang>n~g</corr> kailan~gan-v-To give the
necessities; provide; aid; succor; defray;
supply; furnish; minister.

Bigyan kapangyarihan-v-To <corr sic=autorize resp=e>authorize</corr>;
empower; commission.

Bigyan katibayan-v-To guarantee;
ratify.

Bigyang loob-v-To gratify; condescend;
indulge; submit; give way.

Bigyang pasiya-v-To judge; decide; determine;
conclude; resolve.

Bigyang sala-v-To blame; condemn;
accuse; criminate; impeach; reproach;
aggravate.

Bigyang sindak-v-To <corr sic=friggten resp=e>frighten</corr>; scare,
dispirit; render dejected.

<pb n=29>

Bigyan lakas-v-To strengthen; cheer;
give strength or force; reanimate.

Bihagin-v-To capture; spirit; kidnap.

Bihasa-a-Accustomed; used; capable;
<corr sic=skilful>skillful</corr>; practical; dexterous; sly; prudent;
knowing; able; experienced;
clever; expert; astute; cunning; elegant;
excellent; polite; civil; courteous;
graceful; smart; learned.

Bihasahin-v-To guide; teach; train;
educate.

Bihasang lubha-a-<corr sic=very>Very</corr> learned; wise;
well educated.

Bihasa sa <corr sic="pag-~gawa">pag-gawa</corr>-a-Accustomed; fit;
proper; convenient.

Bihira-a-Scarce<corr sic="-">; </corr>uncommon; <corr sic=pare>rare</corr>; old;
excellent.

Bihira-adv.-Few; seldom; rarely; uncommonly.

Bihis-n-Change of <corr sic=clotaes resp=e>clothes</corr>.

Bihisan-n-Change of clothes; dress.

Bihisin-v-To change clothes; dress.

Biik-n-Shoat.

Biis-n-Reward; remuneration.

Bikas-n-Shape; form; stature; size; aspect;
measure; ostent; mode; guise;
will; disposition; manner.

Biki-n-Mumps.

Bikik-<corr>n-</corr>Choking; small obstruction.

Biklarin-v-To unfold; enlarge; extend.

Bilang-n-Count; computation; numeration.

Bilan~gin-v-To count; <corr sic=ennumarate>ennumerate</corr>; calculate;
compute; estimate; suppute.

Bilang <corr sic="ñg">n~g</corr> panahon-n-Date.

Bilango-n-Jail; prison; <corr sic=calabose>calaboose</corr>.

Bilanguan-n-<corr sic=jail>Jail</corr>; prison; <corr sic="calabose;">calaboose.</corr>

Bilaran-n-Drying place; place where
anything is dried.

Bilas-n-Two people who <corr sic=marrp>marry</corr> two
sisters<corr sic=";">,</corr> <corr>a </corr>sister and <corr>a </corr>brother<corr sic=";">,</corr> or two
brothers.

Bili-n-Cost price; buying price; value.

Bilibirin n~g suga-v-To fasten with a
rope.

Bilig sa mata-n-Cataract of the eye.

Bilin-n-Message; errand; mission; charge;
commission; request; mandate;
injunction; order.

<corr sic="Bilin~gbilin~gan">Bilingbilin~gan</corr>-n-Windlass.

Bilis-n-Vivacity; <corr sic=roidness>rapidness</corr>; excessiveness;
rapidity.

Bilis-n-Billiards.

Billete-n-Ticket.

Bilog-n-Roundness; circle; <corr sic=spahere resp=e>sphere</corr>; orb;
globe; <corr sic=rotunditp>rotundity</corr>; disc; disk; total.

Bilog-a-Circular; round; whole; total;
universal; entire.

Bilugin-v-To round; sum; add; complete.

Bimbin~gin-v-To retard; delay; defer;
<pb n=30>with-hold; stop; check; dally; monopolize;
preserve; suspend.

Binat-n-Relapse; second fall.

Binata-a-Young; youthful; juvenile.

Binata-n-Juvenile; youth.

Bin~gas-n-Gap or notch in a tool.

Bin~gaw-n-Gap or notch in a tool.

Bin~gi-a-Deaf; hard of hearing.

Bin~gihin-v-To deafen; to make deaf.

Binhi-n-Seed; grain; germ; bud.

Binithay-a&amp; p. p<corr>.</corr>-Sifted.

Bintang-n-False charge; imputation;
presumption; suspicion; imposture.

Bintan~gin-v-To accuse falsely; inculpate;
indict.

Binti-n-Calf of the leg; <corr sic=shang resp=e>shank</corr>.

Binubukalan-n-Source; spring; <corr sic=origen resp=e>origin</corr>.

Binwit-n-Fishing tackle.

Binuli-a &amp; p. p.-Polished.

Binutas n~g tan~ga-a-Moth-eaten.

Binyagan-n-<corr sic=Chriatian resp=e>Christian</corr>; convert; baptism.

Binyagin-n-To christen; baptize.

Birador-n-Wrench.

Birang-n-Handkerchief.

Biro-n-Joke; jest; pun; trick; buffoonry;
hoa; flirt; drollery; grimace.

Biroan-n-<corr sic=Caroucol>Carousal</corr>; revelry; romping;
jocularity; jocoseness; jollity; scuffle;
(masaklap)-sarcasm.

Biruin-v-To <corr sic="6oke" resp=e>joke</corr>; jolly; fool; revel; laugh
at; ridicule; flirt.

Bisa-n-Activity; valor; force; fortitude;
vigor; courage; power; authority; ability;
<corr sic=possitivility>possibility</corr>.

Bisaklatin-v-To spread or extend the feet.

Biscotso-n-Toast.

Biscuit-n-Biscuit.

Bisto-adv<corr>.</corr>-Perhaps.

Bitag-n-Snare; trap.

Bitak-n-Crevice; chink; cleft; crack;
fissure.

Bitakbitak-a-Full of cracks or fissures.

Bitakin-v-To fissure; chink; crack.

Bitang-n-Springe; <corr sic=Deer>deer</corr> net.

Bitay-n-Gallows.

Bitayin-v-<corr sic=hang>Hang</corr>; execute by hanging.

Bitbitayan-n-Scaffold; gallows; place of
execution.

Bitbitin-v-To carry suspended; grasp;
catch.

Bithay-n-Sieve; riddle; crib; cribble.

Bithayin-v-To sift; bolt.

Bitik-n-Garter.

Bitiwan-v-To let go; forsake; yield; untie;
loosen; discharge; slacken; shelve;
permit; forego; set at liberty.

Bitiwan ang dala-v-To lay down a
burden.

Billing-n-Ring.

Bito-n-Feast; festivity; rejoicing; holiday<corr sic=";">.</corr>

<pb n=31>

Bituin-n-Star.

Bituka-n-Intestine; tripe; gut.

Biwas-n-Tug; pull; haul; wave; move.

Biwasin-v-To tug; pull; haul; move;
wave.

Biwiin-v-To untwist.

Biyaya-n-Gift; present; grant; favor;
keepsake; gratification; compliments;
pleasure.

Biyaya n~g DIOS-n-Unction; devotion;
anointing.

Bokot-a-Rough; rumpled; snarled.

Bola-n-Ball.

Bolin~ga-n-An obscure thought.

Bomba-n-Fire engine.

Boogin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To rot; remove.

Buan-n-Month.

Buan darating-n-Proximo.

Buan sa lan~git-n-Moon.

Buaya-n-Alligator; crocodile; cayman;
caiman.

Bubas-n-Small tumor.

Bubo-n-Clown; buffoon.

Bubog-n-Hall; crystal; glass.

Bubong-n-Roof; thatching.

Bubong n~g paa-n-Instep; tarsus.

Bubuan-n-Mold.

Bubun~gan-n-Roof; shed.

Bubuyog-n-Bumble bee.

Buchebuche-n-Fritter.

Budburin-v-To sow; scatter; powder.

Budlon~gin-n-To punch; bore.

Búga-n-Pumice.

<corr sic="Bubá">Bugá</corr>-n-Spit.

Bugain-n-To burnish; glaze; polish.

Bugawin-v-To scare away; frighten.

Bugbog-n-Contusion; bruise; hurt;
wound; injury; blow.

Bugbugin-v-To contuse; bruise; hurt;
injure; mangle; wound; maim; cripple;
pound; crash.

Bugnos-a-Loose; surplus.

Bugnusin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To loosen; untie.

Bugok-n-Addle; rotten; empty; void.

Bugsok-n-Basket; hamper; hand basket.

Bugtong-a-<corr sic=only>Only</corr>; single; particular; individual;
unique; rare; singular.

Bugtong-adv<corr>.</corr>-<corr sic=alone>Alone</corr>.

Bugtong-n-Enigma; <corr sic=puzjle>puzzle</corr>; riddle; conundrum;
poser; rebus; quiz.

Bugtong na anak-n-Only begotten child.

Buhaghag-a-Spongy; porous; fungus; soft;
blended; thin.

Buhaghag-a-An idle talker.

Buhaghagin-v-To thin; <corr sic=rarify>rarefy</corr>; dilute.

Buhalhal-n-Fool; madman; idiot.

Buhalhal-a-<corr sic=frank>Frank</corr>; open.

Buhan~gin-n-Sand.

Buhat-adv.-Since; after; from.

Buhat-a-Originated; derived.

<pb n=32>

Buhatan ang kasalanan-v-To accuse;
<corr sic=impaech resp=e>impeach</corr>; criminate; incriminate.

Buhatin-v-To raise; lift; elevate; heave;
get up.

Buhat n~gayon-adv.-Hereafter.

Buhawi-n-Whirlwind.

Buhay-n-Life.

Buhay-a-Active; <corr sic=livoly resp=e>lively</corr>; spirited; high;
spirited.

Buhayin-v-To vivify; enliven; spirit;
electrify; spirit.

Buhayin muli-v-To <corr sic=resusticate resp=e>resuscitate</corr>; restore
to life; revive; acquire new life.

Buhay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Awake; lively; impetuous;
vivacious; active; fervent.

Buhok-n-Hair.

Buhong-a-Haughty; lofty; rude; insolent;
shameless; impudent.

Buig-n-<corr sic=buuch resp=e>Bunch</corr>; <corr sic=racenne>raceme</corr>.

Buis-n-Taxes; impost; excise; duty; levy;
contribution.

Buisit-a-Ungrateful; bad; unlucky; unfortunate.

Buisitin-v-To cause to be unfortunate.

Bukal-n-<corr sic=origen resp=e>Origin</corr>; <corr sic=eourse resp=e>source</corr>; spring; jet; fountain;
<corr sic=finst resp=e>first</corr> cause.

<corr sic=Bucalan>Bukalan</corr>-n-Head-spring; spring; fountain.

Bukal sa loob-a-Spontaneous; voluntary.

<corr sic=Bucas>Bukas</corr>-adv.-To morrow.-n-Morrow.

Bukás-adv.-<corr sic=open>Open</corr>.-a-<corr sic=clear>Clear</corr>; open.

Bukbok-n-Grub; weevil; rotted tooth.

Bukbukin-a-<corr sic=full>Full</corr> of grubs or weevils.

Bukid-n-Field; country; farm; soil; land;
ground; region.

Bukid na sinasaka-n-Cultivated ground<corr sic=";">,</corr>
or land.

Bukiran-n-Field; farm.

Bukirin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To farm; cultivate.

Buklaw-n-Tumor; extuberance.

Buklod-n-Ring.

Buko-n-Joint; knuckle.

Buko-n-Green cocoanut.

Bukod-adv.-<corr sic=more>More</corr> over; besides; except.

Bukod ang-The rest; others.

Bukod-a-Special; particular.

Bukod pa sa-adv.-<corr sic=besides>Besides</corr>; moreover.

Bukod sa-adv.-<corr sic=Let>Less</corr>; besides; more-over;
except; away from; more than.

Bukod sa iba-a-Strange; <corr sic=feroign resp=e>foreign</corr>; rare.

Bukod tan~gi-a-Distinct; particular.

Bukol-n-Abscess; tumor; lump.

Bukot-a-Crooked; hump-backed.

Buksan-v-To open; <corr sic=rhow resp=e>show</corr>; disclose; discover;
display.

Bula-n-Froth; foam; spume; scum.

Bulaan-n-Liar; imposter.

Bulaan-a-Lying; erroneous.

Bulag-a-Blindman.

Bulag-a-Blind.

Bulagaw-a-Blue or gray eyed.

<pb n=33>

Bulagin-v-To blind; darken; cheat.

Bulaklak-n-Flower; blossom; posy.

Bulaklakan-n-Place of many flowers;
flower garden.

Bulanglang-n-Vegetable soup.

Bulaos-n-Path; trail.

Bulaw-n-Young <corr sic=wilb resp=e>wild</corr> boar.

Bulaw-a-Faded; withered.

Bulati-n-Worm.

Bulaybulay-n-Meditation; contemplation.

Bulaybulayin-v-To meditate; muse; consider;
contemplate.

Bulí-n-Polish.

Búli-n-Small tree snake.

Bulíhin-v-To polish; burnish; finish;
smooth.

Bulihin muli-v-To repolish.

Bulinaw-n-Short or near sighted.

Bulo-n-Calf; suckling.

Bulok-a-<corr sic=rotten>Rotten</corr>; corrupt; putrid.

Bulong-n-Whisper.

Bulong-adv.-Softly.

Bulongbulon~gan-n-Whisper; rumor; report;
murmur.

Bulô n~g baka-n-Calf; heifer; veal.

Bulos-n-A roll of cloth.

Bulsa-n-Pocket; pouch.

Bulukan-n-<corr sic=rotiing resp=e>Rotting</corr> place.

Bulukin-v-To rot; corrupt; make putrid;
disrupt.

Bululos-v-Diarrhea.

Bumaha-v-To lessen; lower; descend; go
down; flow; slump; let down.

Bumabag-v-To fight; contend; dispute;
struggle.

Bumaba ang loob-v-To humble; tame.

Bumabasa-n-<corr sic=Beader>Reader</corr>.

Bumaho-v-To stink; smell bad; fetor.

Bumaka-v-To war; fight; oppose; contend;
struggle.

Bumala-v-To threaten; menace; proclaim;
announce.

Bumago-v-To renew; alter; change; disturb.

Bumalak-v-To propose; offer; announce;
proclaim.

Bumalik-v-To return; go back; fall back;
retrograde; retrocede.

Bumalikuas-v-To over-turn; double; duplicate;
turn over.

Bumalong-v-To spring from; spring;
issue or proceed from; begin; grow;
have its beginning in.

Bumalong ang dugo-v-To bleed.

Bumaluktot-v-To curve; bend.

Bumanat-v-To extend; enlarge; grow large.

<corr sic="Buman~ga">Bumanga</corr>-v-To attack; assault; attempt
fight; collide.

Buman~gis-v-To become or grow fierce
or wild.

<pb n=34>

Buman~gon-v-To arise; rise; get up.

Bumasa-v-To read; peruse.

Bumati-v-To salute; hail; greet; curtsy;
halloo.

Bumatis-v-To ford; wade.

Bumautot-v-To stink.

Bumawas-v-To slump; dwindle; lessen.

Bumawi-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To retrieve a loss; regain.

Bumbuan-n-<corr sic=Grown resp=e>Crown</corr> of the head.

Bumigat-v-To grow heavy; increase in
heft.

Bumigat ang <corr sic=damdan>damdam</corr>-v-To grow worse;
impair; deteriorate.

Bumigti-v-To hang.

Bumihag-v-To captivate; kidnap; capture;
charm.

Bumilang-v-To count; enumerate; reckon; calculate.

<corr sic=Bimili>Bumili</corr>-v-To buy; purchase.

Buminyag-v-To christen; baptize.

Bumithay-v-To sift; separate.

Bumuay-v-To be unstable.

Bumubuga n~g-v-To vomit; spit.

Bumubukal-n-Springing.

Bumuga-v-To vomit; spit; expectorate.

Bumugbog-v-To injure; hurt; wound;
bruise; harm; cause pain; irritate.

Bumuhat-v-To raise; lift up; erect.

Bumuis-v-To pay taxes; contribute;
promote.

Bumukal-v-To proceed from; issue or
<corr sic=sprink resp=e>spring</corr> from; bubble; emanate.

Bumukas-v-To open; dilate.

Bumukod-v-To sort; <corr sic=separste>separate</corr>; remove;
dissuade.

Bumukol-v-To lump.

Bumula-v-To foam; froth; spume; effervesce.

Bumulok-v-To rot; addle; debauch;
decompose.

Bumulong-v-To whisper; murmur;
purl.

Bumulongbulong-v-To whisper; mutter;
murmur; grumble; growl.

Bumulubok-v-To bubble.

Bumuno-v-To wrestle; contest; struggle.

Bumuti-v-To better; thrive; prosper.

Bumutil-v-To grain.

Bundok-n-Mountain; hill; mount; knoll.

Bundok na bato-n-Cliff; rock; mountain
of rock.

Bundok na napuputok-n-Volcano.

Bun~ga-n-Fruit; fruitage.

Bun~ga n~g bayabas-n-Guava.

Bun~gang araw-n-Prickly heat.

Bun~gi-a-Toothless.

Bun~gin-v-To corrupt; rot; make putrid.

Bun~gin-a-Rough; coarse.

Bun~go-n-Skull; cranium.

<corr sic="Bun~go">Bungo</corr>-n-Clash; collision; knock; blow;
<pb n=35>encounter; shock; push; fight; confusion;
sudden meeting.

Buni-n-Scurf; tetter; scurvy.

Bunihin-a-Scurvy.

Buno-n-Wrestle; wrestling; tussle; struggle;
strife.

Buntal-n-Slap; blow with the open hand.

Buntalin-v-To slap; strike with the
open hand.

Bunton-n-Heap; pile; stack; crowd.

Buntonbunton-a-Piled; <corr sic=Having>having</corr> many
piles.

Buntong hinin~ga-n-<corr sic="Tail; train; cue; caudal appendage.">sigh; deep breath</corr> <!-- defitions were all wrong; these are duplicate of defitions for the next entry 'buntot'; new defition based on entry magbuntong hinin~ga-134.png -->

Buntot-n-Tail; train; cue; caudal appendage.

Buntutan-v-To follow; pursue; persecute;
dog; importune; implore; dun.

Bunuhan-n-Fish corral; place of wrestling.

Bunot-n-Pull; tug.

Bunutin-v-To pull up; eradicate; extract;
abstract.

Bunyi-a-Illustrious; noble; famous; celebrated;
noted; conspicuous; notorious.

Buo-a-<corr sic=entire>Entire</corr>; whole; complete; full; perfect;
integral; chock; intact; utter;
sound; just; informed; candid.

Buo ang loob-a-Valiant; brave; bold;
courageous; whole hearted.

Buo at paikpik-a-Solid; firm; sound;
consistent.

Buom-v-To sum; add; fill up; fill; integrate;
complete.

Burahin-v-To blot; blur; erase; raze;
efface; abolish; expurge; cloud.

Burak-n-Mud; mire; slime.

Burakburak-a-Muddy; miry; slimy.

Burol-n-Dry bed of a river; corpse.

Buruhin-v-To salt; season; sprinkle.

Busilak-n-Snow; frost.

Buslo-n-Basket; hamper.

Busog-a-Full; satiated; satisfied.

Busugin-v-To satiate; fill with food;
satisfy.

Butas-n-Hole; aperture; eye; puncture.

Butasan-v-To perforate; puncture; bore.

Butasin-v-To perforate; puncture; bore.

Buti-n-Kindness; goodness; improvement;
generosity; beneficence; benignity;
clemency; good will.

Butihan-n-Kindness; goodness; generosity;
grace; gallantry; spruceness;
smartness; <corr sic=pertection resp=e>perfection</corr>; delicacy; gayety;
finery.

Butihin-v-To better; make good or
better.

Butiki-n-Eft; small lizard.

Butiktik-n-Reptile.

Butil-n-<corr sic=frain resp=e>Grain</corr>; grain of corn.

Butlig-n-Pimple; <corr sic=pustle resp=e>pustule</corr>.

Buto-n-Bone; seed; kernel.

Buto n~g balakang-n-Haunch bone.

Buto n~g paypay-n-Scapula; shoulder
blade.

Butong malambot-n-Gristle.

Butones-n-Button.

Butuhan-a-Reward; premium; satisfaction;
gratification.

Buya-n-Reward; premium; satisfaction;
gratification.

Buyain-v-To <corr sic=Reward>reward</corr>; satisfy; satiate;
gratify.


<div1 type=Letter n=C>
<head>C</head>

<corr sic="Cabellería">Caballería</corr>-n-Cavalry.

<corr sic="Cabelleriza">Caballeriza</corr>-n-Barn; <corr sic=estable resp=e>stable</corr>.

Cajon-n-Box; casing.

<corr sic=Cray>Cay</corr>-prep.-<corr sic=of>Of</corr>; with; from; on; for; by; to.

Camison-n-Smock.

Canta-n-<corr sic=Chorous resp=e>Chorus</corr>; song.

Cantador-n-Chorister.

Capital-n-<corr sic=metropolis>Metropolis</corr>; capital.

Carbon-n-Coal; charcoal.

Circo-n-Circus; <corr sic=Hippodrome>hippodrome</corr>.

Clima-n-Climate.

Cosmetico-n-Cosmetic.

Cornetin-n-Cornet.

Cuartel-n-Barrack.


<div1 type=Letter n=D>
<head>D</head>

Daan-n-Road; street; lane; gangway; place;
spot; time; <corr sic=ocasion>occasion</corr>; leisure; itinerary.

Daan n~g araro-n-Furrow.

Dagá-n-Rat; mouse.

Daganan-v-To cover; put below.

Dagat-n-Ocean; sea; gulf; bay.

Dagatdagatan-n-Lake.

Dagdag-n-Addition; increase; increment;
<pb n=36>amendment; patch; repair; fringe;
border; binding.

Dagdagan-v-To add to; increase; augment;
add; enlarge; exaggerate; amend;
aggrandize. (ang bigat)-overload.

Dagdagan n~g malabis-v-To superadd.

Dagdagin-v-To augment; add; increase;
enlarge; amend.

<pb n=37>

Dagison-n-Assistance; aid; help.

Dagli-adv.-Soon; speedily; quickly; hurriedly;
swiftly.

Dagok-n-Blow; cuff; knock.

Dagta-n-Sap; gum; juice.

Dagukan-v-To punch; strike; beat; knock.

Dahak-n-Cough.

Dahandahan-adv.-Slowly; softly; gently;
by degree.

Dahas-n-Courage; boldness; strength of
heart; vigor; force.

Dahasan-v-To <corr sic=ferce resp=e>force</corr>; urge; give force;
invigorate; <corr sic=strengtbeu resp=e>strengthen</corr>.

Dahidahilan-n-Excuse; pretence; reason;
pretext.

Dahilan-n-Excuse; pretence; reason;
pretext; motive; cause; plea; right;
occasion; allowance; forte; sake;
probability.

Dahil dito-adv.-Therefore; thus; so also;
for this reason; in this manner.

Dahilig-a-Sloping; inclined; slanting.

Dahilig na lupa-n-Declivity; slope;
incline.

Dahil sa-prep.-For; because; about; as;
by; through; on account.

Dahon-n-Leaf.

Dahunan-a-Leafy.

Daigin-v-To overpower; overcome; surpass;
excell; surmount.

Daing-n-Lamentation; lament; complaint;
petition; plaint; dole; wail; <corr sic=suplication>supplication</corr>;
request; remonstrance; grievance;
<corr sic=mormur>murmur</corr>; groan; entreaty; dolor<corr>;</corr> prayer;
evening prayer.

Dakila-a-Grand; noble; <corr sic=illustration>illustrious</corr>; <corr sic=magestic>majestic</corr>;
splendid; honorable; <corr sic=magaificent>magnificent</corr>;
eminent; <corr sic=protent>potent</corr>; famous; sublime;
solemn; exalted; palatial; gorgeous;
lofty; high; elevated; great;
powerful; <corr sic=wealty>wealthy</corr>; patrician; <corr sic=transciendent>transcendent</corr>;
tremendous.

Dakip-n-<corr sic=Cappure>Capture</corr>; spoils; prize.

Dako-prep.-Towards; about; near; in the
direction of.

Dakong kaliwa-To the left side.

Dakong kanan-To the right side.

Dako rito-adv.-Nearer; hither.

Dako roon-adv.-Farther; forward; on
the other side.

Dako saan-prep.-Towards; about; near;
in the direction of.

Dakot-n-Handful.

Dakot-a-Few.

Dakpin-v-To capture; seize; catch; imprison.

Dala-a-Cautious; wary; suspicious.

Daladalawang taon-adv.-Biennial.

Dalaga-n-Young lady; <corr sic=Single>single</corr> lady; lass;
maiden; miss.

<pb n=38>

Dalagang may edad-n-Old maid.

Dalahan-n-Hand basket.

Daláin-v-To frighten; scar; cause to
be wary or cautious.

Dalamhati-n-Trouble; pique; displeasure;
cross; pain; hardship; toil; ache;
fatigue; grief; sorrow; concern;
uneasiness.

Dalang-n-Petition; prayer.

Dálan~gan-v-To rarefy; dilute; thin.

Dalan~gin-v-To petition; entreat; pray.

Dalas-n-Frequency.

Dalaw-n-Visit.

Dalawa-a-Two; both.

Dalawa-n-Two.

Dalawa ang kulay-a-Bi-colored.

Dalawahin-v-To duplicate; repeat; halve.

Dalawahin-a-<corr sic=double>Double</corr>.

Dalàwin-v-To visit.

Dalhin-v-To carry; convey; conduct;
transport.

Dalhin dito-v-To fetch.

Dali-n-Moment; <corr sic=instunt>instant</corr>.

Dáli-n-Width of a finger.

Dalidalian (dalidaliin)-v-To hasten; precipitate;
<corr sic=pispose>dispose</corr> of; alleviate; dispatch.

Daliri-n-Finger; digit.

Dalisay-a-Clean; pure; neat; clear; chaste;
untouched; innocent; simple; cordial;
perfect; unmingled; simple; cordial;
delicate; genuine; smart; mere;
free; glad.

Dalisayin-v-To cleanse; purify; refine;
perfect.

Dalisdis-a-Sloping; slanting; inclined.

Dalisdis na lupa-n-Declivity.

Dalisdisin-v-To cut away the edge.

Dalit-n-Song; ditty; dirge.

Dalita-n-Misery; poverty; torment; pain;
anguish; torture; patience; tolerance.

Dalitaan-v-To <corr sic=suffe>suffer</corr>; bear; tolerate; abide;
<corr sic=compoort>comport</corr>; torment; torture.

Dalitain-v-To suffer; bear; abide; comport;
deign; <corr sic=condesend>condescend</corr>; pain.

Dalit na malumbay-n-Lamentation.

Dalosdalos-a-Impetuous; hasty; unexpected;
precipitate; sudden; violent;
fierce.

Dalosdalos-n-<corr sic=Idrot>Idiot</corr>; madman; fool.

Dalubay-n-Interpreter; translator.

Daluhong-n-Assault; attack.

Daluhun~gin-v-To assail; attack; assault.

Dalumat-n-Sufferance; suffering; toleration.

Dalumatin-v-To suffer; tolerate; abide;
comport.

Daluyong-n-Wave; surf; swell of the sea.

Damag-adv.-<corr sic=all>All</corr> night.

Damahin-v-To feel; touch; grope; examine;
investigate; prove; procure;
<pb n=39>experiment; treat of; move; inspire;
tempt.

Damara-n-Shade; tent.

Damasko-n-Damask.

Damdam-n-Affliction; disease; suffering;
sufferance; grievance; feeling.

Damdamin-v-To suffer; grieve; feel;
perceive.

Dami-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Multitude; crowd.

Damihan-v-To <corr sic=ougment>augment</corr>; increase; sum;
enlarge.

Damit-n-Clothes; dress; robe; costume;
garb; habiliment; vesture.

Damit na pang-ibabaw-n-Loose garment,
worn over the shoulders; overcoat.

Damot-a-Stingy; miserly; closefisted;
scant; short; avaricious.

Damot-n-Stinginess; closefistedness.

Damotin-v-To suffer; abide; tolerate;
comport; grasp; seize.

Dampot-n-Grasp; hold.

Damputin-v-To grasp; hold; seize; pilfer;
receive; hold up; heave; get up; raise.

Damtan-v-To furnish; provide; supply;
<corr sic=hive>have</corr>.

Damuhan-n-Hay-field; <corr sic=Meadow>meadow</corr>.

Danaw-n-Small lake; pond; loch; lough.

Dánay-n-Boundary; limit; district.

Dan~gal-n-Honor; reputation; fame; glory;
<corr sic=excellent>excellence</corr>; kindness; excellency;
triumph; esteem.

Dankal-n-Palm; hand breadth.

Daong-n-Ship; vessel; schooner; coaster.

Dapat-a-Worthy; deserving; adequate;
competent; fit; apt; condign; convenient;
exact; punctual; meritorious.

Dapat-v. a.-Must; ought.

Dapat akma-a-Fit; seasonable; apt.

Dapat batiin-a-One who should be
saluted.

Dapat damdamin-a-Sensible; perceptible;
feeling.

Dapat<corr> galan~gin</corr>-a-Reputable; estimable.

Dapat giliwin-a-Adorable; lovable;
amiable; affectionate.

Dapat ibigin-a-Amiable; lovable; adorable;
pleasing; affectionate; kind; loving.

Dapat igalang-a-Respectable; <corr sic=hanorable>honorable</corr>.

Dapat ilagan-a-Avoidable<corr sic=";">.</corr>-n-That which
should be avoided.

Dapat ipag dan~gal-a-Illustrious; noble;
honorable.

Dapat ipag-tagubilin-a-Commendable;
<corr sic=laudahle>laudable</corr>; praiseworthy; deserving.

Dapat isumbong-a-Accusable; blamable.

Dapat <corr sic=katakutin>katakutan</corr>-a-Awful; frightful;
dreadful; terrible; fearful; ferocious.

Dapat matapos-a-Terminable.

Dapat magalin~gin-a-Preferable; <corr sic=nepectable>respectable</corr>;
praiseworthy.

<pb n=40>

Dapat mahalin-a-Preferable; commendable;
appreciable; laudable; praiseworthy.

Dapat pan~gusapin-a-Reprehensible.

Dapat paniwalaan-a-Creditable; worthy
of credit or belief.

Dapat parusahan-a-Culpable; <corr sic=puishable>punishable</corr>.

Dapat patawarin-a-Pardonable; justifiable;
excusable; venial.

Dapat purihin-a-Praiseworthy; laudable;
plauditory; eulogistic; laudatory;
estimable.

Dapat sisihin-a-Reprehensible; sufferable.

Dapat tangapin-a-Receivable; admissible;
proper; fit.

Dapit-n-The accompanying from one
place to another; meeting and conveying
from one place to another.

Dapitin-v-To take from one place to
another; call; summon; meet and
convey.

Dapit sa-prep.-Towards; about; near; in
the direction of.

Dapog-n-Oven; fireside; hearth.

Dapugan na labasan n~g asó-n-Chimney;
smoke-stack; stack.

Darak-n-Bran; short; chaff.

Darating panahon-n-Future time.

Dasal-n-Prayer; oration.

Dasal na <corr sic=sumangpalataya>sumampalataya</corr>-n-Creed;
articles of faith.

Dasal sa umaga-n-Matin.

Datapua-prep.-Except; yet; besides; moreover;
however; not be it.

Datapwa-conj.-But.

Dati-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Original.

Dati-n-Original; quondam.

Datihan-a-Accustomed; used; excellent;
dexterous; original.

Datnan-v-To overtake; reach; meet; encounter.

Dawag-n-Perplexity; impassible place.

Dawis-n-Anguish; anxiety; grief; sorrow.

Daya-n-Cheat; deceit; delusion; imposition;
fallacy; fraudulence; dodge; deceitfulness;
trap; affectation; sham; trick;
canard; claptrap; sleight; gull; guile.

Daya-a-<corr sic=false>False</corr>; deceitful; delusive; sham;
claptrap; fraudulent; not real.

Dayain-v-To cheat; delude; defraud; deceive;
counterfeit; falsify; impose
upon; default; sham; fleece; gull;
jockey; cozen; allure.

Dayami-n-Straw.

Dayap-n-Lime; lemon.

Dayu-n-Visit; challenge.

Dayuhin-v-To challenge; visit.

Dayukdok-n-Glutton; hungry person.

<pb n=41>

Demonio-n-Devil; satan; the evil one.

Di akma-a-Unfit; improper; inconvenient;
inexpedient.

Di bagay-a-Unfit; unbecoming; improper;
mal apropos; inexpedient; unseemly;
inconvenient.

Di bagay sa anak-a-Unfilial.

Di binyagan-n-Pagan; heathen; savage;
idolater.

Dibdib-n-Breast.

Di buo ang loob-a-Half-hearted.

Diciembre-n-December.

Diccionario-n-Dictionary. <!-- Sic: Dietionary -->

Didal-n-Thimble.

Di dapat patawarin-a-Inexcusable.

Dighal-n-Belch.

Digma-n-War; combat; fray; fight.

Di hikayat sa masama-a-<corr sic=incorruptable>Incorruptible</corr>.

Di hinihintay-a-Unexpected; unforeseen;
sudden.

Di kamukha-a-Unlike; dissimilar; different.

Di karampatan-a-Unworthy; unjust; inconvenient;
perverse; <corr sic=imprope>improper</corr>; unbecoming.

Di karaniwan-a-Old; queer; nondescript;
not general.

Dikdikin-v-To <corr sic=crash>crush</corr>; powder; pulverize;
triturate; bray; pound.

Dikit-n-Beauty; fairness; comeliness;
godliness.

Dila-n-Tongue; tang.

Dilaan-v-To lick; lap.

Dilag-n-Splendor; <corr sic=brillancy>brilliancy</corr>; beauty; glory;
greatness; <corr sic=granduer>grandeur</corr>; finery; lustre;
luster; magnitude.

Dila n~g compana-n-Bell-clapper.

<corr sic="Dila ;t;">Dila,t,</corr> dila-One and all.

Dilaw-a-Yellow; yellowish.

Dilhay-n-Belch.

Dili-n-Reflection; thought.

Dili-adv.-Perhaps; maybe; perchance.

Dilidili-n-Imagination; fancy; conception.

Dilig-n-Sprinkling; watering.

Diligin-v-To sprinkle; water; spray.

Dilim-n-Darkness; obscurity; gloom;
gloominess; opacity.

Di maaninag-a-Opaque; not transparent.

Di maari-a-Impossible; impracticable.

Di mababago-a-Immutable; stable; <corr sic=stapla>staple</corr>;
<corr sic=unchangable>unchangeable</corr>; permanent; fixed;
lasting.

Di maaninaw-a-Imperceptible; opaque.

Di mababawas-a-Irreducible.

Di mabait-a-Restless; incorrigible.

Di mabasa-<corr>a-</corr>Illegible.

Di mabubura-a-Indelible.

Di magagaling-a-Irremediable; incurable.

<pb n=42>

Di magka-kaila-a-Irrefutable; indisputable.

Di mahigpit-a-<corr sic=insecure>Insecure</corr>; <corr sic=unstaple>unstable</corr>.

Di makababawi-a-Irrecoverable.

Di maka kilala-a-Incog; incognito.

Di maka-kita-a-Blind; latent.

Di maka-raraan-a-<corr sic=Impassible>Impassable</corr>.

Di maka-sisira-a-Harmless; pure.

Di maka-titiis-a-Insufferable.

Di makatulog-a-Sleepless.

Di malapatan-a-<corr sic=unlie>Unlike</corr>; <corr sic=unequa>unequal</corr>.

Di malirap-a-Imperceptible.

Di malirip-a-<corr sic=Iustrable>Inscrutable</corr>; fathomless.

Di malupo-a-Impalpable; intangible.

Di mapakali-a-Impatient; restless; fidgety;
peevish.

Di mapalagay-a-Impatient; restless; fidgety;
peevish.

Di mapasok ang hatol-a-Inflexible; invariable.

Di maramdaman-a-Imperceptible; impassive.

Di marating-a-Inaccessible.

Dimarim-n-Reluctance; aversion; repugnance.

Dimarim n~g sikmura na tila ibig magsuka-n-Nausea.

Di marinig-a-Imperceptible.

Di marunong <corr sic="mag-sinnu~galing">mag-sinun~galing</corr>-n-<corr sic=veracios>Veracious</corr>;
truth teller.

Di marunong mapagod-a-<corr sic=indefatigable>Indefatigable</corr>;
unwearied.

Di marunong tumanaw n~g utang na
loob-a-Ungrateful.

Di masalat-a-Impalpable; intangible.

Di masasaktan-a-Invulnerable.

Di masaysay-a-Unspeakable.

Di masupil-a-Invincible; unconquerable.

Di matagos-a-Impenetrable.

Di matarok-a-<corr sic=Unfathonable>Unfathomable</corr>; incomprehensible;
fathomless; impenetrable.

Di matibay-a-Shaky; instable; frail.

Di matiis-a-Intolerable; insufferable.

Di matingkala-a-Incomprehensible.

Di mawawala-a-Indestructible.

Din-adv.-<corr sic=also>Also</corr><corr sic=";">.</corr>-a-<corr sic=same>Same</corr>; similar; like;
selfsame.

Di nagdadalita-a-Insensible; impassible.

Di nahahati-a-Undivided.

Di naka-tutulog-a-Sleepless.

Di nakikilala-a-Unknown; not known.

Di <corr sic=Naka-sulat>naka-sulat</corr>-a-Nuncupatory; nuncupative;
unwritten; oral.

Di namumun~ga-a-Sterile; unfruitful;
barren.

Di nararapat-a-Unworthy; undeserving;
unfit; unjust; unseemly.

Di nasasalang-a-Untouched; <corr sic=numingled>unmingled</corr>;
pure; clean.

Di nawiwili-a-Unfavorable.

<pb n=43>

Dinaya-a &amp; p. p.-Deluded; deceived;
cheated; swindled.

Dinding-n-Partition wall; wall.

Dingin-v-To hear; listen; understand;
comprehend.

Dini-adv.-Here; hither; this way.

Dinig-n-Hearing; listening; understanding;
comprehension.

DIOS-n-GOD; THE LORD.

Dios n~g alak-n-Bacchus[**Errata]; the god of wine.

Dipa-n-Brace; spread of the arms.

Di pagka-lalagay[**matched scan]-a-Restlessness; uneasiness.

Di pagka-palagay-a-Inconstancy[**Errata]; fickleness.

Di pagod-a-Refreshed; unwearied; rested.

Di pagka-tunaw n~g pagkain sa sikmura-n-Indigestion.

Di pa nasusupil-a-Untamed; wild.

Di paniniwalain-a-Incredulous; unbelievable.

Di pa panahon-a-Unseasonable; undue;
out of season.

Di pa siguro-a-Comparative; not very
certain.

Dirain-a-Blear-eyed.

Diri-n-Despicability; loathing.

Di sapat-a-Insufficient; inadequacy[**Errata]; lacking.

Discipulo-n-Disciple; scholar.

Di sinasaysay-a-Nondescript.

Dispunte-n-back-stitch[**Errata (sugg: Backstitch)].

Di sukat nangyari-a-Impossible; impracticable.

Di susuko-a-Indomitable.

Di tatalonin-a-Insurmountable.

Dito-adv.-Here; hither.

Dito at doon-a-Passim.

Diwara-n-Curiosity; conversation.

Diwara-a-Curious; inquisitive.

Diwi-n-Spirit; soul.

Diyan-adv.-There; yonder.

Di yari-a-Imperfect; incomplete; faulty;
defective.

Doon-adv.-There; yonder; thither; opposite;
on the other side.

Doon~gan-n-<corr sic=anchorage>Anchorage</corr>; place of anchoring;
harbor; port; landing.

Dowahagi-n-Persecution; harass; dun;
pursuit[**Errata].

Dowahaginin[**w not visible in scan; fixed to match Errata]-v-To harass; pursue[**Errata]; dun;
importune; persecute; pain; sustain.

Duag-n-Coward.

Duag-a-Cowardly; craven; chickenhearted;
pusillanimous; timorous; timid;
faint-hearted; fearful.

Duble-a-Double; duplicate.

Dublihin-v-To double; duplicate.

Dublihin n~g tatlo-v-To treble; triplicate.

Duda-n-Doubt; mis-trust.

<pb n=44>

Duende-n-Fairy; sprite; <corr sic=fray resp=e>fay</corr>; elf; goblin.

Dugo-n-Blood.

Dugodugoan-a-Bloody; sanguinary.

Dugtong-n-Addition; splice; affix.

Dukha-a-Helpless; destitute; poor; penurious;
mean; niggardly; paltry;
niggard.

Dukuan~gin-v-To overtake; reach; obtain.

Dula sa kapwa-n-Resentment; grudge;
anger.

Dulang-n-Table.

Duling-a-Cross-eyed; torvous.

Dulo-n-Point; end; extreme; extremity;
<corr sic=sumit resp=e>summit</corr>; headland; upshot; pinnacle.

Dulo-a-Last; end; latest; late; latter;
final; extreme.

Dulot-n-Present; gratification.

Dumaan-v-To pass by a place; go by; pass.

Dumabog-v-To growl; snarl; grumble;
murmur.

Dumadalaw-n-Visitor.

Dumahak-v-To spit; expectorate; cough.

Dumahing laruin-v-To frisk; romp; sport.

Dumaing-v-To lament; bewail; remonstrate;
ail; crave; complain; resent;
reprimand; expostulate.

Dumakip-v-To apprehend; capture.

Dumakip-n-Apprehender.

Dumal-n-Aversion; <corr sic=abhorence resp=e>abhorrence</corr>.

Dumalagang manok-n-Pullet.

<corr sic=Dumalagang>Dumalang</corr>-v-To thin; <corr sic=rarify>rarefy</corr>.

Dumalan~gin-v-To implore; beg; entreat;
solicit; crave; pray.

Dumalas-v-To frequent[**Errata]; repeat often.

Dumalaw-v-To visit.

Dumalisay-v-To refine; purify; cleanse.

Dumalo-v-[**To ]assist; support; produce; visit.

<corr sic=Dumalulong>Dumaluhong</corr>-v-To attack; assail; assault;
undertake; attempt.

Dumalusong-v-To assail; assault; attack.

Dumami-v-To thicken; swell; increase;
grow; thrive; improve; grow rich.

Dumampot-v-To pick up.

Dumapit-v-To meet at one place and
escort to another.

Dumapo-v-To perch; roost.

Dumating-v-To arrive; come; approach;
reach.

Dumhan-v[**matched scan]-To stain; <corr sic=polute resp=e>pollute</corr>; soil; dirty;
daub; dab; bespatter; darken; corrupt;
profane.

Dumi-n-Dirt; dross; slags; filthiness;
nastiness; <corr sic=feaces>faeces</corr>; grime.

Dumihan-a-To dirty; soil; dab; daub;
darken; obscure; cloud; confuse.

Dumi n~g tinta-n-Blot of ink.

Dumikit-v-To stick; cling; cohere; paste.

Dumilhay-v-To belch.

Duminig-v-To hear; listen; understand;
comprehend; overhear.

<pb n=45>

Dumoon-a-To lodge; rest; reside; dwell.

Dumoong-v-To anchor.

Dumoong sa gawa-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To complete one's
work.

Dumoon sa-v-To be at.

Dumpolin-v-To tinge; dye; stain.

Dumudugo-v-To bleed.

Dumudugo-a-Bleeding; bloody; sanguinary.

Dumugo-v-To bleed.

Dumulas-v-To slip; slide.

Dumulas sa kamay-v-To slip from the
hand.

Dumulang-v-To wash gold.

Dumulog-v-To present; arrive; reach;
approximate.

Dumunong-v-To illustrate; experience;
grow or become wise.

[**P2: the next two entries appear out of sequence? Could they be typos for Dumupo(**fixed -M) and then Dumusta --> fixed last one]

<corr sic=Dumpo>Dumupok</corr>-v-To become weak or infirm.

Dumusta-v-To become low or abject.

Dumusta n~g masama sa kapwa-n-Offender;
delinquent.

Dun~guis-n-Stain; blot; filthiness; <corr sic=dirty>dirt</corr>;
daub; grime; nastiness.

Dun~gisin-v-To stain; blot; daub; dirty;
darken; corrupt.

Dun~gis sa puri-n-Stain or spot on one's
character.

<corr sic="Dun~git">Dungit</corr>-n-Point; extremity; end; summit;
headland.

Dun~go-a-Pusillanimous; timid; dull; cowardly;
timorous; rude; obscene;
torpid.

<corr sic="Dun~gol">Dungol</corr>-n-Blow with the fist.

Dun~got-n-Summit; apex; top; point;
extremity; end; edge.

[**out of order]Dupok-a-Brittle; weak; frail; fragile.

Dunong-n-Science[**Errata]; knowledge; accuracy;
wisdom; understanding; excellence;
excellency.

Dupong-n-Half burnt wood; charcoal.

Duraduhin-v-To gilt; gild; adorn.

Duro-n-Stitch.

Durog-a-Powdered; broken; crushed[**Errata].

Durugin-v-To powder; crush[**Errata]; pound;
shatter; pulverize.

Duruin-v-To stitch; penetrate.

Dusa-n-Chastizement; punishment.

Dusta-a-Bad; low; abject[**Errata]; miserable.

Duyan-n-Cradle; hammock.

Duyan n~g lubid-n-Swing.

Duyo n~g bilanguan-n-Dungeon.


<div1 type=Letter n=E>
<head>E</head>


Edad-n-Age.

Empatso-n-Indigestion.

Enero-n-January.

Escandalo-n-Scandal.

Espada-n-Sword.

Europa-n-Europe.


<div1 type=Letter n=F>
<head>F</head>


Favor-n-Favor; boon.

Febrero-n-February.

Fecha-n-Date; epoch.

Filipino-n-Philippino.

Formal-a-Formal; serious; solemn; important.

Freno-n-Bridle.

Frenohan-v-To bridle; curb.


<div1 type=Letter n=G>
<head>G</head>


Gaan-n-Lightness; levity; celerity.

Gaanan-v-To lighten; alleviate.

Gaano-How many; how much.

Gabay-n-Balustrade; banister.

Gabok-n-Dust; powder.

Gabokin-v-To powder.

Gabok na ginto-n-Flake gold; [**gold] dust.

Gabukin-v-To powder.

Gagad-n-Imitation; counterfeit; copy.

Gagahin-v-To usurp.

Gagarin-v-To imitate; counterfeit; forge;
mimic; copy; mock; feout;[**Errata: delete 'feout'] ape.

Gahasa-a-Impetuous; violent; fierce.

Gahi-n-Tear; laceration; mark.

Gahiin-v-To tear; lacerate; rend;
mark.

<pb n=46>

Gahisin-v-To force; allure.

Gahisin <corr sic=and>ang</corr> dalaga-v-To rape; force;
ravish.

Gala-a-Errant; wandering; erring.

Gala-a-Walk.

Galak-n-Pleasure; glee; content; merriment;
rejoicing; festivity; joy; happiness;
satisfaction.

Galakgak-n-Loud laugh.

Galang-n-Courtesy; civility; respect;
regard; veneration; esteem; politeness;
good manners; purity; reverence;
urbanity; breeding; education; manners;
gentility; genteelness; homage.

Galang-n-Small hand-basket; book-clasp;
hand cuff.

<pb n=47>

Galapong-n-Flour.

Galaw-n-Agitation; move.

Galawin-v-To agitate; move.

Galawing muli-v-To alter; dismiss;
change; remove.

Galing-n[**matched scan]-Goodness; benefit[**Errata]; utility[**Errata];
kindness; health; welfare; prosperity;
salvation; generosity.

Galing sa-a-Originated; derived from.

Galis-n-Itch; mange.

Galisin-a-Itchy; mangy.

Galisin-v-To have the itch or mange.

Galít-n-Anger; rage; animosity; indignation;
spite; madness; odium; annoy;[**s/b deleted, entry is noun, & annoyance already listed]
annoyance; rancor; enmity; discomposure;
choler; dudgeon.

Galit-a-Angry[**Errata]; mad; fretful[**Errata]; peevish;
irate; ireful; wroth; indignant; at
variance with another.

Galit na bigla-n-Anger; rage; passion.

Galit na galit-a-Very[**Errata] angry; furious;
enraged.

Galit na labis-n-Spite; hatred.

Gallera-n-Cockpit.

Galletas-n-Hardtack; crackers.

Galos-n-Scratch; scrape; scar.

Galosan-v-To scratch; scrape.

Gamit-a-Used; experienced; <corr sic=skilful>skillful</corr>;
practical.

Gamit-n-Use; disposition; practice; experience.

Gamitin-v-To use; serve; wear; practice;
accustom; adopt; employ; make
use of; allay; espouse; wield; affiliate;
(na lagi) addict.

Gamitin-a-Useful; employed.

Gamot-n-Medicine; physic; potion[**Errata].

Gamot na may halong apian-n-Opiate.

Gamutin-v-To doctor[**Errata]; cure; heal; mend;
remedy.

Gamogamo-n-Horsefly; dragon fly.

Ganap-a-Perfect; complete; exact; right;
finished; punctual; clever; integral;
whole; candid; just; entire; faultless;
critical.

Ganapin-v-To complete; perfect; finish.

Ganda-n-Beauty; godliness; fairness; beneficence;
kindness.

Ganda n~g tikas-n-Gentility; elegance;
easiness; freedom.

Ganid-a-Cruel; hard-hearted; severe.

Ganiri-adv.-So; thus; also; therefore;
videlicet[**Errata].

Ganito-adv.-So; thus; also; therefore; in
this manner.

Gansal-a-Odd; unequal; uneven.

Gansal-n-That which is left over.

Ganti-n-Revenge; reward; <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>;
gratification; satisfaction; triumph;
<pb n=48>remuneration; compensation; retribution;
premium; honor; amends;
fee; wages; stipend; salary; payment;
glory; requital; meed; expiation.

Gantihin-v-To revenge; reward; <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>;
gratify; indulge; remunerate;
retribute; requite; expiate; disgorge.

Gantihin ang loob-v-To reward; <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>.

Ganting loob-n-Premium; reward;
prize.

Ganting palad-n-Reward; premium;
prize; bounty.

Ganza-n-Goose.

Gaód-n-Paddle; scull.

Gapasan-n-Harvest; place of harvesting.

Gapasin-v-To harvest; reap; mow.

Gapusin-v-To manacle; hand cuff; trammel;
gyve[**Errata].

Gapusin ang paa n~g hayop-v-To hopple.

Garabanso-n-Pea.

Garing-n-Ivory.

Gasa-n-Border; edge; brim; margin.

Gasaan-v-To chide; scold.

Gasgas-n-Waste; expenditure.

Gasgas-a-Used; worn.

Gasgasin-v-To waste; expend; wear by
use.

Gasta-n-Charge; expense; cost.

Gastos-n-Charges; expenses; costs; outlay.

Gata-n-Juice; sap.

Gatas-n-Milk.

Gatasan-v-To milk.

Gatasan-a-Milch.

Gatasan-n-Milk cellar.

Gatong-n-Tinder; kindlings; fire-wood.

Gawa-n-Work; means; toil; occupation;
task; business; pursuit; labor; husbandry;
operation; deed; action; act;
conduct; management; procedure; cut;
fashion; shape; figure; make.

Gawaan-n-Manufactury; factory.

<corr sic=Gawaang>Gawang</corr> hunhang-n-Foppery; imprudence;
folly; foolishness.

Gawa na maran~gal-n-Masterpiece.

Gawaan n~g katad-n-Tannery.

Gawaan n~g libro-n-Book binder.

Gawang bastos-n-Meanness; malice.

Gawang bata-n-Childish doings.

Gawang dapat tularan-n-Example; precedent;
copy; pattern.

Gawang hamak-n-Malice; meanness;
knavery; injustice.

Gawa n~g kamay-a-Hand made.

Gawang labas sa matwid-n-Wrong; injustice.

Gawang mabuti-n-Remedy; good.

Gawang mahalay-n-Knavery; malice;
wantonness.

<pb n=49>

Gawang maran~gal-n-Glorious deed; masterpiece.

Gawang masama-n-Wickedness; iniquity;
guiltiness; criminality; ugliness; rudeness;
impurity; dullness; lewdness.

Gawang pan~git-n-Moral depravity; turpitude;
ugliness.

Gawang ulol-n-Frenzy; folly; silliness;
foolishness.

Gawgawin-v-To stir; revert; return.

Gawi-a-Common; frequent; inclined.

Gawi-n-Inclination; frequence; frequency;
style; use; custom.

Gawin-v-To do; work; operate; make;
perform; execute; manufacture; produce;
construct; form; realize.

Gawi n~g loob-n-Tendency; propensity;
inclination.

Gawing ginto-v-To convert in gold.

Gawing kalunuran-a-Occidental; western.

Gawing kalunuran-adv.-Westerly.

Gawing kanan-a-Right.

Gawing labas n~g panulukan-n-Angle;
corner.

Gawing lagi-v-To practice.

Gawing likod-n-<corr sic=Group>Croup</corr>; back-side.

Gawing muli-v-To iterate; do again; reproduce;
reconstruct.

Gawing panibago-v-To renew; repair;
regenerate.

Gawing parisukat-v-To square.

Gawing tabas-v-To shape; give shape;
form.

Gawing tatlong duble-v-To treble; triple;
triplicate.

Gawin n~g pasulipat-v-To do or place
anything obliquely.

Gayak-n-Preparation; pomp; show; decoration;
adornment; embellishment;
ornament; preparative; dress.

Gayak-a-Preparative[**Errata]; provident; ornamental;
pompous[**Errata].

Gayakan-v-To embellish; adorn; ornament;
prepare; provide.

Gayakin-v-To prepare; ornament; adorn;
embellish.

Gayak na malaki-n-Splendor; pomp;
gayety.

Gayat-n-Piece; slice.

Gayatin-v-To pick to pieces; cut; slice[**Errata];
divide.

Gayon-adv.-So also; as; such; therefore;
as much; as great; in this manner;
similarly.

Gayondin-adv.-Equally; uniformly; evenly;
also; likewise; moreover; such;
like; eke; straightaway; ditto.

Gayon man-adv.-Yet; notwithstanding;
still; nevertheless; however;
although.

<pb n=50>

Gayon nawa-Amen.

Gayon n~ga-a-Right;[**.] adv.-that[**That] way.

Gayuma-n-Fascination; hypnotism; enchantment.

Giba-n-Destruction; ruin.

Gibain-v-To destroy; demolish; ruin;
plunder.[**Errata]

Gibang-n-Reel; stagger.

Gibang-a-Reeling; staggering.

Giikan-n-Threshing place; threshing.

Giikin-v-To thresh.

Gilagid-n-The gums.

Gilalas-n-Temerity; bashfulness.

Gilalasin-a-Timid[**Errata]; bashful; coward.

Gilalasin-v-To frighten; make bashful.

Guilid-n-Edge; border; margin; brim;
verge; fringe; limit; <corr sic=sire>side</corr>.

Gilid n~g kayo-n-Edge of cloth; selvage.

Gilig-n-Chaff.

Gilik-n-Dust; powder.

Gikban-v-To help; aid; assist[**Errata].

Gikban ako-inter.-Help me.

Gilin~gan-n-Mill; grinder.

Gilin~gang munti-n-Hand-mill.

Gilin~gin-v-To grind[**Errata]; mill.

Gilit-n-Cut; slice.

Gilitan-v-To cut; slice.

Gilitan ang liig-v-To behead.

Gilitin-v-To cut; slice.

Giliw-a-Beloved; dear; estimable.

Giliw-n-Esteem; love; delicacy.

Giliwin-n-To love; esteem; amuse; make
happy.

Gimbal-n-Kettle drum.

Ginagawa n~g taontaon-adv.-Yearly.

Ginaw-n-Cold; frigidness; frigidity.

Ginawa sabay-a-Simultaneous.

Ginday-n-Affected gait or walk.

<corr sic=Ginawa>Ginhawa</corr>-a-Easy; light; convenient; fit.

Ginibanggibang-a-Oscillating; vibrating.

Ginikan-n-Straw.

Ginisa-n-Stew.

Ginoo-n-Mister; gentleman; master; sir.

Ginoo-n-Gentlemanly; polite.

Ginto-n-Gold.

Gintoin-v-To convert into gold.

Giray-n-Wabble; affected air or gait.

Giray-n-Reeling; staggering.

Gisahin-v-To stew.

Gisi-n-Small piece; fragment; tear.

Gisiin-v-To tear; rend; lacerate.

Gising-a-Watchful; lively; wakeful.

Gising-adv.-Awake; alive.

Gisin~gin-v-To wake; awaken; waken.

Gitla-n-Surprise; astonishment; fright;
amazement.

Gitlahin-v-To surprise; astonish; amaze.

Gitna-n-Center; middle; midst; medium.

Giyon-n-Hyphen.

<pb n=51>

Gobierno-n-Government.

Gobiernador-n-Governor; prefect.

Goma-n-Gum<corr>;</corr> rubber.

Gorra-n-Cap.

Grifo-n-Faucet; hydrant.

Guang-n-A hollow spot in wood.

Gubat-n-Woods; forest; backwoods.

Gubatin-v-To pillage; plunder; lay waste;
desolate.

Gugol-n-Expenses; charges; costs.

Guhit-n-Line; mark; design; plan;
sketch; vestige.

Guhitin-v-To line.

Guitara-n-Guitar.

Gukgok-n-Grunt.

Guk-gok-a-Disheveled.

Gulagulanit-a-Ragged.

Gulang-n-Age.

Gulang n~g isip-n-Solidity; firmness or
integrity of thought.

Gulanit-n-Rag hanging from clothes.

Gulanit-a-Ragged; worn out.

Gulat-n-Fright; consternation; astonishment;
alarm.

Gulatan-v-To frighten; astonish; surprise.

Gulatin-v-To frighten; alarm; startle;
make tremble.

Gulat na gulat-a-Fearful; awful; scared.

Gulay-n-Vegetables; herbs; verdure.

Gulili-n-Trifle.

Gulo-n-Perplexity; confusion; disturbance;
turmoil; tangle; chaos; chayos;[**wrong sp.; delete as 'chaos' already listed]
discord; dissension[**Errata]; din; revolution;
sedition; scrape; agitation; shindy;
discomposure; disquietude; disquietness;
entanglement; ado; pother.

Gulo-a-Reverse; intricate; tangled; confused[**Errata];
chaotic.

Gulod-n-Hillock; barrow; slope.

Gulok-n-Bolo; large knife; corn-knife.

Gulo n~g isip-n-Bewilderment.

Gulong-n-Wheel; circle.

Gulonggulon~gan-n-Windpipe; gullet.

Gulugod-n-Spine; backbone; chine.

Guluhin-v-To disturb; entangle; tangle;
perturb; ensnare; row; subvert; perplex;
disconcert; alarm; disquiet; discompose;
confound; reverse; overturn;
overthrow; stir; agitate.

Guluhin ang isip-v-To bewilder; confound[**Errata];
perplex.

Gulun~gin-v-To wheel; roll.

Gumaan-v-To lighten; alleviate.

Gumabi-v-To grow dark; benight; grow
late.

Gumagad-v-To imitate; mimic[**Errata]; ape.<!-- also sic: fiout. -->

Gumaganti-a-Retributive; vengeful; retributing.

Gumagatas-n-<corr sic=Miller>Milker</corr>.

<pb n=52>

Gumagawa-n-Workman; doer; laborer;
worker; journeyman.

Gumalaw-v-To move; stir.

Gumaling-v-To recover; get or grow
well; convalesce.

Gumanap-v-To execute; perform; discharge.

Gumanda-v-To beautify; embellish;
adorn; decorate.

Gumaod-v-To row; paddle; scull.

Gumapang-v-To crawl; creep; go on all
fours,[**.] Sec.[**abbrev for Second (meaning)?] Rob or steal at night.

Gumapas-v-To mow; cut; reap; harvest.

Gumasta-v-To spend; waste; wear away.

Gumatas-v-To milk.

Gumanting loob-v-To correspond; suit;
agree.

Gumawa-v-To do; make; manufacture;
execute; labor; construct; build; perform;
form; produce; practice; operate;
cause; act.

Gumawa n~g antos-v-To digest; consider;
assist; produce.

Gumawa n~g hatol-v-To judge; make
judgement.

Gumawa n~g kautusan-v-To make or
enact laws.

Gumawa n~g salitaan-v-To contract; stipulate.

Gumayak-v-To prepare; adorn; get ready;
caparison; clean.

Gumayak agad-v-To prepare hastily.

Gumayongayon-v-To idle; loiter; lounge;
be careless.

Gumibik-v-To <corr sic=Aid>aid</corr>; assist; help; save;
succor; support.

<corr sic=Gumugiti>Gumigiti</corr>-a-Growing.

Gumiik-v-To thresh.

Gumiit-v-To meddle; interfere.

Gumiliw-v-To love; like; adore; esteem.

Guminday-v-To walk with an affected
air or gait.

Guminhawa-v-To thrive; prosper; ease;
become easier.

Guminhawa ang sakit-v-To recover from[**Errata]
sickness.

Gumiraygiray-v-To swagger; wabble;
stagger.

Gumiri-v-To clamor; howl.

Gumisa-v-To irritate; smart.

Gumiti-v-To bud; grow; shoot; begin to
appear.

Gumugol-v-To expend; spend; waste.

Gumuhit-v-To draw; line.

Gumukgok-v-To grunt.

Gumulo-v-To disturb; perturb; riot;
destroy; be noisy; perplex.

Gumulong-v-To roll.

Gumulong sa lupa-v-To tumble.

Gumumon-v-To roll.

<pb n=53>

Gunamgunam-n-Memory; memorial; memoirs;
reflexion[**Errata: reflection].

Guniguni-n-Fancy; imagination; presumption;
phantom[**Errata]; hallucination.

Guniguni-a-Fantastical; fantastic; whimsical;
imaginary; fanciful; chimerical.

Gunigunihin-v-To imagine; fancy; suppose.

Gunting-n-Shears; scissors; snips.

Guntin~gin-v-To shear; cut with shears
or scissors.

Gupitin-v-To cut; shear.

Gupitin ang buhok-v-To cut hair.

Gupo-n-Fall.

Gurlis-n-Scratch.

Gusarin ang lupa-v-To clean ground.

Gusi-n-Large china jar.

Gusot-a-Tangled; intricate; difficult;
snarled.

Gusutin-v-To entangle; snarl.

Gutom-n-Hunger.

Gutom-a-Hungry.

Gutumin-v-To make hungry; starve.



<div1 type=Letter n=H>
<head>H</head>


Haba-n-Length.

Habaan-v-To lengthen; prolong; protract;
distend; extend; amplify; enlarge;
stretch out.

Habag-n-Clemency; compassion[**Errata]; pity;
condolence; mercy.

Habagat-n-North wind.

Habagin-v-To pity; have compassion[**Errata];
commiserate; condole; afflict; torment;
pain; grieve.

Habagin-a-Compassionate; <corr sic=commiserate>commiserative</corr>.

Habi-n-Weaving; plait.

Habihan-n-Loom.

Habihan-v-To weave.

Habihin-v-To weave.

Habulin-v-To pursue; vex; persecute;
chase; catch.

Hadhad-n-Abrasure; scratch; wound.

Hadlang-n-Stall; cell; obstacle; impediment;
obstruction.

Hadlan~gin-v-To stall; partition; obstruct;
impede; hinder; restrain.

Hagdan-n-Stairs; staircase; steps; stairway.

Hagdanan-n-Staircase; stairway; steps;
ladder; stile.

Haging-n-Whistle; whistling; hum; whir;
whur; hiss.

Hagkan-n-Hug; kiss.

Hagkan-v-To hug; kiss.

Hagulgol-n-Flood of tears; mourning.

Hagurin-v-To soften; pummel.

Hahalili-n-Substitute.

Háka-n-Thought; meditation; idea; design;
supposition.

Hákain-v-To suppose; meditate; think;
design.

Hakam-n-Presupposition.

Halaan-n-Bivalve; shellfish.

<corr sic=Halag>Halaga</corr>-n-Cost; price; charge; value;
amount; worth; moment; valuation;
appraisal; estimate; estimation; expense.

<pb n=54>

Halagahan-v-To appraise; value; estimate;
assess; prize.

Halagahang muli-v-To reassess.

Halagahin-v-To value; prize; esteem; estimate.

Halak-n-Horselaugh; loud or boisterous
laugh.

Halakhak-n-Horselaugh; loud or boisterous
laugh.

Halamanan-n-Garden; orchard.

Halap-n-Alarm; notice of danger.

Halas-n-Ulcer.

Halata-a-Sensible; noticeable; notable;
plain.<!-- sic -->

Halatain-v-To notice; feel; note; scent;
recognize.

Halay-n-Ugliness; rudeness; homeliness;
moral depravity; turpitude; impurity;
lewdness; depravity.

Halayin-v-To ridicule; censure; decry;
slight; disregard; laugh at.

Haligi-n-Post; pillar; support.

Halik-n-Kiss; osculation.

Halikin-v-To kiss; osculate.

Halikuatin-v-To raise on edge; pry.

Halimbawa-n-Example; pattern; copy;
precedent; exemplar; instance.

Halinghing-n-Sigh; moan; groan.

Halinhan-v-To change; exchange; substitute;
succeed; surrogate.

Halo-n-Mixture; compound; medley;
mortar; admixture.

Halobaybay-n-Anchovy.

Halohalo-a-Mixed; promiscuous; confused.

Haloin-v-To mix; stir.

Halomigmig-n-Luke-warm; neither hot
nor cold; slippery.

Halomigmig-n-A small mixture.

Halos-adv.-Almost; nearly; well-nigh.

Halos wala-adv.-Scarcely; hardly.

Halubid-v-Stroke;[**extra ;] with a whip or rope.

Haluin-v-To stir; mix; revert; derange;
confuse[**Errata]; break the thread of intercourse.

<pb n=55>

Halumigmig-a-Damp; humid; moist.

Hamak-a-Low; abject; contemptible;
vulgar; despicable; infamous; unbecoming;
vile; mean; base; knavish;
unworthy; contumelious; cursed;
undeserving; discreditable; clamorous;
menial; servile; sneaking; slavish;
petty; plebeian.

Hamakin-v-To underrate; undervalue;
depreciate; disobey; lower the standard.

Hambal-n-Grief; anguish; affliction.

Hambog-n-Pride; haughtiness.

Hambog-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Haughty; supercilious; arrogant;
proud; vain; presumptuous;
preposterous; disdainful; ostentatious.

Hamog-n-Dew.

Hamon-n-Challenge; impeachment;
threat; fight.

Hampas-n-Stroke; scourge; blow.

Hampasin n~g tungkod-v-To came[**matched scan][**Errata: cane].

Hampas lupa-n-Vagabond; vagrant;
tramp.

Hamunin-v-To challenge; rival; fight;
threaten.

Hanapbuhay-n-Occupation; situation;
employment; employ; profession; vocation;
work.

Hanapin-v-To search; look for; find;
hunt.

Hanay-n-Row; file; line; arrangement;
order.

Hanayin-n-To put in line; order; file;
arrange.

Handa-n-Preparation; pomp; show; provision.

Handa-a-Preparative; prepared; provident; cautious.

Handa na malaki-n-Splendor; pomp;
large feast.

Handog-n-Offer; gift; grant; homage;
tribute; gratification; pleasure; compliance.

Handuka-n-Tolerance; patience; forbearance.

Handulun~gin-v-To assault; assail; attack.

Hanga-n-Limit; boundary; border; goal;
district; milestone; bound; butt; confine;
contour; term; milepost; landmark;
end; edge; crisis; margin; period;
frontier; condition.

Hangahan-n-Boundary; limit; landmark;
border; frontier.

Han~gad-n-Concern; interest; desire.

Han~gal-a-Foolish; stupid; ignorant; indecent;
rude; coarse; clownish.

Han~galin-v-To astonish; stupefy; infatuate;
fool; be rude; deceive; surprise;
cheat.

Hangan-n-Extreme; extremity.

<pb n=56>

Hangan-adv.-<corr sic=even>Even</corr>; till; as far as; also.

Hanganan-n-Boundary; limit; end; termination;
goal; milestone; district;
period; term.

Hangang di-a-Provisional.

Hangang n~gayon-adv.-Here to; heretofore;
here unto; till now.

Hanghang-n-Pungency; acrimony; pique.

Han~gin-n-Wind; air.

Han~gin hilaga-n-North-wind.

Han~gin sa araw-n-East-wind.

Han~gin sa balas-n-North-wind.[**probably one of those is South? |M: No]

Han~gin sa kalunuran-n-West-wind.

Han~guin-v-To extract; take out; take
from; remove; bring out; extort; deduce;
ransom; release; liberate; redeem;
free; set at liberty; acquit.

Han~guin sa sakit-v-To heal; cure.

Hantun~gan-n-Halting place; stay; sojourn;
habitation.

Hanip-n-Louse; flea; small thing.

Hapak-n-Cutlass.

Hapdi-n-Pain; prickling; smarting.

Hapdi n~g kalooban-n-Wound; affliction;
anguish.

Hapis-n-Gloom; sadness; grief; pain;
ache; anxiety; hardship; disgust;
sorrow; grievance.

Hapis-a-Grievous; sad; dejected; disgusted;
dispirited; painful; pained;
peevish.

Hapisin-v-To vex; mortify; afflict; pain;
sadden; torment; grieve; disgust;
render dejected.

Hapitan-v-To press.

Hapitin-v-To press.

Hapo-a-Exhausted; weary; worn out.

Hapo-n-Fatigue; hardship; anguish;
pain.

Hapon-n-Afternoon.

Hapunan-n-Supper.

Hapunán-n-Perch; roost.

Harang-n-Hold-up; ambuscade; robbery;
stop.

Haran~gin-v-To hold-up; ambuscade; rob;
plunder; beset; waylay; stop; restrain.

Harap-adv.-Forward; lead; before.

Harap-a-Front.

Harapan-n-Front; face; fore-end; fore-part;
lead.

Harapan n~g bahay-n-Facade; face of a
house.

Harapin-v-To present oneself.

Hari-n-Monarch; king; sovereign[**Errata]; ruler;
autocrat.

Harina-n-Flour.

Hari n~ga-inter.-Would to GOD; GOD
grant.

Harumpak-n-Waste; expense.

Harumpak-a-Active; wasteful.

<pb n=57>

Harumpakin-v-To expend; waste.

Hasikan-n-Place of sowing.

Hasikan-v-To drill; sow.

Hatdan n~g viatico ang may sakit-v-<corr sic=to>To</corr>
administer sacraments.

Hati-a-<corr sic=mid>Mid</corr>; half.

Hatid-n-Conveyance; conduction.

Hatiin-v-To divide; halve; part; share;
compart; cut apart.

Hating gabi-n-Mid-night.

Hatol-n-Decision; judgement; sentence;
verdict; issue; advice; opinion; resolution;
procedure; council.

Hatulan-v-To sentence; judge; decide;
resolve; determine.

Hawak-n-Clasp; clutch; grasp.

Hawakan-v-To grasp; clutch; catch;
hold.

Hawan-a-Free; clean; neat; pure; clear;
disengaged[**Errata].

Hawanan-v-To free; disengage[**Errata]; facilitate[**Errata];
make easy; ease; expedite.

Haya-n-Sheaf.

Hayag-a-Manifest; plain; clear; public;
general; open; vulgar; perceptible.

Hayin-n-Gift; oblation; offering.

Hayop-n-Animal; brute; beast.

Hayop na apat ang paa-n-Quadruped.

Hayop na walang gulugod-n-Invertebrate.

Hayuma-n-Patch.

Hayumahin-v-To patch; mend; fix.

Hibaybay-n-Boundary; district; limit;
territory.

Hibik-n-Lament; lamentation; groan;
sob.

Hibla-n-Fiber; yarn.

Hibo-n-Cheat; fraud; deceit; delusion;
decoy; sham; claptrap; dodge; trick;
guile.

Hiboin-v-To cheat; decoy; deceive; seduce;
sham; guile; jockey; cozen.

Hibuin-v-To cheat; cozen; deceive; decoy;
sham; victimize; jockey;
seduce.

Hibuin sa pag ibig-v-To jilt.

Hielo-n-Ice.

Higanti-n-Vengeance[**Errata].

Higitin-v-To enlarge; stretch; lengthen;
surpass.

Higo-n-Fig.

Higop-n-Swallow; draught; sip; absorption.

<corr sic=Higuit>Higpit</corr>-n-Tenacity; pertinacity; contumacy;
asperity; closeness; tightness;
narrowness; straightness.

Higpitan-v-To compel; press; oblige;
oppress; squeeze; tighten; restrain;
bind; compact.

Higpitin uli-v-To retighten; repress.

<pb n=58>

Higtan ang <corr sic=balicak>balicat</corr>-v-To shrug the
shoulders.

Higupin-v-To swallow; sip.

Hihigan-n-Couch; bed.

Hihigan n~g hayop sa damo-n-Lair.

Hika-n-Asthma.

Hikaw-n-Earring.

Hikayat-n-Attraction; invitation; <corr sic=facination resp=e>fascination</corr>.

Hikayatin-v-To attract; <corr sic=facinate resp=e>fascinate</corr>; invite.

Hikuatin-v-To pry up.

Hila-n-Draw; pull; tug; drag.

Hilaga-n-North; North-wind[**typo: north-wind].

Hilaga-a-Northern; boreal.

Hilagaan-n-North.

Hilagaan-a-Northern; boreal.

Hilagaan-adv.-Northerly.

Hilahin-v-To haul; tug; drag; pull; draw;
hale.

Hilakbot-n-Horror; dread; fear.

Hilamusan-n-Lavatory; wash-stand.

Hilatsa-v-Thread of cloth.

Hilaw-a-Crude; green; rare; raw; unripe;
unfinished.

Hilawan[**matched scan]-v-To separate; pick.

Hilawin-v-To make crude[**Errata].

Hilbana-n-Basting.

Hilera-n-Row; file; line.

Hilig-n-Inclination;[**matched scan] propensity; tendency;
disposition.

Hilig-a-<corr sic=inclined>Inclined</corr>; disposed.

Hilig n~g loob-n-Inclination; fancy; propensity.

Hiligan-n-Anything to lean on.

Hilik-n-Snore; harsh sound.

Hilo-a-Drunk; intoxicated; dizzy.

Hilongo-n-Drunkard.

Hilot-n-Mid-wife.

Hilurin-v-To soften; rub; stroke; act as
mid-wife.

Hilutin-v-To rub; act as mid-wife;
stroke.

Himagas-n-Dessert.

Himala-n-Miracle; wonder.

Himanhiman-n-<corr sic=Flatery resp=e>Flattery</corr>; cajolery.

Himanhiman-a-Prudent.

Himimlay[**matched scan][**typo: Humimlay]-v-To rest; repose.

Himatay-n-Fainting; swoon; faint.

Himatayin-a-Subject to fainting.

Himawa-n-Blasphemy.

Himawain-v-To <corr sic=Blaspheme>blaspheme</corr>.

Himpakhimpakan-n-Loins of an animal.

Himpakhimpakan-n-Bashfulness.

Himulhol[**fixed, 1st l not visible]-n-Small knot in cloth.

Himulmol-a-Ragged; tattered.

Himulmol-n-Small knot in cloth.

Himulmulan-v-To pluck.

Himutok-n-Complaint; murmur.

Hina-n-Weakness; prostration.

Hinabi-p. p.-Woven.

<pb n=59>

Hinabi-n-That which has been woven.

Hinabing lino-n-Linen.

Hinagap-n-Suspicion; jealousy.

Hinagap-v-To believe; credit; give faith.

Hinagpis-n-Tribulation; anguish; <corr sic=afliction>affliction</corr>;
anxiety; envy; compasion; pity.

Hinahon-n-Moderation; forbearance; prudence;
continence; continency.

Hinala-n-Dread; fear; suspicion; jealousy;
presumption; supposition; malice;
conjecture.

Hinalili-p. p.-Changed.

Hinanakit-n-Complaint; murmur; disgust.

Hinang-n-Solder.

Hinan~gin-n-To solder.

Hinapang-n-Courage; valor; mind; intention.

Hinawan n~g kamay-n-Wash stand.

Hinay-n-Delay; detention; lingering;
slowness.

Hinayang-n-Grief; pity; compassion;
condolence.

Hinayhinay-adv.-Little by little.

Hindi-adv.-No; not.

Hindi <corr sic=Ayos>ayos</corr>-a-Disheveled; irregular.

Hindi ayos-adv.-Unlike; disorderly.

Hindi binyagan-n-Pagan; heathen.

Hindi dapat-a-Unbecoming; unworthy;
unlawful; illicit; undeserving.

Hindi gamit-a-Disused; obsolete.

Hindi ganap-a-Imperfect; faulty; defective.

Hindi gumagalaw-a-Quiet; undisturbed.

Hindi kaayon-a-Contrary; unlike.

Hindi kailan~gan-a-Unnecessary; superfluous;
dispensible.

Hindi kamukha-a-Strange; foreign; unlike;
dissimilar.

Hindi kaofficio-a-Foreign; different vocations.

Hindi kaparis-a-Unlike; dissimilar; contrary;
different.

Hindi kaugalian-a-Strange; unknown;
foreign.

Hindi quilala[**correct sp, but s/b 'kilala' to follow alphab order; also, no other instances of 'quilala' in text]-a-Strange; unknown; foreign.

Hindi mabahagi-a-<corr sic=Invisible>Indivisible</corr>.

Hindi mabuti-a-Bad; false; faulty;
untrue.

Hindi mabuti ang lasa-a-Sour; bad-tasting;
pungent.

Hindi magkaayos-a-Confused; disorderly;
perverse; intricate; difficult; contrary.

Hindi mahalata-a-Imperceptible; hidden;
unseen.

Hindi makamalay tawo-a-Spiritless;
weak; feeble.

Hindi malayo-adv.-Near; not far.

Hindi man-adv.-Though; notwithstanding.

<pb n=60>

Hindi mangyaring mabahagi-a-Indivisible.

Hindi mauso-a-Obsolete; disused; passed;
gone by.

Hindi mapawi-a-Indelible.

Hindi marunong-a-Stupid; ignorant.

Hindi marunong sumunod-a-Obstinate;
disobedient.

Hindi masaysay-a-Indefinite; indetermined.

Hindi matangap-a-<corr sic=Inacceptable>Unacceptable</corr>; inadmissible.

Hindi matarok-a-Unfathomable.

[**out of order]Hindi alipin-a-Free.

Hindi nababago-a-Constant; firm; loyal;
permanent; durable; lasting; manifest.

Hindi nabubulok-a-Incorruptible; imperishable.

Hindi nagagalaw-a-Untouched; pure;
unmingled.

Hindi nagagayak-a-Informal; indisposed.

Hindi nagbuhat[**matched scan] sa iba-a-Original[**Errata]; primitive;
first.

Hindi nagpapaamo-a-Free; frank; liberal.

Hindi nakaalam-a-Stupid; ignorant;
unknown.

Hindi nalulupo-a-Pure; untouched; unmingled;
chaste.

[**out of order]Hindi mapaamo-a-Untamable; inflexible.

Hindi napaguusapan-a-Pure; clean (pertaining
to conversation.)

Hindi pa nalalaman-a-Unknown.

Hindi pa nangyari-a-Unfinished; incomplete;
lacking.

Hindi pa napaamo-a-Untamed; wild.

Hindi paris-a-Unlike; unequal; different.

Hindi patag-a-Rough; cragged; craggy.

Hindi payag-a-Inadmissible.

Hindi rin-a &amp; conj.-Neither; nor.

Hindi sagrado-a-Profane; not sacred.

Hindi sinasadya-a-Accidental; casual;
unintentional.

Hindi tama-a-Amiss; false; not true;
untrue; wrong.

Hindi tapat na loob-a-Unfaithful; false;
feigned; infidel; disloyal; instable;
fickle; uncertain.

Hindi tinatalaga-a-Casual; unintentional;
unexpected; accidental.

Hindi tinatangap-a-Unacceptable; inadmissible.

Hindi totoo-a-Fictitious; untrue; false;
fabulous; feigned; uncertain; spurious.

Hindi tumupad sa ipinanumpa-a-Perjured;
forsworn.

<pb n=61>

Hindi tunay-a-False; untrue; feigned;
counterfeit; imitated.

Hin~gal-n-Pant; palpitation; difficult
breathing.

Hin~galo-n-Agony; gasp; last breaths
of a dying person.

Hingbubuli-n-Lizard.

Hingil-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Propensity; inclination; desire.

Hingil-a-Disposed; inclined.

<corr sic="Hin~gil">Hingil</corr> sa-adv.-Moreover; besides; over;
above; according to; relating to;
concerning.

Hingkod-a-Lame; hipshot.

Hinhin-n-Urbanity; civility; calmness;
tranquility; politeness; kindness; frugality;
bashfulness.

Hinkod-a-Lame; hipshot.

Hinlalaki-n-Thumb.

Hinlog-n-Lineage; race; <corr sic=forfathers resp=e>forefathers</corr>; offspring;
class; parents; relatives; kindred;
pedigree.

Hinog-a-Ripe; mature.

Hintay-n-Stay; stop; hope.

Hintayin-v-To await; hope; expect.

Hinto-n-Stop; halt; pause.

Hintuan-n-Stopping place; halting place.

<corr sic=Hinubahin>Hinuhahin</corr>-v-To collect; deduce; infer.

Hipag-n-Sister-in-law.

Hipan-v-To blow; play on a musical
instrument.

Hipo-n-Touch; blind man's stick.

Hipoin-v-To feel; touch; grope.

Hipon-n-Shrimp.

Hipon sa dagat-n-Lobster.

Hipuin-v-To feel; touch; grope.

Hiram-a-Lent.

Hiram-n-The thing which is lent.

Hiramin-n-To borrow; loan; tax.

Hiran-n-Example; instance; pattern.

Hirang-a-Selected; chosen; select; choice.

Hirang-n-Selection; choice.

Hiran~gin-v-To select; choose[**Errata]; pick.

<corr sic=Harap>Hirap</corr>-n-Hardship; pain; torture; grief;
toil; torment; misery; poverty; distress;
affliction; anguish; cross; trouble;
anxiety; fatigue; ado; dolor.

Hirap n~g kalooban-n-Wound; affliction;
injury.

Hiraran-n-Example; instance.

Hirati[**fixed, t not visible]-a-Accustomed; used.

Hiratihin-v-To accustom; use.

Hiraya-n-Illusion; apprehension.

<corr sic="Hirin~ga">Hiringa</corr>-n-Syringe.

<corr sic="Hirin~gahin">Hiringahin</corr>-v-To syringe.

Historia-n-History.

Hita-n-Thigh.

Hitad-n-Whore; harlot; prostitute.

Hitit[**matched scan]-n-Suck; smoke.

Hititin-v-To smoke; <corr sic=such>suck</corr>.

Hitsura-n-Shape; form; mode; appearance;
<pb n=62>phase; likeness; mien; garb;
guise; ostent; cut; fashion; face.

Hiwa-n-Slice; cut; incision.

Hiwaga-a-Mystery.

Hiwain-v-To cut; slice; carve.

Hiwalay-n-Separation.

Hiwalayin-v-To separate; assort; sort;
compart; renounce; divorce; divide; part.

Hiwas-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-A cut on[**Errata] a bias.

Hiwas-a-Slanting; squint-eyed; incorrect.

Hiwasan-v-To cut on a bias or slant.

Hiwid-a-Hipshot; lame.

Hiya-n-Shame; bashfulness; modesty;
embarrassment; compunction.

Hiyain-v-To shame; embarrass; affront;
insult.

Hiyas-n-Ornament; adornment; trimming;
furniture.

Hiyasan-v-To ornament; adorn; embellish.

Hiyaw-n-Shout; cry; scream[**Errata]; howl;
outcry; clamor; hoot.

Hiyawan-v-Outcry; clamor; shout; cry;
hoot; howl.

Hiyawin-v-To shout; cry-out; howl;
huzza; clamor; hoot.

Hodyat-n-Countersign; watchword;
passport.

Hodyatan-n-Countersign; watchword;
rendezvous; appointment.

Hogyat-n-Alarm; notice of danger;
watchword.

Holhol-n-Howl; cry of horror.

Howad-n-Counterfeit; imitation; copy;
forgery.

Howaran-v-To counterfeit; copy; imitate;
forge; mimic; pirate.

Huad-n-Counterfeit; copy; forgery; imitation;
likeness; transcript.

Huag-inter.-Shan't; do not; don't; stop.

Huaggawin[**typo: Huag gawin]-v-To neglect; quit; relinquish;
forsake; leave; yield; let; omit; refuse
to do.

Huag gumanting palad-v-To be disagreeable;
uncompromising.

Huag ipagkaloob-v-To refuse; deny.

Huag ipatuloy-v-To desist; discontinue;
supercede; stop.

Huag isama-v-To exclude; shut out; keep
separate.

Huag kalin~gayin-v-To slight; disregard.

Huag kumilala-v-To disown; disclaim;
ignore; refuse to recognize.

Huag kumilala n~g utang na loob-v-To
be disagreeable; ungrateful.

Huag kupkupin-v-To leave in danger;
refuse to help;[**,] aid;[**,] shelter or protect.[**there are only 2 defns here]

Huag magalin~gin-v-To reject; condemn;
lower; refuse to approve.

Huag magsalita-v-To refuse to talk;
hush; remain silent.

<pb n=63>

Huag mahalata-v-To hide; conceal; keep
secret.

Huag mahalin-v-To slight; disregard.

Huag makipag-usap[** -? makipagusap is used elsewhere as a single word|M: putting in the - as part of it is visible in scan; dictio is inconsistent in hyphenation, i'm leaving words as they are]-v-To stand mute;
remain silent.

Huag makilala-v-To disown; disavow;
refuse to recognize.

Huag malaman-v-To disown; disavow;
be ignorant of.

[**out of order]Huag bilan~gin-v-To exclude; shut out;
refuse to count.

Huag mapanabi-v-To restrain; refuse to
tell or say; bind.

Huag matanto-v-To be ignorant of; not
to know.

Huag pahintulutin-v-To disapprove; disfavor;
discountenance; refuse to permit.

Huag pamanahin-v-To disinherit.

Huag pumayag-v-To refuse; object;
disfavor; veto.

Huag <corr sic=sabin>sabihin</corr>-v-To refuse to tell or say;
keep secret or silent; seal; secrete.

Huag samantalahin-v-To fail to take
advantage of; fail to gain advantage;
fail to procure.

Huag tamaan-v-To err; misjudge;
mistake.

Huag tangapin-v-To reject; refuse;
object to.

Huag tumupad-v-To shirk; fail to do.

Huag umimik-v-To remain silent; hush;
keep still.

Hubad-a-Naked; nude.

Hubaran-v-To denude; undress; empoverish;
make poor.

Hubaran ang luksa-v-To leave off
mourning.

Hubdan-v-To undress; denude[**Errata]; disrobe.

Hubog-a-Curved[**Errata]; bent; crooked.

<!-- Hubog-a-Bent; curved; crooked. -->

Hubog-n-Bend; curve; arch; crook.

Hubog-p. p.-Bent; curved; arched.

Hubugan-v-To bend; arch; curve.

Hubugin-v-To bend; arch; curve.

Hudyatan-n-Passport; countersign;
watchword.

<corr sic=Hugasing>Hugasin</corr>-v-To wash; lave; bathe.

Hugos n~g compana-n-Bell-clapper.

Hugutin-v-To extract; remove; take out;
deduce; draw out; abstract; extort.

Hukay-n-Excavation; hole; pit; hollow;
cavity.

Hukayin-v-To dig; excavate; hollow.

Hukayin muli-v-To exhume[**Errata].

Hukbo-n-Army.

Hukom-n-Governor; judge; arbiter.

Hukluban[**out of alphabetical order? (M: Yes, I think) or missing vowel before l? Hukuban? |M: retain sp; unfamiliar word but sounds similar to Takluban, w/c has similar defn]-n-Place of covering any thing;
rotting place.

Hukuman-v-To judge.

Hukuman-n-Province; governor's house.

<pb n=64>

Hula-n-Prediction; prophesy; conjecture;
surmise; omen; divination; augury;
precursor.

Hulaan-v-To predict; foretell; prophesy[**Errata];
soothsay; prognosticate; divine.

Hulhol-<corr sic=d>n</corr>-Howl; yelp; yelping.

Huli-adv.-Late.[**Errata]

Húli-n-Capture; spoils; prize.

Huli n~g sasakyan-<corr sic=d>n</corr>-Stern.

Hulihan-n-The back[**Errata] part; stern.

Hulihan n~g hokbo-n-Rear-guard.

Hulihin-v-To capture; seize; catch; get;
apprehend.

Huli sa lahat-a-Last.

Hulma-n-Mold; matrice[**Errata].

Hulo-a-Upper.

Hulo n~g ilog-n-Source of a river.

Hulog-n-Fall; tumble.

Hulugin-v-To throw down; cast.

Hulugin n~g gracia n~g DIOS-v-To sanctify[**Errata];
bless.

Humaba-v-To lengthen; protract[**Errata]; prolong.

Humabi-v-To weave; plait.

Humabol-v-To catch; run after.

Humagkan-v-To hug; kiss.

Humaging-v-To whir; whur; whistle;
whiz; hum.

Humagpos-v-To slip; slide; skulk; escape
from danger.

Humahalo-n-Rocker; one who stirs.

Humakbang-v-To step; stir[**Errata].

Humal-a-Nasal.

Humalaw-v-To choose; select; elect.

Humalay-v-To consume; decry.<!-- sic -->

Humalik-v-To kiss; osculate.

Humalili-v-To exchange; change; alternate;
reciprocate; supercede.

Humalimhim-v-To set; hatch. (per. to
fowls.)

Humalinghing-v-To sigh; groan; moan;
lament.

Humamak-v-Grovel; lower; degenerate.

<corr sic=Humamok>Humamog</corr>-v-To bedew; fog.

Humamok-v-To fight; struggle; contend.

Humamon-v-To anger; provoke; fight;
irritate; offend; excite; contend;
struggle.

Humanap-v-To find; search for; hunt;
search; look for.

Humanda-v-To prepare; get ready.

Humanga-v-To limit; finish; end; close.

Human~gitin-v-To gnaw; molest.

Human~gos-v-To pant; palpitate.

Humantong-v-To stop; halt; desist.

Humapdi-v-To smart; irritate; hurt;
prickle.

Humapis-v-To oppress; grieve; mourn.

Humapon-v-To eat supper.

Humapon-v-To perch.

<pb n=65>

Humarap-v-To present; appear[**Errata]; confront;
witness.

Humatol-v-To judge; give sentence;
sentence; decide; condemn.

Humawak-v-To clasp; clutch; hold; have.

Humbak-v[**matched scan][**typo: n]-Concavity; hollowness.

Humibik-v-To sob; lament; groan.

Humigit-v-To exceed; surpass; excel.

Humigit-a-More.

Humigit-adv.-More; over.

Humigop-v-To sip; suck; absorb; imbibe.

Humihip-v-To blow.

Humikayat-v-To attract; draw; invite.

Humilig-v-To incline; tend; lean; recline.

Humilik-v-To snore.

Humimalay-v-To take what is left.

Humimawa-v-To blaspheme; curse.

Humimig-v-To bubble; appear; answer.

Humimpay-v-To cease; forbear; desist;
stop.

Humimpil-v-To appease; calm; pacify;
becalm; rest; repose; stop.

Humina-v-To grow weak; debilitate;
impair; weaken; pall; enfeeble;
languish.

Humindusay[**P1 unsure of third letter from end |M:s]-v-To weaken; give up an
intention; dispirit.

Humin~ga-v-To respire; breathe; exhale;
expire.

Humin~gal-v-To pant; palpitate.

Humin~gi-v-To ask; request; petition;
beg; entreat; implore; demand; claim;
exact.

Huminkod-v-To limp; deviate.

Huminkodhinkod-v-To limp.

Huminto-v-To stop; halt; desist; rest;
repose.

Humitit-v-To smoke; suck.

Humiwalay-v-To separate; diverge; deviate.

Humiyaw-v-To yell[**Errata]; shout; exclaim.

Humpay-n-Intermission; interruption[**Errata].

Humpayin-v-To interrupt; intermit;
discontinue.

Humuad-v-To counterfeit; falsify; copy;
imitate; mimic.

Humubad-v-To undress; denude.

Humubo-v-To undress; denude.

Humubog-v-To undress; denude.[**I think there's something VERY erroneous in this word; it should mean something like "to carve" - dyerohm |M: suggestion is to note that correct defn
is 'To bend; arch; curve.' (based on defn of hubugan -063.png); typesetting error copied the defns from preceding entry]

Humukay-v-To dig; excavate; hollow;
delve; enter.

Humula-v-To foretell; prophesy; predict[**Errata];
portend; prognosticate; announce; conjecture.

Humula-n-Predictor; prophet.

Humuni-v-To neigh.[**should be "to chirp"? - dyerohm |M: stet, huni (see below) means neigh, possibly obsolete defn]

Humupa-v-To rest; calm; grow quiet;
become thin or weak[**Errata].

Humutok-v-To arch; bend; curve.

Hunghang-a-Foolish; silly; ignorant;
stupid.

Huni-v-Neigh.

Hurno-n-Oven.

Husay-n-Order; regulation; array.

Husay-a-Regulated; arrayed; elaborate;
orderly.

Husayin-v-To arrange; perfect; regulate;
array; adjust; class; order; correct;
set off; put in order; rectify; repair;
patch; conform; improve; mend;
modify.

Husaying muli-v-To rearrange; rearray.

Husto-a-Enough; complete;
perfect; exact; right; sufficient; effectual;
equitable; upright; honest;
clever.

Hustuhin-v-To complete; perfect; finish;
execute; perform.

Hutukin-v-To arch; bend; curve.

Huwarin-v-To imitate; copy; simulate.





<div1 type=Letter n=I>
<head>I</head>


Iabang-v-To wait for; watch for;
await.

Iabot-v-To proffer; hand; offer; reach.

Iaga-v-To foresee; anticipate; preoccupy;
prepare.

Ialay-v-To offer; dedicate; present; give.

Ialis-v-To take away; discard; move;
obviate.

Ialok-v-To offer; hold out; proffer; offer
for sale; entrust; propose.

Iayos-v-To regulate; arrange; array;
busk; put in order.

Iba-a-<corr sic=dissimilar>Dissimilar</corr>; different; diverse; unlike;
other.

Iba-pro.-Other.

Ibabá-v-To lower; put down.

Iba,t, iba-a-Various.

<pb n=66>

Ibabala-v-To explain; announce; anticipate;
foretell; signify.

Ibabao-n-Topside; outside; cover; surface.

<corr sic=Ibadbab>Ibadbad</corr>-v-To soak; steep; imbue.

Ibagay-v-To make convenient; conform.

Ibago-v-To renew; make over; change.

Ibahin-v-To change; transform; alter;
deviate; remove; vary; convert; reform;
transfigure; transmute; modify.

Ibahin ang hitsura-v-To change
the shape; disguise.

Ibahog-v-To mix; mingle; unite; incorporate.

Ibalabag-v-To throw; cast.

Ibalibag-v-To throw.

Ibalik-v-To return; restore; devolve.

Ibalita-v-To relate; report; tell; announce;
<pb n=67>say; mention; notify; apprise; make
known; narrate; proclaim.

Ibalot-v-To envelop.

Iban~gon-v-To raise; stand up; elevate;
heave.

Ibang tawo-n-Stranger; foreigner.

Ibanting-v-To tie; fasten.

Ibaon-v-To bury; inter; submerge;
conceal.

Ibaon-v-To prepare[**Errata] or fix for a journey.

Ibarka-v-To load or freight a ship.

Ibatay-v-To prop; build; upon; be supported.

Ibawal-v-To prohibit.

Ibhan-v-To change; diversify.

Ibig-n-Love; friendship.

Ibigay-v-To give; present; bestow; donate;
cede; afford.

Ibigay nawa n~g Dios-inter.-GOD grant;
would to GOD.

Ibigin-v-To love; like.

Ibilad-v-To dry; sun; put in the sun.

Ibilango-v-To imprison; arrest; confine;
shut up.

Ibitin-v-To suspend; hang up.

Ibon-n-Bird.

Ibsan-v-To lower; take away; forgive.

Ibual-v-To overbalance; tip over; turn
over; discomfit.

Ibubo-v-To mold; cast; founder.

Ibudbod-v-To sprinkle; scatter; sow<corr sic=":">;</corr> distribute.

Ibuho-v-To empty; clear; induce; prompt.

Ibuhol-v-To tie; knot; join or unite by
knotting.

Ibuhos-v-To pour; spill; empty; effuse.

Ibukod-v-To separate; divide; except;
exclude; preclude; set apart; blink;
segregate; keep out; discriminate.

Ibukod ang tuliapes sa palay-v-To
winnow.

Ibulid-v-To precipitate; expose to <corr sic=ruin resp=e>rain</corr>.

Ibuluak-v-To pour; spill; leak.

Ibulusok-v-To precipitate; expose to
ruin[**Errata: rain].

Ibungo-v-To collide.

Ibunton-v-To heap; pile up; put together.

Ibunyi-v-To <corr sic=extoll>extol</corr>; praise; magnify.

Ibusa-v-To parch; roast.

Ibuyo-v-To induce; inspire; incite; rouse;
stimulate; imbue; persuade.

Idagdag-v-To add to; increase[**Errata]; accrue;
aggrandize; aggregate; superadd.

Idaing-v-To implore; complain; beg;
petition; appeal; entreat.

Idaiti-v-To unite; join; touch.

Idalan~gin-v-To intercede; mediate.

Idamay-v-To implicate; effect.

Idaraing-v-To complain.

Idarang-v-To <corr sic=scortch resp=e>scorch</corr>; singe; heat.

<pb n=68>

Idaos-v-To dispatch; dispose of; complete;
verificate[**doesn't seem to be a valid word; typo: verify].

Idatay-v-To stretch; unfold; expand.

Idatig-v-To unite; join; put together.

Ideposito-v-To deposit.

Idikit-v-To stick; paste; glue.

Idikta-v-To dictate.

Idukit-v-To sculpture; engrave.

Igalang-v-To esteem; respect; venerate;
reverence; regard[**Errata]; appreciate; have
regard for; notice.

Igawgaw-v-To mix; mingle; unite; join;
coalesce; consolidate; copulate; incorporate;
conjoin.

Igayak-v-To prepare; get ready; adjust;
arrange.

Igi-n-Ease; goodness; kindness.

Igiba-v-To destroy; demolish[**Errata]; obliterate.

<corr sic=Iganagayak>Iginagayak</corr>-v-To prepare.

I guhit[**typo: Iguhit]-v-To draw; trace; line.

Iguho-v-To demolish; obliterate; destroy.

Igumon-v-To roll; wallow; humble.

Ihabilin-v-To commission[**Errata]; give charge.

Ihagis-v-To throw; cast.

Ihagis n~g pabigla-v-To jerk.

Ihalabos-v-To boil; cook in water.

Ihalal-v-To elect; choose.

Ihalang-v-To put cross-wise.

Ihalili-v-To substitute; change; exchange;
surrogate.

Ihalo-v-To mix; mingle; alloy; join;
unite; coalesce; admix; intermix;
intermingle; blend.

Ihampas-v-To strike; beat; whip.

Ihanda-v-To prepare; get ready; supply;
provide; arrange; adjust.

Ihapay-v-To incline; lean.

Iharang-v-To stop; check; hold up.

Iharap-v-To present; exhibit; confront;
compare.

Ihasa-v-To sharpen.

Ihatid-v-To convoy; accompany; convey;
conduct; carry; transport.

Ihawin-v-To roast; toast; bake; grill.

Ihayag-v-To publish; disclose; show; expose;
apprise; divulge; lay open; reveal.

Ihayin-v-To offer; present; give.

Ihi-n-Urine.

Ihian-n-Retreat.

Ihiga-v-To lay down; stretch; unfold;
expand.

Ihilabos-v-To boil; cook in water;
strike sweepingly.[** non-synonym definition |M: might be obsolete meaning, stet]

Ihilbana-v-To baste.

Ihilig-v-To incline; recline; lean back;
influence; imbue; persuade; induce.

Ihinang-v-To solder; mend with solder.

Ihinday-v-To move to a distance.

Ihingil-v-To incline; influence; induce;
persuade.

<pb n=69>

Ihiwalay-v-To separate; divide; set
apart; subtract; lay aside; revoke;
with-draw; sunder; sort; remove;
discriminate; divorce; segregate.

Ihiwas-v-To slant; sling;[**extra ;] diagonally.

Ihuli-v-To put last or at the end.

Ihulog-v-To throw down; translate;
interpret.

Ihulog ang kapwa sa infierno-v-To
damn; condemn to eternal torment[**Errata].

Ihulog sa ibang wika-v-To translate;
interpret.

Iihan-n-Chamber pot.

Iinit-v-To heat; kindle.

Iisa,t,isa[**typo: Iisa,t, isa]-adv.-One by one.

Iit-n-Nickname.

Ikaanim-n-Sixth.

Ikaanim-a-Sixth.

Ikaanim na puo-n-Sixtieth.

Ikaanim na puo-a-Sixtieth.

Ikaapat-n-Fourth.

Ikaapat-a-Fourth.

Ikababayad-n-Payment; that which is
paid; pay; reward; satisfaction.

Ikabit-v-To fasten; stick; join; tie; paste;
add to.

Ikadalawang puo-a-Twentieth.

Ikadalawang puo-n-Twentieth; vigesimal.

Ikadkad-v-To unfurl; unroll; unfold<corr>;</corr>
stretch; expand.

Ikahon-v-To box; embale; pack.

Ikaila-v-To deny; lie; negative; gainsay;
refuse to tell.

Ikaisang-libo-a-Thousandth.

Ikaisang-libo-n-Thousandth.

Ikait-v-To deny; reject; refuse.

Ikalabing apat-n-Fourteenth.

Ikalabing apat-a-Fourteenth.

Ikalabing dalawa-n-Twelfth.

Ikalabing dalawa-a-Twelfth.

Ikalabing isa-n-Eleventh.

Ikalabing isa-a-Eleventh.

Ikalabing pito-n-Seventeenth.

Ikalabing tatlo-n-Thirteenth.

Ikalabing tatlo-a-Thirteenth.

Ikalabing walo-n-Eighteenth.

Ikalabing walo-a-Eighteenth.

Ikalat-v-To scatter; distribute; disperse;
diffuse; extend; publish.

Ikalawa-n-Second.

Ikalawa-a-Second.

Ikaling-v-To unite; join.

Ikama-v-To adapt; apply; adjudge; consolidate;
copulate; join; conjoin; unite;
collect.

Ikama ang isang bagay-v-To intervene;
insert.

Ikanlong-v-To hide; conceal; defend;
excuse; disguise; keep secret.

<pb n=70>

Ikao-prop.[**typo: pro.]-You; thou.

Ikapit-v-To apply; adapt; adjudge.

Ikapito-n-Seventh.

Ikapito-a-Seventh.

Ikasampuo-n-Tenth.

Ikasal-v-To marry; betroth; match.

Ikating-v-To incorporate; join; conjoin;
consolidate; unite.

Ikatlo-n-Third.

Ikatlo-a-Third.

Ikawalo-n-Eighth.

Ikawalo-a-Eighth.

Ikawalong-adv.-Eighthly.

Ikawalong puo-a-Eightieth.

Ikawing-v-To fasten; add; paste; tie;
stick.

Ikiling-v-To incline; induce; persuade.

Ikinabubuhay-n-Nourishment; food;
maintenance; sustenance; ration;
livelihood.

Ikintal-v-To stamp; print; imprint.

Ikiran-n-Spindle; pivot; axle; bobbin.

Ikiran-v-To wind; convolve.

Ikiskis-v-To scratch; smooth; polish;
rub; burnish.

Ikit-n-Turn.

Iklian-v-To shorten; abridge; reduce;
confine; restrain; pare; clip.

Ikmo-n-Betel nut leaf.

Ikog-n-Turn.

Ikumpas-v-To beat time.

Ikuskos-v-To scratch; scour; rub.

Ikusot-v-To wrinkle; rumple.

Ilabas-v-To remove; put out; exclude;
extract; extort; reject; eject; effuse;
shut out.

Ilabas sa katawan-v-To excrete.

Iladlad-v-To unfurl; unfold; expand;
stretch.

Ilag-n-Shyness; fright; scare; avoidance;
evasion[**Errata].

Ilag-inter.-Begone; keep off.

Ilagak-v-To deposit; entrust; leave
with another.

Ilagan-v-To evade; shun; avoid; parry;
stave off; blink; obviate; escape.

Ilagay-v-To put; place; set; lay; arrange;
appoint; situate; wager; pledge;
mortgage.

Ilagay <corr sic="n~g">ang</corr> man~ga dingding-v-To partition.

Ilagay sa araw-v-To put or place in
the sun.

Ilagay sa grado-v-To grade; class; classify.

Ilagay sa hulihan-v-To put or place
last.

Ilagay <corr sic=a>sa</corr> ibang wika-v-To interpret;
translate[**Errata].

<pb n=71>

Ilagay sa kasukatan-v-To appraise;
value.

Ilagay sa codigo-v-To codify[**Errata].

Ilagom-v-To congregate; unite; join;
meet.

Ilagpak-v-To tumble or throw down;
overturn.

Ilahok-v-To mix; brew; comprise; intermingle.

Ilak-v-To solicit; collect.

Ilak-n-Collection; solicitation.

Ilakip-v-To <corr sic=Reconcile>reconcile</corr>; unite; join;
league; congregate; coalesce; conjoin;
tie; bind; alloy; copulate.

Ilalim-adv.-Underneath; below; under.

Ilalim nang-prep.-Under; below.

Ilang-adv.[**typo: a]-Deserted; lonely; barren.

Ilang-n-Lonely place; desert.

Ilang-a-Sundry; several; various.

Ilang-How many.

Ilangkap-v-To unite; join; conjoin;
incorporate; knit; coalesce; comprise;
contain; include.

Ilap-n-<corr sic=Willness resp=e>Wildness</corr>; shyness; coldness;
temerity; avoidance; bashfulness.

Ilapat-v-To unite; join; inclose.

Ilapit-v-To approach; bring near;
approximate.

Ilarawan sa papel-v-To <corr sic=portrait resp=e>portray</corr>; photograph;
take pictures.

Ilatag-v-To unfold; stretch out; evolve;
expand.

Ilatag ang bato-v-To pave.

Ilathala-v-To declare; manifest; expound;
explain; divulge; publish;
present.

Ilaw-n-Lamp; light; clarity; clearness.

Ilawan-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-Light[**To light a] lamp.[**no ; after 'Light' in scan]

Ilawit-v-To hang up; reach.

Ilaylay-v-To hang up; hoist; reach.

Ilayo-v-To remove; separate; divorce;
distance; retire; withdraw; retract;
lay aside.

Ilibing-v-To inter; bury; intomb;
sepulcher.

[**out of order]Ilibad-v-To take turns; cause to
disappear.

Iligaw-v-To lose; err; commit a mistake;
go astray; cause to misjudge.

Iligin-v-To move to and fro; handle
much.

Iligpit-v-To gather; collect; hide; hoard;
conceal.

Iligtas-v-To rescue; redeem; ransom;
succor; save; free; exempt; acquit;
excuse; liberate; pardon; relieve; remit.

Ilihim-v-To conceal; keep secret; hide;
disguise; reserve

Ilihis-v-To separate; obviate; misguide;
remove.

<pb n=72>

Ilikmo-v-To become; fit; suit; establish;
smooth.

Ilimbag-v-To stamp; print; emboss; seal.

Ilimbang-v-To take a round about way.

Ilin~gid-v-To hide; conceal; bury; keep
secret; diminish.

Ilipat-v-To transform; remove; move;
cross; passover; transpose; transport.

Ilipat ang tanim-v-To transplant.

Ilitan-v-To envy; pay less than one
should for anything; underpay.

Ilitaw-v-To disclose; show; adduce; discover.

Ilog-n-River; creek; stream.

Ilog na munti-n-Rivulet; creek.

Ilong-n-Nose; snout.

Ilual-v-To advance money.

Ilubog-v-To sink; submerge; immerse;
dip; put under water; douse; duck;
merge.

Ilugmok-v-To wallow; roll.

Iluhog-v-To beseech; appeal; ask; pray;
implore; harangue.

Ilulan-v-To load; ship; lade; freight.

Ilunod-v-To sink; submerge; immerse.

Imali-v-To err; misjudge; equivocate;
mistake.

Imang-ha[**typo: Imangha]-v-To stupefy; surprise.

Imarka-v-To mark; stamp.

Imbak-a-Old; cured.

Imbot-n-Concern; interest.

Imot-n-Economy; frugality.

Imot-a-Economic; frugal; close.

Impas-adv.-Equal; even.

Impis-v-To thin; diminish; lower.

Impitin-v-To press; prolong the appearance.

Impukin-v-To keep guard; watch;
observe.

Imukha-v-To resemble; conform; favor;
assimilate.

Ina-n-Mother; mamma.

Inaakala-v-To intend; mean; design.

Inaalon-a-Wavy; undulatory.

Ina-ama-n-God-father.

Ina-anak-n-God-son; God-daughter.

Inaaralan-v-To counsel; advise; teach;
correct.

Inahin-n-Hen; <corr sic=Female>female</corr> (per. to animal.)

Inahit-p.p.[**]-Shaved.
[**inconsistent: p.p. and p. p.]

Ina-ina-n-God-mother.

Inam-n-Beauty; <corr sic=goodliness>godliness</corr>; fairness;
delight; pleasure.

Inam n~g kilos-n-Gentility; elegance;
good breeding.

Inam n~g tikas-n-Genteelness; elegance;
bravery.

Inamoy-p.p.-Smelled[**Errata]; scented.

Inang-n-Mamma.

Inanyaya-p.p. &amp; imp.-Bade; bad.[**? |M: 'bad' is imp. of bid (http://www.1828-dictionary.com/d/search/word,bad)]

<pb n=73>

Inapo-n-Grandchild; descendant; posterity.[**typo poslnterity fixed][**according to Errata, this entry should be deleted, but looks ok to me, although 'In' in Inapo is not visible in scan]

Inawak-n-Veil; cover.

Incenso-n-Incense.

Indahin-v-To feel; perceive; grieve.

Infierno-n-Hell; purgatory.

In~gat-n-Care; solicitude; caution; guard;
precaution; pains; attention; watch;
observation; circumspection; protection.

In~gatan-v-To guard; protect; observe;
watch; care for; look after; heed; keep.

In~gay-n-Noise; carousal; revelry; romping;
scuffle; racket.

Ingles-n-English.

Ingles-a-English.

Inig-n-Tremble; shake; quake; quiver;
quaver.

Iniginig-n-Shake; tremble; oscillation.

Inihalili-n-Substitute; delegate.

Ini-ibig-p.p. &amp; a.-Loved<corr sic=",">;</corr> beloved.

Ini-ibig-a-Dear; estimable.

Ini-ibig-n-Dear.

Ini-irog-p.p.-Loved; beloved.

Ini-irog-a-Beloved; dear.

Inin~gat-n-Reserve; secret; exception.

Ingit-n-Envy; jealousy.

Inimot-adv.-Gently<corr sic=",">;</corr> softly; little by little.

Inip-n-Envy; impatience; eagerness;
hastiness.

Inis-n-Choking; suffocation; smother;
oppression.

Inisin-v-To smother; oppress; choke;
suffocate.

Init-n-Heat; warmth; zeal; fervor; chafe.

Inomin-n-Beverage; drink.

Inomin-v-To drink.

Inotinot-adv.-Gently; softly; little by
little.

Inpo[**see below]-v-To become; smooth; suit; establish.
[**Inpo is prob. a typo; as it is a verb, should be In- followed by a vowel; don't know what the intended word is]

Insik-n-Chinaman; chino.

Insik-a-Chino; chinese.

Instrumento-n-Instrument.

Interes-n-Interest; behalf.

Inugin-v-To go round; encompass; encircle.

Inumin-n-Drink; beverage.

Inumin-v-To drink.

Inuman-n-Afterbirth.

Inunos-a-Worm-eaten.

Inupahan-a-Hackney; hack.

Inutog-v-To grow large; enlarge[**Errata]; harden
(not used).

Inutos-p.p.-Ordered; sent; bade.

Inumit-n-Theft.

Inumit-p.p.-Stolen.

Inuyat-n-Treacle; sorghum.

Ipaala-ala-v-To remind; hint; suggest;
prompt; mention.

<pb n=74>

Ipaalam-v-To ask permission; bid adieu.

[**out of order]Ipagbigay alam-v-To encourage; entice;
reward; induce.[**these defns are wrong; note that these are exactly the same as for the next word; correct defn s/b similar to those for magbigay alam (133.png):
'inform; warn; tell; give notice; participate; advise']

Ipabuya-v-To encourage; entice; reward;
induce.

Ipadala-v-To send; dispatch; remit<corr>;</corr>
transmit; expedite; convey.

Ipagayak-v-To provide; get ready.

Ipag-awit-v-To sing; chant.

Ipagbala-v-To threaten; menace.

Ipagbalobalo-v-To feign; pretend<corr>;</corr> affect.

Ipagbanda-v-To <corr sic=Proclaim>proclaim</corr>; announce.

Ipagbawal-v-To prohibit; interdict;
forbid; refuse; deny; ban.

Ipagbilin-v-To charge; enjoin; recommend.

<corr sic=Ipagdiwag>Ipagdiwang</corr>-v-To shout; huzza; applaud.

Ipagdiwang-v-To celebrate; feast;
solemnize; praise; verify.

Ipaghabla-v-To accuse; demand; inform.

Ipagintindi-v-To signify; intend; mean;
declare; announce[**Errata].

Ipa-gitna-v-To center; put in the center.

Ipagkaila-v-To deny<corr sic=",">;</corr> contradict; refuse;
disown.

Ipagkait-v-To deny; contradict; keep
secret; disown.

Ipagkaloob-v-To concede[**Errata]; cede; donate;
bestow; confer; assign.

Ipagkapuri-v-To honor; respect; dignify;
credit.

Ipagkilala-v-To introduce; present.

[**out of order]Ipagkatiwala-v-To give credit; confide;
deposit.

Ipaglaan-v-To prepare; persist; maintain.

Ipaglaban-v-To defend; protect; maintain;
argue; sustain; persist; hold;
dispute.

Ipaglagay-v-To put or place for another.

Ipagmasakit-v-To interest; concern;
defend; protect; give<corr>;</corr> share in; enjoin;
charge.

Ipagmatowid-v-To argue; regulate;
dispute; contend; straighten.

Ipagpag-v-To shake; brandish.

Ipagpahuli-v-To put behind; leave
behind.

Ipagpalagay-v-To suppose.

Ipagpalit-v-To permute; exchange;
barter.

Ipagpalumat-v-To remove; transport;
transfer; convey; hold anything until
it increases in value.

Ipagpasial-v-To take for a walk.

[**out of order]Ipagpista-v-To feast; celebrate; solemnize;
praise.

Ipagpauna-v-To expect; anticipate.

[**out of order]Ipagsangalang-v-To defend; maintain;
sustain; protect; support.

<pb n=75>

Ipagsabi-v-To tell; publish; reveal;
proclaim.

Ipagtaboy-v-To divorce; separate; dismiss.

Ipagtabuyan-v-To divorce; separate;
dismiss.

Ipagtangol-v-To defend; protect; aid;
save; help; support; maintain; sustain.

Ipagpatuloy-v-To protract; prolong; continue;
hold.

Ipagtulakan-v-To push; impel[**Errata]; shove.

Ipagwisik-v-To sprinkle.

Ipahalang-v-To lay crossways or
crosswise; thwart.

Ipahalata-v-To display; show; make
known.

Ipahalay-v-To thwart.

Ipahatid-v-To send an escort; dispatch;
send.

Ipahayag-v-To proclaim; publish; announce;
reveal; herald; cite; make
known; impart; declare; manifest;
apprise; send forth; communicate;
emit; divulge.

Ipahayag muli-v-To republish; reannounce.

Ipahintulot-v-To leave; let; permit; give
consent; consent; agree; condescend;
sanction; privilege[**Errata].

Ipaibabaw-v-To add; augment; put
upon; boot.

Ipailalim-v-To put under; put below;
bury; cover.

Ipainom-v-To give to drink; invite to
drink.

Ipakilala-v-To introduce; present; manifest;
demonstrate.

Ipakilos[**missing letter? |M:fixed; s partly visible in scan]-v-To actuate.

Ipakipagtalo-v-To dispute; controvert.

Ipakita-v-To show; exhibit; lay before;
point out; explain; expound; present;
display; evince; produce; bespeak.

Ipakiusap-v-To beseech; implore; appeal;
intercede; entreat; harangue; ask;
pray.

Ipako-v-To nail; spike; peg.

Ipako sa cruz-v-To crucify.

Ipakuskos-v-To order to clean or rub.

Ipalabas-v-To put out; effuse.

Ipalagay-v-To choose; elect; name.

Ipalagay sa loob-v-To put within.

Ipalaman-v-To put inside.

Ipaligid-v-To beset.

Ipalit-v-To change; barter; substitute;
exchange.

Ipaloob-v-To put within; enter;
sheathe.

Ipalubog-v-To sink; immerse; inundate;
hide; conceal.

<pb n=76>

Ipamahagi-v-To apportion; distribute;
part; dispart; divide.

Ipamalit-v-To exchange; permute;
change.

Ipamudmod-v-To sprinkle; distribute;
divide; part; apportion.

Ipamulsa-v-To imburse; put in the
pocket; pocket; pouch.

Ipanabi-v-To tell; publish; reveal;
proclaim; say.

Ipanagano-v-To dedicate; consecrate.

Ipan~gako-v-To promise; insure.

Ipan~ganak-v-To give birth; bear children.

Ipan~gat-v-To expose; lay open; boil.

Ipan~gayaw-v-To refuse; retrocede; retire;
deny.

Ipan~gusap-v-To <corr sic=advice>advise</corr>; counsel; foreshow[**unclear |M:foreshow].

Ipanhik-v-To go up; take up; invite
up.

Ipanumpa-v-To swear in; adjure.

Iparis-v-To favor; pair; resemble.

Ipasan-v-To load[**Errata]; land; put on the
shoulders.

Ipasial-v-To take for a walk.

Ipasya-v-To ordain; decide; enact;
determine; conform.

Ipasok-v-To place in; put in; enter;
interject.

Ipaspas-v-To shake.

Ipataas-v-To lift up; raise; emboss;
aggrandize.

Ipatag-v-To level; make level.

Ipatalastas-v-To make known; manifest;
explain; announce; declare; construe;
impart.

Ipatalo-v-To lose; cause to lose; lose
purposely; let lose.[**see note in Errata, 7.png]

Ipatanaw-v-To show; exhibit; expose;
lay before; point out.

Ipatawad-v-To forgive; pardon.

Ipatong-v-To add to; put on; load;
boot.

Ipatnugot-v-To direct; teach; guide;
show the right way; manage; conduct;
show; rule; govern.

Ipatuad-v-To invert; turn upside down.

Ipatuloy-v-To continue; finish; pursue[**Errata];
follow; accomplish.

Ipaunawa-v-To expound; explain; point
out; announce; teach; lay before.

Ipawis-v-To perspire; sweat.

Ipayag-v-To concede; allow; admit; grant;
conform.

Ipilig-v-To shake.

Ipinan~ganak sa bundok-n-Mountaineer;
highlander.

Ipinahiram-n-Loan; that which has
been lent.

<pb n=77>

Ipinta-v-To paint.

Ipinta ang tabas-v-To draw the outlines;
trace.

Ipis-n-Cockroach.

Ipisan-v-To unite; join; congregate.

Ipit-n-Tweezers; pincers.

Ipitin-v-To pinch; press.

Ipoipo-n-Whirlwind; vortex.

Ipukol-v-To throw; cast.

Ipunin-v-To gather; store; hoard; lay up.

Ipunta-v-To point; direct.

Iraos-v-To finish; complete.

Ire pro.-This.

Iri-n-Groan.

Irog-a-Dear; beloved.

Irugin-v-To love; esteem.

Isa-a-One.

Isa-n-Digit.

Isabat-v-To interrupt.

Isabit-v-To hang up; suspend.

Isabog-v-To scatter; throw<corr>;</corr> broadcast;
bestrew; squander; lavish[**Errata]; misspend;
(sa gulo)-discomfit; disperse.

Isabong-v-To fight or pit cocks.

Isadya-v-To do intentionally or purposely.

Isagi-v-To use out of place or when
one should not.

Isa-isa [**-]<corr sic=one>One</corr> by one; one at a time;-adv.-singularly.

Isakay-v-To ride; embark.

<corr sic="Isalangsan~g">Isalangsang</corr>-v-To oppose; object; contradict;
trespass; cross; go through.

Isalin-v-To copy; transcribe; transfer.

Isalit-v-To alternate; mix; mingle.

Isalong <corr sic="an~g">ang</corr> sandata-v-To sheathe.

Isaloob ang hindi totoo-v-To suppose.

Isama-v-To join; unite; conjoin; consolidate;
associate; adjoin; include; accompany;
incorporate; collect; alloy;
mix; mingle; affiliate; knit.

Isambulat-v-To scatter; squander; lavish.

Isampay-v-To hang up; suspend.

Isandig-v-To recline; lean back.

Isandok-v-To dish; stir with a spoon.

Isan~gag-v-To toast; torrefy[**??? |M:valid word, means dry by fire].

Isang dali-n-Instant; trice.

Isang docena-n-Dozen.

Isang kasuotang husto-n A complete
suit.

[**out of order]Isang laksa-a-Ten thousand.

Isang kisap mata-n-An instant.

Isang pulutong-n-A platoon.

Isanla-v-To mortgage; pledge; pawn;
plight; hypothecate[**??? |M:valid word].

Isara-v-To close; shut.

Isarin-v-To resemble; be alike.

Isauli-v To return; restore; reestablish.

Isawala-v-To cause to lose; make lost;
lose.

<pb n=78>

Isaw-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Gut; tripe; intestine; entrail.

Isawsaw-v-To dip.

Isda-n-Fish.

Isikad-v-To kick; spurn.

Isiksik-v-To cram in; force; put in by
force.

Isilid-v-To put in; pack; place in.

Isilid sa supot-v-To sack.

Isin~ga-v-To blow the nose.

Isin~git-v-To cram; put in by force.

Isip-n-Reason; thought; sense; will;
understanding; mind; idea; meditation;
judgement; notion; fancy.

Isipin-v-To think; reason; meditate; conceive;
contrive; fancy; suppose.

Isiping-v-To put or place by the side;
lay beside.

Isipot-v-To cause to appear; show; disclose.

Isisid-v-To duck; put under water; dip;
douse.

Isisin-v-To scrub; wash; mop.

Isubo-v-To eat with the fingers.

Isuga-v-To tie to a rope; tether.

Isugba-v-To precipitate.

Isulat-v-To write.

Isulat ang huling kalooban-v-To write
a will; bequeath.

Isulat ang n~galan sa isang libro-v-To
marticulate[**Errata: matriculate]; register; enroll; record.

Isulong-v-To propel; shove along.

Isumbong-v-To accuse; inform.

Isuot-v-To put on; wear.

Isurot-v-To indicate; point out.

Isurot sa isip-v-To suggest; hint;
prompt.

Isusi-v-To lock.

Itaan-v-To dedicate; consecrate; reserve.

Itaas-v-To lift; raise up<corr>;</corr> heave up; elevate;
upbear.

Itaas-v adv.[**POS s/b 'adv.' only]-<corr sic=above>Above</corr>; over; high.

Itaboy-v-To divorce; remove; separate.

Itagal-v-To suffer; tolerate; abide; comport;
prolong.

Itaguilid[**correct sp, but s/b 'Itagilid' to follow alphab order]-[**v-]To raise on edge.

Itago-v-To hide; conceal; guard; keep
secret; reserve; inclose[**Errata].

<corr sic=Itagpu>Itagpi</corr>-v-To patch; mend.

Itagpos-v-To continue; hold; protract;
lengthen; endure.

Itahan-v-To quiet; still; place; put.

Itak-n-Bolo; <corr sic=Gorn resp=e>corn</corr>-knife.

Itakad-v-To move by degrees.

Italatag-v-To exhibit or show all.

Italay-v-To dedicate; consecrate.

[**out of order]Itakwil-v-To reject; repel; gainsay; contradict.

Itali-v-To tie; fasten; bind; oblige.

<pb n=79>

Itambal-v-To strengthen; join or unite
in order to strengthen.

Itampok-v-To emboss; extoll; aggrandize.

Itanda-v-To remember; note; record;
register.

Itan~gi-v-To except; exclude; keep out;
separate; divide; lay aside; refuse;
deny; disown.[**last 3 defns are actually for Itangi (v), w/c is not listed here]

Itanong-v-To ask; question; query.

<corr sic=Itanyang>Itanyag</corr>-v-To present; extoll; manifest;
magnify; exhibit.

Itaob-v-To overbalance; put face down;
overset.

Itapal-v-To poultice; put on; apply.

Itapon-v-To throw away; cast; lavish;
mis-spend; waste; discard.

Itapon ang may sala sa <corr sic="iban~g">ibang</corr> lugar-v-To
banish; deport; exile.

Itapon sa labas-v-To eject.

Itatag-v-To establish; institute; found;
ordain; fix; enact.

Itatua-v-To deny; contradict[**Errata]; gainsay;
disown; refuse.

Itayo-v-To establish; build; situate;
construct.

Itayong-v-To delay; suspend.

Itayo uli-v-To rebuild; reestablish; reconstruct.

Itigil-v-To discontinue; suspend; delay;
stop.

Itim-a-Black; jetty; blackish; gloomy.

Itim-n-That which is black; blackness.

Itimbuang-v-To leave or let lay.

Itirik-v-To set posts.

Itiwalay-v-To separate; sort; divide; remove;
divorce; withdraw; lay aside;
dissuade.

Itiwasay-v-To calm; tranquilize.

Itlog-n-Egg; testicle.

Ito-a-This.

Ito-pro.-This.

Itoon-v-To join; unite; add; increase.

Itowid-v-To straighten; make right.

Itudla-v-To point with the finger.

Itulag-v-To throw a spear.

Itulak-v-To push; impel; shove; drive;
press; forward.

Itulos-v-To set on end; set posts.

Itulot-v-To compare; dedicate; permit;
give permission.

Itulay-v-To continue; keep on; <corr sic=persue resp=e>pursue</corr>.

Itun~go-v-To direct; conduct; incline;
influence.

[**out of order]Itungkol-v-To destinate[** ? |M:valid obsolete word]; pertain.

Ituro-v-To teach; train; guide; direct;
show; construe; point out; denote.

Iudyok-v-To induce; egg on; encourage;
persuade; prejudice.

Iugoy-v-To swing; rock; move.

Iukol-v-To destinate; pertain.

Iuli-v-To restore; reform; reestablish[**Errata];
mend; renew.

Iuna-v-To anticipate; <corr sic=preceed resp=e>precede</corr>; forego.

Iunat-v-To unfold; extend; stretch out.

Iutos-v-To order; enact; ordain; send;
command.

Iwa-n-Cut; gash.

Iwaan-v-To cut; slash; gash.

Iwagwag-v-To shake; wave.

Iwaksi-v-To separate; reject; condemn;
repel; preclude.

Iwala-v-To lose; miss.

Iwan-v-To leave; let; abandon; forsake;
omit; quit; relinquish.

Iwayway-v-To wave; shake.

Iwisik-v-To sprinkle.

Iyak-n-Cry; howl.

Iyak n~g tupa-n-Bleat.

Iyan-a-That.

Iyan-pro.-That.

Iyangyang-v-To dry; put in the air; air.

Iyang man~ga-a-Those.

Iyan man~ga-pro.-Those.

Iyan n~ga-pro.-That.

Iyo-pro.-Thy; thine; your; yours.

Iyon-a-That.

Iyon-pro.-That.

Iyuko-v-To bow; incline or lower ones'[**typo: one's]
head.

<corr sic=Iyakod>Iyukod</corr>-v-To humble; lower.




<div1 type=Letter n=J>
<head>J</head>


Jelea-n-Jelly; jam.

Jesu Cristo-n-Jesus Christ; Messiah.

Judio-n-Jew; Hebrew.

Judio-a-Jewish; Jew; <corr sic=hebrew>Hebrew</corr>.

Jumento-n-<corr sic=jackass>Jackass</corr>; ass.




<div1 type=Letter n=K>
<head>K</head>


Ka-pro.-You; thee.

Ka-adv.-Very.

Kaabalahan-n-Obstacle; impediment.

<pb n=80>

Kaagaw-n-Rival; competitor; antagonist;
opponent.

Ka-agulo-n-Mistress; concubine.

<pb n=81>

Ka-agusan-n-Current; torrent.

Ka-akma-a-Sympathetic.

Ka-alaban n~g loob-n-Fervor; warmth;
zeal; ardor.

Ka-alakbay-n-Companion; chum; company;
accomplice; associate.

Ka-alam-n-Accomplice; associate; confederate.

Ka-alimurahan-n-Abuse; insult; contempt;
outrage.

Ka-alisagaan-n-Inconstancy; levity; fickleness.

Ka-alit-n-Enemy; antagonist.

Ka-aliwan-n-Solace; sport; consolation;
happiness; relaxation.

Ka-amoan-n-Tameness; kindness; humility; modesty.

Kaamuan-n-Tameness; meekness; gentleness;
mildness.

Kaanayaran-n-Softness; gentleness;
mildness; delicacy; meekness.

Kaang-n-Dyer's copper.

Kaapit bahay-n-Neighbor.

Kaasalan-n-Rite; ceremony; custom; habit.

Kaawa-awa-a-Pathetic.

Kaaway-n-Enemy; opponent; antagonist;
competitor.

Kaaya-aya-a-Smiling; agreeable; peaceful;
pleasing; delightful; delicious.

Kaayahan-n-Festivity; rejoicing; gayety;
happiness.

Kaayawan-n-Reluctance.

Kaayawan gumawa-n-Idleness; laziness;
reluctance to do work.

Kaayon-n-Unanimity.

Kaayon-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Unanimous.

Kaayos-a-Unanimous.

Kaayupan-n-Baseness; rudeness; insult;
humiliation.

Kaba-n-Fear; dread; suspicion; emotion.

Kababaan-n-Meekness; humility; mildness;
inferiority; modesty.

Kababaan n~g kilos-n-Meanness; lowness;
lewdness.

Kababaan n~g loob-n-Humility; mildness;
modesty; meekness.

Kababalaghan-n-Impediment; obstacle;
prevention; anything that can perturb
the mind.

[**out of order]Kaban~gisan-n-Ferocity; wildness; cruelty;
inhumanity.

Kababayan-n-<corr sic=Follow resp=e>Fellow</corr>-citizen; country-man.

Kabag-n-Gust of wind from the stomach;
colic.

Kabàg-n-Wave of the hand.

Kabagalan-n-Slowness; heaviness; <corr sic=dulness>dullness</corr>;
turpitude; carelessness; slovenliness;
impurity; lewdness; ugliness.

<pb n=82>

Kabagay-a-Fit; appropriate; sympathetic;
accommodating[**Errata].

Kabagayan-n-Fitness; propriety; reliableness;
reliability; adaptation;
aptitude.

Kabagkabág[** accent uncertain |M:looks ok]-n-Small bat.

[**out of order]Kabagsikan-n-Severity; harshness; rigor;
asperity; cruelty; truculency; sharpness;
inhumanity; force.

Kabagong tawohan-n-Youth; <corr sic=celebacy>celibacy</corr>.

Kabahagi-n-Part; piece; portion.

Kabahayan-n-Place of many houses.

Kabahoan-n-Fetidness; stench; stink.

Kabaitan-n-Wisdom; knowledge; prudence;
skill; moderation; judgement;
learning; discretion[**Errata]; morality.

Kabaitan sa pagpalapat-n-Equity; right;
justice; impartiality; moderation;
<corr sic=concientiousness>conscientiousness</corr>.

Kabaitan sa pagtupad-n-Equity; justice;
impartiality; conscientiousness[**Errata];
moderation.

Kabalikan-n-Wrong side; back part;
reverse.

Kabalisahan-n-Restlessness; unrest;
commotion; disturbance.

Kabaluktutan-n-Crookedness; bend;
curvation; curvature.

Kaban-n-Trunk; chest; coffer; locker.

Kaban n~g sombalilo-n-Hat-box.

Kabanalan-n-Virtue; purity; sanctity;
holiness; godliness.

Kaba n~g dibdib-n-Palpitation; pant;
heaving of the breast.

Kabanayaran-n-Prudence; equity; justice;
right; mildness; impartiality;
moderation.

Kabáng-n-Coffer; bier.

Kaban~gisan-n-Cruelty; inhumanity; truculency;
asperity; ferocity.

Kaban~guhan-n-Fragrance; fragrancy[**Errata].

<corr sic=Kabangutan>Kabantugan</corr>-n-Fame; celebrity; glory;
reputation; renown; name; excellence.

Kabastusan-n-Roughness; rudeness;
coarseness; rowdyism; contumely.

Kabastusan-n-Roughness; rudeness;
coarseness; vile conduct;
meanness; contumely; rowdyism.

Kabataan-n-Youth; girlhood; boyhood;
childhood.

Kabatuganan-n-Slowness; slovenliness;
carelessness.

Kabayanihan-n-Heroism; bravery; courage.

Kabayo-n-Horse; <corr sic=shelte>sheltie</corr>; hackney<corr>;</corr> plug.

Kabayong ginagamit nang sundalo-n-<corr sic=charger>Charger</corr>;
cavalry horse.

Kabayong kargahan-n-Pack-horse.

Kabayong kulaklang-n-Spotted horse.

<pb n=83>

Kabayong n~guso-n-Peevish horse

Kabayong siklan-n-Stallion.

Kabiak-n-Half; counterpart.

Kabiawan-n-Sugar-mill; cane press.

Kabigatan-n-Heaviness; heft; weight;
gravity[**Errata]; enormity; seriousness.

Kabigayan-n-Liberality; giving.

Kabiglaan-n-Speed; quickness; promptitude;
rapidity; promptness; activity;
haste.

Kabiglaanan-n-Haste; activity; speed:
urgency; exigence; quickness[**Errata]; promptness;
promptitude.

Kabihasahan-n-Habit; custom.

Kabihasanan-n-<corr sic=learning>Learning</corr>; wisdom; knowledge;
skill; ability; sagacity.

Kabihasnan-n-Revelation; <corr sic=illucidation>elucidation</corr>;
illustration; the forming of a habit.

Kabilan~gan n~g tawo sa isang lugar-n-<corr sic=census>Census</corr>;
population.

Kabilugan-n-Whole; total; totality;
roundness; account.

Kabilugan n~g buan-n-Full moon.

Kabin~gihan-n-Deafness.

Kabinian-n-Modesty; decency; chastity;
gentility; genteelness; meekness.

Kabinyagan-n-Day of baptism.

Kabkab-n-Cavity in wood.

Kable-n-Cable.

Kabo-n-Corporal.

Kabog-n-Fall; hurt; contusion; blow;
knock.

Kabubuliran-n-Precipice; fall.

Kabuisan-n-Revenue; tax; rent.

Kabulaanan-n-Fictitiousness; falsity;
uncertainty; lying; unreliability.

Kabulagan-n-Blindness; error<corr sic=",">;</corr> stupidity;
<corr sic=dulness>dullness</corr>.

Kabuluhan-n-Weight; worth; consequence;
importance; moment; use.

Kabulukan-n-Corruption; pollution;
putrefaction; depravity; rottenness.

Kabulukan n~g sugat-n-Proudflesh; gangrene;
pus.

Kabundukan-n-Mountain system.

Kabuntisan-n-Pregnancy.

Kabunyian-n-Fame; glory; reputation;
excellence; name.

Kabuoan-n-Total; totality; entirety; sum;
amount; roundness.

Kabuoan n~g loob-n-Valor; bravery; boldness;
courage<corr>;</corr> intrepidity[**fixed, 1st t not visible].

Kabuoan n~g puso-n-Serenity; valor; intrepidity.

Kaburakan-n-Quagmire; slough; marsh;
swamp; miry place.

Kabusugan-n-Satiety; satiation; satisfaction.

Kabutihan-n-Goodness; kindness; good;
benefit; utility; benevolence.

<pb n=84>

Kabutihan n~g isip-n-Wisdom; knowledge;
prudence.

Kabutingtin~gan-n-Folly; tedium; useless
work.

Kabuyaan-n-Satiety; satiation; satisfaction.

<corr sic=Kadaghan>Kaadaglian</corr>-n-Promptitude; activity.

Kadakilaan-n-Greatness; sublimity; magnitude;
preeminence; superiority; royalty;
grandness; dignity; loftiness;
majesty; sumptuousness.

Kadalagahan-n-Maidenhood.

Kadalamhatian-n-Grief; disgust; abhorrence.

Kadalasan-n-Frequence; frequency.

Kadali-n-Instant.

Kadalian-n-Quickness; activity; speed;
promptitude; rush; facility; ease; hurry;
pressure; ready; compliance.

Kadalitaan-n-Poverty; misery.

Kadataan-n-Softness; delicacy; tenderness;
suavity.

Kadiliman-n-Darkness; obscurity; density;
opacity.

Kadin~gatdin~gat-a-Unexpected; <corr sic=unforseen>unforeseen</corr>;
sudden.

Kadin~gatdin~gat-adv.-Suddenly; unexpectedly.

Kadiosan-n-<corr sic=Diety>Deity</corr>; divinity; sanctionary[**sanctity is prob. meant here].

Kadiwaraan-n-Curiosity; inquisitiveness.

Kadlit-n-Small cut; incision.

Kadlitan-v-To incise; make a small cut.

Kadoon~gan-n-Harbor; anchorage.

Kadowahagian-[**n][**no word type |M:fixed]-Affliction; humiliation;
injury.

Kadugo-n-Kindred; relation; having the
same blood; of the same blood.

Kadugtong-n-Addiction; continuation;
end; postscript.

Kadukhaan-n-Lowness; lewdness; vileness;
abjection; degradation.

Kaduluhan-n-End; extremity.

Kaduluhan-a-Last; end; extreme.

Kadun~gan-n-Contraction; humiliation;
humility; backwardness.

Kandun~guan[**typo: Kadun~guan]-n-Bashfulness; backwardness;
temerity; pertness.

Kadustaan-n-Lowness; vileness; lewdness;
abjection.

Kadustadusta-a-Humiliating; ignoble;
ignominous; disgraceful; low; abject;
mean.

Kagaanan-n-Levity; lightness.

Kagabi-n-Last night.

Kagagawan-n-Action; doing; feat; event;
fact.

Kagaláng-n-Pair; the other.

Kagalan~gan-n-Respect; reverence; regard;
politeness; civility; homage; courtesy;
good manners; education; breeding;
manners; observance; obedience.

<pb n=85>

Kagalanggalang-a-Respectable; polite;
respectful; courteous; reverend; civil.

Kagalawan-n-Movement; disturbance;
moving.

Kagalin~gan-n-Goodness; kindness;
gentility.

Kagalit-n-Enemy; opponent; antagonist.

Kagálitan-n-Anger; indignation; vexation;
passion; rage.

Kagalitan-v-To anger; perturb; vex.

Kagamitan-n-Use; custom; utility; profit.

Kagamitan-a-Ordinary; usual; customary.

Kagampanan-n-Compensation<corr>;</corr> value.

Kagamutan-n-Remedy; reparation; cure;
redemption; recourse.

Kagandahan-n-Beauty; elegance; comeliness;
kindness; gentility; amiability;
genteelness.

Kagandahan nang loob-n-Munificence;
kindness; benignity; beneficence;
generosity; benevolence; liberality.

Kagasohan-n-Noisiness; restlessness.

Kagaspan~gan-n-Rudeness; roughness;
coarseness; illbreeding; stupidity;
rusticity.

Kagat-n-Bite; mouthful.

Kagatin-v-To bite; gnaw; nip.

Kagawian-n-Inclination; habit; use; custom.

Kagayat-n-Slice; <corr sic=Piece>piece</corr>; cut.

Kagilit-n-Companion.

Kagilit-adv.-<corr sic=side>Side</corr> by side.

Kaginhawahan-n-Ease; facility; prosperity.

Kaginsaginsa-adv.-Suddenly; unexpectedly.

Kaginsaginsa-a-Sudden; unforeseen.

Kagipitan-n-Narrowness; closeness;
straightness; hard straits.

Kagulan~gan-n-Maturity.

Kagulanggulang-a-Mature.

Kagulatan-n-Fright; scare.

Kagulatgulat-a-Dreadful; frightful;
shocking.

Kaguluhan-n-Disturbance; confusion;
commotion; carousal; tumult; revelry;
scuffle; romping; quarrel; perturbation;
overthrow; noise; fight.

Kagungkong-n-Noise; clamor; bustle;
dispute; tumult; rumor.

Kagyat-adv.-Hardly; with trouble; scarcely;
almost.

Kagyatin-v-To prepare.

Kahabaan-n-Length; protraction.

Kahabaang malabis-n-Tediousness.

Kahabaan n~g buhay-n-Longevity[**Errata].

Kahabagan-n-<corr sic=Wretched>Wretchedness</corr>; misery.

Kahabaghabag-a-Wretched; miserable;
downfallen.

Kahalagahan-n-Appraisement; valuation;
value; price; worth.

<pb n=86>

Kahalakhan-n-Boisterous laughing.

Kahalakhalak-a-Happy; joyful.

Kahalayan-n-Lowness; lewdness<corr>;</corr> ugliness;
obscenity; impurity; unchastity;
dishonor; dishonesty; rudeness; sordidness;
turpitude; covetousness.

Kahalili-<corr sic=u>n</corr>-Substitute; exchange<corr>;</corr> substitution;
relief; successor; alternate;
delegate<corr>;</corr> successor.

Kahalo-n-Mixture<corr>;</corr> accomplice.

Kahamakan-n-Lowness; lewdness; baseness<corr>;</corr>
vice<corr>;</corr> contumely; infamy; dishonor;
scoundrelism; accident.

Kahambalhambal-n-Sad; deplorable;
lamentable; dismal; doleful; horrible.

Kahambugan n-Braggartism; haughtiness;
arrogance; presumption<corr>;</corr> vanity<corr sic=":">;</corr>
boast; <corr sic=pompuosity resp=e>pomposity</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> disdain; vaunt:
ostentation<corr>;</corr> pride.

<corr sic="Kahan~ga">Kahanga</corr>-n-Limit; bound.

Kahan~gahan~ga-a-Miraculous<corr>;</corr> wonderful;
admirable<corr>;</corr> marvelous; astonishing.

Kahan~ginan n-Braggartism; brag<corr sic=",">;</corr> boast<corr sic=",">;</corr>
presumption; ignorance; foolishness;
clownishness<corr>;</corr> emptiness.

Kahapisan-n-Suffering<corr>;</corr> hardship; sufferance;
infelicity; calamity.

Kahapishapis-a-Doleful<corr sic=",">;</corr> sad; dismal;
deplorable.

Kahapon-n-Yesterday.

Kahapon-adv.-Yesterday.

Kaharian-n-Kingdom<corr sic=",">;</corr> crown; dynasty;
realm.

Kahayopan-n-Brutality; inhumanity.

Kahigpitan-n-Tightness; tenacity; contumacy<corr>;</corr>
pertenacity[**Errata: pertinacity]; severity; harshness.

Kahigtan-n Surplus; increase<corr>;</corr> augmentation<corr>;</corr>
overplus<corr>;</corr> preference<corr>;</corr> difference.

Kahigtan sa iba n-Superiority

Kahihiyaan-n-Bashfulness<corr>;</corr> shame; confusion;
humilation; compromise.

Kahilawan n-Crudeness<corr sic=",">;</corr> crudity;

Kahiman-prep.-Though; notwith standing.

Kahimanawari inter-. Would to GOD-[**; ]GOD grant.

Kahimpak n Large slice.

Kahinaan-n-Weakness; debility; feebleness;
prostration.

Kahinaan n~g loob-n-<corr sic=Effeminence resp=e>Effeminateness</corr>; <corr sic=effeminency resp=e>effeminacy</corr>.

<corr sic=Kahinahinayan>Kahinahinayang</corr>-n-Compassion; pity.

Kahin~gian-n-Petition; request; claim;
prayer.<corr>;</corr> demand.

Kahinhinan-n-Decorum; purity; honor;
circumspection<corr sic=":">;</corr> modesty; chastity;
decency; respect; meekness; gravity<corr sic=",">;</corr>
seriousness.

<pb n=87>

Kahinugan n Maturity; ripeness.

Kahirapan-n-Hardship<corr>;</corr> poverty; misery;
sufferance; disaster; suffering; duress;
yoke; disadvantage<corr>;</corr> calamity.

Kahit-adv. Though; notwithstanding.

Kahitman-prep.-Though; notwithstanding.

Kahiwa n-Slice; cut; piece; part.

Kahiyahiya-a-Disgraceful; shameful;
inglorious<corr>;</corr> low; lewd.

Kahon-n-Box; crate.

Kahoy-n-Timber; wood<corr>;</corr> tree; cudgel; stick.

Kahoyan-n-Grove<corr>;</corr> woods<corr>;</corr> timber.

Kahuad-n-Likeness<corr>;</corr> imitation; copy; counterfeit.

Kahubaran-n-Nakedness<corr>;</corr> nudity

Kahulihan-n Posteriority.

Kahulihulihan-a-Last<corr>;</corr> hindmost; latest<corr>;</corr>
mizzen; utmost; uttermost.

Kahulihulihang pasiya-n-Ultimatum.

Kahulihulihang salita n-Ultimatum.

Kahulugan-n-Signification; definition;
prognostic<corr>;</corr> utility.

Kahumalan-n Nasality.

Kahumbakan-n-Concavity; hollowness.

Kahung-han~gan-n-Foolishness; silliness;
rusticity.

[**P1 unsure of eighth letter |M:a]Kahusayan-n-Decency; order; arrangement<corr>;</corr>
propriety.

Kahustuhan-n-Sufficiency; enough.

Kaiba-a-Foreign<corr>;</corr> strange; rare.

Kaiba-n-Difference<corr>;</corr> strangeness.

Kaibahan n-Difference; diversity; variety.

Kaibhan n~g lalaki sa babayi-n-Sex.

Kaibigan-n-Inclination; desire; mind;
wish; intention.

Kaibigan-n Friend.

Kaibuturan-n-Center; interior; inside.

Kaidkuran-n Scraper; cylinder; roller;
meanness; avarice.

Kaigutan-n-Penury; avarice<corr>;</corr> meanness;
paltriness<corr sic=":">;</corr> poverty; difficulty.

Kaiklian n-Shortness; brevity.

Kaiklian n~g isip-n-<corr sic=Dulness resp=e>Dullness</corr>; stupidity;
ignorance; turpitude.

Kaila-n-Negation; denial; refusal; repulse.

<corr sic="Kailan~gan">Kailagan</corr>-n Wildness; bashfulness<corr>;</corr> shyness;
backwardness.

Kailan~gan-a-Necessary; needful; requisite;
stringent; essential.

Kailan~gan-n-Necessity; need; want; requisition;
essential; requisite.

Kailan~gang malubha-n-<corr sic=Indespensible resp=e>Indispensable</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr>
needful.

Kailan~ganin-v-To require<corr sic=",">;</corr> need<corr sic=":">;</corr> necessitate<corr sic=",">;</corr>
want.

Kailanman adv.-Never; always; at one
time.[**Note that the defns 'always' & 'never' are opposites. The defn "Never" applies only in negative sentences.]

<pb n=88>

Kailanman hindi narinig-a Unheard of;
strange<corr sic=",">;</corr> foreign.

Kainaman-n-Neatness<corr sic=",">;</corr> beauty<corr sic=",">;</corr> elegance;
prettiness; finery; nicety; goodness.

Kainam manalita-n-Fluency or elegance
of speech

Kainan-n-Feast; dinner; banquet.

Kaing-n-Basket.

Kain~gatan-n-Care<corr>;</corr> prudence; caution.

Kain~gayan-n-Noise<corr>;</corr> carousal<corr sic=",">;</corr> revelry;
romping; clamor; scuffle; jargon;
racket; bustle.

Kainipan-n-Envy; impatience; eagerness<corr>;</corr>
hastiness.

Kainitan-n-Heat<corr sic=",">;</corr> fervor; warmth; zeal;
ardor; zest.

Kain aan[**best guess is typo for 'Kainkaan', w/c I can't confirm if a valid word; sounds similar, though, to Kamkaan (93.png)] n-Proverb.


Kaisa a-Identical; similar; equal<corr sic=":">;</corr> uniform;
like; unanimous; united.

Kaisa-n-Unanimity; similarity.

Kaitaasan-n-Top<corr>;</corr> peak; summit.

Kaitiman-n-Blackness<corr sic=",">;</corr> darkness.

Kaiva[**can't confirm if this is a valid word, but stet; other words here use 'v', so spelling acceptable] n-Fish-basket.

Kakaiba a-Eccentric; strange; absurd<corr>;</corr>
ridiculous.

Kakaibang umisip-n-Paradox.

Kakailan~gan-n-Stringency.

Kakal na may n~gipin n-Curry-comb.

Kakanan n~g hayop-n-Manger; crib;
rack.

Kakapalan n-Thickness; density.

Kakapusan-n-Lacking; shortcoming<corr sic=":">;</corr>
lack.

Kakapusan n~g isip-n-Incapability; incapacity
inability; <corr sic=dulness>dullness</corr>; stupidity;
ignorance; folly.

Kaunti[**typo: Kakaunti (Kaunti appears in correct order on 103.png)]-a-Scanty; <corr sic=scare>scarce</corr>; limited<corr sic=":">;</corr> small;
little<corr sic=":">;</corr> slight.

Kakaunti ang halaga-a-Trifling<corr sic=":">;</corr> of little
value; valueless; worthless.

Kakikita adv.-Recently seen.

Kakilakilabot-a-Horrible<corr>;</corr> awful; monstrous;
terrible; horrid<corr>;</corr> dire<corr>;</corr> direful;
grime; grisly; ghastly; horrific.

Kakilala-n-Acquaintance<corr>;</corr> friend.

Kakinan~gan-n-Brightness; smoothness;
terseness; purity.

Kakinisan-n-Brightness; delicacy; finery;
cleanliness<corr>;</corr> beauty<corr sic=",">;</corr> terseness.

Kakiputan-n Narrowness; straightness;
closeness.

Kakitiran n-Narrowness; straightness;
closeness.

Kakubaan-n Hump<corr>;</corr> curvature; Hump-back[**typo: hump-back].

Kakubutan-n-Curvature; hump-back.

Kakulan~gan-n-Lacking<corr sic=":">;</corr> defect; deficiency<corr sic=",">;</corr>
shortcoming; shortage; slight;
discrepancy; want<corr>;</corr> need; necessity.

<pb n=89>

Kakulan~gan n~g ayos- n-Discord; disarrangement[**next letter unreadable |M: already fixed]

Kakulan~gan nang palad-n Misfortune;
mishap; misery; unhappiness; disappointment.

Kakulan~gan n~g bait n-Folly<corr sic=",">;</corr> nonsense;
indescretion[**Errata: indiscretion]<corr>;</corr> absurdity.

Kakuparan-n-Slowness; sloth; slothfulness<corr sic=",">;</corr>
laziness<corr sic=",">;</corr> indolence.

Kakupinan-n-Slowness; laziness; indolence;
slothfulness.

Kala-n Shell of the turtle; turtleshell.

Kalaban-n-Opponent; competitor; antagonist;
rival; enemy[**Errata].

Kalabasa-n-Squash.

Kalabaw n-<corr sic=Carabou resp=e>Carabao</corr>.

Kalabisan-n-Excess; surplus; overplus;
superfluity; profuseness; residue<corr sic=",">;</corr>
remainder.

Kalabnawan-n-Liquidity; thinness.

Kalabog-n-Fall; tumble; noise[**? |M: valid defn]; clamor;
bustle.

Kalabuan-n-Muddiness; opacity; opaqueness;
<corr sic=dulness>dullness</corr>; stupidness.

Kalagayan-n-State; condition; aspect;
situation; rank; attitude; disposition;
mode; consistence; consistency; predicament;
manner; quality.

Kalagayang mahirap-n-Peasantry.

Kalagayang bata-n Childhood; <corr sic=perulity resp=e>puerility</corr>.

Kalagayan n~g loob n-Humor; mood.

Kalagin-v-To unhitch; unfasten; untie;
loosen; absolve; pardon.

Kalagin sa sala-v-To pardon; acquit;
forgive.

Kalagitnaan-n-Middle; center; midst;
medium; average; half diameter.

Kalagok-n-Swallow; draught.

Kalagposan n-Surplus; overplus; superfluity;
excess; superabundance.

Kalagpusan-n Surplus; overplus; superfluity;
excess; superabundance.

Kalaguan-n-Fertility; plenty; fruitfulness.

Kalaguan n~g san~ga-n-Thickness of foliage.

Kalaguyo-n-Companion; comrade; partner;
friend.

Kalahatan-n Totality; total; entirety;
whole.

Kalahati-a-Half; semi; moiety.

Kalahatian-n-Half; middle; midst; average.

Kalahati n~g bilog-n Semicircle; half
circle.

Kalahok-n-Ingredient; mixture; companion<corr sic=":">;</corr>
associate.

Kalaitlait-a-Nefarious; abominable;
hideous<corr sic=":">;</corr> despicable; vile; reprehensible;
low.

<pb n=90>

Kalakal-n-Merchandise; commodity.

Kalákaran-n-The usual or ordinary custom
or habit.

Kalakasan-n-Strength; force<corr sic=":">;</corr> vehemence;
vehemency; hardiness; robustness.

Kalakhan n Size; amplitude; greatness.

Kalakhan n~g katawan-n-Corpulence;
corpulency[**Errata].

Kalakhan n~g puso-n-Liberality; generosity;
largeness of heart.

Kalakihan-n-Size; largeness; amplitude;
grandness.

Kalakip-n-Annexation; joining; inclosure.

Kalihiman-n Depth; profundity.

Kalaluan n Surpassing; excess; surplus;
superfluity.

Kalaman~gan-n Overplus; surplus; excess<corr>;</corr>
residue.

Kalambutan-n-Softness<corr sic=",">;</corr> delicacy; tenderness<corr>;</corr>
mildness<corr>;</corr> suavity; pliability;
pliableness.

Kalamigan-n Cold; coolness; frigidness.

Kalamkam n Tickling.

[**P1 unsure of last letter]Kalamnan-n-[**unreadable first letter P1]Hip; buttock; rump.[**M: all ok in this entry]

Kalan n-Fireplace; forge; hearth.

Kalanda n Bier; hearse.

Kalang n- <corr sic=edge>Wedge</corr>; prop.

Kalap n Timber; wood.

Kalaparan[**unreadable letter P1 |M: already fixed]n-Width; space; capacity;
interval.

Kalapastan~ganan-n-Offence; injury; insolence;
impudence; transgression.

Kalapati-n-Pigeon; dove.

Kalapit-a-<corr sic=Neigboring>Neighboring</corr>; next; proximate;
mediate; contiguous; conjunct; united;
near.

Kalapitan-n-Proximity; closeness; vicinity;
contiguity.

Kalapsawin v-To stir<corr>;</corr> revert.

Kalaputan-n Thickness; density.

Kalasag-n-Shield.

Kalasín[**matched scan]-n Chaise.

Kalasin v-To undo.

Kalasing-n Clatter; jingle; jangle.

Kalat-n Distribution; scattering.

Kalatis-n-Noise made in walking.

Kalatog-n Noise made by shaking anything;
sound; report.

[**P1 unsure of last letter |M:n]Kalaulin-v-To <corr sic=forsee resp=e>foresee</corr>; know beforehand.

<corr sic=Kaulaunang>Kalaunang</corr> panahon-n-Antiquity.

Kalawang n-Rust; stain.

Kalawan~gin-a Rusty; moldy.

Kalawan~gin-v-To rust.

Kalawang n~g tanso-n Verdigris.

Kalawit-n-Hook.

Kalawitin-v-To[**; not in scan] hook.

Kalayaan n-Freedom; <corr sic="libérty">liberty</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> release.

Kalayolayoan-a-Farthest; farthermost;
utmost; uttermost.[**last letter unreadable |M:t]

<pb n=91>

Kalendario-n Calendar.

Kalesa n Chaise<corr>;</corr> gig.

Kaliban~gan-n-Neglect; joy; pleasure;
amusement.

Kalibugan-n-Obscenity; immodesty;
unchastity<corr>;</corr> lewdness; shamelessness;
impudence; impurity<corr>;</corr> lust<corr>;</corr> ugliness;
rudeness<corr>;</corr> turpitude<corr sic=",">;</corr> lowness[**Errata].

Kalidad-n-Quality.

Kaligayahan n Happiness; joy; gaiety[**Errata];
conviviality.

Kaligharan-n-Spitting; expectoration.

Kaligharaan v-To spit<corr>;</corr> expectorate.

Kaligtaan-n-Forgetfulness<corr>;</corr> carelessness;
neglect; omittance.

Kalihim-n Secretary<corr>;</corr> detective; <corr sic=allay>ally</corr>;
confederate<corr>;</corr> emissary.

Kaliitan-n Smallness<corr>;</corr> nicety<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=sutility resp=e>subtilty</corr>.

Kaliksihan n Quickness<corr>;</corr> activity; ability;
promptness<corr sic=":">;</corr> promptitude<corr>;</corr> acceleration;
nimbleness; velocity; lightness;
speed; accuracy.

Kalikutan-n Restlessness; mischievousness;
trick; wile.

Kalilohan n-Treachery<corr>;</corr> perfidy<corr>;</corr> treason;
disloyality; felony<corr sic=",">;</corr> overthrow;
overturning.

Kaliluhan n-Treachery<corr sic=":">;</corr> perfidy<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=Treason>treason</corr><corr>;</corr>
disloyalty; overthrow; overturning.

Kalimutin-v To forget<corr>;</corr> neglect; overlook;
miss.

Kalinawan-n Clarity; purity.

Kalinawan n~g isip-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Illustration<corr>;</corr> saneness;
sanity<corr sic=",">;</corr> clearness of thought;
<corr sic=illucidation>elucidation</corr>.

Kaling n-Door knocker<corr>;</corr> crossbar

Kalin~gain-v-To favor; patronize<corr>;</corr> protect.

Kalinisan-n Cleanliness; chastity; purity;
neatness; decency; decorum;
excellence; frankness; modesty<corr sic=",">;</corr> cordiality;
accuracy; honesty.

Kalipulan&mdash;n-Destruction; havoc.

Kalisan v-To scrape.

Kaliskis-n-Scales.

Kalituhan n-Confusion; perplexity<corr sic=":">;</corr> perturbation;
lightheadedness<corr sic=",">;</corr> overthrow;
overturning.

Kaliwa-a-Left

Kaliwa n-Left.

Kaliwagan n-Delay; protraction<corr>;</corr> tardiness.

Kaliwanagan n Illustration; clearness;
brightness; clarity.

Kaliwang kamay-The left hand.

Kalo-n-Pulley.

Kalog-a Empty;[**Errata] <corr sic=hallow resp=e>hollow</corr>.

Kalóg-n-Clatter.

Kaloob n Gift<corr>;</corr> grant; present; gratification;
keepsake; donation; boon;
benefaction.

<pb n=92>

Kalooban-n-Will; mind; sense; understanding;
sheathe; interior.

Kalooban-adv.-At will.

Kalooblooban-a-Most central; most
inward; inmost.

<corr sic=Kalaoblooban>Kalooblooban</corr>-n-Center.

Kalos-n-Strickle[**? |M:valid obsolete word]; level.

Kaluagan-n-Breadth; width; freedom;
liberty.

Kalualhatian-n-Glory; honor; sanctionary[**? |M:'sanctimony' is probably meant];
fame; felicity.

Kaluban-n-Implement shed; place for
keeping implements.

Kalubayan-n-Stop; compliance.

Kalubayan n~g loob-n-Amiability; prudence;
affability; serenity; meekness;
mildness.

Kalubong-n-Cover; covering net.

<corr sic=Kalugolugod>Kalugodlugod</corr>-a-Delightfull[**keep double l? |M:typo for Delightful]; pleasing;
acceptable; happy; delicious.[** original ddlicious]

Kalugkog-n-Anything that serves to
make a noise.

Kaluguran-n-Happiness; gayety; conviviality;
amusement.

Kalukun~gan-n-Convexity.

Kaluluwa-n-Soul; spirit; ghost; spright.

Kalunitan-n-Obscurity; closeness.[**entry repeated below]

Kalungkutan-n-Sadness; sorrow; grief;
contrition; contriteness; infelicity.

Kalunitan-n-Obscurity; closeness.[**double entry]

Kalunoslunos-a-Deplorable; lamentable;
detestable; <corr sic=Wretched>wretched</corr>.

Kalunuran-a-West; <corr sic=Western>western</corr>.

Kalunuran-n-West.

Kalunya-n-Mistress; concubine.

Kalupaan-n-Earthliness; sensuality;
lewdness; moral depravity; ugliness;
homeliness[**Errata]; turpitude.

Kalupitan-n-Cruelty; inhumanity; detestation;
hatred.

Kalupit-lupit-a-Detestable; hateful;
loathesome; cruel; inhuman.

Kalupkop-n-Noise; horse shoe[**? |M:this is ok]; anything
that serves to make a noise.

Kalupkupan-n-Cover; spread.

Kalupkupan-v-To cover; overspread;
screen.

Kalusakan-n-Muddy place; rubbish.

Kamaganak-n-Parent; relative; kindred;
relation.

Kamaganakan-n-Lineage; kindred; relatives;
offspring.

Kamahalan-n-Dignity; honor; rank; reputation;
nobility; purity; respect;
decency; decorum; valor; distinction;
splendor; glory; lustre; generosity.

Kamahalan po ninyo-Your Grace; Your worship.

Kamakalawa-n-The day before yesterday.

<pb n=93>

Kamakalawa adv<corr>.</corr> -Day before yesterday.

Kamalbasan-n-Mallow ground; place
where <corr sic=mallous>mallows</corr> grow.

Kamalian n-Wrong; error; mistake;
blunder; fault<corr>;</corr> slip<corr>;</corr> injustice.

Kamalig-n-Store house.

<corr sic=Kamahin>Kamalin</corr>-v-To knead.

Kamanahan-n-Inheritance; heirloom.

Kamandag n-Poison.

Kamandagan-v-To poison.

Kamanghamangha-a Wonderful; stupendous;
miraculous<corr>;</corr> extraordinary;
fabulous.

Kamangman~gan-n-Stupidity; folly; foppery<corr>;</corr>
ignorance; foolishness; nonsense;
incapability<corr>;</corr> inability<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=dulness resp=e>dullness</corr><corr>;</corr> ugliness;
rudeness; absurdity; <corr sic="inca-pacity">incapacity</corr>.

Kamatayan-n-Death; mortality; fate<corr>;</corr> pest.<corr>;</corr>
fatality.

Kamaw-n-Wrist; earthen pan,[**.]

Kamay-n-Hand.

Kamiyaw-n-Accomplice; associate.

Kamiyawin v To stir; associate<corr sic=",">;</corr> begin;
move.

Kamkaan n-Proverb.

Kamkam n-Avarice; envy.

Kamote n Sweet <corr sic=potatoe resp=e>potato</corr>.

Kampapalis n-Swallow.

Kampit n-Knife.

Kamukha-a Like; similar[**Errata]; uniform; equal;
alike.

Kamukha-adv.-Alike; on a par.

Kamtan-v-To attain; obtain; collect;
gather<corr>;</corr> possess.

<corr sic=Kamuluan>Kamuhian</corr>-v-To hate<corr sic=",">;</corr> abhor; detest;
dislike.

<corr sic=Kamumuo>Kamumo</corr>-n Bee.

Kamunti-n-Mite; whit.

Kamunti-adv.-Very little<corr>;</corr> somewhat.

Kamuntian-n Smallness.

Kamuraan-n-Immaturity; tenderness;
sauvity[**Errata: suavity]; delicacy; softness.

Kamurahan-n Cheapness; insult<corr>;</corr> infamy;
censure; affront; outrage<corr sic=",">;</corr> baseness;
lowness; dishonor; <corr sic=humilliation>humiliation</corr>.

Kamutin-v-To scratch; scrape

Kanan-n-Right

Kanan-a Right.

Kanawin-v-To dilute<corr sic=",">;</corr> dissolve.

<corr sic=Kandara>Kandaro</corr>-n-Latch.

Kandila <corr sic=nn>n</corr>-Candle.

Kandirit-n-Hop.

Kanga-n-Wagon.

Kan~ginong-pro.-Whose.

Kanila-pro.-Their; theirs.

Kanin~gasan n Fervor; warmth<corr>;</corr> zeal;
ardor; flame; vehemence; vehemency.

Kaninong-pro.-Whose.

Kanipisan-n-Thinness; nicety<corr sic=",">;</corr> tenuity;
subtileness; delicacy; acuteness.

<pb n=94>

Kaniya pro.-His; hers.

Kaniyahin-v-To appropriate; usurp:
defraud; cheat.

Kanlun~gan n-Conversation among
many; group of talkers.

Kanlun~gin-v-To shelter; protect; defend.

Kanot-a Bald.

Kanta a-Song.

Kantero n-Mason; bricklayer.

Kanugnog-n-Limit; bound.

Kanunuan-n-Ancestry; forefathers[**Errata].

Kanyon-n-Cannon.

Kapabayaan-n-Negligence; neglect;
abandoment[**Errata: abandonment]<corr>;</corr> carelessness; laziness;
<corr sic=inadvertanee>inadvertence</corr>; <corr sic=inadvertancy>inadvertency</corr>; lassitude;
indolence; idleness<corr sic=",">;</corr> tardiness; inaccuracy.

Kapag-adv.-How; as<corr sic=",">;</corr> if<corr>;</corr> after; just as.

Kapagalan-n-Service; work.

Kapahamakan-n-Calamity; disappointment<corr>;</corr>
accident.

Kapahin~gahan-n-Rest; quiet; tranquility;
repose; quietude.

Kapahintulutan-n Permission; leave;
liberty; freedom.

Kapain-v-To search; grope; feel;
touch.

Kapaitan-n-Bitterness; asperity; poignancy.

Kapakinaban~gan-n Utility; profit; gain;
advantage; usefulness.

Kapakumbabaan-n-Submission; compliance;
modesty; meekness<corr sic=",">;</corr> density;
multitude; creation.

Kapal-n-Thickness[**Errata]; coarseness; density;
multitude<corr>;</corr> creation

Kapalagayan-n-Tranquility; rest; repose;
calmness.

Kapalagayang loob-n-Confidence.

Kapalagayang loob-a-Confident.

Kapalaluan-n Pride; presumption; <corr sic=arogance resp=e>arrogance</corr>; haughtiness; vanity; loftiness;
pompuosity[**Errata: pomposity]<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=pompuousness resp=e>pompousness</corr>;
inflation; swelling.

Kapalan-v-To thicken; strengthen; make
thick.

Kapalaran-n-Fortune; success; chance;
luck; fortuity; doom; fate; hap; contingent;
contingency; hazard; happiness.

Kapalibhasaan-n Affront; outrage; infamy<corr sic=",">;</corr>
dishonor.

Kapalit-Exchange; <corr sic=sustitution>substitution</corr>; substitute<corr>;</corr>
barter<corr>;</corr> delegate; commutation.

Kapalit nang-prep,[**.]-For<corr sic=",">;</corr> by<corr sic=",">;</corr> about; as
by; on account.

Kapanaghilian n-Envy; covetuousness.

Kapanahon-n-Contemporary; time.

Kapanahunan-n-Maturity; season; time<corr sic=",">;</corr>
term; age<corr>;</corr> opportunity[**Errata].

<pb n=95>

Kapanatagan-n-Tranquility; rest; repose;
peace; calmness; quiet; security.

Kapan~gahasan-n-Zeal; valor; bravery;
boldness; insolence; impudence;
precociousness; precosity.

Kapan~ganakan-n-Nativity; birth.

Kapan~ganakan-a-Natal; native.

Kapan~ganiban-n-Danger; risk; hazard.

Kapan~gitan-n-Ugliness; hideousness;
<corr sic=homliness>homeliness</corr>; sordidness; moral depravity;
turpitude; covetousness.

Kapanglawan-n-Gloom; sadness; obscurity;
darkness.

Kapangyarihan-n-Power; authority; <corr sic=aibility>ability</corr>;
jurisdiction; <corr sic=meams resp=e>means</corr>; right; command;
dominion; virtue; faculty.

Kapangyarihan gumawa-n-Authority or
power to do.

Kapangyarihan n~g hukom-n-Jurisdiction.

Kapantay-a-Equal; similar; uniform;
equable.

Kapantayan-n-Similarity; equivalence;
uniformity; <corr sic=equinamity>equanimity</corr>; equalization.

Kapara-a-Identical; equal; similar;
alike.

Kaparis-a-Alike; similar; equal; identical;
uniform; even; equable.

Kaparisan-n-Equality; uniformity; similarity;
likeness; comparison.

Kaparte-n-Participation;[**matched scan] part.

Kapaslan~gan-n-Impudence; insult; outrage;
abuse; contempt.

Kapatagan-n-Evenness; levelness.

Kapatak-n-Drop; little.[**not a noun - can't think what this is intended to be. Maybe katapak='little drop'&mdash;yes, there's a word as "kapatak", which sometimes appear as "gapatak," or "a bit, just a drop" if translated&mdash;dyerohm P3)
|M: "little" is correct defn for Kapatak as adjective, my suggestion is to just note this; the other alternative (inserting a separate entry 'Kapatak-a-Little') is overcorrection, I think]

Kapatawaran-n-Pardon; absolution; <corr sic=forgivenness>forgiveness</corr>;
<corr sic=acquital>acquittal</corr>.

Kapatid-n-Brother; sister.

Kapatid na lalaki-n-Brother.

Kapatid na babayi-n-Sister.

Kapatid n~g ama-n-Uncle.

Kapausan-n-Hoarseness.

Kapayapaan-n-Rest; repose; tranquility;
calmness; quietness; quietude; peace;
pacification.

Kapayatan-n-Feebleness; leanness; thinness.

Kape-n-Coffee.

Kapighatian-n-Disgust; vexation; antipathy;
mortification; humiliation.

Kapilayan-n-Lameness.

Kapilipitan-n-Sinuosity.

Kapilitan-n-Force; perseverance; persistence;
persistency; necessity; <corr sic=indispensibility>indispensability</corr>;
persuasion.

Kapinsalaan-n-Reunion; obstacle; impediment;
herd; flock; drove.[**The only correct defns here are obstacle & impediment; the rest are meant for kapisanan & kapisanan n~g m~ga hayop (listed below)]

Kapintasan-n-Fault; defect; censure.

Kapiran~got-n-Particle.

Kapiraso-n-Piece; slice; cut; fragment;
scrap; part; portion; share.

<pb n=96>

Kapisanan-n-Reunion; congregation;
meeting; <corr sic=facition>faction</corr>; clique.

Kapisanan n~g bundok-n-Range of
mountains.

Kapisanan n~g kalap-n-Raft of logs.

Kapisanan n~g m~ga utos n~g gobierno-n-Code
of laws.

Kapisanan n~g m~ga hayop-n-Flock; herd;
drove.

Kapisanan n~g man~ga tawo-n-Society;
partnership; corporation.

Kapisanan n~g m~ga utos-n-Digest.

Kapistahan-n-Feast; holiday; festivity;
exhibition; presentation.

Kapit bahay-n-Neighbor; fellow creature.

Kapootan-n-Anger; vexation; rage;
hatred.

Kapormalan-n-Formality; seriousness;
gravity; circumspection.

Kapos-a-Lacking; insufficient; wanting;
inadequate; short; scanty; small.

Kapowa-pro.-Both.

Kapowa tawo-n-Fellow creature.

Kapulaan n~g sahing-v-To paint or
cover with pitch.

Kapurihan-n-Purity; chastity; excellency.

Kapurulan-n-Dullness; turpitude; ugliness;
impurity; stupidity; rudeness;
lewdness.

Kapuspusan-n-Roundness; fullness.

Kapusukan-n-<corr sic=heat>Heat</corr>; vivacity.

Kaputican-n-Marsh; slough; miry place.

Karagdagan-n-Addition; increase; improvement.

Karakaraka-adv.- <corr sic=mmidiately>Immediately</corr>; instantly;
suddenly.

Karakot-n-Handful; fewness.

Karakot-a-Few.

Karatula sa ibabaw n~g libing-n-Epitaph.

Karalan~gan-n-Rarity; looseness.

Karamihan-n-Abundance; plenty; multitude;
torrent.

Karamiramihan-<corr sic=v>a</corr>-Most.

Karampatan-a-Fit; proper; <corr sic=convenent>convenient</corr>;
corresponding.

Karampot-n-Mite; whit.

Karamutan-n-Stinginess; penury; poverty;
avarice; covetousness; paltriness;
meanness; voracity; voraciousness;
sordidness.

Karang-n-Cover; covering; awning.

Karan~galan-n-Glory; honor; dignity;
royalty; fame; prestige; majesty; <corr sic=exellence resp=e>excellence</corr>;
eminence; sublimity; elevation;
loftiness; superiority.

Karaniwan-a-Usual; ordinary; familiar;
customary; vulgar; common; epidemic;
prevaleut[**Errata: prevalent]; prevailing; mediocre; <corr sic=plebian>plebeian</corr>;
hackney.

<pb n=97>

Karaniwan tawo-n-Plebian[**typ: Plebeian].

Karapatan-n-Dignity; condignity; <corr sic=mert resp=e>merit</corr>.

Karapatan-a-Just; deserving; corresponding.

Karatig-adv.-Near; close; neighboring.

Karatula sa ibabaw n~g libing-n-Epitaph.

Karayom-n-Needle.

Karayom na panahi n~g supot-n-Packing;[**; s/b deleted]
needle.

Kareton-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Wagon; cart.

Kargador-n-Porter; packer.

Kargahan-n-Pack.

Kargahan-v-To pack; load.

Karikitan-n-Neatness; beauty; elegance;
prettiness; gentility.

Karne-n-Meat.

Karne n~g baboy-n-Bacon; pork.

Karromata-n-Chaise; gig.

Karuagan-n-Cowardice; dastardness;
poltroonery; <corr sic=effeminence resp=e>effeminateness</corr>; <corr sic=effiminency resp=e>effeminacy</corr>.

Karugtong-n-Annex; addition; annexation;
sequence; sequel.

Karukhaan-n-Penury; poverty; misery;
lowness; lewdness.

Karumihan-n-Dirt; filthiness; obscenity;
impurity; sordidness; slovenliness.

Karunun~gan-n-Wisdom; knowledge;
learning; science; sagacity; ability;
ken; erudition; discretion; art<corr>;</corr> illustration;
sapience; virtue; culture; aptitude;
cleverness; dexterity; excellence.

Karupukan-n-Frailty; brittleness[**Errata]; weakness[**Errata];
feebleness.

Karyagan-n-Clearness; clarity; front or
right side of anything.

Kasabay-n-Contemporary; companion;
company.

Kasabay-adv.-Together; simultaneously;
at the same time.

Kasabihan-n-Proverb; maxim.

Kasaganaan-n-Abundance; plenty; profuseness;
profusion; fullness; amplitude;
lavishness; multitude; excess.

Kasaganaang malabis-n-Overabundance;
superfluity; overplus; surplus; excess.

Kasaganaan n~g pagaari-n-Opulence;
wealth; affluence.

Kasagsagan-n-Trot; haste.

Kasakiman-n-Avarice; stinginess; covetousness.

Kasakitan-n-Sickness; suffering; sufferance;
calamity; hardship; cross;
toil; trouble; epidemic; anger; vexation.

Kasakitsakit-a-Painful; sensitive.

Kasaklapan-n-Detestation; acerbity;
asperity; sharpness; roughness or
severity of taste.

<corr sic=Kusaksaan>Kasaksaan</corr>-n-Time; season; opportunity.

<pb n=98>

Kasal-n-Marriage; wedding; espousal;
betrothal; betrothment<corr sic="; espousal"></corr>.

Kasalanan-n-Fault; crime; guilt; transgression;
offence; defect; slight<corr>;</corr>
infringement; failure; deficiency;
infraction.

Kasalatan-n-Want; need; necessity; penury;
poverty; meanness; paltriness;
narrowness; misery; bereavement;
blight; misadventure.

Kasalaulaan-n-Filth;[**third letter unreadable. P1 |M:l] dirt; sordidness;
filthiness; obscenity; impurity[**Errata]; lust;
immodesty; unchastity; rudeness;
lewdness; squalor; squalidness; squalidity;
ugliness; impudence.

Kasalbahian-n-Savagery; savageness[**Errata];
truculence; truculency.

Kasaliwaan-n-Misfortune; mishap; misery;
stubbornness; contrariness.

<corr sic=Kasaliwaang>Kasaliwahang</corr> loob-n-<corr sic=Inconstency resp=e>Inconstancy</corr>; fickleness[**Errata];
contrariness.

Kasaliwaang palad-n-Calamity; misfortune;
mishap; disaster; ill luck[**Errata (sugg: illluck)]; bad
luck; fatality; unhappiness.

Kasalukuyan-a-Actual; present; real; effective.

Kasama-n-Companion; colleague;
company; partner; comrade; help-mate.

Kasama-a-Inclusive; united.

Kasama-adv.-Near; close; near; at hand.

Kasamaan-n-Malice; wickedness; iniquity;
lowness; vileness; infamy; baseness;
dishonor; profligacy; evil; bane;
vice; criminality.

Kasamaan n~g lasa-n-Bitterness; asperity;
want or lack of taste.

Kasamahan-n-[**unreadable letter P1 |M:fixed]Companion; accomplice;
colleague.

Kasamasamaan-a-Worst.

Kasama[**typo Kasma corrected] sa paggawa-n-Cooperator; accomplice.

Kasanayan-n-Practice; ability; aptitude.

Kasandok-n-Spoonful; ladle.

Kasangkapan-n-Instrument; tool; furniture;
appliance; apparatus.

Kasangkapan <corr sic=panugat>panukat</corr> n~g araw-n-Heliometer.

Kasangulan-n-Infancy; childhood; beginning.

Kasantosan-n-Sanctity; holiness; godliness.

Kasantosantosan-a-Most holy.

Kasapatan-n-Sufficiency.

Kasarapan-n-Sweetness; delicacy.

Kasariwaan-n-Freshness; coolness.

Kasayahan-n-Happiness; jocularity; gayety;
mirth; glee; joy; festivity; rejoicing;
content; pleasure; comedy;
comicality; conviviality; vivacity;
<pb n=99>vivaciousness, jocoseness; comicality,
comicalness.

Kasaysayan-n Signification; explanation;
interpretation[**fixed, 2nd e not fully scanned]<corr sic=":">;</corr> account; comment;
declaration; definition<corr>;</corr> affirmative;
narration<corr>;</corr> relation.

Kasia-a Sufficient; apt; fit; proper;
enough.

Kasiba n-Splinter.

Kasibaan n Gluttony[**Errata].

Kasiguruhan-n-Security; certainty<corr sic=",">;</corr> bail;
sponser[**Errata: sponsor]<corr>;</corr> probability.

Kasiitan-n-Grove of bamboo.

Kasikian-n Impediment<corr>;</corr> obstruction;
obstacle<corr>;</corr> difficulty; nuisance.

Kasikpan-n-Narrowness<corr sic=",">;</corr> closeness; intimacy.[**entry repeated below, same 3 defns]

Kasikpan-n-Narrowness; intimacy; closeness.

Kasindakan-n-Fright<corr>;</corr> scare; horror.

Kasindaksindak-a-Awful<corr>;</corr> horribble<corr>;</corr> terrible;
dreadful; horrific; tremendous.

Kasing-adv<corr>.</corr>-So<corr sic=":">;</corr> as much as; so much;
as much<corr>;</corr> as well

Kasing buti-adv<corr>.</corr>-<corr sic=A>As</corr> good as.

Kasing halaga-a-Equivalent<corr sic=",">;</corr> of the same
value.

Kasinsinan n Density<corr>;</corr> thickness; solidity<corr sic=",">;</corr>
closeness; compactness.

Kasinun~galin~gan-n-Lying<corr sic=":">;</corr> untruth<corr sic=":">;</corr> falsehood<corr>;</corr>
fib; fiction; fallacy; delusion;
deceit.

Kasipagan-n-Industry<corr>;</corr> diligence<corr>;</corr> activity;
promptness; promptitude; lightness<corr>;</corr>
quickness.

Kasiping adv<corr>.</corr> -Beside; near; mediate.

Kasiraan n-Destruction<corr sic=":">;</corr> fault<corr>;</corr> defect;
scath; error; mistake[**Errata]; disadvantage;
rotting.

Kasiraan malaki-n-Calamity; havoc; disappointment.

Kasiraan n~g bait-n-Madness; insanity<corr>;</corr>
derangement of the mind.

Kasiraan n~g loob-n <corr sic=Dementea>Dementia</corr>.

Kasiraan n~g puri-n-Shame; disgrace;
dishonor<corr>;</corr> fall<corr>;</corr> baseness; degeneracy;
degredation[**Errata: degradation]<corr>;</corr> discredit; stain or spot
on one's character.

Kasiraang tinatangap n Prejudice; injury;
detriment; damage; dishonor.

Kasiyahan-n Sufficiency<corr>;</corr> frugality; commensuration;
sobriety; proportion;
competence; moderation; temperateness<corr>;</corr>
abstinence; justice; temperance;
thrift<corr>;</corr> method.

Kaskásan-n-Grater; scraper; raker; roller
cylinder.

Kaskasán-v-To grate; scrape; rake.

Kasko-n-Casco; barge.

<pb n=100>

Kasowayan-n-Rebelliousness; stubbornness;
disobedience.

Kastila-n Spaniard.

Kastila-a Spanish.

Kasubha-n Saffron.

Kasuitikan n-Theft<corr>;</corr> thieving; rascality;
fraudulence<corr>;</corr> cheating.

Kasukaban-n-<corr sic=Threachery resp=e>Treachery</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> disloyalty;
perfidy<corr>;</corr> felony<corr>;</corr> crime.

Kasukalan-n-Dirt<corr>;</corr> filth<corr>;</corr> sordidness<corr>;</corr> filthiness<corr>;</corr>
rubbish; dumping ground.

Kasukalan n~g loob-n-Mortification<corr sic=",">;</corr> vexation.

Kasukasuan-n-Joint.

Kasukatan-n-Measure<corr sic=",">;</corr> dimension<corr>;</corr> measurement<corr>;</corr>
justice; right; enough;
sobriety; equality.

Kasuklaman-n-Hate; disgust; abhorrence.<corr>;</corr>
detestation<corr>;</corr> repugnance; dislike<corr sic=",">;</corr> antipathy<corr>;</corr>
revulsion; curse<corr>;</corr> execration;

Kasuklamsuklam <corr sic=n>a</corr>-Detestable; hateful;
loathesome<corr>;</corr> dreadful; awful<corr>;</corr> horrible.

Kasulatan-n-Writing<corr>;</corr> deed; contract;
treatise<corr>;</corr> document<corr>;</corr> maxim<corr>;</corr> abstract;
accord<corr>;</corr> accordance; schedule.

Kasulatan n~g isang puno-a-Attestation;
disposition; or command in writing.

Kasunod-n-Successor<corr>;</corr> follower[**matched scan]<corr sic=",">;</corr> one who
follows.

Kasunod-a-Successive<corr>;</corr> following; consecutive<corr>;</corr>
next.

Kasunod-adv.-Then<corr>;</corr> following.

Kataasan-n-Height<corr>;</corr> eminence<corr>;</corr> eminency<corr>;</corr>
superiority<corr>;</corr> preeminence; arrogance<corr>;</corr>
haughtiness.

Kataastaasan a-Supreme; paramount;
tallest; most high; highest; omnipotent<corr>;</corr>
most powerful<corr>;</corr> almighty.

Kataastaasan lugar-n-Highest place;
acme.

Katabaan-n-Corpulence<corr>;</corr> corpulency<corr sic=",">;</corr> obesity<corr>;</corr>
fat.

Katabaan n~g lupa-n-Fertility; fruitfulness.

Katabi adv.-Beside<corr>;</corr> conjunct; near.

Katad-n-Skin<corr>;</corr> leather; hide.

Katagan-n-Conveniency.

Katahimikan n-Peace<corr sic=",">;</corr> tranquility; pacification<corr sic=":">;</corr>
quietness; quietude: rest-[**; ]calmness<corr sic=",">;</corr>
serenity<corr>;</corr> composure<corr>;</corr> silence<corr sic=":">;</corr>
repose<corr sic=":">;</corr> selfpossession; continence-[**; ]continency<corr>;</corr>
dispassion; lull; hearts-ease;
quiescence.

Katakataka-a-Strange<corr>;</corr> rare<corr sic=":">;</corr> -<corr sic=scare>scarce</corr>; stupendous;
<corr sic=wonderfull>wonderful</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr> marvelous; astonishing<corr>;</corr>
miraculous<corr sic=":">;</corr> fabulous; admirable;
unheard of; excellent; foolish<corr>;</corr>
silly; egregious; awful; dire;
<corr sic=dreadfull>dreadful</corr>; extraordinary.

<pb n=101>

Katakawan-n-<corr sic=Glutton>Gluttony</corr>.

Katakottakot-a-Awful; dreadful; terrible;
horrible; dire; fearful; monstrous;
direful; tremendous; formidable; ghastly;
grim; grisly; grand.

Kataksilan-n-Treason; perfidy; treachery;
instability; criminality.

Katalasan-n-Sagacity; sharpness; cunning;
craft; wisdom; sagaciousness;
ability; prudence; skill; learning; sapience;
handiness.

Katalinuhan-n-Learning; wisdom; ability;
sagacity; sagaciousness; prudence;
skill; handiness; sharpness; quickness.

Katalo-n-Rival; antagonist; opponent;
adversary; competitor.

Katám-n-Plane.

Katámanan-n-Constancy; perseverance;
persistence; loyalty; persistency.

Katamaran-n-Laziness; idleness; indolence;
slovenliness; negligence; tardiness;
lassitude; neglect; carelessness.

Katamasan-n-Advantage; gain.

Katamin-v-To plane.

Katamisan-n-Sweetness; fineness.

Katamisan n~g dila-n-Eloquence.

Katamlayan-n-Sadness; indisposition;
gloominess; coolness toward a friend.

Katampalasanan-n-Insolence; impudence;
<corr sic=inclivility>incivility</corr>; insult; disrespect; disregard;
flippancy; <corr sic=petulence resp=e>petulance</corr>; haughtiness;
inhumanity.

Katampatan-n-Justification; justice;
right; <corr sic=concientiousness>conscientiousness</corr>; reason; moderation;
impartiality; uprightness;
exactitude; righteousness.

Katampatan-a-Equitable; just; honorable;
impartial.

Katamtaman-n-Sufficiency; enough.

Katamtaman-a-Sufficient; fit; proportional.

Katamtaman-adv.-Middling; so-so.

Katandaan-n-Antiquity; <corr sic=longlevity resp=e>longevity</corr>; age;
old-age; anteriority; decrepitude.[**matched scan]

Katanghalian-n-Noon; lateness; dinner;
lunch.

Katangihan-n-Refusal; denial; negation;
exception; difference.

Katapan~gan-n-Boldness; bravery; sauciness.

Katapatan-n-Opposition; convenience;
reason; sufficiency; equality; confidence.

Katapatang loob-n-Loyalty; sincerity;
frankness; cordiality; fidelity; honesty;
fealty; candor; troth.

Katapusan-a-Last; latest; final; hindmost;
extreme; conclusive; determinative;[**matched scan]
end.

Katapusan-n-End; final; finish<corr>;</corr> extremity; 
<pb n=102>conclusion; goal<corr sic=",">;</corr> result<corr sic=",">;</corr> boundary;
termination.

Katas-n-Juice; sap; substance; essence.

Katasahan-n-Valuation; appraisal; approximation;
appraisement;[**matched scan] calculation-

Katasin v-To draw out the sap; sap.

Katas n~g katawan-n-Humor; mood.

Katatagaan-n Medium; middling[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> sufficient.

Katatagaan-adv.-So so<corr sic=",">;</corr> middling; even.

Katawan-n-Body.

Katha-n-Fiction; fabulosity; invention of
the mind[**Errata].

Kathain-v-To bring forth; produce; generate.

Kati-n-Ebb.

Kati-n-Itch.

Katibayan-n-Guarantee; plight<corr>;</corr> bail; document;
<corr sic=flrmness>firmness</corr>; solidity; steadiness;
stability.

Katibayan n~g loob-n-Inflexibility; perseverance;
constancy; loyalty; firmness;
candor; proof<corr>;</corr> reliance.

Katig-n-Out-riggers; balance.

Katigasan-n-Hardness; <corr sic=sstiffness>stiffness</corr>; firmness;
stubbornness.

Katigasang makipagusap-n-Harshness
or severity of speech.

Katiisan-n-Forbearance<corr sic=",">;</corr> suffering;
patience<corr sic=":">;</corr> respite<corr>;</corr> indulgence<corr>;</corr> penance-

Katimtiman-n-Prudence; moderation;
modesty.

Katimtiman n~g loob-n-<corr sic=Constanck resp=e>Constancy</corr>; loyalty;
fidelity; fealty; firmness.

Katin~gan-n-Boiler; cauldron.

Katinig-n-Unison; two things which
have the same sound.

Katipunan-n-Meeting; congregation;
reunion; society; secret society.

Katiwala-n-Agent.

Katiwasayan-n-Tranquility; repose; quietude;
serenity; peace.

Katiyagaan-n Constancy; loyalty; perseverance;
persistance[**Errata: persistence].

Katog-n-Blow; knock.

Katotohanan-n-Truth; veracity; truism;
reliableness; reliability; criterion;
proof; reality; equality; testimony;
certification; witness; reason; indication.

Katowiran-n-Right; justice; loyalty;
lawfulness; reason; cause<corr>;</corr> uprightness;
exactitude; straightness; prerogative;
consideration; argument;
forte; moderation.

Katugon-n-Response; reply; answer<corr sic=":">;</corr>
aid; help.

Katulad-n-Similarity; uniformity; likeness;
resemblance; simile; facsimile<corr>;</corr>
equality.

<pb n=103>

Katulad na lubos-a-Like; similar; equal;
even; on a par.

Katulinan-n-Swiftness; agility; activity;
rapidity; promptitude; speed; quickness;
celerity; <corr sic=accleration resp=e>acceleration</corr>.

Katulisan-n-Sharpness; keenness.

Katulong-n-Co-operator; accomplice;
helper; helpmate.

Katulun~gin-v-To associate; cause to
help or aid.

Katunayan-n-Reality; truth; fact; certainty;
legitimacy; legitimateness; security;
truthfulness.

Katungkulan-n-Position; occupation;
duty; employment; obligation; work;
profession; situation; business; trade;
engagement; employ; contract; command;
power; authority; prefecture.

Katunugan-n-Sonorousness.

Katuparan-n-Compliance; <corr sic=excution>execution</corr>; discharge.

Katusuhan-n-Craft; cunning; astuteness;
sagacity; <corr sic=sagacousness resp=e>sagaciousness</corr>; ability.

Katutubo-a-<corr sic=proper>Proper</corr>; fit.

Katutúbong hilig-a-Natural.

Katuwaan-n-Joy; gladness; drollery;
mirth; merriment; diversion; gayety;
happiness; comicality; comedy; comicalness;
<corr sic=joyfulnes>joyfulness</corr>.

Kaugalian-n-Custom; habit; use; usage;
style; fashion; mode; manner; rite;
skill.

Kaugaliang sarili-n-Natural custom.

Kaugoygoyan-n-Underbrush; copse;
shrubbery.

Kaukol-n-<corr sic=Coreespondent resp=e>Correspondent</corr>.

Kaukulan-n-Correspondence; relevance;
relevancy; pertinence.

Kaululan-n-Nonsense; foolery; foolishness;
bosh; madness; insanity.

Kaunahan-n-Preference; <corr sic=preceedence resp=e>precedence</corr>.

Kaunaunahan-a-First.

Kaunaunahan-adv.-First.

Kaunaunahan martir-n-Protomartyr.

Kaun~gasan-n-Nonsense; ignorance; stupidity;
foolishness; turpitude.

Kaunti-a-Some; few; little; scanty; not
much.

Kauntian-n-Smallness; scantiness; paucity.

Kauntian n~g pagmamahal-n-Lack of
respect; scorn; contempt.

Kauntiuntian-a-Minimum; least.

Kauntiuntian-n-Minimum.

Kanunuan-n-Ancestry; fore fathers; ancestors.

Kaunuran-n-<corr sic=Dulness resp=e>Dullness</corr>; stupidity; nonsense;
ignorance; foolishness.

Kaunuran-n-Confidante; crony.

<pb n=104>

Kaupahan-n-Wages; payment; fee; salary.

Kaupasalaan-n-<corr sic=Threachery resp=e>Treachery</corr>; perfidy; inconstancy;
treason.

Kausap-n-Companion in conversation;
the person with <corr sic=which resp=e>whom</corr> one converses
or speaks.

Kausutin-v-To move; touch; manage;
direct.

Kautalan-n-Stammering; stuttering.

Kautusan-n-Proclamation; order; command;
errand; message; edict; precept;
rule; law; mandate.

Káwa-n-Caldron; boiler.

Kawad-n-Wire.

Kawalaan-n-Loss; deficiency; lack; absence.

Kawalang hiya-n-Shamelessness; impudence;
insolence; immodesty.

Kawalan magampon-n-Lack of support;
destitution.

Kawalan n~g awa-n-Inhumanity; cruelty;
inclemency; rigor; severity.

Kawalan n~g ayos-n-Slovenliness; carelessness;
disarrangement.

Kawalan n~g bait-n-Impudence; <corr sic=indescretion resp=e>indiscretion</corr>.

Kawalan n~g damdam-n-Health; welfare;
prosperity; apathy.[**? does not fit with the other words |M: yes, but defn is still correct, it just uses a difft meaning of 'damdam' from the other 3 defn]

Kawalan n~g damit-n-Nakedness; nudity.

Kawalan n~g dunong-n-Inaptitude; inability;
ignorance; lack of <corr sic="know-ledge">knowledge</corr>.

Kawalan n~g galang-n-Incivility; impudence;
disrespect; inattention; lack
of beauty.

Kawalan nang ganda-n-Awkwardness;
lack of beauty.

Kawalan n~g gawa-n-<corr sic=Liesure resp=e>Leisure</corr>; lack of
work; idleness.

Kawalan n~g gusto-n-Displeasure[**Errata]; lack;[**; should not be there]
of taste; <corr sic=dissstisfaction>dissatisfaction</corr>.

Kawalan n~g hiya-n-Impudence; <corr sic=shame resp=e>shamelessness</corr>;
fllippancy[**Errata: flippancy].

Kawalan n~g interes-n-Sangfroid.

Kawalan n~g kailan~gan-n-Necessity; want;
need; lacking.

Kawalan n~g kailan~gan-n-Inattention;
abandonmant[**Errata: abandonment]; carelessness.

Kawalan n~g kaya-n-Incapability; incapacity;
inability; inaptitude.

Kawalan n~g laman-n-Vacancy; vacuity;
emptiness.

<corr sic=Kaawlan>Kawalan</corr> n~g lasa-n-Want or lack of
taste; bad taste; disgust.

Kawalan n~g pag-ibig-n-Lack of love;
unconcern.

Kawalan n~g pagmamahal-n-Scorn; contempt.

Kawalan n~g pananampalataya-n-Incredulity;
unbelief; disquisition.

<pb n=105>

Kawalan n~g paniniwala-n-Incredulity;
unbelief; disquisition.

Kawalan n~g puno-n-Anarchy.

Kawalan n~g tikas-n-Awkwardness.

Kawalan n~g tuto-n-Ignorance; stupidity;
error; blindness; lack of knowledge.

Kawalan n~g ugali-n-Disrespect; incivility;
lack of manners.

Kawalan n~g wasto-n-Uncleanliness; filthiness;
carelessness; lack of care.

Káwali-n-Griddle; skillet.

Kawan-n-Herd; flock; bunch; multitude.

Kawan~gis-a-Like; similar; alike.

Kawan~gis-n-Li eness[**typo: Likeness]; simile; similarity.

Kawangki-a-Like; similar; alike; equal.

Kawanki[**Typo: Kawangki? |M: no, stet; spelling variant]-n-Similarity; likeness; equality;
resemblance; simile.

Kaway-n-Brandish; flourish.

Kawayan-n-Bamboo; cane.

Kawayan-v-To call or summon by signs;
signal; brandish.

Kawikaan-n-Proverb.

Kawiliwili-a-Agreeable; pleasing; amusing;
attractive; delightful.

Kawit-n-Hook; <corr sic=galf>gaff</corr>; drag-hook.

Kaya-n-Ability; power; aptitude; capacity;
authority; possibility.

Kaya-adv.-Since<corr>;</corr> perhaps<corr>;</corr> then[**interpunction? |M: scan is poor, but ; fits here]; by what
way.

Kaya n~ga-prep.-Therefore.

Kayaban~gan-n-Braggartism; brag; boast;
vaunt; <corr sic=pompuosity resp=e>pomposity</corr>; <corr sic=pompuosness resp=e>pompousness</corr>.

Kayaban~gan n~g san~ga-n-Thickness of
foliage.

Kayamanan-n-Riches; wealth; treasure;
fortune; property; pelf; potency; affluence<corr sic=",">;</corr>
opulence; <corr sic=mamon resp=e>mammon</corr>.

Kayamoan-n-Gluttony; excess; superfluity.

Kayarian-n-Cut; shape; make; fashion;
figure; termination; completion; perfection[**Errata];
faultlessness.

Kayariang lubos-n-Completion; perfection;
faultlessness.

Kayasan-v-To scrape; clean; polish.

Kayas-n-Scrape.

Kayayari pa lamang-a-Recent; modern;
new.

Káyo-n-Cloth; texture.

Kayó-pro.-You.

Káyong panluksa-n-Crape.

Káyong sutla-n-Silk; silk cloth.

Kayó po-pro.-You; Your honor; your
worship; you sir.

Kayong sutla at <corr sic=mabintab>makintab</corr>-n-Satin.

Kay sa-conj.-Than.

Kayumangi-a-Brown; swarthy; drab.

Kayumangi-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Drab; brown.[**double entry |M: based on a TIA copy, this 2nd defn should be for Kayumangi as noun]

Kayumanging mura-a-Brownish.

Kelooy-n-Mire; mud; quagmire.

<pb n=106>

Kiba-n-Fish-hook.

Kibal-n-Bend; curve.

Kibit-n-Grimace; wry face.

Kibitin-v-To make a grimace of wry
face; shrug; hook.

Kibitin ang isda-v-To hook a fish.

Kibot-n-Pant; palpitation; nervous movement.

Kidkirin-v-To unwind; wind.

Kidlat-n-Flash.

Kikil-n-File; rasp.

Kikilin-v-To file; rasp.

Kikio-n-Desire.

Kilabot-n-Pore[**referring to skin pore]; <corr sic=Horror>horror</corr>; fright; scare.

Kilala-n-Acquaintance.

Kilalanin-v-To acquaint; know.

Kilalanin maaga-v-To anticipate; <corr sic=forsee resp=e>foresee</corr>.

Kilalanin mabuti-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To ascertain; consider;
recognize; know well.

Kilap-n-Splendor; brilliancy; gloss; lustre.

Kilay-n-Eyebrow.

Kilig-n-Shrug.

Kilikili-n-Armpit.

Kilikin-v-To take in ones[**typo: one's] arms.

Kiling-n-<corr sic=Inclanation resp=e>Inclination</corr>; <corr sic=sidp resp=e>side</corr> motion; <corr sic=declevity>declivity</corr>.

Kíling-n-Mane.

Kilin~gan sa masama-v-To defend any
one who is bad.

Kiliti-n-Tickling; tickle.

Kilitiin-v-To tickle.

Kilkilin-v-To file; rasp.

Kilos-n-Act; action; move; movement;
manner; form; deportment; civility;
antic; todo[**typo: to do].

Kilua-n-Mustard.

Kilusin-v-To move; act; excite; inspire;
touch.

Kimi-n-Temerity; shyness; bashfulness.

Kimpot-n-Temerity; shyness; bashfulness;
pant; palpitation.

Kinagatan-p. p.-Bitten.

Kinakabagan-a-Windy; indigestible;
<corr sic=coliky>colicky</corr>.

Kinalong n~g abogado-n-Client.

Kinamtam-p. p.-Gotten.

Kinanipan-n-Unition;[**typo: Uniting? Union |M: no, unition is a valid obsolete word] joint; addition.

Kinang-n-Gloss; polish; finish; brightness;
splendor; terseness.

Kindat-n-Wink.

Kindatin-v-To wink.

Kindi-n-An affected air or walk.

Kinikita-n-Wages; salary; earnings; pay.

Kinis-n-Polish; finish; brightness; lustre;
gloss; fineness; terseness.

Kinsay-n-Celery.

Kintab-n-Gloss; polish; shine; finish;
brightness; sheen; shimmer; twinkle;
glimmer; glitter; corruscation.

<pb n=107>

Kintal-n-Seal; signet; sign; crucible;
melting pot.

Kintalan-v-To purify; cleanse; clean.

Kintalin-v-To smelt; melt.

Kinukulun~gan-n-Place where anything
or anyone is confined.[**P2 typo contained |M: confined is ok]

Kinulty[**this is a highly unusual spelling in Tagalog&mdash;P3 |M:it's a typo][**typo: Kinulti]-n-Tanning.

Kinusa-adv.-Intentionally; purposely;
designedly; knowingly.

Kipot-n-Narrowness.

Kiputan-v-To <corr sic=norrow>narrow</corr>; contract; curtail;
restrain; constrain; tighten.

Kirot-n-Pain; <corr sic=ach>ache</corr>.

Kisap-n-Flash; wink; brilliance; sheen;
shimmer; corruscation; twinkle.

Kisap mata-n-Instant <corr sic=wiuk>wink</corr> of the eye;
moment; jiffy.

Kiskis-n-Polish; file; scarf.

Kiskisin-v-To file; polish; smooth; rub.

Kita-n-Appearance; face; looks; likeness.

Kitang-n-Roundfish.

Kitáng-n-Fish-net.

Kitid-n-Narrowness.

Kitid-n-Fish-net; trawlnet; trawl.

Kitiran-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To narrow.

Komediahan-n-<corr sic=Theaire>Theatre</corr>; theatricals.

Komediante-n-Actor; player; comedian.

Komerciante-n-Merchant; dealer.

Konowa-a-False; apparent; deceitful;
hypocritical.

Konowari-a-False; hypocritical; deceitful;
apparent but not real.

Konvento-n-Convent; priory.

Kopa-n-Cup; goblet; wine-glass.

Kosina-n-Kitchen.

Kosina n~g sasakyan-n-Galley.

Kosinero-n-Cook.

Korona-n-Crown; diadem.

Koronahan-v-To crown.

Kotsero-n-Coachman.

Kreosote-n-<corr sic=Kreosote>Creosote</corr>.

Kruz-n-Cross; intersection.

Kuago-n-Owl.

Kuako-n-Pipe.

Kuarta-n-Money; coinage.

Kuarto-n-Room; chamber.

Kuarto n~g babayi sa Turkia-n-Harem.

Kúba-a-Humpback; deformed; crooked.

Kubo-n-Cabin; hut; barrack; shed;
shanty.

Kubkob-n-Defense; protection.

Kubkubin-v-To defend; protect; sustain.

Kudkuran-n-Grater; scraper.

Kuenta-n-Calculation; example; problem.

Kuentahin-v-To calculate; reckon; figure;
compute; estimate.

Kuetis-n-Skyrocket.

Kugon-n-Straw; mountain-grass.

Kuha-inter.-There; well; what.

Kuintas-n-Rosary.

<pb n=108>

Kuitib-n-Blackant.[**meaning "black ant"]

[**out of order]Kókak-n-Toad.

Kuko-n-Nail; claw; hoof; talon.

Kukob-a-Convex; convexed.

Kulam-n-Fascination; enchantment.

Kulambo-n-Mosquito net.

Kulamin-v-To fascinate; charm; enchant;

Kulamos-n-A furrow made by a plane.

Kulandong-n-Cover; covering; awning;
curtain.

Kulang-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Defective; lacking; deficient;
faulty; incomplete; wanting; insufficient;
inadequate; scrimp; scant; less.

Kulan~gan n~g anoman-v-To discount;
deduct; curtail.

Kulang n~g n~gipin-a-Toothless.

Kulang palad-a-Unlucky; unhappy; <corr sic=misfortunate>unfortunate</corr>;
miserable; wretched; dejected.

Kulang sa pagkain-a-Hungry.

Kulapulan-v-To besmear; smear.

Kulay-n-Color<corr>;</corr> hue.

Kulay dalanghita-n-Xanthia.[**couldn't find any reference stating Xanthia as a name of color or name of fruit dalanghita]

Kulay dugo-a-Bloodcolored.

Kulay ginto-a-Gold colored.

Kulay kapis-a-Pearl colored.

Kulay lila-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Lilac colored; mauve.

Kulay pula-a-Red; ruby; ruddy.

Kulay pulot-a-Honey colored.

Kulay rosas-a-Rose colored.

Kulay suha-a-Orange colored.

Kulay tabaco-a-Tobacco colored.

Kulay talon-a-Livid.

Kulay trigo-a-Brownish.

Kuliglig-n-Katydid; cricket; locust.

Kulkulin-v-To scrap; scratch.

Kulo-n-Boil; boiling.

Kulog-n-Thunder.

Kulos-n-Rústle[**typo: Rustle]; rustling; noise.

Kulot-n-Curl; ringlet.

Kulot-a-Curly; crisp.

Kuluban-n-Sweater; sweating;[**extra ;] place.

Kulubot-n-Wrinkle.

Kulubot-a-Wrinkly; rugose.

Kulun~gan-n-<corr sic=Coral>Corral</corr>; pen; inclosure; place
of confinement.

Kulun~gan n~g tupa-n-Sheepfuld[**Errata: Sheep-fold].

Kulun~gin-v-To shut up; pen up; lock up;
seclude; circumscribe; immune.

Kulutin-v-To twist; curl.

Kumaba ang dibdib-v-To pant; palpitate.

Kumabila-v-To cross; go over.

Kumagat-v-To bite; gnaw; nip.

Kumagungkong-v-To make a noise.[**deleted hyphens, not in scan]

Kumain[**capital invisible |M:already fixed]-v-To eat; dine.

Kumain ang[**typo: n~g] agahan-v-To breakfast;
eat;[**extra ;] breakfast.

Kumakaw-v-To bark; howl.

Kumalasing-v-To jingle; jangle; sound;
rattle.

Kumalat-v-To scatter; throw; broadcast.

<pb n=109>

Kumalin~ga-v-To care for; protect; look
out for; administer; govern; serve.

Kumalog-v-To clatter; make a noise
from within.

Kumapal-v-To thicken; grow; increase;
swell; augment; <corr sic=enlargo resp=e>enlarge</corr>.

Kumapit-v-To grasp; <corr sic=sieze resp=e>seize</corr>.

Kumasal-v-To <corr sic="espóuse">espouse</corr>.

Kumaskas-v-To rub.

Kumatas-v-To extract the sap or juice.

Kumatha-v-To think; plant; invent;
create; appoint.

Kumati-v-To itch; smart.

Kumati ang tubig-v-To ebb; recede.

Kumatig-v-To take hold of anything
to keep it from falling.

Kumatog-v-To knock.

Kumausap-v-To talk; speak.

Kumayod-v-To grate.

Kumidlat-v-To flash; lighten.

Kumilap-v-To glitter; glow; shine;
glisten.

Kumilig-v-To shrug.

Kumiling-v-To incline; lean.

Kumilos-v-To move; act.

Kumimot-v-To economize; save; hoard.

Kumindat-v-To wink.

Kumindi-v-To assume an <corr sic=effected>affected</corr> air
or walk.

Kuminig-v-To tremble; vibrate.

<corr sic=Kumintal>Kumintab</corr>-v-To glitter; glow; shine;
glisten; corruscate; twinkle; glimmer.

Kumipot-v-To narrow; contract.

Kumirap-v-To move the eyelids; wink.

Kumisap-v-To shine; glisten; glitter;
glow; corruscate; twinkle.

Kumislot-v-Make a sudden move;[**hyphens deleted, not in scan] move
suddenly; act quickly.

Kumita-v-To gain; earn; see.

Kumitid-v-To narrow; contract.

Kumitil-v-To pinch; cut; gather one
by one.

Kumiyaw-v-To brag; threaten.

Kumon-n-Toilet; closet.

Kumot-n-Blanket; <corr sic=Comforter>comforter</corr>; counter-pane.[**fixed -*, counter-pane occurs elsewhere]

Kumot na linso-n-Bed-sheet.

Kumpari-n-God-father.[**more complete defn is 'godfather of one's child']

Kumpisal-n-Confession.

Kumpisalin-v-To confess; hear confession;
ascartain[**Errata: ascertain].

Kumpunihin-v-To recompose; mend;
make over.

Kumudkod-v-To grate.

Kumuha-n-Taker.

Kumulang sa-adv.-Nearly; almost; insufficient;
less than; scrimp.

Kumulo-v-To boil; seethe; simmer; effervesce.

Kumulog-v-To thunder.

<pb n=110>

<corr sic=Kumunpuni>Kumumpuni</corr>-v-To repair; patch; mend;
fix.

<corr sic=Kumumtrato>Kumuntrato</corr>[**P2 typo Kumuntrato or out or order? |M:typo]-v-To contract.

Kumunti-v-To lessen; decrease; grow;[**extra ;]
smaller.

Kumupas-v-To fade.

Kumurot-v-To pinch; nip.

Kumusta-v-To greet.

Kumusta-n-Compliments; greeting.

Kumuto-v-To be lousy; have lice.

Kumutog-v-To palpitate; pant; flutter.

Kundi-conj.-But.

Kundi-adv.-Yet; besides; moreover; if
not<corr>;</corr> except.[**P2 typo somewhere? |M: fixed]

Kundol-n-Citron.

Kung-prep.-If; though[**Errata]; when.

Kung gayon-adv.-Then; at that time.

Kung hindi-adv.-If not; on the contrary.

Kung sacali-If; perhaps; provided; if
it should happen.

Kunin-v-To get; take; fetch; extract;
remove; subtract; seize; grasp; receive.

Kuning ilabas-v-To extract; draw out.

Kunotin-v-To corrugate.

Kunotkunot-a-Rugose; wrinkly.

Kunowa-a-Fictitious; fabulous; hypocritical;
deceitful; illusive; delusive.

Kupas-a-Faded; discolored; colorless;
withered; decayed; pale.

Kupitin-v-To steal; rob; <corr sic=theive resp=e>thieve</corr>.

Kupkupin-v-To aid; help; succor; protect;
defend; assist; champion; shelter; advocate;
preserve.

Kural-n-<corr sic=Coral>Corral</corr>.

Kurap-n-Movement[**Errata] of the eyelids.

Kuripot-a-Stingy; petit; close; miserly.

Kurlit-n-Comma.

Kuro-n-Imagination[**Errata]; fancy; conception.

Kurot-n-Pinch; scratch; nip; flip; tweak.

Kurso-n-Diarrhea.

Kuruin-v-To imagine; fancy; calculate;
concept[**Errata: conceive].

Kurus-n-Cross.

Kurusan-v-To cross.

Kurutin-v-To pinch; tweak; scratch.

Kusá-n-Spontaneousness; spontaneity;
voluntariness; voluntariness.[**last 2 defns repeated]

Kusina-n-Kitchen.

Kuskusin-v-To scrub; rub; polish.

Kusot-n-Shavings; sawdust.

Kusutin-v-To rub; scrub clean.

Kuta-n-Rampart; fort; wall; castle.

Kutab-n-Groove; hack; mortise.

Kutíng-n-Kitten; kit.

Kutkutin-v-To excavate; hollow; investigate.

Kuto-n-Louse.

Kutod-a-Short.

<pb n=111>

Kutod ang buntot-a-Shorttailed.[**Should be hyphened |M:stet, follow author]

Kutog ng[**typo: n~g] puso-n-Foreboding; movement
of the heart.

Kutong aso-n-Flea.

Kutsara-n-Spoon.

Kutuhin-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Lousy.

Kutuhin-v-To become lousy.



<div1 type=Letter n=L>
<head>L</head>


Laan-n-Secret; reserve.

Laba-n-Wash; Washing.

Labag-n-Contradiction; resistance.

<corr sic=Labahin>Labagin</corr>-v-To contradict; gainsay; oppose;
resist.

Labahin-v-To wash; <corr sic=laundry resp=e>launder</corr>.

Labak-n-Puddle; rut; pit; pond.

Laban-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Adverse; contrary; opposite.

Labanán-n-War; fight; setto;[**set to? |M:'set-to' is meant here; author prefers 'setto', 4 instances in the text] assault;
attack.

Labanán-v-To war; fight; resist; assault;
assail; attack.

Laban~gan-n-Crib; rack; manger; trough;
hog-trough.

Laban cay-prep.-Against; by favor of.[**2nd defn is wrong, s/b deleted]

Labanos-n-Radish.

Laban sa-prep.-Against; counter.

Laban sa katowiran-a-Illegal; unlawful.

Laban sa pagkabulok-a-Antiseptic.

Laban sa pinuno-a-Against the government;
insurrectionary.

Labas-prep.-Besides; except that; without;
excepting; over and above.

Labasa-n-Razor.

Labasán-n-Outlet; result.

Labasan n~g ilog-n-The mouth of a river.

Labas n~g bayan-adv.-Abroad; in public.

Labas sa hirap at sakit-a-Healthy;
sound; well.

Labas sa katowiran-a-Illegal; unlawful;
unjust; unrighteous.

Labas sa matowid-a-Wrong; faulty.

Labas sa panahon-a-Unseasonable; abortive;
untimely.

Labas sa pan~ganib-a-Safe; unhurt;
undamaged.

Labay-n-Skein.

Labayan-n-Reel.

Labhan-v-To wash; <corr sic=laundry resp=e>launder</corr>.

Labi-n-Lip.

Labing apat-a-Fourteen.

Labing apat-n-Fourteen.

Labing dalawa-a-Twelve.

Labing dalawa-n-Twelve.

Labing isa-a-Eleven.

Labing isa-n-Eleven.

Labing lima-a-Fifteen.

Lábing makapal-n-Thick lip.

Labing tatlo-a-Thirteen.

<pb n=112>

Kutuhin-v-To plait; fold; double; crimple.[**crimp? M:no, crimple is a valid obsolete word]

Kutuhin ang kayo-<corr sic=f>v</corr>-To fold cloth.

Kutyain-v-To censure; decry; criticise;
defame; deride.

Kuyumpis-a-Wrinkled; denied;[**Errata: delete 'denied'] timid;
pusillanimous.

Kuyusin-v-To rub against.

L[**NB: previous page also went from K to L]

Labing tatlo-n-Thirteen.

Labis-n-Excess; surplus; superfluity;
remainder; residue; overplus; refuse;
debauch.

Lablab-n-Quagmire; mud; mire; marsh.

Labnutin-v-To pluck out; pull out.

Labo-n-Obscurity; darkness.

Labuan-v-To cloud; obscure; darken;
delay; make muddy.

Labúlan-v-To feed by scattering.

Laceta-n-Knife; skean.

Lagablab-n-Flame; blaze; fire-light.

Lagak-n-That which is left with another.

Lagálag-n-Tramp; vagabond; bum.

Lagánap-a-Universal; general; public.

Lagápac-n-Sound or report made by
the falling of anything.

Lagari-n-Saw.

Lagariin-v-To saw.

Lagasan-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To strip; draw.

Lagasan n~g dahon-v-To strip off leaves.

Lagasan n~g n~gipin-v-To draw teeth.

Lagay-n-State; condition; rank; status;
category; form; shape; appearance;
look; likeness; face; aspect.

Lagay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Frank; outspoken;
clear.

Lagay n~g loob-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-State or condition of
the mind.

Lagi-adv.-Always.

Lagi-a-Perpetual; everlasting; habitual;
permanent; durable; stable; firm;
steady; continuous.

Lágim-n-Sadness; gloom; gloominess;
gathering.

Lági na-adv.-Always; frequently.

Lági na-a-Perpetual; everlasting; habitual;
frequent.

Laging madilim-n-Perpetual darkness.

Laglag-n-Fall.

Lagnat-n-Fever.

<corr sic=Lagot>Lagok</corr>-n-Draught; swallow; tragus; potion.

Lagot-n-Break.

Lagpak-n-Fall; collapse.

Lagpos-n-Excess; surplus; remainder;
overplus; overtime.

Lagpos-a-Excessive; superfluous; <corr sic=exhorbitant resp=e>exorbitant</corr>;
extravagant; lavish; <corr sic=ennormous>enormous</corr>.

<pb n=113>

Lagpos-adv.-Too much.

Lagpos sa pag-gasta-n-Lavishness; extravagance.

Lagpus-a-Superfluous; excessive; lavish.

Lagpusan ang karampatan-v-To transgress;
exceed.

Lagúmin-v-To <corr sic=Gather>gather</corr>; collect; hoard.

Lagúsaw-n-Noise made by the <corr sic=rustliny resp=e>rustling</corr>
of paper or the shaking of
water; movement.

Lagusaw adv.-Spread out.

Lagutin-v-To break; pull apart.

Lagutok-n-Crack; crackling; clash.

Lagyan-v-To put; place.

Lagyan n~g asin-v-To salt.

Lagyan n~g bubong-v-To roof.

Lagyan n~g butas-v-To perforate.

Lagyan n~g halaga-v-To estimate; value;
appraise.

Lagyan n~g ribete-v-To hem.

Lagyan n~g sangka-v-To construct canals
or drains.

Lagyan n~g sello-v-To stamp.

Lagyan n~g siya <corr sic=sa>ang</corr> kabayo-v-To saddle
a horse.

Lagyan n~g sopas-v-To put soup.[**=? |M: entry looks fine]

Lagyan n~g tanda-v-To seal<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=sing>sign</corr>.[**=? |M: entry looks fine aside from noted typos]

Lagyan n~g <corr sic="tandan~g">tandang</corr> krus-v-To make the
sign of the cross.

Lahang-n-Crack; cleft; fracture; chink.

Lahan~gin-v-To crack; cleave; split; fracture.

Lahan~gin-a-Brittle; frail; fissile;[**=? |M:valid word] fragile.

Lahat-a-All; whole; entire; each; every;
total; gross; universal.

Lahat-lahat-adv.-Wholly; entirely; <corr sic=guite resp=e>quite</corr>.

Lahat-lahat-a-Entire; all; whole; every;
total.

Lahi-n-Progeny; race; clan; lineage;
sept[**Errata: sect]; <corr sic=foction resp=e>faction</corr>; class; offspring.

<corr sic=Lahok>Lahi</corr> n~g harí-n-Dynasty.

Lahok-n-Admixture; mixture.

Lait-n-Insult; abuse; execration; curse.

Laitin-v-To insult; abuse; curse; revile;
execrate.

Lakad-n-Walk; step; pace; passage;
excursion; journey.

Lakad n~g paa-n-Pedestrian.

Lakad ng[**typo: n~g] panahon-n-Course or space
of time.

Lakas-n-Strength; hardiness; vigor;
force; forti ude[**typo: fortitude]; valor; <corr sic=brrwn>brawn</corr>; might;
thew;[**=? |M:valid word] impetus; violence; robustness;
activity; ability.

Lakas n~g loob-n-Resolution; courage;
decision; fortitude; will; power;
strength of mind; promptitude[**Errata].

Laki-n-Size; largeness.

<pb n=114>

Laki at lapad-n-Dimensions; extent;
capacity; bulk.

Laki n~g anoman-n-Magnitude; greatness;
grandeur[**Errata].

Laknip-n-Cream.

Laksa-a-Ten thousand.

Laksa-n-Ten thousand.

Laksi-n-Confidence; aid; help.

Laktaw-n-Omission; skip.

Lalagin-n-To <corr sic=Undo>undo</corr>; gather; collect.

Lalagyan-n-Place of putting.

Lalagyan n~g asin-n-Salt-cellar.

Lalagyan n~g ginikan-n-Hay or straw
loft.

Lalagyan n~g labasa-n-Razorcase.

Lalagyan n~g man~ga kopa-n-[**matched scan]Cupboard.

Lalagyan n~g palaso-n-Quiver.

Lalagyan n~g salapi-n-Till.

Lalagyan n~g salsa-n-Saucer.

Lalagyan n~g sombrero-n-Hatbox.

Lalagyan n~g tabaco-n-Tobacco pouch.

Lalaki-n-Man; male.

Lalaking bagong kasal-n-Groom.

Lalamin-v-To reserve; retain; restrain;
with-hold; suspend.

Lalamunan-n-Throat; gullet; windpipe;
esophagus; gorge.

Lalang-n-Strategy; stratagem; snare; industry;
trick; wile; cunning; craft;[**craftiness? |M: craft is ok]
slyness; skill; creation; invention;
handiness; handicraft; work; toil;
labor; employment.

Lalan~gin-v-To produce; create; generate;
make; institute; bring forth.

Lalas-n-Banishment; extermination.

Lalasin-v-To banish; exterminate; halve.

Lalawigan-n-Province; county; shire.

Lalikan-n-Axletree; wheel.

Lalikin-v-To <corr sic=turth>turn</corr>; wind around.

Lalim-n-Depth; profundity; profoundness.

Lalo-adv.-More.

Lalo-a-More.

Lalong-adv.-More.

Lalong dakila-a-Superior; paramount.

Lalonglalo-adv.-Principally.

Lalong mabuti-a-Better.

Lalong magaling-a-Better.

Lalong malaki-a-Bigger; larger; more
grand;[**more grand? or more; grand? |M: more grand] superior; paramount.

Lalong maliit-a-Smaller.

Lalong masamá-a-Worse.

Lalong mataas-a-Higher; loftier; superior.

Laman-n-Substance; essence[**Errata].

Laman n~g tiyan-n-Viscera.

Lamang-adv.-Alone; solely; sole.

Lamang-a-Sole; singular.

Lamasin-v-To knead; pummel; handle[**Errata].

Lamat-n-Crack; chink.

<pb n=115>

Lambanog-n-Sling.

Lambat-n-Net; snare.

Lambo-n-Tassel; tuft.

Lambong-n-Black veil;

Lambot-n-Softness; delicacy<corr>;</corr> tenderness.

Lambutin-v-To soften; mollify.

Lamig-n-Cold; freshness; coolness; frigidness;
damp; frigidity.

Lamok-n-Mosquito; gnat.

Lampas-n-More; excessive[**Errata]; <corr sic=exhorbitant resp=e>exorbitant</corr>.

Lampas-n-Excess<corr>;</corr> surplus; remainder;
residue; superfluity; overplus.

Lampas sa panahon a-Overdue.

Lamugin v-To <corr sic=pumel resp=e>pummel</corr>; make soft<corr sic=":">;</corr> soften.

Lamunin-v-To swallow<corr sic=",">;</corr> glut; eat hurriedly;
stuff ones[**typo: one's] self<corr sic=",">;</corr> imbibe; engulf<corr sic=",">;</corr>
gorge; gobble; gormandize; gulp<corr sic=":">;</corr>
devour<corr>;</corr> consume; absorb.

Lamuymoy-a-Threadbare; shabby;
ragged.

Lamuyot-n-Deceit; fraud; imposition.

Lamuyutin-v To deceive; delude; seduce;
impose upon; pick to pieces.

Lamuyutin ang isang dalaga-v-To seduce
a young lady.

Landas-n-Path; trail; defile; pathway; way.

Langam-n-Ant.

Lan~gaw n-Fly.

Lan~gaylan~gayan-n-Swallow. (bird)

Lan~gib-n-Scab;[**matched scan] scurf;

Lan~gis n-Oil.

Lan~gislan~gis-a-Oily; unctuous; greasy.

Lan~git-n-Sky; heavens.

Lan~gitn~git-n-Creaking; crackling; creak;
squeam

Langkumin-v-To fold; gather; unite;
collect; hoard.

Lan~go a-Drunk; intoxicated; inebriated.

Lan~go-n-Drunkenness.

Lan~go-n-Drunkard.

Langotse-n-Gunny.

Lan~goy-n Swim; swimming.

Languay-n.Beetlenut[**refers to "betel nut"; not sure if typo or mispelling or variant] box.

Lan~guhin-v-To inebriate; intoxicate;
make drunk.

Lansa-n-Stench; fetor; bad smell.

Lansag a-Ruined; broken.

Lansag-n-Destruction; ruin.

Lansagin v-To destroy; ruin; tear to
pieces.

Lansakin-v-To congregate at a certain
place to do a piece of work.

Lansan~gan-n-Street; road; lane; avenue.

Lansetang panagra-n-Lancet; small knife
or <corr sic=lacne resp=e>lance</corr>.

Lansi-n-Trick; stratagem; wile; craft;
thrust in fencing: throwing of a lance.

Lanta-n-Fading; withering.

Lanta-a-Faded; withered[**Errata]; parched.

<pb n=116>

Lantáhin-a-Perishable.

Lantahín-v-To perish; fade; wither.

Lantot-n-Stench; fetor; stale water.

Láon-a-Old; stale; musty.

Laon-n-Duration; age; preservation;
prolixity; prolixness; oldness; time;
continuance.

Láot-n-Middle; center.

Laoya-n-Stew.

Lapad-n-Width.

Lapak-n-Break; fracture.

Lapakin-v-To break; slice; part.

Lapang-n-Piece; slice; part.

Laparan-v-To widen; extend; outspread;
expand; enlarge; amplify.

Lampastan~ganan[**typo: Lapastan~ganan]-n-Insult; offense; outrage;
abuse.

Lampastan~ganin[**typo: Lapastan~ganin]-v-To insult; offend;
abuse; outrage; depreciate.

Lapat-a-Exact; even; punctual; apt;
proper; fit.

Lapok-a-Weak; feeble; forceless; frail.

Lapukin-v-To enfeeble; make weak; rot;
make brittle.

Larak-n-Proof; review.

Lakarán[**probable typo for Larakán, based on defns of preceding entry 'Larak']-v-To review; prove; observe.

Larawan-n-Effigy; image; figure; copy;
portrait.

Larawan n~g Jesu Cristo-n-Crucifix.

Larga vista-n-Telescope.

Larío-n-Brick.

Laro-n-Play; sport; game; jest; amusement.

Laroan-n-Plaything.

Larong karat-n-Lottery.

Larong rifa-n-Raffle; lottery.

Larong tanga-n-Play that resembles
pitching.

Larot-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Leaky; ragged; broken; destroyed.

Lasa-n-Taste; palate; relish; flavor;
essence; smack; gust; aesthetics;[**matched scan] delight;
pleasure; satisfaction; substance.

Lasang matapang-n-Tang; taste.

Lasap-n-Taste; smack; relish; palate;
gust; <corr sic=aesthetice resp=e>aesthetics</corr>; pleasure; delight.

Lasapin-v-To taste; relish; smack; like;
sip; enjoy; try.

Lasa sa pananalita-n-Wit.

Laseta-n-Knife.

Lasing-a-Inebriated; intoxicated; drunk.

Lasing-n-Drunkard.

Lason-n-Poison; venom.

Lasunin-v-To poison; envenom.

Latá-n-Weakness; feebleness; debility.

Lata-n-Can.

Latag-a-Flat; extended; <corr sic=outspaead resp=e>outspread</corr>.

Latag-n-Extension; paving.

Latagán-v-To unfold; expand; stretch.

Látak-n-Sediment; silt.

<pb n=117>

Laták n~g alak-n-<corr sic=Lee resp=e>Lees</corr>.

Latigo-n-Whip; scourge.

Latok-a-Rotten; putrid.

Lawá-n-Pool; pond; lake; reservoir.

Lawak-n-Width; extension; size.

Láway-n-Spit; saliva.

Lawin-n-Hawk; castrel;[**sic, kestrel(?) |M:castrel valid variant sp] falcon.

Laya-a-Ungoverned; free; exempt; independent;
unencumbered; unrestrained.

Laya-n-Freedom[**Errata]; independence; exemption.[**P2 typo ; should be -. P3 fixed]

Layag-n-Sail.

Layás-n-Tramp; fugitive.

Layaw-v-Caress; favorite.

Layawin-v-To caress; favor; free.

Layo-inter.-Keep off; begone.

Láyo-n-Distance.

Layog-n-Distance.

Layolayo-Rather far.

Layolayo ang pagkalagay-At certain
distances.

Layuan[**P2 u/n unclear, out of order if n |M:4th letter is u]-v-To distance; put at a distance.

Leccion-n-Lesson.

Letra-n-Letter.

Ley-n-Law.

Liad-a-<corr sic=bent>Bent</corr> back.

Libag-n-Filth; dirt; nastiness.

Libagan-v-To dirty; make filthy or nasty.

Libágan-n-Gossip.

Libak-n-Mockery; ridicule; sneer; scoff;
derision; jeer; moc [**typo: mock].[**mock(?) there's a space between the c and the "." I think the k hasn't come through |M: another TIA copy shows only space not 'k', so I think it's typesetting error]

Libakin-v-To deride; ridicule; scoff;
mock; sneer at; laugh at[**sic][**space before 'at'added by P3]; reprimand.

Liban-adv.-Less; except.

Liban-n-Happiness; gayety.

Liban~gin-v-To make happy; distract.

Liban sa-adv.-Away from; except; without;
excepting.

Libing-n-Funeral; burial.

Libin~gan-n-Grave; sepulchre; vault;
tomb.

Libin~gang marilag-n-Mausoleum.

Libis-n-<corr sic=Declevity>Declivity</corr>; low land.

Libo-n-Thousand.

Libo-a-Thousand.

Libro-n-Book; volume.

Ligalig-n-Perturbation; vexation; confusion;
laziness; riot.

Ligaligin-v-To perturb; vex; disturb;
molest; confuse.

Ligas-n-Garter.

Ligaw-a-False; erroneous; mendacious; lost.

Ligaw-n-Fugitive.

Ligawan-v-To love; court; pretend.

Ligaw na balita-n-Silliness; false news.

Ligaw sa akala-a-Deluded; deceived.

Ligaw sa daan-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Misguided; ill-advised.

Ligaya-n-Mirth; merriment; pleasure;
happiness; felicity; delight; comfort;
satisfaction; caprice.

<pb n=118>

Ligisin-v-To mill; pound; break into
bits; powder.

Ligtaan-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To neglect; forget; omit.

Ligtas-a-Free; saved; exempt; ungoverned.

Liguan-n-Bathing place.

Liha-n-Emery.

Lihia-n-Ginger.[**correct defn is 'Lye']

Lihim-n-Secret; termination; secrecy;
clandestination[**is this a word? |M: s/b clandestinity or clandestineness]; caution; silence.

Lihim-adv.-Secretly; hiddenly.

Lihim-a-Hidden; secret; clandestine;
reserved; private; silent.

Lilim-n-Shade.

Lihis-n-Avoidance; shunning; escape.

Lihisan-v-To avoid[**Errata]; shun; escape.

Lihis sa daan-a-Misguided; lost.

Lihis sa matowid-a-Wrong; illicit;
unlawful; unjust.

Liig-n-Neck.

Liig n~g <corr sic=pantong>pantog</corr>-n-Urethra.

Liit-n-Smallness; littleness.

Liitan-v-To decrease; curtail; clip;
abridge; impair; reduce; lessen.

Lija-n-Fruits.

Lija-n-Joint of bamboo.

Likat-n-Intermission; interruption.

Liko-a-Illegal; unllawfully[**matched scan][**Errata: unlawful]; illicit; wrong.

Liko-n-Angle; turn; salient; ply.

Likod-n-Back; reverse.

Likod n~g hukbo-n-Rear guard.

Liksi-a-<corr sic=Activy>Activity</corr>; lightness; speed;
quickness; promptness; nimbleness.

Likuran-n-Back part; croup; back.

Lila-n-Toaster; roaster.[**actual meaning of Lila is 'Lilac']

Lilik-n-Scythe; sickle; reaping hook.

Lilim-n-Shade.

Lilis-n-Raising of the pantleg.

Lilis ang binti-a-Barelegged.

Lilo-a-Unfaithful; treacherous; disloyal;
perfidious; infidel.

Lilukan-v-To engrave; cut in metal.

Lima-n-Five.

Lima-a-Five.

Limangpuo-n-Fifty.

Limangpuo-a-Fifty.

Limbag-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Print; printing; edition.

Limbagin-v-To print; stamp.

Limbagin muli-v-To reprint; republish[**Errata].

Limonada-n-Lemonade; soda water; pop.

Limos-n-Charity; alms.

Limutin-v-To forget; omit.

Linab-a-Greasy; fatty.

Linan~gin ang lupa-v-To cultivate; farm.

Linaw-n-Clarity; clearness.

Linawan-v-To clarify; clear; illuminate;
lighten.

Lindol-n-Earthquake.

Lin~gap-n-Notice; appreciation; regard;
observation.

<pb n=119>

Lin~gapin-v-To regard; notice; appreciate;
watch; observe; behold.

Linkod-n-Servant.

Linkod sa isang dalaga-n-<corr sic=Woer resp=e>Wooer</corr>; lover.

<corr sic=Linkod>Lingo</corr>-n-Sunday; week.

Linguhan-adv.-Weekly.

Linis-n-Cleanliness; neatness.

Linis-a-Clean; neat; pure.

Linisin-v-To clean; clear; purify; cleanse;
scour.

Linisin n~g walis-v-To brush; sweep.

Linkaw-n-Sickle.

Linso-n-Linen.

Linta-n-<corr sic=Leach resp=e>Leech</corr>; blood-sucker.

Lintik-n-Electricity; lightning.

Lintos-n-Blister.

Lipa-n-Nettle.

Lipak-n-Callous.[**s/b Callus; callous is adj]

Lipas-a-Old; stale; gone by; musty;
obsolete; disused; passed.

Lipay-n-Vine.

Lipi-n-Offspring; <corr sic=descendent>descendant</corr>; race.

Lipos-a-Full; replete; complete.

Lipolin-v-To destroy; abolish; obliterate;
annihilate; exterminate; suppress;
raze; rase; efface.

Lisa-n-Egg of a louse.

Listahan-n-List; <corr sic=dock resp=e>docket</corr>; bill; catalogue;
<corr sic=role>roll</corr>; file; register; schedule.

Listahan n~g man~ga bagay sa isang
lugar-n-Invoice.

Listahan n~g m~ga salita-n-Vocabulary.

Listahan n~g m~ga tawong tumatahan
sa isang lugar-n-Census; poll; <corr sic=voice resp=e>invoice</corr>;
register.

Listahin-v-To list; schedule; invoice;
register.

Liston-n-Ribbon.

Litak-n-Crevice; fissure; chink; cut;
cleft; crack.

Litang-n-The spreading of a ladder
so that the <corr sic=rounds>rungs</corr> fall out.

Litaw-a-Vulgar; apparent; public; general;
notable; sensitive; sensible[**Errata]; perceptible.

Litaw-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Upshot; appearance[**Errata].

Litid-n-Nerve; ligament.

Litiran-a-Nervous; strong; robust.

[**out of order]Lisanin-v-To choose; select.

Litiran-v-To cut the cord or ligament
of the ankle.

Litohin-v-To amuse; entertain.

Lituhin-v-To amuse; entertain.

Liwag-n-Delay.

Liwanag-n-Clarity; clearness; brightness;
splendor; refulgence; refulgency;
illumination; explanation.

Liwanagan-v-To clear; clarify; illuminate;
lighten; illustrate; explain;
<corr sic=ivolve resp=e>evolve</corr>.

<pb n=120>

Liwanagan ang isip-v-To enlighten the
mind.

Liwanag na malaki-n-Splendor; great
light.

Liwanag nang isip-n-Illustration; <corr sic=illucidation>elucidation</corr>;
revelation; clearness of
thought.

Liwayway-n-Dawn; twilight.

Lobo-n-Wolf.

Loco-a-Crazy; daft; delirious.

Lon~gib-n-Cave; grot; cellar.

Loob-n-Interior; inside.

Loob-a-Interior.

Loob n~g bulaklak-n-Corol; <corr sic=corollo>corolla</corr>.

Loob n~g bubun~gan-n-Ceiling.

Loob n~g dibdib-n-Breast; bosom[**Errata].

Loob n~g simbahan-n-Nave.

Look-n-Bay; gulf.

Loteria-n-Lottery.

Luad-n-Mud; mire.

Luag-n-Width.

Luagan-v-To widen; loosen; free; ease;
slacken.

Lualhati-n-Glory; honor; fame.

Lualhati-a-God-like; famous; glorious;
holy.

Luang-n-Width.

[**out of order]Luagin-v-To widen; free; extend;
enlarge.

Luat-n-Delay; protraction; length of
time; prolixity; prolixness[**Errata].

Luatan-v-To delay; prolong; protect;
extend; lengthen; postpone.

Luat n~g isang panahon-n-Era; age;
length of time.

Lubag-a-Loose[**Errata]; free.

Lubagin-v-To loosen; free; slacken; ease.

Lubak-n-Hollow; hole.

Lubha-adv.-More; greatly; very.

Lubhang-a-Exorbitant[**Errata]; enormous; excessive.

Lubhang dakila-a-Superior; supreme.

Lubhang duag-a-Timorous.

Lubhang galit-a-Furious; frantic.

Lubhang hambog-a-Presumptuous[**Errata].

Lubhang hunghang-a-Savage; barbarous;
very ignorant.

Lubhang mabaho-a-Fetid; stinking.

Lubhan mahalaga-a-Inestimable;
invaluable.

Lubhang mahigpit-a-Austere; strict;
rigorous.

Lubhang mainam-a-Exquisite; super; fine;
excellent.

Lubhang tago-a-Hidden; secret; abstruse.

Lubid-a-Rope; cord.

Lubid na may silo-n-Halter.

Lubirin-v-To twist; make rope.

Lubluban-n-Wallowing place.

Lubog-n-Dip; souse; douse.

<pb n=121>

Lubos-a-Complete; full; perfect; utter;
quite; plenary; absolute; plentiful.

Lubos ang inam-a-Beautiful; fair; handsome;
fine.

Lubugin-v-To sink; submerge; put under
water[**Errata]; dip; souse; douse.

Lubukin-v-To aid; assist; preserve.

Lubunutan-v-To pluck.

Lubusin-v-To complete; perfect; finish;
crown.

Lugal-n-Place; position; spot; region;
time; occasion; leisure; stead; <corr sic=lien resp=e>lieu</corr>.

Lugal na aliwan-n-Place of recreation;
play ground.

Lugal na doon~gan-n-Place of anchoring;
port; harbor.

Lugal na gawaan n~g lario-n-Brickyard.

Lugal na gawaan n~g lubid-n-Rope-walk;
ropery; rope factory.

Lugal na gawaan n~g tisa-n-Tileworks.

Lugal n~g ilang-n-Desert.

Lugal na labahan-n-Washing place.

Lugal na madulas-n-Slippery place.

[**out of order]Lugal n~g liig-n-Throttle.

Lugal na patakbuhan n~g cabayo-n-Racetrack.

[**out of order]Lugal n~g parusahan-n-Place of punishment.

Lugal na patuyuan-n-Place of drying.

Lugal na pinagaalakan-n-Distillery;
still; brewery.

Lugal na pinagpapatayan n~g hayop-n-Slaughterhouse.

Lugal na pinagtuturuan-n-School; college[**Errata];
studio; place of study.

Lugal na tago-n-Place of privacy.

Lugal na yangyan~gan-n-Drying place.

Lugi-n-Loss; perdition; disadvantage.

Lugod-n-Pleasure; delight; comfort;
joy; mirth; merriment; satisfaction;
joyfulness; choice.

Luha-n-Tear.

Luhaan-n-Place where the tears come
from.

Luhaluhaan-adv.-Weepingly.

Luhog-n-Request; entreaty; petition;
supplication[**Errata]; oration; demand.

Lukba-n-Bulb.

Lukob-n-Gouge; round chisel.

Lukubin-v-To[**matched scan] gouge.

Luksa-n-Mourning; sorrow.

Lukso-n-Jump; leap; bound.

Lula-n-Seasickness; dizziness.

Lulan-n-Load; baggage.

Lulod-n-Tibia; shinbone.

Lulon-n-Swallow; draught.

Luluan-v-To gain; profit.

Lulunin-v-To roll up; swallow.

Luma-n-Old; stale; rank; antique; musty;
archaic; worn out.

<pb n=122>

<corr sic=Lamabag>Lumabag</corr>-v-To disobey; oppose.

Lumabag sa kautusan-v-To violate; oppose.

Lumaban-v-To fight; war; oppose; defend;
protect; attack; combat; contend;
resist; repel; conflict; cope;
advocate; antagonize<corr sic=":">;</corr> champion<corr sic=":">;</corr> tilt;
rival; undertake; attempt; defy.

Lumaban sa utos-v-To violate.

Lumaban sa utos-n-Violator.

Lumabas-v-To go out; sally; depart;
proceed forth.

Lumabis-v-To exceed; overflow; surpass.

Lumabis na lubha-v-To superabound.

Lumabnaw-v-To thin; <corr sic=rarify>rarefy</corr>.

Lumabo-v-To grow dim; darken; bedim.

Lumaganap-v-To extend in all parts.

<corr sic=Lamagay>Lumagay</corr>-v-To put; place.

Lumagi-v-To endure; last; persist.

<corr sic=Lumagitig>Lumagitik</corr>-v-To crack; crackle.

Lumago-v-To grow; thrive; improve;
increase; swell; become fruitful or
fertile; fertilize.

Lumago muli-v-To resprout.

Lumagpak-v-To fall; collapse; plumbpod[**doesn't seem to be a valid word; probable typo for 'plump' or 'plump down'].

Lumagpos-v-To exceed; superabound.

Lumagutok-v-To crack; crackle.

Lumahang-v-To split; crack; splinter;
chink; flaw.

Lumahok-v-To mix; mingle.

Lumalait-n-Insulting person.

Lumakad-v-To walk; go away; depart;
amble; march.

Lumakad ang hukbo-v-To decamp;
march.

Lumakas-v-To strengthen; become or
grow strong.

Lumaki-v-To swell; increase; aggrandize;
ascend; eke; grow large; accrue; dilate;
plumbpod[**doesn't seem to be a valid word; probable typo for 'plump' or 'plump out'].

Lumalo-v-To increase; aggrandize.[**out of order; an entry 'Lumalo' also appears below with more defns]

Lumalakad-n-Pedestrian; passenger.

<corr sic=Lumalak>Lumalaki</corr>-n-One who grows.

Lumalang-v-To create; found; institute<corr sic=":">;</corr>
invent.

Lumalik-v-To wind about; turn; increase;
aggrandize; outvie.

Lumalo-v-To exceed; surpass[**Errata]; excel;
increase; aggrandize; outvie[**Errata].

Lumambot-v-To soften; emolliate; grow
or become soft; limber.

Lumampas-v-To exceed; surpass; excel.

Luman~gitn~git-v-To squeak; creak; grate.

Luman~goy-v-To swim.

Lumapit-v-To draw near; approach;
abut; advance; join; arrive.

Lumapot-v-To thicken; condense; curdle;
grow; thick.

Lumata[**matched scan]-v-To become or grow weak;
enfeeble.

<pb n=123>

Lumayag-v-To sail.

Lumayo-v-To separate; quit; absent; go
away; abandon; forsake; leave; evade.

Lumbay-n-Sorrow; grief; concern;
gloom; anguish; affliction; melancholy.

Lumbayin-v-To render rejected, dispirited,
sad, gloomy or melancholy.

Lumbo-n-Drinking gourd.

Lumibak-v-To ridicule; roast; make fun of.

Lumibat-v-To repeat; try again.[**alternatively, a flying mouse with its tail on fire |M: never heard of this]

Lumibis-v-To descend; let or go down; <corr sic=fllow>flow</corr>.

Lumigalig-v-To perturb; disturb; interrupt[**Errata];
harrow.

Lumigpit-v-To collect; gather; hide;
conceal.

Lumihis-v-To separate; remove; sort;
escape; lose ones[**typo: one's] way.

Lumiit-v-To grow smaller; descend; fall;
decrease; lessen.

Lumiklik-v-To go round; encompass.

Lumikmo-v-To sit.

Lumiko-v-To sheer;[**typo: shear? |M: no, sheer is a valid word] digress; turn.

Lumiko sa kanan-v-To turn to the right[**Errata].

Lumiksi-v-To be active; accelerate.

Lumilim-v-To become or grow shady.

Luminbutod-v-To jut out.

Lumindol-v-To quake.

Luminaw-v-To clear up; grow or become
clear; clarify.

Lumipad-v-To fit; transfer.[**actual defn is 'To fly']

Lumipad na magpasikosiko-v-To flutter.

Lumipana-v-To extend to a certain print[**upside down "i"][**Errata: point].

Lumipas-v-To pass; grow stale; elapse.

Lumipat-v-To transfer; transport; remove;
convey.

Lumitak-v-To <corr sic=creak resp=e>crack</corr>; split; splinter.

Lumitaw-v-To appear; come out; occur;
result; come into view; seem; resemble.

Lumiwanag-v-To clear up; clear; illuminate;
lighten; explain; become serene;
clarify.

Lumkalin-v-To inspect; survey; investigate;
register; record.

Lumpo-n-Dingue[**?,unclear n |M:n][**typo: Dengue]; inability to walk; weakness
of the lower limbs.

Lumpon-n-Crowd; group; bunch.

Lumuag-v-To loosen; free; ease; slacken.

Lumuag ang loob-v-To appease; grow
calm; become pleasant or generous.

Lumuang-v-To broaden; widen; extend;
loosen; free; ease.

Lumubog-v-To sink; submerge; inundate;
put under water.

Lumuha-v-To weep; mourn; lament; bewail.

Lumuhod-v-To kneel.

Lumuhod-v.[**space]imp.-Knelt.

Lumuhog-v-To beg; petition; crave; implore;
pray; solicit; entreat; demand;
claim; covet.

<pb n=124>

Lumukso-v-To leap; jump; rebound.

Lumulan-v-To load; ship; freight; embark.

Lumulutang sa tubig-a-Natatory.

Lumundag-v-To leap; jump; rebound.

Lumura-v-To expectorate; spit.

Lumusob-v-To fight; combat; attack; assail;
assault.

Lumusong-v-To descend; flow; go down;
help another do work.

Lumusot-v-To fall through; pass in a
running match.

Lumutang-v-To float; be on the surface
of the water.

Lunas-n-Antidote.

Lunas n~g ilog-n-Bed of a river.

Lundag-n-Jump; leap; bound.

Lun~ga-n-Cave; grotto; grot; cellar.

Lunga n~g daga-n-Rathole.

Luningning-n-Splendor; finery; brilliance;
brilliancy; glory.

Lunit-n-Frequence; frequency.

Lunusin-v-To affect; move; touch.

Lupa-n-Ground; soil; land; earth; globe;
universe.

Lupain-n-Large tract of land.

Lupang alatan-n-Salt marsh; land that
is reached by the tide.

Lupang asinan-n-Salt marsh.

Lupang maluag at patag-n-Plain;
prairie; champaign.

Lupang may tanim na mansanas-n-Apple-orchard.

Lupang panagulan-n-Riceland.

Lupang patag-n-Prairie; plain; level
ground.

Lupang puti-n-Chalk.

Lupang sinasaka-n-Farm; estate; grange;
plantation.

Lupang tuyot at mahina-n-Barren-ground;
sterile ground.

Lupang walang damo-n-Desert.

Lupaypay-n-Weakness; debility.

<corr sic=Lapuypay>Lupaypay</corr> na loob-a-Languid; down-fallen;
feeble.

Lupian-n-Place of doubling or turning;
folding; turning.

Lupigin-v-To usurp; appropriate by
force.

Lupit-n-Sternness; harshness; cruelty;
inhumanity; rigor; moral depravity;
inclemency.

Lupon-n-Reunion; meeting; congregation.

Lupong-n-Reunion; meeting; congregation;
gathering.

Lura-n-Spit; saliva.

Luraan-n-Spittoon.

Lusak-n-Mud; mire.

Lusaw-n-Liquid; fluid.

Lusaw-a-Liquid; fluid.

<pb n=125>

<corr sic=Lunawin>Lusawin</corr>-v-To liquefy; dilute; dissolve;
melt; consume[**Errata]; mis spend.[**matched scan]

Luslos-n-The unwinding; giving out;
freedom.

Luslosan-v-To unwind; give more rope;
free; give more freedom; increase.

<corr sic=Lula>Luta</corr>-n-Profit; advantage; improvement;
proficiency; progress; utility.

Lutasan-n-Finish; termination; conclusion;
end.

Lutasin-v-To terminate; finish; conclude;
close; end; dispatch; dispose of.

Luto-n-Cooking; manner of cooking.

Lutos-n-Rottenness.

[**out of order]Lutusin-v-To rot on the inside.

Lutuin-v-To cook; boil.

Lutuin sa mantika-v-To fry.



<div1 type=Letter n=M>
<head>M</head>


Maaaring ipahintulot-a-Permissible;
admissible; allowable.

Maaaring mabiak-a-Fissile.

Maabala-v-To be embarrassed.

Maabot-a-Attainable; obtainable.

Maabot n~g isip-a-Comprehensible<corr sic=":">;</corr> conceivable.

Maabot n~g isip-v-To comprehend; understand.

Maaboy-v-To be led; taken to.

Maaga-adv.-Early; soon.

<corr sic=Magaap>Maagap</corr>-a-Active; smart; quick; alert;
diligent; ready.

Maagap-adv.-Early; soon; quickly; diligently.

Maagasan-v-To miscarry; menstruate.

Maagaw-v-To be stolen.

Maagaw tulog-v-To doze<corr sic=":">;</corr> nap<corr sic=":">;</corr> be
drowsy.

Maakma-a-Proper<corr sic=":">;</corr> fit; suitable; agreeable.

Maakma-v-To be proper; fit; correspond;
suit; be ready; fit.

Maaksayá-v-To be spent foolishly; mispend.

Maakyat-v-To ascend; go up.

Maalala-a-Memorable; memorial.

Maalab-a-Fervent; ardent.

Maalaga-a-Diligent; active; officious;
careful<corr sic=":">;</corr> obsequious.

Maalam <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Gentle; mild; meek;
quiet; prudent.

Maalam na[**typo: n~g] lahat-a-General; omniscient;
omnipotent.

Maalas-v-To note.

Maalat-a-Salty; salted; briny; husky;[**defn doesn't fit here]
brakish; saltish.

Maalikabok-a-Dusty.

Maalindog-a-Facetious; happy.

Maalis ang galit-v-To become appeased;
appease.

Maalis ang puit-v-To lose the bottom.

Maalisan ang[**typo: n~g] atip-v-To unroof.

Maaliw-v-To rest; sport; live at ease.

Maaliw-a-Diverting; free; happy.

Maaliwalas-a-Spacious; capacious; wide;
commodious; free.

<pb n=126>

Maaluningning-a-Brilliant; sparkling.

Maaluningning-a-Brilliant; sparkling;
magnificent.

<corr sic=Mamag>Maamag</corr>-a-Musty; mouldy.

Maamo-a-Tame; meek; gentle; mild; benign;
benignant.

Maamong loob-a-Soft; affable; meek;
placid; jovial; gay; merry; cheerful.

Maamoy-a-Scented; odorous[**Errata]; odoriferous[**Errata].

Maanghang-a-Peppery; sharp.

Maan~gilin-v-To growl; demand in a
loud voice.

Maan~gilin-a-Growling; snarling.

Maaninag-a-Transparent.

Maanta-a-Rank; stale; strong scented.

Maantala-v-To retard; defer; delay;
detain.

Maasahan-a-Sanguine; hopeful; expectant.

Maasim-a-Sour; acrid; sharp; salty;
crude; briny; salted.

Maaso-a-Smoky; fumy; full of smoke.

Maáwa-a-Clement; compassionate.

Maawa-v-To pity; be clement; be sorry
for another.

Maawain-a-Clement; humane; compassionate;
commiserate[**not an adjective][**typo: commiserative]; magnanimous;
generous; merciful; touching; noble;
godly.

Maawain sa mahirap-a-Charitable; generous;
liberal.

Maaya-a-Eloquent; pleasant; pleasing.

Maayos-a-Honest; pure; arranged; clean;
convenient; decent; reasonable; modest;
suitable.

Mabaak-v-To be cleaved; quartered; taken
to pieces.

Mababa-a-Low; abject; ordinary; vulgar;
<corr sic=plebian>plebeian</corr>; dull.

Mababa ang halaga-a-Cheap; inferior.

Mababakla-v-To be disturbed; perturbed
or vexed.

Mababa sa iba-a-Inferior; lower.

Mababang loob-a-Humble; meek; submissive;
gentle; quiet; mild; tame;
simple; plain; resigned; respectful.

Mababasa-a-Legible.

<pb n=127>

Mababaw-a-Low; shallow; superficial.

Mabagal-a-Slow; dull; tardy; lazy;
indolent; dilatory; sluggish.

Mabagay-a-Fit; proper; suitable; convenient;
becoming adaptable; agreeable.

Mabagbag ang sasakyan-v-To be shipwrecked.

Mabago-v-To be altered; changed or
renewed.

Mabagsik-a-Rigid; severe; rigorous;
austere; cruel; truculent; fell; stern;
arbitrary; fierce; terrible; grim;
tyrannical; hard-hearted; despotic;
rough; ugly.

Mabahagi-v-To be divided or parted.

Mabahaw ang sugat-v-To heal or cure
a wound.

Mabaho-a-Stinking; bad-smelling.

Mabait-a-Prudent; judicious; modest;
discreet; just; fair; honest; honorable;
reasonable; skillful; capable;
smart; clever; candid; wise; sensible;
circumspect; decent; sharp;
mature; continent;[**?? |M:valid defn] becoming; suitable;
considerate.

Mabait ang ugali-a-Decorous; decent.

Mabakbak-v-To unglue.

Mabalahibo-a-Wooly; fleecy; hairy.

Mabalaho-a-Swampy; marshy; muddy.

Mabalakubak-a-Scurvy; scurry[**not an adjective; also nothing to do with 'scurvy'|M:typo][**Errata: scurfy].

Mabalat-a-Unpolished; unfinished; rustic;
skinny.[**typo for ?? |M:defn is ok]

Mabalatong-v-To be intercepted; deviate.

Mabalda-v-To be interrupted.

Mabali-v-To break.

Mabalian ang[**typo: n~g] buto-v-Break a bone.

Mabalisa-v-To be restless; disturbed;
perturbed.

Mabaliw-v-To mope; fool; be mopish.[**?? |M: valid obsolete word]

Mabaliwag-a-Deep.

Mabalot-v-To be embaled; packed.

Mabalot-a-Having many wraps.

<corr sic=Mabaanagan>Mabanaagan</corr>-v-To have an idea.

Mabanga-v-To bump against; collide.

Maban~gis-v-Severe; cruel; hard-hearted;
tyrannical; despotic; sanguinary;
ugly; wild; fierce; savage; ferocious;
arbitrary; truculent; grisly; grim;
intolerable.

Maban~go-a-Fragrant; aromatic[**Errata]; redolent;
odoriferous[**Errata]; odorous.

Mabantog-a-Famous; noble; honorable;
great; grand; celebrated; renowned.

Mabao[**matched scan; Mabao & Mabalo are synonymous]-v-To become a widow or widower.

Mabasa-v-To become wet or moist.

Mabasa-a-Wet; moist.

Mabasag-a-Broken.

<pb n=128>

Mabasag-v-To become broken.

Mabatbat-v-To be scratched or scraped.

Mabatid-v-To understand; hear.

Mabato-a-Stony; rocky.

Mabawasan-v-To diminish; lessen; waste.

Mabawi-v-To recover; gain back.

Mabiak-v-To crack; cleave.

Mabigat-a-Heavy; burdensome; weighty.<corr>;</corr>
important; grievous; offensive; serious;
cumbrous; ponderous; grave;
onerous.

Mabigat gawin-a-Laborious; tiresome;
painful.

Mabigla-v-To be[**Errata] surprised or astonished;
do without thinking or in a hurry.

Mabihasa-v-To be accustomed or
trained.

Mabihasa-a-Wise.

Mabilango-v-To be confined or imprisoned.

Mabilis-a-Rapid; quick; precipitate;
swift; light.

Mabilog-a-Round; circular; spherical.

Mabilog na haba-a-Oval; plump; egg-shaped;
oblong.

[**out of order]Mabilog ang katawan-a-Plump; plumb[**matched scan].[**??|M: can't confirm if 'plumb' has an obsolete defn similar to 'plump', so it seems misplaced here]

Mabinat-v-To relapse; devolve.

Mabingbing-v-To be impeded, checked,
or stopped.

Mabin~gi-v-To become or grow deaf;
deafen.

Mabini-a-Quiet; peaceful; modest;
chaste; decent; unassuming.

Mabisa-a-Stout; strong; fervent; ardent;
active; effective; <corr sic=diligence resp=e>diligent</corr>; vigorous.

Mabitin-v-To suspend; be suspended.

Mabood-v-To be obstructed; impeded.

Mabual-v-To tumble; fall; topple.

Mabubo-v-To overflow; run over.

Mabudbod-v-To be distributed; divided.

Mabugnos-v-To come untied; open.

Mabuhaghag-v-To become loose; free.

Mabuhan~gin-a-Sandy.

Mabuhay-v-To live; be alive.

Mabuhay-a-Lively; active; alive.

Mabuhay sa gugol n~g iba-v-To live on
another; live on another's salary.

Mabuhay na mahaba sa iba-v-To outlive;
survive.

Mabuhay uli-v-To restore to life; revive;
resuscitate[**Errata]; live again.

Mabuhok-a-Hairy.

Mabukid-a-Landed.

Mabula-a-Frothy; foamy.

Mabulalas-v-To be frank, open or indiscreet.

Mabulalas-a-Talkative; generous; spendthrift.

Mabulid-v-To fall; tumble; topple.

<pb n=129>

Mabulo-a-Wooly; fleecy.

<corr sic=Mauulok>Mabubulok</corr>-a-Rotten; spoiled; damaged;
putrid.

Mabulok-v-To rot; spoil; decay; corrupt;
putrefy.

Mabulun~gin-a-Grumbling[**Errata].

Mabun~ga-a-Fruitful; fertile.

Mabuni-a-Scurvy.

Mabunot-v-To be pulled up.

Mabunton-v-To be heaped up; piled.

Mabunyi-a-Celebrated; famous; renowned[**Errata];
noble; extolled; excellent; magnificent.

Mabura-v-Erasable.

Mabura-v-To blot; be effaced or clouded.

Maburak-a-Muddy; <corr sic=mlry resp=e>miry</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr> swampy.

Mabusog-v-To be satisfied; filled; satiate.

Mabuti-a-Good; wholesome; suitable;
healthful; salutary; useful; fit; proper;
profitable; convenient[**Errata].

<corr sic=Mabat>Mabuti</corr>-adv.-Well.

Mabuti ang gayak-a-Elegant.

Mabutihin-v-To make good; justify;
accept.

Mabutil-a-Seedy; granulous; granular.

Mabuting kapalaran-n-Good-luck; success;
prosperity.

Mabuting loob-n-Kindness; generosity;
benevolence; magnanimity.

Mabuting n~galan-n-Fame; good name;
reputation.

Mabuting paguugali[**n or u? |M:u, no n in this word]-n-Urbanity; good;
manners; civility.

Mabuti sa katawan-a-Healthful; salutary.

Mabuto-a-Bony; seedy.

Mabuya-v-To stuff or glut one's self.

Mabuyo-v-To be induced or persuaded.

Madagdagan-v-To be augmented.

Madagil-v-To wear away by friction;
gall; chafe.

Madahakin-v-To spit phlegm.

Madahon-a-Leafy.

Madaig-v-To lose; be conquered.

Madakila-a-Grand; superior; paramount;
excellent; glorious; noble; honorable.

Madala-v-To avoid; be scared or frightened;
become timid; evade; shun.

Madala-v-To be carried or conveyed.

Madálang-a-Rare; scarce; wide; spare.

Madalang-adv.-Seldom.

Madalas-adv.-Frequently; often.

Madalas-a-Frequent; habitual.

Madali-adv.-Quickly; promptly; briskly;
urgently; actively; swiftly; soon.

Madali-a-Quick; urgent; pressing; brisk;
brief; prompt; ready; nimble; concise;
active; swift;[**unclear |M:swift] cursory.

Madalian-v-To be in a hurry; be in
haste; be quick or active.

<pb n=130>

Madaling araw-n-Day-light;[**retained -, not end of line] dawn.

Madaling galawin-a-Movable; variable;
unsteady; shifting.

Madaling gawin-a-Practicable; feasible;
easily done.

Madaling gumalaw-a-Unsteady; movable;
variable; shifting.

Madaling gumulong-[**a-]Easily rolled.

Madaling hubugin-a-<corr sic=Eithe resp=e>Lithe</corr>.

Madaling humalata-[**a-]Easily noted or distinguished.

Madaling intindihin-a-Intelligible; conceivable;
easily understood.

Madaling kalagin-a-Soluble; solvable.

Madaling kuruin-a-Intelligible; conceivable;
easily understood.

Madaling macaraan-a-Transitory.

Madaling mamuo-a-Congealable.

Madaling maniwala-a-Believable; credible;
trustworthy.[**actual defn is closer to 'impressionable', 'naive' or 'gullible' (easily believes someone or something)]

Madaling masira-a-Brittle.

Madaling <corr sic=matanaw>matunaw</corr>-a-Soluble.

Madaling matunaw sa sikmura-a-Digestible.

Madaling ulolin-a-Simple; artless.

Madalita-a-Poor; penurious; suffering.

Madapat-v-To become; <corr sic=behoobe>behoove</corr>; concern;
belong to.

Madapat-a-Proper; fit; corresponding;
convenient.

Madapilas-v-To slip; slide.

Madatay-v-To be laid smoothly.

Madawag-a-Thorny; <corr sic=shiny>spiny</corr>.

Madaya-a-Deceiving; delusive.

Madidikit-a-<corr sic=Vicid resp=e>Viscid</corr>; viscous; sticky.

Madilaw-a-Yellow; xanthia.[**Typo: xanthin? |M: stet; although meaning is unverified, xanthia also appeared once in text with meaning similar to this]

Madilim-a-Dark; gloomy; hazy; shady;
opaque; murky; obscure; unintelligible.

Madiwara-a-Curious; troublesome; prying;
cautious.

Madla-n-Public; multitude.

Madla-a-Much; abundant; plentiful;
many.

Maduag-a-Cowardly; dastardly.

Madugo-a-Bloody; sanguine; gory.

Madulas-a-Smooth; slippery.

Madulas-v-To slip; slide.

Madumhan-v-To besmear; be covered
with dirt or filth.

Madun~gis-a-Nasty; dirty; filthy.

Madun~go-a-Silent; dumb; repellent.

Madurog-v-To break; powder.

Maestro-n-Master; teacher; pedagogue.

[**out of order]Maestra-n-Lady teacher.

Mag[**note that this is a prefix (Mag-)]-v-To grow; do.

Magaan-a-Light; gay; nimble; swift;
agile; spry; buoyant; jaunty; janty;
giddy; trifling.

Ma gaan[**typo: Magaan] ang dugo-a-Sympathetic.

<pb n=131>

Ma gaang[**typo: Magaang] basahin-a-Legible; easily read.

Mag aaraw-n-Day laborer; journeyman;
laborer.

Mag abot-v-To reach; amount to.

Magagalitin-a-Hot-headed; cross-grained;
intractable; easily[**Errata] enraged;
grumbling; snarling.

Magagamit-a-Usual; customary; ordinary;
profitable; useful; fit; serviceable[**Errata];
helpful.

Magagapas-a-Fit to be harvested.

Magagawa-a-Possible; feasible; practicable.

Mag akala-v-To think; plan; wish;
design; invent; fancy; imagine; try;
intend; desire; discuss.

Mag alaala-v-To remember; remind.

Mag alab-v-To burn; blaze; glow.

Mag alaga-v-To breed; bring up; care
for; heed; nurse; educate.

Mag alak-v-To distill; still.

Magalang-a-Urbane; polite; respectful;
kind; obliging; decorous; decent;
courteous.

Magalang-adv.-Respectfully; courteously;
kindly; obligingly; politely.

Magalan~gin-a-Courteous; polite; civil;
well-bred.

Magalaw-a-Lively; noisy; boisterous;
restless; mischievous.

Mag alay-v-To dedicate; consecrate;
sacrifice; offer; pay homage.

Magaling-a-Gallant; gay; smart; elegant;
noble; genteel; polite; fine; perfect;
delicate; civil; good; precious; valuable;
magnanimous[**Errata]; generous; liberal;
attentive; heedful.

Magalin~gin-v-To respect; appreciate;
have regard for; honor; be polite;
credit; dignify; approve; prefer; like;
enjoy; adorn; be pleased with.

Magaling kay sa iba-a-Better.

Magaling na lubha-a-Wonderful; astonishing;
miraculous; marvelous.

Mag alipusta-v-To blackguard; defame;
run down.

Mag alis-v-To leave off; take away.

Mag alis ang[**typo: n~g] luksa-v-To leave off[**;? |M: no]
mourning.

Mag alisaga-v-To loiter; idle; lounge.

Mag alisan-v-To take off or away.

Magalit-a-Angry; mad.

Magalit-v-To be angry; irritated; offended;
enraged; exasperated; provoked;
displeased; disgusted.

Mag aliw-v-To entertain; keep in hope;
amuse; delight; comfort; rest; gratify;
recreate; sport; live[**;? |M: no] at ease.

Magámit-a-Usual; customary; ordinary;
useful.

<pb n=132>

Mag ampon-v-To shelter; aid; help;
protect; assist.

Maganda-a-Beautiful; pretty; handsome;
fine; fair; delicate; smart; neat; exquisite;
gorgeous; winsome; comely.

Magandang kalooban-n-Gentility; magnanimity;
generosity; liberality; benevolence;
nobility.

Magandang loob-a-Generous; magnanimous;
benignant; liberal; bounteous;
benevolent; benign; gracious; noble.

Magandang tikas-a-Elegant; graceful;
exquisite; gallant; gay; gentle; polite;
excellent; brave; strong; robust.

Maganit-a-Tough; glutinous.

Mag aral-v-To study; learn; pore.

Mag araro-v-To plow; plough.

Mag asawa-Man and wife.

Magaslaw-a-Rompish; boisterous; noisy;
fidgety; restless.

Mag asawa-v-To betroth; espouse; wive;
marry; match.

Mag aso-v-To smoke.

Magaspang-a-Coarse; rough; rude; ill-bred;
incident[**Errata: indecent]; blowzy; gross.

Magasta-a-Expensive; costly.

Magawa-v-To do; be done.

Mag away-v-To fight; wrangle; war;
quarrel; dispute; struggle; oppose.

Magagawi-a-Inclined.

Mag ayos-v-To arrange; put in order;
place.

Mababag-v-To struggle; fight.

Magbabaliwag-n-Haberdasher.

Mag bago-v-To be reformed; reform;
renew; correct; mend; change; alter;
transfer.

Magbahala-v-To care for; take care[**Errata] of;
man; manage; run; take charge of.

Magbahin-v-To sneeze.

Magbakod-v-To build fence; make a
fence[**Errata].

Magbala-v-To threaten; menace.

Magbalak-v-To proffer; announce.

Magbalatkayo-v-To go incognito; delude;
deceive.

Magbalita-v-To inform; report; relate;
proclaim; announce; give notice;
herald; warn[**Errata]; tell.

Magbaliwag-v-To traffic; trade.

Magbaliwas-v-To pull up a pole and
line.

Magbalobalo-v-To feign; pretend; delude.

Magbanalbanalan-v-To feign; pretend; be
a hypocrite.

Magban~gay-v-To combat; fight; attack.

Magbangit-v-To allude; mention.

Magbankat-v-To reinforce; tie; bind;
fagot.

<pb n=133>

Magban~gon-v-To arise; rise; get up;
edify; build; erect.

Magbanhay-v-To frame.

Magbanli-v-To scald.

Magbansag-v-To nickname; dub.

Magbantay-v-To patrol; guard; watch.

Magbasabasa-v-To moisten; dampen; wet.

Magbasag ulo-v-To dispute; fight; quarrel;
wrangle.

Magbatikbatik-a-Spotted; speckled.

Magbawal-v-To prohibit; divest.

Magbawas-v-To lessen; reduce; decay;
sink[**Errata]; decline; abridge; grow smaller.

Magbayad-v-To pay; recompense; retribute;
disburse; liquidate a debt.

Magbayaran-v-To pay; recompense; retribute.

Magbeberso-n-Poet; author.

Magbigay-v-To give; grant; concede;
allow; admit; donate.

Magbigay alam-v-To inform; warn; tell;
give notice; participate; advise.

Magbigay daan-v-To allow; give way;
admit; give a reason; assign a motive.

Magbigay galang-v-To salute; hail; greet;
pay one's regards or respect.

Magbigay loob-v-To condescend; submit;
comply; allow.

Magbigay lugod-v-To please; gratify[**Errata]; humor;
content; satisfy.

Magbigay n~g fianza-v-To bail; give
security.

Magbigay n~g katibayan-v-To bail; give
security.

Magbigay pagkain-v-To give food; feed;
nourish; maintain.

Magbigay pakinabang-v-To give or yield
a profit.

Magbigay parte-v-To give notice; participate.

Magbigay puri-v-To purify; honor; respect;
credit; dignify; adorn.

Magbigay sala-v-To criminate; accuse;
impeach.

Magbigti-v-To commit suicide by hanging.

Magbihis-v-To dress; change clothes.

Magbinata-v-To act like a child.

Magbin~gibin~gihan-v-To grow deaf; act
like a deaf person.

Magbintang-v-To accuse falsely; impute;
attribute; suspect; criminate.

Magbinyag-v-To christen; baptize.

<corr sic=Mabiro>Magbiro</corr>-v-To play; joke; palter; pun; jest.

Magbithay-v-To sift; sieve.

Magbitin-v-To hang up; suspend.

Magbubo-v-To found; cast.

Magbubong-v-To roof.

Magbugbugin-v-To contuse; bruise.

Magbugnos-v-To loosen; untie; free;
extricate.

<pb n=134>

Magbuhat-v-To originate; arise from;
commence; begin; descend from; occur;
happen.

Magbuhat kailan-Since; when.

Magbuhol-v-To knot; tie in a knot.

Magbukid-v-To farm; plow; plough;
cultivate; till.

Magbukod-v-To separate; remove; sort;
dissuade.

Magbulaan-v-To lie; falsify; deceive.

Magbulaybulayan-v-To cogitate; muse;
think; meditate.

Magbuno-v-To wrestle; struggle; tussle.

Magbuntod-v-To pile up; heap; accumulate.

Magbuntong hinin~ga-v-To sigh; draw
a deep breath.

Magburil-v-To engrave; polish.

Magcompisal-v-To confess.

Magdaan-v-To go by; pass; walk.

Magdagta-v-To gather sap.

Magdahilan-v-To feign; give a reason;
give an excuse.

Magdala-v-To carry; wear; bring; bear.

Magdalit-v-To sing; <corr sic=cant resp=e>chant</corr>; hum.

Magdalita-v-To suffer.

Magdamdam-v-To feel; be sensible of;
suffer; grieve; resent; be sorry; be
affected or moved; deplore; lament;
bewail; smart; irritate.

Magdaragat-n-Mariner; seafaring man;
sailor; seafarer.

Magdaragat-v-To sail the seas.

Magdaraya-a-Knavish; counterfeit; cheating;
false; untrue; fraudulent; sham;
deceitful; guileful; vile.

Magdaraya-n-Impostor; defaulter; sharper;
swindler; cheat; defrauder.

Magdasal-v-To pray; beseech.

Magdenuncia-v-To denounce; blame;
accuse.

Magdibuho-v-To draw; lithograph.

Magdiladila-v-To flatter; coax; delight;
please.

Magdilig-v-To sprinkle; spray; water;
moisten.

Magdilim-v-To grow dark; daze.

Magdilim ang buan ó araw-v-To tach;[**Errata: delete 'tach' (and ;)]
eclipse.

Magdiwang-v-To celebrate.

Magdiwara-v-To pry; be inquisitive.

Magduda-v-To doubt; mistrust.

Magdugtong-v-To add; exaggerate; at-[**Errata: attach]

Magdulas-v-To slip; slide.

Magduling-v-To look crosseyed.

Maggalaw-v-To move; traverse.

Maggalawin-v-To stir; begin; move.

Maggamot-v-To doctor.

Maggantihan-v-To revenge; retribute;
recompense.

<pb n=135>

Maggasta-v-To spend; disburse.

Maggiliwan-v-To amuse one another;
love one another.

Maggisa-v-To cook.

Maggrado-v-To grade; class; reach a
certain class or grade.

Magguhit-v-To draw.

Magguniguni-v-To imagine; cogitate;
muse.

Maghahalaman-n-Gardener; horticulturist.

Maghain-v-To offer; present; sacrifice.

Maghaka-v-To deliberate; reflect; consider;
imagine; fancy.

Maghakbang-v-To step.

Maghalaman-v-To garden.

Maghalimbawa-v-To give or set an
example; instance.

Maghalinhinan-v-To take turns; alternate;
exchange.

Maghalo-v-To mix; mingle.

Maghambog-v-To brag; boast; blow;
bully; swagger; vaunt; infatuate.

Maghampas-v-To <corr sic=chastize>chastise</corr>; punish;
strike; whip.

Maghampas lupa-v-To tramp; loiter;
lounge; lead a licentious life.

Maghamunan-v-To defy; rival; challenge.

Maghanda-v-To prepare; get ready;
provide; furnish; cater; busk; dispose;
dispatch.

Maghandog-v-To present; offer; sacrifice;
dedicate; pay homage.

Maghan~gad-v-To desire; wish; long
for; require; demand.

Maghan~gin-v-To boast; brag; blow;
swagger.

Maghaplit-v-To hustle; hurry; rush;
bustle.

Magharang-v-To hold up; rob on the
public highway.

Maghari-v-To govern; reign; command;
predominate; be king.

Maghasik-v-To plant by drilling; sow.

Maghatid-v-To conduct; accompany.

Maghigab-v-To yawn; gape.

Maghikab-v-To yawn; gape.

Maghilatsa-v-To ravel.

Maghilik-v-To snore.

Maghimatay-v-To faint; swoon.

Maghimutok-v-To lament; complain;
resent; murmur.

Maghinagap-v-To believe; credit; give
faith.

Maghinakdal-v-To receive; protect;
give shelter.[**actual defn is 'To complain']

Maghinala-v-To presume; suppose; conjecture;
suspect.

Maghin~galo-v-To gasp; expire.

<pb n=136>

Maghin~gutuhan-v-To criticize one another.

<corr sic=Maghito>Maghinto</corr>-v-To stop; pause; halt;
cease.

Maghirap-v-To grow or become difficult.

Maghubad-v-To denude; undress; doff.

Maghubo-v-To denude; undress; doff.

Maghugas-v-To wash; bathe.

Maghusay-v-To arrange; put in order;
adjust.

Mag iba-v-To alter; change; reform.

Mág iba[**typo: Mágiba (giba, not iba, is the root)]-v-To fall; tip over; topple.

Mag ihaw-v-To roast; bake.

Mag ikit-v-To turn.

Mag ilaw-v-To enlighten; illuminate.

Magiliw-a-Tender; loving; affectionate;
amorous; friendly.

Maginaw-a-Cold; frigid.

Maginawin-a-Chilly.

Maging-v-To become; be; be current;
exist; belong to; behoove; concern;
beseem; worth.

Maging alak-v-To ferment.

Maging asawa-v-Future wife.[**more accurate defn is 'To become a wife']

Mag in~gat-v-To care; heed; watch; be
on one's guard; reck; beware.

Mag in~gay-v-To make a noise; be
noisy; be boisterous.

Maging bagay-v-To beseem.

Maging bastos-v-To become coarse.

Maging buto-v-To ossify.

[**out of order]Maging bubog-v-To vitrify.

Maging paano ay hindi&mdash;in no degree;
by no means.

Maging para sa[**typo: parang (for 'para sa')] isa-v-To become like.

Maginhawa-a-Prosperous; successful;
fortunate; happy; easy; eminent;
potent; wealthy.

Mag inis-v-To smother; oppress.

Mag init-v-To heat.

Maginoo-a-Principal; honorable.

Maginoo-n-Sir; mister; miss; master;
madam; gentleman; lady.

Mag isda-v-To fish.

Magising-v-To wake; awake.

Mag isip-v-To think; reason; meditate;
muse; contemplate; consider; pore;
deem.

Mag isip isip-v-To meditate; muse;
deliberate; reflect; consider; con;
cogitate; ponder.

Mag isis-v-To scrub.

Magitla-v-To be surprised or startled[**Errata].

Magitlahin-a-Timid; fearful; <corr sic=skittlish resp=e>skittish</corr>.

Magitna-v-To be between.

Mag iwan-v-To leave; forsake; abandon.

Mag iwi-v-To nurse; breed; bring up;
care for.

<pb n=137>

Magkaakma-v-To sympathize; be sympathetic.

Magka amag-v-To moss[**is this a verb? |M:yes]; cover with
moss.

Magkaanohan-Justly or unjustly; by
all means.

Magkabungo-v-To bump against; collide.

Magkabutasbutas-v-To be perforated.

Magkagalit-v-To displease; anger; offend.

Magkagusto-v-To be pleased; like;
enjoy; relish.

Magkahalaga-v-To amount to.

Magkahiang-v-To sympathize; be sympathetic.

Magkaiba-v-To dissent.

Magkaibigan-v-To be friends.

Magkaibigan-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Friends.

Magkaila-v-To negative; disclaim;
contravene; abjure; recant.

Magkailan~gan-v-To want; need; necessitate;
be in need.

Magkailan~gang mahigpit-v-To be urgent
or absolutely necessary.

Magkailanman-adv.-Always; perpetually.

Magkainkil-v-To wear or waste away
by friction; collide.

Magkaisa-v-To resemble; be equal;
agree; coincide; be of the same
opinion.

Magkaisa ang layo-Equally distant; <corr sic=of resp=e>at</corr>
an equal distance.

Magkaisaisa-v-To agree; concert; be
united.

Magkakaayon-a-Accordant.

Magkakahoy-n-Woodsman; woodcutter.

Magkakalakal-n-Merchant; trader; shopkeeper;
dealer.

Magkakalap-n-Wood-dealer; timber-merchant.

Magkalabog-v-To fall and make <corr sic=an>a</corr>
noise.

Magkalagot-v-To pull apart; break.

Magkalakal-v-Trade[**typo: To trade]; buy and sell.

Magkalaman-v-To grow fleshy; be of
the same flesh and blood.

Magkalawas-v-To tie; bind; fagot.

Magkalilim[**last letter m? |M:yes]-v-To be shady.

Magkaloob-v-To allow; give; bestow;
grant; concede; admit.

Magkalugat-v-To contain.

Magkalunatlunat-v-To defer; delay;
differ.

Magkamali-v-To err; make a mistake;
mistake; commit an error.

Magkamatayan-a-Mortal; fatal.

Magkamit-v-To reach; overtake; come
up; obtain; attain.

Mag amtan[**typo: Magkamtan]-v-To acquire; get; beget; win.

Magkanlalabis-v-To overflow[**Errata].

<pb n=138>

Magkandili-v-To bring up; breed; care
for; watch.

Magkanlong-v-To protect; hide; shield;
conceal.

Magkano-How much.

Magkanta-v-To sing.

Magkaparis-v-To resemble; be alike.

Magkapuri-v-To honor; respect; dignify;
credit.

Magkarinigan-v-To misunderstand; confound;
confuse.

Magkaroon-v-To have; get; beget; contain;
possess; attain; obtain; procure;
take; hold fast.

Magkaroon[**accent on 'o' probably just speck; a TIA copy shows no accent] n~g karampatan-v-To deserve;
merit.

Magkaroon n~g pag asa-v-To hope.

Magkaroon[**Magkaroon? |M: yes, accent on 'o' probably just speck; a TIA copy shows no accent] n~g ugali-v-To have habits.

Magkasakit-v-To be sick; feel indisposed;
ail.

Magkasakitan-v-To pester; annoy.

Magkasala-v-To sin; infract[**sic, should be 'n' (typo iufract already corrected)]; commit a
misdeed.

Magkasalot-v-To pester; annoy.

Magkasalun~gat-v-To oppose.

Magkasamá ang loob-v-To displease;
offend.

Magkasiksikan-v-To stuff; ram; jam.

Magkasunduan-v-To agree; accord.

Magkatam-v-To plane.

Magkataon-v-To happen; befall; bechance;
hap; be casual; take place.

Magkatipon-v-To assemble; meet; congregate.

Magkatiwala-v-To be an agent.

Magkatkat-v-To cast a net; unfold.

Magcatulad[**correct sp, but s/b Magkatulad to follow alpha order]-v-To assimilate; resemble;
favor; be equal.

Magkaumpog-v-To collide.

Magkayayat-v-To extenuate; debilitate;
waste away; emaciate.

Magkidkid-v-To wrap; reel; wind.

Magkidlat-v-To flash; lighten.

Magkita-v-To meet; see; encounter.

Magkonowa[**matched scan]-v-To counterfeit; pretend;
forge; mimic; pirate.

Magkonowari-v-To counterfeit; pretend;
mimic; pirate; feint; dissemble.

Magkontrato-v-To contract.

Magkrus-v-To cross; intersect; make
the sign of the cross.

Magkuako-v-To smoke a pipe.

Magkulang-v-To fall short; lack; be
deficient; fail; lessen; diminish;
decline; decay; sink; waste; shrink.

Magkulang sa kautusan[**the 6th letter is unclear, I think it's an 's' |M:yes]-v-To sin;
offend.

Magkulung-v-To imprison; shut up.

Magkulimlim-v-To darken; become
dark.

<pb n=139>

Magkumot-v-To blanket; use a blanket.

Magkumpuni-v-To repair; fix; mend;
adjust.

Magkunot-v-To wrinkle; plait; knit.

Magkupkupan-v-To help one another.

Magkural-v-To pen up; corral.

Magkuro-v-To muse; meditate; reason;
contemplate; provide; get ready; furnish;
conceal.

Maglaan-v-To reserve; restrain; separate;
provide; get ready; furnish; conceal.

Maglaban-v-To fight; contend; war;
invest; wager; sustain; defend.

Maglabatiba-v-To syringe.

Maglagay-v-To put; place; set; lay; appoint;
wager; arrange.

Maglagay n~g iit-v-To nickname; give
an alias.

Maglagay n~g nota-v-To make note of;
note; mark.

Maglagay n~g tanda-v-To note; mark.

Maglagay sa loob-v-To put in.

Maglagdá-v-To legislate; enact laws.

Maglagos-v-To omit; exceed;[**typo exeed corrected] overlook.

Maglaitan-v-To insult; scoff; deride;
ridicule; criticize in an insulting
manner; execrate; curse.

Maglakad-v-To walk; march; journey.

Maglakbaybayan-v-To go from place to
place; travel.

Maglalabra n~g bato-n-Stonecutter.

Maglalario-n-Brickmaker.

Maglaman-v-To contain; comprise.

Maglamas-v-To knead.

Maglámas-v-To handle.

Maglampaso-v-To play; gambol.[**matched scan][**defns are wrong (note that these are the same as for the next entry); defn s/b 'To mop; scrub']

Maglaro-v-To play; ganblo[**matched scan][**Errata: gambol].

Maglaro n~g rifa-v-To raffle.

Maglasing-v-To get drunk; inebriate;
intoxicate; besot; tope.

Maglatag-v-To unfold; stretch out.

Maglatag n~g bato-v-To pave.

Maglaway-v-To spit; expectorate.

Magliab-v-To blaze; glow; burn.

Maglibakan-v-To scoff; ridicule; insult;
laugh at; criticize.

Maglibang-v-To sport; rest; live at ease;
amuse one's self.

Magligaw-v-To become lost; lose one's way.

Magliguak-v-To spill.

Magliit-v-To shorten; become smaller.

Magliit n~g gastos-v-To reduce expenses.

Maglikot-v-To caper; frolic; frisk; jest;
joke; be restless; be mischievous.

Maglilingo-adv<corr>.</corr>-Weekly.

Maglilingo-a-Weekly.

Maglimas-v-To bail.

Maglin~gas-v-To blaze; burn; glow.

Maglingkod-v-To court; wait upon; woo;
love.

<pb n=140>

Maglinis-v-To clean; scour; purify.

Maglipat-v-To transfer; alter the position;
transmit.

Maglipat n~g pananim-v-To transplant.

Maglitak-v-To crack; split.

Magliwanag-v-To glitter; shine; glow;
gleam; become clear; illuminate.

Magluat-v-To prolong; extend; protract;
retard; lengthen; defer; delay; dally;
remain.

Magluha-v-To weep; cry.

Magluksa-v-To be in mourning.

<corr sic=Maluluat>Magluluat</corr>-<corr sic=v>a</corr>-Perpetual; tedious; tardy.

Maglunas-v-To build the bottom of a
canal.

Maglunas-v-To massage.

Maglundag-v-To jump; caper; frolic;
spring; bound.

Maglungkot-v-To mourn; pine; lament;
be sorrowful.

Maglura-v-To spit; expectorate.

Magluraan-v-To spit at another.

Magluto-v-To cook.

Magmadalas-v-To frequent; haunt.

Magmadali-v-To hurry; be in haste; bestir;
bustle; hustle; hie; rustle.

Magmagaling-v-To make good; become
good or agreeable.

Magmahalan-v-To value; prize; love;
respect.

Magmalikmata-v-To change appearance;
assume different aspects; be transfigured.

Magmamana-n-<corr sic=Interior>Inheritor</corr>; heir.

Magmana-v-To inherit.

Magmamaramot[**typo Magmamarmot fixed]-v-To be stingy; penurious;
closefisted or cordid[**is this a word? |M:no][**typo: sordid]; act the
miser; act miserly.

Magmasa-v-To knead.

Magmasid-v-To observe; watch; notice;
heed; behold; look; mind; scrutinize.

Magmasiran-v-To spy; watch closely;
scrutinize.

Magmatigas-v-To become hard; harden;
persist; persevere; be obstinate.

Magmatuid-v-To argue; reason; correct;
remonstrate; set aright; make right;
object; oppose; protect; assist.

Magminindal-v-To lunch.

Magmithi-v-To resent; fail; begin to
give way.

Magmuang-v-To cast; throw.

<corr sic=Magmkuha>Magmukha</corr>-v-To resemble.

Magmukhang angel-v-To resemble an
angel.

Magmula-v-To begin; commence; arise;
originate; proceed from; issue; spring
from; come[**Errata] from; occur; happen.

Magmuli-v-To repeat.

Magmúra-v-To sprout; bud.

<pb n=141>

Magmurá-v-To curse; slander; insult;
blackguard; censure.

Magmurahan-v-To blackguard; insult;
abuse; revile.

Magnakaw-v-To steal; rob; plunder;
purloin.

Magnana-v-To suppurate.

Magnanakaw-n-Thief; robber; freebooter;
pickpocket.

Magnan~gis-v-To whine; whimper; sniffle;
cry.

Magnasa-v-To wish; desire; long for;
covet; claim; demand.

Maan~gasab[**typo: Magn~gasab]-v-To smack; masticate.

Magnin~gas-v-To burn; blaze; glow.

Magningning-v-To glitter; glow; shine;
glisten; gleam; radiate; sparkle; twinkle.

Magnutnot-v-To ravel.

Magpaalaala-v-To remember; record;
mention.

Magpaaraw-v-To put out to[**Errata] dry in the sun.

Magpabaya-v-To neglect; forget; overlook;
lounge.

Magpabuis-v-To loan money on interest;
rent to another.

Magpabuya-v-To <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>; reward;
gratify.

Magpadala-v-To dispatch; send; transmit;
carry.

Magpagal-v-To tire; work until tired.

Magpagalit-v-To exasperate; irritate;
anger; offend.

Magpahalata-v-To cause[**; deleted, not in scan] to feel.

Magpahamak-v-To damage; injure; hurt;
lower; make worthless.

Magpahayag-v-To say; tell; announce;
declare; manifest; expound; express;
explain.

Magpahid-v-To wipe; smear.

Magpahin~ga-v-To rest; stop; repose;
cease; live at ease.

Magpahin~galay-v-To rest; repose; live
at ease; stop work.

Magpahiram-v-To lend.

Magpahirap-v-To oppress; make poor;
overpower[**Errata]; crush; squeeze; press.

Magpakahirap-v-To hurt one's self by work.

Magpakailanman-adv.-Never; for ever
and ever.[**see note for Kailanman, 087.png]

Magpakain-v-To feed; nourish; maintain.

Magpakainom-v-To drink often.

Magpakalaon-v-To prolong; delay; retard;
defer.

Magpakaluat-v-To prolong; defer; delay;
retard; detain.

Magpakasakit-v-To work until one becomes
sick.

Magpakilala-v-To make known; introduce;
lay before; expound.

<pb n=142>

Magpakita-v-To show; exhibit.

Magpako-v-To nail; spike.

Magpakumpisal-v-To confess; receive
confession.

Magpalagay-v-To adduce; suppose.

Magpalagi-v-To accustom; frequent.

Magpalago-v-To make fruitful; maintain
or nourish plants.

Magpalahaw-v-To exclaim; shriek.

Magpalakas-v-To strengthen; make
stronger; cheer; reanimate; give
strength[**Errata].

Magpalaki-v-To increase; aggrandize;
make larger.

Magpalalò-v-To boast; drag; bully; be
proud or haughty.

Magpalamig-v-To cool; refresh.

Magpalibhasa-v-To insult; abuse;
revile.

Magmaligid-v-To encompass; go round;
encircle.

Mapaliit-v-To lessen; diminish; make
smaller.

Magpalimos-v-To beg; ask alms.

Magpalipas-v-To pass; cause to pass;
leave or let become stale.

Magpalipatlipat-v-To fly across.

Magpalit-v-To change; exchange; trade;
barter; transfer.

Magpalitan-v-To barter; exchange.

Magpamana-v-To bequeath; <corr sic=demtze resp=e>demise</corr>.

Magpamangha-v-To astonish; amaze.

Magpamula-v-To commence; begin.

Magpamulsa-v-To reimburse; put in the
pocket.

Magpanayán-v-To continue; make equal.

Magpan~gako-v-To promise; plight.

Magpan~galan-v-To call; name; summon
by name.

Magpangkat-v-To chapter; divide into
chapters or paragraphs; paragraph.

Magpapalayok-n-Potter.

Magpapari-v-To admonish; correct; advise.

Magpapaupa sa maghapon-n-Workman;
journeyman; laborer.

Magpaputok-v-To have shot; cause to
shoot.

Magparaan-v-To leave or let pass;
resort.

Magparátang-v-To accuse; charge; impute;
attribute.

Magpari-v-To be ordained; be a priest.

Magparis-v-To compare; make alike[**sic (typo 'ali e' corrected)]
or equal.

Magparusa-v-To chastize; punish; remonstrate;
sentence.

Magpasakit-v-To cause or give pain[**Errata]<corr>;</corr>
feel.

Magpasalamat-v-To thank.

<pb n=143>

Magpasalubi-v-To except<corr sic=",">;</corr> exclude; keep
out.

Magpasandali-v-To lend.

Magpasawatan-v-To compromise without
advantage.

Magpasial-v-To take a walk; stroll;
saunter.

Magpasimuno-v-To begin; commence.

Magpasiya-v-To sentence; resolve; determine;
give sentence.

Magpasok-v-To put in.

Magpastol-v-To herd; watch cattle.

Magpasuso-v-To nurse; give suck.

Magpataba-v-To fatten.

Magpatahimik-v-To calm; pacify; appease.

Magpatama-v-To hit the right thing.

Magpatawa-v-To cause to laugh; make
laugh.

Magpatawad-v-To pardon; forgive.

Magpatotoo-v-To assure; approve; prove;
credit.

Magpatubo-v-To loan money on interest;
cause to grow.

Magpatuloy-v-To shelter; protect; continue;
protract.

Magpatupat-v-To smoke a pipe.

Magpatutot-v-To be lewd; prostitute.

Magpatutot-n-Harlot; prostitute; <corr sic=strumpit>strumpet</corr>;
whore.

<corr sic=Magpaugap>Magpangap</corr>-v-To counterfeit; forge;
mimic; feign; affect; pretend.

Magpauna-v-To advance; go first.

Magpaunawa-v-To announce; proclaim;
advertise.

Magpaunti-v-To diminish; lessen; shorten;
make smaller.

Magpaupa-v-To rent; hire; let.

Magpayo-v-To reconcile; council.

Magpighati-v-To grieve; disgust; detest;
feel; consume with rage.

Magpilapil-v-To embark; terrace.

Magpilipit-v-To distort; twist.

Magpinta-v-To paint; delineate; picture.

Magpisan-v-To join; associate; adhere;
be united; unite; assemble; congregate;
meet; abut; adjoin.

Magpisik-v-To sputter.

Magpita-v-To desire; wish; long for;
require.

Magpugad-v-To nestle; dwell.

Magpugay-v-To salute; hail; greet.

Magpugot-v-To behead; decapitate.

Magpulikat-v-To cramp; convulse.

Magpumilit-v-To persist; exert; enforce;
contend; force; urge; persevere.

Magpunas-v-To wash the hands and
face.

Magpunla-v[**inserted]-To propagate; make a nursery;
sow; broadcast.

<pb n=144>

Magpuno-v-To direct; preside; command;
govern.

Magpurol-v-To become dull; get dull.

Magpustahan-v-To bet; wager.

Magputok-v-To shoot; fire; break; burst;
split; crack.[**sic (typo crach corrected)]

Magputok sa <corr sic=towa>tawa</corr>-v-To burst with
laughter.

Magpuyat-v-To stay up all night.

Mag rabo[**typo: Magrabo]-v-To mortise.

Magrenuncia-v-To renounce; resign; give
up; abjure.

Magsabi-v-To tell; say; speak; express.

Magsabi n~g cahan~ginan-v-To brag; boast.

Magsabi n~g mabuti-v-To expound; explain;
interpret; translate.

Magsabog-v-To scatter; propagate; sow;
throw; broadcast.

Magsabog ang[**typo: n~g] ari-v-To misspend;
squander; lavish; dissipate.

Magsabong-v-To pit cocks.

Magsagsag-v-To trot; be in haste.

Magsaka-v-To till; cultivate.

Magsakdal-v-To go to another and ask
a favor; petition.

Magsalaghati-v-To resent.

Magsalamangka-v-To juggle.

Magsalangsang-v-To oppose; contradict;
confute.

Magsalansan~gan-v-To impugn; contradict;
confute.

Magsalat-v-To hunger; want; need; lack;
famish; starve; be hungry or in
need.

Magsalita-v-To talk; speak; reason; address;
harangue; converse.

Magsalitaan-v-To converse; talk together;
condition; covenant; parley.

Magsalun~gatan-v-To contradict; gainsay.

Magsamasama-v-To unite; put together;
bind; alloy; mix; league; coalesce;
collect; gather.

Magsanay-v-To practice; exercise.

Magsangalang-v-To defend; protect;
assist; prohibit.

Magsan~gayon-v-To associate; join; unite;
be united.

Magsankletas-v-To wear toe slippers.

Magsapantaha-v-To suppose; suspect;
conjecture; presume.

Magsasabon-n-Soapmaker.

Magsasaka-n-Farmer; agriculturist.

Magsaulian-v-To return; restore; give
back.

Magsaya-v-To be happy; enjoy one's
self; be comforted; sport.

Magsayaw-v-To dance.

Magsaysay-v-To relate; report; explain;
announce; tell; characterize.

Magsikad-v-To kick.

<pb n=145>

Magsikap-v-To economize; save.

<corr sic="Ma~gsilbe">Magsilbe</corr>-v-To serve; be useful.

Magsinok-v-To hiccough.

Magsingkaw-v-To hitch up; harness; yoke.

Magsinun~galing-v-To lie; fib; deceive;
falsify.

Magsira-v-To break; rot; degrade.

Magsiraan n~g puri-v-To tarnish or
darken one's reputation.

Magsirain-v-To blacken or darken.

Magsisi-v-To repent; rue; bemoan.

Magsiste-v-To assist; make or cause
to laugh.

Magsubsob-v-To fall down; crawl under
anything.

Magsubukan-v-To <corr sic=trig>try</corr><corr>;</corr> <corr sic=sprig resp=e>spy</corr><corr>;</corr> watch; rival.[**not sure if semicolons should be added between any of those |M:fixed]

Magsugal-v-To play cards; gamble.

Magsuhol-v-To bribe.

Magsuitik-v-To rob; plunder.

Magsuka-v-To vomit; disgorge.

Magsulsol-v-To provoke; induce; excite;
arouse.

Magsumakit-v-To economize; lay up; lay
away; hoard.

Magsumbong-v-To accuse; blame; tell;
denounce.

Magsumikap-v-To economize; lay away.

Magsun~gad-v-To pit two animals.

Magsuot-v-To put on; wear; cover; screen;
put in.

Magsuot sa gubat-v-To hide in the
woods.

Magsupling-v-To sprout; shoot; bud;
germinate.

<corr sic=Mugsuri>Magsuri</corr>-v-To fold; plait; double; crimple;
probe; investigate; examine.

Magsusutla-n-Silkmercer.

Magtaan-v-To reserve; defer; exempt;
conceal; separate; restrain; leave.

Magtabil-v-To gossip.

Magtaglay-v-To fetch; carry; wear.

Magtago-v-To hide; conceal; disguise;
hoard; collect; protect; shelter.

Magtahan-v-To cease; desist; forbear.

Magtaka-v-To marvel; wonder.

Magtakapan-v-To insult.

Magtacbo[**M: fixed; Magtacbo in a TIA copy; correctly spelled, but s/b Magtakbo to follow alphab order][**"c"/"o"?][**P2: changed to 'o' - alpa order]-v-To run; caper; frolic; frisk.

Magtali-v-To tie; bind; fagot.

Magtalo-v-To dispute; contend; rival;
fight; struggle; antagonize; cope.

Magtaman-v-To suffer; tolerate.

Magtamasa-v-To gain; succeed; procure;
acquire.

Magtamo-v-To follow; pursue; reach;
overtake; come up; obtain.

Magtampo-v-To pout; be sulky.

Magtanan-v-To run away; leave secretly;
skip out.

Magtanan n~g sundalo-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To desert.

Magtanka[**typo: Magtan~ga]-v-To be motheaten.

<pb n=146>

Magtan~ga-a-Moth-eaten.

Magtangal-v-To take apart; take to
pieces; discompose.

Magtangkal-v-To lump.

Magtangol-v-To defend; protect; help;
assist; resist; oppose; repel.

Magtanim-v-To sow; plant.

Magtanong-v-To ask; question; enquire<corr sic=":">;</corr>
consult.

Magtapon-v-To throw away; mis-spend.

Magtapon ang[**typo: n~g] ari-v-To mis-spend.

Magtatag-v-To found; institute; build;
set up; establish; construct; edify.

Magtatagal-a-Lasting<corr sic=",">;</corr> durable.

Magtatapayan[**matched scan; accent on 4th a is speck]n-Potter; earthenware-maker.

Magtayo-v-To build; found; institute;
edify; construct; form.

Magtihaya-v-To fall on the back; lay
face up.

Magtiis-v-To suffer; endure; abstain;
refrain; tolerate; submit; resign<corr sic=":">;</corr>
undergo.

Magtika-v-To determine; decide.

Magtimbang-v-To weigh.

Magtinda-v-To sell; vend; cater.

Magtipid-v-To economize; lessen expenses.

Magtipiran-v-To economize; curtail or
clip expenses.

Magtipon-v-To accumulate; gather; lay
up; store; save; lay away; cumulate.

Magtira-v-To reserve; defer; exempt;
conceal; separate; restrain; leave.

Magtirik-v-To set on end.

Magtitinapay-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-To[**s/b deleted] Baker[**Bake? |M:no, but POS s/b noun]; breadmaker.

Magtitisa-n-Tilemaker[**2 words? |M:no, let's follow author].

Magtrabaho-v-To work; labor.

Magtubo-v-To gain; profit; grow; increase.

Magtulak-v-To push; impel; press forward.

Magtulakan-v-To push; shove.

Magtuli-v-To circumcise[**Errata].

Magtuloy-v-To continue; proceed; advance;
stay; sojourn.

Magtulun~gan-v-To favor; protect; help;
assist; aid.

Magtunaw v-To dissolve; liquefy;
melt.

Magtun~gayaw-v-To curse; swear; blaspheme;
execrate.

Magturing-v-To propose; guess; haggle;
higgle; offer a certain price.

<corr sic=Maturo>Magturo</corr>-v-To teach; educate; breed;
instruct; drill; discipline; coach;
edify.

Magturuan v-To discipline; drill;
punish.

<pb n=147>

Magtuos-v-To balance an account; close
an account; redeem a pledge.

Mag ubo-v-To cough.

Mag ugat ang halamanan-v-To take
root; sprout.

Magugol-a-Expensive; costly; highpriced[**2 words? |M:no, follow author].

Mag ugnay-v-To add to; exaggerate; recompose;
put in order.

Mag ugoy-v-To swing; rock; move to
and fro.

Maguhit-a-Full of lines.

Maguho-v-To fall; collapse.

Mag ukol[**"l"or mark on page? |M: l]-v-To pertain; belong to.

Mag ukol [**missing 'na']parang may ari-v-To master;
domineer.

Mag ulak-v-To reel; wind; wrap up.

Magulang-a-Ripe; mature; parent; aged.

Magulang-n-Parent.

Mag ulap-v-To cloud; darken; obscure.

Magulat-v-To be astonished; startled;
surprised; astonish; surprise.

Magulatin-a-Timid; skittish; easily
frightened.

Mag uliuli-<corr sic=k>v</corr>-To whirl; eddy.

Magulo-a-Noisy; troubled; disorderly;
troublesome; chaotic; clangorous;
blatant.

Magulo[**s/b 'Mag ulo' to follow other cases of mag + space + vowel-starting root; also so as not to confuse with 'Magulo' above]-v-To put heads together.

Magulo ang kalooban-a-Turbulent; unquiet;
dissatisfied;[**matched scan] perturbed.

Magulun~gin-a-Rolling; wheeling; easily
rolled.

Mag umpok-v-To[**matched scan] converse; hold or
carry on a conversation.

Magunigunihin-v-Apprehensive; fanciful;
visionary; fearful; timid; sensitive.

Mag usap-v-To talk; converse; litigate;
contend; dispute.

Mag usbong-v-To sprout; shoot up; bud;
germinate.

Mag usisa-v-Investigate[**To investigate]; pry; reconnoiter;
espy; reconnoitre.

Magustuhan-v-To like; enjoy; be pleased[**sic (typo peeased fixed)]
with; be delighted.

Magutom-a-Hungry; ravenous; starved.

Magutom-v-To hunger[**Errata]; starve; famish;
be hungry.

Mag utos-v-To order; send; command;
ordain; enact.

Mag utos [**missing 'na']parang may ari-v-To master;
domineer.

Magviage-v-To travel; journey; make
a journey.

Magvisita-v-To visit.

Magvoto-v-To vote.

Magwagi-v To wave; brandish.

Magwalis-v-To sweep; brush.

Magwangki-v-To appear; see; hypocricize[**? |M:author probably wanted to put 'hypocriticize' here, which is not a valid word; maybe replace with 'be a hypocrite'].

<pb n=148>

Magwari-v-To think; meditate; muse;
contemplate; consider; reason; reflect;
cogitate; ponder; theorize.

Magwariwari-v-To think; meditate; muse;
consider; contemplate; reflect; cogitate;
con; deem; reason.

Magyabang-v-To boast; brag; vaunt.

Magyari-v-To complete; finish.

Magyari n~g salitaan-v-To contract.

Mahaba-a-Long; lengthy.

Mahabag-a-Compassionate; clement;
sympathetic.

Mahabag-v-To sympathize; pity; have
compassion; grieve; be sorry.

Mahabagin-a-Compassionate; merciful;
pious; piebald;[**this defn doesnt fit here; s/b deleted] holy; godly.

Mahabang lubha-a-Prolix; tedious; very
long; troublesome.

Mahal-a-Costly; dear; high priced;
magnificent; grand<corr sic=":">;</corr> splendid.

Mahalaga-a-Precious; dear; costly; expensive;
valuable.

Mahalal-v-To be elected; elect; choose;
declare; decree.

Mahalata-v-To feel; note; perceive.

Mahalata-a-Notable; perceivable.

Mahalay-a-Indecent; immodest; obscene;
shameless; lewd; impure; mean;
homely; ugly; bad; depraved; licentious;
sordid; rude; imprudent[**Errata]; unbecoming;
malicious; dirty; dishonest;
slow; dull; torpid.[**the next 4 entries are out of order]

Mahalan-v-To grow dear; overvalue;
raise the price.

Mahalin-v-To have regard; overvalue;
value; <corr sic=profer resp=e>prefer</corr>; endear; enshrine; praise;
appreciate; love.

Mahal kay sa iba-<corr sic=v>a</corr>-Superior; paramount;
dearer; more dear.

Mahalal na[**typo: Mahal ang (for 'Mahalal na')] ugali-a-Noble; honorable;
gentlemanly; ladylike;[**sic (typo ladylaike corected)] prudent.

Mahambal-a-Mournful; sad.

Mahan~gal-a-Stupid; dull; mean; low;
abject.

Mahapdi-a-Sensitive; painful; smarting;
prickly; pungent.

Mahapdian v-To irritate; smart; cause
a sharp pain.

Mahapis-a-Sad; mournful; grievous.

Mahapis-v To sadden; afflict; be mournful.

Mahapishapis-a-Woebegone.

Mahawig-v-To incline; be disposed.

Mahibang-v-To rave; dote; become mad;
go crazy; become demented.

Mahiga-v-To lie down; lay down.

Mahigit-a-More.

Mahigpit-a-Tight; tenacious; exact; severe;
harsh; strict; taut; rigid; close;
inflexible; narrow.

<pb n=149>

Mahigpit kumapit-a-Tenacious; firm;
obstinate.

Mahigpit na nasa-n-Eagerness; violent
desire.

Mahikayat-v-To excite; rouse; stimulate;
be attracted.

Mahilig-v-To incline; be inclined.

Mahilig-a-Liable; subject.

[**out of order]Mahilig sa pakikipagtalo-a-Peevish;
touchy.

Mahilig sa basagulo-a-Ensnaring; quarrelsome.

Mahilig sa kasiyahan-<corr sic=v>a</corr>-Temperate; regulated;
quiet.

Mahilig sa pakikipagsama-a-Sociable;
courteous; social.

Mahiman-a-Prudent; slow; moderate.

Mahina-a-Weak; languid; infirm; feeble;
rickety; delicate; frail; thin; imbecile;
insecure; withered.

Mahina ang tain~ga-a-Hard of hearing.

Mahinahon-a-Moderate; prudent[**Errata]; temperate;
circumspect; abstemious; affable;
peaceful; courteous[**Errata]; confidential; quiet;
frugal; continent; reserved.

Mahinahon.-adv.-Moderately; calmly;
quietly; peacefully.

Mahinang loob-a-Coward; languid; weak;
forceless.

Mahinang umintindi.-a-Stupid; slow to
comprehend; dull minded.

Mahin~gil-a-Liable; subject; inclined.

Mahinhin-a-Chaste; pure; modest; decorous;
polite; kind; obliging[**Errata]; honest;
moderate; attentive; circumspect; decent;
virtuous; heedful; unassuming.

Mahinog-v-To ripen; mature; mellow.

Mahinto-v-To stop.

Mahinto muna-v-To stop before.

Mahipohipo-a-Tactile; frequently handled.

Mahirap-a-Poor; hard; difficult; burdensome;
needy; grievous; important;
disastrous[**Errata]; dolorous; weary; anxious;
painful; decrepit; tiresome; onerous;
arduous; profound; disadvantageous;
abstract; inaccessible; faint.

Mahirap gawin-a-Laborious; difficult;
tiresome; painful; hard to accomplish.

Mahirati-a-Usual; ordinary; used<corr sic=",">;</corr> accustomed.

Mahiya-v-To be ashamed; blush.

Mahiya-a-Shameful; timid; backward.

Mahiyain-a-Timid; shameful; backward;
bashful; shy.

Mahiyang-v-To be acclimated, united,
or accustomed.

Mahiyawin-a-Clamorous; vociferous;
boisterous; loud voiced.

Mahubdan-v-To denude; disrobe.

<pb n=150>

Mahubog-a-Pliant; easily bent

Mahubog sa lambot-v-To bend because
of the softness.

Mahukay[**matched scan]-a-Pitted; full of holes.

Mahulaan-v-To foretell; prophesy.

Mahulagpos-v-To avoid; escape; liberate;
avoid punishment.

Mahulog-v-To fall; yield under a difficulty.

Mahulog sa ibang wica-v-To interpret;
translate.

Mahulog sa iba-v-To relapse; fall back.

Mahusay-a-Sound; healthy; wholesome;
arranged; secure; discreet; generous;
noble; safe; sincere; just.

Mahusayin-v-To arrange; justify; make
good; classify.

Maibigan-v-To like; have regard for;
appreciate.

Maibigan-a-Friendly; beloved; temperate.

Maibigan sa kasiyahan-a-Loving; friendly;
beloved.

Maibsan-v-To throw off.

Maigot-a-Paltry; niggard; niggardly.

Maigot-v-To be bound tightly.

Maihaw-v-To be roasted; roast.

Maiinom-a-Potable; drinkable.

Maikli-a-Short; brief; concise; small;
limited; diminished; compendious;
summary.

Maikli ang isip-a-Dull minded.

Mailag-v-To avoid<corr sic=",">;</corr> be bashful or shy;
be afraid of.

Mailagan-a-Avoidable; evitable; eludible;
that which may be avoided.

Mailap-a-Wild; unsocial; intractable.

Maimot-a-Close; chary.

Maimot at masakim-a-Avaricious.

Mainam-a-Handsome; fair; pretty; fine;
genteel; dainty; tasty; cheerful; neat;
entertaining; beautiful; exquisite;
gorgeous; janty; jaunty.

Mainam na lubos-a-Elegant; exquisite;
excellent; graceful; dexterous.

Main~gat-a-Careful; prudent; moderate;
modest; circumspect; vigilant; mindful;
solicitous; cautious; chary; confidential;
aware; precautionary; precautional;
reserved.

Main~gat-a-Carefully; moderately; prudently.

Mainip-v-To be impatient, restless, fidgety
or jealous; vex; irritate.

Mainipan-a-Restless; impatient; fidgety;
jealous.

Mainis-v-To smother.

Mainit-a-Hot; warm; fiery; sultry.

Mainit ang ulo-a-Quick tempered; hot-headed.

<pb n=151>

Maintindihan-v-To understand; comprehend.

Maipagkakaila-a-Deniable.

Maipahihintulot-a-Permissible.

Maipapalit-a-Changeable; permutable.

Mairog-a-Loving; lovable; fine; tender;
affectionate; delicate; mild; kind;
pleasing; perfect.

Mairogin-a-Lovable; amiable; pleasing.

Mais-n-Corn.

Maisan-n-Cornfield.

Maisasabit-a-Fit to be hung up.

Maisasabit[**?? |M:supplied missing headword]-n-<corr sic=that>That</corr> which may be hung up.

Maisipan-v-To remember; remind; think;
meditate.

Maisipan-a-Pensive; thoughtful.

Maitatago-a-Concealable.

<corr sic="Maitatan~gi">Maitatangi</corr>-a-Deniable.

Maitim-a-Black; blackish; jetty; obscure;
gloomy; dark; raven; ebony; dark-brown.

Maiwan-v-To leave; forego; quit.

Máka[**note that this is a prefix (Máka-)]-v-Can; could; having the power.

Makabubuhay-a-Nutrimental; nourishing[**Errata].

Makagagaling-a-Sanative; sanable;
healthful.

Makagigilit-n-Cutter.

<corr sic=Makahalin>Makahalina</corr> ang loob-v-To call or court
the love of another.

Makahapis-a-Painful; sad; piteous.

Makahawa-v-To contage;[**not a valid word] be contagious;
infect; corrupt; pervert.

Makahawig-a-Propitious.

Makahin~ga[**matched scan] sa harap-v-To breathe audibly;
perspire.

Makahihiwa-a-Sectile.

Makahilagpos-v-To pull apart; elude;
slip away; get away.

Makahon-v-To embale; be packed or
boxed up.

Makahuhubog-a-Pliable.

Makaisa ang halaga-v-To be equivalent;
be of equal value.

Makaisa ang layo-v-To be <corr sic=of resp=e>at</corr> an equal
distance.

Makaiyak-a-Crying.

Makakaiba-a-Alterable; alterant.

Makakain-a-Eatable; edible; comestible.

Makakamtan-a-Attainable; obtainable.

Makakita-v-To see.

Makalat-v-To scatter; extend.

Makalawang-a-Rusty.

Makaligtas-v-To liberate; save from
danger.

Makalilim-a-Shady.

Makalilimot-a-Omissible.

Makaliliwanag-a-Illuminative; illuminating.

Makalimot-v-To forget; omit; miss;
neglect.

<pb n=152>

Makalin~ga-a-Careful; solicitous; vigilant;
mindful; assiduous; attentive; diligent;
anxious; obsequious; compliant.

Makalugod-v-To be pleasing, gratifying
or humorous.

Makalulugi-a-Disadvantageous; losing.

Makalulugod-a-Agreeable; pleasing; smiling;
humorous.

Makalunos-v-To cause sadness.

Makalunos-a[**matched scan]-Painful; sad; piteous.

Makamamatay-a-Deadly; mortal.

Makamandag-a-Poisonous; venomous.

Makamandagan-v-To be poisonous; be
affected by poison.

Makanaw-v-To dilute; dissolve.

Makapagbigay lilim-v-To make shady;
produce shade.

Makapal-a-Thick; large; corpulent;
compact; numerous; serried; stocky;
gross.

Makapal ang buhok-a-Hairy.

Makapamahala-n-Jurisdiction; authority.

<corr sic=Makapamala>Makapamahala</corr>-v-To heed; watch; manage.

Makapangyarihan-a-Powerful; potent;
omnipotent; most powerful<corr sic=",">;</corr> almighty;
eminent; wealthy.

Makapangyayari-a-Powerful; potent;
mighty; wealthy.

Makapangyayari sa lahat-a-Omnipotent;
almighty; most powerful.

Makapasok-v-To contain; be able to enter.

Makapitong doble-a-Sevenfold.

Makapulas-v-To escape; avoid danger.

Makapupurga-n-Cathartic.

Makaraan-v-To elapse; go by; pass.

Makasalanan-n-Sinner; offender; delinquent.

Makasama-v-To hurt; injure; cause pain;

Makasapat-v-To be just or sufficient;
satisfy; gratify.

Makasasama-a-Injurious; harmful.

Makasasawa-a-Tiresome.

Makasilaw-<corr sic=r>v</corr>-To dazzle.

Makasilin~git[**typo: Makasin~git]-v-To crowd in; slip in;
take part after the proper time.

Makasing layo[**Letter missing in original - by the alphabetical order should just be a k |M: fixed]&mdash;Of[**Errata: At] an equal distance.

Makasira-v-To be able to break or destroy.

<corr sic=Makasistra>Makasisira</corr>-a-Harmful; injurious; not
healthful; deleterious; disadvantageous;
noxious.

Makatanaw-v-To see; look; view.

Makatas-a-Juicy; sappy; succulent.

Makatatawa-a-Laughable; ludicrous;
smiling; agreeable; droll; absurd.

Makatawan-a-Vast; massive; corpulent;
fat; large.

Makatekas-v-To cheat; deceive; swindle.

<pb n=153>

Makatimbang-v-To balance; counterpoise;
weigh.

Makatitiis-a-Bearable; forbearing; patient.

Makatulad-v-To be <corr sic=lake resp=e>like</corr>; resemble.

Makatulog-v-To sleep.

Makaulinig-v-To misunderstand; hear
imperfectly.

Makawala[**matched scan]-v-To escape; avoid.

Makawan~gis-a-Alike; equal; similar; assimilated.

Makaya-v-To be able; have the power
or ability.

Makayamutan-v-To displease; offend;
disgust.

Makialam-v-To interfere; meddle; intermeddle.

Makiapid-v-To seduce; fornicate<corr>;</corr> adulterate[**Errata: commit adultery].

Makiayon-v-To coincide; <corr sic=acquiese>acquiesce</corr>; yield;
have the same idea.

Makibagay-v-To <corr sic=sympatize>sympathize</corr>; <corr sic=accomodate resp=e>accommodate</corr>.

Makihalubilo-v-To be one of a multitude.

Makiisa-v-To yield; coincide; agree;
attest; <corr sic=comform>conform</corr>; prove.

Makiisa sa pasiya-v-To feel or grieve
for another.

Makilala-v-To know; understand; detect;
meet; ascertain; discover; recognize;
judge.

Makiling-a-Leaning; inclined.

Makilitiin-a-Ticklish.

Makimatyag-v-To look after<corr>;</corr> care for;
attend; to pay attention.

Mákina-n-Machine.

Makinabang-v-To gain; profit; interest.

Makínang-a-Bright; shiny; polished;
glossy; brilliant; lustrous.

Mákinang pangapas-n-Harvester; mower;
reaper.

Makinig-v-To hear; listen.

Makinis-a-Glossy; elegant; fine; shiny;
nice; gay; graceful; lucid; shining;
plain; neat; natty; terse; slick.

Makintab-a-Showy; shiny; lambent; lucient;
glossy.

Makintal-v-To print; stamp; emboss.

Makipagaway-v-To dispute; litigate; contend;
fight; rival; quarrel; <corr sic=opposse resp=e>oppose</corr>; pick;[**extra ;]
a quarrel.

Makipagbabag-v-To fight; rival; contend;
quarrel.

Makipagbaka-v-To war; fight; attack;
combat; oppose.

Makipagdamdam-v-To feel; grieve.

Makipaghamon-v-To fight<corr>;</corr> oppose; combat;
defy; challenge.

Makipagcapowa[**correct sp, but s/b Makipagkapowa to follow alphab order]-v-To be cordial; kind;
social or courteous[**Errata].

<pb n=154>

Makipagcasundo[**correct sp, but s/b Makipagkasundo to follow alphab order] v. To reconcile; comply;
be friends or congenial.

Makipaglamas v. To attack<corr>;</corr> assault; fight;
combat.

Makipaglikutin v. To be boisterous; be
rompish or noisy.

Makipagmook v. To fight; war; oppose;
combat.

Makipagpasiya v, To feel; grieve.

Makipagsalitaan v. To converse; talk;
enter into a conversation.

Makipagtalo v. To dispute; argue; litigate;
contend<corr sic=",">;</corr> quarrel; resist; oppose; repel;
murmur; snarl.

Makipagusap v. To litigate; dispute;
study; talk; discuss; contend; converse;
speak; reason; confer; harangue.

Makipagyari v. To complete; finish.

Makipot a. Narrow; close; tight.

Makiskis v. To scratch; waste by friction.

Makisama v. To be friends<corr>;</corr> be[**remove this "be"? |M:no] with.

Makisap a. Brilliant; shiny; bright; lucid;
lucient; glossy.

Makita v. To see; look; meet; ken.

Makitalamitam v. To meddle; interfere.

Makitang muli v. To review<corr sic=":">;</corr> see or
meet again.

Makitid a. Narrow; close; right; rigid;
exact.

Makiusap v. To entreat; speak.<corr>;</corr> harangue;
reason; implore; crave<corr sic=",">;</corr> beg; pray;
request; petition.

Makiugali v. To sympathize; be congenial.

Makuha v. To get; take.

Makulot a. Curly.

Makulot v. To curl.

Makunan v. To miscarry; menstruate
very strongly.

Makupad a. <corr sic=Diliatory>Dilatory</corr>; lazy; dull; indolent;
late; slow.

Makupitin v. To purloin; pinch; knock
down.

Makuro v. To know; understand.

Makuto a. Lousy.

Malában a. Opposite.

Malabas v. To be excluded or kept
out; be exempt.

Malabis a. Excessive; <corr sic=exhorbitant resp=e>exorbitant</corr>; enormous;
profuse; abundant; lavish;
extreme.

Malabis[**matched scan] adv. Abundantly; lavishly; excessively;
profusely.

Malabis n. Rest; remainder; residue.

Malabis na kasamaan n. Perversity;
wickedness.

Malabis na luat n. Tedium; tediousness;
prolixity.

<pb n=155>

Malabis na pagmamahal -n-Predilection;
excessive love.

Malabis n~g tipid-a-Miserable<corr sic=",">;</corr> mean;
miserly; stingy.

Malabnaw a-Thin[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=pare>rare</corr><corr>;</corr> diluted.

Malabo-a Muddy; obscure; murky; dark;
gloomy; dubious; indistinct; unintelligible[**Errata]<corr>;</corr>
enigmatic<corr>;</corr> thick.

Malagak-v-To put in charge of another;

[**inserted the next 2 entries to match scan]
<corr sic=Malagamgamgam>Malagamgam</corr>-a-Tepid; lukewarm.

Malagas ang dahon-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To fall off (per to leaves).

Malaglag v-To[**fixed] fall.

Malagkit-a-Sticky<corr sic=",">;</corr> unctious; greasy<corr>;</corr>
mucous<corr>;</corr> gluttinous<corr>;</corr> soft.

Malago-a-Leafy;[**fixed; L not visible in scan] pertile[**matched scan][**typo: fertile]; luxuriant<corr sic=",">;</corr>
fruitrul[**Errata: fruitful]; copious.

Malago ang buhok a Hairy.

Malagot-v-To break<corr sic=",">;</corr> pull apart.

Malagot ang hinin~ga-v-To expire<corr sic=",">;</corr>
die.

Malagpos-a-Excessive[**Errata]; overabundant.

Malagpos-adv.-Excessively;[**matched scan] abundantly;
profusely

Malagpos-n-Residue; remainder;[**matched scan] overplus.

[**inserted next entry to match scan]
Malagpos ang dami-a-Overabundant; exuberant; too many.

Malagpos ang <corr sic=kababaan>katabaan</corr>-a-Obese; too
fat.[**matched scan]

[**inserted next entry to match scan]
Malait-a-Contemptible; despicable; low; abject.

Malakad ang paa-v-To go <corr sic=afort resp=e>afoot</corr>; walk.

Malakas-a-Strong<corr>;</corr> stout<corr>;</corr> firm; husky;
vigorous; mighty; <corr sic=drawny resp=e>brawny</corr>; burly;
hale<corr sic=",">;</corr> corpulent<corr>;</corr> robust; rigid<corr>;</corr> perfect;
sound; solid; stocky; inflexible;
hard<corr>;</corr> coarse<corr>;</corr> brave; valiant<corr>;</corr> active;
effective; bouncing<corr>;</corr> vehement.

Malakas ang katawan-a-Healthy<corr>;</corr> sound.

Malakas kumain n-Glutton; healthy
eater.

Malakas uminom-n-Tippler; drunkard.[**fixed]

Malakhin-v-To honor<corr sic=",">;</corr> respect<corr sic=",">;</corr> dignify<corr>;</corr>
adorn.

Malaki a-Large; great; vast; huge; burly;
gigantic; heavy; weighty; important;
compact; strong<corr>;</corr> lofty; corpulent;
circumspect; arduous; stout<corr sic=",">;</corr> grievous.

Malaking lakas-n-<corr sic=Powder>Power</corr>; might.

Malakingmalaki-a-Very great or large<corr>;</corr>
chief; principal.

Malaking pag-ibig-n-Deep love.

Malaking tawo-n-Large man<corr>;</corr> gentleman.

Malaki pa-a Larger<corr>;</corr> greater.

Malakuko-a-Warm<corr>;</corr> lukewarm<corr>;</corr> tepid.

Malalaluan[**matched scan]-a-Superable; conquerable.

Malalim a-Deep<corr sic=",">;</corr> profound.

Malamán-a-Fleshy; full of meat.

<pb n=156>

Malaman-v To[**matched scan] know<corr sic=",">;</corr> wit; ken<corr sic=",">;</corr> understand<corr>;</corr>
comprehend; cognize.

Malambot a-Soft; spongy; pliable; limber;
bland; mellow<corr sic=",">;</corr> tender; lithe;
flexible; delicate; docile; <corr sic=plaint resp=e>pliant</corr>; weak;
mild.

Malambot ang ugali a-Submissive; humble<corr>;</corr>
resigned<corr>;</corr> affable; meek[** Unclear |M:meek]<corr>;</corr> gentle;
placid<corr>;</corr> soft tempered; lenient[** Unclear |M:lenient].

Malamig-a Cold; frigid; cool; bleak;
refrigerant.

Malan~gib-a Scabby; scurvy; <corr sic=scurry resp=e>scurfy</corr>;
mangy.

Malan~gis-a Oily<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=oleagneous resp=e>oleagenous</corr>; fine.

Malanta-v To pine or fall away<corr>;</corr> wither;
dry up.

Malaon-n Time<corr>;</corr> tide<corr>;</corr> term; sea on[**typo: season (for 'sea on')]; age;
duration.

Malaon-a Prolix<corr>;</corr> old.

Malapad-a Wide; open; spacious; capacious.

Malapad-n One cent.

[**inserted next entry to match scan]
Malapit-adv.-Near; close.

Malapit-a[**matched scan] <corr sic=Proximity>Proximal</corr><corr>;</corr> next; neighboring;
contiguous; mediate; impending.

Malapit na malapit-adv. Very near<corr>;</corr>
nearly; almost.

Malapot-a Thick; dense; close.

Malasa-a Palatable; tasty; mellow.

Malasin-v To run over; peruse; survey<corr>;</corr>
review; revise; observe<corr>;</corr> notice<corr>;</corr> heed;
mind.

Malason-v-To be poisoned[**Errata (sugg: poison)].

Malason a-Poisonous; venomous[**Errata].

Malata-a Tender; weak; delicate; languid<corr>;</corr>
faint; soft; heartless; withered

Malawak-a Large; extensive; ample;
wide; capacious; spacious; champaign.

Malaway-a Salivous<corr>;</corr> salivary.

Malawig-v-To explain in a round about
way.

Malayo-a Distant<corr>;</corr> remote; outlying;
far; retired<corr>;</corr> solitary.

Malayo sa kaguluhan-a Quiet; calm.

Malayo sa kapowa-a Shy; diffident.

Malayo pa sa-adv. Beyond<corr sic=",">;</corr> farther; on
the other side.

Mali-n-Mistake; error; fault; defect;
oversight; blunder.

Mali-a-False; mendacious; erroneous;
bad; incorrect; faulty.

Mali sa sulat ó limbag-n-Erratum.

Malibag-a-Dirty; greasy; filthy[**Errata].

Malibog a-Lewd<corr sic=":">;</corr> lustful; immodest;
indecent; obscene; impure; shameless.

Maligaw-v To mistake; commit an error;
lose one's way; err.

Maligaya-a-Joyful; pleasant; merry;
happy; fortunate; prosperous; convivial;
holiday.

<pb n=157>

Maligo-v To bathe; take a bath.

Maligtas v-To be saved.

Malihim a-Secret; reserved; cautious;
confidential; <corr sic=salient>silent</corr>.

Malihis v-To err<corr sic=":">;</corr> mistake; misjudge:
become lost.

Maliit-a Little; small; short; scanty.

Maliit na kuta-n-Bulwark; defence.

Maliit na maliit a-Very small; very
litle[**Errata: little].

Maliit pa sa-a Smaller; less.

Malikot-a-Restless; boisterous; mischievous;
lively; noisy; turbulent.

Maliksi-a-Active; quick; speedy; expeditious;
smart<corr sic=":">;</corr> nimble; light; free;
prompt; lithesome; highspirited; swift<corr sic=":">;</corr>
ready<corr sic=":">;</corr> spry; diligent; loose; mercurial.

Malilim-a-Shady; umbrageous.

Malilimutin-a-Forgetful: oblivious;
neglectful.

Malimbag-v-To stamp; print.

Malimit-a Close<corr>;</corr> dense<corr sic=":">;</corr> thick; compact;
condensed.

Malimutan-v-To forget; neglect; omit;
mistake; unlearn.

Malinamnam-a-Delicious; select; mellow:
buttery.

Malinaw a-Clear[**Errata]; bright; plain; distinct;
open; evident; manifest; public<corr sic=":">;</corr>
transparent; sheer; obvious.

Malin~gatin v-To neglect<corr sic=":">;</corr> forget; overlook<corr>;</corr>
skip.

Malin~gat a-Forgetful; neglectful.

Malinis-a-Clean; pure; clear; decent;
unmixed<corr sic=":">;</corr> free<corr sic=":">;</corr> neat<corr>;</corr> plain; immaculate;
unadulterated; virtuous; devout;
tidy; honest; modest; refined<corr sic=":">;</corr> mere.

Malinis <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Sincere; clear; frank<corr sic=",">;</corr>
cordial; pure.

Malinsad v-To disjoint.

<corr sic=Malipo>Malipol</corr> v-To extinguish; become exterminated
or destroyed.

Malipos-a-Pustly[**does not seem to be a valid word; can be replaced w/ Pustulous or Pustulated]; <corr sic=fnll>full</corr> of pustles[**matched scan][**Errata: full of pustules].

Malipos-v-To be full of.

Malirot-a Unsavory<corr sic=":">;</corr> having a bad taste.

Malite-a Strong; robust; nervous; vigorous.

Malito-v To mistake; err<corr sic=":">;</corr> embarrass;
be uneasy or discomposed.

Maliwag-a-Slow<corr sic=":">;</corr> tardy; slothful: indolent<corr>;</corr>
lazy.

Maliwag mangyari[** spelling error |M:looks fine]-a-Difficult<corr>;</corr> hard.

Maliwanag-a-Clear<corr sic=":">;</corr> bright<corr>;</corr> evident; obvious;
luminous; lucid; distinct<corr>;</corr>:
refulgent; overt; ostensible<corr sic=":">;</corr> express;
notable; quite:[**extra :] pronounced; point
blank; sheer.

<pb n=158>

Maliwanag na malabis a-Glistening; too
shiny or bright.

Malowag-a-Wide; free; open; loose.[**this &amp; the next entry are the same, w/ just 2 defns interchanged]

Malowag a-Loose; free; open; wide.

Maluag ang kamay-a Spendthrift; prodigal.

Maluag ang loob-a-Free hearted; generous;
calm; free; good natured.

Malualhati a Blessed; glorious<corr sic=",">;</corr> happy;
beloved.

Maluag-a-Wide<corr sic=":">;</corr> diffuse; ample<corr>;</corr> open;
spacious; champaign; diffusive; capacious;
slow.

Maluang man~gusap-a Eloquent.

Maluat-a Slow<corr sic=",">;</corr> tardy; protracted; prolix;
tedious.

Malubay a Easy; pliant; amiable; pleasing;
slow; easy of success.

Malubay ang asal-a-Amiable; pleasing;
good natured.

Malubay makipagusap-a-Mild of
speech.

Malubay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a Meek; gentle; tame<corr>;</corr>
quiet; mild.

Malubha-a-Excessive; extreme.

Malubha-adv. Too; very.

Malubog-v-To sink; submerge.

Malugas-v-To fall out; shed hair.

Malugod-a-Amiable; pleasing; happy;
merry; convivial; good natured.

Malugod-v-To be happy, contented,
pleased, satisfied, delighted or convivial.

Malukong-n-Concave<corr sic=",">;</corr> concavity; hollow;
hollowness.[**the defns are a mix of nouns &amp; adj]

Malulan-v-To contain; hold; have; comprise;
be held.

Malulutang a-Bouyant[**Errata].

Maluma-v-To become[**Errata] old, stale or musty.

Malumanay-<corr sic=v>a</corr> To[**delete] Docile; gentle; slow;
meek; tame.

Malumbak-a-Pitted; full of holes.

Malumbay-a-<corr sic=Glomy resp=e>Gloomy</corr>; sad; sorrowful; mournful;
plaintive; mean.

Malumbay v-To be afflicted or sad.

Malumbay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob a Sad; mournful.

Malumot-a-Mossy; oozy; slimy.

Malumpo-v-To have <corr sic=rhe>the</corr> <corr sic=dingue>dengue</corr>; give
way in the knees.

Malungkot-a-Sad; sorrowful; gloomy;
unhappy; mournful; melancholy;
men; rueful; bleak; hapless; downcast;
crestfallen; chapfallen; contrite<corr>;</corr>
plaintive; pensive; disconsolate.

Maluningning-a-Bright; shining; <corr sic=brillant>brilliant</corr>;
glistening<corr>;</corr> glittering.

Malunusan v-To be sad or mournful.

<pb n=159>

Malupa a. Earthy<corr sic=",">;</corr> having much land;
territorial.

Malupaypay v. To grow or become weak
or languid.

Malupaypay a. Languid; weak.

Malusaw a. Liquid.

Malusaw v. To dilute; dissolve.

Maluto v. To boil; cook.

Malutong a. Brittle; fragile.

Mamaang v. To wonder; stare.

Mamaga v. To swell; become swollen;
tumefy.

Mamagitan v. To intercede; interpose;
mediate; bespeak.

Mamahal v. To grow or become dear;
raise the price.

Mamahala v. To manage; look after; heed;
take care; keep; govern; command;
direct; administer; man; wield; <corr sic=reek resp=e>reck</corr>;
boss.

Mamagpag v. To shake; wag.

Mamalagi v. To continue; endure; habituate;
subsist; protact.

Mamalago v. To become fruitful; be
abundant.

Mamali v. To err; mistake; equivocate;
blunder; misjudge; commit a mistake.

Mamali ang dinig v. To misunderstand.

Mamalo v. To falsify; be false.

Mamalso n. Falsificator.

Mamamayapa n. Pacificator; pacifier.

Mamana v. To inherit.

Mamanas v. To swell; tumefy.

Mamangha[**matched scan] v. To wonder<corr sic=",">;</corr> marvel; <corr sic=store>stare</corr>.

Mamanhid v. To numb; benumb; cramp;
become torpid or senseless.[**matched scan]

Mamanhik v. To intercede; interpose;
mediate; go up.

Mamansa v. To brag; glory; boast.

<corr sic=Mamansag>Mamansa</corr> v. To spot.

Mamantal v. To be flea <corr sic=biten resp=e>bitten</corr>.

Mamantika a. Buttery<corr>;</corr> mellow; fat; corpulent;
coarse; obese.

Mamantog v. To inflate; fill with wind;
blow full of wind.

Mamaos v. To become hoarse.

Mamaos a. Hoarse.

Mamasdan v. To see; watch; detect; find;
discover;[**matched scan] meet with; hit upon.

Mamaslang v. To be rude or disrespectful.

Mamatay v. To die; perish; end<corr>;</corr> go out;
stop; terminate or conclude life.

Mamaulo[**matched scan] v. To fill; be filled or stuffed.

Mamaya adv. Presently; soon; immediately;
right away; at once; then; before
long; in a moment; after.

Mamili v. To choose; buy; purchase;
go shopping; prefer.

<pb n=160>

Maminsanminsan.-adv<corr>.</corr>-Now and then;
sometimes; from time to time.

Mamintas.-v-To find fault; censure;
ridicule; criticize[**Errata].

Mamirinsa.-v-To iron.

Mamohaghag.-v-To <corr sic=rarify>rarefy</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> become thin.

Mamook.-v-To war; fight<corr sic=",">;</corr> oppose.

Mamualan.-v-To fill<corr sic=",">;</corr> stuff; satisfy.

Mamuhi.-v-To disgust; displease, of fend[**matched scan][**typo: offend];
vex; molest<corr sic=",">;</corr> loathe; excite.

Mamuhunan.-v-To found; furnish capital.

Mamuisan.-v-To loan on interest; rent
for cash.

Mamukha.-v-To resemble; to be like; favor;

Mamukod.-v-To separate<corr sic=",">;</corr> divide; be distinct<corr sic=",">;</corr>
except; distinguish.

Mamukod sa lahat.-v-To surpass; outvie<corr sic=",">;</corr>
exceed; excel.

Mamula.-v-To redden; blush<corr sic=",">;</corr> dye red.

Mamulaklak.-v-To flower, bloom; flourish;
thrive.

Mamulamula.-a-Reddish.

Mamulan~gos.-v-To slip or run through
the fingers.

Mamulayan.-v-To have knowledge.

Mamulayan.-a- Wise<corr sic=",">;</corr> knowing.

[**next 2 entries are out of order]
Mamun~ga.-v-To bear fruit; produce;
bring forth; flower; be fruitful.

Mamumula.-That which will become red.

Mamulubi.-v-To beg; be poor; impoverish<corr sic=",">;</corr>
hunger<corr sic=",">;</corr> starve; famish.

Mamuno.-v-To command; lead; head;
marshal.

[**out of order]Mamumuhunan.-n-Capitalist.

Mamuti.-v-To whiten.

Mamutik.-v-To become muddy.

Mana.-n-Inheritance; heirloom; rheum;[**wrong defn; s/b deleted]
patrimony.

Manabako.-v-To smoke cigars.

Manada.-n-Flock; herd.

Managal.-v-To last; continue; subsist;
endure<corr sic=",">;</corr> persist.

Managhoy.-v-To lament; mourn; grieve;
cry; bewail.

Managot.-v-To bail; answer.

Manahan.-v-To inhabit<corr sic=",">;</corr> reside[**Errata]; dwell.

Manaig.-v-To conquer; predominate; excel;
out do; surpass.

Manaing.-v-To lament; bewail; tell one's <corr sic=misfortuness resp=e>misfortunes</corr>.

Manain~ga.-v-To listen; hear en[**Errata: harken (for hear en)]; hear;
attend.

Manakanaka.-adv-Sometimes; now and
then; from time to time.

Manakit.-v-To hurt; wound; offend.

Manakot.-v-To frighten; terrify; daunt<corr sic=",">;</corr>
intimidate; scare.

Manalan~gin.[**fixed; ~ partly visible in scan]-v-To petition; harangue;
beseech; pray; <corr sic=pleab>plead</corr>; invocate; invoke.

<pb n=161>

Manalig.-v-To have faith.

Manalo.-v-To win; gain<corr>;</corr> conquer<corr>;</corr> exult;
triumph.

Manamanahan.-a-Hereditary.

Manambitan.-v-To lament; mourn: cry;
grieve; bewail

Manampalasan.-v-To insult<corr sic=":">;</corr> offend;
make angry<corr>;</corr> revile; abuse; injure.

Mananagot.-n-Bondsman.

Mananagpi.-n-Cobbler<corr>;</corr> one who patches.

Mananagwan.-n-Rower; paddler.

Mananakop.-n-Savior; rescuer<corr>;</corr> redeemer.

Manananim.-n-Planter<corr sic=",">;</corr> one who plants.

Mananayaw.-n-Dancer.

Manan~gis.-v-To cry; mourn; snivel; sob;
grieve<corr>;</corr> lament; bewail.

Manaog.-v-To descend<corr sic=":">;</corr> go down.

Manariwa.-v-To grow or become green.

Manatili.-v-To continue<corr sic=":">;</corr> protract<corr>;</corr> endure;
subsist; last<corr>;</corr> fix; fasten<corr sic=":">;</corr> persist.

Manbabayo[**matched scan].-n-Mallet.

Mandala.-n-Stack; rick.

Mandaya.-v-To deceive; cheat.

Manduduit.-n-Thief[**Errata]; robber: freebooter;
pillager; plunderer.

Mandudurog.-n-Pounder; one who flails.

Manekas.-v-To cheat<corr sic=":">;</corr> defraud; swindle;
gull; impose upon.

Manenegosio.-a-Negotiable.

Manenekas.-n-Swindler; defaulter.

Man~gaahit[**typo: Mang aahit].-n-Barber.

Man~ga anak.-n-Children.

Man~ga bagaybagayan.-n-Chattels; fixtures;
furniture.

Man~ga bagay nakasamsam[**typo: na nasamsam] sa kaaway.-n-<corr sic=spoils>Spoils</corr><corr>;</corr>
capture<corr>;</corr> prizes.

Man~ga bituka.-n-Entrails; intestines.

Man~gabayo.-v-To ride a horse.

Man~ga damit.-n-Apparel.

Mangagamot.-n-Doctor<corr>;</corr> physician.

Mangagamot na hindi nag-aral.-n-Quack-doctor.

Mangagamot n~g hayop.-n-Veterinarian[**Errata];
ferrier[**Errata: farrier]<corr sic=",">;</corr> horse doctor.

Mangagaod.-n-Rower<corr sic=":">;</corr> paddler.

Mangagapas.-n-Reaper; harvester; mower;
one who reaps or harvests.

Man~ga gastos.-n-Expenses; charges.

Man~gagaw.-n-Robber; plunderer<corr>;</corr> thief.

Mangagawa.-n-Doer<corr sic=":">;</corr> maker; author.

Mangagawa n~g bariles.-n-Cooper.

Mangagawa n~g kutsilio.-n-Cutler.

Man~gagat.-v-To bite:

Man~gagkayonkayon.-v-To agree; <corr sic=consert resp=e>concert</corr>;
decide

Man~gahas.-a-<corr sic=Agressive resp=e>Aggressive</corr>; saucy; bold;
plucky<corr>;</corr>: intrepid; forward; stalwart;
stalworth; spunky; precocious; high-spirited.

Man~gahas.-v-To dare; defy; venture; try.

<pb n=162>

Man~galigkig.-v-To shiver or tremble
with cold.

Mangaling.-v-To come from<corr sic=":">;</corr> issue from;
arise<corr sic=",">;</corr> proceed or spring;[**extra ;] from<corr sic=":">;</corr> originate
in.

Mangaling sa.-v-To descend or come
from.

Manga[**typo: Man~ga] manok.-n-Poultry.

Mang amba.-v-To pretend to threaten.

Man~gan~gahoy.-n-Woodsman<corr>;</corr> woodcutter;
timber<corr>;</corr> merchant.

Man~gan~galakal.-n-Merchant; dealer; trader;
shopkeeper.

Man~ganib.-v-To be in danger.

Man~ganinag.-v-To be transparent.

Man~ga pagkain.-n-Victuals; provisions.

Man~gapit.-v-To grasp; seize; catch;
snatch.

Mangas.-n-Sleeve.

Mangas na maluag.-n-Poke.

Mangaso[**typo: Man~gaso].-v-To hunt; chase; go hunting;
course<corr>;</corr> gun; go on a chase.

Man~ga sundalong bantay.-n-Guard.

Man~gatal.-v-To oscillate; vibrate<corr sic=",">;</corr> shiver;
tremble.

Man~gan~gatal.-<corr sic=v>a</corr>-Tremulous; quivering.

Man~gan~gayat.-v-To become or grow
thin, weak or poor.

Man~gati.-v-To attract by deceit.

Man~gatowiran.-v-To argue; reason; discuss<corr sic=":">;</corr>
discourse; affirm; give a reason.

Man~ga upang bato.-n-Judge's fees.

Man~gayayat.-n-To become weak; thin
or languid; debilitate.

Mangbabasag.-n-Breaker; one who
breaks.

Mangbadya.-v-To imitate; scoff; mock;
ridicule; copy.

Mangbansag.-v-To nickname,

Mangbihag.-v-To capture; captivate.

Mangbihag n~g sasakyan.-v-To pirate.

Mangbububo.-n-Founder.

Mangdirigma.-n-Warrior<corr sic=":">;</corr> soldier.

Mangubat.-v-To go to the woods; work
in the woods<corr>;</corr> become or grow woody.

Mangugupit.-n-Barber.

Mangha.-n-Wonder.<corr>;</corr> admiration<corr sic=":">;</corr> amazement.

Manghahabi.-n-Weaver.

Manghahabi n~g sutla.-n-Silkweaver.

Manghahalo.-n-Mixer<corr sic=",">;</corr> roller.

Manghaharang.-n-Highwayman;[**matched scan] bandit;
robber.

Manghahayuma.-n-Patcher; cobbler.

Mangharang.-v-To hold;[**extra ;] up; rob; plunder<corr>;</corr>
assault.

Manghawak.-v-To attach; hold up; catch<corr>;</corr>
hold of.

Manghihinang.-n-Soldering iron.

<pb n=163>

Manghimasok.-v-To interfere<corr sic=",">;</corr> interrupt[**Errata];
meddle.

Manghimatay.-v-To faint<corr sic=":">;</corr> swoon.

Manghina.-<corr sic=T>v</corr>-To weaken<corr>;</corr> pine:[**extra :] away; debilitate<corr>;</corr>
extenuate<corr sic=":">;</corr> waste away.

Manghina ang loob.-v-To dishearten<corr>;</corr> become;[**extra ;]
discouraged; grow dejected;
become weak.

Manghinapang.-v-To become courageous<corr>;</corr>
strengthen; invigorate<corr>;</corr> enforce;
exert<corr>;</corr> reinforce<corr sic=",">;</corr> gather <corr sic=farce resp=e>force</corr>; make
strong or brave.

Manghin~guto.-v-To louse; clean from:[**extra :]
lice or fleas.

Manghiniksik.-v-To louse<corr sic=":">;</corr> clean from
lice or fleas.

Manghinuha.-v-To collect; gather.

Manghiya.-v-To shame; make ashamed;
cause to be ashamed.

Manghuhula.-n-Prophet.

Mang iba.-v-To alter<corr>;</corr> change.

Mang iba sa capowa.-v-To distinguish
one's self.

Mang iit[**matched scan].-v-To nickname; ridicule<corr>;</corr> scoff;
censure.

Man~gilabot.-v-To terrify.<corr>;</corr> frighten; scare.

Mangilalás[**matched scan].-v-To marvel<corr>;</corr> wonder.

Mangilid.-v-To approach the edge or shore.

Manghimay.-v-To shell.

Man~ginig.-v-To tremble; sparkle; oscillate;
vibrate.

Mán~giti.-v-To smile<corr>;</corr> look pleased or
happy.

Man~gitlog.-v-To lay eggs.

Mang iyaw[**matched scan].-v-To mew.

Mangkok.-n-Crock; bowl; porringer.

Mangkulam.-v-To bewitch.

Mang-laban.-v-To struggle; fight; war;
oppose<corr sic=":">;</corr> strive; contend; resist.

Manglalik.-n-Turner.

Manglibak.-v-To deride; scoff; jeer;
mock.

Mangliligis.-n-Miller<corr sic=":">;</corr> grinder.

<corr sic=Manglilinag>Manglilinang</corr>.-n-Cultivator; gardener; horticulturist.

Mangloob.-v-To plunder; assault; pillage;
rob.

Manglulusog.-n-Plunderer; destroyer; pillager;
consumer.

Mangmang.-a-Foolish<corr>;</corr> idiotic; stupid; dull;
cowardly; ignorant; rude; silly.

Mangmang.-n-Brute; idiot.

Mangmumuli.-n-Grinder<corr sic=":">;</corr> miller.

Mangulo.-v-To wrangle; fight; perturb; disturb<corr sic=":">;</corr>[**disturb? |M:yes]
harrow.

Mang ulo.-v-To head; command; be chief;
govern.

Man~gulam.-v-To eat nothing but meat.

Mangulo[**typo: Man~gulot].-v-T ocurl[**typo: To curl].

<pb n=164>

Mang umit.-v-To steal<corr sic=":">;</corr> pilfer; rob; seize<corr sic=":">;</corr>
grasp.

Mang unay.-v-To benumb.

Mang undot.-v-To wrinkle; become wrinkly.

Mang urong.-v-To revoke<corr sic=",">;</corr> retract; retreat;
retire; go back.

Mang usap.-v-To talk<corr sic=":">;</corr> utter; converse<corr>;</corr>
speak; reason<corr>;</corr> harangue.

Man~gusap na hindi mawatasan.-v-To
<corr sic=numble>mumble</corr>; mutter.

Mangyari.-n-Result; consequences.

Mangyari.-v-To happen<corr sic=":">;</corr> be done<corr sic=":">;</corr> have;
may; can; be possible; be able or
feasible; possess.

Mangyari.-conj.-Because.

Mangyaring bigla.-v-To do in a hurry.

Mangyayari.-a-Feasible<corr sic=":">;</corr> practicable; possible;
easy.

Mangyayari sa arawaraw.-a-Quotidian.

<corr sic=Mangyayariring>Mangyayaring</corr> ihiwalay.-a-Separable.

Mangyayaring mabusog.-a-Satiable.

Mangyayaring mamali.-a-Fallible.

Mangyayaring mapagaling.-a-Curable;
healable.

Mangyayaring matapos.-a-Terminable.

Mangyayaring matawa.-a-Laughable; ludicrous.

Mangyayaring tiisin.-a-Sufferable; endurable.

Manhid.-n-Numbness; ache.

<corr sic=Mahilakbot>Manhilakbot</corr>.-v-To terrify; scare; frighten.

Manhinayang.-v-To pity; have compassion;
grieve for<corr sic=":">;</corr> be sorry for.

Manibasib.-v-To attack; assault; undertake;
attempt.

Manibay.-v-To strengthen; secure; make
fast; prop; affirm.

Manigarrillo.-v-To smoke cigarrettes.

Mamihasa.-v-To accustom; inure.

Maniin.-v-To prop up; build upon; raise
on the hands; support on anything.

Manika.-n-Wrist.

Manikad.-v-To kick<corr sic=":">;</corr> fling out.

Manikluhod.-v-To ask; beseech; petition;
beg.

Maniko.-v-To <corr sic=ellow>elbow</corr>.

Manilbihan.-v-To serve; favor; make
use of.

Manindal.-v-To be <corr sic=added resp=e>aided</corr> or supported
by another.

Manin~gas.-a-Fervent; ardent; vehement.

Manigid[**either this entry is out of order or a typo (not sure if for 'Manin~gid' as I couldn't verify if this is a valid word)].-n-Trower.

Manin~gil.-v-To collect.

Maningning.-a-Bright<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=sparking>sparkling</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr> radiant;
shining; luminous; lucid; refulgent;
<corr sic=grittering>glittering</corr>; <corr sic=lucient>lucent</corr>; quivering.

Maningning.-v-To sparkle; shine; glitter;
radiate<corr>;</corr> scintillate.

Maninin~gil.-n-Collector; taxgatherer.

<pb n=165>

Manininta-n-Lover.

Maninira-n-Breaker; destroyer; misdealer;
corruptor.

Maninira ang[**typo: n~g] ari n~g may ari-n-Defaulter;
defrauder.

<corr sic=Maaninira>Maninira</corr> n~g pagaari-n-Spendthrift;
squanderer.

Maninira n~g puri-n-Defamer; slanderer.

Maninirahan sa isang lugar-n-Inhabitant.

Manipis-a-Thin; slender; fine; sleazy.

Manirahan-v-To dwell; live; lodge; reside;
inhabit.

Manirintas-v-To braid.

Maniwala-v-To believe; trow; credit;
trust; have faith.

Maniwalain-a-Trustful.

Manlalabra-n-Stonecutter.

Manlalagari-n-Sawyer.

Manlalalik-n-Turner.

Man lamang-adv.-Though; at least; scarcely;
hardly; otherwise.

Manliso-n-Cramp; spasm.

Manlulupig-n-Usurper.

Manok-n-Rooster; cock; chanticleer.

Mano na-inter.-Would to GOD; for
heaven's sake.

Manong-inter.-At least.

Manong-adv.-Though; at least; scarcely;
hardly; otherwise.

Manotnot-v-To ravel.

Mansa-n-Spot; stain; blot; blur; blotch;
blemish; faeces; dirt.

Mansahan-v-To stain; spoil; blur; blot;
tarnish; bespatter; daub; contaminate;
blotch.

Mansuhin-v-To tame; domesticate.

Mantel-n-Mantel; tablecloth; altarcloth.

Mantika-n-Grease; lard; fat.

Mantinihin-v-To maintain; support; sustain;
hold up.

Mantiquilla-n-Butter.

Manuag-v-To hook with the horns;
butt.

Manuba-v-To deceive; cheat; defraud;
swindle; impose upon.

Manuba-a-Deceitful; cheating.

Manubig-v-To urinate; emit urine.

Manubok-v-To spy; espy; watch; test;
try.

Manuka-v-To peck.

Manukod-v-To jut out; surpass; excel

Manuluyan-v-To lodge; board; repose;
<corr sic=entertailn>entertain</corr> in one's home.

Manumpa-v-To swear; make oath; curse;
blaspheme.

Manumpa n~g kasinun~galin~gan-v-To per
jure[**typo: perjure]; swear falsely.

Manunuba-n-Swindler; cheat.

Manunubok-n-Spy; hangdog.

Manunula-n-Poet.

<pb n=166>

Manunulid.-n-Spinner of thread<corr sic=",">;</corr> examiner.

Manunulong.-n-Helper<corr sic=",">;</corr> aid; assistance;
one who aids or assists.

Manunulsa.-n-Raper<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=papist resp=e>rapist</corr>.

Manununog.-n-Incendiary; burner.

Manuya.-v-To flatter; coax; delight;
please.

Maolin~gan.-v-To bespatter with soot.

Maowi.-v-To return<corr sic=",">;</corr> devolve; become.

Mapa.-n-Map.

Mapag aglahi.-a-Joking<corr>;</corr> funny<corr>;</corr> happy.

Mapag aksaya.-a-Spendthrift<corr>;</corr> prodigal.

Mapag aksaya ang[**typo: n~g] pag-aari.-n-Spendthrift;
squanderer.<corr>;</corr> prodigal.

Mapagal.-v-To fatigue; tire.

Mapag ampon.-a-Generous; noble; liberal;
magnanimous; kind.

[**out of order]Mapagnumpa.-a-Cursing.

Mapagbalbas.-n-Flatterer.

Mapagbanalbanalan.-a-Hypocritical<corr sic=":">;</corr> insincere.

Mapagbasagulo.-a-Quarrelsome<corr sic=":">;</corr> entangling;
ensnaring; <corr sic=coutious resp=e>captious</corr>; bellicose;
controversible.

Mapagbata.-a-Childish.

Mapagbigay galang.-a-Respectful; polite.

Mapagbigay loob.-a-Obedient; attentive;
compliant.

Mapagbiyaya.-a-Extravagant[**should be extravagant? |M:yes (typo fixed)]; generous;
wasteful<corr sic=",">;</corr> magnificent<corr>;</corr> grand; splendid.

Mapagbuhos.-a-Effusive.

Mapagdasal.-a-Prayerful; pious.

Mapagmagaling.-a-Curable<corr sic=",">;</corr> healable.

Mapaghamon.-a-Provocative; irritative;
provocating.<corr>;</corr> provoking.

Mapaghan~gin.-a-Boastful; arrogant.

Mapaghilik.-a-Snoring.

Mapaghinala[**matched scan].-a-Fearful; distrustful; suspicious;
suspective; jealous.

Mapag isip.-a-Thoughtful; imaginative;
fanciful; contemplative.

Mapagkit.-a-<corr sic=Vicid resp=e>Viscid</corr><corr>;</corr> viscous<corr>;</corr> sticky.

Mapagkonowari.-a-Hypocritical[**matched scan]; deceitful;
false; untrue; counterfeit.

<corr sic=Mapaglantunay>Mapaglantutay</corr>.-a-Slothful; tardy<corr sic=",">;</corr> slouchy.

Mapaglaro.-a-Playful; jesting; rompish;
wanton.

Mapaglaway.-a-Salivous.

Mapaglingkod.-a-Compliant; loving<corr sic=",">;</corr> kind;
obliging; <corr sic=obsequeous>obsequious</corr>.

Mapag lura.-a-Salivous.

Mapágmarikit.-a-Spruce; proud; haughty;
blown.

Mapagmarunong.-n-Pretender; sciolist.

Mapagmasid.-a-Observing; careful; cautious.

Mapagmayabang.-a-Conceited; proud;
haughty.

<pb n=167>

Mapagmura.-a-Vile; slandering; low;
slanderous.

Mapagnasa.-a-Desirous<corr>;</corr> eager; greedy;
longing<corr>;</corr> lewd.

Mapagod.-v-To be or become tired<corr sic=",">;</corr> be
fatigued or worn out[**Errata].

Mapagimbabaw.-a-Feigned; false.

Mapagpalaro.-a-Playful.

Mapagpanaginip.-a-Dreamy.

Mapagpasial.-a-Strolling<corr>;</corr> walking.

Mapagpasiya.-a-Abstinent.

Mapagpatawa.-a-Laughable; happy; gay;
joyful<corr>;</corr> ludicrous.

Mapagpatubo.-a-Fertile; profitable.

Mapagpigil.-a-Temperate; frugal<corr>;</corr> moderate<corr>;</corr>
abstemious; prudent<corr>;</corr> sober.

Mapagpita.-a-<corr sic=Respectfully>Respectful</corr>; kind; generous.

Mapagpitagan.-a-Polite; respectful; kind;
obliging<corr>;</corr> generous.

Mapagpasinun~galing.-a-Lying; deceitful;
erroneous.

Mapagsiste.-a-Joyful; gay<corr sic=",">;</corr> festive<corr>;</corr> happy;
graceful.

Mapagsugal.-n-Gambler.

Mapagsumbong.-n-Telltale.

Mapagsumbong.-n-Informer; telltale; tale-*bearer.[**M: tale bearer on 662.png]

Mapagtago.-a.Secret<corr>;</corr> underhanded.

Mapagtago ang[**typo: n~g] galit.-a-Rancorous<corr>;</corr> spiteful.

Mapagtamasa.-a-Profuse; lavish; showy;
abundant.

Mapagtanim sa loob.-a-Rancorous; spiteful.

Mapagtapon.-a-Spendthrift; prodigal.

Mapagtawa.-a-Laughable.

Mapagtiis.-a-Patient; forbearing; <corr sic=accomodating>accommodating</corr><corr>;</corr>
abstinent.

Mapagtumpak.-a-Prudish; fastidious.

Mapagtun~gayaw.-a-Cursing<corr>;</corr> slanderous;
vile; foulmouthed.

Mapagupasala.-a-Critical; slandering; insulting.

Mapagwari.-a-Prudent; considerate; meditating[**Errata]<corr>;</corr>
contemplative[**Errata].

Mapaghamak.-v-To injure; hurt.

Mapahin~ga.-v-To rest; repose; be calm;
breathe; respire.

Mapaigatan.-a-To interpose<corr sic=":">;</corr> intercede.

Mapaikpik.-v-To compress; press.

Mapainom.-v-To invite to drink.

Mapait.-a-Mordant<corr>;</corr> bitter<corr sic=":">;</corr> poignant;
pungent; rough to the taste.

Mapakaila.-v-To deny; retract.

Mapakaila.-a-Deniable.

Mapakaluma.-v-To be old or stale.

Mapakatanda.-v-To be very old.

Mapakialam.-a-Meddlesome[**Errata]; interfering.

<pb n=168>

Mapakikinaban~gan.-a-Profitable; <corr sic=servicible resp=e>serviceable</corr>; useful[**Errata]; beneficial.

Mapalad.-a-Happy; lucky; fortunate<corr>;</corr> blessed<corr>;</corr>
prosperous; successful; thriving.

Mapalagay.-v-To elect; <corr sic=chose resp=e>choose</corr>; nominate.

Mapalaran.-v-To be lucky;[**,] happy;[**,] or fortunate.

Mapamanhin.-a-Superstitious.

Mapamansa.-a-Spotted; dirty; proud; arrogant

Mapamula.-v-To commence; begin.

Mapanaog.-v-To go down; descend; let or
send down.

Mapang agad.-a-Quick; early.

Mapang agad.-adv.-Early; quickly[**Errata].

Mapan~gaw ang gulong.-v-To stick in the
mud.

Mapangbabayi.-a-Lewd; lustful.

Mapanghibe.-a-Deceitful; cheating.

Mapanglibak.[**should be Mapanglibak? (typo already fixed)]-a-Scoffing; ridiculous.

Mapanglibak.-n-Scoffer; scorner; censor.

Mapanghicayat.-a-Attractive.

Mapangiba.-n-Gainsayer.

Mapanglaw.-a-Gloomy; dark; obscure; sorrowful;
sad; mournful<corr>;</corr> sullen; somber;
cheerless; rueful; mean; murky;
hazy.

Mapanggulo.-a-Turbulent; seditious; malcontent;
discontented; noisy; boisterous.

Mapanhik.-v-To mount; ascend; go up; increase.

Mapanira.-n-Destroyer; breaker.

Mapanirang puri.-n-Defamer.

Mapansin.-v-To feel; note; understand;
hit upon.

Mapantay.-v-To become equal or matched

Mapanumpa.-a-Foulmouthed; vile.

Mapanuya.-a-Flattering.

Mapaos.-a-Hoarse; husky.

<corr sic=Mapalitan>Mapapalitan</corr>.-a-Changeable.

Maparañgalan[**matched scan; typo: Maparan~galan].-a-Boastful; arrogant;
proud<corr>;</corr> haughty.

Mapasa iba.-v-To fall to another; devolve;
relapse.

[**out of order]Maparis.-v-To be like or equal; resemble;
match.

Mapasal.-v-To meddle; interfere.

Mapasalan.-v-To be obstructed or choked up.

Mapasigaw.-v-To exclaim; cry out.

Mapasok.-v-To enter; go in.

Mapatawa.-a-Comic; comical.

Mapatong.-v-To put on; add to; augment.

Mapatpat.-v-To go to a place without
any definite[**Errata] object in view.

<pb n=169>

Mapatulala-a-<corr sic=astonishing>Astonishing</corr>; <corr sic=stufeying resp=e>stupefying</corr>;
wonderful[**Errata].

Mapawis-v-To be sweaty or sweated.

Mapawis-a-Sweaty; perspiring

Mapeka v To feel angry or hurt.

<corr sic=Mapekas>Mapeka</corr>-a Angry; disgusted; hurt.

Mapiga-v-To squeeze; press.

<corr sic=Mapaghati>Mapighati</corr>-a <corr sic=Antiphatethic resp=e>Antipathetic</corr>; irritated.

Mapigil-v-To be bound or restrained.

Mapilay-v-To become lame<corr>;</corr> limp<corr>;</corr> sprain.

Mapilipit-v To be twisted or twined<corr sic=",">;</corr> twist;
twine about.

Mapilit-a-Urgent<corr>;</corr> compulsory.

Mapilitin-v-To press; urge; compel;
oblige.

Mapintasin[**typo already corrected]-a-Censorious.<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=Particular>particular</corr>.

Mapoot-v-To be exasperated, irritated,
offended or provoked.

Mapoot a-<corr sic=sulky>Sulky</corr>; testy.

Mapootin-a-Touchy; moody; fretful; <corr sic=irrascible>irascible</corr>

Mapudpod-a-Blunt; dull<corr>;</corr> stupid.

Mapula a-Red<corr sic=",">;</corr> reddish; ruddy.

Mapula ang mukha a Redfaced.

Mapulang mukha-n-Blush.

Mapulapula-a-Pink<corr>;</corr> reddish.

Mapúlot-v-To find; pick up; detect; hit
upon; meet.

Mapúlot-a Full of honey; having much
honey.

Mapun~gay ang mata-a-Squinteyed;
sleepy.

Mapuno-v-To fill; stuff.

Mapurol-a-Dull; obtuse; blunt; spiritless.

Mapurol ang isip a Dull; torpid<corr sic=",">;</corr> stupid;
inert; slow.

Maputi-a-White.

Maputik-a-Muddy; miry.

Maputiputi-a-Whitish.

Maputla-a-Pallid; pale; discolored; colorless;
sallow; ghastly.

Marabilis-n-Maravedi.

Marahan adv.-Slowly; little by little;
by degrees.

Marahas-a-Brave; valiant; bold; audacious<corr>;</corr>
forward.

Marahil-adv<corr>.</corr>-Probably; perhaps; maybe;
can be; haply.

Maralita-a-Needy<corr sic=",">;</corr> poor; poverty-stricken;
in want.

Maramay-v-To effect; inculpate.

Maramdaman-v-To feel; grieve; <corr sic=percieve>perceive</corr>;
note.

Maramdamin-a-Sensible; tender; notable;
sensitive; tender; hearted[**typo: tenderhearted (for 'tender; hearted')]; affectionate.

Marami-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Many; numerous; copious;
abundant; plentiful; manifold; several.

Maraming buto a Bony.

Maraming dahon-a-Leafy; full of leaves.

<pb n=170>

Maraming nabasa <corr sic=sa>na</corr> libro-a-Learned.

Maraming pagaaring lupa-n Land-holder<corr sic=",">;</corr>
planter.

Maraming panulukan-a-Angular; cornered

[**out of order]Maraming taba-a Greasy<corr sic=",">;</corr> fatty; corpulent<corr>;</corr>
obese.

Maraming san~ga-a-Branchy<corr sic=",">;</corr> ramous;
ramose having many branches.

Maramot-a-Stingy<corr sic=":">;</corr> miserly; paltry;
niggardly; petit; close<corr>;</corr> mean<corr sic=",">;</corr> close-*fisted;[**- is EOL, closefisted elsewhere]
penurious; tight<corr>;</corr> grasping;
frugal<corr sic=",">;</corr> voracious; selfseeking, miserable;
churlish<corr>;</corr> narrow.

Maran~gal-a-Eminent; honorable<corr>;</corr> noble;
illustrious; solemn; excellent[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> sublime;
grand<corr sic=":">;</corr> great<corr sic=":">;</corr> fine<corr>;</corr> splendid; sumptuous;
surpassing; potent; just; fair;
honest; patrician; transcendant;
exalted<corr sic=":">;</corr> powerful; wealthy; large;
huge<corr sic=",">;</corr> lofty<corr>;</corr> important.

Marapat[**typo already fixed]-v-To deserve; merit; have due<corr sic=":">;</corr>
appertain<corr>;</corr> belong to.

Marapatin-v-To incur; merit; have due.

Marapatang tangapin a Acceptable.

Marapat nasain-a-Desirable.

Marapat pagpalain a-Meritable; deserving.

Marapat parusahan-a Punishable<corr sic=",">;</corr> that
which should;[**extra ;] be punished.

Maratihan-v-To accustom; be experienced<corr sic=",">;</corr>
or[**matched scan] accustomed to.

Marawal-a Unworthy; undeserving; unmeritable.

Marawal ang ugali a-Impolite; rude;
false<corr sic=",">;</corr> bad mannered.

Marawasan-v-To <corr sic=known>know</corr>; experience<corr sic=",">;</corr> be
able.

Margen-n Margin; edge.

Marikit-a-Beautiful; graceful; pretty<corr>;</corr> genseel[**closed up, EOL - after 'gen' not visible but there's space for it][**Errata: genteel]; elegant; excellent; nice<corr>;</corr> neat;
fair<corr sic=",">;</corr> handsome[**t replaced with s by hand][**Errata]; gay; gallant; fine;
exquisite; dexterous.

Marilag a Eminent<corr>;</corr> grand; famous; illustrious;
magnificent<corr sic=",">;</corr> noble<corr>;</corr> honorable;
splendid;[**matched scan] graceful; gay; shining; lucid.

Marinero-n-Sailor; marine; seafaring
man.

Marinig-v-To hear<corr sic=":">;</corr> understand; pay
attention; <corr sic=percieve>perceive</corr>; overhear.

Marka-n-Mark; stamp.

Markáhan-v To stamp; mark; brand.

Marques-n-Marquis.

Martillo-n-Hammer.

Marumhan-v-To dirty; soil; <corr sic=bedpatter resp=e>bespatter</corr>.

Marumi-a Dirty; soiled; nasty; filthy;
foul; sordid; indecent<corr>;</corr> dingy; grimy[**Errata];
dowdy; <corr sic=droosy resp=e>drossy</corr>;[**3rd letter unreadable |M:o] obscene; licentious;
obscure; jetty; gloomy<corr sic=",">;</corr> unbecoming.

Marungis[**typo: Marun~gis]-a-Dirty; soiled; filthy; foul;
nasty; dowdy; <corr sic=droosy resp=e>drossy</corr>; sordid; dingy;
<pb n=171>uninndtece[**Errata: indecent]; <corr sic=becoming resp=e>unbecoming</corr>; lewd[**Errata];
licentious; obscene.

Marunong a-Wise; learned<corr>;</corr> knowing;
discreet; prudent; judicious<corr>;</corr> sage;
erudite; shrewd; proficient<corr>;</corr>
prudential<corr>;</corr> conversant<corr>;</corr> able; civilized<corr sic=",">;</corr> sapient;
reserved.

Marunong-n-Sage; wise man.

Marunong magin~gat n~g lihim-a-Secret<corr sic=",">;</corr>
silent<corr>;</corr> reserved.

Marunong makipagkapwa tawo-a <corr sic=polite>Polite</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr>
urbane; courteous; wellbred.

Marupok-a-Brittle; frail<corr>;</corr> feeble<corr>;</corr> fragile;
delicate; forceless<corr sic=",">;</corr> frangible; weak.

Marzo n March.

Masabi a-Loquacious<corr>;</corr> talkative.

Masadhan-v-To be obstructed or choked
up.

Masagana-a-Abundant<corr>;</corr> excessive<corr>;</corr> plentiful;
wealthy; rich.

Masagana-adv.-Abundantly; <corr sic=evcessively resp=e>excessively</corr>;
plentifully.

Masagana sa dugo-a-Sanguine.

Masagana sa pagaari a-Rich<corr sic=":">;</corr> opulent;
affluent; wealthy.

Masagi-v-Gall[**To gall]; wear away by friction.

Masagutin a-Answerable; responsive;
respondent.

Masahin-v-To knead.

Masakim-a-Avaricious; greedy; miserly.

Masakit-a-Sick; painful; dolorous; laborious.

<corr sic=Masaklad>Masaklap</corr>-a-Sour<corr sic=",">;</corr> mordant; rough to
the taste; unpleasant<corr>;</corr> disagreeable.

Masakop-v-To protect; defend; be annexed;
be included; impend

Masaktan v-To cripple<corr>;</corr> hurt<corr>;</corr> injure;
main[**Errata: maim]; wound; offend[**Errata]; grieve.

Masaktin-a-Unhealthy; painful; sickly

Masakuna-a-Disastrous.

Masalab-v-To scorch[**Errata]; singe.

Masalanta-v-To be of no use.

Masalita a-Loquacious<corr sic=",">;</corr> talkative; conversant<corr sic=",">;</corr>
garrulous; voluble.

Masalubong-v-To encounter; meet<corr sic=":">;</corr> join;
hit upon.

Masalun~gat-v-To oppose; repugn; contradict.

Masama-a-Bad; evil; wicked; vile; perverse<corr>;</corr>
vicious; pernicious<corr>;</corr> unbecoming;
indecent<corr sic=":">;</corr> baneful; deleterious;
harmful<corr sic=":">;</corr> abusive<corr>;</corr> profligate; arrant;
despicable<corr>;</corr> depraved; infamous; ominous<corr sic=":">;</corr>
destructive<corr sic=",">;</corr> dreadful; false;
ferocious; terrible; fatal.

Masama-adv.-Perversely<corr sic=",">;</corr> viciously; perniciously;
banefully.

Masama-n-Evil; bad<corr>;</corr> harm; faul[**matched scan][**Errata: fault]<corr sic=",">;</corr> hurt;
injury; mischief.

<pb n=172>

Masama <corr sic=at>ang</corr> hilig-a-Sinister; inauspicious;
vicious.

Masamang hitsura-a-Illshaped; deformed.

[**out of order]Masamain-v-To disapprove; censure;
dislike<corr>;</corr> reprove<corr>;</corr> make or cause to
be bad; hate<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=adhor resp=e>abhor</corr><corr>;</corr> detest<corr>;</corr> loathe.

Masamang kaugalian-a-Illbred<corr>;</corr> rude.

Masamang ugali-a-Illmannerred<corr sic=",">;</corr> impolite;
illbred.

Masama pa-a-Worse.

Masama sa lahat-a-Worst.

Masambulat-v-To scatter; sow<corr>;</corr> broadcast.

Masanay-v-To practice<corr>;</corr> know; experience;
be accustomed or able.

Masandat-v-To fill stuff<corr sic=",">;</corr> satisfy; glut.

Masan~ga-a-Branchy; ramose.

Masansang-a-Strong scented.

Masapantaha-v-To presume; suppose,

Masapong-v-To meet<corr>;</corr> encounter; collide;
hit upon.

Masarap-a-Palatable; sweet; savory; delicious;
rich; dainty; tasty; nice;
select; delicate.

Masarapan-v-To be sweet; sweeten;
make palatable or savory.

Masaya-a-<corr sic=happy>Happy</corr>; joyful; cheerful<corr>;</corr> jocose;
jocular; entertaining; merry; halcyon;
facetious; pleasant[**t? |M:yes]; affable<corr>;</corr> convivial;
bouyant; gleeful; jaunty; vivacious;
winsome<corr>;</corr> comical; comic<corr>;</corr> good
natured; cavalier; festive; amusing;
tasty.

Masáyang-v-To throw away; fail of
success; do in vain.

Masaya ang loob-v-Happy;[**matched scan] gay; jovial;
merry; cheerful; compliant.

Masaya ang mukha-a-Smiling; agreeable.

Masculino-a-Masculine.

Masdan-n-Exploration; watching<corr>;</corr> examination;
study; observation; notice;
spying.

<corr sic=Masabo>Masebo</corr>-a-Greasy<corr>;</corr> fatty; fat.

Maselang-n-Clean; neat<corr>;</corr> tidy; fastidious<corr sic=",">;</corr>
cleanly; particular<corr>;</corr> cleanly.[**there are 2 'cleanly' as defns w/c s/b deleted as they're adverbs & 'clean' is already listed]

Masiba-a-<corr sic=Gluttinous resp=e>Gluttonous</corr>; fond of dainties.

Masid-n-Observation; glance; gaze;
look.

<corr sic=Masidli>Masidhi</corr>-a-Active; affective.

Masigla-a-<corr sic=Diligect resp=e>Diligent</corr>; active; merry; amusing.

Masikap-n-Officious; diligent; industrious;
solicitous<corr>;</corr> anxious; assiduous.

Masiki-a-Shy; bashful; embarrassed.

Masikip-a-Narrow; close; tight.

Masiksik[**Masiksik? |M: yes: 2nd i not visible in scan but present in a TIA copy]-v-To fill up; stuff.

Masilaw-v-To be dazzled; daze.

Masindak-v-To be startled, surprised,
or astonished.

<pb n=173>

Masinop-a-Curious; inquisitive.

Masinsay-v-To be clear, evident or
known.

[**added next entry to match scan]
Masinsay-a-Clear; evident.

Masinsin-a-Close; thick; compact; firm;
solid; consistent; gross; tight; strong;
massive.

Masintahin-a-Affectionate; kind; loving;
pleasing.

Masintahin sa Dios-a-Pious; holy; merciful.

Masipag-a-Diligent; industrious; thrifty;
sedulous; officious; ready; prompt;
quick; active; smart.

Masipag magaral-a-Studious.

Masipak-v-To break (per. to, the jaws).

Masira-v-To break; damage; rot; spoil;
impair.

Masira ang isip-v-To go crazy; become
demented or crazy.

Masiyasat-a-Curious; inquisitive.

Maso-n-Nave; hub.

Masobasob-v-To full[**Errata (sugg is 'pull' but s/b 'fall')] down.

Masowail-a-Stubborn; rebellious; contradictory;
disobedient.

Masawayin[**correct variant sp, but s/b Masowayin to follow alphab order]-a-Disobedient; contradictory;
stubborn; obstinate; rebellious; conceited.

Masubok-v-To try; experiment; attempt;
experience.

Masubucan[**matched scan]-v-To wound; hurt; cause
pain.

Masuhin-v-To drive or pound with a
mallet.

Masukal-a-Dirty; filthy; slattern.

Masukal ang loob-a-Malcontent; discontented.

Masuklam-a-Acrid; detestable; <corr sic=loathesome>loathsome</corr>;
execrated; antipathetic.

Masuklam ang loob-a-Angry; irritated.

Masulat-v-To be written or composed.

Masulong-v-To swell; increase; continue;
be brave or bold.

Masumpong-v-To run against; meet
by chance; strike or butt against.

Masundo-v-To be called or sent after[**Errata].

Masunduan-a-Reconcilable.

Masun~git-a-Cross; intractable; severe;
harsh; arduous; crampy; cynic; fell<corr>;</corr> rigid;
arbitrary; combative; cynical; pugnacious;
vixenish; vixenly; crabbed.

Masunod-v-To follow; come next.

Masunog-v-To burn; blaze; inflame.

Masunurin-a-Docile; convenient; gentle;
moderate; obedient; attentive; compliant;
submissive; humble; dutiful;
amiable; resigned; duteous; indulgent.

Masupok-v-To be on sumed[**Errata: consumed (for 'on sumed')].

Masustancia-a-Succulent; juicy; nourishing.

<pb n=174>

Masusuklam-a-Repulsive.

Masuwayin-a-Obstinate; obdurate; stubborn;
conceited.

Masuyo-a-Obedient; attentive; compliant;
civil; polite; courteous.

Mataas-a-Tall; high; elevated; lofty; <corr sic=transcendant>transcendent</corr>;
majestic.

Mataas ang gitna-a-Convex; convexed.

Mataas magsalita-a-Grandiloquent.

[**out of order]Mataas ang halaga-a-Dear; costly; high
priced.

Mataas pa-a-Higher; taller; superior.

Mataba-a-Fat; obese<corr sic=":">;</corr> greasy; chubby;
chunky; plump; thickset; corpulent;
<corr sic=unctious>unctuous</corr>; <corr sic=fertille resp=e>fertile</corr>; fruitful; copious.

Matabang-a-Tasteless; insipid; dull;
heavy.

Matabil-a-<corr sic=Ialkative>Talkative</corr>; loquacious.

Mataboy-a-To be divorced or separated.

Matagal-a-Staple; permanent; firm; steady;
lasting; durable; prolix; indefatigable;
unwearied.

Matagid-v-To be obstructed; take the
clear and leave the muddy.

Matagilid-adv.-Sidewise.

Mataginting-a-Sonorous[**Errata]; pleasing; harmonious.

Matago-v-To be hidden or concealed.

Matago-a-Hidden; concealed.

Matagpos-a-To be deficient; fail.

Matagpuan-a-To find; detect; meet; encounter;
discover; hit on.

Matagumpay-v-To triumph; exult.

Matahimik-v-To become calm, peaceful,
serene or quiet.

Matahimik-adv.-Quietly; calmly.

Mataho-v-To know; be able; experience.

Matacaw[**Matakaw? from alphabetic order |M: Matacaw is correct sp, but if to follow order s/b Matakaw]-a-Gluttonous; greedy; sharpset[**? |M: valid obsolete word];
ravening; hoggish.

Matakot-a-Afraid; terrified; intimidated;
tremulous; timid; fearful.

Matakutin-a-Tremulous; timid; fearful;
cowardly; apprehensive; sensitive;
<corr sic=corward>coward</corr>; chickenhearted.

Matalas-a-Cute; cunning; sly; sagacious;
fine; smart; lively; knowing; crafty; diligent;
adroit; shrewd; discerning;
ready; delicate; perfect.

Matalas ang isip-a-Learned; sharp; intelligent;
skillful<corr>;</corr> skillful;[**redundant defn] awake; knowing[**typo already corrected];
ingenious; able; sagacious; keen;
sapient; sage; watchful; lively.

Matalas ang mata-a-Sharp eyed.

Matalas magmasid-a-Cunning; sagacious.

Matalastas-v-To know; understand; comprehend;
prove; demonstrate; manifest;
experience.

<pb n=175>

Matalim-a- Sharp; pointed; edged.

Matalino-a- Clear; circumspect; witty;
prudent<corr>;</corr> judicious<corr>;</corr> wise<corr>;</corr> knowing;
sharp; sensible<corr>;</corr> light; acute<corr>;</corr> discreet;
learned<corr>;</corr> smart; intelligent<corr>;</corr> skillful; sagacious<corr>;</corr>
sage<corr>;</corr> sapient; mature.

Matalo-v- To lose.

Matambog-v- To throw to another.

Matambok-a- Swollen.

Matamis-n- Sugar<corr>;</corr> sweets.

Matamis a[**matched scan] Sweet; dulcet.

Matampuhin-a- Sulky<corr sic=",">;</corr> touchy; pouting.

Matanda-a- Old; aged; decrepit<corr sic=",">;</corr> ancient;
antiquated; antique.

Matandang galit-n- Rancor<corr>;</corr> grudge.

[**out of order]Matandaan-a- Mindful<corr>;</corr> retentive.

Matan~ga-v-[**matched scan]To astonish; stupefy.

Matan~gisin[**matched scan]-a- Touchy; sniveling.

Matankad-a-Tall<corr>;</corr> straight.[**matched scan]

Matanto-v- To understand; hear.

Matapang-<corr sic=v>a</corr>- Brave; valiant<corr sic=",">;</corr> bold; intrepid;
spirited; vigorous; gritty; redoubtable<corr sic=",">;</corr>
courageous<corr>;</corr> strong; firm;
gallant; doughty<corr sic=",">;</corr> graceful; stalwart;
stalworth<corr>;</corr> spunky<corr>;</corr> plucky<corr>;</corr> aggressive[**Errata];
saucy; pungent; poignant.

Matapos-v- To finish; terminate; end;
perish; die; conclude.

Matarok-v- To enter; penetrate; remark;
sound; be understood; judge.

Matastas-v- To rip; ravel.

Matatag-a- Strong; robust; vigorous; firm;
fast; resolute; consistent; inflexible;
solid; stubborn<corr>;</corr> tight.

Matatag-v- To be established, ordained
or enacted.

Matatahanan-a- Inhabitable.

Matatakutin-a- Fearful<corr sic=",">;</corr> timorous; timid;
coward.

Matatangap-a- Admissible; acceptable;
fit; proper; <corr sic=recievable resp=e>receivable</corr>.

Matatawanin-a- Smiling<corr>;</corr> agreeable.

Matayog-a- High; tall; elevated.

Matayong-v-To obstruct<corr>;</corr> check<corr>;</corr> stop.

Matibay-a- Firm; strong[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> staple; compact;
stout; sound; <corr sic=permament resp=e>permanent</corr>; perfect;
fast; steady; resolute; secure;
entire; constant; coarse<corr>;</corr> complete;
solid; vigorous; hard; rigid; informed<corr sic=",">;</corr>
close.

Matibay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a- Constant; loyal; manifest; steadfast; firm.

Matigas-a- Hard; solid; stubborn; firm;
inflexible; vigorous; tight.

[**inserted next entry to match scan]
Matigas ang buhok o balahibo-a-Bristly.

[**there's an entry here in the scan that duplicates the next entry but only up to the first 3 defns]
Matigas ang ugali-a- Stubborn; pertina-*[**matched scan]
<pb n=176>*ceous<corr>;</corr> obstinate<corr sic=",">;</corr> contumelious<corr sic=",">;</corr> dogged;
tenacious.

Matigmak-v- To impregnate; be impregnated;
soak.

Matiis-a- <corr sic=Tolorable>Tolerable</corr>; sufferable; constant;
abstaining; <corr sic=obstinent resp=e>abstinent</corr>; firm; loyal;
manifest.

Matikman-v- To try; attempt; experience;
taste; esperiment.

Matili-<corr sic=n>a</corr>- Shrill.

Matimbang-v- To balance; counterpoise;
be weighed.

Matindi-a- Heavy; weighty<corr sic=",">;</corr> cumbrous;[**fixed; checked vs a TIA copy]
strong; cumbersome.

Matinik-a- Thorny; spiny.

Matining-v- To resound;[**'s' not fully visible in scan; checked vs a TIA copy] tingle.

Matining <corr sic=na>ang</corr> kalooban-a- Brave; strong;
valiant.

Matining <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a- Moderate; forbearing<corr>;</corr>
temperate<corr>;</corr> kind<corr sic=",">;</corr> obliging; polite;
constant; manifest<corr sic=",">;</corr> brave<corr sic=",">;</corr> valiant;
firm<corr>;</corr> loyal.

Matinkal-a- Cloddy.

Matipi-<corr sic=a>v</corr>- To compress; be compressed.

Matipid-a-Economic; frugal; economical;
close; stingy.

Matira-v- To remain; stay; stop over;
residue.

Matisod-v- To stumble; stub.

Matisuran-a- Stumbling; tripping.

Matitiis-a- Tolerating<corr>;</corr> abstentious; sufferable;
abstaining.

Matitirahan-a- Inhabitable; habitable.

Matiyaga-a- Constant<corr>;</corr> loyal; firm; diligent;
tolerating; sufferable.

Matong-n- Hamper; basket.

Matowa-v- To be happy, gay, merry, [**or] delighted<corr>;</corr>
<corr sic=rejoiced>rejoice</corr>.

Matowid-a- Right; legal; lawful; just;
constitutional; honest; upright;
straight<corr>;</corr> direct<corr>;</corr> pointblank.

Matowid-adv.[**matched scan]- Rationally; justly; honestly;
righteously[**Errata].

Matsing-n- Monkey.

[**out of order]Matuiran-v- To debate<corr sic=",">;</corr> discuss; dispute;
controvert<corr>;</corr> reason.

Matúbo-a- Lucrative<corr sic=",">;</corr> profitable; flourishing;
thriving<corr>;</corr> increasing; growing.

Matuklasan-v- To discover;[**matched scan] detect; find;
search.

Matulin-a- Swift; quick; fast; nimble;
rapid; prompt; hasty; precipitate;
spry.

[**inserted next entry to match scan]
Matulin-adv.-Rapidly; lightly; quickly;
<corr sic=ready>readily</corr>; promptly; precipitately.

Matulad-v- To resemble; be similar.

Matulis-a- Sharp<corr>;</corr> pointed; marked.

Matulog-v- To sleep; doze; slumber.

Matuloy-v- To continue; proceed; effect;
accomplish.

<pb n=177>

Matumal-a- Dull<corr>;</corr> depressive,

Matumbakan-v- To conjecture; assert;
guess<corr>;</corr> hit upon; stamp.

Matunaw-v- To dissolve; liquefy; melt.

Matunaw ang kinain-v-To digest.

Matungkol-v- To respect; belong or pertain
to<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=apportain resp=e>appertain</corr>; concern<corr sic=",">;</corr> relate;
refer<corr sic=",">;</corr> behoove<corr sic=",">;</corr> correspond.

Matunog-a- Sonorous; resounding; loud.

Matuto-v- To learn; experience; comprehend.

Matutol-n- Respondent; replier.

[**out of order]Matuto-a- Ready; having the last word.

Matutol-v- To respond.

Matutuhan-v- To learn.

Matuwa-a- Happy; joyful[**Errata].<corr>;</corr> content<corr sic=",">;</corr> satisfied;
fain; gleeful; good humored;
joyous.

Matuyo-v- To dry up<corr>;</corr> dessicate<corr>;</corr> fall;
pine away; become lean or thin.

Mauban-a- Hoary; grey headed; old;
hoar.

Maubos-v- To give out; expand; run out
of; use up.

[**out of order]Maubo-a- Hoarse with a cold.

Maubuhin-a- Subject to colds or hoarseness.

Maugat-a- Nervous<corr>;</corr> robust<corr sic=":">;</corr> lithe; vigorous.

Mauhaw-a- Thirsty[**Errata]; dry.

Maukol-v- To pertain; belong to; appertain.

Maukol sa-v- To belong<corr sic=",">;</corr> pertain; concern;
behoove.

Maukol sa amoy-a- Olfactory; pertaining
to the sense of smell.

Maulan-a- Rainy; showery; pluvious<corr sic=",">;</corr>
pluvial.

Maulap-a- Cloudy<corr sic=":">;</corr> hazy; foggy[**typo 'forgy' fixed]; misty.

Maulinin~gan[**matched scan]-v- To hear imperfectly;
hear indistinctly.

Maulol-v- To dement[**typo: dementate (obsolete word; 'dement' doesn't seem to be a valid word)]; become crazy or
demented.

Maumid-a- Mute; short

Maumid-v- To stand mute or silent;
shorten.

Maumpog-v- To bump against; run
against.

Mauna-v- To go before; anticipate; go
ahead; preceed[**matched scan][**Errata: precede].

Mauntog-v- To bump against; collide[**Errata],
strike against.

Maupo-v- To sit down.

Mausisa-v- To inquire; investigate; be
curious.

Mausisain-a- Inquisitive; curious.

Mautak-a- Brainy

Mautak at mahinahon-a- Prudent; sedate.

Mautal-v- To stutter; stammer.

Mautas-v- To finish; terminate; end; conclude.

<pb n=178>

Mauyam-a-Critical; scoffing; sarcastic;
sardonic.

Mawanki-v-To be similar or like<corr sic=":">;</corr> resemble;
be alike.

Mawala-v-To lose<corr sic=",">;</corr> be lost.

Mawalan-v-To lose<corr>;</corr> be lost.

Mawalan ang[**typo: n~g] hiya-v-To become shameless;
lose one's sense of <corr sic=same resp=e>shame</corr>

[**out of order]Mawala ang dili-v-To lose one's sense
of honor,

Mawalan[**matched scan] ang[**typo: n~g] pitagan-v-To lose one's
selfrespect<corr>;</corr> become rude or <corr sic=imprudent resp=e>impudent</corr>;
be disrespectful.

Mawatasan-v-To understand; comprehend;
know.

May-v-To have; possess<corr sic=",">;</corr> contain<corr sic=",">;</corr> hold.

Mayabang-a-Boasting; bragging; boastful;
vaunting; conceited; blown; vainproud[**typo: vain; proud];
haughty; whimsical.

Mayabang (ang)[**matched scan]-n-Boaster<corr sic=",">;</corr> bragger.

Mayabong-a-Leafy; luxuriant; branchy;
sprightly.

Mayaman-a-Rich<corr>;</corr> potent; wealthy; opulent;
powerful; eminent; affluent.

Mayamot-v-To disgust; vex; displease;
molest<corr>;</corr> loathe; irritate<corr>;</corr> lose patience.

Mayamutin-a-Tedious; tiresome<corr>;</corr> disgusting
irksome; loathe some[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr> irritable<corr>;</corr>
vexatious.[**matched scan]

[**next 3 entries are out of order]
May anim na panulukan-a-Sixcornered;

May apat na mukha-a-Four faced; quadrilateral;
having four faces.

May apat na paa-a-Fourfooted; quadruped.[**matched scan]

May ari-n-Owner; proprietor[**Errata]; lord;
master.

May ari n~g daong-n-Shipowner.

May ari n~g gilin~gin-n-Miller; millowner.

May asin-a-Salty<corr sic=":">;</corr> briny; saline.

May bait-a-Judicious; prudent; discreet.

May buig-a-Bunchy; full of bunches.

May buto-a-Bony.

May damdam-a-Suffering; sick; indisposed;
feeling; patient.

May dan~gal-a-Honorable<corr>;</corr> illustrious; noble;
gentlemanly<corr sic=",">;</corr> honest.

May daya-a-Counterfeit; false; cheating.

May duda-a-Doubtful; mistrustful.

May dunong-a-Wise; intelligent; apt<corr>;</corr>
erudite; knowing; fit<corr>;</corr> learned.

May galit-a-Angry; mad.

May gawa-n-Author; maker.

May gawa-a-Busy.

May guhit-a-Striped; full of line.

May gusto[**matched scan]-a-Voluntary.

May gusto-adv.-Volantarily.

May haligi-a-Columnar.

May halong lupa-a-Terrene<corr sic=",">;</corr> earthy

May hanga-a-Limited; finite; bounded.

<pb n=179>

May isip-a-Rational; prudent; judicious;
sensible.

May kamandag-a-Baneful; poisonous.

May kapal-n-Creator.

May kasalanan-a-Culprit; delinquent.

May katawan-a-Corporeal; corpulent;
plump; fat; obese.

May katowiran-a-<corr sic=Justificable resp=e>Justifiable</corr>.

May katungculan -n-Officeholder; <corr sic=One>one</corr>
who has a trade or vocation.

May katungculan magbayad-n-Paymaster.

May kaya-a-Competent; fit; able; apt;
proper; sufficient; enough.

May lalang-n-Creator.

May lan~gib-a-Scabby.

May lipak-a-Callous.

May luha-a-Weeping.

May malaking nasa-a-Greedy; ravenous;
very desirous.

May mansa-a-Stained; spotted; dirty.

[**out of order]May masamang kalooban-a-Malevolent;
malignant; malicious; angry.

May maraming butas-a-Cellular.

May maraming hitsura-a-Multiform.

May nana-a-Purulent.

May n~gipin-a-Toothed.

Mayo-n-May.

May pan~gintindi-a-Intelligent; skillful;
learned; knowing; wise.

May pagitan-adv.-At intervals; by
intervals.

May pagcaulolulol[**s/b pagkaulolulol to follow alphab order]-a-Foolish; silly; half-witted.[**restored EOL -, hyphenated elsewhere]

May pagsala-a-Fallable.

[**out of order]May pakinabang-a-Profitable<corr>;</corr> useful;
gainful; proficious[**typo: proficuous (obsolete word)].

May pahid na sebo-a-Greasy; greased.

May pakpak-a-Pennate.

May pan~gako-a-Votary.

May pan~ganib-a-Dangerous; perilous;
hazardous.

May pan~ganib mahulog-a-<corr sic=Wevering resp=e>Wavering</corr>;
unsteady; unstable.

May pan~ganib mahulog-adv.[**matched scan]-Waveringly.

May pawis-a-Sweaty; perspiring.

May pitagan-a-Respectful; honorable;
noble; gentlemanly.

May puri-a-Honorable; honest; pure;
just; fair; <corr sic=virgen resp=e>virgin</corr>.

May putik-a-Muddy; miry.

Mayroon-v-To have; possess; <corr sic=cointain>contain</corr>.

May sakit-a-Sick; ill; unwell; infirm;
patient.

May sakit-n-Patient; sufferer; sick
person.

May sala-a-Faulty; guilty; delinquent;
amiss.

May sala-n-Delinquent[**Errata]; offender; criminal.

<pb n=180>

May salapi-a-[**matched scan]Rich<corr>;</corr> wealthy.

May sugat-a-[**matched scan]Wounded

May sun~gay-a- Horned.

May supil sa kamatayan a- Mortal; fatal<corr>;</corr>
deadly.

May sutla-a Silken.

May tali-a-[**matched scan]Subject; tied<corr>;</corr> knotted; bound.

May tan~gan[**typo: tan~ga][**-a]-Motheaten.

May tanim sa loob-a- Angry, wroth;
odious

May tatlong n~gipin a- Trident.

May tatlong n~gipin-n- Trident.

May tatlong panulukan-a- Triangular

May tatlong panulukan-n- Triangle

May tatlong wika-a- Trilenguar[**Errata (sugg is Triangular but s/b Trilingual)].

May tinik-<corr sic=n>a</corr>- Thorny; spiny

May tubo-a- Profitable; gainful.

May tuka-a- Beaked.

May tulis-a- <corr sic=Poited>Pointed</corr><corr>;</corr> sharp

May uban-a- Hoary<corr sic=",">;</corr> white headed;
chaffy.

Mayun~gib-a- Pitted; full of holes

May uod-a- Wormeaten.

May usap-n- Litigant.

Mayuscula-n- Capital letter.

May utang n- Debtor.

May walong silaba-a- Octosyllabic

Melon-n- Melon.

Mercurio-<corr sic=u>n</corr>- Mercury.

Mey-v- To have; possess; contain.

Microbe[**s/b Microbio]-<corr sic=u>n</corr>- Microbe

Minamahal-<corr sic=v>n</corr>- Beloved; dear; favorite;
darling.

Minana-a- Inherited.

Mina n~g asin-n- Salt mine.

Minindal-n- Luncheon[**Errata]<corr sic=":">;</corr> lunch.

Mitsa-n- Lamp-which[**Errata: wick (for 'which')]; <corr sic=which resp=e>wick</corr>.

Mo pro.- Thy; thine; your; yours.

<corr sic=Molinette>Molinete</corr>-n- Windlass.

Monja-n- Nun[**Errata].

Monje-n- Monk.

Muang-a- Foolish<corr sic=",">;</corr> ignorant.<corr>;</corr> artless;
simple.

Mugmog-n- Gargle.

Mugmogin-v- To gargle.

Muhi-n- Molestation<corr>;</corr> vexation[**Errata]; disgust;
adhorence[**Errata: abhorrence]; hardship; detestation; grievance.

Muhiin-a- Disgusting; <corr sic=teidous resp=e>tedious</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> irritable;
impatient; <corr sic=loathesome>loathsome</corr>.

Mukha-n- Face; aspect; surface; shape;
outside; countenance; looks; front;
cover; side.

Mukhaan-v- To face; make a face.

Mukha n~g dahon n~g libro-n- Page of a book.

Mukhang angel-a- Seraphic<corr>;</corr> angelic.

Mula -n- Beginning; origination; origin.

Múla-prep.- Since; after.

<pb n=181>

Mula adv. Since; after.

Mulaan v-To commence; begin; undertake;
attempt.

Mulain-v-To commence; begin<corr>;</corr> attempt;
undertake<corr sic=",">;</corr> examine<corr sic=",">;</corr> investigate.

Muli-adv.-Again.

Mulihin-v-To grind.

Muliing-a-Foolish.

Muling bumalik-v-To return<corr sic=",">;</corr> come back
again.

Muling gawin-v-To reproduce; do again;
do over.

Muling ibigkis-v-To rebundle<corr>;</corr> rebind.

Muling ipatnugot-v-To renew a lease or
contract

Muling kathain-v-To reproduce.

Muling mabuhay-v-To acquire new life;
revive.

Muling magsisui-v-To resprout.

Muling magsupling-v-To resprout.

Muling tingnan-v-To review; revise.

Multa-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Mulct<corr>;</corr> fine; forfeit.

Multahan v-To fine; mulct; make pay a
forfeit.

Multiplicando-n-Multiplicand.

Muna-adv.-Before; prior.

Mundo-n World.

Muni-n-Peanut.

Munika-n-Doll.

Munti-a-Small; little.

Munti ang halaga-a-Trifling; light; of no
consequence.

Munting duende n-Elfin.

Munting damdam-n-Indisposition.

Munting trabaho-n-Chore

Muog-n-Rampart; wall.

[**out of order]Munting piraso a~g[**typo: n~g] lupa n-Plot; plat.

Mura-a-Cheap; valueless<corr sic=",">;</corr> tender; young;
modern<corr sic=",">;</corr> new; recent.

Mura n-Curse; imprecation.

Mura ang halaga a-Cheap; valueless;
trifling.

Murahin-v-To insult; revile; abuse;
affront; accurse; curse; detract; vilify;
vituperate.

Muselina-n-Muslin.

Música-n-Music.

Músico-n-Musician.

Muson-n-Landmark.

Mustasa n-Mustard; mustard greens.

Mutain-n Soreeyed.

Mutya n-Love;

Mutyang a-Beloved; dear, darling.



<div1 type=Letter n=N>
<head>N</head>


Na-prop[**typo: pro.]-.Who; which; that<corr sic=",">;</corr> whom.

Naagaw tulog-a-Sleepy; drowsy.

Naayon sa matowid-a-Just; fair<corr sic=",">;</corr> equitable;
honorable; according to right.

Naayos-a-Shipshape; arranged.

Naayos sa mabuting caugalian-a Just;
simple; sacred; honorable; noble; virtuous.

Naayos sa matowid-a-Lawful; just; according
to law.

Nababagay-a-Convenient; fit; proper;
suitable; proportional; corresponding.

<corr sic="Naban~git">Nabangit</corr>-a-Said; aforesaid; aforementioned;
abovementioned.

Nabibitin a-Pendant; hanging; unpaid.

Nabubuhay sa limos-n-Beggar.

Nabubukod-a-Solitary; separated; lone;
extra; especial; special; extraordinary;
exceptional; rare<corr>;</corr> uncommon.

Nabubulok-a-Corrupting.

Nabulok-a-Corrupt.

Nadadapat-a-Proper; fit; merited; corresponding.

Nadadaya-a-Delusive; cheating; <corr sic=decieving resp=e>deceiving</corr>.

Nadarapat-a-Proper<corr sic=",">;</corr> fit; corresponding;
merited.

Nadarapat sa <corr sic=silong>ilong</corr>-a-Nasal; pertaining;[**extra ;]
to the nose.

<pb n=182>

Nagaabot n-Giver; donator<corr sic=",">;</corr> donor.

Nagalay-n-Dedication; <corr sic=give>giver</corr>; donator;
donor.[**matched scan]

Nag-aalon-alon a-Wavy; undulatory.

Nag ampon-a-Tutelary; helpful; tutelar;
protecting.

Nag aantok-a-Sleepy; drowsy; somnambulent.

Nagaaral-n Student; Scholar; pupil; disciple.

Nagaaraw-n-Laborer; journeyman; <corr sic=mercinary resp=e>mercenary</corr>.

Nagaasahan-a-Expectant.

Nagaaso-a-Smoky; full of <corr sic=Smoke>smoke</corr>.

Nagagalit-a-Angry; mad; hostile;

Nagagatid-v-To be speechless; unable
to explain.

Nagagayak-a-Prepared; provident; ready.

Nagbabalita n-Narraton[**matched scan][**Errata: Narrator]; relater; reporter;
herald.

Nagbabalita a-Monitory; newsy; admonitory.

Nagbabanalbanalan-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Hypocritical;
false; <corr sic=demur resp=e>demure</corr>.

Nagbabayad-a-Retributive; retributing;
paying.

Nagbabayad-n-Payer; he who pays.

Nagbibigay-n-Giver; donor.

<pb n=183>

Nagbibili-n-Buyer; seller.

Nagbibili n~g asin-n Salt dealer.

Nagbibintang-n-Imputor[**typo: Imputer (obsolete word)]<corr>;</corr> accuser.

Nagbibisita-n-Visitor.

Nagbigti n-Suicide.

Nagbubuig-a-Bunchy; full of bunches
or clusters.

Nagbubun~ga-n-Fertilizer.

<corr sic=Nagdadakop>Nagdadahop</corr>-a-Needy; in want.

Nagdadalit-n-Vocalist.

Nagdadalamhati-n-Sorrowful; low spirited<corr sic=":">;</corr>
dejected.

<corr sic=Nadamdam>Nagdamdam</corr>-a-Sorrowful; low spirited.<corr>;</corr>
dejected.

Nagdaraan-a-Transitory.

Nagdidiwang-n-Celebrator; one who
celebrates.

Naghabilin n-Repositor.

Naghahalal-n-Elector; chooser.

Naghahalaman-n-Gardener<corr sic=",">;</corr> horticulturist

Naghahandog-n-<corr sic=Donater resp=e>Donator</corr>; giver; donor.

Naghahatid-n-Convoy.

<corr sic=Naghahayad>Naghahayag</corr> n-Herald; reporter.

Naghihiman-v-To exist<corr>;</corr> cause<corr sic=",">;</corr> make;
form; practice; produce.

Naghihin~galo-a-Dying<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=dear>near</corr> death.

Nag iibig-a-Loving; desirous; longing;
eager.

Nag iinainalon-a-Wavy; undulatory.

Nag iisa-a-Solitary; lone; only; sole;
singular<corr sic=",">;</corr> single; individual; particular;
especial; solus; lonely.

Nag iisa-adv.-Alone; purely; simply.

Nagising-a-Awake<corr>;</corr> watchful<corr>;</corr> lively.

Nagkakaakma-a-Uniform; agreeing; fit;
proper; convenient.

Nagka-kadugtong-ductong[**typo: Nagka-kadugtong-dugtong]-a-<corr sic=Continuos resp=e>Continuous</corr>;
lasting; <corr sic=asiduous resp=e>assiduous</corr>.

Nagkakahati-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Halved.

Nagkakaisa-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Attesting; unanimous; uniform;
confirming.

Nagka-kaloob-n-Donor<corr sic=":">;</corr> giver.

Nagka kapisan-adv.-Unanimously; uniformly;
joinedly; conjointly.

Nagka-kataon-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Accident; casualty; happening.

Nagkaroon-v.-Imp.[**s/b 'v. imp'] Had.

Nagkasala-n-<corr sic=Violater resp=e>Violator</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> sinner; delinquent;
malefactor.

Nagkataon-a-Accidental; casual; unexpected<corr sic=",">;</corr>
fortuitous; haphazard.

Nagkataon-n Contingent; accident.

Naglalakad n-Pedestrian; traveler;
walker.

Naglalako n~g asin-n-Saltdealer.

Naglalaro-n-Player.

Nagliligaw-n Lover; wooer; one who
courts.

<pb n=184>

[**out of order]Naglalaman-a-Increasing;[**,] thriving;[**,] or
growing

Nagliliwanag-a Radiant; resplendent;
shining; glittering.

Naglululan-a Containing; having.

Nagmana-n-Heir; <corr sic=lagatee>legatee</corr>.

Nagnakaw-n-Robber; peculator; thief.

Nagnanasa a-<corr sic=Desirious>Desirous</corr>; longing; eager;
greedy.

Nagniningning-a-Resplendent; glittering;
shining.

Napan~gako[**typo: Nagpan~gako]-n Votarist; votaress; votary.

Nagpapabun~ga-n-Fruit grower.

Nagpapadala-n Sender; remitee;[**not a valid word] <corr sic=remittor>remitter</corr>

Nagpapahina-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Extenuating.

Nagpapapayat-a-Extenuating.

Nagpapagayongayon-n-Tramp; hobo;
bum.

Nagpapakati-a-<corr sic=Diminuitive>Diminutive</corr>.

Nagpapakonowari-a-False; feigned.

Nagpapala as[**typo: Nagpapalakas]-a-Strengthening.

Nagpapalambot a Softening; mollifying.

Nagpapaliit-a-<corr sic=Diminuitive>Diminutive</corr>.

Nagpapalimbag-n-Editor.

Nagpapalimos-n Beggar.

Nagpapaluang a-Laxative.

Nagpapamana-n-Legator.

Nagpapastol-n-Herder; cowboy; <corr sic=herdsmen resp=e>herdsman</corr>;
herdman.

Nagpapasulsol-n-Agitator.

Nagpapaupa sa araw-n-Laborer; journeyman;
workman.[**typo 'wor man' already corrected]

Nagpipigil-n-Detainer; one who stops.

Nagpipita-a-Desirous<corr sic=",">;</corr> longing; eager.

Nagsasalawahan-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Irresolute<corr>;</corr> undecided;
flirting.

Nagsaysay-n-Narrator; relator; reporter;
analyst.

Nagsisisi-n-Penitent.

Nagsusumbong-n-Accuser; informer;
denouncer.

Nagsusugal-n-Gambler.

Nagtatangi-v-To deny; refuse.

Nagtatakbo-n-Runner.

Nagtatanim-n-Planter; farmer.

Nagtitiis-n Sufferer; patient.

Nagtitinda-n Seller<corr>;</corr> vender.

Nagtitinda n~g binhi-n-Seedsman.

Nagtitinda n~g bun~gang kahoy n-Fruit-vender.

Nagtitinda n~g m~ga pagkain-n-Grocer.

Nagtitira sa bundok-n-Mountaineer.

Nagtuturo-n-Teacher; educator.

Naguas-n-Petticoat.

Nag utos v. Imp.[**imp.]-Bade.

<corr sic=Naghahalal>Nahahalal</corr> sa katungkulan-n-Elect; the
chosen.

Náhahanga-a-Bordering; neighboring.

Nahahapis-a-Grievous; pitiful.

<pb n=185>

Nahibo-n-Victim.

Nahihiya-a-Ashamed; shy; coy; crestfallen;
mortified.

Nahuhuli-a-Last; hindmost; posterior.

Naibigan-a-Lovable.

Nais-n-Wish; desire; will; want; longing;
eagerness; hankering; lust; mind; aspiration;
cupidity; whim; anxiety.

Nais n~g sarili-n-Self-will.

Naka-aakit-a-Attractive; inductive.

Naka-aalibadbad-a-Nauseous.

Naka-aalimura-a-Outrageous; dishonorable.

Naka-aaliw-a-Loving; recreative; diverting;
comfortable.

Naka-aanyaya sa katamaran-a-Lazy; <corr sic=Indolent>indolent</corr>;
inattentive.

Naka-aaral-a-Wise; learned; sage.

Nakaahon sa m~ga utang-a-Solvent.

<corr sic=Nababagot>Nakababagot</corr>-a-Sharp; rough; mordant; disagreeable.

Nakababawas-a-<corr sic=Diminuitive>Diminutive</corr>.

Nakabibigkis-a-Bundled.

Nakabitin-a-Pensile; suspended.

Nakabubulok-a-Corruptive; putrefying.

Nakabubuti-a-Wholesome; healthful; salutary.

Nakabukod-a-Distinct; discrete; exclusive.

Nakadadaya-a-Delusive; illusive; deceitful;
affected; claptrap; sham.

Nakadayti-a-Touching; adjacent.

Nakadudulit-a-Terrifying; frightful.

Nakadudusta-a-Ignominious; disgraceful;
dishonorable; reproachful; shameful.

Nakadugtong-a-Adjunct.

Nakadugtong-n-Appendix.

Nakagagaling-n-Sanative[**? |M: valid word].

Nakagagaling[**last g not in scan--added] sa katawan-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Healthful;
wholesome.

Nakagagalit-a-Offensive; onerous; disagreeable;
unpleasant; vexatious; ugly;
immodest; homely; fastidious;
grievous.

Nakagayak-a-Prepared; ready; prompt.

Nakahahalina-a-Alluring; attractive;
instructive.

Nakahalo-a-Mixed; mingled.

Nakahanda-a-Prepared; prompt; ready;
fit.

Nakahanga-a-Bordering.

Nakaharap-a-Present.

Nakaharap-adv.-Present; in front of.

Nakahiga-a-Laid down; horizontal.

Nakahigpit-a-Tight; close; contracted.

Nakahihibo-a-Cheating; deceiving; illusive;
alluring; claptrap; guileful;
sham; simulate.

Nakahihikayat-a-Provocative; exciting[**Errata];
quarrelsome; inciting.

Nakahihila-a-Attractive; inductive.

<pb n=186>

Nakahihinayang[**typo Nakhihinayang corrected]-a-Pitiful; sad; doleful;
sorrowful.

Nakahihiya-a-Shameful; nefarious; abominable[**Errata];
hienous[**Errata: heinous]; shameless.

Nakahilig-a-Minded; inclined.

Nakahiwalay-adv.-Apart; asunder.

Nakaiisip-a-Abstracted.

Nakakain-a-Eatable; nutritious; nutritive.

Nakakalakip-adv.-Jointly; unitedly;
conjointly.

Nakakalat-a-Scattered; wide; open.

Nakakalat-adv.-Broadcast; wide.

Nakalabas-a-Free; unencumbered; independent;
exempt; unrestrained.

Nakalagay-a-Situated; situate.

Nakalaman-a-Full of meat; having
sustenance[**typo sustinence corrected].

Nakalilibang-a-Recreative; diverting.

Nakalilinis-a-Cleansing; purifying.

Nakaliliwanag-a-Luminous; luminary;
light giving.

Nakaluhod-v. p. p.-Knelt.

Nakalulugod-a-Affable; recreative; pleasing;
agreeable; comfortable; happy;
placid; gentle.

Nakalulumbay-a-Mournful; sad; melancholy;
saddening.

Nakamamangha-a-Marvelous; wonderful;
astonishing; awe inspiring.

Nakamamatay-a-Fatal; deadly.

Nakamatay-n-Murderer; cutthroat.

Nakamumuhi-a-Disagreeable; disgusting;
vexatious; aggravating.

Nakan~giti-a-Smiling; agreeable; pleasant.

Nakapagaantok-a-Sleepy; drowsy.

Nakapagkakasakit-a-Morbid; unhealthful;
sickening.

Nakapagpapalakas-a-Healthful; wholesome;
salutary.

Nakapagpapalambot-a-Softening; mollifying.

Nakapan~gin~gilabot-a-Hideous; frightful;
shocking; disgraceful; awful.

Nakapan~gin~gimbubo-a-Enviable.

Nakapapagod-a-Tiresome; tedious; anxious;
painful.

Nakapapan~git-a-Ugly; disfiguring.

Nakapipilit-a-Provocative; exciting;
persistent; inciting.

[**out of order]Nakapilipit-a-Twisted.

<corr sic=Napapawis>Nakapapawis</corr>-a-Sudorific.

Nakaraan na-a-Preterit; past; gone by.

Nakaririmarim-a-Nasty; filthy; dirty;
ugly; homely; immodest.

Nakasabit-a-Pensile; suspended.

Nakasadsad-a-Anchored.

Nakasasaklaw sa lahat-a-Universal; general.

Nakasásama-a-Harmful; bad; evil; prejudicial;
pernicious; vicious; wicked.

<pb n=187>

Nakasisindak-a-Terrifying; terrible;
awful<corr>;</corr> terrific; dreadful.

Nakasisira-a-Corruptive; pernicious;

Nakasisira n~g katawan a-Unhealthful;
sickening.

Nakasisira n~g malaki a-Destructive.

Nakasisira n~g puri a-<corr sic=Ignominous>Ignominous</corr>; disgraceful;
blighting; ugly<corr sic=",">;</corr> homely;
immodest.

Nakasusuka-a-Nauseous[**Errata].

Nakasusuklam-a Disgusting; ugly;
homely<corr sic=",">;</corr> immodest.

Nakasusunok-a-Sweet but not palatable;
<corr sic=sickening>sickeningly</corr> sweet.

Nakasusuya-a-Sweet but not palatable;
<corr sic=sickening>sickeningly</corr> sweet.

Nakataan sa DIOS-a-Sacred; holy.

Nakatagilid-adv.-Sidewise.

Nakatataho a Learned.

Nakatatakot a-Timorous<corr sic=",">;</corr> timid; fearful.

Nakatatalastas-a-Learned; wise.

Nakatatawa-a-Laughable<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=ludricous resp=e>ludicrous</corr>; facetious<corr sic=",">;</corr>
jocose<corr sic=",">;</corr> good natured.

Nakatatawag sa iba-a-Attractive; alluring<corr>;</corr>
inductive.

Nakatayo a-Perpendicular.

Nakatitibay a-Strengthening; corroborative.

Nakatotowa-a-Cheerful; entertaining<corr>;</corr>
happy; joyful.

Nakatutulong-a-Co-operative.

Nakatuñgo a-Directory.

Nakatutuwa a-Pleasing; happy; entertaining<corr sic=",">;</corr>
cheering; cheerful<corr sic=",">;</corr> joyous.

Nakatutuyo[**matched scan] a-Dessicated.

Nakaupo-a-Sitting.

Nakaupo-v. p. p<corr>.</corr> -Sat.

Nakaw-n-Theft<corr>;</corr> robbery.

Nakawala-a-Astray.

Nakawin-v To steal; rob; plunder<corr sic=",">;</corr> peculate;
filch; thieve.

Nakayamot a-Grievous; vexatious.

<corr sic=Nayayayamot>Nakayayamot</corr> a-Fastidious; disagreeable;
tedious; unpleasant; offensive.

Nakita-n-That which was seen.

Nakita-v-[**hyphen s/b space]imp. Saw.

Nakita[**typo 'Na;ita' corrected]-n-Wages; salary; earnings.

Nalaban a Opposite; adverse; contrary.

Nalalahok-a-Mixed; mingled.

Nalalayo-a-Distant; far<corr sic=",">;</corr> remote.

Nalalaman-v imp.-Knew.

Naliligaya-a Glad; content; joyful.

Nalilihim-a-Secret; confidential.

Nalilimutan-a-Forgetful.

Nalimutan v. imp.-Forgotten; forsaken.

Nalulugod-a Happy; glad; gay; cheerful;
content.

Namaga-a-Turgid.

Namamagitan-a-Intervening; intermediate;
mediating.

<pb n=188>

Namamanhid-a-Numb.

Namamaos a-Husky.

[**out of order]Namaman~ginoon-v-To hunt a superior;
recognize one's superiors.

Naman-adv<corr>.</corr> -Also; likewise<corr sic=",">;</corr> moreover;
even; still; yet; as yet; never theless<corr>;</corr>
equally; evenly.

Namatay-v. imp<corr>.</corr>-Died<corr>;</corr> dead.

Namimili n~g asin n-Saltbuyer.

Naminami-<corr sic=n>a</corr> Nauseous<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=loathesome>loathsome</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> despicable.

Naminami <corr sic=a>n</corr>-Nausea; despicableness.

Namnam-n-Taste<corr sic=",">;</corr> relish<corr>;</corr> pleasure; delight<corr sic=",">;</corr>
choice; caprice<corr>;</corr> mind.

Namnamin-v-To taste<corr sic=",">;</corr> relish<corr>;</corr> like; enjoy.

Namumukod-a-Singular; single<corr>;</corr> individual<corr sic=",">;</corr>
particular; surpassing; excellent.

Namumuho ang dugo-v-To contuse.

Namumula-a-Reddish.

Namumula-v-To become red.

Namumun~ga v-<corr sic=Te>To</corr> bear fruit.

Namumuti-v-To whiten; become white.

Namumutla-a-Discolored; pale; pallid;
colorless.

Namumutla-v-To grow or become pale
or pallid.

Nana-n-Pus; gleet.

Nanalo-v. imp.-Won.

Nanalo-n-Victor<corr>;</corr> winner.

Nananain~ga-n-Hearer; listener; auditor.

Nang-prep.-For<corr sic=",">;</corr> about<corr>;</corr> to<corr sic=",">;</corr> in<corr sic=",">;</corr> on; with<corr>;</corr>
if; as by; on account.

Nan~gagaw n~g isang babayi-n-Rapist;
ravisher.

Nan~gan~galakal n~g puri n~g isang babayi
n-Pimp.

Nan~gan~ganinag-v-To be transparent.

Nan~gan~garal-n Preacher<corr>;</corr> orator; speaker.

Nan~gan~gatal-a Tremulous<corr sic=",">;</corr> quivering.

Nang hindi-v To refuse.

Nagi-inter.-Meaning disgust.

Nan~gin~gibig n-Lover.

Nan~gin~ginig-a-Tremulous<corr>;</corr> quivering.

Nan~gin~gitim-v-To blacken; become
black, dark, or brown

Nan~gis-n-Whimper; crys; obsnivel[**Errata: replace 'crys; obsnivel' w/ 'cry; sob; snivel']<corr>;</corr> whine

Nang panahong yaon-adv.-Then; at
that time.

Nangyari na-p. p.-<corr sic=done>Done</corr>.

Nangyari na-v. imp,[**.]-Did.

Nangyari na-a Preterit<corr sic=",">;</corr> past.

Nangyaring sabay-a-Simultaneous.

<corr sic=Nayayari>Nangyayari</corr>-n-Event; issue; success.

Naninigas-v-To become hard; harden.

Naninigid-a-Prickling; piquant; acrid; hot.

Nanininta-<corr sic=a>a</corr>-Lover<corr sic=":">;</corr> sweetheart.

Nanonood-n-Spectator; looker on; bystander; gazer

Nanugat-n-Wounder.

Nanunuod-n-Spectator.

<pb n=189>

Nanumpa n~g di totoo-n-Perjurer; forswearer.

Nanunuluyan-n-Lodger; boarder<corr sic=":">;</corr> guest.

Napahiya v-To be ashamed.

Napakadakila-a-Excellent; magnificent;
potent; fine; grand.

Napakatulis a Very sharp.

Napakatuyo-a-Very dry.

Napapagal-a-Tiresome<corr sic=",">;</corr> fatiguing; grievous.

Napapaloob-adv.-<corr sic=Withim resp=e>Within</corr>.

Nararamdaman a-Sensitive[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> feeling; sensible;
perceptible[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr> painful.

Nararapat a-Worthy; meritable; suitable;
serving.

Nasunog-v. imp.-Burned; burnt.

Nasusuklam ang loob a Disgusted; restless;
sorrowful.

Nasusulok-v- To[**1st letter unreadable |M: T] be in the corner.

Natakpan-a-Covered.

Natatago a-Secret; hidden<corr sic=":">;</corr> dark<corr sic=":">;</corr> confidential.

Natatalaga-a.Intentional; disposed<corr sic=",">;</corr>
ready.

Natatalaga-adv<corr>.</corr> -Purposely; intentionally<corr sic=":">;</corr>
always.

Natatangi-a-To be retired; refuse; separate; divide.

Natatapat-a Proper<corr>;</corr> fit; convenient.

Natatapat-adv. Opposite; in front.

Natatapos-a-Terminable; transitory<corr>;</corr> transient.

Natay n- Cutthroat;[**'C' not present in scan but present in a TIA copy] murderer.

Natay sa ama n Patricide.

Natay sa hari-n-Regicide.

Natay sa ina-n-Matricide.

Natay sa kapwa-n-Homicide; murder.

Natay sa sarili-n-Suicide.

Natimawa-a Free<corr>;</corr> unencumbered; independent<corr sic=",">;</corr>
exempt; unrestrained.

Natotowa-a-Glad<corr>;</corr> pleased; happy; gay;
merry<corr sic=",">;</corr> cheerful; joyous; entertaining.

Naturan na a-Aforesaid; abovementioned.

Natutungcol-a-According; belonging; pertaining.

Natutungcol sa regla a-Regular; according
to rules or regulations.

Natutuwa-a-Glad; happy<corr>;</corr> free; pleased;
joyous<corr>;</corr> merry; content; contented.

Nauna-a-Foremost; first; previous; primeval.

Nauuhaw a-Thirsty; dry.

Nauukol a-To pertain or belong to.

Nauukol a-Fit; apt.

Nauukol sa-a <corr sic=Revelant resp=e>Relevant</corr>.

Nauukol sa alipin-a-Servile; slavish;
menial.

Nauukol sa alon a-Tidal; wavy.

Nauukol sa ama a-Patrimonial<corr sic=":">;</corr> paternal;
fatherly.

<pb n=190>

Nauukol sa anak-a-Filial; childish; pertaining
to children.

Nauukol sa araw -a-Solar.

Nauukol sa aso a-Canine; doggish.

Nauukol sa awit-a-Legendary.

Nauukol sa babayi a-Feminine; womanly<corr>;</corr>
womanish.

Nauukol sa baboy-a-Porcine.

Nauukol sa bakang lalaki-a-Taurine.

Nauukol sa bata a-<corr sic=Perule resp=e>Puerile</corr><corr>;</corr> childish.

Nauukol sa Bathala a-Sacred; godly;
holy.

Nauukol sa bubog-a-Vitreous.

Nauukol sa buto a Bony.

Nauukol sa kristal-a-Vitreous.

Nauukol sa dati a-Primeval.

Nauukol sa dugo-a-Sanguine; sanguinary.

Nauukol sa gatas a Milky; lacteal.

Nauukol sa gawa-a-Pertaining to work.

Nauukol sa gobierno-a-Administrative;
gobernatorial.

Nauukol sa halamanan a Horticultural.

Nauukol sa hilagaan-a-Polar<corr sic=",">;</corr> pertaining
to the north.

Nauukol sa historia-a-Historical; historic.

Nauukol sa hukom-a-Juridic; juridical.

Nauukol sa ilog-a-Fluvial.

Nauukol sa ilong-a-Nasal.

Nauukol sa infierno a Hellish; infernal.

Nauukol sa itim-a Ethiopic; ethiopian<corr sic=",">;</corr>
pertaining to black.

Nauucol[**correct sp, but s/b Nauukol to follow order] sa kaluluwa-a-Spiritual; ghostly.

Nauukol sa kalunuran a Occidental; western.

Nauucol sa kapan~ganacan a-Natal; native.

Nauukol sa karunun~gan-a-Scientific.

Nauukol sa kasal-a-Nuptial; connubial;
conjugal.

Nauukol sa katawan-a-Bodily.

Nauukol sa konvento a-Monastic.

Nauukol sa kosina a-Culinary.

Nauukol sa lalaki-a-Male; virile.

Nauukol sa lamesa-a-Tabular.

Nauukol sa laway-a-Salivous.

Nauukol sa liig-a-Jugular.

Nauukol sa likod-a-Dorsal.

Nauukol sa limbag-a-Editorial.

Nauukol sa lingo-a-Weekly.

Nauukol sa lulod-a-Tibial.

<corr sic=Nouukol>Nauukol</corr> sa lupa-a-<corr sic=Eartly resp=e>Earthly</corr>; terrene; worldly;
earthy.

Nauukol sa lupang tinubuan-a-Vernacular.

Nauukol sa pagkakasama-a-Social; companionable;
sociable.

Nauukol sa mana-a-Hereditary.

Nauukol sa m~ga kulay-a-<corr sic=Chromatis resp=e>Chromatic</corr>.

<pb n=191>

Nauukol sa pag iisip-a-Intellectual;
mental; ideal.

Nauukol sa pagkain a-Nutritious<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=nutrive>nutritive</corr>.

Nauukol sa pagkakapatid-a-Brotherly<corr>;</corr>
fraternal.

Nauukol sa pagsasaysay-a-Narrative.

Nauukol sa pagtangi-a-Negative; <corr sic=negatory resp=e>nugatory</corr>.

Nauukol sa pagtatawa-a-Laughable.

Nauukol sa panahon-a Chronic; primeval.

Nauukol sa parang-a-Rural<corr>;</corr> rustic.

Nauukol sa paskong mahaba-a-Quadrigesimal.

Nauukol sa patay-a-Obituary.

Nauukol sa puso a Cordial; sincere.

Nauukol sa religion-a-Sacred; holy.

Nauukol sa sacramento a-Sacramental.

Nauukol sa salapi-a-Pecuniary.

Nauukol sa katawohan[**typo: sang katawohan]-a National.

Nauukol sa serapin-a-Seraphic<corr sic=",">;</corr> angelic.

Nauukol sa sulat-a-Graphic.

Nauukol sa tin~gin-a-Visual.

Nauukol sa tiyan-a <corr sic=Ventrial resp=e>Ventral</corr>.

Nauukol sa umaga a-Matin.

Nauukol sa voces-a-Vocal.

Nauukol sa volcan-a-Volcanic.

Nauna[**typo: Nauuna (Nauna already listed on 189.png)] a-Primitive; former<corr sic=",">;</corr> anterior<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=preceeding resp=e>preceding</corr>.

Nauuso a-Customary; fashionable; frequent.

Nauutal-a-Tongue-tied; stuttering; stammering.

Nauutas-v To finish; terminate.

Nawala ang diwa-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Spiritless; languid;
weak; down-hearted.

Nayon-n-Suburb; district; territory; hamlet;
burg; small village.

Negro-n-Negro<corr sic=",">;</corr> ethiopian; ethiop.

<corr sic=Nuetro>Neutro</corr> a-Neuter.

N~ga-adv.-Well; then<corr sic=",">;</corr> since; therefore.

N~galan-n-Name; vocable<corr sic=":">;</corr> denomination.

N~galanan-v-To name; denominate; give
a name; nickname.

N~gala-n~gala-n-The roof of the mouth;
pharnyx[**Errata: pharynx].

N~gasab-n-Munching; crunching.

N~gatn~gat-n Gnaw; gnawing.

N~gatn~gatin-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To gnaw.

N~gayon-adv.-Now; at the present time.

N~gayon araw-adv.-To-day.

N~gayon din-adv.-Now<corr sic=":">;</corr> immediately; instantly;
plumb.

N~giaw-n Mew.

<pb n=192>

N~giba-a-Singular<corr>;</corr> individual; particular.

N~gibit-n Grimace<corr sic=",">;</corr> wry face.

N~giki-n-Chill.

N~gimi-n <corr sic=emerity resp=e>Temerity</corr>; scare; fright.

N~gin~gi-n-The edge of the eyelids or lips.

N~gipin-n-Tooth.

N~gipinin at paglapatin-v-To mortise.

N~giti-n-Smile.

N~giwi n-Grimace.

N~gumasab-v To crunch<corr sic=":">;</corr> munch.

N~gumiaw-v-To <corr sic=Mew>mew</corr>.

N~gumiki-v-To chill.

N~gumiti-v-To smile.

N~gumuso-v-To pout; pucker.

N~gumuya-v-To masticate; chew.

N~guni conj.-But<corr sic=",">;</corr> nevertheless<corr sic=",">;</corr> except;
yet.

N~guso-n Upper lip.

N~guso n~g baboy ó hayop n Snout; nose.

N~gusuan-a-Longsnouted.

N~gusuyan-v-To point with the nose.

N~guyain-v-To chew; masticate.

Ni prep.-To; of; from; <corr sic=wit resp=e>with</corr><corr>;</corr> on; by; for.

Nila-pro.-Their; theirs.

Nilay-n-Thought; meditation<corr sic=",">;</corr> idea.

Nilayin-v-To think; muse<corr sic=",">;</corr> meditate[**Errata];
contemplate; consider.

Nilimbag-n-Pamphlet; printed matter;
edition.

Ninakaw-n-Theft; robbery; that which
has been stolen.

Nin~gas-n-Fervency; flame; ferventness;[**doesn't seem to be a valid word]
ardency.

Ningning-n-Luster[**Errata]<corr sic=",">;</corr> glitter<corr>;</corr> brilliancy;
brightness<corr>;</corr> shine; refulgency; refulgence<corr sic=",">;</corr>
scintilla; shimmer<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=gleen resp=e>gleam</corr>.

Niog n Coconut.

Nipis n-Thinness.

Nipisan-v-To thin<corr>;</corr> make thin.

Niya pro.-His; her<corr>;</corr> it's[**Errata: its]; hers.

Niyon-adv.-Then; at that time.

Noo-n-Forehead.

Noon-adv.-Then; at that time; when.

Nunal-n-Mole.

Nuno-n Grandfather; grandmother; spectre;
specter; <corr sic=spight resp=e>spright</corr>; <corr sic=pantom resp=e>phantom</corr>.

Nuno sa talampakan-n Great; great-grandfather[**typo: Great-great-grandfather (there's only 1 defn here)].

Nutnut[**typo: Nutnot (to follow alphab order; also no 'nutnut' elsewhere]-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Ravellings.

Nutnotin-v-To <corr sic=unravell>unravel</corr>.

Nuynoy n-Exploration; examination.

Nuynoyin-v-To explore; examine; name<corr sic=",">;</corr>
specify.



<div1 type=Letter n=O>
<head>O</head>


Octubre-n-October.

Onza-n-Ounce.

Oo-adv<corr>.</corr>-Yes; sure<corr sic=",">;</corr> aye<corr sic=":">;</corr> yea; indeed.

O opo[**typo: Opo (for 'O opo')]-adv. Yes sir;[**there's a - after 'Yes' in a TIA copy, like in the next defn] yes-ma'am.

<pb n=193>

Oras-n Hour<corr>;</corr> time.

Orasion-n-Orison<corr sic=",">;</corr> even; eve.

Oras n~g camatayan-n-The hour of death.

[**out of order]Orasan-n-Clock<corr>;</corr> watch; timepiece.

Ordenanza-n <corr sic=Ordenance resp=e>Ordinance</corr><corr>;</corr> bylaw[**matched scan].

Oropel n-Tinsel.

Oroy.-inter<corr>.</corr>-Begone; get out[**typo 'gitout' corrected]; hum.

Owang.-n-Horned bug which resembles[**Errata] the
june bug.

Oyam.-n-Mockery; scoffery;[**does not seem to be a valid word; maybe replace with 'scoffing'] jeer; sneer;
scoff; hoax.

Oyamin.-v-To ridicule[**Errata]<corr sic=",">;</corr> scoff<corr sic=",">;</corr> jeer.



<div1 type=Letter n=P>
<head>P</head>


Pa-adv.-Yet; still<corr sic=",">;</corr> notwith standing.

Paa n-Foot

Paalam-n-Goodbye; adieu<corr sic=":">;</corr> valediction;
valedictory.

Paalisin-v-To dismiss; send away; put
out<corr>;</corr> dispel.

Paamoin-v To tame; domesticate.

Paamuin-v-To tame<corr>;</corr> domesticate.

Paa n~g ibon ó hayop na matulis[**typo matilis corrected] ang
kuko-n-Talon; claw.

[**out of order]Paanayarin-v-To soften; mollify; mitigate.

Paano-adv.-How; as; why; in what manner.

Paano iyan-How is that.

Paano na ay hindi-By now means; in no
degree.

Paasahan-v To give hope.

<corr sic=Paaasohan>Paasohan</corr> v-To make or cause to
smoke.

Pa asohan-n-Smoke stack; chimney.

Paasohin-v-To smoke<corr sic=",">;</corr> fumigate.

Pababain-v-To lower.

Pababain ang loob-v-To humble; humiliate<corr>;</corr>
tame; dishearten.

Pabalik-a-Reverse<corr>;</corr> backward.

Pabalikan-v-To reverse; rebut.

Pabaliktad a Contrary<corr sic=",">;</corr> reversed.

Paban~gisin-v-To make wild or fierce.

Paban~go n-Perfume<corr sic=",">;</corr> odor.

Paban~gohan-v To perfume.

Pabaya-a-Indolent; neglectful; lazy;
negligent<corr>;</corr> careless<corr sic=",">;</corr> heedless; injudicious<corr>;</corr>
indescreet[**Errata: indiscreet]<corr sic=",">;</corr> inert; forgetful;
indifferent; devious; inadvertent;
improvident; slovenly; slouchy.

Pabayaan-v-To neglect; omit; forget;
overlook; abandon; countenance; quit<corr sic=",">;</corr>
leave; let; relinquish; forsake.

Pabalun~gan-n-Spring.

Pabigat-n-Weight<corr>;</corr> burden; ballast.

Pabiglabigla-adv.-Hastily; hurriedly;
precipitately.

Pabilin-n Compliments; message; errand;
commission.

Pabuis-n-Interest; profit; gain.

Pabulabukin sa lalamunan-v-To gargle.

Pabuya-n-Premium; prize; reward; bounty;
encouragement; inducement; stimulant.

<pb n=194>

Padakilain.-v-To extol.<corr>;</corr> exalt; sublimate;
elevate; magnify.

Padaluyan n~g tubig.-n-Canal; gutter;
drain.

Padapa.-a-Prone<corr>;</corr> facedown

Pader na lupa.-n-Mud-wall.

Padilagin.-v-To embellish<corr sic=":">;</corr> aggrandize;
beautify; adorn<corr sic=",">;</corr> emboss; raise; elevate;
illustrate.

Padilimin.-v-To blacken; darken; blind<corr sic=":">;</corr>
obscure.

Padparan.-v-To pare<corr>;</corr> shorten; cut away;
delineate.

Padparin.-v-To equalize; match; make;[**extra ;]
equal.

Padron.-n-Census.

Pag aagawan.-n-Scrambling; snatching;
scrambling match.

Pag aalaala.-n-Remembrance; reflexion;
thought<corr>;</corr> thinking; meditation; contemplation.

Pag aalab n~g loob.-n-Passion; rage; anger;
strong love.

Pag aalaga.-n-Tutelage<corr>;</corr> education<corr>;</corr> breeding;
taking care of; bringing up.

Pag aalay.-n-Dedication; consecration;
present; offer; gift.

Pag aalis.-n-Going; leaving; evacuation.

Pag-aaliw.-n-Diversion; sport; merry-*making;
leisure[**Errata]; recreation; consolation;
comfort; entertainment; amusement;
pastime.

Pag aalsa.-n-Rebellion; uprising; insurrection;
mutiny; riot.

Pag aampon.-n-Protection<corr>;</corr> support; <corr sic=maintainance>maintenance</corr>;
kindness; favor; patronage<corr>;</corr>
help; aid; tutelage.

Pa gaanin[**typo: Pagaanin].-v-To lighten<corr sic=",">;</corr> alleviate[**Errata]; make
lighter.

Pag aanito.-n-Idolatry; inordinate love.

Pag aanyaya.-n-Invitation.

Pag aapoy.-n-Kindling; ignition; setting
on fire.

Pag aaral.-n-Study; learning; instruction;
apprenticeship.

Pag aari.-n-Fortune; wealth; estate farm.

Pag aari sa salaping buisan.-n-Mortgage;
pledge; security.

Pag aasawa sa dalawa.-n-Bigamy.

<pb n=195>

Pag aaway-n-Fight; war; combat; dispute;
quarrel; conflict; contest; disagreement.

Pag abuloy-n-Aid; help; succor; assistance.

Pag agap-n-Activity; lacrity; quickness;
prevention.

Pag agaw-n-Scrambling; snatching;
rape; pillage; plundering; marauding

Pag ahit-n-Shave<corr sic=":">;</corr> shaving.

Pag ahon-n-Going up; ascendency<corr sic=",">;</corr>
mounting.

Pag akay-n-Leading; teaching; drawing.

Pag akyat-n-Ascension<corr>;</corr> ascendency.

Pagal-n-Fatigue; hardship; weariness;
molestation; work.

Pagal-a-Wearisome; tiresome; fatuiging;[**typo fatiging corrected]
painful.

Pagálá[**typo: Pagalá]-n-Pelican.

Pag alan~gan n~g loob-a-Uncertainty; perplexity;
irresolution; wavering; hesitation;
suspicion; suspense.

Pag alimura-n-Insult<corr>;</corr> abuse; reproach;
slander; denunciation.

[**out of order]Pag alalay n-Support; help; assistance.

Pagalin~gin-v-To cure; heal; mend;
heighten; extol.

Pagalin~gin-v-To clean or clear land;
prepare brush land for planting.

Pag alipusta-n-Insult; abuse; <corr sic=effence>offence</corr>;
effrontry[**Errata: effrontery]; contempt<corr>;</corr> denunciation; <corr sic=vituperotion>vituperation</corr>;
vilification; injury; abusiveness.

Pagalis-n-Start; departure; egress;
agression[**Errata: aggression]; exodus.

Pagalitan-v-To anger<corr>;</corr> make angry.

Pag alitan-n-Cause of a quarrel.

Pag ambag-n-Contribution; subscription;
tax.

Pagandahin-v-To beautify; embellish;
adorn; decorate; emboss.

Pag an~gil-n-Growling; snarling; grumbling.

Pag ani n-Crop; harvest.

Pagano-n Pagan.

Pagapan-adv.-Creepingly.

Pag apaw-n-Inundation; overflow.

Pag api-n-Grievance.

Pag apid-n-Adultery.

Pag <corr sic=aguhap>apuhap</corr>-n-Groping; hunting for anything
by feeling; blind man's stick.

Pag asa-n[**matched scan] Hope; expectancy.

Pag asiste-n-Help; assistance; aid.

Pag ato-<corr sic=j>n</corr>-Poise.

Pag ayaw-n-Refusal<corr>;</corr> denial; quitting.

Pagayongayon a-Lazy; indolent; idle;
careless; negligent; wandering; slipshod<corr>;</corr>
harumscarum.

Pagayongayon-adv<corr>.</corr>-Indolently; carelessly;
lazily; negligently.

<pb n=196>

Pag ayusin-v-To arrange; regulate; set
in order.

Pagbaba-n-Descent; <corr sic=descencion>descension</corr>.

Pagbabadbad-n Steeping<corr sic=",">;</corr> soaking; wetting.

Pagbabag-n-Fight; mutiny<corr sic=":">;</corr> riot.

Pagbabaga-n Kindling; ignition<corr>;</corr> setting
on fire.

Pagbabago n Renewing<corr sic=",">;</corr> change; alteration<corr sic=":">;</corr>
transfiguration; metamorphosis.

Pagbabagong lakas n Convalescence<corr sic=":">;</corr> recovery.

Pagbabahagi-n Partition<corr>;</corr> division.

Pagbabahin n Sneezing; sneeze.

Pagbabahog n Incorporation.

Pagbabaka n War; fight; conflict; fray<corr>;</corr>
combat; dispute.

Pagbabala-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Threat<corr>;</corr> menace; intention.

Pagbabalbas n Flattery.

Pagbabalayi-n Wedding; nuptials.

Pagbabalibag n Throw<corr sic=",">;</corr> cast; casualty.

Pagbabalintuna n Doing of anything by
another, that should be done by one's-self<corr>;</corr>
reverse<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=perpersity resp=e>perversity</corr>; perverseness.

Pagbabalita-n-Narration<corr>;</corr> relation; notification<corr>;</corr>
reference<corr sic=":">;</corr> telling of news.

<corr sic=Pagbabaliwas>Pagbabaliwag</corr> n Traffic; trading; commerce.

Pagbabalot-n-Package; wrapping; baling.

Pagbabaluktot-n-The bending; clinching.

Pagbabanal n Virtue; sanctification; virtuousness<corr sic=",">;</corr>
purity<corr sic=",">;</corr> chastity.

Pagbabasta n~g kalakal n-Packing; package<corr sic=":">;</corr>
baling.

Pagbabawas n-<corr sic=Dimunition>Diminution</corr>; decline;
fall.

Pagbabayad-n Payment; pay; retribution-<corr>;</corr>
reward; disbursement; quittance.

Pagbabayad n~g lubos-n-Satisfaction; gratification;
<corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>.

Pagbabayad n~g upa n-Payment; <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>.

Pagbagayin v-To adjust; adapt; fit; make
proper or convenient.

Pagbago n-Renewal; alteration; renewing;
transition.

Pagbaha n-Overflow; inundation.

Pagbala n-Threat; challenge; impeachment.

Pagbalak-n-Intention: <corr sic=innouncement>announcement</corr>.

Pagbalik n-Return; devolution.

Pagbanalbanalan-n Hypocrisy[**Errata].

Pagbangit n Mention; allusion.

Pagbása n-Wetting; moistening.

Pagbása n Reading.

Pagbatak n Pull; haul; tug; draw; pulling;
tugging; regress,

Pagbati n Salutation; greeting; salute.

Pagbatiin-v-To salute; <corr sic="g reet">greet</corr>; reconcile.

Pagbawalan-n Prohibition; prohibiting.

<pb n=197>

Pagbawalan-v-To prohibit; deprive;
suspend.

Pagbawan[**This a typo for Paghawan, bu Paghawan already appears on 200.png w/ the same defn] n~g kahoy-n-The felling of
trees.

Pagbawas-n-Dwindle.

Pagbawi-n-Recovery; redemption[**Errata]; redeeming;
retaliation.

Pagbayaran-n-Payment; <corr sic=recompence>recompense</corr>.

Pagbibigay-n-Giving<corr>;</corr> offer; gift<corr>;</corr> bequest;
legacy; present; presentation; gratuity.

Pagbibigay n~g upa-n-Payment.

Pagbibigay parte-n-Notification; participation.

Pagbibigla-n-Haste; hurry; confusion;
tumult; speed.

Pagbibilang-n-Count; counting; enumeration.

Pagbibilango-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Imprisonment; imprisoning.

Pagbibilin-n-Commission; command;
errand; charge; request; recommendation.

Pagbibilog-n-Rotation; rounding sum.

Pagbibintang-n-Imputation; accusation<corr sic=":">;</corr>
indiction; indictment.

Pagbibintan~gan-v-To accuse; blame;
impeach.

Pagbibithay-n-Sifting; bolting.

Pagbigat-n-Gravity; weight; importance.

Pagbigkas-n-Pronunciation; publication;
saying of anything without thinking.

Pagbigyang lingkod-n-Courtship; lovemaking.

Pagbigyang loob-n-Indulgence; compliance.

Pagbitakan-n-Cracking; splitting.

Pagbitakin-v-To crack; split.

Pagbual-n-Tumbling; tumble; demolition.

Pagbububo-n-Founding; casting; fusion;
smelting.

Pagbubugbog-n-Bruise; contusion.

Pagbubuhat-n-Origin; <corr sic=baginwing resp=e>beginning</corr>; raising;
lifting.

Pagbubucod[**correct sp, but s/b Pagbubukod to follow alphab order]-n-Separation; segregation;
preclusion.

Pagbubula-n-Effervescence; effervescency.

Pagbubulaybulay-n-Meditation; contemplation;
musing; thought; idea.

Pagbubulungbulun~gan-n-Whisper; whispering;
gossip; gossiping.

Pagbubuno-n-Wrestling; wrestle; scuffling.

Pagbugaw-n-Scaring; fright.

Pagbugbog-n-Contusion; bruise.

Pagbuhat-n-Lift; raising.

Pagbuhos-n-Effusion; pouring.

Pagbukal-n-Springing up; dawing[**dewing? |M: no, stet]; <corr sic=emination>emanation</corr>.

Pagbuli-n-Polish.

<pb n=198>

Pagbulok-n-Rottening; pus; corruption;
decomposition.

Pagbunot-n-Eradication; pulling up.

Pagbutasbutasin parang bithay-n-Perforation.

Pagbuti-n-Improvement; improving;
progress; advancement; growth<corr>;</corr> addition.

Pagdabog-n-Grumbling; growling; murmuring.

Pagdadala-n-Carrying; carriage; transportation;
transporting.

Pagdadahilan-n-Excuse; plea; allowance;
apology

Pagdadalawahin n-Bi-section.

Pagdadaop-n-Dispute<corr>;</corr> disagreement; the
closing;[**extra ;] of two things.

Pagdahak-n-Hawk<corr sic=":">;</corr> hawking.

Pagdahas n-Force; courage; vigor; fortitude<corr sic=",">;</corr>
valor; violence; coercion[**Errata].

Pagdadalhin-n Transportation.

Pagdaing-n Lamentation; entreaty;
imploration; expostulation.

Pagdaka-adv.-Soon; immediately; instantly;
suddenly<corr sic=",">;</corr> right away; presently<corr sic=":">;</corr> speedily.

Pagdaka-a-Sudden; unexpected; immediate; plumb.

Pagdakip-n-Seizure<corr sic=":">;</corr> capture.

Pagdalan~gin-v-To request<corr sic=",">;</corr> entreat; petition;
pray.

Pagdalaw-n Visit; visitation.

Pagdalo-n-Succor; assistance<corr sic=",">;</corr> aid; help.

Pagdama-n Moistening.

Pagdamay-n-Implication<corr>;</corr> inculpation.

Pagdamdam-n-Sentiment; perception;
feeling<corr sic=":">;</corr> sensation; indisposition.

Pagdami n-Increase; multiplication;
proficiency.

Pagdaraan-n-Passing; review.

Pagdaragdag-n-Addition; increase.

Pagdaragdag n~g lakas n-Reinforcement.

Pagdaramdam n Suffering; feeling<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=suffarence>sufferance</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr>
indisposition; sensation.

<corr sic=Pegdarasal>Pagdarasal</corr>-n-Prayer.

Pagdaraya-n-Cheating; allurement; deceit;
fiction.

Pagdatal-n-Arrival; coming.

Pagdating-n Arrival; coming.

Pagdayo-n-Visit; visitation; going to a
place for a certain purpose.

Pagdedeposito-n-Depositing; deposition.

Pagdedestiero n-Deportation; banishment;
exile

Pagdidikit-n Gluing; co-hesion; coherence;
coherency.

Pagdidilidili-n-Meditation; musing<corr>;</corr> contemplation.

Pagdidilig-n-Sprinkling<corr>;</corr> watering.

Pagdidilim n~g araw-n-Eclipse of the sun

<pb n=199>

Pagdidilim n~g buan-n-Eclipse of the moon.

Pagdidiwang n-Celebration.

Pagdool-n-Perversion<corr>;</corr> perversity; perverseness;
<corr sic=deprevation>deprivation</corr>.

Pagdowahagi n-Persecution; illtreatment<corr>;</corr>
abuse.

Pagdowahagiin-v-To persecute; illtreat;
abuse

Pagduduble n-Doubling<corr sic=":">;</corr> duplication.

Pagdudurog n Pulverization; powdering.

Pagdulog-n-<corr sic=Presention>Presentation</corr>; presenting.

Pagduruin-v-To prick; perforate<corr sic=":">;</corr> punch through.

Paggahis-n Rape; ravishment; allurement.

Paggala-n-Stroll; gadding<corr sic=":">;</corr> going.

Paggalang-n-Respect; adornation; worship.

Paggalaw-n-Movement; commotion.

Paggaling-n-Recovery; growth<corr>;</corr> advance;
progress; advancement.

Paggamit-n-Use; service; employment;
custom; adoption; affiliation; style;
espousal; fashion.

Paggamot-n-Remedy; reparation; cure;
healing<corr>;</corr> doctoring; recourse.

Pagganti n-Remuneration; revenge; reward;
retribution.

Pagganti n~g utang na loob-n-Gratification;
satisfaction; gratitude.

Paggapas-n-Harvesting; harvest; reaping;
gathering of a crop.

Paggasliw-n Liking<corr>;</corr> affection; taste.

Paggasta-n-Expense; costs<corr sic=",">;</corr> charge; disbursement

Paggawa-n-Work; construction; operation<corr>;</corr>
working.

Paggawa uli n-Iteration.

Paggiba-n Destruction; overturning; <corr sic=desolution resp=e>desolation</corr><corr>;</corr>
devastation.

Paggibik-n-Succor; assistance; aid; help.

Paggiik-n-Threshing.

Paggisi n~g balat-n-Itch; itching.

<corr sic=Paggitti>Paggiti</corr>-n-Sprouting.

Pagguhit-n-Lining; line; drawing of
lines.

Paggulamos-n-<corr sic=Scratchiug>Scratching</corr>; pinching[**Errata].

Paggulong-n-The rolling.

Paghahaba-n-Lengthening; prolongation.

Paghahabilin-n Trust<corr sic=":">;</corr> recommendation.

Paghahalaga-n-Valuation; appraisal;
<corr sic=appraisment>appraisement</corr>.

Paghahalaman-n-Horticulture.

Paghahalili-n-Change; substitution;
reliel[**Errata: relief]; exchange; succession; surrogation:
remission.

Paghahamak-n-Depreciation; contempt;
scorn; disregard; insult.

<pb n=200>

Paghahámok-n Dispute; dissagreement[**typo: diagreement];
fight<corr>;</corr> war<corr sic=",">;</corr> battle; conflict.

Paghahandog-n-Preparation; preparing;
pleasure<corr>;</corr> present<corr sic=":">;</corr> gratification.

Paghahati-n-Division; partition<corr sic=":">;</corr> apportionment;
compartment; distribution.

Paghahatid n-Conduction<corr>;</corr> conducing;
accompanying

Paghahayin-n-Oblation; offering

[**out of order]Paghahalal-n Election; choice; electing;
choosing.

Paghalay-n-Awkwardness; scorn; contempt<corr sic=",">;</corr>
depreciation.

Paghalo-n-Mixture<corr sic=":">;</corr> mixing.

Paghaluhaluin-v To mix; <corr sic="jumblé">jumble</corr>.

Paghaluin-v-To mix<corr sic=":">;</corr> mingle.

Paghahanga-n-Limitation<corr sic=",">;</corr> limit; <corr sic=distric>district</corr>;
bounds.

Paghamak-n-Depreciation; disregard;
scorn; contempt; insult.

Paghamog-n-The falling of the dew.

Paghamon-n-Challenge; threat<corr sic=":">;</corr> provocation.

Paghanap-n-Search; hunt; searching;
looking for

Paghandulong n-Assault; attack.

Paghapis n Excruciation.

Paghapit n-Pressure.

Pagharap-n-Presence; presenting; presentation;
exibition[**Errata: exhibition].

Paghátol-n-<corr sic=Setence>Sentence</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr> judgement

<corr sic=Pahawan>Paghawan</corr>-n The felling of trees.

Paghibik-n Groan; sob.

Paghibo-n-Seduction<corr sic=":">;</corr> deceit; illusion;
imposition; cheating.

Paghigpit-n.Tightening; oppression; cruelty;
hardship.

Paghihigop n-Supping; sup; absorption;
swallow.

Paghihimagsik-n-Rebelliousness[**Errata]; severity;
stubbornness

Paghihimagsik n~g bayan laban sa
puno-n Revolution; sedition; insurrection<corr>;</corr>
rebellion.

Paghihimpil-n-Alleviation.

Paghihintay-n-Expectation; stop; stay;
sojourn; pause; expectancy.

Paghihip-n-Blow<corr sic=":">;</corr> blast<corr sic=":">;</corr> puff.

Paghihirap-n-Excruciation; pain.

Paghihiwalay-n-Separation; disunion;
segregation<corr sic=":">;</corr> divergence; divergency[**Errata];
compartment.

Paghila-n-Draw; drawing; haul; <corr sic=bauling>hauling</corr>.<corr>;</corr>
dragging<corr sic=":">;</corr> tug; tugging; towing; tow.

Paghilig-n-Inclination; fancy<corr>;</corr> propensity;
reclining.

Paghilo n-Dizziness.

Paghilot-n-Softening<corr sic=",">;</corr> mollifying

Paghiluman n~g sugat-n-The knitting[**Errata]
together of a wound.

<pb n=201>

Paghiman~git-n The tearing into small
bits.

Paghinapan~gin-v-To fortify; strengthen;
give courage.

Paghin~gal-n-Pant; palpitation; respiration;
breathing.

Paghin~gi-n-Entreaty; request; petition;
prayer<corr sic=",">;</corr> claim; demand; imploration.

Paghinto-n-Stop<corr sic=",">;</corr> pause<corr sic=",">;</corr> suspension<corr sic=",">;</corr> cessation;
relay; delay.

Paghinuhod-n-Apology

Paghipo-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Touch.

Paghiwa-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Cut; cuttings<corr>;</corr> slicing.

Paghiwa-hiwain-v-To cut into small
pieces.

Paghiwalay-n-Division; separation; sunder.

Paghiwalayin-v To separate<corr sic=",">;</corr> divide; part;
sunder.

Paghuad-n-Counterfeit<corr sic=":">;</corr> imitation; copy.

Paghuhula-n-Prognostication<corr sic=",">;</corr> prophecy.

Paghuhulog-n-Falling; fall; throwing
down.

Paghuhulog n~g isang wika sa iba-n-<corr sic=translation>Translation</corr>;
interpretation.

Paghukay-n-Excavation.

Paghukay muli-n-Exhumation.

Paghupa-n-Decay; decline; fall; declination<corr>;</corr>
extenuation.

Pagi-n-Dog-fish.

Pag ibig-n-Love; affection; esteem; attachment;
desire; estimation; philanthropy;
good nature.

Pag ibig sa DIOS-n-Piety.

Pag ibig n~g mahigpit-n-Fraternity; brotherhood.

Pag igi-n-Improvement; easing; alleviation.

Pag igihin-v-To ease; alleviate.

Pag iiba-n-Alteration; transformation;
change; metamorphosis.

Pag iikit[**M: matched scan][**should be "ikot" - the rootword of this word |M: ikit (synonym of ikot) is correct]-n-Gyration; turning.

Pag iilag-n-Wildness; evasion; scare.

Pag iilagan n-Wildness; temerity; evasion;
scare.

Pag iilagin-n-Diarrhea.

Pag iilagin-a-Wild; timid.

Pag iin~gat-n-Care; caution; precaution;
prudence; painstaking; sefeguard
watching; heed; reserve; security.

Pag iinog-n-Gyration; turning.

Pag iipon-n Hoarding; gathering<corr>;</corr> laying
away; storing; putting;[**extra ;] away.

Pag iisa-n-Solitude; unison; <corr sic=lonliness>loneliness</corr>;
agreement<corr sic=":">;</corr> conformity.

Pag iisip n-Thinking; thought; reason;
talent; mind; brain; understanding;
intention; justice; consideration; prudence;
right; principle; ability.

Pag iiwan-n Abandonment[**Errata]; quittance.

<pb n=202>

Pag ikit[**matched scan]-n-Rotation; turn; <corr sic=turming>turning</corr>.

<corr sic=pag>Pag</corr> ilag-n-Avoidance; evasion.

Pag iling n Negation; denial; negative;
refusal.

Página-n-Page.[**fixed; 'P' not visible in scan]

Pag intindi-n-Intelligence; understanding;
skill; ability; sense; spirit.

Paging-v To be; become; exist.

Pagitan-n-Space; interval<corr sic=",">;</corr> interlude; distance;
middle.

Pagitan-prep.-Among; between.

Pagitna-a-Intermediate; intervening; mediate.

Pag inis n Smothering; hardship; oppression,

Pagiwi n Nursing; tutelage<corr>;</corr> guardianship

Pag iyak-n Cry; weeping; act of <corr sic=corying resp=e>crying</corr>;
mourning.

Pagka adv.-After; afterwards.

Pagka aba n-Misery; humiliation.

Pagka agas n-Miscarriage; strong menstruation.

Pagka ahon-n-Ascencion; ascendency.

Pagka ahon sa pagka alipin n-Freedom<corr sic=.></corr>
from slavery.

Pagka akma n-Correspondence; fitness.

Pagka alaala-n-Remembrance; recognition;
memory.

Pagka alila n Servitude<corr sic=",">;</corr> state of being
a servant.

Pagka alipin-n-Servitude; bondage; slavery;
thralldom; thrall<corr sic=",">;</corr> yoke; oppression.

Pagka antala n Detention; delay<corr sic=",">;</corr> obstacle.

Pagka api-n <corr sic=Degredation>Degradation</corr>; fall; degeneracy;
diminutive.

Pagka ayos n Arrangement; order.

Pagka ayos sa matowid n Justification;
equity; justice.

<corr sic=Paka>Pagka</corr> baba n Degeneracy; declination;
fall; decline.

Pagkabagbag n~g sasakyan n Shipwreck.

Pagkabalam n Detention; delay; slowness;
lingering.

Pagkabalatong n Accident; incident; delay
caused by the breaking of an
instrument or machine.

Pagkabalisa n Restlessness[**Errata]; perturbation;
uneasiness.

Pagkabantay n Guard; watch.

Pagkabasa n Wetting; moistening.

Pagkabasag n~g sasakyan-n Ship wreck.

Pagkabata n Childhood; <corr sic=perulity resp=e>puerility</corr><corr sic=":">;</corr> juvenility.

Pagkabawi n <corr sic=Recevery resp=e>Recovery</corr>; regaining.

Pagkabayani n-Boldness; courage<corr>;</corr> audacity.

Pagkabigatan-n-Heaviness; overloading;
surcharging.

<pb n=203>

Pagkabigla-n-Hurry; quickness[**Errata]; activity;
promptitude; speed.

Pagkabihag-n-Captivity; confinement.

Pagkabili-n-Cost; cost price; price.

Pagkabitin-n-Suspension; hanging.

<corr sic=Pagkabawal>Pagkabuwal</corr>-n-Tumble; fall; overbalance;
overturning.

Pagkabuhay-n-<corr sic=Maintainence>Maintenance</corr>; support;
<corr sic=sustinence>sustenance</corr>; subsistence; life.

Pagkabuhay na muli-n-Resurrection; revival.

Pagkabuhos-n-Effusion; pouring.

Pagkabuli-n-Polish[**unreadable first letter][**P3: Polish |M: yup]; finish.

Pagkabulok-n-[**Noun? Adjective? |M: n]-Rottenness; putrefaction;
pollution; corruption; infection;
putridness;[**matched scan] depravity; depravation.

Pagkabusog-n-Satiety; fullness of the
stomach.

Pagkadalaga-n-Virginity; girlhood.

Pagkaduble-n-Duplication.

Pagkadulas-<corr sic=u>n</corr>-Smoothness; slipping.

Pagkagalit-n-Anger; rage.

Pagkadios-n-<corr sic=Diety resp=e>Deity</corr>; divinity.

Pagkagawa-n-Work; cut; shape; fashion;
make; doing.

Pagkagastahan-n-Expense; cost.

Pagkagawgaw-n-Mixing.

Pagkaginoo-n-Rank; honor; decorum;
honesty; decency<corr sic=":">;</corr> nobility; distinction;
respect.

Pagkagitla-n-Surprise; amazement.

Pagkagulo-n-Disturbance; fight; noise;
war; insurrection; commotion; tumult;
riot; confusion; perturbation.

Pagkahamak-n-Infamy; dishonor; disgrace;
humiliation; baseness.

Pagkahanda-n-Preparation; pomp; show.

Pagkahan~go-n-Redemption; taking out;
ransom.

Pagkahapay-n-Inclination.

Pagkahapo-n-Inability.

Pagkahapon-adv<corr>.</corr>-Afternoon; after dinner;
in the afternoon.

Pagkahawa-n-Infection; contagion.

Pagkahibang-n-<corr sic=Dilirim resp=e>Delirium</corr>; dotage; rant.

Pagkahilig-n-Inclination; inclining.

Pagkahilig n~g loob-n-Affection; inclination;
fancy; liking; taste.

Pagkahinog-n-Maturity; ripenness.

Pagkahubo-n-Nakedness.

Pagkahukluban-n-Decrepitude; old-age.

Pagkahuli-n-Posteriority;

Pagkahulog-n-Fall.

Pagkaiba[**matched scan]-n-Dissimilarity; dissimilitude;
inequality.

Pagkaibig-n-Love; liking; desire; choice;
caprice.

Pagkain-n-Food; victuals; viand; ration;
fare; sustenance.

Pagkaina-n-Maternity<corr sic=",">;</corr> motherhood.

<pb n=204>

Pagkaing ikinabubuhay-n-Food; maintenance;
<corr sic=subsistance>subsistence</corr>.

Pagkaisa-n-Uniformity; unison; unity;
conformity.

Pagkaitan-n-Refusal; denial; negation.

Pagkaa akgpang[**typo: Pagkaka agpang] n~g m~ga tawo-n-Fraternity;
brotherhood.

Pagkaka alit-n-Dispute; disunion; difference;
controversy; discord; disagreement;
misunderstanding; variance.

Pagkaka ayaw-n-Refusal; denial.

Pagkaka ayon-n-Accord; accordance;
conformity; uniformity; unity; coincidence.

Pagkaka ayos-n-Arrangement; equality;
alliance; unity.

Pagkakagalit-n-Discord; anger; dispute;
rage; passion.

Pagkakagalitan-n-Quarreling[**Errata]; misunderstanding;
disagreement; dispute.

Pagkakagulo-n-Revolution; insurrection;
disturbance; sedition.

Pagkakahalo-n-Mixture; mixing.

Pagkakahiwalay-n-Separation; disunion;
division.

Pagkakaiba-n-Alteration; difference.

Pagkakaila-n-Denial; contravention.

Pagkakailan~gan-n-Necessity; want; need;
urgency; exigence.

Pagkakaisa-n-Unity; agreement; unanimity.

Pagkakakuha-n-Seizure; capture; taking;
getting.

Pagkakalagay-n-State; condition.

Pagkakalakip-n-Juncture; joint; unity;
state of being together.

Pagkakalapat-n-Juncture; union; connection;
uniting; combination; joining;
unity; coalition; contiguity.

Pagkakalapit-n-Proximity; vicinity;
proximation; approximation.

Pagkakaling-n-Reference; relation.

Pagkakalin~ga-n-Heed; care; attention;
colicitude[**Errata: solicitude]; caution; watching.

Pagkakaloy-n-Timbrel maker or seller;
stamp maker.

Pagkakamag anakan-n-Relation; relatives;
kindred.

Pagkakamali-n-Error; mistake; blunder;
oversight.

Pagkakamatay-n-Mortality; death.

Pagkakamit-n-Attainment.

Pagkakamtan-n-Attainment; acquisition.

Pagkakamukha-n-Resemblance; similarity;
likeness[**Errata]; equity; equality[**Errata]; similitude;
simile.

Pagkakapantay-n-Equality; similitude.

Pagkakaparis-n-Equality; similitude;
similarity; simile; equivalence; equity;
likeness.

<pb n=205>

Pagkakapisan-n-Unity; union; combination;
meeting; congregation; alliance.

[**out of order]Pagkakapatid-n-Fraternity; brotherhood.

Pagkakasal-n-Espousal; nuptials; wedding.

Pagkakasalimoot-n-Density[**Errata]; closeness;
compactness.

<corr sic=Pagkakaksalingsaling>Pagkakasalingsaling</corr>-n-Tradition.

Pagkakasalot-n-Poverty[**P assumed |M:ok]; bad luck; pestilence.

Pagbakasáma[**typo: Pagkakasáma]-n-Juncture; joining; unition.

Pagkakasan~gayon-n-Unity of time.

Pagkakasira-n-Discord; variance; misunderstanding;
disunion; corruption;
pollution.

Pagkakasunduan-n-Reconciliation; concord.

Pagkakasunod-n-Succession; series.

Pagkakasunodsunod-n-Row; file.

Pagkakatalaga-n-Intention; appropriation;
propriety; manner; mode.

Pagkakatali-n-Tie; tying; binding.

Pagkakatalo-n-Dispute; opposition; argument;
contradiction.

Pagkakataon-n-Accident; occurrence; occasion;
happening; hap; opportunity.

Pagkakatimbang-n-Equilibrium; balance.

[**unreadable 5th letter |M:a]Pagkakatipon-n-Meeting; gathering; congregation;
hoarding; laying up.

Pagkakatipon n~g madla-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Multitude;
crowd; meeting; congregation.

Pagkakatotoo-n-Proof; realization;
truth.

Pagkakatulad-n-Resemblance; similitude;
likeness; similarity.

[**Out of Alph. Ord.]Pagkakaumpog-n-Company; meeting.

Pagkakatapat-n-Equality; equivalence.

Pagkakawanag-n-Reference; relation.

Pagkakawan~gis-n-Conformity; likeness;
resemblance; similarity; simile; similitude.

Pagkakawanki-n-Similitude; resemblance;
likeness; simile.

Pagkakwasto[**1st k reconstructed][**typo: Pagkakawasto]-n-Order; likeness; uniformity;
regularity.

Pagkakayas-n-Whittling[**Errata]; shaving.

Pagkakikil-n-Filings[**Typo:Fillings? |M:No].

[**out of order]Pagkakiskis-n-Scratching; friction.

[**out of order]Pagkakabahog-n[**2nd n redundant--deleted]-Incorporation; combination;
mixing.

Pagkakilala-n-Amnesty; cognizance;
intelligence; knowledge; skill; ability;
friendship.

Pagkakiling-n-Inclination; declination.

Pagkakintal-n-Stamp; print; edition;
impression.

Pagkakola-n-Gluing.

<pb n=206>

Pagkakuha n~g kabuntisan-n-Miscarriage;
abortion.

Pagkakulo-n-Effervescence; effervescency[**doesn't seem to be a valid word].

Pagkalagay-n-Attitude; position; state;
condition; rank.

Pagkalalaki-n-Virility.

Pagkalanta-n-Withering; fading.

Pagkalasa-n-Taste.

Pagkalat-n-Scattering; distribution; dispersion.

Pagkaligpit-n-Picking up; gathering;
putting away; putting in order.

Pagkalimot-n-Forgetfulness; carelessness;
heedlesness; oblivion.

Pagkalipa-n-Leveling.

Pagkalipol-n-Extermination; destruction[**Errata];
extinction[**Errata].

Pagkalis-n-Scraping; taking of the edge.

Pagkalito-n-Confusion; perplexity; perturbation;
lightheadedness.

[**out of order]Pagkalunok-n-State or condition of poverty.

Pagkaloob-n-Giving; gift; presentation;
offering.

Pagkalubog-n-Submersion[**Errata]; immersion.

Pagkalugso-n-Destruction.

Pagkalula-n-Swoon; dizziness; seasickness.

Pagkalulo-n-Swoon[**w surmised |M:ok].

Pagkalusaw-n-Fluidity; liquescency;
squandering of an inheritance.

Pagkaluto-n-The manner of cooking;
cookery; decoction.

Pagkamaan-n-Amazement; charm.

Pagkamalahinin~ga-n-Tepidity.

Pagkamalakuko-n-Tepidity.

Pagkamapagpatawa-n-Jollity; joyfulness.

Pagkamaramdaman-n-Tenderness; delicacy.

Pagkamasdan-n-Look; review; examination.

Pagkamatay-n-Death; decease; mortality.

Pagkamot-n-Scratch; scratching.

Pagkanlong-n-Hiding; protection; concealment;
shading; palliation; defense.

Pagkapá-n-Feel; touch.

Pagkapalabun~ga-n-Fruitfulness; fertility.

Pagkapalagay-n-Adulation.

Pagkapaos-n-Hoarseness.

Pagkapatawad-n-Acquittance; acquittal;
forgiveness.

Pagkapilay-n-Lameness; sprain; limp;
disability; halt.

Pagkapilipit-n-Twist; wreathing; contortion;
twining.

Pagkapoeta-n-Poet.

Pagkapuno-n-Repletion.

Pagkaraka-adv.-Suddenly; instantly;
immediately.

<pb n=207>

Pagkasagi-n-Brushing[**Errata] of one's clothes
against another; walking where one
should not.

Pagkasakit-n-Disability; sickness.

Pagkasaklaw-n-Universality.

Pagkasala-n-Violation.

<corr sic="Pagkasalan~gasan~g">Pangkasalangsang</corr>-n-Contravention.

Pagkasalawahang loob-n-Inconstancy;
infidelity; uncertainty; suspicion;
doubt; hesitation.

Pagkasauli-n-Return; reintegration.

Pagkasira-n-Ruin; downfall; pollution;
corruption; putrefaction.

Pagkasunduan-n-Accord; accordance;
amenity; reconciliation; accommodation.

Pagkasunodsunod-n-Alteration; succession.

Pagkasupil-n-Subjection; submission.

Pagkatagpo-n-Find; discovery.

Pagkatakid-n-Trip; stumble.

Pagkatan~gi-n-Singularity; separation; remoteness;
solitude.

Pagkatangi-n-Refusal; denial.

Pagkatapos-adv.-After; afterwards; then;
next.

Pagkatápos-n-Termination; end.

Págkatapos nang-prep.-After.

Pagkáti-n-Ebb.

Págkatí-n-Itching.

Pagkatina-n-Dye; <corr sic=dying resp=e>dyeing</corr>; act of <corr sic=dying resp=e>dyeing</corr>.

<corr sic="Pagkatin~gnan">Pagkatingnan</corr>-n-Review; examination.

Pagkatisod-n-Stumble; trip; impediment;
obstacle; difficulty.

Pagkatulisan-n-Outlawry.

Pagkatunaw-n-Smelting; melting.

Pagkatunaw n~g kinain-n-Digestion.

Pagkatunaw[**typo: Pagkaugnay (as found in a TIA copy)]-n-Reference; relation; unity;
union.

Pagkaugpong-n-Juncture; union; connection.

Pagkaulianin-n-Decrepitude; old age;
repetition.

Pagkaulila-n-Orphanage.

Pagkaulit-n-Repetition; reiteration.

Pagkaulol-n-Delirium; dotage; rant;
craziness; insanity.

Pagkautal-n-Hesitation; stammering;
stuttering; haw.

Pagkautas-n-Finish; termination;
end.

Pagkawala-n-Loss.

Pagkawala n~g diwa-n-Loss of sense.

[**out of order]Pagkawalang dalita-n-Impassibility.

<corr sic=Pagkawalan>Pagkawala</corr> n~g loob-n-Perturbation;
uneasiness.

Pagkawáy-n-Waving; motioning.

Pagkawili-n-Affection; liking; taste;
pleasure.

Pagkikikil-n-The filing[**Typo: filling? |M: no].

<pb n=208>

Pagkilala n~g utang na loob n-Gratitude;
gratefulness.

Pagkipagkitaan n Meeting; visiting; encounter.

Pagkit-n Glue<corr>;</corr> mucilage; waxtaper.

Pagkubkob sa isang lugar-n-Siege.

Pagkuenta-n-Summing; addition.

Pagkuha-n-Taking; seizing<corr sic=",">;</corr> grasping;
grasp; capture; seizure.

Pagkuha ang[**typo: n~g] di kaniya-n-Usurpation.

Pagkukulang-n-Lack; shortage; want.

Pagkukulong-n-Confinement; seclusion.

Pagkukulong <corr sic=sa>na</corr> kusa-n-Hermit; recluse.

Pagkukunuwari n-Affectation; deceit;
hypocricy[**Errata: hyprocrisy].

Pagkukupkup n Shelter; <corr sic=protectios resp=e>protection</corr>; safe
guard.

Pagkukuro-n-Correction; regulation.

Pagkukuton-n-Wrinkling; wrinkle; ruffling

Pagkulo-n-Boiling.

Pagkupas n-<corr sic=Pading resp=e>Fading</corr>; withering.

Pagkurot-n-Nip; pinch.

Pagkuskus-n-Scrape; <corr sic=catching resp=e>scratching</corr>; friction.

Pagkusot-n-Rumple; rumpling.

Paglabag-n-<corr sic=Resistence resp=e>Resistance</corr>; stubbornness; rebelliousness;
rebellion<corr>;</corr> insurrection.

Paglabag sa kautusan-n-Violation.

Paglaban-n-<corr sic=Resistence resp=e>Resistance</corr>; fight; war; antagonism<corr>;</corr>
opposition; assault.

Paglabas-n-Departure; start; exit; exodus[**Errata];
going out.

Paglabnot-n-Pluck; plucking.

Paglagin-n-Frequence[**Errata]; frequency; permanency;
duration.

Paglago n-Proficiency; profusion; improvement<corr>;</corr>
addition.

Paglagom-n-<corr sic=Unision>Unition</corr>; uniting; joining;
juncture[**Errata]; joint.

Paglahang n-Crack; cracking.

Paglahok-n-Inclusion; incorporation.

Paglahukin[**should be "Paghaluin"? |M: no--fixed (k not visible in scan)] v-To incorporate; include.

Paglait-n-Abuse; contempt; outrage;
insult.

Paglakad-n-Walk; march.

Paglaki-n-Increase;[**fixed; I not visible in scan] growth; swelling;
dilation.

Paglakip-n-Unison; joining; alloy; uniting;
coalescense[**matched scan][**typo: coalescence]<corr>;</corr> gathering.

[**out of order]Paglakasan-n-Strengthening; exertion;
invigoration; enforcement.

Paglaktaw n-Omission; skip; leaving;[**extra ;] out.

Paglaktaw n~g isang salita-n-<corr sic=Elipsis resp=e>Ellipsis</corr>.

Paglala-n-Weaving.

Paglalaba-n-Washing; wash.

Paglalagari-n-Sawing.

Paglahok[**typo: Paglalahok (to follow alphab order; also, Paglahok is already listed above)]-n-Inclusion; incorporation;
mixture; mixing.

Paglalacbay[**correct sp, but s/b Paglalakbay to follow order] n-Travel; travelling; journey;
passage.

<pb n=209>

Paglalakip-n-Joining; union; juncture;
conjunction; coalition; combination;
alliance.

Paglalang n Creation; creating.

Paglalaro n-Play; playing; romping;
amusement<corr sic=",">;</corr> sport; game.

Paglalatag n~g bato n Paving pavement

Paglalaway-n Salivation; spitting.

Paglamas n Kneading.

Paglamatin-v-To flaw; crack.

Paglamutak n Kneading.

Paglamuyot n Seduction.

Paglan~gitn~git n Creaking<corr>;</corr> squeaking.

Paglapad[**matched scan] n Width; widening.

Paglapastan~ganan n Outrage; insult<corr>;</corr> affront;
abuse<corr sic=",">;</corr> contempt; injury; slight<corr sic=",">;</corr>
injustice; wrong; offense.

Paglapit-n-Approximation; approach; calculation

Paglasap n Tasting; taste; relish.

Paglason n Poison; poisoning.

Paglayo n Retreat; distance<corr sic=",">;</corr> privacy.

Paglibak n Slander; defamation; ridicule.

Pagligalig n Laziness; indolence; depravity;
carelessness; tramping about
without any <corr sic=deftinity resp=e>definite</corr> object.

Pagligaw n Love making<corr>;</corr> courtship.

Pagligawligaw n Subversion.

Pagligpit n Gathering up; putting in
order; putting away.

Pagligtas n Salvation; saving; preservation.

Pagliit n <corr sic=Dimunition>Diminution</corr>; declination; decline.

Pagliko n Sheer; digression.

Paglilibang n Recreation; amusement;
pastime; diversion; sport; play; jest;
game; festivity; feast; vacation; rejoicing;
leisure[**Errata].

Paglilibing n-Funeral<corr>;</corr> burial; sepulture.

Pagliligaw n Lovesuit<corr>;</corr> love<corr sic=",">;</corr> courtship.

Paglilihim n Secret<corr>;</corr> reserve; secrecy; exception.

Paglilikot n-Restlessness<corr sic=",">;</corr> boisterousness; uneasiness.

Paglilimbag n Stamping; printing; edition.

Paglilinkod n Service; courtship; attendance;
compliance.

Paglilinis n Cleansing; cleaning.

Paglilipat n Transition; transfer; transportation.

Paglimot n[**matched scan] Neglect<corr sic=":">;</corr> forgetfulness<corr>;</corr> negligence; disregard.

Paglinang n Harrowing.

Paglinkuran n Service; courtship.

Paglipana n Extension; scattering; skirmishing.

Paglipat n Passage; transition; transfer.

<pb n=210>

Paglipol. n. Extinction; destruction; extermination<corr>;</corr> abolition

Pagliyasin. n. Try; attempt<corr sic=",">;</corr> examination; proof

Paglitakin n. Cracking; crack; split<corr sic=",">;</corr> splitting

Pagliwanag n Solution; illumination.

Pagluat n Duration; protaction; prolongation<corr>;</corr> retarding<corr>;</corr> delay; deference.

Paglubay n Stop; cessation.

Paglubo n Flattery; flattering<corr>;</corr> coaxing; decoy.

Paglubog n- Inundation; sinking;
overflow; occident; west<corr sic=",">;</corr> submersion.

Paglubog n~g araw n- The setting of the sun.

Pagluhog n Request; <corr sic=suplication resp=e>supplication</corr>; entreaty;
imploration; petition.

Pagluluat n Slowness; delay; detention;
lingering; prolongation.

Palulubog n Submersion; immersion.

Paglululan n- Embarkation; <corr sic=sipping>shipping</corr>; loading

Paglupig n Usurpation.

Paglupi n Fold.

Paglupilupiin -n- Redoubling; refolding.

Paglura -n- Spitting; expectoration.

Paglusob -n- Attack; assault.

Pagmamadalas[**matched scan] -n- Frequence; frequency.

Pagmamadali n- Haste<corr>;</corr> hurry<corr>;</corr> speed<corr sic=",">;</corr> exigence;
hastiness; celerity; rush; promptitude.

Pagmamagaling -n- Pride; selfesteem.

Pagmamahal -n- Affection; estimation;
esteem; endearment; value; price.

Pagmamahal n~g tan~gi n- Brotherhood;
fraternity; predilection.

Pagmamaka ano -n- <corr sic=Suplication resp=e>Supplication</corr>; request;
petition; doing in any way.

Pagmamalikmata -n- Transfiguration.

Pagmamana n- Heirdom; inheritance[**Errata].

Pagmamarati -n- Durability<corr sic=",">;</corr> permanency;
stability; duration; durance; minute; ness[**typo: minuteness (for 'minute; ness')]

Pagmamasid -n- Observance; observation;
note; scrutiny; remark.

Pagmamatowid -n- Reasoning; argument;
discussion; correction; disquisition;
dissentation[**Errata: dissertation]; dispute.

Pagmamatwiran -n- Reasoning; argument;
dispute; discussion; <corr sic=disquisitation resp=e>disquisition</corr>;
dissentation[**Errata: dissertation]; dispute.

Pagmumukha -n- Mode; face; aspect; countenance;
look; appearance; front; outline;
arrangement; manner.

Pagmumultiplicar n- Multiplication.

Pagmura -n- Slander; insult; abuse;
vituperation; vilification; slandering;
insulting.

<pb n=211>

Pagmura sa hindi kaharap.-n-Backbiting;
gossiping.

Pagnacaw.-n-Theft<corr>;</corr> robbery; larceny;[**should be larceny? |M:yes (typo larcency already corrected)]
peculation; pillage.

Pagnanaknak n~g sugat.-n-Ulceration.

Pagn~gatn~gat.-n-Gnawing.

Pagn~gin~giti.-n-Smiling.

Pagn~giti.-n-Smile.

Pagn~giwi.-n-Grimace; wry face.

Pagn~guso.-n-Pout.

Pagnitin.-n-Unglueing.

Pagod.-n-Anguish; fatigue; weariness;
anxiety.

Pagod na malabis.-n-Fatigue; hardship;
anguish.

Pagong.-n-Turtle; tortoise<corr sic=",">;</corr> terrapin.

Pagpaalis.-n-Expulsion.

Pagpagalan.-n-Work fatigue.

[**out of order]Pagpag -n-Shake; flourish; brandish.

Pagpagpag.-n-Shaking; brandishing; flourishing.

Pagpakonowari.-n-Sham; fiction<corr>;</corr> falsehood<corr>;</corr>
stratagem<corr>;</corr> pretense<corr>;</corr> deceit.

Pagpalabas.-n-Ejection; ejectment; expulsion.

Pagpalagay.-n-Ascription.

Pagpalain.-v-To help<corr>;</corr> support; shelter;
protect<corr>;</corr> heed; take care of; do well;
improve; mend; meliorate.

Pagpalaki.-n-Increase; aggrandizement.

Pagpalayaw.-n-Cajolery; favoritism; caress.

Pagpalitan.-n-Change; barter; permutation

Pagpalitan n~g n~galan.-n-Misnaming<corr>;</corr> alias;
taking of another name.

Pagpalitpalitan.-n-Changing with frequency.

Pagpalo.-n-Strike; beating-<corr>;</corr> whipping; hit.

Pagpana[**matched scan].-n-Shooting of an arrow<corr sic=",">;</corr> archery.

Pagpanaog[**matched scan].-n-Descent; descenscion.

Pagpanaw.-n-Deportation; exile; banishment.

Pagpanibaguhan.-n-Renewal; mending;
reiteration; reformation.

<corr sic=Pagpaalaala>Pagpapaalaala</corr>.-n-Remembrance; <corr sic=momento resp=e>memento</corr>.

Pagpapaalis.-n-Expulsion; sending away;
banishment.

Pagpapabaya.-n-Abandonment; neglect;
negligence; carelessness.

Pagpapabun~ga.-n-Fertility; fruitfulness.

Pagpapabuti.-n-Betterment.

<corr sic=Pagpapala>Pagpapadala</corr>.-n-Remittance; remission: remittal;
remitment.

Pagpapagayongayon.-n-Idleness; indolence;
laziness.

Pagpapahan~gin.-n-The airing.

Pagpapahayag.-n-Relation; notice; <corr sic=anunciation resp=e>annunciation</corr>;
manifestation<corr sic=":">;</corr> declaration<corr sic=",">;</corr>
revelation; proclamation.[**should be proclamation? (typo already fixed)]

<pb n=212>

Pagpapahid.-n-Smearing; wiping.

Pagpapahin~ga.-n-Rest; vacation; cessation<corr>;</corr>
pastime<corr sic=":">;</corr> repose<corr sic=",">;</corr> diversion; intermission<corr>;</corr>
leisure[**Errata]

Pagpapahin~ga n~g hokbo.-n-Camp; encampment.

Pagpapahinog.-n-Maturity; maturing; ripening.

Pagpapahintulot.-n-Permission<corr sic=",">;</corr> leave;
permit.

Pagpapahiram.-n-Lending<corr>;</corr> loaning.

Pagpapahirap.-n-Illtreatment; abuse; giving
or causing of pain.

Pagpapakababa.-n-Humility; submission;
meekness; humiliation; self-contempt.

Pagpapakabanal.-n-Sanctification; virtue.

Pagpapakain.-n-Maintenance; sustinence;
feeding<corr>;</corr> giving of food.

Pagpapaiwan.-n-Leaving; abandonment.

Pagpapakilala.-n-Presentation<corr sic=",">;</corr> introduction;
acquaintance; explication; manifestation.

Pagpapalagay.-n-Supposition; putting.

Pagpapalago.-n-Fertilization.

Pagpapalalo.-n-Bragging; pride; haughtiness.

Pagpapaligo.-n-Bathing.

Pagpapalimos.-n-Beggary; mendicacy;
begging.

Pagpapalit.-n-Changing; permutation.

Pagpapalitan.-n-Commutation;[**matched scan] change;
exchange.

Pagpapaloob.-[**n-]Insertion; putting in.

Pagpapalumagak.-n-The leaving of anything with another.

Pagpapamook.-n-Affray; scuffle; strife;
struggle.[**should be struggle? (typo already corrected)]

Pagpapanaw.-n-Deportation; banishment<corr>;</corr>
transportation.

Pagpapanday.-n-Blacksmithing.

Pagpapantay.-n-Equalization.

Pagpaparatang.-n-Imputation; accusation<corr>;</corr>
charge.

Pagpaparusa.-n-Punishment; chastisement.[**should be chastisement? (typo already corrected)]

Pagpapasákit.-n-Torture[**Errata]; pain; torment;
anguish.

Pagpapasiyal.-n-Stroll; walk.

[**out of order]Pagpapasiya.-n-Sentence; judgment<corr>;</corr> advice;
determination.

Pagpapatalastas.-n-Announcement; notice;
declaration; annunciation.[**should be anunciation? (typo already corrected)]

Pagpapatawad.-n-Pardon; relief; remission<corr sic=":">;</corr>
absolution; liberation; forgiveness.

Pagpapatawag.-n-Call; calling; notice;
notification; summons; admonition.

Pagpapatay.-n-Murder; assassination.

Pagpapatibay.-n-Strengthening; confirmation;
ratification; fortification.

<pb n=213>

Pagpapatigil- n Suspension; cessation;
stop.

Pagpapatiwakil n -Exasperation.<corr>;</corr> indignation.

Pagpapatotoo- n -Confirmation<corr>;</corr> ratification.<corr>;</corr>
affirmation; certification<corr>;</corr> testimony<corr sic=":">;</corr>
assertion

Pagpapatuloy- n - Continuation<corr sic=":">;</corr> continuance

Pagpapaupa- n - Hire

Pagpapaupa n~g puri- n - Brothel<corr>;</corr> whoring.

Pagpapautang- n - Giving credit<corr>;</corr> crediting<corr>;</corr>
loaning.

Pagpapawis- n - Perspiration.<corr>;</corr> perspiring;
sweating.

Pagpapayo n - Advice.<corr>;</corr> exhortation.

Pagparoon- n - Going.

Pagpasáin- n - Contusion; bruise; burn.

Pagpasalamat- n - Thanksgiving; thanks;
thanking.

Pagpaslang- n Ill treatment; abuse; offence;
injury<corr sic=",">;</corr> insult; lack of respect;
transgression.

Pagpasok n - Entrance; ingress; entree;
entry<corr>;</corr> importation<corr>;</corr> beginning; interjection.

Pagpasuko- n Repulsion

Pagpasulong- n - Propulsion; drive.

Pagpasuso - n - Lactation; nursing.

Pagpatalastas- n Annunciation; proclamation<corr sic=":">;</corr>
announcement.

Pagpatawad[**matched scan]- n - Quittance; pardon.

Pagpatay- n - Murder.

Pagpatay sa hari n - Regicide.

Pagpatay sa kapwa- n - Homicide; murder

Pagpatay sa sarili- n Suicide.

Pagpatay sa sariling ina- n - Matricide.

Pagpatibay- n - Confirmation<corr>;</corr> ratification;
fortification; strengthening.

Pagpatotoo- n Affirmation; testimony;
proof; attestation; evidence; indication;
verification.

Pagpaunawa- n - Annunciation; proclamation.

Pagpatuad- n Inversion.<corr>;</corr> demolition.

Pagpawala nang halaga- n Depreciation
in value.

Pagpayapa- n - Pacification; quietude;
calmness; quietness; quiet; tranquility.

Pagpayohan- n - Advice; advising.

Pagpayuhan- n Advice; admonition; influence.

Pagpiga- n Pressure<corr sic=":">;</corr> squeeze

Pagpighatian- n Disgust[**matched scan]<corr sic=",">;</corr> loathing.

Pagpigil- n Suppression; suspension;
stop; check; constraint.

Pagpigilan- n Check<corr sic=":">;</corr> stopping.

Pagpigilan n~g kalooban- n Moderation.

<pb n=214>

Pagpili n Election; choice<corr>;</corr> choosing.

Pagpilipit n Twisting; twist; twining;
wreating[**Errata: wreathing]; contortion; winding.

Pagpilit n Persistence<corr>;</corr> force<corr>;</corr> urgency;
coersion[**Errata: coercion]; enforcement.<corr>;</corr> compulsion;
violence.

Pagpilit sa babayi n Rape.

Pagpipigil n Stopping; checking; stop;
check.

Pagpipiging n Festivity; feasting.

Pagpipilit n Urging<corr sic=":">;</corr> persistence,

Pagpipinsan n Cousinship.

Pagpipisan n Reunion; meeting<corr>;</corr> congregation

Pagpipisik n Sputtering; sputter.

Pagpipista n Feasting; rejoicing; feast.

Pagpiral n The twisting of the ear

Pagpisan n Accumulation; heaping;
<corr sic=unision>unition</corr>; uniting.

Pagpitagan n Respect; regard; esteem;
veneration.

Pagpugot n Beheading; decapitation.

Pagpukol n Throw[**Errata]; cast.

Pagpulandit n Spattering.

Pagpupúlo n Congregation; meeting.

Pagpupulong n Meeting; congregation.

Pagpupulong n~g congreso n A session
of congress.

Pagpupuri n Plaudit; eulogy.

Pagpuputong n~g korona n Coronation.

Pagpuputukan n~g baril n Shooting of
a gun.

Pagpupuyat n Night-watching.

Pagpuri n Commendation; esteem; estimation<corr>;</corr>
virtue<corr>;</corr> acclamation.

Pagpuri n~g kabutihan n Praise.

Pagpusta n Wager; bet.

Pagputok n Shooting; shoot<corr>;</corr> explosion;
crack<corr>;</corr> report.

Pagputol n Amputation; cutting<corr>;</corr> cut.

Pagputol n~g kahoy n The felling of trees.

Pagsabog n Dispersion;[**matched scan] scattering.

Pagsabunot n Plucking out.

Pagsadsad n Anchorage; anchoring;
beaching.

Pagsagot n Answer<corr sic=":">;</corr> reply<corr sic=",">;</corr> repartee;
contestation<corr>;</corr> response.

Pagsagsag n Trot; trotting.

Pagsaka n Cultivation; agriculture.

Pagsakay n The riding<corr sic=":">;</corr> ride.

Pagsakop n Redemption; salvation;
ransom; taking under protection.

Pagsalakay n Stealing; thieving; surprise

Pagsalangsang n Resistance; opposition;
contradiction<corr sic=",">;</corr> refutation<corr>;</corr> contrariness<corr>;</corr>
violation.

Pagsálat n Touch; touching; notation;
comprehension.

Pagsalát n Touch; hardship; poverty[**Errata];
bad-luck.

<pb n=215>

Pagsalin-n-Transcription; copying;
empting[**Errata: emptying] from one vessel into another.

Pagsalsal-n-Flattening<corr>;</corr> riveting; clinching<corr sic=",">;</corr>
expending; wasting.

Pagsalubong-n-Reception; meeting; encounter;
compromise.

Pagsalun~git[**typo: Pagsalun~gat] n-Contrariness; opposition;
disobedience; stubbornness<corr sic=",">;</corr> contrariety;
reverseness.

Pagsáma n-Connection; meeting; company;
retinue; corporation; affiliation;
uniting; joining; aggregation; aggregate

Pagsáma-n-Perversion; perversity; depravation;
wickedness; disobedience.

Pagsamahin-n-The joining; collection;
gathering; spoils; capture of anything.

Pagsámasámahin-n-Collection; gathering

Pagsamsam-n Collection; capturing; gathering.

Pagsandig-n-Reclining; leaning against.

Pagsapsap-n Munching; crunching

Pagsasabi-n Telling; report; narration;
relation[**typo ralation corrected]<corr>;</corr> predication.

Pagsasabon-n Making of suds; soaping

Pagsasagupa-n-Scuffle; strife<corr sic=",">;</corr> fight;
affray.

Pagsasaka-n Cultivation; farming.

Pagsasakdal n-Recourse; appeal; petition;
entreaty.

Pagsasalab-n-<corr sic=Scortching resp=e>Scorching</corr>.

Pagsasalaysay-n-Explanation; narration;
signification; saying.

Pagsasalin-n-Putting from one vessel
into another<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=coppying>copying</corr><corr>;</corr> transcribing.

Pagsasalita-n-Talking<corr sic=",">;</corr> saying; conversation.

Pagsasalitaan-n-Conversation<corr>;</corr> chat;
conference; talking.

Pagsasamba-n-Homage.

Pagsasandokan-n-The taking by spoonsful;
ladling.

Pagsasangla-n-Hypothecation.

Pagsasauli n-Devolution<corr sic=":">;</corr> returning;
restitution<corr>;</corr> reintegration.

[**the next entries are out of order]
Pagsaway n-Stopping<corr>;</corr> checking,

Pagsasaysay-n-Relation; narration;
report; explication<corr sic=":">;</corr> declaration;
account; saying; telling.

Pagsauli-n-Devolution; restoration.

Pagsawa n-Fullness.

Pagsasaya-n-Feasting; rejoicing; festivity<corr>;</corr>
happiness<corr sic=",">;</corr> celebration.

Pagsayaw-<corr sic=u>n</corr> Dance.

Pagsaysay-n-Narration; reference; relation<corr>;</corr>
solution; predication; portrayal;
analysis

Pagsesello n-Stamping.

Pagsesermon-n-Preaching.

<pb n=216>

[**out of order]Pagsiyasat-n Inquiry; investigation; examination;.

Pagsigaw-n-Cry; screaming; yell; yelling;
calling; vociferation

Pagsilang n~g araw-n-The rising of the sun.

Pagsilbihan-n-Serving<corr sic=",">;</corr> making use of.

Pagsimana n-Turn; order; succession<corr sic=",">;</corr>
vicissitude.

Pagsimba-n-Worship.

Pagsin~ga-n-The blowing of the[**typo ahe fixed] nose.

Pagsin~gaw-n-Steaming; exhalation

Pagsinta-n-Love; loving<corr sic=":">;</corr> courtship.

Pagsipot-n-Appearance<corr sic=",">;</corr> apparition; emanation;
birth.

Pagsira-n-Breaking; destruction; disruption<corr>;</corr>
demolition; dilapidation; destroying<corr sic=",">;</corr>
rotting

Pagsirang puri-n-Slander; defamation.

Pagsilid-n-Putting in; sacking up.

Pagsisisi-n-Repentance; penitence;
regret

Pagsisiyasat-n-Examination; investigation<corr>;</corr>
inquiry<corr>;</corr> inspection; survey.

Pagsoway-n-Disobedience; contrariness;
contradiction; opposition.

Pagsuhol-n-Bribery; <corr sic=subordination resp=e>subornation</corr>.

Pagsukat-n Measurement; mensuration;
measuring.

Pagsuko[**fixed; k not visible]-n-Subjection; surrender; rendition;
yielding.

Pagsukol-n-Prevention.

Pagsukot-n-<corr sic=Humilliation resp=e>Humiliation</corr>; self-contempt;
shame; submission.

Pagsulat-n-Writing; contract<corr sic=":">;</corr> treatise:

Pagsulong-n Progress; advancement;
growth<corr sic=":">;</corr> augmentation; improvement;
proficiency; addition<corr sic=":">;</corr> increase.

Pagsuma n-Sum; summing;[**extra ;]up; total; addition;
amount; conclusion.

Pagsungab-n-Wrestling; wrestle.

Pagsunod-n-Obedience; submission; observance;
following; succession.

<corr sic=Pagsunod>Pagsunog</corr>-n-Burning; conflagration;
combustion; burn.

Pagsuob n-Fumigation; smoking; fumigating.

Pagsupil-n-Domination; control; governing.

Pagsusulatan-n-Correspondence; writing;
intercourse.

Pagsusulsol-n-Instigation; infusion;
domination.

Pagsusumakit-n-Work; working with care.

Pagsusumbong-n-Accusation; impeachment;
accusing.

Pagsusupling-n-Sprouting; germination.

Pagtábas n-Shape; shaping; cut; outline.

Pagtabas-n-Cutting; delineation.

Pagtagupak-n-Slap; sound;[**extra ;] made by a slap.

Pagtahol-n-Bark; barking.

<pb n=217>

Pagtakal-n Measurement; measuring

Pagtakas-n-Migration; escape; elopement<corr sic=",">;</corr>
secret leaving.

Pagtakbo-n-Run; running<corr sic=",">;</corr> flight.

Patakpan-n-Cover<corr sic=",">;</corr> covering.

Pagtalikod n-Denial; negation.

Pagtalop-n Paring<corr>;</corr> peeling.

Pagtan~gan-n-Hold<corr>;</corr> holding.

Pagtangap-n-Receipt; acceptance; reception<corr sic=",">;</corr>
acceptation<corr>;</corr> receiving.

Pagtangi-n-Denial; refusal; negation.

Pagtan~gis-n-Crying<corr sic=",">;</corr> weeping; bewailing;
snivelling.

Pagtapak-n Tread; tramp.

Pagtapakan-n-Treading<corr sic=",">;</corr> trampling.

Pagtarok-n-Sounding<corr>;</corr> sound.

Pagtatae na may halong dugo n Dysentery.

Pagtatagal n Duration; continuance; stability;
continuation<corr sic=",">;</corr> subsistence<corr sic=",">;</corr> prolongation;
tardiness; slowness.

Pagtatagpi n-Mending; patching.

Pagtatagumpay n Defense; protection;
support.

Pagtataka n-Wonder<corr sic=",">;</corr> amazement; charm;
admiration; amaze.

Pagtatakapan n Dispute; fight with
words<corr>;</corr> argument in which bad words
are used.

Pagtakip n Cover; covering<corr>;</corr> hiding;
concealment; concealing.

Pagtatakpanan-n Covering; concealment<corr>;</corr>
hiding.

Pagtataktak n Branding; marking; sealing.

Pagtatali n-Tying.

Pagtatalo-n Dispute<corr sic=",">;</corr> quarrel; strife<corr>;</corr> fight;
contest; conflict; rivalry; competition;
antagonism; argument; difference; litigation;
lawsuit; controversy.

Pagtatalunan n Cause of a dispute or
argument; argument; quarreling.

<corr sic=Pagtatamo>Pagtataman</corr> n-<corr sic=Sufference resp=e>Sufferance</corr>; suffering; tolerance;
toleration.

<corr sic=Pagtataman>Pagtatanan</corr> n-Elopement.

Pagtatanan n~g sundalo-n-Desertion; deserting.

Pagtatanaw n-Discernment[**Errata]; view.

Pagtatanda-n-Memorization<corr>;</corr> remembering;
marking; branding; sign

Pagtatangal n Solution; disintegration;
taking to pieces.

Pagtatangap-n-Receiving; acceptance;
acceptation<corr sic=":">;</corr> taking.

Pagtatangol-n-Shelter; protection; defence.

Pagtatanim n-Planting; sowing.

Pagtatanim [**n~g] galit n-Hatred; aversion;
rancor<corr sic=":">;</corr> grudge.

Pagtatanim [**n~g galit] sa kapwa-n-Hatred; aversion.

<pb n=218>

Pagtatanim sa loob-n-Anger<corr sic=",">;</corr> passion;
rage.

Pagtatankilik-n Protection; support;
maintenance.

Pagtatanod n Guard<corr>;</corr> watch<corr>;</corr> sentinel.

Pagtatapat-n-Fidelity<corr>;</corr> constancy; the
telling of the truth; comparison of
two things.

Pagtatapon-n Throwing away; wasting;
cast; scattering.

Pagtatapos-n-Conclusion<corr sic=",">;</corr> finish; finishing<corr sic=",">;</corr>
ending.

Pagtatatag-n Institution; founding; establishment;
edification.

Pagtatayo-n-Edification; building<corr>;</corr> founding<corr sic=":">;</corr>
establishment; establishing; institution.

Pagtatlong bahagi-n-The dividing into
three parts.

Pagtawad-n-Bartering; haggling; offering
of a certain price for anything.

Pagtawag-n Calling; announcement;
announcing; summons.

Pagtayo n~g bigat n Weighing.

Pagtibayan-n-Ratification; affirmation;
fortification; strengthening<corr>;</corr> corroboration;
making;[**extra ;] fast; security.

Pagtigil n Stop; check<corr>;</corr> pause; delay;
suspension; <corr sic=suspence resp=e>suspense</corr>; sojourn.

Pagtigpas-n-The act of cutting or slicing.

<corr sic=Pagtikhim>Pagtikim</corr>-n-Taste; tasting.

Pagtiklop-n-Fold<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=Folding>folding</corr>; doubling.

Pagtikloptiklopin-n-Refolding.

Pagtilansik-n-Splashing; splash.

Pagtimban~gan-n-Weighing; balancing.

Pagtin~gin-n-Sight; respect; regard<corr sic=",">;</corr> veneration.

Paptipirin-n-Economy.

Pagtira-n-Habitation; lodging; dwelling;
living; inhabiting.

Pagtitiis-n-Patience; endurance; tolerance;
toleration; sufferance<corr sic=",">;</corr> suffering.

Pagtitina-n-The act of dyeing.

Pagtitipan-n-Notification; agreement;
announcement.

Pagtitipid-n-Economy; frugality.

Pagtitipon-n-Gathering<corr sic=",">;</corr> hoarding<corr>;</corr> laying
away; collection; collecting; congregation;
meeting.

Pagtubo-n-Increase; growth; augmentation;
profit<corr>;</corr> gain.

Pagtubos-n Redemption<corr sic=":">;</corr> ransom; remission.

Pagtudla-n-Throw<corr>;</corr> cast.

Pagtugtog-n The playing of musical instruments.

Pagtugtog n~g kampana-n-The tolling of
a bell.

<pb n=219>
[**This page was almost entirely type-in. Please watch for typos on my part.&mdash;P1]

Pagtuka-n-The pecking; peck.

Pagtukso-n-Teasing; joking; jesting;
temptation.

[**out of order]Pagtutukin-n-The collision.

Pagtulad-n-Imitation<corr>;</corr> copying.

Pagtulak-n-Shove; push<corr>;</corr> propulsion.

Pagtulong-n-Help; assistance; aid; cooperation;
safe-guard.

Pagtupad-n-Compliance; complying; observance;
obedience[**Errata].

Pagturo-n-Teaching; instruction; doctrine.

Pagtutukain-n-Peck or pecking of a fowl.

Pagtutulun~gan-n-Cooperation; aid; assistance<corr>;</corr> help.

Pagtutunaw-n-Thawing<corr sic=",">;</corr> melting<corr>;</corr> smelting;
loss; losing of money.

Pagtuturo-n-Teaching[**typo for Teaching (typo already fixed)]; instruction; edification.

Pagdulot[**typo: Pag udlot]-n-Rebounding<corr>;</corr> returning;
bouncing; retrocession.

Pag uga-n-Rocking; moving; commotion;
movement.

Pag ugpun~gin[**typo for Pag (already fixed) |M: 's' deleted--not in scan]-n-The joining at the ends.

Pag ugtun~gan[**'d' deleted--not in scan]-n-The joining at the ends.

Pag uli-n-Repetition<corr>;</corr> reiteration.

Pag ulit-n-Reiteration; repetition.

Pagulogulo adv. Disorderly<corr sic=",">;</corr> madly<corr sic=",">;</corr> silly.

Pagulun~gin-v-To roll; run on wheels.

Pag umit-n-Peculation<corr>;</corr> stealing.

Pag uno-n-Hesitation; wavering; stammering;
stuttering.

Pag unti-n-<corr sic=Dimunition>Diminution</corr>; decline; fall;
declination<corr>;</corr> dwindle; decay.

Pag upak-n-Clap.

Pag upak-n-The husking.

Pag upat-n-Instigation; flattery<corr sic=",">;</corr> persuasion<corr>;</corr>
destitution<corr sic=",">;</corr> leaving of another
in destitute circumstances.

Pag <corr sic=uraly>urali</corr>-n-Instigation; impulse; persuasion;
opinion.

Pagurin-v-To tire; make tired.

Pag urong-n-Retrocession; taking back;
return.

Pag usad-n-Crawling<corr>;</corr> creeping; wooden
rattle[**3rd defn doesn't belong here]

Pag usig-n-Persecution.

Pag usisa-n-Examination; investigation;
inquiry.

Pag usisain-v-To inquire; investigate;
review

Pag uugali-n-Procedure[**typo for Procedure (already fixed)]; conduct; manner;
demeanor<corr sic=",">;</corr> use; custom; style; fashion<corr>;</corr>
mode; form; method; deportment.

Pag uugnay-n-Conformity<corr>;</corr> contiguity;
combination; union; conjunction; order<corr>;</corr>
unity; composition.

Pag uugoy-n-Swinging; moving; rocking.

Pag uukol-n-Destination<corr>;</corr> pertinence.[**typo for pertinence? (already fixed)]

<pb n=220>

Pag uuli-n-Restoration<corr>;</corr> restitution; devolution;
renewing<corr sic=":">;</corr> reestablishment.

Pag uulit-n-Iteration; reiteration; duplication.

Pag uurong-n-Recession<corr>;</corr> backing down.

Pag uusap-n-Dispute; litigation; lawsuit;
contract.

Pag uusapan-n-Session; conference; conversation.

Pag uusbong-n-Germination.

Paguusisa-n-Examination<corr>;</corr> research;
review; probation; inquiry.

Paguusisang muli-n-Revision; review.

Paguuyam-n-Ridicule.

Pagvovoto-n-Voting; vote; poll; ballot.

Pagwawaksi-n-Separation; division; culling;
refusal; negation.

Pag awari[**typo: Pagwawari]-n-Meditation<corr>;</corr> deliberation;
reflection<corr>;</corr> cogitation; contemplation;
reasoning.

Pagwiwika-n-Talking; talk<corr>;</corr> saying.

Pagwiwika n~g masama-n-Backbiting;
slander; gossip; bad talk.

Pagwiwika n~g katampalasanan [**n? |M: dont know what 'n' is referred to but entry looks ok]-n-Insult;
abuse; slander; libel; abusiveness;
libeling.

Pagwiwisik-n-Sprinkling.

Pagyamanin-v-To enrich;[**matched scan] make rich;
make fruitful or fertile.

Pagyao[**typo Pagyaw fixed]-n-Departure.

Pagyari-n-Construction; termination;
finish.

Pagyasak-n-Trampling; treading.

Pagyukod-n-Respect<corr>;</corr> veneration; homage<corr>;</corr>
reverence; backwardness.

Pagyurak-n-Trampling<corr>;</corr> treading.

Pahaba-adv.-Lengthwise<corr>;</corr> sidelong.

Pahalang-n-Crosspiece; cross-timber.

Paham-n-Learning; wisdom.

Pahan~ginan-v-To air; dry in the air.

Paharap-adv.-Face forward.

Pahayag-n-Notice<corr sic=",">;</corr> proclamation; revelation;
publication.

Pahayag n~g kasal-n-Banns.

Pahayag n~g patay-n-Obituary.

Pahid-n-Smear; wipe.

Pahiga-adv.-Horizontally.

Pahiga-a-Horizontal.

Pahigitin-v-To <corr sic=excell>excel</corr><corr>;</corr> exceed; surpass.

Pahigtin-v-To tighten; press.

Pahimpilin-v-To ease; lighten; calm;
cease.

Pahinain-v-To weaken; make weak.

Pahinain <corr sic="n~g">ang</corr> loob-v-To dishearten; discourage;
dismay.

Pahinayin-v-To prepare for cooking.

Pahindi-n-Denial; refusal; negation; contradiction;
disowning.

Pahin~gahan-n-Resting place; place of rest.

<pb n=221>

Pahintoin-v-To stop; check; detain; keep;
retard.

Pahintulot-n-Permission; assent; leave;
license; <corr sic=privelege>privilege</corr><corr>;</corr> approval; admittance;
approbation; sanction; consent;
indulgence; furlough<corr>;</corr> liberty; authority[**typo for authority? (already fixed)];
right; power<corr>;</corr> good will.

Pahintulotin-v-To permit; leave; consent;
approve; admit; give permission;
let; sanction; assent; <corr sic=privelege>privilege</corr>;
license.

Paghinugin[**typo? (M: yes) pag- not alpha order?][**typo: Pahinugin]-v-To ripen; make ripe.

Pahiran-v-To wipe; smear.

Pahiran n~g alkitran-v-To tar.

Pahiran n~g cebo-v-To grease.

Pahirapan-v-To chastize; punish; injure;
abuse; aggrieve; agonize; distress.

Pahiwalayan-v-To separate<corr>;</corr> divide.

Pahiwas-adv.-Slantingly; slopingly.

Pahiwas-a-Sloping; slanting.

Pahiyain-v-To shame; disgrace; embarrass.

Pahumal-a-Nasal.

Pahupain-v-To diminish; make thin;
weaken.

Pahusayin-v-To arrange; put in order.

Paibabaw-a-Uppermost; top; superficial;
shallow.

Paikit-adv.-Gyratory.

<corr sic=Pakipik>Paikpik</corr>-a-Tight; compressed; pressed;
solid.

Paikpikin-v-To press; tighten; make solid<corr>;</corr>
tamp.

Pailangilang-[**adv.-]Scatteringly.

Paimbabaw-n-Hypocrisy; haughtiness.

Paina-n-Shelf.

Painamin-v-To adorn; embellish; decorate<corr>;</corr>
beautify; extol; exalt; honor;
magnify.

Painisin-v-To overwhelm; smother.

Painitin-v-To heat; warm.

Painog-adv.-Gyratory.

Painom-n-Drink; beverage.

Painugin-v-To spin; twirl.

Painumin-v-To invite to drink; give to
drink.

Paisipan-a-Thoughtful; meditating.

Paisipan-n-Puzzle; enigma.

Paít-n-Chisel.

Pait-n-Bitterness.

Paitan-v-To chisel.

Paitiman-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To blacken; darken; ebonize.

Pagkaasahan-n-Hope; expectancy.

Pagkabanal-n-Purity; virtue.

Pagkábanalan sa gracia n~g P. Dios-n-Sanctification.

Pagakdurugin[**typo? (M: yes) not alpha order][**typo: Pagkadurugin]-n-Powdering; pulverizing.

Pagkagiliwin-v-To love; make love.

Pagkagiliwin-n-Deep love; anxious desire.

<pb n=222>

Pakakaisa-n-Unity; agreement; unanimity<corr sic=":">;</corr>
union.

Pakakinisin-v-To polish; smooth; finish.

Pakalayaan-n-Liberation; giving of freedom;
setting at liberty.

Pakaligisin-v-<corr sic=Pulverizatiou>Pulverization</corr>.

Pakaliningin[**typo: Pakalinin~gin]-n Review; revision<corr sic=":">;</corr> inquiry<corr>;</corr>
close observance; examination<corr>;</corr>
investigation.

Pakalinisin-v-To clean; cleanse; purify.

<corr sic=Pagkalog>Pakalog</corr> n Rattle.

Pakamasdan-n-Look; observation; inquiry;
review; revision; examination;

Pakamusta-n-Compliments; message.

Pakana-n-Idea<corr>;</corr> notion<corr>;</corr> fancy; design.

Pakanasain-a-Anxious; desirous.

Pakanin-v-To feed; give to eat.

<corr sic=Pakapilitin>Pakapilipitin</corr>-n-Twisting<corr>;</corr> twining.

Pakapilitin-n-Perserverance; persistence;
inciting.

Pakasalin v-To[**fixed; T not visible in scan] betroth<corr>;</corr> marry; match.

Pakasamuin-v-To condemn.

<corr sic=Pagkasintahin>Pakasintahin</corr>-v-To love.

<corr sic=Pagkasiyasatin>Pakasiyasatin</corr>-v-To ascertain; examine;
investigate

Pakatinain-v-To dye.

Pakatingnan-n-Review; revision; look;
investigation<corr sic=":">;</corr> sight; watching.

Pakaway-n-Movement of the hands;[**matched scan]
weight[**typo weith corrected]<corr sic=":">;</corr> balance.

Pakay-n-Intention; desire: end; goal;
object; design-

Pakikiapid-n-Adultery; seduction.

Pakikinaban~gan-a-Profitable; useful.

Pakikipag usap-n-Style of address or
conversation

Pakikisama-n-Partnership; company; society<corr sic=",">;</corr>
treatment; behavior; gallantry;
compact.

Pakikitun~go-n-Compact; contract; traffic;
trade.

Pakinabang-n-Profit; revenue; gain; advantage;
utility; benefit<corr>;</corr> interest<corr>;</corr> benefaction;
lucre; improvement<corr sic=":">;</corr> income;
tax<corr>;</corr> usefulness; acquisition; rent.

Pakinaban~gan-v-To profit; benefit; gain.

Pakinan~gin-v-To smooth; polish.

Paking-a-Distracted.

Pakingan-v-To listen; hear; heed; hark;
hearken; comprehend; understand.

Pakinisin-v-To smooth; polish; finish;
brighten.

Pakintabin-v-To brighten; polish;
smooth; finish.

Pakiramdam-n Feeling<corr sic=",">;</corr> sensibility; notability.

Pakita-n-Appearance.

Pakitang loob n-Gallantry; manners.

Pakiusap-n-Request<corr>;</corr> entreaty; petition<corr>;</corr>
<corr sic=suplication>supplication</corr>; prayer.

<pb n=223>

Pakiusapan-v-To request; entreat; beg
or petition.

Pakli-n Intercalation; contestation; distant
answer.

Pakó-n Nail.

Pakong bakal na walang ulo-n-Brad;
tenon; spile.

Pakong kahoy-n-Wooden peg<corr sic=",">;</corr> peg<corr>;</corr> trunnel.

Pakong maliit-n-Tack; shingle nail;
small nail.

Pakong sabitan n~g papel-n-<corr sic=aper>Paper</corr> file.;

Pakpak-n-Wing; lean to; addition<corr>;</corr>
pennon.

Pakuan-n-Watermelon.

Pakuluin-v-To boil.

Pakumusta-n Compliments; expressions
of kindness.

Pakupasin-v-To fade; wither; cause to
fade or wither.

Pakupkop-n-Protection; help; aid; assistance;
favor.

[**out of order]Pakunutin-v-To wrinkle.

[**out of order]Pakunutin <corr sic="n~g">ang</corr> noo-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To wrinkle the
forehead.

Pakuyumpisin-v-To shrink; contract.

Pála n-Shovel; spade.

Palá-n Improvement<corr>;</corr> gain; reward; profit;
compensation<corr sic=",">;</corr> triumph<corr sic=",">;</corr> gratification;
glory.

Pala-inter. So.

[**unreadable 5th letter |M:a]Palaanito-n-Idolater; pagan.

Palaantok-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Lethargic<corr>;</corr> sleepy.

Palaaway-n Quarreller.

Palaaway-a Quarrelsome; noisy<corr sic=",">;</corr> touchy;
peevish.

Palabá-n-Wash<corr sic=":">;</corr> washing.

Palabahan-n-Place of washing; laundry.

Palabá n~g buan-n-The raining at night
when the moon shines.

Palabiro-a-Jocose; jocular<corr sic=",">;</corr> droll.

Palabiro-n-Joker; jester<corr sic=",">;</corr> wag<corr sic=",">;</corr> droll.

Palabisin v-To exceed; <corr sic=excell>excel</corr>; surpass;
overcome; give more than is necessary.

Palabuin-v-To darken; blur; blot.<corr>;</corr> obscure;
cloud; confuse; make muddy
or murky.

Palabun~ga-a-Fruitful; prolific.

Palacio-n-Palace.

Palad-n-Chance<corr sic=":">;</corr> fate<corr sic=",">;</corr> luck; doom<corr sic=":">;</corr> hap;
happiness[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr> prosperity; felicity.

Palagay-n-Supposition; election; appointment.

Palagay <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Calm; serene; tranquil<corr>;</corr>
affable<corr>;</corr> meek; plain.

Palaguin-v-To make leafy; unfold; unroll;
increase.

Palahan~gin[**matched scan]-v-To crack; split; cleave;
flaw; chink.

<pb n=224>

Palahan~gin-a-Boastful; bragging.

Palaihi-a-Continually making water.

Palá isipan-n-Riddle; enigma; puzzle;
rebus.

Pala isipin-a-<corr sic=Thougtful>Thoughtful</corr>; meditating.

Palak-a-Distant; remote; separated.

Palak-adv.-At a distance.

Palaka-n-Frog; toad.

Palakad-n-Procedure; conduct; demeanor;
management; manner; custom;
use; usage; mode; method.

Palakad lakad-a- Wandering<corr>;</corr> vagabond;
erring; errant; excursive.

Palakain-n-Glutton.

Palakain-a-Gluttonous.

Palakang kakapsoy-n-Toad.

Palakasin-v-To invigorate; strengthen;
fortify; inspire or give courage; make
courageous; remove[**Errata] fear.

Palakhin-v-To enlarge; aggrandize; increase;
heighten; augment; improve.

Palakihin-v-To augment; increase; enlarge;
aggrandize; heighten.

Palakihin ang isip-v-To educate; instruct;
breed; bring up; teach; broaden
the mind.

Palakihin ang katawan-v-To make fat;
fatten.

Palakol-n-Axe; ax.[**matched scan]

Palakolin-v-To chop; hew; cut with an
axe.

Palakpak-n-Slam; sound caused by the
fall of anything; wooden rattle.

Palalasing-a-Intemperate; immoderate.

Palalimin-v-To deepen; profound.

Palalo-a-Proud; haughty; supercilious;
overbearing; arrogant; lofty; presumptuous;
insolent; imprudent; boastful;
inflated.

Palaluin-v-To make <corr sic=pround>proud</corr> or haughty;
exceed; excel; surpass; overcome;
overpower.

Palamara-n-Traitor.

Palamara-a-Infidel; inconstant; untrue;
traitorous; ungrateful; shameless.

Palambutin-v-To soften; mollify; make
soft, bland or tender.

Palampasin-v-To <corr sic=exeed>exceed</corr>; excel; surpass;
go beyond; pass.

Palanan~gis-a-Snivelling;.[**Typo: remove ';']

Palanan~gis-n-Sniveling.

Palanas-n-Stony place; flat rock.

Palangana-n-Washbasin; basin.

Palangoy[**typo: Palan~goy]-a-Floating; <corr sic=bouyant resp=e>buoyant</corr>.

Palan~goyin-v-To make or cause to swim.

Palansikin-v-To bespatter; splash;
dab.

[**out of order]Palamigin-v-To refresh; cool; refrigerate.

Palapala-n-Scaffold; shade.

<pb n=225>

Palaputin-v-To thicken; condense; curdle.

[**out of order]Palapasial-n-Walker; one who is on
the go all the time; gad about.

Palaso-n-Dart; arrow.

Palasugal-n-<corr sic=Qambler resp=e>Gambler</corr>.

Palasumbong-n-Taleteller; telltale.

Palatain-v-To cause to wither or fade.

Palatak-n-Click

Palatanong-n-Querist.

Palatanong-n-Quizzical.

Palataw-n-Hatchet; broad axe.

Palausap-a-Quarrelsome; touchy.

Palawit-n-Anything that is hung up as
an adornment.

Palay-n-Rice that is still in hull.

Palayan-n-Rice-field.

Palayasin-v-To send away; dismiss; oust.

Palayaw-n-Caress; cajolery; dandle; petting<corr>;</corr>
freedom.

Palayawin-v-To caress; pet; <corr sic=cejole>cajole</corr>; humor;
cheer; coddle; dandle; free; liberate;
give much freedom.

Palayok na gatasan-n-Milk-jar.[**"Milk-jar"?, scan unclear. |M: - is present]

Palayok-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Jar; olla.[**? Scan illegible |M: olla (a type of jar)]

Palayok na tanso-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Copper kettle.

Palayuin-v-To distance; remove to a
distance; send;[**extra ;] away; separate; part.

Palibid-n-Circumference; circuit; environs.

[**out of order]Palibhasain-v-To depreciate; insult; revile;
abuse.

Palibot-n-Circumference; circuit; environs.

Paligid-n-Circumference; circuit; perimeter;
periphery.

Paligid-adv.-About.

Paligid[**matched scan]-prep.-About.

Paligiran-v-To circuit; skirt.

<corr sic=Paligin>Paliguin</corr>-v-To bathe; lave.

Palihan-n-Anvil.

Palihim-adv.-Secretly; hiddenly; <corr sic=surreptuously resp=e>surreptitiously</corr>;
treacherously.

Palikid-n-Ball of string.

Palikoliko-adv.-Flutteringly.

Palikoliko-a-Fluttering; crooked; turning;
tortuous.

Palikpik n~g kayo-n-Fringe of cloth.

Paliligo-n-Bath.

Paliling-adv.-Obliquely.

Paliling-a-Oblique.

Palinamnamin-v-To taste; relish; give
taste.

Palinawin-v-To clear; make plain; explain;
expound; demonstrate the
truth.

Palinsarin ang buto-v-To disjoint; pull
apart.

Palinuhod-[**a-] Humble; meek; begging;
kneeling.

<pb n=226>

Paliparin-v-To cause to fly.

Palipisan-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Temple.

Palis-a-Clean.

Palis-n-Place.

Palit-n-Change; barter; exchange; surrogation;
commutation.

Palikatin-v-To split; cleave; crack.

Palitaw-n-Apparition; appearance; overt.[**adj (headword is noun)]

[**out of order]Palitan-v-To change; exchange; barter;
substitute; surrogate; commute; permute;
replace.

Paliwanagin-v-To explain; clear; expound;
lay open; evince; make plain
or clear; demonstrate.

Paliwas-a-<corr sic=transverse>Transverse</corr>; oblique.

Paliwas-n-Evasion; avoidance.

Palo-n-Pole; mast; stick; cudgel; blow
with anything.

[**out of order]Palopalo n~g damit-n-Clothes-beater.

Paloob-v-To put in; enter; meddle; interfere.

Palso-a-False.

Palsohin-v-To falsify<corr sic=",">;</corr> counterfeit.

Paltos-n-Burn.

Paluagin-v-To loosen; free; liberate.

Paluagin ang loob-v-To appease; calm;
tranquilize.

Palubalub-v-To wallow; roll in mud.

Palubalub sa bisio-v-To wallow in vice.

Palubayin-v-To mitigate; assuage; appease;
calm; stop; check; soften.

Palubugin-v-To submerge; inundate.

Palugit-n-Advantage; start; handicap;
distance.

Palugit n~g panahon-n-Increase of time;
furlough.

Paluin-v-To beat; strike; belabor; pummel;
scourge.

Palumatlumatin-v-To crack; split; defer;
delay; dally.

Palumatin-v-To crack; split.

Palundagin-v-To cause or make jump.

Palungkutin-v-To make or cause to be
sorrowful or sad.

Paluputan-v-To wrap up.

Paluputin-v-To wrap up.

Palutang-adv.-Floating; <corr sic=bouyant resp=e>buoyant</corr>.

Pamagain-v-To cause to or make swell.

Pamagat-n-Vow; promise.

Pamagat-n-Nickname; alias; denomination.

Pamagatan-v-To nickname; give an alias;
denominate; make a vow or promise.

Pamahalaan-v-To manage; heed; care
for; keep; guard; govern; direct; conduct;
domineer.

Pamahid-n-Wiping rag; packers[**typo: packer's] waste.

Pamahid n~g pawis-n-Handkerchief.

Pamahin-n-Superstition.

Pamakpak-n-Addition; lean to; wing.

<pb n=227>

Pamalimali-a-Erroneous; full of mistakes;
inconsiderate.

Pamamaga-n-Swelling; inflammation; tumidity;
tumidness.

Pamamagpak-n-The waving of one's
arms<corr>;</corr> cruse[**can't confirm but this seems as typo for 'cruise' as 'cruse' is a type of jar]; beginning<corr>;</corr> appearance.

Pamamag itan[**typo: Pamamagitan]-n-Intercession; intervention;
meditation.

Pamamahagi-n-Partition; distribution;
division; dividing.

Pamamahala-n-Care; cargo<corr>;</corr> watch; guard;
duty; management; government.

Pamamahala na mabagsik[**"mahagsik"? image unclear |M:no, mabagsik]-n-Tyranny;
severity; rigidity of government.

Pamamahay-n-Habitation; abode; residence;
lodging; mansion.

Pamamalagi-n-Stability; lasting; habituation;
subsistence.

Pamamalat-n-Hoarseness.

Pamamalita-n-Narration; speaking; revelation;
<corr sic=speach>speech</corr>; talk; talking.

Pamamanas-n-Beri-beri; swelling caused
by a cold.

Pamamanglaw-n-Solitude; loneliness[**Errata];
gloominess.

Pamamansag-n-Nickname; alias.

Pamamantog-n-Inflation.

Pamamaos-n-Hoarseness.

Pamamarati-n-Stability; duration; permanency;
eternity.

Pamamayad-n-Payment; compensation.

Pamana-n-Legacy; inheritance.

Pamanahan-v-To legate; inherit.

Pamanghain-v-To amaze; cause to stare
or wonder; astonish.

Pamankin-n-Nephew; niece[**Errata].

Pamankin na babayi-n-Niece.

Pamankin na lalaki-n-Nephew.

Pamankin sa pakinabang-n-Stepchild.

Pamansa-n-Promise; denomination; determination.

Pamantugin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To inflate; fill with wind.

Pamaoy-n-Scare crow.

Pamaratihin-v-To accustom; inure; frequent.

<corr sic=Pamagatan>Pamatagan</corr>-n-Level; anything used for leveling

Pamatay n~g <corr sic=ilay>ilaw</corr>-n-Light extinguisher.

Pamawis-n-Handkerchief.

Pamaypay-n-Wag; fan; shaking.

Pamibigan-n-Talk; anything that is
put in the mouth.

Pamigkis-n-Belt; sash; girdle; <corr sic=hand>band</corr>; ligature;
scarf.

Pamigkis <corr sic="n~g">na</corr> balat-n-Leather belt.

Pamihasanin-v-To abuse; inure; accustom.

Pamimili-n-Purchase; buying; selection;
choice; volition.

<pb n=228>

Pamimintuho-n-Petition<corr sic=",">;</corr> prayer; asking;
service<corr>;</corr> obedience; submission.

Pamimintuho sa Dios-n-Prayer to God.

Pamin~gihin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To deafen.

Paminsan-adv.-Once.

Paminta-n-Pepper.

Pamitpit-n-Instrument for cutting.

Pamugaw-n-Scarecrow.

Pamula-n-Origin<corr sic=",">;</corr> source<corr sic=":">;</corr> beginning;
root<corr sic=":">;</corr> entree<corr sic=",">;</corr> entry; element<corr>;</corr> principle;
motive.

Pamulaan-v-To commence.<corr>;</corr> begin; undertake<corr>;</corr>
attempt.

<corr sic=Pamumubok>Pamumubog</corr>-n-Crystalization.

Pamumukod-n-Separation<corr>;</corr> distinction[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr>
singularity.

Pamumula n~g mukha-n-Blush; bashfulness.

Pamumuno-n-Government; commanding;
commandment; leading; heading.

Pamumula n~g balat-n-Pallor; wanness; paleness<corr sic=",">;</corr> ghastliness.

Pamunas-n-Washingcloth; dusting cloth; trifle.

Pamun~gahin-v-To fertilize<corr>;</corr> make fruitful

Pamuti-n-Adornment[**Errata]<corr sic=",">;</corr> adoration; ornament;
embellishment.

Pamutihan-v-To adorn<corr>;</corr> embellish, set-off;
fit up; ornament; clean.

Pamutihin-v-To decorate; embellish;
adorn<corr>;</corr> set off.

Pamutiin-v-To whiten; make white.

Pana-n-Arrow<corr>;</corr> dart.

Panabihan-n-Toilet; retreat.

Panabing-n-Curtain; covering; awning;
screen.

Panabing sa pinto-n-Screen.

Panagano-n-Dedication; consecration; inscription.

Panagap n~g bula-n-Skimmer.

Panaghiling banal-n-Emulation; envy;
jealousy.

Panaghoy-n-Lamentation; dole; dolor;
lament<corr>;</corr> bewailing; wail<corr sic=",">;</corr> strong sentiment.

Panaghoy na malumbay-n-Sad lamentation.

Panaginip-n-Dream.

Panagpi-n-Patch

Panagutan-n-Guarantee<corr sic=",">;</corr> bail; response;
responding; answering.

Panahod-n-Receiver; small bucket.

Panahok-n-Spice

Panahon-n-Time<corr sic=",">;</corr> era; age; term; tide;
season; epoch; occasion; opportunity.

Panahon mabuting ipagtanim-n-Seed
time.

Panahon na magkasing luat ang araw
at gabi-n-Equinox.

<pb n=229>

Panahon nakaraan-n-Past time; past
tense.

Panahon na walang gawa-n-Rest; repose;
recreation.

Panahon nang babayi-n-Periodical indisposition
of women; menses.

Panahon n~g gapasan n-Harvest time.

Panahon n~g pagani-n-Harvest time.

Panahon n~g tatlong buan-n-Quarter.

Panahon salat sa ulan-n-Drought.

Panahunan-n-Turn; time; succession

Panakip n-Cover<corr>;</corr> lid<corr>;</corr> stopper.

Panakip n~g hihigan[**matched scan] n Coverlet; bedspread.

Panakot-n Scarecrow.

Panaksak n-Poniard; dagger; dirk;
stilleto.

Panaktak-n-Branding iron

Panalan~gin-n Prayer; petition; invocation<corr sic=",">;</corr>
oration; evening prayer.

Panali-n-String<corr>;</corr> thong.

Panali n~g zapatos-n-Shoestring.

Panaluyan bahay-n-Hotel; inn; boarding
house.

Panambil-n-Covering screen; cover;
inclination; vocation.

Panambitan n-Lamentation; lament;
moan.

Pananahan-n-Habitation; abode; living
at a certain place.

Pananakot-n Fright; threat; surprise.

Pananálig n Hope.<corr>;</corr> expectancy; firmness;
constancy.

Pananalita-n-Talk<corr>;</corr> discourse; conversation;
idiom; language.

Pananalo-n-Victory<corr sic=",">;</corr> winning.

Pananamit-n Garb; wearing; apparel;
clothes<corr>;</corr> complete suit.

Pananampalataya n-Credence; faith;
creed; belief<corr sic=",">;</corr> troth<corr>;</corr> theory<corr>;</corr> credit.

Pananamsam-n-Plunder; spoils<corr>;</corr> pillage.

Pananatili-n-Stability<corr sic=",">;</corr> permanence; duration;
tenacity; continuance<corr>;</corr> persistency.

Pananauli-n-Restoration; <corr sic=devolutation>devolution</corr>.

Pananda-n-Branding-iron[**matched scan]<corr sic=":">;</corr> stencil<corr>;</corr> marker<corr sic=":">;</corr>
marking iron.

Panan~gis-n Weeping; crying; snivelling.

Pananim-n-Seed; sowing; seed time;
that which is planted.

Panat-a-Tight; hard; firm; solid.

Panata-n-Promise; offer.

Panatag-n-Secure; constant; tranquil;
quiet; calm; rest.

Panauhan-n-<corr sic=Border resp=e>Boarder</corr>; lodger; guest.

Panay-a-Even; equal; continuous; all.

Panay-adv.-Evenly; equally; totally.

Panáya n-Continuance; evenness;
<corr sic=equallty>equality</corr>.

Pandak-a-Short; chubby; stocky; chunky.

<pb n=230>

Pandampe-n-Blotter.

Pandareta-n-Tambourine.

Panday-n-Blacksmith<corr>;</corr> ironsmith.

Pandayan n-Blacksmith shop; forge.<corr>;</corr>
iron works.

Pan de sal n Salt bread; bun; bunn.

Pandilig-n-Sprinkler; watering pot.

Pandinig n Ear trumpet; ear

Pandulo n Final; conclusion<corr>;</corr> acme<corr>;</corr>
finish; termination; crisis<corr sic=",">;</corr> goal.

Panduro n-Punch.

Pan~ga-n Jawbone.

Pan~gadya-n-Anything used to defend
something else.

Pan~gahas-n Daring; boldness; sauciness<corr>;</corr>
forwardness<corr>;</corr> insolence; impudence<corr>;</corr>
dissolution; audacity; intrepidity;
fearlessness<corr sic=",">;</corr> spunk.

Pang ahit n-Razor.

Pan~gako-n-Promise<corr sic=",">;</corr> guarantee; plight.

Pan~galág n~g tornillo-n-Screwdriver.

Pan~galan-n-Name.

Pan~galawa n Second<corr sic=",">;</corr> assistant.

Pan~galawa buhat sa dulo-n-Penultimate;
the last but one.

Pan~galawang n~galan-n Surname<corr sic=",">;</corr> nickname.

Pan~galíng[**matched scan]-n-Brush hook<corr>;</corr> instrument for
cutting away brush.

Pan~galos-n-<corr sic=Scrapper>Scraper</corr>; anything used as
a <corr sic=craper>scraper</corr>.

Pan~gamba-n-Doubt<corr>;</corr> suspicion; jealousy;
fear; plight<corr>;</corr> indecision[**Errata]; dread<corr>;</corr> suspense[**Errata];
hesitation.

Pan~gambahin a-Fearful; distrusful;
jealous<corr>;</corr> suspicious.

Pan~gamoy n Nostril; nose.

Pan~gan~galakal-n Traffic<corr>;</corr> trade; commerce.

Pan~gan~galakal n~g katawan-n-Brothel<corr sic=",">;</corr>
whoring<corr>;</corr> prostitution.

Pan~gan~galan-n The giving of a name;
naming.

Pan~gan~ganak-n-Birth; giving birth.

Pan~gan~garal-n-Preaching<corr>;</corr> sermon; exhortation.

Pan~gan~gaso-n Hunt-<corr>;</corr> chase; gunning.

Pan~gan~gatawan-n Shape or form of the
body.

Pan~gan~gayaw n-Negation; unwillingness.

Pan~gan~gayayat-n-Extenuation<corr>;</corr> feebleness;
weakness[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr> debility; wasting away.

Pan~gan~gayupapa-n-Submission; humiliation;
yielding; losing in a fight.

Pan~ganib n-Danger; risk; peril; jeopardy;
hazard.

Pangapas-n-Sickle[**Errata]; scythe; reaping-hook<corr>;</corr>
gyue[**Errata: gyve].

Pan~gapon-n Discard.

Pangapos n~g paa-n-Shackles; hopple,

<pb n=231>

[**out of order]Pangapos n~g kamay-n-Handcuffs.

Pan~garal-n-Discourse; sermon; advice;
preaching.

Pan~garalan-v-To exhort<corr sic=",">;</corr> preach.

Pan~garal kristiano n Sermon.

Pan~garap n Dream.

Pan~gaso-n-Chase; hunt.

Pan~gati-n-Decoy; snare.

Pan~gating ibon-n-Decoy bird.

Pan~gatlo n-The third.

Pan~gatn~gat-n-Bite<corr>;</corr> gnaw; <corr sic=nible resp=e>nibble</corr>.

Pan~gayayatin-v-To extenuate; debilitate<corr sic=",">;</corr>
make weak or thin.

Pan~gayod-n Grater<corr sic=",">;</corr> scraper.

Pangbatak-n Pull; tug<corr sic=",">;</corr> haul<corr sic=",">;</corr> attraction.

Pangbatid-n-Dam.

Pangbayo-n-Mallet<corr>;</corr> mall.

Pangbulok-n-Anything that will make
or cause another to rot.

Pangbutas-n-Auger<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=gimble>gimblet</corr>; punch;
weevil; puncheon.

Pangbuya-n Incitement; spur; <corr sic=stimulous>stimulus</corr>.

Pangdamdam-n-Sensibility<corr sic=",">;</corr> sense; sentiment;
perception.

Panggapus-n-Trammel; handcuff; shackle.

Panggising-n-Alarm clock; alarmbell.

Panghahapdi-n Smarting; stinging[**; ]-smart
pain.

Panghaharang-n-Highway robbery;
holdup.

<corr sic=Panghahalili>Panghalili</corr>-n Substitute; that which is
put in place of another.

Panghalina-n-Attraction; magnet.

Panghalo n-Mixer; rocker; mortar; any
thing that is used to mix with.

Panghapit-n-Pestle.[**fixed; P not visible in scan]

Panghihiganti-n-Vengeance; retaliation.

Panghihimagsik-n-Sternness; rigor;
strictness; severity.

Panghihimagsik laban[**matched scan] sa puno n Insurrection;
rebellion; sedition.

Panghihina-n Debility; weakness; extenuation;
feebleness; wasting;[**extra ;] away.

Panghihina n~g loob-n-Lack or want of
courage; temerity; weakness of heart;
faintheartedness.

Panghihinang-n-Soldering.

Panghihip n~g platero n-Jeweler's blowpipe.

Panghihiwalay-n Separator.

Panghikuat-Lever; fulcrum.

Panghila-n Attraction; anything which
serves to draw another.

Panghilamos-n-Towel; the washing of
the face and hands.

Panghina-n-Anything[**fixed; A not visible in scan] which serves to weaken another.

Panghinang-n-Solder; soldering-iron.

Panghinin~ga-n-Toothpick.

<pb n=232>

Panghinuli-n-<corr sic=Earphick resp=e>Earpick</corr>.

Panghuhula[**matched scan]-n-Prophecy; surmise; conjecture.

Panghuit-n-Lever; fulcrum.

Panghukay-n-Spade; hoe

[**out of order]Panghuli n~g isda-n-Fishtrap.

Panghuli-n-Trap.

Pan~giki-n-Chill.

Pan~gil-n-Eyetooth; fang; tusk.

Pan~gimayin-v-To benumb<corr sic=",">;</corr> cause to be
senseless.

Pan~gimbubo-n-Envy; jealousy.

Pan~gin~giba-n-Singularity;[**matched scan] distinction;
novelty; strangeness.

Pan~gin~gilabot-n-Fright; terror.

Pan~gin~gilag-n-Avoidance; evasion.

[**out of order]Pangigilalas-n-Admiration; wonder;
amazement<corr sic=",">;</corr> stupor.

Pan~gin~ginig-n-Trembling; shaking; quaking<corr>;</corr>
sparkling.

Pan~gin~gisda-n-Fishing.

Pan~gin~gitlog-n-The laying of eggs.

Pan~gin~gitlog n~g isda-n-The spawning
of fish.

Pan~ginoon-n-Master; overseer<corr sic=",">;</corr> proprietor[**Errata];
owner; mistress; lord.

Pan~gintindi-n-Sense; spirit<corr sic=",">;</corr> intelligence;
knowledge; skill; ability.

Pan~gispiki-n-Lever; fulcrum; handspike.

Pan~git-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Ugly; homely; immodest; disfigured;
dirty; deformed; sordid<corr>;</corr> huge.

Pan~gitlugan-n-Hen's nest; haunt of a hen.

Pangkat-n-Chapter; part; clan.

Pangkat n~g[**matched scan] bayan-n-District; part.

Panglalata-n-Prostration; languidness;
weakness.

Panglasap-n-Palate;[**matched scan] taste; relish.

Panglaw-n-Gloom; sorrow; grief; sadness;
loneliness[**Errata]; depression of spirits.

Panglilibak-n-Slander; insult; ridicule.

Panglin~got n~g tapon-n-Corkscrew.

Pangloloob-n-Robbery; robbing.

Pangnamnam-n-Taste; palate; relish.

Pangpahimpil-n-Sedative.<corr>;</corr> anything
which serves to quiet;[**,] ease or calm.

Pan~giti[**typo: Pan~gin~giti]-n-Smile; budding of blossoms.

Pangpakilos n-Motor.

Pangpalakas-n-Corroborative; anything
which serves to strengthen.

Pangpang-n-Shore; strand; bank.

Pangpawis-n-Sudorific.

Pangpasuka-n-Emetic.

Pangpasulong-n-Propeller; incitement.<corr>;</corr>
inducement.

<corr sic=Panpatibay>Pangpatibay</corr>-n-Corroborative; guarantee<corr sic=",">;</corr>
anything which serves to strengthen.

Pangpatulog-n-Narcotic[**Errata]; drug.

<pb n=233>

Pangpatuyo-n-Drier[**Errata].

Pangpiga-n-Press; pestle.

<corr sic=Panpigil>Pangpigil</corr>-n-Brake.

Pangpihit-n-Wrench.

Pangsual-n-Handspike.

Pangsurong-n-Shovel<corr sic=",">;</corr> spade.

Pangtala-n-Rule; marker<corr>;</corr> that which
serves to govern.

Pan~gudn~god-n-Grater; scraper.

Pan~gulo-n-Leader; commander; chief;
principal; head.

Pan~gunahan-n-Head; leader.

Pan~gun~gulili-n-Sordidness; filthiness;
dirtiness.

Pan~gun~gundot-n-Lance; blunt instrument
used for purposes of defense.

Pan~gun~gurong-n-Contraction; bucking;
shortening; retraction; retirement;
backing down.

Pan~gungusap[**typo: Pan~gun~gusap]-n-Advice<corr>;</corr> talking; lecture;
locution; speech.

Pan~gusap-n-Correction<corr>;</corr> advice; charge;
reprehension; reproach; censure;
reprimand; reproof.

Pan~gusapan-v-To advise; reprimand;
censure; reprehend; admonish; lecture.

Pan~gusap na masaklap-n-Reprimand;
reproof; lecture.

Pang uumit-n-Theft; peculation; stealing;
thieving.

Pangwakas-n-Final; conclusion; determination;
end; remembrance.

Pangwakas-a-Final; conclusive; last.

Pangyayari-n-Accomplishment; event;
incident; issue; success; realization;
casuality.

Pangyayaring bigla-n-Sudden;[**extra ;] happening.

Panibago-a-New; renewed.

Panibagong pagbaban~gon-n-Rebuilding;
reconstruction.

Panibugho-n-Jealousy; envy.

Panimba-n-Bucket.

Panímba-n-Clothes[**Errata] used to go to church
in.

Panimbang-n-Weight<corr>;</corr> balance.

Panimdim-n-Meditation; anxiety; restlessness
caused by thinking of another.

Panin~gasin-v-To kindle; set afire.

Panin~gilan-n-Collection of debts; place
of collection.

Paninigalan-n-Sideboard<corr>;</corr> dresser.

Paninilaw-n-Pallor; ghastliness; wanness;
pallidness.

Paninilay-n-Meditation; contemplation;
musing.

Paninilbihan-n-Service; servitude.

Paninilo at pagbabalat n~g libro-n-<corr sic=the>The</corr>
binding of books.

<pb n=234>

Paninin~gil-n-Collection of outstanding
debts.

Panininta[**matched scan]-n-Courtship<corr>;</corr> love-making<corr>;</corr> love
suit.

Paninirang puri-n-Slander<corr>;</corr> gossip<corr>;</corr> back-bitting.

Paninira sa isang lugar-n-The living or
lodging at a certain place.

Paniwala[**typo: Paniniwala (Paniwala already listed below)]-n-Belief; faith; credit<corr>;</corr> credence<corr sic=",">;</corr>
confidence<corr>;</corr> testimony.

Panipit-n-Tongs<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=princers resp=e>pincers</corr>; clamp.

Panira n~g puri-n-Slander<corr>;</corr> defamation.

Paniwala-n-Belief<corr>;</corr> credence<corr>;</corr> credit.

Paniwalaan-v To believe<corr>;</corr> credit<corr>;</corr> have
faith in.

Paniwalain-a-Credulous; simple.

Panlimas-n-Bail.

Panot-a-Bald<corr>;</corr> hairless<corr>;</corr> baldheaded.

Pansinin-a-Notable<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=preceptible>perceptible</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> sensible;
sensitive; thoughtful.

Pantain-v-To level<corr>;</corr> make equal.

Pantás-n-Sage<corr>;</corr> wise man<corr>;</corr> writer

Pantay-a-Equal; uniform; level; even<corr sic=",">;</corr>
similar; of the same height

Pantayin-v-To equalize; level; make
equal; match<corr sic=",">;</corr> make similar.

Panti-n-Net

Pantuyo-n-Drier.

Panual-n-Lever<corr>;</corr> push; shove.

Panudlok-n-Stimulant[**Errata]<corr sic=",">;</corr> billiard eue[**matched scan][**typo: cue]

Panugtog[**matched scan] n~g kampana-n-Bell clapper

Panukat-n-Measure<corr>;</corr> tape line.

Panukat n~g ulan-n-Udometer.

Panukaba-n-design; intention.

Panulat-n-Penmanship.

Panulukan-n-Angle<corr sic=",">;</corr> corner<corr sic=",">;</corr> nook.

Panuluyanan-n-Inn; hotel inn of a monastery.

Panumpa-n-Adjuration

Panumpaan-v-To make oath: swear;
promise

Panungkit-n-Hook; gaff; window pole;
provocation.

Panunuan-n-<corr sic=Longing>Lodging</corr><corr>;</corr> champion; friend.

Panunúba-n-Trick<corr>;</corr> deceit<corr>;</corr> trap<corr>;</corr> fraud.

Panunubok-n-Secret observation or
watching; surprise

Panunumbalik-n-Restoration<corr>;</corr> devolution.

Panunumpa-n-Vow; oath; curse; imprecation.

Panunumpa n~g hindi totoo-n-Perjury;
false oath.

Panuob-n-Disinfectant

Panutog-n-Prick.[**matched scan (P not clear in scan)]

Panutog n~g pabete-n-Snuffers.

Panutsot-n-Whistle; call.

Panuyo-n-The asking of the father for
the hand of his daughter in marriage;[**matched scan]
gallantry; service of love; congratulation.

<pb n=235>

Panuyuan-v-To court; love; woo.

Panyito n~g damit-n-Gore of [**a] skirt.

Panyo-n-<corr sic=Hankerchief resp=e>Handkerchief</corr>.

Panyo sa liig-n-Kerchief.

Paos-n-Hoarseness.[**matched scan]

Papa-n-Pope<corr sic=",">;</corr> pontiff.

Papag aralin-v-To send to school<corr sic=",">;</corr> make
or cause to study; teach.

Papag alsahin-v-To cause to raise.

Papagbagahin-v-To rubify; make like a
live coal

Papagdalitain-v-To cause to suffer.

Papaghirapin-v-To give or cause pain;
impoverish; make poor.

Papag initin-v-To heat<corr sic=",">;</corr> make angry.

Papag asunduin[**typo: Papagkasunduin]-v-To reconcile<corr sic=",">;</corr> cause
to become friends again.

Papaglamatin-v-To crack.

Papagluatin-v-To prolong.<corr>;</corr> stretch;
lengthen (per. to time).

Papagpasain-v-To bruise<corr>;</corr> burn; contuse.[**matched scan]

Papagtakahin-v-To astonish; amaze<corr>;</corr>
cause to wonder or stare; surprise.

Papanghimagsik-n-Vengeance<corr sic=",">;</corr> cruelty;
tyranny.

Papan~gilabutin-v-To terrify; scare.

Papan~gilinin-v-To observe; sanctify;
respect; worship.

Papan~gitan-v-To pollute; stain; make
ugly or homely.

Papan~gitin-v-To pollute; stain; make
homely or ugly.

Papanglawin-v-To sadden; make or
cause to be sad, gloomy, dark or
mournful.

Papang undutin-v-To contract; wrinkle;
shrink.

Papang urun~gin-v-To contract.<corr>;</corr> shrink.

Papaniwalain-v-To persuade; imbue;
induce; make or cause to believe.

Papasok-n-Entering; manner of entering;
entrance.

Papayo-n-Advice.

Papel-n-Paper.

Papel na <corr sic=bastos>basta</corr>-n-Wrapping paper.

Papilipit-adv.-Twistingly<corr>;</corr> on the contrary.[**matched scan]

Papulahin-v-To redden; rubify<corr sic=",">;</corr> stain;
make or cause to blush.

Papulanditin-v-To squirt.

Papurihan-v-To honor<corr>;</corr> respect<corr>;</corr> dignify.

Paputiin-v-To pick.

Paputihin-v-To whiten.

Paputukin-v-To shoot; burst<corr>;</corr> break open.

Paraan-n-Path; mode; method; way<corr>;</corr>
manner; <corr sic=from>form</corr>; course<corr>;</corr> gangway<corr sic=",">;</corr> disposition<corr>;</corr>
will; aspect.

Paraan n~g isip-n-Theory.

<pb n=236>

Paraanan n~g masid[**matched scan] ang isang libro-v- To
peruse; run over<corr>;</corr> read hurriedly

Paraanin -v- To pass; let pass; give
way:

Paraanin sa-v- To make go a certain
way; compel to go a certain way.

Paragala-n- <corr sic=Grit resp=e>Gift</corr><corr>;</corr> reward; present

Paragos-n- Harrow; drag.

Paralis-n- Roller; rolling pin.

Paralis n~g nagliligawan-n- Pimp.

Paramihin-v- To multiply; increase<corr>;</corr> augment<corr>;</corr>
dilate; diffuse; propagate.

Parang-n- Country<corr>;</corr> field; meadow.

Paran~galin-v- To extol; exalt; elevate;
sublimate; honor.

Parang apoy-a- Fiery.

Párang bato-a - Stony.

Párang hayop-a- Brutal.

Párang hindi-adv.-[**matched scan]As if not<corr>;</corr> as if it
were not.

Parang lan~gib-a- Scabby; scablike.

Parang n~g pastulan[**matched scan]-n- Pasture.

Párang nuno-a- Ghastly.

Párang serafin-a[**matched scan]- Seraphic<corr sic=",">;</corr> angelic.

Párang sutla-a- Silky.

Párang uhog-a- Mucous; slimy.

Parapara-adv.- Equally<corr sic=",">;</corr> uniformly; evenly.

Para sa-prep<corr>.</corr>- For<corr>;</corr> to; towards<corr>;</corr> in order
to; to the end that.

Parátang-n- Accusation; charge<corr>;</corr> imputation.

Paratan~gan-v[**matched scan]- To accuse; charge; impute;
criminate<corr>;</corr> impeach.

Parati-adv.- Always.

Paraya-n- Deceit; fraud.

Parayá-n- Suffering; patience; toleration.

Pareja-n- Pair<corr sic=",">;</corr> brace; couple; match;
<corr sic=doublelt>doublet</corr>

Pari-n- Priest; clergyman; divine<corr>;</corr> ecclesiastic.

Parikit-n- Ornament<corr>;</corr> adornment.

Parikitin-v- To ornament; beautify; embellish<corr>;</corr>
adorn.

Parinsa-n- Sadiron.[**entry looks ok]

Parinsahin-v- To iron.

Pares-n- Pair; brace<corr>;</corr> doublet.

Parisán-n- Pattern; precedent; type;
model<corr>;</corr> example:

Parísan-v- To imitate<corr>;</corr> counterfeit; mimic;
forge; pattern.

Parisukat-n- Square; quadrate.

Parisukat-a- Square; quadrate; quadratic.

Parisukatin-v[**matched scan]- To square<corr sic=":">;</corr> quadrate.

Parol-n- Lantern.

<corr sic=Paroodin>Paroonin</corr>-v- To go[**matched scan] after; send[**';' deleted, just a speck] after.

Paroparo-n- Butterfly.

Parti-n Quota; part.

<corr sic=Paratihin>Partihin</corr>-v- To part; divide.

<pb n=237>

Parusa-n-Punishment; <corr sic=chastizement>chastisement</corr><corr>;</corr>
penality[**Errata: penalty]; correction; <corr sic=requittal resp=e>requital</corr>.

Parusahin-v-To punish; <corr sic=chastize>chastise</corr>; correct;
requit.

Parusahin[**fixed (s didn't scan fully)] sa salita-v-To rebuke; censure;[**matched scan]
scold.

Pasá n-Bruise<corr>;</corr> burn; contusion.

Pasabi n-Message; errand.

Pasabugsabog-adv.-Helterskelter.

[**out of order]Pasá n~g dugo-n-Serous blood.

[**out of order]Pasakabila[**Fixed (s just didn't scan fully)] n~g bundok-v-To go over
the mountain.

Pasak n-Plug[** Unclear |M: fixed]; stopper<corr sic=",">;</corr> calk; peg.

Pasakin-v-To calk<corr>;</corr> plug<corr>;</corr> stop; <corr sic=heck>check</corr>.

Pasakit-n Torment; torture; pain; anguish.

Pasákitan-v To pain<corr>;</corr> distress; torment;
torture; afflict<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=chastize>chastise</corr>; mortify;
disgust; disable.

Pasal-n-Oakum.

Pasalan-v[**matched scan]-To calk; stop a leak; block
up.

Pasalapsap-a Shallow; superficial.

Pasaliwa adv.-Backhanded.

Pasalun~ga-adv<corr>.</corr> Reluctantly; contrarily;
reverse; repugnantly[**Errata].

Pasalun~gat-a Contrary; reluctant; repugnant;
reverse; against.

Pasamahin-v To unite<corr>;</corr> join; put together.

Pasamain-v-To deprave; corrupt; make
or cause to be bad.

Pasamain ang loob-v-To displease;
disgust.

Pasan-n Load.

Pasanin v-To carry or put on the
shoulders.

Pasarapin-v To relish; give zest.

Pasaulan-n-Devolution; restoration.

Pasayahin-<corr sic=n>v</corr> To gladden; cheer; make
happy.

Pasial-n-Stroll; walk; saunter.

Pasialan n-Promenade<corr sic=",">;</corr> avenue; walk.

Pasigan-n-Shore; strand<corr sic=",">;</corr> beach.

Pasiglahin-v-To vivify; incite; excite;
imbue<corr sic=",">;</corr> revive.

<corr sic=Pasimalaan>Pasimulaan</corr>-v-To commence; begin.

Pasimulan-n Beginning; commencement.

Pasinun~galin~gan-v-To give the[**a] lie;
contradict.

Pasiya-n Decision; verdict; judgement;
sentence; resolution; determination;
decree; rebuke.

Pasko-n Christmas.

Paskong mahaba-n-Quadrigesima.

Pasko n~g pagkabuhay n Easter.

Paslan~gin-a-Skittish.

Paslan~gin-v-To surprise; make a sudden
movement.

Paslang n Insolence; imprudence; daring.

<pb n=238>

[**M:I fixed a bit the -POS- on this page]
Paslan~gin[**matched scan]-v-To insult; profane; dare<corr>;</corr>
be impudent; violate<corr sic=",">;</corr> impute.

Paslit a-Mucous; mucky; low; abject;
ignorant; <corr sic=despicible>despicable</corr>; depraved.

Páso-n-Burn.

Páso n Earthen pan or tub.

Paso n Pass.

Pások-n Entrance.

Pasolo-n Sharp point.

Paspás n Shaking; dusting; instigation.

Paspasin-v To dust.<corr>;</corr> shake.

Pastol n~g tupa n-Shepherd.

Pastor-n <corr sic=Castor>Pastor</corr>; divine; ecclesiastic.

Pastulan n <corr sic=Filed>Field</corr>; meadow; pasture.

Pasubali-n Exception; condition; conditional
promise.

Pasubali sa n On condition that.

Pasúgo-n-Embassador; counsel.

Pasúin-v-To burn; <corr sic=scortch resp=e>scorch</corr>.

Pasukab asv.[**typo: adv.]-Treacherously<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=underhanded>underhandedly</corr>.

Pasukal adv.[**typo: a] -Treacherously, underhanded[**first 2 defns s/b deleted; mistakenly copied from above entry]
low; dirty

Pasukalin ang loob-v To vex; disgust;
disturb; molest<corr>;</corr> displease.

Pasukuin-v-To subdue<corr sic=":">;</corr> quell<corr>;</corr> overcome<corr>;</corr>
conquer.<corr>;</corr> subject<corr>;</corr> worst<corr>;</corr> overwhelm;
cause to surrender; captivate; charm.

Pasulat-n-Dictation; order to write.

Pasulun~gan v-To drive; impel.

Pasunod n-Example; precedent; copy; pattern.

Pasupil-n-Triumph; subjection;[**matched scan] conquering;
overcoming; overwhelming.

Pasupilin v-To overcome; subdue; overwhelm.

Pasuotsuot adv.-Twistingly; tortuously.

Pasuotsuot[**matched scan] a-Twisted; crooked; winding;

Pasusuhin-v To nurse; give suck.

Pasutsot-n-Whistle.

Pataasin-v-To raise; elevate.

Patabain-v To fatten; batten; fertilize;
maka[**Errata: make] fruitful.

Patad-n Rosin.

Patag-a Level; flat<corr>;</corr> even; plane; firm;
equal; similar; uniform; contain; consistent;
tranquil; smooth.

Patagin-v-To level; flatten.

Patago adv. Hiddenly; secretly; <corr sic=clandestinety resp=e>clandestinely</corr>

Patahimikin-v-To calm; tranquilize;
pacify; appease; settle; quiet.

Patak-n-Drop; blot; <corr sic=trip>drip</corr>.

Patakasin v-To cause or help to escape;
steal.

Patalim-n-Steel; cutting edge.

Patalimin-v-To sharpen; make keen.

Patanaw-n-Sight; apparition; model;
pattern.

<pb n=239>

Patan~gahin-v-To cause to be lazy or
indolent.

Patani-n-Lima beans.

Patapan~gin-v-To encourage; strengthen;
invigorate; enforce; make valiant;
exert.

[**out of order]Patahanin-v-To quiet; pacify; appease;
tranquilize.

Pátaw-n-Weight.

Patawad-n-Pardon; absolution; palliation;
forgiveness.

Patawarin-v-To forgive; pardon[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> absolve;
spare; acquit; condone; palliate.

Patawin-v-To weight.

Patayan-n-Killing; slaughter; carnage;
slaughter house.

Patayin-v-To kill; murder; assassinate;
quenca[**Errata: quench]; put out; extinguish.

Patayo-a-Perpendicular.

Patay sa kapatid-n-Fratricide.

Patay sa sariling ina-n-Matricide.

Patibong-n-Trap; deceit; fraud; cheat.

Patibong na panghuli n~g daga-n-Rat trap.

Patid-n-Break; cut.

Patigasin-v-To toughen; harden.

Patilansikin-v-To spatter; splash; dab;
bespatter.

Patingkayad-a-Tiptoe; walking on the
toes.

Patinin~gin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To clear up; settle; make
serene.

Patirin-v-To cut asunder; break; fracture.

Patis-n-Brine.

Patitiin-v-To drain.

Pati tis[**typo: Patitis]-n-Lampblack.

Patiwasayin-v-To tranquilize; calm; pacify.

Patnugot-n-Maxim; adage; motto.

Patong-n-Addition; boot; premium; augmentation.

Patos n~g gulong-n-Clinch.

Patotohanan-v-To ratify; verify; prove;
manifest; testify; confirm.

Patotohanin-v-To make true; prove<corr>;</corr> ratify;
verify; true.

Patuad-a-Inverted.

Patuad-adv<corr>.</corr>-Upside down.

Patubo-n-Interest; profit; gain.

Patuhin-v-To toss; pitch.

Patulinan-v-To accelerate; enliven.

Patuloy-n-Continuation; succession.

Patuluyan-v-To continue; lodge.

Patuluyan ang kapwa-v-To receive;
lodge; entertain; protect; give shelter.

Patuluyin-v-To lodge; let lodgings.

Patun~gan-v-To add; augment; give boot;
give a premium.

<pb n=240>

Patun~got[**fixed; part of the headword did not scan]-n-Small addition;[**,] or premium.

Patunugin-v-To whistle; make a noise
or sound on anything.

Patúpat-n-Pipe.

Patutot-n-Whore; prostitute[**Errata]; harlot.

Patuyo-adv<corr>.</corr>-Dryly; morosely.

Patuyuin-v-To dry; dessicate.

Patuyuin sa han~gin-v-To dry in the air.

Paulól-adv<corr>.</corr>-Foolishly; silly; madly;
harumscarum.[**Paulól? |M: yes]

Paulol-n-Increase; addition.

Paulol ulol-adv<corr>.</corr>-Foolishly; madly; silly;
precipitately; rashly.

Paulúlin-v-To make foolish.

Páululin-v-To fill; augment; add to.

Pautang-n-Credit; trust; bill; note.

Páwa-a-All; each; every; whole.

Pawalaan-v-To loosen; slacken; free;
liberate; set at liberty.

Pawalan ang alipin-v-To emancipate;
liberate.

Pawalan ang halaga-v-To condemn; depreciate;
diminish the value.

Pawalan n~g kabuluhan-v-To condemn;
depreciate<corr sic=",">;</corr> diminish.

Pawiin-v-To blot; erase; abolish; extinguish;
efface; put out; suppress.

Pawiin ang antok-v-To wake.

Pawiin ang kulay-v-To discolor; fade;
wash out.

Pawiin ang uhaw-v-To quench thirst.

Pawikan-n-Tortoise.

Pawis-n-Perspiration; sweat.

Payamanin-v-To enrich; make rich.

<corr sic=Payamoyin>Payamotin</corr>-v-To chafe; disgust.

Payanigin-v-To make or cause to tremble.

Payaos-a-Husky; hoarse.

Payapa-a-Pacific; tranquil; calm; quiet;
mild.

Payapain-v-To calm; pacify; tranquilize;
quiet; allay; settle; appease.

Payat-a-Weak; lean; thin; poor; meagre;
delicate; slender; gaunt; wizen; infirm;
faint; barren.

Payatin-v-To prostrate; exhaust; debilitate;
make thin or lean.

Páyo-n-Advice; admonition[**Errata].

Payong-n-Parasol; umbrella.

Payong na munti-n-Parasol.

Paypay-n-Fan.

Paypayin-v-To fan.

Pekas n~g mukha-n-Freckle.

Pepino-n-Cucumber.

Peras-n-Pear.

Perdegones-n-Buckshot.

Pidpid-n-Stick; splinter.

Pidpirin ang kahoy-v-To chop wood.

Piga-n-Squeeze; press; crush.

Pigain-v-To squeeze; press; crush.

<pb n=241>

Pighati-n-Disgust<corr sic=":">;</corr> melancholy; annoy<corr>;</corr>
annoyance; distaste; dudgeon; grievance;
grief; sorrow; gloom<corr>;</corr> sadness;
affliction

Pigi-n-Breech; buttock; haunch; hip;
rump; posteriors.

Pigil-n-Curb; check; stop.

Pigilan-v-To stop; curb; check; rein.

Pigilin-v-To stem; constrain; check;
curb; bridle; stop; <corr sic=obstruck>obstruct</corr>; restrain;
withhold.

Piging-n-Banquet; feast; fete.

Pigin~gin-v-To banquet; give a feast in
honor of another.

Pigsa-n-Tumor; <corr sic=abcess resp=e>abscess</corr>; tumefaction; boil.

Pigtain-v-To drench; soak

Pihit-n-Turn; sinuation.

Pihitin-v-To turn; tighten; sinuate.

Pikit-n-Wink; blink.

Piklat-n-Scar.

Piko-n-Pick.

Pilak-n-Silver.

Pilapil-n-Terrace; dike; dam; embankment;
imbankment.

Pilay-a-Lame.

Pilayin-v-To lame; disable; truncate;
make lame.

Pilduras-n-Pill.

Pilegas-n-Plait; ruff; ruffle.

Pilegasan-v-To plait; ruffle<corr>;</corr> crimple

<corr sic=Piti>Pili</corr>-n-Choice; volition; selection.

[**out of order]Pilat-n-Scar.

<corr sic=Palihin>Pilihin</corr>-v-To twist; warp; <corr sic=disort resp=e>distort</corr>; turn;
curl.

Piliin-v-To choose; select; elect.

Pilikmata-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Eyelash.

Piling-n-Cluster<corr sic=",">;</corr> bunch.

Pilipit-a-Sinuous;[**typo Sinous fixed] twisted; contorted.

Pilipit-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Sinuation; twist.

Pilipitin-v-To twist; curl; sinuate.

Pilit-n-Persuasion; obligation; enforcement;
compulsion.

Pilitin-v-To persuade; urge; enforce;
oblige; extort; press; persist; beset;
compel; ply; prevail<corr>;</corr> convince; drive;
persevere.

Pina-n-Pine.

Piña-n-Pineapple.

<corr sic=Pina>Pinag</corr> aapuyan-n-Hearth; fireplace; stove.

Pinag <corr sic=aaralan>aralan</corr>-n-Breeding; education; manners

Pinag bubuan-n-Foundry; casting house.

Pina buhatan[**typo: Pinagbuhatan]-n-Cause; occasion; beginning<corr>;</corr>
motive; source; origin; germ;
<corr sic=nception>inception</corr>; principle<corr>;</corr> ancestry; forefather.

Pinag gagawan n~g sabon-n-Soap factory.

Pinag hugasan-n-Dirty water left after
washing.

<pb n=242>

Pinagkakautan~gan n Creditor.

Pinagkaratihan n Habit<corr>;</corr> custom.

Pinagkaskasan n Filings; scrapings

Pinagkasunduan n Agreement<corr>;</corr> reconciliation.

Pinagkikilan n Filings.

Pinaglagarian-n Sawdust.

Pinagliliban~gan n-Place of recreation or
amusement.

Pinaglilimbagan n Printing shop.

Pinaglinisan-n Cleanings<corr>;</corr> rubbish.

Pinaglulutuan n Place of cooking.

Pinagmulan n Source; origin<corr>;</corr> beginning<corr sic=",">;</corr>
motive<corr>;</corr> cause; occassion<corr>;</corr> principle<corr sic=",">;</corr>
inception.

Pinagpag-v. imp.-Shook.[**fixed]

Pinagpagihan-n Filings made by filing
with the tail of the pagi.

Pinagpilian n Remainder; residue; refuse;
leavings<corr>;</corr> offal.

Pinagpupugutan n-Place of beheading<corr sic=",">;</corr>
garrote.

Pinagputulan n-Residue or remainder
of anything that has been cut.

Pinagsabunan n-Soapsuds; suds; <corr sic="lathér">lather</corr>.

Pinagsasabunan n-Place of making
suds

Pinagsugpun~gan n <corr sic=Join>Joint</corr>; juncture.

Pinagtabasan-n-Clippings or leavings
of a tailor.

Pinagtatalan n-Chips<corr>;</corr> fagots.

Pinagtinghasan-n-Chip<corr>;</corr> fagots.

Pinag usapan n Contract<corr>;</corr> subject of <corr sic="conversatíon">conversation</corr>;
argument<corr>;</corr> agreement.

[**out of order]Pinagtutun~guhan[**n? |M: h (3rd to the last letter)] n- design; purpose<corr>;</corr>
object

Pinag uusapan n Object; design; purpose;
subject of conversation.

Pinag utusan n-Servant<corr>;</corr> agent<corr>;</corr> errand
boy.

Pinagyagitan n Place of congregation;
stolen articles

Pinakamatanda sa lahat n Senior.

Pinamili-n-Purchases

Pinamili v. imp. Bought; purchased.

Pinangalin~gan-n Source<corr>;</corr> origin<corr>;</corr> head;
spring<corr>;</corr> beginning; cause; ancestry;
ancestors; forefathers<corr>;</corr> root; germ.

Pindang-n-Jerked beef; dried beef.

Pindan~gin v To jerk or dry beef.

Pindot n Pinch; nip<corr sic=",">;</corr> press; squeeze;
tweak.

Pindutin-v To pinch; nip<corr sic=":">;</corr> squeeze; press;
tweak.

Pindutin-v To pinch<corr>;</corr> squeeze; press;
tweak.

Pinga n-Lever; carrying stick.

Pingan n Plate.

Pingan na malaki-n Platter.

Pin~gas n-Chip; notch; chink; gap.

<pb n=243>

Pin~gasan-v-To notch; chip; chink.

Pinsan-n-Cousin.

Pinta-n-Paint.

Pintahin-v-To paint.

Pintakasi-n-Mediator; favor; patron;
protector; intercessor; solicitor; one
who does a favor.

Pintas-n-Fault; defect; drawback; decrial;
disappointment; criticism;
scorn; contempt; censure; aspersion.

Pintasan v-To criticize<corr sic=",">;</corr> censure<corr sic=",">;</corr> underrate;
undervalue; dissapprove; reprove<corr>;</corr>
find fault; asperse.

Pintasin-v-To find fault<corr>;</corr> criticize; carp;
censure; gibe; inculpate.

Pinto-n-Door<corr>;</corr> gate; entry<corr>;</corr> gateway.

Pintuho-n-Veneration<corr sic=",">;</corr> reverence; respect;
regard.

Pintuhuin-v-To respect; venerate; reverence;
esteem; obey; have regard for.

Pinuno na wálang sinusunod na utos
-n-Tyrant<corr sic=",">;</corr> despot.

Pinya n-Pineapple.

Pipi-a-Dumb; mute; silent.

Piral-n-A pull or twist of the ear.

Piralin-v-To twist or pull the ear.

Piraso-n-Piece<corr>;</corr> fragment; scrap; shred;
sherd; morsel,

Pirasong manipis;n-Slice; thin piece.

Pirasong munti n Fragment; morsel;
nip<corr sic=",">;</corr> pinch<corr sic=",">;</corr> small piece.

Pirito-a Fried.

Pirma-n-Signature.

Pirmahan-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To sign; attach one's
signature,

Pirmahin-v-To sign; attach one's signature.

Pisak ang isang mata-a- One eyed.

Pisanin-v-To meet<corr>;</corr> congregate<corr>;</corr> gather.

Pisaw-n-Large knife, resembling a
cornknife.

Pisi-n-Cord; string.

Pisigan-a Strong; stout; vigorous; robust.

Pisik n-Sputter; flicker.

Pis~gi[**typo: Pisn~gi]-n-Cheek.

Pista n-Feast<corr sic=",">;</corr> banquet; holiday.

Pistahin-v-To feast<corr>;</corr> banquet.

Pisunin-v-To level; flatten; stamp; ram;
drive down.

Pita-n Desire; wish; liking; lust; mind;
ambition; aspiration; cupidity.

Pitágan n-Respect; politeness; veneration;
reverence; homage; kindness.

Pitahin-v-To wish; desire; like; aspire;
have ambitions.

Pitik n Chalk line; snap.

Pitikin <corr sic=n>v</corr>-To chalk line<corr sic=",">;</corr> snap.

Pitisin-v-To squeeze; press; wind;
tighten.

Pito n Whistle; <corr sic=picolo resp=e>piccolo</corr>.

<pb n=244>

Pitó a Seven.

Pitó-n Seven.

Pitong daan-a Seven hundred.

Pitong daan-n-Seven hundred.

Pitpitin-v-To mash.

Piyaos a-Hoarse; husky.

Platero n-Jeweler; silversmith.

Plaza-n-Square; park.

Pohia-n-Boiler; kettle; dyers[**typo: dyer's] copper;
copper dipper

Pokyotan-n-Honeybee.

Policia n-Police.

Pook n-Corner; point; place.

Poon-n-Lord; saint.

Poot-n-Indignation; dislike; disgust;
aversion.

[**out of order]Porcelana-n Porcelain.

Pootin-v-To irritate; provoke; disgust;
cause to be indignant or to dislike.

Pormal-a-Formal; serious; ritual; earnest
grave.

Potro-n-Colt.

Presidente-n President<corr>;</corr> mayor; chairman.

Prituhin[**matched scan; stem of 'h' partly visible]-v-To fry.

Pronombre-n Pronoun.

Provincia-n Province; country.

Puang-n-Space; interval; distance<corr sic=",">;</corr> breech.

Pudpod-a Dull; blunt.

Pugad n Nest.

Pugaran-n-Hen's nest; haunt of a hen

Pugay-n-Salute; salutation; greeting.

Pugo-n-Quail; <corr sic=bod>bob</corr> white.

Pugpog-n-Knoll; low hill.

Pugot-a-Headless; decapitated; beheaded;
blunt; cut off.

Pugutan n~g ulo-v-To behead<corr sic=",">;</corr> decapitate.

Puhunan-n Capital; fund.

Puit-n-Bottom; breech; <corr sic=hinder>hind</corr>.

Pukaw-n-Fright; surprise; scare.

Pukawin-v-To surprise; excite; scare;
frighten; rouse.

Pukulin-v-To throw<corr>;</corr> cast.

Pukulin n~g bato-v-To stone.

Pukliin-v-To stone; throw; cast.

Puklo-n-Udder; bag of a cow.

Pukol-n-Throw; cast.

Pukot-n-Fishing boat or smack.

Pukpok-n-Hammer; stroke with a
hammer.

Pukpukin-v To hammer.

Pukpukin n~g maso-v-To pound with a
hammer.

Pula n-Red; ruby; color of flesh.

Púla-n-Criticism; censure.

Púlaan-v-To criticise; censure.

Pula n~g itlog n-Yolk<corr sic=",">;</corr> yelk.

Pulgas[**typo Palgas corrected]-n-Flea.

Púlikat-n Spasm; cramp; convulsion.

Pulo-n-Island.

Pulong n Reunion; meeting; congregation

<pb n=245>

Pulos-a-All; entire; whole; each; every;
equal; uniform.

Pulot-n-Honey; molasses.

Pulpol-a-Blunt; dull; obtuse.

Pulubi-n-Beggar.

Puluhan-n-Handle.

Pulutin-v-To pick up; gather.

Pulutong n-<corr sic=Plattoon>Platoon</corr>.

Pumagod-v-To tire; weary; fatigue;
molest; <corr sic=ink>irk</corr>.

Pumagpag v-To shake; flop.

Pumaibabaw-v-To be superior; put on.

Pumalatak-v To click.

Pumalit-v-To change; barter; alter.

Pumalo-v To beat; strike<corr>;</corr> cudgel; drub.

Pumalo-n-Cudgel; club.

Pumana-v-To shoot a dart or an arrow[**Errata].

Pumanaw-v-To absent one's self; go
away; leave.

Pumanday-v-To blacksmith.

Puman~git-v-To grow or become ugly or
homely.

Pumanhik-v-To go up; ascend; mount.

Pumanhik sa kabayo-v-To mount a horse.

Pumantay-v-To equalize; match; become
equal or of the same height.

[**out of order]Pumagaypay v-To wave; undulate.

Pumaroon-v To go; resort; wend.

Pumasok-v-To enter; go in; interfere;
meddle.

Pumatak v To drop; drip; dribble.

Pumatakpatak v To drip; drop; fall in
drops.

Pumatáy v-To kill; murder; assassinate.

Pumatnugot v To defend; guard; attend;
accompany; go with.

Pumáwidpawid-v To <corr sic=Stagger>stagger</corr>; waver.

Pumawis v To perspire; sweat.

Pumayag v-To concede; permit; allow;
cede; agree; acquiesce; grant; coincide;
accord; countenance.

Pumayapa v-To calm; pac ty[**typo: pacify]; appease;
tranguilize[**Errata: tranquilize]; allay; settle; rest.

Pumayapa-n-Pacificator; pacifier.

Pumiga v-To squeeze; press out.

Pumihit v To turn; go back; return.

Pumikit v-To blink; wink.

Pumili v To choose; prefer; elect.

Pumiling v To cluster; bunch.

Pumilipit v To twist; twine.

<corr sic=Pumili>Pumilit</corr> v To urge; persist; force; oblige.

Pumipintas <corr sic=v>n</corr> Critic; faultfinder.

Pumirma v To sign; subscribe; underwrite.

Pumisan v-To join; congregate; meet;
collect; unite; aggregate; associate.

Pumisik v-To sputter; flicker.

Pumukpok v To hammer; <corr sic=trob resp=e>throb</corr>.

Pumulaan-v-To commence; begin.

Pumulot-v-To pick up; gather; acquire.

<pb n=246>

Pumunit-v-To tear; touse.

Pumuno-v-To fill; <corr sic=pod resp=e>pad</corr>.

Pumunta-v-To go; wend.

Pumusta-v-To wager; bet.

Pumutok-v-To burst; shoot; explode;
break open; breach; fulminate.

Pumutol-v-To chop; cut down.

Pumuyat-v-To stay up; keep awake at
night.

Puñal-n-Dagger; <corr sic=poinard>poniard</corr>.

Punasan-v-To clean with a rag.

Punduhan-n-Anchoring place; anchorage;
harbor; port; place where people
stop to rest.

Pungke-n-Pannier; basket; dust pan.

Pun~gusin-v-To slice; cut away; pare off;
shorten.

[**out of order]Punla-n-Sprout; shoot; seedling.

[**out of order]Punlaan-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Seed plot; nursery; hot bed.

Punin-v-To fill; stuff.

Punit-n-Tear; touse.

Punit-a-Torn; ragged.

Punitin-v-To tear; touse.

Punitpunit-a-Ragged; torn; very ragged.

Punó-a-Full; replete; chock; plenary;
complete.

Puno-n-Commander; chief; leader; principal;
prefect; trunk.

Puno-n-Beginning;[**typo; corrected from "beggining" to "beginning"] principle; motive;
cause.

Puno n~g alikabok-a-Dusty; full[**typo; correct from "fult" to "full"] of dust.

Puno n~g banlik-a-Muddy; full of mud.

Puno n~g kasamaan-a-Malicious; wicked;
bad.

Puno n~g lukban-n-Orange tree.

Punong aral-n-Axiom; maxim; rule;
standard; proverb.

Punongpuno-a-Replete; full to the
brim.

Púno sa catedral-n-Dean.

Puntahin-v-To point; aim.

Puntas-n-Lace<corr>;</corr> edging; bobbinet.

Punto-n-Point.

Punto sa pagsasalita-n-Style or manner
of speech.

Punuin-v-To fill; replete; stuff; satisfy;
satiate.

Purga-n-Purge; cathartic.

Purgahin-v-To purge.

Puri-n-Virtue;[**typo; corrected "Virture" to "Virtue"] honor; reputation; rank;
fame; glory; applause; dignity.

Purihin-v-To praise; honor; respect;
dignify; commend; <corr sic=plaudit resp=e>applaud</corr>; eulogize;
extol.

Pusa-n-Cat; pussy; puss.

Púsak-n-Movement; moving.

Pusakal-a-Accustomed.

Pusali-n-Mud; mire; slime; clay.

Púsalian-n-Place that is muddy; sinkhole;
sink.

<pb n=247>

Puso-n-Heart

[**out of order]Puso n~g mais-n Ear of corn.

Pusod n Center of anything.

Pusód-n Chignon.

Pusod n~g tiyan-n-Navel[**Errata].

Pusok a-Proud; bragging; passionate.

Pusok <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob a Fervent; impetuous<corr sic=",">;</corr>
fiery; lively.

Puson n Groin.

Pusot n Bottom; bed of a stream or
river.

Puspos-a-Full; replete; round; circular;
complete.

Puspos n~g kalualhatian a-Glorious; excellent.

Pusta n Wager; bet.

Pustahan-v-To wager; bet.

Pustahan n Wager; bet.

Puta-n Whore; harlot; prostitute.

Putakti n-Hornet; wasp; yellow jacket.

<pb n=248>

Putik-n- Mud<corr sic=",">;</corr> mire; <corr sic=clays>clay</corr>.

Putla-n- Paleness; <corr sic=wanners>wanness</corr>; pallor; ghastliness.

Putlain-v- To extenuate; grow pale.

Putlin[**Errata: Putulin]-v- To cut; chop; amputate; truncate;
resind[**Errata: rescind].[**Although Errata says Putulin s/b Putlin, Putlin is an accepted variant sp; if you choose to follow Errata, note that there's already a 'Putulin' entry below; to avoid duplicate entries, you can stet 'Putlin' here]

Putlin[**Errata: Putulin] <corr sic="n~g">ang</corr> man~ga san~ga-v- To prune.[**Putlin is an accepted sp variant]

Putok-n- Shot; burst; report; crack;
cracking; sound.

Putol-n- Piece.

Putol ang kamay-a- Handless.

Putong-n- Crown; wreath; coronet.

Putulin-v- To chop; cut; rescind; truncate;
amputate.

Putun~gan n~g corona-v- To crown.

Putusan-v- To fill.

Pututin-v- To rape; ravish; force.

Puyat-n- Vigil; nightwatch.

Puyat-a- Sleepless.

Puyatin-v- To keep awake.



<div1 type=Letter n=Q>
<head>Q</head>


Queso n-Cheese.

Quitá&mdash;You<corr sic=",">;</corr> by me.


<div1 type=Letter n=R>
<head>R</head>


Rabo-n-Mortise.

Regla n-Rule; order; precept; method.

Religion-n-Religion; faith; creed; belief.

Retaso-n-Remnant.

Retrato-n- Portrait; picture.

Rienda-n- Rein.

Rifa-n- Raffle; lottery.

Rigudon-n- Quadrille; cotillon.

Rin-adv.- Also; too; self same; similarly


<div1 type=Letter n=S>
<head>S</head>


Sa-prep.-To; of; from; with; at; for; on;
or; about; through; towards; in.

Sa aba ko inter. Poor me; unlucky me;
pity me.

Saan adv. Where; whither; to or at what
place.

Saan banda -adv.- Where; whither<corr sic=",">;</corr> at
what place; at which side.

Saan man adv.-Whereever; everywhere;
anywhere.

Sabado n Saturday.

Sabak-n-Crotch<corr>;</corr> joint; mortise; groove.

Sa balasan[**typo: Sabalasan] n Northwind.[**huh? |M: defn looks ok]

Sabarin-v-To vex; harrow<corr sic=":">;</corr> perturb; disturb;
interrupt; interfere; disgust.

Sabat-n-Wedge.

Sabatan-v-To <corr sic=Wedge>wedge</corr>; split with a
wedge.

Sabatin-v-To ambush; ambuscade; lay
in wait; meet; encounter.

Sabaw-n- Broth.

Sa bawat sandali-adv.- Momentarily; every
moment.

Sabay-adv.- Together; at the same time.

Sabay sabay-adv.- Simultaneously; together;
at once; at the same time.

Sabi-n- Talk; speech; citation; narration.

Sabihin-v- To say; tell; narrate; cite.<corr>;</corr>
speak; talk; predicate.

Sabihin ang n~galan-v- To name; call by
name.

Sabihin uli-v- To reiterate; repeat; say
or tell again.

Sabisabi-n- Rumor; report; gossip; foolish
talk.

Sabisabing lihim-n- Secret; gossip.

Sabitan-n- Hook; hanger; peg; coat rack;
anything that is used to hang things
on.

Sable-n- Sabre.

<pb n=249>

Sabon n Soap.

Sabsában n Trough; hog trough.

Sabsabán v To scrape but leave the
scrapings<corr sic=",">;</corr> clean but leave the cleanings.

Sabúgan-n[**matched scan] Scattering.

Sabugán-v To scatter; throw<corr>;</corr> broadcast.

Sabunin v To soap.

Sadhan v-To obstruct; close; block up;
seal.

Sadia adv.-Intentionally<corr sic=":">;</corr> purposely;
avowedly; designedly; deliberately.[**matched scan]

Sadya adv. Intentionally; purposely;
avowedly; <corr sic=designely>designedly</corr>; deliberately;
knowingly<corr sic=",">;</corr> on purpose.

Sagad-a-Brim full; replete; exhausted.

Sagad na sagad a Brim full<corr sic=",">;</corr> replete<corr sic=",">;</corr>
profuse; rich; numerous<corr>;</corr> much; many;
lavish; bounteous<corr sic=",">;</corr> provident; fertile;
fruitful; large in quantity.

Sagana-adv.-Fully; completely; abundantly;
copiously; plentifully; bounteously;
magnificently.

Sagápan n Skimmer.

Sagapán ang bula v To skim.

Sagawíng[**typo: Sa gawing] adv. In the direction of; toward.

Sa gawing hilagaan-adv.-Northerly; northward.

Sa gawing kalunuran adv.-Westerly; westward.

Sa gawing silan~ganan[**matched scan] adv.-Easterly<corr sic=",">;</corr> eastward.

Sa gawing timugan adv. Southerly; southward.

Sagiok n-Crack; snap.

Sagipin v To save; succor; deliver.

Saglit adv. Shortly; briefly<corr>;</corr> in a short
space of time.

Sago n Sago.

Sagot n Answer; reply; retort; response;
repartee<corr>;</corr> contestation.

Sagpan~gin v To snap; bite quickly.

Sagsag n Trot.

Saguan n Paddle<corr sic=",">;</corr> oar; scull.

Saguing-n Banana; plantain.

Saguin~gan-n-Banana grove or plantation.

Sagutan v-To answer; respond; contest;
guarantee.

Sagutan-n-Answer; debate; response;
guarantee.

Sa harap-adv.- In front; against; before;
in presence of.

Sa hayag-adv.-Abroad; in public; at
sight; publicly.

Sahig n Floor.

Sahigan v-To floor.

Sahing-n-Pitch; rosin.

Sa hipo adv.-By the touch.

<pb n=250>

Sa huli-adv.-Lastly; after; behind; back
wards.

Sa hulihan adv. Lastly; after.<corr>;</corr> behind;
then.

Sa hulo adv.-At the upper part; at the
source.

Sahurin-v To receive; accept.

Sahurin ang upa-v-To receive one's
pay or salary.

Sa ibaba-adv. Below; beneath; under.

Sa ibabaw adv. On; upon; above<corr sic=",">;</corr> on top.

Sa ibayo adv.-Beyond on the other side.

Sa ilalim adv. Under; beneath; below.

Sa ilalim a Nether.

Sa isang dali adv. In a moment; presently
in a trice.

Sa itaas adv.-Above; over; high up.

Sa ito adv.-Here in; hereon; herewith.

Sa iyo&mdash;For<corr sic=",">;</corr> with<corr sic=",">;</corr> to<corr sic=",">;</corr> of<corr sic=",">;</corr> from you.

Saka adv.-After; afterwards<corr sic=",">;</corr> next.

Saka condj.[**typo: conj.]-And.

Sa kaduluhan adv. Lastly; at the end.

Sakag n-Fish net.

Sakang adv. Open legged.

Sakang-adv.-Bowlegged.[**In a TIA copy, POS is adjective, w/c matches the defn]

Sakali-adv.-Perhaps; by chance; at least;
should it come to pass.

Sakasakali-adv. Perhaps; if by chance;
should it come to pass.

Sa katapusan-adv.-Lastly; at the end;
then; at last.

Sakdal-a Full; replete; complete.

Sakdalan n. Protection; shelter.

Sakit n-Sickness; <corr sic=desease resp=e>disease</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> torture<corr>;</corr> pain;
hardship; anguish; torment[**M:looks ok]; ail; distress;
dolor; malady; afliction; suffering<corr>;</corr>
ache; trouble.

Sakit n~g himatay n Fainting<corr>;</corr> swooning.

Sakit na nakahahawa na buhat sa gawaang
kalupaan n-Venerial desease[**matched scan][**Errata: Venereal disease].

Sakit na pasma n-Spasm; convulsion.

Saklap-n-Bitterness; disgust; harshness;
severity.

Saklaw-n Hold up; heading[**no ; in scan] <corr sic=of>off</corr>;
turning.

Saklawin-v-To head off<corr sic=",">;</corr> hold up; turn.

Saklolo n-Defense; help; protection;
support; aid; suffrage.

Saklolohan-v-To help; aid; succor; provide;
support; protect; defend.

Sakong-n-Heel.

Sakramento-n Sacrament.

Saksak-n-Stab; thrust.

Saksakin-v[**matched scan]-To stab; stick; dirk.

Saksi-n-Witness.

<corr sic=Saksi>Saksing</corr> nakakita n~g pinaguusapan-n-An
eye witness.

Saktan-v-To hurt; wound; pain; cripple;
maim; lame; <corr sic=chastize>chastise</corr>; <corr sic=agrrieve>aggrieve</corr>; offend; irritate.

<pb n=251>

Sakuna n Disaster<corr sic=",">;</corr> calamity; misfortune;
misadventure; mishap; misery<corr sic=",">;</corr> accident.

Sakupin v To take or put under the
control of another; subdue; subject;
subordinate<corr>;</corr> overcome.

<corr sic=Sal>Sala</corr>-n-Sin; fault<corr>;</corr> crime; culpability; infraction<corr>;</corr>
infringement; violation; guilt;
offense; transgression; defect; vice;
deficiency; slight.

Salaan-n-Strainer<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=collander>colander</corr>; sieve; filter<corr>;</corr>
<corr sic=cullander>cullender</corr>.

Sa labas adv.-Out side; abroad; in public;
publicly; moreover.

Salabin v To scorch[**Errata]<corr>;</corr> singe.

Sálag n Man midwife.

Salág n Contradiction; opposition

Salagin-v To stop anything that is
thrown toward you.

Salaghati-n-Resentment; grudge; disgust;
loathing; restlessness; inquietude.

Salain v To strain; filter.

Salain muli v To restrain; refilter.

Salagubang-n Junebug.

Salakuban-n-Leather bag or pouch.

Salahin v-To reject; condemn; find
fault; criticize;

Sálahin v-To weave.

Salahula-a-Sloppy; dirty; filthy; slattern;
slatternly; <corr sic=slutish resp=e>sluttish</corr>; squalid;
dowdy.

Salamangka n Jugglery; leger de main.

Salamat n Thanks.

Salambaw-n Fish net, snare, or trap.

Salamin-n-Looking glass; mirror; speculum.

Salamin sa mata n Eyeglasses; spectacles.

Salamin n~g tain~ga n Eardrum.

Salan~gin-v To touch.

Salang palad-a Unlucky<corr sic=",">;</corr> unfortunate;
miserable.

Salangsang-n-Trespass; contravention.

Salangsan~gin-v-To contradict; confuse;
oppose; resist<corr sic=",">;</corr> controvert; dispute;
transgress<corr>;</corr> trespass; refute<corr sic=",">;</corr> reject; repel<corr>;</corr>
contravene; object.

Salanta-n-Abuse; illtreatment; misuse;
mistreatment.

Salanta-a-Illused<corr>;</corr> mistreated; abused.

Salantain v To misuse; illtreat;
abuse.

Salapang-n-Fork<corr sic=",">;</corr> pitch fork<corr>;</corr> spear.

Salapi-n-Money; cash; pelf[**valid word]<corr>;</corr> specie.

Salaping katubusan sa anoman n-Ransom.

Salapun~gan n~g daan n-Crossroad.

Salas n Salon; saloon; hall.

<pb n=252>

Salat-a-Poor; needy; helpless; destitute;
disconsolate; poverty stricken; scarce;
scanty; wanting; lacking; deficient;
penurious; paltry; mean; short; close.

Salatin-v-To touch; feel; sound;[**sou?d |M:?=n] probe;
investigate; procure.

Salat sa bun~ga-a-Sterile; fruitless; barren; unfruitful.

Salaulain-v-To soil; make foul; nasty;
or filthy.[**looks like original has typo "tilthy" |M: looks 'filthy' to me]

Salawal-n-Pant; pantaloon; trouser.

Sálay-n-Nest; receiver; dripping pan.

Salaysay-n-Relation; narration; account;
explication; declaration; proposal.

Salaysayin-v-To narrate; relate; declare;
account; tell; explain; refer; propose.

Salbahi-n-Savage.

Salbahi-a-Savage; truculent; mean; rude;
bad.

Sa likod-adv<corr>.</corr>-Behind; after; at the back.

Sa likuran-adv<corr>.</corr>-Behind; at the back;
after; following.

Salilon~gan-n-Redemption; ransom; assistance;
defense; guard; shelter.

Salilun~gan-n-Vindication; defense; protection;
shelter; guard.

Salin-n-Copy; transcript; likeness; counterpart;
duplicate.

Salinan-n-Place[**really "Salinan"? Can't make out fourth letter. |M:yes] of copying or transcribing.

Salinsing-n-Wild growth of grain.

Salisalita-n-Foolish talk; rumor.

Salita-n-Discourse; speech<corr>;</corr> talk; word;
conversation; converse; gab; locution;
vocable<corr>;</corr> term.

Salitaan-n-Conversation; agreement;
contract; discourse; colloquy[**typo corrected on earlier round from "coloquy" to "colloquy"]; parley;
chat; argument; conference; convention;
covenant[**Errata][**typo "convenant" corrected to "covenant"]; pact; paction; parlance.

Salitaan n~g dalawa-n-Dialogue.

Salita at kilos palalo-n-Braggartism.

Salitain-v-To speak; talk; reason; harangue;
narrate; say; tell; relate.

Salita na may maraming silaba-n-Polysyllable.

Salita n~g isang nacion ó kapulun~gan-n-Language<corr sic=",">;</corr>
idiom; dialect.

Salitang hunghang-n-Nonsense.

Salitang magkaisa ang kahulugan-n-Synonym.

Salitang mahalay-n-Rude word, phrase,
or speech.

Salitang malasa-n-Wit; witty talk.

Salitang panininta-n-Love talk.

Salitin-v-To mix; mingle; alternate; jumble.

Salitsalit-a-Streaked or interlined with
fat and lean; alternate.

<pb n=253>

[**out of order]Salawahang loob-n-Fickleness; infidelity;
indecision[**Errata]; inconstancy.

Saliwahang loob-n-Inconstancy; infidelity;
indecision; fickleness.

Saliwang kapalaran-n-Bad or ill luck;
misfortune.

Saliwang loob-a-Unhappy; unlucky; unfortunate.

Salmon-n-Salmon.

Salong-n-Cabin; barrack; hut.

Salon~gan-n-Place of concealment; protection;
help.

Sa loob-adv<corr>.</corr>-Within; inside; internal.

Sa loob-a-Nether.

Salopilin-v-To dam; obstruct; augment;
exaggerate; add to.

Salpok-n-Blow;[**"Blow;"? |M: yes, B did not scan fully] knock; encounter; clash;
shock; fight; sudden meeting.

Salsal-a-Obtuse; blunt; dull; flat nosed.[**"flat-nosed"? |M:no]

Salsalin-v-To blunt; dull the point; rivet;
clinch; squander or spend money
foolishly.

Salubsob-n-Thorn <corr sic=on resp=e>or</corr> splinter that has
been run into the foot slantwise.

[**out of order]Salubong-n-Gift; present.

Salubun~gin-v-To meet; encounter.

Sa lugar n~g-adv<corr>.</corr>-Instead.

Salukan-v-To skim; take off.

Salun~gahan-n-Ascension; acclivity.

Salun~gat-a-Opposed; contrary.

Salun~gatin-v-To oppose; contradict<corr>;</corr> object;
resist; brush back; turn back;
impugn.

Salun~gat sa-a-Opposite; contrary.

Salun~gat sa-adv<corr>.</corr>-On the contrary.

[**out of order]Salun~gatin-v-To raise with the point of
a needle or pin; reach with a pole
or stick.

Saluysoy-n-Ravine; gully; brook; rill;
rivulet.

Samá-n-Ugliness; wickedness; evil; badness;
imperfection; fault; mischief;
injury; hurt; harm; moral depravity;
homliness[**Errata: homeliness]; turpitude; misfortune[**Errata].[**typo "misfurtune" corrected to "misfortune" in earlier round]

Sa mabuting panahon-a-Opportune.

Sa magisang sarili-adv<corr>.</corr>-Alone; only.

Samahan-n-Society; company; partnership;
assembly.

Samahan-v-To accompany; unite; join.

Sa maikling panahon-adv<corr>.</corr>-Shortly;
briefly; soon; in a short time.

Samakalawa-adv<corr>.</corr>-Day after to-morrow.

Samakalawa-n-The day after to-morrow.

Samá n~g loob-n-Displeasure; disgust;
uneasiness; resentment; grudge; anger;
discontent; asperity; pique.

Samang palad-n-Bad luck; ill luck; misfortune.

Samantala-adv<corr>.</corr>-While; in the meantime;
meanwhile; interim.

<pb n=254>

Samantalahin-v-To while away time;
take advantage of; improve.

Samantalang-a-Provisional.

Sa may-To him who has<corr>;</corr> in the direction
of; near; near to.

Sambahan-n-Church; temple; place of
worship.

Sambahin[**unclear letter |M:looks ok]-v-To worships[**typo: worship;] reverence; hallow;
sanctify.

Sambahin ang anito-v-To idolize[**Errata]; worship
idols.

Sambalilo-n-Hat.

Sambilatin-v-To scatter promiscuously;
throw about; tumble[**;? |M:no] topsy-turvy.

Sampaguita[**spacing? |M:no space after Sam]-n-Small white flower.

Sampal-n-Slap; blow <corr sic=white>with</corr> the open
hand.

Sampalataya-n-Faith;[**matched scan] creed; belief.

Sampalatayanin-v-To believe; credit; give
faith.

Sampalin-v-Slaps[**typo: To slap].

Sampalok-n-Tamarind; <corr sic=tamarac>tamarack</corr>.

Sampayan-n-Clothes line; line used to
hang things on.

Sampayin-v-To hang up.

Sampong-adv.-Till; until; also; even; as
far as.

Sampulong-adv.-Whole; entire; all.

Sampuo-n-Ten.

Sampuo-a-Ten.

Sampuong utos n~g DIOS-n-The Ten commandments
of GOD.

Samsaman-n-Collection; gathering.

Samsamán-v-To collect; gather; take
away; congest.

Samsamán n~g sandata-v-To disarm.

Samsamin-v-To capture; collect; gather.

Sanay-n-Practice; experience; exercise.

Sanay-a-Experienced; expert; able; <corr sic=skilful>skillful</corr><corr>;</corr>
capable; fit; adroit; graceful; deft;
dexterous; practical.

Sanayin-v-To teach; instruct; practice;
train; exercise; break in; learn by
experience; accustom.

Sandali-n-Instant; moment; trice; jiffy;
short space of time.

Sandalias-n-Sandals.

Sandat-a-Full; replete; abundant; satiated;
satisfied.

Sandata-n-Sword[**S conjectured |M: S just didnt scan fully]; weapon; arm.

Sandatin-v-To satiate; satisfy; replete<corr>;</corr>
gratify.

Sandig-a-Slanting; sloping; leaning.

Sandigan-n-Couch; baluster; anything to
lean on.

Sandigan-v-To put a rail or balustrade
on the side of a stairway.

Sandok-n-Ladle; large spoon.

Sandok na malaki-n-Scoop.

<pb n=255>

[**out of order]Sandokin v-To scoop<corr sic=",">;</corr> take[**matched scan] out with a
spoon ladle.

Sang-a-A<corr>;</corr> an; one.

San~ga-n-Branch<corr sic=",">;</corr> sprig

Sang daan-n-One hundred.

<corr sic=San>Sang</corr> daan-a-A hundred.

Sangdaig-digan-n- The universe.

Sanghaya-n- Dignity<corr>;</corr> rank.

Sang haya-n- Hand[**matched scan] full.

Sangka-n- Canal<corr>;</corr> drain<corr>;</corr> sluice<corr sic=",">;</corr> ditch.

Sangkang patubigan-n- Canal<corr sic=",">;</corr> drain.

Sangkap n-Jewel; ornament; part<corr>;</corr> piece.

Sangla-n- Pledge; pawn; mortgage; attachment;
plight; security.

Sanglang lupa-n-Mortgage

Sanglibutan-n- The earth; globe;
universe

Sangol-n- Creature; babe; baby.

Sangtaon-n- One year.

Sánib-n- Juncture; joint

[**out of order]Sanepa-n- Picture frame

Sankalan-n-Butcher's block.

Sankap-n-Implement<corr>;</corr> tool.

Sankatawohan-n- Humanity<corr sic=",">;</corr> nation.

Sankleta n Slipper.

Sankutsahin-v- To parboil.

Sansalain-v- To <corr sic=impece>impede</corr>; hinder; obstruct;
restrain; detain.

Santa Biblia-n- Holy,[**extra ,] bible; evangel.

Santa escritura-n- Holy scripture.

Santo-n- Saint.

Sapa-n- Rivulet<corr>;</corr> brook<corr>;</corr> creek.

Sa paanomang paraan-adv.- Resolutely<corr>;</corr>
justly or unjustly; by all means<corr>;</corr> in
any possible way; no matter what
passes.

Sa pagitan[**matched scan]-prep.- Between; betwixt; among.

Sa pagitan-adv.- Meanwhile; meantime.

Sapagka't-conj.-Because[**matched scan]<corr sic=",">;</corr> for<corr sic=",">;</corr> as; since.

Sapakin-v- To break.

Sapakin ang bibig-v- To break the jaws

Sápal-n- Trash; crushed sugar cane.

Sa paligid-adv.- Round; about; around;
round about<corr>;</corr> on every side.

Sa paligid-adv.- Round; about; around.

[**out of order]Sa palibot-adv.- Round; about; round about;
around; on every side.

Sa pamagitan n~g-adv.- By means of<corr sic=",">;</corr> by
virtue of; by favor of.

Sa panahon-adv.- Timely; in time.

Sa panahon-a- Opportune;

Sapantaha[**matched scan]-n- Supposition; hypothesis;
conjecture; presumption; suspicion.

Sa paraan ito-adv.- Hereby<corr sic=",">;</corr> herewith;
hereon.

Sapat-n- Sufficient; enough[**Errata]; full; complete;
replete.

Sapatos na bakal-n- Horseshoe.

Sapilitan-adv.- By force or persuasion.

<pb n=256>

Sa pilitan[**typo: Sapilitan]-a-Obligatory; binding<corr sic=",">;</corr> necessary;
needful; precise; <corr sic=indespensible resp=e>indispensable</corr>.

Sapin-n-Shoe; shoes

Sapol sa ugat-adv.- From the root; entirely.

Sápot-n-Shroud.<corr>;</corr> <corr sic=Winding>winding</corr> sheet.

Sapsapan-v- To husk; strip off husks;
peel.

Sáputin-v-To enshroud.

Sara-n-Closing; sealing.

Saraguete-n-Truant; rascal.

Sara n~g sulat-n- The sealing of a letter.

Sarap-n- Taste; relish<corr sic=",">;</corr> pleasure; sweetness;
delight<corr>;</corr> gratification.

Sarili-a-Self

Sarili-n-Self

Sarili n~g araw-a-Solar; belonging to
the sun.

[**out of order]Sarili n~g m~ga alipin ó alila-a-Servile;
menial; slavish.

Sariling asawa n~g isang babayi-n-Husband.

Sariling asawa n~g isang lalaki-n-Wife.

Sarili nila-pro[**matched scan]<corr>;</corr>-Their; theirs.

Sarili niya-pro<corr>.</corr>-His<corr sic=",">;</corr> her; hers.

Sarisari-n-Notions.

Sarisari-a-Various; miscellaneous; multiple.

Sarisaring kulay-a-Motley.[**matched scan]

Sariwa-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Fresh; green; young; delicate

Saro-n-Jar<corr sic=",">;</corr> pot.

Sasakyan-n-Ship; vessel.

Sa sarili To him or her.

Sa silong-adv.-Down stairs; beneath; below;
under.

Sastre-n-Tailor

[**out of order]Satsat n~g pari-n-Bald spot on a priest's
head.

Sa tabi n~g-n[**typo: adv.]-Beside; on the brim or
edge.

Sa tanyag-adv.-Abroad; in public<corr>;</corr> visibly.

Sa tanyag-a-Visible; public.

Sa tapat-adv.-Opposite<corr sic=",">;</corr> facing; in front.

Sa towitowi na-adv.[**typo 'ado.' fixed]-Always; momentarily;
frequently; every moment.

Saulan-v-To restore; give back; return

Sa uli uli-adv.-Again; again and again.

Sawá-a- Enough; sufficient; full; complete.

<corr sic=Sawain>Sawayin</corr>-v-To prohibit; interdict; forbid.

Sawatain[**matched scan]-v-To impede; hinder<corr sic=",">;</corr> obstruct<corr sic=",">;</corr> restrain; <corr sic=detrain>detain</corr>.

Sawi-adv.-Opposite; contrary.

Sawing kapalaran-n-Ill luck; bad luck;
misfortune.

Sáya-n-Skirt.

Sáya[**typo: Sayá]-n-Joy; happiness;[**matched scan] glee; festivity.<corr>;</corr>
mirth<corr sic=",">;</corr> merriment; gladness; pleasure;
gayety;[**matched scan] joyfulness; airiness.

Sayá na malabis-n- Ecstacy[**Errata].

<pb n=257>

Sayang n-Grief; pity; compassion; condolence; waste

Sayang-inter.-Pity; what a pity.

Sayan~gin-v-To waste; squander; throw away

Sayaw-n-Dance

Sayawan-n-Ball; dance.

Sayasatin-v-To examine<corr>;</corr> investigate

Saysay-n-Explication; declaration; demonstration;
signification; narration; account; proposal; <corr sic=Precept>precept</corr>; method;
order.

Saysayan-v-To decide; distinguish; determine; give importance;
explain; tell; narrate; account; expound

Saysayin-v-To <corr sic=Explain>explain</corr>; portray; say; tell; narrate; recite; translate; relate;
cite; predicate; analyze<corr>;</corr> interpret<corr>;</corr> signify; lay open; expound; manifest; report; rehearse; construe;
declare<corr>;</corr> characterize; demonstrate; mean; denote.

Saysayin ang kahulugan-v-To interpret; translate<corr>;</corr> tell the meaning.

Saysayin mabuti-v- To explain.

Saysayin malinaw v To define describe; explain delineate

Saysayin[**fixed; 2nd s just didn't scan fully] maliwanag-v-To describe; explain;
define; say or tell clearly.

Saysayin <corr sic=sa>ang</corr> pintas-v-To comment.

Sebada-n- Barley.

Sebo-n-Grease; fat

Sebuyas-n-Onion

Sentencia-n-Sentence; decision; judgement.

Sermon-n-Sermon.

Sermon sa paglilibing-n-Obsequy.

Servilleta-n-<corr sic=Doile>Doily</corr>; napkin.

Sesgo-n-Gore; plait.

Sexo-<corr sic=u>n</corr>-Sex

Siasatin-v-To investigate; examine; inspect;
review; survey; study; probe;
revise; register.

[**out of order]Siap-n-Puling;[**matched scan (valid word)] chirping; chirp.

Sibá-n-Gluttony.

Sibad-n-Running like the wind.

Sibak-n-Split.

Sibakin-v-To split.

Sibat-n-Spear; lance<corr>;</corr> pike; staff.

Sibatin-v-To spear; lance.

Sicante-n-Blotter.

Sidhi-n-Rigor; sternness; harshness;
keenness; <corr sic=fulness>fullness</corr>; completeness.

Sigá-n Bonfire.

Sigén[**typo: Sigán]-v-To set a fire; kindle; burn.

Sigaw-n-Cry; shriek; yell; loud call;
scream; howl; shout; screak; scheech[**matched scan][**Errata: screech].

Sigawan-v-To shriek; call; cry out;
gowl[**Errata: howl]; shout; hoot.

Sigawin-v-To shout; howl; scream; cry;
exclaim; hoot; clamor.

<pb n=258>

Sigáwin-a-Vociferous; clamorous; noisy;
howling.

Sigirin-v-To prick; pierce.

Sigla-<corr sic=u>n</corr>-Boldness; courage; activity;
liveliness<corr sic=",">;</corr> vivacity.

Sigwa-n-Storm; tempest.

Sihang-n-Jawbone

Sikad-n- Kick<corr sic=",">;</corr> spurn; thrust with the
foot.

Sikang-n-Cross timber; long bolster of
a bed.

Sikap-n-Diligence; industry; activity;
afficiousness[**Errata: officiousness]; assiduity.

Sikapat-n-Shilling<corr>;</corr> bit; 12&ndash;1/2 cents

Sikapat labing dalawa-n-Twenty cents.

Sikapat sikolo-n-Eighteen and three quarter <corr sic=cento resp=e>cents</corr> mex.

Sikaran-v-To kick<corr>;</corr> spurn

Sikat-n-Appearance; rising

Sikat n~g araw-n-The rising of the
sun

Sikmura n~g hayop-n-Maw

Siko-n-Elbow; hock

Sikolo-n-Six and quarter cents mex.

Sikpinin-v-To <corr sic=Narrow>narrow</corr><corr sic=",">;</corr> contract.

Siksik-a-Dense; close; thick[**Errata]; compact.

Siksikin-v-To pack closely<corr sic=",">;</corr> cram<corr>;</corr> stuff;
jam<corr>;</corr> force in.

Sikulate-n-Chocolate

Silab-n-Burn; parch<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=scorth resp=e>scorch</corr>.

Silabin-v-To burn; scorch[**Errata]<corr sic=",">;</corr> parch

Silan~ganan-n-The east; orient.

Silay-n-Glance; glimpse

Silid na tulugan-n-Bed chamber; bed
room; sleeping apartment.

Silip-n-Glance<corr sic=",">;</corr> glimpse; blink<corr>;</corr> peep.

Silipin-v-To peep; glance; blink.

Silla-n-Chair.

Silo-n-Snare.[**matched scan]

Silong-n-The first story.

Silsilin-v-To clinch<corr>;</corr> rivet<corr>;</corr> secure.

[**out of order]Siban~got-n-Frown<corr>;</corr> displeasure<corr sic=",">;</corr> wryface.

Simaron-a-<corr sic=Intractible resp=e>Intractable</corr>; wild<corr>;</corr> savage;
cross grained.

Simbahan-n-Church; temple; house of
worship.

Simot-a-Exhausted; fatigued;[**matched scan] tired;
used up; totally drained.

Simpan-n-Economy; guard; watch.

Simpanin-v-To economize; keep; guard.

Sinabi-v. p. p.-Said.[**matched scan]

Sinadya-a-Intentional.

Sinadya-adv.-Intentionally; designedly;
avowedly; purposely.

Sinandali-v-To borrow.

Sinapete-n-Anchor.

Sinapupunan-n-<corr sic=Grons resp=e>Groin</corr>.[**actually means womb]

Sinasama-v-To be unhappy; unlucky.

<pb n=259>

Sinasapantaha-a-Putative; supposed;
suppositional

Sinasaysay-a-Affirmative.

<corr sic=Sinsaysay>Sinaysay</corr> sa libro-v-To quote; affirm.

Sindak-n-Fright; terror;[**matched scan] dread; scare;
surprise.

Sindakin-v-To scare; frighten; surprise.

Sindi-n-Fire; light<corr sic=":">;</corr> burning.

Sindihan-v-To kindle<corr sic=":">;</corr> light; set fire to.

Sinelas-n-Slippers.

Sin~gaw-n-Appearance; eruption.

Sin~gaw na anoman sa balat-n-Eruption
or outbreak of the skin.

Singhot-n-Snuff; snuffle.

Sin~gilin -v- To collect<corr>;</corr> dun; request payment

Sin~git -n- Groin; crack.

Singkad -a- Chief; principal; important; great; collective.

Singkaw -n- Yoking; hitch.

Singkawin -v- To hitch<corr>;</corr> yoke.

Singsing -n- Ring<corr>;</corr> finger ring.

Sinkad-a-[**matched scan]Full; complete; replete.

Sinkamas n Turnip.

Sino -pro.- Who; which.

Sinok -n- Hiccough.

Sinoman -pro.- Anyone<corr>;</corr> anybody.

Sinoman-n Somebody.

Sinoman ay hindi-pro.-Nobody; none

Sinop-n-Curiosity; inquisitiveness; inquisition.

Sinsay-a-Illegal; illicit<corr>;</corr> unlawful.

Sinsin-n-Solidity; thickness; closeness;
compactness.

Sinsinan-v-To condense; thicken<corr sic=",">;</corr> confine;
press; condense; put close together.

Sinsinin-v-To thicken; confine<corr sic=",">;</corr> press;
condense; put close together.

Sinta-n-Love; courtship.

Sintahin-v-To love; court.

Sintas-n-Ribbon.

[**out of order]Sintaron-n-Belt; strap;

Sinulat n~g nagpapalimbag-n-Editorial.

Sinulid-n-Thread.

Sinun~galing-n-Lie; cheat; imposter; liar<corr sic=",">;</corr>
swindler; sharper.

Sinun~galing-a-Lying; false; fraud; unfaithful;
inconstant.

Sinusundan-n-Former<corr>;</corr> antecedent.

Sipa-n-Kick<corr sic=":">;</corr> spurn.

Sipag-n-Diligence; attention; industry;
thrift; officiousness.

Sipain-v-To kick <corr>;</corr>spurn.

Sipakin-v-To split<corr sic=",">;</corr> cleave.

Sipan-n-Toothbrush.

Siphayo-n-Insult; censure; reproach.

Sipiin-v-To compile; copy.

Sipit-n-Tweezers; pincer; tongs.

Sipon-n-Constipation; catarrh.

Sirá-n-Putrid; broken; disrupt; cracked;
<pb n=260>used up; useless.

Sirá-n-Break; scath;[**typo for "scathe"? |M: scath is ok, obsolete sp] breach; blight;
putridness; putridity.

Sirá ang isang mata-a-One eyed.[**"One-eyed"? |M:no]

Sirá ang isip-a-Crazy; insane; delirious;
mad; frantic; furious.

Sirain-v-To break; destroy; ruin; injure;
fracture; scathe; disrupt; blight;
dilapidate[**Errata]; hurt; pervert; pollute;
corrupt; infect; deprave; shatter;
stain; impair; waste; misspend; deteriorate.

Sirain-a-Brittle; fragile; perishable.

Sirain ang loob-v-To dishearten; alienate.

Sirain ang mabuting kaugalian-v-To
corrupt; <corr sic=viliate resp=e>vitiate</corr>; mar; seduce; bribe.

Sirain ang puri-v-To stain; <corr sic=viliate resp=e>vitiate</corr>;
degrade; deprave; detract; profane;
stain or tarnish one's character.

[**out of order]Sisíd-n-Dive; immersion; dip; plunge.

Sisí-n-Repentance[**Errata].

Sisihín-v-To repent; scold; reprimand;
admonish; blame.

Sisiw-n-Chick; small chicken.

Sisíwa-n-Wet nurse.

Sitaw-n-Beans.

Sitsit-n-Gossip; false rumor.

Siya-pro<corr>.</corr>-He; she; it.

Siyá-inter.-Enough; stop; halt.

Síya-n-Saddle.

Siya nawa-n-Amen.

Siya nawa-adv.-Amen

Siya n~ga-adv.-Sure; surely; yes; yea.

Síyasat-n-Inquiry; investigation;
examination; inquisition; survey;
curiosity.

Siyasatin-n-To inquire; investigate;
examine; explore; search; try; prove;
scrutinize; scan; survey; peruse; detect;
find.

Siyasating main~gat-v-To search; pry
into; consult.

Siyasatin ang lihim-v-To scent; pry or
peep into; discover secrets.

Sobre-n-Envelope.

Sombrero-n-Hat; castor.

Soriso-n-Sausage.

Sowail-a-Obstinate; disobedient; pertinacious;
rebellious; <corr sic=intractible resp=e>intractable</corr>; dogged.

Suabe-a-Soft; tender; delicate.

Suabe-adv.-Softly; tenderly; delicately.

Suag-n-Butt; hook.

Suagin-v-To butt; hook.

Suatan-v-To fail to keep one's word
because of an accident.

Subiang-n-A thorn or sliver that is run
into the foot slantingly.

Subo-n-Mouthful.

<pb n=261>

Subok n. Proof; assay; trial; indication;
sign<corr sic=",">;</corr> token; evidence; reason.

Subukin v. To try; prove<corr sic=",">;</corr> assay; examine;
try one's strength.

Sudsod n. Plow point; colter; coulter.

Sudsuran v. To give <corr sic=the>a</corr> lie; contradict.

Sudlan n. Spindle.

Sudya -n- Gore; plait.

Suela n~g sapin -n- Sole; sole leather.

Sueldo -n- Pay; wages; salary; stipend;
fee<corr sic=",">;</corr> payment.

Suga n. Tether[**Errata]; stake line; stake rope;
lariat.

[**out of order]Subukin v. To spy; watch closely; lurk;
surprise; overtake; astonish.

[**out of order]Sugal -n- Game; gambling; card playing.

Sugahin v. To tether; stake out.

Sugat n. Wound; cut; incision; injury.

Sugatan -a- Ulcerous; easily hurt.

Sugatan v. To wound; hurt; injure.

Sugat n~g pana n. Arrow wound.

Sugat n~g saksak -n- Stab.

Sugpo n. Large shrimp; lobster.

Sugpong n Joint; juncture; union.

Suhay -n- Prop; fulcrum; support.

Súhol -n- Bribe[**Errata]; bribery; <corr sic=subordination resp=e>subornation</corr>;
incitement.

Suhulan v. To bribe<corr sic=":">;</corr> suborn.

Suhulin v. To bribe; suborn.

Sui n Shoot or sprout of a banana plant.

Suit n Small bowl.

Suitik -n- Thief; robber; highwayman.[**typo higwayman fixed]

Suitik -a- Cheating; infidel; disloyal; inconstant;
crafty.

Sukab -a- Treacherous; faithless; infidel;
false; inconstant; traitorous; perfidious.[**typo perfldous fixed]

Sukal n. Disgust; garbage; filth; dirt.

Sukal n~g loob -n- Disgust; displeasure;
discontent; anger.

Súkat -n- Measure; rule; dimension; extent;
capacity; bulk.

Sukat inter. Enough.

Sukat -a- Sufficient<corr sic=",">;</corr> enough; effectual;
mete;[**not an adj] apt; fit.

Sukatin v. To measure; mete.

Sukatin ang lalim n~g tubig v. To sound.

Sukatin muli -v- To remeasure.

Sukat kamtan -a- Obtainable; attainable.

Sukat mabusog -a- Satiable.

Sukat magasta -a- Expendable.

Sukat magawa a. Feasible; practical; practicable.

[**out of order]Sukat manyari -a- Feasible; practical; practicable

Sukat makadaya -a- Delusive; deceitful.[**typo deceiful fixed]

Sukat makaliwanag -a- Illuminative.

Sukat mamuo a Congealable; that which
may or can be melted.[** congeal is the wrong way if it's melting, should be liquidfiable |M: congealable is correct; maybe replace 'may or can be melted' with 'may or can congeal']

Sukat matalastasin -a- Comprehensible;
conceivable.

<pb n=262>

Sukat na -inter.- Enough; halt<corr sic=":">;</corr> stop.

Sukat n~g anoman -n Measurement; size;
dimensions; measure.

Sukdan -prep.- Though; notwithstanding;
never the less.

Suki n- Customer<corr>;</corr> patron.

Suklam -n Disgust; dislike; reluctance;
repugnance; antipathy; nausea; loathing.

Suklam n Nauseous; despicable[**Errata]; disgusting;
loathsome.

Suklam n~g loob n Aversion<corr sic=",">;</corr> <corr sic=abhorence>abhorrence</corr>;
displeasure; loathing.

Suklay n Comb

Suko n Defeat; surrender; subjection;
vanquishment; cession; repulse.

Sukob -n Buckram.

Suksukan n~g palaso -n Quiver.

Suksukin -v- To shuffle.

[**out of order]Sulambi -n Row; aisle; flank; brim.

[**out of order]Suklob -n Cover; covering: lid.

Sulasurin v To fall headlong; stumble
into errors.

Sulat n Writing; deed; letter<corr sic=":">;</corr> contract;
treatise; inscription<corr>;</corr> epistle.

Sulat kasama sa testamento ó huling
kalooban n Codicil.

[**out of order]Sulat kamay n Manuscript.

Sulat na bastos n Scribble.

Sulat n~g banhay n Rough draft.

Sulat na maikli n Summary.

Sulat na paninta n Billetdoux.

Sulat sa ibabaw n~g libing n Epitaph.

Suliap n Glance; peep; gaze; glimpse;
ogle.

Suliaw n Cup; crock; bowl.

Suligi n Dart; bamboo; lance.

Sulipat -a Oblique,[**matched scan] squint eyed.

Suliran -v To spin; weave.

Sulirán -n Spindle

Sulit <corr sic=u>n</corr>- Examination; investigation.

Sulitin -v- To investigate; examine; explore.

Suló -n Torch; firebrand.

Sulok -n Corner; angle.

Sulol[**matched scan] -n Shoot; sprout.

Sulong - inter. - Hurry up; continue; be
gone; get away; get out; go on.

Sulsol[**fixed; 's' partly visible in scan] -n -Agitation; excitement; incitement;
instigation; temptation.

Sulsulan -v -To incite; excite; agitate;
tempt; urge; instigate<corr sic=",">;</corr> prompt; hint<corr sic=",">;</corr>
suggest.

Sumaad -v -To inform; advise; admonish;
warn.

Sumaba -v -To be at home or in mourning

Sumabang -v -To fall headlong<corr sic=":">;</corr> remit.

Sumabit -v- To cling; hang; catch on.

Sumadsad -v- To anchor.

<pb n=263>

Sumagana v-To <corr sic=Swell>swell</corr>.<corr>;</corr> grow<corr>;</corr> teem<corr sic=":">;</corr> increase.<corr>;</corr>
abound; grow abundantly.

Sumagana n~g malabis v-To superabound.[**fixed; EOL - after 'supera' faint]

Sumagiok v To smack the lips.

Sumagot v To answer; reply; respond;
acknowledge.<corr>;</corr> guarantee.

Sumagsag v To trot<corr>;</corr> be in haste

Sumaguan v To row; paddle; scull.

Sumahod v To receive<corr>;</corr> accept.

Sumakay v To ride<corr>;</corr> embark.

Sumakay sa cabayo v To ride a horse.

Sumakit v To pain<corr sic=":">;</corr> hurt; smart

Sumaklaw v To ambush; encounter<corr sic=",">;</corr> meet;
lie in wait<corr sic=",">;</corr> be bounded by.

Sumakop v To join with another; be
under the control of

Sumaksi v To testify.<corr>;</corr> certify; be a witness<corr>;</corr>
give evidence.

Sumala v To miss<corr sic=":">;</corr> fail<corr>;</corr> violate.<corr>;</corr> be deficient<corr>;</corr>
be guilty.

Sumalangsang v To oppose<corr>;</corr> go against;
violate; resist; contradict.

Sumalig v To recline; lean back; lie back.

Sumalilong v To be sheltered, protected,
helped or favored.

Sumalin v To copy; transcribe

Sumalipad lipad-v- To flutter.

Sumaloysoy v To gully.

Sumalubong v To meet<corr>;</corr> join; encounter.

Sumalun~ga -To mount<corr>;</corr> ascend.

Sumáma v-To accompany; attend.<corr>;</corr> go
with; join; associate<corr>;</corr> follow.<corr>;</corr> adhere;
unite; be united.

Sumamá v To be bad<corr>;</corr> go to the bad<corr sic=":">;</corr>
deprave; corrupt<corr>;</corr> become depraved.

Sumamba v-To praise<corr>;</corr> worship.

Sumámo v To implore; petition<corr>;</corr> beg; pray;
crave.

Sumampa v-To mount; ascend; rise.

Sumampalataya sa Dios v To believe in God.

Sumamyo-v-To smell.

Sumandal-v-To recline; lean back.

Sumandali adv.-Shortly.<corr>;</corr> briefly; immediately;
instantly.

Sumandig sa siko v To lean on the elbow.

Sumanguni v- To consult; take or receive
advice..

Sumanib-v To join.<corr>;</corr> unite<corr sic=",">;</corr> associate<corr sic=":">;</corr> adhere.

Sumansala v To prohibit; interdict<corr>;</corr> forbid;
stop; check

Sumapaw v To appear; sprout; shoot;
overflow.

Sumápit v To arrive; reach; fetch amount
to; approach; join end.

<pb n=264>

Sumariwa.-v-To green; become green.

Sumasagana.-a-Luxuriant; abundant;
superfluous; superabundant.

Sumasaklaw[**should be Sumasaklaw? |M: yes, 2nd 's' prob. just didnt scan fully] sa lahat.-a-Universal; public;
vulgar<corr>;</corr> general.

Sumasal.-v-To irritate.

Sumasama ang loob.-v-To disgust<corr>;</corr> displease.

Sumasamba sa anito.-n-<corr sic=Adolater resp=e>Idolater</corr>.

Sumawa.-v-To tire.<corr>;</corr> loathe; disgust<corr>;</corr> grow
tired of anything.

Sumaway.-v-To stop<corr>;</corr> check; dissuade.

Sumaya.-v-To elate[**Errata: To be elate]; exult<corr>;</corr> be happy.

Sumbang.-n-Headlong fall; dispute; quarrel<corr>;</corr>
contradiction.

Sumban~gin.-v-To fall headlong; dispute;
quarrel; contradict; gainsay.

Sumbi.-n-Slap<corr>;</corr> blow; cuff; box.

Sumbong.-n-Accusation; complaint.

Sumentencia.-v-To sentence<corr>;</corr> condemn.

Sumiap.-v-To pule; chirp<corr>;</corr> peep<corr sic=",">;</corr> pip.

Sumibol.-v-To sprout; bubble<corr>;</corr> spring;
appear.

Sumigaw.-v-To cry; scream; shout;
shriek; exclaim; clamor<corr>;</corr> vociferate;
halloo; hoot<corr>;</corr> screech; screak.

Sumikat.-v-To[**matched scan] appear<corr>;</corr> rise<corr>;</corr> sally.

Sumikat ang araw.-v-To rise (per. to the sun.)

Sumiki.-v-To narrow; contract<corr>;</corr> mix;
mingle.

Sumikip.-v-To narrow; contract; grow;[**extra ;]
less; lessen.

Sumilakbo ang tubig.-v-To <corr sic=hubble>bubble</corr>; spring;
gush.

Sumilang.-v-To appear; grow out<corr>;</corr> occur.

Sumilip.-v-To glance<corr sic=",">;</corr> peep<corr>;</corr> peek.

[**out of order]Sumiphayo.-v-To insult<corr>;</corr> slander<corr>;</corr> abuse.

Sumiman~got.-v-To pout; make a wry
face.

Sumimbá.-v-To go to church<corr sic=",">;</corr> hear mass.

Sumin~gap.-v-To draw a long breath after
drinking.

Sumin~gasing.-v-To sniff; blow one's nose.

Suminghot.-v-To sniff; snuffle.

Suminsin.-v-To grow thick <corr>;</corr>condense; become
dense.

[**out of order]Suminta.-v-To love; woo<corr>;</corr> court.

[**out of order]Sumisinta.-n-Lover; sweetheart.

Sumipot.-v-To appear<corr>;</corr> begin; sprout;
<corr sic=eminate>emanate</corr>; loom; grow out.

Sumipot na walang abog abog.-v-To surprise;
overtake; astonish; come without notice; appear suddenly.

Sumira.-v-To break; impair; <corr sic=delapidate resp=e>dilapidate</corr>;
ruin.

Sumisi.-v-To repent.

Sumisi sa namamali.-n-Reprehender.

Sumisid.-v-To dive; plunge; dip.

Sumisigaw.-n-Shouter; clamorer; <corr sic=cryer resp=e>crier</corr>.

<pb n=265>

Sumoway-v-To resist; disobey; oppose<corr sic=",">;</corr>
violate.

Sumpa-n Curse.<corr>;</corr> imprecation; oath.[**matched scan]

Sumpain-v-To curse; detract; accurse.<corr>;</corr>
swear<corr>;</corr> make oath; imprecate.

Sumuway-v-To disobey; violate; oppose.

Sumuway sa kautusan-n-Delinquent; offender.

Sumubo-v-To eat with the fingers.

Sumubsob-v-To crawl under<corr sic=",">;</corr> fall head-*long.[**- is EOL]

Sumugat-v-To hurt; wound<corr>;</corr> injure.

Sumugat-n-Wounder; striker.

Sumuhol-v-To bribe; suborn.

Sumukab-v-To be traitorous;[**,] unfaithful,
inconstant, bad, infidel or evil.

Sumuko-v-To <corr sic=Surrender>surrender</corr>; truckle; be
defeated.

Sumukot-v-To crouch<corr sic=",">;</corr> stoop.

Sumulat-v-To write; compose.

Sumulat n~g[**matched scan] bastos-v-To scribble.

Sumulat sa bato-v-To lithograph.

Sumulid-v-To spin.

Sumulong-v-To continue;[**matched scan] advance<corr>;</corr> go
ahead.

Sumumpa-v-To swear<corr>;</corr> imprecate; blaspheme;
execute; accurse; curse; make oath.

Sumundo-v-To send for.

Sumungkal -v- To loosen; not scatter about.

Sumuno-v-To board; lodge; live with
another.

Sumunod-v-To follow<corr sic=",">;</corr> obey.<corr>;</corr> yield; comply;
submit<corr sic=",">;</corr> ensue; be inherent.

Sumunod sa mangyari-v-To happen<corr>;</corr>
supervene.

Sumunod sa iba-v-To follow another;
comply<corr sic=",">;</corr> yield<corr sic=":">;</corr> yield to another's wish
or desire.

Sumunodsunod-a-Following; <corr sic=ensueing>ensuing</corr>.

Sumunodsunod sa uso-v-To be in use.

Sumunodsunod sa uso-a-Fashionable; customary.

Sumurot-v-To point.

Sumuso-v-To suck.

Sumustento-v-To sustain; support;
maintain.

Sumusulat n~g historia-n-Historian.

Sumusunod-a-Successive; following; consecutive.

Sumusunod sa aral-n-Sectary.

Sumususo-n-Sucker<corr>;</corr> one who sucks.

Sumutsot-v-To whistle; whiz.

Sumuyo-v-To love; court.

Sundalo-n-Soldier.

Sundalong dagat-n-Marine<corr sic=":">;</corr> marine soldier

Sundalong lakad-n-Grenadier; infantryman.

<pb n=266>

Sundalong nagtanan-n-Deserter.

Sundan-v-To <corr sic=persue resp=e>pursue</corr>; follow; go after;
obey.

Sundang-n-Poinard; <corr sic=Pointed>pointed</corr> knife.

Sunday-a-Inclined; leaned against;
propped.

Sundin-v-To follow; obey; submit; comply;
<corr sic=persue>pursue</corr>; persecute.

Sundulin-v-To punch.

Sungaban-n-Wrestling; scrambling.

Sungabán-v-To wrestle (catch as catch can).

Sun~gay-n-Horn.

Sun~gayan-a-Horned; horny.

Sungkal-n-Rooting (per. to the hog).

Sungkal-n-Disorder.

Sungkalin-v-To root.

Sun~goy-n-Gulch; gully.

Suno-n-Guest<corr>;</corr> lodger; boarder.

Sunodsunod-a-Successive; following<corr>;</corr> alternative;
consecutive; alternate[**Errata].

Sunodsunod-adv.-Successively; consecutively.

Sunog-n-Fire; conflagration; burn; burning;
combustion.

Sunok-n-Distaste; aversion to the taste.

Suntok-n-Blow; <corr sic=fistycuff>fisticuff</corr>; punch with
the fist.

Sunugin-v-To burn; fire; <corr sic=scortch resp=e>scorch</corr>; set
afire; kindle.

Suob-n-Fumigation; disinfection.

Suobin-v-To fumigate; <corr sic=disinfection>disinfect</corr>.

Supil-n-Domination; subjection; repression;
humiliation; reduction.

Súpil-n-Round or circular comb.

Supílin-v-To subject; dominate; subdue;
conquer; overcome; humble; curb;
rein; subjugate; subordinate; repress;
confine; humiliate.

Supling-n-Sprout; shoot.

Súpot-n-<corr sic=SSack>Sack</corr>; bag; pocket; pouch; poke.

Supot n~g dalawang itlog-n-Scrotum.

Súpot n~g sulat-n-Mail bag.

Súri-n-Ruff; ruffling; pleat.

Suriin-v-To ruffle; pleat.

Súrot-n-Bedbug.

Surót-n-The pointing with the finger.

Surutin-v-To surprise by pointing with
the finger.

Susi-n-Key; <corr sic=cock>lock</corr>.

Suso-n-Teat; dug; pap.

Suson-n-Layer.

Susuhan-a-Having large teats.

Susúhan-v-To weave the corners of a
bag or basket.

Sutla-n-Silk.

Sutsot-n-Distaste; aversion of the taste.[**actually means 'Whistle' (typesetting error--duplicated defns for next entry); the 2nd defn for entry 'Tabad' (below) is more appropriate here]

Suyo-n-Distaste; aversion of the taste.

Suyo-n-Courtship; courting; love
making; loving.

Suyo-n-Compliance; civility.

<pb n=267>

Suyuin-v-To love; court; make love;
comply; be civil or polite.


Suyod-n-Fine haircomb.

Suyurin-v-To comb with a fine comb.


<div1 type=Letter n=T>
<head>T</head>

Taan-n-Reserve; exception; secret; caution.

Taas-n-Height; highness.

Taas n~g katawan-n-Stature; height of
the body.

Taasan-v-To raise; heighten.

Taba-n-Grease; lard; fat; <corr sic=corpulancy resp=e>corpulency</corr>.

Tabad-n-Scratch; call by whistling.[**2nd defn doesn't belong here; see note for 'Sutsot' above]

Tabagan-v-To increase; augment.

Tabak-n-Long knife<corr>;</corr> point; lack of spice
or seasoning.[**3rd defn doesnt belong here (seems to be typesetting error--see entry 'Tabang' below)]

Tabak-a-Fresh.

Tabang-n-Lack of spice or seasoning;
insipidity; insipidness.

Tabaran-v-To <corr sic=Scratch>scratch</corr>; cause to bleed.

Tábas-n-Cut; shape; fashion; appearance;
aspect; look.

Tabásan-v-To cut; delineate; pare off.

Tabasán-n-Tailor's pattern; tailor's table.

Tabas pusod-a-<corr sic=Naval resp=e>Navel</corr> shaped.

Tabi-n-Side; edge; brim; limit; border;
margin[**Errata]; fringe; verge; shore; bank;
strand.

Tabig-n-Push; shove.

Tábing-n-Curtain; veil; screen.

Tabing n~g pinto-n-Door-curtain.

Tabla-n-Board.

Tablang makapal-n-Plank.

Taboy-n-Divorce.

Tabsing-a-Saltish; brakish.

Tablado-n-Scaffold.

Tabunan-v-To cover anything with dirt,
chaff, straw, grain or sand.

Tadhanaan-v-To determine, assign or
give time; set a limit.

Tadhaanaan-n-Time; limit; duration; season.

Tadtarin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To chop fine; make into
sausage.

Tadyak-n-Kick; tread.

Tadyang-n-Rib.

<corr sic=Tea>Tae</corr>-n-Flux; excrement; faeces.

Taeng bakal-n-<corr sic=lags>Slags</corr>; dross.

Tae n~g hayop-n-Dung; manure.

Tága-n-Fishhook.

Tagá-n-Cut; slash; gash.

Taga-prep.-From; of.

Taga bayad-n-Paymaster; paying teller;
payer.

Taga bilang-n-<corr sic=Acomptant resp=e>Accomptant</corr>.

Taga Filipinas-n-Filipino.

Taga gawa-n-Workman; artificer; maker;
author; mechanic.

<pb n=268>

Taga gising-n-Alarm.

Taga ibang bayan-n-Stranger; foreigner.

Taga infierno-a-Hellish; infernal.

Tagak-n-Crane; heron; swan.

Taga kabila n~g bundok-n-Transmountaineer.

Taga kabila n~g bundok-a-Transmountain[**Errata];
belonging to the other side of
the mountains.

Taga kilala-n-Examiner.

Tagal-n-Duration<corr>;</corr> time; protraction; delay;
prolixness; prolixity.

Tagalan-v-To protract; delay; prolong;
lengthen; postpone.

Taga lan~git-n-Saint.

Taga lan~git-a-Heavenly; belonging to or
from heaven.

Taganás-a-Clear; neat; pure; clean.

Taga pagalaga-n-Breeder; trainer; nurse;
janitor.

Taga pagdala-n-Conductor; carrier.

Taga pag inas-n-Transporter; carrier.

Taga pagkanlong-n-Defender; abettor;
protector.

Taga pagkudkod-n-Scraper.

Taga pagluto-n-Cook.

Taga pagpasan-n-Porter; carrier.

Taga pagpasuso-n-Wet nurse.

Taga pagsalin ang[**typo: n~g] sulat-n-Copyist.

Taga pagsunog-n-Incendiary<corr>;</corr> burner.

Taga pagtangol[**matched scan]-n-Defender; protector;
supporter.

Taga pag ugoy-n-Rocker; one who rocks.

Taga pamagitan-n-Intercessor; mediator;
petitioner; solicitor; advocate.

Taga pan~gusap-n-Speaker; one who
speaks.

Taga pigil-n-Brakeman.

[**out of order]Taga panubok-n-Examiner; scout; spy.

Taga pulo-n-Islander.

Taga Roma-n-Roman.

Taga sa-prep.-Belonging to; from.

Taga sa ibang bayan ó lupa-n-Foreigner;
stranger.

Taga siyasat-n-Examiner; investigator;
surveyor.

Taga sulat-n-Writer; secretary; notary;
clerk.

Taga tangap n~g buis-n-Tax collector.

Taga taktak-n-Sealer.

Taga tupad-n-Complier; one who complies;
envoy.

[**out of order]Taga tawag-n-Call boy; bellboy; caller.

<pb n=269>

Tagdan-n-Handle.

Taghoy-n-Lamentation; grief; complaint;
story of hardship.

Tagiliran-n-Side; flank; margin[**Errata]; brim;
edge.

Tagiliran kanan n~g sasakyan-n-Starboard.

[**out of order]Tagiliran kaliwa n~g sasakyan-n-Larboard.

Taginting-n-Sonorousness.

Taglay-n-Equivalent.

Taglayin-v-To equalize; fetch; carry.

Tagliran-v-Side; flank[**Errata]; verge.

Tago-a-Hidden; concealed; secret; clandestine;
profound; deep; private.

Tagóbana-n-Porosity; porousness.

Tagobilin-n-Recommendation; charge; injunction;
praise; command.

Tagpi-n-Patch.

Tagpian-v-To patch.

Taguan-n-Storehouse; repository; place
of concealing anything.

Taguan n~g damung tuyo-n-Hay loft.

Taguan n~g labasa-n-Razorcase.

Tagumpay-n-Defense; protection; support.

Tagupak-n-Report of a slap; clapping;
clap.

Tahanan-n-Habitation; abode; residence;
lodging; mansion.

Tahanan-v-To live; reside; lodge; inhabit.

Tahid-n-Spur (of a chicken).

[**out of order]Tahi-n-Sewing; stitch.

Tahiin-v-To sew; stitch.

[**out of order]Tahian-n-Tailorshop; dressmaking establishment.

Tahiin muli-v-To resew.

Tahiin na bigla-n-To baste; sew quickly.

Tahimik-a-Quiet; peaceful; calm; pacific;
placid; noiseless; gentle; undisturbed;
serene; tranquil; mild; tame;
meek; self possessed; dispassionate;
halcyon; quiescent; composed; continent;
tacit; mature; judicious.

Tahong-n-Bivalve; shellfish.

Tahul-n-Bark; howl.

[**out of order]Tainan-n-Tenacity; flexibility.

Taimtim-a-Loving; affectionate; intimate.

Tain~ga-n-Ear.

Tákal-n-Measure; extent; dimension; capacity;
bulk; mete; gauge; contents.

Takalan-v-To measure. (for someone else).

Takalin muli-v-To remeasure.

Takápan-n-Quarrel; dispute; insult; fight;
affray.

<pb n=270>

Takapan-v-To quarrel; dispute; insult.

Takaw-n-Gluttony.

<corr sic=Tukaw>Takaw</corr> na malabis-n-Greed.

Talas-n-Cunning; craft; sharpness; wit;
quickness of thought.[**out of order, but there's also a Talas entry below ]

Takbo-n-Run; scamper; running; sprint;
course.

Takbo n~g panahon-n-Lapse or space of
time.

Takbuhan-n-Race.

Takdaan-v-To determine; distinguish;
decide; resolve.

Takip-n-Cover; lid; covering; casing.

Takipan-v-To cover; case; put on the
lid.

Takip n~g lamesa-n-Tablecover; tablecloth.

Takot-n-Fright; terror; affright; temerity;
timidity; cowardice; dread; consternation.

Takot n~g marami-n-Panic.

Takpan-v-To cover; overspread; hide;
thatch; conceal; stop up.

[**out of order]Takotin-v-To[**fixed; upper part of T did not scan] scare; frighten; overawe.

Takpan muli-v-To recover.

Taksay-<corr sic=a>n</corr>-Fishing[**matched scan] boat.

Taksil-a-Treacherous; perfidious; disloyal;
false; unfaithful; infidel; inconstant;
instable; seditious.

Taktak-n-Seal; stamp; brand; mark.

Takutin-v-To scare; frighten; apall[**scan unclear: "spall"? |M: apall in a TI copy][**typo: appall]; cow;
overawe.

Tala-n-Star; sign; mark.

Taláan-v-To mark; assign; designate;
brand; note.

Talaan-n-Clam; bivalve; cockle.

Talabá-n-Oyster.

Talagá-adv.-Avowedly; designedly; intentionally.

Talagahan-v-To intend; do intentionally
or avowedly.

Taláhib-n-Reed; grass; rushes.

Talaksan-n-Measure of wood. (64 × 64 × 32 inches. (about 73 cu. ft.)

Talampakan-n-The sole of the foot.

Talampakin-v-To tread; trample under foot.[**matched scan]

Talampakin-v-To speak clearly, frankly,
plainly or openly.

Talas-n-Cunning; slyness; wit; skill;
sharpness of wit; handiness; craft.

Talas-n-Drip; dripping.

Talas n~g isip-n-Talent; ability; genius;
understanding; wit.

<corr sic=Talalasok>Talasok</corr>-n-Wooden wedge.

Talata-n-Row; file; line.

Talbos-n-Vegetables (such as the squash
and sweet potato).

<pb n=271>

Tali-n-Garter; band; tie; <corr sic=litigation resp=e>ligature</corr>; string.

Talian-v-To tie; bind; hitch; chock.

Talián-n-Place of tying.

Taliba-n-Guard; watch.

Talibaan-v-To guard; watch.

Talibis na lupa-n-Ravine.

Talibugso-n-Knot.

Talikuran-v-To turn the back; retract;
take back; renounce; reject; abjure;
negate; disclaim; recant; disown.

Talim-n-Sharpness; cutting edge; steel.

Talinhaga-n-Proverb; allegory; example;
mystery.

Talino-n-Clearness of thought; wisdom;
quickness[**Errata] of thought.

Talino n~g isip-n-Talent; ability; wisdom;
genius; clearness of thought.

Talipandas-a-Exempt; unrestrained;
loose; dissolute; rude; insolent.

Talis-n-Sharp prickle; fork; point.

Talisuyo-n-Serf; slave; servant; lover;
one who courts.

Talo-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Setto[**"Set to"? |M:yes, closed up "set-to"; author's sp]; dispute; dissension; perdition;
repulse.

Tálob-n-Cover<corr>;</corr> lid.

Talohaba-a-Oval; oblong.

Talohaba-n-Oval; oblong; ellipse[**Errata].

Taloktok-n-Top; apex.

Taloktok n~g bundok-n-The top of a
mountain.

Talon-n-Jump.

Talonin-v-To jump; overcome; overpower.

Talonin ang hari-v-To dethrone.

Talon n~g tubig-n-Falls; cascade; cataract.

Talong-n-Eggplant.

Talop-n-Peeling; peel.

Táltálan-n-Dispute; quarrel; argument.

Taltalan-v-To dispute; quarrel; argue.

Taluban-v-To cover.

Taludtod-n-Row; file; line; lay.

Taludtod n~g bundok na sunodsunod-n-A
chain of mountains.

Talutod n~g haligi-n-Colonnade.

Talu ap[**typo: Talukap] n~g mata-n-Order; method; rule;
example; precept; following.[**actual defn is "Eyelid"; the headword for the listed defns s/b "Talunton"]

Taluntonin-v-To follow.

Talupan-v-To peel; shell; bark; husk;
pare.

Tama-a-Right; exact; dogmatic; dogmatical;
upright; faithful; honest.

Tamad-a-Lazy; indolent; idle; inattentive;
neglectful; heedless; negligent;
careless; slow; tardy; inert.

Tamad-adv.-Slowly; lazily; idly; tardily.

Taman-n-Firmness; steadiness; constancy;
resolution.

Támanán-v-To be constant;[**,] firm;[**,] resolute
or steady.

Tama sa katuiran-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Reasonable; fair;
just; right.

<pb n=272>

Tambak a. Level; even.

Tambakan v. To level; even.

Tambal n. Joining; putting together;
addition; exaggeration.

Tambalan v. To join; put together; add;
to exaggerate.

Tamban n. Anchovy.

Tambing adv. Immediately; instantly;
hastily; right away; presently.

Tambin~gin v. To do immediately; prepare
hastily.

Tambol n. Drum.

Tambubong n. Granary; mow; place
where traders stop or meet to buy
and sell.

Tambuli n. Hunter's horn; deerhorn.

Tamlay n. Indisposition; sorrow; down
heartedness.

Tamnan v. To sow; plant.

Tamnan muli-v-To resow; replant.[**inserted entry to match scan]

Tamnan [**n~g] panibago v. To resow; sow
again; replant.

Tamuhin[**correct sp, but s/b "Tamohin" based on alphab order; also, a 'Tamuhin' entry already appears below] v. To feel; bear; wear; suffer;
forbear; lead; carry.

Tampa n. Advance of money on anything.

Tampahan v. To advance money on a crop.

Tampak prep. Against; opposite.

Tampal n. Slap; cuff; blow with the
open hand.

Tampalasan n. Insolence; discourtesy;
discourteousness; rudeness; abusiveness<corr>;</corr>
insult; immodesty.

Tampalasan a. Insolent; rude<corr sic=":">;</corr> discourteous;
impudent; flippant; abusive;
profligate; disreputable; overbearing;
immoderate; contumelious; lofty; inhuman;
soulless; perverse; haughty.

Tampalasanin v. To insult; abuse; injure;
misuse; malign; illtreat; mistreat;
maltreat.

Tampalin v. To slap; cuff.

Tampi n. Blow; knock; cuff; slap.

Tampo n. Pout; resentment; anger; pique,

Tampuhan v. To sulk; pout; resent; quit;
forsake; abandon.

Tamtam n. Compensation; <corr sic=idemnification>indemnification</corr>.

Tamtaman v. To indemnify; compensate;
repair.

Tamuhin v. To reach; gain; feel; succeed;
procure; obtain; attain; bear;
suffer; forbear; lead; wear.

Tanaw n. View; sight; prospect; look.

Tanawan n. Place of watching; ken.

Tanawin v. To view; behold; observe;
watch; notice; discern.

Tanda n. Mark; emblem; sign; standard;
note; symptom<corr sic=":">;</corr> precursor; score<corr sic=",">;</corr>
badge; <corr sic=significant>significance</corr>; prognostic; note;
brand; seal; banner; print; stamp.

<pb n=273>

Tandaan-n Catalogue; list.<corr>;</corr> role<corr sic=",">;</corr> file;
memorandum[**Errata].

Tandaán v-To remember; mark<corr sic=":">;</corr> seal;
record<corr sic=":">;</corr> note<corr sic=":">;</corr> stamp<corr sic=",">;</corr> name<corr>;</corr> score.

Tandaan n~g nan~gamatay[**matched scan]-n-Necrology.

Tandos-n Spear<corr sic=",">;</corr> lance<corr>;</corr> javelin.

Tan~ga-n Stupid; slow; dull; ignorant;
wondering<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=starting>staring</corr>.

Tan~gá n-Moth.

<corr sic="Tan~ga">Tanga</corr>-n-A game which resembles
pitching.

Tan~gaan-v- To cause to stare or wonder<corr>;</corr>
scare.

Tangal-n Disconnection.

Tangalin-v-To <corr sic=disconnest>disconnect</corr><corr>;</corr> take to
pieces; disunite; disintegrate; take
apart<corr>;</corr> disarm; disband.

Tangapin n-To <corr sic=reseive resp=e>receive</corr>; take<corr>;</corr> accept.

Tanghali-n-Noon<corr sic=":">;</corr> noontime; midday.

Tanghali adv.-Midday.

Tanghalian n-Dinner.

[**out of order]Tanghalan-n- Fair<corr>;</corr> exposition

Tan~gi-a Singular; single; individual;
particular; rare<corr>;</corr> strange; unequalled;
special<corr>;</corr> foreign.

Tan~gi adv.-Solely<corr sic=":">;</corr> only; purely; alone.

Tangi-n-Refusal; denial; contravention.

Tangihan-v-To deny; refuse; contravene;
resign; disown.

Tan~gi n~g inam a Exquisite; excellent.

Tan~gi sa prep.-Besides; without; above;
over.

Tan~gi sa-adv.-Besides; moreover.

Tan~gis-n-Snivel<corr sic=":">;</corr> crying.

Tangkakal n-Defense; protection; vindication<corr sic=":">;</corr> aid; assistance.

Tangkalag n-Block.

Tang kilik[**typo: Tangkilik] n-Protection<corr sic=":">;</corr> defence; aid<corr sic=":">;</corr>
shelter.

Tangkilican[**correct sp, but s/b 'Tangkilikan' to follow alphab order]-v To shelter; protect<corr sic=":">;</corr> assist;
aid.

Tanglaw n-Light<corr>;</corr> clearness; clarity.

Tangnan-n-Handle.

Tangnan-v-To take; hold<corr sic=":">;</corr> have<corr sic=":">;</corr> grasp;
catch<corr sic=",">;</corr> obtain.

Tangnan n~g baldi n Bail.

Tangnan n~g palakol n-Helve.

Tan~go n Nod of the head signifying
yes; conformity.

Tanikala n Chain.

Tanim-n-Plant<corr sic=":">;</corr> seed<corr sic=",">;</corr> seedtime; planting.

Tanim na loob n-Rancor; anger; hatred;
odium.

Taning-n-Term<corr sic=":">;</corr> end.

Tanin~gan-v-To determine; decide.

Taning na araw-n-Last day; writ.

Taning na panahon-n-Crisis; end of
time.

Tankay-n Stem<corr>;</corr> handle; culm; hanlon[**Errata: replace 'culm; hanlon' with 'culmination'].

<pb n=274>

Tankilik-n-Shelter; protection; aid.

Tanod-n-Custody.<corr>;</corr> guard; watch; sentry;
sentinel.

Tanong-n-Question; inquiry; interrogation.

Tanso n-Brass; copper.

Tansong dilaw-n Brass.

Tansong pula n Copper.

Tantia-n Compensation; understanding.

Tantuin-v-To comprehend<corr>;</corr> understand.<corr>;</corr>
consider; try; ascertain; recognize.

Tanyag-a-Manifest<corr>;</corr> clear; open; plain.

Taob adv.-Overset; up side down; face
down.

Taon-n-Year.

Taontaon-adv:[**.]-Annually; yearly.

Taontaon-n-Anniversary; annual.

Taos n-Affection; liking

Taos <corr sic=na>ang</corr> loob-a-Affectionate; intimate.

Taos sa puso a Cordial<corr sic=":">;</corr> sincere.

Tapa-n-Driedbeef; jerked beef.

Tapak-n-Footstep.<corr>;</corr> foot print; tread;
track.

Tapal-n-Cover; poultice; cataplasm.

Tapal na pangtibay n~g sikmura-n Abdominal
bandage.

Tapang-n-Courage; bravery; fortitude;
intrepidity<corr sic=":">;</corr> boldness; valor; vigor;
spunk; grit; mind<corr sic=":">;</corr> intention.

Tapat-a Just; straight;[**'s' not fully scanned] upright; honest<corr>;</corr>
lawful<corr>;</corr> perfect; strong; sound; complete;
steadfast; evident; certain.

Tapatan n Short cut.

Tapat <corr sic="n~g">ang</corr> loob a Loyal; confident<corr>;</corr> firm<corr sic=":">;</corr>
faithful<corr>;</corr> honest; sincere<corr sic=",">;</corr> frank<corr>;</corr> cordial.<corr>;</corr>
pure<corr sic=":">;</corr> gentle.

Tapat sa matuid adv.-Straightly<corr sic=":">;</corr> justly;
honesly<corr sic=":">;</corr> frankly.

Tapayan-n-Ewer; large earthen pot or jar.

Tapiasan-v-To cut slantingly or on a
slant.

Tapik-n Slap; clap of the hands.

Tapon-n Cork; plug; bung.

Tapos-n-Finish; end; final; close; termination<corr sic=":">;</corr>
conclusion.

Tapsin-a-Brakish; saltish.

Tapunan-n-Dumping;[**matched scan] ground.

Tapunan n~g yagit-n Dunghill.

Tapusan v To <corr sic=Close>close</corr>; finish; terminate;
end; conclude.

Tapusin-v To <corr sic=Close>close</corr>; finish; end<corr sic=":">;</corr> terminate.

Tapusin v To finish<corr>;</corr> end; terminate<corr sic=":">;</corr>
close; conclude; complete; perfect;
crown.

Tarak-n-Stake.

Tarik n- Steep slope.

Tarok-n-Depth<corr sic=":">;</corr> <corr sic=profoundity resp=e>profundity</corr>; skill; judgment;
wisdom.

<pb n=275>

Taros-n-Prudence; knack; activity; skill<corr sic=":">;</corr>
judment.

Taruhin v To measure<corr sic=":">;</corr> compare; estimate

Tarukin-v-To try; fathom<corr sic=":">;</corr> sound; probe<corr sic=":">;</corr>
investigate; perforate; penetrate;
sift.

Tarukin n~g isip-v-To comprehend<corr>;</corr> understand<corr>;</corr>
enter the mind

Tarunahan-v To board a floor.

Tasa n Cup.

Tasahan-v-To appraise; value.

Tasahan-v-To sharpen; point.

Tasak n-Plug; cork; bung.

Tasakán v-To plug; cork<corr sic=":">;</corr> stop a
crack

Tasik n-Brine.

Tasok-n-Plug<corr sic=":">;</corr> wooden stopper; cork;
wedge<corr sic=":">;</corr> stab.

Tastas-n-Rip.

Tastasin-v-To rip; unseam.

Tata-n-Papa.

Tatag-n Equilibrium<corr sic=":">;</corr> solidity[**matched scan]<corr sic=":">;</corr> integrity;
firmness; establishment; founding.

Tatahan at muling babalik-a-Intermittent.

Tatak-n-Stamp<corr>;</corr> brand<corr sic=":">;</corr> sign; seal; mark.

Tatakan-v-To seal; stamp; brand; mark;

Tatal-n-Splinter; chip,

Tatang n-Papa.

Tatangnan-n-Handle.

Tatay-n-Papa<corr>;</corr> father.

Tatlo-n-Three.

Tatlo-a-Three.

Tatlo ang kulay-a-Tricolored<corr>;</corr> three
colored.

Tatlong kulay-a-Tricolored; three colored.

Taula n~g paggawa-n-Glorious deed; noble
work.

Tawa-n-Laugh<corr>;</corr> laughter<corr sic=":">;</corr> giggle.

Tawad n-Bid<corr>;</corr> immunity; pardon.

Tawag n-Call; summons; announcement;
proclamation.

Tawagin-v-To call<corr sic=":">;</corr> summon; name; announce;
proclaim; evoke.

Tawag sa madla-n-Proclamation; publication; notice.

Tawas-n-Alum

Tawirin v-To ferry<corr sic=":">;</corr> cross on a ferry;
ferry across.

Tawo-n-Person; man; individual; woman<corr sic=":">;</corr>
people; nation.

Tawong bastos-n-Curmudgeon<corr sic=":">;</corr> carl;
<corr sic=myrmidom>myrmidon</corr>; rude person.

Tawong bukid-n-Tike<corr>;</corr> farmer; person.

Tawong duag-n-Coward<corr sic=":">;</corr> poltroon.

Tawong gubat-n-Backwoodsman.

Tawong ginoo-n-Gentleman; lady.

<pb n=276>

Tawong hamak-n-<corr sic=Plebian>Plebeian</corr>; hangdog;
varlet.

Tawong kumakain <corr sic=ang>n~g</corr> kapwa-n-Cannibal.

Tawong itim-n-Negro; ethiop; ethiopian.

Tawong mababa-n-<corr sic=Plebian>Plebeian</corr>.

Tawong malakas-n-Carl.

Tawong mahirap-n-Peasant.

Tawong maramot-n-Codger; stingy person.

Tawong marun~gis-n-Dowdy person;
slouch.

Tawong marunong-n-Sage; savant.

Tawong matakaw-n-Glutton; gormand;
gourmand.

Tawong matalas-n-Wit; genius; witty
person.

Tawong mayaman-n-Potentate.

Tawong napakababa-n-Dwarf.

Tawong napakasuitik-n-Sharper; cheat;
swindler.

Tawong natatanoha-n-Overseer; foreman;
inspector.

Tawong sinoman-n-Anybody; any person.

Tawong taksil-n-Traitor; turncoat.

Tawong ulol-n-Lunatic; crazy person;
madman.

Taya-n-Bet; wager.

Tayaan-v-To bet; wager.

Tayantan~gin-v-To be well <corr resp=e>acquainted </corr>or accustomed.

Tayantan~gin-adv.-Little by little.

Tayo-n-Position; posture; attitude; form;
situation; shape; size; mode.

Táyog-n-Height.

Tayom-n-Indigo; indigo plant.

Tayum-n-Suspense; uncertainty.

Teatro-n-Theatre.

Tekas-n-Pickpocket; cheat; swindler;
gull.

Tekasin-v-To cheat; swindle; victimize;
gull.

Tiaga-n-Sufferance; constancy; tolerance;
tenacity.

Tiakad-n-Stilts; booth.

Tian-n-Abdomen; belly; paunch.

Tianak-n-Goblin; sprite; spirit.

Tibag-n-Bank; avalanche; cave in.

Tibagin-v-To cave; slide down; quarry.

Tibay-n-Solidity; firmness; fortitude;
strength; integrity; force; vigor.

Tibayan-v-To strengthen; plight; man;
fortify; support.

Tibay <corr sic=na>n~g</corr> loob-n-Fortitude; forbearance;
strength of heart.

Tibo-n-Thorn; fishhook.

Tibok-n-Pant; palpitation.

Tibok n~g puso-n-Palpitation; foreboding.

<pb n=277>

Tibyaya-n-Squash.

Tigagal-n-Idler; loiterer; indolent person.

Tigas-n-Hardness; solidity; stiffness;
firmness; strength; force; fortitude;
violence; inflexibility.

Tigas n~g loob-n-Resolution; decision; inflexibility;
tenacity; hardness of heart.

Tigdas-n-Measles; pimple.

Tigdasen-v-To break out with the measles
or with pimples.

Tighabol-n-Augmentation; increase; addition.

Tigil-n-Stop; halt; lull; cessation.

Tigil-inter.-Halt; stop; beware.

Tigmak-n-Stain; drench.

Tigmakin-v-To wet; drench; stain; dampen.

Tigpas-n-Slice; cut.

Tigpasin-v-To cut; slice; divide.

Tihaya-adv.-Face up.

Tihaya-a-Faced.

Tiis-n-Toleration; sufferance; endurance;
repentance; patience.

Tiisin-v-To suffer; tolerate; endure;
bear.

Tika-n-Intention; meaning; mind; view;
design; purpose; intent.

Tika-n-Form; shape; size; mode; design;
manners; gentility.

Tikim-n-Taste; palate; relish; proof;
experiment.

Tikis-adv.-Intentionally; purposely; designedly;
knowingly.

Tiklop-n-Fold; plait; ply.

Tiklupin-v-To fold; plait; double.

Tiklupin muli-v-To refold; redouble.

Tikman-v-To try; taste; prove; experiment;
probe; attempt; assay; grope;
investigate.

Tiktik-n-Spy; hedger; scout; one who
aids another to win at cards.

Tiktikan-v-To spy; watch secretly; lurk.

Tila-adv.-Like it seems; it appears.

Tila patay-a-Ghastly.

Tili-n-Shriek; loud cry.

Timain-a-Fusible.

Timawa-n-Peace; tranquility; freedom.

Timawa-a-Peaceful; calm; tranquil; quiet;
free.

Timawain-v-To free; liberate; tranquilize;
make tranquil.

Timawain ang alipin-v-To emancipate;
free a slave.

Timbang-n-Weight; balance; poise.

Timban~gin-v-To weigh; balance; poise;
counterpoise.

Timog-n-South; south wind.

Timpla-n-Temper.

Timplahin-v-To temper.

<pb n=278>

Timsim-n-Wicking.

Timtim-n-Modesty; decency; chastity;
firmness.

Timtiman-a-Decent; chaste; unassuming;
modest.

Timtiman-n-Chastity; decency; modesty;
firmness.

Timtimin-v-To extract; remove; investigate;
inquire.

Timug-n-South.

Timugan-n-South; south wind.

Tina-n-Dye; stain; indigo.

Tinaan-n-Dye shop; place of dyeing.

Tinag-n-Touch.

Tinagin-v-To move[**Errata]; touch; direct; guide;
manage; use.

Tinago-a-Hidden; secret.

Tinago-v. p. p.-Hidden; secreted.

Tinain-v-To dye;[**matched scan] stain.

Tinalaga-adv.-Intentionally; designedly;
knowingly; deliberately; purposely;
avowedly.

Tinali-v. p. p.-Tied; bound.

Tinapay-n-Bread.

[**out of order]Tinuturuan-n-Scholar; pupil.

Tinda-n-Notions; anything that is sold;
found[**typo: fund (based on a TIA copy)].

Tindahan-n-Store; shop; canteen.

Tindahan n~g gatas-n-Dairy.

Tindahan n~g alak-n-Groggery; grog-shop;
saloon.

Tindahan n~g m~ga pagkain-n-Grocery.

Tindi-n-Weight; gravity; importance;
burden; guarantee.

Tindig-n-Stand; position.

Tindigan-v-To stand; guarantee; be
responsible.

Tindihan-n-Stretcher; place of stretching
anything.

Tinekas-n-Victim.

Tinga-n-Lead.

Tingalan n~g asin-n-Salt marsh.

Tingang puti-n-Tin; tin plate.

Tinghas-n-Chip; splinter; sharp point.

Tin~gin-n-Sight; look; gaze; glance; prospect.

Tin~gin sa labas-n-Appearance; face;
likeness.

Tingkal-n-Lump; clod.

Tingkayad-adv.-On tiptoe.

Tingkayad-a-Squatted; stooped.

Tingnan-v-To look; see.

Tingnan muli-v-To review; revise; look
or see again.

Tingnan muna-v-To foresee<corr sic=":">;</corr> see before.

Tinig-n-Sound; tone; echo; tune.

Tiniis-v. p. p.-Underwent; undergone.

Tinik-n-Thorn; fishbone; thistle.

Tining-n-Settlings; residue; remainder.

<pb n=279>

Tinin~gal-n-Provision.

Tinin~gal-adv.-Stored away; put away.

Tining n~g loob-n-Determination; resolution;
intrepidity; bravery; valor;
boldness; courage; moderation; forbearance.

Tinitingnan-n-The object which is
seen; that which one is looking at.

Tinkal-n-Clod; lump.

Tinta-n-Ink.

Tinutulugan-n-Bed chamber; bed;
place of sleeping.

Tinutungtun~gan-n-Route; ending; object;
itinerary; goal.

Tipa-n-Convention; appointment; contract.

Tipan-n-Promise; vow; testament.

Tipanan-n-Convention; contract; agreement;
utility; profit.

Tipiaw-n-Trip; stub; stumble.

Tipid-a-Economical; frugal; close.

[**out of order]Tipi-a-Compact; firm; close; solid; compressed.

Tipiin-v-To press; compress.

Tipirin-v-To economize[**Errata]; clip or curtail
expenses; be frugal or saving.

Tipó-n-Gap or notch in a tool.

Tipó-a-Toothless.

Tipon-n-Gathering; meeting; assembly;
congregation.

Tipuin-v-To break; nick; notch.

Tipunin-v-To gather; unite; compile;
pouch; congregate; meet.

Tirá-n-Gleanings; residue; remainder;
remains; residium; excess; refuse;
overplus; remnant.

Tirahan-n-Habitation; abode; house;
home; place of living.

Tirahán-v-To save; leave over; reserve;
set aside; keep for.

Tirik-a-Steep; perpendicular.

Tirikan n~g kandila-n-Candlestick.

Tiríkan-v-To put a candle in a candlestick.

Tirintas-n-Braid.

Tirintasin-v-To braid.

Tisa-n-Tile.

Tisain-v-To tile.

Tisod-n-Stub; stumble; trip; slip; impediment;
obstacle; difficulty.

Tistisin-v-To sew; <corr sic=him>hem</corr>.

Tisurin-a-Tripping; stumbling.

Tisurin-v-To cause to stumble.

Titik-n-Letter; deed; writing.

Titingkatingkayad-v-To walk on tiptoe
or in a cowering manner.

Título-n-Title; diploma.

Tiwalag-a-Separated; distant; far; retired;
divided.

Tiwangwang-adv.-Wide<corr sic=";"></corr> open.

<pb n=280>

Tiwasay-a-Firm; secure; safe; clear.

Tiyan-a-Abdomen; belly; paunch.

Tiyot-n-Drought.

Toktok-n-Top; crest; crown.

Tono-n-Tone; tune; volume.

Toro-n-Bull.

Totohanin-v-To be serious; verify; accomplish;
affect; make<corr sic=";"></corr> true.

Totoo-a-Certain; serious; evident; true;
positive; sure; effectual; devout;
downright; veritable; dogmatic; dogmatical;
peremptory; reliable; categorical.

Totoong-adv.-Very; greatly.

Towa-n-Joy; pleasure; glee; mirth; merriment;
gayety;[**matched scan] delight; comfort; rejoicing;
satisfaction.

Towid-n-Right; straightness.

Towid-a-Right; straight; just.

Towi na-adv.-Always; often; frequently.

Towirin-v-To straighten; rectify; justify;
make right; right; clarify.

Trabajador-n-Worker; workman; laborer;
journeyman; artificer; mechanic.

Trabajo-n-Work; task; labor; husbandry.

Trangka-n-Gate; gateway.

Trangkahan-n-Gate; gateway.

Trato-n-Contract; agreement.

Tresagio-n-Matin.

Tresillas-n-Gimp.

Tresiete-n-Whist.

Trono-n-Throne.

Tropa-n-Troupe; company.

Tropang lakad-n-Infantry.

Trote-n-Trot.

Tsa-n-Tea.

Tubig-n-Water; lymph.

Tubig na bumukal-n-Spring water.

Tubig na ulan-n-Rain water.

Tubó-n-Interest; profit; gain; lucre; revenue;
emolument; acquisition; advantage;
growth; increase.

Tubó-n-Sugarcane.

Tubo-n-Lamp chimney.

Tubos-n-Redemption[**Errata]; ransom.

Tubo sa ibang bayan-a-Stranger; foreign.

Tubo sa ibang lupa-n-Stranger; foreigner.

Tubsin-v-To ransom; redeem.

Tubsin ang sangla-v-To redeem a pledge.

Tubuan-n-Sprout; growing; growth.

Tubuan n~g n~gipin-v-To cut teeth.

Tubuan-v-To grow; sprout.

Tubusin-v-To redeem; ransom.

Tudla-n-Aim; point.

Tudlain-v-To aim; point.

Tudling-n-Furrow.

Tudlin~gan-v-To furrow; plow.

Tudlok-n-Punch; point.

<pb n=281>

Tudlukin-v-To punch; poke; point; shoot
with a cue.

Tugak-n-Frog.

Tugatog-n-Hill; knoll; hillock; small
mountain; <corr sic=hommock>hammock</corr>.

Tugno-n-Brine.

Tugon-n-Answer; repartee; reply; response;
retort.

Tugtog-n-Play; piece of music; playing
on musical instruments.

Tugtog muna sa kanta-n-Overture.

Tugtog n~g loob-n-Inspiration.

Tugtog n~g músico-n-The playing of a
band or an orchestra.

Tugtugan-n-Piece of music; playing of
musical instruments.

Tugtugan na walang ayos-n-Dissonance;
discord.

Tugtugin-v-To play on a musical instrument.

Tuhod-n-Knee.

Tuhog-n-Stringer; that upon which
anything is strung.

Tuhuguin-v-To string; impale; pass
through.

Tuhuran-v-To push or shove with the
knee.

Tuka-n-Beak; bill; peck.

Tukain-v-To peck; pick.

Tukarol-n-Cap; bonnet; turban.

Tukó-n-Small[**S partly visible] lizard.

Tukod-n-Post; prop; support; protection.

Tukso-n-Teasing; temptation; vexation;
aggravation; enticement; instigation.

Tuksuhin-v-To tease; vex; entice; tempt;
instigate; worry; chaff; haggle; inveigle.

Tuktok-n-Top; crest.

Tuktok n~g manok-n-Comb of a chicken.

Tuktok n~g ulo-n-The crown of the
head.

Tulá-n-Poem.

Tulad-n-Copy; counterfeit; imitation.

Tulag-n-Spear; lance; dart; javelin.

Tulagin-v-To throw a dart or spear;
lance.

Túlak-n-Push; shove; thrust; drive.

Tulakin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To shove; push; thrust.

Tulala-a-Stupid; lazy; ignorant; indolent;
idle; weak; feeble; imbecile.

Tulalain-v-To astonish; stupefy.

Tularan-v-To imitate; copy; counterfeit;
mimic.

Tularan-n-Precedent; example; pattern.

Tulatod-a-Last; hindmost.

Tulatod-n-Rump; croup.

Tulay-n-Bridge.

<corr sic=Tult>Tuli</corr>-n-Circumcision.

<pb n=282>

Tulig-<corr sic=n>a</corr>-Foolish; stupid; torpid; ignorant;
idiotic; senseless.

Tulig-n-Fool; idiot; madman.

Tuliin-v-To circumcise.

Tulin-n-Speed; velocity; quickness; activity;
promptness; promptitude; nimbleness.

Tulin~gad-n-Fool; idiot; madman.

Tulis-n-Sharpness; point; acuteness; end.

Tulisan-n-Robber; highwayman; bandit.

Tulisan-v-To sharpen; point.

Tulisan sa dagat-n-Pirate; <corr sic=corsican resp=e>corsair</corr>.

Tuló-n-Leak.

Tulog-n-Sleep; slumber.

<corr sic=Talong>Tulong</corr>-n-Help; aid; assistance; support;
succor; vindication.

Tulon~gan-n-To help; aid; assist; succor;
defend; facilitate; protect.

Tulos-n-Stake.

Tulot-n-Permission; license; furlough;
leave; admittance.

Tuloy-a-Continued; successive; continuous;
lasting; following.

Tuloytuloy-a-Prompt; speedy; expeditious<corr>;</corr>
continued without interruption.

Tulun~gan-v-To assist; defend; aid; help;
protect; furnish; favor; minister;
supply.

Tulun~gin-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To help; aid; assist; defend;
protect.

Tulutan-v-To permit; license; give leave
or permission.

Tuluyan-v-To continue; keep going;
terminate.

Túluyan-n-Hotel; boarding house.

Tumaan-v-To reserve; put away; keep
separate.

Tumaas-v-To grow in height; ascend;
mount; rise; raise.

Tumaba-v-To grow or become fat or
fleshy; fatten.

Tumaba ang lupa-v-To fertilize; grow
or become fruitful (per. to land).

Tumadiak-v-To kick.

Tumae ang ibon-v-To mute.

Tumagal-v-To last; prolong; endure;
suffer; dally; subsist.

Tumagilid-v-To turn sideways; <corr sic=lay>lie</corr> on
the side.

Tumaginting-v-To sound.

Tumagistis ang luha-v-To cry; weep;
run (per. to tears).

Tumago-v-To hide; conceal; put away.

Tumagos-v-To penetrate; leak; run
through.

Tumagupak-v-To clap; make a noise
by clapping the hands or stamping
the feet.

Tumahan-v-To dwell; nestle; reside;
lodge.

<pb n=283>

Tumahan-v-To calm; appease; grow or
become quiet or peaceful.

Tumahi-v-To sew; stitch.

Tumahol-v-To bark; yelp; yap; yawl;
howl.

Tumahimik-v-To appease; become or
grow peaceful or calm; calm; rest;
repose; lull.

Tumakas-v-To[**matched scan] decamp; escape; slip off;
leave on the sly; sneak off; leave
secretly.

Tumakbo-v-To run<corr>;</corr> sprint; course;
hasten; flow.

Tumakot-v-To intimidate; frighten;
scare; terrify.

Tumal-n-Depression; scarcity; slowness;
scantiness.

Tumal-a-Slow; depressed; not salable.

Tumalas-v-To filter; strain; leak; trickle;
trill; pour down; ooze.

Tumalas-v-To become or grow witty.

Tumali-v-To tie; bind

Tumalikod-v-To turn one's back; take
back; retract; recant.

Tumalikod sa kanyang bandila-v-To
desert one's flag.

Tumalima-v-To yield; submit; obey.

Tumalima-v-To contradict; oppose;
gainsay.

Tumalon-v-To jump down; precipitate.

Tumáma-v-To hit; guess; conjecture.

Tumanan-v-To run away; elope; sneak
off; make off; leave secretly.

Tumánga-v-To prohibit; interdict; forbid.

Tuman~gan-v-To have<corr>;</corr> hold.

Tumangap-v-To receive; accept; take.

Tumangap-n-Receiver; taker;[**matched scan] recipient.

Tumangi-v-To refuse; renounce; deny;
resign.

Tuman~gis-v-To weep; mourn; lament;
bewail.

Tuman~go-v-To consent; agree; confirm;
affirm; promise.

Tumaning-v-To give or prolong time;
extend time; reprieve.

Tumankilik-v-To protect; defend; support;
favor; corroborate; confirm; hold
up; prop.

Tumanong-v-To ask; question; inquire;
interrogate.

Tumantan-v-To rest; quiet; appease.

Tumaos-v-To penetrate; pierce.

Tumapang-v-To encourage; become
brave, courageous, bold or valiant.

Tumarok-v-To sound; delve.

Tumatahan sa isang lugar ó bahay-n-Inhabitant;
lodger.

Tumatakbo-n-Runner.

Tumatanaw-n-Spectator.

<pb n=284>

Tumatatua-n-Backslider; one who denies
anything; gainsayer; contradictor.

Tumatawa-n-Laugher; one who laughs.

Tumatua-v-To deny; contradict; gainsay.

Tumawa-v-To laugh; giggle.

Tumawag-v-To call; summon; name;
term; send for; announce; evoke;
hallo.

Tumaya-v-To bet; wager.

Tumayo-v-To establish; build; edify.

Tumba-n-Tower; grave stone.

Tumba n~g patay-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Tomb; vault; sepulcher;
tomb stone.

Tumbong-n-Anus; fundament.

Tumibay-v-To fortify; strengthen; afirm;
guarantee.

Tumibok-v-To palpitate; flutter.

Tumigas-v-To harden; indurate.

Tumiguil-v-To stop; cease; stay; lull;
remain; leave off<corr sic=";"></corr> work.

Tumiin-v-To ooze; leak.

Tumika-v-To limp.

Tumikim-v-<corr sic=Taste>To taste</corr>; try; attempt; assay.

<corr sic=Tumikim>Tumikhim</corr>-v-To cough; draw <corr sic=ones>one's</corr> attention.

Tumila-v-To cease.

Tumili-v-To shriek; scream; cry in a
high tone.

Tumimbang-v-To weigh.

Tuminbuang-v-To lay down; stretch
one's self on a bed.

Tumindig-v-To arise; rise; stand up.

[**out of order]Tuminag-v-To be brisk or smart.

Tumin~gin-v-To see; look; view; gaze;
behold; observe; watch; notice; discern;
vide.

Tumingkayad-v-To stoop; squat; walk
or stand on the toes.

Tumira-v-To dwell; live; reside; lodge;
inhabit; nestle.

Tumira-v-To remain; be left over.

Tumita-v-To drain; let fall drop by
drop.

Tumitig-v-To eye; glance; look.

Tumitis ang pawis-v-To sweat or perspire
freely.

Tumiwalag-v-To separate; remove; sort;
dissuade.

Tumpa-n-Last journey or trip; going.

Tumpa gawi-n-Inclination; tendency;
fancy.

Tumpak-n-Skill; judgment; prudence;
knack[**Errata]; mischievousness; restlessness.

Tumpok-n-Small round heap; patty.

Tumubo-v-To grow; increase; swell.

Tumubo pumatong sa ibaw-v-To outgrow.

Tumugon-v-To answer; respond; reply;
acknowledge.

<pb n=285>

Tumugtog-v-To play on a musical
instrument; ring a bell.

Tumuka-v-To peck; pick.

Tumuktok-v-To beat, strike or knock
with the knuckles.

Tumulad-v-To equalize; make equal;
match.

Tumúlak-v-To push; shove; thrust.

Tumulo-v-To leak; drip; fall drop by drop.

Tumulong-v-To help; aid; assist; cooperate;
favor; succor; support; serve;
defend; protect; corroborate; hold up;
confirm; prop; minister.

Tumulotulo-v-To drip.

Tumumba-v-To tower.

Tumumog na malakas-n-Resolution;
courage; mind; promptitude; aid; determination.

Tumumok-v-To gather; crowd.[**matched scan]

Tumumpa-v-To carry down; have the
last of anything.

Tumunaw-v-To melt; liquefy; dissolve.

Tumun~go-v-To wend; trend; bend; bow.

Tumunog-v-To sound; clank; clang;
ring.

Tumuntong-v-To tread; trample; stamp;
put on; occupy[**Errata].

Tumupad-v-To execute; discharge; perform;
comply; heed; do one's duty;
dispense; observe.

Tumurote-v-To trot.

Tumutul[**correct sp, but s/b Tumutol to follow alphab order]-v-To reply; answer; respond;
affirm; allege; oppose; fight.

Tumutol sa pagtangol-v-To fight for
another; defend; argue in another's
favor.

Tunang-n-Outcry.

Tunang malaki-n-Tumult; outcry; riot.

Tunaw-n-Liquid; fluid.

Tunawin-v-To melt; liquefy; dissolve;
smelt; consume; spend.

Tunawín-a-Soluble; solvable; meltable<corr>;</corr>
liquefiable.

Tunawin ang kinain-v-To digest.

Tunay-a-True; cordial; sincere; loyal;
constant; firm; manifest; solemn; dogmatic;
dogmatical; certain; downright;
reliable; legitimate; actual; candid;
confident; real; peremptory; important.

Tunay-adv.-Really; truly; actually; loyally;
candidly; certainly; seriously;
surely; positively; evidently.

Tunay n~ga-a-True; serious; certain; positive.

Tun~ga-a-Slow; half-witted; ignorant;
torpid; rude; foolish.

Tun~gag-a-Half-witted; foolish; dull;
torpid; slow; ignorant; rude; wild;
obscene.

Tun~gaw-n-Tick; woodtick.

<pb n=286>

Tun~gayaw-n-Curse; imprecation; oath;
malediction; swearing; ban.

Tung ayawin[**typo: Tun~gayawin]-v-To curse; swear; imprecate;
ban.

Tungkay-n-Object; design; end; intent.

Tungkod-n-Cane[**scan unclear |M: cane]; staff; prop; fulcrum;
support; protection; truncheon.

Tungkol-p. a.[**? |M: means prep. & adv.]-According; pertaining;
concerning.

Tungkol-prep.-About; over.

Tungkol-n-Duty; obligation; contract;
agreement.

Tun~go-n-Bow; nod; object; behavior;
trend.

Tun~go-a-Inclined; disposed.

Tún~go-n-Tuber.

Tun~gó n~g <corr sic=look>loob</corr>-n-Intent; design; purpose.

Tungtong-n-Cover; lid; pot lid.

Tunod-n-Magnetic needle; the unrolled
leaves of the palm or banana.

Tunog-n-Sound; noise; report; clank;
clang; ring; resonance.

Tunog na bagol-n-Grating[**;"? |M:no] harsh sound.

Tunog n~g voces-n-Tune[**scan unclear |M: Tune]; tone.

Tunsoy-n-Shiner.

Tuntun~gan-n-Objective; place that one
is heading for.

Tupa-n-Sheep.

Tupád-n-Compliance; doing of one's
duty.

Tupang babaye-n-Ewe.

Tuparin-v-To comply; do one's duty.

Turing-n-Bid; asking price; proposal;
overture; proposition; guess.

Turo-n-Teaching; instruction; doctrine.

Turuan-v-To teach; instruct; educate;
discipline; inform; civilize; point out.

Tuso-a-Sly; cunning; crafty; sagacious;
vulpine; keen; sapient; wily.

Tusok-n-Stitch.

Tustusin-v-To loosen; slacken.

Tusukin-v-To stitch; prick.

Tuto-n-Skill; learning; knowledge; judgment;
prudence; wisdom; sagacity;
circumspection.

Tutol-n-Answer; reply; response; repartee.

Tutop-n-Patch; cover.

Tutos-n-Stitch; union.

Tutsang n-Bristle.

Tutugin-v-To separate or take out the
ashes; reduce to ashes.

Tutupan-v-To patch; mend; splice.

Tutusin-v-To stitch; sew.

Tuwa-n-Happiness; mirth; merriment;
joy; pleasure; content; solace; consolation;
gladness; gayety;[**matched scan] festivity;
rejoicing.

Tuwa-a-Glad; joyful; merry; happy.

Tuwi-a-Each; every; all; entire; whole.

<pb n=287>

Tuwituwina-adv.-Often; frequently.

Tuyá-n-Flattery; false praise.

Tuyáin-v-To flatter.

Tuyo-a-Dry; barren; withered; arid.
[**check column break]
<corr sic=scar>sear</corr>; sere; wizen.

Tuyongtuyo-a-Very dry.

Tuyot-a-Dry; dessicated.

Tuyuin-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To dry; dessicate.



<div1 type=Letter n=U>
<head>U</head>

Uban-a-Hoary; gray headed; white.

Uban-n-Gray hair; chaff.

Ubanin-a-Old; hoary; grayheaded.

Ubanin-v-To grow old or grayheaded.

Ubas-n-Grapes; grape.

Ubo-n-Cough.

Ubod-n-Heart; center.

Ubod n~g hirap-n-Worst misery.

Ubong malakas-n-Whooping cough.

Ubos-n-Termination; consummation; ending.

Ubos-a-Terminated; consumed; used up.

Ubusin-v-To consume; use up; end;
terminate; expend; waste.

Udiok-n-Stimulation; incitement; persuasion;
inspiration; instigation.

Udiokan-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To incite; stimulate; instigate;
excite; persuade; induce; imbue.

Udiukan-v-To persuade; incite; induce;
prevail upon; inspire; move.

Udlok-n-Boman[**Errata: Instigater (typo: Instigator)].

Udyok-n-Persuasion; incitement; excitement;
stimulation; inspiration; encouragement.

Udyukan-v-To inspire; persuade; induce;
incite; ply; imbue.

Uga-n-Move; rock.

Ugain-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To rock; move.

Ugali-n-Use; custom; habit; disposition;
usage; wont; fancy; temper.

Ugaling parang-a-Rough; illbred[**Typo: "ill bred"? |M: no]; rustic.

Ugan~gin-v-To make foolish.

Ugat-n-Root; vein; blood vessel; bud;
source; origin; spring.

Ugit-n-Plow beam; plow handle; helm.

Ugong-n-Noise; clamor; crack; clash;
din.

Ugoy-n-Rocking; swinging.

Ugoyin-v-To rock; swing.

Uhalea-n-Buttonhole.

Uhaw-n-Thirst.

Uhaw na uhaw-a-Very thirsty; dry.

<corr sic=Uhaw>Uhay</corr>-n-Head of grain.

Uhog-n-<corr sic=Mucous>Mucus</corr>; slime; snot; muck.

Uhugin-a-Mucous; slimy; snotty.

Ukit-n-Dent.

Ukitin-v-To dent.

Ukol-n-Correspondent; trustee; agent.

Ukol sa-a-Pertaining to; concerning;
apt; fit; ready.

<pb n=288>

Ukol sa sikmura-a-Gastric; pertaining
to the stomach.

[**out of order]Ukol sa lupa-a-Terrestrial; belonging or
pertaining to the earth.

Ulak-n-Spindle; reel; pinfeathers.

Ulakan-n-Wrapping frame; spindle; reel.

Ulakin-v-To wind; roll up; wind around.

Ulam-n-Meat.

<corr sic=Ulam>Ulan</corr>-n-Rain; shower.

Ulang bigla at masasal-n-Heavy
shower of rain.

Ulap-n-Cloud.

<corr sic=Ulak>Ulap</corr> na makapal at mababa-n-Mist; fog.

Ulapot[**Ulapet? |M:no]-n-Rag hanging from the clothes.

Ulian-a-Wornout; decrepit.

Ulianin-a-Old; worn out; decrepit.

[**out of order]Uli-adv.-Again.

Uliin-v-To repeat; renew; patch; make
over.

Ulila-n-Orphan.

Ulilang lubos-n-Orphan; child who has
neither father nor mother.

Uling-n-Coal; charcoal; soot; cinder;
grime; lampblack.

Uliran-n-Type; pattern; example; model.

Ulit-adv.-Again; once more.

Ulitin-v-To repeat; duplicate; renew;
double; iterate; reiterate; rehearse;
do or try again.

Uliting madalas-v-To repeat frequently.

<corr sic=Ulili>Uliuli</corr>-n-Whirlpool; eddy; vortex.

Uliyaw-n-Echo.

Ulo-n-Head; poll.

Ulog-n-Movement; management; direction.

Ulogin-v-To move; manage; direct.

Ulol-n-Lunatic; madman; idiot; dolt;
gump; loggerhead; crazy man.

Ulol-a-Demented; crazy; insane; mad;
daft; delirious; foolish; stupid; distracted;
idiotic; ignorant; unlearned.

Ulong ulo-a-Baldheaded.

Ulong-n-Meeting; union; congregation.

Ulos n~g sandata[**letter unreadable between sa and data |M:fixed]-n-Slash or stab.

Ulug-n-Handling; moving.

Ulugin-v-To handle; move to and fro.

Ululan-v-To exaggerate; add to; increase.

<corr sic=Ululing>Ululin</corr>-v-To infatuate; stupefy; make
or cause to be foolish; alienate.

Umabala-v-To interfere; oppose; prevent;
molest; trouble; vex; prolong.

<pb n=289>

Umabot-v-To reach; overtake; catch up;
approach; arrive; come up; get; obtain;
abut.

Umabuloy-v-To assist; help; aid; support;
serve; contribute; suffice; defray; succor;
minister; promote.

Umaga-n-Morning; forenoon.

Umaga-adv.-Early; soon; betimes.

Umagang umaga-adv.-Very early.

Umagang umaga-n-Dawn; break of day.

Umagap-v-To preoccupy; foresee; anticipate;
be quick or active.

Umagaw-v-To steal; snatch.

Umagaw sa isang babayi-n-Rapist; ravisher.

Umahon-v-To go up; ascend; land;
mount; climb up; disembark.

Umakin-v-To tame; domesticate.

Umakyat-v-To climb; ascend; mount; go
up; increase.

Umakyat na magukiabit-v-To climb
with the use of the hands.

Umalalad-v-To resound; jingle; clink.

Umalalay-v-To support; help; assist;
aid; maintain.

Umali-v-To succeed; happen.

Umalimura-v-To insult; revile.

Umalin~gasaw-v-To rise; extend; transcend.

Umalin~gasaw ang baho-v-To stink;
smell bad.

Umalin~gawn~gaw-v-To echo; resound;
rumble; rumor.

Umalis-v-To go; leave; sally; retire;
abandon; forsake; quit; emigrate; absent
one's self.

Umalitiit-v[**matched scan]-To grate; creak; scrape.

Umalsa-v-To rise; loosen; grow fluffy;
uprise.

Umambag-v-To contribute; give; promote.

Umambon-v-To mist; drizzle; mizzle.

Umamo-v-To tame; domesticate; become
domesticated.

Umampon-v-To help; protect; aid; defend;
support; corroborate; favor; conform.

[**out of order]Umamoy-v-To smell.

Uman~gil-v-To howl; snarl; growl; murmur;
grumble.

Uman~gis-v-To stink; smell bad.

Umani-v-To gather; harvest; reap.

Umanit-v-To pull.

Umankin-v-To appropriate; usurp.

Umanod-v-To descend; flow with the
current.

Umanta-v-To grow rancid or stale.

Umapaw-v-To overflow; inundate; overrun.

Umapid-v-To seduce; abort.

<pb n=290>

Umaral-v-To advise; warn; inform.

Umari-v-To own; have.

Umari n~g hindi kaniya-v-To usurp; appropriate
anything that is not one's
own.

Umasa-v-To hope; await; desire; expect.

Umasim-v-To sour; become salty or
briny.

Umaso-v-To smoke; fume; reek.

Umáso-a-<corr sic=Funy>Fumy</corr>; smoky; fuming; smoking.

<corr sic=Umasok>Umusok</corr>-v-To smoke; fume.

Umaway-v-To fight; war; oppose; dispute;
rival; contest.

Umayon-v-To conform; coincide; acquiesce;
agree; accord.

Umawit-v-To sing; carol.

Umayaw-v-To resign; decline; quit; renounce;
reject; stop.

Umayos-v-To arrange; agree; put in
order.

Umbok ang gitna-a-Convex; convexed.

Umibig-v-To love; like; wish; desire;
court; will.

Umibis-v-To dismount; get off.

Umigi-v-To ease; improve; appease; become
less painful.

Umihi-v-To urinate.

Umiki-v-To limp.

Umikit-v-To turn; revolve; roll; gyrate.

Umiko-v-To limp.

Umilag-v-To dodge; avoid; escape; shun;
grow or become wild.

Umimik-v-To murmur; mutter; mumble;
reply; respond; answer.

Umindayog-v-To oscillate; vibrate;
move.

Umin~gos-v-To grumble; snarl; growl.

Uminis-v-To smother; oppress; overpower;
crush; subject.

Uminog-v-To turn; gyrate; roll; spin.

Uminom-v-To drink; imbibe.

Umintindi-v-To understand; comprehend.

Umisip-v-To think; invent; plan; plot;
contrive; meditate.

Umitim-v-To blacken; become black;
darken.

Umitim-v-To steal; peculate; pilfer;
cabbage; purloin; filch.

Umiyak-v-To cry; weep; bewail; lament.

Umiyak ang hayop-v-To low; bleat;
howl; grunt.

Umpog-n-Collision; encounter; clash;
shock; push.

Umpok-n-Conversation; converse.

Umudlot-v-To rebound; bounce; recoil.

Umug-n-Moth; the fouling of grain so
that it lumps.

Umuga-v-To move; shake; vibrate.

<corr sic=Umuguin>Umugin</corr>-v-To molder; lump because of
dampness.

<pb n=291>

Umugit-v-To steer; pilot.

Umugit sa sasakyan-n-Pilot; steersman;
helmsman.

Umugong-v-To make a noise.

Umugong [**na] parang kulog-v-To fulminate;
make a noise like thunder.

Umugoy-v-To rock; swing.

Umukit-v-To dent.

<corr sic=Umayabit>Umukyabit</corr>-v-To claw; scratch.

Umulayaw-v-To coax; wheedle; fondle;
pet; humor.

Umulan-v-To rain; shower.

Umulan n~g busilak-v-To snow.

[**out of order]Umulan n~g bubog-v-To hail.

Umuliaw-v-To echo; resound.

Umulit-v-To pilfer; steal; peculate;
filch.

Umúna-v-To go before; go first; anticipate;
foresee; expect.

Umunat-v-To stretch; lengthen; adjust;
enlarge; upon.

Umugot[**typo: Umun~got]-v-To whisper.

Umunouno-v-To stutter; hesitate; stammer.

Umunti-<corr sic=a>v</corr>-To lessen; decline; fall; descend;
dwindle; grow or become
smaller.

Umupasala-v-To defame; slander; insult;
deride.

Umupo-v-To sit.

Umupo-v. imp.-Sat.

Umuriturit-v-To stammer; titter; stutter;
hesitate.

Umurong-v-To recoil; fall back; retrograde;
back; regress; backslide.

Umurong ang kabayo-v-To balk.[**more complete defn is "To balk (per. to a horse)"]

<corr sic=Umurong>Uminom</corr> n~g marami-v-To quaff.

Umusig-v-To investigate; inquire; examine;
follow; register.

Umusos-v-To go down; descend.

Umutalutal-v-To stutter; stammer; haw;
hesitate.

Una-adv.-Soon; early; first.

Una-a-First; primitive.

Unahan-v-To go first; preoccupy; <corr sic=preceed>precede</corr>;
lead; anticipate; expect; foresee.

Unahan-n-Front; lead; fore end; beginning.

Unan-n-Pillow.

Unang araw n~g buan sa lan~git-n-Neomenia;
first night of the new moon.

Unano-n-Dwarf; pigmy; manakin.

Unatin-v-To stretch[**Errata]; unfold; expand.

Unatin ang baluktot-v-To straighten.

Unauna-adv.-First; principally; chiefly.

Unka[**typo: Un~ga]-n-Lowing; low.

Un~gal-n-Howl; cry of horror.

Un~gas-a-Stupid; foolish; dull; ignorant;
simple; idiotic.

<pb n=292>

Ungo-n-Monkey.

Ungong babaye-n-Female monkey.

Un~gos[**Ungos? |M:no]-n-Sprout; shoot; anything that
protrudes from another.

Unos-n-Tornado; tempest; storm; hurricane;
heavy shower of rain.

Unosin-v-To storm.

Unouno[**-n-][**P3: Can't be just a Noun, since last two definitions are verbs |M:those are nouns (gerunds)]Stammer; stutter; stuttering;
stammering.

Unsayanin-a-Rickety; chaffy; without
resistance.

[**out of order]Untiunti-adv.-Slowly; little by little;
by degrees; gradually.

Untian-v-To lessen; curtail; clip; decline;
sink; decay.

Untog-n-Collision; encounter; blow;
contusion.

Uod-n-Worm; larva; larvae.

Upa-n-Wages; salary; pay; fee; recompense;
stipend.

Upahan-v-To pay; recompense.

Upahan n~g araw-n-Daylaborer; journeyman.

Upak-n-Bark; peel; rind; crust; skin.

Upakan-v-To bark; peel; skin.

Upasala-n-Insult; scorn; derision; defamation;
slander; mockery.

Upa sa pagtawid-n-Bridge or ferry toll.

Upat-a-Bald; hairless; destitute.

Upat-n-Deceit; delusion; fraud.

Upatan-v-To deceive; defraud; delude;
impose upon; leave bald.

Upaw-a-Bald headed; bald.

Upawin-v-To make bald.

Upo-n-Squash.

Upo-n-Seat; sitting.

Upuan-n-Chair; seat.

Uralian-v-To imbue; instigate; inspire;
persuade; induce; incite; stimulate;
urge.

Uraling masama-n-Temptation; enticement;
incitement.

Uraing[**typo: Uraling? (M: no) something else in alphabetical order?][**typo: Urang]-n-Stake; cudgel; club.

Uria-n-Border; fringe.

Uriin-<corr sic=n>v</corr>-To assay; examine; look into.

Urongsulong-a-Undecided; irresolute.

Uroy-inter.-Get out; git.

Uroy-n-Mockery; scoff; jeer.

Urun~gan-v-To retrocede; take back;
back.

Usa-n-Deer.

Usang babayi-n-Doe; roe.

Usang inahin-n-Doe; roe.

Unang lalaki-n-Hart; buck.

Usap-n-Dispute; litigation; lawsuit; contest;
strife; dissent; contract.

Usb ng[**typo: Usbong]-n-Sprout; shoot; sucker.

Usigi-v-To examine; investigate; pursue[**Errata];
follow.

Usisa-n-Probation; examination.

<pb n=293>

Usisain-v-To examine; investigate; survey;
inquire; inspect; scrutinize[**Errata];
probe; scan; discern; espy.

Uso-n-Use; habit; custom; usage.

Usok-n-Smoke; vapor; steam.

Usós-n-Rupture (of the scrotum).

Utak-n-Brain.

Utak n~g buto-n-Marrow.

Utal-a-Stammering; stuttering; hesitating;
tongue-tied.

Utal-n-Stammering; <corr sic=stuterer resp=e>stutterer</corr>.

Utang-n-Debt; <corr sic=obligattion>obligation</corr>; duty.

Utas-a-Finished; closed; concluded.

Utasin-v-To finish; terminate; end; conclude;
close; bring to an end.

Utayutay-adv.-Gently; softly; easily.

Utong-n-Nipple.

Utos-n-Law; order; command; rule; statute;
precept; edict; injunction; mandate;
errand; message; proclamation.

Utúsan-v-To send; convey; command;
order; [**Errata: insert 'make' here] [**an] edict.

Utusan-v-To send; convey; command;
order; [**Errata: insert 'make' here] [**an] edict.[**not sure why there are 2 sp. for utúsan/utusan; maybe just retain the accented entry]

Utusan[**sugg.: change this to Utusán to differentiate with the verb Utúsan above]-n-Servant; errandboy; messenger;
porter.

Uupan-n-Chair; seat.

Uyam-n-Sarcasm; mockery; ridicule;
disdain; decrial.

Uyamin-v-To mock; scoff; deride; ridicule;
scathe; make fun of.



<div1 type=Letter n=V>
<head>V</head>

Varnis-n-Varnish.

Vervo-n-Verb; predicate.

[**out of order]Verso-n-Verse.

Viage-n-Voyage; passage; journey; excursion.

Violeta-n-Violet.

Violin-n-Violin; fiddle.

Violinista-n-Violinist.

Virgen-n-Virgin[**Errata].

Visagre-n-Hinge.

Visita-n-Visit; chapel.

Visitahin-v-To visit; examine.

Vocabulario-n-Vocabulary.

Volcan-n-Volcano.

<corr sic=Voluntarios>Voluntario</corr>-n-Volunteer.

Voto-n-Vote.


<div1 type=Letter n=W>
<head>W</head>

Wágas-a-Neat; pure; clean; clear; free;
innocent; virtuous; genuine.

Wahiin-v-To tear; rend; lacerate; cut;
wear out; break; fracture.

Wakal-n-Termination; end; conclusion<corr sic=",">;</corr>
extremity; edge; border; extreme;
limit; boundary; bounds.

Wakas-n-Extreme; extremity; end; limit;
bound; boundary; edge; border; conclusion;
termination.

Wala-n-Nothing; naught.

Wala-adv.-No[**Errata]; not in <corr sic=on>any</corr> degree.

Wala-a-Distant[**unclear |M:Distant]; absent; not present.

Walang ala ala-a-Calm; free; tranquil;
peaceful; having nothing to think about.

Walang asa-a-Desperate.

Walang asawa-a-Single; unmarried.

Walang asawa-n-Bachelor; old maid.

Walang awa-a-Heartless; cruel; ruthless;
inclement; fell; inhuman; hard-hearted;[**fixed -*, hyphenated elsewhere]
soulless.

Walang ayos-a-Disarranged; disorderly;
slovenly; careless; filthy; confused;
pellmell[**typo: pell-mell |M:stet, follow author]; immethodical; unclean;
harum scarum.

Walang bahid dumi-a-Clean; untouched;
pure; neat; unmingled; innocent;
virtuous; holy.

<pb n=294>

Walang bait-a-Thoughtless; imprudent.

Walang baro-a-Shirtless.

Walang basagulo-a-Peaceful; calm; serene.

Walang bayad-a-Gratis; free of cost;
gratuitous.

Walang buhay-a-Lifeless; inanimate.

Walang buhok-a-Bald; baldheaded.

Walang daan-a-Impossible; impracticable.

Walang dalita-a-Painless; well.

Walang damdam-a-Insensible; well;
without pain; painless.

Walang damit-a-Naked.

Walang dan~gal-a-Infamous; vile; despicable;
low; abject.

Walang dulo-a-Pointless.

[**out of order]Walang daya-a-Equitable.

Walang galang-a-Disrespectful; rude;
impudent; morose; insolent; haughty;
peevish; inattentive; thoughtless; lofty;
discourteous.

Walang galang-adv.-Peevishly; impudently;
morosely; insolently; discourteously;
thoughtlessly.

Walang galit-a-Quiet; serene; calm; unmolested.

Walang gawa-n-Leisure[**Errata].

<pb n=295>

Walang gulo-a-Silent; quiet; still; calm;
tranquil; noiseless; loyal; constant;
faithful.

Walang gulugud-a-Invertebrate.

Walang gusto-a-Loath; loth.

Walang habag-a-Cruel; heartless; hard-hearted;
inclement; incompassionate;
inhuman; soulless.

Walang halaga-a-Worthless; trifling;
vain; frivolous; mean; vulgar; empty;
void; fruitless.

Walang halo-a-Pure; unmixed; unmingled;
clean; neat; mere.

Walang hanap buhay-a-Destitute; helpless;
without work or employment.

Walang handa-a-Extempore; informal.

Walang hangan-a-Boundless; endless;
interminable; perpetual; everlasting;
immortal; infinite; infinitive.

Walang hanganan-a-Unlimited; boundless;
interminable; endless; everlasting;
infinite; without end.

Walang hiya-a-Shameless; impudent;
insolent; forward; disrespectful; obscene;
petulant; without selfrespect.

Walang humpay-a-Continual; incessant;
uninterrupted; continuous.

Walang ikababayad-a-Insolvent.

Walang in~gat-a-Careless; incautious;
heedless; reckless; forgetful; neglectful.

Walang interes-a-Impartial; uninterested;
candid; just; loyal.

Walang kaba-a-Bold; intrepid; dauntless;
valiant; firm; constant; serene.

Walang kabuluhan-a-Worthless<corr>;</corr> trifling;
catchpenny; futile; <corr sic=addle resp=e>addled</corr>; void; empty;
incapable.

Walang kahulilip-a-Incomparable; matchless;
singular; unequalled; unparalleled.

Walang kahulugan-a-Senseless; unmeaning;
trifling; worthless[**Errata]; useless; foolish.

Walang kalin~ga-a-Inattentive; careless;
thoughtless; heedless; negligent; neglectful.

Walang <corr sic=kalulwa>kaluluwa</corr>-a-Soulless; inanimate;
lifeless.

Walang kamahalan[**P2:h or b? |M:h]-a-Insolent; impudent;
haughty; vulgar; ordinary; shameless;
ignorant; without dignity.

Walang kapalaran-a-Hapless<corr sic=":">;</corr> luckless.

Walang kapara-a-Matchless; special;
unequalled; unparalleled; incomparable;
particular; singular.

Walang kaparis-a-Singular; special;
unequalled; unparalleled; matchless;
particular; peerless.

<pb n=296>

Walang kapintasan-a-Immaculate; faultless;
perfect.

Walang karapatan-a-Unjust; unjustifiable;
unfit; unreasonable; without justice.

Walang <corr sic=kasam>kasama</corr>-a-Solitary; sole; only.

Walang kasama-ad.[**typo: adv.]-Alone; solely.

Walang katapusan-a-Endless<corr sic=",">;</corr> interminable;
immortal; without end; infinite.

Walang katawan-a-Bodiless; immaterial.

Walang katulad-a-Unequalled; matchless;
unparalleled; special; peerless; without
comparison; incomparable.

Walang <corr sic=caya>kaya</corr>-a-Unable; incomparable;
unfit;[**] powerless.

Walang kibo-a-Silent; quiet; dumb.

Walang kimi-a-Free; disengaged; unembarrassed.

Walang kimot-a-Silent; quiet; undisturbed;
dumb; motionless; noiseless.

Walang kinikilin~gan-a-Impartial; just;
unprejudiced.

Walang kulang-a-Complete; entire; whole;
integral; perfect; exact; right; finished;
enough.

Walang labas sa matowid-a-Just; lawful;
true; fair; truthful.

Walang laman-a-Empty; <corr sic=addle resp=e>addled</corr>; vacant;
void.

Walang lasa-a-Tasteless; insipid; flat.

Walang lihim-a-Open; frank; clear; unreserved.

Walang likat-a-Perpetual; everlasting;
continuous; continual; endless; erect.

Walang likit-a-Straight; erect; continuous.

Walang makakamukha-a-Matchless; incomparable;
unparalleled; unequalled.

Walang mansa-a-Immaculate; spotless;
pure.

[**out of order]Walang hanga at mula-a-Endless; eternal;
without end.

Walang nag aampon-a-Helpless; destitute.

Walang nagkukupkop-a-Helpless; destitute;
solitary; lonely.

Walang nasa-a-Disinterested; not desirous.

Walang n~gipin-a-Toothless.

Walang pagod-a-Indefatigable; unwearied.

Walang pagtitiis-a-Insufferable; intolerable.

Walang pakiramdam-a-Insensible; senseless;
indifferent; shameless.

Walang palad-a Unfortunate; unlucky;
sad; hapless.

<pb n=297>

Walang pananampalataya-a-Incredulous;
unbelievable.

Walang pan~galawa-a-Matchless; unparalleled;
solitary; singular; unequalled.

Walang pangdamdam-a-Insensible; indifferent;
shameless.

Walang[**matched scan] paniniwala-a-Incredulous; unbelievable.

Walang pinag aralan-a-Coarse; rough;
illbred; rustic; ignorant; abject; low.

Walang puri-a-Infamous; vile; despicable;
shameless.

Walang sakit-a-Hale; well.

Walang sandata-a-Disarmed.

Walang sapin-a-Barefoot.

Walang sigla-a-Infirm; lifeless; inactive;
slow; weak.

Walang sinelas-a-Barefoot.

Walang sukal-a-Clean; pure; free; neat;
cleanly.

Walang taba-a-Lean; meagre[**Spelling: "meager" |M: meagre is ok].

Walang tahan-a-Continual; endless; incessant;
uninterrupted; continuous.

Walang tahi-a-Seamless.

Walang takot-a-Bold; fearless; intrepid;
dauntless; audacious; valiant; plucky.

Walang testamento-a-Intestate.

Walang tigil-a-Incessant; continual;
uninterrupted.

Walang turing-a-Ungrateful; low<corr sic=",">;</corr> abject;
mean; ignorant.

Walang tuto-a-Ignorant; dumb; silly;
unlearned; foolish.

<pb n=298>

Walang ulo-a-Headless.

Walang wasto-a-Disarranged; confused;
disorderly; simple; silly; artless.

Wala sa horas-a-Unseasonable; untimely.

Wala sa capanahunan[**out of order (or change to 'kapanahunan')]-a-Abortive; untimely.

Wala sinoman-n-Nobody; none.

Wala sinoman-pro<corr>.</corr>-Neither.

Walis-n-Broom; duster.

Walisin-v-To sweep; dust.

Walo-n-Eight.

Walo-a-Eight.

Walong puo-n-Eighty.

Walong puo-a-Eighty.

Wari-n-Reasoning; thought; idea; meditation.

Wariwariin-v-To think; reason; meditate;
recall to mind.

Watak-a-Wide open; clear; separated.

Watakwatak-a-Wide;[**extra ;] open; clear; separated;
at or by intervals.

Wawa-n-The mouth of a stream.

Wika-n-Language; idiom; discourse; talk;
lingo; dialect; conversation; converse.

Wikain-v-To talk; converse; pronounce;
speak; say; tell; discourse.

Wikain labas sa matowid-v-To lie; tell
a falsehood.

Wika n~g Judio-n-Hebrew.

Wilig-n-Sprinkling.

Wiligan-v-To sprinkle.

Wisik-n-Sprinkler.

Wisikan-v-To sprinkle; water; spray.




<div1 type=Letter n=Y>
<head>Y</head>

Yabag-n-Footstep; tread; noise of a
footstep.

Yagyag-n-Trot.

Yacap[**s/b Yakap to follow alphab order; also more instances of yakap vs yacap]-n-Hug; embrace.

Yacapin[**s/b Yakapin to follow order]-v-To hug; embrace; imbosom[**Spelling: "embosom"? |M: imbosom is ok].

Yaman-n-Riches; mammon.

Yaman-adv<corr>.</corr>-Since; well; then; now[** ; not in scan] that.

Yaman-prep<corr>.</corr>-Therefore.

Yamut-n-Disgust; abhorrence; molestation;
displeasure; impatience; vexation;
loathing; disturbance; chafe;
disquiet; distaste.

Yamuan-n-Rasure; scrapings; filings;
parings.

Yamutin-v-To disturb; displease; vex;
molest; irritate; worry; bother; disgust.

Yangyan~gan-n-Place of stretching anything;
stretcher.

Yanig-n-Oscillation; vibration; shake;
trembling; wave.

Yanigin-v-To wave; shake.

Yano-a-Average; regular; even; ordinary;
mediocre; plain; flat; neither good
nor bad.

Yantas-n-Tire; felloe.

Yaon-pro<corr>.</corr>-That.

Yaon din-adv.-Ditto; idem.

Yapak-n-Tread[**capital obscure |M:ok]; footstep.

Yari-n-Cut; shape; make; figure; work;
form; fashion; termination; finish;
ending.

Yari-pro<corr>.</corr>-This.

Yariin-v-To finish; close; terminate;
end; do; make; effect.

Yasak-n-Desolation; break; destruction;
tear.

Yasakin-v-To desolate; destroy; break;
tear; lay waste.

Yasyas-n-Polish; planing.

Yasyasin-v-To plane; smooth; polish.

Yawe-n-Stopcock.

Yaya-n-Invitation.

Yayain-v-To invite; stand treat.

<pb n=299>

Yayamang-prep.-Therefore; yet;
since.

Yayamang-ad.[**typo: adv.]-Then; now then; now that;[**??? |M:'now that' is ok].

Yayat-n-Extenuation; weakness; leanness;
languidness.

Yimot-n-Oakum; tow; cloth.

<corr sic=Ymari>Yumari</corr>-v-To make; form; produce; cause;
exist; be.

Yuko-n-Bow; stoop; salutation; bend;
inclination.

Yukod-<corr sic=v>n</corr>-Salutation; bow; salute; nod;
greeting.

Yumagyag-v-To trot; jog; be in haste.

<corr sic=Yamaing>Yumanig</corr>-v-To tremble; vibrate; oscillate.

Yumaman-v-To enrich; grow or become
rich; thrive; prosper.

<pb n=300>

Yumamot-v-To vex; disgust; displease;
glut; pique; irk; molest; disturb; afflict;
be displeased or vexed; anger;
oppress.

Yumi-a-Faded; withered; decayed.

<corr sic=Yumiim>Yumiin</corr>-v-To fade; wither; decay.

Yumuko-v-To bow; nod; bend; stoop.

Yumukod-v-To nod; bow; stoop; bend
the head.

Yumurak-v-To tread; trample; stamp.

Yun~gib-n-Cave; grotto; cellar; hole;
cavern; haunt; pit.

Yupi-n-Bend; fold; double.

Yurak-n-Stamp; tramp.

Yurakan-v-To tread; stamp; trample.

Yusakin-v-To tread; trample; stamp.

Yupiin-v-To fold; double; bend.
