<pb n=301>

<div1>
<head>MAN~GA PAN~GALAN</head>


Adan-n-Adam.
Adelaida-n-Adelaide.
Adriano-n-Adrian.
Agustin-n-Augustin.
Alberta-n-Bertha.
Alberto-n-Albert.
Alejandra-n-Alexandra.
Alejandro-n-Alexander.
Alfonso-n-Alphonso.
Ana-n-Anna.
Andrea-n-Andrea.
Andres-n-Andrew.
Angela-n-Angeline.
Angel-n-Angelo.
Anselma-n-Selma.
Antonio-n-Anthony.
Arturo-n-Arthur.
Barbara-n-Barbara.
Bartolome-n-Bartholomew.
Basilio-n-Basil.
Beatricia-n-Beatrice.
Benancia-n-Bernice.
Benjamin-n-Benjamin.
Bernaldo-n-Bernard.
Bibiano-n-Vivian.
Cain-n-Cain.
Canuto-n-Kenneth.
Carlos-n-Carl; Charles.
Carlota-n-Charlotte.
Carolina-n-Caroline.
Catalina-n-Katherine; Kate.
Cecilia-n-Cecilia.
Clara-n-Clara.
Claro-n-Clare.
Claudio-n-Claude.
Clementa-n-Ruth[**huh?].
Conrado-n-Conrad.
Constantina-n-Constance.
Cristina-n-Christina.
Cristino-n-Christian.
Daniel-n-Daniel; Dan.
David-n-David.
Diego-n-Diego.
Dionicio-n-Dennis.
Dora-n-Dora.
Dorotea-n-Dorothy.
Doroteo-n-Dorchester. <!-- sic -->
Eduardo-n-Edward.
Elena-n-Helen; Lena; Ellen.
Elias-n-Elias.
Emilia-n-Emily.
Emilio-n-Emil.
Engracia-n-Grace.
Enoc-n-Enoch.
Enrique-n-Henry.
Enriquetta-n-Henrietta; Harriet.
Erman-n-Herman.
Eugenio-n-Eugene.
Eva-n-Eve.
Federico-n-Frederick.
Felipe-n-Phillip.
Feliz-n-Felix.
Fernando-n-Ferdinand.
Flora-n-Flora.
Florencia-n-Florence.
Francisca-n-Francis.
Francisco-n-Frank.
Gabriel-n-Gabriel.
George-n-George.
Gerónima-n-Jeremy.
Gerónimo-n-Jeremiah; Jerome.
Gil-n-Gil.
Gregorio-n-Gregory.
Guillerma-n-Wilhelma. <!-- Wilhelmina -->
Guillermo-n-William.
Herculano-n-Hercules.
Herodes-n-Herod.
Isac-n-Isaac.
Jacob-n-Jacob.
Jarme-n-James.
Job-n-Job.
José-n-Joseph.
Josepa-n-Josephine.
Juanita-n-Juanita.
Juan-n-John; Jonathan.
Juliana-n-Juliana.
Julia-n-Julia.
Julian-n-Julian.
Julio-n-Julius.
Justo-n-Justus.
Laura-n-Laura.
Leonardo-n-Leonard.
Leoncia-n-Leona.
Leoncio-n-Lionel.
León-n-Leon.
Leonora-n-Leonoir.[**Lenoir?]
Lorenzo-n-Lawrence.
Lucas-n-Luke; Lucas.
Lucia-n-Lucille; Lucy.
Luisa-n-Louisa.
Luis-n-Lewis; Louis.
Magallanes-n-Magallan.
Magdalena-n-Magdalene.
Manuel-n-Emanuel.
Marcelino-n-Marshall.
Marcelo-n-Marshall.
Marcos-n-Marcus; Mark.
Margarita-n-Margarita; Margery.
Mariana-n-Miriam.
Maria-n-Mary; Marie.
Mariano-n-Marion.
Marta-n-Martha.
Martin-n-Martin.
Mateo-n-Matthew.
Matias-n-Matthias.
Mauricio-n-Maurice.
Melecio-n-Michael.
Meliton-n-Milton.
Moises-n-Moses.
Nicolás-n-Nicolas.
Patricio-n-Patrick.
Paula; Paulina-n-Paulina.
Paulino-n-Paul.
Pedro-n-Peter.
Rafael-n-Ralph.
Raymundo-n-Raymond.
Rebeca-n-Rebecca.
Ricardo-n-Richard.
Roberto-n-Robert.
Rosalia-n-Rosalind.
Rosa-n-Rose; Rosa.
Rufino-n-Rufus.
Ruperto-n-Rupert.
Salome-n-Salome.
Salomon-n-Solomon.
Samuel-n-Samuel.
Sara-n-Sarah.
Silvestre-n-Silvester.
Simeon-n-Simeon.
Simon-n-Simeon[**Simon?].
Sofia-n-Sophia.
Susana-n-Susanna.
Teobaldo-n-Theobald.
Teodora-n-Theodora.
Teodoro-n-Theodore.
Timoteo-n-Timothy.
Tobias-n-Tobias.
Tomás-n-Thomas.
Trinidad-n-Trinidad.
Vicente-n-Vincent.
Victoria-n-Victoria.
Victor-n-Victor.
Virginia-n-Virginia.
Yrene-n-Irene.
Yreneo-n-Ira.
Ysabel-n-Isabel.
Ysayas-n-Isaiah.
Zoilo-u[**n]-Zoilus.


<div1>
<head>MAN~GA BUAN</head>


Enero-n-January.
Febrero-n-February.
Marzo-n-March.
Abril-n-April.
Mayo-n-May.
Junio-n-June.
Julio-n-July.
Agosto-n-August.
Septiembre-n-September.
Octebre-n-October.
Noviembre-n-November.
Deciembre-n-December.



<div1>
<head>MAN~GA ARAW</head>


Lingo-n-Sunday.
Lunes-n-Monday.
Martes-n-Tuesday.
Miercoles-n-Wednesday.
Jueves-n-Thursday.
Viernes-Friday.
Sábado-n-Saturday.



<pb n=305>

<div1>
<head>PROPER NAMES</head>


Adam-n-Adam.
Adelaide-n-Adelaida.
Adrian-n-Adriano.
Albert-n-Alberto.
Alexander-n-Alejandro.
Alexandra-n-Alejandra.
Alphonso-n-Alfonso.
Andrea-n-Andrea.
Andre-n-Andrés.
Andrew-n-Andrés.
Angeline-n-Angela; Angelina.
Angelo-n-Angel.
Anna-n-Ana.
Anthony-n-Antonio.
Arthur-n-Arturo.
Augustin-n-Agustin.
Barbara-n-Bárbara.
Bartholomew-n-Bartolomé.
Basil-n-Basilio.
Beatrice-n-Beatricia.
Benjamin-n-Benjamin.
Bernard-n-Bernaldo.
Bernice-n-Benancia.
Bertha-n-Alberta.
Cain-n-Cain.
Carl-n-Carlos.
Caroline-n-Carolina.
Charles-n-Carlos.
Charlotte-n-Carlota.
Christian-n-Cristino.
Christina-n-Cristina.
Clara-n-Clara.
Clare-n-Claro.
Claude-n-Claudio.
Conrad-n-Conrado.
Constance-n-Constancia.
Daniel-n-Daniel.
Dan-n-Daniel.
David-n-David.
Dennis-n-Dicnicio.
Diego-n-Diego.
Dora-n-Dorotea.
Dorchester-n-Doroteo. <!-- sic -->
Dorothy-n-Dorotea.
Edward-n-Eduardo.
Elena-n-Elena.
Elias-n-Elias.
Emanuel-n-Manuel.
Emil-n-Emilio.
Emily-n-Emilia.
Enoch-n-Enoc.
Eugene-n-Eugenio.
Eva-n-Eva.
Felix-n-Felix.
Ferdinand-n-Fernando.
Flora-n-Flora.
Florence-n-Florencia.
Francis-n-Francisca.
Frank-n-Francisco.
Frederick-n-Féderico.
Gabriel-n-Gabriel.
George-n-George.
Gil-n-Gil.
Grace-n-Engracia.
Gregory-n-Gregorio.
Harriet-n-Enriqueta.
Helen-n-Elena.
Henrietta-n-Enriqueta.
Henry-n-Enrique.
Hercules-n-Herculano.
Herman-n-Erman.
Herod-n-Herodes.
Ira-n-Yreneo.
Irene-n-Yrene.
Isaac-n-Isac.
Isabel-n-Ysabel.
Isaiah-n-Ysayas.
Jacob-n-Jacob.
James-n-Jaime.
Jeremiah-n-Gerónimo.
Jeremy-n-Gerónimo.
Job-n-Job.
John-n-Juan.
Jonathan-n-Juan.
Josephine-n-Josepa.
Joseph-n-José.
Juliana-n-Juliana.
Julia-n-Julia.
Julian-n-Julian.
Julius-n-Julio.
<corr sic=Juniata>Juanita</corr>-n-Juanita.
Justus-n-Justicio; Justo.
Katherine-n-Catalina.
Kenneth-n-Canuto.
Laura-n-Laura.
Lawrence-n-Lorenzo.
Lena-n-Elena.
Lenoir-n-Leonora.
Leonard-n-Leonardo.
Leon-n-Leon.
Lewis-n-Luis.
Lionel-n-Leoncio.
Louisa-n-Luisa.
Louis-n-Luis.
Lucile-n-Lucia.
Lucy-n-Lucia.
Magdalene-n-Magdalena.
Magellan-n-Magallanes.
Marcus-n-Marcos.
Margaret-n-Margarita.
Marie-n-Maria.
Marion-n-Mariano.
Mark-n-Marcos.
Marshall-n-Marcelo.
Martha-n-Marta.
Martin-n-Martin.
Mary-n-María.
Mathias-n-Matias.
Matthew-n-Mateo.
Maurice-n-Mauricio.
Michael-n-Melicio.
Milton-n-Meliton.
Moses-n-Moises.
Nicholas-n-Nicolás.
Patrick-n-Patricio.
Pauline-n-Paulina; Paula.
Paul-n-Paulino.
Peter-n-Pedro.
Phillip-n-Filipe.
Ralph-n-Rafael.
Raymond-n-Raymundo.
Rebecca-n-Rebeca.
Richard-n-Ricardo.
Robert-n-Roberto.
Rosalind-n-Rosalia.
Rose; Rosa-n-Rosa.
Rufus-n-Rufino.
Rupert-n-Ruperto.
Ruth-n-Clementa.
Salome-n-Salome.
Samuel-n-Samuel.
Sarah-n-Sara.
Selma-n-Anselma.
Silvester-n-Silvestre.
Simeon-n-Simeon; Simon.
Cecilia-n-Cecilia.
Solomon-n-Solomon.
Sophia-n-Sofía.
Susanna-n-Susana.
Theobald-n-Teobaldo.
Theodora-n-Teodora.
Theodore-n-Teodoro.
Thomas-n-Tomas.
Tobias-n-Tobias.
Trinidad-n-Trinidad.
Victoria-n-Victoria.
Victor-n-Victor.
Vincent-n-Vicente.
Virginia-n-Virginia.
Vivian-n-Bibiano.
Wilhelmina-n-Guillerma.
William-n-Guillermo.
Zoilus-n-Zoilo.



<div1>
<head>Months of of the year</head>


January-n-Enero.
February-n-Febrero.
March-n-Marzo.
April-n-Abril.
May-n-Mayo.
June-n-Junio.
July-n-Julio.
August-n-Agosto.
September-n-Septiembre.
October-n-Octubre.
November-n-Noviembre.
December-n-Diciembre.


<div1>
<head>Days of of the week</head>

Sunday-n-Lingo.
Monday-n-Lunes.
Tuesday-n-Martes.
Wednesday-n-Miercoles.
Thursday-n-Jueves.
Friday-n-Viernes.
Saturday-n-Sábado.
