<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]>

<!--

Step one

[X] Run pgpp.pl
[ ] Fix page-breaks
[X] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[X] Insert p tags
[ ] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[ ] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[ ] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for /<b>word [0-9]</b>/ case
[ ] verify 'real' italics (not samples), look for /[a-z] italics>/ case
[ ] verify meaning numbers followed by sub-head-word or phrase <b>[0-9] word</b> case
[ ] italics and bolds midword. E.g. A<i>ng</i>
[ ] remove redundant tags near commas.
[ ] handle sup tags
[ ] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " '", etc.
[ ] Renumber pages.

Step three

Iterate:
    [ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [ ] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3

-->


<pb n=2001>
<b>matampúhun</b> <i>a</i> @generous in contributing.

<p><b>tampuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2456; ac] stab so as to
make the instrument stick, be sticking in.
<i>Akuy mitampuk ug lápis sa báni,</i> I stuck
a pencil into the banana trunk. <i>Báraw nga
mitampuk sa dughan,</i> A knife sticking into
the breast. <b>2</b> [A; a] beat s.t. with the inside
of the fist (as if sticking a dagger into it).
<i>Mitagubtub ang ákung likud nga íyang gitampuk,</i>
My back resounded when he hit it
with his fist. <b>-in-an</b> <i>a</i> jewelry having precious
stones embedded. [+]

<p><b>tampuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] gather and @dump into
s.t. <i>Ang mutsatsa mauy nagtampuk sa mga
bulingun sa planggána,</i> The maid put the
dirty laundry into the basin. <i>Tampúkun
(itampuk) ku ang mga basíyung láta sa dakung
kahun,</i> I will dump the empty cans
into the big box.

<p><b>tampulung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B56] @loom, @{stand out} large.
<i>Dúnay dakung batu nga nagtampulung daplin
sa likuánan sa dálan,</i> There is a huge
rock looming at the side of the road at the
bend. <b>2</b> [A; b6c1] pile or heap stones. <i>Magtampulung
siyag mga batu líbut sa ílang balay,</i>
He will pile stones around their house
as a wall. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> large rock or pile of stones
that stands prominently in the middle of the
sea, protruding or immersed under shallow
water. <b>2</b> a dike of piled stones in the sea,
constructed to trap fish behind it when the
tide goes out.

<p><b>tampúng</b> = <sc>TAMPULUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tampuug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] @loom large, @{stand out}
prominently. <i>Nagtampuug sa dálan ang buldúsir,</i>
The bulldozer is looming large on the
road. <b>2</b> [B6; c1P] be piled in a large heap.
<i>Nagtampuug ang sagbut sa búngun sa ílang
balay,</i> There is a huge @pile of garbage beneath
their house. <i>Ngánung gipatampuug
(gitampuug) nímu ang makinilyahúnun únà
mu buháta?</i> Why did you allow the typing
to @{pile up} before working on it?

<p><b>tampuuk</b> = <sc>TAMPUUG</sc>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>tampúung</b> = <sc>TAMPULUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tampuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] lay s.t. over sores, boils as a
compress. <i>Tabákù itampuy sa ímung hubag,</i>
Put a tobacco leaf over your boil. <i>n</i> @compress.

<p><b>tamsi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @bird with yellow plummage
and black on the head, wings, and
breast, the olive-backed sunbird: <i><b>Nectarinia
jugularis</b></i>. <b>tamsitamsi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @snapper with
yellowish coloring and a blackish blotch.
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> manner of fighting of a gamecock
characterized by hovering above the opponent
with fluttering wings. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for a
gamecock to fight in this way. <b>2</b> [A23] for
<pb n=2002>
the hair on the nape to come to a point.
<i>Mutamsi ang buhuk sa tingkuy ug taas na,</i>
The hair on the nape comes to a point when
it gets long. <b>tamsíhun</b> <i>a</i> having hair at the
nape coming to a point.

<p><b>tamstak</b> = <sc>TAMTAKS</sc>.

<p><b>tamsun</b> <i>n</i> @{Thompson submachine gun}. <i>v</i> [a12]
shoot s.o. with a @Thompson submachine gun.

<p><b>tamtaks</b> <i>n</i> @{thumb tacks}. <i>v</i> [A; b6] fasten
with thumb tacks. <i>Tamtaksi nang kalindaryu
sa bungbung,</i> Fasten the calendar on the
wall with thumb tacks.

<p><b>*tamtám</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] do s.t. with @restraint.
<i>Manamtám kug káug bábuy,</i> I'll @limit the
amount of pork I eat. <i>Dílì manamtám ug
gastu,</i> Spend without restraint.

<p><b>tamud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @obey; perform s.t. in
obedience. <i>Ang Kristiyánus magtamud giyud
sa súgù sa Diyus,</i> A Christian must obey
the law of God. <i>Tamdun ku ang tanan mung
pagmandù,</i> I will obey all your orders. <b>1a</b>
abide by one's word, fulfill one's promises.
<i>Kinahanglang magtamud ka sa átung gikasabútan,</i>
You should abide by our agreement.
<b>1b</b> [A3; a12] give @respect to s.t. by heeding
it. <i>Ángay ka nga magtamud sa pahimangnù
sa ímung mga ginikánan,</i> You must respect
the advice of your parents. <b>1c</b> [A; a12] observe
a custom, feast day. <i>Uban nga mga táwu
dílì magtamud sa adlaw nga iglilíhi,</i> Some
people do not observe holidays of obligation.
<b>2</b> [A13; a12] @respect. <i>Magtinarung ta
arun tamdun sa átung isigkatáwu,</i> We must
deport ourselves in an honest fashion if we
are to be respected by our fellowmen. <b>3</b>
[A; a12] gaze at s.t. with attention or intent.
<i>Ug magkupya ka, tamda sígi ang pahina,</i>
When you copy, keep looking at the
page. <b>4</b> [A; b(1)] guide oneself by s.t. <i>Sa
mísa karun dílì na kinahanglang mutamud
ug misal,</i> Nowadays, it is not necessary to
read the missal during the mass. <i>Nagtamud
siya sa margáti sistim,</i> He is following the
margate system of planting. <i>Tamdi ang libru
inigtubag nímu,</i> Refer to the book when
you recite. <b>4a</b> [A13; b(1)] @copy, @trace off
from. <i>Ayaw ug tamdi ang libru kay mulamà
ang ági,</i> Don't trace on top of the book because
it will leave a mark. <b>4b</b> [b(1)] mark
s.t. for easy reference. <i>Sayun ra nga bulúngun
ang dápit sa sugilánun kay ákung gitamdan
ang pahina,</i> It is easy to locate the
part of the story because I marked the page.
<b>4c</b> [b(1)] @remember, make a @note of.<i> Tamdi
ni, Wà pa giyud aku masayup niíning
mga butánga,</i> Take note of this: I have
never made a mistake in these matters. <b>-in-</b>
<pb n=2003>
<i>a</i> @respectable person. <i>Tinamud nga mga dinápit,</i>
@Respected guests. <b>talamdan, tamdanan</b>
<i>n</i> basic <corr sic=buide>guide</corr>, rules, and regulations to
follow. <i>Mau niy talamdan ug maggansilyu
ka ug bidsprid,</i> This is the instruction sheet
<b>to</b> crochet a bedspread by. <b>talamdun</b> <i>a</i>
worthy of being respected, revered. <b>matinamdánun</b>
<i>a</i> characterized with faithful and
regular observance of customs. <i>Rilihiyúsa
siya ug matinamdánun sa mga pista sa simbahan,</i>
She is religious and keeps good observance
of church holidays.

<p><b>támug</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be @{soaking wet}. Natámug
ang íyang púlu sa singut, His shirt is @soaking
@wet with perspiration.

<p><b>tam-ug</b> <i>a</i> paper or cloth that is slightly moist.[**typo: , PP: NO two meanings.]
not very dry. <i>Tam-ug pa ang hinayhay. Dì
pa ikasul-ub,</i> The wash is still moist. You
can't put it on yet.

<p><b>tam-uk</b> = <sc>TAM-AK<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tamulù</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>a</i> @ugly, unpleasant to
look at. <i>Tamulù ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Your
work came out ugly. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become
ugly-looking. <i>Dáan pa ku nga matamulù
giyud kug samut niíning ákung hirdu,</i>
See, didn't I tell you I'd look uglier in this
hairdo?

<p><b>támus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] ingest s.t. by sucking and
licking. <i>Ug mutumar ka áning tambála ayaw
ug usápa, tamúsi lang,</i> If you take this medicine,
don't chew it, just suck on it. <b>&mdash; sa
tudlù</b> <i>v</i> [A12S] be @penniless. <i>Kamu kay
gastadur kaáyu magtámus ra giyud mu sa
tudlù sa kaulahían,</i> You are such spendthrifts
you will end up poor as church mice.

<p><b>tamuy</b> = <sc>TÁMUS</sc>.

<p><b>tan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> short for <i>kapitan</i>. <b>2</b> an honorary title
of address for prominent citizens in former
usage. <b>&mdash; Birínu</b> a person who assumes financial
responsibilities for a group. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
become a <i>Tan Birínu</i>. <i>Ipadáyun lang kay
akuy mutan birínu sa kumbira,</i> Go ahead
with it because I will foot the bills for the
feast.

<p><b>tana, tána</b> short for <sc>TALA NA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TALA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tanáman</b> <i>n</i> @{flower garden}. <i>v</i> [A1] make a
flower garden.

<p><b>tanan</b> (from <i>ngatanan</i>) <b>1</b> @all, @everyone. <i>Tanan
tsukuláti ang kík,</i> The cake is all chocolate.
<b>2</b> @{in all}. <i>Dúsi tanan ang ákung anak,</i> I have
twelve children in all. <i>Ginadápit ang tanan
sa prugráma,</i> Everybody is invited to the
program. <b>sa &mdash;</b> most, greatest in degree, magnitude
(but less than <i>sa ngatanan</i>). <i>Maldítu
siya sa tanan,</i> He's the naughtiest of
the naughty. <i>Tabian sa tanang tabian,</i> The
most talkative of all talkative ones.

<p><b>tan-aw</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> @see, @{look at}. <i>Mutan-aw</i>
<pb n=2004>
<i>kug sini karung gabíi,</i> I'll go see a movie
tonight.<i> Ispisyalista ang nagtan-aw níya,</i> A
specialist is examining her. <i>Tan-áwa ang
íyang ríkurd kun madáwat ba,</i> Examine his
records to see if he's acceptable. <b>2</b> size up,
form an opinion on s.t. <i>Ayawg tan-áwa ang
libru sa íyang tabun,</i> Don't judge a book by
its cover. <b>2a</b> [b8] see in s.o. <i>Unsay ímung
natan-awan ni Piyuks?</i> What do you see in
Piux? <b>3</b> look after. <i>Gipítul kamu kay nagtan-aw
mi sa inyung kaugmáun,</i> I'm disciplining
you because I'm thinking of your
future. <b>4</b> [a12] wait and see what turns
out. <i>Tan-áwun ta lag kinsay mudaug,</i> Let's
wait and see who wins. <i>n</i> way one regards
s.t. <i>Sa ákung tan-aw (panan-aw) igat nà siya,</i>
She is a flirt, the way I look at her. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i>
[B1256P] look at s.t. because of outside
influence. <i>Nahitan-aw (nahipatan-aw) siya
nákù sa kahibúlung,</i> She looked at me in
surprise. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [ANB156] stare at, observe
s.t as if unable to do anything about it.
<i>Naghinan-aw lang ang mga táwu sa naligsan,</i>
The people just looked at the traffic victim.
<b>-in-ay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c6] look at one another. <i>Nagkatinan-áway
sila,</i> They looked at each other.
<b>ig-r-/l-</b> <i>n</i> eyes. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> manner of looking.
<i>Ang íyang tinan-awan may kahulúgan,</i>
He gives you too meaningful a look. <b>2</b> =
<sc>PAN-</sc>, <i>2.</i> <b>pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> opinion one has. <i>Dakù ang
ámung pagtan-aw nímu,</i> We have a high opinion
of you. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAN-AW</sc>, <i>n.</i> <b>3</b> concern,
care. <i>Walà siyay pagtan-aw sa íyang amahan,</i>
She has no feeling for her father. <b>3a</b> liking,
crush. <i>Sugut nà dáyun kay may pagtan-aw
nímu,</i> She'll accept you right away because
she has a crush on you. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sense of
sight. <i>Maáyu pa siyag panan-aw,</i> He has
good vision. <b>2</b> gaze. <i>Walà níya ibulag ang
íyang panan-aw sa ákung nawung,</i> He did
not take his gaze from my face. <b>3</b> = <sc>TAN-AW</sc>,
<i>n.</i> <b>paN-un</b> <i>n</i> vision, s.t. seen in a trance.
<i>Nakakità kug panan-áwun sa lángit,</i> I saw a
vision of heaven. <b>-um-r-</b> <i>n</i> audience, spectators.
<b>-l-un</b> <i>n</i> scenic attraction or s.t. on display.
<i>Makalingaw ang talan-áwun sa karnabal,</i>
There's lots of interesting things to see
at the carnival.

<p><b>tandà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> go to inspect, take a look
at s.t. one is taking care of. <i>Tandáa tung linung-ag
básig mihubas na,</i> Go take a look
at the rice. It must be cooked now. <b>2</b> visit
s.o. <i>Mutandà ta níya sa uspital,</i> Let's visit
him in the hospital. <b>3</b> [A; b] report s.w. to
do work. <i>Nagtandà man tingálig aláyun si
Tátay kay wà man diring íyang sanggut,</i>
Father is probably at the work bee because
his scythe is not here. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go
<pb n=2005>
and attend a feast. <i>Didtu ku gíkan nanandà
ug kasal,</i> I have just come from a wedding
party. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> party or[**of?] feast goers.

<p><b>tandà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @sign or @mark which indicates s.t.
<i>Ang búlak nga íyang gihátag mauy tandà
nga siya nagmahal,</i> The flower that he gave
is a sign that he cares. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] @mark,
put a mark on, esp. for identification. <i>Si
Pápa ang nagtandà sa mga lubi nga amúa,</i>
Father marked the coconut trees that were
ours. <i>Tandái ang átung mga dalhunun,</i> Put
identifying marks on our baggage. <b>2</b> [A12]
@remember, @recollect. <i>Wà ku makatandà nga
nag-áway mi,</i> I don't remember a time that
we quarrelled. <b>-l-an</b> <i>n</i> @indicator. <i>Ang rilu
mauy talandaan sa úras,</i> A watch is an indicator
of time.

<p><b>tandang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b26(1)] for the sun or moon
to shine. <i>Bísan dì pa mutandang ang adlaw,
túa na siya sa uma,</i> The sun hadn't shone
yet but he was already in the field. <b>2</b> [A]
for light to hit or shine upon. <i>Pulis ang nagtandang
sa ímung nawung,</i> It was a policeman
who beamed a light in your face.

<p><b>tanday</b> = <sc>TANGDAY</sc>.

<p><b>tandáyag</b> = <sc>ANDÁYAG</sc>.

<p><b>tandì</b> = <sc>TANGDÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tanding</b> = <sc>TANGDÌ</sc>, <i>v1</i> 1[**v1?].[**F1 Yes, v1]

<p><b>tandù</b> = <sc>TANGDÙ</sc>.

<p><b>tandug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a1b2] touch s.t. lightly to
disturb it. <i>Dinhà giyuy nagtandug sa rúsas
kay nabálì ang sanga,</i> S.o. must have @{brushed
against} the rosebush because a branch is
broken. <i>Ayaw siya tandúga kay natúlug na,</i>
Don't @touch her because she is asleep. <b>1a</b>
touch a wound. <i>Ayaw ug apil sa dúlà kay
hitandugan (hingtandugan) nyà ang ímung
samad,</i> Don't take part in the game because
s.o. might strike your wound. <b>1b</b> [a3] produce
an effect, @affect. <i>Bísan ug kusugkusug
tung hangína, ang barku walà matandug,</i>
The wind was quite strong, but it did not
affect the boat. <b>1c</b> [A; a2] for fish to bite
a line. <i>Gitandugan siya, apan wà makúhà,</i> A
fish bit his line, but he didn't catch it. <b>2</b> [A12;
a12] touch s.t. in the process of using
it. <i>Wà gánì siya makatandug sa íyang pagkáun,</i>
He hasn't even touched his food. <b>3</b> [A;
a12] do s.t. to interfere with one's thoughts,
decisions, plans. <i>Ang disisiyun sa kuymi dílì
matandug,</i> The umpire's decision is final. <b>3a</b>
[A3P; a3] move s.o. to have sympathetic
feelings or pity. <i>Way kasingkásing nga dílì
matandug adtung mga pulúnga,</i> No heart
could fail to be touched by those words. <b>4</b>
[A13; a12] @{touch on} past events. <i>Dílì tà ángay
nga magtandug sa inyung miáging kabangían,</i>
You ought not to touch on what
<pb n=2006>
you quarrelled about long ago. <b>5</b> [AP; a2b8]
cause a @relapse of an illness or injury.
<i>Natandug ang piang,</i> His broken bone broke
again. <i>n</i> pull on the line when fish bite. <b>-l-un(->)</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @critical, @grave in health or condition.
<i>Ang masakitun náa sa talandugun nga kahimtang,</i>
The patient is in a grave condition.
<i>Tandugun ang kahimtang sa Mídul Ist,</i> The
situation in the Middle East is critical. <b>1a</b>
prone to sickness. <i>Tandugun siya. Hilantan
lang, magkumbulsiyun dáyun,</i> He is prone
to sickness. Even if he has just a slight fever,
it turns to convulsions. <b>2</b> @touchy, @temperamental.
<i>Paabúta nga maáyu siya kay
tandugun nang íyang kinaíya,</i> Wait until he
is in a better mood because he is a bit temperamental
right now. <b>3</b> subject to question,
reconsideration. <i>Hukum nga talandugun,</i>
A decision open to question. <b>pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@test, @trial. <i>Kadtung hitabúa mga pagtandug
lámang sa usa ka táwu nga gikasináhan,</i> That
event is just a trial for you because you are
the object of envy. <b>2</b> strike, act of taking
the bait. <i>Sa ikaduhang pagtandug napaktan
sa bàbà ang isdà sa tagà,</i> On the second
strike, the fish was hooked in the mouth.

<p><b>tanduktanduk</b> <i>n</i> @{top shells}.

<p><b>tánga</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @scorpion. <b>2</b> @cockroach.

<p><b>tangà</b> <i>a</i> @inattentive, doing even simple things
incompetently. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1] stay put when one
is supposed to do s.t. at hand. <i>Nagtangà ka
mang daghan tang trabahuun,</i> You're just
standing around when we have so much
work. <b>2</b> [b6] consider s.o. incompetent.
<i>Gitangaan ku níya kay dúgay kasabut,</i> I
consider him stupid because he takes forever
to understand.

<p><b>tángà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @climb up an incline. <i>Gitángà
níya ang hagdan sa tulu lámang ka lákang,</i>
He climbed the stairs in only three steps.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> on an upgrade.

<p><b>tangad, tángad</b> = <sc>TANGLAD</sc>.

<p><b>tangag, tángag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] hold s.t. between
the teeth, vise, and the like, or on s.t. pointed.
<i>Nagtangag ug papil ang makinilya,</i> There
is paper in the typewriter. <i>Tagà nga nagtangag
ug paun,</i> A hook with bait on it. <i>Gitangag
sa iring ang tinap-ánan,</i> The cat has got
the smoked fish in its mouth. <b>2</b> [A13] for
the key to be left in the lock or keyhole.
<i>Nagtangag ang lyábi sa yawihánan,</i> They
left the key in the keyhole. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> litters
with teeth at birth.

<p><b>tangali, tangáli</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a funnel-shaped holder
made from coconut or banana leaves into
which leaf tobacco or a cigarette is placed.
<b>2</b> turrid shells (which look similar to a cigarette
holder). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make a tobacco
<pb n=2007>
or cigarette holder of this sort. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)]
smoke with this device.

<p><b>tangantángan</b> <i>n</i> @{castor-oil plant}, the seeds of
which produce castor oil: <i><b>Ricinus communis</b></i>.[+]

<p><b>tángas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; a12] @{go up} a slope or incline.
<i>Namatay ang makina samtang nagtangas
ang trák,</i> The motor quit while the
truck was going up the slope. <b>2</b> [A23] step
on, go to dry land. <i>Sa tingpangitlug ang pawíkan
mutángas sa mamala ug mangitlug sa
balas,</i> During the egg-laying season, the sea
turtle goes on land and lays its eggs in the
sand. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> upgrade, @ascending slope. <i>Tangasun
kaáyung dalána,</i> A very @steep path.
<i>v</i> [B125] be, become steep.

<p><b>tangay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @bribe s.o. into doing s.t.
<i>Akuy mutangay sa ímung bátà ug[**unclear] tsukulit
arun dì muuban nátù,</i> I'll bribe your child
with chocolate so that she will consent not
to come with us. <i>Dì ta makatangay ning irúa
kay mupáak giyud,</i> This dog will bite even
if we give it food to keep away. <b>tangaytángay</b>
= <sc>TANGAY<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tangay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A23] take a great liking to s.o.
<i>Mutangay dáyun ang babáyi níya kay gwápu,</i>
A woman will immediately @{take a liking
to} him for he is handsome. <i>a</i> taking a liking
to s.o., easily won over.

<p><b>tangba</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b8] inspire fear mixed with
respect. <i>Dílì mutangba ang mga istudiyanti
ug dì mag-inistriktu ang magtutudlù,</i> Teachers
should be somewhat strict to inspire
fear and respect from the students.

<p><b>tangbid</b> = <sc>TAMBID</sc>.

<p><b>tangbù<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TAMBÙ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tangbù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. coarse @grass of swamps with a
hollow stem, used for the manufacture of
brooms and hats: <i><b>Phragmites vulgaris</b></i>.

<p><b>tangday</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB36C3; cP] for s.t. not wide
to rest on top of s.t. else not wide. <i>Kinsay
nagtanday ánang tukun sa trúsu?</i> Who laid
that pole on the log? <i>Purmag kurus ang
nagtanday nga lápis,</i> The crossed pencils
looked like a cross. <i>Itanday (ipatanday) ang
lápis sa ngilit sa libru,</i> Rest the pencil against
the edge of the book. <b>2</b> [AC; c] rest one's
leg on s.t., rest with one's legs on each
other. <i>Natúlug siyang nagtanday sa bána,</i>
She slept with her leg over her husband's.
<b>-in-ay, -anay, -ay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] have their legs
resting on each other's. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> type of cushion
for putting the leg over.

<p><b>tangdì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC2; ac] @compare which is greater
in degree, quality or size. <i>Way makatandì
(makagtandì) sa íyang kaanyag,</i> Nothing
can compare with her beauty. <i>Makigtandì
ka nákù sa katas-un?</i> You want to compare
<pb n=2008>
your height with mine? <i>Tandía ang duruha
kun háin ang mas putì,</i> Compare the two to
see which one is lighter in complexion. <i>Way
sarang ikatandì (ikagtandì) kang Risal,</i> There
is no one who can be compared with Rizal.
<b>2</b> [A12C; c1] match fighting cocks for a
cockfight. <i>Natandian ang íyang ugis ug buyugun,</i>
His white-feathered cock was paired
with a honey-colored one. <b>-ay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3]
compare with each other.

<p><b>tangding</b> = <sc>TANGDÌ</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>tangdù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @nod the head. <i>Mitandù
siya ingun sa miúyun apan nagdukà diay,</i>
He nodded as though in approval, but in
reality he had dozed off. <i>Tandúan gánì ka
nákù, byái mi,</i> When I nod at you, leave us
alone. <b>2</b> [A2; a2] @consent to, @accept. <i>Tandúa
nang íyang paghálad,</i> Accept his proposal.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @consent, @assent. <b>2</b> click or snapping
@beetle, a black or dark brown beetle
growing to &frac23;&Prime; that moves its head with a
clicking noise when trying to extricate itself
from s.t. <b>tangdùtangdù</b> = <sc>TANGDÙ</sc>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>tanggab</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a1] cut s.t. down clean, usually
with one stroke. <i>Nananggab ang mag-uúma
sa kasagingang gialkuhíris,</i> The farmer
is cutting down the bananas that are infected
with a mosaic disease. <i>a</i> winning a card
game with the first card that opens. <i>Ang
íyang kard wíting dáyun, unyà tanggab pa
giyud siya kay ang íyang wíting mau say úpin
kard,</i> His hand needed only one card to
make rummy on the deal, and then he won
with the first card because the open card
was the card he was waiting for.

<p><b>tanggal</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] @detach, @remove s.t. from
where it is held firmly. <i>Ug matanggal gánì
nà, ipasulda lang,</i> If that comes off, have it
soldered. <i>Lyábi túbu ang itanggal sa kupling,</i>
Use a pipe wrench to get the joint of
the pipe off. <i>see also</i> <sc>ANANANGGAL</sc>.

<p><b>tanggíli<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. large timber @tree.

<p><b>tanggíli<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TANGÍGI</sc>.

<p><b>tanggu</b> <i>n</i> @tango. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] dance the tango.
<b>2</b> [A; c1] play, dance in tango rhythm.[+]

<p><b>tanggu<sub>3</sub>, tanggub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small, easily maneuvered,
two-man fishing boat.

<p><b>tanggub<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TANGKUB</sc>.

<p><b>tanggung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @incarcerate. <i>Itanggung
ang kriminal arun pagpanalípud sa susyidad,</i>
Criminals are @jailed to protect society. <b>2</b> [A;
b1] raise an animal for slaughter on a special
occasion. <i>Magtanggung kug bábuy pára
sa sunud pista,</i> I'll raise a pig for next fiesta.
<i>Tanggúngi nang baktin pára sa inyung kasal,</i>
Raise that piglet for your wedding. <b>3</b> [B126;
b8] be stranded, maneuvered into a place
with no exit. <i>Sulug mauy nakatanggung</i>
<pb n=2009>
<i>(nakapatanggung) námù sa isla,</i> The strong
current caused us to get stranded on the
island. <i>Ang batalyun natanggung sa kimba,</i>
The battalion was trapped in the gully. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> place one keeps an animal he is raising.

<p><b>tanghag</b> = <b>DANGHAG</b>.

<p><b>tanghágà</b> <i>n</i> @@riddle, @mystery. <i>v</i> [A; c] give a
riddle, puzzle. <i>Way makatubag kun akuy
mutanghágà,</i> No one can answer if I give a
riddle.

<p><b>tanghal</b> <i>v</i> [A13] stare blankly. <i>Wà ka makakità
sa pag-ági sa bátà kay nagtanghal ka
man lang,</i> You did not see the child pass by
because you were just staring blankly.

<p><b>tanghun</b> = <sc>SUTANGHUN</sc>.

<p><b>tangì</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] @{break off}, @detach s.t. attached.
<i>Makatangì (makapatangì) ug tangu
ang íyang suntuk,</i> His fist can loosen your
teeth. <i>Ayaw tangia ang kaptanan sa bág,</i>
Do not detach the handle of the bag.

<p><b>tangígi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. Spanish @mackerel, silvery white
and black color, with no scales, popularly
eaten raw: <i><b>Scomberomorus commersoni</b></i>
and <b><i>guttatus</i></b>, and others.

<p><b>tangil</b> <i>n</i> charm worn for protection, e.g. by a
fighting cock to keep it from being badly
cut. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear, make into a protective
charm. <i>Ang tangu sa buáya mauy maáyung
tangilun (itangil) památuk sa buyag,</i> A crocodile's
tooth is said to be an effective charm
against <i>buyag</i>. <b>paN-, paN-(<-)</b> = <sc>TANGIL</sc>.

<p><b>tangíngi</b> = <sc>TANGÍGI</sc>.

<p><b>tangis</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] @cry, @weep. <i>Mitangis siya sa
pagkamatay sa íyang inahan,</i> She wept when
her mother died. <i>n</i> @cry, @weeping.

<p><b>tangítang</b> <i>n</i> stalk of a banana bunch.

<p><b>tangkà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] set to do s.t. <i>Mutangkà
kug alas syíti sa buntag sa ákung trabáhu,</i> I
set to work at seven o'clock in the morning.
<i>Gitangkaan níla ang usa ka litsun ug nahurut,</i>
They set to eating a roast pig, and they
finished it off. <b>1a</b> [AN; b] go s.w. to do
work, usually the <i>aláyun</i>. <i>Tangkái intáwun
kug usa ka adlawng dáru,</i> Please come to
my place to plow for one day. <b>2</b> [A] reach
an entrance, vicinity of a place. <b>2a</b> [C23]
agree to meet to do s.t. <i>Nagtangkà silang
mangalígù sa Sabadu,</i> They agreed to meet
to go swimming on Saturday. <b>3</b> [A; c] @{place
on}, @{set upon}. <i>Nakatulug siyang nagtangkà sa
bangkíyu,</i> He fell asleep sitting on the toilet.
<i>Tangkái únà ang sug-ang sa kaldíru únà
dagkuti,</i> Place the pot on the stove first before
you light it. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one's turn to do work
in communal rotational work (<i>aláyun</i>). <b>2</b>
@feast, @banquet. <i>Makabuhung nga tangkà ang
gidúlut níla,</i> They served a sumptuous banquet. 
<pb n=2010>
<b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b2] @{happen on} s.t.,
come to a place by chance. <i>Hitangkaan níya
ang kawatan nga nangabli sa húnus,</i> He
@{came upon} the burglar opening the drawers.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] have s.o. come to work, <i>n</i>
one's turn to have people come to work in
communal rotational work. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>TANGKÀ</sc>,
<i>v1a, n1</i>.

<p><b>tangkag</b> <i>a</i> sticking out of ears. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for
ears to stick out, prick up. <i>Natangkag ang
íyang dunggan kay gipanamkun siyag inasal,</i>
His ears stick out because his mother had a
desire for roast pig when she was pregnant
with him. <i>Mitangkag ang íyang dunggan
pagkadungug níyag isturyang hílas,</i> His ears
pricked up when he heard the dirty story.

<p><b>tangkal</b> <i>n</i> @cage, covered enclosure. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
<b>1</b> put in a cage. <i>Malúuy kung mutangkal sa
langgam,</i> I pity the bird too much to put it
in a cage. <b>2</b> @jail. <i>Tangkálun (itangkal) ang
sinumbung,</i> The accused will be put in jail.

<p><b>tangkalù</b> = <sc>TUKTUR</sc>.

<p><b>tangkas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> rip open the seam, rip off
hinges, and the like. <i>Nagtangkas siya sa sinínang
guut,</i> She's ripping open the seams of
her tight dress. <i>Natangkas ang pultahan nga
gilúgus pag-abli,</i> The door was ripped off
its hinges when s.o. forced it open. <b>1a</b> [B1256]
@{burst at the seams}. <i>Natangkas ang sáku
ug naúsik ang pasì,</i> The sack burst at the
seam and the grain spilled out. <b>2</b> @unfasten,
@unhook. <i>Gitangkásan níya ang kábaw sa yúgu,</i>
He took the yoke off the water buffalo.

<p><b>tangki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tank for water, fuel, et al. <b>2</b> military
tank used in warfare. <b>3</b> tank, artificial
pool for fish. <i>May tulu ka tangki ang ílang
pispan,</i> Their fishpond has three tanks. <i>v</i>
[A13; c1] keep, raise in a fishpond. <i>Daghang
nagtangki ug bangus niíning dapíta,</i> A
lot of people here raise milkfish in fishponds.

<p><b>tangkig</b> <i>n</i> k.o. harmless freshwater @snake,
growing up to 2´ and 2&Prime; in circumference.

<p><b>tangkihud</b> (from <i>kihud</i>) <i>v</i> [B16; b6] @limp.
<i>Arun dì siya sugúun gitangkihuran ku níya,</i>
She walked with a limp in front of me so I
wouldn't send her on an errand.

<p><b>tangkil</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> attach to s.t. so that it
dangles. <i>Tangkíli ug gamayng krus ang kwintas,</i>
Attach a small crucifix on the necklace.
<i>Gitangkílan ang patayng irù ug batu ug gitambug
sa dágat,</i> They attached a rock to
the dead dog and tossed it into the sea. <b>2</b>
carry s.t. attached to the body. <i>Itangkil sa
ímung háwak ang pistúla,</i> Carry the pistol
around your waist. <b>3</b> carry a baby while one
is doing s.t. <i>Bísag magmadyung, túa nagtangkil
ug bátà,</i> She carries her baby even while
<pb n=2011>
she plays mahjong. <b>3a</b> for a man to drag
along a woman wherever he goes. <i>Dì nà siya
mutangkil sa íyang asáwa kay ábi dì man
gwápa,</i> He doesn't bring his wife along with
him because she's not beautiful.

<p><b>tangkiyu</b> @{thank you}. <i>Tangkiyu kaáyu sa gása,
ha?</i> Thank you very much for the gift. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A2; a2] say thank you. <b>2</b> [A23; a2] just
say thanks without giving money. <i>Dimálas
giyud kun tangkiyúhun lang ang átung panaygun,</i>
We are out of luck if all we get is a
thank you for our caroling.

<p><b>tangkù</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] take water for toddy
from the coconut tree without the owner's
permission. <i>Tangkúun námù ímung sanggutan
ug magdináwù ka,</i> We'll steal the water
from your coconut tree if you are so selfish.
<b>-an, maN-r-</b> <i>a</i> one who steals palm toddy
right from the tree.

<p><b>tangkub</b> <i>n</i> @silverfish, a silver-colored insect
that attacks papers and starched clothes. <i>v</i>
[a4] be infested with silverfish.

<p><b>tangkuban</b> <i>n</i> the reed holder in the loom
which holds the reeds (<i>suluran</i>) in place.

<p><b>tangkud</b> <i>a</i> exactly to date. <i>Tangkud kung diyis
run,</i> I'm exactly ten today. <i>v</i> [B246] be
exactly to date. <i>Ugmà mutangkud nang túig,</i>
It will be exactly one year tomorrow.

<p><b>tangkúgù</b> <i>n</i> @nape of the neck. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12]
hit in the nape. <b>hi-/ha-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] be hit
where it hurts. <i>Nahitangkugù ang mga insik
kay gidid-an pagtindag bugas,</i> The Chinese
merchants were hit where it hurts because
they were prohibited from selling rice.

<p><b>tangkul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a slender bamboo tube, about a
foot or two in length, tied to an animal's
neck and to a tether rope, the purpose of
which is to prevent the animal from biting
the tether rope. <b>2</b> @shackle, @manacle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
b6(1)] tie with a shackle or with a piece of
bamboo between the tether and the neck.
2 [a12] make into a shackle, or bamboo
tether-guard.

<p><b>tangkul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{coral reef} under 3&ndash;4 fathoms of
water. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> place where there are corals
under deep water.

<p><b>tangkung</b> <i>n</i> leafy @vegetable of swamps and
stagnant pools, cultivated and wild: <i><b>Ipomoea
aquatica</b></i>. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] make, have
<i>tangkung</i>.

<p><b>tanglad</b> <i>n</i> @{lemon grass}, a k.o. tall grass that
smells of lemon and is used as a spice: <i><b>Andropogon
citratus</b></i>. <i>v</i> [A; b6] season with
<i>tanglad</i>.

<p><b>tanglas</b> <i>a</i> smooth to the throat when drunk
or taken as medicine. <i>Maháwut ug tanglas
nga tubà,</i> Mellow and smooth palm toddy.
<b>ma-</b> = <sc>TANGLAS</sc>.
<pb n=2012>

<p><b>tangpi</b> = <sc>TAMPI</sc>.

<p><b>tangsà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become very @thin, @emaciated.
<i>Magtangsà (matangsà) ka giyud
ug dì ka mukáug maáyu,</i> You'll grow thin
if you don't eat well. <i>a</i> emaciated, thin.

<p><b>tangsà<sub>2</sub></b> = <b>TINGSÌ</b>.

<p><b>tangsi</b> <i>n</i> strong @monofilament of nylon or
catgut, used for guitar strings, fishline, and
the like.

<p><b>tangsù</b> <i>v</i> [AB16; a1] be @loosened from its
socket or @detached from its place, cause s.t.
to be so. <i>Kinsay nagtangsù sa tiil sa silya?</i>
Who loosened the legs of the chair? <i>Natangsù
ang kab-ing sa kibídu,</i> One side of the
eyeglass frame came off. <i>Tangsúa úsà ang
ngípun únà ibta,</i> @Loosen the tooth first before
you pull it. <b>tangsùtangsù</b> <i>v</i> [B16] be
wobbly after being loosened at its base.
<i>Nagtangsùtangsù ang pasamánu,</i> The handrail
is wobbly.

<p><b>tangtang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB123; a] @{take off}, @remove
s.t. fastened or tied. <i>Tabángi kug tangtang
sa yúgu sa kábaw,</i> Help me take off the carabao's
yoke. <i>Nakatangtang ang bábuy sa
íyang gihigtan,</i> The pig worked himself
loose from the place it was tied. <i>Tangtánga
ímung pustísu kun manutbras ka,</i> @Remove
your false teeth when you brush them. <b>2</b>
[A; a] pay off debts, free from obligation.
<i>Tangtángun ku ang útang,</i> I will pay off the
debt.[+]

<p><b>tangu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{canine tooth}. <b>2</b> @fang of animals.
<i>Maáyung anting-anting ang tangu sa buáya,</i>
A crocodile's tooth is a powerful charm. <b>3</b>
@cog of gears. <b>&mdash; sa báliw, lintì</b> <i>n</i> in folk belief,
the tooth of a thunderbolt that gets lodged
in places where it strikes. It possesses a magical
power. <b>tang-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> highly @unscrupulous.
<i>Pahiphip giyud kanang mga tang-an sa sitihul,</i>
Those unscrupulous people in City Hall
have to be bribed. <b>2</b> tops in one's field due
to experience. <i>Tang-an siyang magsusúlat sa
Binisayà,</i> He is one of the top Visayan
writers. <b>3</b> @rich, @wealthy. <i>Nagparti ang mga
tang-an sa Maníla Hutil,</i> The oligarchs are
having a party at the Manila Hotel.

<p><b>tangud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB26; a1] @attract s.o. with
s.t.; be attracted. <i>Ang balhíbu sa manuk
makatangud (makapatangud) ug mga isdà,</i>
Chicken feathers will attract fishes. <i>Karmilítus
ang itangud níla sa mga bátà,</i> They use
candies to attract the children. <i>Mutangud
ang mga kwaknit sa mga búlak sa duldul,</i>
Bats are attracted to the flowers of the kapok
tree. 2</b> [A; a12] @heed, @obey. <i>Ang magtangud
sa púlung sa Diyus malangit,</i> Those
who follow the words of the Lord will go
to heaven. <i>Gitangud ku ang tanang pahimangnù 
<pb n=2013>
mu,</i> I followed all your advice.

<p><b>tang-ug</b> = <sc>TAN-UG</sc>.

<p><b>tángul</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b2] be, get lodged between
the teeth. <i>Sakit ang ákung bag-ang kay
hitangulan ug gamay nga bukug.[**F1 ,?]</i> My molars
hurt because a piece of bone got lodged
between them. <i>n</i> particle of food stuck between
the teeth.

<p><b>tangul-ul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @bird, the yellow-vented bulbul:
<i><b>Pycnonotus goiavier</b></i>.

<p><b>tang-un</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); b4] <b>1</b> for liquids to stop
flowing. <i>Mutang-un ang dugù kun baátan
siyag turniki,</i> The bleeding will stop if we
tie a tourniquet around it. <b>2</b> come to a @stop.
<i>Kun mutang-un ang pulsu wà nay kinabúhi,</i>
When one's pulse @ceases to beat he is dead.
<i>Mitang-un ang kasukù,</i> His anger @subsided.
<i>Wà pa giyud makatang-un ang kasábà sa gawas,</i>
The noise outside has not stopped. <i>Kining
tambála makatang-un (makapatang-un)
sa sakit sa ngípun,</i> This medicine can stop a
toothache.

<p><b>tangunan</b> = <sc>TALUNGAN</sc>.

<p><b>tangway</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a] buy coconut palm toddy.
<b>2</b> [A; a] buy things in small quantities
for consumption. <i>Diin ka makatangway ug
asin?</i> Where did you manage to buy salt?
<i>Gitangway na ang tanan nílang utanun,</i>
Their vegetables were already all bought up.
<b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place where one habitually buys
things in retail or palm toddy. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i>
buyer of palm toddy in large quantities.

<p><b>tangyad</b> = <sc>TANGLAD</sc>.

<p><b>taniag</b> a <b>1</b> for the day to be bright after being
cloudy. <b>2</b> for glass to be shiny and clear.
<b>3</b> @clear, @vivid in outline. <i>Taniag kaáyu ang
litra kun maggámit kag antiyúhus,</i> The letters
become very clear when you use spectacles.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] for a gloomy day to @brighten.
<i>Mutaniag gánì run,[**speck or ,?] pangarmirul giyud,</i>
As soon as the sun shines, starch the clothes.
<b>2</b> [B; c16] for the face to brighten. <i>Unsa
kahang balitáa nakataniag (nakapataniag)
sa íyang nawung?</i> What news could have
brightened her face? <b>3</b> [APB; c1] for glass
to be, become transparent and clear; cause
it to become so. <i>Túbig lang ang magtaniag
(magpataniag) ánang lapúkung bildu,</i> Only
water will make that muddy pane of glass
transparent and clear. <i>Mutaniag ang básu
kun hugásan ug tayid,</i> The glass will become
transparent and clear if you wash it with
detergent. <b>4</b> [A; c1] @foretell the past, present,
and future. <i>Taniagun (itaniag) ku ang
ímung kaugmáun pinaági sa pagtan-aw sa ímung
pálad,</i> I will foretell your future by
looking at the palm of your hand. <b>5</b> [A; c1]
peer, peep through s.t. at s.t. else. <i>Mitaniag</i>
<pb n=2014>
<i>siya sa lungag sa yawihánan,</i> He peeped
through the keyhole. <i>n</i> s.t. to peer into to
foretell the future.

<p><b>tánil</b> <i>n</i> @tunnel. <i>v</i> [A; b] make a tunnel.

<p><b>táning</b> <i>v</i> [C3; c3] for two to die together.
<i>Nagtáning ang magtiáyun pagkalúnud sa
barku,</i> The couple died together when the
boat sank.

<p><b>tanlad</b> = <sc>TANGLAD</sc>.

<p><b>tanlag</b> <i>n</i> @conscience. <i>Pamináwa ang ímung
tanlag únà ka muhukum,</i> Listen to your
conscience before deciding.

<p><b>tanlak</b> <i>n</i> one's child. <i>Iyang gikúgus ang íyang
tanlak nga naghilak,</i> She carried her child
in her arms as it cried.

<p><b>tanlas</b> = <sc>TANGLAS</sc>.

<p><b>tansan</b> <i>n</i> @{bottle cap}.

<p><b>tansil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tonsils. <b>2</b> @tonsilitis. <i>v</i> [a4] have
swollen tonsils.

<p><b>tantan<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB126; c1] shake a container up
and down to let the contents become more
compact, @settle. <i>Walà matantan ang íyang
kináun,</i> His food did not settle in his stomach.
<i>Tantána (itantan) ang sáku arun daghang
masúd,</i> Shake the sack well so we can
get lots in it.

<p><b>tantan<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3P; c] pay off a debt partially.
<i>Gikuháag bayinti písus ang swildu kay gitantan
sa útang,</i> Twenty pesos was deducted
from the salary to pay off part of the
debt.

<p><b>tantiya, tantíya, tantíyar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @estimate.
<i>Tantiyaha lag pilay magastu,</i> Just make an
estimate of how much it will be. <i>n</i> @estimate.
<i>Sa íyang tantiya ang gúbat sa Biyit Nam
mulungtad ug nap[=ù] ka túig,</i> According to
his estimate the war in Vietnam will last
for ten years.

<p><b>tantu<sub>1</sub> sa &mdash; nga</b> [<i>verb base</i>] do [verb] to
such an extent that s.t. else happens. <i>Sa
<b>tantu</b> nákung hinílak gilunúpan ang sáwug,</i>
I cried so much the floor was flooded. <i>dílì
&mdash;</i> not very. <i>Grábi piru dì tantu,</i> It's bad but
not too much. <b>myintras &mdash;</b> for the time being,
@while. <i>Paglípay myintras tantung bátà
pa,</i> Be merry while you are still young.

<p><b>tantu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @interest on money loaned. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2N;
b6(1)] borrow money with interest. <i>Ug
way kwarta, panantu lang,</i> If you're out of
money, borrow. <i>Tantúhan námù ímung
kwarta, dílì libri,</i> We will borrow your money
with interest, not for nothing. <b>2</b> [cP]
charge interest. <i>Pilay ímung itantu (ipatantu)?</i>
How much interest do you charge?
<b>2a</b> [A; b6] give, pay interest. <i>Mutantu kug
kinsi pursintu ug pahulam ka nákù,</i> I will
pay fifteen percent if you lend me money.
<i>Nagtantu kus singsing nga ákung giprinda,</i> I
<pb n=2015>
am paying off the interest on the ring I
pawned. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] lend money for interest.
<i>Nagpatantu siyag kwarta,</i> He lends
money for interest. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who lends
for interest or borrows on interest.

<p><b>tanud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @tame. <i>Tanud ang íyang langgam
maung binuhían,</i> His pet bird is tame so it
is not caged. <b>2</b> for things which are normally
elusive to approach, be submissive. <i>Tanud
nímu ang kapaláran,</i> Good fortune does
not elude you. <i>v</i> [B126] become tame, @submissive.
<i>Kining lumáya makapatanud (makatanud)
sa mga babáyi nímu,</i> This potion
can make girls submissive to you.

<p><b>tanud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> sewing @thread. <i>v</i> [A; b6] thread a
needle or sewing machine. <i>Tanuri ang makina,</i>
Thread the sewing machine.

<p><b>tánud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> keep watch over s.t.
that needs care. <i>Nagpulipúli mig tánud sa
masakitun,</i> We took turns keeping watch
over the patient. <b>2</b> stay, @{live with} s.o. <i>Way
makatánud nímu tungud sa kalas-ut sa ímung
kinaíya,</i> Nobody can live with you
because you are so wicked. <i>n</i> s.o. who keeps
watch over s.t. which needs care.

<p><b>tanug</b> = <sc>TANUD<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tan-ug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b1] store mature fruits in
such a way as to hasten ripening. <i>Tan-úgi
nang ságing sa sáku,</i> Store the bananas in
the sack to ripen. <b>2</b> [A; b5] keep unused,
dormant. <i>Dúgay natan-ug ang yútà,</i> The
land was left unused for a long time. <i>Ayaw
tan-úgi ang ímung puhúnan,</i> Don't keep
your capital unused. <b>2a</b> [A; c] keep coconut
juice for a time to ferment it before
cooking into oil. <i>Itan-ug ug mga usa ka adlaw
úsà lanáha,</i> Keep and ferment it for
about a day before cooking it into oil. <b>3</b>
harbor s.t. in secret. <i>Dúgay na siyang nagtan-ug
ug gugma,</i> He has been harboring a
secret love for a long time. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> raw oil
which floats to the surface after the coconut
juice has fermented. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fruits
kept for ripening. <b>2</b> things kept in secret.
<i>Sa ílang áway, nabutyag ang mga tinan-úgan
sa kadaghánan,</i> In their quarrel they exposed
their secrets to the public. <b>3</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>.

<p><b>tanuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] boil starchy foods, but not
rice: ears of corn, root crops, bananas. <b>-in-</b>
<i>a</i> cooked root crops, bananas, or corn.

<p><b>tanum</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @plant, grow plants. <i>Katamnan
nag sibúyas ang ímung líug,</i> Your neck
is so thick with dirt you could plant onions
on it. <b>2</b> implant, nurture in the mind. <i>Ayaw
pagtanum ug kayugut sa ímung dughan,</i>
Don't harbor hatred in your heart. <i>Itanum
sa ímung kaisípan ang ákung pína,</i> Implant
my admonition in your mind. <i>n</i> @plant. <b>(<-)</b>
<pb n=2016>
<i>v</i> [A; c] plant a large crop. <i>Makatánum ta
kun dúnay ígung ulan,</i> We can plant our
crops if there is enough rain. <b>talamnánan</b> <i>n</i>
area prepared for planting. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. engaged
in planting. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @planting, @farming.
<i>Pananum ang ílang panginabúhì,</i> Agriculture
is their source of livelihood.

<p><b>tanungan</b> = <sc>TALUNGAN</sc>.

<p><b>tánus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; c1] @straighten; be, become
@straight. <i>Siyay mitánus (mipatánus) sa sangang
báwug,</i> He straightened the bent
branch. <i>Nagtánus lang nang ímung bukubuku,</i>
Your back is certainly straight. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
@discipline, impose disciplinary measures.
<i>Ang amahan ray makatánus ánang batáa,</i>
Only the father can discipline that
child. 2a [B1256] be @chastened. <i>Natánus
ang maldítung[**malduung? |P2: maldítu a <b>1</b> naughty, evil] bátà human malatiguhi,</i> The
mischievous child was chastened after he
got his whipping. <i>a</i> = <sc>TANUS</sc>. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @straight,
not curved or bent. <i>Tanus nga karsáda,</i>
Straight road. <i>Tanus nga bára,</i> Straight bar.

<p><b>tan-us</b> <i>n</i> a yellowish swelling in the skin caused
by an infection of a wound or sore. <i>Gitusdikan
níyag dágum ang íyang tan-us,</i> He
pricked the yellow swelling next to the
scratch on his skin with a needle. <i>v</i> (B3(1)46;
b4] develop a yellow-colored infection
under the skin next to a wound. <i>Gitan-usan
ang íyang núka,</i> His skin ulcers developed
yellow swellings on the sides.

<p><b>tanyag</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @offer s.t. for s.o.'s consideration.
<i>Mitanyag siyang ihatud ku,</i> He offered
to escort me. <i>Gitanyagan aku níyag trabáhu,</i>
He offered me a job. <i>Pilay gitanyag
sa balay?</i> How much did they offer for the
house? <b>2</b> offer an opportunity, entertainment.
<i>Kining dúlà itanyag álang sa inyung
kalingáwan,</i> This play is offered for your
enjoyment. <i>n</i> @offer.

<p><b>táp</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a2] be the tops in an exam. <i>Siya
ang mitáp sa bár,</i> He @topped the bar
exam. <b>2</b> [A; a1] buy all of s.t. <i>Akuy mutáp
sa ímung mangga,</i> I'll buy all of those mangoes.
<i>Ákung baratúhun kun tápun nímug
palit,</i> I'll give them cheap if you buy all of
them. <b>2a</b> [A; a12] take on all of s.o.'s bet.
<i>Tápun ku bísag pilay inyung pusta,</i> I will
take you on no matter how much you bet.
<i>n</i> one who is tops in an exam.

<p><b>tapa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] smoke fish. <i>Makatapa kug
isdà ug náay ginabas ipaasu,</i> I can smoke
fish if there is some sawdust to smoke it
with. <b>1a</b> [A; c6] broil fish not close to the
embers. <i>Bagul itapa sa isdà,</i> Use coconut
shells for broiling the fish. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] kiln-dry
copra. <i>Magtapa mi sa kupras kay way
ínit,</i> We'll kiln-dry the copra because there
<pb n=2017>
is no sun. <i>n</i> @{smoked fish}. <b>tapahan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> copra
kiln-drier. <b>2</b> grate for broiling. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> =
<sc>TAPA</sc>, <i>n</i>. <i>see also</i> <sc>TAP-AN</sc>.

<p><b>tápa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] make jerked meat. <i>Magtápa
kug unud sa kábaw,</i> I'll @jerk some carabao
meat. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> jerked meat. <b>2</b> canned fish in
small, thin tin cans.

<p><b>tapad, tápad</b> <i>v</i> [A3SC; ac] <b>1</b> stay, put beside
s.t. <i>Nakatapad kug gwápa sa dyíp,</i> I sat beside
a pretty girl in the jeep. <i>Ayaw sila tapára,</i>
Don't put them next to each other. <i>Itapad
nang diksiyunári kun magbásag librung
lisud,</i> Put the dictionary beside you when
you read a difficult book. <b>2</b> stay next to
s.o. to keep him company. <i>Bisan dì ka mukáun,
tapari ku diri,</i> Even if you don't eat
anything, sit here to keep me company. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
s.o. sitting beside s.o. else. <b>2</b> @next. <i>Ang ámung
báy tápad (tapad) sa íla,</i> Our house is
next to theirs. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C; ac] compare so
as to match. <i>Gwápa ka kun tapáran ug maksut
(maksut ang itápad nímu),</i> You are pretty
if you are compared with an ugly person
(if an ugly person is put next to you). <b>2</b> [A2;
ab2] match a cock with another for a
cockfight. <i>Way mutápad sa ákung manuk
nga maáyu mulabuk,</i> No one will match his
cock with mine because it is good in fighting.
<i>n</i> @comparison. <i>Dì siya maiwit sa tápad,</i>
He does not lose out in comparison. <b>taparan</b>
<i>n</i> place where cocks are usually matched
for a cockfight. <b>ka-(<-)</b> @seatmate. <i>Siyay ákung
katápad sa klási,</i> He is my seatmate in
class.

<p><b>tápak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @patch. <i>Tapáki ring gisì sa
kurtína,</i> Patch the tear here in the curtain.
<b>2</b> [A12; c6] cover one's debts. <i>Karung swildúha
ígù rang ikatápak sa mga bayranan,</i>
This salary is just enough to pay for the
bills. <b>3</b> [A; c] @{cover up for} undertime. <i>Magtápak
ku sa ákung naabsinan,</i> I'll @{make up
for} the time I lost when I was absent. <b>3a</b>
cover over a bad feeling. <i>Ang pag-inum-ínum
ray íyang itápak sa íyang mga kaguul,</i>
He drowns his sorrows in alcohol. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i>
@patch on s.t. torn. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. patched.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> having patches.

<p><b>tap-ak</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] @{step on}. <i>Hingtap-akan nákù
ang ímung ituy,</i> I accidentally stepped
on your puppy. <i>Ngánung gitap-ákan man
nímu ang ákung irasan?</i> Why did you step
on my seedbed?

<p><b>tapal</b> <i>v</i> [A; b1] <b>1</b> pay, make up for s.t. lost
or short. <i>Makatapal giyud kag wad-un nímu
nà,</i> You'll have to pay for it if you lose it.
<i>Tapli tung adlaw nga naabsin ka,</i> @{Make up
for} the day you were absent. <b>2</b> pay s.o.'s
bills for later reimbursement. <i>Tapli lang ku</i>
<pb n=2018>
<i>kay nahibilin ang ákung pitáka,</i> Pay for me
because I left my wallet. <i>n</i> amount of s.t.
made up.

<p><b>tápal</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] lay s.t. over a small area and
stick it. <i>Nagtápal siyag itsiban sa íyang payuk,</i>
He laid a medicinal plaster over his
bruise. <i>Itápal ning inúsap dáhun sa samad,</i>
Chew the leaves and spread them over the
wound. <i>n</i> s.t. laid and stuck over.

<p><b>tapalúdu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @mudguard, @fender
of a vehicle. <i>v</i> [A; a] put a fender on.

<p><b>tápan</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] do s.t. for a successive period
without interruption. <i>Wà ku makatápan ug
trabáhu karung bulána kay nagdaut ku,</i> I
was not able to report for work steadily
this month because I was ill. <i>Natápan nákù
ang adlaw karung simanáha sa pagpanglaba,</i>
I spent the whole week doing the laundry.

<p><b>tap-an</b> (from tapa) <i>v</i> [b5] @broil fish not close
to the embers. <i>Tap-áni ang isdà ayaw isugba,</i>
Broil the fish, but don't charcoal broil
it. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. broiled but not close to the
fire.

<p><b>tapang</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b2] hit or do s.t. right, out
of sheer luck. <i>Nakatapang siyag syát sa búla
bísag layù,</i> He put the ball into the basket
from a good distance by sheer luck. <i>Hitapangan
(hitapngan) níya ang tubag sa pangutána,</i>
He guessed the answer to the question
correctly out of sheer luck. [+]

<p><b>tapangku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lean-to roof, a single-pitched,
sloping roof constructed at the sides or end
of a building without the floors or walls. <b>2</b>
awning. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] put, construct a lean-*to
roof or awning. <i>Tapangkúhi ang inyung
balay arun adúnay kabutangan sa awtu,</i> Put
a porte cochere next to your house so you
will have a place to keep your car.

<p><b>tapar</b> = <sc>TAPAL</sc>.

<p><b>tapas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @{dress yarn} for weaving by
starching and combing it to eliminate fluff
or lint and give it a degree of stiffness. <b>2</b>
@{cut sugar cane} and clean it of its leaves.
<i>Nagtapas mis tubu pára galingun,</i> We are
cutting sugar cane to mill. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one
who cuts sugar cane.

<p><b>tapat</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> be @true and loyal to s.o. <i>Sálig
kay magtapat aku sa ákung sáad,</i> Trust
me because I'll be true to my promise. <b>2</b> resolve
oneself to reform. <i>Nagtapat siyang dílì
na mangáwat,</i> He resolved not to steal
any more. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @loyal. <i>Tapat ang irù sa íyang
agálun,</i> The dog is loyal to its master. <b>2</b> @sincere.
<i>Tapat ang íyang paghinulsul,</i> He is
sincere in his repentance.

<p><b>tápay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cock's comb}. <b>2</b> <b>pula ang &mdash;</b> for
ears to be red from drinking (humorous).
<i>Daling mamuwa ang íyang tápay ug makainum</i>. 
<pb n=2019>
His ears grow red easily when he
drinks. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a comb. <b>2</b> having a
crest. <i>Sawang tapáyan,</i> Crested snake. <b>tapaytapay</b>
<i>n</i> k.o. harmless insect resembling
a spider but not spinning a web. <b>tapaytápay</b>
<i>n</i> annual ornamental with red (or also white
or yellow) flowers in panicles which resemble
a cock's comb: <b><i>Celosia argentea var.
cristata</i></b>.

<p><b>tápay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B12; c1] for roasted rice grains to
be pounded flat. <i>Nagkatápay na ang pinípig
sa tantung linubuk,</i> The <i>pinípig</i> is becoming
flat from constant pounding.

<p><b>tapdagan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet banana with green
peelings, growing to about 4&Prime;, similar to
<i>búngan</i>. It is eaten uncooked.

<p><b>tapdagay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. light colored cerith found
clinging to small stones. Upon sensing danger
they draw back into their shells and release
their hold thus falling down.

<p><b>tapdas</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> @{brush off} briskly with
the hand or an instrument. <i>Hadluk siyang
mutapdas sa uk-uk sa íyang sinínà,</i> She's
afraid to brush the cockroach off her dress.
<i>Hitapdasan níya ang básu pagkab-ut níya sa
kan-un,</i> He knocked the glass off the table
when he reached for the food. <b>2</b> @{dust off} by
whisking. <i>Tapdási sa kálù ang lingkuránan,</i>
Dust the bench off with your hat. <b>3</b> [A; b6]
for waves, wind to dash against s.t. <i>Makamig
nga hángin mitapdas sa ákung nawung,</i>
A chilly wind swept my face.

<p><b>tapdawun</b> <i>n</i> a convertible with the top down.
<i>v</i> [A; c1] have the top of a convertible
down. <i>Mutapdáwun lang siya sa íyang awtu
ug way ínit,</i> He will have his car with the
top down when the sun is not out.

<p><b>taphaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @shallow, not well-based. <i>Taphaw
ra kaáyu kanang katarungána,</i> That reasoning
is too shallow. <i>Gidakup siya bísan taphaw
lang ang katáhap,</i> He was arrested on
very shallow suspicion. <b>2</b> @insincere, @superficial.
<i>Taphaw ang pahíyum nga pinugus,</i> A
forced smile is artificial. <b>3</b> @silly. <i>Dì ba taphaw
nang babayhána, mukatáwa lag kalit
nga walay hinungdan?</i> Isn't she silly the
way she laughs suddenly without reason?

<p><b>tapi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @crooked, @slanted, not well-rounded,
@{off the mark}. <i>Tapi ning pagkasulat kay way
linya ang papil,</i> The lines are not straight
because the paper has no lines. <i>Tapi siyag
úlu,</i> His head is not well-rounded. <i>Tapi man,
wà mabuls-ay,</i> It's off the mark, not a
bull's-eye. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c1] come out crooked,
off the mark; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mutapi
(matapi) ang úlu sa bátà ug pirmi takildun,</i>
A child gets an irregularly-shaped head if he
is put down on his side. <b>2</b> [A; a1] fend off
<pb n=2020>
a blow with a sideward motion of the arm
or club. <i>Tapihun nímu ang duslak kay mau
nay labing piligrúsu,</i> You must fend off the
forward thrust because that is the most
dangerous. <b>tapitápi</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] do s.t. @unevenly,
@zigzaggedly. <i>Nagtapitápig lakaw ang hubug,</i>
The drunk walked in a zigzag way.

<p><b>tapi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> piece of cloth wrapped around the
waist or upper body as a @skirt. <i>v</i> [A13; c]
wear a <i>tapi</i>. <i>Nagtapi ang babáying nanglaba,</i>
The woman who was washing clothes was
wearing a skirt that covered her bosom
down to her knee.

<p><b>tápig</b> <i>v</i> [A; b1] <b>1</b> @hide s.t. <i>Tapígi iyang sapátus
arun dì siya kalakaw,</i> Hide his shoes so
he can't go out. <b>2</b> put s.t. where people
can't get at it. <i>Akuy nagtápig sa midisína
arun di [**d[**??]áan]duláan[**corrected. P2],</i> I put the medicine away so
no one could play with it. <b>3</b> hold for @{safe-*keeping}.
<i>Akuy tápig arun dì maw[=à][**note accent. P2][** maw[=â]?],</i> I'll keep
it so it can't get lost. <b>4</b> keep in secret. <i>Ang
kagahápun nagtápig ug mga katáwag kasákit,</i>
The past hides joys and sorrows. <b>-anan</b>
<i>n</i> @{hiding place}. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. kept hidden.

<p><b>tapigas</b> = <sc>DAPIGAS</sc>.

<p><b>tapik</b> <i>n</i> one who is related to a family through
marriage. <i>v</i> [B236] be, become an @{in-law}
to a family.

<p><b>tápik</b> <i>n</i> @topic. <b>áwut-ub &mdash;</b> see <sc>ÁWUT</sc>.

<p><b>tap-il</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] teasingly match s.o. with s.o.
else. <i>Ganáhan siyang itap-il nákù kay nakagustu
siya nákù,</i> She likes people to pair
her off with me because she does like me. <i>n</i>
pairing people off in a teasing way. <i>Tap-il
ang sinugdánan sa ílang pagkatrátu,</i> They
were teasingly matched and it led to serious
courtship. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> matching people off in
a group with each other teasingly.

<p><b>tapindas</b> <i>v</i> [B126] @slip, sliding and losing
one's balance, but not falling. <i>Natapindas
ku kay dangug ang ákung gilaktan,</i> I lost
my balance because the path I was walking
on was slippery, but I didn't fall. <b>Culu-</b> <i>v</i>
[B] tip to the sides repeatedly because of
unsteady footing.

<p><b>táping</b> <i>n</i> @{tap-dancing}, dance with fancy footwork
and tapping of the feet. <i>v</i> [A] @{tap
dance}.

<p><b>tap-ing</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> an animal with a solid-color coat
and a splotch on the face of a different color.
<b>2</b> big @birthmark or splotch on the face. <i>v</i>
[B126; b8] have a big @splotch. <i>Natap-ing
(natap-ingan) ang íyang píkas nawung tungud
sa sanla,</i> Half of her face had a big
splotch on it from leprosy.

<p><b>tapiri</b> = <sc>TAMPIRI</sc>.

<p><b>tápir wír</b> <i>n</i> @tupperware.

<p><b>tapis</b>, <b>tápis</b> <i>n</i> piece of cloth worn around the
<pb n=2021>
[Greek: ]waist or upper body as a @skirt. <i>v</i> [A; c]
wear s.t. wound around the body. <i>Hubù siya
gawas sa tualya nga gitápis,</i> She was
naked except for a towel she wore around
her waist. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be at the stage of
developing a sheath around the trunk. <i>Lubi
kun magtapis na,</i> A coconut when it gets
its sheath.

<p><b>tapíta</b> <i>n</i> @taffeta, a fine, rather stiff, silk cloth
with a sheen. <i>v</i> [A; a] use taffeta cloth.

<p><b>tapíti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{billiard table carpet}. <b>2</b> @{sewing machine
cover}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] carpet a billiard
table. <b>2</b> [A; a] use, make into a sewing machine
cover.

<p><b>tapiun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @press or lay one's hand on
a part of the body. <i>Itapiun ang kamut sa
nag-agus nga samad,</i> Press your hand down
on the bleeding wound. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] @{stifle
progress}, @prevent from developing. <i>Imbis
tabángan arun muasinsu tapin-an na hinúun
níya,</i> Instead of helping her improve, he stifles
her progress. <b>2a</b> sit on an application or
papers, pigeonhole them. <i>Ug way mutapiun
sa aplikisiyun, madáwat ka,</i> If nobody pigeonholes
your application, you will be accepted.
<b>3</b> [A2; c6] play a chord by pressing
it with the fingers. <i>n</i> chord of a guitar or
any stringed instrument which is played by
pressing with the fingers.

<p><b>taplud</b> <i>n</i> @{luggage carrier} on top of vehicles.
<b>-ing</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>TAPLUD</sc>.

<p><b>tapnatsir</b> <i>n</i> @{top-notcher}, one who is tops in
an examination. v [B126; b6] be the top-*notcher.
<i>Ang miáging bár mauy íyang gitapnatsíran,</i>
He was in first place in the bar
examination last year.

<p><b>tapsay</b> <i>n</i> a triangular fishnet into which the
fish are driven, operated by one or two people
holding the V-shaped frame and two
people working the scareline. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2;
b6] go fishing with a <i>tapsay</i>.

<p><b>tapsing</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b8] @sideswipe, @graze. <i>Ígù
rang nakatapsing ang bála sa úlu,</i> The bullet
only grazed his head. <i>Padaplin kay hitapsingan
kag trák,</i> Stay on the side. You might
get sideswiped by a bus.

<p><b>taptap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @cover s.t. by laying s.t. over
it, putting s.t. flat on top of it. <i>Usa ka táwuy
mitaptap nákù arun dì ku makadumdum
sa agiánan,</i> A person blindfolded me
so I wouldn't know the way. <i>Nagtaptap ug
panyù ang mga tulisan,</i> The robbers covered
their faces with handkerchiefs. <i>Taptápig puwa
ang tabánug,</i> Cover the kite with red paper.
<i>Ang lángit gitaptápan sa mabagang dag-*um,</i>
The sky is covered with thick clouds. <i>n</i>
s.t. lain over as a covering.

<p><b>taptin</b> <i>n</i> the first ten from the top. <i>Nahiapil</i>
<pb n=2022>
<i>ku sa taptin sa ámung klási,</i> I am among
the top ten in our class.

<p><b>tápù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac6] put all together. <i>Kinsay
nagtápù íning tanan sa sáku?</i> Who put them
all in the sack? <b>2</b> [A2C3; c16] for one end
of s.t. tied around the body to meet the
other. <i>Nagtápù ang higut apan dì mabalighut,</i>
The two ends of the bond meet but
you can't tie them. <i>Matápù nímu ang duha
nímu ka kamut sa íyang páa,</i> You can encircle
her legs with your two hands. <b>2a</b> join,
connect. <i>Gitápù ang ílang kamut,</i> They
joined hands. <b>hi-/ha-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> be
put together with the rest by chance. <i>Ngánung
nahitapù ning ákung butang sa imúha?</i>
Why are my things mixed with yours? <b>2</b>
happen to join, live with a group. <i>Maáyung
nahitapù ku sa inyung grúpu,</i> It's a good
thing that I joined your group.

<p><b>tapuk</b> <i>a</i> for fibrous materials to be @weak,
@{easily torn}. <i>Kining klasíha sa panaptun tapuk
kaáyu,</i> This k.o. cloth is very weak. <i>v</i>
[B2] be weak, easily torn. <i>Ang bisti nga
ihúmul sa klúruks matapuk,</i> Clothes soaked
in chlorox get weak.

<p><b>tápuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC3; a2] 1 make a pile of s.t. scattered.
<i>Nagkatápuk ang mga pangánud,</i> The
clouds gathered. <i>Tapúka ang mga dáhun,</i>
Pile the leaves up. <b>2</b> @gather people, @{be gathered}.
<i>Nagkatápuk uruy ang mga búang,</i> A
bunch of fools have gotten together in one
place. <i>Tapúka ang mga saup kay ákung pakigsultíhan,</i>
Get the tenants together so I
can have a talk with them. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pile of things.
<b>2</b> crowd gathered. <b>tapuktápuk</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b6]
form cliques within a larger group. <i>Kinahanglang
úsa tanan, way magtapuktápuk,</i>
All must be in one group, no forming of
cliques. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clique. <b>2</b> social gatherings, parties.
<i>Sa mga tapuktápuk náa giyud ang susyalayit,</i>
The socialites are sure to be present
at gatherings. <b>tapuktapuk</b> = <sc>PUNDUKPUNDUK</sc>.
<i>see</i> <sc>PUNDUK</sc>.

<p><b>tápuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @dump, @{throw away} waste
materials. <i>Itápuk nang patayng ilagà sa kanal,</i>
Dump the dead rat into the canal.

<p><b>tapukù</b> = <sc>TIPUKÙ</sc>.

<p><b>tapul</b> <i>n</i> any variety of root crop, grain, or
beans that is dark violet in color.

<p><b>tápul</b> <i>v</i> [B46; a4b4] be, @{become lazy}. <i>Mitápul
siyas trabáhu kay gamayg swildu,</i> He
became @lazy in his work because he got a
small salary. <i>Gitápul (gitapúlan) na sad siya
maung miabsin,</i> He felt lazy again so he's
absent. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> lazy. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A1] do
lazily. <i>a</i> lazily done. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] do in
a lazy way. <i>Gitinapúlan lang níya ang ákung
súgù,</i> He just ran my errand in a lazy way.
<pb n=2023>

<p><b>tapun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] <b>1</b> @move to another house or
place. <i>Kung mag-áway ang magtiáyun ang
asáwa adtu dáyun mutapun sa íyang ugángan,</i>
If the couple quarrels, the wife immediately
goes to stay with her mother-in-law.
<b>2</b> move, bring to a nearby location separated
by some k.o. barrier. <i>Mitapun ang
langgam sa láing sanga,</i> The bird moved to
another branch. <b>3</b> @cross to the opposing
party. <i>Daghang mutapun sa partídung daúgan,</i>
Many people will @{cross over} to the winning
party. <i>n</i> @{area across} s.t. Kining kaingína
muluwak sa tapun íning búd, This clearing
stretches over to the opposite slope of
this hill.

<p><b>tapun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> s.t. used as a cover for a valve.

<p><b>tap-ung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @cover, close an opening or
passage. <i>Manap-ung ka sa bàbà ug muubu
ka,</i> Cover your mouth when you cough.
<i>Natap-ungan ang kanal kay mikáwas ang túbig
ngari,</i> The canal is @clogged up because
the water overflowed this way. <i>Tabla ang
itap-ung sa lungag,</i> Use a piece of wallboard
to cover the hole. <i>n</i> s.t. used to cover an
opening or passage.

<p><b>tapun-ug</b> = <sc>TIPUN-UG</sc>.

<p><b>tapuruk</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{ark shell}.

<p><b>tápus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{put an end to}, @finish. <i>Dakung
kumbíti ang mitápus sa silibrasiyun,</i> A
big feast concluded the celebration. <i>Tapúsa
na siya arun mahílum,</i> Kill him (lit. finish
him off) to silence him. <b>2</b> [A2B12; a12] do
to the end, @{come to an end}. <i>Wà ku mutápus
sa sini kay way lamì,</i> I didn't finish the
movie because it was no good. <i>Mutápus
(matápus) ang prugráma inig-aríya sa tilun,</i>
The program will come to an end when the
curtain comes down. <b>pagka-</b> @afterwards, after
that. <b>3</b> [A13] hold the <i>tápus</i> feast. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@after, at the end of. <i>Tápus sa gúbat, After
the war.</i> <b>2</b> the feast which is prepared on
the ninth day of the prayer for a deceased
person. <b>(->)</b> that's all, that will do it. <i>Kun
masukù siya hagki lang. Tapus,</i> If she gets
angry, kiss her. That will do it. &mdash; <b>dáyun</b> <i>n</i> a
story in a periodical or on radio or TV
complete in one installment. <b>hiN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
coming to an end. <i>Atangi ang naghinapus
tang sugilánun,</i> Watch for our story that's
nearing its conclusion. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [c] make as a
concluding point, part or finale. <i>Ang sáyaw
mauy ipanápus nátù sa prugráma,</i> We will
make the dance number the last part. <i>n</i> s.t.
that concludes. <i>Maáyung panápus tung bálak
sa ímung diskursu,</i> That poem made a
good ending to your speech.<b> paN-(->)</b> <i>a</i> @final,
no matter what the consequences might be.
<i>Ibundak ku ning uska libu. Panapus ning</i>
<pb n=2024>
<i>sugála kay nagkapildipildi ku,</i> I ran out of
luck, but I'll gamble this one thousand pesos,
come what may. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @end, @termination.
<b>2</b> = <sc>TÁPUS</sc>, <i>n2.</i> <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)]
hold the <i>tápus</i> feast. <b>-um-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> about to
end or finish. <i>Tumatapus na ang prugráma
ug mamaulì na ta,</i> The program is about to
end, and we will go home.

<p><b>tápus<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TULÁPUS</sc>. see <sc>ÍLU</sc>.

<p><b>tap-us</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @plaster medicinal leaves
on an afflicted portion. <i>Gitap-úsan níyag
dáhun sa tubatuba ang piang,</i> She put a
plaster of <i>tubatuba</i> leaves on the sprain. <i>n</i>
@{medicinal plaster}.

<p><b>tapusuk</b> <i>n</i> @wentletrap, k.o. edible @univalve.

<p><b>taput</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC3; b] @stick, be firmly attached
to s.t. <i>Mitaput giyud ang buling sa sinínà,</i>
The dirt sure stuck to the clothes. <i>Nagtáput
ang láwas sa sayamis tuwins,</i> The bodies of
the Siamese twins are stuck to each other.
<i>Gitaptan ug sisi ang gapnud,</i> Small oysters
were attached to the driftwood. <b>2</b> [A2; b]
for a disease to @infect s.o. <i>Dì makataput ang
sakit sa himsug nga láwas,</i> Disease cannot
infect a healthy body. <b>3</b> [A2; b6] remain
very @close and @loyal to s.o. <i>Mutaput siya
nímu kun ímu siyang makúhà,</i> She will stick
to you once you have had her. <b>4</b> [b4] be
somewhat affected by an unpleasant feeling.
<i>Gitaptan siyag kalísang,</i> Fear came over him.
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{tight-fitting} clothes. <i>Taput kaáyu sa láwas
ang sinínà ni Marilin,</i> Marilyn has a very
tight-fitting dress on. <b>2</b> sticking to the spot
as if stuck. <i>Kasing taput,</i> A top that whirls
without wobbling. <b>&mdash; láwas</b> see <sc>LÁWAS</sc>. <b>&mdash;
sa pamilya</b> one who has become a member
of a family through marriage.<i> Wà kay lábut
sa panunud kay taput lang kas mga Ríyis,</i>
You do not get an inheritance because you
are related to the Reyeses only by marriage.
<b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> thin tissue paper used to make lanterns
or kites. <b>taptanan</b> <i>n</i> joist in a roof to which
the galvanized iron sheets are attached.

<p><b>tapuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] finger the strings or the keys
of a musical instrument and the like. <i>Bungul
ang tíngug sa sista kay luag kang mutapuy,</i>
The guitar sounds dull because you're not
holding tight enough to the chords. <i>Gitapuy
níya ang íyang mga tudlù sa tikla,</i> He let his
fingers move over the keyboard. <i>n</i> @fingering
of chords. <b>tapyanan</b> <i>n</i> @{finger board} or a @fret
of a stringed instrument.

<p><b>tapwak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; c] @drag, @push s.o. to danger
or sin. <i>Ikaw ang nagtapwak níya sa kadaútan,</i>
You drove her to danger. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)]
@dive, @dash forcefully towards. <i>Kinsa
tung mitapwak sa ákung likud,</i> Who was
that who jumped on my back? <b>3</b> [a3b8]
<pb n=2025>
meet the eyes. <i>Mauy natapwak (natapwakan)
sa ákung panan-aw ang babáying naghúbù,</i>
A stark naked woman met my eyes.
<b>4</b> [A; c] @splash onto. <i>Usa ka dakung balud
ang mitapwak sa íyang náwung,</i> A big wave
splashed his face. <i>Hitapwakan ug íhì ang
nangharána,</i> The serenaders got splashed
with a potful of urine.

<p><b>tapya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for waves to dash against
the shore. <i>Tapyáhun (itapya) nang gapnud
sa baybáyun,</i> The waves will dash that driftwood
against the shore. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @{fend off}
blows with the palm or with an instrument.
<i>Tapyáha íyang duslak sa ímung bangkaw,</i>
Fend off his thrust with your spear. <i>n</i> dashing
of waves. <b>tapyahan</b> <i>n</i> seashore where
the waves break.

<p><b>tapyas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b] @graze, rub against slightly.
<i>Gitapyasan sa panà ang íyang áping,</i> His
cheek was grazed by the arrow. <b>2</b> [A; a1]
@deflect, hit with a swinging arm. <i>Makatapyas
ka íning dunggába?</i> Could you parry
this thrust? <i>Tapyasa ang mga lamuk,</i> Drive
the mosquitoes away by swinging your arms.
<b>3</b> [A; a] wipe s.t. off s.t. by sliding the palm
of the hand over it. <i>Tapyása ang mga sagbut
sa lamísa,</i> Sweep the scraps off the table.

<p><b>tarà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; cP] put s.t. where it is easy to
get at, can easily be hit. <i>Mitarà siya sa íyang
nawung sa táwu nga nag-ingung musagpà,</i>
She put her face forward when the man
threatened to slap her so he could hit her
squarely if he dared. <i>Kinsay nagtarà ug usa
ka plátung mani sa mga bátà?</i> Who put a
plate of peanuts in front of the children
where they could get at them? <b>2</b> [A; c]
@{point at}, @{train upon}. <i>Wà pa gánì siya makatarà,
mibutu na ang pusil,</i> The gun went off
even before he could take his aim. <i>Itarà ang
ímung nawung sa adlaw,</i> @Face directly to
the sun. a <b>1</b> in fighting, exposing the body
and not parrying or ducking. <i>Tarà muáway
manúka, dì mulihay,</i> That rooster exposes
itself when it fights and fails to parry. <b>2</b> for
a woman to be motionless, sexually unresponsive.
<i>Tarà babayhána, dì mubálus kun
dyangdyángun,</i> An unresponsive woman.
She does not react to sexual play. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A;
c6] fail to move and thus expose oneself
instead of defending oneself or hiding. <i>Ayawg
patarà sa pinusílay,</i> Don't expose
yourself to the line of fire.

<p><b>tarabáhu</b> = <sc>TRABÁHU</sc>.

<p><b>tarabisíya</b> = <sc>TRABISÍYA</sc>.

<p><b>taráha</b> = <sc>TRÁHA</sc>.

<p><b>tarák</b> = <sc>TRÁK</sc>.

<p><b>taraktarak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A1; b6] put several blade
marks on s.t. <i>Ákung gitaraktarakan ang pu-*</i>
<pb n=2026>
<i>*núan sa nangkà arun muági ang taguk,</i> I put
blade marks in the trunk of the jackfruit so
<b>the</b> sap would flow.

<p><b>taraktarak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A1] make noisy footfalls. <i>Gisabáan
ang mga burdir sa sílung kay may
nagtaraktarak sa táas,</i> The boarders on the
ground floor were disturbed by the person
walking noisily upstairs.

<p><b>táral</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> force s.t. to come along by
dragging. <i>Gitáral nákug bábuy ngadtu sa ihawan,</i>
I dragged the pig to the slaughterhouse.
<b>1a</b> coax s.o. into coming along. <i>Ayaw
pagkúyug ug dúnay mutáral pagpangharána,</i>
Don't go if s.o. coaxes you into going
serenading. <b>2</b> bring before the court for
trial. <i>Tarálun sa hukmánan ang gikatahápan,</i>
The suspect will be brought to court. <b>3</b> drag
s.o. to misery. <i>Tarálun ta ka sa kauláwan
uban nákù,</i> I'll drag you down to shame
with me. <i>Tarálun ka sa kamatáyun niánang
labihan mung paghingaguul,</i> You'll be dragged
to death with your excessive grief. <b>taraltáral</b>
<i>v</i> [A3; a12] carry or take along where
s.o. is. <i>Ang íyang amígu mauy nagtaraltáral
níya sa syudad,</i> His friend took him out and
around the city.

<p><b>tarangka</b> = <sc>TRANGKA</sc>.

<p><b>taranta, tarant&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b3(1)c5] <b>1</b> @{lose
one's head} due to fright, panic. <i>Natarantar
siya dihang nagpúsil na,</i> He @panicked when
the shoot-out started. <b>2</b> @{get rattled}, lose
one's presence of mind. <i>Natarant&acaron;r siya dihang
gipangutána siyas abugádu,</i> He got @rattled
when the lawyer questioned him. <b>tarantádu</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @panicked. <b>2</b> @stupid in one's action.
<i>Katarantádu nímu! Ngánu gung ímung
gihíkap ang pintal nga basà pa,</i> You fool!
Why did you touch the wet paint? <i>v</i> [B12;
b6] <b>1</b> @panic. <b>2</b> become stupid.

<p><b>taras</b> <i>n</i> one's character trait in regards to the
way he deals with other people. <i>Gidáyig ku
ang íyang taras pagkamaabiabíhun ug pagkamaluluy-un,</i>
I admire his trait of character,
his hospitality and his ability to sympathize.

<p><b>tarbáhu</b> = <sc>TRABÁHU</sc>.

<p><b>tardang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] strike at a trunk or branch
of a tree with a bladed instrument with
moderate force and without intention of
cutting it off. <i>Nagtardang ku sa punúan sa
nangkà nga ákung gikuháan ug taguk,</i> I
chopped a mark in the jackfruit trunk to
get sap.

<p><b>*tardang<sub>2</sub></b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> expose s.t. or oneself
<b>to</b> the elements or for others to see. <i>Gipatardang
ni Rúsa ang íyang páa arun ku
makaalinggat,</i> Rosa exposed her legs to
catch my attention. <b>2</b> allow s.o. or oneself
<pb n=2027>
<b>to</b> do as much of s.t. as he wants. <i>Ayaw patardánga
ug pakáun ang bátà,</i> Don't let the
child eat as much as he wants.

<p><b>targit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @target. <i>Aku bay targit sa ímung insultu,</i>
Am I the target of your insult? <b>2</b> skill
in throwing the knife. <b>3</b> @{bull's eye} hit. <i>Syátir
giyud ka kay targit man,</i> You must be a
sharpshooter because it's a bull's eye. <b>4</b>
children's game in which the object is to
hook rubber bands which have been laid on
the ground with an arrow projected by a
rubber band. <b>4a</b> toy arrow made of coconut
midribs used in a game of <i>targit</i>. <b>5</b> manner
of shooting in basketball wherein the ball is
made to go straight into the basket instead
of describing an arc. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] hit the target.
<i>Makatargit ku ánang láta,</i> I can hit that
can. <b>2</b> [A; a] hit by throwing a knife. <i>Ayaw
siyag pusila. Targíta lang,</i> Don't gun him
down. Just hit him with a knife. <b>3</b> [C; b6]
play <i>targit</i>. <b>4</b> [A; a] make a <i>targit</i> shot in
basketball. <b>5</b> [A; a12] have s.o. for sexual
intercourse. <b>&mdash; praktis</b> <i>n</i> @{target practice}. <i>v</i>
[A1; b6] have target practice. <b>targittargit</b>
= <sc>TARGIT</sc>, <i>n4</i>.

<p><b>tarha</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] deduct tare weight. <i>Ang Insik
mitarhag singku kílus sa usa ka sákung kupras
kay basà,</i> The Chinese deducted five
kilos from the total weight of the sack of
copra to make up for its being wet. <i>n</i> tare
weight deducted.

<p><b>tarhíta</b> <i>n</i> @card, @tag. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put a @tag on s.t.
<i>Tarhitái ang pákids arun dì maw[=â],</i> Put a tag
on the package so it won't get lost.

<p><b>tárì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; a] enter, fight a cock in a cockfight
with gaffs. <i>Tarían ku nang ugis mu sa
ákung pula,</i> I'll pit my red cock against your
white one. <b>1a</b> [A1C; b6] have, hold a @cockfight.
<i>Magtárì rung Birnis,</i> There will be a
cockfight this Friday. <b>2</b> [A; b] tie the gaff
on the cock's leg. <i>Hapini ang tiil únà taríi,</i>
Pad the leg before tying the gaff on it. <b>(->)</b>
<i>n</i> @gaff. <i>Naunay ka sa kaugalíngun nímung
tarì kay ang ímu hinúung irù ang nahílu imbis
ang sa silíngan,</i> You fell into your own
trap (lit. got cut with your own gaff) when
your dog was poisoned instead of your
neighbor's. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be in a fighting
mood or shape (lit. wants to be made to
fight). <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] go to the cockfights.
<i>Kuháa ang hiniktan kay manárì ku,</i> Get the
cock, I am going to the cockfights. <i>n</i> @cockfighting.
<b>ig-r-/l-</b> <i>n</i> @cock for fighting. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> cockfighting enthusiast. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> a
perfect match, ideal for pairing off in marriage.
<i>Ikaw duktur ug siya nars; tariun giyud
mu kaáyu,</i> You're a doctor and she's a
nurse; you are a perfect match.
<pb n=2028>

<p><b>tarik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{outrigger boom}, the poles to which
the floats are attached. <b>2</b> @penis (slang). <i>v</i>
[a] put, make into an outrigger @boom.

<p><b>taríkì</b> = <sc>TURÍKÌ</sc>.

<p><b>taríma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> movable platform on which cargo
is placed in loading or unloading a ship. <b>2</b>
vending @stall, @stand. <i>Dúnay napúlù ka taríma
sa isdaan,</i> There are ten stalls in the fish
section of the market. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> make into,
put up a movable @platform. <b>2</b> make, put up
a @{vending stall}. <i>Gitarimáhan na ang bag-ung
tabuan,</i> Stalls have already been installed in
the new marketplace.

<p><b>taringtaring</b> <i>a</i> @flirt. <i>Dalì nang bayhána paangkan
kay taringtaring,</i> That girl will surely
get pregnant because she is a flirt. <i>v</i> [B; b6]
@flirt; be a flirt. <i>Kusug siyang mutaringtaring
sa mga laláki maung daghang uyab,</i> She
flirts a lot. That is why she has lots of boys
interested in her.

<p><b>tarípa</b> <i>n</i> @{customs duties}.[+]

<p><b>tarírit</b> <i>n</i> a guide for the cue in billiards on
which the cue is laid when one has to shoot
a ball which is too far from the edge of the
table for the hand to prop the cue.

<p><b>tariya, taríya</b> <i>n</i> @assignment, @allotment of
work. <i>v</i> [A; c] @assign a piece of work to s.o.
<i>Si Tatay nagtaríya nákug kawus,</i> Father
gave me the chore of fetching water. <i>Gaan
ang itaríya sa luyahun,</i> Assign an easy job
to weak persons.

<p><b>tarsan</b> <i>name:</i> @Tarzan. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] act like
Tarzan: climb and jump in a risky way. <i>Ayawg
tinarsan dihà kay mahúlug ka,</i> Stop
playing Tarzan. You might fall.

<p><b>tarsin</b> short for <i>murtar sin</i>. = <sc>MURTAL<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>a2</i>.

<p><b>tartanilya</b> <i>n</i> two-wheeled, horse-drawn @rig. <i>v</i>
[A13; a12] ride on a rig. <i>Tartanilyáhun nímu
nang duul kaáyu,</i> Do you have to ride a
rig for such a short distance?

<p><b>táru</b> <i>n</i> large cubical tin can made to contain
kerosene and hold five gallons. <i>v</i> [B256]
get to be one <i>táru</i> full. <i>Wà ra mutáru ang
nainum námung tubà,</i> We didn't even consume
five gallons of palm toddy.

<p><b>tarug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] budge a little. <i>Ígù lang natarug
ang kutsing ákung gitúlud,</i> The car I
was pushing just barely budged. <b>2</b> [B12; a1]
for s.t. implanted to become loose. <i>Manghíngù
na ang bátà kay nagkatarug na íyang
ngípun,</i> The child will soon lose his teeth
now that they are getting loose. <b>3</b> [B126]
for feelings to be moved, softened. <i>Bisan
lúhà dì makatarug (makapatarug) sa íyang
balatían,</i> Even tears cannot move his feelings.
<i>a</i> s.t. planted that is loose. <i>Húmuk na
ibtun ang lansang kay tarug na,</i> It's easy to
pull the nail out now because it's loose. <i>n</i> a
<pb n=2029>
loose tooth. <i>Ipaibut na ímung tarug,</i> Have
your loose tooth pulled.

<p><b>tarughuy</b> = <sc>TARUGSUY</sc>.

<p><b>tarugsuy</b> <i>a</i> @tapering to a point. <i>Daw tudlung
nagsudiyà ang tarugsuy níyang dughan,</i> Her
breasts are pointed like an accusing finger.
<i>v</i> [B6] be @pointed. <i>Nagtarugsuy lang ang
mais kay wà ulana,</i> The cornstalks stood
like pointed sticks because there was no
rain.

<p><b>tarúgu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @peg or @rod to hold s.t. in place
or provide @support. <b>2</b> @penis (slang). <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
put a peg. <i>Tarugúhan ug dakù ang halígi
arun makadaug sa busaug,</i> Put a large
peg in the post to support it so it will hold
up the joists.

<p><b>táruk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> plant a post or s.t. large.
<i>Lawma kun magtáruk kag pusti,</i> When you
plant a post make it deep. <b>2</b> @erect a structure.
<i>Magtáruk tag bunggalu inigkaminyù
nátù,</i> We'll @construct a bungalow when we
get married. <b>taruktaruk</b> <i>v</i> [AP] sit or stand
motionless, not saying a word. <i>Ang táwung
hilumun nagtaruktaruk (nagpataruktaruk)
lag lingkud,</i> The quiet man was sitting without
saying a word.

<p><b>tárung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @straight, not curved. <i>Tárung nga
dálan,</i> Straight path. <b>2</b> @straight, not tilting
or slanting. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] set @upright or @level
s.t. slanting or tilting. <i>Tarúnga nang pusting
naghirig,</i> @Straighten up that leaning post. <b>2</b>
[A; a12] do s.t. @seriously and @properly, not
playfully or improperly. <i>Káun ug tárung,</i>
Eat properly. <b>3</b> [B6] be @reformed. <i>Nagtárung
(nagtarung) na siya gíkang giparul,</i> He
has reformed since he was paroled. <b>4</b> [B456]
@behave well. <i>Magtárung ka kun dúnay
bisíta,</i> Behave when we have visitors. <b>5</b> [A;
c1] do, put in a proper position. <i>Ug mutárung
<b>tag</b> higdà, masulud tang tanan dinhi sa
sála,</i> If we arrange ourselves properly we can
all sleep in the living room. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @right and
@proper. <i>Wà kay mabúhat nga tarung kun
matarant&acaron;r ka,</i> You won't do anything right
if you panic. <b>2</b> @sane, not crazy. <i>Tarung pa
ba nang táwung síging tagawtaw,</i> Could you
call s.o. who keeps talking nonsense to himself
sane? <b>tarungtarung</b> <i>a</i> quite @presentable.
<i>Usa ra ka parisan ang ákung sapátus nga tarungtarung,</i>
I have only one pair of shoes
that is presentable. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @right, @justice. <i>Ang
katárung mudaug giyud sa dautan,</i> Right
triumphs over wrong. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @reason. <i>Matag
búhat dúna giyuy katarúngan,</i> Every action
must have a reason. <b>2</b> @justice. <i>Labánan
ang katarúngan,</i> Defend justice. <b>láwas ug
ka-an</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÁWAS</sc>. <i>v</i> [c6] give as a reason.
<i>Milális giyud siya bisag way ikatarúngan,</i>
<pb n=2030>
He argued even if he had no argument to
make. <b>panga-an</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] give an explanation
or defense, justify oneself. <i>Pangatarúngan
kun hustu ka,</i> Explain yourself when
you're right. <i>n</i> argument given in defense,
@explanation for @justification. <b>maka-anun</b> <i>a</i>
<b>1</b> @reasonable. <i>Makatarungánun ang íyang
hangyù,</i> Her request is reasonable. <b>2</b> @just,
@fair. <i>Makatarungánun ang Diyus,</i> God is
just. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> @righteous. <i>Wà siyay diyus, apan
matárung siya,</i> He knows no God, but he is
righteous. <b>mina-(->)</b> <i>a</i> in a righteous way.

<p><b>tarúngan</b> <i>a</i> @crested, having a circular growth
of flesh or feathers on the crown or head.
<i>Ang tarúngan nga manuk dúnay balhíbu nga
mag-ulbu sa úlu,</i> A crested chicken has a
puff of feathers forming a circle on the top
of its head.

<p><b>tarúrut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> paper, leaf rolled into a @cone. <i>Usa
ka tarúrut mani,</i> Peanuts in a piece of paper
rolled into a cone. <b>2</b> k.o. @squid characterized
by its long tapering tail. <b>3</b> any musical instrument
or noisemaker blown with the
mouth. <b>3a</b> @drumbeater, @{publicity man}. <i>Gisangyaw
dáyun sa mga tarúrut sa mayur nga
siya ang nakapasimintu sa dálan Kulun,</i> The
mayor's publicity men immediately broadcast
that he was responsible for cementing
Colon St. <b>4</b> @cuckold. <i>a</i> short and stout. <i>Tarúrut
<b>tan-áwun</b> ang mubù nga mutambuk,</i>
A short person looks like a cone when he
grows stout. <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> roll s.t. into a cone.
<i>Nagtarúrut si Tátay arun ipúli sa íyang nawálang
hunsuy,</i> Father rolled a leaf into a
cone to smoke with when he lost his pipe.
<b>2</b> play a @{wind instrument}. <b>3</b> for a wife to
make a fool of her husband by taking up
with other men. <i>Gitarúrut siya sa íyang asáwa,</i>
His wife made him a cuckold.

<p><b>tarúti</b> <i>n</i> @trot, a gait of a horse in which the
legs are lifted in alternating diagonal pairs.
<i>v</i> [A; a2] @trot. <i>Maáyu mutarúti ning kabayúa,
dì kaáyu lihuk,</i> This horse trots well.
It does not bounce so much.

<p><b>tarútut</b> = <sc>TARÚRUT</sc>.

<p><b>tarútuy</b> = <sc>TURÚTUY</sc>.

<p><b>táruy</b> = <sc>TAGDUY</sc>.

<p><b>tása, tásà</b> <i>n</i> cup. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] use a cup. <i>Tasáa
lang ang sabaw kun way yahung,</i> Use
cups if there are no soup bowls.

<p><b>tasadur</b> <i>n</i> @assessor, a person who sets valuation
on property for taxation purposes. <i>v</i>
[B156] be, become an assessor.

<p><b>tasal</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] set a date or time to do s.t., or
for s.t. to happen. <i>Dì ku mutasal anus-a ku
mubálik,</i> I won't set a date as to when I'm
coming back. <i>Gitasalan ang masakitun sa
kansir ug usa ka búlan,</i> The cancer patient
<pb n=2031>
was given a month to live. <i>Lúnis ang gitasal
nga adlaw sa kasal,</i> Monday was the day set
for the wedding. <i>n</i> date fixed for s.t. expected.
<b>tasádu</b> <i>n</i> a fixed date, term. <i>Way tasádu
kun anus-a ang ílang kasal,</i> There's no
date fixed for their wedding. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)]
give a date, term or period. <i>Mutasádu kag
úras kun anus-a ku ikaw hapita,</i> You have
to set a fixed time as to when I shall pick
you up.

<p><b>tasar</b> = <sc>TASAL</sc>.

<p><b>tasasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @valuation; @assessment of s.t. <i>v</i>
[A13; c] @assess, @value s.t. at. <i>Gitasasiyunan
lag mínus arun dì ku mabuktut sa buluhísan,</i>
My property was given a low valuation
so I could escape the taxes.

<p><b>tásik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the liquid residue of sea water that
has been crystalized in salt making. <b>2</b> liquid
residue left after milling sugar. <b>haluan &mdash;</b> <i>n</i>
snakeheads found in salt water.

<p><b>taslak</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); b2] @loaf, go about lazily in
one's work. <i>Mutaslak ang mga trabahadur
ug way magtan-aw níla,</i> The workers loaf in
their work if no one watches them. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @lazy, fond of loafing. <i>Taslakan kaáyu siya
ug náay masúgù,</i> She is very lazy when
there's s.o. to do the household work. <b>2</b>
@cowardly. <i>Taslakan kaáyu nang bayhána, dì
makatáhas sa báy nga mau rang usa,</i> That
woman is very cowardly. She is afraid to
stay in the house alone. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> become
a lazybone. <b>2</b> become cowardly. <b>ka-</b>
<i>n</i> @fear, @cowardice.

<p><b>taslup</b> (from salup) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @penetrate,
@{sink into}. <i>Mitaslup ang tinggà sa túbig,</i> The
sinker sunk into the water. <i>Walà makataslup
sa íyang buktun ang dágum sa indiksiyun,</i>
The hypodermic needle didn't penetrate
into his arm. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)] penetrate
deep into s.t.; impart s.t. into the thing penetrated.
<i>Mitaslup na ang kaparat sa isdà,</i>
The saltiness has penetrated deep into the
flesh of the fish. <i>Nakataslup na ang kahumut
sa panákut sa kasahusun,</i> The taste of
the spices has penetrated deep into the
jerked meat. <b>3</b> [A2] for the sun to disappear
behind s.t., set.

<p><b>tasngà</b> <i>v</i> [A13] grin idiotically. <i>Nagtasngà
lang siyang gikasab-an,</i> He just grinned stupidly
as he was scolded.

<p><b>taspuk</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b6] @laze, @loaf. <i>Nagtaspuk siya
sa íyang trabáhu,</i> He is loafing on his job.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> @lazy. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become lazy. <b>ka-</b>
<i>n</i> @laziness.

<p><b>tastas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] undo stitches. <i>Tastása ang tahì
sa sákung himúung hábul,</i> Undo the
stitches of the sacks to make them into a
blanket. <i>a</i> stitches that came undone.
<pb n=2032>

<p><b>táta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @father, address of respect to a father,
esp. among Muslims. <b>2</b> address of respect
to an old man, esp. a close relative. <i>v</i>
[A; a] address or call s.o. <i>táta</i>.

<p><b>tátà</b> <i>short form:</i> <b>tà</b> <i>n</i> a pet name for boys or
girls.

<p><b>tàtà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] @{worn out}, damaged due
to rough or constant use. <i>Natàtà ang karsúnis
ug ginámit,</i> The pants are worn out after
long use. <b>2</b> [B126; a12] badly bruised by
blows. <i>Tàtáun ku ang simud ánang pisti,</i> I'll
pulverize that s.o.b.'s snout.

<p><b>tàtà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> empty a container of its
contents by turning it upside down and
banging it downwards. <i>Nagtàtà ku sa mga
síli áring butilya,</i> I'm pushing the chili peppers
out of this bottle. <i>Itàtà (tàtáa) ang mga
sulud sa sáku,</i> Shake out the contents of
the sack. <b>2</b> pour, take out catch from a fish
net or fish trap. <b>3</b> empty coconut-palm toddy
in a container. <b>3a</b> sell coconut-palm toddy
to a permanent customer. <i>Mutàtà kug
tubà nímu káda buntag,</i> I'll sell you fresh
coconut-palm toddy every morning. <b>4</b> [A;
b] @lap at a liquid. <i>Irù ang mitàtà sa litsis bátà,</i>
The dog lapped the baby's milk. <b>-an</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> a shed where catch from different bancas
are put together for division into shares.
2 place where palm toddy is kept. <b>3</b> person
who sells palm toddy on a regular basis.

<p><b>tatak</b> (slang) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> label indicating the make of
s.t. <b>2</b> @tattoo. <i>v</i> [A; c] attach a certain label.
<i>Dílì tinúud mahalun nang íyang sinínà. Gitatakan
lang ug Kristiyan Díyur,</i> It's not
really an expensive dress. She just sewed a
Christian Dior label into it.

<p><b>tátang</b> <i>n</i> an address of respect given to an old
grandfather or great-grandfather; sometimes
used to address an old and well-respected
leader in a community. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call
s.o. <i>tátang</i>.

<p><b>tátaw</b> a <b>1</b> clearly visible, not covered. <i>Tátaw
sa bintánà ang ílang rinubuhay,</i> You could
see them necking clearly through the window.
<b>2</b> @obvious. <i>Tátaw kaáyu siyang nag-inartista,</i>
She's obviously faking. <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
<b>1</b> be clearly seen. <i>Matátaw nímu ang dágat
ibabaw sa búkid,</i> You can clearly see the
sea from the top of the hill. <b>2</b> be @obvious.
<i>Minuri kay matátaw kaáyung gustu ka níya,</i>
Slow down. It's obvious that you like him.

<p><b>tatay, tátay</b> <i>n</i> term of address to one's father
and sometimes uncle or grandfather. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
a12] call s.o. father. <b>2</b> [B1256] become a
father. <b>(->)</b> voc. <i>short form:</i> <b>tay</b>.

<p><b>tatha</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] cut or lop off branches with
a bladed tool. <i>Tatháun ku ning sangáha nga
nagdaplay sa alambri,</i> I will cut off the
<pb n=2033>
branch that hangs across the electric wires.

<p><b>táting</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tatting, @{knotted lace}. <b>2</b> @shuttle for
making tatting. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make tatting.

<p><b>tatsa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b4(1)] @mark or @blemish on
an otherwise smooth surface. <i>Wà giyud makatatsa
ang buksidur sa íyang kuntra,</i> The
boxer was not able to make a single mark
on his opponent. <i>Natatsahan ang íyang puting
barung,</i> His white barong has a @spot on
it. <b>2</b> [A2N; b5c] @criticize; @{find fault} with
s.t. <i>Kusug siyang mutatsa (manatsa) sa búhat
sa uban,</i> He is fond of criticizing others'
work. <i>n</i> @mark, @blemish. <i>Way tatsa ang íyang
pagkababáyi,</i> Her womanhood is unblemished.
<b>-dur</b> <i>a</i> fond of criticizing or despising.
<b>-dúra</b> = <sc>TATSADUR</sc> (female).

<p><b>tats&acaron;r</b> = <sc>TATSA</sc>.

<p><b>tatsing</b> <i>v</i> [a12] touch the net in volleyball. <i>n</i>
1 the violation of touching. <b>2</b> one who commits
the violation. <i>Tatsing ka. Ákung sirbi,</i>
You touched the net. My serve.

<p><b>tatsu</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. rounded, shallow brass or clay
@pan having two handles, used primarily in
making sweets. <i>v</i> [A; a] use a <i>tatsu</i>.

<p><b>tatu, tatù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] mark with a @tattoo. <i>Tatuhan
tag kurus ímung buktun,</i> Let's tattoo a
cross on your arm. <i>n</i> tattoo marks.

<p><b>tátut</b> = <sc>BÍ</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>tatuwa</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>.

<p><b>táub</b> a @{high tide}. <i>Táub (taub) kaáyu ang dágat
run,</i> The tide is high now. <i>v</i> [B45; b4]
be high tide. <i>Láwum ang pantalan kun mutáub,</i>
The harbor is deep when it's high tide.
<i>n</i> @tide. <i>Ang táub gaagad lang sa búlan,</i> The
tide depends on the moon. <b>-un</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sea at
high tide. <i>Misíbug na ang taúbun,</i> The tide
is going out now. <b>2</b> @{high tide}. <i>Abtun giyud
nang sináug nga barútu kay milíhuk na ang
taúbun,</i> When the high tide rushes in it will
surely reach the boat that has been beached.

<p><b>táud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] put s.t. up or on by fastening,
attaching, or inserting. <i>Pagtáud ug muskitíru,</i>
@{Put up} a mosquito net. <i>Itáud ang
singsing,</i> Put the ring on. <b>2</b> [C2; c3] have
@{sexual intercourse}. <i>Nagtáud sigúru sila kay
nahílum,</i> They must be having intercourse
because they're silent. <b>3</b> [A; a12]
make a plow. <i>n</i> @plow. <i>Bargas karun ang ákung
táud,</i> I use a Vargas plow now. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i>
a trimming of lace attached to a garment as
a frill.

<p><b>taudtaud</b> <b>1</b> @{after a while}. <i>Mihigdà ku, unyà
taudtaud nakatúlug,</i> I lay down, and after a
while fell asleep. <b>2</b> be for some time. <i>Taudtaud
ka nang wà mubisíta nákù,</i> It's been
some time since you visited me. <b>3</b> [do] @{every
now and then}. <i>Taudtaud lag pangíhì
ning táwung gibus-aw,</i> This man with a bladder
<pb n=2034>
ailment keeps having @frequent urination.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B246; b] done some time ago.
<i>Mutaudtaud na karung wà kung kakità ug
sini,</i> It's been some time now since I've last
seen a movie. <i>Pataudtauri (taudtauri) nà sa
káyu únà haúna,</i> Let it stay over the fire for
several minutes before you take it off. <b>2</b> [A13]
do s.t. every now and then. <b>3</b> [b8]
taking a rather long time. <i>Mataudtauran pa
dagway úsà siya muulì,</i> It will probably be
some time before he comes home.

<p><b>táuk</b> = <sc>TALÁUK</sc>.

<p><b>taun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> set a trap or fishline in place.
<b>2</b> offer a part of the body to receive blows
or abuse. <i>Gitaun sa irù ang íyang líug arun
kahiktan,</i> The dog offered its neck to let us
tie it. <b>3</b> place s.t. as a bet. <i>Ayaw itaun ang
buakung húlin,</i> Don't put broken marbles
down as your bet. <i>n</i> bet put together with
others in a game.

<p><b>taunduk</b> = <sc>TAUSDUK</sc>.

<p><b>táup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; P] pierce deep. <i>Mitáup ang udiyung
sa íyang dughan,</i> The arrow pierced
deep into his breast. <b>2</b> [B125] for the
sound of s.t. one cannot see to fade away.
<i>Natáup ang tíngug sa nagkalayung ayruplánu,</i>
The sound of the airplane faded as it
got further and further away. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23]
<b>1</b> @sink, disappear below the level of. <i>Nanáup
ang barku sa pagkalúnud niíni. Bisan pálu
wà makítà,</i> The ship was completely hidden
when it sank. Even the mast could not
be seen on the surface of the water. <i>Nanáup
ang bátà sa daghang táwu,</i> The child disappeared
in the midst of the crowd. <b>2</b> for a
score to be at the lowest, or at the bottom.
<i>Sa lima ka tím, íla rang iskur ang nanáup,</i>
Of the five teams, their score was the lowest.

<p><b>tausduk</b> <i>v</i> [B4; c1] be piled or heaped high.
<i>Nagtausduk ang labhanan sa palanggána,</i>
The laundry is @{piled high} in the basin. <i>Ayawg
tausdúka (itausduk) ang kan-un sa plátu,</i>
Do not @heap the food on the plate.

<p><b>tawa</b> <i>a</i> jovial of face or visage. <i>Ang táwu nga
tawa (matawa) ug panagway,</i> A person of
joyful mien. <b>ma-</b> = <sc>TAWA</sc>. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2S;
b3C5] @laugh. <i>Nagkatawa sila sa múut kaáyung
sini,</i> They were laughing at the funny
picture. <i>Gikataw-an ang bukidnun,</i> They
laughed at the bumpkin. <i>Dílì ikakatáwa kanang
hitabúa,</i> That incident cannot be
laughed off. <i>n</i> @laughter. <b>hika-/haka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256]
laugh despite oneself. <i>Nahikatawa ku
pagkadalin-as níya,</i> I couldn't help laughing
when he slipped. <b>kataw-anay, kinataw-anay</b>
<i>v</i> [C3] smile at each other. <b>hinga-</b> <i>a</i> @gay,
easily aroused to laughter. <b>kataw-anan</b> <i>a</i>
<pb n=2035>
@funny. <b>kalataw-an</b> <i>n</i> @{laughing stock}. <b>kinataw-an</b>
<i>n</i> manner of laughing. <b>kataw-unun</b> <i>a</i>
feel like bursting into laughter. <b>mataw-ánun</b>
<i>a</i> @laughingly, @jokingly. <i>Mataw-ánung pangutána,</i>
A joking question.

<p><b>tawà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing with a drift line for moderately
deep seas. A swivel is attached between
<b>the</b> leader and the line which is in
<b>turn</b> attached to a bamboo float having a
coconut frond stuck into it as a marker.

<p><b>tawag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2] @call, @{call on}. <i>Tawga siya
kay mangáun na,</i> Call him. Lunch is
ready. <i>Pagtuun básig hitawgan kang mám,</i>
Study because the teacher might call on
you. <b>1a</b> [a12] consider one as s.t. <i>Daw ikaúlaw
níya nga tawgun silang magsúun si Dúris,</i>
Apparently she was ashamed to be called
Doris' sister. <b>2</b> [A3; a1c] call s.o. s.t.
<i>Tawga lang kug Suping,</i> Just call me Sofing.
<i>Bahálà nag unsay ímung itawag nákù,</i> I
don't care what you call me. <b>3</b> [A; b5] @{call
up}. <i>Tawga (tawgi) ku inig-abut nímu,</i> Call
me up when you arrive. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> way one calls
s.t. <i>Unsay tawag nímu nang táwung hambugun?</i>
What name do you give to a braggart?
<b>2</b> action of calling out. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{call
out} the marriage bans. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAWAG</sc>, <i>3</i>. <i>n</i> the
call of marriage bans in church. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
<b>1</b> for a dead person to call the relatives
to follow him shortly after his death. In
folk belief, if a corpse fails to stiffen, it is a
sign that he is calling for his relatives to follow
him, and it must be warded off with a
<i>sumpà</i>. <i>Ang minatay nga húmuk mu rag búhì,
magpanawag sa mga kaparintíhan,</i> A
corpse that is soft as if it were alive is calling
his relatives to follow him in death. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash;
ug nánay, tátay, ginikánan</b> call out in great
distress or pain (lit. say <i>'Máma!'</i>). <i>Nagpanawag
ug nánay ang gisirulan,</i> The man had
stomach cramps and yelled 'Mama!' in pain.
<b>talawgun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> frequently called on for services.
<i>Talawgun kaáyu nang duktúra,</i> That
doctor is very @busy. <b>2</b> requiring repeated
calls to make him come. <i>Talawgun nang batáa.
Dì muanhi ug dì sigíhag tawag,</i> That
child needs to be called a lot. He doesn't
come unless you keep calling him. <b>-l-un(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> @{errand boy} or girl. <b>paN-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> place
where one makes a call, esp. for an assembly.
<b>pala-, pala-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that calls. <i>Ang bagting
sa kampána mauy palatáwag sa mga
manuk níla,</i> The ringing of the bell gathers
their chickens. <i>a</i> fond of calling on others.
<b>panawagtawag</b> = <sc>PAMUTINGTING</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BUTINGTING</sc>.

<p><b>tawak</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. black fungus @beetle that infests
mung beans and stored cereals. <i>v</i> [A12; a4] 
<pb n=2036>
be infested with this sort of beetle.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> beetle-infested beans or cereals.

<p><b>tawal</b> <i>n</i> treatment in folk medicine consisting
of betel nut spit on the afflicted area
and a magical prayer. <i>v</i> [A; b] treat with
<i>tawal</i>. <i>Gitawalan ang íyang pinaakan sa hálas,</i>
His snakebite was treated with betel
nut spittle.

<p><b>tawas</b> <i>n</i> @alum.

<p><b>tawatawa</b> = <sc>MANGÁGAW</sc>.

<p><b>tawgi</b> <i>n</i> @{mung bean sprouts}, used as vegetable.
<i>v</i> [A1; a2b6] cook with or make into
bean sprouts.

<p><b>tawhay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @orderly, @{well-arranged}. <i>Tawhay
ang mga butang sa lamísa,</i> The things on the
table are well-arranged. <b>2</b> @relaxed, with the
mind free from trouble or worries. <b>2a</b> face
looking fresh and relaxed, free from worry
or pain. <b>3</b> work that is light and easy to do.
<i>Tawhay kaáyu ang trabáhu kay íhap lang,</i>
The work is very light because it's just
counting things. <i>v</i> [B2; c1] <b>1</b> be, become
@orderly, @{well-arranged}. 2 be @peaceful and
free from trouble or worries. <i>Mitawhay ang
íyang buut pagkatápus sa mga bátà sa ílang
kursu,</i> He felt relaxed and relieved after his
children had finished their courses. <i>Tawháya
(itawhay) ang mga trabahadur,</i> Calm the
laborers down. <b>2a</b> for the face to look fresh
and relaxed. <i>Mitawhay (natawhay) ang náwung
sa bag-ung nanganak,</i> The face of the
woman that had just delivered her baby
looked relieved and relaxed. <b>3</b> @{become light}.
<i>Mutawhay ang trabáhu ug hingpit ta sa kasangkápan,</i>
The work becomes easy if one
has all the tools one needs.

<p><b>tawid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @cross; go over to the other
side. <i>Nagtawid na sa taytáyan ang trák,</i> The
truck is crossing the bridge now. <i>Kining barkúha
dì makatawid ug dagkung lawud,</i> This
boat cannot cross large seas. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)]
@leave, @{go away} from a place. <i>Mitawid ang
mga tulisan pag-abut sa písi,</i> The robbers
vanished when the P.C. arrived. <i>n</i> @{opposite
side}, place across.

<p><b>táwid</b> <i>n</i> @meadow, uncultivated @grassland for
pasturing. <i>Adtu nákù itugway ang mga báka
sa táwid,</i> I'll pasture the cows in the meadow.
v [B12; b6] be, become a meadow. <i>Natáwid
ang ámung yútà nga wà kultibaha,</i>
The piece of land that wasn't tilled turned
into a meadow.

<p><b>tawiltawil</b> <i>v</i> [A12] @dangle to and fro. <i>Lagmit
sakmitun nang ímung kayril nga nagtawiltawil
sa ímung bulsa,</i> S.o. is likely to grab the
watch chain that is dangling from your
pocket.

<p><b>tawngun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{thorny vine} of thickets, similar 
<pb n=2037>
to the bougainvillea but sharper, with
small leaves in three lobes and small white
flowers.

<p><b>tawsì</b> <i>n</i> small, brown k.o. @sunbird, similar to
<i>tamsi</i>, white in front with a brown spot.

<p><b>Tawsug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the Muslims of Jolo. <b>2</b> their language.

<p><b>tawsyu</b> = <sc>TAHUSYU</sc>.

<p><b>táwu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @man, @person. <b>1a</b> @man, @fellow. <i>Naunsa
mag táwu! Nanghawuk man!</i> What's
gotten into the man! Kissing me like that.
<i>Kanà gung tawhána,</i> That guy ... <b>2</b> @follower.
<i>Táwu nà siyang Markus,</i> He is one of
Marcos' men. <b>3</b> @{face card}. <i>Nindut íyang baráha
kay púlus táwu,</i> He has good cards, all
face cards. <b>4</b> s.o. left to watch the house.
<i>Kinsay táwu run sa balay,</i> Who's left to
watch the house? <b>5</b> @visitor. <i>Dì ku makalakaw
kay náay táwu sa ámù,</i> I can't leave the
house because we have visitors. <b>6</b> <i>in phrases:</i>
<b>anak sa &mdash;</b> the son of man (Biblical). <b>-ng Matúud</b>
Jesus Christ. <b>dakung &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>DAKÙ</sc>. <b>tawhána</b>
particular man. <i>Kanang tawhána,</i> That
man. <i>Kinsang tawhána?</i> Which man? <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b6] stay and watch the house. <i>Taw-i
ang báy samtang manábù ku,</i> Watch the
house while I go marketing. <b>2</b> [B1256; b8]
be @born. <i>Natáwu siya sa pasungan,</i> He was
born in a manger. <i>Unsang pitsáha íyang natawhan?</i>
On what date was he born? <i>Yútang
natawhan,</i> @{Native land}. <b>3</b> [AN] prepare
for guests on special occasions. <i>Manáwu sila
unyà sa pista sa ílang baryu,</i> They will prepare
for visitors when it is the feast day in
their village. <b>4</b> [A] @attend an affair or special
occasion. <i>Mutáwu ta sa kasal níla,</i> We
will attend their wedding. <i>Nagtáwu sila sa
mísa sa kaadláwun,</i> They are attending the
early morning mass. <b>5</b> [AN; a12] @{pay a
visit}. <i>Gitáwu níla ang mga prísu,</i> They @visited
the prisoners. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] <b>1</b> have s.o.
stay in a house. <b>2</b> give rise to a feeling. <i>Mupatáwu
sa talagsaung kadásig,</i> Gives rise to
an unusual enthusiasm. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a]
come, bring into the world. <i>Ngánung gipakatáwu
pa aku?</i> Why was I brought into
this world? <b>2</b> [A13] take the form of man,
pretend to be man. <i>Magpakatáwu ang ingkantu
kun mangulitáwu,</i> The enchanted beings
take the form of man when they go after
women. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] be left in a
house to watch it. <i>Siya na lay nahitáwu sa
balay,</i> She was the only one left in the
house to watch it. <b>tawutáwu</b> <i>n</i> @figurehead.
<i>v</i> [A1B12; c16] make s.o. a figurehead, become
a figurehead. <b>taw-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> not unoccupied.
<i>Taw-an nang payága kay dúnay sugà,</i>
That hut is not unoccupied because there's
<pb n=2038>
light. <b>2</b> inhabited by supernatural beings.
<i>Magdiwáta sila sa káhuyng taw-an,</i> They'll
offer offerings to the tree that is inhabited
by spirits. <b>tawhánun</b> <i>a</i> @characteristic of humans,
@earthly. <i>Gibyáan sa mungha ang mga
tawhánung tingúhà,</i> The nun put away
earthly desires. <i>Masayup kita tungud kay
tawhánun,</i> We commit mistakes because we
are human. <b>makitawhánun</b> <i>a</i> @humanistic,
@humanitarian. <i>Makitawhánun siya, dílì manaugdáug
sa láin,</i> He is humanitarian. He
does not oppress other people. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> done
in a human way. <i>Ang ímung gibúhat dì na
tináwu, linuug na,</i> What you did was no
longer human but beastly. <i>n</i> paid by individuals,
not by the whole vehicle, service, etc.
<i>Tináwu ang báyad sa dyíp, dì pakyaw,</i> The
amount of fare depends on the number of
people. It's not for the whole car. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1]
pay for individually, not for a whole. <b>2</b> [c1]
do s.t. @manually, use bare manpower on as
compared to the use of machines. <i>Kun tinawhun
(itináwu) nà pagbúhat madúgay giyud,</i>
If you do it @{by hand} it will take time.
<b>3</b> [A13; b6] @{give a banquet}. <i>Dì ka ba magtináwu
rung pyista?</i> Aren't you going to
prepare a banquet this coming feast? <b>katawhan</b>
<i>n</i> @people, @masses.<i> Kabus ang átung
mga katawhan,</i> Our people are poor. <b>pagka-</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @character, @personality. <i>Kasalígan siyang
pagkatáwu,</i> He has a trustworthy character.
<b>2</b> @birth. <b>kina-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @nature, @inborn character
or @inherent tendencies of a person. <i>Kinatáwu
nà níla nga mga dagkù sila kaáyu,</i> It runs
in their family that they grow to be large
people. <b>2</b> @genitalia (euphemism). <b>tawutáwu</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. like a person, e.g. @scarecrow or the
like. <b>2</b> pupil and iris of the eye. <b>tinawutáwu</b>
<i>n</i> @{comic strips}. <i>Unáhun kug bása ang tinawutáwung
sugilánun,</i> I'll read the comic
strips first. <b>uli-</b> see <sc>ULITÁWU</sc>.

<p><b>tawu-</b> <i>for forms with</i> tawu- <i>see also</i>[**F1 Typo wrong parts italic?Correct> for forms with <i>tawu-</i> see also] <sc>TALU-</sc>.

<p><b>tawugtawug</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for s.t. long and thin
that is standing with the base firmly attached
to wave back and forth. <i>Antína sa awtu
nga magtawugtawug inighúnung sa awtu,</i>
An automobile antenna that waves back
and forth when the car stops.

<p><b>tawun</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] <b>1</b> @move to a place to take
shelter or refuge. <i>Nakatawun na mi sa simbahan
pagbahà,</i> We moved to the church
when there was a flood. <b>2</b> move to another
place. <i>Nakatawun na sila sa Mindanaw,</i> They
have already moved to Mindanao. <b>tawuntáwun</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b5] @transfer, go over from place
to place. <i>Nagtawuntáwun lang ang mga manaygúnay
sa kabalayan,</i> The carolers caroled
from house to house. <i>Gitawuntawúnan</i>
<pb n=2039>
<i>(gitawuntáwun) sa bátà ug paráyig ang íyang
máma ug pápa,</i> The child went back
and forth between his mother and father
asking for affection.

<p><b>táwun</b> <i>short for</i> <b>INTÁWUN.</b>

<p><b>tayà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> place a bet. <i>Adtu ku tayà sa
hárì,</i> I'll bet on heads. <i>Ayawg itayà ang tibuuk
puhúnan,</i> Don't stake all the money
you have. <b>2</b> stake one's life, honor. <i>Nagtayà
ang sundálu sa íyang kinabúhì álang sa násud,</i>
The soldier puts his life on the line for
his country. <i>Ákung itayà ákung dungug paglában
sa sinumbung,</i> I'll stake my name to
defend the accused. <b>3</b> [A; b6(1)] pay for
the others in a treat (slang). <i>Akuy magtayà
sa átung inúmun,</i> I'll pay for the drinks. <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> bet. <b>2</b> treat, turn to pay (slang).

<p><b>tayà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> rust. <b>way &mdash; ang bulsa</b> be broke
(slang). <i>Wà giyud bisag tayà ákung bursa,</i>
My pocket doesn't have a thing (lit. not
even rust [from money]). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b4] become
rusty. <i>Tay-an ang gamitung dì lanahan,</i>
Tools get rusty if you don't oil them.
<b>2</b> [b4] be rusty from lack of practice. <i>Natay-an
na ku sa pagtukar kay dúgay na kung
wà kahikap,</i> I've gotten rusty because I
haven't picked my instrument up in ages.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> rusty.

<p><b>tayáda</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23; b6] engage in the action of
doing s.t., make the motions of doing s.t.
<i>Wà pa gánì mubagting ag kampána mitayáda
dáyun ang usang buksidur,</i> The bell had
not even rung when one of the boxers started
swinging his fist. <b>2</b> [A23] put on a big
show, make ostentatious motions of doing
s.t. <i>Mitayáda dáyun siya sa íyang nakat-unan
nga tanggu,</i> He immediately set out to
show off the tango steps he had learned. <i>n</i>
act of making motions, esp. ostentatiously.
<i>Púrus lang tayáda, way natúman,</i> They just
put on, but accomplish nothing.

<p><b>tayakan</b> <i>n</i> a makeshift stall in a marketplace.

<p><b>tayam, táyam</b> <i>a</i> a little bit sweet or salty.
<i>Ang atábay nga duul sa dágat tayam ug túbig,</i>
The water of a well near the sea is a bit
salty. <i>v</i> [AB; a] have a faint taste of sweetness
or saltiness, make s.t. so. <i>Wà na tay kámay
maung ígù lang mitayam ang kapi,</i>
We're out of sugar. That's why the coffee
is just slightly sweetened. <i>Ígù rang mitayam
(gitayam) ang asin sa íyang pagkáun,</i> He
used just enough salt to make his dinner
slightly salty.

<p><b>taydalwib[**taydal wib?]</b> <i>n</i> tidal wave. v [A; a4] have a tidal
wave, be affected by a tidal wave.

<p><b>taygir</b> <i>see</i> <b>URKID.</b>

<p><b>tayhad</b> <i>a</i> having an erect posture with the abdomen
thrust out. <i>Tayhad kaáyu siya nga</i>
<pb n=2040>
<i>nagtindug,</i> He is standing tall and straight. <i>v</i>
[A] <b>1</b> stand erect. <b>2</b> stand around doing
nothing when s.t. should be done. <i>Nagtayhad
ka man lang dihà nga daghan mang buluhatun,</i>
You are just standing around when
there is so much to do!

<p><b>tayhup</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> blow through a tube
to build a fire. <i>Magtayhup ku sa háling,</i> I
will blow on the fire I'm building. <b>2</b> treat
sickness by blowing on the crown, nape of
the neck or the spot that ails. <i>Tayhúpi ra
ring pinaakag h[=á]s,</i> Would you treat this
snake bite by blowing on it? <i>n</i> tube through
which one blows to build a fire.

<p><b>tayid</b> <i>n</i> detergent (from the brand name
<i>Tide).</i>

<p><b>tayils</b> <i>n</i> tile. <i>v</i> [a12] make s.t. tile. <i>Gitayils
níya ang sawug sa banyu,</i> He made the
bathroom floor a tile floor.

<p><b>tayim</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> time, o'clock. <i>Unsay ímung tayim,</i>
What time do you have? <b>2</b> time at which
s.t. is scheduled to begin or end. <i>Daliag human
kay hápit na ang tayim,</i> Finish it quickly
because it's almost time. <b>3</b> time, chance.
<i>Wà kuy tayim pagrilaks,</i> I don't have time
to relax. <b>&mdash; pa 1</b> time out, let me have some
more time. <i>Tayim pa. Wà pa kung katágù,</i>
Time out. I haven't hidden yet. <b>2</b> just a
minute. <i>Tayim pa kay tawgun ku siya,</i> Just
a minute. I'll call her. <b>3</b> just a second, I'll be
right back. <i>Tayim pa. Ákung kuháun,</i> Just
a second. I'll get it. <b>4</b> excuse me, let me interrupt
or change the subject. <i>Tayim pa ra
gud, kinsa tu?</i> Excuse me. Who did you say
it was? <b>5</b> excuse me (correcting oneself).
<i>Muabut sa Lúnis. Tayim pa diay, sa Martis,</i>
He is arriving on Monday, I mean, on Tuesday.
<b>&mdash; awut = TAYIMPA,</b> <i><b>1.</b></i> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] ascertain
the time, rate. <i>Taymi kung magtayip,</i>
Time me typewriting. <b>2</b> [B256] be
time to start or end. <i>Buhíi ang klási kay hápit
na mutayim (matayim),</i> Dismiss the class
because it's almost time. <b>3</b> [A2] say 'time
out', 'wait a second'. <i>Sa ríng dì ka makatayim
ug kupúgan ka na sa kuntra,</i> In the
ring you can't ask for time-out when your
opponent mauls you.

<p><b>tayim-áwut</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] call for time-out. <i>Itayim-áwut
sà kay manginum ta,</i> Call time-out
so we can get a drink. <i>n</i> time-out.

<p><b>tayimkípir</b> <i>n</i> timekeeper at work, in a game.
<i>v</i> [B156] be the timekeeper.

<p><b>táyip</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] typewrite. <i>Taypa inyung
tirmpípar,</i> Type your term papers. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
typed.

<p><b>tayiprayting</b> <i>n</i> typewriting paper.

<p><b>tayipraytir</b> <i>n</i> typewriter.

<p><b>taylan = BÍGÀ<sub>1</sub>.</b>
<pb n=2041>

<p><b>tayming</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> timing, the way s.t. is made to
coincide with s.t. else. <b>2</b> timing in music,
rate of beating. <b>2a</b> tempo. <i>Rumba ang tayming
íni, dì tanggu,</i> This is a rumba beat,
not tango. <b>2b</b> sense of rhythm. <i>Maáyug tayming
nang batáa sa íyang pagkanta,</i> That
boy sings with very good timing. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> well,
opportunely timed. <i>Tayming kaáyu ang ámung
pag-abut sa íla kay nagbinignit sila,</i>
We timed our arrival perfectly because they
were serving <i>binignit.</i> <b>2</b> in time, rhythmical.
<i>Tayming kaáyu ang istíping sa íyang sáyaw
sa ákung kanta,</i> His dance steps are in time
with my song. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2NC3; b2c1] synchronize,
do s.t. so as to make it correspond
with s.t. else. <b>2</b> [A12; b2] happen on, get a
chance to. <i>Nakatayming siyag baylig gwápa,</i>
He happened to dance with a pretty girl.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] take a chance on. <i>Panayming
lag ansir. Siliksiyun tayip bítaw,</i> Take a
chance on your answer. Anyway it's a multiple-choice
exam.

<p><b>taypist</b> <i>n</i> typist. <i>v</i> [B156] be a typist.

<p><b>taytay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mountain range. <b>2</b> bridge. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
b6(1)] make a bridge. <i>Ákung gitaytáyan ug
kawáyan ang ámung labnganan,</i> I made a
bamboo bridge for us to cross on. <b>2</b> [A; a]
start weaving a hat or a mat, weaving the
fundamental portion (the crown in the hat)
from which the rest is continued. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2;
b6] travel along the mountain ridge. <i>Manaytay
ta arun makítà ang luyug luyu sa búkid,</i>
Let's travel along the ridge so we can
see both sides of the mountain. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
bridge. <b>2</b> means by which s.t. is attained.

<p><b>taytul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title. <b>2</b> title, championship. <b>3</b> law
title. <b>&mdash; payit</b> <i>n</i> title fight in boxing. <i>v</i> [A;
c] give a title to. <i>Unsay maáyung itaytul
ning baláka,</i> What would be a good title for
this poem?

<p><b>tayúbung</b> <i>n</i> starch made from cassava. <i>v</i> [a2]
make into starch. <i>Ilain ang dyábang tayubúngun,</i>
Set aside the cassava to be made into
starch.

<p><b>tay-ug</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; a1] <b>1</b> shake s.t. large and tall,
be shaken. <i>Natay-ug (mitay-ug) íyang láwas
sa pag-inubu,</i> Her body shook with coughing.
<i>Tay-úga ang káhuy arun mangataktak
ang búnga,</i> Shake the tree so the fruits will
fall off. <b>2</b> shake, affect the emotions with
intensity. <i>Ang túmang kalísang ang mitayug
kaníya,</i> Great fear shook him. <b>pa- = PAÚYUG.</b>
<i>see</i> <b>ÚYUG.</b>

<p><b>táyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> row. <i>Kining tayúna sa lubi tag-un
arun kapadak-an ang karsáda,</i> This row of
coconut trees will be cut down so the road
can be widened. <b>2</b> length or span of s.t.
<i>Nagkinahanglan pa ta ug usa ka táyun nga</i>
<pb n=2042>
<i>túbu,</i> We still need a length of water pipe. <i>v</i>
[a12] put or arrange several things in rows.
<i>Tayúna pagpamutang ang mga misitíra,</i> Put
the flower pots in rows.

<p><b>tayúpì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] cheat, defraud. <i>Gitayúpì ta
sa matadíru pinaági sa timbangang dílì hustu,</i>
The butcher cheated us with inaccurate
scales. <i>a</i> cheat, defrauder. <i>Ayaw pagsálig níya
kay tayúpì kaáyu nà,</i> Don't trust him because
he is a cheat.

<p><b>tayùtù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1 = TALÙTÙ. 2 = TAGÙTÙ<sub>2</sub>.</b> <i>v</i> <b>= TAGÙTÙ<sub>2</sub>.</b>

<p><b>TB</b> <i>see</i> <b>TÍBI<sub>2</sub>.</b>

<p><b>ti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> letter <i>t.</i> <b>2</b> the seventh note in a musical
scale. <b>&mdash; minur</b> B minor. <b>3 = TIDYÚWIN.</b>

<p><b>tì</b> short for <b>ITÌ</b> (vocative).

<p><b>tiad</b> <i>a</i> with the back arched. <i>v</i> [A2; c6] bend
one's body backwards. <i>Dì ku makatiad kay
musakit ang piang sa bukubuku,</i> I cannot
bend backwards because it will hurt the
sprain in my back.

<p><b>tiágak</b> <i>v</i> [A23] <b>1</b> for chickens to make the
sound of being disturbed. <i>Mitiágak ang sunuy
kay ímung gisámuk,</i> The rooster
squawked because you bothered it. <b>2</b> yell,
esp. when about to be punished. <i>Mitiágak
siya dáyun dihang gihanaan ku siyag latigu,</i>
He shrieked when I got set to whip him. <i>n</i>
the action of squawking.

<p><b>tiamtíam</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a] move one's mouth slightly
in mumbling, chewing, smacking to get
the taste. <i>Dúna siyay gihínuk pagkáun kay
nagtiamtiam siya,</i> She's eating s.t. secretly
because her mouth is moving. <i>Tiamtiáma úsà
ang tubà usà ka mupalit,</i> Taste the coconut
toddy first before you buy it.

<p><b>tiámu</b> <i>short for</i> tíaw mu. <i>see</i> <b>TÍAW,</b> <i>n2.</i>

<p><b>tiaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. goatfish.

<p><b>tíaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] tease, play a joke on. <i>Ayawg
túu kay gitiáwan ka lang níya,</i> Don't believe
him. He's just teasing you. <b>1a</b> for supernatural
beings to cast a spell on s.o. <i>Gimínù
siya kay gitiáwan sa ingkantu;</i> He couldn't
find his way because a spirit cast a spell on
him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> joke, prank. <b>dílì &mdash;</b> no small thing.
<i>Dì tíaw nga búhat,</i> No small job. <i>Dì tíaw
ang ákung kakurat,</i> I was really frightened.
<b>2 &mdash; (ba)y, nga; &mdash; mu (ba)y, nga</b> just imagine!
<i>Tíaw bay limay íyang kabit,</i> Just imagine,
he has five mistresses. <i>Tíaw mu nang
diyut mi mabuku,</i> Imagine, we were almost
exposed. <b>2a &mdash; mu ugud nga, y</b> can you beat
that, [so-and-so] happened despite everything.
<i>Tíaw mu guy nakapasar ug bár,</i> Imagine,
he passed the bar despite everything.
<b>2b &mdash; mu kanà</b> I warned you, now see what
happened. <i>Tíaw mu nà ug mipatúu ka pa,</i>
I told you so. If you had only listened. (->)
<pb n=2043>
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a4] be punished by the soul of a departed
relative for engaging in merry-making
activities too soon after the person's death.
The victim usually behaves odd but only
temporarily. <b>2</b> [A123P] cause to grow gray
hairs early. <i>Makatiaw kunu nang magkanta
sa abúhan samtang naglung-ag,</i> You will get
grey hair before your time if you sing while
standing before the stove and cooking. <b>tiawtíaw</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> be @joking. <b>2</b> @{toy with}
an opponent in a contest.<i> Gitiawtiáwan lang
sa kampiyun ang tsalindyir,</i> The champion
just toyed with the challenger. <b>-l-an</b> <i>n</i> one
who is the usual object of ridicule. <i>Ang bungì
gibúhat lang tiliáwan sa iskuylahan,</i> The
harelip was made the butt of ridicule in
school. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become the object of
ridicule. <b>-an(->)</b>, <b>pala-</b>, <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> fond of
making jokes.

<p><b>tiáyun</b> (from <i>ayun</i>) <i>v</i> [C3; a12] be @married
to each other. <i>Gustu giyud sa ílang mga ginikánan
nga tiayúnun ang ílang isig ka anak,</i>
It was the parents' wish that their children
be married to each other. <b>mag-</b> <i>n</i> @{married
couple}. <i>Way anak ang magtiáyun,</i> The couple
is childless. <b>panag-</b> <i>n</i> @marriage, the state
of being @married. <i>Sa ámung panagtiáyun
wà giyud mi magkaáway,</i> During our marriage
we never once quarrelled.

<p><b>tibà</b> <i>v</i> [A; b8] for liquid contents to @spill
out from a container. <i>Dì makatibà ang tubà
ug butangag sungsung,</i> The palm toddy
won't spill out if s.t. is stuffed in the mouth.

<p><b>tibadtibad</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{talk back} in a grumbling
manner. <i>Dílì maáyu sa usa ka anak
nga magtibadtibad kun kasab-an,</i> It isn't
good for a child to talk back when scolded.
<b>tibadtibaran</b> <i>a</i> given to back talk.

<p><b>tibagnul</b> <i>a</i> for root crops and fruits to have
hard @lumps in the flesh. v [B2; b6] having
hard lumps in the flesh. <i>Sakit ang nakatibagnul
(nakapatibagnul) sa mga búnga sa
tsíkus,</i> Blight has caused the sapodillas to
get @lumpy. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> of a lumpy sort of fruit.

<p><b>tibagsuy</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go out straight without
minding anything or anyone. <i>Mitibagsuy
lang siya, wà ku hulata,</i> She went straight
away without waiting for me.

<p><b>tíbak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. @rot causing decay in portions
of jackfruit (nangkà). v 1 [a4; b4] be affected
with jackfruit rot. <i>Tibákun ang nangkà
ug dì pustun,</i> The fruits of jackfruit will
get affected with rot if you don't wrap
them. 2 [B26; a4b4] for a body to be covered
with @sores. <i>Natíbak ang íluk sa pamutu,</i>
The armpit is full of skin eruptions. <b>-un</b>
<i>a</i> fruits affected with this rot.

<p><b>tíbak<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TÍBIN</sc>.
<pb n=2044>

<p><b>tibaknul</b> = <sc>TIBAGNUL</sc>.

<p><b>tibalas</b> <i>n</i> the Schach @shrike: <b><i>Lanius nasutus</i></b>.

<p><b>tíbas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{take the rest} of s.t., @finish
doing the remaining portion. <i>Akuy mitíbas
ug pamutul sa mga káhuy sa maisan,</i> I cut
the rest of the trees in the cornfield. <i>Kinsay
nagtíbas ug palit sa ímung mga mangga?</i>
Who bought the rest of your mangoes?
<i>Tibása nang kan-un sa ímung plátu,</i> Eat the
rest of the food on your plate. <b>2</b> [B23; b6]
for crops or fruits to be past their season.
<i>Hápit na matíbas (mutíbas) ang mga mangga,</i>
Mango fruits will soon be @{out of season}.
<i>Nagkatibas na ang áni sa mga humay,</i> The
rice harvest season is starting to be over.

<p><b>tibás</b> = <b>TIBALAS</b>.

<p><b>tíbaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @visit, usually to see how
s.t. is. <i>Aku ray mutíbaw sa ákung nangkà
ug nahinug na ba,</i> I'll take a look at the
jackfruit that I kept and see if it's ripe yet.
<i>Tibáwun na sad níya ang íyang tinagúan,</i>
He will visit his mistress again. <b>2</b> inspect a
trap to see if there is a catch. <i>Way kuhà ang
gitíbaw kung lit-ag,</i> The trap I inspected had
no catch.

<p><b>tibáwas</b> (from <i>báwas</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TIBÁS</sc>. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
@finish, bring to completion. <i>Ang hiniluang
indiksiyun mauy nagtibáwas sa nagpinal,</i>
The poisoned injection finished off the dying
man. <b>3</b> go all the way to marriage. <i>Tibawása
(ipatibáwas) na lang sila. Tutal, nag-ípun
na man,</i> Marry them off. Anyway they
are living together. <b>impas &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] @{be
destroyed}, done away with with[**delete one with?] @irrevocable
finality. <i>Nabuak ang katapúsan. Naimpas
tibáwas na ang huygu,</i> The last of them
broke. Now the set is completely gone.

<p><b>tibhang</b> <i>v</i> [A; b7] <b>1</b> @remove a portion of a
whole. <b>1a</b> @{cut off} a piece to make s.t. <i>Ákung
tibhángan ang pára sa bàbà sa sag-ub,</i> I will
@{chip off} a piece of the end of the bamboo
to serve as a mouth. <b>2</b> @lessen, @diminish. <i>Way
makatibhang sa ákung pagbátì nímu,</i> Nothing
can make me love you less. <i>Matibhang
ákung trabáhu kun mutábang ka,</i> My work
will be less if you help me. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{deduction
from}, @lack. <i>Gihátag níya ang swildu ngadtu
sa íyang asáwa nga way tibhang,</i> He handed
his salary intact to his wife. <b>2</b> space left after
s.t. was removed. <i>Ang tibhang sa yútà
nga giagian sa karsáda mga siyin mitrus
kwadrádu,</i> About 100 square meters were
taken off the land for the road. <b>tibhangtibhang</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b] @chop the outer part of a tree
trunk to leave open marks.

<p><b>tibhung</b> = <sc>TIB-UG</sc>.

<p><b>tíbi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @TV. <i>v</i> [A1] @{watch TV}.

<p><b>tíbi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> TB. <i>v</i> [B126; a4] become, @{get TB}.
<pb n=2045>
<i>Makatíbi nang subrang kahágù,</i> Overwork
causes @<sc>TB</sc>. <i>Matíbi ang ubung pinasagdan,</i> A
cough may turn into <sc>TB</sc> if you let it go. <i>Gitíbi
siya,</i> He got <sc>TB</sc>. <b>tibihun, tibíhun</b> <i>n</i> one
with <sc>TB</sc>.

<p><b>tíbi<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> acronym for <i>Tinípung Bansa</i> (<sc>U.S.</sc>).

<p><b>tíbì</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] screw up the lips as if about
to cry. <i>Muhílak nà run siya kay mitíbì na,</i>
She is going to cry because she's screwing
up her lips. <i>n</i> action of screwing up the
lips. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] tease a baby until it
cries. <i>Ang mupatíbì sa bátà mau say mupahílum,</i>
Whoever teases the baby is going to
have to quiet him down.

<p><b>tíbin</b> <i>n</i> twenty pesos or twenty centavos
(slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] secure twenty pesos or
<b>twenty</b> centavos. <b>2</b> [B26] be, become twenty
pesos or twenty centavos. <i>Hápit mutíbin
(matíbin) ang íyang daug,</i> His winnings
come to nearly twenty pesos.

<p><b>tíbis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> pour @water on s.t. to @rinse it
off or sprinkle it. <i>Túa siya sa gardin nagtíbis
sa mga tanum,</i> He is in the garden watering
the plants. <i>Bi, tibísan nátù ug túbig
arun makapanghinaw ka,</i> Here, let's pour
water on your hands so you can wash them.
<b>2</b> pour liquid into a container. <i>Aku lay mutíbis
sa tubà arun dì mayabu,</i> I'll pour the
palm toddy into your glass so that it won't
spill over.

<p><b>tíbíwis[**tibíwis?]</b> = <sc>TABÍLIS</sc>.

<p><b>tibtìb</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{chip off}, cut off small pieces
with repeated strokes. <i>Akuy mutibtib sa
butung arun makainum tag sabaw,</i> I'll chip
off the top of the young coconut so we can
drink the water. <i>Tibtíbi ang kawáyan sa buku
arun mahámis,</i> @{Chop off} the nodes from
the bamboo pole to make it smooth.

<p><b>tibu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible, dark-grey spindle shell, between
one and two inches long, found in
shallow bays.

<p><b>tibù</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a2] do s.t. in large quantity
rather than little at a time, be in a large
quantity. <i>Natibù ang labhunun kay nasakit
ku,</i> My laundry piled up because I was sick.
<i>Kusgan giyud ang makatibù ínig hákut,</i> Whoever
can carry all of this at once must be
strong. <i>Tib-ag báyad ang útang. Ayawg datadatáhi,</i>
Pay the debts all at once, not bit
by bit. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; c1] @group or @join together.
<i>Nagtíbù sa usa ka dápit ang mga bantúgang
mamumulung,</i> All the best orators
grouped in one place. <i>Dílì makatíbù ang
mga kabus ánang kapunungána,</i> The poor
cannot join that organization. <b>tinib-anay,
tinib-ánay</b> <i>a</i> putting everything one has into
it at once. <i>Tinib-anay tung ílang panamílit,</i>
They poured all of their emotions into their
<pb n=2046>
farewell.

<p><b>tibuagsà</b> (from <i>buagsà</i>) <i>v</i> [B246; b3] move
rapidly in various directions, be @dispersed.
<i>Mitibuagsà ang punduk nga giitsáhag libintadur,</i>
The group scattered in all directions
when firecrackers were thrown in their
midst. <i>Nagtibuagsà ang mga anak sa dihang
nangaílu,</i> The children were scattered when
they got orphaned.

<p><b>tibuagya</b> (from <i>buagya</i>) = <sc>TIBUAGSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tibud</b> <i>n</i> small @{clay jar}.

<p><b>tib-ug</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <i>add</i> a liquid to another liquid,
usually to adulterate or dilute. <i>Akuy mitib-ug
ug túbìg sa payn-ápul dyús arun madaghan,</i>
I added water to the pineapple juice to
make it go a long way.

<p><b>tibugsuk</b> (from <i>bugsuk</i>) <i>v</i> [A23; a3b6] @dive
or @{fall headlong}. <i>Mitibugsuk ang tikaruy
ngadtu sa dágat arun pagdágit sa isdà,</i> The
kingfisher dove into the water to snatch
fish. <i>Natibugsuk siya sa íyang pagkah[=ú]g sa
hagdan,</i> She fell headlong down the stairs.

<p><b>tibug-uk</b> (from <i>buuk</i>) <i>a</i> beads of @sweat or
drops of @tears formed s.w. <i>Tibug-uk nga
mga lúhà,</i> Drops of tears. <i>v</i> [B46N; b6] for
beads of sweat to form or tears to well up.
<i>Mitibug-uk (nanibug-uk) ákung singut dihang
gikasab-an kung Tátay,</i> I got beads of
sweat on my forehead when Father scolded
me. <i>Hápit na mutúlù ang nagtibug-uk níyang
lúhà,</i> The tears that welled up in her
eyes are about to come streaming down.

<p><b>tibugul</b> (from <i>bugul</i>) <i>n</i> @lump. <i>Tumur nang
tibugul sa ímung súsu,</i> The lump in your
breast is a tumor. <i>Gilábay ku siyag tibugul
nga yútà,</i> I threw a @clod of earth at him. <i>v</i>
[B] be formed into lumps. <i>Natibugul ang
litsi kay dì maáyung pagkakútaw,</i> The milk
came out all lumpy because it was not well
mixed.

<p><b>tibug-ul</b> = <sc>TIBUGUL</sc>.

<p><b>tibugun</b> (from <i>bugun</i>) <i>n</i> @lump, @cyst. <i>v</i> [B3(1)]
be formed into lumps or cysts. <i>Mitibugun
ang ági sa ákung indiksiyun,</i> My injection
formed a lump. <i>Nagtibugun ang brásu
sa buksiyadur,</i> The muscles of the boxer are
@hard and @firm. <i>Dì makatibugun ang pawdir
milk ug ayúhun pagkútaw,</i> Powdered milk
does not form lumps if you stir it well.

<p><b>tibukul</b> (from <i>bukul</i>) <i>n</i> @lump, a mass of
indefinite or irregular shape. <i>v</i> [B6; c1]
be, @{become lumpy}, form into a lump. <i>Mitibukul
ang harína nga ákung gikas-a paglúnud,</i>
The flour formed lumps because I
poured it into the liquid all at once. <i>Tibukula
ang kan-un nga ímung ihátag sa bátà,</i>
Form the food into a lump before you give
it to the baby.
<pb n=2047>

<p><b>tibuk-ul</b> = <sc>TIBUGUL</sc>.

<p><b>tibul</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> pour liquid into a vessel with
a narrow opening. <i>Daghang úsik kun ikay
mutibul sa lamparilya,</i> You waste so much
when you pour kerosene into the lamp. <b>2</b>
pour a liquid over another liquid. <i>Tibuli ug
gás ang kanal arun mamatay ang wayawaya,</i>
Pour kerosene over the ditch so that the
wrigglers will die. <b>3</b> have @intercourse (humorous).
<i>Magbagulbul ang asáwa ug dílì katiblan
káda gabíi,</i> The wife complains if she
doesn't have bit of sex every night. <b>-anan(<-), 
tiblanan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pouring vent or hole. <b>2</b> s.t.
which needs to have liquids poured into it.
<i>Ayaw sag dagkuti nang sugáa kay tibulánan
(tiblanan) pa nà,</i> Don't light that lamp yet
because it has not been filled with kerosene.

<p><b>tíbul</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] have a hostess sit at one's
table in a night club. <i>Ug kwartáhan siya
magtíbul siya ug duha ka hustis,</i> If he is in
the money he has two entertainers sit at his
table. <i>n</i> <i>in phrases:</i> <b>madyung, pingpung &mdash;[**, before translation ?]</b>
mahjong, @{pingpong table}. <b>multiplikisyun &mdash;[**, do]</b>
@{multiplication table}. <i>see also</i> <sc>LUNG TÍBUL</sc>.

<p><b>tib-ul</b> = <sc>TIBUL</sc>.

<p><b>tibuláag</b> <i>v</i> [AC3] go in various directions.
<i>Mitibuláag ang mga táwu pagkadungug sa
butu,</i> The crowd ran to all directions upon
hearing the gunshot. <i>Nagkatibuláag ang mga
Hudíyu human mabíhag,</i> The Jews were
@scattered after their captivity.

<p><b>tibùtibù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @mumble words unintelligibly.
<i>Musúkul ang anak nga magtibùtibù ug
kasab-an,</i> It is a sign of defiance if your
own child mumbles under his breath when
he is scolded. <i>Nagtibùtibù ang íyang bàbà
sa pangadyì,</i> Her mouth mumbled as she
prayed.

<p><b>tibuuk</b> (from <i>buuk</i>) <b>1</b> @whole, @all of s.t. <i>Gidúngug
sa tibuuk lungsud ang ílang pagtában,</i>
The whole town knew about their
eloping. <i>Simbáhun ku ikaw sa tibuuk kung
kasingkásing,</i> I'll adore you with all my
heart. <b>2</b> whole, @unfragmented. <i>Sinsiyúi ring
tibuuk písu,</i> Change this whole peso bill.
<i>Palita nang tibuuk, ayaw nang píkas,</i> Buy
the whole piece, not just a half. <b>2a</b> @{whole
grain}, not ground. <i>Unsa man nang maísa,
tibuuk u ginaling?</i> What kind of corn is
that, whole grain or ground? <b>3</b> @{solid tires},
not pneumatic. <i>Sa karáang mga trák ang
gúma sa ligid tibuuk,</i> The old trucks had
solid rubber wheels. <i>a</i> resonant in timbre of
voice. <i>Máayu siyang mukanta kay tibuuk
kaáyu siya ug tíngug,</i> He sings well because
he has a very resonant voice. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make
whole, in one piece. <i>Tibuk-a ning dyigsu
pásul,</i> Put the jigsaw puzzle together. <i>Wà</i>
<pb n=2048>
<i>siya katibuk-ig báyad,</i> He hasn't been paid
@{in full}. <b>&mdash; ang hunàhúnà, hukum</b> <i>v</i> [B126]
be resolved, decided. <i>Natibuuk ang ákung
hunàhúnà nga magmadri (Natibuuk sa ákung
hunàhúnà ang pagmadri),</i> I have decided to
become a nun. <b>kinatibuk-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> absolutely
@undivided[**, ?] @whole. <b>2</b> @aggregate, @total @sum.

<p><b>tibwáag</b> = <sc>TIBULÁAG</sc>.

<p><b>tibwagsà</b> = <sc>TIBUAGSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tibway</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @complete s.t. unfinished.
<i>Kinsay mutibway sa gibyáan nímung daruhun?</i>
Who'll @finish plowing the rest of the
field? <b>1a</b> buy the remaining portion of s.t.
<i>Tibwáya ring nahibilin kay ákung baratúhun,</i>
Buy all that's left, and I'll let you have
it cheap. <b>2</b> put to an @end. <i>Kining hilu mauy
mutibway ning[** ?ning ?] kinabúhì,</i> This poison will
@end my life. <b>&mdash; ug</b> @{should have} [done], would
@rather [do] than what is the case now. <i>Tibwayg
mikúyug tu, malingaw untà ku,</i> I
should have gone with them. I would have
had a good time. <i>Tibwayg mamatay kay sa
mag-antus,</i> I'd rather die than suffer the
way I am. <b>tibwanay</b> <i>v</i> [C2] put an end to
each other. <i>Ug wà ulánga magtibwanay ang
duha,</i> If they had not been separated, they
would have killed each other.

<p><b>tidisin</b> = <sc>DISINTI</sc> (slang).

<p><b>tídit</b> = <sc>TÍTIT</sc>.

<p><b>tidiyum, tidíyum</b> <i>n</i> Te Deum, a religious
service of thanksgiving.

<p><b>tidlum</b> (from <i>lalum</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; cP] dive under
water, @sink. <i>Mitidlum ang angkla,</i> The anchor
sank. <i>Mitidlum (mipatidlum) ang mamamánà
sa lawum,</i> The diver dove into the
deep. <i>Itidlum (ipatidlum) ang submarínu
kay dúnay kaáway,</i> @Submerge the submarine
because there's an enemy. <b>2</b> [A; b6] for the
sun to set. <b>3</b> [A] sink into the mind or feelings
(literary). <i>Ang sirmun wà makatidlum
sa íyang pagbátì,</i> The message of the sermon
did not sink into his feelings. <b>hi-/ha-</b>
<i>v</i> [B1256] sink involuntarily. <i>Nahílum si
Lúlu, nahitidlum,</i> Grandfather sank into
silence.

<p><b>tidlung</b> = <sc>TIDLUM</sc>.

<p><b>tidlup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; cP] @{dive sharply}. <i>Mitidlup
pagkalit ang tabánug sa yútà,</i> The kite suddenly
@nose-dived to the ground. <i>Mipatidlup
(mitidlup) ang langgam,</i> The bird dove
sharply downwards. <b>2</b> [A; b6] for the sun
to set.

<p><b>tidyúwin</b> <i>n</i> @T-joint. <i>v</i> [A; bc] join things in a
T-joint.

<p><b>tig-</b> prefix added to most verbs which refer
<b>to</b> an action to form nouns which mean one
who usually does [so-and-so]. <i>Siyay tiglampasu
sa ámù,</i> He is the one who usually
<pb n=2049>
scrubs the floor in our house. <i>Irung tigkaun
sa mga subra,</i> Dog that eats the leftovers.

<p><b>tig(<-)</b> prefix, short form for <i>nakig-</i> and <i>makig-</i>.

<p><b>tig-a</b> <i>a</i> @hard, not soft. <i>Tig-a daw puthaw,</i>
Hard as steel. <i>Tig-a giyug balatían ang dì
malúuy kaníya,</i> You have to be @heartless
not to pity her. <i>v</i> [B24; b6] become hard,
not soft. <i>Mitig-a ang karning gibulad,</i> The
meat which was dried under the sun got
@hardened. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> very @hard. <i>v</i> [A13] be hard.
<i>Nagmatig-ang kasingkásing,</i> A hard heart.
<b>patig-atig-a</b> <i>v</i> [A13] pretend to be unyielding.
<i>Nagpatig-atig-a siya kay magpalúgit,</i>
She pretended to be unyielding to give him
a hard time.

<p><b>tigáan</b> = <sc>TAGÁAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>*TÁGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tig-ab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] make a jerky @{gasp for breath}.
<i>Namatay lag diritsu, wà gánì makatig-ab,</i> He
was not even able to gasp for breath because
he died suddenly. <b>2</b> = <sc>DUG-AB</sc>.

<p><b>tigalbung</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b6] <b>1</b> fall hard, usually
with a sound. <i>Kinsa tung mitigalbung (natigalbung)
sa katri gabíi?</i> Who fell from the
bed last night? <b>2</b> fail in an exam. <i>Unsang
iksamína ímung gikatigalbúngan?</i> What test
did you fail? <i>n</i> sound of s.o. falling with a
thud.

<p><b>tigáman</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @remember, keep s.t. in
one's mind thinking about it. <i>Nagtigáman
kug singsing nga ákung palitun inigswildu,</i>
I had my eye on a ring which I wanted to
buy on payday. <i>Nakatigáman ka kung unsang
adláwa ang kasal ni Bíbi?</i> Can you @recall
the date of Baby's marriage? <i>Tigamni
ang ákung pahimangnu nímu,</i> Always @{bear
in mind} the precautions I gave you. <i>n</i> sign
to help recall s.t. <i>Dúna kuy tigáman nga gikúlit
sa mga káhuy arun dì ta maw[=â][**note accent. P2] sa lasang,</i>
I carved some signs on the trees so we
won't get lost in the jungle.

<p><b>tigas</b> a <b>1</b> @tough, @fearless. <i>Tigas nà siya, dì madág
hulgà,</i> He's tough and cannot be threatened.
<b>2</b> exceptionally good in s.t. <i>Tigas kaáyu
nà siya mubaskitbul,</i> He's very good in
playing basketball. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] <b>1</b> become
tough or a @toughie. <i>Matigas ba ang baklà?</i>
Can a sissy become a @{tough guy}? <b>2</b> be exceptionally
good in s.t. <i>Ang kaáyu níyang
mulantúgì mauy nakatigas (nakapatigas) níyang
abugádu,</i> His skill in debate made him
a very good lawyer. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] act
like a tough, treat like a tough. <i>Ang tigas
magpakatigas,</i> A toughie will act like one.
<b>patigastígas</b> <i>v</i> [A13] pretend to be tough.
<i>Nagpatigastígas uruy ang báyut,</i> There goes
the sissy pretending to be tough.

<p><b>tigasub, tigásub</b> = <sc>TIKASUB</sc>, <sc>TIKÁSUB</sc>.
<pb n=2050>

<p><b>tígaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @disturb, break up the quiet,
serenity, or stillness of. <i>Ang butu mauy mitígaw
sa kamíngaw sa kagabhíun,</i> The explosion
disturbed the stillness of the night.
<i>Ayawg tigáwa ang duut sa isdà,</i> Don't disturb
the school of fish. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.o. considered
responsible for misfortune, trouble. <i>Siyay
tígaw adtung pagkakisas sa plánu,</i> He's the
one responsible that the plan misfired. <b>2</b>
<b>dala sa &mdash;</b> bring misfortune.

<p><b>tígaw<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ÁWUY</sc>.

<p><b>tigayun</b> (from <i>gayun</i>) <i>v</i> [B123(1)6] have
@{good fortune}, become @prosperous. <i>Matigayun
ang táwu nga kugihan,</i> A diligent man
will @prosper. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] put up a
business. <i>Magpatigáyun tag puthaw,</i> We will
put up a scrap iron business. <b>2</b> [A13] manage
to do s.t. on one's own without assistance.
<i>Nagpatigáyun ang bátà ug hímù ug duwáan,</i>
The child is making a toy on his own.
<i>n</i> @business, @commerce. <i>Muuswag ang patigáyun
kun maáyung pagkadala,</i> A business
well-managed prospers. <b>magpapa-</b> <i>n</i> @businessman.
<b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @holdings, @properties.

<p><b>tigbábaw</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BABAW</sc>.

<p><b>tigbak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] kill instantly on the spot.
<i>Maay rag tigbákun nang manúka áning taría,</i>
I hope this cock is killed instantly in this
fight. <b>2</b> [B126] @die (coarse). <i>Maáyu rang
natigbak ang animal,</i> Served that beast right
that he died. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> unlicensed cockfight.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; c] hold an illegal cockfight. <i>Magtigbakay
sa buwangan kun mahiphípan ang
pulis,</i> We'll hold an illegal cockfight if the
police can be bribed. <b>2</b> [A12C; c3] have
illicit sexual intercourse (humorous metaphorical).
<i>Nakatigbakay giyud ang duha kagabíi,</i>
The two managed to have illicit intercourse
last night.

<p><b>tigbas</b> = <sc>TIKBAS</sc>.

<p><b>tigbáyun</b> = <sc>TIGBALÁYUN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BALAY</sc>.

<p><b>*tigbung</b> <b>-in-</b> = <sc>TINIKBUNG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>*TIKBUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tighayà</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HAYÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tighik</b> <i>a</i> very @skinny. <i>v</i> [B; b6] become skinny.
<i>Nagkatighik siya kay gitíbi,</i> He's getting
@emaciated from <sc>TB</sc>.

<p><b>tighud</b> <i>v</i> [B134] for the tide to begin to @ebb.
<i>Sulug kaáyu ang bukána sa subà ug mutighud
ang dágat,</i> The current at the mouth of
the river is strong when the tide ebbs.

<p><b>tighulug</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HÚLUG</sc>.

<p><b>tigi</b> <i>n</i> a small @anchovy of shallow waters,
4&ndash;5&Prime;, darkish brown in color on the dorsal
part of the body and silvery sides: <i><b>Thrissocles
spp.</b></i> and <i><b>Scutengraulis spp.</b></i> <b>tigihun</b> =
<sc>TIGI</sc>.

<p><b>tígì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; a1c3] pit persons against each
other to determine who is the best in s.t.
<pb n=2051>
<i>Ang prinsísay mutígì sa buut mangasáwa
níya,</i> The princess will have the people that
want to marry her vie with each other. <i>Magtígì
(magtigiay) ta kun kinsay taas ug utung,</i>
Let's have a contest to see who can hold his
breath longest. <i>Palaínum sad tung gikatígì
nákug ínum,</i> The one I had a drinking bout
with was also a drunkard. <b>2</b> [A; a12] diagnose
an illness by a marble placed at the
edge of a glass. A yes-no question is put by
the sorcerer, and if the marble falls, the answer
is 'no'. <i>Tigíun nátù ang sakit,</i> We will
divine the sickness. <i>n</i> @contest between two
people or teams. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>v</i> [C] @vie with one
another. <i>n</i> @contest. <b>panag-</b> <i>n</i> a @vying with
one another. <i>Ang kulilísi panagtígì sa mga
birsu,</i> The <i>kulilísi</i> is a contest in making
verses.

<p><b>tigib</b> <i>n</i> @chisel. <i>v</i> [A; a1] @chisel. <i>Tigiba (tigba)
kun magtábas kag sín,</i> Use a chisel when
you cut iron sheets. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. toy @top with
a chisel-shaped nail point.

<p><b>tigidig</b> word used in imitation of the sound
made by a galloping horse. <b>&mdash; bangbáng</b> <i>n</i> a
western movie. <i>Ang salída run sa Uryinti
tigidig bangbáng,</i> A western is playing in the
Oriente.

<p><b>tig-ik</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] make a high-pitched, suppressed
cry. <i>Nakatig-ik ku dihang natumban
ákung kalyu,</i> I let out a short cry when s.o.
stepped on my corn. <i>n</i> a high-pitched suppressed
cry.

<p><b>tígis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] pour liquid into a drinking receptacle.
<i>Nakatígis ka na bag ímung ilimnun?</i>
Have you poured some drinks for
yourself?

<p><b>tigistígis</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] do a little or a part at a
time. <i>Bísag mutigistígis ka lag báyad arun
maimpas sa kadugáyan,</i> Just pay me @{little
by little}. Eventually your debt will be paid
off. <i>Tigistigísa (itigistígis) ninyu paggáwì
ang papil,</i> Use paper @sparingly.

<p><b>tigkul</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] turn deaf ears to an order
or to pleadings. <i>Mitigkul lang si Huwan nga
gipakabù ug túbig,</i> Juan just turned deaf
ears when he was told to fetch water. <b>2</b> [B2]
be, become @stubborn. <i>Mutigkul hinúun
siyag buyagun,</i> He'll become more stubborn
if he'll be reprimanded. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @stubborn, unwilling
to do as told. <b>2</b> turning a deaf ear to
pleadings. <i>Tigkul siya sa nangamátay,</i> He is
the stingiest of the stingy.

<p><b>tigkung</b> <i>a</i> stooped and thin. <i>v</i> [B] become
stooped and thin. <i>Nagkatigkung siya sa íyang
sakit,</i> She's wasting away with her sickness.

<p><b>tig-l-</b> alternant prefix to <i>tig-r-</i>, but of more
limited distribution.
<pb n=2052>

<p><b>tigma</b> = <sc>TINGBA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TINGUB</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>tigman</b> (from <i>tígum</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a12] do several
things together at one time. <i>Mutigman ku
nímu ug báyad sa ákung mga útang sa Lúnis,</i>
I will pay you all my debts on Monday. <i>Tigmanun
ku ug dala ang mga hiraminta arun
wà nay balíkun,</i> I will bring all the tools together
at once so I won't have to go back
for anything.

<p><b>tigmaya</b> = <sc>TAGBAYA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tigmì</b> = <sc>TIGNÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tigmù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] give a riddle. <i>Tag-ána ning
ákung itigmù,</i> Guess the answer of the riddle
I'm going to give. <i>n</i> @riddle.

<p><b>tignì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @filthy. <i>Tignì kaáyu ang ílang kasilyas,</i>
Their toilet is very filthy. <b>2</b> for floors
or the ground to be wet. <b>3</b> @chilly. <i>v</i> [B; b6]
<b>1</b> be, become @filthy. <i>Nagkatignì ang lagúna
kay síging gibalibayan ug sagbut,</i> The meadow
is becoming filthy because they always
throw trash there. <b>2</b> become @damp or @moist.
<i>Mutignì ang tugkaran kun mag-ulan,</i> The
yard will become @wet when it rains. <b>3</b> become @chilly.
<i>Ang hángin sa búkid mauy nakatignì
(nakapatignì) sa gabíi,</i> The mountain
breeze made the night chilly.

<p><b>tigpud</b> a <b>1</b> food that has been cooked crisp
and brittle. <i>Tigpud pagkaprítu ang isdà,</i> The
fish has been fried until it is crisp and brittle.
<b>2</b> for teeth or other things with sharp
points to be broken off. <i>Talhi ring tigpud
nga lápis,</i> Sharpen the pencil because it is
broken. <i>v</i> [B26] <b>1</b> get cooked @brittle. <i>Mutigpud
(matigpud) ug bálik ang sitsarun ug
inítun pag-usab,</i> The pork rinds will get
brittle if you reheat them. <b>2</b> be, become
weak and easily broken, chip off easily. <i>Ang
karmilítus makatigpud (makapatigpud) sa
ngípun,</i> Candy ruins your teeth. <i>Nagkatigpud
ang ákung bag-ang,</i> My molar is chipping off.

<p><b>tig-r-</b> alternant prefix to <i>tig-</i> but added only
to some verbs which take <i>tig-</i>.

<p><b>tigri</b> <i>n</i> @tiger. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @striped.

<p><b>tigritigri</b> = <sc>ISPÁDA DIÚRU</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>ISPÁDA</sc>.

<p><b>tigsik</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b4] grow gray hairs. <i>Mutigsik
ang úban kun matigúwang na ang táwu,</i>
A man gets grey hair when he grows old.
<b>-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @grey-haired. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAGSIKAN</sc>.[**Should select grey or gray, not use both?]

<p><b>tigsù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> game of tag played by two teams in
which the object is to reach the base without
getting tagged. Team A sends out a
player to try to reach the base and team B
sends out a player to catch him. Then team
B sends out a player to reach the base and
team A sends out s.o. to catch him, and so
forth. <i>v</i> [A13] play this game.

<p><b>tigsù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. @bird that looks like a chick
<pb n=2053>
and lives near rivers and wet places so that
it is always wet.

<p><b>tigsuk</b> = <sc>TISUK</sc>.

<p><b>tigsun</b> a <b>1</b> @firm-fleshed. <i>Tigsun nga ságing,</i>
Firm-fleshed bananas. <i>Tigsun ug buktun,</i>
Firm arms. <b>2</b> for soil to be dry and hard. <i>v</i>
[B2; b6] become firm of flesh.

<p><b>tígul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dried young leaf of a nipa or buri
palm filled with tobacco, used as a cigarette.
<b>2</b> anything made of dried buri leaves. <i>Tígul
nga banig,</i> Mat made of buri leaves.

<p><b>tigúlang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>GÚLANG</sc>.

<p><b>tígum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; a2] @assemble, @gather. <i>Nagkatígum
ang mga tabian sa barbiruhan,</i> The
gossipers are assembled in the barber shop.
<i>Tigúma ang mga iskuyla,</i> Have the pupils
assemble. <b>2</b> [A3S; a2] @{save up}. <i>Nakatigum
(nakatígum) kug diyútay sa ákung paglangyaw,</i>
I have saved a little from my work
abroad. <i>Tigúma ang mga basíyu kay átung
ibaligyà,</i> @Save the empty bottles so we can
sell them. <i>n</i> @meeting, @conference. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i>
stored coconut palm toddy that has had
fresh toddy added continually for several
days. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @savings. <b>tigumtígum</b> <i>n</i> @{social
gatherings}. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @meetings.

<p><b>tigway</b> = <sc>TUGWAY</sc>.

<p><b>tihad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] @{stand erect}, and straight.
<i>Dì makatihad ang taas nga táwu kay ubus
ang kisami,</i> A tall fellow cannot @{stand
straight} because the ceiling is low. <i>a</i> vertically
erect, straight. <i>Tihad ang mga sundálu,</i>
Soldiers are erect.

<p><b>tihap</b> <i>n</i> interest payable in kind (usually
farm products) for money borrowed. The
interest is paid continuously until the principal
in cash is repaid. <i>v</i> [A; c] pay interest
in kind for money borrowed. <i>Mutihap kug
tulu ka bákid sa ímung dus syintus písus,</i>
I'll pay three sacks of palay as interest on
your two hundred pesos.

<p><b>tihaw</b> a unnatural smile given to cover up a
feeling of embarrassment. <i>Tihaw kaáyu siya
ug pinahiyuman kay sad-an siya,</i> He is smiling
with discomfiture because he is guilty.
<i>v</i> [B1256; a12] get a funny expression on
the face in embarrassment. <i>Natihaw ang íyang
nawung dihang nahibaw-an nga siya
ang nangawkaw sa sápì,</i> He got a strange
expression on his face when it was discovered
that he was the one who stole the
money.

<p><b>tihaytíhay</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c16] straighten or stretch
one's back. <i>Magtihaytíhay pud ta sa átung
likud human sa dúgayng pagsinúlat,</i> You
should stretch your back after writing for
a long time.

<p><b>tihib</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make a hole in s.t. round by
<pb n=2054>
chopping off part of the surface. <i>Tihibi (tibhi)
ring lubing kuháag sabaw,</i> Punch a hole
in this coconut to get the water.

<p><b>tihik</b> a @cheapskate. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become
@tightfisted. <i>Matihik ka kun síging kwinta sa
gastu,</i> You'll become tightfisted if you keep
counting expenses. <i>Tihikan ku níya kay dì
mutíp,</i> I consider him a cheapskate because
he doesn't give a tip. <b>tihiktíhik</b> <i>a</i> done on a
@niggardly scale. <i>Kasal nga way tihiktíhik,</i> A
wedding with no expenses spared. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
<b>1</b> do s.t. in a niggardly way. <b>2</b> <sc>dílì, walà,
ayaw tihiktíhik</sc> do s.t. @extravagantly, @{without
restraint} (slang). <i>Dì ka man magtihiktíhik
mangasábà,</i> You scold without restraint.
<i>Ayaw siyag tihiktihíka paghaluk,</i> Kiss her
without restraint.

<p><b>tihíras</b> <i>n</i> canvas @cot. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a
cot.

<p><b>tihìtihì</b> <i>n</i> edible meat of the sea urchin (<i>saluwákì</i>).

<p><b>tihul</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] @whistle. <i>Tihula kunu ang túnu
ánang kantáha,</i> Whistle the tune of that
song. <i>Tihuli ang irù arun mudúul,</i> Whistle
at the dog to make it come near. <i>n</i> @whistling.

<p><b>tiid</b> <i>v</i> [A12] @observe, observe in secret. <i>Nakatiid
ka bag katingad-an gabíi?</i> Did you
observe anything strange last night? <b>paN-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @observe, observe in secret.
<i>Ayawg sábà kay dúnay naníid nátù,</i> Be
quiet. S.o. is @watching us. <i>Panid-ig muus-us
bag íyang hilánat,</i> Observe him and see if
his fever goes down. <i>n</i> opinion based on observations.
<i>Sa ímung paníid mudaug kahang
Libiral?</i> As far as you have observed it, is
the Liberal Party going to win? <b>tigpaN-(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> s.o. who makes observations as a profession
or task. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> @spy. <b>mapaniírun</b> <i>a</i>
critically @observant.

<p><b>tiil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @foot. <i>Sakit ang ákung mga tiil,</i> My
@feet hurt. <i>Lima ka tiil ang gitas-un,</i> Five
feet tall. <b>2</b> @leg. <b>3</b> leg of a table or other furniture.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] hit in the leg or foot. <i>Tiila
lang siyag pusil kun muikyas,</i> Shoot him in
the leg if he escapes. <b>2</b> [A; b] put legs on
furniture. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] fight with the legs.
<i>Nakabunù ang ugis kay maáyung maniil,</i>
The white cock won because it fought well
with its legs. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @legwork, as in a cockfight.
<b>2</b> a short length of rope tied to an animal's
foot and in turn attached to the tether rope
to prevent it from kinking. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6]
<b>1</b> go @barefoot. <i>Magtiniil ku kun magsakag
lubi,</i> I climb a coconut tree barefoot. <b>2</b> do
with the hands (humorous). <i>Nagtiniil mig
káun,</i> We ate with our hands. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> place at
the foot: foot of mountain, bed, etc.

<p><b>tíing</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC2; b1] pour liquid out for
<pb n=2055>
drinking. <i>Nagtíing siyag tubà pára nákù,</i> He
poured me a glass of palm toddy. <b>2</b> [C2; c3]
share joy, pleasure with s.o. <i>Nagtíing sila
sa dugus sa gugma,</i> They are sharing the
honey of love. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> container drinks are
poured into.

<p><b>tiíya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> small cup for chocolate. <b>2</b> small
@saucer.

<p><b>tik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound made to get fowl to approach.
<b>2</b> graphic representation of sound produced
by clicking the fingers.

<p><b>*tik<sub>2</sub></b> <b>&mdash; wan, tu</b> in basketball, take one, take
two foul shots. <i>Tik tu basta pawlun ka,</i>
You will have two foul shots if you get a
foul.

<p><b>tika</b> contraction for <i>ta</i> and <i>ikaw</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>tíka</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. to be @sticky. <i>Tíka ra kaáyu ang
almirul,</i> The starch is too sticky. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3;
a12] solidify into s.t. sticky. <i>Dugayng nakatíka
ang gilútung kalamay,</i> It took a long
time for the coconut candy to become
sticky. <b>2</b> [A13] for s.t. to become sticky
from having come in contact with s.t. sticky.
<i>Nagtíka ang íyang buhuk sa pamáda,</i> His
hair is sticky with pomade.

<p><b>tíkà</b> <i>n</i> long, drawn-out coughing (as if one is
about to vomit). <i>Dì na man nà urdinaryung
ubu. Tíkà na man nà,</i> That is no ordinary
cough. That is a churchyard cough. <i>v</i> [A13]
cough in a hard, drawn out manner, as if
vomiting. <b>tikàtíkà</b> <i>v</i> [A] breath[**breathe? P2] with difficulty
due to suffocation or choking.

<p><b>tikab</b> <i>n</i> k.o. full-bodied <i>tamban</i> (@sardine). <b>tikabtikab</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c1] for the mouth to open
and close in rapid succession in speaking,
eating or any other activity. <i>Mutikabtikab
ang bàbà sa halu ug makakità ug manuk,</i>
The mouth of a monitor lizard moves up
and down when he sees a chicken. <i>Mutikabtikab
siya kun dúgay kung muulì,</i> She cusses
me out good when I come home late.

<p><b>tíkad</b> <i>v</i> [AB124; a] cultivate, develop land,
industry, mining. <i>Kamiy mitíkad sa ámung
kaugalíngung yútà,</i> We developed our own
land. <i>Langyaw ang nagtíkad sa átung kamináhan,</i>
Foreigners are developing our mines.
<i>Nagkatikad na ang átung industriya,</i> Our
industry is gradually developing.

<p><b>tikalbù</b> = <sc>TIGALBUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tikalbung</b> = <sc>TIGALBUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tikang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] place a foot on a step, rung,
or any foothold. <i>Mitikang siya sa istríbu arun
musakay sa kabáyù,</i> He @stepped on the
stirrup to get on the horse. <i>Katulu ra níya
<b>tikanga</b> ang hagdanan,</i> He climbed the
stairs in three steps. <i>n</i> act of @stepping. <b>-an(<-),
-anan(<-), -l-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @step, @stirrup, place
one gets a @foothold. <b>-in-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> first mass
<pb n=2056>
in a series of nine masses said at dawn for
nine days before Christmas. <b>2</b> fine paid an
older brother or sister by a younger brother
or sister who marries ahead of him.

<p><b>tikangkang</b> <i>v</i> [B36; c1] lie or lean on one's
back and spread the legs, fall into such a
position. <i>Mitikangkang dáyun ang pampam,</i>
The prostitute immediately raised her legs
and spread them apart. <i>Natikangkang (mitikangkang)
siya dihang ákung gibastruk,</i> He
fell down with his legs in the air when I hit
him.

<p><b>tikarul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> the white-collared @kingfisher: <i><b>Halcyonchloris
sp.</b></i>

<p><b>tikaruy</b> = <sc>TIKARUL</sc>.

<p><b>tikas</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; ab2] raise s.t. which covers
s.t. else into the air. <i>Natikas ang ámung atup
pagbagyu,</i> The roofing was lifted off
the house in the storm. <i>Tikasa ang kurtína,</i>
Raise the curtain.

<p><b>tíkas</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] @cheat, @swindle. <i>Ísug siyang
maníkas (mutíkas) sa sugálan,</i> He has got
the guts to cheat in gambling. <i>Gitíkas níya
ang kwarta sa bangku,</i> He swindled the
bank's money. <i>n</i> @fraud. <i>Ang tíkas nga nahímung
isyu nasyunal,</i> The fraud that made
the national headlines. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. gotten
by swindling. <b>-an(->), -íru</b> <i>n</i> @cheat. <b>-íra</b> = <sc>TIKASIRU</sc>
(female). <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @swindler.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @graft, rampant @fraud.

<p><b>tikasub, tikásub</b> <i>v</i> [A] fall into the water
with a big splash. <i>Mitikásub ang táwung nahúlug
sa pantalan,</i> The man fell from the
wharf with a big splash. <i>n</i> splashing sound
made when s.t. falls into the water.

<p><b>tikaw</b> contraction of <i>ta</i> and <i>ikaw</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>tikawtikaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] move about doing s.t.
in a deserted place. <i>Talagsa ray táwu nga
nagtikawtikaw sa kadalánan,</i> Only a few
people were moving about in the streets.
<i>Unsay ímung gitikawtikáwan ganínang kaadláwun,</i>
What were you doing up and around at dawn?

<p><b>tikay-ang</b> <i>v</i> [B16; c1] fall on the back, overturn
with the belly up. <i>Natikay-ang ku dihang
nabálì[** accent on the i?][**corrected. P2] ang sandigánan sa silya,</i> I fell
on my back when the back of the chair
broke. <i>Tikay-ánga (itikay-ang) ang bisiklíta
arun ilísan tag ligid,</i> Turn the bicycle over
so we can change the tire.

<p><b>tikayhang</b> = <sc>TIKAY-ANG</sc>.

<p><b>tikbà</b> = <sc>TIKWÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tikbas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] slash or hack with a machete
or similar long knife. <i>Naputul dáyun ang
kamunggay nga íyang gitikbas,</i> The tree he
slashed at was cut down. <i>n</i> action of slashing,
hacking with a machete. <b>-ay(->), -in-ay(->)</b>
<i>n</i> @{bolo duel}. <i>v</i> [A23] have a bolo duel.
<pb n=2057>

<p><b>tikbil</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @{stir up} a sensitive feeling.
<i>Kadtung buháta mitikbil sa gitagúang kahiubus,</i>
What you did stirred up the feelings
of humiliation which he had kept hidden.
<i>Ayaw tikbíla ang átung kagahápun,</i> Don't
stir up the past.

<p><b>tikbù</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)6; c] spill over the side of a
vessel. <i>Matikbù ang sabaw,</i> The soup will
spill over. <i>Ákung tikbúan sa bulà ang sirbisa,</i>
I'll knock the foam off the top of the
beer.

<p><b>*tikbung</b> <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> style of swimming where the
feet are kicked. <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> swim kicking
the feet. <b>2</b> for a baby to produce a thudding
sound by kicking its feet in the cradle.

<p><b>tikdul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @rap, @knock s.t. lightly. <i>Kinsay
mitikdul sa ákung úlu,</i> Who rapped me
on the head? <i>Tikdúli lang ang búla ayaw
batíra,</i> @Bunt the ball, don't bat it. <i>n</i> light
@rapping. <b>tikdultikdul</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc1] do s.t. @intermittently
or @{once in a while} or @occasionally.
<i>Mutikdultikdul lang siyag tunghà arun
ingnung nag-iskuyla pa,</i> He goes to school
once in a while so that people will say that
he is still a student. <i>Tikdultikdúlan lang nà
nákug trabáhug makalugar ku,</i> I'll just work
on it off and on, as I get the chance. a done
@{off and on}, little at a time.

<p><b>tíki</b> acronym for <i>Tinípung Kanasúran</i>, United
Nations.

<p><b>tikì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @gecko. <b>matag &mdash;</b> things which resemble
a gecko's eyes: <b>a</b> large pustule filled
with pus similar to <i>talubig</i>, <i>1</i>, but larger. <b>b</b>
round blemishes on tobacco leaves. <b>2</b> baby
in the womb (humorous). <i>Pisti, dúna nay
tikì ang tiyan sa ákung uyab,</i> Damn! My
girl is pregnant (lit. has a gecko in her
womb). <b>tikìtíkì</b> = <sc>TABILI SA DAGAT</sc>.[+]

<p><b>tikig</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] become @stiff. <i>Mitikig (natikig)
ámung líug ug hinangad,</i> We got stiff
necks from looking up. <i>Nagkatikig ang bagung
minatay,</i> The body is getting stiff. <i>a</i>
@stiff. <b>&mdash; ug líug</b> <i>a</i> @haughty. <i>v</i> [B; b6] become
haughty. <i>Ang kalampúsan makatikig (makapatikig)
sa líug,</i> Success makes one haughty.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] act haughty. <i>Ayawg patikig sa
líug,</i> Don't be haughty.

<p><b>tikiltíkil</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b] do s.t. @{little by little} at
intervals. <i>Magtikiltíkil gánì ka niánang trabahúa,
ambut lang anus-a nà mahuman,</i> If
you keep on working like that, a little at a
time, God knows when you'll get done.

<p><b>tíkit</b> <i>n</i> @ticket. <i>v</i> [b4] be issued a ticket for
violating s.t. <i>Tikítan ka,</i> You'll get a ticket.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] @{issue tickets}. <i>Ang kunduktur
mauy maníkit, dì ang draybir,</i> The conductor
issues the ticket, not the driver. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [b4]
hold an affair with admission. <i>Patikítan</i>
<pb n=2058>
<i>nátù ang dráma,</i> Let's charge admission for
the play. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who issues tickets.
<b>-íra</b> <i>n</i> one in charge of the ticket counter.

<p><b>tikitíki</b> <i>n</i> k.o. liquid vitamin preparation.

<p><b>tikiu</b> <i>n</i> acronym for @<sc>TKO</sc>, a @{technical knockout}
in boxing. <i>v</i> [A; a12] beat with a @TKO.
<i>Gitikiu sa tsalindyir ang kampiyun,</i> The
champion was TKO'd by the challenger.

<p><b>tikla</b> <i>n</i> key of piano, organ, or typewriter.
<b>-du</b> = <sc>TIKLA</sc>.

<p><b>tikláub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2SB12S6; c1] turn a bowl,
plate, or s.t. concave with its opening downward.
<i>Siyay nagtiklaub sa dúwang,</i> He turned
the basin over. <i>Miabay mi sa nagtiklaub
nga sakayan,</i> We clung to the overturned
boat.

<p><b>tikláub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2456; c3] step or fall into the
mud with a plop. <i>Mitikláub (natikláub) ang
ákung tiil sa lápuk sa kangitngit,</i> In the
darkness I stepped into the mud puddle
with a plop.

<p><b>tikling</b> <i>n</i> k.o. long-legged @bird, the barred
rail: <i><b>Rallus torquatus</b></i>. <i>a</i> @long-legged and
@lanky. <i>Kasagáran sa mga mudílu mga tikling,</i>
Most models are long-legged and lanky.
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> a dance in which dancers dance between
two bamboo poles banged together in
time to the music (in imitation of the <i>tikling</i>
bird). <b>-un(->)</b> = <sc>TIKLING</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>tiklù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> catch s.t. by encircling
the neck with a band or loop attached to an
end of a pole. <i>Mutiklù siyag ubud,</i> He
catches eels by grasping them by the neck.
<b>2</b> steal s.t. petty (slang). <i>Tiklúun ta nang íyang
manuk karung gabíi,</i> Let's swipe his
chicken tonight. <b>3</b> catch s.o. committing a
petty crime. <i>Maáyu nang pulísa mutiklù ug
mangunguut,</i> That policeman is good in
catching pickpockets. <b>4</b> [A; ab2] kill, esp.
violently (slang). <i>Nakatiklù na siyag duha
ka kuntra,</i> He has killed two enemies. <b>4a</b>
have a girl for sexual purposes for the first
time. <i>Minyù ang únang mitiklù ánang bayhána,</i>
A married man had sexual intercourse
with that woman for the first time.

<p><b>tiklù<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TAKILPÙ</sc>.

<p><b>tikluhud, tiklúhud</b> (from <i>luhud</i>) <i>v</i> [B26] go
down on one's knee(s). <i>Mutikluhud siya sa
usa ka túhud,</i> He will @genuflect. <i>Natikluhud
siya sa dihang ákung gipigtíngan sa tuwaytúway,</i>
He fell on his knees when I switched
him on the knees.

<p><b>tiklup</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] close by folding. <i>Kinsay
nagtiklup sa páyung nga basà pa?</i> Who folded
the umbrella while it was wet? <i>Itiklup
(tiklúpa) ang tanang libru,</i> Close all your
books. <b>tikluptiklup</b> <i>n</i> @collapsible. <i>Tikluptiklup
nga silya,</i> Folding chairs.
<pb n=2059>

<p><b>tikmìtikmì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] eat slowly, pecking at
one's food. <i>Ngánung nagtikmìtikmì ka man?
Wà ka ba gutma?</i> Why are you pecking at
your food? Are you not hungry?

<p><b>tiknik, tiknika</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @technique. <b>2</b> cunning
means of attaining s.t. <i>Maáyu siyag tiknik
kay nagpabúy arun makapaniktik,</i> He was
pretty smart, becoming a houseboy in order
to spy on them.

<p><b>tiknikal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @technical. <i>Hinábang tiknikal ang
itanyag sa yúin,</i> The <sc>UN</sc> offers technical
aid. <b>2</b> = <sc>TIKNIKAL NAK-ÁWUT</sc>. <b>3</b> = <sc>TIKNIKAL
PAWUL</sc>. <b>&mdash; nak-áwut</b> <i>n</i> @{technical knockout} [** hyphen removed]
in boxing, where one of the boxers is
still conscious but not able to continue
fighting. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; pawul</b> @{technical foul} in basketball,
committed against a player who does
not have the ball. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab3] beat by a <sc>T.K.O.[**in an earlier page, this was TKO. P2]</sc>
<b>2</b> [A; a12] slap a technical foul on.

<p><b>tikniku</b> <i>n</i> @technician.

<p><b>tiknikúlur</b> <i>n</i> @technicolor movie. <i>a</i> brightly
colored like technicolor. <i>Tiknikúlur ang íyang
púlu,</i> His shirt is brightly colored. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[c16] make a movie with technicolor. <b>2</b>
[A; c1] do s.t. in colors.

<p><b>tiknisyan</b> <i>n</i> @technician. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a
technician.

<p><b>tiknuludyi</b> <i>n</i> school course in technology.

<p><b>tiksas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fierce @gamecock (said to be
bred from stock imported from Texas). <b>2</b>
girl who is sexually aggressive. <i>Tiksas nang
bayhána kay mugukud giyug láki,</i> That girl
is aggressive because she runs after men.

<p><b>tikstu</b> <i>n</i> text of the Bible.

<p><b>tiktak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tick-tock sound of a clock and the
like. <b>2</b> two pieces of wood clapped against
each other to produce a <i>tik tak</i> sound, used
as percussion in a combo.

<p><b>tiktik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b4(1)] @{spy on}, discover by
snooping. <i>Akuy maniktik (mutiktik) sa kalihúkan
sa átung kuntra,</i> I'll spy on our enemies'
activities. <i>Natiktikan siyang may laláki,</i>
She was discovered with a paramour. <i>n</i>
@detective. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @{detective work}.

<p><b>tiktik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> portion of the corn grain that
comes out powdery when the corn is ground
into grits. <b>1a</b> by extension, the similar by-*product
of rice. <b>2</b> dirt under the foreskin of
the penis. <i>v</i> [B12] become dirt under the
foreskin. <i>Makatiktik nang way kalígù,</i> If
you don't bathe you get dirt under your
foreskin. <b>&mdash; ug</b> it's impossible that [so-and-so]
could happen (coarse). <i>Tiktik pug magbag-u siya,</i>
I doubt that he'll ever reform.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having dirt under the foreskin of
the penis. <b>2</b> uncircumcised.

<p><b>tiktik<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] tap lightly on a hard surface,
producing a sound of tick-tick. <i>Tiktíka 
<pb n=2060>
(itiktik) ang linung-ag nga itlug sa lamisa,</i>
Tap the hard-boiled egg gently on the table.
<b>2</b> [AN; b6(1)] chip off rust. <i>Tayaun na gánì
ang barku tiktikan dáyun sa mga tripulanti,</i>
When the sides of the ship become
rusty, the crewmen chip off the rust. <b>paN-*an
sa bakì</b> <i>n</i> out-of-the-way, hardly accessible
place (place where the frogs go tick-tick).
<i>Túa ku magmaistra sa paniktikag bakì,</i>
I'm teaching in the backwoods.

<p><b>tiktik<sub>4</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> call for chickens to come near in
feeding them. <b>2</b> call of the mother hen for
her chicks. <i>v</i> [c1] call newly hatched or
small chicks.

<p><b>tikúb</b> = <sc>TIKULUB</sc>.

<p><b>tikubù, tikúbù</b> (from <i>kubù</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; c]
bend over as if to pick s.t. up. <i>Mitikubù siya
pagpunit ug batu,</i> He stooped down to
pick up a stone. <i>Itikubù ímung láwas inigsumbag
níya,</i> Bend low when he swings at
you. <b>2</b> [B2S; b6] be, become bent. <i>Nagtikubù
ang táwu sa katigúlang,</i> The man is
bent with age.

<p><b>tikud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @heel of the foot. <b>2</b> @heel of shoe.
<i>Pagtaas ug tikud,</i> Wear high-heels. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
b] put heels on shoes. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] hit s.o.
on the heel.

<p><b>tikud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] push back the lower part of
the vaginal opening in delivery to prevent
laceration.

<p><b>tikug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @selfish, @ungiving and @unsharing. <i>Tikug
kaáyu nà. Ayaw na lag pangáyù bísag
unsa,</i> He is very selfish. Don't waste time
asking anything from him. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be
selfish.

<p><b>tikug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @stoop-shouldered. <i>Tikug na siya kay
tigúwang na,</i> He is stoop-shouldered because
he's old. <i>v</i> [B] be stoop-shouldered.

<p><b>tíkug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. thin-bladed @grass of swamps
growing to <b>3</b> m.,[**unnecessary .? P2,P3 fixed] used for mats and hats:
<i><b>Fimbristylis globulosa</b></i>. <b>2</b> sleeping mat made
from the <i>tíkug</i> plant.

<p><b>tikúgas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @rail found in rice fields or
marshy areas, 5&ndash;6&Prime; high, and used for food,
the white-breasted @swamphen: <i><b>Amaurornis
phoenicurus</b></i>.

<p><b>tikugkug</b> a for the body to be very bent. <i>Tikugkug
ka na kaáyu tungud sa tísis,</i> You
are very haggard and bent because of your
tuberculosis. v [B6] for the body to become
bent. <i>Nagtikugkug na siya sa kaníwang,</i>
She has grown bent from extreme
thinness. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> having a bent body.

<p><b>tikúkà</b> <i>v</i> [A] @retch in choking or prior to
vomiting. <i>Nagtikúkà siya dihang nabut-ukan
sa túbig,</i> He coughed hard rapidly after he
choked on the water. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256]
@retch.
<pb n=2061>

<p><b>tikùkù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @{curl up} tight, be bent
over. <i>Nagtikùkù siya paghigdà,</i> He lay down
curled up. <b>2</b> [B; b6] be curled up.

<p><b>tikulub, tikúlub</b> (from <i>kulub</i>) <i>v</i> [A3P; c1]
turn over and lie on one's belly; @overturn.
<i>Makatikulub na ang bátà nga upat ka búlan,</i>
A four-month-old baby can turn over and
lie on his belly. <i>Tikulba (itikulub) ang mga
kún,</i> Turn the pots face downward.

<p><b>tik-um</b> = <sc>TAK-UM</sc>.

<p><b>tikung</b> = <sc>BUTÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>tikungkung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] curl up the legs. <i>Nagtikungkung
siyang natúg [**not readable][**first part of word?]ugnaw,[**P2 guesses 'sa katugnaw' or 'sa kabugnaw']</i> It
was so cold that he slept with [**his?] legs curled
up. <i>Tikungkúnga (itikungkung[**P2 guesses there should be ) here] ímung tiil
arun masúd ka sa kaban,</i> Curl up your legs
so you'll fit in the trunk.

<p><b>tikup</b> <i>n</i> door or window @shutter. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)]
close an opening in a room or an enclosed
area. <i>Ákung gitikupan ang bintánà ug banig,</i>
I covered the window with a mat. <b>2</b> [c1]
make into a shutter to cover an opening.

<p><b>tíkup</b> <i>a</i> closed tight, without holes or spaces
in between. <i>Tíkup pagkalála ning baníga,</i>
This mat was tightly woven. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1]
make s.t. @tight. <i>Kadaug kang mutíkup ug
siklat ánà,</i> Are you strong enough to weave
the bamboo slats tight? <b>2</b> [A; a1] close up
the opening of a hollow area or a hole in s.t.
that wraps around s.t. else. <i>Akuy mutíkup[**up? -not sure][**corrected P2]
sa púyù,</i> I'll sew up the pouch. <i>Tikupa [**na?-not sure][**P2 guesses sà.]
ang kural líbut sa balay,</i> Make the ends of
the fence around the house meet.

<p><b>tik-up</b> <i>v</i> [AB46; b2c1] <b>1</b> cover over an opening[**not sure]
with s.t. that moves over it and fits it.
<i>Gidalì níyag tik-up ang bintánà,</i> She @shut
the windows at once. <i>Mutik-up ang kurtína
human sa káda isína,</i> The curtain will @close
after each scene. <b>2</b> @{close up}, be folded,
cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ganíha ra nà siyang tábì
wà pa giyud mutik-up ang bàbà,</i> She has
been chattering for quite some time now.[**full stop?][**corrected. P2]
Her mouth never seems to shut. <i>Nagtik-up
pa ang biyúus,</i> The bud is still unopened. <i>Dì
siya makatik-up sa páyung kay gáhì,</i> She
can't fold the umbrella because it is stuck.
<b>3</b> [A2] for the sun to set. <i>Mingitngit ang
kalibútan dihang nakatik-up na ang adlaw,</i>
The earth became dark after the sun had set.

<p><b>tikus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] strap s.t. to the waist. <i>Nagtikus
ug sád ang mananggíti,</i> The toddy gatherer
straps a sickle to his waist. <i>Itikus ang
bukag inigpangáni nímu,</i> Strap the basket
to your waist when you harvest rice.

<p><b>tikus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @triggerfish with a protruding
mouth and no dorsal spine. <b>nawung ug
&mdash;</b> having a snout that protrudes.

<p><b>tikuskus</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] @{curl up} tightly, draw into 
<pb n=2062>
itself. <i>Nagtikuskus siya paghigdà,</i> She lay
curled up in a tight ball. <i>Ínit mauy nakatikuskus
(nakapatikuskus) sa dáhung tagak,</i>
The heat made the fallen leaves curl up.

<p><b>tikutkut</b> = <sc>TIKUSKUS</sc>.

<p><b>tíkuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b3(1)] for s.t. baked to fall,
settle and harden while baking. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{fallen
cake}. <b>2</b> dough left over, not enough to
make a whole cake, but at least enough to
form into s.t. <b>2a</b> the youngest child in a
family, still comparatively small in size (humorous&mdash;from
the notion that <i>tíkuy</i> is a
cake, not full-sized, made from the leftovers).

<p><b>tíkuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @filch, @swipe s.t. usually of
small value. <i>Kinsay nagtíkuy sa ákung mansánas
diri sa lamísa?</i> Who swiped my apple
from the table?

<p><b>tikwà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] for a liquid to @spill over. <i>Hináyag
dala ang tásà kay mutikwà ang kapi,</i>
Carry the cup carefully so the coffee does
not spill. <i>Ayawg tikwáa inigkáwus nímu,</i>
Don't spill the water when you fetch it.

<p><b>tikwang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @{tip over} to the side.<i> Dakung
balud mitikwang sa sakayan,</i> A big
wave tipped the boat over to its side. <i>Tikwánga
ang barsahan arun mayabu ang sulud,</i>
Tip the sled over to get the load off.

<p><b>tikwì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound made by a hawk. <b>2</b> name
given to hawks or buzzards which sound
tikwì: the <i>ananangkil</i> and the <i>banug</i>. <i>v</i> [A;
b6] <b>1</b> produce such a sound. <i>Mutikwì ang
banug inigkakitag madágit,</i> The hawk goes
<i>tikwì</i> when he spies a prey. <b>2</b> fondle a baby
by imitating a hawk's sound raising the
hand and letting it fall in some part of the
body to tickle it in imitation of a preying
hawk.[+]

<p><b>tikwì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B] get stiff in death (slang). <i>Nagtikwì
na ang táwung naghíkug sa dihang
hindiskubrihan,</i> The man who committed
suicide was already stiff when they found
him.

<p><b>tikyáub</b> = <sc>TIKLÁUB<sub>1 2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tikyup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456] close gently. <i>Mutikyup
ang hibìhibì kun makahilan,</i> The leaves of
the touch-me-not close when you touch it.
<b>2</b> [B2456; b(1)] for darkness to close in.
<i>Mitikyup ang kagabhíun binyáan ang láing
adlaw,</i> Night came leaving behind another
day. <b>2a</b> [AB; b5] for lights to @dim, cause
them to do so. <i>Tikyúpi (tikyúpa) ang sugà
kun matúlug ka na,</i> Turn the lamp down
when you go to sleep. <b>3</b> [A; c1] fold s.t.
flat over haphazardly once or twice. <i>Tikyúpa
(itikyup) lang ang banig arun dì kan-un
ang humay sa manuk,</i> Fold the mat so that
the chicken won't get at the rice on it.
<pb n=2063>

<p><b>tíla</b> <i>n</i> @cloth, @textile. <b>&mdash; mitalika</b> @{wire screen}
of fine mesh. <i>v</i> [b6] screen s.t. with @{screening
wire}.

<p><b>tílà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] lick s.t. (normally not the
lips). <i>Hápit mutílà sa ímung tiil kanang nanguyab
nímu,</i> Your suitor nearly licks your
foot. <i>Gitiláan sa irù ang íyang núka,</i> The
dog licked his sores. <b>2</b> [a3] get s.t. out of
s.o. or s.t. <i>Daghan kag amígu kun dúna pa
silay matílà nímu,</i> You'll have lots of friends
if there is s.t. they can get out of you. <b>3</b> @obtain,
get s.t. out of s.t. <i>Wà tay matílà dinhi?</i>
Isn't there anything to get out of this place?
<b>4</b> <b>&mdash; ug háp</b> <i>v</i> [b] for a certain quantity to
be consumed entirely. <i>Gitiláag háp ang ákung
swildu tungud sa daghang bayranan,</i>
The bills completely ate up my salary.

<p><b>tílab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] slice off the flesh of fish close
to the bone, usually lengthwise. <i>Magtílab
kug ipaun,</i> I'll slice some fish off for bait.
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> fish sliced thin.

<p><b>tilabhù</b> (from <i>buhù</i>) <i>v</i> [B126; c] for the foot
to slip into a hole, deep mud or the like.
<i>Natilabhù ku sa gabuk námung sáwug,</i> The
floor gave way where I stepped on it. (Lit. I
stepped through the rotten floor.) <i>Itilabhù
ímung tiil sa lápuk kun unsa kaláwum,</i> Stick
your foot into the mud to see how deep it
is.

<p><b>tilad</b> <i>n</i> mixture of betel nut, bettle-pepper
leaves, and lime for chewing. <i>v</i> [AN; a]
chew betel. <b>tilaran</b> <i>n</i> container for the betel
chewing equipment.

<p><b>tiladtilad</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dark-brown @millipede about
1&ndash;1/4&Prime; long which coils up when touched.

<p><b>til-ag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] thoroughly clean rice of chaff,
bran, unhusked grains, etc. <i>Til-ági ang bugas
únà lung-ága,</i> Clean the rice before you
cook it.

<p><b>tilagak</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] drip in long drops. <i>Nagtilagak
ang íyang láway,</i> His saliva is @drooling
from his mouth. <i>Gitilagakan ang sawug sa
dugus,</i> Honey dripped on the floor.

<p><b>tilambù</b> <i>n</i> young coconut fruit at a stage
where it is full-sized but the meat has not
developed, and only the soft shell and water
are found within the husk.

<p><b>tílang</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a3] be @pierced with a sharp,
pointed object. <i>Lansang ang nakatílang sa íyang
tiil,</i> It was a nail that pierced his feet.
<i>Natílang ang íyang páa pag-ikid níyas kural,</i>
Her thigh got @spiked when she jumped over
the fence.

<p><b>tilangù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{sea cucumber}.

<p><b>tilap, tílap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @lick. <i>Makahílu nà bísag
makatilap ka lang,</i> That's poisonous even if
you only lick it. <i>Tilapi ímung wait,</i> Lick
your lips. <b>2</b> @lap at, @cover (literary). <i>Gitilapan 
<pb n=2064>
ang bungtud sa sílaw,</i> The sun's rays
are touching the hill now. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6]
@{lick the lips} in anticipation. <i>Nagpanilap siyang
nagtan-aw nákù,</i> He was licking his
lips looking at me.

<p><b>tilapya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fresh-water @fish with a dark
color, 6&ndash;8" in length, commercially raised
in ponds: <i><b>Tilapia mossambica</b></i>. <b>2</b> @prostitute
(slang). <b>&mdash; sa mamala</b> = <sc>TILAPYA</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>til-as</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @worm having hairs that cause a
severe itch, commonly found in monkey-*pod
(<i>akasya</i>) trees. <i>v</i> [b4] be stung by such
a worm.

<p><b>tilaub</b> <i>n</i> boiled young corn on the cob. <i>v</i> [A;
a2] boil young corn. <i>Sak tu[**Saktu?] tilaubun ning
maísa,</i> These ears of corn are just right to
boil. <b>-un</b> <i>n</i> young ears of corn ready to boil.

<p><b>tiláuk</b> <i>n</i> region of the upper back of the
mouth in the vicinity of the uvula. <i>Maáyung
pagkatáup ang tagà sa tiláuk sa isdà,</i> The
hook was well lodged in the fish's @throat.
<b>-an</b> <i>n</i> @esophagus, @gullet.

<p><b>tilaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @taste. <i>Tilawi ang sabaw kun
parat ba,</i> Taste the soup to see if it's salty.
<b>2</b> @try, @experience. <i>Mutilaw kug sakayg dyít,</i>
I'd like to experience riding a jet. <b>3</b> [A12; b2]
get a beating, scolding, etc. <i>Makatilaw
ka giyug muusab ka,</i> You'll get it if you do
it again.

<p><b>tilhung</b> = <sc>TALHUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tílib</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] take a thin @slice off of s.t.
<i>Tilíbi pag ákung kalyu kay bagà pa,</i> Slice
some more off of my corn because it's still
thick. <i>Tilíban ug dakù ang bàbà sa sag-ub arun
sayun pagtíing,</i> Slice a fairly good-sized
piece off the bamboo toddy container so
that it will be easy to pour water out of it.

<p><b>tilibisyun</b> <i>n</i> @television.

<p><b>tiligráma</b> <i>n</i> @telegram. <i>v</i> [A; c] send a telegram.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> line for telegraph transmission.
<i>Nabugtù ang tiligrama maung dílì ka
na makatiligráma,</i> The @{telegraph wire} is cut,
so you can't send a telegram. <b>2</b> @{telegraph
post}. <i>Kabáyù nga gihukut sa tiligrama,</i> Horse
that was tethered to the telegraph post.

<p><b>*tiligrapiku</b> <b>híru &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{telegraphic money order}.

<p><b>tiligrapista</b> <i>n</i> @{telegraph operator}.

<p><b>tiligrapu</b> <i>n</i> @telegraph.

<p><b>tilíis</b> <i>a</i> shrill, high-pitched voice. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be
shrill, high-pitched. <i>Mitilíis ang singgit sa gilúgus,</i>
The girl let out a shrill scream as she
was raped. <i>Natilíis ang íyang tíngug tungud
sa dipiktu sa tutunlan,</i> Her voice became
shrill due to some throat defect.

<p><b>tílik</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] spin coins for gambling. <i>Pusta
úsà parabir nákù tilíkun ang usa ka dakù,</i>
Put your bet first before I twirl the penny.
<pb n=2065>
<b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> a betting game twirling a coin, usually
<b>the</b> big centavo piece, and the bettor chooses
heads or tails. <i>v</i> [A] play a game of <i>patílik</i>.

<p><b>tilim</b> = <sc>LUNAS</sc>.

<p><b>tilimad-un</b> (from <i>balà<sub>1</sub></i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sign which portends
s.t. (not necessarily sent or known to
an individual). <i>Dautang tilimad-un ang kumíta,</i>
A comet is a bad @omen. <b>2</b> @indication,
@symptom. <i>Musumpà sa mga tilimad-un sa
kasagárang sip-un,</i> Stops the symptom of
the ordinary cold. <i>v</i> [A13] signify, show as
a sign or omen of. <i>Ang lapad nga agtang
nagtilimad-un sa pagkautukan,</i> A wide forehead
signifies high intelligence.

<p><b>tilingtiling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @ring with the sound of
tiny bells or the telephone. <i>Tilingtilinga ang
kampanilya,</i> Ring the bell. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ringing
sound. <b>2</b> tiny @bell.

<p><b>tílip</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental similar to the <i>kilála</i>.

<p><b>tilipunu</b> <i>n</i> @telephone. <i>v</i> [A; b] @phone. <i>Tilipunuhi
ku,</i> @Call me up. <b>tilipunista</b> <i>n</i> @{telephone
operator}. <i>v</i> [B156] be a telephone operator.

<p><b>til-is<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TILÍIS</sc>.

<p><b>til-is<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] for liquids, usually urine, to
stream out with force. <i>Kinsay mitil-is (nanil-is)
sa ákung tanum?</i> Who urinated on
my plants? <i>n</i> @urine.

<p><b>tiliskupyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @telescope, @binoculars. <b>2</b> @eyeglasses.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2b] use, view through a
telescope, binoculars. <b>2</b> [A13] drink from
an upraised container (from the notion that
the face is in the same position as when
peering into a telescope&mdash;humorous). <i>Sígi
nang pangáun ang mga bisíta. Nagtiliskupyu
na gánì ang uban,</i> The people are eating in
full swing now. Some have started making
like a telescope with their bottles.

<p><b>tilitayip</b> <i>n</i> @teletype machine.

<p><b>tilitul</b> = <sc>TULITUL</sc>.

<p><b>tiltil<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @rap, @tap lightly. <i>Tiltíli, ayawg
paknga ang íhi,</i> Tap it gently. Don't
strike the axle hard. <b>1a</b> [A; b] chip off s.t.
small from s.t. hard by tapping on it. <i>Tiltíli
ang simintung sapáwag pinising,</i> Roughen
the concrete that we will put the finish on.
<b>2</b> [A23; b(1)] make slightly biting or insulting
remarks or allusions. <i>Ug mapikal siya
mutiltil pud,</i> He makes slight digs when he's
irked.

<p><b>tiltil<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)4N; b6] @sink straight to the
bottom. <i>Nagkatiltil ang sakayan,</i> The boat
was sinking. <i>Nakatiltil na siya pag-itsa sa salbabída,</i>
He had already sunk when the lifesaver
was thrown to him.

<p><b>tílù</b> = <sc>TÍLUK</sc>.

<p><b>tílub</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become @deaf (said in
scolding or in a mild curse). <i>Nagsinggit na
man gánì ku unyà walà gihápun ka kadungug. 
<pb n=2066>
Unsa man? Natílub ka?</i> I shouted at
you, but you didn't hear me. What is the
matter with you anyway? You deaf? <b>patilubtilub</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b(1)] pretend to be deaf, @ignore.
<i>Gipatilubtiluban ku níya sa ákung gikinahanglan,</i>
He turned deaf ears to my
needs.

<p><b>til-ug</b> <i>n</i> food prepared esp. for s.o. recuperating
from s.t. <i>v</i> [A; ac] feed health food to
s.o. <i>Ug nahadagat pa, dì ikatil-ug,</i> Terribly
homely. (Lit. If it were a fish, it could not
be used to feed a person recuperating from
an illness.) <i>Maáyu itil-ug ang mayamáya,</i>
Red snapper is good for s.o. recuperating
from an illness. <b>&mdash; sa hilánat</b> <i>n</i> boil that
comes out after one is cured of fever. <i>v</i> [b4]
have a boil as an after-effect of fever. <i>Gitil-úgan
ang ákung hilánat,</i> I had a boil as
an after-effect of my fever. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
food good for convalescents.

<p><b>tíluk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @remove, @consume to the last
bit. <i>Ang iring mauy nagtíluk sa salin,</i> The
cat got all of the leftovers. <i>Tilúkag punit
ang mga sagbut,</i> Pick up all of the refuse.

<p><b>tilun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> curtain on stage. <b>2</b> @{movie screen}.
<b>abri &mdash;</b> in stage presentation, expression
meaning '@{curtains up}'. <b>búka &mdash;</b> the main curtain
that covers the whole stage. <b>sira &mdash;</b> in
stage presentations, expression meaning
'@{curtains down}'. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] make into a stage
curtain. <b>2</b> [c] put a stage curtain. <i>Hábul lay
átung itilun sa dúlà,</i> We'll just use blanket
as a curtain for the play. <b>3</b> [A3; b6] hang
like a curtain (literary). <i>Nagtilun ang lasangnung
kasagbutan,</i> The jungle vines hung
like curtains. <b>-iru(<-)</b> <i>n</i> person in charge of
opening or closing the curtain.

<p><b>tiluring</b> <i>n</i> @{tailor shop}. <i>v</i> [A13] run a @{tailoring
shop}. <i>May hílig ka sa pagpanahì ug karsúnis.
Maáyu pag magtiluring ka,</i> You have
an interest in making trousers, so you will
do well running a tailoring shop.

<p><b>tilus</b> <i>n</i> a @spoon made out of a coconut shell.
<i>v</i> [A; a2] make, use a coconut-shell spoon.

<p><b>tím<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @team. <i>Usa ka tím sa písi ang nagguwardiya
níya,</i> A <sc>P.C.</sc> team is guarding him. <i>v</i> [B1256C2;
c3] form, be a member of a team.

<p><b>tím<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @theme, a short composition required
in school. <i>v</i> [A1] write a theme.

<p><b>tima</b> <i>n</i> a makeshift bit for a horse, made
from a length of tether rope, usually in the
form of a clove hitch, passed over the lower
jaw. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put such a bit on a horse.

<p><b>tíma<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @theme, @subject. <i>Kasína mauy tíma sa
sugilánun,</i> Envy is the theme of the story. <i>v</i>
[c6] use as a theme.

<p><b>tíma<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @plan, @intend to. <i>Nagtíma
ming magpiknik ugmà,</i> We plan to have a
<pb n=2067>
picnic tomorrow. <i>Mau kini ang gitimáhan
níla,</i> This is what they plan to do.

<p><b>tíma<sub>3</sub></b> be @done doing s.t., for s.t. to be @finished.
<i>Tíma ka nas ímung humwurk,</i> Are you
through with your homework? <i>v</i> [AB126;
a12] @finish s.t.; be @through with s.t. <i>Aku
nay mitíma sa íyang trabáhu,</i> I finished his
work. <i>Matíma na gánì ang trabáhu,</i> When
the work is done.

<p><b>timáan</b> <i>v</i> [A3S; b(1)] <b>1</b> @remember, @{take note}.
<i>Maáyu siyang mutimáan ug ngálan,</i> He's
good in remembering names. <i>Nakatimaan
ka ba sa átung giagían niadtu?</i> Do you remember
the road we took before? <i>Timan-i
unsáun pagbúhat íni,</i> Take note how this is
done. <b>2</b> keep, @{bear in mind}. <i>Magtimáan ka
sa íyang panambágun,</i> Keep his advice in
your mind. <i>Timan-i nga sinagup ka lang,</i>
Bear in mind that you are just a foster
child. <b>3</b> [A; c] @mark, @indicate. <i>Way kurus
nga nagtimáan sa íyang lubung,</i> No cross
marks his grave. <b>4</b> [A13] @mean, be an @indication
of. <i>Ang pagpasákit nagtimáan sa gugma,</i>
Sacrifice is an indication of love. <b>5</b> [A;
b] affix a signature or thumbmark. <i>Ubligádu
ka pagtúman kun mutimáan kag kuntrátu,</i>
When you @sign a contract, you are obliged
to abide by it. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sign, @mark. <b>2</b> @indication.
<b>3</b> @signature or @thumbmark. <b>(->) &mdash; ug
buut</b> <i>v</i> [A12] <b>1</b> regain consciousness. <i>Nagkatimaan
nag buut ang nautas,</i> The person
who fainted has regained consciousness. <b>2</b>
reach the stage in life where one is aware.
<i>Ílu na kung dáan pagkatimaan nákug buut,</i>
From the time of my earliest consciousness
I have been an orphan. <b>timan-anay</b> <i>v</i> [C2]
for two or more parties to sign papers agreeing
to s.t. <i>Nagtiman-anay sila sa kasabútan,</i>
They signed the agreement.[+]

<p><b>timailhan</b> <i>n</i> @sign, @symbol or @mark to indicate
s.t. <i>v</i> [A13] @indicate, be a sign of. <i>Ang kadautan
sa panahun nagtimailhan sa umaábut
nga bagyu,</i> The bad weather is a sign of
an approaching storm. <i>n</i> @birthmark.

<p><b>tim-an</b> (from tíma) <i>v</i> [B126] for rumors,
gossip to die out. <i>Natim-an ang huhungíhung
paglutaw sa tinúud,</i> The rumors stopped
when the truth came out.

<p><b>timang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6(1)] change the topic or
course of a conversation; @digress. <i>Makatimang
ku usáhay sa ákung pagliktiyur,</i> Sometimes
I unwittingly digress in my lecture.
<i>Ayawg itimang ang inyung kabildu ug láin
ug iksplikaran ka,</i> Don't change the topic
of the conversation when a man proposes
to you. <b>2</b> [A2; c] give an additional remark
to supplement what has been said. <i>Nanglibak
sila kanímu ug gitimángan sab dáyun sa</i>
<pb n=2068>
<i>ímung karibal,</i> They were talking against
you and your rival quickly joined in with
more information. <i>n</i> s.t. said in @digression.

<p><b>timàtimà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] keep eating a little now
and then, be munching on s.t. <i>Wad-an kag
gána kun pirmi kang magtimàtimà,</i> You'll
lose your appetite if you keep nibbling on
food. <i>Pagdág matimàtimà sa sinihan,</i> Bring
s.t. to @nibble on in the movies.

<p><b>timaud</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep one's word as to s.t.
promised, <i>Walà giyud siya magtimaud sa ámung
sábut,</i> She did not keep her word as
per agreement.

<p><b>tim-aw</b> <i>v</i> [A23P; a12] @appear, @{show up}. <i>Wà
mutim-aw (mupatim-aw) ang nubya kay gitában,</i>
The bride didn't show up because
s.o. eloped with her. <i>Wà siya tim-áwa sa íyang
dít,[**superscript??][**P2 doubts it.]</i> Her date didn't show up to get
her.

<p><b>timáwà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @poor, @destitute. <i>Timáwà pa sa ilagà,</i>
Poorer than a church mouse. <b>2</b> unfortunate
and humble person. <i>Dungga intáwun
ning timáwang hinikáwan sa gugma,</i> Hear
the pleas of an unfortunate being deprived
of love. <i>v</i> [B126] become @destitute.

<p><b>timayud, timáyud</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a12] <b>1</b> @recognize,
be aware of the importance of s.t. <i>Mutimayud
lang ka nákù kun dúna kay kinahanglan,</i>
You bother about me when you want
s.t. from me. <i>Nagtimáyud ku níla ísip ákung
mga ginikánan,</i> I recognize them as my parents.
<b>2</b> @notice, be @aware of s.t. <i>Nakatimáyud
kung may misaka sa balay,</i> I noticed s.o.
entering the house. <b>3</b> @{pay attention} to,
@watch s.t. <i>Timayúra ang ímung manghud
kun túa ba sa iskuylahan,</i> @See if your brother
is in school. <i>Itimáyud ku sa balay kun wà
mi dihà,</i> Please watch the house for us while
we are away. <b>4</b> do s.t. well putting one's full
attention to it. <i>Mitimáyud na siyag trabáhu,</i>
He now works consistently well. <i>Timayúra
ug bása ang libru,</i> Read the book carefully.

<p><b>timbà</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab1] fetch s.t. by dipping from
a well, scooping from a pit, or the like. <i>Magtimbà
ku sa atábay,</i> I'll go fetch some water
from the well. <i>Timbáa ang kinubkub
kay láwum nag buhù,</i> Bring the earth up because
the pit is deep now. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pail, @dipper,
@scoop. <b>2</b> pail-, @dipperful. <i>Gái kug usa ka
timbà,</i> Give me a dipperful.

<p><b>timbakúwas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] get up quickly from
a lying position. <i>Mitimbakúwas siya sa íyang
higdaan,</i> He got up instantly from his bed.

<p><b>timbálung</b> <i>v</i> [B26] fall headlong. <i>Walà siya
makabrík ug ang awtu mitimbálung sa pangpang,</i>
He didn't get a chance to apply the
brakes and the car fell headlong down the
cliff. <i>Íya kung gitulud ug natimbálung ku sa</i>
<pb n=2069>
<i>túbig,</i> He pushed me and I fell headlong into
<b>the</b> water.

<p><b>timbang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @weigh s.t. <i>Akuy mutimbang
sa kupras,</i> I'll weigh the copra.
<i>Timbánga ang bábuy,</i> Weigh the pig. <b>1a</b> [A]
@weigh, have the weight of. <i>Mutimbang siyag
sisinta kílus,</i> He weighs sixty kilos. <b>2</b> [AC3;
a] make s.t. @balance. <i>Matikwang ang sakayan
kung way makatimbang sa píkas,</i> The
boat will capsize if nobody stays on one
side to balance it. <i>Ang pagsálig ángay timbángan
sa pag-amping,</i> Trust must be balanced
with carefulness. <b>3</b> [A; b] @help. <i>Timbángi
ra ku,</i> Help me. <i>Mahímù siyang ikatimbang
sa panimalay,</i> He can be used as a
helper in the household. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ug kúgus (pangúgus),
luhud (panglúhud)</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c] be a
sponsor in a wedding or baptism of a person
of the opposite sex. <i>Nagtimbang mig
pangúgus sa pyista,</i> We were co-sponsors of
a baptism during the town feast. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @weight.
<b>2</b> @helper. <b>2a</b> male sponsor of a female in
wedding or baptism or the female sponsor
of a male. <i>a</i> @balanced. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] @{maintain
balance}. <i>Nanimbang siyang milátay sa
písì,</i> He maintained his balance as he walked
on the rope. <b>2</b> [A2] engage in the buying
and selling of things by weight. <i>Nanimbang
siyag kupras,</i> He is engaged in the buying
and selling (lit. weighing) of copra. <i>n</i>
@balance. <i>Nawad-an siya sa panimbang,</i> He
lost his balance. <b>Culu-, timbangtimbang</b> <i>v</i>
[A; a12] @ponder. <i>Nagtulutimbang siya kun
kinsay íyang sugtun,</i> She is @considering who
to accept. <i>Timbangtimbánga kun magpárì
ka ba giyud,</i> @{Think it over} if you really
want to be a priest. <b>hiN-</b> = <sc>paN-</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
@helper, @assistant. <i>Siyay ákung katimbang sa
uma,</i> He's my @farmhand. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> @scale to
weigh things.

<p><b>timbaruk</b> <i>v</i> [B6] stand unmoving, rooted or
frozen on one's feet. <i>Mitimbaruk ang babáyi
pagkakità sa hálas,</i> The woman froze on
her feet when she saw the snake. <i>Ngánung
nagtimbaruk man mu? Hala trabáhu!</i> Why
are you @{standing around} like a bunch of
statues? Get to work!

<p><b>timbaya, timbayà</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a12] @greet. <i>Mutimbaya
siya káda súgat námù,</i> She greets me
each time we meet. <i>Timbayahun diay nákù
nang dì kaíla,</i> Do I have to greet s.o. I don't
know? <i>n</i> @greeting.

<p><b>timbri<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> put an official stamp or
seal on. <i>Nutaryuy nagtimbri íning apidábit,</i>
A notary stamped this affidavit. <i>Magámit
ning istáma kay wà timbríhi,</i> You can use
this stamp because it doesn't have a postmark.
<b>2</b> affix one's thumbmark. <i>Timbríhi</i>
<pb n=2070>
<i>ang ímung balúta,</i> Put your @thumbmark on
your ballot. <i>n</i> @stamp affixed, @seal, @thumbmark.

<p><b>timbri<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pushbutton or the @bell or @buzzer
the pushbutton manipulates. <i>v</i> [A; b] @{push
a button} or @{ring a bell} or operate a similar
contrivance.[+]

<p><b>timbríra</b> <i>n</i> k.o. food container consisting of
several covered bowls which are hooked together.

<p><b>timbul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ac] @mix s.t. into s.t. else in
order to change the composition. <i>Maáyu siyang
mutimbul ug ilimnun,</i> He's good in
mixing drinks. <i>Nakigtimbul ang mga tigúlang
sa mga tin-idyir,</i> The old folks mixed
with the teen-agers. <i>Lamì timbúlun ang lambanug
ug sibin-ap,</i> Nipa wine and seven-up
are good mixed together. <b>2, 3, 4</b> = <sc>TIBUL</sc>.
<i>n</i> s.t. added to mix with the dominant element.

<p><b>timbul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @thimble. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear a thimble.
<i>Natupukan ang íyang tudlù kay wà timbúli,</i>
She pricked her fingers because she
didn't wear a thimble.

<p><b>timbúngan</b> <i>n</i> general name for @goatfishes.

<p><b>timbúwad</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] fall headlong. <i>Natimbúwad
siya ngadtu sa túbig pagkatambug
níya sa taytáyan,</i> He fell headlong into the
water when he fell from the bridge.

<p><b>timbuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1, 2</b> = <sc>TIBUL</sc>, <i>3</i>. <b>3</b> add a little
amount of s.t. to s.t.; contribute a little.
<i>Mitimbuy (nagtimbuy) siyag písus sa ílang
kapunúngan,</i> He contributed one peso to
their organization. <i>Nakatimbuy ning librúha
pagkúhà ku sa iksámin,</i> This book helped
a little when I took the examination. <i>Gitimbúyan
níyag asin ang sabaw,</i> He added
salt to the soup. <b>4</b> [A; b] have sexual relations
with a married woman. <i>Nakatimbuy
ka ánang batáa?</i> Have you contributed s.t.
to the making of that child?

<p><b>timgas</b> a <b>1</b> neat, clean and white with a clear
and fine texture. <i>Timgas kang tan-áwun gíkang
nalígù,</i> You look clean-complexioned
after bathing. <b>2</b> enunciated with clarity and
determination. <i>'Ipanimalus ku ang ákung asáwa,'
timgas ug maisúgung pamúlung ni Sultan
Saranggáni,</i> 'I will avenge my wife,' Sultan
Saranggani averred firmly. <i>v</i> [BN] be
clear, white and smooth in texture. <i>Magtimgas
ang lugas sa humay nga maáyung pagkauga,</i>
The grains of well-dried rice are smooth
and clear. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a fair and clean sort.

<p><b>timhung</b> = <sc>TAMHUNG</sc>.

<p><b>*timì</b> <b>timìtimì</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b6] pick at food, eat
without appetite. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> prone to be having
no appetite, just picking at the food.

<p><b>timik walà &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A3] keep completely @silent,
<pb n=2071>
@tight-lipped. <i>Wà lang siya magtimik dihang
giimbistigar,</i> He didn't say a word when he
was interrogated. <b>walay &mdash;</b> totally @silent.
<i>Way timik ang mintiryu magabíi,</i> There's
not a sound in the cemetery at night.

<p><b>timing</b> <i>n</i> small, square or oblong fish trap
made of basket work, set in shallow waters.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] catch fish with this trap.

<p><b>timpag</b> = <sc>LUMPAG</sc>.

<p><b>timpasaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> splash heavily and
resoundingly into the water. <i>Mitimpasaw
ngadtus túbig pagkahúlug níya gíkan sa pantalan,</i>
He fell off the wharf and landed in
the water with a splash. <b>2</b> be hit by the aptness
of what s.o. might say about one. <i>Ug
átung buhátun mutimpasaw ta niadtung
pagyà nga nag-ingun nga maáyus tayáda,
way ági,</i> If that is what we do, they'll be
able to apply that old saying to us&mdash;that
we're all talk and no action.

<p><b>timpiramintu</b> <i>n</i> @temperament. <i>Bisan ang managkalúha
lahig timpiramintu,</i> Even twins
have different temperaments.

<p><b>timpiratúra</b> <i>n</i> @temperature.

<p><b>timpla</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] add s.t. so as to @season, @flavor.
<i>Himarat ang nagtimpla sa sabaw,</i> Whoever
seasoned the soup likes salt. <i>Maáyung
itimpla ang kámay sa kapi,</i> Sugar is good to
put into coffee. <b>2</b> [A; a2] prepare things in
which s.t. is mixed or added. <i>Timpláhi si Bíbig
gátas,</i> @Mix some milk for Baby. <b>3</b> [A13;
a12] @weigh, @consider carefully before deciding.
<i>Ikaw lay magtimpla kun mukúyug
ka ba sa piknik,</i> You @decide for yourself if
you are going to the picnic. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @flavoring,
@seasoning. <b>2</b> the @proportions of a mixture.
<i>Layaw ra ang timpla sa mása,</i> The concrete
mixture is too watery. <i>Unsa may timpla sa
minása? Tris dus u kwatru dus?</i> How is the
dough to be mixed? Three to two or four
to two? <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the @solution or @mixture
that results. <i>Layaw ra ang timpláda sa litsi,</i>
The milk is too watery. <b>2</b> @temperament
(slang). <i>Dì sila magkadúul kay nagkaláhì silag
timpláda,</i> They can't go together because
their temperaments clash. <b>-du</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
already seasoned, flavored. <i>Ayaw nag kamayi
ang sampurádu kay timpládu na,</i> Don't
put sugar in the chocolate porridge because
it is already sweetened. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> one who
is in charge in mixing. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] @{size
up} s.o. <i>Kamau siyang manimplag táwu,</i> He
knows how to size people up. <i>Panimpláhan
nátù siyag ángay bang pangasaw-un,</i> Let's
size her up to see if she is worth marrying.
<i>n</i> opinion reached on sizing s.o. up.

<p><b>timplit</b> <i>n</i> @{registration plate} of vehicles.

<p><b>timplíti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @pavilion built for especial 
<pb n=2072>
church services.

<p><b>timplu</b> <i>n</i> @temple.

<p><b>timpránu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @early. <b>2</b> @{just in time} for s.t.
<i>Timpránu giyud pag-abúta nímu, talilákaw  [** possibly? talilákaw][**corrected. P2]
ku,</i> You got here just in time, because I was
about to go. <i>v</i> [A2; a2] do s.t. @early or ahead
of schedule. <i>Timpranúhag human pagdáru
arun timpránu tang makapugas,</i> Finish
the plowing early so we can plant early.

<p><b>timpu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @time, @chance. <i>Wà kuy timpu ihalayhálay,</i>
I have no time for relaxation. <b>2</b>
@time, @schedule. <i>Timpu sa tingkaun ra mi
magkitaay,</i> We meet only at mealtime. <b>3</b>
@weather. <i>Mubyáhi ka bísag dautag timpu?</i>
Are you travelling even in bad weather? <b>4</b>
@season. <i>Timpu sa pagpangáni karun,</i> It's harvest
season now. <b>4a</b> propitious time to do
s.t. <i>Timpu na run sa íyang himbis,</i> According
to the scale configuration on its legs,
now is the time to fight it. <b>5</b> @era, @period.
<i>Timpu sa Katsílà pa nang ímung purul,</i> Your
shorts go back to the Spanish times. <b>6</b> @tempo.
<i>Swít ang timpu íning sunatáha,</i> This
dance is in a slow tempo. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6]
do s.t. at the best time. <i>Manimpu siyag súgal,
kanà lang dibuynasun,</i> He gambles only
when the time is right, when it's his lucky
day. <i>n</i> doing s.t. at the best time. <b>timputimpu</b>
<i>v</i> [c16] do s.t. at the right season. <i>Itimputimpu
(timputimpúhun) ang pagtanum
kun way patubig,</i> Planting is done in the
right season if there's no irrigation. <i>a</i> @{from
time to time}. <i>Timputimpu nga musáka us-us
ang prisyu,</i> Prices fluctuate from time to
time.

<p><b>timpuraryu</b> <i>a</i> @temporary. <i>n</i> s.o. temporary in
a job or position. <i>v</i> [c] put on a temporary
basis. <i>Patrabahúa siya bísag itimpuraryu
lang únà,</i> Give him a job even if it is only
on a temporary basis.

<p><b>timríra</b> = <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>tíms</b> <i>n</i> small @bus with the motor not in the
front, accommodating twenty or so passengers
and plying the provincial highways. (So
called from the brand Thames.)

<p><b>timsung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> theme song. <b>2</b> song chosen by
lovers as their song. <i>v</i> [A; c] make as one's
<b>theme</b> song.

<p><b>timtim</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] taste or sample liquid. <i>Timtími
ang sabaw kun hustu bag timpla,</i> Taste
the soup to see if it is all right.

<p><b>timtisyun</b> <i>n</i> temptation, k.o. fast @dance. <i>v</i>
[A] dance the temptation.

<p><b>timù</b> <i>n</i> @snack. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] have a @snack. <i>Bastanti
nang itimù (timuun) ring biskwit,</i> This
biscuit is enough for a snack. <b>2</b> [A; c] put
into one's mouth. <i>Arun dì masakpan gitimù
nákù ang sigarilyu,</i> To avoid being caught, I
<pb n=2073>
stuffed the cigarette into my mouth. <b>timùtimù</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c1] eat snacks casually between
meals.

<p><b>tímug</b> <i>n</i> wind that hits Cebu from the east.

<p><b>timun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @rudder. <b>2</b> @clitoris (humorous euphemism).
<i>v</i> [AN2; b] steer a boat with a
rudder, or with a paddle used like a rudder.
<i>Lihíru siyang mutimun (manimun) kúmu
mananagat,</i> He steers the rudder well since
he is a fisherman. <i>Timuni ang sakayan,</i> Steer
the boat. paN- <i>v</i> [A2; b6] @steer, @guide, @lead
a group. <i>Ang Prisidinti mauy manimun sa
násud,</i> The President steers the nation. <i>Ang
punduk nga ímung gipanimunan,</i> The group
you are the leader of. <b>-il</b> <i>n</i> @helmsman. <i>v</i> [B156;
a2] be the helmsman.

<p><b>timúna</b> = <sc>KIMÚNA</sc>.

<p><b>timuri</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. secret talk where certain phonemes
are substituted for others: <i>u</i> for <i>a</i>, <i>t</i>
for <i>d</i>, <i>p</i> for <i>d</i>, <i>r</i> for <i>l</i>, <i>n</i> for <i>m</i>, and <i>y</i> for <i>s</i>,
the rest remaining. The word <i>timuri</i> is derived
from <i>binali</i> ('done backwards'). <i>v</i> [A;
a2] speak in <i>timuri</i>. <i>Kumuu kung nutimuri?
(Kamau kang mubinali?)</i> Cangre yougre
speakgre Hoggre? (Can you speak Hog Latin?)

<p><b>timus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. light, brownish @grasshopper less
than 1" found in bushes and tall grasses.

<p><b>tim-us</b> <i>a</i> @pure, @sincere. <i>Ang gugmang tim-us
dì mulubad,</i> Pure love doesn't fade.

<p><b>timwurk</b> <i>n</i> @teamwork. <i>Lawgaw ang ámung
grúpu kay way timwurk,</i> Our group is no
good because it lacks teamwork. <i>a</i> have
teamwork, right @coordination. <i>Timwurk kaáyu
ang bahista ug ang pyanista,</i> The bass
player and the pianist @coordinated beautifully.
<i>v</i> [B12C; c3] @{team up} with, do s.t.
harmoniously together in coordinated effort.
<i>Nagkatimwurk ang duruha sa ílang
pag-ílad sa sapian nílang iyaan,</i> The two
made a perfect team in swindling their rich
aunt.

<p><b>tin.</b> abbreviation for <i>tinyinti</i> '@lieutenant'.

<p><b>tína</b> <i>n</i> a child born with the umbilical cord
wound around the neck. According to folk
belief such a child will turn out hot-tempered.

<p><b>tinà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. brown-colored rot that affects
rice plants stunting their growth or killing
them.

<p><b>tínà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @dye. <i>Tináa ang milubad nga karsúnis,</i>
Dye the faded pants. <i>Natínà sa dugù
ang bindáhi,</i> The bandage is @stained with
blood. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @dye. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> @{dyeing vat}.

<p><b>tinabal</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TABAL</sc>.

<p><b>tinabuylu</b> (from <i>buylu</i>) <i>n</i> the rapid @whirling
motion of a body, as a propeller, motor,
etc. <i>Ang tinabuylu sa pála sa barku,</i> The
<pb n=2074>

whirling motion of the propeller.

<p><b>tinái</b> (from <i>tái</i>) <i>n</i> @intestines. <b>&mdash; sa kawáyan</b> <i>n</i>
the inner sides of bamboo, stripped off
from the hard outer part to use for weaving.
<b>layù sa &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> off the target. <b>2</b> for a wound to
be minor (humorous). <i>Ayawg hílak layù ra
nà sa tinái,</i> Don't be a sissy. It's a minor
cut. <b>igsumpay, kasumpay ug &mdash;, igpútul, kapútul
ug &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @brother, @sister.

<p><b>tinápa</b> <i>n</i> fish packed in small 2" by 4" cylindrical
can. <i>v</i> [A1] have such fish for one's
meal.

<p><b>tinápay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @bread. <b>2</b> @pastry. <i>v</i> [A1] have
bread.

<p><b>tinatína</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. children's ball game mainly
for girls where the ball is dribbled in a court
made up of ten squares and the object is to
dribble the ball in each square a specified
number of times. <i>v</i> [A; b] play such a game.

<p><b>tin-aw</b> a <b>1</b> @clear, not turbid or muddied. <i>Tin-aw
ang limpiyung túbig,</i> Clean water is clear.
<b>2</b> @clear, @definite. <i>Tin-aw ang íyang báhad,</i>
His warning was clear. <b>3</b> @clear-voiced. <i>Tin-aw
íyang tíngug kay dì siya muinum,</i> He has
a clear voice because he doesn't drink. <b>&mdash; ug
íhì</b> a a woman who can have intercourse again
after having had a baby (lit. having
clear urine). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6] become clear, not
muddled or hoarse. <b>2</b> [AP; a2] @clarify. <i>Tin-áwun
nátù nga akuy masunud dinhi,</i> Let's
make it clear: you're supposed to obey me
here. <i>Patin-áwig maáyu ang mga labhanan,</i>
Rinse out the clothing till the water becomes
clear. (Lit. Make what is from the
clothing clear.) <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] confront
each other so as to iron out differences.
<i>Makigtin-away ku níya báhin niánang tabía,</i>
I'll @{have it out} with her about that gossip.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @clarification, @explanation.

<p><b>tináwu</b> see <sc>TÁWU</sc>.

<p><b>tinda</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] sell s.t. which is displayed in a
store or on the sidewalk. <i>Mutinda siyag báhawng
pán,</i> The bread he sells is not fresh.
<i>Gipanakup ang naninda sa asíras,</i> The people
that were selling things on the sidewalk
were arrested. <i>n</i> @goods for sale in a store.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] go into the selling business.
<i>Ang lisinsiyádu ray makapanindag álak,</i> Only
licensed dealers can sell liquor. <i>n</i> selling
@business. <b>tindáhan</b> <i>n</i> @store. <b>tindíra, tindíru</b>
<i>n</i> @salesgirl, @salesman. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be a
salesman, salesgirl.

<p><b>tindak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] push, kick with the sole of
the foot; @stamp the feet. <i>Kusug siyang mitindak
sa bisiklíta,</i> He stepped hard on the
bicycle. <i>Itindak ang tiil iniglanguy nímu,</i>
@Kick your feet when you swim. <i>n</i> @kick. <b>-an,
-anan</b> <i>n</i> @treadle, @pedal. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> two coconut
<pb n=2075>
<b>trees</b> planted right next to each other so
<b>that</b> it looks as though one is kicking the
other. Coconuts planted this way usually
mark a boundary. <i>v</i> [c1] plant coconut
<b>trees</b> in two's.

<p><b>tindaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] visit a fish corral and find
out if there is a catch.

<p><b>tinday</b> <i>n</i> adolescent female horse.

<p><b>tind&icaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @expose, @show openly. <i>Mutind&icaron;r
sa ílang láwas sa kadaghánan,</i> Expose
their bodies in public. <i>Gitindihan mi níya sa
tanang sud-an,</i> He laid all the dishes in front
of us. <b>tindída</b> <i>n</i> in card games, a card placed
face-upwards in the stack of discards.

<p><b>tindíra, tindíru</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TINDA</sc>.

<p><b>tindug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB346; c1] @stand, cause s.t. to
stand. <i>Kinsay nagtindug (nagpatindug) sa
pusti,</i> Who set the post up? <i>Nagtindug ang
ubang pasahíru,</i> Some of the passengers
were standing. <i>Tindúga (itindug, ipatindug)
ang butilyang natumba,</i> Set the bottle that
toppled back up. <b>2</b> [A; b6] act as a wedding
sponsor. <i>Mayur ang mitindug sa ílang
kasal,</i> The mayor acted as their wedding
sponsor. <b>3</b> [A2; b] stand on, @{back up}
one's word, idea, etc. <i>Tindúgi giyud nang
ímung pasángil,</i> Be sure to back up your
charges. <b>3a</b> take responsibility for s.o.'s
expenses for him. <i>Akuy mutindug sa ímung
matrikula,</i> I will take care of your
school obligations. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @height (said of living
beings and objects). <b>2</b> a bride-to-be's @{wedding
ensemble}, everything she wears on her
person during the wedding ceremony. <i>Namalit
na ang mga ginikánan ni Idyun ug tindug
álang sa íyang pangasaw-unun,</i> Edion's
parents have bought his bride's wedding ensemble.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac1] construct a building.
<i>Íning sapía makapatindug na tag balay,</i> With
this money we can now construct a house.
<i>n</i> stake set under beams to add support
when there is a considerable distance between
the supporting posts. <b>hi-/ha-, hipa-/hapa-</b>
<i>v</i> [B1256] stand up involuntarily.
<i>Nahatindug (nahapatindug) ku sa kakurat,</i>
I stood up in shocked surprise. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> @{wedding
ensemble}, including the accessories.
<b>-um-, -um-r-</b> <i>n</i> original inhabitants, @natives.
<i>Talagsa ray tumitindug (tumindug) sa syudad,</i>
There are few people originally from
<b>the</b> city. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> the family, relatives, and
friends of the groom. They serve the bride
and her family (<i>lingkurun</i>) at the wedding
festivities. <i>Kita kay tindugun, átù ang tanang
trabáhu unyà sa adlaw sa kasal,</i> We are
in the groom's party so we have to do the
work at the wedding party.

<p><b>tinduk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. cooking @banana, a foot or
<pb n=2076>
more long, somewhat curved and about as
big as a man's arm: <i><b>Musa paradisiaca var.
magna</b></i>.

<p><b>*tinduk<sub>2</sub></b> <b>-um-, -um-r-</b> <i>n</i> people @indigenous to
a certain area. <i>Ang mga tuminduk (tumitinduk)
sa Misamis mga Suban-un,</i> The Subanos
are the @natives of Misamis. <i>v</i> [B1256]
be a native.

<p><b>tinduktinduk</b> <i>n</i> @shrub of seashore: <i><b>Prosopis
vidaliana</b></i>.

<p><b>ting-</b> prefix added to roots which refer to s.t.
which happens seasonally to form nouns
which mean 'season or time of the day that
[so-and-so] takes place'. Most forms with
<i>ting-</i> have short penults. <i>Sayung buntag nga
mauy tinglusad sa manuk,</i> The early morning
hours when the chickens come down
from their perches. <i>Tingbunga (tingpamunga)
sa mangga,</i> The mango season. <i>Tingadlaw
(ting-adlaw),</i> The hot season. <i>Tingbálud,</i>
The wavy season.

<p><b>tinga</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> food particle lodged between the
teeth. <b>2</b> k.o. reddish breast tumor believed
to be caused by eating any k.o. shellfish
with nipple-like growths, and treated with
steam from those k.o. shellfish. <i>v</i> [A123P]
<b>1</b> have food particles lodged in the teeth.
<i>Makatinga (makapatinga) ang karni sa ngípun,</i>
Meat sticks in the teeth. <b>2</b> get this k.o.
tumor.

<p><b>*tínga</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] give advance partial payment.
<i>Mupatínga kag katungà kun magpakudak
ka,</i> You must pay half in advance if
you have your picture taken. <i>Tirsiyu lay
ipatínga,</i> Give one third of the cost as advance
payment. <i>n</i> partial payment given in
advance.

<p><b>tingà</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be in the throes of death. <i>Pagkúhag
párì kay nagtingà nag pasyinti,</i> Get a
priest because the patient is in the throes of
death.

<p><b>ting-ab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] open the mouth to gasp
for breath. <i>Nagting-ab intáwun ang hubákun,</i>
The poor asthma patient is gasping for
breath.

<p><b>tingabngab</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be gaping with a huge
opening or hole. <i>Mitingabngab ang bakilid
nga gidinamíta,</i> The hill had a big gape in it
after it was dynamited. <i>Ayawg tingabngába
(itingabngab) ang ímung bàbà kay sudlag
lamuk,</i> If you open your mouth wide mosquitoes
are going to come in.

<p><b>tingag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36; c] catch, @snag or hold by
piercing. <i>Mitingag (natingag) sa íyang tutunlan
ang bukug sa isdà,</i> The fish bone got
snagged in his throat. <i>Nagtingag pa sa íyang
bukubuku ang báraw,</i> The knife was still
sticking on[**in?] his back. <i>Gitingag níya sa kalindaryu 
<pb n=2077>
ang dágum,</i> He ran a needle through
the calendar. <b>2</b> [A12; a] knock a piece of
the circle in the game of <i>taksì<sub>1</sub></i>. <b>3</b> [B126]
suffer the relapse called <i>tingag</i>. <i>Ang kalísang
mauy nakatingag (nakapatingag) sa bag-ung
nanganak,</i> The intense fright caused the
woman who had just given birth to have a
fatal relapse. <i>n</i> fatal relapse suffered by a
woman who has recently had a baby, caused
by overstrain or emotional disturbance.
<b>bughat &mdash;</b> = <sc>TINGAG</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>tíngal</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1c] force s.t. into s.o.'s
mouth. <i>Tingálun ang bátang purgahun,</i> If
you give a child a purgative, you have to
force it down his throat. <b>1a</b> force a pig's
mouth open by sticking s.t. into it. <b>2</b> [A; c]
@bribe. <i>Mamakak ang saksi ug dúnay mutíngal
níya,</i> The witness will lie if s.o. bribes
him. <i>Itíngal ni sa gwardiya,</i> Give this as a
bribe to the guard. <b>3</b> [A; c] for s.t. to be
brought onto one (literary). <i>Dílì ku na hápit
maantus ang kapaítan nga gitíngal kanákù
sa kapaláran,</i> I can hardly bear the bitter
experiences which fate has bestowed on me.

<p><b>tingála</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256; b3(1)c5] be @surprised,
@mystified at s.t. unexpected. <i>Natingála ku
sa íyang pagkausab,</i> It surprised me at how
he had changed. <i>Gikatingad-an ang butu sa
laburaturyu,</i> People were mystified by the
explosion in the lab. <i>Dì ikatingála ang íyang
pagdaug,</i> It's not amazing that he won. <b>2</b> [B26N]
for one's body processes or health
to be upset from being subjected to s.t. to
which one is not accustomed. <i>Naningála ang
ákung tiyan sa pagkáun ug nangkà,</i> The
jackfruit upset my stomach. <i>Natingála ang
íyang láwas sa kabugnaw sa irkundisyunir,</i>
His body can't seem to adjust to the air
conditioner. <b>paN-(->), paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] <b>1</b> =
<sc>TINGÁLA</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>2</b> be ill at ease from being new
to s.t. <i>Naningala ku áning bag-ung kambiyu,</i>
I find it hard to adjust to this new gearshift.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> state of being surprised. <b>katingaláhan</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @mysterious, @wondrous. <i>Katingaláhan
ang búhat sa Diyus,</i> God's ways are wondrous.
<b>2</b> @enchanted, with @magical power.
<i>Pangáyù bisan unsa sa katingaláhang singsing,</i>
Wish for anything at all from the @magic
ring.

<p><b>tingalaw</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; b6] prepare
food for people who are working on the
farm. <i>Nagtingalaw kus nagdáru,</i> I'm preparing
meals for the men who are plowing.

<p><b>tingáli</b> @probably, @maybe. <i>Tingálig muulan
run kay nanag-um,</i> It will probably rain because
the clouds are gathering. <i>Ikaw tingáli
ang nagsumbung, nu?</i> You're the one that
told on me, weren't you? <i>Dílì tingáli mahímù 
<pb n=2078>
kay....</i> I don't think I can do it because....
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] say 'perhaps' to signify
uncertainty. <i>Dì ku manigúru. Maningáli
lang ku,</i> I am not sure. Maybe I can. <b>Culu-</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] = <sc>PAN-</sc>.

<p><b>tingalngal</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] for a cover or shutter
to open wide, cause it to do so. <i>Nagtingalngal
ang kaban tungud sa kadaghan sa sulud,</i>
The chest came open because so many
things were inside it. <i>Tingalngála (itingalngal)
ug maáyu ang pultahan arun masúd
ang bangkù,</i> Open the door shutter wide so
that the chair outside can be taken in. <i>a</i>
@{opened wide}.

<p><b>tingàngà</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] for a cover or shutter to
be slightly open or ajar; cause it to do so.
<i>Nagtingàngà ang pultahan. Sirhi,</i> The door
is ajar. Close it. <i>a</i> opened a little way.

<p><b>tingáyi</b> = <sc>TINGÁLI</sc>.

<p><b>tinggà</b> <i>n</i> @metal, @lead. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @lead-like, @heavy.
<b>-un ug kamut</b> <i>a</i> @clumsy, tending to break
things easily.

<p><b>tinggalung</b> = <sc>SINGGALUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tinggàtinggà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @wrasse of rocks in
shallow waters.

<p><b>tinggil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @clitoris. <b>2</b> mild curse word, expressing
frustration or exasperation. <i>Tinggil!
Napalus na pud,</i> @Darn! It slipped off
again.

<p><b>tinggu</b> <i>n</i> @debt (slang for <i>útang</i>). <i>v</i> [A; c] buy
s.t. on credit (slang).

<p><b>tinghab</b> <i>v</i> [A] gasp one's last few breaths in
dying. <i>Nagtinghab na ang irù nga naligsan,</i>
The dog that the car ran over is now gasping
for its last breath.

<p><b>tinghágà</b> = <sc>TANGHÁGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tinghak</b> <i>v</i> [A] be @panting, @gasping for breath.
<i>Nagtinghak siya human sa lumbà,</i> He was
panting after the race.

<p><b>tinghuy</b> <i>n</i> small @{oil lamp} made of a wick of
tightly rolled cotton blossoms floating in
the oil, used as a wake lamp, kept burning
the night through.

<p><b>tingi</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; b3] put s.o. to @shame or deep
@embarrassment. <i>Ang uyab níyang baklà mauy
nagtingi níya sa kadaghánan,</i> His homosexual
lover put him to a great shame in public.
<i>Natingi ku pagpahalípay níya kay dì
man diay adlaw níya,</i> I was very embarrassed
when I wished him happy birthday because
it turned out it was not his birthday.

<p><b>tingil</b> = <sc>SINGIL</sc>.

<p><b>tingkad</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] do s.t. to the whole of
s.t. <i>Wà nímu matingkad paglimpiyu ang sular,</i>
You just cleaned part of the yard.

<p><b>tingkag</b> = <sc>TANGKAG</sc>.

<p><b>tingkagul, tingkágul</b> <i>v</i> [B6; b6] <b>1</b> make a
loud banging noise. <i>Mitingkagul ang silyang</i>
<pb n=2079>
<i>giitsa sa alkúba,</i> The chair thrown to the
attic made a heavy @thud. <b>2</b> be in @prison.
<i>Ang pagkakiriwan mauy nakatingkagul (nakapatingkagul)
níya sa prisuhan,</i> His thievery
got him thrown into prison. <b>3</b> be thrown
into a miserable situation. <i>Anía akung aláut,
nagtingkagul sa kagul-ánan,</i> Here I am,
wretched and suffering in grief. <i>n</i> @{banging
noise}.

<p><b>tingkal</b> <i>n</i> loosely twisted cotton @thread made
from low-grade cotton used for blankets,
wicks, or twisted into fishing lines.

<p><b>tingkálag</b> <i>v</i> [B456N; b4N] for hair to stand
on end. <i>Mitingk[=á]g ang ákung balhíbu nga
namínaw sa kaági ni Drakula,</i> My hair stood
on end while I listened to the story of Dracula.
<i>Nagtingk[=á]g ang balhíbu s[**maybe an 'a' can't identify letter 100%] sunuy nga
naggukud sa hingangkan,</i> The feathers of
the cock were standing on end while he
chased the hen.

<p><b>tingkalù</b> = <sc>TUKTUR</sc>.

<p><b>tingkap</b> <i>n</i> enamel-coated tin @cup. <i>v</i> [A; a2]
use an enamel cup.

<p><b>tingkarul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1, 2, 3</b> = <sc>TINGKAGUL</sc>. <b>4</b> [A1]
light one's way with a <i>tingkarul</i> torch. <b>5</b>
[A; a] make a <i>tingkarul</i> torch. <i>n</i> k.o. @{kerosene
torch} made from bamboo or a bottle
into which a tube nearly as big around as
the mouth is inserted. So called from the
noise this torch makes, and also from the
fact that in the k.o. fishing with which it is
used, a banging noise is made to draw the
fish (<i>cf.</i> <sc>DAGUKDUK</sc>).

<p><b>tingkas</b> = <sc>TANGKAS</sc>.

<p><b>tingkiri</b> = <sc>KINGKIRI</sc>.

<p><b>tingkiyu</b> = <sc>TANGKIYU</sc>.

<p><b>tingkù</b> n, <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TAGULTUL<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n1, v</i>. <b>2</b> pound
rice in a mortar at the same time as s.o.
else is pounding rice and in rhythm with
him.

<p><b>tingkubù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12P] @hunch one's shoulders
forward. <i>Nagtingkubù siya tungud sa íyang
kagúlang,</i> He is hunched over because he is
old.

<p><b>tingkuy</b> <i>n</i> hollow space in nape of neck. <b>lalum
ug &mdash;</b> @greedy, @ungiving or not sharing
what one eats.

<p><b>tingsì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] draw the lips back in amusement
or to @smile. <i>Nakapasar dagway siya
kay nagtingsì,</i> He must have passed the test
because he is smiling to himself. <i>Tingsíi lang
sila kun kabsan kag isulti,</i> Just smile at
them when you run out of things to say. <i>n</i>
a weak smile. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] draw the
lips back involuntarily in amusement.

<p><b>tingsían</b> <i>n</i> k.o. forest @tree producing a dark-reddish
hardwood.

<p><b>tingting</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TALINGTING</sc>. <b>2</b> [AC; b(1)]
<pb n=2080>
have @{sexual intercourse} (slang).

<p><b>tingub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] do s.t. @{all at once}. <i>Tinguba
(tingba, itingub) paglaba ang bulingun,</i>
Wash all of the clothes at once. <b>2</b> [B126C23]
be @combined in one, be entirely devoted
to s.t. <i>Magtingub tag pangadyì,</i> Let's all
pray @together. <i>Kining mga híyas natingub
sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> All these qualities were
combined in his person. <i>Natingub ang tanang
pagpanggà sa bugtung nílang anak,</i>
They devoted @all of their love and affection
to their only child. <i>Ang nasakpan mauy natingban
sa tanang pasángil,</i> The one who
was caught got all of the blame. <i>n</i> s.t. complete
in one. <i>Ang tingub ánang idiyáha maúmul
sa usa ka púlung,</i> The @entirety of that
idea can be expressed in one word. <i>a</i> @complete,
covering everything. <i>Usa ka mubù apan
tingub nga pangutána,</i> A short but @all-embracing
question. <b>tingbanan</b> <i>n</i> @storage,
@reservoir. <b>katilingban</b> <i>n</i> @society, @community.
<b>katilingbánun</b> <i>a</i> having to do with society,
community. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> done all at one[**at once? or as one?]. <b>tingbanay</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>. <b>2</b> done to the fullest extent
possible. <i>Tingbanay giyud ning átung pag-*ínum,</i>
Let's not just drink. Let's get completely
soused.

<p><b>tíngud</b> = <sc>SÍNGUD</sc>.

<p><b>tíngug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] produce a @sound. <i>Ayúha
nang tiklang dì mutíngug,</i> Fix the piano
keys that don't sound. <b>2</b> [A2S; b3c] @speak,
@{speak up}. <i>Unsa pay tinggan nákù nga dì ka
man mamínaw?</i> What should I @talk for,
since you won't listen? <i>Tíngug sa míting ug
dúna kay ikatíngug,</i> Speak up in the meeting
if you have s.t. to say. <b>3</b> [C; b6] be on
@{speaking terms}. <i>Walà mi magtíngug (magtingganay),</i>
We aren't on speaking terms. <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @sound, @voice. <b>2</b> one's say or word in the
proceedings of. <i>Ang ákung tíngug mauy
matúman,</i> They will do whatever I say. <b>pa-</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c1] turn on radio, TV, make s.t.
sound. <i>Patingúga (ipatíngug) ang radiyu,</i>
Turn the radio on. <b>tingganay</b> = <sc>TÍNGUG</sc>, <i>v3</i>.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> the way the voice sounds, the manner
of speaking. <i>Subù ang paníngug sa namatyan,</i>
The bereaved person spoke in a
sad @{tone of voice}.

<p><b>tingúhà</b> (from <i>kúhà</i>) <i>v</i> [A13; a12] @{aim for},
seek to possess. <i>Matag baksir nagtingúhà sa
kampiyunátu,</i> Every boxer aims at the
championship. <i>Gitingúhà níyang magbúlag
sila,</i> It was her @intention to separate them.
<i>n</i> s.t. one intends, aspires to do. <i>Wà kuy tingúhang
dautan nímu,</i> I do not have wicked
@intentions against you. <i>Ang mga tingúhà sa
bayánì álang sa násud,</i> The hero's @aspirations
for the country. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12]
<pb n=2081>
give one's utmost in doing s.t. <i>Muasinsu ang
táwung maningúhà,</i> He who strives hard will
succeed. <i>Paninguháa nga mutáp ka sa tís,</i>
Try hard to top the exam. <b>2</b> [A2] @court a
woman. <i>Naningúhà ku níya piru gibastid ku,</i>
I courted her for all I was worth, but I was
turned down. <i>n</i> striving, trying hard. <i>Káwang
ang paningúhà nga dì nuntan ug kaabtik,</i>
It is futile to try hard if you don't couple
it with shrewdness.

<p><b>tingusbáwan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>USBAW</sc>.

<p><b>tiniblas</b> <i>n</i> the Wednesday before Easter.[+]

<p><b>tinidur<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> table @fork. <b>2</b> forked bars that
support the front wheel of a bicycle. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; sa
yútà</b> spade shaped similar to a pitchfork
used to turn the soil. <i>v</i> [A; a] use a @fork.

<p><b>tinidur<sub>2</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>TINIR</sc>.

<p><b>tin-idyir</b> <i>n</i> @teen-ager. <i>v</i> [B256; b6] be a teen-*ager.

<p><b>tininti<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TINYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>tininti<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TINUNTU</sc> (humorous euphemism).
<i>see</i> <sc>TUNTU</sc>.

<p><b>tinir</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @keep, @have in possession.
<i>Nagtinir siyag babáyi,</i> He's keeping a mistress.
<i>Wà ku magtinir ug sapátus nga daghan,</i>
I don't have many shoes. <i>Magníwang
kag itinir nímu nang kaguúla,</i> You'll grow
thin if you @harbor that sorrow. <b>2</b> @detain. <i>Itinir
siya ug dì makapiyansa,</i> Detain him if
he cannot post bail. <b>tinidur dilibru</b> <i>n</i> @bookkeeper.
<i>v</i> [B156] be a bookkeeper.

<p><b>tínir</b> <i>n</i> @thinner for paints, lacquers.

<p><b>tínis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tennis. <b>2</b> tennis or @{canvas shoes}. <i>v</i> 1
[AC; b6] @{play tennis}. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] wear
tennis shoes. <b>&mdash; kurt</b> @{tennis court}. <b>&mdash; plíyir</b> <i>n</i>
@{tennis player}. <i>v</i> [B156] be a tennis player.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{tennis court}. <b>2</b> @{dancing space}
out in the open.

<p><b>tinrawundir</b> <i>n</i> boxer who qualifies for ten-round
fights. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a boxer who
qualifies for ten-round fights.

<p><b>tinsiyun</b> = <sc>ATINSIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>tintà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ink. <b>2</b> ink of squids or octopuses. <i>v</i>
[A; b4] put @ink in a pen or on s.t. <i>Palíhug
rag tintà sa pawuntin pin,</i> Please fill the pen
with ink. <i>Natintaan ang mantil,</i> The tablecloth
got ink spilled on it. <b>&mdash; sa lumayágan,
núkus, tamalà, etc.</b> ink of squid, cuttlefish,
octopus. <b>tintíru</b> <i>n</i> @inkwell. <b>tintiruhan, tintirúhan</b>
= <sc>TINTÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>tintal</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] <b>1</b> @tempt, @entice. <i>Wáyis manintal
(mutintal) ang yáwà,</i> The devil
tempts in a shrewd way. <i>Ayaw kug tintála
ánang ímung páa,</i> Don't entice me with
your legs. <i>Mau nang bukíra ang gitintálan ni
Hisus,</i> Jesus was tempted on that mountain.
<b>2</b> bother so as to @distract. <i>Gitintal siya
maung nagkasáyup,</i> S.o. distracted him so
<pb n=2082>
he made errors. <i>n</i> @temptation. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i>
@tempter, @temptress. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @enticing. <b>tintasiyun</b>
<i>n</i> @temptation.

<p><b>tintin<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> child's word for @penis (<i>útin</i>).

<p><b>tintin<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TALINGTING</sc>.

<p><b>tintíru</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TINTÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tintu</b> <i>n</i> red @{table wine}. <b>&mdash; dulsi</b> @{sweet red
wine}, usually served as a lady's drink. <i>Gisirbíhan
ang mga babáyi ug tintu dulsi,</i> The
women were served sweet red wine. <b>&mdash; síku</b>
@{strong liquor}. <i>Ang mga láki ra ang gisirbíhan
sa tíntu[**tintu] síku,</i> Only the men were served
the strong liquor. <b>bínu &mdash;</b> = <sc>TINTU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>tintúra</b> <i>n</i> @{tincture of iodine}. <b>&mdash; arnika</b> <i>n</i> @{tincture
of arnica}. <b>&mdash; diyúdu, yúdu</b> = <sc>TINTÚRA</sc>.

<p><b>tinù, tínù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> insects which make a tiny ticking
sound when squashed. <i>v</i> [B246] make
a tiny popping sound when squashed. <i>Mutínù
ang búhì nga lusà kun tusdun,</i> Unhatched
eggs of head lice will make a tiny popping
sound when you press them between
your thumbnails.

<p><b>tínù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @ascertain, @verify. <i>Tinúang
way bantay inigsulud nátù,</i> @{Be sure} there's
no guard when we break in. <i>a</i> absolutely
@certain. <i>Tínù nang kadaúgan. Dílì malális,</i>
We most certainly will win. There is no dispute
about it. <i>a</i> absolutely certain.[**F1 duplicate definition of the adjective] <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @certainty. <i>Way katinúan nga magnúud ang
ákung pangagpas,</i> There's no certainty that
my guess will prove right. <b>2</b> s.t. that proves,
verifies. <i>Nagkinahanglag ígung katinúan arun
mahukman siya,</i> We need sufficient @evidence
if he is to be convicted.

<p><b>tinur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tenor voice. <b>2</b> @{tenor part} in a choral
group. <b>3</b> @{tenor instrument}. <b>&mdash; saks</b> @{tenor
saxophone}. <i>v</i> [A; b6] sing tenor.

<p><b>tinuryu</b> <i>n</i> a @{Don Juan}.

<p><b>tinùtinù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @herb of waste places: <i><b>Physalis
lanceifolia</b></i>.

<p><b>tinutuwa</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>.

<p><b>tinúud</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÚUD</sc>.

<p><b>tinyaplába</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>ALAP-AP</sc>. <b>2</b> medicine for
<sc>ALAP-AP</sc>. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] be infected with
tinea flava.

<p><b>tinyinti</b> <i>n</i> @lieutenant in rank. <i>v</i> [B156] be a
lieutenant. <i>Dì ku gustung maultimu, magtinyinti
ku,</i> I don't want to be a private but
a lieutenant. <b>&mdash; dil baryu</b> <i>n</i> @{barrio chief}. <i>v</i>
[B156] be a barrio chief.

<p><b>típ<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @tip, @gratuity. <i>v</i> [A; c] give, get a @tip,
gratuity. <i>Nakatíp siyag písus,</i> He got a peso
tip. <i>Diyis pursiyintu ang hustung itíp,</i> Ten
percent is a big enough tip to give.

<p><b>típ<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @tip, secret information. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)]
@{tip off}, give, get secret information. <i>Nakatíp
ang písi báhin sa túlis,</i> The <sc>P.C.</sc> got a tip
about the robbery.
<pb n=2083>

<p><b>típ<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] fasten with, apply adhesive
@tape. <i>Típi ang dinugtungan sa wayir,</i> Tape
the wire joints. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{adhesive tape}. <b>2</b> @{magnetic
tape}. <b>iskats &mdash;</b> @{Scotch tape}. <b>&mdash; ríkurd</b> @tape,
@{tape recording}. <i>v</i> [A; c] make a @tape recording.
<i>Akuy mutipríkurd sa íyang diskursu,</i>
I'll make a tape recording of his speech. <b>&mdash;
rikurding</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{tape recording session}. <b>2</b> @{tape
recording}. <i>v</i> [C23] have a tape recording
session. <i>Nagtiprikurding mi sa ámung ispits
klas,</i> We had a tape recording session in our
speech class. <b>&mdash; rikurdir</b> <i>n</i> @{tape recorder}. <i>v</i>
[A12] obtain a tape recorder.

<p><b>tipak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab7] break, chip a piece from.
<i>Natipak ang bàbà sa kupíta,</i> The rim of the
goblet is @chipped. <i>Ayawg tipki ni kay gamay
na lang,</i> Don't break anything off of
this piece. It's already small as it is. <b>2</b> [A; b7]
@{take away from} one's money, time, etc.
<i>Mutipak kug tirsiyu sa swildu pára sa buhis,</i>
I @{chip in} one-third of my salary for taxes.
<i>Tipki kug diyútay sa ímung panahun,</i> @Spare
me a little of your time. <b>3</b> [AB12; a1]
@crack. <i>Kinsay nakatipak sa tibud?</i> Who
cracked the jar? <i>Nagkatipak ang sag-ub nga
pirming nabulad,</i> The bamboo bucket is getting
cracked because it is constantly left in
the sun. <i>Ayawg tipka nang básu,</i> Don't
crack the glass. <b>4</b> [A; a3] get a @profit from
s.t. <i>Dakù kug natipak sa gúmang ákung gibaligyà,</i>
I made a lot from the tires I resold.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> piece broken from s.t. <b>2</b> s.t. taken, deducted
from.

<p><b>tipaka, tipakà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fragments, small broken
pieces. <i>Ang tipaka sa saang nahaságul sa unud,</i>
The pieces of the shell got mixed with
the meat. <i>Tipaka sa átung napusgay nga kaminyúun,</i>
The fragments of our broken
marriage. <b>2</b> hard outer @hull, @husk, or @shell
of fruits and nuts, @eggshells, shells of crustaceans.
<b>3</b> k.o. land @snail introduced by the
Japanese for food purposes.

<p><b>tipal-u</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @worm with legs, about 1" long,
that tends to seek dark places and gives off
phosphorescence when crushed.

<p><b>tipanu</b> <i>n</i> @{bamboo flute}.

<p><b>tipas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @veer, go in a new direction.
<i>Mitipas siyag láing dálan arun dílì siya hikit-an,</i>
He @{turned off} onto another road, so
they wouldn't find him. <b>1a</b> take off the
way, turn away from one's goals. <i>Ayawg itipas
ang ímung panganduy ngadtu sa kahiláyan,</i>
Don't let your ambitions veer to lustful
pleasures. <i>Inay idiritsu níyag hatud ang
babáyi gitipas sa awáawng dapit,</i> Instead of
taking the girl directly home, he took her
off to a deserted place. <b>2</b> [A23] for a conversation
to take a new tack. <i>Mitipas ang ílang 
<pb n=2084>
panagsulti ngadtus pulitika,</i> The[**Their?] conversation
shifted to politics. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256]
be caused to veer, deviate. <i>Nahitipas
na nà sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> That is far
from good manners. <b>-anan(<-), -l-an(<-), -an(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> @fork in a road, place where one turns
off in a new direction.[+]

<p><b>tipasak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @splash hard against s.t. <i>Mitipasak
ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung,</i> Rain
splashed from the gutter. <i>n</i> splashing against
s.t.

<p><b>tipasaw</b> = <sc>TIMPASAW</sc>.

<p><b>tipasì</b> (from <i>pasì</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> unhusked rice. <b>2</b> a nobody
compared with s.o. big. <i>Mangimbitar
kag tipasì sa parti?</i> You're inviting a bunch
of nobodies to the party? <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> for rice or
corn to have lots of unhusked grains mixed
in with it.

<p><b>tipay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. pearl @oyster with a thin, black
shell and brittle, tooth-like projections at
the mouth. It is a source of mother-of-pearl.
<b>2</b> @mother-of-pearl. <i>Tipay ang gunitánan sa
pistúla,</i> The pistol has a mother-of-pearl
handle. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] dive for this sort
of oyster.

<p><b>tipdas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @measles. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] have
<i>tipdas</i>.

<p><b>tipdas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] hit lightly, just barely
@graze. <i>Nagaras siya. Ígù lang nakatipdas ang
panà,</i> He was scratched. The arrow just
grazed him. <i>Way kásu, hitipdasan lang siya
sa bála,</i> It's nothing serious. The bullet just
grazed him.

<p><b>típì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @kill (slang). <i>Tipía ang saksi kun
mupyáit,</i> @Liquidate the witness if he sings.

<p><b>típig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1, 2, 3</b> = <sc>TÁPIG</sc>, <i>v1, 2, 3</i>. <b>4</b> [A1; b(1)]
@{save money}. <i>Maáyu nang magtípig pára
sa pagkatigúlang,</i> It's good to @save for your
old age. <i>Tipígi ang subra sa galastúhan,</i> Save
whatever you haven't spent. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @savings.
<b>2</b> s.t. kept hidden. <i>Dúna siyay tinipígang
pagbátì nímu,</i> She has a @secret love for
you. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> @{hiding place}.

<p><b>tipik</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] take a bit off s.t. <i>Dì giyud ka
makatipik ánang kík pára nákù?</i> Can't you
break a bit of that cake off for me? <i>Tipki
sad ku sa ímung pagtagad,</i> Let me have a
moment of your attention. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{small portion},
a @fraction of s.t. <i>Ang íyang hinábang
tipik lang sa íyang bahandì,</i> His donation is
only a fraction of what he has. <b>2</b> @{integral
part}. <i>Tipik ka na sa ákung kaugalíngun,</i>
You're already a part of my being. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
that forms a whole together with s.t. else.
<i>Ang yútà nga ákung gipalit katipik niadtu
sa asyinda,</i> The land I bought was formerly
@{part and parcel} of the hacienda.

<p><b>tipíyu</b> <i>n</i> acronym for @{Truck Public Utility}, a
<pb n=2085>
group of vehicles classed for vehicular licensing
purposes.

<p><b>tiplas</b> <i>v</i> [b8] @graze slightly. <i>Natiplasan lang
íyang agtang sa bála,</i> The bullet just grazed
his forehead lightly. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c1] aim s.t.
so that it just grazes the target. <i>Patiplasa (ipatiplas)
lang ang pagtíru sa púga,</i> Just graze
the escapee when you shoot him.

<p><b>tipmisyur</b> <i>n</i> @{tape measure}.

<p><b>tipríkurd</b> see <sc>TÍP<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tipsing</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] hit s.t. at the edge. <i>Natipsingan
ra níya ang targit,</i> He just hit the target
at the edge. <b>walà sa &mdash;</b> nothing as compared
to. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{slivers of wood} left after
chopping. <i>Ang tinipsing sa káhuy nga átung
gisapsápan maáyung idumálig,</i> The slivers
of wood that we chopped are good to use
as kindling. <b>2</b> @{small amount} as compared to
s.t. else. <i>Ang ímung natampu tinipsing lang
(walà sa tipsing) sa akúa,</i> Your contribution
is nothing compared to mine.

<p><b>tiptip</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @cut the tip of s.t. with scissors
or shears. <i>Ang mutiptip sa balíli gantíhan,</i>
Whoever clips the grass will get s.t. <b>1a</b>
[AP; c1] cut close to the surface or ground.
<i>Ákung gitiptípan (gipatiptípan) ang íyang
buhuk kay gikutu,</i> I cut his hair very short
because he has lots of lice. <b>2</b> [A; a1] break
s.t. with the teeth. <i>Kalabaw níla ang nagtiptip
sa ámung mais,</i> Their carabao chewed
up our corn. <i>a</i> @{cut close} to the surface. <i>Tiptip
kaáyung pagkaputul ang mga tuud sa nataran,</i>
The stumps in the yard were cut
close to the ground.

<p><b>típu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a @{liquid measure} of various amounts
depending on the locality. <b>1</b> for palm toddy,
usually containing six liters. <b>2</b> containing
about a ganta (3 liters). <b>tipuhan</b> <i>n</i> @container
holding a <i>típu</i>, usually one or two
nodes of bamboo.

<p><b>típu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @contours, @shape of face. <i>Daw diyúsa
ang típu sa íyang nawung,</i> Her profile is
like a goddess'. <b>may &mdash;</b> having an @attractive
appearance. <i>May típu giyud nang tawhána
dà,</i> That man is sure @{good-looking}. <b>2</b> @type
of person, @personality. <i>Ang típu sa babáying
ákung gustu kanang igat,</i> I like the type of
girl that is a flirt.

<p><b>típu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> @weight, @{registered weight} on the
scale. <i>Pilay típu nímus timbangan?</i> What is
your weight? (Lit. How much do you register
on the scale?)[**typo:scale?)][**corrected. P2] <i>v</i> [B256; c1] @{balance
the scales} by placing the rider on the zero
mark. <i>Tipúha (itípu) ang timbangan úsà
manimbang,</i> Place the rider on the zero
mark before you weigh s.t.

<p><b>típù</b> v [A; ac] @{put together}. <i>Kinsay nagtípù
sa mga tutbras? Bayag magkabaylu,</i> Who
<pb n=2086>
put the toothbrushes together? Suppose
they get mixed up? <i>Tipúa ang tanang ináni
únà bahína,</i> Put all the harvest together before
apportioning it. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> a crank-operated
device for twisting strands into a rope.

<p><b>tipug-uk</b> <i>a</i> @lumpy. <i>v</i> [B] be, become lumpy.
<i>Mutipug-uk (matipug-uk) ang harína ug dì
ayágun,</i> The flour will become lumpy if it
is not strained.

<p><b>tipuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{rub out}, @liquidate (slang). <i>Íyang
gitipuk ang háwak sa Karbun silbing
panimawus,</i> The chief tough of the Carbon
market area was @killed in revenge.

<p><b>tipuknul</b> = <sc>TIBUGUL</sc>.

<p><b>tipuksul</b> <i>n</i> lumps bulging out of a surface.
<i>Mga tipuksul sa nawung,</i> Lumps on the face.
<i>v</i> [A; a12P] @bulge out of a surface, form a
lump on. <i>Ayaw ug ibutang ang pistúla sa
bulsa kay mutipuksul,</i> Don't put the pistol
in the pocket because it will bulge.

<p><b>tipukù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> get on top of s.o. or s.t.,
hugging and bending it down. <i>Gitipuk-an
níya ang bábuy,</i> He jumped on the pig and
pinned it down. <b>1a</b> have a woman for intercourse
(euphemism). <b>1b</b> use s.t. one sets
oneself on. <i>Maay ka lang mutipukù ánang
bisiklíta apan dì ka muáyu ug madáut,</i>
You are good at using the bicycle, but
are you good at fixing it if it breaks? <b>2</b>
@{crowd around} s.o. or s.t. <i>Mitipukù ang mga
táwu sa labasíru,</i> The people crowded
around the fish peddler. <i>Gitipuk-an sila sa
mga lángaw,</i> A swarm of flies set on them.

<p><b>tipuk-ul</b> = <sc>TIBUGUL</sc>.

<p><b>tipúli</b> <i>n</i> the monkey-eating @eagle: <i><b>Pithecophaga
jefferyi</b></i>.

<p><b>tipúlu</b> = <sc>ATIPÚLU</sc>.

<p><b>típun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] put, be @together, @join in a
group. <i>Dì siya mutípun sa mga pundukpunduk,</i>
He doesn't mingle with groups. <i>Iniglaba
ayawg tipúna ang putì ug dikulur,</i> In doing
the laundry don't put the white and colored
clothes together. <i>Malatà nang prutása
ug itípun sa lataun,</i> That fruit will get rotten
if you put it together with rotten ones.
<b>2</b> [A2C; c5] @{live together}. <i>Pait ikatípun
ning kusug muháguk,</i> It's terrible to @{live
with} s.o. who snores. <b>3</b> [C; c3] live as a
@common-law couple. <i>Magtípun lang ta, way
kasalkásal,</i> Let's just live together without
getting married. <i>n</i> being together. <i>Típun mi
niadtug kwartu,</i> We were roommates formerly.
<b>tipuntipun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible cerith @shells,
&frac12;&Prime;&ndash;1&Prime; long, mud-colored or black, found
on rocks or mangrove trees. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that
has been put together. <i>Tinípung Bansa,</i> @{United
States}. <i>Tinípung Kanasúran,</i> @{United
Nations}. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @housemate. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> the <i>Katipúnan,</i> 
<pb n=2087>
a secret revolutionary society
which aimed at independence from Spain.
<b>katipuníru</b> <i>n</i> a member of the <i>Katipúnan</i>. <i>v</i>
[B156] become a <i>katipuníru</i>. <b>panag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@{living together}, esp. as a couple. <b>2</b> @gathering,
@{coming together}.

<p><b>tipun-ug</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); c1] be piled up into a big
heap. <i>Nagtipun-ug ang hugasan human sa
parti,</i> There was a huge stack of dishes after
the party. <i>Siya ang gitipun-ugan sa tanang
pagbásul,</i> The blame was all dumped on
him. <i>Tipun-úga (itipun-ug) lang ang mga
sagbut dihà arun dabúkan,</i> Heap the trash
there to burn it. <i>n</i> @pile, @heap of.

<p><b>típus</b> <i>n</i> @typhus. <i>v</i> [a4] be sick with typhus.

<p><b>*tipúsa, *tipúsu</b> <b>balay, túri nga &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> name
given to the @{Blessed Virgin} in prayers.

<p><b>tipuy</b> <i>n</i> @money (slang). <i>Arang run mi kaambuy,
way tipuy,</i> We're flat broke. Completely
busted. <i>v</i> [A; ac1] have some money,
have s.t. to use as money. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5]
get hold of money. <i>Makapanipuy gánì nà
siya, pasíkat dáyun,</i> If he gets his hands on
money he starts to show off.

<p><b>tipyas</b> = <sc>TIPLAS</sc>.

<p><b>tíra</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @shoot. <i>Tiráhi dáyug langgam
inigbátug,</i> Shoot the bird as soon as it lands
on the branch. <b>2</b> dynamite fish. <i>Tiráhi bísag
duut sa gagmayng isdà,</i> Blast it even if it's a
school of small fish. <b>3</b> go after a girl (slang).
<i>Mutíra siya bísag kinsa basta manimáhung
babáyi,</i> He courts anybody as long as it
smells like a woman. <b>4</b> have a woman for
sexual purposes. <i>Mutíra nà bísag kúkuk,</i> He
will have sexual intercourse even with prostitutes.
<b>5</b> [A; c] @publish, @{appear in print}. <i>Itíra
nang balitáa sa pamantaláan ugmà,</i> That
news will be published in the papers tomorrow.
<i>n</i> @shooting. <b>&mdash; pula</b> in a variety of billiards
where only three balls are used, the
condition that the player must hit the red
ball first whenever he tries to make a carom.
<b>&mdash; paságad</b> <i>n</i> @hit-and-miss, @{at random}.
<i>Diplánu ang ámung panúlis, dì tíra paságad,</i>
Our robberies are planned, not merely hit-and-miss.
<i>Dì siya makaigù kay tíra pasàgad
siyang manumbag,</i> He can't hit the mark
because he shoots at random. <i>v</i> [A3P] do
s.t. thoughtlessly or indiscriminately. <i>Ayawg
tíra paságad. Pilía ang laláking buútan,</i>
Don't pick just anybody. Choose a good
man to marry. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a single photographic
@exposure, @shot. <i>Kining tiradáha didtu makúhà
duul sa taytáyan,</i> This shot was taken
near the bridge. <b>2</b> @shot in a billiard game.
<b>biyin &mdash;</b> good shot. <b>3</b> @attack, verbal or physical.
<i>Kusug nga tirádang nakapalukápa níya,</i>
A hard @blow that sent him reeling. <b>4</b> the
<pb n=2088>
way one tries to persuade or @approach s.o.
(slang). <i>Sayup ímung tiráda hay imbis musugut,
nasukù na hinúun,</i> Your @approach
was wrong because instead of consenting
he became angry. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @attack s.o.
verbally or physically. <i>Mutiráda ku bísag
kinsa,</i> I'll sock anyone. <i>Gitiradáhan sa past&ucaron;r
ang mga maut,</i> The minister @{lashed out}
at the hypocrites. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @slingshot. <b>2</b>
one who lures victims into some sort of
swindling operation. <i>Tiradur kanang nagpatúung
giáyu sa tambálan,</i> The man who is
pretending the doctor cured him is just
there to lure victims. <b>3</b> one who engages in
dynamite fishing. <i>v</i> [A; a12] shoot with a
slingshot. <i>Tiradura ang manuk nga nanuktuk
sa binlad,</i> Shoot the chicken that is
pecking at the rice with a slingshot. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i>
dynamite fishing.

<p><b>tirána</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{love song} in a minor key of melancholy
character. <b>míngaw pay (pa sa) &mdash;</b> <i>a</i>
lacking in noise and gaiety. <i>Ang ílang pyista
míngaw pay tirána (pa sa tirána),</i> The feast
in their place was more mournful than the
<i>tirána</i> love song.

<p><b>tiranti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{high waistline}. <i>Human sa lúwis úsu
na sad ang tiranti nga karsúnis,</i> Pants with a
high waistline became the fad following the
low-waist. <b>2</b> @suspenders. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear suspenders.

<p><b>tirar</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] take s.o.'s picture. <i>Pangítà ug
<b>táwu</b> nga mutirar (manirar) kay nindut dinhi
ug byú,</i> Look for s.o. to take our pictures
because there's a nice view here.

<p><b>tíras</b> <i>n</i> @lace used as trimming. <i>v</i> [A; c] put
ornamental lace on s.t. <i>Tirási ang sinínà arun
manindut,</i> Put lace on the dress to
make it pretty.

<p><b>tirása</b> <i>n</i> @terrace, an extension of the flooring
of a house enclosed with a balustrade.

<p><b>tirasis</b> <i>n</i> @{terraced land} or a piece of level land
on the top of a mound for planting. <i>v</i> [b5]
build terraces.

<p><b>tiratíra</b> <i>n</i> @{pull taffy}. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make taffy.

<p><b>tirbis</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b(1)] for men to engage in illicit
physical enjoyments with girls on a short
term basis. <i>Mutirbis ang bána ug manganak
ang asáwa,</i> The husband engages in extra-*marital
relationships when his wife is in the
maternity hospital. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> act of playing
around with girls illicitly. <b>tirbistirbis</b> =
<sc>TIRBIS</sc>.

<p><b>tirbisíya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26; b8] @miscarry, result in
failure. <i>Ug dílì mutirbisíya (matirbisíya)
ang átung plánu, madátù giyud ta,</i> If our
plans don't miscarry, we will surely be rich.
<i>Ang dagkung swildu mauy nakatirbisíya
(nakapatirbisíya) sa átung nigusyu,</i> Our
<pb n=2089>
business failed because we gave too big salaries.
<b>2</b> [B126; b8] suffer a misfortune. <i>Natirbisíya
siya ug karun lúgus na makabisti sa
íyang mga anak,</i> He suffered a misfortune
and now he can hardly clothe his children.

<p><b>tirdrap</b> <i>n</i> an encased pearl pendant in the
shape of a teardrop. <i>v</i> [A] wear a teardrop
pendant.

<p><b>tiribli</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @horrible. <i>Tiribli ang nahitabù sa gilunúpang
baryu,</i> What happened to the
flooded barrio was horrible. <b>2</b> unusual in
ability, intensity, degree. <i>Tiribli siyang mubaskitbul,</i>
He plays basketball @terribly well.
<i>Tiribli níyang pagkagáhig úlu,</i> He's @terribly
stubborn.

<p><b>tiriktirik</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] mark with dots. <i>Mga uwat
sa buti mitiriktirik sa íyang nawung,</i> @Pock-*marks
dotted his face. <i>Ang birding panaptun
giritiktirikan ug putì,</i> The green cloth
is dotted with white dots. <i>n</i> @dots all over s.t.

<p><b>tirírit</b> = <sc>TARÍRIT</sc>.

<p><b>tíris</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> an open @terrace on top of buildings
usually utilized as an open-air eating place.
<b>2</b> = <sc>TIRÁSA</sc>.

<p><b>tirituryu</b> <i>n</i> @territory.

<p><b>tirmina</b> = <sc>TIRMINAR</sc>.

<p><b>tirminal<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{passenger terminal}.

<p><b>tirminal<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> term in mahjong: <b>1</b> one of the
end numbers (one or nine). <b>2</b> a sequence of
<b>three</b> one's or three nine's of different designs.
<b>-is</b> = <sc>TIRMINAL<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>1</i> (plural).

<p><b>tirminar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> give a specific date or
time for. <i>Wà siya mutirminar kun anus-a
mubálik,</i> He did not give a specific date for
when he would come back. <b>2</b> @predict that
s.t. will happen. <i>Way makatirmina sa dadangátan
sa kalag sa táwu,</i> No one can predict
what will happen to a man's soul. <i>Gitirminahan
nang dáan sa mga maistru nga mulampus
siya,</i> The teachers have predicted
that he would be a success.

<p><b>tirminit</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @fire s.o. from his job. <i>Tirminitun
(itirminit) ka giyud dáyun kun musúkul
ka,</i> You'll surely be fired if you are
insubordinate.

<p><b>tirminu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @term, @word. <b>1a</b> @meaning, @nuance.
<i>Púlung nga nagdalag láing tirminu,</i> Words
that have a meaning other than what is usually
understood. <b>2</b> @limit, @end. <i>Adúnay tirminu
ang tanan. Ang tanan lumalábay lámang,</i>
Everything must come to an end. Everything
is transient. <b>2a</b> @term, @tenure in office.
<b>2b</b> specific date or day. <i>Way tirminu ning
ákung byáhi kay nag-agad sa panahun,</i> My
trip has no fixed date. It depends on the
weather. <i>v</i> [A; c] give a term, @name. <i>Unsay
maáyung itirminu ánang sakíta?</i> What would
be a good term for that disease?
<pb n=2090>

<p><b>tirmumitru</b> <i>n</i> @thermometer.

<p><b>tirmus</b> <i>n</i> @{thermos bottle}.

<p><b>tirnu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> man's @suit. <b>2</b> formal woman's @{native
dress}, of floor length and one piece. <b>3</b> outfit
consisting of two or more pieces matching
in color. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a12] wear or make a suit
or terno dress. <b>2</b> [A12] for different articles
of apparel to match. <i>Nagatirnu ang ímung
bág ug sanínà,</i> Your bag and your
dress match. <i>a</i> @matching, of the same color.

<p><b>tirsíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{third gear} of a motor vehicle. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash;
klási</b> @{third class}. <i>v</i> [A2; c] put into third
gear. <i>Wà ku makatirsíra sa hustung higayun,</i>
I wasn't able to put it into third gear on
time.

<p><b>tirsíru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{third in rank}, grade. <b>2</b> one who is
a @{third grader}. <i>v</i> [B256] be in the third
grade. <i>Mutirsíru na siya karung abli,</i> He'll
be in the third grade this year.

<p><b>tirsiya parti</b> <i>n</i> @{one-third}.

<p><b>tirsiyu</b> <i>n</i> @{one-third}. <i>Tirsiyu ang báhin sa tag-*íya
sa yútà,</i> The owner gets a third as his
share. <i>v</i> [C2; a12] divide s.t. into three
equal shares.

<p><b>tirsiyupílu</b> <i>n</i> @velvet. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear, put velvet
on s.t.

<p><b>*tirtin</b> <b>&mdash; kards</b> <i>n</i> a manner of playing @mahjong
using 13 pieces for each player. <b>&mdash; tils</b>
<i>n</i> a winning mahjong hand that has four
<i>iksibisiyun</i> combinations.

<p><b>tíru</b> = <sc>TÍRA</sc>, <i>v1</i>, 2, 5. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>PANÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>tírung</b> n a supernatural being of dwarfish
proportions with a strong body of iron or
stone, said to inhabit isolated cliffs and
caves. It is popularly said that the machinery
in sugar mills is under the control of a
<i>tírung</i> and it will not function unless he
is fed. Hence, children are popularly threatened
to be fed to this monster. <i>Hílak arun
iláwug ta ka sa tírung,</i> Keep crying and I'll
feed you to the monster.

<p><b>tirungan</b> = <sc>TULUNGAN</sc>. see <sc>TÚLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>Tiruray</b> <i>n</i> an ethnic group in Upi, Cotabato.

<p><b>tirurismu</b> <i>n</i> @terrorism. <i>v</i> [A; a1] @terrorize.
<i>Mudaug lang siya kun tirurismúhun níya
ang butanti,</i> He will win only if he terrorizes
the voters.

<p><b>tirus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @squeeze nits or lice with the
thumbnail or an itchy part of the body between
the thumbnails. <i>Tirusa ang mga katul
sa ákung likud,</i> Squeeze the itchy places on
my back between your nails.

<p><b>tirúti</b> = <sc>TARÚTI</sc>.

<p><b>tís<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @tease the hair. <i>Tísa ákung buhuk,</i>
Tease my hair.

<p><b>tís<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @test in school. <i>v</i> [A; a] have a test. <i>Ákù
mung tísun báhin sa asayinmint,</i> I'll give
you a test on the assignment.
<pb n=2091>

<p><b>tísà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. single-seeded @fruit, the size and
shape of a small pear with bright yellow,
inedible skin and flesh which is sweet and
fleshy but dry: <b><i>Lucuma nervosa</i></b>.

<p><b>tísà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{roofing tile}.

<p><b>tísà<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>TÍSAS</sc>.

<p><b>tisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] sit or @{stand straight}; have a
bent back straightened. <i>Mitisar ang kadíti
dáyung salúdu,</i> The cadet stood straight
and executed a salute. <i>Matisar pa nang ímung
pagkabakù,</i> Your bent posture can
still be corrected. <i>a</i> @straight in posture.

<p><b>tísas</b> <i>n</i> @chalk. <i>v</i> [A; c1] use, apply chalk on
s.t. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>TÍSAS</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>tisay</b> (from <i>mistísa</i>) <i>n</i> woman with some
Caucasian blood or features (slang).

<p><b>tisiku</b> <i>n</i> one who has @tuberculosis. <i>v</i> [B126]
be, become a tubercular.

<p><b>tísirt</b> <i>n</i> a sport shirt that slips over the head:
@{T-shirt}, @{polo shirt}. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] wear a T-shirt.

<p><b>tísis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @tuberculosis. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12] for a sickness
to become tuberculosis. <i>Matísis ang ubung
pinasagdan,</i> A cough that is not treated will
turn into tuberculosis. <b>2</b> [a4] get T.B. <i>Gitísis
siya kay kúlag káun,</i> He got tuberculosis
because he didn't eat enough. <b>-un</b> a tubercular
person.

<p><b>tísis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @thesis, @dissertation for a degree. <i>v</i> [A1]
write a thesis.

<p><b>tiskug</b> <i>v</i> [B46] @stiffen so as to lose a pliant
quality. <i>Mitiskug ang íyang líug sa kalísang,</i>
Her neck stiffened in fear.

<p><b>tiskwir</b> <i>n</i> @{T-square}.

<p><b>tislang</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] stand @erect. <i>Dì na mutislang
ang kinatáwu sa tigúlang,</i> An old man's penis
will no longer erect. <i>Magtislang ang buhuk
kun dì pamadáhan,</i> Your hair will stand
on end if you don't put pomade in it.

<p><b>tislaub</b>,<b> tisláub</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b6] <b>1</b> @{fall into} s.t.
with a splash. <i>Natisláub (mitisláub) siya sa
tunaan,</i> He fell into the mudhole. <i>Mau nang
basáka ang íyang gitislaúban,</i> That's the rice
paddy she fell into. <b>1a</b> fall into a state viewed
as bad. <i>Mitisláub sila sa bung-aw sa pulitika,</i>
They plunged into the sinkhole of
politics. <b>2</b> [B126] for an area to get a depression
in it. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @{shallow depression}.

<p><b>tislub</b> = <sc>TUNLUB</sc>.

<p><b>tislup</b> = <sc>TASLUP</sc>.

<p><b>tisngì</b> = <sc>TINGSÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tispípar</b> <i>n</i> papers for a @test.

<p><b>tist</b> = <sc>TÍS<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tistamintu</b> <i>n</i> @testament, @will. <b>Bag-ung &mdash;</b> @{New
Testament}. <b>Dáang &mdash;</b> @{Old Testament}.

<p><b>tist&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{make a will}. <i>Ang kamanghúrang
anak mauy gitistahan sa karáang balay,</i>
The ancestral home was bequeathed to the
<pb n=2092>
youngest son.

<p><b>tistígus</b> <i>n</i> @{witness in court}. <i>v</i> [A; c] act as a
@witness in court. <i>Way mutistígus kay mahadluk
nga maapil,</i> Nobody wants to testify
because they are afraid of getting involved.

<p><b>tistimunyu</b> <i>n</i> @testimony. <i>Ang tistimunyu sa
tistígus,</i> The witness' testimony. <i>v</i> [A; c]
@{give testimony}, @profession. <i>Gitistimunyu níya
ang íyang pagkakábig,</i> She testified as to
her conversion.

<p><b>tisting</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @test, @try s.t. <i>Nagtisting pa
gánì ta nadáut na,</i> All we were doing was
testing it and it broke. <i>Tistíngi ang brík,</i>
Test the brakes. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] try s.t. new to
have a taste of it. <i>Mutisting kug LSD kun
unsay mahitabù,</i> I'll try LSD and see what
it leads to.

<p><b>tistir</b> <i>n</i> @tester used to detect electric, electronic
problems.

<p><b>tistis</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] @joke. <i>Mu ra kug gitíkun kun
siya nay manistis (mutistis),</i> It is as if he
tickles me when he tells jokes. <i>Dúna siyay
bag-ung itistis káda prugráma níya,</i> He has
new jokes for each of his programs. <i>n</i> joke.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> given to joking. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @joking.
<i>Matistísung kulukabildu,</i> A joking conversation.
<b>-ay(->)</b>, <b>-anay</b> <i>v</i> [C2; c3] exchange
jokes. <i>Nagtistisay (nagtistisánay) ang mga
hubug sa tubaan,</i> The drunks are exchanging
jokes at the toddy stand. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> exchanging
jokes. <b>2</b> art of telling jokes. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>-AY(->)</sc>,
<i>n2</i>.

<p><b>tísu</b> <i>a</i> @erect in posture. <i>Ang suldádu tísu kaáyu
ug láwas,</i> A soldier has a very erect body.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] be, become erect. <b>2</b> [A; c] carry
one's body straight and erect. <i>Itísu ang láwas
inigkaman ug atinsiyun,</i> Stand straight
at the command of attention.

<p><b>tisuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @{plant seed} into the ground.
<i>Nagtisuk kug nangkà sa nátad,</i> I planted a
jackfruit seed in the yard. <b>1a</b> thrust a sharp
object on the ground. <i>Gitisuk sa manggugubat
ang íyang bangkaw sa atubángan sa rayna,</i>
The warrior planted his spear before the
queen. <b>2</b> @implant in the mind. <i>Itisuk sa hunàhúnà
ang ákung pahimatngun,</i> Implant
my advice firmly in your mind.

<p><b>tisun</b> = <sc>TÍSU</sc>.

<p><b>tisuríra</b> = <sc>TISURÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>tisuriríya</b> <i>n</i> @treasury.

<p><b>tisuríru</b> <i>n</i> @treasurer. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, make a
treasurer. <i>Tisurirúhun nímu nang kiriwan?</i>
Are you going to make that crook the
treasurer?

<p><b>tisuy</b> = <sc>TISAY</sc> (male).

<p><b>tisyirt</b> = <sc>TÍSIRT</sc>.

<p><b>títa</b> = <sc>TÍTU</sc> (female). <b>titatíta</b> = <sc>KITAKÍTA</sc>,
<i>2</i>, <i>v2</i>. <i>see</i>[**typo see italic?F1] <sc>KITA</sc>.
<pb n=2093>

<p><b>titanus</b> <i>n</i> @tetanus. v 1 [B126] for s.t. to become
tetanus. <b>2</b> [a4] @{get tetanus}.

<p><b>tithi</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @spit out in a tiny squirt. <i>Naíkug
kung mutithi sa bínung labihang isúga,</i> I
was ashamed to spit out the strong wine.

<p><b>títi</b> <i>n</i> @breast. <i>v</i> [A; b] suck the breast. <i>Malináwung nagtíti
ang masúsu,</i> The infant is
peacefully sucking the breast.

<p><b>titì</b>, <b>títì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @dirty (child talk). <i>Titì kaáyu ang
nawung nímu,</i> Your face is very dirty. <i>v</i> [B126;
b6] be, become dirty.

<p><b>títì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> address of respect to an elder @brother
or a close male relative. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o.
<i>títì</i>.

<p><b>títì<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>TÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>tìtì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @drain, @consume to the last
drop or bit. <i>Ang íyang bisyu mauy nakatìtì
sa ílang tinígum,</i> His vice exhausted their
savings entirely. <i>Ákung gitìtì ang katapúsang
túlù sa kukakúla,</i> I drained the last
drop of Coca-Cola. <b>2</b> use s.t. up in a figurative
sense. <i>Natìtì na ang ákung paílub,</i> My
patience is exhausted. <b>ka-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> state of
being used up entirely.

<p><b>títik</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @write, @print letters or words.
<i>Ngálan sa kandidátu ang gitítik sa karatula,</i>
The candidate's name is printed on the billboard.
<i>n</i> @letter of the alphabet. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @spelling.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @writings, @literature. <i>Inila siyang
magsusúlat sa Katitíkang Bisayà,</i> He is a
noted writer in Visayan Literature.

<p><b>titip</b>, <b>títip</b> <i>a</i> very @steep. <i>Way makasáka ánang
titip nga pangpang,</i> No one can climb that
very steep cliff. <i>v</i> [b6] consider s.t. steep.

<p><b>títit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] say beep-beep in pretending to
blow one's horn. <i>Mutítit gánì ku, manlarga
na kunúhay ta,</i> When I say beep-beep, let's
pretend we're leaving. <i>n</i> @horn (child's talk).

<p><b>tits<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> humorous, impolite term of address
to a man, usually used when negating s.t.
he says: @buster, @{buddy roe}. <i>Ilára tits. Úna
pa ku nímu sa dúyan,</i> Don't try to fool me,
buster! I wasn't born yesterday. <i>Hadlúka[** unclear][**corrected. P2]
tits,</i> You can't scare me, buddy roe. <i>v</i> [a12]
call s.o. by this title.<i> À, gitits lang níya si
prupísur,</i> He dared call the professor 'buddy'.

<p><b>tits<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @teach in school. <i>Nagt&icaron;ts dáyun
ku humag graduwar,</i> I taught right after
graduation. <b>praktis -ing</b> <i>n</i> practice teaching.
<i>v</i> [A; b6] do practice teaching. <i>Ang mga
búgù ang ákung gipraktis titsíngan,</i> I have
dull students for my practice teaching. <b>-ir(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> @teacher. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a teacher.

<p><b>títu</b> <i>n</i> address of respect for an @uncle. <i>v</i> [A;
c12] call s.o. títu.

<p><b>tituláda</b> = <sc>TITULÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>tituládu</b> <i>n</i> one who has a @degree. <i>Dílì ka makasulud 
<pb n=2094>
ug trabáhu ug dì ka tituládu,</i> You
can't get a job if you don't have a degree. <b>2</b>
land having a Torrens Title. <i>v</i> [B1256] have
a degree.

<p><b>titulu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> professional @degree. <b>2</b> @title, name
of literary works. <b>3</b> document certifying
legal @ownership of a piece of land. <b>humstid
&mdash;</b>, <b>pripatin &mdash;</b> @homestead, free @patent title.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @entitle, name a work. <i>Ang maung
lílas gitituluhan ug Tintal,</i> The movie is entitled
Temptation. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] make documents
certifying to legal ownership of land.
<i>Makalún lang ta kun tituluhan nátù ang yútà,</i>
We can make a loan only if we have a
title prepared for the lot. <b>&mdash; túrins</b> <i>n</i> @{Torrens
Title}.

<p><b>titurun</b> <i>n</i> @{tetoron cloth}.

<p><b>tiudtiud</b> = <sc>TAUDTAUD</sc>.

<p><b>tíug</b> <i>v</i> [c] be known and talked about. <i>Wà
matíug ang ílang panagtrátu kay tinagùtagù
man,</i> People don't know that they are engaged,
for they meet in secret. <i>Gikatíug nga
aku awuk,</i> They say around here that I'm a
vampire. <i>a</i> thing talked about. <b>baN-(->)</b> see
<sc>BANIUG</sc>.

<p><b>tiuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @choke s.o. by putting s.t.
around his throat. <i>Ayawg hugta ang kurbáta
kay matiuk ku,</i> Don't tighten the necktie
so tight or I will choke.

<p><b>tíun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{point a weapon} at close range.
<i>Íyang gitiúnan ang ákung agtang,</i> He took
aim at my forehead. <i>Ayawg itíun nà nákù,</i>
Don't @point that thing at me.

<p><b>tiúnay</b> (from <i>unay</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. deeply imbedded
in the flesh such that one must dig to get it
out. <i>Gikúhà sa duktur ang tiúnay sa ákung
dughan,</i> The doctor removed the arrowhead
from my chest. <b>2</b> @true, @sincere. <i>Salígi king
gugmang tiúnay,</i> Trust this sincere love (of
mine). <b>3</b> interest[**typo for inherent F1], natural property of. <i>Ang
kabangis tiúnay sa tawhánung kinaíya,</i> Pugnaciousness
is inherent in human nature. <b>4</b>
= <sc>KASYA<sub>1</sub></sc>. <i>v</i> [B] be deeply @imbedded.
<i>Gugmang nagtiúnay sa dughan,</i> A love that
has penetrated deep into my breast.

<p><b>tiúruk</b> (from <i>úruk</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; cP] @dive, @{go
down} headfirst. <i>Mitiúruk (mipatiúruk) ang
ayruplánu,</i> The airplane took a @{nose-dive}.
<i>Itiúruk (ipatiúruk) ang tabánug unyà ipasáka
na sad,</i> Have the kite nose-dive then let
it climb up. <b>2</b> [B1246] @{fall headfirst}. <i>Nabálì
ang íyang líug kay natiúruk pagkahúlug,</i>
He broke his neck when he fell headfirst.
<b>&mdash; sa búhat</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] do s.t. @conscientiously,
work without lifting the head. <i>Dì nà siya
mutiúruk sa búhat,</i> He is not conscientious
in his work. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be caused to
bow one's head. <i>Nahitiúruk siya sa dihang</i>
<pb n=2095>
<i>nauláwan siyag maáyu,</i> He bowed his head
in shame.

<p><b>tiúrus</b> <i>v</i> [B46; a] <b>1</b> continue @{going on}, speed
away. <i>Mitiúrus siyag lakaw bisan gitawag,</i>
He continued walking away even though
s.o. was calling him. <i>Gitiúrus níya ang dágan
sa trák,</i> He sped away with the truck. <b>2</b>
@slide down, @swoop down. <i>Mitiúrus ang
ayruplánu ngadtu sa kaáway,</i> The plane
swooped down on the enemy. <i>Labihan níyang
nakatiúrus sa káhuy sa pagkakità níya
sa bitin,</i> How quickly he got down from
the tree when he saw the snake.

<p><b>tius-us</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>DAÍLUS</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>US-US</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>tiwangwang</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] @spread or @open apart
from a vertex or hinge-like joint. <i>Nagtiwangwang
ang mga basahun sa lamísa,</i> The
books are laid open on the table. <i>Gitiwangwang
níya ang íyang páa,</i> She spread her
thighs apart.

<p><b>tiwas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @finish, @complete. <i>Wà ku
makatiwas ug káun kay nabukug ku,</i> I
didn't finish eating because a bone got stuck
in my throat. <i>Tiwasa úsà ang iskuyla únà ka
magminyù,</i> Finish your studies first before
you get married. <b>2</b> [A3P; b] give a @{finishing
blow}, kill in the end. <i>Ang kaguul mauy nakatiwas
(nakapatiwas) sa masakitun,</i> Grief
finished off the sick man. <i>Ug mulíhuk pa
gánì tiwasi (tiwsi),</i> If he still moves, deliver
him the coup-de-grace. <b>3</b> [C2] conclude a
conflict by fighting it out to the death. <i>Huy
animal! Kanáug diri arun magtíwas ta,</i> Hey
you! Come on down here so we can fight it
out to the death. <i>n</i> @finished. <i>Tiwas na ang ákung
pípar,</i> My paper is all done. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
ac] have s.o. bring s.t. to an end. <b>2</b> [c] have
s.o. get married. <i>Ipatiwas na sila si Tabúra
ug si Tunyu,</i> Have Tonio and Tabora get
married.

<p><b>tiwsan</b> see <sc>TIWAS</sc>.

<p><b>tiwtiw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] wave a finger at s.o. to
@scold, @accuse. <i>Sa íyang pagbuybuy nákù, gitiwtíwan
ku,</i> He waved his fingers at me as
he listed all the good things he had done for
me. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @nagging, @scolding by shaking
a finger at. <b>2</b> @gossiping. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] <b>1</b> be a
nag. <b>2</b> be gossiping.

<p><b>tiwtiw<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>BATIWTIW</sc>.

<p><b>tiyà</b>, <b>tíyà</b> <i>n</i> term of address for one's @aunt or
the female cousins of one's parents, or by
extension any woman older than the speaker.
<i>v</i> [A; a1] call s.o. aunt. <i>Tiyaa nang tindíra
ágig táhud,</i> Call the woman in the store
auntie as a sign of respect.

<p><b>tiyan</b>, <b>tíyan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stomach. <b>2</b> @pregnancy. <i>Pila
na ka búlan ang ímung tiyan?</i> How many
months along are you (lit. is your stomach)?
<pb n=2096>
(->) <i>v</i> [a12] hit in the @stomach. <i>Gitiyan nákù
siyag sumbag,</i> I hit him in the stomach.
<b>-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> having prominent stomach.

<p><b>tiyù, tíyù</b> <i>n</i> term of address for one's parents'
brother or male cousins, or by extension,
any man older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; c12]
call s.o. @uncle.

<p><b>tl</b> written representation of a dorso-patatal
imploded click used in urging a horse to
move.

<p><b>tling</b> written representation of the sound
made by strumming a guitar.

<p><b>trabáhu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] @work, @{go to work}.
<i>Nagtrabáhu siya sa kapitul,</i> He is working
at the Capitol. <i>Ámung tindáhan ang íyang
gitrabahúan,</i> She is working in our store. <b>1a</b>
[A123S] obtain employment. <i>Lisud makatrabahu
ang ikskanbik,</i> An ex-convict has a
hard time finding employment. <b>2</b> [A; a]
@{work on} s.t. <i>Trabahúa ang íyang sinínà,</i>
Work on her dress. <b>3</b> [A; a2] have @{sexual
intercourse} (euphemism). <i>Ayawg trabahúa
ímung asáwa ug nagrigla,</i> Don't have intercourse
with your wife when she menstruates.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> piece of work. <b>2</b> @job. <b>trabahadur</b> <i>n</i>
@{manual laborer}. <i>a</i> one who works hard on
manual labor. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156] be a @laborer. <i>Natrabahadur
siya sa gihímung karsáda,</i> He
was a laborer on a road-building project. <b>2</b>
[B126; b6] be a hard worker (usually said
of manual work). <i>Ang tingúhang muuswag
mauy nakapatrabahadur (nakatrabahadur)
níya,</i> He was a hard worker because of his
desire to prosper. <b>-a(<-)</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>TRABAHADUR</sc>
(female). <b>trabahanti</b> <i>n</i> @laborer, @employee. <i>a</i>
hard worker. <i>Ang táwung trabahanti dì gustung
mupahúway,</i> A hard worker does not
want to rest. <i>v</i> [B156] be a laborer, employee.
<i>Natrabahanti siya sa ákung upisína,</i>
He was an employee at my office.

<p><b>*trabiling</b> <b>&mdash; bag</b> <i>n</i> @{traveling bag}. <b>&mdash; nga sinihan</b>
<i>n</i> commercial movie that moves from
place to place.

<p><b>trabilirs tri</b> <i>n</i> traveller @palm, an ornamental
palm with leaves like a banana spread in a
fan-like arrangement: <i><b>Ravenala madagascariensis</b></i>.

<p><b>trabisíya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] go around s.t., go the
long way around instead of directly to one's
destination. <i>Nakatrabisíya na ang gwardiya
sa prisuhan,</i> The guard has made the rounds
of the prison. <i>Itrabisíya ang sakayan kun
sungsungun ang hángin,</i> Let the boat go
round about if you have to go against the
wind. <b>2</b> [AN; c] place a private bet against
a member of the crowd in the cockpit. <i>Itrabisíya
únà ang kwarta arun mutúbù,</i> First
bet the money around among the onlookers
<pb n=2097>
so it will grow. <b>3</b> [A13; c1] lie diagonally
across s.t. <i>Kun magtrabisíya kita paghigdà
masulud kitang tanan niíning katri,</i> If we lie
diagonally across the bed, we can all get in
it. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place for onlookers, crowd, etc. around
a cockpit. <i>Anhà siya sa trabisíya,</i> He
stays in the place for the onlookers. <b>2</b> cockpit
audience or crowd. <i>Ang trabisíya nanghugyaw,</i>
The crowd in the cockpit yelled.

<p><b>trabungku</b> <i>n</i> in folk belief, a glowing, round
stone which confers magical powers on
whoever gets hold of it. It is said to be
found in the possession of certain snakes.

<p><b>tradisiyun</b> <i>n</i> traditional @customs. <i>v</i> [B1256]
become @traditional.<i> Natradisiyun na dinhi
ang pagpanaygun mapasku,</i> It has become a
@tradition here to go caroling at Christmas.

<p><b>tráha</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @threads of a screw, pipe, and
the like. <b>2</b> mechanical device for forming
threads. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] make threads.

<p><b>tráhi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a complete @{men's suit}. <b>2</b> an article
of clothing that is part of a suit. <i>Kining karsunísa
<b>tráhi</b> sa amirkána,</i> This is the pair of
pants that goes with the suit. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)]
wear a suit. <b>&mdash; dibayli</b> <i>n</i> @{ball gown}. <b>&mdash;
dibúda, sa kasal</b> <i>n</i> @{wedding dress}.

<p><b>trahidiya</b> <i>n</i> @tragedy.

<p><b>trák</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{motor vehicle}. <b>2</b> @bus. <i>v</i> [A13] go
by bus or truck. <i>Mas dalì ang magtrák kay
sa magbarku,</i> Going by bus is faster than
by boat. <b>&mdash; dikarga</b> @{cargo truck}. <b>&mdash; dipasahíru</b>
@{passenger bus}. <b>-ing</b> <i>n</i> @trucking, the business
of trucking. <i>Dúna siyay tráking ug láging
nga kumpaníya,</i> He has a trucking and
logging company. <i>v</i> [A13] go into the
trucking business.

<p><b>traktur, traktúra</b> <i>n</i> farm @tractor. <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
use a tractor.

<p><b>trakúma</b> <i>n</i> @trachoma, an infection of the
eyes. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] become trachoma. <b>2</b> [a4]
have trachoma.

<p><b>trambíya</b> <i>n</i> @tramway.

<p><b>trambutsu</b> = <sc>TAMBUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>trampas</b> <i>n</i> @trick set to deceive, fix s.t. <i>Way
trampas tung madyíka. Tinúud giyung madyik,</i>
There was no trick in the act. It was
a real magic.

<p><b>trampit</b> <i>n</i> @trumpet with pistons. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
play a trumpet. <i>Kinsay nagtrampit adtung
sunatáha?</i> Who played the trumpet in that
piece? <b>-ir(->)</b> <i>n</i> trumpeter.

<p><b>trangka</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @bolt a doorway, shutter,
close with a crossbar. <i>Trangkahi (trangkáhi)
ang bintánà kay dúna unyay kawatan,</i> Bolt
the window, because a robber might come.
<b>2</b> [AN2] bolt oneself in a room, house, etc.
<i>Nasukù siya maung nanrangka (nanarangka,
nagtrangka) sa kwartu,</i> She was angry and
<pb n=2098>
bolted herself in the room. <i>n</i> bolt or crossbar.
<b>trangkahan</b> <i>n</i> gate or door fastened with
a bolt. <i>Giúyug sa prísu ang trangkahan,</i> The
prisoner shook the gate. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> @locked.[+]

<p><b>trangkásu</b> <i>n</i> @influenza. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] cause,
have influenza.

<p><b>transaksiyun</b> <i>n</i> @transaction. <i>v</i> [C2; c3] have a
transaction with s.o. <i>Dì[** accent direction?][**corrected. P2] ku makigtransaksiyun
ug tikasan,</i> I won't do business with a
cheat.

<p><b>transistur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @transistor. <b>2</b> @{transistorized
radio}.

<p><b>transkrip</b> <i>n</i> a @transcript of academic records.

<p><b>transmisyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{automotive transmission}. <b>1a</b>
@transmission of power. <b>2</b> radio, @{TV transmission}.

<p><b>transmit</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @transmit a message by radio,
telegraph, etc. <i>Itransmit dáyun nang tiligráma
kay dinalian,</i> Transmit that cable
right away because it's urgent.

<p><b>transmítir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> radio, @{TV transmitter}. <b>2</b> @transmitter
site.

<p><b>transpigurasiyun</b> <i>n</i> transformation of the
bread and wine in the mass into the body
and blood of Jesus Christ.

<p><b>transpir</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @transfer from one school to
another, from one job to another. <i>Mutranspir
ku sa Yúbi sunud túig,</i> I'll transfer to
<sc>U.V.</sc> next year. <i>Itranspir dáyun sa publasiyun
kadtung duul sa luwag,</i> Workers close
to the officials (lit. ladle) don't take long to
get their transfer to town. <i>n</i> order or authorization
of transfer.

<p><b>transpurmir</b> <i>n</i> electrical @transformer. <i>v</i> [b6]
use a transformer on. <i>Transpurmíri ang tíbi
arun magáwì sa dusbayinting bultáhi,</i> Use a
transformer with the television so we can
plug it into 220 volts.

<p><b>transpurtasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @transportation, mode of
travel. <i>Wà nay transpurtasiyun ngadtu human
sa bagyu,</i> There was no way to get
there after the storm.

<p><b>transpurti</b> <i>n</i> @transport, @{troop ship}. <i>Galamitun
sa gíra nga gikargas dagkung transpurti,</i> War
equipment that was loaded on big transports.
<i>v</i> [A13; c1] travel, convey in a troop
ship.

<p><b>trantádu</b> = <sc>TARANTÁDU</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TARANTA</sc>.

<p><b>trapal</b> <i>n</i> @tarpaulin. <i>Trapal ang gawíun sa paggamag
tihíras,</i> They use @canvas to make
cots. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] cover s.t. with tarpaulin.
<i>Gitrapalan ang mga sinakung simintu
pag-ulan,</i> They covered the bags of cement
with tarpaulin when it rained.

<p><b>trápik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @traffic. <b>2</b> street intersection with
a traffic light in it. <b>3</b> policeman directing
traffic. <b>4</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> lacking manners. <i>Wà kay
trápik. Mulatas ka man sa taliwálà sa mga</i>
<pb n=2099>
<i>táwung nagsultihánay,</i> You have no manners.
You pass between people talking. <i>a</i>
heavy traffic. <i>Trápik kaáyu ug alas dúsi,</i> The
traffic is heavy at twelve o'clock. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;
b(1)] @{direct traffic}. <b>2</b> [B156] be a traffic
policeman. <b>3</b> [B6] for traffic to be heavy,
congested. <i>Magtrápik ang karsáda ug dúnay
parid,</i> Traffic is congested if there's a parade.
<b>4</b> [a12] be caught in a traffic jam. <i>Natrápik
ku sa Kulun,</i> I was caught in a traffic
jam on Colon Street.

<p><b>trapiku</b> = <sc>TRÁPIK</sc>, <i>n, v2</i>.

<p><b>trápu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b1] @wipe a large area. <i>Nagtrápu
siya sa singut sa bátà,</i> She's wiping off
the child's sweat. <i>Trapúhi ang lamísa únà
basyúhi,</i> Wipe the table before setting it.
<i>Trapúhi ring lipstik sa ákung ngábil,</i> Wipe
the lipstick off my lips. <b>2</b> [A; b] clean s.o.
by rubbing with a wet cloth. <i>Trapúhi lang
ang bátà kay kahilanatun,</i> Just @wash the
child off with a wet cloth because he's feverish.
<b>3</b> [c6] in games: be badly beaten. <i>Sa
baskit gitrápu mi sa San Karlus,</i> We were
badly beaten by San Carlos in basketball.
<b>4</b> [B1256; c1] make old garments into rags
for wiping. <i>Trapuha (itrapu) na lang ning
gisiun nga bláwus,</i> Make this old, worn-out
blouse into rags. <b>5</b> [A1; c16] finish a big
quantity of food. <i>Duha ra ka táwu ang nagtrápu
sa usa ka k[=ú]ng linúgaw,</i> Two people
finished off the whole potful of porridge.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @rag or anything for wiping. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2;
c6] <b>1</b> wipe oneself dry. <i>Nanarápu (nanrápu)
siya human kalígù,</i> He dried himself
after he took a bath. <b>2</b> clean oneself with a
washcloth. <i>Dì ku malígù. Manarápu lang ku,</i>
I won't take a bath, I'll just wash myself
with a washcloth.

<p><b>traski</b> [so-and-so] is bad enough, but in addition
[such-and-such] must happen. <i>Traski
lisud ang kwartang pangitáun, náa sab kamu
nga kusug mag-usik-usik,</i> Money is hard enough
to come by without your all having
to go and waste it.

<p><b>traspiri, traspirir</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @move, @{change
residence}. <i>Mutraspirir mi sa bag-ung balay
ugmà,</i> We'll move to the new house tomorrow.
<b>2</b> transfer from one document to another.
<i>Itraspirir sa ímung ngálan ang kabtángan
sa namatay,</i> The deceased's property
will be transferred to your name.

<p><b>traspurti</b> <i>n</i> vessel used in @transport. <i>Miabut
na ang traspurting hinábang álang sa Byapra,</i>
The transports with aid for Biafra have
arrived.

<p><b>tratádu</b> <i>n</i> @treaty between states.

<p><b>tratar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> treat, bear oneself toward.
<i>Maáyung mutratar kaníla ang ílang inaína,</i>
<pb n=2100>
Their stepmother treats them well. <b>2</b> @{attend
to} s.t. <i>Mitratar dáyun ang mayur sa prublíma
sa mga iskwátir,</i> The mayor immediately
attended to the problem of the squatters.
<b>3</b> @treat, @{deal with} a question. <i>Unsay gitratar
sa párì sa íyang sirmun?</i> What did the priest
talk about in his sermon? <b>tratamyintu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
treatment accorded to one. <i>Maáyu ang íyang
tratamyintu sa mga míd,</i> He treats the
maids well. <b>2</b> treatment, dealing with s.t.
that needs attention. <b>3</b> @treatment, discussion
of a question.

<p><b>tratsi</b> <i>n</i> @fret of a stringed instrument. <i>v</i> [A;
c] put, use as a fret.

<p><b>trátu</b> <i>n</i> @sweetheart. <i>v</i> [a1c3] be sweethearts.
<i>Musintinyal nákung panguyab níya únà mi
magkatrátu,</i> I courted her for nearly a century
before we became sweethearts. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[A12] get for a sweetheart. <i>Nakatratu siyag
bungì,</i> He had a harelip for a sweetheart.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] go get a sweetheart. <i>Unyà
ka ra manarátug ugpas ka na?</i> Do you intend
to have a sweetheart only after you've
become all used up? <b>manag-</b> <i>n</i> sweethearts.
<i>Managtrátu sila</i>, They are sweethearts. <b>panag-</b>
<i>n</i> relationship of being sweethearts.

<p><b>tráyal</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @try s.t. or s.o. out. N<i>agtráyal
kug duha ka klási nga ripridyirítur,</i> I have
tried out two different brands of refrigerator.
<i>Pila na ka buuk ang gitrayálan álang
niíning trabahúa,</i> They have tried out several
applicants for the job. <i>n</i> @trial.

<p><b>trayanggul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @triangle. <b>2</b> triangle, k.o. percussion
instrument. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make, form a
triangle. <i>Trayanggula (itrayanggul) ang purmisyun
sa banda,</i> Form the marching band
into a triangle.

<p><b>trayanggulu</b> = <sc>TRAYANGGUL</sc>.

<p><b>trayinta</b> number thirty. <i>v</i> see <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>trayintaydus</b> <i>n</i> thirty-two @caliber gun or @cartridge.

<p><b>trayintay-utsu</b> <i>n</i> thirty-eight @caliber gun or
@cartridge.

<p><b>trayir</b> <i>v</i> [A] @betray. <i>Nasáyud si Hisus nga si
Húdas mutrayir kaníya,</i> Jesus knew that
Judas would betray Him. <i>Kinsay nagdamgu
nga mutrayir siya kanímu?</i> Who ever
dreamed that she could @deceive you?

<p><b>trayd&ucaron;r</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @traitor. <b>2</b> @sickness that attacks
without warning. <i>Trayd&ucaron;r kaáyung sakíta
nang hayblad,</i> High blood pressure is a
treacherous disease. <i>v</i> [B156; b6] become
a traitor. <i>Natrayd&ucaron;r siya tungud sa pasálig
sa kaáway,</i> He became a traitor because of
the enemy's promises.

<p><b>traysikul</b> <i>n</i> @tricycle, @pedicab. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a1c]
ride, bring on a pedicab. <b>2</b> [A; a] make into
a pedicab.
<pb n=2101>

<p><b>tráyu</b> = <sc>TRÍYU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tríbu</b> <i>n</i> tribe.

<p><b>tribukar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @divulge. <i>Ang míd mauy
nagtribukar sa paglúib sa asáwa,</i> The maid
divulged the wife's infidelity. <i>Ayaw itribukar
nga partíhan nátù siya,</i> Don't say a
word that we are giving him a party. <i>2</i> [B1256]
be @{found out}, @{brought out} into the
open.

<p><b>tribunal</b> <i>n</i> @tribunal @{court of justice}.

<p><b>tribusun</b> <i>v</i> [AB156; a1] have, set the hair in
@ringlets. <i>Ang byutisyan mauy nagtribusun
sa íyang buhuk,</i> The beautician set her hair
in ringlets. <i>Nagtribusun ang taas nga buhuk
sa bátà,</i> The child's hair hangs down in ringlets.
n @ringlet, long hanging @curl.

<p><b>tridayminsiyun</b> <i>n</i> @{three-dimensional} movie.
v [c16] make a movie in @{three dimensions}.

<p><b>trid-in</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{trade in} for s.t. better. {Itrid-in
nang ímung uyab nga bughuan,} Trade
your jealous girl friend in for a new one.

<p><b>trígu</b> <i>n</i> @wheat.

<p><b>trím</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @trim, @cut to even lengths. <i>Akuy
mutrím sa antuwánga,</i> I'll trim the hibiscus
plants. <i>Trími lag ákung buhuk. Ayawg mubui,</i>
Just trim my hair. Don't cut it short.

<p><b>trimistral</b> <i>n</i> done @{every three months}. <i>Trimistral
ang báyad sa lisinsiya,</i> You pay for
your license once every three months. v [A;
c1] do s.t. on a @{once-in-three months} basis.

<p><b>trimistri</b> <i>n</i> period of three months.

<p><b>trín<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> railway @train. <i>Byáan ka sa trín,</i> You
won't get married (lit. miss the train). <i>v</i> [A13;
a12] @ride on the train.

<p><b>trín<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> @train, @teach to make proficient.
<i>Trína siyag maáyu,</i> Train him well. <b>2</b>
train, @discipline. <i>Gitrín sila sa ílang inahan
ug trabáhu,</i> They were trained by their
mother to work. <b>-i</b> <i>n</i> @trainee in military
training. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a trainee. <b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> @trainer.
<i>Akuy gitrínir sa bag-ung tím,</i> I was made
the trainer of the new team.

<p><b>tringka</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @fasten s.t. securely by binding
it fast. <i>Tringkáhan nátù ang átung dala
arun dì kawátan,</i> We'll @{tie up} our baggage
securely so nothing can be stolen from it.

<p><b>trinsas</b> <i>n</i> U-shaped black @hairpin for a top-*knot
or the like. <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] use this sort
of hairpin. <i>Manrinsas pa ku sa ákung pinangkù,</i>
I'm still putting hairpins in my
chignon.

<p><b>trinsíras</b> n military @trench. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
make trenches.

<p><b>*trip</b> <b>pirst, last &mdash;</b> n first or last trip of the
day made by scheduled transportation. <b>las
&mdash;</b> <i>n</i> funeral cortege to the cemetery (humorous).

<p><b>tripilya</b>, <i>tripilyas</i> <i>n</i> the small @intestines of a
<pb n=2102>
pig.

<p><b>triplikádu</b> <i>n</i> @triplicate. <i>v</i> [B126] be made in
triplicate.

<p><b>triplit</b> <i>n</i> @triplets. <i>v</i> [B1256] turn out to be
triplets.

<p><b>tripulanti</b> <i>n</i> @crew on a ship, member of a
ship's crew. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; b6] be a member of
the crew. <i>Barkung istranghíru ang ákung gitripulantíhan,</i>
I was a crew member on a
foreign ship. <b>2</b> [A12] have as a member of
the crew.

<p><b>trís</b> number @three. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256; c1] get to be
three, make s.t. three. <i>Mutrís na siya karung
Marsu,</i> He'll be three this March. <i>Hápit na
siya matrís, di pa gihápun kalakaw,</i> He's almost
three and he still can't walk. <i>Trísa (itrís)
lang ning isdà,</i> Let me have this fish for
three pesos (lit. make it three pesos). <b>2</b> [A1]
give or get three (pesos, centavos, etc.).
<i>Kinsang maistráha nagtrís nímu?</i> Which
teacher gave you a grade of three? <i>Nakatrís
ku sa paglinimpiya,</i> I earned three pesos
polishing shoes. <b>3</b> [b] incur expenses amounting
to three. <i>Hitrísan ku sa búlang,</i> I
lost three pesos in the cockpit. <b>alas &mdash;</b> @{three
o'clock}. <b>&mdash; andánas</b> <i>n</i> three-storey building.
<b>&mdash; anyu</b>s three years. <b>tris-adus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> vision that
is @cross-eyed. <b>2</b> three-to-two odds in betting.
<i>v</i> [A1] be cross-eyed. <i>Nagtris-adus ang
ímung panan-aw,</i> You are cross-eyed. <b>&mdash;
bandas</b> <i>n</i> three-sided @billiards, where the
ball is made to bounce off three edges. <b>tris-idus</b>
= <sc>TRIS-ADUS</sc>. <b>&mdash; kantus</b> <i>n</i> @{three-edged}
blade, file, or anything that can have three
edges. <b>&mdash; kwartas</b> @{three-fourths}. <b>&mdash; nuybis</b> <i>n</i>
in mahjong, a combination of three nines
of different designs, one of the <i>iksibisiyun</i>
combinations. <b>&mdash; únus</b> an <i>iksibisiyun</i> combination
in mahjong of three one's. <b>-ay</b> <i>n</i> betting
for three (centavos, pesos) each time. <i>v</i>
[C] bet three each play. <i>Magtrisay tag baráha,</i>
Let's play cards with three-peso bets.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of the three (peso, centavo) kind. <i>Trisun
man nang gidak-úna,</i> That size costs
three pesos each. <b>tag-</b> <i>a</i> three centavos (pesos)
each. <b>tag-un</b> <i>a</i> of the type that costs
three centavos (pesos).

<p><b>trisahiyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a devotion offered to the Blessed
Trinity for thanksgiving. <b>2</b> a k.o. @rosary
usually said or sung in Spanish for the souls
of children under three years of age: prayed
for seven nights in the case of children one
or two years old, and three nights for infants.

<p><b>trísi</b> number @thirteen. <i>v</i> see <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>. <b>&mdash; kartas</b>
= <sc>*TIRTIN KARDS</sc>. <b>&mdash; klásis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{Chinese
medicine}, a drink made of thirteen
kinds of herbs or barks, commonly taken
<pb n=2103>
during pregnancy for ease in delivery.

<p><b>tri síkans</b> <i>n</i> in basketball, the violation of
having the ball inside the foul line next to
one's goal for more than three seconds. <i>v</i>
[B1256] commit a three-second violation
in basketball.

<p><b>trisiklu, trisikulu</b> = <sc>TRAYSIKUL</sc>.

<p><b>trisipílu</b> = <sc>TIRSIYUPÍLU</sc>.

<p><b>trísir</b> <i>n</i> @tracer used in dressmaking. <i>v</i> [A; b]
@trace with a tracer. <i>Trisíran úsà nà unyà subáyug
gunting,</i> Trace it, then cut it out with
scissors. <b>&mdash; búlit</b> <i>n</i> @{tracer bullet}.

<p><b>tris maríyas</b> = <sc>ALUNDRIS<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tristi</b> <i>a</i> @sad. (literary). <i>Pagkatristi ning ákung
dughan,</i> How sad this heart of mine is.

<p><b>trisuríra</b> = <sc>TISURÍRU</sc> (female).[**Remarkable: female with TR, male with T.]

<p><b>triyanggulu</b> = <sc>TRAYANGGUL</sc>.

<p><b>tríyu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> vocal @trio. <i>v</i> [C; ac3] sing a @{vocal
trio}. <i>Nagtríyu ang Litirmin,</i> The Lettermen
sang a trio. <i>Triyúha lang kun way báhu,</i>
Make it a trio if there is no bass part.

<p><b>tríyu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> in mahjong, a set of three cards of
the same design and number.

<p><b>trubinayis, trubináyus</b> <i>n</i> stiff-collared @shirt.
<i>v</i> [A1; a2] wear, make into a stiff-collared
shirt.

<p><b>trúbul</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] stir up trouble so as to @disrupt
a proceeding. <i>Trubúlun nátù ang míting,</i>
Let us disrupt the meeting by creating
trouble. <i>n</i> @fight, @brawl (slang). <b>&mdash; syúting</b> <i>n</i>
@troubleshooting, looking for defects in a
machine. <b>&mdash; syútir</b> <i>n</i> @troubleshooter.

<p><b>trúkis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC] for two things to cross each
other's path but not meet; be facing each
other but not squarely. <i>Magtrúkis sila sa ílang
ispáda,</i> They will @cross swords. <i>Magtrúkis
ang duha ka trín,</i> The two trains will
@pass each other. <i>Upat ka lamísa nga gatrúkis
pagkabutang,</i> Four tables placed facing
each other in a disorderly way. <b>2</b> [AC; a2c3]
trade two things for each other that are
exactly in opposing functions or positions.
<i>Makigtrúkis aku nímu. Pusta ka sa ákung
manuk, aku sa ímu,</i> OK, I'll trade with you.
I bet on your cock and you bet on mine.
<i>Trukísun ang ílang gúl sa haptayim,</i> They
traded goals at half-time. <i>Itrúkis ímung rákit
sa iyáha,</i> Trade your racket for his. <b>3</b>
[C; c3] have a clash of ideas or exchange of
words. <i>Nagtrúkis mi si Sír báhin sa ákung
swildu,</i> I had a @quarrel with the boss regarding
my salary. <i>Amígu gihápun ta bísag nagkatrúkis
átung idíya,</i> We will remain friends
even if our ideas clash. <b>4</b> [C3] for ideas to
contradict each other. <i>Namakak ka kay nagkatrúkis
ang ímung katarúngan,</i> You are lying
because your reasoning is self-contradictory.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> being in a @crossed position.
<pb n=2104>
<i>Trúkis kanang duha ka lubi,</i> Those two coconut
<b>trees</b> are growing so that they form
an <sc>X</sc> relative to each other. <b>2</b> @argument.
<i>Walay kahusayun ang inyung trúkis,</i> There's
no solving of your argument.

<p><b>trúling</b> <i>n</i> @trawling. <i>Way trúling nga gitúgut sa
dapit nga mabaw sa átung kadagátan,</i> Trawling
is not permitted in shallow waters. <i>v</i> [A;
a2] do @{trawl fishing}.

<p><b>trumbun</b> <i>n</i> @trombone. <i>v</i> [A; b6] play the
trombone.

<p><b>trumpa</b> <i>n</i> @trumpet, funnel-shaped device used
for amplifying or directing sound.

<p><b>trumpit</b> = <sc>TRAMPIT</sc>.

<p><b>trumpíta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @trumpet with or without pistons.
2 triton trumpets, k.o. large @univalve.
<i>v</i> [A; b6] play a trumpet.

<p><b>trumpíti</b> = <sc>TRUMPÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>trunsal</b> <i>n</i> @tuck or @fold stitched into a garment
for a better fit or for decoration. <i>v</i> [A; c]
make a fold or @dart in a garment. <i>Ákung gitrunsalan
ang háwak arun mahustu,</i> I made
a dart in the waistline in order to make the
dress fit your body.

<p><b>trúnu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @throne. <b>2</b> @{high position}, @{top post}
(humorous). <i>Maáyu ka na man giyung pagkamunt&acaron;r
dihà sa ímung trúnu, ayaw táwun
mig kalimti ang día sa ubus,</i> Now that you
are nicely established on your throne, don't
forget those of us left down here below. <i>v</i>
[B1456] be seated at a higher level than the
others in watching an event (humorous).

<p><b>trúpa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @troop of soldiers. <b>2</b> @troupe of entertainers,
actors.

<p><b>trúpi</b> <i>n</i> @trophy. <i>v</i> [A12] win a trophy. <b>(->)</b> =
<sc>TRÚPI</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>trupiku</b> <i>n</i> @tropics.

<p><b>trupíya, trupiyu</b> = <sc>TRÚPI</sc>.

<p><b>trúsu</b> <i>n</i> @log. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @logger. <b>panurúsu</b> <i>n</i> @{logging
business}. <i>Panurúsu ang ákung pangítà,</i>
I'm engaged in @logging.

<p><b>tsá</b> <i>n</i> @tea. <i>v</i> [A13] have tea. <i>Magtsá ta ug way
kapi,</i> We will have tea if there is no coffee.
<b>-ríra</b> <i>n</i> @teapot.

<p><b>tsalíku</b> = <sc>SALÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>tsalit</b> <i>n</i> small @bungalow. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a
bungalow.

<p><b>tsamba</b> = <sc>SAMBA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tsampáka</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small ornamental @tree grown
for its fragrant flowers: <i><b>Michelia alba</b></i> and
<i><b>champaka</b></i>. <b>&mdash; sa insik</b> k.o. cream-colored
@magnolia: <i><b>Magnolia coco</b></i>.

<p><b>tsampiyun</b> <i>n</i> @champion. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] become
the champion. <i>Natsampiyun ang ámung
tím,</i> Our team became the champion.

<p><b>tsampurádu</b> = <sc>SAMPURÁDU<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tsampuy</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>KYAMUY</sc>.

<p><b>tsáns</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chance, @possibility for s.t. to happen. 
<pb n=2105>
<i>May tsáns kahang mabúhì siya,</i> Is there
a chance that she will live? <b>2</b> @chance, @opportunity.
<i>Mangupya ang istudiyanti kun
dúnay tsáns,</i> The student cheats if he gets
the chance. <b>3</b> chances of attaining s.t. <i>Dakug
tsáns kang madáwat,</i> You have good
chances of getting the job. <i>Wà kay tsáns níya,</i>
You don't have a chance with her. <i>v</i> [A12]
get a chance, opportunity. <i>Makatsáns
lang mig háluk sa sinihan,</i> We get the chance
to kiss only in the movie house. <b>&mdash; pasindyir</b>
<i>n</i> @{stand-by passenger} without reservations.
<i>v</i> [A13; c] go on a @{stand-by} basis. <b>-ing</b> <i>v</i> [A2]
touch s.o. with the intention of making
sexual advances (humorous). <i>Dílì kaduúlag
babáyi nis Abil. Mutsansing giyud siya dáyun,</i>
No woman dares get near Abel because
he'll try her out if she does.

<p><b>tsápa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @badge. <b>2</b> @washer, a ring made of
metal or other materials. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> wear,
put a badge. <i>Tsapáhi ímung púlu arun mu
ra kag sírip,</i> Put a badge on your shirt so
you look like a sheriff. <b>2</b> put a washer on
s.t. <i>Tsapáhi ang ruska arun dì mulubung,</i>
Put a washer around the screw so it will
not sink in.

<p><b>tsapirun</b> <i>n</i> @chaperon.[**chaperone? P2] <i>v</i> [B3; b(1)] be accompanied
by a chaperon.[**chaperone? P2, P3 ok as is]

<p><b>tsaplin</b> <i>n</i> @chaplain. <i>v</i> [B156; a1] work as, become
a chaplain.

<p><b>tsapstik</b> <i>n</i> @chopsticks. v [A; a] use chopsticks.

<p><b>tsapsuy</b> = <sc>SAPSUY</sc>.

<p><b>tsaptir</b> <i>v</i> [B256] have a @wreck[** Old term for accident? F1]. <i>Dalì dang mutsaptir
(matsaptir) ang mga sakyanang gaan
basta kusgun pagpadágan,</i> Light vehicles will
easily meet an @accident if you drive them
fast. <i>Nabálì ang kamut ni Pidru sa dihang
natsaptir siya sa íyang mutur,</i> Pedro broke
his hand when he had a wreck with his motorcycle.

<p><b>tsardying</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @charging, an offensive foul called
on a player who charges into a guard. <b>2</b>
one who commits this foul. <i>v</i> [B1256] commit
this foul.

<p><b>tsaríra</b> see <sc>TSÁ</sc>.

<p><b>tsarlistun</b> <i>n</i> @Charleston @dance. <i>v</i> [A] do the
Charleston.

<p><b>*tsarming</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)] do s.t. to look
@beautiful, make oneself @charming. <i>Magpatsarming
giyud ta sa ritrátu,</i> We've got to
make ourselves beautiful for our pictures.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> charming, beautiful-looking. <i>Nadani
siya sa babáying tsarmingun,</i> He was attracted
to the charming girl.

<p><b>tsart</b> <i>n</i> @chart.

<p><b>tsarul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{patent leather}. <b>1a</b> patent leather
shoes. <b>2</b> @{spit shine}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] wear, use
<pb n=2106>
patent leather. <b>2</b> [A; a1] give a spit shine.

<p><b>tsatsa</b> <i>n</i> @{cha-cha-cha}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @dance[**to find it searching dance] the
cha-cha-cha. <b>2</b> [A; c1] play, dance in cha-cha-cha
rhythm.

<p><b>tsatsuy</b> = <sc>HATSUY</sc>.

<p><b>tsáw</b>, <b>tsáwu</b> = <sc>SIYÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tsaynamut</b> <i>n</i> k.o. commercial preparation of
the mixture called <i>trísi klásis</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>TRÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>*tsaynis</b> <b>&mdash; bambu</b> <i>n</i> small ornamental bamboo:
<b><i>Bambusa multiplex</i></b>. <b>&mdash; bras</b> <i>n</i> @brush
for writing Chinese. <b>&mdash; guld</b> <i>n</i> twenty-four-carat
gold in jewelry. <b>&mdash; gwába</b> <i>n</i> variety of
large guava with few seeds. <b>&mdash; payil</b> <i>n</i> way
of arranging one's pieces in mahjong. <b>&mdash; pitsay</b>
<i>n</i> variety of <i>pitsay</i> that is esp. long and
whitish: <b><i>Brassica pekinensis</i></b>. <b>&mdash; tsikir</b> <i>n</i> @{Chinese
checkers}.

<p><b>tsi</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>TSIPI</sc>. <b>2</b> expression denoting @contempt
for s.o. <i>Tsi, hitsúra níyang mangulitáwu
nákù,</i> Huh, imagine a guy like that
courting me. <i>v</i> [b6] snort at s.o. in contempt.
<i>Gitsíhan lang ku níya kay wà man
kuy barku,</i> She just snorted at me because
I'm not rich (lit. have no ship).

<p><b>tsì</b> = <sc>SÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tsík<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> mark with a @check. <i>Tsíki
ning brákit kun muurdir ka,</i> Put a check in
the bracket if you want to order. <b>2</b> @check,
@correct s.t. written. <i>Gitsíkan nag átung tirm
pípar,</i> Our term papers have been checked.
<i>n</i> check mark.

<p><b>tsík<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC2; bc3] share a cigarette. <i>Magtsík
lang ta kay wà nay láin,</i> Let's just share this
cigarette because I haven't got any more.

<p><b>tsík<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] say '@{check}', put an opponent's
king in danger of being checked. <i>Mutsík
giyud ka basta muatáki ka sa hárì,</i> You
have to say 'check' when you attack the
king.

<p><b>tsikà</b>, <b>tsikalà</b> <i>n</i> @meal, @refreshment (slang).
<i>Mutambung ta sa kasal kay dúnay tsikà,</i> Let
us go to the wedding party because there is
going to be a feed. <i>v</i> [A; c] eat a meal or refreshment
(slang). <i>Adtu ta mutsikà sa ristawran,</i>
Let's eat in the restaurant.

<p><b>tsik-ap</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{check up}, @examine. <i>Ispisyalista
ang nagtsik-ap nákù,</i> A specialist examined
me. <b>2</b> [A; a12] check up on s.o.'s
activities. <i>Nagtsik-ap ku ug nagsígi bag tunghà
ang ákung bátà,</i> I am checking up to see
if my son is attending classes.

<p><b>tsik-awut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @{check out} from a place
of work. <b>2</b> check out from a hotel. <i>n</i> check-*out
time. <i>Alas singku ang átung tsik-áwut,</i>
We check out at five o'clock.

<p><b>tsíki</b> <i>n</i> @check. <i>Kás, dílì tsíki ang ámung dawátun,</i>
We accept only cash, no checks. <i>v</i>
[A1; b(1)] issue a check. <i>Kinsa may nagtsíki 
<pb n=2107>
nímu nga miuntul?</i> Who issued you a
bouncing check?

<p><b>tsíkin<sub>1</sub></b> a for a male to be @chicken. <i>Tsíkin kaáyu
ka. Ngánung dì man nímu kumplimintuhan
siya?</i> You sure are chicken. Why
don't you compliment her? <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be,
become chicken.

<p><b>tsíkin<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{good looking} (slang). <i>Tsíkin pa níya
ang íyang manghud,</i> Her younger sister is
more @beautiful than she.

<p><b>tsíkin<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @dance characterized by a
scratching-like motion of the feet. <i>v</i> [A]
dance the <i>tsíkin</i>.

<p><b>tsik-in</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @{check in} to one's place of
work. <i>Kinahanglan tang mutsik-in únà musúgud
ug trabáhu,</i> We have to check in before
we start work. <b>2</b> check into a hotel. <b>3</b>
check in for a flight. <i>n</i> @{check-in time}.

<p><b>tsikiníni</b> <i>n</i> telltale toothmark or scratch on
the skin as a result of torrid necking.

<p><b>tsíkin pid</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a large amount to be negligible
in cost to a person with lots of money.
<b>2</b> for s.t. hard to be easy for a person with
great capability. <i>Kanang bár tsikin pid ra nà
nímu,</i> The bar exam is too easy for you. <i>v</i>
[b6] consider a large amount negligible or
consider s.t. difficult quite easy.

<p><b>tsíkin sálad</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @{chicken salad}.
<i>v</i> [A; a] make, have chicken salad.

<p><b>tsíkir<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC; b6c3] play @checkers. <i>Magtsíkir
ta palabay sa panahun,</i> Let's play checkers
to pass the time. <i>n</i> @checkerboard.

<p><b>tsíkir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @checker, person who checks incoming
or outgoing things. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be a
checker.

<p><b>tsíkird</b> <i>n</i> @{checkered cloth}. <i>v</i> [A1] wear s.t. of
checkered cloth.

<p><b>tsikitilya</b> <i>n</i> @vest. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] wear a vest.

<p><b>tsiku</b> <i>n</i> familiar term of address to male, usually
to one's peer or younger. <i>Basta ikaw,
tsiku, arigládu,</i> So long as it is you, @{my
friend}, it will be done. <i>v</i> [a12] call s.o.
@chico.

<p><b>tsíku</b> <i>n</i> @sapodilla, a small tree cultivated for
its sweet, juicy fruit: <i><b>Achras zapota</b></i>. <b>(->)
&mdash; karabaw</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>. <b>&mdash; kapúti</b> = <sc>TSÍKU</sc>.
<b>tsíkus</b> = <sc>TSÍKU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>tsikut</b> = <sc>KUTSI</sc> (slang).

<p><b>tsimaníya</b> <i>n</i> @chimney or @stack, esp. of a ship.
<i>v</i> [A; c] make, put a chimney s.w.

<p><b>Tsína</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @China. <b>2</b> @Chinese (female).

<p><b>*tsindying</b> <b>&mdash; gips</b> <i>v</i> [c2] @{exchange gifts}, as
at Christmas. <i>n</i> exchanging gifts. <b>&mdash; paybut</b>
<i>n</i> in basketball, the violation of pivoting
and then stepping. <i>v</i> [B1256] commit this
violation.

<p><b>tsinílas</b> = <sc>SINÍLAS</sc>.

<p><b>tsíning</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @chin oneself. <i>Managkù</i>
<pb n=2108>
<i>átung buktun ug magtsíning ta,</i> Your arms
will grow large if you chin yourself. <i>n</i> @chinning
exercise. <b>&mdash; bar</b> <i>n</i> @{chinning bar}.

<p><b>tsínu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAMÍSA</sc>.

<p><b>tsíp</b> <i>n</i> @chief, @head of an office. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12]
call s.o. chief. <i>Ayaw kug tsípa kay paríhu ra
ta,</i> Don't call me chief because we are the
same. <b>2</b> [B1256; b6] become, be chief. <b>(->)</b>
term of address to s.o. superior in authority,
particularly a law officer. <i>Wà táwun ku
mangáwat tsip,</i> I didn't steal anything, officer.


<p><b>tsipi</b> <i>short form:</i> <b>tsi</b>. expression used to drive
away cats. <i>Tsipi! Nagpanan-aw na pud ning
irínga sa pinirítung isdà,</i> @Scat! That cat is
looking at the fried fish.

<p><b>tsipun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chiffon fabric or cloth material. <b>2</b>
@{chiffon cake}.

<p><b>tsíris</b> = <sc>SIRÁLI</sc>.

<p><b>tsirman</b> <i>n</i> @chairman. <i>v</i> [AB56; c1] be chairman.


<p><b>tsís<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TSÍSIR</sc>. <b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> @chaser taken after liquor.
<i>v</i> [A13; c] have a chaser. <i>Túbig lay átung
itsísir kay way kúk,</i> We will just have water
as chaser since we do not have Coke.

<p><b>tsís<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC; b6c3] play @chess. <i>Balà siyang
mutsís,</i> He plays chess poorly. <i>Makigtsís ku
nímu kun dúnay pusta,</i> I'll play chess with
you if we bet. <i>n</i> @chess. <b>&mdash; burd</b> <i>n</i> @chessboard.

<p><b>tsís<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> @cheese. <i>v</i> [A13] have cheese.

<p><b>tsismis</b> <i>n</i> idle @gossip. <i>Nagpakasal na lang sila
paglikay sa tsismis,</i> They got married to
stop the gossip. <i>v</i> [A12C; c] engage in idle
gossip. <i>Bísag unsa lay itsismis níya nákù báhin
sa ílang bag-ung silíngan,</i> She tells me
everything about her new neighbors.

<p><b>tsismúsa</b> <i>a</i> given to @gossip. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be,
become a @gossipmonger.

<p><b>tsismúsu</b> = <sc>TSISMÚSA</sc> (male).

<p><b>tsitsà, tsìtsà</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] take @{light refreshments}
or snacks (slang). <i>n</i> @eating.

<p><b>tsitsiríka</b> = <sc>SITSIRÍKA<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tsitsiríyas</b> = <sc>SITSIRÍYAS</sc>.

<p><b>tsk</b> spelling to represent the sound produced
by clicking the tip of the tongue against the
alveolar ridge with an implosion. <b>1</b> in calling
animals. <b>2</b> in expressing an adverse reaction
to a mistake. <i>Tsk, tsk, dì na ni mahímù,</i> @Tsk,
now we can't do anything about it.

<p><b>*tsu</b> <b>mau diay &mdash;</b> (humorous for <i>mau diay
tu</i>) So that's the way it is! <i>Mau diay nasuud
sila kay uyab man. Mau diay tsu,</i> @{Oh, I
see}. They are close because they are sweethearts.

<p><b>tsù</b> = <sc>TSUY</sc>.

<p><b>tsug</b> word used in writing to represent the
sound of an arrow piercing an object.

<p><b>tsuk</b> word used in writing to represent the
<pb n=2109>
sound of s.t. darting and piercing into s.t.
like an arrow.

<p><b>tsúk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @chalk. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be covered with
chalk marks. <i>Nagkatsúk ang bungbung,</i> The
wall is covered with chalk marks.

<p><b>tsúk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @choke a motor or engine. <i>Ug
dílì muandar tsuki,</i> If it doesn't start, choke
it.

<p><b>tsúkir</b> <i>n</i> @choker, a short necklace that fits
closely around the neck. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use,
wear a choker.

<p><b>tsuktsuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @masturbate (slang). <i>Gitsuktsuk
níya ang ákung útin,</i> She banged away
at my penis.

<p><b>tsukuláti</b> (not without <i>l</i>), <b>tsukulit</b> <i>n</i> @{chocolate
drink}. <i>v</i> [A; a2] have, make a chocolate
drink. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get chocolate all over it.
<i>Nagkatsukuláti ang mantil,</i> The tablecloth
has chocolate all over it.

<p><b>tsulítas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dish of breaded pork chops,
where the meat is pulled to the bottom of
<b>the</b> rib bone. <i>v</i> [A; a] make @chuletas.

<p><b>tsunggu</b> <i>n</i> small @monkey.

<p><b>tsup</b> <i>n</i> word used in writing to represent the
smacking sound of a kiss.

<p><b>tsupà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @{suck off} (coarse slang). <i>Dì
ku musugut nga tsupaun ang ákù nga way
báyad,</i> You're going to have to pay me if
you want to suck me off.

<p><b>tsupir</b> <i>n</i> @driver, @chauffeur. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] work
as a driver, chauffeur. <i>Natsupir siya sa ámung
dyíp,</i> He was the driver of our jeep.

<p><b>tsupun</b> <i>n</i> rubber nipple of a bottle or pacifier.
<i>v</i> [A1; c6] suck on a pacifier.

<p><b>tsúra</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HITSÚRA</sc>.

<p><b>tsurísu</b> = <sc>SURÍSU</sc>.

<p><b>tsuwinggam</b> = <sc>SWINGGAM</sc>.

<p><b>tsúwit</b> <i>n</i> child's word for @{chocolate candy}.

<p><b>tsuy</b> (from <i>atsuy</i>) <i>n</i> term of address to male,
suggesting familiarity or informality. <i>Ása ta
run mag-ínum tsuy,</i> Where are we going to
have a drink, @pal? <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o.
pal.

<p><b>tu<sub>1</sub></b> (from <i>tuu</i>) command for a carabao to
turn right.

<p><b>tu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KADTU</sc>.

<p><b>tú<sub>1</sub></b> (from <i>kadtu</i>) @those (pointing to s.t. far
from both speaker and hearer).

<p><b>tú<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TULU</sc>.

<p><b>túa</b> = <sc>ATÚA</sc>.

<p><b>tuab</b> <i>v</i> [B26] for a group to burst into loud
and boisterous laughter. <i>Natuab (mituab)
ug pangatáwa ang íyang giisturyáhan ug kataw-anan,</i>
The group broke into boisterous
laughter when he told them s.t. funny.

<p><b>túab</b> <i>n</i> @neckhole or @armholes in a dress. v
[A; b6(1)] cut the neckhole or armhole of
a garment.
<pb n=2110>

<p><b>tuagsik</b> = <sc>TUÁSIK</sc>.

<p><b>tuak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @strangle. <i>Mu rag mutuak nákù
ning huut nga kwilyu,</i> This tight collar
is about to @choke me. <i>Gituak sa manyak
ang íyang biktima,</i> The maniac strangled
his victim. <b>tuaktúak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] eat so greedily
one seems to choke. <i>Ayawg tuaktuáka
(ituaktúak) nang ímung pagkáun kay mabukug
ka,</i> Don't eat your food greedily because
you might choke on a small bone.

<p><b>tuáli</b> <i>v</i> [AB2S3(1)6; c1] be, turn @{upside
down}. <i>Kinsay nagtuáli íring bangà?</i> Who
turned this jar upside down? <i>Magtuali ang
kabug kun maghúp,</i> Bats hang upside down
when they perch.

<p><b>tualya</b> <i>n</i> @towel. <b>itsa sa &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ITSA</sc>.

<p><b>tuang</b> <i>v</i> [A23P] for rain, flood, flow of
blood to @{let up} or @stop. <i>Manlákaw ta ug mutuang
ang ulan,</i> We are going out when the
rain stops. <i>Tambal nga makapatuang (makatuang)
sa pagdugù,</i> Medicine to stop the
flow of blood. <b>tuangtúang</b> <i>v</i> [B456] keep
raining off and on, stopping and starting.

<p><b>tuáruk</b> <i>v</i> [B256; b6] @fall headfirst. <i>Patay
untà kun simintu pay gituarúkan sa bátà,</i>
The child would have died if it had been
concrete he had landed on with his head.

<p><b>tuásik</b> <i>v</i> [A2S3; b6] @spatter, for little things
to fall in all directions. <i>Mituásik ang bawud
nga misúgat sa pambut,</i> The waves dashing
against the motorboat splashed in all directions.
<i>Nagtuasik ang mga bála dihang gimasinggan
mi,</i> We were machine-gunned, and
bullets fell all over the place. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> spattering
given off by s.t.

<p><b>tuaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] @exclaim in surprise or wonderment.
<i>Nakatuaw ug nakapanghisus siya
sa kahibúlung,</i> She exclaimed and uttered
'Jesus' in amazement. <b>2</b> [A] @{cry out}. <i>Náa
siya nagtuaw sa gawas naghangyù nga mubálik
ka,</i> He is outside, crying out, imploring
you to come back.

<p><b>tuay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456; c6] for s.t. attached to hang
@limp from its base. <i>Nabálì sigúrug íyang
buktun kay nagtuay man,</i> His arm must be
broken because it is hanging limp. <i>Ituay ímung
úlu ingun sa patay ka,</i> Let your head
hang limp as if you were dead. <b>2</b> [B123(1)]
become bent over in maturity. <i>Ug matuay
na ang mga mais,</i> aníhun na nátù, If the corn
is quite bent over, we can harvest it. <i>a</i> for
corn to be bent over when it is mature.

<p><b>túba</b> <i>n</i> k.o. croton plant: <b><i>Croton tiglium</i></b>. <b>-
nga bákud</b> = <sc>TUBATUBA</sc>. <b>tubatuba</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
shrub, the leaves of which are used as a
poultice and the seeds of which produce oil
for soap: <b><i>Jatropha curcas</i></b>. <b>tubatubang murádu</b>
<i>n</i> k.o. <i>tubatuba</i> with reddish leaves:
<pb n=2111>
<i><b>Jatropha gossypifolia</b></i>.

<p><b>tubà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> fermented and processed toddy from
coconut palms. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] give water for
toddy. <i>Ang buluk dílì mutubà pag-áyu sa
ting-init,</i> The flower bud doesn't produce
much water during the hot season. <b>2</b> [b8]
get toddy all over it. <i>Natubaan ang ákung
púlu,</i> My shirt got toddy all over it. <b>3</b> [b8]
be the one who has to treat others to toddy.
<i>Hingtubaan ku kay napildi ku sa pustahánay,</i>
I had to pay for a round of toddy because
I lost the betting. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)]
go out to get toddy. <i>n</i> s.t. for buying toddy.
<i>Gái kug diyis, panubà ba,</i> Let me have
ten centavos to buy a glass of toddy. <b>ka-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] get toddy all over it. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> stand
which sells toddy. <b>hiN-, hiN-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> fond of
toddy. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> for a cock to be colored like
red palm toddy.[+]

<p><b>tubà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] cut down a banana stalk for
<b>the</b> fruit. <i>Tub-a na nang saginga kay gúwang
na,</i> Cut down that banana because
the fruits are mature.

<p><b>tubag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1c6] @answer. <i>Akuy mutubag
sa pangutána,</i> I'll answer the question. <i>Tubaga
ang nangutána,</i> Answer the person
who asked a question. <i>Pahiyum lay íyang
itubag sa ákung hangyù,</i> The only answer
she gives to my plea is a smile. <b>1a</b> [A; b5]
answer correspondence. <i>Wà ku makatubag
dáyun sa ímung sulat,</i> I couldn't answer
your letter right away. <b>1b</b> [A2; a12] @{talk
back}, @retort. <i>Hisagpaan siya kay mitubag sa
inahan,</i> She got a slap in the face because
she talked back to her mother. <b>1c</b> [C3; c36]
exchange heated words. <i>Nagkatúbag mi
dihang giinsultuhan ku níya,</i> We exchanged
heated words when he insulted me. <b>1d</b> [A23;
b5] for an uncommon event to recur or
be followed by s.t. similar (in folk belief, a
not-so-common event is followed by s.t.
similar). <i>Tubagun (tubagan) pa nang ímung
swirti sa láing táwu,</i> S.o. else will have good
luck in response to your good luck. <b>2</b> [A2N;
a12] @{answer for}, @{take responsibility}. Ángayng
<b>tubagun</b> nimu ang dadangátan sa ímung
kirída, You ought to take responsibility
to whatever happens to your mistress.
<b>2a</b> [A2; a1] bear s.o.'s expenses. <i>Tubagun
sa sigúru ang bayranan nímu sa uspital,</i> The
insurance will @cover your hospital bills. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
answer. <b>2</b> s.t. which happens after s.t. in
response to it. <b>&mdash; pangutána, úyun, etc.</b> question,
agreement, etc. given in answer. <i>'Náa
ka na diay?' tubag tuksù ni Kulasing,</i> 'Are
you really there now?' asked Kulasing in
answer. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] @answer questions.
<i>Pasar siya sa intirbiyu kay maáyu siyang</i>
<pb n=2112>
<i>manubag,</i> She passed the interview because
she answered the questions well. <i>Unsay ákung
ipanubag ug imbistigarun ku?</i> What
shall I answer if I am investigated? <b>tubagtubag</b>
<i>v</i> [A; a12] @{talk back} insolently. <i>Ayawg
<b>tubagtubaga</b> ang ímung magulang kay
gabáan ka,</i> Don't talk back insolently to
your elder brother or you will get divine
retribution visited on you. <b>matubagtubagun</b>
<i>a</i> inclined to talk back insolently. <b>tubagtúbag</b>
<i>v</i> [A; a1c] sing, read s.t. alternatingly
or with a responsive reading. <i>Tubagtubágan
<b>ta</b> pagbása ang kasulátan,</i> Let us read the
scriptures responsively. <b>-in-ay(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TUBAG</sc>,
<i>v1c</i>. <b>2</b> = <sc>TUBAGTUBAG</sc>. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> heated
exchange of words. <b>2</b> responsive or alternate
making of sound. <i>Ang tinubágay sa mga
langgam mabuntag,</i> The alternating sounds
of birds in the morning. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> manner of
answering. <b>-l-un(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @responsibility that
one has to answer for. <i>Tulubágun sa tsapirun
ug unsay mahitabù níla,</i> It is the chaperon[**chaperone? P2,P3 ok as is]
who has to answer if s.t. happens to
them. <b>2</b> material from which a responsive
reading or singing is read.

<p><b>tubas</b> <i>n</i> off-season for fruit-bearing trees. <i>v</i> 1
[B23] for trees to stop bearing fruit. <i>Nagkatubas
na ang pamúnga sa kaimítu,</i> The
fruit-bearing season for star apples is coming
to a close. <b>2</b> [B2] stop raining. <i>Ug mutubas
na ang ulan, dì na ta magpáyung,</i> If
the rains stop, we won't need an umbrella
any more. <b>3</b> [b4] get, be @rain-soaked (lit.
be in the rain till it stops). <i>Gitubasan (hingtubasan)
ku sa ulan,</i> I got soaked by the
rain.

<p><b>tub-as</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23] for the season of a certain
fruit or crop to be over. <b>2</b> [b4] be drenched
with rain. <i>n</i> off-season for crops or fruits.

<p><b>túbaw</b> <i>v</i> [B12; a] for the husks to come off
of pounded grains. <i>Gáhì matúbaw ang humay
nga pínug lugas,</i> It is difficult to get
the husk off fine-grained rice.

<p><b>túbay</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; b(1)] @{keep on} doing s.t. <i>Dì
siya mutúbay ug trabáhu kay pul-ánun,</i> He
does not keep working for long because he
gets bored easily. <i>Aku ray nakatúbay ug pamínaw
sa taas nga sirmun,</i> I was the only
one left that kept on listening to the long
sermon. <i>Nagtúbay silag ínum hangtud sa
buntag,</i> They kept their drinking spree going
until morning. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> s.o. capable of
keeping on doing s.t. <i>Matubáyun sa trabáhu,</i>
One who sticks to a piece of work.

<p><b>túbig</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @water. <b>buyag sa &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BUYAG</sc>, <i>n2</i>.
<b>&mdash; sa butung</b> water in the young coconut.
<i>Túbig sa butung ang ákung gustung imnun,</i>
I want to drink water of the young coconut. 
<pb n=2113>
<b>2</b> score in a game of <i>tubigtúbig</i>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2]
become water. <i>Natúbig ang ayis drap,</i>
The popsicle @melted. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; sa úlu</b> [a12]
@master in one's mind. <i>Tubíga sa ímung úlu
kining kúd,</i> Master this code. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b]
put, @{mix with water}. <i>Tubigi ang wiski ug ísug
ra,</i> @{Add water} into the whiskey if it is
too strong. <b>2</b> [AP; bP] @irrigate. <i>Gipatubigan
(gitubigan) ang basak,</i> The rice paddy was
irrigated. <b>3</b> [B456] @water, produce liquid.
<i>Mutubig ákung bàbà ug makakità kug sambag,</i>
My mouth waters if I see tamarinds.
<i>Nagtubig ang íyang núka,</i> His sore is watering.
<b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] fill glasses with
water. <i>Panubig diri,</i> Give us some water. <b>2</b>
[A2; b6(1)] get one's water s.w. <i>Ang mga
taga isla adtu manubig sa unay,</i> People from
small islands get their water from the mainland.
<b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] @bail water out. <i>Sígi
kung hinúbig kay milikì ang luwang,</i> I kept
bailing water out because the bilge leaked.
<i>n</i> instrument for bailing. <b>hiN-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> place
water is bailed out from. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @{irrigation
system}. <b>tubignun</b> <i>n</i> @{water spirit}. <b>tubigtubig</b>
<i>n</i> k.o. @{skin disease} characterized by itchiness
and tiny pustules with watery discharge.
<i>v</i> [B146; a4b4] have <i>tubigtubig</i>. <b>tubigtúbig</b>
<i>n</i> child's game played with two
teams of an offensive and defensive side.
Two rows of adjacent squares are drawn,
two squares for each defensive player. The
offensive team aims to get in and back
through the series of squares without being
<b>touched</b> by the defensive team whose movements
are restricted. A point, called <i>túbig</i>,
is made when a player gets in and back
through the squares untouched. <i>v</i> [A1; b6]
play <i>tubigtúbig</i>. <b>tubigtubigan</b> <i>a</i> @well-to-do;
s.o. having much money on hand. <i>v</i> [B126;
b8] become well-off.

<p><b>túbil</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> pour fuel in a tank or container.
<i>Íya nang gitubílan ug gás ang sugà,</i>
He has already poured kerosene into the
lamp. <i>Trayinta litrus ang itúbil sa trák,</i> Fill
the truck with thirty liters. <b>2</b> pour drinks
for s.o. (colloquial). <i>n</i> <b>1</b> liquid poured into
a container. <b>2</b> drink poured.

<p><b>tubitubi, tubìtubì, tubiltubil</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{answer
back} when one is reprimanded. <i>Íya
kung gitubiltubilan, maung ákù siyang gilúsì,</i>
He @{talked back}, so I pinched him. <b>ma-un,
-un</b> <i>a</i> given to answering back when reprimanded.

<p><b>tublag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @dilute s.t. <i>Ákung gitublágag
túbig ang súkà,</i> I diluted vinegar with
water. <b>1a</b> [A12] for a food ingredient added
as a seasoning or sweetening to be well
diffused. <i>Dílì makatublag ang diyútayng asúkar 
<pb n=2114>
sa usa ka tásang kapi,</i> A little sugar
cannot sweeten a cup of coffee. <b>2</b> [B126; c5]
for everybody to get some of s.t., usually
food. <i>Dílì makatublag sa tanan ug maglútù
lang kug gamay,</i> If I don't prepare but a
little, not everyone will get s.t. to eat. <i>Natublag
ang tanan sa ákung gilútù,</i> I prepared
enough to take care of everybody.

<p><b>tubli</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrub growing along streams and
in secondary forests, the leaves and branches
of which are used as fish poison: <b><i>Derris elliptica</i></b>.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] poison fish with <i>tubli</i>. <b>2</b>
[A2; a12] give off a terrible odor, enough
to make one groggy. <i>Ang báhù sa íyang utut
makatublig búnug,</i> When he breaks wind it
could kill a goby. <b>3</b> [B126] be tired of the
same old thing: hearing the same story,
music, etc. <i>Natubli na ku ánang ímung isturyang
balikbálik,</i> I'm tired hearing the
same story over and over again. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A1;
c6] catch fish with tubli. <b>tinublíhan</b> <i>n</i> fish
caught with <i>tubli</i>.

<p><b>tubluk</b> = <sc>TULBUK</sc>.

<p><b>tubtub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1b7] @cut s.t. at its base,
very close to the surface. <i>Tubtúba pagputul
ang ságing arun sayun ang pagpanáhà,</i> Cut
the banana stalk close to the ground so it
will readily grow suckers. <b>2</b> [A; b5] cut
around s.t. cylindrical, usually bamboo
poles, little by little with short hacks, resulting
in a clean finish. <i>Tubtúbi (tubtúba) ang
tumuy sa kawáyan arun malimpiyu,</i> Cut
around the tip of the bamboo pole so it will
be clean. <b>3</b> [A; a] make a toddy container
out of a length of bamboo. <i>a</i> being cut close
to the surface. <i>Tubtub rang pagkaputúla
ang íyang buhuk,</i> Her hair was cut too close
to the roots. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> section cut from a long
piece. <i>Usa ka tubtub nga láwas sa lubi,</i> A
section of a coconut tree trunk. <b>2</b> one node
length of bamboo, usually used as a container,
esp. for palm toddy.

<p><b>tubtub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] for chickens to charge,
flapping the wings and kicking the feet.
<i>Mutubtub ug táwu ang íyang hiniktan,</i> His
gamecock will charge at people. <i>n</i> action of
charging.

<p><b>tubu</b> <i>n</i> @{sugar cane}. <b>-ng palinà</b>, <b>pula</b> red sugar
cane. <b>&mdash; lumhan</b>, <b>putì</b> green sugar cane. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2] cut sugar cane for milling. <i>Manubu
ku sa ílang asyinda,</i> I shall apply as a laborer
to cut sugar cane stalks on their hacienda.
<b>katubhan</b> <i>n</i> sugar cane plantation.

<p><b>túbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tube. <b>2</b> @{water pipe}. <b>3</b> chimney of a
lamp. <i>Gianuúsan ang túbu sa lampara,</i> The
lamp chimney is covered with soot. <b>hínis sa
&mdash;</b> see <sc>HÍNIS</sc>.

<p><b>túbù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b17] <b>1</b> @grow, @{become larger}.
<pb n=2115>
<i>Mutaas pa siya kay nagtubù pa,</i> She will
@grow taller because she is still growing. <i>Dus
pulgádas ang ákung gitubúan,</i> I grew two
inches taller. <i>Gitubúan na ang sinínà,</i> She
has @outgrown her dress. <i>Ang gitubúan sa
dákit,</i> Where the banyan tree was @growing.
<b>2</b> @{earn interest}. <i>Mutúbù ang kwartang ibangku,</i>
Money put in the bank earns @interest. <b>3</b>
[b(1)] @{develop feelings}. <i>Gitubúan kug kasína
sa íyang paglampus,</i> I grew envious over
his success. <b>4</b> [A2S] for water, dough, land
<b>to</b> @rise. <i>Hurnúha ang harínang gimása ug
mutúbù na,</i> Put the dough in the oven when
it rises. <i>Síging magtubù ang dágat ug dì pa
makalantung,</i> The sea continues to rise until
it reaches its highest point at high tide. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@growth. <i>Kusug ang túbù sa tanum,</i> The
plant grows fast. <b>2</b> @interest on loan. <b>bag-ung
&mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BAG-U</sc>. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] lend money with
interest. <i>Patubúan diay nímu tung ákung
gibaylu?</i> Are you going to charge interest
on the money I borrowed? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @leavening
agent. <b>2</b> wall stud of bamboo. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> @grown,
@raised. <i>Sankis nga pinatúbù sa Kalipurníya,</i>
California-grown sunkist. <b>-in-an, -in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i>
outgrown outfit. <b>tubùtúbù</b> <i>n</i> growth on the
skin. <i>Mu rag áwum nang íyang tubùtúbù piru
nagkadakù,</i> Your growth looks like a
mole, but it is getting bigger. <b>halinub-un</b> <i>a</i>
having a tendency to grow fast even with no
care. <i>Halinub-un ning sagbúta, pirmi lang
hagbásan,</i> This k.o. grass grows fast. It has
to be trimmed frequently.[+]

<p><b>túbù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible white @mushroom that
grows on decaying trees. It has a tougher
stipe and pileus than the <i>úhung</i>.

<p><b>tubud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @flow in a steady stream.
<i>Mitubud ang dugù sa dakung samad,</i> Blood
flowed from the big wound. <i>Sandayung ang
tuburan sa ulan,</i> The rain flowed out of the
gutter. <b>2</b> [B46] for liquid to @leak out of a
container or boat. <i>Nagtubud ang sakayan
maung sígi kung gahinúbig,</i> The boat sprung
a leak so I kept bailing out water. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> water
@spring. <b>2</b> @leak. <b>pa-, pa-(<-) sa úhung</b> <i>v</i>
[A] make people believe s.t. about oneself
which is impossible (lit. make a water flow
from a mushroom). <i>Nagpatúbud na sad sa
úhung ang hambugíru,</i> The boaster is bragging
again. <i>Ayaw pagpatúbud dinhi kay suhítu
mi sa ímung kaláki,</i> Don't try to @{talk
big} around here because we know what you
are. <b>tuburan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spring. <b>2</b> source of s.t. that
gushes in abundance. <i>Diyus nga tuburan sa
kalúuy,</i> All-merciful (lit. giver of all mercy)
God. <b>tinubdan</b> <i>n</i> @source, @origin. <i>Tinubdan
sa sapà,</i> The brook's source. <i>Tinubdan sa
balità,</i> Source of news.
<pb n=2116>

<p><b>tubug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medium-sized @tree having small,
round, green, inedible fruits in bunches
growing directly from the trunk and branches:
<i><b>Ficus sp.</b></i>

<p><b>tubuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b36] commit @suicide. <i>Mau nang
pangpánga ang íyang gitubukan,</i> That is the
cliff he jumped to his death from.

<p><b>túbuk</b> = <sc>TULBUK</sc>.

<p><b>tubul</b> <i>n</i> @{hard stools}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] for stools to become
hard. <b>2</b> [a4] have @constipation. <i>Gitubul
siya maung dúgayng nalibang,</i> It took
him long to have his bowel movement because
he is constipated.

<p><b>tubung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cut down abaca plants at the
base before stripping off the outer stalks.

<p><b>tubus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @redeem, @{save from}. <i>Ang ímung
bahandì dì makatubus sa mahúgaw
mung ngalan,</i> Your wealth cannot redeem
your filthy name. <i>Gitubus sila ni Muysis gíkan
sa kaulipnan,</i> They were saved from
slavery by Moses. <b>2</b> [A; a2b2] in games
where several people play in turns, take a
player's turn for him to keep him from losing
his turn (e.g. when a player is in a difficult
position, for s.o. better to play for him
for that one move). <b>2a</b> take s.o. else's place
in his absence or in the event of his inability.
<i>Akuy mutubus ug káun sa ímung báhin
kay dì ka man muadtu,</i> I'll eat your share
because you aren't going. <i>Dì ku makatubus
sa ímung trabáhu kay mulakaw man ku,</i> I
can't take your work over for you because
I'm going out. <b>katubsánan</b> <i>n</i> @redemption.
<b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @redeemer; @{Christ the Redeemer}.

<p><b>tub-us</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] cut down off the main part
with a sharp cutting instrument, esp. in one
stroke. <i>Ang hábul sundang dì makatub-us
ug ságing,</i> A dull machete can't cut a banana
plant down.

<p><b>túbuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c16] hold, put upward and
above the rest. <i>Makatúbuy ku ánang barbil,</i>
I can raise that barbell above my head. <i>Daw
tubúyun (itúbuy) siya sa lángit kun pahiyuman
siya ni Adilayda,</i> It was as though he
was being raised to the heavens when Adelaida
smiled at him. <b>2</b> [C; c6] @{put up for
election}. <i>Itúbuy nátù siya pagkakunsihal,</i>
We will put him up as councilor.

<p><b>túda</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @fast, @rapid. <b>2</b> @hard, with much force.
<b>3</b> doing to a high degree or in excess. <i>Túda
siyang mukáun,</i> He eats ravenously. <i>Túda
siyang matúlug,</i> He sleeps soundly. <i>Túda siyang
mangasábà,</i> He scolds very severely. <i>v</i>
1 [A2; b(1)] do s.t. @fast, @rapidly. <i>Ayaw tudáhig
lakaw,</i> Don't walk too fast. <b>2</b> [A; b5]
do s.t. with much force. <i>Tudáhag (tudáhig)
lísù ang takub,</i> Turn the cap with a good
deal of force. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @{drive fast}. <i>Gipatudáhan 
<pb n=2117>
sa kapitan ang dágan sa yáti,</i> The
captain made the yacht go fast.

<p><b>tud-an</b> see <sc>TULA</sc>.

<p><b>túdas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] be totally @lost or @{used up},
cause s.t. to be so. <i>Akuy mutúdas ánang ímung
baligyà basta barátu,</i> I'll take all of
your wares if you let me have them cheap.
<i>Ang ákung mga anak nga kiat mauy nagtúdas
sa ákung mga básung tarungtarung,</i> The
children played around and broke all my
decent glasses. <i>Natúdas ang ákung singsing
nga mihiplus sa ákung tudlù,</i> The ring slipped
off my finger and is lost. <b>2</b> [A2; a2]
draw the card that makes the hand complete.
<i>Búnut na kay tudásun ku na ni,</i> Draw
a card because I am going to go out now. <b>3</b>
[AB126; a1] murder (slang). <i>Tudásun nátù
nang hambugírung dakù,</i> We will kill that
bigmouth. <i>a</i> completely used up, lost, killed,[** .? P2]
<i>Hansákan ku bítaw sa tris kantus, túdas lagi,</i>
I stabbed him with a three-bladed knife.
That was the end of him. <i>n</i> the card in a
game of <i>tudasay</i> that completes the last
pair. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] for s.o. who is desperate,
and sure to die anyway to kill s.o. to
die along with him. <i>Manúdas na lang ku kay
wà na man kuy mahímù,</i> I'll just kill s.o. to
die along with me because I am at the end
of my rope. <b>tudastúdas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. coin-tossing
game where three coins are tossed up and
the bettors win only if it is three heads or
three tails. <i>v</i> [AC2; b6(1)] play <i>tudastúdas</i>.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> card that allows one to go out in
<i>tudasay</i>. <b>walay -an(->)</b> be no match for s.o.
<i>Haníti kaáyu nà. Wà kay tudasan ug musúkul
ka,</i> He is very skillful. You won't have a
chance if you play against him. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i>
card game with drawing and discarding in
which the object is to compete to get three
pairs from a hand of five cards. <i>v</i> [A2; c]
play tudasay.

<p><b>tudkan</b> = <sc>TUGKAN</sc>. see <sc>TURUK</sc>.

<p><b>tudling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @furrow the field for planting.
<i>Magtudling ta arun katamnan ang uma,</i>
We will furrow the field so we can plant on
it. <i>Tudlínga ang daruhan humag sudlay,</i>
Furrow the field after harrowing. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a furrow
in the field. <b>2</b> row of plants. <b>3</b> @column
in a periodical. <b>&mdash; púlung</b> <i>n</i> @sentence.

<p><b>tudlis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @prick with a needle to get
s.t. out. <i>Akuy mutudlis sa ímung tunuk sa
tiil,</i> I will prick your foot to get the thorn
out. <i>Tudlísa ang hubag arun mugulà ang nánà,</i>
Prick the boil so the pus can come out.
<i>n</i> needle or the like to get s.t. out. <b>&mdash; sa
tabákù</b> = <sc>PALIYU</sc>.

<p><b>tudlù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] point at, out. <i>Kun mutudlù
si Sír nímu sulayi lag tubag,</i> If the teacher
<pb n=2118>
calls on you just try to answer. <i>Tudlúa ang
sinumbung,</i> @{Point out} the one who did it. <b>2</b>
[A; c6] @point, give @directions. <i>Kinsay gatudlù
nímung nía ku magpuyù?</i> Who told
you that I live here? <b>3</b> @teach. <i>Nagtudlù siya
sa pablik,</i> She is teaching in the public
schools. <b>4</b> [A; c16] @appoint. <i>Ang prisidinti
nagtudlù níya pagkahuwis,</i> The president
appointed him judge. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{index finger}. <b>2</b>
the @fingers in general. <b>hamuy sa &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HAMUY</sc>.
<b>3</b> [<i>numeral</i>] <b>ka &mdash;</b> [so-and-so] many
fingers wide. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; sa tiil</b> @toes. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; dalága, dátù</b>
<i>see</i> <sc>DALÁGA<sub>2</sub></sc>, <sc>DÁTÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>. <b>tudlùtudlù</b> <i>n</i> eatery
where the food for sale is put in a case
on display. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @appointee. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @appointment.
<b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @teacher.

<p><b>tudluk</b> = <sc>TUSLUK</sc>.

<p><b>tudlun dátù</b> = <sc>TUDLÙ DÁTÙ</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>DÁTÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tudlus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Tudlúsi ku
diri ug lansang,</i> Hand me some nails up here.
<b>2</b> [A3; c6] extend one's hand to give a
handhold. <i>Mitudlus siya sa íyang kamut nákù
ug nanggúnit ku,</i> He extended his hand
to me and I held on to it. <b>3</b> [A2; b6] give
aid or small things. <i>Tudlúsan nátù ug diyútayng
inasal ang átung mga silíngan,</i> Let us
give a little roast pig to our neighbors.

<p><b>tudtud</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] hit on the fingers or toes.
<i>Tudtúrun ku nang ímung tudlù ug mangáp
ka,</i> I will rap your fingers if you touch anything.
<i>Hitudturan ákung kumagkù paglansang
nákù,</i> I hit my thumb while I was driving
a nail.

<p><b>tuduk</b> = <sc>TURUK</sc>.

<p><b>tudulukyíri</b> a woman who is @promiscuous. v
[B126] be, become promiscuous. <i>Natudulukyíri
nang bayhána human byái sa bána,</i>
That woman became promiscuous after her
husband left her.

<p><b>tudu pudirúsu</b> <i>a</i> @All-Powerful. <i>Ang Diyus tudu
pudirúsu,</i> God is All-Powerful.

<p><b>túdus<sub>1</sub></b> @all, @everyone, @everybody. <i>Bíi, Tay,
Nay, Ingku Imuk, túdus,</i> Good evening
Father, Mother, Uncle Imuk, and everybody.
<b>&mdash; lus Santus</b> <i>n</i> @{All Saints' Day}.

<p><b>túdus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> in a game, to double the bet by
placing the entire amount or quantity won
from the preceding game. <i>v</i> [A; c] bet all
the preceding game's winnings.

<p><b>tudútut</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>TURÚTUT</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TARÚRUT</sc>.

<p><b>tudyuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @prick, @pierce with s.t. large
and pointed. <i>Kinsay nagtudyuk ug dinágum
sa ákung pabúrut?</i> Who pricked my balloon
with a pin? <i>Lúya na tung ihúa kay natudyukan
ku na tu sa sápang,</i> That shark must
be weak by now because I have pierced it
with my spear. <i>n</i> prick in a piercing action
with s.t. pointed.
<pb n=2119>

<p><b>*tuga</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] dare do s.t. in unreasonable
disregard of one's capacity to do it.
<i>Magpatuga siyag minyù bísag way pangítà,</i>
He dares to get married without a job. <b>magpatugatuga</b>
= <sc>PATUGA</sc>.

<p><b>túga<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] for God or nature to bestow,
endow. <i>Gitugáhan siyag diyútay nga kaísug,</i>
He has been endowed with a little courage.
<i>Ang kaálam itúga sa Diyus niadtung nagtáhud
kaníya,</i> God bestows wisdom on whoever
shows Him reverence. <i>n</i> s.t. esp. given,
directly from God. <i>Túga sa lángit nang ímung
anak,</i> Your child is a gift from heaven.
<i>v</i> [b6] be given s.t. exclusively by a
supernatural being. <i>Si Hárì Artur gitugáhan
ug usa ka ispáda,</i> King Arthur was given a
sword by a supernatural being. <i>n</i> s.t. presented
exclusively to s.o. by a supernatural
being.

<p><b>túga<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{cap and gown} worn for graduation.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] wear a cap and gown. <b>2</b> [A2;
a2] make a cap and gown.

<p><b>tug-ab</b> = <sc>DUG-AB</sc>.

<p><b>tugábang</b> = <sc>KUKUG BANUG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>KUKU</sc>.

<p><b>tugábung</b> <i>n</i> @{artificial chignon}. <i>Úsu niadtu ang
tugábung,</i> Chignons used to be in vogue. <i>v</i>
[A; c] wear, make into an artificial @chignon.

<p><b>tugahálà</b> (from <i>túga ni Bathálà</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. done
or sent by divine will. <i>Usa ka dakung tugahálà
nga nahibalik na ang kurúna sa úlu sa
Birhin,</i> It was a great gift of the Lord that
the crown was restored to the Virgin's head.
<b>2</b> @miracle. <i>Usa na lang ka tugahálà ang makaluwas
kaníya gíkan sa silya iliktrika,</i> Only
a miracle can save him from the electric
chair.

<p><b>tugáhuk</b> <i>n</i> @clitoris.

<p><b>túgal</b> <i>v</i> [A3N; b5] @disturb, @bother order or
peace. <i>Way mutúgal (manúgal) ug wà kay
útang,</i> Nobody disturbs you if you don't
have any debts. <i>Gitúgal (gitugálan) ang baryu
sa mga tulisan,</i> Robbers disturbed the
peace of the village.

<p><b>tugalbung</b> = <sc>TIGALBUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tugalhab</b> (from <i>galhab</i>) <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a gaping
tear or wound. <b>2</b> no longer a virgin. <i>Tugalhab
na nang babayhána kay kadaghan na
paangki,</i> That woman is no longer a virgin
for she has had several illegitimate children.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1; b] get torn wide open. <i>Nagkatugalhab
ang gisì kay wà dáyun sursíhi,</i> The tear
became a gaping hole because she didn't
darn it at once. <b>2</b> [B126] lose one's virginity.

<p><b>túgan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÚLUG</sc>.

<p><b>tug-an</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @reveal, report s.t. revealing.
<i>Mitug-an ang sinumbung sa íyang saláud,</i>
The accused confessed his crime. <i>Tug-áni ku</i>
<pb n=2120>
<i>sa ímung sikrítu,</i> Tell me your secret. <i>Itug-an
<b>tikawng</b> Tátay nga ímu kung gisumbag,</i>
I'll report you to Father that you hit me. <b>2</b>
@confess. <i>Ug dílì ka mutug-an, kastigúhun ka,</i>
If you don't confess, I will beat you.

<p><b>tugas</b> <i>n</i> @molave, k.o. @wood producing extremely
hard timber: <i><b>Vitex parviflora</b></i>. <i>v</i> [a12]
make s.t. out of molave. <i>Tugasun nátù
ang sáwug arun lig-un,</i> Let us make the
flooring out of molave so it will be durable.

<p><b>tugastugas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small marine @crab, poisonous
to eat.

<p><b>tugasub, tugásub</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b6] fall into the
water with a deep sound. <i>Mitugasub ang batu
nga gilábay sa dágat,</i> The stone was
thrown into the water and fell with a loud
splash. <i>n</i> deep sound, like one produced by
a heavy object falling into water.

<p><b>tugáuk</b> = <sc>TUKTUGÁUK</sc>.

<p><b>tugaw</b> <i>a</i> @disturbed from a peaceful state. <i>Tugaw
na ang mga bábuy sa pangayam maung
namalhin,</i> The hunting has disturbed the
wild pigs so they have gone elsewhere. <b>walay
&mdash;</b> there's nothing to disturb. <i>Maáyu dinhi
isturyáhan kay way tugaw,</i> This is a good
place to talk because there is nothing to
disturb us. <i>v</i> [A; a12] @disturb one's peace.
<i>Manira ku arun way makatugaw sa ákung
pagtuun,</i> I will lock myself in the room so
no one disturbs my study. <i>Ayawg tugawa
ang natúlug,</i> Don't disturb the man sleeping.

<p><b>tugbábaw</b> = <sc>TIGBÁBAW</sc>. <b>pa-</b> = <sc>PATIGBÁBAW</sc>.
<i>see</i> <sc>BABAW</sc>.

<p><b>tugbang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] give s.t. as @counterpart;
@match. <i>Ug muámut ka ug kanding sa kumbira
mutugbang ku ug ámut ug bábuy,</i> If
you give a goat for the feast, I will give a
pig to match it. <b>2</b> [C; b6] sit across or in
front of each other. <i>Nagkatugbang mi ug
lingkud sa dyip,</i> We happened to sit across
from each other in the jeep. <b>3</b> in activities
where people are paired off: be s.o.'s opposite.
<i>Dílì ku makigtugbang nímu sa kuntis
kay maáyu ka,</i> I don't want to be matched
against you in the contest because you're
good. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> thing given as @counterpart. <b>2</b> one's
opposite in a contest. <b>3</b> s.t. which happens
which makes up for s.t. else. <i>Kining átung
mga pag-antus run tugbang sa átung kalípay
niadtu,</i> Our sufferings now are exact payment
of our happiness formerly. <b>4</b> s.t. @commensurate
in degree or weight. <i>Ang tugbang
sílut sa pagpatay mau ang pagbítay,</i> Hanging
is the punishment @appropriate for murder.
<b>5</b> = <b>KA-</b>. <b>&mdash; púlung</b> @antonym. <i>Ang tugbang
púlung sa 'layù', 'duul',</i> The antonym of
'far' is 'near'. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @analogous, @counterpart.
<i>Ang inbiay tugbang sa ipbiay sa istíts,</i> The
<pb n=2121>
<sc>NBI</sc> is the counterpart of the <sc>FBI</sc> in the
States.

<p><b>tugbaw</b> <i>a</i> @lofty, @high up. <i>Tugbaw kaáyung
miuntul ang búla,</i> The ball bounces high.
<i>Hilabihang katugbaw sa garbu!</i> What a great
pride! <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B246; a3] @rise to a considerable
height. <i>Mitugbaw ang tíngug ni Níning sa
kasukù,</i> Nening's voice rose in anger. <i>Natugbaw
sa íyang hunàhúnà ang mga hudlat
ni Maks,</i> Max's threats came to his thoughts.
<b>2</b> [c1] put s.t. high up or way up. <i>Itugbaw
(tugbáwa) pagdala nang isdà arun dílì maabut
sa irù,</i> Lift the fish you are carrying
high so the dogs can't reach it. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i>
@lofty (literary). <i>Matugbáwung damgu,</i> Lofty
dreams. <b>3</b> [A12C1; a2] match in height,
popularity, or ability. <i>Walay makatugbaw
sa kataas ni Pidru,</i> No one is as tall as Pedro.
<i>Tugbáwun ku ang kaálam níya sa makina,</i>
I'll try to learn as much about machine as
he knows.

<p><b>tugbù</b> (from <i>túbù</i>) <i>n</i> new @sprouts of leaves.
<i>Utána ang tugbù sa alugbáti,</i> Make a soup
of the <i>alugbáti</i> sprouts. <i>v</i> [B46] for leaves
to @sprout. <i>Mitugbù (nanugbù) nag mga dáhun
sa kamunggay nga gipul-úngan,</i> The
leaves of the pruned malunggay are now
sprouting.

<p><b>tugbung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2c] go, bring to the town or
coastal area from the mountains or country.
<i>Mitugbung siya kay mipalit ug ginamus,</i>
He went down to the town to buy fish
paste. <i>Kinsay nagtugbung sa utanun?</i> Who
brought the vegetables to town?

<p><b>tugdà</b> <i>n</i> stumps of cornstalks left in the field
after cutting off the stalks.

<p><b>tugdan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @pole or stem-like @handle. <i>Ang
tugdan sa latigu sa kabáyù,</i> The handle for
the horsewhip. <i>Tugdan sa timbà,</i> A bamboo
pole to which the bucket for drawing water
is attached. <b>2</b> @cornstalk.

<p><b>tugdang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB23(1); c1] @sink to the bottom
of water, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mitugdang
na ang lawug, ug tin-aw na ang túbig,</i> The
mud in the water has @settled, and it is clear
now. <i>Natugdang na ang bapur digíra,</i> The
battleship has sunk. <i>Nakatugdang na ka
sa taliwálà ánang línaw?</i> Have you gone to
the bottom in the middle of that lake? <b>2</b> [A2;
b6] land hard after being projected or
dropped. <i>Didtu siya mutugdang sa bunbun
pagluksu níya,</i> He landed on the sand when
he jumped.

<p><b>tugduk</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; ab2] for s.t. pointed to
pierce or thrust into, not necessarily sticking.
<i>Natugduk ang tumuy sa bangkaw sa bukubuku
sa túru,</i> The end of the spear pierced
the back of the bull. <i>Hingtugdukan ang</i>
<pb n=2122>
<i>ákung tiil sa tumuy sa kutsilyu,</i> The knife
hit my foot when it fell.

<p><b>tugdun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @alight, @{set down} from the
air. <i>Mitugdun ang buyug sa búwak,</i> The bee
alighted on the flower. <i>Gipálid siya sa alimpús.
Diin siya itugdun?</i> The whirlwind carried
her away. Where was she set down?
<b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place where s.t. lands. <i>Tugdunánan
sa ayruplánu,</i> Airplane @{landing field}.

<p><b>tughang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] break and pulverize hardened
soil for planting. <i>Lisud pagtughang sa
yútà kay nabantuk na kaáyu,</i> It is difficult
to break up the soil because it has gotten
very packed down. <i>a</i> no longer a virgin.

<p><b>tughaw</b> <i>a</i> @lukewarm. <i>v</i> [AB2; a] be, become
lukewarm, cause liquids to do so. <i>Magtughaw
kug túbig para ikalígù,</i> I'll heat some
water for bathing.

<p><b>tughù</b> = <sc>DUGHÙ<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>tughuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A23; b(1)] appear suddenly, unexpectedly.
<i>Walà ku damha nga muanhi siya,
mitughuk lag abut,</i> I never expected him
to come. He just arrived suddenly. <i>Trabáhu
kay tughúkan unyà tag dúaw sa átung agálun,</i>
Keep working. Our boss might come
without notice.

<p><b>tughuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> formal asking of a girl's hand by
the groom's parents, always accompanied
with food brought by the groom's delegation.
<i>v</i> [A2; b5] formally ask for a girl's
hand. <i>Mutughuk gihápun ta bísag burus na
ang babáyi?</i> Do we still have to make a formal
proposal when the girl is already pregnant?

<p><b>tughung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cook leftover cooked staple
which stuck to the pot by adding water and
usually boiling it with sugar. <i>Tughúnga nang
dukut,</i> Recook the leftover rice stuck to
the pot. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> food prepared by the process
of <i>tughung</i>.

<p><b>tughuy</b> = <sc>TARUGSUY</sc>.

<p><b>tugkad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] touch the bottom standing
in water. <i>Makatugkad ka ba dihà?</i> Can
you stand there? <b>2</b> [B456] for the feet or
s.t. dangling to reach the ground. <i>Dílì makatugkad
ang íyang tiil sa salug ug kanang
siyáhay lingkúran,</i> His feet don't touch the
ground if he sits in that chair. <i>Nagtikwangtikwang
ang lamísa kay wà magtugkad ang
usa ka tiil,</i> The table is jiggling because one
of the legs isn't touching the ground. <b>3</b> [A;
a12] @fathom, @comprehend s.t. mysterious.
<i>Way makatugkad sa ákung hunàhúnà,</i> Nobody
can read my mind. <i>Lisud tugkárun
ang sumbíngay sa páras,</i> It is hard to @understand
the meaning of the Parable of the
Vine. <b>tugkaran</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @yard of a house. <b>2</b> foot
of a hill. <b>tulugkárun</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that takes deep
<pb n=2123>
understanding.

<p><b>tugkalan</b> = <sc>TUGKARAN</sc>, <i>1</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>TUGKAD</sc>.

<p><b>tugkay</b> <i>n</i> @stalk of a leaf or flower.

<p><b>tugmadan</b> = <sc>TUGKARAN</sc>, <i>1</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>TUGKAD</sc>.

<p><b>tugnà</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @dip, @dunk into liquid. <i>Dì pa
ku malígù, apan mutugnà lang úsà ku sa túbig,</i>
I won't swim yet, I'll just immerse myself
quickly. <i>Ang balanghuy laming itugnà
sa mantíkà,</i> Cassava tastes good if you dip
it into pork fat.

<p><b>tugnaw</b> <i>a</i> @cold to the touch, feel. <i>Tugnaw kaáyu
sa Bagyu,</i> It's very cold in Baguio. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B] become cold weather. <i>Mutugnaw (matugnaw)
ang panahun inigka Disimbri,</i> The
weather gets cold in December. <b>2</b> [a4] @{feel
cold}. <i>Gamítag hítir kun tugnawun ka,</i> Use
the heater if you feel cold. <b>3</b> [b8] be exposed
to the cold. <i>Gisip-un siya kay hitugnawan,</i>
He caught cold because he was exposed
to the cold. <i>n</i> @cold. <i>Dì kung kaagwanta
sa tugnaw,</i> I can't take the cold. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
state of being cold. <i>Nagkuray siya sa katugnaw,</i>
She is shivering with cold. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i>
@chills. <i>Ang panugnaw mubálus sa hilánat,</i>
Chills come right after fever. <i>v</i> [a4] get the
chills. <b>ting-</b> <i>n</i> @{cold season}.

<p><b>tugnub</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @dip s.t. or oneself into a liquid.
<i>May disinpiktanti ang gitugnúban sa
mga hiraminta sa duktur,</i> The liquid the
doctor dipped his instruments into has disinfectant.
<i>Itugnub ang plúma sa tintiruhan,</i>
Stick the pen into the inkwell.

<p><b>tugnus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @anchovy with a silver
stripe, which comes seasonally in great abundance,
most commonly eaten preserved
in salt. <b>ting-</b> <i>n</i> season for <i>tugnus</i> fish.

<p><b>tugpa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B346; b6] for s.t. that flies to
@land. <i>Mitugpa ang salampáti sa atup,</i> The
dove @alighted on the roof. <i>Nagtugpa na ang
ayruplánu,</i> The airplane has landed. <b>2</b> [A2;
b6] jump from a high place. <i>Ang tulay nga
íyang gitugpáhan,</i> The bridge he jumped
off from. <b>tugpahánan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place where airplanes
land: @airport or @runway. <b>2</b> place
where persons jump off, @{diving board}.

<p><b>tugpù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] <b>1</b> @toss s.t. up in the air. <i>Itugpù
ang búla kay akuy mubumba,</i> Toss
the volleyball and I will spike it. <b>2</b> put up
s.o. as candidate. <i>Siyay átung itugpù pagkamayur,</i>
We will put him up as candidate for
mayor. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a coin-tossing game with three
coins where one wins when all heads or all
tails appear. <b>2</b> one's turn to toss the coin.

<p><b>tugpù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] tease unmarried people by
pairing them off. <i>Ug akuy mutugpù, magkadáyun
giyud pagkaminyù,</i> If I tease people
by pairing them off in marriage, they
end up getting married.
<pb n=2124>

<p><b>tugsad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] hit, reach the ground from
an elevated position. <i>Milayat siya ug didtu
mutugsad sa píkas tampi,</i> He jumped and
landed on the opposite bank. <i>Gibukhárag
panaptun ang gitugsáran sa rayna gíkan sa
hagdanan,</i> A cloth was laid over the area
the queen stepped on when she came down
from the stairs.

<p><b>tugsaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a3b] @plunge into water, @dunk
s.t. straight into a liquid. <i>Nagtugsaw ang íyang
tiil sa dágat samtang nagdagan ang
pambut,</i> His feet were @immersed in the water
while the boat was moving. <i>Natugsaw
siya sa kanal,</i> He fell into a ditch.

<p><b>tugsuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] strike s.t. pointed into
s.t. <i>Nagtugsuk siyag káhuy silbing timáan,</i>
He planted a stake as a marker. <i>Tugsukun
níya ang linung-ag ságing sa tinidur,</i> He will
@stick a fork into the boiled banana. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)]
stick one's finger into liquid and immediately
remove it. <i>Ang binditahan nga
ákung gitugsúkan sa ákung tudlù,</i> The font
of the holy water into which I @dipped my
finger. <i>n</i> @skewer, s.t. to stick into s.t. <i>Ambi
ra ang tugsuk kay átung isuway sa amúti,</i>
Let me have a stick so I can see if the sweet
potatoes are done.

<p><b>tugsuy</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for s.t. to appear as an
elongated shape. <i>Unsa nang mitugsuy sa ímung
bursa, ságing?</i> What is that thing protruding
in your pocket, a banana? <i>Nagtugsuy
lang nang níwang mu rag kawáyan,</i> That
skinny person looks tall and thin like a
bamboo pole. <i>a</i> thin and @elongated. <i>Tugsuy
ug simud,</i> Long-snouted.

<p><b>tugtug</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] play a piece of music, an
instrument. <i>Mitugtug ang urkistra,</i> The orchestra
played a piece. <i>Tugtúga ang 'Lawra',</i>
Play 'Laura'. <i>n</i> music piece being played.
<b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. that provides the music.

<p><b>tugub</b> <i>a</i> @full, having s.t. in abundance. <i>Tugub
sa sustansiya ang gátas,</i> Milk is full of nutrients.
<i>Tugub na ang barku sa pasahíru,</i> The
boat is full of passengers. <i>Tugub nga áni,</i>
@Abundant harvest. <i>v</i> [B2; a2] become,
make full, rich. <i>Natugub siya sa kalípay,</i>
She was filled with joy.

<p><b>tug-ud</b> <i>n</i> @stem of large, grassy plants or trunks
of palm trees. <b>&mdash; sa buli</b> <i>n</i> unopened buri
palm frond together with its stem.

<p><b>túgun</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1c6] leave or send s.o. with instructions
to do s.t. <i>Tugna siya pagpalit ug
asin inigtugbung níya,</i> Give him the message
to buy some salt when he goes to town. <i>Unsay
ímung itúgun inig-adtu nákù sa Manílà?</i>
What do you want me to do for you when
I go to Manila? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> word of instruction to
do or get s.t. <b>2</b> final message of a dying man.
<pb n=2125>
<b>Bag-ung &mdash;</b> @{New Testament}. <b>Dáang &mdash;</b> @{Old
Testament}. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; b6] ask s.o. to
get and bring s.t. back. <i>Nagpanugun tus Búbuy
sa íyang duláan,</i> Boboy keeps asking
you to bring him a toy. <b>2</b> [A2; c] give final
instructions, will at deathbed. <i>Nanúgun na
ang himatyun,</i> The dying man is giving his
final instructions.

<p><b>túgut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] pay out line. <i>Tugúti ang
lambu hangtud malúya ang isdà,</i> Pay out
the line until the fish gets weak. <b>2</b> [A; c]
@permit, @allow. <i>Mulangyaw untà ku kun mutúgut
ka,</i> I would like to go abroad if you
permit me. <i>Dílì itúgut ang paghulam íning
librúha,</i> No one is permitted to borrow this
book. <b>3</b> [A; c6] sell s.t. at a price lower
than that quoted. <i>Ákù ning palitun ug itúgut
nímug písus,</i> I'll buy it if you give it to
me for one peso. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> line which one pays
out, esp. a kite string.

<p><b>tug-ut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] tie hemp fibers end to end
to form a long strand for weaving. <i>Magtug-ut
ka ug bayinti ka bituul pára ihulug,</i> Tie
up twenty skeins of hemp to use as warp
threads.

<p><b>tugway</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] lengthen a tether. <i>Tas-ig
tugway ang kábaw,</i> Give the carabao more
rope. <i>Tugwáyi ang kanding arun makapanabsab,</i>
Give the goat more rope so it can
graze. <b>2</b> [AN; c] pasture an animal by
lengthening or untying the tether. <i>Manugway
kug kábaw mahápun,</i> I pasture the carabao
each afternoon. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rope used to @tether
animals. <b>2</b> length of tether allowed. <b>-anan</b>
<i>n</i> place where animals are tethered. <b>maN-r-</b>
<i>n</i> one who pastures animals with a tether.

<p><b>tugyan</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @entrust, put into s.o.'s power
or disposal. <i>Ang hárì gustu nang mutugyan
sa trúnu ngadtu sa íyang anak,</i> The king
wants to abdicate the throne in favor of his
son. <i>Ayawg itugyan níya ang ímung kaugalíngun
antis mu makasal,</i> Don't surrender
yourself to him until you are married. <b>-in-an</b>
<i>n</i> one to whom s.t. has been turned over. <b>&mdash;
sa baláud</b> @policeman. <i>&mdash; sa lungsud</i> @{public
servant}, specifically, @congressman.

<p><b>túhab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @peck a piece of s.t. <i>Dílì makatúhab
ang langgam sa búnga nga giputus,</i>
The bird could not peck at the fruit that
was wrapped. <b>2</b> [A; b6] cut a large opening
or swath. <i>Kinsay maistráhang nagtúhab sa
úlus ákung anak?</i> Which teacher was it that
cut a wide swath into my son's hair? <i>Bistídu
nga mu rag sáku nga gituhában pára agiánas
buktun,</i> A dress like a sack with pieces
snipped off for armholes. <b>3</b> [A23; a12] affect
s.t. as though diminishing it. <i>Sígas plaslayit
nga mitúhab sa kangitngit,</i> A flashlight
<pb n=2126>
beam that pierced the darkness. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> large
hole left, large portion removed. <b>2</b> large
opening in a dress. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a woman who is
no longer a virgin (humorous). <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> place
s.t. was pecked off. <i>Makáun pa ning kapayása.
Abisa lang nang tinuhában,</i> You can
still eat the papaya. Just cut out the holes.
<b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> fruits that have peck marks.

<p><b>tuhak</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> @{peck at}. <i>Kwaknit ang nagtuhak
sa mga prútas,</i> Bats pecked at the
fruits. <i>Gituhak sa manuk ang íyang mata,</i>
The chicken pecked at his eyes. <b>2</b> strike
with a pecking-like motion. <i>Mituhak ang
dakung sawa,</i> The big snake struck. <i>n</i> feed
of chickens, fowls or birds. <b>kakha &mdash;</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>KAKHA</sc>. <b>-l-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> dish for feeding chickens.


<p><b>tuhaw</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)6] <b>1</b> spring forth unexpectedly,
appear suddenly, @{pop up}. <i>Mituhaw
lang pagkalit ang anak hung nawálà,</i> My
lost son suddenly appeared in our house.
<i>Mituhaw sa íyang hunàhúnà ang usa ka maanindut
nga láraw,</i> A beautiful plan popped
into his mind. <b>2</b> do s.t. suddenly and without
cause. <i>Nabúang kang mituhaw ka man
lag kasukù,</i> Have you gone crazy, flaring up
like that? <i>a</i> done or appearing suddenly and
unexpectedly.

<p><b>tuhay</b> <i>v</i> [B2; c1] <b>1</b> for the mind to be at
peace. <i>Matuhay (mutuhay) pag ákung hunàhúnà
ug manláyas mu,</i> I'll have @{peace of
mind} only if you all get out of here. <b>2</b> do or
accomplish s.t. to the finish without any
hitch or disturbance. <i>Dì matuhay (mutuhay)
ang ákung trabáhu ug samúkun ku,</i> My work
won't go smoothly if I am disturbed.

<p><b>tuhi</b> sound imitating spitting to show contempt.
<i>Tuhi! Hitsúra lang,</i> @Pff, the nerve
of him. <i>v</i> [b6] say <i>tuhi</i> to s.o.

<p><b>tuhib, túhib</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> @{peck at} s.t., esp.
food. <i>Mga langgam nga nagtuhib sa hinug
kapáyas,</i> The birds pecking at the ripe papaya.
<b>2</b> @nibble, bore a hole in s.t. <i>Ang ilagà
mauy mitúhib sa kísu,</i> A mouse nibbled at
the cheese. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @bill, @beak. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> place
pecked at, hole nibbled into s.t.

<p><b>tuhik, túhik</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] @peck with a sharp,
pointed beak to eat or inflect a wound.
<i>Nagtuhik ang manuk sa wati,</i> The chicken
is pecking at an earthworm. <i>Ilábay ang gituhikan
nga prútas,</i> Throw away the fruits
that have holes pecked in them. <b>maN-</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
@fish that is particularly vicious.

<p><b>tuhil</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] poke or tap s.t. small or a tiny
portion of s.t. so as to move it. <i>Ayaw punáyig
tuhil ang itlug sa irù kay mapaakan
ka,</i> Don't keep poking the dog's testicles.
He might bite you. <i>Mataktak ang búwak</i>
<pb n=2127>
<i>bísag ígù lang tuhilun,</i> The flowers will fall
off even if you just touch them lightly. <i>n</i>
s.t. used to poke.

<p><b>tuhu, tuhù</b> particle following the first word
of the predicate, used in negating s.o.'s
statement and stressing the contrary. <i>Namutbut
siya. Mutan-aw tuhù nà siyag sini,</i>
She is lying. She is so going to the movies.
<i>Dílì tuhù nà siya indyinir,</i> No, he's not. He
is not an engineer.

<p><b>tuhud</b> = <sc>TULUD</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>túhud</b> <i>n</i> @knee. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] hit in the knee. <i>Gitúhud
siyag búnal maung napaluhud,</i> He was
whipped on his knees and it made him fall
to his knees. <b>2</b> [B2456] reach nearly as high
as the knees. <i>Mutúhud na ang túbig sa dálan,</i>
The water in the street is nearly up to the
knees. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TÚHUD</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>2</b> [A2; a1] ask
for a girl's hand from her parents, not necessarily
in a formal way with ceremony and
bargaining. <i>Mituhud na siya kay disidídu giyung
mangasáwa,</i> He asked the girl's parents
for her hand because he really is determined
<b>to</b> marry her. <b>taga-(->)</b> up to the knees.[+][**][**corrected. P2]

<p><b>túhug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] pierce through with a
string, stake, or s.t. else, hang s.t. on s.t.
long. <i>Magtúhug kug pirlas arun ímung ikwintas,[**][**its' fine. P2]</i>
I'll @string some pearls for you to
wear as necklace. <i>Natúhug ang isdà sa panà,</i>
The fish got @impaled on the spear. <i>Tuhúga
sa uway ang kubit,</i> @String the catch by passing
a rattan strip through it. <i>Tuhúgi rag hílu[**][**corrected. P2]
nang dágum,</i> @Thread that needle. <i>Siyay
nagpas-an sa bugsay diin itúhug ang bukag,</i>
He carried the paddle over his shoulder and
hung the basket over it. <b>&mdash; sa ilung</b> lead around
by the nose. <i>Matúhug ka ba lang níya
sa ilung?</i> Can she lead you about by the
nose? <b>2</b> [A123S] follow or put in memory
the thread of a story, idea, lecture. <i>Way nakatuhug[**][**it's fine. P2]
sa isturya níyang naglikùlíkù,</i> Nobody
could follow his incoherent story. <b>2a</b>
@understand, @comprehend. <i>Bísag bungul siya,
makatuhug siya sa ímung isulti nga magtan-aw[**][**corrected. P2]
lang sa ímung ngábil,</i> Even if he is deaf,
he can understand what you are saying by
just reading your lips. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @string or s.t.
used to string or pierce through s.t. <i>Nabugtù
ang tuhug sa dunggan sa bábuy,</i> The string
that was fastened through the pig's ears
broke. <b>2</b> hole punched into the nose or
ears. <b>3</b> quantity contained on a string of s.t.
<i>Tagpíla ang tuhug sa isdà?</i> How much is a
string of fish? <b>tuhugtúhug</b> <i>n</i> children's
game, taking a coconut midrib and fishing
out in turns[**, ?] rubber bands buried in the
sand. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>TUHUGTÚHUG</sc>.

<p><b>tuhuktuhuk</b> <i>v</i> [B456; b6] have tiny marks
<pb n=2128>
(like pin marks) all over. <i>Tawumtum nang
nagtuhuktuhuk sa panaptun,</i> That is mildew
<b>that</b> has made tiny spots on the cloth. <i>Gituhuktuhukan
ang íyang náwung sa úwat sa
bugas,</i> His face is @pockmarked by pimple
scars. <i>n</i> tiny marks all over s.t.

<p><b>tuhup</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5] <b>1</b> @permeate. <i>Mituhup ang
katugnaw sa sinínà,</i> The cold @seeped through
the dress. <b>2</b> for s.t. wet to @{seep through},
permeate. <i>Gituphan sa kabasà ang yútà,</i>
Moisture permeated the earth. <b>3</b> be affected
with a feeling or emotion. <i>Tuphun kug kahingáwa
matag byáhi níya,</i> I get anxious
whenever he goes on a trip. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i>
@penetrating.

<p><b>túhus</b> = <sc>TÚLUS</sc>.

<p><b>tuhuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] get out of s.w. suddenly and
with haste. <i>Dì pa gánì mahuman kug súgù,
mutuhuy dáyug lakaw,</i> I can't even finish
giving my orders before he rushes up to get
going. <b>2</b> [B; b3cP] be sticking out straight.
<i>Mituhuy ang túbig sa hús,</i> The water from
the hose is spurting out far. <i>Nagtuhuy ang
tintin sa báta. Básig kaihiun,</i> The child has
an erection. He probably has to urinate.
<i>Ayawg ituhuy (ipatuhuy) nang ímung buhuk
dapit sa agtang. Mu ra kag tin-idyir,</i>
Don't let your hair stick out over your
forehead. You look like a teen-ager. <i>a</i> <b>1</b>
carrying oneself in a straight but artless
way. <b>2</b> @{sticking out}.

<p><b>túig</b> <i>n</i> @year. <i>v</i> [B56; b4] be almost, last for
a year. <i>Mutúig nákung pinaábut nímu,</i> I
waited for you for almost a year. <i>Nagtúig
ang ámung pagbúngul,</i> It's been one year
now that we haven't been on speaking terms.
<i>Dì na matuígan ang ímung kinabúhì,</i> Your
life won't last for another year. <b>tuigtúig</b> <i>a</i>
@{every year}; @yearly. <i>v</i> [B; c16] be, become
yearly, do s.t. on a yearly basis. <b>-in-(->)</b> @annual.
<i>Tinuig nga tígum,</i> @{Annual meeting}.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @years. <i>Nanglábay ang daghang katuígan,</i>
Many years passed. <b>2</b> @{Easter obligation},
the obligation of every Roman Catholic
to go to confession and Holy Communion
once a year on a definite period specified
by the church&mdash;that is, in the period
between Easter Sunday and November 2,
All Souls' Day. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> first planting
season in the calendar year (during June
and July); crops planted during this season.
<i>Aníhun sa Disyimbri ang humay sa panuig,</i>
The first crop of rice is harvested in December.
<b>2</b> extraordinarily big. <i>Panuig man pud
nang librúha, dílì man madaug ug bátà,</i> That
sure is a big book. A child couldn't lift it.
<b>paN-un</b> <i>n</i> @age. <b>may &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> be old enough to do
s.t. <i>May panuígun na si Lítang muiskuyla,</i>
<pb n=2129>
Lita is old enough now to go to school. <b>2</b>
be no longer young. <i>May panuígun na siya
pagkaminyù,</i> She was well along in years
when she got married. <b>paN-un(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
be of [such-and-such] an age. <i>Nagpanuigun
siyag diyis,</i> He is ten years old.

<p><b>tuis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @twist. <i>Siyay nagtuis sa ákung
buktun,</i> He twisted my arm. <b>2</b> @distort a fact
or truth. <i>Way mutuu nímu kay maáyu kang
mutuis sa tinúud,</i> Nobody believes you because
of the way you distort the truth. <b>&mdash; sa
pálad</b>, <b>kapaláran</b> <i>n</i> turn of fate. <i>Usa ka tuis
sa kapaláran nga ang kanhi banyágà karun
nagpakilúuy na,</i> It is a turn of fate that the
ruthless scoundrel now has to beg for mercy.

<p><b>tuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> word used in writing to indicate a
knocking sound. <b>2</b> in bowling, a hit scored
through the center, opening up a clear path.
<i>v</i> [B26] for a hit to turn out to be of this
sort.

<p><b>túk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] stick a stick into s.t. to serve as
a @marker. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> marker stuck into s.t. <i>Gibutangan
nákug túk ang gilubngan sa bahandì,</i> I
stuck a stick to mark the spot where I buried
the treasure. <b>2</b> clitoris (slang).

<p><b>tukà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @strangle with the hands.
<i>Tuk-un ta kag musinggit ka,</i> I'll choke you
if you scream. <b>2</b> [A123P; b4(1)] choke on
s.t. ingested. <i>Makatukà nang tag-as nga bíhun,</i>
You can choke on long noodles. <i>Hituk-an
ku pag-inum nákù sa wiski,</i> I choked
when I drank the whiskey. <b>2a</b> get @jammed
or @stuck into s.t. as if choking on it. <i>Papil
ang nakatukà (nakapatukà) sa kasilyas,</i> Paper
clogged the toilet up. <i>Ug matuk-an ang
makina gáhì na tuyúkun,</i> If a sewing machine
gets stuck it is hard to turn.

<p><b>tukà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @peck at to eat. <i>Gustung
mutukà ug tibuuk mais ang manuk,</i> Chickens
like to peck at whole kernels. <i>Dúna pa
bay tukaun ang sunuy?</i> Are there any grains
left for the rooster to peck at? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @beak,
@bill. <b>2</b> @feed for fowls or birds. <b>kakha &mdash;</b> see
<sc>KAKHA</sc>. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] feed fowls.

<p><b>túkab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @open by pushing s.t. aside,
lifting a cover. <i>Kinsay nagtúkab sa kúlun?</i>
Who took the cover off the pot? <i>Tukába
ug dakù ang bintánà kay galhà,</i> Open the
windows wide because it is warm. <i>n</i> distance
s.t. opens.

<p><b>tuk-ab</b> = <sc>DUG-AB</sc>.

<p><b>tukabtukab</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; c1] @gasp for breath,
@pant. <i>Nagtukabtukab ang íyang gininhawaan
sa pagdinágan,</i> He panted for breath after
running so much.

<p><b>tukad</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2c] @go, bring up to the mountain,
or country from town. <i>Mutukad ku
karung tingsanggì,</i> I'll go to the country this
<pb n=2130>
coming harvest. <i>Butung ray ákung tukarun,</i>
I'm going to the country just to get young
coconuts. <i>Itukad ring abúnu,</i> Bring this fertilizer
to the country.

<p><b>tukadur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @dresser, a chest of drawers with
a large mirror and a flat space for cosmetics.
<b>2</b> a plain @mirror of considerable size. <i>v</i> [b]
look at oneself in a mirror. <i>Tukaduri ra
nang nawung mug tan-áwag angayan ka ba,</i>
Look at yourself in the mirror and see if
you look nice. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] look at oneself
in a mirror.

<p><b>tukag</b>, <b>túkag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2S6; cP] place s.t. long
in a position @vertical or @crosswise relative to
s.t. else; cause it to be so. <i>Ayúhag butang
ang gabas kay mutúkag sa kahun,</i> Lay the
saw down carefully crosswise in the toolbox.
<i>Nagtukag ang bukug sa íyang tunlan,</i>
A bone is lodged cross-ways in his throat.
<i>Itúkag (ipatúkag) ang lipak sa takup arun
dílì mutak-up,</i> Prop the shutter open with a
stick of bamboo. <b>2</b> [B2S6] for s.t. slender
to be jutting out. <i>Ang mga tiil sa dakung
bátà mutukag kun kugúsun,</i> The legs of a
big child dangle if he is carried. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t.
placed athwart s.o. <b>2</b> sticking out. <i>Tukag
siyag dawunggan,</i> He has ears that stick out.

<p><b>tukal</b> <i>n</i> @gap formed as a result of shrinkage
between two juxtaposed materials, esp.
wood. <i>v</i> [B3(1)] form a gap. <i>Mitukal (natukal)
ang mga sawug paglúbag,</i> Cracks developed
between the floor boards when they
shrunk. <b>tukaltukal</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] hang loosely
from a loose attachment. <i>Nagtukaltukal ang
bungbung sa báy,</i> One side of the walling of
the house is hanging loosely.

<p><b>tukámud</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b8] @fall face first to the
ground. <i>Nasapiti siya ug natukámud,</i> He
tripped and fell face first to the ground.

<p><b>tukang</b> = <sc>TUKLANG</sc>.

<p><b>tukar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @play a musical instrument,
piece. <i>Hanas siyang mutukar sa marimba,</i>
He plays the marimba well. <i>Tanggu tukara,</i>
Play a tango. <b>1a</b> [A; b(1)] for a musical
group to @perform. <i>Dúna silay tukaran nga
parti karung gabíi,</i> They will perform at a
party tonight. <b>2</b> [A2] have an attack of a
recurring illness or undesirable behavior.
<i>Mutukar ang riyuma kun ting-ulan,</i> Rheumatism
flares up on rainy days. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> music
played. <i>Magsáyaw ta inigsúgud sa tukar,</i>
Let's dance when the music starts. <b>2</b> @performance
by a musical group. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac]
turn on a phonograph, radio for music. <i>Patukara
ang púnu,</i> Turn on the phonograph.
<i>Bítuls ang ipatukar,</i> Play a Beatles record.

<p><b>tukarul</b> = <sc>TINGKARUL</sc>, <i>4</i>.

<p><b>tukas</b> = <sc>TUKLAS</sc>.
<pb n=2131>

<p><b>tukaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @{stay awake} at night doing
s.t., keep @vigil. <i>Magtukaw ku karung gabíi
paghuman sa tirm pípar,</i> I'll be awake all
night finishing my paper. <i>n</i> @wake. <i>Sa tukaw
nagdala silag baráha arun dílì sila tulgun,</i>
They brought a deck of cards to the wake
so they wouldn't feel sleepy.

<p><b>tukaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] tower over. <i>Mga pipila
ka túig mutukaw na siya nákù,</i> In a few
years he will be towering over me. <i>Usa ka
lubing láyug ang nagtukaw sa ílang payag,</i>
A tall coconut tree is towering over their
hut.

<p><b>tukaw<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> a unit of length reckoned from the
tip of the thumb to the tip of the index finger
extended. v [A; a1] measure s.t. in tukaw's[**tukaws?].

<p><b>tukáya</b> = <sc>TUKÁYU</sc> (female).

<p><b>tukáyu</b> <i>n</i> one who has the same name as s.o.
else. <i>Tukáyu siya nákù kay Dyun usab íyang
ngán,</i> He's my @namesake because his name
is John too. <i>v</i> [AC2; ac3] call s.o. or each
other <i>tukáyu</i>. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> term of address to
one's <i>tukáyu</i>.

<p><b>tukbil</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @touch slightly. <i>Wà siyay
gána ug ígù lang mitukbil sa kan-un,</i> She had
no appetite and barely touched the food.
<i>Mutak-up dáyun ang hibìhibì ug tukbílun,</i>
The touch-me-not plant closes as soon as
you touch it. <b>2</b> [A; a12] touch the emotions
or on s.t. that provokes feelings. <i>Ikaw
pay nakatukbil sa ákung dughan,</i> You were
the first to have touched my heart. <b>3</b> [A; a12]
mention s.t. in passing. <i>Sa íyang diskursu
mitukbil siya sa pulitika,</i> In his
speech he mentioned politics in passing.
<b>-l-un</b>, <b>-l-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> delicate, engendering arguments
or hard feelings. <i>Kanang mga paagíha
tulukbilun (tulukbílun) kaáyu,</i> That
procedure is very much open to argument.
<b>&mdash; ug buut</b> short-tempered.

<p><b>tukbù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @grasp by encircling the fingers
around. <i>Nagtukbù siyag ságing,</i> He is
grasping a banana. <i>Tukbúa ang buktun sa
bátà kun matukbù ba,</i> Put your fingers around
the child's arm if they can go all the
way around it. <b>2</b> @bundle long things together
to form a bunch big enough to be clasped
in one or both hands. <i>n</i> bundle of s.t. that
can be clasped in one or both hands.

<p><b>tukbuy</b> = <sc>TALUKBUY<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tukdab</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] @cut s.t. down at the base
with one stroke. <i>Kining dapíta ang ákung
gitukdaban sa mga tuud sa mga gagmayng
káhuy,</i> This is the place where I cut the
stumps of the small tree down.

<p><b>tukdug</b> <i>v</i> [BN46] for s.t. to stand out straight
and bare. <i>Mitukdug (nanukdug) ang mga</i>
<pb n=2132>
<i>mais human hugpái sa dúlun,</i> The corn
plants stood straight and bare after a swarm
of locusts settled on them. <i>n</i> ribs of umbrella.

<p><b>tukgaw</b> = <sc>LUKGAW</sc>.

<p><b>tukhi</b>, <b>tukhì</b> <i>n</i> @toothpick. <i>v</i> [a12] make into
toothpick. <i>Maáyung tukhíun ang tukug,</i> Coconut
midribs make good toothpicks. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; c6] pick one's teeth.

<p><b>tukì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @investigate, @examine. <i>Ang
kumiti mauy mutukì sa anumalíya,</i> The
committee will investigate the anomaly. <i>Madiskubrihan
ang tíkas kun tukiun ang libru,</i>
They will discover the embezzlement if the
books are examined. <b>2</b> @ask, @interrogate. <i>Gitukì
siya apan wà mutug-an,</i> He was questioned
but he didn't tell. <b>3</b> @discuss with the
idea of analyzing, explaining. <i>Unsay tukiun
sa míting?</i> What is going to be discussed in
the meeting? <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> characterized with
persistent, methodical, and detailed application
of a procedure. <i>Kining instruksiyun
sa libru masabtan sa matukíung pagbása,</i>
The instructions in the book can be understood
only if you read it with care and analysis.

<p><b>túkib</b> <i>a</i> @detailed, @complete, and @{well-described}.
<i>Túkib kaáyu ang íyang isturya sa aksidinti,</i>
His account of the accident is complete
to the minutest detail. <i>v</i> [A; a1] delve
into s.t. so as to have a thorough knowledge
of it.<i> Buut kung tukíbun ang tanghágà sa
íyang kinabúhì,</i> I want to delve into the riddle
of his life. <i>Dì matúkib ang kaguul sa namatyan,</i>
The grief of the bereaved one cannot
be described. <b>-l-un</b> <i>a</i> that which hides a
mystery, riddle. <i>Tulukíbun ang pahiyum sa
katingaláhang istranyu,</i> The mysterious
stranger has a sphinx-like smile.

<p><b>tukig</b> <i>a</i> @stiff. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become stiff. <i>Mitukig
ang kasáhus nga gibulad,</i> The jerked
meat is stiff. <i>Ang ispísu nga amirul mauy
nakatukig (nakapatukig) sa muskitíru,</i> The
thick starch made the mosquito net stiff.
<i>Nagkatukig ang ákung líug,</i> My neck is getting
stiff.

<p><b>tukíkà</b> = <sc>TIKÚKÀ</sc>.

<p><b>tukikì</b>, <b>tukìkì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] laugh with a partly
suppressed high-pitched laughter. <i>Mitukikì
siya sa ákung tistis,</i> He snickered at my joke.
<i>Unsay inyung gitukìkían[**irregular usage of i forms ?]?</i> What are you
snickering about?

<p><b>túkis</b> <i>n</i> talkies, talking movies. <i>Dì pa túkis
ang sini sa panahun ni Púpuy,</i> There weren't
any talkies in Grandpa's day.

<p><b>tuklang</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> put a piece of wood s.w.
to inhibit motion, either by propping s.t.
under it and keeping it from falling or by
<pb n=2133>
laying it in the way and stopping it from
proceeding. <i>Tuklángun (tuklángan) ang takup
sa dúlung arun dílì musira,</i> @{Prop up} the
hood so it won't slam shut. <i>Ituklang nis bintánà
arun dílì matúkab,</i> @Wedge the window
shut with this so it can't come open. <b>1a</b>
@prop s.t. up. <i>Taas nga káhuy ang ituklang sa
hayhayan arun dì masagyad ang hinayhay,</i>
Use a long bamboo pole to hold the clothesline
to keep the wash from touching the
ground. <b>2</b> [AN3; b6] put up the hands to
keep s.o. at arms' distance, as if bracing
oneself. <i>Nanuklang siya kay gipiit siya sa
ílang pagbayli,</i> She kept her hand up because
her partner danced too close to her.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A1] brace oneself or keep s.o. away
from one's body. <i>Kun wà pa siya makapanuklang
mahaplà untà siya,</i> Had she not
braced herself she would have fallen flat. <i>n</i>
stick used to prevent motion.

<p><b>tuklas</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a1] @open a shutter, curtain or
s.t. that covers, be opened. <i>Natukas ang atup
pagbagyu,</i> The roof was blown off in
the storm. <i>Natukas ang íyang sayal paghángin,</i>
Her skirt was lifted up by the wind. <i>Inánayng
nagkatukas ang tilun,</i> The curtain
slowly opens. <i>a</i> be @open. <i>May nangáwat kay
<b>tukas</b> nag paradur,</i> There has been a robbery
because the cabinet is open.

<p><b>tuklì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] turn a page. <i>Tuklía ang mga
dáhun ug hínay arun dílì mu hinglaktawan
ang litrátu,</i> Turn the pages slowly so you
will not miss the picture.

<p><b>tukling</b> = <sc>TUKLID</sc>.[**F1 'tukling' should go after 'tuklid']

<p><b>tuklid</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] give s.o. a sudden @push.
<i>Kinsay nagtuklid nímung nahayang ka man?</i>
Why did you fall? Who pushed you? <i>Wà ka
ituklid, hibanggaan ka lang,</i> Nobody pushed
you. S.o. just accidentally bumped into you.

<p><b>tuklù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] steal by catching s.t. at
the neck, esp. chicken. <i>Gituklù ang manuk
sa nangharána,</i> The chicken was swiped by
the serenaders. <i>Gituklù sa naglágut nga bána
ang líug sa asáwa,</i> The husband was so
angry he grabbed his wife's neck and
squeezed it. <b>2</b> [A2; a1] dart or @strike instantly
with the head. <i>Pagbantay kay ang bitin
mutuklù lag kalit,</i> Watch out for a snake
might just strike out suddenly. <i>Ang manuk
nakatuklù ug duha ka bakì,</i> The chicken has
caught two frogs pecking at them.

<p><b>tuklud</b> = <sc>TUKLID</sc>.

<p><b>tuklung</b> <i>a</i> for rice or corn to have overripe
grains. <i>Tukung na kaáyu ang humay nga wà
maáni dáyun,</i> The rice in the fields is bent
over now because it was not harvested right
away. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] get grains that are overripe.
<pb n=2134>

<p><b>tuklus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Ituklus ang
suwat,</i> @{Hand over} the letter. <b>2</b> [b5] = <sc>PAN-</sc>.
<b>paN-</b> [A; b] <b>1</b> go to a banquet with the primary
purpose of eating. <i>Manuklus ta sa íla
kay dakù silag híkay,</i> Let's go to their house
for a free meal, because they have prepared
quite extensively. <b>2</b> attend any k.o. entertainment
without invitation. <i>Manuklus tag
bayli sa ílang iskuyláhan,</i> Let's go attend
the dance in their school.

<p><b>tukmà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @exact, @exactly. <i>Náa sa libru ang
tukmà nga tubag,</i> The exact answer is in the
book. <i>Tukmà nga alas syíti ang pagsúgud sa
prugráma,</i> The program starts at exactly
seven o'clock. <i>Tukmà sa gikasabútan,</i> Exactly
as agreed. <i>Tukmang usa ka búlan ugmà
sukad sa íyang paggíkan,</i> It will be exactly
one month tomorrow since the day he left.
<i>Kining ruskáha tukmà kaáyu ánang pirnúha,</i>
This nut fits that bolt very nicely. <b>2</b> @suitable,
@appropriate. <i>Tukmà ang tíma sa ukasiyun,</i>
The theme @fits the occasion exactly. <i>Kining
tanúma tukmà giyud sa bugnawng klíma,</i>
This plant is perfectly @adapted for a cold
climate. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26C; c] @coincide, @correspond
with. <i>Mitukmà ang ákung pangagpas sa nahitabù,</i>
My guess coincided with what actually
happened. <i>Nagkatukmà ang pista ug
ang ákung adlaw,</i> The fiesta and my birthday
fall on the same date. <b>1a</b> [C3; c6] for
edges to fit, abut perfectly. <i>Itukmag maáyu
ang mga ngilit,</i> Make the edges abut perfectly.
<b>2</b> be, make @suitable, @appropriate. <b>3</b> [b8]
@{come upon} s.o. quite unexpectedly. <i>Hitukmaan
níya ang bátà nga mikúut sa kúkis,</i>
She came upon the child getting some cookies.
<b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b8] <b>1</b> come out to be
<b>the</b> same as or appropriate. <b>2</b> @{come upon}
s.t. in a place. <b>Sa íyang paglatagaw nahitukmà
siya sa usa ka payag,</b> In his wandering
he came upon a hut. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] make
s.t. coincide. <i>Kinahanglang ipahitukmà ang
prugráma sa gubyirnu sa kinahanglanun[**defect over i ?] sa
násud,</i> The government's program must be
made to correspond with the country's
needs. <b>-in-an(->)[** arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> <i>n</i> @joint. <i>Ang tinukmaan sa
túbu tulù,</i> The pipe joint is leaky.

<p><b>tukmu</b> <i>n</i> the Philippine @turtledove: <i><b>Streptopelia
bitorquata</b></i>.

<p><b>tukmud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @push abruptly and hard.
<i>Nasarásay siya dihang ákung gitukmud,</i> He
reeled when I pushed him hard. <b>2</b> @goad,
@prod. <i>Ang kaugalíngung kahígal mauy mitukmud
kaníya sa panlúgus,</i> His own lust
goaded him to rape. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @spurred, @urged.
<i>Tinukmud sa tingúhang mulampus nanlimbásug
siya,</i> He strove hard under the goad
of the drive to succeed.
<pb n=2135>

<p><b>tuknul</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Dawáta ug
dúnay kwarta nga ituknul sa lídir,</i> Accept it
if the political leader hands you some money.

<p><b>tukpaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> push s.t. upward. <i>Akuy
mutukpaw nímu ngadtus atup arun ka makasaka
ngadtu,</i> I'll give you a @boost onto
the roof so that you can climb up there. <b>2</b>
induce s.o. to do s.t. bad for him. <i>Ang íyang
mga amígu nakatukpaw níya sa mga bisyu,</i>
His friends induced him into a life of sin.
<i>Ayaw siya itukpaw ngadtu ni Satanas,</i> Do
not lure him into the ways of the devil. <b>3</b>
jump from one point to another. <i>Ang ági sa
makina mutukpaw,</i> The sewing machine
@skips. <i>Gitukpaw níya ang isturyag láin,</i> He
@{skipped over} to s.t. else to change the
subject. <i>Ingun ug magatukpaw ang átung
sulti, wà diay makapasar si Tunyu sa búrd,</i>
To @{change the subject}, so Tony didn't pass
the board examination. <b>tukpawtukpaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; c1] work skipping about, not systematically.
<i>Gitukpawtukpaw níya pagpintal,
man nga nagkábang ang ági,</i> He did not
paint it square at a time and so it came out
splotched. <b>2</b> [B; b6] move with a jerky up
and down motion. <i>Nagtukpawtukpaw ang
sakayan sa bawud,</i> The boat @bounced up
and down in the waves.

<p><b>tuksì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] slice or prod off the outer layer
of s.t. <i>Pagtuksì ug lapnis nga ibugkus sa
kináhuy,</i> Pull off some of the outer strips
of the abaca to tie the firewood up with.
<i>Tuksía ang pakpak sa mais,</i> Loosen the corn
husks. <i>n</i> instrument used to prod an outer
layer loose.

<p><b>tuksu, tuksù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @query in a pressing
way. <i>Akuy mutuksù níya kun tinúud tung
ímung gisulti,</i> I will @ask him if what you
said was true. <i>n</i> @query. <i>Makalíbug ang mga
tuksù sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer's @questions
were confusing.

<p><b>tuktugáuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] for cocks to @crow. <i>Mutuktugáuk
na gánì ang mga manuk, sa átù
pa duul na ang kabuntágun,</i> When the cock
crows, we know morning is near. <b>2</b> [A; c]
vomit due to excessive drinking of alcoholic
beverages (slang). <i>Kanang ímung kan-un ímu
ra sang ituktugáuk ug magpalabi kag ínum,</i>
You will vomit out what you are eating if
you drink too much. <i>n</i> cock's @crow or noise
of a similar sort.

<p><b>tuktuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @{knock on}. <i>Tuktúka ang
pultahan únà musúd,</i> @Knock on the door
before you go in. <b>2</b> @{peck at} repeatedly. <i>Gituktuk
sa sunuy ang íyang higut,</i> The cock
@pecked at its tether. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @knocking. <b>2</b> feed
for chickens. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] feed grains to.
<pb n=2136>
<i>Patuktuka ang sunuy ug tibuuk mais,</i> Feed
whole kernels to the cock. <i>Tipasì lay ipatuktuk
sa himungáan,</i> Feed unhusked rice
to the hen.

<p><b>tuktuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> give enlightenment to (confined
to set phrases). <i>Tuktúkan kay may salabútan,</i>
@Enlighten him because he can understand.
<b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b3] keep still as if in
deep thought. <i>Naghinuktuk si Pidru kay wà
tugúti,</i> Pedro is @brooding because they
didn't let him do it. <b>2</b> [b(1)] @ponder s.t.
<i>Hinuktúki kini pag-áyu únà ka magpárì,</i>
@Consider it carefully before you enter the
priesthood.

<p><b>tuktuk<sub>3</sub></b> (from <i>taluktuk</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B346] for s.t.
long to stand on its end unsupported. <i>Mutuktuk
ang lipak kun maáyung pagkabalansi,</i>
A bamboo stick will stand on its end if it
is well balanced. <i>Makatuktuk na ang bátà,
hápit nang kalakaw,</i> The child can stand
alone now. It is about to walk. <b>2</b> = <sc>TALUKTUK</sc>.
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TALUKTUK</sc>. <b>2</b> straight above in
the sky. <i>Alas dúsi na kay tuktuk na ang adlaw,</i>
It is twelve noon because the sun is at
its @zenith.

<p><b>tuktur</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird, a @{night jar}, which flies
after dusk, the eggs of which are the source
of the <i>tagulílung</i> charm: <i><b>Eurostopodus macrotis</b></i>.
The name derives from its call: 'trrk-*trrk'.

<p><b>tuku</b> <i>n</i> @prop stick or post. <i>v</i> [A; b] @{prop up}
with a pole or post. <i>Magtuku mi sa báy nga
naghirig,</i> We are going to prop up the house
which is leaning. <i>Tukhi ang hayhayan arun
dì magtuntun,</i> Prop up the clothesline so it
doesn't sag. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] for a girl to push
her partner at arm's length in dancing. <i>Maáyu
si Tirya nga baylíhan kay dílì manuku,</i>
It's nice to dance with Terry because she
does not keep you at arm's length. <b>2</b> [A3]
be hesitant to do s.t. mainly due to rules of
propriety. <i>Nagpanuku ang nubyu paghaluk
sa nubya,</i> The groom was hesitant to kiss
the bride.

<p><b>tukù</b> = <sc>TIKÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tukub</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] for a beast of prey to devour.
<i>Makatukub ug bábuy ang higanting
sawa,</i> A giant snake can devour a pig. <b>tukbunun</b>
<i>n</i> @prey. <b>maN-r-(<-)[** left arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> <i>n</i> @{beast of prey}.

<p><b>túkud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @brace, @prop. <i>Tukúra ang
kapáyas kay malúad unyà inigbagyu,</i> Brace
the papaya. It might fall when the storm
comes. <i>Itúkud ímung kamut sa bungbung
unyà barug sa usang tiil,</i> Prop your hand
against the wall. Then stand on one leg. <b>2</b>
[A; c1] @erect a house, building. <i>Anhi tukúra
(itúkud) ang munisipyu,</i> The municipal
hall will be erected here. <b>3</b> [A; a] form,
<pb n=2137>
@found an organization, establishment. <i>Kinsay
nagtúkud sa Siliman?</i> Who founded Silliman
University? <i>Gitúkud ang buluntaryu
panahun sa Hapun,</i> Volunteer troops were
@organized during the Japanese occupation.
<b>4</b> put up a business. <i>Ang nigusyung tukúrun
kanang gikinahanglan sa lungsud,</i> The business
you @{put up} should be one which the
town needs. <b>(->)[** right arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to prop or brace
s.t. <b>tag-(->)[** right arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> <i>n</i> @founder, @organizer. <b>katukúran</b>
<i>n</i> @founding, @establishment. <i>Nagsaúlug sila sa
katukúran sa syudad,</i> They are celebrating
the founding of the city. <b>mag-r-</b> = <sc>TAGTUKUD</sc>.
<b>patukuránan</b> <i>n</i> @foundation, @basis. <i>Way
patukuránan ang ímung pasángil,</i> Your
charges are without foundation. <b>tukudtúkud</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b(1)] fabricate a story, esp. one
with a dubious motive. <i>n</i> @fabrication, @concoction.
<i>Pulus tu tinukudtúkud (tukudtúkud)
ang ílang isturyang naglaki ang ímung
asáwa,</i> Those stories about your wife's carrying
on with other men are all fabrication
anyway. <b>tinukudtúkud</b> = <sc>TUKUDTÚKUD</sc>,
<i>n</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] hold oneself at arm's
length when dancing.

<p><b>túkud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cut a style of dress. <i>Tukúra
lag yánu ning ákung sinínà,</i> Just make my
dress in a simple style. <i>n</i> @{style of dress}. <i>Ang
<b>túkud</b> sa sinínà nagbalikbálik lang,</i> The same
dress styles keep coming back again. <b>(->)[** right arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> =
<sc>TÚKUD<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>túkud<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> @plow. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a plow.

<p><b>tukug</b> <i>n</i> midrib of a coconut or buri palm
leaf.

<p><b>túkug</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b6] @bulge or @{stick out}, sometimes
causing slight inconvenience. <i>Nanúkug
ang mga bukug sa síku tungud sa kaníwang,</i>
He is so thin his elbow is sticking out.
<i>Nabuslut ang sáku nga gitukúgan sa pusil,</i>
The sack developed a hole where the gun
was sticking out.

<p><b>tukul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3] @{nurse a grudge}. <i>Mauy nakaáyu
kanímu kay dì giyud ka mutukul kun buyagun
ka sa ímung sayup,</i> One thing good
about you is you never nurse a grudge
against people who call your attention to
your mistakes.

<p><b>tukul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] disobey by keeping silent
and failing to act. <i>Dílì ángayng tukulan ang
<b>tambag</b> sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You should not
disobey your parent's advice. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
be @hesitant in doing s.t. <i>Nagpanukul ku
ug uban ninyu sa piknik,</i> I am hesitant
about going with you on the picnic.

<p><b>tukun</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @{prop up}. <i>Tukna ang ságing
kay harag na kaáyu,</i> @Prop the banana tree
up because it is leaning way over. <b>2</b> propel
oneself by pushing on a pole. <i>Nagtukun mi</i>
<pb n=2138>
<i>sa baybay kay nabálì ang bugsay,</i> We poled
ourselves toward the shore because the paddle
broke. <i>Tukna ang dágat kun lawum ba,</i>
Put the pole to the floor of the sea to see if
it is deep. <i>n</i> pole for propelling or for supporting.

<p><b>tukung<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TUKLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tukung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> tailless bird or fowl. <i>Ilhan ku ra
tung ákung piríku kay tukung,</i> I will recognize
my parrot because it lost its tail. <i>v</i> [B1256;
a12] become tailless.

<p><b>tuk-ung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @squat or lie with the
knees bent up double against the body nearly
touching the chin. <i>Nagtuk-ung ang bátang
nagdúwag húlin,</i> The child playing
marbles is squatting. <b>2</b> be s.w. looking as
though it were squatting (literary). <i>Ang pitrumaks
nagtuk-ung dihà sa bangkíwà,</i> The
petromax lantern was located squatting
atop of the mast.

<p><b>túkuy</b> <i>n</i> word used to call dogs. <i>v</i> [A; a12] 1
call a dog, saying <i>'túkuy'</i>. <i>Tukúya ang irù
arun pakan-un,</i> Call the dog so it can eat. <b>2</b>
draw irresistibly toward s.t. <b>Ang kadalù mauy
mutúkuy sa táwu pagpaníkas,</b> Greed
leads a person to cheat. <b>3</b> in folk belief, induce
a person to walk in his sleep by tying
a string to a finger and pulling it rhythmically.
<i>Kamau siyang mutúkuy ug táwung
natúlug,</i> He knows how to make a person
walk in his sleep. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @puppy.

<p><b>tukwa</b> <i>n</i> @{bean curds} done to a dough-like
consistency. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make, cook with
@{bean paste}.

<p><b>tukwang<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TUKLANG</sc>.

<p><b>tukwang<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TIKWANG</sc>.

<p><b>tukway</b> = <sc>BUKWAY</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>túl</b> <i>n</i> @tulle, a fine, silk, open-meshed material
used for veils.

<p><b>tula</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> set food or
drinks aside for s.o. <i>Tud-i (tulahi) ug sud-an
ang ulahing mukáun,</i> Set some food aside
for those who are going to eat later. <b>2</b> bestow
certain feelings on one. <i>Tud-ig diyútayng
kalúuy ang mga bátà,</i> Show the children
a little pity.

<p><b>túla</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] stew fish or chicken. <i>Magtúla
<b>ta</b> kun dúnay lab-as,</i> We can have stewed
fish if there are fresh fish. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> stewed fish
or chicken.

<p><b>tulà</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] feed fowls and pet animals. <i>Akuy
magtulà sa mga manuk mabuntag,</i> I
feed the chickens each morning. <i>Gitulaan
ang irù ug karni,</i> They fed meat to the dog.
<i>n</i> feed for pets or poultry.

<p><b>tulabhù</b> = <sc>TILABHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>tulábung</b> <i>n</i> a small, white @heron often found
perching on the backs of water buffaloes,
<pb n=2139>
eating insects.

<p><b>túlag</b> <i>v</i> [B14; a12] be in a @disorderly, topsy-turvy
condition. <i>Panghípus mu kay nagkatúlag
lang ang kwartu,</i> Fix the room because
it's a @mess.

<p><b>tulak</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4(1)] stop raining. <i>Pil-a nag páyung
kay mituwak nag uwan,</i> Fold the umbrella
now because the rain has stopped.
<i>Didtu mi hitulaki sa ulan sa Karkar,</i> The
rain stopped falling when we got to Carcar.

<p><b>túlak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @push or move s.t. with the
arm. <i>Kami mauy mitúlak sa awtu nga nalubung,</i>
We were the ones who pushed the car
that got stuck in the mud. <i>Íya kung gitúlak
ngadtus swíming pul,</i> He pushed me into
the swimming pool. <b>2</b> lift s.t. up to one's
head or higher and throw to an elevated
place. <i>Kami mutúlak sa sáku ngadtu sa tinumpì,</i>
We will throw the sack up onto the
pile. <i>Itúlak ang kahun sa istanti,</i> Throw the
box up onto the top of the shelf. <b>3</b> [B126;
b8] @fall from a height accidentally when
one loses his hold, slips, support is taken
away, and the like. <i>Ayawg padaplin kay
matúlak ka unyà,</i> Don't sit too close to the
edge or you might fall. <b>tig-(->)</b> <i>n</i> person who
tosses or pushes s.t. heavy upwards onto s.t.

<p><b>tulakhang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KALING</sc>. <b>2</b> woman who has
lost her virginity (derogatory). <i>v</i> [B126; b6]
have lost one's virginity.

<p><b>tulakì, tulákì, tulakig</b> = <sc>ÍSUL</sc>.

<p><b>tulala, tulála</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>a</i> @idiot. <i>v</i> [B12;
b6] be a @moron or like one.

<p><b>tul-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @knee joint of human beings or
large animals. <b>2</b> @legs or @{lower limbs} of man
or animals. <i>Maglatà mig tul-an pára karung
udtu,</i> We'll boil beef shanks for dinner.

<p><b>tulandus</b> = <sc>BULANDUS</sc>.

<p><b>*tulápus</b> <b>ílu nga &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÍLU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>túlas</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @{tongue irritations}
caused by hot spices. <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] have
tongue irritations, as when burned.

<p><b>tulawug</b> <i>n</i> @{spring pole}. <i>Kusug mulibkas ang
balag-ung kay gáhì ug tulawug,</i> The trap
springs fast because the spring pole is stiff.
<i>v</i> [A13; a12] make, attach a spring pole.

<p><b>tulay</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @bridge. <i>v</i> [A13; b]
put a bridge. <i>Kinsay nagtulay ug lubi sa kanal?</i>
Who put a coconut trunk across the
canal? <i>Kinahanglang tulayan ning subáa
kay dì malabang,</i> This river needs a bridge
over it because no one can get across it.

<p><b>túlay</b> = <sc>BANTÚLAY</sc>.

<p><b>tulbuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{poke at} a point. <i>Nakatulbuk
ka na bag bilyar?</i> Have you tried your
hand at (lit. poked at) billiards? <i>Tulbúka
ang timbri,</i> @Push the doorbell. <b>2</b> [A; b] put
a period or dot. <i>Tulbúki nang ímung ay,</i>
<pb n=2140>
Put a dot over your letter I. <i>n</i> @period or @dot.
<i>Náay gagmay nga tulbuk ang ímung nawung,</i>
There are small @spots on your face.

<p><b>tulbung</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b4(1)] @rise, @ascend to appreciable
height or level. <i>Gidagkutan ang kwítis,
misíyuk, unyà mitulbung,</i> The rocket
was lit, sizzled, and then rose straight up.

<p><b>tulda</b> <i>n</i> @tent. <i>v</i> [A; a] @pitch a tent. <i>Nagtulda
ang mga kampirs,</i> The campers pitched a
tent. <i>Hábul lay itulda,</i> Use a blanket as a
tent. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] for pants to bulge due
to erection of the penis (humorous). <i>Ngánung
nanulda ang ímung karsúnis?</i> What is
that pole sticking out in the front of your
pants?

<p><b>túlì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @circumcise. <i>Tambálan ang
nagtúlì nákù,</i> A folk doctor circumcised me.
<i>Tulía ang bátà pipila ka adlaw human ianak,</i>
Circumcise the child a few days after it is
born. <b>2</b> [a3] get one's @comeuppance or @{just
deserts}. <i>Natúlì ang mangingilad dihang gihatágan
siya ug minì nga kwarta,</i> The con-*man
got his just deserts when he was given
fake money. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who has been circumcised.
<b>2</b> action of having been circumcised.
<b>&mdash; andaw</b> <i>n</i> s.o. born with the glans
penis exposed. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. who circumcises.

<p><b>tulibag</b> <i>a</i> @diverging, going off @{at an angle}. <i>Tulibag
ang ímung tinubagan. Dílì tukmà,</i>
Your answer doesn't get at what I asked.
It's not to the point. <i>v</i> [B; c1] go off at an
angle. <i>Mutulibag ang íyang tinan-awan ug
mahakalit,</i> He becomes cross-eyed when he
looks at s.t. suddenly. <i>Nagtulibag man ning
ímung tinahian,</i> You sewed your seams
@crooked.

<p><b>tulibagbag</b> = <sc>TULIBAG</sc>.

<p><b>tul-id</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @straight. <i>Tul-id nga linya,</i> A straight
line. <b>2</b> @{straight towards}. <i>Lakaw lag tul-id ánang
dálan ug musangkù ka sa simbahan,</i>
Just walk straight on that street and you
will reach the church. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; a] @straighten.
<i>Akuy mutul-id (mupatul-id) sa balikug
nga alambri,</i> I'll straighten the crooked wire.
<i>Mitul-id siya sa íyang pagyukù,</i> He @{straightened
up} after he had bent over. <b>2</b> [AB; a2]
@reform, @correct. <i>Dì na matul-id ang dautan
níyang pagkatáwu,</i> His bad ways cannot be
reformed. <b>katul-íran</b> <i>n</i> @reform, @amendment.

<p><b>tulílik</b> <i>v</i> [B2S46] @reel around unsteadily. <i>Mitulílik
ang ayruplánung nawad-ag kuntr&ucaron;l,</i>
The plane that lost control turned round
and round. <i>Nagtulilik ang kasing nga taliundang
nag túyuk,</i> The top which is about to
stop whirling is reeling unsteadily. <b>-ay(->)</b> =
<sc>TULÍLIK</sc>.

<p><b>tulimbang</b> <i>v</i> [AB56; c] for bells to @toll, @peal,
<pb n=2141>
<b>toll</b> bells. <i>Ang kampaníru mauy mutulimbang
sa kampána,</i> The sexton will toll the
bell. <i>Human nag mísa kay nagtulimbang nag
kampána,</i> The mass is over because the bells
are ringing. <i>n</i> @pealing or @tolling of bells.

<p><b>túlin</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> @{move forward}. <i>Pagbulhut
sa hángin mitúlin ang sakayan,</i> When the
wind blew, the boat moved @forward. <b>2</b> cover
a certain distance. <i>Mutúlin ang dálan ug
kilumitru úsà mulikù sa tuu,</i> The road will
@{go on} for a kilometer before it turns to the
right. <i>Pila may tulínan sa usa ka baril nga
aspaltu?</i> How far can a barrel of asphalt
go? <b>2a</b> @accomplish a certain amount. <i>Dí ta
mutúlin ug kanúnay kag sámuk,</i> I won't
accomplish anything if you keep making a
nuisance of yourself. <b>2b</b> [A2] @expand, take
space in the direction of. <i>Ámù nang yútà
ang gitulínan sa gihímung karsáda,</i> The road
they made has @encroached on our land. <b>3</b>
[B2; b6] become @fast, @swift. <i>Mutúlin (matúlin)
ang pambut kun habwáag karga,</i> The
motorboat will move fast if we take the
cargo off. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @accomplishment, distance
covered. <i>Gamay ra siyag túlin kay naglangaylángay
man,</i> He made little @progress because
he was just loafing. <b>2</b> @speed, @{forward
motion}. <i>Hínay ang túlin sa bangkà kun way
hángin,</i> The sailboat's speed is slow if there
is no wind. <i>a</i> @fast and @swift. <i>Túlin nga nanglábay
ang katuígan,</i> The years passed @swiftly.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> extend measurements in
constructing s.t. <i>Ug padak-an ang balay, adtu
patulíni sa luyu,</i> If you enlarge the house,
extend the construction to the rear. <b>2</b> increase
the speed of s.t. moving forward.
<i>Magpatúlin ta arun sayu tang maabut,</i> Let's
increase our speed, so we arrive early.

<p><b>tulindaw</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @{go caroling} during the
Christmas season to the house of s.o. who
made preparations to treat the carolers. <i>Manulindaw
(mutulindaw) ta sa íla kay nagbingka
sila,</i> Let's go @carol at their house because
they made rice cakes.

<p><b>tulíngan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @mackerel: <i><b>Rastrelliger kanagurta</b></i>,
<i><b>Katsuwonus pelamis</b></i>, and others.

<p><b>tulíngì, tulíngig</b> (from <i>língì</i>) <i>v</i> [B26] turn the
head sharply to one side, as when slapped.
<i>Natulíngì (mitulíngì) siya dihang gitamparus,</i>
She snapped her head to one side from
the force of the slap she received. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> for
the neck or s.t. similar to be twisted to one
side. <i>v</i> [B1; c6] become @twisted to one side.
<i>Nagtulingì ang gunitánan sa gunting,</i> The
handle of the scissors is twisted.

<p><b>tulipsay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] for s.t. thrown or that
flies away to swerve off its path. <i>Ang batung
lapad mutulipsay ug ibunù,</i> If s.o.
<pb n=2142>
<b>throws</b> a flat stone it will go in a curve. <i>Hitulipsayan
siya sa káhuy nga ákung gibughà,</i>
A piece of the wood that I split flew off
and swerved onto him.

<p><b>tulipsay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> Asian moon @scallop, a smooth-surfaced,
golden scallop, white on the inside.

<p><b>túlis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @rob, steal with force and intimidation.
<i>May yáwi giyud ang nagtúlis sa
tindáhan,</i> The one who robbed the store
must have had a key. <i>Tulísun ku nang dátung
Insik,</i> I'll rob that rich Chinaman. <i>n</i>
@robbery. <i>Wà pa masulbad ang túlis,</i> The robbery
has not been solved yet. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @robbery
in general. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> @robber, @bandit.
<b>-anis</b> <i>n</i> @robbers, @bandits.

<p><b>tulísuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] scold, reproach by pointing
a finger. <i>Yawyaw lang. Ayaw kug tulisúka,</i>
Just keep scolding, but don't shake your
finger at me. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @reproach severely.
<i>Gitulísuk sa kaugalíngung tanlag,</i> Reproached
by his own conscience. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @reproachful,
usually accompanied with blame.

<p><b>tulitul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @hemorrhoid. <b>2</b> an infected puncture
in the cheek. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b5] become,
get a <i>tulitul</i>.

<p><b>tulíyuk</b> <i>v</i> [APB46; aP] @spin, @whirl. <i>Akuy
nagtulíyuk (nagpatulíyuk) sa sabad,</i> I made
the propeller spin. <i>Ingun sa mutulíyuk ang
kalibútan,</i> It was as if the world was spinning
about. <i>n</i> @spinning, @whirling.

<p><b>tulmà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC3; a] let s.t. touch on s.t. <i>Itulmà
ang ímung tudlù sa ínit sa plansa,</i> @Touch
your finger to the hot iron. <b>2</b> [A; c] make
an @imprint or @impression on. <i>Gitulmáan níyag
'risib' ang sulat,</i> He @stamped the word
'received' on the letter. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @imprint, @mark,
@impression. <b>2</b> @horizon, place where the land
or sea and the sky seem to meet. <b>3</b> @boundary.

<p><b>tulpuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @prick or @poke at with s.t.
pointed. <i>Dágum nga mitulpuk sa ákung
buktun,</i> A needle that pricked my arm. <i>Tulpúka
ang timbri,</i> @Push the doorbell button.
<b>2</b> make, put a dot on s.t. <i>Tulpúkan nátug
itum ári pára mata,</i> We'll put dots here for
the eyes. <b>3</b> press the keys of a piano, typewriter,
and the like. <i>n</i> @pricking, @poking, @injection
with a hypodermic needle. <i>Dús ang
ipabáyad sa dukt&ucaron;r káda tulpuk,</i> The doctor
charges two pesos for each @shot. <b>tulpuktulpuk</b>
<i>n</i> dots in cloth design. <i>Bistídung may
tulpuktulpuk nga pula,</i> Dress with red dots.

<p><b>tultug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)7] knock off the ashes or
embers. <i>Nakatultug siyag bága sa agipu didtu
sa mga papil,</i> He accidentally knocked an
ember off from the firebrand onto the
pieces of paper.

<p><b>tultul</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @tell, @{lead the way} s.w.
<pb n=2143>
<i>Kinsay gatultul nímu sa ámung hayd-áwut?</i>
Who @led you to our hideout? <b>2</b> [A12; b8]
find one's way s.w. <i>Pangutána lang kun dì
ka makatultul sa íla,</i> Just inquire if you
can't @locate their place. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [B1236]
manage to do s.t. in the way that is normal,
started. <i>Nalintar siya ug dì na makahinultul
ug unsay buhatun,</i> She panicked and
couldn't do what had to be done. <i>Kinsay
mahinultul sa búhat kun magpúnay kag sámuk?</i>
Who can do his work right if you
keep making a nuisance of yourself?

<p><b>tulu</b> <i>numeral</i> @three. <i>Pirmi giyung magkúyug
ang tulu,</i> The three always go together. <i>v</i>
[B256; a12] be in or about three in number.
<i>Mutulu ka búlan na siyang gasabak,</i>
She is about three months pregnant. <i>Natulu
ang ákung panan-aw pagkahubug nákù,</i> I
had triple vision when I got drunk. <i>Tulua
pagrisirba kay ang tsapirun diay,</i> Make three
reservations, an extra one for the chaperon.[**chaperone? P2,P3 ok as is]
<b>r-</b> @three. <b>ika-</b> @third. <b>ka-, maka-</b> three times.
<b>-in-</b> into three, in three's. <b>katluan</b> <i>n</i> @thirty.
<b>tinulutulu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @rope of three strands, <b>tag-(<-),
[** left arrow][**corrected. P2] tag-, tagutlu</b> three each. <i>v</i> [A; c1] do
s.t. by three's.

<p><b>túlù</b> <i>n</i> @drop. <i>Bisan usa ka túlù nga lúhà,</i> Even
one single teardrop. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] leak so as to
cause dripping. <i>Sungkípi ang atup kay nagtulù,</i>
Fix the roof because it is leaking. <b>1a</b>
[A2S; b28] @drip, leak through. <i>Ug dúnay
malígù sa táas, ang túbig mutúlù námù diri,</i>
If s.o. takes a bath upstairs, water drips
down on us. <b>2</b> [A12; b6] for drops to fall.
<i>Hápit makatúlù ákung lúhà sa kahiubus,</i> I
almost shed tears in humiliation. <b>(->)[** right arrow][**corrected. P2]</b> <i>a</i>
@leaky. <i>Tulù ang atup kay gibagyu,</i> The roof
is leaky because it was hit by a storm. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i>
[A; c] <b>1</b> let drip. <i>Nagpatúlù siya sa íyang
lúhà,</i> She shed tears. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; sa singut</b> @labor
hard. <i>Nagpatúlù sa singut ang ímung amahan
arun ka makatunghà,</i> Your father is
@{working hard} just so you can study. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i>
[A] drip plentifully. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @drops. <i>Tinúlù sa
ulan,</i> Raindrops. <b>2</b> shedding of tears, blood,
or anything in drops. <b>3</b> noise of dripping.
<i>Makadisturbu ang tinúlù sa ulan,</i> The noise
of the dripping of the rain is disturbing.

<p><b>tulud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] <b>1</b> @push. <i>Itulud ang kutsi kay
dì muand&acaron;r,</i> Push the car because it won't
start. <b>2</b> @goad, @incite. <i>Daw sa may mutulud
nákù sa pagpaúlì,</i> As if s.t. were @urging me
to come home. <b>tuludtúlud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] pass
work, blame onto one another. <i>Nagtuludtúlud
lang sila dihang gipangutána kinsay
nakasalà,</i> They just kept passing the blame
onto each other when I asked them who
the culprit was. <i>Ayawg ituludtúlud ang trabáhu,</i> 
<pb n=2144>
Don't keep trying to pawn off the
work on each other. <b>&mdash; bátang</b> <i>n</i> the period
from August to October when the wind direction
is not fixed (the time when a log
[<i>bátang</i>] is pushed in one direction and
then another).

<p><b>túlug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B123S6; a2] go, put to @sleep. <i>Ang
yáya mauy pirming magtúlug sa bátà,</i> The
baby's nurse usually puts him to sleep. <i>Natúlug
na ba siya?</i> Is he @asleep yet? <i>Dì ku
makatulug ug dì ku kainum,</i> I can't sleep
without drinking s.t. first. <i>Tulga ang bátà,</i>
Put the baby to sleep. <b>2</b> [B126] for lard
and oil to @congeal. <i>Natúlug ang mantíkà sa
katugnaw,</i> The lard congealed due to the
cold. <b>3</b> [B126] for tops to spin steadily
without a wobble. <i>Mu rag walà maglihuk
ang kasing kay natúlug,</i> The top seems not
to move because it is spinning steadily. <i>n</i>
@sleep. <i>Wà kuy túlug gabíi,</i> I had had no sleep
last night. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @{sound asleep}. <i>Tulug na kaáyu
ang bátà,</i> The child is sound asleep. <i>v</i>
[A123P; a4] be @sleepy. <i>Makapatulug ning
tambála,</i> This medicine can make one
sleepy. <i>Gitulug aku pag-áyu sa ímung diskursu,</i>
Your speech made me very sleepy.
<b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] @sleep. <i>Mikatúlug (natúlug) siya,</i>
He went to sleep. <i>Dì ku makakatúlug,</i> I
can't sleep. <i>Sawug lay katulgi,</i> Just sleep on
the floor. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] induce, put to
sleep. <i>Makapakatúlug ang ímung mga isturya,</i>
Your stories make me fall asleep. <i>n</i> s.t.
that induces sleep. <i>Tablítas nga pakatúlug,</i>
Sleeping pills. <b>hika-/haka-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b8]
@{fall asleep}. <i>Nahikatulug na ang ákung pinalanggà,</i>
My darling has finally fallen asleep.
<i>Hikatulgan ku siyang nag-isturya,</i> I fell asleep
on him as he was talking to me. <b>pakuluka-,
patulugtúlug</b> <i>v</i> [A13] pretend to
sleep. <i>Didtu siya sa káma magpakukat[=ú]g
(magpatugt[=ú]g), piru wà diay,</i> He was lying
on the couch pretending to be asleep, but
he really wasn't. <b> túgan, hinúgan</b> <i>a</i> top that
spins smoothly and rapidly without a wobble.
<i>v</i> [B126; b6] become @smooth-spinning.
<b>ka-un</b> <i>n</i> @sleep. <i>Wà ku duáwa sa katulúgun,</i>
Sleep did not come to me. <b>kina-, kinatulgan</b>
<i>n</i> sleep[**, ? ] slept. <i>Maáyu ákung kinatúlug (kinatulgan)
kagabíi,</i> I had a good sleep last night.
<b>katulganan</b> <i>n</i> place one sleeps. <i>v</i> [A13]
sleep habitually s.w. <i>Anáa ku magkatulganan
sukad sa ákung pag-anhi,</i> I have been
sleeping there since my arrival. <b>ka-un(->),
katulgun</b> <i>a</i> @sleepy. <i>Katúgun (katulgun) kaáyu
ku,</i> I'm very sleepy. <b>hinga-un(->), hingatulgun,
ma-(->), ma-un</b> <i>a</i> fond of sleeping,
always sleeping. <i>Ang táwung matulúgun</i>
<pb n=2145>
<i>way kaugmáun,</i> A person who is always
sleeping has no future.

<p><b>tulugtulug</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. bush bearing clusters of
reddish fruit: <b><i>Breynia rhamnoides</i></b>.

<p><b>tuluk</b> = <sc>TURUK</sc>.

<p><b>tulun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @swallow. <i>Mitulun siyag
dakù únà musulti,</i> He swallowed hard before
speaking. <i>Tunla ang tablítas,</i> Swallow
the pill. <b>2</b> [a3] @endure s.o.'s temperament,
hurting words, etc. <i>Dì matulun ang íyang
taras,</i> I can't take her ways. <b>&mdash; lamuy</b> <i>a</i> eating
s.t. without bothering to chew. <i>Hingtuk-an
kay tulun lamuy mag mukáun,</i> He
choked because he eats without chewing.
<b>tunlan</b>,<b> tutunlan</b> <i>n</i> @throat.

<p><b>túlung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @skewer. <i>Tabángi kug túlung
sa aslúnun,</i> Help me skewer the pig we are
roasting. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> skewer.

<p><b>tulunggun</b> see <sc>TUNUG</sc>.

<p><b>túlus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <i>semen</i> (not coarse, but avoided). <b>pa-(->)</b>
<i>n</i> enhancing sperm production. <i>Patulus
nang mga pagkaúna kay daghan ug sustansiya,</i>
Those foods will give you lots of sperm
because they have nutritive value. <i>v</i> [A13]
enhance semen production.

<p><b>túlus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B126] get into the habit of doing
s.t. the whole year through by doing it on a
special holiday or on a day it should not be
done (whether intentionally done or not).
<i>Makat[=ú]s (makapat[=ú]s) sa pagkahingatúgun
ang pagdúgayg mata sa bag-ung túig,</i> It will
make you get up late the whole year through
if you get up late on New Year's Day.

<p><b>túlut</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b6P] pay out rope or string. <i>Dílì
ku mutúlut (mupatúlut) sa pasul kay musángit
unyà sa ilálum,</i> I will not pay out the
fishline because it might snag at the bottom.
<i>n</i> length of line paid out. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> =
<sc>TÚLUT</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>2</b> [A; c1] sail smoothly, swiftly
with the wind. <i>Mupatúlut ang sakayan basta
pabur sa hángin,</i> A boat sails smoothly
and swiftly if it goes with the wind.

<p><b>túluy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] be caught in a net. <i>Ug mutúluy
ang isdà dì na kabuhì,</i> If the fish snarls
in the mesh it can't get away. <i>Nit[=ú]y ang bábuy
ih[=á]s sa batung,</i> The wild pig was caught
in the net. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. caught in a net.

<p><b>túluy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>tamban</i> 4&ndash;5" long, with a
greenish back and white belly.

<p><b>túma</b> <i>n</i> @{body louse}, similar to the head louse
(<i>kútu</i>) in appearance and habits, but found
in clothing. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with body
lice. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] remove body lice.
<b>tumahun</b> <i>a</i> infested with body lice.

<p><b>túmà</b> <i>n</i> drinking of alcohol (slang). <i>v</i> [AC; a2]
drink alcohol. <i>Hubug man, nakatúmà sigúru,</i>
You're drunk. You must have come
<pb n=2146>
from a drinking spree.

<p><b>túman<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @obey. <i>Matag lungsuránun
kinahanglang mutúman sa baláud,</i> Each
citizen must obey the law. <b>2</b> @fulfill, @realize.
<i>Natúman ra ang íyang tingúhang maabugádu,</i>
His ambition to become a lawyer has
finally been realized. <b>3</b> [A13] stubbornly
have one's own way. <i>Náa ra nímu ug magtúman
ka,</i> It's up to you if you insist on
your own way. <b>4</b> [b(1)P] @indulge, or permit
s.o. his way. <i>Tumáni (patumáni) lang ang
bátà arun way gubut,</i> Just indulge the child
so there won't be any trouble. <b>tulumanun</b> <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @obligation to be carried out. <b>2</b> @program.
<i>Tulumanun sa administrasiyun,</i> The program
of the administration. <i>Tulumanun sa
radiyu,</i> Radio program. <b>ma-in-un</b> <i>a</i> @obedient.
<b>ma-in-un sa gustu</b> stubbornly wanting one's
own way. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @realization, @fulfillment.
<i>Ang katumánan sa damgu,</i> The realization
of a dream. <b>ka-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> @fulfillment reached.
<i>Walay katumanun sa ímung tingúhà,</i> There
is no hope of fulfilling your dreams. <b>pinaan</b>
<i>n</i> one who is granted his way. <i>Bátang pinatumánan,</i>
A @spoiled child.

<p><b>túman<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> the @utmost of, @extreme. <i>Túmang
kalípay,</i> Extreme happiness. <i>Túmang kamíngaw,</i>
@Utter loneliness. <i>Túmang kahílum,</i>
@Absolute silence.

<p><b>tuma pusisiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @inauguration. <i>Ugmà ang
tuma pusisiyun sa prisidinti,</i> The president's
inauguration is tomorrow. <b>2</b> taking over of
ownership. <i>Ang tuma pusisiyun sa balay,</i>
Taking over possession of the house. <i>v</i> [A13]
<b>1</b> carry out inauguration ceremonies.
<i>May tuma pusisiyun sa irpurt ugmà,</i> They
will @inaugurate the airport tomorrow. <b>2</b>
take over ownership.

<p><b>tumar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] take @medicine. <i>Tumaha
(tumara) nang tablítas,</i> Take those pills. <b>2</b>
[A2] @afford, have the means for. <i>Ang sapían
ra giyuy mutumar (makatumar) niánang
ímung prisyu,</i> Only a millionaire could afford
the price you are setting. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug aksiyun</b>
[A; b] @{take action} on s.t. <i>Ang kíha wà
katumahig aksiyun,</i> They didn't @{act on} his
complaint. <b>&mdash; ug nutisya, libak, et al.</b> <b>4</b> [AN;
c1] @{pick up gossip}, rumors. <i>Ang mga radiyu
balágun adtu matumar sa tubáan,</i> You
can pick up rumors at the toddy stand.

<p><b>tumatub</b> <i>n</i> @{bag of waters}.

<p><b>tumaw</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)6] @{pop up}, @{come out}, @surface,
esp. s.t. unexpected, secret, or little
known. <i>Mutumaw giyud ang matúud,</i> The
truth always comes out. <i>Ug dì ka makatumaw
sa inyung kásu, prisúhun ka giyud,</i> If
you do not @appear in court, you will surely
be imprisoned. <i>Kanang ímung pagrilaks mau</i>
<pb n=2147>
<i>nay makatumaw (makapatumaw) sa sulbad
sa prublíma,</i> Relaxation can make the solution
to your problem pop up. <i>n</i> @mutant. <i>Tumaw
nang batáa kay nigru man untà ang
mga ginikánan ug ngánung putì man nà siya,</i>
That child is a mutant, because the parents
are black, but he is white.

<p><b>tumba<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; a] for s.t. upright to @{fall
over}, cause it to do so. <i>Kinsay nagtumba sa
bisiklíta?</i> Who made the bicycle fall over?
<i>Natumba ang bátà,</i> The child fell. <b>2</b> [A; a]
slaughter an animal for an occasion. <i>Magtumba
tag báka sa ímung kasal,</i> We will
slaughter a cow on your wedding. <b>2a</b> <i>&mdash; ug
kandílà</i> [A; b] light a candle as an offering.
<i>Nakatumba na siyag kandílà pára sa kalag
sa mga minatay,</i> He has already lighted a
candle for the departed souls. <b>2b</b> [A; a12]
consume a liquor container full of drink.
<i>Kanang grupúha mutumba ug usa ka tárung
tubà,</i> That group will consume one kerosene
can of palm toddy. <b>&mdash; lúbu</b> <i>a</i> @unbalanced:
<b>1</b> for a vehicle to have its load unevenly
distributed. <b>2</b> for a building or ship to have
a top floor that is too high in proportion to
its bottom floor. <i>Kusug kaáyung mukíling
ang barku nga tumba lúbu,</i> A ship which
has an unproportionately large upper deck
easily lists. <i>v</i> [B1256] develop a lack of balance.
<b>tumbatumba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] offer various
reasons for doing or not doing s.t., keep
changing one's mind. <i>Nagtumbatumba ka ánang
pangatarúngan nímu. Ug buhátun nímu,
buhata na,</i> You keep changing your
reasons. If you want to do it, do it already.
<b>2</b> [A] play ball with the politicians, not
stick to one or the other but going along
with whoever is in power. <b>3</b> [A; c1] for
capital in a business to be so small that it is
entirely invested in merchandise and new
goods are bought with proceeds. <i>Dì paútang
ang tindáhan ug magtumbatumba ang puhúnan,</i>
A store that has all its capital invested
in goods cannot afford to give credit. <i>a</i> having
flexible politics. <i>Kinahanglan tumbatumba
ang nigusiyanti,</i> A businessman has
to be flexible when it comes to politics. <i>n</i>
= <sc>LIYALÍYA</sc>.

<p><b>tumba<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> an empty coffin laid on a platform
with lighted candles, placed in the
center front of the church where a requiem
mass is being celebrated. <b>2</b> @tomb.

<p><b>tumbága</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @copper or a @{copper alloy} that is
still copper-colored. <b>2</b> = <sc>AMURÁDU</sc>. <b>-in-</b> <b>1</b>
= <sc>AMURÁDU</sc>. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nga kampána</b> <i>n</i> bell made
of bronze.

<p><b>tumbálay</b> = <sc>TUNGBÁLAY</sc>.

<p><b>tumbalik</b> = <sc>SUMBALIK</sc>.
<pb n=2148>

<p><b>tumbáling</b> <i>v</i> [a12] @{pay attention}. <i>Tumbalínga
ang ákung tambag,</i> @Heed my advice.
<i>Ngánung tumbalíngun ka nákù? Si kinsa
man ka?</i> Why should I @obey you. Who are
you anyway? <i>Ayaw tumbalínga ang íyang
mga sugsúg,</i> Don't pay attention to his teasing.
<b>paN-, paN-(->)</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>TUMBÁLING</sc>. <b>2</b> [A12]
@notice, be @aware. <i>Wà ku makapanumbáling
ug dinhà bay niági,</i> I did not notice if
anyone passed by.

<p><b>tumbas</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; b6] @equal in comparison.
<i>Way makatumbas sa íyang kaanyag,</i> Nothing
can equal her beauty. <i>Magtumbas giyud
ang inyung pagkadawù,</i> You both are @equally
greedy. <i>Ang íyang kamaksut gitumbásan
sa íyang kadautan,</i> He is as ugly as he is
mean. <i>a</i> @equivalent, @worth. <i>Tumbas sa napúlù
ka bútus ang maung balúta,</i> The ballot is
worth ten votes. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @equivalent to.
<i>Mau ni ang katumbas sa ganti nga Uskar sa
Amirika,</i> This is the equivalent of the Oscar
in America.

<p><b>tumbayà</b> (from bayà) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; cP] leave s.t.
to the care of s.o. <i>Ayaw itumbayà sa sulugúun
ang mga bátà,</i> Don't leave the children
to the care of the maids. <b>2</b> [AP; b(1)P] fail
to care for. <i>Kanang inahána nagpatumbayà
lang sa íyang mga anak,</i> That mother is @neglecting
her children. <i>Nagkagubà ang karáang
balay nga gipatumbayáan (gitumbayáan)
lang,</i> The old @neglected house is getting dilapidated.

<p><b>tumbuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] poke a finger or s.t.
pointed at s.t. <i>Mitumbuk siya sa makinilya
arun pagtisting niíni,</i> She poked a finger at
the typewriter keys to try them out. <i>Aku
na say tumbuk sa bilyar,</i> It is my turn to
strike the billiard ball. <b>2</b> [A; c1] @{point out},
@pinpoint. <i>Dì ku katumbuk sa iksaktung hinungdan,</i>
I cannot @{point to} the exact reason.
<i>Tumbúka ang utlánan sa mápa</i>, Point
out the boundaries on the map. <b>3</b> [A; b]
put a dot s.w.

<p><b>tumbuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> container, usually a tin can, 2"
by 2", with a handle used for measuring
out kerosene for retail sales.

<p><b>tumbuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1] reproach s.o. while
mentioning the benefits given him. <i>Ayawg
tumbúya nang nangípun ninyu, bisag tapulan,</i>
Don't tell the people who are living
with you that they are ingrates, though
they are lazy.

<p><b>tumbuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{female homosexual}, active @Lesbian;
woman who acts like a man. <i>v</i> [B12]
become a lesbian or tomboyish. <i>a</i> having
the characteristics of a lesbian, @tomboyish.

<p><b>tumindug</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TINDUG</sc>.

<p><b>tumitusus</b> <i>n</i> @{tomato sauce}.
<pb n=2149>

<p><b>tumpag</b> = <sc>LUMPAG</sc>.

<p><b>tumpang</b> <i>v</i> [AC12; b] @{answer back}, even up
the score in a quarrel or argument. <i>Ug ang
táwung idukádu magtumpang ug lális ug
bastus, labaw siyang bastus,</i> If an educated
man stoops to quarrel with a low person,
he just degrades himself. <i>Mu ra mug búang
tan-áwun ug tumpángan ninyu nang giyawyaw
sa hubug,</i> You'll look like fools if you
try to answer that drunk's ranting.

<p><b>tumpáwak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] @fall from a higher
elevation. <i>Ang labandíra natumpáwak sa atábay,</i>
The washer woman fell into the well.
<b>2</b> [B126; b6] fall, be drawn into s.t. undesirable.
<i>Natumpáwak siya sa bisyu sa upyu,</i>
He fell into opium addiction.

<p><b>tumpì</b> <i>v</i> [AB156; c1] @pile s.t., usually neatly,
on top of s.t. else. <i>Akuy mutumpì sa mga
hugasan,</i> I'll pile the dishes up. <i>Nagtumpì
ang daghang inutaw,</i> The huge number of
ironed clothes are piled up. <i>n</i> a neat pile of
things one on top of the other. <i>Usa ka tumpì
nga kwarta,</i> A @stack of bills.

<p><b>tumpil</b> = <sc>TUMPÌ</sc>.

<p><b>túmu</b> <i>n</i> a @volume of a set of books.

<p><b>túmud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] transport goods from the
place of production to market, @export. <i>Nakatúmud
na tag bugas sa láing násud,</i> We
have exported rice to other countries. <i>Itúmud
ning isdà sa tabuan,</i> Deliver these fish
to the market to sell them. <i>n</i> transporting
of goods from place of production for sale;
@export. tumuran <i>n</i> vehicle or boat used to
transport or deliver goods.

<p><b>túmug, túmuk</b> <i>v</i> [B2] be @soaked with. <i>Lúhà
nga mitúmug sa mga mata,</i> Tears that filled
<b>the</b> eyes. <i>Natúmug ang bindáhi sa dugù,</i> The
bandage is soaked with blood.

<p><b>tumung, túmung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @aim s.t. at s.t.
<i>Ayawg itumung nákù nang pistúla,</i> Don't
@point that gun at me. <b>2</b> [A; acP] go to the
direction of s.t. straight. <i>Tumúnga nang baláya,</i>
Go in the direction of that house. <i>Itumung
(ipatumung) ang dáru ánang káhuy
arun tul-id ímung ági,</i> Aim your furrow at
that tree, so it will be straight. <b>3</b> [a1] direct
a statement, joke, etc. <i>Aku bay gitumung sa
ímung insultu?</i> Was your insult directed at
me? <i>Wà nákù itumung ang insultu nímu,</i> I
didn't aim the insult at you. <b>4</b> [A12; a2]
get s.t. (good or bad) as one's lot. <i>Nakatumung
siyag asáwang bagìbian,</i> He ended up
with a nagging wife. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @direction. <i>Way tumung
sa átung lákaw run,</i> We are not going
any particular place. <b>2</b> @purpose for which
s.t. is done. <i>Unsa may tumung sa íyang pagsukitsukit?</i>
What was the purpose of his
asking around? <b>3</b> @{straight toward}. <i>Miatubang 
<pb n=2150>
siya tumung sa bandíra,</i> He faced @toward
the flag.

<p><b>tumur</b> <i>n</i> @tumor. <i>v</i> [B126; b4] become, have
a tumor. <i>Pusibling matumur ang bun-ug,</i> A
bruise may turn into a tumor. <i>Gitumuran
ang íyang tútuy,</i> She got a tumor on her
breast.

<p><b>tumus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> second growth of the edible roots
of a sweet potato. <i>Gagmay ning amutíha
kay tumus ni,</i> These sweet potatoes are
small because they are second-growth roots.
<b>2</b> a coconut with a leaf sprout. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2;
b6] gather second-growth sweet potatoes.
<i>Manumus ka pára lung-águn pára pamáhaw,</i>
I will gather second-growth sweet potatoes
to cook for breakfast. <b>patumsan</b> <i>n</i> @{coconut
seedling}. <i>v</i> [A; c6] grow coconut seedlings.
<i>Mupatumsan mi ánang klásiha sa lubi,</i> We
will grow that k.o. coconut for seedlings. <b>n</b>
<b>katumsan, pinatumsan</b> = <sc>PATUMSAN</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>túmus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] draw in the juice of s.t.
placed in the mouth. <i>Ang mga bátà mitúmus
(nagtúmus) sa santul,</i> The children
were @sucking on a santol seed.

<p><b>tumutub</b> = <sc>TUMATUB</sc>.

<p><b>tumùtúmù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @fabricate, @{make up} a
story. <i>Gitumùtumúan si Risal ug pasángil
sa mga Katsílà,</i> The Spaniards fabricated
charges against Rizal. <i>n</i> @{fabricated tale}, report,
etc. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> given to fabricating stories.
<i>v</i> [B12] be, become given to fabricating
stories.

<p><b>tumuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tip, @end, @top. <i>Tumuy sa búkid,</i>
Top of the mountain. <i>Tumuy sa sundang,</i>
Tip of the knife. <i>Tumuy sa karsáda,</i> End of
the road. <b>2</b> glans penis (euphemism). <b>bug-at
ang &mdash;</b> not having indulged in sexual acts for
quite a long time (humorous euphemism).
<i>v</i> [C; a1c3] do s.t. at the end, tip of s.t.
<i>Nag-áway sila maung nagtúmuy paglingkud
sa bangkù,</i> They had a quarrel; that is why
they are sitting on opposite ends of the
bench. <i>Tumuya paggúnit ang pulbult,</i> Hold
the pole vault at the end.[+]

<p><b>tuna<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @stammerer. <i>v</i> [B12] be a stammerer.
<i>Ang kahadluk níya sa íyang amahan mauy
nakatuna (nakapatuna) níya,</i> His being scared
of his father made him a stammerer.

<p><b>tuna<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> small, glossy-black, worm-like @snake,
deadly poisonous, found in moist places in
grasses and weeds.

<p><b>túnà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @wallow. <i>Mitúnà ang kábaw
sa tunaan,</i> The water buffalo wallows in the
puddle. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] put a water buffalo in
a puddle to have him wallow in. <i>Magpatúnà
úsà ku únà magsúgud pagdáru,</i> I will let the
carabao wallow a while before starting to
plow. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> puddle for water buffalos to
<pb n=2151>
wallow in.

<p><b>túnà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A23; c6] <b>1</b> use a @thumbmark for
signature. <i>Itúnà ang kumagkù sa mga táwung
dì makamaung mupirma,</i> People who
don't know how to write use a thumbmark
for their signatures. <b>2</b> have @coitus (humorous
euphemism). <i>a</i> @illiterate. <i>Ispúting kaáyu
apan túnà diay,</i> He is well-dressed but he's
illiterate (he uses thumbmark for his signature).

<p><b>tunáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tune of a musical piece. <b>2</b> @tone,
@tenor of voice or statement. <i>Nagdalag kasukù
ang tunáda sa íyang tíngug,</i> The tone of
his voice is tinged with anger. <i>Kláru ang íyang
túyù sa tunáda lang sa suwat,</i> Her object
is obvious just by the tenor of the letter.

<p><b>tun-as</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB12] decompose entirely,
cause s.t. to do so. <i>Way báhù ang patayng
láwas nga matun-as,</i> A dead body that is
totally decomposed is odorless. <b>2</b> [B12] fall
into complete ruin. <i>Natun-as na ang karáang
báy nga wà puy-i,</i> The old, uninhabited
house has fallen into ruin. <b>3</b> destroy dreams,
hopes, etc. <i>Nagkatun-as na ang ákung mga
damgu,</i> My dreams are gradually crumbling
down. <i>a</i> totally decomposed.

<p><b>túnaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB123(1); a2] @melt, @dissolve.
<i>Nagtúnaw kug kandílà pára sa sawug,</i> I melted
some candles for the floor. <i>Kutáwa ang
kapi arun matúnaw ang kámay,</i> Stir the coffee
so the sugar will dissolve. <b>2</b> [a3] be
@mortified, melt with shame (literary). <i>Natúnaw
siya sa hilabihang kaúlaw sa dihang gibinábuy
siyag kasábà sa kadaghánan,</i> He
was <corr sic=moritifed>mortified</corr> with shame when he was given
a dressing down in public. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug gátas</b>
[A; b] mix a baby's formula. <i>Kinahanglan
maampíngun ang mutúnaw ug gátas sa bátà,</i>
One who mixes a baby's formula must be
careful. <i>a</i> @melted. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @half-melted. <i>Ayawg
palit ug ayis drap nga tunaw,</i> Don't buy a
half-melted popsicle. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> vessel for
melting s.t. by heating. <b>pang-</b> <i>n</i> instrumental
in melting s.t. <i>Sambúgan sa hustung timpla
nga pangtúnaw niíni,</i> Dilute it with the
right mixture which will let it dissolve.

<p><b>túnay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @real, @genuine (slang). <i>Dì ni imitisyun
uy. Túnay ni,</i> This is not imitation.
This is genuine. <i>Maáyu siyang mudá mu rag
túnay giyud,</i> He acts well, as though it were
actually real. <b>2</b> @true; @faithful to one's sweetheart
(slang). <i>Ayaw siyag binuángi kay túnay
nà siya nímu,</i> Don't deceive her because
she is true to you.

<p><b>tunáyit</b> <i>v</i> [A13] hold a dance until late
hours. <i>Magtunayit sarà ang bayli basta dì
muuwan,</i> We'll continue the dance till late
<pb n=2152>
if it doesn't rain.

<p><b>tundaan</b> <i>n</i> small boat usually towed behind
the stern of a larger boat, used for putting
into shore where the larger boat can't put
in.

<p><b>tundag</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] @sink, be on the way to
the bottom; cause s.t. to be so. <i>Mitundag
na ang nasúnug nga bapur,</i> The boat that
burnt has begun to sink.

<p><b>tundan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>tundù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] engage in s.t. @conscientiously.
<i>Primyúhan tikawg magtundù kag tuun,</i>
I'll give you a reward if you study conscientiously.
<i>Tundua nang ímung pagpangimplíyu,</i>
Be conscientious in your job. <b>-in-</b> =
<sc>TUNDÙ</sc>.

<p><b>tunduk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @poke, hit or strike s.t. with
the end or tip of s.t. <i>Ang hálas nga nakatunduk
níya,</i> The snake that struck him. <i>Gitunduk
níya sa lamísa ang ayis pik,</i> He stuck
the icepick in the table. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> thrust with the
end of s.t. <i>Ang hínay nga tunduk sa bára,</i>
The gentle thrust of an iron bar. <b>2</b> a spot
on an animal's body or head. <i>May tunduk
nga itum ang awman,</i> The spotted snapper
has a black spot. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> animal having a
spot.

<p><b>túng</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rake-off given by gamblers to the
owner of the gambling paraphernalia used.
2 bribe given to a policeman to avoid arrest.
<i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] pay the <i>tung</i>. <i>Ngánung dì ka
man mutúng nga ikaw may nakadaug?</i> Why
don't[**didn't?] you pay the rake-off when you won
the game? <i>Ug túngan nímu ang pulis, papamaligyáun
ka nas asíras,</i> If you pay the cops
off, you'll be allowed to hawk on the sidewalk.
<b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> the one who collects the rake-off
in a gambling den.

<p><b>tunga</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] come out from under water.
<i>Layù siyag gitungahan gíkan sa íyang
gisawman,</i> The place he came up was far
from where he dived. <b>1a</b> [c6] pause to
breathe while drinking a whole container of
spirits. <i>Dílì nákù itunga ang usa ka búl nga
tubà,</i> I'll drink a jar of coconut palm toddy
without pausing to breathe. <b>2</b> [A2; a12]
show up or see s.o. as per appointment or
agreement. <i>Wà na mutunga ang nakautang
nákù,</i> The person who owed me money
didn't show up.

<p><b>tungà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @half. <i>Tungà sa taknà,</i> Half an hour.
<b>2</b> @middle, @center. <i>Tungà sa karsáda,</i> Middle
of the road. <b>3</b> @vagina (euphemism). <b>4</b> @stomach
(coarse). <i>Bísag napunù na ang tungà, gabagulbul
nga walay lamì ang pagkáun,</i> He
filled his @gullet, but he grumbles that the
food was no good. [<i>so-and-so</i>] <b>sa ímung (íyang)
&mdash;</b> [so-and-so] is not true (said in denying 
<pb n=2153>
s.t. vigorously and with resentment).
<i>Dátù sa íyang tungà. Wà man gánì kuy ikapalit
ug bugas,</i> Rich my foot! Here[**image not clear] I don't
even have money for food! <b>tungang gabíi</b> <i>n</i>
@midnight. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256; c16] be at about half
of s.t. <i>Mutungà sa kilumitru ang ákung gibaktas,</i>
I walked for about half a kilometer.
<b>2</b> [c16] hit at the middle or center. <i>Itungà
(tung-a) giyud pag-igù arun buls-ay,</i> Hit the
center to get a bull's-eye. <b>3</b> [B126; a12]
consume, reduce to half. <i>Tung-un ku nang
usa ka galun nga tubà,</i> I'll consume half of
that gallon of palm toddy. <b>4</b> [b(1)] place
between two or more others. <i>Gitung-an siyag
higdà sa íyang Nánay ug Tátay,</i> She was
laid between her mother and father. <b>5</b> [AC;
abc3] divide, share into halves. <i>Akuy mutungà
arun way áway,</i> I'll divide it so there
will be no quarrel. <i>Magtúngà ta sa ganansiya,</i>
We will split the profit equally. <i>Tungáa
(tung-a) nà ninyung duha,</i> Divide it equally
between the two of you. <b>tungàtúngà</b> <i>n</i> the
halfway or mid-point. Tungàtúngà sa átung
lákaw, Mid-point of our trip. <i>v</i> [A; a] divide
equally among. <i>Tungàtungáa ninyu nang usa
ka buuk kík,</i> Divide that one cake equally
among yourselves. <b>hinungàtungà</b> <i>v</i> [B1356]
be about halfway through. <i>Nahinungàtúngà
(nanungàtungà) na ang mísa pag-abut námù,</i>
The mass was about halfway through when
we arrived. <b>panungàtúngà</b> <i>v</i> [A13] = <sc>HINUNGÀTÚNGÀ</sc>.
<b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [B156] be halfway
done. <i>Walà pa gánì mahinungà ang kan-un
niíni, mitindug na kini,</i> She got up before
the rice was even halfway consumed. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i>
by half. <i>Tinungà ka manghangyù,</i> You bargain
things down to half-price. <i>v</i> [A; c] do
by halves or two to one. <i>Way musúkul nímu
bísag itinungà ang pusta,</i> No one will challenge
you even if the bet is two to one. <b>kinatung-an</b>
<i>n</i> @centermost, @middlemost. <b>&mdash; silangan</b>
@{Middle East}. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @{one-half} of s.t. <i>Ibangku
ang katungà sa ímung swildu,</i> Deposit
half of your salary in the bank. <i>v</i> [B236]
be at about halfway. <i>Nakatungà na ku
sa libru,</i> I'm halfway through the book. <i>Wà
pa ku makakatungà sa tísis,</i> I have not reached
the halfway point in my thesis. <b>tulung-an</b>
<i>n</i> palm toddy measure, a bamboo tube container
which holds one-half a <i>típu<sub>1</sub></i>,[**image not clear][**printing error<sub>1</sub>?F1] <i>1</i>.[**? F1] <b>tulung-un</b>
the Wednesday of the Holy Week
where work is done half day.

<p><b>túngab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; c] put the mouth to the
edge of a vessel, as in drinking. <i>Mitúngab
siya sa pawpaw arun pag-inum,</i> He brought
the half coconut shell to his mouth to drink.
<b>2</b> [c6] put the mouth near s.t. as in drinking.
<i>Ayawg itúngab ímung bàbà sa ákung</i>
<pb n=2154>
<i>dunggan ug musulti ka,</i> Don't put your
mouth right on top of my ear when you
talk.

<p><b>túngan</b> = <sc>TULUNGAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TÚLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>túngas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] go up a mountain, @uphill.
<i>Mutúngas ta ánang bakilid,</i> We are going up
that slope. <i>Tungásun ku ang kabukíran pagpangítà
nímu,</i> I will @{climb mountains} to
look for you. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @uphill. <b>2</b> @{uphill
fight}. <i>Tungasun ang íyang kahimtang sa iliksiyun,</i>
He has an uphill fight in the election.
<i>v</i> [B125] be @uphill or @steep. <i>Pahináyi
ang awtu kay nagkatungasun ang karsáda,</i>
Slow the car down because the road is becoming
steep.

<p><b>tungaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. very minute, red @mite that
abounds in bushes, producing an itchy bite
and hiding in skin pores. <i>Madakup pay tungaw
nga dílì gayud kini musayup paghapit
kanámù,</i> It's more likely that you could
catch a mite (i.e. highly unlikely) than that
he would fail to stop in our place. <i>v</i> [b4]
be infested with such fleas.

<p><b>tungay</b> <i>v</i> [B] hang down on a weak or loose
attachment. <i>Nagtungay ang sanga sa káhuy
nga wà malahus ug kaputul,</i> The branch of
the tree is hanging because it was not completely
cut through.

<p><b>*tungbálay</b> (from <i>datung balay</i>) <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2]
<b>1</b> go to s.o.'s house. <i>Manumbálay ta sa átung
bag-ung silíngan,</i> Let's @visit our new
neighbor's house. <b>2</b> haunt one's mind. <i>Nanumbálay
sa ákung hunàhúnà ang átung kagahápun,</i>
Our past haunts my mind. <b>3</b> [A2;
a] go to farmhouses to barter commodities.
<i>Manumbalay mi sa búkid káda tingsanggì,</i>
We go bartering to the farmhouses during
harvest season. <b>maN-</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. fine-grained
white @rice with a savory, permeating smell.

<p><b>tungdan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>tunggà</b> <i>v</i> [C; c] have a @{drinking spree} (slang).
<i>Makigtunggà sila nákù karung ákung adlaw,</i>
They want to have a drinking spree with me
on my birthday.

<p><b>tunggal</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] prod s.t. with a stick to
drive or push it out of a small place. <i>Gitunggal
níya ang sagbut sa túbu,</i> He pushed the
dirt out of the pipe with a stick. <i>Tunggála
ang ilagà sa kisami,</i> Poke at the mice in the
ceiling to drive them out.

<p><b>tunggul</b> <i>a</i> @stupid, having no common sense.
<i>Tunggul kaáyu nímu uy nga dì ka man makasabut
ug sugúun,</i> How stupid you are!
You don't understand when you are told
to do s.t.!

<p><b>tungguy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> any growth that protrudes from
the body. <b>2</b> a swelling or <corr sic=protruberance>protuberance</corr> on
a tree. <i>v</i> [B46] @protrude. <i>Mutungguy ang</i>
<pb n=2155>
<i>sábà úsà mugulà,</i> The sucker protrudes first
before coming out. <b>tungguytungguy</b> <i>n</i> a
knoblike @protrusion, e.g. a @pommel. <i>Isab-it
lang ang rinda sa tungguytungguy ánang
muntúra,</i> Just loop the reins around the
pommel of the saddle. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] make,
attach a knoblike protrusion.

<p><b>tunghà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @appear. <i>May kumíta
nga mitunghà sa lángit,</i> A comet appeared
in the sky. <i>Gitungháan siyag ingkantu,</i> A
supernatural being appeared to him. <b>1a</b> [A2;
a12] show up for a date. <i>Nagsábut mi
nga magkítà sa alas dus apan wà ku níya
tungháa,</i> We agreed to meet at two o'clock
but he didn't appear. <b>1b</b> [b8] @{come upon}
s.t. <i>Sa pagtúngas námù sa búkid ámung
hingtunghaan ang usa ka talagsáung talan-áwun,</i>
When we climbed up the mountain
we came upon a spectacular view. <b>2</b> @{report
to work}. <i>Mutunghà kug sayu,</i> I'll @{go to work}
early. <b>3</b> [A; b6] @{attend school}, classes. <i>Nagtunghà
siya sa kulihiyu,</i> She is attending
college. <b>4</b> [A23; b1] for s.t. to occur periodically.
<i>Sakitan giyud siya sa tiyan basta
mutunghà na kaníya ang íyang sakit,</i> She
gets a stomachache when she has her period.
<b>&mdash; ang bisíta</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5] @menstruate (euphemism).
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] send to school.
<i>Magwurking gud ku ug dì mu makapatunghà
nákù,</i> I will work my way through if you
can't support my studies. <b>-l-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> @school.

<p><b>tunghak</b> <i>v</i> [A23; c6] stop drinking to catch
one's breath. <b>tunghaktunghak</b> <i>v</i> [A13] stop
every now and then while drinking to catch
one's breath. <i>Ísug kaáyung ilimnúna. Magtunghaktunghak
kang muinum,</i> The drink
is too strong. You have to stop every now
and then to catch a breath when you drink
it.

<p><b>tungína<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> misfortune or suffering inflicted
on s.o. by a supernatural being in retribution
for some infraction or at the behest of
a sorcerer. <i>Kini ang tungína sa ákung pagkamakasasálà,</i>
This is my retribution for being
a sinner. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] send <i>tungína</i> to s.o.
<i>Tungináhan ka,</i> I'll send divine punishment
on you. <b>tunginahan</b> <i>n</i> sorcerer who can
have divine retribution sent.

<p><b>tungína<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] needlessly deprive s.o. of
s.t. <i>Dì mutungína ang inahan sa kinahanglanun
sa anak,</i> A mother does not deprive a
child of its needs:[** : ?] <i>Ang kagawásan nga itungína
nátù sa Kumunismu,</i> The liberty that
Communism will deprive us of.

<p><b>tungkà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2C3; c1] @meet, @join, @{come
together}. <i>Kining karsadáha mutungkà adtung
karsadáha,</i> This road will meet that
road. <i>Nagtungkà ang duha ka tumuy sa alambri,</i>
<pb n=2156>
The two ends of the wire meet.
<i>Tungkáa (itungkà) ang duha ka pidásung
panaptun,</i> Join the two pieces of cloth. <i>Dúgay
nang wà mi magkatungkà,</i> We haven't
@{gotten together} for a long time. <b>2</b> [AC; a2]
hold a drinking spree, @drink alcoholic beverages.
<i>n</i> @{drinking spree} (slang). <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> place
for drinking alcoholic beverages. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i>
@joint, @connection, @seam.

<p><b>tungkáhal</b> <i>v</i> [B46N; c] for projections to
@stick out. <i>Mitungkáhal (nanungkáhal) ang
mga sílik sa isdà,</i> The fins of fish are sticking
out. <i>Gitungkahálan sa mga lansang ang
salug,</i> Nails are sticking out from the floor.

<p><b>tungkalù</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c6] sit down idly. <i>Makatungkalù
ka uruy dihà nga náay daghang
buluhatun sa ímung atubángan,</i> nu? How
can you just @{sit around} idly when there's
so much work to be done?

<p><b>tungkì</b> <i>n</i> @dustpan. <i>v</i> [a12] do s.t. with a dustpan.
<i>Tungkía nang sinilhig ug ilábay sa basúra,</i>
Sweep the waste into the dustpan.
Then throw it to the garbage can.

<p><b>tungkù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] step, set on top of s.t.
<i>Tungkúa ang binítay arun ka kaabut,</i> @{Step
on} s.t. to reach the thing we had hung up.
<i>Itungkù ang básu sa láin,</i> Put the glass on
top of another.

<p><b>*tungkù<sub>2</sub></b> <b>tabla ug &mdash;</b> appear like a @fool (euphemism
for <i>tabla ug tuntu</i>). <i>Tabla lang tag
tungkù íni. Naghuwat ta dinhi, naghuwat
pud diay siya didtu,</i> We're just like a bunch
of fools. We wait here, and all the time he
was waiting there.

<p><b>tungkù<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>TUK-UNG</sc>.

<p><b>tungkud</b> = <sc>SUNGKUD</sc>.

<p><b>tunglu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @curse bringing evil effect.
<i>Ang Ginuu nagtunglu nga magkamang ang
hálas,</i> The Lord condemned the serpent to
crawl on the ground. <i>Ayawg tunglúha siya
kay matinúud unyà,</i> Don't curse him, for it
might come true. <i>n</i> @curse that brings evil effect.
<i>'Malatà pa untà ímung tinái!' tunglu
níya,</i> 'May your intestines rot!' he cursed.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] utter curses. <i>Daw makítà
ku siya nga nagpanunglù kanátù,</i> It was as
if I could see her cursing us. <b>2</b> [A2] do s.t.
not serious which will bring a curse on one.
<i>Ngánung nanilhig kag gabíi? Nanunglu ka?</i>
Why are you sweeping after dark? You
want to bring a curse on yourself? <b>matunglúhun</b>
<i>a</i> @cursing.

<p><b>tungtung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] step, put on top. <i>Mitungtung
siya sa tabládu arun pagdiskursu,</i> He
stepped on the stage to speak. <i>Itungtung
ang silya sa lamísa,</i> Put the chair on top of
the table. <b>2</b> [A; b6] reach an age, grade in
school. <i>Karun hinúun nga mitungtung na</i>
<pb n=2157>
<i>aku ning ákung panuígun,</i> Now that I have
reached this age. <i>Primarya ra ang íyang hitungtungan,</i>
He didn't get any further than
the primary grades. <b>3</b> [A; c] put interest
on a loan. <i>Grábi sad kang makatungtung ug
túbù,</i> You sure charge a high interest. <i>n</i>
@interest on a loan.

<p><b>túngu</b> = <sc>TUNGLU</sc>.

<p><b>tungud</b> <b>1</b> @because, @{due to}. <i>Napúkan si Samsun
tungud ni Dilayla,</i> Samson fell because
of Delilah. <i>Tungud kay nalísang ku,</i> Because
I was afraid. <b>1a</b> <i>in set usage in prayers:</i> 'in
the name of'. <i>Tungud sa timáan sa Santa
Krus, sa ámung mga áway bawíun mu kami,
Ginúung Diyus námù....</i>[**F1 usual comma missing] By the sign of the
Holy Cross deliver us from our enemies,
our Lord God.... <b>2</b> @by, @at a place. <i>Ihúnung
ang dyíp tungud ánang balay,</i> Stop the jeep
by that house. <b>3</b> @{directly beneath}. <i>Dúnay
subwi tungud ning átung gitindúgan,</i> There
is a subway directly beneath where we are
standing. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; cP] put directly beneath.
<i>Kinsay nagtungud (nagpatungud) ánà sa bintánà?
Hilud-an hinúun,</i> Who put that beneath
the window? S.o. spat on it. <i>Itungud
(ipatungud) ang baldi sa grípu,</i> Put the pail
directly under the faucet. <b>2</b> [AN; a12] go
under the house to peep. <i>Kinsa guy gustung
mutungud ug tigúlang,</i> Who likes to peep at
an old woman? <b>3</b> [B1256] be at, near, or
directly beneath s.t. <i>Sirbátu kun matungud
na ta sa taw-ang dákit,</i> Blow your horn
when we get near the enchanted banyan
tree. <b>4</b> [b4] be @concerned, @{referred to}. <i>Álang
niadtung hitungdan,</i> To whom it may
@concern. <i>Kadtung hitungdan sa ákung sulti,</i>
Those referred to by my words. <b>4a</b> [a12]
@{aim at} s.t. or s.o. <i>Ngánung mau man puy inyung
tungdun ug insultu ang hilumun?</i> Why
do you @aim your insults to one who does
not even talk? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the place directly below,
directly across. <b>2</b> <b>niadtung tungúra</b> at that
particular juncture, moment. <i>Niadtung tungúra
pagkadisgrasya níya gipangulbaan ku,</i>
That instant when he met his accident I was
terrified. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ac3] put, arrange one
exactly beneath or opposite the other. <i>Akuy
mutúngud sa naghiwì nga dubul dik,</i> I
will put the double-deck beds exactly beneath
each other. <i>Wà magtúngud ang butúnis
ug uhális,</i> The buttons and the buttonholes
are not exactly opposite each other.
<b>2</b> [A1; a12] look down searchingly into the
sea for fish. <i>Nagtúngud ang mananagat ug
maáyung panaun,</i> The fisherman is looking
into the sea for a good fish to spear. <b>tungudtúngud</b>
<i>v</i> [AP; b6P] @{make a pass} at a girl
or boy. <i>Dúsi pa siya piru daghan nang nagtungudtúngud 
<pb n=2158>
(nagpatungudtúngud) níya,</i>
She is only twelve but lots of boys are making
passes at her. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] go beneath, near.
<i>Mipatungud siya sa ákung lawak,</i> He went
directly under my room. <b>pahiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c]
<b>1</b> give s.o. s.t. by way of thanks. <i>Kay mitábang
man ka mupahinungud ku nímu ug
diyis písus,</i> Because you helped I will give
you ten pesos as thanks. <b>2</b> dedicate, do s.t.
in honor of s.o. <i>Nagpahinungud ang lungsud
ug mísa álang sa minatay,</i> The town offered
a mass in honor of the dead. <i>Kining kantáha
ákung ipahinungud nímu,</i> This song I dedicate
to you. <i>n</i> s.t. offered as thanks or as a
dedication. <b>ka-, ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @right, @privilege.
<i>May katungud (katúngud) kang mahibalu
kúmu asáwa,</i> You have the right to know,
being the wife. katungdánan <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @duty. <i>Katungdánan
sa anak ang pagsirbi sa ginikánan,</i>
It is a child's duty to serve his parents. <b>2</b>
@office, @position. <i>Taas siyag katungdánan sa
gubirnu,</i> He holds a high office in the government.
<b>pangatungdánan</b> <i>v</i> [A] @{hold a position}.
<b>tag-, tag-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> s.o. who owns, has
responsibility over s.t. <i>Gustung ipalubung
dáyun sa tagtungud (tagtúngud) ang minatay,</i>
The family (lit. concerned party) wants
to have the body buried at once. hinungdan
<i>n</i> @cause of, @{reason for}. <i>Unsay hinungdan
nga miundang ka?</i> What is the @reason you
quit? <b>way &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> @good-for-nothing, @useless.
<i>Way hinungdan tawhána gipabantay, nat[=ú]g
na hinúun,</i> He is useless! He is supposed to
stand guard but he is sleeping. <i>v</i> [A12P]
@cause. <i>Ang mga pabrika mauy nakapahinungdan
sa pag-uswag sa dápit,</i> The factories
@{brought about} progress in the place. <b>pakahinungdan</b>
<i>v</i> [A13; a12] consider s.t. important.
<i>Dì nátù pakahinungdánun ang milabay
na,</i> Let's not give importance to what has
already passed. <b>hinungdánun, mahinungdánun</b>
<i>a</i> @important. <i>Hinungdánun nga túyù,</i>
Important business. <b>mahi-/maha-</b> @about.
<i>Magsulti ta mahitungud sa Biyitnam,</i> Let us
talk about Vietnam. <b>nahiN-</b> <i>n</i> thing pertaining
to. <i>Mau ray ílang gihisgutan ang nahinungud
sa nigusyu,</i> All they talked about was
matters of business. <b>tungdunun</b> <i>n</i> stars,
constellations, or landmarks used by fishermen,
navigators, as a guide.

<p><b>tungug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. @mangrove, the bark of which
is used for dyeing and as an ingredient of
coconut palm toddy. <b>2</b> bark of this mangrove.
<i>v</i> [b4] apply <i>tungug</i>. <b>tulunggan, tungganan</b>
<i>n</i> container made of a bamboo node
to hold powdered material from this plant.
<b>katunggan</b> <i>n</i> @{mangrove swamp}.

<p><b>tunguk</b> <i>v</i> [B456] stay @immobile, staring
<pb n=2159>
blankly. <i>Nagtunguk siya. Nagdamgu sigúru,</i>
He is @{staring blankly}. He's probably day-*dreaming.
<i>Natunguk siya pagkadungug sa
dautang balità,</i> He sat @motionless after he
heard the bad news.

<p><b>túngul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stomach of animals. <b>2</b> human
stomach (humorous). [so-and-so] <b>sa ímung
(íyang) &mdash;</b> [so-and-so] is not true. <i>Magminyù
sa íyang túngul. Náa pa gániy gátas sa
bàbà!</i> He is going to get married? The hell
he is. He isn't even weaned yet!

<p><b>tungup</b> <i>v</i> [B6; a1] be @exactly a certain quantity,
time. <i>Mutungup giyud sa úras ning ákung
rilu,</i> My watch gives the exact time.
<i>Tungpa lag lung-ag bálig lima ka táwu,</i> Cook
exactly enough rice for five people. <b>tunguptúngup</b>
<i>v</i> [A; a12] calculate the time or
measurements. <i>Nagtunguptúngup lang ku sa
úras kay wà man kuy rilu,</i> I'm just estimating
the time because I don't have a watch.

<p><b>tung-uy</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] set cooking utensils over
the fire. <i>Nagtung-uy kug lung-agan,</i> I'm putting
the rice on the fire now.

<p><b>tunhay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] @prosper, be successful.
<i>Mutunhay ang nigusyu kun kuntintu ang
mga trabahanti,</i> The business will prosper
if the employees are contented. <i>Way kapulisan
nga makatunhay (makapatunhay) sa
kalínaw inig-iliksiyun,</i> No police force can
guarantee peace and order during elections.
<b>2</b> [A23; a2P] @endure, @last. <i>Mutunhay ning
sapatúsa kay lig-un,</i> This pair of shoes will
last because they are sturdy. <i>Dílì ka tunháyan
ug butang ánang ímung ginamitan,</i> The
way you are using your things, nothing is
going to last. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] promote the success
or endurance of s.t. <i>Salapì nga mupatunhay
sa kinabúhing hamugáway,</i> Money
that will allow one to have a life of leisure.
<b>ka-an, ka-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> success achieved. <b>mag-r- sa
kalínaw</b> <i>n</i> @sergeant-at-arms. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @lasting,
@enduring for a long time (literary). <i>Matunháyung
kalípay,</i> @Everlasting happiness.

<p><b>tunhay<sub>2</sub></b> a for the weather to be clear and
bright. <b>&mdash; ang ugat</b> <i>a</i> @straight-grained wood.
<i>Ang káhuy nga tunhay ug ugat sayun limpiyúhan,</i>
Straight-grained wood is easy to
plane. <i>v</i> [B25; b6] be, become fine weather.
<i>Ug matunhay (mutunhay) ang panahun,
mularga ta,</i> If the weather is good, we can
leave.

<p><b>túnik</b> <i>n</i> k.o. perfumed @lotion (from the brand
name, Tonix). <i>v</i> [A; b] apply this lotion.
<i>Tuníki siya arun mahumut,</i> Put perfume on
her so she will smell good. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6]
apply this lotion to oneself.

<p><b>*tuniku bínu &mdash; istumakal</b> <i>n</i> an old medicinal
liquor.
<pb n=2160>

<p><b>tunil<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> bamboo palm toddy container of
two nodes.

<p><b>tunil<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TUNILÁDA</sc>.

<p><b>tunil<sub>3</sub>, túnil</b> <i>n</i> @tunnel.

<p><b>tuniláda</b> <i>n</i> @ton. <i>Mutimbang ug usa ka tuniláda,</i>
It weighs one ton.

<p><b>tunlù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] dip part of s.t. in a liquid or
solid. <i>Gitunluan námù ang sikwátig pán,</i> We
dipped the bread in the hot chocolate. <b>-an,
-anan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. where one dips s.t.

<p><b>tunlub</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] stick, @dunk s.t. completely
or partially into a liquid or solid. <i>Nagtunlub
siyag mga saput sa amirul,</i> She is @dipping
clothes into the starch. <i>Itunlub ang plúma
sa tintíru,</i> @Dip the pen into the inkpot.

<p><b>tunlud</b> (from <i>lúnud</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c] @submerge in a
liquid.

<p><b>tunsil</b> = <sc>TANSIL</sc>.

<p><b>tuntu</b> <i>a</i> @stupid, @silly. <i>Tuntu! Ngánung kining
klasíha ímung gipalit,</i> Stupid! Why did you
buy this kind? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] become stupid,
silly, consider s.o. as such. <i>Sa nagkadugay
ka ning trabahúa nagkatuntu ka sab,</i>
The longer you are on this job, the dumber
you get. <b>2</b> [AN; a12] @deceive, make a fool
of. <i>Way kalúuy ang laláking nagtuntu nímu,</i>
The man who deceived you was heartless.
<i>Manuntu ka man nákung mas wayis man ku
nímu,</i> Don't try to make a fool of me. I'm
a bit smarter than you are. <i>Gituntu ka lang
ánang mananag-an,</i> That fortuneteller just
@hoaxed you. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> @abuse, do s.t.
mean or bad to s.t.[**P2 add: or s.b.,P3: why not s.o.?] <i>Ug dúnay mutinuntu
nímung buguy, tawga lang ku,</i> If some ruffian
is mean to you, just call me. <i>Kinsay
nagtinuntu ring ákung tigib nga nagíbang
man,</i> Who abused my chisel? Somebody
nicked it. <b>1a</b> @{abuse sexually}. <i>Ayaw siyag tinuntuhi
samtang dì pa mu minyù,</i> Don't
abuse her so long as you are not married. <b>2</b>
do s.t. in a careless way, somewhat playfully.
<i>Ayawg tinantug dúwà kay mapildi ta,</i>
Don't @{fool around} in this game. We might
lose. <i>Gitinuntuhan níyag drúwing ang ákung
tsárt,</i> He was just fooling around with the
chart that I had him draw. <b>3</b> fool around
with women. <i>Nagtinuntu ang íyang bána,</i>
Her husband is fooling around. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fooling,
@{horsing around}. <b>2</b> bad, @{illicit practices}. <i>Daghan
kaáyung tinuntu sa gubirnu,</i> There is a
great deal of @corruption in the government.

<p><b>tuntun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @lower s.t. <i>Mitábang kug
tuntun sa lungun sa buhù,</i> I helped lower
the coffin into the hole. <i>Ituntun ang baldi
sa atábay,</i> Lower the pail to[**P2: into] the well. <b>1a</b> [B6]
@sag loosely. <i>Mituntun íyang súsu nga wà
bráhi,</i> Her breasts sagged without a bra.
<i>Nagtuntun ang luag níyang karsúnis,</i> His
<pb n=2161>
pants are sagging because they are loose. <b>1b</b>
[A; b(1)] pay out a fishline. <i>Tuntúni ug
mga lima ka dupa ang pasul,</i> Pay out five
fathoms of line. <b>2</b> [AB2; b6(1)] for s.t.
weighted down to sink; cause it to do so.
<i>Magtuntun siya sa iring nga ilábu sa dágat,</i>
He'll weight the cat down to throw it into
the sea. <i>Mutuntun (matuntun) ug dalì ang
pasul ug lagdúngan,</i> The fishing line will
sink easily if you attach a sinker. <b>2a</b> [A13;
b6] use a @plumb to test whether things are
vertical. <i>Magtuntun kus halígi arun dílì maghirig,</i>
I am using the plumb line on this post
so it won't lean. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> string or rope used to
lower s.t. <b>2</b> heavy object attached to s.t. to
make it sink. <b>3</b> @{plumb line}. paN- <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)]
fish in deep waters with a hook, line,
and sinker. <i>n</i> fishing with a hook, line, and
sinker in deep waters.

<p><b>túnu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tune of music pieces. <i>Tudlúi ku sa
túnu ánang kantáha, Teach me the tune of
that song. <b>2</b> @intonation, @tone. <i>Nindut ug túnu
ang sinultihang Ilunggu,</i> The Ilongo language
has a pleasant intonation. <i>Malumu
ang túnu sa párì nga nagsirmun,</i> The priest
preached with a tender tone. <b>&mdash; ug pasiyun</b>
<i>v</i> [AC3; a2] sing the passions of Jesus
Christ during Lent. <i>Súgud sa Martis Santu
magtúnu nag pasiyun sa ámù,</i> Starting with
Holy Tuesday they sing the Passion of Jesus
Christ at our place. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @tone, @{manner of
speaking}. <i>Sa íyang panúnu sukù kaáyu tu siya,</i>
By the tone of his voice he was very
angry.

<p><b>túnu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B6; a12] for an undertaking to
@{come out well} or all right. <i>Wà mutúnu ang
ákung bibingka kay kúlang ang lubi,</i> My
rice cakes did not @{come out good} because
they lacked coconut. <i>Tunúha ang ímung
pagtuun arun ka mulampus,</i> Study consistently
and carefully so you will @succeed.

<p><b>tunù, túnù</b> <i>n</i> juice extracted by squeezing
coconut meat. <i>v</i> [A; a12] extract juice from
coconut. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] prepare food with coconut
extract. <i>Tunui ang útan nga kalbásà,</i>
Stew the squash with coconut juice. <b>-in-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> s.t. cooked with coconut extract. <b>-un(->)</b>
<i>a</i> coconut meat having plenty of juice.

<p><b>tunub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{step on}. <i>Nagtunub ka sa
ákung prupyidad,</i> You are stepping on my
property. <i>Ayawg tumbi ang sáwug kay basà
pa,</i> Don't step on the floor. It's still wet. <b>2</b>
[A2; b2] @{set foot on}, in. <i>Dì na ku mutunub
ning inyung báy,</i> I will never @{set foot in}
your house again. <b>3</b> [A12] have attended
some school. <i>Amin na lang kay nakatunub
nà siyag unibirsidad,</i> Just give in. He has
gone to college, you know. <b>4</b> [A; b6] @dishonor, 
<pb n=2162>
@desecrate s.o.'s name or honor. <i>Ayawg
<b>tumbi</b> ang dungug sa átung pamilya,</i>
Don't dishonor our family's name. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@footprint. <b>1a</b> the k.o. life one led. <i>Sunda
ang túnub sa ímung amahan,</i> Follow in your
father's footsteps. <b>2</b> @footfalls. <i>Kinsa nang
dagkug túnub sa táas,</i> Who made that loud
noise upstairs? <b>&mdash; ug kasíkas</b> <i>n</i> @{sound effects}
in a radio play (lit. footfalls and noise). <i>Ang
mga túnub ug kasíkas kinahanglang itayming
giyud sa lakaw sa dúlà,</i> The sound effects
should be coordinated with the progress
of the play. <b>tumbanan</b> <i>n</i> place one puts
the feet when sitting.

<p><b>túnud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] convey below the surface
of the water or into a pit. <i>Nagtúnud kug
patayng irù sa lawud,</i> I threw the dead dog
into the deep part of the ocean. <i>Itúnud na
ang lungun sa lungag,</i> Lower the casket into
the hole now. <b>2</b> [B245; b6] for the sun to
set. <i>Nagkatúnud (nagkatunud) na ang adlaw
sa kasadpan,</i> The sun is sinking in the west.

<p><b>tunug</b> <i>n</i> sound of a musical instrument. <i>Manánuy
ang tunug sa mga tulunggun,</i> The
musical instruments make a sweet sound. <i>a</i>
<b>1</b> @resonant, producing a distantly loud
sound. <i>Tunug ning sistáha dà, dì bungul,</i>
This guitar is sure resonant. It is not dull.
<i>Tunug kaáyu dinhi ang sinultihánay sa píkas
kwartu,</i> You can clearly hear the conversation
in the next room. <b>2</b> @{widely known}.
<i>Tunug na nga mupaúlì ka,</i> Everybody knows
that you're going home. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] <b>1</b> become
resonant, consider s.t. so. <i>Sa magkadaan
ang byulin, magkatunug sab,</i> The older
a violin gets, the more resonant it becomes.
<b>2</b> be distinctly @audible. <i>Mutunug ímung
<b>tíngug</b> kun pabur mi sa hángin,</i> Your
voice is very audible if the wind comes towards
us. <b>3</b> [B12] be widely known. <i>Natunug
na sa lungsud ang inyung kasal,</i> Everybody
knows that you're getting married.
<b>tulunggun</b> <i>n</i> @{musical instrument}.

<p><b>tun-ug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cold air}, atmosphere. <i>Panira arun
dì musulud ang tun-ug,</i> Close the windows
so the @cold won't get in. <b>2</b> @dew. <i>v</i> [b4] be
exposed to cold drafts. <i>Giubu siya kay natun-ugan,</i>
He has a cough because he got exposed
to the cold. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] expose
s.t. or oneself to the cold. <i>Ayawg patun-ugi
ang kutsi kay dúgayng muandar,</i> Don't expose
the car to the cold because it will be
hard to start. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] for the odor of s.t.
to spread all over. <i>Dílì makapanun-ug ang
búwak ug dì pa mamuklad,</i> Flowers don't
give off fragrance before the blossoms open.

<p><b>tunuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @thorn. <i>Tunuk sa rúsas,</i> Rose thorns.
<b>&mdash; sa isdà</b> sharp spines on a fish. <b>2</b> a @sliver
<pb n=2163>
or @thorn which has pricked the foot and
gotten lodged. <i>Tudlísa ang tunuk,</i> Get the
@splinter out with a needle. <b>3</b> @prick <i>Tambáli
ang tunuk,</i> Put medicine on the prick. <i>v</i> [B126]
get a sliver or nail into one's foot. <i>Natunuk
siyag lansang maung gititanus,</i> He got
tetanus because he stepped on a nail. <i>Makatunuk
nang tuyum,</i> Sea urchins can prick
you. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4(1)] cut the spines from
fish. <i>Piligru ang ítu ug dì hinungkan (hinunukan)
kay l[=á],</i> It is dangerous if you don't
cut off the spines from the catfish because
they are poisonous. <b>-un, tungkun</b> <i>a</i> @thorny.
<b>alambri nga -un</b> <i>n</i> @{barbed wire}.

<p><b>túnul</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] convey s.t. to s.o. by hand.
<i>Mitúnul siya sa kamut arun pagpahalípay
nákù,</i> He offered his hand to congratulate
me. <i>Itúnul ra nákù nang libru,</i> Would you
hand me that book?

<p><b>tunung</b> directly at a point. <i>Naigù ang langgam
tunung giyud sa kasingkásing,</i> He hit
the bird @right in the heart. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC3; ac6]
@{zero in} on a mark, go directly to s.t. <i>Dihà
mutunung sa íyang úlu ang napúwak nga
lubi,</i> The coconut fell right on his head. <i>Dì
kung katunung sa buhù sa dágum kay kurug
ku,</i> I cannot get the thread into the eye of
the needle because I'm shaking. <i>Wà magtúnung
ang mga batúnis ug uhális,</i> The buttons
and buttonholes don't exactly align. <b>2</b>
[B1256; c16] happen at a particular time,
@coincide with a certain other event. <b>Natunung
nga bakasiyun ang pagkasakit nákù,</b> I
got sick just when it was vacation time. <i>Itunung
(tungna) sa Anyu Nuybu ang inugurasiyun,</i>
The inauguration is set for New
Year's day. <b>3</b> [A12; a2] get s.t. (good or
bad) as one's lot. <i>Nakatunung kug silyang
tughuun sa sinihan,</i> Of all the seats in the
theater I had to pick one that was infested
with bugs. <i>Tungna nang asáwang paraygun,</i>
Pick a wife that asks for affection. <b>4</b> [A12]
have the presence of mind to do s.t. <i>Hastang
kulbáa nákù. Wà ku katunung ug dágan,</i>
How shaken I was! I didn't have the
presence of mind to run. <i>n</i> s.t. aimed at. <i>Milakaw
siyang way tunung,</i> He walked out
without going anywhere in particular. <i>Láin
siyag tunung,</i> He has an evil purpose.

<p><b>túnuy</b> a fully @ripe, @well-ripened. <i>v</i> [APB3(1); c1]
be, become @{fully ripe}, make s.t. ripe.
<i>Karbúru mauy mutúnuy (mupatúnuy) sa
ságing,</i> Calcium carbide will make the fruit
fully ripe. <i>Matunuy na ning mga prútas inigabut
nátù sa Manílà,</i> These fruits will be
fully ripe when we arrive in Manila.

<p><b>tunyu nu</b> (from <i>tuntu nu</i>) would I be foolish
enough to do that? <i>Nagdúngan mig swildu</i>
<pb n=2164>
<i>apan akuy íyang pabayrun sa sini. Tunyu
nu?</i> We were both paid at the same time,
but he wants me to pay his way to the
show. He must think I'm stupid or s.t.

<p><b>tupà</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b8] alight, settle down or land
without effective control. <i>Ang ayruplánu
mitupà sa humayan,</i> The airplane @crash-landed
in the rice field. <i>Ang balay nga natupaan
sa kwítis nasúnug,</i> The house on
which the rocket fell caught fire.

<p><b>tupad</b> = <sc>TAPAD</sc>.

<p><b>túpas</b> <i>n</i> @topaz.

<p><b>tupay</b> <i>v</i> [a4] become unconscious with the
pupils of the eyes moving upward and with
twitching of the fingers. <i>Idalì ang bátà sa
huspital sa dílì pa tupayun,</i> Bring the child
at once to the hospital before it becomes
unconscious. <i>n</i> state of being unconscious.

<p><b>tupi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] give @haircut. <i>Kinsang barbirúha
nagtupi nímu,</i> Which barber gave you a haircut?
<i>n</i> @haircut. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] get a haircut.

<p><b>túpi</b> <i>v</i> [B26C3; c] be @flush with. <i>Sipilyáhi
ang bagà nga tabla hangtud magtúpi ang
duha,</i> Plane down the thick board until the
two boards are exactly @even. <i>Abunúhi ang
karsáda hangtud matúpi sa daplin,</i> Put fill
in the road until it is flush with the edge.
<i>Pun-a ang tangki hangtud ang túbig matúpi
sa ngábil,</i> Fill up the tank until the water is
flush with the rim.

<p><b>tupiku</b> <i>n</i> @topic. <i>Pirmi lang pulitiku ang tupiku
nga ílang hisgútan,</i> Politics is always the
topic of their conversation.

<p><b>tupit</b> <i>v</i> [B; c16] speak with mispronunciations
from speech defects, similar to lisping
in English, but with a substitution of /s/ for
/t/. (The tongue is said to stick to the roof
of the mouth.) <i>Nagtupit ang dílà sa nagdiskursu
tungud sa nirbiyus,</i> The man who was
giving a speech was so nervous he started to
lisp.

<p><b>tuplak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] <b>1</b> push s.o. or s.t. away. <i>Gituplak
sa bátà ang básu sa bintánà,</i> The
child pushed the glass out of the window. <b>2</b>
push a cock toward another to induce the
second cock to fight. <i>Ituplak ning sunúya
sa usa arun masakmalan tung usa inig-áway
níla,</i> Shove this cock toward the other one
so that I can grab it when they fight.

<p><b>tuplas</b> = <sc>PANTUPLAS</sc>.

<p><b>tupluk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @mischievous, full of pranks. <i>Gibutangag
íhì sa tupluk dakù ang pláwir bís ni
Mám,</i> The prankster put urine in the teacher's
vase. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become mischievous.

<p><b>tupluk<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TULPUK</sc> (but not doubled).

<p><b>tuptup</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @cut s.t. from its base or
stem. <i>Tuptúpa ang pakù kay dì nà iapil paglútù,</i> 
<pb n=2165>
Cut the wings off. Don't include them
with what you are cooking. <b>1a</b> cut s.t. with
long strokes at the base. <b>2</b> cut s.t. straight
across, not tapering. <i>Kinsay nagtuptup ug
<b>tupi</b> nímu?</i> Who cut your hair evenly all around
your head? <i>a</i> being cut straight across,
not tapering. <b>pina-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] make s.t.
cut straight across.

<p><b>túpù</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac6] pair a boy and a girl off half
jokingly. <i>Kusug siyang mutúpù piru nagpabíling
dága,</i> She loves to match others off,
but she herself stays single. <i>Tupúa sila labun
parisun,</i> Match them up. They make such a
good pair. <b>tupùtúpù</b> <i>n</i> @{matching couples}.

<p><b>túpuk</b> = <sc>TULPUK</sc>. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hole in the ear for
earrings. <b>2</b> holes in an animal's ears through
which a rope is passed.

<p><b>túpung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> of the same height, @even along
the top or bottom. <i>Túpung ang íyang mga
ngípun,</i> Her teeth are all of the same height.
<b>2</b> reaching an equally high state of excellence.
<i>Si Magsaysay walay túpung,</i> No one
is as great as Magsaysay. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23S; a2b2]
@reach to a certain height or level. <i>Ang ákung
kalágut mitúpung na sa lángit,</i> My anger
reaches the heavens. <b>2</b> [A; a] make things
even. <i>Tupúnga ang tiil sa silya arun dì magkindangkindang,</i>
@{Even up} the chair legs so
it won't wobble back and forth. <i>Dílì na siya
hitupngan sa pagkapalikíru,</i> No one is as
great a philanderer as he is. <b>3</b> [C; a] be of
the same height. <i>Nagtúpung sila,</i> They are
of the same height. <i>Tupúngun nátù ang mga
tanum,</i> Let's cut the plants even along the
top. <b>&mdash; ang tiil</b> <i>v</i> [C3] be @dead (humorous).
<b>4</b> [C; c] compare height, ability. <i>Dílì ikatúpung
ang íyang abilidad,</i> There is nothing
that can compare to his ability. <i>see also</i>
<sc>ALINUPUNG</sc>.

<p><b>tupus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> @suck on s.t. in the
mouth to eat it or get the juice out. <i>Nagtupus
kug biksdrap kay árat ákung tunlan,</i> I
am sucking on a cough drop because I have
a sore throat. <b>2</b> toy or play with s.t. with
the mouth. <i>Madaníhung ngábil nga íyang
gitupsan sa pagháluk níla,</i> The attractive lips
he played with as they kissed. <b>tinupsan</b> <i>n</i>
@pulp or juiceless flesh after eating. <i>Silhíga
ang mga tinupsan human mug pangus ug tubu,</i>
Sweep away the pulp after you're
through eating your sugar cane. <b>talinupsan</b>
<i>a</i> for clothes to[** be ?] moist, almost dry after having
been wet. <i>Mabulkas na ang hinalay kay
<b>talinupsan na,</i> You can take in the clothes
now because they are @{almost dry}. <i>v</i> [B125]
be, become almost dry.

<p><b>tupus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{take over} the task of s.o.
incapable or unavailable. Kinsa may mutupus 
<pb n=2166>
sa ímung trabáhu ug mulakaw ka,</i> Who
takes over your chores when you go out?
<i>Tupsa ring ákung buhatun kay kahilanatun
ku,</i> Take over my work because I feel feverish.
<b>2</b> [A; b] make up for the time lost or
missed. <i>Buhían mu run kun tupsan ninyu
ang klási sa Sabadu,</i> I will dismiss you now
if you make the class up on Saturday. <b>3</b> [A;
a12] @{make up for} s.t. lacking by s.t. very
good. <i>Púlus sila burung piru gitupus sa ílang
anak nga utukan,</i> They are mostly imbeciles,
but their one brainy child made up for it.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> time used for make-up. <i>Ang trabáhu run
tupus sa pista upisiyal gahápun,</i> Today's
work is to make up for yesterday's holiday.
<b>2</b> s.t. just as much so in exactly the opposite
way. <i>Dátù mi niadtu, tupus pud run nga
kakha tukà,</i> We used to be just as rich as we
are poor now. <i>Pagkagarbúsang bayhána, tupus
sa íyang bánang labihan kamapaubsánun,</i>
She is just as stuck up as her husband
is modest.

<p><b>tupwak</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] push s.t. into a place
below in one motion. <i>Wà pa hibaw-i kung
kinsay mitupwak sa Dun didtu sa pangpang,</i>
The person who pushed the Don over the
cliff has not been identified yet.

<p><b>*turágas</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] do s.t. indiscriminately
without any aim or connection and in unrestrained
amounts. <i>May katarúngan nà siyang
mupaturágas ug gastu kay kwartáhan
man sab,</i> He has a reason to spend his money
@carelessly. He has plenty anyway. <i>Pangutan-a
nang piríku dì ba mupaturágas nà rug
tubag,</i> Address the parrot and it will answer
you with a stream of @random talk. <i>Nagpaturágas
lag pamusil sa kabalayan ang mga bandídu,</i>
The bandits sprayed the houses with
bullets @indiscriminately. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. done
carelessly and without restraint. <b>2</b> @{extemporaneous
dialogue}. <i>Nalingaw kaming namínaw
sa mga pinaturágas ni Karpu ug ni
Bituy sa radiyu,</i> We had great fun listening
to the extemporaneous dialogue of Karpo
and Bitoy over the radio.

<p><b>tural</b> <i>see</i> <sc>NATURAL</sc>.

<p><b>turátuy</b> <i>v</i> [P; b4] go directly s.w. without
paying attention to the surroundings because
of anger, embarrassment or some other
emotion. <i>Mipaturátuy (miturátuy) siyag
lakaw bísag ámung gitawag,</i> She walked
straight ahead even though we called her.

<p><b>túray</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @scold s.o. heavily. <i>Mutúray
nà siyag kasábà ug dì nímu tumánun ang
íyang súgù,</i> She really scolds you if you
don't do what she says.

<p><b>turban</b> <i>n</i> @turban or similar headdress. <i>v</i> [A;
c] wear a turban.
<pb n=2167>

<p><b>turdbis</b> <i>n</i> @{third base} in a ball game. <i>v</i> [B36]
be on third. <i>Wà giyuy nakaturdbis námù,</i>
Not one of us got to third base.

<p><b>túri</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tower. <b>2</b> @rook in chess. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] confine
in a tower. <i>Gitúri sa hárì ang bigáun
níyang anak,</i> The king shut his promiscuous
daughter up in a tower. <b>2</b> [A13] stay high
above from a vantage position overlooking
the view below. <i>Nagtúri ka man giyud dihà.
Maáyu kaáyu ang ímung paglantaw sa byú,
nu?</i> You are up high over there. You sure
get a good view, don't you?

<p><b>túrik</b> = <sc>KUSLAD</sc>.

<p><b>turíkì</b> <i>v</i> [AC; b5] have intercourse with (humorous).
<i>À, muturíkì ka níya bísag gadaut
siya,</i> My! You'd have intercourse with her
even if she is menstruating?

<p><b>turil</b> <i>n</i> @corral for a herd. <i>v</i> [a1] enclose herd
in a corral. <i>Kinahanglang turilun ang mga
báka arun way makabuhì,</i> The cows must
be fenced in so that none can escape.

<p><b>túrins</b> <i>n</i> @{Torrens Title}, a document attesting
full legal ownership of a piece of land. <b>titulu
&mdash;</b> = <sc>TÚRINS</sc>.

<p><b>turíru</b> <i>n</i> @jeans, women's tight-fitting @trousers
that look like matadors' trousers. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
make jeans.

<p><b>turista</b> <i>n</i> @tourist. <i>v</i> [B16] be, become a tourist.

<p><b>turíti</b> <i>n</i> @{male calf} of a cow or carabao.

<p><b>turiyal</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @disturb, @bother s.o. <i>Way
muturiyal nímu ug wà kay útang,</i> Nobody
disturbs you if you don't owe anybody anything.
<i>Way makaturiyal nákù ug akuy matúlug,</i>
Nobody dares disturb me when I'm
asleep.

<p><b>turíyu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> adolescent or young bull or male
water buffalo. v [B1256; b6] for a male
calf to get to be full grown. <i>Ikadáru na nang
nati ug maturíyu,</i> You can use the calf for
plowing when it gets to be nearly full-grown.

<p><b>turíyu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @bullfight.

<p><b>turka</b> = <sc>TURKU</sc> (female).

<p><b>turku</b> <i>n</i> @Indian or @Pakistani.

<p><b>turnilyu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @bolt, @screw. <i>v</i> [b6] use a screw or
bolt on s.t. <i>Turnilyúhi na lang nang kaptanan
arun malig-un,</i> Just use a screw on that
handle so it is strong. <b>lísù sa &mdash;</b> = <sc>LÍSÙ SA BUUT</sc>.
see <sc>LÍSÙ</sc>. <b>turnilyadur</b> <i>n</i> @{screw driver}. <i>v</i>
[a] use a screw driver on s.t.

<p><b>turnilyu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{finger wrestling} where the
players join their middle fingers with their
arms resting on a table and the one who
succeeds in turning the other's hand over
wins. <i>v</i> [B; b6] have finger wrestling.

<p><b>turníru</b> see <sc>TURNU</sc>.

<p><b>turniyu</b>, <b>turníyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tournament. <b>2</b> sports
tournament. <i>Turníyu sa baskitbul,</i> Basketball
tournament. <b>3</b> = <sc>TURNILYU<sub>1</sub></sc>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13;
<pb n=2168>
ab3c] have a tournament. <i>Turniyúhun (turniyúhan)
nátù ang kamut sa prinsísa,</i> We
will have a tournament for the princess'
hand. <i>Ug iturníyu ang kamut sa prinsísa, sigurádung
ikay únang mapárut,</i> If the princess'
hand is offered in a tournament you
would surely be the first to get beaten. <b>2</b> [A13]
have a sports tourney. <b>3</b> = <sc>TURNILYU<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>turnu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] turn or cut s.t. in a lathe.
<b>2</b> [A; b6] thread screws or bolts. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lathe
or machine for threading screws and bolts.
<b>2</b> thread on a screw or bolt. <b>turnuhan</b> =
<sc>TURNU</sc>, <i>n1</i>. <b>turníru</b> <i>n</i> lathe operator.

<p><b>turnu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @turn to do s.t. <i>Ímu nang turnu paglútù
karun,</i> It's your turn to cook now. <i>v</i>
[A; c] assign turns to do s.t. <i>Kinsay gaturnu
nímu paggwardiya sa Duminggu?</i> Who assigned
you to stand guard on Sunday? <b>turnuturnu</b>,
<b>turnuhay</b> <i>n</i> @{rotation system} or by
turn. <i>Turnuturnu ang paglimpyu sa simbahan
ug átù karun,</i> Cleaning the church is
done by turns, and it's our turn today. <i>v</i> [A1;
c] do by turns. <i>Magturnuturnu (magturnuhay)
tag báyad sa sugà,</i> Let's take turns
paying the light bill.

<p><b>turnus</b> = <sc>TUGNUS</sc>.

<p><b>turpáda</b> <i>v</i> [AC; b5] @attack, encounter in a
fight. <i>Kausa ra nang kasúha ug abugádung
dikampanilya ang muturpáda ánà,</i> You'll
have no trouble getting your case dismissed
if you have a good lawyer fighting it for
you. <i>Ang mga girilyang nagturpáda sa garisun
sa Hapun,</i> The guerrilla who attacked
the Japanese garrison. <i>Ug mga bátà ang makaturpáda
íning makaúna, mangurímaw ni
dáyun,</i> If the children attack this food,
nothing will be left of it. <i>Ug makigturpáda
kag bastus, mabastus kag apil,</i> If you fight
with low people, you bring yourself down
to their level.

<p><b>turpi</b> <i>a</i> @{acting stupid}. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] @{become
stupid}. <i>Nagkadugay ka ning trabahúa nagkaturpi
sab ka,</i> The longer you are on the
job the dumber you act. <b>&mdash; ang dílà</b> <i>v</i> [B12;
a12] for the tongue to be twisted, as after
a heart attack, or when a person is in the
throes of death.

<p><b>turpídu</b> <i>n</i> @torpedo. <i>v</i> [A; a12] torpedo. <i>Giturpídu
ang bapur ug natundag,</i> The ship
was torpedoed and sank.

<p><b>tursi</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @twist a limb, @wring a neck.
<i>Buhíi nang kurta arun dì ku tursíhun nang
ímung buktun,</i> Drop that knife or I'll twist
your arm. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @turn, @rotate s.t. <i>Tursihag
hínay ang manabíla,</i> Turn the steering
wheel slowly.

<p><b>turta</b> <i>n</i> k.o. thick, heavy @cake made from
flour and eggs. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make, have <i>turta</i>.
<pb n=2169>

<p><b>turtilya, turtilyas</b> <i>n</i> egg @omelette, s.t. cut up
fine and fried with a beaten egg. <i>v</i> [A; a2]
have, make an omelette.

<p><b>turtur</b> = <sc>TUKTUR</sc>.

<p><b>túru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> male @carabao or @bull. <b>&mdash; nga báka</b>
@bull. <b>2</b> male in a paid sex show. <b>2a</b> = <sc>PA-</sc>,
<i>n2</i>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] become a bull. <i>Kusgan
kaáyu ning turiyúha ug matúru na,</i> This young
bull will be very strong when it gets to be a
full-grown bull. <b>2</b> = <b>PA-</b>, <i>v1a</i>. <b>3</b> [A; c16]
make s.o. work like a horse. <i>Kusug nang
agalúnang mutúru ug súgù, apan dílì maáyung
manwildu,</i> That employer makes his
employees work like a horse but he doesn't
pay them well. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @bullfight. <b>2</b> sexual
intercourse displayed for a fee. <b>3</b> fraudulent
coin-tossing game where the coins have two
heads. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> hold a bullfight. <b>1a</b> have a
sex exhibition. 1b cheat with fraudulent
coins. <b>2</b> have @{sexual intercourse} (humorous).
<b>turutúru</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>v1a</i>. <b>2</b> [A;
c16] work hard like a horse. <i>Giturutúru nákù
ang trabáhu apan wà ku swildúhi,</i> I
worked like a horse, but I wasn't paid.
<b>paturutúru</b> <i>v</i> [A13] pretend to be brave like
a bull.

<p><b>turuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)46; b(1)] @sprout, grow
from the surface. <i>Wà makaturuk ang similya
<b>tungud</b> sa húlaw,</i> The seeds did not sprout
because of the drought. <i>Uy gitugkan ug buhuk
si Upaw,</i> My, old Baldy has grown hair.
<b>2</b> [B246; b(1)] for a feeling to develop. <i>Makapaturuk
(makaturuk) sa katáhap ang íyang
linihukan,</i> His behavior arouses suspicion.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sprout. <i>Pandúngi ang mga bag-ung
turuk arun dì maláyà,</i> Cover the new sprouts
so they don't wither. <b>2</b> sprout on coconut
fruit. <i>Tul-id giyud ang turuk sa binhiun nga
lubi,</i> The sprouts of the coconuts for
planting are really straight. <b>3</b> @penis (humorous
euphemism). <b>&mdash; banwa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. growing without
being planted and taking space, like a
weed. <b>2</b> a person who is useless and occupies
space. <i>Turuk banwa nà siya sa pamilya;
dílì mutábang sa buluhatun,</i> That person
just occupies space in the house. He
does not help with the chores. <b>tugkan</b> <i>n</i> coconut
having a sprout. <b>turukturuk</b> <i>n</i> tiny
@growths which emerge. <i>Unsa nang mga turukturuk
sa ímung náwung, bugas?</i> What
are those growths on your face, pimples?

<p><b>turun</b> <i>n</i> confection made with chopped nuts
mixed in honey or sugar paste. <b>&mdash; diman</b>
peanut nougat. <b>&mdash; dipíli</b> pili nut nougat.
<b>banána &mdash;</b> sweet made of bananas wrapped
in hin[**typo:thin] <corr sic=pastery>pastry</corr> and fried. <i>v</i> [A; b6c1] make
a nut nougat. <b>-is(<-)</b> = <sc>TURUN</sc> (plural).

<p><b>turung</b> <i>n</i> s.t. worn as a @{head covering}. <i>Pagdalag 
<pb n=2170>
turung kay tingálig muulan,</i> Bring s.t. to
cover your head with. It might rain. <i>v</i> [B6;
c1] protect the head, wear a head covering.
<i>Nagturung siyag dáhun sa ságing arun dì
mahumud sa ulan,</i> He protected his head
with a banana leaf to avoid getting wet in
the rain.

<p><b>turungturung</b> <i>n</i> small @{top shells} reaching 1".

<p><b>turúrut</b> = <sc>TARÚRUT</sc>.

<p><b>turus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> squash s.t. between the
two thumbnails. <i>Turusa (tudsa) dáyun ang
kútu arun dílì mawálà,</i> Squash the louse immediately
with your thumbnails before it
disappears. <b>2</b> defeat or crush helpless opposition
in a fight. <i>Ipakítà ku kaninyu unsáun
pagturus nang ámung mga kaáway,</i> I'll show
you how we will crush our enemy.

<p><b>turut</b> <i>a</i> exhibiting a lack of judgment or
propriety in doing s.t. or speaking; @silly.
<i>Manginhas magpáyung mu rag si turut,</i> You
are a @dodo! You want to take an umbrella
to go shellfishing! <i>v</i> [B126] be, become
silly.

<p><b>turútut</b> = <sc>TARÚRUT</sc>.

<p><b>turútuy</b> a a person much shorter than
normal. <i>Taastaas sad ang turútuy kay sa inánu,</i>
A very short person is taller than a dwarf. <i>v</i>
[B12; b6] become a very short person.

<p><b>tús<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] set up a volleyball. <b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> one
whose job is to set up the ball for the
spiker. <i>v</i> [B1256; c1] be the one who sets the
ball up for the spiker.

<p><b>tús<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TÚLUS</sc>.

<p><b>tusak</b> = <sc>TUSLAK</sc>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B13; a12] pierce
s.t. with several holes. <i>Kinsay nagtúsak
áring tilun?</i> Who put a lot of holes in the
screen? <i>Tusákun kag dunggab ug hisakpan
ka sa tulisan,</i> The bandits will stab you all
over if they catch you. <b>tusaktusak</b> = <sc>TUSAK</sc>.

<p><b>tus-ap<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] put up a candidate.
<i>Musugut kag tus-ápun (itus-ap) kang kandidátu?</i>
Are you amenable if they put you up as a
candidate?

<p><b>tus-ap<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TÚS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tusdik</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] prick a pustule. <i>Ayaw ug
líhuk samtang nagtusdik ku sa ímung
talubig,</i> Don't move while I prick your pustule.

<p><b>túsik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{drinking party} (slang). <i>Ági unyà sa
ámù karung gabíi kay may túsik didtu,</i>
Come by the house tonight because we're
holding a drinking party. <i>v</i> [AC; c1] have a
drinking party or @drink alcoholic beverage
(slang).

<p><b>túsik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] @{peck at}. <i>Nabúta siya kay
gitúsik íyang mata sa langgam,</i> He became
blind because a bird pecked at his eyes. <b>2</b>
[AC; a12] start a cockfight by letting the
<pb n=2171>
cocks peck each other once. <i>Kinahanglang
<b>tusíkun</b> ang mga manuk arun maglábuk dàyun,</i>
The cocks must be set to pecking at
each other so that they will fight at once. <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @pecking. <b>2</b> setting of cocks to peck at
each other.

<p><b>tuskig</b> <i>a</i> @stiff, @crisp. <i>Tuskig nga papil dibangku,</i>
Crisp banknotes. <i>v</i> [B; b6] @stiffen. <i>Ang
nagtuskig níyang karsúnis,</i> His well-@starched
trousers. <i>Nagkatuskig na ang minatay,</i> The
body is getting stiff. <b>&mdash; ug líug</b> be @haughty.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] act @haughty. <i>Nagpatuskig lang
siya sa líug dihang gipangayúag hinábang,</i>
She acted haughty when I asked her for a
contribution.

<p><b>tuslak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] drive s.t. into s.t. so as to
pierce it. <i>Kinsay nagtuslak sa prútas ug kutsilyu?</i>
Who stuck a knife into the fruit? <i>Gituslak
níla ang mata sa higanti,</i> They pierced
out the giant's eyes.

<p><b>tuslù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @dip part of s.t. into s.t. for a
short period of time. <i>Ígù ra kung mituslù sa
túbig.</i> Walà ku magdúgay kay tugnaw, I just
dipped into the water for a minute. I didn't
stay long because it was cold. <i>Nagtuslù ug
asin nga nagkaug mangga,</i> He is eating mangoes
dipping them in salt.

<p><b>tuslub</b> = <sc>TUNLUB</sc>.

<p><b>tuslud</b> (from <i>sulud</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c] @dunk s.t. in a
liquid or solid, partially or completely. <i>Maputì
ang karning ituslud sa inínit túbig,</i>
Meat gets pale if it is dunked into hot water.
<i>Ituslud ang mangga sa asin,</i> Stick the
mango in the salt.

<p><b>tusluk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @prick or @poke s.t. by
driving s.t. pointed into it. <i>Kinsay nagtusluk
íring kík nga nabúhù man?</i> Who poked
a finger in the cake? It has a hole in it. <i>Tuslúka
ang mata sa kuntra,</i> Poke your finger
into your opponent's eyes. <b>1a</b> [b8] be had
for sexual purposes. <i>Hituslukan na nang
bayhána sa íyang uyab,</i> The girl has had relations
with her boy friend. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)]
plug into a socket. <i>Itusluk únà ang kurd únà
mamalantsa,</i> Plug the cord in before you
iron. <i>n</i> @{electric plug}. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> @{electric outlet},
@socket for plugging s.t. into.

<p><b>tusmaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] get into a pool of liquid,
completely or partly. <i>Natusmaw ku sa lápuk,</i>
I fell into a muddy pool. <i>Ang mga nagámit
nga kubyirtus mauy itusmaw sa túbig
ínit,</i> The silver they used should be immersed
into the boiling water.

<p><b>tusmud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> push s.o. forward. <i>Natumba
ang bátà nga íyang gitusmud,</i> The child
that he pushed fell down. <b>2</b> @dip, @immerse
s.t. big in water. <i>Siyay nagtusmud sa katring
dughuun didtu sa dágat,</i> He immersed the
<pb n=2172>
bed that was full of bugs into the sea. <i>Natusmud
siya sa kanal,</i> He fell into the ditch.
<b>3</b> [A] @wade, immerse oneself in the water.

<p><b>tusnub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @dip, @dunk or @sop in liquid,
esp. s.t. which absorbs and becomes soft.
<i>Alkuhul nga gitusnúban sa gápas,</i> Alcohol
the doctor dipped the cotton in. <i>Itusnub
ang dúnat sa kapi,</i> Dunk the doughnut in
the coffee. <b>2</b> [A2] @wade, @swim in water.

<p><b>tusnud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @dip, @immerse a part of s.t. or
s.t. held. <i>Kinsa tung nagtusnud sa ákung [=ú]
sa túbig?</i> Who held my head under the water?
<i>Natusnud sa lápuk ang íyang sapátus,</i>
He stepped into the mud puddle with his
shoes.

<p><b>tust&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @toast bread or noodles. <i>n</i> s.t.
@toasted. <b>tustádu</b> <i>n</i> toasted bread or noodles.
<i>v</i> [A13; a12] toast bread or noodles.

<p><b>tustus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] roll up a tobacco leaf. <i>Tustúsa
dáan nang tabákù arun dì ka na magtustus
pa sa uma,</i> Roll the tobacco beforehand
so you won't have to roll any in the
field. <i>n</i> rolled tobacco leaf, <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> rolled up
tobacco leaf. <i>v</i> [A] smoke rolled tobacco.
<i>Magtinustus gihápun siya bisag makapalit
nag abánu,</i> He insists on smoking rolled tobacco
even though he can afford cigars now.

<p><b>túsu</b> <i>a</i> clever in deceiving others. <i>Túsu kaáyu
si Baúhay maung nakalingkawas siya gíkang
Amúay,</i> Mr. Turtle was very clever so he
managed to escape from Mr. Monkey. <i>v</i> [B12;
b6] become clever in deceiving. <b>patusutúsu</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b6] @pretend. <i>Nagpatusutúsu
kung hubug arun agákun ku níya,</i> I @acted
drunk so she would help me walk.

<p><b>tusud</b> = <sc>TURUS</sc>.

<p><b>túsug</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a4] for s.t. sharp to pierce and
get stuck into s.t. <i>Bildu mauy nakatúsug sa
ligid,</i> A glass splinter got stuck into the tire.
<i>Natúsug ang íyang kamut sa dágum,</i> He
pricked his hand with a needle. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a sliver
stuck into s.t.

<p><b>túsuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] pierce s.t. through s.t. else,
@skewer. <i>Tusúka ang isdang tap-anan,</i> Skewer
the fish you are going to broil. <b>2</b> [A; b]
make a hole in the earlobe. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @skewer.
<b>2</b> a hole in the ear for earrings or in animals
for the tether rope.

<p><b>túsup</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] suck the juice out of s.t. <i>Tusúpi
ang lísu únà iluwà,</i> Suck the juice out
of the seed before you spit it out.

<p><b>tusuy</b> = <sc>SUTUY</sc>.

<p><b>tutal</b> it does not matter, in any event [so-and-so]
is the case. <i>Pahagka ku bi. Tutal,
kaslúnun na man ta,</i> Let me kiss you. @Anyway,
we are going to get married. <i>Ákù lang
gibilin. Tutal, mubalik pa man ku,</i> I just left
<pb n=2173>
it. Anyway, I was going to come back for it.
<i>Ngánu bag mag-úlan? Tutal, díay ákung páyung,</i>
What if it rains? Anyway, I have my
umbrella.

<p><b>tútal</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{add up}. <i>Búgù giyug aritmitik
ang nagtútal íni,</i> The one who added this
up must be slow in arithmetic. <b>2</b> [a12] @{sum
up} advantages and disadvantages, pro's and
con's, etc. <i>Ug tutálun nátù, ikaw ang alkansi
sila ang nak aganansiya,</i> If we @analyze it,
you are on the losing end and they gain.

<p><b>tutbras</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @toothbrush. <b>2</b> action of brushing
the teeth. <i>Ngípun nga walay tutbras,</i> Teeth
which haven't been brushed. <i>v</i> [A; b] brush
s.o.'s teeth for him or false teeth. <i>Tutbrási
nang ímung marpil uy,</i> Brush your false
teeth! <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] brush one's teeth.
<i>Ayawg panutbras kay anúgun ang kìkì,</i>
Don't brush your teeth because it's a waste
of food particles.

<p><b>tuthu</b> = <sc>TALUTHU</sc>.

<p><b>tutpik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @toothpick. <i>Mu ra ka mag tutpik
kaniwánga,</i> You are as thin as a toothpick.
<b>2</b> variety of @croton (<i>kalípay</i>, <i>2</i>) with very
slender leaves. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] pick one's
teeth.

<p><b>tútù</b> title for a male a little older than the
speaker, used also as a nickname.

<p><b>tùtù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] crush, pound s.t. until it is
soft or tender but without breaking it into
pieces. <i>Magtùtù kug anghilika itampuy sa
nagsakit kung ngípun,</i> I'll crush bryophyllum
leaves to use as a compress for my
teeth. <i>Ákung tùtúun ang karning bipstikun,</i>
I'll pound the meat for beefsteak. <b>2</b> [A; c1]
bruise a part of the body, the lips, with a
violent impact.

<p><b>tùtù<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TALÙTÙ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>tutub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] cover the mouth of a container
securely by laying s.t. over it and
tying it. <i>Ákung tutubun (tutbun, tutuban,
tutban) ang ginamus,</i> I'll cover the salted
fish securely. <i>n</i> cover tied around the mouth
of a container. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> vessel or container
which is covered securely.

<p><b>tutug</b> = <sc>TULTUG</sc>.

<p><b>tútuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2] stand upright unaided or on
one's own. <i>Dì pa mutútuk ning batáa,</i> This
child can't @{stand unsupported} yet. <i>Dì pa ku
makatútuk kaáyu kay lúya pa ang ákung láwas,</i>
I can't @{stand alone} very well yet because
I'm weak. <b>udtung &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{high noon}.

<p><b>tútuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @stare. <i>Nagsiga íyang mata
nga mitútuk nákù,</i> He stared at me with his
eyes blazing. <i>Itútuk ímung mga mata sa kahitas-an,</i>
Fix your eyes to the heavens. <b>-in-ay</b>
<i>v</i> [C; c3] stare at each other.
<pb n=2174>

<p><b>tutul,</b> tútul <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] @object. <i>Ug way mututul,
aprubádu na ang musiyun,</i> If no one
objects, the motion is approved. <i>Unsang partíha
sa risulusiyun ang ímung gitutúlan?</i>
What part of the resolution are you objecting
<b>to?</b> <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> characterized with @reluctance
or @disobedience.

<p><b>tutunlan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÚLUN</sc>.

<p><b>tútut</b> = <sc>TÍTIT</sc>.

<p><b>tútuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; b] suck the breast. <i>Nagtutuy
pa siya pagkamatay sa íyang inahan,</i> He
was still sucking his mother's breast when
she died. <b>2</b> [A13] be at the sucking stage.
<i>Dì pa mabulag ang ituy sa inahan kay nagtutuy
pa,</i> You can't take the puppy away
from its mother because it is still suckling.
<b>3</b> [A23] lick s.o.'s boots. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang
íyang pag-usbaw sa katungdánan kay maáyu
mang mutútuy,</i> He easily got to the top
because he never hesitates to lick his superiors'
boots. <i>n</i> @breast. <b>tutyan, tutyanan</b> <i>n</i>
@{feeding bottle}.

<p><b>tuu, túu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{right hand}, right side of a pair.
<i>Kusgan ang tuu (túu) nákung kamut kay sa
wala,</i> My right hand is stronger than my
left. <b>&mdash; nga kamut</b> <b>a</b> @{right hand}. <b>b</b> @{right-hand
man}. <i>Siya ang túung kamut sa dátù,</i> He is
the right-hand man of the Datu. <b>2</b> @{right side}.
<i>Likù sa tuu,</i> Turn to the @right. <b>wala ug &mdash;</b>
<i>see</i> <sc>WALA</sc>. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] go to keep to
the right side. <i>Ipatuu ang kutsi labinag likuun,</i>
Keep to the right, esp. on the curves.
<b>tuuhun, tuhuun, tùhun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @right-handed. <b>2</b>
implement made to be used by a right-handed
person. <i>Ayawg gámit sa tuuhun nga sundang
ug walhun ka,</i> Don't use a right-handed
bolo if you are left-handed.

<p><b>túu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @believe. <i>Mutúu ka bag anting-anting?</i>
Do you believe in amulets?
<i>Tuhúan (tuúhan) ba gud nang pulitiku?</i>
Should you believe that politician? <b>2</b> [AP;
b(1)] @heed. <i>Dì ka man gud mupatúu (mutúu)
ug tambágan,</i> It's because you don't
@listen when you're given advice. <i>Sultíhi siya
kay ikaw ray íyang tuhúan,</i> Tell him because
you're the only one he listens to. <b>Mitúu
Aku</b> <i>n</i> The @{Apostles Creed}. <i>short form:</i>
<b>mituáku</b>. <i>Mangadyì kitag Mitúu Aku,</i> Let
us pray the Apostles' Creed. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] return,
come back to a place after having supposedly
left it for good (from the portion
of the Apostles' Creed that reads, 'And He
will come back....'). <i>Anía mibálik na sab
ku mu ra ug nagmitúu aku,</i> Here I am back
again, like it said in the Apostles' Creed. <b>2</b>
[A13P] keep going back and forth. <i>Magmituáku
ang kalag pagtúman sa pinitinsiya,</i> A
soul keeps coming back on earth to do penance. 
<pb n=2175>
<i>Ang pagkalimtánun mauy makamituáku
(makapamituáku) nákù sa balay,</i> I'm so
forgetful I keep going back and forth to the
house. <b>tuutúu</b> <i>n</i> @{superstitious belief}. <i>Tuutúu
lang nga taw-an nang dakíta,</i> It's nothing
more than @superstition that that banyan
is inhabited by spirits. <b>patuutúu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c]
deceive by pretending to be s.o. or teaching
s.t. false. <i>Nagpatuutúu siyang asindíru apan
diay musimus nga dakù,</i> He pretends to be
a big landowner when he's nothing more
than a beggar. <i>Unsa na say íyang gipatuutúu?</i>
What k.o. foolishness is he trying to
make you believe now? <i>n</i> false ideas which
s.o. is disseminating. <i>Patuutúu lang nà sa
mga panatiku,</i> That's nothing but @baloney
that the fanatics try to make you believe.
<b>matuutuuhun, matuhùtuhuun</b> <i>a</i> @superstitious,
given to false beliefs. <b>tinuhúan, tinuúhan</b>
<i>n</i> @beliefs, religious or otherwise. <b>tuluhúan</b>
<i>n</i> @{article of belief}. <b>pag-</b> <i>n</i> @belief, feeling
of certainty that s.t. is a certain way.
<b>matuúhun</b> @a having faith.

<p><b>tuub, túub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. treatment by steam
whereby the patient is set before a pot of
boiling water with herbs or a representative
of whatever caused his illness, and a blanket
is put over him so that he can breathe in
the steam; or if it is just a part of his body
that is ailing, the ailing part is exposed to
the steam. <b>1a</b> a similar treatment with tobacco
smoke instead of steam for stomach
ailments. <b>2</b> the material which is thought to
have caused the illness, used in the <i>tuub</i>
treatment. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] treat with <i>tuub</i>.
<i>Gitúub (gituúban) ku ang katul sa ákung tiil,</i>
I treated the rash on my foot with steam.

<p><b>túub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> unopened palm fronds, esp. coconut.
<i>Nagkúhà siyag túub pára sa bindíta sa
lukay,</i> He gathered some unopened coconut
fronds for Palm Sunday.

<p><b>tuud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stump of tree or post. <i>2</i> unextracted
stump of a tooth. <i>v</i> [B1256] get worn
down to stumps.

<p><b>túud<sub>1</sub></b> <b>1</b> particle indicating agreement with
an explanation or after being reminded. <i>Túud
nu, pídi man diay run,</i> That's right, isn't
it? It is payday today, isn't it? <b>2</b> particle
indicating that s.t. is in accordance with
what happened before. <i>Túud man, ílang gilúkat
ang ságing,</i> And @so, they uprooted the
banana plant (after having discussed doing
so). <b>3</b> particle used to disprove s.t. that was
negated: @actually, @{in reality}. <i>Wà kunu siyay
áluy, dúna túud,</i> He said he does not have a
penny, but actually he does. <b>4</b> is it true
that? <i>Muanhi túud ang mayur ugmà,</i> Is the
mayor @really coming tomorrow? <b>5</b> to be
<pb n=2176>
sure [so-and-so] is the case, but.... <i>Barut
<b>túud</b> ni apan barátu man sab,</i> This may be
a poor kind but it is cheap anyway. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[A23C23; a12] get to be @serious about a
game or joke, make s.t. serious. <i>Ayaw palábig
kundat níya kay mutuud nà siya,</i> Don't
fool around too much with him because he
will take it @seriously. <i>Ang ílang háluk sa maung
isína nagtúud kay giganáhan na sila,</i>
<b>Their</b> kiss in that scene became real when
<b>they</b> both got stimulated. <i>Muundang nà siya
nímug sugsúg ug ímung tud-un,</i> He will
stop teasing you if you treat him seriously.
<b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <b>-IN-(->)</b>, <i>v</i>. <b>2</b> [A23] get emotionally
@agitated in a game or argument.
<i>Manuud siyag ikalális,</i> He gets agitated if
you argue with him. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @true, @correct,
@genuine. <i>Tinúud nga kaági,</i> True-life story.
<i>Tinúud nga diyamanti,</i> Genuine diamond.
<b>2</b> do well. <i>Háwid ug tinúud arun dì ka mahúlug,</i>
Hold on tight so you don't fall. <i>v</i>
[B1256] become true, correct, genuine.
<i>Pastilag matinúud tung ákung damgu!</i> My!
What if that dream of mine were to come
true! <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] @{make true} a statement,
threat. <i>Pastilan ug tinud-un níya tung
íyang hulga!</i> My! What if he makes his
threat come true! <b>2</b> [AN; a12] do s.t. in a
true or serious way, not jokingly or half-*heartedly.
<i>Wà muy dag-anan ug mutinuud
(maninuud) na kug dúwà,</i> You haven't a
hope if I play @seriously. <b>-inin-(->)</b> <i>a</i> in a @genuine,
@serious way. <i>Tininuud tung íyang paningkámut,</i>
It was an @honest-to-goodness
effort of his. <b>tinud-anay, tinud-ay, tinuuray</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @sincere. <i>Tinud-anay (tinuuray) nga pagbásul,</i>
Sincere regret. <b>2</b> serious, not playfully.
Tinud-anay tung ílang áway dì dráma,
Their fight was @real, not just a put-on. <i>v</i> [C]
get to be serious from mere joke or play.
<b>kamatuúran</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @truth. <i>Dúnay kamatuúran
ang íyang gisulti,</i> There is some truth in
what he said. <b>2</b> @proof. <i>Ayawg kíha ug wà
kay kamatuúran,</i> Don't sue if you have no
proof. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> @true. <i>Mau kini ang matúud nga
hinungdan,</i> This is the true reason. <i>v</i> [A; bc1]
@prove. <i>Kini ang mumatúud sa ímung salà,</i>
This will prove your guilt. <i>Namatud-an
siyang sad-an,</i> He was proven guilty. <i>Imatúud
(matuúra) kanà sa hukmánan,</i> Prove that
in court. <b>pakama-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] consider
s.t. true. <b>matinud-ánun</b> <i>a</i> @sincere, @true. <i>Matinud-ánun
siya sa íyang sáad,</i> He is true to
his promises. <b>pagka-in-</b> <i>n</i> @truth, @reality. <i>Sa
pagkatinúud wà kuy pagsálig nímu,</i> In reality
I don't trust you. [+]

<p><b>túud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3S; a1b] know how, show s.o.
how to get to a place. <i>Nakatuud ku sa ílang</i>
<pb n=2177>
<i>hayid-áwut,</i> I know where their hide-out is.
<i>Tuúra ang gitagúan nákung kúkis,</i> Locate
the place I hid the cookies at. <i>Tuúri kug háin
ang sikrítung agiánan,</i> Lead me to the secret
passage. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @show s.t.; show
off s.t. <i>Mipatúud ang bátà sa íyang samad
sa íyang inahan,</i> The child showed his mother
his wound. <i>Nagpatúud ang hambugíru sa
íyang bag-ung kutsi,</i> The braggart is showing
off his new car.

<p><b>túug</b> <i>n</i> the young unopened leaf of a buri
palm, esp. processed into strips to be used
in weaving mats and bags.

<p><b>tuuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @choke. <i>Kusgánung kamut
ang mituuk níya,</i> Strong hands choked her.
<i>Natuuk ang manuk sa kaugalíngung hukut,</i>
The chicken choked on the string that tied
it.

<p><b>tuun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> @teach. <i>Si Mánuy nagtuun
nákug bisiklíta,</i> My brother taught me how
to ride a bicycle. <i>Tun-i siyag languy,</i> Teach
her how to swim. <b>2</b> @study. <i>Dì na nà tun-an
kay sayun da,</i> You don't have to study that
because it's easy. <b>2a</b> [A; b(1)] @study, put
s.t. under consideration. <i>Tun-an pa nákù
<b>tung</b> ímung tanyag,</i> I will still put your offer
under consideration. <b>3</b> @{attend school}. <i>Ayawg
intra sa ínum kay nagtuun ka pa,</i>
Don't take up drinking because you are still
studying. <b>4</b> [A12; b8] @{learn from}. <i>Didtu siya
makatuun ug panúlis sa munti,</i> He learned
about robbery in prison. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to
be studied. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @studious. <i>Hinúun siya,
buguk lang,</i> He studies hard, only he is stupid.
<b>matulun-ánun</b> <i>a</i> @educational, giving lessons.
<i>Matulun-ánun nga lílas,</i> An @instructive
movie. <i>v</i> [B146] be instructive, educational.
<b>pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @studies, @schooling. <i>Nahúnung
ang íyang pagtuun paggíra,</i> His studies were
interrupted by the war. <b>2</b> action of putting
s.t. under analytic consideration or advisement.
<b>pagtulun-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @teachings, @{moral lesson}.
<i>Pagtulun-an sa sugilánun,</i> The moral
lesson of the story. <b>2</b> @lesson in school. <i>see
also</i> <sc>KAT-UN</sc>.

<p><b>túun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3] be directed towards[**typo:toward] a @focus.
<i>Wà ku makakità nímu kay didtu magtúun
ang ákung mata sa ladlad,</i> I didn't see you
because my eyes were @focused on the wares
that were on display. <i>Dì matúun ang gás sa
bàbà sa butilya ug way imbúdu,</i> Kerosene
will not get directly into the mouth of the
bottle if there is no funnel. <b>2</b> [A; c] put a
child on the patty. <b>(->)<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [c6] happen @coincidentally
with s.t. else. <i>Wà mi magsábut
kay natuun lang sa pag-abut,</i> We had no agreement.
We just arrived at the same time
by coincidence. <i>Ituun ug Duminggu ang kasal,</i> 
<pb n=2178>
Have the wedding on a Sunday.

<p><b>tuung</b> <i>n</i> a raised frame of wood or iron placed
around an opening to prevent foreign materials
from getting in. <i>Butangi ug tuung ang
bàbà sa atábay arun dílì mubálik ug sulud
ang túbig,</i> Put a @coaming around the mouth
of the well so that water will not get back
in. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] construct a coaming around
s.t. <i>2</i> <b>&mdash; ang tutunlan</b> [B46] get a
@{lump in the throat} from emotion. <i>Mutuung
ang ákung tutunlan nga magtan-aw sa mga
bátang manligdas lang sa asíras magabíi,</i> I
get a lump in my throat when I see children
sleeping on the sidewalks at night.

<p><b>túuy</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] press a hot object over
s.t. <i>Nasúnug ang panaptun nga íyang gituúyan
sa ínit kaáyung plantsa,</i> The cloth got
burnt when she pressed it with a hot @iron.

<p><b>tuwa</b> = <sc>TULA</sc>, <b>tuwatúwa, tinuwatuwa</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>.

<p><b>tuwad</b> <i>v</i> 1 [A; b6] be in position with the
rump stuck out and the body downward.
<i>Ilúhi nang bátà kay nagtuwad na,</i> Wipe the
child now that he is thrusting out his rump.
<b>1a</b> [A3P] for s.t. horizontal to be lower at
the tail end. <i>Nagtuwad ang sakayan kay
bug-at sa prúwa,</i> The boat is low at the bow
because too much weight was put in front.
<b>2</b> [A; c1] @overturn s.t. bottoms up. <i>Tuwara
(ituwad) ang bisiklíta kay átung ilísag ligid,</i>
Turn the bicycle @{upside down} because I will
change the tire. <b>3</b> [A; a12] scrutinize s.t.
carefully to find a mistake or falsity. <i>Bísan
pag tuwarun ninyu siya, mudukut giyud siya
sa íyang diklarasiyun,</i> No matter how
well you cross-examine him he will stick
to his declaration. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> (colloquial &mdash; somewhat
coarse) <b>1</b> fruit or product of one's effort
or endeavor. <i>Nabúhì siya sa dílì íyang
túwad,</i> He lives on the fruit of others' efforts.
<b>2</b> @children. <i>Akuy musúgù sa ákung
mga anak kay ákung túwad,</i> I'll tell my
children what to do because they are my
own. <b>3</b> @work. <i>Ákù ang tanang túwad sa balay,</i>
I do all the work in the house. <b>(<-) tuáli</b>
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a12] be in complete @disorder, @disrupted.
<i>Usba nang trabahúa kay nagtúwad
tuáli,</i> Redo that work because it's all a @mess.
<i>Dì ku mangilábut ninyu bísag túwad tualíhun
ninyu ang inyung kinabúhì,</i> I won't interfere.
You may make a mess of your life
if you like. <b>2</b> = <sc>TUWAD</sc>, <i>v3</i>. <b>ka-(<-) tuáli</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] be in complete disorder. <b>tuwadtúwad</b>
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TUWAD</sc>, <i>v3</i>. <b>2</b> [A1] expend a
great deal of effort in s.t. <i>Nagtuwadtúwad
ug hílak,</i> Crying for all he was worth.

<p><b>túwag</b> v [B1; b6] be @disarranged, in @disarray.
<pb n=2179>
<i>Matúwag (magtúwag) ang mga butang sa
báy ug náay mga bátà,</i> The things in the
house will be in disarray when there are
children around. <i>a</i> @{in disarray}.

<p><b>tuwak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] cross over the summit of
a hill and come down on the other side. <i>Mutuwak
kag pitu ka bungtud úsà ka muabut
sa gilagíngan,</i> You have to cross over seven
hills before you reach the logging area. <b>2</b> [A2]
for rain to stop. <i>Manlákaw ta kun mutuwak
na ang ulan,</i> We will go if the rain stops.

<p><b>tuwang<sub>1</sub>, túwang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] @tilt s.t. over on
its side, for s.t. to tilt. <i>Hináyag tuwang ang
<b>táru</b> ug maghuwad kag túbig,</i> Tilt the can
slowly when you pour water out. <i>Twangun
(ituwang) ku ning lamísa kun manihúun nímug
baráha,</i> I'll turn the table over if you
manipulate the cards. <i>a</i> @tilted. <i>Tuwang kaáyu
ang tartanilyang gisakyag tambuk,</i> The
cart was tilted very much to one side when
a fat man got on it. <b>tuwangtúwang</b> <i>v</i> [AB1456;
a12] <b>1</b> @rock, make s.t. rock from side
to side. <i>Nagtuwangtúwang ang barku sa kadagkù
sa balud,</i> The boat was rocking from
side to side in the big waves. <i>v</i> [A; c16] carry
water using the <i>tuwangtúwang</i>. <i>n</i> strong
strip of bamboo for carrying cans of water
which are suspended from it. <b>&mdash; nga silya</b> <i>n</i>
rocking or @{swivel chair}. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>TUWANGTÚWANG</sc>,
<i>n</i>.

<p><b>tuwang<sub>2</sub>, túwang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B234] for rain or a
storm to stop. <i>Nagkatuwang na ning bagyúha
kay mihínay na ang hángin,</i> This storm
is abating now as the wind has subsided.

<p><b>túwang<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @help s.o. work. <i>Tulu kaming
mitúwang kaníya ug dáru,</i> Three of us
helped him plow. <i>Dì siya makatúwang nímu
pag-alsa sa kaban,</i> He cannot help you lift
the trunk. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @helper.

<p><b>túwang<sub>4</sub></b> a having a big gap in age or financial
state. <i>Adunáhan siya ug kabus ku. Túwang
kaáyu ang ámung kahimtang,</i> She's wealthy
and I'm poor. We come from very different
social positions.

<p><b>tuwas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; b6] be @dislocated, @displaced.
<i>Mituwas (natuwas) ang íyang síku sa pagkahúlug
níya,</i> His elbow was dislocated when
he fell down. <b>2</b> [A; c1] @unlodge, @unwedge
s.t. lodged in a place. <i>Ikaw bay nagtuwas sa
ali sa agiánan?</i> Did you remove the bar that
blocked the passageway? <i>Átung twasun (ituwas)
nang punúan sa lubi nga nasángit sa
káhuy,</i> We'll remove the coconut trunk that
is wedged in the branches of the tree.

<p><b>tuwatúwa</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>.

<p><b>tuwaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>TUAW</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>2</b> [A; b3] @weep, @cry.
<i>Unsay gituwawan nímu, ang sintimintal nga</i>
<pb n=2180>
<i>salída?</i> What are you crying about? The
sentimental movie?

<p><b>tuway<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> vaginal secretion having an extremely
foul odor. <i>v</i> [a4] have such secretions.
<i>Gituway sigúru siya kay bakag kaáyug ági,</i>
She must have a vaginal disorder because
she leaves behind a very foul odor. <b>-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i>
having a very odourous vaginal secretion.

<p><b>tuway<sub>2</sub>, túway</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible @clam about 3"
in width. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go @clamming. <i>Nanúway
mi sa katunggan,</i> We @{gathered clams}
in the mangrove swamps. <b>tuwaytuway<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i>
k.o. @clam.

<p><b>tuwaytuway<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B4] for s.t. to be almost
cut off and dangle loosely. <i>Nagtuwaytuway
ang íyang tudlù nga hápit na maputul,</i> The
part of his finger that is almost cut off is
dangling loosely. <i>Ang pagkadugmuk sa íyang
bitíis mauy nakatuwaytuway (nakapatuwaytuway)
niíni,</i> His leg is now dangling
loosely because it was crushed.

<p><b>tuwaytúway<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @kneecap. The kneecap of a
dead person is believed to give a person special
powers, e.g. invisibility.

<p><b>tuwaytúway<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. annual, erect and
branched @herb of open waste spaces: <i><b>Bidens
cynapiifolia</b></i>.

<p><b>tuwittuwit</b> <i>n</i> @chirp of birds. <i>Makalingaw pamináwun
ang mga tuwittuwit sa mga langgam,</i>
It's amusing to listen to the birds
chirp. <i>v</i> [A] for birds to chirp.

<p><b>túy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> simplified version of <i>takyan</i> where
the players pass the <i>takyan</i> around in a circle
and whoever misses gets punished by
having to serve all the players in turn. <i>v</i> [A;
b6] play <i>túy</i>.

<p><b>túy<sub>2, 3</sub></b> = <sc>TÚLUY<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>túya</b> <i>n</i> @freak. <i>Túya nà siya kay dakù kaáyug
úlu,</i> He is a freak because he has a very
large head.

<p><b>túyà</b> <i>v</i> [AB234; c16] @sway, move in a rocking-like
motion. <i>Mga balud nga mutúyà sa
sakayan,</i> Waves that @rock the boat. <i>Kusug
mutúyà ang sakayan ug way karga,</i> An empty
boat rocks a lot. <i>n</i> @swaying. <b>tuyàtúyà</b> <i>v</i>
[AB46; c1] @rock, @sway. <i>Nagtuyàtúyà ang
dáhun nga natágak,</i> The leaves are @waving
back and forth as they fall.

<p><b>*túyang</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] keep on doing s.t.
on a lavish scale. <i>Kun magpatúyang kag ínum,
lagmit ulsirun ka,</i> If you don't curb
your drinking, you will surely get an ulcer.
<i>Gipatuyángan siya sa gustu,</i> She was allowed
to do what she wanted to do without restraint.
<b>pina-an</b> <i>n</i> one who is allowed to
have his way. <b>mapa-un</b> <i>a</i> @immoderate, @lavish
in quantity.

<p><b>tuyarug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] stand erect, motionless,
<pb n=2181>
and speechless. <i>Sa ákung kalísang mituyarug
na lang ku sa daplin nga hálus muginháwa,</i>
Due to my fright I stood motionless in
<b>the</b> corner, hardly daring to breathe.

<p><b>tuyátuy</b> = <sc>TURÁTUY</sc>.

<p><b>tuybù</b> <i>v</i> [B6; b6] @project from the surface,
@{stick up} into the air. Mituybù lang ang isla
nga bag-ung nahimugsù, The newly-born island
just @{sprang up}. <i>Súngay nang nagtuybù
sa ímung úlu?</i> Is that a horn @protruding
from your head? <i>n</i> @projection, @mound, or
the like.

<p><b>tuyhad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] straighten up the body,
stay erect. <i>Tuyhad ug panagsa kun maglingkud
kag dúgay,</i> Stretch out once in a while
when you sit for some time. <i>Ituyhad (tuyhára)
ímung láwas kanang mu rag kadíti,</i>
Carry your body straight like a cadet. <b>2</b> [A1]
arrive from s.w. empty-handed (lit. not
bent under a load). <i>Miabut gíkan sa byáhi
walà giyuy dala. Nagtuyhad lang,</i> He arrived
from his trip empty-handed. <i>a</i> straight, erect
of the body.

<p><b>tuyhákaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] crane one's neck, pull
oneself up tall. <i>Mituyhákaw ang tanang líug
paglabay sa artista,</i> They all craned their
necks when the actress passed by. <i>Nagtuyhákaw
ang kubra nga pumapaak,</i> The cobra
pulled itself up when it was preparing
to strike.

<p><b>tuyhud</b> <i>a</i> @straight, not bent or crooked. <i>Tuyhud
kaáyu ning kahúya,</i> This piece of wood
is very straight. <i>v</i> [AB3; c1] stretch out
straight. <i>Nagkatuyhud na ang ákung buktun
nga napíang,</i> I can gradually begin to
@{straighten out} the arm I had sprained. <i>Nagtuyhud
lang nang tawhánang nagbayli,</i> That
man is dancing straight and stiff.

<p><b>tuytuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> fruit bud, small immature fruits.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] grow small fruits. <i>Ang bungáhuy
makapanuytuy ug dalì ug daúban,</i> A
fruit tree will develop fruit buds if you expose
it to smoke.

<p><b>tuytuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make a sound to call
chickens. <i>Ánad kaáyung manúka kay mudúul
dáyug tuytúyun,</i> What a tame chicken!
As soon as you go 'toytoy' to it, it
comes. <b>2</b> = <sc>TÚKUY</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound for calling
chickens. <b>2</b> = TÚKUY.

<p><b>tuytuy<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> any small @{clay jar}. <b>2</b> one-node
bamboo tube container for water or palm
toddy. <b>3</b> small-mouthed, thick, dark-green
glass @jug holding about six gallons, used for
storing coconut palm toddy. A network of
rattan with a handle on both sides is fitted
around the body. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>TUYTUY<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>túyu</b> <i>n</i> @{soy sauce}. <i>v</i> [b] put soy sauce in s.t.

<p><b>tuyù</b> <i>n</i> @wound esp. one which is inflicted in
<pb n=2182>
a contest. <i>Ang sunuy nakadaug sa tárì nga
walay tuyù,</i> The rooster won in the cockfight
without a wound. <i>v</i> [A12; b8] inflict
a @wound. <i>Padag-un ku ang ímung manuk ug
makatuyù sa ákù,</i> I will let your cock win if
it can inflict a wound on mine.

<p><b>túyù<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TÚYU</sc>.

<p><b>túyù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @purpose, @intention. <i>Unsay ímung túyù
dinhi,</i> What is your purpose in being
here? <b>&mdash; kay</b> [so-and-so] happened because
s.t. else was or was not done. <i>Gihilantan ka
<b>túyù</b> kay nagpasinguwan,</i> You got a fever
because you went and played in the rain. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A3; a2b] do s.t. @{on purpose}. <i>Pasaylúa ku
kay wà nákù tuyúa,</i> I'm sorry. I didn't do it
@intentionally. <b>2</b> [A13; b(1)] do s.t. for a
specific purpose. <i>Nagtúyù mig bingka pára
sa ímung pag-abut,</i> We made rice cakes esp.
for your arrival. <b>3</b> [A13; b(1)] with full
awareness of what one is doing. <i>Agwanta
ka kay gituyúan nímu ang pagpangasáwa níya,</i>
You have to put up with it because you
married her on purpose. <b>3a</b> [A13; b(1)] do
s.t. to provoke trouble for oneself, @{ask for
it}. <i>Ngánung dì ka man mutúug sugúun?
Magtúyù ka lang giyud,</i> Why do you not do
as you're told? You are @{asking for it}. <i>Ngánung
misaka ka dihà? Nagtúyù kag mahúlug?</i>
Why are you climbing up there? You
want to fall or s.t.? <b>paN-</b> = <sc>PAMALÁYI</sc>. <i>see</i>
<sc>BAYI</sc>. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] get @angry. <i>Nanuyù
si Pápa kay dúgay kang naulì,</i> Daddy is
angry because you went home late. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@intentional. <i>Dì tu aksidinti. Tinúyù tu,</i> It
was no accident, it was intentional. <b>2</b> esp.
done. <i>Tinúyù nga gulà sa pasku,</i> @Special
Christmas issue. <b>3</b> @{arranged marriage}. <i>Ang
kaminyúung tinuyù lagmit dílì mutunhay,</i>
Arranged marriages rarely last. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
done @intentionally. <i>Wà ku magbásul kay tinuyúan
man tu nákù,</i> I don't regret it because
I did it on purpose. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @aims, @purpose.
<i>Gibatbat ang katuyúan sa kumpirinsiya,</i>
They explained the aims of the conference.
<b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> specifically made or designed.
<i>Pinatúyù nga lingkuránan sa bátà,</i> Chair esp.
designed for children. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> place not
conveniently accessible. <i>Tuyuun ílang balay
kay náa sa intiriyur,</i> Their house is not convenient
to get to because it is far from the
road.

<p><b>túyub</b> <i>n</i> k.o. itchy and painful fistula growing
under the skin in the rectum, penetrating
deeply, eventually reaching the intestines.
<i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get <i>túyub</i>.

<p><b>tuy-ud</b> <i>v</i> [APB3; c16P] @straighten s.t. out,
be @straight. <i>Sayun dang pagtuy-ud (pagpatuy-ud) 
<pb n=2183>sa kulut nga buhuk,</i> It's easy to
@straighten out curly hair. <i>Dì kung katuy-ud
sa mubung katri,</i> I can't lie with my legs
straight on a short bed.

<p><b>túyuk</b> <i>v</i> [APB2S3; aPc] @spin, @{turn around},
@{go around} s.t.; make s.t. spin or go around.
<i>Pagnga ang púnu kay nagtuyuk pag turntíbul,</i>
Turn the victrola off because the turntable
is still turning. <i>Isakay siya sa bisiklíta
ug itúyuk sa plása,</i> Put him on your bicycle
and take him around the plaza. <b>nag-(->) pa
ang búla</b> nobody can be sure (lit. the ball is
still @rolling). <i>Bísag dakù na tag bíyà, ayaw
mug kadiskárids kay nagtuyuk pa ang búla,</i>
Even if we are way behind, don't get discouraged
because the game isn't over. <b>pa-</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c] have s.o. turn or spin s.t. around.
<i>Ipatúyuk ning istinsil sa tigmimyugrap,</i> Have
the mimeographer run this stencil off. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> @axle. <i>Nabálì ang tuyukan sa garapinyíra,</i>
The axle in the ice-cream freezer
broke. <b>tuyuktúyuk nga silya</b> <i>n</i> @{swivel chair}.
<b>tuyuktúyuk ug pangítà</b> <i>v</i> [B1] search here
and there. <i>Timan-ig maáyu ása mu nà ibutang
arun dì ka magtuyuktúyuk (matuyuktúyuk)
ug pangítà ug kinahanglánun na,</i>
Make a note of where you put it so you do
not go around everywhere looking for it
when you need it. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> general term for
cone and olive shells.

<p><b>twagsik</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] for a liquid to fly and
scatter. <i>Ngánu bang mutwagsik (manwagsik)
man nang íyang láway igsulti níya,</i> Why
does his saliva spray out when he talks?
<i>Palayù ta kay nagpanwagsik ang túbig gíkan
sa panghugasan,</i> Let's keep out of the way
of the water splashing from the drain.

<p><b>twakdug</b> <i>n</i> bamboo @{wall stud}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
attach the bamboo studs. <b>2</b> [c1] use s.t. for
bamboo wall studs.

<p><b>twásik</b> = <sc>TUÁSIK</sc>.

<p><b>twilb-uklak</b> <i>n</i> twelve o'clock in the sight of a
weapon.

<p><b>twirka</b> <i>n</i> @screw. <i>v</i> [b] fasten with a @screw.
<b>lisù sa &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÍSÙ</sc>.

<p><b>twis, twist</b> <i>n</i> @twist, name of a dance. <i>v</i> [A]
dance the twist.

<p><b>tyábaw</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] <b>1</b> @{cry out} in pain, grief,
and the like. <i>Nagtyábaw ang nanganak sa
kasakit,</i> The woman delivering is hollering
in pain. <i>Unsay ímung gityabáwan? Namatyan
kag iring?</i> What are you @hollering about?
A cat of yours that died? <b>2</b> complain
for being unable to bear s.t. <i>Mityábaw
nang lungsud sa kamahal sa palalítun,</i> The
people are beginning to scream at high
prices. <b>3</b> for animals to make their normal
<pb n=2184>
loud noise. <i>Nagtyábaw ang kábaw,</i> The carabao
lowed.

<p><b>tyágù</b> (from <i>Tyágù</i>, <i>short for</i> <b>Santiyágu</b>, a
name of a person) <i>a</i> @poker-faced when making
jokes. <i>Tyágù kaáyu ning tawhána kay
dílì mukatáwa bísag kataw-anan,</i> He really
is poker-faced because he makes the funniest
jokes without cracking a smile. <b>&mdash; nu</b>
exclamation of discomfiture w<i>hen one is
the butt of a joke or prank. Tyágù nu! Labi
nag dílì ikay tumung sa kumidiya!</i> It
sure is funny, isn't it, esp. when the joke is
not on you!

<p><b>tyáli</b> <i>n</i> @inch:[**typo? .] <i>Walu ka tyáli ang gilapdun sa
papil,</i> The paper is eight inches wide.

<p><b>tyának</b> = <sc>MANTIYÁNAK</sc>.

<p><b>tyangaw</b> = <sc>PYANGAW.[**verify?]</sc>

<p><b>tyanggi</b> <i>n</i> @marketplace. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] @{go
marketing}. <i>Tagái kug kwartang ipanyanggi,</i>
<pb n=2185>
Give me some money to go marketing with.
<b>tyanggihan</b> <i>n</i> marketplace and its vicinity.

<p><b>tyatru</b> <i>n</i> @theater.

<p><b>tyimpu</b> = <b>TIMPU</b> in all meanings except <i>n6</i>.

<p><b>tyinda</b> = <sc>TINDA</sc>.

<p><b>tyubíbu</b> <i>n</i> @merry-go-round. <i>v</i> [A; b6] ride,
construct a merry-go-round.

<p><b>tyúning purk</b> <i>n</i> @{tuning fork}.

<p><b>tyúpì</b> = <sc>TAYÚPÌ</sc>.

<p><b>tyuríya</b> <i>n</i> @theory. <i>v</i> [a12] apply a certain
theory, hunch, technique of diagnosis. <i>Átung
tyuriyáhun ning makináha, bir ug dì
ba muandar,</i> Let's try my hunch on this
machine and see if we can't get it to start.

<p><b>tyusupíya</b> <i>n</i> @theosophy.

<p><b>tyútur</b> <i>n</i> @tutor. <i>v</i> [AB156; b(1)] @tutor s.o.,
be a tutor. <i>Sayun siyang tyutúran kay brayit,</i>
It's easy to tutor him because he is
bright.
<pb n=2186>

<p><b>u<sub>1</sub></b> @or. <i>Kinsa may muadtu, ikaw u aku?</i> Who
will go, you or me? <i>Muadtu ka ba u pabilin
ba,</i> Are you going or staying here? <b>&mdash; byín</b>,
<b>bín</b> <i>particle offering two choices of action:</i>
or, if you wish. <i>Ikaw bay muanhi u byin[**byín] aku
bay muanhà?</i> Are you coming here, or
shall I go there?

<p><b>u<sub>2</sub></b> <b>1</b> <i>particle initial in the sentence:</i> exclamation
of surprise upon finding out s.t. <b>1a</b> expressing
annoyed surprise. <i>U, ngánung kúlang
man ning suklì!</i> Hey, this isn't enough
change! <i>U, ngánung mipaúlì ka pa man!</i>
What are you doing back here! <i>U, ngánung
wà man siya mukúyug!</i> Why? How come
she's not with you? <i>U, mudílì ka na hinúun
nga náa gitúnul na?</i> You mean you are going
to refuse it when you already have it in
your hand? <b>1b</b> expressing pleasant surprise.
<i>U, Ting! Nía man diay ka!</i> Hey, Ting.
You're here! <b>1c</b> exclaiming surprise at having
made a mistake: Oh! <i>U, singku písus
ba diay tu ímung gihátag nákù?</i> Oh! Was
it five pesos you gave me? <b>2</b> exclamation
preceding an emphatic denial. <i>U dílì, dílì nà
mahímù,</i> Oh no, that can't be done. <b>2a</b> preceding
a statement that s.t. is not the way
the interlocutor thought. <i>U, sayun ra nang</i>
<pb n=2187>
<i>lutúun. Lat-i lang,</i> Oh, that's easy to cook.
Just boil it. <b>3</b> pause before speaking. <i>U, ári
diri nà ibutang,</i> Oh, just put that over here.
<b>4</b> (most often at the end of the clause) particle
to draw s.o.'s attention. <i>U, Dyú, dalì
ra kadiyut,</i> Oh, Joe[**,?] would you come here
a second. <i>Ambi ra nang lápis u,</i> Would you
hand me that pencil, that one over there.
<i>Díay písus u. Patupi didtu,</i> Here, here's a
peso. Go get a haircut.

<p><b>u<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> letter O.

<p><b>[=ú]<sub>1</sub></b> expression of frustration. <i>[=Ú], ngánu ug
ngánu gayud nga nahitabù tu,</i> Oh why, oh
why did that have to happen?

<p><b>[=ú]<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ÚU</sc>.

<p><b>[=ú]<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>ÚLU</sc>.

<p><b>úbak</b> <i>n</i> trunk of a banana or abaca[**I?] tree. <i>v</i> [A;
a12] separate layers of the banana trunk.
<i>Ubáka ang baláni para kan-an,</i> Separate the
banana trunk layers to use as plates.

<p><b>uban</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @companion, s.o. together with s.o.
else. <i>Kinsay ímung uban?</i> Who is your companion?
<b>1a</b> s.t. that belongs together with
s.t. else. <i>Kining mayka uban adtung tiprikurdíra,</i>
This mike belongs with that tape recorder.
<b>1b</b> <b>&mdash; sa</b>, [dat.] together with. <i>Mianhi
ku dinhi uban níya,</i> I came here together
<pb n=2188>
with him. <i>Misugut siya uban sa pagtúu nga
...</i> He agreed in the belief that ... <b>1c</b> <b>&mdash;
ang</b> including, [so-and-so] is also along. <i>Milakaw
siya uban ang íyang masusu,</i> She left
taking her baby with her. <b>1d</b> one's wife or
husband, referred to in the third person.
<i>Ákung ingnun ang ákung uban inig-abut níyas
trabáhu,</i> I'll tell my husband when he
gets home from work. <b>2</b> the other ones, additional
ones. <i>Háin na man ang uban,</i> Where
are the others? <i>Unsa pay uban,</i> What else?
<i>ug uban pa</i> and so forth (abbreviated <b>ubp.</b>).
<b>3</b> some of a group, but not all. <i>Mauy buhátun
sa uban,</i> Some people do that. <i>Ságad
barátu ang prútas, piru uban mahal,</i> Usually
fruit is cheap, but some kinds are expensive.
<b>4</b> <b>mau rang -a(<-)</b> of the same class. <i>Ang tulíngan
ug barílis mu rang ubána,</i> The mackerel
and tuna are in the same family. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC;
ac] go with, accompany s.o. <i>Muuban ku
nímu,</i> I'll go with you. <i>Nagkaúban mi pag-adtu
sa Manílà,</i> We happened to go to Manila
together. <i>Unsa pa may ímung ubanun
ngadtu sa dawuntáwun?</i> What do you want
to go downtown with me for? <i>Ubanan ku
siya kanúnay,</i> I always go with her. <i>Kinsa
may ákung iuban dinhi,</i> Who will I bring
here with me? <b>1a</b> [A; b6] escort s.o. in an
affair or any gathering. <b>2</b> [c] include in a
group. <i>Nauban nà diri sa ákung lista,</i> That
is included here on my list. <b>3</b> [b] give s.t.
else in addition. <i>Mutúu ku nímu ug ímung
ubanag pasálig,</i> I'll trust you if you give me
additional assurances. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [c] <b>1</b> be, do
together with s.o. <i>Nagkaúban mi sukad sa
gagmay pa mi,</i> We have been together since
childhood. <i>Makig-úban ku níyag puyù didtu
sa syudad,</i> I'll stay with him in the city. <b>2</b>
share happiness, difficulties, etc. with s.o.
<i>Nag-úban mi kanúnay sa mga kasákit,</i> We
share each other's sorrows. <b>uban-úban</b> <i>v</i> [AC;
c] participate in things one should not.
<i>Wà na ku muuban-úban sa ílang mga binúang,</i>
I no longer take part in their foolishness.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> common-law spouse. <b>2</b> s.t. taken
along on short notice. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] have
s.o. go with s.o. else or oneself. <i>Mupauban
ka pa ba?</i> Do you still need s.o. to accompany
you? <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] do s.t. unnecessary
in addition to s.t. <i>Dì ku mupauban (magpauban)
ug púng bísan unsay ákung ihátag,</i>
When I give s.t., I don't say a lot of unnecessary
things. <b>2a</b> [c] take in, send together
with s.t. else. <i>Paubanan nákù ug túbig iniglamuy
sa tablíta,</i> I'll wash the tablet down
with water. <i>Ipauban ang unum ka kutsárang
mantikilya,</i> Add the six tablespoons of butter.
<b>-ay (pa) untà</b> [so-and-so] should have
<pb n=2189>
been done under the rules of propriety.
<i>Ubánay pa untà mananghid,</i> The least you
could have done is asked. <i>Ubánay pa untà
mutábang ka nákù imbís maghinan-aw lang,</i>
You should have helped instead of just
looking at me. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> done together with
s.t. else. <i>Inubanan ug kasábà ang íyang pagtúgut,</i>
He agreed to it but not without a
good cussing out first. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @companion.
<i>Irù ray ákung kaúban dinhi,</i> A dog is
my only companion here. <b>ka- sa kinabúhì</b>
one's @spouse. <b>2</b> one who is together with
s.o. in a job or in a place. <i>Kaúban sa klási,</i>
A classmate. <b>2a</b> <b>ka- nga</b> @fellow-. <i>Kaúban nákung
maistru,</i> A teacher that teaches in the
same school as I do. <i>v</i> [B1256] happen to
be together with s.o. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> [**can't identify][**P2 thinks it's 1] @kin. <i>Daghan
mig mga kaubánan sa Mindanaw,</i> We
have many @relatives in Mindanao. <b>2</b> people
belonging to the same large group. <i>Mga kaubánan
níya sa partídu,</i> His fellow party
members.

úban <i>n</i> @{gray hair}. <i>Daghan na ku ug mga úban,</i>
I have lots of gray hair. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4b6]
have gray hair. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having grey hairs. <i>Ubánun
na ang tigúwang,</i> The old man has lots
of gray hair. <i>v</i> [B12] get to have grey hair.

<p><b>ubaryu</b> <i>n</i> @ovary in women.

<p><b>úbas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @grapes.

<p><b>úbas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> refuse from soft-boiled rice or
cooked cassava flour after extracting the
starch used for starching clothes. <b>2</b> pulp of
citrus fruits. <b>3</b> chips or curled up slivers
that result from drilling wood or metal.

<p><b>ubaub</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @eyelid. <b>2</b> @temple of the head.

<p><b>ubaug</b> <i>n</i> @{eye socket}. <i>Ang ubaug mauy nagsanggà
sa mata,</i> The eye socket supports
the eyeball.

<p><b>ubay</b> <i>a</i> @parallel to, @along the lines of, @{in line
with}. <i>Ang dálan mitúlin ug usa ka kilumitru
ubay sa subà,</i> The path ran for a kilometer
along the river. <i>Ang íyang gitambag ubay sa
mga lagdà sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> The advice
he gives is @{in accordance with} the rules
of proper behavior. <i>Ubay sa prugráma sa
pagdagínut,</i> In line with the austerity program.
<i>Ubay sa panahun ang pagpangarsúnis
sa mga babáyi karun,</i> It is @{in accordance
with} the times the way women wear pants
these days. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ac] go along the side
of, be situated @alongside, put s.t. parallel.
<i>Daghang táwu ang miubay sa kutsi nga gisakyan
sa pamúnù,</i> Many people went along
beside the car bearing the president. <i>Nag-úbay
kami pagkatúlug,</i> We slept lying down
@beside each other. <i>Nag-ubay sa baybáyun
ang mga payagpáyag,</i> The shacks @lined the
beach. <b>2</b> [A; c] do s.t. in @accordance with
<pb n=2190>
s.t. else. <i>Kung iubay nímu sa katárung ang
ímung líhuk,</i> If you act @{according to} the
rules of right conduct. <b>pa-un(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b]
@concur, @{go along with} s.o.'s decision. <i>Gipaubayúnan
níya ang tanang hangyù sa asáwa,</i>
He @consented to everything his wife wanted
to do. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. parallel with s.t. else.

<p><b>ubay-ubay</b> <i>a</i> of a @considerable number or
amount. <i>Ubay-ubay mi ug kuhà run,</i> We had
a @good-sized catch today. <i>v</i> [B26; c1] be of
a good number. <i>Ubay-ubaya (iubay-ubay)
ang ímung pagkáun arun dì na ku magbálun,</i>
Fix a @{good amount} of food so I won't have
to take any along.

<p><b>úbi</b> <i>n</i> widely grown @yam of variable color
and size; used mainly as an ingredient in
sweet dishes: <i><b>Dioscorea alata</b></i>. <b>&mdash; nga gataw</b>
<i>n</i> variety, the tuber of which becomes exposed
above the ground. <b>&mdash; nga kinampay</b>
variety with purple meat. <i>v</i> [b6] make s.t.
of <i>úbi</i>. <b>kulur di-</b> violet-colored. <b>ubihan</b> <i>n</i>
@{yam patch}.

<p><b>ubíhas</b> <i>n</i> word used in the <i>gúsus</i> of certain
novenas to refer to the souls who have
joined the angels.

<p><b>úbir<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> beyond the allowed limit. <i>Bug-at ra
kaáyu. Úbir nas timbangan,</i> It's too heavy.
It weighs way more than the scale indicates.
<i>v</i> [B26] go beyond the limit. <i>Miúbir siyas
linya maung napáwul,</i> He went @{over the
line} and so he was declared foul. <b>&mdash; drap</b> <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @overdraft. <b>2</b> shortage of money. <i>a</i> being
@short of money. <i>Dì kung kapalit kay úbir
drap ku run,</i> I can't buy any right now because
I'm short of money. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] become
short of money. <b>2</b> [B12] be @bankrupted.
<b>&mdash; dus</b> <i>n</i> @overdose. <i>v</i> [B126] take an
overdose of s.t. <b>&mdash; hid</b> <i>n</i> violation in basketball
where a player dribbles the ball above
his head. <i>v</i> [B1256] commit this violation.
<b>&mdash; hit</b> <i>v</i> [B] for engines to overheat. <b>&mdash; hul</b>
<i>v</i> [A; a2] @overhaul a vehicle. <b>pa- hul</b> <i>v</i> [A;
ac] have a general physical check-up. <i>Kinahanglang
magpaúbir hul ta kausa sa usa ka
túig,</i> We need a general physical check-up
once a year. <b>-ispíding</b> <i>n</i> @speeding. <i>v</i> [A] be
speeding. <b>&mdash; kut</b> <i>n</i> @jacket. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear,
make into a jacket. <b>&mdash; lan</b> <i>v</i> [A] go s.w. overland
rather than by sea. <b>&mdash; lap</b> <i>n</i> trousers
made to be worn without a belt, having an
overlapping closing in the waist. <i>v</i> [c1]
make trousers in this style. <b>-lúdid</b> <i>a</i> for a
vehicle or boat to carry a load greater than
the legal limit. <i>v</i> [B12] be @over-loaded. <b>-nayit</b>
<i>v</i> [A2] stay s.w. @overnight. <i>n</i> @{overnight
bag}. <b>-nayit bag</b> <i>n</i> @{overnight bag}. <b>-prayis</b> <i>v</i> [A2;
b(1)] @overprice s.t., jack up the price.
<b>&mdash; sis</b> <i>n</i> vessel that goes overseas out of the
<pb n=2191>
Philippines. <i>v</i> [A] sail or work on an overseas
vessel. <b>-tayim</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{overtime work}. <b>2</b> {overtime
pay}. <i>v</i> [A; b6] work @overtime. <i>Náay
ámung giubirtayman,</i> We're working overtime
on s.t. <b>&mdash; tik</b> <i>v</i> [A; b1] <b>1</b> @pass another
vehicle. <i>Ayaw pag-ubir tik sa kurbáda,</i>
No overtaking on a curve. <b>2</b> get a girl
to say yes to one before s.o. else does. <i>Naguul
si Huwan tungud kay giubirtikan siya
ni Pidru sa pagpangulitáwu ni Maríya,</i> Juan
is sad because Pedro beat him to Maria (and
Maria accepted Pedro). <b>&mdash; ul</b> <i>n</i> @overalls. <i>v</i>
[A; c1] wear, make overalls.

<p><b>úbir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] in volleyball, toss the ball
back to the opponents.

<p><b>úbir<sub>3</sub></b> humorous reference to the song <i>U Bírhin
Maríya</i>.

<p><b>ubispu</b> <i>n</i> @bishop. <i>v</i> [B6; c1] be, become a
bishop. <b>ubispádu</b> <i>n</i> @bishopric.

<p><b>ubligar</b> <i>v</i> [B; a12] @force, @compel s.o..[**extra period?] <i>Kanang
ímung sakit mauy muubligar nímu sa kamatáyun,</i>
Your illness will bring you @inexorably
to your death. <i>Wà siya nákù ubligara (ubligaha)
pagbáyad sa íyang útang,</i> I didn't
force him to pay his debt. <i>Naubligar ku sa
pagpangútang ug kwarta pára sa masakitun
kung anak,</i> I was forced to borrow money
for my sick child. <b>ubligádu</b> <i>a</i> @must do. <i>Ug
gustu kang muabut sa pyista, ubligádu kang
mularga run,</i> If you want to make it to the
feast you must leave today. <i>Dílì ubligádu
ang pagsimba sa mga Hudíyu,</i> It is not @obligatory
for Jews to attend church. <i>v</i> [B126;
a12] be @obliged to do s.t <b>ubligasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@obligation, @{moral compulsion} to do s.t. <i>Ubligasiyun
sa usa ka ginikánan pagbuhì[**P2? or í,P3 ok as is] sa
íyang mga anak,</i> Parents have an obligation
to raise their children. <b>2</b> @{financial obligation}.
<i>Wà kuy ikabáyad sa ákung ubligasiyun,</i> I
don't have the means to pay my obligations.
<b>may &mdash;</b> a married man.

<p><b>ublung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @oblong in shape. <b>2</b> for s.t. normally
round not to be so. <i>v</i> [B2] for s.t. round
to get out of shape. <i>Kun ímung padagánun
nang bisiklítang plát muublung (maublung)
ang yantas niánà,</i> If you ride the bicycle
flat, the rims will get out of shape.

<p><b>ubp.</b> abbreviation for <i>ug uban pa</i> 'and so
forth'.

<p><b>ubra</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @work, esp. manual. <i>Nag-ubra
ku sa báy ni Andis,</i> I'm working on Andis'
house. <b>2</b> [b(1)] @{work off} a debt. <i>Ákung
ubráhan tung bayinti nga útang nákù,</i>
I will work off my twenty-peso debt to
you. <b>3</b> [A23; b(1)] for medicine to take
effect. <i>Wà pa ka ubráhi sa purga?</i> Hasn't
the purgative taken effect yet? <b>4</b> [B; b4]
for menstruation to flow freely. <i>Dì muubra</i>
<pb n=2192>
<i>ang ákung dugù ug malígù ku,</i> My menstruation
won't flow freely if I take a bath. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@work, esp. manual or heavy. <b>gíkan sa &mdash;
padúlung sa trabáhu</b> going from work to
more work. <i>Wà kuy diskansu kay gíkan sa
laba padúng sa kusína, padúng sa bátà &mdash; gíkan
sa ubra padúng sa trabáhu,</i> I have no
rest. From the laundry to the kitchen, to
the baby. I go from work to more work.
<b>2</b> @{finished works}. <b>&mdash; maistra</b> <i>n</i> @masterpiece.
<i>Nahálin ug dakù ang ubra maistra sa pintur,</i>
The masterpiece of the artist sold for a good
price. <b>ubríru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{manual laborer}. <b>2</b> member
of a household (humorous). <i>v</i> [B1256; a12]
be a @worker. <b>ubrírus</b> = <sc>UBRÍRU</sc> (plural). <b>pina-</b>
<i>n</i> @{hired hands}, @workers. <b>inubráhan</b> <i>n</i> @remuneration
for one's work. <b>ulubrahun, ubrahúnun</b>
<i>n</i> things to be done. <b>-s publikas</b> <i>n</i>
@{public works}.

<p><b>ubríru</b> <i>see</i> <sc>UBRA</sc>.

<p><b>ubsirbar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] make an observation,
@{keep an eye on}. <i>Ubsirbahan úsà nákù ang
ímung trabáhu úsà ku muumintu sa ímung
swildu,</i> I will @see how you work before I
give you a raise. <i>Giubsirbahan sa dukt&ucaron;r ang
ipiktu sa iniksiyun sa masakitun,</i> The doctor
@observed the effect of the injection on the
patient. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] @notice. <i>Hiubsirbahan
ta ka nga naghinuktuk usáhay,</i> I've noticed
you have been wrapped in deep thought
from time to time. <b>ubsirbádu</b> <b>1</b> be one's
observation. <i>Ubsirbádu na nà nákù sa muguwà
gánì ang mga úbus, muulan giyud,</i> I
have already observed that when the winged
ants come out, it will rain. <b>2</b> having first-*hand
experience with s.t. <i>Ubsirbádu ku ánang
sakíta kay daghan kug anak,</i> I'm familiar
with that sickness, because I have lots of
children. <b>ubsirbasiyun</b> <i>n</i> as one looks at it.
<i>Sa ákung ubsirbasiyun, mulansad giyud si
Imilda,</i> As far as I can see it, Imelda is sure
to run.

<p><b>ubsirbaturyu</b> <i>n</i> @observatory.

<p><b>ubu</b> <i>n</i> @cough. <b>amígu sa &mdash;</b> one who is susceptible
to coughs and colds. <i>v</i> [B46; a4]
@cough. <i>Sap-úngi ang ímung bàbà ug muubu
(ubhun) ka,</i> Cover your mouth if you cough.
<b>ubuubu</b> <i>n</i> @tuberculosis. <i>v</i> [B146; a4] have
<sc>TB</sc>. <i>Nag-ubuubu (giubuubu) ku,</i> I have <sc>TB</sc>.

<p><b>ubù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c] lie down on the stomach. <i>Ákung
iubù ning ákung tiyan arun maw[=à] ang bútud,</i>
I'll lie on my stomach to get rid of my
gas pains. <b>1a</b> for a baby to be able to turn
over on its stomach. <i>Kining batáa kay muubù
na, maáyu na ni pasundan,</i> This child
can turn over on his stomach. It's about
time to have another baby. <b>2</b> [A; c] crouch
or stoop with the body low. <i>Ug dì ka muubù</i>
<pb n=2193>
<i>masungkù ka,</i> If you don't stoop, you'll
bump your head. <b>3</b> [b(1)] throw oneself
on s.o. to protect him. <i>Ákung giub-an ang
bátà sa nagpungasì na ang bála,</i> I threw myself
on the child when the bullets came fast
and thick. <b>bilat sa íyang &mdash;</b> a coarse and
humorous euphemism for <sc>BILAT SA IYANG
INA</sc>. <b>pa- sa bága</b> <i>v</i> [c1] broil s.t. over hot
coals. <i>Paub-a (ipaubù) sa bága ang manuk,</i>
Broil the chicken over the coals.

<p><b>ub-ub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] chew and eat s.t. crunchy
between the molars. <i>Ub-úba ang tablítas,</i>
@Chew the tablets. <b>2</b> [A; a] @eat (slang). <i>Muub-ub
siya bísan unsa,</i> He eats anything.

<p><b>ubud</b> <i>n</i> general name for @{marine eels}. <b>&mdash; itúhun</b>
k.o. @eel the head of which is shaped
like a catfish's (<i>ítu</i>).

<p><b>úbud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the tender heart of the trunk of
palms, bananas, bamboos, rattans. <i>Lamì
lumpiyáun ang úbud sa lubi,</i> The heart stem
of the coconut is good for egg rolls. <b>2</b> @{bamboo
shoots}. <i>v</i> [AN; b6] get, gather hearts
of stems and trunks. <b>ubúrun</b> <i>a</i> having the
whiteness and smoothness of the heart of a
banana stem. <i>v</i> [B126] develop a white,
fine texture.

<p><b>úbug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @wade or walk through shallow
water. <i>Tagahawak ang túbig nga ákung
giúbug,</i> I waded through water that was
waist-deep.

<p><b>ubul-úbul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{Adam's apple}. <b>2</b> @trachea or
@windpipe of vertebrates. <i>v</i> [c16] hit s.o. on
the Adam's apple.

<p><b>ubus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @beneath. <i>Ubus sa káhuy may táwu
nga naglingkud,</i> Beneath the tree there sat
a man. <b>1a</b> the lower part of body. <b>1b</b> @lowlands,
usually coastal areas. <b>2</b> @under, @{subjected
to}. <i>Ubus sa íyang pagdumála,</i> Under
his management. <i>Magminyù aku nímu ubus
sa usa ka kundisiyun,</i> I'll marry you under
one condition. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @low, not high in price or
degree. <i>Ubus kaáyu nang prisyúha,</i> That
price was very low. <b>2</b> low, not high in elevation.
<i>Itaas ang kutay kay ubus ra kaáyu,</i> Put
the strand up higher because it is too low.
<b>2a</b> for the womb of a pregnant woman to
be low. <b>3</b> low of station or of social rank.
<b>&mdash; balauránan, pamalauránan</b> @{Lower House}.
<b>4</b> arrive s.w. later than s.o. else. <i>Ubus ka nákug
singku minútus,</i> You arrived five minutes
later than I did. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b7Pc] @decrease,
@{go down}. <i>Ug muubus ang ímung
grádu,</i> If your grades go down. <i>Ubsi (paubsi)
ang ímung tunung, tingáli buls-ay,</i> Lower
your aim. You might make a bulls-eye. <b>2</b>
[APB; cP] be lower in elevation or placement.
<i>Miubus ang sawug kay mius-us ang
panawganan,</i> The floor sunk because the
<pb n=2194>
joists sunk. <i>Miubus na ang íyang tiyan. Hapit
na manganak,</i> Her baby has @descended.
She is about ready to have it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)]
travel, @{fly low}. <i>Ang banug talagsa ra
nga magpaubus,</i> Hawks seldom fly low. <b>2</b>
[A3] go to live in coastal areas. <b>3</b> [A13]
be @humble. <i>Magpaubus ta kay mabà ra ta
ug ranggu,</i> We should be humble because
we are of low rank. <b>4</b> [A; b7c] lower one's
voice. <i>Mipaubus siya sa íyang tíngug, hadluk
hidunggan,</i> He lowered his voice, afraid of
being heard. <b>5</b> [A1; c2] @reduce an amount.
<i>Paubsan (ipaubus) sa prisidinti ang sílut,</i>
The president will reduce the penalty. <b>6</b>
[A; a1c] @{put down}, @lower. <i>Ug mupaubus
siya sa íyang pusil ayaw ug tirúhi,</i> If he
lowers his gun, don't shoot him. <i>Ipaubus
ang inyung bangkaw. Way kásu,</i> Lower your
spears. There's nothing wrong. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i> [B126;
b3(1)] be @offended, @hurt. <i>Nahiubus ku sa
íyang sulti,</i> I was hurt by what he said. <b>ka-</b>
<i>n</i> condition or state of being @inferior or @{low
in rank}. <b>kahi-</b> <i>n</i> @{hurt feelings}. <b>mapaubsánun,
mapahiubsánun, mapinaubsánun, mapainubsánun</b>
<i>a</i> @humble. <b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> people residing in
the coastal areas.[+]

<p><b>úbus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a12] be all @consumed. <i>Kinsay
nag-úbus sa kík?</i> Who ate the cake? <i>Átung
ubúsun ang pagkáun,</i> Let's eat all the
food.

<p><b>úbus<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALIBUSBUS</sc>.

<p><b>ubuub</b> a low-roofed house, building. <i>Ngitngit
ning baláya kay ubuub kaáyu ang atup,</i>
This house is dark because it has a very low
roof. <i>v</i> [B6; c1] make a building or house
low-roofed.

<p><b>[=ú]d</b> = <sc>ÚLUD</sc>.

<p><b>úday</b> = <sc>ÚRAY</sc>.

<p><b>udhak</b> <i>n</i> deep cough or gasp for breath of
the sort one gets from an asthma attack,
over-exertion, a blow on the chest, or the
like. <i>Ang udhak sa tisísun milánug sa kagabhíun,</i>
The coughing of the tubercular
resounded in the night. <i>v</i> [A; a4] have a
deep coughing fit or gasp for breath. <i>Mu
rag dílì siya makaginháwa ug muudhak (udhákun)
siya,</i> It is as if he can't breathe when
he has his attacks.

<p><b>udhan</b> <i>a</i> be mean enough to do s.t. <i>Udhan
(udhánun) kang mulakaw bísag nagdaut ang
ímung anak?</i> Can you bear to leave the
house when your child is sick? <b>-un</b> = <sc>UDHAN</sc>.

<p><b>udíyu</b> <i>n</i> @{extreme unction}. <i>v</i> [A; b6] give the
extreme unction.

<p><b>udiyung</b> <i>n</i> @arrow, @dart. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; a2] make
arrows. <b>2</b> [A; a12] hit with an arrow. <b>-un(<-)</b>
<i>a</i> @slender, @arrow-like. Udiyúngun ug láwas
<pb n=2195>
<i>ang babáyi,</i> The lady has a slender body.

<p><b>udlut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> young @leaf, leaf @bud. <b>2</b> one who
belongs to the upper class or top level of
society. <i>Ikaw kay udlut magpataas ug aku
kay laylay magpaubus,</i> You, who are of the
upper class, should stay on top while I, who
am of the dregs, should remain down where
I belong. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b4] sprout leaf buds.
<i>Miudlut (nangudlut, giudlútan) na ang ákung
manan-aw,</i> My orchid is budding. <b>2</b>
[A3P; b4] for the flesh to swell in forming
scar tissue in a place where there was a
wound or boil. <i>Kining samára ang giudlútan
sa prisku nga unud,</i> This is the wound where
scar tissue formed. <b>3</b> [AN; b5] pick the
top of leafy plants. <i>Ang kanding mauy
miudlut (nangudlut) sa ákung agbáti,</i> The
goat chewed off the leaf buds of my <i>alugbáti</i>.
<b>ting-</b> <i>n</i> time for sprouting new leaves
of plants, trees, etc. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> the topmost
part of the tree in monocots.

<p><b>udtu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{twelve o'clock}, for the sun to be
overhead. <b>&mdash; nga láruk</b>, <b>tútuk</b>, <b>tuktuk</b> @{high
noon}. <b>2</b> for the moon or s.t. else to be overhead
in the heavens at the noon position.
see also phases of the moon under <sc>BÚLAN</sc>.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B25; b8] be @noon. <i>Muláruk ang adlaw
ug maudtu na,</i> The sun reaches its zenith
when it is noon. <b>1a</b> [B] for a heavenly body
to get into the noon position. <b>2</b> [A13; b4(1)]
do s.t. till noon. <i>Hiudtuhan (naudtuhan)
siyag pagwápa atubángan sa ispíhu,</i> She
primped in front of the mirror the whole
morning until noon. <b>3</b> [B1256] do s.t. at
noon time. <i>Maudtu ray ákung ipahúway,</i> I
take a rest only at noon time. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B56]
be almost high noon. <i>Ínit kaáyu ang adlaw
ug muhingudtu (mahingudtu) na,</i> The sun
becomes hot when it's almost noon time.
<b>2</b> [A; c] slice the terminal portion of a coconut
bud to induce sap to flow regularly
at noon. <b>2a</b> gather coconut palm toddy at
noon. <b>panghiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] do s.t. at
noon one doesn't normally do at noon, e.g.
have sexual intercourse. <i>Dúgay siyang miabut
sa upisína kay nanghingudtu pa man,</i>
He arrived late at the office, because he
still had his noon intercourse. <b>udtuhan</b> <i>n</i>
@zenith. <i>Ang búwan náa sa udtuhan,</i> The
moon is at the zenith. <b>kaudtúhun</b> <i>n</i> noon
time. <i>Ang kaudtúhun ínit kaáyu,</i> At noon
time it is very hot. <b>pani-</b> <i>n</i> @lunch, @{lunch
time}. <i>v</i> [A2C12; b6(1)] have, eat lunch.
<b>udtúhun</b>, <b>udtuudtu</b> <i>n</i> a tiny, poisonous
black snake having bright reddish-orange
eyes, so called because its poison is said to
kill the victim at noon. <b>tali-</b> <i>n</i> time just before
noon. <b>udtuhun</b> <i>n</i> coconut palm toddy
<pb n=2196>
gathered at noon.

<p><b>udù</b> = <sc>UNDÙ</sc>.

<p><b>ud-ud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b5] dig up the ground with
the snout. <i>Ang ákung bábuy ang nag-ud-ud
sa ímung nataran,</i> It was my pig that plowed
up the ground in your yard. <b>2</b> [A] for an
unborn baby to squeeze its head into a position
above the groin causing the mother
to have difficulty in walking. <i>n</i> the condition
where an unborn baby presses on its
mother's groin.

<p><b>ud-ud<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALUD-UD</sc>.

<p><b>uduy</b> = <sc>UNDÙ</sc>.

<p><b>ug</b> <i>short form:</i> <b>g.</b> particle showing grammatical
relation between two forms. <b>1</b> preceding
non-specific goals. <i>Mipalit siya ug libru,</i> He
bought a book. <i>Gitagáan ku níyag kindi</i>, He
gave me some candy. <b>1a</b> preceding a noun
referring to s.t. specific, but referring to it
as s.t. general on any and all occasions. <i>Dì
síya muadtug Manílà,</i> He refuses to go to
any[**? P2] Manila. <b>1b</b> <b>ása &mdash;</b> where is one to get.
<i>Ása man ka ug kwartang ibáyad ánà?</i> Where
will you get the money to pay for that? <b>2</b>
preceding infinitives (replacing a prefix
<i>pag-</i>).<i> Naglísud ku ug saka,</i> I had a hard time
going up. <b>2a</b> with adjectives of manner. <i>Milakaw
siya ug kusug,</i> He walked away fast.
<b>2a1</b> <b>&mdash; ímu</b>, <b>íya</b>, <b>íla</b>, <b>etc.</b>[**?] by yourself, himself,
themselves, etc. <i>Káun ug ímu,</i> Just go ahead
and eat on your own. <i>Mutúyuk ug íya ra,</i>
It will turn all by itself. <b>2b</b> after <i>ayaw</i>. <i>Ayaw
siya ug tan-áwa,</i> Don't look at him. <b>3</b> <i>adj.</i>
plus <b>ug</b> <i>plus noun:</i> 'have'. <i>Si Pidru dakù ug
buktun,</i> Pedro has big arms. <i>Uy, kanindut
bayà níya ug mata!</i> What beautiful eyes
she has! <b>4</b> preceding a non-specific genitive.
<b>4a</b> marking the possessor. <i>Anak ug hárì,</i>
The son of a king. <b>4b</b> marking the agent.
<i>Gidágit ug banug,</i> Was taken by a hawk. <b>5</b>
if, when. <i>Ug maabut siya, pahibaw-a ku,</i>
When he arrives, notify me. <i>Ug aku pa nímu,</i>
If I were you. <b>5a</b> <i>with indirect questions:</i>
whether. <i>Pangutan-a siya ug muabut
ba ang barku ugmà,</i> Ask him whether the
boat will arrive tomorrow. <b>5a1</b> with indirect
questions containing interrogatives. <i>Nangutána
aku ug unsa nà,</i> I asked what that was.
<b>5b</b> linker for qualifying phrases. <i>Nákù ug
ímu nang nahuman,</i> I thought you had finished
it already. <i>Tingáli ug muanhi siya
ugmà,</i> Perhaps he will come tomorrow. <i>Syáru
ug dì nà mahímù,</i> I don't believe that is
impossible. <b>6</b> @or. <i>Pritúhun ug tuláhun, paríha
ra nákù,</i> Deep fried or stewed, it's all
the same to me. <b>7</b> @{and}. <i>Lakaw ug ayaw pagbálik!</i>
Go away, and don't come back! <i>Sila 
<pb n=2197>
si Huwan ug si Pidru ang mianhi,</i> John
and Pedro were the ones who came here.

<p><b>uga</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dry, having no moisture. <i>Uga na kaáyu
ang kupras,</i> The copra is very dry now.
<i>Ugang ubu,</i> A dry (hard) cough. <b>2</b> @lifeless,
@dry in personality. <i>Uga kaáyu nà siyang ikaisturya,</i>
He is very lifeless to talk to. <i>n</i> @{dried
fish}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; c1P] @{dry out}; cause s.t. to
do so. <i>Nag-uga (nagpauga) ku ug isdà,</i> I am
@drying some fish. <i>Muuga (mauga) ra nà ug
ihayhay,</i> It will get @dry if you hang it up.
<i>Nagkauga na ang atábay,</i> The well is drying
up. <i>Hiughan na ang ímung linadlad,</i> The
clothes you were bleaching have gotten dry.
<b>2</b> [B; c1] get lifeless and dry in manner.
<i>Nauga na man ka run,</i> You have become
@cool to us. <b>3</b> [b4(1)] be affected by s.t. being
dry. <b>3a</b> have a @{dry labor}. <i>Naglísud pagpanganak
ang babáyi kay naughan,</i> The
woman had a difficult delivery because she
had a dry labor. <b>3b</b> for one's throat to be
@parched. <b>&mdash; ang tutunlan</b> needing a drink
(of liquor).

<p><b>ugáhip</b> <i>n</i> a contagious @{skin disease} which
forms itchy pustules that pop and become
painful, forming a crust, found most commonly
around the mouth, but spreading
over the body. <b>&mdash; likuslikus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>ugáhip</i>
that spreads over any part of the body. v
[A123P; a4b4] get <i>ugáhip</i>.

<p><b>ugahípun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. very venomous @snake, short
and stout, having dark-grayish body, yellowish
front and black spots on the back.

<p><b>ugáling</b> <i>short form:</i> <b>gáling</b>. = <sc>GÁNÌ</sc> in all
meanings except <i>5</i>. <b>ka-un</b> <b>1</b> one's @own. <i>Ákù
ning kaugalíngung kutsi,</i> This is my own
car. <i>May kaugalíngung banyu ang kwartu,</i>
The room has its own bathroom. <i>Gigastu
ku ang kaugalíngun kung kwarta,</i> I spent
my own money. <b>1a</b> one's @home. <i>But-an ku
nímu sa ákung kaugalíngun?</i> You dare dictate
to me in my own house? <b>2</b> @oneself.
<i>Nagsulti siya sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> She was
talking to @herself. <b>panga-un</b> <i>v</i> [A2] @{manage
a home}. <i>Hustu na siya sa idad nga mangugalíngun,</i>
She is old enough to manage a home.
<i>n</i> home, as it is managed. <b>kina-un(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
<b>1</b> live on one's own. <b>2</b> have one's meals on
one's own. <i>Dì ta mangasíra. Magkinaugalingun
lang ta,</i> Let's not board. Let's have our
meals on our own. <b>kaugalingnan</b> <i>n</i> independence
of a nation. <i>Nagpakamatay si Risal
álang sa kaugalingnan sa átung násud,</i> Rizal
gave his life for the independence of our
country.

<p><b>ugam</b> <i>n</i> whitish substance coating the tongue
and upper palate. <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] get <i>ugam</i>.
<pb n=2198>

<p><b>ugang</b> <i>n</i> @{mother hen}.

<p><b>ugángan</b> <i>n</i> parent of one's spouse. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126]
be, become one's father- or @mother-in-law.
<b>2</b> [A; c] have as a @parent-in-law. <i>Muugángan
ka níla nga pubri man,</i> Would you
like them to be your parents-in-law when
they are poor? <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> one's prospective
parents-in-law.

<p><b>ugat</b> <i>n</i> @vein, @{blood vessel}. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> @penis
(humorous). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2NP] for the veins to
come out from exertion or anger. <i>Miugat
(nangugat) ang íyang líug sa íyang pagkanta,</i>
The veins on her neck bulged out when she
sang. <b>2</b> [A23] do s.t. with serious intent.
<i>Nangugat giyud siyag hangyù nga muuban,</i>
He @seriously asked to be taken along. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; b] be @angry. <i>Pamínaw ug katarúngan.
Mangugat ka man lang dáyun,</i> Just listen to
reason. You must not get angry right away.
<b>pangli-(<-)</b> = <sc>UGAT</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>ugat-ugat</b> <i>a</i> leaves
having lots of veins. <i>v</i> [B1456] for leaves
to be veined. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @{blood vessels}. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i>
full of prominent veins.

<p><b>ugaúga</b> = <sc>GAUGÁU</sc>.

úgay <i>v</i> [A; a1] @fondle or @stroke. <i>Dúgay na
ku nga wà makaúgay sa ákung mga binuhì,</i>
It's been a long time since I stroked my
pets. <i>Bátang nag-úgay sa íyang tintin,</i> A little
boy playing with his thing.

<p><b>ugba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] work arduously, earnestly.
<i>Adlaw-adlaw muugba si Pidru sa íyang uma
arun mabúhì ang pamilya,</i> Pedro @toils on
his farm all day long so his family may survive.
<b>2</b> [A1] @establish, @found, @{bring into being}.
<i>Ílang gipasidunggan ang táwung nag-ugba
sa kapunúngan,</i> They conferred an
honor on the man who founded the organization.
<b>3</b> [A; a] @reconstruct, work again on
s.t. left to deteriorate or ruin. <i>Mag-ugba ta
sa karáan nátung báy nga natun-as,</i> Let's @rebuild
our old dilapidated house.

<p><b>ugbáti</b> = <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.

<p><b>ugbp.</b> abbreviation for <i>ug uban pa</i> 'etc.' <i>see</i>
<sc>UBAN</sc>.

<p><b>ugbuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] plant or stick s.t. upright
or erect. <i>Mag-ugbuk mi run sa mga pusti sa
kural,</i> We will now set up the fence posts.
<i>Kandilíru ang ákung giugbúkan sa mga kandílà,</i>
I set the candles upright on a candlestand.
<b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; ang, sa pálu</b> [A; c] have @{sexual
intercourse} with a woman (lit. implant the
mast&mdash;slang). <b>2</b> [A; c1] @construct, @build a
structure. <i>Ugbúkun (iugbuk) ba ang inyung
balay dinhi?</i> Will you build your house
here? <b>3</b> [a3b8] @{stand still} as if rooted to
the ground. <i>Naugbuk siya tungud sa kalísang,</i>
He stood @stock-still in fear. <i>n</i> @stake.

<p><b>ugbun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mound, esp. a @heap of finely-textured 
<pb n=2199>
things. <i>Usa ka ugbun nga abu ang nahibilin
sa táwung nagsulit,</i> Only a small
mound of ash was left of the man who
burned himself. <b>2</b> @ashes. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] be, become
a small mound. <i>Miugbun (naugbun)
ang dapit nga gilubngan sa patayng irù,</i> The
place where the dead dog was buried has
formed a mound. <b>2</b> [B2] burn to ashes.
<i>Naugbun na ang báy pag-abut níla,</i> The
house was a heap of ashes when they arrived.

<p><b>ugbus</b> <i>n</i> young and unopened palm frond.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1] do by fronds. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] remove
young fronds. <i>Ayawg ugbúsi ang lubi kay
masálut,</i> Do not remove the young frond
from the coconut because it will be stunted.

<p><b>ugda, ugdà</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @initiate, @introduce s.t.
by first doing it. <i>Kinsa ninyu ang miugda
ug kukabáyù sa mga unlan?</i> Who of you
started this playing horse with the pillows?
<i>Ang mga Amirikánuy nakaugda paggámit
sa abúnu,</i> The Americans initiated the use
of fertilizer. <b>pasi-</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>UGDA</sc>. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)]
@sponsor. <i>Prugráma nga gipasiugdáhan sa sabung
Laks,</i> Soap opera sponsored by Lux
soap. <i>Banggà sa panugilánung gipasiugdáhan
sa <sc>LUDÁBI</sc>,</i> A short-story contest sponsored
by <sc>LUDABI</sc>. <b>tigpasi-</b> <i>n</i> @sponsor of a program,
project.

<p><b>ugdang</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @heavy for one's size. <i>Ugdang kaáyu
ning batáa bísan gamay,</i> This child is
very heavy though he is small. <i>Ugdang ning
kasága kay tambuk man,</i> This is a heavy
crab because it is fleshy. <b>2</b> @serious, @matured
for one's age. <i>Ugdang na kaáyu siyag nilihukan,</i>
She acts @mature for her age. <b>2a</b> @serious
in demeanor. <i>Ugdang nga paníngug sa agálun,</i>
The master spoke @seriously. <b>3</b> @weighty,
full of meaning. <i>Ugdang kaáyu tung buut
níyang ipasabut,</i> What she meant to imply
had more meaning than would appear on
the surface. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] get to be heavy
for one's size; @mature, full of meaning. <b>2</b>
[B236; b6] @sink into the bottom of water.
<i>Miugdang na ang pundu,</i> The anchor has
sunk to the bottom. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @weight, @seriousness,
@meaningfulness.

<p><b>ugdaw</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a12] burn down completely
to ashes with no flames left. <i>Naugdaw na
ang ámung báy pag-ulì nákù,</i> Our house was
in ashes when I arrived home. <i>n</i> burnt to
ashes.

<p><b>ugdu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a dry measure to be @heaping.
<i>Maigù ug barátu kay ugdu ang takus,</i> It
comes out cheap because it is a heaping
measure. <b>2</b> @rounded in shape and @full. <i>Ugdu
kaáyu siya ug dughan,</i> She has very full
<pb n=2200>
breasts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a12] be, become @heaping,
full, or rounded. <b>2</b> [B3; b6] be @piled up
high. <i>Muugdu ang labhanan ug paugmaan,</i>
The soiled clothes will @{pile up} if you leave
them for tomorrow. <b>pina-</b> = <sc>PINAULBU</sc>. <i>see</i>
<sc>ULBU</sc>.

<p><b>ugdu<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>BUGDU</sc>.

<p><b>ugduk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stake. <b>2</b> general name for @eels of
any sort. <i>v</i> [A; c] plant a stake in the ground.

<p><b>ugdul</b> <i>a</i> @short, @trimmed. <i>Gipalabihag ugdul
níya ang íyang buhuk,</i> She had her hair cut
very short. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] be @trimmed short.
<i>Naugdul ang mga mais kay giharíag tuhak
sa manuk,</i> The chickens pecked the corn
plants right down.

<p><b>ugdung</b> = <sc>UGDU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>ughad</b> <i>a</i> for a throat to be sore. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6]
for the throat to get sore. <i>Nag-ughad ang ákung
tunlan. Ubhun tingáli ku,</i> I have a sore
throat. I'm probably getting a cough. <b>2</b> [AN;
c1] expel phlegm by coughing it out
hard.

<p><b>ughak</b> = <sc>UDHAK</sc>.

<p><b>ugíngut</b> <i>n</i> @{body odor} of unwashed perspiration
and dirt. <i>Nanimáhù lang kang ugíngut,</i>
You have a terrible <sc>B.O.</sc>

<p><b>ugis</b> a <b>1</b> having completely white feathers.
<i>Limpiyu tan-áwun ang ugis nga manuk,</i>
White-feathered chickens look clean. <b>2</b> @fair
of complexion. <i>Ugis kaáyu sila,</i> They are
very @white. <b>2a</b> people belonging to the white
race. <b>2b</b> @albino. <i>v</i> [B26; b6] be, become
@white-feathered, @white-skinned.

<p><b>ugíut</b> = <sc>ÍGUT<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>ugkad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] dig, @{pull out} s.t. that is
completely or partly buried or contained
inside s.t. else. <i>Láing dyíp ang miugkad sa
dyíp nga nalubung sa lápuk,</i> Another jeep
pulled out the jeep that got stuck in the
mud. <i>Ang nakaugkad sa buláwang budha,</i>
The man who @{dug up} the golden Buddha.
<i>Giugkad sa kawatan ang ákung kaban,</i> The
thief dug up the things in my trunk. <b>2</b> [A12;
b8] find s.t. that was in s.t. or buried.

<p><b>ugkal</b> = <sc>UKAL</sc>.

<p><b>ugkat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1b2] dig s.t. out from under
s.t. <i>Giugkat níla ang natabunan,</i> They dug
out the person who had been buried. <b>2</b> [A;
a12] @{dig out} or @{find out} s.t. not known.
<i>Buut ba ninyung ugkátun ang ákung kagahápun?</i>
Do you want to @{dig into} my past?

<p><b>ugkay</b> (from <i>ukay</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @{dig out} s.t.
buried. <i>Mga pulis ang nag-ugkay sa gilubngan
sa gibunù,</i> The policemen @exhumed
the murder victim. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] @ransack
things in looking for s.t. <i>Ákung ugkáyun
ang mga butang nímu básug túa didtu ang
ákung rilu,</i> I'll ransack your things in case
