

<p><b>instul</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] <b>1</b> buy s.t. on @installments, pay installments. <i>Instulun (instulmínun) ngánì nímu, mas dakù kag mabáyad kay sa kás,</i> If you buy it on installments you are going to pay more than if you had paid cash. <i>Pilay ímung iinstul run?</i> How big of an installment are you going to pay this time? <b>2</b> = <sc>INSTALAR</sc>. <b>-min, -mint</b> <i>n</i> @{installment paid}. <i>v</i> [c16] buy s.t. on installments.

<p><b>*insular</b> <b>gubyirnu, kagamhánan &mdash;</b> @{National government} (from the usage in Spanish times when the government of the Philippines was called <i>Gobierno insular</i> to distinguish it from the Spanish government at home.

<p><b>insultu</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b5c] @insult. <i>n</i> @insult. &dagger;

<p><b>insumáda</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet, soft @bread rolled into a spiral and covered with butter and powdered sugar. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make <ix>insumáda</ix>.

<p><b>insumniya</b> <i>n</i> @insomnia.

<p><b>insuriktu</b> <i>n</i> @insurgent against the Spanish government. <i>v</i> [B16; b6] be, become an insurgent. <b>-s</b> = <sc>INSURIKTU</sc> (plural).

<p><b>insuy</b> <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] <b>1</b> get sick from taking a bath after sexual intercourse. <b>2</b> for a wound to get @infected from bathing. <i>Giinsúyan ang ákung samad,</i> My wound got infected.

<p><b>intabládu</b> <i>n</i> @stage. <i>v</i> [c1] build a stage.

<p><b>intap</b> <i>a</i> @afraid of s.o. for his superiority. <i>Intap kaáyu ang mga buguy níya kay ísug siya,</i> The thugs are very much afraid of him because he is fierce. <i>v</i> [B26; b3(1)] fear s.o. for his superiority. <i>Gikaintápan nang ílang tím dinhi. Wà nay manúkul,</i> Their team is most feared here. No one dares compete with them.

<p><b>intáwun</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>táwun</bx>. <b>1</b> particle expressing or asking for pity. <b>1a</b> in statements. <i>Daghan táwun ang namatay didtu,</i> A lot of people died in that place. <i>Mu man nà táwuy ákung panginabúhì,</i> That's what we live from, poor us. <b>1b</b> with imperatives: please, have mercy. <i>Iúlì intáwun nà sa labing madalì,</i> Please return that at the earliest possible time. <b>2</b> expressing humility: I don't necessarily deserve s.t. good. <i>Nahinumdum táwun siya nákù,</i> He remembers me (though I am not important enough to be remembered). <i>Nakadaug táwun ku,</i> I won just by luck. <b>2a</b> with statement praising oneself, expressing humility. <i>Kamau táwun ku ánà uy,</i> I know how to do that. (I don't think I'm great guns, but I do know how to do it.) <b>2b</b> with statements that a catastrophe hasn't happened: through the mercy of the Lord. <pb n=387><i>Wà táwun mi hitabuig iltur,</i> We haven't been hit by El Tor, thank God. <b>3</b> with a sharp denial, taking the sting out of the denial. <i>&lsquo;Anak nu ka sa gawas ni Pidru.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dílì, tawun uy,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;They say you're Pedro's illegitimate son.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Good heavens, no! (Have mercy, don't think of that.)&rsquo; <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b6] say <ix>intáwun</ix>. <i>Nagpangintawun siya nga nanghulam nákù ug kwarta,</i> He kept on saying &lsquo;poor me&rsquo; as he was borrowing the money.

<p><b>intil<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B126; b6] for one's growth to be @stunted. <i>Basta maintil ang táwu, hínayg túbù,</i> A person whose growth is stunted does not grow fast.

<p><b>intil<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @clitoris.

<p><b>intilhinti, intilihinti</b> <i>a</i> @intelligent. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become intelligent.

<p><b>intimánu</b> = <sc>ANTIMÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>intinsiyun</b> <i>n</i> @intention, @plan. <i>Wà kuy intinsiyun nga mubakasiyun kay musámir man ku,</i> I have no plans for taking a vacation because I'm planning to take summer classes. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] do s.t. intentionally. <b>2</b> [b4] do s.o. harm intentionally in basketball. <i>Mihagbà si Panir kay giintinsiyunan man sa íyang paglusut,</i> Paner hit the floor because s.o. tripped him as he drove into the basket.

<p><b>intirbinir</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @interfere, get oneself involved in others' affairs. <i>Ayaw pag-intirbinir sa mga sulti sa dagkù,</i> Don't break in when grown-ups are talking. <i>Nahúnung ang mainítung panaglális sa dihang giintirbinihan sa pulis,</i> The quarrel came to a halt when the policeman intervened.

<p><b>intirbintur</b> <i>n</i> @{poll watcher}.

<p><b>intirbiyu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @interview s.o. <i>Intirbiyuhun ka sad sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> The manager will interview you, too. <i>n</i> interview.

<p><b>intiris<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @interest, a feeling of @concern or @curiosity. <i>Wà siyay intiris sa sabdyik,</i> He has no interest in the subject. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; a] look at s.t. with an ulterior motive. <i>Kwarta ray ílang giintiris nákù,</i> Their only interest in me is my money. <b>2</b> [A23N; b] @steal, do malicious damage. <i>Ayawg byàbyái nang ímung radiyu. Daghan ra bay mangintiris dinhi,</i> Don't leave your radio around because there are lots of people that steal around here. <i>Giintirisan ang ílang awtu,</i> S.o. did malicious damage to their car. <b>2a</b> [b4] abuse s.o. sexually. <i>Giintirisan pa giyud ang babáyi sa mga kawatan,</i> The robbers also abused her sexually. <b>-adu(<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @interested, @enthusiastic, feeling or showing interest or curiosity. <i>Intirisádu kaáyu siyang mahibaw-an ang ákung sikrítu,</i> She is very interested in knowing my secret. <i>Intirisádu ka sa ímung pagtuun?</i> Are you interested in your studies? <b>2</b> having an ulterior motive on s.t. <i>Intirisádu kaáyu siya sa yútà kay patadlasag karsáda,</i> He's very interested in that land because they're going to put a road through it. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] interested in s.t., or interested in acquiring s.t. <b>-is(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @property, holdings. <i>Mugamut ang usa ka táwu sa usa ka lugar kun náa ang íyang mga intirísis,</i> A person stays rooted in a place if he has property there.

<p><b>intiris<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @interest on a loan.

<p><b>intiriyur</b> <i>a</i> away from roads. <i>Lisud pangitáun ang ílang báy kay intiriyur kaáyu,</i> It is very difficult to locate their house because it is situated in the interior, away from the road. <i>Ang intiriyur nga mga baryu,</i> The barrios that are located away from the highway. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] be located far from the highway. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{inner tube}. <b>2</b> bladder of an inflatable ball.

<p><b>intir kurs</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance with sexual intercourse-like movements. <i>v</i> [A] dance this dance.

<p><b>intirmidiya</b> <i>n</i> @{grades 5, 6, 7} in school. <i>v</i> [B6; b(1)] be in the @{intermediate grades}.

<p><b>intirmidiyu</b> situated @halfway between two. <i>Ang ámung balay intirmidiyu sa iskuylahan ug sa simbahan,</i> Our house is located halfway between the school and the church.

<p><b>intirmisyun</b> <i>n</i> @intermission, @break. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] be intermission. <i>Kinahanglang intirmisyunan nímu ang iskidyul nímu sa buntag,</i> You have to take a break in the morning. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] give a number during the intermission of a performance.

<p><b>intirn</b> <i>n</i> @{medical intern}. <i>v</i> [B16; b(1)] be an intern.

<p><b>intirna</b> <i>n</i> female student staying in a ritzy boarding school, finishing school. <i>v</i> [B36; c1] board in a finishing school.

<p><b>intirnal</b> <i>a</i> @internal, esp. s.t. to be taken or applied inside the body. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] become, make s.t. internal. <i>Intirnalun (iintirnal) ang pagtambal,</i> Treat the patient with medicines to take internally. &dagger;

<p><b>intirnasyunal</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @international. <b>2</b> woman having had several children from different fathers, usually of different nationalities (humorous). <i>Íya ra intáwun dì manakud, intirnasyunal kaáyu nang bayhána,</i> God forbid it happen to anyone else. That woman has children from all different fathers. <i>v</i> [B12; b6c1] be, become international.

<p><b>intirnu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c1] keep in seclusion. <i>Nag-unsa ka sa ímung lawak, nag-intirnu?</i> What are you staying in your room for? Hiding? <i>Iintirnu (intirnúhun) tika sa ímung kwartu kun magbinúang ka,</i> I will lock you in your <pb n=388>room if you fool around. <b>2</b> [B36; c1] be a boarder in school. <i>Kung sa siminaryu ka mag-intirnu, dì ka giyud kaguwàgúwà,</i> If you board in the seminary you aren't allowed to leave the grounds. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> male student who boards at school. <b>2</b> medical intern.

<p><b>intirpriti, intirpritir</b> <i>n</i> @interpreter. <i>v</i> [B16] be, become an interpreter.

<p><b>intíru</b> @whole, @complete, @completely. <i>Wà hikan-i ang kík kay intíru pa man,</i> No one ate any of the cake because it is untouched. <i>Dì giyud mairug ug hihunasag intíru,</i> You can't budge if you're completely caught by the low tide. <b>&mdash; adlaw, gabíi, búlan, etc.</b> the whole day, night, month, etc. <i>Wà siyay pahúlay intíru adlaw,</i> He had no rest the whole day. <b>&mdash; kwirpu</b> a whole body length (said of a mirror glass). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] turn out to be whole. <b>2</b> [a] do s.t. to a whole of s.t. <i>Ayawg intirúhag pula ang balay,</i> Don't make the whole house red. <b>3</b> [A; c1] do s.t. the whole length of a unit of time. <i>Mag-intíru adlaw lang nà siyag bása,</i> He reads the whole day. <i>Intirúhun (iintíru) níya pagpatukar si Prank Sinatra sa íyang prugráma,</i> He plays Frank Sinatra records throughout his radio program.

<p><b>intiyíru</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SANTU</sc>.

<p><b>intiw</b> = <sc>INTIL<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>intra</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6(1)] participate in a game, contest, and the like; indulge in, engage in s.t. <i>Dì ku muintra sa inyung dúlà,</i> I won't join your game. Miintra siyag pamabáyi, He started to take up with a mistress. <i>Nakaintra na kug pangutsíru,</i> I've tried my hand driving a rig. <i>Kining lábil ákung iintra sa ílang bunutbúnut,</i> I'll submit this label as an entry in their contest. <b>2</b> [A13; b] for s.t. to be taken up or indulged in as s.t. additional. <i>Sukad muintra ang pamabáyi sa íyang nigusyu, sígi siyang nagkaalkansi,</i> He's been losing in his business ever since he started taking up with women as a sideline. <i>Intráhig dagandágan ang ímung kuntra arun dì ka manak-áwut,</i> Try taking to hit-and-run tactics against your opponent so that you won't get knocked out. <b>3</b> [A; c] enter down in a record, list, diary, and the like. <i>Ayaw iintra sa libru ang risíbung naw[=à],</i> Don't enter the lost receipts into the book.

<p><b>intrabudy&ucaron;s</b> = <sc>INTRUDY&Ucaron;S</sc> (humorous).

<p><b>intráda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @opening, @beginning portion of. <i>Ang intráda sa únang simistri Hulyu 15,</i> The first day of classes for the first semester will be on July 15. <i>Ang pasiuna náa sa intráda sa libru,</i> The preface is in the first few pages of the book. <b>2</b> the front part of the foot, starting at where the foot widens before the toes. <b>2a</b> vamp, part of a boot or shoe covering the intráda. <b>3</b> area at the nape of the neck where one begins making the haircut. <b>4</b> entrance fee. <b>&mdash; hiniral</b> general admission in places of entertainment. <b>5</b> area that serves as an entrance. <i>Salída ni. Túa sa pikas ang intráda,</i> This is the exit. The entrance is on the other side. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a3b6(1)] be at the beginning. <i>Ang simistri muintráda sa Lúnis,</i> The semester starts on Monday. <i>Giintradáhan ni Pilíta ug kinatsilang áwit ang íyang pasundáyag,</i> Pilita started her show with a Spanish number. <b>2</b> [b6] put a vamp in a shoe. <b>3</b> [A; b] make the beginning cuts in a haircut. &dagger;

<p><b>intrans</b> <i>n</i> entrance fee in a school, portion of the fee students must pay upon registering. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] for a school to impose an entrance fee. <b>2</b> [A3; c] pay the entrance fee in school. <b>&mdash; iksaminisyun</b> <i>n</i> entrance examination. <i>v</i> [A13] hold an entrance examination.

<p><b>intranti</b> <i>n</i> persons who take part in a performance or contest. <i>Ang mga intranti sa sáyaw,</i> The participants in the dance program. <i>Mga intranti sa karíra,</i> Entrants in the horse race. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] be, become an entrant or participant.

<p><b>intri</b> for matters to be between, among. <i>Ayawg apil adtung ílang lális kay intri ra kadtu nílang duha,</i> Don't mix into their quarrel because it is only between the two of them. <i>Intri sa mga salmut sa banggà siya ang kinagwapahan,</i> Among the contestants she is the most beautiful.

<p><b>intribinir</b> = <sc>INTIRBINIR</sc>.

<p><b>intribista</b> <i>n</i> @interview. <i>v</i> [A13] hold an interview. <i>Mag-intribista run hápun sa mga aplikanti,</i> They'll hold an interview for all of the applicants this afternoon.

<p><b>intribudy&ucaron;s</b> = <sc>INTRUDY&Ucaron;S</sc> (humorous).

<p><b>intríga</b> <i>n</i> @intrigue. <i>Kasína ug intríga mauy naghárì sa ílang punduk,</i> Jealousy and intrigue dominate their group. <i>v</i> [A13] intrigue against s.o.

<p><b>intrigar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] hand over or turn s.t. to s.o. personally, giving the responsibility of it. <i>Way láing intrigahan kun dílì ang ginikánan,</i> Don't turn it over to anyone but the parents. <i>Karun iintrigar nátù ang prugráma sa imsi,</i> Now I turn the program over to your host. <b>intrigádu</b> <i>a</i> s.t. handed over and entrusted to s.o. <i>Intrigádu ku tanan ang ákung swildu ngadtu sa ákung asáwa,</i> My entire salary is handed over to my wife. <i>Intrigádu ang ákung kalag ug láwas sa gugma nímu,</i> Because of my love I have entrusted <pb n=389>my body and soul to you.

<p><b>intrígu</b> = <sc>INTRIGAR</sc>.

<p><b>intrimitir</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @meddle in s.o. else's affairs. <i>Dì ta muintrimitir sa mga magtiáyung mag-áway,</i> We should not meddle into a married couple's quarrel. intrimitída, <b>-u</b> <i>a</i> @meddling in others' affairs.

<p><b>intripiti</b> = <sc>INTIRPRITI</sc>.

<p><b>intrisádu</b> = <sc>INTIRISÁDU</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>INTIRIS<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>intrisáli</b> <i>v</i> [A13P; b(1)] for many people to go s.w. and leave again. <i>Natural, mag-intrisáli giyud ang táwu dinhi kay tindáhan man,</i> Of course, people come and go to this place because this is a store. <i>Intrisalíhan sa táwu ang tindáhang hingusúgan sa pálit,</i> People flock in and out of a store that does a brisk business.

<p><b>intriyul, intriyur</b> = <sc>INTIRIYUR</sc>.

<p><b>intru</b> <i>v</i> [c6] throw the basketball from the end courts. <i>n</i> a throw in basketball from the end courts.

<p><b>intrubudy&ucaron;s</b> = <sc>INTRUDY&Ucaron;S</sc> (humorous).

<p><b>intrudy&ucaron;s</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @introduce s.o. to s.o. else. <i>Iintrudy&ucaron;s ku ánang ímung amíga bi,</i> Introduce me to your lady friend.

<p><b>intrunisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] carry out the ceremony of blessing and installing an image in a home or another building. intrunisasiyun <i>n</i> the enthronement of an image or statue in a place of honor in the house. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] do the enthronement.

<p><b>intsards</b> <i>n</i> person in charge of a class, enterprise, or any other group activity. <i>Siya ang intsards dinhi sa klási,</i> He is the one in charge in this class. <i>v</i> [B126; c] be in charge.

<p><b>intunsis</b> <b>1</b> @therefore, @consequently, the inescapable outcome is ... <i>Intunsis, kay nakáun na man nímu, bayran giyud,</i> Consequently, since you ate it, you have to pay for it. <i>Intunsis magtuun ka arun dílì ka mahagbung,</i> Therefore, you must study if you are not to flunk. <b>2</b> the conclusion we draw is ... <i>Intunsis, wà diay ka sa klási ug wà ka kakità nákù didtu,</i> So, you must not have been in class if you did not see me there. <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> go to waste: for an outlay to give no return, be put to useless effort, be damaged to the point of being useless. <i>Naintunsis ang ákung tris míl adtung nigusyúha,</i> In that venture I lost three thousand. <i>Naintunsis kug báyad ug mahal sa ímung pagpasakitsákit,</i> Because you pretended to be ill, I was made to go to a lot of needless expense. <b>1a</b> end up miserable. <i>Naintunsis ang babáying gibyáang burus,</i> The poor woman was ruined because she was made pregnant and abandoned. <b>2</b> <b>ang &mdash;</b> [A12] the only thing wrong is ... <i>Ang nakaintunsis nímu kay gáhì kag úlu,</i> The thing that's wrong with you is that you are stubborn.

<p><b>intus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{mill sugarcane}. <i>Kining intusána muintus ug lima ka iktaryang katubhan matag adlaw,</i> This sugar mill can mill five hectares of sugarcane every day. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{sugar mill}. <b>2</b> @{cane crusher}.

<p><b>intuy</b> = <sc>UNDÙ</sc>.

<p><b>inudúru</b> <i>n</i> @{toilet bowl}. <i>v</i> [A; a] install, make into a toilet bowl.

<p><b>inugurasiyun</b> = <sc>INAGURASIYUN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>INAGURAR</sc>.

<p><b>inuínu</b> <i>v</i> [AP; a12] ingeniously devise ways to make s.t. do. <i>Labihan nákung makainuínu nga ang singku muabut giyug usa ka adlaw,</i> How I tried to devise ways to make five pesos last for one day. <i>Giinuínu sa sastri nga muígù ang panaptun,</i> The dressmaker devised ways to make the cloth go far enough.

<p><b>inum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @drink. <b>2</b> [A2; a] @{drink liquor}. <i>Nagwandugwandug ang linaktan níya, nakainum tingáli,</i> He's wobbling. Maybe he had one too many. <b>3</b> [A; ab2] take medicine with water. <i>Muinum siyag tablítas arun makatúg,</i> He will take sleeping pills so that he can go to sleep. <i>n</i> action of @drinking. <b>(<-)</b> <b>4</b> [AC; c1] have a drinking spree. <i>Ang dispirádu túa mag-ínum sa súd sa íyang kwartu,</i> The despondent man is drinking heavily in his room. <i>n</i> drinking spree. <b>imnanan</b> <i>v</i> [A13] drink s.w. habitually. <b>imnanan, ilimnan, ilimnanan, inúman</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{drinking container}. <b>2</b> place where one habitually drinks. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fond of drinking. <i>Dì ku hingínum ug tubà,</i> I don't care too much for toddy. <b>2</b> @drunkard. <b>ma-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to drink, esp. alcoholic. <b>pala-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>HING-</sc>, <i>2</i>.[**pointing to hiN-, <b>2</b> above] <b>ilimnun, imnunun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> alcoholic liquor or beverage. <b>2</b> any liquid for drinking. <b>3</b> folk medicine consisting of boiled herbs and roots taken orally. <i>v</i> [A; b] treat with boiled herbs or roots. <i>Giilimnunan lang ang íyang hilánat,</i> His fever was just treated with boiled herbs and roots.

<p><b>inun-an</b> = <sc>INUN-ÚNAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>UN-UN<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>inunay</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>UNAY</sc>.

<p><b>inúnay</b> = <sc>KANYÁHAY</sc>.

<p><b>inupung</b> = <sc>ALINUPUNG</sc>.

<p><b>inusinti, inusintis</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @naive, @innocent of the ways of the world. <i>Inusinti ka sa palípat, pildi ka giyud,</i> You're not wise to thimble-*rig gambling, so you'll lose. <i>Inusinti pa siya sa mga babáyi,</i> He's innocent when it comes to women. <b>1a</b> @harmless, not likely to think of doing misdeeds. <i>Dì giyud siya muy nangíriw. Inusinti nà siya,</i> She didn't steal it. She's a harmless sort. <b>1b</b> innocent of a joke played on one. <i>Nasugamak sa binúang ang <pb n=390>inusinti,</i> The innocent fellow walked right into the trap. <b>2</b> people having no involvement but brought to harm through no fault of their own. <i>Daghang mga inusinti ang naamung,</i> Many innocent people were caught up in the catastrophe. <b>3</b> @innocent, not guilty. <b>4</b> Innocents' Day (December 28), The Philippine equivalent of April Fool's. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a2] be, become innocent. <b>2</b> [A; a12] fool s.o. on Innocents' Day.

<p><b>inut</b> <i>a</i> @close-fisted to the point of not spending for the barest necessities. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] get to be close-fisted. <b>inut-ínut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c1] spend money or use s.t. sparingly. <i>Ug kamau ka muinut-ínut sa ímung kwarta, dì ka giyud kahutdan,</i> If you know how to spend your money sparingly, you won't run out. <i>Inut-inúti (inut-inúta) ang pagtabakù kay wà ka ra bay swildu,</i> Go easy on the smokes. You aren't earning any money. <b>-an</b> = <sc>INUT</sc>.

<p><b>inútil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @invalid, @disabled. <i>Inútil siya human sa aksidinti,</i> He was disabled after the accident. <i>Inútil ang ákung buktun,</i> My arm is completely disabled. <b>2</b> @{worthless person}. <i>Líhuk mung mga inutíla mu,</i> Get a move on, you worthless bums. <b>3</b> @wash-out, one who passed his peak. <i>Inútil na nang artistáha,</i> That actress is a has-been. <i>v</i> [B126; a] be, become disabled. <i>Inutílun ba nímu ang ímung anak ug kinastígu?</i> Do you want to cripple your child with that punishment?

<p><b>inyam</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree.

<p><b>inyiksiyun</b> = <sc>INDYIKSIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>inyu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMU</sc>.

<p><b>ipak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @split, @break a piece off of s.t. hard, @divide into pieces. <i>Mag-ipak kug káhuy,</i> I'll chop off a piece of firewood. <i>Giipak ang kamúti kay dakù kaáyu,</i> She broke the yam into pieces because it was too big. <i>Íyang ipakun ang mga kawáyan nga isalug,</i> He'll split the bamboo poles to use for flooring. <i>n</i> a piece chopped, split or broken off from.

<p><b>íp buy</b> an expression uttered when lifting s.t. heavy. <i>Íp buy, kabug-at na niíning batáa, Uup,</i> how heavy this child has grown.

<p><b>ípi</b> = <sc>ÍGI<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>, <sc>*ÍGI<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>ipidimya</b> <i>n</i> @epidemic of some disease. <i>v</i> [B16] be, become an epidemic disease.

<p><b>ipikasint</b> <i>n</i> @{efficascent oil}, patent @{medicinal oil}. <b>&mdash; úwil</b> = <sc>IPIKASINT</sc>.

<p><b>*ipik</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> @ineffective (humorous).

<p><b>ipiktar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4(1)] effect an outcome on s.t. <i>Miipiktar na sa lungsud ang subrang gastu sa iliksiyun,</i> Spending too much on the elections is now having its repercussions on the country. <i>Nag-ipiktar na ug súgud ang anistisya,</i> The anesthesia is beginning to take effect now. <b>ipiktádu</b> be adversely affected by. <i>Ipiktádu ang átung ikunumíya sa kangil-ad sa pamunúan,</i> The economy suffers the consequences of a corrupt administration.

<p><b>ipiktíbu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @effective, having results. <i>Ipiktíbu nga tambal,</i> Effective medicine. <b>2</b> effective, taking effect at a specified time. <i>Ipiktíbu karung adláwa, wà nay mga háyup nga buhían,</i> Effective today, no animals will be permitted to wander loose. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] come to have effect. <i>Maipiktíbu ning tambála ug tumarun káda adlaw,</i> This medicine will be effective if you take it daily.

<p><b>ipiktu</b> <i>n</i> @effect. <i>Way ipiktu nákù ang mariwána,</i> Marijuana has no effect on me. <i>v</i> [A2; b4] take effect. <i>Ang tambal muipiktu usa ka úras human sa pag-indyiksiyun,</i> The medicine takes effect one hour after the injection.

<p><b>ipiktus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{personal belongings}. <b>2</b> various goods or commodities for sale. <b>3</b> various cargoes or load.

<p><b>ipil</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large hardwood tree of the primary or secondary forest, furnishing yellowish lumber and a dye from the bark: <b><i>Intsia bijuga</i></b>. <b>ipil-ípil</b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>ipiliptiku</b> <i>a</i> @epileptic. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become an epileptic.

<p><b>ípis</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] pour liquid into a container, esp. for drinking. <i>Iípis ring payn-ápul dyus sa mga básu,</i> Pour the pineapple juice into the glasses. <i>n</i> action of pouring. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> glass into which drinks are poured and passed around in drinking sprees. <b>tig-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> one who does the pouring for the others esp. in a drinking spree.

<p><b>ipistula</b> <i>n</i> @Epistle of the Bible, section of the mass where the Epistle is read. <i>v</i> [A1] read the Epistle. <i>Wà pa mag-ipistula sa pag-abut níya sa simbahan,</i> They hadn't gotten to the Epistle when he arrived in church.

<p><b>ipit, ípit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @jam, @wedged in between two things. <i>Ipitun ang linidgid nga kamúting káhuy arun pagkúhà sa dugà,</i> They press the cassava to get the poisonous liquid out. <i>Naipitan (naipit) ang íyang kurbáta sa húnus,</i> His tie was caught in the drawer. <b>2</b> [a3] be caught and be forced into marrying a girl (slang). <i>Ákù lang siyang giduwàduwáan hangtud naípit núun ku,</i> I was just playing around with her, but I got cornered into marrying her.

<p><b>íp lay</b> = <sc>ÍP BUY</sc>.

<p><b>iplì</b> = <sc>HIPLÌ</sc>.

<p><b>iprun</b> <i>n</i> @apron, garment worn to protect one's clothing. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear, make an apron.

<p><b>ipsut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> escape from a guard <pb n=391>through inattention on his part. <i>Miipsut siya sa magbalantay,</i> He escaped from his guard. <i>Wà makaipsut sa íyang mga mata ang sayup nga ispíling,</i> The spelling error did not escape his attention. <b>2</b> get out of doing s.t. <i>Dì ta makaipsut sa amutan,</i> We cannot get out of paying our share. <b>3</b> slip out of s.t. that is holding it. <i>Nakaipsut ang isdang ákung gigunítan,</i> The fish I was holding slipped out of my hand. <i>Gamayng lungag sa bulsa ang giipsútan sa ákung kwarta,</i> My money slipped through a small hole in my pocket.

<p><b>ipù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] break off from an attachment without using much force. <i>Naipù ang gunitánan sa tása,</i> The handle broke off the cup. <i>Mahímung ipuun ang mais bísan anagun pa,</i> You can pick corn even before it is mature. <i>n</i> s.t. picked from the tree. <i>Tagak kahà nà? Dì kahà nà ipù sa punúan?</i> Are you sure you just found that fruit on the ground? Didn't you pick it from the tree?

<p><b>ipù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [c1] be driven, sink all the way in. <i>Muipù (maipù) nang hasuk sa yútà kun ímung tumban,</i> The peg will be driven all the way into the ground if you step on it. <i>Kinsay nag-ipù sa sundang sa punúan sa ságing?</i> Who stuck the bolo all the way into the trunk of the banana plant?

<p><b>ipukrita</b> = <sc>IPUKRITU</sc> (female).

<p><b>ipukritu</b> <i>a</i> @hypocrite. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] be, become a hypocrite.

<p><b>ipun</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; c] <b>1</b> do s.t. together with s.o. as he does it. <i>Muípun ku sa inyung dyip,</i> Let's go together in the same jeep. <i>Muípun ku ninyug káun,</i> Let me bring my lunch over to sit with you while you eat. <b>1a</b> put things together. <i>Iípun ra ang ákung bálun sa ímung bag,</i> Let me stick my lunch in your bag. <b>2</b> live or stay with s.o. <i>Muípun ang bag-ung minyù sa ílang ginikánan,</i> The newly-weds will stay with their parents. <b>2a</b> live as man and wife without being married. <i>Ang babáyi nga makig-ípun ug laláki nawad-an na sa kaúlaw,</i> A woman who asks a man to live with her has lost all feelings of shame. <b>3</b> mingle with. <i>Dì ta makaípun sa ílang punduk kay mga asyúsu,</i> We cannot mingle with their group because they are snobs.

<p><b>ípus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small cockroach 1/4" to 1/2" long with an orange-brown color.

<p><b>ipus-ipus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to various coral fishes similar to burayburay. <b>2</b> k.o. white and brown edible rock shell.

<p><b>iputíka</b> <i>v</i> [A] @mortgage. <i>Dílì ka makaiputíka sa yútà nga balahinun pa sa mga iridíru,</i> You cannot mortgage land that is to be divided by the heirs.

<p><b>IR5</b> = <sc>AY-AR PAYIB.</sc>

<p><b>-íra</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>-ÍRU</sc> (female). <b>2</b> affix added to nouns referring to s.t. kept and dispensed regularly to form nouns referring to the container. <i>Habuníra,</i> Soap dish. <i>Kapitíra,</i> Coffee pot.

<p><b>irad</b> <i>a</i> having a stomach that sticks out very much. <i>Irad ang kasagáran sa mabdus,</i> Most pregnant women have a stomach that sticks forward. <i>v</i> [B] getting a stomach that sticks out.

<p><b>irag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @lean back on. <i>Kanúnay nátung makítà ang Miksikánu nga mag-irag sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> We always see Mexicans leaning back asleep on a tree.

<p><b>iráid</b> <i>n</i> delicacy made of finely grated cassava or sweet potatoes with coconut juice and sugar, wrapped in banana leaves, shaped into sticks, and cooked in steam. <i>v</i> [A; a] make <ix>iráid</ix>.

<p><b>íras</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] germinate seeds before planting them in their permanent place. <i>Irása (iiras) usà nang mga lísu únà luyúnga,</i> Germinate the seeds first, then transplant them. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> seedbed used for germination. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> seedlings grown from small seeds.

<p><b>*íray</b> <b>nag-/magdala sa &mdash;</b> spoil an otherwise perfect performance by ineptness. <i>Nindut untà musáyaw ang kadaghánan, apan nagdá lang tu sa íray ang usa,</i> The dancers put on a good performance, only one spoiled it all with his awkward steps.

<p><b>irbabuyna</b> = <sc>HIRBUBUYNA.</sc>

<p><b>irbras</b> <i>n</i> k.o. atomizer operated by compressed air and used for spraying paint. <i>v</i> [A; c1] paint with an airbrush.

<p><b>irbubuyna</b> = <sc>HIRBUBUYNA.</sc>

<p><b>irbularyu</b> = <sc>ARBULARYU.</sc>

<p><b>irgat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a woman to be @pretentious in actions, putting on airs and showing contempt for ordinary people. <i>Irgat kaáyu nang bayhána, dì giyud musul-ub ug sapátus nga baratuhun,</i> That woman is haughty. She won't wear cheap shoes at all. <b>2</b> forward and immodest in behavior toward men. <i>Irgat kaáyu nang bayhána. Magduuldúul ug láki,</i> That girl is forward. She makes advances to men. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be, become @haughty or @immodest in behavior.

<p><b>irgu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ab3] @argue, @debate heatedly. <i>Makig-irgu ka man sa tindíra nga ímu man tung sayup,</i> Why do you argue with the sales clerk when it was your fault? <i>n</i> heated argument.

<p><b>irgu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> @therefore, as a consequence we may conclude that. <i>Miingun ka wà ka mulakaw. Irgu, dihà ra ka sa balay,</i> You said you did not leave. Therefore, you were in the house.

<pb n=392>

<p><b>irgutína</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medicine to prevent hemorrhage after childbirth.

<p><b>irgu trit</b> <i>n</i> @ergot, k.o. drug to make the muscles contract.

<p><b>íri</b> <i>n</i> letter R.

<p><b>írid</b> <i>n</i> @{air-raid shelter}. <b>&mdash; syiltir</b> = <sc>ÍRID.</sc> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] build an air-raid shelter. <b>2</b> [cP] put in an air-raid shelter. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] go to, put in an air-raid shelter.

<p><b>iridar</b> <i>v</i> [AN2; a12] @inherit property. <i>Kinsay muiridar (mangiridar) sa yútà ug wà muy anak?</i> Who will inherit the land if you have no children? <b>iridíra</b> = <sc>IRIDÍRU</sc> (female). <b>iridíru</b> <i>n</i> @heir. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become an heir.

<p><b>irigar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> administer a vaginal douche to oneself or s.o. else. <b>2</b> irrigate the sinuses. <b>irigasiyun</b> <i>n</i> irrigation.

<p><b>irigular</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @uneven in occurrence or succession. <i>Irigular ang íyang rigla,</i> Her menstruation is irregular. <b>2</b> @irregular in school, not taking the usual prescribed subjects. <i>Irigular ku nga tird yir kay dúna pa man kuy bálik sa sikan yir,</i> I'm an irregular third year student because I have to repeat a course in the second year. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] be, become irregular. <i>Ug iirigular (irigularun) nímu ang instulmin, lagmit maimbargu,</i> If you are not regular in paying your installments, it might be repossessed. <b>2</b> [B16; b6] be, become an irregular student.

<p><b>irihinsiya</b> = <sc>IRINSIYA.</sc>

<p><b>iríhis</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @infidel or s.o. who does not believe in Christ. <b>1a</b> unbaptized person (humorous). <b>2</b> not having attended service during a Sunday or a holiday of obligation (slang). <i>Iríhis pa ni si Nituy kay wà pa kasimba,</i> Nitoy is still a heretic because he hasn't gone to church yet. <b>3</b> ignorant of the ways of the world. <i>Iríhis gud nímu dì ka man mukáug kísu,</i> What an ignoramus you are. You don't eat cheese. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] <b>1</b> be, become an infidel. <b>2</b> be, become ignorant.

<p><b>iring</b> <i>n</i> @cat. <b>iring-iring</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>KANDINGKANDING.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KANDING.</sc> <b>-un</b> cat-like. <b>íhung -un</b> k.o. shark with a broad and rounded head: <i><b>Rhina ancyclostoma.</b></i>

<p><b>irinsiya</b> <i>n</i> @inheritance. <i>v</i> [A2N; a] receive an inheritance.

<p><b>iris</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @erase. <i>Irisa ang blakburd,</i> Erase the blackboard. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> erasure. <b>2</b> place an erasure was made. <b>-ir(<-)</b> <i>n</i> eraser. <i>v</i> [A23; b6(1)] use an eraser.

<p><b>irisipilas</b> = <sc>PAYLAS.</sc>

<p><b>irispunsabli</b> <i>a</i> @irresponsible, lacking a sense of responsibility. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become irresponsible.

<p><b>iritar</b> <i>v</i> [B126] for a wound to get infected. <i>Nairitar ang ákung samad kay wà tabúni,</i> My wound was not covered, and it got infected. <b>iritasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @irritation at a particular spot on the skin or in the body.

<p><b>irkun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @air-conditioner. <b>2</b> = <sc>IRKUNDISYUN.</sc>

<p><b>irkundisyun</b> <i>a</i> @air-conditioned. <i>Irkundisyun ang sinihan,</i> The movie theater is air-conditioned. <i>v</i> [A; a] air-condition s.t. <b>-ir</b> = <sc>IRKUN.</sc>

<p><b>irmad</b> = <sc>IRMAT.</sc>

<p><b>irmána</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> female member of a religious group of devotees to a particular saint. <b>2</b> woman who is in charge of raising the funds for a religious celebration and who makes up the difference between the amount collected and the costs. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156] become a member of a religious sorority. <b>2</b> [B3(1); c1] become the sponsor of a religious celebration. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{mother superior.} <b>2</b> = <sc>IRMÁNA</sc>, <i>2.</i> <i>v</i> [a3] <b>1</b> be made the mother superior. <b>2</b> = <sc>IRMÁNA,</sc> <i>2.</i>

<p><b>irmánu</b> = <sc>IRMÁNA,</sc> <i>n2, v2</i> (male). <b>&mdash; mayur</b> = <sc>IRMÁNU.</sc>

<p><b>*irmánus</b> <i>[proper name]</i> &mdash; <i>[name]</i> and Co. <i>Limbumping Irmánus,</i> Lim Bonfing and Co.

<p><b>irmat</b> <i>n</i> @mother (slang). <i>v</i> [A12; b2] have a mother (slang).

<p><b>irmil</b> <i>n</i> @{air mail.} <i>v</i> [c1] send by air mail.

<p><b>irmitanyu</b> <i>n</i> @hermit. <i>v</i> [B16; b6c1] be, become a hermit.

<p><b>irniya</b> = <sc>HIRNIYA.<sc>

<p><b>irpad</b> = <sc>IRPAT.</sc>

<p><b>irpákit</b> <i>n</i> @{air pocket.} <i>v</i> [B46] for there to be an air pocket.

<p><b>irpat</b> <i>n</i> @father (slang). <i>v</i> [A12; b2] have a father (slang).

<p><b>irpun</b> <i>n</i> @earphones. <i>v</i> [A; a] use earphones.

<p><b>irpurt</b> <i>n</i> @airport.

<p><b>irsisyu</b> = <sc>IHIRSISYU<hi rend=sub>2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>irù</b> <i>n</i> @dog. <b>suul sa &mdash;</b> @{stomach spasm.} <i>Nagligidligid siya sa kasakit kay dúna siyay suul sa irù,</i> He was doubled up in pain because he had stomach cramps. <b>dílì makáun ug &mdash;</b> treating people in an unacceptable and completely obnoxious way. <i>Kasábà nga dílì makáug irù,</i> A scolding not even acceptable for a dog (harsh and ranging far beyond the alleged offense). <b>a</b> greedy to the point of eating food which people ordinarily wouldn't eat. <i>Kay irù ka man mukáun ka sa ransiyung karni,</i> Because you are so gluttonous, you'll even eat rancid meat. <b>b</b> greedy over s.t. one loves very much. <i>Irù kaáyu siyag sini,</i> She loves movies very much. <b>&mdash; nga daug</b> <i>a</i> cowardly, yellow. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] be, become gluttonous. <b>2</b> [B126] become a slave to an overpowering emotion (become oblivious to shame, like a dog). <i>Gugma mauy nakairù (nakapairù) sa aláut nga babáyi,</i> Love had <pb n=393>made the poor woman a slave to her passions. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] make notions of giving s.t. but actually not doing so. <i>Ayaw kug irúa. Ug ihátag, ihátag. Ug dílì, ayaw,</i> Don't you make pretenses of giving. If you want to give it to me, give it. If not, don't. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] do s.t. like a dog. <i>Ganáhan siya muinirù, silbing palain,</i> She wants to do the dog position for variety. <b>irùírù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] court a woman by hanging around her. <i>Nag-irùírù nà siya nákù sa dága pa ku,</i> He used to hang around me when I was still single. <i>n</i> broken-off piece of white coral, roughly resembling a dog in shape. <b>irùirúay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. game in which the players throw a stone at a can in a circle and try to knock it out.

<p><b>-íru</b> <b>1</b> affix added to words referring to an action not approved of to form adjectives meaning &lsquo;one who is fond of engaging in [such-and-such] an action&rsquo;. <i>Salsalíru,</i> One who is fond of masturbating. <i>Hambugíru,</i> Braggart. <b>2</b> added to words referring to things with which one can make his living to form nouns which mean &lsquo;one who engages in [such-and-such] an occupation&rsquo;. <i>Lab-asíru,</i> Fish vendor. <i>Labandíru,</i> Laundry-*man.

<p><b>irug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB3; c1] @move, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Akuy miirug sa bangkù dapit sa bungbung,</i> I moved the chair towards the wall. <i>Nag-irug ba nang barku sa lawud?</i> Is that ship in the ocean moving? <i>Iruga (iirug) ug diyútay ang sud-an ngari,</i> Move the plate of food over here. <b>2</b> make progress, move ahead in time. <i>Sáma lang sa wà muirug ang íyang idad,</i> She looks as though she hasn't gotten any older. <i>Wà giyud muirug ang ámung kahimtang,</i> Our financial condition has made no progress. <b>3</b> budge from one's belief. <i>Dì ni giyud siya mairug sa íyang disisiyun,</i> He cannot be moved from his decision. <i>n</i> progress, advancement. <i>Gamay rag irug ang kauswágan sa lungsud,</i> The town has undergone little progress.

<p><b>iruk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] squeeze nits, lice on the head with the thumbnail or perform a similar action to relieve itching. <i>Igka giyud ang lusà arun dì mamusà,</i> Squash the nits so they won't hatch. <i>Igka ring katul sa ákung [=ú],</i> Squeeze this itching spot on my head.

<p><b>isa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>USA<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>isa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> short for <sc>IÁSA.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁSA<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>ísa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB3; a] @raise, @rise. <i>Ang kadíti mauy nag-ísa sa bandílà,</i> The cadet raised the flag. <i>Miísa ang íyang kílay sa kahingangha,</i> She raised her brows in surprise. <i>Iísa (isáha) na ang báling,</i> Hoist the nets. <b>2</b> [AB2; c1] increase in value, amount. <i>Muísa (maísa) na sad ang prisyu,</i> The price is going up again. <b>3</b> [A2B26; c1] increase in degree, intensity. <i>Muísa (maísa) dáyun nang íyang tíngug ug masukù,</i> His voice rises when he is angry. <b>4</b> [A2B2; c1] rise, raise in position. <i>Nagkaisa ang íyang ranggu kay maáyu mang mutrabáhu,</i> He is gradually rising in rank because he works well. <i>n</i> increase in degree, quantity, value.

<p><b>isà</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)46] for a wound or skin ailment to develop water or watery pus. <i>Dílì makaisà ang núka basta kanúnayng hunáran,</i> The sore won't secrete water if it is cleaned and dressed regularly.

<p><b>ísà</b> <ix>short form:</ix> <b>sà.</b> <b>1</b> wait a second. <i>Ísà pa kay pangutan-un pa nákù si Lurdis,</i> Just a minute. I'll ask Lourdes first. <i>Ísà pa ha kay ákung tawgun,</i> Just a second. I'll call her. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; ka run,</b> You just wait. I'll get you! <b>2</b> <ix>expression used upon changing a subject:</ix> by the way. <i>Ísà pa, tagadiin tu ka?</i> By the way, where did you say you come from?

<p><b>isab</b> = <sc>USAB</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>isang dakut na bigas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. branched, spreading herb found in damp places and grown as an ornamental in hanging pots: <b><i>Pilea microphylla, var.</i></b>

<p><b>isdà</b> (from <ix>sulà</ix>) <i>n</i> @fish. <i>v</i> [A12] have fish. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] go fishing. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fishing as a means of livelihood. <b>2</b> fishing equipment. <b>pinaN-an</b> <i>n</i> catch of fish. <i>Ang ílang gisuwà pinangisdáan sa amahan,</i> They're eating the father's catch for dinner. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> fishpond. <i>a</i> having fish. <i>Isdáan si Husi kay nakapangisdà man gabíi,</i> Jose has lots of fish because he went fishing last night. <b>-ánun</b> <i>a</i> teeming with fish. <i>Isdaánun kaáyu ang kadagátan sa Pilipínas,</i> The Philippine seas are teeming with fish. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> fisherman. <b>&mdash; sa batu</b> fish found in rocky places. <b>&mdash; sa hapun</b> name given to the <ix>bilásun</ix>, a fish formerly widely sold by Japanese fishermen. &dagger;

<p><b>isdug</b> = <sc>IRUG.</sc>

<p><b>isdyi</b> <i>n</i> @ten, ten centavos or ten pesos (slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] get ten centavos or pesos. <i>Nakaisdyi ku sa madyung,</i> I won ten pesos in mahjong. <b>2</b> [B26] be, become ten centavos or pesos.

<p><b>isi, ísi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>ÁSI.</sc>

<p><b>ísi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @harpoon. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] catch with, make into a harpoon. <i>Isíhun ku ang sánga,</i> I'll harpoon the manta ray.

<p><b>ísi<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> letter S. &dagger;

<p><b>ísi<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> take it easy. <i>Ísi lang bay, ayg kasukù,</i> Take it easy. Don't get angry. <b>isiísi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] take things or people for granted, lightly. <i>À, mag-isiísi man lang nga muiskuyla. Wà mang gániy nutbuk,</i> He goes to school <pb n=394>without even a notebook. He's taking his schooling for granted. <i>Isiisíhun (iisiísi) lang ang mga linibulibug pildi sa búlang sa mga sugarul nga tahur,</i> Big time gamblers don't mind losing by the thousands in the cockpit.

<p><b>ísi riturn</b> <i>n</i> an easy return to the server.

<p><b>*isig</b> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash; ka [<ix>noun</ix>]</b> one's fellow [noun]. <i>Ang isig nímu ka mananagat,</i> Your fellow fisher-*man. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; [<ix>verb base</ix>]</b> each do [verb] to his own. <i>Isig paúlì ang mga táwu,</i> They each returned to their respective homes. <i>v</i> [A13] each [do]. <i>Nag-isig paúlì (nagsigpaúlì) ang mga táwu,</i> They each returned to their respective homes.

<p><b>isig-isig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] rush s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Dì siya gustung magpatúlì apan giisig-isig siya sa mga biaybíay,</i> He didn't want to get circumcised, but he was goaded on by the taunts of his playmates. <b>2</b> order s.o. about and put him down at the same time. <i>&lsquo;Unsay kalibútan mu ánà. Tumána lang ákung súgù,&rsquo; nag-isig-isig ang inaína,</i> &lsquo;What do you know about that? Just do what you're told,&rsquo; said the stepmother in her high-handed way. <b>3</b> treat cruelly. <i>Giisig-isig sa inaína ang mga bátà,</i> The stepmother treated the children cruelly. <b>isig-isigun, maisig-isigun</b> <i>a</i> tending to rush or push around, characterized by doing so.

<p><b>isiisi</b> = <sc>ISIG-ISIG</sc>.

<p><b>isiísi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A3; b] play hard to get when one intends to agree. <i>Ayaw isiisíhi nang nangulitawu nímu kay makabuhì,</i> Don't play hard to get. He might just slip away.

<p><b>isína</b> <i>n</i> @scene in a play, motion picture.

<p><b>ising-ising</b> <i>v</i> [A; c15] avoid the company of s.o. from whom one feels one can get nothing, discard a friend or relative whom one finds no longer useful. <i>Íla na lang ku nga ising-isingun (iising-ising) kay wà na man kuy kapuslánan,</i> They'll avoid me now, for I'm no longer of any use to them.

<p><b>ísip</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> @count s.t. <i>Isípa ang suklì kun hustu ba,</i> Count your change to see it's correct. <b>1a</b> count and remember favors one does for s.o. <i>Isípun pa giyud níya hasta ang dunut nga sinínang gihátag,</i> He remembers his favors, even the ragged shirt he gave me. <b>1b</b> consider, treat s.t. or s.o. as s.t. Giísip ku siyang anak, I treat him like a son. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> in the role, function of. <i>Mutábang giyud ku sa ákung ginikánan ísip usa ka anak,</i> I have to help my parents as a good son. <i>Muhawuk aku sa kamut ni Lúlu ísip usa ka pagtáhud,</i> I kiss my grandpa's hands as a sign of respect. <i>Nangáyù siyag kinhasun ísip íyang sud-an,</i> He asked for shells as food. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; [<ix>number</ix>]</b> number [so-and-so]. <i>Misúd siya sa lawak ísip katursi,</i> He entered room number 14. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> one who compares his favors done with those he received to see if anyone got advantage over him. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] get to be a sort who counts and weighs favors. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @mind, seat of consciousness, @intellect. <i>Daghan kaáyung mga hitabù nga misámuk sa íyang kaisípan,</i> Many events are troubling his mind. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @wise, @learned. <i>Tulu ka maísip nga hárì,</i> Three wise kings. <b>2</b> @prudent, thinking before acting. <i>v</i> [B16; b6] be, become wise, prudent. <i>Magmaísip ka na untà karung dakù ka na,</i> I hope you will be prudent in your ways now that you are old enough. <b>-l-an</b> <i>n</i> @mind. <i>Itisuk sa inyung ilisípan ang gitudlù kaninyu,</i> Bear in mind what you have been taught. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> sense, way of thinking. <i>May pangísip ka na man,</i> You're old enough to have common sense. <i>Ang íyang pangísip bátà pa bisag dakù na siyag idad,</i> He has a child's mentality even though he is chronologically old.

<p><b>is-is</b> <i>a</i> having a fine and smooth complexion. <i>v</i> [A2PB; c1] become fine and smooth in complexion, cause it to be so. <i>Muis-is (mais-is) ang pánit mug kanúnay kang hustug túg,</i> You will develop a good complexion if you always get sufficient sleep. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @whiteness. <i>Miámag pag-áyu ang kais-is sa mga batu nga gidan-ágan sa mabugnawng sílaw sa búlan,</i> The stones glowed with whiteness under the pale moonlight.

<p><b>iskabitsi</b> <i>n</i> @escabeche, fried fish with a sour sauce. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make escabeche.

<p><b>iskála</b> <i>n</i> @stop-over. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] make a stop-over. <i>Muiskála ang barku sa Kagayan sa dì pa muadtu sa Ilígan,</i> The boat makes a stop-over in Cagayan before proceeding to Iligan.

<p><b>iskalanti</b> = <sc>KARDÁBA</sc>.

<p><b>iskálar</b> <i>n</i> recipient of a scholarship. <i>v</i> [B16; b6] be, become a scholarship awardee.

<p><b>iskalarsyip</b> <i>n</i> @scholarship.

<p><b>iskalipsi</b> <i>n</i> @eclipse. <i>v</i> [B; b4] be an eclipse.

<p><b>iskalíra<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @staircase.

<p><b>iskalíra<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> in mahjong, a set of consecutive pieces of the same design, numbered from 1&ndash;9. <b>&mdash; plásis</b> hand in mahjong consisting of an iskalíra plus two dragúnis or bintus. <b>&mdash; ruyal</b> <i>n</i> hand in mahjong consisting of an <ix>iskalíra</ix> plus an eye (<ix>ay<hi rend=sub>4</i></ix>) of the same design as the <ix>iskalíra</ix> and two other pieces of the same design.

<p><b>iskalítur</b> <i>n</i> @escalator. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] ride the escalator. <b>2</b> [b(1)] install an escalator.

<p><b>iskandalu</b> <i>a</i> @scandal, @scandalous, s.t. that shocks the moral feelings of a community. <i>v</i> [A13B12; b6] become a scandal, make a <pb n=395>scene. <i>Mag-iskandalu kug musyágit kang bayhána ka,</i> I'll make a scene if you scream, woman. <i>Maiskandalu nang inyung transaksiyun ug hisakpan,</i> Your shady transactions will be a public scandal if you get caught. <b>-sa(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @scandalous (female). <b>-su(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @scandalous (male).

<p><b>iskapadur</b> <i>a</i> one who gets out of responsibility. <i>Si Lítu iskapadur kaáyu sa trabáhu sa báy,</i> Lito bugs out of household chores. <i>Iskapadur siya sa klási,</i> He cuts classes. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become an @evader.

<p><b>iskapal, iskapar</b> = <sc>ISKÁPU</sc>, <i>v1</i>, <i>2</i>, <i>3</i>.

<p><b>iskaparáti</b> <i>n</i> @{display window}, @showcase. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] install a showcase or display window. <b>2</b> [A; c] display s.t. in a showcase.

<p><b>iskapaturya</b> <i>n</i> way of escape. <i>Wà kay iskapaturya ug gipangità kang Al Kapun,</i> There's no escape if Al Capone is looking for you.

<p><b>iskápu</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] <b>1</b> @escape. <i>Gustu siyang muiskápu sa bilangguan,</i> He wants to escape from prison. <b>2</b> escape by artful or slippery dodges. <i>Muiskápu giyud siya ug pit-un nag pangutána,</i> He knows how to get out of it if you press him with questions. <i>Dílì ka makaiskápu sa ákung suntuk,</i> You can't evade my blows. <b>3</b> @{evade responsibilities}. <i>Dílì ta makaiskápu sa mga amutan,</i> We can't evade making our contribution. <b>4</b> cut s.t. one is supposed to attend. <i>Kung iskapúhan nímu ang inyung klási suspindirun giyud ka,</i> If you cut classes you'll be suspended. <i>n</i> @escapee.

<p><b>iskapularyu</b> <i>n</i> two images worn on one's front and back suspended by pieces of cloth or string, worn as a token of religious devotion. <i>v</i> [A; c6] wear such images.

<p><b>iskarp</b> <i>n</i> @scarf. <i>v</i> [AC12; c6] wear a scarf.

<p><b>iskats</b> <i>n</i> @{scotch whisky}. <b>&mdash; típ</b> <i>n</i> @{scotch tape}. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] use scotch tape on.

<p><b>iskáwut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> member of the Philippine Scouts, an outfit composed of Filipinos under the command of the U.S. Army, during World War II. <b>2</b> boy, girl scout. <b>buy, gil, kab &mdash;</b> Boy, Girl, Cub Scout. <b>&mdash; lídir, wik</b> Scout leader, week. <i>v</i> [B16; c16] be, become a member of the Philippine Scouts or a boy or girl scout.

<p><b>iskay is da (di) limit</b> <i>a</i> s.t. for which one spends with no limits. <i>v</i> [A; c1] consume without any limit. <i>Iiskay is da límit ba nang ímung pangumpra?</i> What are you going to do? Buy, the sky is the limit?

<p><b>iskidyul</b> <i>n</i> @schedule. <i>v</i> [A; c1] schedule s.t.

<p><b>iskilibinti</b> = <sc>ISKRIBYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>iskilipsi</b> = <sc>ISKALIPSI</sc>.

<p><b>iskilitun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sandals or shoes consisting of straps with no sides. <b>2</b> framework of a house. <i>v</i> [A13] wear skeleton-like shoes.

<p><b>iskína</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @corner. <i>Iskína lang dung,</i> Let me off at the corner, driver. Ang iskína sa kahun, The corner of the box. <b>2</b> block, one side of a city square. <i>Duha ka iskína gíkan dinhi,</i> Two blocks from here. <b>babáyi sa &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> a cheap woman. <i>Kanang puwa kaáyu nímu nga lipistik mu ra kag babáyi sa iskína,</i> With that red lipstick you look like a cheap hussy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b(1)] make a rectangular corner on the edge, end of. <b>2</b> [c16] do s.t. at the corner. <i>Iskináha paglansang ang kwadru,</i> Nail the picture frame on the corners. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] negotiate a route by going around instead of taking a more direct route. <i>Nangiskína siya sa íyang pagpadúng nganhi kay ngitngit sa lakturánan,</i> He went round about in coming here because the straight route is too dark. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> @rectangular. <i>Kanang tambal nga binisayà, maáyu lang nà niadtu sa iskinádu pa ang ligid,</i> Visayan folk medicine was only good long ago, when they used square wheels. <i>v</i> [B124; c1] be, become rectangular.

<p><b>iskiníta</b> <i>n</i> the place where two small paths meet.

<p><b>iskiping rup</b> <i>n</i> skip rope, the game or rope. <i>v</i> [AC] skip rope.

<p><b>iskir</b> <i>a</i> brisk and alert in movement. <i>Iskir siyang milihay,</i> He ducked cleverly. <i>Iskir pa bísag tigúwang na,</i> He is still spry, even at his age. <i>v</i> [B; c] be quick and brisk in movement. <i>Nagkaiskir na ang irù nga nagluya human indiksiyuni,</i> The sick dog grew slowly more active after he was given a shot.

<p><b>iskiríma</b> = <sc>ISKRÍMA</sc>.

<p><b>iskirul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @scab, a worker who refuses to strike, or who takes the place of a striking worker. <b>2</b> @prostitute. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36; c1] be, become a prostitute. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] <b>1</b> patronize prostitutes. <b>2</b> work as a prostitute.

<p><b>iskiyus</b> = <sc>IKSKIYUS</sc>.

<p><b>isklibinti</b> = <sc>ISKRIBYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>isklimint&acaron;r</b> = <sc>ISKRIMINT&Acaron;R</sc>.

<p><b>isklipsi</b> = <sc>ISKALIPSI</sc>.

<p><b>iskrab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @scrub, rub clean with a brush. <i>Iskrábig (iskrábag) maáyu ang ímung salug,</i> Scrub the floor hard.

<p><b>iskrábul</b> <i>n</i> game of scrabble. <i>v</i> [AC; b(1)] play scrabble.

<p><b>iskram<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A] cram for an exam.

<p><b>iskrats<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @{scratch paper}. <b>&mdash; pípar</b> = <sc>ISKRATS<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>iskrats<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> in pool, the situation when a cue ball gets into one of the pockets. The shot is not counted as the player loses the ball. <i>v</i> [B26] for this situation to obtain in pool.

<p><b>iskríba</b> <i>n</i> @scribe.

<p><b>iskribánu</b> <i>n</i> @{clerk of court}. <i>v</i> [B1256; a12] be, make into a clerk of court.

<pb n=396>

<p><b>iskribinti, iskribyinti</b> <i>n</i> @clerk, esp. a government clerk. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] be, become a clerk.

<p><b>iskríma</b> <i>n</i> native fencing, using two canes or a cane and a pointed bolo or dagger. <i>v</i> [AC; b(1)] <b>1</b> @fence. <b>2</b> [A; c] gesticulate while talking. <i>Muiskríma ang íyang kamut samtang mag-isturya,</i> His hands gesture wildly while he talks. <b>3</b> [A3] struggle to make s.t. do against odds, contrive to deal with a difficult financial situation. <i>Ang mga kabus síging nag-iskríma sa panginabúhì,</i> The poor constantly struggle through life. <i>Iskrimáhun ku lang arun muínat ang gamay kung swildu,</i> I will contrive means to make my meager salary go a long way. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> native fencer, esp. a skilled one. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] be, become a skilled native fencer.

<p><b>iskrimint&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] feel sorry for one's sins or mistakes. <i>Mapatumbayáun kaáyu nang inahána sa íyang mga anak. Unyà ra nà muiskrimint&acaron;r ug mamatyan,</i> That mother is very careless with her children. She will be taught a lesson if one of them dies. <i>Giiskrimintahan ku na ang ákung mga salà,</i> I have already repented my sins.

<p><b>iskrin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> screen for a home. <b>2</b> movie screen. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] screen in. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] block in games to afford a good shot for the teammate. <i>Iskrínan giyud ang gwardiya arun lugar kaáyu sa pagsiyut ang ímung kaúban,</i> Block the guard so your teammate is free to shoot the ball. <b>3</b> [A; a12] screen applicants. <i>Iskrínun úsà ang tanang aplikanti usà pakuháa sa iksámin,</i> All applicants are screened before being allowed to take the exam.

<p><b>iskrip</b> <i>n</i> @script of a movie or play.

<p><b>iskrípir</b> <i>n</i> rubber scraper used in scraping out the dough that sticks to the mixing bowl and spoon. <i>v</i> [a] get s.t. out with a scraper. <i>Iskripíra ang namilit nga mása sa miksing bul,</i> Get the dough out with the scraper. <b>gúma nga &mdash;</b> = <sc>ISKRÍPIR</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>iskrituryu</b> <i>n</i> @escritoire.

<p><b>iskru</b> <i>n</i> @screw. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] @screw, fasten with a screw. <i>Iskrúhi ang bisagra arun dì matangtang,</i> Fasten the hinge with a screw so that it won't come off. <b>&mdash; draybir</b> <i>n</i> @{screw driver}. <i>v</i> [A13] use a screw driver.

<p><b>iskúba<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hair or shoe, clothes @brush. <b>2</b> @mustache (humorous slang). <i>v</i> [A; c] brush s.t. <i>Iskubáhan níya ang kabáyù,</i> He'll brush the horse. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] brush oneself, one's hair.

<p><b>iskúba<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> name given to various woody erect herbs of waste places. <b>&mdash; nga kiláyan</b>: <b><i>Sida acuta</i></b>.

<p><b>iskuhir</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] sort s.t. according to class or kind. <i>Akuy muiskuhir sa tabákù,</i> I'm going to sort the tobacco leaves. <i>Iskuhirun ang bulad úsà ibaligyà,</i> The dried fish is sorted before it is sold. <b>iskuhídu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the finest quality tobacco or abaca. <b>2</b> choicest k.o. anything. <i>Mukáun lang siyag iskuhídung isdà,</i> He eats only the choicest fish.

<p><b>iskúlar</b> = <sc>ISKÁLAR</sc>.

<p><b>iskulbus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{school bus}. <b>2</b> admirer, friend or boy friend who accompanies a girl, usually home from school (slang). <i>Dúna siyay iskulbus sa íyang pag-ulì gabíi,</i> She had an escort in going home last night. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] go by school bus. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] escort a girl friend home from school (slang).

<p><b>iskulsuplayis</b> <i>n</i> @{school supplies}.

<p><b>iskultur</b> <i>n</i> @sculptor. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be, become a sculptor.

<p><b>iskupidur</b> <i>n</i> @cuspidor. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6] provide with a cuspidor. <b>2</b> [a12] make s.t. into a cuspidor.

<p><b>iskupíta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shotgun. <b>2</b> @{air rifle}. <b>(<corr sic="&mdash;">-></corr>)</b> <i>v</i> [a12] shoot s.t. with an air rifle or shotgun.

<p><b>iskúr</b> <i>n</i> @score, mark to keep tally of. <i>Iskúr sa baskitbúl,</i> Basketball score. <i>Pilay iskúr nímu sa iksámin?</i> What is the mark you got on the examinations? <b>&mdash; burd</b> <i>n</i> @scoreboard. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] mark the score. <b>2</b> [A] make a point or score. <i>Wà siya makaiskúr sa páwul siyát,</i> He didn't score a point in the foul shot. <b>-ir(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> scorer in a game. <b>2</b> third party who tags along on a date (taken from the notion that he has nothing to do but tally the number of kisses&mdash;slang). <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> be the scorer. <b>2</b> be the third party on a date. <i>Maiskúrir lang kag ang kúyug mu managtrátu,</i> You'll just be an observer if your two companions are lovers.

<p><b>iskuríya</b> <i>n</i> tiny chocolate cups for a thick chocolate drink.

<p><b>iskursiyun</b> <i>n</i> @excursion, @outing. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] hold an excursion.

<p><b>iskurt</b> <i>n</i> @escort, one who accompanies for protection, company, or honor. <i>Wà kuy iskurt sa bayli,</i> I have no escort for the dance. <i>v</i> [A; c1] act as an escort. <i>Duha ka mutursiklu ang nag-iskurt sa kutsing gisakyan sa artista,</i> Two motorcycles escorted the car the actress was riding in.

<p><b>iskusya</b> <i>n</i> finely-woven, silky cotton thread, used commonly for undershirts. <i>v</i> [A13] wear an escocia undershirt.

<p><b>iskutinyu</b> <i>n</i> counting of votes. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] count the votes.

<p><b>iskútir</b> <i>n</i> child's scooter or @{motor scooter}. <i>v</i> [A; a12] ride a scooter.

<p><b>iskuwadrun</b> <i>n</i> @squadron, unit of military aviation. <i>v</i> [A13] fly by squadron.

<p><b>iskuwála</b> <i>n</i> @{try square}. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] mark s.t. off with a try square. <b>&mdash; nga balay</b> an L-shaped <pb n=397>house.

<p><b>iskuwat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @squat with the buttocks not resting on anything and standing on the toes. <b>&mdash; dyamp</b> <i>n</i> @{squat jump}. <i>v</i> [AC12; c16] do the squat jump.

<p><b>iskuwat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2N] attend a class section one is not supposed to. <i>Wà ku makatambung sa klási sa buntag maung miiskuwat (nangiskuwat) ku sa hápun,</i> I missed the morning lecture so I attended the same lecture in the afternoon. <b>-ir(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @squatter: a person who stays on land in urban areas which does not belong to him. <b>2</b> squatter areas in the city. <b>3</b> s.o. occupying s.o. else's seat (humorous). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B16; b6] be, become a squatter. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] for a place to turn into a slum area. <i>Maiskuwátir unyà nang plása ug dílì nà anamug papaháwà nang mga nagbarungbárung dihà,</i> The plaza will soon become a squatter area if the shanties are not removed as they are put up. <b>3</b> [A; a12] oust squatters and demolish their houses. <i>Iskuwatírun mi sa tag-íya íning yútà,</i> The owner of the land is planning to oust us.

<p><b>iskuwir</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @square. <b>2</b> being angular, squarely built. <i>Iskuwir kaáyug abága nang tawhána,</i> That man is square-shouldered. <b>3</b> fighting fair and square. <i>Way dúmut tung ílang sinumbagay kay iskuwir man,</i> Their fist fight left no ill will between the protagonists because it was a square fight. <b>4</b> square brush cut. <b>&mdash; bab</b> bobbed hair, cut evenly at the bottom. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; c1] be, become square. <b>2</b> [A12C; c1] make a fight a square one, hold a square fist fight. <b>3</b> [a12] make a haircut a brush cut. <b>4</b> [A; a2] square up accounts, pay debts. <i>Iskuyrun ku na ang ákung útang nimu,</i> I'll square off my debt to you.

<p><b>iskuyla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @school, holding of classes. <i>Way iskuyla basta pista upisiyal,</i> There is no school on an official holiday. <b>2</b> @pupil, @student. <i>Iskuyla siya sa San Husi,</i> She is a student at San José. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> attend classes. <i>Iiskuyla nà nímung gisiun mung púlu?</i> Are you going to school in that torn shirt? <b>2</b> study in a certain school or a certain school year. <i>Dì siya muiskuyla sa síkan simistir kay way kwarta,</i> He can't attend school during the second semester because he has no money. <b>3</b> [A2] go to the cockpit to bet or see a cockfight (slang). <i>Káda Duminggu muiskuyla siya sa Tipúlu,</i> Every Sunday he goes to the cockpit at Tipolo. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] send s.o. to school. <i>Paiskuyláhun ku ang ámung mutsatsa,</i> We're going to send our servant to school. <b>iskuylahan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @school. <b>2</b> @cockpit (slang).

<p><b>isla</b> <i>n</i> @island. <i>Tulu ka isla ang naglangkub sa Kamútis,</i> The Camotes consist of three islands.

<p><b>islag<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b3] @scatter in all directions. <i>Muislag nang duut sa isdà ug ímung labáyug batu,</i> The school of fish will scatter if you throw a stone at them. <b>2</b> [B126] get @scattered out such that it is impossible to gather. <i>Naislag ang íyang mga anak sukad níyang gibyàbyáan ang panimalay,</i> His children have taken to roaming ever since he abandoned his home. <b>3</b> [A] run away from, @{flee from}. <i>Miislag sa syudad ang mga kawatan sa siya pay hípi sa kapulisan,</i> The thieves fled from the city when he was the chief of police. <b>4</b> [A; a] @{drive away}. <i>Islága ang mga máya sa humayan,</i> Drive the birds away from the rice field. <b>5</b> [B126] drive away lonely feelings. <i>Nangítà siyag trabáhu arun maislag ang mga kaláay sa íyang pag-inusára,</i> She looked for a job to drive away loneliness.

<p><b>islag<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] pound rice, coarse corn grits for a second time. <i>Islagi (islági) ring tipasiun,</i> Pound this partly husked rice. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> coarse particles of ground or milled corn grits. <b>2</b> the portion of sifted rice left after winnowing out the husked grains. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>INISLAGAN</sc>.

<p><b>islaks</b> <i>n</i> slacks worn by women. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear slacks.

<p><b>islang</b> <i>a</i> speaking with unclear articulation. <i>v</i> [A2B2; c1] speak with unclear articulation, for speech to become unclear. <i>Muislang (maislang) ang íyang sinultihan ug makainum,</i> His speech becomes unclear when he gets drunk.

<p><b>islaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. spotted snapper, esp. <b><i>Lutianus fulviflamma</i></b>. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>ISLAW</sc>.

<p><b>islayding</b> <i>n</i> a violation in basketball where a player moves while holding the ball.

<p><b>islayid rul</b> <i>n</i> @{slide rule}. <i>v</i> [A; b5] use a slide rule.

<p><b>isláyid<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26; b8] @slip, lose one's footing by slipping. <i>Muisláyid (maisláyid) ang táwung makatamak ug pánit sa ságing,</i> A man will slip if he steps on a banana peel. <b>2</b> [B3(1)6; b6(1)] slide down on s.t. <i>Muisláyid ku sa pasamánu,</i> I will slide down the bannister. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sliding ramp. <b>2</b> slide on a trombone.

<p><b>isláyid<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{photographic slide}. <b>2</b> @{microscope slide}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] show slides. <b>2</b> [c6] put a slide under a microscope.

<p><b>isláyis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{slice off}, cut into slices. <i>Akuy muisláyis sa pán,</i> I'll slice the bread. <i>Islaysan ta kag kík,</i> I'll slice a piece of cake for you. <i>n</i> slice, piece cut off. <i>a</i> @sliced.

<pb n=398>

<p><b>isliblis</b> <i>a</i> @sleeveless dress or blouse. <i>v</i> [A13; c1] wear, make into a sleeveless dress or blouse.

<p><b>islindir</b> <i>a</i> @slender, @slim in figure. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be, become slender. <i>Muislindir (maislindir) giyud kag magdáyit ka,</i> You will become slender if you go on a diet. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] make oneself slender.

<p><b>islú drag</b> <i>n</i> slow drag, a dance with a slow tempo music.

<p><b>islúput</b> <i>a</i> @slowpoke, person who acts or moves slowly. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become a slowpoke.

<p><b>ismagling</b> <i>n</i> @smuggling.

<p><b>ismaglir</b> <i>n</i> @smuggler. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become a smuggler.

<p><b>ismágul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{smuggled goods}. <b>2</b> rubber slippers (so called because the first rubber slippers sold were smuggled). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC12; c1] @smuggle. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] wear rubber slippers.

<p><b>ismart, ismarti</b> <i>a</i> for women to be well-*groomed, neat, and stylish. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] for a woman to get to be stylishly dressed.

<p><b>ismayling</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BURNAY</sc>.

<p><b>ismilir, ismiril</b> <i>n</i> @{emery wheel}. <i>v</i> [A; a] grind on an emery wheel.

<p><b>ismiringhuy</b> <i>n</i> @paramour (slang). <i>Taggabii na muabut ang íyang bána kay muhapit pa man sa íyang ismiringhuy,</i> Her husband arrives home late every evening because he drops by his mistress's. <b>2</b> the unpleasant smell of body odor (indirect allusion). <b>3</b> genitalia (humorous). <i>v</i> [B126; c16] be, become a paramour (slang).

<p><b>ismúgul</b> = <sc>ISMÁGUL</sc> (colloquial, humorous).

<p><b>ismul batíri bul</b> <i>a</i> small but capable of big things. <i>Ismúl batíri bul ílang mutsatsa. Kusug mamalansa,</i> Their maid may be small but she's very capable. She irons like a ball of fire.

<p><b>isnatsir</b> <i>n</i> snatcher of bags, etc. <i>v</i> [A12] be a snatcher.

<p><b>isníkir</b> <i>n</i> @sneakers. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] wear sneakers.

<p><b>isnú</b> <i>n</i> @snow. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for it to snow.

<p><b>ispáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sword. <i>Nagsingkì ang ílang duha ka ispáda,</i> Their two swords clanged against each other. <b>2</b> the best swordsman in a place. <i>Sila ang upat ka ispáda sa Kastilya,</i> They are the four swordsmen of Castille. <b>3</b> the sword in Spanish cards. <b>4</b> variety of large, bland pepper shaped like a sword, about 4" long. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> like a sword. <i>Inispáda nga dáhun,</i> Sword-shaped leaf. <b>2</b> = <sc>ISPÁDA</sc>, <i>4</i>. <b>&mdash; diúru</b> ornamental reed-like herb consisting of long, green, spear-shaped leaves with a yellow edge and white splotches in the middle: <b><i>Sansevieria trifasciata var. Laurentii</i></b>. <b>&mdash; disambuwangga</b> variety with no splotches. <b>&mdash; nga isdà</b> = <sc>DÍWIT</sc>.

<p><b>ispadil</b> = <sc>ISPÁDA,</sc> <i>1.</i>

<p><b>ispaghíti</b> <i>n</i> @spaghetti. <i>v</i> [A13C12] make, eat spaghetti.

<p><b>ispaltu</b> = <sc>ASPALTU.</sc>

<p><b>Ispánis</b> <i>n</i> @Spanish class, language, person. <i>Nindut kaáyu pamináwun ang Ispánis gitar,</i> The Spanish guitar is pleasant to listen to. <i>v</i> [A; c1] communicate in Spanish. <b>&mdash; lís</b> <i>n</i> k.o. lace fabric, usually made into veils.

<p><b>Ispaniyul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Spaniard. <b>2</b> Spanish language.

<p><b>ispansbat</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] wash oneself off with a washcloth. <i>Ispansbáti ang bátà,</i> Wash the child with a cloth. <i>n</i> action of washing s.o. with a cloth.

<p><b>ispanta</b> <i>v</i> [A3B12; c1] @prevent s.t. from happening, s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Ang pinaangkan miispanta sa kasal sa nakapaanak níya,</i> The wedding was stopped by the woman whom the groom had made pregnant. <i>Naispanta sa bakúna ang pagkaylap sa buti,</i> Vaccination kept the smallpox from spreading.

<p><b>Ispanya</b> <i>n</i> @Spain.

<p><b>Ispanyúla</b> = <sc>ISPANIYUL</sc> (female).

<p><b>Ispanyúlis</b> <i>n</i> @Spaniards. <i>Kanhi sa mga Ispanyúlis pa giulípun lámang ang mga Pilipínu,</i> During the Spanish times the Filipinos were treated like slaves.

<p><b>ispáring</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{sparring session.} <b>2</b> sparring partner. <i>v</i> [A2C; b(1)] engage in a sparring session. <b>&mdash; partnir, ka-</b> <i>n</i> sparring partner.

<p><b>isp&acaron;rk plag</b> <i>n</i> @{spark plug.}

<p><b>ispasyu</b> <i>n</i> @{outer space.}

<p><b>ispat</b> <i>n</i> @flashlight. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] shine a flashlight on. <i>Ispáti nu diri dapit kay nah[=ú]g ang ákung sinsíyu,</i> Shine your flashlight over here because I dropped my money.

<p><b>isp&acaron;t<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> spot on the lungs that indicates <sc>TB.</sc>

<p><b>isp&acaron;t<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] in pool: shoot a target ball to a designated spot on the table. <b>2</b> [A2; b] in basketball: take pot shots from a distance. <i>n</i> this sort of shot in billiards or basketball. <b>-ir(<-)</b> <i>n</i> one who throws the ball accurately in basketball.

<p><b>ispatlayit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>ISPAT.</sc> <b>2</b> @spotlight. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] shine the spotlight on.

<p><b>ispáyik</b> <i>n</i> @{shoe spike.} <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] fasten a spike on a shoe.

<p><b>ispayral</b> a hair waved without being cut. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] wear, have hair that has been waved.

<p><b>ispíd</b> <i>n</i> @spades in playing cards. <i>v</i> [A12] get spades.

<p><b>ispidbut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @speedboat.

<p><b>ispidbut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A1; b6(1)] cook more rice or corn hurriedly in a small pot because what was cooked earlier was not enough for everyone (humorous&mdash;so called from the small speedboats that accompanied Japanese warships). <i>Bisitahun kaáyu mis ámù. <pb n=399>Kanúnay lang ming mag-ispidbut ug lung-ag,</i> We keep having visitors, so we always have to prepare extra rice.

<p><b>ispidnu</b> = <sc>IMPIRNU.</sc>

<p><b>ispíhu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mirror, looking glass. <b>2</b> glass. <i>Ang ispíhu sa iskaparáti,</i> The glass of the display case. <b>3</b> name of one of the dragons <ix>(drágun)</ix>, [**a tile in mahjong] the white dragon which has the black outline of a mirror-like design. <i>v</i> [A2N; b6(1)] look at oneself in the mirror. <i>Mangispíhu úsà ku,</i> I'll look at myself in the mirror.

<p><b>ispíking</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the act of proposing to a girl (colloquial). <b>2</b> line handed to convince s.o. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @propose to a girl (colloquial). <i>Sígi lag bisíta, wà pa giyud makaispíking,</i> He keeps visiting her but he hasn't proposed. <b>2</b> hand s.o. a line. <i>Giispikíngan níya ang íyang Nánay arun hatágan siyag kwarta,</i> He handed his mother a line so that she would give him money.

<p><b>ispíkir<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @loudspeaker. <i>v</i> [b6] use, put in a loudspeaker.

<p><b>ispíkir<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @Speaker of the House, the presiding officer of the House of Representatives. <b>gist &mdash;</b> guest speaker. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be, become the speaker.

<p><b>ispiksiyun</b> = <sc>INSPIKSIYUN.</sc>

<p><b>ispíling</b> <i>n</i> @spelling. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] spell a word. <i>Ispilínga ang ímung ngálan,</i> Spell your name. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] make s.t. out, explain s.t. to oneself. <i>Lisud giyud ispilíngun unsay íyang nagustuan ánang karáang kwanggul,</i> I can't understand what he sees in that old coot. <b>3</b> explain, describe in words. <i>Dílì maispíling ang náwung níya pag-ingkib níya sa aslum nga mangga,</i> You can't imagine what she looked like when she bit into the sour mango.

<p><b>ispír</b> <i>n</i> @spare in bowling, the act of knocking down all the pins with two consecutive balls; a score so made. <i>v</i> [AB6; c1] make a spare in bowling, for a throw to be a spare.

<p><b>ispiragus</b> = <sc>ASPARAGUS.</sc>

<p><b>ispiraltima</b> = <sc>ISPÍRA ULTIMA.</sc>

<p><b>ispiransa [**may need to indicate (with preceding asterisk) the form occurs in combination] may, walay &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> for there to be a (no) possibility or probability that s.t. desirable happen. <i>Wà ka nay ispiransa ánang bayhána,</i> You haven't got a chance with that girl. <i>Dúna pay ispiransa nga mabúhì ang bátà,</i> There is still hope that the child will survive. <b>2</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> hopelessly bad. <i>Way ispiransa nà siyag náwung,</i> She's hopelessly ugly. <i>Way ispiransa ang ági,</i> Your work is hopeless.

<p><b>ispíra ultima</b> <i>n</i> a flowering plant cultivated for both ornamental and medicinal purposes: <i><b>Chrysanthemum sinense.</b></i>

<p><b>*ispírit</b> <b>&mdash; ab amunya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. liquid used like smelling salts. <b>&mdash; ub di glas</b> <i>n</i> a method of contacting the souls of the departed with a medium using a glass.[** use a Ouija board, was a theme in a Tagalog movie] <i>v</i> [A; a12] hold such a session.

<p><b>ispiritista</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @medium in a séance. <b>2</b> one who believes in spiritualism. <i>v</i> [B1; a12] become a spiritualist.

<p><b>ispiritu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spirit, human @soul. <b>&mdash; malignu</b> soul, in folk belief, that roams over the face of the earth doing penance. <b>&mdash; santu</b> <i>n</i> Holy Ghost. <b>2</b> spirit, volatile substances. <b>&mdash; dilimun</b> lemon oil. <b>ispirituhánun</b> <i>a</i> spiritual. <i>Ang pangaláwat usa ka ispirituhánung bangkíti,</i> Communion is a spiritual feast. &dagger;

<p><b>ispirma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @paraffin. <b>2</b> paraffin candles. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] rub paraffin on the floor. <i>Ispirmáhi nà arun musínaw,</i> Rub floor wax on the floor so that it shines.

<p><b>ispisiyal</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @special, particularly good. <i>Lutúan níyag sud-an nga ispisiyal ang íyang bisíta,</i> She will fix special food for her guests. <b>2</b> especial, out of the ordinary. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB12; c1] be, become special, particularly good. <b>2</b> [A; c1] do s.t. special, out of the ordinary. <i>Ispisyalun (iispisiyal) ta kag tawag,</i> I'll mention your name especially, apart from the others. <b>2a</b> [A] do a particular dance at a ball where only certain people are invited to dance. <i>Mag-ispisiyal run ug bayli, pára sa mga upisyális,</i> The next number is a special number for the officers only. <b>&mdash; dilibiri</b> <i>n</i> special delivery. <i>v</i> [A13; c6] send s.t. special delivery. &dagger;

<p><b>ispísu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for liquids to be thick, of great density. <i>Ispísu kaáyung sikwáti kay gidaghan níyag tablíya,</i> The chocolate drink is thick because he put lots of chocolate on it. <b>2</b> for colors to be intense as if thickly laid on. <i>Ispísu kaáyu ang kaitum sa balhíbu sa ákung iring,</i> My cat's hair is a deep black. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; nga [noun]</b> a diehard, fanatic follower or believer of. <i>Ispísu giyud nang Katuliku,</i> He is a devout Catholic. <i>Ispísung Usminyista,</i> Diehard follower of Osmeña. <b>4</b> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <b>&mdash; ug apdu</b> brave (lit. having thick bile). <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <b>a</b> having guts. <b>b</b> heartless, merciless. <b>&mdash; ug hambug</b> laying bragging on thick. <i>v</i> [AB; c1] for liquids to become thick, cause them to do so. <i>Muispísu (maispísu) ang sabaw ug butangag úbi,</i> The soup will become thick if you add yams.

<p><b>ispisyalista</b> <i>n</i> @specialist, esp. a @doctor. <i>Ang buta nagpahiling sa usa ka ispisyalista sa mata,</i> The blind man consulted an eye specialist. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] <b>1</b> be, become a specialist. <b>2</b> [A3; c6] specialize in a particular field of medicine.

<p><b>ispíya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spy, secret agent. <b>2</b> one who spies <pb n=400>on others. <i>v</i> [AN; b] <b>1</b> spy, spy on s.o. <i>Giispiyáhan na ku sa ákung asáwa, kay nagdúda,</i> My wife is spying on me because she has suspicions. <b>2</b> [B16; a12] be, become a spy.

<p><b>isplikar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @explain. <b>2</b> [A; b] state one's purpose, esp. proposing marriage. <i>Wà ku kaisplikar níya kay dihà man si Máma níya sígi,</i> I couldn't broach the question because her mother never left us a minute. <b>3</b> give s.o. a line to convince him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> explanation. <b>2</b> a line handed to s.o. <i>Wà ku madá sa isplikar sa ahinti,</i> I wasn't taken in by the salesman's line. <b>isplikasiyun</b> = <sc>ISPLIKAR,</sc> <i>n.</i> <b>isplikátut</b> <i>n</i> explanation, excuse one isn't inclined to believe (colloquial). <i>Ay na lang ku ánang ímung isplikátut. Dì ku mutúu ánà,</i> Don't hand me that line again. I don't believe it.

<p><b>ispl&icaron;t<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> palsy-walsy, very @{close friends} (colloquial). <i>Napildi ku sa madyung kay ispl&icaron;t <corr sic=ag>ang</corr> ákung mga kuntra,</i> I lost in mahjong because my co-players were palsy-walsy. <i>Makasulud ta kay ispl&icaron;t nátù ang gwardiya,</i> We can get in because the guard is our man. <i>v</i> [A2C1; ac5] be on palsy-walsy terms. <i>Nagkaispl&icaron;t sila kay paríhug balhíbu,</i> They became palsy-walsy because they're birds of a feather. <i>Lisud isplitun (ikaispl&icaron;t) nà siya,</i> It's difficult to get on palsy-walsy terms with him.

<p><b>ispl&icaron;t<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> extra piece which the dealer in mahjong gets as a privilege. He starts the game by discarding a piece without drawing another.

<p><b>isprí</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @spray. <i>Ispríhi ang rúsas,</i> Spray the roses. <b>&mdash; nit</b> hair spray. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] spray the hair.

<p><b>ispringpild</b> <i>n</i> Springfield @rifle.

<p><b>ispuksib</b> <i>n</i> @spokeshave, a tool for trimming and smoothing rounded surfaces. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use a spokeshave.

<p><b>ispúku</b> <b>1</b> <b>-y, nga</b> can you imagine that! <i>Ispúku muy (mung) mupalit ug kadilak nga way uinstulmin,[**corr: muinstulmin]</i> Imagine! He bought a Cadillac with no installments. <i>Nagdawat ug kinyintus unyà mugastug sitisintus, ispúku mu nà?</i> He receives five hundred and spends seven hundred. Can you beat that? <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> imagine what would happen if. <i>Ispúku ug tabangan kag tulu. Wà kay dalag-an,</i> Imagine if three people were to gang up on you at once. You wouldn't have a chance.

<p><b>ispungha</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sponge or sponge-like substance. <b>2</b> powder puff.

<p><b>ispunghar</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] <b>1</b> for odors to rise. <i>Muispunghar giyud ang báhù sa kasilyas,</i> The toilet exudes a terrible odor. <b>2</b> for volatile substances to evaporate. <i>Miispunghar ang agwa kay wà tabúni,</i> The perfume evaporated because no one covered it. <b>ispunghádu, ispungháwu</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. to have given off its volatile constituent. <i>Wà na kaáyuy báhù ang agwa. Ispungháwu na man,</i> The perfume doesn't have much odor any more because it weakened from evaporation.

<p><b>ispungháwu</b> <i>a</i> for hair to be wavy and soft. <i>Nindut ning ispungháwu tag buhuk kay dì na lang kinahanglan ang pagpakulung,</i> It's nice to have soft and wavy hair, because we don't need to have permanents. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] for hair to be, become soft and wavy.

<p><b>ispunsur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sponsor of a program or social affair. <b>2</b> the girl escort (muse) who accompanies a man in official functions. <b>3</b> one who sponsors an immigrant abroad. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] sponsor s.t. <b>2</b> [AB16; c16] take as one's muse, become a muse. <b>3</b> [A; b6(1)] act as sponsor for an immigrant abroad. &dagger;

<p><b>ispurt<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{good sport} or @sportsmanlike. <i>Ispurt giyud tu si Kusáka kay bísag pildi, mapahiyúmun lang gihápun,</i> Kosaka was a good sport, for even if he lost, he was still all smiles. <b>2</b> fight that is fought on the basis that there should be no bad feelings. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] <b>1</b> be, become a good sport or sportsmanlike. <i>Kung mag-ispurt lang ang táwu wà giyuy gubut,</i> If a man fights fairly there won't be any trouble. <b>2</b> hold a fight on condition that no one have hard feelings.

<p><b>ispurt<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>ISPÚTING.</sc>

<p><b>ispurts kar</b> <i>n</i> @{sports car.} <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13C12] travel, go by sports car. <b>2</b> [A12] get a sports car.

<p><b>ispúsa</b> <i>n</i> @wife. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be, become a wife. <i>Kung naispúsa pa kang Markus, kanindut kahà nu?</i> If you had become Marcos' wife, it would have been nice, wouldn't it? <b>2</b> [A12] happen to have as a wife. <i>Naka-ispúsa kug bagìbian,</i> I got a nag for a wife.

<p><b>ispúsu</b> <i>n</i> @husband. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ISPÚSA.</sc>

<p><b>ispúting</b> <i>a</i> smartly dressed, @{dressed up.} <i>Mamisíta tingáli si Usting kay ispúting man,</i> Maybe Osting is paying his girl a visit, for he is dressed up. <i>v</i> [B3; b6] get all dressed up.

<p><b>ispúwil</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @spoil a child. <i>Ispuwílun man nímu ang bátà, ayg hatágig kwarta pirmi,</i> You are spoiling the child. Don't constantly give him money. <b>-d</b> <i>a</i> for a child to be spoiled. <i>v</i> = <sc>ISPÚWIL.</sc>

<p><b>Israylítas</b> <i>n</i> @Israelites.

<p><b>ist</b> = <sc>ISTI<hi rend=sub>2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>istabiyin</b> <ix>expression indicating approval:</ix> @fine, @good.

<p><b>istablisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @found, @establish s.t. <i>Muistablisar kug kaugalíngung nigusyu ug makagraduwar na ku,</i> I'll establish my own business when I graduate. <b>istablisimintu</b> <i>n</i> business <pb n=401>establishment.

<p><b>istadista</b> <i>n</i> statesman. <i>Si Kláru Riktu mauy usa sa mga bantúgang istadista sa Pilipínas,</i> Claro Recto is one of the famous statesmen of the Philippines.

<p><b>istádiyum</b> <i>n</i> @stadium.

<p><b>istádu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @situation. <i>Ang istádu mau ni: pagsulud nákù sa lawak dihay babáyi nga naghigdà sa katri,</i> The situation was this: when I entered the room there was a woman lying on the bed. <b>2</b> @state, @condition s.t. is in. <i>Pag-abut nákù nagkayamúkat na ang istádu sa mga mwiblis,</i> When I arrived, the furniture was in a state of disarray. <i>Wà na sa istádu ang ákung ámu,</i> My master is acting strangely. <b>2a</b> civil status. <i>Unsay ímung istádu, minyù u ulitáwu?</i> What's your civil status, married or single? <b>3</b> married, settled, and thus not free to run around. <i>Ngánung mangulitáwu pa man ka nga istádu na man ka?</i> Why do you run after women when you are married?

<p><b>Istádus Unídus</b> <i>n</i> @{United States.}

<p><b>isták</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stock merchandise on hand. <b>2</b> stocks in a corporation. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] stock up on s.t., stock s.t. with. <i>Istákan níyag mga linata ang íyang tindáhan,</i> She will stock her store with canned goods. <b>&mdash; huldir</b> <i>n</i> stockholder. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be, become a stockholder. <b>uld &mdash;</b> old stock, leftover merchandise. <i>Mga uld isták ang bulad ímung gipalit,</i> You bought old, leftover dried fish.

<p><b>istáka</b> <i>n</i> @stake or @peg to hold s.t. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make, drive or use a stake. <b>2</b> [A; a] arrange stones in a pile for some purpose. <i>Dagkung batu ang giistáka sa mananagat sa íyang balirung,</i> The fisherman piled up big stones to make his fish trap. <i>Maáyung istakáhan ang bakilid arun dílì ibanlas ang yútà,</i> We should pile stones on the sloping land so that the soil will not be washed away.

<p><b>istak-ap</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)] become @stuck, plugged up. <i>Naistak-ap ang túbu sa labábu,</i> The drainpipe in the sink got plugged up.

<p><b>istáking, istákings</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stockings. <b>2</b> @condom. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] wear stockings, a condom.

<p><b>ístakul</b> <b>1</b> a word used to heighten the suspense, said while performing some suspenseful action. <i>Ákù nang bunútun paghínay ang baráha. Ístakul!</i> I'll take the card out slowly. Here goes! <b>2</b> <ix><corr sic=particule>particle</corr> used after giving a series of commands:</ix> fine, that's good now. <i>Atras pa, diyútay na lang. Ístakul!</i> Back it up some more, a little more. O.K., fine.

<p><b>istalar</b> = <sc>INSTALAR.</sc>

<p><b>istalasiyun</b> = <sc>INSTALASIYUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>INSTALAR.</sc>

<p><b>istambay</b> <b>1</b> one standing by waiting for business or work. <i>Daghang mga istambay nga trák didtu sa pír nga paabangan,</i> There's lots of trucks sitting at the pier to rent. <b>2</b> one who has nothing to do and hangs around s.w. <b>3</b> out of service. <i>Istambay úsà ang trák kay way písa,</i> The bus is out of commission now because it's lacking a part. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> stand-by for business or work. <b>2</b> hang around. <b>2a</b> [B16; a] become an idle loafer. <b>3</b> [A4; c] for a machine to be out of service. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> place loafers hang out.

<p><b>istampa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> religious picture, usually colored and framed.

<p><b>istampa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> patched, @{torn clothing.} <i>v</i> [c] torn clothes.

<p><b>istamp&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] put a notice or picture up in a conspicuous place. <i>Ayawg istampahi (istampari) nang bungbung ug law-ayng litrátu,</i> Don't put dirty pictures on that wall. <i>Mga ngálan sa kaslunun mauy giistamp&acaron;r sa bulitin burd,</i> The names of the couples planning to get married are posted on the bulletin board.

<p><b>istampíta</b> <i>n</i> small religious picture, usually colored.

<p><b>istan</b> <i>n</i> @stand to hold s.t.

<p><b>istanbay</b> = <sc>ISTAMBAY.</sc>

<p><b>istandar, istandard</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small kerosene lamp with a metal body and tall with a glass chimney, similar to a hurricane lamp. <i>v</i> [A13] use this type of kerosene lamp.

<p><b>istandarti</b> <i>n</i> religious standard or emblem consisting of an image painted on a pennant or piece of wood mounted on a pole and used in processions.

<p><b>istanding<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> having standing room only in theaters. <i>Istanding kaáyu, wà giyud ku kalingkud,</i> It was very crowded. I couldn't get a seat. <i>v</i> [B6; b6] for a theater to have standing room only.

<p><b>istanding<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> standing position in sexual intercourse (humorous slang). <b>2</b> erection of the penis (slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] do s.t. in a standing position. <i>Nag-istanding kung nagkaun kay walà na may lingkuránan,</i> I ate standing because there were no more seats. <b>2</b> [B1256] for penis to be erect (humorous slang).

<p><b>istansa</b> <i>n</i> @stanza of a poem. <i>v</i> [c] write, add a stanza. <i>Ang makapahinuklug nga panápus ang iistansa sa katapúsan,</i> Write a sorrowful ending for your last stanza.

<p><b>istanti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> glass @showcase. <b>2</b> @shelf. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] add a glass showcase or shelf. <b>2</b> [c16] put in a showcase or shelf. <i>Istantíha (iistanti) nang inyung baligyà,</i> Put your merchandise inside a showcase.

<p><b>istanyu</b> <i>n</i> solder of tin and lead.

<p><b>istáp<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] receive the serve in volleyball <pb n=402>and slow down the impetus to set it up for a return.

<p><b>istáp<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> traffic sign ordering a @stop. <i>v</i> [B236] for a traffic signal to be red. <i>Manghúnung ang mga sakyanan ug muistáp,</i> The vehicles will stop when the light is red.

<p><b>istápa</b> <i>n</i> @embezzlement of funds entrusted to one. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> @embezzler. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become an embezzler of funds.

<p><b>istapbul</b> <i>n</i> in billiards, the method of @shooting the cue ball hitting it near the base, causing it to stop or go backwards upon hitting another ball. <i>v</i> [A2; c1] make one's shot a @stop-ball.

<p><b>ist&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; b36] @stay, @reside in a certain place. <i>Unsay istaran (istahan) nátug dúgay dinhi?</i> Why should we stay here long? <i>Maáyung istahan ang Banáwà kay dílì ínit,</i> It's good to stay in Banawa because it's cool.

<p><b>istar dansir</b> <i>n</i> @{starring dancer}. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be, become a starring dancer.

<p><b>istarim</b> <i>n</i> a variety of @yautia (<ix>bisul</ix>) having a reddish-pink rootstock, as opposed to the more common white variety.

<p><b>istáring</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @star in a film. <b>2</b> be prominently @mentioned or @conspicuous in a picture, talk. <i>Istáring ka man sa wáli sa párì,</i> You were conspicuously mentioned in the priest's sermon. <b>3</b> be conspicuously important or significant in an activity. <i>Istáring mi sa parti kay kami nangúlu sa dúlà,</i> We were important persons in the party because we led the games. <i>v</i> [B126] <b>1</b> @star in a film. <b>2</b> be conspicuous. <b>3</b> be prominently mentioned, conspicuous in a picture. <b>4</b> be an important person in some activity.

<p><b>istartir</b> <i>n</i> @starter of an engine.

<p><b>istasiyun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> radio, gas, police @station. <b>2</b> railroad or bus station (not common usage). <b>-an</b> <i>1</i> station for vehicles, gas station. <i>Istasyunan sa gasulína, trák,</i> Gasoline, bus station. <b>2</b> police, radio station (not common usage).

<p><b>istasiyun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @station, way of the cross: 14 pictures of Christ's sufferings placed around the sides of a church for the worshippers to visit. <i>v</i> [A] make the way of the cross, visiting each of the 14 pictures and praying <corr sic=befor>before</corr> each one.

<p><b>istátik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @static on the radio. <b>2</b> @hoarseness in the throat when singing. <i>v</i> [B26] <b>1</b> for the voice to get @hoarse in singing. <b>2</b> have @static.

<p><b>istatistika</b> <i>n</i> @statistics.

<p><b>istatúwa</b> <i>n</i> @statue. <i>v</i> [a2] make into a @statue. <i>Íyang istatuwáhun kanang káhuy nga íyang gisugdag silsil,</i> He will make a statue out of that piece of wood.

<p><b>istáyil</b> <i>n</i> @style of doing s.t. <i>Bítuls ang istáyil sa íyang buhuk,</i> He wears his hair in the Beatles style. <i>Si Ilurdi dúnay kaugalíngung istáyil sa pagbuksing,</i> Elorde has his own boxing style. <i>a</i> stylish in doing s.t. <i>Istáyil kaáyug kinantahan si Sami Díbis dà,</i> Sammy Davis has a stylish way of singing. <i>v</i> [c16] make s.t. stylish. <i>Maáyu giyung istaylun (iistáyil) nímu ang ímung mga bisti kay batan-un ka pa,</i> You should dress stylishly because you are still young.

<p><b>istaylis</b> <i>a</i> adopting the latest fads.

<p><b>isti<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <b>1</b> expression of pause when speaker can't think of the right word or is embarrassed. <i>Buy, itúnul ang kuan, isti, ang piryudiku,</i> Boy, pass the whatchamacallit, umm, the newspaper. <b>2</b> expression to correct or take back what one has just said. <i>Si Imil, isti, si Lúkas paanhía,</i> Emil, I mean, Lucas, have him come here. <b>paistiisti</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] put on a pretense of indifference to s.t. one really likes. <i>Ngánung nagpaistiisti kang gustu ka man diay?</i> Why do you pretend you don't like it when you really do?

<p><b>isti<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the east piece, the name of one of the winds (bintus). <b>2</b> the dealer in a mahjong game. <b>3</b> the name given to the first round in a mahjong set until all four players have had a chance to be the dealer. It is followed by a second round which is called sur. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b4] draw an east piece. <i>Giistihan aku ug mau na lay ákung giwíting,</i> I drew an east wind and that was what I needed to go mahjong. <b>2</b> [B1256] be the dealer in a mahjong game.

<p><b>istibidur</b> <i>n</i> @stevedore. <i>v</i> [B16; c12] be, become a stevedore.

<p><b>istídi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @steady girl or boy friend. <b>2</b> prostitute one patronizes on a regular basis. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12C; a12] be, become @sweethearts, go steady. <i>Dúgay na nà silang naistídi,</i> They have been going steady for a long time. <i>Nagkaistídi ming Lurína sa úna,</i> Lorena and I used to go steady formerly. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] get as a sweetheart. <i>Wà sukad aku makaistídi,</i> I have never had a sweetheart.

<p><b>*istígi</b> <b>&mdash; santu</b> expression used by an elder for blessing a younger person who has just kissed his hands. The sign of the cross is made at the same time the blessing is given.

<p><b>istikin ap, istikinap</b> <ix>expression uttered when pulling a hold up</ix>: &lsquo;Stick 'em up!&rsquo; <i>v</i> [A; a] pull a stick-up. <i>Síging giistikin ap nang tindahána,</i> They keep holding that store up.

<p><b>istíkir</b> <i>n</i> @sticker. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] paste a sticker on s.t.

<p><b>istilítu</b> <i>n</i> @stiletto, a small dagger-like instrument used for making holes in cloth to be embroidered. <i>v</i> [c6] use s.t. as a stiletto.

<pb n=403>

<p><b>istilmáting</b> <i>n</i> steel sheets laid on soft ground for vehicles or temporary airstrips. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] surface with steel matting.

<p><b>istilmit</b> <i>n</i> stalemate in chess. <i>v</i> [B126; c16] come to a stalemate in chess.

<p><b>istílu</b> = <sc>ISTÁYIL</sc>.

<p><b>istilwul</b> <i>n</i> @{steel wool}.

<p><b>istima, istimar<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] take care, look after s.o. <i>Dì kamaung muistimar sa mga bisíta,</i> Doesn't know how to take care of the visitors. <i>Istimáha ang inyung katigulángan,</i> Take care of your old folks.

<p><b>istimar<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> @estimate, @calculate. <i>Istimaha (iistimar) kunu ang magastu,</i> Figure out the expenses. <b>2</b> treat, consider s.o. as. <i>Istimáha[**Istimaha above] (iistimar) nga inyung igsúun ang mga ílu ninyung ig-ágaw,</i> Consider your orphaned cousins your own brothers and sisters. <i>n</i> @estimate, rough calculation. <b>istimasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @estimate. <i>Untup-untup ang ákung istimasiyun (istimar),</i> My estimate is almost exact. <b>2</b> the way one regards s.o. <i>Taas ang ákung istimasiyun níya,</i> I have a high regard for him.

<p><b>istimit</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @estimate. <i>Maáyu muistimit sa gibug-atun sa usa ka butang,</i> He is good at estimating weights. <i>n</i> estimate. <i>Pilay ímung istimit sa galastúhan?</i> How much do you estimate it will cost?

<p><b>istinsil</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] mark s.t. with a @stencil, reproduce s.t. by stencil. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> typed stencil, stencil from which a design or lettering is made. <b>2</b> design, lettering done by a stencil.

<p><b>istinugrapir</b> <i>n</i> @stenographer. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a stenographer.

<p><b>istip</b> <i>n</i> word asked by a player in hopscotch asking whether he had stepped on the line. <i>Istip, nu?</i> Did I step on the line or not?

<p><b>istipburd</b> <i>n</i> narrow board under the passenger bus running along the chassis on either side between the front and rear wheels, where cargo is placed.

<p><b>istip-in</b> <i>n</i> open-heeled @shoes or @slippers for women, with or without high heels. <i>v</i> [AC12; b6(1)] wear step-ins.

<p><b>istíping</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> step in dancing. <i>Lisud kaáyu ang istíping sa kinabag-uhang sáyaw karun,</i> The steps for the latest dance are very complicated. <b>2</b> a violation in basketball, making steps not allowed. <b>sayup ang &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [a12] for s.o. to make a mistake in an important move. <i>Nasayup lang ang inyung istíping ug dì mu mudúul ug pulitiku nga mangaplay ug trabáhu,</i> It is a wrong move for you to apply for a job without a politician's help. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] commit the violation of stepping in basketball.

<p><b>istiplir, istípul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] fasten with staples. <i>Mas maáyung ímung istipúlun (istipúlan) ang mga papil arun dì magbúwag,</i> It's necessary that you <corr sic=stapel>staple</corr> the pieces of paper together so that they won't get separated. <i>Lisud na ni buwágun ug ímung istipúlun (istipúlan),</i> It will be difficult to get these apart after they have been stapled. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stapler. <b>2</b> @staples.

<p><b>istíril</b> <i>a</i> @sterile, incapable of procreation. <i>v</i> [B6] be, become sterile.

<p><b>istiriláyis</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] @sterilize, free from germs.

<p><b>istiryu</b> <i>n</i> @{stereo phonograph} or @{tape recorder}. <b>&mdash; púnu</b> <i>n</i> stereo phonograph. <i>a</i> @stereophonic in sound reproduction. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; c16] reproduce a sound stereophonically. <i>Dì maistiryu ang ipiktu ug usa lang ka ispíkir ang gamítun,</i> You don't get a stereophonic effect if you use only one speaker. <b>2</b> [A13] do s.t. with stereo music on. <i>Mag-istiryu giyud nà siyag magtuun,</i> He always studies with stereo music on.

<p><b>Istits</b> <i>n</i> @{the States}, @U.S.A. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] go, bring to the States.

<p><b>istitsáyid</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> coming from the States. <i>Kanang íyang sapátus istitsáyid,</i> His shoes are imported from the States. <b>2</b> a person in the Philippines who originates in the States. <b>3</b> being like s.t. American. <i>Istitsáyid siyag linihukan,</i> She acts like an American. <i>v</i> [B126] be from the States or like s.t. from the States.

<p><b>istituskup</b> <i>n</i> @stethoscope. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use a stethoscope.

<p><b>istityu</b> <i>n</i> children's @game of freezing or keeping still when the leader shouts <ix>istityu</ix>. <b>&mdash; dans</b> <i>n</i> statue dance, a dance in which the participants freeze every time the music is stopped. <i>v</i> [A1C2; b(1)] play &lsquo;statue&rsquo; or do the statue dance.

<p><b>istranghíru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @foreigner. <i>Barku nga istranghíru,</i> A foreign ship. <b>2</b> @{foreign ship}. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] be, become a stranger in another land.

<p><b>istranyu</b> <i>n</i> @stranger, @newcomer to a place. <i>v</i> [B12] be a stranger to a place. <i>Naistranyu na ku dinhi tungud sa daghang kausában,</i> I have become a stranger in this place because of the changes that have taken place here.

<p><b>istráp</b> <i>n</i> @strap. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] put, fit a strap on. <i>Istrápi ang rilu,</i> Put a strap on the watch. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a strap.

<p><b>istráyik<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @strike: <b>a</b> in baseball. <b>b</b> the pins in bowling knocked down in one ball, or the score so made. <b>2</b> unpleasant allusion made against s.o. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be, become a strike in baseball or bowling. <b>1a</b> [A12] make a strike in baseball or bowling. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] <pb n=404>make unpleasant allusions about s.o. <i>Ug istraykun ku níya, dì lang ku manumbáling,</i> If he makes unpleasant allusions about me, I won't pay any attention.

<p><b>istráyik<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] for students or workers to strike. <i>Giistraykan ang Yúbi sa mga maistra,</i> The teachers at U.V. are striking. <i>n</i> strike of students or workers.

<p><b>istri</b> <i>n</i> @three, esp. @{three pesos} (slang). <i>Manan-aw tag sini, dúna kuy istri diri,</i> Let's go and see a movie. I have three pesos here. <i>v</i> [A12] get three pesos.

<p><b>istribilyu</b> <i>a</i> @cross-eyed. <i>v</i> [B; c16] be cross-eyed. <i>Muistribilyu ang iyang panan-aw ug masukù,</i> He becomes cross-eyed when he gets angry.

<p><b>istríbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stirrup of a saddle or anything one steps on to mount with. <b>2</b> @{running board}. <i>v</i> [A; a] attach, make a stirrup, mounting step, or running board.

<p><b>istribur</b> <i>n</i> @starboard of a vessel. <i>v</i> [A; c1] turn to the starboard. <i>Istribura (iistribur) ug diyútay arun dì ta mabanggà,</i> Turn the boat to the right so that we will not collide.

<p><b>istrikta</b> = <sc>ISTRIKTU</sc> (female).

<p><b>istriktu</b> <i>a</i> @strict in demanding obedience. <i>Istriktu na run ang baláud sa pagbáyad sa buhis,</i> The law is very strict about paying your taxes. <i>v</i> [B; a2] be, become strict, do strictly. <i>Dílì istriktúhun pag-inspiksiyun ang malíta sa táwung kuniktádu,</i> They aren't strict in inspecting baggage which belongs to s.o. with connections.

<p><b>istrilya</b> <i>n</i> s.t. which has the shape of a star. <i>Istrilyang parul,</i> A star-shaped lantern. <b>-du, -wu</b> eggs fried sunny side up. <i>v</i> [A; a] fry or serve eggs sunny side up.

<p><b>istrilyíta</b> <i>n</i> s.t. shaped like a small star.

<p><b>istrimlayin</b> <i>a</i> @streamlined, built without excess corners or structures. <i>v</i> [c1] build s.t. in a streamlined style.

<p><b>istrit<hi rend=sub>1</i>, istrít<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @upright. <i>Istrit kaáyu nang huwísa, dì nà madág bagsak,</i> He's an upright judge. He doesn't accept bribes. <b>2</b> @frank. <i>Istrit ra kaáyu nang manulting tawhána, mahilaw ka lang usáhay,</i> He's so frank that sometimes he embarrasses you. <b>3</b> @fluent in speech. <i>Istrit kaáyu nang maistráhang muininglis. Way kunù,</i> That teacher speaks fluent English. She doesn't stammer. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b] tell, do frankly. <b>2</b> [A; a12] go, walk straight on a road.

<p><b>istrit<hi rend=sub>2</i>, istrít<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> straight blow in boxing. <b>2</b> straight in poker. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] deliver a straight blow. <i>Istríti siya arun mutagam,</i> Deliver a straight blow to teach him a lesson. <b>2</b> [A12] get a straight hand in poker. <b>3</b> [A2; c1] vote a straight ticket. <i>Ayaw istrita (iistrit) pagbutar ang Libiral,</i> Don't vote straight Liberal. <b>4</b> [A2; c1] drink all the contents down without a break.

<p><b>istrit<hi rend=sub>3</i>, istrít<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> @street. <i>Háin tang istríta na,</i> What street are we on now?

<p><b>istritbul</b> <i>a</i> the situation in billiards where the cue ball and the target ball are directly in line to the hole.

<p><b>istritsabul, istritsibul</b> <i>a</i> @stretchable cloth. <i>v</i> [A12; b(1)] wear s.t. of stretchable cloth.

<p><b>istritsir</b> <i>n</i> @stretcher. <i>v</i> [c1] carry s.o. on a stretcher.

<p><b>istrú</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @straw used in weaving. <b>&mdash; bag</b> bag made of straw. <b>2</b> @straw to drink through. <i>v</i> [A; b5] drink with a straw.

<p><b>istrubíri</b> <i>n</i> @strawberry.

<p><b>istrúk</b> <i>n</i> good way of doing a particular thing, esp. unusual or unconventional. <i>Lahì sab siyag istrúk mangumidiya kay dì mukatáwa,</i> He tells jokes in an unusual way. He doesn't laugh. <i>Maáyug istrúk siya nga mangáyug kwarta,</i> He has a smart way of asking for money.

<p><b>istrúki</b> = <sc>ISTÚKI</sc>.

<p><b>istrúking</b> = <sc>ISTRÚK</sc>.

<p><b>istruksiyun</b> = <sc>INSTRUKSIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>istrungk&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @{take apart}, @disassemble. <b>istrungkadur</b> <i>n</i> @{screw driver}. <i>v</i> [A; a12] use, make into, hit with a screw driver.

<p><b>istrúpa</b> <i>n</i> @stanza of a sort.

<p><b>istúb</b> <i>n</i> gas, electric @stove. <i>v</i> [A12] get a stove. <b>gas, iliktrik &mdash;</b> gas, electric stove.

<p><b>istudiyanti</b> <i>n</i> @student. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B16; b(1)] be, become a student. <b>2</b> [A1; b26] have as a student. <i>Mag-istudiyanti gánì kag tarung, hayáhay kaáyung dad-un ang klási,</i> If you have good students, it is no problem to handle the class.

<p><b>istudiyu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> artist's or photographer's @studio. <b>2</b> motion picture studio. <b>3</b> broadcasting studio. <i>v</i> [A13; a] make, make into a studio.

<p><b>istudiyu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> @study s.t. <i>Giistudiyúhan pa sa duktur ang íyang sakit,</i> The doctors are studying his disease. <b>2</b> take a certain course. <i>Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan,</i> He's taking up law.

<p><b>istukáda</b> <i>v</i> [A12C; a2] fence or make motions like fencing. <i>Miibut siya sa íyang sundang ug miistukádang nagpaninggit,</i> He pulled out his sword and raised it in the air shouting.

<p><b>istúki</b> <i>v</i> [B12C; b3c15] have a @{heated argument}, make an argument heated. <i>Maistúki giyud nà madúgay ang ílang isturya,</i> I bet their conversation is going to end up in an argument. <i>n</i> heated argument.

<p><b>istula</b> <i>n</i> stole worn by a priest. <i>v</i> [A; c6] use, <pb n=405>wear a stole.

<p><b>istumagu</b> <i>n</i> @stomach viewed medically or physiologically. <i>Ang istumagu sa báka duhay hut-ung,</i> A cow's stomach has two chambers. <i>Pagkáung makadáut sa istumagu,</i> Food which can ruin the stomach.

<p><b>istúpa</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] stuff s.t. into seams to make them watertight. <i>n</i> material stuffed into seams to make them watertight.

<p><b>istupádu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. dish made of thinly sliced meat stewed and served with gravy. <b>2</b> food with a filling. Istupádung pán, Bread with a meat filling. <b>&mdash; nga lansang</b> <i>n</i> dried anchovies (humorous). <i>v</i> [A; a] have <ix>istupádu</ix>.

<p><b>istupida</b> = <sc>ISTUPIDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>istupidu</b> <i>a</i> @stupid, doing stupid things. <i>Istupidu! Ngánung gipainum man nímug gátas nga bahù ang bátà?</i> Stupid! Why did you give the child spoiled milk to drink? <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become stupid.

<p><b>isturbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @nuisance, @bother. <i>Isturbu kaáyu ning batáa sa ákung pagsuwat,</i> This child is a terrible nuisance to me while I'm writing. <b>2</b> public disturbance. <i>v</i> [A3P; a1] make a nuisance or public disturbance. <i>Siyay miisturbu sa bayli,</i> He created a disturbance at the benefit dance. <i>Ayawg isturbuha (isturbúha) si Istir kay natúlug,</i> Don't disturb Esther. She is asleep.

<p><b>isturya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @{tell a story}. <i>Iisturya didtu sa kurti ang tinúud nga nahitabù,</i> Tell the court what really happened. <b>1a</b> tell s.t. untrue. <i>Ayaw kug isturyáhi!</i> Don't tell me! <b>1b</b> tell s.o. about s.t. <i>Ayawg iisturya ning sikritúha,</i> Don't tell the secret. <b>2</b> [A2C; bc3] converse, talk to s.o. <i>Unsay inyung gipanag-isturyáhan?</i> What are you discussing? <i>Kinsa tung ímung gikaisturya?</i> Who were you conversing with? <b>3</b> [C1; a12] talk s.t. out with s.o. to reach an understanding. <i>Nagkaisturya na mi ug ang ákung trátu, ug nagkaúlì na mi,</i> I have already talked it out with my girl, and we're on good terms again. <i>Mas maáyung inyu nang isturyáhun arun dì mu magdinumtanay,</i> You should thrash out your differences so that you won't end up hating each other. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @story. <i>Daghan siyag isturya báhin sa gúbat,</i> He has lots of war stories to tell. <b>1a</b> plot of a story. <i>Unsay isturya sa sini?</i> What was the movie about? <b>1b</b> s.t. told. <i>Mutúu ka ba sa isturya níyang namatay ang prisidinti?</i> Do you believe his story that the president died? <b>2</b> conversation. <i>Taas kaáyu inyung isturya sa tilipunu,</i> Your telephone conversation lasted a long time. <b>3</b> talk, useless talk. <i>Daghan nímug isturya. Buháta lang nà,</i> You talk too much. Just go ahead and do it. <b>isturyahánay, isturyahay</b> <i>v</i> [C] converse, tell each other stories. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fond of telling stories. <b>2</b> fond of engaging in conversation. <i>Hilumun nà. Dì kaáyu isturyadur,</i> He's a silent sort. He doesn't like to talk very much. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become a good conversationalist.

<p><b>*istiyúdint</b> <b>wurking &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> student working his way through school.

<p><b>isud, isug</b> = <sc>IRUG</sc>, <i>v 1.</i>

<p><b>ísug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @brave, full of guts. <i>Ísug kaáyu si Dyú kay dì mahadluk muatubang ug mikrupunu,</i> Joe is full of guts. He doesn't hesitate to get up before the microphone. <b>2</b> quick to anger, getting fuming mad at the slightest provocation. <i>Pagmatngun sa ímung trabáhu kay ísug ra ba kaáyu ang manidy&icaron;r,</i> Be careful with your work, for the manager is short-tempered. <b>3</b> @fierce. <i>Ísug ang irù. Dì mudágan,</i> It is a mean dog. He won't run away. <b>4</b> strong in odor, taste, etc. <i>Ísug tabak-un ang Sálim,</i> Salems are strong cigarettes. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <b>1</b> having highly smelly blood in menstruation. <b>2</b> having characteristics that tend to be inherited. <i>Isug[**Ísug?] ug dugù nang rasáha. Maáyung paliwatan,</i> That breed has characteristics which tend to appear in the children. It would be good to use for breeding stock. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; c1] be, become brave. <i>Unsang tambála ang makaísug (makapaísug) sa manuk,</i> What medicine can make a fighting cock brave? <b>2</b> [B2; b6] be, become quick to get angry. <b>3</b> [B] get fierce. <b>4</b> [B2; c1] for a smell, taste to get strong. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13N] be in a bad mood, continuously angry. <i>Nag-isug (nagpangisug) siya kay dakug pildi sa tárì,</i> He's in a bad mood because he lost heavily in the cockfight. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> be fuming mad. <i>Ug mangísug na gánì ang maistra, mahílum dáyun ang klási,</i> Once the teacher starts to bark, the class becomes quiet. <b>2</b> for meteorological phenomena to be violent. <i>Gihampak sa nangísug nga balud,</i> Beaten by the violent waves. <b>3</b> for the penis to erect. <i>Nangísug ang íyang buhì sa dihang nakakitag páa,</i> His penis grew erect when he saw a woman's thigh. <b>4</b> insist, strive hard to do s.t. <i>Ug wà pa giyud ku mangísug nga muuban, dì untà ku makaanhi,</i> Had I not insisted on coming along, I wouldn't have gotten here. <i>Ákù gayung pangisgan nga magmalampúsun aku sa ákung mga gimbuhátun,</i> I will strive hard to be successful in my undertakings. <b>papaN-</b> <i>v</i> [a12] get s.o. angry. <i>Papangisgun (papangisúgun) ku siya,</i> I'll get his goat. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @bravery. <b>2</b> nerve to do s.t. <i>May kaísug ka pa uruy nga misulti nákù nga gihigugma mu pa aku,</i> You've got a nerve to tell me that you still love me. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> very <pb n=406>brave, fierce, quick to anger, for a smell to get strong. <i>v</i> [B1456] be strong in spirit, courageous. <i>Kinahanglang magmaísug kita sa pagpakig-atúbang sa matúud,</i> Let us be brave enough to face reality. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> in a brave, courageous way. <i>Maisúgun siyang miasdang sa mga kaáway,</i> He faced his enemies courageously. <b>2</b> in an angry way. <i>Maisúgun siyang namúlung,</i> He spoke angrily.

<p><b>ísul<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; cP] move backwards without turning around. <i>Iísul (ipaísul) ang trák ngadtus iskína,</i> Back the truck up to the corner. <i>n</i> the triangular structure of a fowl or bird from which the tail feathers grow. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>ÍSUL<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>ísul<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>IRUG</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>iswag</b> = <sc>IRUG</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>iswid</b> = <sc>GISWID</sc>.

<p><b>iswim<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance characterized by motions similar to swimming. <i>v</i> [A] dance this dance.

<p><b>iswim<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> [A12] @drink, esp. in a spree (slang). <i>Nakaiswim tingáli si Rupínu kay puwa man ang tápay,</i> Rufino must have drunk again because his ears are red.

<p><b>iswis</b> exclamation expressing that s.t. has been put in just the right place. <i>Iruga pa. Hustu na. Iswis,</i> Move it a bit. Enough. That's it.

<p><b>isyu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] issue a license, permit, or the like. <i>Giisyúhan ka na ba ug bag-ung lisinsiya?</i> Have you been issued a new license?

<p><b>isyu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> issue of a periodical. <b>2</b> political issue. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] be, become a political issue. <i>Ngánung isyuhun (iisyu) pa man giyud sa kaatbang ang kamahal sa palalitun?</i> Why does the opposite camp have to make a political issue of the high cost of living?

<p><b>íta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <ix>short for</ix> <b>tagái ta</b>.[** . P /or/ , p] please[ give me some.

<p><b>íta<hi rend=sub>2</i>, ità</b> = <sc>AYTA<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>itad-itad</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; a] @stretch s.t. to make it go a long way, for s.t. to be stretched out. <i>Muitad-itad ang kwarta ug buut giyud,</i> If you really want to make the money stretch, you can. <i>Itad-itarun námù ang bugas kun dúna miy kamúti,</i> We will make the rice go further if we have sweet potatoes.

<p><b>itay</b> <i>n</i> @Father.

<p><b>itbi</b> <i>n</i> 8-B, a recently introduced variety of rice.

<p><b>itgam</b> = <sc>IGTAM</sc>.

<p><b>iti</b> <i>v</i> [B2; b6] <b>1</b> @{dry up}, @evaporate to dryness. <i>Muiti (maiti) na sad ang mga sapà ning iníta,</i> The rivers will dry up again in this heat. <i>Giithan (hiithan) ang linung-ag kamúti,</i> The water in the cooked sweet potatoes has boiled away. <b>2</b> for s.t. that is prepared by evaporation to come out powdery and not good. <i>Muiti ang sabun ug palabian sa síga,</i> Soap turns into powder if the flame is too high. <b>3</b> [AN; b6(1)] for fowls and birds to excrete their bodily wastes. <i>Bugáwa ang manuk dihà sa hawanan kay tingálig mangiti (muiti),</i> Shoo the chickens out of the living room because they will make a mess. <b>hunsuy nga mu- ug mani</b> <i>n</i> small caliber fire-*arm (lit. tobacco pipe that excretes peanuts&mdash;slang). <b>4</b> [b4] get inside a woman, esp. in an extra-marital affair (slang). <i>n</i> <b>1</b> what results when the process of boiling off is not properly done. <b>2</b> excrement of birds, fowl, lizards, crabs. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug langgam</b> k.o. sweet potato with white-colored flesh and red skin.

<p><b>íti</b> @eighty (usually said of scores, grades). <i>v</i> [A12; c1] get eighty, make s.t. eighty. <i>Ug makaíti ka, pasar ka,</i> If you get an eighty<corr sic=.>,</corr> you pass. <i>Kinahanglan nga itíhun nímu ang ímung grádu,</i> You must get a grade of eighty.

<p><b>itì</b> <i>n</i> term of address for a male much younger than the speaker.

<p><b>itiíti</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] run at a slow pace with short steps. <i>Mag-itiíti na lang ku kay kápuy na ikusug ug dágan,</i> I will just trot because I'm too tired to run fast.

<p><b>ítik<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> white @duck. <b>2</b> @pimp (slang). <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become a pimp. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] work as a pimp. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> duck farm. <i>v</i> [A1C12; c6] raise ducks. <b>itik-itik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name of a folk dance characterized by an imitation of the movements of a duck. The dancers wear <ix>balintawak</ix> costumes. <b>2</b> k.o. ornamental vine: <i><b>Aristolochia elegans.</b></i> <i>v</i> [AC12] dance the <ix>itik-itik.</ix>

<p><b>*ítik<hi rend=sub>2</i> pa-</b> <i>n</i> a game of chance where a coin is spun and covered with a cup or s.t. similar and players bet on heads or tails.

<p><b>itikíta</b> <i>n</i> @{tailor's tag} sewn into the article. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] sew or put a tailor's tag on s.t.

<p><b>ítip</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] clip, crop s.t. very close. <i>Muítip kaáyug putul ang lunmúwir sa sagbut,</i> The lawn mower cuts the grass very short. <i>Kinsa kahay nag-ítip ug gunting ning kuku sa bátà?</i> Who cut the baby's fingernails so short? <i>Itípun (iítip) ba nátù pagputul ang mga sanga sa kamunggay?</i> Shall we cut these <ix>kamunggay</ix> branches very short? <i>a</i> cropped short.

<p><b>ítir</b> <i>n</i> @ether.

<p><b>itirinaryu</b> <i>n</i> @itinerary.

<p><b>itlib</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] <b>1</b> @bite gently with the front teeth. <i>Miitlib (nangitlib) siya sa íyang ngábil arun dílì mahikatawa,</i> He just bit his lips to keep from laughing. <b>2</b> @nibble at. <i>Itlíbun lang sa isdà ang paun apan dílì ang tagà,</i> The <pb n=407>fish just nibbles at the bait but not the hook. <b>&mdash; ug asin</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be so hard up as to have barely anything to eat (lit. bite salt). <i>Nag-itlib mig asin sa kapait pagkapapha sa ákung bána,</i> We can barely eat now since my husband got fired.

<p><b>itlug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @egg. <b>2</b> @testicles. <b>putì ug, ang &mdash;</b> cowardly. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b6(1)] lay an egg. <i>Muitlug (mangitlug) na tingáli ang himungáan,</i> The hen is probably going to lay eggs. <b>2</b> [A13C13] serve, eat eggs. <i>Mag-itlug lang ta sa pamáhaw,</i> Let's just have eggs for breakfast. <b>3</b> [a12] hit in the testicles. <i>Nikúum si Kusáka kay naitlug,</i> Kosaka doubled up in pain because he was hit in the testicles. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> laying of eggs. <i>Ang mga manuk nga íyang gipamalit álang sa pangitlug,</i> The hens he bought are for laying eggs. <b>-ánan</b> <i>n</i> nesting place. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> egg-shaped. <b>2</b> yellow in color.

<p><b>itnib</b> (from <ix>binti</ix>) <i>n</i> @twenty (slang).

<p><b>itsa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c] @throw, @toss s.t. towards; be thrown off from a position due to impact. <i>Didtu siya mag-itsa sa íyang láya sa may lawumlawum,</i> He cast his net in the deep part of the sea. <i>Naitsa sa layù ang táwu dihang mibutu ang mína,</i> The man was thrown a long way when the mine exploded. <i>Iitsa ra ngari nákù ang ákung káwù,</i> Toss me my hat. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] shoot the ball in basketball. <i>Tagsa ray sipyat ug siyay muitsa,</i> He rarely misses when he shoots the ball. <b>&mdash; ug tualya</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] in boxing, throw the towel to a boxer to signify surrender. <i>Itsáhi nag tualya ang ímung buksidur kay gihímu na lang nang pantsing bag,</i> Toss your boxer a towel. He is being turned into a punching bag. <b>&mdash; puyra</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] remove s.o. from a job, position, dwelling without ceremony. <i>Itsa puyráhun (iitsa puyra) nátù nang mga iskuwátir,</i> Let's kick those squatters out. <b>&mdash; sa kálù</b> throw one's hat in the ring, enter a political race. <b>itsaitsa</b> <i>n</i> shooting of the ball into the basket for fun and practice. <i>v</i> [A; c] do some practice shooting in basketball.

<p><b>itsar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; b] cause to move the bowels. <i>Giitsaran (giitsahan) siyag dalì sa purga,</i> The purgative caused her to have a B.M. in no time. <b>2</b> [A13; a4] have loose bowel movements. <i>Nag-itsar (giitsar) ang bátà,</i> Her child has loose B.M. <b>3</b> excrete s.t. from the body. <i>Miitsar ang íyang dugù pag-alsa níyag bug-at,</i> She had a profuse discharge of menstrual blood when she lifted s.t. heavy. <i>Dúgay kang itsahan (itsáhan) ug mugámit kag ritardiks,</i> It will take you a long time to come if you use retardex.

<p><b>itsas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>HITSU.</sc>

<p><b>itsas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> one who has completed the fixed number of points for winning in pool billiards. <i>v</i> [B23(1)6; a2] wrap up the game in pool.

<p><b>itsay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mistress. <b>2</b> @{girl friend.} <i>v</i> [A2; a12] keep a mistress.

<p><b>itsiban</b> <i>n</i> medicinal plaster applied to sore places (from the brand name <i>Itchiban</i>).

<p><b>itsu diritsu</b> = <sc>HITSU DIRITSU.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HITSU.</sc>

<p><b>itsus</b> <i>v</i> [AC; a2] have @{sexual intercourse} (slang). <i>Nag-itsus ang managtrátu sa sulud sa mutil,</i> The two sweethearts made love in the motel.

<p><b>itsuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{male lover.} <b>2</b> @chum, @buddy (slang). <i>Short form:</i> <b>tsuy.</b> <i>Itsuy, padagkúta ku,</i> Let me have a light, pal. <b>2a</b> term of address between intimate male friends. <i>Ása ka, tsuy,</i> Where are you going, pal? <i>v</i> [A; c16] have a male lover.

<p><b>ítu</b> <i>n</i> general name for @catfish. <b>itúhun</b> <i>a</i> coloration of chicken feathers, variety of a <ix>talisáyun</ix> or <ix>lambuhun</ix> type: dark green feathers interspersed with black or grey feathers, esp. on the breast.

<p><b>ítuk</b> <i>v</i> [A23; a1b3] <b>1</b> @provoke s.o., make s.o. angry. <i>Naítuk ang bána kay dugayan mag-ílis ang asáwa,</i> The husband was irritated because his wife took so long to get dressed. <i>Hikaiktan (giitúkan) ku sa ákung inahan kay dúgay kung mipaúlì,</i> My mother got angry at me because I came home late. <b>2</b> stimulate interest in s.t. <i>Itúkun ku siya sa pagpanulat,</i> I'll stimulate his interest in writing. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> anger. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> done with annoyance.

<p><b>itum</b> <i>a</i> @black. <b>&mdash; ug dílà</b> <i>a</i> having a black spot on the tongue, a sign that a person is a <ix>buyágan.</ix> <b>&mdash; ug kasingkásing, tanlag</b> cruel, heartless. <i>Way kalúuy ang itum ug tanlag,</i> The heartless fellow has no mercy. <i>v</i> [AB; a] become black, make s.t. black. <i>Akuy miitum sa sapátus mung putì,</i> I dyed your white shoes black. <i>Muitum (maitum) ang ímung úban ug ímung tináun,</i> Your grey hair will turn black if you dye it. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B14] be very black. <i>Nag-ítum na lang ang ákung buktun sa mga bun-ug,</i> My arms were black with bruises. <b>itman</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, black, fresh-water shrimp. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> somewhat dark or black-colored. <i>Dì siya angayang magsul-ub ug pula kay itumun,</i> She doesn't look good in red because she is dark-complexioned.

<p><b>it-un</b> <i>a</i> @intelligent. <i>Ang bátang it-un dalì rang musabut,</i> An intelligent child easily understands. <i>v</i> [B12] become intelligent.

<p><b>*ítung</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> stay put and do nothing when told to do s.t. or when there is a clear need. <i>Nagpaítung nà siya bísan ug walay túbig ilung-ag,</i> He just sits there doing nothing even though there is no water to <pb n=408>cook with. <b>2</b> endure s.t. without moving. <i>Nagpaítung sila sa katugnaw nga nagpaábut sa trák,</i> They sat around shivering waiting for the bus.

<p><b>ítus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] evaporate or boil off liquid from a mixture until it reaches a certain consistency. <i>Itúsun nákù ang arníbal arun maispísu,</i> I'll boil the syrup so that it will become thick. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> evaporating dish.

<p><b>itus-ítus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] bear intense hardships or sorrow alone. <i>Masakit ka ug muitus-ítus lang ka sa ímung kaguul,</i> You'll get sick if you bear your sorrow in silence. <i>Itus-itúsun námù ang kalisud arun mu makatunghà,</i> We will go through hardships so that you can have an education.

<p><b>ítut</b> <i>v</i> [AC; a12] have sexual intercourse (coarse slang). <i>Itútun níya ang ílang binatunan,</i> He will screw their maid.

<p><b>ituy</b> <i>n</i> @puppy, kid of goats, baby of monkeys and some other animals. <b>ituy-ítuy</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b(1)] @kowtow to, behave obsequiously to. <i>Muituy-ítuy (mupaituy-ítuy) siya sa mayur arun hatágag pabur,</i> He will fawn on the mayor to get a favor. <i>Nagpaituy-ítuy siya sa dalágang íyang gihaláran,</i> He fawned on the lady he courted. <i>Ituy-itúyi (paituy-itúyi) ang ímung ámu ug gustu kang umintúhan,</i> Serve your boss obsequiously if you want to be promoted. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> young of a squash, esp. the climbing variety. <b>2</b> @shill, one employed in gambling to act as a customer and attract bettors to the game. <b>3</b> one who kowtows.

<p><b>íwa</b> <i>n</i> @{wet nurse}. <i>v</i> [A; c1] act as a wet nurse, be made wet nurse. Nakaíwa kug bátang hilak, I have nursed a baby that tends to cry.

<p><b>iwad</b> = <sc>IGWAD</sc>.

<p><b>íwag</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] illuminate with a moveable source of light. <i>Iwági sa ispat ang d[=á]n nga ímung agian,</i> Light your way with a flashlight. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> moveable light used to illuminate s.t. <b>2</b> light, source of inspiration or guidance. <i>Ang ákung hinigugma mauy gihímù kung iwag sa ákung kinabúhì,</i> My sweetheart is the light of my life. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2C12; b(1)] go fishing using a light to attract the fish. <b>-in-an, in-an(->), pinang-an</b> <i>n</i> fish caught using a light.

<p><b>iwang-íwang</b> <i>v</i> [A3PB5; b6c1] walk with the legs apart due to pain in the groin or fat legs. <i>Nag-iwang-íwang siya paglakaw kay may hubag ang íyang búgan,</i> He's walking with his legs apart because he has a boil in his groin.

<p><b>iwas, íwas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> slip away from, get out of the way. <i>Miiwas siya sa íyang mga kúyug nga pulus hubug,</i> He slipped away from his companions who were all drunk. <i>Kun wà pa makaiwas, igù na untà siya,</i> Had he not dodged, he would have been hit. <b>2</b> avoid doing s.t. <i>Ubligasiyun nga dílì maiwasan,</i> Obligations one cannot avoid. <b>3</b> [A3] miss a mark. <i>Miiwas ug diyútay sa íyang úlu ang bala,</i> The bullet missed his head by just a little bit. <i>Miíwas hinúun ka sa ámung pista,</i> You missed our fiesta (came after it).

<p><b>íway</b> <i>v</i> [A2; ab2] move out of the way, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miíway ang mga táwu pag-ági sa bumbíru,</i> The people moved aside when the fire truck passed by. <i>Pag-íway sa pangánud, nakítà ang búlan,</i> When the clouds drifted away, you could see the moon. <i>Mga pulis ang miíway sa mga táwu nga nag-ali sa agiánan,</i> The police cleared the people who were blocking the route out of the way. <i>Iwáya ang mga kúgun,</i> Push the saw grass out of the way. <b>&mdash; sa kadáut</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c6] spare s.o. from a mishap or danger. <i>Ákù ta kang iíway sa kadáut kay gimahal ta ka,</i> I'll keep you from danger, for I love you.

<p><b>iwígik</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] for pigs to squeal. <i>Miiwígik ang babuy pagkadungug sa hugangkul sa baldi,</i> The pig squealed when it heard the clatter of the pail.

<p><b>íwik</b> = <sc>IWÍGIK</sc>.

<p><b>iwit</b> <i>a</i> last in a race, class, or anything where things are compared. <i>Iwit siya sa klási,</i> He's the dumbest in the class. <i>v</i> [B126; b] come out last. <i>Naiwit (nangiwit) siya sa banggà sa lánguy,</i> She came out last in the swimming race. <i>Dílì siya maiwit sa hitsuraay lang,</i> If you consider looks, she doesn't come out bad (lit. the last). <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] allow oneself to be outdone. <i>Wà siya magpaiwit. Mitindug ug mibayli pud,</i> He did not let himself be outdone. He got up and danced too.

<p><b>íya</b> preposed gen. form from <ix>siya</ix>. <i>Iyang libru, His book. Íyang gibása,</i> He read it. <b>sa [**dash changed to -]-ng lagay, luslus</b> (or any part of the body) strong expression of disbelief (coarse, if a coarse word is used; not coarse, if a mild word is used). <i>Mangasáwa sa íyang túngul, unsay ibuhì,</i> Get married, my foot (lit. stomach)! What will they live on? <b>&mdash; ra, &mdash; ra dì manakud</b> phrase uttered when discussing s.t. bad that happened to s.o. to forestall the possibility that it should happen to anyone else. <i>Kadakù sa íyang kabahung, íya ra dì manakud,</i> My, what a huge ulcer! God forbid that anyone else should get it. <i>v</i> [a3] be his, hers. <i>Maíya ni ug íyang bayran,</i> It will be his if he pays for it. <b>iyaíya, iyáhay</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> each one did [so-and-so]. <i>Nag-iyáhay silag panghílak pagkadungug sa balità,</i> Each one of them cried upon hearing the news. <b>2</b> each do alone for himself. <i>Nag-iyaíya (nag-iyáhay) silag lung-ag,</i> Each cooked <pb n=409>his own dinner. <b>sig-</b> [A13] each one [does, did] to his own. <i>Nagsig-íyag pamaúlì ang mga táwu dihang nag-ulan,</i> All the people returned to their own homes when it rained. <b>tag-</b> <i>n</i> @owner. <i>Siyay tag-íya sa sini Uryinti,</i> He is the owner of the Oriente theater. <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> become the owner of. <i>Ug siyay matag-íya sa tindáhan, wà nay mupalit didtu,</i> If he is the owner of the store, nobody will buy there. <b>2</b> [A12] have acquired possession. <i>Pára nakatag-íya ug usa ka taksi garbúsu na siya kaáyu,</i> Just because she acquired a taxi, she has become very haughty. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5] own s.t. <i>Gastúsu kaáyu ning ma[**à ?]nag-íya ta ug awtu,</i> It is expensive to own a car. <b>tag-iyáhan</b> <i>a</i> having an owner. <i>Dílì ni ikabaligyà kay tag-iyáhan na ni,</i> I cannot sell it because s.o. owns it. <ix>see also</ix> <sc>IDYAIDYA</sc>, <sc>KADAÍYA</sc>, <ix>and</ix> <sc>KINAÍYA</sc>.

<p><b>iyà</b> <i>n</i> title or term of address for women, much older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. by this title. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> @aunt. <i>v</i> [A12; b8] have an aunt. <b>-an sa pag-agáwan</b> <i>n</i> @cousin (of any degree) of one's father or mother.

<p><b>iyágak</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] <b>1</b> for a chicken to @squawk in pain. <b>2</b> for a child to cry upon being punished. <i>Muiyágak ka man lagi ug hibunalan,</i> You'll cry if I hit you. <b>3</b> cry out in pain like a chicken, squawk. <i>n</i> @squawking of fowl, cry of a naughty child, or similar sound.

<p><b>íyak</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] @chirp, @cheep. <i>Muíyak ang mga pisù,</i> The chicks will cheep. <i>n</i> @chirping, @cheeping.

<p><b>iyak-iyak</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird, the barred graybird: <b><i>Coracina striata</i></b>.

<p><b>iyása</b> = <sc>IÁSA<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>iyat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @snobbish, unwilling to mix with people deemed inferior. <i>Iyat na siya kay naidukar man sa syudad,</i> She is snobbish now because she went to school in the city. <b>2</b> @choosy, unwilling to take s.t. one deems not up to his class. <i>Iyáta nímu uy, dì ka man musakay ug paráda,</i> My, how choosy you are. You won't ride on a rig. <i>v</i> [B2] become snobbish or choosy and particular.

<p><b>iyawan</b> = <sc>AWAYAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁWAY</sc>.

<p><b>iyáwat</b> for s.t. small to be of some use. <i>Díay diyis iyáwat na lang ning ikapugung sa gútum,</i> Here's ten cents. Perhaps this might help stave off hunger. <i>Dì ku ibaligyà ning yútà. Iyáwat ra ni sa ákung mga anak,</i> I won't sell this piece of land. It will surely be of use for my children. <i>v</i> [AN; a12] make good use of s.t. one has little of or can only get in limited quantities. <i>Mag-iyáwat ka sa dáan mung sapátus,</i> Wear your old shoes to economize. <i>Iyawáta ang ímung panahug tuun,</i> Make good use of your limited time by studying. <b>(->)</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>IYÁWAT</sc>. <b>2</b> [AN; a12] do s.t. in order to save on s.t. or get s.t. not readily available. <i>Mikúyug siya nákù kay nangiyawat nga malibri sa plíti,</i> He came along with me because he could save by having me pay the fare. <i>Miapil siya sa tím kay giiyawat ang unipurmi,</i> He joined the team to get a free uniform.

<p><b>iyù</b> <i>n</i> term of address or title for a man much older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. by this title. <b>Iyù Hantuy</b> Uncle John, the imaginary character representing the Filipino people (s.t. like the American Uncle Sam). <i>Gituntu si Iyù Hantuy sa mga pulitiku,</i> Politicians are taking advantage of Uncle John.

<p><b>*iyukaristiku</b> <b>Kunggrísu &mdash;</b> @{Eucharistic Congress}.

<p><b>Iyurúpa</b> = <sc>URÚPA</sc>.

<p><b>íyut</b> <i>v</i> [A2SC; a2b2] have sexual intercourse with (avoided word). <i>Ikay nag-iyut sa míd?</i> Did you screw the maid? <b>íyut ta, yuta</b> coarse interjection of disbelief. <i>Yuta! Mu nay íyang gisulti apan dì ku mutúu,</i> My foot! That's what he says, but I don't believe it. <b>pala-(->)</b> <i>a</i> having great appetite for screwing.



<div1 id=K>
<head>K</head>


<p><b>ka<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>ka<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <b>1</b> linker between numeral and noun. <i>Tulu ka mansánas,</i> Three apples. <i>Líbu ka líbu,</i> Thousands and thousands. <b>2</b> between <ix>isig</ix> or <ix>masig</ix> and nouns. <i>Ísig nímu ka táwu,</i> Your fellow men. <i>Ang ílang masig ka áping,</i> Each of their cheeks. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> <ix>particle in expressing alternative situations</ix>: &lsquo;be it ... or&rsquo;. <i>Manágat giyud siya mag-ulan kag mag-ínit,</i> He goes fishing rain or shine.

<p><b>*ka<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <b>sa &mdash; [<ix>name</ix>], íla &mdash; [<ix>name</ix>]</b> at [name]'s place. <i>Adtu ku sa ka Banung (íla ka Banung),</i> I am going to Banong's place.

<p><b>ka<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> <i>n</i> @{letter K}.

<p><b>ka-<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>NAKA-</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MAKA-<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>ka-<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> affix forming nouns which mean &lsquo;one's <pb n=410>co-[noun]&rsquo;. <i>Ákung kaklási</i>, My classmate. <i>Ákung katagilungsud,</i> My fellow townsman. <i>Ákung kaáway,</i> My opponent.

<p><b>ka-<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> affix added to adjectives. Adjectives plus <ix>ka-</ix> have these uses: <b>1</b> as nouns which mean &lsquo;the state of being [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Tungud sa ákung kasubù,</i> Because of my sorrow. <i>Ang katahum sa palíbut,</i> The beauty of the surroundings. <b>2</b> in exclamations. <i>Kagwápu sa ímung balay!</i> What a beautiful house you have! <i>Kadakù!</i> How big it is! <b>3</b> after <ix>unsa</ix> to form a phrase: how (to what extent) s.t. is [adj.]. <i>Unsa kadakù?</i> How big is it? <i>Dì mabatbat kun unsa kangilngig,</i> Words cannot describe how horrible it was.

<p><b>ka-<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> = <sc>MAKA-<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>ká</b> <i>n</i> @hemorrhoids. <i>Gipaupirahan na ba níya ang ká sa íyang lubut?</i> Did he have his hemorrhoids operated on?

<p><b>káag</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c16] move in @haste. <i>Nakáag (mikáag) siya kay mibagting na ang alas syíti,</i> She was in a hurry because it was already seven o'clock. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> doing s.t. with great haste and carelessly. <i>Kaag kaáyu kang mamuhatbuhat. May mga sayup,</i> You are very fast but careless in your work. You made lots of mistakes. <i>v</i> [B15; a12] be, become @careless. <i>Kinsa guy musálig nímus trabáhu nga nagkaag ka man lang?</i> Who would trust your work when you work so carelessly?

<p><b>ka-an<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> inflectional affix: the local passive potential, future. see <sc>-AN<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>ka-an<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> affix forming nouns <b>1</b> added to adjectives to form nouns which mean &lsquo;the quality of [adj.]&rsquo;. <i>Kalampúsan,</i> Success. <i>Kalipáyan,</i> Happiness. <i>Ang íyang kasuk-ánun mauy usa ka kasukwahían sa íyang maáyung pamatásan,</i> His quickness to anger is not in harmony with his good manners. <b>2</b> added to nouns or adjectives to form nouns which refer to a group of [noun]'s. <i>Ang mga kabatáan,</i> The children. <i>Balay sa kahiláyan,</i> Den of vice. <i>Kanipáan,</i> Nipa swamp. <b>2a</b> forming numbers, the multiples of ten's. <i>Katluan</i>, Thirty. <i>Kapituan</i>, Seventy.

<p><b>ka-an<hi rend=sub>3</i> (<-)</b> affix added to adjectives which refer to a state to form nouns which refer to the achievement of the state. <i>Way katin-áwan ang inyung burúka,</i> Your case has not reached a clear resolution. <i>Way kahusáyan ang inyung burúka ug isig pasángil,</i> Your case will never be resolved if all you do is accuse each other.

<p><b>kaang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> flowerpot. <i>v</i> [A; c16] plant in a flowerpot.

<p><b>kaang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> having legs apart when walking. <i>v</i> [B; a12P] walk with legs apart. <i>Mukaang siya ug lakaw kay may hubag sa bilahan,</i> He walks with legs apart because he has a boil in the crotch.

<p><b>kaangkáang</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] go here and there, from place to place in excitement. <i>Nagkaangkáang siya ug pangítag kwarta nga íyang mabáwun,</i> He went here and there excitedly looking for money to take with him on his trip.

<p><b>káat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] go out and wander around aimlessly to pass idle time. <i>Mukáat ku kay gilaáyan ku dinhi,</i> I'll go out and mess around because I'm bored here.

<p><b>kába</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> carry close to the chest or strapped to the back. <i>Ang inahang ungguy nga nagkába sa íyang ituy,</i> A mother monkey carrying its little one. <b>2</b> carry a house to move it. <i>Gikába níla ang balay ngadtu sa tabuk,</i> They carried the house across the street. <i>n</i> = <sc>KABAHAN</sc>. (->) <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] copulate, esp. animals. <i>Ang irù mukaba bísag náa atubángan sa daghang táwu,</i> Dogs will copulate even in front of people. <b>kabahan</b> <i>n</i> strap for a load carried on the back.

<p><b>kabad</b> <i>v</i> [A23] run or walk instantly without hesitation. <i>Mikabad pagpanágan ang mga sugarul sa pagkakità níla sa pulis,</i> The gamblers took to their heels when they saw the police.

<p><b>kábag</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b4] have @{gas pains}. <i>Gikabágan ku humag káun sa nangkà,</i> I had gas pains after eating the jackfruit. <i>n</i> @{gas pain}.

<p><b>kabaghak</b> = <sc>BALÁHAK</sc>.

<p><b>kabahíru</b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>kabahung</b> <i>n</i> large and deep sore caused by an infection. <i>v</i> [B2; b4] get a sore. <i>Makabahung nang núka kun dì tagdun,</i> That sore will turn into an ulcer if you don't take care of it. <i>Gikabahungan ang íyang tiil,</i> His foot developed a deep ulcer. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having deep ulcers.

<p><b>kabàkábà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. @butterfly, orange in color, and unusually big. <b>2</b> k.o. @sailboat the sail of which looks like butterfly wings. <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> turn into a <ix>kabàkábà</ix> @butterfly. <b>2</b> ride, make into this sort of sailboat.

<p><b>kabal</b> <i>n</i> one point short of winning. <i>Kabal na ang ámung iskur. Usa na lang ka syát, daug na,</i> Our score is just one point short of winning. One more shot to victory. <i>v</i> [B2] reach a score which is one point to winning.

<p><b>kabalungga</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medicinal oil made from the snake melon (<b><i>Trichosanthes quinquangulata</i></b>).

<p><b>kabalíti</b> = <sc>KABILÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>kabalyiríya</b> <i>n</i> @cavalry, horse-mounted soldier <pb n=411>(not mechanized).

<p><b>kabalyíru<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @gentleman. <b>2</b> acting like a gentleman. <b>3</b> spending liberally. <b>prísu &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> one under house arrest. <b>2</b> trustee in prison who can go about as he pleases. <i>v</i> [AB12; c1] spend on a liberal scale, become a @{liberal spender}. <i>Wà giyuy búngang makúhà ug kabalyirúhun (ikabalyíru) ug gastu ang kwarta,</i> No good can result of it if he spends money lavishly.

<p><b>kabalyíru<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small ornamental tree with pinnate leaves bearing red or yellow flowers: <b><i>Caesalpinia pulcherrima</i></b>.

<p><b>kabalyíti</b> = <sc>KABILÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>kabalyu, kabalyus</b> <i>n</i> @horsepower. <i>Tris kabalyus,</i> Three horsepower.

<p><b>kaban<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @trunk, @chest. <i>v</i> [a12] store in a trunk. <b>&mdash; mundu</b> <i>n</i> trunk with a rounded top and lined with upholstery tacks along its sides. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @rectangular in shape. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a rectangular shape. <i>Kinabana pagtábas ang líab sa ákung sinínà,</i> Cut the neckline of my dress square. <b>kabankaban</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bivalve, so called because it opens and closes like a trunk.

<p><b>kaban<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> measurement equivalent to twenty-five gantas. <i>Usa ka kaban nga bugas humay,</i> A cavan of rice. <b>-is(<-)</b> cavans (plural).

<p><b>kabang</b> a <b>1</b> @spotted, @splotched. <i>Ang ákung iring kabang putì ug itum,</i> My pet cat is spotted white and black. <b>2</b> unevenly painted or cut. <i>Kabang ang íyang tupi,</i> His haircut is uneven. <b>3</b> uneven in voice because of fright, adolescence, and the like. <i>Kabang ang íyang tíngug kay hápit na maulitáwu,</i> His voice is uneven because he is an adolescent. <i>v</i> [B2; a] be @splotched, @uneven. <i>Nagkabang ang íyang nawung sa ap-ap,</i> His face is splotched with fungus. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B145] intensely uneven or splotched. <i>Nagkábang ang íyang nawung sa pulbus,</i> Her face was <corr sic=splothced>splotched</corr> with powder.

<p><b>kab-ang</b> <i>n</i> @hook, @crook. <i>v</i> [AB3; ac] hook around s.t., for a crook to catch onto s.t., cause it to do so. <i>Mikab-ang (nakab-ang) ang angkla sa dakung batu mau nga wà mabira,</i> The anchor hooked on a big stone. That's why we couldn't get it up. <i>Nagkab-ang ang gunitánan sa páyung sa lansang,</i> The umbrella is hung by the handle over the nail. <i>Ikab-ang ug hugut ang ímung buktun sa sanga,</i> Hook your arm tight around the branch. <i>n</i> hook that holds or grabs s.t.

<p><b>kabangáhan</b> = <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.

<p><b>kabarit</b> <i>n</i> @cabaret. <b>-íra</b> <i>n</i> @{cabaret girl}.

<p><b>kabaryu</b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>kabási</b> <i>n</i> @{gizzard shad}: <b><i>Nematalosa nasus</i></b> and <b><i>Anodontostoma chacunda</i></b>.

<p><b>kábat</b> = <sc>KALÁBAT</sc>.

<p><b>Kabatáang Makabáyan</b> <i>n</i> name of a militant, leftist youth organization (Pilipino for <i>@{Patriotic Youths}</i>).

<p><b>kabatkabat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] hop from island to island in going s.w. <i>Gikabatkabat sa mga kuntrabandista ang mga pulù</i>, The smugglers hopped from one island to another.

<p><b>kábaw</b><hi rend=sub>1</i> = <sc>KALABAW</sc>.

<p><b>kábaw</b><hi rend=sub>2</i> <i>n</i> female @genitalia (euphemism).

<p><b>kabawkábaw</b> = <sc>KINALABAW</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALABAW</sc>.

<p><b>kab-ay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] lay the @forearms over s.t., generally for support. <i>Mikab-ay siya sa barútu dihang gikápuy nag linanguy</i>, He hung onto the boat when he grew tired of swimming.

<p><b>kabayru</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KABALYÍRU</sc><hi rend=sub>2</i>. <b>2</b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>kabáyù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @horse. <b>2</b> @paramour (slang). <b>3</b> @{knight in chess}. <b>4</b> face card showing a horse in Spanish cards, worth eleven. <b>&mdash; sa dágat</b> @{sea horse}. <b>&mdash; sa dáru</b> plow beam. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] <b>1</b> ride, bring s.t. on a horse. <b>2</b> ride, mount on s.t. <i>Bansay siyang mukabayù sa bisiklíta</i>, She rides a bicycle expertly. <b>3</b> [A; b6] be on top of s.o. in wrestling or similar activity. <b>3a</b> have sexual @intercourse with (slang). <i>Nakakabayù aku níyag kas-á</i>, I have had intercourse with her once. <b>3b</b> [b6] be mobbed. <i>Gikabay-an sa mga batan-un ang mga artista</i>, The movie stars were mobbed by the young people. <b>kinabay-anay</b> <i>v [c] have intercourse. <i>Udtung tútuk, nagkinabay-anay pa gihápun!</i> It's high noon and they are still having intercourse! <b>Culu-, kabayùkabáyù</b> <b>1</b> folding @{ironing board}. <b>2</b> toy horse. <b>-in-</b> <i>n <b>1</b> long-armed @{corn grinder}. <b>2</b> = <sc>KULUKABÁYÙ</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>kinabay-an</b> <i>n manner of riding. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @horse-like. <i>Kabayúug nawung</i>, Horse-faced.&dagger;

<p><b>kabdus</b> = <sc>MABDUS</sc>.

<p><b>kabhang</b> = <sc>ALUKABHANG</sc>.

<p><b>kábi</b> = <sc>KÁBIG</sc>.

<p><b>kabiba, kabíba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] carry s.t. strapped or slung over the shoulder. <i>Hasta bátà nga gamay kabibahan pa giyud ug putus</i>, Even the small child has to carry a package over her shoulders. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] wear s.t. wrapped around the torso. <i>Nagkabíba siyang nalígù</i>, She took a bath with s.t. wrapped around her body. <b>3</b> [A; c1] <b>a</b> make into a @{shoulder strap}. <b>b</b> make into a @chemise or s.t. to wrap around the body. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> shoulder strap. <b>2</b> loose chemise or anything wrapped around the torso.

<p><b>kabíbat</b> <i>v</i> [ac] @climb holding on to s.t. with both hands, climb up to get. <i>Kabibáta kanang mga sambag nga hinug</i>, Climb up to get those ripe tamarinds. <i>Ikabíbat ang písì <pb n=412>ngadtu</i>, Climb up there to put the rope up.

<p><b>kabibit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @{hold on} to s.t. <i>Nagkabibit kug malíta</i>, I was carrying a suitcase. <i>Sanga nga íyang gikabibitan</i>, The branch he was holding on to. <b>2</b> [A; b] <b>a</b> put a @handle onto s.t. <b>b</b> make s.t. into a handle. <i>n</i> handle, s.t. with which one holds on to s.t.

<p><b>kábig</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] <b>1</b> make s.t. move toward one; @attract towards s.o., to s.t. <i>Nakábig ákung pagtagad sa manánuy níyang tíngug</i>, Her sweet voice attracted my attention. <i>Kining tawhána nagkábig sa íyang signus kay kiat kaáyung mudráyib</i>, This fellow is courting danger with his reckless driving. <i>Kabíga (ikábig) ang túbig sa kanal</i>, Draw the water towards the ditch. <b>2</b> @convert. <i>Kabíga (ikábig) ang mga Múrus</i>, Convert the Muslims. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> convert.

<p><b>kabíkab</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a2] @climb up with the hands taking an important part. <i>Makabíkab ku ning inyung bintánà kay náay káhuy sa tapad</i>, I can climb up to your window because there is a tree next to it.

<p><b>kabíkag</b> = <sc>KABÍKAB</sc>.

<p><b>kabil</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @touch, brush against s.t. lightly. <i>Nabanggaan ímung awtu? Wà, nakabilan lang</i>, Did you wreck your car? No, it was just scratched. <b>-l-un(<-), -únun</b> <i>a</i> @touchy, @sensitive. <i>Kalabílun (kabilúnun) nà siyag buut. Daling masukù</i>, He's very sensitive. He gets angry right away.

<p><b>kabílaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. slender, creeping herb of waste places, with sticky sap used as a poultice for disorders of the uterus: <b><i>Commelina benghalensis</i></b>.

<p><b>kabildu</b> <i>n</i> @conversation. <i>v</i> [C; ac] @converse. <i>Nagkabildu mi báhin sa ámung trabáhu</i>, We were talking about our jobs. <i>Ngánung mangísug ka man? Kabildúhun ta lang gud ni</i>, Why do you have to blow your top? We can talk this out calmly. <i>Unsa may inyung gikabildúhan (gipanagkabildúhan)?</i> What were you talking about? <b>kabilduhay</b> <i>v</i> [C] @converse. <b>Culu-</b> = <sc>KABILDU</sc>.

<p><b>kabilinggan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @impediment to one's freedom of action. <i>Makalangyaw ku kay ulitáwu pang way kabilinggan</i>, I'm free to travel as I am unmarried and have no responsibilities. <i>Dúnay kabilinggan ang yútà</i>, There's some problem with the title to that land. <b>walay &mdash;</b> <b>a</b> of no impediment. <b>b</b> of no importance. <i>Dinhay áway piru wà tuy kabilinggan</i>, There was a fight, but it was nothing worth talking about. <i>Way kabilinggan nang samára. Kadlas ra</i>, That wound was nothing. It was just a scratch. <i>Way kabilinggan ug hutdan tag kwarta kay makahuwam ta</i>, It doesn't matter if we run out of money because we can always borrow. <b>2</b> responsibility. <i>Dakung kabilinggan ang pagkuput ug dakung kwarta</i>, It's a big responsibility to be in charge of a large sum of money. <b>3</b> things to attend to. <i>Dúgay siyang maulì kay may kabilinggan pang giatiman sa upisína</i>, He will come home late because he has s.t. to attend to at the office. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having responsibilities.

<p><b>kabilíti</b> <i>n</i> @{ridge pole} of a roof. <i>v</i> [A; a12b(1)] make, put in a ridge pole.

<p><b>kabilkabil</b> = <sc>KAWILKAWIL</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAWIL</sc>.

<p><b>kabilúsu</b> <i>a</i> ready to take @offense and therefore trouble-prone. <i>Dílì katiáwan ang táwung kabilúsu</i>, You can't play jokes on people who take offense easily. <i>v</i> [B1; c5] become readily offended and therefore trouble-prone. <i>Ug magkabilúsu ka íning dapíta, tabangan ka giyud sa mga buguy dinhi</i>, If you act touchy around these parts, the toughs will gang up on you.

<p><b>kabilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bars for reinforcing concrete. <b>2</b> iron bars for window grills. <i>v</i> [c] put iron bars in.

<p><b>kábin</b> <i>n</i> ship's @cabin. <i>v</i> [A1] travel cabin class.

<p><b>kab-ing</b> = <sc>KAB-ANG</sc>.

<p><b>kabinit</b> <i>n</i> @cabinet, case with drawers or shelves for medicine, food, jewelry, etc.

<p><b>kabir</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a3b8] make a @profit. <i>Dakug makabir ang nigusyung ismagling</i>, There's a big profit to be made in the smuggling business. <i>Bay-ansil mauy ákung nigusyung nakabiran</i>, I made profit in the business of buying and selling.

<p><b>kábir</b> <i>n</i> @cover. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] put a cover on s.t. <i>Kabíri ang libru arun dì mahúgaw</i>, Put cover on the book so it won't get dirty. <b>2</b> [A; c] protect oneself from blows with the hands. <i>Mukábir siya dáyun kun dyában</i>, He covers immediately if his opponent jabs him. <b>3</b> cover the ball in a volleyball game. <i>Páwul kay síku ímung gikábir</i>, Foul! You covered the ball with your elbow. <b>kabirkábir</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>dílì, walà &mdash;</b> fail to keep s.t. concealed, be direct where propriety requires the opposite. <i>Sa walay kabirkábir íya akung gihingawátan</i>, Without beating around the bush, he accused me of being a thief.

<p><b>kabísa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> provincial capital. <b>2</b> village chief. <b>&mdash; dibaranggay, sa baryu</b> = <sc>KABÍSA</sc>, <i>2</i>. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become the village chief.

<p><b>kabisáda</b> <i>n</i> @bridle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] put a bridle. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a bridle.

<p><b>kabisádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> have complete @knowledge of s.t. <i>Kabisádu na nákù ang (kabisádu na aku sa) mga dálan dinhi</i>, I'm completely familiar with roads here. <b>2</b> have complete knowledge of a procedure. <i>Kabisádu kaáyu siya <pb n=413>sa mga makina</i>, He is very knowledgeable about engines.

<p><b>kabisdak</b> <i>n</i> an old variety of paddy @rice with long, white grains.

<p><b>kabisilya</b> <i>n</i> head of the table. <i>v</i> [A; b] sit, seat at the head of the table.

<p><b>kabisíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{capital town}. <b>2</b> @seat at the place at the table occupied by the most honored person in the group.

<p><b>kabit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> @{cling to}, @{hang on to}. <i>Punù na kaáyu ang trák. Mukabit lang ta</i>, The truck is already full. Let's just hang on to the sides. <b>2a</b> join in on a transportation franchise on a minor basis. <i>Mukabit na lang sila sa ámung linya kay duruha ra man ka buuk ang ílang dyip</i>, They have decided to let their jeep run on our line as they only have two. <b>2b</b> hook up to a telephone with another line. <b>3</b> set decorations in another material. <i>Ang sinínà sa birhin gikabitan ug mga brilyanti</i>, The dress of the image was inlaid with diamonds. <b>4</b> [B126] be late in planting (grab on to the tail end of the season). <i>Makabit giyud ning átung pagpugas tungud sa kadúgay sa ulan</i>, We'll be late sowing because the rains came late. <b>5</b> [A; a12] take a paramour or lover. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> connection of public transportation, party line in telephone. <i>Bísi kaáyu ang tilipunu kay daghang kabit</i>, The telephone is very busy because there are a lot of party lines. <b>2</b> s.o. with whom one has extra-marital relations. <i>Nahibalu na giyud ang asáwa nga may kabit diay si Tiruy</i>, The wife finally found out that Terry had a paramour. <b>3</b> planted at the end of the season.

<p><b>kábit</b> <i>n</i> @{gambling game} of tossing coins, where bets are placed on heads or tails. <i>v</i> [AC; c3] toss coins.

<p><b>kab-it</b> = <sc>KAB-ANG</sc>.

<p><b>kabkab</b><hi rend=sub>1</i> <i>v</i> [A; a] @dig a hole by scooping out dirt. <i>Gikabkab sa irù ang bukug</i>, The dog dug up the bone. <b>&mdash; sa, ang kabúhì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] press the finger tips into the pit of the stomach to relieve it of <ix>kabúhì</ix> and massage it with a digging motion. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> action of digging and disturbing the surface. <i>Pwirting kabkabay sa mga táwu sa nasunúgan!</i> How the people dug around the ruins of the fire!

<p><b>kabkab</b><hi rend=sub>2</i> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fern, grown as an ornamental: <b><i>Drynaria quercifolia</i></b>. <b>2</b> k.o. light brown, thick, edible fungus.

<p><b>kabkab</b><hi rend=sub>3</i> = <sc>KALABKAB</sc>.

<p><b>kabli</b> <i>n</i> @cable, wire rope.

<p><b>kabligráma</b> <i>n</i> @cablegram.

<p><b>kabling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] turn s.t. heavy over on its side. <i>Dì ka makakabling ánang aparadur nga mau rang usa</i>, You can't turn that chiffonier over on its side all by yourself.

<p><b>kablit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; ab2c] @touch, @move s.t. by curling the fingers. <i>Maáyu siyang mukablit ug sista</i>, He plays the guitar well. <i>Gikablit ku siya arun mulíngì</i>, I touched her to get her to turn to me. <i>Hikablitan gánì ang gátu, maimpas ka giyud</i>, If you accidentally pull the trigger, you'll be done for. <b>2</b> [A12N; a12] ask a favor readily from a close acquaintance or friend. <i>Makakablit (makapangablit) ta sa átung manidy&icaron;r ug dúna tay kinahanglánun</i>, We can always ask a favor from the manager if ever we need anything. <i>Wà giyud kay makablit dihà sa kustums?</i> Don't you have any friends (to help us out) at the Customs? <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] play a guitar. <i>Unsa mang kantaha ang íyang gikinablit?</i> What's that song he's playing on the guitar? <i>n</i> action of playing a guitar. <b>-l-un, -l-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> sensitive, easily angered.

<p><b>kabra</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> break s.t. open by prying it. <i>Bára ray makakabra niánang bintánà</i>, We can force that window open only with an iron bar. <i>Kabráha ang kandádu ug way yáwi</i>, Force the lock open if there's no key. <b>2</b> remove a big portion from s.t. <i>Kabráha nang pánit nga kagumkum</i>, Get that big chunk of crunchy skin of the roast pig. <i>Wà mahimbà ang búus nga gikabráhan ug usa ka trák nga mais</i>, It hardly seemed to make any difference that they took a truckload of grain from the granary, there was so much. <b>bára di-</b> <i>n</i> @crowbar.

<p><b>kabtang</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BUTANG<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kabting</b> = <sc>KULABTING</sc>.

<p><b>kábu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @foreman. <i>Ang ákung amahan mauy kábu sa trabáhu sa karsáda</i>, My father is the foreman on the highway construction. <b>2</b> corporal in an armed force. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a foreman or corporal.

<p><b>kabù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> dip water, @scoop solids out of a container. <i>Kabuun ta ning túbig sa tangki</i>, Dip the water out of the tank. <i>Ayawg ikabù ang ímung básu sa bugas</i>, Don't use your glass to scoop the rice out. <b>1a</b> [A2] take in some water in tilting to one side. <i>Pagtakílid sa barku, nakakabù giyug diyútayng túbig</i>, When the ship listed, it took in some water in the process. <b>2</b> fetch water. <i>Túa siya sa atábay, nagkabù</i>, He's at the well, fetching water. <b>3</b> [a12] make, use as water dipper. <i>n</i> s.t. used as a dipper or scoop. <b>kab-anan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> container for fetching water. <b>2</b> place from which water is fetched. <b>3</b> s.t. used to dip or scoop up. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] catch fish fry with a dip net. <i>Mangabù mig bangus páras púnung</i>, We will catch the fry of milkfish with a dip net for the fishpond.

<pb n=414>

<p><b>kabud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] tie ropes, strings, wires around s.t. large. <i>Kinsay nagkabud sa alambri diri sa halígi?</i> Who wound the wire around the post? <i>Ikabud ang písì sa kabáyù sa íyang hiktanan,</i> Tie the rope of the horse to the post. <i>n</i> rope for tying.

<p><b>kabuduk</b> <i>n</i> @{red light district}.

<p><b>kabug<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. large fruit bat with a dark brown color, growing to a five or even seven-foot wingspan. The flesh is highly esteemed. <b>kabgan</b> <i>n</i> abode of this sort of bat. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] stay awake at night and sleep during the day like a bat. <i>Pirmi kung mabilar kay nagkinabug ang bátà,</i> I'm always losing sleep because the child stays awake at night. <i>n</i> a k.o. triple-looped hitch used to fasten a line to a piece of wood so that it will not slip when the rope is pulled parallel to the wood. So called because the loops form what look like a bat's claws holding to the wood.

<p><b>kabug<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> variety of millet (dáwa) that is small, rounded, and dark, but highly prized.

<p><b>kabugasun, kabugwasun</b> <i>n</i> morning star.

<p><b>kabúgaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. astringently sour citrus used for hair rinse and seasoning: <b><i>Cytrus hystrix</i></b>.

<p><b>kabúhì</b> (from <ix>búhì</ix>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a pulsating thing located in the abdominal region which is what one feels when one experiences hyper-acidity or other sharp abdominal pains. The cause of these pains is thought to be the displacement of the <ix>kabúhì</ix>, most often in an upward direction, and treatment is by hot compresses and by massage (<ix>kalaykay</ix>) to put the <ix>kabúhì</ix> back in place. <i>Misáka ákung kabúhì sa kutukutu,</i> My <ix>kabúhì</ix> rose to under my rib cage. <b>2</b> this pulsating thing viewed as the seat of life. Unsang urása nabugtù ang íyang kabúhì? What time did he expire (lit. was his <ix>kabúhì</ix> broken off)? <i>v</i> [A13P; a4b4] have pains because of the <ix>kabúhì</ix>. <i>Gikabuhían (gikabúhì) aku,</i> I have pains in the abdominal region. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>KABÚHÌ</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to get pains caused by <ix>kabúhì</ix>.

<p><b>kabukabu</b> <i>n</i> @dust that settles on things. <i>v</i> [BN; a4b4] covered with dust, spray. <i>Mikabukabu (nakabukabu, gikabukabuhan, gikabukabu) ang salug kay walay lampasu,</i> The floor was covered with dust because it had not been cleaned. <i>v</i> [A; b6] be swept up by the wind into a fine spray or particles of dust. <i>Nagkabukabu ang dágat,</i> The sea was whipping up a fine spray. <b>kabukabuhun</b> <i>a</i> @dusty.

<p><b>kabúkaw</b> = <sc>BUKAWBUKAW</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>BÚKAW<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kabulay</b> <i>n</i> a black wax formed as a dwelling place by the <i>kíyut</i>, a honeybee that nests in houses. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] put this k.o. beeswax on s.t.

<p><b>kabunghan</b> <i>n</i> name of a wind.

<p><b>kábu nigru</b> = <sc>IBYUK</sc>.

<p><b>kaburáta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{riding crop}. <b>2</b> @{policeman's club}. <i>v</i> [A; a12] strike with a riding crop or policeman's club.

<p><b>kabus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @{very poor}, @indigent. <i>v</i> [b4] run out of s.t. <i>Nakabsan kami sa pálad,</i> We ran out of luck. <i>Makabsan unyà ta sa bugas,</i> We will run out of rice.

<p><b>kabus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AB2; a2b2] for s.t. to slip off from a place it has been put or tied, cause it to do so. <i>Mikabus (nakabus) ang kuríya sa makina,</i> The cord of the machine slipped off. <i>Kinsay nagkabus sa kahun sa bangil?</i> Who pushed the box off of the wedge? <i>Kabusa lang ang bugkus arun maabli ang putus,</i> Just slip the string off so the bundle can be opened.

<p><b>kabus-uk</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BUS-UK</sc>.

<p><b>kábut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @stir a liquid. <i>Ug kabútun ang nilúgaw, dílì mudukut,</i> If you stir the porridge, it won't stick. <b>2</b> [A; b5] dig a hole in the ground. <i>Íla nang gikabútan (gikábut) ang mga lungag pára sa mga halígi,</i> They have dug up holes for the posts. <i>n</i> hole dug into the ground. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to stir liquids.

<p><b>kab-ut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2] @{reach for}. <i>Kab-úta nang hinug nga byábas,</i> Reach for that ripe guava. <i>Nakab-utan ang ákung buhuk sa ungguy,</i> The monkey managed to get hold of my hair. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] @attain. <i>Damgu nga gitingúhà námung kab-útun,</i> The dreams we have striven to fulfill. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @achievement, @realization. <i>Ang pagkaduktur mauy kakab-útan sa íyang mga damgu,</i> Being a doctor was the realization of his dreams.

<p><b>kabútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN</sc>.

<p><b>kabuway</b> = <sc>KABULAY</sc>.

<p><b>kabya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] move s.t. with a heavy sweeping motion of the arms as in moving water with a paddle or splashing. <i>Mukabya kag kusug arun matúlin ang barútu,</i> Paddle hard to make the boat go fast. <i>Ikabya (kabyáha) ngari ang gabayan arun ákung maabut,</i> Splash the waterwings this way so I can reach them. <b>1a</b> move s.t. light with a sweeping motion. <i>Mikabya siya sa kurtína arun sa paglìlì,</i> She moved the curtain aside to peep outside. <b>2</b> [A; c] fling water or grains out or into s.t. <i>Huy, kinsa may nagkabya ug túbig sa lagúna?</i> Hey, who threw water out onto the lawn? <i>Ayawg kabyáhig balas ang asíras,</i> Don't throw sand onto the sidewalk. <b>2a</b> toss a ball to a teammate using this k.o. motion. <i>n</i> action of sweeping with the arms <pb n=415>or flinging.

<p><b>kabyára</b> <i>n</i> reddish-brown coloration of a chicken.

<p><b>kabyaw</b> = <sc>KULABYAW</sc>.

<p><b>kabyun</b> = <sc>KULABYUN</sc>.

<p><b>káda</b> @each, @every. <i>Káda túig,</i> Each year. <i>Káda káun níla usa ka ganta ang ílang mahurut,</i> Every time they eat, they consume a whole ganta of rice. <b>&mdash; usa [<ix>dat.</ix>]</b> each and every one of (us, you, them). <i>Káda usa kanátù (ang káda usa kanátù) magdalag pusil,</i> Each and every one of us <corr sic=bring>brings</corr> a gun.

<p><b>kadáding</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet potato with yellow flesh and white peels.

<p><b>kadaíya</b> (from <i>káda</i> and <i>íya</i>) <i>a</i> of various @kinds. <i>Kadaíya man lang ang prútas nga gibaligyà sa karbun,</i> Fruits of various kinds are sold in the market. <i>v</i> [B1456] be all of different kinds. <i>Nagkadaíya ang mga midisínang gidápat,</i> All different kinds of medicines were administered.

<p><b>kadal-ug</b> <i>n</i> an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

<p><b>kad-ang</b> = <sc>KAB-ANG</sc>.

<p><b>kadangkadang</b> <i>n</i> blight affecting coconut trees. <i>v</i> [a4] have coconut blight. <i>Gikadangkadang ang mga lubi,</i> The trees have coconut blight.

<p><b>kadastral</b> <i>n</i> cadastre, public records of real estate for purposes of taxation. &dagger;

<p><b>kadaw-ug</b> = <sc>KADAL-UG</sc>.

<p><b>kadína</b> <i>n</i> @chain. <i>Kadína sa bisiklíta,</i> Bicycle chain. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] form a chain, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Magkadína kitag búlak,</i> Let's join these flowers in a chain. <i>Kadináhun nátù ning mga lastiku,</i> We'll make a chain out of these rubber bands. <b>2</b> [b6] shackle with chains. <i>Átù ning kadináhan arun lisud ablíhun,</i> Shackle it with chains to make it difficult to open. <b>&mdash; pirpituwa</b> <i>n</i> @{life imprisonment}. <b>&mdash; diamur</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small, leafy vine of waste places with tiny pink or white odorless flowers: <b><i>Antigonon leptopus</i></b>. <b>&mdash; wib</b> <i>n</i> k.o. weave in a series of interlocking chain stitches. <i>Ang muskitírung kadína wib dílì mahilhig,</i> The threads in a mosquito net that is woven with chain stitches cannot be pushed apart. <b>kadiníta</b> <i>n</i> tiny chain worn as jewelry.

<p><b>kading</b> <i>n</i> one who gossips (slang). <i>Ang mga kading namínaw pag-áyu sa lális sa magtiáyun,</i> The gossips listened with close attention to the couple's quarrel. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] tell s.o. of, usually gossip (slang). <i>Kinsay nagkading nímung mabdus si Níla?</i> Who told you that Nella was pregnant? <b>1a</b> [A12] receive information<corr sic=.>,</corr> usually gossip (slang). <i>Nakakading kung daghan kunug babáyi si Dyú,</i> I have heard that Joe has many mistresses. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] be, become a gossip (slang). <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C; c16] talk idly, gossip together. <i>n</i> action of gossiping idly (slang). <i>Dúgay nahuman ang ílang káding sa tilipunu,</i> Their telephone conversation took a long time.

<p><b>kadisnun</b> = <sc>KARDÁBA</sc>.

<p><b>kadíti</b> <i>n</i> @cadet.

<p><b>kadkad</b> = <sc>KALADKAD</sc>.

<p><b>kadlas</b> <i>a</i> having scratches on the surface. <i>Kadlas kaáyu ang pintal sa ímung awtu,</i> The paint on your car is full of scratches. <i>n</i> scratch, mark left on a surface. <i>Dílì mailhan ang kadlas,</i> The scratch is invisible. <i>v</i> [A13P; a12b2] put a scratch in s.t., make a break on a surface. <i>Hikadlasan ang tapalúdu sa awtu,</i> The fender got scratched. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> full of scratches. <b>-ánay</b> = <sc>TUBIGTÚBIG</sc>. see <sc>TÚBIG</sc>. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a leader of the defenders in a children's game called <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>. <i>v</i> [B] be the leader in this game.

<p><b>kadlit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> strike a match, put a match to s.t. <i>Kadlíti ang mga kandílà,</i> Light the candles with a match. <b>2</b> make a small incision or other motion analogous to striking a match. <i>Akuy mukadlit sa hubag,</i> I will make an incision in the boil. <i>Tambálan ang mikadlit sa buayáhun,</i> A folk doctor made an incision in the palm of the child that had the mark of the crocodile. <i>Gikadlítan ku kuntra sa buti,</i> I was vaccinated against smallpox. <i>n</i> action of striking a match. <b>way &mdash;</b> don't strike any matches, humorously said when a man is urinating on analogy of what one says when pouring gasoline. <b>-ánan</b> <i>n</i> the side of a matchbox where matches are struck. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> general name for surgeon fish so called because of the powerful sharp spines situated on each side of the caudal peduncle.

<p><b>kadlum</b> <i>n</i> k.o. erect, branched, hairy herb, aromatic when crushed, with pink and purple flowers, sometimes cultivated. Used as hair rinse: <b><i>Pogostemon cablin</i></b>. <b>&mdash; ihálas</b> similar hairy herb of waste places, the leaves of which are used to cure boils: <b><i>Waltheria americana</i></b>. <b>kadlumkadlum</b> = <sc>KADLUM IHÁLAS</sc>.

<p><b>kadtu</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>tu</bx>. <b>1</b> that (far from speaker and hearer). <i>Kadtung balay sa unáhan kang Husi,</i> That house up ahead is Joe's. <b>1a</b> he, she (far away). <i>Wà man gud tu makasabut sa ákung sulti,</i> He did not get what I said. <b>2</b> that one that was past in time. <i>Ngánu man kadtu?</i> Why did that happen? <i>Kadtung ákung giingun,</i> What I said. <b>2a</b> that was the case. <i>Dihà kadtuy higayun nga ...[** ,]</i> It <pb n=416>happened one time that.... <b>2b</b> he, she (referring to a person remote in time). <i>Nagtúu ang mga tulisan nga kadtu patay na,</i> The bandits believed that he was already dead. <b>3</b> followed by a verb: that time when. <i>Kadtung musumbag na siya, mulikay pud ku,</i> When he would strike me, I would also dodge. <b>4</b> the ones, those that are. <i>Kadtung nakaapil na walay lábut áning duláa,</i> Those who have already tried it once are not to take part this time. <b>niadtu</b> <b>1</b> <ix>gen.</ix>: of that. <i>Ang tag-íya niadtung sakayána,</i> The owner of that boat. <b>2</b> <ix>dat.</ix>: to, on that. <i>Ihátag niadtung tawhána,</i> Give it to that man. <i>Niadtung adláwa migíkan siya pára sa Manílà,</i> On that day he left for Manila. <b>3</b> formerly <ix>short for</ix> <bx>kaniadtu</bx>. <b>adtu</b> = <sc>NIADTU</sc>. <b>naadtu</b> = <sc>NIADTU</sc>.

<p><b>kadtut</b> = <sc>KADTU</sc>.

<p><b>kadyapà</b> = <sc>KUDYAPÀ</sc>.

<p><b>*kadyì</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PANGADYÌ</sc>.

<p><b>kadyung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cook root crops and bananas in steam. <i>Kadyungun ku ang kamúti arun dì malatà,</i> I'll steam the sweet potatoes so they won't become soggy. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> steamer for root crops and bananas.

<p><b>kadyus</b> <i>n</i> cultivated bush bearing beans the seeds of which are like small, black pellets. The young pods are eaten as a vegetable and the seeds, when mature: <b><i>Cajanus cajan</i></b>.

<p><b>kág</b> = <sc>KALAG</sc>.

<p><b>kagà</b> <i>v</i> [B; a12] become thin and emaciated. <i>Hala, kagaa giyud inyung láwas pagpúnayg bilar magabíi,</i> Go on, make yourselves thin and enervated by staying up late at night. <i></i>a @emaciated, @thin.

<p><b>kágà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> talking excessively of foolish things. <b>2</b> @lying, esp. boastfully. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23N] talk foolishness excessively. <b>2</b> [AN; b6(1)] tell a lie, esp. a boastful one. <i>Nakapangágà (nakakágà) siya sa mga tagabúkid nga abugádu siya,</i> He has led the gullible mountaineers to believe that he was a lawyer. <i>Bísag unsa lay íyang gikágà (gipangágà) sa íyang giulitawhan,</i> There was no limit to the lies he told the woman he was courting. <b>3</b> for a chicken to make clucking noise instead of fighting. <i>Ayaw ug isígig sábung ang sunuy tingálig mukágà nà,</i> Don't keep fighting the rooster. It will get so it will cackle instead of fighting. <b>3a</b> [A23N; b3] grow timid like a chicken. <i>Ngánung kagáan man nímu nang gwápa nga may hitsúra ka man sab?</i> Why are you scared to face that beautiful woman when you're good-looking? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{empty talk}. <i>Ísug kaáyug sinultihan, kágà man lang diay pulus,</i> He talks so fiercely, but it's nothing but all empty talk. <b>2</b> @liar, esp. a boastful one. <b>3</b> cowardly, timid, chicken. <i>Kagáun kaáyu ning manúka dílì ángayng itárì,</i> This cock is very cowardly. It is not fit for a cockfight. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> talkative. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become a boastful liar or timid.

<p><b>kagabkab</b> <i>n</i> @{flapping sound}. <i>v</i> [B46] make a flapping sound. <i>Mukagabkab ang bandíra ug hangínun,</i> The flag flaps noisily in the wind.

<p><b>kagàkà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dull, non-reverberating but loud sound produced by the knocking of light materials. <b>2</b> sound of stuttering. <i>Nahadluk táwun tu siya. Kagàkang mitubag,</i> He was afraid and stuttered when he answered. <i>v</i> [B3] make such a sound. <i>Mikagàkà ang ákung tápir wir búl ngadtu sa sílung,</i> My tupperware bowl rattled as it fell down the stairs.

<p><b>kagàkà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2b3] burst into loud laughter. <i>Mukagàkà nà siya dáyun ug makadungug ug kataw-anan nga isturya,</i> She bursts into hearty laughter when she hears a funny story.

<p><b>kagalkal</b> <i>a</i> @clanking, @rattling, @jangling sound: broken-voiced, boisterous-sounding laughter. <i>Ang trák nga gubaun kagalkal kaáyung mudágan,</i> The broken-down truck runs with a rattling noise. <i>Kagalkal nga ubu,</i> A rattling cough. <i>v</i> [A] make a clanking sound.

<p><b>kágang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. small crab of muddy areas near the shore, with highly prized flesh, but small. <b>2</b> = <sc>KAGANGKAGANG</sc>. <b>kagangkagang</b> <i>n</i> a small land crab, dark brown in color, inedible, and with a venomous bite. a for machines or vehicles to be rickety and ready to fall apart. <i>Ang kagangkagang níyang kutsi,</i> His rattletrap car. <i>v</i> [B15] be rickety.

<p><b>kag-ang</b> <i>a</i> @thin, @emaciated. <i>Kag-ang na siya kaáyu run kay daghang prublíma,</i> She has gotten emaciated because she has so many worries. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become thin or emaciated.

<p><b>kagar</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for a machine to fail to work. <i>Mikagar ang dyíp paglabang sa subà,</i> The jeep stopped dead upon crossing the river. <i>Mikagar ang pusil,</i> The rifle didn't go off.

<p><b>kagaral</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>GARAL</sc>.

<p><b>kágards</b> (from <ix>kagirun</ix>&mdash;slang). <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having pockmarks. <i>Dì nímu ikapusta ang kágards nga dyúlin,</i> You can't bet marbles with a rough surface. <b>2</b> ugly. <b>2a</b> old, above thirty. <i>Ang amatyur kantis karun álang sa mga kágards,</i> The amateur contest is for the above thirty's. <b>3</b> broke, out of money for gambling. <i>Dì na ku mudúwà kay kágards,</i> I won't play any more because I'm broke. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become pockmarked.

<pb n=417>

<p><b>kagas</b> <i>a</i> @haggard and @emaciated. <i>v</i> [B1456] be haggard and emaciated. <i>Nagkagas na ang pinirísung wà pakan-a,</i> The prisoner is haggard and thin from lack of food.

<p><b>kágas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B2S] for skin diseases to dry and develop scabs. <i>Mukágas ang núka nga maigù sa tambal,</i> A skin disease dries instantly if you apply the right medicine.

<p><b>kágas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A3] go in haste. <i>Mikagas (ningkágas) pagdágan ang bátà pagkakitas íyang tátay,</i> The child immediately ran when he saw his father.

<p><b>kagaskas</b> <i>n</i> @{rustling sound}. <i>v</i> [B; aP] @rustle. <i>Nikagaskas ang mga dáhung layà paghángin,</i> The dry leaves rustled in the wind. <i>Kagaskásag armirul ang ákung sanínà,</i> Make my shirt rustle with starch.

<p><b>kagat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] <b>1</b> bite to inflict injury, grab, or hold s.t. <i>Mikagat ang isdà sa paun,</i> The fish grabbed at the bait. <i>Kagtun ku ang ímung dalunggan run,</i> I'm going to bite your ears. <b>1a</b> be fooled into s.t. <i>Dalì ra siyang mukagat sa buláda,</i> She is easily taken in by (bites at) flattery. <b>2</b> @catch, @snag so as to hold firmly. <i>Mubasiyu lang kun sikáran ang bisiklita. Dì mukagat,</i> The bicycle pedal just goes round. It does not hold. <i>n</i> pincer of a crab. <b>kagtan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. adult freshwater shrimp with well-developed pincers. <b>-um-</b> <i>a</i> ready to bite at the least provocation. <i>Iring kumagat nga nagkaun ug ilagà,</i> Cat eating a rat, ready to bite whoever comes within range.

<p><b>kágaw</b> <i>n</i> @germs. <b>&mdash; sa laláki</b> @sperm (euphemism). <i>v</i> [B1245] be contaminated with germs. <i>Nagkakágaw na nang pán nga nahúg sa yútà,</i> The bread that fell to the ground is covered with germs now. <b>-un</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be full of germs.

<p><b>kagáwad</b> <i>n</i> @{municipal councilors}.

<p><b>kagawkaw</b> = <sc>KAGALKAL</sc>.

<p><b>kagay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> very mature coconut that is brown.

<p><b>kágay</b> <i>n</i> rattle of dishes. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a rattling sound. <i>Nikágay sa baskit ang mga buak nga plátu,</i> The broken plates rattled in the basket. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> for a cough to be loose. <i>v</i> [B2] for cough to become loose. <i>Mukagay na gánì ang ubu, hinug na nà,</i> If the cough is loose, it's mature.

<p><b>kagaykay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound made by empty shells or the like, rattling. <i>Ang kinagaykay sa mga pitsas,</i> The rattling of the mahjong pieces. <b>2</b> s.o. who talks too much without saying any thing of value. <b>3</b> <i>a</i> @braggart. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make a rattling sound. <b>2</b> [A13] talk much without sense (slang). <i>Nagkagaykay lag íyang sinultihan. Wà giyuy unud,</i> He is talking so much blah-blah. There's nothing to it. <b>3</b> [A] @brag around.

<p><b>kagaykay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. herb of waste places bearing beans: <b><i>Crotolaria mucronata</i></b>.

<p><b>kagibúhì</b> (from kaági and kinabúhì) <i>n</i> @biography.

<p><b>kagid</b> <i>n</i> contagious @{skin disease}, characterized by small eruptions which develop white scales and itch intensely. <i>v</i> [a4] be infected with <ix>kagid</ix>. <b>kagirun</b> <i>a</i> @itch-ridden. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become itch-ridden.

<p><b>kagidlay</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*GIDLAY</sc>.

<p><b>kagíit</b> <i>n</i> high-pitched squeak or creaking noise caused by friction. <i>v</i> [A4] creak, squeak.

<p><b>kagìkì</b> <i>n</i> @snicker, laughter that is suppressed. <i>v</i> [A; b3] @snicker. <i>Mikagìkì ang mga bátà kay walà makapamutúnis ang maistru,</i> The children snickered because the teacher forgot to button his pants.

<p><b>kagilkil</b> <i>n</i> @clinking, high-pitched sound of metal. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a clinking sound. <i>Ang mga sinsilyu nikagilkil sa íyang bulsa,</i> Coins jingled in his pocket. <i>Ayawg kagilkíla ang kadína,</i> Don't rattle the chain.

<p><b>kaging</b> <i>a</i> @stiff. <i>v</i> [B; a] become stiff. <i>Makaging (mukaging) ang kusáhus ug mabulad ug dúgay,</i> The jerked meat will get too stiff if you leave it out too long. <i>Dúgay na siyang nakaging,</i> He kicked off (lit. became stiff) a long time ago.

<p><b>kagingking</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> growth on a bamboo which extends like a vine and has thorns. It grows at the tips as branches. <b>2</b> k.o. spiny bamboo: <b><i>Bambusa spinosa</i></b>.

<p><b>kágis</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] @scrape s.t. carefully so it is not damaged. <i>Kagísa ang pintal sa bungbung,</i> Scrape the paint off the wall. <b>2</b> @shave. <i>Kagísan únà ang pasyinti úsà upirahi,</i> They shave the patient before operating. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] shave oneself. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @scrapings.

<p><b>kagiskis<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> shrill, scraping, scratching sound. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a shrill, scraping sound. <i>Nagkagiskis ang puthaw nga gikiskísan sa pintal,</i> There was a scratching sound as the paint was being scraped off the metal.

<p><b>kagiskis<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>AGIS-IS</sc>.

<p><b>kagiskis<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> = <sc>AGUSAHIS</sc>.

<p><b>kágit</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] make a @{creaking sound}. <i>Nikágit ang lansang dihang giibut,</i> The nail made a loud, creaking sound as he pulled it out. <i>Kagítun kung ákung ngípun,</i> I'll grit my teeth.

<p><b>kagitkit</b> <i>n</i> grinding, grating sound. <i>v</i> [A; b6] make a grinding, grating sound. <i>Mukagitkit ang sín ug gabsun,</i> Galvanized iron produces a grating sound if you saw on it. <i>Magkagitkit ang lansang nga iwiriswiris sa bungbung nga simintu,</i> Nails produce a high-pitched screeching sound when you grate them against <pb n=418>cement.

<p><b>kágiw</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAGIW</sc>.

<p><b>kagkag<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> for hair to be standing up and going in every direction. <i>v</i> [B1; a12] have hair going every which way. <i>Nagkagkag man nang buhuk mu, mu ra kag si Stukuski,</i> Your hair is standing up and going in every direction. You look like Stokowski.

<p><b>kagkag<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KALAGKAG</sc>.

<p><b>kagmu</b> <i>n</i> @snort of pigs or people when they are angry. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] @snort. <i>Nangagmu ang bábuy ihás,</i> The wild pig snorted.

<p><b>kagmud</b> = <sc>AGMUD</sc>.

<p><b>kagù</b> = <sc>BAGÙ<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kagubkub</b> a <b>1</b> @crunchy, @crisp. <i>Kagubkub kaáyug pánit ang inasal,</i> The roast pig has very crisp skin. <b>2</b> making a @{crunching sound}. <i>Kagubkub pamatíun ang yílu nga giúsap,</i> The ice he's chewing sounds crunchy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a] be, become crisp. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make a crunching sound.

<p><b>kagud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @grind s.t. to shreds by rubbing or scraping it. <i>Kagdun (kagurun) ku ning ímung lubi,</i> I'll grate your coconut. <b>2</b> [b4] @abrade, @{wear off}. <i>Wà pa kagdi ang ligid,</i> The tire is not worn down yet. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C] have intercourse (slang). <b>kaguran, kalagúran</b> <i>n</i> shredder made of a serrated metal circle attached to a piece of wood to scrape out the coconut meat. <b>paN-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> skin irritation of the toes characterized by welt-like eruptions and extreme itching. It is said to be caused by stepping in dung with the bare feet. The itching is relieved by an action similar to that of shredding a coconut. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> shredded coconut meat.

<p><b>kagùkù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] make a hollow thumping sound. <i>Ug mukagùkù ang sambag, hinug na,</i> When the tamarind rattles, it's ripe. <b>2</b> [A; b3] laugh with a deep, loud voice. <i>Nahikagùkù akug katáwa sa íyang isturya,</i> I burst into loud laughter at his story. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hollow sound in large fruits; chugging sound of trains in motion. <b>2</b> a large k.o. sweet pepper of the same type as is commercially grown in the States, so called because it makes hollow sounds if you tap it.

<p><b>kagùkù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> a large k.o. crab with a long, reddish body like a hermit <corr sic=carb>crab</corr>, but dwelling in its own shell. Inedible, but used as bait.

<p><b>kagulángan</b> <i>n</i> virgin forest, untouched by man.

<p><b>kagulíyang</b> <i>n</i> noisy confusion. <i>Ang kagulíyang sa nanúgat sa artista,</i> The noise made by the people meeting the actress. <i>v</i> [A13; b3] be in noisy confusion. <i>Nagkagulíyang ang mga táwu sa súnug,</i> The people broke into noisy confusion at the fire.

<p><b>kagulkul</b> <i>n</i> noise made by the knocking of hollow and heavy things. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a hollow, rattling sound. <i>Nagkagulkul ang mga húlin sa kumúda,</i> The marbles rattled in the drawer. <i>Mukagulkul kamu sa prisuhan,</i> You will rot (lit. rattle) in prison.

<p><b>kagumkum</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @crisp (but not so crisp as <ix>kagubkub</ix>). <i>Kagumkum kaáyu ang patátas,</i> The cookies are somewhat crisp. <b>2</b> making a crunching, but slightly prolonged sound. <i>v</i> [B; a] be crisp.

<p><b>kagung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AN] <b>1</b> make a hollow sound when empty. <b>2</b> be empty, as if producing such a hollow sound. <i>Nipaúlì ku gíkang namasul nga mikagung (nangagung) ang sakayan,</i> I came home from fishing with an empty boat.

<p><b>kagung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KAGUNGKUNG</sc>.

<p><b>kagungkung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the portion at the base of the spine of fowl just above the triangular structure which holds the tail feathers (<i>ísul</i>). <b>2</b> the analogous structure in mammals. <i>v</i> [B26N; b6] be, become skin and bones (like the <ix>kagungkung</ix> which has little flesh or fat). <i>Mangagungkung (mukagungkung) ka kun dì ka mukáun,</i> You will become very thin if you do not eat. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> bony, thin.

<p><b>kagunkágun</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac3] go around as a group, take s.o. along with a group. <i>Daghang mukagunkágun nákù sa pagpangharána,</i> A lot of people take me around to go serenading. <i>Dì ku makigkagunkágun sa mga palahúbug,</i> I don't go around with drunkards.

<p><b>kagupà, kagúpà</b> <i>n</i> collective term for one's blood relations. <i>Aku ray tituládu sa ámung kagúpà,</i> I'm the only one in our clan that has a degree.

<p><b>kágus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] scrape s.t. that is hard and coarse. <i>Nagkágus siyag bagul,</i> He is scraping a coconut shell.

<p><b>kaguskus</b> <i>n</i> dull, rustling sound. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a dull, rustling sound. <i>Nagkaguskus siyang nanguskus sa dukut,</i> He made a dull, rustling sound, scraping the rice that stuck to the pot.

<p><b>kágut</b> <i>n</i> gnashing, grinding sound. <i>v</i> [a2] make a gnashing, grinding sound. <i>Nikágut ang ákung ngípun sa kalágut,</i> I gnashed my teeth in anger. <i>Nagkágut ang galingan. Abdi,</i> The grinder is making a grating sound. Pour more grains into it.

<p><b>kagutkut</b> <i>n</i> sound made by s.t. gnawing away at s.t. or scraping s.t. off. <i>Ang kagutkut sa ilagang gakitkit sa kumúda,</i> The gnawing <pb n=419>sound of the rats nibbling at the drawer. <i>v</i> [AN; c] make a continuous gnawing sound. <i>Nikagutkut ang tísas pagsulat nákù sa islít,</i> The piece of chalk made a scraping sound when I wrote on the slate. <i>Ang kinagutkut sa limbas,</i> The scraping sound of the carpenter's file.

<p><b>kagwang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> flying squirrel. <b>2</b> a joking, half-affectionate reference to a person implying a mild insult, general in nature but nothing in particular, made in annoyance or amusement. <i>Kagwang nímu nga ímung gihúlug ang sulat nga way prangkíyu,</i> You dodo! You mailed the letter without stamps.

<p><b>kagyu</b> = <sc>KALAGIW.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAGIW.</sc>

<p><b>káha</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @box, @pack, @case made to contain s.t. <i>Duha ka káhang sigarilyu,</i> Two packs of cigarettes. <b>2</b> cash register. <b>3</b> safe. <b>&mdash; diyíru</b> <i>n</i> steel safe. <b>&mdash; sa trák</b> body of a truck. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make into a case or boxes. <i>Gwápu nang ímung gikaháan ang radiyu,</i> The radio looks nice now that you've made a case for it. <b>2</b> [A; c] put into a cash box, register. <b>kahíru</b> <i>n</i> cashier. <i>v</i> [B15; a12] be a cashier. <b>kahíra</b> = <sc>KAHÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>kahà</b> = <sc>KAYHÀ.</sc>

<p><b>káhà</b> = <sc>KALÁHÀ.</sc>

<p><b>káham</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @touch with the whole hand. <i>Ang mukáham sa pagkáun manghunaw,</i> Whoever touches food should wash his hands. <i>Ikáham (kaháma) ang íyang líug kun gihilantan ba,</i> Feel her neck to see if she has a fever. <b>2</b> [AN; a12] touch for sexual purposes. <i>Dúnay báyut nga nangáham nákù sa sinihan,</i> A homosexual tried to touch me in the movie house. <b>3</b> [A; a] steal. <i>Wà hibaw-i ang mikáham sa mga aláhas,</i> No one knows who stole the jewelry. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> s.t. that is one's favorite. <i>Ang kináham kung pagkáun,</i> My favorite food. <i>Kináham níyang basahúnun,</i> His favorite reading matter. <i>Kináham níyang prugráma,</i> His favorite program. <i>v</i> [B1256] become one's favorite.

<p><b>kahamkaham</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible, greenish-brown seaweed, not highly esteemed.

<p><b>kahangay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] dare touch s.t. forbidden. <i>Way mukahangay sa ákung gamit ayug latiguhun,</i> Nobody dares touch my instruments for fear of getting whipped. <i>Ayawg kahangyi nà kay wà pa mahuman,</i> Don't dare touch that because it's not done.

<p><b>kahangay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] <b>a</b> do s.t. to while away the time or in one's spare time. <i>Nagkahangay kug basabása samtang nagpaábut níya,</i> I read the papers to while away the time while I was waiting. <b>b</b> do s.t. as one's avocation during spare time. <i>Nagkahangay siyag pangahintig mintiryu,</i> She sells cemetery lots in her spare time.

<p><b>kahápun</b> = <sc>KAGAHÁPUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>GAHÁPUN.</sc>

<p><b>káhas</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] <b>1</b> have the audacity to get or use s.t. without the consent of the proper person. <i>Gikáhas sa asáwa ang ílang tinígum arun ipalit ug tíbi,</i> The wife had the nerve to take their savings to buy a T.V. set. <i>Gikáhas níyag baligyà ang bábuy,</i> He took it upon himself to sell the pig. <i>Gikáhas ug lúgì sa íyang anak ang ílang kalubihan,</i> His son had the nerve to harvest their coconuts. <b>2</b> embezzle. <i>Ang tisuríru nga mikáhas sa pundu,</i> The treasurer who embezzled the funds. <b>pangáhas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5] <b>1</b> do s.t. one should not. <i>Ayaw giyug pangáhas ug paúlì nga mag-inusára sa kagabhíun,</i> Don't dare go home alone at night. <b>1a</b> abuse s.o. sexually. <i>Buut ku siyang pangahásan,</i> I wanted to abuse her. <b>2</b> dare do s.t. that takes courage. <i>Dì ku mangáhas pagtabuk samtang bahà pa,</i> I don't dare cross while the river is in flood stage. <b>mapaN-un</b> <i>n</i> daring to do s.t. forbidden.

<p><b>kahátì</b> = <sc>KALAHÁTÌ.</sc>

<p><b>kahid-un</b> = <sc>KAIHIUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÍHÌ.</sc>

<p><b>káhig</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] bring s.t. to one or push s.t. away with an instrument or, analogically, with the hand or foot. <i>Kahígan ku ning daspan sa sagbut,</i> I'll sweep the rubbish into the dustpan. <i>Ikáhig (kahíga) ang túbig ngadtu sa kanal,</i> Sweep the water towards the canal. <b>dala sa &mdash;</b> swept along with the majority. <i>Pagpanglíup sa mga kawáni, apil sad siya, nadá sa káhig,</i> When there was a lay-*off of the employees, he was included, swept along by the tide. <i>Hugut siyag kumbiksiyun, dílì madá sa káhig,</i> He has strong convictions, he can't be swept along by the majority. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> implement used to rake, poke, push things.

<p><b>kahil<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1b2] @touch, brush lightly against s.t. <i>Nagkahil ang dáhun sa alambris kuryinti,</i> The leaf is in contact with the electric wire. <i>Kahila ug hínay sa lipak arun dílì mapakling,</i> Touch it lightly with the bamboo stick so that it won't fall over. <b>2</b> [A; b6] do an activity to a lesser degree than usual. <i>Wà gánì ku makakahil níya, haluk na hinúun,</i> I haven't even touched her, much less kissed her.

<p><b>kahil<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small, green, somewhat bitter orange which turns yellow when overripe: <i><b>Citrus aurantium.</b></i> <b>-áda</b> <i>n</i> lemonade, orangeade. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make lemonade.

<p><b>kahimtang</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BUTANG<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kahir</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] @entice, lead s.o. to do s.t. not good for him. <i>Dì aku makahir sa ímung pangatarúngan,</i> I cannot be swayed by your <pb n=420>reasoning. <i>Nakahir siya sa usa ka mamaligyag isdà,</i> He fell for a fish vendor. <i>Bísag karmilítus lay ikahir sa bátà,</i> You can easily attract a child with candies.

<p><b>kahíra, kahíru</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁHA.</sc>

<p><b>kahis</b> = <sc>KALIS.</sc>

<p><b>kahista</b> <i>n</i> @typesetter. <i>v</i> [B156] become a typesetter.

<p><b>kahíta</b> <i>n</i> @{small box}, @case. <b>Kahíta sa aláhas,</b> Jewel box.

<p><b>kahug, káhug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; ac] @mix moist and dry ingredients together. <i>Kahugun ku ning tahup ug kinagud nga lubi,</i> I'll mix the corn bran with shredded coconut. <i>Kahugi ang makarúni sa mayunis,</i> Mix the mayonnaise into the macaroni. <b>2</b> [A; a] stir s.t. thick. <i>Kahúga ang linúgaw arun dílì mudukut,</i> Stir the porridge so it won't stick.

<p><b>kahun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @box. <b>2</b> square or rectangular section in a rice paddy. <i>Napúlù ka kahun ang íyang pilapilan,</i> There are ten square partitions in his rice paddy. <b>3</b> group of fives in tallying (four vertical lines and one slanting line). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make into a box. <b>2</b> [a12] divide into square, rectangular sections. <b>3</b> [A12] obtain groups of fives. <i>Sa pag-iskutinyu wà gánì makakahun ang átung kandidátu,</i> When the ballots were counted our candidate did not even get a score of five. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> enclosed in boxes. <i>Mga kinahun nag íyang dala,</i> The things were all enclosed in boxes. <b>-is</b> = <sc>KAHUN, 3</sc> (plural).

<p><b>káhuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tree. <b>2</b> @wood, firewood. <b>3</b> <b>búngang &mdash;</b> fruit tree. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] obtain firewood. <i>Nakakahuy (nakakáhuy) giyud mi sa ginubà sa ámung balay,</i> We had firewood when our house was demolished. <b>2</b> [a] make into firewood. <i>Kahúyun nátù ning gubang kural,</i> We'll make this broken fence into firewood. <b>3</b> [a2] steal by picking the pocket (slang). <i>Gikáhuy ang íyang pitáka didtu sa Kulun,</i> S.o. picked his wallet downtown. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B4] for muscles to get stiff with fatigue. <i>Nagkahuy ang ákung abága sa pagpinas-ag kupras,</i> My shoulders are stiff from carrying sacks of copra. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> cut down and gather firewood. <i>Didtu sila mangáhuy sa búkid,</i> They were in the mountains gathering firewood. <b>2</b> take parts from an engine. <i>Gipangahúyan níla ang trák daut,</i> They cannibalized the broken-down truck. <b>3</b> [A2; b(1)] steal by picking. <i>Ang babáying gipangahúyan sa íyang trisintus,</i> The woman who had three hundred stolen from her. <b>pangahuykáhuy</b> <i>v</i> [A] for muscles to get stiff with fatigue. <i>Undang na tag pangarga kay nangahuykáhuy na ang ákung háwak,</i> Let's stop loading now because my waist is getting stiff. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fuel gathered. <b>2</b> s.t. shoplifted, cannibalized. <b>ka-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> @woods. <b>maN-r-/l-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @woodcutter. <b>kahuykahuy</b> <i>n</i> k.o. weed roughly resembling a full grown tree in structure, growing up to 1&ndash;1/2', the leaves of which are used as a poultice to stop bleeding. <b>tig-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> log with branches cut off. <b>2</b> @twigs. <i>v</i> [A; a] gather, cut down wood for firewood. <i>Mitigkáhuy ku sa íyang tinápuk,</i> I gathered the wood he had piled up. <b>talig-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>TIGKÁHUY</sc>. <i>v</i> [A2N] gather logs for a house. <i>Manaligkáhuy ta. Magbáy ra ba ta,</i> Let's gather logs because we're going to build a house. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> coarse, like wood.

<p><b>kahúyung</b> <i>n</i> variety of rice.

<p><b>kaimítu</b> = <sc>KAYMÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>kain</b> = <sc>HÁIN</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>kaína</b> = <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.

<p><b>kaing</b> <i>n</i> large, cylindrical, rattan basket loosely woven in a hexagonal design, 3' tall by 2' across. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make, make into a <ix>kaing</ix>.

<p><b>kaíngin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> slash and burn agriculture. <b>2</b> area in the forest cleared by burning for agriculture, of temporary or permanent nature. <i>v</i> [A; b5] make a clearing in a forest for agricultural purposes. <b>-iru</b> <i>n</i> one who practices slash and burn agriculture.

<p><b>kaintì</b> <i>n</i> variety of rice.

<p><b>kairil</b> = <sc>KAYRIL</sc>.

<p><b>kák</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] cock a firearm. <i>Gáhì kákun (ikák) ang gáran,</i> It takes a great effort to cock the garand rifle. <i>a</i> @cocked. <i>Kák na dáan ang íyang pistula,</i> His pistol was already cocked.

<p><b>káka</b> = <sc>KÀKÀ<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kakà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. grayish-brown spider with a body the size of a pea that spins webs in trees.

<p><b>kákà</b> <i>n</i> children's word for female genitalia.

<p><b>kàkà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @{tobacco tars}. <i>v</i> [B246; a4b4] get filled up with tobacco tars. <i>Mukàkà (kàkáan, kàkáun) na gánì ang hunsuy, limpiyúhi,</i> If the pipe gets filled with tar, clean it.

<p><b>kàkà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> @stammering, having a speech impediment whereby one repeats the beginning sounds of what he is trying to get out. <i>v</i> [B; b6] speak in a stammering way.

<p><b>kákak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cackle. <b>2</b> how a person reacts. <i>Makítà ra giyud ang kákak ánang tawhána kun makaingkuwintrug buguy,</i> We'll see what k.o. a fellow that man is when he runs into a bully. <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> @cackle. <b>2</b> @{chicken out}, @coward. <i>Mu rag ísug apan kun suklan giyud, mukákak diay,</i> He appears tough but if you challenge him, he runs away. <b>3</b> [A; b3] for a woman to squawk with displeasure. <i>Nagkákak <pb n=421>ang asáwa kay dúgayng miulì ang bána</i>, The wife is squawking because her husband came home late.

<p><b>kakas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @detach s.t. that has been stitched or similarly attached. <i>Kinsay nagkakas niíning ginansilyu?</i> Who undid this crochet-work? <i>Kakasa (kaksa) na lang ang gubà nga atup</i>, @{Tear off} the worn-out part of the roof. <b>2</b> @uproot vines in clearing an area. <i>Gikaksan na ang kamutihan</i>, The sweet potato patch has been cleared of old vines. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> thin membrane which encases the small intestines of pigs and attaches it to the rear wall of the abdominal cavity, used for wrapping <ix>murkun</ix>. <b>2</b> = <sc>ILUGUN</sc>, <i>n</i>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÍLUG</sc>.

<p><b>kakaw</b> <i>n</i> @cacao.

<p><b>kakawáti</b> = <sc>MADRI KAKAW</sc>.

<p><b>kakha</b> <i>v</i> [AN; ab2] @scrape, @scratch out s.t loose. <i>Nangakha ang túru úsà mudasmag</i>, The bull kicked the ground before charging. <i>Nagkakha ug pagkáun ang manuk</i>, The chicken is scratching around for food. &mdash; <b>tukà, &mdash; tuhak</b> <i>a</i> @{hand-to-mouth existence}.

<p><b>káki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{khaki} cloth. <b>2</b> khaki color. <b>3</b> brown one-centavo piece. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @{wear khaki} or s.t. khaki-colored. <b>2</b> [B6] become khaki in color.

<p><b>kakin</b> = <sc>NAKINNÁKIN</sc>.

<p><b>kaktil</b> <i>n</i> @{cocktail drink}.

<p><b>kaktus</b> <i>n</i> @cactus.

<p><b>kakyup</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @yesterday (dialectal). <b>2</b> late in the afternoon, evening (dialectal).

<p><b>kál<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> an egg-layer which has stopped laying at a profitable rate. <i>v [B2; b6] for an egg-layer to have ceased laying profitably.

<p><b>kál<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @cal, a white powder used as a whitener for shoes. <i>v</i> [A; b] whiten with cal. <i>Káli ang sapátus putì</i>, Apply cal to white shoes. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B1245] get cal splattered over it. <b>-iru<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @kiln for burning limestone or sea-*shells to obtain lime. <b>2</b> any big fire for roasting or burning s.t. or obtaining s.t. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a kiln or a large fire to obtain s.t.

<p><b>kalába</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @honeycomb. Ang <i>tálu gíkan sa kalába</i>, Beeswax comes from the honeycomb. <i>v</i> [AN] form or build a honeycomb.

<p><b>kalab-ánan</b> = <sc>KALABÁNAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁBAN</sc>.

<p><b>kalabanghan</b> = <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.

<p><b>kalabantus</b> = <sc>KARABANSUS</sc>.

<p><b>kalabásà</b> <i>n</i> @squash of various varieties: <b><i>Cucurbita maxima</i></b>. <b>&mdash; nga putì</b> general name for squashes with light-green skin and white flesh: <b><i>Lagenaria leucantha</i></b>. <ix>see also</ix> <sc>BALANTÍYUNG</sc>, <sc>TABÁYAG</sc>, <sc>TAMBALÍYUNG</sc>. <b>&mdash; nga pula</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> general term for squashes and pumpkins with red or orange meat. <b>2</b> zero grade. <i>Kalbásà ang ákung nakúhà</i>, I got a zero. <b>2a</b> failure of grades or ratings. <i>v</i> [B126N] be a failure as a student. <i>Ayaw pagbuguybúguy sa ímung pagtuun kay makalabásà (mangalabásà) ka unyà</i>, Don't play hooky from school or you'll fail.

<p><b>kalábat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] reach up to an amount or length of time. <i>Ang húlaw nakakábat giyud ug tulu ka búlan</i>, The dry season lasted for three months. <i>Ikábat ug singkuwinta ka tápuk ang inasal</i>, Make the roast pig do for fifty portions. <b>2</b> [A2; a] @{go as far as}. <i>Kabátun ku ang mga bitúun álang kanímu</i>, I'll go to the stars for you. <b>3</b> [A; a] @walk holding on s.t. <i>Gikabátan sa bátà ang mga silya</i>, The child walked holding onto the chair. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. one holds onto while walking.

<p><b>kalabaw</b> <i>n</i> @carabao, @{water buffalo}. <b>dakung &mdash;</b> @{fully grown}, @{old enough}. <i>Dakù ka nang kábaw wà gihápun kay buut</i>, You're fully grown now but you still are irresponsible. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] work like a carabao. <i>Nagkinábaw ku pagtrabáhu arun mu mabuláhan</i>, I work like a horse to give you a better life. <b>2</b> [A13] @{have sexual relations}. <i>Ada, mag-agaw lag maadlaw, kun gabíi magkinábaw</i>, They pretend to be cousins during the day but at night they have sexual relations. <i>n</i> stage in an infant's development before it actually crawls. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having thick and big feet like a carabao's. <b>2</b> having a pregnancy that lasts more than nine months or so. <i>Kabáwun siyang nagmabdus</i>, She's like a carabao in this pregnancy (having passed nine months without giving birth).

<p><b>kalabíra</b> <i>n</i> @skeleton, @skull. <i>v</i> [BN] become a skeleton or like one. <i>Nangalabíra (nakalabíra, nikalabíra) na intawun ang íyang lawas</i>, His body has become skin and bones. <b>marka &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{skull and cross-bones}. <b>2</b> poisonous preparation.

<p><b>kalabkab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @{fan a fire}. <i>Nagkabkab siya sa kaláyu sa pagpasíga</i>, He fanned the fire to make it catch. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] fan oneself. <i>Nangabkab siya sa kaínit</i>, He fanned himself because it was so hot. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hand fan. <b>2</b> delicacy made of flour or cassava flour baked thin and crisp in the shape of a large fan. <i>a</i> having large ears (humorous).

<p><b>kalábu</b> = KLÁBU.

<p><b>kalabus</b>, kalabúsu (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @jail. <i>v</i> [B125] land in prison, in jail. <i>Nakalabus ra giyud ang kriminal</i>, The criminal finally went to jail.

<p><b>kaladángan</b> <i>n</i> name for a large variety of fish similar to porgies.

<p><b>kaladkad</b> <i>v</i> [A3P] @boil. <i>Ug mukaladkad ang nilúgaw</i>, If the porridge boils.

<p><b>kaládu</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> k.o. @embroidery <pb n=422>stitch with a mesh design, usually done on fine fabric. <i>v</i> [a12] make a mesh design on.

<p><b>kalag</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @soul. <i>Kaluy-an mu ang kalag ni Luísa</i>, Have mercy on the soul of Louisa. <b>1a</b> a person as reckoned for count. <i>Walà giyuy bisag usa ka kalag nagtikawtikaw sa íla</i>, Not a soul stirred in the house. <b>1b</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> @heartless, @cruel. <i>Wà kay kág, wà kay kalúuy</i>, You're heartless, without mercy. <b>2</b> @ghost. <b>3</b> human skeleton showing itself as a ghost. <i>Naingun kag kalag sa kaníwang</i>, You're as thin as a skeleton. <b>&mdash; sa animas</b> thin as a soul in purgatory. <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] for a ghost to haunt s.o. <i>Mamatay gánì ku kágun (kalgun) tikaw</i>, If I die, I'll haunt you. <i>Hikalgan siya sa íyang asáwa</i>, He was haunted by his wife's ghost. <b>paN-</b> [b8] for a ghost to come back to earth. <b>kalagkálag</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{All Souls' Day} or a small party of prayers and eating on All Souls' Day, in honor of the dead. <b>2</b> = <sc>PLASÍBU</sc>, <i>n, 1</i>. <i>v</i> [A1] <b>1 hold such a celebration on All Souls' Day. <i>Káda adlaw sa minatay magkalagkálag giyud mi</i>, Every year on All Souls' Day we hold a celebration. <b>2</b> = <sc>PLASÍBU</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>pangalagkálag</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> go to s.o.'s home to celebrate the All Souls' Day ritual. <b>2</b> = <sc>PAMLASÍBU</sc>. <b>kalagkalag</b> <i>v</i> [a4] get a sickness caused by the soul of a departed relative. <i>Walay duktur nga makaáyus íyang sakit. Gikalagkalag man diay nà siyas íyang lúlu</i>, No doctor can cure his disease. He is suffering from an affliction caused by the soul of his grandfather. <b>kalagnun</b> <i>a</i> spiritual.

<p><b>kalagiw</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAGIW</sc>.

<p><b>kalagkag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @loosen soil, flour, and the like, breaking small lumps into fine particles. <i>Nagkalagkag pa ku sa harína nga ákung ayágun</i>, I'm breaking up the lumps in the flour I'm going to sift.

<p><b>kalagu</b> <i>n</i> dogs having long, shaggy, and curly hair.

<p><b>kaláhà</b> <i>n</i> @{frying pan} with a rounded bottom and a handle.

<p><b>kalahátì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coin of the early 1900's worth twenty centavos. <b>2</b> s.o. who shares with or is part of. <i>Ang ákung mga anak mauy kahátì nákù sa pagtagad sa ákung bána</i>, My children and I share my husband's attention.

<p><b>kalàkalà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> croaking sound of frogs. <b>2</b> @sputtering sound of defective engines. <b>3</b> sound of s.t. boiled at a stage when the water and the material boiled has formed a soft and thick mass. <i>v</i> [A3] @croak, @sputter. <i>Mukalàkalà giyud ang mga bakì sa panahun sa ting-ulan</i>, Frogs croak on rainy days. <i>Ipatan-aw ang trák kay nagkalàkalà ang tíngug</i>, Have the car checked because the engine sputters.

<p><b>kaláki</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁKI<hi rend=sub>2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kalakkalak</b> <i>n</i> @sputtering sound of a defective machine. <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for a defective machine to sputter. <i>Mukalakkalak ang makina ug náay dipiktu,</i> The sewing machine will sputter when there's s.t. wrong with it.

<p><b>kalam</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @plow by describing a spiral starting at the outer edge of the field. <i>Kalamun nákù pagdáru arun maapil ang mga daplin,</i> I'll plow the field circularly so that the outer edges are also plowed. <i>n</i> spiral described by this manner of plowing.

<p><b>kálam</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> @search, @{look for.} <i>Mukálam pa siya sa íyang hunsuy nga naw[=à],</i> He still has to look for the pipe he lost. <i>Labihan nakakálam ang pulis sa gipangítang kawatan,</i> How the policeman looked for the thief that was wanted! <i>Kaláma ang dinakpan ug wà bay armas,</i> Search the prisoner to see if he is armed. <b>2</b> earn a living. <i>Inyung amahan ang nagkálam sa átung gikaun,</i> It is your father who earns what we eat.

<p><b>kalamalunggay</b> = <sc>KALAMUNGGAY.</sc>

<p><b>kalamansi, kalamansì</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) = <sc>LIMUNSÍTU.</sc>

<p><b>kalamantígì</b> <i>n</i> ornamental annual growing to 2' high, bearing red, white, and pink flowers, and fleshy capsules which burst when touched: <i><b>Impatiens balsamina.</b></i>

<p><b>kalámay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sugar. <b>2</b> @{brown sugar} (as opposed to <ix>asúkar</ix>). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a2] make sugar. <b>2</b> [B5] become sugar. <i>Kun itúsun ang tubà mukámay (makámay) diay,</i> Palm toddy can also be made into sugar by crystallizing it. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put sugar into. <i>Kamayan tang ímung tsá?</i> Shall I put sugar in your tea? <b>2</b> @sweet-talk s.o. <i>Ímu na pud kung gikamayan,</i> You're giving me sweet talk again. <b>2a</b> <b>bisan -an pa</b> no matter what inducement is given (even if you put sugar on it). <i>Bísag kamayan pa, dì giyud ku musugut níya,</i> I wouldn't accept him for all the tea in China. <b>3</b> [B246] for coconut taffy to fail to turn out and become crystalline and sandy. <i>Daling mukamay ang kukunat ug kúwang sa lubi,</i> The coconut taffy comes out sandy if you don't use enough coconut milk. <b>4</b> [A; a] (not without <ix>l</ix>) make <ix>kalamay.</ix> <i>n</i> (not without <ix>l</ix>) sweets made from ground sticky rice boiled with the juice of coconut meat and brown sugar.

<p><b>kalamayu, kalamáyu</b> <i>n</i> an acute @infection which has swollen and become red, but not yet open or oozing. <i>v</i> [BN; a4] be acutely @inflamed. <i>Nangalamáyu (nikalamáyu, nakalamáyu, <pb n=423>gikalamáyu) ang íyang samad,</i> His wound became acutely inflamed.

<p><b>kalambíbat</b> = <sc>KABÍBAT.</sc>

<p><b>kalambitay</b> = <sc>KULUMBITAY.</sc>

<p><b>kalambri<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @cramp. <i>v</i> [BN; a4b4] get a cramp. <i>Nikalambri (nakalambri, nangalambri) ang íyang tiil sa dúgayng hinúmul sa túbig,</i> He got a cramp in his legs because he stayed in the water too long. <i>Ang mabdus dalì kaáyung kalambríhun (kalambríhan),</i> Pregnant women are easily attacked by sudden and painful cramps.

<p><b>kalambri<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @cuss word, fairly strong, but which can also be used with a light note of humor, expressing annoyance. <i>Kalambri ning tawhána, manúgug paningil íning wà pay swildu,</i> Damn, this man. He tries to collect from me before I even get paid!

<p><b>kalambúra</b> = <sc>KARAMBÚLA.</sc>

<p><b>kalamidad</b> <i>n</i> @calamity.

<p><b>kalamri</b> = <sc>KALAMBRI<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kalamúhuy</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @fish.

<p><b>kalamúkat</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAMÚKAT.</sc>

<p><b>kalamundì, kalamundin, kalamunding</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) = <sc>LIMUNSÍTU.</sc>

<p><b>kalamunggay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> small, rapidly growing cultivated tree, with thrice pinnate leaves, the leaflets of which are one of the most popularly eaten vegetables in the Visayas: <i><b>Moringa oleifera.</b></i> <b>2</b> clubs in playing cards.

<p><b>kalamutsing</b> = <sc>KAMURITSING.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MURITSING.</sc>

<p><b>kalan, kálan</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> small @{portable stove} made of clay. <i>v</i> [a12] make into such a stove.

<p><b>kalandátay</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for a conversation to drag on, going from one subject to another. <i>Nakalandátay ang isturya kay púlus na hubug,</i> The conversation went on and on because everybody had one drink too many.

<p><b>kalandrákas</b> <i>n</i> things of all different kinds and varieties coming at once. <i>Ang kalandrákas sa inadlawng pagkinabuhì,</i> The various activities of daily life. <i>v</i> [A; a12] be a conglomeration of various things or kinds. <i>Magkalandrákas lang ang mahisgutan sa mga tapuktápuk,</i> They talk about all different things in their gatherings. <i>Kalandrakása pagpalit ang mga kulur,</i> Buy all different colors.

<p><b>kálang</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> portion of a field which has been plowed at one time. <i>v</i> [A1; b5] plow a certain portion of the field. <i>Nakakálang na sila sa katungà sa daruhan,</i> They had already plowed half of the field. <i>Ang duul sa sapà mauy ákung kalangun (kalangan) pag-úna,</i> I'll clear up the part near the river first.

<p><b>kal-ang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @gap. <i>Adtu lapus sa kal-ang sa paril</i>, Pass through the gap in the wall (or between the two walls). <b>2</b> distance in time or space between two things. <i>Ang kal-ang sa ílang pangidarun</i>, The gap in their ages. <i>v</i> [B5; c1] be located with gaps in between. <i>Kal-ángi ang mga silya arun dílì magkinupyahánay</i>, Place your chairs far apart so you won't be copying from each other. <b>-an(->)</b><i>n</i> space between two things. <i>Ang kal-angan sa sini ug iskuylahan gitukúran ug balay</i>, A house is built in the space between the movie house and the school. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> place where there is the biggest gap.

<p><b>kalangkálang</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a12] @estimate, @{consider s.t. carefully}. <i>Ikaw ra ang mukalangkálang ug makaáyu ba nímu</i>, Weigh it carefully yourself whether it would do you any good. <i>Aku ray mukalangkálang nga maígù ang pagkáun sa tanan</i>, I'll ration the food out so that it will go around. <i>n</i> estimation, consideration. <i>Sa ákung kalangkálang mudaug giyud ang prutista ni Usminya</i>, As I see it, Osmeña's protest will be successful.

<p><b>kálap<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] look for medicinal plants. <i>Mukálap kag tambal didtu sa patayng búlan</i>, You must look for medicinal herbs when there is no moon. <i>Unsang mga tambála ákung kalápun?</i> What medicinal plants shall I get? <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] look for s.t. one wants to obtain but is not easy to find. <i>Makapangálap kag kwarta basta imirdyinsi</i>, You have to scramble about to find money if it's an emergency. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> medicinal plants gathered. <i>Ang sulud sa básu mga kinálap nga gamut</i>, The glass contained medicinal roots.

<p><b>kálap<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> @touch, @tinker, @{play with s.t. forbidden}. <i>Latusun ku ang magkáp sa gamitun</i>, I'll whip anyone who tinkers with the tools. <i>Gikápan giyud ang tigib kay nagíbang</i>, S.o. must have played with the chisel because it got nicked. <b>2</b> @tease, @{play a joke} on s.o. <b>3</b> [AN] engage in petty stealing. <i>Bantáyi siyang musulud kay mukáp nà</i>, Watch him if he comes in because he lifts things. <b>kalapkálap</b> <i>v</i> [A3] tinker, try one's hand at s.t. new. <i>Namikaniku siya kay ganáhan mukapkáp ug makina</i>, He became a mechanic because he likes to tinker with machines.

<p><b>kalapáti</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] @calk, make s.t. watertight by filling the seams or cracks. <i>Gikalapatíhan (gikalapáti) ang tanang sinumpayan sa káhuy nga mikang-a</i>, All the wooden joints that came loose have been calked. <b>2</b> [B1; b6(1)] be covered with s.t. sticky and dirty. <i>Nagkalapáti ang nawung sa bátà sa bábul gam</i>, The child's <pb n=424>face is smeared with sticky bubble gum. <i>Ayaw pagdúwà sa taguk sa nangkà kay makakalapáti (makapakalapáti) nà sa kamut mu</i>, Don't play with the sticky sap of jackfruit, as it will get your hands all sticky.

<p><b>kalapi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. thin and thorny rattan used in fishing equipment because of its resistance to salt water. It produces clusters of edible, sour berries: <b><i>Calamus sp</i></b>.

<p><b>kalapi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>a</i> a defect in coconut trees manifested by the fronds, such that the lowest fronds do not hang but tend to be vertical and easily break off. <i>v</i> [B1456] for a coconut tree to be of this sort.

<p><b>kalapíti</b> = <sc>KALAPÁTI</sc>, <b>2</b>.

<p><b>kalapitsi</b> = <sc>KARAPITSI</sc>.

<p><b>kalapkap</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b5] go to a woman's bed to have intercourse with her without her knowledge.

<p><b>kalapúti</b> = <sc>KALAPÁTI</sc>, 2.

<p><b>kaláru</b> = <sc>KLÁRU</sc>.

<p><b>kalas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @rake out s.t. that is growing, @harrow. <i>Kinahanglan kalasun ang mga sagbut samtang wà pay ulan</i>, You must rake out the weeds before the rains come. <i>Ímung kalasan ug úna ang dapit sa sapà</i>, First harrow the part which is near the brook. <b>1a</b> [a12] make into a harrow, rake. <b>2</b> [A; b1c] give the owner of gambling equipment a rake-off. <i>Kalasan námù ang ímung baráha kun magpúkir mi</i>, You will get a rake-off for your cards when we play poker. <i>Kalasi si Pidru</i>, Give Pedro his rake-off. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rake, harrow. <b>2</b> rake-off to the owner of gambling paraphernalia. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who lets people gamble with his equipment for a rake-off.

<p><b>kalas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a12] @die in a disaster, accident, war. <i>Kadaghang way lábut ang nakalas sa gúbat sa Byitnam</i>, A lot of innocent people died in the war in Vietnam. <i>Kalasun kamung tanan</i>, You will all meet your death. <b>2</b> [a3] @{be destroyed}, annihilated. <i>Daghang ayruplánu ang nakalas sa Pirl Harbur</i>, Many planes were destroyed at Pearl Harbor. <b>(<-)</b> <i>a</i> (with <i>l</i> droppable) @wasteful, using in an extravagant way. <i>Kás kaáyu sa panahun ang ar-utísi</i>, ROTC is a big waste of time. <i>Kanang plantsáha kás ug kuryinti</i>, That iron uses more electricity than necessary. <i>v</i> [A2; a2] waste, use wastefully. <i>Ayaw kalása paggáwì ang túbig</i>, Don't waste the water. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> wasteful, using more than necessary. <i>Kalasan ka kaáyug papil</i>, You use paper wastefully.

<p><b>kalásag</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shield. <b>2</b> @defense. <i>Ang pagkamatárung mauy bugtung níyang kalásag bátuk sa dautan</i>, Righteousness is his sole defense against evil.

<p><b>kalasíkas</b> <i>n</i> rustling sound like that produced by the motion of leaves. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; c1] produce this k.o. rustling sound. <i>Kasikása (ikasíkas) ang mga dáhun arun sila mahadluk</i>, Rustle the leaves so they'll be afraid. <b>2</b> [A1] bustle about in preparation for s.t. <i>Mikasíkas ang mga tagibalángay kay nagkaduul na ang pyista</i>, The people are bustling about with the fiesta approaching. <i>Hápit ka na mugíkan, wà pa ka kakasíkas!</i> It's nearly time to leave and you haven't made any preparations! <b>&mdash; sa panahun</b> <i>n</i> doings, activities of constant and ordinary nature.

<p><b>kalaskálas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>ANGALASKÁLAS</sc>. <b>2</b> name given to tiny inedible crabs that dig holes in the sand.

<p><b>kalaskas</b> <i>n</i> a bird which appears at night, believed to be an <ix>unglù</ix> which has assumed this form. So called from its purported sound: <ix>kas-kas</ix>.

<p><b>kalat, kálat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] cane with bamboo or rattan. <i>Kamau kang mukalat ug síya?</i> Do you know how to cane a chair? <i>n</i> s.t. caned from bamboo or rattan. <i>Buslut ang kalat sa katri</i>, The caned portion of the bed is broken.

<p><b>kálat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB46; c] be @scattered in a confused manner, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Kinsay nagkálat sa mga duwáan sa sáwug?</i> Who scattered the toys all over the floor? <i>Hipúsa ang mga papil nga nagkálat sa salug</i>, Gather the pieces of paper scattered all over the floor. <i>Ayaw ikálat ang mga bulingun sa salug</i>, Don't scatter the soiled clothes on the floor. <b>2</b> [A; cP] for news, @rumors to spread. <i>Mikálat ang hulungíhung báhin sa ribulusiyun</i>, There were rumors about a revolution that began to spread.

<p><b>kalatkat</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @climb up s.t. using the hands and feet: climb to get, bring. <i>Nikatkat ang bátà sa lamísa</i>, The child climbed up on the table. <i>Katkátun gihápun nà sa iring dihà</i>, The cat can still climb up there to get it. <b>&mdash; sa kapáyas</b> <i>v</i> [A] have @intercourse with a woman (humorous). <i>Inigdunggù giyus bána mukatkat giyud sa kapáyas pagkagabíi</i>, As soon as the husband arrives from abroad, you can be sure he's going to get him some papayas that night.

<p><b>kalatsutsi</b> <i>n</i> @frangipani, k.o. ornamental tree planted for its flowers: <b><i>Plumiera spp</i></b>.

<p><b>kalátung</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @knocker made from a section of a bamboo with a slit on the side. It is resonant and is rapped to call or send signals.

<p><b>kálaw</b> <i>n</i> @hornbill bird: <b><i>Buceros hydrocorax</i></b>.

<p><b>kaláwan</b> <i>v</i> [A23; cP] be somewhat @raised, <pb n=425>get somewhat off the ground. <i>Ang salug sa balay mikáwan lag usa ka pi[**pí?] gíkan sa yútà</i>, The floor of the house is elevated about a foot from the ground. <i>Nakakáwan nag ayruplánu sa pag-abut námù sa irpurt</i>, The plane had already gotten off the ground when we got to the airport. <ix>see also</ix> <sc>KAWANKAWAN</sc>.

<p><b>kaláwat</b> (from <i>dáwat</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN2; b(1)] take @{Holy Communion}. <i>Nakakalawat (nakapangaláwat) ka rung Duminggúha?</i> Did you take communion this Sunday? <b>2</b> [A; a12] accept s.t. as true. <i>Dílì ku mukaláwat árung mga pangatarúngan mu</i>, I will not accept any of your reasons. <b>3</b> @receive, @accept (Biblical). <i>Kalawátun mu ba si Kurdaping nga ímung asáwa?</i> Do you take Kordaping as your wife? <i>n</i> Holy Communion. <b>-an(->), -ánan</b> <i>n</i> communion railing.

<p><b>kalaw-it</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b25] <b>1</b> get s.t. with a @hook, hook s.t. onto s.t. <i>Mikaw-it (nangaw-it) siya sa ákung líug</i>, She hooked her arm around my neck. <i>Átung kaw-ítun (kaw-ítan) ang kaimítu</i>, We'll hook the star apple and pull it down. <i>Íyang gikaw-it ang kawit sa íyang abága</i>, He hooked the bamboo palm toddy container to his shoulders. <b>2</b> @capture as the result of having run into by accident. <i>Ang patrulya nakakaw-it ug kumpit sa ismaglir</i>, The patrol ran into a smuggler's boat and captured it. <b>3</b> s.t. with a hook on it to pull things out of reach to one. <b>-an(->), -ánan</b><i>n</i> hook onto which s.t. is hung.

<p><b>kálay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. children's @game similar to marbles played with cowries. <i>v</i> [AC2; b(1)] play <i>kálay</i>.

<p><b>kalaykay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @{dig up} s.t. with the hands, hoe up s.t. in a scratching manner. <i>Nagkaykay siyag kamúti</i>, He is digging up sweet potatoes. <b>2</b> [A; b5] press hard with the finger tips in the pit of the stomach to massage it in a manner similar to scratching. <i>Mukalma ang kabúhì ug kalaykáyun (kalaykáyan) ang tiyan</i>, A burning stomach calms down when you massage it in a digging motion. <i>n</i> @hoe.

<p><b>kalaykay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. tellin clams, about 1&ndash;1/2" long and 1" wide, sand-colored and found in the sand along the shore.

<p><b>kaláyu</b> <i>n</i> @fire. <i>v</i> [B2S6] <b>1</b> grow into, be on fire. <i>Nakáyu ang bága nga giitsa sa basúra</i>, [**unsure of acute accent in "Nakáyu", could be a splotch on the scan?] The ember thrown into the garbage turned into a fire. <b>2</b> be on fire with an emotion. <i>Nagkalayu siya sa kalágut</i>, He was fuming with rage. <b>3</b> spark, produce sparks. <i>Nagkayu ang ismiril sa dihang gidaítul ang amul</i>, The sharpener gave off sparks when the bolo was pressed against it. <b>kayukayu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] for cooking utensils or burners to produce sparks while cooking s.t. <b>2</b> [B1456] for love to be burning. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> boiled corn on the cob. <b>kakalayúhan</b> <i>n</i> fires of hell.

<p><b>kalbaryu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @calvary. <b>2</b> situation causing intense mental suffering. <i>Kalbaryu nákù ning pagtuun ug sista</i>, Learning to play the guitar is utter torture to me. <i>v</i> [B126] become a calvary.

<p><b>kalbásà</b> = <sc>KALABÁSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kalbu</b> <i>n</i> @{bald-headed}. <i>v</i> [B1] be bald-headed.

<p><b>kalbúru</b> = <sc>KARBÚRU</sc>.

<p><b>kaldíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @boiler of steam engines. <b>2</b> seat of one's emotions as the source of ardent feelings. <i>v</i> [A; a2] install, make into a boiler.

<p><b>kaldirin</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALDÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>kaldiríta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALDÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>kaldiríta<hi rend=sub>2</i>, kaldirítas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @stew of goat's meat and spices. <b>2</b> stewed dog's meat (humorous). <i>v</i> [A; a] make goat stew.

<p><b>kaldíru</b> <i>n</i> @{metal pot}, usually flat-bottomed. <b>baryu nga way &mdash;</b> @cemetery (humorous). <b>kaldirin</b> <i>n</i> cooking pot, cylindrical in shape, usually made of galvanized sheet metal, and flat-bottomed. <b>kaldiríta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> light metal pot with flat bottom, usually for storing food.

<p><b>kaldíyu</b> <i>n</i> egg drop @soup, usually with a fish base but may be made of a different base. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make egg drop soup.

<p><b>kaldu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @soup made by sauteeing meat and spices to which broth has been added.<b>2</b> bowl, cup to hold soup. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make soup. <b>kalduhan</b> <i>n</i> tiny @cup for chocolate.

<p><b>kalgas</b> <i>n</i> animal flea. <i>v</i> [a4] have a skin disease characterized by small, itchy pyramid-shaped eruptions. It spreads when scratched. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> having this type of skin disease.

<p><b>kalhang</b> = <sc>KAL-ANG</sc>.

<p><b>kalhay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AB1N; a] <b>1</b> make big tears in s.t. <i>Nagkalhay (nangakalhay) ang íyang sinínà<corr>,</corr></i> Her dress was all tattered. <b>2</b> destroy utterly. Nakalhay ang taytáyan sa bumba, The bridge was utterly destroyed by the bombs.

<p><b>kalhay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> for grains or powder to be @dry and not stuck into lumps. <i>Kalhay ang balas nga uga</i>, Dry sand is loose. <i>v</i> [AB2; a2] for grains or powder to be, become dry and loose, cause them to be so. <i>Ag-ága ang harína arun makalhay</i>, Sift the flour to make it nice and powdery. <i>Kinsay mukalhay (magkalhay) sa nagbúgul nga yapak?</i> Who will break up the lumpy soil?

<p><b>káli</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] gather root crops by digging. <i>Magkáli (mangáli) tag balanghuy</i>, Let us dig some cassava. <b>kalihun</b> <i>a</i> mature root crops (ready for digging).

<p><b>kalibhay</b> = <sc>KALÌHAY</sc>.

<pb n=426>

<p><b>kalibkib</b> <i>n</i> the slivers of coconut meat and brown exterior portion which remain after the meat of the coconut has been shredded. <b>binday nga -un</b> woman's sex organ that is thin like the <ix>kalibkib</ix>.

<p><b>kalibri<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @caliber, @quality, @ability. <i>Mau nay kalibri sa táwung húmuk masukù,</i> That is the k.o. man that gets angry easily. <b>2</b> caliber of a bullet or firearm.

<p><b>kalibri<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> (from <ix>libri</ix>) <i>n</i> k.o. cassava with red stems. It may be eaten with little cooking without poisoning effect in contrast to other varieties. It is so called from the phrase <ix>makalibri sa kagútum</ix> &lsquo;save from starvation&rsquo;.

<p><b>kalibugan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÍBUG</sc>.

<p><b>kalidad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @quality. <i>Maáyug kalidad ang panaptun,</i> The cloth is of good quality. <b>2</b> @kind, @sort. <i>Unsa may kalidad sa íyang pagkatáwu?</i> What k.o. a person is he? <b>-is(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> of various kinds. <i>v</i> [B1; a1] be of various types. <i>Nagkalidádis lang ang ákung tinda,</i> I sell all sorts of goods. <b>&mdash; ang tíngug</b> for the voice to change pitch in fear. <i>Basta malísang ku, makalidádis dáyun ang ákung tíngug,</i> When I get frightened my voice gets uncontrolled.

<p><b>kalidádis<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small sweet potato with an orange flesh and dark-red skin.

<p><b>kálids</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @college. <b>2</b> one in college. <i>Kálids ka na? Kabátà pa gud nímu!</i> Are you already in college? You sure are young for that! <i>v</i> [B6] be in college. <i>Mukálids na siya sa sunud abli,</i> She will be in college next school-*year.

<p><b>kálids swing</b> <i>n</i> college swing, a k.o. old-fashioned permanent wave where the hair is cut up to the nape of the neck. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear a college swing permanent.

<p><b>kaligkig</b> = <sc>KIGKIG</sc>, <i>3</i>, <i>4</i>. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>PANGIGKIG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KIGKIG</sc>.

<p><b>kaligutgut</b> = <sc>ALIGUTGUT<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kalìhay</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] carry s.t. by having it slung over the shoulders. <i>Nagkalìhay ug pusil ang mga mangangáyam,</i> The hunters had shot-*guns slung over their shoulders.

<p><b>kalíhim</b> <i>n</i> @secretary, an official in charge of a department of the government. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a secretary.

<p><b>kalimbagas</b> <i>v</i> [A] run as fast as one can to get away from s.t. <i>Mikalimbagas siya ug dágan paghitungud sa mintiryu,</i> He ran as fast as he could as he passed the cemetery. <i>Kábaw nga nagkalimbagas ug ginukdánay,</i> The mad rushing of carabaos running after one another.

<p><b>kalimpus</b> <i>n</i> a variety of white-grained paddy rice.

<p><b>kalimutaw, kalimútaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @iris or @pupil of the eye. <i>Mudakù ang kalimutaw sa iring ug magabíi,</i> A cat's eyes grow large in the evening. <b>2</b> by extension, @eyeball. <i>Ang nagbudlat níyang kalimutaw,</i> His bulging eyeballs.

<p><b>kalindaryu</b> <i>n</i> @calendar. <b>káwas, lápas na sa &mdash;</b> for a girl to be above thirty (and get beyond a marriageable age&mdash;lit. go beyond the calendar).

<p><b>kalinding</b> = <sc>KALÍRING</sc>.

<p><b>kaling</b> <i>n</i> small dried @anchovies. <b>-in-(<-)</b> = <sc>KALING</sc>.

<p><b>káling</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB6; c1] turn over on the side, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mukáling ang kúlun nga ibutang sa lamísa nga way bangil kay língin ang lubut,</i> If you put a clay pot on the table without a support it will turn over on its side because it is round-bottomed. <i>Kalínga (ikáling) ang mga libru sa lamísa básin nadat-ugan ang sulat mu,</i> Turn the books over on the side. Maybe the letter is just underneath them. <b>2</b> [A; a12] move s.t. solid and heavy showing it one side at a time. <i>Kalíngun lang nátù ang pridyidir kay dì ta makadaug,</i> Let's just move the refrigerator by shoving it one side at a time because we cannot carry it. <b>3</b> rock a small boat that has been grounded so it will move free. <i>Kalíngun nátù ang búti kay mitaub na,</i> Let's rock the boat to free it because the tide is beginning to come in.

<p><b>kalíngag</b> = <sc>KANÍNGAG</sc>.

<p><b>kalingkaling</b> <i>n</i> k.o. mussel living in the roots of mangroves, about 1&ndash;1/2" long.

<p><b>kalingkit</b> <i>n</i> old variety of red, fine-grained paddy rice.

<p><b>kalinyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bobbin on which the thread for weaving is wound. It is attached to the shuttle. <b>2</b> amount of thread put on one bobbin. <i>v</i> [AN; a] wind thread around the bobbin in weaving. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>KALINYAS</sc>.

<p><b>kalípay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name originally given to an ornamental shrub planted for its leaves: <b><i>Polyscias fruticosa</i></b>. <b>2</b> name now also given to the croton, an erect ornamental shrub planted for its large, shiny leaves in various mottled colors and in a variety of shapes: <b><i>Codiaeum variegatum</i></b>. <b>-an</b> = <sc>KALÍPAY</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>kalipikar</b> <i>v</i> [A] register for voting.

<p><b>kalipikasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @qualification. <b>2</b> registration of new voters. <i>v</i> = <sc>KALIPIKAR</sc>.

<p><b>kalipir</b> <i>n</i> @caliper, an instrument used to measure the thickness or diameter of s.t.

<p><b>kalipláwir</b> = <sc>KULIPLÁWIR</sc>.

<p><b>kalipsu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> calypso song, dance. <b>2</b> calypso outfit, consisting of a straw hat and a sport shirt or blouse, the lower edges and sleeves of which are scalloped or raggedy.

<p><b>kalíring</b> <i>v</i> [APB3(1); c1] roll, usually said of flat disk-like things; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang <pb n=427>taklub sa kaldíru mikalíring sa kanal,</i> The pot cover rolled into the canal. <i>n</i> hoop used as a toy for children to roll.

<p><b>kalíru<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] stack ears of corn or rice on the stalk in an orderly arrangement. <i>Íyang kalirúhun (ikalíru) ang ináni,</i> He'll stack the harvested rice. <i>n</i> orderly stack of rice on the stalk or ears of corn.

<p><b>kalíru<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAL</sc>.

<p><b>kalis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] flatten off s.t. that heaps up to measure them exactly. <i>Kalisun nátù arun way bintáhà,</i> Let us level <corr sic=if>it</corr> off carefully so no one gets too much. <b>2</b> [a12] dismiss a group from office. <i>Ug malibiral ang administrasiyun kalisun mu sa inyung katungdánan,</i> If we get a Liberal administration you will all be swept from office. <i>n</i> s.t. used to level off a measured item.

<p><b>kális<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @chalice.

<p><b>kális<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. pointed sword, around 18&ndash;20" long with serrations near the handle.

<p><b>kalísa</b> <i>n</i> a two-wheeled horse drawn carriage. <i>v</i> [A13] ride in a <ix>kalísa</ix>.

<p><b>kaliskis</b> <i>n</i> scale-like crust on the skin. <i>v</i> [B1456; a4] have such scale-like encrustation on one's skin. <i>Butangig lána ang ímung bitíis kay nagkaliskis (gikaliskis),</i> Rub oil on your legs because they have scales on them.

<p><b>kalit</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @sudden. <b>2</b> @suddenly, @abruptly. <i>Sa kalit lámang nalímut siya kanákù,</i> He suddenly forgot all about me. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] happen suddenly, quickly. <i>Nikalit (nakalit) lag abli ang pultahan,</i> The door opened suddenly. <b>2</b> [AN; abc] do s.t. suddenly, quickly. <i>Átù ning kalitug kúhà,</i> Let's grab this quickly. <i>Gikalitan ku siyag haluk,</i> I suddenly kissed her. <i>Ayawg ikalit pagbutang,</i> Don't put it down hastily. <b>3</b> [b8] be surprised, caught unaware. <i>Nakalitan siya sa balità. Walà giyud siyang katíngug,</i> He was shocked by the news. He couldn't speak. <b>kalitkálit</b> <i>v</i> [BN; abc] squeeze in s.t. in one's spare time. <i>Nagkalitkálit silag ábut,</i> They took time out for a quick tryst. <i>Kalitkalíti nag silhig,</i> Take out a few moments and sweep it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] take s.o. by surprise. <i>Átù siyang pakalitan arun dílì makapangandam,</i> Let's take him by surprise so that he cannot prepare himself. <b>paniN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KALITKÁLIT</sc><corr sic=",">.</corr> <b>2</b> [A2; b] walk out on s.o. or one's obligation. <i>Dílì ku makapaningalit kanímu kay ikaw may ákung pakaslan,</i> I can't desert you, for I am going to marry you. <i>Wà kung kauban níla kay íla man kung gipaningalitan,</i> I did not get to go with them because they walked out on me. <b>ma-(->)</b> <i>a</i> @sudden. <i>Makálit nga katalagman,</i> A sudden calamity. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> do things on the spur of the moment, without proper thought. <i>Makalítun ka ra kaáyu sa ímung mga sáad,</i> You are two-faced in your promises.

<p><b>kalítang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. banana eaten raw, rarely grown commercially because it keeps poorly.

<p><b>kalkag</b> <i>a</i> for the hair to be disheveled, in disarray. <i>v</i> [APBN; c1] for hair to become disheveled, cause it to do so. <i>Ang hángin mauy mikalkag (mipakalkag) sa ákung buhuk,</i> The wind caused my hair to get disheveled. <i>Panudlay kay mikalkag (nangalkag) nang ímung buhuk,</i> Comb your hair because it is disheveled.

<p><b>kalkal</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] dig with light instruments. <i>Magkalkal ta ug tambákan sa mga sagbut,</i> We will dig a pit to throw the garbage into. <i>Nakakalkal silag usa ka kaban nga buláwan,</i> They have dug up a trunkful of gold.

<p><b>kalkulu, kalkúlu</b> = <sc>KARKULU</sc>.

<p><b>kalma</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @calm. <i>Kalma kaáyu ang panahun run,</i> It's a very calm day. <i>Kalma kaáyu siya taliwálà sa kakuyaw,</i> He remains very calm in the face of danger. <b>2</b> @slow, @deliberate, and sure in behavior. <i>Kalma kaáyu siyang nagtrabáhu bísag giapíki,</i> He worked slowly and deliberately even if he was under pressure. <i>Kalma siyag sinultihan,</i> He speaks slowly and deliberately. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a12] become calm, be unruffled of feelings, be soothed in pain. <i>Kalma lang. Ayawg kasukù dáyun,</i> Calm down. Don't get mad right away. <i>Nakalma (mikalma) na ang dágat. Mularga na kita,</i> The sea has become calm now. Let's go. <i>Makakalma (makapakalma) sa sakit ning tambála,</i> This medicine can soothe pain. <b>2</b> [b4] be becalmed. <i>Wà makairug ang barútung gikalmáhan,</i> The sail-*boat was caught in a calm and could not move. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> calm and collected. <b>-nti</b> <i>n</i> @tranquilizer. <i>Kalmanti lang tung iniksiyun nga gihátag sa duktur,</i> The injection that the doctor gave was only a tranquilizer.

<p><b>kalsáda</b> = <sc>KARSÁDA</sc>.

<p><b>kalsadur</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALSU</sc>.

<p><b>kalsitin</b> <i>n</i> @socks. <i>v</i> [A; b] put socks on s.t., get, make into socks.

<p><b>kalsu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] wedge s.t. into s.t. to make it hold or to make it come on or off. <i>Kalsúhun sa panday ang tabla nga gilansang sa bungbung,</i> The carpenter will pry off the boards that were nailed to the walls. <i>Kalsúhi ang ímung sapátus arun sayung isul-ub,</i> Use a horn for your shoes so you won't have any trouble putting them on. <i>Ikalsu ning papil sa húnus arun dílì mabukas,</i> Wedge this paper in the drawer so it won't come open. <b>1a</b> wrench s.t. loose at the <pb n=428>joints or s.t. tied around s.t. else. <i>Ang kawatan nakakalsu sa íyang mga kamut gíkan sa púsas,</i> The thief managed to wrench his hands out of the cuffs. <b>2</b> [A; c1] stick s.t. in the pocket. <i>Ayaw ikalsu (kalsúha) ang ímung daug. Iplantáda giyud sa lamísa,</i> Do not pocket your winnings. You must keep them on the table. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lever to pry s.t. off, open. <b>2</b> @shoehorn. <b>kalsadur</b> <i>n</i> @shoehorn or anything used for putting on the shoes.

<p><b>kalsúnis</b> = <sc>KARSÚNIS</sc>.

<p><b>kalsunsilyu</b> = <sc>KARSUNSILYU</sc>.

<p><b>kaltik</b> <i>n</i> an empty can of motor oil about 7" long with a diameter of about 2', locally used as a unit of measurement for sea shells.

<p><b>kaltiks</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Caltex, name of a company and a brand of gasoline. <b>2</b> = <sc>KALTIK</sc>.

<p><b>kalù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KALÙKALÙ</sc>. <b>kalùkalù</b> <i>a</i> @stupid, @{mentally defective}. <i>Sugúa lag simpling butang ang táwung kalùkalù,</i> Give morons simple orders. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become stupid, slow-witted; consider s.o. as such.

<p><b>kalù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] scoop out the top part of a liquid. <i>Ikawù (kaw-a) ang buwà sa linung-ag,</i> Scoop away the foam from the top of the boiling rice.

<p><b>kálù</b> <i>n</i> @hat. <b>&mdash; sa pitrumaks</b> <i>n</i> shade of pressure lantern. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear a hat, make into a hat. <b>kalùkálù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> glans penis (humorous). <b>2</b> conical cover for a chimney top. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)<corr>]</corr> put up a conical cover over a chimney. <i>Gikalùkalúan níyag sín ang panghaw,</i> He put a conical cover made of iron sheeting on the smokestack.

<p><b>kalub</b> <i>a</i> for the surface of s.t. round and flat to be depressed. <i>Dílì giyud muhárì ning usa ka dakúa kay kalub man ang patay,</i> This one centavo coin will not come up heads because its tail is depressed. <i>v</i> [B; a12] get depressed in the middle. <i>Nagkalub man lang ang ági niíning plakáha,</i> My! How warped this record is.

<p><b>kalubay</b> <i>n</i> a variety of common squash that has a club-shaped fruit, 2&ndash;4' long, with smooth whitish-green skin and white flesh, the skin and flesh of which are edible. It is sold commercially as kalbásang putì: <b><i>Lagenaria leucantha</i></b>. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] cook <ix>kalubay</ix> or with <ix>kalubay</ix>.

<p><b>kalúbid</b> <i>n</i> an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

<p><b>kalubkub</b> <i>n</i> small, low-roofed hut for temporary shelter. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] make such a hut. <b>2</b> [A; c] put, store in such a hut.

<p><b>kalug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hand tool similar to a small sickle used in cutting rice panicles during harvest. <i>v</i> [A; a] use this instrument.

<p><b>kalugkalug</b> = <sc>KALÙKALÙ</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALÙ<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kalugpus, kalugpuy</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS</sc>.

<p><b>kalugtì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet potato with white peelings and yellow or reddish meat.

<p><b>kalugungkugung</b> <i>n</i> name given to several aromatic herbs, used as a hair rinse. In some areas the name is given to a plant used as a spice, probably <b><i>Ocimum sanctum</i></b>. <b>&mdash; sa kabáyù</b> a tall, strongly aromatic, woody herb of waste areas: <b><i>Hyptis suaveolens</i></b>.

<p><b>kalúha</b> (from <ix>duha</ix>) <i>n</i> @twin, @twins. <i>Si Pidru ákung kalúha,</i> Peter is my twin. <i>Nanganak siya ug kalúha,</i> She gave birth to twins. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C3] be twins. <b>1a</b> [A12; b6] have as one's twin. <b>&mdash; ug sawa</b> be born at the same time as a snake. Some people are thought to have snakes around them that bring good luck. These snakes are thought to have been born at the same time as the person and are considered his twin. <b>1b</b> [b(1)] be coupled with. <i>Ang íyang mga kasákit gikaluháag pagmáhay,</i> His sufferings were coupled with regrets. <b>2</b> give birth to twins. <i>Ang íyang asáwa gikaluháan ug babáyi,</i> His wife gave birth to twin girls.

<p><b>kalukalu</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> sweet made of very fine corn grits (<ix>tiktik</ix>) boiled with coconut milk and sugar. <i>v</i> [A13; a] make <ix>kalukalu</ix>.

<p><b>kalukálu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> fried rice, made of leftover rice and usually nothing else but salt. <i>v</i> [A; a1b(1)] cook or make simple fried rice.

<p><b>kalukálu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the sweet, watery outer coating of coconut meat.

<p><b>kalukhu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] scrape, scratch off s.t. that sticks to a surface with a thrusting motion. <i>Gáhì kalukhúun ang dukut sa kúlun,</i> It's hard to scratch burnt rice in the pot. <i>Kukhúi ang dárug lápuk,</i> Scrape the plow clean of mud. <b>kalukhuun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> meat of very young coconut at a stage that it is just scraped, not dug out, or the <ix>dalínug</ix>. <b>2</b> dredged to the point that only a little is left to dig out.

<p><b>kalúkud</b> = <sc>KULÚKUD</sc>.

<p><b>kalúkus</b> = <sc>KULÚKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kalumingking</b> = <sc>KULUMINGKING</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KINGKING<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kalumitsing</b> = KAMURITSING. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MURITSING</sc>.

<p><b>kalumpang</b> <i>n</i> spreading tree which reaches a height of twenty meters or more bearing foul-smelling flowers which are deep-red in color and kidney-shaped fruit, as big as a child's fist with edible peanut-like seeds: <b><i>Sterculia foetida</i></b>.

<p><b>kalumpit</b> <i>n</i> an old variety of paddy rice with white grains.

<p><b>kalung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> upland river crab with a red breast.

<pb n=429>

<p><b>kalung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KALUG</sc>.

<p><b>kalunggu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> feathers just coming in. <b>2</b> @warts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b6] for feathers to come in, either in young birds or after shedding. <i>Ug mangalunggu ang balhíbu, sakit nga hikápun,</i> If the feathers are just coming in, it hurts the bird if you touch them. <b>2</b> [B26; a4b4] turn into a wart, be affected by a wart. <i>Ug makahikap kag kawunggug manuk, kawunggúhun ka,</i> If you touch sprouting feathers, you will get warts. <i>Gikalunggúhan (nangalunggu) ang tibuuk níyang bukubuku,</i> His back is all covered with warts.

<p><b>kalungkung</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for the body or limbs to be curled up, bent. <i>Nagkungkung siya sa katri sa túmang katugnaw,</i> He curled up in bed from severe cold. <i>Nakungkung ang mga tudlù sa tigúwang,</i> The old man's fingers are gnarled. <i>Ikungkung (kungkunga) ang ímung tiil,</i> Pull in your legs. <i>a</i> @{curled up}, @bent.

<p><b>kalunsing</b> = <sc>LUNSING</sc>.

<p><b>kalúpù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] wrap s.t. around s.o. or oneself. <i>Kalupúi ang bátà kay tugnaw,</i> Put s.t. around the child because it's cold. <b>2</b> [c1] make, use as a shoulder wrap. <i>n</i> s.t. used to wrap around oneself. <i>Unsa may kalúpù mu ug paalut ka, tualya?</i> What do you use around your shoulder if you get a haircut, a towel?

<p><b>kalus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @{fetch water}. <i>Nakakalus na kug pára ikalígù,</i> I've already fetched water for my bath. <b>2</b> get liquid out with a dipper. <i>Mukalus na lang ku ug sabaw,</i> I'll just ladle out soup for myself. <i>Kalusun lang ni nátù arun maángay,</i> Let us just ladle this out so we will have equal shares. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. used as a dipper. <b>2</b> @dipperful. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> intense action of fetching water. <i>v</i> = <sc>KALUS</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>KALUS</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>kaluskus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] @scrape or @scratch to remove s.t. from a surface. <i>Kuskúsag maáyu ang kan-un nga namilit sa kaldíru,</i> Scrape out the rice that is sticking to the pot. <b>2</b> [AN; b5] scratch the hair hard with the hands. <i>Nagpanguskus siya sa kakatul sa íyang úlu,</i> He kept on scratching because his head itched so intensely. <i>Nakakuskus (nakapanguskus) siya sa íyang úlu tungud sa kalisud sa prublíma,</i> He scratched his head due to the difficulty of the problem.

<p><b>kaluskus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a12] pull up the trouser legs or sleeves. <i>Nangaluskus (mikaluskus) siya sa íyang karsúnis,</i> He rolled up his trousers. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUYUSKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kaluskus<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> = <sc>KAGUSKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kálut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @dig, @excavate. <i>Ang luyu sa balay gikalútan ug atábay,</i> A deep well has been dug in our back yard. <b>2</b> scratch an itch. <i>Kalúta ang ákung likud, katul<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> Scratch my back. It's itchy. <b>&mdash; ug dílì katul</b> = <sc>HIKAP SA DÍLÌ HILIKÁPUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HÍKAP,</sc> <i>6.</i> <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pit or hole dug up. <b>1a</b> amount dug up. <b>2</b> instrument for scratching oneself. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] scratch oneself. <i>Nangalut siya sa íyang tingkuy,</i> He scratched the back of his neck. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place where a hole or pit is dug up. <b>2</b> place s.o. scratched. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who digs s.t. <b>2</b> gravedigger.

<p><b>kalutkut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{scrape off} s.t. hard by rubbing it back and forth. <i>Nagkalutkut siyag dukut,</i> He's scraping off the food sticking to the pot.

<p><b>kaluwaan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DUHA.</sc>

<p><b>kaluykuy</b> <i>n</i> @{whooping cough.} <i>v</i> [a4] have a whooping cough. <i>Nanglugwà ang íyang mata ug inubu kay gikaluykuy siya,</i> He is coughing his head off because he has a persistent cough.

<p><b>kalyi</b> <i>n</i> @street. <i>Náa sa Kalyi Magalyánis ang mga dagkung tindáhan,</i> The large department stores are on Magallanes Street. <b>pasa-</b> girl one is playing around with, not seriously in love. <i>Unsa guy mangasáwa? Pára pasakalyi lang nà siya,</i> Who said I was going to get married? I'm just playing around with her.

<p><b>kalyu</b> <i>n</i> @corns on the toes. <i>v</i> [B126; a4b4] get corns. <i>Gikalyu (gikalyúhan) ang ákung tiil,</i> I have corns on the feet. <b>kalyuhun</b> <i>a</i> having corns all over it.

<p><b>kalyus</b> <i>n</i> dish made from the legs and tail of cows or carabaos. The bones are removed and the meat is sliced, sauteed with spices, and then stewed with vegetables.

<p><b>kám</b> = <sc>KALAM.</sc>

<p><b>káma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @bed, usually with mattress. <b>2</b> a large stack of s.t. piled in an orderly fashion. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; ab] make one's bed, make into a bed. <i>Magkáma ka sa katri inigmata nímu,</i> Make your bed after you wake up. <i>Kun walay láing higdáan mahímu rag kining tag-as nga bangkù kamáhun,</i> You can use these benches as beds to lie on. <b>2</b> [A1; c1] stack into a neat way. <i>Ákù ning ikáma (kamáhun) ang káhuy sa sílung,</i> I'll pile this firewood under the house. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> in a large neat stack. <b>-da</b> = <sc>KÁMA,</sc> <i>2 n, v.</i> <b>kinamáda</b> = <sc>KINÁMA.</sc>

<p><b>kamadutsay</b> <i>n</i> married man's @mistress. <i>v</i> [A; a12] have, make into a mistress.

<p><b>kamagkù</b> = <sc>KUMALAGKÙ.</sc>

<p><b>kamagung</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large forest tree producing a highly prized, hard, black wood used as building material and for making canes. The fruit is brown and hairy with white flesh and edible. Varieties bearing fruit with few <pb n=430>seeds are planted and sold commercially as <ix>mabúlu:</ix> <i><b>Diospyros discolor.</b></i> <i>a</i> a person who is very dark black. &dagger;

<p><b>kamálig</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @storehouse for farm products. <b>2</b> @stable for work animals. <i>Ang Diyusnung Bátà natáwu sa kamálig,</i> The Christ Child was born in a stable. <i>v</i> [c1] store farm products in a storehouse. <b>atup nga -in-</b> roof consisting of a single piece of wood set at an angle. <b>-in-, -in-(->)</b> <i>a</i> by the granaryful. <i>Kinamálig kun mupalit siyag bugas,</i> He buys rice by the granary.

<p><b>kamálù</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> k.o. @{poultry disease} characterized by black spots on combs or eyes of fowls. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4b4] be affected with this poultry disease. <i>Gikamálù (gikamalúan) ang mata sa manuk,</i> The chicken's eyes are affected with poultry disease.

<p><b>kamalunggay</b> = <sc>KALAMUNGGAY.</sc>

<p><b>kamandag</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @meconium, the first stools of a newborn baby. <b>2</b> poison venom.

<p><b>kamandir</b> <i>n</i> @commander. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN; a2] be a commander. <i>Kinsa na man karuy nagkamandir (nangamandir) sa mga huks?</i> Who is the commander of the Huks? <b>2</b> [AN; a2b2] commandeer. <i>Ákung awtu nakamandir sa armi,</i> My car was commandeered by the army. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> like a commander.

<p><b>kamang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{red snapper} producing red fat: <i><b>Lutianus sp.</b></i>

<p><b>kámang</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b5] <b>1</b> @creep, @crawl. <i>Tabúni ang pagkáun kay kamángun unyà sa mga uk-uk,</i> Cover the food or the cockroaches will crawl all over it. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa kalisud, &mdash; daw úmang</b> be in utter poverty. <i>Nagkamang kami sa kalisud,</i> We're crawling in poverty. <b>1b</b> be sent sprawling on the floor. <i>Nakakámang intáwun ang táwu nga naigù sa suntuk,</i> The poor fellow was sent sprawling to the floor after he was hit by the blow. <b>2</b> [A; a12] go to a woman's bed without prearrangement to have illicit relations. <i>Ang ílang búy nagkámang ni Pitra,</i> Their houseboy crawled into Petra's bed. <b>3</b> [A; a12] go after a voter to keep him from voting for the opposition. <i>Ang wà pa nímu mahaylu, kamánga. Kinahanglang way bútung Usminya dinhi,</i> Go after those you can't win over. There must be no votes for Osmeña. <b>-in-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> going after voters in the last moment to keep them from voting or buy their votes.

<p><b>kamangyan</b> <i>n</i> a dried form of the resin obtained from <ix>almasíga</ix> and other forest trees. It is burned over coals for its smoke, which is used in folk medicine and other rituals for magical purposes and also used as a mosquito smudge or for other non-magical purposes.

<p><b>kamaníru</b> <i>n</i> one who works on street or road maintenance. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] worker on street maintenance.

<p><b>kamansi</b> <i>n</i> @breadfruit with seeds, the seeds and pulp of which are eaten as a vegetable when not ripe: <i><b>Artocarpus camansi.</b></i>

<p><b>kamansili, kamansilis</b> <i>n</i> medium-sized tree with short, sharp spines at the base of the leaves and on the branches that bears a white or reddish edible fruit similar to tamarind <i>(sambag)</i> but smaller and with a more pronounced spiral. The bark is used for tanning: <i><b>Pithecolobium dulce.</b></i>

<p><b>kamantígì</b> = <sc>KALAMANTÍGÌ.</sc>

<p><b>kamanyan</b> = <sc>KAMANGYAN.</sc>

<p><b>kamara báha</b> <i>n</i> @{House of Representatives,} the lower house of the Congress of the Philippines.

<p><b>kamarin</b> <i>n</i> @warehouse with an iron roof. <i>v</i> [A12; a2] make, build, make into a warehouse. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> by the warehouseful.

<p><b>kamarun</b> <i>n</i> dish of shrimps, split and dipped in eggs, optionally mixed with ground meat. <i>v</i> [A; a] make, have <ix>kamarun.</ix> <b>&mdash; ribusádu</b> = <sc>KAMARUN.</sc>

<p><b>kamarúti</b> <i>n</i> an @{officer's quarters} on the deck, @cabin in a sailing vessel.

<p><b>kámas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c6] @struggle, @strive intensively in an endeavor. <i>Hala, kámas arun ka mulampus,</i> Strive hard so that you'll be a success. <b>2</b> [AN; a] do s.t. in the shortest time possible. <i>Nagkámas siya pagpanghúgas arun makasúruy dáyun,</i> She did the dishes hurriedly so that she could go out soon. <b>kamaskamas</b> = <b>KÁMAS<hi rend=sub>1</i>,</b> <i>v2.</i>

<p><b>kámas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KAMRAS.</sc>

<p><b>kamátis</b> <i>n</i> @tomato. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] cook s.t. with tomatoes. <b>2</b> [B2S] be green or red like a tomato. <b>2a</b> [B2S46N; a4S] for a penis just circumcised to swell like a tomato. <i>Nagbulad ka man gud sa ínit maung nagkamatis (nangamátis, gikamatis) ang ímung tulì,</i> You went out in the sun, so your penis you just had circumcised has become red and swollen.

<p><b>kamáug<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a mild @{cuss word,} euphemism for <ix>kamatay</ix>, expressing disgust or anger over s.t. or s.o. <i>Kamáug, nahibilin man diay ang yáwi,</i> Darn! I forgot the key.

<p><b>kamáug<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. <corr sic=terrestial>terrestrial</corr> @orchid that grows in waste places, commonly under coconut trees. It has a fleshy rootstock which produces a sticky sap, used as a glue for guitars. The scrapings also have medicinal uses: <i><b>Geodorum nutans.</b></i> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] glue s.t. with <ix>kamáug.</ix>

<p><b>kam-aw</b> <i>n</i> shallow earthen @bowl, used to hold food. <i>v</i> [c16] put in a small earthen bowl.

<pb n=431>

<p><b>kamay</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b5] @summon by a wave of the hand. <i>Ang dakung pátag sa Kauswágan daw nagkamay (nagpangamay) kaníya,</i> The wide plains of Kauswagan seemed to be beckoning to him. <i>Ákù siyang gikamay (gikamayan),</i> I beckoned to him.

<p><b>kámay</b> (from <ix>kalámay</ix>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> <b>taliwálà, ibabaw sa &mdash;</b> in @ecstasy (usually sexual). <i>Bisag mamatay ku karun dáyun basta sa ibabaw sa kámay,</i> I don't mind if I die this instant as long as I'm in the midst of ecstasy. <b>&mdash; mu</b> <b>1</b> now see what you have done! <i>Kámay mu nà karun, nadakpan hinúun ta,</i> Now see what you have done! We're caught! <b>2</b> can you imagine this surprising thing happened! <i>Kámay mu bay siya pay manghulam, unyà mangísug pa,</i> Can you beat that! He borrows and then gets angry! <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> imagine if this surprising thing were to happen. <b>Kámay mu bag láking makigminyug láki!</b> Imagine a man marrying a man!

<p><b>kamayingking</b> = <sc>KUMINGKING</sc>. see <sc>KINGKING<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kamayu</b> = <sc>KALAMÁYU</sc>.

<p><b>kamba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; b4] have a @{quickened heartbeat}. <i>Mikamba ang ákung dughan sa gitiúnan aku sa pistúla,</i> My heartbeat quickened when the pistol was pointed at me. <b>2</b> [B46; b4] be inhibited by a feeling of fear and respect. <i>Mukamba giyud ming sír,</i> We are all scared of the teacher.

<p><b>kambang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @grouper.

<p><b>kambantulì</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. long @sword with a pronounced and a flat end jutting out to a point at the bottom.

<p><b>kambas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1a</b> [AN; b5c] @canvass for votes or sales. <i>Kambásun (kambásan) nátù sila kay wà pa sila hibaligyai,</i> Let's canvass them because they haven't bought any. <i>Ikambas ning bag-ung pruduktu sa kasilinganan,</i> Bring this new product around the neighborhood. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @count votes, ballots.

<p><b>kambat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @tie or @weave a network: <b>a</b> around a bottle to protect it or across the mouth of s.t. to keep the contents from falling out. <i>Kambáta ang pagbáat sa bukag arun dílì kataktákan,</i> Tie the basket up with a net over the mouth so that nothing can fall out of it. <i>Átung kambátan ning dáma sa tubà,</i> Let's weave strips of rattan around the demijohn. <b>b</b> to mend or patch s.t. <i>Gikambat nákù pagsursi ang midyas,</i> I darned the socks by weaving a network.

<p><b>kambáya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> reenforcing string tied crisscross over a kite's frame to which the paper is pasted. <i>Butangig kambáya ang tabánug,</i> Put reenforcing string on the kite. <b>2</b> parallel lines crossing each other at right angles, forming a design similar to plaid. <i>Ang kambáya sa íyang bistídu pula ug birdi</i>, Her dress has crisscrossing red and green lines. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] tie or put reenforcing string. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>KAMBÁYA</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>kambirs</b> <i>n</i> brand of expensive high sneakers.

<p><b>kambiyáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @transmission of cars and other automotive vehicles. <i>Ang kambiyáda sa íyang awtu may kwarta martsa</i>, The transmission of his car has a fourth gear. <b>2</b> @{change of key} in a piece of music. <i>Nindut kaáyu pamináwun ang kambiyáda íning kantáha</i>, This song is very melodious the way it changes keys. <b>&mdash; sa hángin</b> @{change of wind}. <i>Kining hilanáta dala sa kambiyáda sa hángin</i>, This fever was brought on by the change of weather. <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> put or shift into gear, operate the gearshift. <b>2</b> change the key in a piece of music. <b>3</b> [B; b4] for the wind to change.

<p><b>kambiyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @transmission of automotive vehicles. <i>Daut ug kambiyu ning awtu</i>, This car has a defective transmission. <b>1a</b> stick shift of the transmission. <b>1b</b> gear. <i>Kambiyu sa primíra</i>, First gear. <i>Kining trakturáha may dusi ka kambiyu sa abanti</i>, This tractor has twelve forward speeds. <b>2</b> change of key within a piece of music. <b>3</b> change of wind. <b>4</b> money given as @change. <i>Pila may kambiyu sa ímung písus?</i> How much change did you get for your peso? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] shift gears. <b>2</b> [A; c1] change the key in music. <b>3</b> [B; b4] for the wind to change. <b>4</b> [AC; c] @exchange things with s.o., give s.t. in exchange. <i>Magkambiyu ta ug lingkuránan, ha?</i> Let's exchange seats, shall we? <i>Singku písus ákung ikambiyu sa matag dulyár</i>, I will give five pesos for every dollar. <b>4a</b> [A23; c] give s.o. his change. <i>Wà ku nímu kambiyúhi</i>, You haven't given me my change. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. given in exchange for s.t. else.

<p><b>kambiyúlu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> vertical @roulette, table roulette. <b>2</b> raffle drum.

<p><b>kambúha</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> chicken whose feathers are naturally upturned like those of an angry hen. <b>2</b> name given to @fish with fins sticking out prominently like the kambúha chicken, e.g. kinds of dragonets.

<p><b>*kamhir</b> <b>nagdala ug &mdash;</b> for a woman's action to have a note of @flirtation in it. <i>Ang íyang pahíyum nagdala ug kamhir</i>, Her smile said, &lsquo;Come here.&rsquo;

<p><b>kami</b> @we (not including addressee). <i>Kami mubáyad ug makagustu</i>, We pay if we like it. <b>mi</b> short for <b>kami</b>. <b>Dílì mi mubutar ni Markus</b>, We will not vote for Marcos.<b><i>námù</i></b> <b>1</b> <ix>gen</ix>. <i>Amahan námù, náa ka sa mga lángit...</i>, Our Father, who art in heaven.<b>2</b> <pb n=432><ix>short for</ix> <sc>KANÁMÙ.</sc> <b>kanámù</b> <ix>dat.</ix> <i>Ári kanámù ihátag,</i> Give it to us. <i>Ayaw língì kanámù,</i> Don't turn around to look at us. <b>ámù</b> <ix>preposed gen.</ix> <b>1</b> our. <i>Ang ámung irù,</i> Our dog. <i>Ámung ibaligyà,</i> We will sell it. <b>2</b> my place, at home. <i>Si Pápa túa pa sa ámù,</i> Dad is at home. <b>taga-</b> one from our place. <i>Si Pídu taga-Karkar, dílì tagaámù,</i> Pedo is from Carcar. He is not from our place. <b>3</b> the one that is ours. <i>Ang inyung irù putì, ang ámù itum,</i> Your dog is white, ours is black. <b>3a</b> <b>ang &mdash; gud</b> the thing that worries us. <i>Ang ámù gud ug mahibalu sa plánu ang amahan,</i> The thing that worries us is that the father will know of the plans. <b>4</b> <i>[verb]</i> <b>ug ámù</b> [do] by ourselves. <i>Magdúwà mig ámù,</i> We'll play by ourselves. <b>5</b> <b>sa ámù</b> = <sc>KANÁMÙ.</sc> <b>amúa</b> = <sc>ÁMÙ.</sc> <b>kamikámi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> just us, no one special. <i>Kamikámi ray naglútù áni,</i> We cooked this ourselves. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ra</b> <i>[nom. or dat.]</i> be distantly related to us. <i>Kamikámi ra si (ni) Markus,</i> Marcos is distantly related to us. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ra</b> we are of the same caliber, age, in comparison. <i>Kamikámi ra si Ríta ug abilidad sa mat,</i> Rita and I are about the same in math. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] do s.t. by ourselves. <i>Nagkamikámi lang mig puyù áning gamayng balay,</i> We're just living by ourselves in this small house.

<p><b>kámig</b> <i>a</i> @cold to the touch. <i>Kámig kaáyu ang ayis,</i> Ice is very cold. <i>v</i> [BN; c1] be cold. <i>Nangámig na ang patayng láwas,</i> The corpse is cold.

<p><b>kámil, kamilyu</b> <i>n</i> @camel.

<p><b>kamingking</b> = <sc>KUMINGKING.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KINGKING<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kaminíru</b> = <sc>KAMANÍRU.</sc>

<p><b>kamintang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KUMINTANG.</sc>

<p><b>kamintang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> variety of croton <i>(kalípay, 2).</i>

<p><b>kamira</b> <i>n</i> @camera.

<p><b>kamísa</b> = <sc>KAMÍSA TSÍNU.</sc> <b>&mdash; dintru</b> <i>n</i> men's @{dress shirt.} <i>v</i> [A3; a] wear, make into a dress shirt. <b>&mdash; tsínu</b> <i>n</i> men's outer garment worn loose and hanging either long or short-sleeved[** unsure of joining hyphen there] and collarless. It is used by older men for formal or casual wear. <i>v</i> [A3; a2] wear, make into a <ix>camisa chino.</ix>

<p><b>kamisin</b> <i>n</i> @undershirt, sleeveless or T-shirt style. <b>&mdash; dibrásu</b> sleeveless undershirt. <i>v</i> [AN; a] wear, make into an undershirt.

<p><b>kamisíta</b> = <sc>KAMISIN.</sc>

<p><b>kamisúla</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. loose, chemise-like, sleeveless undergarment for women, with a rounded neckline, worn below the <ix>kimúna</ix> and <ix>nagwas.</ix> <i>v</i> [A; a] use, make a <ix>kamisúla</ix>.

<p><b>kamisulin</b> = <sc>KAMÍSA DINTRU.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMÍSA.</sc>

<p><b>kamisun</b> <i>n</i> whole @slip. <i>Naglabaw ang ímung kamisun,</i> Your slip's showing. <i>v</i> [AN; a] wear, make into a slip. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> like a slip in shape.

<p><b>kamkam</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @touch with the fingers. <i>Ayawg kamkáma ang tunukung sanga,</i> Don't touch that thorny branch. <b>2</b> [AN] @take s.t. that is not one's own. <i>Ngánung mikamkam ka man sa dílì ímung butang?</i> Why did you touch s.t. that didn't belong to you? <i>Nasakpan ang tisuríru nga nangamkam,</i> The treasurer was caught embezzling.

<p><b>kamlà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @touch s.t. heavy-handedly. <i>Dúnay nagkamlà sa ákung linabhan kay nabuling,</i> S.o. pawed my laundry because it has dirt on it. <i>Nakakamlà kug basang iti,</i> I inadvertently touched wet chicken dung.

<p><b>kamlas</b> = <sc>KAMRAS.</sc>

<p><b>kamlut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @pull out s.t. with little force or pull gently on s.t. with the hands. <i>Ayaw kamlúta nang sanga kay mahurut katágak ang mga dáhun,</i> Don't pull on that branch because you'll knock all the leaves off. <i>Kamlúta ang húnus,</i> Pull out the drawer. <i>Kamlútan níya ang basakan sa mga sagbut,</i> He'll pull out the weeds in the rice paddy.

<p><b>kampamintu</b> <i>n</i> @encampment, temporary @camp. <i>Ang kampamintu sa mga trabahadur duul sa subà,</i> The laborers' camp is near the river.

<p><b>kampána</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{church bell.} <b>2</b> uvula. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] ring the bell. <i>Ug kampanáhan ang bunyag, dakù ang báyad,</i> You have to pay a lot if you want them to ring the bell for the baptism. <b>2</b> [b6] install a bell. <b>kampanakampána</b> = <sc>KAMPÁNA,</sc> <i>n 2.</i> <b>-ryu</b> <i>n</i> belfry, bell tower. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] put a bell tower to a church. <b>kampanilya<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> small bell. <i>v</i> [A; b6] ring a small bell. <i>Kinsa guy ímung gikampanilyáhan dihà?</i> Who are you ringing that bell at? <b>di-</b> having a small bell at one's disposal. <b>abugádu di-</b> a high-class lawyer (lit. one who uses a bell [to summon assistants]). <b>2</b> anything high-class. <i>Púru dikampanilya ang ákung kahúguy,</i> I only associate with high-class people. <b>kampaníru</b> <i>n</i> one who rings bells. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be a bell ringer.

<p><b>kampanilya<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> ornamental shrub with large, yellow bell-shaped flowers: <i><b>Thevetia peruviana.</b></i>

<p><b>kampanti</b> <i>a</i> dressed elaborately, esp. with jewelry. <i>v</i> [A; c] be elaborately dressed and adorned with jewelry.

<p><b>kampanya</b> <i>n</i> @campaign. <i>v</i> [ANC12; c] campaign, talk in campaigning. <i>Nangampanya siyag pára itúkud ug iskuyláhan,</i> He is campaigning for money to build a schoolhouse. <i>Kampanyáhan tikaw básin adtu kang Markus butar,</i> I'll talk to you. Perhaps you'll vote for Marcos. <i>Kampanyáhan nátù si Markus,</i> <pb n=433>Let's campaign for Marcos. <i>Sa naandan bakak lang gihápuy ikampanya,</i> As usual, they'll tell a lot of lies in their campaign.

<p><b>kampat</b> <i>a</i> having paint, powder, or the like unevenly applied. <i>Kampat ang pagpintal,</i> The paint job was uneven. <i>v</i> [AB; c1] become splotched or uneven, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Nawung nga nagkampat sa pulbus,</i> Face, splotched with powder.

<p><b>kampi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2C; b(1)] @{take sides} with. <i>Dì ku makakampi sa usag usa níla kay púlus nákù sila minahal,</i> I can't side with either of them because they are both dear to me. <i>Nagkakampi ang Hapun ug Aliman sa gúbat,</i> The Japanese and Germans were on the same side during the war.

<p><b>kampi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] tuck overlapping or dangling parts of a skirt, esp. a wrap-around, into the waist. <i>Akuy mukampi sa ikug-íkug sa ímung sáya,</i> I'll tuck in the train of your skirt. <i>Kampíhun (ikampi) níya ang subrang tumuy sa patadyung iniglíkus níya niíni sa háwak,</i> She'll tuck in the overlap of her wrap-around when she wraps it around her waist.

<p><b>kampílan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. long, sharp @sword, straight-*bladed, with the top sloping down to form a point and having a sharp spike protruding from the top side 2 or 3" in the back of the tip.

<p><b>kamping</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] go @camping, esp. scouts.

<p><b>kampísaw</b> = <sc>KULAMPÍSAW.</sc>

<p><b>kampiyun</b> <i>n</i> @champion, @winner of the first place in a competition. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become a champion. <b>-atu(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> championship: being a champion or period of time that one is a champion. <i>Ang kampiyunátu ni Ilurdi nilungtad ug dúgay,</i> Elorde was champion for a long time. <b>2</b> championship contest. <i>Kampiyunátu run ang amatyur,</i> Tonight's amateur program will determine the champion.

<p><b>kampu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @encampment, permanent or temporary. <b>&mdash; santu</b> <i>n</i> cemetery. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b(1)] encamp. <i>Nagkampu ang mga trabahadur sa may karsáda,</i> The workers encamped near the road. <i>Ang tiilan sa búkid mauy gikampúhan sa mga kaáway,</i> The enemies encamped at the foot of the mountain. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a camp.

<p><b>kampu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>ALUNDRIS<hi rend=sub>2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kampur</b> <i>n</i> @{camphor oil.}

<p><b>kampus</b> <i>n</i> @campus, the grounds of a school or college.

<p><b>kamras</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] @scratch with the nails or claws. <i>Ayawg híkap sa halu kay hingkamrasan ka,</i> Don't touch the monitor lizard. It might scratch you. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> scratch marks. <i>Nagdugù ang íyang buktung daghag kinamrasan,</i> His arms were all bloody with the numerous scratches he had received.

<p><b>kamray</b> <i>n</i> pineapple fiber woven into a cloth.

<p><b>kamrut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @touch, @grab s.t. with the bare hands. <i>Ayaw kamrúta kanang atsára kay mapan-us,</i> Don't grab that sauerkraut made from papayas with your bare hands because that will cause it to go bad. <b>2</b> = <sc>KAMLUT.</sc>

<p><b>kamu</b> @you (plural). <i>Kamung duhay gitawag,</i> I called the two of you. <ix>short form in position other than predicate:</ix> <bx>mu.</bx> <i>Kinahanglan magtuun giyud mu,</i> You must study. <b>kamukámu</b> <b>1</b> just you all and no one else. <i>Kamukámu ras inyu run kay namaúlì na ang mga bisíta,</i> You are the only ones left in the house now that the visitors have left. <b>2</b> distant relative. <i>Kamukámu ra si Uyung kay mag-ágaw inyung isig ka amahan,</i> You and Oyong are distant relatives because your fathers are cousins. <i>v</i> [A] do s.t. by yourselves. <i>Magkamukámu lang diay mug adtu ug dì mu mangimbitar,</i> Are you going by yourselves and not invite anyone else along? <b>kamuhánun</b> <i>n</i> related to you distantly or coming from the same place. <i>Kamuhánun mu si Isku kay tagadidtu pud siya,</i> You and Esco are from the same place because he also comes from there. <b>ninyu</b> <ix>gen.:</ix> your, by you. <i>Bahinbahina ni ninyu,</i> Divide this among yourselves. <b>2</b> = <sc>KANINYU.</sc> <b>kaninyu</b> <ix>dat.:</ix> you. <i>Kaninyung duha kinsay maáyung mukanta?</i> Who sings better of the two of you? <i>Muawhag ku kaninyu sa pagpaningkámut,</i> I urge you to strive hard. <b>inyu</b> <b>1</b> <ix>preposed gen.:</ix> your, by you. <i>Ang inyung suliran,</i> Your problem. <i>Inyung buhátun,</i> You all will do it. <b>2</b> belongs to you. <i>Inyu ba ni?</i> Does this belong to you? <i>v</i> [a12] make, get, have s.t. for yourselves. <i>Kinta inyúhun na lang ang yútà bisag wà pa kabayri,</i> In other words, you will have the land for yourselves even if you have not paid for it? <b>inyuinyu</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] do, have s.t. by, for yourselves. <i>Mag-inyuinyu man mug kartíyu ug dílì musampit ug pakitábang,</i> You manage things by yourselves and don't call on anyone else for help. <b>tagainyu</b> <i>n</i> one coming from your place.

<p><b>kámu</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] prepare, @cook food. <i>Mabuntag siyay mukámu sa ámung pagkáun,</i> She cooks our food in the morning.

<p><b>kamù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{touch food} with the bare hands. <i>Kamua ang pagkáun ug dalì dang mapan-us,</i> Touch the food with your fingers and it will get spoiled right away.

<p><b>kamug</b> = <sc>KAMUL.</sc>

<pb n=434>

<p><b>*kamug</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> with no inheritance. <i>Nakaasawa siyag way kamug</i>, He has married s.o. without any inheritance. <b>2</b> @penniless. <i>Wà na kuy kamug kay nahurut ug pamáyad</i>, I'm flat broke again because I paid all my bills.

<p><b>kamúgaw</b> = <sc>KABÚGAW</sc>.

<p><b>kamúhuy</b> = <sc>KALAMÚHUY</sc>.

<p><b>kamukámu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @vine of open fields resembling the sweet potato, with violet, pink, and white flowers resembling the morning glory: <b><i>Ipomoea sp.</i></b>

<p><b>kamul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @moisten s.t. <i>Kamulun (kamulan) ang binlud úsà ilúnud</i>, The corn grits are moistened before you put them into the boiling water.

<p><b>kámul</b> <i>a</i> @numb, devoid of sensation. <i>Kámul pa ákung lagus sa iniksiyun</i>, My gums are still numb from the injection. <i>Kámul ákung tiil sa pagtinindug</i>, My legs are numb from standing so long. <i>v</i> [B3PN; b4] be, become numb. <i>Nagpangamul man ang ákung tiil, tingáli may piang</i>, My foot is becoming numb. Maybe it is broken.

<p><b>kamulitsing</b> = <sc>KAMURITSING</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MURITSING</sc>.

<p><b>kamúlu</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <b>1</b> for s.t. to occur just when an activity starts or is about to start. <i>Kamúlu giyud námung pangáun, pagkapálung sa sugà</i>, We had just started eating when the lights went out. <b>2</b> @simultaneously, while. <i>Kamúlung gasirbisyu sa simbahan, gabúnù pud sa gawas</i>, While the church service was going on, there was a murder outside.

<p><b>kamunggay</b> = <sc>KALAMUNGGAY</sc>.

<p><b>kamúning</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small tree of the secondary forest and also cultivated, furnishing a yellow wood used for canes, sword handles, and the like. The leaves are used to make wreaths or for other ornamental purposes: <b><i>Murraya paniculata</i></b>.

<p><b>kamuritsing</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MURITSING</sc>.

<p><b>kamusta</b> = <sc>KUMUSTA</sc>.

<p><b>kamut</b> <i>n</i> @hand. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] do with the hand. <i>Kamuta lang pagkáun</i>, Just eat it with your hands. <b>2</b> [b8] be obtained, achieved. <i>Makamtan nímu ang kalípay</i>, You can achieve happiness. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] do s.t. by hand. <i>Magkinamut na lang kug tahì</i>, I'll just do my sewing by hand. <i>Magkinamut ta</i>, Let's eat with our hands. <b>2</b> [A1] go about @barefooted (humorous). <i>Nagkinamut na lang siya kay gibanus ang íyang sinílas</i>, He walked barefooted because s.o. was using his slippers. <b>(<-)</b> = <sc>KAMRUT</sc>. <b>paN-, paniN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> do s.t. by one's own hand. <i>Pangamutan (paningamutan) ni nákug trabáhu arun way mga sayup</i>, I will do this work myself so there won't be any errors. <b>2</b> = <sc>SINGKÁMUT</sc>. <i>n</i> @skill, ability of the hand. <i>Ang íyang pangamut sa burda</i>, Her skill in embroidery. <b>maN-, maniN-</b> <i>v</i> do s.t. expertly with the hands. <i>Maáyu mangamut pandáya</i>, A skilled carpenter. <b>sing-, sin-(<-)</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SINGKÁMUT</sc>.

<p><b>kámut</b> = <sc>KAMLUT</sc>.

<p><b>kamúti</b> <i>n</i> @{sweet potato}: <b><i>Ipomoea batatas</i></b>.<i>v</i> [A2] have @{sexual intercourse} with (humorous slang). <i>Nakapangamúti si Isku gabíi sa íyang asáwa</i>, Isko had sexual intercourse with his wife last night. <b>&mdash; nga káhuy</b> cassava: <b><i>Manihot esculenta</i></b>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; ab] dig sweet potatoes. <i>Makapangamúti gánì kug usab hatágan ku ikaw</i>, Next time I dig sweet potatoes, I will give you some. <b>2</b> [A23] be way behind in a contest, race, exams. <i>Ang búgù nangamúti sa iksámin</i>, The stupid fellow was way behind in his exams. <b>kamutihan, kamutinhan</b> <i>n</i> sweet potato patch.

<p><b>kamuy</b> = <sc>KULAMUY</sc>.

<p><b>kamwà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the young of the <ix>katang</ix>, k.o. @{fresh-water crab}. <b>2</b> k.o. @{harp shell}.

<p><b>kamya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental ginger producing good-sized, white, fragrant flowers. The rhizomes are used medicinally: <b><i>Hedychium coronarium</i></b>.

<p><b>kamyas</b> = <sc>BANGKILING</sc>.

<p><b>kanà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <b>1</b> @that (near hearer, far from speaker). <i>Mau kanay ákung gustu</i>, That is the one I want. <b>-y bátà, láki</b> <ix>expression of praise:</ix> atta boy! <i>Kanay bátà! Síging nubinta</i>, Atta boy! You always get ninety's. <b>2</b> him, her (referred to previously or well-known). <i>Sígi, bisitáhan nátù nà (nà siya)</i>, All right. Let's visit her. <b>3</b> that, this, just mentioned or well-known. <i>Ug pagbutar kaníya ang gikinahanglan, buhátun nátù nà</i>, If what we have to do is vote for him, that's what we'll do. <b>&mdash; nga</b> when one does [so-and-so], when [so-and-so] happens. <i>Sálum gud, kanà bang mulanguy sa ilálum sa túbig</i>, Diving is, you know, when you swim under water. <i>Arun lamì ang litsun kanang ínit pa isirbi</i>, Serve the roast pig while it is still hot so that it will be tasty. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga ...</b> pause word used while speaker is trying to think of what to say. <i>Kanang, ímu úsà nga kuan, panítan</i>, Er, you watchamacallit, you peel it first.<b>&mdash; siya</b> = <sc>KANÀ</sc>, <b>2</b>. <b>nà</b> short for <ix>kanà</ix> or <ix>niánà</ix>. <b>niánà</b> <ix>short form:</ix> <b>ánà</b>. <b>1</b> <ix>gen.:</ix> of this. <i>Háin man ang tabun niánang kahun?</i> Where is the lid of that box? <b>2</b> <ix>dat.:</ix> to, at this. <i>Ibutang ang siya niánang iskína</i>, Put the chair in that corner. <b>usa &mdash; ka</b> [<ix>word of time</ix>] one day (week, month). <i>Usa niánà ka buntag miabut ang bána</i>, One morning the husband arrived. <b>unsa may náa &mdash;</b> what is the matter <pb n=435>with that? <i>Unsa may náa ánà, paríha ra man nang duha,</i> What difference does it make? They're both the same. <i>Sigi lang, unsa may náa ánà? Gitan-aw man lang níya,</i> Never mind. There's nothing wrong with it. He was just looking at it. <b>wà ku &mdash;</b> I have nothing to say to that. <i>Unsa may ímung ikatubag áni? Wà ku ánà,</i> What can you say to this? I have nothing to say to that (lit. I don't have that). <b>naánà</b> = <sc>NIÁNÀ</sc>. <i>ánà </i>short for <ix>niánà</ix>. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] do like that, that way. <i>Muánà ka paglingkud,</i> You sit that way. <i>Nag-ánà siya paghigdà,</i> He lay down like that. <i>Anáun nímu pagbatil,</i> Stir in that way. <b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> Cebuano speakers of Leyte, so called to distinguish them from the speakers of Samar-Leyte Visayan (Warays) whose language does not use <ix>kanà</ix>.

<p><b>kanà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @{American lady} (colloquial).

<p><b>kanáas</b> <i>v</i> [A2S3] make a @rustling, @{rushing sound}. <i>Mikanáas ang mga dáhun nga gihuyup sa hángin,</i> The leaves rustled in the wind. <i>Nagkanaas ang túbig sa busay,</i> The water in the waterfalls made a rushing sound. <i>n</i> rustling, rushing sound.

<p><b>kanahan<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @eager, @enthusiastic in anticipation of s.t. <i>Ang hinayaw kanahan kaáyu muadtug bayli,</i> The girl who is so fond of dancing is eager to get to dances. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] get to be very eager.

<p><b>kanahan<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @silly, @stupid. <i>Kanahan kaáyu ning batáa. Dì makatunung sugúun,</i> This child is very stupid. He just can't do things right. <b>2</b> reference to a person who causes one slight anger, given as a mild reproof. <i>Kanahang dakù, gibílin lang ang suklì!</i> You oaf, you forgot to get the change!

<p><b>kanáhù</b> = <sc>KANÁKÙ</sc> (dialectal). <ix>see</ix> <sc>AKU</sc>.

<p><b>kanáit</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>NÁIT</sc>.

<p><b>kanáka<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>INDAY-INDAY</sc>, 3. <ix>see</ix> <sc>INDAY</sc>.

<p><b>kanáka<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> a @{native Hawaiian woman}, usually thought of as being big and heavy-set. <i>a</i> of a kind that is tall or long and @big in size. <i>Kanáka kaáyu ug tiil nang bayhána. Makahubas ug dánaw,</i> That girl has huge feet. They're big enough to dry up a pool. <i>Kanáka tingáli ning kapayása kay dagkù,</i> These are monster papayas because they are so big.

<p><b>kanákù</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>AKU</sc>.

<p><b>kanal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ditch. <b>2</b> the grooves on the sides of a bowling alley. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] dig a ditch. <i>Magkanal ku sa átung balisbísan,</i> I'll dig a ditch around the house. <b>2</b> [B25; c16] be thrown towards the ditch, bowling grooves. <i>Makanal (mukanal) pirmi ang búla inigdúwà níyag búling,</i> The ball always rolls along the groove whenever he bowls. <b>kanalkánal</b> <i>n</i> small linear depression running on or along a surface. <i>Kanalkánal sa lubut</i>, Linear depression between the cheeks of the buttocks. <i>Kanalkánal sa ilung</i>, The depression running between the nose and the upper lips.

<p><b>kanámù</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMI</sc>.

<p><b>kánap</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] @spread over an area. <i>Ang tipdas mikánap (nakánap) sa tibuuk láwas</i>, Measles spread all over his body. <i>Ikánap (kanápun) níya ang íyang mga ahinti dinhi sa syudad</i>, He will spread his salesmen over the city. <i>Ang baul gikanápan sa túbig</i>, Water spread all over the field. <b>kanapkanap</b> a @blurred, dim eyesight. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for the eyesight to become blurred. <i>Mukanapkanap na giyud ang átung panan-aw kun magkatigulang na kita</i>, As we grow older our eyesight becomes more and more blurred.

<p><b>kanastru</b> <i>n</i> a large @hamper made of thin, loosely woven strips of bamboo or rattan, with no handle. It is usually used as a container for rice or corn grains, or versions with a lid are used as clothes hampers.

<p><b>kánat</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] @cover an area, length. <i>Mikánat (nakánat) ang balità sa daling panahun</i>, The news spread in a short time. <i>Nikánat ug usa ka líbu ang gastu</i>, The expenses reached a thousand pesos. <i>Kanátun (ikánat) ni nátung písì arun hikit-an ang gitas-un</i>, We should unwind this rope to see how long it is. <i>n</i> spread, breadth, length. <i>Taas ang kánat sa kaláyu</i>, The spread of the fire covered a large area. <b>-in-, pina-</b> a writing in longhand.

<p><b>kanátù</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KITA</sc>.

<p><b>kanáug</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*NÁUG</sc>.

<p><b>kanáway<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @wind that blows from a westward direction. <i>Kanáway sa amíhan</i>, Northwest wind. <i>Kanáway sa habágat</i>, Southwest wind. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B5] for the west wind to blow. <i>Ug mukanáway ang hángin, dílì ta mularga</i>, If the wind blows from the west, we will not sail. <b>2</b> [AN] sail before the west wind. <i>Nanganáway sila paglarga</i>, They sailed before the west wind. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> direction from which the <ix>kanáway</ix> blows.

<p><b>kanáway<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. white sea bird, some 6" long and 4" high, found perched on driftwood or on sea corals.

<p><b>kanawkánaw</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] be perceived at a great distance, extend into the distance. <i>Ang íyang tíngug mikanawkánaw sa mamingáwung kagabhíun</i>, Her voice can be heard from way off in a distance coming through the stillness of the night. <i>Nanganawkánaw ang kalapad sa humayan</i>, The rice fields extended into the distance. <i>Gamay na ang ayruplánung nanganawkánaw sa kalangítan</i>, The airplane looked very small in the distance.

<pb n=436>

<p><b>kánay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] for a feeling to spread throughout one's body. <i>Ang kabugnaw sa túbig mikánay ngadtu sa ákung tinái</i>, The coolness of the water spread through my innermost bones. <b>2</b> [A23N; b6] for a sound to reach out or come from a great distance. <b>Ang kagabhíun gikanáyan sa uwang sa irù</b>, The stillness of the night was broken by the howling of the dog. <b>kanaykánay</b> = <sc>KÁNAY</sc>.

<p><b>kanày</b> particle expressing surprise at what s.o. did and implying that the agent should be ashamed of himself. <i>Kanày, naunsa mag táwu, nanghaluk nákù!</i> Hey! What has gotten into this man, kissing me like that!

<p><b>kanayun</b> (from <i>náyun</i>) <i>v</i> [A13] @say s.t. in a conversation. <i>&lsquo;Sa átù pa,&rsquo; nagkanayun siya</i>, &lsquo;In other words,&rsquo; he continued....

<p><b>kanbas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @canvass cloth.

<p><b>kanbas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KAMBAS</sc>.

<p><b>kandádu</b> <i>n</i> @padlock. <i>v</i> [A; b] padlock s.t. <i>Baul nga gikandadúhan</i>, A trunk that is padlocked. <b>rumpi &mdash;</b> k.o. @barracuda.

<p><b>kandaktur</b> <i>n</i> musical @conductor. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a conductor of a musical group.

<p><b>kandi</b> = <sc>KINDI</sc>.

<p><b>kandidáta</b> <i>n</i> female @candidate, usually in beauty contests. <i>v</i> [B12356] be a candidate.

<p><b>kandidátu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{political candidate}.<b>&mdash; upisiyal</b> candidate nominated for a certain post by the Party. <b>2</b> s.o. to whom s.t. unpleasant is likely to happen. <i>Niánang ímung ubu kandidátu ka sa mintiryu</i>, You're a candidate for the cemetery with that cough of yours. <i>Kandidátu mu sa kastígu hiniral</i>, You're both in for a spanking. <i>v</i> [B12356; a2] be a candidate. <i>Nakandidátu siya apan walà kadaug</i>, He was a candidate but he didn't win.<i>Unsang pwistúha ang ímung kandidatúhan?</i> What position will you be running for?<b>-ra</b> <i>n</i> candidacy.

<p><b>kandidit</b> <i>n</i> @candidate for office. <i>v</i> [B12356; a2] be a candidate.

<p><b>kandíis<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> dimples. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having dimpled cheeks.

<p><b>kandíis<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree about 30' tall producing a lot of sap and bearing small rounded edible drupes:<b><i>Garcinia sp.</i></b>

<p><b>kandil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. @{oil lamp} made of a piece of bamboo about 2&ndash;4', to the bottom of which a clam shell to hold the oil is attached. It is usually hung near the altar in a house or s.w. else in the house and kept burning throughout the night. <b>2</b> cylindrical metal cooking pot having a flat bottom.

<p><b>kandílà</b> <i>n</i> @candle. <i>v</i> [A13] use a candle. <i>Walay kuryinti karung gabíi, magkandílà na lang ta</i>, There will be no electric current tonight, so we'll just use candles. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] be like a candle. <i>a</i> be standing like a candle, bare and stripped. <i>Nangandílà ang kamaisan nga naagian sa dúlun,</i> The corn stalks stood bare and stripped of everything after a swarm of locusts had passed over them. <b>b</b> become skin and bones. <i>Nangandílà siya sa kaguul,</i> She is all skin and bones now because of her sorrows. <b>c</b> be grades of one. <i>Nangandílà ang mga grádu sa iskálar,</i> The scholarship student got all one's (A's). <b>2</b> [A2; b6] sell, make candles for sale. <i>Nangandílà si Nánay pára nga makakitag kwarta,</i> Mother makes (or sells) candles to earn money. <b>3</b> [A2] be kept standing for a long time. <i>Haskang nakapangandílà nákug pinaábut nímu,</i> My! I waited and waited for you. <b>mag-r-(->), maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> candle seller. <b>-un</b> a shaped like a candle. <i>Kandiláun siyag tudlù,</i> She has long, slender fingers.

<p><b>kandilabra</b> <i>n</i> @candelabrum.

<p><b>kandilarya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> church festival celebrated on the second of February (forty days after the Nativity) for the blessing of candles. It is in commemoration of the presentation of Christ in the Temple and the purification of the Blessed Virgin and marks the end of the Christmas season. <b>2</b> candles blessed on this day, burnt during lightning storms. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</</i> [A2] <b>1</b> sing carols during candelaria (carols about the three Kings, not about the birth of Christ). <b>2</b> spend this holiday s.w.

<p><b>kandílaw</b> (made up from <ix>kandílà</ix> and <ix>sílaw</ix>) <i>n</i> @candlelight (literary).

<p><b>kandilíru</b> <i>n</i> @candlestick or @chandelier.

<p><b>kanding</b> <i>n</i> @goat. &mdash; <b>nga way súngay</b> <i>n</i> @dog, viewed as food (slang). <i>Nag-íhaw silag kanding nga way súngay,</i> They are butchering a dog. <b>-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @goat-like. <b>2</b> hating to take baths. <i>v</i> [B12] develop an aversion for bathing. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> herd of goats. <i>v</i> [A13] raise goats commercially. <b>kandingkanding</b> <i>n</i> @lantana, a k.o. aromatic perennial herb planted as an ornamental for its flowers and also growing wild. So called because the fruit resembles goat's dung: <b><i>Lantana camara</i></b>.

<p><b>kandul</b> = <sc>KUNDUL</sc>.

<p><b>kandungga</b> <i>n</i> a triangular @neckerchief worn around the shoulders with any native dress, originally of heavily starched cotton. <i>v</i> [AN; a] wear, make into a kerchief of this sort.

<p><b>kandus</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @{scoop up} or @shovel off s.t. <i>Mikandus siyag balas sa karumáta,</i> He shoveled sand out of the cart. <i>Kandúsi ra kug sabaw,</i> Please dip me some soup. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @scoop, shovel, @dipper. <b>2</b> hand @net used for scooping fish out of the water. <b>2a</b> @scoopful, <pb n=437>shovelful, dipperful.

<p><b>kanduwálì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. long, straight @sword with a V-shaped indentation at the end.

<p><b>kang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> dat. marker for proper names. <i>Ihátag kang Tasyu,</i> Give it to Tacio. <i>Aku ang nag-ingun kang Tátay,</i> I was the one who told Dad. Ang kang Tiryu nga balay, The house that belongs to Terio. <b>&mdash; kinsa</b> to whom? <i>Kang kinsa nang baláya?</i> Who does that house belong to?

<p><b>kang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> four mahjong pieces of the same suit (same design and number). Having a <ix>kang</ix> wins a certain amount. <b>&mdash; buki</b> a <ix>kang</ix> consisting of a <ix>buki.</ix> <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> <i>(pláwir)</i> a <ix>kang</ix> consisting of four <ix>búlak's.</ix> <b>sikrit &mdash;</b> a <ix>kang</ix> which one has not laid down, but retains in his hand. <b>úpin &mdash;</b> a <ix>kang</ix> which has been laid on the table. <i>v</i> [A2; a] get a <ix>kang.</ix> <i>Mukang ku ánang karta nga ímung gilábay,</i> I'll get <ix>kang</ix> with the piece you discarded.

<p><b>kángà</b> <i>a</i> @stammered speech due to nervousness. <i>Kángà ang tubag sa maistra nga gipangutána sa supirbaysur,</i> The teacher gave a stammering answer to the supervisor's question. <i>v</i> [B6; a12] be rattled or stuttering in speech because of nervousness. <i>Nakángà (mikángà) ang sinultihan sa tistígus nga gipangutána,</i> The witness stammered under interrogation. <b>kangàkangà</b> = <sc>KÁNGÀ<corr sic=",">.</corr></sc>

<p><b>kang-a</b> <i>a</i> slightly open, having come off, having a long crack. <i>Nanglìlì ang mga bátà sa kang-a sa pultahan,</i> The children peeped through the small opening in the door. <i>v</i> [B3(1); a12] come off, develop a crack, get slightly opened. <i>Mikang-a ang kaban kay punù ug bisti,</i> The trunk opened up a bit because it was chockful of clothes. <i>Nagkang-a ang laminisyun sa playwud,</i> The veneer came off the plywood.

<p><b>kang-al</b> = <sc>KANG-A.</sc>

<p><b>kangga</b> <i>n</i> k.o. carabao-drawn @sled with two large runners laid flat on the ground to which traces are attached, with or without a whippletree. <b>látay sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [c6] be thrown into the bargain. <i>Way lábut ang karír sa mutur apan átù na lang ilátay sa kangga,</i> The carrier doesn't come with the motorcycle, but we'll throw it into the bargain. <b>kanggahan</b> = <sc>KANGGA.</sc>

<p><b>kanggaru</b> <i>n</i> @kangaroo.

<p><b>kanggrína</b> <i>n</i> @gangrene. <i>v</i> [B2N; a4b4] develop into gangrene. <i>Nakanggrína (manganggrína, mikanggrína) ang samad,</i> The wound developed into gangrene. <i>Giputul ang wala níyang tiil kay gikangrína (gikangrináhan) man,</i> His left foot was amputated because it was infected with gangrene.

<p><b>kangkang</b> <i>v</i> [B36; c1] for two or more things which are joined at the base to spread apart. <i>Mikangkang (nangangkang) ang íyang kamut nga nidáwat sa kwarta</i>, He spread out his palm to receive the money. <i>Nagkangkang ang mga panid sa libru</i>, The leaves of the book are spread open. <i>Ayaw kangkánga (ikangkang) ang ímung tiil</i>, Don't sit with your legs spread apart. <i>a</i> @{spread apart}.

<p><b>kangkárut</b> <i>a</i> having lost all of one's gambling money; go @bankrupt. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] lose all gambling money; go bankrupt.

<p><b>*kanghu</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> not have a cent. <i>Wà kuy kanghu diri</i>, I don't have a cent with me.

<p><b>kangrína</b> = <sc>KANGGRÍNA</sc>.

<p><b>kángù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c16] @shake s.t. erect, be shaken. <i>Kinsay nagkángù sa lamísa? Nayabu ang sabaw</i>, Who shook the table? The soup spilled. <i>Unsay nakakángù (nakapakángù) sa ímung ngípun?</i> What caused your teeth to get loose? <i>Nikángù ang bintánà paghampak sa makusug nga hángin</i>, The window shook from the impact of the strong wind. <i>Nagakakangù na ang úlu ni tátay, tigúlang na giyud</i>, Dad's head is becoming shaky. He's growing old. <b>2</b> [B] be rattled by a question. <i>Mikangù ku adtung gipangutána kus abugádu</i>, I got rattled when the lawyer put a question to me. <b>3</b> [B6] for an engine to sputter just before conking out. <i>Mikángù ang makina dáyung kamatay</i>, The engine sputtered and then conked out.<b>kangùkangù</b> <i>a</i> rickety and shaky. <i>Kangùkangù nga taytáyan, tigúlang</i>, A rickety bridge, old man. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be rickety or rickety and old.

<p><b>kanhi</b> <b>1</b> in former times. <i>Kanhi, sa wà pay gíra, barátu ang palalítun</i>, @Formerly, before the war, goods were cheap. <i>Sa kanhing mga tyimpu</i>, In olden times. <b>2</b> the one which was formerly. <i>Si kanhi Prisidinti Garsíya</i>, Ex-President Garcia. <i>Asáwa níya si kanhi Dga. Maríya Ríyis</i>, His wife is the former Miss Reyes. <i>Ang kanhing balay lungsud</i>, The former town hall. <b>3</b> at end of phrase: it was [so-and-so] long ago that s.t. or s.o. achieved a new status. <i>Naminyù siya sa Amirika tulu ka búlan kanhi</i>, He got married in the States three months ago. <b>kanhíay</b> = <sc>KANHI</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>kanhiánun</b> <i>a</i> the ones of former times. <i>Ang kanhiánung mga múda</i>, The styles of former times.

<p><b>kani</b> = <sc>KINI<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kaniadtu</b> @formerly. <i>Kaniadtu ang pantalan didtu sa lawis</i>, Formerly the pier was at the point. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> past event. <i>Nindut handúmun ang átung mga kaniadtu</i>, It's nice to think back on what we used to do years ago.<b>2</b> former sweetheart. <i>Mipahíyum tu níya kay íya man tung kaniadtu</i>, She smiled at him <pb n=438>because he was her former sweetheart. <b>niadtu, adtu</b> short for <ix>kaniadtu</ix> in all uses but as <i>n</i>. <b>&mdash; pa</b> long ago was the first time&mdash;i.e., [so-and-so] has been since long ago. <i>Kaniadtu pa aku mamaistra,</i> I've been a teacher since way back. <i>Kaniadtu pa ku kabalità ánà,</i> I've known about that for ages. <i>Kaniadtu pa aku makakità sa ingun,</i> That time was the first time I saw the like.

<p><b>kaníha</b> = <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.

<p><b>kaníla</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SILA</sc>.

<p><b>kanilun</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] do s.t. @severely or in @rapid-fire order. <i>Kusug siya mukanilun ug súgù mu rag katsílà,</i> He gives a lot of heavy orders like a Spaniard. <i>Gikanilun kung Tátay ug kasábà kay nakapaburus ku,</i> Father scolded me severely because I got a girl pregnant. <i>Gikanilun nákug human ang mga buluhatun,</i> I finished the work up in rapid-fire order.

<p><b>kanímu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>kanína</b> = <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.

<p><b>kaníngag</b> <i>n</i> small to medium-sized @tree of the forest, the bark of which produces cinnamon: <b><i>Cinnamomum mercadoi</i></b> and perhaps some other species of this genus.

<p><b>kaninyu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMU</sc>.

<p><b>kánit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC3; c16] do, be in @{close succession}, form a close line. <i>Mikánit ang mga duguung hitabù,</i> Bloody events came one after another. <i>Nagkánit lang ang mga balay sa daplin sa baybáyun,</i> The houses are one right next to the other along the seashore. <i>Kaníta (ikánit) pagláray ang mga silya,</i> Put the chairs in a line close together. <b>2</b> [A] spread fast. <i>Nagkánit ang káyu sa silinganan,</i> The fire has spread through the neighborhood. <i>Nagkakánit na ang mga hulungíhung,</i> The rumors have spread. <i>n</i> action of spreading. <i>a</i> in close, @uninterrupted succession.

<p><b>kaníya</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SÍYA</sc>.

<p><b>kaniyun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @cannon. <i>v</i> [A; a2] @shoot with a cannon or artillery piece. <b>-ásu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @bomb intensively with artillery. <i>Ang bapur sa níbi nagkanyunásu sa Nurt Byitnam,</i> The navy ship fired a barrage on North Vietnam. <i>n</i> artillery bombardment.

<p><b>kaniyun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @bobbin 4" to 5" long which holds newly spun yarn or fiber. <b>2</b> @warp in a loom. <b>2a</b> @{length of cloth} being woven<corr>.</corr> <i>v</i> [A; a12] wind thread on spools.

<p><b>kankan</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for movement of water to @erode or @wash s.t. away. <i>Ang balud kusug mukankan sa yútà,</i> Waves are rapidly washing away the beach. <i>Nakankanan ang bakilid,</i> The slope is all eroded. <b>2</b> [A; a] remove soil or sand from an area. <i>Nagkankan siya sa lápuk nga naglúup sa kanal,</i> He shoveled the mud which clogged the ditch. <i>Átù ning kankánang dapíta arun mapátag,</i> We'll remove some of the soil from this place to make it level. <i>a</i> eroded, worn away. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that has been removed by eroding action.

<p><b>kanlat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @tear s.t. off or out with force. <i>Dinhay buut mukanlat sa íyang kwintas,</i> S.o. tried to pull her necklace off. <i>Kinsay nagkanlat sa abísu sa bulitin burd?</i> Who ripped the notice off the bulletin board? <i>Ang kakusug sa hángin mauy nakakanlat sa atup,</i> The wind tore the roof off. <b>2</b> throw a basketball downwards with force. <i>Sulud giyud ug siyay mukanlat sa búla sa gúl,</i> It's sure to be good if he hurls the ball into the basket.

<p><b>kansa</b> (from <ix>kang kinsa</ix>) <b>-ng</b> @whose. <i>Kansang sulat ni?</i> Whose letter is this? <i>Babáyi, kansang dagway ...<corr>,</corr></i> A woman, whose face....

<p><b>kansil</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @{cross out} s.t. written. <i>Kansíla ang subrang sintins,</i> Cancel the extra sentence. <b>2</b> @cancel s.t. already set. <i>Kinsay nagkansil sa ákung urdir?</i> Who cancelled my order? <i>Ímu gánì syang kansílun sa lista,</i> If you strike her off the list. <i>Gikansílan ang tindáhan sa lisinsiya sa ilimnun,</i> The store lost its liquor license. <b>-d</b> <i>a</i> crossed out, cancelled. <b>kansilkansil</b> <i>n</i> k.o. game of &lsquo;she loves me, she loves me not&rsquo; done by cancelling the letters in the two persons' names.

<p><b>kansilar</b> = <sc>KANSIL.</sc>

<p><b>kansiling</b> <i>n</i> crime of concealing a deadly weapon. <i>Gikíha siyag kansiling kay hisakpang naglukluk ug báraw,</i> He was caught with a dagger in his waist and was charged with concealing a deadly weapon.

<p><b>kansir</b> <i>n</i> @cancer. <i>v</i> [B26; a4b4] become a, get cancer. <i>Makansir ang tumur ug pasagdan,</i> A tumor may turn into cancer if you let it go. <i>Gikansíran (gikansir) ang íyang súsu,</i> She has cancer of the breast. <b>-un(->), -us(->)</b> <i>a</i> having cancer.

<p><b>kansiyun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] @serenade. <i>Gikansiyunan námù si Míla gabíi,</i> We serenaded Mila last night. <i>n</i> song sung in a serenade. <b>karáang &mdash;</b> old tune, s.t. one cannot believe because it has been repeated too often. <i>Wà nay mutúu ánang ímung karáang kansiyun,</i> No one can believe that old song and dance of yours any more. <b>-íru</b> <i>n</i> the one who does the singing in a group of serenaders. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be the singer.

<p><b>kansiyun<hi rend=sub>2</i>, kansiyung</b> <i>n</i> in mahjong, drawing of the piece needed for one to go mahjong from the flower pile <i>(payil sa búlak)</i>. Winning in this way entitles one to extra pay.

<pb n=439>

<p><b>kansursilyu</b> = <sc>KARSUNSILYU.</sc>

<p><b>kanta</b> <i>n</i> @song. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @sing. <i>Káda buntag kantáhun níla ang nasudnung áwit,</i> They sing the national anthem every morning. <b>2</b> [A; c] confess a crime, squeal on others (humorous slang). <i>Nikanta siya sa kapulisan,</i> He confessed to the police. <i>Kinsay nagkanta ngadtu sa átung ámu nga miabsin ku?</i> Who squealed to the boss that I was absent? <b>&mdash; mísa</b> <i>n</i> first high mass offering of a newly-ordained priest. <i>v</i> [A; b6] offer his first high mass. <b>kantakanta</b> a musical movie or play. <i>v</i> [A13] in a jolly mood, humming and singing. <b>mísa -da</b> <i>n</i> sung mass. <i>Kantáda ang mísa karun,</i> There will be a choir at the mass today. <i>v</i> [A12; c1] hold a high mass. <b>-du</b> s.t. sung as opposed to spoken. <i>Púru kantádu ang mga linya áning papíla,</i> The lines for this role are all sung.

<p><b>kantalíta</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b3c] @mock, @scorn. <i>Sapían nga nagkantalíta sa mga kabus,</i> A rich man who scorns the poor. <i>Gikantalitáhan siya kay musugut kang bísan kinsa,</i> She is scorned because she gives herself to anyone. <i>n</i> scorn. <i>Kantalíta nga katáwa,</i> Mocking laughter. <b>makantalitáhun</b> <i>a</i> scornful, derisive.

<p><b>kantidad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> amount of money. <b>2</b> @value or worth of s.t. in money or its equivalent. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B346] reach a certain amount or value. <i>Mukantidad ning baláya ug kinsi mil písus,</i> This house will be worth fifteen thousand pesos. <b>2</b> [c] give a certain monetary value to s.t. <i>Pila giyuy ímung ikantidad sa itlug kung dinusinahun ku pagpalit?</i> What price will you quote me for a dozen eggs? <b>táwung di-</b> <i>a</i> person of more than ordinary social standing.

<p><b>kantil</b> <i>n</i> drop-off in the ocean close to the shore. <i>a</i> be sharply @dropping. <b>-adu</b> = <sc>KANTIL,</sc> <i>a.</i>

<p><b>kantin</b> <i>n</i> @{water canteen.}

<p><b>kantína</b> <i>n</i> company store or eating place. <i>v</i> [a2] make into a @canteen. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] go to the canteen to eat or shop.

<p><b>kantíru</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KANTU.</sc>

<p><b>kantu</b> <i>n</i> @corner, edge of s.t. rectangular. <i>Isig gúnit mug kantu sa kahun,</i> Each of you take hold of a corner of the box. <i>Túa sila sa kantu mag-istambay,</i> They are hanging around at the street corner. <i>Kantu sa halígi,</i> The edge of the post. <b>&mdash; barína</b> <i>n</i> corner brace used to bore in cramped places. <b>&mdash; buy</b> <i>n</i> punk who hangs around on the street. <i>v</i> [B16; b6] be a street punk. <b>kantíru</b> <i>n</i> stone-*mason, stone cutter.

<p><b>kantur</b> <i>n</i> male @singer in a church. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be a singer. <b>-a</b> <i>n</i> female singer in a church.

<p><b>kanù</b> <i>n</i> @American (colloquial).

<p><b>kanukay</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @disturb s.o.'s peace, disturb s.t. put in order. <i>Way láing makakanukay sa mga híman sa laburaturyu gawas sa tiglilimpiyu</i>, No one may disturb the laboratory equipment except the janitor. <i>Mu rag gikanukayng hulmígas ang syudad sa paglínug</i>, After the earthquake the city looked like an anthill that had been disturbed. <i>Kanukayun ka sa mga maniníngil ug daghan kag útang</i>, Your creditors will keep disturbing you if you have lots of debts.

<p><b>kan-un</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁUN</sc>.

<p><b>kanúnay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @always, @frequently. <i>Muy kanúnay nímung isulti</i>, That's what you always say. <i>Muadtu siya kanúnay sa Buhul</i>, He frequently goes to Bohol. <b>2</b> @steadily consistent. <i>Kanúnay ang inandaran sa makina</i>, The engine runs steady. <i>v</i> [A; b5c] do s.t. always. <i>Kanunáyag (kanunáyig) batil</i>, Keep stirring it all the time. <i>Ang íyang kalampúsan mauy ikanúnay níya ug sulti námù</i>, His success is all he ever tells us about. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b5] frequent a place, do s.t. frequently. <i>Sukad niadtu, magkanunayan siyag bisítang Maríya</i>, From that time on, he always visited Maria. <i>Kanunayana (kanunayani) ug páhid ang singtánun mung nawung</i>, Wipe your sweaty face frequently. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> constant.

<p><b>kanunisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @canonize s.o. into a saint.

<p><b>kanus-a</b> @when? <i>Kanus-a man ka muabut (miabut)?</i> When did you arrive? <i>Kanus-a ka man mularga<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> When will you leave? <b>&mdash; lang</b> when did [so-and-so] ever happen (when it never did)! <i>Kanus-a lang gud ku mutíaw nímu?</i> When did I ever joke with you?

<p><b>kanúus</b> <i>n</i> loud hissing sound. <i>Sa kanúus sa suplíti dì ta magdúngug</i>, We won't hear each other over the roar of the blowtorch. <i>v</i> [A2S; ac1P] make a loud hissing noise. <i>Mikanúus ang pitrumaks</i>, The pressure lantern made a hissing sound.

<p><b>kanyáhay</b> <b>1</b> no wonder [such-and-such] a thing usually happens. <i>Kanyáhay kang maníwang kay dì ka mukáun</i>, No wonder you lose weight. You don't eat. <b>2</b> <b>sa &mdash;</b> eventually, in the long run. <i>Sa kanyáhay mamatay ra giyud siya tungud sa ínum</i>, In the long run he will die from drinking too much.

<p><b>kanyamásu, kanyamu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. thin transparent cloth made of pineapple, maguey, or abaca fiber. <i>Ang kanyamu mauy tahiun nga kimúna</i>, Kanyamu cloth is used for the <ix>kimona</ix>.

<p><b>kanyunásu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KANIYUN<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kanyútu</b> <i>n</i> small @tube or hollow @cylinder: e.g., a cylindrical metal tube in a kerosene lamp where the wick is inserted, or an enema <pb n=440>tip. <i>v</i> [A; a] use, make a small cylindrical tube. <i>Mikanyútu siyag papil nga sungsúngan sa upus</i>, He rolled a piece of paper into a small tube to hold his cigar stub.

<p><b>kap</b> <i>n</i> short for kapitan, @captain.

<p><b>káp</b> = <sc>KALAP<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kápa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @cape. <i>v</i> [A; a] put on a cape, make into a cape.

<p><b>kápa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KÁPAL</sc>.

<p><b>kapagkapag</b> <i>v</i> [A13; c1] @{walk fast}&mdash;half running, half walking. <i>Nagkapagkapag ang asáwa nga niápas sa íyang bána sa sugálan</i>, The wife half-walked, half-ran to the gambling den after her husband.

<p><b>kapakápa</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c1] <b>1</b> @flap the wings or arms. <i>Nikapakápa siya sa túbig kay dílì maantigung mulanguy</i>, He flapped his arms in the water because he did not know how to swim. <b>2</b> @jump up and down in happiness. <i>Nagkapakápa ang bátà sa kalípay</i>, The child jumped up a<i>n</i>d down in happiness. <i>n</i> @fluttering or flapping of wings or arms. <i>Ang kapakápa sa mga manuk mauy nakapúkaw kanákù</i>, I was awakened by the flapping of chicken wings.

<p><b>kapákut</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÁKUT<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kapal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dark gray, highly esteemed fish, as big as a man's palm, about as wide as it is long.

<p><b>kápal, kap-al</b> <i>v</i> [B3; c1] <b>1</b> @cover, @coat s.t. with a thick layer. <i>Mukápal (makápal) nang buling sa ímung líug ug dì ka manglúgud</i>, Your neck will be caked with dirt if you do not rub it when you bathe. <i>Nakakápal ang abug sa mga silya</i>, The dust has formed a thick layer on the chairs. <i>Gikapálan ug lápuk ang tapalúdu</i>, The fender got mud caked on it. <b>2</b> for an emotion to appear all over the face. <i>Mikápal ang kalípay sa íyang nawung</i>, His face shone with happiness.

<p><b>kapálaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{sweet potato}, oblong-shaped, with white meat and reddish peelings.

<p><b>kapan, kapankapan</b> = <sc>ALISIWSIW</sc>.

<p><b>kapan-usan</b> <i>n</i> @{evening star}, said to be so called because it disappears and by the time it returns its food has become spoiled (<ix>napan-us</ix>).

<p><b>kapar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @spend money belonging to s.o. else or on a purpose for which it was not supposed to be spent. <i>Mukapar (mangapar) nà siyag kwartang ipiyal níya</i>, He is apt to spend money entrusted to him. <i>Nakapar nákù ang igbalayad sa sugà</i>, I spent the money I was supposed to pay the electric bill with. <b>2</b> [A; a12] buy, take all of s.t. <i>Dì mi kapalit ug kaparun sa nigusyanti</i>, We won't be able to buy any if the merchant takes all of it. <i>Kaparun námù ang tanang lingkuránan,</i> We will take all the seats.

<p><b>kapasidad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @power one has to do s.t., power of a machine. <i>Sa kapasidad sa pagkaprisidinti, mabúhat nákù nà,</i> As president it is within my powers to do that. <i>Pilay kapasidad niíning pabrikáha?</i> How much can this factory produce? <i>Walà sa ákung kapasidad ang pagpahulam nímug kwarta,</i> It's not within my powers to lend you money. <i>Susíhun giyud ang kapasidad sa mulún,</i> We must check the borrower's capacity to repay. <i>Makinang may kapasidad nga kwarintay singku kabalyus,</i> A motor with a @capacity of 45 hp. <b>2</b> @amount s.t. has space to hold. <i>Ang sinihan may kapasidad nga dus míl ka táwu,</i> The movie house has a capacity of two thousand people. <i>v</i> [A2] have a certain @power or @capacity to hold.

<p><b>kapatas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @foreman. <b>2</b> one who loafs on the job, esp. in hard manual work done by a group (humorous). <i>Dì mahuman kay daghan mang kapatas,</i> It won't get finished because there are too many supervisors. <i>v</i> [B6; a2] <b>1</b> be a @foreman, act as a foreman. <b>2</b> act like a @supervisor and not work.

<p><b>kápaw</b> <i>v</i> [B3; cP] <b>1</b> come to the surface. <i>Mikápaw ang sílik sa íhu,</i> The shark fin appeared above the water. <b>1a</b> @{rise up into} s.t. <i>Mikápaw ang ayruplánu sa kapunawpunáwan,</i> The airplane went up into outer space. <i>Usa ka maitum nga láraw nakakápaw sa íyang hunàhúnà,</i> A diabolical plan hatched in his mind. <b>2</b> for an emotion to show. <i>Nakápaw sa íyang nawung ang túmang kasukù,</i> Intense anger showed on his face. <i>n</i> amount that s.t. shows above a surface. <i>Ang kápaw sa submarínu,</i> The amount of the submarine which appears above the water. <b>saling-</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SALINGKÁPAW</sc>.

<p><b>kapay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{pectoral fins} on a fish. <b>2</b> anything analogous that propels: @wing, @flipper. <i>Ang mga kapay nga gigámit sa mananáwum,</i> The flippers the diver used. <i>Kapay sa langgam,</i> The wings of the bird. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> swim, fly with flapping motions. <i>Tiil na lay ikapay ug kapúyun na ka,</i> Kick your feet to help you swim if you get tired. <b>2</b> make @flippers, wings for s.o. or s.t. <b>kapaykápay</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] flap s.t. repeatedly. <i>Nagkapaykápay ang kabaw sa íyang dunggan pag-ábug sa lángaw,</i> The carabao flapped its ears to shoo off the flies.

<p><b>kapáyas</b> <i>n</i> @papaya, small tree which bears a melon-like fruit. It is eaten ripe as a melon, unripe as a vegetable, esp. pickled, and the leaves are used medicinally: <b><i>Carica papaya</i></b>. <b>katkat, dap-us sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> have @intercourse (humorous). <b>&mdash; sa Amirikánu</b> variety of large <pb n=441>and often tasteless papaya. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> tending to cry readily, like the papaya, the skin of which exudes sap at the slightest touch. <i>Kapayásun nang batáa,</i> That child is a cry-baby. <b>2</b> for breasts to be pendulous like papayas. <i>Tambuk ang mga anak niánang babayhána kay kapayásun man siyag dughan,</i> The children of that woman must be fat because she has large and pendulous breasts. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be a cry-baby, have pendulous breasts.

<p><b>kapdrap</b> <i>n</i> @{cough drops.}

<p><b>kapi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coffee bean, plant, drink. <b>2</b> @brown in color. <i>Panaptun nga lútù kapi,</i> A piece of dark brown cloth. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b(1)] make, prepare coffee. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] make into coffee, grind into coffee. <b>3</b> [B2; a] turn brown in color. <i>Kapihun ku ning ákung sinínà nga putì,</i> I'll dye my white dress brown. <b>3a</b> [A1] wear s.t. brown. <i>Magkapi ang dúnay dibusiyun sa Karmin,</i> A devotee of the Lady of Carmel wears brown. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] drink coffee. <b>kapihun, kapinhun</b> <i>a</i> colored s.t. like coffee. <b>-tíra</b> <i>n</i> coffeepot.

<p><b>*kapi<hi rend=sub>2</i>, *kápi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <b>sa &mdash; nga</b> instead of doing [so-and-so]. <i>Sa káping muhílak, mikatáwa ang bátà,</i> Instead of crying, the child laughed.

<p><b>kápi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KALAPI<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kapi aspirína</b> <i>n</i> brand of @aspirin.

<p><b>kapìkapì</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for an emaciated person or animal to move with unsure steps. <i>Nagkapìkapì na intáwun ang tisísun,</i> The T.B. patient is walking unsteadily.

<p><b>kapilya</b> <b>n</b> small @chapel or temporary chapel built annually to honor a patron saint. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] construct a chapel.

<p><b>kapin</b> <i>v</i> [B456; b(1)] be in @excess or @extra. <i>Mukapin sa gatus ang mitambung,</i> More than a hundred people attended. <i>Nagkapin ka na sa ímung pagpasagad,</i> Your irresponsibility is getting too much. <i>Kapinan ug sulti sa tabian ang íyang mga libak,</i> The gossip always exaggerates the stories she tells behind people's backs. <i>Kapin sa tungà ang ganansiya,</i> The profit was more than half. <b>&mdash; kun kúlang</b> more or less. <i>Ang íyang mga apu kapin kun kúlang, singkuwinta ka buuk,</i> He has fifty grandchildren, more or less. <b>&mdash; nga buut</b> ulterior motive. <i>Ayaw laínag sabut. Way kaping buut niíning ákung ihátag,</i> Do not misunderstand me. I have no ulterior motives in giving you this. <b>may (way) &mdash; nga kabubut-un</b> having strings attached. <i>Dúna giyuy kaping kabubut-un ang paghátag, kay unyà lisud pagbalíbad,</i> There are strings attached to that gift, because she's going to have a hard time refusing him after she has accepted it. <b>&mdash; pa</b> moreover. <i>Kapin pa, nasáyud na giyud ang bána sa íyang gibúhat didtu,</i> Moreover, the husband also found out about everything she did there. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] give an excess or extra. <i>Ngánu bang mukapin pa man giyud siyag sulti?</i> Why does he have to say more than what is necessary? <i>Gipakapinan kug usa ka buuk kay mipalit kug usa ka dusína,</i> She gave me an extra one, because I bought a whole dozen. <i>n</i> extra, s.t. additional given. <b>hiN-, hiN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be done to an excessive degree. <i>Naghingápin ra ang íyang pag-inum,</i> He drinks too much. <b>-an(->)</b> <b>1</b> having anomalous growth s.w. in the body. <b>2</b> the donkey's ears abalone, or any oval-shaped abalone, so called because there is more flesh in proportion to the shell-size than other types of bivalves. <b>-an</b> = <sc>-AN(->),</sc> <i>2.</i> <b>tag-(->)</b> each more than. <i>Tagkápin sa gatus ámung báhin,</i> We get more than a hundred as our share.

<p><b>káping</b> <i>n</i> capping ceremonies for nurses. <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] hold capping ceremonies.

<p><b>káping sú</b> <i>n</i> @{coping saw.}

<p><b>kápir</b> <i>n</i> @copper.

<p><b>kapisnun</b> <i>n</i> old variety of white, fine-grained @rice.

<p><b>kapistuwa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medium-sized forest tree producing a hard wood, used as lumber.

<p><b>kápit</b> <i>n</i> @influence or special connections for getting s.t. <i>Dì ka madáwat ug wà kay kápit sa byúru,</i> You won't be successful if you don't have influence in the bureau. <i>v</i> [A12; b6] manage to have s.o. influential to whom one can turn. <i>Makakápit ta kang Sidru ug mapílì siyang diputádu,</i> We can have s.o. to pull strings for us if Sidro is elected congressman.

<p><b>kapital</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{capital letter.} <b>2</b> @{capital city.} <b>3</b> @capital, @resources. <b>3a</b> quality that is an asset to success. <i>Kapital na nímu nang ímung pangútuk,</i> Your brains are an asset to you. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] write in capital letters. <i>Kapitala (ikapital) pagsuwat ang mga ngálan sa táwu,</i> Write the names of persons in capital letters. <b>2</b> [B126; a12] make into a capital city. <b>3</b> [A; c] put up capital. <i>Niuprisir siya nga mauy mukapital sa manukan,</i> He offered to put up the capital for a poultry business. <b>4</b> [c6] use as a source of profit or benefit. <i>Ang kaálam ug katakus mauy maáyung ikapital sa panginabúhì,</i> Knowledge and skill are assets in our struggle for existence. <b>-ista</b> <i>n</i> capitalist. <i>v</i> [B156] be a capitalist or financier.

<p><b>kapitan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> boat @captain. <b>2</b> army captain. <b>&mdash; sa baryu</b> <i>n</i> barrio captain, the titular head of the village. <b>&mdash; birínu</b> <i>n</i> the one who treats <pb n=442>when a group eats and drinks. <i>v</i> [A1] @treat a company. <i>Kinsa may mukapitan birínu sa átung nangakáun?</i> Whose treat is this dinner?

<p><b>kapitíra</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAPI<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kapitiríya, kapitirya</b> <i>n</i> @cafeteria, usually serving snacks, not heavy meals. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make, have a cafeteria. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go to a cafeteria.

<p><b>kapitul</b> <i>n</i> provincial government building housing the provincial government administrative offices.

<p><b>kapitulu</b> <i>n</i> @chapter of a book, Bible.

<p><b>kapitulyu</b> = <sc>KAPITUL</sc>.

<p><b>kapkap<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] grow @clinging onto s.t. <i>Bágun nga nagkapkap sa paril,</i> A vine climbing on the wall. <i>Dakù na ang dákit sa káhuy nga íyang gikapkápan,</i> The strangling fig is larger than the tree it has grown around. <b>2</b> [A3N] @grope for s.t. <i>Nagkapkap (nagpangapkap) na lang kung naglakaw sa ngitngit,</i> I had to grope my way in the dark. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)] search a body for s.t. <i>Gikapkápan sa gwardiya ang buut musulud,</i> The guard searched those who wanted to get inside. <b>4</b> [A2N] struggle to obtain s.t. <i>Mukapkap (mangapkap) giyud ang táwu arun mabúhì,</i> A man has to struggle to live. <b>5</b> [AN; a2b2] sneak into a house with the intention of having intercourse with a girl. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> grope. <b>1a</b> grope for s.t. to say. <i>Ang táwung namakak mangapkap sa unsay itubag,</i> A person who lies groped[**should be "gropes"] for what to say.

<p><b>kapkap<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KALAPKAP</sc>.

<p><b>kapkáp</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{trigger fish}, bigger than the <ix>pugut</ix>, and black in color.

<p><b>kaplag</b> (from <i>pálag</i>) <i>v</i> [A12; ab2] @find s.t., @{come across} s.t. <i>Adtu níya sa Mindanaw kaplága ang íyang kapaláran,</i> He will seek his fortune in Mindanao. <i>Nakaplagan na ang tambal sa tísis,</i> The cure for TB has already been discovered. <i>Hikaplagan na ang taguánan sa tulisan,</i> They found the hiding place of the robbers. <i>Bag-ung kaplag sa maputing tábil,</i> New movie discovery.

<p><b>kapling</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cuff links}. <b>2</b> @coupling, mechanical device for joining things. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] wear, make into cuff links. <b>2</b> [A; b] join s.t. with coupling. <b>di-</b> having cuff links.

<p><b>kapri</b> = <sc>AGTÀ</sc>, <i>n 1</i>.

<p><b>kapritsu</b> <i>n</i> @caprice. <i>Kapritsu tung ámung pagminyù,</i> We got married on a whim. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make @whimsical demands. <i>Nagkapritsu ang asáwa níyang burus,</i> His pregnant wife is making capricious demands. <b>-sa</b> = <sc>-SU</sc> (female). <b>-su</b> <i>a</i> @capricious.

<p><b>kápul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] form a thick layer that sticks. <i>Mukápul ang tayà sa sulab,</i> Rust will form a thick layer on the blade. <i>Gikapúlan ug kayankan ang hunsuy</i>, The pipe had a thick layer of tar in it. <i>n</i> encrustration, [**sic, prob should be "encrustation"] coating. <i>Ang kápul sa buling sa íyang líug</i>, The layer of caked-up dirt on his neck.

<p><b>kapulíhay</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚLI</sc>.

<p><b>kapulut</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @{bird trap} made of a sticky sap extracted from a tree and placed on a stick tied to a branch. Any bird that alights on the stick will adhere. <i>v</i> [A; a] catch s.t. with this trap.

<p><b>kapun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] @castrate or @spay domestic animals. <i>Kapni (kapna) ang iring arun dì mahígal</i>, Castrate the cat so it won't get over-sexed. <b>2</b> [b2] @take s.t. away from s.t., take a little bit out of s.t. <i>Gikapnan ang kík</i>, The cake has had s.t. removed. <i>Nakúlang ang ákung suklì kay gikapnan níya</i>, I didn't get enough change because she held some of it back. <b>3</b> [A; b] @{cut off} a portion from a plant to make growth take place in a desirable part. <i>Kapni ang tabákù arun managkù ang dáhun</i>, Cut off the terminal buds of the tobacco plant to make the leaves grow large. <b>kinapnan</b> <i>n</i> castrated.

<p><b>kápung</b> <i>n</i> woman @prostitute (colloquial).<i>v</i> [B126; a2] be a prostitute. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] patronize a prostitute, engage in prostitution. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> red-light district.

<p><b>kapunsa</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. fine-grained, white rice with a savory, permeating smell.

<p><b>kapupungtan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚNGUT</sc>.

<p><b>kapus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B; ab] for s.t. which cannot be replaced to be practically running out. <i>Nagkapus ang ámung bugas, ug dúgay pa ang swildu</i>, Our rice is practically gone, and we won't be paid for a long time. <i>Nagkakapus na ang panahun nga gilugway kanákù</i>, My time has practically run out.

<p><b>kapus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KAP-US</sc>.

<p><b>kap-us</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> finish eating. <i>Bag-u pa giyud kaming nakakap-us sa ámung panihápun</i>, We have just finished our supper.<b>2</b> finish s.t. else. <i>Mahingpit giyud ang átung pagpahúlay kun makap-us na ang átung kinabúhì</i>, We can have eternal rest when our life is over. <i>a</i> be done eating. <i>&lsquo;Mangáun ta.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Salámat na lang. Kap-us na ku,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Would you like to eat?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No, thanks. I'm done eating.&rsquo;

<p><b>kaput</b> = <sc>KUBUT</sc>.

<p><b>káput<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KULÁPUT</sc>.

<p><b>káput<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KÁPIT</sc>.

<p><b>kapúti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @raincoat. <b>2</b> @condom (humorous). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] wear, make into a raincoat.<b>2</b> <corr>[</corr>A; b6] use a condom.

<p><b>kápuy</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @tired, @weary, @exhausted through exertion. <b>2</b> s.t. that is too much trouble, <pb n=443>one who is too lazy to do. <i>Dì ku musimba kay kápuy</i>, I won't go to church because I'm too lazy. <b>&mdash; na</b> it is too much to believe, it's tiring to hear this repeated thing. <i>Kápuy na ug tinuúrun nímu kug prí sa sini</i>, I'm sick of hearing you say it. I doubt if you would really treat me to a movie. <i>v</i><b>1</b> [A123P; a4b4] be tired. <i>Pahúway ta kay gikápuy (gikapuy, gikapúyan) ku</i>, Let's take a rest. I'm already tired. <b>2</b> [b4] be too @lazy to do s.t., find s.t. too much trouble to do. <i>Kapúyan ku mutambung ug parti</i>, I find it tedious to attend parties. <i>Kapúyan ku malígù inigmata</i>, I am too lazy to take a bath when I wake up. <b>3</b> [a4b4] be @bored with s.t. oft repeated. <i>Gikapúyan (gikápuy) kug pamínaw sa íyang mga panghambug</i>, I have grown tired of his bragging. <i>Gikapúyan (gikápuy) na kug kináun ug bulad</i>, I am tired of eating dried fish. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23; a4b4] be affected with a sore, tired feeling in the bones, of the sort one feels when ill. <i>May hilánat ku maung nangápuy ákung láwas</i>, I have a fever so my bones are all weary.<i>n</i> feeling of weariness. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> exhaustion, weariness.

<p><b>kapyaspirína</b> = <sc>KAPI ASPIRÍNA</sc>.

<p><b>kapyut</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KULAPYUT</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>KÁPIT</sc>.

<p><b>kára</b> <i>n</i> a gambling game just like <ix>hantak</ix> but using two coins. <b>dubli &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DUBLI</sc>. <b>kára krus</b> = <sc>KÁRA</sc>. <b>laba-</b> <i>n</i> @washcloth. <i>v</i> [A2C3; ac3] @play <ix><corr sic=cara>kára</corr></ix>.

<p><b>kárà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @{speak rapidly with excitement}. <i>Mikárà siyag sugílun sa nahitabù níla pagbagyu</i>, She described their experiences in the typhoon with great excitement. <i>Hilum, nagkárà lang nang bàbà mu</i>, Keep quiet, you blabber-mouth. <b>2</b> [A23] @rush, go excitedly and hurriedly. <i>Mikárà siya sa bangku pagkadawat sa tsíki</i>, She excitedly rushed to the bank when she received the check.

<p><b>karáan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DÁAN</sc>.

<p><b>karab, kárab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for monkeys to chatter. <i>Nagkarab ang ungguy mu rag dinhay gikahadlúkan</i>, The monkey was chattering as though there was s.t. it was scared of.<i>n</i> monkey chatter.

<p><b>karabalyas</b> = <sc>KARBALYAS</sc>.

<p><b>karabansus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bean with long pods having four, longitudinal, angular lobes, which are eaten: <b><i>Psophocarpus tetragonolobus</i></b>.

<p><b>karabaw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KALABAW</sc>.

<p><b>karabaw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> @{expression of slight annoyance}. <i>Karabaw. Sakit sa ákung tiil</i>, Damn! That hurt! <i>Karabaw. Kadúgay adtung ákung gisúgù</i>, Damn! What could be taking him so long?

<p><b>karábu</b> = <sc>KLÁBU</sc>.

<p><b>karadutsi</b> = <sc>KALATSUTSI</sc>.

<p><b>karadyaw</b> = <sc>KAÁYU</sc> (dialectal). <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁYU</sc>.

<p><b>kárag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a] @wander about. <i>Imbis ka magkárag, maáyu pang magtuun ka,</i> Instead of wandering about, you'd do better to study. <i>Unsa pay inyung karágun, gabíi nang dakù?</i> What do you all want to go out for when it's already night? <b>2</b> [A2] do in a @hurry, right away. <i>Mikárag siyag trabáhu pag-abut sa íyang agálun,</i> She rushed back to her work when her mistress arrived. <b>(->), -an(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> restless, given to wandering. <i>Karagan (karag) siya. Dílì magpuyù sa balay,</i> He is restless. He does not stay at home. <b>2</b> for women to go out or deport themselves uninhibitedly (with lots of motion, gestures) in a way deemed unsuitable for women. <i>Karagan (karag) nímu à! Ayawg yapayapa ug musulti ka,</i> How immodest you are! Don't throw your arms around when you talk. <b>2a</b> for a top to @{jump about} instead of spinning steadily. <i>Karag (karagan) kaáyu nang ímung kasing,</i> Your top moves about as it spins. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; sa mga babáyi</b> tending to go after women. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> get to be @restless, @wandering, @uninhibited. <b>2</b> for a top to jump instead of spin steadily.

<p><b>karahay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] do s.t. by @borrowing s.t. which s.o. else owns. <i>Nakapanahì ku kay nakakarahay (nakapangarahay) man ku sa íyang makina,</i> I managed to sew some things because I got to use her sewing machine. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; ab] lend s.t. for s.o. to use while the owner is not using it. <i>Pakarahaya ra ku sa ímung makinilya,</i> May I use your type-*writer while you're not using it? <i>Dì níla pakarahayan ang ílang utaw,</i> They don't lend their iron.

<p><b>karahay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> cast-iron @skillet with a round bottom, 2&ndash;4" smaller in diameter than the <ix>kaláhà</ix> with proportionate depth.

<p><b>karahay<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b4] leave a place in a @hurry. <i>Unsa may naingnan átu? Mikarahay man tu pag-abut nákù?</i> What's the matter with her? She left as soon as I arrived. <i>Amù ang tanang líhuk run kay gikarahayan mi sa mga míd,</i> We do all the work now because<corr sic=","></corr> our household help walked out on us suddenly.

<p><b>karáhu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> half-humorous reference to a big, @clumsy, @slow-witted person, often said in anger, but not necessarily so. <i>Natumban ákung tiil sa karáhu,</i> The lout stepped on my feet. <i>Putì, dílì itum, karahúa ka,</i> I said white, not black, you oaf.

<p><b>karáhu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @{lizard fish}: <b><i>Trachinocephalus sp.</i></b> and <b><i>Saurida sp.</i></b>

<pb n=444>

<p><b>karáhu<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> @penis (slang).

<p><b>karakara</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @hurry s.o. or oneself up. <i>Káda human sa ámung trabáhu mukarakara dáyun kug paúlì</i>, As soon as work is over, I hurry home. <i>Dì ka angayan mukarakára níyag súgù</i>, It's not right for you to give her orders and tell her to hurry it up. karakarahun a fond of hurrying others.

<p><b>karaktir<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @character in fiction.

<p><b>karaktir<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> one of the nine mahjong pieces that have Chinese characters as their design. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] for the piece as drawn to turn out to be a &lsquo;character&rsquo;. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] get a &lsquo;character&rsquo; mahjong piece.

<p><b>karakul</b> <i>n</i> general name for volute shells or other univalves similar in shape.

<p><b>káral</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S3] @rattle, give a clattering sound. <i>Mikáral ang baldi ngadtu sa kanal</i>, The pail fell into the ditch with a clattering noise. <b>2</b> [c1] do s.t. in a rattling, noisy way. <i>Ayaw ikáral (karála) paggúyud ang silya</i>, Do not drag the chair so noisily. <i>n</i> clattering sound.

<p><b>karamba</b> reference to s.o. made in mild anger, but not implying anything about the person to whom the reference is made. <i>Karamba ning bat-ána. Nangáyù na pug túbig</i>, Darn this child! He asked for another glass of water.

<p><b>karambúla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> free-for-all cockfight in which three or more cocks take part. <b>2</b> free-for-all among people. <b>3</b> way of playing billiards such that the cue ball must hit both balls to score. <b>3a</b> score thus made. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c1] hold a free-for-all cockfight. <b>2</b> [C; a2b3] have a free-for-all fight. <i>Sa iláwum sa íyang dughan ingun sa adúnay daghang butang nga nagkarambúla</i>, It was as if there were numerous matters fighting it out with each other deep in his breast.<i>Husáyun ta lang ni. Ngánu bang karambuláhun pa man giyud?</i> Let's settle this case amicably. Why do we have to fight it out? <b>3</b> [AC; b] play carom billiards.

<p><b>karamílu</b> <i>n</i> white sugar that has been melted and allowed to harden, cut into rectangular pieces. It is used for beverages or flavoring. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] make rock sugar, put rock sugar into s.t.

<p><b>karampag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{sweet potato} with slightly lobed and almost rounded roots (some irregularly shaped) white-skinned, with very light yellow, mealy meat, not sweet.

<p><b>karamúsing</b> <i>n</i> @{noisy fight}, such as that between cats and dogs. <i>v</i> [C23; b3] have a noisy fight.

<p><b>karamutsing</b> = <sc>KAMURITSING</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MURITSING</sc>.

<p><b>kárang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stilts or similar contrivance to walk on, used for walking through water or for amusement. <b>2</b> = <sc>ANDADUR.</sc> <i>a</i> tall and lanky. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> walk on stilts, make into stilts. <b>2</b> = <sc>ANDADUR.</sc>

<p><b>karansa, karansay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] be @active and @moving about a good deal. <i>Nagkaransa ang duha ka buksidur nga nagpagayun,</i> The two boxers danced about waiting for a chance. <i>Nagkaransa na sad ang byúda,</i> The widow is back in action again. <b>2</b> [C] have a noisy quarrel, ruckus. <i>Nagkakaransa na sad ang magtiáyung palaaway,</i> The quarrelsome couple is at it again. <i>n</i> action of moving about a lot, quarreling. <i>Karansa sa istukáda,</i> Dancing about in fencing.

<p><b>karapáta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fast multiplying, blood-*sucking @mite that burrows under the skin in the pubic hair causing intense itching. It is commonly spread by prostitutes. <b>2</b> k.o. @tick. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with this k.o. mite or tick.

<p><b>karapatdápat</b> humorous euphemism for <ix>karapáta</ix>.

<p><b>karapitsi</b> <i>n</i> sugarcane crushing apparatus composed of two steel rollers stood vertically on a platform, turned by a long piece of timber which is pulled by a carabao. The carabao is made to walk round and round to turn the rollers while the sugarcane stalks are fed into them one or two at a time, and the juice is squeezed out into a vat. <i>v</i> [A; a12] crush and squeeze juice out of sugarcane stalks with the <ix>karapitsi</ix>. <b>karapitsihun ug bàbà</b> having a mouth like a <ix>karapitsi</ix>&mdash;i.e., a voracious eater.

<p><b>karapkarap</b> <i>v</i> [A13] @grope blindly for s.t. to hold on to. <i>Nagkarapkarap ming misúbay sa pasilyu kay napáwung ang sugà,</i> We groped our way along the corridors because the lights went out.

<p><b>karas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @rake out s.t. growing, @harrow. <i>Karasa ang mga sagbut,</i> Remove the weeds by raking. <i>Karasi ang humayan human madáru,</i> Harrow the paddy after you plow it. <b>2</b> @scratch lightly. <i>Nakaras ang íyang buktun sa tunuk,</i> His arm got scratched by the thorns. <b>3</b> scratch out, @{cross off.} <i>Karasun ku ang ngálan mu sa lista,</i> I'll cross your name off the list. <b>n</b> <i>1</i> rake, harrow. <b>2</b> light scratch. <b>3</b> marks made to cross s.t. off.

<p><b>káras<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for citrus to be acrid and biting. <b>2</b> for the throat to be raspy, dry, and sore. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46; b6] for citrus fruit to be biting in taste due to acidity. <b>2</b> [B3N; a2b4] for the throat to be raspy, dry, and sore. <i>Nagkáras ang ákung tutunlan pagkináun sa buúngun nga káras ug lamì,</i> I felt a stinging sensation <pb n=445>in my throat after eating too much of the acrid pomelo.

<p><b>káras<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B6] do s.t. suddenly in a hurry. <i>Mikáras siyag saka sa táas pag-abut sa mga bisíta kay nagkarsunsilyu lang,</i> He suddenly rushed upstairs when the visitors arrived because he was in his underwear.

<p><b>karaskaras</b> <i>v</i> [AP] behave roughly and ill-mannered, as when drunk. <i>Dì ta makakaraskaras sa parti kay purmal man,</i> You can't let your hair down in the party, for it is a formal affair.

<p><b>karat</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for a top to keep jumping <corr sic=aabout>about</corr> instead of spinning steadily. <i>Mukarat (makarat) ang ímung kasing ug dì matàrung ang lansang,</i> Your top will jump about if the nail is not in straight.

<p><b>kárat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> giving off a grating sound like the sound given off by a sharp-pointed metal instrument rubbed on a surface. <b>2</b> = <sc>ÁRAT<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc> <i>v</i> [B; c1P] give off a scraping or grating sound. <i>Nakárat (mikárat) na ang tíngug sa radiyupúnu kay hilis na ang dágum,</i> The victrola gives off a raspy sound because the needle is worn down. <i>Makakárat (makapakárat) sa pawuntin pin kung iduut ni pagsuwat,</i> Pressing down hard on the fountain pen causes it to give off a rough, grating sound.

<p><b>karáti</b> <i>n</i> @karate. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] practice, do the art of karate. <i>Ayaw siyag hagíta kay kamau nang mukaráti,</i> Don't challenge him because he is skilled in karate. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] deliver a karate chop with the side of the palm. <i>Buak ning halublak ug ákung karatíhun,</i> This cement block will break in two if I hit it with a karate chop. <b>karatihay</b> <i>v</i> [C2] engage in karate blows against each other. <b>-sta, -syan</b> <i>n</i> one versed in karate. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] become an expert in karate.

<p><b>karatil<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b3c] @{move away} from s.w. fast and suddenly. <i>Pagsirbátu sa pulis nikaratil ug panágan ang mga nanaghantak,</i> When the cop blew his whistle the gamblers immediately took to their heels.

<p><b>karatil<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> large reel to which strands of hemp fiber twisted into rope are wound, used in rope manufacture. <i>v</i> [AN; a] reel twisted hemp strands on a frame in the process of making rope.

<p><b>karatsutsi</b> = <sc>KALATSUTSI.</sc>

<p><b>karatsutsu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] pile or roll chips or coins into groups of the same denomination. <i>n</i> pile or roll of chips or coins of the same denomination.

<p><b>karatula</b> <i>n</i> @signboard, small hanging @sign. <i>v</i> [A13; a] put up a signboard.

<p><b>karátung</b> = <sc>KALÁTUNG.</sc>

<p><b>káraw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @stir or @shuffle s.t. around to mix it. <i>Gikáraw nákù ang mga pitsas sa madyung,</i> I shuffled the mahjong pieces. <i>Karáwa ang armirul arun dílì magbitulbitul,</i> Mix the starch so it won't get lumpy. <b>2</b> [B; c1] @shake back and forth. <i>Mukáraw ang mga dáhun sa balíli inighuyup sa hángin,</i> The blades of grass will stir when the wind blows. <i>Nagkaraw ang síga sa kandílà,</i> The candle flame is flickering. <i>Karáwa (ikáraw) ang langkay arun manglúpad ang mga máya,</i> Shake the dry coconut fronds to scare away the rice birds. <b>3</b> [AN; a12] touch or take things belonging to s.o. <i>Kinsa na puy nangáraw sa ákung midiyas?</i> Who could have used my socks? <i>Walay makapangáraw sa butang sa upisína,</i> Nobody can touch things in the office. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to touch or take s.o.'s things. <b>karawkaraw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> move around continuously. <b>2</b> busy oneself in household chores. <i>Bísi ku kay daghan kug karawkarawun sa balay,</i> I'm busy because I have lots of things to do in the house.

<p><b>káraw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46] make a @clattering noise. <b>2</b> [AC; b6(1)] @{play mahjong} (so called from the noise made by the pieces). <i>n</i> noise made by movements of things that fall or are knocked.

<p><b>karáwi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. upland @rice.

<p><b>karaygan</b> <i>n</i> the right side of cloth, the side which shows the design, as opposed to the obverse side which does not. <i>v</i> [c1] have clothing such that the right side shows. <i>Karaygana (ikaraygan) ang lugum nga kulur sa panaptun,</i> Sew the cloth with the darker color on the outside.

<p><b>karbalyas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. crevally: <i><b>Caranx sp.</b></i>

<p><b>karbansus</b> = <sc>KARABANSUS.</sc>

<p><b>karbáyin, karbin</b> <i>n</i> @{carbine rifle.}

<p><b>karbun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coal. <b>2</b> @{carbon paper} used in duplicating written or typed work. <i>v</i> [b] use carbon paper. <i>Karbúni ang sulat,</i> Make a carbon of that letter. <b>&mdash; kápi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> carbon copy. <b>2</b> exact replica; children that look just like their relatives. <i>Ang ímung anak karbun kápi giyud nímu,</i> Your son looks exactly like you. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a carbon copy of s.t.&dagger;

<p><b>karbun<hi rend=sub>2</i>, karb&ucaron;n</b> <i>n</i> largest public market in Cebu City. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] go shopping at the Carbon market. <i>Mangarbun mi ug mabirnis kay tábù,</i> We go shopping at Carbon on Fridays because that's the market day. <b>&mdash; kálids</b> humorous appelation for the public market in Cebu, so called because most of the public transportation routes to the market also pass the schools, and where other passengers are heading for this and that college, <pb n=446>the maids are heading for Carbon.

<p><b>karbunátu</b> = <sc>BIKARBUNÁTU</sc>.

<p><b>karburadur</b> <i>n</i> @carburetor.

<p><b>karbúru</b> <i>n</i> @{calcium carbide}. <i>v</i> [b1] treat a fruit with calcium carbide to make it ripen faster. <b>kinarburúhan</b> <i>n</i> fruit that has been treated with calcium carbide.

<p><b>kard</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> student's report @card. <b>2</b> <ix>in set phrases</ix>: <bx>balintayins, birtdi, krismas, pus &mdash;</bx> Valentine's, birthday, Christmas, post card. <i>v</i> [A; a] list s.t. on a card.

<p><b>kardába</b> <i>n</i> variety of @banana, 6&ndash;8" in length, square in shape, and yellow when ripe. Usually cooked, though edible raw.

<p><b>kardinal</b> <i>n</i> @cardinal in the church. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] be, become a cardinal.

<p><b>kardíru</b> = <sc>KALDÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>karga</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @load, put in or on a conveyance. <i>Suhúli ang nagkarga sa bukag sa trák</i>, Pay the man who loaded the basket on the truck. <i>Ikarga ring ságing sa balsa</i>, Load these bananas on the sled. <b>1a</b> [A] take a load. <i>Mukarga ug tris tuniládas ning tráka</i>, This truck can take a load of three tons. <b>2</b> @charge a firearm or battery. <i>Gikargáhan nákù ang ripli</i>, I loaded the rifle. <i>Gikargáhan na ba ang ákung batiríya?</i> Has my storage battery been charged? <b>2a</b> [A] hold a certain charge. <i>Dì na mukarga ning batiriyáha</i>, This battery cannot be charged any further. <b>3</b> [A; c1] @carry s.o. in one's arms. <i>Akuy mukarga sa bátà kay nagkagúkam ka sa mga dad-unun</i>, I'll carry the baby for you. You've got enough to carry. <b>4</b> [A1; c] include figures in another figure. <i>Kinsay nagkarga sa sumáda karun sa lista sa miáging búlan?</i> Who included today's totals in last month's list? <i>Ikarga ni sa útang nákù</i>, Add this to what I owe you. <b>5</b> [A13; b6] charge s.o. for s.t. falsely. <i>Gikargáhan siyag útang</i>, He was falsely charged a debt. <b>5a</b> charge interest on. <i>Ang ákung útang gikargáhan ug diyis pursiyintu</i>, I was charged ten percent interest on my debt. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @load. <b>hustu sa &mdash;</b> @{well prepared}. <i>Antis mularga, hustu sa karga</i>, Before venturing into s.t., everything should be prepared in advance. <b>trák di-</b> cargo truck. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; búru, búrut</b> k.o. @{card game}, similar to idiot's delight. Each player gets five cards. The dealer pulls a card from the pack and puts it down face up. Each player follows suit. Whoever cannot follow suit must draw from the pack until he can. The one who puts down the highest card leads. The object is to rid oneself of his cards. <i>v</i> [A; c] play <ix>carga burro</ix>. <b>&mdash; siráda</b> a full, filled to capacity. <i>Wà mi makasakay kay pulus karga siráda ang mga trák</i>, We did not manage to get a ride because the buses were filled to capacity. <i>Karga siráda ang ákung tiyan adtung kaúna</i>, My stomach was filled to bursting after that dinner. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] become full. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] work as a laborer loading goods. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of loading cargo on a boat. <i>Ug way kargáda, wà say trabáhu ang mga kargadur sa piyir</i>, If there is no loading to do, the stevedores are idle. <b>2</b> supplies or materials issued to an army, workers, and the like. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> supply with materials or provisions. <i>Kargadáhan mug dúgang bála</i>, You will be supplied with additional bullets. <b>2</b> give supplies to. <i>Ang SWA mikargáda (nagkargáda) ug panaptun sa nasunúgan</i>, The SWA supplied the fire victims with materials for clothing. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> loaded, full. <i>Dì na pasakyan ang trák. Kargádu na</i>, The truck will take no more passengers. It's full. <b>2</b> drunk. <i>Ayaw na siyag paimna kay kargádu na</i>, Don't give him any more to drink because he's already loaded. <b>3</b> full of, having lots of. <i>Kargádu ug búnga ang nangkà</i>, The jackfruit is full of fruits. <b>3a</b> most of. <i>Kargádu sa mga istudiyanti karun way batásan</i>, Most of the students nowadays are ill-mannered. <b>3b</b> be present in large quantities. <i>Kargádug Insik sa Hungkung</i>, Hong Kong is full of Chinese. <i>Kargádu mga way kwarta ang nagpuyù dinhi</i>, A lot of the people that live here don't have money. <i>Kargádug asin ang ímung timpla</i>, You use a heck of a lot of salt in your cooking. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] <b>1</b> get to be loaded. <b>2</b> get drunk. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> one who loads things onto a conveyance. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] become a loader, stevedore. <b>-mintu</b> <i>n</i> cargo, baggage.

<p><b>karganti</b> <i>a</i> making a pest or nuisance of oneself. <i>v</i> [b6] consider a pest. <i>Gikargantíhan ku ánang batáa, sígig pangáyug singku bísag gibalibáran na</i>, I find that child a pest because he keeps asking for a nickel even though I already told him no.

<p><b>kargu</b> <i>n</i> financial responsibility. <i>Ímung kargu ang pagpaiskuyla sa ímung anak</i>, It is your responsibility to send your child to school. <i>Kargu sa suluguun ang mga plátung íyang nabuak</i>, The servant is held responsible for any plate he breaks. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] take financial responsibility. <b>2</b> [A; c6] hold s.o. responsible.

<p><b>*kari<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <b>&mdash; dipáta</b> <i>n</i> dish of beef joints and feet with banana bud and eggplants cooked into a thick soup with rice and peanuts added. <b>karikari</b> <i>n</i> a dish of beef joints and feet cooked with Chinese spices. <i>v</i> [A; a2] have one of these two dishes.

<p><b>kari<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KIRI</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>ARI</sc> (dialectal).

<pb n=447>

<p><b>kári</b> <i>n</i> @curry powder. <i>v</i> [A; a12] cook with curry. <b>karihan</b> <i>n</i> curry powder container.

<p><b>karidad</b> <i>n</i> @charity. <b>íhas di &mdash;</b> Daughters of Charity, a religious order.

<p><b>karikatúra</b> <i>n</i> drawn @caricature. <i>v</i> [A; b5c1] portray in caricature.

<p><b>karikit</b> = <sc>KURIKIT.</sc>

<p><b>karína</b> <i>n</i> k.o. skirt with no tail which gathers around the hips and with projecting ends used for tying around the shoulders, usually of home-woven cloth. It is worn around the house. <i>v</i> [AN; b6c1] wear the <ix>karína</ix>, make into a <ix>karína</ix>.

<p><b>karindiríya</b> <i>n</i> a small @eatery where ready-to-eat foods are displayed. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] engage in a <ix>carenderia</ix> business. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b] go to a <ix>carenderia</ix> to order food.

<p><b>karingking</b> <i>v</i> [A23] for women to conduct themselves so as to attract admirers. <i>Kanúnay na siyang magmik-ap run, mikaringking na tingáli,</i> She always makes her face up nowadays. She must be trying to attract admirers. <i>n</i> @paramour, @mistress (humorous).

<p><b>karinyu</b> <i>n</i> showing of @affection by words or action. <i>v</i> [AC; b] express affection physically or with words. <i>Ang hustis mikarinyu sa íyang kustumir,</i> The nightclub hostess caressed her customer. <i>Karinyúhun únà ang pagdúlug úsà magkúan,</i> We engage in tender exchange of affections before we do it. <i>Karinyúhan gánì siya sa íyang anak, maw[=à] dáyun ang kasukù,</i> As soon as his little girl kisses him, his anger vanishes. <b>-sa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> showing affection. <i>Dì ku kabalíbad sa karinyúsa nákung anak,</i> I cannot refuse my daughter because she is so affectionate. <b>2</b> being charming in action and speech. <i>Ang mga Ilungga karinyúsag tíngug bísag masukù,</i> The Ilongo women talk sweetly, even when they are angry. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] <b>1</b> become affectionate. <b>2</b> become charming and pleasant. <i>Ang íyang sanag nga pagtan-aw sa kinabúhì mauy nakakarinyúsa níya,</i> Her bright attitude on life allows her to be sweet and charming. <b>-su</b> = <sc>KARINYÚSA</sc> (male).

<p><b>karinyúsa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{folk dance} in 3/4 time. <b>2</b> song which accompanies this dance. <i>v</i> [A2C2; b6] dance the <ix>cariñosa</ix>.

<p><b>karír</b> = <sc>KÍRIR.</sc>

<p><b>karíra<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{horse race.} <b>2</b> = <sc>ANILYU,</sc> <i>n1, v.</i> <i>v</i> [A13; b6c1] have or run a horse race. <b>karirahan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> race track for horse racing. <b>2</b> racehorse.

<p><b>karíra<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @career.

<p><b>karista</b> (from <i>káru</i>) <i>n</i> one who works in a sawmill placing the logs to be sawed on the carriage that conveys them to the revolving blade. <i>v</i> [B156] become a loader.

<p><b>karíta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spool for thread. <b>2</b> spoolful.

<p><b>karíta<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> Carreta, name of an area near Cebu City, where there is a leprosarium.

<p><b>karíti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spool. <b>2</b> spoolful. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wind s.t. on a spool. <b>karitihan</b> <i>n</i> bobbin on a sewing machine or on which thread is wound.

<p><b>karitil</b> = <sc>KARATIL<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>karitíla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @calesa, k.o. @{horse-drawn cab,} holding two passengers facing frontwards. <b>2</b> = <sc>KARITILYA.</sc> <i>v</i> [A1] <b>1</b> ride such a carriage. <b>2</b> = <sc>KARITILYA.</sc>

<p><b>karitilya</b> <i>n</i> @wheelbarrow or small three-wheeled @cart for transporting light items. <i>v</i> [A; c1] load or transport s.t. in a wheelbarrow.

<p><b>karitíra, karitíras</b> <i>n</i> main @road or public @highway running outside of a town. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] make, make into a highway. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go along the main road. <b>&mdash; prubinsiyal</b> main or arterial road or highway.

<p><b>karítis</b> = <sc>KARÍTI.</sc>

<p><b>karitun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> device consisting of a pole and a wheel or two wheels, from which a load is suspended. <b>2</b> drifter, one who always goes about anywhere like the <ix>karitun</ix>. <i>v</i> [A; c1] transport s.t. with a <ix>karitun</ix>.

<p><b>karkulu, karkúlu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @reckon, @calculate. <i>Karkulúha ug pilay átung magastu sa piknik,</i> Estimate how much we will spend for the picnic. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> reckoning, calculation. <b>2</b> viewpoint, way one regards a situation. <i>Sa ákung karkúlu mu rag dílì háyan ang gíra,</i> As I see it, there's no likelihood of war.

<p><b>karlang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>BISUL.</sc>

<p><b>karlang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @liar, @boaster (euphemism).

<p><b>karmas</b> = <sc>KAMRAS.</sc>

<p><b>karmilítus</b> <i>n</i> @candy.

<p><b>karmílu</b> = <sc>KARAMÍLU.</sc>

<p><b>karmin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the Virgin of Mount Carmel. <b>2</b> badge worn by Carmelite nuns and devotees. <b>3</b> habit worn by devotees of the Virgin of Carmel. <i>v</i> [A; b] wear this habit. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] make oneself up pretty, smell nice (like the Virgin of Carmel). <i>Nangarmin siya kay mamasíyu,</i> She's making herself up nice because she is going for a walk. <b>lubag ang paN-</b> what happened is the result of [agent]'s own stupidity (lit. your dressing up has turned sour). <i>Lubag na ang ímung pangarmin. Ayaw na pagkatkat ug usab,</i> You brought it on yourself. Next time do not climb. <i>v</i> [A; b4] for s.t. to happen to one as a result of his foolishness. <i>Naglubag na ang ímung pangarmin,</i> What's happened is your own doing.

<p><b>karminatíbu</b> <i>n</i> @carminative, a k.o. liquid medicine for expelling gas from the stomach.

<p><b>karnába</b> = <sc>KARDÁBA.</sc>

<pb n=448>

<p><b>karnabal<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @carnival or @fair. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] hold a carnival or fair. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go to a fair or carnival. <b>-an(->)</b> fair grounds.

<p><b>karnabal<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> in playing mahjong with a deal of sixteen pieces, the situation where a player has eight pairs. He is then in a position to get seven pairs of two <i>(syíti páris)</i> and one three of a kind on his next draw, which gets him mahjong.

<p><b>karni</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @meat, @flesh of animals (not fowl) used as food. <b>2</b> a woman viewed as having a nice body. <i>Kanay karni! Maáyung kusìkusíun,</i> What a woman! It would be fun to pinch her all over. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] have meat for meals. <i>Talagsa na lang kitang makakarni panahun sa kwarisma,</i> We rarely eat meat during Lent. <i>Karung mga panahúna makarni na ang irù,</i> Nowadays dog meat can be used as food. <b>2</b> [A; a] use s.t. for meat. <i>Ang usa ka bábuy átung aslun, ang usa karníhun,</i> One pig will be roasted, the other will be cut into pieces for meat. <b>&mdash; asádu</b> roast meat. <b>&mdash; nurti</b> <i>n</i> corned beef. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] have corned beef. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] make into corned beef. <b>&mdash; púra</b> lean meat. <b>karnihan</b> <i>n</i> meat section in the market. <b>-síra, -síru</b> <i>n</i> meat dealer.

<p><b>karníru</b> <i>n</i> @sheep. <b>-in-</b> a a way of weaving, usually of a blanket or a towel, that comes out thick and curled like a sheep's pelt.

<p><b>karpintíru</b> <i>n</i> @carpenter. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a carpenter.

<p><b>karpit</b> <i>n</i> @carpet. <b>rid &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{red carpet}, @{royal welcome}. <b>2</b> seats placed just outside a ring where live shows, boxing, or wrestling matches, or exhibitions are held.

<p><b>karsáda</b> <i>n</i> @street, @highway. <i>v</i> [A; a2] build a road. <i>Ang mga baryuhánun mismu mauy nagkarsáda niíni,</i> The village people themselves built this road. <i>Karsadáhun ning dapíta,</i> This place will be made into a road. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go along the street or highway.

<p><b>karsil</b> <i>n</i> @prison house. <i>v</i> [AP; c1] put s.o. in prison. <i>Karsílun (ikarsil) nang táwung walay salà?</i> Imprison an innocent man?

<p><b>karsitin</b> = <sc>KALSITIN.</sc>

<p><b>karsu</b> = <sc>KALSU.</sc>

<p><b>karsúnis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @trousers. <b>2</b> = <sc>NAG-,</sc> <i>1a.</i> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] wear, make into trousers. <i>Mukarsúnis ka bag dáan?</i> Would you wear old trousers? <i>Bísag mga babáyi run magkarsúnis na,</i> Even the women wear trousers these days. <i>Ang babáyi dílì pa makakarsúnis sa simbahan,</i> Women still cannot wear trousers to church. <i>Karsunísun ku kining panaptúna,</i> I will make this cloth into trousers. <i>Karsunísi ang bátà,</i> Put the child's pants on him. <i>Ikarsúnis ning bag-u. Tan-áwun ta,</i> Put on these new trousers. Let's look at them. <b>1a</b> <b>nag-</b> men, viewed as potential partners for women. <i>Unsay ákù? Dílì ra ikay nagkarsúnis (karsúnis),</i> What do I care? You're not the only man in the world. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] get pants. <i>Nakakarsúnis ku pagbisíta nákù sa ákung uyuan,</i> I got me a pair of pants free when I visited my uncle. <i>Lúgus ku makakarsúnis niíning ímung iswildu nákù,</i> I can hardly afford to buy pants with what you pay me. <i>Pagbisíta sa ákung bayaw hikarsunisan kug mahalun,</i> When my brother-in-law came for a visit, it cost me an expensive pair of pants. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] put one's pants on. <i>Nangarsúnis pa ku pag-abut sa bána,</i> The husband arrived while I was putting my pants on. <i>Midágan siyang wà ngánì makapangarsúnis,</i> He ran off without even getting a chance to get his pants on. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> cloth to be made into pants. <i>Bayinti ang karsunisun niíning panaptúna,</i> This cloth costs twenty pesos per cut (enough to make a pair of pants). <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> made like a pair of pants. <i>Paldang kinarsúnis,</i> A skirt made like a pair of pants. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> way one wears one's pants. <i>Yasyas ug kinarsunisan nang tawhána,</i> That man wears his pants crookedly.

<p><b>karsunsilya</b> = <sc>KARSUNSILYU,</sc> <i>n1.</i>

<p><b>karsunsilyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @panties. <b>2</b> man's @undershorts or boxer-style trunks. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear, make panties, underpants or boxer trunks.

<p><b>karta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> letter sent by a prospective groom's parents to the parents of the prospective bride announcing that they will come to the house to ask for the girl's hand formally <i>(pamaláyi).</i> <i>v</i> [A; b6] send such letter.

<p><b>karta<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cards or @{mahjong pieces.} <b>2</b> hand in cards or mahjong. <i>Sa íyang karta dihay duha ka alas,</i> He got two aces in his hand.&dagger;

<p><b>kartabun</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1] strike from an upraised position with the hand or s.t. held by the hand. <i>Mukartabun ning batáa sa íyang gulunggulung ug sungúgun,</i> This child will strike you hard with his rattle if you tease him. <i>Way sakit ang unlan nga ikartabun sa [=ú],</i> A pillow does not hurt if you strike the head with it.

<p><b>kartil</b> <i>n</i> @placard, @poster, @notice for display in a public place.

<p><b>kartilya<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> system of teaching reading where the student starts by learning the alphabet, then the combination of two or three letters to form syllables, and finally the blending of the syllables to form words. <b>2</b> primer reader teaching this method.

<p><b>kartilya<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KARITILYA.</sc>

<p><b>kartíra<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @wallet. <b>2</b> lady's @bag. <b>3</b> small @briefcase or @suitcase.

<p><b>kartíra<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KARITÍRA.</sc>

<pb n=449>

<p><b>kartíru</b> <i>n</i> mail carrier, @postman. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a postman.

<p><b>kartíyu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a] be able to work out a problem, think one's way out of a tight spot. <i>Wà siya makurnir kay maáyung mangartíyu</i>, They couldn't pressure him into marriage, because he was a quick thinker. <i>Kartiyúhun nátù ang makina básig muandar</i>, Let's try to use our brains on this sewing machine. Maybe we can figure out how to make it go. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] accomplish s.t. with less than what one would normally have available. <i>Ug maáyu kang mukartíyu, makapaiskuyla ka sa ímung anak</i>, If you handle your limited resources right, you can still send your son to school. <i>Wà tay istrungkadur, átù lang kartiyúhun ug kutsilyu</i>, We don't have a screwdriver, but we'll manage it with a knife. <b>2</b> [A13] slap together a plan hastily. <i>Nagkartíyu lag usa ka dinalìdaling ripurt</i>, He just waffled up a quick report. <i>n</i> ability, thinking power to solve problems. <b>kartiyúhan</b> <i>a</i> having a knack for solving problems.

<p><b>kartulína</b> <i>n</i> k.o. smooth and fine-grained cardboard of a thin and sturdy sort.

<p><b>kartun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cardboard box}. <b>2</b> cardboard. <i>v</i> [a12] put in a cardboard box. <i>Gikartun ang mga rilip</i>, The relief goods were put in boxes. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> put in a box. <b>2</b> by the boxful.

<p><b>kartun<hi rend=sub>2</i>, kartuning</b> <i>n</i> animated @{movie cartoon}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] have, show a movie cartoon. <b>2</b> [c1] make into or show as a cartoon.

<p><b>kartutsu</b> = <sc>KARATSUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>káru</b> <i>n</i> an open @carriage on wheels used for carrying sacred images of saints during a religious procession or a body in a funeral procession. <i>v</i> [A; c1] put on a carriage, make a carriage for a procession.

<p><b>karù</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a12] @shake s.t. to see if there is anything inside or to loosen it, for s.t. rooted to be loosened. <i>Dúnay nagkarù sa halígi kay nagharag na</i>, S.o. must have shook the post because it's leaning to one side. <i>Nagkarù na ang íyang ngípun ug ipaibut na</i>, His tooth is loose and should be extracted. <i>Karua nang kawit ug may sulud ba</i>, Shake the toddy container to see if there is any inside.

<p><b>karul</b> (from <ix>arul</ix>) <i>v</i> [AB16N; a] @pluck feathers out, @molt. <i>Nagkarul (nangarul) ang mga balhíbu sa manuk</i>, The chicken is molting. <i>Gikarul níya ang balhíbu sa manuk</i>, He plucked out the chicken's feathers.

<p><b>kárul<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AC12; b] go Christmas caroling.

<p><b>kárul<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] @clatter, make a clattering sound. <i>Mukárul ang bakyà níya sa salug</i>, Her wooden slippers will clatter on the floor. <b>2</b> [B2S46; a4] for the teeth to chatter. <i>Mikárul (gikárul) ákung suwang sa katugnaw</i>, My teeth (lit. chin) chattered because of the cold. <i>n</i> clatter. <i>Dungug sa sílung ang kárul sa mga plátu</i>, The clatter of the plates could be heard downstairs.

<p><b>karumáta</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large two-wheeled @cart with shafts, designed for draft animals but in urban areas pushed by people, used for transporting s.t. heavy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] haul s.t. in a carromata. <i>Karumatáhan ta kag balas tulu ka biráda</i>, I will deliver you three carromata-*loads of sand. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] go s.w. in a carromata. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] earn one's livelihood by hauling things on a carromata. <b>karumatilya</b> <i>n</i> a small three-wheeled cart, pushed by people.

<p><b>karun</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>run</bx> <b>1</b> this time @now. <i>Gikinahanglan ka karun</i>, You are needed now. <i>Sukad karun ayaw na pagpakítà dinhi</i>, From now on, don't show yourself here. <b>sa pagka</b>- as of this moment. <i>Sa pagkakarun wà kuy ikabáyad nímu</i>, For the @moment, I can't pay you yet. <b>&mdash; dáyun</b> @{right now}. <i>Lakaw karun dáyun</i>, Go this minute. <b>matag &mdash; ug unyà</b> every now and then. <i>Nahigmata siya matag karun ug unyà</i>, He kept waking up every so often. <b>2</b> this time, immediately ahead of us. <i>Latiguhun ta ka run</i>, I'll whip you in a minute. <b>&mdash; na</b> I'll do it in just a minute. <i>&lsquo;Mangáun na ta.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Karun na!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let's eat.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;OK. Just a minute.&rsquo; <b>&mdash; pa</b> a just now. <b>b</b> in a little while. <i>Wà pa siya. Karun pa tu siya</i>, He hasn't gotten here yet. He'll be here presently. <b>&mdash; ka giyud</b> you'll get it in a minute. <i>Karun ka lang giyud, bayhána ka</i>, You'll get from me, woman. <b>3</b> today. <i>Unsa man ta run (rung adláwa)?</i> What is it (lit. are we) today? <b>&mdash; nga [<ix>time</ix>]</b> this [time] we are at now. <i>Karung simanahúna</i>, This week. <i>Karung adláwa</i>, Today. <i>Sus, ínit rung udtúha</i>, My, how hot it is this noon. <b>4</b> <b>-ng</b> this coming. <i>Kitáun ku siya karung udtu</i>, I'll go to see him this noon. <i>Karung Hulyu</i>, This coming July. <i>Mugíkan mi karung alas dúsi</i>, We'll leave this coming noon (twelve o'clock). <b>4a</b> <b>-ng bag-u</b> recently. <i>Gibisitáhan ku níla karung bag-u</i>, They recently visited me. <b>5</b> the ones now as opposed to people at other times (Nominative or Dative). <i>Ang karung mga istudiyanting nagbanhà dihà, sa ímung klási</i>, The students that are making noise there are from your class. <i>Karung (niárung) mga panahúna, mahal tanang palalítun</i>, These days everything is very high. <b>niárun, árun</b> (Genitive, Dative). <i>Wà ku mahibalu niárun</i>, I don't know this thing here. <i>Sáma niárung panahúna</i>, Just about like the weather we're having here. <b>6</b> <ix>particle used to keep a narration on track</ix>: now. <i>Karun, <pb n=450>kadtung ákung giingung babáyi ...</i>, Now, this woman I was telling you about.... <b>7</b> <b>ba &mdash;</b> <ix>particle of pause in making a calculation</ix>: let's say. <i>Padangtan ba rug diyis minútus</i>, <corr sic="... "></corr>Let it boil, say, for about ten minutes. <i>Sum[=à] sa ímung gustu. Dus písus ba run ang ihátag, maáyu na</i>, Whatever amount you want&mdash;say, two pesos, that's good enough. <b>karún</b> (from <ix>karun</ix>, <b>5</b>) that's right. <i>Karún. Mau nang tubága ákung gustu</i>, There. That's the answer I want. <b>karunkarun</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] tell s.o. to do s.t. in a hurry. <i>Dílì ta makakarunkarun ug súgù níya</i>, We cannot tell him to do s.t. in a hurry. <b>karunkarun dáyun</b> this very instant. <i>Lakaw karunkarun dáyun</i>, Go this very instant. <b>-ay</b> at this very moment. <i>Karúnay pa siya batíag kalúuy sa íyang asáwa</i>, It's only now that he felt pity for his wife.

<p><b>kárung</b> <i>a</i> @disheveled. <i>v</i> [B3; c1] be, become disheveled, become tousled (hair). <i>Human sa áway nagkárung íyang buhuk</i>, After the fight her hair was all disheveled.

<p><b>karunsing</b> <i>n</i> a variety of sweet @potato, oblong-shaped, reddish-skinned, and with white meat. When cooked it has dry and powdery, but tasty meat.

<p><b>karúsa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KÁRU</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>KARUMÁTA</sc>. <b>3</b> float, a decorated vehicle for carrying exhibits in a parade. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] make, use as a <ix>karúsa</ix>. <b>2</b> [A; c] carry on a <ix>karúsa</ix>. <b>3</b> [A; a12] go s.w. on a <ix>karúsa</ix>.

<p><b>karut, kárut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @scratch hard so as to take flesh. <i>Ayaw karúta ímung pangágud, kay magdugù</i>, Don't scratch deeply into your athlete's foot because it will bleed. <b>2</b> [A; a] get the last bit that remains in a container out, such that the bottom of the container is scraped. <i>Karúta ang dukut kay wà nay kan-un</i>, @Scrape out the rice sticking to the bottom of the pot because there is no more rice. <b>3</b> [B126; a12] run out of gambling money or go bankrupt in a business. <i>Nakárut siya sa tárì, wà giyuy nahibilin sa íyang kwarta</i>, He lost all his money at the cockfights. He had nothing left. <i>Nakárut ang tindáhan nga wà maáyu pagkadá</i>, The store went bankrupt because it was not well managed.

<p><b>kárut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <b>n</b> @carrot.

<p><b>karwáhi</b> <i>n</i> a horse-drawn passenger @carriage, usually four-wheeled. <i>v</i> [A13; ac] go, bring s.t. by carriage.

<p><b>karwas</b> = <sc>KAMRAS</sc>.

<p><b>karyáda</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @transport things with animals or people. <i>Nagkaryáda mi ug bála sa kaniyun ngadtu sa panggubátan</i>, We hauled artillery shells to the front. <i>Nalúya ang kabáyù kay usa na ka simánang gikaryáda</i>, Our horse is weakened because it was used to haul things for the whole week. <i>n</i> action of hauling. <i>Sa maung gidaghanun sa mais ang karyáda mulungtad ug duha ka adlaw</i>, With that much corn, the hauling will take two days. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] engage in a hauling business. <b>karyadahan</b> <i>n</i> vehicle used for transporting. <b>kinaryadáhan</b> <i>n</i> money earned in hauling.

<p><b>karyír</b> = <sc>KÍRIR</sc>.

<p><b>kás<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cash, @money on hand. <i>Pílay kás náa nímu dihà?</i> How much do you have? <b>2</b> money as opposed to other things of value. <i>Ang nakáwat aláhas ug kás mga dusintus</i>, I lost jewelry and two hundred pesos cash. <i>v</i> [A; a2] pay s.t. in cash. <i>Kásun ku lang ang báyad</i>, I will make the payment in cash. &mdash; <b>adbans</b> advance on one's salary. <i>v</i> [A; ac] ask for or give a cash advance.

<p><b>k[=á]s<hi rend=sub>2</i></b>[**[=á] should be á?] = <sc>KÁLAS</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALAS<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kasa</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] bet on s.t. or an amount. <i>Mukasa ka sa ákung manuk?</i> Will you bet on my cock? <i>Kasahan kug usa ka líbu si Ilurdi</i>, I'll bet one thousand pesos on Elorde. <i>Pilay ímung ikasa?</i> How much do you bet?

<p><b>kása</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @business @firm. <b>2</b> @{commercial building}. <b>&mdash; digubyirnu</b> government building. <b>&mdash; riyal</b> the term given during the Spanish regime to refer to the building in which government offices were located.

<p><b>kásà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c16] produce a crackling, rustling sound. <i>Nagkásà ang mga ilagà sa táas sa atup</i>, The rats are rustling up in the roof. <i>Ayawg kasáa (ikásà) ang pagkúmut sa mga papil</i>, Do not make the papers crackle when you crumple them. <b>2</b> [B] talk loudly, too garrulously. <i>Mukásà nà siya basta náay babáying mamínaw níya</i>, He talks a lot and loud when there are women listening. <i>Ngánung nakásà man mu dinhà?</i> What are you chattering about over there? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> crackling, rustling sound. <b>2</b> preparation for a party, esp. cooking, as evidenced by noise. <i>May kásà sa íla. May kumbira dagway</i>, There's the noise of preparations at their house. They must be planning a party. <i>a</i> a chatterbox, talking too much.

<p><b>kas-a<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <b>1</b> short for <sc>KANUS-A</sc>. <b>2</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>USA</sc>.

<p><b>kasába</b> = <sc>KAMÚTING KÁHUY</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <b>KAMÚTI</b>.

<p><b>kasádu</b> <b>1</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KASAL</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>2</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KASAR<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kasag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible salt-water @crab growing to 4". <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] catch <ix>kasag</ix>.

<p><b>kasáhus</b> = <sc>KUSÁHUS</sc>.

<p><b>kasal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wedding. <b>2</b> taking of vows by a nun. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] officiate marriage rites. <i>Ang misiyun mukasal sa mga magtiáyung mansibádu</i>, The missionary priest will marry the common-law <pb n=451>couples. <i>Daghan ang kaslun basta Hunyu,</i> Many people get married in the month of June. <b>2</b> [a12] for a nun to take her @{final vows}. <i>Gikasal na ang madri,</i> The nun has taken her final vows. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> intense wedding activity. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [AC12; c] marry s.o. <i>Kinahanglang mupakasal siya nímu kay burus ka,</i> He should marry you because you're pregnant. <i>Íyang gipakaslan ang babáying íyang napaangkan,</i> He married the woman who had borne him a child out of wed-*lock. <i>Ipakasal nà sila,</i> Have them get married. <b>kasádu</b> <b>1</b> having gone through a @marriage ceremony. <i>Mansibádu ang ákung ginikánan kay dílì kasádu (kinasal),</i> My parents are common-law husband and wife. They have not been married. <b>2</b> @married, as opposed to divorced or single. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>KASÁDU</sc>, 1. <b>kaslunun, kalaslun</b> <i>n</i> s.o. about to be married. <b>kasamintu, kasamyintu</b> <i>n</i> state of being officially married. <i>Ang kasamintu dílì garantíya sa malipáyung panagpúyù,</i> It's no guarantee that you will be happy living together, just because you have been officially married.

<p><b>kasaníhan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*SÁNI<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>kasap</b> <i>a</i> not being able to taste. <i>v</i> [B; b6] get to be so one can't taste a thing. <i>Mukasap ang bàbà basta kahilanatun ta,</i> One loses his sense of taste when there is an incipient fever.

<p><b>kasapuygu</b> <i>n</i> a @{box of matches}.

<p><b>kasar<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @load or @cock a gun. <i>Nagkasar siyang dáan kay nahadluk siyag hiunhan,</i> He loaded his gun beforehand because he was afraid he would be shot at first. <i>Gikasar níya ang pistúla ug gitan-aw kun dúna bay bála,</i> He cocked his pistol and looked to see if it had bullets in it. <b>kasádu</b> <i>a</i> for guns to be loaded.

<p><b>kasar<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] put up money for a bet, see s.o.'s @bet. <i>Mukasar kug dusintus. Mudáwat ka?</i> I'll bet two hundred. Do you accept? <i>Kasdan ku ang ímung mil,</i> I'll accept your thousand-peso bet. <b>kasádu</b> <i>n</i> amount put down in a bet. <i>Pilay kasádu ninyu?</i> How much money is involved in the betting? a for a bet to be finalized. <i>Kasádu na. Dì na ta makabakwì,</i> The bet's been made. We can't get out of it. <i>v</i> [AC; a2] make it a bet, bet money against each other. <i>Nakigkasádu kug milyunaryu,</i> I bet against a millionaire. <i>Hinúgay nang ímung hambug. Kasadúhun nátù,</i> That's enough of your big talk. Let's make it a bet.

<p><b>kásaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make noise by @splashing water. <i>Wà siyay kuhà kay dinhay nagkásaw,</i> He didn't make a single catch because s.o. was splashing.

<p><b>kasba<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @eat greedily like a pig. <i>Nakakasba ka na, mangáyù pa giyud,</i> You have already eaten, but you are asking for more. <i>Gikasba sa bábuy ang ákung kamutihan,</i> The pigs chewed up our sweet potato garden.

<p><b>kasba<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AC; ab2] for animals to @mate, or (applied vulgarly) for people to do so. <i>Pakasbahun ang ámung butakal sa ímung anay,</i> We'll have our male mate with your sow.

<p><b>kasbu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @heron that eats rice: <b><i>Nycticorax caledomicus</i></b>.

<p><b>kási<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> @almost all, nearly all. <i>Kási sa mga istudiyanti nakabayad,</i> Nearly all of the students have paid. <i>Kási sa (ang) mga nagpuyù dinhi dátù,</i> Almost everyone who lives here is rich. <b>kasikási</b> = <sc>KÁSI<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kási<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] make or take on a @bet, make it a bet, bet with each other. <i>Nagkási sila. Siya didtu kang Markus ug ang usa kang Sirhing,</i> They made a bet. He was for Marcos and the other one was for Serging. <i>Kasíhi siya, ambi mukasar ba,</i> Bet him. Let's see if he takes it. <i>Ikási ang ákung kwarta sa manuk níya,</i> Bet my money on his cock. <i>n</i> @bet made.

<p><b>kasibáya</b> = <sc>KISIBÁYA</sc>.

<p><b>kasíkas</b> = <sc>KALASÍKAS</sc>.

<p><b>kasíli<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>BAIS</sc>.

<p><b>kasíli<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @darter: <b><i>Anhinga melanogaster</i></b>.

<p><b>kasílik</b> <i>n</i> general name for @wrasses.

<p><b>kasilyas</b> <i>n</i> @toilet, room with a toilet in it. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] build a toilet, @bathroom. <i>a</i> nothing as compared to. <i>Kasilyas lang ang Sibu sa Manílà,</i> Cebu is nothing compared to Manila. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go to the toilet. <i>Hulat únà kay mangasilyas pa ku,</i> Wait a moment. I'm going to the toilet. <b>kasilyíru</b> <i>n</i> a person hired to empty the septic tank or a toilet hole of its contents. <i>v</i> [B136] be a <ix>kasilyíru</ix>.

<p><b>kasing</b> <i>n</i> @top. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a top. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> game of playing with a top. <i>v</i> [AC; b6(1)] play with a top. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> shaped like a top. <i>Talabánug nga kinasing,</i> Kite shaped somewhat like a top. <b>kasingkásing</b> <i>n</i> @heart. <i>Laming adubáwhun ang kasingkásing,</i> Heart tastes good stewed in soy sauce. <i>Dakung haw-ang sa ákung kasingkásing,</i> A feeling of emptiness in my heart. <i>Tigpatantu nga way kasingkásing,</i> A heartless money-lender. <b>gastu ang &mdash;</b> = <sc>GASTU ANG KUNSINSIYA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUNSINSIYA</sc>. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @sincere. <i>Kinasingkásing ang íyang pahalípay,</i> He was sincere in his congratulations. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @kindhearted. <b>2</b> @heartless. <i>Nakaáku pagbíyà sa íyang mga anak, kasingkasíngang amahána,</i> He could actually abandon his children. What a heartless father! <b>2a</b> iron-nerved, stouthearted. <pb n=452><i>Kasingkasíngan giyung duktúra kay nakaáku pag-upira sa kaugalíngun níyang asáwa</i>, He's a very stouthearted doctor because he can operate on his own wife.

<p><b>kasíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who gets room and board. <b>2</b> amount paid for room and board. <i>v</i> [A; c] board s.w. <i>Balay nga íyang gikasiráhan</i>, The house he is boarding at. <i>Háin mu ikasíra ang ímung anak?</i> Where did you have your child board? <b>kasirahan</b> <i>n</i> @{boarding house}.

<p><b>kasirúla</b> <i>n</i> a covered @saucepan with a long handle or with ear-like handles at the sides.

<p><b>kasíyu</b> = <sc>KISÍYU</sc>.

<p><b>kaskádu</b> = <sc>KASKÁRU</sc>.

<p><b>kaskáru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to skin infections characterized by numerous sores. <b>2</b> scaly skin infection caused by ringworm. <i>v</i> [B126; a4b4] be, become affected with this k.o. skin disease.

<p><b>kaskas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{dig in}, scratch to get a foothold. <i>Makakaskas kining ligíra bísan dangug ang dálan</i>, This k.o. tire can hold even on a slippery road. <b>2</b> [A23N] @strive hard, make great efforts. <i>Mukaskas (mangaskas) ku karun myintras bátà pa</i>, I'll strive hard and make use of my time now while I'm still young. <i>n</i> activities, intense work. <i>Ímu ra man ang tanang kaskas dinhi</i>, You are the one doing all the work here.

<p><b>kaskas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @strum a guitar. <i>Kaskása ang sista kay musáyaw ku</i>, @{Play the guitar} because I'm going to dance. <i>n</i> action of strumming. <i>Akung kaskas, ákung sáyaw</i>, Why do I have to do everything around here? (Lit. It's my strumming and my dance.)

<p><b>kaskas<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @uproot vines to clear an area. <i>Kaskása ang kamutihan</i>, Clear off the sweet potato patch.

<p><b>*kaskas<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @mesentery, the membranes which enfold the intestines and their appendages and connect to the dorsal wall of the abdominal cavity. It is used to wrap <ix>murkun</ix>.

<p><b>kaskas<hi rend=sub>5</i></b> = <sc>KALASKAS</sc>.

<p><b>kaskás</b> = <sc>KALASKÁLAS</sc>.

<p><b>kasku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the @framework and the main structure of s.t. without appendages. <i>Kasku sa sakayan</i>, The hull of the boat. Kasku sa kutsi, The body of the car. <i>Kasku sa táwu</i>, The torso of a man. <i>Kasku sa muskitíru</i>, Walling of the mosquito net. <b>2</b> a blunt-bowed wooden boat with square stern about 30' long, towed or with a sail, used for lightering or for river or coastal transport. It is so called because it consists of little more than a hull. <i>v</i> [A; a] build the basic structure of s.t., use as the basic structure. <i>Wà pa ku makakasku sa ákung muskitíru kay wà pa kuy ilangitlángit</i>, I haven't made the sides of the mosquito net because I don't have materials for the top.

<p><b>kaskug</b> <i>v</i> [A12] muster enough strength to move or to do s.t. <i>Dì pa makakaskug sa pagbángun ang masakitun</i>, The patient doesn't have enough strength to get up out of bed.

<p><b>kasla</b> = <sc>TUBATUBA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>TÚBA</sc>.

<p><b>kaspa</b> <i>n</i> @dandruff. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get dandruff. <b>kaspahun</b> <i>a</i> having dandruff.

<p><b>kaspag</b> <i>a</i> for hair to be dry. <i>Brilyantíni ang ímung buhuk kay kaspag kaáyu</i>, Put brilliantine on your hair because it is very dry. <i>v</i> [B] for hair to become dry.

<p><b>kaspat</b> = <sc>KAMPAT</sc>.

<p><b>kasta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] for animals to @mount in copulation. <i>Ug mukasta ang báka sa láing báka, nag-ulag na</i>, When the cow mounts another, it means she's in heat. <b>2</b> [A] have @{sexual intercourse}, @copulate (derogatory).<i> Hígal kaáyung tawhána. Mukasta bisag unsang bayhána</i>, He's over-sexed. He'll go to bed with anybody.

<p><b>kastanits</b> = <sc>KASTANYAS</sc>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>kastanyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chestnut. <b>2</b> @castanets. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a1] make into castanets. <b>2</b> [A; b6] use castanets.

<p><b>kastanyíta, kastanyítas</b> = <sc>KASTANYAS</sc>, <b>2</b>.

<p><b>kast&acaron;r</b> = <sc>KASTA</sc>.

<p><b>kastígu</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @{inflict punishment} on s.o., usually physical. <i>Ginadilì sa maistru ang pagkastígu sa istudiyanti</i>, It is forbidden for teachers to inflict physical punishment on their students. <i>n</i> physical @punishment. <b>&mdash; hiniral</b> punishment meted to all in a group, without distinction. <b>kinastiguhan</b> <i>n</i> manner of inflicting punishment.

<p><b>kastílà</b> = <sc>KATSÍLÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kastilya</b> <i>n</i> @Castile. <b>kastilyanhun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Castillian. <b>2</b> Castillian speech.

<p><b>kastilyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @castle. <b>2</b> ornate @fireworks, pyrotechnical display. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b] display fireworks. <b>2</b> [a12] make into pyrotechnic firework.[**fireworks]

<p><b>kastur úwil</b> <i>n</i> @{Castor oil}.

<p><b>kastus</b> <i>n</i> @celibate. <i>Ang mga munghi mga kastus, Monks are celibates</i>. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] be, become a celibate, take the vow of chastity or celibacy.

<p><b>kásu</b> <i>n</i> @case, @suit. <b>palit ug &mdash;</b> get dragged into a case. <b>way &mdash;</b> nothing serious. <i>Síging bayli kay way kásu</i>, On with the dance because there's nothing serious. <i>v</i> [A23C; b3c1] make a legal case. <i>Magkakásu giyud kamu kun dílì mu magkasinábut</i>, You will have to go to court if you can't come to an understanding. <i>Makásu giyud nang yutáa <pb n=453>kay way mga dukumintu</i>, That property will become a matter of legal dispute because the papers are not in order. <i>Pára singku sintábus kasúhun pa giyud nà?</i> You want to make a federal case out of a nickel? <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] get involved in a lawsuit. <i>Kun mangásu ka kinahanglan hustu ka sa bulsa</i>, If you get involved in a lawsuit, you must have enough money. <i>Hitabù nga gipangasúhan</i>, Incident that was the subject of a lawsuit. <b>ing-, pur-ing-</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>INGKÁSU</sc>.

<p><b>kasulya</b> <i>n</i> @chasuble. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] have, put on a chasuble. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a chasuble.

<p><b>kasuy</b> <i>n</i> @cashew: <b><i>Anacardium occidentale</i></b>.

<p><b>kaswal</b> <i>n</i> @{casual worker}, government worker employed with no permanent appointment.

<p><b>kasway</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. deep-sea @crab about the same size as the <ix>langbay</ix> and with longer claws. <i>Parti na gánì sa nigusyu kasway nà sa lápuk, hínay nga mangapay, lagsik mamiluk</i>, When it comes to business, he is like a crab in the mud: he moves slowly but his eyes are constantly blinking (i.e. he is alert). <b>2</b> crab legs. <i>Walu ang kasway sa langbay</i>, Sea crabs have eight legs. <b>3</b> limbs of people. <i>Tag-as ug kasway ang taas nga táwu</i>, A tall person has long limbs.

<p><b>kasya<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> traces of the harness of a plow. <i>v</i> [A; a] use as the traces in a plow. <b>kasyahun</b> <i>n</i> rope to be used as trace in a plow.

<p><b>kasya<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>AKASYA</sc>.

<p><b>kasyahan</b> = <sc>AKASYAHAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>AKASYA</sc>.

<p><b>kasyúti, kasyútis</b> = <sc>SAYÚTI</sc>.

<p><b>kát<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] take or give a @cut from an amount of money due s.o. <i>Kátan sa ahinti ang halin</i>, The agent will take a cut from the proceeds. <i>Kátan ang ahinti ug dyís pursintu</i>, The agent will get a cut of ten percent. <b>2</b> [A; a] cut playing cards. <i>Kátun ang baráha paghumag saksak</i>, The deck of cards is cut after it is shuffled. <b>3</b> [A; a] for a movie to have s.t. cut out of it. <i>Gikát sa sinsur ang hílas nga parti</i>, The lewd scenes were cut out by the censors. <b>3a</b> [A; a12] stop a recording to correct an error by re-recording. <b>4</b> [A; a2] cut the ball in table tennis, hitting it with the edge of the paddle to make it spin. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one's share in a deal, commission. <b>2</b> action of cutting in cards or table tennis. <b>3</b> portions of a movie removed by the censors. <b>4</b> recording. <i>Maáyu kaáyu mukanta. Usa lang ka kát, úki na</i>, He is really a good singer. Just one recording, and it is O.K. <b>4a</b> single side of a record.

<p><b>kát<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KÁLAT<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i></sc>.

<p><b>káta</b> <i>a</i> for sounds to be rapid, in quick succession. <i>Kátà lang ininglis níya!</i> He talks English so fast! <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; c1] talk rapidly. <i>Mikátà lag tabian ay</i>, There's the babbler talking at full speed. <i>Ug katáun (ikátà) nákù ang ákung sinultihan, dì mu kasabut</i>, If I talk rapidly, you won't understand. <b>2</b> [B3(1)6] make a series of sharp short sounds in quick succession. <i>Mikátà ang masinggan</i>, The machine guns rattled. <i>Makakátà gánì ang makinilya</i>, If the typewriter makes a rapid popping noise. <i>Mikátà na ang ákung gilung-ag ságing</i>, The bananas I'm cooking are bubbling now. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> talking rapidly.

<p><b>kátab</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac1] @chatter, @{talk rapidly} about s.t. trivial and not sensible. <i>Nagkátab ang bàbà sa tabì</i>, She's running off at the mouth with gossip. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> given to chattering.

<p><b>katabuk</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{sweet potato} with reddish peelings and white, not prized meat.

<p><b>katadkatad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{stamp one's feet} in anger or in a tantrum. <i>Mikatadkatad ang bátang gustung muuban</i>, The child stamped his feet because he wanted to go along.

<p><b>kátag</b> <i>v</i> [AB16; c1] @spread, @scatter out, cause s.t. to be scattered. <i>Ngánung nagkátag mu dihà. Tápuk mu ngari</i>, Why are you scattered out all over? Come in close here. <i>Ikaw nagkátag sa mais sa bululáran?</i> Was it you that spread the corn out on the drying tray? <i>n</i> <ix>how good one is in s.t.</ix>: one's ability as it appears after being tested in competition. <i>Hawud aku sa Pámas. Makatulu nga bist aktur. Kanà ang kátag ku</i>, I'm one of the top actors. I won the FAMAS award as best actor three times. That's how good I am.

<p><b>katakáta</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for s.o. to be too eager to do work no one told him to do. <i>Katakáta ka man giyung mudáru. Hala tiwasag dáru tung umahan</i>, You have been wanting to plow so much, so go ahead, plow the whole field. <b>2</b> daring to do s.t. one is not supposed to do. <i>Katakáta giyud ning bayhána mulakaw magabíi nga mag-inusára</i>, This woman is daring. She goes out all alone at night. <i>v</i> [A13P] take s.t. onto oneself one shouldn't. <i>Kinsay nagkatakáta (nagpakatakáta) ug lútù niíning bábuy nga wà may mandù nga lutúun?</i> Who went and cooked this pork when nobody told you to do it?

<p><b>katála<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @{monkey wrench} with straight gripping edges as opposed to one with curved grips (<i>yábi túbu</i>). <i>v</i> [A; a2] use a monkey wrench on.

<p><b>katála<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> k.o. white @parrot with a red beak.

<p><b>katalagman</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TAGAM</sc>.

<p><b>katalug, katalugu</b> <i>n</i> @catalog, esp. of fashion design. <i>v</i> [A13; c1] compile or make a catalog.

<p><b>katambak</b> <i>n</i> general name for porgies and <pb n=454>sheepheads, esp. <b><i>Lethrinus spp.</i></b>, and also loosely given to fish of similar appearance such as <b><i>Monotaxis grandoculis</i></b>.

<p><b>katang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible fresh-water @crab growing to 4" by 3", dark brownish-green in color.

<p><b>kátap</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] @spread all over. <i>Mikátap ang mga táwu sa plása</i>, People were all over the plaza. <i>Ang usa ka galun nga pintal dílì makakátap sa pisami</i>, A gallon of paint will not cover the entire ceiling. <b>2</b> [B] for vision or reasoning powers to be @blurred. <i>Nagkátap ang ákung tinan-awan sa mga lúhà</i>, My vision was not clear because of my tears. <i>Mikátap ang íyang hunàhúnà sa hilabihang kasábà</i>, He couldn't think clearly because of the incessant din. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> be spread widely. <i>Kátap kaáyu ang balità</i>, The news spread widely. <b>2</b> for vision or thoughts to get blurred.

<p><b>katarak, kataráta</b> <i>n</i> @cataract of the eyes.

<p><b>kataru</b> <i>n</i> @cough. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] have a cough.

<p><b>kataw</b> <i>n</i> supernatural sea creatures with the head and trunk of a beautiful woman and the tail of a fish, which play practical jokes on fishermen, kidnap them, or drive them crazy. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] for a <ix>kataw</ix> to annoy a fisherman. <i>Dúna kunuy nagkataw ni Pidru sa íyang pagpamasul gabíi</i>, They say a @mermaid took an interest in Peter (played jokes or tried to lure him) last night while he was fishing. <i>Gikataw nà siya maung nabúang</i>, A mermaid went after him, and that's why he went crazy.

<p><b>katáwa</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TAWA</sc>.

<p><b>kátay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b(1)] for plants to @creep or @climb onto s.t. <i>Nakakátay na ang kamúti sa tibuuk baul</i>, The sweet potato vines have spread all over the field. <i>Ang kural nga gikatáyan sa bágun</i>, The fence the vines were climbing on. <b>2</b> [B3(1)6; aP] for news, fire, and the like to spread. <i>Mikátay dáyun ang balità</i>, The news spread quickly all over the place. <i>Dakùdakung lunà ang gikatáyan sa súnug</i>, The fire spread over a wide area. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> longhand writing. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for s.t. to trail in a scattered way behind s.t. moving forward. <i>Nagkakátay ang tinái sa hidunggaban</i>, The intestines of the stabbing victim trailed behind him. <b>-an(->), -ánan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. on which vines climb.

<p><b>káti, kátì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] set s.t. into motion by providing a stimulus or catalyst. <b>1a</b> @use, @lure s.t. with a decoy or lure in hunting or fishing. <i>Katíhun nákù ang núkus íning uwang-úwang</i>, I'll lure squids with this artificial shrimp. <i>Kining ákung sunuy mauy ikáti sa mga ihás manuk</i>, We'll use my cock to lure wild chickens. <b>1b</b> [A13SN; a12] win a big amount in gambling with a small starting bet. <i>Nakakati (nakapangati) giyud kug bayinti sa ákung písu</i>, I managed to win twenty pesos with my one peso. <b>2</b> [A; b5] @{prime a pump} by pouring water in until suction is established. <i>Dílì muágay nang bumbáha ug dílì katíhun (katíhan)</i>, That pump won't work unless it is primed. <b>2a</b> [A; a] @{induce vomiting}. <i>Katía ang íyang pagsúka arun isúka ang hilu</i>, Induce him to vomit so that he will vomit out the poison. <b>2b</b> [A; a] remove water that has gotten into the ears by priming with warm water. <i>Kinahanglan inadlaw ang túbig nga mukáti sa túbig nga nahasulud sa dalunggan</i>, Use warm water to get the rest of the water inside your ears out. <b>3</b> [A3P; a1] @{stir up emotions}. <i>Bantay ka lang sa ímung kakiriwan. Magkáti ka lang sa ákung pangísug</i>, You'd better stop touching my things. You might stir up my anger. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> decoy. <b>2</b> water used to prime a water pump. <b>katihan, paN-</b> <i>n</i> @decoy, @lure in fishing. <b>katihanan</b> <i>n</i> place where one catches or traps game or fish by using a decoy or lure. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> person who traps game. <b>katikatiun, katìkatiun, katikatihun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a woman to be @provocative. <i>Kanang bayhána katikatiun kaáyu sa íyang míni nga sinínà</i>, That woman is provocative in her miniskirt. <b>2</b> inciting trouble, butting in to create trouble. <i>Katìkatiun kang pagkatáwu. Dalì ra kang makaagig áway</i>, You're such a trouble-maker. It doesn't take you long to find a quarrel.

<p><b>katíbu</b> <i>n</i> children's game of tag played by two. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] play <ix>katíbu</ix>.

<p><b>katidral</b> <i>n</i> @cathedral.

<p><b>kátids</b> <i>n</i> @{vacation home}, house in the mountains or on the beach where one spends one's leisure time. <i>v</i> [A13] have a vacation house.

<p><b>kátids indastri</b> <i>n</i> @{cottage industry}.

<p><b>kátig</b> <i>n</i> float of the outrigger. <i>v</i> [A; a] provide a boat with outriggers. <i>Gikatígan na ang sakayan</i>, The floats are being put up now.

<p><b>katigbì</b> = <sc>ÍLAS</sc>.

<p><b>katiguríya</b> <i>n</i> @category. <i>v</i> [c1] place in a class or category.

<p><b>katíkat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{climb up} s.t. vertical using both hands and feet. <i>Nahadluk kung mukatíkat sa bintánà</i>, I'm afraid to climb through the window. <i>Katikáta kanang hinug kapáyas</i>, Climb up to get those ripe papayas.

<p><b>katikati</b> <i>n</i> @doodlebug, larva of the ant lion.

<p><b>katikismu</b> <i>n</i> @catechism. <i>v</i> [A13] hold a catechism class.

<p><b>katikista</b> <i>n</i> a person who teaches the fundamentals of religion. <i>v</i> [AB16; a12] be a catechist.

<pb n=455>

<p><b>katisismu</b> = <sc>KATIKISMU</sc>.

<p><b>katimpa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large @{sweet potato} with white peelings and yellowish meat, rather dry and good eating.

<p><b>kátin</b> <i>a</i> for things to be suspended or hanging higher than the normal level. <i>Iubus-ubus paghikut ang muskitíru, kátin ra kaáyu</i>, Hang the mosquito net a little lower. Its edges are too high. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] hang, be suspended in mid-air or not hanging down as far as the normal level. <i>Mikátin (nakátin) ang íyang sinínà kay mabdus man siya</i>, Her dress is kind of up in the front because she is pregnant. <b>udtung &mdash;, &mdash; ang búlan</b> half-moon in the last quarter (so called because the moon is high in the sky at daybreak).

<p><b>kat-in</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @{cut in in a dance}. <i>Maglágut ku ug kat-ínan ta</i>, I get irritated if s.o. cuts in on me. <b>2</b> [A; c] @insert s.t. in its proper place in a file or series. <i>Ikat-in ring bulyúma sa láray sa insayklupidiya</i>, Replace this volume in its proper place in the row of encyclopedias.

<p><b>káting</b> <i>n</i> @cuttings of plants to be propagated. <i>Wà gyud kuy pinalit niíning ákung mga tanum. Pulus ni káting nga ákung pinangáyù</i>, I didn't buy any plants. They all come from cuttings that I got from my friends.

<p><b>káting klásis</b> <i>v</i> [A] @{cut classes}. <i>Gisuspind ang iskuylang nagkáting klásis</i>, The student got suspended for cutting classes.

<p><b>katípa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. freshwater @catfish of swamps, dark brown with venomous spines at the base of the pectoral fin. Edible, but not prized.

<p><b>katípan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dark brown, very hard-shelled @cowries up to 3" (k.o. <ix>sigay</ix>): the hump-*back and snake-head cowries.

<p><b>katipúnan, katipuníru</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TÍPUN</sc>.

<p><b>kátir<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> cutter in a tailoring shop. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be a cutter in a tailoring shop.

<p><b>kátir<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @cater food for a party. <i>Mukátir mi ug náay kaslun</i>, We cater to weddings. <b>2</b> [AP; acP] hire a caterer. <i>Sa átung parti magkátir (magpakátir) lang ta arun way hikayhíkay</i>, For our party let's just get a caterer so we won't have to prepare.&dagger;

<p><b>kátir<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> @{coast guard cutter}.

<p><b>katitir</b> <i>n</i> @catheter. <i>v</i> [A; bc5] insert a catheter into, catheterize s.o.

<p><b>katkat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @undo s.t. sewn or crocheted. <i>Ang sastri nagkatkat sa karsúnis nga usbunun</i>, The tailor undid the seams of the pants to be altered. <i>Katkáta ang tahì sa atup</i>, Undo the shingles of the roof. <i>Nakatkat ang atup sa hángin</i>, The roof came off in the wind.

<p><b>katkat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KALATKAT</sc>.

<p><b>katmun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @fruit.

<p><b>katri</b> <i>n</i> @bed. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b] lie on a bed. <i>Dílì siya makatulug kun dílì magkatri</i>, She can't sleep unless she lies on a bed. <b>2</b> [a12] be made into a bed.

<p><b>katsa</b> <i>n</i> unbleached muslin cloth.

<p><b>katsap</b> = <sc>KITSAP</sc>.

<p><b>katsaw</b> <i>n</i> secondary rafters, beams which slope from the ridgepole down to the eaves, to which nipa shingles are attached. The <ix>katsaw</ix> are smaller than the primary rafters (<ix>salagunting</ix>). <i>v</i> [A; b6] put or attach secondary rafters to s.t.

<p><b>katsílà</b> <i>n</i> @Spaniard. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> like the Spaniards. <i>Kinatsilang batásan</i>, Strict and hard in discipline (like the Spaniards). <b>2</b> the Spanish language. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c1] do s.t. like a Spaniard. <b>2</b> [A; a2] speak, write Spanish. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> Spanish-like. <i>Katsiláun nga ilung</i>, Spanish nose.

<p><b>katsir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @catcher in baseball. <b>2</b> a woman who tends to get pregnant. <i>Katsir kanang bayhána. Dílì hisaghirag bahag</i>, That woman is very fertile. You must have to look at her to get her pregnant. <b>3</b> a woman who will accept any suitor if she can get s.t. from him. <b>4</b> a person that hangs around restaurants to pick up the leavings of the diners. <b>4a</b> fish that eats anything. <i>Ang bugáung katsir kaáyu<corr sic=".">,</corr></i> Jarbua is a fish that eats excrement. <b>5</b> not missing out on any gossip. <i>Katsir kaáyung bayhána. Dì masipyatag tabì</i>, That lady is good at ferreting out gossip. <i>v</i> [B56; a2] be, become a catcher in baseball, softball.

<p><b>katsúrì</b> (from <ix>katsílà</ix>) <i>n</i> Filipino with Spanish blood (derogatory). <i>Kining katsúrì ay. Patuutúug kinatsilà</i>, That half-breed! He thinks he can talk Spanish!

<p><b>katu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{dog tick}. <i>v</i> [A123P] be infested with dog ticks.

<p><b>katu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> fast speech for <ix>kadtu</ix>.

<p><b>katù &mdash; ang úlu</b> a little @deranged. <i>May katù ang úlu sa ímung anak kay mukáun ug sabun</i>, Your son must be a bit deranged because he eats soap.

<p><b>kátù</b> <i>v</i> [A13B; b4] for dirt to cake on s.t., have dirt caked on it. <i>Nagkátù (gikatúan) lang ang lamísa sa abug</i>, The table is thick with dust on it. <i>Nagkátù ang buling sa kwilyu</i>, The collar is caked with dirt. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> be dirty or untidy in one's clothing. <i>Katù nà siyang mamistibisti</i>, She dresses in a dirty and shabby way. <b>katùkatù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] make s.t. very dirty, untidy. <i>Ayaw mug katùkatù sa sála kay dúna tay bisíta</i>, Don't make the parlor untidy because we are going to have <pb n=456>visitors. <i>Dì ku mulaba sa ímung sinínà ug ímung katùkatuun (katùkatuan)</i>, I won't wash your clothes if you make them very dirty.

<p><b>kátud</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] have lots of dirt sticking to it. <i>Mukátud ang bisti ug dúgayng hubúun</i>, The dress will become very dirty if you do not change it for a long time. <i>Kaligúa nang anak mu kay nagkátud na</i>, Bathe your child. He is filthy.

<p><b>katuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @conk s.o. on the head. <i>Katuka siya sa martilyu</i>, Conk him with a hammer. <b>2</b> [B2; b6] become stupid, slow to understand and lacking in sense (as if having been hit on the head). <i>Mukatuk siya kun higutman pag-áyu</i>, He gets so he doesn't understand readily when he is very hungry. <i>n</i> blow delivered on the head. <i>a</i> lacking in good sense as if one has been conked on the head.

<p><b>katukà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large @{sweet potato} with reddish peelings and white meat, too dry for good eating.

<p><b>katukatu</b> <i>n</i> @{common sense}, ability to reason, knowledge. <i>Dílì ka makasabut? Háin gud nang ímung katukatu?</i> You can't understand? Where's your head? <i>Wà giyud nay katukatung bayhána kay wà katunub ug iskuyláhan</i>, That woman is illiterate because she hasn't gone to school.

<p><b>katul<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @itchy. <i>Katul ákung kamut. Kwarta na</i>, My hands are itching. I must be due to get some money. <b>1a</b> having a social disease (lit. having an itch). <i>Ug katul ang gamítun nímung babáyi ...</i>, If you happen to have sexual contact with a woman who has the itches.... <b>2</b> causing itch. <i>Katul ang dápaw sa mais</i>, The hairs on corn plants are itchy. <b>&mdash; ug kamut</b> <i>a</i> having hands that itch to steal. <i>v</i> [AN; b4] <b>1</b> itch, feel itchy. <i>Mukatul ang ákung pánit ug abugan</i>, My skin itches if dust gets on it. <i>Nangálut siya sa bukubuku kay gikatlan</i>, He is scratching his back because he itches. <b>2</b> feel a restless desire or craving to do s.t. <i>Makabatì gánì kug tukar, katlan dáyun ku</i>, Whenever I hear music, I feel the itch (to dance). <b>2a</b> [b8] feel the itch to have sex. <i>Ug katlan ka, pangrílis</i>, If you feel the urge, go to the <i>rílis</i> (red light district). <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b4] itch intensely. <b>katulkatul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> skin disease that itches. <b>2</b> s.t. which is enough to stimulate, but not satisfy and then displeases because it is inadequate. <i>Mu ra nay ihátag mung kwarta? Nagkatulkatul lang nà nákù</i>, Is that all you're giving me? It just makes me itch. It isn't enough to satisfy.

<p><b>katul<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> mosquito repellent in coil form, burnt to give off smoke (from the brand name <ix>Katul</ix>). <i>v</i> [A13] burn a mosquito coil.

<p><b>katulik dipindir</b> <i>n</i> @{Catholic Defenders}, an organization sworn to defend the Roman Catholic church against attacks from within or without. <i>v</i> [B156] be a member of the Catholic Defenders.

<p><b>Katulika</b> <i>n</i> @{Roman Catholic} (female).

<p><b>katuliku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{Roman Catholic religion}. <b>2</b> a Roman Catholic. <i>v</i> [B1; a12] become a Roman Catholic.

<p><b>katulisismu</b> <i>n</i> @Catholicism.

<p><b>katumsan</b> = <sc>PATUMSAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>TUMUS</sc>.

<p><b>kat-un</b> (from <ix>tuun</ix>) <i>v</i> [B36; b8] @learn to do s.t. <i>Makat-un ka pagmakinilya kun magsígi kag praktis</i>, You will learn to type by constant practice. <i>Walà ka giyuy nakat-unan didtu</i>, You learned nothing there.

<p><b>katunggan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TUNGUG</sc>.

<p><b>katursa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> reddish fish about an inch long with fine scales, rough skin, eaten stewed in vinegar or fermented, preserved in salt.

<p><b>katursa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> variety of short-term paddy rice with large reddish or white grains.

<p><b>katursi</b> <i>n</i> @fourteen. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>katyális</b> <i>n</i> brand name of a medicinal ointment for skin diseases.

<p><b>katyubung</b> <i>n</i> k.o. coarse herb of waste places and cultivated for its long, white, trumpet-shaped flowers, which are burnt for the treatment of asthma: <b><i>Datura metel</i></b>.

<p><b>kaub</b> <i>v</i> [AB36; c1] @{lie down} on one's belly, be turned over, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mukámang na ang bátà kay makakaub na</i>, The baby will soon be able to crawl because it can turn over now. <i>Nakaub ang sakayang gihampak sa balud</i>, The boat was turned over when it was lashed by big waves. <i>Gikauban níya sa kaldíru ang íyang bánang libudsuruy</i>, She left no food for her good-for-nothing husband (lit. she turned the pot upside down on him).

<p><b>kaug</b> <i>a</i> @active, @lively in movement of body. <i>Kaug kaáyu ning batáa. Dílì mahamutang</i>, This child is very active. He cannot keep still. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] be, become or act lively. <i>Nagkakaug ang sáyaw nunut sa sunáta</i>, The dance is getting lively together with the music. <b>2</b> [A; c1] make s.t. at rest move by touching it, touch s.t. and disturb it. <i>Dúnay nagkaug sa gipaugang pinintal nga laráwan</i>, S.o. touched the portrait before it had a chance to dry. <i>Ayaw kauga (ikaug) ang lamísa arun dì mahíwì ang ákung gibágis</i>, Do not shake the table so the line I'm drawing won't get crooked. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B] be intensely active or misbehaving by moving about. <pb n=457><i>Nagkáug ang mga bátà samtang milakaw ang maistra</i>, The children misbehaved and ran about while the teacher was out of the room.

<p><b>kaugalíngun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>UGÁLING</sc>.

<p><b>káun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S3S; a] @eat. <i>Nagkaun ka na?</i> Have you eaten? <i>Nakakaun na kug amù</i>, I have eaten monkey meat. <i>Unsa may kan-un sa masakitun?</i> What should the patient eat now? <b>1a</b> [a3] be eaten to get one to act in an unusual way. <i>Unsay nakáun sa táwu? Mangúhit man</i>, What got into you that you touched me? <b>2</b> [A; a2] @destroy by fire, erosion, corrosion. <i>Ang asidu mukáun ug tayà</i>, Acid eats away rust. <i>Ang balay gikaun sa kaláyu</i>, The house was destroyed by the fire. <i>Nahánaw siya kay gikaun man sa kangitngit</i>, He suddenly vanished because he was engulfed in darkness. <i>Gikaun ang túbu sa tayà</i>, The pipe is corroded with rust. Dimungkug! <i>Wà uruy kan-a sa kílat</i>, The devil! Why didn't lightning strike (lit. eat) him? <i>Pangpang nga nakan-an sa balud</i>, Cliff eroded by the waves. <b>3</b> [A12] @consume, @{use up}. <i>Ang ímung plansa mukáun ug dakung kurinti</i>, Your iron consumes a lot of electricity. <b>4</b> [A; ab7] take a man in games of chess, checkers, and the like. <i>Wà pa kan-i ang ákung mga piyun</i>, None of my pawns has been captured yet. <b>4a</b> [b48] when one returns the shuttlecock in <ix>takyan</ix> (by kicking it), for the return kick to be caught and kicked by the opponent. <i>Hikan-an ang ákung pátid kay ang ákung patid napatiran níya. Sa átù pa, hikan-an ku</i>, My kick was returned (lit. eaten) because he returned the shuttlecock when I kicked it. In other words, I had my kick returned. <b>5</b> [A] for a man to have sexual relations with a blood relative. <i>Háyup ka mukáun kag kaugalíngung anak</i>, You're a beast. You have intercourse with your own child. <b>5a</b> [a3] for a girl to be old enough to be had for sexual intercourse. <b>6</b> [b4] for a fish to bite on one's line. <i>Wà ku kan-i gabíi</i>, I didn't get a bite last night. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> food served. <i>Sa míting adúna usáhay puy káun</i>, In the meeting they sometimes serve food. <i>Sa pagpabulan lábut na ang káun</i>, If you work as a maid, food is included. <b>1a</b> action of eating. <i>Tris díyas kung way káun</i>, I went three days without food. <b>2</b> consumption, amount of s.t. that is used up. <i>Dakug káun sa gasulína ning kutsíha</i>, This car consumes a lot of gas. <b>3</b> <ix>in games of chess, checkers or drafts</ix>: a turn to take an opponent's man. <i>Ákung káun, kúhà na ang ímung dáma</i>, Now it's my move to take your man. I have your king. <b>3a</b> action of taking a piece in mahjong which another player had discarded. <b>4</b> biting of fish. <i>Kúsug ang káun sa isdà run</i>, The fish are biting in force. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @feed, give to eat. <i>Pakan-a na ang mga bátà</i>, Feed the children. <i>Unsay átung ipakáun níla?</i> What shall we give them to eat? <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. fed with s.t. special on a regular basis. <i>Ákung sunuy pinakáug karni</i>, My rooster is given meat. <b>panag-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A23; a2] for several to eat. <i>Gipanagkaun sa bilat sa ílang ina</i>, The sons of bitches ate it. <b>paniN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] feed on, look for s.t. to feed on. <i>Naningáun sa kahumayan ang mga langgam</i>, The birds are feeding in the ricefield. <b>kan-anan</b> <i>v</i> [AP3] eat s.w. regularly. <b>kaunkáun, kaunkaun</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a12] eat light snacks between meals. <i>Aníay mga biskwit ug kúkis kun gustu mung magkaunkáun (magkaunkaun)</i>, Here are some biscuits and cookies for your snacks. <b>kan-anan, kalan-an</b> <i>n</i> place to eat (eating table, dining room, restaurant). <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of eating. <i>Hingáun kug mga prútas</i>, I'm fond of fruits. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. eaten, consumed. <i>Kináun sa gabas</i>, Sawdust (what was eaten by the saw). <b>kinan-an</b> <i>n</i> way of eating. <b>kakan-unun, ka-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> feel very much like eating. <i>Kakan-unun kug bága</i>, I'm so angry I could eat coals. <b>ma-</b> <i>n</i> food ready to eat. <i>Inig-ulì ni Máma, daghan siyag dáng makáun</i>, When Mom comes home, she will bring lots of food. <b>pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> meal. <i>Maáyu sab tung pagkaúna dà</i>, That was a good meal. <b>2</b> food. <i>Unsay átung pagkáun dihà?</i> What food do we have? <b>kan-un</b> <i>n</i> cooked rice or corn. <b>kalan-un</b> <b>1</b> food. <i>Kalan-un námù sa matag adlaw ihátag mu karung adláwa</i>, Give us this day our daily bread. <b>2</b> snacks. <b>-um-r-(->)</b> <i>a</i> ready to eat. <b>&mdash; ug táwu</b> be very angry. <i>Ayaw mu pagsurangsurang kay kumakaug táwu ning ákung ginháwa</i>, Don't provoke me because I'm so angry I could eat s.o. right now.

<p><b>ka-un</b> affix added to nouns which refer to a time of day or of life to form nouns which mean &lsquo;period of time that it is [so-and-so].&rsquo; <i>Kagabhíun</i>, In the evening time. <i>Manunggù ang mananagat sa sayung kabuntágun</i>, The fishermen return in the early hours of the morning. <i>Pribinihig kwarta ang ímung katigulangun</i>, Set money aside for your old age. <i>Kamatáyun</i>, @Death.

<p><b>ka-un(->)</b> <b>1</b> affix added to verbs which refer to personal feelings to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;be on the verge of, feel that one is going to do and cannot keep himself from it.&rsquo; <i>Kahilakun kaáyu ku</i>, I was on the verge of tears. <i>Kaihiun ku</i>, I have to urinate very <pb n=458>urgently. <b>1a</b> affix added to words referring to meteorological phenomena to form adjectives which mean [such-and-such] an event is about to burst forth. <i>Kaulanun kaáyu run,</i> It's just about to burst into rain now. <b>2</b> affix added to adjectives which refer to a state to form noun which refer to the achievement of the state. <i>Way katagbawun,</i> There's no satisfaction. <i>Way katapusun ning trabahúa,</i> There's no end to this job.

<p><b>kaung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KAGUNG<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kaung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>BÍGÀ<hi rend=sub>1</i>.</sc> <b>kaungkaung</b> <i>n</i> a small aroid similar to <i>bíga</i> often gathered and planted in flower pots as an ornamental.

<p><b>kaung<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> a sweet delicacy made from the young fruit of the <ix>buri</ix> palm.

<p><b>kaungkuy</b> <i>n</i> old variety of white-grained paddy rice.

<p><b>ka-unun(->)</b> alternant to the affix <ix>ka-un(->)</ix> added to roots with a short open penult where the vowel of the final syllable is dropped when affixation takes place. <i>Kakataw-unun kaáyu ku,</i> I felt very much like laughing. <i>Way kahutdunun,</i> It never runs out.

<p><b>kaw</b> short for <sc>IKAW</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>káwà</b> <i>n</i> a broad, deep @pan without a handle used for stewing, made of cast iron. <b>kawàkáwà</b> <i>n</i> concaved depression on the ground roughly having a depth and diameter of a <i>káwà</i>.

<p><b>kawáli, kawálì</b> <i>n</i> round bottomed @skillet with no handle, smaller than the <i>káwà</i>.

<p><b>káwan</b> = <sc>KALÁWAN.</sc>

<p><b>káwang</b> <i>a</i> @futile. <i>Káwang lang ang paghílak kay nahitabù na,</i> It is futile to cry because it is already over and done. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] fail, be in vain. <i>Walà makáwang ang íyang ginadamgung kalampúsan,</i> Her dreams of success were not in vain. They came true. <i>Dílì ku kawángun ang ímung kinahanglan,</i> I will never fail you if you need me.

<p><b>kawáni</b> <i>n</i> white collar @employee. <i>v</i> [B1256; b6] be, become employed. <i>Nakalit siyag kasapían sukad nakawáni sa adwána,</i> He has grown rich suddenly since he was employed at the Customs Office. <b>kawaníhan</b> <i>n</i> employees' force. <i>Kinahanglang magyunyun ang kawaníhan,</i> The employees should form a union.

<p><b>kawankawan</b> (from <ix>kaláwan</ix>) <i>v</i> [BN46] for an area to look very large because of little or scattered content. <i>Mukawankawan (mangawankawan) ang awdituryum ug way táwu,</i> The auditorium looks very large when there's no one in it. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [BN46] for s.t. to stretch into, appear in the distance. <i>Mikawankáwan (nangawankáwan) ang tabanug sa tumuy sa taas nga tugut,</i> The kite soared way high at the end of the long string.

<p><b>káwas</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c] <b>1</b> get, bring out of a vehicle. <i>Tabángi kug káwas íring kahun gíkan sa trák,</i> Help me unload the box from the truck. <i>Nikáwas na ang tanang pasahíru sa barku,</i> All the passengers have gotten off the ship. <i>Ikáwas ang mga kargamintu sa dyíp,</i> Unload the cargo off of the jeep first. <b>2</b> get, bring s.t. out of the water. <i>Mikáwas siya gíkan sa línaw,</i> She came out of the water. <i>Ikáwas ang báling,</i> Pull in the net. <b>2a</b> [B2S4N] for solids to come out of their container. <i>Mikáwas ákung tiil sa sapátus kay gitubúan,</i> My feet came out of my shoes because I outgrew them. <i>Iduut ang mga bulingun kay nanggáwas na nà sa bàbà,</i> Press down on the laundry because it is coming out of the hamper. <b>&mdash; sa kalindaryu</b> for a woman's age to get to be more than the days of the calendar (and thus be beyond the age of marriage). <i>Dì na tingáli siya maminyù kay nikáwas na man sa kalindaryu ang íyang idad,</i> I doubt if she will get married because her age has outgrown the calendar. <i>n</i> on dry land. <i>Mamatay ang isdà sa káwas,</i> Fish won't survive on dry land.

<p><b>kawasdak</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white @rice with long, fine grains. It grows both in the paddy and in the uplands.

<p><b>káwat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3S; a2] @steal s.t. <i>Way mukáwat ánang rilu mung baratuhun,</i> No one would steal that cheap watch of yours. <i>Kawátun ku nà ug dì nímu ihátag,</i> I'm going to steal it if you don't give it to me. <i>Gikawátan ang tindáhan,</i> The store has been robbed. <b>1a</b> [A2; b7] steal space from s.t. <i>Nakakáwat ug duha ka pulgáda ang dapit nga ímung gigunting,</i> You cut off about two inches when you cut it with the scissors. <b>2</b> [A23SN; b(1)] do s.t. without s.o.'s knowledge or while he wasn't watching. <i>Mikáwat ku pagtan-aw níya,</i> I stole a glance at her. <i>Mikáwat siyag lakaw samtang natúlug ku,</i> He stole away while I was sleeping. <i>Gikawátan nákù siyag haluk,</i> I stole a kiss from her. <b>2a</b> steal a basket ball from s.o. while he is dribbling. <i>n</i> theft. <i>Ísip káwat ang pagtípig sa kinit-an,</i> It's considered theft to keep what you have found. <b>panghiN-</b> <i>v</i> [b5] charge s.o. with being a thief, usually with malicious intent. <i>Gipanghingáwat (gipanghingawátan) siya sa íyang agálun,</i> Her employer falsely charged her with thievery. <b>kawatkawat</b> <i>v</i> [AN] do s.t. surreptitiously, secretly, and repeatedly. <i>Mukawatkawat (mangawatkawat) giyud siyag káun ug bábuy <pb n=459>bisag gidid-an,</i> She eats pork secretly even though she's not supposed to. <b>kinawatkawat</b> <i>a</i> s.t. done surreptitiously, secretly. <i>Kinawatkawat nga kalípay,</i> Happiness (in love) stolen on the sly. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> thief. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> loot, booty, spoils. <b>-in-ay</b> <i>n</i> outbreak of thievery. <b>-un(->), kawatúnun</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to be stolen.

<p><b>káwat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @wire used for conducting electricity. <b>hatud &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> message sent by telegraph or apparatus used to send telegraph (literary). <i>v</i> [A; c] send a telegram.

<p><b>kawatkáwat</b> = <sc>SAKÁTI.</sc>

<p><b>kaway</b> = <sc>GAWAY.</sc>

<p><b>kawáyan</b> <i>n</i> general name for @bamboo, but most specifically refers to armed species, esp. <b><i>Bambusa spinosa.</i></b> <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> resembling a bamboo.

<p><b>kawbuy</b> <i>n</i> @cowboy movie. <i>a</i> like the cowboy of the movies: rough, rugged, tough. <i>Kawbuy kaáyung tawhána. Buut ug ruburúbu, abtik kaáyung muiskápu,</i> He's a cowboy sort. He puts up with anything and is quick to escape. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> like a cowboy as shown in the movies. <i>Kinawbuy ang íyang bisti,</i> He is dressed up like a cowboy. <b>2</b> Western movie. <b>3</b> rough and informal. <i>Mau ni gustu kung kumbira, kinawbuy,</i> This is the kind of party I like, informal and rugged. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] do s.t. in an informal, cowboy way.

<p><b>kawhaan</b> = <sc>KALUHAAN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DUHA.</sc>

<p><b>kawhat</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] @reach for s.t. <i>Kawháta ang libru kay dì kung kaabut,</i> Reach for the book because I can't. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of reaching. <b>2</b> extent of reach. <i>Taas ug kawhat ang buksidur,</i> A boxer has a long reach. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] reach for s.t. without quite being able to get it. <i>Nagpangawhat ang bátà sa plátu,</i> The child is grabbing for the plate.

<p><b>kawhit</b> <i>n</i> @pole or @stick, usually with a hook at the end, used in picking or getting s.t. which is out of one's reach. <i>v</i> [A; a] get, pick s.t. with a <ix>kawhit</ix>. <i>Akuy mukawhit sa baskit,</i> I'll get the basket down with a pole.

<p><b>kawil</b> = <sc>KAWILKAWIL.</sc> <b>kawilkawil</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @dangle loosely. <i>Níay nagkawilkawil sa sidsid sa ákung sinínà,</i> S.t. is dangling at the hem of my dress. <i>Nagkawilkawil ang nindut níyang aríyus,</i> Her beautiful earrings were dangling. <i>Ayawg kawilkawila (ikawilkawil) ang ímung tiil ug magsakay kag swíng,</i> Don't let your feet dangle when you swing.

<p><b>kawinkáwin</b> = <sc>KAWILKAWIL.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAWIL.</sc>

<p><b>kawit</b> <i>n</i> container made to hold the water from the palm blossom as it is gathered. It is made out of two or three bamboo nodes, with a wooden hook on the upper side to hook over the shoulders.

<p><b>kaw-it</b> = <sc>KALAW-IT</sc>.

<p><b>kawkaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @touch s.t. with the hands. <i>Dúnay nagkawkaw sa mga inutaw</i>, S.o. put his dirty paws on these clothes. <i>Hala kawkáwa nang bága</i>, Go on, touch those glowing embers. <i>Sa pagkawkaw lang mailhan ug pila ka búwan ang tiyan</i>, You can tell just by feeling how many months the baby is in the stomach. <b>2</b> [AN; a2b2] @steal s.t. that one has access to. <i>Mahadluk kung mukawkaw sa pundu</i>, I'm afraid to touch the fund. <b>-an, maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who steals things.

<p><b>kawkus</b> <i>n</i> political @caucus or similar @discussion. <i>v</i> [A12C; ab3] <b>1</b> hold a caucus. <b>2</b> @discuss, confer as in a caucus. <i>Nagkawkus ang magsúun kun unsáun pagbáhin ang yútà</i>, The brothers were discussing how to divide the land.

<p><b>kawpi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medicinal seeds.

<p><b>kawras</b> = <sc>KAMRAS</sc>.

<p><b>kawrut</b> = <sc>KAMRUT</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>kawsa</b> <i>v</i> [A13; bc] @accuse s.o. <i>Gikawsáhan (gikawsahan) siyang naníkas</i>, He was accused of embezzling. <i>Unsang saláa ang ímung ikakawsa níya?</i> What crime can you accuse him of? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> accusation. <b>2</b> cause one espouses. <i>Nagpasákit si Risal sa íyang kaugalíngun tungud sa kawsa sa kagawásan</i>, Rizal suffered for the cause of freedom.

<p><b>kawu</b> <i>n</i> @handle for s.t. that is lifted or strap that hangs over the shoulder. <i>Kawu sa kamisin</i>, Strap of one's undershirt. <i>Kawu sa kabù</i>, Handle of the dipper. <i>Kawu sa tásà</i>, The handle of the cup. <i>Kawu sa baldi</i>, Handle of the pail. <i>v</i> [A; b] make a handle or strap for s.t.

<p><b>kawu-</b> <ix>see also</ix> <sc>KALU-</sc>.

<p><b>kawunsil</b> <i>n</i> @council.

<p><b>kawuntid</b> <i>a</i> for a point to be counted. <i>Kawuntid tu kay ids bul man</i>, It's good because it was an edge ball. <b>nat &mdash;</b> for a point not to be counted.

<p><b>kawuntir<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @counter of a store, bar, or eatery.

<p><b>kawuntir<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] <b>1</b> in boxing, strike one's opponent while parrying. <i>Pagsumbag ni Ilurdi gikawuntíran siyag usa ka istrit</i>, When Elorde delivered a blow, his opponent countered with a straight. <b>2</b> make a counter drive in pingpong.

<p><b>kaw-uy</b> <i>v</i> [A12; c] have the strength to get up or @lift the limbs. <i>Dì na ku makakaw-uy kay gútum na kaáyu</i><i></i>, I cannot lift my arms or legs because I'm famished.

<p><b>kay</b> <b>1</b> @because, for the reason that. <i>Undang na ta kay gikápuy man ku</i>, Let's quit because I'm tired. <i>Kay magminyù ka man giyud, <pb n=460>na hala, sígi,</i> Since you're bent on getting married, all right, go ahead. <b>ábi &mdash;</b> just because. <i>Ábi kay bag-ug awtu muhambug dáyun,</i> Just because he has a new car, he has to brag about it. <b>&mdash; arun</b> because in that way a desired result will happen. <i>Magtuun ka kay arun makapasar ka,</i> You should study so you can pass. <b>kúmu &mdash;</b> seeing as how, because the situation is that.... <i>Kúmu kay ikay amahan, ikay mubadlung,</i> Since you're the father, it's your duty to keep him in line. <i>Kúmu kay wà kuy kwarta, dì ku magminyù,</i> Since I have no money, I won't get married. <b>maáyu &mdash;</b> it's good that. <i>Maáyu kay nía ka,</i> It's a good thing you're here now. <b>tungud &mdash;</b> @because, just for the reason that. <i>Tungud kay gikusì ka, mamúnal diay ka?</i> Just because he pinched you, you beat him up? <b>untà &mdash;</b> @since it is, was like that, [so-and-so] should have happened. <i>Untà kay ikaw may magulang, ikaw untay dílì magpabuyag,</i> Since you are the elder, you should have behaved yourself. <i>Untà kay wà nay bugas, ímu untà kung giingnan,</i> Since we were out of rice, you should have told me. <b>2</b> @why is it that way? <i>Traynta? Kay pabayrun ba diay ang bátà?</i> Thirty cents? Why? You mean to say the baby has to pay fare too? <b>&mdash; [<ix>interrogative</ix>]</b> Why is it like that? Who, what, why, how, etc. is it, that it should be like that? <i>Misulti siyag ingun? Kay kinsa ba nà siya,</i> Is that what he said? Why, who the hell is he? <i>Dì mau? Kay unsa man diay tu?</i> Isn't that it? Why? What was it then? <i>Kay ngánu man diay? Dì ka mutrabáhu?</i> What do you mean? You mean you don't want to work? <i>Dì mau? Kay unsáun pa man diay?</i> What do you mean it's not the right way? How are we to do it then? <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; [<ix>dative</ix>]</b> than. <i>Dakù siya kay kanákù (sa ákung anak),</i> He is bigger than I am (than my child). <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; basta</b> <b>a</b> if [so-and-so] is done, [such-and-such] is the result. <i>Kay basta (basta kay) ímung dugáyun ug ínit, madáut giyud,</i> If you heat it for a long time, it will get ruined. <b>b</b> that's the way it is. <i>Kay basta (basta kay) mu tuy gisulti,</i> That's the way it is. That is what he said. <b>5</b> <b>dílì &mdash;</b> <b>a</b> it is not really that way. <i>Dílì kay aku ray nagmulù,</i> It's not as though I were the only one that had a complaint. <i>Ang giingung barátu, dì kay barátu giyud, ubus-ubus lang sa uban,</i> When he says it's cheap, it's not really cheap. It's just a little lower than the others. <b>b</b> not only is it [so-and-so]. <i>Dì lang kay barátu, barátu gayud,</i> It's not just cheap, it's very, very cheap. <b>dílì &mdash; ... kun dílì</b> not only ... but also. <i>Dì lang kay gwápu, kun dì dátù,</i> Not only is he handsome, he's rich.

<p><b>kaya</b> <i>n</i> @youngest child. <i>Ságad sa mga bátà nga kaya manyahun giyud,</i> More often than not, the youngest child is wilful.

<p><b>káya</b> (slang) <b>1</b> within one's ability, easily tackled. <i>Ayaw na lag tábang. Káya ku ra ni kaáyu,</i> Never mind helping me. I can easily tackle this job. <b>2</b> within one's financial capacity to shoulder. <i>Káya kaáyu nákù ang balur ánang awtúha,</i> The car is very much within my reach. <i>v</i> [A12; a] tackle, handle s.t. with ease. <i>Dì ku makakáya pag-alsa ánà,</i> I can't lift that thing easily. <i>Kayáhun giyud nímu bísag labihang lisúra,</i> Are you going to force yourself to tackle it even if it's very hard for you.[** ?] <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> having the means to spend for whatever one likes. <i>Dakù kaáyu ang íyang báy; kayáhan (kayáan) giyud tingáli,</i> His house is very big; he must be rich.

<p><b>kayà</b> = <sc>KAYHÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kay-a</b> <i>n</i> a small square-mouthed @basket made of loosely woven thin bamboo strips. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c16] put inside a <ix>kay-a</ix>. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make a <ix>kay-a</ix>.

<p><b>káyab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; c1P] for cloth or the like to @flap, cause it to do so. <i>Mikáyab (mipakáyab) siyag panyù paglarga sa barku,</i> She waved her handkerchief as the boat moved away. <i>Nagkáyab ang bandílà sa hángin,</i> The flag waved in the breeze. <i>Kayába (ikáyab) ang ímung kamut,</i> @Wave your hand. <b>2</b> [A; c1P] raise a flag or unfurl a sail. <i>Kayába (ikáyab<corr>)</corr> ang bandílà, layag,</i> Raise the flag, unfurl the sail. <b>3</b> [A2] for a divinity to ascend into the heavens. <i>Mikáyab si Kristu sa lángit,</i> Christ ascended into heaven. <i>n</i> the Ascension of Christ.

<p><b>kay-ag</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] <b>1</b> @disarrange s.t. that was put in order, @scatter s.t. put together neatly. <i>Hángin nga mikay-ag sa pinunduk nga papílis,</i> The wind that scattered the piles of paper. <i>Ayaw kay-ága ang kamáda sa káhuy,</i> Don't get the stacks of wood all in disorder. <b>2</b> cause things in one place to scatter. <i>Ang pinusílay nakakay-ag (nakapakay-ag) sa mga táwu sa plása,</i> The shoot-out scattered the people in the plaza. <b>&mdash; ang láwas</b> <i>v</i> [B125] for a dead body to be in an advanced state of decomposition. <i>Nakay-ag na ang láwas sa nabangalang patay,</i> The body they found was in an advanced state of decomposition. <b>&mdash; ang tinái</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @kill a man by @stabbing. <i>Kay-águn (ikay-ag) nákù ang ímung tinái ug maglúib ka,</i> I'll kill you if you betray me. <i>a</i> scattered about.

<p><b>kayag-ang</b> = <sc>KAGANGKAGANG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁGANG</sc>.

<pb n=461>

<p><b>kayagkag<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing in which the net is made to touch the bottom of the sea. The fish are driven towards it by people beating large cans. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] catch fish with this method.

<p><b>kayagkag<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be in @disorder, @dishevelled. <i>Mikayagkag ang íyang buhuk sa hángin,</i> Her hair was all in disorder from the wind. <i>Nagkayagkag ang mga sinínà sa aparadur,</i> The dresses were all in disorder in the closet.

<p><b>kayálì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, spineless @bamboo similar to <ix>butung</ix> but with itchy hirsutes on the trunk and with smaller nodes.

<p><b>kayamúkat</b> = <sc>KALAMÚKAT</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAMÚKAT</sc>.

<p><b>káyang</b> <i>n</i> @shed consisting of a roof of buri palm thatch supported by sticks or poles with no walls: <b>1</b> put on a small boat as a shelter against rain. <b>2</b> used as a shed by transient vendors or purveyors of entertainment. <i>v</i> [A; b] put up such a shed.

<p><b>kayangkayang</b> <i>v</i> [A3] fall on one's back tottering and grasping the air with the limbs. <i>Nagkayangkayang siyang natikalbung sa kanal,</i> He fell backwards into the ditch, waving his arms wildly.

<p><b>kayankayan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tobacco tars. <b>2</b> burnt food stuck at the bottom of cooking utensils. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a4b4] get clogged with tobacco tars. <i>Gáhì yupyúpun ang hunsuy kay gikayankan (gikayankánan) na kaáyu,</i> It's hard to puff the pipe because it's too clogged up with tars. <b>2</b> [B26] for food to burn at the edges or bottom. <i>Ayaw palabihig síga ang ímung gilútù kay mukayankan (makayankan) unyà nà,</i> Don't turn the fire up too high or the food will burn. <b>3</b> [A; ab] mix tobacco tars into drinks as a practical joke. <i>Gikayankanan ang ímung ilimnun, maung nalípung ka,</i> Tobacco tars were mixed with your drink. That's why you got dizzy right away.

<p><b>kayapà</b> = <sc>KUDYAPÀ</sc>.

<p><b>káyas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{harvest corn}. <i>Gikáyas níla ang mais bísan anagun pa,</i> They harvested the corn while the ears were still young. <i>n</i> harvest of corn.

<p><b>káyat</b> <i>v</i> [AC2; ab2] have sexual intercourse (not coarse, but replaced by a euphemism in polite speech). <i>Kayátun ku siya run kay wà na dug-a,</i> I'll have her today because she's not menstruating any more. <i>n</i> @{sexual intercourse}. <i>Ang káyat mauy lamì nga dì ikapangagda,</i> Sexual intercourse is one of the pleasures which we need not, in fact cannot, invite our friends to share. <b>hiN-(->), pala-(->)</b> <i>a</i> having a great appetite for sex.

<p><b>káyaw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] fly up high to a distance. <i>Mikáyaw ang pati pagkabuhì,</i> The pigeon flew up high when it got loose. <i>Mikáyaw sa lángit si Kristu,</i> Christ ascended into heaven. <b>2</b> [A3P; b4] for one's spirit to soar, be elated. <i>Ang maung hitabù nakakáyaw (nakapakáyaw) sa ákung pagbátì,</i> That event lifted my spirits.

<p><b>káyaw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KÁLAW.</sc>

<p><b>kaybuy</b> <i>n</i> @cowboy of the movies (humorous&mdash;children's talk).

<p><b>kayda</b> <i>n</i> covered @porch in the front of a house and an extension of the main floor. <i>v</i> [A3; a] make a front porch in a house, make into a front porch.

<p><b>kayhà</b> (usually pronounced <ix>kahà</ix>) <b>1</b> @perhaps, @possibly. <i>Kayhà mahikalimut pa usab siya kang Mirilin kun mahigugma siya sa láin,</i> Perhaps he will forget Marilyn again if he falls in love with s.o. else. <b>1a</b> <b>kayhà ... kayhà</b> maybe because ... or perhaps because. <i>Nanghátag siya&mdash;kahà kay manggihatágun, kahà kay dihay giapas,</i> He gave me s.t., maybe to be nice or maybe he was after s.t. <b>2</b> in questions <b>a</b> with no interrogative: by any chance, I wonder if. <i>Muanhi ba kahà siya?</i> Will he come by any chance? <i>Dílì siya makahúbad, aku pa kahà?</i> Even he can't translate it. Could I possibly do so? <b>b</b> with an interrogative: who (what, where, etc.) can it be? <i>Ginúu ku, unsa kahay nahitabù?</i> My Lord! What can have happened? <i>Unsáun ku kahà pagbáyad sa útang?</i> How could I ever pay the debt? <b>c</b> maybe, approximately. <i>Magkinahanglan kahà kug tulu,</i> I'll need approximately three. <b>3</b> <b>man &mdash;</b> since apparently [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Mutan-aw ka man kahà sa sini. Ngánung nía[** typo?] ka pa man?</i> You said you were going to the movies. Why are you still here? <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> s.t. held doubtful or uncertain. <i>&lsquo;Makapasar kahà siya sa iksámin?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Kayhaan pa,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will he pass the examination?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It is still doubtful.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Anus-a ka magpakasal níya?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sa kayhaan,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;When will you marry her?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Someday (but when, I still do not know).&rsquo; <b>2</b> accidentally, unexpectedly. <i>Sa kayhaan nagkítà sila sa Manílà,</i> By chance they met in Manila.

<p><b>kayhun</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @{lean on} s.t. with the hands. <i>Mukayhun ku nímu arun dì ku matumba,</i> I'll lean on you so I don't fall. <i>Nabálì ang sanga nga íyang gikayhúnan sa duha níya ka kamut,</i> He leaned on the branch with both hands and it broke. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] lean on s.t. for support.

<p><b>kayi</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{pull in} s.t. not stiff or push it with a sidewise motion. <i>Láin ang magkayi sa báling, ang uban mamunit sa mga isdà,</i> Some of them will pull in the net and the <pb n=462>others will gather the fish. <i>Kayiha (ikayi) ang túbig sa lamísa arun dílì mutúlù sa ímung páa,</i> Wipe away the water on the table so it won't drip on your legs.

<p><b>káyì</b> <i>n</i> piles of sand made by small sand crabs <i>(agúkuy)</i> along the beach or on tidal flats. <i>v</i> [A; b1] for small crabs to dig up the sand or do like them. <i>Magkaun ka, mu rag agúkuyng magkáyì kay daghang mumhu sa ímung atubángan,</i> When you eat, you are like a sand crab digging up sand because you spill the rice all over the edge of the table.

<p><b>kaykay<hi rend=sub>1,2</i></b> = <sc>KALAYKAY<hi rend=sub>1,2</i>.</sc>

<p><b>kaykay<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. round @cookie about 3" in diameter, topped with ground peanuts.

<p><b>kaylab, kaylap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> for s.t. that leaves some sort of effect to @spread. <i>Mikaylap ang kaláyu sa balay,</i> The fire spread to the house. <i>Ang pagmariwána nagkaylap na,</i> Smoking of marijuana is spreading everywhere. <i>Gikaylápan ang íyang láwas sa nukanuka,</i> His body is covered with sores. <b>2</b> for roots to spread. <i>Inigkadakù na sa lubi, layù ug kaylápan ang gamut,</i> When the coconut tree reaches a good size, the roots spread far.

<p><b>kaymítu</b> <i>n</i> @{star apple}, a medium-sized tree cultivated for its fruit which is the size of an apple, green or purple when ripe with juicy, white flesh: <b><i>Chrysophyllum cainito.</i></b>

<p><b>kayril</b> <i>n</i> @{watch chain}. <i>v</i> [A] wear a watch chain.

<p><b>káyu</b> = <sc>KALÁYU.</sc>

<p><b>*káyù</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; ac1] @ask for s.t. <i>Nagpangayug pakitábang ang nabanggà,</i> The accident victims shouted for help. <i>Pangayúa ang suklì,</i> Ask for the change. <i>Dúna untà kuy ipangáyù (pangayúun) nímu ug mahímù,</i> I would like to ask s.t. of you if it isn't too much. <b>2</b> [A2; a] set a bride price. <i>Pangáyug barku arun dì makatúman,</i> Set the bride price so high they cannot meet it. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug katahúran</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] greet s.o. by saying &lsquo;good morning&rsquo;, etc. <i>Ug makahinagbù kay tigúlang, pangáyug katahúran,</i> When you meet an elderly person, bid him good morning (evening). <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. asked for. <i>Pilay pangáyù sa nanaygun?</i> How much are the carolers asking for? <b>2</b> bride price. <b>pinaN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. which has been obtained by asking. <i>Dì ni pinalit, pinangáyù ni,</i> I didn't buy this. I solicited it. <b>2</b> child born to a childless couple that prayed to God for it. <i>Pinanggà kaáyu ang bátang pinangáyù,</i> A child born to a childless couple after fervent prayers is highly cherished. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> fond of asking for things. <i>Kayuan kaáyu, dì maglútug iyáha,</i> He is fond of asking for things and doesn't bother to fix his own.

<p><b>kayúang</b> <i>n</i> a large and deep sore caused by an infection on the legs. <i>v</i> [B12; a4b4] for the legs to become ulcerated. <i>Gikayuángan (gikayúang) íyang batíis,</i> His legs got deep ulcers on them.

<p><b>káyud</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] @{work hard} (slang). <i>Ang draybir kinahanglan giyung mukáyud sa hustu arung makabawì sa ábang,</i> A jeep driver has to work hard to earn enough money to pay for the rent of his jeep.

<p><b>kayug</b> = <sc>KALUG.</sc>

<p><b>kayugpus</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS.</sc>

<p><b>kayukayu</b> (from <ix>kaláyu</ix>) <i>v</i> [B1456; b] rain blows on s.o. or strike s.t. in quick succession. <i>Nagkayukayu ang tigbas sa huramintádu,</i> The man who ran amok is swinging his sword like a blazing fire. <ix>see also under</ix> <sc>KALÁYU.</sc>

<p><b>kayunda</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @misuse equipment by treating it too roughly. <i>Nagubà ákung makina kay bísag kinsa lay mukayunda niíni,</i> My sewing machine broke because anybody and everybody was allowed to use it in any old way. <b>2</b> [A; a12] work energetically to get a lot of things done. <i>Dílì ku makadiskansu kay gawas nga mukayunda sa labhanan, náa pa giyuy ulutáwun nga kayundáhun,</i> I can't rest because I have to get the laundry done, and then there is the ironing to do.

<p><b>kayung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cook root crops with steam.

<p><b>kayúring</b> <i>v</i> [A3] @jabber, talk rapidly and noisily, often unintelligibly. <i>Nagakayúring ang mga Suban-un human sa butu,</i> The Subanos jabbered away after the explosion. <i>n</i> action of jabbering. <i>Hinúgay nang inyung kayúring dihà. Matúlug na ta,</i> That's enough of your jabbering. Let's go to sleep.

<p><b>kayut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ANC; abcP] @hold or @touch s.t., hold on to s.t. so as to be joined to it. <i>Ang bátà mikayut (nangayut) sa sinínà sa inahan,</i> The child held his mother's dress. <i>Magkáyut tang tanan nga manglábang sa subà,</i> We will all join hands together in crossing the river. <i>Kayútun ku ning duha ka tabla,</i> I will join these two boards together. <i>Wà kuy kwartang makaytan,</i> I can't get my hands on any of the money. <b>2</b> [A23] in pool, for the cue to slip off the ball when shooting.

<p><b>kayútis</b> = <sc>SAYÚTI.</sc>

<p><b>ki</b> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash;</b> <i>[verb]</i> <b>&mdash; dílì, walà,</b> <ix>or [verb]</ix> @whether [so-and-so] happened or not. <i>Ki nagkahigugmaay sila ki nagdinumtanay, ambut háiy tinúud,</i> Whether they love each other or hate each other, I don't know. <i>Ki mutangdù <pb n=463>ki dílì, ayaw panigurúa,</i> You can't be certain whether or not he will consent. <b>2</b> <i>[verb] ki [verb]</i> (where the verb refers to an action) doing [so-and-so] intensely. <i>Ínum ki ínum lang mu. Wà giyud muy láing nahunàhunaan, nu?</i> All you do is drink and drink. You don't think of anything else? <i>Búnal ki búnal lang ang pulis. Wà giyud siya mutug-an,</i> The police kept beating and beating him. He refused to reveal anything.

<p><b>kí</b> <i>n</i> @key in music.

<p><b>kî</b> short for <sc>SÚKÌ.</sc>

<p><b>kiamkiam</b> = <sc>TIAMTIAM.</sc>

<p><b>kiang</b> <i>v</i> [B] @limp, become @crippled in the feet or legs. <i>Nagkiang siya kay natunuk,</i> He is limping because he got a thorn in his foot. <i>Nakiang siya tungud sa aksidinti,</i> He became crippled due to an accident. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B; b4] for an enterprise to be crippled by the absence of some part or member. <i>Nakíang (gikiángan) ang trabáhu pagrisáyin nímu,</i> The work was crippled because you resigned. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a limp. <b>2</b> being crippled. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>KIANG,</sc> <i>a.</i>

<p><b>kiat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @restless and inclined to rowdy or bouncy actions. <i>Nagsáyaw sila inubanan sa kiat nga tugtug,</i> They danced to the bouncy music. <i>Kiat ka man kaáyu dì nadam-ag,</i> You jump about all the time so you slipped and fell. <b>1a</b> immodestly forward toward men. <i>Dalì makúhà ang babáying kiat,</i> One easily gets a loose woman. <b>2</b> doing s.t. carelessly because one's attention jumps to other matters. <i>Wà magkadimáu paglútù kay kiat man kaáyu,</i> The dinner came out awful because she was so careless and heedless. <i>v</i> [B] get to be rowdy, unreserved in manners or restlessly inattentive. <b>a</b> get to be immodest, unreserved towards men. <i>Nakiat siya tungud sa íyang pagkuyugkúyug ánang taga Manílà,</i> She has become immodest due to her association with that girl from Manila. <b>b</b> be intensely restless, careless or immodest. <i>Mikíat lang paglakaw, binyáan ang dinung-ag,</i> She just walked off without thinking what she was doing, leaving the food on the fire.

<p><b>kiaykíay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @sway the hips. <i>Nagkiaykíay ang hawayána,</i> The Hawaiian dancer is swaying her hips. <b>2</b> [AP] walk around to exhibit oneself. <i>Sabadu ipanudlay, Duminggu ikiaykíay (ipakiaykíay),</i> Saturday is to make oneself up. Sunday is to promenade. <i>n</i> swaying of the hips or metaphorically, a similar action. <i>Ang kiaykíay sa mga dáhun nga gihurusan sa huyúhuy,</i> The playing of the leaves in the breeze.

<p><b>kibà</b> <i>v</i> [AB; ab7c] for liquids to spill over the top of a container, cause them to do so. <i>Paghínay arun dílì mukibà ang túbig sa baldi,</i> Walk carefully so the water in the pail won't spill. <i>Kibai nang básu kay punù ra,</i> Spill some of the water out of the glass because it's too full. <i>Anhà ikibà sa masitíra ang túbig,</i> Toss the water onto the potted plant. <i>n</i> liquid spilt over the top of a container.

<p><b>kibad</b> <i>v</i> [A23] <b>1</b> get out of a place without losing time. <i>Pag-abut sa kubradur mikibad ku sa kusína,</i> When the bill collector arrived, I left on the double through the kitchen door. <b>2</b> move by swiftly. <i>Mikibad lang ang dyit sa íyang paghangad,</i> The jet just zoomed by when he looked up.

<p><b>kibag</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> behaving in a strange and socially unacceptable way: @tactless in speech, oblivious to the propriety of what one is saying or doing. <i>Kibag ang íyang pamisti kay way nakabadlung níya,</i> She dresses immodestly because no one ever told her what was proper. <i>Kibága nímu uy! Dì tu níya mutsátsa. Asáwa tu,</i> You idiot! That wasn't a maid. That was his wife. <b>2</b> not to the point, not reasonable. <i>Kibag tung ímung tubag. Swítu kug unsay nahitabù. Tug-áni kug kinsa,</i> You didn't answer my question. I know what happened so just tell me who did it. <i>v</i> <b>1a</b> [B6; c6] be, become @improper in one's behavior. <i>Ug mag-ismágul ka sa simbahan kibagan giyud ang mga táwu,</i> If you wear rubber slippers to church, the people will consider it bad manners. <b>1b</b> [AP; aP] do s.t. in a socially unacceptable way. <i>&lsquo;Ma! Nía na ag yàyà,&rsquo; mipakibag ug singgit ang bátà,</i> &lsquo;Mom! The old goat you were talking about has arrived,&rsquo; shouted the little girl thoughtlessly. <b>2</b> [AP; aP] get off the point, be unreasonable.

<p><b>kibhang</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b7c] be @lessened or @diminished. <i>Wà giyud mukibhang ang átung kalisud bísag gamay,</i> The misery of our condition hasn't lessened a bit. <i>Nakibhang ug dakù ang íyang tinipígan sa nagastu níya sa uspital,</i> His savings were greatly reduced after he paid his hospital bills. <i>n</i> deduction in amount.

<p><b>kibídu</b> <i>n</i> @eyeglasses. <i>v</i> [A; a2] wear, get, make into eyeglasses.

<p><b>kibkib</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] wear down s.t. bit by bit with the front teeth. <i>Ákù lang kibkíbun ning lubi kay gáhì nang kuskúsun,</i> I'll just bite the coconut meat from its shell because it's hard to scrape it out. <i>Ang punúan sa kapáyas gikibkiban sa bábuy,</i> The pig has nibbled away at the trunk of the papaya tree. <i>n</i> = <sc>KALIBKIB.</sc>

<p><b>kibra</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; ab7] be @decreased, be @diminished. <pb n=464><i>Usa ka kalihúkang nakakibra (nakapakibra) sa ákung pagmahal,</i> An action which makes my love for you grow less. <i>Kibráhan ang takus kay mahal na man,</i> They give you less in a package because the price is going up. <i>Dakù na ang kibra sa ákung timbang,</i> I have lost a lot of weight. <b>2</b> [A; a] in a card game like rummy, deal a player a card which will force him to put down or discard cards he is holding&mdash;i.e., cause an opponent's hand to diminish. <i>Nakakibra siya sa ákung baráha ug nahátag ku ang ákung gikuptan,</i> He dealt me a card such that I had to open, and I relinquished the cards I had been saving. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @downgrade. <i>Giatángan sila sa kibráda,</i> They were ambushed at the downgrade. <b>2</b> @decrease. <i>Kibráda sa mga prisyu,</i> Lowering of prices. <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> for the road to @descend. <b>2</b> for s.t. to move downward, becoming less.

<p><b>kibù</b> <i>v</i> [B246] <b>1</b> do s.t. in reaction. <i>Wà siya mukibù dihang gitiúnan na,</i> He didn't move a muscle or say a word when I aimed at him. <b>1a</b> [B126] be @affected. <i>Wà giyud makakibù (makapakibù) ang mga balud sa sakayan,</i> The waves had no @effect on the boat. <b>1b</b> [A2; b(1)] show signs of recognition upon meeting s.o. <i>Dì man lang ta nímu kibuan,</i> You go by me as if you don't know me. <b>1c</b> [A2; b(1)] for the shoulders to be shrugged. <i>Ígù lang ku gikibuan sa abága. Wà ku níya klarúhig unsa,</i> All he did was shrug his shoulders. He didn't give me a clear answer. <b>2</b> = <sc>KIBÀ</sc>. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> movement in reaction. <b>2</b> liquid spilled over. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] move a part of the body in reaction: shrug the shoulders, nod the head, and the like.

<p><b>kibul</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a @cropped or @cut-off tail. <b>2</b> for s.t. else to be cropped @short. <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> cut a tail off or short, usually of animals but by extension, also of fowl. <i>Kibulun nátù ang íkug sa ituy,</i> Let's cut off the puppy's tail. <b>2</b> cut s.t. else short. <i>Buhuk nga kibulan,</i> Hair which was cut short. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] with the tail cut short. <i>Tan-áwa ra ang irù nagkakíbul lang ang íkug,</i> Look at the dog with its tail cut short.

<p><b>kíbul<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AC; b5] @mate, have sexual intercourse (euphemism). <i>Nagkíbul ang duha ka irù,</i> The two dogs are mating. <i>Kibúlun (kibúlan) ku nang bayhánag kalugar ku,</i> I will have that woman if I get a chance.

<p><b>kíbul<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> textile cone shell.

<p><b>kíbul<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)46] for the spines of sea urchins to @{go deep into} the skin; for the flesh of sea shells to recede into the inner part. <i>Mukíbul ang kinhasun ug mapalabian ug lútù,</i> Sea shells shrink into the shell if you overcook them. <i>Gáhì nang kuháun ang tunuk sa tuyum ug makakíbul na,</i> It's hard to pick out the spines of sea urchins once they penetrate into the skin.

<p><b>kíbut</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] <b>1</b> for the anus to move in contracting. <i>Huypa ang lubut sa manuk dì ba mukíbut,</i> Blow on the chicken's rear. See if <corr sic=if>it</corr> doesn't @twitch. <b>1a</b> for any part of the body to twitch. <i>Dúnay kusug nga kalit lang mukíbut,</i> There are muscles that suddenly just twitch. <b>2</b> for the mouth to move in chewing or speaking. <i>Mikíbut ang íyang ngábil pagyamyam,</i> Her lips moved as she uttered her prayers. <b>3</b> [B256] for a mass of s.t. to move in a somewhat wriggling fashion. <i>Nagkíbut ang mga úlud sa ginamus,</i> The worms are wriggling over the preserved fish. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> movement of the anus or lips. <b>2</b> @anus. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; nímu, níya</b> expression showing complete disbelief (lit. your anus) (not refined usage). <i>Madátù sa ímung kíbut!</i> We couldn't become rich, and you know it. <i>Buta sa íyang kíbut. Makakità bayà siya,</i> Blind, my foot (lit. his ass)! He can see.

<p><b>kid</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> friendly address to children or to persons younger than the speaker. <b>2</b> friendly term of address among intimates of the same age. <b>3</b> title affixed before names of boxers.

<p><b>kida, kída</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; bc] @deduct s.t. from an amount. <i>Mukída nà siyag swildu sa míd basta makabuak,</i> She deducts it from servants' wage if they break anything. <i>Kidahi ang íyang yútà kay dakù ra,</i> @Lessen his quota because it is too large. <b>2</b> [B6] for s.t. to remain after division. <i>Hustung pagkabahína kay walà magkída,</i> It was very well divided. There was no extra. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @deduction. <b>2</b> amount remaining after division.

<p><b>kída bwilta</b> = <sc>ÍDA BWILTA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>BWILTA</sc>.

<p><b>kidangkídang</b> <i>v</i> [A3; c1] @rock or @sway. <i>Mukidangkídang ang barku ug bawrun,</i> The boat rocks sideways when it is buffeted by waves. <i>Íyang kidangkidángun (ikidangkídang) ang silyang tuwangtúwang,</i> He will rock the rocking chair.

<p><b>kidhat</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @signal with the eyes or eyebrows. <i>Kinsa man nang tawhána nga nagkidhat (nagpangidhat) nímu?</i> Who's that fellow winking at you? <i>Kidhátan ta lang kag úras na,</i> I'll just signal you with my eyes when it's time. <i>n</i> signal with the eyebrows.

<p><b>kidlap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for a light (strong or soft) to be intermittent: @glitter, @flash. <i>Mikidlap ang bitúun,</i> The star @twinkled. <i>Nagkidlap ang sugà sa patrul,</i> The police car's light is flashing. <i>n</i> flash, sparkle. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] sparkle intermittently and rapidly. <i>Nagpangidlap <pb n=465>ang linantip sa kaháit,</i> The bolo is sparkling, it is so sharp.

<p><b>kidnap</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @kidnap, @abduct. <i>Mga ribildi nga mikidnap sa upisyal,</i> The rebels who kidnapped the official. <i>Gikidnap siya sa sinalikwayng trátu,</i> She was abducted by the man she had spurned. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> a kidnapper. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> kidnapping.

<p><b>kig-(<-)</b> prefix, short form for <ix>nakig-</ix> and <ix>makig-.</ix>

<p><b>kigi</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] strip fiber from a plant by running it between two things that squeeze out all matter but the fiber. <i>Magkigi siya ug lánut arun himúung písì,</i> He'll strip abaca fibers to make them into rope. <i>Gikighan níya ang íyang útang nákù,</i> He worked off his debt by stripping abaca. <b>kilighan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> abaca stripper. <b>2</b> debt to be worked off by stripping abaca.

<p><b>kigkig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46] twitch in death spasms. <i>Nikigkig ang manuk pagkaigù sa tarì,</i> The cock twitched in its death spasm when the gaff hit it. <i>Maáyu rag mukigkig nang malditúha nà,</i> If that devil dies (twitch in a death spasm), that will be fine by me. <b>1a</b> [B] become very thin such that the bones become prominent. <i>Mukigkig ka giyud ug sígi kang gapulaw,</i> You will become all skin and bones if you keep staying up late at night. <b>2</b> @shiver or @shudder due to cold, fright. <i>Mikigkig siya sa katugnaw,</i> He shivered with cold. <b>3</b> [b6] for water shaken off the fur to land on one. <b>4</b> [b6] for s.t. to scratch itself in front of one. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> shake water off the fur. <i>Nangigkig ang irù gíkan sa ulan,</i> The dog shook water off its body when it came in from the rain. <b>2</b> scratch the body vigorously. <i>Síging pangigkig ang irù nga gikarapáta,</i> The dog which is infested by fleas is constantly scratching. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a thin sort and not tending to get fat by nature.

<p><b>kignat</b> <i>v</i> [B126] start because of s.t. that distracts the attention. <i>Nakignat siya pagkamatngun nga may táwung nagbarug sa íyang luyu,</i> She started when she noticed a man standing behind her.

<p><b>kigul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place around the sacrum and coccyx in man and animals. <b>2</b> by extension, the @anus. <i>Hugási ang kigul sa bátà,</i> Wash the baby's rectum. <b>(sa) ímung &mdash;</b> affectionate and humorous expression of disgust or disappointment. <i>Unsay nakakaun? Unsa may kan-un, ímung kigul, nga walà may nahibilis kan-un!</i> What do you mean, have I eaten? What is there to eat when you didn't leave me anything, you fool! <i>v</i> [a12b2] be hit in this area.

<p><b>kigwa</b> <i>n</i> tiny white intestinal @worms which appear in the anus and tickle intensely. <i>v</i> [A123P; a2] have these worms. <i>Makakigwa kunu kanang magtiniil tag lakaw,</i> They say walking barefoot causes pinworm infestation. <b>kigwahun</b> <i>a</i> having these worms.

<p><b>kíha</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] file a case in court. <i>Ikíha ta ka sa ímung pagpakaúlaw nákù,</i> I'll @sue you for slandering me. <b>&mdash; ug atras</b> <i>v</i> [c6] sue s.o. for backing up, a joking threat (inasmuch as there is no such crime as &lsquo;backing up&rsquo;). <i>Ug mangulitáwu, ikíha ug atras,</i> If he courts you, sue him for &lsquo;backing up&rsquo;. <i>n</i> complaint in a lawsuit. <i>Ang kíha gidismis kay kúwang sa ibidinsiya,</i> The case was dismissed for insufficiency of evidence. <b>-nti</b> <i>n</i> complainant.

<p><b>kihar</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b3] @complain on account of s.t. <i>Nagkihar mi tungud sa kasábà sa makina sa ámung duul,</i> We are complaining about the noise the machine near our house is making.

<p><b>kihat</b> = <sc>KIDHAT.</sc>

<p><b>kihud, kìhud</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] walk with a @limp. <i>Nagkihud siya kay mubù ug píkas tiil,</i> He walks with a limp because one of his legs is short. <i>Nakihud siya pagkabálì sa íyang páa,</i> He limped after he hurt his leg. <i>n</i> one who walks with a limp. <b>tang-</b> = <sc>KIHUD.</sc>

<p><b>kihul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] make motions to do s.t. <i>Wà lang mukihul gisúgù ay,</i> I asked him to do s.t., but he didn't make a move. <i>n</i> motion made preparatory to s.t. <i>Wà tingáli kumbira sa íla kay way kihul,</i> I doubt that they're going to have a party because they haven't made a move to prepare.

<p><b>kíim</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> acronym for <i>Kabatáang Makabáyan.</i> <b>2</b> be a member of the <sc>K.M.</sc> <b>3</b> person short in height (humorous slang&mdash;so called for the term <ix>kabatáang mugbù</ix> &lsquo;short children&rsquo; a teasing reference to <ix>Kabatáang Makabáyan</ix>).

<p><b>kík</b> <i>n</i> @cake. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a cake.

<p><b>kikbak</b> <i>n</i> money given as @kickback. <i>v</i> [A; c] give, get kickback. <i>Padag-a sa bíding ang kusug mukikbak,</i> Award the contract to the one that gives the biggest kickback. <i>Mukikbak sad ang ahinti sa biay-ar,</i> Internal revenue agents also get kickbacks.

<p><b>kikhi</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @scrape off s.t. that cakes onto s.t. <i>Kikhía ang buling sa tsinílas,</i> Scrape the dirt off of your slippers.

<p><b>kíkì</b> <i>n</i> child talk for female genitalia.

<p><b>kìkì</b> <i>n</i> food particles left in the teeth. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] pick s.t. out of the teeth. <i>n</i> s.t. used to pick the teeth. <b>panghiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] pick one's teeth. <i>Díay tutpik u. Panghingìkì,</i> Here's a toothpick. Pick your teeth. <b>ígù rang ipanghingìkì</b> for food to be so little as to be just <pb n=466>enough to stick between the teeth (lit. to pick out of the teeth). <i>Mu ra ni ihátag mu? Ígù ra nang ipanghingìkì</i>, Is this all you are giving me? It's hardly enough to stick to the teeth.

<p><b>kíkik<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bird which makes the sound <i>kíkik</i> which is said to accompany an <i>úngù</i> or, in other versions, which is a form the <i>úngù</i> takes. <b>2</b> illegitimate woman abortionist (slang). <b>2a</b> @{gold digger}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] turn into a <i>kíkik</i> bird. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] for a <i>kíkik</i> to harass s.o. <i>Ug dúnay magkíkik sa manganak, patay ang ianak</i>, If a <i>kíkik</i> harasses a mother in labor, the baby will be stillborn. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] for a <i>kíkik</i> to go about its evil business.

<p><b>kíkik<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KIKBAK</sc> (slang).

<p><b>kikílu</b> <i>n</i> name given to flat fish nearly as wide as they are long: <b><i>Scatophagus argus</i></b>.

<p><b>kikim</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @{wring out}, @{rub off} dirt or stains with little water from a worn clothing.

<p><b>kíking</b> <i>n</i> @kicking the ball, a violation in basketball.

<p><b>kilá</b> = <sc>KILÁLA</sc>.

<p><b>kilab</b> <i>v</i> [A3] @{flash by} swiftly, do s.t. in a flash. <i>Mikilab lang ang dyit</i>, The jet plane flashed by. <i>Ang íyang hulagway mikilab sa ákung panumdúman</i>, Her image flashed through my memory. <i>Nagkilab ang mga katuígan</i>, The years went by like a flash. <b>kilabkilab</b> <i>v</i> [AN] glitter, flash intermittently. <i>Ang sikwins sa íyang sinínà nagkilabkilab</i>, The sequins in her dress sparkled. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] = <sc>KILABKILAB</sc>. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @gleam, @flash, @luster. <i>Dakug sángat ang kinilab sa linti gíkan sa barku</i>, The flash of the boat's light ranges over a wide area.

<p><b>*kilába</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] @plead, @implore, @{ask earnestly}. <i>Kun magkalisudlisud ka, ása ka mupakilába?</i> When you are in dire need where do you go to ask for help? <i>Nagpakilába siya sa katawhan nga pamináwun ang íyang katarúngan</i>, He pleaded to the public to listen to his explanations. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>PA-</sc>.

<p><b>kilála</b> <i>n</i> ornamental shrub, the reddish leaves of which have medicinal use: <b><i>Cordyline fruticosa</i></b>.

<p><b>kilas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> characterized by making rapid and shifting movements. <i>Kilas ang talabánug kay dílì balansi</i>, The kite is unsteady because it is not balanced. <i>Kilas nga tugtug</i>, Fast and lively song. <b>2</b> moving about too much, roaming about. <b>2a</b> flirting too much with the opposite sex. <i>Ikaw, kay babáying kilas, buut rag ása makatulug</i>, Since you are a woman who lets herself go all the time, you would agree to sleep anywhere. <i>Bisag minyù ka na, kilas gihápun ka sa mga babáyi</i>, Even though you are married you go after women too much. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> be, become unsteady and shifting in motion. <i>Unsa guy nindut ánang kasing nga nagkilas?</i> What's so good about that top? It is unsteady. <b>2</b> roam about, move about too much, get to have loose morals. <i>Ayaw pagkilas. Paúlì dáyun human sa klási</i>, Don't go roaming about. Come straight home after school.

<p><b>kílat</b> <i>n</i> @lightning. <b>kusug pa sa &mdash;</b> faster than greased lightning. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] for lightning to flash. <i>Mukílat gánì, dúna giyuy dalugdug</i>, Where there is lightning, there is thunder. <b>1a</b> <b>-an</b> curse hoping lightning strikes s.o., esp. for doing s.t. immoral. <i>Nagpabaliw ang amahan ug anak. Kilátan pa untà</i>, The father and daughter are having sexual relations. May lightning strike them! <b>2</b> [b(1)] have a @{lucky break} in a seemingly impossible situation (lit. have lightning flash at one). <i>Mupalit kug tíkit sa swipstiks uruy. Ug kilátan dì madátù unyà ku</i>, I'll buy a sweepstakes ticket. Who knows. If I get a lucky break, I'll be rich. <i>Musúkul ta bísag maáyu sila. Básin pag kilátan nga makadaug</i>, We will play against them, strong as they are. Who knows we might get a break and win. <b>3</b> [b6] be done with @{lightning speed}. <i>Gipanggútum ang kabatáan kay gikilátan lang ang pagkáun sa lamísa</i>, The children must have been hungry because they finished their food with a lightning speed. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for lightning to be flashing intensely. <i>Dautan ang panahun kay nagpangilat</i>, The weather is bad and the sky is ablaze with flashes of lightning. <b>-nun</b> a with lightning speed.

<p><b>kiláti</b> <i>n</i> @carat, @{unit of weight for precious stones or metals}.

<p><b>kílaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{eat s.t. raw} or unripe. <i>Kiláwun sa bátà ang bugas</i>, The baby will eat the rice raw. <b>1a</b> eat vegetables slightly cooked or raw fish or meat together with vinegar and spices. <i>Maáyung kiláwun ang púsù sa ságing</i>, The end of a bunch of bananas is good for salads. <b>1b</b> [C2; b6] have a raw seafood eating spree. <i>Magkílaw ta sa hunásan</i>, Let's have a raw seafood party at the seashore. <b>2</b> [A; a12] take care of a task handily and easily. <i>Kiláwun lang níya ang mát</i>, He'll just breeze through mathematics. <b>2a</b> <b>-un ug way sukàsúkà</b> I'd like to make mince meat out of you (lit. cut you up for raw fish without vinegar). <i>Kagágu bayà nímu. Maáyu giyud kang kiláwun ug way sukàsúkà</i>, What a dumbbell you are. I'd like to <pb n=467>make mince meat out of you. <b>3</b> = <sc>KILAWKÍLAW.</sc> <i>n</i> raw seafood to eat. <i>Nindut ang kílaw ug dúnay tubà,</i> Raw seafood goes well with palm toddy. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> a dish, usually of raw foods prepared with vinegar and spices. <i>v</i> [A1] prepare or eat <ix>kinílaw</ix>. <b>-un(->), -nun</b> <i>n</i> s.t. for eating raw, esp. raw fish meat. <b>kilawkílaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] speak hurriedly with poor enunciation. <i>Unsáun pagsabut nga gikilawkílaw man lang níya ang íyang pakigpúlung?</i> How could people understand when he just <corr sic=mubbled>mumbled</corr> his speech hurriedly?

<p><b>kiláwan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. porgy.

<p><b>kílay</b> <i>n</i> @eyebrows. <i>v</i> [A; a] put on false eyebrows, line the eyebrows. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] pluck one's eyebrows. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having bushy eyebrows.

<p><b>kilditáyim</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] in games, kill time so that the losing team won't have time to make points.

<p><b>kílid</b> <i>n</i> @side. <i>Samad sa kílid ni Hisus,</i> Wound on Jesus' side. <i>Ipapilit sa píkas kílid sa bungbung,</i> Paste it on the other side of the wall. <i>v</i> [B2S6; c1] lean to one side. <i>Mikílid (nakílid) ang barku paghampak sa bawud,</i> The ship leaned to one side when the waves hit it. <i>Nagkilid ang trák sa kadaghan sa pasahíru,</i> The truck was leaning to one side because it was overloaded with passengers. <i>Kilíra (ikílid) nang baril arun karútun ang túbig,</i> Turn the barrel sideways so that the water can be scooped out to the last drop. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] hit on the side. <i>Nakilid pagsumbag si Humaw-as,</i> Jumao-as was hit on the side. <b>kiliran</b> <i>n</i> at one's side. <i>Milingkud ku sa kiliran sa masakitun,</i> I sat beside the patient. <b>hiN-(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to be hit on the side.

<p><b>kiligkilig</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @shudder from cold or on experiencing s.t. that raises goose bumps; @shake the body. <i>Nagkiligkilig kung nagtan-aw sa sud-an nga tambuk,</i> I got goose pimples seeing the fatty food. <i>Gikiligkiligan ku sa irù human nákug lígù áni,</i> The dog shook off his water on me after I had bathed him.

<p><b>kilígù</b> humorous for <sc>KALÍGÙ.</sc> see <sc>LÍGÙ.</sc> <i>Way kilígù,</i> Needing a bath.

<p><b>kilikísi</b> = <sc>KISIKÍSI.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KISI.</sc>

<p><b>kilikíti</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make s.t. into a tight roll. <i>Nagkilikíti siyag papil nga gam-ung pabílu sa ribintadur,</i> She made fine, tight rolls of paper to make into firecracker fuses. <b>2</b> [A; a1] make motions with the palms or fingers of the sort one makes in rolling s.t. <i>Arun paglínis sa tablíya, kilikitíha (kilikit-a) ug maáyu ang buluníyu,</i> In order to dissolve the chocolate, twirl the stirring stick between the palms. <i>Kilikit-a ang tútuy,</i> Tickle the nipples by rubbing them between the thumb and forefinger.

<p><b>kilíkug</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KULÍTUG.</sc>

<p><b>kilíkut</b> = <sc>KULÍKUT.</sc>

<p><b>kilim</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large @tree.

<p><b>kíling</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c1] <b>1</b> @lean, @list to one side. <i>Nikíling ang sakayan paghampak sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat tilted because the waves lashed at it. <i>Nagkiling ang túri sa Písa,</i> The tower of Pisa is leaning. <b>2</b> defect to the opposite side. <i>Ang ámung partídu mauy íyang gikilíngan,</i> He defected to our political party. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> listing, tilting to one side. <i>Kiling ning lamisáha,</i> This table is tilting to one side.

<p><b>kíling ditayim</b> = <sc>KILDITÁYIM.</sc>

<p><b>kilípay</b> humorous for <sc>KALÍPAY.</sc> see <sc>LÍPAY.</sc> <i>Way kilípay kay wà íyang bána dinhi,</i> She hasn't been having any (sexual) fun because her husband isn't here.

<p><b>kilis</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] wash cereals, sand, or anything granular. <i>Kisli ang mais únà lung-ága,</i> Wash the corn grits before you cook them. <i>Ang balas sa dágat kislan úsà imása sa simintu,</i> The sand from the sea has to be washed first before one makes the cement mixture. <b>-in-, -in-an</b> <i>n</i> water which had been used in washing grains. <b>kislanan, kilislan, kislunun, kilislun</b> <i>n</i> grains to be washed.

<p><b>kilísiw</b> = <sc>KULÍSIW.</sc>

<p><b>kilkig</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] get scrapings from s.t. <i>Ang tambálan nagkilkig ug tambal pára sa masakitun,</i> The folk doctor is scraping medicinal bark for the sick man. <i>Kilkígun ang pánit sa kaníngag pára ipanákut,</i> They scrape cinnamon bark to get a spice. <b>-an</b> thing on which one scrapes s.t. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> scrapings.

<p><b>kilkil</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> @scratch an itch. <i>Nakilkil ku na, lakip ang dílì makatul,</i> I've scratched it, including the part that doesn't itch. <b>2</b> @extort money. <i>Gikilkílan kug singku sa pulis, kay nadakpan nga way lisinsiya,</i> The policeman extorted five pesos from me because he caught me without a license. <b>-in-, -in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. extorted. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> occupation of extortion.

<p><b>kilu</b> = <sc>KÍTUNG.</sc>

<p><b>kílu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @kilogram. <b>2</b> @weight as it comes out on the scale. <i>Mu rang kilúha, dinhi sa átug sa íla,</i> It'll come out to be the same weight, on our scale or theirs. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1] buy or sell s.t. by the kilogram. <i>Kilúha (ikílu) pagbaligyà ang bwáhan,</i> Sell the fruits by the kilogram. <b>2</b> [A; a] weigh. <i>Kilúhun ni nákung ripulyu,</i> I will weigh the cabbage. <b>3</b> [B256; a12] be a kilogram. <b>kiluhan</b> <i>n</i> scales graduated in kilos. <b>-in-, -in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. measured <pb n=468>by the kilo. <b>2</b> sex on a business-like basis (as one would buy a kilogram of s.t.). <i>Gustu mu bang mupalit na lang kug kinilu?</i> You want me to go to a prostitute (buy flesh by the kilogram)?

<p><b>kilù</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @wink the eyes to signal. <i>Nagpangilù siyang nagtan-aw sa gwápa,</i> He kept on winking as he was looking at the pretty girl. <i>Kiluan ta lang ka ágig sinyas,</i> I'll wink at you as a signal. <i>n</i> wink.

<p><b>*kilug</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] @shudder (with pleasure or revulsion). <i>Nagpangilug (gipangilugan) aku sa kalamì, kangilngig,</i> I shuddered with pleasure, horror. <b>pangilugkilug</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] shudder, shiver in waves. <i>Nangilugkilug ang kabáyù pag-ábug sa lángaw,</i> The horse made his skin shudder to get rid of the flies.

<p><b>kilumitru</b> <i>n</i> @kilometer. <i>v</i> [B256; b6] be a kilometer. <i>Wà ra mukilumitru (makilumitru) ang gilay-un sa ámung gibaktas,</i> The distance which we hiked did not reach a kilometer. <b>kilumitráhi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> kilometer post. <b>2</b> mileage (reckoned in kilometers). <i>Bag-u ning awtúha mau nga mabà ug kilumitráhi,</i> This car is new. That is why it has low mileage. <b>-s</b> kilometers (plural&mdash;used with numbers of Spanish origin).

<p><b>kilumkílum</b> <i>n</i> @dusk. <i>v</i> [B5N; b2] be dusk, be overtaken by dusk. <i>Manghúp ang manuk ug magkilumkílum na,</i> Chickens roost when it's dusk.

<p><b>kilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> an edge that is square. <i>Háit ra ang kilya sa lamísa,</i> The square edge of the table is too sharp. <b>2</b> keel, chief timber or piece of steel which extends the entire length of the bottom of a boat or ship and supports the frame. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] make the edges of s.t. square. <b>2</b> [B126] bump against an edge. <i>Nakilya ang íyang úlu sa pasamánu pagkatumba,</i> He hit his head against the bannister when he fell. <b>kilyakilya</b> <i>v</i> [A23; c] keep knocking the ball at the edge of the table in pingpong to keep the opponent off balance. <i>Magdagandágan ang íyang kuntra ug íya nang ikilyakilya ang búla,</i> His opponent has to run all over the place when he keeps bouncing the ball off the edge. <i>n</i> action of hitting the ball this way.

<p><b>kimàkimà</b> <i>v</i> [B6; b6] talk haltingly, @stammer. <i>Mukimàkimà siya ug pangutan-un na sa huwis,</i> She stammers when the judge questions her.

<p><b>kimaw</b> = <sc>KIWAW.</sc>

<p><b>kímay</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b4] have a broken, twisted, or deformed wrist. <i>Nakímay siya pagkabálì sa íyang kamut,</i> He got a twisted wrist when he broke his hand. <i>Kimayan ta ka ug mangáwat ka pa,</i> I'll break your wrist if you steal again. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> having a broken, twisted, or deformed wrist.

<p><b>kimba</b> <i>n</i> @{low cliff} or @gully. <i>Nah[=ú]g ang kábaw sa kimba. Maáyu nga wà kabalíig tiil</i>, The carabao fell into the gully. It was a good thing it didn't break its legs. <i>v</i> [B; a] develop into a gully. <i>Mukimba (makimba) giyud ning dapíta sa tantung kinankan sa túbig</i>, This area will turn into a series of gullies from erosion.

<p><b>*kimbid</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] @shudder, get goose-*pimples. <i>Nagpangimbid aku sa kaísug sa álak</i>, I shuddered because the liquor was so strong. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] have shudders come over one. <i>Nahakimbid siya sa pagkahinumdum sa mangilngig hitabù</i>, He shuddered when he remembered the grisly incident.

<p><b>kimbig</b> = <sc>*KIMBID</sc>.

<p><b>kimi</b> = <sc>KUMI</sc>.

<p><b>kimì<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @awkwardly @hesitant in doing s.t. <i>Mau diayng kimì manglihuklihuk, buta giyud diayng tinuuray</i>, So that's why he moves hesitantly. He really is blind. <b>kimìkímì</b> <i>v</i> [A13] move in an awkward manner as if hesitating. <i>Nagkimìkimì siyang naggámit sa tinidur. Wà man gud maánad</i>, He looks awkward when he uses the fork because he is not used to it.

<p><b>kimì<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{wash out} dirt or stains from s.t. without washing the whole thing. <i>Akuy mukimì sa mantil nga natuluan sa kitsap</i>, I'll wash out the ketchup stain which got into the table cloth.

<p><b>*kimì<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> = <sc>*TIMÌ</sc>.

<p><b>kimika</b> <i>n</i> @chemistry. <b>-l</b> chemical engineering course. <i>v</i> [B156] take up chemical engineering. <b>&mdash; indyinir</b> <i>n</i> chemical engineer.

<p><b>kimikna, kimiknà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] ask s.o.'s final decision or say on a matter.

<p><b>kimiku</b> <i>n</i> @chemist. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a chemist.

<p><b>kímin</b> <i>n</i> person holding an important position in a company. <i>v</i> [AB1; c1] become, make into a key man. <i>Makímin (kimínun, ikímin) giyud siya kay anak sa tag-íya</i>, He will be given an important position because he is the son of the owner.

<p><b>kimist</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chemist. <b>2</b> mixer of the drinks in a drinking party (humorous slang). <i>v</i> [B156] become a chemist.

<p><b>kimpang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] @{walk with a limp} as if with one leg shorter than the other, become a limp. <i>Mikimpang ang íyang linaktan kay way tikud ang píkas sapátus</i>, She limped because she lost the heel on one of her shoes. <b>2</b> [B] for a table or chair to wobble with one leg shorter. <i>Mukimpang (makimpang) ang lamísa ug ímung mab-an ang usa <pb n=469>ka tiil,</i> The table will become wobbly if you make one of its legs short. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> limping in walk with one leg shorter than the other. <b>2</b> wobbly with a short leg.

<p><b>kimpì</b> <i>a</i> knock-kneed. <i>Magpingkì ang túhud sa kimpì iniglakaw,</i> A knock-kneed person's legs bang against each other as he walks. <i>v</i> [B6] be knock-kneed.

<p><b>kimpit</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KUMPIT<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>KULAMPIT</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>kimpitay</b> <i>n</i> the Kempetai, a branch of the Japanese army in charge of liquidation, or a Japanese soldier belonging to that branch. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156] become a member of the Kempetai. <b>2</b> [c1] send to the Kempetai prison.

<p><b>kimù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> wash out a stain with a little water without taking the clothes off. <i>Kimui lang nang namantsahan arun makúhà,</i> Just wash out the stain you got on your dress to get rid of it right away. <b>2</b> eat up s.t. in a jiffy. <i>Kimua (ikimù) na lang nang ímung gikaun kay manlákat na ta,</i> Eat your food down quickly because we're leaving.

<p><b>kimù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KÍMUD</sc>.

<p><b>kimud, kímud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] point to a place or at s.t. with mouth or chin. <i>Mikímud siya diin sila padúng,</i> He pointed out where they went to with his mouth.

<p><b>kimug</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b4] twitch involuntarily. <i>Nagkimug ang ákung unud sa kagiluk,</i> My flesh trembled because it tickled me so much. <i>Gikimúgan siyang namínaw sa mangilngig nga balità,</i> The terrible news chilled her. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep trembling. <b>kimugkimug</b> <i>v</i> [AN3] = <sc>PAN-</sc>.

<p><b>kimùkímù</b> <i>v</i> [AN] for flesh to quiver, shiver. <i>Mukimùkímù (mangimùkímù) ang átung unud basta tugnaw,</i> Our flesh quivers if it's cold. <i>Magkimùkimù ang unud sa kabáyù nga isugba,</i> Horse flesh appears to twitch when it's put over the coals.

<p><b>kímun</b> <i>v</i> [A2N2; c1] gather a wide skirt together in front of the body to hide s.t., or get it out of the way, or minimize body odor, and the like. <i>Kimúnun (ikímun) sa girigla ang íyang sayal ug náay muági,</i> The woman gathers her skirt close to her body when s.o. passes by because she is menstruating.

<p><b>kimúna</b> <i>n</i> k.o. loose, short-sleeved blouse worn as part of the native costume, cut low at the neck and made of a flimsy, translucent material. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear a <ix>kimúna</ix>, make into a <ix>kimúna</ix>.

<p><b>kimut, kímut, kim-ut</b> <i>a</i> murky, or dark such that it is difficult to see. <i>Kimut ákung mata kay bag-u pa kung nagmata,</i> My eyes are dim because I just got up. <i>v</i> [B; c1] <b>1</b> be, become gloomy, dark. <i>Mikímut ang kalibútan pagsálup sa búlan,</i> Everything became dark when the moon set. <b>2</b> for one's expression to be gloomy. <i>Unsay suliran, tì, nga nagkim-ut man nang dagway mu?</i> What's your problem, friend? Your face is so gloomy.

<p><b>kina-an(->)</b> affix added to adjectives or nouns referring to a position to form nouns which mean &lsquo;the @most [adj.]&rsquo; or &lsquo;the very heart of.&rsquo; <i>Kinadak-an,</i> The largest. <i>Kinamaayuhan,</i> The best. <i>Kinalawran,</i> The deepest part of the sea. <i>Ang trapik layit náa sa kinasang-an sa dálan,</i> The traffic light is in the very middle of the crossing.

<p><b>kináham</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁHAM</sc>.

<p><b>kinahángan, kinahanglan</b> (from <ix>hangul</ix>) @should, @must, it is @necessary. <i>Kinahanglan (kinahanglang) magtuun ka arun makapasar ka,</i> You must study if you wish to pass. <i>n</i> s.t. needed, @required for a particular thing. <i>Pilay ímung kinahanglan?</i> How much do you need? <i>v</i> [AN; a] need, require. <i>Kun mulangyaw kita magkinahanglan (manginahanglan) giyud kitag bísa,</i> When we travel abroad we need to have a visa. <i>Gikinahanglan ka sa míting,</i> You are needed at the meeting. <i>Kinahanglánun kaáyu ang bitamína sa bátà,</i> Vitamins are very necessary for children. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> needs. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. required in general, for general use. <i>Mau kiniy mga kinahanglanun sa iskuylahan,</i> These are the things we need for school.

<p><b>kinaíya</b> (from <ix>siya</ix>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @characteristic traits of s.t. or s.o.; the way it (he) is. <i>Maáyug kinaíyang bayhána,</i> A woman good in her ways. <i>Kinaíya giyud niánang tawhána nga matúlug lang kun mahubug,</i> It's that man's characteristic just to fall asleep when he is drunk. <b>2</b> @natural thing for s.o. <i>Kinaíya sa asáwa nga mangabughù,</i> It is natural for wives to get jealous. <i>Kinaíya man nang bun-ug nga mapáyuk,</i> It is natural for a bruise to be bluish. <i>Kay wà man makatunghà, kinaíya níya nga dílì makabasa,</i> He never went to school, so naturally he can't read. <b>3</b> genitalia (euphemism). <i>v</i> [B1246] become one's @habit. <i>Nakinaíya na nákù karun ang pagmata ug sayu sa buntag,</i> I have gotten into the habit of getting up early in the morning. <b>kinaiyáhan</b> <i>n</i> @nature, the natural things one observes in the world: the sky, sea, mountains, trees, et al. <b>kinaiyanhun</b> <i>a</i> pertaining to nature.

<p><b>kinákin</b> = <sc>NAKINNÁKIN</sc>.

<p><b>kinampay</b> <i>n</i> any root crop or fruit that is violet, usually said of yams, and by extension star apples and ice cream.

<p><b>kinaunsa</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>UNSA</sc>.

<pb n=470>

<p><b>kindàkindà</b> = <sc>KÍRÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kindang, kindangkindang</b> <i>a</i> wobbling, rocking from side to side. <i>v</i> [AB; c1] rock from side to side. <i>Tupúnga ang tiil sa lamísa kay nagkindangkindang</i>, Even out the table's legs because it wobbles. <i>Kindangkindángun (ikindangkindang) ang kúna sa bátà</i>, Rock the baby's crib. <i>n</i> action of wobbling from side to side.

<p><b>kindaykinday</b> <i>v</i> [A] move with slow waddling or gracefully swaying motion. <i>Nagkindaykinday ang tambuk babáy</i>, The fat lady was waddling. <i>Gikindaykindáyan níla ang sunátang pandanggu</i>, They swayed gracefully to the music of the Fandanggo. <i>n</i> action of swaying or wobbling slowly.

<p><b>kindi</b> <i>n</i> candy. <i>v</i> [A; a] make candy. <i>Lamì kaáyung kindíhun ang duryan</i>, Durian can be made into a very delicious candy. <b>Amirkánu, Amirkána nga walay</b> &mdash; persons of fair complexion or with American blood but not American citizens; or persons who do not have a trace of American blood or do not look American but have American citizenship (humorous).

<p><b>kindir, kindirgartin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> kindergarten, the year before first grade. <b>2</b> at kindergarten level. <i>Duhay ákung bátà nga kindirgartin</i>, I have two children in kindergarten. <i>v</i> [B56; c1] be in kindergarten.

<p><b>kindwit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{rattan tie} to hold beams in place in bamboo dwellings, used instead of supporting pegs (<ix>tarúgu</ix>).

<p><b>king</b> contraction for <sc>KINI NGA</sc> (literary).

<p><b>kíng</b> <i>n</i> <i>1</i> king in a playing card. <b>2</b> king in chess. <i>v</i> [A12] get a king in cards.

<p><b>kíngas</b> <i>v</i> [B2S; b6] move about too much, be careless, lack poise and grace. <i>Mukíngas ang nawung ánang bayhána ug náay mga laláki. Malukup ug língì</i>, That woman becomes restless when there are men around. She has to keep turning around to look at them. <i>Nagkíngas ka man gud maung hintumban lang ang ákung tiil</i>, You were so rowdy, you stepped on my foot. <i>Ngánung makíngas man ang nawung ánang maistráha ug ubsirbahan?</i> Why does that teacher get fidgety when her superior observes her? <i>Nagkakíngas lang mu. Tan-áwa dì nabyaan ang átung bálun</i>, You were so careless. Look, you left our lunch behind. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> rowdy, carelessly inattentive.

<p><b>kíngat</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] do things fast, in a rough, rowdy manner. <i>Kuyaw ug mukíngat ug drayib ang draybir</i>, It's scary if the driver drives roughly. <i>Nakingat lang bayà ang íyang nawung nga misulud sa kwartu</i>, He entered the room in such a rowdy manner.

<p><b>kingki<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. hanging kerosene lamp with a glass chimney and a covering. <i>v</i> [A13] use this kind of kerosene lamp. <b>-lya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small kerosene lamp similar to the <ix>kingki</ix>, often used to light an altar or a room while all the other lights are out. <i>v</i> [A13] light a <ix>kingkilya</ix>.

<p><b>kingki<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> @kinky. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for hair to become kinky. <i>Mukingki (makingki) ang ímung kulung ug lutúug maáyu</i>, Your permanent will become kinky if it's overdone.

<p><b>kingking<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A1N; a] do in a gingerly way with the thumb and the forefinger. <i>Nangingking siyang mikuput sa tiil sa bakì</i>, He held the frog's feet carefully with his thumb and forefinger. <b>-alum-, -ulum-, -um-</b> <i>n</i> little finger. <b>walà sa</b> &mdash; <b>1</b> not as big as the little finger when compared. <i>Si Karangkál walà sa kulumingking itandì niadtung dakù kaáyung isdà</i>, Tom Thumb wasn't as big as a little finger compared to that huge fish. <b>2</b> nothing as compared to. <i>Kanang ímung abilidad walà ra sa ákung kumingking</i>, Your ability is nothing compared to mine.

<p><b>kingking<hi rend=sub>2</i> = TAKINGKING.</b>

<p><b>kingkiri</b> expression used by children when they want to have a group of children compete for s.t. they are to give away: &lsquo;Who wants it?&rsquo; The first one who says <ix>yukayu</ix> gets it. <i>v</i> [A13; c1] have kids compete for s.t. by saying <ix>quien quiere</ix>.

<p><b>kingpin</b> <i>n</i> the kingpin placed at the center in bowling. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] hit the kingpin in a game of bowling.

<p><b>kingpus</b> <i>n</i> the king post, a vertical supporting post connecting the apex of a triangular truss (e.g. of a roof) with the base. <i>v</i> [A1; a] put up the king post, make into the king post.

<p><b>kingsan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. pink snapper that turns deep pink when caught: <i><b>Lutianus sp.</b></i>

<p><b>king sayis</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> king-sized cigarettes. <b>2</b> s.t. unusually big for its kind.

<p><b>kinhas</b> (from <ix>hunas</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> gather seashells on tidal flats. <i>Sayun nang kinhásun kay magmata</i>, It's an easy k.o. shell to gather because it is open. <b>2</b> [A2] go around caroling for money (slang). <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b] gather shells. <i>Manginhas ta inighunas</i>, Let's gather shells when it's low tide. <b>2</b> [b5] get hold of money by any means whatsoever, usually dubious. <i>Manginhas kug ipangmadyung diri sa bulsa sa ákung bána</i>, I'm going through my husband's pockets to find some change to play mahjong with. <b>2a</b> go caroling for money (slang). <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> seashells. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> seashells one has gathered. <b>2</b> money acquired by dubious ways. <b>2a</b> <pb n=471>money acquired by caroling.

<p><b>kinhud</b> = <i>KIHUD</i>.

<p><b>kini<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> short forms: <b>ni, king</b> <b>1</b> @this (near speaker and person spoken to). <i>Pila man ni?</i> How much is this? <b>1a</b> <b>mau -g &mdash;</b> expression used in lieu of giving reasons or excuses why s.o. failed to do s.t. or cannot do s.t. <i>Mau kinig kini, mau kanag kanà.... Sus, daghan kaáyug katarúngan,</i> Because of this and this, and that and that ... there's no end to reasons why he couldn't do it. <b>1b</b> this one now. <i>Tinúud na karun kining ákù,</i> What I am saying now is true. <b>2</b> this well-known kind of. <i>Natural, kay láin man ning kumbira ug walay bayli ug ínum!</i> Of course! Because a (lit. this) party is no good without dancing or drinking. <b>3</b> he, she (person just referred to). <i>Átù ning tabangan,</i> Let's gang up on him. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga</b> pause word used when one is hesitant about plunging into things. <i>Kining, nía ku kay dúna kuy ihangyù,</i> Err, I came here because I have a request. <b>4a</b> this action of, when one does. <i>Uh, unsa gud ning ámut na pud!</i> What's all this stuff about contributions again! <b>4b</b> when, at that time you know well. <i>Pag-abut níya sa íla, kining pagsaka níya sa íla,</i> When he arrived home, when he went up the stairs. <b>niíni, niáni</b> gen., dat. <i>Niíni, nakat-un aku pag-amping,</i> Because of this, I learned to be careful. <i>Ang amahan niíni,</i> His father. <b>íni, áni</b> short for <b>niíni, niáni</b>.

<p><b>kini<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KUMI</sc>. <b>kinihun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @shark that resembles the <ix>kumi</ix> fish.

<p><b>kinína</b> <i>n</i> @quinine.

<p><b>kinis, kínis</b> <i>a</i> clear and @smooth on the surface. <i>v</i> [B2] become clear and smooth on the surface. <i>Mukínis (makínis) ang ímung nawung niíning lusyúna,</i> This lotion will give you a creamy complexion. <i>Mukínis ang káhà,</i> The frying pan will become clean and smooth. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> fineness of complexion or surface.

<p><b>kinkin</b> <i>v</i> [BN; c1] for the hemline, sleeves, curtains, and the like to be @shorter than intended. <i>Ayúhag táud ang muskitíru kay mikinkin (nanginkin),</i> Fix the mosquito net because it is up too high off the bed. <i>a</i> for the hemline to be shorter than it is supposed to be. <i>Kinkin rag buktun ang púlu,</i> The sleeves of this shirt are too short.

<p><b>kinlaw</b> <i>a</i> @gleaming brightly, @shining with a steady reflected light. <i>Kinlaw ang lamísang gisilakan,</i> The table is gleaming because it was shellacked. <i>v</i> [B; a] gleam brightly with a steady light. <i>Nagkinlaw ang linimpyáhang sapátus,</i> The shoes I polished are gleaming.

<p><b>kinsa</b> <b>1</b> @who, @whose? <i>Kinsay muanhi rung hápun?</i> Who will come this afternoon? <i>Kinsa ring lapis?</i> Whose pencil is this? <b>&mdash; [<ix>noun</ix>]-a</b> <b>2</b> which person (of several). <i>Kinsang batáang naligsan?</i> Which child was it that was run over? <b>3</b> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <b>bísan &mdash;</b> anybody, and everybody. <i>Ang mayur nag-awhag kang bísan kinsa nga ang sidula pagabayran giyud,</i> The Mayor urges anyone and everyone to pay his head tax. <i>Abúga bísan kinsang batáang magdúlà dinhi,</i> Drive away any child that plays here. <b>ni, si bísan &mdash;</b> no one at all, no matter who it is. <i>Way si (ni) bísan kinsa ang makahilabut niíni,</i> No one, and I don't care who, can touch this. <b>kang &mdash;</b> whose. <i>Kang kinsa ni?</i> Who does this belong to? <b>&mdash; pa a</b> who else? <i>Kinsa pay gustung mupalit?</i> Who else wants to buy? <b>b</b> who in the world! <i>Kinsa pay layhan nga mutrabáhu ug mau nay swildu!</i> Who in the world would want to work here if that is the salary! <b>-y ngálan</b> <i>[gen.]</i> what is [gen.]'s name? <i>Kinsay ngálan níya?</i> What is his name? <b>si &mdash; a1</b> s.o. who thinks he's of importance but is not. <ix>in interrogative sentences:</ix> who does he (she) think he is? <i>Si kinsa ba siyang musúgù nákù?</i> Who is he to command me? <b>a2 mu rag si &mdash;</b> as if he were s.o. <i>Nagpasugùsúgù si Ambuy mu rag si kinsa,</i> Amboy is giving orders as if he were s.o. <b>a3 abi, kaingun</b> <i>[gen.]</i> <b>ug si &mdash;</b> [gen.] thought it was s.o. of importance, when it wasn't. <i>Ingun nákù ug si kinsa, ikaw diay,</i> For a moment I thought it was s.o., but it was just you. <b>b &mdash; kadtung</b> whoever, anyone who. <i>Si kinsa tung makapildi sa higanti hatágag primyu,</i> Whoever can kill the giant gets a reward. <b>kinsáun, maha-, mahakinsakinsa</b> whoever it turns out to be. <i>Bísan kinsáun (mahakinsa, mahakinsakinsa) padayunun sa balay,</i> Whoever comes, she just lets him come into the house. <b>kinsakinsa</b> anybody and everybody. <i>Kinsakinsa na lang duktur ákung gitawag. Wà ma maáyu ang masakitun,</i> I called every doctor there was, but the patient did not improve.

<p><b>kinsan</b> = <sc>KINGSAN.</sc>

<p><b>kinsay</b> = <sc>KINTSAY.</sc>

<p><b>kinsi</b> <i>n</i> @fifteen. <i>Kinsi anyus,</i> Fifteen years old. <i>Kinsi ka buuk,</i> Fifteen pieces. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DISIUTSU.</sc>

<p><b>kinsína, kinsínas</b> <i>n</i> half a month. <i>v</i> [c1] do on a bimonthly (twice a month) basis. <i>Sukad karun dì na sinimanal. Kinsináhun (ikinsína) nátù nà,</i> From now on, we won't do it every week. We'll do it twice a month. <b>Culu-</b> every half month. <b>-in-(->), -l-(->)</b> <i>n</i> by the fifteen days. <i>Kininsina (kinsinal) ang ámung pagswildu,</i> We pay salaries every fifteen days.

<pb n=472>

<p><b>kinta<hi rend=sub>1</i>, kintà<hi rend=sub>1</i>, kint&acaron;</b> <b>1</b> let's just consider how it would be&mdash;perhaps it is so, perhaps not. <i>Naghátag sila arun kinta pagpakítà sa kadaghánan,</i> They gave some perhaps just for appearances' sake (or perhaps in all honesty). <b>1a</b> supposing that it is or will be the case. <i>Kinta nagtúu kang kináwat ku kadtu. Unsay pagtúu mu kanákù&mdash;kawatan?</i> Supposing you think I stole it. What do you think I am, a thief? <i>Kinta ig-adtu ku didtu, bayran na ku nímu?</i> Let's say I go there. Will you pay me? <i>Kinta bungatan kag dyís, hangyúag dus,</i> If he offers to sell it for, say, ten, offer two for it. <b>1b</b> let's say for the sake of the game or the story. <i>Ang nakakuhag dyís puntus, kinta, muy mananáug,</i> The one who gets, say, ten points wins. <i>Ang gilay-un sa ílang balay gíkan sa ámù, ingun kinta dinhi ug ngadtu sa Kapitulyu,</i> Their house was about as far from ours as, say, it is from here to the Capitol. <b>2</b> pretending to be. <i>Naghilak kinta ka, ayaw paila nga nagkumidiya,</i> You're supposed to be crying. Don't let on you're joking. <b>2a</b> since [so-and-so] is, after all, the case. <i>Ikaw man kintay pinyalan dinhi&mdash;ayúha pagdá ning ímung mga sákup,</i> You're supposed to be in charge here, so treat your men fairly. <b>3</b> <b>kay &mdash;</b> why, is [so-and-so] really the case (when it shouldn't be)? <i>Kay kinta ikaw bay magbuut dinhi?</i> Why, do you think you have the right to have the say here? <i>Kay kinta siya ra giyuy taypist&mdash;mangítà tag láin,</i> What the hell. Does he think he's the only typist in the world? We'll look for another one. <i>Kay kinta patrabahúun pa giyud kug maduminggu?</i> What? Do I have to work on Sundays, too? <b>kintáhay</b> = <sc>KINTA<hi rend=sub>1</i>,</sc> <i>1, 2.</i>

<p><b>kinta<hi rend=sub>2</i> &mdash; martsa</b> fifth gear of vehicular engines. <b>&mdash; siniyal</b> the fifth signal in a typhoon. <i>v</i> [AC6] do, put into fifth gear.

<p><b>kintà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for horses, dogs to be sprightly, @frisky. <i>Ang ákung kabáyù batan-un, abtik, ug kintà,</i> My horse is young, alert, and frisky. <b>2</b> self-confident in a posturing, showy way. <i>Kintà siyang musulti, mu rag siya ray kamau,</i> He speaks so self-confidently&mdash;as if he were the only one who knew how. <i>Mukintà ang kabáyù nga laki basta dúul sa bayi,</i> The male horse becomes frisky if there is a female around. <b>2</b> [B] be, become self-confident in a showy, posturing way.

<p><b>kintab</b> <i>a</i> @shining, @gleaming with a steady reflected light. <i>Kintab kaáyu ang pagkalimpiya sa ímung sapátus,</i> Your shoes have been polished very shiny. <i>v</i> [B; c1] become clean and shiny.

<p><b>kintal</b> <i>n</i> a unit of weight measurement roughly equalling fifty kilograms. <i>v</i> [B256] reach or add up to a <ix>kintal</ix>. <i>Ug mukintal (makintal) ang timbang sa kupras ibaligyà,</i> If you get enough copra to make fifty kilograms, sell it.

<p><b>kintid</b> <i>a</i> @short, for s.t. to be hanging such that its lower edge is more above the ground than normal. <i>Kintid kaáyu ang íyang míni,</i> Her miniskirt is very short. <i>v</i> [B; b6] come out too short. <i>Magkakintid ang kurtína káda laba,</i> The curtains become shorter every time they are washed.

<p><b>kintsay</b> variety of @celery <b><i>(Apium graveolens)</i></b> with narrow stalks, the leaves of which are used as a seasoning in Chinese dishes.

<p><b>kintu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] move, be on one's @tiptoes. <i>Mukintu ang mubù arun makakità sa intabládu,</i> The short person will stand on his tiptoes to see the stage. <i>Magkintu ta paglakaw kay dúnay natúlug,</i> Let's walk on our tiptoes because there's s.o. asleep. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] be cautious, be extra wary of s.o. <i>Magkintu giyud ming Tátay kay istriktu kaáyu,</i> We are very circumspect with Dad because he is quite strict. <i>n</i> high-heels. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>KINTU<hi rend=sub>1</i>,</sc> <i>n.</i>

<p><b>kintu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <b>1</b> @{fifth grade}. <i>Kútub ra ku sa kintu,</i> I just went as far as the fifth grade. <b>2</b> fifth grader. <i>Kintu na si Maríya,</i> Maria is a fifth grader now. <b>&mdash; distrítu</b> <i>n</i> fifth congressional district. <b>&mdash; grádu</b> <i>n</i> fifth grade. <b>&mdash; limbu</b> <i>n</i> a region bordering Hell, where souls of unbaptized children are consigned. <i>Bísan ug magtágù ka sa kintu limbu, pangitáun ta giyud ka,</i> Even if you hide in the fifth limbo, I'll look for you. <i>v</i> [B56] be in the fifth grade, be fifth in rank.

<p><b>kintuplits</b> <i>n</i> @quintuplets.

<p><b>kinù</b> <i>v</i> [AB45; a2] @shake s.t. <i>Akuy mukinù sa alkansiya ug bug-at na ba,</i> I'll shake the piggy bank to see if it's heavy. <i>Mukinù giyud ang lahing,</i> A mature coconut sloshes when you shake it. <b>&mdash; ang útuk</b> <i>v</i> [B; b4(1)] become somewhat mentally unbalanced. <i>Nakinuan siya sa útuk dihang nabangkarúta,</i> He went slightly crazy after he went bankrupt. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mature fruit of the coconut. <i>Ang mga kinù lang mauy taktákun,</i> Only the mature fruit of the coconut should be harvested. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug útuk</b> mentally unbalanced.

<p><b>kinul, kínul</b> <i>v</i> [B2] <b>1</b> @shrivel up. <i>Mukínul ang útin human ug tíra,</i> The penis shrinks after coitus. <i>Ínit mauy makakínul (makapakínul) sa kupras,</i> Heat causes copra to shrivel. <b>2</b> become callous, insensitive after being subjected to s.t. for too long. <i>Mikínul na nang batáa ug kinasábà,</i> The child got hardened <pb n=473>to the parents' constant scolding.

<p><b>kínut</b> <i>a</i> for food to be @tough and hard to break but flexible. <i>v</i> [B; b6] come out tough, become tough. <i>Mukínut (makínut) ang sitsarun ug dílì isulud ug sirádu</i>, Pork rinds get tough and lose their crispness if you don't keep them in a jar.

<p><b>kinyintus</b> <ix>number</ix> @{five hundred}. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>kípat</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @blink the eyes. <i>Ikípat (kipáta) sa túbig ang ímung puling</i>, Blink your eyes in a basin of water to get the speck out. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A] do s.t. @{quick as a flash}. <i>Mikipat lang ang íyang úlu sa bintánà</i>, His head just appeared for a second in the window. a constantly blinking. <i>Kipat siyag mata kay nirbiyusun</i>, Her eyes blink all the time because she is nervous. <i>n</i> action of blinking.

<p><b>kipditsíns</b> don't give or ask to be given the change. <i>Kipditsíns na lang kay wà kuy isuklì</i>, Just let me keep the change because I have no change. <i>v</i> [A2; c6] ask to keep the change. <i>Ang mga silbidúra run kusug kaáyung mukipditsíns</i>, The waitresses nowadays ask to keep the change.

<p><b>kípì</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] draw the knees and thighs together. <i>Mikípì paglingkud ang nagmíni</i>, The girl wearing a mini skirt sat with her knees drawn together. <i>Kipía (ikípì) ang ímung mga páa inigkanáug nímu sa hagdan</i>, Keep your legs together as you go down the stairs. <b>kipìkipì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. spreading, half woody herb with leaves <corr sic=ocnsisting>consisting</corr> of four pinnae which contract when touched: <b><i>Mimosa pudica</i></b>. <b>2</b> name also given to a related ornamental herb, less sensitive with yellow axilliary flowers.

<p><b>kípit</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b6] @hold or take hold of s.t. between two fingers or with two sticks, tongs or the like. <i>Ikípit ning duha ka lápis sa singkuwinta nga náa sa lungag</i>, Pick out the half-dollar in the hole with these two pencils.

<p><b>kíput<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2; ab7] for an opening to become closed or s.t. exposed to get to be covered or hidden, cause it to do so. <i>Si Dyúli ang mikíput sa lungag sa bungbung</i>, Jolly closed up the hole in the wall. <i>Mikíput (nakíput) ang íyang mga mata ug hinílak</i>, Her eyes became mere slits from crying. <i>Kipútun ku nang ímung dakung bàbà</i>, I'll shut that big mouth of yours. <i>Kipúti ug gamay nang ímung mga páa</i>, Keep your legs more together. <b>2</b> [A2] @disappear from one's sight in a flash. <i>Wà gánì siya makatimbayà nákù. Mikíput lang</i>, He didn't even greet me. He just flashed by me. <b>(->)</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KÍPUT<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>3</b> [A2; b2] for the surface of the water or ground to be high enough to bury s.t. standing erect. <i>Lawum na ang buhù kay mikiput na sa ímung úlu</i>, The pit is now deep enough because it is higher than your head. <i>Inigtáub kiptan ang bungsud</i>, When it's high tide, the sea rises above the fish corral. <b>pa-</b> <i>a</i> woman who plays hard to get. <i>Dì dáyun nà musugut nímu kay pakíput nang dakù</i>, She won't accept your love right away because she is great at playing hard to get. <i>v</i> [A; b] for a woman to play hard to get.

<p><b>kíput<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab3] @{move about} or do s.t. busily, in quick movements and in a quiet manner. <i>Sígi ka lang gakíput sa kusína bísag gabíi na</i>, Why are you still busying yourself in the kitchen at this late hour? <b>kiputkiput</b> = <sc>KÍPUT<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>*kíra</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> allow s.o. to get the last word in a quarrel. <i>Ngánung magpakíra man ku nga magulang man ku</i>, Why should I let you get the last word in when I'm older than you are? <b>2</b> let oneself get left behind, outclassed by others. <i>Dílì giyud siya pakíra sa urug</i>, She won't let herself get left behind by the fashion.

<p><b>kírà</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a12] @move or @wobble rapidly back and forth or side to side. <i>Nagkírà ku sa kúna pagt[=ú]g[**unclear][**corrected at P2, previous note left as it is] sa bátà</i>, I'm rocking the crib to make the baby sleep. <i>Mikírà ang sakayan kay dagkù kaáyu ang bawud</i>, The boat rocked because of the big waves. <b>kiràkírà</b> rock or wobble rapidly back and forth. <i>n</i> @{rocking motion}. <b>síya nga &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{rocking chair}.

<p><b>kírang</b> = <sc>KINDANGKINDANG</sc>.

<p><b>kirat</b> <i>a</i> having a @scar in the upper part of the eye. <i>Kirat nà siya kay mibutu ang hubag sa íyang mata</i>, He has a scar on the upper part of his eye because his boil burst. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] develop such a scar.

<p><b>kíraw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @mess, @{mix things up}. <i>Gikíraw ang ákung aparadur unyà wà hipúsa</i>, S.o. messed up my closet without putting the things back. <b>2</b> steal s.t. <i>Putlan kug kamut ang mikíraw sa alkansiya</i>, I'll cut off the hands of whoever stole the piggy bank. <i>n</i> activity, hum of business. <i>Ang kíraw sa balay sa kaslunun</i>, The hum of activity in the bride-to-be's place. <i>a</i> noisy, with confusion. <i>Dílì ku gustu muist&acaron;r sa siyudad kay kíraw kaáyu</i>, I do not want to stay in the city because it is very noisy. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a petty thief. <b>kirawkiraw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] move about busily doing little chores. <i>Sígi gihápun ka dihang kirawkiraw bisag gabíi na kaáyu?</i> You're still very busy taking care of little things even if it's already late?

<p><b>kiri</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <b>ri</b>. <b>1</b> @this (near speaker but not near hearer). <i>Dì nákù ihátag ring librúha <pb n=474>nímu</i><i></i>, I won't give you this book. <b>2</b> this (on side of speaker away from hearer). <i>Kawháta ring písì ug ihukut dihà sa pusti</i>, Grab this rope and tie it to that post. <b>niíri</b> gen. and dat. <i>Ag taklub niíring bulpin nabuak</i>, The cover of this ballpoint pen is broken. <i>Ibutang ang kahun niíring lamísa</i>, Put the box on this table. <b>íri, ári</b> = <sc>NIÍRI</sc>.

<p><b>kíri</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PAHILIHÍLI</sc>.

<p><b>kirída</b> <i>n</i> @mistress, @concubine. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] have as one's mistress. <i>Ságad sa mga dátù magkirída</i>, Most rich men take mistresses. <b>2</b> [B156] become s.o.'s mistress. <i>Nakirída nà siyag kapitan</i>, She became a ship captain's mistress.

<p><b>kírig</b> <i>v</i> [B246] go into violent @convulsions, usually leading to death. <i>Nikírig ang ilagà nga nakakaun sa hilu</i>, The rat went into convulsions after eating the poison. <b>kirigkirig</b> <i>v</i> [B456; c1] for the body (or part of the body) to move, shiver, move in convulsions. <i>Mikirigkirig ang íyang kamut</i>, His hands are shaking. <i>Nagkirigkirig ang láwas sa mananayaw</i>, The dancer wiggled her body furiously.

<p><b>kirilya</b> <i>n</i> @{charges of a criminal nature}. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] file charges against s.o. for a criminal offense. <i>Gikirilyáhan na ang nakabunù</i>, The murder suspect has now been formally charged.

<p><b>kiring, kíring</b> <i>v</i> [A] for a doorbell, phone, clock, or the like to @ring. <i>n</i> ringing sound of an alarm clock, phone, etc. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] set the alarm clock. <i>Mupakiring kug sayu arun ku mahimata,</i> I'll set the alarm ring early so I can wake up early.

<p><b>kírir</b> <i>n</i> @{bicycle carrier at the back}. <i>v</i> [b6] put a carrier on a bicycle.

<p><b>kiríring</b> = <sc>KÍRING</sc>.

<p><b>kiritkirit</b> <i>a</i> do s.t. at a fast clip. <b>Kiritkirit siyang mulakaw, lisud apsun</b>, She walks at a fast clip. It's difficult to catch up with her pace. <i>v</i> [A; a] do things hurriedly. <i>Gikiritkiritan kug suwat ang ákung papil kay tayim na</i>, I wrote the answers on my test paper hurriedly because the time was up.

<p><b>kíriw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] @wriggle, move rapidly in a wriggling motion. <i>Mikíriw ang íkug sa tùtù nga naputul</i>, The house lizard's tail squirmed when it was cut off. <i>Tudlù nga nagkiriw sa tikla</i>, Fingers that flew over the keyboard. <b>1a</b> [A] cause s.t. to move or wriggle about. <i>Nagkíriw na lang mig agipu pag-ulì</i>, We lighted our way home by shaking a glowing stick back and forth. <b>2</b> [A2S] wriggle with the itch to do s.t. <i>Magkiriw sa pagsáyaw ang ákung tiil ug dúnay sunáta</i>, My foot itches to dance when there is music. <b>3</b> [A; a] steal s.t. of little value. <i>Bantáyi nang sinsilyu kay kiríwun unyà,</i> Keep an eye on that change because s.o. might swipe it. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to swipe things.

<p><b>kirkir</b> <i>n</i> skin @eczema caused by mites, characterized by intense itching which spreads with scratching. <i>v</i> [A3P; a12] have this eczema. <i>Sígi lang siyag pangáwut kay gikirkir siya,</i> He kept scratching with his <ix>kirkir</ix>. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having <ix>kirkir</ix>.

<p><b>kirubínis</b> <i>n</i> @cherubim, heavenly beings of some sort.

<p><b>kirug</b> = <sc>*KILUG</sc>.

<p><b>kírus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b3] do s.t. hurriedly in less time than one has available. <i>Mikírus dáyun mig panghípus pag-abut sa tiligráma nga papaulíun mi,</i> We hurriedly got busy packing when we received the wire to go home. <i>Unsa may inyung gikirúsan? Náay bag-ung niabut?</i> Why are you bustling and hustling about? Is there a new arrival? <b>2</b> [B26; b6] scratch an itch intensely. <i>Mikírus siya ug pangálut,</i> She started to scratch violently. <b>2a</b> itch to do s.t. <i>Mikírus siya sa kahínam sa pag-abli sa sulat,</i> She was itching to open the letter. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] itch to do s.t.

<p><b>kirut</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1b2] @pinch to inflict pain. <i>Unsa bay salà nákù nga gikirut mu man aku?</i> What have I done to make you pinch me? <i>n</i> @pinching.

<p><b>kiryi</b> <i>n</i> @{kyrie eleison} in the mass. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] be at the kyrie eleison.

<p><b>kiryulína</b> = <sc>KRIYULÍNA</sc>.

<p><b>kís</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] @kiss (usually said for babies). <i>Ngánung dì man ka mukís?</i> Why don't you want to kiss me? <b>2</b> [AC3; c1] for two or more balls in billiards to be just touching. <i>Ug nakalígid pag singku mukís (makís) untà tu sa katursi,</i> Had the number five ball rolled it would have touched number fourteen. <i>Nagkís ang bulimánu ug ang dús,</i> The lead ball is touching the number two ball.

<p><b>kísà</b> = <sc>KÁSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kisákit</b> <i>n</i> @socket for an electric bulb that has a switch in it.

<p><b>kisami</b> <i>n</i> @ceiling of a house. <i>v</i> [A; c1] put up the ceiling. <i>Kinahanglang kisamihan ang balay nga sín kay ínit,</i> A house with iron-sheet roofing must have a ceiling because it's hot.

<p><b>kisamkisam</b> = <sc>KISAPKISAP</sc>.

<p><b>kisap</b> <i>a</i> for eyes to have sand in them. <i>Kisap kaáyu ang ákung mata ug katulgun ku,</i> My eyes get sand in them when I am sleepy. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for the eyes to get sand in them.

<p><b>kisapkisap</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a] move the jaw up and down in a @chewing motion, munch. <i>Pirming magkisapkisap ang kábaw bísag dì manabsab,</i> A carabao is always munching even if <pb n=475>it's not grazing. <i>Maáyu ning swinggam kisapkisapun samtang magdúlà,</i> It's good to chew gum while playing.

<p><b>kisas</b> <i>v</i> [A23P; b2c1] fail to follow through on s.t. set forth. <i>Mukisas ka sa átung sábut,</i> You don't adhere to our agreement. <i>Kining mga pitsipitsing gastu mauy makakisas (makapakisas) sa átung badyit,</i> These miscellaneous expenses wreck [**typo for wreak? P2] havoc with our budget.

<p><b>kísaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> make a soft, pleasant rustling sound. <i>Mukísaw lang ang kalasangan ug huypun sa hángin,</i> The forest rustles only when the wind blows through it. <b>2</b> disturb the water. <i>Ayaw kisáwa ang túbig kay dúnay namasul,</i> Don't disturb the water because s.o. is fishing. <b>3</b> [B46] hum with activity. <i>Magkísaw ang kusína ug mapista,</i> The kitchen hums with activity during fiestas. <b>4</b> [A; b6] stir up, disturb the peace <i>Nakísaw ang ílang pamuyù sa parinting niípun,</i> The relatives which moved in with them disturbed their peace. <b>4a</b> confuse s.o.'s mind. <i>Usa ka dakung suliran mikísaw sa íyang kaisípan,</i> A serious problem is disturbing his thoughts. <i>Kisáwan kaáyu ku niánang dúwà nga madyung,</i> I find mahjong very confusing. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound of rustling or splashing. <b>2</b> activity. <i>a</i> disturbing or confusing. <b>ka-</b> = <sc>KÍSAW,</sc> <i>n.</i>

<p><b>kisaykísay</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] thrash the arms and legs around in water to stay afloat or thrash the legs and arms about while lying on the back. <i>Bísag dì makamaung mulanguy basta mukisaykísay (mangisaykísay) lang dílì giyud malumus,</i> Even if you don't know how to swim, if you thrash your arms and legs about, you won't drown. <i>Nagkisaykísay ang bátà sa kúna,</i> The baby thrashed its arms and legs about in its crib.

<p><b>kisdum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] for the sky to darken. <i>Nagkisdum ang panahun kay may bagyung muabut,</i> The weather is gloomy because a typhoon is coming. <b>2</b> [B; a2] for the face to get a gloomy and frowning expression. <i>Nagkisdum ang nawung. Nasukù tingáli,</i> He has a dark expression on his face. He must be angry.

<p><b>kisdung</b> = <sc>KISDUM.</sc>

<p><b>kisi, kisikísi</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b6] <b>1</b> @wriggle around as if to get free. <i>Nagkisikisi ang isdà sa ákung kamut,</i> The fish wriggled in my hand. <b>2</b> for a child to stamp its feet, jump around or just insist on fulfilling its desire. <i>Magkisikisi (magkisikísi) ang bátà ug dì paubanun,</i> The child throws a tantrum if you don't let him go along. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] insist, be insistent. <i>Mipakisi siya pag-adtu bísag gibalibáran,</i> She insisted in going though she wasn't permitted to.

<p><b>kisì</b> = <sc>GISÌ</sc>.

<p><b>kisibáya</b> I don't care, to hell with it. <i>Kisibáyag kurawun sila, dì ku giyud sila tabángan</i>, I don't care if they starve. I won't help them. <i>Kisibáya nang kwartáha. Kalimti</i>, To hell with that money. Forget it.

<p><b>*kisíra</b> <b>&mdash; ug, kun</b> <b>1</b> in @case, in the @event that. <i>Kisíra ug madúgay ku, una na lang</i>, In case I am late, just go ahead. <b>2</b> had it been the case. <i>Kisíra ug dì pa amígu nákù tung pulísa, nadala na ta</i>, If that policeman hadn't been my friend, we would have been arrested.

<p><b>kisíyu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{cheese made from carabao milk}.

<p><b>kiskis</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] @scrape, to @remove, @smooth, or get scrapings. <i>Nagkiskis ku sa tayà sa mga kubyirtus</i>, I'm scraping the rust off the silverware. <i>Kiskísun nákù ang bágun kay gamítun ang pánit</i>, I'll scrape the vine because I would like to use the bark. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> corn mill that grinds to a highly polished degree. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> scrapings left. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> thing scraped.

<p><b>kislabù</b> <i>n</i> @potholes, small depressions formed by water. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b8] fall or step accidentally into a water-filled depression. <i>Nakislabù siya sa las-ag</i>, He stepped into a mud puddle. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be all full of potholes. <i>Nagkakislabù ning dána</i>, This road is full of holes.

<p><b>kislap</b> <i>n</i> @gleam, @sparkle. <i>Ang kislap sa íyang mga mata</i>, The gleam in her eyes. <i>v</i> [B; c1P] sparkle, flash momentarily. <i>Ang tinúud nga diyamanti mukislap</i>, A true diamond will sparkle. <i>Nagkislap ang suwab nga nasilawan</i>, The blade flashed in the sunlight.

<p><b>kisma</b> = <sc>KUSMU</sc>.

<p><b>kismi</b> <i>n</i> short strands of hair near the forehead curled upwards, called the &lsquo;kiss me&rsquo; hair style. <i>Nagwápa kag samut nga náay ímung kismi</i>, You look prettier with your &lsquo;kiss me&rsquo; curls. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] have a &lsquo;kiss me&rsquo; curls.

<p><b>kísu</b> <i>n</i> @cheese. <i>v</i> [A13; b] have, put cheese in s.t. <b>&mdash; dibúla</b> <i>n</i> cheese shaped into a ball and coated with red wax.

<p><b>kisul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. perennial herb about 10&ndash;12" high with dull, yellow-green, cordiate leaves, aromatic in root-stock and leaves. The leaves and roots are used medicinally. The leaves are also given to cocks to make them aggressive and used as a rinse after washing the hair.

<p><b>kisum</b> <i>a</i> for toddy to be sour. <i>v</i> [B; a] @{become sour}.

<p><b>kita</b> <i>1</i> @we, @us (including person addressed&mdash;nominative). <i>Kita ra giyud way láin</i>, Just us. No one else. <ix>Short form in position other</i> <pb n=487>than predicate</ix>: <bx>ta</bx>. <i>Kinahanglan kita (ta) magbantay giyud</i>, We must be on the alert. <b>2</b> I, me (humble). <i>Makaagi ba ta áning karsadáha?</i> May I pass on this road? <b>3</b> you (patronizing). <i>Nindut man lagi ta ug sinínà run!</i> My! Aren't we wearing a pretty dress today! <b>kitakíta</b> <b>1</b> just us, no one else. <i>Kitakíta ra bítaw. Way kauláwan</i>, It's just us. There won't be anyone to cause us embarrassment. <b>2</b> one who promotes a love affair by carrying messages, arranging meetings and the like. <b>3</b> distant relative. <i>Kitakíta si Pítir kay púrus mag-ágaw ang átung isig ka apuhan</i>, Peter is our distant kin because our grandfathers are cousins. <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> do s.t. by ourselves. <i>Bída, nagkitakíta man lang ta ug trabáhu áni</i>, My, we are doing the work (by) ourselves. <b>2</b> be the go-between in a love affair. <i>Kanang magkitakíta ka makapahanig nímu sa impiyirnu</i>, If you act as a go-between, you'll be sent to hell to pave the way for the lovers. <b>kitahánun</b> <i>n</i> related to us distantly or just coming from the same place. <i>Ayaw ug duhadúha ug pangáyù ug hinábang kay kitahánun ra ta</i>, Don't hesitate to ask help from me because we are relatives. <b>nátù</b> <b>1</b> gen. form. <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>ta</bx>. <i>Dílì nátù (ta) buhátun</i>, Let's not do it. <i>Kumusta na man ang kásu ta?</i> How is our case coming along? <b>ta ka, ta ikaw, ta kamu I</b> will [do] to you, you are my [noun]. <i>Ihatud ta ka (tikaw, ta ikaw) sa pultahan</i>, I will see you to the door. <i>Amígu ta ka</i>, You are my friend. <b>2</b> = <sc>KANÁTÙ</sc>. <b>kanátù</b> dat. form. <i>Kanátung tulu usa ray dawátun</i>, Of us three, only one will be accepted.<i> Tingáli gitudlus níya kanátù (nátù) ganíha</i>, Perhaps he gave it to us a while ago. <b>átù</b> <b>1</b> gen. <i>Ang átung balay</i>, Our house. <i>Átung tan-áwun</i>, Let's see. <i>Átù ra kini</i>, This is just between us. <b>unsa may</b> &mdash; what would you like. <i>Unsa may átù, kukakúla u bir?</i> What would you like, Coca-cola or beer? <b>sa</b> &mdash; <b>pa</b> in other words<corr>.</corr> <i>Sa átù pa, ay na lang ug anhi kay way trabáhu</i>, In other words, don't come because there will be no work. <b>láin pay</b> &mdash; by the way. <i>Láin pay átù, nakapamahaw ka na?</i> By the way, have you had your breakfast yet? <b>atuánun</b> coming from our place. <i>Ayaw panigláin. Atuánun ra ta</i>, Make yourself at home. You're from our place. <b>inátù</b> <i>a</i> informal, like at home. <i>Inátù lang ning kaúna</i>, This is a simple dinner, just like at home. <i>v</i> [A; a12] behave, do s.t. with informality. <b>tagaátù</b> <i>n</i> one coming from our place.

<p><b>kítà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1a</b> [A123S; a2b2] @see. <i>Nakakità ka ba sa pilikula?</i> Have you seen the movie? <i>Makítà ba nímu ang ayruplánu?</i> Can you see the plane? <i>Nakit-an ku siyang nagsakayg dyíp,</i> I saw her riding a jeep. <i>Ingun sa pagahikit-an ku ang dautang sangputánan sa ákung gugma,</i> It was as if I could see the terrible results of my love. <b>&mdash; ug aniníput</b> @{see stars} (lit. fireflies) after being hit. <b>1b</b> [A123S; b8] @find. <i>Nakakità kug diyis,</i> I found a dime. <i>Dalì rang makit-an kay dakù,</i> It won't take long to find it because it's big. <b>1c</b> [a3b2] @see s.t. good in s.t. <i>Unsa kahay nakit-an ni Mildi kang Atilyu?</i> What does Meldy see in Atillo? <i>Wà kuy nakítang maáyu niánà,</i> I don't see anything good in that. <b>1d</b> [B12] become @visible. <i>Makítà dinhi ang búkid ug way gábun,</i> You can see the mountain from here if there's no fog. <b>2</b> [C; a4c] @meet with. <i>Magkítà ra tag usab, bastus,</i> We'll meet again, you rat. <i>Kitáa ang dukt&ucaron;r,</i> Go see the doctor. <i>Talagsa rang igkítà kanang klasíha,</i> You rarely meet with that kind. <b>3</b> [A2; a12] @earn. <i>Mukítà siyag trayinta ang adlaw,</i> He earns thirty pesos a day. <i>a</i> @visible. <i>Kítà kaáyu ímung panti,</i> Your panties are very much in view. <b>&mdash; mu</b> You see what you did? <i>Kítà mu? Gubà na núun,</i> See what you did? Now it's broken. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>NAKAKITÀ</sc>. <b>kitàkítà</b> <i>v</i> [C; a12] <b>1</b> @{meet secretly}. <i>Nagkitàkítà ang duruha kay may kabilinggan,</i> They met on the sly because one of them is married. <b>2</b> @{meet occasionally}. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c] @show, let one see. <i>Dì ku mupakítà níya kay utángan ku,</i> I will not show myself to him because I owe him money. <i>Pakitáa (pakitái) mi sa abilidad nímu sa sáyaw,</i> Show us your dancing talent. <i>Ayawg ipakítà ang ímung baráha,</i> Don't show your cards. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a2] <b>1</b> @{look for}. <i>Nangítà kug trabáhu,</i> I am looking for work. <i>Human ka makatilaw áni, magpangità ka sa maung klási,</i> Once you try this kind you will always look for it. <i>Mahímù. Pangitáan nátug paági,</i> It's possible. We'll look for a way. <b>2</b> court trouble. <i>Nagpangità ning batáa ug latus kay nagminalditu,</i> This child is asking for a whipping the way he is so naughty. <i>n</i> @work, @job. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] look for s.o. with intent to harm. <i>Gipangità ka sa mga buguy,</i> The toughies are looking for you. <b>pinaN-(->)</b> <i>a</i> highly @sought-after. <i>Pinangità nga klási sa mangga,</i> A highly sought-after variety of mangoes. <i>Pinangitang tulisan,</i> Highly wanted robber. <b>paN-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @available, but not everywhere all the time, s.t. one has to expend effort to get. <i>Pangitaun kaáyu ang písa niíning awtúha,</i> Spare parts for this car are hard to get. <b>paka-(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @see (plural). <b>2</b> [A12] cause one to see. <i>Usa ka suntuk nga nakapakakità <pb n=477>níyag aniníput</i>, A blow that caused him to see stars. <b>hiN-, hiN-(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> easily finding things. <i>Hingítà siya ug sayup sa ímung tináyip</i>, He easily finds the errors in your typing. <b>2</b> fond of looking for. <i>Hingítag away</i>, One who looks for trouble. <b>pinaN-an, -in-an</b> <i>n</i> @earnings. <i>Katungà sa íyang kinitáan ihúlug sa bangku</i>, Half of his earnings he deposits in the bank. <b>pala-(->)</b> = <sc>HIN-</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>kitaipúni</b> <i>a</i> @detachable, @removable. <i>Kitaipúni ang ákung pustísu</i>, My false teeth are detachable. <i>v</i> [c1] be detachable, removable. <i>Maáyung kitaipuníhun (ikitaipúni) ang sira sa tindáhan</i>, It's good to have the doors of a store that are removable.

<p><b>kitang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. longline sea fishing, done with a main line (<ix>baháyan</ix>) to which individual leaders with hooks are attached, for catching large fish. <i>v</i> [AN; a2] fish with the <ix>kitang</ix>.

<p><b>kitára<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a small four-stringed ukelele, the body of which is made of coconut shell. <i>v</i> [AN; a2] play the <ix>kitára</ix>.

<p><b>kitára<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @tantrum, a fit of ill-temper or caprice. <i>Mau giyuy ilíhuk sa kitára niánang batáa kun maghimatayun ang búlan</i>, She always throws a fit of temper whenever the moon is in the last quarter. <b>kitaráhun</b> <i>a</i> temperamental.

<p><b>*kitbì</b> <b>&mdash; ang, sa atay, kabúhì</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b4] be gripped with a feeling of revulsion or gruesomeness at some blood-curdling or revolting experience. <i>Mikitbì ang ákung atay pagkakità sa dugúung hitabù</i>, I was overcome by a feeling of revulsion when I saw the bloody incident. <i>Makapakitbì sa atay ang íyang pagdagmal sa tigúwang</i>, It's revolting the way he mistreats the old man.

<p><b>kítib</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{move rapidly} in a repeated action. <i>Mikítib siyag lakaw</i>, He walked with rapid steps. <i>Mikítib íyang bàbà mu rag masinggan</i>, His mouth chattered away like a machine gun. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B46] for the heart to beat rapidly. <i>Mikitib ang íyang kasingkásing</i>, His heart beat rapidly. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> @chattering incessantly.

<p><b>kítid</b> <i>a</i> taking short and hurried steps, or stamping the feet in place. <i>v</i> [B; aP] walk with short, hurried steps. <i>Ang bátà mikítid pagsunud sa íyang pápa</i>, The child walked with short and rapid steps following his father. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> short in length or height. <i>Kitid ang ákung lápis sa pagginámit</i>, My pencil is worn short after being used so much. <i>Ang magulang kitid kay sa manghud kay dì man kaáyu mukáun</i>, The elder child is shorter than the younger one because he doesn't eat much. <i>Kitid na ang mga sinínà run</i>, They are wearing short dresses these days. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KÍTID</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>2</b> [AB; ab7] shorten, @{become short}. <b>kitidkitid</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] stamp the feet in place. <i>Nagkitidkitid ang bátà kay wà paubana</i>, The child stamped his feet because they would not take him along.

<p><b>kitíkut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; ac] @squeeze into or @penetrate deeply and slowly into a very tight space. <i>Ang kasakit mikitíkut sa ákung kahiladman</i>, The pain creeped deep into my innermost self. <i>Ákù giyud nang kitikútun ngadtu arun ku makadúul sa artista</i>, I'll squeeze through the crowd to the front so I can get near the actress.

<p><b>kitin</b> = <sc>KITING</sc>.

<p><b>kiting</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @tendons of the heel. <b>2</b> tendon in the back of a carabao's leg joints. <i>v</i> [b6] cut the heel tendon or the carabao's tendon in back of the knees. <i>Kitnan ku nang kabáwa ug manabsab sa ákung mais</i>, I'll cut the tendons in back of that carabao's knees (thus rendering it useless) if it feeds on my corn. <b>unsay sakit sa &mdash;</b> Who cares? It does not bother [so-and-so]. <i>Unsa bay sakit sa kiting ku kun byáan mu aku</i>, What do I care if you leave me. <b>putì (bakud) ang &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [B6] take to one's heels (lit. the heels will look white [rise]). <i>Naputì (nabakud) ang kiting ni Tumas pagkakità nákù</i>, Thomas took to his heels when he saw me.

<p><b>kitiw</b> <i>n</i> @clitoris.

<p><b>kítiw</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] move from side to side with quick motions, take quick steps. <i>Mikítiw ang mga tudlù sa pyanista</i>, The pianist's fingers moved rapidly. <i>Tiil nga nagkítiw pagtinindak sa bisiklíta</i>, Feet moving swiftly, pedaling the bicycle. <i>Pwirting nakakítiw ang irù sa íyang íkug</i>, How the dog wagged its tail. <i>n</i> quick movement from side to side. <b>kitiwkitiw</b> = <sc>KÍTIW</sc>.

<p><b>kitkit</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] @(wear s.t. down}, @{wear off} bit by tiny bit, with the front teeth taking tiny bites. <i>Ilagà ang nagkitkit sa kísu</i>, A rat nibbled at the cheese. <i>Kitkíta ang lubi ug way lugit</i>, Bite off the coconut meat if there is nothing to get it out of the shell with.

<p><b>kitsap</b> <i>n</i> @ketchup. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make ketchup. <b>2</b> [A; b6] use ketchup.

<p><b>kitu</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>KADTU</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>KINI<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>kítung</b> <i>n</i> a deep-sea fish with a compressed body and very fine, soft, thin scales, usually golden brown, speckled with grey, similar to <ix>danggit</ix>, but a good deal larger.

<p><b>kítuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] for the fingers or toes to twitch. <i>Búhì pa ang gipusil kay nagkítuy (nagkituy) pa ang tudlù</i>, The man that was shot is still alive because his fingers are twitching. <b>2</b> [A; c1] play close and open <pb n=478>the palm with a baby. <i>Inigkatulu ka búlan makakítuy na ang kamut sa bátà</i>, At the age of three months a baby can open and close its palms on command. <i>n</i> expression used to induce a baby to open and close its hands. <i>Kítuy nang kítuy. Báyad sa tútuy</i>, Open your palms to pay for your titty.

<p><b>kiug, kíug</b> <i>v</i> [AB2; c1] jounce, shake, cause s.t. to do so. <i>May nagkiug tingáli sa lamísa kay nayabu ang sabaw</i>, S.o. must have shaken the table because the soup spilled. <i>Mukíug ang sakyanan ig-ági sa daghang libaung</i>, A vehicle that passes over a bad road bounces a lot. <i>Wà mukiug ang íyang panagway pagkadungug sa pamalíkas nga íyang nadáwat</i>, He didn't betray a bit of emotion upon hearing curses that were heaped upon him. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> jouncing, shaking. <i>Kiug nga lingkuránan</i>, A wobbly seat.

<p><b>kíum</b> = <sc>KYÚUM</sc>.

<p><b>kiung</b> = <sc>KIANG</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>kiwà, kiwag, kíwag</b> <i>a</i> awkward because of self-consciousness or not knowing how to do s.t. well. <i>Kiwag ta sa trabáhu ug bag-u pa</i>, We do things awkwardly when we're new at them. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be awkward or clumsy. <i>Mukíwag ang átung panlihuklihuk basta maúlaw ta</i>, One tends to be awkward if he feels self-conscious. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] for s.t. long to stick out prominently. <i>Nagkiwag ang ímung káhuy nga gibugkus</i>, Some of the pieces of wood you bundled are sticking out. <i>Nagkiwag ang ayis pik sa íyang bulsa</i>, The ice pick stuck out of his pocket. <i>Ayaw ikiwag ang ímung mga tiil sa agiánan</i>, Don't stick your feet into the passageway.

<p><b>kiwákiw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] wag one's tail. <i>Mikiwákiw ang íkug sa irù</i>, The dog wagged its tail.

<p><b>kíwat</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); c1] move busily and fast. Mikíwat<i> ang íyang bàbà ug pangatarúngan</i>, Her mouth went like a machine gun as she explained herself. <i>Mukíwat ug panghípus ang mga bátà inigpamúhì</i>, The children move as quick as they can putting their things away when classes are over.

<p><b>kiwaw</b> <i>a</i> awkward, esp. in movement, but also, by extension, in speech and behavior. <i>Kiwawng linihukan</i>, Awkward movements. <i>v</i> [B; b6] feel awkward. <i>Makiwaw ang pagbúhat áni basta primíru pa</i>, One usually does this awkwardly the first time around. <i>Kiwawan kung mulakaw nga magbirmúda</i>, I feel awkward going out with bermuda shorts on.

<p><b>kiwì, kíwì</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] grow stiff or cramped in the joints, twisted out of shape. <i>Mikiwì ang íyang bàbà sa pagpangyam-id</i>, She screwed up her mouth into a frown. <i>Mikiwì ang tabla nga nainitan pag-áyu</i>, The board got twisted out of shape in the sun. <i>Nangíwì ákung tudlù ug hinílut</i>, My fingers got stiff from massaging so much.

<p><b>kiwiskiwis</b> <i>n</i> a long, tapering tip of bamboo, or the ends of palm fronds including the leaflets, or the tips of branches at the top of a tree.

<p><b>kiwkiw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] shake rapidly in pain. <i>Nakakiwkiw ku dihang nadukdukan ang ákung tudlù</i>, I shook my hand in pain after I hit my fingers with the hammer. <b>2</b> [A3N] pick, hold s.t. gingerly with the tips of the thumb and index finger. <i>Nangiwkiw siyang mipunit sa ilagang patay</i>, She gingerly picked up the dead rat.

<p><b>kiwut</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÍYUT</sc>.

<p><b>kíya, kíyà</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] rock from side to side, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Dagkung balud mauy nagkíyà sa sakayan</i>, Big waves rocked the boat. <i>Kiyáun (kiyáhun, ikíyà) nátù ang dyíp arun mahadluk sila</i>, Let's rock the jeep to scare them.

<p><b>kiyag-ang</b> = <sc>KAGANGKAGANG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁGANG</sc>.

<p><b>kíyas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] scrape or shave s.t. close to the surface. <i>Nagkíyas ku sa takuling sa kaldíru</i>, I'm scraping off the soot from the kettle. <i>Ákung kyásun ang balhíbu sa ákung íluk</i>, I'll shave my armpits. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> scrapings.

<p><b>kíyaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. bird that stays on the ground. It is nearly as big as a wild chicken, and good to eat, named for its sound. <b>2</b> the cry or sound emitted by the <i>kíyaw</i> bird. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46; a] emit the sounds of <i>kíyaw</i>. <b>2</b> [B; a] make a lot of fuss over trifles.

<p><b>kíyud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] thrust the lower part of the body forward, as <corr>a </corr>male does in sexual intercourse. <b>2</b> [AC; b] have sexual intercourse (coarse, though not as taboo as <ix>iyut</ix>). <b>kiyudkiyud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] keep moving the belly forward. <i>Hílas ang bag-ung sinayawan nga magkiyudkiyud ang duruha</i>, I find it revolting the way they thrust their bellies forward in the modern dances. <b>kiniyúran</b> <i>n</i> offspring (coarse).

<p><b>kíyus</b> <i>v</i> [B2] for meat to shrink. <i>Mu rag daghan nang karníha, piru ug malútù, mukíyus na</i>, That looks like a lot of meat, but when you cook it, it's going to shrink.

<p><b>kíyut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. wild black bee that does not sting, smaller than a fly. It builds a nest of wax (kabulay) in sheltered places, often dwellings, and produces a small amount of honey. <b>2</b> = <sc>KABULAY</sc>.

<p><b>KKK</b> <i>n</i> letters placed in the center of the flag of the insurgents against the Spaniards, an abbreviation of the Tagalog name of their society: <ix>Kataastaásang Kagalanggalángang <pb n=479>Katipúnan ng mga Anak ng Báyan</ix> &lsquo;The Supreme, Most Venerable, Union of the Sons of the Nation&rsquo;.

<p><b>klab</b> <i>n</i> club, organization. <b>nayit</b> &mdash; <i>n</i> night club. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go to a night club.

<p><b>klábu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. aromatic mint with hairy, fleshy leaves which are used as a spice for cooking and also for curing coughs and boils.

<p><b>klag-ap</b> <i>v</i> [B26] for a water outlet to get clogged up. <i>Ayawg lundi ug buhuk ang labábu kay muklag-ap (maklag-ap)</i>, Don't throw the hair from your comb into the washbowl because it will clog it up.

<p><b>klam</b> <i>n</i> carpenter's clamp. <i>v</i> [A; b] fasten together with a clamp. <i>Maáyu pang kláman nà arun malig-un</i>, It's better to fasten it with a clamp to strengthen it. <b>bar</b> &mdash; <i>n</i> bar clamp, a device used in joining the sides of boards together to set them in place.

<p><b>klap</b> <i>v</i> [A3; a] clap the hands. <i>Maáyu na kaáyung mukláp ang bíbi ku</i>, My baby can clap its hands very well now. <i>n</i> clapping of hands.

<p><b>klára</b> <i>n</i> egg white.

<p><b>klarinit, klariníti</b> <i>n</i> clarinet. <i>v</i> [A3] play the clarinet.

<p><b>kláru</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> clear, clearly defined and easily made out. <i>Kláru ning ritratúha</i>, This picture is clear. <i>Kláru dinhi ang Buhul</i>, You can see Bohol clearly from here.<i> Kláru ang tútuy sa hugut nga bistídu</i>, Her breasts stand out clearly in her tight dress. <i>Kláru siyang bakákun</i>, She is obviously a liar. <i>Kláru ang tíngug níya sa tilipunu</i>, Her voice on the phone was clear. <b>1a &mdash; na lang</b> obviously, naturally. <i>Kláru na lang mangísug siyag dì ka mananghid</i>, Naturally, she will get angry if you don't ask permission. <b>2</b> unequivocal, definite. <i>Way kláru tung inyung panagsábut</i>, Your agreement hasn't come to any definite results. <i>Kláru na ang kadaúgan</i>, Victory is clearly in our hands. <i>Kláru pa sa adlaw nga musubang sa sidlakan</i>, As sure as the sun will rise in the East. <b>3</b> for vision or optical instruments to enable the user to discern clearly. <i>Kláru pa ang ákung panan-aw</i>, I can still see clearly. <i>Kláru ang mikruskupyu</i>, The microscope offers a clear view. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12B2] see clearly; be, become distinct and clear. <i>Makakláru lang kug tan-aw ug dúnay kibídu</i>, I can see clearly only if I wear glasses. <i>Makláru ang litra ug gamítan ug linti</i>, The letters will be clear if you use a magnifying glass. <b>2</b> [AB12; c1] become clear, apparent; make s.t. clear. <i>Ug nagkláru ka pa dì ka untà dudáhan</i>, Had you made yourself clear, you won't have been suspected. <i>Sa katapúsan nakláru na giyud kun kinsay sad-an</i>, At last it came out clearly who was the guilty party. <i>Klarúha (ikláru) unsay ímung túyù</i>, Make it clear what you really want. <b>2a</b> [A; c] @{tell s.o. frankly}. <i>Klarúhan ta kang dì nà mahímù</i>, I'll tell you frankly that that can't be done. <b>2b</b> [A; a12] go ahead and really do s.t., not just do it half-way or a semblance of it. <i>Nag-igwad-igwad kang bayúta ka. Kláruha na lang nag sáyaw</i>, You wiggle your fanny so much when you walk, you fairy. Why don't you just dance and be done with it? <b>3</b> [A; a3] @{find out} for sure, make out s.t. clearly. <i>Nagkláru lang kug mangadtu ba ta run</i>, I'm just trying to get it clear if we're going or not. <i>Nakakláru ka ba unsay íyang gisulti?</i> Did you hear clearly what she said? <b>Makláru ba ang ákung pustísu?</b> Are my false teeth really obvious? <b>klaruhay</b> <i>v</i> [C] have s.t. clear with each other, tell each other frankly. <i>Sa katapúsan nagkaklaruhay na giyud sila unsáun pagbáyad sa útang</i>, In the end they got it clear how to pay the debt.

<p><b>klás</b> <i>a</i> showing class, @classy. <i>Ristawran nga klás</i>, A classy restaurant. <b>pirs, síkan &mdash;</b> first, second class.

<p><b>klási<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @class, @kind. <i>Primíra klási nga panaptun</i>, First class cloth. <i>Klási sa mananap</i>, A kind of animal. <i>Way mutagad ánang klasíha sa pagkatáwu</i>, No one pays that sort of person any heed. <i>v</i> [a12] @classify, @sort out by kind. <i>Klasíha ning panaptun</i>, Classify these pieces of cloth. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be of all different kinds. <i>Nagkaklási lang ang táwu sa Karbun</i>, There are all different types of persons at the Carbon market. <b>klasiklási</b> <i>a</i> be all different kinds. <i>v</i> [AB1456; a] put, be of various types or kinds. <i>Magklasiklási giyud ang táwu</i>, There are all different sorts of people. <i>Klasiklasíha pagpalit ug utanun</i>, Buy vegetables of various kinds.

<p><b>klási<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @class of students. <i>Klási sa mil nuybisyintus bayinti utsu</i>, Class of 1928. <b>2</b> @class session. <i>Way klási maduminggu</i>, There are no classes on Sundays. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] hold, @teach classes. <i>Dì kita magklási ugmà kay pista upisiyal</i>, We don't have class tomorrow. It's a legal holiday. <i>Giklasíhan mi bísag nagbagyu</i>, We held classes even though there was a typhoon. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> classmate.

<p><b>klasika</b> <i>a</i> @classical music, dance, and the like.

<p><b>klasipikar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] @{sort out}, separate by type. <i>Átù ning klasipikahung mga sambag: ang hinug diri, ang hilaw dihà</i>, We'll sort out these tamarinds: the ripe ones go over here, and green ones, over there.

<pb n=480>

<p><b>klasmit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @classmate. <b>2</b> people who have similar defects, sicknesses (colloquial). <i>Náa rang ímung klasmit u, nga hubákun sad,</i> Here comes your &lsquo;classmate&rsquo;. He is asthmatic, too. <i>v</i> [A12C; ac3] be classmates. <i>Nakaklasmit kug púlus bráyit,</i> I had nothing but bright students as classmates. <i>Nagkaklasmit mi sa Ingglis,</i> We were classmates in English.

<p><b>klas ríkurd</b> <i>n</i> teacher's @{grade book}.

<p><b>klas ring</b> <i>n</i> @{class ring} in school.

<p><b>klats</b> <i>n</i> @clutch or @{clutch pedal}. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] put in the clutch. <i>Klatsan úsà nímu antis ka mukambiyu,</i> Step on the clutch first before you shift gears.

<p><b>klik<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A23C3] for people to click with, take to each other. <i>Miklik dáyun mi,</i> We hit it off immediately.

<p><b>klik<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [BP; ac1] @click, make a clicking sound. <i>Wà kung kabantay nga miklik na diay ang kamira,</i> I was unaware that the camera had already clicked. <i>Paglingkud nákù sa taksi nagklik dáyug súgud ang mítir,</i> As soon as I was seated in the taxi, the meter began to click. <i>Ábi kug mubutu giyud ang pusil, giklíkan lang diay ku níya,</i> I thought the gun would go off, but it just clicked.

<p><b>klím</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @claim for possession. <i>Wà pay nagklím dinhi kay pablik lan pa man kini,</i> Nobody has made a claim here because it is still public land. <i>Dúna kuy klímun nga pákids sa adwána,</i> I have a package to claim at the customs bureau. <i>n</i> mining claim.

<p><b>klíma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @climate. <b>2</b> @fever. <i>v</i> [B1456] be feverish. <i>Hikápa ra ning bátà, mu ra mag nagklíma,</i> Feel the baby. She seems to be running a fever.

<p><b>kling</b> <i>n</i> word to represent the sound of ringing.

<p><b>klínik, klinika</b> <i>n</i> medical @clinic. <i>v</i> [A; b6] hold clinic hours. <i>Dúnay duktur nga muklínik sa Sintir káda Sabadu,</i> A doctor attends the clinic at the Center every Saturday.

<p><b>klinsing krim</b> <i>n</i> @{cleansing cream}. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] apply cleansing cream.

<p><b>klip</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @fasten s.t. with a @clip. <i>Nangalkag ang ákung buhuk kay wà ku makaklip (makapanglíp),</i> My hair is a mess because I didn't fasten it with a clip. <i>Klípi ang papílis arun dì magbúlag,</i> Clip the papers so they won't get separated. <i>n</i> paper or hair clip.

<p><b>klíping</b> <i>n</i> @clippings from newspapers or magazines.

<p><b>klír<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> free of T.B. or V.D. <i>v</i> [B1256] for a medical examination to come out clear.

<p><b>klír<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] give s.o. leaving a job clearance from financial or other responsibilities, <i>Dì ka pa matranspir ug dì ka pa maklír,</i> You can't transfer before you're cleared. <b>-ans</b> <i>n</i> clearance, certification of freedom from encumbrance.

<p><b>klirikal</b> <i>n</i> @{clerical work}. <i>Laáyan kug trabáhung klirikal,</i> Clerical work is boring for me.

<p><b>klirk</b> <i>n</i> @clerk. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] work as a clerk.

<p><b>klitsi</b> <i>n</i> @cut for pictures or designs to be printed. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a cut for printing. <i>Klitsíhun ning ritratúha kay iapil sa prugráma,</i> They will make a cut of this picture because it will be included in the program.

<p><b>kliyinti</b> <i>v</i> @client. <i>v</i> [B126; a2] be s.o.'s client. <i>Manlulugus ang nakliyinti ni Aturni Gu, Atty.</i> Go got a rapist for a client. <i>Maáyung kliyintíhun ang mga langyaw kay maáyung mubáyad,</i> Foreigners make good clients because they pay generously.

<p><b>kliyintíla</b> <i>n</i> @clientele.

<p><b>klum<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> term used during the war to refer to relay stations for porters which also doubled as lookout posts for approaching Japanese.

<p><b>klum<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @sluiceway for irrigation, either dug into the ground or above the ground, made of boards. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] install, make into a sluiceway.

<p><b>klúruks</b> <i>n</i> <corr sic=Cholorox>@Chlorox</corr>, solution for bleaching clothes. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)] apply Chlorox to s.t.

<p><b>klús</b> <i>a</i> being @close, @intimate. <i>Klús na kaáayu ang managtrátu,</i> The lovers are now very intimate. <i>Klús kaáyu mi sa mayur,</i> We're very close to the mayor. <i>v</i> [A23C1; a12] become intimate with s.o. <i>Muabusar nang tawhána ug ímung klúsun,</i> If you get intimate with that man, he'll take advantage of you.

<p><b>klusnik</b> <i>n</i> @turtleneck, opening at the neck, or a narrow opening which comes as far as the neck but does not cover it. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] wear s.t. with a turtleneck or near turtleneck opening. <b>2</b> [c1] cut clothing with a turtleneck opening.

<p><b>klus-úpin</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] for a baby to close and open the hand upon being told to do so. <i>Makamau nang muklus-úpin ang bátà sa íyang kamut,</i> The baby can close and open its hands when told to do so.

<p><b>krak<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> word used in writing to represent a cracking sound.

<p><b>krak<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> in table tennis, a ball bouncing in an unexpected way due to some foreign particle on the table. <i>Way kwinta sa puntus basta krak,</i> They don't count a dead ball. <i>v</i> [B26] for a ball to bounce off irregularly in table tennis.

<p><b>krákir, krákirs</b> <i>n</i> @crackers, usually square-shaped. <pb n=481><i>v</i> [A13] eat or have crackers.

<p><b>krang</b> <i>n</i> crank to start a motor. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> crank an engine to start it. <b>2</b> goad s.o. into a feeling. <i>Wà tà tu siya mangísug, ímu pung gikrangan</i>, He wouldn't have gotten angry, but you goaded him into it.

<p><b>krás<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B126; c] for vehicles to crash. <i>Nakrás ang ayruplánu (trák)</i>, The plane (bus) crashed. <i>n</i> crash, accident.

<p><b>krás<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] cancel or cross out s.t. written. <i>Kinsay mikrás sa ákung sinulat?</i> Who crossed out what I wrote? <i>Krásun nátù ang íyang ngálan sa lista</i>, Let's cross his name off of the list. <i>Ayaw nag krási kay hustu nà</i>, Don't put a line through that because it's correct.

<p><b>krás<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [B126; b8] have a crush on s.o. <i>Nakrás ku ni Sinatra</i>, I had a crush on Sinatra. <i>Artistang íyang nakrásan</i>, The actor she had a crush on. <i>n</i> crush, infatuation.

<p><b>kratsis</b> <i>n</i> crutches. <i>v</i> [A; b] use crutches. <i>Kinahanglang kratsísan nang ímung balì nga tiil</i>, You need to have crutches for your broken leg.

<p><b>kraysis</b> = <sc>KRÍSIS</sc>.

<p><b>krayula, krayúla</b> <i>n</i> crayons. <i>v</i> [A; b] draw, color with crayons.

<p><b>kridinsiyal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> documents required for enrollment in a school. <b>2</b> certificate of ownership of work animals. <i>v</i> [A; b6] make a certificate of ownership for work animals. <i>Munisipyu ang mukridinsiyal sa kábaw</i>, The municipal office makes credentials for carabaos.

<p><b>kriditu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> credit, acknowledgement of s.t. good. <b>2</b> credit rating, trust people have in one's ability to repay. <i>Maáyu siyag kriditu sa ámung tindáhan</i>, His credit is good in our store. <b>3</b> the time allowed for payment. <i>Ang kriditu nákù sa tindáhan báli rag usa ka búwan</i>, My credit in that store is only good for one month. <i>v</i> [A12] get credit for s.t. done.

<p><b>krídu</b> <i>n</i> the Nicene Creed or the part in the mass where it is recited. <i>v</i> [A1] recite the Nicene Creed; be at that part of the mass where the Nicene Creed is recited.

<p><b>krím</b> <i>n</i> cosmetic cream. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] apply cream.

<p><b>kríma</b> <i>a</i> cream-colored, cream-complexioned. <i>Kríma ang kulur sa íyang bág</i>, Her bag is cream-colored. <i>v</i> [A13; a] wear s.t. cream-colored, make s.t. cream-complexioned. <b>krimáhun</b> <i>a</i> of a creamy-complexioned sort.

<p><b>krímin</b> <i>n</i> crime. <b>-al(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who has committed a crime against a person. <b>2</b> criminal deed. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become a criminal. <b>-alidad(->)</b> <i>n</i> extent to which crime exists. <i>Midagsang ang kriminalidad sa syudad</i>, Crime has become rampant in the city.

<p><b>krín</b> <i>n</i> mechanical crane. <i>v</i> [c1] use a crane.

<p><b>kring</b> = <sc>KÍRING</sc>.

<p><b>kríp</b> <i>n</i> crepe. &mdash; <b>pípar</b> <i>n</i> crepe paper.

<p><b>krís</b> <i>n</i> a kris, double-edged sword with a wavy blade. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] wear or use a kris. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make a cris.[**kris]

<p><b>krísis</b> <i>n</i> dire scarcity of s.t. <i>Krísis sa túbig kun hulaw</i>, There's a severe shortage of water during droughts. <b>2</b> depression of the Thirties. <i>Daghang magpapatigayun nga naghíkug niadtung dakung krísis sa trayinta</i>, Many businessmen committed suicide during the Great Depression of the Thirties. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a4b4] experience severe shortage. <i>Human sa iliksiyun magkrísis (krisísun, krisísan) ang násud sa kwarta</i>, After the elections the nation will undergo a financial crisis. <b>2</b> [B26] become severely lacking. <i>Nakrísis (mikrísis) ang humay</i>, There is a severe rice shortage.

<p><b>krismas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Christmas season, day. <b>2</b> Christmas present. <i>v</i> [B56; b8] be Christmastime. &mdash; <b>kard</b> <i>n</i> Christmas greeting card. &mdash; <b>tri</b> Christmas tree.&dagger;[**f1 unsure what to do with this footnote tag]

<p><b>kristal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> crystal, brilliant glass. <b>2</b> watch glass. <b>3</b> glass pane of a showcase. &mdash; <b>bul</b> <i>n</i> crystal ball. &mdash; <b>silk</b> <i>n</i> k.o. cloth made of pressed fabric of fibrous material, soft and silky with a shiny gloss on one side. <i>v</i> [A1] wear s.t. made of crystal silk.

<p><b>kristíya</b> = <sc>SAKRISTÍYA</sc>.

<p><b>kristiyánu</b> <i>n</i> Christian person or in practice. <b>kristiyanismu</b> <i>n</i> Christianity.

<p><b>kristiyánus</b> <i>n</i> Christian person. <i>Múrus nà siya, dílì kristyánus</i>, He's a Muslim, not a Christian. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be, become a Christian.

<p><b>Kristu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <ix>name</ix> Christ. <i>v</i> [B16; a1] be like Christ. <i>Magkristu ka nga dílì ka man musúkul?</i> Do you want to be a Christ that you do not fight back? <b>iglisya ni</b> &mdash; name of a religious sect or a member thereof. &mdash; <b>Rí</b> <i>n</i> a religious feast day in honor of Christ the King. <b>kristuhánun</b> <i>a</i> Christian.&dagger;[**f1 unsure what to do with this footnote tag]

<p><b>kristu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> in cockfights, a gambler with no capital but who makes money by placing bets for other people who give him a cut of their winnings.

<p><b>krít</b> <i>n</i> crate. <i>v</i> [A; c1] put s.t. in a crate. <i>Mga dilikádung butang ang ílang krítun (ikrít)</i>, They will put the fragile things in crates.

<p><b>kritikal</b> <i>a</i> critical, grave. <i>Kritikal ang kahimtang sa masakitun</i>, The patient's condition is critical.

<p><b>kritiku</b> <i>n</i> critic.

<pb n=482>

<p><b>kriyáda</b> = <sc>KRIYÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>kriyádu</b> <i>n</i> household help. <i>v</i> [B6; a2] be, become a servant.

<p><b>kriyulína</b> <i>n</i> a disinfectant compound, so called from the trade name Creolin.

<p><b>krúdu</b> <i>n</i> crude oil. <i>v</i> [B124; b] get crude oil on it.

<p><b>krukidnul, krukignul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> croquignole, a method of making the hair wavy by winding the hair around metal rods and applying heat or chemicals, or a hairstyle fashioned by this method, e.g., like the hair styles[**"hairstyle" above] of the Thirties. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wave the hair by this method or wear the hair in this style.

<p><b>krumyu</b> <i>n</i> chromium.

<p><b>krúnir</b> <i>n</i> crooner. <i>v</i> [B56; a2] be a crooner.

<p><b>krus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cross. <b>2</b> the cross one has to bear. <i>Ang palahúbug kung anak mauy ákung krus</i>, My drunkard son is the cross I must bear. <i>v</i> [B156] become the cross one has to bear. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> hammerhead shark.

<p><b>krusáda</b> <i>n</i> crusade, vigorous campaign for or against s.t. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] crusade for s.t.

<p><b>krúsing</b> <i>n</i> place where a path or road crosses another path, road, or a river. <i>Didtu siya banhígi sa may krúsing</i>, He was ambushed near the highway intersection.

<p><b>krusipíhu</b> <i>n</i> crucifix. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] wear, place, show s.t. a crucifix. <i>Mudágan ang abat ug krusipihúan</i>, The ghost will run away if you raise the crucifix at it. <b>2</b> [a12] make a crucifix.

<p><b>krusipiksiyun</b> <i>n</i> the crucifixion of Jesus.

<p><b>krusláyin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> misconnection in a telephone where, when one dials a busy number, one can talk to another party which also has dialed a busy number. <b>2</b> action of purposely dialing a number one knows to be busy in the hopes of finding s.o. to talk to through the cross line. <b>v</b> [A1NC1; b(1)] look for s.o. to talk to by the cross line.

<p><b>krus raypul</b> <i>n</i> crossed rifles, the insignia of the infantry. <i>v</i> [A1; c] wear this insignia.

<p><b>krus rúha</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Red Cross. <b>2</b> red cross pin.

<p><b>krutsay</b> = <sc>KURUTSAY</sc>.

<p><b>krutsítis</b> = <sc>KUTSÍTIS</sc>.

<p><b>ku</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>AKU</sc>.

<p><b>kuadhutur, kuadutur</b> <i>n</i> assistant priest to the parish priest. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become an assistant priest.

<p><b>kuan</b> <b>1</b> <ix>pause word used to fill in when the speaker cannot think of the right word:</ix> um, well. <i>Kining, kuan, Day! Ikúhà kug bir!</i> Err, um, you. Bring me some beer. <b>1a</b> as a verb (with any affixes). <i>Human nímu pagkuan, pánit, ímung kuanun, pikásun, aw kuanan úsà, hugásan,</i> After you um, whatchamacallit, peel it, you, umm, cut it up, rather um, wash it. <b>2</b> word used to avoid saying a taboo word. <i>Maáyung kusiun sa kuan</i>, It would be nice to pinch her in the &mdash;[**unsure if dash is omitted word or a separator] you know (the genitalia). <i>Pwirting kuánay níla</i>, My how they were busy doing IT. <b>pakuankúan</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] pretend to be s.t. <i>Nagpakuankúan siyang dátù</i>, He was pretending to be rich.

<p><b>kuaw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for s.t. packed in s.t. to be lacking, not tightly filled. <i>Ayaw ku baligyáig puspurung kuaw</i>, Don't sell me boxes of matches that are not filled. <i>Kuawng itlug</i>, An addled egg (egg that has failed to develop and has an empty area inside it). <b>2 &mdash; ug útuk</b> addle-brained, confused, not having complete thinking functions. <i>Kuaw ug útuk ang tigúwang, Mawálà ug mulakaw</i>, The old woman is confused. She gets lost whenever she goes out. <b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> get to be lacking in content. <i>Ngánung nakúaw man ning biskwit? Inyung gikan-an?</i> How come this box of crackers isn't full? Did you eat any of them? <b>2</b> for the brain to get confused.

<p><b>kúaw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AB; a] disturb liquids, thrash them about; get disturbed. <i>Mukúaw ang túbig sa subà kun magbahà</i>, Water in the river gets all muddy when it floods. <i>Ayaw kutáwa ang kapi kay makúaw ang linugdang</i>, Don't stir the coffee because you will stir up the sediment. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> for liquids to be disturbed, mixed up.

<p><b>k[=ú]b</b> = <sc>KÚLUB</sc>.

<p><b>kuba</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] for the chest to tighten from fright or from suddenly realizing s.t. frightening. <i>Mikuba ang ákung dughan kay dihay misinggit</i>, I got a tight feeling in my chest because I heard a scream. <i>Gikubahan ku kay dinhay ákung nabyaan</i>, I felt my chest tighten because I forgot s.t. <i>n</i> a pang in the chest from fright. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B; b(1)] for the heart to beat in a pounding way. <i>Nagkúba ákung dughan humag túngas sa bakilid</i>, My heart pounded after I climbed the slope. <b>kubakuba</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for the chest to pound wildly, repeatedly. <i>Nagkubakuba ang ákung dughan samtang nagtíun ku sa liyun</i>, My heart pounded wildly as I aimed at the lion.

<p><b>kúbà</b> = <sc>KULBÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kubad</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for children to be moving around too much, making a nuisance of themselves. <i>Dì ta makasuwat dinhi kay kubad kaáyu ning mga bataána</i>, I can't write properly because these children are running about too much. <b>2</b> engaging in vice constantly. <i>Kubad na kaáyu siya sa panúgal</i>, He is a constant gambler. <b>3</b> thoughtless or tactless in speech. <i>Naghisgut sa ákung kirída atubángan sa ákung <pb n=483>asáwa. Dì ba nà kubad?</i> He talked about my girl friend in front of my wife. That's what I call stupid. <b>3a</b> asking questions when one knows the answer.<i> Kubára nímu uy. Nakakità sa ákung gidala, nangutána pa</i>, You sure are stupid. You saw what I brought, so why ask? <i>v</i> [B] <b>1</b> move around too much. <b>2</b> engage in a vice constantly. <i>Nakubad siya sa babáyi</i>, He became woman crazy. <b>3</b> become thoughtless in action and speech. <b>4</b> do things quickly in a rapid, careless manner. <i>Mikubad man lang tug ági</i>, He just walked by in a flash. <i>Nagkubad ang bàbà ni Dyíni nga nakig-áway</i>, Jenny's mouth rattled away as she fought. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B] <b>1</b> move about much too much. <b>2</b> engage in a vice to an extreme degree. <i>Mikúbad ang pinalitay sa balúta</i>, There was rampant vote buying. <i>Manday natigúwang, mikúbad sa pamabáyi</i>, In his old age, he has gotten worse and worse in his lust for women.

<p><b>kubal, kúbal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> callus. <b>2</b> thick skin on a pig. <i>Maáyung tsitsarunun ang kúbal sa bábuy</i>, The thick part of the pig's skin is good for fried pork rinds. <i>v</i> [B1246; b(1)] develop calluses. <i>Gikubálan na lang ning ákung túhud ug linuhud wà gihápun dungga ang ákung pag-ampù</i>, I have been praying until I got calluses on my knees, but my prayers were never answered. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> thick-skinned, callused. <i>v</i> [B126] become callused. <b>kubalkúbal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. salt-water fish with thick and tough skin.

<p><b>kubana</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.

<p><b>kubanug</b> = <sc>KUKUG BANUG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUKU</sc>.

<p><b>kubásà</b> = <sc>KALABÁSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kúbaw</b> = <sc>KÚBAL</sc>.

<p><b>kubay</b> <i>n</i> name given to young bean pods that are eaten, the young of the <ix>balátung, tahúri, munggu</ix>, and <ix>habitsuylas</ix>.

<p><b>kubiku</b> <i>n</i> cubic meters.

<p><b>kubìkubì</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] <b>1</b> touch, monkey with. <i>Ayaw kubìkubia ang mga butang sa lamísa</i>, Do not mess with the things on the table. <b>2</b> touch things to steal them. <i>Wà gyud ku makakubìkubì sa mga butang sa ímung bulsa</i>, I have never touched the things in your pocket. <b>-un, -an</b> <i>a</i> having the tendency to monkey with things or engage in petty thievery.

<p><b>kubil</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] touch s.t. so as to do s.t. to it. <i>Bunálan giyud nákug dúnay mukubil ning ákung papílis</i>, I'll spank anyone who touches my papers. <i>Unyà na nákù ni kubila kay gabíi na</i>, I'll work on this later because it's now late.

<p><b>kubing</b> <i>n</i> tripletail, a k.o. fish: <b><i>Lobotes surinamensis.</b></i>

<p><b>kúbir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cover. <i>Kúbir sa magasin</i>, Magazine cover. <b>2</b> amount charged per setting in a dinner party at a restaurant. <i>Tagsingku písus ang kúbir sa parti</i>, The party will be five pesos per person. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] cover s.t. <i>Kubíri ang libru</i>, Put a cover on the book. <b>2</b> [A; a] take cover, shelter. <i>Mukúbir ta ánang batu inigpinusílay</i>, Let's take cover behind that rock when the firing starts. <b>2a</b> [A; b] cover up for s.t. <i>Bisag unsay íyang buhátun kubíran dáyun sa inahan arun dì hibaw-an sa amahan</i>, Whatever he does his mother will cover it up, so the father won't find out. <b>2b</b> [A; b] shield s.o. in a ball game. <i>Kubíri ku samtang magdríbul ku</i>, Cover me while I dribble. <b>3</b> [a3] be put on a magazine cover. <i>Makúbir si Imilda sa Layip</i>, Imelda will be on the cover of Life. <b>4</b> [A] give s.t. news or radio-TV coverage. <i>Ang istasiyun sa radyu diway-ar-ip mauy nikúbir sa dakung súnug sa dálan kulun</i>, Station DYRF covered the big fire on Colon Street. <b>kubirkúbir</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>walà, dílì</b> &mdash; be direct, keep nothing concealed where propriety would require the opposite. <i>Wà siya magkubirkúbir sa íyang pagkadisgrasyáda</i>, She made no bones about not being a virgin. <b>way</b> &mdash; frank, without concealing anything (when one should).

<p><b>kubirta</b> = <sc>KUBYIRTA</sc>.

<p><b>kubirtus</b> = <sc>KUBYIRTUS</sc>.

<p><b>kubit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] touch s.o., curling the fingers to get his attention. <i>Milíngì ku kay dihay ningkubit nákù</i>, I turned around because s.o. poked me. <b>1a</b> turn to s.o. influential for help. <i>Dúna ba tay makubit didtu sa kustums?</i> Do we have anybody influential to help us out in the custom? <b>1b</b> [A1; a2b2] steal s.t. not of great value. <i>Bantayi nà kay kubitun unyà nà</i>, Keep an eye on it because s.o. might lift it. <b>1c</b> [A2; a12] get a woman for illicit sex. <i>Wà giyuy mukubit niánang tigulánga</i>, No one wants to have an affair with that old woman. <b>2</b> [A; a12] take the bait. <i>Kusug mukubit ang isdà ánang paúna</i>, Fishes like to take that k.o. bait. <b>2a</b> [A12; b4] catch a fish by hook and line. <i>Nakakubit ang mananagat ug íhu</i>, The fisherman caught a shark. <i>Gikubitan kug bugáung</i>, I caught a jarbua. <b>2b</b> [A2; a12] hook s.o. in marriage. <i>Nakakubit siyag sapíang bálu</i>, She hooked a rich widower. <b>2c</b> &mdash; <b>ug way paun</b> <b>2c1</b> confirm s.t. bad the interlocutor suspects but doesn't know for sure by assuming that he does know for sure and letting out s.t. to confirm it. <i>Wà tà ka hibaw-i, ningkubit ka sa tagà nga way paun. <pb n=484>Nabistu na hinúun</i>, I wouldn't have known about you but you took the bait. Now I found out. <b>2c2</b> butt in in a conversation where one has no business or answer remarks intended for s.o. else. <i>Dílì ikaw ang gisultíhan, ngánung mukubit ka man dihà nga way paun?</i> I wasn't talking to you. Why do you butt in when I wasn't talking to you? <i>n</i> fish caught with hook and line. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> biting of fish. <i>Hínay ang kúbit basta way súg</i>, Fish don't bite if there is no current.

<p><b>kubkub<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] dig away dirt scooping it with the hands or with a similar motion using an instrument. <i>Gikubkub sa irù ang gilubung níyang bukug</i>, The dog dug up the bones he had buried. <i>Ilang kubkúbun (kubkúban) ang daplin sa sapà arun mutubig</i>, They will dig a shallow hole next to the river to get water. <i>n</i> shallow well made by scooping sand out in the vicinity of the river, seashore, or above an underground spring. <b>-ay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. narrow spade or a long pole used to dislodge rocks. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> s.t. one can easily scoop out to dig a hole.

<p><b>kubkub<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> purse seine or impounding net used to catch fishes that run in schools. The school is surrounded with the net which is then pursed at the bottom. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b6] catch with the <ix>kubkub</ix> net.

<p><b>kublà</b> = <sc>KULBÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kubli, kublì</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] take cover, hide behind s.t. to keep from being seen. <i>Mikublì ku sa pakshul</i>, I took cover in the foxhole. <i>Mikubli ku luyu sa pusti</i>, I hid behind the post.

<p><b>kubra<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] get money coming to one or collect a debt. <i>Nikubra na ka sa ímung swildu?</i> Have you already drawn your salary? <i>Kubráha ang ábang</i>, Collect the rent. <i>Basta dátù dílì kubrahan sa buhis</i>, As long as he's rich, no one will collect taxes from him. <b>2</b> [A; ab7] pull in a rope or a string. <i>Kubráha na ang pundu kay mularga na ta</i>, Lift the anchor. We are leaving. <i>Kubráhi ug mga bayinti ka dupa ang tugut</i>, Pull in twenty fathoms of rope. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> fish harvested from fishing gear. <i>Kubráda sa bungsud</i>, Harvest from the fish corral. <i>v</i> [A] collect fish caught s.w. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> bill collector. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156] be, become a bill collector. <b>2</b> [A12] have as bill collector. <b>-nsa</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUBRANSA</sc>.

<p><b>kubra<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> cobra. <b>rid</b> &mdash; <i>n</i> breed of fighting cock.

<p><b>kubransa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] make a collection of a certain amount. <i>Mukubransa kug duul ug manggátus káda adlaw</i>, I collect almost a hundred pesos daily. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of collecting. <b>2</b> amount collected or bill presented.

<p><b>kubri<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>KUBLI</sc>.

<p><b>kubri<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. simple kerosene lamp made of a flat bottomed metal cup with a spout having a wick on it.

<p><b>kubri<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] cover one's obligation or what is lacking. <i>Dúnay nagkubri sa ákung amutan kay wà man ku paningli</i>, S.o. paid for my obligation because nobody collected from me.

<p><b>kubrikáma</b> <i>n</i> bedspread, bed cover. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put a bedspread on a bed. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a bedspread.

<p><b>kubu</b> = <sc>KUBA</sc>.

<p><b>kubù</b> <i>a</i> stoop-shouldered. <i>Ságad sa mga tisísun kubù</i>, Most people with TB are stoop-shouldered. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] stoop a little, bend over. <i>Nikubù siya pag-ági sa mabang pultahan</i>, He stooped when he went through the low door. <b>2</b> [B] for the posture to be hunched over.

<p><b>kubul</b> <i>v</i> [B2] <b>1</b> for s.t. cooked to come out tough or hardened. <i>Mukubul ang pánit sa giasal kun dì humdan ug túbig</i>, The roast pig skin becomes tough if it has been roasted without daubing water on it. <i>Nagkakubul na ang kindi nga ákung gilútù</i>, The candy I'm cooking is gradually hardening. <b>2</b> become hardened, insensitive. <i>Mikubul (nakubul) na ang íyang kasingkásing sa tanang biaybíay</i>, Her feelings have become hardened to any and all insults. <i>Nagkakubul ang ákung láwas sa katugnaw</i>, My body is gradually becoming inured to the cold. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> hardened. <b>2</b> hardened in feelings, insensitive. <i>Kubul siya sa mga pakilúuy</i>, She is insensitive to pleas for mercy. <b>kublan</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> invulnerable. <i>Dì nà siya dutlan ug bála kay kublan</i>, Bullets can't pierce him because he is invincible. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUBUL</sc>, a. <i>v</i> [B] become invulnerable.

<p><b>kubung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> drinking glass made of a piece of bamboo some 5" long cut just below a node which serves as the bottom. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c16] make into such a bamboo glass. <b>2</b> [A13; c1] use or put s.t. in such a bamboo glass.

<p><b>kubung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> protective covering. <b>2</b> mosquito net. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] put up a protective covering, make into a protective covering. <i>Gikubungan sa mananagat ang lampara arun dì mapálung</i>, The fisherman put a covering over the lamp to keep the wind from blowing it.

<p><b>kubung<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> = <sc>KÚLUT</sc>.

<p><b>kúbung</b> <i>n</i> keyhole limpets, limpets with a small hole at the top of the shell, living in shallow water.

<p><b>kubus</b> <b>a</b> low in amount. <i>Kubus ang bili sa ismágul</i>, <pb n=485>Smuggled goods are cheap. <i>v</i> [AB2; b7c] for an amount to become less, cause it to do so. <i>Mukubus ang swildu ug hínay ang nigusyu</i>, Salaries go down when business is poor. <i>Kubsan ang ímung tagal sa pagbáyad sa útang</i>, We'll shorten the term for you to pay off the debt.

<p><b>kubut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; b(1)] hold, take hold of s.t. <i>Kinsay nagkubut sa lyábi?</i> Who has the key? <i>Magkúbut ta arun dì ta magkabúwag</i>, We'll hold hands so that we won't be separated. [**f1: bold looks like scan error] <i>Nawálà ang lápis nga ákung gikubtan</i>, The pencil I was holding got lost. <b>1a</b> [AN; b6(1)N] hold on to s.t. to keep from falling. <i>Nangubut (mikubut) siya nákù kay danglug</i>, He held on to me because it was slippery. <b>1b</b> [A3; b8] get hold of s.t. to have it. <i>Wà pa ku makakubut ánang kantidára</i>, I had not held such an amount (of money). <i>Hikubtan sa pulis ang kawatan nga miiskápu</i>, The policeman happened to get hold of the thief who was about to escape. <b>1c</b> [A2] hold on by sticking to it. <i>Ang iskats tip mukubut kaáyu sa átung papitlan niíni</i>, Scotch tape adheres well to whatever you stick it to. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] occupy, hold a certain position or office. <i>Ang katungdanan nga íyang gikubtan</i>, The position he is holding. <b>3</b> [A; b26] handle, play, operate. <i>Maáyu siyang mukubut sa sista</i>, She plays the guitar well. <i>Sipii ang nagkubut sa íyang libru sa tindáhan</i>, A CPA takes care of the accounts in their store. <b>4</b> [A; b(1)] keep a mistress. <i>Dúna siyay gikubtan nga hustis</i>, He has a night club hostess for a mistress. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] wed s.o. on his deathbed by just having the couple hold hands and blessing them. <i>Kadaghan na makakúbut ang párì ug himatyung páris nga nabúhì</i>, The priest has officiated at many deathbed weddings where the dying partner recovered. <b>kubtanan</b> <i>n</i> handle. <b>kinubtánan</b> <i>n</i> keepsake among close friends or sweethearts.

<p><b>kubútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN</sc>.

<p><b>kubyirta</b> <i>n</i> covered decks of ships.

<p><b>kubyirtus</b> <i>n</i> silverware. <i>v</i> [A1; c] use silverware. <i>Magkubyirtus mig mangáun kun adúnay bisíta</i>, We use silverware when we have visitors. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put silverware on the table.

<p><b>kúd</b> <i>n</i> code, secret writing. <i>v</i> [A13] write in code.

<p><b>k[=ú]d</b> = <sc>KÚLUD</sc>.

<p><b>kudak</b> <i>n</i> camera. <i>v</i> [A; b] take pictures. <i>Maáyu kudakan nang byúha</i>, That is a good view to take a picture of. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] have one's picture taken. <i>Nagpakudak ang bag-ung kasal</i>, The newly weds had their pic-*