


<p><b>milù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. civet similar to the <i>maral</i>, but
lighter in color and not so odorous.

<p><b>milun, mílun</b> <i>n</i> @cantaloupe: <b><i>Cucumis melo</i></b>.

<p><b>milung</b> <i>v</i> [B126] feel disappointed and embarrassed
that s.t. expected did not turn out
to be or happen. <i>Dà, namilung lagi sila kay
walà man diay salída sa sini, labun pa, walà
na giyud maniudtu,</i> They were embarrassed
and disappointed. There was no movie that
day, and they had gone without even eating
lunch.

<p><b>milya</b> <i>n</i> @mile. <i>v</i> [B256] be, get to be about
one mile. <i>Mumilya giyud ang gilay-un,</i> The
distance is about a mile. <b>-hi</b> <i>n</i> @mileage.

<p><b>milyun</b> <i>n</i> @million. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>. <b>&mdash; dálar
ismayil</b> <i>n</i> a million dollar smile. <b>&mdash; dálar ligs</b>
<i>n</i> shapely legs. <b>-arya</b> = <sc>MILYUNARYU</sc> (female).
<b>-aryu</b> <i>n</i> @millionaire. <i>v</i> [B16] be, become
a @millionaire.

<p><b>milyun pláwir</b> <i>n</i> k.o. low, ornamental shrub
with large, rounded, hairy leaves and clusters
of blue or pinkish flowers: <b><i>Hydrangea
macrophylla</i></b>.

<p><b>mimbru</b> <i>n</i> @member. <i>Mimbru sa simbahan,</i>
Church member. <i>v</i> [B156; c16] be, make a
@member. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] join s.t. to become a
@member.

<p><b>mími</b> baby talk for: <b>1</b> going to sleep. <b>2</b> drinking.
<i>v</i> [A23] sleep or drink.

<p><b>míming</b> <i>n</i> term of endearment for a cat.

<p><b>mímis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [c] @rub s.t. violently on s.t. <i>Gimímis
sa iring ang ilagang gitangag dihas yútà,</i>
The cat rubbed the rat it was holding in its
mouth on the ground.

<p><b>mímis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a variety of first-class rice having
white, smooth, shiny, slender, and long
grains. <b>2</b> any first-class white rice.

<p><b>mímu, mimurandum</b> <i>n</i> @memorandum.

<p><b>mimuráyis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @memorize. <b>2</b> [a12]
skip a meal. <i>Gimimuráyis ku ang paniudtu,</i>
I skipped lunch.

<p><b>mimurya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @memorize. <b>2</b> [a12]
skip a meal. <i>Gimimurya námù ámung pamáhaw
sa ámung byáhi,</i> We skipped our breakfast
during our trip.

<p><b>mimyu</b> = <sc>MIMYUGRAP</sc>.

<p><b>mimyugrap</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @mimeograph. <i>Magmimyugrap
ku sa prugráma,</i> I am going to
mimeograph the program. <b>tig-</b> <i>n</i> @mimeographer.

<p><b>mína<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mine, mineral deposit. <b>2</b> explosive
mine. <i>v</i> [A; a2] mine a mineral deposit. <b>minahan</b>
<i>n</i> @mine. <i>Túa siya magtrabáhu sa minahan,</i>
He is working in the mine. <b>minahun</b>
<i>n</i> mineral deposit to be mined.

<pb n=1402>

<p><b>mína<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> situation in pool wherein two or
more balls are in contact with each other
and the one in the back is directly in line
with one of the pocket holes, so that it is
almost certain that the ball or balls in front
will be knocked into the hole. <i>Sigurádung
masúd nang utsu kay mína man,</i> The eight
ball will surely go into the hole because
they are directly aligned.

<p><b>minandis</b> = <sc>MANANDIS</sc>.

<p><b>Mindanaw</b> <i>n</i> @Mindanao.

<p><b>ming-</b> = <sc>MI-</sc>.

<p><b>míng</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound used to call cats. <b>2</b> baby talk
for a cat.

<p><b>míngaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @lonely, @deserted. <i>Míngaw ang balay,
kay nanáug ang tanan,</i> The house is deserted
because everyone went out. <b>2</b> @lonely
in feeling. <i>Míngaw ang syudad ug istranyu
ka,</i> A city is a lonely place for a stranger. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [B; b6] be lonely, quiet. <i>Nagmingaw ka
man gud, ikaw ra bang usa?</i> You seem to
be lonely. Are you alone? <b>2</b> [a4b3] feel
@homesick, miss s.o. <i>Wà ka ba mingáwa (mingawa)
sa ímung mga bátà?</i> Didn't you miss
your children? <i>Buut akung magpaduul gayud
sa namingáwan (gikamingáwan) kung
asáwa,</i> I want very much to be near my
wife whom I miss so much. <b>&mdash; sa gunting</b> <i>v</i>
[a12] for hair to be uncut (humorous).
<i>Ang buhuk sa mga Bítuls gimíngaw sa gunting,</i>
The Beatles' hair is lonely for the scissors.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @loneliness, @homesickness. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i>
@quiet, @silent. <i>Mamíngaw nga kagabhíun,</i>
Quiet night. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @lonely. <i>Mamingáwun
kaáyu siya sukad mamatay ang íyang bána,</i>
She has been lonely since her husband died.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>a</i> lonely, deserted place. <i>Nagtubù siya
sa kamingáwan sa kabukíran,</i> He grew up in
the lonely mountains.

<p><b>minghuy</b> = <sc>PINGHUY</sc>.

<p><b>mingkay</b> <i>n</i> endearing term for a cat.

<p><b>mingming</b> = <sc>MÍNG</sc>.

<p><b>minì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @unintelligent. <i>Lisud ikasulti ning minì
kay láin ug tubag,</i> It is difficult to talk
with an unintelligent person because he
can't answer to the point. <b>2</b> @fake, @counterfeit.
<i>Kwartang minì,</i> Counterfeit money.
<i>Diplúmang minì</i>, Fake diploma.

<p><b>min-ibin</b>, <b>min-ibint</b> <i>n</i> main event in boxing.
<i>v</i> [A13] hold a main event. [+]

<p><b>minimu<sub>2</sub></b>, <b>minimum</b> <i>n</i> @{minimum wage}. <i>Sayis
ang adlaw ang minimu karun,</i> The minimum
wage is six pesos a day. <i>v</i> [A; c1] pay a minimum
wage.

<p><b>minindyaytis</b> <i>n</i> @meningitis. <i>v</i> [a4] be afflicted
with meningitis.

<p><b>miniral</b>, <b>minirális</b> <i>n</i> @minerals. <i>Miniral nga gikinahanglan
sa láwas,</i> Minerals which the
<pb n=1403>body requires. <i>Ang yútà sa Sibu tugub sa
mga miniral,</i> The lands in Cebu are rich in
minerals.

<p><b>minirba</b> <i>n</i> hand-fed printing press (so called
from the trade name, Minerva).

<p><b>miníru</b> <i>n</i> @miner. <i>v</i> [B1456] be a miner.

<p><b>miniskirt</b> <i>n</i> @miniskirt, k.o. skirt that hugs the
hips and is 2&ndash;5" above the knee. <i>v</i> [A] wear
a miniskirt.

<p><b>ministil</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MISTIL</sc>.

<p><b>ministiryu</b> <i>n</i> divine or religious ministration.
@
The church's ministry is to the whole world.

<p><b>ministru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @minister, usually of a Protestant
church. <b>2</b> minister to a head of state. <b>primir
&mdash;</b> @{prime minister}. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a
church minister or minister to a head of
state.

<p><b>míns</b> <i>n</i> @menstruation. <i>v</i> [A13; a4] have menstruation.
<i>Ayaw kalígug magmíns (minsun)
ka,</i> Don't bathe if you're menstruating.

<p><b>minsáhi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> message left for s.o. <i>Nagbílin bag
minsáhi ang mitilipunu nákù?</i> Did the man
who called me leave a message? <b>2</b> @message.
<i>Ang minsáhi sa Santu Pápa,</i> The Pope's message.
<b>-ru</b> <i>n</i> @messenger. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become
a messenger.

<p><b>mintal</b> <i>n</i> @{mental hospital}. <i>v</i> [B1256] wind
up in a mental hospital. <i>Ayaw pagpalábig
hunàhúnà sa ímung prublíma kay mamintal
ka unyà,</i> Don't worry too much about your
problem or you'll wind up in the loony bin.

<p><b>mintalidad</b> <i>n</i> @mentality, @{mental ability} or way
of thinking. <i>Mubù kaáyug mintalidad ang
mga bátà sa ákung klási,</i> The children in my
class are of a low mental ability. <i>Mau nay
mintalidad sa mga batan-un karun,</i> That's
the way young people think these days.

<p><b>mintira</b> <i>a</i> pronouncing words with phonemes
metathesized, e.g. <i>balyu</i> for <i>baylu</i>, <i>sùdan</i>
for <i>sud-an</i>, etc. <i>v</i> [B; c1] pronounce words
with phonemes reversed. <i>Nagmintíra ang íyang
ubang púlung kay natakdan sa mga
taga Simala,</i> He pronounces some of his
words with the sounds reversed because his
speech is influenced by the Simala speech.

<p><b>mintiryu</b> <i>n</i> @cemetery. <i>v</i> [B1256] @die (lit. go
to the cemetery). <i>Sa ímung kabágis mamintiryu
giyud kag sayu,</i> You are such a ruffian
you won't live long.

<p><b>mintras</b> while, during or the time that. <i>Mintras
naghulat ka, pagkalingawg basabása dihà,</i>
While you are waiting, just amuse yourself
reading. <i>Paglípay mintras búhì pa,</i> Enjoy
yourself while you're still alive. <b>&mdash; tantu</b>
<b>1</b> = <sc>MINTRAS</sc>. <b>2</b> for the time being. <i>Lápis
lay gamíta mintras tantu nga wà tay bulpin,</i>
Just use a pencil for the time being since
<pb n=1404>we have no ball point pen.

<p><b>mintul</b> <i>n</i> @{mentholated candy}.

<p><b>mínù</b> <i>n</i> <i>a</i> magic spell cast by supernatural inhabitants
of forested areas on persons wandering
in their area. The victim is caused to
see mirages and loses his way. The mirage
may consist of trails diverging from the
main path or thick underbush, so that the
trail vanishes, or a person whom the traveler
follows and then vanishes. The spell may
last for days but can be counteracted if the
victim removes his clothing and puts it back
on inside out. <i>v</i> [a4] be lost because of the
<i>mínù</i> spell.

<p><b>minúdu</b> <i>a</i> sold in small quantities. <i>Binaskit
giyud ang sambag, dílì minúdu,</i> You have to
buy the tamarinds by the basket; you can't
buy just a few. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sell in small quantity
or amount. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [c6] for a young
woman to engage in sex occasionally. <i>Ayaw
ipaminúdu ang ímung pagkababáyi,</i> Don't
sell your virtue bit by bit (i.e. don't give in
to sexual advances).

<p><b>minuldi</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MULDI</sc>.

<p><b>minúnga</b> = <sc>BINÚNGA</sc>.

<p><b>min-úpis</b> <i>n</i> @{main office}.

<p><b>minur<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> in @{low gear} or speed. <i>Gibutang ku
sa minur ang mútur,</i> I put the motorcycle
at low gear. <b>2</b> for engines to be revolving at
slow speed, idling speed. <i>v</i> [B6; b7c] for an
engine to slow down. <i>Wà siya muminur sa
kurbáda,</i> He didn't slow down at the curve.
<i>Ningminur ang dágan sa makina kay way
gasulína,</i> The engine slowed down because
it ran out of gasoline. <b>minurmínur</b> <i>v</i> [b7]
decrease the intensity of, or the amount of
work. <i>Minurminúri lang ang ímung káun arun
dílì ka mutambuk,</i> Decrease your food
intake so that you will not grow fat.

<p><b>minur<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{minor key}. <b>2</b> @{minor chord}. <b>3</b>
songs in a minor key.

<p><b>minur diidad</b> <i>n</i> @{minor in age}.

<p><b>minuríya</b> <i>n</i> @minority.

<p><b>mínus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @few, @{less in quantity}. <i>Mínus ang abut
run kay húlaw,</i> The yield is lower this
time because of the long drought. <i>Mínus
kaáyu ang pumapálit ánang klasíhas panaptun,</i>
Few buy that kind of cloth. <b>2</b> @low. <i>Mínus
ang grádu,</i> Having low marks. <b>3</b> @{inferior
in quality}. <i>Ayawg palit íni kay mínus kaáyung
klasíha,</i> Don't buy this because it's an
inferior sort. <b>4</b> @{slow in comprehension}. <i>Ikaw
kay mínus ka, dílì dáyun makasabut,</i>
Because you are slow in comprehension
you don't get it right. <i>v</i> [APB6; b7] @lower
or @reduce; be less, get scarce. <i>Dílì giyud mumínus
(mamínus) sa kinyintus ang ákung
kítà,</i> My income will not be less than five
<pb n=1405>hundred pesos. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b] look down
haughtily on s.t. <i>Nakaminus ka nákù nga
biyà may ímung ihátag?</i> Do you look
down on me since you give me the rejects?
<i>Gikaminusan níla ang ímung trabáhu,</i> They
look down on the kind of job you have.

<p><b>minuskula</b> <i>n</i> @{lower case letters}.

<p><b>minutíru</b> <i>n</i> @{minute hand} of a clock.

<p><b>minútu</b> <i>n</i> @minute. <i>Lima na lang ka minútu sa
dílì pa ang alas singku,</i> It is five minutes before
five o'clock. <b>-s</b> @minutes (used after the
numbers of Spanish origin). <i>Dus minútus,</i>
Two minutes. <i>see also</i> <sc>UNMINÚTU</sc>.

<p><b>minyak</b>, <b>minyat</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small musk shrew.

<p><b>minyù</b> <i>a</i> @married. <i>Pagdagínut na kay minyù
ka na,</i> Be thrifty because you're married
now. <i>Daghan sa mga minyù nga nanagbúlag,</i>
Many married couples have separated. <i>v</i> [B16C; ab]
get married. <i>Gustu na si Rumulítu
nga magminyù,</i> Romulito wants to get married
now. <i>Ug maminyù na ku,</i> When I am
married. <i>Makigminyù na ang ákung trátu,</i>
My girl friend wants to get married now.
<i>Minyúun (paminyúun) sila arun dì magkawatkawat
sa gawas,</i> Let's let them get married
so they won't be meeting outside in secret.
<i>Gipaburusan siya, piru wà minyúi,</i> He
made her pregnant but did not marry her.
<b>ka-un</b> <i>n</i> @marriage. <i>Gihiúsa sila sa kaminyúun,</i>
They were united in marriage. <i>Kinabúhì
sa kaminyúun,</i> Married life. <b>mag-l-</b> <i>n</i> about
to get married.

<p><b>míra</b> <i>n</i> @myrrh.

<p><b>mirakul</b> <i>a</i> persons short in height (humorous&mdash;so
called from miracle rice, a newly developed
variety of rice which ripens rapidly).
<b>&mdash; rayis</b> <i>n</i> @{miracle rice}.

<p><b>miramíra</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] wave the fingers at s.o. in
anger. <i>Gimiramiráhan ku níya, mu rag si kinsang
dunyáha,</i> She waved her fingers at me
as if she were some grand señora.

<p><b>mirasul</b> <i>n</i> @sunflower: <b><i>Helianthus annuus</i></b>.

<p><b>mirída</b> <i>n</i> @{bad omen}, usually portending death
of s.o. far away. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)] for a portent
of death to appear. <i>Pagkamatay ni Pidil
sa Manílà nagmirída sa íla kay may itum
nga alibangbang nga nagtuyuktúyuk,</i> When
Fidel died, there was an omen that appeared
to them: a black butterfly fluttering
about in their house.

<p><b>miriguráwun</b> <i>n</i> a children's game in which all
the participants hold hands to form a circle;
then they let the circle turn singing at the
same time.

<p><b>mirkánu</b> = <sc>AMIRIKÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>miriku</b> <i>n</i> folk doctor that treats illnesses of
natural or supernatural cause. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; b(1)]
be, become a folk doctor. <b>2</b> [A; c1]
<pb n=1406>have a sickness treated by a folk doctor. <i>Imiriku
(mirikuha) kanang ímung buyagbuyag,</i>
Have a folk doctor take care of that
skin ailment. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] go to a folk doctor
for treatment.

<p><b>mirinda</b> = <sc>MIRYINDA</sc>.

<p><b>miringgi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @meringue. <i>v</i> [A; a] make meringue,
put meringue on s.t.

<p><b>mirísi</b> expression indicating that s.o. got his
just desserts. <i>Mirísi nga nahúlug ka kay kiat
man,</i> That's what you get when you won't
sit still. Now you fell.

<p><b>miritu</b> <i>n</i> @merit, praiseworthy quality. <i>Way
miritu ang ímung paghátag ug hinábang ug
ímung gikabug-at sa buut,</i> There is no merit
in giving help with strings attached.

<p><b>mirkádu</b> <i>n</i> @market. <i>Mamalit kug útan ug sibúyas
sa mirkádu,</i> I will buy vegetables and
onions in the market. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1N; a12] go
shopping. <i>Mangmirkádu (magmirkádu) tag
sayu,</i> Let's do our shopping early. <i>Isdà lay
ákung mirkadúhun kay náa na man ang tanan,</i>
All I'll buy is fish because we've got
everything else. <b>2</b> [B1; a1] make into, become
a market. <i>Gimirkadúhan ang iskwátir
irya,</i> A market has been put up in the squatter's
area.

<p><b>mirkána</b>, <b>mirkánu</b> = <sc>AMIRKÁNA</sc>, <sc>AMIRKÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>Mirkulis</b> <i>n</i> @Wednesday. <i>see</i> <sc>BIRNIS</sc> <i>for verb
forms</i>. <b>&mdash; Santu</b> Wednesday of the Holy
Week.

<p><b>mirkyur krúm</b>, <b>mirkyuru krúm</b> = <sc>MIKRU
KRÚM</sc>.

<p><b>mirma</b> <i>v</i> [B] for the body to reduce. <i>Mumirma
ang ímung láwas ug wà kay tulug,</i> You
will lose weight if you lack sleep.

<p><b>mirtiyulit</b> <i>n</i> @merthiolate.

<p><b>mirun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> spectator in table games. <b>2</b> one
who goes to cockfights but doesn't pay admission
and attaches himself to people on
the outside that want to bet, helping them
place their bets. <b>3</b> one who eats without
paying, mooching off others or who rides,
enters, or engages in any other activity
without paying. <b>4</b> anyone who asks for
handouts shamelessly, though perfectly
able to support himself. <i>v</i> [B6; c1] <b>1</b> be a
@spectator. <b>2</b> act as the <i>mirun</i> for gamblers.
<i>Gimirun nà siya sa mga tahur,</i> The professional
gamblers use him to help place their
bets. <b>3</b> get to act like a @moocher. <i>Mamirun
kag magtsinílas sa simbahan,</i> You will be no
better than a moocher if you wear slippers
to church.

<p><b>miruy</b> <i>a</i> having lost all one's money in betting.
<i>Miruy na ku ug mapildi ning katapúsan
kung kwarta,</i> I'll go home in a barrel if
I lose this last piece of money. <i>v</i> [B126; a12]
<pb n=1407>lose all one's money in betting. <i>Miruyun
ka lang ánang mga tawhána,</i> You will just
lose all your money to those men.

<p><b>miryinda</b> <i>n</i> light meal taken between lunch
and supper. <i>v</i> [A; c] take one's afternoon
snack. <b>&mdash; sína</b> <i>n</i> a light supper given in the
afternoon. <i>v</i> [A13] have a merienda cena.

<p><b>mis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Miss, a title of high respect for an
unmarried woman, e.g. term used to address
a nurse. <b>2</b> @muse, @{beauty queen}. <i>v</i> [B16; c1]
be, become a muse, beauty queen.

<p><b>mis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @month, used only after <i>un</i> or <i>usa ka</i>
'one'. <i>Un (usa ka) mis,</i> One month. <i>v</i> [B256]
be a month. <i>Hápit na mumis sukad sa íyang
paggíkan,</i> It's almost a month now
since she left. <b>-is(<-)</b> = <sc>MIS<sub>2</sub></sc> (plural). <i>Dus
(duha ka) mísis,</i> Two months.

<p><b>mísa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> mass in the church. <b>&mdash; diaginaldu, digalyu</b>
nine consecutive dawn masses ending
on Christmas Eve. <b>&mdash; digrasya</b> @{thanksgiving
mass}. <b>&mdash; ditris</b> mass officiated by three
priests. <b>&mdash; griguryána</b> mass said for one hundred
successive days for the soul of a departed
person. <b>&mdash; ispisiyal</b> any special mass. <b>&mdash;
kantáda</b> mass that is sung. <b>&mdash; kumun</b> mass
said for a number of dead people at once.
<b>&mdash; kunsilibráda</b> mass celebrated by more
than one priest. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> high mass with
incense. <b>&mdash; puntipikal</b> @{pontifical mass}. <b>&mdash; rikim</b>
requiem mass. <b>&mdash; risáda</b> @{low mass}. <b>&mdash; sulimni</b>
high mass with a special offering, usually
offered for the patron saint of a place.
<i>v</i> [A; b] say mass. <b>pa-</b> [A; b] have a mass
offered. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mass offered. <i>Maghatud kug pamísa
sa simbahan pára sa kalag sa ákung inahan,</i>
I will make a mass offering for the soul
of my mother. <b>2</b> amount given to have a
mass said.

<p><b>mísa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{billiard table}. <i>Maáyung pagkaníbil
ang mísa. Tul-id kaáyu ang dágan sa búla,</i>
The billiard table is good and level. The ball
rolls straight. <b>sarhintu di-</b> <i>n</i> @{desk sergeant}.
<b>-da</b> <i>n</i> amount paid for the use of game facilities,
usually based per game. <i>Bayinti sintábus
ang misáda sa bilyar,</i> Each game you
pay twenty centavos. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] pay the
<i>misáda</i>.

<p><b>misal</b>, <b>mísal</b> <i>n</i> @missal. <i>v</i> [A13] bring, use a
missal in church.

<p><b>misay</b> <i>n</i> @{pet cat}.

<p><b>misbuy</b> <i>n</i> @messboy on a boat. <i>v</i> [B156; a2]
be, become a messboy, make s.o. a messboy.

<p><b>misik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a3] for s.t. to be @misplaced. <i>Namisik
ang ákung papil nga gitrabáhu,</i> I misplaced
the paper I was working on. <b>2</b> <b>walay
&mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [c6] nothing was missed, s.t. happened
to all. <i>Way namisik níla, nakadawat silang
tanan ug latigu,</i> Not one of them was spared.
<pb n=1408>They all got whipped. <i>Way imisik níla sa
pagkáun nga ibutang sa lamísa,</i> They did
not miss a morsel of the food left on the
table.

<p><b>misímis</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] attack s.t. with utter abandon
and intense violence. <i>Kinsa may nagmisímis
niíning bag-ung piryudiku?</i> Who
crumpled this newspaper till it is utterly
ruined? <i>Gimisímis sa iring ang ilagà nga íyang
nadakpan,</i> The cat picked up the
mouse it caught and moved it about violently.

<p><b>misimus</b> = <sc>MUSIMUS</sc>.

<p><b>misirabli</b> <i>a</i> @miserable. <i>Misirabling kahimtang
sa prísu,</i> The prisoners are in a miserable
condition. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] be, become miserable,
look miserable. <i>Misirabli ang pamilya sukad
abandunaha sa amahan,</i> The family has been
miserable since the father abandoned them.

<p><b>misirinúbis</b> Cebuano pronunciation of <i>miserere
nobis</i> in the litany of the Rosary.

<p><b>mísis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>MIS<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>mísis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Mrs., title given to a married woman.
<b>2</b> one's wife. <i>Siya ang mísis ni Tínung,</i>
This is Tinong's wife. <i>v</i> [a12] call s.o. Mrs.;
be, become Mrs. <b>(->)</b> voc. <i>short form</i>: <b>sis</b>.
<i>Ása ka, sis?</i> Where are you going, Ma'am?

<p><b>misíta</b> = <sc>LAMISÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>misítas</b> = <sc>MASÍTAS</sc>. <b>misitasan</b> = <sc>MASITASAN</sc>.

<p><b>misitíra</b> = <sc>MASITÍRA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MASÍTAS</sc>.

<p><b>misíyas</b> <i>n</i> @Messiah. <i>Si Kristu ang Misíyas,</i>
Christ, the Messiah.

<p><b>misiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a series of special exercises getting
the people in an area to fulfill their
church obligations. <i>Magsúgud na karung adláwa
ang misiyun sa simbahan,</i> The church
mission will start today. <b>2</b> foreign missionary.
<i>Misiyun ang nagdala ánang simbahána,</i>
A missionary is running that church. <b>3</b> mission
for which s.o. is being sent. <i>Unsay ímung
misiyun pag-adtu sa Amirika?</i> What
is your purpose in going to America? <i>v</i> [A; b6]
hold a church mission s.w. to get the
parishioners to fulfill their religious obligations.
<b>-aryu</b>, <b>-íru</b> <i>n</i> @missionary. <i>v</i> [B156] be,
become a missionary.

<p><b>miskínu</b> <i>a</i> in @{small quantities}, @scarce. <i>Miskínu
ang túbig tungud sa húlaw,</i> There's very little
water because of the drought. <i>Miskínu
ang taksi dinhing dapíta,</i> Taxis are scarce in
this area. <i>Miskínu sila mupakáun sa ílang
mga kasíra,</i> They feed their boarders in a
niggardly way. <i>v</i> [AB; c1] get to be scarce,
small in quantities. <i>Mumiskínu (mamiskínu)
ang ímung ginastuhan ug maminyù ka,</i> You
won't spend on such a big scale once you
get married.

<p><b>miskla</b> = <sc>MIKSKLA</sc>.

<pb n=1409>

<p><b>mismis</b> <i>n</i> particles of yellowish substance
sticking to the face after sleep, hardened
mucus from the eyes or mouth. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4]
cause, have such substances on the face.
<i>Panghilam-us kay gimismis ka,</i> Wash your
face because you have mucus on your face.

<p><b>mismu</b> <b>1</b> <i>with nouns or pronouns referring
to a person</i>: even [so-and-so]. <i>Sa klin-ap
wik ang mismu nga mga tituládu manilhig,</i>
During Clean-up Week even white collar
workers sweep. <i>Aku mismu many milútù
niíni,</i> I cooked this myself. <b>walay &mdash;</b> not
even this little bit. <i>Way mismung usa ka dakù
ang íyang gitábang nákù,</i> He didn't even
give me a single penny in help. <b>2</b> <i>with forms
referring to a place</i>: right in [such-and-such]
a place. <i>Sa Maníla mismu may mga
Huk,</i> There are Huks right in Manila. <i>Didtu
mismu siya mamatay,</i> He died right in that
place. <b>2a</b> <b>karun, awra &mdash;</b> right this very moment.
<i>Karun mismu nag-íhap na sila sa mga
balúta,</i> Right this very moment they are
counting the ballots.

<p><b>mistík</b> <i>n</i> @mistake. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] make a mistake
in school or on one's paper.

<p><b>mistil</b> need to, have to do (used only negatively
or in questions). <i>Mistil pa ba nà nímu
buhátun?</i> Must you do that? <i>Dì na siya
mistil sultíhan,</i> He does not need to be told.
<b>-in-</b> = <sc>MISTIL</sc>.

<p><b>mistir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for a @gentleman. <b>2</b> @husband.
<i>Háin man magtrabáhu ang ímung mistir?</i>
Where is your husband working? <b>3</b> title for
the winner of a contest among men, as Mr.
Universe. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; a12] call s.o. Mr. <b>2</b> [B156; c6]
be, become Mr. [so-and-so]. <i>Kun
gustu kang mamistir Pilipins pagbarbil,</i> If
you want to become a Mr. Philippines,
practice weight lifting. <b>(->)</b> voc. <i>Ása ka Mist&icaron;r?</i>
Where are you going, Sir?

<p><b>mistiri tyún</b> <i>n</i> mystery tune contest on the
radio.

<p><b>mistiryu</b> <i>n</i> mystery, one of the fifteen events
in the lives of Jesus and Mary serving as a
subject for meditation during the saying of
the rosary. <i>Mistiryu sa Himáyà, Kalípay,
Kasákit,</i> The Glorious, Joyful, Sorrowful
Mysteries. <b>2</b> mystery, s.t. that is difficult to
understand. <b>-sa</b> = <sc>MISTIRYÚSU</sc> (female). <b>-su</b>
<i>a</i> mysterious. <i>Usa ka mistiryúsung istranyu
ang nagluwas nákù,</i> A mysterious stranger
rescued me. <i>v</i> [B12] get mysterious. <i>Nagkamistiryúsu
na hinúun ang íyang kamatáyun,</i>
His death is getting to become more and
more of a mystery.

<p><b>mistísa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> woman of mixed blood. <i>Mistísa
Insik,</i> Woman with Chinese blood. <b>2</b> k.o.
light-skinned cooking banana. <b>3</b> drink of
<pb n=1410>beer, coke, and cheap hard liquor. <b>&mdash; dris</b> <i>n</i>
a modern version of the old Filipina dress
(<i>sáyang pinarawhan</i>) which may lack the
<i>panuylu</i> or long skirt (<i>íkug</i>) or the stiff
sleeves (<i>paráwu</i>). <b>mistisahun</b> <i>a</i> having Caucasian
features. <b>mistisilya</b> <i>a</i> having some
mestiza blood or features.

<p><b>mistísu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> person of mixed blood. <b>1a</b> person
with Caucasian features, considered to be
handsome. <b>2</b> animal of mixed breed. <i>v</i> [B126; b6]
be, become mestizo. <b>&mdash; balúlang,
bangus, patsang</b> <i>n</i> a word of ridicule for an
ugly mestizo. <b>mistisuhun</b> <i>a</i> looking like a
person with Caucasian blood. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
working knife (<i>búlu</i>) with a square end,
longer than the usual <i>búlu</i> but shorter than
the <i>sundang</i>.

<p><b>mistra</b> = <sc>MAISTRA</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>mistru</b> = <sc>MAISTRU</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>miswa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> fine, brittle, thread-like noodles of
white flour. <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] make a dish of
<i>miswa</i>.

<p><b>miswa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> humorous term of address for
young ladies, used intimately without affixing
the name. <i>Huy, Miswa, dalì na,</i> Miss,
Miss. Come here. <i>Nía nang mga miswa,</i> Here
comes the girls.

<p><b>misyunibirs</b> <i>n</i> @{Miss Universe}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B16] be,
become Miss Universe. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] get a
Miss Universe winner. <i>Nakamisyunibirs (namisyunibirsan)
na ang Pilipínas,</i> The Philippines
has produced a Miss Universe.

<p><b>mitad</b> <i>n</i> half the number or size of s.t. <i>Ang
mitad sa karni kang Piduy,</i> Half the piece of
meat belongs to Pete. <i>v</i> [b6] in a game, give
s.o. a handicap of half the number of points.
<i>Arun lang magkadúlà ta mitaran ta ka,</i> Just
so we can play I will give you a handicap of
half the number of points.

<p><b>mítal</b> <i>n</i> @metal. <i>Palábad nga mítal,</i> Metal propeller.

<p><b>mitalika</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÍLA</sc>.

<p><b>mitaliku</b> <i>a</i> @metallic. <i>Hílu nga mitaliku,</i> Metallic
thread.

<p><b>mitàmità<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] act childishly by crying
or threatening when demands are not met,
complaining all the time, and the like. <i>Ug
dúna kay gustu ayawg mitàmità kay dakù
ka na,</i> If you want s.t. don't just scream.
You're too big for that.

<p><b>mitàmità<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] pick at food, eat without
appetite. <i>Magmitàmità siyag káun ug
way sud-an,</i> She only picks at the food if
there's no food to go with the rice. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> always
without appetite in eating, given to
picking at food.

<p><b>mithì</b> <i>n</i> @ideals, @virtues. <i>Unsay ímung mga mithì
<pb n=1411>sa kinabúhì?</i> What are your ideals in life?
<i>v</i> [a12] have s.t. as one's ideal, cherish. <i>Ibaligyà
hasta kalag tungud sa gimithì nga kalampúsan,</i>
They sell their souls to attain the
success they so desire. <b>paka-</b> = <sc>MITHÌ</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>miti</b>, <b>mitimíti</b>, <b>mitilmítil</b> = <sc>MITIRMÍTIR</sc>.

<p><b>míting</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @meeting convened. <b>2</b> political
meeting or rally. <b>&mdash; diabansi</b> political rally
the night before an election. <i>v</i> [A2C2; ab]
hold a meeting. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place for holding
meetings.

<p><b>mitirmítir</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] put a limit to or limit
one's acts. <i>Ása mumitirmítir ug sulti si Máma
ug manuyù,</i> Mama does not mince
words when she is angry. <i>Karung panahúna
kinahanglan nga magmitirmítir ug sinud-anan,</i>
In these times it is necessary to limit
our food consumption. a being done in a
scarce, limited way.

<p><b>mitkan</b> <i>n</i> @{mess kit}, commonly used as a
lunch box. <i>v</i> [A1; c6] put s.t. in a mess kit.

<p><b>mitmit</b> <i>v</i> [B46; a4] for the eyes to be full of
yellowish discharge. <i>Nagmitmit (gimitmit)
íyang mata sa mútà,</i> His eyes are full of eye
discharge.

<p><b>mitnà</b> <i>n</i> @minute. <i>Pipila ka mitnà ang nanglábay
únà ku makatíngug,</i> Several minutes
elapsed before I could say a word.

<p><b>mitru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{taxi meter}. <b>2</b> @meter (not used after
the numbers of Spanish origin). <i>Duha ka
mitru (mitrus),</i> Two meters. <b>-s</b> @meters. <i>Dus
mitrus,</i> Two meters. <i>v</i> [A3; c1] measure by
the meters. <b>mitrusan</b>, <b>mitruhan</b> <i>n</i> measuring
stick or tape.

<p><b>mitsa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> small cylindrical tin can of around
4&ndash;6 oz. in a size used for kerosene lamps. <i>Mitsa
nga punug sinsilyu,</i> A tin can filled with
coins. <b>mitsahan</b> <i>n</i> kerosene lamp made out
of small empty tin cans.

<p><b>mitsa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @wick, @fuse of explosive. <i>Mubù ra
ang mitsa sa dinamíta. Maung mibutu dáyun,</i>
The dynamite has too short a wick.
That is why it exploded immediately. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
use, make as a dynamite wick.

<p><b>mitsádu</b> <i>n</i> dish consisting of round of beef
into which strips of pork fat have been inserted
stewed with spices to tender, served
sliced with tomato sauce.

<p><b>mitsilin</b> <i>n</i> cement used for patching rubber
(so called from the brand name). <i>v</i> [A13; a2]
patch with rubber cement.

<p><b>mituáku</b> <i>short for</i>: <b>Mitúu Aku</b> The @{Apostles'
Creed}.

<p><b>mitudu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> method of teaching, learning in
music. <i>Mitudu sa sista,</i> Method of learning
how to play the guitar. <b>2</b> being methodical.
<i>Way mitudu ang pagpanglimpiyu,</i> You
<pb n=1412>aren't being methodical in your cleaning.

<p><b>mituluhíya</b> <i>n</i> @mythology.

<p><b>miunmíun</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> be careful in using
money or consuming goods. <i>Magmiunmíun
ta sa bugas arun mulungtad,</i> We must economize
on our rice so it will last. <b>2</b> hold back
one's temper or feelings, restrain oneself.
<i>Ayawg imiunmíun ang ímung kaguul arun
dílì ka masakit,</i> Don't suppress your grief
so that you will not get ill.

<p><b>*míya</b> <b>íha &mdash;</b> my darling girl. <i>Uy, íha míya dì
nà mau ang ímung nadá. Iúlì nà,</i> Oh, honey,
you took the wrong one. Put it back! <i>see
also</i> <sc>MADRI</sc>.

<p><b>miyaw</b> n <b>1</b> @meow of a cat. <b>2</b> cat in baby talk.
<b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A] cry meow. <i>Kusug mumíyaw ang
iring nga mangúlag,</i> A cat in heat cries loud.

<p><b>míyur</b> <i>n</i> @mayor.

<p><b>Mlbn.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>manlalában</i>. <i>see</i>
<sc>LÁBAN</sc>.

<p><b>mm</b> <b>1</b> sound made prior to plunging into
one's speech. <i>Mm, kinsa tu?</i> Umm, who was
it now? <b>2</b> sound emitted in showing approval
of s.t. tasted or smelled. <i>see also</i> <b>U&Mgrave;</b>.

<p><b>Mr.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>Mistir</i>.

<p><b>mu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÁMÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>mu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAMU</sc>.

<p><b>mu<sub>4</sub></b> = <sc>MAU</sc>.

<p><b>m[=ù]</b> = <sc>MÚLÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mu-</b> punctual active verbal prefix, future.
(<i>Past</i>: <b>mi-</b> <i>or</i> <b>ni-</b> <i>or</i> <b>ming-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>mu-</b>.)
<i>Muadtu ku didtu ugmà,</i> I will go there tomorrow.
<i>Miadtu (niadtu, ning-adtu, ming-adtu)
ku didtu gahápun,</i> I went there yesterday.
<i>Walà ku muadtu didtu,</i> I did not go
there. Verbs with <i>mu-</i>, <i>mi-</i> have the following
meanings (as opposed to verbs with
<i>nag-</i>, <i>mag-</i>; <i>see</i> <sc>MAG-</sc>). <b>1</b> volitional action.
<i>Walà siya musulti,</i> He wouldn't (refused to)
say. <i>Gipapaháwà siya kay walà muhátag sa
báhin,</i> He was evicted because he refused to
give the landowner his share. <b>2</b> action which
is non-durative. <i>Muhílak siyag kusiun,</i> He
will burst out crying if he is pinched. <i>Mumata
mi sa alas singku káda buntag,</i> We
wake up every morning at five. <i>Mutindug
mi ug musulud siya,</i> We will get up if he
comes in. <b>2a</b> added to nouns to form verbs
of this meaning. <i>Mukaláyu ang kakugnan,</i>
The grasslands will burst into flames. <b>3</b> <i>added
to verbs referring to state</i>: come into
[such-and-such] a state, become [so-and-so].
<i>Muabri ang pultahan,</i> The door will
open (come open). <i>Mutúyuk ang galingan,</i>
The mill will turn. <b>3a</b> <i>added to adj.</i>: become
[adj.]. <i>Mugamay ímung láwas ug dì ka mukáun,</i>
You will get thin if you don't eat.
<pb n=1413><i>Mupula ímung ngábil ug ímung lipistíkan,</i>
Your lips will become red if you put lipstick
on them. <b>3b</b> <i>added to roots referring to
measurements</i>: become [so-and-so] much.
U<i>g mualas utsu na gánì, lakaw na lang,</i> If it
gets to be eight o'clock, just go on ahead.
<i>Muduha na ka túig,</i> It is almost two years
now. (Lit. It will become two years.) <i>Mutúhud
ang túbig,</i> The water is nearly knee-deep
(lit. will become knee-deep). <b>3c</b> <i>added
to verbs referring to capability</i>: be capable
of [do]ing. <i>Kining sakayána mukarga ug lima
ka táwu,</i> This boat will hold five people.
<i>Kining dyípa musakay ug dúsi ka buuk,</i> This
jeep can carry a dozen people. <b>4</b> <i>added to
verbs or adjectives referring to manner</i>:
[do] in [such-and-such] a way. <i>Mukusug
siyag katáwa,</i> He will laugh loudly. <i>Maáyu
siyang mulútù,</i> He cooks well. <b>5</b> <i>added to
nouns referring to a place</i>: go to [such-and-such]
a place. <i>Mugráhi ang taksi run,</i> The
taxi is headed for the garage. <i>Mulawud siya
bísan magbagyu,</i> He will go to sea, even in
the typhoon.

<p><b>múb</b> <i>n</i> move in chess and the like. <i>Ákù pang
múb ha,</i> It's my move, all right? <i>v</i> [A; c]
make a move. <i>Dugáya sad nímung mumúb,
uy,</i> Heavens, how long does it take you to
move?

<p><b>mubgas</b> = <sc>MALUBGAS</sc>.

<p><b>múbil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{mobile patrol}. <i>Pag-abut sa múbil
nanágan ang mga sugarul,</i> When the mobile
patrol arrived, the gamblers disappeared. <b>2</b>
Mobil oil gasoline station. <b>&mdash; patrul</b> =
<sc>MÚBIL</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>mubù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @short, @brief. <i>Mubù nga sirmun,</i> A
brief sermon. <b>2</b> short in height or quantity.
<i>Mubù si Napuliyun,</i> Napoleon was a short
man. <i>Mubù ang mga sinínà karun,</i> Dresses
are short nowadays. <b>3</b> @low. <i>Mubù ang lamísa
pára sa mga bátà,</i> The tables for the children
are low. <b>3a</b> low in price, grade. <i>Pilía
nang tinda nga mubù ra ug prisyu,</i> Choose
low-priced goods. <i>Mubù ug grádu ang buluk,</i>
The dull child got a low grade. <b>4</b> <i>in
phrases</i>: having little. <b>&mdash; ug buut</b> in a bad
mood. <i>Ayaw nag samuksamuka kay mubù
run nag buut,</i> Don't disturb him because he
is in a bad mood now. <b>&mdash; ug ginháwa</b> short-winded.
<b>&mdash; ug idukasiyun</b> having little education.
<i>Mubù siyag idukasiyun maung way
batásan,</i> He's just ignorant. That's why he
is ill-mannered. <b>&mdash; ug lánat</b> lacking endurance.
<i>Mubù ra siyag lánat sa lánguy,</i> He
cannot swim very far. <b>&mdash; ug lupad</b> like a
prostitute. <i>Ang mga babáying mubù ug lupad
tinámay sa katilingban,</i> Women of easy
virtue are held in contempt by the community.
<pb n=1414><b>&mdash; ug paminsar</b> lacking thinking power.
<i>Mubù nà siyag paminsar. Maung gigastu ang
puhúnan,</i> He didn't think very hard and
that is why he spent his capital. <b>&mdash; ug panlantaw</b>
lacking foresight. <b>&mdash; ug pasinsiya</b>
lacking patience. &mdash; <b>ug tinan-awan</b> nearsighted.
<b>&mdash; ug tubul</b> sensitive, easy to take offense.
<i>Kamubù nímug tubul uy. Dì man ka
kakumidiyáhan,</i> You're too sensitive. It's
impossible to make a joke with you. <b>&mdash; ug
tul-an</b> having short limbs. <b>5</b> low in pitch.
<i>Mubù siyag tíngug,</i> She has a low voice. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B1; ab7] be brief, concise. <i>Mub-a ang ímung
tubag,</i> Make your answer short. <b>2</b> [AB; b7c1]
become low, make s.t. low. <i>Imubù
(mub-a) lang pagtábas ang ákung sayal,</i> Just
cut my skirt short. <i>Mub-i ning ákung buhuk
dapit sa kílid,</i> Cut my hair short on the
sides. <b>ha-</b> <i>a</i> short. <b>-g-</b> <i>a</i> short (plural). <i>Sa
mugbù pa ang lubi,</i> In olden times (when
the coconuts were still short). <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> shortenings.
<i>Ang yúbi mauy minubù sa University
of the Visayas,</i> U.V. is short for the University
of the Visayas.

<p><b>múda</b> <i>n</i> @mode, current @fashion. <i>Múda karun
ang mugbù nga sinínà,</i> Short dresses are the
style these days. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] be in fashion.

<p><b>mudílu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{fashion model}, one who poses
for photographers or artists. <b>2</b> @style or @design.
<b>3</b> model to emulate. <i>Mudílu sa maáyung
pamatásan,</i> A paragon of good behavior.
<b>4</b> a small copy, model of s.t. <i>Mudílu sa
ayruplánu,</i> Model airplane. <i>v</i> [A; c6] work
as a model that poses.

<p><b>mudipikar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] modify s.t. to adopt it
for a new use. <i>Mudipikahun nátù ning silyang
himúung tuwangtúwang,</i> Let's modify
this chair to turn it into a rocking chair.

<p><b>mudiradur</b> <i>n</i> in the United Church of Christ
in the Philippines (a merging of several Protestant
sects), the executive head of a conference
composed of several local congregations
in a certain area. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be the
moderator.

<p><b>múdirn</b> <i>n</i> modern dance of the late sixties
and seventies. <i>v</i> [A23] dance a modern
dance.

<p><b>mudirnu</b> <i>a</i> @modern. <i>Mudirnung paági sa panguma,</i>
Modern farming methods. <i>v</i> [B12; a12]
be, become modern; make s.o. or s.t.
modern.

<p><b>mudista</b> <i>n</i> @seamstress, usually one who sews
very ordinary clothes. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be,
become a seamstress.

<p><b>mudmud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] press or bury one's face
hard against s.t. <i>Mihilak siya ug mimudmud
sa íyang nawung sa unlan,</i> She cried and
buried her face in the pillow. <b>2</b> [A; c6] put
<pb n=1415>s.o. in a tight situation. <i>Gimudmud siya sa
labihang kapit-us,</i> He was oppressed by extreme
poverty.

<p><b>mudtu</b> = <sc>UDTU</sc> (except with <i>hiN-</i> and doubling).

<p><b>múdu</b> <i>a</i> liking as evinced by pleasant behavior.
<i>Wà ka ba kamatngun nga si Kurdapya
may múdu nímu?</i> Have you not noticed
that Cordapia has a liking for you?

<p><b>mud-uk</b> <i>a</i> having an @unsmiling, @{sour expression}.
<i>v</i> [A; c1] have a sour look on the face
from being in a bad mood. <i>Dílì giyud nang
batáang makamaung mumud-uk bísag kasab-an,</i>
That child never looks angry even
when he is scolded. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of an @unsmiling,
angry sort.

<p><b>múdus</b> <i>n</i> @procedure, @system. <i>Karáang múdus
sa panguma ang íyang gigámit,</i> He uses old
methods of farming. <i>Mau kanà ang ílang
múdus pag-ílad sa táwu,</i> That is their procedure
for swindling people. [+]

<p><b>mug-aw</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] feel lonely and empty
when parted from a dear one. <i>Namug-aw
sila pagkahibalu nílang gitában nag ílang anak,</i>
They had a lonely and empty feeling
when they heard that their daughter had
eloped. <i>Namug-aw man lang tag hinulat nímu,</i>
I felt so lonely waiting for you.

<p><b>mugmug</b> = <sc>LIMUGMUG</sc>.

<p><b>mugnà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @create, bring into existence.
<i>Kinsay nagmugnà sa kasámuk dinhi?</i> Who
created a disturbance here? <i>Gimugnà sa
Amirika ang mga mangilngig nga paági sa
pagpatay,</i> America has created terrifying devices
to kill people. <i>Gimugnáan ku níya ug
usa ka kanta sa gugma,</i> He composed a love
song for me. <i>n</i> @creation. <i>Ang kalibútan
mugnà sa Diyus,</i> The earth is God's creation.
<b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @creator. <b>tig-</b>, <b>tag-</b> <i>n</i> @creator,
originator of a certain thing. <i>Si Baldu ang
tagmugnà sa pagpalusut sa mga kuntrabandu,</i>
Baldo is the one who thought up ways
of smuggling contraband goods.

<p><b>mugtuk</b> <i>a</i> @frowning, @scowling of face. <i>Kinsay
ganáhan makig-úban níya nga mugtuk kaáyug
náwung?</i> Who cares for her company
when she has such a frowning face? <i>v</i> [B; c1]
look gloomy, sad, pouting. <i>Nagmugtuk
siya kay gipugus pagpatrabáhu,</i> He pouted
because he was being forced to work. <i>Nagmugtuk
ang íyang nawung kay gipapha siya
sa trabáhu,</i> He has a dejected look because
he was fired from his job.

<p><b>mug-ut</b> = <sc>MUD-UK</sc>.

<p><b>*muhir</b> <b>babáying &mdash;</b> derogatory, but meaningless,
reference to a woman (from the analogy
of phrases of the form <i>babáying</i> [<i>adj.</i>],
which mean 'woman doing s.t. improper'&mdash;<pb n=1416>e.g. <i>babáying kiat</i> 'flirt', whereas <i>muhir</i>
[from Spanish] has no meaning by itself.)
<i>Nía na pud magsamuksamuk nang babáying
muhir,</i> Here comes that female again, making
a nuisance of herself.

<p><b>muhun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> concrete land marker buried in
the ground. <b>2</b> penis (humorous). <i>v</i> [A; b]
post land markers.

<p><b>mukasin</b> <i>n</i> @{moccasin shoes}, shoe that has no
heel and is made of soft leather. <i>v</i> [A; b]
wear moccasins.

<p><b>mukda</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b2] <b>1</b> suddenly realize s.t. so
as to get startled. <i>Dihà na ku makamukda
nga wà kuy kwarta pagbáyad nákù,</i> I suddenly
realized I had no money when I was
about to pay. <i>Namukdahan ku pagkadungug
sa balità,</i> I was stunned by the news. <b>2</b>
be caught in the act. <i>Himukdahan ang mga
sugarul sa pulis,</i> The police caught the gamblers
red-handed.

<p><b>múku</b> <i>v[** n]</i> variety of cooking banana, growing
in bunches with fewer hands and shorter individual
pieces than the kardába, but firm
of flesh and round.

<p><b>*múkuy</b> = <sc>SAGMÚKUY</sc>.

<p><b>mul</b> <i>n</i> mould or pattern for making a hat the
right size. <i>v</i> [A; a1] use, make a head mould.

<p><b>múla</b> <i>n</i> large breed of horse, reddish-brown
in color.

<p><b>mulásis</b> <i>n</i> @molasses.

<p><b>muldi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mold for forming s.t. <i>Muldi sa halublak,</i>
Mold for making hollow blocks. <b>2</b>
piece of s.t. shaped by a mold. <i>Pila ang muldi
sa bibingka?</i> How much are the rice
cakes apiece? <b>3</b> anything that is made in
large quantities in the same size and shape,
such as spare parts. <i>v</i> [A1; a] mold for s.t.,
make s.t. with a mold. <b>muldihan</b> = <sc>MULDI</sc>,
<i>n1</i>. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @printing, @{block letters}. <i>v</i> [A; c16]
print, write in block letters.

<p><b>mulignù</b> = <sc>KARABALYAS</sc>.

<p><b>mulínu</b> <i>n</i> a small hand-cranked mill. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
grind s.t. in a grinder. <i>Maáyung mulinúhun
dáyun ang kapi human ug sanlag,</i> You
should grind the coffee beans immediately
after roasting them.

<p><b>mulistiya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] @molest, @bother s.o. <i>Ipadakup
kanang táwung nagmulistiya kanímu,</i>
Have that man who molested you arrested.
<b>2</b> [A; ac] inconvenience, bother s.o. asking
a favor. <i>Ayaw kug mulistiyáhag hulamhúlam
ug kwarta,</i> Don't you bother me by
borrowing money. <i>Unsa na say ímung imulistiya
nákù?</i> What are you going to bother
me with this time?

<p><b>mulitsing</b> = <sc>MURITSING</sc>.

<p><b>mulmul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> general name given to parrot fish:
<b><i>Scarus spp.</i></b>

<pb n=1417>

<p><b>mulmul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> chicken feather coloration, ranging
from light tan to reddish brown with a
yellowish tinge.

<p><b>multa</b> <i>n</i> @fine. <i>Adúnay multa sa mangíhì dinhi,</i>
Whoever urinates here will be fined. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b6(1)] pay a fine. <i>Ngánung mumulta
man ku nga wà man ku makalápas sa baláud?</i>
Why should I pay a fine when I haven't
broken the law? <b>2</b> [A; c] impose a fine.
<i>Multáhan ang muabsin sa parti,</i> Anyone
who is absent from the party will be fined.

<p><b>multibaytamins</b> <i>n</i> multi vitamin tablets.

<p><b>multiplay</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] multiply, do the operation
of multiplication. <i>Ang mga hay-iskul
karun dì pa gihápun makamaung mumultiplay,</i>
High school students nowadays don't
even know how to do multiplication.

<p><b>multiplikar</b> = <sc>MULTIPLAY</sc>. multiplikasiyun <i>n</i>
multiplication.

<p><b>multu</b> <i>n</i> @ghost of a dead person. <i>Gipakítà siya
sa multu,</i> The ghost appeared to him. <i>v</i>
[A13; a2] for ghosts to appear. <i>Nagmultu
ang kalag ni Krispin sa ikakwarinta díyas
human siya mamatay,</i> The ghost of Crispin
appeared on the fortieth day after his death.
<i>Ang balay nga gimultúhan sa namatay,</i> The
house where the soul of the deceased appeared.

<p><b>mulù</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] complain about grievances or
what one feels. <i>Nagmulù ang mga saup kay
gagmay rag ílang mabáhin,</i> The tenants are
grumbling because they got a small share. <i>Ayaw
imulù nákù ang ímung sakit. Didtu sa
duktur,</i> Don't tell me your complaints. Tell
it to a doctor. <i>n</i> complaint about what one
feels. <b>mud-ánun</b> <i>a</i> given to much complaining
and grumbling.

<p><b>mulyi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pier, @wharf. <i>Nagkargadur siya sa
mulyi,</i> He is working as a stevedore at the
pier. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a wharf, pier.

<p><b>mulyi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @spring, tightly coiled wire that rebounds.
<i>v</i> [A1; a] attach, use as a spring.

<p><b>mulyi<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] sharpen a thin-bladed instrument.
<i>Kinsay mumulyi niíning bulang?</i>
Who will sharpen this gaff? <i>Mulyíhun ta
ning mga habulan nga bulang,</i> Let's sharpen
the blades of these dull gaffs. <b>mulyihan</b> <i>n</i>
k.o. grindstone used to hone thin-bladed
instruments.

<p><b>mulyínu</b> <i>n</i> @mill consisting of a large stone
turned by a draft animal.

<p><b>mumhu</b> <i>n</i> little particles of cooked rice or
corn that fall next to the plate when eating.
<b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be full of morsels of rice. <b>mumhuun</b>
<i>a</i> full of morsels of rice or corn.

<p><b>mumintu</b> <i>n</i> @moment. <i>Mga mumintu sa kinabúhì
nga dì níya hingkalimtan,</i> Moments in
his life which he cannot forget. <i>see also</i>
<pb n=1418><sc>UNMUMINTU</sc>.

<p><b>múmu</b> <i>n</i> @muumuu. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear, make into
a muumuu.

<p><b>mumù</b> <i>a</i> having as much of s.t. as one could
want. <i>Mumù sa pagpanggà ang bugtung,</i> An
only child has love lavished on him. <i>v</i> [B12]
get to have as much of s.t. as one would
want. <i>Nagkamumù mi sa pagkáun sa nagkadatù
mi,</i> We were getting to have all the
food we want as we got richer.

<p><b>mùmù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] bump the mouth against s.t.
<i>Nagdugù ang ngábil sa bátà kay namùmù sa
lamísa,</i> The child's lip is bleeding because
he bumped it against the table.

<p><b>múmug</b> = <sc>LIMUGMUG</sc>.

<p><b>múmuy</b> <i>n</i> pet name for a monkey. <i>Gipakáun
níyag ságing ang múmuy,</i> He fed the monkey
a banana.

<p><b>munamúna</b> <i>a</i> doing s.t. to the best of one's
ability, with maximum effort. <i>Munamúna
giyud nákung dágan apan wà giyud kung
kaapas,</i> I ran as fast as I could but I
couldn't overtake her. <i>Náay ákung tinígum
apan munamúna sab nákung dagínut,</i> I have
saved some money, but with great sacrifice.

<p><b>munarkíya</b> <i>n</i> @monarchy.

<p><b>munastiryu</b> <i>n</i> @monastery, @nunnery.

<p><b>múnay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bread made with more eggs
and butter than ordinary bread and covered
with a thin layer of beaten eggs which is
baked onto it.

<p><b>mundu<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>BAUL[**space?] MUNDU</sc>.

<p><b>mundu<sub>2</sub></b>, <b>munduy</b> <i>n</i> small, thin-skinned, but
very full and compact variety of cooking
banana.

<p><b>mungà</b> <i>n</i> @{mother hen}[** .] <i>v</i> [A1; a12] raise a
mother hen. <i>Mungaa ang hingitlug,</i> Make
the hens that are good layers into mother
hens. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>HIMUNGÁAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BÚNGA</sc>.

<p><b>*mungálung</b> <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1236; b8] <b>1</b> @{be aware}.
<i>Sa pagkahimungáwung nákug buut,
nawálà na sila,</i> When I came to, they were
gone. <i>Wà ku makahimungáwung nga nawálà
ákung singsing,</i> I wasn't aware that my ring
was gone. <b>2</b> remember a face vaguely. <i>Wà
ku makahimungáwung sa íyang dagway,</i> I
couldn't place his face. <b>3</b> get a good enough
look at a face to recognize it. <i>Wà ku makahimungáwung
sa íyang dagway kay ngitngit,</i>
I couldn't recognize his face because it was
dark. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] bring s.o. to his senses.
<i>Ug wà makapahimungáwung nákù ang ákung
mga anak, mapatay ku siya,</i> If my
children hadn't brought me to my senses, I
would have killed him.

<p><b>*mungawmúngaw</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] pretend not to
know or be aware. <i>Nagpamungawmúngaw
<pb n=1419>siyang wà kahibáwu nga nakadaug siya sa
swipstik,</i> He pretended not to know that he
had won a prize in the sweepstakes.

<p><b>*mungáwung</b> = <sc>*MUNGÁLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>munggus</b> <i>n</i> @{mung bean}, stewed like lentils or
made into bean sprouts: <b><i>Phaseolus aureus</i></b>.
<i>v</i> [A13; b6] prepare a dish of mung beans.
<i>Nindut munggusan ang bulad bulinaw,</i> Dried
anchovies goes well if cooked with mung
beans.

<p><b>mungha</b> <i>n</i> @{cenobite nun}. <i>v</i> [B156] <b>1</b> be a
cenobite nun. <b>2</b> cloister oneself like a nun.

<p><b>munghi</b> <i>n</i> @{cenobite monk}. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become
a monk.

<p><b>mungit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. edible fish of the rocks of
an unusually strong smell. <b>2</b> allusion to s.o.
who smells bad. <i>Kalígù uy nanimáhù ka
mang mungit,</i> Wash yourself, man. You
smell like a mungit fish.

<p><b>mungkádu kuluni</b> <i>n</i> colony of members of a
religious brotherhood, so called after their
founder Hilario C. Moncado. <b>mungkadista</b>
<i>n</i> a follower of Moncado.

<p><b>munha</b>, <b>munhi</b> = <sc>MUNGHA</sc>, <sc>MUNGHI</sc>.

<p><b>*munisipal</b> <b>hunta</b>, <b>kunsíhu &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> municipal
board.

<p><b>munisipyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{municipal building} in a town.
<b>2</b> town not as big as a city. <i>v</i> [B126; a12]
be, become a @municipality.

<p><b>munitur</b> <i>n</i> @monitor, a student chosen to help
a teacher with order, attendance, and other
non-teaching chores. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] be, become
a monitor, make s.o. the monitor.

<p><b>muntáda</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @mount, set s.t. up resting
on s.t. <i>Nagmuntáda sila sa mga kanyun
ibabaw sa kútà,</i> They are mounting the cannons
on the upper walls of the fort. <b>2</b> [A]
be mounted, put up s.w. <i>Nagmuntáda ang
bátà sa kúna,</i> The baby is lying flat on the
crib.

<p><b>munt&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] set s.t. up, install s.t. for
use. <i>Wà pa ku makamunt&acaron;r sa utáwan,</i> I
have not set the ironing board up yet. <i>Gimunt&acaron;r
na ang ilibítur,</i> The elevator has
been installed. <b>2</b> [A2] mount, get on a
saddle. <i>Dì ku makamunt&acaron;r sa silyíta sa bisiklíta
kay hábug,</i> I can not get on the bicycle
seat because it's too high. <b>3</b> for male
animals to copulate. <i>Dílì mumunt&acaron;r ang butù
kay walà bigái,</i> The male won't mount
because he isn't sexed up.

<p><b>munti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> = <sc>MUNTINGLÚPÀ</sc>.

<p><b>munti<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @monte, k.o. card game. <i>v</i> [A2C; b6]
play monte.

<p><b>muntinglúpà</b> <i>n</i> Muntinglupa, national penitentiary
of the Philippines. <i>v</i> [B1256] be
sent to Muntinglupa.

<pb n=1420>

<p><b>muntúra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @saddle. <i>Lisud ang magkabayù
nga way muntúra,</i> It's difficult to ride a
horse without a saddle. <b>2</b> seat of a bicycle.
<i>v</i> [c] @{mount s.t. on s.t.}, usually so as to put
it in full view. <i>Kamira nga gimuntúra ibabaw
sa lamísa,</i> A camera mounted on top
of the table. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] place conspicuously
s.w. <i>À, náa man giyus úna magpamuntúra,
mu ra mag hárì,</i> Hm, how he dared take
a seat right in the front, as if he were a king!

<p><b>munumintu</b> = <sc>MUNYUMINTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>munyíka</b> <i>n</i> @doll. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; c6] play with
dolls. <b>2</b> [A12] obtain a doll. <b>3</b> [a12] make
into a doll. <b>&mdash; nga nuug</b> <i>n</i> @{rag doll}.

<p><b>munyumintu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> monument. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)]
set up a monument.

<p><b>munyumintu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> small marker of cement to
indicate the corners of land boundaries. <i>v</i>
[A; a2] put a cement marker up.

<p><b>múr</b> (from murtál) I @swear, it's true. <i>Tinúud
laging gipalitan kag sinínà, múr,</i> I swear to
God, she bought you a dress. <b>&mdash; pa</b> I swear,
it's true.

<p><b>mura</b> = <sc>MAU RA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MAU</sc>.

<p><b>múra</b> <i>n</i> @{muslim woman}.

<p><b>murabya</b> <i>n</i> variety of banana.

<p><b>murádu</b> <i>a</i> reddish purple. <i>n</i> = <sc>AMURÁDU</sc>. <i>v</i>
[a12] color s.t. reddish purple.

<p><b>mural</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @morale. <i>Makadáut sa mural sa sundáwu,</i>
Can destroy the soldiers' morale. <b>2</b>
@moral or moral lesson.

<p><b>muralidad</b> <i>n</i> @morality, moral conduct. <i>Mubù
na kaáyu ang muralidad sa mga táwu karun,</i>
The current generation does not conform
to high standards of morality.

<p><b>muralista</b> <i>n</i> one who is a stickler for moral
propriety.

<p><b>murdir</b> <i>v</i> [a12] murder, corrupt a language,
song. Gimurdir ni Nína ang ispíling sa ákung
ngálan, Nena murdered the spelling of my
name.

<p><b>murgi</b> <i>n</i> @morgue. <i>v</i> [c1] be kept in a morgue.
<i>Murgihun (imurgi) na lang ang minatay
samtang maghulat kun kinsay mukúhà,</i> The
body will be kept in the morgue while they
wait for s.o. to claim it.

<p><b>murína</b> = <sc>MURÍNU</sc> (female).

<p><b>murínu</b> <i>a</i> brown or dark-brown in complexion.
<i>v</i> [B125] be, become brown in complexion.

<p><b>muritsing</b> v [B12; b6] be smeared, spotted
with dirt, grimy. <i>Mauy nakamuritsing (nakapamuritsing)
sa ákung sinínà ang úling
nga ákung gidala,</i> The charcoal which I was
carrying soiled my dress. <b>ka-</b> [A13] be
smeared all over. <i>Nagkamuritsing man lang
nang nawung mu sa sikwáti,</i> Your face is all
besmeared with chocolate.

<pb n=1421>

<p><b>murkun</b> <i>n</i> dish made of ground meat mixed
with spices and wrapped in the leaf fat or
thinly sliced pork or beef, and boiled and
then fried. <i>v</i> [A13] make, have <i>murkun</i>.

<p><b>murpína</b> <i>n</i> @morphine.

<p><b>mursíku</b>, <b>mursíkus</b> = <sc>AMURSÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>murtal<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{mortal sin}. <i>Ayawg pangáwat kay
salà kanang murtal,</i> Do not steal because
that is a mortal sin. <b>2</b> I swear, it's true. <i>Wà
lagi ku mamakak, murtal (murtal sin) pa,</i> I
am not lying, I swear. <b>&mdash; sin</b> = <sc>MURTAL</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>murtal<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{mortar cannons}. <i>Murtal ang gamítun
pagbungkag sa kaáway,</i> They use mortars
to scatter the enemy. <i>v</i> [A; a] fire a
mortar cannon on.

<p><b>murtar sin</b> = <sc>MURTAL<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>a2</i>.

<p><b>muru</b> <i>a</i> @pouting, @unsmiling face. <i>v</i> [B46; c1]
having a sour face in displeasure. <i>Nagmuru
ang babáying nasukù,</i> The angry woman is
frowning.

<p><b>murumúru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> play in verse, dramatizing noble
deeds of royalty, performed on an elaborate
and lavish scale on the feast day of a
patron saint. <b>2</b> s.t. put on merely as a show,
not with serious purpose. <i>Usa lang nà ka
murumúru ang imbistigasiyun sa kahugáwan
sa Arsii,</i> The investigation of the Rice
Administration scandals is all a big show. <i>v</i>
[A1; c1] hold a Moro-Moro play.

<p><b>murun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. torch made from a section of
bamboo around 3 cm. in diameter with a
neck and fuelled with kerosene. <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
make, make into a torch of this sort.

<p><b>múrus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Muslim (derogatory reference). <b>2</b>
unbaptized infant (humorous). <b>-in-</b>, <b>-in-(<-)</b>
<i>a</i> doing things like the Moros: <b>1</b> speak the
language of the Moros. <b>2</b> fight, settle arguments
like the Moros. <b>3</b> setting outrageously
high prices. <b>4</b> traitorous, stabbing in the
back. <i>v</i> [A; c1] do s.t. like the Moros. <b>ka-an</b>
<i>n</i> place where many Muslims live.

<p><b>murúsu</b> = <sc>AMURÚSU</sc>.

<p><b>muryumuryu</b> <i>n</i> a notorious red light and
slum district near the waterfront of Cebu
City.

<p><b>mus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. soil with heavy humus content
used by florists.

<p><b>músa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @muse, a @{beauty queen}. <i>Si Bilin ang
nahímung músa sa klási,</i> Belen became the
class muse. <b>2</b> in a benefit dance where girls
are auctioned off to dancing partners, the
girl who gets the highest amount of money.
<i>v</i> [B1256; a2] be, become a muse; make
s.o. the muse.

<p><b>musgut</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @pout and @frown from annoyance.
<i>Mimusgut siya nga ákung gisúgù,</i>
She frowned when I sent her on an errand.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> always frowning in countenance.

<pb n=1422>

<p><b>musì</b>[**accent unclear] <i>n</i> name given to an edible k.o. puffer-*fish
with no spines.

<p><b>musika</b> <i>n</i> @music.

<p><b>musikal</b> <i>a[** n]</i> @{musical film}.

<p><b>musiku</b> <i>n</i> @{music band}. <i>Mitukar ang musiku
ug usa ka martsa,</i> The band played a march.
<i>v</i> [b6] provide a band. <b>musikíra</b> = <sc>MUSIKÍRU</sc>
(female). <b>musikíru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @musician. <b>2</b> member
of a band. <i>v</i> [B156] be a musician or
member of a band.

<p><b>musimus</b> <i>a</i> being of the poorest and lowest
class (derogatory term). <i>Musimus giyud nga
pagkatáwu dì kahibawu mugámit ug kutsára,</i>
He was born in a stable. He doesn't even
know how to use a spoon. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] be,
become lowly and looked down upon. <i>Ug
mutumpang ka ánang way grádu, mamusimus
ka sad,</i> If you step into the gutter to
fight with that ignoramus, you'll bring yourself
down to his level.

<p><b>muskatil</b> <i>n</i> @muscatel wine.

<p><b>muskit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a ship cook's helper. <i>Ang muskit
mauy katábang sa kusiníru,</i> The ship cook's
helper gives the cook assistance. <b>2</b> cook
who is hired or just offers his services for a
special occasion. <i>Mau nay ámung muskit
káda pyista,</i> He is our cook every fiesta. <b>3</b>
the one who is it (the server) in a game of
takyan or marbles. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B136; a2] be, become
a cook for a special occasion. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
make a person remain it for a long
time. <i>Muskítun kug maáyu si Pidru. Lagyuun
nákug pátid ang takyan,</i> I'll make Pedro
be it for a long time. I'll kick the shuttle-*cock
far away.

<p><b>muskitíru</b> <i>n</i> @{mosquito net}. <i>v</i> [A; a] put up,
use a mosquito net; make into a mosquito
net. <i>Magmuskitíru ta kay daghang namuk,</i>
We have to put up a mosquito net because
there are lots of mosquitoes. <b>&mdash; ug tabla</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] be dead (lit. wearing a wooden mosquito
net). <i>Ug dì ka muhúnung ug ínum
magmuskitíru kag tabla,</i> If you don't stop
drinking, you will wind up in a coffin
(wearing a wooden mosquito net).

<p><b>muskubádu</b> <i>n</i> raw, @{unrefined sugar}.

<p><b>muskuládu</b>, <b>muskuláwu</b> <i>a</i> @muscular, @brawny.
<i>Dì siya musúkul nímu kay muskuládu ka,</i>
He won't fight with you because you are
brawny. <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become muscular.

<p><b>musmus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] push s.o.'s face hard
against s.t. <i>Imusmus ku nang nawung mu sa
bungbung,</i> I'm going to push your face
against the wall. <b>2</b> [B1256] fall down hard
hitting one's face on s.t. <i>Nadalispang siya
ug namusmus sa lápuk,</i> He slipped and fell
down face first in the mud.

<p><b>mus na</b> <i>short for</i> <sc>BÁMUS NA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BÁMUS</sc>.

<pb n=1423>

<p><b>mustása</b> <i>n</i> @mustard, commonly raised as a
vegetable: <b><i>Brassica integrifolia</i></b>.

<p><b>mustra</b> <i>n</i> explanation by example, showing
how s.t. is or works. <i>Mustra kun unsáun
pagbúhat ang plánu sa balay,</i> A demonstration
on how to make the plans of a house.
<i>Mustra lang kini. Dílì ibaligyà,</i> This is just a
sample for display. It is not for sale. <i>v</i> [A; c]
demonstrate how to do s.t. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i>
mannequin or showcase used to display.

<p><b>músu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] hire oneself out to do a
piece of work. <i>Bugas ang gisúhul sa nagmúsu
ug gúna,</i> The man who did the weeding
was given rice in compensation. <b>2</b> [c2] hire
a work animal. <i>Íyang karabaw mauy átung
imúsu (musúhan) sa dáru,</i> We will hire his
carabao. <i>n</i> s.o. or s.t. hired out. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a]
hire s.o. <b>2</b> [A; c] hire one's work animal
out to s.o. else.

<p><b>musulíyu</b> <i>n</i> @mausoleum.

<p><b>musyun</b> <i>n</i> motion in a meeting of a voting
body. <i>v</i> [A; c6] make a motion.

<p><b>mútà</b> <i>n</i> dried pus or mucous secretion in the
eyes. <i>v</i> [B126] become this secretion in the
eyes. <i>Ang abug sa mata mamútà,</i> If dust
gets into the eyes it will turn into pus. <b>(->)</b>
<i>v</i> [B146; a4] be filled with this secretion.
<i>Nagmutà (gimutà) ang mata sa gipiskat,</i> The
man with the sore eyes has dried pus in his
eyes. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] remove the <i>mútà</i> from the
eyes. <b>paNhi-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] remove pus from
one's eyes. <b>hi-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> the corner of the eye
where the <i>mútà</i> is deposited. <b>-un(->)</b> a full
of <i>mútà</i>.

<p><b>mutíbu</b> <i>n</i> @motive. <i>Pangabubhu ang mutíbu
sa pagpatay,</i> Jealousy was the motive for
the murder.

<p><b>mutil</b> <i>n</i> @motel or @cabins, usually used for illicit
romance.

<p><b>mutimuti</b> = <sc>KAMUKÁMU</sc>.

<p><b>mutsatsa</b> = <sc>MUTSATSU</sc> (female), <i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>mutsatsu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{male servant}, @houseboy. <b>2</b> in
children's games, the loser who serves out a
penalty. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a2] be, become a @servant.
<b>2</b> [A12] hire or have s.o. as a servant.
<i>Nakamutsatsu mig kawatan,</i> We got a thief
as a servant. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A1] hire oneself out as
a servant. <i>Didtu siya sa Manílà magpamutsatsu,</i>
He worked as a servant in Manila. <b>paka-</b>
<i>v</i> [A13; a12] consider, treat like a
houseboy.

<p><b>mutsu</b> <i>a</i> being temporarily rich (colloquial).
<i>Daghan kug amígu basta mutsu ka,</i> You will
have lots of friends as long as you're in the
clover. <b>&mdash; diníru</b> having lots of money. <i>v</i> [B1256]
have lots of money. <i>Mamutsu lang
tag tingswildu,</i> We are rich only on payday.

<p><b>mutu</b>, <b>mutù</b> <i>n</i> @mound, @hill. <i>Túa sa luyung
<pb n=1424>mutu ang ámung balángay,</i> Our town lies
beyond that hill.

<p><b>mut-uk</b> (from but-uk) <i>v</i> [b2] be dumbfounded,
be struck speechless because of the sudden
impact of words or events. <i>Hingmut-ukan
(namut-ukan) ku sa ímung nutisya kay
mu rag dì katuúhan ang nahitabù,</i> I was
struck dumb by your news because it sounded
unbelievable.

<p><b>mutùmútù<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>TUMÙTÚMÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mutùmútù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] @estimate, @{calculate
approximately}. <i>Mutùmutúa lang unsa kadaghana
ang gikinahanglan,</i> Just estimate
how many we need.

<p><b>mutun</b> <i>n</i> block, a metal or wooden case containing
a pulley or pulleys. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] attach
a block to s.t.; haul out s.t. by means
of a block.

<p><b>mutung</b> <i>a</i> for an animal in a group or flock
to be fierce and domineering over the others.
<i>v</i> [B1] gain supremacy over others.
<i>Ang sunuy nagmutung sa pultri,</i> The cock
is the boss of the chicken yard. [+]

<p><b>mutur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @engine, @motor. <i>Nadáut ang mutur
sa tiprikurdir,</i> The motor of the tape recorder
got broken. <b>2</b> @motorcycle. <b>3</b> corn or rice
mill. <i>Túa siya sa mutur nagpagaling ug mais,</i>
He is at the corn mill to have the corn milled.
<b>-bayik</b>, <b>-saykul</b> <i>n</i> @motorbike, @motorcycle.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c] put s.t. as an engine; use s.t. as
an engine. <b>2</b> [A; a12] go by motorcycle. <b>di-</b>
motorized, having a motor. <b>-ista</b> <i>n</i>
@motorist, @driver.

<p><b>mutursaykul</b>, <b>mutursiklu</b> <i>n</i> @motorcycle.

<p><b>mutyà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> precious gem with magical properties.
<i>May mutyà nà siya búsà dílì dutlan,</i>
He has a charm and so he is invulnerable.
<b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa ságing tinduk</b> <i>n</i>
in folk belief, a precious
stone which falls from the blossom of
a <i>tinduk</i> banana when it opens at midnight
on a moonless night. Supernatural beings in
the form of powerful monsters watch for
this stone to fall. If a man obtains this stone,
he is endowed with magical powers but he
must wrest it from the supernatural beings
who are also after it. <b>2</b> anything precious or
valued highly. <i>Ang bugtung níyang mutyà
dinhi sa kalibútan mau ang íyang anak,</i> Her
only treasure here on earth is her child. <b>2a</b>
<b>daw may -ng gisapnay</b>, <b>nagsapnay ug &mdash;</b> being
extraordinarily careful in handling s.t.
(as if one were carrying a precious gem).
<i>Ampíngi ang ímung dungug sáma sa mutyang
sinapnay,</i> Guard your honor like a
jewel. <b>2b</b> @treasured, most @valued. <b>&mdash; sa mga
mata</b> apple of one's eye. <i>v</i> [A12; b(1)] possess
a precious gem having a charm. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i>
[A13; a12] consider, treat as a precious
<pb n=1425>gem.

<p><b>muu</b> = <sc>MAU</sc>.

<p><b>múuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] be asleep soundly. <i>Magmúuk
ug katúlug ang bátà human digúa,</i> A
baby sleeps soundly after you bathe it. <b>2</b>
[A1; b(1)] stay in bed due to inactivity.
<i>Magmúuk lang siya kanúnay sa banig bísag
udtu na,</i> She is always staying in bed, even
if the sun is up. <b>3</b> [A13] be so that air cannot
get at it. <i>Ug magmúuk ang ímung samad,
dílì mamaáyug dalì,</i> If your wound is
wrapped up so air cannot get at it, it will
take a long time to get better. <b>muukmúuk
ug katáwa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] roll with laughter,
suppressing the sound. <i>Nagmuukmúuk mi
pagkatáwa sa ámung maistrung wà makapamutúnis,</i>
We practically exploded with
laughter at our teacher because he hadn't
buttoned his pants. <b>-an(->)</b>, <b>pala-</b> <i>a</i> sleepy-*head.

<p><b>muung</b> <i>n</i> k.o. cardinal fish: name given to
numerous small, red, lightly-scaled fish of
the family <b><i>Apogonidae</i></b>.

<p><b>muut</b>, <b>múut</b> (from <i>buut</i>) a funny, extremely
laughable. <i>Muut kaáyu si Dulpi mudala ug
kumidiya,</i> Dolphy is very funny in a comedian's
role. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a2] be funny, hilarious.
<i>Muúta nang ímung mga líhuk arun mangatáwa
sila,</i> Make your actions funny so
that they will laugh. <b>2</b> [B1256] be, become
amused at s.t. funny. <i>Namuut ku sa íyang
kumidiya,</i> I was amused at her jokes. <b>para-(<-)</b>
a funny, laughable. <i>Ang mga salída ni
Dyíri Líwis pulus paramúut,</i> Jerry Lewis's
films are all funny.

<p><b>muwaybuway</b> = <sc>BURAYBÚRAY</sc>.

<p><b>muy</b> <b>1</b> <i>exclamation initial to a sentence</i>: My!
How very. <i>Muy hináya pud nímu nga musulat!</i>
How slow you write! <b>2</b> exclamation
expressing deep disgruntlement or dissatisfaction.
<i>Muy! Ug magsígi ning gastúha,
makapútu,</i> My! If these expenses go on, it
will make us go bankrupt.

<p><b>mùy</b> = <sc>MUY</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>*muyù</b> <b>hig-/hag-</b> = <sc>HISAG-/HASAG-</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>SAGMUYÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mwiblis</b> <i>n</i> @furniture. <i>v</i> [A12] get furniture.

<p><b>mwilyi</b> = <sc>MULYI<sub>1, 2, 3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>mwistra</b> = <sc>MUSTRA</sc>. <b>-dur</b> = <sc>MUSTRADUR</sc>.

<p><b>myápi</b> = <sc>PYÁPI</sc>.

<p><b>myáus</b> = <sc>MAYÁUS</sc>.

<p><b>myimbru</b> = <sc>MIMBRU</sc>.

<p><b>myintras</b> = <sc>MINTRAS</sc>.

<p><b>Myirkulis</b> = <sc>MIRKULIS</sc>.

<p><b>myúsik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> piece of music being played. <i>Dúnay
myúsik sa intirmisyun sa sini,</i> There's
music during the intermission in the movies.
<b>2</b> music as a course. <b>3</b> go, word uttered
<pb n=1426>by a conductor of a passenger vehicle to
signal the driver to drive off. <i>Dihang misinggit
ang kunduktur ug myúsik, mipabulhut
<pb n=1427>dáyun ang draybir,</i> When the conductor
shouted 'music, maestro', the driver
immediately took off.

<pb n=1428>

<p><b>na<sub>1</sub></b> particle following the first word of the
predicate. <b>1</b> now [so-and-so] is the case by
now, will be the case by a certain point of
time. <i>Ang ákung kinamagulángan sayis anyus
na,</i> My eldest son is six years old now.
<b>1a</b> <i>with commands and exhortations</i>: [do]
now! <i>Mag-agwáda na ta ug túbig,</i> Let us
fetch water now. <i>Lakaw na,</i> Go on now!
<b>ayaw &mdash;</b> stop [do]ing! enough! <i>Ayaw na!
Dílì na ku muusab!</i> Stop! I won't do it
again. <b>1b</b> <b>adtu, ari &mdash; ku, mi</b> good-bye. <i>Adtu
na ku, Ma,</i> Good-bye now, Mom. <b>1c</b> <b>ása, diin,
háin &mdash;</b> where is [subject] now? <i>Háin na
kahà si Bíbut?</i> Where can Bebot be now?
<b>1d</b> <b>unsa &mdash;</b> <b>1d1</b> how are you now? <i>Unsa na,
Ping? Ganíha ka ra?</i> How are you, Ping?
Have you been here long? <b>1d2</b> how did it
go? <i>Unsa na ag ímung iksámin?</i> How was
your exam? <b>1d3</b> what is it this time? <i>Unsa
na, kapi gihápun?</i> What is it this time? Coffee
again? <b>unsa -ng urása</b> what time is it
now? <b>1e</b> <b>túa &mdash;</b> answer given when called:
coming! (Lit. He is gone.) <i>'Pidung, dálì.'&mdash;'Túa
na!'</i> 'Pete, come here.'&mdash;'Coming!'
<b>2</b> <i>other phrases with</i> <b>na</b>: see the first word
of the phrase. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; lang, lámang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LAMANG</sc>.
<b>4</b> <b>&mdash; man</b> particle correcting oneself
when one has mispoken.[**mis-spoken] <i>Pidru! A Pidru na
man, Husi!</i> Pedro! I don't mean Pedro.
José! <i>Bútù na man. Bútu diay,</i> I don't
mean vagina, I mean votes. <b>tagad ka &mdash; man</b>
don't worry about it. <i>Adá, tagad ka na man
ánang mga tabì,</i> Nonsense. Don't worry
about that gossip. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; pud, sad, sab</b> <b>5a</b>
again. <i>Nía na pud ang sabaan,</i> Here comes
that loud-mouth again! <b>5b</b> in turn. <i>Si Tunyu
na pud ang miluslus sa bisiklíta,</i> This
time Tonio was the one who broke the bicycle.

<p><b>na<sub>2</sub></b> particle preceding a sentence. <b>1</b> all
right, I give assent. <i>Na, ímu na tung ákung
kabáyù,</i> All right, you can have that horse
of mine. <b>1a</b> <ix>particle terminating a conversation</ix>:
well, all right. <i>Na, adtu na lang ku,</i>
Well, I'll be going now. <b>1b</b> <ix>before exhortations
<pb n=1429>or commands to begin as action</ix>: well,
O.K. Let's get on with it and [do]. <i>Na, adtu
na lang mi,</i> All right, we'll be going now.
<b>2</b> <ix>particle preceding a statement that concludes
a conversation</ix>: well, all right, I give
up. <i>Na, ikaw ray mahibalu ánà,</i> Well, it's all
up to you. <b>2a</b> <ix>in narrations</ix>: now anyway,
that's the way it was. <i>Na, mau tu nga ang
amahan ug anak kaúban sa klási,</i> Well, the
situation was that the father and the son
were in class together. <b>2b</b> word expressing
exasperation or helplessness in coping with
a situation. <i>Na, dì na man giyud muhílum
ning batáa uy,</i> My, the baby is not going to
stop crying. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; &mdash;</b> expression comforting
s.o. who has hard feelings. <i>Na, na, hílum na,</i>
Now, now! Stop crying!

<p><b>na<sub>3</sub></b> word following an apodisis ('then'
clause) which precedes the protasis, giving
the tone of a veiled threat. <i>Dì ta man núun
ka paubanun sa sini na, ug magpadugaydúgay
kag ílis,</i> Well, if you take so long to get
dressed, I'm not going to take you along to
the movies.

<p><b>nà</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KANÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>na-</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MA-<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>náa</b> = <sc>ANÁA</sc>.

<p><b>naáka</b> <i>n</i> expression of mild displeasure at s.o.
with a note of affection. <i>Ag naáka! Muamin
ra nákù kay mangáyù ug singku!</i> You
little devil! You are only kissing my hand
because you are asking for a nickel.

<p><b>na-an</b> <i>see</i> <sc>-AN<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>nába</b> = <sc>UNSA BA</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>nabal</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BÁSI</sc>.

<p><b>nában</b> <i>n</i> @husband (slang).

<p><b>nabdus</b> = <sc>MABDUS</sc>.

<p><b>nabigar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @navigate, @sail. <b>2</b> [a12] cover
distance in sailing. <i>Nabigarun (nabigahun)
ang Pasipiku sa usa ka búlan,</i> The Pacific
can be navigated in one month. <b>3</b> [A] @roam
around. <i>Unsa bay singaríhan ninyug nabigar
magabíi?</i> What do you roam around at
night for?

<p><b>nabu</b> = <sc>ANABU</sc>.

<pb n=1430>

<p><b>náda</b> <i>n</i> @nothing, @naught. <i>Walà siya hatági ug
swildu sa íyang trabáhu. Náda lang ang tanan
níyang kahágù,</i> She wasn't paid for her
work. All her efforts amounted to nothing.
<b>walay &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> @{no good}, @inferior. <i>Way náda ning
klasíha kay baratuhun,</i> This kind is no good
because it is cheap. <b>2</b> @nothing, @{of no importance}.
<i>Dì ka mutagad nákù kay wà man
kuy náda nímu,</i> You don't notice me because
I am nothing to you. <b>3</b> good for nothing.
<i>Wà kay náda pagkabanáha ka kay palahúbug
ka,</i> You're a good-for-nothing husband
because you're a drunkard. <i>v</i> [c1]
make s.t. insignificant, go for naught. <i>Ginadáhan
ka lang ning ákung trabáhu nga dakung
panahun ang naúsik ku niíni?</i> You
just dismiss this work as nothing when I've
spent so much time on it? <i>Unsa? Dì ku nímu
suhúlan? Nadáhun (ináda) lang nímu
ang ákung kabudlay?</i> You won't pay me?
You mean you're going to make all my efforts
go for naught?

<p><b>nadtu</b> = <sc>NGADTU</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>nag-</b> durative active verbal affix, past. <i>see</i>
<b>MAG-</b>.

<p><b>naga-</b> alternative form for <i>nag-</i> in meanings
2, 2a, 3, 3a, 4. <i>see</i> <b>MAG-</b>.

<p><b>nága</b> <i>n</i> narra, a large forest tree yielding a
hard, red wood, highly prized for furniture-*making:
<b><i>Pterocarpus indicus</i></b>. <i>v</i> [a12] make
s.t. of narra.

<p><b>nagiknik</b> <i>n</i> light and continuous rain. <i>Magbuntag
ning ulána kay nagiknik,</i> This rain
will last the whole night because it is light
and continuous. <i>v</i> [B456; b4] for rain to
fall slowly but continuously.

<p><b>nagmù</b> = <sc>NÁMÙ</sc>, <sc>KANÁMÙ</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>nagnag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] in preparing a field for
planting, separate lumps of earth from roots
and break them up. <i>Ang mga bátà munagnag
sa daruhan,</i> The children will break up
the lumps of earth in the field.

<p><b>nagumnum</b> <i>a</i> having a nutty flavor. <i>v</i> [B; a2]
get a nutty flavor. <i>Butangi ug mani arun
managumnum ang bingka,</i> Put peanuts into
the rice cake so that it will get a nutty
flavor.

<p><b>nagutnut</b> <i>a</i> @miserly. <i>Nagutnut (nagutnútan)
kaáyung tawhána. Mugastu lang ug diyis
pára káun káda adlaw,</i> That man is such a
miser. He spends only ten centavos a day
for his meals. <i>v</i> [B12] become miserly. <b>-an</b>
= <sc>NAGUTNUT</sc>.

<p><b>nagwas</b> <i>n</i> ankle-length petticoat. <i>Nindut ug
tíras ang íyang nagwas,</i> Her petticoat has a
beautiful lace-edging. <i>v</i> [A1; a] wear, obtain
a <i>nagwas</i>.

<p><b>náhù</b> = <sc>NÁKÙ</sc> (dialectal). <i>see</i> <sc>AKU</sc>.

<pb n=1431>

<p><b>nahut</b> <i>n</i> leavings from the abaca stem after
the fibers have been stripped off. <b>walay &mdash;</b>
@penniless, extremely @poor. <i>Ayaw pangáyù
nákù kay wà kuy nahut,</i> Don't ask me for
anything because I'm penniless. <i>v</i> [b6] be
considered poor. <i>Giwaynahutan ka uruy
nákù nga anak ug mag-uúma,</i> You consider
me a nothing just because I'm the son of a
farmer. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] pretend to be,
treat as penniless.

<p><b>náit</b> (from <i>dáit</i>) <i>v</i> [c3] be @contiguous to each
other. <i>Ang ámung mga parsíla nagnáit,</i> Our
lots are contiguous. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> the @adjacent one.
<i>Sa kanáit nga lawak bátì kaáyu siya,</i> He can
be heard clearly in the adjacent room.

<p><b>nak-áwut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; a] knock out in boxing.
<i>Ginak-áwut ku níya sa usa lang ka sumbag,</i>
He knocked me out with just one blow. <b>2</b>
[B126] get knocked out from drinks, fatigue,
drugs. <i>Nanak-áwut giyud ku human
sa ákung trabáhu,</i> I was knocked out after
my work. <i>n</i> knockout.

<p><b>nakdáwun</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12b3(1)] knock down
in fighting. <i>Si Prísir pa giyuy baksir nga nakanakdáwun
(nakapanakdáwun) ni Tsubálu,</i>
Frazier is the only boxer up to now who
has been able to knock Chuvalo down. <i>n</i>
@knockdown in boxing.

<p><b>nakig-</b> past volitional active of bases with
<i>pakig-</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>PAKIG-</sc> and <sc>MAKIG-</sc>.

<p><b>nakinnákin</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] let the feet swing
back and forth. <i>Ayawg nakinnakína (inakinnákin)
ang ímung tiil kay matay-ug ang
lamísa,</i> Don't swing your feet back and
forth because the table will shake. <b>2</b> [A; b5]
do s.t. with ease (from the notion that letting
the feet dangle is a manifestation of
ease). <i>Kasayun sa iksámin à, ákù man lang
ginakinnakínan (ginakinnákin),</i> How easy
the test was! I just breezed through it.

<p><b>naknak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c1] knock s.t. lightly against
s.t. else. <i>Kinsay nakanaknak niíning
básu nga nabalanáan man?</i> Who knocked
this glass against s.t. to make it crack? <b>2</b>
[B] for fish to be plentiful and spread over
a wide area (so called because the fish are
attracted by a banging sound&mdash;<i>Cf.</i> <sc>DAGUKDUK</sc>).
<i>Nagnaknak ang mga tugnus karun
maung daghang nanlampara,</i> There's millions
of anchovy fry around, so everybody
is out catching them. a for a school of fish
to be so plentiful they are easy to catch.

<p><b>nákù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>AKU</sc>.

<p><b>*nalam</b>, <b>*nálam</b> <b>hi-</b> = <sc>HIGÁLAM</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>*GÁLAM</sc>.

<p><b>namarku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Namarco, acronym on the abbreviation
of National Marketing Corporation,
a now-defunct organization set up to
stabilize food prices. <b>2</b> commodity sold by
<pb n=1432>the Namarco under its brand name.

<p><b>nambir</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put a number on. <i>Kun nakanambir
na mu, sugdan na nátù ang tis,</i>
When you have numbered your papers, we
will begin the test. <i>n</i> number put on s.t.
<b>baydi &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> slow in doing things, as if counting
the steps. <i>Baydi nambir bayà níyang
maglakaw,</i> You sure take long when you
walk. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] do things very slowly. <i>Ug
baydi nambírun (ibaydi nambir) ang líhuk
dì mahuman ang trabáhu,</i> We can't finish
the work if we don't move. <b>&mdash; wan</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> one's
favorite friend or sweetheart. <i>Nadúgay ang
íyang trátu. Niági pa tingáli sa nambir wan,</i>
Her boy friend is late. He probably passed
by to see his number one girl friend. <b>2</b> the
one who is the best. <i>Ikay nambir wan sa
klási,</i> You're the best in the class.

<p><b>námù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAMI</sc>.

<p><b>namuk</b> <i>n</i> @mosquito. <i>v</i> [a4] <b>1</b> be bothered by
mosquitoes. <b>2</b> be kept waiting too long.
<i>Pagkadúgay nímu mag-ílis, namukun man
lang tag paábut,</i> You sure take long to
change. I have been kept waiting till mosquitoes
have eaten me up.

<p><b>nan<sub>1</sub></b> <b>1</b> = <sc>DAN</sc>. <b>2</b> in narrations, particle preceding
a statement that is off the subject
but important for the course of the story.
<i>Nan, kadtu si Antunyu, palainan ta lang, ákù
tung ámu,</i> Now, this Antonio, to change
the subject, was my employer.

<p><b>nan<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>UG</sc>, <i>1</i> (dialectal).

<p><b>nana</b> meaningless syllables used in humming
out a tune.

<p><b>nána</b> <i>n</i> title for a related female: <b>1</b> for grandparents
or women of an older generation. <b>2</b>
for one's elder sister. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o.
<i>nána</i>.

<p><b>nánà</b> <i>n</i> @pus. <i>v</i> [b4] be filled with pus. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[A] give off pus. Munanà nang ímung hubag,
Your wound will exude pus. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b]
take out pus. <b>panghi-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] remove the
pus from one's wound. <i>Ambi tung dágum
kay manghinánà ku,</i> Hand me that needle
because I'll remove the pus from my wound.

<p><b>nának</b> <i>n</i> sleep personified (literary). <i>Si Nának
nga maluluy-un mauy nakaluwas sa bátà,</i>
Merciful sleep saved the child. <b>sabakan
ni &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> sleep personified (literary). <i>Ang kagabhíun
nahinánuk sa sabakan ni Nának,</i>
The night slept soundly in <i>Nának's</i> womb.

<p><b>nanam</b> <i>a</i> for prepared foods to contain s.t.
to make them unusually tasty. <i>Nanam ang
bibingka kay gibutangag itlug,</i> The rice cake
is delicious because it has an egg in it. <i>v</i> [B2]
be, cause to be tasty. <i>Ang mantíkà sa
bábuy makananam (makapananam) sa pán,</i>
Lard will make bread tasty.

<pb n=1433>

<p><b>nánang</b> <i>n</i> term of address or reference for
one's mother or grandmother.

<p><b>nánaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2b2] <b>1</b> gaze over a wide area.
<i>Ginánaw sa mamumulung ang mga nawung
sa nanambúngay,</i> The speaker looked at
the faces of the audience. <b>2</b> scan an area to
look for s.t. <i>Minánaw siya sa dágat pamásin
nga dúnay mga isdà,</i> He scanned the sea in
hopes of finding fish.

<p><b>nánay</b> <i>n</i> @mother. <i>Háin man si Nánay mu?</i>
Where is your mother? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] call
s.o. mother. <i>Nanáyun lang ka nákù kay sáma
ka sa inahan nákù,</i> I'll call you Mother
because you are like a mother to me. <b>2</b> [B1256]
become a mother. <b>(->)</b> voc. <i>short
form</i>: <b>nay</b>.

<p><b>nang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MANANG</sc>.

<p><b>nangkà</b> <i>n</i> @jackfruit, a medium-sized tree cultivated
for its large spiny fruit, which may
reach 70 lbs. and is eaten unripe cooked
and raw when ripe. The seeds are eaten as
a vegetable, roasted or boiled: <b><i>Artocarpus
heterophyllus</i></b>. <b>nahulugan ug &mdash;</b> for a face
to have smallpox scars (lit. a jackfruit fell
on it). <i>v</i> [A13; b6] cook s.t. with unripe
jackfruit. <i>Nangkaan nátù ning bulad,</i> Let's
cook the dried fish with jackfruit.

<p><b>nangnang</b> <i>v</i> [B] be badly infected and festering
(more severe infection than <i>ngasngas</i>).
<i>Ug magbulad ka, munangnang (manangnang)
giyud nang hubag mu,</i> If you keep
staying in the sun your inflammation will
worsen and fester.

<p><b>nanhi</b> = <sc>NGANHI</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>naniw</b> = <sc>LANIW</sc>.

<p><b>nánu<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>NGÁNU</sc>, <sc>UNSA</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>nánu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> = <sc>NÁNA</sc> (male).

<p><b>nánuy</b> <i>a</i> soft and sweet, @melodious. <i>Nánuy
nga sunáta sa tipanu,</i> The soft and sweet
melody of the flute.

<p><b>napkin</b> <i>n</i> sanitary napkin, table napkin. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
use a sanitary or table napkin.

<p><b>napta</b> <i>n</i> @horoscope.

<p><b>naptalína</b> <i>n</i> @naphthalene. <i>v</i> [b6] put naphthalene.

<p><b>napù</b> <i>n</i> fertile, flat land.

<p><b>napúlù</b> = <sc>PÚLÙ</sc>.

<p><b>nára</b> = <sc>NÁGA</sc>.

<p><b>naranghíta</b> <i>n</i> a variety of small orange.

<p><b>narkutiku</b> <i>n</i> @narcotic.

<p><b>nars</b> <i>n</i> @nurse. <i>v</i> [B156] become, work as a
nurse. <i>Adtu ku magnars sa kabukíran diin
way mga dukt&ucaron;r,</i> I'll work as a nurse in a
rural place where there are no doctors. <b>-is</b>
<i>n</i> @nurses (plural). <b>-ing</b> <i>n</i> nursing course.

<p><b>nasiyunalismu</b> <i>n</i> @nationalism.

<p><b>nasiyunalista</b> <i>n</i> name of a political party, or
a member thereof. <i>v</i> [B156] become a
<pb n=1434><i>Nacionalista</i>.

<p><b>nasnas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] for a wound, tear to enlarge,
spreading little by little, and growing worse
and worse. <i>Munasnas (manasnas) ang ímung
samad kun mukáun kag parat,</i> Your wound
will grow worse if you eat salty foods. <i>Nagkanasnas
na ang gisì sa karsúnis,</i> The tear
of the trousers is getting larger and larger.
<b>2</b> [B12; b6] wear off and become thin,
weak, and about to be torn. <i>Nanasnas ang
samput sa karsúnis sa síging liningkud,</i> The
seat of his trousers got worn out from constant
sitting.

<p><b>naspu</b> (from Tagalog <i>púnas</i>) <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
wipe oneself with a wet towel or face cloth
(slang). <i>Dì na lang ku mugúli kay nakanaspu
na ku,</i> I will not take a bath because I
have already wiped myself with a wet towel.

<p><b>násud</b> <i>n</i> @nation. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a nation.
<i>Pag-abut sa mga Katsílà wà pa ta manásud,</i>
When the Spaniards came we were not a
nation yet. <b>maki-nun</b> <i>a</i> @nationalistic. <i>Kasagárang
makinasudnun mga antiamirikan,</i>
Most of the nationalists are anti-American.
<b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> @national. <i>Si Risal mau ang átung nasudnung
bayáni,</i> Rizal is our national hero.
<b>kanasúran</b> <i>n</i> group of nations. <i>Tinípung
Kanasúran,</i> United Nations.

<p><b>nasyunalisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @nationalize, put under
government control.

<p><b>nátad</b> (for <i>lanátad</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @yard of a house or
building. <i>Gitamnan ug mga búlak ang nátad
(nataran) sa ílang balay,</i> There are flowers
planted in the yard of their house. <b>2</b> sphere
of work or activity. <i>Sa nátad sa pulitika giila
siyang ikspirtu,</i> He is considered an expert
in the field of politics. <b>nataran</b> = <sc>NÁTAD</sc>.

<p><b>nati</b> <i>n</i> young of a pasture animal, calf or kid.

<p><b>natibidad</b> <i>n</i> @nativity of Jesus Christ.

<p><b>nat kawuntid</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAWUNTID</sc>.

<p><b>nátù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KITA</sc>.

<p><b>natuk</b> <i>n</i> @{powdery starch} of any sort that
has been obtained by soaking the source
in water and letting it settle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1]
make starch this way. <b>2</b> [A; b6] mix <i>natuk</i>
into s.t.

<p><b>nátun</b> = <sc>NÁTÙ</sc> (dialectal). <i>see</i> <sc>KITA</sc>.

<p><b>natural</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @normal, @natural. <i>Dúnay trátu ang
ímung anak. Natural kanà,</i> Your daughter
has a sweetheart. That's normal. <b>2</b> <i>short
form</i>: <b>tural</b> of course. <i>Natural muhátag ku
kay mahal ka nákù,</i> Of course, I'll give you
some because you're dear to me. <i>n</i> person's
real character. <i>Nagpaayuáyu siya apan bantayi
kun mugulà ang íyang natural,</i> He is
pretending to be nice, but watch out when
his real character comes out. <i>v</i> [A23] for
one's real nature to come out. [+]

<pb n=1435>

<p><b>naturalísa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the natural thing to do. <i>Naturalísa
sa táwung mamakak basta dílì sakpan,</i>
It's only natural for people to lie if no one
ever catches them. <b>1a</b> inborn characteristics
or behavior especial to one. <i>Ang íyang naturalísang
mangil-ad mulutaw giyud,</i> His
disagreeable character will sooner or later
show itself. <b>2</b> whitish fluid secreted by
women. <i>Ang babáying naughan sa naturalísa
nagkaluspad,</i> The woman who failed to
secrete white blood corpuscles was getting
pallid. <b>2a</b> @menstruation. <i>Dalága ka na inig-abut
sa ímung naturalísa,</i> You'll be a full-grown
girl when you have had your first
menstruation.

<p><b>naturalya</b> <i>n</i> @menstruation.

<p><b>*náug</b> <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3SB; ac] @climb, @{bring down};
go, bring out of a house; get off, unload
from a vehicle. <i>Nanáug (nikanáug) ang mananggíti
gíkan sa lubi,</i> The toddy gatherer
climbed down from the coconut. <i>Ang kulikt&ucaron;r
ray mukanáug ánà,</i> The bus conductor
will unload it. <i>Kanaúga ra ang silya sa
sílung,</i> Go get the chairs downstairs. <i>Ayaw
ikanáug ang bátà kay nag-ulan,</i> Don't bring
the child downstairs because it is raining. <b>2</b>
[A23] resign, abdicate. <i>Nanáug ang hárì sa
trúnu arun pagpangasáwa,</i> The king abdicated
the throne in order to marry. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6]
<b>1</b> hand down a decision. <i>Ang hukum nga
ipakanáug sa maghuhúkum dílì na mausab,</i>
The decision the judge hands down is irrevocable.
<b>2</b> pass, promulgate a law. <b>kalanaugun</b>
<i>a</i> situated below a certain level. <i>Ang
balay kalanaugun pa gíkan sa karsáda,</i> The
house needs to be reached by descending a
way from the road.

<p><b>naugnaug</b> = <sc>NUUGNUUG<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>nawása</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> acronym for the National Waterworks
and Sewerage Authority. <b>2</b> plain
drinking water (humorous slang). <i>Wà man
tay ikapalit ug supdringk, mag-agwanta lang
tag nawása,</i> We don't have any money for
soft drinks, so we'll just have to put up
with plain water. <b>&mdash; dyus</b> <i>n</i> (lit. Nawasa
juice) drinking water from the tap (humorous
slang).

<p><b>náwi</b> <i>n</i> @{strip of rattan}. <i>v</i> [A; a] cut rattan into
strips. <i>Dagkung buuk sa uway ang ámung
nawíhun,</i> We cut big stems of rattan into
strips. <b>nawihan</b> <i>n</i> a device for cutting rattan
into strips.

<p><b>nawnaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] put s.t. in a liquid and
swish it around. <i>Munawnaw ka áring patis?</i>
Will you dunk it in this sauce? <i>Inawnaw
ang sinabnan sa túbig,</i> Swish the soapy
clothes around in the water. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a]
rinse. <i>Hinawnáwi ang mga plátu arun matíluk
<pb n=1436>ang sabun,</i> Rinse the plates to remove
the soap. <b>2</b> [AN; c6] have an expensive
meal as a change from the usual. <i>Muhinawnaw
(manghinawnaw) kug inasal ug maswilduhan
ku,</i> I will have roast pig when I get
my salary. <b>panghi-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] rinse oneself off.
<i>Parat ang ímung pánit kay wà ka manghinawnaw,</i>
Your skin is salty because you
didn't rinse yourself.

<p><b>nawug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fine sediment that settles at the
bottom of a container. <b>2</b> youngest child in
the family (humorous).

<p><b>nawung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @face. <b>2</b> giving the impression of
being. <i>Nawung ka man ug búang,</i> You seem
to be crazy! <b>2a</b> k.o. s.t. <i>Nagkalainláing nawung
ang galáhan sa karnabal,</i> There were
various kinds of amusements at the carnival.
<b>3</b> the right side of s.t. <i>Nawung sa panaptun,</i>
The obverse side of the cloth. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; sa dágat,
búkid</b>[**correct: lángit] the surface of the sea, the face of the
sky. <i>Nagbusing-ut ang nawung sa lángit,</i> The
skies are somber. <b>4</b> @nerve, @shamelessness.
<i>Dúna ka pa uruy nawung, nu, mangáyu human
sa ímung nabúhat,</i> You sure have a lot
of nerve, don't you, to ask for s.t. from me
after what you did. <b>4a</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>gen.</i>] the nerve
of [gen.]. <i>Nawung nímu à!</i> Some nerve
you've got! <b>5</b> <i>other phrases</i>: <b>duhay &mdash;</b> unfaithful
in love (two faces). <b>&mdash; ug kwarta,
sápì</b> @greedy. <i>Húgaw ang gubyirnu kay ang
mga upisyális nawung ug kwarta,</i> The government
is corrupt because the officials are
greedy. <b>hílas nang &mdash; nímu</b> derisive interjection
showing disbelief. <i>Nanugílun man kang
gisugut kang Tirya. Hílas nang nawung mu!</i>
You told everyone that Terya accepted
you. You don't look like it! <i>see also</i>
<sc>BAGÀ</sc>, <sc>BUG-AT</sc>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] hit in the face.
<i>Ákung nawngun arun mablak-ay,</i> I'll hit
him in the face so he'll get a black eye. <b>2</b>
[A; b5] tell bluntly. <i>Ginawung (ginawngan)
ku siyag sulti nga wà siyay batásan,</i> I told
him bluntly that he had no manners. <b>2a</b>
[C] come face to face with s.o. to settle
s.t. <i>Magkasábut tingáli mu ug magnáwung
mu,</i> Maybe you'll see eye to eye if you confront
each other. <b>3</b> [a12] sew or iron with
the obverse side up. <b>-anay</b> <i>v</i> [C] = <sc>NAWUNG</sc>,
<i>v2a</i>. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> @{good-looking}. <b>nawungnáwung</b>
<i>v</i> [A1; a12] obtain, be consisting of
various kinds. <i>Makanawungnáwung ka sa útan
ug náay daghang utanun,</i> You can have
all different kinds of vegetables to eat if we
have lots of vegetables. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be of
various kinds. <i>Magkanawungnáwung ang
tambal nga gidápat sa masakitun,</i> All sorts
of medicines were given to the patient.

<p><b>này</b> short for <sc>KANÀY</sc>.

<pb n=1437>

<p><b>nayanáya</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] take sorrows easily. <i>Ikaw
na lay maantígu munayanáya sa ímung kaguul,</i>
Try to dispell[**dispel] your gloom.

<p><b>nayintináyin</b> <i>a</i> @moronic, @simple-minded
(from the notion that a simple-minded person
is somewhat lacking [<i>kulangkulang</i>]
and 99 is slightly lacking to make <b>1</b>00).

<p><b>nayitklab</b> <i>n</i> @{night club}. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make,
make into a night club. <b>-ing</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c6] go
night clubbing. <i>n</i> action of going to night
clubs.

<p><b>nayitlítir</b> <i>n</i> night letter telegram. <i>v</i> [c6] send
a night letter.

<p><b>nayits ab kulumbus</b> <i>n</i> @{Knights of Columbus}.

<p><b>nayitskul</b> <i>n</i> @{night school}. <i>v</i> [A13] attend
night school. <i>Magnayitskul lang ku kay trabáhu
man ku maadlaw,</i> I'll just attend night
school because I work days.

<p><b>naylun</b> <i>n</i> @nylon.

<p><b>náyun</b> (from <i>dayun</i>) <i>a</i> @adjacent, @{in line with}.
<i>Ang ákung balay náa náyun ra sa mirkádu,</i>
My house is just adjacent to the market. <i>v</i>
[A13; c1] straight-lined. <i>Walà giyuy purma
ang íyang láwas. Nagnáyun lang,</i> Her figure
is without curves. It's just formed straight
way down. <i>Nayúnun (ináyun) ku lang pagtábas
ning ímung bistída,</i> I'll cut your dress
straight down.

<p><sc>NBI</sc> <i>see</i> <sc>INBÍAY</sc>.

<p><sc>NDB</sc> <i>see</i> <sc>INDÍBI</sc>.

<p><b>ng</b> <b>1</b> short form for <sc>NI<sub>1</sub></sc> and <sc>KANG<sub>1</sub></sc>. <b>2</b> short
form for <sc>NGA</sc>.

<p><b>nga</b> grammatical marker. <i>short forms</i>: <b>ng</b>
after vowels, <i>n</i>, <i>3</i>;[**image not clear. P2] zero after consonants. <b>1</b>
following preposed gen. <i>Íya kung gilípay,</i>
He made me happy. <i>Ang íyang payag,</i> His
hut. <b>2</b> following demonstratives and interrogatives.
<i>Taw-an kanang kahúya,</i> That tree
is inhabited by spirits. <i>Unsang adláwa run?</i>
What day is it today? <b>3</b> between members
of a two-headed endocentric construction.
<i>Nindut nga sinínà,</i> A beautiful dress. <i>Plawtang
kawáyan,</i> A bamboo flute. <i>Usa ka húngut
nga tubà,</i> A coconut shell full of palm
toddy. <i>Ang ákung gihulaman nga bulpin,</i>
The ball point pen that I borrowed. <i>Gihilásan
ku nga namátì sa íyang hambug,</i> I was
disgusted listening to his boasts. <b>4</b> <i>preceding
a clause</i>: that. <i>Nahadluk siya nga mapugus
pagminyù sa Insik,</i> She feared that she
would be forced to marry the Chinaman.
<i>Huhungíhung nga daghan kag babáyi,</i> Rumors
that you have many mistresses. <b>4a</b>
when [such-and-such] a thing is the case.
<i>Unsáun man nímu pagpanghimakak nga náa
may nakakità?</i> How can you deny it when
so many people saw it? <b>5</b> linker between a
word that expresses manner or mode and a
<pb n=1438>verb that follows it. <i>Siya gustung magpárì,</i>
He wants to be a priest. <i>Maáyu siyang mubinisayà,</i>
He speaks Visayan well. <i>Mahímù
ka nang mulakaw,</i> You may leave. <b>6</b> preceding
the goal of a verb which refers to the
same thing as the subject of the verb. <i>Gipílì
siyang prisidinti,</i> He was chosen president.
<i>Nagpabílin silang malipáyun,</i> They remained
happy. <b>7</b> <b>daghan &mdash;</b> there are, were many.
<i>Sus, kadaghang táwu,</i> My! How crowded
it is! <b>8</b> [<i>noun</i>] <b>nga</b> [<i>noun</i>] the very [noun]
itself. <i>Si Biguy nga Biguy mihukum gánì sa
ingun, ikaw pa!</i> Biguy himself (great as he
is) thought so&mdash;how could you say otherwise!

<p><b>ngà</b> = <sc>INGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>ngáab</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{cry loudly}. <i>Kanang batáa
mungáab dáyun kun dì tagáan sa gustu,</i> That
child yells right away when he is not given
what he wants. <i>n</i> @{loud crying}.

<p><b>ngáan</b> = <sc>NGAY-AN</sc>, dialectal for <sc>DIAY</sc>.

<p><b>ng[=á]b</b> = <sc>NGÁLAB</sc>.

<p><b>ngába</b> = <sc>UNSA BA</sc>, <sc>NGÁNU BA</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>ngábil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lips. <b>2</b> @brim of a container. <i>Pun-a
ang bangà hangtud sa ngábil,</i> Fill the jar up
to the brim. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put a brim to a container.

<p><b>ngabngab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c1] for the wound or an
opening to become big or wide. <i>Mingabngab
ang íyang samad kay wà tambáli,</i> His
wound grew big because he did not have it
treated. <i>Ang kalihuk níyang matúlug mauy
nakangabngab (nakapangabngab) sa gisì sa
muskitíru,</i> The tear in the mosquito net
grew because he kept moving in his sleep. <b>2</b>
[A; b3c] shoot off one's mouth, say things
that are nonsensical and that one doesn't
know anything about. <i>Nagngabngab ka lang
sa ímung pagdúda sa mga butang nga wà nímu
makítà,</i> You are shooting off your
mouth doubting things you haven't even
seen. <i>Dì nímu ángayng ingabngab ang íyang
pagkatáwu,</i> You should not gossip about
his real character. <i>a</i> gaping, wide open.

<p><b>ngadtu</b> going to over there (far from speaker
and hearer). <i>Gíkan dinhi mupaingun siya
ngadtu sa píkas,</i> From here he goes to the
other side. <i>v</i> = <sc>ADTU</sc>. <b>&mdash; nganhi</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2]
go back and forth. <i>Nigusyanti siya maung
magngadtu nganhi sa Manílà,</i> He is a
businessman, so he goes back and forth to
Manila. <b>pasi-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] be on way to, headed
for (literary). <i>Daw pagalantawan ku nga
nagpasingadtu ikaw sa dakung kapildíhan,</i> I
can see that you are heading for a great
failure. <b>ngadtungadtu</b> in the long run. <i>Kun
naglísud ka karun, sa ngadtungadtu makakat-un
ka ra,</i> If you find it hard this time,
<pb n=1439>you'll learn how to after a while.

<p><b>ngalab</b> = <sc>NGÁAB</sc>.

<p><b>ngálab</b> <i>n</i> dividing line between the sea and
the shore at lowest tide. <i>Daghang batu ug
kinhasun sa ngálab,</i> There are plenty of
stones and sea shells at the edge of the
shoreline. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A] to go to the edge of
the shoreline. <i>Nagpangalab sila búsà naabtan
sila sa taúbun,</i> They went to the edge of
the shoreline so the tide caught up with
them.

<p><b>ngálan</b> <i>n</i> @name. <b>sa &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> @{in the name of}, @{on account
of}. <i>Sa ngálan sa átung panaghigalaay
buhátun ku kanà,</i> I'll do that for the sake
of our friendship. <b>2</b> @concerning. <i>Sa ngálan
sa ímung gugma dílì na aku mamínaw pa
niánà,</i> As far as your love is concerned, I
don't want to hear any more about it. <b>&mdash; nga</b>
@being, @as. <i>Ngálan nga managsúun ángay untang
magpinasayluay,</i> Being brothers, we
ought to forgive each other. <i>Ngálan nga mauy
nagpadakù nákù may katungud siyang
mangáyù,</i> Being the one who raised me, he
has the right to ask me for favors. <i>v</i> [A; c]
<b>1</b> call, give a name. <i>Ginganlan siyag baklà
kay báyut kaáyu,</i> She calls him 'quebo' because
he is a fairy. <i>Dyunyur ang ingálan sa
bátà,</i> Call the child Junior. <b>2</b> mention,
enumerate. <i>Makangálan kug bayinti ka langgam,</i>
I can name twenty kinds of birds. <b>hi-</b>
= <sc>NGÁLAN</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>ngalngal</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make thoughtless, extravagant
demands. <i>Ningalngal ang mga ginikánan
sa babáyi ug mga pangáyù,</i> The girl's
parents made such fabulous demands for
their daughter's hand. <i>Gustu kag iskútir?
Nagngalngal ka lang!</i> You want a scooter?
You're making an unreasonable request!
<i>Bisag unsa lay ímung ngalngálun (ingalngal),</i>
You demand whatever comes to your head.

<p><b>ngámig</b> (from <i>kámig</i>) <i>a</i> cold, lacking in heat.
<i>Ngámig na ang sabaw,</i> The soup is already
cold. <i>v</i> [B2S3P; a12P] be, become cold.
<i>Mangámig ang minatay,</i> The corpse will get
cold.

<p><b>ngan</b> (from <i>dungan</i>) and (dialectal).

<p><b>ng[=á]n</b> = <sc>NGÁLAN</sc>.

<p><b>nganga</b>, <b>ngánga</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] open the mouth.
<i>Mingánga siyag dakù pinakítà ang lingagngag,</i>
He opened his mouth wide showing
the back of his mouth. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be unable
to speak, usually out of not knowing
what to say. <i>Nagngánga lang ku adtung ílang
giisturyáhan. Pulus man tu báhin sa sáyans,</i>
I stood there like a dummy while they
talked about science. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B36] for things
that have edges to gape. <i>Minganga (nanganga)
ang samad nga dakù,</i> The wound gaped
<pb n=1440>wide. <i>Nagnganga ang malíta kay punù ra,</i>
The suitcase is open because it's too full. <i>n</i>
amount s.t. gapes.

<p><b>ngàngà</b> <i>a</i> @stuttering. <i>Maáyu kaáyung musuwat
nang tawhána apan ngàngà kaáyung
musulti,</i> That man writes well but he stammers
terribly when he talks. <i>v</i> [B; c1] @stutter.
<i>Mungàngà nà siya ug makuyawan,</i> He
stutters when he is scared.

<p><b>ngangha</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b3(1)] be open-mouthed
with sudden surprise. <i>Nangangha (nahingangha,
nahangangha) aku sa nutisya,</i> I
was left open-mouthed by the news. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b>
= <sc>NGANGHA</sc>.

<p><b>nganhà</b> going there (near hearer). <i>Muanhà ku
nganhà karun dáyun,</i> I'll go there right away.
<i>v</i> = <sc>ANHÀ</sc>. <b>pasi-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] be on the
way there.

<p><b>nganhi</b> here (near speaker and hearer). <i>Anhi
nganhi ku mulingkud,</i> I will sit over here.
<b>ngadtu &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>NGADTU</sc>. <i>v</i> = <sc>ANHI</sc>. <b>pasi-</b> <i>v</i>
[A3] be on the way here. <i>Nagpasinganhi
sila,</i> They are on their way here.

<p><b>ngánì</b> = <sc>GÁNÌ</sc>.

<p><b>ngánu</b> <b>1</b> @why? <i>Ngánung nangutána ka?</i> Why
are you asking? <b>2</b> what is the matter with,
what has happened to? <i>Nagmugtuk man
ka. Ngánu ka?</i> You are sulking. What's the
matter with you? <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> @{who cares?}
<i>Ngánug mabálì nà?</i> Who cares if that
breaks? <i>Ngánu ba uruy ug mahagbung ku
sa bár, basta dì mabúang,</i> Who cares if I
fail the bar, as long as I don't go crazy.

<p><b>ngari</b> to, towards me (nearer me than to you).
<i>Ngari lingkud sa wala,</i> Sit over here on my
left. <b>pasi-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] be on the way here.

<p><b>ngasngas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B] for wounds to fester. <i>Ang
pasáyan mauy nakangasngas (nakapangasngas)
sa ákung mga katulkatul,</i> The shrimps
caused my eczema to fester.

<p><b>ngasngas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] damage by scraping. <i>Kinsay
nagngasngas sa tapalúdu?</i> Who scraped
the fender? <i>Nangasngas ang ákung síku
pagkadagmà nákù,</i> My elbow got scraped
when I fell. <i>n</i> @abrasion, @scratches. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
be covered with abrasions.

<p><b>ngatanan</b> <i>n</i> @all (Biblical). [<i>adj.</i>] <b>sa &mdash;</b> @very
[adj.]. <i>Nakakità kug barkung dakù kaáyu
sa ngatanan,</i> I saw a very big boat.

<p><b>ngatngat</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a12] separate two or more
things clinging to each other. <i>Kinsay nagngatngat
sa duha ka nagsinumbagay?</i> Who
separated the two people who were fighting?
<i>Ngatngáta ang babáying migakus sa
namatay níyang bána,</i> Try to get the woman
to let go of her dead husband.

<p><b>ngawngaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] @{cry loudly}. <i>Ang bátà
nagngawngaw kay gigútum,</i> The child cried
<pb n=1441>hard because he was hungry.

<p><b>ngawngaw<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>NGALNGAL</sc>.

<p><b>ngayà</b> (from <i>mungayà</i>) <i>a</i> @cheerful in appearance
or feelings. <i>Ngayà siyang pagkatáwu,</i>
He is a cheerful person. <i>v</i> [B; b3(1)] @cheerful.
<i>Nagngayà ang ílang mga hitsúra kay
Pasku,</i> Their faces are cheerful because it's
Christmas.

<p><b>ngí</b> word of derision used by children, equivalent
in meaning to sticking out the tongue
(which has the same nuance as sticking out
the tongue in the States). <i>Ngí! Manghátag
ba gud ku nímu?</i> Nma, do you think I'd
give you any?

<p><b>ngíaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{lonely and deserted}. <i>Ngíaw kaáyu
ang kulisíyum kun way gámit,</i> The coliseum
is very lonely and deserted when it is not in
use. <i>v</i> [B; b6] @deserted, @lonely. <i>Mungíaw
(mangíaw) ang kadalánan basta kaadláwun,</i>
The streets become deserted in the morning.

<p><b>ngíaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] laugh in a mocking way.
<i>Dílì maáyung mungíaw sa mga dipiktu sa
átung isig ka táwu,</i> It is wrong to laugh at a
person's defects.

<p><b>ngibingibi</b> <i>n</i> edge of a precipice, tall structure,
or deep ravine.

<p><b>ngidlis</b> <i>a</i> <i>a</i> sharp, high-pitched sound, as of
the screeching of brakes. <i>Ang kuku nga mahakarwas
sa hugasan ngidlis kaáyung pamináwun,</i>
If you scratch your nails against the
galvanized iron of the sink, you will make
a screeching sound.

<p><b>ngidngid</b> = <sc>NIDNID</sc>.

<p><b>ngigngig</b> <i>a</i> be @fatty, @greasy. <i>Ngigngig kaáyu
ang ímung bíkung hinímù,</i> The sticky rice
you made is very greasy. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be, become
greasy.

<p><b>ngihit</b> = <sc>NIHIT</sc>.

<p><b>ngil-ad</b> <i>a</i> @bad, @ugly, @evil. <i>Ngil-ad ug dungug
ang usa ka hustis,</i> A night club hostess has a
bad reputation. <i>v</i> [B; ac5] become bad. <i>Nangil-ad
ang íyang dagway kay napásù sa asidu,</i>
Her face became ugly because it was
burned with acid. <i>Sukad ta maminyù nagkangil-ad
ang ímung kinaíya,</i> Ever since we
got married your disposition has been getting
worse. <i>Gingil-ad ku pagsabut ang maáyu
níyang túyù,</i> I construed her good intentions
the wrong way. <i>Ngil-aran aku sa
ímung pagpakaúlaw níya,</i> I consider it bad
the way you embarrass her.

<p><b>ngilbit</b> <i>a</i> part of material near the edges or
ends. <i>Ngilbit ra pagkalansang ang tabla maung
milutak,</i> The wood was nailed too close
to the edge so it cracked. <i>v</i> [A13; c1P] attach
to, put s.t. down on top of the edge of
s.t. <i>Kun ngilbítun (ingilbit, ipangilbit) paghikut
<pb n=1442>ang tukun muhiplus lang ang písì,</i> If
you tie the pole near its end the rope will
just slip off.

<p><b>ngili</b> <i>a</i> causing a chilling sensation in the
spine (said of worms, snakes, and the like).
<i>Ngili kaáyu hikápun nang wati,</i> It is spine-chilling
to touch a worm. <i>v</i> [b4] have a
chilling sensation. <i>Gingilihan kung nangúhà
sa mga lintà sa ákung batíis,</i> I had a chilly
sensation taking the leeches from my leg.

<p><b>ngilit</b> <i>n</i> @edge. <i>Milingkud siya sa ngilit sa katri,</i>
He sat at the edge of the bed. <i>v</i> [C1P]
put s.t. at the edge. <i>Nangilit nákug butang
sa lamísa ang básu maung nahúlug,</i> I put
the glass at the edge of the table, so it fell.
<i>Ayawg ingilit (ngilita) pagháwid kay mahiplus,</i>
Don't hold it at the edge because it
might slip out of your hands. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3]
@{go to the edge}. <i>Ayaw ug pangilit sa pangpang
kay mahúlug ka,</i> Don't stay at the edge
of the cliff. You might fall.

<p><b>ngílit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b(1)] @grin. <i>Pwirti siyang nakangílit
sa pagkakità níya kanákù sa layù,</i>
How he grinned at me upon seeing me at a
distance. <b>2</b> [A3] bare the teeth in anger.
<i>Ayaw pagdûul sa magngílit nga irù,</i> Don't
go near a dog that has bared teeth.

<p><b>ngilngig</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @gruesome, stirring revulsion. <i>Ngilngig
tan-áwun ang naligsan,</i> The man who
was run over by a truck was a gruesome
sight. <b>2</b> terribly good. <b>2a</b> @{very skillful}. <i>Ngilngig
siya musista,</i> He is very skillful in playing
the guitar. <b>2b</b> @{big shot}, @prominent. <i>Ngilngig
siya run. Tag-íya nag láging,</i> He is a big
shot now. He owns a logging concession.
<b>2c</b> @excellent. <i>Ngilngig kaáyu siyag trabáhu,
Nilibu ang swildu,</i> He has an excellent job.
He has a salary in four figures. <b>3</b> @greasy, @fatty.
<i>Ang mantikáun nga kalan-un ngilngig
kan-un,</i> Food with lots of fat is greasy. <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
<b>1</b> be, become horrible. <b>2</b> be excellent,
skillful. <b>3</b> make greasy. <i>Ayaw ngilngíga
paglútù,</i> Don't cook it with too much fat.

<p><b>ngilu</b> <i>a</i> setting the teeth on edge, causing the
spine to tingle (said of eating sour things,
shrill noises, having teeth filed). <i>Ayaw kagísa
nang puthaw kay ngilu kaáyu pamináwun,</i>
Don't scratch that metal because it
makes my spine tingle to hear it. <i>v</i> [B; b4]
have a tingling sensation in teeth. <i>Mingilu
(nangilu) ang ákung ngípun ug kináug hilawng
mangga,</i> It set my teeth on edge to
eat unripe mangoes.

<p><b>ngílu</b> a yellow color (humorous).

<p><b>ngípun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @teeth. <b>2</b> teeth of saws, gears, and
the like. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] for a baby to cut
teeth. <i>Magdautdáut ang bátà basta magngipun
na,</i> A child tends to be sickly if it is
<pb n=1443>cutting its teeth. <b>ngipnan</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having serrations
or teeth. <b>2</b> litter born with teeth.

<p><b>ngísi</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; c1] @grin. <i>Nagngisi man ka
mu rag gihadlà sa anghil,</i> You're grinning as
if an angel were titillating you. <b>2</b> [B12S456]
be slit, lacerated. <i>Ipatahì sa dukt&ucaron;r kanang
nagngisi nímung samad,</i> Have a doctor sew
up that gaping wound. <i>n</i> grin. <b>ngisingisi</b> <i>n</i>
name given to various things that cause one
to screw up his face: <b>1</b> k.o. small fish with
poisonous spines. <b>2</b> other sea creatures
which exude poisonous matter. <b>3</b> young
head lice (kuyamad). <b>4</b> k.o. skin infection
characterized by intense itching and scattered
sores. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] <b>1</b> be beset with
young lice. <b>2</b> get this skin infection. [+]

<p><b>ngislit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] smile in an ugly way, showing
the teeth. <i>Ningislit siya sa dihang hindiskubrihan
ang íyang kabúang,</i> She grinned
sheepishly when her stupidity was discovered.
<i>Gingislit níyag lúgus ang íyang nawung
pagdismular sa kaúlaw,</i> He forced himself
to grin to cover his embarrassment.

<p><b>ngislù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @grimace, distort the face
upon experiencing s.t. disagreeable. <i>Nakangislù
siya sa kasakit,</i> He grimaced in pain.

<p><b>ngisngis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> very pale-skinned, like tissue paper.
<i>Ngisngis kaáyu ang pamánit kay anak
sa ingkantu,</i> He is white as tissue paper because
he is an albino (the son of an encanto).

<p><b>ngisngis<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALINGISNGIS</sc>.

<p><b>ngitngit</b> <i>a</i> for the atmosphere to be dark. <i>v</i>
[B; ab] get dark, be out of the light. <i>Panáig
mu kay nagngitngit lang ang balay,</i> Light
some candles because the house is dark. <i>Wà
makláru ang íyang nawung kay nangitngitan,</i>
We couldn't make out his face because
it was in the dark. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] be in a dark
place. <i>Nagpangitngit sila arun dì himatikdan,</i>
They stayed in the dark in order not to
be noticed. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> place where there is
darkness. <i>Ang panulay mauy hárì sa kangitngítan,</i>
Satan is the ruler of darkness.

<p><b>ngitungitu</b> <i>n</i> the part of the sea with the
deepest hue indicating great depth. Didtu
siya mangisdà sa ngitungitung dápit, He
fished where it was very dark because of
the depth. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] having its deepest hue.
Nagngitungitu sa kalawum ang dágat, The
sea is deep blue due to its depth. <b>2</b> [B] for
the night to be very dark. Magngitungitu sa
kangitngit ang kagabhíun kay dúnay dag-um,
The night becomes very dark when
there are rain clouds. a for the night to be
very dark.

<p><b>ngíub</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> dark and eerie with no human
noise. <i>Sa mga hilit nga dapit mangíub ang
<pb n=1444>kagabhíun,</i> In isolated places the night is
dark and quiet. <b>2</b> gloomy of outlook. <i>Ngíub
kag kaugmáun ug dì ka muiskuyla,</i> You
have a gloomy future if you don't go to
school. <i>v</i> [B] become dark and quiet.

<p><b>ngiwngiw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. grass owl: <b><i>Tyto capensis</i></b>.

<p><b>ngiyan</b> = <sc>UNYÀ</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>ngiyaw</b>[**correct: insert comma] <b>ngíyaw</b> <i>n</i> mewing of a cat or a similar
sound. <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @mew. <b>2</b> screw up the
face at an unpleasant sensation. <i>Ningíyaw
ang íyang nawung kay naasuhan ang íyang
mata,</i> He grimaced because he got smoke in
his eyes.

<p><b>ngual</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> manner of speaking characterized
by inadequacy in pronouncing some consonants.
<b>2</b> s.o. with a short tongue causing
such a speech defect. <i>Unsay gisulti ánang
ngual?</i> What's that man with a speech
defect talking about? <i>v</i> [B; c1] for speech
to be badly pronounced. <i>Nagngual síyang
nagsulti kay punù ang bàbà,</i> He speaks unintelligibly
because his mouth is full.

<p><b>ngugngug</b> = <sc>ALINGUGNGUG</sc>.

<p><b>nguhal</b> <i>a</i> thick, speaking with indistinct articulation
like a drunk. <i>Nguhal ang sinultihan
sa himatyun,</i> A dying man speaks indistinctly.
<b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] talk thickly and indistinctly.
<i>Mungúhal (mangúhal) ang sinultihan ug
mahubug ka,</i> Your speech will become
thick if you get drunk.

<p><b>nguhù</b> <i>a</i> talking through the nose. <i>v</i> [B; c1]
become nasal in speech. <i>Nagnguhù siya kay
gisip-un,</i> He is talking through his nose because
he has a cold. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be nasal
in speech. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make one's
speech nasal.

<p><b>ngulngul</b> <i>v</i> [B46] deep-seated pain over a
wide area. <i>Mingulngul ang ákung mga buktun
sa pagpanglaba tibuuk adlaw,</i> My arms
ached because I washed all day long. <i>a</i> having
deep-seated pain. <i>Pahílut ku kay ngulngul
kaáyu ang ákung kalawásan,</i> I will get
a massage because my whole body aches.

<p><b>ngúlub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @growl. <i>Ayaw pagdúul sa
irù nga nagngúlub kay mamáak nà,</i> Don't
get near a growling dog because it will bite
you. <i>Ayaw kug ngulúbig masukù ka,</i> Don't
growl at me if you are angry. <i>n</i> @growling.

<p><b>ngúlut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] growling in defiance or
complaint. <i>Ug mungúlut ang irù ayawg duúla,</i>
If the dog growls, don't go near it. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>a</i> given to growling.

<p><b>ngúmiks</b> <i>n</i> comics section or magazine (humorous).
<i>Nagbása ug ngúmiks,</i> Reading a
comics magazine.

<p><b>ngúngù</b> <i>n</i> monster referred to in scaring children.

<p><b>ngurk</b> word used to represent the sound of
<pb n=1445>snoring in writing.

<p><b>ngusngus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @scour, rub s.t. hard to remove
s.t. <i>Dílì ku mungusngus ng adyaks sa
awtu kay makadáut sa pintal,</i> I will not rub
Ajax on my car because it destroys the
finish. <i>Ngusngúsa ang húgaw,</i> Rub off the
dirt.

<p><b>ngutngut</b> <i>a</i> pulsating, throbbing @pain. <i>Ngutngut
kaáyu ang ákung bunul,</i> My boil is
very painful. <i>v</i> [B46] be in pain. <i>Nagngutngut
ning ákung dughan kay gibulagan ku,</i>
My heart is aching because I was jilted.

<p><b>nguwal</b> = <sc>NGUHAL</sc>.

<p><b>nguynguy</b> = <sc>DANGUYNGUY</sc>.

<p><b>nguyunguyu</b> <i>n</i> larvae of mosquitoes.

<p><b>ngyáwà</b> particle expressing discomfiture
when one is put on the spot (euphemism
for <i>yáwà</i>). <i>Ngyáwà ni si Angkay! Nakumprumísu
ku áning íyang pakig-áway,</i> Darn!
Angkay sure has put me on the spot the
way she picks fights.

<p><b>ngyílu</b> = <sc>NGÍLU</sc>.

<p><b>ni</b>- = <sc>MI-</sc>.

<p><b>ni<sub>1</sub></b> <b>1</b> gen. marker before names or titles.
<i>Ang kangga ni Tasyu,</i> Tacio's sled. <i>Ang gibúhat
ni Tasyu,</i> What Tacio did. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; kinsa</b>
of whom, whoever. <i>Gikúhà ni kinsa?</i> It was
taken by whom? <b>2</b> dat. marker = <sc>KANG</sc>.

<p><b>ni<sub>2</sub></b> @nor. <i>Sukad karun dì na ku makigsulti ni
magpakítà nímu,</i> From now on I will not
talk with you nor will I show myself to
you. <b>2</b> <i>preceding a subject in sentences with
a negative predicate</i>: nor did [subject] do.
<i>Ni aku walà pud kakità kaníya,</i> Nor did I
see him either. <i>Ni siya ni ikaw way katungud
pagbadlung nákù,</i> Neither you nor he
has a right to reprimand me.

<p><b>ni<sub>3</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KINI</sc>.

<p><b>nía</b> = <sc>ANÍA</sc>.

<p><b>niadtu</b> <b>1</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KADTU</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>KANIADTU</sc>.

<p><b>niánà</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KANÁ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>níbi</b> <i>n</i> @navy or one in the navy. <i>v</i> [B156]
become a navy man. <b>&mdash; blu</b> <i>n</i> @{navy blue}
color.

<p><b>nibil</b> <i>n</i> @level, device for establishing horizontal
lines. <i>v</i> [A; b5] use the level. <i>Ubus-ubus
ang píkas tumuy kay wà nibila (nibili),</i> The
other end is lower because no level was used
on it. <sc>-adu(<-)</sc>, <sc>-awu(<-)</sc> <i>a</i> @flat. <i>Lunang nibiláwu,</i>
A flat lot.

<p><b>*níbir</b> <b>&mdash; gayud</b> that will never be. <i>'Magminyù
ka níya?'&mdash;'Níbir gayud,'</i> 'Will you
marry him?'&mdash;'Never.' <b>ayil &mdash; giyud</b> I
won't ever. <i>Ug nahibalu pa lámang aku, ayil
níbir giyud,</i> If only I had known, I'd never
have done it. <b>&mdash; mayin</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] become
disregarded, become s.o. about whom no
one cares. <i>Ug musugut ka ánang palikíru
<pb n=1446>maníbir mayin ka,</i> If you give in to that
philanderer, what will happen to you? He'll
forget all about you anyway.

<p><b>nibíra</b> <i>n</i> @refrigerator.

<p><b>nidnid</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @grate. <i>Nidníra (inidnid)
ninyu ang kamúti kay maglidgid ta,</i> Grate
the sweet potatoes because we'll make
sweet potato fritters. <b>nidniran</b> <i>n</i> @grater or
@shredder. <b>nidnirun</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to be grated.

<p><b>nigar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @deny having done s.t. <i>Inigar
giyud ang ímung kalabútan sa krímin,</i> Just
deny that you had anything to do with the
crime.

<p><b>nigatib<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> having negative indications of a
disease. <i>Sa iksámin sa dukt&ucaron;r nigatib ku sa
tíbi,</i> The doctor's exam showed me negative
for TB.

<p><b>nigatib<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> negatives of film.

<p><b>nigra</b> <i>a</i> @dark-skinned (female). <i>n</i> @negress. <i>v</i>
[B12] become dark-skinned.

<p><b>nigru</b> <i>a</i> @dark-skinned. <i>Aku ray nigru námung
managsúun,</i> I'm the only one who has dark
skin among my brothers and sisters. <i>n</i> @Negro.
<i>v</i> [B126; b6] for the complexion to
become dark.

<p><b>nigrus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. plow (so called from the commercial
name).

<p><b>nígu</b> <i>n</i> rattan winnowing tray. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
make, make into a winnowing tray.

<p><b>nigusiyar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> negotiate a sale. <i>Siyay
munigusiyar (magnigusiyar) sa ámung yútà,</i>
He will handle the sale of our land. <b>1a</b> sell
a person as a prospective marriage partner.
<i>Inigusiyar ku si Birting kang Siling,</i> I will
sell Berting to Celing. <b>2</b> engage in the business
of selling s.t. <i>Nakanigusiyar kug bábuy
sa syudad,</i> I sold pigs in the city.

<p><b>nigusyabul</b> <i>a</i> available for marriage (slang).
<i>Nigusyabul pa nà siya kay bálu,</i> He is available
for marriage because he is a widower.

<p><b>nigusyanta</b> = <sc>NIGUSYANTI</sc> (female). <i>see</i>
<sc>NIGUSYU</sc>.

<p><b>nigusyu</b> <i>n</i> @business. <b>may, dúnay &mdash;</b> court a
woman (slang). <i>Nagpagwápu man si Lálit,
may nigusyu (magnigusyu) tingáli dà,</i> I
wonder why Lalet is dressed up. He must
be courting s.o. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] put up a business.
<i>Magnigusyu kug uway kay halinun,</i>
I'll go into the rattan business because it
sells. <b>2</b> [A; a12] play a trick on s.o. by leading
him to believe or do s.t. <i>Maáyu siyang
nigusyúhun kay dalì mutúu,</i> It is easy to
play a trick on him because he is gullible. <b>3</b>
[A13] court a woman (slang). <b>nigusyanti</b> <i>n</i>
@businessman. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a businessman.

<p><b>nihit</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @scarce. <i>Nihit kaáyu ang túbig kun
húlaw,</i> Water is very scarce during dry periods.
<pb n=1447><b>2</b> @scarcely, @rarely. <i>Nihit ka na nákung
ikatagbù sa d[=á]n,</i> I rarely meet you on the
street any more. <i>Nihit na níya mabátì ang
mga púlung sa pagmahal,</i> She rarely hears
words of affection. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] become
scarce. <i>Kun magníhit ang humay, mapugus
pag-impurt ang gubiyirnu,</i> If the supply of
rice is scarce, the government is forced to
import it. <b>nihitníhit</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c1] use s.t. sparingly.
<i>Magnihitníhit tag gáwì niíning bugas
kay mahal kaáyu,</i> We have to use rice sparingly
because it is so expensive.

<p><b>niíni</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KINI</sc>.

<p><b>niíri</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KIRI</sc>.

<p><b>niítu</b> the gen. and dat. of <sc>KITU</sc>. <b>1</b> = <sc>NIÍNI</sc>.
<i>see</i> <sc>KINI</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>NIADTU</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>KADTU</sc>.

<p><b>nikiládu</b>, <b>nikiláwu</b> <i>a</i> @nickel-plated. <i>v</i> [a12]
be nickel-plated.

<p><b>nikinikinu</b> <i>a</i> @simple-minded. <i>Ang táwu nga
nikinikinu dílì makasabut dáyun,</i> A simple-minded
person will not understand readily.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @tease s.o., do foolishness. <i>Munikinikinu
siya sa mga babáyi,</i> He teases the
women. <i>Ug nikinikinuhun ka, ayawg tagda,</i>
If he teases you, pay him no mind. <b>2</b> [B]
be simple-minded. <i>Munikinikinu siya kun
higutman,</i> He becomes simple-minded when
he is hungry.

<p><b>nikruluhíya</b> <i>n</i> @{necrological service}, services
honoring a dead person after his death but
before he is buried. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] hold a necrological
service.

<p><b>niktay</b> <i>n</i> @necktie. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear a necktie.

<p><b>nikutin</b>, <b>nikutína</b> <i>n</i> @nicotine.

<p><b>níla</b>[**note: accent unclear, check main entry] <i>see</i> <sc>SILA</sc>.

<p><b>nilkátir</b> <i>n</i> @{nail cutter}. <i>v</i> [A; a12] clip one's
nails with a nail cutter. <i>Nilkatíra lang ang
kuku ug ayawg abisag kurta,</i> Trim your nails
with a nail cutter and don't cut them with
a knife.

<p><b>nimpa</b> <i>n</i> female supernatural being thought
to inhabit streams, not considered very dangerous
but capable of doing mischief or
good.

<p><b>nímu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>IKAW</sc>.

<p><b>nindut</b> = <sc>ANINDUT</sc>.

<p><b>ning-</b> = <sc>MI-</sc>.

<p><b>ninu</b> <i>n</i> a small tree similar to <i>bangkúru</i> but
with smaller and lighter-colored leaves: <b><i>Morinda
sp.</i></b>

<p><b>ninyu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> the Holy Infant Jesus, a small image
of the Holy Infant brought from place to
place to be kissed during the Christmas
season. <i>Inighawuk nímu sa ninyu muhúlug
sab kag kwarta,</i> When you kiss the image
of the Holy Infant, you also have to give
some money. <b>&mdash; bunítu</b> <i>n</i> person being idolized.
<i>Si Sirhing mauy ninyu bunítu sa Sibu,</i>
<pb n=1448>Serging is the idol of Cebu. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [a12]
treat with the fear and respect accorded
the image of the Christ Child.

<p><b>ninyu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAMU</sc>.

<p><b>nípà</b> <i>n</i> palm of great commercial importance
growing along tidal streams and in dense
stands in brackish swamps. The leaves are
used mainly for thatching, but also for
bags, hats, and handicrafts. The sap is fermented
into toddy and distilled into a
stronger liquor called <i>manyan</i>. It also is
used as vinegar: <b><i>Nypa fruticans</i></b>. <i>v</i> [a12]
make s.t. out of nipa or nipa thatch.

<p><b>nipay</b>, <b>nípay</b> = <sc>ANIPAY</sc>.

<p><b>nipis</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @thin, not thick. <i>Nipis kaáyu ang
mga pánid sa Biblíya,</i> The Bible's pages are
very thin. <b>2</b> @thin, @scanty. <i>Nipis siyag buhuk,</i>
He has thin hair. <b>3</b> in billiards, shot hitting
the target ball at an angle so that it goes off
at right angles to the hole. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c1] become,
make thin. <i>Minipis (nanipis) ang dalunggan
sa bag-ung bána,</i> The ears of the
newly-wed husband became thin (from the
notion that sexual indulgence causes one's
ears to become thin). <i>Kun magnipis kag
puthaw makmákag kusug,</i> When you flatten
metal, hammer it hard. <b>2</b> [A; b7c1] do s.t.
on a scanty scale, thin s.t. out. <i>Nipsa (inipis)
pagpulbus sa ímung nawung,</i> Just apply a
little powder to your face. <i>Nipsan nátù ang
ímung buhuk,</i> Let's thin out your hair. <b>3</b>
[A3P; b5] hit a target ball so that it goes
off at right angles to the target. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6]
come too close to another vehicle.
<i>Ayaw pagpanipis sa ingkuwintru,</i> Don't
drive too close to the oncoming traffic. <b>tag-(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> name given to various kinds of long
and slender sardines and herrings.

<p><b>nipul</b> <i>n</i> small nipple-like projection on glass
or metal.

<p><b>nirbiyus</b> <i>n</i> @nervousness, easy excitability.
<i>Mitukar ang ákung nirbiyus pagtan-aw nákù
sa sirkus,</i> I got nervous when I watched
the circus. <i>v</i> [B126; a4] get nervous. <i>Makanirbiyus
(makapanirbiyus) ang pagpúnay ug
inum sa kapi,</i> Too much drinking of coffee
can set your nerves on edge. <i>Ginirbiyus
kung nagpaábut sa iksámin,</i> I got the jitters
waiting for the exams. <b>-a</b>, <b>-u</b> <i>a</i> @nervous, tending
to get nervous.

<p><b>nislagan</b> = <sc>INISLAGAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>ISLAG<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>nisnis</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] clean or smooth s.t. by rubbing
s.t. back and forth over it. <i>Nisnísa ang
almirul nga mitaput sa plansa,</i> Rub off the
starch that is sticking to the iron. <i>Nisnísi
ang káhuy úsà nímu pintáli,</i> Rub the wood
smooth before you paint it.

<p><b>nít<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> net (in games). <i>v</i> [a12] hit the ball in
<pb n=1449>the net. <i>Ginít man nímu. Sayid-áwut na sad,</i>
You hit the ball in the net. Now it's their
serve.

<p><b>nít<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @neat, @well-groomed, @clean. <i>Maáyung
pagka-arigl&acaron;r kining ímung kwartu. Nít kaáyu,</i>
Your room is well-arranged. It looks
very neat. <i>Nít siyang mamisti,</i> She dresses
neatly.

<p><b>nitbul</b> <i>n</i> @{net ball} in a game. <i>v</i> [a12] hit a net
ball. <i>Kun wà pa manitbul, puntus na untà,</i>
Had it not been a net ball, it would have
been a point.

<p><b>nitruhínu</b> <i>n</i> @nitrogen.

<p><b>nitsu</b> <i>n</i> vault in a cemetery big enough to
accomodate[**typo: accommodate] a coffin or two, built against a
wall or above the ground. <i>v</i> [A12; c1] have
s.o. buried in a <i>nitsu</i>.

<p><b>nítù</b> <i>n</i> scrambling ferns, the stems of which
are used in weaving baskets, hats, boxes:
<b><i>Lygodium spp.</i></b> <b>-ng putì</b> species of <i>nítù</i> that
does not turn black when it grows old.

<p><b>níwang</b> <i>a</i> @thin, not stout. <i>Níwang ang sibúyas
nga way bùbù,</i> The onions are undersized.
They haven't been watered. <i>v</i> [B2S] become
thin. <i>Nagníwang ka kay kúlang kag
maáyung káun ug katúlug,</i> You are thin because
you lack good food and sleep.

<p><b>niwniw</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] swish s.t. around in water.
<i>Nagniwniw kug anyil sa túbig,</i> I'm swishing
bluing about in the water. <i>Ang usa ka tásang
ínit túbig nga niwniwan ug gamayng
ampiyun,</i> A pinch of opium swished around
in a cup of hot water.

<p><b>níya</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SIYA</sc>.

<p><b>niyan</b> = <sc>UNYÀ</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>níyun</b> <i>n</i> @{neon lamp}, @{neon light}. <i>Níyun nga
bilburd,</i> Neon billboard. <i>v</i> [A1] have neon
lights.

<p><sc>NPC</sc> <i>see</i> <sc>INPÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>nu<sub>1</sub></b> <b>1</b> isn't that right? <i>'Muinum man ka, nu?'&mdash;'Mu
lang',</i> 'You drink liquor, don't you?'&mdash;'I
sure do'. <b>2</b> so it is, isn't it? <i>Martis man
diay run, nu?</i> Today is Tuesday, isn't it? <b>3</b>
<i>particle asking the hearer if he understands</i>:
You know what I mean? <i>Ákù siyang giabláhan.
Unyà nu, mihílak siya,</i> I proposed
to her. And then, you know what? She
cried. <b>sa &mdash;</b> = <sc>SA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>UNSA</sc>, <i>5</i>.

<p><b>nu<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KUNU</sc>.

<p><b>Nub.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>Nubimbri</i>, November.

<p><b>*nubáli</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<ix>number of Spanish origin</ix>] in billiards,
the amount of handicap a player
gives his opponent, the amount he must
reach before giving up the cue if his score is
to be counted. <i>Way kwinta tung nakuhir
nímung singkwinta kay nubáli siyin may
ímung gihátag nga bintáhà,</i> The fifty points
<pb n=1450>you scored do not count because your handicap
was no points unless they amount to
one hundred or more. <b>&mdash; náda</b> <i>a</i> @{without effect},
@useless. <i>Nubáli náda lang ang tambag
nímu ánang tawhána kay dì nà mamínaw,</i>
It's useless to give advice to that fellow because
he doesn't listen. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] be without
effect. <i>Dílì giyud manubáli náda ang
kahibalu sa makinilya,</i> A knowledge of
typing always will come in handy.

<p><b>nubátu</b>, <b>nubátus</b> <i>a</i> @inexperienced, @neophyte.
<i>Kumaw siya kay nubátu pa ánang trabahúa,</i>
He does it awkwardly because he is inexperienced
in that job.

<p><b>núbi</b> <i>n</i> decoration representing clouds used
in the background of the representation of
the nativity scene in church at Christmas.

<p><b>nubíla</b> <i>n</i> @novel. <b>nubilista</b> <i>n</i> @novelist.

<p><b>nubimbri</b> = <sc>NUBYIMBRI</sc>.

<p><b>nubína</b> <i>n</i> @novena. <b>&mdash; nga bug-us</b> <i>n</i> special
novena for one person or soul. <b>&mdash; sa kumun</b>
<i>n</i> novena offered for all souls on All Souls'
Day or on the nine days before. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
hold a novena. <i>Nakalingkawas tu siya sa
purgaturyu kay nanubináhan,</i> He has probably
been saved from purgatory because a
novena was held for him. <b>&mdash; ug sugung, almanáki</b>
<i>v</i> [A12; b6] I'll eat my hat, do the
impossible (lit. read a novena from a bamboo
tube, almanac). <i>Magnubína kug sugung
ug makapasar kas síbil sirbis,</i> I will eat my
hat if you pass the Civil Service exams. <b>nubinahan</b>
<i>n</i> book used in praying the novena.
nubinaryu <i>n</i> the nine-day period in which a
novena is held. <i>v</i> [A13] hold this feast.

<p><b>nubinta</b> <i>number</i> @ninety. <i>see</i> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc> for
verb forms.

<p><b>nubù</b> = <sc>MUBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>núbù</b> (from <i>lanúbù</i>) <i>v</i> [a2] make s.t. go far.
<i>Nubúag gámit ang sabun,</i> Use the soap
sparingly.

<p><b>nubya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fiancee. <b>2</b> @bride. <i>v</i> [B1256; a12]
become, be one's bride. <i>Kun akuy manubya,
kuntúdu giyud ang ákung kasal,</i> When I
become a bride, my wedding will be on a
grand scale.

<p><b>nubyimbri</b> <i>n</i> @November. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>ABRIL</sc>.

<p><b>nubyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fiance. <b>2</b> @bridegroom.

<p><b>nudnud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] rub on with moderate
pressure. <i>Nudnúrig kandílà ang utaw,</i> Rub
wax on the iron. <b>2</b> [c6] impose a discriminating
burden or imposition. <i>Mau pay pubri
ku, inudnud pa giyud tag palukat ug lisinsya,</i>
Poor as I am, I still have to pay for
a license.

<p><b>núdul sup</b> <i>n</i> @{noodle soup}.

<p><b>nugbù</b> = <sc>MUGBÙ</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MUBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>nuísu</b> <i>n</i> in billiards, points not counted. <i>Nuísu
<pb n=1451>ang tiráda kay walà makarambúla,</i> The
shot doesn't count because it wasn't a carom.
<b>&mdash; karambúla</b> <i>n</i> shot that is not a carom.

<p><b>núka</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sore, @infection on the skin, not of
great size. <b>2</b> north wind pieces in mahjong
(slang for nurti). <i>v</i> [B; b6] become a sore.
<i>Minúka (nanúka) ang íyang samad,</i> His
wound became a sore. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [a4] be affected
by sores. <i>Ginuka siya kay dì manghimatíis,</i>
He has sores on his legs because he
doesn't wash them. <b>nukaun</b> <i>a</i> infested with
sores.

<p><b>nukanuk</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for rain to be steady and continuous,
but light. <b>2</b> for a war or battle to
be off and on, light and dragging. <i>Nukanuk
ang inawayan sa girilya,</i> Guerrilla warfare is
not steady. It drags on and with heavy
fighting interrupted by periods of calm. <b>3</b>
for persons to be bothersome, pestering,
with repeated requests. <i>Nukanuk siya. Káda
adlaw túa sa upisína arun paghulam ug kwarta,</i>
He is a pest. He comes to the office
every day to borrow money.

<p><b>nukliyar</b> <i>n</i> @nuclear.

<p><b>núkus</b> <i>n</i> @squid. <b>&mdash; sa ípil</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small squid
with a caudal fin running the length of the
body. <b>&mdash; tarúrut</b> = <sc>TARÚRUT</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>nukusnúkus</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] keep changing one's mind
about agreeing to s.t. <i>Dì ku gustung magnukusnúkus
ka. Muuban kag dílì,</i> Make up
your mind once and for all. Are you coming
or not? <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go fishing for
squids.

<p><b>núli</b> <i>n</i> Rizal's novel <i>Noli Me Tangere</i>.

<p><b>núlu</b> <i>n</i> @{null and void}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @nullify.
<i>Ginúlu sa huwis ang ílang kasal,</i> The judge
annulled their marriage. <b>2</b> [a12] turn to
nothing. <i>Nulúhun lang ang ímung salapì kun
muapil ka niánang klasíha sa nigusyu,</i> Your
money will disappear into thin air if you
engage in that k.o. business.

<p><b>numbrar</b> <i>see</i> <sc>NUMR&Acaron;R</sc>. <b>numbramyintu</b> =
<sc>NUMRAMYINTU</sc>.

<p><b>numbri</b> = <sc>NUMRI</sc>.

<p><b>numinar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c1] @nominate. <i>Numinahun
(inuminar, numinahan) ta siya pagkasarhintu,</i>
Let's nominate him sergeant-at-arms.
<b>numinasyun</b> <i>n</i> @nomination for voting.

<p><b>numiráwu</b> <i>a</i> @numbered for easy identification
or guidance. <i>Numiráwu ang mga lingkuránan
sa awdituryum,</i> The seats in the
auditorium are numbered. <i>v</i> [B1256] for
s.t. to be numbered.

<p><b>numiru</b> <i>n</i> @number. <b>&mdash; únu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{number one},
greatest in degree. <i>Siya ang numiru únung
ismaglir sa násud,</i> He is the number one
smuggler in the country. <i>Siyay numiru únu
<pb n=1452>sa klási,</i> He's number one in his class. <b>2</b> a
favorite girl or boy friend. <i>Daghan túud
kug trátu, apan ikay numiru únu,</i> It's true
I have lots of sweethearts, but you are number
one. <b>&mdash; kwatru</b> sitting with one ankle
crossed over the knee. <i>Numiru kwatru ang
íyang nilingkuran,</i> He sat down resting his
ankle on his knee. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sit in such a
position. [+]

<p><b>numr&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @appoint. <i>Makalingkud ka
na sa katungdánan kay ginumrahan ka sa
prisidinti,</i> You can assume office now because
the president appointed you. <b>2</b> [A; b]
@nominate. <i>Ginumrahan aku pagkaprisidinti,</i>
I was nominated president. <b>numramyintu</b>
<i>n</i> @appointment to public office.

<p><b>numri</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @name. <i>Ang titulu sa yútà anáa sa
numri ni Nánay,</i> The title of the land is in
Mother's name. <b>2</b> @{family name}. <b>3</b> @signature.
<i>Gikinahanglan ang ímung numri sa dukumintu,</i>
Your signature is needed in the document.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] have or give a name or
family name. <b>2</b> [A; b] affix a signature,
sign a name. <i>Kinahanglan nga munumri ka
sa pírul,</i> You have to sign the payroll.

<p><b>-nun</b> = <sc>-ANUN</sc>.

<p><b>nung</b> short for <sc>MÁNUNG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MÁNUNG</sc>.

<p><b>nungka</b> <b>1</b> it will never happen. <i>Muampu ku
níya? Nungka!</i> Me, bow to him? Never!
<i>Nungka nga muhátag ku níyag danyus,</i> I
will never pay him for the damages. <b>2</b> rather
than [so-and-so], which is worse[** .] <i>Mas
báli pag mamatay nungka nga makigminyù
ánang animal,</i> I'd rather die than marry
that beast.

<p><b>nunut</b> <b>1</b> together with. <i>Natundag ang karyir
nunut sa daghang ayruplánu nga gidala niíni,</i>
The carrier sank together with the planes
it was carrying. <b>2</b> with [subject] as accompaniment.
<i>Nag-áwit kami nunut ang singgit
sa hudiyákà,</i> We sang and shouted in merriment.
<b>3</b> for hair or fibers to be easily workable,
amenable, doing others' bidding. <i>Nunut
ang íyang buhuk búsà sayun sudláyun,</i>
His hair is easy to work. That's why it's
easy to comb. <i>Nunut kaáyu kanang kabáwa.
Bísan bátà makabalhin,</i> That is a very
complaisant water buffalo. Even a child
can lead it. <i>v</i> [A2; ac] <b>1</b> follow along. <i>Kun
mulawig ka, ingun sa mununut usab ang
mga pangánud,</i> When you sail, the clouds
seem to follow along. <i>Nunta didtu ang libru,</i>
Go along with him to get the book. <b>2</b>
accompany with. <i>Ang kakúgi kinahanglang
nuntan ug kaálam,</i> Industry must be accompanied
by wisdom. <b>3</b> follow a new
faith, idea, custom. <i>Makaminyù lang ta kun
mununut ka sa ámung rilihiyun,</i> We can get
<pb n=1453>married only if you embrace our religion.
<b>pahi-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] go along with an idea,
submit oneself to an outside force. <i>Wà siyay
dugúkan kay magpahinúnut lang kanúnay
sa ámung hukum,</i> He is spineless because
he always agrees with our decision
without any objections. <i>Gipahinuntan siya
sa gustu,</i> She is given her whims. <b>sag-/sig-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [A23; b6] go along with, follow. <i>Misagnúnut
ang ákung panan-aw sa milabay
nga dalága,</i> My eyes followed the woman
who passed by. <b>pasig-/pasag-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>PAHINÚNUT</sc>.
<b>2</b> = <sc>SAGNÚNUT</sc>.

<p><b>nu puydi</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PUYDI</sc>.

<p><b>nuranti</b> <i>short for</i> <sc>IGNURANTI</sc>.

<p><b>nurmal<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @normal. <i>Nurmal na ang búang human
katambáli,</i> The insane man is normal
now after he has been treated. <i>v</i> [B] become
normal. <i>Minurmal (nanurmal) ang íyang
timpiratúra human sa indiksiyun,</i> His
temperature went back to normal after the
injection.

<p><b>nurmal<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{normal school}, a training school
for elementary teachers. <b>2</b> elementary
teaching course. <i>Nurmal ang ákung gikúhà,</i>
I'm taking elementary teaching.

<p><b>nurt</b> = <sc>NURTI</sc> <i>2</i>, <i>3</i>, <i>4</i>.

<p><b>nurti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @north. <b>2</b> north wind piece, the
name of one of the winds (<i>bintus</i>) in mahjong.
<b>3</b> the player to the left side of the
dealer. <b>4</b> the name given to the fourth
round (cf. <sc>RÁWUN</sc>, <i>1a</i>). <b>karni &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KARNI</sc>.

<p><b>núrul</b> <i>n</i> simple way of polishing shoes without
bothering to rub the polish in well. <i>Dì
kaáyu sínaw ang sapátus kay núrul pagkalimpiya,</i>
The shoes are not very shiny because
they were polished in a simple way.
<i>v</i> [A3; a] polish in a simple way.

<p><b>Nurwígu</b> <i>n</i> @Norwegian.

<p><b>nusnus</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] rub s.t. back and forth on
s.t. else with pressure. <i>Siyay nagnusnus ug
tinúnawng ispirma sa salug,</i> He applied (lit.
rubbed on) melted wax on the floor. <i>Nusnúsi
ug abu ang kutsára arun musínaw,</i> Rub
ashes onto the spoons so they'll get shiny.

<p><b>núsul</b> <i>n</i> @nozzle.

<p><b>núta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rating grade. <b>2</b> notes in music. <b>di-</b>
<i>n</i> played looking at the music. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
play looking at the music.

<p><b>núta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @stain, @blemish on one's character. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A; b5] put s.t. on record, note down.
<b>2</b> [A; b6] note s.o. down as s.t. <i>Ginutáhan
nang istudyantíha nga aktibist,</i> That
student is marked as an activist. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> @notorious.
<i>Nutádung mangingilad,</i> A notorious
embezzler. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become notorious.

<p><b>nutaryu</b> <i>n</i> @notary. <i>v</i> [A; b] @notarize. <i>Nutaryúhan
<pb n=1454>giyud arun maligal,</i> It should be notarized
to make it legal. [+]

<p><b>nutbuk</b> <i>n</i> @notebook.

<p><b>nutikal</b> <i>n</i> @{nautical course}.

<p><b>nutisya</b> <i>n</i> @news. <i>May nutisya ku báhin níya,</i>
I have some news about him. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c]
give @information. <i>Nutisyahi (nutisyai) siya
báhin sa nahitabù,</i> Inform him about what
happened. <b>2</b> [A12] receive information.
<i>Nakanutisya ku nga minyù na ka,</i> I heard
that you are married.

<p><b>nutrisyunista</b> <i>n</i> @dietician. <i>v</i> [B1456] be a
dietician.

<p><b>núts</b> <i>n</i> @notes taken for future study or reference.
<i>Núts sa Písiks,</i> Physics notes. <i>v</i> [A; c]
@{take notes}.

<p><b>*nutsi</b> <b>&mdash; buyna</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the night of @{Christmas
Eve} or the repast prepared for eating at
midnight or after mass on Christmas Eve. <b>2</b>
@{New Year's Eve}. <i>v</i> [A; c6] prepare a Christmas
Eve meal. <i>Magnutsibuyna lang tag pinubri,</i>
We'll have a simple meal at midnight
on Christmas Eve. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] spend
Christmas Eve. <i>dáma di-</i> <i>see</i> <sc>DÁMA</sc>. <b>midiya
&mdash;</b> = <sc>NUTSI BUYNA</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>núud</b> (from <i>túud</i>) <i>v</i> [A13] @{prove true}. <i>Nagnúud
ang ákung katáhap,</i> My suspicions
proved true.

<p><b>nuug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cloth. <i>Maáyung pulúhun ning nuúga,</i>
This cloth will make a good sport shirt.
<b>2</b> discarded clothes for rags. <i>Pagkúhag nuug
arun himúung pahiran,</i> Get some discarded
clothes for rags. <i>v</i> [B1256; c1] be made into
<pb n=1455>rags. <b>nuugnuug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. hairy shrub bearing
globose fleshy green or yellowish fruits,
the leaves of which are used to clean dishes
instead of soap: <b><i>Solanum verbascifolium</i></b>.

<p><b>nuugnuug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> name given to various kinds of
small fish with stinging spines.

<p><b>núun</b> = <sc>HINÚUN</sc>.

<p><b>nuy</b> short for <sc>MÁNUY</sc>.

<p><b>nuybi</b> <i>number</i> @nine. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>TRIS</sc>.

<p><b>nuybinta</b> = <sc>NUBINTA</sc>.

<p><b>nwistra</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINYÚRA</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>nyà</b> <i>see</i> <sc>UNYÀ</sc>.

<p><b>nyíbi</b> <i>n</i> @snow.

<p><b>nyur</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINIYUR</sc>.

<p><b>nyura</b>, <b>nyúra</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINYÚRA</sc>.

<p><b>nyuralhiya</b> <i>n</i> @neuralgia.

<p><b>nyuríta</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINYURÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>nyurítu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINYURÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>nyús</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @news. <b>1a</b> @newspaper. <b>2</b> in mahjong,
a four-piece combination consisting of the
<i>nurti</i>, <i>isti</i>, <i>wisti</i>, and <i>sur</i> which get[**gets? P2] extra
winnings. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] release news. <i>Patingúgag
radiyu kay nagniyús[**note: inconsistent orthography of headword nyús] na,</i> Turn the
radio on because the news is on. <b>2</b> [A12]
receive news about s.t. <i>Nakanyús ka ba báhin
sa katalagman?</i> Have you read the
news about the disaster? <b>&mdash; pípar</b> = <sc>NYÚS</sc>,
<i>1a</i>.

<p><b>nyusbuy</b> <i>n</i> @newsboy. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] become
a newsboy.

<p><b>nyutral</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @neutral in an argument. <b>2</b> @{neutral
gear}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] stay neutral. <b>2</b> [A13; c6]
shift into neutral.

<pb n=1456>

<p><b>pa</b><sub>1</sub> <b>1</b> still, yet: up to now, up to a specific
point in the past. <i>Natúlug pa si Pidru,</i> Pedro
is still asleep. <i>Si Huwan pay naabut,</i> So
far only John has arrived. <b>1a</b> with measurements:
only [so-and-so much] up to now.
<i>Tungà pa ug túbig ang baril,</i> The barrel is
still only half full of water. <b>1b</b> <b>dílì, walà &mdash;</b>
<b>1b1</b> not yet. <i>Ang linung-ag nga ságing walà
pa malútù,</i> The boiled bananas are not
cooked yet. <b>1b2</b> before. <i>Hipúsa ang libru
sa dílì pa si Pápa muabut,</i> Put the book
away before Dad arrives. <i>Sa wà pay gíra,</i>
Before the war. <b>2</b> else, in addition. <b>2a</b> <i>with
future verb</i>: [so-and-so] will still happen.
<i>Sulatan pa nákù si Husi,</i> I still have to write
<pb n=1457>to José. <b>2b</b> with a past verb: [did] besides.
<i>Human siya sagpáa, gisultían pa ug pait,</i> He
was slapped and bitter words were said to
him as well. <b>2c</b> <i>with existential</i>: [so-and-so]
also is in existence. <i>Náa pa bay túbig sa baril?</i>
Is there any more water in the barrel?
<b>2d</b> <i>interrogative &mdash;</i>: <b>2d1</b> what, where, why,
etc. else. <i>Kinsa pay muadtu?</i> Who else will
go? <b>2d2</b> what, where, why, etc. could it
be. <i>Unsa pa ug dílì kwarta?</i> What could it
be it[**if? P2] not money? <i>Ngánu pa nga ikaw giyud?</i>
Why, oh why, was it you, of all people?
<b>2d3</b> <b>unsa, háin -y</b> <i>[noun]-un</i> what
[noun] are you talking about? <i>Unsa pay
radiyúhun nga dúgay nang gikáwat,</i> What
<pb n=1458>radio are you talking about when it was
stolen long ago. <b>2e</b> <i>in phrases bringing up a
new subject</i>: <b>láin &mdash;y átù</b> by the way, to
change the subject. <i>Láin pay átù, minyù ka
na ba?</i> By the way, are you married? <b>mau
&mdash; diay átù</b> by the way, I just thought of it.
<i>Mau pa diay átù, wà ta kadág abridur,</i> It
just occurred to me. We didn't bring a can
opener. <b>úsà, ísà, tayim &mdash;</b> excuse me a second
(lit. one more second). <i>Ísà pa kay ákung
pagngun ang radiyu,</i> Excuse me. I am
going to turn off the radio. <b>2f</b> <i>in phrases
meaning in addition</i>: <b>bísan &mdash;</b> even ... too,
despite. <i>Bísan pa ang mga bátà giapil,</i> Even
the children were included. <i>Bísan pa niánà,
dì ku muadtu,</i> Despite that, I won't go!
<b>gawas, lábut &mdash;</b> besides. <i>Gawas (lábut) pa
niánà, unsa pa may púlung níya?</i> Besides
that, what else did he say? <b>labaw &mdash;</b> in addition
to. <i>Labaw pa niánà tagáan tikag primiyu,</i>
And in addition, I will give you a
reward. <b>3</b> [predicate] is superflous;[**typo: superfluous] [do]
when one shouldn't or shouldn't have to.
<i>Ug nagbayadbáyad pa siya nga wà man tu
kinahanglána,</i> And he was paying for it
when there was no need. <i>Sus! Ipakítà pa
giyud níya mu rag dílì baratuhun,</i> Heavens!
She has to show off, as if it weren't s.t.
cheap. <b>3a</b> [do] some more so that [such-and-such]
a bad thing will happen again.
<i>Nasagpaan ka. Panabì pa,</i> You got yourself
a slapping. Go on. Blabber some more. <i>Nadagmà
ka núun. Sígi, dágan pa,</i> You fell
down. Go on. Keep on running around (so
you can fall again). <b>3b</b> that's what happens
when you do [so-and-so]. <i>Minyù pa. Mu ra
na kag irung panit,</i> That is what you get for
getting married. You're no better off than a
mangy dog. <b>3c</b> <b>walà nay</b> [<i>doubled verb</i>] &mdash;
didn't even do [so-and-so] though it is customary.
<i>Gipalit níya ang kutsi dihàdihà nga
wà nay hangyùhangyù pa,</i> He bought the
car, then and there, without even bargaining.
<b>3d</b> <b>mau &mdash;y</b> [<i>verb</i>] [so-and-so] was the
case, which was bad enough, but then....
<i>Mau pay kisì, ímu pung iuran ug sígi, nadúnut,</i>
It was already torn. You kept wearing it,
so it was ruined. <b>3d1</b> <b>mau &mdash;y</b> [<i>verb, adj.</i>] ...
<b>mau &mdash;y</b> [<i>verb, adj.</i>] he [did, does] and yet
dared, dares to do [so-and-so] in addition.
<i>Mau pay sad-an mau pay mangísug,</i> He is at
fault, but he dares to get mad. <i>Mau pay nangáyù
mau pay mipílì,</i> He is asking the favor
and yet he is choosy. <b>4</b> [subject] is still
in a group with other things mentioned.
<i>Ang íhu isdà. Isdà pa ba ang pági?</i> Sharks
are fish; are rays also considered fish? <b>4a</b>
<b>málu &mdash; nà</b> that's not so bad, is it? <i>Sígi
<pb n=1459>málu pa nà ug makadiyis ka,</i> Go ahead. If
you make ten bucks on it, that ain't bad. <b>5</b>
<i>in comparisons</i>: even more. <i>Gwápa pa ka
kang Maríya,</i> You are more beautiful than
Mary. <b>5a</b> [<i>adj.</i>] <b>pay</b> [<i>subject</i>] [subject] is
more [adj.] than.... <i>Lamì pay lamaw niíni,</i>
This is worse than garbage. (Lit. Garbage is
more delicious than this.) <i>Lisud pay magkaug
mani,</i> It's harder to eat peanuts than do
this. <b>6</b> <i>in quotations, preceded by gen.</i>:
[gen.] said. <i>Ug mau tu ang nahitabù, níya
pa,</i> And that is all what happened, he said.
<b>6a</b> <b>mátud &mdash;</b> [<i>gen.</i>] [gen.] says, said. <i>Mátud
pa níla aku dílì ángay,</i> They say I am not
worthy. <b>6b</b> <b>siya &mdash;</b> he said. <i>Kay na, siya pa,
unsáun man nákù?</i> Well, said he, what can
I do? <b>6c</b> <b>sa átù &mdash;</b> in other words. <i>Aw, sa
átù pa diyis ákung ibáyad nímu,</i> Oh, in
other words, ten is what I pay you. <b>7</b> with
the apodosis of a condition contrary to
fact. <i>Ug walà pa nímu kawáta, ngánung náa
man nà nímu?</i> If you hadn't stolen it, why
do you have it? <b>7a</b> [<i>noun</i>] <b>&mdash;y</b> [<i>noun, pronoun,
adj.</i>] if [noun] were [noun, pronoun,
adj.]. <i>Aku pay Huwan,</i> If I were
John. <i>Aku pay ikaw (aku pa nímu),</i> If I
were you. <i>Aku pay dátù,</i> If I were rich.
<i>Aku pa nímu, níya,</i> If I were you, him. <i>Kami
pa ninyu, níla,</i> If we were you, them.
<b>7b</b> [<i>predicate</i>] <b>&mdash;y ímu!</b> [so-and-so] is stupendous
in quantity, quality (lit. if you
could only see [such-and-such]). <i>Mais pay
ímu, sus kadaghan!</i> If you could only see
my corn. My! There's a lot. <i>Si Pidru pay
ímu, káun giyud tug irù,</i> Believe me, Pedro
will eat dog meat, and how! <b>7b1</b> [<i>noun</i>]
<b>&mdash;y ákù</b> I never thought [so-and-so] was
what he was. <i>Si Pidru pay ákù may kirída
diay nà siya,</i> I never thought it was possible,
but Pedro has a mistress. <b>7c</b> <b>&mdash; lámang</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>LÁMANG</sc>, <i>4b</i>, <i>c</i>. <b>7d</b> <b>agad, maáyu &mdash;</b> it would
be, would have been better if, it would
have been good. <i>Maáyu (agad) pa untà ug
átung napintálan ang kahun úsà gawía,</i> It
would have been better if we had painted
the box before we used it. <i>Agad (maáyu)
pa ug magtuun ka kay sa magkantakanta,</i>
You would do better to study than just sit
around singing. <b>7e</b> <b>hináut, básin, básun &mdash;</b> I
hope that. <i>Hináut pang dílì muulan,</i> I hope
it won't rain. <b>8</b> <i>modifying a phrase referring
to time</i>: [so-and-so] recently happened,
won't happen until.... <i>Dílì madala ug bálik
ugmà, Huybis pa,</i> I cannot bring it back
tomorrow. Not until Thursday. <i>Bag-u pa
siya nga milakaw,</i> He left just now. <i>Gíkan
pa siya sa Manílà,</i> He is just back from Manila.
<i>Karun pa siya muabut gíkan sa Buhul,</i>
<pb n=1460>He arrived just now from Bohol. <b>8a1</b> <b>ayhà,
anhà &mdash;</b> only then [will so-and-so] happen.
<i>Ayhà (anhà) pa siya mulíhuk ug pakit-an
ug latigu,</i> He only moves if he sees a whip.
<b>8a2</b> <b>dihà &mdash;</b> only then [so-and-so] happened.
<i>Dihà pa siya mutuun nga hápit na ang iksámin,</i>
He only started to study when it was
nearly exam time. <b>8b</b> <b>mau &mdash;y</b> [<i>abstract
form</i>] or [<i>instrumental passive</i>] that is the
first time [abstract] happened, [instrumental
passive] will happen. <i>Mau pay pagkadungug
nákù niánà,</i> That is the first time I
heard that. <i>Mau pay ilung-ag ug mudtu na,</i>
Don't cook it until noon. (The first time to
cook it when it's noon.) <b>8c</b> [<i>future verb
abstract form</i>] <b>&mdash;</b> but then when [so-and-so]
was done. <i>Dúgay nákung limpiyu sa salug.
Baldiyúhan pa nákù, human dáyun,</i> It took
me a long time to clean the floor. But then
when I hosed it down, it was finished right
away. <i>Pag-abri pa nákù sa subri, wà diay sulud,</i>
When I opened the envelope, there was
nothing in it after all. <b>dáan &mdash;</b> [subject]
knew [so-and-so] in advance. <i>Dáan pa lagi
ku,</i> I knew that long ago! <b>9</b> much less [do].
<i>Dì gánì aku makasulti, kanta pa,</i> I cannot
even talk, much less sing. <i>Dì gánì aku makahímù
niánà, ikaw pa,</i> I can't even do that,
much less you.

<p><b>pa<sub>2</sub></b> short form for <sc>PÁPA<sub>1</sub></sc>. <i>Pa, háin man si
Máma?</i> Pa (Dad), where is Mommy?

<p><b>pa<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> @fa. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> F major. <b>&mdash; minur</b> F minor.
<b>&mdash; sustinídu</b> F sharp.

<p><b>pá</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tiny ant, smaller than the <i>utitud</i>,
pale yellow in color and does not bite,
found swarming over food. <i>v</i> [a4] for food
to get <i>pá</i> over it. Cf. <sc>PALA</sc>.

<p><b>p[=à]</b> = <sc>PÁLÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pa-</b> derivational verb-forming affix to which
inflectional affixes are added without morphophonemic
alternation. <b>1</b> referring to actions
one has caused s.o. to do (either to
s.t. else or to oneself). <i>Palútù ta ug sud-an,</i>
Let's have s.o. prepare (<i>lútù</i>) some food.
<i>Palutúun nátù si Maríya,</i> Let's have Maria
cook. I<i>palútù ang sud-an,</i> Have the food
cooked. <i>Patupi ta,</i> Let's get a haircut (cause
s.o. to cut hair [tupi<i>]).</i> <b>1a</b> added to adjectives.
<b>1a1</b> have s.o. make s.t. [adj.]. <i>Ipaitum
ang ákung sapátus,</i> Have s.o. dye my
shoes black. <b>1a2</b> have s.t. become [adj.].
<i>Patambúkun ta ka sa uma,</i> We'll fatten you
up on the farm. <b>1b</b> <i>added to nouns</i>: cause
s.o. to do [the action that verbs derived
from the noun refer to]. <i>Gustu ka ba pabakyà?</i>
You want me to hit you with a
wooden slipper (cause me to use the <i>bakyà</i>)?
<i>Dì ku paulípun,</i> I will not let myself
<pb n=1461>be made a slave. <b>2</b> <i>added to doubled adjectives</i>:
pretend to be. <i>Ayaw pasakitsákit dihà,</i>
Don't pretend to be sick! <i>Nagpadiyusdiyusnun
ang sungáyan,</i> The devil is pretending
to be saintly. <b>3</b> <i>added to nouns</i>: go
to [noun]. <i>Padaplin ug dì ka gustung hiligsan,</i>
Get out of the way if you don't want
to get run over. <i>Papiliw ba ang ímung sakayan
run?</i> Is your boat headed for the shallow
waters now?

<p><b>páa</b> <i>n</i> @thigh, legs from the knees up. <i>v</i> [A12]
obtain a thigh for one's effort in slaughtering
domestic animals. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [a12] hit in the
thighs. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> the way the thighs are. <i>Hastilag
pamáa ning bayhána. Makabúngug,</i> My,
how huge this woman's thighs are. They're
absolutely amazing (lit. deafening). <b>paahan</b>
<i>n</i> the upper leg of a pair of pants.

<p><b>paagpaag</b> <i>a</i> @staggering, @tottering walk. <i>v</i> [B6; c1]
@stagger, @totter. <i>Nagpaagpaag ang hubug,</i>
The drunk staggered in his walk.

<p><b>páak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @bite, @sting. <i>Gipáak aku sa
bátà,</i> The child bit me. <i>Hipaakan ku sa kasag,</i>
I got bitten by the crab. <b>2</b> [b2] be
caught in s.t. <i>Hipaakan (napaakan) ákung
karsúnis sa kadína sa bisiklíta,</i> My pants got
caught into the bicycle chain. <b>3</b> [A; a]
charge high prices on s.t. sold. <i>Ayaw sad
kug paákag maáyu íni,</i> Don't charge me too
much for this. <b>4</b> [A] buy or ask for a small
amount of s.o. else's purchase, just enough
to meet one's needs. <i>Mupáak kug singkwinta
stábus sa ímung isdà,</i> Let me buy fifty
centavos worth of the fish you have bought.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> claw, pincer of crustaceans. <i>Paak sa
kasag,</i> Crab's claw. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] allow to
bite. <b>2</b> [c] hold s.t. with pliers. <i>Ipapaak ang
twirka sa alikáti samtang hugtan ang pirnu,</i>
Hold the bolt with the pliers while you turn
the screw. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> be biting with
heat. <i>Nagpamaak ang kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The
heat of the sun is scorching (biting). <b>2</b> bite
one's lips or tongue. <i>Nagpamaak siya sa íyang
ngábil sa kasukù,</i> He is biting his lips in
anger. <b>-in-ay(->)</b> <i>v</i> [C23] biting each other,
kissing lovingly. <i>Lábing kaáyu sila nga nagpinaakay,</i>
They were very loving and kept
kissing each other. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. acquired from
the things s.o. has just bought. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i>
bite. <i>Wà muskitirúhi si Bungbung. Dì daghag
pinaakan sa lamuk,</i> Bongbong wasn't
given a mosquito net, so he got lots of mosquito
bites.

<p><b>paas</b>, <b>páas</b> <i>a</i> having a tired voice, @hoarse from
overuse. <i>v</i> [B; c1] for the voice to be tired
and hoarse from overuse. <i>Mupaas (mapaas)
ímung tíngug ug magsígig tábì,</i> Your voice
will become hoarse if you keep talking too
<pb n=1462>much.

<p><b>páaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B12] be @anxious about s.t. over
which one has no information or over which
one has little control. <i>Mapáaw giyud ku níya
ug wà siya sa balay sa alas nuybi,</i> I get
worried about him if he isn't home at nine.
<i>Napáaw ang amahan kay diyútay na lang
ang bugas,</i> The father got worried because
there was little rice left. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> need of s.t.
which one cannot do without. <i>Way nakatábang
sa ákung kapáaw. Wà kuy masangpit,</i>
No one helps me in my great need. I have
no one to turn to. <b>2</b> anxiety for s.t. over
which one has a great concern.

<p><b>páaw<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PÁLAW</sc>.

<p><b>pabalúnan</b> see <sc>BÁLUN</sc>.

<p><b>pabhas</b> = <sc>PAHUBAS</sc>, <i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>HUBAS</sc>.

<p><b>pabílu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @wick of a lamp. <b>1a</b> drainage, sterile
gauze inserted into a wound. <b>1b</b> @fuse of
dynamite. <b>2</b> cause, agent of intensity. <i>Siya
ang pabílu sa kasámuk sa ámung balay,</i> She
is the cause of the troubles in our house. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] put a wick in a lamp, fuse in
dynamite, drainage in a dressing. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
give a cause for a quarrel or misunderstanding.
<i>Wà tà tu siya mangísug apan ímu pung
gipabilúhan,</i> He wouldn't have gotten angry
if you hadn't given him cause.

<p><b>pablik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{public school}. <i>Paiskuyláhun ku siya
sa pablik,</i> I'll have him attend public
school. <b>2</b> <i>in phrases</i>: <b>&mdash; bíding</b> public bidding.
<b>&mdash; disturbans</b> public disturbance. <b>&mdash; iskúl</b>
public schools. <b>&mdash; markit</b> government-run
market. <b>&mdash; sirbis</b> government service.

<p><b>pablikar</b> = <sc>PUBLIKAR</sc>.

<p><b>pabliku</b> = <sc>PUBLIKU</sc>.

<p><b>pablísir</b> <i>n</i> @publisher. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a
publisher.

<p><b>pablisiti</b> <i>n</i> @publicity.

<p><b>pablum</b> <i>n</i> @pablum, cereal for children.

<p><b>pabrika</b> <i>n</i> @factory. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] put up, operate
a factory. <b>2</b> [a2] make into, put up a
factory. <b>3</b> [A; c1] manufacture goods in a
factory.

<p><b>pábu</b> <i>n</i> @turkey. <i>&mdash; riyal</i> <i>n</i> @peacock.

<p><b>pabur</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> advantageous to. <i>Ang kasabútan
pabur kanátù,</i> The agreement is advantageous
to us. <b>&mdash; sa hángin</b> have the wind at
one's back. <i>Túlin ang sakayan kay pabur sa
hángin,</i> The boat sails fast when the wind is
in back. <b>2</b> in favor of, on the side of. <i>Ang
disisiyun pabur kang Rimutígi,</i> The decision
was in favor of Remotigue. <b>3</b> within
easy reach. <i>Pagbantay! Kay pabur ka ra ba
sa ákung tuu!</i> Watch out! You're in easy
reach of my right hand! <b>4</b> move towards.
<i>Iirug-irug ang lamísa pabur sa tuu,</i> Move
the table more to the right. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> advantage,
<pb n=1463>concession. <i>Nangáyù siyag pabur sa kumpári
níyang mayur,</i> He asked a favor from his
friend who was the mayor. <b>2</b> port, left side
of a ship. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] <b>a</b> have the edge or winning
trend. <i>Kusug ming musyágit ug makapabur
nag ámung manuk,</i> We shout boisterously
when our cock gets the edge. <b>b</b> be
in a position to hit, strike well. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
favor, take sides. <i>Ayawg paburi ang bísag
háing grúpu,</i> Don't take sides with either
group. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] turn a boat to the left
side. <b>pur-</b> please (said in asking a favor).
<i>Purpabur ayaw na kug samúka,</i> Please, don't
bother me any more. <i>Purpabur ikúhà kug
túbig,</i> Please, get me a glass of water. [+]

<p><b>paburíta</b> <i>n</i> k.o. salt cracker.

<p><b>paburitismu</b> <i>n</i> @favoritism. <i>Dúnay paburitismu
ang pagdumálà sa ámung prinsipal,</i> Our
principal practices favoritism in the way he
runs the administration.

<p><b>paburítu</b> <i>a</i> @favorite. <i>Ang adúbu mauy paburítu
kung sud-an,</i> Adobo is my favorite
dish. <i>v</i> [B126] become one's favorite.

<p><b>pad</b> <i>n</i> @{pad of paper}.

<p><b>pád</b> = <sc>PÁLAD</sc>.

<p><b>padayugdug</b> <i>see</i> <sc>DAYUGDUG</sc>.

<p><b>páding</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @padding. <b>2</b> padding of the payroll.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] put, use, make into padding.
<b>2</b> [A; a] pad the payroll. <i>Mipáding sila sa
pírul,</i> They padded the payroll. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i>
having padding.

<p><b>padir</b> <i>n</i> cemented fence.

<p><b>pádir</b> <i>n</i> title for a priest. <b>(->)</b> vocative.

<p><b>padlak</b> <i>n</i> @padlock. <i>v</i> [A; b] padlock s.t. <i>Padláki
ang kusína,</i> Padlock the kitchen.

<p><b>padlas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] drive s.o. out of the
house. <i>Ímu gánì kung padlásun (padlasun)
dì ku magduhadúha paglakaw,</i> If you ask
me to leave, I will not hesitate to do so. <b>2</b>
[A; b5] fish in the <i>padlas</i> way. <i>n</i> k.o. fishing
in shallow or moderately deep waters
where a rectangular net is set, into which
fish are driven.

<p><b>padpad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] for wind or water to carry
s.t. in the current. <i>Ang dag-um nga walà
makabundak ganíha gipadpad,</i> The rain
clouds did not fall a while ago and were
dispersed. <b>1</b>a bring s.o. s.w. <i>Unsang hangína
ang mipadpad nímu nganhi?</i> What (wind)
brought you here? <b>2</b> [A; a] remove s.t.
from whatever it was mixed with or stuck
to. <i>Padpára ang amursíku sa ímung sinínà,</i>
Pull the burrs from your dress. <i>Padpárig pasì
nang bugas,</i> Pick out the unhusked grains
from the rice.

<p><b>padpád</b> = <sc>PALADPALAD</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>PÁLAD</sc>.

<p><b>padri</b> <i>n</i> title for a @priest. <i>Si Padri Rudrígis
Hiswíta,</i> Father Rodriguez is a Jesuit. <b>(->)</b>
<pb n=1464>vocative. <ix>short form</ix>: <b>dri</b>.

<p><b>padr&icaron;</b> short for <i>kumpadri</i>, vocative.

<p><b>padri dipamilya</b> <i>n</i> male head of the family.
<i>Ang amahan mauy padri dipamilya sa balay,</i>
The father is the head of the family in
the house.

<p><b>padrínu</b> <i>n</i> sponsor in marriage, baptism, or
other religious ceremony. <i>v</i> [AC; a2] become
the sponsor in baptism or marriage.

<p><b>padri nwistru</b> <i>n</i> the Lord's Prayer.

<p><b>padrun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pad of paper. <b>2</b> padding, lining.
<i>Butangig padrun ang abága sa amirkána,</i>
Put padding in the shoulders of the coat. <b>3</b>
dress pattern. <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> put a lining or
padding. <i>Siyay mipadrun ug gápas sa lingkuránan,</i>
He put cotton padding on the
seats. <b>2</b> make a pattern for s.t. <i>Ákung gipadrúnan
ang tahiúnun,</i> I made a pattern
for the dress.

<p><b>padrun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> registry books for newly-born
babies of a parish, town, or locality.

<p><b>padyáma</b> <i>n</i> @pajamas. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] wear,
use pajamas. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make into pajamas.

<p><b>pag-</b> prefix added to most bases which take
the verbal inflectional affixes. <b>1</b> forming
imperatives (used esp. after <i>ayaw</i> 'don't').
<i>short forms</i>: <b>g</b>, or <b>ug</b>. <i>Ayaw paglakaw (ug
lakaw, glakaw),</i> Don't go away. <i>Ayaw siya
pagpatya,</i> Don't kill him. <b>2</b> forming infinitives.
<i>Gisugdan níya pagtágik ang íyang bálak,</i>
He began to compose his poem. <i>Arun
sa pagbutyag sa íyang tinagúan,</i> In order to
make his secrets public. <b>3</b> forming nouns
meaning the action of [do]ing. <i>Dílì maáyu
ang pagpalabi,</i> It's no good to do things
to excess. <i>Nakabungkag sa ílang pagpúyù,</i>
Destroyed their life together. <i>Ang pagburunda
sa simbahan dì na kinahanglan,</i> It is
no longer necessary to wear a veil to church.
<b>4</b> forming words which mean 'when [so-and-so]
was done'. <i>Pag-abut nákù sa balay,
mau say íyang paglakaw,</i> When I arrived at
the house, he left.

<p><b>pág</b> = <sc>PALAG</sc>.

<p><b>paga</b>, <b>pága<sub>1</sub></b> exclamation shouted in a game
of marbles or for other kinds of pieces,
when a player has hit a piece not intended,
thus nullifying the game for the player. <i>v</i>
[A; a12] to commit <i>paga</i>.

<p><b>pága</b><sub>2</sub> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{pay in full}. <i>Gipagáhan na nákù
ang bayranan sa iskuylahan,</i> I have paid
the tuition fees in full. <b>&mdash; distínu</b> = <sc>PAGÁDU
DISTÍNU</sc>. <b>midiya &mdash;</b> @{half fare}. <b>-du</b> <i>n</i> paid off.
<i>Pagádu na ang útang,</i> The debt has been
paid off. <i>v</i> [B125] get paid up. <b>-du distínu</b>
for a passenger's fare to be paid on arrival.
<i>Pagádu distínu ang ákung paglakaw,</i> My
trip was on the payment-upon-arrival basis.
<pb n=1465><i>v</i> [A] travel on the payment-upon-arrival
basis. <b>-díru distínu</b> = <sc>PAGÁDU DISTÍNU</sc>.
<b>-dur</b> <i>n</i> paymaster. <i>v</i> [B156] become the
paymaster.

<p><b>pága<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shelf put above the stove. <i>Limpiyúhi
ang mga kúlun ug ibutang sa pága,</i>
Clean the pots and place them on the shelf.
<b>2</b> @platform built close to the roof forming
a loft but not extending the entire length
of the house. <i>v</i> [b6] put a shelf, loft in a
house.

<p><b>paga-a</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PAGA-UN</sc>.

<p><b>paga-an</b> local passive durative affix, future.
(<i>Past</i>: <b>gina-an</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>paga-i</b>.) <i>For the
use of the durative passive forms see the
entry under</i> <b>paga-un</b>. <i>Pagabantayan ang dáwang
anihun,</i> Millet that is ready for harvest
should be looked at every so often.
<i>Ingun sa pagahitan-awan sa íyang hunàhúnà,</i>
It was as if it kept appearing in his
mind. <i>Ang maung hitabù nahímung ginahisgútan
sa mga táwu,</i> That event became the
subject of conversation for these people.
<i>Pagaabunuhi ang lubi,</i> Keep putting fertilizer
to the coconut trees every once in a
while.

<p><b>paga-i</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PAGA-AN</sc>.

<p><b>pagakpak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound produced by clapping,
clapping of wooden sandals, clopping of
horses, and the like. <i>Limpiyang pagakpak,</i>
Shoeshine done by slapping a piece of cloth
over the shoes with a popping sound. <b>2</b> instrument
for making a clapping sound. <i>v</i>
[A; c1] make a clapping, clip-clop sound.
<i>Ikaw bay mupagakpak sa humayan?</i> Will
you sound the clapper in the rice field?
<i>Nagpagakpak ang ílang bakyà pag-ági níla,</i>
Their wooden sandals made a clapping
sound as they passed by. <i>Pagakpákan nátù
ang nakadaug,</i> Let's applaud the winner.

<p><b>págal</b> <i>v</i> [B12] be broke (slang). <i>Miundang
siyag súgal sa dihang napágal na siya,</i> He
stopped gambling when he went broke. <b>(->)</b>
a flat broke.

<p><b>pagan</b>, <b>págan</b> = <sc>PAGA</sc>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] involve
s.o., cause s.o. to be included in a
misfortune. <i>Kanang ímung tinuntu mupágan
sa uban,</i> That mischief of yours will
likely involve the others. <i>Pagkasúnug sa dakung
balay napágan ang mga balay nga silíngan,</i>
When the large house burnt, the
neighboring houses were included.

<p><b>pagang</b> <i>a</i> for hair to be dry and lack oil. <i>v
</i>[B] for hair to become dry and lose its
gloss. <i>Mupagang (mapagang) ang buhuk kun
sabunan,</i> The hair will lose its luster if you
wash it with soap. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> easily getting dry
and losing luster.

<pb n=1466>

<p><b>paganti</b> <i>a</i> @{paid off}. <i>Paganti na ang útang,</i> The
debt has been paid off.

<p><b>pagánu</b> <i>n</i> @pagans.

<p><b>pagapak</b> = <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.

<p><b>pagari</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. payable on an installment
basis. <i>Mukúhà kug tíbi nga pagari,</i> I will get
a T.V. set on an installment basis. <b>2</b> @{promissory
note}. <i>Pirmáhi ring pagari arun masigúru,</i>
Sign this promissory note to be sure. <i>v</i>
[A; b6] sell, pay for s.t. on an installment
basis. <i>Nakapagari aku ug sininaun,</i> I got a
piece of dress material on an installment
basis.

<p><b>págas</b> <i>n</i> hardened crust on top of a wound.
<i>v</i> [B3] form a crust on top of a wound.

<p><b>pagatpat</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree of mangrove swamps:
<b><i>Sonneratia caseolaris</i></b> and <b><i>acida</i></b>.

<p><b>paga-un</b> direct passive durative affix future
time. (Past: <b>gina-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>paga-a</b>.) <i>Literary
style except in Southern Leyte and
Bohol where it is colloquial</i> (<i>with the dialectal
prefix</i> <b>a-</b> <i>substituting for</i> <b>paga-</b>). <i>Forms
with</i> <b>paga-un</b> <i>are used to refer to actions
repeated at intervals or after preposed forms
meaning 'it is good, proper, necessary,' and
the like</i>. <i>Ságad pagabasáhun níya ang Biblíya
sa dì pa matúlug,</i> She usually reads the
Bible before she goes to sleep. <i>Unsay ángay
nátung pagabuhátun?</i> What is the proper
thing to do? <i>Forms with</i> <b>gina-</b> <i>refer to an
action which goes on in time</i>. <i>Ginapasundáyag
pa gihápun ang mga dúlà ni Piyuks,</i>
Piux's dramas are still performed. <i>The forms
with</i> <b>paga-a</b> <i>are used when the subjunctive
is required, or for the imperatives, in contexts
referring to repeated or enduring actions</i>.
<i>Ang humay adtu pagadagamíha sa
búus,</i> They take the rice on the stalks to
the granary, and there they get the rice
grains (as they need them).

<p><b>pagaw</b> <i>a</i> @hoarse. <i>v</i> [BN] become hoarse. <i>Mipagaw
(napagaw, namagaw) ang ákung tíngug
sa pagsinyágit,</i> My voice got hoarse
from shouting. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be very
hoarse. <i>Undang na lang ug kanta dihà uy.
Nagkapágaw lang ang ímung tíngug,</i> Stop
singing. Your voice is hoarse. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a
hoarse sort.

<p><b>pagáwal</b> <i>see</i> <sc>GÁWAL</sc>.

<p><b>pagawpaw</b> <i>a</i> for soil to be used up. <i>Ang yútang
pagawpaw gamay nag abut,</i> Leached-out
land has a low yield. <i>v</i> [B] be, become
barren. <b>-un(->)</b> a worked-out k.o. soil.

<p><b>pagba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] fire objects in a kiln. <i>Ikaw
bay mupagba sa mga kúlun?</i> Will you fire
the pots? <b>2</b> [B; a12] tan, darken the skin
in the sun. <i>Napagba siyag kinalígù sa dágat,</i>
His skin got dark from bathing in the sea
<pb n=1467>so much.

<p><b>paghid</b> (from páhid) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] put s.t. on
by spreading. <i>Ikaw bay nagpaghid ug mantikilya
sa pán?</i> Did you spread butter on
the bread? <b>2</b> [A12; b8] brush against momentarily.
<i>Nakapaghid kug bátà sa ákung
pagdalìdalì,</i> I brushed against a child because
I was rushing about.

<p><b>paghut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @bark. <i>Gipaghut mu sa
irù kay sábà man mu kaáyu,</i> The dog barked
at you because you were very noisy. <b>2</b> [A]
@cough (humorous). <i>Nagpaghut ka lang ánang
tantu nímung pag-inubu,</i> You are
coughing so much, you sound like you're
barking. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @barking. <b>2</b> action of coughing
(humorous).

<p><b>pági</b> <i>n</i> general term for rays.

<p><b>pagiyun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental bulb, the spider
lily: <b><i>Crinum asiaticum</i></b>.

<p><b>pagka-<sub>1</sub></b> affix added to most bases which occur
with the verbal inflections in one or
more of the following usages. <b>1</b> forming a
noun meaning the action of having had [so-and-so]
done or happen to it. <i>Maáyu ang
pagkalútù níya sa kík,</i> He baked the cake
well. (Lit. The action of his having baked
the cake was good.) <i>Ang kabílin wà maángay
pagkabáhin,</i> The inheritance was not
divided fairly. <i>Dalì rang pagkamatay,</i> He
died quickly. <b>1a</b> forming a noun meaning
'having done [so-and-so]'. <i>Hustu ra giyud
ang pagkaabut ninyu kay dáyun na námung
paniudtu,</i> You arrived just in time because
we are about to eat dinner[**P2: isn't paniudtu lunch?|F1: a.k.a. 'dinner'!]. <b>2</b> forming a
word meaning when [so-and-so] had happened,
had been done. Pagkapalit níya sa
pán, When he had bought the bread (lit.
when the bread was bought). <i>Pagkakità níya
niánà,</i> When he saw that. <b>3</b> forming an
infinitive referring to completed action or
the coming into a state. <i>Walà maángay pagkabáhin
ang kabílin,</i> The inheritance had
not been fairly divided. <i>Misamut siya pagkahubug,</i>
He got all the more drunk.

<p><b>pagka-<sub>2</sub></b> prefix added to adjectives to form
exclamations. <i>Pagkadakù bayà niíning syudára,</i>
Gee! What a huge city this is! <i>Pagkabuútan
giyud nímu,</i> How awfully nice of
you!

<p><b>pagka-a(<-)</b> forms with the prefix <i>pagka-<sub>1</sub></i>
and <i>pagka-<sub>2</sub></i> to which <b>-a(<-)</b> has been added.
<b>1</b> prefix added to adjectives to form exclamations,
with a greater degree of emotion
or intensity of the exclamation than <i>pagka-<sub>2</sub></i>.
<i>Pagkadakúa sa ílang bag-ung balay!</i>
Their new house is absolutely tremendous!
<b>2</b> form meaning particular action of having
done [so-and-so]. <i>Hustu giyud tung pagkaabúta
<pb n=1468>ninyu,</i> Your arrival (lit. that particular
arrival of yours) was just at the right
time.

<p><b>pagkang</b> = <sc>PAKGANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pagkut</b> = <sc>PAKGUT</sc>.

<p><b>pagpag</b> <i>a</i> for hair to be dishevelled. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN; c1]
for hair to be dishevelled. <i>Mipagpag
(napagpag, namagpag) ang ákung buhuk sa
hángin,</i> My hair became dishevelled in the
wind. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] agitate to remove dust.
<i>Íyang gipagpágan ang ílang mga butang sa
abug,</i> She shook the dust out of their things.

<p><b>pagtung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN; a12] @burn, @scorch. <i>Napagtung
siya sa kaínit sa adlaw,</i> He got burned
by the heat of the sun. <b>2</b> [B12; a12] for
popcorn to fail to pop. <i>Napagtung ang bitì
ug walà mubukad,</i> The corn turned brown
and did not pop. <i>a</i> thoroughly burnt from
baking or being otherwise exposed to heat.
<i>Pait ang ságing nga pagtung pagkasugba,</i>
Burnt bananas taste bitter.

<p><b>pagu</b> <i>a</i> @{burnt to a crisp}. <i>Dì na ni makáun kay
pagu na kaáyu,</i> You can't eat this any more
because it has been burnt to a crisp. <i>v</i> [B]
be burnt to a crisp.

<p><b>págu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{welsh on a bet}, @{delay payment}.
<i>Kinsay nagpágu sa tanang pusta nga
nahánaw man lang?</i> Who ran away without
paying the bets? <i>Ákù lang úsà ning pagúhun
(ipágu) nga pusta,</i> I won't pay my
bet for the time being. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> amount which
one failed to pay. <i>Pilay ímung págu kaníya?</i>
How big an amount did you welsh on? <b>2</b>
comeuppance, just deserts. <i>Mau kanay págu
nímu,</i> That's what you get!

<p><b>pagù</b> <i>n</i> a small brownish bird of the bush,
with a body about 2" in length.

<p><b>págud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; a12] @burn, @burnt. <i>Baliha
ang adúbu arun dílì mapágud,</i> Turn the
fried meat to the side so that it will not get
burnt. <i>Ínit sa adlaw muy nakapágud (nakapapágud)
sa ákung pánit,</i> The heat of the
sun burnt my skin. <i>Nagkapagud na ang pán.
Dalia pagháun,</i> The bread is burning. Take
it out quickly. <b>2</b> [A; a] roast cereals black.
<i>Magpágud tag mais pára ikapi,</i> Let's roast
some corn grits for coffee. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @burnt. <i>Akuy
káun sa pagud nga pán,</i> I'll eat the
burnt bread. <i>Kasagáran sa mga mananagat
pagud ug pánit,</i> Most fishermen have deeply
tanned skin. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> cereal roasted black, esp.
corn grits. <i>Pinágud ra giyuy ámung kapi,</i> All
we have for coffee is burnt corn grits.

<p><b>pag-ud</b> <i>a</i> @tough, @strong, @hardy. <i>Pag-ud ang
simintu kay sa káhuy,</i> Cement is stronger
than wood. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] become tough,
strong. <i>Nagkapag-ud na ang íyang láwas,</i> He
is getting stronger now.

<pb n=1469>

<p><b>pagudpud</b> <i>a</i> crumbling, but hard; @brittle. <i>v</i>
[B; a12] be brittle. <i>Mupagudpud (mapagudpud)
ang tiratíra ug butangan ug mani,</i>
Taffy becomes brittle if you put peanuts in
it.

<p><b>pagúha</b> <i>n</i> k.o. wild banana with yellow fruit
when ripe, with sweet but seedy flesh: <b><i>Musa
errans</i></b>.

<p><b>pag-uk</b> <i>a</i> grayish, darkened due to dirt. <i>v</i> [B]
be, become grayish or darkened due to dirt.
<i>Nagkapag-uk na ang mga bisti nga wà ikaladlad,</i>
The clothes that are not bleached
are becoming discolored.

<p><b>pag-ulíngun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small tree or shrub of the
secondary forest: <b><i>Cratoxylon blancoi</i></b> and
<b><i>celebicum</i></b>.

<p><b>pag-umangkun</b> (from <i>anak</i>) <i>n</i> @niece, @nephew:
son or daughter of one's siblings or of a
cousin of one's own generation of any degree.
<b>&mdash; sa pag-agáwan (panag-agáwan)</b> child
of a cousin of one's own generation.

<p><b>pagupak</b> <i>n</i> clapper made from bamboo, banana,
or wood. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make such a clapper.

<p><b>pagúrut</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*GURUT</sc>.

<p><b>pagut</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to be forward in making
advances to men. <i>Ug manghagad kag
láki, pagut ka,</i> If you make advances to
men, you are forward.

<p><b>pagutput</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> put-put sound. <b>2</b> croaking
sound of frogs. <i>v</i> [A] make a put-putting
or croaking sound. <i>Mupagutput giyud ang
makina basta may dipirinsiya,</i> The machine
goes put-put if s.t. is wrong with it.

<p><b>pagya</b>, <b>pagyà</b> <i>n</i> way of referring to s.o. in a
humorous, but indirect way. <i>Layágun ug
dunggan si Pidru mu nay nahímung pagyà,</i>
Pedro has large ears so that became the way
they used to refer to him. <i>v</i> [A; b5c] refer
to s.t. by making a joke about it but not
naming it. <i>Napagyà karun nga ang dalágang
mamatay pabawnan ug alhu,</i> It is a common
joke to say that when a spinster dies,
they should put a pestle at her side. <i>Gipagyà
(gipagyáan) námù siyang pahak,</i> We used
to refer to him as scar head.

<p><b>páha</b> <i>n</i> @girdle or abdominal binder. <i>v</i> [A; c]
wear a girdle, binder; make into a binder.

<p><b>páhak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a3b] make a gash, slash or gorge
a piece out of s.t. <i>Ang kalabaw mauy nagpáhak
sa ámung tágud,</i> The carabao consumed
a portion of our seed bed. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
the space left in an area after a piece has
been removed. <i>May pahak ang ímung agigísing,</i>
There's a spot on your temples with
very short hair. <i>Dakug pahak ang kík, mu
rag gikan-an,</i> There's a piece missing in my
cake. I think s.o. touched it. <b>2</b> scar on the
<pb n=1470>head. <i>Nipsa pagtupi ang buhuk arun dílì
makítà ang pahak,</i> Just trim the hair off so
you can't see the scar.

<p><b>pahamtang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BUTANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pahang</b>, <b>páhang</b> <i>v</i> [B] smell of food beginning
to rot. <i>Napahang na ang sud-an sa
paradur úsà níya hikit-i,</i> The food got rancid
in the pantry before he found it. <b>(->)</b>
a having the smell of s.t. rotting. <i>Kapahang
sa pípì sa bátà, wà hugási,</i> The baby's
vagina smells terrible because no one washed
it.

<p><b>páhat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3S; ac] divide food, property,
money into allocations. <i>Ang gubyirnu mupáhat
nímu ug dúsi iktariyas,</i> The government
will allocate you twelve hectares. <i>Paháta
ang kík sa lima ka báhin,</i> Divide the
cake up into five portions. <b>2</b> [A12; b6]
get a portion, allocation. <i>Nakapahat (napahatan)
siyag dakùdakù kay sa ákù,</i> He managed
to get a slightly larger allocation than
mine. <i>n</i> @allocation, @portion. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> mail
section in the post office where mail is
sorted and placed in different bags.

<p><b>pahaw</b> = <sc>PAGAW</sc>.

<p><b>pahawin</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HÁWIN</sc>.

<p><b>páhi</b> <i>n</i> personal @valet, @servant to wait on
hand and foot. <i>v</i> [A; c1] be a personal
valet.

<p><b>páhid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] rub on, apply by wiping.
<i>Akuy mupáhid ug mantikilya sa pán,</i> I will
spread butter on the bread. <i>Pahírig túbig
ang inasal,</i> Wipe water over the roasted pig.
<i>Ipáhid kini sa tutunlan,</i> Rub this on the
throat. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; ug salà</b> lay the blame on s.o.
else. <i>Ayaw ipáhid ang ímung salà nákù,</i>
Don't put the blame for what you did on
me. <b>2</b> [A; ab1] wipe slightly to remove s.t.
<i>Pahíra ang mumhu sa lamísa,</i> Wipe the morsels
off the table. <i>Pahíri ang ímung lúhà,</i>
Wipe your tears. <i>Pahíri ang lamísa arun mauga,</i>
Wipe the table lightly so that it will get
dry. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to wipe. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b1]
wipe oneself to remove s.t. <i>Namáhid siya sa
lúhà,</i> She wiped her tears away. <b>pahiran</b>,
<b>pahiránan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @doormat. <b>2</b> rags to wipe the
hands.

<p><b>pahilihíli bágu kíri</b> <i>set phrase from Tagalog</i>:
saying one doesn't want to, but actually be
dying to do it.

<p><b>pahimangnù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MANGNÙ</sc>.

<p><b>pahimulus</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PULUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pahimús</b> = <sc>PAHIMULUS</sc>. see <sc>PULUS</sc>.

<p><b>pahína<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @page, @{leaf of a book}. <i>v</i> [A; b]
mark, number pages. <i>Gipahináhan ku na
ang ripurt,</i> I have already numbered the
pages of the report.

<p><b>pahína<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [C2; a2b] for a group to work on
<pb n=1471>s.t. without compensation. <i>Magpahína pagpatay
sa ilagà ang tibuuk baryu káda Sabadu,</i>
The whole village works on a project to
exterminate rats every Saturday. <i>Gipahinahan
sa Pitii ang pagtrabáhu sa iskuylahan,</i>
The P.T.A. volunteered to work on the
school building. <i>n</i> work bee to accomplish
a certain project.

<p><b>pahináhin</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*HINÁHIN</sc>.

<p><b>pahinanti</b> <i>n</i> worker that does heavy unskilled
labor, esp. hauling. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] do heavy
unskilled labor. <i>Íya kung pahinantíhun sa
ílang trák,</i> He'll put me to work as a laborer
on their truck.

<p><b>pahinar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] fix the hair. <i>Dì ku makapahinar
sa ákung buhuk ug aku ra,</i> I don't
know how to fix my hair alone. <b>pahinadur</b>,
<b>pahinadúra</b> <i>n</i> one who fixes the hair. <i>v</i> [B156]
become a hairdresser.

<p><b>pahit</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2b7] <b>1</b> bite using the front
teeth, for insects or animals to bite. <i>Gipahit
ku sa mga umígas,</i> The ants bit me. <i>Pahitan
nákug gamay ang ímung pán,</i> I'll take a bite
from your piece of bread. <b>2</b> for animals to
go at young corn. <i>Gipahit sa irù ang mais sa
anagun pa,</i> The dog went at the young corn.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> bite one's lips. <i>Nakapamahit
ang sarhintu sa íyang ngábil sa kasukù,</i> The
sergeant bit his lips in anger. <b>2</b> for heat to
be biting. <i>Nagpamahit nga kaínit sa adlaw,</i>
The scorching heat of the sun. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> bite
inflicted on one. <i>Pinahitan sa lamuk</i>, Mosquito
bites.

<p><b>pahiyum</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HÍYUM</sc>.

<p><b>páhù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small, fibrous mango: <b><i>Mangifera
altissima</i></b>.

<p><b>pahugpahug</b> <i>a</i> somewhat stupid. <i>Dílì siya makahímu
niánang buháta kay pahugpahug,</i>
He is not capable of doing the work because
he is such a stupid fellow. <i>v</i> [A; b] roam
around aimlessly. <i>Tibuuk adlaw nákung pahugpahug
sa syudad,</i> I roamed around the
city the whole day.

<p><b>pahúlì</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HÚLÌ</sc>.

<p><b>pahung</b> <i>a</i> a person who acts strange or does
things people would consider stupid. <i>Báhu
ning pahung nagyasyas lang nang kinarsunisan,</i>
Of course he's a fool, he wears pants
too big for him. <i>v</i> [B1] become foolish.

<p><b>pahunpáhun</b> <i>n</i> general appearance, actions.
<i>Mu rag giputul nang batáa sa amahan kay
amahan giyud ang pahunpáhun,</i> That child
is a chip off the old block. He acts and
looks just like his father. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] <b>1</b>
for the hazy outline of s.o. or s.t. to appear
at a distance. <i>Mamahunpáhun ang kabukíran
sa sayung kabuntágun,</i> The mountains
loom clear in the early morning light. <b>2</b>
<pb n=1472>carry oneself. <i>Mu ra giyud nà siya sa íyang
inahan nga mamahunpáhun,</i> She moves just
like her mother. <i>n</i> general outline, contours.

<p><b>pahut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{lace shoes}. <i>Pahuti sa listun
ang sapátus sa bátà,</i> Lace the child's shoes.
<b>2</b> [A; ac] tie with any interweaving knot.
<i>Pahuta ang písì pára dílì mabadbad,</i> Make
the rope into a looped knot so it won't
come undone. <i>n</i> knot which is interlooped
so that it cannot slip, like a square knot or
a slipknot. <b>pahutpahut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] darn a
tear with big temporary stitches. <i>Dalìdaliag
pahutpahut ang gising hábul,</i> Stitch the torn
blanket quickly. <b>2</b> [A; b6] travel in and out
across s.t. as if describing the course taken
by a needle in darning. <i>Nagpahutpahut sa
kabukíran ang mga girilyíru,</i> The guerillas
traveled across the mountains.

<p><b>pahuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @scarecrow. <b>2</b> a person who is manipulated
by others. <i>Insik ang tag-iya niánà.
Pahuy lang nà siya,</i> A Chinaman owns that.
He's just a dummy. <i>Si Markus usa ka pahuy
sa mga impiryalista,</i> Marcos is an imperialist
lackey. <i>v</i> [AN; c1N] put up a scarecrow.

<p><b>páig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] roast s.t. till it becomes
charred. <i>Magpáig kug bugas nga kapihun,</i> I
will roast some rice to make into coffee. <b>2</b>
[B12] scorch the skin. <i>Ang adlaw nakapáig
(nakapapáig) sa pánit sa mananagat,</i> The
sun burnt the fisherman's skin. <b>3</b> for a business
to fail or go bankrupt. <i>Nagsígi mag paútang
maung napáig ang ílang tindahan,</i>
Their store went bankrupt because they allowed
so many people to credit. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> totally
burnt with only charred remains. <i>Ang kík
paig kaáyu,</i> The cake was completely burnt.
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. roasted till charred, esp. corn grits,
for making into coffee. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> dark in
complexion.

<p><b>paílub</b> <i>n</i> @patience. <i>v</i> [A; c] @endure, be @patient
with. <i>Nagpaílub siya bísag kápuy ang
trabáhu,</i> He is patient although his work is
wearisome. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @patient, @enduring.

<p><b>pais</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] cook s.t. by wrapping it in
leaves and burying it in live coals. <i>Gustu
kung paisan lang ang útuk,</i> I want the brains
prepared by broiling them in leaves. <b>-in-an</b>
<i>n</i> s.t. cooked broiled in live coals.

<p><b>paisánu</b> <i>n</i> one's @compatriot, s.o. from the
same town or village.

<p><b>pait</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{bitter in taste}. <b>2</b> @{bitter in situation}.
<i>v</i> [B; a2] <b>1</b> be bitter in taste. <i>Mipait (napait)
ang atay kay napusà ang apdu,</i> The liver
became bitter because the gall bladder
broke. <i>Paita ang timpla sa ákung kapi,</i> Make
my coffee strong (lit. bitter). <b>2</b> be a bitter
situation. <i>Ang nakapait nímu kay dì ka mamátig
katarúngan,</i> What's bad about you is
<pb n=1473>that you don't listen to reason. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b>
for pork liver to taste bitter on account of
what was fed to the pig. <b>2</b> k.o. 1" vase shell,
the meat of which tastes bitter. <i>v</i> [B12]
for liver to get bitter in taste. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> dish
of Ilocano origin made from goatskin, cut
into tiny pieces, and cooked in vinegar with
spices and made to taste very bitter by mixing
spleen into it. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] prepare <i>papáit</i>.

<p><b>pak</b> <i>n</i> word used in writing to represent the
sound of a slap, or explosion of firecrackers.

<p><b>paka</b> <i>n</i> pincers of shellfish.

<p><b>páka</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] break s.t. off from the
thing to which it is attached, become broken
off. <i>Mapáka giyud ang pul-an sa kutsilyu
ug itigbas sa bukug,</i> The handle of the knife
will surely break off if you use it to chop
bones. <i>n</i> cuttings for planting, usually of
sugar cane. <i>Ákung itanum ang mga páka sa
tubu,</i> I'll plant the cuttings of the sugar
cane.

<p><b>pakà</b> = <sc>PALAKÀ</sc>.

<p><b>pákà</b> <i>n</i> loud cracking sound like that of guns,
wood cracking, slapping sound. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A]
make a cracking sound. <i>Mupákà giyud nang
ímung nawung ug dílì ka patúu,</i> Your face
will resound with a crack if you don't listen.
<i>Mipákà ang butu sa pusil,</i> The gunshot resounded
with a crack. <b>2</b> [A; b6P] for a
language to be spoken fast and fluently like
a machine gun. <i>Mupákà lang ang ininglis
kay Amirikánu siya,</i> His English comes
fast and fluent because he is an American. <b>&mdash;
ang inamang</b> not talking in a situation where
conversation would be normal. (lit., talking
like the mutes). <i>Pulus man gud sila mauwáwun,
pákà lang ang inamang,</i> They were
both shy and they just sat there in silence.

<p><b>paka-</b> derivational verb forming prefix. <b>1</b> added
to adjectives or nouns referring to a person
in a certain capacity, forming verbs
which occur with the durative active affixes
(<i>mag-<sub>1</sub></i>) and the direct passive affixes
(<i>-un<sub>1</sub></i>). With the durative active affixes,
verbs with <i>paka-</i> mean 'pretend to be, act
like [so-and-so]' and with the direct passive
affixes they mean 'consider as [so-and-so]'
or 'treat like [so-and-so]'. <i>Nagpakadakung
asyindíru,</i> Pretended to be a big plantation
owner. <i>Nagpakatigúlang,</i> Acted like an old
man. <i>Ángayng pakabathaláun ang bána sa
asáwa,</i> A wife should consider her husband
a god. <i>Gipakasayun lang nímu ang kaminyúun,</i>
You think marriage is an easy thing.
<b>2</b> added to most verbs to form verbs with
potential meanings (see <i>maka-<sub>1</sub></i>) to which
the durative active affixes (<i>mag-<sub>1</sub></i>) are added.
<pb n=1474>This form is literary and usually refers to
several agents. <i>Nagpakapusta sila sa manuk
nga napildi,</i> They bet on a cock that lost.
<i>Nagpakabatì sila apan nagpakabungulbúngul,</i>
They heard but remained silent. <b>2a</b> added
to a few verbs meaning see, hear, smell,
sense, and the like to form verbs which
mean 'cause s.o. to hear, etc.'. Verbs with
<i>paka-</i> of this sort occur only with the potential
active affixes. <i>Suntuk nga nakapakakità
ug aniníput,</i> A blow that made him see
stars. <b>3</b> added to roots referring to a state
to form verbs meaning 'bring oneself or s.o.
else into [such-and-such] a state purposely.'
Verbs with this <i>paka-</i> occur with the active
durative and local passive affixes. <i>Nagpakabúhì
siya álang sa íyang mga anak,</i> He
lived for his children. <i>Nagpakaúlaw kug
panghangyù,</i> I lowered myself to beg. <i>Gipakamatyan
níya ang yútang natawhan,</i> He
gave his life (lit. caused himself to die) for
the sake of his country. <b>3a</b> added to roots
referring to a time of day or life: stay s.w.
until [such-and-such] a time. Usually with
<b>(->)</b>. <i>Magpakatigulang ku dinhing dapíta,
piru adtu ku magpakamatay sa ámù,</i> I will
stay here until my old age, but I will go
home to die. <i>Didtu sa barku pagpakakaadláwun,</i>
Stay on the boat until daybreak. [+]

<p><p>pákal</p> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put a large piece into the
mouth. <i>Ayaw ipákal ug hurut ang kan-un sa
ímung bàbà,</i> Don't put all the food into
your mouth. <b>2</b> stuff a hole. <i>Pakálig batu
ang lungag sa ilagà,</i> Put rocks into the rat
hole.

<p><b>pakang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ab2c] hit with s.t. fairly
good-sized. <i>Nagkapákang ang ílang úlu,</i>
Their heads slammed into each other. <i>Pakngag
hínay ang silsil,</i> Tap the chisel lightly.
<b>2</b> [A; a] rap s.o. on the head. <i>Sira sa kabinit
ang nakapakang sa ákung úlu,</i> I bumped
my head on the cabinet door. <i>Pakngun ta
ka run ug dílì ka mutúu,</i> I'll rap you on the
head if you don't obey me. <i>n</i> s.t. used to
tap or drive s.t. in. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C; ac] set off
one's debts against each other. <i>Átù na lang
pakángun ang átung útang. Ang ímung singku
kuntra sa ákung usa ka lungnik,</i> I owe
five pesos and you owe me a fifth, so let's
just say we're even. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> fond of rapping.

<p><b>pakang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> flat, pocket-sized bottle of liquor
holding 350 cc. (slang).

<p><b>pak-ap</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] pack up. <i>Nagpak-ap na mi
kay mularga,</i> We're packing up because we
are about to leave.

<p><b>pákas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> slice a fish in two, lengthwise,
to dry it. <i>Ákù lang pakásun ning subrang
<pb n=1475>isdà kay ákung ibulad,</i> I'll split the extra
fish to dry them. <b>2</b> break s.t. in two.
<i>Pakása ang pán,</i> Break the loaf in two. <b>3</b> [c]
share in a bet. <i>Nagpákas sila sa usa ka tíkit,</i>
They went in together on one ticket. <i>n</i>
half of a pair. <i>Pákas sa karsúnis,</i> One of the
trouser legs. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> dried fish.

<p><b>pakat</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] @snag s.t., @catch. <i>Ayúha ug
lábay ímung pasul kay hipaktan ta sa tagà,</i>
Throw your fishline carefully because the
hook might snag me.

<p><b>pakaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @bowlegged, @pigeon-toed. <b>2</b> have
an inarticulated elbow, such that one can
not straighten his arm. <i>v</i> [B] be bowlegged,
pigeon-toed. <i>Mapakaw giyud ang bátà basta
pirming sap-ángun,</i> A child will become
bowlegged if it is always carried astride.

<p><b>pákaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @corncob. <b>2</b> handle stuck into a
frying pan with a rounded bottom (<i>kaláhà</i>).

<p><b>pákaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> buoy or float made of a long
bamboo node 1&ndash;1/2" to 2' used principally as
a marker for fishing equipment. <b>2</b> the part
of a floating anchor (<i>paladyaw</i>) that offers a
drag, consisting of a[**delete: 'a'] woven coconut fronds.
<i>v</i> [A; c] tie this sort of float to s.t., buoy.

<p><b>pakdul</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b8] <b>1</b> knock s.o. on the top
of the head. <i>Sakit ákung úlu nga napakdul
sa halígi,</i> My head hurts because I bumped
it against a post. <b>2</b> stub one's toes. <i>Mapakdul
giyud kag mulakaw ka sa ngitngit,</i> You
will stub your toes if you walk in the dark.
<b>2a</b> [B1256] mispronounce a word in speech
due to haste in speaking or due to the difficulty
of pronouncing the word.

<p><b>pakgang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] stop s.t. short. <i>Way nakapakgang
sa íyang batásan nga laksut,</i> No
one has put a stop to his ugly ways. <i>Gipakgang
ku ang íyang pamakak,</i> I put a stop to
his lies.

<p><b>pakgang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dried sugar cane leaves. <b>2</b> frond
of a buri palm.

<p><b>pakgut<sub>1</sub></b> (from <i>gákut</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c] tie s.t. tightly
around several things or over an opening so
that nothing can budge. <i>Pakgúti ug maáyu
ang kináhuy,</i> Tie the firewood together securely.
<i>n</i> s.t. to tie around. <i>Ang uway maáyung
pakgut sa kartun,</i> Rattan is good for
tying around boxes.

<p><b>pakgut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab7] cut, slice with a sickle.
<i>Pakgútan sa manananggut ang buluk káda
buntag,</i> The toddy gatherer slices a piece
off the young coconut blossom every morning.
<b>2</b> [A; a] strip an abaca trunk into fibers.
<i>Ayaw pakgúta kanang abaka nga butung pa
ang tugdan,</i> Don't strip an abaca plant with
a young stem. <i>n</i> action of cutting.

<p><b>pakha</b> <i>n</i> Chinese woman whose feet have
been bound from birth to make them tiny.

<pb n=1476>

<p><b>paki-</b> prefix added to nouns to form adjectives
meaning 'extremely fond of [noun]'.
<i>Paki Núra giyud ning mga batan-un run,</i>
The youngsters these days are very fond of
Nora Aunor. <i>Pakiayiskrim</i>, Very fond of ice
cream.

<p><b>páki</b>, <b>pakì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a bar made of bamboo or
other light wood put between the upper
and lower sail in two- or more-piece sails. <b>2</b>
the lower sail in a two- or more-piece sail,
which is rolled up when the skipper wishes
to reduce the amount of wind which can
hit the sail. <i>v</i> [A; ac1] <b>1</b> roll up the lower
sails. <b>2</b> make or attach a <i>páki</i> bar or lower
sail.

<p><b>pakì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @stiff. <i>Pakì ra ning sinináa pagkaarmirul,</i>
This shirt has been starched too stiff.
<b>2</b> @{recently dead}, stiff. <i>Pakì na siya pag-abut
nákù,</i> He was dead when I arrived. <i>v</i> [ABN; c1]
<b>1</b> be stiff, cause s.t. to become stiff. <i>Namakì
ang karni nga gisulud sa prísir,</i> The
meat in the freezer became stiff. <b>2</b> be @dead.

<p><b>pakíbut</b> <i>v</i> [c16] send letters by the paquebot
mail service, formerly provided by the
Post Office, whereby a mailbox was placed
on a boat in which letters destined for the
port of call or interior ports are placed.

<p><b>pákids</b> <i>n</i> @package, esp. sent by mail.

<p><b>pakig-(<-)</b> (<i>see</i> <sc>MAKIG-</sc> <i>for illustrations of
the tense forms of the active voice</i>.) Derivational
verb forming affix, added to almost
all roots which refer to an action and also
to bases with <i>-ay</i>, (<i>-anay</i>) to form verbs
which mean 'engage s.o. in [such-and-such]
an action'. <i>Ayaw pakigkítà níyag usab,</i>
Don't go see him again. <i>Dakù ang ákung tingúhà
pakiglákaw níya sa plása,</i> I am very
intent on taking her for a walk in the plaza.
<i>Ayaw pakigsumbagay ug gamay,</i> Don't pick
a fight with s.o. smaller than you.

<p><b>pakig-an(<-)</b> local passive future prefix added
to some bases with a prefix <i>pakig-</i>. (<i>Past</i>: <b>gipakig-an(<-)</b>.
<i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>pakig-i</b>.) <i>Pakigsabútan
ku siya,</i> I will make an agreement
with him. Gipakigbungúlan ku siya, I got
onto bad terms with him. <i>Ayaw siya pakigkitái,</i>
Don't go to see her.

<p><b>pakig-i</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PAKIG-AN</sc>.

<p><b>pak-il</b> <i>a</i> @{hard and compacted}. <i>Pak-il ang kamúti
kay wà nímu tabúni paglung-ag,</i> The
sweet potatoes came out hard because you
boiled them without a cover. <i>v</i> [B; a] become
hard and compacted.

<p><b>páking<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{packing plant}. <i>Nanarbáhu didtus
páking sa Dil Munti, magdilatag pinya,</i>
Working at the Del Monte packing plant,
canning pineapples. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>PÁKING</sc>.

<p><b>páking<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] apply packing to a hemorrhage.
<pb n=1477><i>Dukt&ucaron;r ang mipáking níya kay nagdugù
man siya humag panganak,</i> The doctor
applied packing because she had a hemorrhage
after her delivery.

<p><b>pákit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pocket in billiards. <b>2</b> = <sc>PÁKIT SÁYIS</sc>.
<i>v</i> [AN; c1] pocket money dishonestly.
<i>Kinsay nagpákit sa inyung swildu?</i> Who
pocketed your salary? <i>Pakítun (ipákit) kunu
sa tisuríru ang kwarta sa kapunúngan,</i>
They say the treasurer will pocket the money
belonging to the organization. <b>&mdash; buk</b> <i>n</i>
a @{paperback book}. <b>&mdash; máni</b> petty cash one
has for s.o.'s sundry expenses. <b>&mdash; sáyis</b> <i>n</i>
flat bottle of liquor holding 350 cc. <b>sayid &mdash;</b>
<i>n</i> side pocket of a billiard table. <b>sikrit &mdash;</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>SIKRIT</sc>.

<p><b>pakíti</b> <i>n</i> @package. <i>Usa ka pakíting sigarilyu,</i>
A pack of cigarettes. <i>v</i> [A; c1] put in a
package.

<p><b>paklang</b> <i>n</i> petiole of a buri palm frond.

<p><b>paklay</b> <i>n</i> dish made from goats' or dogs' entrails
and blood, cut up and sautéed with
spices. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make <i>paklay</i>.

<p><b>paklì</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; c1] turn s.t. that is flat. <i>Ang
kusug hángin mauy nakapaklì (nakapapaklì)
sa páwud sa atup,</i> The strong wind turned
the shingles of the roof over. P<i>aklía ang
sunud panid,</i> Turn the next page.

<p><b>paklid</b> (from <i>kílid</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c1] remove a thick,
heavy sheet which has been attached to or
lodged against s.t. <i>Ang kawatan ang nagpaklid
sa mahalung kwadru nga gilansang sa
bungbung,</i> The thief knocked off the expensive
frame that was nailed to the wall.
<i>Gipaklid níyag hínay ang tabun sa bugásan,</i>
He opened the cover of the rice container
slowly.

<p><b>pakling</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; c1] knock over s.t. erect
and not rooted, usually to a lower place.
<i>Kinsay nagpakling sa masitíra?</i> Who knocked
the flower pots over? <i>Napakling ang
makililímus kay nasabdan sa irù nga milabay,</i>
The beggar was knocked down by a
passing dog that brushed against him.

<p><b>pakluy</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> tending to loaf, take it easy when
not watched. <b>2</b> lacking the energy to improve
one's lot. <i>v</i> [B; b] <b>1</b> @idle, be @loafing.
<i>Mahímu rang paklúyan nátù ning buháta,
walà bítaw tay súhul,</i> We can take it easy
on this job. We're hardly paid anyway. <b>2</b>
be slow and unaggressive. <i>Ug magpakluy ka
sa kinabúhì, dì ka madiyus,</i> If you are not
sufficiently aggressive, you'll never succeed.

<p><b>paknit</b> (from <i>aknit</i>) <i>v</i> [AB; a] peel off s.t.
thin with care, flake in small bits, peel. <i>Akuy
mupaknit sa mga silyu arun dílì madáut,</i>
I'll be the one to take the stamps off so
they won't get damaged. <i>Napaknit ang pintal
<pb n=1478>sa bungbung,</i> The paint on the walls
peeled off.

<p><b>pakpak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @husk, @bark of trees. <i>Pakpak sa
mais,</i> Corn husks. <b>2</b> by extension, peels. <i>v</i>
[ABN; a2] @{peel off}, @shell. <i>Nagkapakpak ang
íyang pánit tungud sa ínit,</i> He is peeling because
of his sunburn. <i>Isirbi ang mani nga
gipakpákan,</i> Serve the peanuts that we shelled.
<b>-an(->)</b>, <b>-un</b>, <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> nearly ripe tamarinds,
the peelings of which are loose.

<p><b>pakpak<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PALAKPAK</sc>.

<p><b>pakshul</b> <i>n</i> @foxhole. <i>v</i> [A; b6] dig a foxhole.
<i>Nagpakshul dáyun ang mga sundálu,</i> The
soldiers dug foxholes right away.

<p><b>paksì</b>, <b>paksit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] rip off s.t. flexible
that is adhering firmly to s.t. <i>Kinsang buánga
ang nagpaksì (nagpaksit) sa anunsiyu?</i>
Who is the fool that ripped off the announcement?
<i>Paksíun (paksítun) ku nang
ngábil mung nagbagà,</i> I will rip your thick
lips off your snout.

<p><b>paksiw</b> <i>n</i> dish of meat or fish cooked with
vinegar and spices. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make <i>paksiw</i>.
<i>Paksíwun nátù ang subrang inasal,</i> We'll
make <i>paksiw</i> of the extra roasted pig.

<p><b>paksiyun</b> <i>n</i> @faction.

<p><b>paksul</b> = <sc>PAKSHUL</sc>.

<p><b>paksut</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] @{peel off} s.t. which is adhering
in a film or layer over s.t. else. <i>Akuy
mupaksut sa mga ritrátung ímung gipapilit
sa bungbung,</i> I'll peel the pictures off that
you pasted on the wall. <i>Napaksut ang íyang
túhud sa pagkadam-ag níya,</i> His knees were
bruised when he stumbled. <i>n</i> place s.t. was
peeled off. <i>Dúnay paksut ang káhuy nga napingsan
sa bala,</i> There is a slight bruise on
the tree that the bullet grazed.

<p><b>paktaw</b> = <sc>PATÁNÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>paktu</b> <i>n</i> @pact, an agreement between two or
more parties. <b>&mdash; diritru</b> sale of land subject
to repurchase within a period of time. <i>v</i>
[c1] execute a deed of sale with the right
to repurchase.

<p><b>paktul</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] knock the head with
s.t. <i>Paktúlan ku nang ímung úlu arun makasabut
ka,</i> I will conk you on the head so
you can understand. <b>2</b> [b4(1)] have <i>paktul</i>
practiced on one. <i>n</i> k.o. sorcery whereby
s.t. is done to a skull, doll, or some other
representation of a person, and the person
against whom it is practiced feels the effects
of whatever is done to the image. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2]
practice <i>paktul</i>. <b>maN-r-</b>, <b>maN-l-</b> <i>n</i> sorcerer
who practices <i>paktul</i>.

<p><b>paktúra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @invoice of goods bought. <b>2</b> label
attached to merchandise indicating the price
in code. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] make @{price tags} for
goods to be sold.

<pb n=1479>

<p><b>paku<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fern, the young leaves of which
are eaten as a salad: <b><i>Athyrium esculentum</i></b>.

<p><b>paku<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> plaster of belladona: k.o. plaster
applied locally for muscular aches. <i>v</i> [A; c]
apply a plaster of belladona.

<p><b>pakù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @wings. <b>2</b> @{ventral fin}. <b>3</b> means or
instrument to achieve s.t.: money, credentials,
ability (colloquial). <i>Dì ku makapamyista
kay wà man kuy pakù,</i> I can't attend
the fiesta because I don't have the money
for the fare. <i>Dì ka mauwaw nga murikumind&acaron;r
níya kay hustu nà sa pakù,</i> You need
not be ashamed to recommend her because
she has the qualifications. <b>4</b> @armpit (humorous
euphemism). <i>v</i> [A; b6] put wings on.
<b>pakùpákù</b> <i>n</i> upper part of back just below
the shoulder. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{grow wings}.
<b>pak-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @winged. <b>2</b> @devilish. <i>Pak-an bayà
nímung dakù!</i> You are a devil.

<p><b>pákù</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a12] be frustrated in one's
efforts to accomplish s.t. <i>Wà ku mapákù sa
ákung pagpanágat gabíi kay nakadá kug diyútay,</i>
It was worthwhile going fishing last
night because I managed to catch some.[**ex. does not illustrate a frustrating event!]

<p><b>pakug</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c] bang the head against s.t.,
bang heads together. <i>Pakúgun ta mu kay paríhu
mung sad-an,</i> I'm going to bang your
heads together. You are both guilty. <i>Íyang
ipakug ang íyang úlu sa halígi ug sapútun,</i>
He bangs his head against the post when he
is angry. <b>pakugpákug</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] for things
hanging loosely to bang repeatedly against
each other. <i>Magpakugpákug ang mga buwad
nga binítay ug hangínun,</i> The dried fish
which are hung up knock against each other
when the wind blows.

<p><b>pakul</b> <i>n</i> name given to good-sized triggerfishes
with a larger mouth than the <i>pugut</i>.

<p><b>pákul</b> = <sc>PAGÚHA</sc>.

<p><b>pakúma</b> <i>n</i> FACOMA, the acronym for Farmers'
Cooperative Marketing Association.

<p><b>pakung</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ab2c] give s.t. a light rap with
s.t. else, bump a small part of the head against
s.t. <i>Kanang maistrang saputun ang
nagpakung nákù,</i> That irate teacher rapped
me on the head. <i>Napakung ang ákung úlu
sa nag-abring sira,</i> I knocked my head against
the open door. <i>v</i> [A; ac] bang repeatedly.

<p><b>pakupak</b> = <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.

<p><b>pákut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{bind s.t. tightly}. <i>Tulisan ang
nagpakut níla sa haligi[** halígi?],</i> The robber bound
them to the post. <i>Pakúta ang mga bulus sa
kawáyan arun sayun dad-un,</i> Bind the bamboo
stems together so they will be easy to
carry. <b>2</b> [A13; c1] be of all different kinds,
do s.t. to all different kinds. <i>Ug pakútun
(ipákut) ninyu ang prútas nga inyung kan-un
maimpatsu giyud mu,</i> If you eat all different
<pb n=1480>kinds of fruit at one time you'll
surely have indigestion. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @bond. <b>ka-</b> <i>a</i>
of various kinds put together. <i>Kapákut lang
ang ímung pamalíbad,</i> You have run the full
gamut of excuses. <i>v</i> [B1456] be of various
kinds put together. <i>Nagkapákut ang íyang
sinínà sa mga tapak,</i> Her dress was all patches
of every sort and shape.

<p><b>pákut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{wild boar}.

<p><b>pakwan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @watermelon. <b>2</b> dried watermelon
seeds.

<p><b>pakyas</b> <i>a</i> @failed, come to nothing. <i>Pakyas na
ang ákung panganduy,</i> My dreams have
come to naught. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @fail, make s.t.
fail. <i>Dílì aku mupakyas nímu,</i> I will not fail
you. <i>Dílì ka mapakyas,</i> You cannot fail.
<i>Ayawg pakyása ang ákung tingúhà,</i> Don't
cause my aspirations to fail. <b>2</b> [A2; b5] fail
to do s.t. <i>Gipakyas (gipakyásan) níya ang
íyang pagsimba,</i> He missed going to church.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @failure.

<p><b>pakyaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] hire for the whole job,
buy the whole lot. <i>Nagpakyaw mig usa ka
trák pára sa ámung ikskursiyun,</i> We chartered
a bus for our excursion. <i>Magpakyaw tag
panday paghímug aparadur,</i> Let's hire a
carpenter to make the cabinet, paying him
for the job. <i>Pakyáwun ku ang pagtúkud sa
balay,</i> I'll have the house constructed, paying
a lump sum for the whole job. <i>Pakyáwun
ku ang tanang ságing basta itúgut ug
barátu,</i> I'll buy all your bananas if you let
me have them cheap. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] finish a
game by making all the points consecutively
without changing balls or hands. <i>Ug aku
nay makasirbi, pakyáwun giyud nákù,</i> If I
serve, I'll do it to the end of the game (the
other side won't get the ball again). <b>3</b> [a12]
skip doing s.t. one regularly does. <i>Way bugas,
pakyáwun na lang nátù ang átung paniudtu,</i>
We don't have any rice. Let's just skip
our dinner. <i>n</i> s.t. hired or paid for as a
whole. <i>Dílì ni inadlaw. Pakyaw ni,</i> We are
paid for doing the whole job, not on a daily
basis. <b>maN-r-</b>, <b>maN-ay</b> <i>n</i> whole lot buyer
or worker of jobs under agreement.

<p><b>pál<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> one's @pal. <i>v</i> [C; c] be pals.

<p><b>pál<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> acronym for Philippine Air Lines. <i>v</i>
[A13] take a PAL flight; by extension, take
a plane.

<p><b>pala</b> <i>n</i> k.o. black ant, the size of an ordinary
red ant (<i>hulmígas</i>) infesting fruits. It does
not bite but secretes an acid which can
sting the eyes. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with black
ants. <i>see also</i> <sc>PA</sc>.

<p><b>pála<sub>1</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c] @flatter, @{sweet
talk}. <i>Akuy mupála ni Nánay arun ta palitan
ug bag-ung sinínà,</i> I'll sweet talk Mother into
<pb n=1481>buying us new dresses. <i>n</i> flattery. <b>palapála</b>
= <sc>PÁLA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pála<sub>2</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @spade, @shovel. <i>v</i> [A; ac]
move s.t. with a shovel. <i>Paláha nang balas
dihà,</i> Shovel that sand away. <i>Ipála ang
balas ngari,</i> Shovel the sand over here. <b>(->)</b>
= <sc>PÁLA<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>pála<sub>3</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @propeller.

<p><b>pálà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @erase. <i>Mam, akuy mupálà sa
blakburd,</i> Ma'am, I'd like to erase the board
(for you). <i>Lisud kang pad-un (paláun) sa
ákung panumdúman,</i> It's difficult to erase
you from my mind. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> eraser for
pencil or typewritten figures. <b>-in-an</b>, <b>pinad-an</b>
<i>n</i> @erasure. <i>Daghan rag pinalaan (pinad-an)
ang ímung tinayip,</i> Your typing has too
many erasures. [+]

<p><b>pálà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A12; a3b2] get s.t. as a result of
one's actions or behavior. <i>Makapálà kag
maáyung kapaláran ug magtinarung ka,</i> You
will get good fortune if you are a good and
upright person. <i>Way láing hipaláan sa táwung
burukintu kun dì áway,</i> A trouble-*maker
gets nothing but trouble.

<p><b>palábad</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*LÁBAD</sc>.

<p><b>palabangáhan</b>, <b>palabanghan</b> = <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.

<p><b>palabra</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{word of honor}.
<i>Wà siyay palabra kay dílì mutúman ug sáad,</i>
He has no word of honor because he does
not hold to his promises. <b>2</b> talk as opposed
to action. <i>Palabra lang, way nabúhat,</i> It's
all talk, no action. <b>&mdash; diunur</b> @{word of honor}.
<b>-s</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>palábu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÁBU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pálad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @palm of the hand. <b>2</b> one's @fate. <i>Dì
ku madátù kay mau nay ákung pálad,</i> I will
not get rich because it's my fate not to. <b>2a</b>
<b>pilay &mdash;</b> who knows? <i>Ayaw siyag sawaya.
Pilay pálad ug maprisidinti siya,</i> Do not
scorn him. Who knows, he might one day
become president. <b>2b</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> @unfortunate.
<b>Mis &mdash;</b> name Miss Palm, the hand as used in
masturbating (humorous). <i>Napildi kung Mis
Pálad gabíi,</i> I gave my all to Miss Palm last
night (i.e. masturbated). <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> general
name given to various flatfishes: flounders,
brills, soles. <b>2</b> k.o. creeping grass: <b><i>Cynodon
dactylon</i></b>. <b>paladpalad</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>PALAD</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>2</b>
= <sc>BILABILA</sc>. <b>panim-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @venture,
try one's luck. <i>Adtu ku sa Manílà manimpálad,</i>
I will go to Manila to try my luck. <i>Panimpalári
ug hangyù si Pidung básig musugut,</i>
Try your luck in asking Pedong to do
it. He might agree to. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b(1)]
read the palm. <i>Human siya kahimadli naghingári
lang siyag hinuktuk,</i> Ever since he
had his fortune read, he has moped. <b>panghiN-</b>
<i>n</i> @palmistry. <b>manghihimalad</b> <i>n</i> @palmist.

<pb n=1482>

<p><b>paláran</b> <i>a</i> @fortunate. <i>Paláran ka kay ikay napílì,</i>
You're lucky you were chosen. <b>kapaláran</b>
<i>n</i> @fate, @destiny. <i>Súgù sa kapaláran ang
nahitabù,</i> What happened was the decree of
fate. <i>Balud sa kapaláran,</i> The cruelty of
fate. <b>palárun</b> <i>a</i> turning out lucky, successful.
<i>Ug palárun ang plánu,</i> If the plan is
successful.

<p><b>paladyaw</b> (from <i>layaw</i>) <i>n</i> k.o. floating anchor
attached to a line, consisting of a float and
s.t. tied to it to offer resistance (<i>pákaw</i>),
the purpose of which is to slow down s.t.
drifting or hold back s.t. moving. <i>v</i> [A13; a2]
attach a <i>paladyaw</i>. <i>Paladyawi ang palíhan
arun malúya dáyun ang íhu,</i> Attach a
float to the harpoon line so the shark will
tire easily.

<p><b>palag</b> <i>v</i> [A12] = <sc>HI-</sc>. <b>hi-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A12C3; b8c3]
@meet with, @{run into}. <i>Nakapalag (nakahipálag)
na ku sa hustung tubag,</i> I found the
right answer. <i>Hipalgan sa mga pulis ang patayng
láwas sa nalumus,</i> The policemen
found the dead body of the drowned person.
<i>Gikahipálag ku siya didtu,</i> I ran into
him there.

<p><b>palagpag<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tray made of bamboo lattice-*work
that is hung s.w. for various uses, e.g.
in the kitchen as a storage place for food,
or hung in the garden as support for vines,
et al. <b>2</b> bamboo stretcher for carrying corpses,
the flooring of which is made of bamboo
slats. <i>Palagpag ang gikargáhan sa minatay,</i>
The corpse was carried on a bamboo
stretcher. <i>v</i> [A1; a] put in, make into a tray
of this sort or in a bamboo stretcher.

<p><b>palagpag<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ac2] agitate s.t. to remove
dust. <i>Ipalagpag (palagpági) ang sinínà arun
makúhà ang abug,</i> Beat or shake the dresses
to remove the dust.

<p><b>palagupak</b> <i>n</i> clapper made of bamboo or a
banana leaf stalk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] sound the
<i>palagupak</i>. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make a <i>palagupak</i>.

<p><b>palahúta</b> = <sc>PLAWTA</sc>.

<p><b>pal-ak</b> <i>n</i> <i>a</i> leafstalk and its leaf. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
remove the leafstalk from the mother plant.
<i>Pal-áki kug pila ka dáhun sa pitsay,</i> Take
some Chinese cabbage leaves off of the
plant for me.

<p><b>palakà</b> <i>n</i> @frog.

<p><b>palakáya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @trawling with a V-shaped net
(<i>púkut</i>) usually in deep waters. <i>v</i> [AN; a2]
@trawl, catch by trawling.

<p><b>palakíru</b> = <sc>PALIKÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>palakpak</b> <i>n</i> @applause. <i>v</i> [A; b] @clap. <i>Ang gipalakpákan
ug maáyu mauy nakadaug,</i> The
one who got the most applause won.

<p><b>palakpalak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> croaking of frogs, flapping of
wings of fowls, clacking of wooden slippers.
<pb n=1483><b>2</b> = <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>. <b>2a</b> @lesbian, so called from
the bamboo clapper which consists of two
like-shaped pieces of bamboo. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1]
make the <i>palakpalak</i> sound. <b>2</b> [C] engage
in Lesbian[**lesbian -P2] behavior.

<p><b>palakul</b>, <b>palákul</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @hatchet.
<b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [a12b2] hit with a hatchet. <i>Palakulun
ku nang irúa,</i> I'll hit that dog with an axe.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> like a hatchet. <b>-un ug tiil</b> having feet
with spreading toes.

<p><b>palakupak</b> = <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.

<p><b>palamban</b> = <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TAMBAN</sc>.

<p><b>palamingku</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> long, sharp,
pointed knife, of light weight, about 8"
long, used for slaughtering or slicing meat.
<i>v</i> [A; ab2] strike, stab with a <i>palamingku</i>.

<p><b>palanas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> flat, smooth rock or stone cliff.
<b>2</b> eroded untillable area where large stones
stick out. <i>v</i> [B2] for the soil to become
barren, eroded. <i>Mupalanas (mapalanas) ang
yútà ug mabahaan,</i> A piece of land becomes
infertile if it is subject to floods.

<p><b>palandung</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LANDUNG</sc>.

<p><b>palanggà</b> (from <i>danggà</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a12] love and
care for s.o. <i>Mupanggà ku sa bátang buútan,</i>
I'll love a good child. <i>Palanggáun ku ikaw
hangtud sa kahangtúran,</i> I will love and care
for you till the end of time. <i>n</i> @dearest, @darling.
short form: <b>langg[=à]</b>. <i>Natúlug ka na ba,
palanggà?</i> Are you asleep, darling? <b>ma-in-un</b>
<i>a</i> bestowing loving care, full of love. <b>-in-</b>
= <sc>PALANGGÀ</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>palanggána</b>, <b>plangganíta</b> = <sc>PLANGGÁNA</sc>.
<sc>PLANGGANÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>palangging</b>, <b>palanggingging</b> <i>n</i> form of endearment
for <i>palanggà</i>. <i>Unsa may gustu nímung
kan-un palangging?</i> What do you want to
eat, little dear?

<p><b>palangka<sub>1</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> religious offering
or pledge in the form of prayers, sacrifices,
and penance for the success of a <i>kursilyista</i>
(see <sc>KURSILYU</sc>). <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a <i>palangka</i>.

<p><b>palangka<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PLANGKA</sc>.

<p><b>palangkì</b> = <sc>PULANGKÌ</sc>.

<p><b>palangri</b> <i>n</i> general name for longline fishing
in deep waters. <i>v</i> [AN; b6] go longline
fishing.

<p><b>palanhay</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>a</i> @{sloping gradually}.
<i>v</i> [B1; a12] be, become a @{gradual slope}. <i>Abunúhig
yútà sa ubus arun mapalanhay ang
baháda,</i> Put in filling in the part below so
that it will be an easy grade.

<p><b>palansa</b> = <sc>PLANTSA</sc>. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> flat-topped hair-*cut
with short sides.

<p><b>palantig</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] throw s.t. at s.t. <i>Gipalantig
nákung manuk nga mituktuk sa binlad,</i>
I threw stones at the chicken that was pecking
<pb n=1484>at the rice.

<p><b>palantígun</b> = <sc>BALANTÍGUN</sc>.

<p><b>palàpà</b> = <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ</sc>.

<p><b>palapag</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> strong, permanent trellis, with
posts, usually made of metal or hardwood,
used as a support for climbing plants or as
a screen. <b>2</b> matting made of closely woven
bamboo slats. <i>Katága sa palapag ang kupras,</i>
Spread the copra on the bamboo slats. <b>3</b> a
round winnowing tray.

<p><b>palápag</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> improvised litter. <i>Ang masakitun
gibutang sa palápag ug gibayúngan ngadtu
sa tambalánan,</i> The sick person was placed
on the improvised carriage and was taken to
the hospital. <b>2</b> = <sc>PALAGPAG<sub>1</sub></sc>. <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b>
carry in a litter. <b>2</b> make a litter.

<p><b>palapála</b> = <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ</sc>.

<p><b>palàpálà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> horizontal trellis for plants to
grow on. <b>2</b> temporary shed without walls
with a flat roof. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] make such a
shed or trellis for climbing plants. <i>Magpàpà
lang tas sílung nga pára kan-anan sa bisíta,</i>
We'll make a pergola in the yard for the
dinner guests.

<p><b>palàpálà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> advantage given an opponent
whereby the stronger player agrees to make
a certain multiple of the score gotten by
the weaker, e.g., he must make five points
for every one point of his opponent. <i>v</i> [A; c]
give this advantage.

<p><b>palaríti</b> (not without <i>l</i>) = <sc>PLARÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>pálas<sub>1</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A3P; a] @erase writings,
memories. <i>Ákù ta kang palásun sa ákung
listahan,</i> I'll erase your name from my
list. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @eraser. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> @erasure.

<p><b>pálas<sub>2</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] summon
people to work. <i>Palásun ku ang mga silíngan
kay maglálung ta sa balay,</i> I will go notify
the people to come because we're going to
move the house.

<p><b>pálas<sub>3</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a12] continue
weaving s.t. already started. <i>Nasugdan ku
na man, ikaw na lay magpálas,</i> I started it.
Now you continue weaving it.

<p><b>palásan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rattan with a stem as big around
as the arm, and the nodes approximately
1&ndash;1/2" apart. The heart stem is edible
but bitter. The stalk is used for furniture
and the split stems for tying.

<p><b>palasíbu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) = <sc>PLASÍBU</sc>.

<p><b>palast&acaron;r</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [AB; c1] <b>1</b> lay flat,
lie down flat. <i>Kinsa man nang nagpalast&acaron;r
dihà sa katri?</i> Who's that lying down on the
bed? <i>Ipalast&acaron;r (palastára) ang panaptun sa
lamísa úsà nímu tabása,</i> Lay the cloth flat
on the table before you cut it. <b>2</b> set in proper
place. <i>Palastáran ku sa ákung tinda kining
ímung lamísa, ha?</i> May I set my goods
<pb n=1485>up here on your table?

<p><b>palásu</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>PLÁSU</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>PALATSU</sc>.

<p><b>palasyu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> palace. <b>2</b> archbishop's
residence. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a
palace.

<p><b>palata</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fish found around rocks in shallow
waters, not particularly good eating.

<p><b>palatik</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> outrigger boom to
which the float (<i>kátig</i>) is attached. <i>v</i> [A; a]
make or attach an outrigger boom[** .]

<p><b>palatíru</b> (not without <i>l</i>) = <sc>PLATÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>palatsu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. flowing gown for women consisting
of a flaring, full skirt modified to
form two pant legs. <i>v</i> [A; a2] wear this sort
of gown.

<p><b>palátu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) = <sc>PLÁTU</sc>.

<p><b>palatun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> plate, 9" to 12" in diameter,
made of enamel-coated tinplate, round and
deep like a shallow soup plate. <b>2</b> any @plate.
<i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> use a <i>palatun</i>. <b>2</b> make into a
<i>palatun</i>. <i>a</i> eating a lot.

<p><b>palaw</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [B1256] feel disappointment
tinged with embarrassment at the
failure of s.t. to happen. <i>Napalaw ang mangunguut
kay way sulud ang pitáka,</i> The
pickpocket was disappointed because the
wallet contained no money. <i>Napalaw mi
pagkanta námug hápi birtdi kay dì diay adlaw
níya,</i> We were embarrassed when we
sang happy birthday because it wasn't his
birthday.

<p><b>pálaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, vigorous growing aroid,
the tubers and leaves of which are eaten,
esp. in times of scarcity: <b><i>Cyrtosperma merkusii</i></b>.
<i>v</i> [A; b6] plant <i>pálaw</i>. <b>-an(->)</b> <b>1</b> =
<sc>PÁLAW</sc>. <b>2</b> name for a similar aroid.

<p><b>palaw-a</b> = <sc>PALWA</sc>.

<p><b>paláwir</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> female genitalia.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] adorn with flowers. <b>2</b>
[A2; b3] make oneself up pretty, dress to
kill (humorous). <b>3</b> [A2; a12] for a young
girl to do s.t. appropriate to grown-ups.
<i>Ngánung nangmik-ap ka? Namaláwir ka na
ba?</i> Why are you putting make-up on? You
want to act like a grown-up? <b>4</b> [A23] gather
fallen coconuts, esp. from plantations
not one's own (humorous&mdash;word play on
<i>pamúlak</i> 'gather fallen coconuts' which
looks as though the root is <i>búlak</i> 'flower'
[whereas actually the root is <i>púlak</i>]).

<p><b>palaypay</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] spread s.t. out or hang it
up to air, dry. <i>Didtu sa gawas ipalaypay ang
hábul,</i> Spread the blanket out outside. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> place where laundry is hung out to
dry.

<p><b>palbangáan</b>, <b>palbangáhan</b> = <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.

<p><b>palda</b> <i>n</i> skirt. <i>v</i> [A; a] wear, obtain, make
into a skirt. <b>&mdash; iblúsa</b> <i>n</i> skirt and blouse. <i>v</i>
<pb n=1486>[A; c] wear a skirt and blouse.

<p><b>paldíyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> brim of a hat. <b>2</b> part of the leg
of the trousers from the knees to the cuffs.
<i>v</i> [A; b] make the brim of a hat.

<p><b>paldu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] pack into bales. <i>Átung paldúhun
ang mga pamantaláan,</i> Let's bale the
newspapers. <i>n</i> @bale, @bundle. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. packed
in bales.

<p><b>palhi</b> <i>a</i> for a place to be inhabited by supernatural
beings that can get easily angered
and inflict diseases on the object of their
ire. <i>Giila ra ba ning yutáang palhi. Buháti
únà úsà darúha,</i> This land is notorious for
the supernatural beings that guard it. Make
an offering before you plow it.

<p><b>palhug</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] slip s.t. long under or in between
s.t. else, usually not tightly placed.
<i>Ayawg palhúgi ug malíta ang ilálum sa hagdanan,</i>
Don't keep a suitcase under the
stairs.

<p><b>palì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> large @scar. <i>v</i> [B; b4a4] form, have a
scar. <i>Mupalì ang kabahung ug mataptan ug
mík,</i> The infection will form a scar if you
treat it with a coin.

<p><b>palì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B126] for the upraised hands to be
bent back with some force. <i>Kusug ra kaáyu
tung pagkapasáha sa búla, makapalì (makapapalì)
man pud sa magsáwù,</i> You really
threw the ball with force. It can bend the
hand over backwards.

<p><b>palias</b> <i>a</i> having pale and very dry lips. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i>
[B26N; b4] for the lips to be, become pale
and very dry. <i>Ang táwung masakitun mipalías
(namalías) ang ngábil,</i> A sick man's lips
turn pale and get dry. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a pale and
powdery sort.

<p><b>palibkas</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LIBKAS</sc>.

<p><b>palid<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sheet of paper, metal. <i>Duha ka palid
nga sín,</i> Two iron sheets. <b>2</b> door or window
shutter. <b>3</b> installment of a story. <i>Dì ku
saypan ang matag palid sa sugilánun,</i> I won't
miss a single installment of the story.

<p><b>palid<sub>2</sub></b>, <b>pálid<sub>1</sub> &mdash; sa luwag</b> <i>n</i> handle of a ladle.
<i>v</i> [A; c1] make the handle of a ladle.

<p><b>pálid<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for the wind to blow s.t.
away. <i>Gipálid sa hángin ang hinayhay,</i> The
wind blew the laundry away. <b>1</b>a [c6] be
blown off course. <i>Didtu ipálid ang sakayan
sa Buhul,</i> The boat was blown over to Bohol.
<b>&mdash; ug hangínun</b> [c] be so thin the wind
could blow it away. <i>Gisumbag pa sa salbáhis
nga bána ang íyang asáwa nga ipálid gánig
hangínun,</i> The wife was so thin she could
have been blown over by a gust of wind, but
that didn't stop her brute of a husband
from boxing her. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @winnow, throw
grains in the air so the wind can carry them
off or winnow with a machine. <i>Magpálid
<pb n=1487>mig humay sa baybáyun,</i> We'll winnow rice
at the seashore. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>PÁLID</sc>, <i>v2</i>. <b>palidpálid</b>
<i>v</i> [AB; c1] sway back and forth in the
wind, make sway. <i>Nagpalidpálid ang kurtína
sa hángin,</i> The curtains waved in the
wind. <i>Ang hángin nagpalidpálid sa íyang buhuk,</i>
The wind blew her hair in all directions.

<p><b>palidpid</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] pass close along the side
of s.t. <i>Namalidpid (mipalidpid) kug ági sa
karsáda,</i> I walked along the side of the
street.

<p><b>palíhan</b> <i>n</i> rope tied to a harpoon or arrow
with which the quarry can be held after it
is speared. <i>v</i> [A13; a] attach, use for a harpoon
rope.

<p><b>paliháru</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large sweet potato having
soft, yellowish meat.

<p><b>palíhug</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*LÍHUG</sc>.

<p><b>palikíru</b> <i>a</i> @philandering. <b>&mdash; ug mata</b> being flirtatious
with women, using the eyes.

<p><b>palinà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small sugar cane that has a dark
maroon color and is decidedly sweeter than
the commercial variety. The stem is soft
and easily chewable.

<p><b>palínà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fumigation practised for medical
treatment or for various rites, the purpose
of which is always purification or nullification
of s.t. <b>2</b> materials used for this
treatment. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] give s.o. this treatment.
<i>Magpalínà ku sa bag-ung balay,</i> I will
have my new house purified by magic
smoke. <b>2</b> [AN; b] give oneself this treatment.
<i>Namalínà ku gíkan sa mintiriyu,</i> I exposed
myself to fumigation after I left the
cemetery.

<p><b>paling</b> <i>v</i> [AB126; c1] for s.t. not rooted or
fixed at the base to fall over to its side;
cause it to do so. <i>Iring ang mipaling sa masitíra,</i>
The cat knocked the flower pot over.
<b>palingpaling</b> <i>a</i> having no strong convictions
and easily yielding to influence. <i>v</i> [B56] be
not firm, an easy prey to influence. <i>Way íyang
kaugalíngung panghunàhúnà, mupalingpáling
(mapalingpáling) pa,</i> He can be
swayed in his decision. He has no mind of
his own.

<p><b>palìpì</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] place thorns around the
base of plants to keep them from animals
or thieves. <i>Ug wà pa ku makapalìpì sa ákung
mangga, mahurut untà sa káwat,</i> If I hadn't
put thorns around the base of the mango
tree, the fruit would have all been stolen. <i>n</i>
thorns placed around plants.

<p><b>palinpinun</b> <i>n</i> <i>a</i> narrow road with a sharp turn
having a high cliff on one side and a deep
precipice on the other side.

<p><b>palis</b> <i>n</i> @{early afternoon}, between noon and 4
P.M. <i>v</i> [B5; b4(1)] be in the afternoon. <i>Napalisan
<pb n=1488>kug laba sa mga bulingun,</i> I washed
the clothes until afternoon. <i>Palisan ku ang
ímung bábuy,</i> I will pay for your pig with
an afternoon's work.

<p><b>pális</b> = <sc>PÁLID<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>palispis</b> <i>v</i> [AN] for leaves to start sprouting[** .]
<i>Sa tulu ka adlaw mupalispis (mamalispis)
na ang pugas,</i> In three days the corn seeds
will be sprouting. Nagpalispis na ang sanga
nga íyang gitisuk, The branch of a tree that
she planted is beginning to grow leaves. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
short, thin sprouting leaf, not fully grown.
<b>2</b> sheath of a stem of the bamboo plant. <b>3</b>
sheath wings, usually of insects. <b>4</b> caudal
fin of the squid. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> a fraction of s.t. <i>Pinalispis
lang kini sa ímung abilidad,</i> This is
only a fraction of your ability.

<p><b>palit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @buy. <i>Akuy mupalit ánag diyis,</i>
I'll buy it for ten pesos (lit. if it's ten
pesos). <i>Kinsay nagpalit sa ímung awtu?</i>
Who bought your car? <i>Nakapalit mig barátung
kutsi,</i> We managed to buy a car cheap.
Palitun ku ning tambála, I will buy this medicine.
<i>Kinsay ímung gipalitan sa kutsi?</i>
Who did you buy the car from (or for)? <i>Wà
kuy kwartang ipalit ug awtu,</i> I have no
money to buy a car with. <b>2</b> [A; a12] <b>&mdash; ug
áway, burúka</b> get into trouble with s.o. with
whom one had no quarrel simply because
of too much meddling. <i>Sa ímung tábì nakapalit
kag áway,</i> You bought yourself a quarrel
with your gossip. <i>n</i> amount paid to buy
s.t. <i>Pilay palit nímu sa isdà? How much did
you pay for the fish?</i> <b>&mdash; baligyà</b> <i>n</i> @{buying
and selling}. <i>Ang íyang patigáyun palit baligyà
sa mais,</i> He is in the business of buying
and selling corn. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @sales. <i>Kusug ba ang
pálit sa ímung tinda?</i> Are your goods selling
fast? a selling well. <i>v</i> [b5] <b>1</b> sell in large
quantities. <i>Bulad mauy gipálit (gipalítan)
run sa mga táwu kay mahal ang lab-as,</i> Dried
fish sells well now because fresh fish is dear.
<b>2</b> [A13] for a farmer who raises his own to
buy when his stock runs out. <i>Nagpálit na
run mi kay nahurut na ang abut námù nga
mais,</i> We are buying corn grits now because
we used up our stock of corn. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> a fond
of buying. <i>Himálit kaáyu siyag prútas,</i> She
is fond of buying fruits. <b>hiN-an</b>, <b>hiN-an(<-)</b>
<i>a</i> selling well. <i>Himalitan (himalítan, pálit)
ang ímung tinda kay bubaratu,</i> Your goods
sell well because they're cheaper. [+]

<p><b>palíta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{brick trowel}. <b>2</b> a flat paddle for
removing baked foods from an oven. <i>v</i> [A3; ab2]
<b>1</b> smooth with a trowel. <i>Palitáha ang
pinising,</i> Smooth out the finishing cement.
<b>2</b> use a paddle, hit with a paddle. <b>-da</b> =
<sc>PALÍTA</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<pb n=1489>

<p><b>palitaw</b>, <b>palítaw</b> <i>n</i> sweet made of finely
ground sticky rice patties boiled in water
and covered with sugar and shredded coconut.
<i>v</i> [A; a] make <i>palitaw</i>.

<p><b>palítu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @toothpick, @matchstick. <i>v</i> [a12]
make a toothpick. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] use a toothpick.
<i>Namalítu siya human ug káun,</i> He
picked his teeth after he ate.

<p><b>palítu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>paliya</b>, <b>palíya</b> <i>n</i> widely cultivated vine producing
an elongated fruit with wart-like
skin, eaten unripe as a vegetable, having a
bitter taste: <b><i>Momordica charantia</i></b>.

<p><b>paliyar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; b4(1)] for an engine to malfunction.
<i>Sus, nagpaliyar na pud ning kagangkagang!</i>
Darn! This rattletrap is breaking
down again! <b>2</b> [B6] for a plan to fail
to come out successfully. <i>Mipaliyar ang ámung
sábut nga mangalígù kay nag-ulan,</i>
Our plans to go swimming didn't materialize
because it rained. <b>3</b> [A2; c1] default in
payment. <i>Nakapaliyar kug usa ka instulmin
sa pagdaut nákù,</i> I failed to pay one installment
when I got sick. <b>4</b> [B36] for one's
health to fail. <i>Mipaliyar ang íyang láwas tungud
sa síging bilar,</i> She kept staying up
nights and it ruined her health. <b>palyádu</b>,
<b>palyáwu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> malfunctioning. <b>2</b> failing to
come out. <b>3</b> defaulting in payments. <b>4</b> failing
in health. <i>v</i> [B12] break down.

<p><b>paliyu</b> <i>n</i> flat, pointed stick, usually bamboo,
used as a needle to string tobacco leaves together.
<i>v</i> [A; a12] make into a <i>paliyu</i>. <b>(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{match stick},[**matchstick above] @toothpick. <b>2</b> swab of cotton
on a thin stick. <i>v</i> [A; c] swab s.t. <i>Paliyúhan
giyud ang búug arun dì mudalítay,</i>
Swab the thick ear discharge so that it
won't ooze out.

<p><b>palku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> balcony of a theater or a house. <b>2</b>
small improvised hut built fronting a stage
as a box for viewers. <b>palkupalku</b> <i>n</i> a raised
flooring or stage for a performance.

<p><b>palma</b> <i>n</i> palm plant or any part thereof. <i>Ang
palma simbulu sa kadaúgan,</i> The palm is a
symbol of victory. <b>&mdash; ulíba</b> olive palm, a
palm of the same genus as the <i>pitúgu</i>, but
somewhat smaller.

<p><b>palmíra</b> <i>n</i> any of a number of small pinnate-leafed
palms, potted or planted for ornamental
purposes.

<p><b>palmíta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rod for punishment. <b>2</b> punishment
with a rod. <i>v</i> [A; a] administer the
rod. <i>Kusug mupalmíta ang mga páring Katsílà,</i>
The Spanish priests were fond of punishing
the children with a rod.

<p><b>palmu</b> <i>n</i> a game of marbles in which marbles
are made to bounce off a board. The first
player shoots and the second player tries to
<pb n=1490>hit the first player's marble or get within a
certain distance. If he fails, the first player
throws again, and so forth. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c] play
a game of <i>palmu</i>. <b>2</b> [c6] in basketball,
shoot the ball into the basket by making it
bounce off the board first.

<p><b>palmug</b> = <sc>PAMULUG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BULUG<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>palpag</b> <i>a</i> @disheveled. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be disheveled.
<i>Ang íyang buhuk mipalpag tungud sa hilabihang
kauga,</i> Her hair was disheveled because
it was so dry.

<p><b>palpagu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. herbaceous ground cover with
creeping stems also grown in pots: <b><i>Pellionia
daveauana</i></b>.

<p><b>palpal</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] <b>1</b> hit s.o. on the open
palm. <i>Palpálun ku run nang ímung kamut,</i>
I'm going to slap your palms. <b>2</b> knock s.t.
with the flat palm. <i>Si Martiris ang nakapalpal
sa búla gíkan kang Plurinsiyu,</i> Martirez
knocked the ball out of Florencio's hands.
<b>3</b> [B1] for the feet to get flat. <i>a</i> flat of feet.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> somewhat @flat-footed.

<p><b>palpara</b> <i>n</i> a ruffle or frill attached to the
neckline or to the sleeves of a dress. <i>v</i> [A; c]
decorate a dress with ruffles or wear a
dress decorated with ruffles.

<p><b>palsipikar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] falsify papers or documents;
forge s.o.'s signature. <b>palsipikádu</b> <i>a</i>
forged, counterfeit document, forged signature.
<b>palsipikasiyun</b> <i>n</i> falsification of documents.

<p><b>palsu</b> a <b>1</b> @false, @incorrect. <i>Palsu ang ímung
pangatarúngan,</i> Your reasons are wrong. <b>2</b>
@failed. <i>Palsu ang ílang tingúhà,</i> Their endeavors
came to naught. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] @fail, not
come to fruition. <i>Mipalsu (napalsu) ang ílang
plánu,</i> Their plans failed.

<p><b>palta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] fail to do s.t. <i>Walà pa ku
makapalta sa ákung klási,</i> I never missed a
class. <i>Napalta ug hatud run ang Tayims,</i> The
Times wasn't delivered today. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
break up people fighting. <i>Gipalta sa pulis
ang duha ka batan-un nga nagsinumbagay,</i>
The policeman separated the two youngsters
who were engaged in a fist fight. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
failure to attend some function. <b>2</b> fail to do
s.t. <i>Way palta ang íyang pagbisíta magabíi,</i>
He never failed to visit her in the evening. <b>3</b>
amount less in a score, amount lacking in a
count. <i>Palta úna ug tabla na kamu,</i> One
more point and you'll be even. <i>Ang ímung
ihap kúlang. Palta ug duha,</i> You counted
wrong. You lack two. <b>kúhà ug &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)]
be held culpable. <i>Makuháag palta ang mga
ginikánan nga kinamatayun nga mukastígu
ug anak,</i> Parents can be held culpable if
they punish their children too severely. <b>hiN-</b>
<i>a</i> tending to be absent.

<pb n=1491>

<p><b>paltik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> homemade firearms. <b>2</b> fake money.
<b>3</b> in baseball, foul ball. <b>4</b> s.o. who rides
s.t. or enters without a ticket. <i>Daghang paltik
sa ílang pasahíru,</i> There were lots of non-*paying
passengers. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go s.w.
without a ticket. <i>Náay ákung amígu sa sini.
Mamaltik ta,</i> I have a friend that works in
the theater. Let's sneak in.

<p><b>paltus</b> <i>v</i> [B26] fail in one's plans or strategy.
<i>Mipaltus ang íyang plánung manúlis kay hipanid-an
man,</i> His plans for the robbery
were foiled because s.o. had observed him.

<p><b>palu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> be disappointed
and embarrassed due to the failure
of one's expectations. <i>Napalu siyag hátag
ug gása kay dílì pa diay mau ang adlaw,</i> He
was embarrassed when he gave his birthday
gift as it turned out it was not the man's
birthday. <b>2</b> for a top to fail to spin. [+]

<p><b>pálu</b> (not without l) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @mast. <b>2</b> @pole. <i>v</i> [a]
make a mast, pole, put a mast on. <i>Káhuy nga
palúhun sa bangkà,</i> A piece of wood to make
into a mast of the boat. <b>&mdash; Maríya</b> = <sc>BITÁUG</sc>.
<b>&mdash; síbu</b> <i>n</i> name of a game in which s.o. tries
to climb a greased pole to get a prize on
top. <b>palupálu</b> <i>n</i> paddle used in pounding
clothes. <i>v</i> [A; b5] beat with a paddle.

<p><b>palù</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @hit, @slap in punishment. <i>Paluun
ku ang ímung nawung,</i> I will slap your
face. <i>Hipaluan siya sa sinílas,</i> He got slapped
with the slippers. <i>n</i> s.t. used to slap with.
<b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of hitting.

<p><b>pálù</b> <i>a</i> @infatuated (slang). <i>Misugut dáyun kay
pálù man siya nákù,</i> She accepted me right
away because she has a crush on me. <i>v</i> [B12; b3]
get a crush on s.o.

<p><b>paluap</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] follow up one's orders or
request to see if they have been acted on.
<i>Madúgay ang aplikisyun ug way mupaluap,</i>
The application will take forever if no one
follows it up. <b>2</b> [A; c] in basketball, knock
the ball into the basket after it bounces
from the ring or board. <i>Ug dì masyát ang
búla ipaluap dáyun,</i> If the ball doesn't get
in the first time, knock it in by hitting it
again. <i>n</i> act of knocking a ball which
bounces off the ring or board into the basket.

<p><b>pálud</b> <i>n</i> shingle of palm thatch, usually <i>nípà</i>
but also <i>lumbiya</i>, used for roofing or walling.
It is made by wrapping the leaflet around
a piece of bamboo and sewing it. <i>v</i> [A; a]
make into, provide with shingles of this
sort. <b>palawran</b> <i>n</i> piece of bamboo around
which the shingle is wound and sewn.

<p><b>palug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> half a buck (slang).

<p><b>palug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. fresh-water fish, about 3"
long, blackish and scaly.

<pb n=1492>

<p><b>palumar</b> <i>n</i> @dovecote. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] construct or
put up a dovecote s.w.

<p><b>palung<sub>1</sub></b> (not without <i>l</i>) = <sc>PALAW</sc>.

<p><b>palung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] whittle the end of s.t. to
make it taper or smooth it. <i>Gipalungan níya
ang pasamánu sa hagdan,</i> He made the edges
of the bannister rounded. <b>2</b> [A; a] cut the
ears so that they hang. <i>Gipalung ang dalunggan
sa bábuy ági ug timailhan,</i> They cut the
pig's ear as a mark. <b>2a</b> cut the cockscomb.
<b>3</b> [A; b] move the end of a line to make it
parallel or directly vertical to s.t. <i>Gipalungan
níya ang linya dapit sa tuu,</i> He moved
the line a little to the right. a having an ear
that hangs due to injury. <i>Si Huwan palung,</i>
Juan has a dangling ear. <i>n</i> deformations on
the ear. <b>paN-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> stempost or sternpost of
small outrigger boats. <b>pinaN-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small
outrigger boat, the stempost and sternpost
of which are exactly alike.

<p><b>pálung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{extinguish a fire}, @{turn off
a light}. <i>Bumbíru ang nakapálung sa kaláyu,</i>
The firemen put out the big fire. <i>Pagnga ra
gud ang sugà,</i> Please turn the light off. <b>2</b> [B126]
for the vision to become blurred. <i>Nagkapáwung
ang ákung panan-aw sa kagútum,</i>
I can hardly see, I'm so hungry. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ang kasukù</b>
<i>v</i> [B126; a1] for anger to die down or
subside. <i>Dílì mapáwung ang ákung kasukù
nímug dì ka mangáyug pasaylu,</i> Nothing can
quench my anger unless you apologize.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> instrument for snuffing out candles.

<p><b>palungpung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @cluster or @bunch. <i>Misuksuk
ang manuk sa palungpung,</i> The chicken hid
itself in the cluster of bushes. <i>Palungpung
sa lyábi,</i> A bunch of keys. <i>v</i> [AB; a12] be
in cluster or bunch, bunch s.t. <i>Mupalungpung
ang búnga sa úbas,</i> Grapes come
in bunches. <i>Pungpúnga ang ímung buhuk
arun dílì magwarung,</i> Tie up your hair so it
won't get dishevelled.

<p><b>palungpung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> toddy container made of a
bamboo tube, two or three nodes long, with
no handle. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make into a <i>palungpung</i>[** .]

<p><b>paluphu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] scrub cooking utensils. <b>2</b>
= <sc>PUPHU</sc>, v1. <i>n</i> s.t. used to scrub cooking
utensils, usually coconut husks. <i>Paluphu
ang ákung ilimpiyu sa dukut sa kaldíru,</i> I'll
clean the rice stuck to the pot with coconut
husks.

<p><b>palúrus</b> = <sc>PARÚLUS</sc>.

<p><b>palus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> cause s.t. loosely tied or
attached to slip off. <i>Palusa (ipalus) ang baskit
nga gisab-it sa ákung abága,</i> Slip the basket
off my shoulder. <b>2</b> slip the foreskin
back. <i>Ug mapawus ang yámis hustu nang
tulíun,</i> If the foreskin can be pulled back, it
<pb n=1493>is ready to circumcise. <i>a</i> a foreskin that can
be slipped back.

<p><b>palus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> measurement of a skein of thread
one hundred fathoms in length.

<p><b>pálus<sub>1</sub></b> (not without l) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @score in a game. <b>2</b>
advantage in score given in billiards to a
weaker opponent. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] score in a
game. <i>Ipálus (palúsa) nang syíti,</i> Make seven
points (knock the seven into the hole).
<b>2</b> [A; c] give s.o. an advantage in score. <i>Kining
tiradáha ipálus ku nímu,</i> I will give you
the score of this shot.

<p><b>pálus</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> [A; b7c] pay out
additional length of line. <i>Gipalúsan níya ang
tugut arun musákag maáyu ang tabánug,</i> He
paid out more line so that the kite would
climb higher.

<p><b>pálut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{peel skin off}. <i>Gipalútan ku
na ang mansánas,</i> I peeled the apple. <b>2</b> [B2]
for the skin to get chafed. <i>Napálut (mipálut)
ang líug sa kábaw tungud sa yúgu,</i> The
yoke chafed the water buffalo's neck. <b>3</b> [AB12]
for land to become bare. <i>Napálut ang
kaumahan kay way ulan,</i> The fields became
bare from lack of rain. <b>3a</b> [A; b5] shave the
head bald. <i>Akuy mupálut sa ímung úlu ug
dì ka magpatupi ánang ímung bítul,</i> I'll
shave your head bald if you don't get rid of
your beatle cut. <i>n</i> @peelings. <i>a</i> bare of vegetation.
<i>Kanúnay kitang bahaan kay pálut na
ang kabukíran,</i> We have constant floods because
the mountains have been denuded. <b>&mdash;
ságing</b> @{banana peel}, said esp. in stating that
s.t. is of no more worth than a banana peel.
<i>Ngánung wà man ku kunsultahi. Unsa man
ku, pálut ságing?</i> Why was I not consulted?
What am I around here, anyway? Just a
piece of furniture? <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sorely chafed
area. <b>2</b> scar on the head. <i>Nakítà ang palut
sa íyang úlu,</i> You can see the scar on his
head. a having a bald spot on it. <i>Ang sal-ing
palut ug úlu,</i> The coleto bird has a bald
spot on the head.

<p><b>palutput</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fish, general name for slip-*mouths:
<b><i>Leiognathus spp.</i></b>

<p><b>paluy</b> = <sc>PAKLUY</sc>.

<p><b>palwa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> petiole of a palm frond, banana
leaf, or similarly-shaped leaves. <b>2</b> the whole
palm frond, banana leaf. <b>2a</b> the leaf (petioles
and leaflets) of the kalamunggay. <i>Duha
ka palwang kalamunggay,</i> Two branches of
<i>kalamunggay</i> leaves. <b>&mdash; sa kadaúgan</b> <i>n</i> palm
of victory. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] <b>1</b> grow fronds.
<i>Namalwa (gipamalwáhan) na ang pitsay,</i>
The Chinese cabbage has grown leaves. <b>2</b>
gather palm fronds. Mamalwa tag isugnud,
We'll gather palm fronds for fuel. <b>palwáhun</b>
<i>a</i> like a frond. <i>Palwáhun ug ilung,</i> Flatnosed.

<pb n=1494>

<p><b>palya</b> = <sc>PALIYAR</sc>. <b>-du</b>, <b>-wu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PALIYAR</sc>.

<p><b>palyu</b> <i>n</i> canopy covering the bishop in religious
services or processions.

<p><b>pam-</b> for forms beginning with <i>pam-</i> <i>see</i> also
<b>B-</b> and <b>P-</b>.

<p><b>pamáda</b> = <sc>PUMÁDA</sc>.

<p><b>pamaláyi</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BAYI</sc>.

<p><b>pamálung</b> <b>1</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PALUNG</sc>. <b>2</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PÁLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>pamául</b> <i>n</i> @{muscle ache}. <i>v</i> [A2; b4] for muscles
to be sore.

<p><b>pambul</b> <i>n</i> violation of fumbling in basketball,
consisting of hitting the legs or the feet of
one's opponent while he is dribbling.

<p><b>pambut</b> <i>n</i> @{pump boat}, a small motorized
boat. <i>v</i> [A; a12] go by pump boat.

<p><b>pamili &mdash; sayis</b> <i>a</i> family-sized packaged products.
<b>pil indi &mdash; wi</b> feel at home (humorous&mdash;from
the English 'be in the family
way' meaning to be pregnant). <b>Ayaw lag
kaúlaw pil indi pamili wi,</b> Don't be shy.
Just feel at home.

<p><b>pamilínu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PILÍNU</sc>.

<p><b>pamilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{immediate family}, group of
closely related people who live together. <b>2</b>
large group of related people with the same
name. <i>Ang mga Lúpis dátung pamilya sa Pilipínas,</i>
The Lopezes are a rich family in the
Philippines. <b>3</b> belonging to a class or a family.
<i>Kining isdáa pamilya sa mga pági,</i> This
fish is in the ray family. <i>v</i> [B1256]
become a member of a certain family by
virtue of marriage. <i>Ayaw lag kaúlaw kay
mapamilya ka na námù,</i> Don't be shy because
you are soon going to become a member
of our family. <b>di-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> family man. <i>Lisud
sa usa ka dipamilya kun way kapangwartáhan,</i>
It is terrible for a person with a family
if he has no work. <b>2</b> man's undershorts, cut
in boxer style. <b>3</b> of a large size, designed for
two or more people in a family. <i>Muskitírung
dipamilya,</i> A large-sized mosquito net.
<b>4</b> s.t. done together by all the members of
a family. <i>Dipamilya manan-aw ug sini,</i> See
the movie with the whole family. <i>v</i> [A13]
wear boxer-style underpants. <b>padri di-</b> <i>n</i>
head of a family.

<p><b>pamilyar</b> <i>a</i> familiar with s.o. or s.t. <i>v</i> [B12]
be familiar with or close to s.t. or s.o. <i>Wà
pa ku makapamilyar nímu,</i> I'm not familiar
with you yet.

<p><b>pamimislun</b> = <sc>AMIMISLUN</sc>.

<p><b>pamínaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; ab2] @listen, @hear. <i>Mamínaw
ta sa nyús,</i> Let's listen to the news. <b>1a</b>
[A23; a12] listen, heed. <i>Dì ka untà maingun
ug namínaw pa ka,</i> If you had listened, that
wouldn't have happened to you. <b>2</b> [A12; a12]
feel, think. <i>Pamináwun ku lang ug makaadtu
<pb n=1495>ku,</i> I'll see if I can go. <b>3</b> [A2S; a12]
watch, keep an eye on. <i>Pamináwa ra ang balay
samtang wà ku dinhi,</i> Watch the house
while I'm away. <b>4</b> [A2S; b5] look to find
out. <i>Pamínaw didtu ug dúna ba silay bakanti,</i>
Go find out if they have any openings. <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> @feeling. <i>Kumusta ang ímung pamínaw karun?</i>
How are you feeling now? <b>2</b> @observation.
<i>Sa ákung pamínaw dílì siya kasalígan,</i>
As far as I have noticed, he is not to be
trusted. [+]

<p><b>pamingkúngan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BINGKUNG</sc>.

<p><b>pamingwit</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BINGWIT</sc>.

<p><b>paminta</b> = <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.

<p><b>paminti</b>, <b>pamintì</b> (from <i>bintì<sub>2</sub></i>) <i>v</i> [B46N; b(1)]
be angry so that the whole body is
trembling. <i>Mibathay ang ugat sa ákung agtang
sa dihang naminti ku,</i> I was fuming
with rage and the veins stood out on my
forehead.

<p><b>pamintun</b> <i>n</i> spicy red seasoning, sold packaged.
<i>v</i> [A; b7] mix <i>pamintun</i> into food.

<p><b>pamisliun</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>AMIMISLUN</sc>. <b>2</b> region of the
body around the kidneys.

<p><b>pamlug</b> = <sc>PAMULUG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BULUG</sc>.

<p><b>pampam</b> <i>n</i> @prostitute (slang). <i>v</i> [B5N] become
a prostitute. <i>Nagpampam lang siya
kay gustu siyag kwartang sayun,</i> She just
became a prostitute because she wanted
easy money. <b>paN-</b> v [A2; b6] patronize a
prostitute. <i>Daghan ang mamampam run kay
bag-ung swildu,</i> Lots of people will go to
the prostitutes tonight because it's payday.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @whorehouse. <b>2</b> @{red light district}.

<p><b>pampangginya</b> = <sc>PAMPANGGINYU</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>pampangginyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a native of Pampanga, a
province in Central Luzon. <b>2</b> the language
of Pampanga.

<p><b>pampbut</b> = <sc>PAMBUT</sc>.

<p><b>pamplit</b> <i>n</i> @pamphlet. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a pamphlet.

<p><b>pamúg</b> = <sc>PAMULUG</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>BULUG</sc>.

<p><b>pamulígi</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b3c5] for s.o. to be hurt
and envious because of s.t. good which happened
to s.o. else but did not happen to
him. <i>Kinsa guy dílì mamulígi nga si Turyu
ra may gihatágan ug gása?</i> Who won't be
hurt and envious when Torio was the only
one that got a present? <i>Gipamuligíhan ku
níla kay dakù kug grádung nadáwat,</i> They
were hurt and felt envious of me because I
got good grades (and they didn't).

<p><b>pamúu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] work for s.o. in seasonal
work in order to be paid in kind. <i>Mamúu
kug mais ug humay sa Mindanaw karung
ting-ani,</i> I'll go to Mindanao to help with
the harvest to earn some rice and corn. <b>2</b>
[A2; b6] labor for wages. <i>n</i> labor, work accomplished.
<pb n=1496><i>Kinahanglan giyud nga kaangáyan
ang pamúu,</i> Labor should be given
a fair recompense. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @laborer. <b>2</b>
@employee. [+]

<p><b>pamúuk</b> = <sc>PANÚUK</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>SUUK</sc>.

<p><b>pamyinta</b> = <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.

<p><b>pán</b> <i>n</i> @bread. <b>&mdash; amirikánu</b> <i>n</i> bread in a rectangular
loaf. <b>&mdash; disal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hard roll. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
make bread. <b>-adíru</b> <i>n</i> @baker. <i>v</i> [B156]
be a baker. <b>-adiríya</b> <i>n</i> @bakery. <i>v</i> [A1; b6]
have a bakery. [+]

<p><b>pan-</b> for forms beginning with <i>pan-</i> see also
<b>S</b>, <b>T</b>, and <b>D</b>.

<p><b>paN-</b> (<i>see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol</i>
<b>N.</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MAN-</sc> <i>for illustrations of the
tense forms of the active voice</i>.) <b>1</b> derivational
verb forming prefix. <b>1a</b> forming verbs
that refer to plural actions: action done by
one or more agents to several things, or several
agents to one thing, or one (or more)
agents to s.t. more than once. <i>Pangáun na,
mga bátà,</i> Come eat, children. <i>Ikay pangúhà
sa mga hinayhay,</i> You be the one to
bring the laundry in. <i>Hinúgay na ug pangusì
ánang bat-ána,</i> You've been pinching that
child for long enough now. <b>1a1</b> added to
nouns referring to living beings to form
verbs meaning 'catch [such-and-such]'. <i>Pamangsi</i>,
Go catch flying fish (<i>bangsi</i>). <i>Nanginabúhì
sila sa pagpangisdà,</i> They live by
catching fish. <b>1a2</b> do [so-and-so][**such-and-such] as an occupation.
<i>Dúgay na níyang pangutsíru,</i> He
has been a rig driver (<i>kutsíru</i>) for a long
time. <i>Dì ka makakwarta sa pagpangáhuy
lang,</i> You cannot get rich by gathering fire-*wood
(<i>káhuy</i>). <b>1b</b> forming verbs referring
to an energetic action or happening. <i>Nagpanlugnut
ang dalága nga gikidnap,</i> The girl
that was being kidnapped struggled to get
free. <i>Gipaningut ku,</i> I am completely
drenched with sweat. <i>Nagpangamay siya iyáwat
makit-an,</i> He waved for all he was
worth in hopes that he would be seen. <b>1c</b>
added to verbs referring to the action of
cleaning, beautifying, and the like to form
verbs meaning '[do] to oneself'. <i>Panipilyu
uy!</i> Brush your teeth! <i>Panabun ug maáyu,</i>
Soap yourself well. <i>Ayaw pangìkì,</i> Don't
pick your teeth. <b>1d</b> added to nouns referring
to an event or a place to form verbs
meaning 'attend [such-and-such] an event,
go to [such-and-such] a place'. <i>Pamirnis
Santu sa inyu,</i> Spend Good Friday (<i>Birnis
Santu</i>) at home. <i>Pangarbun na,</i> Go to the
Carbon market now. <i>Pamista sa ámung lungsud,</i>
Come to the fiesta in our town. <b>1d1</b>
added to other nouns to form verbs. <i>Ayaw
<pb n=1497>úsà pamána, Pirla,</i> Don't get married (lit.
take a husband&mdash;<i>bána</i>), Perla. <i>Hápit siya
mamatay pagpanganak,</i> She practically died
in childbirth. <i>Ginadílì ang pagpangíhì dinhi,</i>
It's forbidden to urinate here. <b>1e</b> added to
adj. to form verbs meaning be [adj.]. <i>Nag-inánay
pagpamula ang íyang náwung,</i> His
face gradually started getting red all over.
<i>Pagpangínit na sa íyang bukubuku mibákud
siya,</i> When his back was warm, he got up.
<b>1f</b> verb forming affix with no ascertainable
meaning. <i>Pangáyù didtu níyag kwarta,</i> Ask
for (<i>káyù</i>) money from him. <i>Pananghid úsà
ka mulakaw,</i> Say good-bye (<i>sanghid</i>) before
you leave. <b>2</b> noun forming affix. <b>2a</b> added
to roots which form verbs taking <i>paN-</i>: action
of [do]ing. <i>Way kaláki ang pangisdà
dinhi,</i> Fishing is no good here. <b>2b</b> instrument
for [do]ing. <i>Panlaba</i>, S.t. to wash
with. <i>Panágat</i>, Fishing equipment. <i>Panápì</i>,
Means of obtaining money. <b>2c</b> sense of. <i>Panimhut</i>,
Sense of smell.

<p><b>panà</b> <i>n</i> arrow, spear projected. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac]
shoot an arrow, spear. <i>Panàa ang dakung isdà,</i>
Spear into the huge fish. <i>Ipanà ang udiyung
ngadtu sa irù,</i> Shoot the arrow into
the dog. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make into an arrow,
spear. <b>igù sa &mdash; ni Kupidu</b> <i>v</i> [a3] fall in love
(lit. hit with Cupid's dart). <i>Si Idyun naigù
na sa panà ni Kupidu sígi nag iskulbus,</i>
Edion is in love because he is always escorting
s.o. home. <b>igù sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [a3] be drunk
from drinking <i>Kulafu</i>, a brand of cheap liquor
which shows a hunter aiming with a
bow and arrow on its label (slang). <i>Nagpiraypiray
na siya kay naigù sa panà,</i> He is
staggering because he had one too many
shots of <i>Kulafu</i>. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> = <sc>PANÀ</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>paN-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [A; a] hunt with bow and arrow, go
spear fishing. <i>Ayawg lubúga kay náay namánà,</i>
Don't stir the water because s.o. is
spear fishing (a humorous phrase uttered in
the presence of s.o. wearing sunglasses&mdash;likening
him to a spear fisherman). <i>n</i> hunting
with bow and arrow, spear fishing. <b>pinaN-an(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> s.t. caught with a bow and arrow
or by spear fishing.

<p><b>pánà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @crazed. <i>Uy! Pánà kang tawhána ka,
gahúbù ka man,</i> You're mad! Why are you
going around naked? <i>v</i> [a4] be @crazy. <i>Nawung
ka man ug gipánà, sígi ka man lag katáwa,</i>
You seem to be crazy, the way you're
laughing all the time. <b>-in-</b> cuss word to express
mild annoyance. <i>Ang pinánà wà uruy
kan-a sa kílat,</i> The devil! Why doesn't lightning
strike him? <i>Pinánà! Diyut ku mapásù,</i>
Darn! I nearly got burned.

<pb n=1498>

<p><b>panábu</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.

<p><b>panabúgan</b> (from <i>tabug</i>, <i>2</i>) <i>n</i> @{puffer fish}.

<p><b>panagána</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TAGÁNA</sc>.

<p><b>panag-ing</b> = <sc>PANIG-INGUN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>INGUN<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>panahun</b>, <b>panáhun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @weather. <i>Dì ta mularga
kay dautan ang panahun,</i> We cannot travel
because the weather is bad. <b>2</b> @season, @{recurring
time}. <i>Panahun sa ting-ulan,</i> Rainy
season. <b>3</b> time s.t. happened or happens. <i>Sa
panahun sa libirasiyun,</i> In the liberation
period. <b>3a</b> times of s.t. <i>Mahinumdum ka
lang sa Diyus panahun sa kalisud,</i> You remember
God only in times of hardship. <i>Natigúlang
ku sa dì pa sa ákung panáhun,</i> I became
an old man before my time. <b>3b</b> <b>&mdash; dì
átù</b> we are not the masters of our fate (lit.
time is not our own). <i>Magpaábut ta sa pagbuut
sa Ginúu, ang panahun dì átù,</i> Let us
wait for what God ordains. We are not the
masters of our fate. <b>4</b> time to do s.t. <i>Wà na
kuy panahun paghulat nímu,</i> I have no more
time to wait for you. <b>5</b> @chance, @occasion.
<i>Daghan ka pang panahun pag-usab,</i> You still
have a lot of chances to reform. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1456; b8]
come at a certain season. <i>Magpanahun
ang mangga; dílì kanúnay,</i> Mangoes
come in season. They aren't always available.
<b>2</b> [A12] have a chance, time to do. <i>Ug
makapanahun ka, pamisíta sa ámù,</i> If you
have time, come visit us.

<p><b>panaksan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TAKUS</sc>.

<p><b>panákut</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SÁKUT</sc>.

<p><b>panalamban</b> = <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TAMBAN</sc>.

<p><b>panálang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÁLANG</sc>.

<p><b>panalángin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @prayer. <i>Ang ákung panalángin
nga makapasar untà ku walà dungga,</i>
God did not answer my prayers to let me
pass. <b>2</b> @blessings, @benediction. <i>Pangayúa ang
panalángin sa Diyus,</i> Ask for God's blessings.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @pray. <b>2</b> [A; b] @bless.

<p><b>panama</b> <i>n</i> panama hat, made from select
leaves of buri palm. <i>v</i> [A1; b] wear a panama
hat.

<p><b>panamban</b> = <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TAMBAN</sc>.

<p><b>panamílit</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] @{bid farewell}. <i>n</i> bidding
farewell.

<p><b>panangítan</b> (from <i>sángit</i>) <i>n</i> general name for
biting eels with teeth that curl inwards,
snagging on the prey.

<p><b>panaptun</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SAPUT</sc>.

<p><b>pánas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @erase, @{make s.t. unclear}.
<i>Ang maung hitabù dílì mapánas sa ákung
panumdúman,</i> That incident cannot be erased
from my memory. <i>Panása ang sulat sa
blakburd,</i> Erase the writing on the black-*board.
<b>2</b> [B2] for s.t. engraved, s.t. raised
to become worn down and unclear. <i>Mupánas
kanang salapì ug isígi nímug bagnus,</i>
<pb n=1499>That fifty-cent piece will get worn down if
you keep rubbing it. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @erased, @{not
clear}. <b>2</b> @{worn down}.

<p><b>pánas<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PALANAS</sc>.

<p><b>panatiku</b> <i>n</i> @{religious fanatic}.

<p><b>panatismu</b> <i>n</i> @{religious fanaticism}.

<p><b>pánaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @travel, @journey. <b>2</b> regularly scheduled
trip. <i>v</i> [A; b5c] make a travel or journey.
<i>Layù kaáyung dápit ang ámung gipánaw
(gipanáwan),</i> We traveled to a place far
away. <b>&mdash; sa láing kalibútan</b> [A23] @die, pass
away into the other world. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A12]
go to a place regularly.

<p><b>panay</b> <i>n</i> @{earthenware vessel}, usually hemispherical
but shallow, used to hold liquids.

<p><b>pandak</b> <i>a</i> @{short and stout}. <i>v</i> [B] be short and
stout. <i>Mupandak ku ánang tabása,</i> I'll look
short and stout in that cut.

<p><b>pandan</b> = <sc>PANGDAN</sc>.

<p><b>pandanggu</b> <i>n</i> name of a folk dance. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i>
like the Fandango.

<p><b>panday</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] <b>1</b> @forge. <i>Walu ka ispáda
ang íyang gipanday,</i> He forged eight swords.
<b>2</b> build s.t. from wood. <i>Kinsay namanday
(nagpanday) sa inyung balay?</i> Who made
your house? <b>3</b> @circumcise (colloquial). <i>Ang
mga Ilunggu hadluk kunu papanday,</i> They
say the Ilongos are afraid to get circumcised.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @blacksmith. <b>2</b> @carpenter. <b>&mdash; (sa)
pandaut, dáut</b> inept in carpentry or blacksmithing.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{blacksmith shop}. <b>2</b> <b>bátà
pa ang -an</b> be early in one's child-bearing
years (lit. the blacksmith shop is still young&mdash;humorous).
<i>Sayung sundan ang kamanghúran
kay bátà pa ang pandayan,</i> They'll
soon have another baby after this one because
the baby-factory is still productive.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> occupation of blacksmithing or carpentry.

<p><b>pandíta</b> <i>n</i> @{muslim preacher}. <i>v</i> [B5; a] become
a muslim preacher.

<p><b>pandul</b> = <sc>PANGDUL</sc>.

<p><b>pandung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. held over the head as protection.
<b>2</b> reflector of a pressurized kerosene
lantern. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] cover the head, esp.
to protect it. <i>Karun dílì na kinahanglang
magpandung sa simbahan,</i> Now it is no
longer necessary to cover the head in
church. <i>Pandúngi nang bátà kay náay ulan,</i>
Cover the child's head because it's raining.
<b>2</b> [A12; a] attach, make into a lantern reflector.

<p><b>pang-</b> for forms beginning with <i>pang-</i> see also
<sc>K-</sc>, and initial vowel.

<p><b>panga</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{forked stick}. <b>2</b> forked handle of a
slingshot. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make, attach a
forked handle of a slingshot. <b>pang-an</b> <i>n</i> having
an extra finger branching from the side
<pb n=1500>of the hand.

<p><b>pangadyì</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] @pray. <i>Átung pangadyíun
ang Santus nga Rusaryu,</i> Let us pray the
Holy Rosary. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of praying. <b>2</b> period
of nine days in which the novena is said.
<b>-un</b>, <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> @prayers.

<p><b>pangag</b> <i>a</i> lacking one or a few teeth. <i>Pangag
nga sudlay,</i> A comb with teeth missing. <b>(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [AB12; b] knock out, lose teeth. <i>Makapángag
kining anagúnang gáhì,</i> This hard corn
can make you lose your teeth. <b>-un(->)</b> a
lacking teeth.

<p><b>pangaghu</b> <i>n</i> @{sigh noisily}. <i>v</i> [A; c] sigh with
strong aspiration. <i>Nangaghu siya sa kakápuy,</i>
He went 'whew' because he was exhausted.

<p><b>pangágud</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAGUD</sc>.

<p><b>pangáhas</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KÁHAS</sc>.

<p><b>pangalíya</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] cry out in supplication.
<i>Pangaliyáhan ta ang Makagagáhum básin pa
ug pamatíun ta,</i> Let us implore the Almighty
to hear us. <i>n</i> @supplication. <b>&mdash; panalángin</b> @invocation
offered at the beginning of a religious
service.

<p><b>pangalwan</b> = <sc>PANGHALWAN</sc>.

<p><b>pangalyúpu</b>, <b>pangalyúpù</b> = <sc>PANGILYÚPÙ</sc>.

<p><b>pangampis</b> <i>n</i> saddle feathers of roosters.

<p><b>pangamúyù</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> @beg, @{pray for} with
humility. <b>2</b> @ponder, @meditate. <i>Gipangamuyúan
ku ang pagkamatay sa átung Ginúu,</i> I
am reflecting on our Savior's death. <i>n</i> humble
plea, prayer.

<p><b>pangan</b>, <b>pángan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fresh water scavenger
fish.

<p><b>pang-an</b> <i>a</i> @expert, @experienced and @practiced.
<i>Pang-an nga abugádu,</i> An highly experienced
lawyer. <i>v</i> [B1256] become outstanding
in s.t. <i>Napang-an ra giyud siya sa nátad sa
áwit,</i> He became an outstanding singer.

<p><b>*pangandak</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ANDAK</sc>.

<p><b>panganduy</b> <i>n</i> @{great desire}, @craving. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
crave, desire s.t. very much. <i>Nanganduy ang
balbal ug dugù,</i> The vampire craves blood.
<i>Ayaw pangandúya (ipanganduy) ang kinabúhing
harúhay,</i> Don't wish for an easy life.

<p><b>panganti</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] wish for s.t. to happen.
<i>Nanganti siyang manimalus sa nagpatay sa
íyang amahan,</i> He cried out for revenge on
his father's killer. <i>Kamatáyun ray ákung gipanganti,</i>
I wish only for death. <i>n</i> wish. <i>Káwang
lang ang tanan mung panganti kun dì
ka mulíhuk,</i> It is no use wishing if you do
not act as well. <b>pangantihan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to make
a wish on. <i>Singsing pangantihan,</i> Wishing
ring.

<p><b>pangánud</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÁNUD</sc>.

<p><b>pangapang</b>, <b>pangápang</b> <i>v</i> [A2S3P; b6] for
leaves to become lush and vigorous in
<pb n=1501>growth. <i>Mipangápang (nangápang) ang mga
tanum sa pag-uwan,</i> The plants grew lots of
leaves when it rained. <i>a</i> growing lush and
vigorous leaves.

<p><b>pangarmin</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KARMIN</sc>.

<p><b>pangáwan</b> = <sc>PANGHALWAN</sc>.

<p><b>pangáyam</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÁYAM</sc>.

<p><b>pangáyaw</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] go to another place to
do or get s.t. <i>Túa sila sa Lilúan mangáyaw
ug pananggì,</i> They went to Liloan to help
with the corn harvest. <i>Ipangáyaw nátù ning
banig sa Manílà,</i> Let's sell the mats in Manila.
<i>n</i> persons coming from other places. <i>Nía
sila kay mga pangáyaw sa súgal dinhi,</i> They
came here to do some gambling.

<p><b>pangdan</b> <i>n</i> @pandanus, any of the plants of the
genus <b><i>Pandanus</i></b>, esp. <b><i>tectorius</i></b>. <b>&mdash; nga humut,
tsína</b> a small species with fragrant
leaves, used to line the bottom of containers
for cooking rice, grown as ornamental: <b><i>Pandanus
odoratissimus</i></b>.

<p><b>pangdul</b> <i>v</i> [B12; b8] <b>1</b> stub one's toe. <i>Pagtan-aw
sa ímung laktan arun dílì ka mapangdul,</i>
Look where you're going so you don't
stub your toes. <b>2</b> @mispronounce a word in
speech due to haste or difficulty in speaking.
<i>Basta magpaspas tag sulti mapangdul
usáhay ta,</i> We are bound to mispronounce
once in a while if we speak fast. <b>pangdulpangdul</b>
<i>v</i> [B145] <b>1</b> keep stubbing the toes.
<b>2</b> be hard up financially. <i>Nagkapangdulpangdul
na sila nga wà na ang ílang amahan,</i>
They are in bad financial straits now that
their father is dead. <i>a</i> hard up financially.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @obstacle.

<p><b>panggà</b> = <sc>PALANGGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>panggal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fish or crab trap, made of
thin woven bamboo, rounded in form, with
a hole in the top to afford easy entry but
no exit. <b>2</b> a woven container shaped like
the fish trap to hold chickens. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12]
make a <i>panggal</i>. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] catch fish or
crabs with a <i>panggal</i>. <b>3</b> [c] put in a <i>panggal</i>-shaped
basket. paN- <i>v</i> [A2] go fishing with
a <i>panggal</i> trap. <i>n</i> action of fishing with a
<i>panggal</i>.

<p><b>panggalatuk</b> <i>n</i> the language of Pangasinan.

<p><b>panggasininsi</b> <i>n</i> people from Pangasinan.

<p><b>panggaw</b> = <sc>PANGGAL</sc>.

<p><b>panggi-</b> <b>1</b> prefix added to almost all verb
bases to form verbs which refer to an action
carried out by more than one person. (See
<i>manggi-</i> for illustrations of the tense forms
of the active voice.) This affix is productive
in Leyte and in other regions, but elsewhere
almost unknown. <i>Ayaw mu panggiáway,</i>
Don't fight among yourselves. <b>2</b> dead prefix
added to a few roots with no plural meaning.
<pb n=1502><i>Ayaw panggilábut sa ílang mga prublíma,</i>
Don't mix into their problems.

<p><b>panggus</b> <i>n</i> small @abrasion. <i>v</i> [B126] be @chafed.
<i>Napanggus ákung túhud kay nadam-ag
ku,</i> I scraped my knee because I stumbled.

<p><b>pangguun</b> <i>n</i> ornamental shrub with thin linear
leaves, bearing yellow, bell-shaped flowers:
<b><i>Thevetia peruviana</i></b>.

<p><b>panghak</b> a @{smelling bad} as, for example, salted
fish in an advanced stage of fermentation
or clothes wet with urine that weren't rinsed
out. <i>Panghak na ning ginamúsa. Dì na
maáyung kan-un,</i> This salted fish smells awful
and is unfit for human consumption. v
[B1; a12] be, become @{bad-smelling}.

<p><b>panghaw</b> <i>n</i> @chimney. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put a chimney
s.w.

<p><b>panghit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b1] @{take a bite}. <i>Gipanghítan
ni Bíbi ang ákung kindi,</i> Baby took a bite
of my candy. <b>2</b> [A; a2] snap at, bite with
force. <i>Mamanghit nang irúa,</i> That dog snaps.

<p><b>panghupaw</b> <i>n</i> sigh without much noise. <i>v</i> [A; b3]
heave a sigh. <i>Nanghupaw kug dakù dihang
nakit-an ang ákung brilyanti,</i> I heaved
a big sigh of relief when my diamond was
found.

<p><b>pangilába</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KILÁBA</sc>.

<p><b>pangílin</b> <i>n</i> @fiesta, the annual celebration in
honor of a patron saint. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] attend a
fiesta. <b>2</b> [A13] hold a fiesta. <i>Ángay silang
magpangílin,</i> They should celebrate the fiesta.
<b>mangingílin</b> <i>n</i> people who go to the
fiesta.

<p><b>pangilyúpù</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] @{ask for}, @pray with
humility. <i>Mangilyúpù ku ug diyútay nga hinábang
sa mayur,</i> I entreated the mayor to
grant a little help. <i>n</i> @entreaty, @prayer. <b>ma-un</b>
<i>a</i> self-effacingly humble. <i>Mapangilyupúun
siyang mihangyù,</i> He asked in an imploring,
humble tone.

<p><b>pangimbig</b> = <sc>PANGIMBID</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>KIMBID</sc>.

<p><b>pangimbísug</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] @strive, do one's
best. <i>Nangimbísug ku sa pagpangítà ug trabáhu,</i>
I am doing my best to find a job. <i>Sa
kapubri makapangimbísug ku sa ákung pag-iskuyla,</i>
I was so poor I had to struggle to
get through school. <i>n</i> action of striving.

<p><b>panginánu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @{care about} s.t., @{bother
about} s.t. <i>Wà lang manginánu si Isku kun
háin ang íyang asáwa,</i> Esko didn't care about
where his wife was. <i>Ngánung wà ninyu
panginanúhag pangítà ang mga papílis
nga nawálà?</i> Why didn't you bother looking
for the papers that you lost?

<p><b>pangindáhay</b> <i>n</i> wishful @longing, @desire. <i>v</i> [A2; b6c1]
dream of s.t. wishfully, long for
s.t., asking for it. <i>Kun magbulhut kag turútut
lukay mangindáhay kag sakit.[** ,]</i> If you
<pb n=1503>blow a horn made of coconut leaves, you
are asking to get sick. <i>Makapangindáhay giyud
ang kabus sa mga mahalung butang,</i> A
poor man can't help dreaming of luxurious
things. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> wishfully desirous.

<p><b>pangit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2b2] @bite, take a bite. <i>Mipangit
kug gamay sa íyang mansánas,</i> I took a
small bite off his apple. <i>Pangita ang tansan
sa butilya,</i> Bite off the bottle cap.

<p><b>pángit</b> <i>a</i> @ugly (slang). <i>Dílì angay magrayna.
Pángit ug hitsúra,</i> She's not fit to be a
queen. She's ugly. <i>v</i> [B2; a2] be ugly.

<p><b>pang-it</b> = <sc>PANGHIT</sc>.

<p><b>pangítà</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KÍTÀ</sc>.

<p><b>pangkà</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] @{bump against} s.t. <i>Mipangkà
aku kanímu,</i> I bumped against you. <i>Nagkapangkà
mi apan wà giyud ku makaila níya,</i>
We bumped against each other, but I
don't know her. <i>a</i> be in dire @{financial straits}.
<i>Pangkà na sila sukad mamatay ílang amahan,</i>
They are in bad straits since their father
died. <b>pangkàpangkà</b>, <b>pangkaay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A]
keep bumping against s.t. <b>2</b> [B1] go from
place to place to get s.t. one vitally needs.
<i>Nagkapangkàpangkà akug panghulam,</i> I
went from place to place trying to borrow
money. <b>3</b> [B1] be in dire poverty. <i>Napangkàpangkà
ku kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> I was in
desperate financial straits because I had no
job.

<p><b>pangkay</b> <i>n</i> child's word for the female genitalia.

<p><b>pangkì</b> = <sc>PULANGKÌ</sc>.

<p><b>pangkù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{knot the hair}. <i>Pangkúa (ipangkù)
lang ang ímung buhuk,</i> Tie your
hair in a knot. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> hair tied in a knot.

<p><b>pangkù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. large sailing ship used by
Muslims. <i>v</i> [A1; ac] ride on a pangkù.

<p><b>pangkug</b> <i>n</i> single @step, @stair. <i>Walu ka pangkug
ang ámung hagdánan,</i> Our stairway has eight
steps. <i>v</i> [A; c] lay steps in place.

<p><b>pangkul</b> <i>n</i> handle of a hand-powered corn or
rice mill.

<p><b>pangli</b>, <b>panglin</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] harvest root crops.
<i>Panglíhun na nátù ang gábi,</i> We'll harvest
the taro. <i>n</i> dull knife, bar, or stick, pointed
on one end, used to gather root crops.

<p><b>pangpang</b> <i>n</i> @cliff. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] become a cliff,
make a cliff. <i>Mupangpang (mapangpang)
nang lugára ug sigíhag kúhà ang yútà,</i> The
place will become a cliff if they continue
taking soil away. <b>-anun</b> <i>a</i> @{cliff dwellers}. <b>hiN-un(->)</b>
<i>n</i> a section of road cut into a side of
a steep slope. <i>Paghínay ug maníhu kay nía
ta sa himangpangun,</i> Drive slow because we
are at the place where the road has been cut
into the hillside. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cliffs. <b>2</b> the province
Pampanga, its people, and its language.
<pb n=1504><b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> characterized by having cliffs.
<i>Pangpangung baybáyun</i>, Shore with cliffs
going to the sea.

<p><b>pangsud</b> <i>n</i> offensive odor in the armpits. <i>v</i>
[B12] have bad-smelling armpits.

<p><b>pangsut</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>PANGSUD</sc>. <b>2</b> smelling like urine.
<i>Pangsut kaáyu ka kay dì ka man manghúgas
inig humag pangíhì,</i> You smell because you
don't wash yourself after you urinate. v [B; b6]
have a <i>pangsut</i> smell.

<p><b>pángu</b>, <b>pangug</b> <i>a</i> @stupid, tending to do the
wrong thing unthinkingly. <i>Ang pangug giapil
ang baskit paglábay sa basúra,</i> The idiot
threw the basket away with the garbage. <i>v</i>
[B2; b6] be somewhat stupid. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> a stupid
sort.

<p><b>pangulílang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ULÍLANG</sc>.

<p><b>pangulípas</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KULÍPAS</sc>.

<p><b>pangunggu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A23] try to pull a fast one.
<i>Dílì ni diyamanti uy. Lubut ni sa básu. Nangunggu
sad ka dà,</i> This is no diamond. It's
a glass. You're trying to pull a fast one on
me. <i>Tagdiyis ra ni uy! Nangunggu sad,</i>
What do you mean, it's only worth ten
cents. Are you trying to be funny?

<p><b>pangunggu<sub>2, 3</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KALUNGGU</sc>, <sc>UNGGU</sc>.

<p><b>pángus</b> = <sc>PANGGUS</sc>.

<p><b>pang-us</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] chew on a stalk, or stick.
<i>Mupang-us kag tubu?</i> Will you chew sugar
cane stalk? <i>Ayaw pang-úsa ang ímung lápis,</i>
Don't chew on your pencil! <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> bagasse,
the pulp of sugar cane.

<p><b>pangusmu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KUSMU</sc>.

<p><b>pangut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] bite, chew on s.t. <i>Pangtun
sa bábuy ang íyang higut,</i> The pig will chew
on the rope.

<p><b>pangyas</b> = <sc>ÍLAS</sc>.

<p><b>pangyáwan</b> <i>n</i> climbing fleshy vine of thickets,
the bitter sap of which has wide medicinal
application; used as an aborticide: Tinospora
rumphii. <b>pait pa sa &mdash;</b> more bitter
than the <i>pangyáwan</i>. <i>Haskang kasabáa, pait
pa sa pangyáwan!</i> What a cussing out. It
was harder to take than the <i>pangyáwan</i>.

<p><b>panid<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @arrange, do s.t. in the proper
order. <i>Siyay mupanid sa mga insayklupidiya,</i>
She will arrange the encyclopedia in
alphabetical order. <i>Panira ug kúhà, ayawg
laktawlaktawa,</i> Take it in order. Don't skip
around.

<p><b>panid<sub>2</sub></b>, <b>pánid</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @panel, @sheet. <i>Duha ka pánid
playwud,</i> Two panels of plywood. <b>2</b>
@page. <b>3</b> @section in a publication. <i>Pánid sa bálak
sa Bisayà,</i> The poetry section in Bisaya.
<i>v</i> [A; a12] cut into panels, small sheets.

<p><b>pánig</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> side. <i>Pánig sa wala,</i> On the left
side. <b>2</b> @{group faction}. <i>Mitapun siya sa ámung
pánid,</i> He joined our group. <i>v</i> [A23P; b(1)]
<pb n=1505>take s.o.'s side. <i>Ug kasab-an ang anak,
mupánig dáyun ang inahan,</i> If they scold
the child, the mother takes his side right
away. <i>Panígan ta ang mga dinaugdáug,</i> Let
us take the side of the oppressed.

<p><b>paníga</b> <i>n</i> a unit of dry measurement containing
one-third of a cavan (eight gantas and
one liter). <i>v</i> [a12] measured by <i>paníga</i>'s.
<i>Panigáha lang pagtakus ang humay,</i> Measure
the rice by the <i>paníga</i>.

<p><b>panígù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÍGÙ</sc>.

<p><b>pánil</b> <i>n</i> @{panel truck} or car, mostly the closed
type for delivering goods. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] use,
ride in a panel truck or car.

<p><b>paniN-</b> derivational verb forming prefix forming
verbs with a number of meanings or
nouns referring to the action of doing s.t. in
this way. Not a live prefix. <i>Makabungkag sa
panimúyù,</i> Can destroy one's family life.
<i>Ayaw paninágad sa mga tabì,</i> Don't pay attention
to the gossip.

<p><b>paningud</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINGUD</sc>.

<p><b>pánis</b> <i>see</i> <sc>BADLI PÁNIS</sc>.

<p><b>panit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tuna.

<p><b>pánit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @skin. <b>2</b> @peelings. <b>3</b> @bark. <b>4</b> @leather,
s.t. made of leather. <b>5</b> shell of a shrimp,
egg. <b>bukug ug &mdash;</b> @{skin and bones}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
skin, peel s.t. <i>Sayun ang ukban panítan,</i>
It is easy to peel a tangerine. <i>Paníti ang itlug,</i>
Take the shell off the egg. <b>1a</b> [B1256; b6]
for a barber to take too much hair off.
<i>Gipanítan ku sa barbíru,</i> The barber butchered
my hair. <b>2</b> beat s.o. in gambling. <i>Gipanítan
ku sa madyung gabíi,</i> I lost in mahjong
last night. <b>3</b> be trounced in a fight.
<b>(->) mu rag irug panit</b> miserable poor (like
a dog with no fur). <i>Kung wà tay kwarta mu
ra tag irug panit,</i> If we don't have money,
we are miserable. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @complexion. <i>Is-is
siyag pamánit,</i> She has smooth, white skin.

<p><b>pankik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pancake. <i>v</i> [A; a] make, have
pancakes.

<p><b>pankik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{pancake make-up}. <i>v</i> [A; b1] use
pancake make-up.

<p><b>pans</b> <i>n</i> @fans, usually of people in show business.

<p><b>páns</b> <i>n</i> @{facial cream} (so called from the brand
name Pond's).

<p><b>pansak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> drive or stuff s.t. forcibly
into s.t. <i>Ipansak ang sungsung sa bàbà sa butilya,</i>
Shove the cork into the mouth of the
bottle. <b>2</b> in basketball, put the ball into the
ring from above. <i>Basta taas ipansak lang ang
búla,</i> A tall player simply places the ball in
the ring.

<p><b>pansat</b> <i>n</i> @prawn. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] catch
prawns.

<p><b>pansayan</b> <i>n</i> @outhouse. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] make a
<pb n=1506>comfort room.

<p><b>pansi</b> <i>n</i> @{costume jewelry}.

<p><b>pansil</b> <i>n</i> place with rocks. <i>Didtu kami mamánà
sa pansil (kapansílan),</i> We went spear
fishing in the coral reefs. <i>a</i> @eroded. <i>v</i> [B]
become rocky, eroded. <i>Nagkapansil na ning
yutáa,</i> This land is becoming eroded. <b>-un(->)</b>
<i>a</i> @rocky. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> place where there are rocks.

<p><b>pansing<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3; b4] punch a hole into s.t.
<i>Gipansíngan na mig tíkit sa lantsa,</i> Our ferry
tickets have been punched. <i>n</i> punch to
make holes.

<p><b>pansing<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @punch in boxing. <b>&mdash; bag</b> <i>n</i> @{punching
bag}.

<p><b>pansir</b> <i>n</i> @{paper punch}.

<p><b>pansis</b> <i>n</i> @punches, thrusting blows with a fist.

<p><b>pansit</b> <i>n</i> dish of míki noodles. <b>&mdash; kantun</b> k.o.
<i>pansit</i> with crisp noodles. <b>&mdash; luglug</b> <i>pansit</i> in
broth. <i>v</i> [A; a] have, make <i>pansit</i>. <i>Magpansit
ta karung panihápun,</i> We'll have pansit
for supper. <b>-an(->)</b>, <b>-iríya</b>, <b>-irya</b> <i>n</i> an eatery
specializing in short order Chinese dishes.

<p><b>pansiyadur</b> <i>n</i> in a sawmill, the person who
spots planks to edge. <i>v</i> [B456] be a spotter.

<p><b>pansu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> punch to make holes. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
<b>1</b> punch a hole. <i>Pansúhan ku ning buklit arun
matuhúgan ug ríbun,</i> I'll punch holes in
the booklet so I can tie it with a ribbon. <b>2</b>
punch one's time in a Bundy clock.

<p><b>pansu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. thick unsweetened roll with a
crust.

<p><b>pansud</b> = <sc>PANGSUD</sc>.

<p><b>pansung</b> <i>a</i> for a nose to be flat and turned up
at the end. <i>v</i> [B12; a12] for the nose to flatten.
<i>Mapansung ang ilung basta iduut sa bildu,</i>
Your nose gets flattened and turned up
if you press it against the window pane.

<p><b>pansut<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>PANGSUD</sc>.

<p><b>pansut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pantsuit, a set of clothes for women
composed of a pair of long pants and
blouse of the same material. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
wear, make into a pantsuit.

<p><b>pantalan</b> <i>n</i> @wharf.

<p><b>pantalun</b> <i>n</i> @pants. <i>v</i> [A13; a] wear, make into
long pants. <i>Ang bátà nga ringbírir sa kasal
nagpantalun ug itum,</i> The ring bearer in
the wedding wore long black pants. <b>&mdash; dilargu</b>
<i>n</i> @{long pants}. <b>&mdash; dipuntu</b> <i>n</i> @{short pants}.

<p><b>pantalya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{shade reflector} put over a lamp
to diffuse light. <b>2</b> @facade, cover for s.t. <i>Ang
nigusyung bay-ansil pantalya sa íyang ismagling,</i>
His buying and selling business is just
a facade for his smuggling. <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> put a
reflector on a lamp. <b>2</b> put up a false front,
cover. <i>Dì na mapantalyahan ang kahimtang
sa íyang láwas,</i> She can't hide it that she's
pregnant any longer. <b>3</b> [c] show, display.
<i>Ayaw ipantalya kanang law-ay nga mga ritrátu,</i>
<pb n=1507>Don't display those dirty pictures in
public.

<p><b>pantasma</b> <i>n</i> terrifying @apparition.

<p><b>pantat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. fresh water catfish. <b>2</b> = <sc>PANSAT</sc>.

<p><b>pantaw</b> <i>n</i> @porch which may or may not be
roofed and/or walled. Usually in back of a
house. <i>v</i> [A3; b6] make, add a porch. <b>-an</b>
<i>n</i> = <sc>PANTAW</sc>.

<p><b>pantaypantay</b> <i>a</i> more or less equal in ability
(slang). <i>Pantaypantay ra mi sa klási,</i> We
have about the same standing in class.

<p><b>panti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @panty, @briefs. <i>v</i> [A; b1] wear, make
into a panty.

<p><b>panti<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. nylon fishing net for deep water.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go fishing with this
k.o. net.

<p><b>pantíhan</b> <i>n</i> @{manta rays}, esp. <b><i>Mobula eregoodoo-tenkee</i></b>.

<p><b>pantilit</b> <i>n</i> @pantalettes, drawers edged with
lace, sticking out from under a skirt. <i>v</i> [A; c]
wear pantalettes.

<p><b>panting</b> <i>n</i> @palace, @castle.

<p><b>pantiyun</b> <i>n</i> grave consisting of a rectangular
concrete box raised above the ground, or
building used as a @tomb. <i>v</i> [B; b6] make a
@tomb.

<p><b>pants</b> <i>n</i> @punch, beverage consisting of a mixture
of water and sweet drinks often with
liquor. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make, have punch.

<p><b>pantsak</b> = <sc>PANSAK</sc>.

<p><b>pantug</b> <i>n</i> @{urinary bladder} of man and animals.

<p><b>pantuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] knock s.t. against s.t. else.
<i>Ipantuk ang pul-an sa simintu arun matáup
ang gítung,</i> Bang the handle on the cement
so that the tang will go all the way in.

<p><b>pantun</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @discipline, @{correct s.o.}
to be good. <i>Pantúna ang mga bátà nga gagmay
pa,</i> Discipline children while they are
young. <b>2</b> @{train s.o.} or s.t. to do s.t. <i>Si Huwan
ang mupantun sa gamayng piríku pagsulti,</i>
Juan will train the young parrot to
talk. <b>3</b> @{form s.t.} in a desired shape. <i>Gipantun
nákù ang sanga sa tiradur,</i> I bent the
slingshot at the fork to shape it properly. a
amenable to formation. <i>Pantun ang íyang
buhuk. Sayung sudláyun,</i> His hair is not unruly.
It is easy to comb.

<p><b>pantuplas</b> <i>n</i> pantofles, k.o. slippers for out-*door
wear with a solid toe and hard sole. <i>v</i>
[A; b6] wear pantofles.

<p><b>panuku</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TUKU</sc>.

<p><b>panukus</b> = <sc>PANUKLUS</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TUKLUS</sc>.

<p><b>panulindaw</b> = <sc>TULINDAW</sc>.

<p><b>panúlung</b> (from <i>dúlung</i>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{bow of ship}. <b>2</b>
fascia board providing facing for the rafters
underneath the eaves of a roof.

<p><b>panumbálay</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*TUNGBÁLAY</sc>.

<pb n=1508>

<p><b>panumbaling</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TUMBÁLING</sc>.

<p><b>panun</b> <i>n</i> @{large group} of people, birds, planes,
or other animals. <i>v</i> [AC; c1] go in a group.
<i>Ngánung nagpanun kamug anhi?</i> Why have
you come in a group? <b>(<-)</b> = <sc>PANUN</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>panúni</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>PANGHÚNI</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>HÚNI</sc>.

<p><b>panurámik</b> <i>n</i> wide movie projection. <b>&mdash; bilt</b> <i>n</i>
webbed belt with a metal buckle.

<p><b>panurúsu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TRÚSU</sc>.

<p><b>pan-us</b> <i>a</i> for food, wash, or the body to get a
rancid smell from having been wet and not
allowed to dry out well. <i>Pan-us ang kík nímu,</i>
Your cake is spoiled with a sour smell.
<i>v</i> [B] get spoiled, sour in smell.

<p><b>panut</b> <i>a</i> @bald-headed.

<p><b>panutsa</b> <i>n</i> penuche, a k.o. fudge made of unrefined
sugar, cream, and nuts. <i>v</i> [A; a]
make penuche.

<p><b>panuylu</b> <i>n</i> a @kerchief consisting of a square
cloth folded triangularly and worn over the
neck like a collar. <i>v</i> [A; a] use, make into a
<i>panuylu</i>.

<p><b>panuyù</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÚYÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>panyas</b> = <sc>ÍLAS</sc>.

<p><b>panyáwan</b> = <sc>PANGYÁWAN</sc>.

<p><b>panyù</b> <i>n</i> @handkerchief. <i>v</i> [A; a] use, make
into a handkerchief.

<p><b>panyulítu</b> <i>n</i> @{small handkerchief}. <i>v</i> [A; a] use,
make a small handkerchief.

<p><b>panyulun</b> <i>n</i> @{square shawl} worn over the
shoulder folded into a triangle, larger than
the <i>panuylu</i>. <i>v</i> [A; c] use a <i>panyulun</i>.

<p><b>pápa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> father, term of address to one's father,
father-in-law, or godfather. <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
call s.o. pápa. <b>(->)</b> voc. <i>Short form</i>: <b>pa</b>.

<p><b>pápa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @Pope. <b>Santu &mdash;</b> = PÁPA<sub>2</sub>.

<p><b>pápà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] child's talk for eat. <i>Unsay ímung
papáun, gà?</i> What are you going to
eat, sweetheart?

<p><b>pàpà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> bite s.t. or grab it with the
teeth without tearing or wounding it. <i>Maáyu
ning irúa sa pangáyam. Dílì mupàpà sa
kuhà,</i> This is a good dog for hunting because
it just takes the game in its mouth
without tearing it. <b>1a</b> for a pig to chew on
s.t. without eating it. <i>Pàpáun sa anay ang íyang
pasawan ug dì dáyun mapasawan,</i> A
pig will chew at its trough if it is not fed on
time. <b>2</b> slurp up greedily, eat s.t. completely.
<i>Mipàpà ang kaláyu ug ubay-ubayng balay,</i>
The fire consumed quite a number of
houses.

<p><b>pàp[=á]</b> = <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pápal nunsiyu</b> <i>n</i> @{Papal Nuncio}.

<p><b>papan</b> <i>n</i> @{stone slab}.

<p><b>pápang</b> <i>n</i> address of respect for a father or
an old man closely related to one.

<p><b>pápap</b> <i>n</i> sound of a low-pitched car horn. <i>Wà
<pb n=1509>siya mudayun ug labang kay nakadungug
ug pápap,</i> She did not cross the street because
she heard a horn.

<p><b>pápas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @erase, @obliterate s.t. <i>Dílì siya
mapápas sa ákung hunàhúnà,</i> I cannot erase
her from my mind. <i>Ang ulan sa kadugáyan
makapápas sa mga kinulit sa lapida,</i> With
the passage of time the rain will obliterate
the engraving on the tombstone. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @eraser.
<b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> @erasure.

<p><b>pápay</b> <i>n</i> child's talk for snack. <i>Mukáun ug pápay
si Inday parísan ug pitsi,</i> Baby is going
to eat some snacks with her Pepsi.

<p><b>pap-ay</b> <i>n</i> hand in mahjong where only an <i>ay<sub>4</sub></i>
is needed to get mahjong. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] have
a <i>pap-ay</i> hand.

<p><b>papha</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] brush away dust or particles
from a surface with the open palm. <i>Papháa
ang mumhu,</i> Wipe away the bits of rice.
<b>2</b> [A; a12] @{fire s.o.} from a job. <i>Papháun ka
sa trabáhu ug dì ka magtárung,</i> You'll be
fired if you don't do your work right. <b>&mdash; sa
mapa</b> <i>v</i> [a12] annihilate a place. <i>Napapha
sa mápa ang Hirusíma,</i> Hiroshima was wiped
from the face of the earth. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A]
brush off dust from oneself. <i>Nagpamapha
siya kay giulmigas íyang karsúnis,</i> He keeps
brushing himself off because he got ants all
over his pants.

<p><b>papil</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @paper. <b>2</b> @role. <i>Dakù ang papil nga gidala
sa Amirika sa Asya,</i> America has a big
role in Asia. <b>súgù sa &mdash;</b> according to the
script. <b>2a</b> <b>basà ang &mdash;</b> lose one's good name,
reputation. <i>Mabasà átung papil ug sakpan
tang maníkas,</i> You will lose your reputation
if you are caught cheating. <b>3</b> paper in
a game of <i>pik</i> (hammer, paper, scissors). <b>&mdash;
intirmidiya</b> @{ruled pad} paper. <i>v</i> [A; a] make
into paper, use paper. <b>&mdash; dibangku</b> @{paper
money}. <b>&mdash; dihapun, hapun</b> thin, colored tissue
paper for wrapping, kites, lanterns, decorations,
and the like. <b>&mdash; dilíha</b> @sandpaper.
<b>di-</b> <i>a</i> strict, stickler for the rules. <i>Dì ka makadalìdálì
niánang tawhána. Dipapil kaáyu
nà,</i> You can't approach him easily just like
that. He is a stickler for proper rules.

<p><b>papílis</b> <i>n</i> @documents, @papers.

<p><b>papilíta</b> <i>n</i> small piece of paper bearing one's
record of birth issued by the civil registrar
for presentation to the priest during baptism.

<p><b>papilítus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a dose of powdered medicine
wrapped in a piece of paper. <b>2</b> a piece of
paper on which an <i>urasiyun</i> has been written.

<p><b>papkurn</b> <i>n</i> @popcorn. <i>v</i> [A; a] make popcorn.

<p><b>paplin</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. coarse cotton cloth, plain
woven, sometimes printed. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)]
<pb n=1510>wear a dress made of poplin cloth.

<p><b>paprika</b> <i>n</i> @paprika.

<p><b>papsikul</b> <i>n</i> @popsicle. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a popsicle.

<p><b>pár</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @pair of s.t. of the same kind. <i>Mupalit
kug tulu ka pár tsinílas,</i> I'll buy three
pairs of slippers. <b>2</b> bottle of liquor and a
bottle of soft drink which will be mixed
together. <b>3</b> being of the same color or cut.
<i>Pár silag kurbáta, púlus pula,</i> They have
matching ties, both red. <i>v</i> [C; ac] <b>1</b> wear
s.t. which is of the same color or cut as s.o.
else's. <i>Dì ku mupár nímug sinínà,</i> I don't
want to wear a dress the same style as yours.
<b>2</b> be a pair, match. <i>Maáyung párun ang ítik
arun musánay,</i> It would be good to make it
a pair of ducks so they can multiply. <i>Kining
bága mauy ipár sa ímung sapátus,</i> This is
the bag you should match your shoes with.
<b>parpár</b> <i>n</i> a hand in mahjong containing two
pairs. <i>v</i> [A; c1] have two pairs, either one
of which may allow one to go mahjong.

<p><b>para</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] @{result in}. <i>Ug unsay ímung parahan,
wà kuy lábut,</i> Whatever happens to
you, I won't be responsible. <i>Unsa may giparahan
sa inyung nigusyu?</i> What happened
in the end to your business venture? <i>n</i>
chance of winning or succeeding. <i>May parahan
kahà ning átung tím?</i> Think our team
has a chance of winning?

<p><b>pára<sub>1</sub></b> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash; sa</b>, [<i>dat.</i>] for. <b>1a</b> for the sake or
benefit of. <i>Nagdala kug isdà pára nímu,</i> I
brought some fish for you. <b>1b</b> in the direction
of. <i>Mau ba ning barkúha pára sa Manílà?</i>
Is this the boat for Manila? <b>1c</b> in the
estimation of. <i>Pára nákù paríha ra ang duha,</i>
For me, it's all the same. <b>1d</b> as change for
money. <i>Dúna ka bay sinsíyu pára sa diyis
písus?</i> Do you have change for ten pesos?
<b>1e</b> with an end to. <i>Gáwig Isu Tayudyan pára
sa mas daghang maáni,</i> Use Esso Thiodian
for a better harvest. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; [<i>verb</i>]</b> for the purpose
of, in order to, so that. <i>Ímung sigáhan
pára malútù dáyun,</i> Turn the heat up so
that it will get done right away. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; [<i>noun
referring to action</i>]</b> to be used in [doing].
<i>Ákung gawíun ning kardburd pára paypay,</i>
I will use the cardboard for a fan. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; alas</b>
([so-and-so] many minutes) before [such-and-such
an hour]. <i>Karun bayinti minútus
pára alas singku,</i> It is now twenty minutes
to five o'clock. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; [<i>noun</i>]</b> all it is is [noun]
and yet.... <i>Pára dalugdug ug unyà matarant&acaron;r
ka dáyun,</i> All it is is thunder and you
get wild with fright. <b>4a</b> just because [so-and-so]
is the case. <i>Pára gamayng sayup ímung
papahawáun dáyun?</i> For such a small
mistake you want to fire him right away?
<b>4b</b> [such-and-such] a bad thing is nothing.
<pb n=1511><i>Maáyu siyag láwas. Pára nawung ray dipirinsiya,</i>
She has a nice body. The only thing
wrong with her is her face.

<p><b>pára<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] hail a vehicle or ask the
driver to stop. <i>Pára bay,</i> Stop, driver! <i>Paráha
ang bús kay musakay ku,</i> Stop the bus
because I want to get on. <b>2</b> [A123P; c1]
discontinue a course of action. <i>Dílì siya makapára
sa íyang pag-inum,</i> He can't stop his
drinking. <i>Paráhun (ipára) ang átung pinsiyun
ug mamatay na aku,</i> If I die my pension
will be cut off. <b>3</b> [A23; b5] hesitate
doing s.t. (usually in negative sentences).
<i>Dílì mupára ug súkul nang batáa bísag kinsa,</i>
That child doesn't hesitate to fight back,
no matter who it is. <i>Wà kuy gipára (giparáhan)
sa mga kan-unun,</i> There is no food I
hesitate to eat. <b>-da<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> two-wheeled, horse-drawn
rig that plies the streets and takes up
to four passengers who sit facing each other.
<i>v</i> [A; c] park a vehicle in a certain place.
<i>Ang íyang giparadáhan gidilì,</i> He parked in
a no-parking zone. <b>pamaráda</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)]
operate the <i>paráda</i>. <i>n</i> rig-driving occupation.
<b>paradahan</b> <i>n</i> vehicle terminal. <b>-dista</b> <i>n</i> one
who drives a <i>paráda</i>. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be in
this occupation.

<p><b>parabir &mdash;</b> [<i>verb</i>] before [doing]. <i>Parabir ka
mukáun panghunaw úsà,</i> Before you eat
wash your hands first. <i>Parabir siya milákaw
(mulakaw) nagbílin ug kwarta,</i> He left some
money before he went out.

<p><b>parabula</b> <i>n</i> @parable. <i>Ang parabula sa parasan,</i>
The parable of the vineyard.

<p><b>paráda<sub>1</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>PÁRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>paráda<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @parade. <i>v</i> [A1; c] <b>1</b> have a parade.
<b>2</b> display s.t. before the public. <i>Ayaw iparáda
ang gisiun nímung sinínà,</i> Don't parade
around in your torn shirt.

<p><b>paráda<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> @bet involving a large amount of
money. <i>v</i> [A; c] place a bet of major size.

<p><b>paradista</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PÁRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>paradur</b> = <sc>APARADUR</sc>.

<p><b>paragátus</b> <i>n</i> @slippers made of braided abaca.
<i>v</i> [A; a] wear, make this sort of slipper.

<p><b>paragáyu</b> = <sc>KALÍPAY</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>paragparag</b> <i>a</i> @tottering. <i>v</i> [B; c1] walk unsteadily,
zigzagging. <i>Nagparagparag ang hubug
nga naglakaw sa karsáda,</i> The drunkard
is staggering down the street.

<p><b>paragù</b> = <sc>PAGÙ</sc>.

<p><b>paragwa</b> <i>n</i> @forge, place or furnace where
metals which are to be worked are heated.

<p><b>paraísu</b> <i>n</i> @paradise.

<p><b>parak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> counter for things that come in
large lumps. <i>Dakung parak nga pagkababáyi,</i>
A huge hulk of a woman. <i>Mupalit kug
bibingkang duha ka parak ug kalamayng usa
<pb n=1512>ka parak,</i> I will buy two rice cakes and one
piece of sugar candy. a being fat and large.
<i>Parak siyag nawung,</i> She has a fat and round
face. <i>Antaw kaáyu ang parak ánang nagbáting
siyut,</i> You can clearly see the bulges in
the genital region on that girl wearing a
bathing suit. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B2S5] get large and
round. <i>Mipárak (napárak) na ang íyang nawung
pagkináun ug tambuk,</i> His face got
fat and round because he kept eating fat.
<b>-in-</b> <i>v</i> [c1] [do] by the piece.

<p><b>parak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @cop (slang).

<p><b>parakayda</b> <i>n</i> @parachute. <i>v</i> [A; ac] use a parachute.

<p><b>parakul</b> = <sc>PALÁKUL</sc>.

<p><b>parakyut</b> = <sc>PARAKAYDA</sc>. <b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> @paratrooper.
<i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a paratrooper.

<p><b>paraláyis</b> <i>v</i> [B12] be, become @paralyzed.

<p><b>paralisar</b> <i>v</i> [B16; c1] @paralyze, @immobilize
activities. <i>Maparalisar ang trabábu kun madáut
ang makina,</i> The work will be paralyzed
if the machine breaks down. <i>Paralisahun
(iparalisar) ang nigusyu sa mga impliyádu
nga nagwilga,</i> The business will be paralyzed
by the employees who are on strike. paralisádu
a paralyzed.

<p><b>paralísis</b> <i>n</i> @paralysis. <i>v</i> [B126; a4] become a
paralytic, paralyzed. <i>Dúgay na siyang naparalísis,</i>
He has been a paralytic for a long
time. <i>Dì na siya makalakaw kay giparalísis,</i>
He can't walk because he is paralyzed.

<p><b>paralitiku</b> <i>n</i> @paralytic. <i>v</i> [B126; a4] be a
paralytic.

<p><b>párang</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] pair off with s.o. in a contest,
fight, dance, or anything else where
people oppose one another. <i>Mupárang kag
sinumbagay níya?</i> Do you want to be his
opponent in boxing? N<i>agkapárang giyud
ang duha sa tabiay,</i> The two gossips made a
pair. <i>Nindut silang tan-áwun ug parángun
sa kuratsa,</i> They look nice when they dance
the curacha together. <i>Kinsa may ímung ipárang
sa ákung manuk,[**should be ?]</i> Who are you going to
put up against my protege? <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one's opponent
in s.t. or dance partner. <i>Kinsay
ímung kapárang sa ahidris,[**should be ?]</i> Who was your
opponent in the game of chess?

<p><b>parapara</b> <i>n</i> @frills, @{lace trimmings}. <i>v</i> [c] put
frills or lace trimmings on a dress.

<p><b>parapin</b> <i>n</i> @paraffin. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] apply paraffin
to s.t.

<p><b>parapirnalya</b> <i>n</i> groups of things used for a
specific purpose: tools for a trade, items
worn with a uniform. <i>Hitsu ka na sa parapirnalya
sa ar-utísi?</i> Do you have all the
items for your ROTC uniform complete?

<p><b>parapu</b> <i>n</i> @paragraph.

<p><b>páras<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @grapes, @raisins. <i>v</i> [b6] make into a
<pb n=1513>vineyard. <i>Maáyu ning lugára parásan,</i> This
is a good place to plant grapes. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @raisin.
<b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @vineyard.

<p><b>páras<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] split a fish lengthwise to
dry it. <i>n</i> @{dried fish}. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>PÁRAS<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>parasparas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] do s.t. hurriedly, usually
with shoddy results. <i>Kun parasparasan
(parasparasun) mug lútù ang sud-an dì mulamì,</i>
If you cook food hurriedly, it won't
taste good.

<p><b>parasparas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> acting uncouthly without taking
time to think. <i>v</i> [AB; b5c] act or do s.t.
in a coarse way. <i>Ang bínu ang nakaparasparas
(nakapaparasparas) sa íyang linihukan,</i>
Alcohol made him rough in his behavior.
<i>Giparasparas níyag súgù ang mga kargadur,</i>
She ordered the porters around in a rough
and rapid way.

<p><b>parat</b>, <b>párat</b> <i>a</i> @salty. <i>v</i> [B; a2] be, become
salty. <i>Ayaw paráta ang sud-an,</i> Don't make
the food too salty. <b>(->) ang &mdash;</b> [A12] what
makes it bad, the thing that is wrong. <i>Ang
nakaparat nímu kay dílì ka mamínaw ug
tambag,</i> What's wrong with you is that you
don't listen to advice. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of eating
salty foods or making foods salty.

<p><b>paraw</b> <i>n</i> <i>a</i> large sailboat with two or more
masts, one rigged in the bow and one in the
stern.

<p><b>paráwu</b> <i>n</i> stiff triangular kerchief worn around
the shoulders as an accessory to the
mistísa dress. <i>v</i> [AN; a] wear a <i>paráwu</i>,
make into a paráwu.

<p><b>paray</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> truck with compartments used for
transporting pigs (so called from the name
of a pig merchant who used these trucks).
<b>2</b> any truck used as a bus for passengers. <i>v</i>
[A1; a12] ride on a truck, make into a
truck.

<p><b>paráyig</b> (from daláyig) <i>v</i> [A; b6] asking for
affection, usually by showing affection.
<i>Nagparáyig nang batáa maung gasígig hílak,</i>
That child is crying because he is asking for
attention. <i>Ákung giparaygan si Máma arun
paadtúun ku sa bayli,</i> I played up to Mother
so she would let me go to the dance. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; c] ask for s.t. in an endearing way.
<i>Mamaráyig aku níyag sapátus,</i> I'll ask her
for shoes in a sweet way. <i>Dúna kuy ipamaráyig
nímu, Pri. Ipasúd ring ákung umágad,</i>
I have a little favor to ask of you. Help my
son-in-law get into the company. <b>paraygun</b>
<i>a</i> @affectionate, demanding of affection. <i>Paraygun
kaáyu ang sinultihan sa mga Ilunggu,</i>
The Ilonggos speak in an affectionate tone
of voice. <i>v</i> [B2] be @affectionate, demanding
of affection. <i>Maparaygun ang bátà ug sigíhag
kúgus,</i> A child gets to be demanding if
<pb n=1514>you keep picking him up. <b>parayganay</b> <i>v</i> [C]
be affectionate with each other.

<p><b>pardnir</b> = <sc>PART</sc>.

<p><b>pardu</b> = <sc>PALDU</sc>.

<p><b>pardun</b> <i>n</i> @pardon granted to a convict. <i>v</i> [a12]
give or grant pardon to a convict.

<p><b>pári</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KUMPADRI</sc>. <b>(->)</b> term of address
to one's <i>kumpadri</i>. <b>2</b> term of address used
by men who are close friends. <i>v</i> [AC; a12]
call s.o. pari, be <i>kumpadri's</i>.

<p><b>párì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @priest. <b>2</b> @cop (slang). <b>3</b> <b>mi-/muguwà
ang &mdash;</b> for cuts to bleed. <i>Way kásung tadlása.
Wà muguwà ang párì,</i> That cut was nothing.
It did not bleed. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become
a @priest. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> group of @priests. <b>2</b> area
in the city of Cebu, so-called because during
the Spanish times it was inhabited by the
Spanish friars. <b>parìpárì</b> <i>n</i> person in the game
of <i>balaybálay</i> who acts as the go-between
between the opposing teams. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> being
like a priest.

<p><b>parid</b> = <sc>PARÁDA<sub>2</sub></sc>. <i>v</i> [A13] go s.w. in droves
as if on parade. <i>Nagparid ang mga táwu
nga nanagbù sa artista,</i> The people trooped
out to meet the actor. <i>Nagparid ang mga
hulmígas nga nanúguk sa kan-un,</i> The ants
swarmed over the food.

<p><b>parigla</b> <i>see</i> <sc>RIGLA</sc>.

<p><b>paríha</b> <i>a</i> @similar, @identical to another. <i>Sigi
lang, paríha ra nà,</i> It's all right, it makes no
difference. (It's all the same.) <i>Paríha kaáyu
ang nawung sa kalúha,</i> The twins look exactly
alike. <i>n</i> @pair. <i>Píla ka paríhang sapátus,[**should be ?]</i>
How many pairs of shoes? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B13C; ac]
be the same. <i>Maparíha kahà ang átung grádu,[**should be ?]</i>
Will our grades come out the same?
<i>Way makaparíha sa ímung kaáyu,</i> No one
could equal your goodness. <i>Nagkaparíha ang
ámung sinínà,</i> Our dresses happened to be
similar. <i>Ayaw kug iparíha nímung tabian,</i>
Don't say I'm like you, a gossip. <b>2</b> [AC; ac]
pair up with. <i>Akuy muparíha níya sa kuratsa,</i>
I will pair off with her in dancing the
curacha. <i>Nagkaparíha sila sa patigáyun,</i>
They teamed up in business. <i>Pariháun nátù
ang átung sunuy,</i> Let's pair off our cocks.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @partner. <b>Culu-</b>, <b>pari-</b> <i>a</i> somewhat similar.
<i>Puparíha (pariparíha) sa kang Risal ang
ímung sinudlayan,</i> The way you comb your
hair looks s.t. like Rizal.

<p><b>paríhas</b>, <b>paríhu</b> = <sc>PARÍHA</sc>, <i>a</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>paril</b> <i>n</i> tall stone or concrete wall enclosing
or at the edge of an area. <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> put a
stone or concrete wall around. <b>2</b> k.o. stone
fish corral in tidal flats in which fish are
trapped by the receding tide.

<p><b>parilya</b> <i>n</i> @grill bars for broiling. <i>v</i> [A; a] broil
on a grill.

<pb n=1515>

<p><b>parinhayit</b> <i>n</i> @Fahrenheit.

<p><b>parinti</b> = <sc>PARYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>páris</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pair. <i>Duha ka páris nga kapling,</i>
Two pairs of cuff links. <b>2</b> the other one of a
pair. <i>Háin man ang páris niíning sapátus,[**should be ?]</i>
Where is the other shoe of this pair of
shoes? <b>2a</b> the thing that matches s.t. else.
<i>Kining bága páris sa ákung bistídu,</i> This bag
is the one that matches my dress. <b>3</b> @partner
in doing s.t. <b>4</b> @spouse. <b>5</b> food or drink served
with s.t. else. <b>6</b> even in number. <i>Lúnis u páris
ba,[**should be ?]</i> Odd or even? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3SC; ac] pair
off, go with, match. <i>Nagpáris silang nanglákaw,</i>
They were walking in pairs. <i>Maáyu
untà ug makaparis kug kugihan,</i> It would
be good to get an industrious girl for a help-*mate.
<i>Ákung parísan ang barung Tagálug ug
karsúnis itum,</i> I'll match my barong with
black trousers. <b>2</b> [C13; c] eat or drink together
with s.t. else. <i>Mangga ang maáyung
ipáris sa budbud,</i> Mangoes go well with rice
sticks. <b>3</b> [B; c1] be even in number, [do]
by two's. <i>Ug mupáris mudaug ka. Akuy pildi,</i>
If it comes out even you win and I lose.
<b>parispáris</b> <i>v</i> [C; c1] be in several pairs. <i>Parisparísun
(iparispáris) sa Ginúu ang mga
maáyug batásan,</i> The Lord will pair good
people up with each other. <b>parisparis</b> <i>n</i> a
game of cards, usually of four players, each
dealt five cards. The players draw and discard
in turn with the object of getting three
pairs (where the last card drawn making
the third pair is not discarded). <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i>
@pair. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @partner. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> things that fit
together. <i>Parisun kaáyu silang duha,</i> They
are a good pair.

<p><b>parisíyu</b> <i>n</i> @pharisee (Biblical).

<p><b>parka</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wallings of a small boat made of
planking or sawali (<i>amákan</i>) waterproofed
with tar. <b>2</b> wooden siding added to the sides
of a boat to lend more freeboard. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
make or put walling on a small boat.

<p><b>parki</b> <i>n</i> @park.

<p><b>parking</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] park vehicles. <i>Dílì mahímung
iparking ang ímung kutsi dinhi,</i> You
may not park your car here. <b>nu &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> notice
of no parking. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> parking place.

<p><b>parliyamint</b>, <b>parliyamintu</b> <i>n</i> @parliament.

<p><b>parlur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{beauty parlor}. <b>2</b> refreshment parlor.
<i>v</i> [A1; b6] construct, make a beauty or
refreshment parlor.

<p><b>parmasya</b> <i>n</i> @drugstore. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] make a
drugstore. <b>parmasyutika</b> = <sc>PARMASYUTIKU</sc>
(female). <b>parmasyutiku</b> <i>n</i> @pharmacist. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
be a pharmacist.

<p><b>parnásu</b> <i>n</i> @Parnassus, the mountain sacred to
the Muses (literary). <i>Niadtung higayúna wà
pa siya mag-ampù sa Parnásu,</i> At that time
<pb n=1516>he had not begun writing poetry (worship
at Parnassus).

<p><b>parsíla</b> <i>n</i> parcel of land. <i>v</i> [A; a12] divide
land into parcels.

<p><b>parsir</b> = <sc>PURSIR</sc>.

<p><b>parsiyar</b> <i>v</i> [B] for eyesight to fail or be impaired.
<i>Na, ug muparsiyar ug súgud ang
átung mata, lisud na ta makabasa,</i> When
your eyesight starts to get impaired, you
can hardly read. <b>parsiyádu</b> <i>a</i> for the vision
to be weak.

<p><b>part</b> <i>n</i> term of address among men of the
same age, usually among friends. <i>Mangharána
ta unyang gabíi part,</i> Let's go serenading
tonight, partner.

<p><b>partayim</b> <i>a</i> @{part-time work}, working part-time.
<i>v</i> [A; b] @{work part-time}. <i>Nagpartayim
kug tyútur samtang nagmaistra,</i> I worked
part-time tutoring while I was teaching. <b>-ir</b>
<i>n</i> one who works part-time. <i>v</i> [B1456]
work as a part-timer.

<p><b>parti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @party, a social gathering. <i>v</i> [A; b]
have, throw a party. <i>Ámung gipartíhan ang
bag-ung nanggraduwar,</i> We held a party for
the new graduates. <b>&mdash; layin</b> <i>n</i> party line of a
telephone. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C; c] be on the same party
line. <b>2</b> [A12] get as one's party line. <b>partiparti</b>
<i>n</i> parties collectively, esp. dance parties.
<i>Túa siya kanúnay ug ása tung partiparti,</i>
Wherever there is a party you'll be
sure to see him. <i>Daghang partiparti sa Disimbri,</i>
There are lots of parties in December.

<p><b>parti<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> share of s.t. <i>Tagáan ta kag usa ka
parti,</i> I'll give you one share. <i>Kwarta parti,</i>
A quarter part. <b>2</b> part assigned to s.o. in a
play, program, and similar activity. <i>Unsay
ímung parti sa dráma?</i> What's your part in
the drama? <b>3</b> a specific part of a certain
location or place. <i>Háin kang parti sa Mindanaw
puyù?</i> In what part of Mindanao do
you live? <b>4</b> concerning about. Nangutána
siya parti sa nahitabù, He asked about
what happened. <i>Parti sa ímung anak ayaw
kabaláka,</i> Don't worry about your son. <i>v</i>
[A; c] <b>1</b> @{divide s.t.} <b>2</b> relay a message; report.
<i>Iparti ni nátù dáyun,</i> Let us report
this immediately. <b>-da<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @message, @report.
<b>-da dibawtismu</b> @{baptismal certificate}. <b>2</b>
share, part of s.t. divided. <i>v</i> = <sc>PARTI</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>partída<sub>1</sub></b> <i>see</i> <sc>PARTI<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>partída<sub>2</sub></b> (from parti<sub>2</sub>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.w., in a certain
part of some place. <i>Adtu ku maninda sa
partída sa Mindanaw,</i> I sell things in some
places in Mindanao. <b>2</b> place one goes outside
of the home on business. <b>3</b> amount
paid for goods bought wholesale or in big
quantities. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @migrate, @travel. <i>Gipartída
<pb n=1517>námù ang mga dagkung syudad sa
Urúpa,</i> We visited the big cities of Europe.
<b>2</b> [AN; c] @peddle. <i>Túa siya sa kabukíran
nagpartídag bulad,</i> She is in the mountains
peddling dried fish. <b>3</b> [AN; a] buy in great
quantities. <i>Nakapartída kug barátu kaáyung
isdà,</i> I managed to buy a big quantity of
fish cheaply. <b>3a</b> [c] @{sell wholesale}. <i>Íyang
ipartída pagbaligyà kay sámuk ug minudúhun,</i>
He will just sell it wholesale because
it is too much trouble to sell it in small
quantities.

<p><b>partída<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> advantage given in a game. <i>Dakù
ang partída nga ílang gihátag sa kaatbang,</i>
They gave their opponents a big advantage.
<b>2</b> in billiards or games of pool where dice
are thrown to give the player part of the
score, the points the player must make to
win in addition to the number rolled on the
dice. <b>2a</b> have made the requisite number of
points in billiards. <i>Makakuhir lang kug dus
puntus, partída na ku,</i> If I can get two
points, I win. <i>Dus puntus na lay ákung partída,</i>
I need only two points to win this
game. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] give an advantage to the
opponent in games, contests, etc. <i>Kun partidáhun
ku ning ákung manuk, musúkul ka?</i>
If I have my cock give you an advantage,
would you bet against it? <b>2</b> [A; a12] need
[so-and-so] many more points to win in
billiards.

<p><b>partidista</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PARTÍDU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>partídu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{political party}. <b>&mdash; Libiral</b> Liberal
Party. <b>&mdash; Nasyunalista</b> Nacionalista Party.
<b>partidista</b> <i>n</i> one engaged in partisan politics.
<i>v</i> [B12] get engaged in partisan politics.

<p><b>partídu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> person related to another, usually
said only of blood ties. <i>v</i> [B126C; b] be
related by blood, said occasionally of relations
by affinity. <i>Mapartídu na ta inigkaminyù
ninyung manang,</i> We will be relatives
if you marry my sister. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> person with
whom one is related by blood. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2C12; b6]
claim, try to establish kinship
with s.o. <i>Ang kandidátu namartídu nákù,</i>
The candidate claims that I'm his relative.
<b>-s</b> = <sc>PARTÍDU</sc> (plural).

<p><b>partikular</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @peculiarity, @characteristic act.
<i>Partikular sa manuk nga mubátug matag
gabíi,</i> That's the way chickens are. They
roost in the evening. <b>2</b> @specific, the very
one. <i>Ngánung kanà mang partikular nga
bran sa rilu ang gustu nímu?</i> Why do you
like just that particular brand of watch?
<i>Ang partikular nga táwu mauy tagáan giyud
sa sulat,</i> The letter should be given to the
man himself. <b>3</b> ordinary in looks or ways.
<i>Milyunaryu, apan mu ra lag táwung partikular
<pb n=1518>nga musúruy,</i> He's a millionaire, but
you'd think he was an ordinary person when
he goes out. <b>3a</b> <b>mga &mdash;</b> unimportant matters,
nothing of special concern. <i>A, mga partikular
lang tung ámung gipanaghisgútan,</i> Oh,
all we talked about were trivial things. <b>4</b>
place outside of the home one goes to on
business. <i>Ang mga nigusyanting bulanti náa
pirmi sa partikular,</i> Traveling salesmen are
always away from home on business. <i>a</i> @exacting,
@fussy about things. <i>Partikular kaáyu
ku sa ákung sapátus,</i> I'm very particular
about my shoes. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a3] become a trait. <b>2</b>
[A; c1] for s.o. who is expected to be in
uniform to wear civilian clothes. <i>Dì magpartikular
ang sundáwu sa patrulya,</i> A soldier
does not wear civilian clothes on patrol.

<p><b>partíra</b> <i>n</i> @midwife who hasn't undergone any
formal training in assisting in childbirth. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [B16] become a <i>partíra</i>. <b>2</b> [c1] hire a
<i>partíra</i>. <i>Wà may kásu ug partiráhun (ipartíra)
ug maáyu lang ang pag-anak,</i> I don't
mind having a baby with an untrained midwife
if it's a normal delivery.

<p><b>partisipasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> participation in a business.
<b>2</b> the amount one has put into a business
with other people. <i>Dakù ang ákung partisipasiyun
sa susyu,</i> I have a large share in
the partnership.

<p><b>partisiyun</b> <i>n</i> @partition, @{room divider}. <i>v</i> [A; a]
<b>1</b> partition a room. <b>2</b> @{partition land}. <i>Partisiyunun
ta ang yútà samtang búhì pa si Tátay,</i>
We'll partition the land while Father is
still alive.

<p><b>parts</b> = <sc>PART</sc>.

<p><b>párù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cook rice or corn grits dry. <b>-in-</b>
<i>n</i> rice or corn grits cooked dry. <b>parùpárù</b> <i>v</i>
[A; c1] cook a small amount of rice, enough
for a couple of people. <i>Magparùpárù
ku ug aku rang usa sa báy,</i> I just cook a little
rice when I'm alone in the house. <i>n</i>
cooking of a small amount of rice.

<p><b>paruk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c] bang the head against s.t.
<i>Akuy muparuk nímu sa bungbung,</i> I'll bang
your head against the wall. <b>2</b> [B16; a4] be
sleepy with the head nodding. <i>Giparuk
kung namínaw sa diskursu,</i> I started to nod
listening to the speech.

<p><b>parúku</b>, <b>parukya</b> <i>n</i> @parish. <i>v</i> [B1256; a12]
be a parish. <b>parukyánu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @parishioner. <b>2</b>
a person who buys regularly from s.o. <b>3</b> a
person who frequents a place regularly. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B1256] be a parishioner. <b>2</b> [AB126C; a2]
be a regular customer. <i>Pahangyúa ku básin
pag maparukyánu ku ninyu madúgay,</i> Let
me bargain. Maybe I'll become your steady
customer. <b>3</b> [B126] become one who frequents
a place on a regular basis. <i>Nagparukyánu
<pb n=1519>ku sa tubaan,</i> I started to hang around
the toddy stand.

<p><b>parul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> hanging @lantern. <b>&mdash; dikumbáti</b> <i>n</i> barn
lantern. <i>v</i> [A; b6] use, have a lantern. <b>-íru</b>
<i>n</i> one whose job is to light the lanterns in
the street.

<p><b>parul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @parole. <i>v</i> [A; a12] be a prisoner out
on parole. <b>-i(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @parolee. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a
parolee.

<p><b>parúla</b> <i>n</i> @lighthouse. <i>v</i> [b6] <b>1</b> put up a lighthouse.
<b>2</b> glass jar of palm toddy (slang).
<i>Daghan kaáyung parúla sa imnanan,</i> There
are lots of jars of palm toddy in the stand.
<b>parulíru</b> <i>n</i> @{lighthouse keeper}. <i>v</i> [B156; b6]
be a lighthouse keeper.

<p><b>parulíru</b> <b>1</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>. <b>2</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PARÚLA</sc>.

<p><b>parúlus</b> <i>n</i> long, heavy horizontal beam that
supports the framework of a bridge, bottom
of a building, or a roof. <i>v</i> [A; ac] make or
put horizontal supporting beams.

<p><b>parúni</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cut a ripe jackfruit into pieces.
<i>Nakaparúni siyag walu sa usa ka búnga,</i>
Each ripe jackfruit she cut into eight pieces.

<p><b>parús</b> = <sc>PARÚLUS</sc>.

<p><b>párut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b5] be utterly @defeated. <i>Sa
pulitika mapárut giyud ang way sápì,</i> In
politics the person who has no money is
sure to get defeated completely. <b>2</b> go @bankrupt.
<i>Ang íyang pagsúgal nakapárut (nakapapárut)
sa íyang nigusyu,</i> His business went
bankrupt because of his gambling. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a
hand in mahjong or cards that lacks a card
or has one card too many and thus cannot
win. <i>v</i> [B12] get in the <i>parut</i> situation. <b>ka-</b>
<i>n</i> defeat suffered by s.o. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @{utter defeat}.
<i>Dawáta ang ímung kaparútan,</i> Accept
your utter defeat.

<p><b>parutput</b> = <sc>PALUTPUT</sc>.

<p><b>páruy</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. in a sing-song manner.
<i>Ábi nákug nagkanta siya, íya diay nga
gipáruy ang íyang anak,</i> I thought she was
singing. She was just calling her son.

<p><b>paruyparuy</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be @unsteady, @tottering
on one's feet. <i>Nagparuyparuy ang hubug,</i>
The drunk is tottering as he is walking. <i>a</i>
@staggering, tottering.

<p><b>paryinti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @relative, related by blood or by
affinity. <b>2</b> as good as, not much different
from. <i>Paryinti na man nas pangáyù ang ímung
hinangyuan,</i> The way you haggle over
the price you might as well ask for it for
nothing. <b>3</b> people having similar defects or
sicknesses (humorous colloquial). <i>Mikúyug
siyag pakilimus sa íyang paryinti nga bakul
sab,</i> He went begging together with his fellow-[**space not - ?]cripple.
<i>v</i> [A12NC] be related by blood
or by affinity. <b>kaparyintíhan</b> <i>n</i> group of
relatives.

<pb n=1520>

<p><b>pas</b>, <b>pás<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] in drinking sprees where
only one glass is used, let one's turn to
drink pass onto the next person. <i>Mupás sà
ku íning tagáya kay kasukaun ku,</i> I will
pass this drink onto the next person because
I feel like vomiting.

<p><b>pás<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> pass giving free access to places where
tickets are required. <i>v</i> [A1] get a pass.

<p><b>pás<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>PASTÍKUM</sc>.

<p><b>pás<sub>4</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] hand in. <i>Ipás na ang tispípar,</i>
Pass in your test papers now.

<p><b>pasa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> abdominal binder for an infant, the
purpose of which is to press down the navel,
or an abdominal binder put around a mother
when she has just given birth. <i>v</i> [A; b]
put on a binder on s.o. <b>pasahan</b> = <sc>PASA</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>pasa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] press clothes which have not
been laundered. <i>Pasahan ku ang sinínang
ákung gisul-ub ganína,</i> I'll iron up the shirt
I had on a while ago. <b>pasahánan</b> <i>n</i> clothes
to be pressed.

<p><b>pása</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] pass s.t. to s.o. <i>Abtik siyang
mipása sa búla,</i> He passed the ball quickly.
<i>Palíhug ipása ang kan-un,</i> Please pass the
rice. <b>pasapása</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] pass s.t. around from
one to the other. <i>Gipasapása sa mga mangangagaw
ang pitákang ílang sinabnit,</i> The
purse snatchers passed the bag they had
snatched on to their comrades. <b>&mdash; banda</b> =
<sc>PASBURD</sc>. <b>pasapasa</b> <i>v</i> [B16; c1] be scattered
around in disarray. <i>Napasapasa ang mga
anak sukad mangaílu,</i> The children were
scattered after they were orphaned.

<p><b>pásad</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; c] @scatter s.t. all over a place;
be scattered. <i>Siyay nagpásad ug mais álang
sa manuk,</i> He scattered corn for the chickens.
<i>Nagpásad ang mga butang sa kwartu,</i>
The things are scattered all over the room.

<p><b>pasádu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PASAR<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pasadur</b> <i>n</i> @{sanitary napkin}. <i>Labhi ang pasadur,</i>
Wash out the sanitary napkin. <i>v</i> [AN; a1]
wear, make into a sanitary napkin.

<p><b>paságad</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*SÁGAD<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pasáhi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> fare on public transportation. <i>v</i> [A; c]
pay one's fare.

<p><b>pasáhi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> introduction, prelude to a musical
rendition. <b>2</b> hints and words said before
one gets around to his real purpose. <i>v</i> [A; b]
<b>1</b> play or sing the opening part of a musical
composition. <b>2</b> give indirect words and hints
by way of introducing the real purpose.
<i>Pasáhi úsà. Ayawg diritsug abla,</i> Make some
opening hints first. Don't propose right off.

<p><b>pasahíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a woman fish peddler. <b>2</b> female
passenger. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] peddle fish. <i>Si Tikay
namasahíra ug isdà sa mga balay,</i> Tikay is
peddling fresh fish from house to house.

<p><b>pasahíru</b> <i>n</i> @passenger. <i>v</i> [A12B156; b8] get
<pb n=1521>passengers, be a passenger. <i>Nakapasahíru
kug wà mubáyad</i>, I got a passenger who did
not pay. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] drive a passenger
vehicle to pick up passengers. <i>Mamasahíru
ku káda human sa klási,</i> I drive a passenger
jeep after classes. <b>pasahiruan</b> <i>n</i> @{passenger
vehicle}. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a passenger vehicle.
<b>di-</b> <i>n</i> a passenger vehicle, boat. <i>Ayaw
pagsakay ug dipasahíru kay daghang hapitan,</i>
Don't take a passenger vehicle because
it makes many stops. <i>v</i> [A; a12] convert a
vehicle into a passenger vehicle.

<p><b>pasakalyi</b>, <b>pasakayli</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6(1)] <b>1</b> do the
introduction to a musical number. <b>2</b> give a
long prologue before getting around to one's
real subject. <b>3</b> [A; b] pass the time away
by strolling around. <i>Mipasakalyi ku sa plása,</i>
I was passing the time strolling in the park.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> introduction to a musical number. <i>Mauy
nindut ang pasakayli kay sa kanta,</i> The introductory
portion was nicer than the song
itself. <b>2</b> round-about speech in preparation
for saying s.t. else difficult. <i>Hinúgay nang
pasakalyi mu. Sulti na,</i> That's enough of
your beating around the bush. What do you
want?

<p><b>pasakpasak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @spatter, @splatter s.t.
soft or liquid. <i>Ayawg pasakpasaka (ipasakpasak)
ang pintal sa sawug,</i> Don't let the
paint spatter on the floor. <b>2</b> [A1] make a
pattering sound. <i>Nagpasakpasak ang uwan
sa atup,</i> The rain makes a pattering sound
on the roof. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> spatter, splatter. <b>2</b> pattering
sound.

<p><b>pasamánu</b>, <b>pasamánus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @handrail of a stair-*case.
<b>2</b> @{window sill}. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make, put a
handrail.

<p><b>pásan</b> = <sc>PALÁSAN</sc>.

<p><b>pas-an</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] carry s.t. over the shoulders.
<i>Nagpas-an siya ug ripli,</i> He was carrying
a rifle over his shoulder. <b>2</b> [A; a12] assume
the burden of s.t. <i>Pas-ánun ku ang
tanang buluhatun sa balay,</i> I will shoulder
all the housework. <b>3</b> [A13; a12] bear, endure
a burden or problem. <i>Tigúlang kansang
kurayut nga láwas nagpas-an sa suliran
sa kinabúhì,</i> An old man, whose shrunken
body bore the problems of life. <b>-l-un</b>, <b>-unun</b>
n s.t. to be carried, burden to be shouldered
by s.o. <b>mag-l-</b>, <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. who carries
things on his shoulders or shoulders burdens.
<i>n</i> action of carrying or amount carried
on the shoulders. <i>Kining kantidára madá
sa usa ka pas-an,</i> You can carry this amount
on your shoulders in one trip.

<p><b>pasángil</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*SÁNGIL</sc>.

<p><b>pasanib</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*SANIB</sc>.

<p><b>pasápul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] take or assume the responsibility
<pb n=1522>for doing s.t. <i>Mupasápul kug hímug
kík basta dúnay katábang,</i> I will take
the responsibility for making the cake as
long as s.o. helps me. <i>n</i> assurance of getting
s.t. done. <i>Sa mga pasápul nga gisáad walay
natúman,</i> He gave lots of assurances but
accomplished nothing.

<p><b>pasapurti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @passport. <b>2</b> s.t. that leads to
s.t. <i>Sakit nga mauy íyang pasapurti ngadtu
sa lubngánan,</i> An illness that lead[**leads? led? P2] to the
grave.

<p><b>pasar<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a2b2] pass an exam, screening,
or the like. <i>Mipasar siya sa iksámin sa
sirbisyu sibil,</i> He passed the Civil Service
test. <b>2</b> [A2] pass a certain time, deadline.
<i>Nakapasar na nang tagal sa pagbáyad,</i> The
term to pay me has expired. <b>2a</b> [B2] for
canned or packaged foods to spoil after being
kept too long. <i>Nagkapasar na ning tablitása
kay nalánay na,</i> These tablets must be
expired because they have already melted. <b>3</b>
[B2] go out of style or fashion, be not with
the times. <i>Napasar na ang tag-as nga múda
sa palda,</i> The long skirt is out of fashion. <b>4</b>
go through, go by s.t. (used in set phrases).
<b>4a</b> <b>&mdash; ang gútum, káun</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b4] fail to eat
at the proper time and lose one's desire to
eat. <i>Makapasar gánì ang ákung gútum dì na
ku gustung mukáun,</i> If I fail to eat during
meal times, I lose my appetite. <b>4b</b> <b>&mdash; ang gána</b>
<i>v</i> [B2] lose one's fondness for s.t. <i>Mipasar
(napasar) na ang ákung gána sa mga kalingáwan,</i>
I have lost my interest for amusements.
<b>4c</b> <b>&mdash; sa kamut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] for s.t. to
pass through one's hands. <i>Mipasar nang bayhána
sa ákung kamut únà maminyù,</i> That
girl passed through my hands before she got
married. <i>Ipasar ang papílis sa ákung kamut
únà idusù,</i> The papers go through my hands
before they are passed forward. <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>noun</i>,
<i>pronoun</i>] [so-and-so] has a passing mark.
<i>Pasar ka sa sibil sirbis tist,</i> You passed the
Civil Service test. <b>pasádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> successful in
an exam. <i>Pasádu tanan kay may líkids,</i>
Everybody passed because there was a leakage
(the test questions were known to the
examinees). <b>2</b> past a certain time. <i>Pasádu
alas dúsi na,</i> It's past twelve o'clock now. <b>3</b>
canned foods, packaged products which are
so old that they have become spoiled. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B126] be successful in an examination. <b>2</b>
[B6; c16] be past a certain hour. <b>3</b> [B] for
canned foods or other packaged products to
spoil from being too old. <i>Mupasádu (mapasádu)
na gánì ang sardínas, ilábay na lang,</i> If
the can of sardines is already spoiled, throw
it away.

<p><b>pasar<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PASA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<pb n=1523>

<p><b>pásas</b> <i>n</i> @raisins. <i>v</i> [b6] put, mix with raisins.

<p><b>pasatyimpu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pastime. <b>2</b> girl with whom
one is just passing time without being serious.
<i>Pasatyimpu lang nang bayhána nákù,[** .? P2]
Dì nákù pangasaw-un,</i> That girl is just for
the pleasure of the moment. I have no intentions
of marrying her. <i>v</i> [A; c6] <b>1</b> pass,
spend one's time doing s.t. <i>Nagpasatyimpu
lang kug bása ug nubíla,</i> My pastime is reading
novels. <b>2</b> have a temporary affair with
a girl.

<p><b>pásaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] feed food mixed with water
to domestic animals. <i>Aku ray mipásaw sa
bábuy,</i> I'll feed the pigs. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> feed for
domestic animals mixed with water. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> trough for feeding the animals.

<p><b>pasáyan</b> <i>n</i> @shrimp. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] gather,
catch shrimp. <i>n</i> occupation of catching
shrimp. <b>pasayanpasáyan</b> <i>n</i> fishing lure which
is formed like a shrimp.

<p><b>pasaylu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SAYLU</sc>.

<p><b>pasburd</b> <i>n</i> shot in basketball made by bouncing
the ball off the board and into the ring.
<i>v</i> [A2; c6] make a goal in this way.

<p><b>pasgung</b> <i>n</i> trap for land crabs and mice made
out of a node of bamboo having an opening
with a trap door at one end. <i>v</i> [A; a] catch
mice or land crab with this k.o. trap. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; c] catch land crabs or rats with a
<i>pasgung</i>. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. caught with a <i>pasgung</i>
trap.

<p><b>pasì</b> <i>n</i> rice in the husk or corn grains with a
shell. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having unhusked rice or corn
grains mixed in it. <b>ti-</b> see <sc>TIPASÌ</sc>.

<p><b>pasiatab</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÁTAB<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pasig</b> <i>n</i> @shoals, a shallow place in a body of
water. <i>v</i> [B2; a] for a water-covered area
to become shallow. <i>Mupasig (mapasig) ang
bukána sa subà ug kusug ang bahà,</i> The
mouth of the river will become shallow if
there is heavy flooding.

<p><b>pasignunut</b> <i>see</i> <sc>NUNUT</sc>.

<p><b>pasíkat</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SÍKAT</sc>.

<p><b>pásil</b> <i>n</i> place near the seashore which becomes
rocky due to the action of the sea. <i>v</i> [B12; a12]
get to be a rocky shore.

<p><b>pasilyu</b> <i>n</i> @corridor, covered @passageway. <i>v</i> [b6]
put a passageway, corridor.

<p><b>pasinsiya</b> <i>n</i> @patience. <i>v</i> [A; b6] be patient
with s.o. for doing s.t. <i>Gipasinsiyáhan ku
lang ang idlut níyang púlung,</i> I just endured
his painful words patiently. <b>pasinsiyúsa</b> <i>a</i>
having lots of patience (female). <i>v</i> [B12]
get to be patient and long-suffering. <b>pasinsiyúsu</b>
= <sc>PASINSIYÚSA</sc> (male).

<p><b>pasinti</b> = <sc>PASYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>pasipála</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @mistreat, treat s.t. roughly,
abusively. <i>Ayaw pasipad-i ang mwiblis,</i>
<pb n=1524>Don't mistreat the furniture. <b>2</b> abuse a
woman. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug sulti</b> mistreat s.o. by saying
s.t. inconsiderate and painful to him in a
light, unthinking way. <i>Ngánung nagpasipála
ka mag pamasángil nga dì ka man sigúru?</i>
Why do you accuse me unthinkingly if you
are not sure? <b>3[** 4]</b> dare do s.t. dangerous. <i>Dì
ku mupasipála ug labang ánang kusug nga
bahà,</i> I don't dare cross the river because it
is so high. <b>mapasipaláhun</b>, <b>mapasipad-ánun</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @abusive, @maltreating. <b>2</b> careless with
things that are dangerous.

<p><b>Pasipiku</b> <i>n</i> @{Pacific Ocean}.

<p><b>pásis<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>PÁS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pásis<sub>2</sub></b> explanation indicating surrender, accompanied
by raising the hands. <i>Pásis. Dì na
ku,</i> I give up. I quit. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] raise the
hands in surrender or as in a stick-up. <i>Ayaw
ug pusila kun mupásis na sila,</i> Don't shoot
if they raise their hands. <b>2</b> [B126C; c16]
settle personal differences. <i>Makigpásis ku sa
ákung kuntra,</i> I'd like to settle my quarrel
with my enemy. [+]

<p><b>pasistur</b> <i>n</i> table with a top that flips for storage.
<i>v</i> [A12; a] make or obtain such a table.

<p><b>pasitib</b> <i>n</i> positive result of a medical test.

<p><b>pasiugda</b> <i>see</i> <sc>UGDA</sc>.

<p><b>pasiuna</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÚNA</sc>.

<p><b>pasiyal</b> <i>v</i> [ANC12; b6(1)] take a leisurely
stroll or ride s.w. <i>Ug mupasiyal (mamasiyal)
ka diri, hapit sa báy,</i> If you take a stroll this
way, drop in the house.

<p><b>pasiyu</b>, <b>pasíyu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> take a leisurely
walk, stroll, ride. <i>Mupasíyu ku sa parki mahápun,</i>
I take a stroll in the park in the afternoon.
<i>Ipasíyu nang bátà arun mainitan,</i>
Take the child for a stroll to get some sun.
<b>2</b> drop by a place to see s.o. <i>Pasyúhan ku siya
matag Duminggu,</i> I drop by her place
every Sunday. <b>pasyuhan</b> <i>v</i> [A13] take a
stroll habitually in a certain place. <i>Magpasyuhan
ku ngadtus íla ug maduminggu,</i> I
usually take a stroll to their place on Sundays.

<p><b>*pasiyu</b> <b>ba &mdash;</b> it is highly impossible that
[such-and-such] happen (said as if addressing
s.o. named Pacio). <i>'Mipasar ka sa iksámin,
Ting?'&mdash;'Pasar ba, Pasiyu!'</i> 'Did you
pass the exams, Ting?'&mdash;'Hell, no!' <i>'Musugut
ka ba?'&mdash;'Musugut ba, Pasiyu!'</i> 'Do
you agree to do it?'&mdash;'Are you kidding?
(No!)'

<p><b>pasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Passion of Jesus Christ. <b>2</b> hymns
relating the Passion of Jesus Christ sung
during the Holy Week. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] sing the
Passion of Jesus Christ.

<p><b>paskan</b> exclamation at the high degree s.t. is.
<i>Paskang iníta run!</i> How hot it is today! <b>&mdash;
<pb n=1525>nu</b> it would be terrible. <i>Paskan, nu, ug mahibalu
ánà ang Prisidinti!</i> What if the President
should come to know about it!

<p><b>paskin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> notice or announcement displayed
publicly. <b>2</b> s.t. bad about a person written
anonymously in a public place or an
anonymous poison-pen letter. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b>
put up as a public announcement. <i>Nagpaskin
si Lútir sa pultahan sa simbahan,</i> Luther
posted his theses on the church door. <b>2</b> post
an announcement ruining s.o.'s reputation.
<i>Kinsay nagpaskin nga si Pidru pisut?</i> Who
wrote on the wall that Pedro is uncircumcised?
<b>2a</b> send an anonymous poison-pen
letter. <i>Gipaskínan ang ginikánan nga kidnápun
ang ílang anak,</i> The parents received
an anonymous letter that their baby would
be kidnapped. <b>3</b> [A; a12] play a game in
which the letters of the name of a man and
a woman are compared to find out if they
will fall in love, be married, and the like.

<p><b>Pasku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Christmas season, day, or Easter.
<i>Maáyung Pasku</i>, Merry Christmas! <b>&mdash; sa
kalípa</b>y <i>n</i> @Christmas. <b>&mdash; sa kasákit</b> <i>n</i> @{Lenten
season}. <b>&mdash; sa labadúra</b> Feast of the @Passover.
<b>&mdash; sa pagkabanhaw</b> @Easter. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b2] spend
Christmas day. <i>Nagpasku ang mga sundálu
sulud sa ílang pakshul,</i> The soldiers spent
their Christmas in their foxholes. <b>2</b> [B3; b8]
for it to be Christmas. <i>Mupasku na lang wà
pa kuy kwarta,</i> It will be Christmas and I
still have no money. <b>3</b> [b8] get a Christmas
present from s.o. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] <b>1</b> spend
or celebrate Christmas. <i>Didtu ku mamasku
sa prisuhan,</i> I spent my Christmas in jail. <b>2</b>
go caroling. <i>Mamasku ta sa kumbintu,</i> Let's
go caroling at the rectory. <b>pinaskúhan</b> <i>n</i>
Christmas gift. <i>v</i> [A12] get a Christmas
present. [+]

<p><b>paskuwas</b> <i>n</i> @poinsettia.

<p><b>paslag</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> drive s.t. away by poking
or throwing s.t. at it. <i>Akuy mupaslag ug batu
sa mga bábuy nga misúd sa gít,</i> I'll drive
the pigs that entered the gate away by
throwing rocks at them. <b>2</b> throw a lot of
things at s.t. <i>Gipaslag ang balay gabíi,</i> S.o.
threw rocks at the house last night.

<p><b>paslak</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] stuff s.t. into s.t. with force,
not carefully. <i>Pasláki ang lungag arun way
mabulásut,</i> Stuff s.t. into the hole so nobody
will fall into it. <i>Gipaslak lang sa nars
ang pítu sa labatíba ngadtu sa ákung lubut,</i>
The nurse just shoved the enema nozzle into
my behind.

<p><b>paslang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @exterminate, defeat a
great number of people or things. <i>Ang usa
ka iring dì makapaslang sa mga ilagà dinhing
baláya,</i> One cat is not enough to get rid of
<pb n=1526>the rats in this house. <i>Gipaslang nila[** níla ?] ang
mga sagbut sa uma,</i> They got rid of all of
the weeds in the field.

<p><b>paslayit</b> = <sc>PLASLÁYIT</sc>.

<p><b>pasluk</b> = <sc>PASUK</sc>.

<p><b>paslut</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b8] @chafe the skin from scalding
or friction. <i>Ug mubutu ang lutu, mupaslut
ang pánit,</i> If the blister bursts, the skin
will come off. <i>Ang ínit kaáyung kapi makapaslut
(makapapaslut) sa dílà,</i> Hot coffee
will blister your tongue. <i>Mapaslutan ang
ímung kamut ug magsígi kag gúna,</i> Your
hands will get chafed if you keep on weeding.

<p><b>pasmu</b> <i>n</i> ailments characterized by a feeling
of weakness and dizziness, or in debility in
a single limb, or by swollen veins, from
two causes: <b>1</b> failing to eat at one's meal
time, eating s.t. at the wrong time. <b>2</b> exposing
the body to water after having done
heavy work. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] get <i>pasmu</i>. <i>Napasmu
ang ugat sa íyang tiil kay nanghimásà
human magbaskit,</i> He got swollen veins in
his feet because he washed them after playing
basketball. <i>Makapasmu usáhay ang pagpuása,</i>
Sometimes fasting can cause pasmu.
<b>&mdash; ang, sa bítuk</b> <i>v</i> [B126] @starve (lit. make
the roundworms get <i>pasmu</i> from not eating).
<i>Napasmu ákung bítuk sa kagamay adtung
rasyúna,</i> We got so little to eat my
roundworms began to starve. <b>&mdash; sa pasálig</b>
<i>v</i> [A123P; a12] frustrate s.o. through promises
(humorous). <i>Napasmu siya sa pasálig sa
íyang trátu,</i> She became frustrated with her
boy friend's promises. <b>&mdash; sa gútum</b> = <sc>PASMU</sc>,
<i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>. <b>&mdash; sa kusug</b> = <sc>PASMU</sc>, <i>v2</i>. <b>hiN-</b>
<i>v</i> [AN; b] treat <i>pasmu</i>. <i>Gihimasmu nákù
ang itlug nga lab-as,</i> I treated my <i>pasmu</i>
with fresh eggs. <i>n</i> s.t. to treat <i>pasmu</i>.

<p><b>paspas</b><sub>1</sub> <i>a</i> @fast in motion or doing s.t. <i>Paspas
siyang mukáun,</i> He eats fast. <i>Paspas siyang
mudrayib ug awtu,</i> He drives fast. <i>Paspas
siyang musulti,</i> He speaks rapidly. <i>v</i> [AB2; b5]
do s.t. hurriedly, get to be fast. <i>Mupaspas
kug káun kay tayim na,</i> I'll eat hurriedly
because it is already late. <i>Mupaspas (mapaspas)
ang ákung pulsu ug kulbaan ku,</i> My
pulse beats fast if I'm scared. <i>Paspásig (paspásag)
bugsay,</i> Row fast. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> anything
gotten or obtained illegally. <i>Kanang kwartang
gigastu sa tagakustum pinaspásan nà,</i>
The customs examiner is spending ill-gotten
money. <b>2</b> magic food left s.w. (e.g. fish in-[** why '-' P2]
a fish trap) by an unglù which will cause
the eater to become an <i>unglù</i> or develop
some sort of ailment, usually losing his
teeth.

<p><b>paspas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @duster. <b>2</b> stick with strips of
<pb n=1527>paper at the end to chase away flies. <i>v</i> [A; b]
1 dust off s.t. with a duster. <i>Paspási ang
bangkù,</i> Dust off the benches. <b>2</b> drive flies
away with a fly whisk. <b>3</b> [A; ab2] hit s.o.
with a duster or a fly whisk. <i>Hingpaspasan
siya nákù kay labihang nakapanugs[=ú]g,</i> I hit
him with a duster because he teased me too
much.

<p><b>paspasanan</b> <i>n</i> a batten running under the
eaves of a roof.

<p><b>paspáyit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] do s.t. with utmost vigor.
<i>Pastilan níyang nakapaspáyit ug káun sa
pansit,</i> My! How he laid into the noodles!
<i>Paspaytan (paspaytun) ta nig trabáhu arun
daling mahuman,</i> Let's work hard on this
so it will get done right away.

<p><b>paspurt</b> <i>n</i> @passport. <i>v</i> [A12] obtain a passport.

<p><b>paspuru</b> = <sc>PUSPURU</sc>.

<p><b>pasta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> filling for a tooth. <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> fill a
tooth. <b>2</b> fill s.t. like a tooth. <i>Gipastáhan na
ang lungag sa bangà,</i> They filled the hole in
the jar.

<p><b>pasta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mixture or[** of] flour or starch and
water used as @paste. <b>2</b> foodstuff pounded
or ground until fine and creamy, made into
a sauce. <i>Pastang tamátis,</i> Tomato paste. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a] make @pasta. <b>2</b> [A; c] paste with
pasta. <i>Pastáhun (ipasta) ku ning ritrátu sa
ákung nutbuk,</i> I'll paste this picture in my
notebook.

<p><b>pasta<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. grass with long lanceolate
leaves which is used for horse feed.

<p><b>pastang</b> = <sc>PASKAN</sc>.

<p><b>pastidiyar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @discipline, @train, break
in. <i>Ayaw luagluági ug magpastidiyar ka ug
kabáyù,</i> Don't be lenient when you break
in a horse. <i>Ug pastidiyáhun ang mga bátà
magtubù nga matinahúrun,</i> Children grow
up to be obedient if you discipline them.

<p><b>pastidiyu</b> <i>a</i> @bothersome, @annoying. <i>Pastidiyu
kaáyu ning mga sayup sa tím,</i> These mistakes
in the compositions are annoying. <i>v</i> [A; a1]
be bothersome, annoying. <i>Dì makapastidiyu
sa maistra ang mga pangutána,</i> Questions
won't annoy the teacher. <i>Aku na say pastidiyúhun
ning batáa,</i> This child is going to
annoy me again.

<p><b>pastíkum</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the custom of the Roman
Catholic church of carrying the image of
the Infant Jesus lying on a crib by two acolytes
from house to house for people to
adore, for which people usually give money
as an offering. The <i>pastíkum</i> begins on
the <b>2</b>5th of December and ends on the <b>2</b>nd
of February. <b>2</b> the words uttered by the
acolyte when the image has been kissed.

<p><b>pastilan</b> <i>short form</i>: <b>tilan</b> <b>1</b> expression of
<pb n=1528>great worry or grief. <i>Pastilan ang ákung bátà
naligsan sa trák,</i> Heavens! My son got
run over by a truck! <b>2</b> <i>expression of feigned
surprise or concern, with a disdainful
tone</i>: what are you worrying so much for?
<i>Pastilan, Tiryú, kasayun niánà ug mahadluk
kang mubúhat!</i> Goodness, Terio, that's
so easy and you're scared to do it? <b>2a</b> expression
of scorn or derision at s.o. trying
to tell a lie. <i>Tilan nímu uy, bísag klárung
bakak patuhúun gihápun ta ánà!</i> You sure
are s.t.! It's such an obvious lie and you
expect me to believe it! <b>3</b> expression of
pain or annoyance. <i>Tilan ning mga batáa,
pagkasabaan!</i> My these children, how noisy
they are! Pastilang labára sa ákung úlu!
Oh! How my head aches! <b>4</b> exclamation
of how intense s.t. is. <i>Pastilang gwapáhang
bayhána!</i> What a beautiful woman!

<p><b>pastiliríya</b> <i>n</i> @frosting or decorations on a
cake. <i>v</i> [A13; c] put frosting or decorations
on a cake.

<p><b>pastilyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. pastilles for deworming. <b>2</b>
name of various confections cooked, rolled,
and sliced into pastille shape. <b>&mdash; dilitsi</b> k.o.
sweet made from condensed milk. <b>&mdash; dimani</b>
sweet made from peanuts. <b>&mdash; diúbi</b> k.o.
sweet made from ground <i>úbing kinampay</i>.

<p><b>pastiyurisádu</b> <i>a</i> @{pasteurized milk}.

<p><b>pastu</b> <i>n</i> @pasture. <i>Túa sa pastu ang báka,</i> The
cows are out in the pasture. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a12]
raise animals that are put to pasture, make
a cattle farm. <i>Íyang pastúhun ang yútà níya
nga pagawpaw,</i> He will transform his barren
land into a cattle ranch. <b>2</b> [A; c] put
out to pasture. <i>Ipastu ang kábaw,</i> Put the
carabao out to pasture. <b>pastuhan</b> <i>n</i> @{pasture
lands}.

<p><b>past&ucaron;r<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @herdsman. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] attend to a
herd.

<p><b>past&ucaron;r<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @minister of a Protestant congregation.
<i>v</i> [B156; a12] become a minister.

<p><b>pastúra</b> <i>n</i> a shepherd's play put on in the
Christmas season by players going from
house to house. It depicts the visit of the
shepherds to the Christ Child and consists
of song and dance sequences. <i>v</i> [AN; c] go
s.w. to put on the shepherd's play.

<p><b>pastúris</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @herdsmen. <b>2</b> participants of a
<i>pastúra</i>. <i>v</i> = <sc>PASTÚRA</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>pasu</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b8] commit certain violations
in games: get a score of more than the winning
number of points and therefore be out
of the contest, step on the demarcation
line in hopscotch, et al. <i>Mapasu (mupasu)
ka na ug mulápas nang ímung puntus sa bayinti
<pb n=1529>únu,</i> You lose if you get more than
twenty-one points. <i>n</i> violation of this sort.

<p><b>pásu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] walk slowly and deliberately.
<i>Mipásu siyag lakaw kay dihay natúlug,</i>
He walked slowly because there was s.o.
asleep. <b>2</b> [A; c] march before a crowd in a
ceremony. <i>Mipásu na ang mga intranti sa
banggà sa kaanyag,</i> The beauty contestants
marched before the judges. <i>Wà kuy sinínà
nga ipásu sa gradwisyun,</i> I don't have a dress
to wear when I march in the commencement.
<b>3</b> [A2; c] walk in front and in view
of many people as if on parade. <i>Mupásu giyud
ta íni kay nagsúgud na ang klási,</i> Now
we are going to have to pass in front of the
whole class because the class has already
started. <i>a</i> for one's walk to be refined and
slow, not rough or erratic. <i>Pásu ang linaktan
sa rayna,</i> The beauty queen walked elegantly.
<i>n</i> manner of walking, esp. a graceful
walk. <i>Nausab ang pásu sa babáyi nga gitaghúyan,</i>
The woman lost her poise when the
men whistled at her. <b>pasupásu</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6]
pace to and fro. <i>Nagpasupásu siya samtang
nagbatì ang íyang asáwa,</i> He paced to and
fro while his wife was in labor.

<p><b>pásù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB126; b4] @{injure s.t. by burning}
it or subjecting it to s.t. that gives similar
effects. <i>Ang asidu makapásù,</i> Acid can burn
you. <i>Napásù ákung tudlù sa tangsi pagbinira
sa kubit,</i> I burnt my hand pulling on the
nylon rope when I caught a fish. <i>Gipasúan
níyag sigarilyu ang ákung áping,</i> He burned
my cheek with a cigarette. <b>2</b> = <sc>PASU</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>(->)</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> burnt part of the skin. <b>2</b> = <sc>PASU</sc>, <i>n</i>. <b>3</b> in
<i>sungkà</i>, the hole that is not in use because
the player lacks requisite pieces to use it.
<b>-an</b> = <sc>PASÙ</sc>, <b>3</b>.

<p><b>pasugbu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SUGBU<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pasuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] stuff or place s.t. in a small
enclosed place. <i>Gidalì níyag pasuk ang sinínà
sa bulsíta,</i> She hurriedly put the dress in
the paper bag. <i>Paski (paksi) ug gápas ang
ilung sa minatay,</i> Stuff cotton into the nose
of the corpse. <b>paskanan</b> <i>n</i> place where
things are stuck or dumped into.

<p><b>pásuk</b> <i>n</i> @peg, @{short stake} to which animals
can be tethered. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] put a stake in
the ground. <b>2</b> [a1] use, make into a short
stake.

<p><b>pasul</b> <i>n</i> @{fishing line}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] obtain a fishing
line. <b>2</b> [a12] catch with a fishing line.
<i>Sayun ra paslun nang isdáa,</i> It's easy to
catch that k.o. fish with a hook and line.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go fishing with a hook and
line. <b>pamaslanan</b>, <b>pamaslánan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fishing
<pb n=1530>place. <b>2</b> fishing boat. <b>pinaslan</b> <i>n</i> fish caught
with a hook and line.

<p><b>pasulábi</b> (from sulábi) <i>see</i> <sc>LABI</sc>.

<p><b>pasúlit</b> <i>n</i> @test or @exam. <i>v</i> [A13] hold or give
a test. <i>Ang gubyirnu magpasúlit pára sa mga
aplikanti,</i> The government will hold a test
for the applicants.

<p><b>pasumánu</b> = <sc>PASAMÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>pasunding</b> <i>n</i> civic or military @parade. <i>v</i> [A; c]
parade. <i>Mipasunding sa íyang alimpatakan
ang mga nindut níyang kaági,</i> He could see
the memorable experiences of his past parading
before his mind's eye. <i>Ang mga bisíta
gipasundíngan sa Rusya sa íyang mga rákit,</i>
Russia paraded her rockets before the
visitors.

<p><b>pasung</b> <i>n</i> @cockscomb. <i>v</i> [AN; a] trim a cockscomb.
<b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] grow a cockscomb. <i>Wà
pa ang mga pisù mamasung,</i> The chicks have
not developed combs yet. <b>pinasngan</b> <i>n</i>
rooster with a trimmed cockscomb.

<p><b>pásung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @trough, originally made of a hollowed-out
log, but now of anything fashioned
into a long but rather shallow open vessel,
used as manger or for pounding stripped
palm trunks. <b>2</b> a unit of dry measure
for unhusked rice more or less equal to 5/7
of a bushel, with a good deal of local variation.
v [A12; a12] make into a manger or
trough. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>PÁSUNG</sc>, n.

<p><b>pas-ung</b> = <sc>PASGUNG</sc>.

<p><b>pasunud</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SUNUD</sc>.

<p><b>paswurd</b> <i>n</i> @password. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] have or use
as a password.

<p><b>pasyinsiya</b> = <sc>PASINSIYA</sc>.

<p><b>pasyinti</b> <i>n</i> @patient, sick person. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b8]
have a patient. <b>2</b> [B125] be s.o.'s patient.

<p><b>pasyunarya</b> = <sc>SAYÚTI</sc>.

<p><b>pasyun syú</b> <i>n</i> @{fashion show}. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> hold
a fashion show. <i>Nakapasyun syú na sila,</i>
They have had their fashion show. <b>2</b> parade
oneself to show off a dress and other personal
apparel. <i>Mupasyun syú nà siya basta
makabag-ug sinínà,</i> She parades herself around
whenever she has a new dress.

<p><b>pat.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>patrulman</i> 'patrolman'.

<p><b>páta</b> = <sc>PALATA</sc>.

<p><b>pátà</b> <i>v</i> [A3] fall with a plop. <i>Mupátà ang tái
sa báka,</i> The bowel movements of a cow
fall with a plop.

<p><b>patad</b>, <b>pátad<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @bet, place a bet. <i>Diyútay
ray nagpatad sa ugis,</i> Only a few people
bet on the white cock. <i>Ayaw ipatad ang tanan
mung kwarta,</i> Do not bet all of your
money. <i>n</i> bet, betting. <i>Way pátad ning duláa,</i>
No betting this game.

<p><b>pátad<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] pair off in a contest or in
<pb n=1531>love. <i>Nagkapátad ang duha ka pulitiku sa
miáging piliay,</i> The two politicians were pitted
against each other in the last election.
<i>Patárun ta ang átung isig ka bátà,</i> Let us
match your daughter and my son. <i>Ayaw
kug ipátad ug dakù,</i> Don't pair me up with
s.o. big. <i>a</i> evenly matched, well paired off.
<i>Pátad kaáyu ang duha ka igtatarì,</i> The two
cocks were evenly matched. <i>n</i> action of
matching, pairing off.

<p><b>pátad<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); c1] lie @scattered all over
a place, such as things for sale, things in disarray,
dead bodies, litter. <i>Mipátad ang patay
nga Bitkung sa pilapilan,</i> The bodies of the
Vietcong lay scattered over the rice fields.
<i>Nagpátad ang tinda apan mínus ang pumapálit,</i>
There were things for sale displayed
everywhere but there were few buyers.

<p><b>patadyung</b> <i>n</i> k.o. loose wrap-around skirt
worn overlapping in the front, made of
hand-woven cloth together with a native
blouse (<i>kimúna</i>). <i>v</i> [A; a] wear a <i>patadyung</i>,
make into a <i>patadyung</i>.

<p><b>pátag</b> <i>a</i> for an area to be @flat and @level. <i>Pátag
ang ibabaw ánang búkid,</i> The top of that
hill is flat. <i>v</i> [AB12] for an area to become
level, cause it to be so. <i>Patágun ang yútà úsà
gam-ang pilapilan,</i> They level the land
before they make it into rice paddies. <i>Patágun
ku nang likud sa buktut ug magbinúang
siya,</i> I'll flatten that hunchback's back if he
makes trouble. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> flat level land, @plains.
<b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> plains. <b>kina-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> place that is
most level.

<p><b>pátak</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for a large number of
things to be scattered over an area. <i>Daghang
bitúun nga nagpátak sa lángit,</i> A myriad
of stars dotting the sky. <b>patakpatak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B6; a] be scattered or strewn over an area.
Nagpatakpatak ang tái sa bátà, The baby's
stools were scattered all over the place. <b>2</b>
[AB6; a1] break, tear to pieces, get broken,
torn to pieces. <i>Nagpatakpatak na sa katagù
ang ákung sinínà,</i> My dress is almost tattered
into pieces, the fabric is so weak. <i>Patakpatakun
ku ning hunub nga kúlun,</i> I'll break
this leaky pot into pieces. <b>3</b> produce a pitter-pattering
sound like falling rain. <i>n</i> pitter-patter
of falling rain.

<p><b>pat-ak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @splotch, spatter all over s.t.
<i>Nagpat-ak ang buling sa salug,</i> The floor is
splotched with dirt. <i>Ayaw pat-áka (ipat-ak)
ang ímung pagpintal,</i> Don't paint so that it
splotches all over everything. <b>pat-akpat-ak</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c1] do at random and irregularly with
blank spaces in between. <i>Nagpat-akpat-ak
ang ap-ap dihà sa íyang dughan,</i> Her breasts
had fungus splotches all over them. <i>Ayawg
<pb n=1532>pat-akpat-aka (ipat-akpat-ak) ang pag-iskuyla
arun dì ka hagbúngun,</i> If you do not attend
classes on a regular basis you will be
dropped.

<p><b>patal</b> <i>a</i> @fatal, usually said of a wound or blow.
<i>v</i> [a] @fatal.

<p><b>patálas</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>n</i> @knife or any sharp
instrument used as a weapon (slang). <i>v</i> [a1]
stab with a knife. <i>Namatay ang buguy nga
gipatálas,</i> The ruffian who was stabbed died.

<p><b>patánì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. chicken which has dark-colored
meat and bones. <b>2</b> a very dark-skinned
person. <b>gíra &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> @{civil war}. <b>3[**2]</b> all-out quarrel
among people residing together. <i>v</i> [B126]
be dark-skinned.

<p><b>patánì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{lima bean}: <b><i>Phaseolus lunatus</i></b>.

<p><b>pátas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; b5] @{even up} a score, debt,
wrong. <i>Nagkapátas ang duha ka tím,</i> The
two teams were tied. <i>Mapátas na gánì átung
iskur dì na ku mudúlà,</i> I'll quit as soon as
the score is tied. <i>Patásun (patásan) ku giyud
ang insultu,</i> I'll get even for the insult. <b>2</b> [A2S; b6]
match, be the equal. <i>Way makapátas
nímu sa ímung kamaldítu,</i> There is no
one as mean as you are. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> even in score.
<i>Pátas ang ílang puntus sa tungàtúngà,</i> Their
score was even at half time. <b>2</b> of equal ability
or achievement. <i>Pátas giyud ang duha ka
manuk,</i> The two fighting cocks are exactly
even in ability. <b>3</b> have an equal share of s.t.
unpleasant. <i>Pátas tang tanan. Púlus gikasab-an,</i>
We're even. We were all scolded. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i>
[A2; c6] for a person who has suffered to
harm others, innocent or not, so that they
too will suffer as he has. <i>Mamátas na lang
ku kay gidaugdáug kug maáyu,</i> I've been
oppressed enough. Now I will raise hell for
everybody.

<p><b>patátas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. flaky brown cracker. <i>v</i> [A1]
serve, have <i>patátas</i>.

<p><b>patátas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @potatoes.

<p><b>pataw</b> <i>n</i> @buoy tied to s.t.: buoy used to hold
up fishing nets, used to mark a fish trap in
the sea, used to mark an unattended fishing
line tied to a rope with a harpoon (<i>paladyaw</i>)
to hold the fish back, et al. <i>v</i> [A; b]
use a float, fasten a float to a rope. <i>Ang ámung
púkut gipatawan ug gúma,</i> We tied
rubber floats for our fishing net. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
place a <i>pataw</i> has been put. <b>2</b> = <sc>PATAW</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>patay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b7] <b>1</b> @kill, @slay. <i>Dì makapatay
ning sakíta nímu,</i> This sickness won't kill
you. <i>Patyun ku siya,</i> I'll kill him. <b>2</b> put an
end to s.t. as if killing it. <i>Ang pagkapakyas
makapatay sa kadásig,</i> Failure can destroy
one's enthusiasm. <i>Adtu sa Kamara Báha
patya ang balaudnun,</i> The bill will be killed
in the Lower House. <i>Angay patyun nang
<pb n=1533>balitáa,</i> That news should be suppressed. <b>3</b>
shut off an engine, light; put out a fire. <i>Patya
nang sugà,</i> Turn off the lights. <b>3a</b> neutralize
chemicals or colors. <i>Putì ang ipatay niánang
pula nga kulur,</i> Neutralize that red color
with white. <b>3b</b> consume time. <i>Maáyu
ning duláa ipatayg úras,</i> This game is good
for killing time. <b>4</b> [A; b] whittle s.t. down
to reduce its size or smoothen it. <i>Patyi ang
ngilit sa lamísa,</i> Round off the edges of the
table. <b>5</b> [a3] be all tails in a game of tossing
coins. <i>Mapatay na ni rung antúga,</i> This
toss will be all tails. <b>6</b> in a game of <i>sungkà</i>,
drop the last stone in an empty hole. <b>7</b> in
set phrases: <b>a &mdash; sa báhù</b> [A2P; a1] mask a
pungent smell. <i>Lamas ang ipatay sa báhù
sa isdang langsa,</i> Spices can cover the fishy
taste of fish. <b>&mdash; ug hálas</b> <b>b1</b> for men to urinate.
<b>b2</b> for men to masturbate. <b>c &mdash; sa
kabugnaw</b> [A; a1] heat water until it becomes
tepid. <i>Patya úsà ang kabugnaw sa túbig
nga idígù sa bátà,</i> Warm the baby's water
before you bathe him. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dead. <i>Patay
na si Tátay,</i> My father is dead. <b>2</b> for s.t. to
have been @killed, @deadened. <i>Patay ang ákung
pagláum,</i> I have no more hope. <i>Patay
ang makina,</i> The engine is dead. <b>3</b> for coins
to come out tails. <b>4</b> for the last stone to
have been dropped in an empty hole in a
game of <i>sungkà</i>. <b>5</b> @{new moon}. <i>Himatayun
ang buwan run. Dì na madúgay patay na,</i>
We are in the last quarter now. Pretty soon
it will be the new moon (no moon). <b>6</b> for
nits to be hatched (lit. for the eggshell to
be dead). <b>7</b> be head over heels in love. <i>Patay
siya nákù,</i> She's head over heels in love with
me. <b>8</b> <i>in phrases</i>: <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> do s.t. in an unenthusiastic
way. <i>Hinay siyang mangulitáwu
kay patayg dugù. Kinahanglan hulhúgun,</i>
He isn't doing a very good job in courting
the girl. He is unenthusiastic and needs
prodding. <b>&mdash; gútum</b> poor as church mice.
<i>Asa gud sila makapaiskuyla sa ílang mga bátang
patay gútum man nà sila?</i> How could
they send their children to school when
they are poor as church mice? <b>&mdash; nga irù</b>
@miserable, @wretched. <i>Patayng irù ang táwung
way kwarta,</i> A man who is penniless is miserable.
<b>&mdash; ug lamì</b> having excessive sexual
desires. <i>Patay kaáyu ug lamì nang bayhána
maung kuyawng pangasaw-un,</i> It's dangerous
to marry that woman because she has
excessive sexual desires. <b>&mdash; ug limud</b> an @{inveterate
liar}. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> intense action of killing.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] for several killings to be going on.
<b>2</b> [C; a12] fight it out with killing. <i>Patáyun
nátù ang átung dúmut,</i> We'll settle our
hatred by fighting it out to the death. <b>lunud,
<pb n=1534>lúnud &mdash;</b> @die-hard, @inveterate. <i>Lúnud pátay
nga sugarul,</i> An inveterate gambler. <b>-an(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C23; c6] for roosters to fight it out to
the death. <b>2</b> [A; a] play <i>patáyan</i>. <i>n</i> game of
betting on heads or tails played by twirling
a coin. <b>pataypátay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] do s.t. intensely.
<i>Pataypatáyun (ipataypátay) nákù ning
ákung láwas sa trabáhu arun ku mabúhì,</i> I
wear myself out working just to live. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)]
do, act slowly without energy or enthusiasm.
<i>Ug magpataypátay ka, mabyaan
ka sa trák,</i> If you take so long, you'll miss
the bus. <b>3</b> [AP] pretend to be poor when
one is rich, be a nobody when one is s.o.
<i>Nagpapataypátay nang tawhána apan unásis
diay,</i> That man acts like a nobody but actually
he's an Onassis. <b>patyanay</b>, <b>pinatyánay</b> =
<sc>PÁTAY</sc>. <b>palatyanan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place s.t. is killed.
<b>&mdash; sa utug</b> girl used to satisfy one's sexual
desires (lit. s.t. to kill one's erection on). <b>2</b>
total part of the body, place in the body
which will cause instant death if struck.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to kill. <i>Maáyung pamatay
sa kágaw kanang sabúna,</i> That soap is a good
germicide.

<p><b>pathaw</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b6] do s.t. suddenly without
sufficient reason, warning, or propriety. <i>Mipathaw
lag katáwa ang búang,</i> The madman
suddenly burst into laughter.

<p><b>pat huldir</b> <i>n</i> @{pot holder}.

<p><b>pati<sub>1</sub> ang [<i>noun</i>], [<i>nom.</i>]</b> it happened to [so-and-so]
as well. <i>Gibunù tanan. Pati ang mga
bátà,</i> They were all killed, including the
children. <i>Pati aku naapil sa kasábà,</i> I was
included in the scolding, too.

<p><b>pati<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>SALAMPÁTI</sc>.

<p><b>pátid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{kick at}. <i>Kusug mupátid ang
plíyir sa sákir,</i> A soccer player kicks hard.
<i>Patíri ang itlug sa kuntra,</i> Kick your opponent
in the balls. <b>2</b> [c6] move s.t. s.w. by
kicking it. <i>Ipátid ra ákung sinílas diri,</i> Kick
my slippers over to me. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @kick. <b>2</b> kick of
drinks (humorous). <i>Pwirtig pátid ning tubáa
dà,</i> This toddy packs quite a kick. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i>
[A1; a] kick with intensity. <i>Nagpamatid
siya sa kasukù,</i> He was kicking in anger. <b>patidpátid</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b] go on foot in a leisurely
manner. <i>Magpatidpátid lang ku inigpaúlì,</i>
I'll walk home leisurely. <b>&mdash; sa láta</b> = <sc>PATIDPÁTID</sc>,
<i>v1</i>. <b>2</b> play <i>patidpátid</i>. <i>n</i> children's
game of undoing knotted rubberbands with
the feet. The one who separates one from
the rest wins all of them.

<p><b>patig</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{army fatigues}. <b>2</b> colored olive drab.
<i>Karsunsilyung patig,</i> Olive-drab undershorts.
<i>v</i> [A1] wear fatigues.

<p><b>pátik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @tattoo, mark with a brand.
<i>Ákù siyang gipatíkan ug agila,</i> I tattooed an
<pb n=1535>eagle on him. <b>1a</b> implant kisses. <i>Patíkan
kug hawuk ang ímung dughan,</i> I'll cover
your breasts with kisses. <b>2</b> @print or @publish.
<i>Napátik ang íyang hulagway sa mantaláan,</i>
Her picture was published in the newspaper.
<b>2a</b> [c6] be fixed indelibly s.w. <i>Napátik sa
ákung kasingkásing ang ímung pangalyúpù,</i>
Your pleas have been imprinted in my
heart. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> implement used for marking
animals. <b>2</b> @tattoo, @brand. <i>May patik nga iks
sa samput,</i> There is an X branded on the
rump. <b>3</b> explanatory annotation on a land
title that it has been made collateral for a
loan. <i>v</i> [b(1)] be so annotated. <i>Napatikan
na giyud ang ákung titulu,</i> I finally had to
borrow on my land. (Lit. My land has finally
gotten an annotation.) <b>-ánan</b> <i>n</i> @{printing
press}. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> one who has been tattooed,
esp. ex-convicts. <b>mag-r-(->)</b>, <b>mag-l-(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
publisher, printer. <b>2</b> one who brands or tattooes.

<p><b>pátik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> terrific in execution, appearance
(slang). <i>Pátik kaáyu siya sa íyang amirikána
dà,</i> He sure looks terrific with his coat. <i>Pátik
sag sinayawan nang bayhána dà,</i> That
girl can really dance.

<p><b>patikan</b> = <sc>ANÍBUNG</sc>.

<p><b>patilya</b> <i>n</i> @sideburns, growth of hair next to
ears. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] wear, leave sideburns.

<p><b>pátin</b> <i>n</i> paten, the plate used to hold the
host in the mass. <i>v</i> [c] use as a paten.

<p><b>pating</b> <i>n</i> general name for small sharks. <b>&mdash;
nga bungul</b> <b>1</b> k.o. shark. <b>2</b> deaf as a door
post (lit. like a <i>pating</i>). <i>a</i> unconcerned about
what is right or wrong (from the notion
that one acting this way is being deaf
to what people say just as the pating is called
bungul 'deaf'). <i>Pating giyud nang batáa.
Dì giyud magtamud bísag unsáug pína,</i> That
child doesn't care to be good. He won't obey
no matter how much you tell him. <i>v</i>
[B46; c] not give a damn about whether an
action is right or not. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1346; c16]
be deaf to s.t. <i>Nagpapating lang siya sa ákung
pagpakiluuy,</i> He was deaf to my pleas.
<b>2</b> [A; c16] do s.t. regarded as wrong no
matter what people think. <i>Nagpapating ang
bigáun bísag bulg&acaron;r sa kadaghánan,</i> The over
sexed woman didn't care what people said
any more. She went right ahead even though
everybody knew about it. <b>patingpáting</b> <i>v</i>
[A12; b(1)] ignore, pretend not to hear.
<i>Ayúhag pamínaw kining ákung súgù. Ayaw
kug patingpatíngi,</i> Listen carefully to what
I tell you to do. Don't just ignore me.

<p><b>patínga</b> <i>n</i> make a @{down payment} on s.t.
bought or ordered. <i>v</i> [A; c] make a down
payment. <i>Gipatingáhan ug singku písus ang
<pb n=1536>ákung pinatahì,</i> I put down five pesos as deposit
on the trousers as I was having made.

<p><b>patinti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> container for measuring liquids,
esp. palm toddy, that has been registered
and licensed. <b>-ru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> palm toddy dealer. <b>2</b>
any @merchant. <i>v</i> [B156] become a dealer in
palm toddy.

<p><b>patinti<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @patent. <i>May patinti siya paggamà
ánang klasíha sa dáru,</i> He has a patent to
manufacture that k.o. plow. <i>v</i> [A; b] issue
a patent.

<p><b>patipati</b> <i>n</i> weed of waste places: <b><i>Acalypha
indica</i></b>.

<p><b>pátirn</b> <i>n</i> @{dress pattern}. <i>v</i> [A; c6] make a dress
pattern.

<p><b>pátir nustir</b> <i>n</i> the @{Lord's Prayer}.

<p><b>patis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> liquified preserved fish paste. <b>2</b> @{soy
sauce}. <i>v</i> <b>[**1]</b> [A; a2] make <i>patis</i>. <b>2</b> [A12; b]
add <i>patis</i> to s.t.

<p><b>patriyúta</b> <i>n</i> @patriot. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] be a patriot.

<p><b>patr&ucaron;l</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{police patrol}, esp. in vehicles or
boats. <b>2</b> @{boy scout patrol}. <i>v</i> = <sc>PATRULYA</sc>.
<b>-man</b> <i>n</i> @patrolman. <i>Patrulman Ruhíru,</i> Patrolman
Rogero.

<p><b>patrulya</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> go on @patrol. <i>Gipatrulyahan
(gipatrulyáhan) sa mga Písi ang
mga prisintu sa pag-iliksiyun,</i> The P.C. patrolled
the precincts during the elections. <b>2</b>
go out for a walk. <i>Magpatrulya ta sa plása,</i>
Let's go out for a walk to the plaza. <i>n</i> @patrol.

<p><b>patrun</b>, <b>patr&ucaron;n</b> <i>n</i> @{patron saint} of a place or
occupation. <i>v</i> [A23; c1] take a saint as
one's patron. <b>-a(<-)</b> <i>n</i> female patron saint. [+]

<p><b>patsáda</b> <i>a</i> good to look at, good in quality.
<i>Kapatsáda ning batáa,</i> What a pretty child.
<i>Patsáda silag baul,</i> They have a first class
farm. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] be, become good. <i>Mapatsáda
ang ímung tíngug ug makakaun kag
úlud,</i> Your voice improves if you eat worms.

<p><b>patsi</b> <i>n</i> medicinal plaster for headaches or
muscular pains. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> patch s.t. by
laying it on top. <i>Ang buslut gipatsíhag gúma,</i>
The hole was patched up with rubber.
<b>2</b> wear a medicinal plaster. <i>Nagpatsi ku kay
labad ákung úlu,</i> I am wearing a medicinal
plaster for my headache.

<p><b>patsing</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cement binding. <b>2</b> decorative
patching on material. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> bind
stones with cement. <i>Patsíngi ang batu sa
paril arun dì matumpag,</i> Bind the stones
forming the wall with cement so it can't
collapse. <b>2</b> put a decorative patching on s.t.

<p><b>pátu</b> <i>n</i> general name for @ducks.

<p><b>pátù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] pair s.o. teasingly with s.o.
else. <i>Kinsay nagpátù nímu kang Pidru?</i> Who
wanted to pair you off with Pedro?

<pb n=1537>

<p><b>pat-ud</b> = <sc>PAT-UL</sc>.

<p><b>patuk</b> <i>a</i> having a protruding bulge in the
front or back of the head. <i>Patuk ug agtang,</i>
Having a bulging forehead. <i>v</i> [B26] for the
front or back of the head to protrude. <i>Mapatuk
ang úlu sa bátà ug sigíhag patakílid,</i>
The child's head will develop a bulge if he
is always put down on his side.

<p><b>pátul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @fit characterized by convulsions
and foaming of the mouth. <i>v</i> [B246; a4]
suffer a @seizure of this sort. <b>-l-un</b> <i>n</i> one who
is subject to these seizures.

<p><b>pat-ul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put s.t. where it can be
chopped, hit, or broken. <i>Kining tadtaran
mauy pat-úlan inigtadtad sa bukug,</i> Put the
bone on this chopping block, when you
chop up the bones. <b>2</b> put s.t. on top of s.t.
for a short period of time. <i>Íyang gipat-úlan
ug ínit nga hampul ang íyang bun-ug,</i> He
put a hot compress on his bruises. <b>3</b> put
the blame on s.o. <i>Íyang gipat-ul nákù ang
tanang salà,</i> She put all the blame on me.
<b>-ánan</b> <i>n</i> @{chopping block}.

<p><b>pat-ul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2N; cN] match s.o. with s.o. else
with the purpose of marrying him or her
off. <i>Ngánung ipamat-ul man nímu nákù
nang tiguwánga,[**should be ?]</i> Why are you trying to
pawn that old geezer off on me?

<p><b>patúla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. squash: <b><i>Luffa acutangula</i></b>. <b>2</b>
by extension, name also given to the <i>sikwa</i>,
a similar vegetable.

<p><b>patung</b> = <sc>BUTUNG<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pátung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] place s.t. on top of s.t. else.
<i>Ang lángaw nga makapatung sa kábaw magpakakábaw
sad,</i> A fly that alights on a carabao
thinks he, too, is a carabao (becomes
swell-headed). <i>Patúngi ang mga papil arun
dì manglúpad,</i> Put a weight on the papers
so they won't get blown away. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pile. <i>Natumpag
ang pátung sa mga diláta,</i> The cans
that were stacked up neatly came tumbling
down. <b>2</b> @interest on money. <i>Pilay pátung sa
kwartang ímung gihulaman?</i> How much interest
did they charge on the money you
borrowed? <b>patungpatung</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; c1] @pile,
be @{piled up}, @accumulated. <i>Nagpatungpatung[** ` splot?]
ang ákung trabáhu, maung sígi kug ubirtayim,</i>
My work is piling up, so I keep having
to work overtime. <b>hi-/ha-(->)</b>, <b>hi-/ha-</b> [B1256]
<b>1</b> be at the top of s.t. <i>Paghipátung níla
sa bungtud,</i> When they reached the top of
the mountain. <b>2</b> reach a certain height of
affluence. <i>Nahipátung ku sa kahamugáway
kay nakadaug kus swipstiks,</i> I was on easy
street when I won the sweepstakes.

<p><b>patùpátù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] compose lines, extemporaneously,
to form a rhyme. <b>2</b> [A; c]
fabricate insidious gossip against others. <i>Maáyu
<pb n=1538>kang mupatùpátù sa mga butang nga
wà mahímù sa ímung isig ka táwu,</i> You are
good at inventing gossip about other people,
things they couldn't possibly have done.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> rhymes composed extemporaneously.
<i>Sa balítaw ang ditsu patùpátù,</i> In the courtship
poems, the verses are extemporaneous.
<b>2</b> fabrication made up against s.o.

<p><b>paturágas</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*TURÁGAS</sc>.

<p><b>patúru</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TÚRU</sc>.

<p><b>patyu</b>, <b>patyù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> open, round booth built in
the center of a plaza. <b>2</b> patio, grounds enclosed
within a building.

<p><b>paud</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] <b>1</b> put s.t. against or over s.t.
hard to steady it. <i>Pad-i ang libru sa ímung
pagsulat,</i> Write on top of the book. <b>2</b> press
s.t. against s.t. hard with one's weight. <i>Gitabangan
nílag paud ang búang sa bungbung,</i>
They all pressed the lunatic against the wall.
<i>Napaud ku sa pusti pagtulud niya,</i> I was
knocked against the post when he pushed
me. <b>2a</b> press part of the body against s.t.
<i>Íyang gipaud ang íyang dughan sa ákung likud,</i>
She pressed her breast against my back.
<b>2b</b> fix the sight on s.t. <i>Gipaud ku sa kisami
ang ákung mga mata,</i> I fixed my eyes to the
ceiling. <b>3</b> [b] put the blame on s.o. <i>Ngánung
aku may pad-an sa ímung salà,[**should be ?]</i> Why
do you put the blame on me for what you
did? <b>pad-anan</b> <i>n</i> buffer for s.t. one writes
or applies pressure on.

<p><b>páuk</b> = <sc>PÁYUK</sc>, <i>a</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>paun</b> <i>n</i> @bait. <b>subad nga way &mdash;</b> butt in on a
conversation where one has no business doing
so (lit. bite when there is no bait). <i>Dílì
ikaw ang ákung gisultíhan. Ngánung musubad
ka man dihà nga way paun,[**should be ?]</i> I wasn't
talking to you. Why do you butt in? <b>subad
ug way &mdash;</b> believe s.t. just because s.o. said
it (lit. bit an unbaited hook). <i>Dì kakumidiyáhan
siya kay musubad ug way paun,</i> You
can't kid him because he will take you literally.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{bait s.t.} <i>Gipan-an ku ang
ilagà ug pán,</i> I baited the rats with bread.
<i>Kwarta ang ipaun sa kiriwan,</i> Use money to
lure the thief. <b>1a</b> [c1] make, use as bait. <b>2</b>
[A; c6] use s.o. else as a means to deflect
danger from oneself. <i>Ipaun man lang ta nímu
sa piligru,</i> You are exposing me to danger
to protect yourself.

<p><b>paúruy</b> <i>n</i> liquor distilled from nipa or coconut
toddy. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make <i>paúruy</i>.

<p><b>paus</b>, <b>páus</b> <i>a</i> severely @hoarse. <i>Páus kaáyu ákung
tíngug sa pagkinanta,</i> My voice is very
hoarse from singing so much. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B] get
severely hoarse.

<p><b>páw</b> = <sc>PÁLAW</sc>.

<p><b>páwà</b> <i>n</i> size of area cleared by weeding or
<pb n=1539>plowing. <i>Dakug páwà ang ákung gisuhúlan
paggúna,</i> The man whom I hired to weed
covered quite a large area.

<p><b>paw-ak</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] take a large part or chunk
off of s.t. <i>Ang mga ungguy dakug gipaw-ak
sa kamaisan,</i> The monkeys consumed a
large part of the corn in the field. <i>n</i> chunk
taken off of s.t.

<p><b>paw-ang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @gap between things that are normally
solid or close to each other. <i>Daghang
paw-ang ang pinugsan sa mais,</i> The way
they planted the corn the plants are too far
apart. <b>2</b> distance in time. <i>Dakù ang paw-ang
sa idad sa magtiáyun,</i> The couple are quite
far apart in age. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] @{have spaces} in
between. <i>Ang bungbung mupaw-ang (mapaw-ang)
ug dílì pakupsun ang káhuy,</i>
Cracks will develop in the wall if the wood
is not aged beforehand. <i>Nagpaw-ang ang
pultahan maung nakasulud ang ilagà,</i> The
door was ajar and so a mouse managed to
get in. <b>2</b> [A12; c1] @miss, @skip. <i>Nakapaw-ang
siyag usa ka linya,</i> He skipped a line.

<p><b>pawdir milk</b> <i>n</i> @{powdered milk}.

<p><b>pawíkan<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{sea turtle}. <i>v</i> [4b4][**4b4 typo?] be affected
by a sea turtle&mdash;i.e. be unable to come
apart in intercourse (from the k.o. sorcery
where the penis of a sea turtle is hidden in
the clothing of an adulterer so that he can
not disengage when he has intercourse). <i>Wà
kunu mag-úkang ang mga mananapaw. Gipawíkan
(gipawikánan) tingáli,</i> They say the
adulterers could not come apart. No doubt
they were victims of sea turtle sorcery. <b>-in-</b>
<i>a</i> crying with a profuse flow of tears (like a
sea turtle is said to do). <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> tending to cry
easily. <i>Kadaghánan sa mga babáyi pawikánun,</i>
Most women are crybabies. <i>v</i> [B12]
get so one cries at the slightest provocation.

<p><b>pawíkan<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>GUYUNGGUYUNG</sc>.

<p><b>páwir</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] be given a power of attorney.
<b>&mdash; ab aturni</b> <i>n</i> @{power of attorney}.

<p><b>páwis</b> <i>n</i> @{shark fins}.

<p><b>pawla</b> = <sc>PALWA</sc>.

<p><b>pawpaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] scoop s.t. off the surface
of s.t. to remove it. <i>Pawpáwa ang nanglútaw
nga buwà sa tubà,</i> Scoop off the foam
from the toddy. <i>Pawpáwi ang kan-un úsà
sukára,</i> Remove the upper part of the rice
before you serve it. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the sweet upper layer
of the surface of coconut meat, scraped
off from the rest. <b>2</b> container for liquids
made of approximately half a coconut shell
(shallower than the <i>húngut</i> and deeper than
the <i>payà</i>).

<p><b>pawu-</b> <i>see also</i> <sc>PALU-</sc>.

<p><b>páwud</b> = <sc>PÁLUD</sc>. <b>palawran</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PÁLUD</sc>.

<p><b>pawug</b> = <sc>KAGWANG</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<pb n=1540>

<p><b>páwul</b> <i>n</i> foul committed in sports. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
commit a foul, in sports. <i>Giwarníngan
ang buksidur kay gipáwul níya ang kuntra,</i>
The boxer was warned because he committed
a foul against his opponent. <b>2</b> [B126]
not be able to do what one had planned to
do. <i>Napáwul ang ámung ikskursiyun tungud
sa dautang panahun,</i> We had to call off our
excursion because of the bad weather. <b>dúbul
&mdash;</b> <i>n</i> double foul, the situation in which
two players bump into each other, such that
both have technically committed a foul. <b>&mdash;
láyin</b> <i>n</i> foul line. <b>&mdash; syát</b> <i>n</i> foul shot, given
to a player against whom a foul has been
committed.

<p><b>pawundirs dí</b> <i>n</i> @{Founder's Day celebration} in
a private school. <i>v</i> [A13] celebrate a
school's Founder's Day.

<p><b>pawuntin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fountain. <b>2</b> @{fountain pen}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[b6] make a fountain. <b>2</b> [A1] use a fountain
pen. <b>&mdash; pin</b> @{fountain pen}.

<p><b>pay</b> <i>n</i> @pie. <b>pig &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> pie made of stale crackers
with pork fat and onions.

<p><b>payà</b> <i>n</i> shallow bowl or scoop made of a
third of a coconut shell. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] make
or use a coconut shell as plate or bowl.
<i>Magpayà mi sa ámù kay wà man miy plátu,</i>
We use coconut shell plates because we
don't have dishes.

<p><b>payadpayad</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be @unsteady, @staggering
in one's walk. <i>Nagpayadpayad siya human
sa dúgay níyang paglubug sa banig,</i> She
was unsteady on her feet because she had
lain in bed for a long time.

<p><b>payag</b> <i>n</i> @hut, small house constructed of
light materials. <b>may táwu na ang &mdash;</b> for a
girl to have a sweetheart. <i>Way tsans ang ímung
gugma kaníya kay may táwu na ang
payag,</i> You don't stand a chance with her
because she already has a beau. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
make a hut.

<p><b>payakpak</b> <i>a</i> for the stomach to be so empty
as to sag and form a hollow on the sides.
<i>Payakpak kaáyug tiyan ang bábuy nga wà
hipasáwi,</i> The pig has a hollow stomach because
they forgot to feed it. <i>v</i> [B3(1)N]
for the stomach to be, become sagging inwards.
<i>Namayakpak ang ímung tiyan,</i> Your
ribs are sticking out (lit. your stomach is
hollow).

<p><b>payanpayan</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] do s.t. half-heartedly
or do s.t. with just enough motion to
give the appearance of working. <i>Gipayanpayanan
lang ang pagdáru maung wà mahuman,</i>
He didn't put any effort into his plowing,
so it never got done.

<p><b>payas</b> <i>a</i> for a pig's abdomen to be thin, not
filled. <i>v</i> [B] be thin, not filled. <i>Ang bábuyng
<pb n=1541>dílì maáyung mukáun magpayas lang
ang tiyan,</i> A pig that doesn't eat well has a
sunken stomach.

<p><b>payásu</b> <i>n</i> @clown, @jester. <i>v</i> [B6; a12] play the
part of a clown. <i>Mangítà ku ug mupayásu
sa dráma,</i> I'll look for a person who will act
as a clown in the play. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] act,
dress, speak like a clown.

<p><b>payat</b> <i>a</i> very meager and small in amount.
<i>Alang kaníya payat kaáyu ang duha ka gatus
nga gastúhun sa usa ka adlaw,</i> For him
it is chicken feed to spend two hundred
pesos in one day.

<p><b>páyaw</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. bamboo raft used in fishing,
used to attract fish. It is left in deep waters
with weighted coconut fronds suspended
from it, on which algae develop and attract
fish which can then be caught with a net. <i>v</i>
[A; a12] make a <i>páyaw</i>. <sc>paN-</sc> <i>n</i> fishing
with a <i>páyaw</i>.

<p><b>paybut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] in basketball, for a player
to pivot on one of his feet. <i>Mipaybut únà siya
sa wà pa musyát arun maw[=à] ang gwardiya,</i>
He pivoted before shooting the ball to
give him a clear shot. <i>see also</i> <sc>TSINDYING</sc>.

<p><b>payhag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] destroy s.t. by knocking it
to pieces, consume or scatter s.t. as though
destroyed. <i>Ang bumba mipayhag sa mga
balay,</i> The bomb destroyed the houses. <i>Tiradur
ang ipayhag sa balay sa putyúkan,</i>
Smash the beehive with a slingshot.

<p><b>payhaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a characteristic shout or cry in
calling s.o. at a distance. <b>2</b> a shout or cry to
ease the tightness in the chest due to panting,
uttered esp. when one climbs a steep
hill. <i>v</i> [AN; c1] let out this sort of shout,
calling s.o. at a distance or to ease up shortness
of breath. <i>Pamináwa náay nagpayhaw
(nagpamayhaw) sa píkas buntud,</i> Listen.
S.o. is yelling on the other side of the hill.

<p><b>payì</b> <i>a</i> lame from having a defect in the articulation
of the bones of the foot or arms. <i>Si
Ingkar magtakiang paglakaw kay payì,</i> Encar
limps when she walks because she is
lame. <i>v</i> [B126] get a dislocation and thus
become lame. <i>Napayì siya sa íyang pagkahúlug,</i>
She was crippled when she fell down.

<p><b>payib kúlum</b> <i>n</i> @{fifth column}.

<p><b>payib pinggir</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @masturbate (slang).
<i>Payib pinggíra (ipayib pinggir) kun muutug,</i>
Masturbate when it erects.

<p><b>payil<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> pile of mahjong pieces from which
the hand is drawn. <b>&mdash; nga ininsik</b> Chinese
way of piling mahjong pieces, 9 double
decks and <b>1</b>6 single decks. <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> the
pieces on the right hand side of a player's
pile stacked in pairs. How many pairs are in
the <i>payil sa búlak</i> depends on the number
<pb n=1542>rolled on the dice at the beginning of the
game. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] pile the mahjong pieces.

<p><b>payil<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @{file papers} and the like.
<i>Ipáyil kini sa a,</i> File this under a. <b>2</b> [A; c]
@{file a complaint} in court for an offense or
misdeed. <i>Ipáyil ku ang kíha ngadtu sa hípi,</i>
I'll file the complaint with the chief of police.
<i>n</i> file in which s.t. is kept.

<p><b>payin tri</b> <i>n</i> @{pine tree}.

<p><b>payir</b> <b>1</b> <i>a command to commence firing</i>: fire!
<b>2</b> <i>a signal to start doing s.t.</i>: come on, go
ahead (colloquial). <i>Sigi, payir, sugdan na
nátug inum nà,</i> Come on, let's go. Let's
start drinking. <i>v</i> [A; c] have sexual intercourse.
<i>Payri siya kanúnay arun dì ka awáyun,</i>
Have frequent intercourse with her so
she won't quarrel with you.

<p><b>payir tri</b> = <sc>ARBUL<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>payit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @boxing. <b>2</b> @{sexual intercourse}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a] fight in a boxing event. <i>Mupáyit si
Balug karung Sabadu,</i> Balug will fight this
Saturday. <b>1a</b> have a fist fight. <b>2</b> [A; a2b2]
have sexual intercourse. <i>Dílì siya pilian. Mupayit
bísan ug tigúlang,</i> He's not choosy.
He will go to bed with anybody, even an
old woman. <b>-unun</b> <i>a</i> be a perfect match, go
well together (colloquial). <i>Paytunun kaáyu
sila si Ális ug si Kulas,</i> Colas and Alice
make a perfect pair. <i>Paytunun kaáyu ang
tubà ug ang Pipsi,</i> Pepsi goes well with
toddy.

<p><b>payla</b> = <sc>PALIYA</sc>.

<p><b>paylas</b> <i>n</i> infectious inflammation of the skin
on the legs, accompanied by fever. <i>v</i> [a4]
get this sickness.

<p><b>*payling</b> <b>&mdash; kabinit</b> <i>n</i> @{filing cabinet}. <b>&mdash; klirk</b>
<i>n</i> @{filing clerk}. <i>v</i> [B156] be a filing clerk.

<p><b>*paylut</b> <b>harbur &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> small motorized boats
which serve as a guide for vessels in the
harbor. <b>2</b> pilot for the pilot boat. <b>&mdash; háwus</b>
<i>n</i> office of the harbor pilot. <b>&mdash; sa lubi</b>, <b>&mdash; sa
kukunat</b>, <b>kukunat &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> palm toddy gatherer
(humorous).

<p><b>payn-ápul</b> <i>n</i> @pineapple. <b>&mdash; dyús</b> <i>n</i> @{pineapple
juice}.

<p><b>paynar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] dress the hair. <b>paynadúra</b>
<i>n</i> @hairdresser, one who arranges a woman's
hair. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a hairdresser.

<p><b>paypay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fan. <b>2</b> k.o. thin, fan-shaped bivalve,
found in sandy seabeds, of no food
value. <i>v</i> [A; b] fan s.o. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] fan
oneself. <i>Nagpamaypay ku sa kaalimúut,</i> I
fanned myself frantically, it was so hot.

<p><b>paypay<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PALAYPAY</sc>.

<p><b>payramid</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pyramid in gymnastics. <b>2</b> the
Pyramids of Egypt. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] form a pyramid
in gymnastics.

<pb n=1543>

<p><b>payr-awut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] dismiss s.o. from a job
or position. <i>Payr-awtun ang mga kaswal,</i>
All casual employees will be dismissed.

<p><b>payriks</b> <i>n</i> @pyrex, a k.o. heat-resistant glass-*ware.

<p><b>payring</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] fire on s.o., for there
to be gunfire. <i>Manlukluk ta sa dì pa magpayring,</i>
Let's get out of the way before
the firing starts. <b>&mdash; layin</b> <i>n</i> firing line. <b>&mdash; pin</b>
<i>n</i> @{firing pin} in a rifle. <b>&mdash; iskwad</b> <i>n</i> @{firing
squad}.

<p><b>payta</b> = <sc>PALATA</sc>.

<p><b>payting ispírit</b> <i>n</i> will to fight or play under
stress or against odds. <i>Lúpig siya, piru may
payting ispírit,</i> He was outclassed but he
had a fighting spirit.

<p><b>payting pis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{fighting fish}. <b>2</b> pornographic
movies.

<p><b>paytir</b> <i>a</i> having a fighting spirit, esp. in defending
one's position or what one thinks
is right. <i>Paytir kaáyung sinadúra. Wà mag-apas
nga pasublì,</i> That senator is a great
fighter for his cause, because he isn't interested
in reelection. <i>v</i> [B126] become a
fighter for what one thinks is right.

<p><b>payud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the @{shoulder blades}, @scapula. <b>2</b> =
<sc>DAPÌDÁPÌ</sc>.

<p><b>payudpayud</b> <i>v</i> [A13] walk with unsteady
steps due to weakness. <i>Nagpayudpayud nga
naglakaw ang apyugun,</i> The convalescing
patient walks with unsteady steps.

<p><b>páyuk</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. light in color to get darkened.
<i>Páyuk ang tísirt nga way ladlad,</i> A T-shirt
comes out greyish if you don't bleach
it. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB] become darkened or discolored,
cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mipáyuk ákung pánit sa
ínit,</i> My skin got black in the sun. <i>Háin na
tung táwung nagpáyuk sa ímung nawung?</i>
Where's that man who made your face black
and blue? <b>2</b> [B236; b4] for the skin to become
black and blue. <i>Mipáyuk ang binunalan,</i>
He turned black and blue where he was
whipped. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> discolored, dark and dirty.
<i>Payuk siyag linabhan,</i> Her wash comes out
grey. <i>n</i> @bruise. <i>Dúgayng naáyu ang mga payuk
sa íyang láwas,</i> It took a long time for
the bruise on her body to heal. <i>v</i> [A12] inflict
bruises. <i>Hínay kaáyu siyang manukmag,
walà gánì makapayuk nákù,</i> He didn't
even hit me hard enough to inflict a bruise.
<b>ka-(->)</b> [A13] get bruises all over one. <i>Nahúlug
siya ug nagkapayuk ang láwas,</i> He fell
and he got bruises all over his body.

<p><b>pay-uk</b> = <sc>PÁYUK</sc>, <i>a</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>páyung</b> <i>n</i> @umbrella. <b>&mdash; sa búlan</b> <i>n</i> ring around
the moon. <b>&mdash; sa libgus, úhung</b> pilleus of
mushrooms. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] use an umbrella,
shelter under an umbrella. <i>Payúngan ta ka
<pb n=1544>kay ínit kaáyu,</i> I'll shelter you with an umbrella
because the sun is hot. <b>2</b> [A12; b(1)]
stretch arms over s.o. in basketball in guarding
a teammate or in preventing an opponent
from passing or shooting the ball. <b>(->)</b>
= <i>v1</i>. <b>payungpayung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash; sa santus</b> artificial
halo around the statues of saints. <b>2</b>
k.o. limpet which looks like an umbrella
found clinging to stones.

<p><b>payúpas</b> <i>n</i> @fan, any device used for fanning.
<i>v</i> [AN; b] fan s.o. <i>Payupási ang bátang natúlug,</i>
Fan the child as he sleeps. <b>paN-</b> [A2; b]
fan oneself. <i>Namayúpas kug kardburd,</i>
I'm fanning myself with a piece of card-*board.

<p><b>payuphu</b> = <sc>PALUPHU</sc>.

<p><b>payuríya</b> <i>n</i> @pyorrhea, infection of the gums.
<i>v</i> [a4] be infected with pyorrhea.

<p><b>payus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] cut a piece off ears, usually
of animals as a marker. <i>Napayus (napayusan)
ang dawunggan sa buksiyadur,</i> The
boxer had cauliflower ears. <i>a</i> having the
ears or a piece of the ears cut off. <i>Hiilhan
ang ámung bábuy kay payus man,</i> I can
easily identify the pig because of the way
its ears are cut. <b>-in-an</b> <i>a</i> having a piece of an
ear cut off.

<p><b>páyut</b> = <sc>PAY-UT<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pay-ut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for skin to be wrinkled and sagging.
<i>Maáyu untag kurti nang bayhána apan pay-ut
ug nawung,</i> She has a nice face, but it is
wrinkled and sagging. <i>v</i> [B12; a2] for skin
to become wrinkled and sagging. <i>Ági sa kaláyu
ang nakapay-ut (nakapapay-ut) sa íyang
láwas,</i> Scars from burning caused wrinkles
on his body.

<p><b>pay-ut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for clothes to be discolored, darkened
with dirt. <i>Pay-ut na kaáyu nang sinínà
nga dúgay nang wà hubúa,</i> You have been
wearing that dress so long it is black with
dirt. <i>v</i> [B2; c1] get discolored with dirt.

<p><b>pi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> letter P. <b>&mdash; dibawtismu</b> baptismal certificate
(acronym for <i>partída dibawtismu</i>).

<p><b>pi<sub>2</sub> may láin &mdash;</b> humorous euphemism for
<i>may láin pa</i>. <i>see</i> <sc>LÁIN</sc>, <i>1a</i>.

<p><b>pí</b> = <sc>PYI</sc>.

<p><b>píang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @dislocate, @sprain, @fracture
s.o. <i>Napíang ku pagkadakin-as nákù,</i> I got
a sprain (fracture) when I slipped and fell.
<i>Kaáyung piángan nang ímung kamut nga
kiriwan,</i> How nice it would be to break
your thieving hands. <b>2</b> [A; b6] make s.t.
crippled, be at a disadvantage because of a
loss or absence of s.t. indispensable. Napíang
ang nigusyu pagháwà sa kasusyu, The
business was crippled when one of the partners
withdrew. <i>Gipiángan na mi dáan kay
nasakit ang ámung sinalígan nga magdudulà,</i>
<pb n=1545>We are already on a disadvantage because
one of our important players is sick. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i>
<b>1</b> general term for @dislocation, @fracture, or
@sprain. It may manifest itself in other ways
than in the sprained or fractured limb, e.g.
respiratory ailments are commonly thought
to result from piang. <b>2</b> @lacking. <i>Piang tag usa
sa kúrum sa madyung,</i> We're lacking one to
play mahjong. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>PIANG</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>-un(->)</b>
<i>a</i> having a sprain, dislocation, or fracture.

<p><b>píar</b> <i>n</i> acronym for @{P.R.}, @{public relations}. <i>Dì
siya mulampus kay kuwag píar,</i> He won't
succeed because he is bad in dealing with
people (lit. lacks public relations).

<p><b>píay</b> <i>n</i> dump truck used by the Bureau of
Public Highways (from the PI mark on its
plate number).

<p><b>Pib.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>Pibríru</i>, February.

<p><b>píbak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] pay back an overpayment.
<i>Nasubrahan kag swildu. Magpíbak ka niánà,</i>
They overpaid your salary. You have to
pay back the extra amount.

<p><b>Pibriru</b>[**Pibríru? See 'Pib.' above] <i>n</i> @February. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <b>ABRIL</b>.

<p><b>píbur</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] be @partial to s.o., playing
favorites. <i>a</i> @partial, @{playing favorites}. <i>Píbur
kaáyu námù ang ripiri, maung midaug mi,</i>
The referee was partial to us, so we won.

<p><b>píd</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] make assists in basketball by
passing the ball to a free teammate near the
goal. <i>Dakug puntus ang purward basta náay
maáyung mupíd,</i> The player who plays
forward will make a high score if he gets
good assists.

<p><b>pídal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pedal. <b>2</b> @{pedal pushers}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b]
pedal s.t. <b>2</b> [A; a] make, wear pedal pushers.
<b>&mdash; púsir</b> <i>n</i> @{pedal pushers}. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>PÍDAL</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>pidásu</b> = <sc>PIRÁSU</sc>.

<p><b>pidbak</b> <i>n</i> feedback in electronic equipment.
<i>v</i> [A2] produce a feedback.

<p><b>pídi</b> <i>n</i> @payday. <i>v</i> [B156; c6] become, have
it be payday. <i>Unsa mang adláwa ang ipídi?</i>
On what day do you receive your pay?

<p><b>pidídu</b> <i>n</i> one's order of dry goods. <i>Día ang
pidídu sa ákung gikinahanglan,</i> Here is the
order for the things I need. <i>Ihatud sa inyu
ang pidídu mung káhuy,</i> They'll deliver the
lumber you ordered to your house. <i>v</i> [A; c]
order dry goods. <i>Kining klasíha mauy ipidídu,</i>
This is the kind to order. <b>-s</b> = <sc>PIDÍDU</sc>.

<p><b>pidikab</b> <i>n</i> @pedicab, a bicycle or motorcycle
with a side car for passengers. <i>v</i> [A1; a] ride
in, bring by pedicab.

<p><b>pidikiyur</b> <i>n</i> @pedicure. <i>v</i> [A; b] get, give a
pedicure. <b>-ista</b> <i>n</i> one who gives a pedicure.

<p><b>pidirasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{labor union}. <b>2</b> member of a
labor union. <b>2a</b> @stevedore (so called because
they were among the earliest workers to
have unions). <i>v</i> [B156; c1] <b>1</b> be, become a
<pb n=1546>member of a labor organization. <b>2</b> be, become
a stevedore.

<p><b>pídir rud</b> <i>n</i> @{feeder road} going from remote
areas to the main highway. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] build
a feeder road.

<p><b>pídir wit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{featherweight boxer} or @jockey.
<b>1a</b> any lightweight person. <b>2</b> the amount a
featherweight weighs. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; c1] become
a featherweight boxer or jockey. <b>2</b>
[B2] be very much reduced in weight. <i>Nagdiyíta
ka nga mipídir wit (napídir wit) na
man ka?</i> Are you on a diet that you've lost
so much weight?

<p><b>pidist</b>&acaron;l <i>n</i> @pedestal on which a flower pot,
vase, lamp, etc. is put. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make into,
use a pedestal.

<p><b>pidíyus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{egg noodles} of the same material
as macaroni but made into various
shapes: shells, stars, half-moons, etc. <i>v</i> [A; b]
cook s.t. with <i>pidíyus</i>.

<p><b>pidlà</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @spurt, for liquid to be ejected
with force for a short period of time.
<i>Inig-abut sa lamì mupidlà ang tús (útin),</i>
When you have your orgasm, the sperm
spurts out (the penis spurts). <i>Magpidlà gánì
ang lungag, dúnay tamalà sa iláwum,</i> If liquid
spurts out of the hole, that means there
is a small octopus inside. <i>Gipidlà níya ang
túbig sa ákung nawung,</i> She spewed the water
in my face. <b>2</b> treat a sickness by chewing
herbs and spitting on the joints of the
patient, usually following massage and prayers.
<i>n</i> this medical treatment.

<p><b>pidlasut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for liquids to come out in
a long, thin spurt. <i>Hipidlasutan ku sa túbig,</i>
The water spurted on me.

<p><b>pidlut</b> = <sc>PIDLASUT</sc>.

<p><b>pidpid</b> <i>a</i> @{very near} or @close. <i>Pidpid ra kaáyu
ang ímung paglingkud kanákù,</i> You took a
seat too close to me. <i>Ibutang ang katri pidpid
sa bungbung,</i> Put the bed against the
wall. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] put, stay very close along
s.t. <i>Mipidpid ku sa paril arun dì himatikdan,</i>
I stayed close to the wall so no one would
notice me. <b>2</b> [AN; b6] travel close along
s.t. <i>Namidpid ang sakayan sa baybáyun,</i>
The boat sails close to the shore.

<p><b>Pidru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Peter, man's name. <b>2</b> <b>si &mdash;</b> one's penis
(euphemistic slang). <i>Paghúbù níya, mitindug
dáyun si Pidru,</i> When she started to
undress, my peter stood up.

<p><b>pidsbuy</b> <i>n</i> @{pageboy bob}. <i>v</i> [A; c16] wear a
pageboy haircut, cut the hair in the pageboy
style.

<p><b>pid-uk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; b7c] make or @{grow dim}.
<i>Mupid-uk ang sugà ug wà nay gás,</i> The light
will get dim (or flicker) if there's no more
gas. <i>Pid-úki ang sugà kay matúlug na ta,</i>
<pb n=1547>Dim the light, because we're going to sleep
now. <b>2</b> [AN3; b6] for a light or the eyes to
flicker. <i>Mipid-uk (namid-uk) siya nákù nga
dílì paubanun níla,</i> She winked at me not to
go along with them. <i>n</i> wink of the eye.

<p><b>pid-uk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [N; b6] look out of the corners of
the eyes with suspicion or disdain. <i>Ngánung
namid-uk ka nákù?</i> Why are you looking
at me with disdain?

<p><b>pigà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @press, @squeeze s.t. <i>Akuy mupigà
sa kinagud lubi,</i> I will press the juice
out of the grated coconut. <i>Gipigà níya ákung
kamut sa kahinangup,</i> He squeezed
my hand in welcome.

<p><b>pigádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for an area to be too small for s.t.
<i>Pigádu kaáyu ning baláya pára ninyu,</i> This
house is too small for you. <i>Pigádu ra ning
baláya sa dálan,</i> This house is too close to
the street. <b>2</b> hard up financially. <i>Pigádu mi
kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We are hard up because
I have no work. <b>3</b> for there not to be
enough time. <i>Pigádu na rung ipaúlì,</i> There
is not enough time to get home any more.
<b>4</b> in billiards, for the cue ball to be touching
another ball or be touching the edge of the
billiard table. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; c1] get to be too
small in space or area. <i>Nagkapigádu ang ákung
mga sinínà nga nanambuk na ku,</i> My
dresses are getting too tight as I gain weight.
<b>2</b> [B12] get to be hard up financially. <b>3</b>
[A] give s.o. little time to do s.t. <i>Mipigádu
siya ug paningil kay nanginahanglan giyud,</i>
He pressed his debtors for immediate payment
because he needed the money.

<p><b>pigal</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] roll s.t. into a cylinder by
turning it over and over on itself or s.t. else.
<i>Magpigal kug panaptun nga ákung suksúkan
sa báraw,</i> I will roll up a piece of cloth to
insert the knife into. <i>Ayaw ipigal (pigala)
ang kwartang papil,</i> Don't roll up the paper
money. <i>n</i> a cylindrical mass of s.t. <b>&mdash; pang
dáhun</b> <i>n</i> young leaf buds or shoots rolled
into a cylinder. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> cigar rolled and pressed
flat.

<p><b>pígat</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] squash, squeeze s.t. soft
out of shape. <i>Siyay nakapígat sa kartun nga
íyang natumban,</i> He stepped on the box
and squashed it. <i>Napígat ang ságing nga nalingkuran,</i>
He squashed the bananas when
he sat on them.

<p><b>pigáwu</b> = <sc>PIGÁDU</sc>.

<p><b>piging</b> <i>n</i> party with sumptuous food. <i>v</i> [A; b]
give a @banquet.

<p><b>pigiri</b> <i>n</i> @piggery. <i>Daghan na ang bábuy sa íyang
pigiri,</i> He has lots of pigs in his piggery
now.

<p><b>pigis</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] crush or mash s.t. fine with
a rolling pin or in a mortar. <i>Pigisa (pigsa,
<pb n=1548>ipigis) ug maáyu ang kakaw,</i> Crush the cacao
fine. <b>pigsanan</b> <i>n</i> flat board where s.t. is
crushed. <b>pinigsan</b> <i>n</i> pork fat cooked to
extract the lard and then squeezed in a
squeezer into rounded slabs. <i>v</i> [A] make,
have <i>pinigsan</i>.

<p><b>pigit</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for the string of a musical instrument
not to sound well because of s.t. that
impedes proper vibration. <i>Ang tíngug sa
íyang sista pigit kaáyu,</i> His guitar doesn't
give a full sound. <b>2</b> for the voice to be
cracked. <i>Pigit kaáyu ang íyang tíngug ug
mutaas ang kanta,</i> Her voice cracks in the
upper register. <b>3</b> for rounded things not to
be true, out of shape. <i>Ang íyang kasing pigit
kaáyu,</i> His top is very much out of true.
<i>v</i> [B] be, become cracked, out of shape;
fail to vibrate properly.

<p><b>pig-it<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @narrow, @tight. <i>Pig-it nga sinínà,</i> A
tight dress. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a12] become tight-fitting,
be narrow. <i>Napig-it ang ákung sinínà
kay mikúlù,</i> My dress became tight because
it shrunk. <i>Ug pig-itun ang kalsáda dílì makaági
ang trák,</i> If the road is made too narrow,
the bus won't be able to use it. <b>2</b> [A; a1]
press s.t. tightly in one's hand or embrace.
<i>Ang mga kandidátu kusug mupig-it
ug kamut,</i> The candidates are shaking hands
for all they are worth. <i>Ayaw pig-íta ang bátà
pagkúgus,</i> Don't hold the baby too close.
<b>3</b> [A; a] pressure s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Pig-íta
arun musugut,</i> Exert pressure on her so that
she will accept you. <b>4</b> [A; b5] subject s.o.
to strong disciplinary constraint. <i>Kinahanglan
pig-ítan ang anak nga dalága,</i> It is necessary
to keep tight reins on one's daughter.
<b>-in-ay</b> <i>v</i> [A13] press, shake each other's
hands. <i>Nagpinig-ítay sa kamut ang mga bisíta,</i>
The guests were shaking each other's
hands.

<p><b>pig-it<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PIGIT</sc>, <i>a1</i>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>pignit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @pinch, pick off with the
thumb and the forefinger. <i>Pigníta ang íkug
sa ilagang patay,</i> Pick up the dead rat by the
tail. <i>Gipignit ku ang íyang áping,</i> I pinched
her cheek. <i>n</i> a pinch of s.t. <i>Usa ka pignit
nga asin,</i> A pinch of salt.

<p><b>pigsà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @mash, @squash s.t. not dry into
a fine pulp. <i>Magpigsà kug nilung-ag patátas,</i>
I'll mash the potatoes.

<p><b>pigsang</b> <i>v</i> [B] <b>1</b> for flowers to be in full
bloom. <i>Mipigsang ang mga búlak sa hardin,</i>
The flowers in the garden bloomed. <b>1a</b> for
s.t. to manifest itself to a great extent. <i>Nagpigsang
ang íyang nawung sa kaúlaw,</i> His
face became flushed with shame. <b>2</b> for a
sickness to be developing to a stage where
a rash or skin inflammation will burst out.
<pb n=1549><i>Mipigsang na ang íyang tipdas,</i> His measles
is in the incubation period. <b>3</b> [AB; a] for
pus to come out of infections; cause to do
so. <i>Mupigsang nang hubag mu ug pislítun,</i>
The pus will come out of your boil if you
press it. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> flourishing, manifesting itself
in great quantities or to a great extent. <b>2</b>
full of pus.

<p><b>pigsat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @mash, @squash into a pulp,
usually a large quantity or s.t. large.

<p><b>pigsik</b> <i>v</i> [AB246; a2] squeeze s.t. to cause it
to squirt out; for liquid to squirt out when
pressed or squeezed. <i>Mupigsik ang balat kun
hikápun,</i> Sea cucumbers will squirt out liquid
if you touch them. <i>Gipigsik níya ang
bugas sa íyang ilung,</i> She squeezed the pimple
on her nose to get the acne out. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i>
for rice grains or coconut to be mature enough
to squirt out white juice if you press
the grains or meat.

<p><b>pigsit</b>, <b>pigsut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b2] spurt out through a
tiny, narrow opening. <i>Mipigsut ang nánà
pagpislit sa hubag,</i> Pus spurted out when the
boil was pressed. <i>Hingpigsutan ku sa átà sa
nukus,</i> The squid spurted ink at me. <i>n</i> @spurt.

<p><b>pigting</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> hit briskly with the end
of a stick. <i>Gipigtíngan nákù sa sungkud ang
íyang kamut,</i> I whacked him on the hand
with my cane. <b>2</b> hack an animal's tendon
prior to slaughtering it so that it cannot
escape when it is stabbed.

<p><b>pigtul</b> = <sc>PINTUL</sc>.

<p><b>pígung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @grip or @hold s.t. firmly. <i>Ayúhag
pígung ang baktin kay makabuhì unyà,</i>
Hold the piglet tight or it will get away. <i>Pigúngi
ning káhuy kay ákung gabsun,</i> Press
this board tight because I'm going to saw it.

<p><b>pigúra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> figure, contours of a body, esp. of
a woman. <b>2</b> a drawing or representation of
a figure. <b>3</b> figures in statistics.

<p><b>pigurin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @figurine. <b>2</b> a framed picture of
a saint.

<p><b>pigus</b> <i>a</i> smallest animal in a litter and, by extension,
among children in a family.

<p><b>pig-ut</b> (from <i>piut</i>) <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @narrow, not affording
enough space. <b>2</b> hard up financially. <i>Pig-ut
ang ámung kahimtang,</i> We are in a tight financial
situation now. <b>3</b> @ugly. <i>v</i> [B12; a] <b>1</b>
become small, narrow in space. <i>Napig-ut
ang kwartu sa mga butang,</i> The room was
crowded with so many things inside it. <i>Nagkapig-ut
ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid,</i> The
trail into the mountain gets narrower and
narrower. <b>2</b> get financially hard up. <b>3</b> become
ugly. <b>4</b> [A; b] subject s.o. under one's
care to tight restrictions. <i>Dì ku mupig-ut
ninyu basta magtárung mu,</i> I won't be too
strict with you as long as you behave. <b>5</b> [A; b5]
<pb n=1550>pressure s.o. into s.t. <i>Dílì siya mubáyad
ug dílì pig-útun (pig-útan),</i> She won't pay if
you don't press her.

<p><b>pihádu</b> see <sc>PIHAR</sc>.

<p><b>pihak</b> <i>v</i> [B6] for a child's fontanel to get
depressed. <i>Mupihak ang hubun[**bubun? P2 |hubun -P3] sa bátà ug
masakit,</i> The baby's fontanel becomes depressed
when it's sick. <i>a</i> for the fontanel to
be depressed. <b>pihakpíhak</b> = <sc>TAMPIHAK</sc>.

<p><b>pihar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b8] notice s.t. <i>Wà ku makapihar
nga miági siya,</i> I did not notice that
he passed by. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] make sure of
s.t. <i>Pihara ug náa ba giyud siya,</i> Make sure
if she is really there. <b>3</b> [A12] have the edge
or advantage in doing s.t. <i>Nakapihar siya sa
tanang aplikanti kay paryinti man,</i> He had
the edge over the other applicants because
he was a relative. <b>pihádu</b> be certain. <i>Pihádu
kaáyu kung kawatan siya,</i> I'm certain he is
a thief. <i>v</i> [B1256; a12] make, become sure
of s.t. <i>Pihadúa úsag túa na ba siya,</i> Make
sure he's gone first.

<p><b>pihaw</b> a <b>1</b> @embarrassed, @self-conscious. <i>Pihaw
kaáyu ang íyang linihukan,</i> She acts in a
very self-conscious manner. <b>2</b> @{out of tune}.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] embarrass slightly. <i>Napihaw
ku kay hisakpan kung nagpasiklap,</i> I was
embarrassed because she caught me stealing
a glance at her. <b>2</b> [B12; a1] get out of tune,
off-key. <i>Mapihaw ku ug mutaas ang núta,</i> I
go off-key on the high notes.

<p><b>pihig</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @slanting, not straight. <i>Ang halígi pihig
sa tuu,</i> The post is tilted to the right. <b>2</b>
favoring. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a] become leaning or slanting.
<i>Napihig man nang ímung hinápay,</i> The
part in your hair is crooked. <b>2</b> [A; c1] show
partiality in favor of. <i>Dì ku mupihig kang
bísan kinsa,</i> I won't play favorites with anyone.
<b>3</b> separate according to class or kind.
<i>Pihigun (ipihig) ang gagmay nga lísu,</i> Separate
out the small seeds. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> one discriminated
against.

<p><b>pihing</b> a being not quite spherical, irregular.
<i>Ságad sa buungun pihing,</i> Most pomelos are
not quite spherical. <i>v</i> [B; c1] become uneven
or irregular, not quite round. <i>Mupihing
ang úlu sa bátà ug pirming magtakilid,</i> The
child's head will grow uneven if you always
have it lie on one side.

<p><b>píhu</b>, <b>píhù</b> <i>a</i> @sure, @certain. <i>Píhu kaáyu nga siya
ang sad-an,</i> It is certain that he is the culprit.
<b>&mdash; na lang</b> obviously. <i>Píhu na lang nga
mangísug siya ug mamakak ka,</i> Of course he
will get mad if you tell lies. <b>prisyu &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{fixed
price}. <i>Wà nay hangyù, prisyu píhu na,</i> You
can't bargain. It's fixed price. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] become
certain. <i>Nagkapíhu na ang kadaúgan
sa ákung kandidátu,</i> My candidate's victory
<pb n=1551>is getting more and more certain. <b>2</b> [A; a]
verify, see if s.t. is true. <i>Pihúa usà ka musumbung,</i>
Make sure it's true before you report
it.

<p><b>pihuk</b> = <sc>PILHUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pii</b> <i>a</i> be not perfectly spherical or circular.
<i>Pii ang ligid kay nadusmug ang mutur sa paril,</i>
The wheel is not round any more because
the motorcycle crashed into a wall. <i>v</i>
[B; a2] be out of true. <i>Mupii (mapii) ang
yanta ug hugut kaáyu ang radiyus,</i> The rim
will be out of true if the spokes are too
tight.

<p><b>píi</b> <i>n</i> acronym for <sc>P.E.</sc>, @{Physical Education}.
<i>v</i> [A1; b6] hold <sc>P.E.</sc> activities.

<p><b>píis</b> <i>n</i> acronym for <sc>P.S.</sc>, @postscript. <i>v</i> [A1; c]
write a postscript. <i>Ipíis ku na lang nang ímung
panúgun,</i> I'll put your request in the
postscript.

<p><b>piit</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{too narrow}. <i>Piit kaáyu siyag sinínà,</i>
She has a very tight dress on. <i>Piit kaáyung
dálan,</i> Too narrow a street. <b>2</b> close, not affording
proper distance. <i>Piit kaáyu siya nga
mubayli,</i> He dances too close. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a] for
an area to be too narrow or small, get
into too narrow a place. <i>Napiit ang ilagà sa
káhuy,</i> The mouse was wedged tight in the
firewood. <b>1a</b> [A; a] hold s.t. tightly, in a
close embrace. <i>Gipiit ni Inting ang láwas ni
Tabúra,</i> Inting held Tabora's body in a close
embrace. <b>2</b> [A; a] compel s.o. to do s.t.
with pressure. <i>Pit-un gánì ku, mutug-an na
lang ku,</i> If I'm pressed, I'll tell the truth. <b>3</b>
[B; c1] for a singing voice to be tight and
forced on a high pitch. <i>Mupiit ang tíngug
ug taas kaáyu ang núta,</i> The singing voice
becomes tight on very high notes. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i>
contrivance to squeeze juice out of s.t.
slowly, made of two pieces of wood, the
top of which is weighed down.

<p><b>pík</b> <i>n</i> a game of hammer, scissors, paper,
used esp. to decide who is it in games. <i>v</i> [A12; a]
play this game. <i>Píkun giyud arun
way bagulbul,</i> Let's decide it by playing
hammer, scissors, paper so that no one will
grumble.

<p><b>pika</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @beat, @strike. <i>Human makapika
sa táwu, nanágan sila,</i> After beating the
man, they fled. <i>Pikhi nang tawhána,</i> Give
that fellow a beating. <b>2</b> berate s.o. with
stinging words. <i>Gipikahan ni Maryu ug insultu
ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun,</i> Mario insulted
the opposition candidate with stinging
criticisms. <b>3</b> take a picture. <i>Gipikhan ku
níya samtang nagsáyaw,</i> He took a picture
of me dancing. <b>4</b> [A; b] have sexual intercourse
(euphemism). <i>Makapika ka bag kalima?</i>
Can you do it five times? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> blow delivered.
<pb n=1552><b>2</b> action of having intercourse.

<p><b>píkak</b> <i>n</i> @peacock.

<p><b>pikal</b>, <b>píkal</b> <i>n</i> @irritability, @{bad temper}. <i>Ayaw
paubani ug pikal ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Don't
work in a bad mood. (Lit. Don't bring irritability
to work with you.) <i>Pikal kaáyung
tan-áwun ang íyang nawung,</i> Just to look at
his face is enough to make anybody angry.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> bad mood, state of being annoyed.
<i>Tungud sa ákung kapíkal wà gánì ku makapanumbaling
níya,</i> I was in such a bad mood
I didn't pay any attention to her. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i>
characterized with or having irritation or
anger. <i>v</i> [B12; a12] get in a bad mood. <i>Mapikal
siya kun samúkun,</i> He gets angry if
you bother him.

<p><b>pik-ap<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> pickup, @acceleration. <i>Maáyug pik-ap
ang íyang dyip kay bag-u ang makina,</i>
His jeep has excellent pickup because it is
new. <i>v</i> [A] pick up speed. <i>Mubagrung ang
awtu kun mupik-ap na,</i> The car zooms the
moment it picks up speed.

<p><b>pik-ap<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a small passenger bus plying unscheduled
routes. <i>v</i> [A; ac] take a pickup,
bring in a pickup bus.

<p><b>pik-ap<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> contact microphone for guitars. <i>v</i>
[A23] for a microphone to pick up sound.
<i>Kusug mupik-ap sa sáwun ning maykrupúna
kay sinsitib,</i> The microphone picks up
sound well because it is sensitive.

<p><b>pik-ap<sub>4</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2N; a2] <b>1</b> pick s.o. up on the
way s.w. <i>Kun makapik-ap ka nákus upisína,
pik-ápa na lang ku kay dúna ka may sakyanan,</i>
If you can pick me up at the office,
please do so, as you have a car. <b>2</b> pick up
girls of easy virtue in public places. <i>Namik-ap
mig babáyi sa pwinti,</i> We found some
pickups at the park.

<p><b>píkas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a] split, cut s.t. into halves
lengthwise. <i>Siyay mipíkas sa kawáyan,</i> He
split the bamboos. <i>Pikása ang isdang ibuwad,</i>
Split the fish you are going to dry. <b>2</b>
[C2; a2] share half of s.t. with s.o. else.
<i>Magpíkas ta áning pán,</i> Let's split this piece
of bread. <i>Pikási siyas ímung gikaun,</i> Split
what you're eating with him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> half of s.t.
sliced in two. <i>Usa ka píkas kík,</i> A piece of
cake. <b>2</b> the other one of a pair. <i>Dakù ang íyang
píkas tiil,</i> His one foot is bigger than
the other. <i>Píkas tumuy,</i> The other end. <b>3</b>
the other side. <i>Píkas kwartu,</i> The next
room. <b>4</b> the other place (said of people who
may be in either one of two places). <i>Túa siya
sa píkas báy,</i> He is in the other house.
<b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B456; a1] get to be half undone,
half the wrong thing. <i>Mupikas ang linung-ag
ug dílì maángay ang kaláyu,</i> The rice will
get cooked on only one side if the fire is uneven.
<pb n=1553><i>Nagpikas ang ímung sapátus,</i> You're
wearing shoes of two different pairs. <i>Nagpikas
ang sawug kay katungà ray gilampasúhan,</i>
The floor is unevenly cleaned because
only half of it was polished. <i>a</i> for s.t. to be
uneven and half-done or in pairs. <i>Pikas nga
linung-ag,</i> Unevenly cooked rice. <i>n</i> general
name for flatfishes (soles, flounders, et al.).
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> part in the hair. <i>Náa sa tungà ang íyang
piníkas,</i> His hair is parted in the middle.
<b>2</b> combing the hair with a part. <i>Piníkas
ang íyang sinudlayan,</i> He wears his hair
parted. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> split, cut. <b>2</b> for physical characteristics
to be similar, alike. <i>Kanang ímung
anak mu ra ug piníkas gíkan nímu,</i> Your son
is a chip of the old block (lit. like a half cut
off of you). <b>ka-</b>, <b>&mdash; sa kinabúhì</b> <i>n</i> @spouse. <b>&mdash;
dughan</b>, <b>kasingkásing</b> one's loved one, @sweetheart.
<b>pikaspikas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] divide into pieces.
<i>Gipikaspikas ni Hisus ang pán,</i> Jesus broke
the bread into pieces.

<p><b>pikat</b><sub>1</sub> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a2] draw down the lower
eyelid either to get s.t. out of it or to make
faces at a person in a gesture of disrespect.
<i>Ug dì ka mupikat sa ímung mata unsáun
man pagkúhà sa puling,</i> If you do not pull
the lower eyelid down, how can I get the
particle out. <i>Pikatan ta ka ug dílì musalir
nang ímung kaláki,</i> I will make faces at you
(by pulling my eyelid down) if your idea
does not work right. <b>2</b> [B] for the eyelids
to get deformed. <i>Mapikat ang mata ug hubagan
ang tabuntábun,</i> The eyes will get deformed
if the eyelids have a boil. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for the
eyes to be slightly deformed. <b>2</b> interjection
used to embarrass s.o. who made a mistake
or who has been denied s.t., uttered together
with the gesture of putting the index finger
to the lower eyelid and drawing it down.
<i>Pikat! Wà siya tagáig kwarta, Nma!</i> You
didn't get any money.

<p><b>pikat<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] push tall grass or s.t. flexible
to the sides in order to clear a path, get a
clear view. <i>Ang mag-una mauy mupikat sa
mga tag-as sagbut,</i> The one in front has to
push the tall grass to the sides. <i>Pikata (ipikat)
ang kurtína kay ngitngit,</i> Push the curtains
to the side because it's dark in here.

<p><b>pikatúrum</b> expression denoting sudden, mild
surprise. <i>Pikatúrum. Ímu pung gimab-an
ang sukud nga wà ku pahibaw-a,</i> Humph!
You gave me less without telling me you
were going to do so.

<p><b>pikbung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sound produced by the Japanese
infantry rifles of World War II. It fires
with a tick followed by a bong. <b>2</b> the rifle
producing this sound.

<p><b>pikdul</b>, <b>pikdung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b2] rap s.o. with s.t.
<pb n=1554>long and rigid with a short jerk of the forearm
(not with the whole arm raised above
the head). <i>Hingpikdungan si Nik sa sungkud
sa amahan sa dalága,</i> The father of the girl
rapped Nick on the head with his cane.

<p><b>pikdut</b> <i>a</i> @cute, @cuddly. <i>Pikdut kaáyu nang
batáa,</i> That child is very cuddly.

<p><b>piki</b> <i>n</i> @pique, k.o. cloth.

<p><b>pikì<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>PITÌ</sc>.

<p><b>pikì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> margin shells, small colorful seashells
of numerous species and designs.

<p><b>píking</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] play a guitar by plucking
the strings a note at a time. <i>Nindut siyang
mupíking sa 'Báya Kun Díyus',</i> He plays
'Vaya Con Dios' beautifully, plucking the
strings. <i>n</i> playing the guitar by plucking
the strings.

<p><b>píkit<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] hold s.t. by clipping or
joining it in some way. <i>Pikítun (ipíkit) nátù
nang ímung sinínà ug alpilir,</i> Let us fasten
your dress with a pin. <i>Pikíti ang ímung buhuk
arun dílì ilupad sa hángin,</i> Put a clasp
in your hair so it will not fly in the wind. <b>2</b>
[AC; c1] glue s.t., stick together. <i>Pikíta (ipíkit)
nang nagísing mápa,</i> Paste the torn
map back together. <i>Nagkapíkit núun ning
mga silyu,</i> The stamps are all stuck together.
<b>3</b> [AC; c1] make s.t. close, tight. <i>Nagkapíkit
mig lingkud,</i> We sat too close to each
other. <i>Ug ímung pikítun (ipíkit) ang ímung
sinínà mulakra ang ímung samput,</i> If your
dress is too tight, your buttocks will show.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clip or ferrule tied around s.t. to
hold it together: handle of knives, swords,
and the like, hoop of a barrel, loop to hold
the outriggers to the body of the boat. <b>2</b>
glue or s.t. used to fasten things in place or
together. <b>3</b> ring (slang). <i>Gitagáan siya sa iyang
bána ug pikit nga diyamanti,</i> Her husband
gave her a diamond ring. <i>a</i> @sticking,
@stuck. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] become stuck. <i>Mupikit ang
buling ug dì ka malígù,</i> The dirt will stick to
you if you don't bathe. <b>2</b> [C; c] wear a ring
(slang).

<p><b>píkit<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b1(1)] @picket. <i>Gipikítan níla
ang kumpaníya,</i> They picketed the company.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @picketing. <b>2</b> @{picket line}. <b>&mdash; layin</b>
@{picket line}. <b>-ir</b> <i>n</i> one who pickets.

<p><b>piknat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] twist and pull at s.t. with
the thumb and forefinger. <i>Piknátun ku nang
dalunggan mu ug dílì ka mamínaw,</i> I will
tweak your ears if you don't listen. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
pull and fluff up cotton fibers and
loosen them from the seeds prior to putting
them in a deseeding device. <i>Nagpiknat kug
gápas pára ilúnud sa dutdutan,</i> I am fluffing
up the cotton before I put it into the deseeding
device.

<pb n=1555>

<p><b>piknik</b>, <b>piknit</b> <i>n</i> @picnic on the beach. <i>v</i> [A; b]
hold a picnic.

<p><b>pikpik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; a12] pat, tap lightly on the
body. <i>Dinhay nagpikpik sa ákung abága,</i>
S.o. tapped me on the shoulder. <i>Pikpíka
ang tiyan sa bátà ug dì ba butud,</i> Tap the
child's stomach to see if he doesn't have
gas. <b>2</b> [A; a] make pottery by tapping with
a flat wooden paddle. <b>3</b> [A13; a12] hammer
out dents in a car. <i>Kinsay nagpikpik sa
mga lumping sa tapalúdus awtu?</i> Who hammered
out the dents in the car fender? <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
small and short wooden paddle used by the
potters in shaping pots. <b>2</b> k.o. sorcery inflicted
by tapping s.o. on the back, counteracted
by tapping the person who sent it on
his back. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @potter. <b>2</b> person who
removes dents from an automotive vehicle
body. <b>maN-l-</b> <i>n</i> @sorcerer who causes illness
by means of <i>pikpik</i>.

<p><b>piktus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] hit with a chopping blow.
<i>Gipiktúsan nákù íyang kamut nga naggunit
sa kurta,</i> I hit the hand that was holding a
knife with a chop.

<p><b>piktiyur tíking</b> <i>n</i> taking pictures at parties or
other events. <i>v</i> [A1] for a group to have
their picture taken. <i>Magpiktiyur tíking ta sa
átung piknik,</i> Let's have our pictures taken
at our picnic.

<p><b>píku<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{pick axe}. <i>v</i> [A; a12] dig with a pick
axe.

<p><b>píku<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @picul, a measure of around 63 kilograms.
<i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] weigh s.t. heavy on a
steelyard.

<p><b>pikù</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a] for s.t. pliant to bend into a
position where it stays, cause it to do so.
<i>Magpikù tag kartun himúung kálù,</i> Let's
bend some cardboard to make hats. <i>Nagpikung
alambri,</i> A bent piece of wire. <i>Pik-a
ang hábul,</i> Fold the blanket. <i>a</i> @folded, @bent.
<b>pikùpíkù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] be @{doubled up}, @{bent over}.
<i>Nagpikùpíkù mig katáwa,</i> We were doubled
up with laughter. <b>&mdash; nga páyung</b> @{folding umbrella}.
<b>&mdash; nga síya</b> @{folding chair}.

<p><b>píkuls</b> <i>n</i> @pickles. <i>v</i> [A1] make, have pickles.

<p><b>pikun</b> <i>a</i> @sensitive, easily provoked to anger
or hurt. <i>Ayawg sugsúga nang pikun,</i> Don't
tease s.o. who is too sensitive. <i>v</i> [B126]
become easily provoked or sensitive. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i>
of a sensitive, easily provoked sort.

<p><b>píkut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a12] close a long, narrow
opening, get closed. <i>Nagkapíkut na ang samad,</i>
My wound is gradually closing up
now. <i>Pikúta ang bàbà sa sáku,</i> Sew the
mouth of the sack. <b>2</b> [B] for the eyes to become
mere slits. <i>Napíkut ang íyang mata sa
paghinílak,</i> Her eyes became mere slits from
crying. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> having slant eyes. <b>2</b> name
<pb n=1556>given to the Japanese during World War II.

<p><b>píkut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] corner a man into marriage
(slang). <i>Gipíkut si Luis sa tigúwang
dága,</i> Luis was trapped into marriage by
the old maid.

<p><b>pikuy</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>PIRÍKU</sc>. <b>2</b> child's word for the
penis.

<p><b>píl<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab8] fail a student. <i>Mupíl ku sa bátà
nga dílì makamau,</i> I'll fail a pupil who
doesn't know anything. <i>Napíl si Birting sa
klási,</i> Berting failed in his class.

<p><b>píl<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] peel moles off the face chemically.

<p><b>pila</b> <b>1</b> how much, how many, to what extent.
<i>Pila ka buuk ímung palitun?</i> How many are
you going to buy? <b>1a</b> how much does it
cost. <i>Pila man ni?</i> How much does this
cost? <b>1b</b> <b>-y pálad</b> who knows. <i>Pilay pálad
ug madátù ku,</i> Who knows, I might get rich.
<b>2</b> = <sc>PIPILA</sc>. <b>3</b> <i>in phrases</i>: <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ra gud</b> it's
nothing, what does it amount to anyway?
<i>Pila ra gud nà ug buut buhátun?</i> What does
it amount to anyway if you put your heart
into it? <b>3b</b> <b>&mdash; may sugílun</b> to make a long
story short. <i>Pila may sugílun, si Binut nahímung
magsusúlat ug nabantúgan,</i> To make
a long story short, Binot became a writer
and became famous. <i>v</i> [b6] consider s.t. to
be very little. <i>Gipilahan ka ba íni nga daghan
kaáyu ni?</i> You think this isn't very
much, when it is so much? <b>(<-)</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>TAG-(<-)</sc>.
<b>2</b> = <sc>PILA</sc>, <i>3a</i>. <b>piláhay</b> <b>1</b> only recently,
not so long ago. <i>Piláhay pa tung naminyù
si Buduy,</i> Bodoy got married not so long
ago. <b>2</b> a few. <i>Piláhay na lang ang nanghibilin
sa ámung buungun,</i> Only a few of our
pomelos are left. <b>3</b> = <sc>PILA</sc>, <i>3a</i>. <b>ika-</b> which
[number] is it? <i>Ikapila na nà ka (nga) básu
nang ímung giinum?</i> That makes how many
glasses that you have drunk? <b>ka-</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>PILA</sc>,
<i>3a</i>. <b>2</b> = <sc>MAKA-</sc>. <b>kapiláhay</b> = <sc>PILÁHAY</sc>, <i>1</i>.
kapid-an a group of many. <i>Kapid-an na ka
adlaw walà pa mahiulì ang amahan,</i> For several
days now, the father has not returned.
<b>maka-</b>, <b>ka-</b> how many times? <i>Makapila nímu
hugási ning imbaw?</i> How many times
did you wash these clams? <b>tag-(<-)</b> how
much apiece? <i>Tagpíla man nang mansánas?</i>
How much are those apples each? <b>tinag-</b> <i>v</i>
[a12] do s.t. in lots or multiples. <i>Gitinagpila
man nímug dala ang káhuy?</i> How many
pieces of wood did you bring at one time?
<b>piláun</b>, <b>pilahun</b>, <b>tagpilahun</b> <i>n</i> the kind that
cost how much. <i>Pilahun (tagpilahun) man
tung íyang gipalit?</i> What kind (the kind
costing how much) did he buy? <b>r-</b> <b>1</b> several.
<i>Human sa pipila ka úras, haúna,</i> Take it out
after a few hours. <b>2</b> a few. <i>Pipila na lang ang
<pb n=1557>nahibilin,</i> Only a few are left.

<p><b>píla</b> <i>n</i> @queue. <i>Taas kaáyu ang píla sa manan-*áway[**should hyphen be retained? i believe the root is tan-aw. P2]
sa sini,</i> There was a long line of people
waiting to get into the show. <i>v</i> [A; a2P]
queue up.

<p><b>pílak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @silver. <i>Ang pintúrang pílak many
ságad ipintal sa puthaw,</i> They usually use
silver paint to paint metal. <b>2</b> @money. <i>Daghan
siyag pílak apan dalù,</i> He has plenty of
money, but he is stingy. <i>v</i> [b6] plate with
silver. <i>Gipilákan ang kuptanan sa pultahan,</i>
The door knob is silver-plated. <i>a</i> @silvery,
@silver-coated. <b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> @silvery.

<p><b>pilantrupu</b> <i>n</i> @philanthropist. <i>v</i> [B156] be or
become a philanthropist.

<p><b>pil-ap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] fill out forms. <i>Pil-ápi ang ímung
purma,</i> Fill out your forms.

<p><b>pilápil</b> <i>n</i> @{rice field}; @{rice paddy}. <i>v</i> [A1; a12]
prepare a piece of land for planting rice.
<b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>PILÁPIL</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>pílas</b> <i>v</i> [B6; b4] <b>1</b> get @chafed. <i>Mupílas (pilásan)
ang bukubuku sa kabáyù ug way hampílù,</i>
The back of the horse will get chafed
if you don't use a saddlecloth. <i>Gipilásan
ang ákung páa pagsinakay sa kabáyù,</i> My
thighs got chafed from too much horseback
riding. <b>2</b> @chafe[**chafed], @sore. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>PÍLAS</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>piláta</b> <i>a</i> @snooty, @{stuck up}. <i>Ang piláta bayà
wà na giyud patim-aw dinhi sukad nakadyakpat
ug Amirkánu,</i> Now that she landed
an American she's too damn high class to
come around here any more.

<p><b>pilátu</b> <i>a</i> @rowdy, @naughty, @mischievous (from
<i>Pilátu</i>, Pontius Pilate). <i>Magubut giyud ang
punduk ug musalga na ni si Pilátu,</i> The
whole group becomes disorderly when this
ruffian (Pontius Pilate) joins them. <i>Kapilátu
bayà íning batáa. Magpakúgus,</i> What a
naughty child this is. He wants to be carried
all the time.

<p><b>pilaw</b> <i>n</i> @vigil. <i>Dúgay kaáyu ang ámung pilaw
sa minatay,</i> We held a long vigil for the
dead. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @drowsy, @sleepy. <b>2</b> not having sleep.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; a4] become drowsy or feel
sleepy. <i>Makapilaw (makapapilaw) man ning
trabahúa,</i> This work makes you sleepy. <i>Gipilaw
na ku,</i> I'm sleepy. <b>2</b> [A] take a @nap,
snatch @sleep. <i>Mipilaw kug kadalì únà mutrabáhu,</i>
I took a quick nap before I went
to work. <b>3</b> [A; b] go without sleep, have a
vigil. <i>Pilawan námug bantay ang kawatan,</i>
We will stay up all night watching for the
robber. <b>tag-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] take a quick nap. <i>Mutagpilaw
ku kadiyut,</i> I'll take a quick nap.
<b>hatag-</b>, <b>hitag-</b> <i>v</i> [B1246; b8] @{doze off}. <i>Nahitagpilaw
ku sa sinihan,</i> I dozed off in the
movies.

<p><b>pílay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2S6; a] bend or droop at its base
<pb n=1558>limply. <i>Nagpilay ang bátà nga nahikatulug
sa silya,</i> The child drooped his head when
he fell asleep in his seat. <i>Nagpílay ang humay
nga naagian sa bahà,</i> The rice plants
were bent double after the flood rushed
over them. <b>2</b> [A; a] fell trees. <i>Mangadtu ta
sa lasang magpílay ug káhuy,</i> Let's go to
the forest to cut trees. <b>pilaypílay</b> <i>v</i> [A; a]
be swaying to and fro. <i>Nagpilaypílay ang uhay,</i>
The rice stalks are swaying. a spineless,
as a person without conviction. <i>Pilaypílay
nà sa pulitika,</i> He has no convictions in his
politics. [+]

<p><b>pilbaks</b> <i>n</i> k.o. homemade bomb used in
street demonstrations.

<p><b>pildi</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a] @lose in a contest. <i>Mupildi
siyag nilibu,</i> He loses by the thousands. <i>Wà
pay nakapildi sa kampiyun,</i> No one has
beaten the champion yet. <i>Mu ra ka mag napildi
sa sugal,</i> You look as if you lost in
gambling. <i>Gipildi ang ílang kandidáta sa
ámù,</i> Our candidate beat theirs. <b>2</b> [B126; a4]
die of a sickness. <i>Pildíhun (mapildi) ka
sa tísis ug dì ka mupatambal,</i> You'll die of
TB if you don't get treatment. <b>3</b> [A; a12]
cause a woman to lose her virtue. <i>Ang uyuan
ray mipildi ánang bayhána,</i> That woman
was despoiled by her own uncle. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @loser.
<i>Kinsay pildi?</i> Who lost? <b>2</b> @loss, as in gambling,
business, crops. <i>Dakù ang pildi sa ákung
humay pagbagyu,</i> The rice field suffered
a big loss because of the storm. a <b>1</b> @outclassed.
<i>Pildi kaáyu ang tím ninyu,</i> Your
team was severely beaten. <b>2</b> an exclamation
of disgust, disappointment. <i>'Pildi!' nakasinggit
si Isku. 'Gihabhab ang ákung karsúnis
sa bábuy,'</i> 'Damn!' shouted Esco. 'The
pig ate my trousers.' <b>kapildíhan</b> <i>n</i> @loss, @defeat.
<i>Angkúna ang ímung kapildíhan,</i> Concede
your defeat. <b>-ru</b> <i>n</i> loser (male). <i>Pildíru
sa iliksiyun,</i> The losers in the election. <b>-ra</b> =
<sc>PILDÍRU</sc> (female). [+]

<p><b>pildir</b> <i>n</i> @outfielder in baseball. <i>v</i> [A; c1] be
an outfielder.

<p><b>pildúra</b> = <sc>PILDÚRAS</sc> (singular).

<p><b>pildúras</b> <i>n</i> medicinal @pills.

<p><b>pilhuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c1] take a @catnap. <i>Mupilhuk
kug kadiyut kay dúna kuy pamuwáwan,</i>
I'll take a catnap because I have to
work all night through. <b>2</b> [B1] for the eyes
to droop in drowsiness. <i>Kat[=ú]g na kay nagpilhuk
na nang ímung mata,</i> You'd better
go to sleep now because your eyes are
drooping.

<p><b>pilhuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> deep @dent, fairly deep hollow
made in a surface. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] dent s.t.
rather deeply, but not too broadly. <i>Kinsay
nagpilhuk sa tapalúdu sa bisiklíta?</i> Who
<pb n=1559>made a dent on the bicycle fender? <b>2</b> [B; b6]
for the eyes to be sunken. <i>Nagkapilhuk
ang mata nga masakitun,</i> The diseased eye
is gradually becoming sunken.

<p><b>pilhung</b> <i>n</i> large shallow @dent in the surface of
s.t. <i>v</i> [A; b5] make a large shallow dent in
the surface of s.t. <i>Napilhungan (napilhung)
ang planggána nga natumban,</i> The basin got
dented when s.o. stepped on it.

<p><b>píli</b> <i>n</i> the pili nut tree of the primary forest
also cultivated for its almond-like nuts. The
sap is used for waterproofing boats: <b><i>Canarium
ovatum</i></b>.

<p><b>pílì</b> <i>v</i> [A3S; a] <b>1</b> @choose, @pick a choice. <i>Pílì
háiy ímu,</i> Choose which one you want to
have. <i>Nakapilì kug barut,</i> I happened to
choose an inferior kind. <b>1a</b> @elect s.o. to office.
<i>Mupílì tag maligdung nga pangúlu,</i> We
should elect a leader of integrity. <b>2</b> sort out
the good or bad. <i>Nagpílì ang kumpradur sa
mga mangga,</i> The wholesale buyer is sorting
the mangoes. <i>Pilíi ang bugas kay daghang tipasì,</i>
Clean (lit. sort) the rice that has lots of
unhusked grains in it. <b>3</b> <b>walay ma-</b> all the
same. <i>Tapulan ang íyang mga anak way mapílì,</i>
Her children are all lazy. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c]
be a candidate. <i>Mupapílì si Mádu pagkamayur,</i>
Mado is running for mayor. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> =
<sc>HIN-(->)</sc>. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> @election. <b>haN-</b> <i>a</i> @noble,
@{highly-esteemed}. <i>Kagíkan siya sa hamílì nga
bánay,</i> He comes from a noble family. <i>Hamíling
katilingban, maáyung gabíi,</i> Friends
(highly-esteemed people), good evening. <b>kahaN-</b>
<i>n</i> state of being noble. <b>hiN-(->)</b>, <b>hiN-*an(->)</b>
<i>a</i> @choosy, @finnicky. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. or s.o.
elected or chosen. <b>2</b> s.t. select, especial, select
k.o. large-grained rice. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. left
over after choosing. <b>-um-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @elector,
@voter. <b>-unun(->)</b> <i>n</i> @candidate for election.

<p><b>pilígis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @pleat, fold sewn in s.t. <b>2</b> @crease.
<i>Ayúhag plantsa ang pilígis,</i> Iron the crease
carefully. <i>Daghang pilígis sa íyang agtang,</i>
He had lots of wrinkles on his forehead. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; c1] make @pleats, @creases in s.t. <b>2</b> [B4N]
get creases. <i>Namilígis ang nawung sa katigúlang,</i>
His face was creased with age.

<p><b>piligru</b> <i>a</i> offering or exposed to danger. <i>Piligru
ang kahimtang sa masakitun,</i> The patient's
condition is critical. <i>Piligru ang kinabúhì sa
ismaglir,</i> A smuggler's life is full of danger.
<i>Piligru ning baláya,</i> This house is unsafe. <i>n</i>
@danger. <i>Ginúu ilikay ku sa mga piligru!</i>
Lord, keep me safe from danger. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2]
be in danger. <i>Mamiligru ku dinhing masakpan,</i>
I am in danger of getting caught in
this place. <b>-su</b> = <sc>PILIGRU</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>pilígu</b> <i>n</i> a sheet of galvanized iron, plywood,
paper. <i>v</i> [c16] count by the sheets.

<pb n=1560>

<p><b>pilíik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; c1] cry loudly in a high-pitched
voice, @squeal. <i>Mipilíik ang bátà nga
íyang gikusì,</i> The child he pinched shrieked.
<i>Nagpiliik na ang mga bábuy. Pasáwi na,</i> The
pigs are squealing. Feed them. <b>2</b> [A2S] for
the tires to screech on braking or negotiating
a curve. <i>n</i> high-pitched @screeching or
@squealing sound.

<p><b>pilik</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] spatter liquid by shaking s.t.
or flipping. <i>Gipilikan ku ang inarmirulan,</i> I
sprinkled water on the clothes to iron. <b>pilikpilik<sub>1</sub></b>
<i>v</i> [AN; a] shake the body, flap the
wings, such that water gets spattered. <i>Mupilikpilik
(mamilikpilik) ang bábuy human
siya makalúnang sa lápuk,</i> The pig shakes
the mud off its body after it wallows.

<p><b>pilikpilik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] choose a person to do
s.t. by flipping coins, drawing lots, counting
off (pinpin), etc. <i>Magpilikpilik ta ug
kinsay muúna,</i> Let's count potatoes to see
who goes first. <i>Pilikpilikun lang nátug kinsay
makatag-íya sa kábaw,</i> We will just draw
lots to determine who will get the carabao.

<p><b>pilikpilik<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. night bird. When it shows
itself it is thought to indicate that s.t. bad
is happening in the vicinity.

<p><b>pilikula</b> <i>n</i> @{motion pictures}. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @{film industry}.

<p><b>pilínu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b6] drive an animal or car.
<i>Rás ang namilínu sa kutsi,</i> The person who
is driving the car is reckless. <i>Dì na pilinúhan
ning kabáwa kay katultul na,</i> You don't
have to drive this carabao because he knows
the way. <b>2</b> [A; a] make s.t. spin. <i>Akuy únang
mupilínu sa ákung kasing,</i> I'll make
my top spin first. <i>n</i> the rope used for leading
a draft animal. <i>a</i> @{spinning wheel}.

<p><b>pilípig</b> <i>n</i> roasted young rice grains. After being
roasted the grains are pounded, winnowed,
and used for making sweets. <i>v</i> [A; a]
make <i>pilípig</i>.

<p><b>Pilipína</b> <i>n</i> @{Filipino woman}.

<p><b>Pilipínas</b> <i>n</i> @Philippines. <b>pilipinismu</b> <i>n</i> Filipinism.

<p><b>pilipinista</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the Philippine Independent
(Aglipayan) Church. <b>2</b> a member of this
church. <i>v</i> [B156] become a member of the
Aglipayan church.

<p><b>Pilipínu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Filipino person. <b>2</b> the national
language of the Philippines. <b>pilipinhun</b> <i>n</i>
Filipino, from the Philippines. <i>Laráwan sa
Pilipinhung mithì,</i> A picture of the Filipino
virtues.

<p><b>pilípit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] roll or twist s.t. small between
the fingers or with the palm of the
hand. <i>Pilipítun paghugut nang lumbuy,</i> Roll
that <i>lumbuy</i> leaf tight (for a cigar). <b>&mdash; ang
dílà</b> <i>v</i> [BN] get @{tongue-tied}. <i>Mupilípit nang
<pb n=1561>íyang dílà ug magsulti siyag Binisayà,</i> She
gets all tongue-tied when she speaks Visayan.

<p><b>pilipíti</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] roll or twist s.t. very small in
the hands or between the fingers. <i>Pilipitíha
ang hílu arun masulud sa dágum,</i> Twist the
thread to make it easy to pass through the
eye of the needle. <i>Pilipit-i (pilipitíhi) ug balhíbu
ang ímung dunggan,</i> Twirl a feather
around in your ears.

<p><b>pilípug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dwarf coconut, growing no
more than three meters, producing small
fruits. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of the <i>pilípug</i> sort.

<p><b>pilípul</b> <i>n</i> crown of the head where the hair
forms a whorl. <i>Duhay pilípul ánang batáa,</i>
That child is double-crowned.

<p><b>pílir</b> <i>n</i> loose-leaf paper filler for a notebook.

<p><b>pílir gids</b> <i>n</i> feeler, a thickness gauge consisting
of a thin, narrow strip of metal of a given
thickness.

<p><b>pilis</b> <i>n</i> a pinch of s.t. fibrous as cotton, fiber,
thread, etc. <i>v</i> [A1; b] get a pinch of s.t.
fibrous. <i>Pilisi kug gápas nga ákung ihúnad,</i>
Get me a pinch of cotton to dress the
wound with.

<p><b>pilit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC3; b6] @{stick on}. <i>Mipilit ang tikì
sa ákung tangkúgù,</i> The gecko stuck to the
nape of my neck. <i>Nagpílit ang mga silyu,</i>
The stamps got stuck to each other. <i>Pitlan
tag istíkir ang kutsi,</i> Let's stick a sticker on
the car. <b>2</b> [A23] stick to one's lover (slang).
<i>Mupilit nà siya nímu ug ímung makúhà,</i>
She'll stick to you once you manage to get
her to go to bed with you. <b>3</b> [A; b6] for
one's gaze to be fixed. <i>Mipilit ang ákung
panan-aw sa íyang atubangan,</i> My gaze rested
on her front (genital region). <i>a</i> sticky so
as to adhere. <i>Pilit kaáyu ning papilíta,</i> This
paste is very sticky. <i>n</i> sticky rice, used for
sweets. <b>&mdash; mais</b> <i>n</i> k.o. corn that produces
sticky grits, used for making desserts. <b>&mdash; ug
kamut</b> @thieving. <b>&mdash; ug dílà</b> having difficulty
pronouncing. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub> &mdash; ang dílà</b> <i>v</i> [A13] have
difficulty pronouncing. <i>Nagpílit ang ákung
dílag pangatarúngan,</i> I got all tongue-tied
trying to explain. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @paste, stick
s.t. to s.t. <i>Mipapilit siyag pahibalu sa bungbung,</i>
She pasted an announcement on the
wall. <i>n</i> @paste. <b>pilitpílit</b> <i>a</i> having difficulty
enunciating. <i>Walay pilitpílit nga pamatíun,</i>
He speaks glibly. (Lit. You don't hear the
tongue sticking.) [+]

<p><b>pílit<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @insist on doing s.t. or that s.o.
else do s.t. <i>Mipílit siya pagsulud sa kwartu
nga ngitngit kaáyu,</i> He insisted on getting
inside the very dark room. <i>Ayaw kug pilíta
sa pagpasulti sa tinúud,</i> Don't force me to
say the truth. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @insistent.

<pb n=1562>

<p><b>pilíti</b> = <sc>PLÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>pilitína</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @drawstring in the waistline used
instead of a garter. <b>1a</b> @{apron strings}. <b>pahikut
sa &mdash;</b> for a man to get married (lit. allow
himself to get tied to the apron strings). <b>2</b>
belt worn around the waist. <i>v</i> [A; a] make
into a drawstring or belt.

<p><b>píliw</b> <i>a</i> area of the sea near the shore, but
still covered at low tide. <i>v</i> [B25; c] go to
the sea near the shore. <i>Akuy dalas timun
ug mupíliw na ang lansa,</i> I'll take the wheel
when the launch gets in close to the shore.
<i>Nagkapiliw na ta. Palawri ug diyútay,</i> We
are slowly moving toward the shore. Steer
toward the deeper waters. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b1]
go toward the sea near the shore. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i>
portion of the sea near the shore. <b>kina-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> part of the sea nearest the shore (but
covered at low tide).

<p><b>pilkag</b> <i>n</i> acronym for the Philippine Civic
Action Group, a group of soldiers sent to
South Vietnam in the mid 1960's.

<p><b>pilm</b> <i>n</i> @film for cameras.

<p><b>pilpil</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] slap s.o.'s hands lightly.
<i>Pilpílun ang kamut sa bátang hugawan,</i> Any
child that plays with dirt, I will slap his
hands. <i>n</i> slapping the hands.

<p><b>píls</b> <i>n</i> @{contraceptive pills}. <i>v</i> [A13] take contraceptive
pills.

<p><b>pilt</b> <i>n</i> @felt.

<p><b>piltir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> filter tips of cigarettes. <b>2</b> filter. v
[A; a] put, make a @filter. <i>Kinsay nagpiltir
sa tangki sa túbig?</i> Who put a filter in the
water tank?

<p><b>pilu</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] look down on, have a low
regard for s.o. <i>Dílì ángay kapiluhan ang kapubri
sa táwu,</i> It isn't right to look down
on s.o. just because he's poor.

<p><b>pílu</b> <i>n</i> the cutting edge of a saw.

<p><b>pilù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] fold s.t. flat. <i>Pil-a (pilua)
ang mga lampin,</i> Fold the diapers. <b>2</b> [A; a]
crease, get creased. <i>Napilù ang litrátu kay
gipasuk lang sa subri,</i> The photo got creased
because it was just stuffed into the envelope.
<b>3</b> [A; b] make a crease in; turn a hem
up. <i>Nahíwì man pagpilù ang sidsid,</i> The
hem is crooked. <i>Ayawg pil-i ang karsúnis,</i>
Don't put a crease in the trousers. <b>4</b> [B25; a12]
be doubled, multiplied several times.
<i>Patubúun kini hangtud mupilù ang gidak-un,</i>
Let it rise until there is double the
amount. <i>Katulu piluun (pil-un) ang ákung
gastu kay sa imúha,</i> My expenses are three
times greater than yours. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; sa, ang túhud</b>
[A3; c1] bend one's knees to ask forgiveness.
<i>Dì ku pasaylúun ang ákung asáwa bísag
magpilù pa siya sa íyang túhud,</i> I will
never forgive my wife even if she crawls to
<pb n=1563>me on hands and knees. <b>6</b> [B3] for the eyes
to close in falling asleep. <i>Duyána ang bátà
kay nagpilù na ang mata,</i> Put the baby in
the cradle because it's asleep. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the hem
or fold in s.t. <b>2</b> the crease. <b>3</b> the number of
times s.t. increases. <i>Pila ka pilù ang pagdaghan
sa liwat?</i> How much has the stock multiplied
by now? <b>&mdash; sa &mdash;</b> to the fullest extent.
<i>Pilù sa pilù ang ákung pagbásul, paghigugma,
pag-úyun, pagláum,</i> I regret, love,
agree, hope (etc.) with all my heart and
soul. <b>pilùpilù</b> <i>v</i> [B456; a] be doubled or
multiplied several times. <i>Mupilùpilù ang panalángin
ug manggihatágun ka,</i> Your blessings
will be multiplied if you are generous.
<b>pinil-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the crease or mark made by
folding. <b>2</b> s.t. on which a hem or fold has
been made.

<p><b>piluk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @eyelash. <b>2</b> fringe, trimming of
cords or threads hanging like eyelashes. <b>&mdash;
sa nípà</b> end tips of nipa shingles. <b>3</b> @wink or
@blink of an eye. <b>4</b> first few days of the third
quarter (so called because only the width
of the eyelash has been taken away from
the moon). <i>Primírung, ikaduhang piluk,</i> The
first, second day of the third quarter. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A2N; c1] wink or blink the eyes. <i>Ayawg
ipiluk (piluka) ímung mata ug han-an ka,</i>
Don't blink when he raises his fist to strike
you. <b>2</b> [A; b] put eyelashes, a fringe on s.t.
<b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. adorned with fringes. <b>2</b> way
of blinking the eyes. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> a wink of an
eye. <i>Sa usa ka pamiluk nawálà siya,</i> He vanished
in the blink of an eye.

<p><b>pilúka</b> <i>n</i> @wig, @wiglet, false hair. <i>v</i> [A; b] use
a wig or false hair.

<p><b>piluk maríya</b> = <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>pilung</b> <i>a</i> for a pointed instrument to be bent
out of shape at the tip. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] bend
the point of an instrument. <i>Napilung ang
tumuy sa pín pagkahúlug,</i> The pen point
was bent out of shape when I dropped it. <b>2</b>
[A; b6(1)] cut the ear or part of it so that
it dangles, usually as an identifying mark.

<p><b>pilus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. cloth with a soft, furry surface.

<p><b>pilusupíya</b> <i>n</i> @philosophy.

<p><b>pilusupu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @philosopher. <b>2</b> @argumentative,
given to meticulous argumentations on trivial
points. <i>Pilusupu kaáyung tawhána kay
lantugíun bísag gagmayng butang,</i> He is a
very argumentative person because he argues
on even the most trivial of things. <i>v</i>
[B1; a12] become argumentative. <b>Culu-</b> <i>v</i>
[A1] acting argumentative on trivial points
where one shouldn't do so. <i>Dì siya makapupilusupu
nákù kay suphun man dáyun,</i> He
can't start subjecting me to his spidery logic
because I'll cut him short.

<pb n=1564>

<p><b>pílut</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a] sew up, patch a hole permanently,
become so. <i>Akuy mupílut sa gisì sa
ímung sinínà,</i> I'll mend the tear in your
dress. <i>Mapílut ang lungag sa dawunggan ug
dílì ariyúsan,</i> The holes in your ear will
close if you do not wear earrings. <i>Pilútun
ang mga lungaglungag úsà silákan,</i> The tiny
holes are filled before you apply shellac.
<b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @slit-eyed. <b>2</b> for seeds or fruits to be
thin, compressed. <i>Dílì maáyung itanum ang
mga lísung pilut,</i> It is no good to plant
scrawny seeds. <i>v</i> [B25] for seeds or fruits
to be too thin or scrawny.

<p><b>pilutári</b> <i>n</i> @{jai alai player}. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a
jai alai player.

<p><b>pilútu</b> <i>n</i> @pilot of a plane or boat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] pilot
s.t. <b>2</b> [B156; a2] be, become a pilot.

<p><b>pilya</b> = <sc>PILYU</sc> (female).

<p><b>pilyu</b> <i>a</i> @naughty, @mischievous. <i>v</i> [B12] become
naughty, mischievous. <i>Napilyu siya
kay pinatuyángan sa kapritsu,</i> He became
a naughty child because they catered to his
caprices. <b>&mdash; sa babáyi</b> <i>a</i> @philanderer. <b>-in-</b> <i>v</i>
[A; c1] behave mischievously, usually at
s.o.'s expense. <i>Mangasábà ang maistra ug
pinilyuhun (ipinilyu) nímu pagpangutána,</i>
The teacher will scold you if you ask questions
in a naughty way.

<p><b>píma</b> <i>n</i> cloth made of pima cotton. <i>v</i> [A13]
wear s.t. of pima.

<p><b>pimbríra</b> = <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>piminta</b> = <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.

<p><b>pimríra</b> = <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>pimyinta</b> <i>n</i> black or white pepper. <i>v</i> [b6]
put pepper in s.t.

<p><b>pín<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> pen point of a fountain pen. <b>&mdash; puyint</b>
pen point of a dip pen.

<p><b>pín<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] pin a ribbon or badge of honor,
an ornament, and the like. <i>Pínan ang balidikturyan
ug midalya,</i> They'll pin a medal
on the valedictorian.

<p><b>pina-</b> prefix consisting of <i>pa-</i> plus <i>-in-<sub>2</sub></i>.

<p><b>pína<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] tell s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Nagpína
si Tátay nga dì ta pagul-un,</i> Father told us
not to go out. <i>Gipináhan ang dinakpan sa
dílì pagpamakak,</i> The suspect was told to
tell the truth. <i>Tumána ang ákung gipína nímu,</i>
If I tell you not to do s.t., don't do it.

<p><b>pína<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] hit s.t. at an angle instead
of directly. <i>Pináhi ang burilyus arun mapingkian
ang tupad,</i> Hit the bowling pin obliquely
so that it will knock the other pins
over, too. <i>a</i> grazing a target or hitting it
obliquely.

<p><b>pinal</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be laboring for breath on
one's deathbed. <i>Nagpinal pa gánì ang amahan,
nag-ílug na sila sa katigayúnan,</i> The
father was still laboring for breath on his
<pb n=1565>deathbed, and they were already quarreling
about the inheritance. <b>kudigu &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{penal
code}. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUDIGU</sc>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>pináli</b> <i>n</i> @finale, the closing of a show.

<p><b>pinápul</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. ornamental cactus which
has pineapple-like leaves with thorny margins
and pinkish tips.

<p><b>pinatbátir</b> <i>n</i> @{peanut butter}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make,
use peanut butter.

<p><b>pinay</b> <i>n</i> @Filipina (colloquial).

<p><b>pinbuy</b> <i>n</i> @{pin boy} in a bowling alley. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
be a pin boy.

<p><b>pindaypinday</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] move in a wobbly
way. <i>Nagpindaypinday ang kabáyung bag-ung
nahimugsù,</i> The horse that was just
born is tottering.

<p><b>pindì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> remove unhusked rice or
corn grains or pebbles from a batch of rice
or grits one is about to cook. <b>2</b> select good
ears of corn from a group. <i>Pindía ang mais
nga pára binhì,</i> Select the good ears of corn
for seeds. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rice from which the
unhusked grains or pebbles have been culled.
<b>2</b> ears of corn not selected.

<p><b>pinding</b> <i>n</i> @pending, unacted on as of yet.
<i>Pinding ang kásu,</i> The case is pending.

<p><b>pindir</b> <i>n</i> a @fielder in baseball.

<p><b>pindisítis</b> <i>n</i> @appendicitis.

<p><b>pindulu</b>, <b>pindulum</b> <i>n</i> @pendulum in a clock.

<p><b>pindulun</b> <i>n</i> @{king post} supporting a roof.

<p><b>ping</b> <i>n</i> word used in writing to represent the
sound of a bullet hitting s.t.

<p><b>píngag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @chip the edge. <i>Napíngag
ang daplin sa pinggan,</i> The edge of the plate
chipped. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @chipped. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a
chipped one. <i>Ug mapingag ang tadiyaw ayawg
palita,</i> If the jar is chipped, don't buy
it.

<p><b>pingak</b> <i>a</i> @flat-nosed, esp. at the bridge. <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
be, become flat-nosed.

<p><b>pingakpíngak</b> <i>v</i> [A] breathe laboriously with
a wheezing sound in the breast, as in stifling
a sob or in an asthmatic spasm. <i>Mupingakpíngak
dáyun nà siya ug kasab-an,</i> She
starts sniffling when she's scolded just the
slightest bit. <i>Nagpingakpíngak ang hubákun,</i>
The asthmatic is breathing laboriously.

<p><b>pingay</b> <i>n</i> child's talk for female genitalia.

<p><b>pingga</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] carry s.o. in a chair with
poles attached to it. <i>Gipingga ang Santu
Pápa,</i> The pope was carried seated on a
throne. <i>n</i> chair used to carry s.o. <b>pinggahan</b>
<i>n</i> = <sc>PINGGA</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>pinggan</b> <i>n</i> @{dinner plate}, usually china. <i>v</i> [A1; a2]
eat from china plates. <i>Dì ta magpinggan
kay kápuy paghúgas,</i> We won't use
plates because it's tiresome to wash them.
<b>pingganpinggan</b> = <sc>BUKINGGAN</sc>: <b><i>Gomphrena
<pb n=1566>globosa</i></b>.

<p><b>pinggiring</b> <i>n</i> @fingering in playing an instrument
or operating a typewriter. <i>Unsay pinggiring
íning nutáha?</i> What's the fingering
for this note?

<p><b>pinggir prin</b>, <b>pinggir print</b> <i>n</i> @fingerprint. <i>v</i>
[A; b6] take s.o.'s fingerprints.

<p><b>pinghuy</b> <i>a</i> @disappointed and @downhearted.
<i>Pinghuy ang nawung sa pildíru,</i> The man
who lost in gambling had a dejected look
on his face. <i>v</i> [BN; c1] be disappointed and
downhearted. <i>Naminghuy siya sa pagkahibalu
nga wà siya dawáta,</i> He was disappointed
when he discovered he was not accepted.

<p><b>pingis</b> <i>v</i> [A12; ab] fail to hit s.t. directly or
right on the mark. <i>Gipingsan sa bála ang
ákung agtang,</i> The bullet grazed my fore-*head.
a not hit directly. <i>Pingis rang pagkaigúa
maung nakalupad,</i> I just grazed it so it
managed to fly away.

<p><b>ping-it</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] @grimace, usually in pain
or suffering. <i>Miping-it siya sa kasakit,</i> He
grimaced in pain. <b>2</b> [A13] @suffer in much
misery or difficulty. <i>Nagping-it ang tanan
sa kamahal sa palalítun,</i> Everybody is suffering
from the high prices of commodities.

<p><b>pingk</b> <i>a</i> @pink-colored.

<p><b>pingkaw</b> = <sc>SINGKAW</sc>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>pingkì</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] knock lightly, esp. s.t. that
produces a clinking noise. <i>Hináyag pingkì
ang duha ka básu,</i> Clink the two glasses together
lightly. <i>Pingkíun ku unyà nang inyung
úlu,</i> I think I'll knock your heads
against each other. <i>a</i> @knock-kneed. <i>Pingkì
ang babáyi nga íyang naasáwa,</i> He married
a knock-kneed woman. <i>n</i> @clinking, @clanking
sound. <i>Ang pingkì sa yílu sa básu,</i> The clinking
of the ice against the glass. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>PINGKÌ</sc>,
<i>n</i>.

<p><b>pingkit</b> <i>a</i> for things that are alike to be joined
by some part of themselves. <i>Pingkit ang
tiil sa bíbi,</i> Ducks have webbed feet. <i>Pingkit
nga ságing,</i> Two bananas joined together as
one. <i>v</i> [A; a] tie things together using a
part of them to do the tying. <i>Nagpingkit siya
sa mga butung nga dad-un,</i> He tied the
two young coconuts together for us to take
home. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> things joined in this way.

<p><b>pingpung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ping-pong. <b>2</b> @{ping-pong ball}. <i>v</i>
[A2C; b6] play ping-pong. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> place to
play ping-pong.

<p><b>pinguspingus</b> <i>v</i> [A13] make quick sniffs at
intervals as in sobbing or simply drawing
mucus back into the nose. <i>Naghilak tingáli
ang bátà kay nagpinguspingus man,</i> The
child must have been crying because he is
sniffling. <i>n</i> @sniffling.

<p><b>píngut</b> <i>a</i> @irritated, slightly angry. <i>Píngut kaáyu
<pb n=1567>ug makakità kug bátang húgaw,</i> I get
very annoyed if I see a dirty child. <i>v</i> [B; ab3c5]
get annoyed, irritated. <i>Nagpíngut ning
ákung úlu sa kasábà,</i> My head is buzzing
from the noise. <i>Kinsay dílì mapíngut sa kabúgù
nímu?</i> Who wouldn't be irritated by
your stupidity? <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @irritation, @anger.

<p><b>ping-ut</b> <i>a</i> for the nose to be stuffed. <i>v</i> [B6; b4]
have a stuffed nose. <i>Muping-ut (maping-ut)
ang ákung ilung ug hitun-ugan ku,</i> I will
get a stuffed nose if I expose myself to
the draft.

<p><b>pinguypinguy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a3] let one's head
hang limply, as in being sleepy, drunk, feeble,
and the like. <i>Nagpinguypinguy siya kay
gitulug,</i> His head is hanging limply because
he is so sleepy. <b>3</b> [AP; b6] hang one's head
in shame. <i>Mupinguypinguy (mupapinguypinguy)
lang nà siyag kasab-an,</i> He just
hangs his head when he is reprimanded.

<p><b>pingwit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>BINGWIT</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>2</b> [AN; a] @{pick
pockets}, @filch (slang). <i>Gipingwit ang mga sinínà
nga gihayhay sa kwartu,</i> The clothes
that were hung in the room were stolen.
<i>Pingwíti ang íyang bulsa,</i> Pick his pocket. <b>3</b>
fish for a compliment, gossip, and the like.
<i>n</i> the equipment for hook and line fishing
in shallow or moderately deep sea waters.
<b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fish caught by hook and line in
shallow or not too deep waters. <b>2</b> thing
stolen or pickpocketed. <b>3</b> talk gathered.

<p><b>pinhuldir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penholder for a dip pen. <b>2</b> @{dip
pen}. <i>v</i> [A; ac] use, write with a dip pen.
<i>Magpinhuldir mi sa ámung tim rayting,</i>
We'll use dip pens for writing our themes.

<p><b>pinid</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> separate things out by class.
<b>2</b> do s.t. in proper order, not skipping
around. <i>Pinira ang paglimpiyu sa salug arun
dì ka magbalikbálik,</i> Clean the floor square
at a time so you don't keep having to go
over the same things again and again. <i>Akuy
mupinid sa mga maáyung púsù sa dì maáyu,</i>
I'll separate the good ears of corn from the
bad ones. <i>Pinira ang mga piryudiku sa tinuig,</i>
Separate the newspapers out according
to years.

<p><b>pinig</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> @{put aside}. <b>2</b> @sort or separate
according to kind. <i>Nagpinig kug dagkung
lubi pára ibinhì,</i> I put aside the large
coconuts for seedlings. <b>3</b> @exclude from. <i>Gipinig
siya sa iks&acaron;m,</i> She was excused from
the exam. <b>4</b> @favor, show @partiality to or
discrimination against. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> showing
discrimination. <i>Mapinígun siyag higála,</i> He
is choosy about who he makes friends with.

<p><b>pinikáda</b> <i>n</i> k.o. disinfectant solution. <b>agwa &mdash;</b>
= <sc>PINIKÁDA</sc>.

<p><b>pinikítu</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] enforce rules or collect
<pb n=1568>debts in a strict manner. <i>Dúnay mga kumirsiyanti
nga kusug mupinikítu ug paningil,</i>
Some business people are merciless when it
comes to collecting their debts. <i>Gipinikítu
(gipinikitúhan) na run sa gubyirnu ang mga
ismaglir,</i> The government is tightening the
reins on the smugglers.

<p><b>*píning</b> <b>maáyu ang &mdash;</b> throwing the ball in
bowling so that lots of pins are knocked
over. <i>Dakù siyag puntus kay maáyu ang íyang
píning,</i> He has a large score because
he knocked lots of pins over.

<p><b>pinípig</b> = <sc>PILÍPIG</sc>. <b>&mdash; krans</b> <i>n</i> ice cream on
sticks with chocolate coating that has <i>pilípig</i>
embedded in it.

<p><b>pinipíta</b> = <sc>SIRBILYÍTA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pinisilin</b> <i>n</i> @penicillin.

<p><b>pinising</b>, <b>pinísing</b> <i>n</i> @finish, @{final coating}. <i>v</i> [A; b]
apply finish. <i>Hámis ang simintung pinisíngan,</i>
The concrete floor will be smooth
after it has been finished. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. nail
without a head used to nail things in such a
way that it is invisible.

<p><b>pinitinsiya</b> <i>n</i> @penance. <i>a</i> involving difficulty
or suffering. <i>Pinitinsiya kaáyu, kita pay mulíhuk
nga nagsakit ta,</i> It is purgatory to do
household chores when you're not feeling
well. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] impose penance. <i>Gipinitinsiyáhan
kug usa ka nubína,</i> I was given
the penance of performing a novena. <b>2</b> [A13; a12]
annoy or burden s.o. with sufferings.
<i>Pinitinsiyáhan ta ka arun ku makabalus,</i>
I'll make you go through hell so I can
get even with you.

<p><b>pinkaw</b> = <sc>SINGKAW</sc>.

<p><b>pinkusyun</b> <i>n</i> @pincushion. <i>v</i> [A; c] use a pincushion.

<p><b>pinpal</b> <i>n</i> @{pen pal}. <i>v</i> [A2C; c3] have a pen pal,
be pen pals. <i>Makigpinpal ang tigúlang pinsiyunádu
ug Pilipína,</i> The old pensioner
wants to engage in correspondence with a
Filipina (for the purpose of marriage).

<p><b>pinpin</b> <i>n</i> game of eeny, meeny, miny, mo.
One version of the rhyme: <i>Pinpin sirapin,
kutsilyu dialmasin. Hawhaw dikarabaw, bá
tú tin.</i> Another version: <i>Pinpin sarapin dilmun.
Bayintisingku kapun. Kulikulik bastun.</i>
<i>v</i> [C2; a12] choose by <i>pinpin</i>.

<p><b>pinsa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fence of wood or bamboo slats. <b>2</b>
space fenced with slats under a house which
is raised on posts. <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> fence s.t. <b>2</b>
fence the part under a house. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> rough
walling made of bamboo slats, groups of
two vertical slats woven through groups of
three horizontal slats.

<p><b>pinsar</b>, <b>pins&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] think of a way,
solution. <i>Pinsárun (pinsarun) ta nig maáyu
ug unsay maáyung paági,</i> Let's think
<pb n=1569>hard about this, what the best solution is. <i>n</i>
one's way of thinking, thought processes.
<i>Hínay kaáyu ang íyang pinsar, apan pulus
hustu,</i> He thinks slowly, but it is always
correct. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>PINSAR</sc>. <b>pinsáda</b> = <sc>PINSAR</sc>.
<b>pinsamintu</b>, <b>pinsamyintu</b> = <sc>PINSAR</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>pinsil<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] treat a puncture with drops
from a burning tobacco midrib dipped in
coconut oil. <i>Kinahanglang pinsílan ang tunuk
sa lansang,</i> The way to treat that
wound from the nail is to apply tobacco
and coconut oil drops.

<p><b>pinsil<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> skirt, cut like a sheath, straight,
narrow at the hips and all the way down to
the hem. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear, make a skirt of
this type. <b>&mdash; kat</b> = <sc>PINSIL<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pinsing</b> <i>n</i> the sport of @fencing. <i>v</i> [A2C; b3]
fence.

<p><b>pinsit</b> <i>n</i> dish made of ground meat, wrapped
in triangular pieces of dough and fried crisp.
<i>v</i> [A; a] make <i>pinsit</i>.

<p><b>pinsiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pension. <b>2</b> allowance given to a
son or daughter with a family of his own. <i>v</i>
[A; c] give or support a daughter or son
with a family of his own. <i>Gipinsiyunan mi
sa ákung ginikánan samtang wà kuy trabáhu,</i>
My parents are sending us an allowance
until I find a job. <b>-áda</b> = <sc>PINSIYUNÁDU</sc> (female).
<b>-ádu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who receives a pension.
<b>2</b> person whose studies are subsidized by
the government. <i>v</i> [B126] become a <i>pinsiyunádu</i>.

<p><b>pinta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; abc] <b>1</b> do s.t. all at once. <i>Pintáha
paghákut ang káhuy,</i> Carry the firewood
all together. <i>Pintáhig báyad ang iskuyláhan,</i>
Pay the school fees all at once. <b>2</b> do s.t. in
large quantities. <i>Pintáhag palit arun mabarátu,</i>
Buy it in large quantities so it will be
cheap. <b>3</b> [A2; a12] hit s.t. squarely such
that it has complete effect. <i>Ug mapintag
búnal ang irù mamatay giyud,</i> If you hit
the dog squarely, you'll kill him. <i>a</i> be hit
squarely. <b>-da</b> = <sc>PINTA</sc>.

<p><b>pinta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; a1] guess the value of an inverted
mahjong piece by feeling it with the
finger[**space?]tips. <i>Pintáhun[**questionable accent. P2] ku ang ímung witingan,</i>
I'll feel the piece to see which one is the
one you are waiting for. <b>-da</b> = <sc>PINTA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pintakási<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] work in a group without
pay on a public project. <i>Gipintakasíhan sa
tagibaryu ang iskuylahan,</i> The people in the
village held a working bee to construct the
school. <i>n</i> free group work on a public project
or the action of taking part in this k.o.
group work.

<p><b>pintakási<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> licensed cockfight of champion
fighting cocks. <i>v</i> [A1; c] hold, have a champion
cockfight. <i>Magpintakási sa ámung baryu
<pb n=1570>mapista,</i> They hold champion cockfights
in our village during fiestas.

<p><b>pintal</b> <i>n</i> @paint. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] paint s.t. <i>Pintáli ug
asul ang lantsa,</i> Paint the launch blue. <b>2</b> [A2N]
put lipstick on. <i>Mamintal lang ku iniglakaw,</i>
I put lipstick on when I go out. <b>3</b>
[B1256] for one's feeling to show in the
face. <i>Napintal sa ílang nawung ang dakung
katingála,</i> Their great surprise showed on
their faces. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @paintings. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that
has been painted. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> @painter: <b>1</b> @artist.
<b>2</b> painter of houses, furniture, etc. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
style of painting. <b>2</b> occupation of painting.

<p><b>pintas</b> <i>a</i> @ferocious, @cruel and @merciless. <i>Pintas
kaáyu ang liyun,</i> A very fierce lion. <i>Ang
pintas nga mga balud,</i> The raging waves. <i>v</i>
[B12] become cruel and ferocious. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
@ferocity, @brutality. <i>Ang kapintas sa mga kaáway
mauy gikahadlúkan sa mga sibilyan,</i>
The civilians feared the merciless enemy.

<p><b>pintik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @slingshot. <i>v</i> [A; a2b2] shoot with a
slingshot. <i>Pintíkun nátù ang hinug nga búnga,</i>
Let's knock the ripe fruit down with a
slingshot.

<p><b>pintik<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PUNTIK</sc>.

<p><b>pintikustis</b> <i>n</i> @Whitsunday.

<p><b>pintuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @terse, to the point. <i>Památig maáyu
kay pintuk ning ákung túgun,</i> Pay close attention
because I'm going to tell you in a
couple of words what I want you to do. <i>v</i>
[B26; c16] talk or answer in a terse manner.
<b>pintukpintuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] do s.t. once
in a while in short, irregular periods of time
and usually not whole-heartedly. <i>Wà mahuman
ang trabáhu kay pintukpintúkan lang,</i>
The work never got done because he didn't
stick to it and he didn't have his heart in it.

<p><b>pintuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] hit s.o. in back of one
accidentally. <i>Ayaw ug barug sa ákung luyu
kay hingpintukan unyà kas atsa,</i> Don't
stand in back of me because you might get
hit with my axe.

<p><b>pintil pin</b> <i>n</i> @{felt-tip pen}.

<p><b>pintul</b> (from <i>putul</i>) <i>n</i> pieces of wood left
over after carpentry. <i>Magámit pa ning pintul
pára sa bangkítu,</i> We can use these piece[**pieces]
of wood for a stool. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> cut wood
into short lengths, chop logs crosswise. <i>Nagpintul
siya sa mga sugnud,</i> He is cutting the
firewood into lengths. <b>2</b> shorten or stub s.t.
by cutting off a length. <i>Gipintúlan níya ang
mga tabákù,</i> She cut off the tops of the tobacco.
a cut off short, into short lengths.
<i>Irù nga pintul ug íkug,</i> A dog with a stubbed
tail.

<p><b>pintur</b>, <b>pint&ucaron;r</b> <i>n</i> @painter: <b>1</b> @artist. <b>2</b> painter
of houses and the like. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be,
become a painter.

<pb n=1571>

<p><b>pintúra</b> <i>n</i> @paint. <i>v</i> [A; b] paint s.t. <i>Nabag-u
ang balay nga gipinturáhan,</i> Their house
looks new because it was just painted. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] get paint all over it.

<p><b>pintus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sweet made of shredded young
corn mixed with condensed milk or coconut
milk and sugar, wrapped in husk and
steamed (= <sc>ALUPÌ</sc>). <b>2</b> the same sort of
sweet made with fine corn grits (<i>tiktik</i>) or
sweet potatoes or cassava and wrapped in
coconut or banana leaves. <i>v</i> [A; a] make
<i>pintus</i>.

<p><b>pínu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> refined, not coarse in manners. <i>Pínug
linihukan,</i> Refined in movement. <b>1a</b>
fine, of delicate composition. <i>Pínug lís,</i> Fine
lace. <b>2</b> fine, not coarse in texture. <i>Pínug kútis,</i>
Soft skin. <i>Pínug buhuk,</i> Fine hair. <i>Pínung
pagkagaling,</i> Milled finely. <b>2a</b> done in
small pieces. <i>Pínung pagkahíwà,</i> Cut up fine.
<b>2b</b> closely spaced. <i>Ang súlud usa ka sudlay
nga pínug tangu,</i> The comb for lice is a very
fine-toothed comb. <b>2c</b> very tiny. <i>Pínung kinusian,</i>
A small and sharp pinch. <i>n</i> children,
as opposed to grown-ups. <i>Ilain ug lamísa
ang mga pínu,</i> Set another table for the
children. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a12] become refined, do
s.t. in a refined way. <b>2</b> [A; a] make s.t. fine.
<b>pinupinu</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a1] break, reduce into tiny
bits. <b>pinuhan</b> <i>n</i> a whetting stone of fine
texture used for the finishing touches.

<p><b>pínu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{pine tree}.

<p><b>pínul</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] press hard on the muscles
with the tips of the thumb and fingers to
massage them.

<p><b>pin-ut</b> = <sc>PING-UT</sc>.

<p><b>pinúun</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. ginger plant similar to <i>alimpuyang</i>,
producing small, sweet berries.

<p><b>pinuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @Filipino, esp. one who is a resident
abroad.

<p><b>pinuy</b>, <b>pínuy</b> <i>n</i> duck's eggs cooked after
they have began to develop. <i>v</i> [A; a] make,
have <i>pinuy</i>.

<p><b>pinya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pineapple. <b>2</b> cloth woven from the
fibers of the pineapple leaves. <b>pinyahan</b> <i>n</i>
pineapple plantation.

<p><b>pinyátu</b> <i>n</i> @{peanut brittle}. <i>v</i> [A1; a1] make
peanut brittle.

<p><b>pípa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cigarette holder}. <b>2</b> @pipe. <i>v</i> [A; c6]
smoke a pipe or cigarettes with a cigarette
holder. <i>Magpípa ku arun dì madág ang ákung
tudlù,</i> I use a cigarette holder so that
my fingers don't get yellowed.

<p><b>pípar bag</b> <i>n</i> large paper sack with a handle.

<p><b>pípì</b> <i>n</i> child's word for female genitalia.

<p><b>pìpì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] hammer or pat s.t. into
shape. <i>Nagpìpì siyag kúlun,</i> He's shaping a
pot by patting it. <i>Pìpíun nátù ang tapalúdung
nalumping,</i> Let's hammer the dented
<pb n=1572>fender back into shape.

<p><b>pipínu</b> <i>n</i> @cucumber.

<p><b>pípir</b> <i>n</i> canned white or black @pepper in powder
form. <i>v</i> [b] use or put pepper.

<p><b>pípir bag</b> = <sc>PÍPAR BAG</sc>.

<p><b>pipis</b> <i>n</i> a small bundle of abaca fibers (about
the size of a finger) used for tying s.t. <i>v</i> [A; a2]
make abaca fibers into such a bundle.
<i>Pipisun nákù ning lánut kay ákung ibángan
sa sugnud,</i> I'm going to bundle up this abaca
fiber to use it to tie up the firewood.

<p><b>pípis</b> <i>n</i> @{cotton bud} that is about to open. <i>v</i>
[A1] for cotton buds to be about to open.

<p><b>piplum</b> <i>n</i> peplum, a short flared skirt attached
at the waist of a dress, blouse, or
jacket, and extending around the hips. <i>v</i>
[b(1)] add a peplum to clothing.

<p><b>pipsi</b> <i>n</i> @{pepsi cola}. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)] have, offer
pepsi cola. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> money to buy a pepsi.

<p><b>pipti</b> <i>v</i> [AC2; b6] share s.o.'s cigarette or
drink with him. <i>Mupipti ku ánang ímung
gitangag, ha?</i> Let me share your cigarette
with you, may I? <b>piptipipti</b> <i>a</i> @equal, @even
(colloquial). <i>Piptipipti ang ílang báhin sa ginansiya,</i>
They share the profit equally.

<p><b>pír</b> <i>n</i> @pier.

<p><b>pira</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bladed hand weapon <b>1</b>8" to <b>2</b>4"
with a blade that curves upwards slightly
toward the tip and flat at the tip.

<p><b>píras</b> <i>n</i> @pear.

<p><b>pirásu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] cut s.t. to pieces. <i>Pirasúhun
ang nangkà arun ibaligyà,</i> Cut the jackfruit
into pieces to sell it. <i>n</i> a piece of s.t. <i>Usa ka
pirásung karni,</i> A piece of meat. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
cut into pieces. <i>Ang pinirásung karni dílì na
mahímung hamun,</i> You can't use the meat
for ham once it has been cut up. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>a</i>
@{by the piece}. <i>Pinirasu ang íyang iniphan sa
labáda,</i> She charges for the laundry by the
piece. <i>v</i> [A; c1] pay or charge by the piece.

<p><b>pirat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B146; a4] be @sleepy. <i>Gipirat (nagpirat)
na kug binása,</i> I'm sleepy from reading
so much. <b>2</b> [A] dilly-dally, take time in
doing s.t. <i>Nagpirat sila sa ílang trabáhu kay
wà swilduhi,</i> They worked slowly because
they didn't get their salary. <i>n</i> @lazy, @loafer.
<i>Ang pirat nga trabahadur wà umintuhi,</i> He
was a lazy worker so he didn't get a raise.
<b>piratpirat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] blink the eyes. <i>Nagpiratpirat
pa ang íyang mata nga mibángun,</i>
He was still blinking his eyes when he got
out of bed. <b>2</b> [A] for a flame to flicker. <i>Gási
ang sugà kay nagpiratpirat na,</i> Put kerosene
in the lamp because it is flickering.

<p><b>piráta</b> <i>n</i> @pirate. <i>v</i> [B156] become a pirate.

<p><b>piraypiray</b>, <b>piraypíray</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] move unsteadily
as if about to collapse. <i>Nagpiraypiray
ang masakitun,</i> The patient walked on
<pb n=1573>unsteady feet. <b>sam-</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SAMPIRAY</sc>.

<p><b>pir bay pir</b> <i>a</i> being {paired off}, esp. boys with
girls. <i>v</i> [A12C; c16] do s.t. paired off, be
paired off. <i>Nagpir bay pir ang mga nagdít sa
Pwinti,</i> The couples dating in the park are
paired off.

<p><b>pir dayim</b> <i>n</i> @{per diem}. <i>v</i> [A13; b(1)] give or
have a per diem allowance. <i>Magpirdayim
(pir dayman) mig diyis písus ang adlaw,</i> We
get a per diem of ten pesos. <i>Ang kumpaníya
magpirdayim námug diyis,</i> The company
gives us a per diem of ten pesos.

<p><b>pirdi</b> = <sc>PILDI</sc>. <b>-da</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to have lost
her virginity.

<p><b>pirdigána</b> <i>n</i> game of chess, checkers, or the
like in which the object is to make the opponent
win all the pieces. <i>v</i> [C2; c1] play
<i>pirdigána</i>.

<p><b>pirdigun</b>, <b>pirdigúnis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{air rifle} or @shotgun
pellets. <b>2</b> seeds of the mung bean (humorous).
<i>Nag-útan mig pirdigúnis,</i> We're having
mung bean stew.

<p><b>pirdisiyun</b> <i>n</i> @loss or @destruction. <i>v</i> [B46; b4(1)]
cause loss or destruction. <i>Napirdisiyunan
mig diyútay sa ámung mga lubi sa pagbagyu,</i>
We lost a few of our coconut trees
during the typhoon.

<p><b>pird&ucaron;n</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> release from temporal punishment
or from punishment for a soul in purgatory.
<b>2</b> candle blessed on February <b>2</b> in
the <i>kandilarya</i> celebration together with
the <i>kandilarya</i> candles. The <i>pird&ucaron;n</i> candles
are lighted to ask forgiveness for the sins of
a dying man. <b>kandílà sa &mdash;</b> = <sc>PIRD&Ucaron;N</sc>, <b>2</b>.

<p><b>pirgula</b> <i>n</i> @pergola. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] make a pergola.

<p><b>pirhisyu</b> = <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.

<p><b>pirhwisyu</b> <i>a</i> making a nuisance of oneself.
<i>Pahatud ka sa iskuylahan. Pakúhà. Pirhwisyu
ka kaáyu,</i> I have to bring you to school
and get you. You're a nuisance. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a2]
make a nuisance of oneself. <i>Nagpirhwisyu
ang bátà kay giinítan,</i> The child is crying in
an annoying way because he feels hot. <b>2</b>
[a12] be put to useless effort or inconvenience.
<i>Napirhwisyu kug adtu sa Karkar kay
wà didtu ag ámung túyù,</i> I went to a lot of
trouble for nothing when I went to Carcar
because the person we wanted to see was
not there.

<p><b>piri</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b2c3] surpass in ability or possessions.
<i>Dílì giyud nang bayhána mapiri sa
mga istayil,</i> That woman has to keep up
with the latest styles at all costs. <i>Dì nà siya
hipirihan sa pagkagwápa,</i> She is second to
none in her beauty. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] allow oneself
to get surpassed in ability or possessions.
<i>Ug sukmatan, dì siya papiri. Mutubag pud,</i>
If you scold him, he won't let you get the
<pb n=1574>last word. He talks back.

<p><b>píri</b> <i>n</i> @ferry. <i>v</i> [A; ac] ferry; go, take on a
ferry. <b>&mdash; but</b> <i>n</i> @{ferry boat}.

<p><b>pirigpirig</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c16] wobble, move unsteadily.
<i>Dì pa ku manáug kay nagpirigpirig
pa ku,</i> I won't go out yet because I still feel
wobbly. <i>Nagpirigpirig siya sa hagdan nga
nagkurugkurug,</i> He was walking gingerly on
the wobbly steps.

<p><b>pirigrínu</b> <i>n</i> @pilgrim. <i>v</i> [A1; c] make a pilgrimage.
<b>pirigrinasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @pilgrimage.

<p><b>pirigula</b> = <sc>PIRGULA</sc>.

<p><b>pirihisyu</b> = <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.

<p><b>piríku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @parrot, esp. the blue-naped parrot:
<b><i>Tanygnathus lucionensis</i></b>. <b>2</b> one who mouths
and repeats things without understanding
them. <b>&mdash; pikuy</b> <b>1</b> @parrot. <b>2</b> male genitalia
(child's talk). <b>&mdash; táwu</b> phrase uttered to a
parrot to make him answer the same thing.
<b>pirikúhun</b> <i>a</i> @parrot-like. <i>Taas untà siyag ilung
apan pirikúhun,</i> He has a long nose;
only it's like a parrot's.

<p><b>pirimyu</b> = <sc>PRIMYU</sc>.

<p><b>pirinda</b> = <sc>PRINDA</sc>.

<p><b>piris wil</b> <i>n</i> @{ferris wheel}. <i>v</i> [A] ride in a ferris
wheel.

<p><b>pirítu</b> = <sc>PRÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>pirkal</b> <i>n</i> @percale, k.o. closely woven cotton,
usually with large flowery designs. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)]
wear clothing made of percale.

<p><b>pirlas</b> <i>n</i> @pearl. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [N2; b6] dive for
pearls. <i>n</i> @{pearl diving}. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @{pearl diver}.

<p><b>pirma<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @signature. <i>v</i> [A; b] affix one's signature.
<i>Pirmáhi ang tsíki sa luyu,</i> Sign your
name on the back of the check.

<p><b>pirma<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KUMPIRMA</sc>, <i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>pirmaninti</b> <i>a</i> @permanent. <i>Kaswal lang ku. Dílì
pirmaninti ning ákung trabáhu,</i> I'm just a
casual employee. My work is not permanent.
<i>v</i> [B; c1] be permanent, make s.t.
permanent. <i>Maáyug magpirmaninti ning ákung
dibuynas,</i> It would be nice if my luck
were a permanent thing. <i>Pirmanintíhun
(ipirmaninti) na nátù ang átung kapilya,</i>
We'll build a permanent chapel.

<p><b>pirmi</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @always. <i>Pirmi ka lang malít,</i> You're
always late. <b>2</b> @steadily, @consistent. <i>Ug pirmi
ang inandaran sa mutur, way daut,</i> If the
motor runs steadily, there's nothing wrong.
<i>v</i> [A; ac] do s.t. always or regularly all the
time. <i>Nagpirmi lang siyag katúlug,</i> He is
sleeping all the time. <i>Pirmíha ang ímung
maáyung gáwì,</i> Maintain your good ways.
<i>Ipirmi ang ímung kamut sa ákung tiyan,</i>
Keep your hand on my stomach. <b>&mdash; ang táku</b>
<b>1</b> hold on to the cue in billiards&mdash;i.e.,
not lose the play. (When one misses, the
cue is passed to the next players.) <b>2</b> go
<pb n=1575>steady with a girl. <b>2a</b> have intercourse steadily.
<b>3</b> be employed steadily in one job. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[AB6; c16] keep the cue in billiards. <b>2</b> go
steady with s.o. <i>Mupirmi (mapirmi) ang táku
nátù kun pahagkun ku nímu,</i> I will go
steady with you if you will let me kiss you.
<b>2a</b> [A; c16] have sexual intercourse regularly.
<i>Nagpirmi ang ílang táku kay nahigám,</i>
They always make love because they have
come to learn how much fun it is. <b>3</b> [B6; c16]
become permanent in a job. <i>Mapirmi
ang ímung táku basta maáyu ang ímung ági,</i>
I will keep employing you if you do well.

<p><b>pirmíru</b> = <sc>PRIMÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>pirmísu</b> <i>n</i> @permission, @permit. <i>Dúnay pirmísu
ang ílang bayli,</i> They have a permit to hold
their dances. <i>Milakaw silang way pirmísu
sa inahan,</i> They went out without their
mother's permission. <i>v</i> [A; b6] give permission.

<p><b>pirmisyas</b> = <sc>PRIMISYAS</sc>.

<p><b>pirmit</b> <i>n</i> @permit, @license to do s.t.

<p><b>pirnu</b> <i>n</i> @bolt. <i>v</i> [A; b6] make, use a bolt s.w.

<p><b>pirpiktu</b> <i>a</i> @perfect. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] make s.t.
perfect.

<p><b>pirpitwa</b> <i>see</i> <sc>KADÍNA</sc>.

<p><b>pirpúmi</b> <i>n</i> @perfume. <i>v</i> [A; b] use perfume.

<p><b>pirs</b> = <sc>PIRST</sc>.

<p><b>pirsigir</b> <i>v</i> [A; a3c] force oneself or s.o. to do
s.t.; do s.t. with persistence and determination.
<i>Mipirsigir ang masakitun pagtindug,</i>
The patient forced himself to get up. <i>Pirsigiha
siya pagpakasal sa íyang gipirdi,</i> Make
him marry the woman he disgraced.

<p><b>pirsing kap</b> <i>n</i> cap with a visor in the front, of
the type worn by army officers. <i>v</i> [A13]
wear such a cap.

<p><b>pirst</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{first place} in a competition. <b>1a</b> one
who is first place, first-placer. <i>Akuy pirst sa
ámung klási,</i> I'm the best in my class. <b>2</b> the
one before the second. <i>Ang ímung ngán
pirst sa lista,</i> Your name is at the top of the
list. <b>&mdash; bis</b> <i>n</i> @{first base} in baseball. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b4(1)]
reach first base. <i>Hingpirstbisan ta sa
átung kuntra,</i> Our opponents managed to
reach the first base. <b>2</b> [A12] get to first
base with a girl, get a favorable reaction.
<i>Gidatungan kug maáyu ang inahan piru wà
giyud ku makapirst bis sa anak,</i> I bribed the
mother, but I still couldn't get to first base
with the daughter. <b>&mdash; hap</b> <i>n</i> first half of a
basketball game. <b>-id</b> <i>n</i> @{first aid}. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
give first aid. <i>Pirst-íri dáyun ug dúnay makuyapang
kadíti,</i> If a cadet faints, give him
first aid immediately. <b>&mdash; klas</b> <i>n</i> @{first class}.
<i>Pirst klas nga pasahíru,</i> First-class passenger.
<i>Púru mga pirst klas ang ákung saput,</i> My
clothes are all of the best quality. <i>v</i> [A] go
<pb n=1576>by way of first class, get first class things. <b>&mdash;
lídi</b> <i>n</i> @{first lady}, wife of the top official. <i>v</i>
[B1256] be the first lady. <b>&mdash; prayis</b> <i>n</i> @{first
prize}. <i>v</i> [A12] win the first prize. <b>&mdash; plur</b> <i>n</i>
@{ground floor}. <b>&mdash; ran</b> <i>n</i> @{first-run movie}. <i>v</i> [B1256]
be a first-run movie. <b>&mdash; trip</b> the first
trip of the day of a passenger vehicle. <i>v</i> [A]
go on the first trip.

<p><b>pirsúna</b> <i>n</i> one of the three persons of the
Holy Trinity.

<p><b>pirsunáhi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> participant in a movie or play.
<b>2</b> important persons. <i>Mga pirsunáhi sa nátad
sa kasinihan,</i> Important personages in
the movie world.

<p><b>pirsunal</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{in person}. <i>Gustu kung makítà si
Núra Unur sa pirsunal,</i> I want to see Nora
Aunor in person. <b>2</b> @personal, pertaining to
one's private life. <i>Ayawg basáha ang sulat
kay pirsunal kanà,</i> Don't read that letter.
It's personal. <i>v</i> [A2; c16] do s.t. in person.
<i>Pirsunalun (ipirsunal) nákù paghátag ang rigálu,</i>
I'll give the gift in person. <b>&mdash; apírans</b> <i>n</i>
@{personal appearance}. <i>v</i> [A] make a personal
appearance. <i>Mupirsunal apírans sa istudiyu
ang Mis Yunibirs,</i> Miss Universe will make a
personal appearance at the studio. <b>-minti</b> =
<sc>PIRSUNAL</sc>, <i>a1</i>.

<p><b>pirsunalidad</b> <i>n</i> @personality, personal charm
or attraction. <i>Wà giyud siyay pirsunalidad,</i>
He has no personality.

<p><b>pirtilaysir</b> <i>n</i> @fertilizer. <i>v</i> [A; b] use fertilizer.

<p><b>piru</b>, <b>píru</b> @but. <i>Mahal piru maáyu,</i> It's expensive,
but good.

<p><b>pirù</b> = <sc>PIRUK</sc>.

<p><b>piruhwisyu</b> = <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.

<p><b>piruk</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] for the eyes to @blink once.
<b>pirukpiruk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for the eyes to keep
blinking. <i>Dì na mupirukpiruk ang ákung tabuntabun
sukad ákung gihílut,</i> My eyelids
don't blink anymore after I massaged them.
<i>Nagpirukpiruk lang siyang gipangutána,</i> She
simply blinked her eyes when she was interrogated.
<sc>2</sc> [A] for a flame or light to flicker.

<p><b>pirukpiruk</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird with light brown
feathers and black speckles, inhabiting
meadows, usually staying perched, singing
a rhythm which sounds <i>pirukpiruk</i>.

<p><b>pírul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{pay roll}. <b>2</b> amount of money to
make the pay roll. <i>v</i> [A1] make out the
pay roll.

<p><b>pirut</b>, <b>pírut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a small bird of meadows, the
grass warbler: <b><i>Cisticola sp.</i></b> <b>2</b> the smallest
person in a group.

<p><b>piruypiruy</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] be unsteady and trembly
on one's feet. <i>Magpiruypiruy pa kug
mubángun ku,</i> I'm very wobbly if I try to
get up.

<p><b>pirwil parti</b> = <sc>DISPIDÍDA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>DISPIDIR</sc>.

<pb n=1577>

<p><b>pirwisyu</b> = <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.

<p><b>pirya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fair, @carnival. <b>2</b> booth in a fair.
<i>Daghang pirya sa karnabal,</i> There are lots
of booths in the carnival. <i>v</i> [A; b6] hold a
fair.

<p><b>piryud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> period, punctuation mark. <b>2</b> period,
there's no more to be said about. <i>Dì ka
makalakaw. Piryud.[** ,]</i> You can't go, and that's
all there is to it. <i>Piryud na mi kay hustu ra
ang tulu,</i> We're not going to have any more
children. Three is enough. <i>v</i> [b6] put a
period.

<p><b>piryudikal</b> <i>n</i> periodical test given prior to
the grading period. <i>v</i> [A] have, take a periodical
test. <b>&mdash; tist</b> = <sc>PIRYUDIKAL</sc>.

<p><b>piryudiku</b> <i>n</i> @newspaper.

<p><b>piryudista</b> <i>n</i> @journalist. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be,
become a journalist.

<p><b>pís</b> = <sc>PYIS</sc>.

<p><b>písa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> spare parts of a machine. <b>2</b> bolt or
roll of cloth. <i>v</i> [c16] buy cloth by the bolt.

<p><b>písa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @music, @{musical score}. <i>v</i> [A13; b6]
use the music in playing. <i>Maáyung magpísa
arun dì masayup ang pagtukar,</i> Better use
the music so you won't make a mistake.

<p><b>pisà</b>, <b>písà</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a] press down s.t. hard
and move back and forth over it to crush or
mash it. <i>Magpisà kug ságing ipakáun sa bátà,</i>
I'll mash a ripe banana for the child. <i>Pisaa
ang lisay hangtud mawálà,</i> Press down hard
on the swollen lymph node until it disappears.

<p><b>pisáda<sub>1</sub></b>, <b>pisadur</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PISAR<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pisáda<sub>2</sub></b>. <i>n</i> the measurement or distance between
the frets of stringed instruments. <i>v</i>
[A; a12] measure the fret distance.

<p><b>pisak</b>, <b>písak</b> <i>a</i> @{muddy ground}, @mire. <i>Pisak kaáyu
ang dálan kay nag-ulan man,</i> The street
has turned to mud because it was raining. <i>v</i>
[B; c6] become a mire. <i>Mupisak (mapisak)
nang silung ug pirmihag yabu sa hinúgas,</i>
The ground underneath the kitchen will
turn into a mire if you keep throwing the
dishwater on it. <b>pisakpisak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] spatter
or splatter dirt or liquid. <i>Nabasà ang sawug
kay nagpisakpisak ang bátà sa banyu,</i>
The floor got wet because the children were
splashing around in the bathtub. <b>2</b> [A; c16]
make a spattering sound. <i>Hilabihan nga nakapisakpisak
ang ulan sa gawas,</i> How the
rain went pat, pat, pat. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> spattering, wet
spot caused by spattering. <b>2</b> spattering
sound.

<p><b>pis-ak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] split wood along the grain, or
by extension, split similar materials. <i>Nagpis-ak
ka na ba ug káhuy isugnud?</i> Have
you split wood to use for fuel? <i>n</i> piece
chopped off.

<pb n=1578>

<p><b>pisami</b> = <sc>KISAMI</sc>.

<p><b>pisan</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1] buy s.t. in bulk. <i>Pisánun
ku ang ímung pitu ka alat mangga,</i> I'll buy
your seven basketfuls of mangoes. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i>
one who buys in bulk.

<p><b>pisar<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] press down on. <i>Nagpisar kaniya
ang daghang prublíma,</i> Numerous problems
weigh down on him. <i>Pisara siya arun
mutug-an,</i> Press him so he will tell. <i>Napisar
siya sa duha ka dagkung batu,</i> He was pressed
between two huge boulders.

<p><b>pisar<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] think about, weigh s.t. in
the mind. <i>Gipisar niya kun muadtu ba siya
u dílì,</i> He is weighing it in his mind whether
to go or not.

<p><b>pisar<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] for a dealer to weigh goods
he is going to buy. <i>Átung pisarun ang ímung
bábuy,</i> I'll weigh your pig (to buy it). <b>pisáda</b>
<i>n</i> computation of how much s.t. weighs
and is worth. <b>pisadur</b> <i>n</i> the one who weighs
produce being bought, usually copra. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
become a weigher.

<p><b>pisára</b> <i>n</i> @blackboard. <i>v</i> [A13] use, write on
the blackboard.

<p><b>pisat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] mash, squash s.t. <i>Napisat ang
kamátis nga natumban,</i> He squashed the
tomato when he stepped on it. <i>a</i> @crushed,
@flattened.

<p><b>pisaw</b> <i>n</i> <i>a</i> k.o. @{kitchen knife} usually with a
metal handle.

<p><b>písi</b> <i>n</i> acronym for P.C., the @{Philippine Constabulary}.
<i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a
member of the P.C. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] have the
P.C. arrest s.o. <i>Ipapísi (papisíhan) nang hubug,</i>
Have the P.C. arrest (watch) that
drunk. <b>&mdash; kuntrul</b> <i>n</i> P.C. control. <i>v</i> [a4] put
under the control of the P.C. <i>Gipísi kuntrul
ang lungsud kay gubut pirmi,</i> The town was
placed under P.C. control because of the
frequent outbreaks of violence.

<p><b>písì</b> <i>n</i> @rope consisting of two or three strands
(<i>lúbid</i>) twisted together, usually made of
fiber. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a rope, twist s.t. like a
rope. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> a device for twisting rope. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i>
tidbit, made of a heavy dough twisted like
a rope and fried until it is brown and
crunchy. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make, have <i>pinísì</i>.
<b>mag-r-</b>, <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> @{rope maker}. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> fiber
to be made into a rope.

<p><b>pisik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b2c1] @spatter, @splatter. Hingpiksan
kug lápuk, I got spattered with mud.
<b>2</b> [A; b2c] channel s.t., cause a little bit of
s.t. to come to certain people. Kinsang kandidatúhay
nagpisik ug kwarta pára sa átung
lungsud? Which candidate was it that cornered
a little bit of money for our town?
Hingpiksan kug diyútay sa íyang daug, I
managed to get my hands on a little of his
<pb n=1579>winnings. <i>a</i> spattering, shooting off of droplets.
<i>Pisik duul sa bintánà ug mag-uwan,</i>
The water splashes next to the window if it
rains. <b>hiN-</b>/<b>haN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] for a small
amount to be channeled off to s.o. <i>Way
sud-ang nahimisik sa mga mutsatsa. Gihurut
ug káun sa bisíta,</i> Not a bit of food seeped
to the servants. The visitors ate every bit.
<b>2</b> <b>walà, dílì &mdash;</b> not spared. <i>Way mahimisik
sa kaligutgut sa Diyus,</i> No one is spared
God's wrath.

<p><b>pisikal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pertaining to the body as opposed
to the mind. <b>2</b> physical education class. <b>3</b>
physical examination. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] have a
physical education. <b>2</b> [A] give a physical
examination.

<p><b>písiks</b> <i>n</i> @physics course or class. <i>v</i> [A13]
have a physics class.

<p><b>pisil</b>, <b>písil</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] squeeze s.t. with the
tips of the fingers fairly far apart. <i>Pisíla
(pisla) ang mangga ug humuk na ba,</i>
Squeeze the mango to see if it is ripe yet. <b>2</b>
squeeze with the fingers to massage or convey
a feeling. <i>Kamau kang mamísil (mupísil)
sa gilabdan ug úlu?</i> Do you know how
to massage a headache? <i>Gipisil níya ang kamut
sa dalága,</i> She gently squeezed the
girl's hand.

<p><b>piskadur</b> <i>n</i> @fisherman. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become
a fisherman.

<p><b>piskal</b> <i>n</i> @fiscal, @{district attorney}. <b>&mdash; sa simbahan</b>
<i>n</i> church clerk or one in charge of keeping
the records of the church. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
be or become a fiscal. <b>-íya</b> <i>n</i> office of
the district attorney.

<p><b>piskanti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> box in a carriage where the driver
sits. <b>2</b> @balcony on the outside of a house.
<i>Didtu siya magdiskursu sa piskanti,</i> He
made a speech from the balcony. <b>3</b> @davit, a
crane projecting over the side of a ship for
hoisting lifeboats.

<p><b>piskat<sub>1</sub></b> (euphemism for <i>pisti</i>) <b>1</b> expression
of @disgruntlement. <i>Piskat ning kinabuhía
kay kanúnay lang tang gidimalas,</i> What a
hell of a life this is. We always have bad
luck. <b>2</b> expression of surprise after having
done s.t. inadvertently or failing to have
done s.t. <i>Piskat nabyaan ang ákung pitáka,</i>
Heavens! I forgot my wallet.

<p><b>piskat<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>MITMIT</sc>.

<p><b>piskay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> alert, active and full of energy. <b>2</b>
full of life. <i>Piskay ang plásag maduminggu,</i>
The plaza is lively on Sundays. <b>3</b> good-looking
or well-dressed woman. <b>4</b> pretty in general.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] active and full of energy,
sprightly. <i>Mupiskay ang átung láwas basta
hustug túlug,</i> You are full of vim and vigor
if you get the right amount of sleep. <i>Nagkapiskay
<pb n=1580>na ang masakitun,</i> The patient is getting
stronger. <i>Gipiskáyan ku sa ákung gibátì
karun,</i> I feel sprightly now. <b>1a</b> [AB; a] do
s.t. briskly or hurriedly. <i>Nagkapiskay ang
ámung paglakaw pagtaligsik,</i> We walked
faster when it started to rain. <i>Piskáya ang
pagkuwinta kay naghulat siya,</i> Hurry up
with your counting because she is waiting.
<b>2</b> get lively and bright. <i>Kining mga búlak
ang nakapiskay sa ámung panimalay,</i> These
flowers made our home lively. <b>3</b> [B12; a1]
get nice looking, pretty. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a lively,
alert, cheerful sort.

<p><b>piskul</b> = <sc>PISKAT<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>piskur</b> <i>n</i> U.S. @{Peace Corps} volunteer. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
be a Peace Corps volunteer.

<p><b>piskut</b>, <b>piskuy</b> = <sc>PISKAT<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>pislà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6c1] spurt s.t. out. <i>Ang mga
táwung dilì idukádu mupislà lang sa bungbung
ug manlúwà,</i> Uneducated people go
out and spit their saliva against the walls.
<i>Magpislà ang núkus sa íyang átà ug matugaw,</i>
Squids spurt out ink if you disturb
them. <b>2</b> [A3P; c1] produce a splattering,
plopping sound. <i>Mupislà ang lápuk ug tunubtunuban,</i>
Mud produces a plopping
sound when you step in it.

<p><b>pislangù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a stuffy nose. <b>2</b> @{flat-nosed}.
<i>Madaníhun nang bayhána bísag pislangù,</i>
She's charming even if she's flat-nosed.
<b>3</b> ugly in manner or looks. <i>Wà tay
pagaunúhan kay gawas nga pislangù ug dagway,
pislangù pa giyud ug batásan,</i> She
doesn't have a single redeeming feature because
aside from being homely she has an
unpleasant disposition as well. <i>n</i> light disease
of chickens similar to colds. <i>v</i> [B1; a4]
have a nasal voice due to cold. <i>Nagpislangù
(gipislangù) ku kay giulanan,</i> I have a bad
cold because I got caught in the rain.

<p><b>pislat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @squash, @flatten and mash
s.t. <i>Pisláta ang ságing nga ipakáun sa bátà,</i>
Crush the banana to feed to the baby. <b>2</b> [B16; b6]
have a flat nose. <i>Ug ang mga ginikánan
pislat, mapislat pud ang anak,</i> If the
parents are flat-nosed, the offspring will also
be flat-nosed. <i>a</i> @flat-nosed. <i>Ayaw ug panaway
kay pislat ka man sad kaáyu,</i> Don't
ever criticize for your nose is flat, too.

<p><b>pislayit</b> = <sc>PLASLÁYIT</sc>.

<p><b>pislit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] press s.t. hard with the
fingers. <i>Kinsay mipislit sa timbri?</i> Who
pushed the buzzer? <i>Ayaw pislíta ang mangga
kay mabun-ug,</i> Don't squeeze the mango
because you will bruise it. <b>2</b> [AN; a12]
massage s.o. by pressing with the finger tips.
<i>Pislítun ta ka arun maw[=à] ang ímung pamául,</i>
I'll massage you so that your muscle pains
<pb n=1581>will disappear. <b>&mdash; layit</b> <i>n</i> flashlight (humorous).

<p><b>pisluk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] go to sleep (said in anger).
<i>Mupisluk (mapisluk) ka na ba sad nga buntag
na man?</i> Are you going to go back to
sleep again when it's morning already? <b>2</b>
[B12; b6] be dark, be getting dark (said in
anger). <i>Nagkapisluk na núun mau pay ipangáhuy!</i>
Why do you wait until it begins to
get dark to look for firewood!

<p><b>pislun</b> <i>n</i> a brand of strong synthetic thread
used in line fishing and in weaving into
fishing nets.

<p><b>pislung</b> <i>n</i> @dent, a slight depression, small hollow.
<i>a</i> @dented. <i>Pislung ug ilung,</i> Having a
flat nose. <i>v</i> [AB126; a1] dent s.t. on the
surface. <i>Kinsay nagpislung sa takurì?[** 't' guessed]</i> Who
dented the kettle?

<p><b>pislut</b> = <sc>PIDLASUT</sc>.

<p><b>pismil</b> <i>n</i> @{fish meal}, ground dried fish used as
feed for poultry. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] make fish
meal.

<p><b>pisngà</b>, <b>pisngag</b>, <b>pisngi</b>, <b>pisngì</b>, <b>pisngig</b> mild
cuss word expressing disgust (euphemism
for pisti). <i>Pisngì! Ngánung nalimtan man
nákug dala,</i> Darn! Why did I forget to
bring it?

<p><b>pisngù</b> = <sc>PISLANGÙ</sc>.

<p><b>pispan</b> <i>n</i> @fishpond. <i>Kasagáran sa pansat gíkan
sa pispan,</i> Most prawns come from the fishpond.
<i>v</i> [A; a12] make a fishpond. <i>Magpispan
ku sa may katunggan,</i> I'll make a fishpond
near the mangrove swamps. <i>Pispánun
níya ang swíming pul,</i> He will convert the
swimming pool into a fishpond.

<p><b>pispis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. green tree insect that makes a
shrill sound at night (so called from its
sound). It is believed that a <i>pispis</i> in the
house is the voice of a departed one who
has come to ask for help in the form of
prayers for his salvation. <b>aN-r-</b> = <sc>PISPIS</sc>.

<p><b>pista</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> feast in honor of a patron saint. <b>&mdash; upisiyal</b>
public holiday. <b>&mdash; sa simbahan</b>
church holiday. <b>2</b> expression meaning 'your
slip is showing'(humorous&mdash;from the notion
that people hang out curtains during
fiesta and another way of calling a woman's
attention that her slip is showing is to
use <i>pangurtína</i> which literally means, 'hang
out curtains'). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b(1)] hold or celebrate
a feast day. <i>Magpista mi sa tris di
Máyu,</i> We hold our celebration on the third
of May. <b>1a</b> [A13] <b>&mdash; sa inyu</b> your slip is
showing (they're celebrating the feast day
in your place). <b>2</b> [A13] it would be a miracle
if (such-and-such an unlikely thing) were
to happen. <i>Magpista ug muanhi pa tu siya,</i>
It would be a miracle if he ever were to
<pb n=1582>come here. <i>Magpista ug sugtun ka ni Maríya,</i>
It would be a miracle if Maria were to
accept you. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] attend the celebration
of a feast day. <i>Nakapamista sila sa
pista sa Santu Ninyu,</i> They attended the celebration
of the feast of the Holy Child. <b>ika-*paN-</b>
presentable, look good enough to take
to a fiesta. <i>Bubintahag nawung ang bána ni
Nilya, ikapamista man sab,</i> Nelia's husband
is good-looking enough. You wouldn't be
ashamed of him. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> eating in large quantities
like at a feast. <b>maN-r-</b>, <b>mamistáhay</b> <i>n</i>
fiesta goers.

<p><b>pistayim</b> <i>n</i> the period immediately after the
war. <i>Pistayim na kug maminyù,</i> I got married
after the war. <i>v</i> [B126C] be in good
terms after a quarrel or misunderstanding,
usually said of couples. <i>Nagkapistayim na
ang magtiáyung nag-áway,</i> The quarreling
couple are in good terms again.

<p><b>pisti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pestilence. <b>2</b> s.o. or s.t. who causes
a pestilence. <i>Tambal bátuk sa mga pisti,</i>
Medicine against germs. <b>3</b> strong curse expressing
anger or disgust. <i>Pisting yáwà gikáwat
ang mga búnga,</i> God damn it to hell.
They stole the fruits. <i>Pisti ning kinabuhía.
Kanúnay lang way kwarta,</i> What a god-*damned
life! We never have money. <b>-ng yáwà</b>
<i>n</i> strong curse expressing anger or disgust.
<i>v</i> [a4] <b>1</b> be affected with pestilence.
<i>Ang ginharían nalúpig dihang gipisti ang
mga ginsakpan,</i> The kingdom was vanquished
when a pestilence hit the people. <b>2</b> go to
hell. <i>Pistihun ka pa untà,</i> Go to hell! (Lit. I
hope a pestilence takes you.)

<p><b>pistud</b> = <sc>PISTUL</sc>.

<p><b>pistul</b> (euphemism for <i>pisti</i>) exclamation of
disgust. <i>Pistul! Nalimtan ku ag bálun, Darn!</i>
I left my lunch home. <b>&mdash; (nga) yawáa</b> euphemism
for <i>pisting yáwà</i> exclamation of disgust.

<p><b>pistúla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pistol, @revolver. <b>2</b> prominent hipbone
(humorous). <i>v</i> [A; a12] shoot or hit
s.o. with a pistol. <i>Gipistúla ang kaáway,</i> He
shot the enemy (or he hit the enemy on
the head) with a pistol.

<p><b>pistun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @piston. <b>&mdash; ring</b> @{piston ring}. <b>&mdash; rad</b>
@{piston rod}.

<p><b>pistun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> home-made detonator put into dynamite,
made of a little cigarette-sized roll
of tin plate, filled with gunpowder. <i>v</i> [A; c3]
attach or use a detonator of this sort.

<p><b>písu<sub>1</sub></b> @peso, the Philippine unit of currency
(singular). <i>Un písu,</i> One peso. <b>2</b> peso bill.
<i>Duha ka písu,</i> Two peso bills. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; kuntra
usa ka dakù</b> [so-and-so] is nothing (a penny)
as compared with s.o. else who is s.t. (a peso).
<i>Ngánung ashan pa nímug súkul nà nga
<pb n=1583>písu ka man kuntra usa ka dakù?</i> Why do
you have to bother fighting with that bum
who's nothing but so much trash compared
to you? <b>-s</b> peso. <i>Pila ni? Písus? Dus písus?</i>
How much is this? A peso? Two pesos? <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [B56; a2] cost a @peso. <i>Nagpísus na ang kílu
sa kamátis,</i> Tomatoes cost a peso a kilogram.
<i>Pisúsa lang ni,</i> Let me have it for a peso.
<b>2</b> [A123S] receive a scolding. <i>Makapisus
ka sa ímung gibúhat,</i> You'll get a scolding
for what you did. <b>maN-</b>, <b>maN-(->)</b> costing a
@peso each. <i>v</i> [a12] <b>1</b> price s.t. at a peso. <b>2</b>
change s.t. into one-peso notes. <b>maN-un</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
the one-peso kind. <b>2</b> one-peso bills.

<p><b>písu<sub>2</sub></b> n storey of a building. <i>Náa sa ikaduhang
písu ang íyang klási,</i> Her class is on
the second @floor.

<p><b>pisù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chick or young of other birds. <b>2</b>
endearing reference for one's children. <b>3</b>
@novice, s.o. new to s.t. Pisù pa lang siya sa
panuwat, He is new to the writing profession.
<i>v</i> [AN; a] hatch an egg. <i>Ang ubang himungáan
dì mupisù sa ílang itlug,</i> Some
hens won't hatch their eggs. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> birdling.
<b>pis-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hen or bird that has chicks. <b>2</b> an
egg that has a chick in it.

<p><b>písù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1a</b> [A; ab2] press the tip of one's fingers
over a part of the body to @massage it.
<i>Magpísù pa ku sa ákung buktun nga namanhud,</i>
I'll massage my arms because they are
numb. <i>Hipisuan ku ang íyang hubag,</i> I accidentally
pressed her boil when I massaged
her.

<p><b>pisuk</b>, <b>písuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @push s.t. small into a
depressed position. <i>Pisúkun ku nang mata
mu,</i> I will push your eyes into your head. <b>2</b>
hit a certain small point right on the head
(as if it were being pushed inwards). <i>Pisúkun
ku nang batu sa ákung kasing,</i> I will hit
the stone directly with my top. <b>3</b> make a
@dent in s.t., covering only a small area. <b>(->)</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> for s.t. small to be @depressed, @sunken.
<i>Maglisud pagtútuy ang bátà kay pisuk ug atngal
ang inahan,</i> The child has difficulty
suckling because the mother has inverted
nipples. <b>2</b> being hit right at the spot aimed
for.

<p><b>pisukut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> inflammation of the eyes characterized
by watery and mucal secretion. <b>2</b>
disease of poultry characterized by watery
eyes, eruptions, and debility. <i>v</i> [B16; a4] <b>1</b>
get this eye infection. <i>Nagpisikut (gipisikut)
ang íyang mata,</i> His eyes are infected. <b>2</b> for
chickens to get this sickness.

<p><b>písul</b> = <sc>PÍSÙ<sub>2</sub>.</sc>

<p><b>písun</b> <i>n</i> @steamroller. <i>v</i> [A; b5] @steamroller.
<i>Hámis ang dálan kay human na man pisuna
(pisuni),</i> The road is smooth because it has
<pb n=1584>been steamrollered.

<p><b>pisut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @uncircumcised. <b>2</b> not having holes
in the ears. <b>3</b> an @inexperienced beginner. <i>Ikaw
nga pisut pa ánang tárì, dílì ángay nga
mupusta ug dakù,</i> You're just a greenhorn
so you should not bet great amounts. <i>v</i> [B126]
turn out to be @uncircumcised.

<p><b>pisut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small edible @{sea cucumber}, dark
brown to black in color.

<p><b>pisyat</b>= <sc>PISLAT.</sc>

<p><b>pisyu</b> (from <i>upisyu</i>) <i>v</i> [A13; abc] @always,
keep on doing s.t. <i>Ngánung nagpisyu siyag
hilak?</i> Why is he always crying? <i>Pagminatarung.
Mau nay gipisyug maymay sa ákung
mga ginikánan,</i> Be good. That's what my
parents always remind me to do.

<p><b>pisyútis</b> <i>n</i> the @tiller in small boats. <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
attach, make into a tiller.

<p><b>píta</b> <i>n</i> an ordinary variety of @rice with white
grains.

<p><b>pità</b> <i>n</i> ground which is muddy and dirty. <i>Ang
bábuy milúnang sa pità,</i> The pig wallowed
in the mud. <i>v</i> [B2] become muddy and
dirty. <i>Mupità (mapità) nang sílung ug sigíhag
yabu ug hinúgas,</i> The ground underneath
the kitchen will become a dirty mire
if you keep throwing the dishwater there.

<p><b>pitáda</b> <i>n</i> the sound of a loud and sharp @{whistle
blast} or @siren.

<p><b>pitak</b> <i>n</i> muddy area, @mudhole full of water.
<i>n</i> muddy place. <i>Ayaw tumbi ang pitak,</i>
Don't step in the mud puddle. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
become muddy or a mud puddle. <i>Napitak
ang nataran nga gisigíhag uwan,</i> The
yard became a mire because it kept raining
all the time.

<p><b>pítak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] for s.t. @fragile to be @crushed
into pieces. <i>Napítak ang ákung bulpin nga
natumban,</i> My ball-point pen was broken
because s.o. stepped on it. <i>v</i> [AB12; c1]
squash s.t. flat leaving it intact. <i>Dagkung
makina ang mupítak sa mga awtung gubà,</i>
Huge machines will flatten the old cars. <i>Napítak
ang mga kamátis,</i> The tomatoes got
squashed flat.

<p><b>pitáka</b> <i>n</i> @purse, @wallet, @pocketbook. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
use a purse, wallet, pocketbook. <i>Nagpitáka
ku bisan ug way sáping ikasulud,</i> I
was carrying a purse even though I didn't
have any money to put inside it. <b>2</b> [A12]
obtain a purse, wallet, pocketbook. <b>3</b> [A; c]
put s.t. in a purse, wallet, pocketbook.
<i>Ipitáka nang ribulbir,</i> Put the revolver in a
pocketbook.

<p><b>pitáti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @mat (banig) made of heavy straw
woven through fine fibers. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] use a
pitáti mat. <b>2</b> [A; c1] obtain, make into a
pitáti mat.

<pb n=1585>

<p><b>pítay</b> <i>n</i> loose hanging skin or cock's wattles:
the loose skin on the underside of a circumcised
penis, the skin hanging under the chin
or on the upper part of the neck.

<p><b>piti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the body to be wet and dirty with
things sticking to it. <i>v</i> [B] get dirty and
sticky. <i>Nagpiti ang ímung buhuk,</i> Your hair
is all sticky with oil.

<p><b>piti<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PITIW</sc>, <i>n1.</i>

<p><b>pitì</b> <i>n</i> slapping, @crackling, or @popping sound.
<i>v</i> [A] resound with this sound. <i>Mipitì ang
íyang nawung kay nagtubagtubag man,</i> She
received a slap because she answered me
back. <i>Mipitì ang papkurn,</i> The popcorn
crackled. <i>Nagpitìpitì ang kakugnan nga nasúnug,</i>
The grass field was crackling as it
burnt. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> intense action of producing
this sound. <i>Pítì lang ang ílang kinatsilà ay,</i>
They're rattling off Spanish. <i>v</i> [A] make
this sound intensely.

<p><b>pitibut</b> <i>n</i> @{PT boat}. <i>v</i> [A1; ac] take a, go by
PT boat.

<p><b>pitii</b> <i>n</i> @PTA, acronym for the Parent-Teachers'
Association. <i>v</i> [A1] have a PTA meeting.

<p><b>pitik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @flick s.t. with the thumb and
forefinger. <i>Kinsay nagpitik sa ákung dawunggan?</i>
Who flicked my ear? <i>Gipitkan
níyang ákung kúmù,</i> He flicked my knuckles.
<b>1a</b> [A; c] @flick s.t. away with the fingers.
<i>Anhà sa astri ipitik ang sigarilyu,</i> Flick
your ashes into the ash tray. <b>1b</b> [A; b] in
carpentry, mark a line on a piece of wood
by stretching a string soaked in dye or soot
and letting it snap onto the wood. <b>1c</b> [A; ab2]
@shot with a slingshot. <i>Pitkun ku nang
manuk ihálas,</i> I'll shoot that wild chicken
with a slingshot. <b>1d</b> [A; b6] @whip s.o. with
s.t. small, making a snapping sound. <i>Ákung
gipitkan ang íyang tiil ug tualya,</i> I flicked a
towel at his legs. <b>2</b> [A] for the heart or
pulse to @beat. <i>Nagpitik pa ang íyang pulsu,</i>
His pulse is still beating. <b>2a</b> [A] for the
heart to @beat for s.o. <i>Mupitik lang ang ákung
kasingkásing kang Artúru,</i> My heart
beats only for Arturo. <b>3</b> [A; c1] make a
click, as when a mechanism is released. <i>Mipitik
lang ang pistúla. Wà nay bála,</i> The pistol
clicked. There were no more bullets. <i>Pahíyum
kay ákù nang pitkun (ipitik) ang kamira,</i>
Smile because I'm going to snap the
camera now. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. which flicks or snaps:
slingshot, chalk line in carpentry, et al. <b>2</b>
beating of the heart. <b>3</b> @clicking, @snapping
sound. <b>4</b> action of flicking or snapping. -in-
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> continuous sound of the heartbeat. <b>2</b>
the dictates of the heart. <i>Sunda ang pinitik
sa ímung kasingkásing,</i> Follow the dictates
<pb n=1586>of your heart.

<p><b>pitikut</b> <i>n</i> @petticoat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] wear a petticoat.
<b>2</b> [A; a12] make into a petticoat.

<p><b>pitimini</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rose with very tiny pink, red,
or white flowers.

<p><b>píting</b> a tight-fitting clothes. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] sew
s.t. that fits well. <i>Maáyu nang sastríhang
mupíting,</i> That seamstress sews clothes that
fit well. <b>2</b> [B2; a12] become, make @{tight-fitting}.
<i>Mupíting (mapíting) nang pulúha ug
muk[=ù][** macron with grave] nà,</i> That shirt will be tight if it
shrinks. <i>Pitíngun nátù ning karsúnis nímu
pagtahì,</i> Let's cut your pants in a tight-fitting
style. <b>3</b> [A13] wear a tight-fitting outfit.
<b>4</b> [A; c] have a fitting of s.t. sewn. <i>Dì
na lang ku mupíting kay hustu lagi nà,</i> I
don't need fitting because I'm quite sure it
fits. <b>&mdash; rum</b> <i>n</i> @{fitting room}.

<p><b>pitisyun</b> <i>n</i> @petition. <i>v</i> [A; c3] @petition for
s.t. <i>Ipitisyun sa pamúnù ang inyung prublíma,</i>
Make a petition to the President about
your problems.

<p><b>pitiw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> trigger device in a trap which actuates
a spring. <b>2</b> @clitoris (humorous). <i>v</i> [A; b6]
put a pitiw in a trap. <b>pitiwpítiw</b> = <sc>PITIW</sc>,
<i>n1.</i>

<p><b>pitla</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @untangle hair or fibers, @separate
things that are stuck or crumpled together.
<i>Nagpitla mi sa mga pahína sa librung
nagpílit,</i> We are separating the pages of the
book that got stuck together. <i>Ákung gipitla
ang hílu nga nagubut,</i> I untangled the thread.

<p><b>pitlà</b> = <sc>PIDLÀ.</sc>

<p><b>pitlag</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @turn sheets of paper or pages
of a book over one by one. <i>Ipitlag (pitlága)
nang únang lima ka dahun,</i> Leaf through
the first five pages.

<p><b>pitlagung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bamboo stick with a tufted
end used to clean the palm toddy containers
left in the tree (sugung) (so called from
the sound produced by using it). <b>2</b> sound
produced by using the pitlagung. <i>v</i> [A; b]
clean a toddy container.

<p><b>pitlud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> pluck off the ends of young
stems to make the plant spread. <i>Pitluran
ang tabákù arun managkù ang dáhun,</i> They
pluck the tops of the tobacco plants so that
the leaves will grow big. <b>2</b> break off of
young stems in general.

<p><b>pitluk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @strangle s.o. with the
hands. <i>Pitlúkun ta ka ug mutug-an ka,</i> I'll
strangle you if you tell. <b>2</b> [A; a12] swipe
fowls (slang). <i>Limbaruk! Gipitluk ang ámung
sunuy gabíi,</i> Damn! They swiped our
rooster last night! <b>3</b> [a12] thrust the finger
in s.o.'s eyes. <i>Bísag pitlukun pa ang mata
sa tudlù dílì makítà tungud sa kangitngit,</i>
It's so dark you couldn't see a finger thrust
<pb n=1587>into your eyes.

<p><b>pitnit</b> = <sc>PIKNIK.</sc>

<p><b>pitpit<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46N] be wet through so that
clothing, hair or feathers stick to the body.
<i>Nagpitpit siyang miabut sa balay,</i> She was
dripping wet when she arrived in the house.
<b>2</b> [BN; a4] for the eyes to get sticky with
yellowish discharge. <i>Mupitpit (mapitpit, pitpítun)
ang ímung mata ug tagimatahun ka,</i>
Your eyes get filled with yellowish discharge
if you have sore eyes. <b>3</b> [A2N; b(1)]
for the strands of hair to be thick with nits.
<i>Mupitpit (mamitpit) ang buhuk sa lusà ug
dílì hugútan,</i> The hair gets thick with nits if
you don't get rid of them. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having
pussy eyes.

<p><b>pitpit<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. @swift. <b>2</b> the mahjong piece
with one bamboo that resembles the pitpit
bird. <i>v</i> [A123; b6] get a pitpit.

<p><b>pitpit<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @squeal about a crime or @tattle
(slang). <i>Mipitpit na ang dinakpan,</i> The
suspect that was arrested squealed. <i>Kinsay
nagpitpit sa maistra nga nangupya ku,</i> Who
told the teacher that I copied?

<p><b>pitpíta</b> <i>n</i> chicken ailment characterized by
the development of a thick rough epidermis
on the outer layer of the tongue rendering
it difficult for the chicken to eat. <i>Dílì mukáun
ang manuk kun may pitpíta,</i> A chicken
with pitpíta will not eat. <b>pitpitáhun</b> <i>a</i> of
a sort having this disease.

<p><b>pí trap</b> <i>n</i> @{P-trap}, an S-shaped tube for the escape
of water or gas that prevents the water
or gas from returning. <i>v</i> [b6] put a P-trap
s.w.

<p><b>pitrulyu</b>, <b>pitrulyum</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @petroleum. <b>2</b> kerosene.
<i>v</i> [A1; b6(1)] fill up with kerosene.
<i>Gipitrulyuman ang kusinilya,</i> They put kerosene
in the pressurized stove.

<p><b>pitrumaks</b> <i>n</i> a pressurized kerosene lantern
(so called from the brand name petromax).
<i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use a petromax.

<p><b>pits<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @peaches.

<p><b>pits<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pitch of a note.

<p><b>pits<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @pitch in a baseball game.

<p><b>pitsa</b> <i>n</i> @date. <i>Unsang pitsáha run?</i> What date
is it today? <i>v</i> [c] put or write the date.
<i>Núlu kanang kuntrátu kay wà pitsáhi,</i> That
contract is null and void because it wasn't
dated.

<p><b>pitsas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mahjong @pieces. <b>2</b> @chips in poker.
<b>3</b> @money (slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b8] have a particular
mahjong piece in one's hand. <b>2</b> [A1; a12]
use chips in playing a game. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> @moneyed,
@rich (slang). <i>Pitsásan nang bayhána
maáyu pangasaw-un,</i> That woman is well-heeled.
She'd make a good wife. <i>v</i> [B1256]
become moneyed.

<pb n=1588>

<p><b>pitsay</b> <i>n</i> Chinese cabbage, a vegetable cultivated
for its long, whitish leaves, eaten cooked:
<b><i>Brassica pekinensis.</i></b> <b>&mdash; bisayà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>pitsay</i>
with darker leaves: <b><i>Brassica chinensis.</i></b>

<p><b>pitsbuy</b> = <sc>PIDSBUY.</sc>

<p><b>pitsi</b> = <sc>PIPSI.</sc>

<p><b>pitsikurnu</b> <i>n</i> @{brass knuckles}. <i>v</i> [A; ab2] use
brass knuckles.

<p><b>pitsil</b> <i>n</i> @pitcher, a container for holding and
pouring liquids. <i>v</i> [a12] place s.t. in a
pitcher.

<p><b>pit sinyur</b> exclamation shouted when dancers
dance the <i>sinulug</i> in front of the image
of the Holy Child (<i>Santu Ninyu</i>). <i>v</i> [A] exclaim
<i>pit sinyur</i>.

<p><b>pitsipitsi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> miscellaneous sundry goods.
<i>Mga pitsipitsi ra ning ákung baligyà,</i> I just
have small, sundry goods here. <b>2</b> miscellaneous,
trivial things. <i>Mga pitsipitsing balità
gikan sa barbiríya,</i> Bits of trivial news and
information from the barber shop. <b>3</b> s.t.
trivial, not worth paying attention to. <i>Pitsipitsi
ang inyung gikaawáyan,</i> You are quarreling
over nothing. <i>v</i> [a1b] buy or sell s.t.
in small amounts. <i>Pitsipitsihun (ipitsipitsi)
nákù ang pagpalit sa ákung mga kinahanglanun,</i>
I'll buy the things I need a little bit at
a time.

<p><b>pitsir<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>PITSIL.</sc>

<p><b>pitsir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @pitcher in baseball. <i>v</i> [B56; c1] be,
make s.o. the pitcher.

<p><b>pitsu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> breast of fowl or birds. <b>2</b> @chest
bones, @sternum. <i>Balíun ku ang ímung pitsu
ug magbinúang ka,</i> I will break your ribs if
you do foolishness. <i>v</i> [A; a12] hit s.o. in
the chest. <b>punta</b> &mdash; <i>see</i> <sc>PUNTA<sub>2</sub>, n5</sc>.

<p><b>pitsukurnu</b> = <sc>PITSIKURNU.</sc>

<p><b>pitu</b> <i>n</i> @seven. <b>labangun ug &mdash; ka láwud</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>LABANG.</sc> <i>v</i> see <sc>TULU.</sc> <b>ika-</b> @seventh. <i>Ang ikapitu
ka (nga) táwu,</i> The seventh man. <i>Ikapitung
lángit,</i> Seventh heaven, @bliss. <b>kapituan</b>
@seventy. <b>ka-</b>, <b>maka-</b> seven times. <b>tag-(<-)</b>
seven at a time.

<p><b>pítu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @whistle. <b>2</b> @whistling sound. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
blow a @whistle, usually as a @signal.
<i>Mipítu ang barku paglarga,</i> The ship blew
its whistle as it left port. <i>Gipitúhan ka sa ripiri,</i>
The referee blew his whistle on you.

<p><b>pítu<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PITÚRU.</sc>

<p><b>pitúgu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental plant with pinnate
leaves resembling a palm. The male plant
produces once a year an enormous cone at
the tip of the stem: <b><i>Cycas rumphii.</i></b>

<p><b>pituk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> @flick the fingers. <b>2</b> [A12; b8]
for an instrument to hit s.t. accidentally.
<i>Paháwà dihà kay hipitukan ka sa sundang,</i>
Get out of there because the bolo will hit
you. <b>3</b> [A; a] @hit with a sudden, sharp blow.
<pb n=1589><i>Gipituk níya ang babáyi sa martilyu,</i> He hit
the woman with a hammer. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @flick of the
fingers. <b>2</b> sharp, sudden @blows.

<p><b>pituk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A13] for the eyes to @stare blankly
into space. <i>Nagpituk ang íyang mata kay lawum
ang íyang gipinsar,</i> He stared blankly
into space because he was absorbed in deep
thought. <b>pitukpituk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; c1] @stare without
thought, blinking the eyes. <i>Mupitukpituk
lang nang batáa ug latiguhun, dílì muhílak,</i>
The child will just stare and blink his
eyes if you whip him. He won't cry. <i>Nagpitukpituk
lang ang búang nga gisultíhan,</i> The
deranged man just kept staring and blinking
his eyes as they talked to him. <b>2</b> [B46] for
a light to @blink on and off. <i>Mipitukpituk
ang síga sa lamparilya kay wà may gas,</i> The
light of the kerosene lamp is flickering because
it has no more kerosene. <i>Pitukpitukun
(ipitukpituk) gánì níya ang plaslayit,
kanà libri na ta pagsulud,</i> When he blinks
the flashlight, that will mean that we are
free to enter.

<p><b>pítul</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] impose punishment to @discipline.
<i>Dì na siya magpabuyag kay napítul
na siya nákù,</i> He won't make a nuisance of
himself any longer because I gave him a
good whipping.

<p><b>pitupitu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mosquito @wrigglers. <b>2</b> @tadpole.
<b>(<-)</b> game played with small children where
the child puts the fingers on the palm of the
adult's hand who recites or sings a rhyme
closing the fingers on the child's hand. One
version: <i>Pitupítu santubud, kan-un púru
budbud, Putdang sanggutan, ang bílin kawatan,
Pitupítu santubud,</i> all he eats is <i>budbud</i>,
Cut the toddy-producing tree down,
Whoever is left is the thief. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a4] be infested
with mosquito @wrigglers or @tadpoles.
<i>Gipitupitu ang danaw,</i> The pond is full of
mosquito larvae (tadpoles). <b>2</b> [B256] become
mosquito wrigglers, tadpoles.

<p><b>pitúru</b> <i>n</i> @enema tip.

<p><b>pit-us</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> not affording enough space. <i>Pit-us
nga kwartu,</i> A room that is too small. <i>Pit-us
ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid,</i> It's a narrow
road that goes into the mountains. <b>2</b> hard
up financially. <i>Pit-us kaáyu mi kay wà kuy
trabáhu,</i> We're very hard up because I don't
have a job. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a] make s.t. narrow.
<i>Nagkapit-us ang asíras sa mga tinda,</i> The
sidewalks are getting jammed because of
all the goods for sale. <b>2</b> [B12] be hard up
financially. <b>3</b> [b8] be in a difficult situation,
in a tight corner, etc. <i>Musúkul ku ug
mapit-usan,</i> I'll fight back if I am cornered.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @tightness, esp. of one's financial condition.

<pb n=1590>

<p><b>pitut</b> <i>n</i> act of @derision made by expelling air
with the two lips allowing them to vibrate
a couple of times and punctuating it with a
<i>t</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b(1)] make this sound. <i>Sagpáun
ku siya ug pamitutan ku níyag usab,</i> I
will slap her if she says 'ptt' to me again.

<p><b>pitwurk</b> <i>n</i> footwork of a boxer.

<p><b>piud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @hold, press close to oneself.
<i>Gipiud níyag maáyu ang libru arun dílì mabasà
sa ulan,</i> She held the book close to her
so it wouldn't get wet in the rain.

<p><b>píud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] weave the edges of s.t. made
of straw in such a way that it won't come
undone. <i>Gipiúran ku pa ang banig,</i> I'm still
weaving the edges of the mat.

<p><b>piug</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> forcibly keep s.t. from moving.
<i>Way nakapiug sa búang nga nangísug,</i>
No one can control the violent madman. <b>2</b>
keep under control. <i>Mapiug lang nátù ang
bátà kun mulatus ta,</i> We can keep the child
under control only if we whip him. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
allow oneself to be prevailed upon. <i>Dílì
giyud nà siya magpapiug. Gustu giyung manimawus,</i>
He can't be prevailed upon. He
wants to take revenge.

<p><b>piut</b>= <sc>PIG-UT.</sc>

<p><b>píward</b> <i>n</i> @ward in a hospital where the patient
is charged, as opposed to a private
room or charity ward. <i>v</i> [c6] stay in a pay
ward.

<p><b>píyad</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for the back to become bent
and, by extension, the stomach. <i>Nagpíyad
ang bukubuku sa kabáyù sa kabug-at sa íyang
dala,</i> The horse's back sagged under
the burden of his load. <i>Ipíyad (pyára) ang
ímung tiyan arun magtakdù ang bakus,</i> Pull
your stomach in so the belt will go all the
way around. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] stick out the
stomach. <i>Ug ímung pyarun (ipiyad) ang ímung
tiyan mu ra kag mabdus,</i> If you stick
your stomach out, you'll look like a pregnant
woman. <b>piyadpiyad</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] walk
and writhe at the same time. <i>Mupiyadpiyad
ang magbatì,</i> A woman that is in labor will
writhe as she walks.

<p><b>piyak<sub>1</sub></b>, <b>píyak</b> <i>n</i> @cheeping sound of chicks or
young birds. <i>v</i> [A; b3] <b>1</b> @peep, @cheep. <i>Pangitáa
rung pisù nga nagpiyak,</i> Look for the
chick that is peeping. <b>2</b> [A12] stand a
chance to win (lit. get a chance to cheep).
<i>Wà makapiyak ang ákung singku písus nga
gidúlà,</i> I bet five pesos, but they didn't get
a chance.

<p><b>piyak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the stomach or flank of an animal
to be thin, not full. <i>Pasabsába ang kábaw
kay piyak kaáyug tiyan,</i> Put the carabao
out to pasture because its flank is very
thin. <i>v</i> [B] having an empty stomach.

<pb n=1591>

<p><b>piyal</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] @trust. <i>Way mupiyal ánang
tawhána kay bakákun,</i> No one trusts that
man because he is a liar. <b>2</b> [A; c] @entrust
s.t. to s.o. <i>Ayawg ipiyal ang mga bátà sa binatunan,</i>
Don't entrust your children to the
maid. <i>Kapyalan kaáyung tawhána,</i> A very
trustworthy person. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> a person who
is entrusted with a responsibility of caring
for, looking after s.t.

<p><b>piyangpiyang</b>, <b>piyangpíyang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cymbal, a
musical instrument which is a pair of metal
concave plates that ring when struck together.
<b>2</b> a @lesbian (humorous metaphor). <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b6(1)] play a cymbal. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make
into cymbals. <b>3</b> [C1; b2] do lesbian acts;
be a lesbian.

<p><b>píyas</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. which was full to be without
its contents and flat and crinkled. <i>Dì na píyas
ang tiyan sa bátà nga nakakaun na,</i> Now
that the child has eaten, his stomach isn't
sunken. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] cause s.t. that was bulging
to flatten out. <i>Mapíyas ang ligid sa awtu
ug way hángin,</i> The tire of the car goes flat
when there is no air. <i>Nagpíyas ang sáku nga
way sulud,</i> The empty sack was crinkled. <b>2</b>
[A; c1] @split s.t. laterally or @peel around the
edges. <i>Gipíyas níya ang íyang pitáka ug gipakítà
ang sulud,</i> He opened his wallet to
show the contents. <i>Gipíyas níya ang ságing
nga mantikaan,</i> She cut the bananas in half
to fry them.

<p><b>piyatpiyat</b> <i>n</i> variation of @poker with up to
four players, each of which is dealt thirteen
cards, which are divided into three groups,
two with five cards each, and one with
three cards. The players' three different
hands are pitted against each other, and the
player who has two winning hands gets the
pot. <i>v</i> [A; c] play this sort of poker.

<p><b>píyu</b> see <sc>PRISYU.</sc>

<p><b>píyù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible fresh water crab about 2"
by 3" in size.

<p><b>píyuk</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3; ab7P] for lamps or lights to
grow @dim. <i>Nagpiyuk man ang sugà. Limpiyúhi
ang túbu,</i> Why is the light dim? Clean
the chimney.

<p><b>piyun</b>, <b>píyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> common @laborer, esp. the
lowest-ranking. <b>2</b> pawn in chess. <i>v</i> [B156]
be, become a common @laborer. <i>Mapíyun giyud
kag dì ka mulampus,</i> You'll become
nothing but a common laborer if you don't
succeed in your studies.

<p><b>píyung</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c1] close the eyes. <i>Pyúnga
(ipíyung) ang ímung mata; unyà tag-ána ni,</i>
Close your eyes; then guess what it is. <b>2</b> [A12; b6]
for one to be so good at doing s.t.
he can do it with the eyes closed. <i>Pyúngan
nà nákug áyu,</i> I can fix that with my eyes
<pb n=1592>closed. <b>3</b> [A; a12] close one's eyes to s.t.
bad, tolerate it. <i>Kadtung nagpíyung sa ílang
mga mata sa mga kasaypánan sad-an pud,</i>
Those who close their eyes to the irregularities
are also guilty. <b>(->)</b> a for the eyes to be
closed. <b>tag-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] take a short @nap.
<i>Mutagpiyung lang kug kadiyut,</i> I'll just take
a short nap. <i>Natagpiyung tingali siya kay
naawahi man sa trabáhu,</i> He must have dozed
off because he was late to work.

<p><b>plág</b> <i>n</i> @{electrical plug}. <i>v</i> = <sc>PLAG-IN.</sc>

<p><b>plag-in</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{plug in} an electrical plug.

<p><b>plagpul</b> <i>n</i> @flagpole.

<p><b>plagrísing</b> <i>n</i> flag-raising ceremony before the
day's activities start. <i>v</i> [A1] hold the flag-raising
ceremony.

<p><b>plagritr&icaron;t</b> <i>n</i> flag retreat ceremony at the end
of the day's activities. <i>v</i> [A] engage in a
flag retreat ceremony.

<p><b>plagsirimúni</b> <i>n</i> flag-raising ceremony. <i>v</i> [A1]
hold a flag-raising ceremony.

<p><b>plagsut</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b8] pop out when squeezed,
be propelled from a confined space
when pressed. <i>Muplagsut ang lísu ug pislítun
nímu ang búnga,</i> The seed will pop out if
you squeeze the fruit. <i>Naplagsutan siyag asíti
pagbumba nákù sa tangki,</i> When I pumped
the tank, oil spurted out on her.

<p><b>plahúta</b> = <sc>PLAWTA.</sc>

<p><b>pláka</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> phonograph @record. <b>2</b> plate from
which a photograph is made. <b>3</b> @plaque. <b>4</b> @{license
plate} of a vehicle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] record
s.t. on a phonograph record. <b>2</b> [b] use a
plate in a camera. <b>3</b> [A] get, give, have a
license plate.

<p><b>plakul</b> = <sc>PALAKUL.</sc>

<p><b>plamingku</b> = <sc>PALAMINGKU.</sc>

<p><b>plámir</b> <i>n</i> @plumber. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a plumber.

<p><b>plán</b> <i>n</i> @custard. <i>v</i> [A; c] make, have custard.

<p><b>planggána</b> <i>n</i> wash @basin.

<p><b>plangganíta</b> <i>n</i> small @basin.

<p><b>plangka</b> <i>n</i> service @switch, the @switch on a service
box used to connect or disconnect electricity
to a house. <i>v</i> [b6] put a service
@switch s.w.

<p><b>plangkíru</b> <i>n</i> one who saws timber into planks
or controls the machine doing so.

<p><b>planhay</b> <i>a</i> @sloping gradually. <i>Planhay ang ílang
yútà dì bakilid dì sad pátag,</i> Their land
is a gradual slope. It is not steep, nor is it
level. <i>v</i> [B; c1] @slope slightly or gradually.
<i>Iplanhay (planháya) pag-atup,</i> Make
the roof at a slight slope.

<p><b>planíla</b> = <sc>PRANÍLA.</sc>

<p><b>planíta</b> <i>n</i> @planet, esp. as a source of astrological
information.

<p><b>plansa</b> = <sc>PLANTSA.</sc>

<pb n=1593>

<p><b>planta</b> <i>n</i> @plant, @factory, @powerhouse. <i>v</i> [A12; b6]
put up a plant.

<p><b>plantáda</b> <i>a</i> in plain, @unobstructed view. <i>Plantáda
kaáyu ang ílang balay gíkan sa iskína,</i>
You can see their house clearly from the
corner. <i>v</i> [AB; c6] be in full view, cause s.t.
to be so. <i>Miplantáda siyag lingkud arun makit-an
sa tanan,</i> She sat where everybody
could see her. <i>Kanang munumintung nagplantáda
dihà,</i> The monument that you see
there.

<p><b>plantasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @plantation. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] have a
plantation.

<p><b>plantilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> list of permanent employees.
<i>Wà ka sa plantilya kay kaswal pa ka,</i> You
are not in the roster because you are a temporary
employee. <b>2</b> cut-out @pattern, sheet
@pattern. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] make a list of employees.
<b>2</b> [A; c1] make, make with a @pattern.
<i>Plantilyaha (iplantilya) ning dáan nga sín,</i>
Use this old iron sheet for your patterns.
<i>Plantilyáhi ang panaptun arun sayun ra tabásun,</i>
Use a pattern on the cloth so that it
will be easy to cut.

<p><b>plantsa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @flatiron. <b>2</b> @trowel. <b>3</b> @{crew cut}. <i>a</i>
for iron sheets to be flat and smooth. <i>Plantsang
sín ang itaptap sa lamísa,</i> Cover the table
with smooth sheets of tin. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b>
@iron s.t. <i>Plantsáha ri day,</i> Please iron this for
me, Miss. <b>1a</b> @flatten out metal sheets that
are corrugated or wrinkled. <b>2</b> @smooth out
cement. <b>3</b> [A; c1] give a @{crew cut}. <b>plantsahan</b>
<i>n</i> @{ironing board}.<b> -du</b>,<b> -wu</b> <i>n</i> ironed
clothes. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> @presser. <i>v</i> [B] become a
@presser. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @ironed. <b>2</b> @{crew cut}.
<b>plantsahun</b>, <b>plantsahúnun</b>, <b>plantsaduhun</b> <i>n</i>
clothes to iron.

<p><b>plánu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @plan of s.t. constructed on a piece
of ground. <b>2</b> @plan, @program of what one is
going to do. <b>2a</b> @plan, @intention. <i>Wà kuy plánu
paglangyaw,</i> I have no plans to go abroad.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] make a @plan of s.t. <b>2</b> [A; ab]
make plans, devise a plan for s.t. <i>Akuy
muplánu sa kasal,</i> I'll make the wedding
plans. <i>Giplánu giyug maáyu ang pagtúlis sa
bangku,</i> The bank robbery was well planned.
<b>2a</b> @plan, intend to do s.t.

<p><b>plaríti</b> <i>n</i> @ribbing of a boat to which the walling
is attached. <i>v</i> [A; b] make the @ribbing
for a boat.

<p><b>*plas</b> &mdash; [<i>number of English origin</i>] [so-and-so]
many points advantage. <i>Hatágan níyag
plas payib ang bangà níyang kuntra,</i> He will
give his weaker opponent a five-point advantage.

<p><b>plás<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b1c] @flush the toilet, @flush water
over an area. <i>Iplás ang kasilyas humag gámit</i>,
Flush the toilet after using it. <i>Giplásan
<pb n=1594>níya ug túhig ang húgaw sa salug sa banyu,</i>
She flushed water over the bathroom floor
to get rid of the dirt. <i>n</i> flush mechanism.

<p><b>plás<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @flash equipment of a camera. <i>v</i> [c6]
@flash news over the radio or on the screen.
<i>Ang kalit nga kamatáyun sa prisidinti sa
násud giplás sa radiyu karun,</i> The sudden
death of the president was flashed over the
radio now. <b>-ing<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> appearance of the
characters on stage before a play begins. <b>2</b>
short advertisement flashed on the screen
in the movies before the show begins.

<p><b>plása</b> <i>n</i> @plaza, a @{public square} or @{market
place} in a city or town. <i>v</i> [ac] make a @plaza.

<p><b>plas balb</b> <i>n</i> @{flash bulb}.

<p><b>plasíbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> feast celebrated in the evening
before All Souls' Day where food is prepared
as an offering to the departed. Originally
it was unsalted and put at the altar
or before a grave. It marks the end of a
novena. <b>2</b> the food prepared for this occasion.
<b>3</b> @{funeral rites} preceding a burial accompanied
or followed by a solemn tolling
of bells. <i>Human sa plasíbu dad-un sa mintiryu
ang minatay,</i> After the church ceremony
the body will be taken to the cemetery. <b>3a</b>
the tolling of the bells for the dead. <i>v</i> [A; b]
hold this feast or funeral ceremony. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] partake of this feast. <i>Mamlasíbu
ta karung gabíi sa íla,</i> We will participate
in their All Souls' Eve celebration.

<p><b>plásing<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @flashing at the edge of a roof. <i>v</i>
[A1; c] put up the @flashing at the edge of a
roof.

<p><b>plásis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hand in mahjong consisting of only
one unit: sirkuls, or bambu, or karaktir
with any other combination of wind pieces
(bintus) or dragons (drágun). <b>2</b> flush hand
in a card game. <i>Lúpig ang plásis sa pulháwus,</i>
A flush can't beat a full house.

<p><b>plaskíya</b> <i>n</i> long, wooden @straightedge[**two words?] of no
standard length.

<p><b>plasláyit</b> <i>n</i> @flashlight. <b>v</b> [A; b] shine a @flashlight
on, use a @flashlight.

<p><b>plasta</b>, <b>plast&acaron;r</b> = <sc>PALAST&Acaron;R.</sc>

<p><b>plastik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @plastic. <b>2</b> @{plastic surgery}. <i>v</i> [A; a]
perform plastic surgery. <b>&mdash; surdyiri</b> <i>n</i>
@{plastic surgery}.

<p><b>plastir</b> <i>n</i> medical plaster or adhesive. <b>&mdash; ab
paris</b> <i>n</i> @{plaster of Paris}. <b>&mdash; kast</b> <i>n</i> plaster
cast. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] use, put a plaster to
cover a wound or s.t. <b>2</b> [A; c1] apply a plaster
cast to s.o.

<p><b>plásu</b> <i>n</i> @extension, @postponement of the
agreed deadline, esp. of payment. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
give an extension or postponement. <i>Giplasúhan
lang kug usa ka búlan paghátag sa bugay</i>,
<pb n=1595>I was given a month's extension to
give the bride price.

<p><b>plat</b> <i>n</i> garden @plot <i>v</i> [A; a] divide a garden
into plots.

<p><b>plát</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @flat, not having depressions or elevations
on it. <i>Plát ug dughang bayhána,</i> A
flat-chested woman. <b>2</b> completely without
money, @penniless. <i>Plát kaáyu ku run,</i> I am
completely broke. <b>3</b> @{flat tire}. <b>3a</b> tire without
enough air. <i>Bumbáhi pa kay plát pa,</i>
Put more air in it because it still is flat. <b>4</b>
flat-heeled shoes. <b>5</b> be knocked flat. <i>Naigù
sa ákung liphuk, dà plát lagi,</i> I hit him with
my left hook and he was knocked out flat.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] get to be flat. <i>Maplát ang bisiklíta
ug sakyan ug tambuk,</i> The bicycle tires will
get pressed down flat if a fat person rides
on it. <b>2</b> [B; a] get a flat tire. <i>Naplátan mi,
maung nadúgay mi,</i> We had a flat tire, and
so we were delayed. <b>3</b> [A1] wear flat shoes,
slippers. <b>4</b> [A2; a12] @refuse s.o. flatly. <i>Giplát
ku níya dáyun nga wà kuy ispiransa,</i>
She told me flatly that I had no hope.<b> &mdash;
syus</b> <i>n</i> flat-heeled shoes. <b>&mdash; tayir</b> <i>n</i> @{flat tire}.
<b>&mdash; tap</b> @{crew cut}. <i>v</i> [A; c16] get a crew cut.

<p><b>pláta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @silver. <b>2</b> silver coin. <i>v</i> [b] alloy s.t.
with silver. <b>búda di-</b> see <sc>BÚDA.</sc>

<p><b>plátap</b> = <sc>PLÁT TAP.</sc> see <sc>PLÁT.</sc>

<p><b>platapurma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stage, @platform. <b>2</b> @platform
of a political party. <i>v</i> [A; b6] make a @stage
or @platform.

<p><b>platik</b> = <sc>PALATIK.</sc>

<p><b>platínu</b>, <b>platínum</b> <i>n</i> @interruptor of an internal
combustion engine.

<p><b>platiríya</b> <i>n</i> goldsmith shop. <i>v</i> [A; a] put up a
goldsmith shop.

<p><b>platíru</b> <i>n</i> silver-, @goldsmith.

<p><b>platítu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @saucer. <i>v</i> [a2] put a saucer or
small plate.

<p><b>platítu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental bush: <b><i>Polyscias
scutellaria.</i></b>

<p><b>platnus</b> <i>a</i> @{flat-nosed}.

<p><b>plátu</b>, <b>platun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> general name for @plates of
any material, flat or deep. <i>v</i> [A; a2] eat
from plates. <b>hayang ang</b> &mdash; see <sc>HAYANG.</sc>

<p><b>platun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @platoon in the military. <b>&mdash; lídir</b> <i>n</i>
@{platoon leader}.

<p><b>pláwir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{female genitalia} (euphemism). <b>2</b>
minor characters in a play, insignificant performers
in a game. <b>3</b> = <sc>BÚLAK</sc>, <i>2a.</i> <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a12] be a minor character in a play or
game. <i>Napláwir ku adtung duláa kay wà ku
hipasahi,</i> I didn't do anything in that game
because they never passed the ball to me
once. <b>2</b> [A12; b6] draw a búlak in mahjong.
<b>&mdash; bis</b> <i>n</i> @vase. <b>&mdash; gil</b> <i>n</i> @{flower girl}. <i>v</i> [B56; c16]
be a @{flower girl}. <b>&mdash; pat</b> <i>n</i> @flowerpot.

<p><b>plawta</b> <i>n</i> @flute. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a] play the @flute,
<pb n=1596>make into a flute. <b>2</b> [A23N2; a12] eat s.t.
long as if playing the flute. <i>Kusug siyang
muplawta (mamlawta) ug inánag,</i> He really
eats broiled corn on the cob fast.

<p><b>*play</b> <b>mu-(->)</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>UNGLÙ</sc> (humorous&mdash;so
called from the ability of the <i>unglù</i> to fly).
<b>kan-(->)</b> = <sc>MUPL&Acaron;Y.</sc>

<p><b>play-awi</b> <i>n</i> hair style of shoulder-length hair
hanging down loosely. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] fix, wear
the hair in this style.

<p><b>playing súsir</b> <i>n</i> @{flying saucer}.

<p><b>pláyir</b>= <sc>PLAYIS.</sc>

<p><b>playis</b> <i>n</i> @pliers. <i>v</i> [A; a2] use @pliers.

<p><b>playit</b> <i>n</i> scheduled flight of an airplane. <i>Unsang
urása ang ímung[** imung?] playit?</i> What time is
your flight?<b> &mdash; atindant</b> <i>n</i> @{flight attendant}.

<p><b>playwit</b> <i>n</i> @flyweight boxer. <i>v</i> [B126] be in
the flyweight class.

<p><b>playwud</b> <i>n</i> @plywood. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] use, make
s.t. of plywood.

<p><b>plí<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> exclamation uttered to make a game
start. <i>Nakatágù na mu? Plí!</i> Are you all
hidden? Coming ready or not.

<p><b>plí<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC; ab5c2] have sexual relations
(euphemism). <i>Káda gabíi magplí sila,</i> They
have sexual intercourse every night.

<p><b>plibisítu</b> <i>n</i> @referendum,[** aka: plebescite] special election over
a single issue. <i>v</i> [A13; c] hold a @referendum.

<p><b>plíbul</b> <i>v</i> [A23] go along s.o. else's proposal
or decision just to gain or stay in his good
graces. <i>Kay mau may íyang gustu, muplíbul
lang ta,</i> If that's what he wants, let's just go
along with it.

<p><b>plíbuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> short-sleeved sport shirt. <i>v</i> [A; a]
wear, make into a sport shirt.

<p><b>plíbuy<sub>2</sub></b> a @philanderer, one who plays around
with lots of women. <i>v</i> [B12] be a @philanderer.

<p><b>plígis</b> = <sc>PILÍGIS.</sc>

<p><b>pligráwun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @playground. <b>2</b> a set of activities
such as dances, calisthenics, gymnastics,
and the like, performed en masse on an open
area. <i>v</i> [a2] make a playground. <b>&mdash; dimunstrisyun</b>
= <sc>PLIGRÁWUN</sc>, <i>2.</i>

<p><b>plígu</b> = <b>PILÍGU.</b>

<p><b>plíma</b> <i>n</i> @phlegm.

<p><b>plimíru</b> = <sc>PRIMÍRU.</sc>

<p><b>plín<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @airplane. <i>v</i> [A1; a1c] take, bring in
an airplane. <i>Magplín ku paingun sa Manílà,</i>
I'll take a plane to Manila.

<p><b>plín<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> cloth that is unfigured, untwilled.

<p><b>plirayid</b> <i>n</i> unofficial player in a game or
gambling, participating as filler so that there
is a full contingent of the required number
of players. His scores are not counted and
he cannot take part in betting. <i>Daghan untà
kug puntus apan walà ikwinta kay plirayid
ra man ku,</i> I got lots of points, but they
<pb n=1597>were not counted because I just filled in. <i>v</i>
[A] fill in to make a full contingent.

<p><b>plirt</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to be @flirting or @coquettish.
<i>v</i> [A; b6] @flirt with s.o.

<p><b>plísing</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] in ball games, played with a
net, place the ball in a certain spot in the
opponent's side. <i>Iplísing sa wala ang búla
ug náa siya sa tuu,</i> Place the ball in the left
side if he is on the right side. a hitting in a
place that is difficult to return the ball
from.

<p><b>plismat</b> <i>n</i> @placemat for putting under dishes.
<i>v</i> [A; c] use @placemats.

<p><b>plít</b> = <sc>PILÍGIS.</sc>

<p><b>plíti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fare. <i>Pilay plíti ngadtus Manílà?</i>
How much is the fare to Manila? <b>1a</b> @fare
money. <i>Díay ímung plíti,</i> Here's the money
for your fare. <b>2</b> @rental. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @rent. <i>Muplíti
ra kug libru kay wà kuy ipalit,</i> I'll just
rent my books because I don't have enough
money to buy them. <b>2</b> [A; c] pay the rent,
fare. <i>Siyay nagplíti nákù,</i> He paid my fare.

<p><b>plitína</b> = <sc>PILITÍNA.</sc>

<p><b>plitnambir</b> <i>n</i> vehicle plate number. <b>walay &mdash;</b>
palm @toddy which is artificially made
(slang). <i>Way plitnambir ning tubáa, magkalíbang
ta íni,</i> This is an artificial palm toddy.
We'll get diarrhea from it. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] issue
a plate number to a vehicle.

<p><b>plíts</b> = <sc>PILÍGIS.</sc>

<p><b>plitsa</b> <i>n</i> a four-wheeled horse-drawn @carriage
used in former times. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] ride in
this sort of carriage.

<p><b>plú</b> <i>n</i> @flu. <i>v</i> [B12; a4] be sick with flu. <i>Plúhun
gánì ka, pahúlay dáyun,</i> Go immediately
to bed if you get the flu.

<p><b>plúhu</b> = <sc>PULÚHU.</sc>

<p><b>plúma</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ornamental feathers. <b>2</b> fountain,
or dip pen, @quill. <b>3</b> the @graphite in pencils.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] adorn s.t. with feathers. <i>Giplumáhan
ang mga kálù sa mga sundálung
bitiránu,</i> The veterans adorned their hats
with feathers. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] use, write with
a fountain pen or dip pen. <i>Magplúma ta
inigsulat sa átung tím,</i> We'll use a dip pen
for writing our themes.

<p><b>plumáhi</b> <i>n</i> ornamental feathers. <i>v</i> [b] adorn
s.t. with ornamental feathers.

<p><b>plumíru<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{feather duster}. <i>v</i> [A; a] dust s.t.
with a feather duster, make a feather duster.

<p><b>plumíru<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PLÁMIR.</sc>

<p><b>plúmu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lead. <i>Plúmu ang gihímù níyang
pamatu,</i> He used lead for his sinker. <b>2</b> @washer
put under nails. <i>v</i> [A; b6] nail s.t. with a
washer. <i>Ang lansang sa sín plumúhan arun
dì mutúlù,</i> They put washers under the roof
nails to prevent it from leaking.

<p><b>plur</b> <i>n</i> @floor, @storey of a building. <i>Unsang
<pb n=1598>plúra ang ímung upisína, sa pip plur?</i> What
floor is your office, on the fifth floor?

<p><b>plúral upiring</b> <i>n</i> flower offering put on a
monument or given to a beauty queen with
a ceremony. <i>v</i> [A1] hold such a ceremony.

<p><b>plurdilis</b> <i>n</i> @zinnia.

<p><b>pluríra</b> <i>n</i> flower @vase. <i>v</i> [A; c1] use s.t. as a
flower @vase.

<p><b>plúris</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>BÚLAK</sc>, <i>2a.</i> <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; di Máyu</b> season
in the month of May when flowers are offered
to the Virgin in the church. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b6]
draw a búlak in mahjong. <b>2</b> [A1] hold
the celebration of the May flowers.

<p><b>plurisin</b> <i>n</i> @{fluorescent lamp}. <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)]
use, install a @{fluorescent lamp}.

<p><b>plurlídir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> floor leader in the legislature. <b>2</b>
the one of a group that sleeps on the floor
(humorous). <i>Kay kúlang ug katri, ikay plurlídir,</i>
There's not enough beds so you sleep
on the floor. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; c16] be made the
floor leader. <b>2</b> [A2B6; a12] be the one to
sleep on the floor, cause one to be such.

<p><b>plurwaks</b> <i>n</i> @{floor wax}. <i>v</i> [A; b] apply @{floor
wax}.

<p><b>plút</b> <i>n</i> @float in a parade. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] ride on a
float. <i>Magplút ang rayna nga iparáda,</i> The
beauty queen will be paraded around on a
float. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make s.t. into a float.

<p><b>plúting</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance wherein a dancer appears
to float. <i>v</i> [A] do this dance.

<p><b>plúting rít</b> <i>n</i> floating rate of currency. <i>Ang
plúting rít mauy nakapamahal sa prisyu sa
mga palalítun,</i> The floating rate is the reason
prices have gone up. <i>v</i> [B1456] for the
floating rate to be in effect.

<p><b>plúwid</b> <i>n</i> a @{cigarette lighter fluid}. <i>v</i> [A; b]
fill with lighter fluid.

<p><b>prá</b> (from <i>pára</i>) cry to get horses to stop:
@whoa.

<p><b>prabir</b> = <sc>PARABIR.</sc>

<p><b>pragáta</b> <i>n</i> @frigate with sails. <i>v</i> [A; a12] ride,
load s.t. in a frigate.

<p><b>pragátus</b> = <sc>PARAGÁTUS.</sc>

<p><b>pragmin</b> <i>n</i> @frogmen.

<p><b>prak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> formal evening gown for women. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A1; b6] wear such a frock. <b>2</b> [a12] make
into a frock of this sort.

<p><b>prak<sub>2</sub></b>, <b>prák</b> <i>n</i> onomatopoetic sound of exploding
firecrackers.

<p><b>prakásu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] fail to carry out an agreement.
<i>Makasálig ka nákù kay dì ku muprakásu
ug sábut,</i> You can count on me because
I do not break agreements.

<p><b>prakayda</b> = <b>PARAKAYDA.</b>

<p><b>praktikal</b> <i>a</i> @practical, simple but useful. <i>Praktikal
kaáyu ang sinínang dastir pára sa balay,</i>
A duster is a very practical dress to
wear in the house. <i>v</i> [c1] do s.t. in a practical
<pb n=1599>way.

<p><b>praktis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @rehearse, @train s.o. <i>Akuy
mupraktis sa mga bátà ug kanta,</i> I'll train
the children how to sing. <b>2</b> @practice, @rehearse.
<i>Magpraktis ta sa átung drama,</i> Let's
practice our drama. <b>3</b> [A; b6] @practice one's
profession. <i>Mupraktis kug makapasar ku sa
bár,</i> I will practice law if I pass the bar. <i>n</i>
@practice or @rehearsal. <i>Lisdan ku magkinatsilà
kay wà na kuy praktis,</i> I have a hard
time speaking Spanish because I don't have
practice. <b>walay &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> @unskilled (as if lacking
practice). <b>2</b> @rough, accustomed to inflicting
pain (derived from the sarcastic usage
where s.o. good in fighting refers to himself
as <i>walay praktis</i> 'unpracticed'). <i>Makatilaw
ka giyud íning kúmù kung way praktis,</i>
If you don't watch out, I'll smack you
one with my 'unpracticed' fists. <b>&mdash; titsing</b> <i>n</i>
practice teaching. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] do practice
teaching. <b>praktisádu</b> <i>a</i> <i>1</i> @proficient from
having practiced. <i>Praktisádu nà siya sa karáti,</i>
He is proficient in karate. <b>2</b> @brawny
due to constant body-building. <i>v</i> [B126]
be, become @{well-practiced} or @trained in s.t.

<p><b>prákul</b> = <sc>PALAKUL.</sc>

<p><b>prangha</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c] @decorate; dress up smartly,
esp. with jewels. <i>Dílì musimba nang tigulánga
ug dílì makaprangha,</i> The old woman
never goes to church without her jewels.
<i>Pranghái ang sakyanan sa bag-ung kinasal,</i>
Decorate the automobile of the newly-weds.

<p><b>prangka</b> <i>a</i> @frank, saying exactly what one
thinks. <i>Prangka pud kaáyu nímu,</i> How very
frank of you! <i>v</i> [A; c1] tell s.o. frankly.
<i>Ákù siyang giprangkáhan nga wà kuy gustu
níya,</i> I told him frankly that I don't like
him.

<p><b>prangkísa</b> <i>n</i> @franchise.

<p><b>prangkisíya</b> <i>n</i> @franchise.

<p><b>prangkíyu</b> <i>n</i> @{postage stamp}. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
put a postage stamp on s.t. <i>Giúlì ang sulat
kay wà kaprangkiyúhi,</i> The letter was returned
because they didn't put stamps on
it.

<p><b>prangku<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> day off. <i>Dílì siya mutrabáhu karun
kay prangku man níya,</i> He will not go
to work today because it is his day off. <i>v</i>
[A2] take a day off from work. <i>Muprangku
ku sa trabáhu ugmà kay magpagíkan ku sa
ákung anak,</i> I'll take the day off tomorrow
because I'll see my child off at the airport.

<p><b>prangku<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>PRANGKA.</sc>

<p><b>praníla</b> <i>n</i> @flannel. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear, make of
flannel.

<p><b>pransis</b> <i>n</i> an elongated loaf of bread with
pointed tips and a cut at the center.

<pb n=1600>

<p><b>Pransiya</b> <i>n</i> @France.

<p><b>prantáda</b> = <sc>PLANTÁDA.</sc>

<p><b>prantsit</b> = <sc>PRUNSIT.</sc>

<p><b>prásis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] process papers or documents.
<i>Madúgay pang prasísun ang mga papílis,</i> It
will take time to get your papers processed.
-ing(->) <b>1</b> preparation of s.t. <b>2</b> processing of
papers.

<p><b>prasku</b> <i>n</i> tall wine bottle with four sides,
holding more than a liter. <i>v</i> [c16] put s.t.
into a bottle of this sort.

<p><b>prawud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @proud and @arrogant. <i>Prawud kaáyu
nà sila ábi sapían man,</i> They are arrogant
just because they have money. <b>2</b> @proud
of s.t. <i>Prawud kaáyu ang ginikánan sa balidikturyan,</i>
The valedictorian's parents were
mighty proud. <i>v</i> [B12] <b>1</b> become @proud
and @arrogant. <b>2</b> become @proud.

<p><b>praybasi</b> <i>n</i> @privacy from view. <i>Dì ku malígù
dinhi kay way praybasi,</i> I won't take a bath
here because there's no privacy.

<p><b>praybit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @private, not for public use. <i>Praybit
dyíp,</i> Private jeep, not used for public
transportation. <b>1a</b> @private, not publicly
maintained. <b>&mdash; iskul</b> @{private school}. <b>&mdash; rud</b>
road maintained by the owner. <b>1b</b> @private,
for the exclusive use of s.o. or a group. <b>&mdash;
nars</b> private nurse. <b>&mdash; rum</b> private room in a
hospital. <b>2</b> @private rank in the military. <i>v</i>
[B156; c1] be a @private enlisted man. <i>Magpraybit
lang ku,</i> I'll content myself with being
a private.

<p><b>prayid rayis</b> <i>n</i> @{fried rice}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make, have
@{fried rice}. <i>Prayid raysa ang kan-un,</i> Make
fried rice of the food (rice).

<p><b>prayid tsíkin</b> <i>n</i> @{fried chicken}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make,
have @{fried chicken}.

<p><b>prayli</b> <i>n</i> Spanish priest that is a member of a
religious order. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] become a
Spanish @friar.

<p><b>praymari</b> see <sc>PRIMARYA.</sc>

<p><b>pri</b> = <sc>PARI.</sc> see <sc>PÁRI.</sc>

<p><b>prí</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @free to do as one likes. <b>2</b> without cost
or @free. <i>Kining tanan gihátag kanímung prí,</i>
All these things are given free to you. <i>Prí ka
sa pagkáun,</i> You don't have to pay for your
food. <b>2</b> in a game, free to make a shot unhindered.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] allow s.o. to do s.t.
free. <b>2</b> [B1256; b(1)] get a chance to take
a shot unhindered.

<p><b>pribáda</b>, <b>pribádu</b> <i>a</i> @private, not for public use
or not financed by the government. <i>Dì nà
dihà pasudlan kay pribádu,</i> You cannot go
in there because it is private. <i>v</i> [B1256; c1]
become @private.

<p><b>pribilids</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>ISPL&Icaron;T<sub>2</sub>.</sc> <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ispits</b> privilege
speech allowed to a member of Congress
during its session.
