<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"    -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"    -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"    -- glottal stop -->
<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "a"           -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "i"           -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "u"           -- u with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i"           -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "e"           -- schwa (turned e) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>


CHECKLIST:

Step one

[ ] Run pgpp.pl
[ ] Fix page-breaks
[ ] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[ ] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[ ] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[ ] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for <b>word 1</b> case
[ ] remove redundant tags near commas.
[ ] handle sup tags
[ ] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " '", etc.
[ ] Renumber pages.

Step three

Iterate:
    [ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [ ] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3


</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>

<pb n=1001>

<p><b>kudakíris</b> <i>n</i> @photographer that takes still pictures. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a photographer.

<p><b>kudambus</b> = <sc>KURAMBUS</sc>.

<p><b>kudigu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{code of laws}. <b>&mdash; iliktural</b> election code. <b>&mdash; iliktural ribisádu</b> revised election code. <b>&mdash; pinal</b> penal code. <b>&mdash; pinal ribisádu</b> revised penal code. <b>&mdash; sibil</b> civil code. <b>2</b> compilation of answers to cheat from in exams or similar jottings for a talk or other public performances. <i>v</i> [A; b] use notes in an exam or in a talk. <i>Dílì ku mukudigu kay mahadluk kug hisakpan</i>, I won't look at my notes because I am afraid I might be caught. <i>Wà siya masayup sa pagkanta kay nagkudigu man</i>, He didn't miss any words in his song because he had a copy to glance at.

<p><b>kuding</b> = <sc>KUTING<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kudkud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @grind into fine pieces by rubbing or scraping. <i>Kudkúra ang lubi</i>, Grate the coconut. <i>Kudkura ang yílu</i>, Take some shavings off the ice. <b>1a</b> [A; a2] carry s.o. astride the hips (from the notion that the way the child is carried is analogous to the coconut put over the shredder). <b>2</b> [A; a] @{file off} metal to clean it or thin it before sharpening it. <i>Kinahanglan kudkúrun kanang tayà sa suwab únà baíra</i>, You should scrape the rust off the blade before you whet it. <b>kudkuran</b> <i>n</i> coconut shredder.

<p><b>kudkúd</b> = <sc>KULUDKÚLUD</sc>.

<p><b>kudlis</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make a @scratch or a @mark on a surface. <i>Kinsay mukudlis sa ímung hubag?</i> Who will make an incision in your boil? <i>Gikudlísan sa bátà ang bungbung ug krayúla</i>, The baby marked up the wall with crayons. <i>n</i> scratch or mark left on a surface.

<p><b>kudlit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> make a @scratch, @pinprick, or line on s.t. <i>Kasingkásing nga gikudlit sa buktun, papil, káhuy</i>, A heart <corr sic=tatooed>tattooed</corr> on the arm, drawn on the paper, carved into the tree. <i>Gikudlítan sa duktur ang hubag</i>, The doctor made an incision in the boil. [A; b] <b>1a</b> @vaccinate. <i>Nía na ang nars nga mukudlit sa mga bátà</i>, Here is the nurse to vaccinate (lit. prick) the children. <b>1b</b> change the palm configuration of a child that has the mark of a crocodile on his palm (<i>buayáhun</i>) which betokens ill. <i>Kinahanglang kudlítan ang buayáhun arun kabuhíag anak</i>, A child that bears the mark of the crocodile on his palm should have it extended so his parents will not have all their children die <pb n=1002>on them. <b>2</b> @write s.t. (literary). <i>Bálak nga gikudlit sa íyang dágang</i>, The poem that his pen produced. <i>n</i> lines, @scratches, @pinpricks. <b>&mdash; sa pálad</b> <b>1</b> @{lines in the palm}. <b>2</b> one's fate or fortune as indicated by the palm. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] have oneself <corr sic=innoculated>inoculated</corr> or have the lines on the palm extended. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> person to be <corr sic=innoculated>inoculated</corr>, place to be punctured, surface to be written on. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> marks made. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who <corr sic=innoculates>inoculates</corr> or tattoos.

<p><b>kudrísu</b> = <sc>KURDÍSU</sc>.

<p><b>kudsan</b> = <sc>KURUSAN</sc>, <i>4.</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KURUS</sc>.

<p><b>kudyapà</b> <i>n</i> herb of waste places, the tender parts of which are eaten as a vegetable. There are two species called by this name: <bx>-ng bayi</bx> an unarmed species, the best for use as vegetable (<b><i>Amaranthus viridis</i></b>) and <bx>-ng laki</bx> an armed species (<b><i>Amaranthus spinosus</i></b>).

<p><b>kudyapì</b> <i>n</i> @{musical instrument} with six or more strings, having a flat, rectangular, wooden body. It is laid down and plucked with both hands.

<p><b>kugal</b> <i>a</i> for the meat of fruit or eggs to be completely separated from the skin or the pit. <i>Daling panítan ang sambag kugal</i>, It's easy to peel ripe tamarinds when the skin is separated from the flesh. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] for the flesh to separate from the peelings or pit. <i>Mukugal ang lísu sa abukádu basta mahinug na</i>, The seed in the avocado gets loose when it is ripe. <b>2</b> [B; b6] for a cough to loosen. <i>Tambal nga makakugal (makapakugal) ning ubúha</i>, Medicine that can loosen this cough.

<p><b>kugan</b> <i>n</i> @{dry crust}, @scab of a sore or wound. <i>v</i> [B4; b(1)] for a scab to form. <i>Maáyu na ang núka kay mikugang (gikugangan) na</i>, The sore is healing because it is forming a scab.

<p><b>kugang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @startled. <i>Hastang kugánga nákù paglagpak sa sira</i>, God! How that slamming door startled me! <i>v</i> [B1256; b4(1)] startle, be startled. <i>Nakugang (nakugangan) ku sa pagbutu sa ribintadur</i>, I was startled when the firecracker burst. <b>kugangkugang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> skin eruptions on some parts of the body of various sizes, thought to be caused by fear, fright, or being startled. This disease is usually diagnosed in small children and the cure is smoke treatment with the <i>kugangkugang</i> herb. <b>2</b> low-growing, woody herb of waste places used to treat children who have the skin eruptions also called <i>kugangkugang</i>. The <i>kugangkugang</i> is set on fire just after sundown, and the child is made to inhale the smoke. The treatment is repeated for three consecutive afternoons.

<pb n=1003>

<p><b>kugang<sub>2</sub></b> = <b>KUGAN</b>.

<p><b>kugaw, kúgaw</b> <i>n</i> fingerling of the milkfish (<ix>bangrus</ix>) at the stage 4&ndash;8" in length: <b><i>Chanos chanos</i></b>.

<p><b>kugay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB; ac1] make brown sugar in a dry and powdered state. <i>Kun sagúlag apug ang dúgà sa tubu nga intúsun mukugay (makugay) ang kámay nga malútù</i>, When lime is added to milled cane juice, the brown sugar will come out dry and in powdered form. <i>n</i> brown cane sugar in its powdered form.

<p><b>kugay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @delicacy made of buri palm starch, brown sugar, shredded coconut meat, and, optionally, other flavorings. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make <ix>kugay</ix>. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <xref>= <sc>KUGAY<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kughad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{clear the throat} vigorously, loosen mucous or phlegm stuck in the lower throat by agitating the throat organs with a clearing-the-throat-like action. <i>Mikughad siya dáyung nangluwà</i>, He cleared his throat vigorously and then spat. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> phlegm one spits up.

<p><b>kughal</b> <i>n</i> @phlegm.

<p><b>kughay</b> <i>n</i> midrib from a coconut leaflet. <i>Kughay sa lubi ang ákung himúung tutpik</i>, I'll use a midrib for a toothpick.

<p><b>kughun</b> <i>n</i> part of the weaving loom: the @heddle and its mounting which alternately raises and lowers each of the two sets of the warp threads. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] put threads in the <i>kughun</i> (heddles). <b>2</b> [A12; a2] attach, make into a weaving harness.

<p><b>kúgi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] do s.t. with a little extra effort. <i>Wà giyud ninyuy nakakúgig limpiyu sa salug, nu?</i> None of you ever took the initiative to clean the floor, did you? <i>Ákù giyud ning gikugíhan ug trabáhu arun mahuman dáyun</i>, I put in extra effort to finish the work quickly. <i>n</i> extra effort put into s.t. <i>Walay kúgi nga dílì musangput sa kaayúhan</i>, If you put in effort, it is bound to result in good. <i>a</i> taking to doing certain things which require effort, doing them with enthusiasm. <i>Kúgi siyang mamunit ug láta</i>, He's very diligent in picking up old cans. <i>Kúgi manakup ug alasiwsiw</i>, He's great in catching grasshoppers. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] @woo a girl hard to win her (slang). <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>KÚGI</sc>, <i>n</i>. <b>kugihan</b> <i>a</i> @industrious, @hard-*working. <b>kinugíhan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. reaped from one's diligence. <i>Ayawg usíki ang ákung kinugíhan</i>, Don't waste the fruit of my labor.[+]

<p><b>kuging</b> = <sc>KIGWA</sc>.

<p><b>kugíta</b> <i>n</i> <corr><b>1</b> </corr>k.o. octopus with the body about the size of a baby's head. <b>2</b> eye disease in which there is a growth on the eyeball which spreads out like the tentacles of an <pb n=1004>octopus. <i>v</i> [b4] get cataracts on the eyes. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] catch octopuses. <b>kugitáhun</b> <i>a</i> like an octopus.

<p><b>kugíut</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] @creak, @squeak. <i>Mikugíut ang salug nga kawáyan sa ákung paglakaw</i>, The bamboo floor made a creaking noise when I walked on it. <i>Nagkugiut[**note: no accent or arrow] ang sira</i>, The door creaked.

<p><b>kugkug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] <b>1</b> curl up stiff and hard. <i>Ug mukugkug ang sinugbang bulad núkus, kuháa</i>, When the dried squid curls up, take it off the coals. <i>Nagkugkug ang tiil sa inasal</i>, The feet of the roasted pig is curled up stiff. <b>2</b> for the body to be hunched over. <i>Tigúlang na si Lúlu magkugkug na maglakaw</i>, Grandfather is old now, and he is hunched over when he walks.

<p><b>kugkug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3; b4] @{shiver from cold}, usually with quivering lips. <i>Pagdyákit kay nagkugkug ka nas katugnaw</i>, Wear a jacket because you are shivering with cold.

<p><b>kugkug<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>KULUGKUG</sc>.

<p><b>kugmat</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a12] get startled. <i>Nakugmat ku sa nagsungasung nga butubutu sa pusil</i>, I was startled by the rapid report of gunfire.

<p><b>kugmu</b> <i>n</i> dry, hardened mucous in the nose. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4b4] get hardened mucous in the nose. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b1] pick the hardened mucous out of a nose. <b>panghiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] pick one's own nose. <b>kugmuhun</b> <i>a</i> nostrils full of dry hardened mucous.

<p><b>kugpus</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS</sc>.

<p><b>kugpuy</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS</sc>.

<p><b>kugtung</b> <i>n</i> name given to very large groupers: <b><i>Epinephelus spp.</i></b>

<p><b>kugum<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @{hold on} to s.t. with the fingernails or claws. <i>Tag-as ug kuku ang dalága nga mikugum sa íyang buktun</i>, The girl who clutched his arms with her nails sure had long ones. <i>Gikugman (gikugum) sa banug ang pisù</i>, The hawk clutched the chick with its claws.

<p><b>kugum<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> muscular @cramp. <i>v</i> [B26; b4] get a muscular cramp. <i>Mikugum (gikugman) ang íyang tiil sa dúgayng linanguy</i>, He got a cramp in his feet from swimming so long.

<p><b>kúgun</b> <i>n</i> tall, tough grass, with solid, slender stems, somewhat like bamboo. This grass together with <i>taláhib</i> moves into deforested areas and takes possession after the area is burnt. The leaves are used for thatching and the stems for various handicrafts: <b><i>Imperata cylindrica</i></b> and <b><i>exaltata</i></b>. <i>v</i> [a12] thatch roof with cogon. <b>kakugnan</b> <i>n</i> cogon lands. <i>v</i> [B1246] become cogon lands.

<p><b>kugungkugung</b> = <sc>KALUGUNGKUGUNG</sc>.

<p><b>kúgus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{carry s.t. in the arms}. <i>Nagkúgus  <pb n=1005>sa bátà ang inahan</i>, The mother is carrying the baby in her arms. <i>Kugúsa ang bulsíta arun dì mabutbut</i>, Carry the paper bag in your arms so that the bottom won't come out. <b>2</b> [A; a2b2] be a child's godparent. <i>Kinsa tung batáa ang ákung gikúgus sa bunyag?</i> Which child did I sponsor in baptism? <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @godchild.

<p><b>kugwa</b> = <sc>KIGWA</sc>.

<p><b>kúhà</b> @get and @bring, get and @{take away}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3S; ab7] get. <i>Magkúhà kug túbig pára nímu</i>, I'll get you some water. <i>Kuháa (kwáa) na ning mga plátu</i>, Come, take these plates away. <b>1a</b> [A; ab7] take away, @remove. <i>Makakúhà ning syampúha sa kaspa</i>, This shampoo removes dandruff. <i>Nakúhà ang ákung kasukù pagpangáyù níyag pasaylu</i>, My anger vanished when she apologized. <i>Ayaw nig kuhái (kwái)</i>, Don't take any of this. <b>1b</b> [A; ab4(1)] @{perform an abortion}, have a miscarriage. <i>Way mananambal nga mukúhà sa ímung gisabak</i>, No doctor will perform an abortion on you. <i>Nakuháan siya human madakdak</i>, She had had a miscarriage after she slipped and fell. <b>2</b> [A3S; a] obtain. <i>Mikúhà kug lúti sa subdibisyun</i>, I bought a lot from the subdivision. <i>Nakakuhà si Pilimun ug tambasákan</i>, Filemon caught a mudskipper (fish). <i>Kuháan ta kag apidábit</i>, I'll get an affidavit from you. <b>2a</b> [A2] @{get goods on credit}. <i>Kúhà ug bugas sa íyang tindáhan</i>, Get some rice at his store on credit. <b>2b</b> [A; a12] @hire for service. <i>Si Isku lay ákung kuháun arun pagpanday sa kusína</i>, I'll hire Isko to repair the kitchen. <b>3</b> @{be able to do s.t.} <b>3a</b> [A3S; a2] catch what s.o. said. <b>3b</b> @imitate, catch on how to do s.t. by following what s.o. else does. <i>Kuháun ku ang dúyug pinaági sa pagpamínaw sa pláka</i>, I'll pick up the accompaniment by listening to the record. <b>3c</b> have the capacity to do the sexual act. <i>Mukúhà ug tulu ka ráwun ang íyang bána</i>, Her husband can do it three times in a row. <b>3d</b> manage to get a girl to engage in sexual acts. <i>Húmuk siyang makúhà</i>, It'll be no trouble to get her for sexual intercourse. <i>Ug dì musugut, kuháa sa kusug</i>, If she doesn't agree to do it, rape her. a achievable. <i>Kúhà nákù nang nutáha</i>, That note is very much within my range. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of getting s.t. <b>2</b> s.t. one got. <i>Pilay ímung kúhà sa mat?</i> What did you get in Math? <b>3</b> @{production of a photo}. <i>Dì maáyu ang kúhà kun ngitngit</i>, The picture doesn't come out good if it's too dark. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @catch of fish or game. <i>Way kuhà ang mananagat</i>, The fisherman came home without any fish. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] get one's livelihood from. <pb n=1006><i>Way láing gihinguháan níya sa paggastu sa pag-iskuyla gawas sa pagpabúy</i>, He had no other source of income for his studies other than his wages as a servant. <b>tiN-, paniN-</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TINGÚHÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kuhil</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> @{touch lightly} against s.t. <i>Ákung gilíngì kun kinsa ang nagkuhil sa ákung buktun</i>, I looked back to see who had touched my arm. <i>Ígù lang nakakuhil ang dyíp sa awtu. Wà gánì makadlasi</i>, The jeep just brushed against the car. It wasn't even scratched. <b>2</b> touch and disturb. <i>Ug kuhilun ning mga butang mailhan nákù</i>, If anyone touches these things I'll know right away.

<p><b>kuhin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @cushion or soft pad for sitting or kneeling on. <b>2</b> special church wedding where there is a special white cloth for the bride and groom to walk over. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] use, put s.t. as soft cushion. <i>Átung kuhinan ang lingkuránan sa dyíp</i>, Let's put cushions on the seats of the jeep. <b>2</b> [A; c1] hold a special wedding. <i>Kuhinun (ikuhin) kunu ang kasal maung nangútang</i>, The wedding will be special. That's why they are going around borrowing money.

<p><b>kuhir</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] reach a certain number of points agreed to as the winning score in billiards or pool. <i>Ug makakuhir siyag dyís, daug na kay mauy íyang wíting</i>, If he gets ten (by hitting the number ten ball into the pocket), he will win because he needs ten points to reach the number we agreed to.

<p><b>kúhit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @poke, @jab, @touch s.t. with the fingers or s.t. long to remove or obtain it. <i>Kuhíta nang búla nga nasaling-it sa sandayung</i>, Poke the ball that is stuck in the gutter. <i>Kuhíti akug bayábas</i>, Knock a guava down for me. <b>2</b> touch s.o. by curling the fingers to attract his attention. <i>Milíngì ku dihang may mikúhit nákù</i>, I looked back when s.o. touched me. <b>2a</b> [AN; a12] @{approach s.o. influential to ask for a favor}. <i>Ug mikúhit (nangúhit) ka pa nákù dì untà ka madá sa prisintu</i>, Had you approached me you would not have been brought to the police station. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> stick to get s.t. <b>2</b> thin, tapering stick with a slit in it used in the process of weaving designs to catch hold of strips of grasses or palms that are being woven. <b>3</b> hook used in embroidery to catch hold of threads.

<p><b>kúhu</b> <i>v</i> [B12; b4(1)] for the hands to be disabled with the joints stiffening such that a person is unable to make a fist. <i>Nakúhu ang kamut sa sanlahun</i>, The leper lost the ability to use his fingers.

<p><b>kukakúla</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coca-cola. <b>2</b> <sc>@TB</sc> (so called from the name Koch's bacillus (humorous slang). <pb n=1007><i>Ayaw paduul ánang tawhána kay kukakúla nà</i>, Don't go near him because he has <sc>TB</sc>. <i>v</i> [A1] drink coca-cola. <b>&mdash; bádi</b> <i>n</i> having a curvaceous body (like a coca-cola bottle).

<p><b>kukhan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUKU</sc>.

<p><b>kukhu</b> = <sc>KALUKHU</sc>.

<p><b>kúkib</b> <i>n</i> @cave, @pit, large @hole in the ground. <i>v</i> [AB12; a] for a hole to develop in the earth, dig a pit or cave. <i>Ang mga miníru nagkúkib sa kílid sa pangpang</i>, The miners are excavating the side of the mountain. <i>Nakúkib ang daplin sa sapà kay natimpag ang yútà</i>, The edge of the river caved in because the earth washed away.

<p><b>kukiri</b> <i>n</i> @cookery, a course in cooking.

<p><b>kuku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fingernails, @toenails. <b>2</b> @claws, @hooves. <i>v</i> [b] get caught or hit by the claws. <i>Gikukhan sa banug ang pisù</i>, The hawk got the chick in its talons. <b>3</b> <b>-g banug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. wild shrub, the leaves of which are eaten as greens and sold commercially under the name of <i>salúyut</i>: <b><i>Corchorus olitorius</i></b>. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] cut nails of. <i>Tinúud bang hinguk-an (hingukúhan) ang kabáyù?</i> Is it true that they trim horses' hooves? <b>panghiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] trim one's own nails. <b>kukhan</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having claws. <b>2</b> grasping, inconsiderate of others' needs. <i>Kukhang dakù kay patúngan ug dakung pursintu</i>, She is a grasping thing because she charges a huge percentage on her loans. <b>3</b> k.o. crevally.

<p><b>kúku</b> <i>n</i> @{unbleached muslin}. <b>&mdash; krúdu</b> = <sc>KÚKU</sc>. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] wear or use s.t. of unbleached muslin.

<p><b>kùkù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1b] @{shrink back}, @curl up into oneself. <i>Mikùkù siya sa íyang gilingkúran sa panghináut nga dì siya himatikdan</i>, He shrank back into his chair in hopes that no one would notice him. <i>Kùkúa (ikùkù) ang ímung tiil arun ka masulud sa kaban</i>, Draw in your legs in so you can get into the trunk. <i>a</i> @{drawn into oneself}, curled back. <b>ti-</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TIKÙKÙ</sc>.

<p><b>kúkud</b> = <sc>KULÚKUD</sc>.

<p><b>kúkug</b> = <sc>KULKUG</sc>.

<p><b>kúkuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird, the Philippine coucal: <b><i>Centropus viridis</i></b>.

<p><b>kúkuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{prostitute (slang)}. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go out with prostitutes.

<p><b>kuku krúdu</b> = <sc>KÚKU</sc>.

<p><b>kúkuks</b> <i>n</i> euphemism for <ix>kulúkuy</ix>.

<p><b>kúkus</b> = <sc>KULÚKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kukwa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{cocoa powder}. <b>2</b> @{chocolate milk}. <i>v</i> [A13; a] drink, make chocolate milk or make s.t. with cocoa powder.

<p><b>kúl<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{phone call}. <b>2</b> a summons to duty, need. <i>Dúnay kúl ang duktur bísag gabíi</i>, A doctor gets calls even at night. <b>3</b> a bet or <pb n=1008>bid shouted or called out (without giving money). <b>4</b> @{invitation to drink at s.o.'s expense}. <i>Adtu ta sa Dayamun Táwir kay ákù rung kúl</i>, Let's go to the Diamond Tower. It's my treat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @{call on the phone}. <i>Dúna ruy mukúl nákug lungdistans</i>, S.o. will call me up long distance today. <b>2</b> [A; c1] @{call s.o. to duty}. <i>Gikúl siya sa armi</i>, He was called into the army. <b>3</b> [A; a] give or accept a bet without showing cash. <i>Kúlun ku ang ímung pusta bisag pila</i>, I'll accept whatever bet you offer. <b>4</b> [A2; c1] accept a challenge to a fight or contest. <i>Ug áway ímung gustu, mukúl ku</i>, If you want a fight, I'll take you up on it. <b>-ay</b> <i>n</i> system of betting without showing money.

<p><b>kúl<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> inferior quality of wood taken from the interior portion of the trunk.

<p><b>kúl<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @{sort out chicks according to sex}.

<p><b>kula, kúla<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @glue to hold s.t. together. <b>2</b> hard rubber. <i>Kúla ang sudlay</i>, Hard rubber comb. <i>v</i> [A; b5] glue s.t. together. <i>Kuláha (kuláhi) ang gitára</i>, Glue the guitar together.

<p><b>*kúla<sub>2</sub></b> <b>pyánu di-</b> @{grand piano}.

<p><b>kulabting</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a] @{hang onto} or cling to with little or no support from below. <i>Ang kabug nikulabting sa sanga</i>, A bat was hanging on the branch. <i>Trák nga gikulabtíngan ug daghang pasahíru</i>, A bus which had lots of passengers clinging on the outside.

<p><b>kulaburítur</b> <i>n</i> @{collaborator with the enemy}. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] be a collaborator with the enemy. <i>Kuútun sa girilya ang magkulaburítur</i>, The partisans will liquidate those who are collaborators.

<p><b>kulabútan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large cuttlefish sometimes growing to 25".

<p><b>kulabyaw</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. edible fruit bat similar to but smaller than the <ix>kulaknit</ix>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] catch <ix>kulabyaw</ix>.

<p><b>kulabyun</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> cling to for support. <i>Kabyun lang nákù arun dì ka muunlud</i>, Cling to me so you won't sink. <i>Nabálì ang sanga kay gikabyúnan sa mga bátà</i>, The branch broke because children hung on to it. <b>2</b> have influential connections. <i>Náay ímung parinting makabyúnan sa kustums</i>, You have relatives to turn to for influence in the customs.

<p><b>kulag</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>a</i> be @{panic-stricken}. <i>v</i> [B126; b3] get panic-stricken. <i>Nakulag ang mga táwu sa paglínug</i>, The people became panic-stricken when there was an earth-*quake. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> of a hysterical type.

<p><b>kulagting</b> = <sc>KULABTING</sc>.

<p><b>kulágù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3c] @{cry wildly} and loudly. <pb n=1009><i>Mikulágù ang bátà nga giilúgan sa duwáan</i>, The child screamed wildly because s.o. took his toy away from him. <i>Ikuwágù ku na lang ang ákung kaguul</i>, I will shriek with grief. <i>n</i> a loud, wild cry, or crying. <i>Ang íyang kulágù nabátì sa mga silíngan</i>, His loud cries were heard by the neighbors.

<p><b>kulágù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @owl: <b><i>Tyto sp.</i></b>

<p><b>kulakdup</b> <i>n</i> brown, edible fungus growing on rotting wood, used as a condiment with noodles (<ix>pansit</ix>).

<p><b>kulaknit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible fruit-eating bat, larger than the <ix>kulabyaw</ix>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] catch such bats.

<p><b>kulambus</b> = <sc>KURAMBUS</sc>.

<p><b>kulambut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] tie a string across a row of strings, crisscross fashion, to make netting for s.t. to protect or secure it. <i>Magkulambut ku sa bàbà sa baskit sa itlug</i>, I'll crisscross strings across the mouth of the basket of eggs. <i>Dì na mabungkag nang kartun kay gikulambútan na ug maáyu</i>, This bundle of boxes won't get untied because I have tied it securely in a crisscross fashion. <b>1a</b> [A; ac1] make or attach a leader in longline fishing. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @wrap oneself up entirely in a blanket. <i>Nagkulambut siya kay gitugnaw</i>, He wrapped himself up with a blanket because he felt cold. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> string used in longline fishing connecting the hook with the main line or the leader with another ganging line. <b>2</b> @blanket.

<p><b>kulambútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN</sc>.

<p><b>kulampísaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{frigate bird}, a large sea bird: <b><i>Fregata arielariel</i></b>.

<p><b>kulampit</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @{wind one's limbs around tightly and firmly}. <i>Wà kalíhuk si Pidru kay gikulampítan siya sa líug sa kuntra</i>, Pedro couldn't move when his opponent locked his legs around his neck. <b>2</b> be @entwining. <i>Gikulampítan ang ríhas sa bintánà sa mabagang bágun</i>, Thick vines entwined themselves around the window grill.

<p><b>kulámug</b> = <sc>DALÍNUG</sc>.

<p><b>kulámus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @grab with the fingers and nails and squeeze or crumple. <i>Kulamúsun nákù ning papílis ug maglágut ku</i>, I'll crumple these papers if I get mad. <i>Kulamúsun ku nang nawung mu dì ba makísì nang ngábil mu run</i>, I'll grab your face with my fingernails and rip your lips off.

<p><b>kulamuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @claws of birds, shellfish. <i>Ang idágan sa kasag mau ang íyang mga kamuy</i>, The crab runs by means of its claws. <b>2</b> @fingers and @toes. <i>Tag-as kag kulamuy. Angayan kang magtuun ug pyánu</i>, You've got long fingers. You should take piano lessons. <b>&mdash; sa baláud</b> <i>n</i> @{arms of the law}.

<pb n=1010>

<p><b>kúlan</b> <i>n</i> long-term variety of white rice with very fine and slender grains that ripen after eight months.

<p><b>kulandir</b> <i>n</i> @colander.

<p><b>kúlang</b> <i>a</i> @lacking, @deficient. <i>Kúlang ra ni pára nákù</i>, This is not enough for me. <b>2</b> too puny to pose a challenge. <i>Magsinumbagay? Kúlang ka ra nákù</i>, You want to fight? You're not strong enough to pose a challenge. <i>n</i> @balance, the amount needed or lacking. <i>Pilay kúwang?</i> How much is needed? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; ab7] be wanting, lacking, deficient. <i>Dì kita makalingkud kay nagkúlang ang lingkuránan</i>, We can't take a seat. There are not enough chairs. <i>Ayawg kulánga pagsuklì</i>, Don't fail to give the right amount of change. <i>Arun ka makaganansiya, kulángi ug gamay ang takus</i>, If you want to make a greater profit, make the measure a little bit short. <b>2</b> [A13] not give s.o. his proper due or attention. <i>Nanglaki ang asáwa tungud kay nagkúlang kaníya ang íyang bána</i>, The wife took up with other men because her husband didn't give her adequate affection. <b>3</b> <b>dílì, walay &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [B2456; a4] be not less than. <i>Dílì makúlang (kulángun) sa singkuwinta ang mitambung</i>, The number of people who came is not less than fifty. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> deficiency, shortcomings. <i>Pasaylúa aku sa ákung mga kakulángan</i>, Forgive me for my shortcomings. <b>kulangkulang</b> <i>a</i> @{mentally retarded}, slightly lacking in intelligence for the age. <i>v</i> [B126; a12] become mentally deficient. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> not quite enough. <i>Kulángun ra ning usa ka bábuy sa mga bisíta</i>, One pig is not enough for the visitors. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> lacking a lot to reach the proper amount. <i>Kulángan kaáyu ning usa ka sáku</i>, This isn't a whole sackful. There's a lot missing.

<p><b>kulangù</b> <i>a</i> slightly @{retarded mentally}, silly. <i>Trayinta anyus, magdyúlin pa. Kulangù</i>, He is thirty years old but still likes to play marbles. He's a bit retarded. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become @stupid, @silly, or @{slow-witted}. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a slightly retarded or silly sort. <i>Kulanguun tung mga pangutána</i>, Those were silly questions.

<p><b>kulángut</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> moist @{nasal discharge} in the nose, but not soft. <i>v</i> [B124; a4b4] be full of moist, hard nasal discharge. <i>Limpiyúhing ilung, nagkakulángut (gikulángut, gikulangútan)</i>, Clean your nose. It's dirty. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> always having a stuffed up nose.

<p><b>kulansi</b> = <sc>KULASÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>kulap, kúlap</b> <i>a</i> @dim, not affording much light; or for the eyes to be dim. <i>Ang kaháyag sa sugà nga lána kulap kaáyu</i>, The light of the <pb n=1011>oil lamp is very dim. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> for light or vision to @dim. <b>2</b> for one's popularity to fade. <i>Nagkakulap na ang kabantug ni Ilbis Prisli</i>, Elvis Presley's popularity is fading. <b>kulapkúlap</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] @blink the eyes. <i>Nagkuwapkúwap ang ákung mata sa kasulaw sa adlaw</i>, My eyes are blinking in the glare of the sun.

<p><b>kul-ap</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{call s.o. on the telephone}. <i>Kul-ápun ku ang ákung asáwa sa lungdistans</i>, I'll call up my wife by long distance.

<p><b>kulapíti</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>; from <ix>kúla</ix> and <ix>piti</ix>) <i>v</i> [B13; b] get s.t. sticky on s.t. which does not come off easily. <i>Nagkulapíti ang íyang buhuk sa pumáda ug buling</i>, His hair is sticky with dirt and pomade. <i>Gikulapitíhan sa bábul gám ang íyang kamut</i>, His hands are all sticky with bubble gum.

<p><b>kulápu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> brand of a cheap local wine. <b>2</b> @penis (humorous slang). <i>Kay dakù man siyang pagkatáwu, dakù sab giyud nag kulápu</i>, He is a big fellow, so he must also have a big penis.

<p><b>kuláput</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @{twine around} s.t. <i>Putla nang kalabásà nga nagkuláput sa kapáyas</i>, Cut down the squash that is entwined around the papaya tree. <i>Ikuláput ang ímung buktun sa ákung líug</i>, Twine your arm around my neck. <b>2</b> [A2SN; b6] cling to s.t. by twining s.t. long around it. <i>Ungguy nga nagkulaput[**typo? nagkuláput] (nanguláput) sa sanga</i>, A monkey clinging to the branch.

<p><b>kulapyut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @{hang down} from s.t. holding on with the limbs. <i>Mukapyut ang sirkadur sa tsíning bar</i>, The acrobat clings to the chinning bar. <i>Ayawg kapyúti ang ákung líug</i>, Don't cling to my neck. <b>2</b> [A12; b] ask a favor by turning to s.o. influential. <i>Nasúd siyas kapitulyu kay nakakapyut man ug pulitiku</i>, He got a job in the Capitol because a politician recommended him. <b>&mdash; sa sagbayan</b> <i>v</i> [A3] get sick with venereal disease (lit. hang on to the rafters). <i>Patúu ug tambag ug dì ka gustung mukapyut sa sagbayan</i>, Listen to advice if you don't want to get <sc>V.D.</sc> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] @cling, hold on to s.t. vigorously or frantically. <i>Nagpangapyut sa bágun ang táwung nah[=ú]g sa bung-aw</i>, The man who fell into the chasm clung frantically to a vine. <b>-ánan</b> <i>n</i> place for clinging or holding onto.

<p><b>kulasísi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. parakeet with a shrill voice, commonly kept as a pet: <b><i>Loriculus philippensis</i></b>.[+]

<p><b>kulasiyun</b> <i>n</i> a light repast taken in place of a real meal when fasting. <i>v</i> [AN; b6] take a light repast. <i>Magkulasiyun ang rilihiyúsu sa Byirnis Santu</i>, Religious people take only a <pb n=1012>light repast on Good Friday.

<p><b>kulat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @splice long pieces of rope by unravelling the strands, running the two pieces together, and retwisting or make the ends of a rope into a loop by an analogous process. <i>Maáyung kulatun ang tumuy sa písì ug dugtúngun arun dílì mubaknal</i>, It is good to join the two pieces of rope by splicing them so there will be no bulges in the middle. <i>n</i> the finished splice. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who splices rope.

<p><b>kuláta<sub>1</sub></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a] @maul s.o., beat s.o. badly. <i>Mga pulis ang nikuláta sa mangunguut</i>, The cops beat the pickpocket up. <i>n</i> mauling administered. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> badly @{beaten up}. <i>Kulatádu siya sa íyang kuntra gíkan sa it ráwun</i>, After the eight round, he was badly punished by his opponent.

<p><b>kuláta<sub>2</sub></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @gunstock. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] make, make into, attach a gunstock to s.t.

<p><b>kulating</b> (humorous euphemism for <i>kuláta</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a12] @maul, @beat s.o. badly. <i>Maáyung kulatingun ang asáwang kusug muputak</i>, A wife that nags all the time needs a good mauling.

<p><b>kulatiral</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> @{collateral on a loan}. <i>v</i> [A; c] offer or use s.t. as collateral.

<p><b>kulat-ug</b> <i>n</i> @{venereal disease}. <i>v</i> [a4] be infected with venereal disease. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> infected with venereal diseases.

<p><b>kulaw-it</b> = <sc>KALAW-IT</sc>.

<p><b>kulánap</b> = <sc>KUYÁNAP</sc>.

<p><b>kulaykulay</b> <i>a</i> double jointed. <i>v</i> [B126] get to be double jointed.

<p><b>kulbà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> provoking a feeling of @fear at s.t. impending. <b>2</b> startling, provoking a pang of fear suddenly. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> have a feeling of fear at s.t. impending or unexplained fear. <i>Gikulbaan kug maáyu kay mu rang usa ra ang bátà sa balay</i>, I feel very apprehensive because the child is all alone in the house. <b>2</b> be very frightened by s.t. sudden. <i>Gikulbaan ku pagpaghut sa irù</i>, I was startled when the dog barked. <b>&mdash; hínam</b> <i>a</i> anticipated with eagerness and fright. <i>v</i> [B] for s.t. to get thrilling, breathtaking. <i>Nagkakulbà hínam ang isturya kay nagkasulbad na ang mistiryu</i>, The story is getting very exciting because the mystery is nearing solution. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [b4] have an intense feeling of @apprehension or be intensely startled. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> feeling of fearful apprehension. <b>-ánun, kululbáan</b> <i>a</i> given to being apprehensive.

<p><b>kulbásà</b> = <sc>KALABÁSÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kuldas</b> = <sc>KWIRDAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kuldun</b> <i>n</i> drawstring or cord passed through the waist of a garment. <i>Nahushus ákung karsunsilyu  <pb n=1013>kay naputul ang kuldun</i>, My under-*pants fell down because the drawstring broke. <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> tie s.o.'s drawstring. <b>2</b> [A; c1] supply with, make into a drawstring. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] tie one's drawstring. <i>Panguldun dihà uy. Mahushus unyà nang panti mu</i>, Tie your drawstring or your panties will come falling down.

<p><b>kulgirl</b> <i>n</i> @prostitute that gives home service. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become a @{call girl}.

<p><b>kulgit</b> <i>n</i> @toothpaste, so called from the brand name Colgate. <i>v</i> [A1N; b] use toothpaste. <i>Asin na lay ikulgit</i>, Just brush your teeth with salt.

<p><b>kulhánun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KULU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kulhíad</b> = <sc>KULÍHAD</sc>.

<p><b>kulì</b> <i>v</i> [a4] get @senile in the mind. <i>Ang táwung gikulì mu ra na lang bátà</i>, A person who gets senile behaves like a child. <b>-un, -ánun</b> <i>n</i> confused due to old age. <i>Kuliánun na si Lúlu. Ábi níyag ang íya kung anak</i>, Grandfather has gotten confused now. He thinks I'm his son.

<p><b>kúlì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having a hard time doing s.t. because of some obstacle. <i>Kúlì kaáyu ning mahuman kay kúwang ug panahun</i>, This is going to be hard to finish because there isn't enough time. <i>Kúlì ta makasakay ug mag-uwan</i>, We have a hard time getting transportation when it rains. <b>2</b> reluctant. <i>Kúlì siyang musugut</i>, I doubt if he will consent to that. <i>Kúlì kaáyu sa ákung buut ning pagpangáyug ámut</i>, I find it very much against my will to ask for contributions. <b>3</b> @seldom, @rarely. <i>Kúlì siya muanhi</i>, He seldom comes here. <i>Kúlì kang kakità ug dunsilya dinhi</i>, You rarely find virgins here. <i>v</i> [B; a2] have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Ngánung mukúlì ka paghátag sa ímung anak?</i> Why do you find it hard to give s.t. to your own child? <i>Kun muhátag ka, hátag dáyun. Ngánung kulíun pa man?</i> If you want to give, all right, give. Why make it so hard? <b>ma- a</b> = <sc>KÚLÌ</sc>. <i>v</i> [B1; b3c] be @hesitant, be @reluctant. <i>Magmakúlì ku sa pagpaiskuyla ug tapulan</i>, I'm reluctant to send a lazy person to school. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @obstacle, @difficulty. <i>Mga kakulían nga dì kapugngan</i>, Circumstances beyond our control. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @hesitant, <corr sic=reluctang>@reluctant</corr>. <i>Makulíun kaáyu siyang nikúyug nákù</i>, She was very hesitant to go with me.

<p><b>kulibugan</b> = <sc>KALIBUGAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÍBUG</sc>.

<p><b>kulígi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] @cry noisily and loudly. <i>Mikulígi ang bátà nga wà hatágig singku</i>, The child cried noisily because he did not get his nickle. <i>Nagkulígi ang masúsu kay gigútum</i>, The baby is crying because it is hungry.

<p><b>kulíhad, kulìhad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] loosen phlegm <pb n=1014>in the throat and expel it. <i>Humag pangíhì, nangulíhad siya ug nanglup-ad</i>, After urinating he loosened his <corr sic=phelgm>phlegm</corr> and spat out. <b>2</b> [A23N; b] @{clear out phlegm in the throat} as a sign of derision or contempt. <i>Mangulíhad (mukulíhad) dáyun ang Dunyag náay pubring mangulitáwu sa íyang anak</i>, The Doña clears her throat in contempt as soon as a poor man comes to pay a call on her daughter. <i>n</i> derision and contempt. <i>Giantus ni Magdalína ang mga pagbiaybíay ug kulíhad sa katawhan</i>, Magdalene endured all the people's derision and contempt. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @expectorated. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>KULÍHAD</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>kulihiyála</b> <i>n</i> a student in an exclusive girls' high school or college. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a student in a girls' school.

<p><b>kulihiyu, kulihíyu</b> <i>n</i> college or lower grade affiliated with a college. <b>&mdash; iliktural</b> <i>n</i> polling place where voters cast their votes in an election.

<p><b>kulíik</b> <i>n</i> shrill, piercing @shriek. <i>v</i> [A; b3] shriek or scream with a shrill or piercing voice. <i>Mikulíik ang bátà nga naipit sa siras pultahan</i>, The child that got its finger wedged in the door let out a piercing scream.

<p><b>kuliksiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @collection, an @accumulation of things collected, esp. as a hobby. <b>2</b> @aggregate amount of money received at any one time, receipts. <i>Kuliksiyun sa simbahan</i>, Church collection. <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> have a collection. <i>Nagkuliksiyun ku ug silyu</i>, I collect stamps. <b>2</b> take up a collection. <i>Magkuliksiyun ta pára sa namatay</i>, Let's take up a collection for the deceased.

<p><b>kulikta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @collect, give payments, usually not for any pre-existing contractual obligations. <i>Nagkulikta siyag dilihinsya sa mga draybir</i>, He is collecting protection money from drivers. <i>Gikuliktáhan ku ug ámut pára sa simbahan</i>, They collected a donation for the church from me. <i>Písu ang ákung ikulikta</i>, I'll give one peso for the collection. <b>2</b> [AN; a2] gather for a collection. <i>Nangulikta siyag trátu</i>, He is collecting girl friends. <b>3</b> [A1] come to the part of the church service where the offering is collected. <i>Nagkulikta na pag-abut nákù</i>, The offering was already being passed when I arrived. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> money collected from payments, dues, taxes, etc. <b>2</b> items collected or gathered for one's hobby. <b>3</b> collection taken up during a church service.

<p><b>kuliktar</b> = <sc>KULIKTA</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>kuliktur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bill collector. <b>2</b> @collector of s.t. as a hobby. <i>Kuliktur nà siyag mga silyu</i>, He is a stamp collector. <b>3</b> @{collector of fares} on public transportation. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; a2] be a <pb n=1015>bill collector, collector as a hobby, collector of fares. <b>2</b> [B156] be a collector of items, such as coins, stamps, etc.

<p><b>kulíkug</b> <i>v</i> [A23] for sound to @{penetrate into one's ears}. <i>Dì ku makatulug kay mukulíkug giyud ang tíngug sa bátà nga naghilak sa ákung dawunggan</i>, I can't sleep, because that child's cries are penetrating into my ears.

<p><b>kulíkut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c] @squeeze, @penetrate into a narrow space; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mikulíkut siya sa daghang mga táwu</i>, He elbowed his way into the crowd. <i>Singgit nga mikulíkut sa ákung dawunggan</i>, A scream that penetrated deep into my ears. <i>Ayaw ikulíkut nang lápis sa ímung dunggan</i>, Don't shove that pencil into your ear. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] make or bore a hole usually with a twisted instrument or twisting motion. <i>Ubang buyug mukulíkut sa yútà unyà mangitlug</i>, Some wasps bore a hole in the ground to lay eggs in. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> tiny chili pepper with a strong bite. <b>síling &mdash;</b> = <sc>KULIKUT</sc>.

<p><b>kulikutkut</b> <i>v</i> [A] be @{curled up}. <i>Tag-as na ang ímung patilya, mukulikutkut na gánì sa dunggan</i>, Your sideburns are so long, they are curling up to your ears. <i>Nagkulikutkut siya sa kasakit sa íyang tiyan</i>, He is curled up because of his stomach ache.

<p><b>kulíling</b> <i>n</i> @ringing, @{tinkling sound} as that of a phone or small bell. <i>v</i> [A; c1] for a small bell to @ring.

<p><b>kulilísi</b> <i>n</i> a game played during wakes after the prayers in which the participants recite verses (<ix>ditsu</ix>), contesting with each other. <b>-ng hárì</b> the leader of the <ix>kulilísi</ix>. <i>v</i> [A] hold a <ix>kulilísi</ix> game.

<p><b>kulímà</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c] screw up the face in pain or upon experiencing an unpleasant taste. <i>Mukulímà ka giyud kun makakaun kag aslum</i>, You will grimace if you eat s.t. sour. <i>Mikulímà ang bátà sa dihang gikusì, dáyung mihílak</i>, The baby screwed up its face when I pinched it and then burst into tears.

<p><b>kuling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] bring s.t. into disarray, @shuffle it all up, as in searching for s.t. <i>Nagkuling siya sa libru kun dúna bay gisalip-it</i>, She is going through the pages of the book to see if s.t. was placed between them. <i>Kulinga ang kaban ug túa ba ang dukumintu</i>, Search the trunk to see if the document is in it.

<p><b>kulípà</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] @{expel from the mouth} by pushing with the tongue or blowing. <i>Mukulípà (mangulípà) ang bátà kun ímung dalìdaliun paghungit</i>, The child will spit the food out if you feed it too rapidly. <i>Ikulípà nà kay húgaw</i>, Spit that out. It's dirty.

<p><b>kulípad</b> = <sc>KULÍPÀ</sc>.

<pb n=1016>

<p><b>kulípas</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @{refuse to acknowledge}. <i>Ang mga táwung bakákun dílì mahadluk mukulípas (mangulípas) sa ílang sulti</i>, Liars are not afraid to disclaim their own words. <i>Si San Pidru mauy nagkulípas nga wà siya makaila ni Hisus</i>, St. Peter denied Jesus saying he did not know Him. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of denying. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> denial.

<p><b>kulípat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2b2] @tweak, @pinch s.t. and twist. <i>Kulipátun ku nang ímung bulug ug ímung samúkun ang nagtuun</i>, I will tweak you in the groin if you bother these children that are studying.

<p><b>kulípì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] <b>1</b> @{cover up for s.o.} <i>Ang inahan mauy nangulípì pagbalíbad nga wà mulakat ang íyang anak</i>, The mother covered up for her son by saying he hadn't gone out. <b>2</b> @{take on s.o. else's duties}. <i>Aku lay nangulípì (mikulípì) sa íyang trabáhu kay nagtuun man</i>, I took over his duties because he was studying. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] be @{jealously possessive} of s.o. <i>Mangulípì ang inahan sa mga ituy ug duúlun sila</i>, The mother dog guards her puppies jealously when s.o. goes near them. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> jealously <corr sic=posessive>possessive</corr>.

<p><b>kulípì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3P] @shrink, @cower in fear. <i>Mikulípì sa suuk ang mga bátà pagkadungug sa dalugdug</i>, The children cowered in the corner when they heard the thunder. <i>Mukulípì ang irù ug han-an ug bunal</i>, The dog will shrink in fear if you raise a club at him.

<p><b>kulipíti</b> = <sc>KULAPÍTI</sc>.

<p><b>kulipláwir</b> <i>n</i> @cauliflower.

<p><b>kúlir</b> <i>n</i> @cooler. <i>v</i> [c1] put s.t. in a cooler.

<p><b>kulira</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @cholera. <b>2</b> rather strong curse uttered in anger. <i>Kulira! Napildi nímung ákung pusta dà!</i> Damn! I lost my bet! <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; a4] cause, get cholera. <b>2</b> [a4] curse in which s.o. is wished ill (lit. may you be afflicted with cholera). <i>Kulirahun ka pa untà! Nagpakaulaw ka lang sa átung bánay</i>, God damn you! You only bring shame to our family.

<p><b>kulirit</b> <i>n</i> euphemism for <xref><sc>KULIRA</sc>, <i>n2</i></xref>.

<p><b>kulirù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a half centavo copper coin. <i>Wà gayud kuy kulirù diri</i>, I don't have a cent. <i>a</i> stupid, simpleton. <i>v</i> [B12] become stupid. <i>Nakulirù siya human masakit ug típus</i>, He became slow-witted after he got sick with typhus.

<p><b>kulirù<sub>2</sub></b> euphemism for <ix>kulira</ix>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v</i>. <i>Gikulirù ka ba nga walà man ku nímu salinig kan-un?</i> Are you sick or s.t. that you didn't leave me anything to eat?

<p><b>kúlis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @collards: <b><i>Brassica oleracea var. acephala</i></b>. <b>2</b> ornamental shrub with yellow leaves which are eaten as a vegetable, esp. <pb n=1017>together with fish stewed in vinegar: <b><i>Pisonia alba</i></b>. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] @cook, cook with <ix>kúlis</ix>.

<p><b>kulisaw, kulísaw</b> <i>a</i> annoyingly @noisy, disturbing, chaotic. <i>Dì ku makatulug kay kulísaw kaáyu ang mga bátà</i>, I can't sleep because the children are so noisy. <i>n</i> a @{noisy disturbance}. <i>Unsa may naingnan adtung kulísaw ganíha?</i> What was the cause of the fracas a while ago. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become disturbing with a chaotic noise.

<p><b>kulisdum, kulisdung</b> = <sc>KISDUM</sc>.

<p><b>kulísiw</b> <i>n</i> loud, piercing @shriek. <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] shriek. <i>Mikulísiw siya pagkakità sa abat</i>, She screamed when she saw the ghost. <i>Nagkulisiw ang bátà nga nasakitag maáyu</i>, The child screamed because it hurt.

<p><b>kulisíyum</b> <i>n</i> @coliseum.

<p><b>kulismaut</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c1] @{grimace in disgust} or dissatisfaction, be frowning. <i>Nagkulismaut ang nawung kay wà tugti</i>, She's frowning because they didn't allow her to go. a frowning, grimacing. <i>n</i> grimace of disgust. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a frowning sort.

<p><b>kulismut</b> = <sc>KULISMAUT</sc>.

<p><b>kulistirul</b> <i>n</i> @cholesterol.

<p><b>kulísuk</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] @scream loudly in anger, pain, or fright. <i>Mukulísuk ang bátà sa pagkakità sa duktur</i>, The child screamed wildly in fright on seeing the doctor. <i>Úngù tung íyang gikulisúkan</i>, She screamed at seeing the vampire. <i>n</i> @{loud scream}<corr>.</corr>

<p><b>kulisyun</b> = <sc>KWALISIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>kúlit</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @carve or @engrave. <i>Magkúlit kug istatúwa sa anghil</i>, I'll carve the statue of an angel. <i>Kulíta nang ági sa lápis</i>, Remove the pencil marks by carving them out. <i>Ikúlit ang litra sa káhuy</i>, Carve the letters into the tree. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> engraving, carving. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. engraved. <i>Ilhan ra kay kinulítan tug ngálan</i>, You can identify it because it has a name engraved into it. <b>mag-r-, maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> sculptor.

<p><b>kulítis</b> = <sc>KUDYAPÀ</sc>.

<p><b>kulitu</b> = <sc>AKULITU</sc>.

<p><b>kulítug</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{insert s.t. into a hole and move it around}. <i>Nagkulítug siyag gápas sa íyang dunggan</i>, He is cleaning his ears with cotton. <i>Kulitúga nang gul-anan arun mudakùdakù</i>, Insert a stick into the outlet and turn it around to make it bigger. <i>n</i> s.t. used to insert into a hole.

<p><b>kulitus</b> = <sc>AKULITU</sc>.

<p><b>kuliut</b> = <sc>KULIKUT</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KULÍKUT</sc>.

<p><b>kulíut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2S46; c1] @grimace or @{distort one's face} in anger or pain. <i>Ayaw kuliúta (ikulíut) ímung nawung bísan ug dì ka ganáhan</i>, Don't contort your face, even if you don't like it.

<pb n=1018>

<p><b>kulíut<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KULÍKUT</sc>.

<p><b>kuliyun</b> <i>n</i> Culion island, a leper colony. <i>v</i> [A2; c1] send lepers to Culion.

<p><b>kulkug</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] shove s.t. slender into an opening just about big enough for it and work it around. <i>Kulkúga íring lipak ang lungag sa ilagà</i>, Thrust this stick into the rat hole. <i>Ayaw ikulkug ang ímung tudlù sa ímung ilung</i>, Don't stick your finger in your nose. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. used to thrust into a hole. <b>2</b> action of inserting s.t.

<p><b>kulkul</b> <i>v</i> [B46; a] <b>1</b> grow to be gnarled, curled up. <i>Mukulkul untà ang mga tudlù sa nagkúhà adtu</i>, May the fingers of the person who stole it stiffen with arthritis. <i>Mikulkul ang tinubúan sa káhuy</i>, The tree grew into a gnarled mass. <b>2</b> shrink back in fear. <i>Mukulkul sa kahadluk ang ímung irù ug pirming bunálan</i>, Your dog will shrink back in fear if you constantly beat it. <b>3</b> withdraw, back out from an undertaking out of apprehension. <i>Ngánung mikulkul ka sa ímung nigusyu?</i> Why have you gone out of business? a curled up stiff. <b>-ánay</b> <i>n</i> @withdraw, @{back out}. <i>Sábut nga way kulkulánay</i>, An agreement we cannot withdraw from.

<p><b>kultibar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @cultivate land for growing crops. <i>Kultibahun ku ning luyu sa balay arun tamnan kug mga utanun</i>, I will dig up the back of my house to grow vegetables. <b>2</b> [A; a12] use up, get rid of. <i>Ang ákung mga anak mauy mikultibar sa kík</i>, My children ate all the cake. <i>Ang banggiítang kwirpu sa mga sikríta mauy nakakultibar sa nanaghítak nga sugálan</i>, The crack group of detectives rid the place of gambling dens. <i>Kultibahun lang sa lídir sa kandidátu ang kwarta, dílì ipamalit ug balúta</i>, The leader of the candidate just pockets all the money for himself. He won't use it for buying ballots. <b>kultibádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{cultivated land}. <b>2</b> all eaten up or drunk. <i>v</i> [B1246] become cultivated land. <i>Ang yútà níya sa Mindanaw may kagulángan ug may nakultibádu na</i>, He has forest lands in Mindanao and also some which are now cultivated.

<p><b>kultsun</b> = <b>KUTSUN</b>.

<p><b>kultu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a Protestant service held at a member's house. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] hold a service at a member's house. <i>Nagkultu sila sa balay sa ansiyánu kay naáyu ang íyang anak</i>, They are holding a service at the elder's place because his son recovered.

<p><b>kultu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @{shoot marbles} with the thumb. <i>Hingígù siyang mukultu sa húlin</i>, He shoots marbles like a marksman. <b>2</b> [A23] in a game of marbles, commit a foul by shooting the marbles into the wrong hole. <pb n=1019><i>Mukultu ka sa síkan ug mudyurds ka dihà</i>, You will commit a foul if you shoot the marble in the second hole. <i>n</i> foul in marbles.

<p><b>kultúra</b> <i>n</i> @culture, @civilization.

<p><b>kulu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] <b>1</b> use s.t. awkwardly because of unfamiliarity. <i>Daghan siyag sayup kay gikulhan pa sa bag-ung aybíim</i>, He made lots of mistakes because he doesn't have the feel for the new IBM machine yet. <b>2</b> be awkward, nervous. <i>Wà ka kulhi nga nikanta sa daghang táwu?</i> Did you not feel nervous singing in front of all those people? <b>3</b> [b4] be unable to react upon seeing violence due to fear. <i>Gikúhan ku pagkakità nákus bátà nga naligsan</i>, I was transfixed when I saw the child run over. <b>kulhánun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> operating s.t. awkwardly because of unfamiliarity. <b>2</b> nervous, fearful, apprehensive. <i>Dì ka giyud makat-un ug dráyib kay kulhánun kaáyu ka</i>, You'll never learn how to drive, you're so nervous. <i>v</i> [B12] become nervous, fearful. <b>kakulhánun</b> <i>n</i> fearfulness, timidity. <i>Tungud sa íyang kakulhánun wà gihápun siya makaabla níya</i>, He is so timid he hasn't brought himself to tell her he loves her.

<p><b>kulu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> seedless @breadfruit, usually cooked with syrup as a sweet or used as an ingredient in sweet preparations: <b><i>Artocarpus communis</i></b>.

<p><b>kúlù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1); b4(1)] @shrink in length or width. <i>Panaptun nga dílì mukúlù</i>, Cloth that doesn't shrink<corr>.</corr> <i>Kwáa ang sinugba sa dì pa makakúlù</i>, Take the meat off the coals before it shrinks. <i>Nainútil siya kay nakulúan ug ugat</i>, He became disabled because he had contracted tendons. <b>2</b> [B46; b34c1] curl up, draw back. <i>Ug mukúlù ang tamalà sa bangag, lisud hisakpan</i>, When the octopus shrinks into the hole, you can't catch it easily. <i>Kulúa (ikúlù) ímung tiil kay dúnay gustung muági</i>, Pull your feet in because people want to go by. <i>Namatay siya kay gikul-an sa dílà</i>, She died because she swallowed her tongue (her tongue shrunk into the throat). <b>2a</b> draw back in fear. <i>Mukúlù ka man lagi ug hanaan</i>, You draw back in fear if s.o. threatens you. <i>n</i> shrinkage. <b>igsaktu, hustu sa &mdash;</b> be a bit too large so that it fits after shrinkage. <i>Sagdig luag ang bistída kay hustu nà sa kúlù</i>, Never mind if the dress is a little too loose because it will fit perfectly after it shrinks. <b>kulùkúlù</b> <i>v</i> [B6] writhe, double up in pain. <i>Mikulùkúlù siya sa kasakit sa tiyan</i>, He was doubled up with stomach pain.

<p><b>kulub</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; c1] lie on one's belly, be overturned. <i>Ug mukulub (makulub) ang sakayan,  <pb n=1020>patay ta</i>, If the boat turns over, we're done for. <i>Magkulub paghigdà ang buktut</i>, A hunchback sleeps lying on his belly. <i>Kulba (ikulub) ang mga hinugásang plátu</i>, Lay the washed plates face downward. <b>&mdash; sa plátu, kúlun</b>, etc. <i>v</i> [b(1)2] deprive s.o. of his livelihood (lit. turn the plate, pot, etc. upside down on him&mdash;as a sign that it is empty). <i>Kun kuháan mu siya sa trabáhu sáma ra sa gikulban mu sila sa kaldíru</i>, If you deprive him of a job, it's just like overturning the kettles on them. &mdash; <b>hayang</b> <i>a</i> unstable, uncertain: one day up, the next day down. <i>Kulub hayang ang kinabúhì sa sugarul</i>, A gambler's life is up today, down tomorrow. <i>n</i> game of group tag in which s.t. is tossed and one group chases the other according to which side the thing that was tossed falls on. <b>ma-, mahayang</b> whatever will be will be, whatever happens. <i>Pasagdi ang ímung anak. Tutal makulub mahayang laláki man siya</i>, Let your son do as he pleases. Anyway, whatever happens, he is a man. <b>&mdash; hubag</b> <i>n</i> a boil which swells downward instead of outward and fails to <corr sic=devellop>develop</corr> a head (lit. an overturned boil).

<p><b>kúlub</b> <i>v</i> [B23; b6] @shrink, @shrivel up. <i>Mukúlub ang prútas nga linghud rang pagkapùpù</i>, Fruits that are picked too young will just shrivel up. <i>Nagkakulub na nà siya kay tigúlang na kaáyu</i>, She is shriveling up with old age. <i>Mik[=ú]b ang núka. Wà na magkamayu</i>, The sore has shriveled up. It's not infected any more.

<p><b>kulubútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN</sc>.

<p><b>kulud</b> = <sc>KULUDKÚLUD</sc>.

<p><b>kúlud</b> <i>n</i> @{midrib, the central rib of a leaf}. <i>v</i> [AN; b7] remove the midrib of leaves. <i>Nagkúlud siya sa lukay</i>, He is removing the midribs of the palm fronds. <i>Ákung kulúran ang mga dáhun sa tabákù</i>, I will remove the midribs of the tobacco leaves.

<p><b>kuludkúlud</b> <i>a</i> be @undulating in little waves. <i>Kuludkúlud nga sín</i>, Corrugated iron. <i>n</i> undulation. <i>Kuludkúlud sa tuud</i>, The rings in the stump. <i>v</i> [ABN; c1] @undulate, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mikudk[=ú]d (nangudk[=ú]d) ang kahumayan</i>, The ricefield is undulating. <i>Ang midisína mauy mukudk[=ú]d sa buhuk</i>, The medicine will make the hair wavy. <i>Nagkudk[=ú]d ang linámang dikulur</i>, The color is in an undulating pattern.

<p><b>kulugkug</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] insert s.t. slender into a narrow opening and work it around. <i>Akuy mikulugkug sa túbu nga nasampungan</i>, I worked a stick around in the pipe that was clogged up. <i>Gikulugkúgan níya sa húgaw ang hunsuy</i>, He cleaned out the tar in the <pb n=1021>pipe.

<p><b>kulugpus</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] <b>1</b> fold the arms in any position with the forearms crossed as a sign of repose. <i>Nangulyugpus lang siya nga nagpaábut ug trák</i>, He stood with his arms folded waiting for the bus. <i>Nagpangulyugpus sa íyang mga buktun nga nangalíya sa mahal nga birhin</i>, She prayed to the blessed Virgin with her arms crossed, hands on the shoulders. <b>1a</b> curl the legs up close to the body. <i>Íyang kulugpúsun ang íyang mga tiil ug tugnawun</i>, He'll curl up his feet if he feels cold. <b>2</b> do nothing in the face of a situation which calls for action. <i>Nangulyugpus lang siya samtang nagkapulíkì mig trabáhu</i>, He just stood by with his arms folded while we went crazy with so many things to do. <i>Magkiyugpus ba lang tang magtan-aw sa ílang kalisud?</i> Shall we just stand by utterly indifferent to the situation?

<p><b>kulugpuy</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS.</sc>

<p><b>kulukar</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AP; c] place s.o. in a job. <i>Kunggrisman ang mikulukar (mipakulukar) nákù sa trabáhu</i>, A politician procured me a job. <i>Ikulukar ta kag maáyung trabáhu</i>, I'll find a good job for you. <b>1a</b> [A; c1] find, obtain s.t. for which there is fierce competition. <i>Kun mag-ulan kúlì kang makakulukar ug sakay</i>, When it rains it is difficult to get public transportation. <b>2</b> [A; c] attend to s.t. so that it is done properly, in the proper situation. <i>Wà giyuy paryinting nagkulukar sa minatay</i>, There was not a single relative to attend to the funeral. <i>Sa nakulukar na ang minatay nag-áway dáyun sila sa kabílin</i>, As soon as the body was laid to rest, they set out to fight over the inheritance. <i>Ákung ikulukar ning ákung manghud úsà ku magminyù</i>, I will see my younger brother through school before I get married. <b>kulukádu</b> <i>a</i> settled in a job, marriage, having a place to stay. <b>kulukasiyun</b> <i>n</i> job, occupation. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] go job hunting. <i>Muadtu siya sa siyudad mangulukasiyun</i>, He will go to the city to look for a job.

<p><b>kuluks, kúluks</b> <i>n</i> euphemism for <ix>kulúkuy</ix>.

<p><b>kulúkud</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a] bundle up dried coconut leaves to make a torch. <i>Kulukúra ang langkay</i>, Bundle up the dried coconut leaves for a torch. <i>n</i> torch of this sort.

<p><b>kulúkus</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] curl up. <i>Mikúkus ang mga dáhun sa kahúlaw</i>, The leaves curled up in the long drought. <i>Nagkulúkus gihápun sa katri bísag taas na kaáyu ang adlaw</i>, He's curled up in bed even though the sun is high in the sky. <i>Kulukúsa (ikulúkus) ang alambri, unyà hipúsa</i>, Roll up the wire and put <pb n=1022>it away.

<p><b>kulukúsu</b> (not without l) = <sc>KUSUKÚSU</sc>.

<p><b>kulúkuy</b> <i>a</i> stupid, lacking in common sense and sound judgment. <i>Kulukúya nímu! Ímu man siyang gisultíhan sa surprísa</i>, How dumb you can get! Why did you tell her our surprise? <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be lacking in common sense and sound judgment.

<p><b>kulumbabit, kulumbábit</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b6(1)] hang or cling onto s.t. with the body suspended but leaning or working against part of it. <i>Mikumbábit ang bátà sa ákung líug</i>, The child clung to my neck. <i>Ang kawatan nagkumbabit sa ríhas</i>, The thief is clinging to the window bars.

<p><b>kulumbitay, kulumbítay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> hang down from s.t. by clinging to it. <i>Palwang gikumbitayan sa kwaknit</i>, A palm frond on which a bat was hanging. <b>2</b> hang down suspended. <i>May parul nga gakulumbitay sa ílang mga bintánà</i>, There were lanterns hanging in their windows. <i>Bágun nga gikumbitayan sa úbas</i>, Vine loaded with (from which were suspended) grapes.

<p><b>kulumna</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> column, pillar in a large building.

<p><b>kulumnista</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> newspaper or magazine columnist. <b>2</b> member of the fifth column. <i>v</i> [B156] be a columnist.

<p><b>kulumpiyu</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>n</i> rocking chair. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a rocking chair. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a12] rock oneself in a rocking chair. <i>Kinsa man nang nangulumpiyu sa diskansu?</i> Who is that rocking on the porch?

<p><b>kulumrínu</b> = <sc>BYATILIS.</sc>

<p><b>kúlun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> cooking pot made of clay. <i>v</i> [A13; a1c] cook in this k.o. pot, make into this k.o. pot. <b>hayang ang &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> a sure thing, very certain of victory (lit. the pot is upright&mdash;the implication being that s.t. is inside). <i>Ari pusta sa ákung kandidátu kay hayang na dáan ang kúlun niíni</i>, Place your bet on my candidate. You are sure to win with him. <b>2</b> for s.t. to make do as a livelihood. <i>Bísan lang ug pangáyu ug rilu apan hayang na ang kúlun</i>, Even if it's just watch repairing, it's enough for a livelihood. <b>baryu nga way &mdash;</b> cemetery. <b>tak-ang sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A] for a woman to answer the call of nature (urinate or defecate&mdash;humorous euphemism). <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> clay soil for making pots. <b>kulunkulun</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>ANGULUNKULUN.</sc> <b>2</b> one who sees to it that no one uses his things and is careful not to use things belonging to others. <i>Nag-ípun ug usa ka bubung apan kulunkulun</i>, They live under one roof, but each has his own things (lit. cook with different pots).

<p><b>kúlun<sub>2</sub></b> (not without <ix>l</ix>)<i>n</i> colon, k.o. punctuation  <pb n=1023>mark.

<p><b>kulung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the hair to be curly, wavy. <i>v</i> [AB; a] for the hair to become curly or wavy; cause it to do so. <i>Ikaw ray ginindutan ánang buhuk mung nagkulung</i>, You're the only one that considers your curly hair pretty. <i>Akuy nagkulung sa íyang buhuk</i>, I gave her a permanent. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the process of curling hair. <b>2</b> its result. <i>Dúgay ang ákung kulung mituy-ud</i>, The permanent I received lasted for quite a while. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> curly, wavy in hair. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> beautician. <b>pa-an</b> <i>n</i> beauty parlor where one gets a permanent. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> the profession of curling hair.

<p><b>kulung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] put in confinement of some sort. <i>Nagkulung ang byúda sa sulud sa íyang balay</i>, The widow shut herself up in her home. <i>Nakulung ang tibuuk pamilya sa uma tungud sa bahà</i>, The family was imprisoned on their farm because of the flood. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place of confinement. <b>2</b> = <sc>KURUNG<sub>1</sub>.</sc> <b>kulungù</b> = <sc>KULANGÙ.</sc>

<p><b>kulunya</b> <i>n</i> colony.

<p><b>kulúpug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] attack in the manner of a mother hen attacking s.t. <i>Mikúpug ang himungáan sa midúul sa íyang mga pisù</i>, The mother hen attacked the man who went near her chicks. <i>Gikupúgan siya sa nasukù níyang asáwa</i>, His wife set on him like an angry hen. <b>2</b> [AC2; b(1)] jump over one for sexual purposes. <i>Dinhà pa sa gawang mikúpug dáyun ang laláki sa pampam</i>, They were hardly through the door when the man set upon the prostitute. <i>Nisúkul ang babáyi sa dihang gikupúgan na siyag haluk</i>, The woman put up resistance as she was showered with hot kisses.

<p><b>kulur, kúlur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> color. <b>2</b> one's true colors, real character. <i>Mu ra nà siyag buútan apan dílì nà mauy tinúud níyang kulur</i>, She appears to be of good character, but that is not what she really is. <i>v</i> [A; b] color s.t. <i>Kulúri ug lainláing kulur ang mga búlak</i>, Color the flowers with all different colors. <b>di-(->)</b> <i>a</i> colored. <i>Sayal nga dikulur</i>, Colored skirt. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>pud &mdash;</b> food coloring. <b>tikni &mdash;</b> technicolor. <b>wútir &mdash;</b> water color. <b>kulurkúlur</b> <i>a</i> of different colors. <i>Ning-ayun ku sa ímung sinínà kay kulurkúlur</i>, I like your dress because it is of all different colors. <b>-áwu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> of many colors, having different colors. <i>Kuluráwu kaáyu ang mga sugà sa Pasku</i>, The Christmas lights are of all different colors. <b>2</b> flushed in the face. <i>Kuluráwu siyag nawung kay nakainum-inum na pud</i>, His face is flushed because he's had one drink too many again. <i>v</i> [B2; a] become, be made colorful. <i>Mu ra unyà kug mag-aawit sa <pb n=1024>nayitklab kun kulurawhun kaáyu nímu ang ákung sinínà</i>, I'll look like a night club singer if you make my dress too colorful. <b>agwa diáwu(<-)</b> <i>n</i> cola drinks, or palm toddy or liquor mixed with cola drinks (humorous).[+]

<p><b>kuluríti, kulurítis</b> <i>n</i> @rouge. <i>v</i> [AN; b] put rouge or lipstick on.

<p><b>kulúrum</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @unlicensed. <i>Kulúrum nga pistúla, Unlicensed pistol. Kulúrum nga taksi</i>, Cab without a franchise. <b>2</b> without a name. <i>Kulúrum nang klasíha sa manuk</i>, That kind (breed) of chicken has no name. <b>3</b> a dissident group in Surigao in the early twenties, who always wore a red band around the head. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] hire an unauthorized car for a ride. <i>Nangulúrum man gánì kug sakay arun mamínus ang plíti, naabiríya hinúun</i>, I hired an unlicensed cab to minimize the expenses, but it broke down.

<p><b>kulus</b> <i>a</i> having a kink or a tight loop in it. <i>v</i> [B; b6] get a twist or kink in it. <i>Nakulus ang hús maung wà kaagi ang túbig</i>, The hose got a kink in it so the water couldn't go through it.

<p><b>kuluskulus</b> <i>n</i> @{rustling sound} made by leaves or paper. <i>v</i> [A; c1] produce a rustling noise. <i>Nagkuskús ang mga ilagà sa kumúda</i>, The mice were rustling about in the drawer. <i>Ayawg kuluskulusa (ikuluskulus) ang mga papil kay sábà</i>, Don't rustle the paper around. It's disturbing.

<p><b>kuluskus</b> = <sc>TIKUSKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kulut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{curly haired}. <i>Kulut kaáyu ang buhuk sa Nigrítu</i>, The Negritoes have very curly hair. <i>v</i> [AB2; b6] for hair to become curly, cause it to do so. <i>Byutisyan ang mikulut sa íyang buhuk</i>, A beautician gave her a permanent.

<p><b>kulut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @culotte. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] wear, make in a culotte.

<p><b>kúlut</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @{wild yam}, a hairy climbing vine, having immense poisonous tubers with yellowish flesh. It is eaten in famine situations after the poison has been washed away: <b><i>Dioscorea hispida</i></b>.

<p><b>kulyáda<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @bleach wash by putting it under the sun. <i>Kining mga dikulur ayawg ikulyáda</i>, Now don't bleach these colored things in the sun.

<p><b>kulyáda<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{windy weather}. <i>Dì maáyung ipanágat ug kulyáda</i>, It's not good to go fishing during windy weather. <i>v</i> [B6; b6] for it to be windy weather.

<p><b>kulyar</b> <i>n</i> animal @collar, @harness. <i>v</i> [A; b] attach a collar. <i>Kulyari ang irù arun ilhang tag-iyáhan</i>, Put a collar on the dog so that people will know it has an owner.

<p><b>kuma<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] get a good hold with the <pb n=1025>hands or feet by holding tight with the fingers, toes, nails, etc. <i>Kinahanglan mukuma (manguma) ang ímung tiil kun danglug ang dálan,</i> You should try to get a good grip on the path with your feet if it's slippery. <i>Inigsaka nímu sa pangpang, ikuma giyud ang ímung kamut,</i> When you climb up the cliff, get a good grip with your hands. <i>a</i> for a child to be @troublesome because it likes to hold on to the mother all the time. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a contest of strength similar to @{Indian wrestling} using just the hands clamped into each other instead of the forearms. <i>v</i> [AC; b] wrestle in this way.

<p><b>kuma<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @cute and @cuddly, such that one would love to pick it up and squeeze it. <i>v</i> [b6] feel like fondling s.t. cuddly. <i>Gikumhan kung nagtan-aw sa ímung bátà,</i> I feel like squeezing your baby when I look at it.

<p><b>kúma<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @comma. <i>v</i> [b] put a comma. <i>Kumáhi, ayawg piryúdi,</i> Put a comma, not a period.

<p><b>kumadri</b> <xref>= <i>KUMÁRI</i></xref>.

<p><b>kumads</b> short for <ix>kumadri</ix>, used intimately. <i>v</i> [C2] call each other <ix>kumads</ix>.

<p><b>kumagat</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAGAT</sc>.

<p><b>kumagkù</b> = <sc>KUMALAGKÙ</sc>.

<p><b>kumàkumà</b> <i>v</i> [B4] speak haltingly because of being flustered. <i>Mukumàkumà giyud ku ug pangutan-un na sa kurti,</i> I'll surely get rattled if I am questioned in court.

<p><b>kumalagkù</b> (from <ix>dakù</ix>) <i>n</i> @thumb, @{big toe}. <i>v</i> [a12] hit on the thumb or big toe.

<p><b>kuman</b> = <sc>KARUN</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>kumandansiya</b> <i>n</i> @headquarters, building where the command of a military unit is located. <i>Dad-a ni sa kumandansiya,</i> Bring this to the headquarters.

<p><b>kumandanti</b> <i>n</i> @commandant, @{commanding officer}. <i>v</i> [A; a] be, become a commandant.

<p><b>kumandir</b> = <sc>KAMANDIR</sc>.

<p><b>kumári</b> <i>n</i> a woman who has one of the following relations to one: she is the mother, godmother, or mother-in-law of children to whom one also is a parent or godparent (but not one's wife). <i>Kumári ku si Kurdaping sa tulu ka higayun: inahan siya sa ákung kinúgus, ug sa ákung linudhan, ug sa ákung binaláyi. Aku sad kumári níya,</i> Cordaping is my <ix>kumári</ix> on three grounds: she is the mother of my godson, and of another son whom I sponsored in marriage, and the mother of my daughter-in-law. And for that reason I am also her <i>kumári</i>. <b>a</b> term of address to a person with whom one has a relation of <ix>kumári</ix>. <b>b</b> friendly term of address to a woman of one's own generation with whom one is familiar. <ix>Short form:</ix> <bx>mari</bx>. <i>Kumusta mari?</i> <pb n=1026>How are you, dear? <i>v</i> [C; ac3] <b>1</b> be in the <ix>kumári</ix> relationship. <i>Gikakumári ku si Imilda kay siyay nagkúgus sa ákù pung gikúgus</i>, Imelda became my <ix>kumári</ix> because she sponsored a baby which I also sponsored. <b>2</b> [A; a] call s.o. by this title. <i>Ayaw kug kulukumaríha dihà. Dì ka makapangútang nákù</i>, Don't bother calling me <ix>kumári</ix>. You can't borrow another cent from me. <b>&mdash; kumablit</b> <i>n</i> a godmother who has some clandestine relationship with the father of her godchild.

<p><b>kumaw</b> <i>a</i> awkward in the way one does s.t. <i>Kumaw kaáyu siyang mugansilyu kay dì anad</i>, She crochets awkwardly because she is not used to it. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] do s.t. awkwardly. <i>Kumawan kung musuwat sa wá</i>, I find it awkward to write with my left hand.

<p><b>kumayingking</b> = <sc>kumingking</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KINGKING.</sc>

<p><b>kumbabit</b> = <sc>KULUMBABIT.</sc>

<p><b>kumbal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hammer the ends of the head of which are rounded, used in moulding metallic sheets into bowl-shaped objects. <i>v</i> [A; a] use this k.o. hammer.

<p><b>kumbansíru</b> <i>n</i> musical ensemble having a singer, accordion, string instruments, and maracas or substitutes therefor, usually playing Mexican-style songs. <i>v</i> [A13] join this sort of ensemble.

<p><b>kumbat</b> <i>n</i> army combat boots. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] wear combat shoes.

<p><b>kumbáti</b> <i>n</i> fight, battle on land. <i>Sígi pa gihápun ang kumbáti sa Byitnam</i>, The war in Vietnam is still raging. <i>v</i> [C; a] <b>1</b> do battle or come to a physical fight. <i>Nagkakumbáti mi kay íya man kung gitulísuk</i>, We came to a fight because she wagged her fingers at me. <b>2</b> [A; a] combat a vice or disease. <i>Ang mga ismaglir kinahanglang kumbatíhun sa átung kagamhánan</i>, The government should combat smuggling. <b>sugà nga di-</b> barn lantern.

<p><b>kumbi</b> <i>n</i> closed van of the microbus type.

<p><b>kumbiksiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> seriously considered opinion. <i>Unsa may ímung kumbiksiyun báhin sa átung násud karun?</i> What is your opinion about the state of our country<corr sic=.>?</corr> <b>1a</b> conviction or belief. <i>Way kumbiksiyun siya kay usáhay mulában sa trabahanti, unyà sa tag-íya</i>, He's a man of no conviction. Sometimes he sides with the workers and sometimes with the owners. <b>2</b> conviction of crime. <i>v</i> [A; a3] convict of a crime.

<p><b>kumbinar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] combine things that belong together or complement each other. <i>Kumbinahun ku ning dalag ug kapi</i>, I'll combine yellow and brown colors (in one dress). <i>Maáyung kumbinahan ning bungbung  <pb n=1027>adúbig táyil</i>, Tiles would go well with this adobe wall. <b>2</b> [A; a] modify s.t. so that it goes with s.t. else. <i>Kumbinahi ning radiyu pára kuryinti</i>, Adapt this radio to house current. <i>Ang barútu kumbinahan ug makina</i>, They'll adapt a motor to put in this boat.

<p><b>kumbinasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> combination of things that complement one another. <i>Nindut ug kumbinasiyun sa mga kulur ang ímung sinínà</i>, Your dress has a beautiful combination of colors. <i>Nindut ug kumbinasiyun ang adúbi ug batu</i>, The rocks and adobe make a good combination. <b>2</b> underhanded agreement. <i>Gibinuángan lang ta. Kumbinasiyun tung awáya</i>, They made a fool out of us. It was a fixed fight. <b>2a</b> illusion produced by some device or sleight of hand. <i>Dì tu tinúud nga nagkumbitay siya sa pangpang. Kumbinasiyun lang tu</i>, He isn't really hanging from a cliff. It was just a camera trick. <b>3</b> combination of a lock. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] rig s.t. up with a combination of things that complement each other. <i>Kumbinasiyunun nímu ang bilin ug sugang palungpálung</i>, Rig the nativity scene up with blinking lights. <b>2</b> [C; b2] get in cahoots to do s.t. shady. <i>Kumbinasyuni ang pagadur ug magpatantu ka sa impliyádu</i>, Make an agreement with the paymaster if you lend money to the employees.

<p><b>kumbinasyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> combination shot in pool whereby the cue ball hits another ball into the pocket by deflecting off the target ball. <b>&mdash; nga pinasúgù</b> a combination shot where the target ball knocks the desired ball into the pocket instead of the cue ball. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUMBINASIYUN.</sc> <i>v</i> [c1] make a combination shot in pool.

<p><b>*kumbíni</b> <b>walay ma-</b> nothing good can be gotten out of [such-and-such] an action. <i>Wà tay makumbíni ánang súgal</i>, We can derive no good from gambling.

<p><b>kumbininsiya</b> <i>n</i> good gotten out of s.t. <i>Unsa may kumbininsyang makúhà ánang pagsingárig katúlug?</i> What good can you get from staying in bed all the time?

<p><b>kumbinsi, kumbins&icaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a1] convince, persuade. <i>Musugut lagi siya basta ayúhun lag kumbins&icaron;r</i>, He will consent to it if you do a good job of convincing him. <i>Kumbinsiha (kumbinsira) giyud ang kurti nga wà kay sà</i>, You must convince the court that you are innocent. <b>kumbinsídu</b> <i>a</i> persuaded, convinced. <i>Hustu na. Kumbinsídu na ku</i>, That's enough. I'm convinced. <i>v</i> [B12] become convinced.

<p><b>kumbinsiyun</b> <i>n</i> convention, assembly. <i>v</i> [A1; b3] hold a convention. <i>Mau nay ílang kumbinsiyúnan  <pb n=1028>karun ang pag-itsapuyra ni Lawril</i>, That is what they're having a convention for: to expel Laurel. <b>&mdash; kunstituyinti</b> <i>n</i> Constitutional Convention.[+]

<p><b>kumbintu</b> <i>n</i> convent or rectory. <i>v</i> [a2] build a convent or rectory.

<p><b>kumbinyinti</b> <i>a</i> convenient, affording ease of action or use. <i>Kumbinyinti kaáyu ang rilu nga dì na lyabíhan</i>, A watch that needs no winding is very convenient. <i>v</i> [b6] find, consider s.t. convenient. <i>Gikumbinyintíhan ka uruy ug lakaw sa tarbáhu</i>, You really find walking to work convenient.

<p><b>kumbinyu</b> <i>n</i> out-of-court settlement. <b>abugádu di-</b> lawyer with no business: so called because of the practice for such lawyers to sit around the courthouse and waylay opposing parties on their way to court to try to convince them to settle out of court (for which he gets a small fee). <i>v</i> [C1; a12] <b>1</b> settle out of court. <i>Kumbinyúhun ta lang ni arun way sámuk</i>, Let's settle it out of court to avoid trouble. <b>2</b> get reconciled, make up in general.

<p><b>kumbira</b> <i>n</i> a feast, sumptuous party. <i>v</i> [A; b] hold a feast. <i>Kumbirahan ta ka ug makapasar ka sa burd.</i> I will give you a banquet if you pass the board exams. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] go to a feast. <i>Pangumbira mu sa ámù</i>, Come to the feast at my house!

<p><b>kumbirs</b> = <sc>KAMBIRS.</sc>

<p><b>kumbirsiyun</b> <i>n</i> conversion to a religion. <i>Ang kumbirsiyun sa mga Pilipinhun mauy tingúhà sa mga Kungkistadúris</i>, The goal of the Conquistadores was the conversion of the Filipinos.

<p><b>kumbirtibli</b> <i>a</i> convertible clothing that can be used for several purposes by making small adjustments. <i>Kút nga kumbirtibli nga mahímung balibalíhun pagsul-ub</i>, A convertible coat that you can wear inside or right-*side out. <i>Pilipína dris nga kumbirtibli. Ug kuháan sa buktun mahímung sinínà pára sa balay</i>, A convertible Filipina dress with removable sleeves to use as a house dress.

<p><b>kumbirtibul</b> <i>n</i> convertible automobile.

<p><b>kumbirt&icaron;r</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] convert s.o. to a faith. <i>Makumbirt&icaron;r kahà ang Múrus sa Kristiyanismu?</i> Do you think the Moros could be converted to Christianity? <b>2</b> [A1; a1] convert to an idea, convince of s.t. new. <i>Nakumbirt&icaron;r aku paggámit sa Táyid</i>, I was converted to Tide detergent. <b>3</b> convert, change s.t. into s.t. else. <i>Ang dakung balay kumbirtihung ristawrant</i>, The large house will be turned into a restaurant.

<p><b>kumbis</b> <i>n</i> flooring in a small boat. <i>May kumbis ang sakayan ibabaw sa luwang</i>, The boat <pb n=1029>has a flooring above the bilge. <i>v</i> [A; a] make the flooring in a small boat.

<p><b>kumbitatay, kumbitay</b> = <sc>KULUMBITAY.</sc>

<p><b>kumbíti</b> = <sc>KUMBIRA.</sc>

<p><b>kumbu</b> <i>n</i> combo, instrumental ensemble. a having clothes of the same color or cut (like the musicians in a combo). <i>Kumbu ug sinínà ang kalúha</i>, The twins are wearing identical outfits. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] have combo music for an affair. <i>Nagkumbu mi sa ámung parti gabíi</i>, We had a combo for our party last night. <b>2</b> [A13] wear clothes of the same color or style.

<p><b>kumbù</b> <i>n</i> @fritters made from cooking bananas, sliced crosswise, mixed with a binder of flour, and deep fried. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make this sort of banana fritters.

<p><b>kumbukasiyun, kumbukisyun</b> <i>n</i> program in school held for a special purpose where speakers in a particular field are invited to speak. <i>v</i> [A; b6] have, hold a convocation.

<p><b>kumbulsiyun</b> <i>n</i> @convulsions. <i>v</i> [B46; a4] suffer convulsions. <i>Ug mukumbulsiyun (kumbulsiyunun) ang bátà, dágan dáyun sa uspital</i>, If the child gets convulsions, rush him to the hospital.

<p><b>kumbútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN.</sc>

<p><b>kumbuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] accompany s.o. going s.w. as a protection. <i>Sikyuriti ang mukumbuy sa pimastir</i>, Security guards will escort the paymaster. <i>Nabyaan sa barku ang nagkumbuy sa kábaw nga itúmud sa Manílà</i>, The man who was supposed to go along with the carabaos being shipped to Manila missed the boat. <i>n</i> protective escort.

<p><b>kumbúya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> partner in a business or ally in war. <b>2</b> naval convoy. <i>v</i> [C; ac3] <b>1</b> be, become partners or allies. <i>Nagkumbúya ang duha ka magsúun sa nigusyu</i>, The two brothers joined their capital together into a business enterprise. <i>Nagkakumbuya ang Alimanya ug Hapun sa gúbat</i>, The Germans and Japanese joined forces during the War. <i>Nakigkumbúya ang mga ismaglir sa mga písi</i>, The smugglers were allied with the P.C. soldiers. <b>2</b> provide convoy protection.

<p><b>kumi</b> <i>n</i> suckerfish, remora: <b><i>Remora spp.</i></b> <b>kumì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] rub out a smudge, dirty spot, wetting the whole piece of clothing or just wetting the dirty spot. <i>Kumian dáyun ang mansa arun dì makataput kaáyu</i>, Wash out the stain immediately before it gets fixed in the cloth.

<p><b>kumída</b> <i>n</i> meal. <b>libri &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> free meals. <i>Maáyu ang prisuhan kay libri kumída</i>, Jail is fine because you get free meals.

<p><b>kumidi</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a person to be funny because of s.t. stupid he did. <i>Kakumidi bayà nímu. <pb n=1030>Ngánung nabyaan ka sa barku?</i> What a dope! Why did you miss the boat? <b>2</b> comedy show. <i>v</i> [A3] do s.t. stupid in a funny way. <i>Nagkumidi ka mag suruysúruy nga nagkampat nang nawung mu sa mik-ap</i>, What a funny sight it is to see you going around with your face spattered with make-up.

<p><b>kumídiya</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> play a joke on, tease s.o. with s.t. fabricated. <i>Ayawg hílak. Nagkumídiya ra bítaw ku</i>, Don't cry. I was only joking. <i>Kumidiyáhi siyag itsa ug dinamíta nga dì mubutu</i>, Play a joke on him by throwing a stick of dynamite at him that won't go off. <b>2</b> bluff s.o. <i>Kumidiyáhi ang bátà nga dì ta mulakaw arun dì mukúyug</i>, Fool the child into thinking that we aren't going out so he won't want to come with us. <b>3</b> [b(1)] for supernatural beings to play a prank or cause harm to s.o. <i>Nabúrut ang íyang tiyan kay gikumidiyáhan sa dílì ingun nátù</i>, His stomach swelled because the spirits played a practical joke on him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> joke played on s.o. <b>2</b> s.t. bad that happens to one brought on by a supernatural being. <b>-nti</b> <i>a</i> given to playing jokes or doing things to make people laugh. <i>n</i> minor character in a play or movie whose role is to make people laugh. <i>v</i> [A13; a2] become a comedian or a person who does things to make people laugh. <i>Angayan kang magkumidiyanti kay muut kag nawung</i>, You'd make a good comedian because you've got a funny face.

<p><b>kumidur</b> <i>n</i> dining room in a house. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a dining room.

<p><b>kumiks</b> <i>n</i> comics.

<p><b>kumilik</b> <i>n</i> Comelec, acronym for the Commission on Elections.

<p><b>kumingking</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KINGKING</sc>.

<p><b>kumintang</b> <i>n</i> periwinkle, a small ornamental grown as a border plant and for its flowers: <b><i>Catharantus roseus</i></b>.

<p><b>kumintarista</b> <i>n</i> newspaper, radio commentator. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] be, become a commentator.

<p><b>kumintaryu</b> <i>n</i> comment, observation on s.t. <i>v</i> [A; c] say s.t. about s.t. <i>Wà ku manaway ígù lang kung nagkumintaryu</i>, I am not criticizing. I'm just making a comment. <i>Wà kuy ikakumintaryu báhin sa ímung pamulitika</i>, I have no comment to make about your politics.

<p><b>kumintítur</b> <i>n</i> radio, newspaper commentator. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become a radio commentator.

<p><b>kumirsiyal</b> <i>n</i> commercial on radio or TV. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> done on a large scale for commercial purposes. <i>Pamuhig bábuy nga kumirsiyal,</i> Raising  <pb n=1031>pigs commercially. <b>2</b> area where commerce is carried out. <i>Distrítu (nga) kumirsiyal</i>, The commercial district. <i>v</i> [A13] broadcast commercials.

<p><b>kumirsiyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> commerce, business. <i>Gipuhúnan dáyun níyag kumirsiyu ang íyang salapì</i>, He immediately invested his money in business. <i>Ang iskuyláhan nahímù nang kumirsiyu</i>, The school has been turned into a business enterprise. <b>2</b> course in business or commerce. <i>v</i> [AN; c1] be engaged in business. <i>Nangumirsiyu siyag panaptun</i>, He is engaged in the textile business. <i>Babáyi íyang gikumirsiyu</i>, Prostitution was his business.

<p><b>kumirsyanti</b> <i>n</i> businessman. <i>a</i> like a businessman in dealings. <i>Kumirsyanti kaáyung tawhána. Bísan igsúun paganansiyáhan ug dakù</i>, He is a real businessman. He even makes a profit on his brother. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a businessman.

<p><b>kumisiyun, kumisyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> commission on s.t. sold. <b>2</b> commission, a group of people appointed by the government for certain duties. <i>Kumisiyun Iliktural</i>, Commission on Elections. <b>3</b> officer's commission. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; c] get a commission. <i>Nakakumisiyun ku sa bakpi nga ákung gihíkay</i>, I got a commission on the back pay claim that I saw through. <b>2</b> [A; b5] commission an officer. <b>-ir(->), -ádu</b> <i>n</i> commissioner, one in charge of a certain government department or of a colony.

<p><b>kumíta</b> <i>n</i> comet.

<p><b>kumiti, kumíti, kumitíba</b> <i>n</i> committee. <i>v</i> [A13; c1] organize into a committee.

<p><b>kumitir</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] commit oneself or s.t. <i>Dì ku mukumitir sa ákung kaugalíngun ánang sabúta</i>, I won't commit myself to that agreement. <i>Ayaw ikumitir ang primírung batalyun kay irisirba</i>, Don't commit the first battalion because it is in reserve.

<p><b>kumkum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] hold s.t. in the hand with the palm closed. <i>Kumkúma (ikumkum) pag-áyu ang sinsilyu arun dì maw[=à]</i>, Hold the change tightly in your hand so you won't lose it. <b>2</b> [A; a12] get possession of s.t. <i>Ang kadaúgan nga karun ílang gikumkum nakúhà sa limbung</i>, Victory is in their hands now, but it is an ill-gotten one. <i>Kun muabut kanang higayúna, kumkúma dáyun kay dì na nà mubálik</i>, When the chance comes, grasp it and hold onto it, for it will not come back again. <b>&mdash; ug kamut</b> <i>a</i> tight-fisted. <i>Kumkum kaáyug kamut. Asin ray isulà</i>, He's terribly tight-fisted. He won't eat anything but salt with his rice. <i>n</i> a fistful. <i>Paghakup ug usa ka kumkum nga balas</i>, Take a handful of sand. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] let a <pb n=1032>baptized child hold an amount as a baptismal gift from his godfather or godmother who failed to bring a gift. <i>Ákù lang pakumkúmun ug singku písus ang ákung kinúgus kay wà man kuy dáng rigálu</i>, I'll let my godchild hold five pesos as a baptismal gift because I didn't bring any gifts.

<p><b>kumnay</b> name given to nosefishes: <b><i>Naso spp.</i></b>

<p><b>kumpabli</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] admit one's guilt, defeat. <i>Dì ku mukumpabli nga aku nasayup</i>, I won't admit that I was wrong. <i>Dì nátù kumpablíhan ang íyang kadaúgan kay may tíkas</i>, We won't concede his victory because there was trickery involved.

<p><b>kumpad</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] toy, play around with s.t. with the fingers. <i>Kumpárun sa bátà ang íyang pagkáun ug pasagdan</i>, The child will play with his food if he is left alone.

<p><b>kumpadri</b> = <sc>KUMPÁRI.</sc>

<p><b>kumpang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. disease of pigs, manifested by a foul odor emanating from the mouth and giving a yellow color to the fat. <i>v</i> [a4] get <i>kumpang</i>. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> sick with <ix>kumpang</ix>.

<p><b>kumpaníya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> business establishment. <i>Sákup siya sa usa ka mauswágung kumpaníya</i>, He is a member of a prosperous company. <b>2</b> business partners. <i>Kumpaníya sila niadtu piru nagbúlag ug nigusyu</i>, They used to be business partners but now they have split their business. <b>2a</b> habitual associate. <i>Pirmi nákù siyang kumpaníya sa pagpangharána</i>, He is always with me when we go serenading. <b>3</b> military company. <i>v</i> [C; ac3] <b>1</b> be partners or associates in business. <i>Nagkumpaníya sila niánang ílang tindáhan</i>, They are partners in that store. <i>Gikumpaniyáhan sa mag-ágaw ang pagpalit sa yútà</i>, The cousins bought the land as co-partners. <b>2</b> be a constant companion or associate.

<p><b>kumpanya</b> = <sc>KAMPANYA.</sc>

<p><b>kumpanyíra</b> = <sc>KUMPANYÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>kumpanyíru</b> <i>n</i> term of address to intimates, used esp. among lawyers. <i>Kumpanyíru, nauswag ang átung bista</i>, Our hearing has been postponed, friend.

<p><b>kumpara, kumparar</b> <i>v</i> [AC2; ac] compare with. <i>Ug kumparahun kamung duha, wà kay dag-anan</i>, If you two are compared, you have no chance of winning. <i>Sayun ni ikumparar niadtu</i>, This is easy compared to that. <b>kumparasiyun</b> <i>n</i> comparison, act of comparison. <i>Way kumparasiyun nang duha</i>, The two have no comparison. <i>Sa ákung kumparasiyun lugum tung usa</i>, As I look at them, one is darker than the other.

<p><b>kumpári</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a male who has one of the following relations to one: he is either the father, godfather, or father-in-law of children to <pb n=1033>whom one also is a parent (but not one's husband). <b>2</b> term of address to a person with whom one has this relation or general term of address to s.o. of one's own age with whom one feels intimate. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>pari.</bx> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C; ac3] be in this relationship. <b>2</b> [A1; a] call s.o. <ix>kumpári.</ix>

<p><b>kumparsa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ensemble of plucked, stringed instruments. <b>2</b> folk dance interlude at a dance. <b>2a</b> folk dance pageant, presented as a contest among groups in a school or among different schools. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b(1)] have music from a string band. <b>2</b> [A1; b(1)] present this sort of dance pageant.

<p><b>kumpas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> being in harmony or correct timing with s.t. else. <i>Mikanta siya kumpas sa dúyug</i>, She sang in time to the accompaniment. <b>2</b> deliberate, slow, and poised in action. <i>Kaanindut niánang bayhána, kumpas kaáyu manlihuklihuk</i>, That girl is very nice; she moves slowly and gracefully. <i>Kumpas pinadulut ang íyang sinultihan,</i> She is slow and careful in speech. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> beat, time. <i>Dílì ku makaagpas sa kumpas niánang sunatáha</i>, I cannot catch onto the tempo of that song. <b>2</b> acts, mannerism. <i>Mu ra man nà siyag buang sa íyang mga kumpas</i>, She seems like a mad woman, the way she acts. <b>kuntra &mdash;</b> out of rhythm or tempo. <i>Kuntra kumpas ang ímung sinayawan</i>, You are not dancing in time to the music. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c1] act or do s.t. in harmony or time. <i>Mikumpas siya pagpakpak uban sa sunáta</i>, She clapped in time to the music. <i>Nagkumpas ang duha ka bátà ug singgit</i>, The two children shrieked in unison. <b>2</b> [B; a] be, become deliberate and posed in action, cause s.t. to be slow and deliberate. <i>Mikumpas ang íyang tíngug (mikumpas siya sa íyang tíngug) sa nasukù na ku</i>, Her voice became soft and measured as I grew angrier and angrier. <i>Ug dì ka magkumpas, mahúlug ka</i>, If you aren't slow and deliberate, you'll fall. <b>3</b> [C2; b] keep up with what s.o. else does. <i>Makigkumpas man gud ning ákung anak ug unsay buhátun sa mga anak sa dátù</i>, This child of mine wants to do whatever the rich people's children do.

<p><b>kumpas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> compass for determining directions or for drawing circles.

<p><b>kumpay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. grass growing wild or cultivated in wet places for hay: <i><b>Panicum maximum.</b></i> <i>Unsáun pa ang kumpay ug patay na ang kabáyù</i>, Locking the barn door after the horse has been stolen. (Lit. What are they going to do with the hay after the horse is dead?) <i>v</i> [AN; a] gather s.t. for animal fodder. <i>Humana silag pananggì, kumpáyun <pb n=1034>na nátù ang mais nga sinanggian</i>, The harvest is over. Let's gather the cornstalks to feed the water buffaloes. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> a field with hay.

<p><b>kumpayut</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] cling to s.t. hanging from it with or without support from below. <i>Nagkumpayut ang ubang pasahíru kay kargádu ang trák,</i> Some passengers clung to the sides because the truck was overloaded. <i>Gikumpayútan siya sa íyang asáwa kay dì siya pagikánun</i>, His wife clung to him because she didn't want him to leave.

<p><b>kumpì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> limping in one's walk because of an injury or permanent defect in the legs. <i>Lúgus makadágan ang bátà nga kumpì</i>, The lame child can hardly run. <b>2</b> = <sc>KIMPÌ.</sc> <i>v</i> [B6; b6c1] walk with a limp. <i>Mikumpì (nakumpì) ang íyang linaktan tungud sa piang</i>, He walks with a limp because he has a sprained ankle.

<p><b>kumpidinsiyal</b> <i>n</i> confidential. <i>Kumpidinsiyal ni. Ayawg isábà ug láin</i>, This is in complete confidence. Don't tell anyone.

<p><b>kumpirinsiya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> conference. <b>2</b> organization of local Protestant churches of the same denomination. <i>v</i> [C; b3] hold a conference. <i>Nagkumpirinsiya ang mga myimbru sa búrd</i>, The board members are holding a conference.

<p><b>kumpirma</b> <i>n</i> confirmation, a religious rite. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> perform confirmation rites. <b>2</b> confirm an appointment or certify a law. <i>Dílì mukumpirma ang prisidinti sa íyang apuwintmint</i>, The president won't confirm his appointment. <i>Kumpirmahan na gánì sa mayur ang urdinansa anhà pa nà muipiktu</i>, As soon as the mayor certifies his approval, the ordinance will take effect. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> confirmed, having received the sacrament of Confirmation. <b>-siyun(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> confirmation in a religion. <b>2</b> confirmation of an appointment or ratification of a law.

<p><b>kumpisal</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> go to confession. <i>Kinahanglang mukumpisal úsà mukaláwat</i>, One should go to confession before taking Holy Communion. <b>2</b> confess to a crime. <i>Mikumpisal ra ang mamumúnù</i>, The murderer finally confessed. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] hear confession. <i>Túa ang párì sa uspital magpakumpisal sa mga masakitun</i>, The priest is in the hospital hearing confession for the patients. <b>-an(<-), kumpisinaryu, kumpisinaryuhan</b> <i>n</i> confessional box. <b>paN-, paN-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> act of confessing in church.[+]

<p><b>kumpisinaryu see KUMPISAL.</b>

<p><b>kumpisk&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] confiscate. <i>Gikumpisk&acaron;r ang tíbi kay wà siya makadata</i>, His <sc>TV</sc> was confiscated because he didn't keep up <pb n=1035>the payments. <b>kumpiskádu</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that has been confiscated. <i>Gibaligyà ang mga sigarilyung kumpiskádu</i>, They sold the confiscated cigarettes. <b>kumpiskadur</b> <i>n</i> one whose job is to confiscate things. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a confiscator.

<p><b>kumpisur</b> <i>n</i> priest who hears confession and gives absolution.

<p><b>kumpisyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> confession of guilt. <b>2</b> the sacrament of confession in church. <i>v</i> [A2N; b8] go to confession. <i>Kausa ra ku mukumpisyun (mangumpisyun) sa usa ka túig</i>, I go to confession only once a year. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b] hear confession. <b>-aryu</b> = <sc>KUMPISINARYU.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUMPISAL.</sc>

<p><b>kumpit<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. full-bodied boat with a deep draft and without outriggers, wider than other native boats. They are used for long distance travel, esp. by Muslims in carrying on trade. <i>v</i> [A; ac] travel, bring by <i>kumpit</i>.

<p><b>kumpit<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] squeeze s.t. between two long things to hold it. <i>Nagkumpit siya sa íyang pinangkù</i>, She held her hair bun in place with a hairclip. <i>Kumpíta pagkúhà ang inánag mais</i>, Take the roasted corn with tongs. <i>Ikumpit kining duha ka lipak pagpunit sa ilagà</i>, Pick up the rat with these two sticks. <i>Gikumpítan sa asáwa ang láwas sa bána</i>, The wife held her husband's body firmly with her legs. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hairclip. <b>2</b> tongs. <b>3</b> chopsticks.

<p><b>kumpitinsiya</b> <i>n</i> competition or competitor. <i>Mahal ning tindahána kay way kumpitinsiya</i>, This store is expensive because there are no competitors. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; b] be competing. <i>Mukumpitinsiya man nímu nang bag-ung istudiyanti</i>, The new student is going to give you competition. <i>Sa nigusyu ra sila nagkakumpitinsiya</i>, They are rivals in business only. <i>Gikumpitinsiyáhan ang Amirika sa Rusya sa pag-adtu sa búwan</i>, Russia competed against America to get to the moon. <b>2</b> [b] outshine. <i>Nasukù siya kay nakumpitinsiyahan (nakumpitinsiyaan) man ang bag-u níyang sinínà</i>, She got mad because s.o. else outshone her in her new dress.

<p><b>kumpítis</b> <i>n</i> confetti.

<p><b>kumpiyansa</b> <i>n</i> confidence in s.o. or oneself. <i>Wà kuy kumpiyansa sa táwu nga bakákun</i>, I have no confidence in a liar. a confident. <i>Napildi siya kay kumpiyansa ra kaáyu</i>, He lost because he was so over-confident. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] have trust or confidence in oneself or s.o. <i>Nagkumpiyansa siyang makadaug, maung wà na magpraktis</i>, He was sure he could win so he didn't practice. <b>2</b> [A; c] entrust s.t. to s.o. <i>Makumpiyansahan kahà nà siyag sikrítu?</i> Do you think we can trust <pb n=1036>her with a secret? <i>Ayawg ikumpiyansa nang ímung anak sa míd</i>, Do not entrust your child to your maid. <b>abúsu di-</b> breach of confidence or of trust. <i>Ug isugílun nímu ang sikrítu, kanà abúsu dikumpiyansa</i>, If you tell the secret, that will be a breach of confidence. <i>Ang pagkawkaw mu sa sáping gibílin ku nímu mauy abúsu dikumpiyansa</i>, It was a breach of trust for you to touch the money that had been left with you.

<p><b>kumpli</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> finish with one's service or study. <i>Ang tanan kung mga bátà kumpli na sa ílang pagtuun</i>, All my children have completed their studies now. <b>2</b> completely ruined, spoiled beyond use. <i>Mau pay pingag ang pinggan, ímu pung gibuak, kumpli na</i>, The plate may have been chipped, but it was still useful. Now you broke it. So that's it. <b>3</b> all done, finished. <i>Kumpli na ang bayranan sa balay</i>, My payments on the house are complete now. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] finish a term, one's study. <i>Magpaábut lang ku hangtud makakumpli ku sa ákung sirbisyu</i>, I'll wait until I can complete my service. <b>1a</b> [A2; b6] retire from the armed forces. <i>Kapitan ang ranggung íyang gikumplihan</i>, He retired a captain. <b>2</b> [a12] be completely ruined beyond use. <i>Kumplíha na lang nà arun kailisdag bag-u</i>, Finish it off, why don't you, so we have to buy a new one. <i>n</i> = <sc>KUMPLIANYU</sc>.

<p><b>kumplianyu</b> <i>n</i> birthday. <i>v</i> [A13; b] hold a birthday party. <i>Káda túig kumplianyúhan giyud siya sa íyang mga ginikánan</i>, Every year her parents give her a birthday party. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] attend a birthday party.

<p><b>kumplikádu</b> <i>a</i> complicated, difficult to untangle or understand. <i>Mas kumplikádu ang makina sa mutursiklu kay sa muturbáyik</i>, The motorcycle has a more complicated motor than a motorbike. <i>Kumplikádu ning kasúha</i>, This is a complicated court case. <i>v</i> [B1245] be, become complicated.

<p><b>kumplikar</b> <i>v</i> [B] for a disease to have complications. <i>Mikumplikar (nakumplikar) ang íyang plú ngadtus íyang kasingkásing</i>, His flu developed complications of the heart. <b>kumplikasiyun</b> <i>n</i> complication in a sickness.

<p><b>kumplimintu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. said or done out of respect or good manners. <i>Kumplimintu lang tung íyang pagdápit nímu kay silíngan man mu</i>, She invited you out of courtesy because you're her neighbor. <i>Bísan wà nay gustu, gibaslan ku ang suwat ágig kumplimintu</i>, Even though I don't like her any more, I answered her letter for politeness' sake. <b>2</b> compliment, s.t. said in admiration or praise. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] say or do s.t. insincere  <pb n=1037>out of politeness. <i>Mukumplimintu lang kug tambung sa íyang parti</i>, I'll just attend his party out of courtesy. <b>2</b> [A2] say s.t. in admiration or praise. <i>Mikumplimintu siya nakù sa bag-u kung hirdu</i>, She complimented me on my new hairdo.

<p><b>kumplín</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] complain about one's grades in school. <i>Kun wà ka mahimuut sa ímung mga grádu, ngánung dì ka man mukumplin?</i> If you aren't satisfied with your grades why don't you complain?

<p><b>kumplítu</b> <i>a</i> complete, having s.t. complete. <i>Kumplítu ang iskuyláhan sa mga kasangkápan</i>, Our school is completely equipped. <i>Kumplítu ang ákung gamitun sa pamanday</i>, My tools for carpentry are complete. <i>Kumplítu ta sa impliyádu</i>, We have our full contingent of employees. <i>Ang búhat nga kumplítu ihátag sa maistru</i>, All papers that are complete should be turned in to the teacher. <i>v</i> [AB12; a] be, become complete, make s.t. complete. <i>Mukumplítu kug báyad sa matrikula</i>, I'll pay the tuition fees in full. <i>Kining istáma mauy mukumplítu sa ákung kuliksiyun</i>, This stamp will make my collection complete. <i>Nagkakumplítu na ang ngípun sa bátà</i>, The child's teeth are almost complete. <i>Mu ray ikakumplítu námù ug ma Pasku</i>, The only time the whole family can get together is on Christmas.

<p><b>kumplut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> conspirator. <i>Ang kahíru usa sa mga kumplut sa pangílad sa sápì</i>, The cashier was one of the people who plotted to swindle the money. <b>2</b> person with whom one is intimate such that arrangements can be made on favored terms. <i>Giprumut siya kay kumplut man sa manidy&icaron;r</i>, He was promoted because he had made especial arrangements with the manager. <i>v</i> [C] <b>1</b> conspire. <i>Nakigkumplut ang ismaglir sa pulis sa pagpalusut sa mga sigarilyung ismágul</i>, The smuggler connived with the policeman to let in his smuggled cigarettes. <b>2</b> become intimate with s.o. to make special illegal arrangements.

<p><b>kumpra</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] buy s.t. in quantity, go shopping. <i>Nakapangumpra ka na bag pára sa ímung kumbira?</i> Have you bought the things for your party? <i>Kumpráha ning tanang nía sa lista</i>, Buy all the things on this list. <i>n</i> things bought. <i>Unsa may ímung kumpra?</i> What things did you buy? <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> buyer, dealer in some commodity. <i>Mga kumpradur sa kupras</i>, Dealers in copra. <i>v</i> [A13] become a dealer. <ix>see also</ix> <sc>MALAPÍ</sc>.

<p><b>kumprumísu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> committal to s.t. onerous or objectionable from which there is no <pb n=1038>turning back. <b>2</b> spouse or family as one's responsibility. <i>Karun nga may kumprumísu ka na sa ímung kinabúhì, pagbinuutan na</i>, Now that you're married, you must resolve to be good. <i>v</i> [A; a] be committed to such objectionable situations. <i>Nagkumprumísu nákù ning pagkapalíta sa awtu kay dì kung kaabut sa dáta</i>, It put me in a tight fix to buy this car because I can't meet the installments. <i>Ayawg paságad ug pirma kay tingálig makumprumísu ka</i>, Don't sign anything recklessly. It might get you into hot water. <i>Nakumprumísu ku pagbúrd sa ákung bátà</i>, I got myself into debt when my son took the bar exams.

<p><b>kumprumitíbu</b> = <sc>KUMPRUMITÍDU.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUMPRUMITIR.</sc>

<p><b>kumprumitir</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] promise, pledge. <i>Mikumprumitir ku nga mubáyad sa tápus búlan</i>, I pledged to pay at the end of the month. <i>Gikumprumitir na níya ang íyang kasingkásing sa láing táwu</i>, She has already pledged her heart to another man. <b>kumprumitídu</b> <i>a</i> bound, committed to do s.t.

<p><b>kumprunta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2N; c] ask or seek one's opinion or advice on s.t. <i>Mikumprunta (nangumprunta) na mig abugádu íning ámung kásu</i>, We consulted a lawyer about our case. <i>Ngánung dì man nímu ikumprunta nang prublimáha sa ímung kumpisur?</i> Why don't you seek the advice of your father confessor regarding that problem? <b>2</b> [A; a] sound s.o. out to see how he feels about s.t. <i>Kumpruntaha si Tátay ug úyun ba siyang iprinda ang yútà</i>, Ask father's opinion if he will go along with mortgaging the land.

<p><b>kumprunt&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A12; c] set a timepiece. <i>Ikumprunt&acaron;r ang rilu sa radiyu</i>, Set your watch by the radio.

<p><b>kumpuni, kumpunir</b> <i>v</i> [A; abc] do make-shift repairs. <i>Átù lang ning kumpunihun kay way bag-ung pyísa</i>, We'll just do make-shift repairs because we don't have new spare parts. <i>Kumpunihan lang ug pasta ang bangag sa tangu</i>, Just put a temporary filling in this tooth. <i>Ikumpunir lang ug tápak ning playwud sa bungbung</i>, Just fix this wall with a piece of plywood.

<p><b>kumpurmi</b> <b>1</b> depending on, in accordance with. <i>Ang gidak-ung palitun kumpurmi lang sa sukud</i>, The size to buy depends on her measurements. <i>&lsquo;Unsay ákung ihátag nímu?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Aw, kumpurmi lang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;What shall I give you?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, it depends on you (whatever you have).&rsquo; <b>1a</b> according to what is necessary. <i>Nanghípus na sila sa ílang mga kumpurmi lang nga dad-unun</i>, They were packing whatever it was that they used to take. <pb n=1039><i>Isigbáyad sila kumpurmi sa ílang nakúhà</i>, Each one paid according to the amount he had borrowed. <b>1b</b> whatever happens to be at hand, whatever comes into the head. <i>Kumpurmi lay pangayúun ning batáa</i>, This child asks for whatever enters his head. <i>Kumpurmi sa íyang makítà íyang palitun</i>, He buys whatever he sees. <b>1b1</b> different kinds or sorts. <i>Kumpurmi lang ang ílang gipamalit sa Karbun</i>, They bought all different things in the market. <b>1b2</b> <b>nanimáhung</b> &mdash; an odor to be so foul that words cannot describe it (lit. smells like anything and everything bad). <b>2</b> be in agreement. <i>Bisag kaáway ta apan kumpurmi ku sa ímung idíya</i>, We may be enemies, but I agree with your ideas. <i>Kumpurmi ka ba nga sa Sabadu na lang ta mangadtu?</i> Is it all right with you if we go on Saturday instead? <b>3</b> same as. <i>Unsa ka dakù ang lungag nga tamnan ug ságing? Kumpurmi sa tamnan ug lubi</i>, How large a hole do we make for planting bananas? The same size as the hole for planting coconut trees. <i>&lsquo;Pila ka mitrus nga panaptun ang ímung palitun?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Kumpurmi sa imúha,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;How many meters of cloth will you buy?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;The same as what you buy.&rsquo; <b>4</b> now look who's talking. <i>&lsquo;Túa ag kawatan!&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Kumpurmi lag kinsay nadakpan,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;There you are, you thief!&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Look who's talking? Who was arrested, anyway, me or you?&rsquo; <i>Unsay dakug káun? Kumpurmig kinsay nakahurut ug usa ka bandihádu nátù!</i> What do you mean eating too much! Look which one of us finished a whole platter off? <i>v</i> [A12] be agreeable. <i>Ang mga táwu nga dílì mukumpurmi sa súgù silútan</i>, Whoever doesn't agree to follow the orders will be punished. <i>Wà siya mukumpurmi sa plánu</i>, He was not agreeable to the plan.

<p><b>kumpurtabli</b> <i>a</i> comfortable. <i>Kumpurtabli ning síya</i>, This chair is comfortable. <i>Kumpurtabli ílang kahimtang</i>, They are in comfortable circumstances. <i>Kumpurtabli ning sinináa. Dílì hugut, dílì galhà</i>, This is a comfortable dress. It's not tight, and it's not hot. <i>v</i> [B2] be comfortable.

<p><b>kumpúsir</b> <i>n</i> composer. <i>v</i> [B156] become a composer.

<p><b>kumpusisyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a musical composition. <i>Ang átung nasudnung áwit kumpusisyun ni Hulyan Pilípi</i>, Our national song was composed by Julian Felipe. <b>2</b> <corr sic=compositon>composition</corr> book. <b>3</b> written theme. <i>v</i> [A1] write a composition.

<p><b>kumpusitur disapátus</b> <i>n</i> shoemaker.

<p><b>kumpúsu</b> <i>n</i> ballad in a minor key treating of love or heroism. It is composed of stanzas of four lines of no set number of syllables <pb n=1040>and which may have one or two syllables more than the song allows, but at least two of which must be rhymed. The melody may be the same throughout the <ix>kumpúsu</ix> or two melodies may be alternate, the second modulated four notes higher than the initial. <i>v</i> [A; b6] compose this sort of ballad.

<p><b>kúmu <b>1</b> &mdash;</b> [<ix>noun, adjective</ix>] as one in [such-and-such] a capacity. <i>Kúmu magulang siya nímu, mutáhud giyud ka níya</i>, As your older brother, you must obey him. <i>Kúmu gwápa, daghang mulíngì iniglabay níya</i>, Being beautiful, many people turn to look at her as she passes by. <b>2</b> <bx>&mdash; kay</bx> since, seeing that. <i>Kúmu kay girikumindar kag pulitiku, nakulukar ka na</i>, Because a politician recommended you, you got placed in a job. <i>Kúmu ba kay prisidinti siya sa kapunúngan, dílì siya muámut?</i> Just because he is the president of the organization, he doesn't contribute? <b>3</b> <bx>may, way &mdash;</bx> there is s.t. (nothing) as good as.... <i>May kúmu pa bang basahun ingun sa Bisayà?</i> Is there any magazine as good to read as the <i>Bisaya? Way kúmu ning dúna tay amígu sa Kustum</i>, There's nothing as good as having a friend in the Customs Bureau.

<p><b>kúmù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{clenched fist}. <b>2</b> <ix>interjection indicating a brusque rejection of one's suggestion:</ix> @{go to hell!} <i>&lsquo;Ikay manghúgas run, ha?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Kúmù!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;You wash the dishes today, OK?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Drop dead, will you?&rsquo; <i>v</i> [A1N; ac1] clench one's fist, keep s.t. tightly in one's palm. <i>Nangúmù siya sa hilabihang kalágut</i>, He clenched his fists in anger. <i>Kumúa nang kindi arun dì makítà</i>, Keep the candy in your fist so that no one can see it. <i>Kumúa (ikúmù) ang ímung kamut</i>, Clench your fists. <b>-in-</b> <xref>= <sc>KÚMÙ</sc>, <i>n.</i></xref> <b>-in-ay</b> <i>v</i> [C23] clench fists at each other.

<p><b>kumuda, kumúda</b> <i>n</i> @drawer. <i>Túa sa kumúda sa ákung lamísa</i>, It's in the drawer in my table.

<p><b>kumudkumud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3c5] @mumble under one's breath in complaint. <i>Mukumudkumud nà siyag sugúun</i>, She mumbles under her breath when she is told to do s.t. <i>Gamay ra nang trabahúang ikakumudkumud</i>, That work is too light to grumble about. <b>kumudkumuran</b> <i>a</i> tending to mumble under one's breath.

<p><b>kumúhuy</b> = <sc>KALAMÚHUY.</sc>

<p><b>kumulga, kumulg&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] take Holy Communion. <i>Adlaw-adlaw siya mukumulga</i>, She takes Communion daily. <b>-nti</b> <i>n</i> one who takes Holy Communion. <b>-siyun</b> <i>n</i> Holy Communion.

<p><b>kumun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> common, ordinary. <i>Kumun kaáyu  <pb n=1041>nà dinhi. Daghan man gud</i>, That's awfully common here. There is so many of them. <b>2</b> ordinary, not special. <i>Kumun kaáyung pagkáun</i>, Very ordinary food. <b>3</b> shared equally among all the members of a group. <i>Kining yutáa wà pa mabáhin. Kumun kini</i>, This land hasn't been divided yet. It belongs to everyone in the family. <i>Mísa karun nga kumun álang sa tanang kalag sa purgaturyu</i>, This is a common mass for all souls in purgatory. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a2] become common. <i>Dílì madúgay makumun na sab ang tag-as nga sanínà</i>, It won't be long before long dresses get to be a common sight. <b>2</b> [c1] make s.t. common property, shared by many in a group. <i>Ug way tistamintu, makumun ang kabílin</i>, If there is no will, the inheritance becomes common property. <b>sintídu &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> common sense.

<p><b>kúmun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] crumple s.t. up into a ball, put s.t. that can be crumpled s.w. carelessly without folding it or smoothing it out. <i>Kumúna na lang nang mga sinínà sa malíta</i>, Just throw those dresses into the suitcase any old way. <i>Ayaw kumúna nang papil kay magámit pa ang luyu</i>, Don't crumple up those papers because we can still use the back. <b>2</b> [A; a2] wrap s.t. up by just crumpling the wrapper. <i>Kumúna lang ang mga hirpin sa panyù</i>, Just wrap up the hair-*pins in the handkerchief. <b>3</b> [A; a] hold s.t. in the fist. <i>Kumúna pag-áyu ang kwarta arun dì mahúlug</i>, Hold the money tightly in your fist so it won't fall.

<p><b>kumunal</b> <i>n</i> for public use. <i>Ang kasilyas sa mirkádu kumunal</i>, The comfort stations in the market are for public use.

<p><b>kumungkumung</b> = <sc>ALIKÚMÙ.</sc>

<p><b>kumunikasiyun</b> <i>n</i> communication.

<p><b>kumunismu</b> <i>n</i> communism.

<p><b>kumunista</b> <i>n</i> communist. <i>a</i> ill-mannered, grasping. <i>Kumunista ka giyud. Bísag gibahínan, nangílug pa giyud</i>, What a grasping sort you are. You have been given your share, but you still want s.o. else's share! <i>v</i> [B1; a12] be, become a communist.<i> Ug makumunista ning nasúra, magkumunista sab ku</i>, If this country goes communist, I'll become a communist, too.

<p><b>kumunwilt</b> <i>n</i> commonwealth. <i>v</i> [B126] become a commonwealth.

<p><b>kumunyun</b> <i>n</i> the sacrament of Holy Communion. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] receive Holy Communion. <b>2</b> [A1] give communion. <b>primir, primíra &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> first communion. <b>2</b> first communicants. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> communion rail.

<p><b>kumurga</b> = <sc>KUMULGA</sc>. <b>-nti</b> = <sc>KUMULGANTI.</sc>

<p><b>kúmus<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>KULÁMUS.</sc>

<pb n=1042>

<p><b>kúmus<sub>2</sub>, kum-us</b> = <sc>GUM-US.</sc>

<p><b>kumusta</b> how is (was, are, etc.). <i>Kumusta ka?</i> How are you? <i>Kumusta ang ímung pagbisíta?</i> How was your visit? <i>Kumusta ang ímung anak? Nakatápus na ba sa íyang pagtuun?</i> How is your child? Has he finished his studies now? <i>v</i> [AC; a1] greet s.o. upon his arrival. <i>Mukumusta ku sa bag-ung abut</i>, I'll greet the new arrivals. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a1] <b>1</b> ask how s.o. is, send regards. <i>Aníay íyang sulat nangumusta kanátung tanan</i>, Here's a letter from him asking how we all are. <i>Ipangumusta lang kung Pápa mu</i>, Give your father my regards. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUMUSTA</sc>. pangumustahay</b> <i>n</i> exchange of greetings upon arrival. <b>-mus</b> friendly greeting to s.o. familiar, after not meeting for some time.

<p><b>kúmut</b> <i>v</i> [AN; ab2] <b>1</b> lay hands on any part of the body including the hair and squeezing or clawing at it. <i>Kumútun ku nang nawung mu</i>, I'll claw your face. <b>2</b> crumple in the hands. <i>Kumúta ang papil úsà ilábay</i>, Crumple the paper before throwing it away. <i>Kalamì rang kumútun sa bátà</i>, How I would love to squeeze that chubby baby. <b>3</b> extract the juice of s.t. by squeezing. <i>Akuy mukúmut sa amirul nga bugas</i>, I'll get starch for the laundry by squeezing the cooked rice. <b>3a</b> [A; b] put salt on s.t. and squeeze it to remove undesirable properties in the juice. <i>Kumúti ug asin ang paliya arun makúhà ang pait</i>, Squeeze the bitter vegetable together with salt to remove its bitter taste. <b>4</b> wash small pieces of clothing in a basin. <i>Kumúti ang mga kamisin sa kabatáan</i>, Wash out the children's undershirts. <b>5</b> [A2; a12] afflict with anguish, grief, etc. <i>Ang mapait níyang mga púlung mikúmut sa íyang kasingkásing</i>, His bitter words clawed at her heart.

<p><b>kum-ut</b> = <sc>GUM-UT.</sc>

<p><b>kun</b> <b>1</b> @if. <i>Kun mau kanà, iitsa ta ikaw sa kaláyu</i>, If that is the case, I will toss you into the fire. <i>Kun maarang, adtu na lang sa prusintu pangatarúngan</i>, Please (lit. if it is all right), explain at the precinct. <i>Ang ákung ngálan si Husi Krus kun adúnay isúgù</i>, My name is Joe Cruz. At your service (lit. if you have anything to command). <i>Kun wà pa nímu iúlì ang awtu, ikíha ta ka</i>, If you hadn't returned the car, I would have filed a case against you. <b>1a</b> when [so-and-so] happens. <i>Kun mulakaw na siya pahibalua ku</i>, When he goes, tell me. <i>Kun ting-init dinhi, ínit giyud</i>, During the hot season it is really hot. <b>1b</b> if, whether. <i>Pangutan-a si Máma mu kun haúnun na ba ring kík</i>, Ask your Mother if I should take the cake out of the oven. <b>2</b> <pb n=1043><bx>&mdash; dílì</bx> <b>2a</b> if not. <b>2b</b> except. <i>Way láin makasulbad sa ákung suliran kun dílì ikaw</i>, No one can solve my problem except you. <b>2c</b> <bx>dílì (walà) lang ... kun dì</bx> <b>2c1</b> not only ... but also. <i>Wà lang gánì siya magmuru nákù, kun dì milingiw pa giyud</i>, He not only frowned at me but even turned his back to me. <b>2c2</b> not ... but rather. <i>Sa ílang dríl dílì lámang káhuy ang gigámit kun dílì ripli giyud</i>, In their drill they did not use wooden guns but rather real rifles. <b>3</b> <ix>expression to introduce an explanatory phrase:</ix> that is to say. <i>Ang mga gradwádu karun walay kadásig sa pagtuun kun sa pagtukì sa kinaadman</i>, The recent graduates have no enthusiasm for study that is to say, to delve into knowledge.

<p><b>kún</b> = <sc>KÚLUN<sub>1</sub>.</sc>

<p><b>kúna</b> <i>n</i> @crib.

<p><b>kúnan</b> <i>n</i> conant coins, coins issued by the American occupation authorities for circulation in the Philippines during the period before the Commonwealth.

<p><b>kúnat</b> <i>a</i> being tough and slightly elastic, difficult to chew. <i>Kúnat ang intiriyur sa bisiklíta</i>, A bicycle tube is tough and slightly elastic. <i>Kúnat ang tiratíra</i>, Taffy is very tough and hard to chew. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] turn out to be tough and difficult to chew. <i>Way kaláki ang inasal nga magkúnat ang pánit</i>, Roast pig is no good if the skin is tough. <b>2</b> [A; a] tweak and pull. <i>Kunáta ang dunggan sa inasal</i>, Twist off the roast pig's ear.

<p><b>kúnay</b> <i>v</i> = <sc>KUNAYKÚNAY</sc>. <b>kunaykúnay</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> play around with a mass of s.t. with the hands. <i>Ang bátà nagkalingawg kunaykúnay sa lápuk</i>, The child is having fun with the mud. <b>2</b> fondle, stroke. <i>Ganáhan mukunaykúnay si Tátay sa íyang hiniktan</i>, Father likes to fondle his fighting cock. <i>Gikunaykúnay sa irù ang íyang mga ituy</i>, The dog is fondling its puppies. <b>3</b> take good care of s.t. <i>Ug dúna kay kwarta, kunaykunáyun ka sa mga narsis</i>, If you have money, the nurses will give you first class service.

<p><b>kundádu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUNDI.</sc>

<p><b>kundas</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b] snarl at s.o. as if about to charge at him. <i>Mikundas (nangundas) ang irù sa dihang natumban ang íyang íkug</i>, The dog snarled when I stepped on its tail.

<p><b>kundat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC12; b] play together vigorously, usually involving physical contact. <i>Ganáhan siyang mukundat sa mga bátà</i>, He likes to engage in horseplay with the children. <i>Gustung makigkundat ang irù sa bátà</i>, The dog wants to play with the boy. <b>2</b> [A; b6] move about noisily, in a fluttering or loud way, unbecoming to a woman. <i>Mikundat  <pb n=1044>dáyun ang mga silbidúra pag-abut sa ílang mga súkì</i>, The bar waitresses immediately flirted and acted noisily when their customers arrived. <i>Gikundátan kaáyu ku sa íyang sinayawan</i>, I consider her way of dancing boisterous and unbecoming. <i>n</i> horseplay, boisterous actions. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> moving about in an exuberant, boisterous way, unbecoming to a woman. <i>v</i> [B12] get to have these characteristics of behavior. <i>Nakundatan na kaáyu ang ámung míd</i>, Our maid has become flirtatious now.

<p><b>kundi</b> <i>n</i> count. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a count. <i>Gustu ka bang magkundi sa átung dráma?</i> Would you like to play the count in our drama? <b>kundádu</b> <i>n</i> area ruled over by a count. <b>-sa</b> <i>n</i> countess. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a countess.

<p><b>kundim</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] condemn s.t. as unfit for use. <i>Ang layinman mauy nagkundim íning kuniksiyúna kay dilikádu</i>, The lineman declared this connection unfit for use because it's dangerous. <i>Ang mga libru lang nga dunut mauy kundima (ikundim)</i>, Declare the worn-out books unfit for use. <i>a</i> declared unfit.

<p><b>kundíman<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. red cotton cloth of a cheap variety, commonly used for pillows. <i>v</i> [A13] wear clothes made of <ix>kundíman</ix> cloth.

<p><b>kundíman<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. love song of a traditional genre.

<p><b>kundina</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] treat s.o. with condescension and contempt. <i>Ayaw siya kundinaha nga usa ka patay gútum</i>, Don't look down on him for being extremely poor.

<p><b>kundína</b> <i>n</i> punishment, imprisonment for heavy offenses. <i>Napúlù ka túig ang kundína sa binilanggù</i>, The prisoner was sentenced to ten years. <i>v</i> [A; c] pass a sentence for a heavy crime. <i>Nakakundína na siyag daghan</i>, He has already sentenced many people to heavy punishment.

<p><b>kundin&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a3] be condemned by God to eternal wandering. <i>Magbalikbálik ang kalag nga nakundinar</i>, A restless soul returns and haunts his place. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] be carried by bad influence. <i>Kun dílì pa ikaw mauy nagkundinar nákù dì untà ku maingun niíni karun</i>, If it had not been for your bad influence, I wouldn't be what I am now. <i>Kundinahun ka na sab ánang tawhána sa súgal ug ínum</i>, That good-for-nothing fellow will again drag you to gambling and drinking. <b>3</b> [A; b] condemn or convict a prisoner to severe punishment. <i>Tulu ka binilanggù gikundinahan sa kamatáyun</i>, Three prisoners were condemned to die. <b>kundinádu</b> <i>n</i> soul condemned by God to eternal punishment, <pb n=1045>said to go back to earth to roam and wander restlessly. a reference to a person one is angry at, implying that he deserves to be damned. <i>Ang kundinádu mung anak mauy nakadaldal sa ákung anak sa kadaútan</i>, Your damned son led my son into evil. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a doomed soul.

<p><b>kundinsáda</b> <i>a</i> condensed milk. <b>litsi &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{condensed milk}.

<p><b>kundísa</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUNDI</sc>.

<p><b>kundisiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> manner or state of being. <i>Kumusta ang kundisiyun sa masakitun?</i> How is the patient's condition? <i>Lisud ámung kundisiyun human ku papháa</i>, Our situation has been difficult since I was fired. <b>2</b> requirement, stipulations. <i>Mga kundisiyun sa kuntrátu</i>, The conditions in the contract. <b>3</b> grade given on condition that the student make up specified deficiencies.<i> May kundisiyun ku sa Mát</i>, I have a conditional pass in Math. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] set conditions to s.t. <i>Nagkundisiyun ku nga makalakaw ka basta mupaúlì ug sayu</i>, I make the condition that you can go out if you come home early. <i>Unsa may ímung ikundisiyun kun magpahulam kag kwarta?</i> What conditions do you impose when you loan money? <b>2</b> [A12; a12] be given a conditional grade. <i>Nakundisiyun (nakakundisiyun) ku sa Histuri</i>, I got a conditional pass in History. <b>-al</b> conditional, dependent upon certain stipulations. <i>v</i> [B1256] be conditional. <i>Ug makundisiyunal ang pagsurindir, dílì dawátun</i>, They will not accept any surrender hedged with conditions.

<p><b>kundukta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> behavior, deportment.

<p><b>kundukta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] guide, escort s.o. to a place. <i>Akuy mukundukta sa mga turista</i>, I will guide the tourists. <i>Gikunduktuhan ku siya kútub sa istasyunan</i>, I conducted her up to the bus station.

<p><b>kunduktur</b> <i>n</i> conductor in public transportation. <i>v</i> [AB156; a2] be, become a conductor in public transportation.

<p><b>kundul</b> <i>n</i> spreading annual vine producing long, green melons of oblong or bottle-like shape, eaten cooked when unripe, and when ripe made into candy: <i><b>Benincasa hispida.</b></i>

<p><b>kundun</b> <i>n</i> condom, a contraceptive device put on the penis. <i>v</i> [A; b] wear, use a condom.

<p><b>kung</b> = <sc>KUN.</sc>

<p><b>kúng</b> = <sc>KULUNG<sub>1</sub>.</sc>

<p><b>kungas</b> = <sc>KINGAS.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÍNGAS.</sc>

<p><b>kunggrísu</b> = <sc>KUNGRÍSU.</sc>

<p><b>kunggu</b> = <sc>KALUNGGU.</sc>

<p><b>kungking</b> <i>n</i> @vagina (euphemism used to children).

<pb n=1046>

<p><b>kungkista</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] subject a foreign land and make it a colony. <i>Gikungkista ang Pilipínas sa mga Katsílà</i>, The Philippines were conquered by the Spaniards. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> conquered people or land that is subjugated and made a colony. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> one who conquers a land or people. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a conqueror.

<p><b>kungkiyang, kungkíyang</b> <i>n</i> conquian, a k.o. rummy played by two players. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] play conquian. <b>2</b> [B6; a2] win in conquian.

<p><b>kungkrítu</b> = <sc>KUNKRÍTU.</sc>

<p><b>kungkung</b> = <sc>KALUNGKUNG.</sc>

<p><b>kungrigasiyun</b> <i>n</i> church congregation.

<p><b>kungrísu</b> <i>n</i> congress, the national legislature. kungrisista <i>n</i> congressman. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a congressman.

<p><b>kunhud</b> <i>v</i> [APB; c2] reduce, diminish. <i>Mukunhud ang prisyu sa bugas kun ting-ani</i>, The price of rice goes down during the harvest season. <i>Adúnay baláud nga nagkunhud sa gidaghanun sa mga mulangyaw gawas sa násud</i>, There's a law lowering the number of those who may go abroad. <i>Kining tambála makakunhud (makapakunhud) sa prisiyun</i>, This medicine can lower blood pressure. <i>Ikunhud (kunhúran) ang swildu kun hínay ang trabáhu</i>, The wages are reduced if business is slow. <ix>see also</ix> <sc>TÚBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>kuníhu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rabbit. <b>2</b> expression indicating annoyance or pretended annoyance, referring to a person, but not really saying anything about him. <i>Nía na sad ang kuníhu, karun pa magpakítà</i>, Here you are, you s.o.b. Where have you been hiding yourself? <i>Kuníhu! Nasayup na sad ku dà</i>, Darn! I made another mistake.

<p><b>kunik</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] in rummy, put cards down which are of the same suit or from a series with cards that have been laid on the table.

<p><b>kuniksyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pull, connections. <i>May kuniksyun siya sa síti hul</i>, He has connections in City Hall. <b>2</b> connection in plumbing, wiring, telephone, and the like. <i>Naputul ang kuniksyun sa túbu</i>, The connection in the pipeline broke. <b>3</b> connections in transportation. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] be connected with influential people. <i>Muasinsu dáyun ang makakuniksyun ug pulitiku</i>, A person who has connections with a politician can rise in the world. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] have an electrical connection. <i>Mukuniksyun na ku sa minláyin</i>, I will be connected to the main line. <b>3</b> = <sc>KUNIK.</sc>

<p><b>kuniktádu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc><corr sic=KUNIKTAR>KUNIKT&Acaron;R</corr></sc>.

<p><b>kunikt&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] <b>1</b> connecting, going through two disparate things. <i>Ang sakit sa ngípun mukunikt&acaron;r sab ngadtu sa tampihak</i>, <pb n=1047>When the tooth aches, the pain also seems to be in the temples. <i>Ang Sibu ikunikt&acaron;r ug taytáyan ngadtu sa Maktan</i>, Cebu will be connected to Mactan by a bridge. <b>2</b> connect a telephone, electric line. <b>kuniktádu</b> <b>1</b> connected, connected up. <i>Ayaw nag hikápa ang alambri kay kuniktádu na kanà</i>, Don't touch that wire. It is connected up now. <b>2</b> having connections in high places.

<p><b>kuniktid</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> be connected with some institution. <i>Kuniktid ku sa Yúbi</i>, I'm connected with U.V. <b>2</b> be connected, hooked up electrically, telephonically, and the like. <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become connected with.

<p><b>kunínit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] for a large number of agents to do s.t. to one thing. <i>Ang mga táwu mikunínit sa artista</i>, The crowd mobbed the movie star. <i>Nagkunínit ang mga táwu sa mga tinda sa baratilyu</i>, The people crowded in to buy the goods at the bargain sale. <i>Gikuninítan sa mga iring ang isdà</i>, The cats crowded around on the fish to eat it.

<p><b>kunis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] tear apart, into shreds. <b>kuniskunis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> tear into pieces, into small bits. <i>Sa íyang kalágut gikuniskunis níya ang suwat</i>, In her anger she tore the letter to shreds. <i>Nakuniskunis ang íyang sinínà sa irù</i>, Her dress got ripped to shreds by the dog. <b>2</b> break the heart. <i>Túmang kaguul nga mikuniskunis sa ákung kasingkásing</i>, The sorrow tore my heart to shreds.

<p><b>kunklusyun</b> <i>n</i> conclusion drawn, deduction. <i>Usa ray kunklusyun átung mahímù ánà</i>, We can come to only one conclusion about that.

<p><b>kunkrítu</b> <i>n</i> concrete, cement. <i>Balay nga kunkrítu</i>, A concrete house. <i>v</i> [A; a] make s.t. of concrete.

<p><b>kunkun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] rinse the hair and scalp with s.t. <i>Magkunkun kug suwà human ug kalígù</i>, I'll rinse my hair with citrus fruit after my bath.

<p><b>kunkun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> name given to the Constitutional Convention, begun in the summer of 1971.

<p><b>kunpirma</b> = <sc>KUMPIRMA.</sc>

<p><b>kunpirmasyun</b> = <sc>KUMPIRMASIYUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUMPIRMA.</sc>

<p><b>kunpisinaryu</b> = <sc>KUMPISINARYU.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUMPISAR.</sc>

<p><b>kunpisur</b> = <sc>KUMPISUR.</sc>

<p><b>kunsábu</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] plot or connive on the sly to do s.t. shady, or detrimental to s.o. <i>Nagkunsábu ang ubang impliyádu nga malagput ku</i>, Some employees are conniving to see if they can get me kicked out. <i>Nakigkunsábu ang tulisan sa gwardiya</i>, The robbers connived with the security guard. <i>n</i> co-*partners in a shady act. <i>Kunsábu tu sila maung nakalusut sa kustum</i>, They plotted together;  <pb n=1048>that's why it got through the Customs. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> accomplice in conniving.

<p><b>kunsad</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b(1)] descend from heaven or into hell. <i>Daw manulundà nga mikunsad gíkan sa lángit</i>, Like an angel descended from heaven.

<p><b>kunsagrar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> consecrate, declare sacred. <b>2</b> ordain a priest. <b>kunsagrasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> consecration of the host in the mass. <b>2</b> ordination to a sacred office.

<p><b>kunsidirar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] give especial consideration, give allowance for. <i>Mukunsidirar ku karun kay primíru pa nímung sayup</i>, I'll give you especial consideration this time because it's your first mistake. <i>Kunsidirahi pud ku, tsip, kay daghan kung anak</i>, Please give me a chance, officer, because I have so many children. <b>2</b> [A; a] consider s.t. to be s.t. <i>Dì ka ba mukunsidirar nga maáyu ning panwildúha?</i> Don't you consider this a good wage? <i>Gikunsidirar ku siyang inahan</i>, I considered her a mother. <b>kunsidirasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> consideration, understanding of s.o. else's problems. <i>Way kunsidirasiyun ang ákung agáwun. Bísan namatyan mi, wà giyud ku tugúti pagpaúlì</i>, My master has no consideration for my problems. We had a death in the family, but I wasn't allowed to go home. <i>Kining kwartáha ági lag kunsidirasiyun sa dúgay nímung pagsirbisyu nákù</i>, This money is in consideration for your long period of service to me. <b>1a</b> special benefits, considerations of employment. <i>Gamay túud ug swildu, apan daghan ug kunsidirasiyun</i>, The salary is small, to be sure, but there is a lot of extras. <b>2</b> the way one thinks. <i>Sa ákung kunsidirasiyun dílì ángayng patrabahúun ang minur diidad</i>, The way I look at it, a minor should not be made to work. <b>abáhu &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> under advisement, with the expectation of giving it further thought. <i>Dawátun ku nang ímung tubag pagkakarun, apan báhu kunsidirasiyun</i>, I'll accept your answer, under advisement. <b>2</b> bound by the way s.o. else thinks. <i>Ang asáwa báhu kunsidirasiyun sa bána</i>, The wife follows what her husband thinks best.

<p><b>kunsigrar</b> = <sc>KUNSAGRAR.</sc>

<p><b>kunsigrasiyun</b> = <sc>KUNSAGRASIYUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUNSAGRAR.</sc>

<p><b>kunsihal</b> <i>n</i> member of a city or lower level council. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a councilor. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> waltz. <i>v</i> [A; c1] dance the waltz.

<p><b>kunsihála</b> = <sc>KUNSIHAL</sc> (female).

<p><b>kunsíhu</b> <i>n</i> council. <i>Kunsíhu ihikutíbu</i>, Executive council. <i>Kunsíhu munisipal</i>, Municipal council.

<p><b>kunsilba</b> <i>n</i> a sweet made of sliced, dried bananas  <pb n=1049>immersed in syrup. <i>v</i> [A; a] make, make into <i>kunsilba</i>; be made into <i>kunsilba</i>.

<p><b>kunsilyu</b> <i>n</i> council in the church.

<p><b>kunsimisiyun</b> = <sc>KUNSUMISIYUN.</sc>

<p><b>kunsinsiya</b> <i>n</i> conscience. <b>gastu ang, sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] for one to be concerned and disturbed mentally and emotionally. <i>Mugastu giyud ang asáwa sa kunsinsiya ug mamabáyi ang bána</i>, It disturbs a woman emotionally when her husband fools around with other women. <i>Ayaw igastu ang ímung kunsinsiya sa mga pitsipitsing kahásul</i>, Don't worry so much about trifles.

<p><b>kunsintadur</b> <xref>= <sc>KUNSINTIDUR.</sc></xref> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUNSINT&Icaron;R.</sc>

<p><b>kunsint&icaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A2] allow s.o. who is in one's charge to do s.t. wrong: either by helping him overtly or by closing the eyes to it. <i>Ug makasalà mi, dì giyud mukunsint&icaron;r ákung inahan. Isumbung giyud mi sa ákung amahan</i>, My mother won't go along with it if we do s.t. wrong. She tells my father right away. <b>kunsintidur</b> <i>a</i> one whose job is to keep an eye on s.o. but lets him get away with s.t. <b>kunsintidúra</b> = <sc>KUNSINTIDUR</sc> (female).

<p><b>kunsirba<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>KUNSILBA.</sc>

<p><b>kunsirbatib</b> <i>a</i> conservative in morals or religious conviction. <i>Dì siya patambúngun ug parti sa kunsirbatib níyang Pápa</i>, Her conservative father will not allow her to attend parties.

<p><b>kunsirbaturyu</b> <i>n</i> conservatory, a school for teaching music.

<p><b>kunsirtu</b> = <sc>KUNSIYIRTU.</sc>

<p><b>kunsisiyun, kunsisyun</b> <i>n</i> concession, right given to exploit natural resources, usually forest or sea resources. <i>May kunsisiyun sila sa kalasangan sa Mulábi</i>, They have a concession in the forest of Molave. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] get a certain concession. <i>Singkuwinta ka iktarya ang íyang gikunsisyun álang sa íyang pastu</i>, He obtained a concession of fifty hectares for his ranch. <b>-aryu</b> <i>n</i> concessionaire.

<p><b>kunsiyirtu</b> <i>n</i> concert. <i>v</i> [A13; c] hold a concert. <i>Nagkunsirtu na sad dinhi kay kastígu hiniral</i>, We're having a concert (of crying) again because everybody got punished. <i>Púru mga klasika mauy ílang ikunsiyirtu</i>, They will present a concert of purely classical music.

<p><b>kunstabularya</b> <i>n</i> Philippine Constabulary.

<p><b>kunstabularyu</b> <i>n</i> member of the Philippine Constabulary.

<p><b>kunstitusyun</b> <i>n</i> constitution. <b>-al(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pertaining to the constitution. <i>Kwistiyun kunstitusiyunal</i>, A question of Constitutional legality. <b>2</b> in accordance with the constitution.  <pb n=1050><i>Dílì kunstitusyunal kanang balaúra</i>, That law is unconstitutional. <b>-al kumbinsiyun</b> <i>n</i> Constitutional Convention.

<p><b>kunstituyinti</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUMBINSIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>kunstruksiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> construction site. <b>2</b> building viewed as the work of a certain person. <i>Kanang mga bildínga kunstruksiyun ni Inhinyíru Lim</i>, Those buildings were constructed by Engineer Lim. <b>3</b> way s.t. is constructed. <i>Usa nà ka mátang sa kunstruksiyun nga mulungtad sa katuígan</i>, That k.o. construction will last for years.

<p><b>kunsul</b> <i>n</i> consul. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be a consul. <b>kunsuládu</b> <i>n</i> consulate.

<p><b>Kunsulasiyun</b> <i>n</i> town of Consolacion. <b>&mdash; guwà</b> <i>n</i> humorous name given to the town of Consolacion. <b>&mdash; súd</b> leprosarium situated at Consolacion.

<p><b>kunsulisyun prayis</b> <i>n</i> consolation prize. <i>v</i> [A12; c] win, give a consolation prize.

<p><b>kunsulta</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b5c] consult, see s.o. for consultation. <i>Kunsultáha (kunsultáhi) sila ug muúyun ba</i>, Consult them to see if they are amenable. <i>Ikunsulta ug ispisyalista ang ímung mata</i>, Consult a specialist for your eyes. <i>n</i> consultation. <b>-siyun</b> <i>n</i> consultation.

<p><b>kunsumisiyun</b> <i>n</i> intense grief that wastes away the body. <i>Ikay ákung kunsumisiyun, bataána ka</i>, You'll be the death of me. <i>Kunsumisiyun ang gikamatyan sa asáwang gibiyáan</i>, The wife wasted away and died of grief after she was abandoned. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B16; a4] be afflicted with grief that wastes away the body. <i>Gikunsumisiyun (nagkunsumisiyun) ang inahan sa kamaldítu sa anak</i>, The mother wasted in grief because of her wayward son. <b>2</b> [B1456; b3] worry very much over a trifle. <i>Ngánung magkunsumisiyun ka man ánang druwínga ug dì giyud mahímù?</i> Why do you have to worry yourself to death over that drawing if you can't do it?

<p><b>kunsumpsiyun</b> = <sc>KUNSÚMU.</sc>

<p><b>kunsúmu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> consumption. <i>Dakug kunsúmu ning awtúha</i>, This car uses a lot of gas. <i>Mínus karun kitag kunsúmu sa túbig</i>, We use less water now. <b>2</b> provisions, food supplies. <i>Kun muadtu mu sa isla, pagdala ug kunsúmu kay way pagkáun didtu</i>, If you go to the island, bring provisions because there is no food there. <i>v</i> [A] consume. <i>Mukunsúmu mig tagsa ka bákid bugas bulanbúlan</i>, We consume a cavan of rice each month.

<p><b>kunsurti</b> <i>n</i> consort of a reigning beauty queen or muse. <i>v</i> [AB156; c1] become, be the consort.

<p><b>kunsuylu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. that makes s.t. unpleasant easier to bear. <i>Bug-at ning trabahúa apan kunsuylu sab ning magswildu tag sayu</i>, The <pb n=1051>work is hard, but one thing that makes it easier to bear is that we are paid early. <b>2</b> improvement, a happy sign in s.t. that had been distressing. <i>Sukad siya madapati sa tambal, may kunsuylu na ang íyang pangláwas</i>, Since she has been taking that medicine, there has been an improvement in her health. <b>3</b> situation that provokes enjoyment, fun. <i>Wà tay kunsuylu áning tindahánang magpalit kay púlus magmug-ut ang mga tindíra</i>, We get no pleasure in buying in that store because the salesgirls are all unfriendly. <b>4</b> advantageous. <i>Kunsuylu ning may awtu kay dílì lisud sa pagpaúlì</i>, It is an advantage to have a car because it is no problem to get home. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; a] give consolation, make s.t. easier to bear. <i>Bísag sulat makakunsuylu na kaáyu sa kamíngaw ku kanímu</i>, A letter from you would be enough to console me in my loneliness for you. <i>Pabakasyuna siya pára ikunsuylu sa íyang kapakyásan sa burd</i>, Give him a vacation to give him solace and comfort after his frustration in the board exams. <b>2</b> [B; b6] for a situation to provoke excitement, delight. <i>Mukunsuylu ang dúwà ug payitpáyit ang tím</i>, A game gets more fun if the teams are equally good. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] give consolation. <i>n</i> s.t. which can give consolation.

<p><b>kuntadur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> meter. <i>Ngánu gung dus písus nga písus ra man ang náa sa kuntadur?</i> Why two pesos, when the meter reads only one peso? <b>&mdash; sa túbig</b> water meter. <b>2</b> scorer, scorekeeper. <i>v</i> [A1; ac1] have a meter.

<p><b>kuntak</b> <i>n</i> contact, connection in an organization or high places. <i>Basta nigusyanti daghang kuntak</i>, A businessman has to have lots of contacts. <i>v</i> [A; a] contact, get in touch with. <i>Kun makigkuntak ka níya, tawga lang sa tilipunu</i>, If you want to get in contact with her, just call her on the telephone. <i>Inig-abut sa mayur, kuntáka dáyun ku</i>, As soon as the mayor arrives, contact me immediately.

<p><b>kunt&acaron;r</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> keep score, count a score. <i>Tulu ka táwu ang mukunt&acaron;r (magkunt&acaron;r) sa buksing: ang ripiri ug ang duha ka huwis</i>, In a boxing three persons keep the score: the referee and the two judges. <i>Dílì tu níya kuntarun (ikunt&acaron;r) kay páwul man</i>, He won't count that shot because they had called a foul. <i>Ikunt&acaron;r (kuntara) sa papil ang matag puntus níla</i>, Mark a score for each point they make on a piece of paper. <b>2</b> shout out the score. <i>Ikunt&acaron;r (kuntara) ang matag puntus</i>, Shout out the score every time s.o. makes a point.

<pb n=1052>

<p><b>kuntidyus</b> <i>n</i> contagious ward in a hospital.

<p><b>kuntimpuraryu</b> <i>n</i> contemporary, one living in the same era as another or being in a certain association at the same time. <i>Kuntimpuraryu si Aginaldu ni Risal</i>, Aguinaldo was a contemporary of <corr sic="Rizal's">Rizal</corr>. <i>Kuntimpuraryu ku siya sa hayiskul</i>, We were in high school at about the same time. <i>v</i> [C13] be contemporaries.

<p><b>kuntindir</b> <i>n</i> contender for a title in fight. <i>v</i> [B126] be a contender.

<p><b>kuntininti</b> <i>n</i> continent.

<p><b>kuntintu</b> <i>a</i> satisfied, contented. <i>Dì ku kuntintu sa ákung swildu</i>, I'm not satisfied with my salary. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become satisfied. Wà ku makuntintu adtung kaúna, I wasn't satisfied with that meal. <b>kakuntintuhun</b> <i>n</i> state of reaching contentment. <i>Dúnay mga babáyi nga way kakuntintuhun</i>, There are women that are impossible to satisfy (sexually).

<p><b>kuntis</b> <i>n</i> a contest, competition. <i>Kuntis sa áwit</i>, Singing contest. <i>v</i> [AC; ab] have a contest. <i>Kuntísun nátù kun kinsa giyuy maáyung láki</i>, We must have a contest to determine who is really the best. <i>Ispíling ang ílang gikuntísan</i>, They will have a spelling bee.

<p><b>kuntra</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> s.t. contrary to one's liking. <i>Kuntra ku giyud nang táwung palahúbug</i>, I very much dislike people who drink too much. <b>1a</b> <bx>&mdash; sa dugù</bx> s.t. that is regarded with aversion. <i>Kuntra sa ákung dugù ang mga maut</i>, I loathe people who are hypocrites. <b>1b</b> <bx>&mdash; gustu</bx> done against one's will. <i>Kuntra gustu siyang mitúman</i>, She complied against her will. <b>1c</b> <bx>&mdash; hitsu</bx> for a body or s.t. manufactured to be unproportional in build or structure. <i>Kuntra hitsu kaáyu siya kay tambuk unyà gagmayg bitíis</i>, She is out of proportion because she is fat but her legs are small. <b>1d</b> <bx>&mdash; kumpas</bx> out of time, not in rhythm. <b>1e1</b> <bx>&mdash; partídu</bx> political opponent. <i>Magsúun nga kuntra partídu sa pulitika apan dílì sa lamísa</i>, Brothers and sisters may be opponents in politics but not in their relationships with each other. <b>1e2</b> people who are always opposed to everything. <i>Mga kuntra partídu kaáyu nang mga tawhána sa tanan tang buhátun, dì maáyung iuban sa punduk</i>, Those people are always opposed to everything we do. Let's not include them in our group. <i>v</i> [B23(1)6C] be, become political opponents or always oppose s.o. else's views or stand. <b>1f</b> <bx>&mdash; tyimpu</bx> an impediment to a course of action to be done in the future. <i>Ug way kuntra tyimpu, karung Duminggu mag-ayskrim ta</i>, If nothing gets in <pb n=1053>the way, we can have ice cream on Sunday. <b>2a</b> causing unpleasant bodily reaction to s.o. <i>Kuntra sa húbak ang pasáyan</i>, Shrimps are bad for asthma. <b>2b</b> remedy for s.t. bad. <i>Kuntra sa húbak kining tablítas</i>, These tablets are good for asthma. <b>2b1</b> <bx>&mdash; sa ampay</bx> love s.t. very much (humorous&mdash;lit. it's a remedy for my craving). <i>Mukáun ug inasal? Kuntra nà sa ákung ampay!</i> Do I like roast pig? No, I love it! <b>3</b> <bx>&mdash; sa</bx> opposed to, rather than. <i>Maáyu na lang ning makalilímus kuntra nímu nga kawatan</i>, It's better to be a beggar than to be like you, a thief. <i>Mas maáyu ang bínu kuntra sa túbà</i>, Wine is much better than palm toddy. <i>Maíbug kahà ku níya kuntra nímu?</i> Would I be attracted to him more than to you? <b>4</b> <bx>&mdash; ug</bx> [such-and-such] an amount bet against [so-and-so] much. <i>Ímung pusta singku kuntrag kwatru</i>, I bet him five to four. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> enemy or opponent. <i>Kuntra sa Inglatíra ang Alimanya</i>, Germany was Britain's enemy. <i>Kuntra si Ilurdi ni Usáka</i>, Osaka was Elorde's opponent. <b>2</b> in folk belief, s.t. used to drive away evil spirits, usually hidden in one's clothing. <b>3</b> s.t. used to reinforce s.t. which is placed at the other side of it. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ab2] be, become hostile to each other. <i>Dì ku mukuntra ug parinti</i>, I won't act hostilely toward my relatives. <i>Nagkakuntra ang managsúun tungud sa kabílin</i>, The brothers became enemies on account of the inheritance. <i>Nakuntrahan (gikuntra) ang íyang trátu sa ginikánan</i>, Her parents took a dislike to her suitor. <b>2</b> [A2C; ac3] oppose s.o. in a contest, politics, and the like. <i>Dílì siya mukuntra ug dakù níya</i>, He won't play against anyone bigger than he is. <i>Kuntráhun nímu sila sa pagkamayur nga paryinti man?</i> Are you going to oppose them in the mayoralty contest when they are your relatives? <i>Ikaw mauy ikuntra námù níya</i>, We will pit you against him. <b>3</b> [c6] use as a remedy. <i>Kining tablítas ikakuntra sa tulug</i>, These tablets are good to take to keep you awake. <b>4</b> [c] be [so-and-so] much against [such-and-such] an amount. <i>Sigurádu man kahà ka, kuntráhan ta nang diyis mug singku</i>, If you're so sure, I'll bet five pesos against your ten. <b>5</b> [A12] wear s.t. sewn in the clothing to drive away evil spirits. <b>6</b> [c] put a reinforcement behind s.t. <i>Kuntráhi (kuntrahi) nang gitaúras batúnis arun dílì magísì</i>, Put a reinforcement behind where you sew on the <corr sic=botton>button</corr> so it won't rip. <b>6a</b> <xref>= <sc>BALINSIYÁNA</sc>, <i>v</i> <b>2.</b></xref> <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> a seam sewn with the <ix>balinsiyána</ix> stitch. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. worn as protection against s.t.[+]

<pb n=1054>

<p><b>kuntrabandu</b> <i>n</i> contraband. <i>v</i> [B1256] be classified as contraband. <i>Makuntrabandu giyud ang butang nga dílì ipaági sa ku</i>stum, Smuggled goods that don't pass the Customs can be called contraband. <b>kuntrabandista</b> <i>n</i> smuggler, one who deals in contraband goods. <i>v</i> [B156] be a smuggler.

<p><b>kuntrabída</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a villain in a drama or story. <b>2</b> one who acts like a villain, spoiling or opposing s.t. good. <i>Kuntrabída kaáyu nà si Máma uy, dì ku patambúngun sa parti</i>, Mother is a killjoy, she won't let me attend the party. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] be, become the villain in a drama.

<p><b>kuntra gustu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>GUSTU</sc>.

<p><b>kuntraktur</b> <i>n</i> contractor for the construction of s.t. <i>v</i> [B156; b6] be, become a contractor. <i>Pruyiktu sa gubiyirnu nga ákung gikuntraktúran</i>, Government projects for which I was the contractor.

<p><b>kuntraryu</b> <i>a</i> being enemies. <i>Kuntraryu mi kaáyu kay wà siyay batásan</i>, We're enemies because he has no manners. <i>v</i> [C1] be enemies with each other.

<p><b>kuntrasinyas</b> <i>n</i> password or secret signal. <i>Ug muhíngus ku, kuntrasinyas nà nga wíting ku</i>, If I sniffle, it's a sign that I'm about to go rummy. <i>Unsay kuntrasinyas sa pagsúd sa kampu?</i> What is the password to enter the camp? <i>Dúnay kuntrasinyas ang balúta arun hibaw-an nga mibutar ka nákù</i>, There's a secret mark on the ballot so we know you voted for me. <i>v</i> [A3; c6] give a word or secret signal.

<p><b>kuntráta, kuntrátu</b> <i>n</i> written contract or verbal agreement. <i>Pilay kuntrátu sa matadíru íning ímung bábuy?</i> What price have you agreed upon with the butcher for your pig? <i>v</i> [ANC2; c] make a contract or verbal bargain. <i>Nagkuntrátu kug sakyanan pára sa átung ikskursiyun</i>, I have already made an agreement for our transportation on the excursion. <b>kuntratádu</b> <i>a</i> bound with a contract or oral agreement. <i>Kuntratádu na ning babúya</i>, This pig has already been spoken for. <b>kuntratista</b> <i>n</i> one who buys and sells things or services on a professional basis, contracting for the things bought or services rendered. <i>Kuntratista sa bábuy</i>, One who buys and sells pigs. <i>Kuntratista sa hákut</i>, One who contracts to haul things. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a contractor of this sort.

<p><b>kuntribusiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> financial contribution. <b>2</b> tax on real property. <i>v</i> [A1; c] give a contribution or pay a real property tax.

<p><b>kuntringkanti</b> <i>n</i> opponents in a political election. <i>v</i> [C; ac3] be opponents for electoral <pb n=1055>office. <i>Dì sila maáyung kuntringkantíhun kay manag-ágaw sila</i>, They should not be made to oppose each other because they are cousins. <i>Bag-ángang pulitiku ang ákung gikakuntringkanti</i>, The man I fought against was a seasoned politician.

<p><b>*kuntrisiyun</b> <b>aktu sa &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> Act of Contrition.

<p><b>kuntr&ucaron;l</b> <i>n</i> control over s.o.'s actions, discipline. <i>Ang mayur way kuntr&ucaron;l sa kapulisan</i>, The mayor has no control over his police force. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] control oneself or the actions of s.t. else. <i>Nagkuntr&ucaron;l lang giyud ku nga dì makapangísug</i>, I did my best to control my temper. <i>Wà na ku makakuntr&ucaron;l sa manubíla</i>, I couldn't control the wheel any longer. <b>2</b> [C2] exercise birth control. <i>Wà mi magkuntr&ucaron;l, maung daghan mig anak</i>, We didn't practice birth control so we had lots of children.

<p><b>kuntrular</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] control s.t. <i>Kuntrulaha ang inyung mga bátà</i>, Control your children. <i>Gikuntrular sa mga Huk ang Sintral Lusun</i>, The Huks control Central Luzon. <i>Ang pamaligyag bugas gikuntrular sa mga Insik</i>, The rice trade is controlled by the Chinese. <b>kuntruládu, kuntruláwu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> in the control of. <i>Ang Kunggrísu kuntruládu sa Nasyunalista</i>, The Congress is in the control of the Nacionalista Party. <b>2</b> under control, subdued. <i>Kuntruládu na ang mga prísu nga nagráyut</i>, The prisoners that rioted are now under control. <i>3</i> done with control. <i>Kuntruládu ang íyang paghapak sa búla maung nasúd ni sa lungag</i>, He drives the golf ball with control. That's why it goes into the hole.

<p><b>kuntud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB; b2c1] decrease in amount or quantity. <i>Mukuntud (makuntud) ang tubà sa tinghangin</i>, The coconut palm toddy yields less when it is windy. <i>Dì siya makakuntud sa íyang pagkáun</i>, She can't cut down on her food intake.

<p><b>kuntud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the surface of a piece of land to be uneven. <i>Ayúha pagpátag kay kuntud pa kanang dapíta dihà</i>, Level that part carefully. It is still bulging there. <i>v</i> [B; c12] be, become uneven. <i>Ipapátag sa buldúsir kanang dápit nga nagkuntud</i>, Have the bulldozer level that part where it is bulging.

<p><b>kuntúdu</b> <i>a</i> elaborate, having all the trimmings. <i>Kuntúdu siyang mamisti</i>, She is dressed elaborately. <i>Ang kuntúdu nga kumbira dakug gastu</i>, An elaborate feast will incur great expense. <b>&mdash; ubligasiyun</b> <i>n</i> job involving all chores there are to be done. <i>Ang ímung trabáhu dinhi kuntúdu ubligasiyun. Ímu ang tanang líhuk</i>, Your work here includes anything there is to do. You must do <pb n=1056>everything. <i>v</i> [A1] go about in grand style. <i>Kláru na lang nga makakuntúdu si Imilda kay milyunarya man</i>, Of course Imelda can live in style because she is so rich.

<p><b>kunu</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>nu</bx> <b>1</b> it is @said, s.o. said. <i>Namatay kunu ag pilútu</i>, They say the pilot died. <b>2</b> <ix>with imperatives</ix>: particle used to person with whom one is familiar implying that he is not under obligation to obey it&mdash;i.e., is not a person one has a right to command: &lsquo;please, do me a favor and ...&rsquo; <i>Itúnul kunu nang libru</i>, Do me a favor and hand me the book. <b>2a</b> <ix>followed or preceded by verb</ix>: do [so-and-so] as a trial. <i>Ikuniktar kunu nátù ring alambri, tingáli ug muandar na ang makina</i>, Try connecting this wire. Perhaps the engine will start. <b>3</b> in conditions: on the chance that. <i>Madúgay pa ba nu ku dinhi kay muanhi siya</i>, If I stay here long, he will come. <i>Ákung gihípus kay básin kunu magámit unyà</i>, I kept it on the chance that we might be able to use it later. <b>kunhun</b> take s.o. to be ignorant of s.t. <i>Akuy kunhun nímu nga kadúgay na nákù niíni</i>, You take me for ignorant when I've been at this for such a long time. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] show one is uncertain of s.t. by saying <i>kunu</i>. <i>Di[**Dì] kaáyu siya sigúru kay nangunu</i>, He's not that certain because he said &lsquo;they said&rsquo;. <b>kunúhay</b> <b>1</b> allegedly, they say, but I'm not sure whether or not it is true. <i>Pipila ka mga pulitiku nga nagsabutsábut kunúhay tu</i>, A few politicians who were allegedly making agreements under the table. <b>2</b> do s.t. to make a show of being a certain thing. <i>Arun pagrispitar nanghúnung kunúhay mi ug paghungit</i>, In order to show respect we made a pretense of stopping eating for the moment. <i>Nagpakítà siya sa íya kunúhay nga pagkamanggihunàhunáun</i>, He is displaying his supposed thoughtfulness. <i>Ayaw ug katáwa kay nangísug kunúhay ka</i>, Don't laugh. You're supposed to be angry. <b>1a</b> be supposedly. <i>Ísug kunúhay ka&mdash;dì ka muhílak ug sugsúgun</i>, You're supposed to be brave. You shouldn't cry if they tease you. <b>2</b> particle giving an excuse for doing s.t. in preparation. <i>Namalit kunúhay mi sa dì pa musáka ang bili</i>, We are buying food before the prices go up. <b>3</b> particle belittling s.o.'s accomplishments. <i>Prisidinti kunúhay kanà siya sa kapunúngan</i>, He's the so-called president of their organization. <b>3a</b> particle of modesty detracting from one's own or one's family's accomplishments. <i>Magsusúlat kunúhay kining ákung bána, ug kini mauy bugtung níyang pangítà</i>, My husband is a writer, you know, and that's how he earns <pb n=1057>his livelihood.

<p><b>kúnu</b> <i>n</i> large rice mill or the building which houses it and serves as a storehouse for the rice to be milled.

<p><b>kunùkunù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] speak haltingly, uncertainly, and in short syllables. <i>Nagkunùkunù siya pagbungat sa íyang hangyù</i>, She made her request in a halting, unsure way. <i>Ayawg kunùkunua (ikunùkunù) ang ímung pagsulti kay maklárung ginirbiyus ka</i>, Don't speak haltingly because everybody will see you're nervous.

<p><b>kunul</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B24] fail to ripen or to grow. <i>Mikunul ang mga lubi nga tinanum nga naatul sa huwaw</i>, Our coconuts didn't grow because they were planted during the dry season. <b>2</b> hardened because of failure to ripen. <i>Mikunul ang ságing kay ahat</i>, The bananas failed to ripen and just hardened because they were picked too soon. <b>2a</b> [B] become hardened, calloused from abuse. <i>Nakunul na lang giyud ang bátà sa pagbinúnal nímu</i>, The child has gotten hardened because you've punished him so much. <b>2b</b> [A23] be stubborn, uninterested in obeying orders. <i>Mukunul na lang nang batáag sugúun. Dílì muirug sa íyang nahimutangan</i>, That child is just stubborn when you tell him to do s.t. He won't move from his place. <b>3</b> [A23] give a dull knock when s.t. hits. <i>Mikunul ang lápuk nga miigù sa sín</i>, The mud went thunk as it hit the galvanized iron sheets. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> hardened from failure to ripen. <b>2</b> hardened. <b>3</b> <bx>&mdash; ug úlu</bx> @stubborn. <b>4</b> for s.t. to lack the hardness needed to give bounce to things that hit it. <i>Ang nipis playwud kunul kaáyu untúlan sa búla</i>, If a ball is hit against thin plywood, it won't bounce well. -un a of a hard, shrivelled-up sort.

<p><b>kúnun</b> = <sc>KULÚNUN.</sc> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÚLUN.</sc>

<p><b>kunup</b> <i>v</i> [B24] disappear suddenly en masse. <i>Mukunup ang tipdas ug mahanginan</i>, A measles rash will disappear if you expose it to the wind. <i>Pag-abut sa prinsipal, mikunup ang mga maistrang nagtábì</i>, When the principal arrived, the teachers just disappeared. <i>Mikunup ang mga duut sa isdà nga gitugaw sa dinamíta</i>, The schools of fish disappeared because of the dynamite fishing.

<p><b>kunuskunus</b> <i>v</i> [A3] make a rustling sound. <i>Mukunuskunus gánì ang papil sa basúra náa giyuy ilagà</i>, If the paper in the trash rustles, there must be a rat. <i>Nagkunuskunus ang dáhun sa hángin</i>, The leaves were rustling in the wind.

<p><b>kunut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wrinkle, fold in s.t. <i>Daghang kunut ang íyang nawung</i>, She has lots of wrinkles in her face. <i>May kunut ang karsúnis</i>, <pb n=1058>The trousers had pleats in them. <b>2</b> anus or female genitalia (humorous allusion). <b>2a</b> <bx>sa ímung &mdash;</bx> expression of disbelief. <i>Diyis písus sa kunut mu, pára usa ka buuk nga gilabhan,</i> What do you mean ten pesos? You only washed a single piece. <i>a</i> having wrinkles, not flat and smooth. <b>bira sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [a4] grow way over a marriageable age (lit. have one's wrinkles pulled&mdash;humorous insult). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ABN; a2] for a piece of cloth or skin to be not flat and smooth, cause it to be so. <i>Mikunut ang tinahian sa sinínà</i>, The dress is sewn with wrinkles at the seams. <i>Nangunut ang nawung paghinunàhúnà</i>, Her face is wrinkled from thinking so much. <i>Nakunut ang papil pagkabasà</i>, The paper got wrinkled when it got wet. <b>2</b> [A; c1] gather pleats or ruffles and sew them into a piece of cloth. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> wrinkled.

<p><b>kúnut</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] pinch s.o. with a finger and the thumb. <i>Kunútun ku nang búgan mu</i>, I'll pinch your groin.

<p><b>kunya</b> <i>n</i> wedge. <i>Bagang kunya ang ipasuk arun mahuut</i>, Insert a thick wedge so it will be tight. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make into a wedge. <b>2</b> [A; b] wedge s.t. into s.t. <i>Kunyáhi ang ubus sa takup arun dì ipálid sa hángin</i>, Place a wedge in the lower part of the shutter so it cannot be blown open by the wind. <b>3</b> [A; b5] get a lock on s.o. so that he cannot move. <i>Kunyáha (kunyáhi) ang ímung kaáway</i>, Hold your opponent in an armlock.

<p><b>kupa, kupà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for the roof to be almost flat, not steeply inclined. <i>Kupa ra ug atup ang ámung balay mau nga nitúlù dáyun</i>, Our house has quite a flat roof, and that's why it developed a leak quickly. <b>2</b> for s.t. flat to be close to the ground. <i>Kupa ang lamísa nímu</i>, The table is too low for you. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1] build a house roof almost flat. <b>2</b> [B; a2] become low, not raised from the ground.

<p><b>kúpa<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> goblet. <b>2</b> goblet design of the Spanish cards. <i>v</i> [A13; c6] use a goblet.

<p><b>kúpa<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>MAKÚPA.</sc>

<p><b>kúpà</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] want to do what s.o. else is doing. <i>Mukúpà nà siya ug makakitag náay mulakaw</i>, She'll insist on going out too when she sees s.o. going out.

<p><b>kúpad<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> toss grains to fowls. <i>Busug na ang mga manuk kay gikuparan na man</i>, The chickens are satisfied because they have been given their feed. <b>2</b> expel s.t. from the mouth. <i>Kinsay nagkúpad áring kindi?</i> Who spat out this candy?

<p><b>kúpad<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KUMPAD.</sc>

<p><b>kupal</b> <i>a</i> for speech to be unintelligible, badly articulated. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for speech to become unintelligible. <i>Nagkakupal na ang sinultihan  <pb n=1059>sa himatyun</i>, The speech of the dying person is becoming unintelligible.

<p><b>kupas</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); b6] for s.t. to lose its aroma from having been left uncovered. <i>Mukupas ang tabákù ug dì pustun</i>, Dried tobacco leaves will lose their flavor if you don't keep them wrapped. a having lost its aroma.

<p><b>kúpas</b> = <sc>KÚPA<sub>1</sub></sc>, 2.

<p><b>kúpat</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); c1] move fast, busily. <i>Wà magkadimáu ang tabì kay nagkúpat ang bàbà</i>, Her speech is incoherent because she talks too fast. <i>Nakúpat silag panlimpiyu kay náay umaábut nga bisíta</i>, They are cleaning as quickly as they can because they are expecting visitors.

<p><b>kúpay</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] play around with in the fingers. <i>Nagkúpay ang bátà sa íyang tái</i>, The baby is playing around with its feces. <i>Ayawg kupáya nang ímung binahugan</i>, Don't put your fingers in your food and play around with it.

<p><b>kupidu</b> <i>n</i> Cupid.

<p><b>kupil</b> <i>a</i> indistinct in pronunciation, not intelligible. <i>Kupil siya ug sinultian kay miági man siya ug daut</i>, He has been unable to talk understandably since he underwent a grave illness. <i>v</i> [B; a12] for one's speech to become impossible to understand. <i>Mukupil ning átung dílà usáhay basta kuyawan ta</i>, We sometimes get tongue-tied when we get frightened. <b>(<-)</b> <i>a</i> speaking rapidly and indistinctly. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] come to speak this way. <b>2</b> [A] talk back in self defense. <i>Ígù lámang siyang naníngud sa walay pagkúpil sa matag higayun nga hisgútan siya sa íyang kumpári</i>, All he could do was stand idly by and listen whenever his friend would talk about him. (He was so ashamed.) <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> allow oneself to be left behind, outclassed or outdone. <i>Aku pay sapían dì giyud ku magpakúpil sa mga urug sa panaput</i>, If I were rich, I would never allow myself to get left behind by the fashions. <b>2</b> let s.t. go by without answering back. <i>Ang asáwa wà magpakúpil sa íyang bána</i>, The wife wouldn't let the husband get the last word in.

<p><b>kupirar</b> = <sc>KUUPIRAR.</sc>

<p><b>kupit</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b] extort petty amounts. <i>Ang dispatsir mangupit ug diyis sintábus sa draybir káda byáhi</i>, The dispatcher extorts ten cents out of the driver each trip.

<p><b>kupíta</b> <i>n</i> a small goblet.

<p><b>kupitinsiya</b> = <sc>KUMPITINSIYA.</sc>

<p><b>kupkup</b> <i>a</i> for hair to be lying down flat close to the scalp. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] for hair to become flat on the head. <i>Mukupkup ang buhuk basta lutúun pagkulung</i>, The hair will become so kinky it sticks to the head if you wave it <pb n=1060>with too much heat or too many chemicals. <b>2</b> [A; b6] stick close to s.t. for protection. <i>Mikupkup ang mga pisù sa himungáan</i>, The chicks kept close to the mother hen.

<p><b>kupras</b> <i>n</i> copra, dried coconut meat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] make, get copra. <i>Magkupras mig ipatimbang</i>, We will make copra to sell by the kilo. <i>Kuprásun ang kalubihan káda trimistri</i>, The coconut plantation is harvested (made to copra) every four months. <b>2</b> [AN; a12] get money from a candidate and then fail to vote for him. <i>Gikupras lang diay ang salapì sa kandidátu kay napildi man</i>, The people must have pocketed the money and not voted for him because he lost.

<p><b>kupù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] lower the head, cower. <i>Nikupù sa suuk ang irù nga gibunálan</i>, The dog was beaten and cowered into the corner. <i>Kupù arun dì ka makit-an, maigù</i>, Crouch down so they won't see you, hit you.

<p><b>kúpù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KALÚPÙ</sc>. <b>2</b> [A; c16] fold the arms across the breast. <i>Ang bátà nga nag-ampù, nagkúpù sa íyang mga buktun</i>, The child is folding his arms across his breast as he prays. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <xref>= <sc>KALÚPÙ</sc>, <i>n</i></xref>.

<p><b>kúpug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a1] crumble s.t., break into tiny pieces. <i>Kupúgun nátù ning báhawng pán</i>, Let's crumble this stale bread. <b>2</b> [B] crumble into ruins. Nakúpug ang túri sa kadugayun, The tower crumbled as the years passed.

<p><b>kúpug<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KULÚPUG.</sc>

<p><b>kupukúpu</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b(1)] quiver and flutter noisily, twitch, thrash around. <i>Mikupukúpu ang manuk sa abug</i>, The chicken shook the dust off. <i>Dì siya kamaung mulanguy maung nagkupukúpu sa túbig</i>, He can't swim. That's why he just thrashed around in the water. <i>Wà makakupukúpu ang táwung naantimánu pagkapusil</i>, The man suffered a direct hit and didn't even have time to twitch before he died.

<p><b>kupun, kúpun</b> <i>n</i> coupon, blank form in an advertisement filled out to order goods or which can be used to redeem a prize.

<p><b>kupun bán</b> <i>n</i> coupon bond, a k.o. typewriter paper.

<p><b>kupungkupung, kupungkúpung</b> <i>n</i> thick and dense plant or a cluster of plants. <i>Mitágù siya sa kupungkupung</i>, He hid in the thickets. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] for plants to grow thick and dense. <i>Pul-úngi ang búwak arun mukupungkúpung</i>, Prune the flowers so they grow thick and lush. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> thicket, area covered with dense growths.

<p><b>kúpus</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> squeeze to extract the juice from s.t. <i>Kupúsa ang kinagud lubi</i>, <pb n=1061>Squeeze the juice out of the shredded coconut meat. <b>1a</b> squeeze s.t. together with s.t. to change the flavor. <i>Kupúsig súkà ang kinílaw</i>, Squeeze the raw fish together with vinegar. <b>2</b> = <sc>KUPUS</sc>. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> shrunken, shriveled after the juice has been extracted. <i>Kupus na ákung hubag</i>, My boil has dried up now. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB2] shrivel, shrink, usually because liquid has been removed, but by extension, because of disease; cause it to do so. <i>Mikupus ang karning gibulad</i>, The meat shrunk as it was dried in the sun. <i>Magkupus tag tambuk</i>, Let's fry fat meat until all of the lard comes out. <i>Nagkakupus ang láwas sa tisísun</i>, The tubercular's body is shriveling up. <b>2</b> [B] shrink away in fear, from cold. <i>Mukupus nag ímung suklan</i>, He'll shrink away if you stand up to him. <i>Mikupus siya sa katugnaw</i>, He shrunk his body into a small ball because of the cold. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> pulp left after extract has been removed. <b>kinupsan, pinakupsan</b> <i>n</i> fat meat fried until all of the lard is removed and nothing but a crunchy mass remains.

<p><b>kuput</b> = <sc>KUBUT</sc>.

<p><b>kúput</b> <i>a</i> characterized by intense activity or movement. <i>Kúput kaáyu tu sila sa ílang priparasiyun sa pista</i>, They were bustling about in preparation for the fiesta. <i>Dalì rang mahuman ang trabáhu kay kúput man ang tanan</i>, The work will get done in no time because everybody is working hard. <i>n</i> intense movement. <i>v</i> [B46; b(1)] characterized by intensely active movement. <i>Nagkúput man lang ning lamuk dinhi sa inyu</i>, This place is buzzing with mosquitoes.

<p><b>kupuy</b> <i>a</i> timid, shy, shrinking back. <i>Kupuy siyang pagkalaláki, mahadluk ug babáyi</i>, He is a shy person. He is afraid of women. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become timid or shy. <i>Mikupuy siyang gihagítan, gikasab-an sa asáwa</i>, He just shrunk back when he was threatened, when his wife cussed him out.

<p><b>kupya</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] copy, imitate, make a copy of s.t. <i>Kupyáhun ku nang ímung disáyin</i>, I'll copy your design. <i>Unsa mang ritratúha ang gikupyáhan?</i> For which picture did you have copies made? <b>2</b> [AN; a] copy in an exam. <i>Nangupya siya. Maung nakapasar</i>, He copied. That's why he passed. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> copy. <i>Sitinta sintábus na ang kupya sa Bisayà</i>, The Bisaya costs seventy cents a copy now. <b>2</b> print of a photo. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] have a photograph reproduced. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a copyist, one who makes written copies. <i>Náay kupyadur sa ámung upisína kusug kaáyung mumakinilya</i>, There's a copyist in our office who types very fast. <b>2</b> one who imitates,  <pb n=1062>copycat. <b>3</b> one who copies in exams. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a copyist. <b>-mus</b> <i>a</i> a cheat in exams (colloquial). <i>Gibantayan pag-áyu sa maistra si Ális kay kupyámus kaáyu</i>, The teacher watched Alice closely because she is known to copy.

<p><b>kupyur</b> <i>n</i> coiffure, hairdo. <i>v</i> [A; a] give s.o. a hairdo. <i>Kupyúri kunu kug paríhas kang Imilda</i>, Do my hair up like Imelda's.

<p><b>kura, kúra<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2] for the heart to pound or beat rapidly due to fear. <i>Mikúra (mikura) ang ákung dughan pagkadungug nákù sa balità</i>, My heart beat with intense fear when I heard the news. <b>kurakura</b> = <sc>KURA</sc>.

<p><b>kúra<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> parish priest. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a parish priest. <b>&mdash; parúku</b> = <sc>KÚRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kurà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the money which circulated during the Japanese occupation. <b>2</b> Japanese.

<p><b>kuradang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name of a k.o. folk dance with lively movements. <b>2</b> general name for dancing. <b>3</b> insulting term of address to a woman named Dádang. <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> dance the kuradang or with lively movements. <b>2</b> go to a dance. <b>&mdash; kun danggit</b> nonsense words used to fill out the lines in a rhyme. <i>Kuradang kun danggit, Kumusta ang inun-únan, Mudúul lag muduslit, Dáyung dalágan</i>, <ix>Kuradang</ix> or <ix>danggit</ix> (k.o. fish), How is it stewed in vinegar? He only comes near me if he wants sex, and then, when he's done, he leaves me.

<p><b>kurag</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to be fast. <i>Túa na sang kurag, mau pa gánì pag-abut gíkan sa sini, mangnayitklab na pud</i>, There goes that fast woman again. She just got home from the movies. Now she's going to the night club. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be fast. <i>Nakurag na dà, sukad nakapuyù ug syudad</i>, She's gotten to be a fast gal since she went to live in the city. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>KURAG</sc>.

<p><b>kurakul</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> snail. <b>1a</b> k.o. olive shell of the sea. <b>2</b> woman of easy virtue, easy to get. <i>v</i> [B16N; c1] for a woman to engage in promiscuous and ready sex. <i>Nagkurakul siya kay bigáun</i>, She is over-sexed so she goes about engaging in promiscuous affairs. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] go after loose women.

<p><b>kural</b> <i>n</i> fence, enclosure. <i>v</i> [A; b5] fence s.t. in. <i>Kinsay nagkural ug tunukung alambri sa misítas?</i> Who put barbed wire around the plants? <i>Kuralun (kurawun, kuralan) ku ning ákung lúti</i>, I will fence my lot in. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fenced. <b>2</b> dance held in a street and enclosed with an improvised fence: considered a dance for the hoi polloi and not for the rich and sophisticated. <i>Dì ku mubaylig kinural uy</i>, You won't catch me dancing in a street dance!

<pb n=1063>

<p><b>kuralun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. synthetic fiber.

<p><b>kurambus</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ac] pool funds in a bet or, by extension, for some other common purpose. <i>Kurambúsun nátù ning átung kwarta ipalit ug sista</i>, Let's pool our funds to buy a guitar. <i>Tagpíla may átung ikurambus áning pustáha?</i> How much do we chip in in this bet?

<p><b>kurambúsà</b> <i>n</i> chicken with feathers which curve outwards instead of lying flat.

<p><b>kurang</b> <i>n</i> lesbian (derogatory). <i>v</i> [C; c1] for females to have homosexual relations. <i>Gikurang ni Hinya si Tasing</i>, Genia made Tasing her lover.

<p><b>kurangut</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> rough, rugged in surface. <i>Kurangut ug pánit</i>, Rough-skinned. <b>2</b> ugly-faced. <i>Ug kurangut tag dagway bawiun tas batásan</i>, If you have an ugly face, compensate for it with a pleasant disposition. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> become craggy of surface. <i>Mukurangut (makurangut) ang ibabaw sa lamísag hiwáan</i>, The surface of the table will become rough if you use it to slice things on. <b>2</b> become ugly in face.

<p><b>kurapkurap</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B146] for lights to flicker. <i>Nagkurapkurap ang lamparilya nga wà nay gás</i>, The kerosene lamp is flickering because the kerosene is almost gone. <b>2</b> [A13P] grope in the dark. <i>Nagkurapkurap mi sa kangitngit</i>, We were groping in the dark. <b>3</b> [B4N] for vision to become blurred. <i>Nagkurapkurap ang mata sa tigúwang</i>, The vision of the old man is blurred.

<p><b>kurapsiyun</b> <i>n</i> corruption in the government or in a corporation. <i>Naghítak ang grap ug kurapsiyun sa subasta sa gubyirnu</i>, Corruption is rife in government bidding.

<p><b>kurasiyun</b> <i>n</i> a medical certification as to the extent of one's wounds used as evidence in court. <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] certify the extent of wounds.

<p><b>kurat</b> <i>v</i> [B126] (usually with <bx>hi-, ha-</bx>) be startled or frightened by s.t. sudden. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] startle or frighten s.o. with sudden surprise. <i>Pakuratan nátù siya lábun nagtalikud</i>, Let's startle him now that his back is turned to us. <i>Gipakuratan ku níla ug parti</i>, They surprised me with a party. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b] be startled with s.t. sudden. <i>Nahikurat siya sa íyang pagkatúlug</i>, She was suddenly awakened from her sleep. <i>Kinsa guy dì hikuratan sa kalit níyang kamatáyun?</i> Who wouldn't be shocked by his sudden death? <b>ka-, kahi-</b> <i>n</i> startling or shocking surprise. <i>Sa dakù níyang kahikurat, nabuhian níya ang butilya</i>, Because of his great shock, he lost his hold on the bottle. <b>-l-an(<-)</b> <i>a</i> nervous, easily startled.

<pb n=1064>

<p><b>kuratsa</b> <i>n</i> curacha, a lively folk dance of the Eastern Visayas or the music thereto. <i>v</i> [A2C; c1] dance the curacha.

<p><b>kuraw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> starvation. <i>Ang tigúlang makililímus namatay sa kuraw</i>, The old beggar died of starvation. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] starve, die or weaken with hunger. <i>Daghang gikuraw sa panahun sa gúbat</i>, Many people died of starvation during the war. <b>-l-an(<-), -l-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> one who cannot stand hunger.

<p><b>kuraw<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KURAL</sc>.

<p><b>kúraw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> stir or agitate to make it smooth and even. <i>Nagkúraw ku sa amirul arun dì matibug-uk</i>, I'm stirring the starch so that it won't form lumps. <i>Kuráwa ang binulad arun mauga ug dalì</i>, Stir the corn around so it will dry quickly. <b>2</b> shuffle mahjong pieces. <b>&mdash; ug kinhasun</b> <i>v</i> [AC] play mahjong (lit. shuffle shells&mdash;colloquial). <i>Walay láing búhat gawas pagkúraw ug kinhasun</i>, They have nothing to do but play mahjong. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to stir. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> sound produced from the shuffling of mahjong pieces.

<p><b>kúray</b> <i>v</i> [B2S46N; a4] shiver with cold or fear. <i>Tualya bi kay nagkuray (nagpanguray, gikuray) na ku sa katugnaw</i>, Give me a towel. I'm shivering with cold.

<p><b>kurayag</b> <i>v</i> [A] move with a wriggling motion. Mukurayag ang kasing nga karagan<i>, An unbalanced top</i> wriggles. <i>Nagkurayag ang mga wayawaya</i>, The mosquito <corr sic=larva>larvae</corr> are wriggling.

<p><b>kuráyus</b> <i>v</i> [B26N; b6] be, become shriveled, wrinkled, withered. <i>Mikuráyus (nanguráyus) pag-áyu ang kusáhus sa hilabihang kaínit</i>, The jerked meat shriveled up very much because it was left in the sun too long. <i>Mikuráyus (nanguráyus) ang luy-a nga dúgay nang gihípus</i>, The ginger got shriveled because it was left lying around too long. <i>Makuráyus ang nawung basta tigúlang na</i>, Your face wrinkles when you get old.

<p><b>kuráyut</b> <i>v</i> [B2SN; b6] get wrinkled and shriveled and thus wither. <i>Ang nagkurayut níyang kaapíngan</i>, Her wrinkled, sunken cheeks. <i>Wà nay lamì nang kamutíha kay nagpangurayut na</i>, That sweet potato is not very good because it is on its way to becoming all shriveled and dried up. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> all shriveled up.

<p><b>kurba</b> <i>n</i> curve. <i>Ang kurba sa karsáda</i>, The curve in the road. <i>Ang kurba sa íyang láwas</i>, The curves of her body. <i>v</i> [AB3; c1] describe a curve; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nagkurba ang linya kay walà ka mugámit ug rúlir</i>, The line is curved because you didn't use a ruler. <i>Kurbáha (ikurba) ang búla pagpits  <pb n=1065>nímu</i>, Pitch the ball in a curve. -da <i>n</i> a curve in a road. <i>Nagkabanggà ang duha ka trák sa may kurbáda</i>, The two buses collided at the bend. <i>v</i> [A; c] for a vehicle to turn sharply. <i>Mikurbáda ug kalit ang trák ug nakulub</i>, The bus swerved suddenly and turned over. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> curved, curving. <i>v</i> [B; c1] become curved; be curving. <i>Nagkurbádu man ning ági sa tahì</i>, The stitches are not sewn in straight. <b>pina-</b> <i>a</i> shaped in a curve; curved. <i>Ang lamísa níya pinakurba</i>, His table is shaped like a curve. <b>kurbáhun</b> <i>a</i> shapely body. <i>Dílì siya maanyag apan kurbáhun siya ug láwas</i>, She isn't beautiful but her body is shapely.

<p><b>kurbáta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> necktie. <b>2</b> k.o. cracker shaped like a bow tie. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b6(1)] wear a necktie. <b>mananggíti nga nag-/mag-</b> be a toddy gatherer that wears a necktie (i.e., prepare artificial coconut palm toddy). <b>&mdash; ang tubà</b> for toddy to be artificial. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a necktie.

<p><b>kurbáwu</b> = <sc>KURBÁDU</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KURBA</sc>.

<p><b>kurbu</b> <i>a</i> convex or concave, shaped round like a bowl. <i>Kurbu ang atup sa kampanaryu</i>, The roof of the bell tower is rounded. <i>v</i> [B; b6(1)] be, become bowl-shaped. <i>Nagkurbu ang sáku sa kapunù</i>, The sack is bulging because it is so full.

<p><b>kurd</b> <i>n</i> cord for electrical appliances.

<p><b>kurdaping</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to male homosexuals in derision. <b>2</b> male homosexual. <i>Ságad sa mga kurdaping mga maáyung mangulung</i>, Most fairies are good at curling people's hair.

<p><b>kurdíru</b> <i>n</i> lamb. <b>&mdash; sa Diyus</b> Lamb of God.

<p><b>kurdis</b> <i>n</i> musical chords.

<p><b>kurdísu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> window sill<corr>.</corr> <i>Mitikang ang kawatan sa kurdísu sa bintánà pagsulud sa balay</i>, The thief stepped over the window sill in going into the house. <b>2</b> horizontal piece in the frame of a building to which vertical boards are nailed, placed at the height of the window sill. <i>Íyang giláray ang mga butilya nga basíyu sa kurdísu sa bungbung</i>, She lined the empty bottles on the sills along the wall. <i>v</i> [A13; a] put up, make into a window sill or a window-height sill.

<p><b>kurdun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>KULDUN.</sc> <b>2</b> cord sewn into embroidery work. <i>v</i> [A; b6] embroider with a cord.

<p><b>kurduruy</b> <i>n</i> corduroy cloth. <i>v</i> [A1] wear s.t. made of corduroy.

<p><b>kúri<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>KURÍDAS</sc>.

<p><b>kúri<sub>2</sub></b> frequently, always. <i>Kúri siyang mamisíta sa ámung dalága</i>, He frequently visits our girl. <i>Kúring abyirtu</i>, Always open. <i>v</i> [A; a12] do s.t. often, always. <i>Gikúri níyag <pb n=1066>sul-ub ang paburítu níyang sinínà</i>, She always wears her favorite dress.

<p><b>kuríbut</b> <i>n</i> paramour, lover. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1NC; c1] for a married man or woman to have a lover or have a married lover. <i>Nakigkuríbut ang asáwa sa higála sa íyang bána</i>, The wife took her husband's friend as her lover. <b>2</b> [A2N] fool around with married men, women or for a married person to fool around.

<p><b>kurídas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> for a number of examples of an item to be bought or otherwise taken at random without selection. <i>Tagsingku písus ang gatus sa tamátis, apan kurídas. Walay pílì</i>, Tomatoes are five pesos a hundred, but you take them at random. You're not allowed to choose. <i>Kurídas ang pagkasulud sa prútas sa baskit</i>, They put the fruits in the basket without sorting them out. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> take a bunch without selecting. <b>2a</b> in billiards, make a carom with all the three balls in straight line but with the cue ball not bouncing off the sides of the billiard table. <b>2b</b> shoot two or more billiards into the pocket with one shot.

<p><b>kurídu</b> <i>n</i> long narrative poem made for oral recitation, but otherwise like the <ix>kumpúsu</ix>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] recite the kurídu. <b>2</b> [c1] make a story into a <ix>kurídu</ix>.

<p><b>kuridur<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> corridor.

<p><b>kuridur<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> dealer of livestock, but not poultry. <i>Gisaáran nga palitun sa kuridur ang ákung báka</i>, The animal dealer promised to buy my cow. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a dealer of livestock. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] buy and sell livestock. <b>-a(<-)</b> <i>n</i> a woman who recruits girls for employment, not usually said of women who recruit for the white slave traffic. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b8] recruit girls for employment, usually prostitution. <b>2</b> [B156] become a white slaver.

<p><b>Kurihidur</b> <i>n</i> Corregidor, an island in Manila Bay.

<p><b>kurihir</b> <i>v</i> [A; b1] correct mistakes. <i>Akuy mikurihir sa inyung tist pípar</i>, I corrected your test papers. <i>Naúlaw siya nga gikurihian atubángan sa kadaghánan</i>, She was embarrassed because she was corrected in public.

<p><b>kurik</b> exclamation of agreement that s.t. is the right thing. <i>Kurik! Dílì giyud siya ángayng pasaylúun</i>, Right! He should not be pardoned. <i>Kurik nang Binisayáa</i>, That's correct Visayan. <b>mau rag (si) &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> as if he were the real one, as if it were the real thing. <i>Naghiraghírag ka bayà sa silya sa manidy&icaron;r, mu rag kurik!</i> You are sitting and leaning back in the manager's chair as if <pb n=1067>you really belonged there! <b>2</b> know it all. <i>Patubagtúbag bisag dì makamau, mu rag si kurik</i>, He knows-it-all, answers all the questions (as if he knew). <i>v</i> = <sc>KURIHIR.</sc> <b>-siyun</b> <i>n</i> correction. <i>v</i> [b1] correct an error. <i>Ayaw kug kuriksiyuni, Don't correct me. Kuriksiyuni ang ákung mga sayup</i>, Correct my mistakes.

<p><b>kurikit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> variety of rice which yields a high quality cereal. The grains are about 1 cm. long, white, smooth in texture and taste comparatively good. <b>2</b> small variety of cooking banana.

<p><b>kurìkurì</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2b2] putter around doing little things, petty chores. <i>Mga kurìkuríung mga búhat ni piru dúgayng mahuman</i>, These are just little odd chores but it'll take a long time to finish them up.

<p><b>kurindu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] push, shove s.t. away that one doesn't want. <i>Ag nawung nga mukurindu sa íyang plátu, mu rag daghag pagkáun sa íla</i>, The nerve of him to shove away his plate as though he had plenty of food at home. <i>Ikurindu ang irug musámuk nímu</i>, Shove the dog away with your foot if it bothers you.

<p><b>kurinti</b> = <sc>KURYINTI</sc>.

<p><b>kuríput</b> <i>a</i> miserly, not liking to spend money. <i>Kuríput kaáyu. Kamúti lay ipaniudtu bisag daghang kwarta</i>, He's terribly cheap. He has nothing but sweet potatoes for lunch even <corr sic=thought>though</corr> he has plenty of money. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become miserly.

<p><b>kuríring</b> = <sc>KULÍLING</sc>.

<p><b>kuriskuris</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] make squiggly or criss-*cross lines on s.t. <i>Gikuriskurisan níya ang ákung drúwing kay nangísug siya nákù</i>, He scratched out my drawing because he was angry at me.

<p><b>kurispundinsiya</b> <i>n</i> correspondence, mail matter.

<p><b>kurispunsal</b> <i>n</i> news correspondent. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a news correspondent.

<p><b>kur-ispunsur</b> <i>n</i> corps sponsor chosen to accompany an ROTC cadet commander in social functions or activities. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] be, become a corps sponsor.

<p><b>kurista</b> <i>n</i> a member of a choir or chorus. <i>v</i> [AB156; c1] make s.o. a choir member; be a choir member.

<p><b>kurit</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] take a small pinch or piece of s.t. by pinching, pinch a small area of s.t. <i>Kurita lag bátà. Ayawg latusa</i>, Just pinch the child. Don't spank him. <i>Kurita kunu ang unud ug húmuk na ba</i>, Try to nip off a piece of the meat and see if it's tender now. <i>Nadáut ang purma sa kík nga gikuritan</i>, The cake is ruined now after you have <pb n=1068>picked a little piece off the sides.

<p><b>kuríya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> belt for the transmission of power or rotation. <i>Kuríya sa makina</i>, The belt on the sewing machine. <b>2</b> cord used to tie around the habit of devotees. <i>Ang nagdibútu sa Birhin sa Karmin nagbakus ug kuríya nga kapi</i>, The devotees to the Virgin of Carmel wear brown belts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; b6] attach a belt for transferring motion. <b>1a</b> [a12] make into such a belt or band. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] wear a cord around the waist with a habit. <b>2a</b> [a12] make into such a cord.

<p><b>kuríyu</b> <i>n</i> mail. <i>v</i> [c6] send through the mails. <b>&mdash; rihistrádu</b> <i>n</i> registered mail.

<p><b>kur kamandir</b> <i>n</i> cadet commander of an ROTC unit in a school. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a corps commander.

<p><b>kurkubádu, kurkubáwu</b> <i>a</i> crooked, having a curve. <i>Ilinya nímu sa papil nang káhuy nga kurkubádu?</i> Are you going to use that crooked stick to line the paper? <i>Kurkubádu siyag bukubuku</i>, She has a crooked back. <i>v</i> [B12P; a] become curved, crooked. <i>n</i> hunchback. <i>Nagminyù siyag kurkubádu</i>, He married a hunchback.

<p><b>kur kumandir</b> = <sc>KUR KAMANDIR</sc>.

<p><b>kurlir</b> <i>n</i> hair curlers. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put hair curlers in the hair.

<p><b>kurmáta</b> = <sc>KARUMÁTA</sc>.

<p><b>kurna<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] tow s.t. that cannot run on its own power. <i>Kurnáhun (ikurna) na lang nang dyíp ngadtu sa talyir</i>, Better have the jeep towed to the repair shop. <b>1a</b> drag s.o. s.w. <i>Nangumprang gikurna ang mga bátà</i>, Shopping dragging the children along. <b>2</b> [AN; a2] find s.o. unexpectedly s.w. and pick him up. <i>Sundálu ang nagkurna sa tulisan ngadtu sa búkid</i>, A soldier found the bandit unexpectedly in the mountains and picked him up. <b>2a</b> meet s.o. with goods of his own production on the way to market and buy them from him. <i>Ug makurna nímu ang kuhà sa mananagat, barátu ra</i>, If you can buy the fish directly from the fisherman, it's cheap. <b>2b</b> pick up a girl in a public place for promiscuous petting. <i>Adtu siya sa barátung sinihan mangurna</i>, He goes to cheap movie houses and picks up s.o. to pet with. <b>2c</b> [A; a12] take a girl around for rides. <i>Gwápa tung ímung gikurna gabíi</i>, The girl you took around last night was pretty. <b>-da</b> <xref>= <sc>KURNA<sub>1</sub></sc>, 1.</xref>

<p><b>kurna<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KURNIR</sc>.

<p><b>kurnáwu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> partners in a small business. <b>2</b> companion. <b>2a</b> side-kick. <i>Dì siya mubulag sa íyang kurnáwu</i>, He won't separate from his side-kick. <i>v</i> [AC; c1] be business partners.  <pb n=1069><i>Kurnawhun (ikurnáwu) kung Pápa sa íyang nigusyu</i>, Father will make me his business partner.

<p><b>kurnil</b> = <sc>KURUNIL</sc>.

<p><b>kurnir<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2b2] <b>1</b> trap s.o. into marriage. <i>Láyas kay makurnir ka sa ginikánan sa ímung gipamabdus</i>, Escape or you'll be forced into marriage by the parents of the girl you made pregnant. <b>2</b> trap a criminal or s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Wà makabalíbad ang amahan sa gipangáyù sa íyang anak kay nakurnir giyud siya</i>, The father couldn't refuse his daughter's request because she trapped him into it. <i>Miampù ang púga dihang gikurnir siya</i>, The escapee surrendered when he was cornered.

<p><b>kurnir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> boxer's corner in the ring.

<p><b>kurnit</b> <i>n</i> skin eruptions at the neck characterized by a copious flow of pus from the eruptions; the knotted, ugly scars which this disease leaves. <i>Dalìdalía pagtambal nang ímung lusay kay arun dílì makurnit</i>, Treat that swelling on your neck immediately before it turns into ugly scars. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having these eruptions or scars therefrom.

<p><b>kurníta</b> = <sc>KURNITIN</sc>.

<p><b>kurnitin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cornet, a brass instrument. <b>2</b> bugle. <i>v</i> [A; c6] play the cornet.

<p><b>kurpinyu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. loose blouse worn under a <ix>kimúna</ix> of the Filipina dress. It is usually ornately decorated because it is seen under the <ix>kimúna</ix>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] wear such a blouse. <b>2</b> [A; c1] make into such a blouse.

<p><b>kurpiyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> curfew. <b>1a</b> the whistle at curfew time. <b>2</b> sexual intercourse (humorous usage). <i>Kapila ang kurpiyu ninyu gabíi?</i> How many times did you have intercourse last night? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; b2] for the curfew to sound. <i>Dakpun ang makurpiyuhan sa karsáda</i>, Anyone caught in the streets when the curfew sounds is subject to arrest. <b>2</b> [AC2; b5] have sexual intercourse.

<p><b>kurpural</b> <i>n</i> corporal in the military or police. <i>v</i> [B156; a2] be, become a corporal, be made a corporal.

<p><b>kurpurasiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> group of people associated for a common purpose. <i>Kurpurasiyun sa mga magyuyútà</i>, Association of landowners. <i>Kanang napalit nga asyinda kurpurasiyun sa mga magsúun</i>, The brothers formed a corporation to buy the plantation. <b>2</b> pool of money to be spent for a common good. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156] organize oneself into an association. <b>2</b> [C2; c1] pool money to spend for the benefit of everybody. <i>Mag-ínum ta piru magkurpurasiyun lang ta kay singkwinta rang ákù diri</i>, Let's have a drinking spree, <pb n=1070>but let us pool our money because I only have fifty centavos.

<p><b>Kurpus Kristi</b> <i>n</i> Corpus Christi.

<p><b>kursan</b> = <sc>KURUSAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KURUS</sc>.

<p><b>kurs&icaron;</b> <i>n</i> corset. <i>v</i> [A1; b] wear a corset.

<p><b>kursikan</b> <i>n</i> polo shirt (from the brand name Corsican). <i>v</i> [A1] wear a polo shirt.

<p><b>kursilyu</b> <i>n</i> an association of lay people who go on a three-day retreat to renew their faith. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] go on the <ix>kursilyu</ix> retreat. <b>kursilyista</b> <i>n</i> one who has undergone this retreat. <i>v</i> [B16] become a person who has gone on this retreat. <i>Sukad siyang nakursilyista dakù kaáyu ang íyang pagkabalhin</i>, After he became a cursillista, he has changed a lot.

<p><b>kursit</b> = <sc>KURS&Icaron;.</sc>

<p><b>kursu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)N; b6] be full of guts or courageous in carrying out a difficult course of action. <i>Nagkursu ang inahan sa pagpaiskuyla sa íyang mga anak</i>, The mother moved heaven and earth to send her children to school. <i>Usáhay muinum ang ulitáwu arun makursung mudíga sa íyang gipangulitawhan</i>, Sometimes a young man drinks to summon enough courage to speak his love to a lady.

<p><b>kursu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> course of study, major subject. <i>Nakatápus na siya sa kursu sa midisína</i>, He has finished medical school.

<p><b>kursunáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> guts, courage, drive.<i> May kursunáda siya. Dì giyud mahadluk musulay</i>, He has guts. He is not afraid to try. <i>1a</i> unashamed boldness, impudence. <i>May kursunáda giyung tawhána sa pagpangáyù ug umintu sa íyang súhul</i>, That man had the nerve to ask for a raise in salary. <b>2</b> have an interest in doing s.t. <i>Wà kuy kursunádang mubayli níya kay maut</i>, I don't feel like dancing with her because she is stuck up. <b>3</b> a girl one is interested in. <i>Mutambung kug sigúru sa parti kay túa ang ákung kursunáda</i>, I won't fail to attend the party because a girl I am interested in will be there. <i>v</i> [B2N; bN] get an interest, guts enough to do s.t. <i>Mukursunáda (mangursunáda) siyag hákut basta suhúlan</i>, He'll develop an interest in hauling the stuff if you pay him. <i>Nakakursunáda ku human makainum</i>, I became bold after I had a drink. <i>Sapátus nga ákung gipangursunadáhan (gikursunadáhan)</i>, The shoes I was interested in.

<p><b>kurt</b> <i>n</i> court for playing games. <b>balibul &mdash;</b> volleyball court. <b>baskitbul &mdash;</b> basketball court. <b>tínis &mdash;</b> tennis court.

<p><b>kurta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> jackknife. <b>-ng awtumátik</b><corr sic=","></corr> <corr sic=Switch>switch</corr> blade. <b>&mdash; diabaníku</b> k.o. jackknife with a single blade which is covered by two pieces <pb n=1071>which pull apart and fold back to form the handle. <b>&mdash; plúma</b> penknife. <i>v</i> [a12] use, stab with a knife. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> in logging: <b>1</b> an apparatus which slices planks or sawn timber into smaller sizes. <b>2</b> the operator of such a machine.

<p><b>kurta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for eggs or milk to be spoiled, usually from exposure to sun. <b>2</b> for the brain to be addled. <b>3</b> for menstruation to stop or hardly flow. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] <b>1</b> for eggs or milk to get spoiled. <i>Mukurta ang gátas (itlug) ug dílì hipúsun sa pridyidir</i>, Milk (eggs) spoil if you don't keep them in the refrigerator. <b>2</b> for the mind to be addled. <i>Mikurta ang íyang útuk sa kahadluk</i>, His brain became addled because of his extreme fright. <b>3</b> [B246; b4] for menstruation to stop suddenly before the proper time. <i>Mukurta ang dugù ug mag-útas ug káun ug aslum</i>, Your menstrual flow will halt if you always eat lots of sour foods. <b>-du</b> = <sc>KURTA<sub>2</sub>.</sc>

<p><b>kurtal</b> <i>n</i> cortal, a patent medicine for pain relief.

<p><b>kurti<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> measure of cloth cut in advance. <i>Tagpíla man ang kurti íning karsunisúna?</i> How much is this pant, material per cut? <b>2</b> shape, type of a face. <i>Nawung nga kurtig katsílà</i>, A face with a Spanish shape. <b>2a</b> style in which s.t. is cut. <i>Nindut ug kurti ang ímung alut</i>, Your hair is cut in a nice style. <i>Wà ku makagustu sa kurti sa íyang bistídu</i>, I don't like the cut of her dress. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] delineate a desired shape or pattern on s.t. to be cut or cut into a certain shape. <i>Akuy kurti sa panaptun ikay tábas</i>, I'll make the pattern on the cloth, you cut it. <i>Kurtíhag kinasingkásing paggabas ang tabla</i>, Saw the wood into the shape of a heart. <i>Kurtíhan ta nang kílay mu</i>, Let's trim your eyebrows. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] cut a deck of cards. <i>Wà pa gániy nakakurti, íya nang gipanghátag ang mga baráha</i>, No one has cut the cards, but he has already dealt. <b>3</b> [A2; b6] join in a pleasurable activity where one is not immediately concerned. <i>Samtang gikasab-an ag míd, mikurti sab ku</i>, While they were cussing out the maid, I also put in my two bits. <i>Gikurtíhan sa mayur ang ílang pag-isturyahánay</i>, The mayor put his two bits into their conversation. <b>3a</b> participate in the giving of punishment, usually physical punishment. <i>Mikurti kug sumbag sa kawatan nga hidakpan</i>, I joined in mauling the thief they caught. <b>3a1</b> [b8] be ganged up on. <i>Hikurtihan siya pag-adtu níyas Pásil</i>, S.o. ganged up on him when he went to Pasil. <b>3b</b> [A; b(1)] acknowledge that s.o. has new wearing apparel or haircut by touching the new thing. <pb n=1072><i>Nakakurti na ku sa bag-ung sapátus ni Buy</i>, I have already acknowledged Boy's new shoes by stepping on them. <i>Kurtíhi si Ramun kay bag-ug tupi</i>, Slap Ramon on the head in acknowledgement of his haircut. <b>4</b> [A; b] use s.t. belonging to s.o. else usually for a brief period of time. <b>4a</b> try doing s.t. <i>Nakakurti na bitaw kug sakays mutur, piru nabanggà ku</i>, I have tried driving a motorcycle, but I crashed. <b>5</b> [A; b] refute s.t. said. <i>Kurtíhan ku nang ímung gisulti</i>, I will refute what you said.

<p><b>kurti<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> court a girl. <b>2</b> have sexual relations (humorous).

<p><b>kurti<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> court for ball games. <b>2</b> law court. <b>&mdash; supríma</b> <i>n</i> Supreme Court. <i>v</i> [a3] for an incident to be brought to court.

<p><b>kurtína</b> <i>n</i> curtain. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b] put up curtains. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a curtain. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] for one's slip to show. <i>Unsa gud, pyista karun sa inyu nga nangurtína ka man?</i> Is it fiesta now (the time people hang up curtains) because your slip is showing (lit. the curtains are up)? <b>kurtinahun</b> <i>n</i> cloth to be sewn into curtains.

<p><b>kurtin rísir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> preliminary boxing bouts before the main events. <b>1a</b> boxer who fights only in preliminary bouts, usually in four rounds. <b>2</b> a short play or skit presented before a longer and more elaborate production. <i>v</i> [B156; c] be, become a curtain raiser. <i>Pirmi ka lang magkurtin rísir, wà giyud mamin-ibintir</i>, You are always used as a curtain raiser. You never fight in a main event. <i>Ang ímung áwit mauy ikurtin rísir sa dílì pa ang banggà</i>, Your song will be made the curtain raiser for the contest.

<p><b>kurtisíya</b> <i>n</i> good manners. <i>Way kurtisíyang tawhána</i>, He's an ill-mannered person.

<p><b>kurtsítis</b> = <sc>KUTSÍTIS</sc>.

<p><b>kurtsu</b> = <sc>KUTSU</sc>.

<p><b>kurtu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> made short, low. <i>Kurtu na kaáyu run ang mga sinínà</i>, Dresses are very short these days. <i>Kurtu ra kaáyu ning lamisáha pára makinilyáhan</i>, This desk is too low to type on. <b>2 &mdash; ug buut</b> short-tempered. <i>Ang táwung way kwarta malagmit nga kurtu kaáyug buut</i>, If a man has no money he is likely to be short-tempered. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] be, become short, low. <i>Putli ang ákung buhuk, piru ayaw lag kurtúha (ikurtu) kaáyu</i>, Cut my hair but don't cut it too short. <b>1a &mdash; sa buut</b> short-tempered. <b>2</b> [A13] wear s.t. short. <i>Kanang nindut ug páa lang ang magkurtu ug sinínà</i>, Only those with pretty legs should wear short dresses.

<p><b>kúru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> choir. <b>1a</b> choir loft. <b>2</b> the refrain of a song following the verse.

<pb n=1073>

<p><b>kúrù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> game played similarly to jackstones but different in that the stone or ball must be caught in the palm before it hits the floor. <b>2</b> <xref>= <sc>BALINSAY</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kúrug</b> <i>v</i> [B2S; ab3(1)] tremble. <i>Mikúrug ang yútà paglínug</i>, The ground shook during the earthquake. <i>Nagkurug ang tíngug sa kalísang</i>, Her voice is trembling with fear. <i>Ayaw kurúga ang lamísa kay mayabu ang sabaw</i>, Don't shake the table or the soup will spill. <i>n</i> vibration, shaking. <i>Ang kúrug sa makina</i>, The vibration of the machine. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> trembling, quivering. <i>Dì na siya hingígù kay kurug na ang íyang kamut</i>, He is no longer a sharp-shooter because his hands have become unsteady. <i>v</i> [B12] become shaky, quivering. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b3] for a person to tremble. <i>Nagpangurug ku paghúbit sa dugúung kaági</i>, I trembled as I recounted the bloody event. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> shaky, trembly.

<p><b>kurúhay</b> = <sc>KURUTSAY</sc>.

<p><b>kúruk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] call a chicken to come by saying krrrk-krrrk, rolling the r's in a high-pitched voice. <b>2</b> [A] for a chicken to go krrrk-krrrk. <i>Mikúruk ang sunuy sa dihang gihapyudhapyud</i>, The rooster went krrrk-krrrk when I patted him. <i>n</i> the krrrk-krrrk sound produced by chickens.

<p><b>kurukignul</b> = <sc>KRUKIGNUL</sc>.

<p><b>kurukunghu</b> <i>a</i> being a simpleton and slightly crazy. <i>Lisud pasabtun ning mga táwu nga kurukunghu</i>, It's very difficult to get simpletons to understand. <i>Naghúbù sa kadaghánan ang kurukunghu</i>, The simpleton is getting undressed in public. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become silly, witless, a simpleton.

<p><b>kurukuntung</b> <i>a</i> eccentric in behavior, doing things deemed unusual if not improper. <i>Kurukuntung siya kay nagswitir ug ting-init</i>, He is eccentric because he wears a sweater during hot weather. <i>v</i> [B125; b6] be, become eccentric.

<p><b>kurukúru</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for cocks to parry and stab on the wing. <i>Lúgus maila unsang manúka naigù sa nagkurukúru silang duha</i>, It is hard to tell which rooster was hit while the two were parrying and stabbing at <corr sic="each each">each</corr> other on the wing. <i>Midágan ag íyang sunuy dihang gikurukurúhan sa ákù</i>, His rooster fled when mine parried and stabbed at it on the wing.

<p><b>kurukutuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> sound made by chickens in summoning other chickens. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for a rooster or hen to make a sound like <i>kurukutuk. Mingkurukutuk dáyun ang sunuy pagkakità sa himungáan</i>, The rooster immediately called the hen when he saw her. <i>Gikurukutukan sa himungáan ang íyang <pb n=1074>mga pisù</i>, The mother hen called her chicks.

<p><b>kurukutuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird, the zebra dove: <i><b>Geopelia striata.</i></b>

<p><b>kúrum</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> quorum of a meeting. <b>2</b> have a requisite number of people for a game of cards or other table game. <i>Kúrum na giyud ta, magmadyung na ta dáyun</i>, We've got a quorum, so let's start our mahjong at once. <b>3</b> have an intimate get-together, esp. for drinks (slang). <i>Dúnay kúrum sa ámung balay karung gabíi</i>, We'll have a drinking session in our house tonight. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B13(1)6; b6] form a quorum in a meeting or for a game. <b>2</b> [C; c] have an intimate get-together among friends.

<p><b>kurúna</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> crown of royalty or royalty in a pageant. <b>1a</b> garland put on the head. <b>1b</b> crown as a symbol of supremacy. <i>Maílug kahà ang kurúna sa átung kampiyun?</i> Will anyone wrest the champion's crown from him? <b>2</b> wreath of flowers as an offering for the dead. <b>3</b> priest's tonsure. <b>4</b> tails of a coin. <b>5</b> the curved lower part of the anchor. <i>Ang kurúna sa angkla mauy mag-una pagbungad sa bunbun</i>, The crown of the anchor touches the sand first. <b>6</b> a small side-compartment in the fish corral (<ix>bungsud</ix>) into which the fish which were not caught in the main compartment are driven. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] crown royalty. <i>Ang gubirnadur mauy mikurúna sa hára</i>, The governor crowned the beauty queen. <i>Si Kristu gikurunáhan ug tunuk</i>, Jesus Christ was crowned with thorns. <b>1a</b> [a12] make into a crown or wreath. <b>2</b> [A; b6] put a wreath on a grave or coffin. <b>3</b> [b(1)] tonsure a priest. <i>Gikurunáhan na ag manghud kung siminarista</i>, My brother in the seminary has already been given his tonsure. <b>4</b> [B256; a2] for tails to come up in coin tossing. <i>Mukurúna (makurúna) gánì ni, ikaw na say antug</i>, If this comes out tails, you take a turn in tossing. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] for the baby to crown in delivery. <i>Nangurúna na ang úlu sa bátà</i>, The baby has already crowned.

<p><b>kurunasiyun</b> <i>n</i> coronation. <i>v</i> [A13] perform a coronation ceremony.

<p><b>kurung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> chicken cage about 2&ndash;3' high and just as deep and wide, usually set in rows abreast. <i>v</i> [A12; b6] construct or put a chicken cage s.w.

<p><b>kurung<sub>2</sub>, kúrung</b> <i>n</i> veil or any other head covering used by women in church. <i>v</i> [A; b] wear a veil on the head while in church. <i>Salingawhan ku ug dílì ku makakúrung sa simbahan</i>, I feel uneasy if I do not wear a veil in the church.

<p><b>kurungkuntung</b> <i>a</i> somewhat mentally retarded  <pb n=1075>or not able to think. <i>Dílì makatumung sugúun ang táwung kurungkuntung</i>, A person who is somewhat retarded cannot do errands properly. <i>v</i> [B12] lose one's common sense, ability to think reasonably. <i>Nakurungkuntung siya pagkabangkarúta sa íyang nigusyu</i>, After he went bankrupt he began to act unreasonably&mdash;as if his mind were s.w. else.

<p><b>kurunil</b> <i>n</i> colonel in the military or police. <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become a colonel.

<p><b>kurunit</b> <i>n</i> woman's hair style in which the curled hair is formed like a crown around the head.

<p><b>kuruntù</b> <i>a</i> stupid, not knowing what to say. <i>Kuruntung tawhána. Ug pangutan-un, dílì mutubag</i>, He's a stupid man. If you ask him a question, he won't answer.

<p><b>kurupsiyun</b> = <sc>KURAPSIYUN</sc>.

<p><b>kurus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cross, crucifix. <i>Way kurus nga lubung</i>, A grave without a cross. <b>2</b> trouble, problem that tries one's virtue. <i>Ang pagkabisyúsu sa íyang bána mauy kurus nga íyang giantus</i>, Her husband with his vices is a cross she has to bear. <b>&mdash; pa</b> cross my heart and hope to die. <i>Kurus pa, mangasáwa lagi ku nímu</i>, Cross my heart, I'll marry you. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] make the sign of the cross on s.t. <i>Kurusi ang ímung ngábil ug makalimut ka sa ímung isulti</i>, Make the sign of the cross on your lips if you forget what you were going to say. <b>1a</b> make a cross mark. <i>Ngánung ímu mang gikurusan ring ákung tubag nga hustu man?</i> Why did you mark my answer with a cross when it is correct? <b>2</b> [A1P] become s.o.'s cross in life. <i>Ang íyang bána nga himabayi mauy nakakurus (nakapakurus) sa íyang kinabúhì</i>, Her philandering husband was the cross she had to bear in life. <b>3</b> [A; ab5c] cross s.t., bring s.t. across, cross each other's way. <i>Mikurus siya pagdalì sa karsáda</i>, She quickly crossed the street. <i>Tápus sa dúgayng panahun nagkúrus pag-usab ang ílang mga dálan</i>, After many years their paths crossed each other's again. <i>Kurusa (kurusi) nang plása padúng sa simbahan</i>, Cross that plaza on your way to the church. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C; c1] be in a position crossing each other. <i>Magkúrus ta paghigdà arun dílì ku hitakdan sa ímung kútu</i>, Let's lie crosswise so I won't get your lice. <b>kuruskurus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make criss-cross marks or lines on s.t. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> criss-cross lines. <b>2</b> k.o. grass of waste places, with four or five short spikes, eaten by water buffalo: <b><i>Dactyloctenium aegyptium.</i></b> <b>3</b> brittle star, k.o. sea creature similar to a starfish but with long flexible tentacles that easily break off. <b>kuruskúrus</b>  <pb n=1076><i>v</i> [A; a] travel or negotiate a distance back and forth several times. <i>Kuruskurúsan ni nákung kadalánan pagpangítà nímu</i>, I'll go back and forth over those streets looking for you. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b] make the sign of the cross. <i>Nangurus siya pagkílat</i>, She quickly crossed herself when the lightning flashed. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> person having crossed lines on the palm. <i>Maáyu kag kapaláran kay kurusan ang ímung pálad</i>, You'll have good luck in life because you have a cross on your palm. <b>2</b> the spot at the center of the forehead between the eyebrows in line with the nose. <b>3</b> place one crosses. <b>4</b> hammer-*head shark. <b>kina-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the center of the forehead. <i>Pagbantay nga dílì ka maigù sa kinakurusan</i>, Beware that you don't get hit at the center of your forehead. <b>2</b> center point of a junction of two streets.

<p><b>kúrus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> chorus, refrain of a song. <b>2</b> chorus, a song rendition by a group. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] <b>1</b> sing as a chorus. <b>2</b> answer in chorus.

<p><b>kurut, kúrut</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] pinch, squeeze hard using the thumb and the sides of the bent forefingers. <i>Dúnay nagkúrut sa ímung buktun kay nangalágum man</i>, S.o. must have squeezed your arms because they're bluish.

<p><b>kurutsay</b> a call uttered by becalmed sailors to bring on the southwest wind (<ix>habágat</ix>).

<p><b>kúruy</b> <i>v</i> [B2S46N] shiver with cold. <i>Nangúruy siya sa katugnaw</i>, He was shivering with cold.

<p><b>kuryinti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> electric current. <b>2</b> electric wire. <i>Ang tabánug nasángit sa kuryinti</i>, The kite is entangled in the electric wire. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23; b] shocked with electricity. <i>Kuryintihan kag hikápun nà nímu</i>, You'll get a shock if you touch that. <b>2</b> [A23] give a feeling similar to a shock when the soft area within the elbow joint is hit. <b>3</b> [b(1)] for s.o. not invited to be taken along to a party by s.o. who was invited (humorous). <i>Nitambung sad sila sa parti kay nakuryintihan tu sila</i>, They attended the party as well because they were taken along by one of the invited guests. <b>4</b> [A2; b] among children, for a child to do to the person nearest him, what s.o. did to him, and for the person who had that happen to him to go ahead and do it to another child, and so forth. <i>Nanghapak siya, dì gikuryintihan sab dáyun nákù ang ákung tupad</i>, He slapped me, and so I slapped my seatmate. <b>di-</b> electrified, operated by electricity. <b>-syan</b> <i>n</i> electrician (humorous slang).

<p><b>kuryúsu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> queer, strange. <i>Kuryúsu kaáyu nang buwáka kay mangalimyun lag tungang gabíi</i>, That is a very strange flower because it only blooms at midnight. <i>Midiyu kuryúsu <pb n=1077>ang kinaíya sa mga langyaw</i>, Foreigners seem to have queer ways. <i>v</i> [B12] become queer, odd. <i>Ang pagkaláin sa íyang úlu mauy nakakuryúsu (nakapakuryúsu) sa íyang linihukan</i>, A mental disturbance made him behave strangely.

<p><b>kuryúsu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. @arum, the roots of which are edible. It is violet and when boiled it gets an even tenderness without becoming soggy.

<p><b>kuryúsu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. spider conch.

<p><b>kús</b> = <sc>KULUS</sc>.

<p><b>kusáhus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> jerked @meat, esp. beef, preserved with spices and dried under the sun. <b>2</b> s.t. s.o. used in bathing hung over the line to dry (so called because of the way it grows stiff on the line like jerked meat). <i>v</i> [A; c1] jerk meat, esp. beef.

<p><b>kúsaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @swish the liquid around. <i>Kusáwa ang anyil sa túbig</i>, Swish the indigo around in the water.

<p><b>kusay</b> <i>a</i> @fast in doing s.t. <i>Kusay kaáyu kang mugamà ug kálù</i>, You are very fast in making hats. <i>Kusay ang úras basta náay kalingawan</i>, Time goes by fast if you're busy. <i>v</i> [B2; c1] accomplish s.t. rapidly; be, become fast in doing s.t. <i>Ayaw kusaya (ikusay) ang ímung pagkáun kay hituk-an ka</i>, Don't eat so fast or you'll choke.

<p><b>kusbat</b> <b>1</b> in a @mess, @disorder. <i>Kusbat kaáyu ang ímung buhuk kay wà nímu bubhúig brilyantin</i>, Your hair is a mess because you didn't put any brilliantine in it. <b>2</b> having a @nasty expression on the face. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @tear s.t. apart with the hands or teeth. <i>Mga irù ang mikusbat sa baskit</i>, The dogs tore the basket apart. <b>2</b> [AB1; ab4] get in @disarray, disordered; cause s.t. to become messy. <i>Kinsay nagkusbat íning butang sa lamísang mu rag giagiag bagyu?</i> Who made this mess on the table? It looks as though a tempest had passed over it. <i>Nagkusbat (gikusbátan) ang íyang nawung sa lápuk</i>, His face was a mess with all the mud. <b>3</b> [B; c1] for the face to get a nasty expression on it. <i>Mikusbat ang íyang nawung pagkáun sa aslum</i>, Her face screwed up when she ate the sour stuff.

<p><b>kusi</b> = <sc>KULASÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>kusì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a1b2] @pinch. <i>Kusiun ku ang ímung ngábil ug magsábà ka</i>, I'll pinch your lips if you make any noise. <b>2</b> [A; b7] pinch off from. <i>Íyang gikusian ug gamay kaáyu ang íyang tsís</i>, She got a very small pinch from her cheese. <i>n</i> action of pinching. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] tear, rip. <i>Nakúsì ang ákung sinínà sa alambring tunukun</i>, My shirt got torn on the barbed wire. <i>Ang mangupya kusían sa <pb n=1078>papil</i>, Whoever copies will have his paper ripped up. <b>kusìkusì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] tear meat into small shreds. <i>Nagkusìkusì ku sa linat-ang manuk nga pára sa bam-i,</i> I'm tearing the cooked chicken into pieces to mix it with the noodles. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] causing a pricking or pinching pain. <i>Nagpangusì ang kagútum sa ákung tiyan,</i> Hunger pangs are pinching my stomach. <b>-in-ay(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C] pinch one another. <i>Dì ta magkinusíay kay sakit,</i> We won't pinch each other because it's painful. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> part of the skin which is pinched. <b>2</b> manner of pinching. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of pinching s.o.

<p><b>kusína</b> <i>n</i> kitchen. <i>v</i> [A; a] build a kitchen. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] work in the kitchen, esp. preparing foods. <i>Káda pyista sa íla aku giyuy mangusína,</i> Every fiesta I do the cooking at their place. <i>a</i> nothing compared to a place. <i>Kusína lang ang Urmuk sa Sibu,</i> Ormoc City is nothing compared to Cebu City. <i>Kusína lang ning bildínga sa Lúim,</i> This building is nothing compared to the Lu Ym building. <b>duul sa &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> close to the powers that be. <i>Nakasulud dáyun siyag trabáhu kay duul ra man sa kusína,</i> He landed a job immediately because he is close to the powers that be. <b>kusiníra</b> <i>n</i> female cook. <b>kusiníru</b> <i>n</i> chef. <i>v</i> [B56; a] be, become a chef. <b>maistru &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> head chef.

<p><b>*kusing</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> not having any money at all. <i>Wà giyuy ákù bísag kusing na lang,</i> I don't have anything, even a single cent.

<p><b>kúsing</b> <i>n</i> (from <ix>singku</ix>) five centavos or five pesos (slang). <i>Napildi siyag kúsing sa hantak,</i> He lost five pesos in the game of tossing coins.

<p><b>kusinilya</b> <i>n</i> a pressure-burner stove using kerosene as fuel. <i>v</i> [A13] cook on such burner.

<p><b>kusísang</b> = <sc>SÚKÀ</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>kusitsa</b> = <sc>KUTSITSA</sc>.

<p><b>kuskus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] strum a stringed musical instrument. <i>Kinahanglang kuskúsun ug kusug ang sista kay bungul,</i> You must strum the guitar hard because it's dull. <b>&mdash; balúngus</b> making a lot of fuss about s.t., having to meet a lot of useless requirements. <i>Daghang kuskus balúngus ning aplikasiyun. Daghang purma, daghang mga pirma nga way hinungdan,</i> This application involves too much red tape. There are too many forms, too many irrelevant signatures. <i>v</i> [A; a1] put to a lot of needless trouble and red tape. <i>Kuskus balungúsun ang barku ug dílì hiphípan ang tagakustum,</i> The boat won't be allowed to sail without a lot of red tape if they don't bribe the customs people. <i>Daghang ikuskus balúngus ug wà kay ikatíngal,</i> <pb n=1079>They'll give you a lot of trouble if you don't have s.t. to bribe them with.

<p><b>kuskus<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KALUSKUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kuslad</b> <i>n</i> host of lice and nits. <i>v</i> [B124; a4] for hair to be infested with lice and nits. <i>Sulúra ang nagkakuslad nga buhuk,</i> Comb the louse-infested hair with a fine comb. <i>Sígi lag pangáwut sa buhuk ang babáying gikuslad,</i> The woman keeps scratching her hair because she is infested with lice.

<p><b>kusmáut</b> <i>v</i> [B2S] grimace, distort one's face. <i>Mukusmáut ang nawung sa babáying magbatì,</i> A woman's face becomes distorted with pain during labor. <i>Nagkusmaut [**correction: Nagkusmáut] ku sa kabahù,</i> I'm grimacing from the smell. <i>Nakusmáut ang íyang nawung sa ritrátu,</i> Her face is distorted in the picture. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> grimacing, frowning.

<p><b>kusmítik</b> <i>n</i> cosmetic pomade in stick form. <i>v</i> [AN; b] apply stick pomade to the hair.

<p><b>kusmu</b> <i>v</i> [b6] snort, blow air out through the nose and vocalize at the same time. <i>Gikusmúhan lang ku sa kabáyù,</i> The horse snorted at me. <i>n</i> snort. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] snort in anger or as a sign of displeasure. <i>Nagpangusmu ang bána sa kalágut nga milakaw ang íyang asáwa,</i> The husband snorted in anger upon hearing that his wife had gone out. <i>Nakapangusmu ku sa kabahù sa patay nga ilagà,</i> I snorted with displeasure at the smell of the dead rat.

<p><b>kusmud</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] pout and frown in displeasure or disapproval. <i>Ayawg kusmúra (ikusmud) nang nawung mu ug dì ka tumánan,</i> Don't pout when you don't get what you want.

<p><b>kusmus</b> <i>n</i> odorless variety of marigold with orange flowers and a single row of wide petals.

<p><b>kusnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> rip into little pieces, pinch off a tiny portion from s.t. <i>Mikusnit kug gamay sa ímung sinugbang isdà,</i> I pinched off a tiny portion from your broiled fish. Ayaw kusníta ang papil, Don't rip up the paper. <b>2</b> pinch, tweak. <i>Kusníta ang íyang dunggan ug dì mamínaw,</i> Tweak her ears if she doesn't listen. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of ripping or pinching. <b>2</b> amount pinched off from. <b>kusnitkusnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] pinch s.t. softly many times over a surface to tickle or caress. <i>Duha ka babáyi ang mikusnitkusnit (nagkusnitkusnit) sa íyang áping didtu sa bar</i>, Two women were pecking at his cheeks in the bar. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> thing s.o. pinched. <i>Nagdugù ang ímung kinusnitan,</i> The part of the skin that you pinched is bleeding.

<p><b>kusnut</b> <i>a</i> wrinkled, crumpled. <i>Kusnut na kaáyu ning ákung sinínà,</i> My clothes are very <pb n=1080>wrinkled. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a] wrinkle, crumple. <i>Sa ákung kalágut gikusnut ku dáyun ang ákung papil,</i> In my anger I immediately crumpled my paper. <b>2</b> disarrange hair. <i>Ayawg kusnúta ang ímung buhuk,</i> Don't rumple your hair. <b>3</b> [AN; ab2] take hold of s.o. with a pinch and a twist. <i>Mukusnut (mangusnut) ra ba ku dáyun kun akuy maglágut,</i> I readily take hold and pinch when I am provoked. <i>n</i> wrinkle in cloth, paper, and the like.

<p><b>kuspag</b> <i>a</i> for the hair to be in disarray. <i>Kuspag pa ang íyang buhuk. Bag-u tingáling nagmata,</i> Her hair was still in disarray. She must have just woke up. <i>v</i> [B; c1] for the hair to get dishevelled.

<p><b>kuspidur</b> <i>n</i> cuspidor.

<p><b>kustabli</b> <i>n</i> member of the Philippine Constabulary. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be, become a member of the Philippine Constabulary. <b>kakustablíhan</b> <i>n</i> constabulary. <b>-s</b> = <sc>KUSTABLI</sc> (plural).

<p><b>kustabularya</b> = <sc>KUNSTABULARYA</sc>.

<p><b>kustanyíra</b> <i>n</i> irregular slabs of wood which have been cut off from the ends and sides of a log when it was squared off for sawing into lumber.

<p><b>kust&acaron;r<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A] be worth, cost. <i>Kining klasíha mukust&acaron;r ug dus míl,</i> This kind costs two thousand.

<p><b>kust&acaron;r<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2] last, take a certain length of time. <i>Mukust&acaron;r ug dúgay ang karni basta ibutang sa ripridyirítur,</i> Meat will stay fresh long if you keep it in the refrigerator. <i>Makakust&acaron;r sigúru ug dúgay ang pag-imbistigar sa krímin,</i> The investigation of the crime may well take a long time. <i>Kustahan giyud siyag tagurha ka túig sa íyang sapátus,</i> His shoes last him two years.

<p><b>kustiyáda, kustiyar</b> <i>v</i> [A12N; c] go, travel to another place for a purpose. <i>Mangustiyáda (mangustiyar) silag panugal,</i> They go to other places to gamble. <i>Nagkustiya (nagkustiyáda) sila sa kabaryúhan ug pamaligyag panaptun,</i> They traveled to the rural areas to sell dress material. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] venture into some undertaking. <i>Nangustiyáda (nangustiyar) siyag apil sa banggà sa áwit,</i> He ventured to participate in the singing contest. <i>Kining kantidára ígù nang ipangustiyáda (ipangustiyar) ug nigusyu,</i> This amount is enough to venture into business with. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] make efforts, do whatever it takes. <i>Sa kawad-un mangustiyáda giyud ta arun mabúhì,</i> Because of our poverty we must do whatever is necessary to make ends meet. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> going to other places for a purpose. <b>2</b> venturing to do s.t. <b>3</b> efforts expended to achieve s.t. <b>kustiyadur</b> <i>a</i> <pb n=1081>one who ventures to go out to other places with a purpose.

<p><b>kustiyun</b> <xref>= <sc>KWISTIYUN</sc>, <i>n</i> 2, 3; <i>v</i> 2, 3.</xref>

<p><b>kustum</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> customs bureau. <b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> people who work for the customs bureau.

<p><b>kustumbri</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> customs, established practice of a group. <i>Kustumbri dinhi sa upisínang mangadyì úsà mutrabáhu,</i> It is a custom in our office to say a prayer before we begin work. <i>Kustumbri sa mga Pilipínu nga muamin sa mga tigúlang,</i> It is the custom of Filipinos to kiss the hands of their old folks. <b>2</b> characteristic nature of an individual. <i>Ngil-ad ug kustumbri nang babayhána, bintahúsa,</i> That woman has a bad character. She takes advantage of others.

<p><b>kustumir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> customer in a store. <b>2</b> customer in a night club or bawdy house. <i>v</i> [A12; b8] have as a customer. <i>Nakakustumir siyag kulat-ugun,</i> She got a customer that had syphilis.

<p><b>kustumri</b> = <sc>KUSTUMBRI</sc>.

<p><b>kusturíra</b> <i>n</i> a seamstress. <i>v</i> [B156; b6] be, become a dressmaker. <i>Magkusturíra ag inyung baklà,</i> Your son, who is a pansy, wants to become a seamstress.

<p><b>kusug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fast, rapid. <i>Kusug mudágan ang trín,</i> The train travels fast. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang dágan sa úras,</i> Time flies very quickly. <b>2</b> loud, heavy or forceful motion. <i>Kusug ang butu sa luthang,</i> The bamboo cannon gave out a loud boom. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang pagkahagbà ni Sísar,</i> Caesar fell with a hard thug. <i>Kusug nga bundak sa uwan,</i> Heavy down-*pour. <b>3</b> selling brisk. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang pálit áning tindahána,</i> This store does a brisk business. <b>4</b> avid doer of s.t. <i>Kusug siyang mangulikta ug silyu,</i> He is fond of collecting stamps. <i>Kusug siyang mukáug mangga,</i> He loves to eat mangoes. <i>v</i> [AB3; c1] <b>1</b> do s.t. fast, rapidly, become fast, rapid; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mikusug siya paglakaw kay nalít na siya,</i> She walked quickly as she was already late. <i>Kinsa may nagkusug ug patúyuk sa bintiladur?</i> Who made the electric fan turn very fast? <i>Nakusug (mikusug) ang pag-andar sa makina,</i> The engine started to revolve faster. <b>2</b> do s.t. in a loud, heavy way; become loud, heavy. <i>Kusga (ikusug) pagsulti kay bungul nang ímung gikaatúbang,</i> Talk loudly because the person you are conversing with is deaf. <i>Dílì ni makakusug hangína,</i> This won't develop into a strong wind. <b>2a</b> [A12] have strength to do s.t. <i>Káun pag-áyu arun makakusug kag dáru,</i> Eat well so you'll have the strength to plow. <b>3</b> [B2; b(1)] for sales to become brisk. <i>Ang pálit sa dulyar mauy gikusúgan <pb n=1082>karun,</i> Dollar-buying is brisk business nowadays. <b>4</b> [B2; b4] do s.t. avidly, at a rate more than normal. <i>Mukusug siyag káun basta ganáhan,</i> He eats plenty if he feels like it. <i>Gidalì pagtabang ang bag-ung nanganak kay gikusgan sa dugù,</i> The woman who has just delivered was treated as an emergency case because she was bleeding fast. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dynamic strength, force. <i>Wà na kuy kusug itrabáhu tungud sa kagútum,</i> I have lost my strength to work because of hunger. <b>2</b> muscle. <i>Nangugdal ang kusug sa barbiládu,</i> The weight lifter's muscles bulged. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] <b>1</b> exert strength, do s.t. energetically. <i>Nangusug siyang miupunir sa ákung musiyun,</i> He opposed my motion energetically. <i>Wà maalsa ang lamísa kay wà ku makapangusug,</i> I didn't lift the table because I didn't exert enough effort. <i>Pangusgi pagpugung ang bátà arun dì kadágan,</i> Hold the child securely so he can't run away. <b>2</b> tense one's muscles. <i>Ayaw pangusug ug indyiksiyunan ka,</i> Don't tense your muscles if you are injected. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13N; b(1)] do s.t. as quickly as one can, putting all one's energy into it. <i>Naghingúsug (nanghingúsug) mi sa pagtiwas niíni dáyun,</i> We are putting all our efforts into finishing this right away. <i>Hayáhay sila samtang nanghingúsug pa ang ílang tindáhan,</i> They lived in comfort as long as their store continued at its height of activity. <i>Sa paghingúsug sa kampanya daghang mga ginamus ang nayagyag,</i> At the height of the campaign, we witnessed lots of dirty linen being washed in public. <i>kusgan a strong. Gamay apan kusgan,</i> He is small but strong. gi-un, kakusgun <i>n</i> <b>1</b> speed. <b>2</b> loudness or intensity. <b>3</b> briskness of sales. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> contest of strength. <i>Ang barbil pakúsug,</i> Weight-*lifting[**'weight lifter' above] is a sport that involves a contest of strength. <b>2</b> rough play. <i>v</i> [A13] play rough.

<p><b>kusukúsu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] rumple or rub s.t. in the hands. <i>Kusukusúha ang papil nga iílu,</i> Rub the paper to soften it so you can use it for toilet paper. <b>1a</b> [A; b5] rub to remove dirt or stains in washing. <i>Kusukusúhag (kusukusúhig) maáyu ang sinabunan,</i> Rub the clothes vigorously after you soap them. <b>1b</b> [A; a] rub in washing the hair. <i>Kusukusúha ang buhuk arun mubulag maáyu ang syampu,</i> Rub it well so that the shampoo will get nice and foamy. <b>1c</b> [A; a12] twirl the beater in the palms to beat a chocolate drink. <b>2</b> [A; a12] treat s.t. violently. <i>Gikusukúsu ang kalubihan sa kusug hángin,</i> The coconut grove was lashed by the violent wind. <i>Kusukusúhun ku kanang ímung bátang lampingásan,</i> I'll give that naughty <pb n=1083>child of yours a sound thrashing. <b>2a</b> [a12] beat soundly in a game. <i>Gikusukúsu námù ang ílang tím,</i> We thrashed their team soundly. <i>n</i> = <sc>BULUNÍYU</sc>.

<p><b>kusung</b> <i>a</i> for cloth or thin sheets to be wrinkled, crumpled, creased. <i>Ayawg sulati nang papíla kay kusung kaáyu,</i> Don't write on that paper. It's all crumpled. <i>v</i> [A; a] wrinkle, crumple. <i>Kining panaptúna húmuk kaáyung makusung,</i> This k.o. material wrinkles easily. <i>Dì na ku musul-ub ning sinináa. Gikusungan na ku niíni,</i> I won't wear this dress any more. It looks so crumpled to me.

<p><b>kút</b> <i>n</i> coat. <b>&mdash; an tay</b> <i>n</i> coat and tie outfit. <i>v</i> [A] wear a coat.

<p><b>kúta</b> <i>n</i> quota, a certain quantity assigned to be met. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] give s.o. a quota. <i>Gikutáhan mig tagnapúlù ka tíkit,</i> We were given a quota of ten tickets to sell.

<p><b>kútà</b> <i>n</i> fort. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make a fort.

<p><b>kútab</b> = <sc>KÁTAB</sc>.

<p><b>kutána</b> <i>v</i> [a1] ask a question, inquire about. <i>Kutan-a siyag unsa ni,</i> Ask her what this is. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] ask a question, inquire about. <i>Nangutána ang kustumir sa prisyu,</i> The customer asked about the price. <i>Syárug wà tay kapangutan-an (mapangutána) nga uturidad sa panulat,</i> We could surely ask s.o. who is an authority on writing. <i>Unsay ímung ipangutána?</i> What would you like to ask? <i>n</i> question, asking. <b>mapangutan-un</b> <i>a</i> questioning, showing curiosity.

<p><b>kutang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] faint. <i>Mikutang si Pí pagkabasa sa tiligráma,</i> Fe fainted upon reading the telegram. Ínit kaáyu didtu sa kwartung íyang gikutangan, It was hot inside the room where she fainted.

<p><b>kutang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B] for s.t. that flows or blows to lessen in intensity. <i>Manágat tag mukutang na ang hángin,</i> Let's go fishing once the wind stops blowing. <i>Turniki ra ang nakakutang (nakapakutang) sa dugù sa íyang samad,</i> The tourniquet caused the flow from her wound to stop.

<p><b>kutang<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>GUTANG</sc>.

<p><b>kutas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> panting for breath from exhaustion. <i>Kutas bayà kaáyu. Ayaw giyud kug sugúa,</i> I'm so exhausted. Don't make me do anything yet. <b>2</b> causing s.o. to run out of breath. <i>Kutas trabahúa,</i> Terrible hard work that makes you pant. <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] cause to be gasping or panting for breath. <i>Gikutasan lang kug inagpas nímu,</i> I was panting from trying to catch up with you. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] work s.t. till it pants for breath. <i>Ayaw pakutasi ang kábaw. Tangtangig palunánga,</i> Don't work the carabao till it's panting. Unhitch it and let it wallow from time <pb n=1084>to time. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [b4] be severely short of breath. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] gasp for breath when one is dying. <i>Ang aláut nga masakitun naghingutas na,</i> The patient is exerting great effort to catch his breath. ka- <i>n</i> hard breathing. <b>-l-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> prone to running out of breath.

<p><b>kutas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> hungry. <i>Mangáun na ta kay kutas kaáyu,</i> Let's eat now because I'm very hungry. <i>v</i> [B2; b4] feel, be hungry. <i>Gikutasan na tingáli nang bátà,</i> The child must be hungry now.

<p><b>kutat</b> <i>v</i> [B; b4] abate, for a flow to weaken<corr>.</corr> <i>Salámat kay mikutat na ang bagyu</i>, Thank heavens, the wind has finally abated. <i>Mikutat ang gátas sa inahan</i>, The mother's milk gave out. <i>Walay pagkutat ang ági sa mga táwu sa háyà</i>, The flow of people that passed by the bier did not subside. <i>Ug kutatan ta sa bahà, mutabuk ta</i>, When the flood subsides, we can cross.

<p><b>kútaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> stir two liquids or a liquid and powder around to mix them. <i>Kutáwag maáyu ang pintal</i>, Stir the paint up well. <i>Kutáwi ra kug niskapi</i>, Please mix me some instant coffee. <b>2</b> stir up water and disturb it. <i>Nakútaw ang dágat tungud sa kusug nga hángin</i>, The sea was stirred up in the strong winds. <b>3</b> get disturbed, confused. <i>Suliran nga mikútaw sa ákung hunàhúnà</i>, Problems that disturbed my thoughts. <i>Makútaw ang kalínaw sa panimalay kun magbisyu ang bána</i>, The peace in the family will get disrupted if the husband takes up a vice. <b>4 &mdash; ang líbug</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be confused or worried as to what to do. <i>Nagkútaw ang ákung líbug ug diin tu nákù ikabutang ang ákung rilu</i>, I'm confused as to where I could have put my watch. <i>Nakútaw ang ákung líbug nímu</i>, I don't know what to do about you. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> stirrer.

<p><b>kutay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c] string a line from one point to another. <i>Nagkutay kug písì pára hayháyan</i>, I tied a rope for the clothesline. <i>Ikutay ang mga bumbilya sa duha ka halígi</i>, String the light bulbs up between the two posts. <b>2</b> [B146; c] place, arrange things in line. <i>Nagkutay siyag batu daplin sa alagían</i>, He lined the pathway with stones. <i>Nagkutay ang mga pumapálit sa tíkit</i>, The people buying tickets were standing in a long line. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> line; row of. <i>Ang kutay sa bungtud milagbas sa duha ka baryu</i>, The range of mountains stretches across the two barrios. <i>Naputul ang kutay sa íyang hunàhúnà pagkadungug sa butu</i>, The trend of his thought was interrupted when he heard the explosion. <b>2</b> rope.

<pb n=1085>

<p><b>kuthan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KUTU</sc>.

<p><b>kuti</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> intricate, requiring close attention and exactness. <i>Kuti kaáyu ang pagburda sa kamut</i>, Hand embroidery is very intricate work. <b>1a</b> intricate and thus tiresome. <i>Kuti kaáyung pitsipitsing atubangun</i>, Tiresome little details to take care of. <b>2</b> thoroughly done, with attention to doing details. <i>Makuting imbistigasiyun</i>, A thorough investigation. <b>&mdash; báru</b> trouble, bother. <i>Kuti báru kaáyu ang paghímug hamun</i>, It's a nuisance to make ham. <i>v</i> [A13B12; a2] become intricate, complicated. <b>kutikúti</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] going into small details, fussing over minor details. <i>Ang ámung agáwun mukutikúti giyud ug inspiksiyun sa ámung ági</i>, Our master inspects our output to the minutest detail. <i>n</i> fuss, bother. a inquisitive about every aspect of a thing. <i>Kutikúti siyang pagkabátà, sígi lang pangutána</i>, He is a very inquisitive child. He keeps asking questions. <b>kutikutihan</b> <i>a</i> fussy, paying attention to small details. <b>makutíhun</b> <i>a</i> doing things with great attention to details. <i>Makutíhung tukì</i>, A very detailed investigation. <b>kutiháwu</b> <i>a</i> meticulous, extremely or excessively careful in details. <i>Pulídu ang íyang búhat kay kutiháwu kaáyu</i>, Her work is highly polished because she's very meticulous. <i>v</i> [B12] be very meticulous over details. <i>Ug dì ka makutiháwu daghang sayup nga mulusut</i>, If you don't get fussy over details lots of errors will make their way into the work.

<p><b>kúti</b> = <sc>KASING</sc>.

<p><b>kútib</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); c1] for the lips to move rapidly as in mumbling or eating. <i>Mikútib (nakútib) ang bàbà sa tigúlang nga nangadyì</i>, The woman's lips are moving fast in prayer. <i>Bàbà nga nagkutib sa pagkináug pakwan</i>, A mouth moving rapidly, chewing water-*melon seeds.

<p><b>kutíhu</b> <i>n</i> list of winning numbers in a raffle or draw. <i>v</i> [A; c1] compare the list of winners against one's tickets. <i>Dúna kuy tíkit nga ákung ikutíhu (kutihúun)</i>, I have a ticket that I will compare to the list of winning numbers.

<p><b>kútiks</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sanitary napkin, so called from the brand name Kotex. <b>2</b> nail polish so called from the brand name Cutex. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] wear a sanitary napkin. <b>2</b> [A] polish fingernails, wear a certain k.o. fingernail polish. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] polish one's nails. <i>Mangútiks ku kay mamista</i>, I'm going to polish my nails because I'm going to the fiesta.

<p><b>kútil</b> <i>n</i> drink consisting of palm toddy (<ix>tubà</ix>) mixed with eggs and/or hot chocolate. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> mix a strong drink with a non-*intoxicating <pb n=1086>beverage, esp. palm toddy with eggs and/or hot chocolate. <i>Káda buntag sayu magkútil giyud siyag itlug, tubà ug sikwáti</i>, Early every morning he drinks an egg-cocktail. <b>1a</b> mix any sort of drink. <i>Magkútil kug gátas pára sa bátà</i>, I will mix a formula for the baby. <b>2</b> [B125; a12] for the mind to get all disturbed or confused. <i>Nakútil ang ákung úlu pagpininsar unsay ibáyad</i>, My mind is in a whirl thinking of how to pay. <b>kutilkútil, -in-</b> <xref>= <sc>KÚTIL</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kutim</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] nibble small hard seeds. <i>Paspas mukutim ug humay ang ilagà</i>, Rats nibble rice grains fast. <i>Kutima ang pakwan</i>, Chew on the dried melon seeds.

<p><b>kuting<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> kitten.

<p><b>kuting<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> bedbug. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with bedbugs. <i>Gikuting ang mga silya sa sinihan</i>, The seats in the movie house are infested with bedbugs. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> infested with bedbugs. <i>Kutingun kaáyu ning katríha</i>, This bed is very much infested with bedbugs.

<p><b>kúting</b> <i>n</i> coat of paint.

<p><b>kutingkuting</b> <i>n</i> sound of the strumming or plucking of the strings of musical instruments. <i>Náa tingáli mangharána kay náa may kutingkuting</i>, There must be some serenaders now. I seem to hear the strumming of strings. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a1] sound a stringed instrument by plucking or strumming. <b>2</b> [a12] have lots of little things to do. <i>Daghan pa kug kutingkutingun sa báy</i>, I have lots of little things to do in the house. <i>n</i> things one might collect or little things to do.

<p><b>kútir</b> = <sc>KÚTIL</sc>.

<p><b>kútis</b> <i>n</i> skin texture, fineness of complexion. <i>v</i> [A12] get a certain k.o. complexion. <i>Makakútis lang kug sáma sa ímu</i>, If I only could have a complexion like yours!

<p><b>kutítub</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> given to talking, loquacious. <i>Ang babáying kutítub bísag sa simbahan magpúnayg tabì</i>, A talkative woman keeps babbling away, even in church. <b>2</b> given to talking back, murmuring against, or making lots of unpleasant, irritating remarks. <i>Kutítub nang batáa. Ug kasab-an mutubag giyud</i>, That child is big-mouthed. He talks back when you scold him. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> become talkative. <b>2</b> be given to talking back, murmuring, or making lots of unpleasant remarks.

<p><b>kutkut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] scrape off s.t. hard by rubbing on it back and forth. <i>Kutkúta ang takuling sa kaldíru</i>, Scrape off the soot on the pot. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] paw s.t. up, dig s.t. up like a dog. <i>Daliag kutkut ang kamúti</i>, Dig up the sweet potatoes fast. <i>Gikutkut sa irù ang gilubung nga bukug</i>, The dog dug up <pb n=1087>the buried bones. <b>2a</b> befriend a person for what one can get out of him, be a gold digger. <i>Gikutkut lang ang byúda sa palikíru</i>, The gigolo was just getting what he could out of the widow. <b>3</b> [AN; a] scratch an itch. <i>Nangutkut siya sa íyang úlu</i>, He scratched his head. <i>Kutkútun ku ning katul sa ákung tiil</i>, I will scratch this itch on my feet. <b>4</b> [AN; a] gnaw. <i>Nalúngag ang bungbung nga gikutkut sa balagtuk</i>, Some rats gnawed a hole into the wall. <i>Gikutkut ang ákung tiyan sa kagútum</i>, Hunger gnawed at my stomach. <b>-in-, -ag-, -inag-</b> <i>n</i> sound of gnawing. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> gnawed part of the thing<corr>,</corr> having a gnawed part. <i>Ang kapáyas nga hinug dúnay kinutkutan sa kabug</i>, The ripe papaya has a hole where the bat pecked on it.

<p><b>kutlì</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] break off s.t. soft by twisting it between the thumb and index finger. <i>Kutlía ang mga bátung</i>, Break up the string beans into small pieces.

<p><b>kutlig</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] detach or pick s.t. tiny between the fingers or teeth with a quick twisting or snapping motion. <i>Mikutlig si Tátay ug tabákù nga íyang gimaskáda</i>, Father bit off a piece of tobacco to chew. <i>Kutlíga lang ang mga udlut. Ayawg gabnúta</i>, Just pick the young leaves gently. Don't rip them off.

<p><b>kutlù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] break off a flower, leaf, seed stalk, bud carefully. <i>Ángay na bang kutlúun ning buláka?</i> Is this flower right to pluck? <i>Kutlúag udlut ang tabákù arun mudagkù ang dáhun</i>, We pluck the buds off the tobacco plant so the leaves will get bigger. <b>1a</b> reach for the stars (literary). <i>Kutlúun ku ang mga bitúun tungud kanímu</i>, I'll pluck the stars for you. <b>2</b> [AN; a2] pick out a quotation, take s.t. from a certain source. <i>Sirmun nga gikutlù gíkan sa Salmu</i>, Sermon taken from the Book of Psalms. <i>Ay in is ang kutlúan níla sa balità</i>, They get their news from the I.N.S. (International News Service). <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> quotation, s.t. gotten from a certain source. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> action of harvesting rice.

<p><b>kúts</b> <i>n</i> coach, usually for a team. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] coach a team. <i>Way nagkúts sa ákung diklamasiyun</i>, Nobody coached me for my declamation. <i>Unsang tíma ang ímung gikutsan?</i> What team are you coaching? <b>2</b> [B156; a12] be a coach. <i>Nakúts siya sa ámung tím sa baskitbul</i>, He used to be our basketball coach.

<p><b>kutsára</b> <i>n</i> tablespoon. <i>Gáwì sa kutsára ug tinidur igkáun nímu</i>, Use a spoon and fork when you eat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a] eat with a table-*spoon. <pb n=1088><i>Kutsaráhun diay ang kúkis?</i> Are you going to eat the cookies with a spoon? <b>2</b> [A; a12] spoon s.t. out. <i>Kutsaráha ang harína</i>, Get the flour out with a spoon. <i>Gikutsára sa duktur ang gilúgus</i>, The doctor took a spoonful of secretion from the girl that had been raped. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] use a tablespoon on s.t., eat with a tablespoon. <b>kutsaríta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> teaspoon. <b>2</b> k.o. fleshy ornamental herbs grown for their colorful leaves as a border plant: <b><i>Alternanthera spp.</i></b> <i>v</i> [A13; a] use, eat with a teaspoon. <b>kutsarun</b> <i>n</i> @ladle, large serving spoon. <i>Kutsarun ang isanduk sa linúgaw</i>, Use a ladle to scoop out the porridge. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a1] dip out with a ladle. <b>2</b> [b6] provide with a serving spoon or ladle. <i>Kutsaruni ang sabaw inigsilbi[**should the space be after 'inig'? P2] nímu</i>, Provide a ladle for the soup when you serve it.

<p><b>kutsi</b> <i>n</i> @car, @automobile. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a2] @ride in a car, use as a car. <i>Kutsíhun pa giyud nà nga kaduul ra niánà?</i> Do you need to go there by car when it is so near? <b>2</b> [A12] get an automobile.

<p><b>kutsilyu</b> <i>n</i> table or kitchen @knife. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b5] use a kitchen knife. <i>Kutsilyúha (kutsilyúhi) ang litsun</i>, Cut up the roast pig. <b>2</b> [b] supply with a table knife. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] use a knife. <i>Ang mga Amirikánu nga magkaun mangutsilyu giyud</i>, When the Americans eat, they are sure to use knives. <b>huwis di-</b> <i>n</i> massacre.

<p><b>kutsína</b> = <sc>KUTSÍNU<sub>2</sub></sc> (female).

<p><b>kutsinta</b> = <sc>PÚTU KUTSINTA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚTU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kutsínu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> unthinking about small but important details. <i>Kutsínu ning mutsatsáha kay nagbáli ang kutsára ug tinidur</i>, What a careless maid. Her mind must be in the clouds because she put the tablespoons and forks on the table backwards. <i>v</i> [B1245; b6] doing things without thinking. <i>Nagkakutsínu siya nga síging naghunàhúnà ug piknik</i>, He doesn't think about what he is doing because his mind is on the picnic.

<p><b>kutsínu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @dirty in one's habits. <i>Kutsínung bataána, nagkupaykúpay sa íyang linúgaw</i>, That child has dirty habits. He plays with his porridge. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become uncleanly or dirty in one's habits. <i>Gikutsináhan ku nímu dà, dúgay kang mag-ílis</i>, I think you're a slob because you rarely change your clothes.

<p><b>kutsínu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>a</i> be the one in a group that fails to do s.t. <i>Kutsínu ang way kwarta, dì kauban</i>, Whoever doesn't have any money will be left out. He cannot come along. <i>v</i> [B126; a2] fail to do s.t. that others in a group get to do. <i>Makutsínu ang maulahig mata, dì na <pb n=1089>kapamahaw</i>, Whoever wakes up late will be left out. He won't have any breakfast. <i>Nakutsínu siya kay wà makatápus sa pagtuun</i>, She wound up the only one who didn't finish her studies.

<p><b>kutsíru</b> <i>n</i> rig, coach @driver. <i>v</i> [A3; a2] be a rig driver. <i>Kinsa may nagkutsíru sa ímung tartanilya?</i> Who is the driver of the rig you were riding on? <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] be a rig driver by occupation. <i>Wà may láing pangítà, mangutsíru na lang siya</i>, He has no other job, so he just drives a rig. <i>n</i> the occupation of rig driving.

<p><b>kutsítis</b> <i>n</i> small snap @fasteners on clothing. <i>v</i> [A; b] attach snap fastener on s.t. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] fasten one's snaps. <i>Milakaw siya nga wà makapangutsítis sa kílid</i>, She went out without snapping up her sides.

<p><b>kutsitsa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @crop, @harvest. <i>Ikaduha kining kutsitsa námù karung tuíga</i>, This is our second harvest this year. <b>2</b> amount harvested. <i>Gamay ra tung kutsitsa</i>, It was a small harvest. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] have [so-and-so] many crops. <i>Mukutsitsa kamig katulu sa usa ka túig</i>, We can have as many as three harvests a year. <b>2</b> [A; c6] @raise, @plant a certain crop. <i>Gustu ka bang mukutsitsa ug kurikit karung timpúha?</i> How would you like to raise kurikit rice this season?

<p><b>kutsu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. women's @slipper, made of thick soles and solid cloth or leather end. <i>v</i> [A1; c6] wear this sort of slipper.

<p><b>kutsukutsu</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3] make a lot of @fuss, ado about s.t. <i>Nagkutsukutsu siya kay gamay ra ang íyang báhin</i>, He is making a fuss because he only got a small share. <i>n</i> @fuss.

<p><b>kutsun</b> <i>n</i> @cushion. <i>v</i> [A1; a] use, have, be provided with a cushion, make into cushions, use as cushions. <b>di-</b> having cushions. <i>Dikutsun giyud ang ílang mga lingkuránan</i>, Their seats are all upholstered or have cushions.

<p><b>kutu</b> <i>v</i> [b4N] be extremely @hungry. <i>Gikuthan (gipanguthan) na ku sa pinaábut nga malútù ang paniudtu</i>, I'm @starved waiting for lunch to be cooked. <b>kutukutu</b> <i>n</i> pit of the stomach. <i>v</i> [a12] hit in the pit of the stomach. <i>Gikutukutu nákù siya pagsumbag</i>, I hit him in the solar plexus.

<p><b>kútu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> head @louse. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with head lice. <i>Kutúun ka giyud ug dì ka malígù</i>, You will get infested with lice if you don't bathe. <b>hiN-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] @delouse the head. <i>Hingut-i (hingutúhi) ang bátà kay síging paniksik</i>, Delouse the child because she keeps scratching her head. <b>hingut-ánay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] pick each other's lice. <b>kutuhun, kutuun</b> <b>1</b> infested with lice. <b>2</b> for a woman to have <pb n=1090>the <ix>karapáta</ix>, a k.o. louse spread by sexual contact. <i>Ayawg paduul ánang bayhána kay kutuun nà</i>, Don't get near that woman. She is full of lice in the genitals. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a woman of this sort.

<p><b>kútu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A] @{cut down}, @{hold back} on doing s.t. <i>Mikútu siya sa íyang pagkáun ug bábuy tungud sa íyang prisiyun</i>, He is restricting his intake of pork because of his high blood pressure. <i>Kinahanglan giyud nga kutúhan (kuthan) nátù ang átung paggastu</i>, We have to limit our spending. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> action of restraining oneself.

<p><b>kútù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @fast in doing s.t. or getting s.t. done. <i>Kútù siyang mulálag banig</i>, She weaves mats quickly. <i>v</i> [B3; c1] do s.t. rapidly. <i>Makútù (mukútù) ang dágan ánang rilúha ug yawíhan</i>, That watch runs fast when you wind it. <i>Ug ímung kutúun (ikútù) pagsulti, dì ku makasabut nímu</i>, When you talk rapidly, I can't make out anything you say.

<p><b>kútù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @creak or @{cracking sound}. <i>v</i> [A2; a12] creaking or cracking noise. <i>Mikútù ang salug nga kawáyan sa ákung pagtunub</i>, The bamboo floor creaked as I stepped on it. <i>Mikútù ang sanga, dáyung kabálì</i>, The branch made a cracking sound and then broke. <b>kutùkutù</b> <i>v</i> [A] make a crackling noise. <i>Mukutùkutù ang sitsarun inig-úsap</i>, Fried pork rinds make a crackling noise when you chew them.

<p><b>kutub</b> <i>a</i> having wrinkles sewn into it. <i>v</i> [B6] for sewing to come out so that wrinkles appear in unintended places. <i>Mukutub (makutub) ang buktun sa ímung sinínà ug dì nímu ilagdà</i>, The sleeves of your dress will come out wrinkled if you sew them directly without basting them.

<p><b>kútub</b> <b>1</b> @{as far as} a certain point in space or time. <i>Kútub ang karsáda sa Bukánu</i>, The road reaches as far as Bocano. <i>Kining trabahúa kútub ra sa Disimbri</i>, This job will last only to December. <i>Ása kútub kining dalána?</i> Where does this road go up to? <b>1a</b> <bx>&mdash; sa</bx> [<ix>word referring to action</ix>] only as much as doing, no more than. <i>Kútub ra sa paghisgut, way líhuk</i>, They only went so far as to discuss it. They didn't take any action. <b>2</b> @{as much as}. <i>Gikúhà níla kútub sa ílang madala</i>, They took as much as they could carry. <b>2a</b> @whatever, @anyone. <i>Patákà ka lag tubag kútub sa ímung mahunàhunaan</i>, You just take a stab saying whatever enters your head. <b>3</b> <bx>&mdash; karun</bx> starting @now. <i>Kútub karun dì na ka mamisíta nákù</i>, From now on don't visit me any more. <b>-in-an, kinutbánan</b> <i>n</i> @end, @limit. <i>Walay kinutúban ning ákung pag-antus</i>, My suffering has no <pb n=1091>end. <i>v</i> [B2456] @last, go as far as. <i>Basta mukútub ra sa háluk, way piligru</i>, As long as it does not go beyond kissing, there's no danger. <i>Ug mukútub sa alas utsu ang prugráma, makapanini pa ka</i>, If the program doesn't last later than eight o'clock, you still have time to go to the show.

<p><b>kutubkutub</b> <i>n</i> throbbing, low, booming sound. <i>Kutubkutub sa lansa</i>, The put-put of the launch. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] make a low throbbing or booming sound from a distance. <b>2</b> [A; a12] mumble words incoherently. <i>Sugúun gánì nà siya, mukutubkutub dáyun ang bàbà</i>, When you ask her to do s.t., she immediately starts mumbling under her breath. <i>Dì makláru ang pangadyì kay nagkutubkutub lang ang bàbà</i>, You can't understand the prayers because they are just mumbled.

<p><b>kutud</b> <i>v</i> [B; b4] for liquids to slow down or stop flowing at the source. <i>Mikutud na ang tubud</i>, The stream dried up. <i>Sustinihi lag pananggut ug dì pa makakutud ang buluk</i>, Keep getting the juice from the bud before it stops flowing. <i>Nagkakutud na giyud ang ákung gátas</i>, My milk is growing less and less in quantity. <i>Gikutdan na ang gúma</i>, The rubber tree has ceased giving latex.

<p><b>kutukkutuk</b> = <sc>KURUKUTUK<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kutul</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] @pinch s.t. hard with the thumb and the index finger. <i>Kutulun (kutlun) ta ka ug dì ka mamínaw</i>, I'll pinch you if you don't listen. <i>Ayawg kutli ang kík</i>, Don't pinch anything off that cake.

<p><b>kutuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @pinch a comparatively small area of the skin, esp. with the nail of the thumb and a finger. <i>Mikutuy siya sa ákung buktun ágig paráyig</i>, She pinched my arm as a sign of affection. <b>2</b> [B146] feel a sharp, steady pain in the stomach or pangs of hunger. <i>Wà man gud kuy pamáhaw, nagkutuy na ang ákung tiyan</i>, I've had no breakfast, so I'm having hunger pangs now.

<p><b>kuub</b> <i>a</i> @{bent forward} in body posture. <i>Ságad sa mga tigúlang kuub ug láwas</i>, Most old people have bent bodies. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1; c1P] be bent forward. <i>Nagkuub ang ímung láwas. Itísu</i><corr sic=.>,</corr> Your body is bent forward. Straighten up. <b>2</b> [AB] be lying face down, place s.t. face down. <i>Nakuub ang bátà sa salug</i>, The child was lying face down on the floor. <i>Ikuub (kuuba) ang mga kaldíru</i>, Place the pots face down. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <xref>= <sc>KUUB</sc>, <i>v2</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kúub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{snuggle up} under a blanket of the like. <i>Mikúub ku sa hábul pagtunghà sa kág</i>, I curled up in a blanket when the ghost appeared. <i>Gikuúban sa himungáan <pb n=1092>ang íyang mga pisù,</i> The mother hen covered her chicks with her wings.

<p><b>kúug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B346] for the head to move to and fro or up and down with short, rapid movements. <i>Mikúug ang úlug dinágan,</i> His head shook as he ran. <b>2</b> [A23] go away hurriedly without turning the head to any direction but forward. <i>Mikúug lang siyag lakaw, wà gánì ku hulata,</i> She went out straight away without waiting for me. <b>kuugkuug</b> <i>v</i> [B146] shake involuntarily, as with weakness or disease. <i>Magkuugkuug nga maglakaw ang paralitiku,</i> A paralytic trembles when he walks.

<p><b>kúul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible bubble shell.

<p><b>kúum</b> <i>v</i> [B246] double up in pain, esp. as a result of a blow in the solar plexus. <i>Mikúum ku dihang naigù ku sa kutukutu,</i> I doubled up in pain when I received a blow in the pit of the stomach.

<p><b>kúup</b> <i>n</i> canteen in school or small business establishment run on a cooperative, non-profit basis.

<p><b>kuupirar</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] cooperate, do s.t. to facilitate the accomplishment. <i>Mikuupirar ang mga ginikánan sa pagpamaligyà sa tíkit,</i> The parents cooperated with their children helping them sell tickets. <i>Mabungkag ang punduk ug dì mukuupirar ang tanan,</i> The group will be dissolved if everybody doesn't cooperate. <b>kuupirasiyun</b> <i>n</i> cooperation.

<p><b>kuurdinadur</b> <i>n</i> coordinator. <i>v</i> [B156] become a coordinator.

<p><b>kuurdinasiyun</b> <i>n</i> coordination.

<p><b>kúut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> thrust one's hand into a small place to fish s.t. out or just feel it. <i>Mikúut siya sa íyang bulsa pagtan-aw ug náa pa bay sinsilyu,</i> He felt around in his pocket to see if he had any more change. <i>Kuútun sa duktur ang bátà ug maglísud ang pag-anak,</i> The doctor pulls the baby out if it is a difficult delivery. <b>2</b> pick a pocket or hand-*bag. <i>Gikuútan ku. Wà gánì kuy ikapamilíti,</i> My pocket was picked. I don't even have carfare. <b>3</b> do s.t. underhanded, pull strings to get s.t. done. <i>Kuútun kung ímung aplikasiyun arun madáwat,</i> I'll pull some strings with your application to make sure it is accepted. <b>4</b> [A; a12] fall back on s.t. <i>Maáyu gánì nga dúna tay gamayng tinipígang makúut</i>, It's a good thing that we have some small savings to fall back on. <b>5</b> [A; a12] tap s.o. to liquidate him. <i>Gikúut ang impurmir sa mga girilyista,</i> The guerrillas tapped the informer for liquidation. <b>6</b> [AN; ab2] touch s.o.'s genitals. <i>Kuúta lang ug gustu ka,</i> Go ahead and touch it if you want to. <b>7</b> [A12; c1] get in a blow or a shot in <pb n=1093>basketball under difficult circumstances. <i>Bísag maáyung gwardiya kuútun ni Martiris</i>, Martires can outmaneuver the best of guards. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @pickpocketing. <b>2</b> @{catching of sea life} by sticking the hands into holes or crevices. <b>kuutkúut</b> <i>n</i> getting in shots or blows under difficult circumstances. <b>-l-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> intricate, difficult. <i>Kuutun ning prublimáha. Dílì ni masulbad</i>, This is a difficult problem. We can't solve it. <i>Kuutun na kaáyu ang túbig sa bangà kay hápit na mahurut</i>, The water in the jar is very difficult to reach because it's almost gone. <i>Kuutun kaáyu ang mga tapuy nga íyang gigámit</i>, He uses very difficult chords. <i>Kuluutung nutáha</i>, A difficult-to-reach note. <b>&mdash; sa kuluutun</b> manage to do s.t. difficult by exerting oneself to the utmost (reach in to get the things difficult to get). <i>Bída ning may ámut, unyà way kwarta. Makakúut ta sa kuluutun</i>, God! When they take up a collection, if we don't have money, we have to come up with it somehow. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @pickpocket.

<p><b>kuuykuuy</b> <i>a</i> @feeble, @{trembling with weakness}. <i>v</i> [B146] become trembly with weakness. <i>Nagkuuykuuy siya sa katiguwangun</i>, He's shaking all the time because he is so old.

<p><b>kuwa-</b> for words beginning with <i>kuwa-</i> see also <sc>KULA-</sc> and <sc>KWA-</sc>.

<p><b>kuwak</b> = <xref><sc>MIRIKU</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kuwan</b> = <sc>KUAN</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>kuwing</b> <i>n</i> @{guinea pig}.

<p><b>kuyabug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @nestling, a young bird that has not abandoned its nest. <i>a</i> <b>1a</b> @neophyte, a beginner at s.t. <i>Usa lang ku ka kuyabug nga magsusúlat</i>, I am only an amateur writer. <b>1b</b> young and inexperienced person. <i>Ayawg sagbat sa isturya sa mga dagkù kay kuyabug ka pa</i>, Do not butt into the conversation of your elders because you are still a child. <b>2</b> mistress, concubine. <i>Mahal níya ang íyang kuyabug kay sa asáwa</i>, He loves his mistress more than his wife. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] hunt for nestlings.

<p><b>kuyáig</b> <i>v</i> [AB16; c] @scatter s.t. that had been in one place, usually such that it makes a sound. <i>Ang mga irù mauy mikuyáig sa mga sagbut gíkan sa basurahan</i>, The dogs scattered the garbage that was in the trash can. <i>Nakuyáig ang básu nga nahagbung sa simintu</i>, The drinking glass fell on the cement floor and broke to pieces all over the place.

<p><b>kuyákin</b> = <sc>NAKINNÁKIN</sc>.

<p><b>kuyákiw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @wag back and forth. <i>Mikuyákiw ang íkug ni Bantay pagkakità nákù</i>, Rover wagged his tail when he saw me. <i>Ang putul nga íkug sa tikì nagkuyákiw sa salug</i>, The severed part of the lizard's tail wriggled <pb n=1094>on the floor.

<p><b>kuyaknit</b> = <sc>KULAKNIT</sc>.

<p><b>kuyamad</b> <i>n</i> newly-hatched head louse (<ix>kútu</ix>). <i>a</i> @young, @innocent, and @inexperienced. <i>Ayawg salga ánang buháta kay mga kuyamad pa mu</i>, Don't go in that work yet, young and innocent as you are. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] turn into a small louse. <i>Siksíkun ang mga lusà sa dì pa manguyamad</i>, Pick out the nits before they hatch into little lice.

<p><b>kuyámang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; b] for insects to @crawl. <i>Mikuyámang ang básul sa ákung buktun</i>, The caterpillar crawled on my arm. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] spread slowly to an area. <i>Mikuyámang sa Sugbu ang pamúhat ug lílas</i>, Film-*making spread slowly in Cebu. <b>3</b> [A23; b(1)] creep deep through one's feelings. <i>Ang kalalim sa íyang haluk mikuyámang sa ákung kinahiladman</i>, The sweetness of his kisses crept through my innermost senses.

<p><b>kuyamas</b> <i>n</i> long and sharp @fingernails, @claws of a bird, crab, etc. <i>Hikawrasan ku sa kuyamas sa iring</i>, I got scratched by the sharp claws of the cat.

<p><b>kuyámis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the soft parts in a young coconut at a stage prior to the formation of meat (<ix>pútut</ix>) where the insides are edible and not bitter. Most coconuts are bitter when young (<ix>pútut</ix>), but there are varieties which have edible insides at this stage. <b>2</b> a variety of coconut with orange-colored outside husk, smaller in size than the ordinary coconut.

<p><b>kuyámud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] get an expression of distaste or dislike on the face. <i>Mikuyámud siya sa aslum nga sambag</i>, She puckered her face at the sour tamarind. <i>Ayaw ug kuyamúra (ikuyámud) ang ímung nawung ug sugúun ka</i>, Don't get a nasty expression on your face when I tell you to do s.t.

<p><b>kuyámug</b> = <sc>DALÍNUG</sc>.

<p><b>kuyamuy</b> = <sc>KULAMUY</sc>.

<p><b>kuyánap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] spread all over an area, for emotions or feelings to creep over one. <i>Ang katugnaw mingkuyánap sa tibuuk kung kalawásan</i>, The cold spread throughout my body. <i>Nagkuyánap lang ang mga nagkalainláing mga bágun sa ílang tugkaran</i>, All different kinds of vines spread over his yard. <i>Gikuyanápan ang ákung kasingkásing sa túmang kaguul</i>, My heart is overwhelmed with grief.

<p><b>kuyap</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fainting spell. <i>Magpalit kug ítir kay tambal nà sa kuyap</i>, I'll buy a bottle of ether, as a medicine for dizzy spells. <b>2</b> a condition of slight nausea and drowsiness caused by eating certain foods, esp. greasy ones. <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] <b>1</b> @faint. <i>Gikuyapan ang babáyi  <pb n=1095>nga napunáwan sa dugù,</i> The woman fainted from loss of blood. <b>2</b> feel slight nausea and drowsiness after eating s.t. <i>Kuyapan ku ug mukáun ug tinunuan,</i> I feel somewhat nauseous and drowsy when I eat food cooked in coconut milk. <b>-l-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> prone to fainting.

<p><b>kuyapì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for fruit or seed to develop in a @faulty way such that there is no flesh. <i>Kuyapì kaáyu ang mga ságing. Wà kaáyuy unud,</i> The bananas are very thin. There's not much flesh to them. <b>2</b> for a person to be @thin, @emaciated. <i>Kuyapì kaáyu ning batáa kay naátas man,</i> The child is very emaciated because he is undernourished. <i>v</i> [B2] come out to be @undeveloped and no good. <i>Mikuyapì (nakuyapì) ang ubang lísu sa kakaw kay kúwang sa abúnu,</i> Some of the cacao seeds are thin and undeveloped because they lack fertilizer.

<p><b>kuyáput</b> = <sc>KULÁPUT</sc>.

<p><b>kuyárut</b> = <sc>KURÁYUT</sc>.

<p><b>kuyaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @frightful, @dreadful. <i>Labihang kuyáwa ang ákung damgu gabíi,</i> My dream last night was very dreadful. <b>2</b> @dangerous to the extent of inspiring fright. <i>Anáa sa kuyaw nga kahimtang ang pasyinti,</i> The patient is in a @critical condition. <i>Kuyaw ning tubíga kay húgaw,</i> This water is dangerous because it is dirty. <i>Kuyaw ang dálan sa Tulídu,</i> The road to Toledo is hazardous. <i>Kuyaw nà siyag masukù,</i> That man is dangerous when he gets angry. <b>3</b> unusually @skillful, @awesome in his ability (slang). <i>Kuyaw nang tawhána mupingpung,</i> That man plays pingpong frightfully well. <b>3a</b> @terribly, unusually good and attractive (slang). <i>Kuyaw ka manguyab bay, blúsil man,</i> You've got yourself a hell of a girl. She's an American. <i>v</i> [A123P] feel @scared, @frightened. <i>Gikuyawan ku pagkahúlug nímu,</i> I was frightened when you fell. <i>Gikuyawan ku dihang dihà na ku atubángan sa daghang táwu,</i> I felt nervous when I was standing before a large audience. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [b8] be terribly frightened. <i>Gipanguyawan ku,</i> I was frightened out of my wits. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @frighten s.o. <i>Mikalit ka lag labang sa karsáda, nagpakuyaw ka lang nákù,</i> You suddenly dashed across the street, giving me a terrible fright. <i>n</i> s.t. used to @startle, @scare, or @frighten. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @terror, @fright. <b>kuyawkúyaw</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. grave to be touch-and-go. <i>Kuyawkúyaw pa malibri ba ang masakitun,</i> It's touch-and-go if the patient will recover. <i>Kuyawkúyaw tung ákung iksámin,</i> It's touch-and-go as to how I did on the exams. <i>v</i> [A13; b4] feel apprehensive and nervous. <i>Hápit na ang iliksiyun. Gikuyawkuyáwan  <pb n=1096>na ang mga kandidatu</i>, Election is near and the candidates are now becoming troubled and uneasy. <b>-l-an(<-), -ánun</b> <i>a</i> easily frightened. <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become easily frightened.

<p><b>kuyayì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible small mushroom that grows on dead trees and glows in the dark. <i>v</i> [b4] have this sort of mushroom growing on it.

<p><b>kuyba</b> <i>n</i> @cave, hollowed out portion in the sides of a slope or cliff. <i>v</i> [A1B12; b5] become a cave, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang mga miníru mauy nagkuyba sa bungtud</i>, Miners dug out a cave in the side of the mountain. <i>Nagkakuyba na man ning dapíta nga gisigíhag káwut</i>, This place is fast turning into a cave because they keep digging in it.

<p><b>kuydáwu</b> @{watch out!} be careful! <i>Kuydáwu! May kurinti nà</i>, Be careful! That's a live wire. <i>Paubanun ku ikaw apan kuydáwu kun maghásul ka didtu</i>, I'll let you come with me, but watch out if you make a nuisance of yourself. <i>n</i> responsibility one must personally answer to. <i>Tagáan tikawg libru. Ang pagpasar ímu nang kuydáwu</i>, I'll give you books. But it is your lookout to see that you pass. <i>Kúmu sirínu ímung kuydáwug dúnay maw[=à] dinhi</i>, As the night watch, it's your responsibility if s.t. gets lost here. <i>Ug magminyù ka, may kuydáwu ka na sa kinabúhì</i>, If you marry, you have responsibilities on you. <b>3</b> <bx>way &mdash;</bx> nothing to worry about. <i>Wà nay kuydáwu. Púru lang nà panghásì</i>, That's nothing to worry about. They are just empty threats. <b>Culu-, kuydawukuydáwu</b> <i>n</i> hesitation, inhibition. <i>Wà miy kuydawukuydáwu nga mangáun sa íla</i>, We are not hesitant about going to their place to eat. <i>v</i> [B1456] for s.o. to do s.t. without inhibitions. <i>Ang mga nars dì magkulukuydáwu paghíkap sa láwas sa mga masakitung laláki</i>, Nurses do not have inhibitions about touching the bodies of male patients.

<p><b>kuykuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{dig up} s.t. by scratching things that cover it. <i>Lawuma paglubung kay kuykúyun unyà sa irù</i>, Bury it deep under the ground or the dog will dig it up. <i>Daghan siyang nadala gíkan sa basurahan nga íyang gikuykúyan</i>, He found a lot of nice things in the garbage he was digging around in.

<p><b>kuyláda</b> = <sc>KULYÁDA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kuylaw</b> <i>a</i> provoking the feeling of nervous excitement, almost fright. <i>Kuylaw kaáyu nang muági na ta sa sigsag</i>, It is nerve-racking to negotiate the zigzag curves. <i>v</i> [b4] be nervously excited. <i>Gikuylawan ku pagkadawat sa rás nga tiligram</i>, I was nervous when I got the rush telegram.

<pb n=1097>

<p><b>kuymi</b> <i>n</i> @umpire in a cockfight or in jai-alai. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B156; c1] act as a @referee in jai-alai or a cockfight. <b>2</b> [A; b8] @{eavesdrop in a quarrel}. <i>Ngánung midúul man mu sa magtiáyung nag-áway? Kamuy mikuymi?</i> Why did you go near the couple quarreling? Did you want to referee their quarrel or s.t.?

<p><b>kúyug</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac1] @{go together} with. <i>Kinsay mukúyug nákù sa sini?</i> Who'll accompany me to the movies? <i>Ayaw kuyúga pagdispatsar ang púlus daut</i>, Don't sell any one buyer all bad ones. <i>Unsa may ímung kuyúgun sa búkid?</i> What will you get out of accompanying me to the mountains? <i>Walà sukad siya ikúyug (kuyúga) sa íyang amahan</i>, His father never had taken him along. <i>Kuyúgi siya kay mahadluk</i>, Go with her because she is scared. <b>&mdash; sa lupad</b> <i>v</i> [A23] <b>1</b> plunge imprudently into s.t. uncertain after having been persuaded. <i>Way maáyung sangpútan ang mga táwung mukúyug lang dáyun sa lupad bísag hanap</i>, No good can come to people who do not look before they leap (go along with the flight even if they cannot see). <b>2</b> abide with the decision of the majority. <i>Dì lang ku mutambung sa míting. Mukúyug lang ku sa lupad ug unsay masabútan</i>, I will not attend the meeting. I'll abide with whatever decision they reach. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @companion. <b>2</b> @{together with}. <i>Miláyas siya kúyug sa íyang trátu</i>, She went away together with her boy friend. <b>(->) &mdash; babuy</b> <i>n</i> one who always tags along. <b>kuyugkúyug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{gang mate}, regular companion. <b>2</b> going together with a gang regularly. <i>Ang kuyugkúyug mau usáhay ang sinugdánan sa gúbut</i>, Going out with a group regularly is often the beginning of trouble.

<p><b>kuyugpus</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS</sc>.

<p><b>kuyúkus</b> = <sc>KULÚKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kuyus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN] @shrivel and @wrinkle up. <i>Tigúlang na giyud si Túnay kay nanguyus na ang mga áping</i>, Tonay has grown really old because her face has become all wrinkled. <i>Ímu pang ilámas nang luy-a nga nakuyus na kaáyu?</i> You're going to use that wrinkled up piece of ginger? <b>2</b> [B2] get shrunk or diminished in quantity. <i>Mikuyus (nakuyus) na ang íyang nawung nga naghubag</i>, Her swollen face has shrunk now. <i>Punù man untà ning sáku sa bugas. Ngánung dalì ra kaáyung nagkakuyus?</i> This sack was so full of rice. Why has it shrunk so rapidly? <b>3</b> [A23] shrink back, lack guts. <i>Ísug siyang musulti apan mukuyus ug suklan</i>, He talks big, but when s.o. stands up to him, he shrinks away.

<p><b>kuyuskus</b> <i>v</i> [B2N] @shrink and curl up. <i>Karun <pb n=1098>nga mikyuskus (nakyuskus) na ang kusáhus wà na makapunù sa palanggána</i>, Now that the jerked meat that we set out to dry has curled up, it no longer fills the basin. <i>Ang túmang kaínit mauy nakakuyuskus (nakapakuyuskus) sa mga dáhun</i>, The intense heat caused the leaves to wither and curl up.

<p><b>kuyut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the flesh to @sag due to old age. <i>v</i> [BN] for the flesh to sag. <i>Namínus ang ákung timbang ug nanguyut ang ákung buktun</i>, I lost a lot of weight and the flesh on my arm is sagging.

<p><b>kuyut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; b6(1)] @{get hold of s.t.} <i>Nagkúyut ang magtiáyun</i>, The couple held hands. <i>Nawálà ang paypay nga ákung gikuytan (gikuyutan)</i>, I lost the fan I was holding. <b>1a</b> [AN; b] hold on to s.t. for support. <i>Dì ku mukuyut (manguyut) nímu, wà kay umuy</i>, I won't hold on to you (for support). You have no strength. <b>2</b> @hold, @occupy a certain position or office. <i>Ang katungdánan nga ákung gikuytan pait kaáyu</i>, I am holding down a very difficult job. <b>3</b> [A] @play, @operate s.t. <i>Mukuyut sad nà siyag bayulin</i>, He also plays the violin.

<p><b>kwa-</b> <ix>see also</ix> <sc>KULA</sc>.[**typo? KULA-]

<p><b>kwabútan</b> = <sc>KULABÚTAN</sc>.

<p><b>kwadhutur</b> = <sc>KUADHUTUR</sc>.

<p><b>kwadirnu</b> <i>n</i> soft-backed composition book.

<p><b>kwadra</b> <i>n</i> @stable or @stall. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] lodge or keep in a stable or stall.

<p><b>kwadráda</b> [**tag with form][<ix>measurement</ix>] <b>&mdash;</b> @square [measurement]. <i>Tris pís kwadráda</i>, Three feet square.

<p><b>kwadrádu</b> <i>a</i> @square or having square sides. <i>Tabási kug mga kwadrádu nga mga panaptun</i>, Cut me some square pieces of cloth. <i>Kwadrádu ang paghíwà sa mga patátas</i>, Cut the potatoes into cubes. <i>v</i> [AB12; a] be, become square-shaped, make s.t. square.

<p><b>kwadrísu</b> = <sc>KURDÍSU</sc>.

<p><b>kwadru<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @frame for a mirror, picture, diploma, and the like. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{enclose in a frame}. <b>2</b> [B1256] for the picture in a movie to be out of focus. <i>Kwadru! Nakwadru ang salída</i>, Focus! The picture is out of focus. <b>3</b> [A; b] obstruct a person's vision. <i>Kwadru dihà!</i> Down in front!

<p><b>kwadru<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] in a benefit dance, outbid s.o. else for the privilege of dancing with a certain girl.

<p><b>kwadruplikit</b> <i>n</i> quadruplicate. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make s.t. in quadruplicate. <i>Kwadruplikita (ikwadruplikit) ang ímung aplikisyun</i>, Make your application in quadruplicate.

<p><b>kwáhab</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{cry aloud} (with the mouth <pb n=1099>wide open). <i>Mukwáhab nà siya ug sugsúgun</i>, He'll go &lsquo;waa&rsquo; if you tease him.

<p><b>kwahaw, kwáhaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. black bird said to portend a long drought, so named from its sound.

<p><b>kwáhu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @anus of pigs. <b>2</b> human anus (humorous).

<p><b>kwákig</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{pig's tail} with a little portion of its base. <b>2</b> tail of a fowl or bird where the tail feathers grow.

<p><b>kwákir uts</b> <i>n</i> @{quaker oats}.

<p><b>kwáku</b> <i>n</i> @pipe for smoking. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] make into a pipe. <b>2</b> [B246N] become thin and bent like a pipe. <i>Mukwáku (mangwáku) ang babáyi basta bulus ang pamuyù</i>, A woman becomes very thin if she lives in poverty. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] smoke a pipe.

<p><b>kwalipikar</b> = <sc>KALIPIKAR</sc>.

<p><b>kwalipikasiyun</b> <i>n</i> @qualification.

<p><b>kwalisiyun</b> <i>n</i> @{political coalition}. <i>v</i> [C; c16] form a political coalition.

<p><b>kwalta</b> <xref>= <sc>KWARTA<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref>

<p><b>kwámug</b> = <sc>KUYÁMUG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>DALÍNUG</sc>.

<p><b>kwandig</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{sit up} in bed, with the body in a reclining position. <i>Mukwandig siya sa pinatungpatung nga unlan</i>, She'll sit up reclining on the pillows that were piled up. <i>Butákang uway ang íyang gikwandígan</i>, She reclined on the rattan chaise lounge.

<p><b>kwanggul</b> <i>a</i> lacking common sense. <i>Ngánung wà nímu hanigig panaptun pagplantsa nímu, kwanggúla ka</i>, You idiot! Why didn't you put a piece of cloth over the pants when you ironed them? <i>v</i> [B12] become @silly. <i>But-an ka man untà kaniadtu, apan karun nagkakwanggul ka na man</i>, You used to be so sensible before, but now you're becoming more and more idiotic. <b>-ù(->)</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>KWANGGUL</sc>. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> of the sort lacking common sense.

<p><b>kwári, kwárì</b> <i>n</i> @quarry.

<p><b>kwarinta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @forty. <b>2</b> <xref>= <sc>KWARINTA DÍYAS</sc>, <i>2</i>. <i>v</i></xref> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc> <ix>for verb forms</ix>. <b>&mdash; díyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> forty days. <b>2</b> the fortieth day after a person's burial, an occasion commemorated with a novena ending on that day and usually a banquet. <b>&mdash; isingku</b> <i>n</i> forty-five caliber revolver.

<p><b>kwarintína, kwarintínas</b> <i>n</i> @quarantine. <i>v</i> [A; a12] place under quarantine.

<p><b>kwarisma</b> <i>n</i> @Lent. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256; b4(1)] be the Lenten season. <i>Hikwarismahan pa ang ikaduhang simistri</i>, The second semester classes will still be on during Lent. <b>2</b> [B1456] be sad and gloomy. <i>Kanúnay lang nang nagkuwarisma ang ímung panagway. Unsa bay <pb n=1100>suliran mu?</i> You are always sad and gloomy. What is the matter? <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b6] spend Lent s.w.

<p><b>kwarta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @money. <b>2</b> it's going to be a profit, a point, be in the bag. <i>Ug masyát nà ni Mumar run, kwarta na</i>, If Mumar sinks that ball, the game will be in the bag. <i>Ug alas ning mabúnut ku, kwarta</i>, If the card I'm going to draw turns out to be an ace, it's going to help me a lot. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @buy, @purchase s.t. <i>Mukwarta kug kindi pára sa bátà</i>, I'll buy some candy for the child. <i>Unsay ímung kwartáhun sa tindáhan</i>,[**?] What are you going to buy in the store? <b>2</b> [A12; b8] make money out of s.t.; secure money. <i>Nakakwarta kug arang-arang sa ákung nigusyu</i>, I have made quite a profit from my business. <i>Makwartahan (makwarta) ra gihápun ni nátung tinígum nga papil</i>, We can still make some money out of the waste paper we are saving. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5] <b>1</b> engage in s.t. as a means of earning money. <i>Mangwarta ku sa Nigrus inigtingtápas sa tubu</i>, I'll go to Negros to earn some money during the season for harvesting sugar cane. <b>2</b> earn money illegally, immorally. <i>Nakwartáhan nang mayúra kay nangwarta sa íyang katungdánan</i>, That mayor became wealthy because he enriched himself in office. <i>Ayaw mug apil ánang Ápag kay tingálig pangwartáhun (pangwartáhan) lang mu niánà</i>, Don't pay <sc>AFAG</sc> (Anderson's Filipino-American Guerillas) a membership fee. They'll just get money out of you for nothing. <i>n</i> means of getting money, esp. for a living. <b>kwartáhan</b> <i>a</i> moneyed, wealthy. <i>v</i> [B12] become wealthy.

<p><b>kwarta<sub>2</sub></b> <b>&mdash; klási, martsa, parti</b> @fourth class, gear, part. <i>n</i> fourth gear. <i>v</i> [A; c6] put into fourth gear.

<p><b>kwartil</b> <i>n</i> @barracks and @headquarters of a military or police group. <i>v</i> [a2] be made a headquarters and barracks.

<p><b>kwartisar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{divide s.t. into four equal parts}. <i>Kwartisara nang butung pára ninyung upat</i>, Divide that young coconut into four equal pieces for each of the four of you.

<p><b>kwartu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @room. <b>1a</b> @bedroom. <i>Ang sála ug kan-anan náa sa ubus ug ang mga kwartu sa itáas</i>, The living and dining rooms are on the first floor and the bedrooms are up-*stairs. <i>v</i> [A1; a2] make a room or partition in a house. <i>Dakù pa ning lugaráha. Makakwartu pa bisag duha</i>, This is quite a large space. We can even make two rooms here. <i>Ímu man ning gibungbúngan. Kwartúhun nímu ni?</i> You are putting up walls here. Are you partitioning it off into a room?

<pb n=1101>

<p><b>kwartu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @fourth. <b>2</b> @quarter. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] be, become fourth in a series. <i>Mukwartu anyu na siya sa hayiskul sa sunud túig</i>, She will be in her fourth year in high school next year. <b>2</b> [A1; a1] @{divide into four equal parts}. <i>Kwartúha ning usa ka kílung bábuy</i>, Divide this kilo of pork into four parts.

<p><b>kwatru</b> <ix>number</ix> @four, used only with words of Spanish origin. <i>Kwatru písus</i>, Four pesos. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TRIS</sc>. <b>&mdash; kantus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to the bottles with four sides made to contain gin. <b>2</b> @dagger with a square four-edged blade, usually made from steel girders. <b>numiru &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>NUMIRU</sc>.

<p><b>kwáyir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @choir. <b>2</b> @{quire of paper}.

<p><b>kwilyu</b> <i>n</i> @{collar of a dress or shirt}. <b>&mdash; sa matris</b> cervix of the uterus. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] attach a collar, make into a collar. <b>2</b> [A; b] hold s.o. by the collar. <i>Gikwilyuhan sa pulis ang mangunguut</i>, The policeman grabbed the pick-*pocket by the collar.

<p><b>kwín</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. sweet, small pineapple. <b>&mdash; áni</b> <xref>= <sc>KWÍN</sc>, <i>n1</i>.</xref> <b>2</b> @queen in cards. <b>3</b> queen in chess. <b>4</b> title for a queen. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12] get a queen in cards. <b>2</b> [B256] be, turn out to be a queen in chess.

<p><b>kwinpus</b> <i>n</i> the queen post supporting a roof.

<p><b>kwinta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC12; a] @compute, sum up accounts. <i>Nagkuwinta [**note: variant spelling not flagged] ang tindíra sa bayranan</i>, The salesgirl is summing up the total cost. <b>2</b> [A; a12] count things numerically. <i>Makamau nang mukwinta ang bátà</i>, The boy knows how to count. <i>Kwintáha ug pilay nadá nímung sinínà</i>, Count the number of shirts you brought with you. <b>3</b> [b6] count favors done to s.o. <i>Bísag paryinti, íyang kwintahan sa íyang mga natábang</i>, He counts the favors he has done, even to relatives. <i>n</i> computation, an accounting of. <b>walay &mdash;</b> worthless. <i>Way kwinta ang táwung tapulan</i>, A lazy person is worthless. <i>Ayawg palit ánang mga walay kwintang butang</i>, Don't buy those worthless things. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23] count favors done to s.o. <i>Kusug kaáyung mangwinta nang bayhána sa mga nahátag níya nákù, mu rag dílì igsúun</i>, That woman certainly counts things she has given to me, as if I weren't her sister. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> given to counting favors done. <b>kwintakwinta</b> <i>n</i> rough estimate. <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> make a rough estimate. <i>Nagkwintakwinta na siyag pilay magastu sa íyang kasal</i>, He is making a rough estimate of how much his wedding will cost. <b>2</b> weigh s.t. on one's mind. <i>Kwintakwintáha kunug háin ang maáyu, mubakasiyun ba ta ug dì ba</i>, Decide which way is better, to go on a vacation or not. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> accounting. <i>Ipatában ang mga risíbu sa kwintáda</i>, Attach the receipts <pb n=1102>to the accounting. <i>v</i> [A] make an accounting.

<p><b>kwinta<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KINTA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>kwintas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @necklace. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] wear a necklace or s.t. around the neck. <i>Ikwintas ring tinúhug sampagíta</i>, Wear this string of jasmine flowers around your neck. <b>2</b> [a2] make into a necklace or ornamental chain around the neck. <b>3</b> <bx>&mdash; ug bukug</bx> <i>v</i> [A13N] become very thin and haggard. <i>Mangwintas (magkuwintas) ka lag bukug sa kabadlungun niánang ímung bána</i>, You will be reduced to skin and bones by your husband's vices.

<p><b>*kwintas<sub>2</sub></b> <b>&mdash; kláras</b> <i>n</i> proper accounting of. <i>Ang awditur muhátag ug kwintas kláras sa kagastúan sa kapunúngan</i>, The auditor will render a proper accounting of the expenses incurred by the organization.

<p><b>kwirdas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{string of a musical instrument}. <i>v</i> [A; b] string a musical instrument. <b>nalisúan sa &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÍSÙ</sc>.

<p><b>kwirdas<sub>2</sub></b> <corr><i>n</i> </corr>clock or watch spring. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] put or install a spring in a time piece.

<p><b>kwirpu</b> <i>n</i> a @{body of police or military force}. <i>Nagkaanam kadakù ang kwirpu sa kapulisan sa syudad sa Sugbu</i>, The police force in the city of Cebu is growing bigger and bigger.

<p><b>kwistiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @question raised in a class, meeting, examination. <i>Píla ka kwistiyun ang tís?</i> How many questions are there in the test? <b>2</b> problem, thing wrong with s.t. <i>Ang kwistiyun gud nímu dílì ka man mamínaw ug tambag</i>, The problem with you is you never listen to advice. <i>Way kwistiyun nang sayúpa. Gamay ra kaáyu</i>, That error is no problem. It's a very minor one. <i>Dì gud nà pait kaáyu. Kwistiyun lang nà sa ánad</i>, It's really not difficult. It's just a question of getting used to it. <b>3</b> controversy, dispute. <i>Mupalit ka niánang yutáa nga nag-atubang kanà karun ug dakung kwistiyun?</i> You are going to buy that land when it is being seriously questioned at the present time? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac6] ask questions in a class or session. <i>Mukwistiyun giyud ku basta dì kung kasabut</i>, I ask questions when I don't understand. <i>Kwistiyunun ka gánì sa maistra, tubag dáyun</i>, When your teacher questions you, answer immediately. <i>Kini ang ákung ikwistiyun sa tís</i>, I'll have this question in the test. <b>2</b> [A12; c1] be a problem or difficulty. <i>Maáyu ang plánu, ang nakakwistiyun lang kay way kwarta</i>, It is a good plan, but the problem is there is no money. <b>3</b> [A; c1] raise s.t. to challenge or dispute. <i>Wà kahay mukwistiyun niíning inyung gibúhat?</i> Don't you think anybody will question what you did? <b>-abli</b> <i>a</i> open to suspicion, having s.t. <pb n=1103>anomalous or dishonest about it. <i>Kwistiyunabli nga transaksiyun</i>, A questionable transaction. <i>Kwistiyunabli kaáyu ang kagíkan ánang bayhána</i>, The real background of that woman is open to suspicion.

<p><b>kwítis</b> <i>n</i> @fireworks consisting of rockets. <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] explode fireworks consisting of rockets.

<p><b>kwúta</b> = <sc>KÚTA</sc>.

<p><b>kyag-ang</b> <xref>= <sc>KAGANGKAGANG</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xref> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁGANG</sc>.

<p><b>kyaknit</b> = <sc>KULAKNIT</sc>.

<p><b>kyampaw</b> <i>n</i> @{sting rays} of genus <b><i>Dasyatis</i></b>, but usually not brightly marked species.

<p><b>kyampi</b> k.o. fish, name given to species of slipmouth that are thick and fleshy, as opposed to the rather thin and rounded species (<ix>palutput</ix> and <ix>sapsap</ix>): e.g., <b><i>Leiognathus ruconius</i></b>.

<p><b>kyamud</b> = <sc>KUYÁMUD</sc>.

<p><b>kyamuy</b> <i>n</i> k.o. candied fruit sold in Chinese stores with a single seed, the size of a small prune, with a taste that is salty, sour, and sweet at the same time.

<p><b>kyápù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Quiapo, a district in the heart of Manila. <b>2</b> female genitalia (humorous allusion, originating with a movie in which the hero, a jeepney driver, keeps peeping at his female passengers' genitalia while shouting his destination, Quiapo).

<p><b>kyawkaw, kyawkyaw</b> <i>n</i> @{fussy complaints}. <i>Ug mupirma ka, pirma lang. Way daghang kyawkyaw</i>, If you are going to sign the papers, sign them. Do not make such a fuss. <i>v</i> [A; b3] making complaints on small things. <i>Bísag gamay kaáyung sayup, mukyawkyaw ang manidy&icaron;r</i>, The manager makes a fuss about the tiniest mistakes.

<p><b>kyugpus</b> = <sc>KULUGPUS</sc>.

<p><b>kyúkus</b> = <sc>KULÚKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kyungkung</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6; c1] @{curl up}. <i>Mikyungkung (nakyungkung) ang núkus sa ínit nga bága</i>, The dried squid curled up in the glowing embers. <i>Nagkiyungkung [**note: spelling variant not flagged] pa gihápun ka dihà bísag taas na ang adlaw?</i> You are still curled up there, even at this hour of the day?

<p><b>kyusku</b> <i>n</i> a @kiosk in a park or plaza, usually used as a bandstand or a place for resting. <i>v</i> [b6] put a kiosk up s.w.

<p><b>kyuskus</b> = <sc>KUYUSKUS</sc>.

<p><b>kyúum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] for s.t. with a horizontal opening to @close tightly. <i>Mukyúum ang imbaw ug matugaw</i>, Clams shut tight when they are disturbed. <i>Makyúum nang samára</i>, That wound will close. <i>Nagkakyúum ang mga dáhun sa akasya nga nagkagabíi na</i>, The acacia leaves are slowly closing up as night is drawing near. <b>2</b> keep the mouth shut and <pb n=1104>not talk. <i>Mukyúum nà siya ug hisagpaan</i>, She'll shut up if you slap her. <i>Kyuúmun (ikyúum) ku lang ang tinúud nga nahitabù</i>, I'll just keep my mouth shut as to what really happened. <b>3</b> [B; a1P] be doubled <pb n=1105>up in fear or pain. <i>Mikyúum siya sa pagkaigù níya sa kutukutu</i>, He doubled up from pain when he was hit in the solar plexus. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> tightly closed. <b>2</b> keeping the mouth shut.

<pb n=1106>

<p><b>la<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>LÁMANG</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>la<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @la, the sixth note in the musical scale. <b>2</b> a syllable used in place of words forgotten when singing a song.

<p><b>l[=á]</b> <xref>= <sc>LÁLA<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xref>

<p><b>láag</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @roam about for no special purpose, just for diversion. <i>Atúa si Pidru sa syudad miláag</i>, Pedro is downtown roaming about. <i>Unsay ímung laágun didtu? Mangítà na pud kag áway?</i> What are you going to roam around there for? Are you looking for another fight? <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> roving about, going nowhere in particular. <i>Lagmit paangkan ang babáying laag</i>, A woman that roams about is likely to get pregnant. <i>Ang laag níyang panan-aw didtu mahiúrung sa babáyi</i>, His roving gaze stopped at the woman. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be a wanderer. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>LAAG</sc>.

<p><b>láang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @noose of a trap. <i>Biraha ang láang inigtunub sa manuk</i>, Pull the noose when the chicken steps in. <i>1a</i> any trap that has a noose. <b>2</b> stratagem designed to catch or trick s.o. <i>Babáyi ang gamíta nga láang pagsíkup sa ispíya</i>, Use a woman as a trap to snare the spy. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> trap s.t. with a noose. <i>Laángun nátung bábuy</i>, Let's trap the pig with a noose. <b>2</b> employ a trick to catch s.o. <i>Dì siya madiritsu ug dakup. Laángun giyud</i>, He can't be caught easily. He should be trapped. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LÁANG</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>laas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] take a sword or rod and raise it. <i>Naglaas ug sundang ang hurimintádu</i>, The amok was brandishing a bolo. <i>Gilaas sa tigúlang ang íyang ulísi</i>, The old man raised his cane in the air. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] go bare of protection. <i>Naglaas ka lang nga tugnaw kaáyu?</i> Why aren't you dressed when it's so cold?

<p><b>láas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @tear leaves or thin sheets lengthwise into strips. <i>Miláas siyag papil pára himúung bandirabandíra</i>, She tore some papers into strips to make into pennants. <b>2</b> <pb n=1107>@tear, @peel s.t. off from an attachment. <i>Nakaláas ku sa bulsa sa íyang púlu</i>, I accidentally tore the pocket off his shirt. <i>Ang uban nga táwu laásun lang ang pánit sa kanding</i>, Some people just peel the skin off of goats. <b>2a</b> remove the cloth-like sheathing of the coconut bud as the first step in tapping the toddy. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the lower part of the leaves of the areca palm which sheathes the trunk. <i>Maáyu kaáyung buhátun ug sudlanan sa bugas ang mga layà nga láas sa káhuyng búnga</i>, Several pieces of dry palm frond sheaths of the areca palm can be made into useful containers for rice or corn grits. <b>2</b> the covering cloth-like sheath of the coconut bud which grows from the sides of the bottom of the frond.

<p><b>laaw</b> <i>n</i> @{stray cat}.

<p><b>láay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @monotonous, wearingly boring. <i>Láay kaáyu ning wà tay búhat</i>, It is so dull to be without anything to do. <i>Láay kaáyu ang pagpaábut</i>, It is very boring just to wait around. <b>2</b> disgusting, disappointing in that one doesn't conform to what is expected of him. <i>Laáya nímu uy, ingun ka palitan ku nímug sapátus</i>, How disgusting! You promised to buy shoes for me (but you didn't). <i>Kaláay bayang Nína, gipanabì diay níya ang ákung sikrítu</i>, How disgusting of Nina. She told my secret to everybody. <i>v</i> [B124; b4] be boring, feel bored. <i>Nagkalaay na ning trabahúa kay mu ra gihápun</i>, This work is getting boring because it is always the same thing. <i>Mipaúlì na lang siya kay gilaáyan nag pinaábut nímu</i>, He just went home. He got tired of waiting for you. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a variety of corn that takes a long time to mature. <b>laaylaay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] while away time or do s.t. for the meantime. <i>Samtang magpaábut ku mulaaylaay lang kug gansilyu</i>, While I'm waiting, I'll while away the time crocheting. <i>Gilaaylaayan ku lang nig búhat, nahuman na giyud</i>, I just did this little by little during <pb n=1108>my spare time, and now it's finished. <b>ka-(->)</b> = <sc>LAAYLAAY</sc>. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> boredom.

<p><b>láb<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> half of the number of points or one less half the number of points that make a tennis or pingpong game. (From the notion that when the one who is behind reaches half the number of points&mdash;usually ten points, that number is subtracted from the winner's points and the one behind is reckoned at zero. E.g. a score 12 to 10 is reckoned at <i>dus láb</i> instead of <i>dúsi diyis</i>.) <i>v</i> [A; b6] for the one who is behind to get as far as the half-way point. <i>Makaláb lang ku, sigurádu giyud kung makaagpas ug makadaug</i>, If I can make it to love (ten points), I'm sure I can catch up and win. <i>Siya ang kampiyun apan gilában ku siya</i>, He is the champion, but I was able to get ten points (out of twenty-one).

<p><b>láb<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> lab.

<p><b>laba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b1] @{wash clothing}. <i>Gilabhan níya ang ákung púlu</i>, She washed my shirt. <i>Ang batu nga ílang gilabhan</i>, The stone where they do their washing. <b>2</b> [A; b] scold, talk against. <i>Gilabhan ka na sad sa ímung bus?</i> Did your boss give you a cussing out again? <b>3</b> [b(1)] be badly defeated. <i>Gilabhan námù ang ílang tím sa baskitbul</i>, We trounced their team in basketball. <b>-kára</b> <i>n</i> washcloth. <i>v</i> [A; b] wash the face with a washcloth. <b>labalába</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc1] @{work furiously}, in a concentrated way. <i>Átung labalabáhan pagpanday ang iskuylahan</i>, Let's work furiously building the school. <b>2</b> keep scolding, ranting against. <i>a</i> done at a furious pace. labhanan <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dirty laundry. <b>2</b> place to do wash. <b>3</b> place to air grievances. <i>labhunun</i> = <sc>LABHANAN</sc>, <i>n1</i>. <b>nilabhan</b> (<b>linabhan</b>) <i>n</i> clean laundry. <b>-bu(<-)</b> <i>n</i> lavatory, sink. -da(<-) <i>n</i> laundry done for pay. <i>v</i> [AN; b5] take in wash, work off a debt by doing laundry. <i>Naglabáda (nanglabáda) na lang siya</i>, She took in wash. <b>labandíra</b> <i>n</i> @washerwoman. <i>v</i> [B156; a] be a washerwoman. labandíru <i>n</i> @laundryman. <b>-dur</b> <i>n</i> @basin.

<p><b>labà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @stains, @spots, uneven color. <i>Ang labà sa íyang mga sinínà walà makúhà</i>, We could not get the stains out of her dress. <i>v</i> [B; c1] get stained, spotted in color. <i>Mulabà (malabà) ang kulur sa sinínà ug ibuwad kini sa ínit</i>, The color of the dress will become uneven if it gets exposed to the sun. <i>Ayaw nag labaa (ilabà) ug pintal</i>, Don't paint it unevenly. <b>labàlabà</b> <i>v</i> [B46] have splotches of lighter or darker hue, not evenly smooth. <i>Naglabàlabà ang sinínang dikulur nga giladlad</i>, The colored dress got splotched when it was bleached in the sun.

<pb n=1109>

<p><b>labà<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>TAAS</sc> (dialectal). <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] do s.t. to enhance one's image in public. <i>Kanang íyang panghátag kwarta nagpalábà lang sa íyang papil</i>, He gave money, but only to enhance his public image. <i>n</i> action of doing s.t. for the show and not with earnest intent.

<p><b>*lába</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KILÁBA</sc>.

<p><b>labábu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LABA</sc>.

<p><b>labad</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for the head to ache. <i>Labad kaáyu ang ákung úlu</i>, I have a terrible headache. <b>2</b> giving a headache, problem. <i>Labad kaáyung tudlúan. Búgù unyà dì pa mamínaw</i>, It's a real headache to teach him. He's stupid and on top of that, he won't listen. <i>Ang pagbáyad ímung labad</i>, It's your headache how to pay it off. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46; b4] get, have a @headache. <i>Naglabad ning ákung úlu sa inyung kasábà</i>, I have a headache because of your noise. <i>Labdun (labarun) pa giyud ku ninyu ánang mga sulirána</i>, You still have to trouble me with those problems. <i>Tumar ug aspirin ug labdan ka sa úlu</i>, Take aspirin if you have a headache. <b>2</b> [B12; b4] be mentally disturbed. <i>Malabad siya basta higutman</i>, He becomes deranged if he misses meals. <b>labdunun</b> <i>a</i> @{mentally disturbed}. <b>labdanan</b> <i>a</i> prone to headaches.

<p><b>*lábad</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @propeller of a plane or wind-*mill. <b>2</b> toy propeller. <i>v</i> [a2] make into, install a propeller. <b>labadlábad</b> = <sc>PALÁBAD</sc>.

<p><b>labáda</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LABA</sc>.

<p><b>labadur</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LABA</sc>.

<p><b>labadúra</b> <i>n</i> @batter. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make a batter.

<p><b>labag,</b> lábag<sub>1</sub> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a bundle of abaca fibers consisting of thirty-two smaller bunches (<i>bituul</i>). <b>2</b> any large bundle of threads or yarn. <i>v</i> [A; a] group fibers into bunches. <i>Labágun lang ning tingkal arun mahibaw-ag pilay abutun</i>, Let's take this twine and group it in bundles so we know how much it amounts to.

<p><b>lábag<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @{wring water out}. <i>Gilabágan sa mga sumasákay ang ílang mga saput nga nahumud sa dágat</i>, The passengers of the boat wrung out the sea water from their wet clothes. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. wrung out.

<p><b>labáha</b> <i>n</i> straight @razor. <i>v</i> [A; b] shave s.o. with a straight razor. <i>Mubui ang tingkuy piru ayaw labahái</i>, Make the nape short, but don't shave it. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] shave oneself with a straight razor.

<p><b>labak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @throw s.t. hard on the ground. <i>Nakalabak na bayà kag daghang plátu. Tingálig mahurut ni</i>, You've already thrown down a lot of plates. No doubt you intend to break all of them. <b>2</b> throw s.t. away. <i>Ayaw nag ilabak, ákù na lang</i>, Don't <pb n=1110>throw that away. Let me have it. <b>3</b> [A; a1b2] spank with open palm. <i>Nakalabak ku sa íyang samput</i>, I spanked her on the buttocks.

<p><b>lábak</b> <i>v</i> [B26] for a sore or an infected wound to be opened wide. <i>Milábak (nalábak) ang íyang hubag nga gitambálan niánang tambála</i>, Her boil opened wide when that medicine was put on it.

<p><b>lab-ak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] get to have spaces or omissions in between; cause s.t. to do so, skip. <i>Mulab-ak lang kug pila ka klási arun ku masayu</i>, I will just skip some classes so I can get home early. <i>Nakalab-ak kug usa ka linya sa ákung pakigpúlung</i>, I accidentally left out a line in my speech. <i>Gilab-akan níya ang tulu ka balay únà siya muhúnung</i>, He passed up three houses before he stopped. <i>Kining pula ilab-ak nímu sa putì</i>, Intersperse these red things between the white ones. <b>1a</b> for colors to get uneven. <i>Mulab-ak ang kulur sa siní<i>n</i>à ug ibulad sa ínit</i>, The dress will get uneven in color (with dark interspersed with light) if you dry it in the sun. <b>2</b> [A; b7c1] go beyond a measure, too far or too deeply. <i>Ang karsáda milab-ak ug usa ka mitru sa ámung yútà</i>, The road encroaches onto one meter of our land. <i>Pasaylúa ku kay nakalab-ak kug sulti ganína</i>, Please forgive me for having spoken beyond the bounds of decency a while ago. <i>Gilab-ak níya paghíwà ang íyang báhin sa kík</i>, He sliced a bigger portion of the cake for himself than for others. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having spaces or omissions in between. <i>Lab-ak nga pagkakural</i>, Fencing with the posts put too far apart. <b>1a</b> being uneven in color. <b>2</b> cut too deeply, gone over the mark or limits. <i>n</i> space left, area beyond which one has gone.

<p><b>labakára</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LABA</sc>.

<p><b>laban</b> (from <i>labi</i>) greater in number, size, intensity. <b>ka-an, ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> most of a number of. <i>Kalabanan (kalabánan) sa mga Pilipínu mugbù</i>, Most Filipinos are short. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3; b2c1] exceed, be more. <i>Mulaban (malaban) sa úras ang íyang paglakaw nganhi</i>, It will take more than an hour for him to get here. <i>Hinglabanan na sad nang ímung bisyu</i>, Your vices have gone beyond the limits of tolerance. <b>2</b> [b2P] do s.t. excessively. <i>Ayaw ug palabani (labani) ug latà ang tinúlang karni</i>, Do not cook the meat overly soft.

<p><b>lában</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] take sides with. <i>Mulában ku nímu ug hustu ka</i>, I'll go to your defense if you are right. <i>Gilabánan sa Yúis ang Israil</i>, The U.S. took sides with Israel. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa nigusyu</b> cooperate in making a business do well. <i>Dúnay mga tindírang dílì mulában sa <pb n=1111>nigusyu sa ílang agáwun</i>, Some salesgirls do not do anything to help their master's business. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] defend s.o. in a lawsuit. <i>Si Aturni Katunggal ang mulában sa ákung kásu</i>, Attorney Catunggal is defending me in a lawsuit. <b>2a</b> [A; b] @{defend one's honor}, uphold the stand he has taken. <i>Naglában lang ku sa ákung dungug sa pagpatay ku níya</i>, I killed him in defense of my honor. <i>Gilabánan níya ang íyang barugánan</i>, He stood by his principles. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> be a lawyer by occupation. <i>n</i> occupation of lawyer. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to take sides with one's child or other person in whom one is interested. <i>Ayg pakig-áway ánang bat-ána kay labanan ra ba kaáyu nag inahan</i>, Don't quarrel with that child because his mother tends to take sides with him. <i>v</i> [B126] become one who mixes in quarrels. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> @attorney.

<p><b>lab-an</b> = <sc>LABAN</sc>.

<p><b>labana</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.

<p><b>labandíru,</b> <b>-a</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LABA</sc>.

<p><b>labang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5c] @cross s.t., go across, bring across. <i>Mulabang na ta, rid láyit na</i>, Let's cross now. It's red light. <i>Labangun pa nímu ang pitu ka lawud úsà ku nímu maangkun</i>, You cannot have me (lit. you have to cross seven seas before you can possess me). <i>Ilabang siya ngadtu sa píkas</i>, Bring her across the street. <b>2</b> [A2; b8] @{pass examinations}. <i>Gamay ra ang milabang sa pasúlit sa pagkaduktur</i>, Only a few people passed the doctor's examination. <b>3</b> [A; b5] come through a crisis. <i>Labangun (labangan) pa nímu ang túmang kaguul</i>, You will have to pass through great sorrow. <b>4</b> [A; b] @surpass. <i>Labangan pa kunu níya ang ríkurd ni Sulayman</i>, She says she will beat Sulaiman's record. <i>Ayaw ilabang sa napúlù ang ímung pagkúhà</i>, Don't take more than ten. <i>n</i> place across from s.t. <i>Ang ílang baul náa sa labang sa sapà</i>, Their field is across the river. <b>&mdash; pa, sa</b> @{further than}, @{more than}. <i>Labang pa niánà ang ákung buhátun ug tagáan kug higayun</i>, I'll do more than that if I'm given the chance. <b>&mdash;, -un ug pitu ka lawud</b> may it not happen, may it be impossible (lit. have to cross seven seas to commit). <i>Simbaku. Labangun (ilabang) ug pitu ka lawud nga mamatay</i>, God forbid. Let it not happen that he die! <b>-unun(<-)</b> <i>n</i> things one has to surmount, trials to which one is put. <b>-anan(<-), labnganan</b> <i>n</i> place one crosses.

<p><b>lab-ang</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] @{pass over}, @miss. <i>Milab-ang siyag usa ka dahun sa íyang gibása</i>, He skipped a page of what he was reading. <i>Lab-ang ug usa ka parapu</i>, Skip one paragraph. <i>n</i> amount missed, interval.

<pb n=1112>

<p><b>labanus</b> <i>n</i> @radishes. The white (Chinese) radishes are the variety most commonly grown in Cebu.

<p><b>labas<sub>1</sub></b> (from <i>lab-as</i>) <i>v</i> [AN; a2c] @vend or @peddle fish that one has bought (usually from the fisherman). <i>Naglabas lang ang íyang anak únà kay wà pa makasulud ug trabáhu</i>, Her daughter works buying and selling fish for the while because she doesn't have a job. <i>Ilabas ring ákung kuhà</i>, Peddle my catch. <b>-íra</b> female fish vendor. <b>-íru</b> = <sc>LABASÍRA</sc> (male).

<p><b>labas<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>GULÀ</sc> (used only by speakers strongly influenced by Tagalog). <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> boast, ostentatious display. <i>Ayaw tug tuúhi ang íyang hílak, palabas lang tu</i>, Don't pay attention to his crying fit. That was just a put-on.

<p><b>labas<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] spend entrusted money for oneself. <i>Gilabasan kug diyútay ang ímung gibílin nákù</i>, I used some of the money you had me keep for you.

<p><b>lab-as</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for s.t. quickly perishable to be @fresh. <i>Lab-as nga hángin</i>, @Fresh air. <i>Lab-as nga balità</i>, Fresh news. <i>Lab-as nga búlak</i>, Fresh flowers. <i>Lab-as isdà</i>, @{Fresh fish}. <b>2</b> fresh in manner. <i>Lab-as ra kaáyu nang ímung panlihuklihuk</i>, Your actions are very fresh. <i>n</i> fresh fish. <i>Musúruy siyag lab-as káda buntag</i>, She peddles fresh fish every morning. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] be fresh. <b>2</b> [AB2; a12] make s.t. fresh to one's mind. <i>Mga handumánan nga naglab-as sa átung kagahápun</i>, Memories that keep our past fresh. <b>nilab-as</b> <i>a</i> in a fresh way. <i>v</i> [a1] do s.t. in a fresh way. <i>Ginilab-as ku níyag pangutána</i>, He asked me in a disrespectful way. <b>-íra</b> <i>n</i> female fish vendor. <i>v</i> [B1; a12] be a fish vendor. <b>-íru</b> = <sc>LAB-ASÍRA</sc> (male).

<p><b>labat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @fence. <b>2</b> @patches made in clothing, walls, fence. <i>Ang labat sa íyang karsúnis lainláin ang kulur</i>, The patches on his pants are of various colors. <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> put up a fence. <i>Si Angì ang milabat sa ámung gardin</i>, Angi fenced our garden. <i>Labatun (labatan) nákug kawáyan ang bakilid sa ámung kalubihan</i>, I will fence the sloping part of our coconut plantation with bamboo slats. <b>2</b> @repair a hole by filling or patching it. <b>labatlabat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> rough and hurried mending. <b>2</b> makeshift fence or barrier. <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> put up a temporary fence. <b>2</b> make coarse, temporary repairs. <i>Gilabatlabatan lang námù ug mga pinunit nga káhuy ang nagubang kural</i>, We patched up the broken fence with whatever pieces of wood we found. <i>Átù lang ning labatlabatang karsúnis</i>, We'll just do quick patchwork on these trousers.

<pb n=1113>

<p><b>labatíba</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @enema. <b>2</b> the apparatus used to give an enema. <i>v</i> [A; b] give s.o. an enema. <i>Labatibáhan ta kag dì ka malibang</i>, If you don't have a B.M. I'll give you an enema.

<p><b>labaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3; c] @{jut out higher than s.t.}, @{stick out} farther from the margin or limit. <i>Milabaw ang íyang úlu sa mga táwu</i>, His head jutted above the crowd. <i>Naglabaw ang ímung kamisun</i>, Your slip is showing. <i>Ilabaw ang antína sa mga atup</i>, Put the antenna higher than the rooftops. <b>2</b> [B3; b] be more, over in degree, number. <i>Way makalabaw sa íyang kahingatag</i>, No one can surpass his generosity. <i>Labwan nákù ang ímung kininhas</i>, I'll gather more shells than you did. <b>3</b> @{be ahead} in a contest. <i>Isáka ang pusta ug mulabaw ta</i>, Raise the bet if we are ahead. <b>4</b> prevail over. <i>Milabaw ang ákung gugma sa kayugut níya</i>, My love for her prevailed over my hate. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> sticking out from the general level or margin. <i>Putla ang mga labaw</i>, Cut off the ones sticking up above the rest. <b>2</b> @more, @over in degree or number. <i>Labaw siyang dátù kay kanámù</i>, He is much richer than us. <b>3</b> @ahead in a contest. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> amount s.o. is ahead. <i>Pilay labaw sa ímung kuntra?</i> How many points is your opponent ahead of you? <b>2</b> @superior, @boss. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; pa, sa</b> in addition to, beyond. <i>Hatágan kag primyu, ug labaw pa niá<i>n</i>à, makabyáhi ka</i>, You will be given a prize, and in addition to that, you can travel. <i>Buútan siya, utúkan, ug labaw sa tanan, gwápa</i>, She is good, brainy, and above all else, she is pretty. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C; b3] try to outdo one another, vie with s.o. <i>Nagpalábaw sila sa hambug</i>, They try to outdo each other with their big talk. <i>Unsa may inyung gipalabáwan nga nagpanghugyaw man mu?</i> You must be having some sort of a contest that you're shouting so much. <b>2</b> [A12C2; b5c] play a game of any sort whereby the one who gets the highest number wins. <i>Nagpalábaw sila arun sa pag-ila kung kinsay musúgud sa dúwà</i>, They drew cards to determine who will start the game. <i>n</i> s.t. done to outdo s.o., e.g. action of winning by getting the highest number. <b>palabwánay</b> = <sc>PALÁBAW</sc>.

<p><b>labay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a] @go, @{pass by} s.t., bring s.t. by s.w. <i>Milabay lang ku, wà ku muhapit</i>, I just passed by, I didn't drop in. <i>Nakalabay na ba ang dyip?</i> Has the jeep passed by yet? <i>Labyun ku unyà tung ákung nalimtan sa inyu</i>, I'll come by to get the thing I forgot at your house. <i>Gilabyan lang ku nímu</i>, You just passed by me. <i>Ilabay kining sud-an unyà sa íla</i>, Bring this food by to them on your way. <b>2</b> [b(1)] @{pass over}, @bypass. <i>Gilabyan  <pb n=1114>níya ang ákung ngálan sa pagpanghímug prumusyun</i>, He passed my name over when he made the list of promotions. <b>3</b> [A2] for time to pass. <i>Milabay ang daghang katuígan</i>, Years passed. <i>a</i> passing, short-lived. <i>Labay lang ning hangína kay unus man</i>, This strong wind is only temporary. It is just a squall. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] let s.t. pass by. <i>Magpalabay ku sa ákung kasukù únà ku muulì</i>, I will let my anger pass before I go home. <i>Palabyun (ipalabay) lang tu nákung íyang sulti</i>, I just won't mind what she says. <b>-um-r-, -um-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> people passing back and forth. <b>2</b> @passing, @transient. <b>&mdash; pa</b> <b>1</b> beyond. <i>Ang íla labay pa sa pusti</i>, Their place is just beyond the post. <b>2</b> in addition, even more. <i>Maáyu siyang mutrabáhu, labay pa musayu siyag anhi</i>, He works well and furthermore, he comes early. <i>&lsquo;Duha ka túig ka didtu sa Amirika?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Labay pa&rsquo;</i>,[** ,&rsquo;] &lsquo;You were two years in the States?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;More than that.&rsquo; <b>3</b> surely, even more than sure. <i>&lsquo;Makapasar kahà ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Labay pa,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you think you can pass?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Most assuredly.&rsquo;

<p><b>lábay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @throw at. <i>Labáyun tikawg hanggranid animála ka</i>, I'll throw a hand grenade at you, you beast. <i>Labáyi tag duha ka buuk bi</i>, Throw me down a couple. <i>Ilábay kanákù ang búla</i>, Throw me the ball. <b>1a</b> [A; c] @{throw away}. <i>Ilábay ang mga latà</i>, Throw away the spoiled fruits. <b>1b</b> throw, discard in a card game. <b>2</b> [A; c] assign to a remote place. <i>Way láin makalábay sa mga impliyádu ngadtu sa layù gawas sa supirintindinti</i>, No one can assign the employees to a remote place except the superintendent. <i>n</i> throw. <i>Kinsang lábay run?</i> Whose turn is it to throw? <i>Ang íyang lábay walà makaabut sa paril</i>, His throw didn't get as far as the wall. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> line drawn to indicate the place at which to stand in throwing s.t. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> dumping place. <i>Ang Pásil labayánan sa tanang húgaw sa syudad</i>, Pasil is the place they dump all garbage in the city.

<p><b>labayan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> of several species of sea fish growing to 6", with fine scales, found individually zigzagging in seaweed. <b>2</b> one who seems to be always on the go, like the <i>labayan</i>.

<p><b>labhà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ABN; b4] for the skin to get welts, bruises, or red splotches; cause it to do so. <i>Nalabhà (nalabhaan) ang íyang nawung sa sagpà</i>, She got red splotches on her face when she was slapped. <i>Nanglabhà nang ímung nawung sa tipdas</i>, Your face is all splotched with measles. <b>2</b> [BN; a1P] blush, redden. <i>Milabhà (nanglabhà) ang íyang nawung sa kasukù</i>, His face became <pb n=1115>red with anger.

<p><b>labhag</b> <i>n</i> @welts, @marks, @splotches on the body. <i>Ang mga labhag sa kuku maila kaáyu</i>, You can easily tell welts made by the fingernails. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B4; b4] get welts, splotches on the body. <i>Milabhag ang íyang láwas sa tipdas</i>, His body became splotched with measles. <i>Ngánung nalabhagan ka man? Gipawù ka?</i> Why are you all covered with welts? Were you given a whipping? <b>2</b> [B; b4] appear like welts. <i>Milabhag dihà sa íyang agtang ang nagbandaybanday nga ugat</i>, His criss-*crossing veins appeared like welts on his forehead. <b>3</b> [A; a2] for emotions to leave their mark. <i>Milabhag sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga háit nga púlung</i>, Her sharp words etched themselves deeply in my memory. <b>4</b> [BN] blush, turn red all over. <i>Manlabhag ákung nawung ug makainum ku ug bínu</i>, My face gets red if I drink wine.

<p><b>labhak</b> <i>n</i> @{rectangular piece}, area. <i>Gibáhin ang syudad ug dagkung labhak</i>, The city was divided into large rectangular areas. <i>v</i> [A; c1] divide into rectangular pieces or areas. <i>Kinsay naglabhak sa káhuy nga wà maángay?</i> Who cut the wood into rectangular pieces of all different sizes?

<p><b>labhu,</b> labhù <i>v</i> [A; a3b] pour boiling water over s.t. <i>Nakalabhù ka na ba sa mga sus-anan sa bátà?</i> Have you scalded the baby's bottles yet? <i>Ayaw pagdúul sa abu, malabhù (malabhuan) ka unyà</i>, Don't go near the stove. You might get scalded. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @scalded. <i>Háin man ang ímung linabhúan?</i> Where are the things you have scalded?

<p><b>labi</b> <i>a</i> @more, @greater. <i>Ug mau nay paági pag-uma, labi ang abut sa yútà</i>, If that is the method of farming employed, the yield of the land will increase. <i>v</i> [B; b] <b>1</b> be greater than s.t. else or excessive. <i>Mulabi ang sakit ug mulíhuk ka</i>, The pain will increase if you move. <i>Naglabi ang mga gagmay sa mga dagkù</i>, There are more small ones than big ones. <i>Asgad ni kay nalabihan (nalabian) nákug timplag asin</i>, This is salty because I put too much salt into it. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nga</b> @more, @most. <i>Siyay labing dátù</i>, He is the richest one. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; pang</b> [<ix>adj.</ix>], [<ix>verb</ix>] even more [adj.], [do] all the more. <i>Usa ka labi pang kusug nga pátid</i>, Even a stronger kick. <i>Ug búang ku, labi pa siyang búang</i>, If I'm a fool, he's a greater one. <i>Ug sultíhan, labi pa siyang mangísug</i>, If you tell him, he gets all the angrier. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; na a</b> = <sc>ILABI NA</sc>. <b>b &mdash; nang</b> [<i>verb</i>] [do, did] all the more. <i>Labi na siyang nangísug</i>, He got all the more angry. <i>Labi na (pa) siyang muhílak ug sugsúgun</i>, He will cry all the more if you tease him. <b>i- na, &mdash; <pb n=1116>na</b> @especially. <i>Lamían, ilabi (labi) na ug timpláhag asin</i>, It's very tasty, esp. if you season it with salt. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] prefer, favor. <i>Magpalabi kung magpabíling pubri kay sa ingun nímu</i>, I would rather be poor than be like you. <i>Palabihun ba nímu ang ímung irù sa ímung asáwa?</i> Do you favor your dog over your wife? <b>2</b> [A; bc2] do s.t. to excess. <i>Nagpalabi siyag ínum</i>, He is drinking too much. <i>Ayaw palabihi (palabii) pagpanggà ang ímung anak</i>, Don't dote on your child too much. <i>Ayaw ipalabi (palabii) ang ímung hílak</i>, Don't cry too much. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. preferred, favored. <i>Sa iskuyláhan way pinalabi</i>, No one gets special treatment in school. <b>pa-(<-)</b> = <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>labilábi way &mdash;</b> no one gets more than anyone else. <i>Way labilábi. Púrus ángay</i>, No one gets more than anyone else. We all get a fair share. <b>palabilábi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] mistreat s.o. <i>Ayaw kug palabilabíhi (palabilabíi). Dì bayà ku nímu suluguun</i>, Don't kick me around. I'm not your servant, you know. <b>palabilabihun</b> <i>a</i> tending to mistreat. <b>mapalabilabíhun</b> <i>a</i> characterized by mistreatment. <i>Mapalabilabíhung kasábà</i>, Arrogant scolding, far beyond the limits of propriety. <b>su-(<-)</b> <b>1</b> @especially, @{all the more so}. <i>Sulábi nag timpláhag asin, wà giyuy lamì</i>, Esp. if you mix salt with it, it will have no flavor. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> better than s.t. else which has the same disadvantages to a worse extent. <i>Ibaligyà lang nà run bisag barátu sulábig mubarátu pa ugmà</i>, You'd better sell it now, even at a low price. Better than getting even less tomorrow. <i>v</i> [AP] <b>1</b> do s.t. all the more. <i>Manday gitagáan ug diyis, misulábi (mipasulábi) ug hílak</i>, I gave him a dime, but he cried all the more. <b>2</b> = <sc>PALABI</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>mapasulabíhun</b> characterized by excessive indulgence. <i>Mapasulabíhun sa babáyi</i>, Indulging in women excessively. <b>si-</b> = <sc>SU-</sc>, <i>2</i>. <b>hilabihan</b> <i>a</i> carried out to excess. <i>Nahugù siya tungud sa kaguul nga hilabihan</i>, He became thin because of his excessive sorrows. <b>labihan, labian, hilabihan, ilabihan, hilabian, hinglabihan, labihánay, hilabihánay, labhan a &mdash; nga</b> [<ix>adj.</ix>] <b>-a, ka-</b>[<ix>adj.</ix>] how very! <i>Labihang mahála sa karni, Labihan kamahal sa karni!</i> How expensive the meat is! <b>b</b> <b>&mdash; nga</b> [<b>maka-/naka-</b><i>verb</i>] how it [did]. <i>Labihang makaulan dinhig mahulyu</i>, How it rains here during the month of July. <i>Labihan níyang nakaantus</i>, How he suffered! <b>labíhay, labihánay pud (sad)</b> It's unbelievable. <i>Labihánay pud. Nakaáku (makaáku) siya niánà?</i> It seems incredible that he could do (would do) that!

<p><b>lábid</b> <i>v</i> [AC3; a] @braid, become @entwined. <i>Akuy  <pb n=1117>mulábid niíning lánut</i>, I will braid these abaca fibers into rope. <i>Nalábid ang íyang dílà sa kalisud sa mga púlung</i>, His tongue became twisted because of the difficult words. <i>Nagkalábid ang duha ka hiniktan</i>, The two roosters became entwined. <i>Kataas sa ímung buhuk! Nindut labírun</i>, How long your hair is! It would be nice to braid it. <i>n</i> s.t. braided. <i>Unsay gidak-un niánang ímung lábid?</i> How big around is the rope you braided?

<p><b>labigan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. herb of moist places, with stout-branched, aromatic rhizomes and long, flat leaves with medicinal uses: <b><i>Acorus calamus</i></b>.

<p><b>lábil</b> <i>n</i> @label, a @mark put on s.t. for identification. <i>v</i> [A; b] @label s.t. <i>Labílan lang ni nátung malíta</i>, Let us label this suitcase.

<p><b>lábing</b> <i>a</i> like @sweethearts. <i>Lábing kaáyu silang magtiayúna</i>, They are a very loving couple. <i>v</i> [B1] be loving. <i>Malábing ra man nà silag náay mutan-aw</i>, They get to be very loving if s.o. is watching them.

<p><b>labit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @stitch with a loop that holds but can be unravelled. <i>Si Lúsi ang mulabit niánang ímung panyù</i>, Lucy will stitch loops around the edges of your handkerchief. <b>labitlabit</b> <i>n</i> small bits of meat adhering to the bones or any part of a slaughtered animal. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; b5] stitch s.t. hurriedly and unevenly by hand. <b>2</b> [A13] for bits of meat to be left adhering to bones. <i>Panguháag mga unud nga naglabitlabit sa bukug</i>, Get the small bits of meat that are adhering to the bones. <i>a</i> meat which has lots of sinews. <i>Gáhì kaáyu usápun ning karníha, labitlabit</i>, This meat is very tough to chew. It is sinewy. <b>labitlabitun</b> = <sc>LABITLABIT</sc>, <i>a</i>. <b>-íra, -íru</b> <i>n</i> one who works stitching materials.

<p><b>labka</b> <i>a</i> @{partially cooked}, usually said of root crops and bananas, but sometimes of cereals as well. <i>Labka pa man ning kamúting ímung gilútù</i>, These sweet potatoes that you are cooking are still half done. <i>v</i> [B26; b5c1] cook root crops halfway, and, by extension, cereals. <i>Mulabka (malabka) ang linung-ag ug dílì maángay ang káyu</i>, Rice will become unevenly cooked if the fire underneath it is uneven. <b>labkahan</b> = <sc>LABKA</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>lablab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; ab2] @slash, @tear in a long slash. <i>Malablab ang bandíra ug kusgun ug hángin</i>, The flag will get ripped if it is blown in too strong a wind. <b>2</b> [B6; c1] be @{loose fitting}. <i>Mulablab (malablab) ang ímung sáya ug ímung padakuan</i>, Your skirt will be very loose if you have it enlarged. <b>&mdash; ang bàbà</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] shoot off the mouth with unsensical, boasting talk. <i>Naglablab ang bàbà sa táwung nahubug</i>, The man who <pb n=1118>got drunk became very talkative. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> big rip, slashed part. <i>Ang lablab sa sáku gipíkut</i>, The big rip on the sack was mended. <b>2</b> nonsensical talk, boasting. <i>a</i> loose fitting.

<p><b>labnaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{heavily diluted}, having too much water. <i>Labnaw ra ning pagkalúgaw</i>, This porridge has too much water in it. <i>Labnaw ug dugù</i>, Weak-blooded, lacking drive or guts. <b>2</b> @cool, lacking in warmth. <i>Labnaw siyag tinagdan sa mga bisíta kay dílì íyang grúpu</i>, She received her visitors <corr sic=cooly>coolly</corr> because they weren't her crowd. <i>v</i> [B; ab7] <b>1</b> be diluted, put too much water in a mixture. <i>Nagkalabnaw man ning ímung kapi nga daghan na hinúun kag súkì</i>, Your coffee is becoming weaker now that you have lots of customers. <b>2</b> get too cold, lacking in ardor.

<p><b>labni</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @snatch, grab with a jerk, esp. s.t. that s.o. has. <i>Wà mailhi sa dalága ang milabni sa íyang pitáka</i>, The maiden did not recognize the man who snatched her bag. <i>Gilabni lang níya ang suwat sa ákung kamut</i>, He just snatched the letter out of my hand.

<p><b>labnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @snatch s.t. attached or just placed s.w. with a jerk. <i>Gilabnit ang íyang bangkaw ug mikaratil pagkanáug</i>, He grabbed his spear from the place he had put it and rushed out.

<p><b>labnub, labnug</b> = <sc>LAGNUB</sc>.

<p><b>labnut</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @pull s.t. with a jerk, usually s.t. that is in s.t. else. <i>Sa íyang kapungut gilabnut níya ang tahì sa sanínà</i>, In her anger she ripped out the stitches of her dress. <i>Ang kurd sa plantsa dílì labnútun, hináyun pag-ibut</i>, You should pull out the cord slowly, not with a jerk. <i>Gilabnútan aku níya sa buhuk</i>, He pulled my hair.

<p><b>labsik</b> <i>a</i> @lovesick. <i>Labsik kaáyu nà siya, maung ganíwang</i>, He is so lovesick that he has grown thin. <i>v</i> [B12] get lovesick.

<p><b>labsit</b> <i>n</i> game of tennis or pingpong played so that a player is declared winner if he gets half the score of the set without letting his opponent get a single point. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] win by this method. <i>Musúkul ka nákù labsítun tika</i>, Are you going to play against me? I'm going to beat you eleven to nothing. <b>2</b> [a12b8] get nothing for one's efforts. <i>Wà ku makalabsit sa ákung pagpanágat</i>, I did not go fishing for nothing. I got s.t.

<p><b>labtik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{strike with a flicking or snapping motion}. <i>Labtíkan tikaw sa lastiku</i>, I'll flick the rubber band at you. <i>Hilabtikan ka sa nawung ug buy-an ku ring sanga</i>, You'll get lashed in the face if I let go off this branch suddenly. <b>2</b> [B46] for a mechanism <pb n=1119>to click or snap. <i>Nagpúsing pa ku, nilabtik na diay ang kamira</i>, I was still posing, but the camera had already clicked. <b>2a</b> [A] for the heart to @beat. <i>Milabtik ang ákung dughan sa kahinangup</i>, My heart beat with joy at seeing her. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @whip or s.t. to flick at s.t. <b>1a</b> reins of a carabao: a rope usually about 3&ndash;4 meters long attached to the end of the nose cord (<i>pangilung</i>). It is snapped on the carabao's back to urge it on. <b>2</b> action of flicking. <b>pa-</b> @hint, s.t. said indirectly. <i>Ang íyang mulù nga wà pay swildu ági lag palabtik nga muhulam siyag kwarta</i>, His complaints that he hadn't been paid were just his way of hinting that he'd like to borrow money. <i>v</i> [A; b] give hints.

<p><b>labting</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @whip s.o. by flicking s.t. long and somewhat pliant at him. <i>Gilabtíngan nákù siyag tualya</i>, I flicked her with my towel.

<p><b>labtingaw, labtíngaw</b> <i>a</i> moderately @salted fish, not completely dried. <i>v</i> [AB6; c1] dry fish, but not completely, with a moderate amount of salt. <i>Milabtíngaw silag bulad ug daghang isdà pára sa húngus</i>, They half dried a quantity of moderately salted fish for the work bee. <i>Walà malabtíngaw (mulabtíngaw) ang buwad kay naulanan</i>, The salted fish did not dry even part way because it got rained on.

<p><b>labu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for ripe fruit, cooked root crops, and squash to have a dry and consistent texture of meat without being soggy. <b>2</b> for skin to be dry. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] get to have a dry and consistent texture. <b>2</b> [B] get dry skin. <i>Mulabu ang pánit sa síging kalígù</i>, A person who always goes swimming will get dry skin.

<p><b>*labu<sub>2</sub></b> <b>kwartang ma-</b> sure, @{easy money}. <i>Kwartang malabu ug maáyu kang ahinti, láway ray puhúnan</i>, It's sure money if you're a good sales agent. All you need for capital is yourself (lit. your saliva).

<p><b>lábu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] @{sink deeply}. <i>Milábu ang ayis pik sa dughan ni Kindi</i>, The ice pick sank deep into Candy's breast. <i>Mu ra ka man ug bairan nga nalábu sa lápuk</i>, You take forever to come back when I send you s.w. (Lit. You are like a whetstone thrown into the mud and fail to come up.) <b>2</b> [A1; c6] throw overboard. <i>Ang mga ismaglir naglábu sa ílang mga karga samtang gibugtaw sa taga kustum</i>, The smugglers jettisoned their cargo when the customs men pursued them. <b>3</b> [AP; b5] go into a woman. <i>Kinsa na sad kahay mulábu (mupalábu) niánang bayhana karung gabíi?</i> I wonder who will use that woman tonight. <b>4</b> [B26; a1] for <pb n=1120>garments to become loose-fitting and flapping. <i>Milábu (nalábu) ang íyang mga siní<i>n</i>à karung daut na siya</i>, Her clothing has gotten loose now that she lost weight. <i>n</i> depth of s.t. sunk in. <i>Usa giyud ka pulgáda ang lábu sa lansang sa íyang lapalapa</i>, The nail sank 1" into the sole of his foot. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. net fishing whereby the net is spread before the sun sets and hauled in some hours later, but before the sun rises. <i>v</i> [A; c1] go net fishing in this way.

<p><b>lábu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; ab2] @{fool s.o. by flattery or lies}. <i>Nalábu sa kandidátu ang mga pumipilì, nakadaug giyud</i>, The voters were fooled by the candidate, so he won. <b>&mdash; líbà, &mdash; kasuy</b> <i>n</i> s.t. said to fool s.o. <i>Lábu líbà (kasuy) lang ang mga pasálig sa tinuryu</i>, The Don Juan's promises are designed to deceive. <b>linabúhan, pinanglabúhan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. gained by flattery or deceit. <b>-um-r-</b> <i>a</i> flatterer, deceiver.

<p><b>lábu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B46] for fish to run in schools. <i>Mulábu ang mga isdà sa ímung tungud kun patungdan mug sugà</i>, Fish gather in throngs beneath you if you beam a light down into the water. <i>Ang paun nga íyang gisabúlak mauy nakalábu (nakapalábu) sa mga isdà</i>, The bait that he sprinkled around in the water made the fish gather in schools. <i>n</i> school of fish, throng of people.

<p><b>labù</b> = <sc>LABU<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>lábù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB] for vision to get @blurred; cause it to do so. <i>Milábù ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà</i>, Her vision was blurred with tears.

<p><b>lábù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2] @{grow thick and lush}. <i>Mulábù ang mga tanum kun hambúkan</i>, Plants will grow thick and lush if you loosen the soil around the base. <i>a</i> lush, thick in growth. <i>Lábù ug kílay</i>, Thick eyebrows.

<p><b>lab-u</b> = <sc>LABHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>labud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @welt. <i>Dílà ra ang walay labud nímu</i>, I'll beat every inch of you. (Lit. only your tongue will escape welts.) <b>2</b> k.o. milliped, about 5" long and an inch around, found in moist earth. The body is covered with a hard, black shell divided into thin segments which go around the body and overlap. It does not bite but secretes a clear yellow substance which burns the skin and may blind the eyes. <b>3</b> lies designed to convince s.o. (slang). <i>Dì ku mutúu nímu kay labud nà</i>, I don't believe you, because that is nothing more than big talk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN; b4N] get welts on. <i>Nanglabud (gipalabdan) ang ákung bukubuku</i>, My back has welts all over it. <b>2</b> [a4] infested with millipeds. <i>Gilabud ang sílung sa ámung balay</i>, The area under our house is full of millipeds. <b>3</b> [A; a]  <pb n=1121>convince s.o. with lies (slang). <i>Nakalabud siya sa íyang asáwa nga pasurúyun,</i> He told his wife some tall stories so she would let him go out.

<p><b>labug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dish consisting of shredded boiled fish stewed in vinegar, coconut juice, and spices. <b>2</b> dish consisting of shredded broiled fish mixed with pickled fish. <i>v</i> [A; ac1] fix <i>labug</i>. <i>Labugun lang ni nátung pági,</i> Let's cook this rayfish in vinegar and coconut juice. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LABUG</sc>.

<p><b>lábug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] throw out. <i>Dílì ku mulábug ug butang hangtud dílì madúnut,</i> I don't throw things away until they are rotten. <i>Sábà dinhà, ikaw unyà ang ákung ilábug,</i> Keep quiet, or I will throw you out. <i>Nahilábug (nalábug) ku paglíkù ug kalit sa trák,</i> I was thrown a distance when the bus made an abrupt curve. <b>2</b> [A3P; c] assign s.o. to a far away place. <i>Ang kuntra níyang supirbisur mauy milábug níya ngadtu sa búkid,</i> The supervisor that had a grudge against him assigned him to teach in the mountains. <i>n</i> distance to which s.t. is thrown.

<p><b>labuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] for a chicken to attack.<i> Milabuk ang himungáan dihang gihilabtan ang pisù,</i> The hen charged when s.o. messed with her chicks. <b>1a</b> charge into a fray like a chicken. <i>Gilabukan níya ang íyang kuntra sa dihang gimiramiráhan siya,</i> She lunged at her enemy when he waved his finger at her. <b>1b</b> [CP; acP] have cocks fight each other for practice. <i>Nakiglábuk (nakigpalábuk) si Talyu sa íyang tiksas sa halsi sa íyang silíngan,</i> Talyo had his Texas cock have a practice fight with his neighbor's Hulsey. <b>1c</b> [A] come in a gust. <i>Milabuk ang hángin ug unyà mikalma dáyun,</i> The wind gusted and then calmed down. <i>Katáhap nga milabuk sa íyang pangísip,</i> A suspicion that suddenly arose in his mind. <b>2</b> [A] go after what one wants. <i>Ingun ka báyut siya. Mulabuk sad nà ug makalugar,</i> You said he was a sissy, but I assure you he won't sit on his hands if he gets half a chance. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; sa hílum</b> go after what one wants without letting on to others. <i>Milabuk siya sa hílum ug nakaunag hangyù,</i> He moved in without letting others notice it, and he was the first one to ask. <i>n</i> way of attacking. <b>hílum, sikrítu ug &mdash;</b> doing things on the sly (secretly). <i>Pahilumhílum nang tawhána, apan sikrítug labuk,</i> That man pretends to be quiet, but actually he is doing things on the sly. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> action of clashing with one another. <b>labuklábuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] do s.t. intermittently. <i>Ígù lang siyang mulabuklábuk sa trabáhu <pb n=1122>kay may láin siyang lingaw,</i> He just appears at work from time to time because he has other diversions.

<p><b>lab-uk</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b3] <b>1</b> swallow one's saliva. <i>Nagpanlab-uk siya sa láway sa kaíbug,</i> He swallowed his spittle in his great desire. <b>2</b> = <sc>LAD-UK</sc>. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of swallowing the saliva. <b>2</b> = <sc>LAD-UK</sc>.

<p><b>labulábu</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ab25] do s.t. with intensity and unrestrainedly. <i>Ug mulabulábu ug trabáhu wà man gihápuy ingkris,</i> If I work very hard, I still won't get a raise. <i>Naglabulábu ang káun sa inyu,</i> They were eating in great quantities and without restraint at your house. <i>Hinglabulabúhan lagig hawuk, padilìdílì bítaw,</i> She was subjected to intense and rough kissing. That's what she gets for pretending not to want to.

<p><b>labun, lábun</b> <b>1</b> when in fact, actually.<i> Gwápa kaáyu, labun hugawan diay,</i> She is beautiful, but actually she has dirty habits. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; kay</b> anyway, [so-and-so] is OK. In any case ... <i>Musugut sad kug dílì ta mangadtu, labun kay daghan ku ug trabáhu,</i> It would be all right with me if we don't go there. Anyway, I have lots of work to do. <b>3</b> while, to take advantage of a situation. <i>Manan-aw tag sini labun daghan pa kug kwarta,</i> Let's go see a movie while I still have lots of money. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B46] be more prevalent. <i>Maglabun ang sulti kay sa búhat,</i> There is more talk than action. <b>-ay(<-), si-, si-(<-)</b> = <sc>LABUN</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] be partial, have preference for. <i>Nagpalabun si Albin sa pagkatúlug kay sa pagsuruysúruy,</i> Alvin would rather sleep than go around. <i>Palabunun kung mag-inusára kay sa magminyù nga maglisudlisud,</i> I'd rather be alone than marry and be financially hard up. <i>Ákù ning ipalabun ang dakung páhat sa tigúlang,</i> I'll give the old woman the bigger share.

<p><b>labung<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>DABUNG</sc>.

<p><b>labung<sub>2</sub>, lábung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> abundant and long of growth. <i>Labung (lábung) ang buhuk sa ákung anak,</i> My child has thick, lush hair. <i>Lábung ang kúgun,</i> The saw grass is growing tall and thick. <b>2</b> exaggerating for the sake of bragging. <i>Labung ug sinultihan, Boastful in his speech.</i> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] growing abundantly. <i>Milabung ang mga sagbut pag-ulan,</i> The weeds and grasses became thick and lush when it rained. <b>2</b> [B; c1] become boastful. <i>Gilábung níya ang íyang sinultihan arun pagpatúu nga dakù siyang asyindíru,</i> He spoke in a bragging way to make people believe he was a big plantation owner.

<p><b>labur</b> <i>n</i> embroidery. <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] embroider. <i>Mga madring Bilgas ang naglabur sa <pb n=1123>mga bílung pinya</i>, The Belgian sisters embroidered the pineapple fiber veils. <i>Ákung gilaburan ang tanang panyù nga ákung gipangrigálu</i>, I embroidered all the handkerchiefs I gave out as gifts.

<p><b>laburaturyu</b> <i>n</i> @laboratory.

<p><b>labut</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LUBUT</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>lábut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @concern, @connection, part of. <i>Wà kay lábut sa ámung gipanagsultíhan</i>, What we are talking about is no concern of yours. <i>Wà kuy lábut sa nahitabù</i>, I have nothing to do with what happened. <b>2</b> @including. <i>Lábut ba ning baskit sa prisyu sa prútas?</i> Is the basket included in the price of the fruits? <i>Lábut ka sa íyang kasukù</i>, You're included in his anger. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; pa</b> @besides that. <i>Tagáan siyag primyu. Lábut pa maasáwa níya ang prinsísa</i>, He will be given a reward, and besides he can marry the princess. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN23; c1] concern oneself with s.t., be included in the responsibility for s.t. <i>Dì lang ku mulábut (manlábut) ánà kay mu ra mag siyay sad-an</i>, I won't mix into that affair because he's apparently guilty. <i>Ayawg ilábut ang inahan nákù sa áway</i>, Don't drag my mother into the quarrel. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> = <sc>HILABUT</sc>. <b>hi-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a] <b>1</b> @touch, @meddle with s.t. or s.o., cause trouble or bother. <i>Ang muhilabut niíning ákung butang mapawù gayud</i>, Whoever touches my things will get a whipping. <i>Hilabtan gánì nang ákung manghud</i>, If you dare meddle with my little sister,... <b>2</b> steal. <i>Hipúsa ang ímung aláhas, hilabtan unyà</i>, Put your jewels in a safe place. They might be stolen. <b>3</b> have @{sexual intercourse} (euphemism). <i>Wà siya muhilabut (manghilabut) sa íyang asáwa kay nagdaut pa man kini</i>, He did not have sexual intercourse with his wife because she was still sick. <b>4</b> harm. <i>Dílì na makahilabut nátù ang úngù kay dúna man tay panagang</i>, That vampire can't harm us because we have a charm. <b>hilabtánun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @meddlesome, given to stealing. <b>2</b> tending to molest women. <i>Sus, pagbantay giyud mu ánang lakíha, hilabtánun ra ba nag babáyi</i>, My! Better be careful. That man is known to be dangerous to women. <b>labutlabut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] become meddlesome. <i>Ayawg labutlabut sa ámung áway</i>, Don't meddle in our quarrel. <b>2</b> [c] include s.t. which shouldn't be included. <i>Ayawg ilabutlabut sa átung lális ang way lábut</i>, Don't include irrelevant matters in our argument. <b>pangi-, panggi-, pangin-, panghi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] meddle in with s.t., make s.t. one's business. <i>Ngánung manggilábut ku sa inyung prublíma?</i> Why should I mix in with your problems? <i>Ngánung panggilabútan  <pb n=1124>pa níya ang ákung kaminyúun?</i> Why is he meddling into my wedding plans? <b>ig-, dílì ig-</b> not related. <i>Makapangasáwa ka níya, kay dílì mu siya iglábut</i>, You can marry her because she is unrelated to you. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> involvement, responsibility. <i>Ang taksi draybir may kalabútan sa káwat</i>, The taxi driver had s.t. to do with the robbery.

<p><b>*labuy</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{ignore s.t. said against one's own person}. <i>Maldíta kaáyu nang bayhána, dì giyud nà mupalabay ug sulti, suklían giyud</i>, That woman is ill-natured. She never lets a word pass without answering back. <i>Ipalabuy (palabuya) lang ang mga huhungíhung nga way katinúan</i>, Just ignore groundless rumors. <b>palabuylábuy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] give hints. <i>Palabuylabúyi ug sulti si Máma arun makasabut nga nagkinahanglan tag kwarta</i>, Give Mama some hints so she will understand that we need money.

<p><b>labúyù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{adolescent rooster}. <b>2</b> wild chicken, male or female, characterized by its smallness as compared with the domestic ones. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having the characteristics of a wild chicken.

<p><b>labyug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB46; c] @swing vigorously with a sweeping arc. <i>Grabíha sad nímung nakalabyug sa dúyan</i>, My, how vigorously you swing the hammock. <i>Milabyug ang bágun nga gikumbitáyan ni Tarsan</i>, The vine that Tarzan rode swung with sweeping arc. <i>Ilabyug ang písì úsà ilábay</i>, Swing the rope vigorously before you throw it. <b>2</b> [A13] wear a loose style of trousers. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> swinging motion with a sweeping arc. <b>2</b> style of loose-fitting trousers. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a] go fishing with a line. <i>Ang katambak panlabyúgun</i>, Porgies are caught by casting a line. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LABYUG</sc>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>lad-an</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁLA</sc>.

<p><b>lad-ang</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> water having a slightly salty taste. <i>Lad-ang ang túbig sa atábay nga duul sa dágat</i>, Water from a well near the sea tends to taste a bit salty. <b>1a</b> for drinking water or soup to have a flat taste. <b>2</b> responding with no enthusiasm, coldly. <i>Lad-ang ang íyang tinagdan kanákù</i>, She gave me a cool reception. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a6] get, be flat or salty tasting. <i>Mulad-ang (malad-ang) ang túbig human pabukála</i>, Water tastes flat after it is boiled. <b>2</b> [B; a12] be cool in one's dealings with s.o.

<p><b>ladíla</b> <i>n</i> @trowel for plastering or smoothing out cement. <i>v</i> [A; b5] use a trowel on s.t.

<p><b>ladlad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> spread soaped white clothes under the sun to bleach them. <i>Nagladlad siya sa íyang mga sinabunan sa kasagbutan</i>, She spread the soaped clothes on the grass. <i>Ang mga dikulur ayaw iladlad</i>, Don't spread <pb n=1125>the colored things out to bleach. <b>2</b> @spread for display. <i>Iladlad ang mga baligyà sa asíras</i>, Spread the goods to display them on the sidewalk. <i>Dílì ángay iladlad ang láwas sa publiku</i>, It is not proper to display your body to the public. <b>2a</b> @show, @present, @tell. <i>Miladlad siya sa ákung angsu nga kagahápun</i>, She spread the smelly details of my past out for the public to enjoy. <b>3</b> [A; c] set a fishline or net. <i>Dì ta muladlad sa pukut sa duha ka dupa kay mabaw ra</i>, We will not set the net at two fathoms because it's a bit too shallow. <i>n</i> goods laid out on the sidewalk for display. <i>Kining guntínga didtu níya mapalit sa ladlad</i>, She bought this pair of scissors from a sidewalk vendor. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> soaped clothes spread for bleaching.

<p><b>láds</b> <i>v</i> [A] @lodge, @rent a room or sleeping space. <i>n</i> @loge in a movie house. <b>ladyir</b> <i>n</i> lodger.

<p><b>lad-uk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> @{gulp down} a liquid. <i>Mulad-uk lang siyag kapi dáyung adtus trabáhu</i>, He gulps down a cup of coffee before leaving for work. <b>2</b> = <sc>LAB-UK</sc>. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of swallowing liquids. <b>2</b> quantity of liquid in a swallow. <i>Tulu ka lad-uk sa túbig ígung ipugung sa uhaw</i>, Three swallows of water, enough to stave off thirst.

<p><b>ladyir</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁDS</sc>.

<p><b>laga</b> = <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.

<p><b>làgà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] broil water or water with s.t. in it: coffee, medicinal herbs, and the like. <i>Naglàgà kug luy-a pára sa nagsakit kung tiyan</i>, I am brewing ginger tea for my stomachache. -anan <i>n</i> any cooking utensil used for boiling purposes.

<p><b>lagáak</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3(1)46] produce a loud cracking or splitting sound. <i>Kusug nga nakalagáak ang kawáyan pagpíkas niíni</i>, The bamboo produced a loud cracking sound when it was split.

<p><b>lag-ab<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{drink in large gulps}, drink greedily. <i>Adtu na pud sa tubaan. Paglag-ab na pud didtu</i>, Go on to the drinking stand. Swig your toddy. <i>Ug lag-ábun nímu ang sabaw, dì na hisalinan ang uban</i>, If you gulp all of the soup down, there won't be any left for the others. <i>n</i> gulp. <i>Sa usa ka lag-ab nahurut níya ang usa ka básu</i>, He drank up the glassful in one gulp.

<p><b>lag-ab<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> having spaces in between. <i>Lag-ab ang pagkasalug sa balay</i>, The flooring was put in with spaces between the floor boards. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] get spaces between. <i>Naglag-ab ang kamaisan kay daghan ang wà muturuk</i>, The corn plants came up far apart because so many failed to germinate. <i>Nalag-aban ang ámung baul sa karsáda</i>, The road divided  <pb n=1126>our field. <b>2</b> [A; b7] @{destroy a large portion of s.t.}, remove a large chunk out of. <i>Ang bagyung Naring milag-ab sa ámung kalubihan</i>, Typhoon Naring destroyed a large number of our coconut plants. <i>Gilag-ában ug dakù ang kík</i>, A big part was taken off the cake. <i>n</i> amount taken off.

<p><b>lag-ab<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] belch, burp. <i>Milag-ab siya sa kabusug</i>, He burped because he was full. <i>Dílì makatulug ang bátà ug dílì makalag-ab</i>, The child can't go to sleep unless he burps.

<p><b>lagablab</b> (from <i>lablab</i>) <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for clothing to be loose so as to be flapping. <b>2</b> @{talking continuously} and inconsequentially. <i>Katuúhan ba gud nà nga lagablab man</i>, Can you believe him when he babbles on all the time? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] be loose and flapping. <i>Nalagablab ang pagkatahì sa íyang sinínà</i>, After it was sewed, her dress was so loose it flapped. <i>Naglagablab ang íyang ági sa íyang paglabay</i>, She passed by with her skirts flapping. <i>Naglagablab ang bandíra</i>, The flag flapped. <b>2</b> [A; c] blab, talk too much. <i>Sugut lang nà siyag way káun basta makalagablab lang</i>, She doesn't mind not eating so long as she can shoot off her mouth. <i>Pagbantay unyag kining ímung hidunggan ímung ilagablab</i>, Better watch out if you blabber about what you heard here.

<p><b>lagak, lágak</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @lower s.t. on a line. <i>Dinhi lang nátù lagákun (ilágak) ang báling</i>, Let us just cast the fishing net here. <i>n</i> length of line lowered.

<p><b>lagàlà</b> <i>a</i> given to loud @boasting. <i>n</i> action of boasting. <i>Maáyu sa abugádu nang lagàlà, kay dílì palúpig</i>, Having a big mouth is good for lawyers, because no one can outdo them. <i>v</i> [B12] be vocally boastful. <i>Nagkalagàlà si Ídi nga nagkadakù ang íyang katungdánan</i>, Eddie is getting more and more loud-mouthed with his boasting now that he has been promoted. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> @boastful sort.

<p><b>lagàlagà</b> <i>n</i> a darting light from a flickering fire or phosphorescent light. <i>Ang lagàlagà sa mga aniníput nakahátag ug talagsaung dan-ag</i>, The flashes of phosphorescence given off by the fireflies gave an unusual brightness. <i>v</i> [A] give off flashes of darting light. <i>Naglagàlagà ang lamparilya nga nahutdan sa gás</i>, The kerosene lamp is flickering because it ran out of gas.

<p><b>lagalaw</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) = <sc>LAGARAW</sc>.

<p><b>lagamak</b> = <sc>LUGAMAK</sc>.

<p><b>lagang<sub>1</sub>[**<sub>1</sub></b> typo?] <i>n</i> chambered nautilus.

<p><b>lagapak,</b> <b>lagápak</b> = <sc>LUGAPAK</sc>.

<p><b>lagaplap</b> <i>v</i> [A] for s.t. flat to come partly off so as to flap. <i>Mulagaplap ang lapalapa <pb n=1127>sa sapátus ug maukang,</i> The sole of your shoe will flap if it comes partly off.

<p><b>lagarat, lagárat</b> <i>a</i> harsh and grating sound of voice. <i>Misinggit siyag pakitábang sa lagarat nga tíngug,</i> She called for help in a raspy, hoarse voice. <i>Lagarat sa masinggan,</i> The rat-a-tat-tat of the machine gun. <i>v</i> [B2S; a] for the voice to get harsh, grating. <i>Magkalagarat ang tíngug sa táwu nga palaínum,</i> A heavy drinker's voice becomes harsh with time.

<p><b>lagaraw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. long @machete with a blunt end which curves downward, used for rough clearing, picking up coconuts, and the like. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] wear or use a <i>lagaraw</i>.

<p><b>lagárì</b> <i>n</i> @saw. <i>v</i> [A; a] saw.

<p><b>lagas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a person to be @old. <i>Dalágang lagas,</i> Old maid. <b>2</b> for corn to ripen. <i>Lagas na ang mais.</i> <i>Sanggiun na,</i> The corn is mature, ready for harvesting. <b>3</b> withered, shriveled up to the point that it falls off the stem. <i>Nagkayamúkat ang nataran sa lagas,</i> The yard is untidy with all the fallen leaves. <b>4</b> having spent long s.w. <i>Lagas na ku dinhi sa Pilipínas,</i> I've spent a long time here in the Philippines. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] for a person to become old. <i>Mulagas (malagas) kag dalì ug maghínay kag panuyù,</i> You'll age fast if you are always angry. <b>2</b> [B2] for corn to mature, be ready for harvest. <b>2a</b> [b8] be overtaken by the ripening of corn. <i>Malagasan ka na lang ánang ímung gitanum, dílì ka pa makaamural,</i> Those corn seedlings will be ready for harvest before you get around to proposing. <b>3</b> [APB; a] for leaves, fruits to wither and fall off; cause them to do so. <i>Yugyúga ang mansanítas arun mulagas (malagas) ang mga búnga ug dáhun,</i> Shake the tree so that its dried leaves and fruits will fall off. <b>4</b> [B5] for a period of time to come to an end. <i>Maghinayhínay na kug panghípus kay nagkalagas na ang adlaw,</i> I had better begin packing up as the day is coming to an end.

<p><b>lagas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @pursue, run after. <i>Nakalagas ku sa trák kay gilabyan lang ku,</i> I was forced to run after the truck because it just passed me by. <b>2</b> [b8] get caught up with. <i>Diin ka hilagasi?</i> Where did they catch up with you?

<p><b>lagasak</b> <i>n</i> splattering, pattering noise made by water falling on s.t. <i>v</i> [A] for water to make a splattering noise. <i>Naglagasak ang íhì níya sa batu,</i> Her urine made a splashing sound as it hit the rocks.

<p><b>lagat<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for root crops or bananas to have a soft, stringy consistency with no flavor. <i>Lagat ning sagínga kay ahat pagkahinug,</i> These <pb n=1128>bananas are soft and stringy because they were picked before they were ripe. <i>v</i> [B; a1] get soggy and fibrous. <i>Mulagat ang kamúti ug madugay ug húmul sa túbig</i>, Sweet potatoes become soggy if they are left soaking in water too long.

<p><b>lagat<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the eyes to be @bulging. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B23] for the eyes to bulge. <i>Nilágat ang íyang mga mata sa kahibúlung</i>, His eyes popped out of his head in surprise.

<p><b>lagatak</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @clattering, slapping, thudding noise of numerous things hitting s.t. <b>2</b> = <sc>LAGASAK</sc>. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> strike with a clatter. <i>Milagatak ang mga batu sa bungbung</i>, The stones hit the wall with a rattling sound. <i>Milagatak ang mga sinsilyu sa simintu</i>, The coins dropped with a clatter on the cement floor. <b>2</b> shell out a large amount of money for s.t. not necessary. <i>Upat ka gatus ang nalagatak níya sa nayitklab</i>, He spent four hundred pesos at the night club. <b>3</b> = <sc>LAGASAK</sc>.

<p><b>lagatlat</b> <i>a</i> for corn grits to be wet and unevenly cooked. <i>v</i> [B6; c1] for corn grits to come out lagatlat. <i>Mulagatlat ang linung-ag ug daghan ang túbig ug kúwang sa káyu</i>, Corn grits come out wet and unevenly cooked if you use too much water and not enough fire.

<p><b>lagatukan</b> <i>a</i> almost cooked, but not quite. <i>Lagatukan pa ang kamunggay, ayaw ú<i>n</i>à haúna</i>, The vegetables are not quite soft. Let them cook a bit longer.

<p><b>lagaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. deep sea fish with pink skin about 6" in length and 2" in width, caught in large schools.

<p><b>lagay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (coarse). <b>2</b> @{scrotal sack} encasing the testicles. <i>v</i> [a12] be hit or struck on the penis or in the scrotum. <i>Lagaya siya pagpátid</i>, Kick him in the balls.

<p><b>lagay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @bribe, grease the palm (slang). <i>Wà man ka mulagay mau nga gidakup ka</i>, You didn't give him anything, so you were arrested. <b>2</b> bribes given to s.o. in power.

<p><b>lagbà</b> = <sc>LABÀ<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lagbas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b5] @pierce or traverse through. <i>Milagbas sa íyang panumdúman ang tíngug sa íyang asáwa</i>, The voice of his wife passed through his mind. <i>Milagbas ang lansang ngari sa píkas</i>, The nail pierced through the other side. <i>Lagbasun (lagbasan) ning sinilása ug lansang</i>, A nail can pierce through these slippers. <b>2</b> [A2; a123] arrive at a destination after having gone through s.t. <i>Dúgay kung kalagbas dinhi kay daghan kug gihapithapitan</i>, It took me a long time to get here because I had to stop at several <pb n=1129>places. <b>3</b> [AC; bc] go, bring s.t. beyond s.t. <i>Tingálig magkalagbas ta</i>, I'm afraid we might pass by each other without knowing it. <i>Makalagbas ka kahà sa íyang abilidad?</i> Do you think you can surpass his ability? <i>Gilagbasan námù ang inyung balay</i>, We went beyond your house. <b>&mdash; sa</b> <b>1</b> through an area or over a stretch of time. <i>Babáying naglakaw lagbas sa háwan sa tulunghaan</i>, A woman walking across the courtyard of the school. <b>2</b> beyond s.t. <i>Lagbas pa sa pusti</i>, Beyond the post. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place one passes through. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a mark left by s.t. that passed.

<p><b>lagdà</b> <i>n</i> pattern or outline to which s.t. is to conform. <b>1</b> rules of behavior or action. <i>Lagdà sa gramatika</i>, Rules of grammar. <i>Lagdà sa pamatásan</i>, Code of behavior. <b>2</b> temporary stitches to be sewn over. <b>2a</b> tracing. <b>3</b> signature. <i>Way lagdà ang tsíki</i>, The check lacks a signature. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] give a set of rules to be followed. <i>Unsay gilagdà sa Kudigu Pinal báhin niíni?</i> What does the Penal Code state about this? <b>2</b> [A; a] baste, make temporary stitches prior to sewing. <i>Gilagdaan pa ni, dílì untà maghíbat</i>, If you had basted it first, it wouldn't have come out crooked. <b>2a</b> [A; c1] trace a pattern. <i>Ang tiil sa bátà gilagdà ku sa papil</i>, I traced the outline of the child's foot on a piece of paper. <b>3</b> [A; b] affix one's signature.

<p><b>lagdas</b> <i>a</i> careless, not giving s.t. its proper attention. <i>v</i> [AP; bP] <b>1</b> do s.t. without proper care. <i>Mulagdas (mupalagdas) lang nag higdà bísan ása</i>, He lies down any old place. <i>Hikaiktan kay naglagdas man lag sulti</i>, He got scolded because he spoke without thinking. <i>Gipalagdásan (gilagdásan) lang níla ang nigusyu maung nabangkarúta</i>, They just let their business go, so it went bankrupt. <b>2</b> be any old place, everywhere. <i>Gibutangan nákug hilu ánang gabíi<corr>.</corr> Pagkabuntag nanglagdas na ang ilagà</i>, I put out poison for the rats that night, and in the morning the rats were scattered all over the place. <b>3</b> [A12] = <b>PA-</b>, <i>1.</i> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] stay in a place without moving away, though there may be good reason to settle elsewhere. <i>Mupalagdas (magpalagdas) lang ku sa ámù kay mahadluk kung mulangyaw</i>, I'll stay in our place forever because I'm afraid to migrate. <b>2</b> [A; c1] fish with the <i>palagdas</i> set s.w. <i>n</i> fishing with a pole which is left alone s.w. and tended only when s.t. bites. <b>pama-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] put in an application s.w. on a slim chance. <i>Mamalagdas lang kug aplay dihà básin pag dawátun</i>, I'll try my luck in applying in case I am accepted.

<pb n=1130>

<p><b>lagdù</b> <i>n</i> droplets. <i>Gagmayng lagdù nga namilit sa kadahúnan</i>, Small droplets that stuck to the leaves. <i>v</i> [B6] form droplets, fall in droplets. <i>Milagdù ang ákung mga lúhà sa ákung kaapíngan</i>, My tears formed droplets on my cheeks.

<p><b>lagduk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a small stake. <b>2</b> penis (humorous slang). <b>3</b> &mdash; <b>ang anínu</b> noon (lit. for the shadow to have been driven in the ground like a stake). <b>3a</b> noon (short for <i>lagduk ang anínu</i>). <i>Lagduk na (ang anínu) pag-abut námù</i>, It was noon when we arrived. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] drive a small stake into the ground. <i>Maglagduk kug tugwáyan sa kábaw</i>, I'll drive a peg to tether my carabao to. <b>1a</b> stick s.t. into s.t. <i>Ilagduk ang kandílà sa kik</i>, Stick the candles into the cake. <b>1b</b> [A; c] hold oneself upright and firm. <i>Makalagduk na si Bíbi pagtindug</i>, Baby can stand by herself now. <b>2</b> [A13; c] put a fighting cock out in the yard by staking the tether string to the ground. <i>Kinsay naglagduk sa manuk diris gardin?</i> Who tied the cock here in the garden? <b>3</b> [A; a2] in bowling, throw the ball keeping the feet together in place without moving them or taking a step. <i>Nakalagduk na ku, apan wà ku kadaug</i>, I tried throwing the ball without taking a step, but I couldn't win. <b>4</b> [B3; b4] for the sun to be directly above one. <i>Mulagduk ang adlaw ug maalas dúsi</i>, The sun gets directly above you at twelve o'clock. <b>4a</b> be, become noon. <i>Gilagdúkan na lang siya sa adlaw wà pa giyud mahumag dáru</i>, It was already noon, and he still had not finished plowing. <b>4b</b> for s.t. to be above one like the sun. <i>Milagduk ákung tabánug</i>, My kite soared above me. <b>4c</b> [B246; c1] for the eyes to roll upwards. <i>Milagduk íyang mata sa kalamì</i>, Her eyes rolled upward in ecstacy. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [a4] become absent-minded. <i>Uy, gilagduk na tingáli ka kay walà ka makapanira sa ímung karsúnis</i>, My, you have become absent-minded because you haven't buttoned up your pants. <b>-an(->)</b> <xref>= <b>LAGDUK</b>. <i>n</i> <i>1.</i></xref>

<p><b>lagdung</b> <i>n</i> sinker for a fishing line, net, or any other rope dropped into the sea. <i>v</i> [b] use or put a sinker.

<p><b>laghang</b> = <b>LAHANG</b> (plural), <i>a</i> and <i>v</i>.

<p><b>laghaw</b> <i>a</i> low and throaty in voice. <i>Laghaw ang tíngug ni Lurin Bakal</i>, Lauren Bacall had a low and throaty voice. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be, become husky, rasping. <i>Makalaghaw (makapalaghaw) ug tíngug ning sip-un</i>, Colds make the voice weak and throaty.

<p><b>laghay</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. in grains or powder to be hard and dry. <i>Gaan ang laghay nga munggus</i>, Dry mung beans are light. <b>&mdash; nga ubu</b> <pb n=1131>dry cough, difficult with no discharge. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] be, become hard and dry. <i>Ilaghay (lagháya) paglung-ag ang kan-un,</i> Cook the rice hard and dry so that each grain is separate.

<p><b>laghus</b> (from <i>lahus</i>) <i>v</i> [A; ac] proceed, take s.t. directly s.w. <i>Dì ku magdúgay dinhi. Mulaghus ku sa ákung gidulngan,</i> I won't stay here long. I'll go directly to the place I'm headed for. <i>a</i> straight without bends.

<p><b>lagi</b> particle used to assert emphatically that s.t. is what it is. <b>1</b> <ix>particle giving assurance about s.t. the interlocutor may be inclined to disbelieve:</ix> believe it or not, I assure you [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Ayaw ug kabaláka kay muabut lagi si Máma mu,</i> Don't worry. Your mother will come back. <i>Wà lagi nákù tuyúa. Ayaw kasukù,</i> I told you I didn't mean to do it. You shouldn't get angry. <b>1a</b> <ix>in narration, a particle acknowledging that there might be reason to disbelieve:</ix> believe it or not. <i>Ang manuk lagi ni Pidru nga bayat nakabunù,</i> Believe it or not, that weakling cock of Pedro's managed to win! <b>1b</b> <b>kay &mdash;</b> [**correction: &mdash; kay] because, after all, that is what one would expect. <i>Tungud lagi kay abtik man tu siya, siyay nakadaug,</i> And since he was, after all, pretty smart, he won. <b>2</b> expressing surprise at s.t. contrary to one's expectations. <i>Ingun kang wâ[**  !?]. Nía ra man lagi,</i> You said it was gone, but here it is! <i>Ingun kang dílì mulubad, milubad man lagi,</i> You said it wasn't going to fade, but it did. <b>2a</b> <b>náa na pud &mdash;</b> expression of deep exasperation at s.t. that <corr sic=occured>occurred</corr> a second time, which already was exasperating to start out with. <i>Náa na pud lagi. Ímu na pung gihilabtan,</i> There you go again. You touched it again. <b>2b</b> <b>apan &mdash;</b> but despite what might have been expected. <i>Apan lagi, dinhi puy pipila nga nanambung,</i> However, there were a few who attended. <b>2c</b> [so-and-so] is the case, after all, much as one might wish it otherwise. <i>Nalípay nga naadtu sa Amirika ang ílang anak, piru kay anak man lagi, mingawun giyud sila,</i> They are happy that their son went to the States, but because he is, after all, their son, they will miss him. <b>2d</b> <i>with a repeated command or request:</i> didn't I tell you to do [so-and-so]? Now do it! <i>Ibutang lagi nang kutsilyu,</i> Didn't I tell you to put that knife down? <i>Ayaw lagig sábà,</i> I said stop that noise. <i>Tris lagi. Dì lagi ni ikatúgut ug dus,</i> I said three. I told you I can't let you have it for two. <b>3</b> <i>indicating that the speaker was right all along about a certain point in contention:</i> see, I told you. <i>Lagi, giingnan ta lagi kang hustu tu,</i> See, I <pb n=1132>told you that was right! <i>&lsquo;Uu. Mubálik giyud ku. Duul ra man.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;Lagi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Yes, I will come back again. Anyway, it's right close.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;Yes (that's what I've been saying).&rsquo; <b>dáan pa &mdash;</b> [<i>gen</i>.] that's what [gen.] thought. <i>Dáan pa lagi ku, wà siya dinhi</i>, That's just what I thought! He's not here. <b>3a</b> @conceding a point with some reservation. <i>&lsquo;Gwápu siyag kutsi.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;U lagi, piru inútang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He's got a nice car.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;He sure does, but it's not his.&rsquo; <i>v</i> [b(1)] emphatically assure s.o. by saying <i>lagi</i> to him. <i>Dì ku musálig sa íyang pasálig bísan ug gilagihan ku níya</i>, I won't count on his promises even though he assured me emphatically.

<p><b>lag-i</b> <i>n</i> thin piece of bamboo or rattan used for flooring, fencing, or tying. <i>v</i> [a; a] split bamboo or rattan.

<p><b>lag-id<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @hard, @tough. <i>Lag-id ang tugas labi na ang íyang lúbas</i>, Molave is a hard wood, esp. the heartwood.

<p><b>lag-id<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] @brush, @whizz, @{speed by} s.t. touching or grazing it slightly. <i>Duha ka íhu ang milag-id (naglag-id) níya</i>, Two sharks whizzed by him. <i>Ígù lang nakalag-id sa íyang nawung ang bala [**type: bála]</i>, The bullet just grazed his face.

<p><b>lagilági</b> @kinds, @quality. <i>Lagilági ang buluk sa bángaw</i>, The rainbow has various colors. <i>v</i> [A; c16] be, get, make various kinds. <i>Dílì ta makalagilági sa putáhi kun wà tay kwarta</i>, We can't have all different kinds of food if we have no money. <i>Ayaw lagilagíha (ilagilági) ang ímung ági</i>, Don't vary your penmanship. <b>ka-</b> of all different kinds. <i>v</i> [A13] be of all different kinds. <i>Ang útan nga magkalagilági lamían</i>, A vegetable stew of various kinds of vegetables tastes good.

<p><b>lagilhi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] smooth sticks by scraping or whittling off unnecessary edges. <i>Siyay milagilhi sa kawáyang igsalálug</i>, He smoothed the slats to put in as flooring.

<p><b>láging</b> = <sc>LÚGING</sc>.

<p><b>lagingling</b> <i>n</i> soft tinkling sound. <i>Ang lagingling sa kampanilya</i>, The tinkling of the small bell. <i>Ang lagingling sa íyang kinataw-an</i>, The tinkling of her laughter. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make a tinkling sound.

<p><b>lagínit</b> <i>v</i> [B2S45] emit a ripping, tearing sound. <i>Nagkalaginit [**typo: Nagkalagínit?] ang pánit nga giláras</i>, The leather that was sliced gave a ripping sound. <i>n</i> a ripping, tearing sound. <i>Nadungug námù ang lagínit sa pagkasìsì sa íyang karsúnis</i>, We heard the sound of his trousers ripping. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LAGÍNIT</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lag-it</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> rough and sharp. <i>Mga lag-it nang mga batu</i>, Those rocks are sharp and rough. <b>1a</b> sharp, keen, piercing. <b>2</b> hard and durable. <pb n=1133><i>Lag-it nga káhuy, pánit</i>, Hard wood, durable leather. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a] @{be, become sharp, piercing}. <i>Sigíhig báid hangtud malag-it</i>, Keep working at it until it becomes sharp. <i>Dinhà na ang babáyi batíag kahadluk sa nagkalag-it na ang tinan-awan sa táwu kaníya</i>, The girl didn't feel frightened until the man started shooting penetrating glances at her. <b>2</b> [B] @{be, become hard and durable}. <i>Mulag-it ang kámay ug latikun</i>, Sugar becomes crystallized if you make it into syrup.

<p><b>lagitì</b> <i>n</i> @{a sharp, snapping or cracking sound}. <i>Ang lagitì sa pistúlang gikák</i>, The snapping of the pistol that was cocked. <i>v</i> [B46] @{make a cracking, snapping sound}. <i>Milagitì ang gamayng sanga nga ákung natumban</i>, The twig cracked when I stepped on it. <i>Ang asin mauy nakalagitì (nakapalagitì) sa káyu</i>, The salt thrown into the fire made it crackle. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LAGITÌ</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lagiting</b> <i>a</i> @{intense heat of the sun}. <i>Mulakaw kang lagiting ang ínit?</i> Do you have to go when the heat is scorching? <i>v</i> <b>[A]</b> @{for the sun's heat to get intense}.

<p><b>lagiw</b> <i>v</i> [B56; b3c] @{run away, escape from a place}. <i>Milagiw (nalagiw) ang mutsatsa kay gidagmálan</i>, The maid ran away because she was badly treated. <i>Unsay ímung gilagiwan sa inyu?</i> What did you escape from at home? <i>Ilagiw ang ímung uyab gíkan sa íyang pamanhunun</i>, Take your girl away from her husband-to-be. <i>n</i> @{escapee, stowaway}. <i>Nasakpan ang lagiw sa pínal kuluni</i>, They caught the escapee from the penal colony. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> = <sc>LAGIW</sc>. <b>kágiw</b> = <sc>KALAGIW</sc>.

<p><b>lagiwliw</b> <i>n</i> @{spiny outgrowths from bamboo plants}. <i>v</i> <b>[A; b]</b> @{gather lagiwliw}.

<p><b>lagkaw</b> <i>n</i> @{makeshift shelter for staying in temporarily}. <i>v</i> <b>[A; a]</b> @{make a temporary shelter}. <i>Naglagkaw ang mga bakwit sa lasang</i>, The evacuees erected lean-to's in the forest. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @{built like a temporary shelter}.

<p><b>laglag</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{fallen off}. <i>Mga laglag nga dáhun</i>, Fallen leaves. <b>2</b> @{destroyed, ruined}. <i>Laglag nga mga damgu</i>, Ruined dreams. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> <b>[B; a]</b> @{fall off, cause to do so}. <i>Ang hángin naglaglag sa mga lusuk sa humay</i>, The wind caused the grains of rice to fall off. <i>Nagkalaglag ang íyang buhuk human masakit sa típus</i>, Her hair has been constantly falling off after her bout with typhoid. <i>Gilaglag níyag túyù ang panyù arun nákù punitun</i>, She dropped the handkerchief on purpose so that I would pick it up. <b>2</b> <b>[B6]</b> @{abort, have a miscarriage or an abortion}. <i>Prisúhun ang duktur nga mulaglag ug bátà</i>, A doctor who performs abortions will be put in prison. <pb n=1134><i>Bag-u pa siya nga nalaglágan</i>, She just had a miscarriage. <b>3</b> [AB12; a] bring to a downfall, @destroy. <i>Ang Diyus naglaglag sa Súdum</i>, God destroyed Sodom. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> destructive. <i>Malaglágung hunàhúnà</i>, Destructive thoughts.

<p><b>laglum</b> see <sc>LALUM</sc>.

<p><b>lagmaw</b> = <sc>LUGMAW</sc>.

<p><b>lagmun</b> <i>n</i> @impulse, what one wants to do at a certain instant. <i>Unsa may lagmun ku? Sa pagkakità kung nanágan sila, midágan sab ku</i>, When I saw them run away, my impulse was to run away, too.

<p><b>lagmit</b> [** part of speech missing?] likely, the chances are very good that s.t. will happen. <i>Ayúhag báat kay lagmit mabadbad ang hukut</i>, Tie it well because the knot will likely come undone. <i>Lagmit sa (ang) mapasahan sa gútum mabúang</i>, A person who has become over-hungered is likely to go crazy<corr>.</corr> <b>ma-</b> = <sc>LAGMIT</sc>. <b>ka-an</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>LAGMIT</sc>. <b>2</b> probability. <i>Ang kalagmítan nga may gíra dílì ikalimud</i>, It cannot be denied that there is a good likelihood of war.

<p><b>lagnak</b> <i>a</i> @loose, @sagging. <i>Lagnak ra nang pagkahigut sa muskitíru</i>, The mosquito net has been tied so that it is sagging. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be, become slack, loose. <i>Nagkalagnak ang íyang mga sinínà gíkan sa íyang pagkasakit</i>, Her dresses have become too loose for her after her sickness.

<p><b>lagnas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] for water to spread out or flow over. <i>Mulagnas ang túbig sa subà ngadtu sa <corr sic="pilapìlan">pilapílan</corr> ug tingbáhà</i>, Water from the river spreads over the rice paddies during the flood season. <i>Basta dakung dágat maglagnas ang ámung sílung</i>, When the tide is high, water spreads under our house.

<p><b>lagnaw</b> = <sc>LABNAW</sc>.

<p><b>lagnay</b> <i>a</i> sagging for lack of firmness. <i>Lagnay kaáyu ang unlan nga kúwang sa dasuk</i>, A pillow that lacks stuffing is very soft. <i>v</i> [B; a2] sag for lack of firmness. <i>Mulagnay ang tútuy sa inahan basta dì na sus-an</i>, The breast of a mother sags after she stops nursing.

<p><b>lagnub</b> <i>n</i> erect shrub or small tree with smooth, glaberous, and shiny oval leaves, used to stop bleeding: <b><i>Ficus hauili</i></b>.

<p><b>lagnut</b> = <sc>LABNUT</sc>.

<p><b>lagpad</b> = <sc>LAPAD</sc> (plural).

<p><b>lagpak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] <b>1</b> @slap, strike a part of one's body with the hand or with s.t. flat. <i>Kinsa tung naglagpak sa ákung bukubuku?</i> Who slapped my back? <b>2</b> [A; b] @{patch a hole}. <i>Lagpáki na lang nà bisag unsa arun dì ka lìlíun</i>, Patch that with anything so they won't peep at you. <i>Pula ang ilagpak sa ákung sinínà</i>, Use a red piece of cloth to <pb n=1135>patch the tear in my dress. <i>n</i> slapping sound. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> having a checkered or striped design. <i>Linagpak nga hinabul</i>, Cloth woven in a checkered design. <i>v</i> [A; a] weave cloth in a checkered design.

<p><b>lagpang</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] broil peeled mature bananas. <i>Lagpangun (ilagpang) níya ang salin nga ságing linung-ag</i>, He will broil the left-*over cooked bananas. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> broiled bananas.

<p><b>lagpì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] harvest corn. <i>Hinug na ang púsù sa mais hustu nang lagpíun</i>, The corn ears are ripe, just right for harvest. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> corn that is ready for harvest.

<p><b>lagput</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26; b6] be knocked a distance. <i>Milagput ang búla ug layù pagpátid ni Rúmi</i>, Romy kicked the ball, and it flew off in the distance. <i>Hilagputan ku sa íyang láway</i>, I was hit by his spit. <i>Nalagput ku nga giigwáran níya</i>, I was thrown to the side when she hit me with her buttocks. <b>2</b> [B246] remove from a job, expel. <i>Nalagput na siya sa iskuylahan. Hasta ikaw mulagput ug dì ka mag-amping</i>, He was kicked out of school, and you will be, too, if you don't watch it. <b>3</b> [B26] be caused to move with alacrity. <i>Milagput mi pagkadungug sa mandasiyun</i>, We moved off smartly when we heard the command. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> cause to fly off. <b>2</b> expel from school or job. <i>Wà na lang nákù siya ipalagput (palagpúta) sa íyang gisap-an</i>, I didn't expel him from the land he was working.

<p><b>lagsaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the voice to be cracking, dry. <i>v</i> [B] get to be cracked and dry. <i>Milagsaw ang tíngug sa bátà ug hinílak</i>, The child's voice became hoarse from crying.

<p><b>lagsaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> tall and lanky. <b>2</b> having bones sticking out prominently. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> become tall and lanky. <i>Milagsaw lag kalit ang batan-ung laláki sa pagkabayung na</i>, The young boy suddenly shot up when he reached his teens. <b>2</b> for the bones to stick out. <i>Naunsa man kang nanglagsaw na nang ímung gúsuk?</i> What's the matter with you that your ribs are sticking out?

<p><b>lagsaw<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> deer.

<p><b>lagsik<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> speedy and energetic. <b>1a</b> doing s.t. quickly. <i>Lagsik kaáyu siyang mulálag banig</i>, He is quick in weaving mats. <b>2</b> healthy. <i>Lagsik na man si Máma. Wà nay hilánat</i>, Mother is fine again. She doesn't have any fever any more. <i>v</i> [B; ab] get to be energetic, healthy. <i>Milagsik ang ílang mga lákang pagtaligsik</i>, They started walking faster when it started to rain. <i>Inum sa ímung tambal arun ka malagsik</i>, Take your medicine so you get your energy. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> briskness. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> of a quick, brisk, healthy sort.

<pb n=1136>

<p><b>lagsik<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B456; b2] for small things to fly off, @splatter. <i>Milagsik ang lápuk pagluksu nákù</i>, Mud splattered in all directions when I jumped. <i>Nanglagsik ang bildu pagkahúlug sa básu</i>, Bits of glass flew off when the tumbler fell. <i>Hilagsikan ku sa íyang láway pagsulti níya</i>, His saliva splattered on me when he spoke. <i>n</i> matured coconut fruits which were thrown in all directions as they were gathered from the trees. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. that flew off.

<p><b>lagsut</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b2] @splatter up or out, for things in pieces to scatter in various directions. <i>Mulagsut ang íyang láway inigsulti</i>, His saliva showers you when he talks. <i>Nangalagsut ang mga lubi sa pagkahúlug sa búlig</i>, The coconuts that came off the tree fell all over the place.

<p><b>lagtang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] roast kernels of corn. <i>Dúnay nanimáhù, may naglagtang tingálì ug mais</i>, S.t. smells good. S.o. must be roasting corn kernels. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> roasted corn kernels.

<p><b>lagtang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. woody vine, the seeds of which are roasted and used for poisoning fish: <b><i>Anamirta cocculus</i></b>. <i>v</i> [AN; b5] fish using this plant as poison. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> fish caught in this way.

<p><b>lagtiw</b> <i>v</i> [B26] <b>1</b> for s.t. small to be knocked off to a distance. <i>Mu rag milagtiw (nalagtiw) ang ákung ispiritu pagbutu sa bumba</i>, It seemed that my spirit left my body when the bomb exploded. <i>Nanglagtiw ang mga binughà nga íyang gibundak</i>, Pieces of wood flew off in all directions when he dropped the logs. <b>2</b> be caused to move with alacrity under some pressure. <i>Nalagtiw ming gisingkáhan ug súgù</i>, We moved smartly when we were given orders in no uncertain terms.

<p><b>lagtub</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> giving off a single thud. <b>2</b> giving a crunchy sound. <b>2a</b> cooked half-way so that it is still crunchy. <b>2b</b> @cooked so that it is crisp. <b>3</b> inflamed, blistered (like s.t. cooked crisp). <i>Unsa man nang lagtub sa ímung buktun?</i> What is that blister on your arm? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] giving a thudding sound. <i>Naglagtub ang batu sa íyang bukubuku</i>, The stone bounced off his back with a thud. <b>2a</b> [B; c1] get to be cooked in a half-done manner. <i>Lagtúba (ilagtub) pagsugba ang atay</i>, Broil the liver rare. <b>2b</b> get to be overcooked, till it is crisp. <i>Mulagtub ang adúbug lat-an úsà</i>, The spiced meat will get crisp if you boil it first. <b>3</b> [B] @blister (like s.t. fried crisp). <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> food that is broiled or fried half-way. <i>Mais nga pinalagtub pagkaánag</i>, Corn broiled half-way. <b>2</b> food fried crisp.

<p><b>lagù</b> <i>a</i> @filthy, very @dirty. <i>Ilísi nang kurtináha, lagù na kaáyu</i>, Change the curtains. They <pb n=1137>are so filthy. <i>v</i> [B; a] be, become filthy. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] all covered with dirt. <i>Nagkalágù siya gíkan sa trabáhu</i>, He was filthy when he came from work. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> dirty-looking.

<p><b>lágub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2C; c1] @join s.t. of value together, as money, land, business. <i>Mulágub ku sa inyung nigusyu</i>, I will join your business. <i>Nagkalágub ang ámung duha ka lúti sa usa ka titulu</i>, Both of our lots are included in the same title. <i>Lagúba (ilágub) ang inyung puhúnan arun mu makalíhuk sa nigusyu</i>, Pool your capital so that you can start a business.

<p><b>lágub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; bc1] for s.t. long to penetrate all the way into s.t. (not said of things put in a case). <i>Milágub ang lansang sa íyang lapalapa</i>, The nail went all the way into the sole of his foot.

<p><b>lagubu,</b> lagúbu <i>n</i> dull, hollow thudding sound. <i>Ang lagúbu sa bawud sa baybáyun</i>, The thudding of the waves on the seashore. <i>v</i> [B46P] be thudding in a hollow way. <i>Milagubu ang ákung likud sa íyang sumbag</i>, My back resounded with his thudding blows. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LAGÚBU</sc>.

<p><b>lagudlágud</b> <i>n</i> @{ovary of a sow}. <b>layà ug &mdash;</b> incapable of bearing children, said of a woman who marries late in life (derogatory). <i>Ang babáying dúgayng maminyù layà na ug lagudlágud</i>, A woman who marries late in life is incapable of bearing children.

<p><b>laguk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sticky, resinous substance taken from trees, esp. the <i>tipúlu</i> tree. <b>2</b> trap for birds and small insects using this resin. The trap is baited and the birds get stuck. <i>v</i> [A12N; ab2] trap birds with <i>laguk</i>. <i>Nakalaguk si Silis ug limúkun</i>, Celes caught a dove with <i>laguk</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] go trap game with <i>laguk</i>.

<p><b>laguk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A] for a liquid to come out scantily from its source. <i>Ígù na lang nilaguk ang túbig sa tubud</i>, The water in the spring was just coming out in a few drops. <i>Wà giyud mulaguk ang íyang mata sa pagkamatay sa íyang inahan</i>, Not a tear formed in her eyes when her mother died. <i>Wà na giyud maglaguk ang sanggutan tungud sa huwaw</i>, The coconut palm didn't produce a drop of toddy because of the drought.

<p><b>laguk<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>LAD-UK.</sc>

<p><b>lag-uk=</b> <sc>LAD-UK</sc>.

<p><b>lagukluk</b> (from <i>lukluk</i>) <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @hide, @conceal by staying out of sight or away from the open. <i>Dì ka giyud makalagukluk ug pangitáun ka níla</i>, You can't hide from them if they look for you. <i>Lawum ang lungag nga gilaguklúkan sa kasag</i>, The hole where the crab hid itself was deep.

<pb n=1138>

<p><b>lagúlu</b> <i>n</i> coarse fern with huge leathery pinnate leaves found in open mud flats, in mangrove swamps, and along tidal streams: <b><i>Acrostichum aureum.</i></b>

<p><b>lagum</b> <i>a</i> dirtyish white, greyish. <i>Lagum ang linabhan ug dì iladlad</i>, Washed clothes are greyish if they are not bleached. <i>Lagum na ang íyang ngábil kay nagdúgayg húmul sa dágat</i>, His lips are blue from staying in the water too long. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become darkish, greyish in color. <i>Milagum (nalagum) siya kay sígig kalígù sa dágat</i>, He has become dark because he always goes swimming. <b>paN-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A23] get dark all over in color. <i>Nanglágum ang bátà nga dúgayng natáwu</i>, The baby that took long to be delivered is blue all over. <i>Nanglágum ang bukubuku sa binunalan</i>, His back is black and blue from being beaten too much.

<p><b>lagumlum</b> (from <i>lumlum</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b(1)] for s.t. to lie dormant and hidden beneath or inside s.t. <i>Naglagumlum sa átung kabukíran ang daghang mína</i>, Ores to be mined are lying dormant in our mountains. <i>Naglagumlum nga kahadluk sa íyang dughan</i>, Fear lurking in her heart. <b>2</b> [A; c16] keep s.t. one doesn't own or should share for oneself. <i>Ang tagakustum kusug mulagumlum sa dílì íla</i>, The Customs people are quick to keep things that don't belong to them. <i>Ayaw lagumlúma ang sikrítu. Ibutyag</i>, Don't keep the secret to yourself. Tell us. <b>3</b> [A; b3] stay s.w. for some good reason. <i>Milagumlum siyag usa ka simána sa íyang panágat</i>, He stayed out fishing for a week. <i>Unsay ímung lagumlúman sa tubaan, dì ínum?</i> What are you hanging around at the toddy stand for if not to drink?

<p><b>lagumù, lagúmù</b> <i>a</i> producing a crunchy sound. <i>Lagumù ang sinángag mais kan-un</i>, Roasted grains of corn are crunchy to eat. <i>v</i> [A2S; c1] make a crunching, grinding sound. <i>Milagúmù ang bildu nga gigaling</i>, The glass made a crunching noise as it was ground.

<p><b>lagumuk, lagúmuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> the sound of s.t. brittle which is being crushed. <i>v</i> [A; b6] produce this sound. <i>Milagumuk ang itlug nga ákung hitumban</i>, I stepped on the egg and it made a crunching sound.

<p><b>lagúmuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A23P; c1] fall down helpless on the floor, ground, ring, etc. <i>Milagúmuk sa ring ang kuntra ni Ilurdi</i>, Elorde's opponent fell prostrate on the ring.

<p><b>lagúna</b> <i>n</i> a meadow. <i>v</i> [B126] turn into a weed-covered field.

<p><b>*lagundà</b> <b>Culu-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] fall asleep some place other than one's usual sleeping place <pb n=1139>before transferring to one's own bed. <i>Ayaw paglulagundà dihà sa sála kay mahinayak ka</i>, Don't take a nap in the living room because you won't be able to wake up till morning.

<p><b>lagundì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrub of thickets and waste places, bearing palmately-arranged groups of fine leaflets, with a velvety undersurface, used as a poultice for <i>panúhut</i>: <b><i>Vitex negundo</i></b>.

<p><b>lagung</b> <i>n</i> name given to @flies larger than houseflies, including the bluebottle fly. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with <i>lagung</i>. <i>Gilagung ang patayng irù</i>, The dead dog was covered with bluebottle flies. <b>ambut sa &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>AMBUT</sc>. <b>simbaku &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SIMBA</sc>.

<p><b>lagunit</b> <i>n</i> @screeching, ripping sound. <i>Ang lagunit sa tayaung lansang nga giibut</i>, The screeching of the rusty nail that was pulled out. <i>v</i> [A] make a ripping, screeching sound. <i>Naglagunit ang papil nga gilaksì sa bungbung</i>, The paper that was ripped off the wall made a ripping sound.

<p><b>lagunut,</b> lagúnut <i>n</i> dull ripping sound, as when weeds are pulled out. <i>v</i> [A] make a dull ripping sound. <i>Milagunut ang gamut sa sagbut nga giibut</i>, The roots of the weeds made a dull ripping sound as they were uprooted.

<p><b>lagupù,</b> lagúpù <i>n</i> dull cracking sound of bones. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] for bones to make a dull cracking sound.

<p><b>lagúrul</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{shave the head clean}. <i>Gilagurúlan ang prísu nga patyunun</i>, They shaved the prisoner's head clean.

<p><b>lagúrut</b> <i>n</i> @{grating sound} or sound of uprooting s.t. <i>Ang lagúrut sa balhíbu sa manuk nga gilabnut</i>, The sound of the chicken feathers being pulled out. <i>v</i> [A2S] make this sound. <i>Naglagurut ang kamúti nga gilidgid</i>, The sweet potatoes make a scratching sound as they were being grated.

<p><b>lagus</b> <i>n</i> @gums. <i>Ang íyang lagus makítà inig katáwa níya</i>, Her gums show when she laughs. [+]

<p><b>lagusà</b> <i>n</i> @hissing, splashing sound of water. <i>Ang lagusà sa busay</i>, The swirling sound at the bottom of a waterfall. <i>v</i> [A13] hiss, as when waves dash on the rocks or bubbles burst. <i>Ang balud nga naglagusà sa lapyahan</i>, The waves hissing against the beach.

<p><b>lagusu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @involve, @include s.o. in some sort of mischief or punishment. <i>Ikaw mauy nakalagusu (nakapalagusu) nákù sa tinuntu</i>, You dragged me into doing mischief. <i>Ayaw kug ilagusu sa ímung kasábà kay wà kuy lábut</i>, Don't scold me, too, because I didn't have any part in it.

<pb n=1140>

<p><b>lagúsù</b> <i>n</i> a soft, crunching sound, as for example that produced by chewing s.t. fleshy and easy to chew, but not soft. <i>v</i> [A2S] produce such a sound. <i>Mulagúsù ang kapáyas nga tagudtud ug kan-un</i>, A hard but ripe papaya produces a faint crunching sound when you eat it.

<p><b>lagut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{chew tobacco}. <i>Bahù ug bàbà ang táwung mulagut</i>, A person who chews tobacco will develop foul-smelling breath. <i>Lagutun ku ning tabakúa</i>, I'll chew this tobacco. <b>2</b> [A13; a1] do chewing motions. <i>Ang kábaw maglagut kanúnay</i>, The carabao is always chewing. <i>Íya lang gilagut ang karni</i>, He just chewed the meat. <i>n</i> chewing tobacco. <i>a</i> for a child to be so cute one would love to pinch or bite it. <i>Lagút kaáyung bataána. Kaáyu dyung kusiun</i>, This child is so cute. How I'd love to pinch it. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @gnash the teeth. <i>Gilágut níya ang íyang ngípun sa kasukù</i>, She gnashed her teeth in anger. <b>2</b> [B146; b3(1)c3] get irritated, angry. <i>Naglágut si Ibuy sa ímung sugsúg</i>, Iboy was irked at your teasing. <i>Ángay ba nà nímung ikalágut (kalagútan)?</i> Is that worth getting mad about? <i>a</i> irritating, irksome. <i>Lágut kaáyu nang bataána, samukan</i>, That brat is very irritating. He's a pest. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] get s.o.'s goat. <i>Unsa na puy ílang ipalágut nákù?</i> What are they going to think of next to annoy me? <i>n</i> s.t. to irk, anger s.o. or rouse s.o. to resentment. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for a child to be @teething. <i>Paliti ug lagutan ang bátà kay nanglagut na</i>, Buy the baby a teething ring because he's beginning to <corr sic=teeth>teethe</corr>. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> teething ring. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> tobacco for chewing. <b>maka-r-, maka-r-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> very maddening. <i>Makalalágut kanang ímung binúang</i>, Your foolishness is maddening. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @irritated. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> anger, irritation. [+]

<p><b>lágut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B126] be knocked to a distance by a force. <i>Nalágut ang bisiklítang hidumbulan sa dyip</i>, The bicycle was thrown off to a distance because the jeep bumped into it.

<p><b>lagutmun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAGUTUM</sc>.

<p><b>lagutù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dull, cracking sound. <b>2</b> for rice or corn grits to be half-cooked, such that they still crunch. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN] make a dull, thick, cracking sound. <i>Milagutù ang ákung lutáhan pagtindug nákù</i>, My joints made a dull cracking sound when I stood up. <i>Ang nagpanlagutù nga pundu sa gángu</i>, The creaking of the ropes tying the large raft. <b>2</b> [B15; b6] for rice or corn grits to be half-cooked.

<p><b>lagútub</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] make a low, prolonged, resonant thud. <i>Milagútub ang kílid sa tangki <pb n=1141>nga nasaghiran sa trák</i>, The tank made a prolonged thudding sound when the truck scraped it. <i>Naglagutub ang bumbu nga nagkalinding sa handag</i>, The drum resounded as it rolled down the slope. <i>n</i> this sound.

<p><b>lagútuk</b> <i>n</i> knocking sound produced when the bony part of the body is hit, cracking sound of bone joints. <i>Ang lagútuk sa túhud sa íyang pagtindug</i>, The cracking of his knees when he stood up. <i>v</i> [B2346] produce this sound. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LAGUTÙ</sc>, <i>n</i> 2, <i>v</i> <i>2.</i>

<p><b>lagutum</b> (from <i>gútum</i>) <i>v</i> [A; bc] @eat, @feed with root crops and bananas in times of scarcity. <i>Naglagutum mig balanghuy paggíra</i>, We ate nothing but cassava during the war. <i>Gilagutuman nákug kamúti ang mga bátà paggútum</i>, I fed my children sweet potatoes during the famine. <i>Ang gábi ikalagutum ug magníhit ang pagkáun</i>, Taro can substitute for the staple food when food is scarce. <b>lagutmun</b> <i>n</i> crops which can be used to replace the staple (corn or rice): root crops and cooking bananas. <i>Ang binignit nilútù sa nagkalainláing lagutmun</i>, <i>Binignit</i> is a sweet soup made of all different kinds of root crops and cooking bananas. <i>v</i> [A13] = <sc>LAGUTUM</sc>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>lagutuy</b> <i>v</i> [B456; b4] for the stomach to have nothing in it. <i>Naglagutuy ang tiyan sa nagpuása</i>, The man who was fasting was starving to death. <i>Nalagutuyan ang bábuy nga nakalimtan ug pásaw</i>, They forgot to feed the pig for a long time and it practically starved to death.

<p><b>laguy</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>LAGIW</sc>. <b>2</b> going about to avoid work, not staying put. <i>Gipapaháwà siya kay laguy man</i>, He was fired, because he never stayed put in his place. <b>laguyláguy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] roam around on the job. <i>Gamay siyag ági kay naghínay lag laguyláguy</i>, He hardly accomplished anything because all he ever did was gad about on the job.

<p><b>laguyláguy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{chew s.t. tough}. <i>Ígù lang siyang makalaguyláguy sa kúbal</i>, She couldn't do anything but chew away at the tough pork rinds.

<p><b>laguyluy</b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>lagwirta</b> <i>n</i> small @{vegetable garden} or, by extension, a yard planted to grass or flowers.

<p><b>lagwis</b> <i>a</i> @tall and @slender. <i>Lagwis kaáyu ug mga bitíis nang bayhána, mu rag tukun</i>, The legs of that woman are long and straight like a bean pole. <i>Lagwis nga pinútì</i>, Long sword. <i>v</i> [B3(1); b6] grow tall and slender. <i>Mulagwis ang kawáyan</i>, Bamboo grows tall and slender.

<p><b>lagwum</b> = <sc>LAGLUM</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LALUM</sc>.

<p><b>lagyu</b> = <sc>LAGIW</sc>.

<pb n=1142>

<p><b>lagyum</b> = <sc>LAGLUM</sc>. see <sc>LALUM</sc>.

<p><b>láhà</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] trim or clean the top of coconut trees to prepare them for becoming toddy-producing palms.

<p><b>lahang</b> <i>n</i> crack in between s.t. <i>Naglìlì siya sa lahang sa bungbung</i>, He was peeping through the cracks in the walls. <i>a</i> have spaces in between, be at wide intervals. <i>Gwápa untà apan lahang lag ngípun</i>, She would be beautiful if it were not for her teeth which are too wide apart. <i>v</i> [AB; c1] be so arranged as to have spaces in between. <i>Kinsay naglahang ug pugas sa mais?</i> Who planted the corn so far apart? <i>Naglahang man ning sawug. Simpúta</i>, The floor slats are so wide apart. Put them close together.

<p><b>láhap</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] slice a thick slab off, cut off s.t. wide and thick. <i>Muláhap untà kug gamay pára isugba</i>, I'd like to slice off a chunk to broil. <i>Ang bahà nakaláhap ug dakung parti sa íyang yútà</i>, The flood took off a big chunk from his land. <i>Naláhap ang tumuy sa íyang tudlù sa blíd</i>, The blade sliced off the tip of his finger. <i>a</i> having been cut widely and deeply. <i>Kaúsik sa mansánas, láhap nga pagkapánit</i>, What a waste! The apples were peeled with so much flesh adhering to the peels. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> chunk sliced off. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. from which a chunk has been cut off.

<p><b>lahawlahaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] wander without purpose over a wide area. <i>Nalahawlahaw (nalahawlahawan) na nákù ang tanang suuk sa kalibútan</i>, I have wandered aimlessly over the face of the earth.

<p><b>*lahay</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> <b>1</b> not having a liking, inclination for s.t. <i>Wà kuy lahay sa baskit</i>, I have no inclination for basketball. <b>2</b> lacking flavor. <i>Walay lahay ang kan-un kun hilantan ta</i>, Food doesn't taste good when one is sick. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)46; b4] feel like doing s.t. <i>Ang táwung hilantan dílì mulahay sa káun (layhang mukáun)</i>, A person with a fever won't feel like eating. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] do liberally to one's heart's content. <i>Mulahay silag katúlug kun wà ang agálun</i>, They sleep to their hearts'[**typo: heart's] content when the mistress is not home. <b>lahaylahay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] do s.t. to pass the time. <i>Maglahaylahay lang kug bása samtang maghulat níla</i>, I will pass the time reading while I wait for them.

<p><b>lahì</b> <i>a</i> different. <i>Káda táwu lahì sa usa</i>, Each person is different from every other. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BC; ac] be different or dissimilar. <i>Malahì giyud kag muadtu kag magdyins</i>, You'll surely be different from everybody else if you go there in jeans. <i>Nagláhì ang ílang hitsúra bisag kalúha sila</i>, They look different even <pb n=1143>though they are twins. <i>Ilahì (lahia) ang pagkáun sa mga binatunan sa átù,</i> Give the servants different food from ours. <b>2</b> [AC12] do s.t. apart from others or the main group. <i>Mulahì sila sa grúpu inigpangáun na,</i> They eat in a small group off to themselves. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] do s.t. different from the ordinary. <i>Dílì ku manundug, mupalahì giyud ku,</i> I won't imitate, I'll do s.t. different. <b>lahìláhì</b> <i>a</i> of different kinds. <i>Lahìláhing mga panaptun ang íyang gipalit,</i> She bought different kinds of cloth. <i>v</i> [B16; a] be of different kinds. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be of various kinds. <i>Nagkalahìláhì ang ámung upiniyun,</i> Our opinions were varied.

<p><b>láhib, làhib</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6(1)] slice off the end part of the coconut bud to induce a flow of palm toddy. <i>Gilàhíban na nákù ang ákung sanggutan,</i> I have sliced off the end part of the coconut buds for the toddy.

<p><b>láhid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] spread, smear s.t. over. <i>Lahírig túbig ang pánit sa inasal,</i> Rub water over the roast pig's skin. <i>Gilahíran ug dyam ang pán,</i> They spread jam on the bread. <b>2</b> [A; a1c1] involve s.o. else in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Muláhid man ka sa uban nga way sâ[**typo ?],</i> Why do you involve others who are blameless?<i> Ayaw kug iláhid sa kastígu,</i> Don't include me with the punishment. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> magical medicine of coconut oil and herbs used for skin ailments of supernatural origin, or the application of this medicine. <i>v</i> [A; c] subject to this treatment. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get all smeared. <i>Nagkaláhid ang bungbung ug húgaw,</i> The walls are all smeared with dirt.

<p><b>lahing, láhing</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{mature coconuts}. <b>2</b> matured person, of age (metaphorical). <i>Lahing na siyag hunàhúnà kay idad-idaran na,</i> He is mature in his ways of thinking, because he's middle-aged. <i>v</i> [B2] for coconuts to become mature. <i>Dalì mulahing (malahing) ang lubi nga inarigl&acaron;r,</i> Coconut fruits mature early if they are well tended.

<p><b>láhit</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b26(1)] cut, slice off with a sharp blade. <i>Muláhit (mangláhit) pa ku sa ákung sanggutan,</i> I still have to make a cut in the coconut buds. <i>Kinsay nagláhit sa sáhà sa ságing?</i> Who cut off the banana shoot? <i>Mityábaw ang kanding nga gilàhítan sa dalunggan,</i> The goat cried because a part of his ear was cut off. <i>n</i> sickle, scythe.

<p><b>lahù</b> <i>v</i> [A2; a2] pass loosely through s.t. <i>Milahù ang búla sa dakung lungag,</i> The ball easily went into the large hole. <i>Gilahù níyag tulun ang dakung lísu,</i> She swallowed the large seed with ease. <i>Kanang gilhánga sa kural lahuan lang nà sa irù,</i> With those gaps in the fence, the dog will pass through it with <pb n=1144>ease. <i>a</i> fitting loosely inside s.t.<i> Lahù ang íyang tiil sa íyang sapátus</i>, His shoes are too big for his feet.

<p><b>lahug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c1] mend a tear in a rough way using long stitches. <i>Ákù lang lahugan (lahugan,[**typo: lahúgan?] ilahug) ang gisì, kay kápuy sursíhan,</i> I'll just stitch the tear hastily because it's a nuisance to darn it.

<p><b>láhug</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c1] <b>1</b> mix s.t. together and stir around. <i>Nagláhug ang mga trabahanti ug simintu,</i> The laborers are mixing the cement. <i>Nagláhug ang dátù ug pubri niadtung mitínga,</i> The rich and the poor mixed together in that gathering. <b>2</b> get all mixed up in no special order. <i>Nagkaláhug ang ílang sulti,</i> They were talking on all different topics mixed up without any order. <b>-ay</b> <i>v</i> [B] = <b><sc>LÁHUG.</sc> lahuglahug</b> <i>v</i> [AC12; a] <b>1</b> roam around with others. <i>Dì ku gustung makiglahuglahug ka sa mga buguy,</i> I don't want you to roam around with bums. <b>2</b> roam around in general for no good purpose. <i>Sa kaping magtrabáhu magpúnay lag lahuglahug,</i> Instead of working, he just used to roam about. <b>3</b> go straight s.w. <i>Manglahuglahug ta dihà ánang mga lagúna paingun sa ámù,</i> Let's cross those meadows to get to our house.

<p><b>lahundung</b> <i>n</i> k.o. grunter (<i>lipti</i> or <i>alatan</i>), also called the <i>alatan nga Maniláun</i>.

<p><b>láhung</b> <i>v</i> [AC; b] help carry a load. <i>Nagkaláhung mi sa kaban,</i> We carried the trunk together. <i>Lahúngi ninyu ang pyánu,</i> Carry the piano together. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one with whom one carries s.t.

<p><b>lahus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ac] proceed, go on or forward, esp. after an interruption or stop. <i>Mulahus lang kug pangumpra human sa simba,</i> I will just proceed to the market after going to church. <i>Nagláhus ang nagsaaray,</i> The engaged couple went through with their marriage. <i>Lahusa nyà ákung karsúnis sa tiluring,</i> Please go ahead to get my pants at the tailor's. <i>Ilahus ni ngadtu sa íla,</i> Bring this on ahead to their house. <b>2</b> [A2] penetrate, pass through. <i>Lahusa (ilahus) lang ang ímung mga plánu,</i> Just go ahead with your plans. <b>3</b> [B3; c1] get through, finish s.t. successfully. <i>Milahus na siya sa íyang abugasíya,</i> He has gotten through his law course. <b>3a</b> [a12] be finished in the first fight. <i>Gilahus ang íyang sunuy,</i> His cock was killed <corr sic=on>in</corr> the first fight. <b>&mdash; sa</b> going through s.t. <i>Lahus ning lansánga sa píkas bungbung kay taas,</i> This nail goes through to the other side. <i>Mu rag[**? Murag] kining ákung tambag lahus lang sa píkas mung dunggan,</i> Apparently my advice to you goes in one ear and out the other. <i>n</i> k.o. <pb n=1145>small shark, so called because its liver causes instant defecation. (<-) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C23; a12] for two things to lead into each other. <i>Nagláhus ang duha ka lángub</i>, The two caves lead to each other. <i>Lahúsa ang duha ka kanal</i>, Have the two ditches connect to each other. <b>1a</b> [C23] for two openings to be arranged in a straight line configuration. <i>Nagláhus ang duha ka pultahan, sayun ra paglahus</i>, The two doors are right in line with each other. It's easy to go through. <b>2</b> [B; c1] do s.t. straight without interruption. <i>Naláhus ang ílang isturya hangtud sa tungang gabíi</i>, Their talk lasted until midnight. <i>Lahúsun (iláhus) ni nákù ug laba kay gamítun ugmà</i>, I will have to wash this in one day because I'm going to use it tomorrow. sa &mdash; entirely. <i>Ang ákung kaguul nawálà sa láhus</i>, My sorrows are gone forever. <i>Malimtan ku nímu láhus</i>, You will forget me entirely. <b>lahusláhus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for s.t. to have lots of openings so that it is easy to pass through it. <b>2</b> taking things easy without much sense of responsibility. <i>Mamána ka niánang lahusláhus nga pagkatáwu?</i> What, you want to wed that irresponsible person? <i>v</i> [A] go s.w. readily without bother. <i>Mulahusláhus lang mu sa ákung kwartu mu rag ristawran</i>, You keep coming into my room without any ado as if it were a restaurant. <i>Malahusláhus na ang Úpun ug mahuman na ang taytáyan</i>, You'll be able to get to Opon in no time when the bridge is done. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>tarik</i> that consists of one long piece of timber going from one outrigger float to the other, usually put on large-sized boats.

<p><b>láhus</b> <i>n</i> slaughtered animal and other food given by the bridegroom's parents to the bride's parents on the eve of the wedding. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] give the <i>láhus</i>.

<p><b>lahútay</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] continue doing s.t. one has started, endure to continue s.t. <i>Mulahútay kug isturya hangtud sa kaadláwun</i>, I can go on talking till dawn. <i>Mulahútay ba ang ílang panagdáit hangtud mahuman ang pruyiktu?</i> Will their good feelings for each other endure to the end of the project? <i>Dílì makalahútay sa trabáhu ning ákung láwas</i>, My body cannot endure to keep on with the work. <i>n</i> action of persevering. <i>Bilib ku sa íyang lahútay nga musimánag bilar nga way pupahúway</i>, I take off my hat to his ability to continue keeping vigil for a week without rest.

<p><b>lahuy</b> <i>v</i> [A] pass or go through with ease, slip in or through without a hitch. <i>Milahuy man lang wà giyud mangáyug katahúran</i>, He just went through without greeting anyone. <pb n=1146><i>Milahuy ang kawatan sa kasayun kay wà may táwu,</i> The thief slipped in and out with ease because there was no one about. <i>Ang ákung mga tambag mulahuy lang sa píkas dunggan,</i> My advice went in one ear and out the other. <b>lahuyláhuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] pass back and forth easily, smoothly. <i>Maglahuyláhuy ang hángin niíning baláya,</i> The breeze blows in and out of this house unobstructed. <i>Singsing nga naglahuyláhuy sa íyang tudlù,</i> A ring that passes readily over his fingers. <b>2</b> [A; c1] escape from s.t. <i>Ilahuyláhuy man lang gud nímu ang súgù sa ímung inahan,</i> You try to get out of what your mother tells you to do. <b>lahuylahuy</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b5c] go from one place to another with no purpose. <i>Gilahuylahuy (gilahuylahuyan) sa ulitáwung gúlang ang kalibútan úsà pahikut sa pilitína,</i> The bachelor roamed around the world first before he let himself get hooked.

<p><b>láin</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> different, another. <i>Láin ning klasíha sa panaptun,</i> This is a different k.o. cloth. <b>1a may &mdash; pa</b> of course, could it be different? <i>&lsquo;Wà na pud tingáli nay kwarta.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;May láin pa?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He's probably out of money again.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Of course, could it be otherwise?&rsquo; <b>1b &mdash; nga kalibútan</b> @afterworld. <i>Adtu ta magkítà sa láing kalibútan,</i> We'll meet in the afterworld. <b>1c sa &mdash; nga báhin</b> on the other hand. <i>Hustu pud ang íyang sulti, apan sa láing báhin, sayup pud siya,</i> What he said is true, but on the other hand, he's also wrong in some ways. <b>2</b> bad, sick. <i>Láin kaáyu ning ákung gibátì,</i> I feel very sick. <b>3</b> odd in behavior, different from what one would expect. <i>Kaláin nímu nga dílì gánì mupahíyum inighinagbù nátù!</i> How odd of you not even to smile when we meet! <i>Láin ug báhù ning agwáha,</i> This perfume has a strange smell. <b>3a &mdash; ug buut, úlu</b> unpredictable in behavior, somewhat crazy. <i>Ayaw nà siya kumpiyansáhi kay láin ra ba nag úlu,</i> Don't trust him, because he's somewhat crazy. <b>3b &mdash; ug sabaw</b> acting strangely, unexpectedly. <i>Láin siyag sabaw kay manáug manday nanghúkad,</i> He's a strange fellow. He leaves just when they are serving dinner. <b>4</b> not of a good sort, bad. <i>Láin ang panahun run,</i> The weather is no good now. <i>Láin kaáyu ug batásan nang íyang asáwa,</i> That wife of his has very offensive manners. <b>4a &mdash; ug buut, úlu</b> @short-tempered.<i> Ayaw siya bikla kay láin ra ba nag buut (úlu),</i> Don't irritate him because he's short-tempered. <b>4b &mdash; ug kamut</b> tending to steal. <i>Láin ug kamut tung ákung binatunan, Daghan ang naw[=á],</i> Our servant was a thief. So many things disappeared. <b>4c</b> <b>&mdash; ug sabaw</b> sensitive, easily taking <pb n=1147>offense. <i>Láig sabawng bayhána. Wà bayà kuy gipasabut nga dautan!</i> What a sensitive woman. I didn't mean anything by that remark. <b>5</b> for a person to be dangerous, capable of supernatural harm. <i>Láin kaáyu ang mga táwu sa Nága. Daghang mga unglù,</i> The people in Naga are dangerous. There are lots of vampires. <b>6</b> <b>&mdash; nga táwu</b> unrelated person, outsider. <i>Nagbalunbálun pa man ka. Mau ra ka mag láing táwu,</i> You're bringing food, as if you weren't related to us. <i>Way láing táwung pasudlun dinhi,</i> No outsider is allowed in. <b>7</b> <b>&mdash; pay ákù, átù</b> <b>7a</b> by the way. <i>Láin pay átù, tagadiin man tu ka?</i> By the way, where do you say you come from? <b>7b</b> = <sc>MAU PAY ÁKÙ</sc>. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] be, become different, unusual. <i>Ug muláin ang andar sa makina, pahunúnga,</i> If the engine develops a strange sound, turn it off. <i>Ayaw laína pagsabut,</i> Don't take it the wrong way. <b>1a</b> [B126; b4(1)] become mentally deranged. <i>Nalaínan (naláin) siya tungud sa labihang kaguul,</i> He went off his rocker because of his extreme grief. <b>2</b> [A13] be or feel bad, sick. <i>Nagláin ákung ginháwa,</i> I feel sick. <b>3</b> [B] get bad, worsen. <b>3a</b> [B1256; b6] be disconcerted, feel distaste. <i>Naláin siya pagkabatì níya sa balità,</i> He reacted with distaste upon hearing the news. <i>Gilaínan ku sa ákung pagkabutang,</i> I feel uneasy in my situation. <b>dílì ig-</b> <b>1</b> related by blood. <i>Dílì ka nákù igláin,</i> You're not unrelated to me. <b>2</b> of the same family as. <i>Ang barílis dílì igláin sa tulíngan,</i> The tuna is not unrelated to the mackerel. <i>Ang arti sa panugilánun dílì igláin sa arti sa pamintal,</i> The art of story writing is not unrelated to the art of painting. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] separate oneself from the group, do s.t. s.w. else or at another time. <i>Milain ang dalágag káun sa laláki,</i> The girls ate apart from the boys. <i>Mulain ta kay lisud ug ípun ta sa mga bayaw,</i> We will live separately because it is difficult to live with in-laws. <i>Lainun nákù ni ug anhi kay dì nákù madala run,</i> I will come back for this some other time because I can not take it now. <b>2</b> [A; ac] separate s.t., set aside. <i>Laina ang hilaw ug ang hinug,</i> Keep the unripe and the ripe ones separate. <i>Ilain kini pára níya,</i> Set this aside for him. <b>lainlain</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> k.o. crazy. <b>2</b> thieves. <i>Kaning mga iskwátir mga lainlain,</i> The squatters around here are a bunch of thieves. <b>3</b> people of supernatural powers. <i>Dílì maáyung paliwatan nang mga tawhána nga lainlain,</i> We mustn't marry our children off to those people because they are thought to be vampires. <b>lainláin</b> <i>a</i> various. <i>Lainláin ang mga klási sa pagkáun,</i> There are all different <pb n=1148>kinds of food. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] <b>1</b> be @varied. <i>Lainlaínun nákù ang kulur sa bungbung,</i> I'll paint the walls all different colors. <b>2</b> do s.t. @separately or alone by oneself. <i>Ngánung naglainlàin ka mag káun dihà?</i> Why are you eating alone by yourself there? <b>kalainláin</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be all different. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @difference. <i>Wà kay kalaínan sa kawatan,</i> You're no different from a thief. <b>2</b> @change. <i>Dakù ang kalaínan nga mahímù sa ímung pánit ug mugámit kag Kamay,</i> It will make a great difference for your skin if you use Camay. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>&mdash; ug buut, úlu, kamut, etc.</b> of the sort that gets easily angered, tends to be crazy, tends to steal. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] change the subject in a conversation. <i>Wà ku maagpas kay mipalain siya sa íyang isturya,</i> I did not understand because he changed the tack of his story. <i>Palainan nátù ang sulti,</i> Let's change the tack of our conversation. <b>panag-</b> <i>v</i> [c] = <sc>PANIG-,</sc> <i>1.</i> <b>panig-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23; c2] feel like a stranger, be treated like a stranger. <i>Dílì siya manigláin nákù kay dúgay na mi nga nagkaíla,</i> He feels at home with me because we've been friends for a long time. <i>Mahiubus ku ug ímu kung paniglaínan (ipanigláin, ipanagláin),</i> I will be hurt if you treat me like a stranger. <b>2</b> [A23; c3] treat s.o. as if he were not related. <i>Dì ku manigláin sa paryinti sa ákung asáwa,</i> I will not treat my wife's relatives like outsiders.

<p><b>láis</b> <i>n</i> @fibers made from the strippings of the outer part of coconut, buri palm fronds, or from bamboo. <i>Pagkúhag láis ibugkus sa sugnud,</i> Get strips of coconut palm fronds to tie the firewood. <i>v</i> [A; a] get fibers from the outer part of coconut, buri palm fronds, or bamboo.

<p><b>Laíti</b> = <sc>LAYTI</sc>.

<p><b>lák</b> <i>n</i> @lock, @latch. <i>v</i> [A; b5] @lock. <i>Wà ku kasulud kay gilákan (gilák) man ang gít,</i> I was unable to come in because the gate was locked.

<p><b>lak-ab<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>LAB-AK</sc>.

<p><b>lak-ab<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a @stanza in a poem or song.

<p><b>lákad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] step over s.t. <i>Dílì ku makalákad sa kanal kay pinsil ang ákung palda,</i> I cannot step over the ditch because my skirt is too narrow. <i>Lakárun lang níya nang kurála,</i> He'll just step over that fence. <b>2</b> [A; b6] go beyond, exceed. <i>Kun mulákad sa trayinta díyas dubli na ang bayranan,</i> If it exceeds thirty days you will have to pay double. <i>Kadtung ímung mga sulti nakalákad sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> What you said went beyond the bounds of proper behavior. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)] marry or wed ahead of big brothers or sisters. <i>Dì sà ta magminyù kay dì ku gustung  <pb n=1149>lakdan (lakáran) ang ákung magúwang,</i> We won't get married because I don't want to get ahead of my big sister. <b>4 &mdash; sa adlaw</b> <i>v</i> [b4] for s.o. to be caught by the noon sun still asleep. <i>Gilakdan (hilakdan) siya sa adlawng natúlug, maung nagluya ang láwas,</i> He slept until afternoon so his body is weak. <i>a</i> <b>1 &mdash; sa</b> beyond a limit. <i>Lákad sa baláud ang ímung buhátun,</i> What you are going to do is a transgression of the law. <b>2 &mdash; ang búlan</b> for the moon to be moving toward the noon position in the early hours of the evening&mdash;i.e., the second quarter. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [b4] <b>&mdash; ug búlan</b> <b>1</b> affliction of individual coconuts whereby the meat of the coconut is hard, grooved, and scanty or there is none at all, and the juice, if there is any, is sour, unfit to drink. A coconut with this disease is called <ix>búang nga lubi</ix> (lit. &lsquo;crazy coconut&rsquo;) and is believed to be caused to be so by the moon's rays. <b>2</b> be mentally deranged. A person is so called because he is compared to the coconut afflicted by the moon (called <ix>búang</ix> &lsquo;crazy&rsquo;). <i>Mu rag gilakaran (gilakdan) ug búwan ang linihukan ánang tawhána,</i> That man acts as if he had been exposed to the moon (i.e. crazy). <b>-in-an, linakáran</b> <i>n</i> fine given to the older siblings by a younger sibling who marries ahead of them.

<p><b>lakag</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac3] chase. <i>Naglákag ang duha ka trák,</i> The two buses are chasing each other. <i>Lakaga (lakga) ang manuk nga nakabuhì,</i> Chase the chicken that escaped. <b>-ay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] chase each other. <i>Naglakagay ang mga bátà,</i> The children are chasing one another.

<p><b>lákang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] step across. <i>Lakángun ku nang kanal,</i> I'm going to step across that ditch. <i>Ilákang pag-úna ang walang tiil,</i> Take the first step with your left foot. <i>n</i> step, stride. <i>Hínay ang íyang lákang padúng sa simbahan,</i> She walked to church slowly. <b>tag-as ug &mdash;</b> arriving at a house in time for a meal (lit. having long leg strides). Such a person is considered lucky. <i>Tag-as kag lákang, Dù, kay mu pay pagsúgud námù,</i> You are lucky you came in time, young man, because we just started to eat. <b>sayup nga &mdash;</b> false move.

<p><b>lak-ang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] stand or squat with legs wide apart. <i>Ayaw lak-ángi ang unidúru kun mugámit mu,</i> Do not squat with your feet on the toilet bowl when you use it. <b>2</b> [A; c] set s.t. on a fire to cook. <i>Ang kalapíhan ang ilak-ang pag-úna,</i> Set the pot of coffee on the stove first. <b>3</b> [A2; b] miss, skip s.t in a series. <i>Milak-ang ang íyang dugù ug usa ka búlan,</i> She missed her period for one <pb n=1150>month. <i>Nalak-angan ang íyang ngálan pagrulkul,</i> They skipped his name when they called the roll. <b>3a</b> [B] for there to be a gap. <b>Naglak-ang ug dakù ang idad sa íyang mga bátà,</b> Her children were widely spaced. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. skipped or missed. <b>2</b> distance, gap. <i>Dakug lak-ang ang kinaíya nílang duha,</i> There is a big difference in their character.

<p><b>lakat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] walk. <i>Mulakat na ang bátà,</i> The baby is able to walk now. <i>Duul ra man nang ámù. Laktun ta lang,</i> My house is near here. Let's go on foot. <b>1a</b> [A] for s.t. to be going on. <i>Milakat ang daghang katuígan,</i> Many years went by. <i>Samtang naglakat ang pangadyì,</i> While the prayers went on. <b>1b</b> approaching an age, length of time. <i>Mulakat na ug usa ka túig sukad sa íyang pag-anhi,</i> It's been close to a year since he came here. <i>Naglakat na ku sa kwarinta,</i> I'm approaching forty. <b>2</b> [A2; ab3c] go away, depart. <i>Wà ra ba dinhi. Milakat na,</i> He's not here. He went out. <i>Unsa may laktun mu sa lungsud?</i> What are you going to the city for? <i>Kagamay ra ánang butang nga ímung laktan,</i> My, you are running away from such an insignificant thing. <i>Ilakat ang bátà sa parki arun malingaw,</i> Take the child to the park to amuse him. <b>3</b> [B46; c] spread. <i>Milakat ang balità nga bakak,</i> The false news spread. <i>Maáyung puúhun ning bagúna arun dílì makalakat nganhi,</i> It would be best to kill this vine off completely so that it can not spread here. <b>4</b> [AP; a1] follow up. <i>Akuy milakat (mipalakat) sa titulu sa ámung yútà,</i> I followed up the title to our land. <i>Laktun sa supirintindinti ang átung apuwintmint,</i> The superintendent will follow up our appointments. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> trend, course or direction s.t. is taking. <i>Lakat sa panahun,</i> Trend of the time. <i>Lakat sa nigusyu,</i> The way business is going. <b>2</b> errand, chore s.o. is sent to do. <i>Wà kuy lakat run,</i> I don't have anything to do now. <b>3</b> trip, journey. <b>4</b> procedure for doing s.t. <i>Ang lakat sa sinadiyap lahì sa yánung paghablun,</i> The procedure for weaving twill is different from that of a simple design. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> action of going some place on foot. <i>Lákat na pud ta kay wà nay sakyanan,</i> Here we go, having to walk again because there is no transportation. <i>v</i> = <sc>LAKAT</sc>, <i>4.</i> <b>pa-, pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] make s.t. walk, go away, spread news, follow it up. <b>1a</b> move pieces around the board in a game. <i>Sígi, ipalákat pa ang mga batu kay dì ra ka mapasu,</i> Go on, keep moving your stones because you haven't stopped in an empty hole. <b>2</b> [A; a] operate an enterprise; business. <i>Antígu siya mupalákat ug nigusyu,</i> He knows <pb n=1151>how to run a business. <b>3</b> [A; b6(1)] continue working on a design that was started. <i>Akuy mupalákat niíning ginansilyu,</i> I'll continue working on your crochet work. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> way, means of doing s.t. <i>Ang íyang palákat sa íyang tindáhan inantigu,</i> She runs her store in a knowledgeable way. <b>2</b> manner or process of doing. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> prone to roaming about. <b>hiN-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> tending to go out a lot for business or for just plain roaming. <b>linaktan, nilaktan</b> <i>n</i> way of walking. <b>laktunun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> way or distance to be walked. <b>2</b> errand to be run. <b>tali-(<-), -um-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> about to go out, depart.

<p><b>lakatan</b> = <sc>BÁNGAN<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lakaw</b> = <sc>LAKAT</sc>.

<p><b>lakayan</b> <i>n</i> container consisting of a bamboo tube about 8" long with the node serving as its bottom. It is worn strapped to the side as container for miscellaneous little things: seeds for farmers, bait for fishermen, et al. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] make into a <i>lakayan</i>.

<p><b>lakbang</b> <i>n</i> step, procedure. <i>Ang íyang mga lakbang nagkahinay,</i> Her steps began to falter. <i>Unsay inyung mga lakbang arun madakpan ang kriminal?</i> What steps have you taken to catch the criminal? <i>Hukmanan sa únang lakbang,</i> Court of First Instance. <i>v</i> [A2; a] go s.w. walking. <i>Milakbang na kug súgud apan íya kung gialíhan,</i> I began to walk away, but he blocked my path. <i>Kaduul ánà, lakbángun rag katulu,</i> It is very close-by[**spurious -? P2]. You can get there in three steps.

<p><b>lakbay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] travel, take a trip. <i>Pila ka adlaw makalakbay na ang táwu sa búwan,</i> Soon we'll be able to take trips to the moon. <b>2</b> [A; a] walk, travel on foot. <i>Mulakbay (maglakbay) siyag paúlì mahápun,</i> He walks home from work in the afternoon. <i>Lakbáyun lang nátù ang lungsud,</i> We will just walk to town.

<p><b>lakbit</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> brief, short in time. <i>Sa lakbit nga pagkasulti,</i> In short or briefly. <i>Lakbit nga pagkakítà,</i> A brief meeting. <b>2</b> <b>sa &mdash;</b> all of a sudden. <i>Sa lakbit misantup sa íyang panumdúman,</i> Suddenly it occured to him that ... <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make s.t. brief. <i>Átù lang ning lakbítug sulti,</i> We'll just say this briefly. <b>2</b> [b2c] touch on s.t. briefly and suddenly in the main course of the conversation. <i>Lakhiti ku dihag ampù,</i> Mention me in your prayers. <i>Gilakbit níya pagtug-an ang tinúud,</i> He revealed the truth in the course of his conversation. <i>n</i> a brief portion, part. <i>Usa ka gamayng lakbit sa ákung kagahápun,</i> One small bit of my past. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] drop hints. <i>Gipalakbítan (gipalakbitan) ku níya sa íyang gustung pinaskúhan,</i> She dropped some <pb n=1152>hints as to what she wanted for Christmas. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> hints.

<p><b>lakdap</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3C3; a12b2] for chickens to dash into fight for only a few clashes. <i>Milakdap ang mungà sa banug,</i> The hen dashed at the hawk. <i>Naglakdap ang duha ka sunuy,</i> The two roosters clashed for a short time. <b>1a</b> [A3P; c16P] have chickens clash with each other. <b>2</b> [A; b] swoop down over, whizz close by. <i>Milakdap ang ayruplánu sa digíra,</i> The plane swooped down over the battleship. <i>Lakdapi siya pagpusil,</i> Let a bullet whizz by him.

<p><b>lakdup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] swoop down. <i>Banug da tung milakdup sa mga pisù,</i> It was a hawk that swooped down on the chicks. <i>Ilakdup ang ímung tabánug sa iyáha,</i> Make your kite swoop down on his. <b>2</b> [A23; b6] appear in one's mind in a flash. <i>Milakdup sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga túgun,</i> His last words came back in my mind. <i>n</i> swoop.

<p><b>lakgak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] join strands of abaca fiber (<i>lánut</i>) end to end to make thread. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> container into which the strands of fiber are laid after they have been joined.

<p><b>lakgut</b> <i>v</i> [AC3; a] tie a series of things together by means of a series of locked knots. <i>Lakgutig maáyu ang mga nípà. Adtu ilakgut sa katsaw,</i> Tie the palm shingles up firmly. Tie them to the rafters. <i>n</i> tie that cannot come undone.

<p><b>laki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> male animal or plant. <b>2</b> descriptive term given to plants, where the same name is given to different species or varieties. The thorny and/or smaller variety or species is called <ix>laki</ix>, as opposed to a larger and smoother species or variety called <ix>bayi</ix> &lsquo;female&rsquo;. <b>3</b> paramour. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256; b6] have male offspring. <b>2</b> = <sc>LALÁKI</sc>, <i>v.</i> <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LALÁKI</sc>. <i>v</i> [B1256; c1] turn out to be a boy. <i>Maáyu untag maláki ning ákung gisabak,</i> It would be nice if my baby turned out to be a boy! <b>laláki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> human male. <i>Laláki kaáyu siyang manlihuklihuk,</i> He acts all man. <b>2</b> paramour. <i>Pusilun ku ang laláki sa ákung asáwa,</i> I'll kill my wife's paramour. <b>3</b> <b>-ng búhat</b> acting in a way proper to a man. <i>Mu nay láking búhat nga makig-áwayg babáyi?</i> Is that what a gentleman does&mdash;quarrel with a woman? <b>4</b> <b>mau nay &mdash;</b> Atta boy, that's the way you ought to do it (said only to males). <b>la-(<-), panla-, panla-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] have a paramour. <i>Nanglaláki (naglalaki) ang íyang asáwa,</i> His wife has a paramour. <i>Gipanglalaki (gilalaki) níya ang íyang humagbus,</i> She took her stepson for a lover. <b>-in-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> done like a male; man-like. <i>Lináki ang íyang tupi,</i> She has a man's haircut. <i>v</i> [A; a] <pb n=1153>do things like a male. <i>Mulináki ku ug ímu kung suhúlan,</i> I'll act like a man if you pay me. <i>Ilináki (linakíha) ang ímung pagbayhun arun dì ka hiilhan nga báyut,</i> Carry yourself like a man so people won't recognize that you're a fairy. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> man's bicycle. <b>2</b> riding astraddle like a man. <i>v</i> [A; a2] ride astride an animal or vehicle. <i>Maglinaki ku pagbakráyid sa mútur,</i> I'm going to ride astride the back of the motorcycle. <b>pakala-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] act like a man, consider, treat like a man. <i>Kinahanglan kang magpakalaláki arun dì ka ingnung báyut,</i> You have to act like a man so they won't call you scared of women. <b>kalalakin-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the menfolk as a group. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAG</sc><b>-(<-). lakin-un</b> <i>a</i> a female that acts like a male, tomboy. <b>tag-(<-), taglakin-an, taglalakin-an</b> <i>n</i> the groom's relatives at the wedding.

<p><b>láki<sub>1</sub></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAKI</sc>.

<p><b>*láki<sub>2</sub></b> <b>maáyung &mdash;</b> have exceptional ability. <i>Maáyung láki si Maríya sa ininglis,</i> Maria has exceptional ability in English. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ability, skill. <i>Pwirtig kaláki níya sa karáti,</i> He is very skilled in karate. <b>1a</b> extraordinary ability of supernatural origin. <i>May kaláki siyang makatihul samtang mag-inum,</i> He has the ability of whistling while drinking. <b>1b</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> no good. <i>Way kaláki ang pagkáun dinhi,</i> The food here is no good. <b>2</b> course of action, maneuver. <i>Ug dì ta mangampanya, masíru giyud ta íning kalakíha,</i> If we don't campaign we will get no votes in this race. <i>Maprísu ta ánang kalakíha nímu,</i> We might land in jail with those plans of yours. <b>3</b> doings, usually evil. <i>Unsa tung inyung kaláki sa Manílà?</i> What was going on in Manila? <b>3a</b> way one does things. <i>Kanúnay kang malít ug mau nang kalakíha,</i> You'll never be on time if that's the way you do things. <b>3b</b> <b>unsay ka-</b> how are things? <i>Unsay kaláki run bay?</i> How are things, pal? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ANP; a1] find ways and means to remedy a problem. <i>Akuy mukaláki (mupakaláki, mangaláki) niíni arun dílì magkúlang,</i> I'll do s.t. so that this will be enough for all of us. <i>Kalakíha ri ug mahímù pa ba ning pawuntin ping daut,</i> See if you can do s.t. with this broken fountain pen to make it work. <b>2</b> [A1P] do s.t. one shouldn't be doing. <i>Nagkaláki (nagpakaláki) ka dihag languylánguy ug malumus ka,</i> You dare to swim where you shouldn't be. You might drown. <i>Kaláki (pakaláki) kag mulumakinilya ug sakpan ka sa tag-íya,</i> Better stop playing with that typewriter. The owner might catch you. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A1] <b>1, 2</b> = <sc>KALÁKI</sc>, <i>v.</i> <b>3</b> do one's best. <i>Magpakaláki giyud aku sa pagtuun,</i> I'll do my best in my <pb n=1154>studies. <b>kalakíhan</b> <i>a</i> having an extraordinary ability of supernatural origin.

<p><b>lakiláki, lakìlákì</b> <i>n</i> splint to brace s.t. broken: broken plants, broken bones, broken furniture legs, and the like. <i>v</i> [A; a1] make into a splint, put a splint on. <i>Gilakìlakían sa duktur ang ákung piang,</i> The doctor put a splint on my broken arm.

<p><b>lakináyin</b> <i>n</i> a card game in which the winning number of points is 9, wherein the face cards count zero. <i>v</i> [A] play lucky nine.

<p><b>lakip</b> including, included. <i>Lakip na niíning báyad ang túbù,</i> This payment includes also the interest. <i>Nangamátay ang mga manuk sa tukdaw lakip ang mga pisù,</i> All the chickens died of the pest including the chicks. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] include in a group or activity; be, become included in a group or activity. <i>Dì ku mulakip ug kasábà sa way lábut,</i> I won't scold (lit. include in the scolding) anyone who had no part in the ruckus. <i>Wà ka malakip sa lista,</i> You were not included in the list. <i>Ayawg lakipa (ilakip) kining ámung yútà pagsukud,</i> Do not include our land in your survey. <b>2</b> [A; a] enclose s.t. within s.t. <i>Nalakip tingáli ang risíbu sa sulat pagpadala,</i> I must have accidentally enclosed the receipt in the letter when I sent it.

<p><b>lákir<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> lacquer. <i>v</i> [A; a] apply, put lacquer on s.t.

<p><b>lákir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> locker.

<p><b>lákit</b> <i>n</i> locket. <i>v</i> [A; c1] have, wear or attach a locket.

<p><b>laklak</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for trousers, pants, underpants to be too loose. <i>Mulaklak ang karsúnis basta luag ang hawakan,</i> Trousers hang loosely if the hip part is loose. <i>Naglaklak ang pundíyu,</i> The undershorts are big around at the seat.

<p><b>laknit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] tear or peel s.t. off with a certain amount of force. <i>Makalaknit ba kahà ning hangína sa atup,</i> I wonder if this wind can rip the roof off. <i>Gilaknit ang íyang bág sa kawatan,</i> A thief snatched her bag. <i>Nalaknitan ug gamay ang ákung sinínà sa alambri,</i> The wire ripped a small piece off my dress.

<p><b>lakpawlakpaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] walk very lightly, hardly touching the ground. <i>Naglakpawlakpaw siya sa katunukan,</i> He walked carefully over the thorny ground.

<p><b>lakra</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> make an impression on a surface. <i>Mulakra sa iláwum nga papil ang ági kun iduut pagsulat,</i> If you write with pressure it will leave a mark on the paper beneath it. <i>Mga tudlù nga naglakra sa líug sa gibunù,</i> Finger marks left on the murder victim's neck. <b>1a</b> for s.t. to show through a transparent or thin surface. <i>Naglakra ang <pb n=1155>ímung panti kay hugut ang ímung sinínà,</i> Your panties are showing through because your dress is too tight. <b>2</b> for feelings or emotions to show in one's face. <i>Milakra sa íyang nawung ang íyang kaguul,</i> Her sorrow was apparent on her face. <i>n</i> impression on a surface. <i>Lakra sa banig sa íyang likud,</i> Impression of the mat on his back. <i>a</i> showing through clearly. <i>Lakra kaáyu ang ímung tútuy sa ímung blawus,</i> Your breasts show clearly through your blouse.

<p><b>laksà</b> <i>n</i> <i>measure of quantity</i>: @{ten thousand}. <i>Usa ka laksang lubi,</i> Ten thousand coconuts. <i>v</i> [B256] reach ten thousand.

<p><b>laksanti</b> <i>n</i> a @{laxative}.

<p><b>laksi</b> = <sc>LASKI</sc>.

<p><b>laksì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> tear off, detach with a jerk. <i>Mulaksì kug usa ka pálid sa ímung nutbuk,</i> I'll tear a sheet out of your notebook. <i>Laksíun ku nang pahibalu nga gipapilit sa bungbung,</i> I'll tear off the notice pasted on the wall. <b>2</b> wipe out of one's mind. <i>Dì na malaksì gíkan sa ákung panumdúman ang átung kagahápun,</i> Our past can never be obliterated from my memory.

<p><b>laksut</b> <i>a</i> bad, @{ugly}, @{unpleasant} to the senses. <i>Laksut ug hitsúra,</i> Ugly in face. <i>Laksut ug batásan,</i> Having bad manners. <i>Laksut ug lamì,</i> Tasting bad. <i>v</i> [B; a] be, become ugly. <i>Milaksut (nalaksut) man hinúun ang ákung nawung nga gimik-ápan,</i> This make-up makes my face uglier instead of prettier. <i>Ang makalaksut (makapalaksut) sa managhigála ang panaglinibákay,</i> What is bad among friends is when they backbite each other.

<p><b>laktaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{miss}, @{skip over}. <i>Sukad sa iskína mulaktaw kag tulu ka balay. Ang ikaupat ámù,</i> From the corner, skip three houses. The fourth is my place. <i>Ug makalaktawg pila ka púlung, maigsaktu ang ihap sa tiligráma,</i> If you can skip a few words, the telegram will have exactly the right number of words. <i>Ayaw laktawi (laktáwi) ang ákung ngálan sa pagtawag,</i> Don't miss my name in the roll call. <i>n</i> s.t. skipped over. laktawlaktaw <i>a</i> not continuous, unevenly spaced. <i>v</i> [B; a] have gaps or omissions. <i>Ayawg <b>laktawlaktáwa</b> pagpintal,</i> Paint every inch. Don't keep skipping spaces. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] have gaps or omissions. <i>Nagkalaktawlaktaw ang íyang isturya sa íyang kahadluk,</i> His story had several details missing because he was so frightened.

<p><b>laktud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> direct, not going round about. <i>Laktud ning dalána kay diritsu,</i> This is the direct route because it is straight. <b>2</b> done directly, straight to the point without spending <pb n=1156>time on s.t. else. <i>Sa laktud nga pagkasulti,</i> In short, to say it directly. <b>3</b> suddenly, straight away without warning. <i>Laktud man lang siyang nawálà, way pupananghid,</i> She just disappeared without saying good-bye. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] go or take s.t. right away, directly. <i>Milaktud siyag súd, way tulutuktuk,</i> He came in directly without bothering to knock. <i>Laktúra pagsulti ang ímung túyù,</i> Say what you want directly. <i>Ilaktud ni Káti pagsulat ngadtu sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> Cathy will send the letter direct to the manager. <b>2</b> [AN; b] go, take a shortcut. <i>Nanglaktud ku padúng sa simbahan,</i> I took a shortcut to church. <b>-anan, lakturánan</b> <i>n</i> shortcut. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> done in the shortest possible time, with unnecessary steps omitted.

<p><b>lakun</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] coil s.t. <i>Lakunun (laknun) únà nang písì úsà hipúsa,</i> The rope should be coiled before you store it. <i>n</i> a coil. <i>Usa ka lakun alambri,</i> A coil of wire.

<p><b>lakung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB6; c1] loop around, wind into a loop. <i>Dihay hálas nga naglakung sa sanga,</i> There was a snake curled around the branch. <i>Siyay naglakung sa pasul,</i> He coiled the fish line up. <b>2</b> [B; b5] warp or curl up at the edges. <i>Nagkalakung ang playwud,</i> The plywood is curling up at the edges.

<p><b>lakuy</b> <i>n</i> k.o. wrasse.

<p><b>lakuy-ung</b> <i>v</i> [B2] fall in a heap when the legs or props give way. <i>Mulakuy-ung nang silyáhag lingkúran kay balig tiil,</i> That chair will collapse if you sit on it because it has a broken leg. <i>Nakalakuy-ung siya sa dihang gipatíran ku ang íyang batíis,</i> I kicked him in the shins, and he fell in a heap.

<p><b>lakwatsa</b> <i>v</i> [AC12; ac] go about with no fixed destination and have fun doing so. <i>Adtu ta sa Talísay maglakwatsa,</i> Let's go to Talisay to stroll about. <i>Ayawg ilakwatsa ug uban ang nagtinarung pagtrabáhu,</i> Don't take the serious workers along when you go roving about. <b>lakwatsíra</b> = <sc>LAKWATSÍRU</sc>. (female). <b>lakwatsíru</b> <i>a</i> one who gallivants about. <i>v</i> [B12] become a gallivanter.

<p><b>lakwig</b> <i>a</i> tall and lanky. <i>v</i> [B] be, become tall and lanky. <i>Naglakwig lang ang bayungbáyung,</i> The adolescent is tall and lanky.

<p><b>lála<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] weave leaves, straw, plastic. <i>Mul[=á] silag mga kálù,</i> They will weave hats. <i>Lad-i (láhi) akug banig,</i> Weave me a mat.

<p><b>lála<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for bites to be poisonous. <i>L[=á] kaáyu ang tuyum,</i> Black sea urchins <corr sic=inflect>inflict</corr> a painful sting. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug bàbà, dílà</b> one who has the trait that whatever bad he utters will come true. Such people usually have a birthmark on the tongue. <i>Dì siya makabuyag, mahitabù dáyun, kay l[=á]g dílà,</i> He cannot make <pb n=1157>comments, because they will come true right away. He has a poisonous tongue. <i>Simbaku malála kag bàbà</i>, God forbid if what you said comes true. (Lit. God forbid that you be a person with a poisonous tongue.) <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be affected by venom. <i>Dì siya lad-an sa suyud sa buyug</i>, He is not affected by bee stings. <b>2</b> be hurt or embarrassed by a comment regarding s.t. which is secret but true. <i>Nalad-an siya sa ílang panaghap nga may kurang</i>, She was embarrassed when they figured that she was having homosexual relations with s.o. because it was true. <b>3</b> [b4] feel the effects of an activity so that one cannot continue doing it. <i>Gilad-an sa bayli maung dì na gánì gustung mamínaw ug sunáta</i>, She has danced so much that she doesn't even want to hear music. <b>lad-ánun</b> <i>a</i> having strong reactions to venom. [+]

<p><b>lálà</b> = <sc>BALALÀ</sc>.

<p><b>làlà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @slurp, lap up s.t. noisily. <i>Gilàlà sa iring ang gátas</i>, The cat lapped up the milk. <b>2</b> drink liquor (slang). <i>Naplastar kay milàlà man gabíi</i>, He is flat on his back because he tied a good one on last night. <i>n</i> drinking spree (slang).

<p><b>lalag</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>DALAG<sub>1</sub></sc>. <b>2</b> @{yellow of complexion}, having jaundice. <i>v</i> [B1] get a yellow, sickly complexion. <i>Malalag sab ang mata sa maawásan sa apdu</i>, Your eyes get a yellow cast if you suffer from jaundice.

<p><b>lalagan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. scaly, yellowish fish about three fingers wide and 5" long found in shallow waters.

<p><b>lalan</b> (not without l) <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> eat food one usually eats with staples alone. <i>Ayaw lalana ang sud-an kay wà na unyay isulà sa paniudtu</i>, Don't eat the food without rice because we'll run out. <b>2</b> eat s.t. without the thing it usually accompanies. <i>Ayaw lalana ang mantikilya</i>, Don't eat the butter without bread.

<p><b>lalang</b> (not without l) <i>v</i> [A; a] @create. <i>Ang mga táwu gilalang nga dì managsáma</i>, Men are created different from one another. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> creature. <b>2</b> power. <i>Unsa kahay lalang ánang tawhána nga mu ra mag tukúyun ang mga babáyi</i>, What sort of power does this man possess that women come to him like chickens coming for their feed. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LALANG</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>lalau</b> <i>n</i> @{muddy water}. <i>Ayaw pagdúlà sa lalau arun dì ka nukaun</i>, Don't play in the muddy water because you'll get sores. <b>kalalauhan</b> <i>n</i> a swampy area, portion of a river or bay where the water is muddy.

<p><b>lalawígan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAWIG</sc>.

<p><b>lalha</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] strip leaves or fronds off of a <pb n=1158>stem by ripping them with a sudden downward motion or cutting downward with a knife such that a clean break is made. <i>Lalháun ku ang dáhun sa tubu,</i> I'll strip the leaves off the sugar cane.

<p><b>lálì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. amberjack.

<p><b>lálik</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @form into a certain shape. <i>Ang iskultur nga naglálik ánang istatwa,</i> The sculptor who carved that statue. <i>Maáyung pagkalálik ang íyang batíis,</i> She has well-formed legs. <i>Gilálik ku na sa ákung hunàhúnà ang ákung buut isulti,</i> I have already formed in my mind the things I want to say. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. carved, formed. <i>Dílì ka magyukbù sa linálik,</i> Thou shalt not worship graven images.

<p><b>lalim</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @pleasurable. <i>Lalim pamináwun ang Rúsas Pandan,</i> The song Rosas Pandan is very pleasant to listen to. <b>2</b> @delicious, delightful to eat. <i>Lalim kaáyung kan-un ang práyid tsíkin nímu,</i> Your fried chicken tastes delicious. <b>&mdash; mu, ka, ninyu, -y</b> <i>or</i> <b>nga</b> imagine that, can you believe it! <i>Lalim mu ba nga (y) wà diay kuy ikapilíti,</i> Imagine! It turned out that I didn't have money for fare. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] be, become pleasurable. <i>Magkalalim ang tubà imnun ug madúgay nang ininum,</i> Coconut palm toddy becomes more delicious after a quantity has already been taken in. <b>2</b> [b6] don't you think that is s.t.? <i>Gilaliman kag bulagan ug uyab?</i> Don't you think being jilted is bad enough? <i>Gilaliman ka ba ánang kantidára?</i> Don't you think that amount is s.t.?

<p><b>lálin</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @emigrate, transfer one's residence to a far place. <i>Ang pamilya ni Mútuk mulálin ngadtu sa Amirika,</i> Mutuc's family will immigrate to America. <b>2</b> [A; c1] transfer s.t. to a new location. <i>Lalínun (ilálin) ang ámung upisína diin adúnay kahílum,</i> Our office will be transferred to a quiet place. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> emigrant.

<p><b>lális</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac3] @argue about the rightness of s.t., @dispute. <i>Dì ku malális nga may rasun ku,</i> You can't deny that I'm right. <i>Ngánung lalísun pa man, sumbagayun na lang,</i> Why argue over it? Just fight it out. <i>Gilalísan níla ang paági sa pagbáhin,</i> They were arguing about how it was to be divided up. <i>Dì mamínaw ug rasun ang ákung gikalális,</i> The man I had a debate with won't listen to reason. <i>n</i> argument, dispute. <b>-an(->), -un</b> <i>a</i> quarrelsome. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.o. with whom one has or had an argument.

<p><b>lálug</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @feed slop to animals. <i>Ang mga subra iláwug sa bábuy,</i> Give the leftovers to the pigs. <b>2</b> feed a person (deprecatory). <i>Gilalúgan na ba sad nímu nang ímung <pb n=1159>way prubitsung bána?</i> Did you feed your no-good husband again? <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> slop to feed animals. <b>1a</b> fodder, feed for animals that graze. <i>Tambúgig lalug nga kumpay ang kábaw,</i> Give the carabao some hay for fodder. <b>2</b> food served (deprecatory). <b>3a</b> fine sediment. <i>Ihuwad nang lawug sa tubà ngadtu sa sukaan,</i> Pour the sediment from the toddy into the vinegar container. <b>3b</b> slime clinging to the bottom of containers. <b>4</b> youngest child in the family (humorous slang).

<p><b>lalum</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @deep, extending far down from the surface. <i>Lalum nga bangag,</i> A deep hole. <i>Ang subà dinhi lawum,</i> The river here is very deep. <b>2</b> late in the night. <i>Lalum nga kagabhíun,</i> Deep in the night. <b>3</b> deep, low in tone. <i>Lalum nga pangaghu,</i> A deep sigh. <b>4</b> profound, hard to understand. <i>Lalum nga tirminu,</i> Difficult terms. <i>Lalum nga pinsar,</i> Deep thought. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug bughat</b> for a relapse after childbirth to be severe. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ab] deepen, cause to become deep. <i>Ang kaminíru mauy mulalum sa mga kanal,</i> The street cleaners will deepen the ditches. <i>Mulalum (malalum) ang samad ug dílì limpiyúhan,</i> A wound will become deep if it is not cleaned. <i>Laluma pagbúhù ang lubung,</i> Dig the grave deep enough. <i>Lalumi pag diyútay ang bulsa,</i> Make the pocket a little bit deeper. <b>2</b> [B25] become late at night. <b>3</b> [B2] become deep and low, reaching from the depths. <i>Milalum ang íyang pangaghu nga nagtan-aw sa masakitun,</i> Her sighs grew deeper as she looked at the sick man. <b>4</b> [B2; b6] get to be profound. <i>Makalalum (makapalalum) diay ug pinsamintu ning kalisud,</i> I have found out that hardship makes one think deeply. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ang bughat</b> [A] for a relapse after childbirth to be severe. <i>Ang kasagunsun sa pagpanganak mauy makalalum (makapalalum) sa bughat,</i> Having babies one after another makes one get severe relapses. <b>6</b> <b>&mdash; ug dulut</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DULUT</sc>. <b>-g-</b> = <sc>LALUM</sc>, <i>a</i>, <i>v</i> (plural). <b>gi-un, giladmun</b> <i>n</i> depth. <i>Ang giladmun sa íyang pangútuk,</i> The depth of his intelligence. <b>ha-</b> <i>a</i> deep. <i>Halawum nga ginháwa,</i> A deep breath. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> depth, deepness. <i>Dílì masukud ang kalalum sa íyang gibátì,</i> The depths of her feeling cannot be fathomed. <b>kahi-an, kahiladman</b> <i>n</i> depths, the innermost recesses. <b>i-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> underneath, under. <i>Ilálum sa káma,</i> Underneath the mattress. <i>Ilálum sa gahum sa Katsílà,</i> Under the Spanish regime. <i>Iláwum sa dágat,</i> Under the sea. <b>pai-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; bc] go under, underneath s.t. <i>Mipailálum ang isdà sa sapyaw,</i> The fish went underneath <pb n=1160>the fish net. <i>Pailadmi sa libru ang mga papil,</i> Put the papers under the book. <b>2</b> [A; a12] assume responsibilities or duties. <i>Akuy mupailálum sa tanang trabáhu dinhi,</i> I'll do all the chores around here. <b>3</b> [A] be subject, subservient to. <i>Násud nga nagpailálum sa bandílang langyaw,</i> A nation that allowed themselves to be subject to a foreign power. <b>hai-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] get to be underneath s.t. <i>Lisud kuháun ang libru kay nahailalum sa uban,</i> It's difficult to get the book because it's way underneath the others.

<p><b>lálung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> grow seedlings. <i>Maglálung kug talung rung tuíga,</i> I will grow eggplant seedlings this year. <b>2</b> transplant, transfer from one place to another as a whole. <i>Maglálung ku íning similya,</i> I'm going to transplant these seedlings. <i>Ang tanang balay sa iskwátirs lalúngun ngadtu sa Lahug,</i> All the squatters' houses will be transferred to Lahug. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> seeds for seedlings. <b>2</b> seedlings to be transplanted. <b>3</b> houses or things of great bulk to be transferred.

<p><b>lamà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @imprint, @stain left behind. <i>Lamà sa ngábil,</i> Mark left by the lips. <i>Lamà sa kuldun sa íyang háwak,</i> The imprint of the cord on his waist. <b>2</b> stain on one's character. <i>v</i> [AB2; b] <b>1</b> leave a mark, have a mark left on it. <i>Naglamà sa mantil ang kitsap,</i> The catsup left a stain on the tablecloth. <b>2</b> bring a moral stain or blemish upon. <i>Ang ímung pagkadisgrasyáda mauy naglamà sa átung kadunggánan sa bánay,</i> You got pregnant, and it has blemished the honor of our family. <b>3</b> become clearly apparent. <i>Ang kaguul mulamà giyud sa hitsúra,</i> Sorrows show themselves in one's countenance. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] dye thread or cloth. <i>Ang usa ka putus tinà makalámà ug tulu ka sinínà,</i> A packet of dye can dye three dresses. <b>-in-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dyed large cotton threads, usually used for weaving into blankets or towels. <b>2</b> red weft thread. <b>lamàlamà</b> <i>a</i> smeared, uneven in color. <i>Lamàlamà nga pagpintal,</i> Not evenly painted. <i>v</i> [B6; a] be, become smeared or uneven in color. <i>Maglamàlamà ang kulur sa sinínà ug iladlad,</i> Your dress will get all uneven in color if you bleach it.

<p><b>lamak, lámak</b> <i>n</i> @muddy, @watery place. <i>v</i> [B; c1] become, make into a muddy, watery area. <i>Lamákun (ilámak) sa kábaw ang pilápil úsà tanumi,</i> The carabaos are made to tramp over the paddy to turn it into a mire before it is planted. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LAMAK</sc>.

<p><b>laman, láman</b> = <sc>LÁMANG</sc>.

<p><b>lámang</b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>lang.</bx> @only, @just. <b>1</b> merely, [do] nothing more than. <i>Naglingkud lang siya didtu ug walà magtingug,</i> He just sat <pb n=1161>there without saying anything. <i>Mutsátsu lang siya unyà magbuut,</i> He's just a houseboy, but he wants to have the say. <i>Walà ku muanhi arun lang kasab-an,</i> I didn't come here merely to get a scolding. <i>Ígù lang siya sa paghílak,</i> All she could do was cry. (Lit. She was merely up to crying.) <i>Káwang lang ang ákung pag-antus,</i> My sufferings were all in vain (nothing more than vain). <i>Barátu ni kay písus lang,</i> This is cheap because it is only a peso. <i>Tú lang ákung gidá,</i> I only brought three. <b>1a</b> <i>with commands or exhortation:</i> just do [so-and-so]&mdash;it's a small thing to do. <i>Hulata lang ku sa gawas,</i> Just wait for me outside. <i>Maglakaw lang ta, duul ra man,</i> Let's just walk. It's not far. <b>1b</b> <b>sígi &mdash;</b> please [do], it's just a little favor to ask. <i>Sígi lang. Tugti lang ku,</i> Come on. Please, let me do it. <b>1c</b> <i>with negatives:</i> not bother to do. <i>Dì lang ta mangatúlug rung gabíi,</i> Let's not bother going to sleep this evening. <b>1c1</b> <b>walà (dílì) &mdash; ... kun dílì ...</b> not only ... but also ... <i>Dì lang ang inahan kun dì hasta anak maapiktahan,</i> Not only the mother but also the child will be affected. <b>1d</b> <b>basta &mdash;</b> just so it happens, though it isn't desirable. <i>Iwarì lang nà. Basta lang mawálà sa ákung panan-aw,</i> Get rid of it. Just so it gets out of my sight. <b>1e</b> <b>karun, bag-u, gahápun &mdash;</b> just now, just recently, just yesterday. <i>Karun lang siya miabut,</i> He just arrived now. <i>Bag-u lang silang namalhin,</i> They just recently moved. <i>Gahápun lang siya maulì,</i> He just went home yesterday. <b>1f</b> [<i>expression of time</i>] &mdash; just do at [such-and-such time] (and no other time). <i>Mahuybis lang sila mamasúra,</i> They just collect garbage on Thursdays. <b>1g</b> <b>balu, ambut &mdash;</b> gee, I don't know (I'm only up to saying I don't know). <b>1h</b> <b>dipindi, sigun &mdash;, sa</b> [<i>verb</i>] &mdash; depending on. <i>Ákung ibaligyà sa makauna lang,</i> I'll sell it to whoever is first. <i>Sigun lang sa prisyu,</i> It depends on the price. <b>1i</b> <b>gáni, gáling &mdash;</b> the only thing wrong. <i>Maáyu untà, gáling lang nasayup ang miskla,</i> It should have been good, only the mixture was in the wrong proportions. <b>2</b> just, take [so-and-so] rather than some other choice. <b>2a</b> <i>with nominal predicate and verb subject:</i> let [so-and-so] do it. <i>Aku lay dá áni bi,</i> There, let me carry this. <i>Ikaw lay pangutána,</i> You ask. (Lit. let you be the one to ask.) <b>2a1</b> [<i>pronoun, noun</i>] &mdash; [so-and-so] will take the consequences. <i>Ug ímung buhátun, ikaw lang,</i> If you do it, you take the responsibility. <b>2b</b> <i>with quantities:</i> just make it [so-and-so] much. <i>Trayinta lang ni ha?</i> Can I have it for thirty? <b>2b1</b> <b>anhi, dinhi, <pb n=1162>nganhi &mdash;</b> only up to here. <i>Anhi lang ku dinhi manáug,</i> I'll just get off here. <b>2c</b> <i>with verb:</i> take the choice of [do]ing. <i>Ang isdang dílì mahálin gamsun lang, dílì bularun,</i> If they can't sell the fish, they just salt it. They don't dry it. <i>Ayaw lag anhi ugmà, kay mahímu man sa Huybis,</i> Don't bother coming tomorrow because you can do it on Thursday. <b>sígi &mdash;</b> <b>2c1</b> never mind. <b>2c2</b> well, all right, I'll agree to it. <i>Sígi lang. Dì lang ku mudayug palit kay mahal,</i> Never mind. I won't buy it because it's expensive. <i>Sígi lang, itúgut ku na lang nig bayinti,</i> Oh, all right. I'll let you have it for twenty centavos. <b>ákù (íya, ímu) &mdash;</b> just let me (him) have it rather than s.o. else. <i>Ákù lang ni. Kadtu lay ihátag ni Pidru,</i> Let me have this one. Just let Pedro have the other one. <b>2c3</b> can't help [do]ing. <i>Mahadluk lang ta bisan sa pagpanimátì lang,</i> We can't help getting cold shivers, even just hearing about it. <b>2c4</b> <b>mau &mdash;</b> <b>2c4a</b> it cannot be otherwise. <i>&lsquo;Mu ba siya ang nakaingun?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mu lang!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is he the one that caused it?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Of course! Who else could it have been.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <b>2c4b</b> yes, most certainly so. <i>&lsquo;Mukáun kag surbíti?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Káun mu lang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Would you like to eat ice cream?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I sure would.&rsquo; <b>3 na &mdash;</b> <b>3a</b> now it is only [so-and-so much] where it was more before. <i>Sukad sila namalhin aku na lang ang nahibilin,</i> After they moved away I was the only one left. <i>Human na ang tanan, paglimpiyu na lang,</i> Everything is done. Only the cleaning remains. <i>Duul na lang ang átung gidulngan,</i> It is just a little way further to where we're going. <b>3b</b> just take [so-and-so] rather than some other manifestly better choice. <b>3b1</b> <i>with nominal predicate and verb subject:</i> [so-and-so] will do it, though it should not be so. <i>Aku na lay tiwas áni, kay madúgay ug láing táwu,</i> Let me just do this myself because it would take forever if s.o. else were to do it. <b>3b2</b> <i>with quantities:</i> just make it [so-and-so much] (which is less than what one would ordinarily get). <i>Trayinta na lang ni, ha?</i> Just let me have it for thirty, this time, all right? <b>3b2a</b> <b>anhi &mdash;</b> just here (when I really want to do it elsewhere). <i>Kay lisud man ug musúd, anhi na lang ku sa iskína manáug,</i> Since it's difficult to take a vehicle in, I'll just get off at the corner. <b>3b3</b> [do] as the best choice under the circumstances. <i>Gamsa na lang nang isdáa kay wà nay mupalit,</i> You might as well just salt that fish because there isn't anybody who'll buy it. <i>Ayaw na lag dad-a ug bug-atan ka,</i> Don't bother taking it if you find it too heavy. <b>sígi na &mdash;</b> = <sc>SÍGI LÁMANG</sc>. <b>ákù, íya na &mdash;</b> let <pb n=1163>me (him) have it (although you might have s.t. better to do with it). <i>Ákù na lang ni, ha?</i> Let me have it, may I? <b>salámat na &mdash;</b> I thank you, since I can't pay you any other way. <i>Ug dì ka pabáyad, salámat na lang,</i> Since you won't let me pay you, just let me thank you. <b>3c</b> can't help [do]ing. <i>Sa tantung kapungut nalímut na lang siya sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> He was so angry he just forgot himself. <b>3c1</b> <i>following expressions referring to time:</i> it's already [so-and-so] late and s.t. still hasn't happened or hasn't stopped happening. <i>Udtu na lang ug naglúkun lang gihápun sa banig,</i> It's already noon, and he's still curled up asleep. <i>Gabíi na lang wà gihápun siya,</i> It's already night and he still has not come home. <b>3c2</b> <b>dayag, kláru na &mdash;</b> obviously, can't help being that way. <i>Kláru na lang nga muhílak ug ímung kusiun,</i> Obviously he's going to cry if you pinch him. <b>3c3</b> <b>salámat na &mdash; nga</b> the only saving grace was. <i>Malumus untà ku. Salámat na lang nga dinhay nakakità nákù,</i> I would have drowned, but thank God, s.o. saw me. <b>4 pa &mdash;</b> <b>4a</b> <i>following expression of time:</i> <b>4a1</b> [such-and-such] was the first. <i>Karun pa lang ku makakità sa ingun,</i> This is the very first time I ever saw anything like that. <b>4a2</b> if it was so at [such-and-such] a time already, it would be even worse later. <i>Sa súgud pa lang nahanákan na siya,</i> At the very beginning he was already out of breath. <b>4a3</b> [so-and-so] just happened now. <i>Karun pa lang siya muabut,</i> He just arrived now. <i>Daw kagahápun pa lang,</i> It seems like only yesterday. <b>4b</b> lest [so-and-so] happen. <i>Dì ku mudúul sa irù kay paákun pa lang ku,</i> I won't go near the dog, because I might get bitten. <b>4c</b> if [so-and-so] had been the case. <i>Dì pa lang ka amígu nákù, ikíha ta ka,</i> If you were not my friend, I would have filed a case against you. <i>Aku pa lay gipabúhat, gwápu tag ági,</i> if they had told me to do it, it would have come out nice.

<p><b>lam-ang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] <b>1</b> overstep, go over s.t. <i>Nalam-angan ku ang lítir dyi,</i> I skipped letter g. <b>2</b> go beyond what is normally expected. <i>Milam-ang sa maáyung pamatásan ang ímung pag-ukit-ukit,</i> Your inquisitiveness has gone beyond the limits of good manners. <i>Hilam-angan ra sad ang ímung pagkaáyu,</i> Your goodness is far beyond what one would expect. <i>a</i> taken beyond normal bounds. <i>Lam-ang kaáyu ang íyang pagpangasábà,</i> Her scolding has gone too far.

<p><b>lam-ang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> name of an Ilocano epic.

<p><b>lamánu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; ab2] shake hands. <i>Naglamánu ang managkuntra apan dúmut gihápun,</i> <pb n=1164>The two protagonists shook hands but they still were full of hatred. <i>Lamanúhun ku ang bag-ung kasal,</i> I'll shake hands with the newly-weds. <b>2</b> [A; c1] join two edges of metal sheets with one hooked into the other. <i>Lamanúhun (ilamánu) ta lang pagsumpay,</i> Let's join it bending the two edges around so that one fits into the other. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> handshake. <b>2</b> joint of two things whereby the two things fit into each other. <i>Nabungkas ang lamánu sa baldi,</i> The pail came apart because the joint where the edges of the metal were made to fit into each other came apart. <b>3</b> powdered milk donated by the U.S. government which bears a picture of a handshake (slang). [+]

<p><b>lamas, lámas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @spice. <i>Las-ay ang útan ug dì lamásan,</i> Vegetables are tasteless if you don't spice them. <i>Ang habubuyna ikalámas,</i> Mint can be used as a spice. <b>2</b> [b] spice s.t. not food. <i>Gilamásan sa kandidátu ang íyang diskursu ug mga kumidiya,</i> The candidate spiced his speech with jokes. (->) <i>n</i> <b>1</b> spice. <b>2</b> s.t. that lends color or richness. <i>Ang kanta lamas sa kinabúhì,</i> Songs add spice to life.

<p><b>lámas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @{rinse off}, @wash s.t. to eat. <i>Gadanghag ka lang naglámas sa kamúti, lapúkun gihápun,</i> You were careless in the way you washed the sweet potatoes. They are still muddy.

<p><b>lámat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @deceive the eyes with an illusion. <i>Gilámat ra tingáli ku pagkakità adtung gwápang babáyi,</i> Maybe it was only an illusion when I saw that beautiful woman. <b>1a</b> for supernatural beings that have taken and hidden a person to put a banana trunk in the person's place and make it look like the body of the dead person. <b>2</b> @enchant, bedazzle. <i>Usa ra ka pahiyum ang milámat kaníya,</i> One smile was enough to enchant him. <i>Nalámat siya sa katahum sa kagabhíun,</i> He was enchanted with the beauty of the night. <i>n</i> thing with which s.o. is bedazzled. <i>Ang lámat sa bahandì,</i> The enchantment of wealth. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> enchanting, bedazzling. <i>Malamátung húni,</i> Enchanting melody.

<p><b>lamaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @slop fed to animals. <i>Lúpig pay lamaw ning sud-ána,</i> This food is worse than pig's slop. <b>2</b> k.o. sweet made of the meat of young coconut mixed with its water, milk, and sugar. <b>2a</b> k.o. sweet made of a mixture of the meat of papaya or avocado with milk and sugar. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make, eat <i>lamaw</i>. (<-) <i>v</i> [A1; b6] have lots of <i>lamaw</i>. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LAMAW</sc>, <i>n2,</i> <i>2a.</i> <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pail for collecting slop. <b>2</b> feeding trough for animals.

<p><b>lámay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] for a sickness, feeling, vice <pb n=1165>to become deep-seated and take root or for medicine or s.t. else taken in to take its full effect. <i>Mawad-an siya sa hwisiyu ug mulámay na ang ispiritu sa álak,</i> He loses his good judgment when the alcohol begins to take its effect. <i>Ang kalúuy milámay sa íyang kahiladman,</i> A feeling of pity took root in his innermost being. <i>Ug dílì ka magpatambal lamáyan giyud ka sa sakit,</i> If you don't submit to treatment, the sickness will get worse and worse.

<p><b>lámay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] join a @wake for the dead without sleeping. <i>Ang nakalámay sa Lúnis sa Myirkulis na sad mubálik,</i> Those who kept vigil on Monday will do so again on Wednesday. <i>n</i> wake for the dead.

<p><b>lamba</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5c] @slam s.t. long and hard against s.t. <i>Kinsang pliyíra tung milamba sa bátir sa yútà?</i> Who was that player who swung the bat hard against the ground? <i>Kupti ang h[=á]s sa íkug unyà ilamba sa paril,</i> Hold the snake by the tail and swing it hard against the stone wall. <i>Nalamba ang sakayan ngadtu sa kabatuan,</i> The boat was slammed against the rocks. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] pass a basketball from a distance to one's teammate. <i>Lambahi (lambáhi) tung kaúban nátung way gwardiya,</i> Throw the ball to the teammate that no one is covering. <b>lambalamba</b> <i>v</i> [B5; c1] be repeatedly thrown or struck against s.t. <i>Naglambalamba ang sira sa bintánà sa kakusug sa hángin,</i> The window shutters swung back and forth against the sills with the force of the wind. <i>n</i> the action of throwing or striking repeatedly.

<p><b>lambang</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] <b>1</b> @join two things, usually live, to each other. <i>Nagkalambang ang duha ka hiniktang sunuy nga gidúul paghigut,</i> The two roosters that were tied too closely to each other got entangled with one another. <i>Lambánga ang duha ka karabaw,</i> Tie the two carabaos together. <b>2</b> for animals to have sexual intercourse, and, by coarse extension, for people to do so. <i>Duha ka irù nga naglambang,</i> Two dogs copulating. <i>À, makiglambang lang nà bisag unsung bayhána,</i> He doesn't care who he screws.

<p><b>lambanug, lambánug</b> <i>n</i> alcoholic drink made from the water taken from the nipa palm bud that has been fermented and distilled.

<p><b>lambáruk</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @mackerel (small <i>adlù</i>).

<p><b>lambay<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>LANGBAY</sc>.

<p><b>*lambay<sub>2</sub></b> <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. @{stage play}, usually about heroic deeds of past ages, with a dialogue delivered in verse. <b>2</b> s.t. put on for the show of it. <i>Kanang paggúkud kunúhay sa mga dagkung ismaglir usa lang ka linambay,</i> The drive against the smugglers is nothing <pb n=1166>but a big show. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b(1)] present a <i>linambay</i> stage play. <b>2</b> [A23] play in a <i>linambay</i>.

<p><b>lambáyaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hardwood timber.

<p><b>lambáyung</b> <i>n</i> creeping vine of seashore with purple morning-glory-like flowers: <b><i>Ipomoea pes-caprae</i></b>.

<p><b>lambì</b> <i>a</i> for one of two things that should fit together to overlap. <i>Lambì ang ngábil, ilhánang nanaway,</i> The lower lip is sticking out, a sign that he is criticising you. <i>v</i> [B6; ac] get to be protruding. <i>Nalambì ang sira sa kaban,</i> The cover of the trunk jutted out over the edge.

<p><b>lambid</b> <i>v</i> [A2C3; a] be @{wound around} in an irregular way. <i>Milambid ang gaway sa kugíta sa íyang páa,</i> The tentacles of the octopus were wound around his thigh. <i>Ayaw idúul ang mga hiniktan arun dílì maglambid,</i> Don't put the cocks close to each other so that their strings don't get all tangled up. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>budbud</i> made with white and violet-colored sticky rice, such that the dark and light colored rice forms intertwining streaks. <b>linambíran</b> = <sc>LINAMBID</sc>.

<p><b>lambígit</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] get @{entwined}, latched on to. <i>Magkítà gánì ming magsúun maglambígit dáyun mig isturya,</i> When we sisters get together we get engrossed in conversation with each other. <i>Nagkalambígit ang ílang mga ngálan tungud sa ílang kasuud,</i> Their names became linked with each other because they are close to each other. <i>Nagkalambígit ang duha ka pasul,</i> The two fishing lines got entangled. <i>Kanúnay ilambígit niíni ang hitabù,</i> Always connect the incident with it. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b> <i>v</i> [c6] be involved, tied up in. <i>Wà ka ba mahilambigit sa tikas?</i> Are you not involved in the swindle? <i>Ag ákung kwarta nahilambígit sa tindáhan,</i> My money is tied up in the store. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> involvement. <i>Maprísu ka ug dúna kay kalambigítan sa huld-ap,</i> You will go to jail if you have s.t. to do with the hold-up.

<p><b>lambing</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c1] join two things together with a length of s.t. <i>Lambínga ang duha ka baskit,</i> Tie the two baskets together. <i>Gidúul ninyu paghigut ang kanding. Dì nagkalambing hinúun,</i> You tied the goats too close together so they got entangled. <i>n</i> fishing line with two hooks attached to the main line.

<p><b>lambiyaw</b> <i>n</i> the fry of a k.o. crevally, silver in color and glossy green on the back with smooth skin: <b><i>Selaroides leptolepis</i></b> (so called from the color resemblance to the <i>bíyaw</i> beetle).

<p><b>lambiyug, lambíyug</b> = <sc>LAMBUYUG</sc>.

<pb n=1167>

<p><b>lambíyung</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; c1] @{whirl around}, go around in circles. <i>Naglambiyung[**correction: Naglambíyung?] ang bintiladur,</i> The electric fan is revolving. <i>Lambiyunga (ilambíyung) ang ímung buktun,</i> Whirl your arm around. <i>Ang tugpahánan gilambiyungan sa ayruplánu únà kini mutugpa,</i> The airplane circled the airport before it landed.

<p><b>lambu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cord made of cotton strings twisted together. <i>Lambu ang ibáat sa putus kay lig-un,</i> Use cord for tying the bundle because it's strong. <b>2</b> fishing line made from such cord. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] catch fish with a hook and line made of <i>lambu</i> dragged behind the boat.

<p><b>lambù</b> <i>a</i> @{growing lush} and tall, @{prospering}. <i>v</i> [B3] <b>1</b> for plants to grow lush and tall. <i>Milambù ang tanum nga giabunúhan,</i> The fertilized plants grew lush. <b>2</b> @{prosper}, @{flourish}. <i>Milambù sa ngadtungadtu ang íyang nigusyu,</i> His business flourished with time. <b>3</b> for good feelings to grow in time. <i>Sa kadugáyan nilambù ang ákung pagbátì níya,</i> With time, my feelings for her grew intense. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> a place where s.t. flourishes. <i>Lambuánan sa mga yawan-ung hunàhúnà,</i> Place where evil thoughts flourish. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> prosperity. <i>Álang sa kalambúan sa násud,</i> For our nation's progress. <b>ka-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> advancement, growth. <i>Way kalambuan ang ímung paningúhà kaníya,</i> Your romantic efforts have made no progress whatsoever. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> growing luxuriantly and tall.

<p><b>lambud</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c] @{wind around}, get wound around. <i>Milambud ang gaway sa kugíta sa íyang páa,</i> The tentacles of the octopus wound around his thigh. <i>Ipalayù ug hikut ang kábaw ug kanding arun dílì magkalambud,</i> Tie the carabao and the goat far from each other so that their ropes will not get entwined with each other. <i>Ilambud ang hílu sa karitisan,</i> Wind the thread around the spool. <b>lamburan, lamburánan</b> <i>n</i> reel or anything on which s.t. is wound. <b>budbud linambúran</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>budbud</i> made of white and violet colored rice or millet, rolled and wound together.

<p><b>lambun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{broil s.t.} in between embers. <i>Pagkúhà ug dáhun kay maglambun tag kamúti,</i> Get some banana leaves. We're going to broil some yams. <b>-in-an</b> <i>a</i> cooked by having been broiled in live coals.

<p><b>lambúnaw</b> <i>n</i> medium-sized tree of the forest producing bunches of oval, red fruit, <b>5</b> cm. or longer, with an edible pulp and a single pit: <b><i>Aglaia everettii</i></b>.

<p><b>lambung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] grow long and thick, clinging or hanging over s.t. <i>Naglambung na <pb n=1168>sa tingkuy ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is already hanging thick over his nape. <i>Gilambúngan sa balantiyung ang ílang atup,</i> The squash grew over their roof, covering it entirely. a hanging long and thick covering s.t. <b>-ay</b> <i>n</i> @{mane}. <b>paN-ay</b> <i>v</i> [A2] grow profusely in strands or bunches as if a mane. <i>Maáyung alutan ang ímung buhuk kay nanglambúngay na,</i> It's about time to cut your hair because it is like a mane. <b>-ayun</b> <i>a</i> thick and long like a mane.

<p><b>lambúnit</b> <i>v</i> [C] fight with one another to get s.t. <i>Naglambúnit ang babáyi ug ang mangangagaw sa bág,</i> The woman struggled with the purse-snatcher.

<p><b>lambus</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] strike with s.t. heavy, usually in a downward motion. <i>Mga balud nga milambus sa gamayng sakayan,</i> Waves that lashed at the small boat. <i>Makalambus ka kahà ánang kaban níya?</i> Do you think you can slam that trunk on him? <i>Gilambúsan ang kawatan sa alhu,</i> We struck the burglar with a pestle. <i>Alsáhun tikaw run ug ilambus sa yútà,</i> I'll lift you and throw you hard against the ground. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> blow with s.t. heavy. <i>Kusug nga lambus sa íkug sa buáya,</i> Heavy lash inflicted by the crocodile with its tail. <b>2</b> stick used to strike s.o.

<p><b>lambut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a2b2] reach a certain amount, length, or distance. <i>Milambut ug usa ka líbu ang ílang halin,</i> Their sales amounted to one thousand pesos. <i>Nakalambut ug usa ka gatus ang mga bisíta,</i> The visitors reached one hundred persons. <i>Lambuta ang syudad sa duha ka úras,</i> Get to within reach of the city in two hours. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] catch up or overtake. <i>Mulambut pa ta sa únang byáhi,</i> We can still make the first trip. <i>Gilambutan námù sila sa Karkar,</i> We caught up with them in Carcar.

<p><b>lambuyud</b> <i>a</i> feeling dizzy. <i>v</i> [B6; b6] @{feel dizzy}. <i>Mulambuyud (maglambuyud) ang ákung panan-aw ug magsígig libutlíbut sa halígi,</i> I get dizzy if I keep running around the post. <b>2</b> = <sc>LAMBUYUG</sc>.

<p><b>lambuyug, lambúyug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] whirl s.t. around on a string and throw it off in a distance. <i>Lambuyugun ku nang langgam nga nagbatug sa sanga,</i> I'll sling a rock at that bird perching on the branch. <i>Gilambuyug níya ang láang úsà pasaplúti ang báka,</i> He whirled the rope before he lassoed the cow. <b>2</b> [B26] for attention, thought to veer off on a target. <i>Nalambuyug ang íyang mga mata sa nagkiaykíay nga babáyi,</i> His gaze was diverted to the girl with the swaying hips. <i>n</i> sling for hurling stones made of a piece of cloth, leather, or palm leaf which holds the <pb n=1169>stone and a pair of strings which are whirled around. When one of the strings is released, the missile flies off.

<p><b>lamdag</b> <i>a</i> @{bright}. <i>Lamdag kaáyu ang síga sa plurisin,</i> The fluorescent lamp gives a bright light. <i>Ayaw pagsugà kay lamdag man,</i> Don't turn on the light because there's enough light. <i>Lamdag ug kaugmáun ang táwung kugihan,</i> An industrious person has a bright future. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> illumination. <i>Ang lamdag sa sugà,</i> The lamp's illumination. <b>2</b> enlightenment. <i>Lamdag sa Ispiritu Santu,</i> The enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ab] give light or brightness; be, get bright or well-lighted. <i>Adlaw nga naglamdag sa kalibútan,</i> The sun that gives light to the world. <i>Dúnay táwu kay naglamdag mag ílang báy,</i> There must be s.o. home because the house is lighted. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] enlighten. <i>Pagtulun-an nga milamdag sa ákung hunàhúná,</i> A lesson that enlightened my mind. <b>3</b> [B1; b6] for a place to be stripped of plants or parts of plants. <i>Ang pagpahit sa kamaisan sa mga bábuy mauy nakalamdag (nakapalamdag) niíni,</i> The pigs ate the corn plants and made the area bare. <i>Gilamdágan ku sa mga káhuy sa lagwirta nga gipamutlan sa mga sanga,</i> The trees in the yard looked bare to me after some of the branches were pruned. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] go, put to a lighted or illuminated area. <i>Ayawg palamdag kay hiilhan ka,</i> Don't go under the light because you might be recognized. <i>Palamdági ku ngari arun makítà ring ákung trabáhu,</i> Give me some light here so I can see my work. <b>ka-un</b> <i>n</i> clarification. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> enlightening.

<p><b>lamdaman</b> (coined from <ix>lamdag</ix> &lsquo;light&rsquo; and <ix>panumdúman</ix> &lsquo;thoughts&rsquo;&mdash;root <i>dumdum</i>) <i>n</i> @{inspiration}. <i>Ang dalága mauy lamdaman ni Rinaldu sa íyang pagpanulat,</i> Reynaldo took his inspiration for his writings from the girl.

<p><b>lamhun</b> <i>v</i> [B3] for a wound or bruise to get infected and swollen, but not severely so. <i>Tambáli nang núka sa dì pa makalamhun,</i> Put medicine on your sore before it gets infected.

<p><b>lamhung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> growing thickly and profusely, esp. such that other plants are crowded out. <b>2</b> choking off or overshadowing, keeping plants from growing well. <b>3</b> swollen and inflamed. <i>v</i> [B3; b6] <b>1</b> grow thick and/or tall such that other growths get stunted. <i>Ang kamukámu milamhung sa lagwirta,</i> The morning glories spread all over the garden (and choked other plants). <b>1a</b> stunt other plants by choking them off or overshadowing them. <i>Makalamhang ang dáhun sa kaymítu <pb n=1170>sa mga tanum,</i> Star apple leaves are used as a cover to kill off other plants. <i>Nalamhungan ang mga munggus sa balíli,</i> The grass stunted the bean plants. <b>2</b> [B2346] get inflamed. <i>Milamhung ang pinaakan sa lamuk,</i> The <corr sic=mosquite>mosquito</corr> bite became inflamed.

<p><b>lamhuy</b> <i>v</i> [B1236] for bruise to swell and get soft. <i>Nalamhuy ang ákung tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> I struck my finger with a hammer and it became soft. <i>Wà makalamhuy ang buktun nga giiniksiyunan,</i> The arm that was injected didn't swell.

<p><b>lamì</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{tasty}, giving a delicious feeling or taste. <i>Lamì nga pagkáun, Delicious food. Lamì nga isturya,</i> A pleasurable talk. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; nga i-[<i>verb</i>]</b> it would be lovely to . . . <i>Lamì rung ikalígù sa dágat,</i> How nice it would be to go swimming now. <b>2</b> beautiful to look at. <i>Lamì kaáyu siyag kurtína,</i> She has beautiful curtains. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{taste}, @{flavor}. <i>Way lamì, Tasteless. Kining isdáa lamig lápuk,</i> This fish tastes like mud. <b>2</b> @{orgasm}. <i>Dúgay siyang abtan sa lamì,</i> It takes her a long time to come to her orgasm. <i>v</i> [B; a] <b>1</b> be, become pleasant to the senses. <i>Mulamì (malamì) ang sud-an ug bitsinan,</i> The food becomes tasty if monosodium glutamate is added to it. <i>Ang pagsinabtanay mauy makalamì (makapalamì) sa panagtiáyun,</i> Understanding is the thing that makes a marriage pleasant. <i>Lamian kung mubunal ug bátang pilyu,</i> I love to whip naughty boys. <b>2</b> [b4] reach orgasm. <b>&mdash; ug kalit</b> <i>v</i> [A23] take a sudden unexpected turn. <i>Maáyu pa tung ámung isturya unyà milamì lang siyag kalit, nasukù man lang nákù,</i> We were having a nice talk. Suddenly s.t. got into her, and she got mad at me. <i>Lúya na ang buksidur, unyà sa katapúsang ráwun milamì lag kalit, gidabudabuhan ang kuntra,</i> The boxer had gotten weak. Then suddenly at the last round he seemed to have gotten his second wind and rained heavy blows on his opponent. <i>v</i> [A13] become more interesting. <i>Naglámì (nagkalámì) ang ílang isturya human makainum,</i> Their talk got more interesting after they had had some drinks. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac1] do s.t. to add to the taste, pleasurableness of s.t. <b>2</b> [A13] indulge oneself in s.t. nice. <i>Nagpalámì siya ug katúlug ug wà gánì maghunàhúnàg digámu,</i> She's sleeping blissfully without even thinking about cooking breakfast. <i>n</i> @{seasoning}. <b>palamìlámì</b> <i>v</i> [A] indulge in sexual pleasures of any sort. <i>n</i> @{sexual indulgence}. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> @{delicious}. <i>v</i> [B126] get to be delicious.

<p><b>lamígas</b> = <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.

<p><b>lamigmig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] pat successively and <pb n=1171>shake or massage lightly, usually on a full and fleshy part of body. <i>Gustu siyang mulamigmig sa ákung páa,</i> She likes to play with my thigh by patting it, shaking the hand while pressing down. <i>Lamigmígi ug asin ang hinimulbúlan nga manuk,</i> Pat some salt into the flesh of the dressed chicken. <b>2</b> [a2b2] be repeatedly hit with s.t., usually not fatal. <i>Hinglamigmigan ka lagi kay nakigsumbagay kag buksidur,</i> If you pick a fight with a boxer you'll get yourself soundly pummelled.

<p><b>lamili</b> = <sc>DAMILI</sc>.

<p><b>lamina</b> <i>n</i> framed @picture, esp. of a saint. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make framed pictures, esp. of saints.

<p><b>laminasiyun</b> = <sc>LAMINISYUN</sc>.

<p><b>láming</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> @confine an animal for the purpose of controlling its food prior to slaughtering. <i>Lamíngun ang alimángug mga simána únà lutúa,</i> They keep mud crabs and feed them a special food about a week before they cook them. <b>1a</b> do a similar thing to people. <i>Iláming sa duktur ang pasiyinti sa dì pa upirahan,</i> The doctor will confine the patient and put him on a special diet before he operates. <b>2</b> keep s.t. in confinement. <i>Kadtung íyang pagsiyágit didtu ra maláming sa íyang kinahiladman,</i> He kept his shouts stifled in his innermost being. <i>Naláming silang tanan sulud sa balay,</i> They were all kept imprisoned in the house. <b>2a</b> in the game of <i>tubigtúbig,</i> imprison players in one of the squares. <i>n</i> animal that had been kept confined prior to slaughter. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LÁMING</sc>, <i>n.</i> <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the first two squares the players at play enter in the game of <i>tubigtúbig</i>. <b>2</b> the player guarding these squares.

<p><b>laminisyun</b> <i>n</i> @lamination of plastic over s.t.

<p><b>laminit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @laminate with plastic.

<p><b>lamísa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @table, @desk. <b>2</b> food set out. <i>Náa na bay lamísa dihà kay musaka mi,</i> Do you have a table set? If you do, we'll come in. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] make into a table. <b>2</b> [A; c] set the table, put food on the table. <i>Lamisáhi ang bag-ung abut,</i> Put dishes on the table for the visitor that just came in. <b>2a</b> have a lot of food on the table (usage taken from the custom among poor people that a table is set only when there is a decent meal&mdash;otherwise people just take what there is and gobble it down). <i>Basta bag-ung swildu maglamísa giyud mi sa Dinghaw,</i> As soon as we get paid we'll have a banquet (lit. table set) at the Ding Hao restaurant.

<p><b>lamisíta</b> <i>n</i> small @table or @desk.

<p><b>lamiti</b> <i>a</i> smeared with s.t. sticky. <i>v</i> [B1; aP] be, become smeared with s.t. sticky. <i>Naglamiti <pb n=1172>ang nawung sa bátà sa tsukulit,</i> The child's face is besmeared with chocolate.

<p><b>lamlam<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a k.o. @itch affecting the parts between the toes, usually caused by walking barefoot on ground soaked with horse urine. <i>Katul kaáyu ang lamlam sa ákung tiil,</i> The itch in my toes is so bad. <i>v</i> [A123P; b4] get <i>lamlam</i>.

<p><b>lamlam<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{talk too much}, nonsensically or boastfully. <i>Lamlámi lang si Tátay mu kay aku dì na mutúu,</i> Just hand that line to your father. As far as I'm concerned, I don't believe you. <i>Unsa na man say gilamlam mu didtu sa imnanan?</i> What sort of foolishness did you tell the boys in the toddy stand this time? <i>n</i> @talk, @words. <i>Pulus lang lamlam nang tawhána way nabúhat,</i> That fellow is all talk, no action.

<p><b>lampaag, lampáag</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @stout, @fat. <i>Kalampáag sa náwung ánang bayhána! Ikatalakpun,</i> What a broad face that woman has! You could use it as a shutter for a window. <b>2</b> spreading lushly. <i>Lampaag kaáyu ang lambáyung dapit sa hunásan,</i> The vines are spreading out lushly near the edge of the tidal flat. <b>3</b> for the hair to look bushy. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> be, become broad, flat. <b>2</b> get to grow lushly. <i>Mulampáag ang mga balíli ug muuwan na,</i> The grass will grow lush when the rains come. <b>3</b> for hair to get bushy. <i>Naunsa man ang ímung hirdu nga naglampaag man. Gitís tingáli,</i> What happened to your hair that it's so bushy? You must have teased it.

<p><b>lampágà</b> = <sc>LAMPAAG</sc>.

<p><b>lampakanay nga kúgun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @reed found in marshland.

<p><b>lampánug</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b3] go out without saying goodbye to escape, get out of work, in anger. <i>Túa, milampánug kay gikasab-an,</i> There, he ran out of the house because I scolded him. <i>Ang pagpanglimpiyu sa sílung muy íyang gilampanúgan,</i> He left the house to get out of helping clean out the cellar.

<p><b>lampara</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> oil or kerosene @lamp without a chimney. <b>2</b> pressurized kerosene @lantern where the light shines downward, used mainly for fishing. <i>v</i> [A13; a1] make, use a lamp of this sort. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> type of fishing using a pressurized lantern to attract the fish, used esp. in shallow waters for catching schools of small fish. <i>v</i> [A2; c] catch fish by this manner. <b>lamparahan</b> = <sc>LAMPARA</sc>, <i>1.</i> <b>lamparista</b> <i>n</i> one who fishes using the <i>panglampara</i> method. <b>lamparahánan</b> <i>n</i> boat used in <i>panglampara</i> fishing. <b>lamparilya</b> <i>n</i> a small kerosene or alcohol lamp without a chimney. <i>v</i> [A13 ; b6] make, use as a small <pb n=1173>kerosene lamp.

<p><b>lampáru</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] @slap with the hand, usually at the head. <i>Dílì ku mulamparu[**typo: mulampáru?] kay piligru kunu sa útuk,</i> I would not slap anyone on the head because it might hurt the brain. <i>Gilampáru ku sa kusug nga hángin,</i> I was struck by a strong wind. <i>n</i> slap.

<p><b>lamparúnis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. pussy, slow-healing @abscesses around the neck that leave large scars. <i>v</i> [B124; a4b4] be afflicted with <i>lamparúnis</i>.

<p><b>lampas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN2; b] @cut down, @sickle grass and undergrowth with a swinging motion. <i>Pagsúhul ug mulampas (manglampas) sa kalubihan,</i> Hire s.o. to cut down the grasses in the coconut grove. <i>n</i> the cutting down of grass or undergrowth from an area. <b>&mdash; tánum</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] cut down the plant growths and plant rice or corn at the same time. This is done in paddies under deep water which cannot be plowed or in second-growth forests between the trees. <i>Gilampas tánum (gilampas tanúman) ang anut,</i> The plants were cut down, and at the same time corn was planted in the second-growth forest. <i>n</i> the process of cutting plant growths, plant rice or corn at the same time.

<p><b>lampas<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LÁPAS</sc>.

<p><b>lampásu</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @polish a floor by rubbing a half a coconut husk or s.t. similar over it. <i>Lampasúhi ang sála,</i> Polish the floor in the living room with a coconut husk. <b>2</b> [A; b2c] pummel, shake and throw to the ground. <i>Ilampásu ku kinsa ninyu magbinúang,</i> If anybody cuts up I'll scrub the floor with him. <i>Ilampásu námù ang inyung tím,</i> We'll give your team a thorough trouncing. <b>2a</b> have s.t. done thoroughly to it. <i>Hilampasuhan unyà mug kasábà,</i> You'll get a thorough tongue-lashing. <i>n</i> s.t. to polish the floor with, esp. a half a coconut husk.

<p><b>lampay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small shallow porcelain @bowl to eat out of.

<p><b>lampin</b> <i>n</i> @diaper. <i>v</i> [A; c1] put on, make into a diaper. <i>Lampínun (ilampin) lang ning dáang palda,</i> Just use this old skirt for a diaper. <i>Lampíni ang bátà,</i> Diaper the baby.

<p><b>lampíngas</b> <i>n</i> @indifference to how s.o. is affected. <i>Ang lampíngas sa kapalaran,</i> The arbitrariness of fate. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> indifferent and oblivious to how other persons are affected. <i>Lampingásan nga táwu nga walà mabalísa sa íyang gipamabdúsan,</i> A brute, completely indifferent to the fate of the woman who bore his child. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become indifferent, oblivious to others.

<p><b>lampínig</b> <i>n</i> @{yellow jacket}. <i>Ang lampínig sa panúlat nakaúkub sa íyang tingkuy,</i> He was <pb n=1174>bitten by the writer's bug. (Lit. The yellow jacket of writing bit into the nape of his neck.)

<p><b>lampírung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> white, translucent material taken from the inside of the shells of certain oysters, used for windows, lampshades and other ornaments. <b>2</b> name of the oyster from which this material is taken. <i>v</i> [a12] use <i>lampírung</i> shells for windowpanes.

<p><b>lampis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small edible @crab of streams.

<p><b>lampuay, lampúay</b> <i>v</i> [B6; b6] flow or spread beyond the limits. <i>Milampuay ang íyang tiyan sa katambuk,</i> His stomach bulged from excess fat. <i>Naglampuay ang sabaw sa panaksan (ang panaksan sa sabaw),</i> The soup spilled over the edge of the bowl.

<p><b>lampurnas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> @scrub, @wipe with force to clean s.t. <i>Nalimpiyu ang pansayan human siya makalampurnas niíni,</i> The comfort room looked spotless after she scrubbed it. <b>1a</b> clean s.t. by splashing water over it. <i>Nakalampurnas na ku sa banyu,</i> I have already splashed water to clean the bathroom. <b>2</b> destroy. <b>2a</b> [A13; a12] beat heavily. <i>Ang way kalúuyng igsúun naglampurnas níya sa gamay lang sayup,</i> His heartless brother beat him mercilessly for the slightest mistake. <b>2b</b> [c6] badly beaten in games. <i>Ilampurnas lang nang inyung tím nga bayat sa iláha,</i> Their team will just trounce your inept team. <b>2c</b> be struck by a severe storm. <i>Nangalúad ang káhuy nga gilampurnas sa bagyu,</i> The trees that were battered by the storm were uprooted. <b>2d</b> [a12] wipe off or out swiftly. <i>Gilampurnas lang ang mga pagkáun nga gid[=ú]t sa pista,</i> The food that was served at the fiesta was rapidly wiped out. <b>2e</b> [A; c] throw s.t. to the ground with force. <i>Íyang ilampurnas ang mga kaldírug way sud-an,</i> He'll smash the pots on the floor if there's no food. <b>2f</b> [A; a1] pet torridly with a girl (slang). <i>Gilampurnas níya ang íyang trátu sa sinihan,</i> He petted frantically with his girl friend[**? girlfriend] in the movie house. <i>n</i> scrubbing. <i>Way lampurnas ang ílang salug,</i> Their floor has not been scrubbed.

<p><b>*lampus</b> <i>v</i> [A24] be @successful. <i>Milampus ang íyang plánu,</i> His plans succeeded. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> success. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> successful. <i>Malampúsun nga míting,</i> A successful meeting. <i>v</i> [A13] be, become successful. <i>Hináut untang magmalampúsun ka sa ímung tingúhà,</i> I hope you will be successful in your undertaking.

<p><b>lampuug, lampúug</b> = <sc>DAMPUUG</sc>.

<p><b>lampuyang</b> = <sc>LUY-ALUY-A</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LUY-A</sc>.

<p><b>lampuyut, lampúyut</b> <i>a</i> for flesh to be @flabby and @loose. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be loose and flabby. <i>Mulampúyut ang átung pus-un ug wà tay <pb n=1175>iksirsayis,</i> The lower part of your abdomen becomes loose and flabby if you do not exercise.

<p><b>lamù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] temporarily preserve tiny fish by salting lightly. <i>Lamua ang subrang tugnus,</i> Preserve the leftover fry by salting them lightly. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> small fish, temporarily preserved with light salt. <b>lamùlamù, lamùlámù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] <b>1</b> do s.t. fast in a slipshod and careless way. <i>Gilamùlamuan (gilamùlamù) lang nímug laba ang mga bisti u, daghan pang buling,</i> You washed these clothes so fast and carelessly. See, they are still all dirty. <i>Ayaw lamùlamúag bungat arun makasabut ku,</i> Don't speak so hurriedly and indistinctly, so I can understand. <b>2</b> done rapidly and without reserve. <i>Gilamùlamù lang níya ang usa ka panaksang pansit,</i> He just gobbled down a whole bowlful of noodles. <i>Gilamùlámù níya ang íyang uyab sa súd sa sinihan,</i> He engaged in a heavy petting session with his girl friend in the movie house.

<p><b>lamudlaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. vine of waste spaces bearing edible fruits, the size and shape of a hen's egg with stripes, acrid and pulpy, but with little juice and lots of tiny seeds.

<p><b>lamugdung</b> <i>a</i> overcast, gloomy. <i>Lamugdung ang lángit, muuwan tingáli,</i> The sky is overcast. It will probably rain. <i>Lamugdung siyag nawung mu rag kahilakun,</i> She has a gloomy expression as if she were about to burst into tears. <i>v</i> [B; b3c1] become overcast, gloomy.

<p><b>lamúgay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] mix, jumble thoroughly. <i>Kamiy milamúgay (naglamúgay) sa balas ug simintu,</i> We mixed the sand and cement thoroughly. <b>2</b> [B26C3; c1] for a crowd to mill about in confusion. <i>Milamúgay ang mga táwu pagkakità sa kaláyu,</i> The people ran about in confused panic when they saw the fire. <i>a</i> topsy-turvy, in disorder. <i>Lamúgay ang sála,</i> The living room was topsy-turvy.

<p><b>lamuglamug</b> <i>n</i> slimy substance. <b>1</b> slime which forms where water has been allowed to stand. <b>2</b> slime exuded by certain animals, such as snails. <b>3</b> thin film that forms on the eyeballs of seriously ill persons. <b>4</b> thin, filmy membranes adhering to meat or tendons. <b>5</b> gelatinous substance found under the bark of young trees. <b>6</b> oily substance found on the surface of coconut meat ripened beyond maturity ( = <sc>DALÍNUG</sc>). <b>&mdash; sa tubà</b> sediment in the coconut palm toddy. <i>v</i> [B1246; a4b4] form slimy substances of these various kinds.

<p><b>lamugmugan</b> = <sc>LIMUGMUGAN</sc>. see <sc>LIMUGMUG</sc>.

<pb n=1176>

<p><b>lamuk</b> <i>n</i> mosquito. <i>v</i> [a4] <b>1</b> be infested with mosquitoes. <i>Ang lugar nga may lámak lamukun,</i> A place where there is standing water gets infested with mosquitoes. <b>2</b> wait s.w. too long. <i>Gilamuk na lang kug hinuwat, wà giyud mupatim-aw,</i> I waited for a long time, but he did not show up. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] be present in large numbers with confusion and bustle. <i>Naglámuk ang mga táwu sa baratilyu,</i> People crowded the bargain sale. <i>Míting man untà ni, nalámuk na man hinúun,</i> This is supposed to be a meeting, but it has become a melee instead. <b>2</b> [BC3] be, become a free-for-all, melee. <i>Nagkalámuk ang mga istudiyanti ug mga pulis,</i> There was a free-for-all between the students and the police. <i>a</i> busy and chaotic with large numbers of people. <i>n</i> a free-for-all, melee. <b>lamuklámuk</b> = <sc>LÁMUK</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i> <b>-ay(<-)</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAMÚKAY</sc>.

<p><b>lamúkat</b> <i>v</i> [B16; a] be, become disorderly, messed up. <i>Naglamúkat ang íyang nawung sa mik-ap,</i> Her make-up was in chaotic disarray. <i>Nalamúkat ang mga dáhun sa sular,</i> The leaves were strewn all over the yard. <i>Ayawg lamukáta nang ímung ásuy arun hisabtan ka,</i> Do not tell your story incoherently so that you'll be understood. <i>a</i> all in disorder. <i>Lamúkat nga administrasiyun,</i> A chaotic administration. <b>ka-</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> [A; a2] be in chaotic disorder. <i>Nagkalamúkat ang labábu sa mga plátu ug kaldíru,</i> The sink is a mess with all the kettles and plates piled up in it. <i>Magkalamúkat ang panimalay kun way pagsinabtanay,</i> Home life is chaotic when there is no understanding.

<p><b>lamúkay</b> (from <i>lamuk</i>) <i>a</i> in chaotic disorder, topsy-turvy. <i>Lamúkay ang kwartu,</i> The room is in chaos. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] mix, stir things up thoroughly. <i>Naglamúkay si Ipì sa simintu,</i> Ipe was mixing the cement. <b>2</b> [B] for there to be chaos, things in great numbers in disorder. <i>Naglamúkay (nagkalamúkay) ang mga táwu sa tyanggihan pagsúnug,</i> The people in the market were rushing about in all directions when the fire broke out. <b>ka-</b> = <sc>LAMÚKAY</sc>, <i>v2.</i>

<p><b>lamun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. badly infected boil which goes deep and fails to develop a head. It often leads to blood poisoning. <b>2</b> word used in a curse hoping the one cursed gets a <i>lamun</i>. <i>Wà ka dad-a sa lamun!</i> Damn you! (Lit. Haven't you been killed by blood poisoning?) <i>v</i> [b4] be infected with <i>lamun</i>. <i>Ang bátang gilamunan namatay,</i> The child who was infected with a <i>lamun</i> died.

<p><b>lámun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] put large chunks of food in the mouth whole. <i>Makalámun kug usa ka <pb n=1177>parak bingka,</i> I can put a whole piece of rice cake in my mouth. <i>Kúlang ka rang lamúnun (ilámun) sa higanti,</i> You're not even enough to stuff in the giant's mouth.

<p><b>lamuruk</b> <i>a</i> plump in the cheeks. <i>v</i> [B] for the cheeks to become full and rounded. <i>Nagkalamuruk ang íyang áping sukad maáyu,</i> Her cheeks are beginning to get rounded now that she has recovered. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of a plump sort.

<p><b>lamuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] take in s.t. by swallowing. <i>Maglamuy kug tablítas pára katúlug,</i> I'll take some sleeping pills. <i>Gilamuy si Hunas sa balyína,</i> Jonah was swallowed by a whale. <b>1a</b> eat greedily or gluttonously (coarse). <i>À, milakaw man lang dáyun human makalamuy,</i> After he gorged himself, he immediately left the party. <b>1b</b> <b>&mdash; sa bakunáwa ang búwan</b> [a12] for there to be a lunar eclipse (for the moon to have been swallowed by the <i>bakunáwa</i>). <b>2</b> [A; a2] swallow words or feelings. <i>Milamuy ka lang dáyun sa íyang gisulti,</i> You swallowed his story, hook, line, and sinker. <i>Gilamuy ku ang ákung kasukù arun way masilù,</i> I just swallowed my anger so that nobody would have hard feelings. <b>3</b> swallowed up in a figurative sense. <i>Galastúhan nga milamuy sa ílang tinipígan,</i> The expenses which swallowed up their savings. <i>Gilamuy siya sa kangitngit,</i> He was swallowed by the darkness. <i>n</i> food consumption. <i>Ang ámung mutsatsu dakug lamuy,</i> Our servant eats too much. <b>walay &mdash;</b> poor as a church mouse (deprecatory). <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> manner of eating.

<p><b>lamúyà</b> <i>v</i> [B] get excessively fat. <i>Naglamúyà siya sa katambuk,</i> He is bulging with excessive fat. <i>Nagkalamuyà ang tiyan sa palaínum,</i> The drunkard is getting a beer belly.

<p><b>lamwas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for water to come in or spread over s.t. <i>Hápit malúnud ang sakayan nga nalamwásan sa túbig,</i> The boat nearly sank because water came in it. <i>Gilamwásan ang tugkaran sa túbig gíkan sa kanal,</i> The water from the drainage ditch flooded our yard. <b>1a</b> for water to run out over a container. <i>Milamwas ang túbig sa planggána,</i> Water ran out over the basin. <b>2</b> [A; c1] extend beyond a certain limit. <i>Mulamwas ang ákung tiil sa katri kay mubù ra,</i> My feet spill over the end of the bed because it is too short. <i>Lamwása (ilamwas) sa túhud ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà,</i> Extend the hem line of my dress beyond the knees.

<p><b>lamyat</b> <i>a</i> sluggish, doing things slowly and lazily. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be sluggish in doing things. <i>Nagkalamyat ang mid nga nagkadugay sa báy,</i> The longer the maid stays in the house <pb n=1178>the slower she works.

<p><b>-l-an</b> alternant for <i>-anan</i>, added to some, but not all, bases which occur with <i>-anan</i> and usually with the same meaning. <i>Palalítan,</i> Place one buys things. <i>Halatagan sa limus,</i> Person to whom alms are given.

<p><b>lána<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> oil obtained from plants. <b>2</b> a concoction of oil and herbs having special curative properties or power to ward off evil of supernatural origin. <b>&mdash; nga pangulang</b> oil to counteract supernaturally caused skin ailments. <b>3</b> <b>may, walay &mdash;</b> have (not have) sexual potency in old age. <i>Mamána ka ánang tigúlang bálu? Wà na nay lána,</i> Are you going to marry that old widower? I doubt if he can do it any more. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make oil. <i>Dílì ku mulána ánang lubi kay kápuy ug kagud,</i> I will not make oil because it is tiresome grating those coconuts. <b>2</b> [b6] put oil in a lamp. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug pútut</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] do the impossible (lit. extract oil from a very young coconut). <i>Maáyu pay maglána ug pútut kay sa mulansar nga way kwarta,</i> It would be easier to squeeze oil out of a young coconut than to win an election without money. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] apply oil on. <i>Lanahi ang halígi arun dílì anáyun,</i> Put oil on the post so the termites can't get at it. <b>2</b> [B3(1)46] be, become oily, exude oily secretion. <i>Naglana ang íyang pánit,</i> Her skin is exuding oil. <b>3</b> [A; b6] coax s.o. by flattery. <i>Lanahi siya dì ba húmuk musugut sa ímung hangyù,</i> Give her some sweet talk. See if she doesn't give you what you ask for. <b>lanáhan, lanhan</b> <i>n</i> folk doctor who practices healing with the use of special oils. <b>lanahan</b> <i>n</i> container for oil. <b>lanahun, lanáhun</b> <i>a</i> full of oil. [+]

<p><b>lána<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>DILÁNA</sc>.

<p><b>lánag</b> <i>n</i> mild, not fatal poisoning. <i>Ang lánag ságad dílì makamatay, makapabúyud lang,</i> Mild poisoning usually doesn't kill. It just makes one dizzy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; b4(1)] have, be affected by poisoning. <i>Nalánag ku sa amúting káhuy nga wà maáyung pagkalung-ag,</i> I got food poisoning from the cassava that wasn't prepared properly. <b>2</b> [B126] be sickened, nauseated. <i>Nalánag ku sa báhù sa karni didtus ihawan,</i> I was sickened by the smell of meat at the abbatoir. <b>3</b> be bored to tears. <i>Nalánag ku ánang ímung isturya nga gibalikbálik,</i> I am bored to tears by your story that you keep telling again and again. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to smoke (derogatory). <i>v</i> [A; c1] smoke. <i>Naglanag ka na sab nga gidid-an ka man sa duktur?</i> You're smoking again when the doctor told you not to.

<p><b>lanang</b> <i>n</i> watery, slushy ground. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] <pb n=1179>become watery and slushy. <i>Milanang (nalanang) ang sílung sa ulan,</i> The yard became watery and muddy in the rain. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for liquid to spread out on an area. <i>Milánang ang ímung íhì sa salug,</i> Your urine flowed over the floor. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> slushy, muddy place. <b>lananglanang</b> <i>v</i> [A] be @{greasy}, @{oily}. <i>Mulananglanang ang ímung nawung ug dí ka mamulbus,</i> Your face will get oily if you don't powder it. <i>Maglananglanang ang sud-an nga labihan kamantikáun,</i> A dish that has too much fat is greasy.

<p><b>lánap</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @{overflow} or @{flood} an area. <i>Ang karsáda nga gilanápan sa dágat napunù sa mga gapnud,</i> The road that the sea had flooded is full of driftwood. <i>Sa pagkusug sa ulan, gilanápan ang ámung sílung sa túbig,</i> Because of the heavy rain, our basement was flooded with water.

<p><b>lanat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @{pursue}, @{chase}. <i>Dílì ku mulanat níla ngadtu sa ngitngit,</i> I will not run after them into the dark. <i>Lanata ang kawatan!</i> Chase the thief. <b>mabà ug &mdash;</b> tend to be short-winded, easily tiring out. <i>Dì siya kaagwanta ug bugtaway kay mabà siyag lanat,</i> He doesn't last in a race because he is short-winded. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @{pursuit}, @{chase}, @{race}. <i>Ang lánat sa kinabúhì,</i> The rat race of life.

<p><b>lanátad</b> <i>n</i> sea which is flat and even, as for example, at high tide before it begins to go out again, or water over tidal flats. <i>v</i> [B2] for a large area to become covered with a smooth surface of water. <i>Ug magbahà, mulanátad ang túbig sa kaumahan,</i> When it floods, the water floods over the fields.

<p><b>lánaw</b> = <sc>DANAW</sc>, <sc>DÁNAW</sc>.

<p><b>lánay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2S; a] @{melt}, @{become soft} <i>Naglánay ku ug tinggà pára gam-ung pamatu,</i> I am melting lead to make into a sinker. <i>Naglanay ang mantikilya,</i> The butter is soft. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ang atay</b> [B246] get flattered. <i>Milánay ang íyang atay pag-ingun nákung gwápa siya,</i> She swelled with pride when I told her she was pretty. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> soft, partially melted. <i>Itì nga lanay,</i> Soft and watery droppings of fowl. <b>3</b> <i>&mdash; ug tíngug</i> for the voice to be flat in tone, not full, as if cracked. <i>Way kaláking pamináwun ang lanay nga tíngug,</i> A flat voice is not pleasant to listen to. <i>v</i> [B; b6] <b>1</b> for the voice to become flat. <b>&mdash; ug sinultihan</b> <i>a</i> way of speaking characterized by a slow and slurring intonation, not brisk. <i>v</i> [B] for the manner of speaking to be slow and slurring in intonation.

<p><b>landa</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] put copra in a tray to dry. <i>Ákù lang landahun ang kupras kay wà may ínit,</i> I'll just dry the copra in a tray (and <pb n=1180>put it in a kiln) because there's no sun. <b>landahan, landáhan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tray for drying copra. <b>2</b> kiln where copra is dried.

<p><b>landag<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] cook eggs by boiling. <i>Ayaw ug landága ang mga itlug kay papusaun,</i> Don't boil the eggs because we are going to let them hatch. <b>2</b> broil bananas or tubers that have been peeled, usually leftover. <i>Landágun nátù ang báhaw nga kamúti ugmà puhun,</i> We'll broil the leftover sweet potatoes tomorrow. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @{hard-boiled eggs}.

<p><b>landag<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LAMDAG</sc>.

<p><b>landang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a powdered buri palm starch. <b>2</b> sweet preparation made of buri palm starch, sugar, juice of coconut meat to which fruit may optionally be added. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make the dish called <i>landang</i>.

<p><b>landasan</b> <i>n</i> anvil.

<p><b>landay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for female humans or mammals to @{be sterile}. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become @{sterile}. <i>Ságad sa masakitung babáyi malanday,</i> Most sickly women tend to be sterile.

<p><b>landay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a sack that holds more than twenty-five gantas and is of a strong material, designed esp. for holding heavy contents. <i>Usa ka landayng kupras,</i> A large sackful of copra.

<p><b>landig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] for boats or airplanes to land. <i>Ang idru mulandig sa Masbáti,</i> The plane will land on Masbate. <b>2</b> [B256] come to rest after falling. <i>Didtu mulandig (malandig) ang awtu sa sapà pagkatambug sa pangpang,</i> The car fell off the cliff and landed in the stream. [+]

<p><b>landing</b> <i>n</i> @{airfield}, @{airport}. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> for airplanes to land. <i>Gilanding ang idru sa dáru,</i> The plane landed on the plowed field. <b>2</b> for invasion forces to land. <i>Ang pwirsa sa mga Amirkánu milanding sa Layti,</i> The American forces landed on Leyte. <b>&mdash; bards</b> @{landing barge}. <i>v</i> [A13] go by landing barge. <b>&mdash; pild</b> <i>n</i> @{airfield}.

<p><b>*landrákas</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KALANDRÁKAS</sc>.

<p><b>landung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{image}, @{replica}. <i>Daw landung sa kamatáyun ang íyang panagway,</i> Her face is a picture of death. <i>Landung giyud siya sa íyang inahan,</i> She is the image of her mother. <b>2</b> @{shade}, @{shadow}. <i>Ang purma sa káhuy mailhan sa íyang landung,</i> You can tell what a tree looks like just from the shadow. <i>a</i> shady. <i>Landung kaáyu sa kalubihan,</i> It is nice and shady in the coconut grove. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46] for an image to form itself, come into the mind. <i>Walà mulandung sa ákung kaisípan nga mau kiniy mahitabù,</i> It never occurred to me that this is what would happen. <b>2</b> [A1B; b2] be, become shady, overcast; cause to become so. <i>Ang akasya nga <pb n=1181>naglandung sa nátad,</i> The acacia tree that shaded the yard. <i>Naglandung ang kalibútan kay bagà ang pangánud,</i> The world is overcast because there is a thick cloud covering. <i>Hinglandungan ang misítas sa lubi,</i> The ornamental plant is in the shade of the coconut tree. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b5] <b>1</b> @{think}, @{ponder}. <i>Nagpalandung ku sa unsay mahitabù nákù,</i> I am pondering over what will happen to me. <i>Ang átung pagpamalandung gikutlù gíkan sa salmus,</i> Our meditation is taken from the Psalms. <b>1a</b> <b>walà, dílì &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a12] not expect s.t. to happen. <i>Wà palandúnga sa tanan nga madátù ka,</i> Nobody thought you'd get rich. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] put or go to the shade. <i>Palandúngi (palandungi) ang kábaw kay ínit na ang adlaw,</i> Put the carabao in the shade because the sun is hot now.

<p><b>landuylanduy</b> <i>v</i> [A; be] gallivant about, bum around (instead of doing s.t. one should be doing) <i>Maglanduylanduy lang ku kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> I'm just bumming around because I have no work. <i>Ayawg landuylandúyi (ilanduylanduy) ang ímung pagtuun,</i> Don't spend the time you're supposed to be studying in roaming about.

<p><b>lang</b> = <sc>LÁMANG</sc>.

<p><b>lángab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] do all of a set portion of work. <i>Langába ug sanggì ang tibuuk maisan,</i> Harvest the entire cornfield. <i>Langábun ku pagpintal ang usa ka bungbung úsà ku musúgud ug láin,</i> I'll paint one whole wall before I start the next. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] inadvertently work on an area assigned to s.o. else. <i>Nalángab ug dáru sa sinuhúlan ang nasikbit nga uma,</i> The hired hand inadvertently plowed the adjacent farm as well.

<p><b>lángan</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a2b3] @{delay}, @{waste time}. <i>Naglángan ka sa ámung byáhi,</i> You are delaying our trip. <b>2</b> [A13; b(1)] spend or waste time, effort doing s.t. <i>Naglángan ka lang ug limpiyu ánang kahun,</i> You are just wasting your time cleaning that box. <i>n</i> delay. <i>Sa walay lángan miadtu dáyun siya sa prisidinti,</i> Without delay he went at once to the President. <i>a</i> wasteful of time. <i>Lángan (langan) kaáyu ning paagíha,</i> This procedure is very wasteful of time. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LÁNGAN</sc>. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> taking a long time. <i>Langanan kaáyu siyang sugúun,</i> He takes his sweet time about it when you tell him to go s.w. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> delay, waste of time. <i>Ang kalángan nákù dílì kabayran ug sápì,</i> Money cannot make up for the delay I suffered. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> wasteful of time.

<b>langas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{noisy}. <i>Langas kaáyu ka nga magtuun,</i> You are very noisy when you study. <b>2</b> moving about a lot, engaging in horseplay. <pb n=1182><i>Langas kaáyung ikadúlug,</i> He'll bother you a lot if you sleep with him because he tosses and turns. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] make noise. <i>Dílì mu maglangas kay matúlug ku,</i> You should not make noise because I'm going to bed. <b>1a</b> [A3] breathe a word. <i>Dílì ka maglangas kang bísan kinsa sa ímung nakit-an,</i> Don't you tell anyone what you saw. <b>1b</b> shut up! <i>Langas! Naglamlam ka lang!</i> Shut up. You are talking nonsense! <b>2</b> [A] moving about, not keeping still. <i>Langas! Ayaw paghikaphíkap,</i> Hold still. Keep your paws to yourself. <b>3</b> [A] make a fuss about s.t. <i>Mulangas man ku ug dílì bahínan,</i> I will make a fuss if you do not give me a share. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{noise}. <b>2</b> fuss, ado. <i>Mitrabáhu dáyun sa walay daghan nga langas,</i> He went to work without much ado. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> noisy, engaging in horseplay. <i>Kadtung langasan kaáyu dílì dad-un sa sini,</i> Those of you who don't keep still will not get to go to the show.

<p><b>langátad</b> = <sc>LANÁTAD</sc>.

<p><b>lángaw</b> <i>n</i> @{housefly}. <i>v</i> <b>(->)</b> [a4] <b>1</b> be infested, swarm with flies. <i>Langawun ang pagkáun,</i> The food will be swarming with flies. <b>2</b> get tired waiting. <i>Dúgay kaáyu siya nga mag-ílis, langawun ka ug pinaábut,</i> It takes her a long time to dress up. You will get tired waiting. <b>3</b> do not sell, sell little. <i>Gilangaw ang íyang tinda, way hálin,</i> Her store did poorly&mdash;she had no sale. pa- <i>v</i> [A12] attract flies. <i>Ang pálut sa mangga makapalangaw,</i> Mango peelings attract flies. <b>ambut sa &mdash;</b> search me, I don't know (and I don't care much). <b>langawlangaw</b> = <sc>ABUNGAW<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lángay</b> <i>a</i> wasteful of time <i>Lángay ka kaáyu sa pagkalígù,</i> You take your sweet time about taking a bath, don't you? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] waste time. <i>Naglángay ka lang kay dílì nà musalir,</i> You are wasting time because that won't do. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] cause delay. <i>Naglángay ka sa ámung trabáhu.</i> You're holding up our work. <i>Dílì mistil langáyun ang kasal bisan ug wà pa dinhi ang amahan,</i> You do not have to hold up the wedding just because the father is not here yet. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> always dilly-dallying.

<p><b>langayà</b> = <sc>LANGAYAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁNGAY</sc>.

<p><b>langbay</b> <i>n</i> edible swimming crabs, found in shallow and deep waters, rather similar in shape and flavor to the blue crabs sold in the States. They differ from other crabs in that the shell has two sharp points on the sides, both claws are the same size and only slightly larger than the other limbs. Deep-sea specimens may grow as big as a foot across. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] catch this sort of crab. <b>-an, paN-an</b> <i>n</i> place where these crabs are found.

<pb n=1183>

<p><b>langbì</b> = <sc>LAMBÌ</sc>.

<p><b>langbù</b> = <sc>LAMBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>langbud</b> = <sc>LAMBUD</sc>.

<p><b>langday</b> = <sc>LANDAY</sc>, <i>1</i>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>langgà</b> <i>short for</i> <sc>PALANGGA</sc>.

<p><b>langgam</b> <i>n</i> @{bird}. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a small instrument used to cut rice panicles during the harvest. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @{bird-like}. <i>Ang íyang sunuy mu rag dílì igtalarì kay langgámun kaáyu ug hitsúra,</i> His rooster doesn't look like a fighting cock because it has a bird-like appearance.

<p><b>langgaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{lukewarm}. <i>v</i> [AB2; c1] be, become lukewarm, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Malanggaw (mulanggaw) ang tubà ug hiinitan,</i> The palm toddy will become lukewarm if you leave it under the sun. <i>Naglanggaw siyag túbig pára ikalígù nákù,</i> She's heating water for my bath.

<p><b>langgaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{vinegar}. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make, make into vinegar.

<p><b>langgì</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] snap s.t. off from the main part at the joint. <i>Ákung langgíun ang sanga sa ímung tanum,</i> I'll break a branch off your plant.

<p><b>langgíkit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] tie or attach things together or side by side. <i>Mulanggíkit ka ug pila ka bulus kawáyan pára gam-ung gákit,</i> Tie several lengths of bamboo together to make a raft. <i>Langgikítun nákù ning duha ka buuk káhuy arun makas-a ug dala,</i> I will tie these two pieces of wood together so I can carry them all at once. <b>2</b> [C23] be near one another. <i>Sígi sila nga maglanggíkit bisag ása lakaw,</i> They are always near each other wherever they go. <b>3</b> [A; c6] involve s.o. in s.t. <i>Ang ímung binúang naglanggíkit nákù sa kaúlaw,</i> Your foolishness involved me in your shame. <i>Ayaw kug ilanggíkit sa inyung tinuntu,</i> Do not involve me in your shenanigans. <i>n</i> link, means of connecting. <i>Kining suláta mauy langgíkit sa kagahápun,</i> This letter is a link to the past.

<p><b>langgilanggi</b> <i>n</i> shrub or small tree with a straight, light-brown trunk used for fencing. The leaves are alternate, elliptic, with entire margins, green on top, whitish on the bottom and smooth. It bears sweet, pea-sized, white berries in axillary clusters.

<p><b>langgis</b> <i>a</i> high-pitched, screeching noise. <i>Langgis ang ági sa tísà sa pisára,</i> It's very spine-tingling the way the piece of chalk scratches the blackboard. <i>v</i> [A] make a spine-tingling, screeching noise. <i>Ayúha nang ímung pagkiskis kay naglanggis,</i> Try not to make it so spine-tingling when you scrape. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> the way s.t. is shrill and screeching.

<p><b>langgisaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fish.

<p><b>langgíta</b> <i>n</i> loop at the waist of trousers <pb n=1184>through which the belt is passed. <i>v</i> [A; b6] make or attach belt loops.

<p><b>langgíti</b> <i>n</i> @{anvil}.

<p><b>langgung</b> <i>v</i> [B56; c1] in pool, for the cue ball to go into the hole and not be counted.

<p><b>langgus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @{chafe}, injure a wide area slightly. <i>Ayawg hukti ug alambri kay mulanggus sa pintal,</i> Don't tie it with a wire because it will scratch the paint. <i>Nalanggus ákung buktun pagkatumba nákù,</i> I chafed my arm when I fell.

<p><b>langgut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1b2] for a fish to break a line. <i>Nalanggut ang pasul kay gidawíhag dakung isdà,</i> The fishing line broke because a huge fish got hooked on it. <b>2</b> [AN; a] @{embezzle}, @{cheat}. <i>Nalanggutan (hilanggutan) ku níyag singku písus,</i> He cheated me out of five pesos. <i>Íyang langgútun nang inyung kwarta ug siyay inyung pagunítun ánà,</i> She will pocket your money if you entrust it to her. <b>-íra</b> = <sc>LANGGUTÍRU</sc> (female). <b>-íru</b> <i>a</i> @{embezzler}, @{swindler}.

<p><b>langgwíta</b> = <sc>LANGGÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>langì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1a</b> loosen s.t. rigid and long from a place it is embedded. <i>Way makalangì sa pusting maáyung pagkataruk,</i> No one can loosen the post, it is so firmly implanted. <b>1b</b> bend s.t. rigid out of shape. <i>Nakabuhì ang isdà kay nalangì ang tagà,</i> The fish escaped because the hook was bent out of shape. <b>1c</b> break the finger or toenail. <i>Malangì ang ákung kuku ug dì hinguk-an,</i> My nails break if I don't trim them. <b>2</b> twist off a branch from plants. <i>Nakalangì ku ug usa ka sanga sa íyang san pransisku,</i> I broke a branch off from her croton. <i>a</i> hangnail, loose in its place. <i>Hustu nang tangung langíun. Langì na kaáyu,</i> That tooth is about ready to pull out. It has gotten very loose.

<p><b>langì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A] <b>1</b> ask for affection by making demands. <b>2</b> act spoiled and abusive from having been pampered. <i>Naglangì nà siya kay labánan man.</i> He has gotten uncontrollable because s.o. always takes his side. <i>a</i> asking for affection, being spoiled. <i>Kanang íyang pagpangáyug pagkáun ági lang nag langì,</i> When she asks for food like that she's just asking for attention.

<p><b>langigngig</b> <i>a</i> for foods to be too greasy or oily to digest readily. <i>v</i> [B; c1] be too greasy and heavy in the stomach. <i>Dì mulangigngig (malangigngig) ang tiil sa bábuy basta lat-an ug butangag bátung linata,</i> Pig's legs won't be too fatty to eat if you add salted black beans. <i>Magkalangigngig ang bíku sa tantung káun,</i> The more sticky rice you eat, the heavier it is in the stomach.

<p><b>langis</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] hoodwink s.o. into doing s.t. <pb n=1185>by giving him sweet talk. <i>Maáyu siyang mulangis sa íyang apuhan arun tagáan ug kwarta,</i> He is good in talking his grandfather into giving him money. <i>Gilangisan ku níyang mupalit ug libru piru íya diayng gipanugal,</i> He hoodwinked me into giving him money which he said was for a book, but actually it turned out to be for gambling. <i>n</i> sweet talk, flattery employed to gain one's ends. <b>-íru</b> <i>n</i> one who sweet talks people and pulls the wool over their eyes.

<p><b>lángit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{heaven}, @{sky}. <i>Ang lángit gibuti sa mga bitúun,</i> The sky is pock-marked with stars. <b>2</b> @{joy}, @{happiness}. <i>Lángit ka sa ákung panan-aw,</i> You are a joy to my sight. <b>ikapitung &mdash;</b> the last tier of heaven where perfect happiness is to be found. <i>Dad-un ku ikaw sa ikapitung lángit,</i> I'll bring you to the seventh heaven of happiness. <i>v</i> [B1256] go to heaven. <i>Ikaw kay makasasálà, dílì ka malangit,</i> You, who are a sinner, will not go to heaven. <b>kità ug &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A12] experience the most painful sensation of one's life, esp. pain in childbirth. <i>Nakakità na siyag lángit sa íyang pagpanganak,</i> She experienced the most painful sensation of her life when she gave birth. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> @{skies}. <b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> pertaining to heaven. <i>Langitnung kaháyag,</i> A heavenly light. <b>langitlángit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{egg white}. <b>2</b> canopy of an altar or bed. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; sa muskitíru</b> top of a mosquito net. <b>langitlangit</b> = <sc>LANGITLÁNGIT</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>langitngit</b> = <sc>ALANGITNGIT</sc>.

<p><b>langkap</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] take over all or part of s.o.'s obligations so that they be completely fulfilled. <i>Akuy milangkap sa íyang bayranan kay wà man siyay kwarta,</i> I paid up all her obligations because she had no money. <i>Langkápa ang ákung báhin sa gunahun, kay may laktun ku,</i> Finish my weeding work for me because I have to go s.w. <i>Gilangkápan sa uyuan ang kúwang sa twisyun,</i> The uncle paid the amount lacking in the tuition fees.

<p><b>langkat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{rip off}, out, @{tear} forcibly away. <i>Átung langkátun ang salug,</i> Let us rip the floor out. <i>Ámung gilangkátan sa mga balágun ang kural,</i> We ripped the vines off of the fence. <b>2</b> [A; b6] strip s.o. of power, rights, or privileges. <i>Gilangkátan siya sa ranggu,</i> He was stripped of his rank. <b>3</b> [A; a2] remove s.t. as if pulled away by force. <i>Ang ímung paglúib naglangkat sa ákung gugma kanímu,</i> Your unfaithfulness has killed my love for you. <i>Sukad karun langkátun ku ang hunàhúnà nga kita manag-amígu,</i> From now on I will banish the thought that we are friends. <b>4</b> [A; a1] slam a basketball that is in the air above the head in a downward <pb n=1186>direction. <i>Pag-untul giyud sa búla sa ring, gilangkat dáyun kini ni Wilyam,</i> As soon as the ball rebounded from the ring, William slammed it down.

<p><b>langkaw</b> <i>a</i> tending to loaf on the job, playing hooky. <i>Gamay kag ági kay langkaw ka sa trabáhu,</i> You haven't accomplished much because you've been loafing on the job. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] loaf on the job, play hooky. <i>Dì ka makapasar ug sígi kang langkaw,</i> You won't pass if you keep playing hooky. <i>Langkáwi ang ímung pagdáru kay minúsan ku ang ímung swildu,</i> Loaf on the job while you're plowing and I will take it off your pay. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> always loafing or playing hooky.

<p><b>langkay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dried coconut palm frond. <b>2</b> old maid (humorous). <i>v</i> [B12] become an old maid.

<p><b>langkay<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>DÍWIT</sc>.

<p><b>langkì</b> <i>a</i> for teeth to be crooked. <i>Makadisgwápa sa babáyi ang mga ngípung langkì,</i> Crooked teeth mar a woman's beauty. <i>v</i> [B; b6] for a tooth to become crooked. <i>Maáyung pagahilútun ang ngípung magkalangkì,</i> It's good to massage into place a tooth that is growing in crooked.

<p><b>langking</b> <i>n</i> k.o. black pigment shaped into rectangular sticks used for shoe blacking, drawing, and by the Chinese for writing. <i>v</i> [A; b6] blacken s.t. with this material.

<p><b>langkit</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] join two pieces of material together by sewing, welding, and the like at the edges. <i>Langkítun ta ang duha ka hábul arun ta makatulda,</i> We'll sew the edges of the two blankets together so we can have a tent. <i>Ilangkit ang usa ka playwud ngari,</i> Join a piece of plywood to this place. <b>2</b> [c] add an affix in grammar. <b>ig-l-</b> <i>n</i> affix.

<p><b>langkiya, langkiyà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{spadefish}: <b><i>Scatophagus argus</i></b>.

<p><b>langkiya<sub>2</sub>, langkíyà</b> (from kíya) <i>v</i> [B236(1)] for airplanes or kites to wobble, dart from side to side in losing altitude. <i>Mulangkíya ang talabánug kun mabugtù ang tugut,</i> The kite will wobble from side to side and continue losing altitude when the string snaps.

<p><b>langkub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC12; ac1] @combine several things, ideas, quantities into a group at the same time. <i>Akuy mulangkub ug dala áning duha ka bugkus,</i> I will take these two bundles at one time. <i>Kining duha ka súma nagkalangkub (gilangkub),</i> The two sums have been put together. <b>1a</b> [A13] include, comprehend. <i>Ang lungsud naglangkub ug lima ka baryu,</i> The municipality includes five barrios. <b>1b</b> [B1256] be included in a group, identified with. <i>Pagkadátù níya nalangkub <pb n=1187>siya sa alta susyidad,</i> After he got rich he was identified with high society. <b>2</b> [A; b5] make s.t. a complete whole. <i>Langkúbi (langkúba) ang kúwang sa báyad,</i> Complete the amount lacking in the payment. <b>2a</b> [A13; a12] fix one's decision, decide to do s.t. with no wavering. <i>Naglangkub ku sa ákung hunàhúnà sa paglikay sa sugal,</i> I am determined to avoid gambling. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> things that are taken together, done collectively. <i>Linangkub nga sisiyun,</i> A joint session.

<p><b>langkuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b5c] @walk or @travel around without any particular purpose. <i>Mulangkuy sila inigpangítag bulad sa tabuan,</i> They walk about in the market when they look for dried fish. <i>Ilangkuy ang masakitun sa wiltsir sa plása,</i> Take the wheelchair patient for a walk in the park. <b>2</b> [B2; b6] be, become an idler. <i>Malangkuy (mulangkuy) siya kun dúnay kwarta,</i> He becomes lazy when he has money. <b>3</b> [AC; a12b2] have sexual intercourse with (slang). <i>Naglangkuy ang magtiáyun súd sa kwartu,</i> The couple are making love inside the room. <i>a</i> idler, lazy. <i>n</i> sexual intercourse (slang). <b>langkuylangkuy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LANGKUY</sc>. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] dawdle about instead of working. <i>Sukad sa ákung pagsulud ug trabáhu dinhi wà ku makalangkuylangkuy,</i> Since I started working here I haven't dawdled around on the job.

<p><b>langkuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> cutlass fish: <b>Trichiurus spp.</b> <i>a</i> tall and thin (like the cutlass fish).

<p><b>langpus</b> = <sc>LAMPUS</sc>.

<p><b>lan-grábir</b> <i>n</i> landgrabber. <i>v</i> [B1256] be, become a landgrabber.

<p><b>langsa</b> <i>a</i> having a fishy smell or the taste of blood. <i>Bahung langsa ang mga pasahírag isdà,</i> Fish vendors have a fishy smell. <i>Ang mulmul langsa nga isdà,</i> The parrot fish has an intense fishy taste. <i>Langsag báhù ang babáying girigla,</i> Women smell of fish when they menstruate. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be smelly from fish or blood.

<p><b>langsad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] run for an elective position or office. <i>Mulangsad ku pagkagubirnadur,</i> I will run for governor. <b>2</b> [A; c] take the gamecock out of his cage. <i>Ilansad ang sunuy sa silinganan,</i> Tether the rooster in the yard. <b>3</b> [A; c1] take a hen and young chicks out of the nest and set them on the ground. <i>Ug ilansad (lansárun) ug sayu ang pisù, patyun sa umígas,</i> If you take the chicks out of the nest too early, they are likely to get killed by the ants. <b>lansaránan</b> <i>n</i> ground on which gamecocks are tethered out.

<p><b>langsi</b> = <sc>LANGSA</sc>.

<p><b>langsub</b> <i>a</i> for an area to be shady and dark, <pb n=1188>either because it is depressed below the surrounding land or because it is surrounded by tall trees. <i>Ságad sa lugar nga langsub bugnaw,</i> A depressed or shaded area tends to be cool. <i>v</i> [B] for an area to be shady because of its depressed situation or the trees surrounding it. <i>Ang mga dagkung káhuy mauy nakalangsub áning inyung sular,</i> The trees make your lot shady.

<p><b>langtaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN13; a2] see, look at s.t. in a distance. <i>Lantáwa ang búkid ug gigabúnan ba</i>, Look at the mountain and see if it is shrouded in mist. <i>Nalantawan ku sa ákung gitindúgan ang pag-abut níya</i>, I could see him coming from where I was standing. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] watch a movie or stage performance. <i>Mulantaw kag sini rung gabíi?</i> Will you see a movie tonight? <b>2</b> [A; a2b2] look to the future, perceive with foresight. <i>Lantáwun mu ang kaugmáun ug panagána,</i> Look to the future and be prepared. <i>Nalantawan ku nga kanang trabahúa walay kauswágan,</i> I have perceived that that job offers no advancement. <b>3</b> [A; a12] look after. <i>Akuy mulantaw sa bátà ug mulakaw ka,</i> I will look after the child if you go out. <i>Lantáwa ang ákung sinugba nga isdà arun dílì mapágud,</i> Keep watching my broiled fish to see that it doesn't get burnt. <b>-an(->), -anan</b> <i>n</i> an elevated place which affords a good view. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @foresight. <i>Kanang ímung paági kúlang sa panglantaw,</i> Your procedure lacks foresight.

<p><b>langtu</b> <i>a</i> having the smell of green beans, spinach, burned feathers, hair, nails, and some kinds of plastic. <i>Ayaw pagsúnug ug balhíbu kay langtu kaáyu ang báhù,</i> Don't burn feathers because the odor is very disagreeable. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] get this particular smell. <i>Ang balátung mauy nakalangtu (nakapalangtu) sa linat-an,</i> The string beans made the stew taste peculiar.

<p><b>langtung</b> <i>n</i> the point in the tide where the highest level is reached and when it is about to start going out again. <b>&mdash; sa hunas</b> point in the tide where the lowest level is reached before it begins to come in again. <i>v</i> [B3N; b6] for the tide to reach its highest point. <i>Ug mulantung ang dágat muabut giyud sa ílang tugkaran ang túbig,</i> At the highest point the tide reaches their front yard.

<p><b>langù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> dizzy due to poisoning. <b>2</b> @drunk (slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] be, become dizzy due to poisoning. <i>Nalangù ang iring human makakaun sa hilu,</i> The cat became dizzy after eating the poison. <b>2</b> [A1P; a] make s.o. drunk. <i>Kadtung ikaduhang lungnik mauy naglangù (nagpalangù) nákù,</i> The second <pb n=1189>fifth sure made me drunk.

<p><b>lang-u</b> <i>a</i> having a dank, unpleasant smell. <i><sic>Lan-u</sic> ang básung giimnan sa bátang nagsuwag inun-únan</i>, The glass that the child drank from after he ate the vinegarized fish has a dank smell. <i>v</i> [B; b6] develop a dank smell. <i>Mulang-u ang trápung way laba</i>, A rag will develop a dank smell if you don't wash it. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @{foul smell}. <i>Ang Láyipbuy makakúhà sa kalang-u sa láwas</i>, Lifebuoy can get rid of body odor.

<p><b>lángub</b> <i>n</i> @cave. <i>v</i> [B1256; a12] become, make into a cave.

<p><b>lang-ug</b> <i>a</i> having the putrid smell of severe halitosis. <i>Lang-ug ang bàbà ug bag-ung mata ug dì makapanutbras</i>, A person that has just woke up has awful halitosis until he brushes his teeth. <i>v</i> [B] get a foul smell. <i>Mulan-ug ang túbig sa bangà ug dílì kailísan</i>, The water in the jar will turn foul if you don't change it.

<p><b>lángut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b] stick to work until it is done. <i>Tiwas dáyun nà ug langútan nákù ug tulu ka úras</i>, It'll get done quickly if I stick to it for three hours.

<p><b>languy</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @swim. <i>Gikalambrihan siya samtang naglanguy</i>, He had an attack of cramps while he was swimming. <b>2</b> [A13] float as if swimming. <i>Ayawg isirbi ang sud-ang naglanguy sa mantíkà</i>, Don't serve food that's swimming in fat. <b>3</b> [b8] for soup to be too dilute. <i>Grábi sab ka makasabaw kalanguyan man</i>, How terrible the soup is! You could practically swim in it. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A12] swim for pleasure. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of swimming. <i>Ang ámung lánguy niadtung Duminggu</i>, Our swim last Sunday. <b>2</b> swimming contest. <b>linangyan</b> <i>n</i> style of swimming.

<p><b>langyaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @{travel abroad}. <i>Mulangyaw ku inigkahíkay sa paspurt</i>, I'm going abroad as soon as my passport is ready. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] emigrate. <i>Mulangyaw sila sa Mindanaw</i>, They will emigrate to Mindanao. <i>n</i> foreigner. <b>buhatang, kalihúkang &mdash;</b> Department of Foreign Affairs. <b>2</b> extra-marital relations (humorous). <i>Human sa trabáhu dílì pa nà siya mupaúlì kay dúna pay kalihúkang langyaw nga atimanun</i>, After work he doesn't go directly home because he still has some foreign relations to attend. <b>&mdash; nga kalabútan</b> foreign affairs.

<p><b>lanipgà</b> <i>n</i> forest tree with wood that smells like cedar, used for making cigar boxes, finger boards for guitars, et al.: <b><i>Toona calantas</i></b>.

<p><b>lanit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @grab s.t., usually with speed. <i>Milanit siya sa íyang amirkána ug miadtu sa huspital</i>1, He grabbed his coat and went <pb n=1190>to the hospital. <i>Gilanit ang íyang pitáka sa kawatan,</i> The thief snatched her purse. <i>Gilanitan ku níya sa íyang pistúla,</i> He drew his gun on me.

<p><b>laniw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small @{flying fish}, smaller than the <i>barúnguy</i> and <i>bangsi</i>.

<p><b>lankay</b> = <sc>LANGKAY</sc>.

<p><b>lanlan</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> eat food usually taken with rice or corn (<i>sud-an</i>) all alone. <i>Mulanlan siya sa isdà úsà mukáun sa kan-un,</i> He eats the fish and then eats his rice afterwards. <i>Mau ra niy bulad, ayaw ug lanlána,</i> This is all the dried fish we have. Don't eat it without rice. <b>2</b> by extension, eat s.t. alone that usually accompanies s.t. else. <i>Mulanlan lang siyag dyam nga way pán,</i> He eats jam all alone without bread.

<p><b>lanlídi</b> <i>n</i> @landlady of a rooming or boarding house. <i>v</i> [A13] be a landlady.

<p><b>lansa</b> <i>n</i> @launch. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] go or travel by launch. <i>Maglansa mi pag-adtu sa Buhul,</i> We will travel by launch to Bohol.

<p><b>lansad</b> = <sc>LANGSAD</sc>.

<p><b>lansadíra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shuttle in weaving. <b>2</b> case for the bobbin in a sewing machine. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] make into, attach, use a shuttle.

<p><b>lansalíra</b> = <sc>LANSADÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>lansang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @nail. <i>Lansang sa kabáyù,</i> Nail for a horseshoe. <b>2</b> dried anchovies (slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] drive a nail, nail. <i>Dì na ni maukang kay gilansángan,</i> You can't get this off because it is nailed down. <i>Ilansang sa bungbung ang kahun arun dílì mahúlug,</i> Nail the box to the wall so it won't fall. <b>2</b> [a12] sit or stand rooted to a place, as if nailed. <i>Gilansang ku sa ákung gilingkúran sa kalísang,</i> I sat nailed to my seat in fright. <b>2a</b> [a3] for the gaze to be fixed, as if nailed. <i>Ang íyang mga mata nalansang didtu sa dalága,</i> His eyes were glued to the maiden. <b>2b</b> [c6] be fixed at a certain quantity, as if nailed. <i>Gilansang sa diyis ang ámung iskur, hangtud nahuman,</i> Our score was stuck at ten points to the very end. <b>3</b> [A; b4] get a tire puncture from nails. <i>Lansángan ang dyip nga dì mubigay,</i> If you don't give protection money, they'll puncture the tires of your jeep.

<p><b>lansar</b> = <sc>LANGSAD</sc>, <i>1.</i>

<p><b>lansaríra</b> = <sc>LANSADÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>lansaru</b> <i>n</i> @leprosy. <i>v</i> [a4] be affected with leprosy. <b>lansaruun, lansaruhun</b> <i>n</i> leper. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a leper.

<p><b>lansilíra</b> = <sc>LANSADÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>lansis</b> <i>v</i> [AN2; b] tell a @lie about what one is doing when one is actually doing s.t. else, make a lying excuse. <i>Nanlansis siya paghulam ug libru apan namisíta diay,</i> He came on the pretext of borrowing a book, but he <pb n=1191>actually wanted to visit my daughter. <i>Unsa may átung ilansis sa maistru ug pangutan-un ta?</i> What excuse will we give the teacher if he asks us? <i>n</i> lie told to disguise one's actions.

<p><b>lansíta</b> <i>n</i> small @launch.

<p><b>lansíyang</b> = <sc>GALANSÍYANG</sc>.

<p><b>lanslayid</b> <i>n</i> @landslide. <i>v</i> [A; b4] for there to be a landslide. <i>Ang tibuuk lungsud gilanslayran sa mga dagkung batu ug yútà,</i> The whole town was buried under a landslide of rocks and earth.

<p><b>lansu, lansun</b> <i>n</i> thin, white, coarsely woven cotton @fabric. <i>v</i> [A; c1] use <i>lansu</i>. <i>Pubri man, dì maglansu lang,</i> I'm poor, so I wear <i>lansu</i>.

<p><b>lansúnis</b> <i>n</i> tall, slender @tree bearing a fruit of commercial importance. The fruit is whitish-yellow, up to <b>6</b> cm. long, growing in bunches from stalks which come out of the larger branches and trunk, and has juicy translucent pulp encasing one or two irregularly-shaped seeds: <i><b>Lansium domesticum.</b></i>

<p><b>lanta</b> <i>n</i> @dressing for open wounds consisting of absorbent cotton soaked in a mixture of lime, vinegar, and coconut oil. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make such a dressing. <b>-in-, ni-</b> = <sc>LANTA</sc>, <i>n.</i>

<p><b>lantáka, lantákà</b> = <sc>LUTHANG</sc>, <i>n2.</i> [+]

<p><b>lantap<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for liquids to have oil or streaks of oil on the surface. <i>Lantap kaáyu ang sabaw,</i> Soup is full of oil. <i>v</i> [A; b] for the surface of a liquid to be oily. <i>Naglantap ang dágat sa usik nga gasulína,</i> The surface of the sea is full of oil because of the gasoline that spilled.

<p><b>lantap<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the sea to be high and calm, as when the tide is coming in and there is no wind. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] for the sea to get high and calm.

<p><b>lantaw</b> = <sc>LANGTAW</sc>.

<p><b>lantay</b> <i>n</i> anything with a top or bottom consisting of bamboo slats: a bed, table, tray, bench, shelf. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] put, make into a <i>lantay</i>.

<p><b>lantáyug</b> <i>a</i> growing very @tall. <i>v</i> [B] grow very tall. <i>Mulantáyug ang lubi ug magúlang na,</i> Coconut trees grow very tall when they get mature. <i>Naglantáyug ka lang nga way buut,</i> You may be tall, but you don't have a grain of sense.

<p><b>lantì</b> <i>a</i> @clear, clearly defined with sharp edges and contrasts. <i>Lantì kaáyu ang makítà diri sa largabista,</i> I see everything very clearly with the binoculars. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become clear. <i>Mulantì ang ákung panan-aw ug mag-antiyúhus,</i> My vision becomes clear if I wear glasses.

<p><b>lanting</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] for boats with no anchor or floats to tie up to or together with another <pb n=1192>boat. <i>Mulanting ku sa ímung sakayan kay walà kuy pundu,</i> I will tie up to your boat because I don't have an anchor. <i>Lantíngun ta ning duha ka bátang arun makadaug nátù,</i> Let us tie these two logs together so that they can carry us.

<p><b>lantip</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @sharp of blade. <i>Lantip kaáyu ning kutsilyúha,</i> This knife is very sharp. <b>2</b> sharp of mind. <i>Lantip ug salabútan,</i> Having an incisive mind. <i>v</i> [B2; a2] be, become sharp-edged or sharp of mind. <i>Kanang ímung binairan dílì makalantip (makapalantip) sa sundang,</i> The machete will not get sharp the way you are doing it. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> a bolo always kept sharp and not usually used for household chores. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> sharpness, keenness of mind.

<p><b>lantsa</b> = <sc>LANSA</sc>.

<p><b>lantugay</b> <i>v</i> [A12] @linger, dilly-dally over s.t. or at a place. <i>Dílì makalantugay ang ákung mga anak sa iskuylahan kay daghag búhat sa ámù,</i> My children cannot afford to linger around after school because there are so many things to do at home. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c1] linger, dilly-dally. <i>Hingkaadlawnan kanúnay ang bána pagpaúlì kay adtu man magpalantugay sa sugálan,</i> The husband used to come home in the wee hours of the morning because he stayed late in the gambling den.

<p><b>lantúgì</b> <i>n</i> @argument, @quarrel. <i>Ang inyung banhà nga lantúgì nakapamata nákù,</i> Your noisy argument woke me up. <i>v</i> [A2C; a2] argue, quarrel. <i>Dì ku mulantúgì nímu ánang butánga,</i> I won't quarrel with you over that matter. <i>Naglantúgì sila ug unsáun pagpaguwà sa pyánu,</i> They are arguing about how to take the piano out. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> an opponent in an argument. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> contentious, argumentative. <i>Malantugíun kaáyu siya nga mitubag sa íyang inahan,</i> He talked back to his mother in an argumentative tone. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> debater. <b>mamumulung &mdash;</b> orator-debater. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> controversial. <i>Lantugiun ang risulta sa iliksiyun,</i> The results of the election are very much a matter of controversy.

<p><b>lantung</b> = <sc>LANGTUNG</sc>.

<p><b>lan-u</b> = <sc>LANG-U</sc>.

<p><b>lanúbù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> grow @lush and big. <i>Lanúbù ang tanum dinhi kay tabunuk ang yútà,</i> The plants grow large here because the land is fertile. <b>2</b> be economical to use because a small amount does the same job as a larger amount of similar material. <i>Lanúbù kining bugása kay kusug mutúbù,</i> This rice is economical to use because it expands well. <i>Lanúbù kining sabúna. Gamay kaáyu ang gawíun,</i> This soap is economical. You just need to use a little. <i>v</i> [c1] make s.t. go far. <i>Lanubúa  <pb n=1193>(ilanúbù) ug gámit ang sabun,</i> Use the soap sparingly.

<p><b>lánug</b> <i>a</i> @loud, @resonant. <i>Lánug kaáyu íyang tíngug sa pagtawag nákù,</i> He called me with a very loud voice. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] be, become loud. <i>Mulánug (malánug) ang ímung tíngug ug magmigapun ka,</i> Your voice will become loud if you use a megaphone. <b>2</b> [A] echo, resound. <i>Naglánug ang íyang singgit sa dyím,</i> His shout resounded in the gym. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> loudness. <b>2</b> echo. <i>Walay mitubag gawas sa lánug sa íyang tíngug,</i> There was no answer except the echo of his voice. <b>2a</b> echoes, reminiscenses of the past. <i>Kining mga awíta mga lánug lámang sa kanhíay,</i> These songs are but echoes of the past. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] broadcast, disseminate by word or publicity. <i>Ipalánug ning balitáa sa tibuuk násud,</i> Broadcast this news throughout the nation.

<p><b>lan-ug</b> = <sc>LANG-UG</sc>.

<p><b>lanulin</b> <i>n</i> @lanolin.

<p><b>lan-us</b> <i>a</i> have the bad smell of eating or drinking utensils which have been used but not well cleaned. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] for utensils to develop a bad smell from not having been properly cleaned. <b>2</b> [A; c1] let coconut milk curdle to use the curds for medicine. <i>Maglan-us kug tunù nga himúung lanta,</i> I'll ferment coconut milk to make into a medicinal plaster. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> sediment from fermented coconut milk.

<p><b>lanut</b> <i>n</i> gelatinous water that develops when rice or beans are boiled. <i>Lanut ang ipainum sa masusu,</i> Give the baby water from boiled beans. <i>v</i> [A] develop this substance. <i>Kining humáya húmuk mulanut ug lugáwun,</i> This rice develops gelatinous water when you make porridge of it.

<p><b>lánut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @hemp from abaca. <b>2</b> any k.o. long, tough plant fibers. <i>Ánang trabahúa ang ímung kinabúhì naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> Your job is very dangerous. (Lit. In that job your life walks over a long thin strand.) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make hemp from abaca. <i>Anus-a man lanúta ninyu ang pinutul nga abaka?</i> When will you make hemp from that abaca you cut into pieces? <b>2</b> [B5] show fibrous components, become threadbare. <i>Dáan na kaáyung kalsunísa naglanut na gánì ang panaptun,</i> These trousers are very old. They are already threadbare. <b>3</b> [B456] for s.t. sticky like syrup, glue, and the like to show fiber-like portions when stretched. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> fibrous, having fibers. <i>Lanútun kaáyu ug unud ang páhù,</i> <i>Páhù</i> is a stringy kind of mango, <b>lanutlanut</b> <i>n</i> fine fibers of fruits.

<p><b>lápà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC12; a] @cut into sizeable chunks. <pb n=1194><i>Lapáa ang bábuy unyà atarúha,</i> Cut the pig in chunks and group them into portions for sale. <b>2</b> [A; a] hack to pieces. <i>Dinhi siya lapáag sundang sa naghuramintádu,</i> He was hacked to pieces in this place by a man who ran amok.

<p><b>lapad</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @flat, @level surface. <i>Lapad siyag nawung,</i> She has a flat face. <i>Lapad ug tiil,</i> Flat-footed or having the toes wide apart. <b>2</b> @broad, having considerable width. <i>Lapad nga karitíra,</i> The broad highway. <i>Lapad nga kayutáan,</i> Vast stretches of land. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] be flat, wide. <i>Mulapad kag baril, mauy ikural,</i> Flatten barrels to make into a fence. <i>Naglapad lang nang ilung mu,</i> Your nose is so flat. <b>2</b> [APB2; ab7] widen or broaden. <i>Nagkalapad na ang baul nga gihawánan na,</i> The field has more area now that it has been cleared of bushes. <i>Lapdan ang lamísa kay gamay ra,</i> The table will be made wider because it is too narrow. <b>&mdash; ang atay</b> <i>v</i> [B26] be, become flattered (lit. for the liver to expand). <i>Mulapad (malapad) dáyun nang íyang atay basta daygun,</i> It goes to her head if you flatter her. <i>n</i> flat, pocket-sized bottle for liquor (slang). <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> matting made out of woven palm fronds. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make this matting. <b>pa-(<-) sa papil, kaugalíngun</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] do s.t. so as to project a good image of oneself. <i>Nagpalápad siya sa papil maung midunar,</i> He made a donation in order to give himself a good public image. <b>-g-</b> = <sc>LAPAD</sc> (plural). <b>ha-</b> <i>a</i> wide, broad. <b>laparun</b> <i>a</i> flattish in surface. <b>ka-</b> <b>1</b> state of being large, broad. <b>2</b> = <sc>GILAPDUN</sc>. <b>gilapdun</b> <i>n</i> width. <i>Kwatru piyis ang gilapdun (kalapad) sa playwud,</i> The plywood is 4' in width.

<p><b>lapak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> an area differing in color or texture from the surrounding area: @splotch, @stripe, @spot. <i>Ang sanínà may lapak nga pula ug itum,</i> The dress has red and black dots (stripes, splotches). <b>2</b> <i>a</i> piece, irregular scrap of material. <i>Paggunting ug lapak sa putì nga panaptun,</i> Cut a piece of white cloth. <i>v</i> [A; a] put spots, stripes, smudges on s.t. <i>Milapak ang pintal nga basà sa íyang buktun,</i> His arm got a splotch of wet paint on it. <i>Nakalapak (nakapalapak) sa salug ang húgaw nímung tiil,</i> My floor has become splotched with your dirty feet. <i>Lapakun pagtáud ang mga lainláing kulur sa buluhátung bidsprid,</i> Sew patches of assorted colors into the bedspread you are making. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> plaid design.

<p><b>lapak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] @spank s.o. lightly. <i>Sakit ang sinílas nga ilapak,</i> It hurts if you are spanked with a slipper.

<p><b>lápak</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] @step on s.t. <i>Nabuling ang <pb n=1195>linadlad kay gilapákan sa bábuy,</i> The bleached clothes got dirty because pigs stepped on them.

<p><b>lap-ak</b> <i>n</i> @splotch, @splatter. <i>Dakung lap-ak sa dugù sa samput,</i> The big blood stain on the bottom of the dress. <i>v</i> [B6; c1] splotch, splatter. <b>lap-aklap-ak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; c1] splotch, splatter. <i>Gilap-aklap-ak (naglap-aklap-ak) ang íyang buktun sa bun-i,</i> His arm has ringworm marks all over it. <b>2</b> [AB; c1] do s.t irregularly, such that the results are splotched or irregularly spaced spots. <i>Ang bungbung naglap-aklap-ak sa litrátu,</i> Photos are pasted all over the wall in an irregular fashion (as if spattered on the wall). <i>Abanira giyud. Ayaw lap-aklap-áka (ilap-aklap-ak) pagpintal,</i> Paint it a square at a time. Don't skip around.

<p><b>lapalapa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sole, bottom surface of the foot. <b>2</b> sole of shoe, boots, etc. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] work on the sole of a shoe being manufactured.

<p><b>lapánag</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b4] for s.t. to @spread over an area. <i>Milapánag ang túbig sa daruhan,</i> The water spread over the fields. <i>Ang íyang ap-ap naglapanag sa íyang tibuuk láwas,</i> His fungus is spreading all over his body. <i>Wà makalapánag ang balità,</i> The news didn't get very far.

<p><b>lapáru</b> = <sc>LAMPÁRU</sc>.

<p><b>lápas</b> <i>a</i> @past, @beyond a time or place considered right. <i>Lápas na sa alas unsi,</i> It's past eleven o'clock. <i>Lápas na ang dyíp sa átù,</i> The jeep has gone past our place. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6c] go past a certain time or place, do s.t. beyond, esp. where one shouldn't. <i>Bayri sa dì pa makalápas sa tagal,</i> Pay it off before it goes beyond the due date. <i>Dì na makalápas sa túhud ang sinínà sa átung mga kababayin-an karun,</i> Women's dresses these days no longer go beyond their knees. <i>Ayawg lapása (lapási, palapása, palapási) ang utlánan,</i> Don't build beyond the boundary of your land. <i>Ayaw ug ilápas (ipalápas) ang kural sa utlánan,</i> Don't have the fence go beyond the boundary. <i>Naminyù na ang ímung manghud ikaw walà pa, hinglapasan hinúun ka,</i> Your younger sister has gotten married, but you haven't. You have been passed over. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; na sa kalindaryu</b> <i>v</i> [B2356] for a woman to have reached an age greater than the number of days in the calendar (lit. gone beyond the calendar). <i>Lisud ka nang maminyù ug mulápas (malápas) ka na sa kalindaryu,</i> You'll find it hard to get married if you get above thirty. <b>2</b> [A; a12] violate a law, go beyond certain rules or agreements. <i>Wà pa dungga nga mulápas kug sáad,</i> I've <pb n=1196>never been known to break a promise. <i>Nakalápas ka sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> You have gone beyond the bounds of good behavior. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @{abalone}, so called because the meat tends to extend beyond the shell. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> violation, actions going beyond a code<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Pasaylúa kami Ginúu sa ámung mga kalapásan,</i> Forgive us, Lord, our trespasses. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> going beyond the limits of right action.

<p><b>lapasì</b> = <sc>LUPASÌ</sc>.

<p><b>lapat<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the contents of a container to be practically gone. <i>Lapat na ang bugas,</i> The rice is right down to the bottom of the rice can. <i>v</i> [B3] be almost to the bottom of the container. <i>Nagkalapat na ang túbig sa tangki,</i> The water in the tank is getting near the bottom.

<p><b>lapat<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> clothes for home wear.

<p><b>lápaw</b> <i>v</i> [B23; cP] go above or beyond a certain amount. <i>Milápaw na ang ákung anak nákù,</i> My son has gotten to be taller than I am. <i>Ug malápaw na sa dus písus ang gantang sa mais, ambut lang,</i> If corn goes beyond two pesos a ganta, I don't know. <i>Makalápaw ka bag luksu ánang gilay-úna?</i> Can you jump beyond that point? <i>Sa íyang abilidad dì ka makalápaw,</i> You can not surpass his ability. <i>Gilapáwan ang mga atup sa lúnup,</i> The flood water rose above the rooftops. <i>Ilápaw (ipalápaw) giyud ang sabaw sa gilung-ag,</i> The water level should be higher than the rice. <i>a</i> gone far beyond, over. <b>&mdash; sa</b> @{beyond}. <b>tagi-, tagi-(->)</b> <i>a</i> high above a certain level. <i>Ang bahà tagilápaw (tagilapaw) sa túhud,</i> The flood is above the knees.

<p><b>lapay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. purple-brown heron of swamps and tidal flats: <b><i>Ardea purpurea</i></b>.

<p><b>lapdus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @{lash}, @{whip}. <i>Midágan ang kabáyù dihang gilapdúsan,</i> The horse galloped when it was lashed. <i>Makapahilánat kunu kanang íkug sa pági kun mauy ilapdus,</i> They say that it will make a person ill if you whip him with a stingray tail. <i>n</i> lash, a stroke with s.t. pliable.

<p><b>lapgus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bundle of twine or hemp. <b>2</b> standard size by which a bundle of twine is sold. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] make a bundle of twine.

<p><b>lápì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] bend or fold s.t. over @{double}. <i>Lapía ang panaptun ug adtu guntínga sa piniluan,</i> Fold the cloth over and cut it in the fold. <b>1a</b> [C3] for two flat surfaces to be close together as if there were only one. <i>Ábi kug usa ra ni ka písus. Duha man diay, nagkalápì lang,</i> I thought there was only one peso, but it turned out they are two bills stuck together. <b>2</b> [B3(1)6] @{double}, @{increase twofold} or by extension, a few folds more. <i>Milápì (nalápì) ang prisyu karun sa <pb n=1197>tanang mga palitúnun,</i> The price of everything has doubled. <i>Anam-anamun ku ni pagbúhat arun dílì maglápì,</i> I will do the work as it comes up so I won't have but one thing to do at a time. <b>2a</b> [A12; a12] do s.t. to two where one is usual. <i>Búang ka ug lapíun nímug pangulitáwu ang mga mag-ágaw,</i> You're crazy if you court both the cousins at the same time. <b>3</b> [A; a] break s.t. off a plant by bending it over and twisting. <i>Maglápì lang kug ígù tilaubun,</i> I'll pick just enough young corn to broil. <i>Putla, ayaw lapía ang pagkúhà sa sanga,</i> Cut the branch off, don't break it off. <i>Malápì nang palwa ug ímung tungtúngan,</i> The frond will break off if you step on it. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of folding s.t double. <b>2</b> times in division. <i>Pila ka lápì ang unum sa trayinta?</i> How many times does six go into thirty? <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> coconuts with dry, oilless meat that is easily detached from its shell, and which has failed to sprout. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become a <i>lapì</i> coconut. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. coconut, the fronds and fruit bunches of which break off easily.

<p><b>lapida</b> <i>n</i> @{tombstone}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a tombstone, put a tombstone on.

<p><b>lapikì</b> <i>n</i> repeated, sharp smacking sounds. <i>v</i> [A; c] make a smacking sound. <i>Milapikì ang íyang nawung pagtamparus nákù,</i> Her face resounded when I slapped her. <i>Gilapikig latus sa kutsíru ang kabáyù,</i> The rig driver cracked his whip on the horse.

<p><b>lapilapi</b> <i>v</i> [B56; c1] for a liquid to reach the brim or to the top of an embankment, almost spilling over. <i>Milapilapi na ang subà. Maglúnup man kahà,</i> The river has risen to the banks. It looks as though it's going to flood. <i>Gilapilapi nákù ang tása sa kapi,</i> I filled the cup to the brim with coffee. <i>a</i> filled up to the brim.

<p><b>laping</b> <i>v</i> [A23; c1] graze s.t. but not hit it squarely. <i>Swirti kay milaping lang níya ang batu,</i> Fortunately the stone just grazed him. <i>Gilapingan lang ku sa bála,</i> The bullet only grazed me.

<p><b>lapínig</b> = <sc>LAMPÍNIG</sc>.

<p><b>lapis<sub>1</sub>, lápis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2] do the same thing to two things at once. <i>Lapísa ang duha ka langgam sa usa ka tíru,</i> Hit two birds with one shot. <i>Ayaw lapisa sa paghigugma ang duha ka magsúun,</i> Don't fall in love with both sisters. <b>2</b> [A; c1] be included in s.t. that happened to s.o. else. <i>Nalapis ku sa kasábà kúmu kaúban,</i> I was included in the scolding since I was their companion.

<p><b>lapis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. leather jacket: <b><i>Scomberoides spp.</i></b>

<p><b>lápis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{pencil}. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] write with a <pb n=1198>pencil. <i>Lapísa lang pagsulat. Usbunun pa bítaw nà,</i> Just write it with a pencil. It has to be rewritten anyway.

<p><b>lapiti</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] make s.t. dirty by bespattering it. <i>Siyay nakalapiti ug lápuk sa bungbung,</i> He spattered mud on the wall. <b>ka-, ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get s.t. smeared, spattered all over one. <i>Nagkalapíti ang bátà sa tái,</i> The child got smeared all over with his stool.

<p><b>laplap<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for clothing to be loose and flapping. <i>Namanus kag sinínà nu kay laplap man kaáyu nímu,</i> You must be wearing s.o. else's clothes because they are so loose on you. <i>v</i> [B; c1] for s.t. to flap or clothes to be loose. <i>Naglaplap ang bandíra sa hángin,</i> The flag is waving in the breeze.

<p><b>laplap<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] slice off s.t. from a surface. <i>Mulaplap kug gamay sa karni pára isugba,</i> I'll slice off a small piece of meat to broil. <i>Laplápa ang apdu ug ilábay,</i> Slice off the gall bladder and throw it away. <i>Laplápi ang lapalapa sa kúbal,</i> Cut the callous off the sole of your foot.

<p><b>lapnis</b> <i>n</i> fiber stripped off the outside of a banana or abaca trunk used to tie things.

<p><b>lapnut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for liquids to be thick and sticky. <i>v</i> [B; a] be thick and sticky. <i>Mulapnut (malapnut) ang sabaw sa útan ug dúnay ukra,</i> Vegetable soup gets sticky if you put okra in it.

<p><b>lapnut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; ab2] remove s.t. rooted, attached, or sticking fast. <i>Kinsay milapnut sa papil nga ákung gipilit sa lamísa?</i> Who ripped off the paper that I had pasted on the table? <i>Íyang gilapnut ang íyang lásu kay gisáput na man pud,</i> She pulled the ribbon out off her hair because she was in a bad mood again.

<p><b>lapnuy</b> <i>v</i> [B2] glide, move through an area smoothly. <i>Milapnuy lag lísu sa santul sa ákung tutunlan,</i> The seed of the santol slipped down my throat. <i>Mulapnuy ang kasíli sa kadanglug,</i> The eel is so slippery, it will come right out of your hands. <i>a</i> moving through an area smoothly. <i>Lapnuy ianak ang gamayng bátà,</i> You will have a smooth delivery if it's a small baby. <b>lapnuylapnuy</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b6] glide up and down on a surface. <i>Naglapnuylapnuy ang gapnud sa mga balud,</i> The driftwood is gliding over the waves.

<p><b>lapris</b> <i>n</i> @{rabbet plane}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] make or smooth a groove with a rabbet plane. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] make into a rabbet plane.

<p><b>lapsaw</b> <i>a</i> @{watery}, @{diluted} in taste. <i>Lapsaw kaáyu ang ílang litsi kay giligaban ug túbig,</i> Their milk is watery because they adulterated it with water. <i>v</i> [B1; a2] get to be watery, have a diluted taste. <i>Kinsay ganáhan <pb n=1199>sa ímung sabaw nga naglapsaw ang lamì?</i> Who likes your soup since it tastes so watery? <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> @{sluggish}, lacking in vigor, movement. <b>&mdash; ug útuk</b> @{stupid}.

<p><b>lapta</b> <i>a</i> @{splotchy}. <i>Lapta kaáyu ang pagkapintal sa kisami kay nubátus ang nagpintal,</i> The paint of the ceiling is splotchy because the painter is inexperienced. <b>laptalapta</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] be splotchy. <i>Naglaptalapta ang mga bun-i sa íyang buktun,</i> Ringworms are appearing in splotches on her arms.

<p><b>lápu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @{spank} s.o. with the hand or with s.t. long, rigid, and flat. <i>Lapúhun ta ka íring lipak ug dì ka mutúman,</i> I'll spank you with this bamboo slat if you don't obey.

<p><b>lapug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large grouper.

<p><b>lápuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{mud}. <b>2</b> @{derogatory remarks}. <i>Nag-iyáhay lag lábay ug lápuk ang mga kandidátu,</i> Political candidates resorted to mudslinging. <b>&mdash; sa agtang</b> <i>a</i> smear on a man's reputation incurred when his wife commits adultery. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a] be, become muddy. <i>Mulápuk (malápuk) lang kita dinhi kun mag-ulan,</i> This place becomes muddy when it rains. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; sa agtang</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b5] for a wife to smear her husband's reputation by committing adultery. <b>lapuklapuk</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b5] make muddy. <i>Gustu giyud maglapuklapuk ang mga bátà,</i> Children enjoy getting themselves all muddy. <i>Gilapuklapukan ang salug sa mga bátà,</i> The children made the floor muddy. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be spattered with mud. <i>Nagkalápuk ang tiil sa irù,</i> The dog's feet are muddy. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @{muddy}. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> places that are muddy.

<p><b>lapulápu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> commercial name given to groupers (<i>pugápu</i>).

<p><b>lapung</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] involve s.o. in s.t. bad that he should not be involved in or do s.t. to more members of a group than should have had it done to them. <i>Siyay naglapung ug pangulitáwu sa tulu námù ka tindíra,</i> He courted all the three of our salesgirls at one time. <i>Makalapung kag dakup niánang mga manúka?</i> Could you catch all those chickens at one time? <i>Gilapung ku níyag áway bísag wà ku makasâ,</i> She quarreled with everyone, including me, even though I had not done anything wrong. <i>Nalapung ang ámung balay sa súnug,</i> Our house got burnt along with the others.

<p><b>lapus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; ac] @{penetrate}, @{pierce} through the opposite side. <i>Dì makalapus ang ulan sa atup,</i> The rain can't penetrate the roof. <i>Nalapsan sa panà ang isdà,</i> The spear went through the fish. <b>1a</b> [b4] have one's menstrual blood penetrate to one's clothing. <i>Gilapsan ku, maung mag-ílis ku,</i> I got menstrual <pb n=1200>blood on my dress so I have to change. <b>2</b> [A2; b6(1)] @{bypass}, pass through or beyond a point. <i>Dì na ku mulapus ngadtu sa píkas bungtud,</i> I won't go beyond the other side of the hill. <b>2a</b> [A12; b6(1)] finish one's studies. <i>Nakalapus na siya sa abugasíya,</i> He has gotten through his law course. <b>2b</b> [A2; a1c] go up to, reach. <i>Milapus ba ning karsadáha ngadtu sa Lilúan?</i> Does this road go all the way through to Liloan? <b>3</b> [C23; a12] for two holes to lead through to each other. <i>Ang duha ka lángub naglápus,</i> The two caves lead into each other. <b>4</b> [B2] for the foreskin of the penis to get loose so that the glans can be exposed. <i>Magpatúlì ku kun mulapus nag ákung tintin,</i> I'll get circumcised when the foreskin of my thing is loose enough to pull back all the way. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> be finished with one's course of studies. <b>2</b> turn out to be relatively more beautiful than the others in a group. <i>Námung magsúun si Nína ray lapus,</i> Nena is the only good-looking one among us children. <b>(<-)</b> <i>a</i> going clear through the other side. <i>Lápus ba ang lungag sa masig ka dawunggan?</i> Do the earholes go clear through the head to the other side? <b>lapsanan</b> <i>n</i> place where s.t or s.o. exits<corr>.</corr> <i>Dúna bay lapsanan ning pasilyúha?</i> Does this passageway have an exit?

<p><b>laput</b> <i>n</i> term for various kinds of fry or tiny fishes caught by the sanggab.

<p><b>láput</b> = <sc>LAP-UT<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lap-ut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B126; b2] get slightly burnt, lightly injured from heat or acid. <i>Nalap-ut ang ákung tudlù sa asidu muryatiku,</i> My finger got scalded with muriatic acid. <i>Nalap-ut ákung bukubuku sa ínit,</i> My back got burnt in the sun. <i>n</i> light burn.

<p><b>lap-ut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> for a liquid to get thick and sticky. <i>v</i> [B3(1)] for soup to thicken. <i>Mulap-ut ang sabaw sa útan nga sagúlan ug bisul,</i> Vegetable soup thickens if yautia is stewed with it. <i>Haúna sa dì pa makalap-ut,</i> Take it out before it gets thick. <i>Ang harína nakalap-ut (nakapalap-ut) sa sabaw,</i> The flour made the soup too thick. <b>-ay, -ay(->)</b> = <sc>LAP-UT</sc>.

<p><b>lapuy</b> <i>v</i> [B; a4b4] be @{weary}, @{fatigued}. <i>Nalapuy (milapuy) ang ákung mga buktun sa pagginúna,</i> My arms have become fatigued from weeding. <i>Gilapuy (gilapuyan) kug maáyu sa paglinanguy,</i> I was exhausted from swimming so much. <i>a</i> @{fatigued}. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> body fatigue.

<p><b>lapwa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] put s.t. in boiling water, to blanch, sterilize, or prepare it for further cooking. <i>Lapwái (lapwáhi) ang kutsára sa masakitun,</i> Sterilize the patient's spoon <pb n=1201>in boiling water. <i>Lapwáhi ang útuk sa túbig nga may asin,</i> Parboil the brain in salted water.

<p><b>lapya</b> <i>n</i> lapping or dashing of waves, sound of waves coming onto the shore. <i>Ang lapya sa mga balud sa baybáyun,</i> The lapping of the waves on the shore. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for the waves to strike the shore. <b>lapyahan, lapyahánan</b> <i>n</i> the place where the waves strike the shore. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> sound of waves striking the shore.

<p><b>lapyà</b> <i>a</i> @broad in face, flattened out. <i>Lapyag nawung,</i> A broad, @flat face. <i>v</i> [B] be, become flattened out. <i>Nalapyà ang nígu nga naligsan sa trák,</i> The winnowing tray is flattened out because the truck drove over it.

<p><b>lapyat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @fat and @flabby. <i>Dalágang úlay kunu piru lapyat na ug dughan,</i> She's supposed to be a virgin but she has sagging breasts. <b>2</b> slow and languid in movement. <i>Lapyat nga manlihuklihuk,</i> Moving sluggishly. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a2] be, become flabby or lacking in fullness. <i>Wà kay iksirsayis maung nagkalapyat ang ímung buktun,</i> You lack exercise. No wonder your arms are getting flabby. <b>2</b> [B; a2] move without energy. <i>Dì giyud mahuman ang ímung trabáhu ug maglapyat ka,</i> Your work will never get done if you work slow.

<p><b>lapyù</b> <i>a</i> @young and @tender. <i>Ang lapyung bágu mauy maáyung utánun,</i> Young and tender <i>bágu</i> leaves make an excellent vegetable stew. <i>Lapyù nga kaisípan,</i> Young and tender minds.

<p><b>lárag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] for leaves to yellow. <i>Nagkalarag ang mga tanum kay way ulan,</i> The plants are becoming yellow because there hasn't been any rain. <b>1a</b> [B12] for leaves or flowers to wither and fall off. <i>Nalárag ang mga dáhun sa lawus nga kamunggay,</i> The withered kamunggay leaves dropped off. <b>2</b> [B12] be faded. <i>Nalárag na ang íyang kaanyag,</i> Her beauty has faded. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ang búlak, pagkabúlak</b> lose one's virginity (for the flower to fade). <i>Nalárag ang íyang pagkabúlak sa dihang gipaangkan siya,</i> She lost her chaste beauty when she became pregnant. <b>3</b> [B] get completely drunk. <i>Sa ílang pag-ínum gabíi si Tunyu ang únang nalárag,</i> In their spree last night Tonio was the first one to get under the table. <b>3a</b> [B12; a1] be fascinated with s.o. <i>Ang íyang kaanyag mauy nakalárag (nakapalárag) nákù,</i> Her beauty fascinated me. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> withered, yellowed leaves, flowers, faded beauty, unchaste. <i>Gipangasáwa siya bísan usa na siya ka larag nga búlak,</i> S.o. married her even though she was a faded flower (no longer a virgin). <i>n</i> fallen leaves.

<pb n=1202>

<p><b>láran</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] @beat, @outdo. <i>Dakù túud si Klí apan walà siya makaláran ni Prísir,</i> Clay may be big but he couldn't beat Frazier. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] allow oneself to be outdone. <b>2</b> [A13] allow oneself to get carried away with his emotions. <i>Magpaláran ka gánis ímung kaguul, masakit ka giyud,</i> If you allow yourself to get carried away with your emotions, you will surely get sick.

<p><b>lárang</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> stew s.t. with coconut milk and nothing else but spices. <i>Lamì ang kyampaw ug ilárang (larángun),</i> The best way to cook ray is by stewing it in coconut juice. <b>2</b> reheat s.t. to remove the fat. <i>Laránga ang adúbu arun dílì kaáyu ngilngig,</i> Heat the <i>adúbu</i> so it won't be so greasy. <i>n</i> dish stewed in coconut milk, usually stingray.

<p><b>láras</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @saw along the length. <i>Larásun nátù ang átung giputul nga káhuy,</i> We'll saw the log into lumber. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> do s.t. to all of a group. <i>Ang huramintádu nga milaras ug patay sa tibuuk pamilya,</i> The amok who killed all the members of the family. <i>Ayaw mi larasa (ilaras) ug kasábà kay usa ray nakasâ[** ^?],</i> Don't include us all in the scolding because only one of us did anything wrong. <i>Gilaras ku pagsuruysúruy ang mga dálan dinhi,</i> I wandered through all of the streets. <b>2</b> do s.t. to a larger number of a group than would ordinarily be expected. <i>Gilaras níyag pangulitáwu ang duha ka magsúun,</i> He courted two of the sisters at the same time. <i>n</i> ripsaw, saw for cutting with the grain. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> sawhorse. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> boards sawed off with a ripsaw.

<p><b>láraw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] @{make plans} to do s.t. <i>Nagláraw ang prisidinti nga magdiktadur,</i> The president is planning to become a dictator. <i>Dúna siyay gilárawng buhátun nímu,</i> He is plotting to do s.t. against you. <i>Ikay gilaráwan níyang patyun,</i> He is planning to kill you. <b>2</b> [A; a2] plan how and where s.t. is to be built. <i>Magláraw ta sa átung balayan,</i> We're going to map out the place where the house is to be built. <i>n</i> plan, plot. <i>Wà kuy láraw sa pagbiyáhi,</i> I have no plans to travel. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> picture. <b>2</b> graven image (Biblical). <i>Dílì ka magsimba sa mga laráwan,</i> Thou shalt not worship graven images. <b>3</b> image, likeness of. <i>Laráwan ka sa ímung inahan,</i> You are your mother's image. <b>4</b> typical example. <i>Laráwan sa kakúgi ug kabuútan,</i> Paragon of industry and virtue. <i>Laráwan sa kahimsug,</i> A picture of health. <i>v</i> [A; a] showing clearly, picture s.t. <i>Ang ílang kahimtang naglaráwan sa túmang kakabus,</i> The condition shows what utter poverty is. <i>Nalaráwan <pb n=1203>sa íyang panagway ang kahadluk,</i> Fear was etched on her face. <i>Larawána kunúhay ang lángit,</i> Try to picture heaven in your mind.

<p><b>laray<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] sing a song with meaningless syllables (<i>la la la</i>). <i>Naglaray siya sa bátà nga git[=ú]g,</i> She hummed the child to sleep. <i>n</i> song sung with meaningless syllables.

<p><b>láray</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] be in a @row or @line; cause s.t. to be so. <i>Siyay miláray sa mga masitíra sa agiánan,</i> She lined the path with flower pots. <i>Nagláray ang mga patyunun atúbang sa payring iskwad,</i> The condemned men were lined up before the firing squad. <i>n</i> line, row. <b>(->)<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LÁRAY</sc>, <i>n. v</i> [A; ac] display goods for sale on the sidewalks or in open booths in the public market. <i>Adtu tas tábù tan-áwun tag unsay gilaray,</i> Let's go to the market and see what is being displayed.

<p><b>larga</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36] for a passenger vehicle to leave. <i>Milarga (nalarga) ang trák binyáan ang kunduktur,</i> The bus went off, leaving the conductor behind. <b>1a</b> leave for a distant place. <i>Mularga mi ugmà pára Butwan,</i> We'll leave for Butuan tomorrow. <i>Ug malarga na mi mahibáwu ka ra,</i> You'll surely know it if we have gotten off. <b>1b</b> used in commands only: go ahead, start. <i>Ug muingun kung &lsquo;larga&rsquo;, dágan ... Na, larga na,</i> When I say &lsquo;OK&rsquo;, run ... OK, run! <b>&mdash; manuk</b> = <sc>LARGA</sc>, <i>1b.</i> <b>3</b>[**typo: 2, image is smudged, or manually proofread] [A3P; b] allow, permit s.o. to do s.t. freely. <i>Kinsa may naglarga nímu nga ipatandug nang trabahúa?</i> Who gave you a free hand to touch that work? <b>2a</b> [A; b] meet a price offered, agree to do s.t. for a certain price offered. <i>Mularga ku ánà sa bayinti,</i> I'll let it go for twenty. <b>3</b> [A; b7] pay out the line. <i>Ayaw palabii ug larga sa tugut ang tabánug,</i> Don't pay out the string of your kite too much. <i>Largahi ang pasul,</i> Pay out the fishline. <b>4</b> [A; bc] let cocks go for a fight. <i>Largáhan na gánì nang duha ka manuk, súgud na ang búlang,</i> When those two cocks are released, that means the game is on. <b>4a</b> [B; b] set on s.o. <i>Gilargahan siya sa mga buguy,</i> The bullies set on him. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i> all set to go, well-prepared, showing confidence as one goes into a fight, examination, or contest. <i>Hustu sa largáda si Klí. Walà giyud magpakítag kahadluk,</i> Clay was all set to go with complete confidence. He didn't show a trace of fear. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who releases cocks in cockfighting. <b>2</b> one who formally announces the candidacy of s.o. running for an elective office.

<p><b>largabista</b> <i>n</i> @binoculars. <i>v</i> [A; b5] look at s.t. with binoculars.

<p><b>largu</b> lead directly to. <i>Kining dalána largu sa subà,</i> The path leads directly to the river. <i>v</i> <pb n=1204><b>1</b> [A2; ac] go straight, take a straight course s.w. <i>Mulargu lang ku ngadtu sa íla,</i> I'll just go straight to their place. <b>2</b> [A2; abc] do s.t. directly straight away. <i>Mulargu ka lang ug hílak bísan gipangutána ka lang,</i> You cry right away even though I only asked you. <i>Dílì ka makalargu ug sulud,</i> You can't just go straight in. <i>Ay na lang ug sukda. Largúha na lang pagputul,</i> Never mind measuring it. Just cut it right off. <i>Largúhi lang siyag ingun nga wà kay gustu,</i> Just tell him directly that you don't like him. <i>Ayaw ilargug hátag,</i> Don't give it to him directly. <b>2a</b> [A2] happen fast without any previous indication. <i>Milargu ug butu ang ribintadur ug wà gánì musíyù,</i> The firecracker exploded right away and it didn't even sizzle. <b>3</b> [B16; c1] be, become straight. <i>Naglargu lang ning sinináa mu rag sáku,</i> This dress is straight at the sides like a sack. <b>larguhánan</b> <i>n</i> short, direct route toward. <b>di-, pantalun di-</b> <i>n</i> long pants.

<p><b>láring</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @sword similar to the <i>kanduwálì</i> but with a slight curve to the blade.

<p><b>larínu</b> <i>a</i> speaking clearly and fluently. <i>Larínu kaáyu nang Kanúa mubinisayà,</i> That American speaks Cebuano very fluently. <i>v</i> [B12; c1] speak clearly and fluently.

<p><b>láruk</b> = <sc>LAGDUK</sc>, <i>in all meanings except 1a.</i>

<p><b>larut</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] <b>1</b> @{pull up} by the roots. <i>Maglarut kug mani pára lapwáan,</i> I'll pull up some peanuts to boil. <i>Íyang larutun ning tangúha,</i> He'll pull this tooth out. <b>2</b> pull s.t. off from its moorings, as if uprooting it. <i>Bagyu ang nakalarut (nakapalarut) sa mga barungbárung,</i> The typhoon knocked the shanties over. <b>3</b> [B12N; b3] lose one's hair. <i>Nanglarut ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is falling out. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hair that has fallen out. <i>Matag kalígù níya dúnay daghang larut,</i> Every time he takes a bath he loses a lot of hair. <b>2</b> bad luck, allegedly brought on by s.o. <i>Ngánung miduwà pa giyud ka, napildi na núun ta. Ikaw lay nagdá sa larut,</i> Why did you have to play with us? Now we lost. You must have brought this bad luck. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7] take rice seedlings out from their bed ready for transplanting. <i>Larútun na nátù ang similya kay andam na ang basak,</i> Let's take the seedlings out of the seedbed now because the field is ready for planting.

<p><b>laruylaruy, laruyláruy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @roam idly, aimlessly about instead of doing s.t. <i>Gilaruylarúyan níya ang íyang pagtuun maung nahagbung,</i> He wandered about instead of studying, so he failed.

<p><b>laryang</b> <i>n</i> meaningless word used in singing a song without words.

<pb n=1205><p><b>las</b> [**part of speech missing] for the @last time. <i>Hatági pa ku bi, las na lang,</i> Please let me have one more. This is the last one, for sure.

<p><b>lása<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @oil floating on top of liquids. <i>Lása kaáyu ang sabaw sa linat-ang manuk,</i> The chicken soup is oily because the chicken is fat. <i>v</i> [B2S] for oil to appear on liquids. <i>Naglasa ang dágat tungud sa gasulína,</i> The sea is covered with a film of oil from the gasoline leak.

<p><b>lása<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @taste. <i>Tayam ang lása sa ílang túbig imnunun,</i> Their drinking water has a salty taste. <i>v</i> [B2346; c5] be @tasty. <i>Dì mulása ang útan ug daghan ang sabaw,</i> Vegetable stew does not taste good if there's too much water. <i>n</i> spices. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6c1] add or use spices. <i>Mulasa kug tanglad sa linat-ang manuk,</i> I use lemon grass to spice chicken stew.

<p><b>las-ag</b> <i>n</i> @puddle, esp. a dirty one.

<p><b>lasak</b> <i>n</i> @money contained in s.t. (slang). <i>Pilay lasak sa pitákang inyung gilunggub?</i> How much was in the bag you snatched?

<p><b>lasang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @forest, @jungle. <b>2</b> the trees on such land. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become a forest. <i>Malasang (mulasang) ning yutáa ug dì nímu trabahúun,</i> This land will become a forest if you don't cultivate it. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> forests. <b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> from the forest. <i>Lasangnun nga mga mananap,</i> Jungle animals. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] clear the forest. <i>Nangahánaw ang mga Suban-un sa dihang gilásang (gilasángan) na ang ílang lugar,</i> The Subanos disappeared when their land was deforested.

<p><b>lásaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for liquids to @flow or @spread all over. <i>Mulásaw ang ámung sílung ug mag-ulan,</i> Water flows under our house when it rains. <i>Mu rag túbig ang álak nga naglásaw sa kumbira,</i> Wine flowed like water at the party. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> diluted, watery. <i>Lasaw ang miskla sa simintu,</i> The cement is watery. <i>v</i> [AB; b7] dilute s.t., make a mixture thin. <i>Ayaw lasawa ang kapi,</i> Don't make the coffee so weak. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <i>a</i> cowardly. <i>Ang lasaw ug dugù níyang manghud wà muambak,</i> His brother was too chicken to jump.

<p><b>las-ay</b> <i>a</i> lacking flavor. <i>Las-ay ang sabaw, kúwag útan,</i> The soup is @tasteless because it lacks vegetables. <i>v</i> [B; c1] get to be tasteless. <i>Ang manggang ahat pagkahinug las-ayg lamì,</i> Mangoes which are not tree-ripened have an insipid taste.

<p><b>lasbi &mdash; ug</b> @rather than that [so-and-so] happen (s.t. else is better). <i>Maáyu pa ug bayran nímu ang buhis, lasbi ug mamurúsu ang yútà!</i> Pay your taxes. It's @better than to have your land foreclosed. <i>Dawáta na lang ning diyis, lasbig wâ[** â ?],</i> Just accept this dime. It's better than nothing. <i>Gihátag na lang nákù, <pb n=1206>lasbig kawátun</i>, I just gave it to him. Better than having him steal it.

<p><b>lasgas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a smooth surface to be @rough with tiny scratches, such that it would make a grating sound if s.t. were rubbed over it. <b>2</b> for corn to be mature (for the husks to become dry and @rough). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] for a smooth surface to @{get roughened}, cause it to do so. <i>Nalasgas ang imabaw sa lamísa kay gikuriskurisan</i>, The table top got all scratched because s.o. rubbed <corr sic="on "></corr>s.t. sharp over it. <b>2</b> [A13] get a k.o. scaly formation on the skin, caused by contact with contaminated water. <i>Naglasgas ang ákung pánit kay nagtrabáhu mi sa kanal</i>, My skin is infected with scales because we have been working in the ditch. <b>3</b> [B12] for corn to mature (from the notion that the husks get @rough and wrinkled when the fruit is mature).

<p><b>lasib</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @slice into long, thin pieces or slice a thin portion off a larger slab. <i>Lamì ang hamun ug nipsun paglasib</i>, Ham tastes better if you slice it thin. <i>Aku na lay mulasib íning karni nga ipanugba</i>, I will slice off portions from this meat to broil. <i>Basta mag-apritáda lasibun ang karni</i>, <i>Apritáda</i> is made with meat cut into slivers.

<p><b>lasid</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @involve, include with the others, esp. in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Ang kastígu sa Diyus mulasid sa tanan</i>, Everybody gets involved in God's punishment. <i>Bísag usa ray makasalà, lasirun (ilasid) ming tanan ug búnal ni Máma</i>, Mother whips everybody even if only one of us does s.t. wrong.

<p><b>lásik</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b8] @{be thrown off} <corr sic=in>for</corr> a distance under a forceful impact. <i>Milásik (nalásik) ug layù ang búla nga íyang gipatíran</i>, He kicked the ball and it went far. <i>Hilasikan (nalasikan) siya sa lápuk</i>, She got mud splashed on her.

<p><b>lasing</b> <i>a</i> @drunk. <i>Kusug na nà siya muisturya ug lasing na kaáyu</i>, He becomes talkative when he is very groggy. <i>v</i> [A13B12; a] @{get drunk}, cause s.o. to do so.

<p><b>laski</b> <i>a</i> @{be fast}, sprightly in doing s.t. <i>Laski mulakaw</i>, A fast walker. <i>Laski ang láwas</i>, A body that is active and full of energy. <i>Laski siyang muhímug kálù</i>, He is energetic in making hats. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be fast or brisk in doing s.t. <i>Mulaski (malaski) nà siyang sugúun ug suhúlan</i>, She'll run an errand with alacrity if you pay her. <i>Nagkalaski na ang nagluyang mga manuk</i>, The chickens were weak, but they are regaining their strength now.

<p><b>laskúta</b> <i>n</i> guy @rope: <b>1</b> a rope, chain, or rod to guide a carabao in plowing. <b>2</b> a rope tied from the boom of a sail to the stern to control <pb n=1207>the sail. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] use or attach a guy rope to a carabao or to a sail. <b>2</b> [A; a2] make into a guy rope.

<p><b>laslas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @cut s.t. with a sawing motion to make a @slash in it or to remove leaves and small twigs. <i>Gilaslas níya ang mga lukay,</i> He cut off the leaflets from the palm frond. <i>Gilaslasan sa kawatan ang ákung bag,</i> The thief made a gash in my bag. <i>Malaslas na lang nang ímung bàbà ug tinambag, dílì gayud pamatíun,</i> You can give him advice till you're blue in the face (lit. you can rip your mouth giving him advice), but he won't listen to you. <i>n</i> slash, cracks like slashes.

<p><b>lasmu</b> <i>a</i> having the fishy odor of stagnant water or a body of a person who has not bathed in weeks. <i>Lasmu kaáyu ang kabù kay walà kahugási,</i> The dipper smells bad because it hasn't been washed. <i>Lasmu kaáyu ang isdà sa batu,</i> Fishes that live in rocks tend to have a revolting smell. <b>way &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> without making a fuss or bother (colloquial). <i>Wà giyud nay lasmung amahána. Muhátag dáyun bísag unsay pangayúun sa anak,</i> That father never makes a fuss. Whatever his son asks for he gets. <i>v</i> [B; b6] smell fishy or revolting like stagnant water. <i>Mulasmu ang plátung dì sabunan inighugas,</i> Plates develop a fishy smell if you don't wash them with soap.

<p><b>lasnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @tear s.t. that sticks or is attached off with force. <i>Akuy milasnit sa ngil-ad ritrátu nga ímung gipilit sa bungbung,</i> I stripped off the indecent picture that you had pasted on the wall. <i>Gilasnítan níyag pánid ang nutbuk,</i> He tore a page out of his notebook.

<p><b>laspa</b> <i>v</i> [AB126; c1] do s.t. which brings ill or good to s.t. else besides the thing for which it was intended. <i>Ang inyung binúang nakalaspa (nakapalaspa) ug daghang táwu,</i> Your foolishness has involved lots of people. <i>Kay dihà man ku pagpanghátag sa mga kindi, gilaspa hasta aku,</i> When they gave out the candy, I also got some because I happened to be there. <i>Íyang gilaspa ug larut ang tanum uban sa sagbut,</i> He uprooted the plant together with the weeds.

<p><b>last<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> in table tennis, one point away from winning. <i>Ug makapuntus siyag kausa daug na, kay last na man ang íyang iskur,</i> If he makes one more point, he wins because he needs only one point. <i>v</i> [B56] be a point away from winning.

<p><b>last<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LAS</sc>.

<p><b>lastats</b> <i>n</i> in basketball, the one who was the last to touch a ball which went out of <pb n=1208>bounds. <i>Inyu ang búla kay lastats man ang inyung kuntra,</i> It's your ball because your opponents touched the ball last. <i>v</i> [B1236] be the @last to touch a ball which went out of bounds.

<p><b>last díl</b> <i>n</i> @{last deal} in a mahjong or card game before quitting. <i>v</i> [c1] be the last deal in a mahjong or card game. <i>Last dílun (ilast díl) na ni nátù kay buntag na,</i> Let's make this our last deal because it's already morning.

<p><b>lasti</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @carry, @ride with s.o. on a bike or other vehicle meant for one. <i>Dílì ka makalasti kay kúlang ug hángin ang gúma,</i> You cannot ride double with me because there isn't enough air. <b>2</b> @tie a rock to leaves or fronds which hang down from a raft to keep them from floating. <i>Ang palwa sa lubi gilastíhag batu arun dílì mulutaw,</i> The palm fronds have rocks tied to them so they won't float.

<p><b>lastiku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{rubber band}. <b>2</b> @slingshot made of a rubber strip. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6] @bind or @fasten with a rubber band. <i>Ákung gilastikuhan ang usa ka bugkus lápis,</i> I bound the bundle of pencils with a rubber band. <b>2</b> [A; a1] @shoot with a slingshot. <i>Lastikuhun lang ang kaimítu,</i> Get the star apple with a slingshot. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] go hunting with a slingshot. <i>Manglastiku ku ug manuk ihálas,</i> I'll go hunting wild chickens with a slingshot. <b>di-</b> having an elastic garter. <i>Dilastiku ang ákung panti,</i> I am wearing a <corr sic=pantie>panty</corr> with an elastic garter.

<p><b>lastrip</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{last trip} of the day by passenger vehicles or trains. <b>2</b> one's trip to the cemetery (humorous). <b>3</b> last chance to get married. <i>Nangartig maáyu si Marta arun dì hibyaan sa lastrip,</i> Martha makes herself up carefully in the hope that she can still make the last train. <i>Bisag lastrip basta pransit,</i> It does not matter if it's the last trip (last chance to get married), so long as it's the front seat (that is, a rich husband). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] take the last trip, be the last trip. <i>Mulastrip ku rung hápun,</i> I'll take the last trip this afternoon. <i>Ug malastrip na ni, musakay na lang ku,</i> If this is the last trip, I'll just take it. <b>2</b> [B26] @die (humorous slang).

<p><b>lásu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ribbon, @bow. <b>2</b> @lasso. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @tie into a bow. <i>Lasúha ang listun, ayawg balitùtúa,</i> Lace the shoelace, don't tie it into a knot. <i>Gilasúhan níya ang íyang dalága,</i> She tied a ribbon in her little girl's hair. <b>2</b> @lasso. <i>Lasúha ang kábaw nga nakabuhì,</i> Lasso the carabao that escaped. <b>3</b> [a3] get entangled in a rope or vines. <i>Nalásu ang mangangayam sa daghang bágun,</i> The hunter got entangled in the vines.

<pb n=1209>

<p><b>lasù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @masturbate (coarse). <b>2</b> [A; a] @misuse s.t. so as to break it. <i>Hala, lasua nang bisiklíta kay ikaw mauy mupaáyu,</i> OK, fool around with that bicycle, and you will have to fix it.

<p><b>las-u</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] heat s.t. by pouring boiling water on it. <i>Wà pa ku makalas-u sa gikan-an sa pasyinti,</i> I haven't poured boiling water over the patient's eating utensils. <b>2</b> [B126; b4] get @burnt with s.t. very hot. <i>Nalas-u (nalas-úhan) ang ákung kamut sa bágang ákung nahikapan,</i> I burnt my hand with the coals that I touched.

<p><b>lasugas</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @expose oneself to the elements. <i>Ngánung naglasugas ka man íning ulan nga dakù?</i> Why are you going out in this heavy rain? <i>Dì maáyung lasugasun nátù ang ínit,</i> It is not good to expose yourself to the sun.

<p><b>las-ung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @catch with a noose. <i>Maglas-ung tag tamsi pinaági íning láang,</i> Let's catch a small bird with this noose. <i>Las-únga nang kabáyung idlas,</i> Catch that wild horse with a lasso. <i>n</i> @lasso or @noose that tightens when you pull it.

<p><b>las-ut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @bad, @ugly. <i>Las-ut kaáyug batásan nang bayhána,</i> That woman has a very bad character. <i>Las-ut ug dagway,</i> Ugly in face. <b>2</b> @shoddy, badly done, poor in quality. <i>Las-ut kaáyung pagkabúhat ning trabahúa,</i> This piece of work is very badly done. <i>Las-ut nga klási sa panaptun,</i> A lousy k.o. cloth. <i>v</i> [B12; a2] get to be bad, ugly, poor in quality, do s.t. badly. <i>Ang kadaghan sa adurnu mauy nakalas-ut (nakapalas-ut) sa íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress was spoiled by the excessive decorations. <i>Ayaw las-úta ning ímung ági,</i> Don't make your penmanship poor.

<p><b>las-ut<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LAP-UT<sub>1</sub></sc>

<p><b>laswa</b> <i>v</i> [AB; b5] pour boiling liquid on. <i>Ákung gilaswáan (gilaswáhan) ang giíhaw nga manuk arun himulbúlan,</i> I poured hot water on the slaughtered chicken to get the feathers off. <i>Pagbutukbutuk sa mantíkà nalaswahan (nalaswa) ku,</i> When the fat popped, I got burnt.

<p><b>lasyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @canal for diverting water. <b>2</b> grooving plane. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] divert water with a canal. <i>Lasyúha (lasyuha) ang túbig sa tubud arun ipatubig,</i> Divert the water from the river for irrigation. <b>2</b> [A; b6] cut a groove. <b>3</b> [A13; a12] make into a grooving plane. <b>lasyadur</b> <i>n</i> grooving plane.

<p><b>lat</b> = <sc>USAB</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>láta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tin @can. <i>Láta sa gátas,</i> Can of milk. <b>2</b> a canful of. <i>Usa ka látang biskwit,</i> A canful of biscuits. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> canned goods. <i>Karni nga linata,</i> Canned meat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b1c1] <pb n=1210>prepare canned food for a meal. <i>Maglinata lang ta kay kápuy ilútù,</i> Let's just have canned foods because I'm too lazy to cook. <b>1</b> [A] can s.t. di- = <b>LINATA. abri-</b> <i>n</i> can opener. <b>batu-</b> <i>n</i> game of kick-the-can.

<p><b>latà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for fruits to be extremely soft or rotten. <i>Ipásaw ang mga latà nga prútas,</i> Feed the rotten fruits to the pigs. <b>1a</b> decayed, rotted. <i>Latà na ang halígi,</i> The posts are rotten. <b>2</b> for foods to be cooked, well-done, and soft, <i>Latà na ang linúgaw,</i> The porridge is soft now. <b>3</b> rotten in character. <i>Ang latà nga pamunúan ni Markus,</i> The rotten Marcos administration. <b>3a</b> for a woman to have been had so often she is putrid (coarse). <b>4</b> slow in action as well as thinking power. <i>Unsáun nátù pagkadaug nga latà kaáyu ang kuts?</i> How can we win with a rotten coach? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12] become rotten or very soft. <i>Náay ilagà nga nalatà sa tangki</i>, There's a dead rat that has rotted in the water tank. <i>Nagkalatà ang mga nuug nga pirming gihúmul</i>, The cloth is rotting because it is always kept in water. <b>2</b> [A; ab] boil food until it is tender. <i>Ayawg lat-a paglútù ang kamúti kay mawálà ang lamì,</i> Don't cook the sweet potatoes too soft or they will lose their flavor. <i>Lat-i ang karni úsà adubúha,</i> Boil the meat tender before you fry it. <b>3</b> [B12] be crushed to flatness. <i>Malatà giyud ka ug hiligsan ka sa pisun,</i> You'll be crushed flat if you are run over by a steam roller. <b>4</b> [A3P; b] maul, gang upon s.o. viciously with blows. <i>Ang kawatan kun hisakpan lat-an sa mga táwu,</i> The people will maul the thief if they catch him. <b>4a</b> [b1] defeat badly. <i>Gilat-an ang bangà nílang tím,</i> Their lousy team got a sound thrashing. <b>4b</b> [b] subject to vigorous questions or criticisms. <i>Gilat-an ang tistígus sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer absolutely pulverized the witness. <i>Pirming lat-an si Markus sa piryudiku,</i> The newspapers always lambast Marcos. <b>ka-</b>(<-) <i>v</i> [A13] be present in huge quantities. <i>Nagkalátà lang ang sayup sa íyang papil,</i> There were plenty of mistakes on his paper. <i>Nagkalátà ang lansúnis didtu sa Misámis,</i> There are plenty of lanzones in Misamis. <b>nilat-an, linat-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. stewed.

<p><b>látab</b> <i>n</i> name given to young <i>samúk</i>: <b>Gerres spp.</b>

<p><b>látab</b><sub>1</sub> <i>v</i> [B6; b] for liquids to have oil, usually edible, floating on top. <i>Ang sabaw naglátab sa mantíkà,</i> The soup has streaks of oil floating on top of it.

<p><b>látab</b><sub>2</sub> <i>v</i> [A13] for liquor to be present in inexhaustible quantities. <i>Maglátab ang tubà sa ámù maduminggu,</i> The toddy simply <pb n=1211>flows at our place on Sundays.

<p><b>látad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] spread s.t. out under the sun. <i>Ilátad ang mais (kupras) arun mauga,</i> Spread the corn (copra) under the sun. <i>Ilátad ang putì,</i> Bleach the white clothes under the sun. <b>lataran</b> <i>n</i> place one spreads things out under the sun.

<p><b>látag</b> = <sc>LÁTAD</sc>.

<p><b>latagaw</b> (from <i>tagaw</i>) a @wanderer, rambling about without destination. <i>Ang latagaw dílì mahimuyù,</i> A vagabond won't stay in one place. <i>Latagaw ang ílang isturya,</i> Their conversation wandered from one topic to another. <i>Latagaw ug mata,</i> Having eyes which rove all over. <i>v</i> [A13B2; b(1)] wander aimlessly about, without destination. <i>Mulatagaw (malatagaw) ang irù ug dílì pakan-un,</i> A dog roves about if you don't feed it. <i>Síging yawyaw ang maistra piru naglatagaw ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> The teacher kept talking away but my mind wandered. <i>Bisan unsang dapíta ang íyang gilatagawan karun,</i> He roams about any place he feels like going.

<p><b>latak</b> <i>a</i> standing out @clear. <i>Latak kaáyu ang panti,</i> You can clearly see her panties (through her skirt). <i>Latak kaáyu ang litra sa aybiim,</i> The <sc>IBM</sc> typewriter types clearly. <i>v</i> [B3(1)] for a mark, outline or imprint to stand out clear.

<p><b>látak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36] for fruits, flowers, or leaves to fall. <i>Malátak ang mga mangga kun hinug na,</i> Mangoes fall off the tree when they are ripe. <b>2</b> [AN] lower (not cast) fishing equipment into the sea. <i>Anhi ta dinhi manlátak sa báling,</i> We'll lower the net in this place.

<p><b>latang</b> <i>a</i> soft and @ripe to the point just prior to getting rotten. <i>Tam-is kaáyu ang búngan ug latang na,</i> The green table bananas are very sweet when they are ripened soft. <i>v</i> [B12] become very ripe.

<p><b>lat-ang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @miss or @skip a chance in a series. <i>Ug makalat-ang kag tumar sa tablítas, maburus ka dáyun,</i> If you miss taking a pill you will get pregnant. <i>Lat-angig duha ka linya úsà isulat ang uluhan,</i> Leave two lines before writing the title. <b>2</b> [A; c] for s.t. to be placed in between s.t. else. <i>Upisína sa prinsipal ang nakalat-ang sa ámung duha ka kwartu,</i> The principal's office is between our two rooms. <i>Lat-ángi ug munggus ang mga tudling sa mais,</i> Plant mung beans between the rows of corn. <b>lat-anglat-ang</b> <i>v</i> [A13; c1] for things to be in a series so that they alternate; put them so. <i>Naglat-anglat-ang ang mga babáyi ug láki paglingkud,</i> The boys and girls are seated alternately.

<p><b>latas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @cross or @{pass through}. <i>Latasun  <pb n=1212>nímu nang subáa padúng sa íla,</i> You have to cross that river to their place. <b>2</b> pass or go through experiences. <i>Mga kalisud nga íyang gilatas,</i> Difficulties he passed through. <b>&mdash; sa</b> @across. <i>Mipánaw aku latas sa kadagátan,</i> I travelled across oceans. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to be crossed.

<p><b>lat-as</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5c] <b>1</b> go straight across s.t., take a @{short cut}. <i>Milat-as (nanglat-as) kug ági sa plása arun maapsan ka,</i> I walked across the plaza to catch up with you. <i>Dílì mahímung lat-asan ang lún,</i> You're not allowed to take a short cut across the lawn. <b>2</b> @{go across}. <i>Mulat-as úsà kag subà adisir ka muabut sa íla,</i> You have to cross a river before you get to their house. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> path, road for taking a short cut.

<p><b>látay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; b5c] go over a narrow walkway. <i>Milátay sa andamyu ang mga pasahíru,</i> The passengers walked over the gangplank. <i>Usa ka gamayng alambri ang gilatáyan (gilátay) sa sirkadur,</i> It was only a small piece of wire the acrobat walked over. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa usa ka lugas lánut</b> be precarious (passing over a single strand). <i>Ang kahimtang sa gikidnap naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The kidnap victim's life is hanging by a thread. <b>2</b> [A2S; b(1)] run, flow through a tube or tube-like thing. <i>Dúnay dugung Aliman nga naglatay sa íyang kaugatan,</i> There is German blood running in her veins. <b>2a</b> [A2; b(1)] for a feeling to creep through. <i>Ang kabugnaw sa íyang nahikapan milátay sa íyang tudlù ngadtu sa íyang buktun,</i> The coldness of what he touched crept from his fingers up to his arm. <b>3</b> [A23; c] add a new debt to one's current account. <i>Ilátay na lang ning útang sa ákung ristanti,</i> Just add this debt to my bill. <i>n</i> small wooden bridge for pedestrian or vehicles. <b>-an(->), -anan</b> <i>n</i> narrow bridge or passageway to walk over.

<p><b>latbù</b> <i>a</i> @fast-growing. <i>Latbù kaáyug tinubuan ang bátà nga daghang sustansiya,</i> A child grows fast if he gets good food. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] grow or develop fast. <i>Mulatbù (malatbù) ang tinubuan sa tanum ug abunúhan,</i> Plants grow fast if they are fertilized. <i>Nagkalatbù kining syudára,</i> This city is growing by leaps and bounds.

<p><b>latbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] throw or knock s.t. heavy, using force, usually with an initial backward swing. <i>Tabangan nátug latbug ang patayng irù sa dágat,</i> Let's all help throw the dead dog into the sea. <b>2</b> [b6] for the mind to wander away from the subject or situation at hand. <i>Samtang nagklási mi, layù ug gilatbúgan ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> My mind wandered far while we were in class.

<pb n=1213>

<p><b>lathang</b> <i>n</i> space between two adjacent teeth which are not close together. <i>Ayaw ug ngísi kay ngil-ad tan-áwun ang lathang,</i> Don't smile because the spaces between your teeth are ugly.

<p><b>lati</b> = <sc>NATI</sc>.

<p><b>latíba</b> = <sc>LABATÍBA</sc>.

<p><b>látid</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @line which delineates an area or @boundary. <i>Sa taliwálà sa dálan dúnay látid nga putì,</i> A white line is drawn in the middle of the road. <i>Sapà ang látid sa duha ka lungsud,</i> A river is the boundary between the two towns. <b>2</b> path, plan by which s.t. is carried out. <b>3</b> rules, laws. <i>Dúnay mga látid ang pagdúlag baskitbul,</i> Basketball is played according to set rules. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> delineate an area, esp. where s.t. is to be built. <i>Pagkúhà ug lambu kay maglátid ta sa ámung balayan,</i> Get some string because we will stake out where the walls for the house are to be put. <b>2</b> plan or arrange a method to be followed or done. <i>Ang mga Libiral naglátid sa ílang buhátun sa kampanya,</i> The Liberals were laying out plans for their campaign. <i>Mauy átung pagasubáyun ang nalátid sa átung kapaláran,</i> What fate has decreed for us to do is what we must follow. <b>3</b> establish laws or rules.

<p><b>latigu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @whip. <i>Latigu sa kabáyù,</i> Horsewhip. <b>2</b> punishment inflicted with a whip. <i>Nakadawat ug latigu kay nakasalà man,</i> He got a whipping because he did s.t. <b>3</b> k.o. aerial orchid with small, violet flowers and long, whip-like projections. <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> whip. <i>Gilatigu sa kutsíru ang kabáyù kay misúki,</i> The rig driver flogged his horse because it balked. <b>2</b> attack with scathing criticism. <i>Ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun milatigu sa kaatbang,</i> The opposition candidate lashed out at his opponent.

<p><b>latik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @syrup made of sugar and water or sugar and coconut milk. <b>2</b> sweet prepared from seedless breadfruit (<i>kulu</i>) cooked in syrup mixed with coconut milk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1B23(1); a] make syrup, for syrup to develop. <i>Ilúnud ang ságing kun mulatik (malatik) na ang gipabúkal nga kámay,</i> Put in the bananas when the sugar turns into syrup. <b>2</b> [b(1)] put syrup on food. <b>3</b> [A; a2] prepare the <i>latik</i> made from breadfruit. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LATIK</sc>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>látik</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for a school of fish to swim near the surface and disturb it. <i>Andáma ang inyung pasul kay nía na ang bansíkul naglátik,</i> Prepare your lines because there is a school of mackerel thrashing around on the surface.

<p><b>latin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Latin. <b>1a</b> special k.o. prayer with <pb n=1214>magical effects. <i>May nakat-unan kung latin nga sumpà sa kasukù,</i> I know of a special prayer that works against anger. <b>2</b> a tongue-lashing. <i>Ayaw paglangaylángay ug paúlì kay ang latin sa ímung asáwa taas ra ba kaáyu,</i> Don't tarry on your way home. Your wife's tongue-lashings are no joke. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] speak Latin. <b>1a</b> utter a special magical prayer. <b>2</b> [A1; c] give s.o. a tongue-lashing. <i>Gilatinan ku ni Máma pagpaúlì nákù,</i> Mother gave me a good tongue-lashing when I got home.

<p><b>lating</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b4(1)] for a missile to @ricochet. <i>Ang bála dílì makalating kay húmuk ang yútà,</i> The bullet cannot bounce off because the ground is soft. <i>Nalatingan ku sa bála,</i> The bullet ricocheted off on me.

<p><b>láting</b> <i>v</i> [B246] for a wound or other injury to @swell because of an infection. <i>Muláting ang samad ug ibuwad sa ínit,</i> A wound swells if you let the sun get on it.

<p><b>látu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a2] have so much of s.t. that one loses pleasure in it or it fails to have the normal effect. <i>Latúhun ta kag pakáun ug mangga,</i> I'll give you so many mangoes you will get sick of them. <i>Nalátu na ku sa ímung pangatarúngan,</i> I can't believe your sob stories any longer. <b>2</b> [A2PB12; a1] feel nauseated from exposure to s.t., cause s.t. to do so. <i>Dugà sa tabákù ang ilátu sa tamalà,</i> Stupefy the octopus with tobacco-leaf juice.

<p><b>latù</b> <i>n</i> a branching, semi-transparent @seaweed, greenish in color and edible. It has small, rounded growths on the branches which pop when pressed.

<p><b>latuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3; b(1)] have a blank and stupid look on the face. <i>Naglatuk lang ang tuntu. Wà makasabut,</i> The idiot just stared blankly. He didn't understand. <i>Gilatukan lang ku sa íyang mata dihang ákung gisultíhan,</i> She just stared at me blankly when I talked to her.

<p><b>latuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{cassava flour}, very fine, white sediment from cassava juice.

<p><b>latun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cylindrical @pail with the mouth as big as the bottom. <b>2</b> drum for petroleum products.

<p><b>latundan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>latung</b> <i>a</i> very @ripe, bordering on over-ripeness. <i>Húmuk na kaáyu ang kapáyas kay latung na man,</i> The papaya has turned soft because it is very ripe. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become very ripe.

<p><b>latungdan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>latus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] <b>1</b> @whip with anything flexible. <i>Dílì giyud tu mulatus ang ámung amahan apan mahadluk giyud mi níya,</i> My father never whipped us but we feared him. <pb n=1215><i>Ang mga madri maglatus sa ílang kaugalíngun inigka Byirnis Santu arun pagsakripisyu,</i> The nuns flog themselves on Good Fridays to mortify themselves. <b>2</b> attack, criticize severely. <i>Kanúnay níyang latusun si Markus sa íyang lindug,</i> He always criticizes Marcos in his column.

<p><b>latuy</b> <i>a</i> for edible beans or pea pods to be tender. <i>v</i> [b6] cook s.t. together with tender pods. <i>Latuyi ang linat-an nga báka,</i> Put tender string beans into the beef stew.

<p><b>lau</b> = <sc>LALAU</sc>.

<p><b>laubláub</b> <i>a</i> increasing and diminishing in intensity periodically. <i>Laubláub ang hilánat íning batáa,</i> This child's fever rises and falls. <i>v</i> [B456] for s.t. to increase and diminish in intensity periodically. <i>Mulaubláub giyud ang nigusyu,</i> Business @fluctuates, as you would expect. <i>Maglaubláub ang pagguwà íning tabuguk,</i> <i>Tabuguk</i> octopuses appear in great numbers from time to time. <i>Ang tilíik sa sirína naglaubláub,</i> The wailing of the siren rises and falls.

<p><b>laud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @tie s.t. to s.t. letting the rope go around it several times before knotting it. <i>Ang kunduktur mauy mulaud sa mga kargamintu sa stipburd,</i> The conductor ties loads to the running board. <i>Ang táwung gikastígu gilaud sa halígi ug gipahulmigasan,</i> The offender was tied to a post and left to the ants.

<p><b>laug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @liking s.t. very much and, therefore, disliking to share it. <i>Laug kaáyu kug ayis krim,</i> I'm very fond of ice cream. <i>Laug siyag bayli,</i> She loves to dance. <b>2</b> @selfish. <i>Laug nga batáa, dílì manghátag,</i> What a selfish child. She won't give anything to anyone else. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be @greedy. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b>[**i.e. láug<sub>1</sub>] [B12] take a strong liking to s.t. <i>Nía rag ímung libru. Way naláug,</i> Here's your damn book. Who wants it anyway (lit. no one has taken a liking to it).

<p><b>láug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> go out to go about with no particular purpose. <i>Unsay ímung giláug didtu? Dúna kay gibisitáhan?</i> What did you stroll over to their place for? Did you visit s.o.? <b>2</b> get out of a place, @flee. <i>Miláug ang manuk,</i> The chicken flew the coop. <i>Laúgan ka sa ímung mga sákup kun mag-inistriktu ka,</i> Your employees will leave you if you are too strict. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to go out to roam about. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be a roamer.

<p><b>laugdu</b> (from <i>ugdu</i>) <i>v</i> [B; c1] @pile, @heap up. <i>Nagkalaugdu ang mga sagbut nga wà kuháa sa mga basuríru,</i> The garbage is piling up because it hasn't been collected by the garbage men.

<p><b>láum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @expect s.t. hopefully. <pb n=1216><i>Nagláum ku nga mausab pa siya,</i> I still have hopes that he'll change. <i>Laúmi ang íyang pagbálik,</i> Hope for his return. <b>2</b> [A; bc5] rely. <i>Makaláum ba ku sa ímung sáad?</i> Can I trust your promises? <i>Kining lúti ang bugtung námung gilaúman sa panginabúhì,</i> This small lot is our sole means of support. <b>ka-an, pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @hope. <i>Nawad-an na siyag pagláum sa kinabúhì,</i> He has lost hope in life. <i>Kini rang midisináha ang ákung pagláum,</i> This medicine is my only hope. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> full of hope.

<p><b>laumlaum</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] prolong one's @stay in a certain place for a purpose. <i>Naglaumláum ang mga batan-un human sa pangadyì tungud sa bayli,</i> The young men who joined the prayers stayed late for the dance. <i>Gilaumlaúman nákù sa Manílà ang pagpaluap sa ákung apuyintmint,</i> I stayed in Manila for some time to follow up on my appointment.

<p><b>laun</b> <i>a</i> @aged: <b>1</b> for s.t. that gets better as it grows old to be mature. <b>1a</b> mellowed, aged. <i>Bínung laun,</i> Aged wine. <i>Tabákung laun,</i> Mellowed tobacco. <b>1b</b> for a plant or animal commonly found immature to grow to its full extent and thus improve. <i>Laun nga aháan ang midáwi kaníya,</i> He caught a full-grown giant snapper. <b>2</b> old stock left over from the previous harvest. <i>Unáhug dispatsar ang laun,</i> Get rid of the old stock first. <b>3</b> old maid (humorous). <i>v</i> [B3; b4(1)] for s.t. to age. <i>Ang kamúti nga malaun (mulaun) sa uma dagkù ug tam-is,</i> If you leave sweet potatoes in the ground to maturity, they will be big and sweet. <i>Wà makalaun ang tabákù kay anam,</i> The tobacco didn't get a chance to age because they kept smoking it as it matured. <i>Ug subra ka kaistrikta, hilaunan kag dalága,</i> If you are too strict, your daughter is going to turn into an old maid on you.

<p><b>launduk</b> = <sc>TALIUNDUK</sc>.

<p><b>laung</b> = <sc>INGUN<sub>2</sub></sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>laus</b> <i>a</i> past one's peak or popularity. <i>Laus na ang buksidur,</i> The boxer is past his prime. <i>v</i> [B12] be past one's peak or popularity.

<p><b>laúsag</b> <i>v</i> [B4] for undesirable characteristics to @worsen. <i>Milaúsag ang íyang kakiriwan,</i> His thievery got @worse. <i>Naglaúsag ang pagkapilyu sa bátà,</i> The child misbehaved more and more.

<p><b>lauy</b> <i>a</i> @lacking @sleep. <i>Lauy ku kay nagbilar ku gabíi,</i> I lack sleep because I kept vigil last night. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] lack sleep. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A13] stay up late at night. <i>Nagláuy siya tungud sa íyang paynals,</i> He is staying up late to study for his finals.

<p><b>láuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] go, see to @visit or to see how <pb n=1217>s.t. is doing. <i>Muláuy (magláuy) ku sa ákung higála sa uspital,</i> I will visit my friend in the hospital. <i>Laúyun (iláuy) nátù ang kamaisan sa walug kun túa na ta sa búkid,</i> While we are in the mountains we will go see how the corn we planted in the valley is doing.

<p><b>láwà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a @spider. <b>lawàlawà</b> <i>n</i> @{spider web}, @cobweb. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be filled with cobwebs. <i>Gilawàlawaan na lang ang ímung makinilyang way gáwì,</i> Your typewriter is all covered with cobwebs because it's never used. <b>2</b> for a dying man's eyes to become dull and blurred (lit. have cobwebs in one's eyes).

<p><b>láwà<sub>2</sub></b> (from <i>walà</i>) not have (slang). <i>Láwà nu siyay takwal,</i> He says he's out of dough.

<p><b>lawáan</b> <i>n</i> name given to a number of forest trees producing inexpensive timber, widely used in construction: <b><i>Pentacme</i></b> and <b><i>Shorea spp.</i></b> <b>&mdash; nga putì</b>: <b><i>Pentacme contorta</i></b>. <b>&mdash; pula</b>: <b><i>Shorea negrosensis</i></b>.

<p><b>láwag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing with lights. Several boats illuminate a wide area and when the fish appear, the boats gradually converge, drawing the fish into a small area from which they can be scooped up with a net.

<p><b>lawak</b> <i>n</i> @room in a house or building. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make a room. <i>Gilawakan ku ang sílung pára sa mga gamit,</i> I made a room in the basement for the tools.

<p><b>láwang</b> <i>a</i> for an area to be @wide, @spacious. <i>Mas láwang ang tinisan kay sa baskitan,</i> A tennis court is wider than a basketball court. <i>n</i> space across, width. <i>Pila ka mitrus ang láwang sa kalsáda?</i> How many meters wide is the road? <i>v</i> [B23] be, become wide or spacious. <b>lawanglawang, lawangláwang</b> <i>v</i> [B4] <b>1</b> have too much space for the amount of material put in. <i>Naglawanglawang ang trák padúlung sa syudad kay way pasahíru,</i> The truck went to the city nearly empty because there were no passengers. <b>2</b> be in a place which is too spacious. <i>Maglawanglawang ta sa dakung balay,</i> We've got room to burn in that huge house. <b>3</b> [c1] make s.t. wider. <i>Gilawanglawang ang silya sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> The manager's chair was given a wider seat.

<p><b>lawanlawan</b> = <sc>LAWANGLAWANG</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAWANG</sc>.

<p><b>láwas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @body of human or animal. <b>taput &mdash;</b> the clothes on one's back. <i>Ang ákung nasalb&acaron;r sa súnug ang taput láwas,</i> All I could save from the fire was the clothes on my back. <b>2</b> the frame or main part of a structure. <i>Láwas sa ayruplánu,</i> Fuselage of the plane. <i>Ang láwas sa angkla,</i> The shank of the anchor. <b>3</b> one's turn in a game where the players perform one at a time in succession. <pb n=1218><i>Sa bíku kamuy páris ug aku rang usa, apan duhay láwas ku,</i> It'll be you two against me in hopscotch, but I get two turns. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; ug katarúngan</b> body and reasoning, all one arms oneself in fighting for justice (as opposed to money, weapons). <i>Láwas ug katarúngan ang ákung iatúbang sa ímung lantúgì,</i> I come here not to fight, but to talk it out (offer my reasoning). <b>5</b> one who takes another person's place, performing his functions in his absence. <i>Ang kinamagulángang babáyi mauy láwas sa íyang inahang patay na,</i> The eldest daughter took the mother's place when she died. <b>6</b> tantamount to, as good as. <i>Sa pag-insultu nímu sa ákung bána láwas ug aku ang ímung gipasakitan,</i> If you insult my husband it is the same as if you hurt me. <i>Bisag usa ray ákung anak, láwas gihápun ug tulu kay duha may ákung binuhì,</i> I have only one child, but it is good as three because I have two adopted ones. <b>6a</b> good for. <i>Miurdir kug pagkáun láwas ug tulu ka táwu,</i> I'll order food enough for three persons. <b>7a</b> physical strength, resistance. <i>Tungud niíning ákung sakit walà na akuy láwas nga ikatrabáhu,</i> Because of my illness I do not have the strength to work. <b>7b</b> one's single body, all that one has to dispose of in working (and no more). <i>Ug ákù ang tanan, unsa pa may ákung láwas?</i> How could I possibly do everything. I don't have but two hands. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B145] have a certain k.o. body. <i>Kaniadtu nagláwas sab kug sáma kalísun kanímu karun,</i> Formerly, I had as nice a body as you have now. <b>2</b> [A2; c] make a body for some structure. <i>Kining kahúya ígù rang makaláwas sa píkas kílid sa sakayan,</i> These boards are only enough to make one side of the boat. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @internode, section of a plant stem between two successive nodes. <i>Tag-as kaáyug lawas kining ímung tubu,</i> Your sugar cane stalks have long internodes. <b>2</b> strands of hair above the base. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] be in the upper part of the strands of hair. <i>Kasagáran manlawas ang lusà basta mamusà na,</i> Usually nits stay in the upper part of the strands of hair when they hatch. <b>-in-, -in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> in person, one's physical presence. <i>v</i> [A; a1] appear personally. <i>Mulinawas pagsalída si Súsan Rúsis,</i> Susan Roces will appear personally. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i> [ANC12; bN] have sexual intercourse outside of marriage. <i>Dì mahilangit kadtung manghiláwas,</i> Those who @fornicate will not go to heaven. <i>Dì ka makighiláwas sa mga way bunyag,</i> Lie not with the heathen. <b>panghi-</b> <i>n</i> @fornication. <b>makighi-un</b> <i>a</i> @fornicator. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> physically @well-built, @stocky. <b>ka-an</b> <pb n=1219><i>n</i> the whole body. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @health; general well-being of a person or animal. <b>tagi-, tag-</b> <i>n</i> one's person, what k.o. body one has. <i>Náa ra sa tagiláwas ug makaagwanta ba sa bug-at nga trabáhu,</i> It depends on the person if he can stand hard work. <b>lawasnun</b> <i>a</i> pertaining to the body or flesh. <i>Lawasnun nga kalimpiyu,</i> Cleanliness of the body. <i>Lawasnun nga kahínam,</i> Desires of the flesh.

<p><b>láway</b> <i>n</i> @saliva. <b> ray puhúnan</b> <i>n</i> @{persuasive talk} (lit. spit was all that was used). <i>Láway ray ákung puhúnan áni kay ákù siyang giulug-ulúgan,</i> I got this by fast talk because I soft-soaped him in giving it to me. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46] @drool. <i>Milaway dáyun ákung bàbà pagkakità nákù sa hilawng mangga,</i> My mouth watered when I saw the green mangoes. <i>Maglaway siya nga matúlug,</i> He drools when he sleeps. <b>2</b> [B1456] feel very desirous of s.t. one cannot have. <i>Maglaway ta áning mga dátù nga makapalit bísag unsa,</i> All we can do is drool at what rich people have. <b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A3; a1] make s.o. desire s.t. strongly which he cannot have. <i>Dì úsà ku magminyù, magpalaway ku úsà sa mga laláki,</i> I won't get married yet. I'll just let men drool over me. <i>Ímu lang kung gipalaway sa ímung tíbi,</i> You were just making me envious of your TV set. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a folk doctor who treats patients with his saliva. <b>2</b> k.o. carangoid fish, shiny-white in color, that spits a transparent, sticky liquid. <b>lawaylaway</b> <i>n</i> name given to various whelks.

<p><b>law-ay</b> <i>a</i> offensive to decency, revolting to the taste. <i>Gisinsur ang law-ay nga libru,</i> The obscene book was censored. <i>Law-ay kaáyung tan-áwun ang dakù nga magbinátà,</i> It's disgusting to see a grown-up act like a child. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be @lewd, @obscene. <i>Nagkalaw-ay ang mga sini karun,</i> Movies are all lewd nowadays. <i>Gilaw-ayan ku sa báhù sa patay,</i> The odor of the corpse was revolting to me.

<p><b>lawgaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @touch, stir up s.t. with the bare hands. <i>Panghunaw kay milawgaw ka man sa pasaw,</i> Wash your hands because you stirred the slop with them. <i>Ayawg lawgáwa nang túbig imnunun,</i> Don't stick your hands in the drinking water. <b>2</b> [B1] be all mixed up, @confused. <i>Naglawgaw ang iksplikasiyun. Wà kung kasabut,</i> His explanation was all mixed up. I couldn't understand it. <b>2a</b> get to be no good. <i>Nalawgaw ang ílang sáyaw kay yabag ang dúyug,</i> Their dance number was unsuccessful because the music was out of tune. <b>3</b> [AN] mix into s.t. and disturb its orderly performance. <i>Ngánung gilawgaw man nímu si Pidru nga nangamural?</i> Why did you butt in on Pedro just <pb n=1220>when he was proposing? <i>a</i> <b>1</b> falling below good standards. <i>Lawgaw tawhána puru lang sáad,</i> He is no good. He is all promises. <b>2</b> @{mixed up} and @chaotic. <i>Lawgaw tung iliksiyúna, dúnay pálit,</i> The election was chaotic with rampant vote-buying. <b>3</b> creating disturbance or confusion in an otherwise orderly performance. <i>Ay siyag paintraha sa sáyaw kay lawgaw,</i> Don't let him take part in the folk dance because he tends to bungle. <b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who habitually creates trouble and confusion in otherwise smooth and peaceful proceedings.

<p><b>láwi, láwì</b> <i>n</i> @{sickle feather}, one of the long curved feathers in the tail of domestic cocks. <b>lawiláwi</b> s.t. like a tail feather. <i>Lawiláwi sa kúgun,</i> The flower of the cogon grass. <b>lawían, lawíhan</b> <i>n</i> name given to fish of various families that have filamentous projections, usually from the fins.

<p><b>lawig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @pasture livestock. <i>Ilawig ang kábaw sa lagúna,</i> Pasture the carabao in the meadow. <b>1a</b> give an additional length of line. <i>Lawigi ang tugut sa tabánug,</i> Pay out more string to the kite. <i>Lawigi ang kábaw arun daghan ang masabsab,</i> Give the carabao more rope so that it can graze over a wide area. <b>1b</b> [A; b] tie an anchor to a boat. <i>Lawigi ang sakayan arun dì madala sa sulug,</i> Keep the boat anchored so the current won't carry it away. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @sail. <i>Naglawig na ang barku pagdasmag sa unus,</i> The boat was on the high seas when a storm hit us. <i>Kadagátan nga gilawigan sa barku,</i> The seas the ship sailed across. <b>2a</b> @travel in general. <i>Bag-u ka pa gánì nahiulì mulawig na pud ka?</i> You have just arrived and now you are going to take another trip? <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cord tied to s.t. <b>1a</b> @{anchor rope}. <b>1b</b> tether @rope. <b>1c</b> cord wound around the neck. <i>Taas ug lawig ang íyang pag-antus,</i> She has a long chain of suffering tied around her neck. <b>2</b> @tentacles. <b>-an</b> place s.t. is tethered. <b>-l-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @province (lit. place one sails to). <b>-um-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> a slender thread which, in folk belief, attaches the placenta (<i>inunlan</i>) to the womb (<i>matris</i>) s.w. in the vicinity of the umbilical cord (<i>púsud</i>) and is the passageway for food from the mother to the baby. The <i>lumáwig</i> is considered very delicate, and if there is intense bleeding during childbirth it is believed due to a rupture of the <i>lumáwig</i>. <i>v</i> [b4] have one's <i>lumáwig</i> ruptured and then suffer intense bleeding.

<p><b>lawìláwi</b>[**note: grave accent unclear] <i>n</i> variety of croton (<i>kalípay</i>).

<p><b>lawis</b> <i>n</i> @spit, a point of low land extending from the shore into the water. <i>v</i> [B6] @{jut out}. <i>May unud nga daw tudlù ang milawis <pb n=1221>sa kumagkù sa táwu,</i> A finger-like growth is sticking out from the man's thumb. <i>Nasungkù aku sa naglawis nga kawáyan,</i> I bumped my head on a piece of bamboo that was sticking out. <i>Gibaligyà ang yútà nga nalawis sa kinadak-an sa yútà,</i> They sold the lot that was jutting out from the main portion of their land.

<p><b>lawiswis</b> = <sc>ALAWISWIS</sc>.

<p><b>lawit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456] for s.t. almost cut off to dangle. <i>Naglawit ang ákung tudlù kay nabakgutan sa sanggut,</i> My finger is dangling because I nearly cut it off with a sickle. <b>2</b> [A; b6] hang, cling barely or precariously to s.t. <i>Naglawit ang kinabúhì sa masakitun sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The patient's life is hanging by a single thread. <b>lawitlawit</b> <i>n</i> pieces of tissue hanging from cuts of meat.

<p><b>lawitan</b> <i>n</i> the two boats holding the ends of the net in a k.o. fishing with a large net (<i>sinsúru</i>) where the fish are driven into a small area by small boats (<i>buntúlan</i>) converging.

<p><b>lawlaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @slacken a line. <i>Maglawlaw ku áning mikubit arun dì mabugtù ang pasul,</i> I am paying out extra fishing line so the line won't break. <i>Ayaw ilawlaw (lawláwa) ang hayhayan,</i> Don't make the clothesline so loose it sags. <b>1a</b> [B] get to be loose, @sagging. <i>Mulawlaw ang kurtína kun luagun ang hílu,</i> The curtain will sag if you make the string loose. <b>1b</b> [AB] for trousers to be cut loose at the crotch, wear trousers cut loose at the crotch. <i>Ságad sa tigúlang maglawlaw ang kinarsunisan,</i> Most old people wear pants loose at the crotch. <b>2</b> [AN; b3] go round the edge of s.t. instead of directly across or along it. <i>Manglawlaw tag ági diri kay dì man katadlasan ang ílang baul,</i> We'll have to go around this way because they won't let people cut across their field. <i>a</i> be cut loose at the crotch. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] let time pass idly by. <i>Ang nagpalawlaw sa panahun way maáni,</i> Those who waste their time doing nothing will have nothing to harvest.

<p><b>lawlaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> sardines which have been preserved in a large quantity of salt, such that not all the salt is dissolved in the juices of the fish, and the result is a dry fish enveloped with fishy grains of salt.

<p><b>lawngun</b> = <sc>LALUNGUN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>lawril</b> <i>n</i> @{bay leaves} used as a spice.

<p><b>lawriyat</b> <i>n</i> k.o. Chinese banquet with ten or more courses tendered on special occasions.

<p><b>lawsi</b> <b>1</b> poor, @sloppy, bad in quality or appearance. <i>Lawsi siya mamisti,</i> She dresses poorly. <i>Lawsi kadtung pagkáun,</i> That was lousy food. <b>2</b> @boring and @uninteresting. <i>Lawsing parti,</i> A lousy party. <i>Lawsi tung salidáha,</i>  <pb n=1222>That was a lousy movie. <i>v</i> [B12; a12b6] be, become lousy.

<p><b>lawting</b> <i>n</i> attic consisting of a shelf built underneath a roof and which runs part of the distance covered by the roof. It is used as a storage place or sleeping area. <i>v</i> [A1; a] make a <i>lawting</i>.

<p><b>lawud</b> <i>n</i> deep open @sea. <b>pitu ka &mdash;</b> @{seven seas}. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁBANG</sc>. <i>v</i> [A2NP; a] <b>1</b> go out into the @{deep sea}, usually to fish. <i>Ug maáyu ang panahun mulawud (manglawud) ku karung gabíi,</i> If the weather is good, I will go out to sea tonight. <i>Kinahanglang lawrun ta giyud ang malasugi,</i> You have to go to the deep to get the sailfish. <b>2</b> [A13] = <sc>LAWUDLÁWUD</sc>. <b>lawudláwud</b> <i>v</i> [A] be like a sea. <i>Naglawudláwud ang halapad nga humayan,</i> The vast rice field is like a sea. <b>i-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> place toward town and away from rural areas. <i>v</i> [AP; ac6P] go, bring s.t. toward town. <b>i-</b> = <sc>ILÁWUD</sc>, <i>v.</i>[**note: ILÁWUD has no <i>v</i> subentry?] <b>kalawran</b> <i>n</i> @seas. <b>kinalawran</b> <i>n</i> deepest part of the sea. <b>lawudnun</b> <i>n</i> of the seas.

<p><b>láwug</b> <i>v</i> [A2SB] for stiff and long things to warp or bend. <i>Miláwug ang tabla human initi,</i> The board warped after having been exposed to the sun. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> long bent things.

<p><b>láwung</b> <i>n</i> @lionfish, a brightly colored fish of coral reefs with very poisonous dorsal fins: <b><i>Pterois spp.</i></b>

<p><b>lawus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @withered. <i>Ngánung lawus ang utanung ímung gipalit?</i> Why did you buy withered vegetables? <b>2</b> withered or @wizened from age or sickness. <i>Lawus na si Glurya Rumíru, gúwang na man gud,</i> Gloria Romero is faded now. She is quite old. <b>3</b> past one's prime. <i>Lawus nang pagkabuksingíru si Ilurdi,</i> Elorde is over his peak as a boxer. <b>4</b> for feelings to have faded. <i>Lawus na ang ímung pagbátì nákù,</i> Your love for me has faded. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B2S; b6] <b>1</b> get @withered. <i>Ang búlak muláwus (maláwus) ug initan,</i> Flowers wither if you expose them to heat. <i>Nagkalawus na ang tanum kay wà katubigi,</i> The plants are getting withered because they were not watered. <b>2</b> @{get old} and shriveled. <i>Naglawus ka man. May balatían ka?</i> You look shrunken. Are you ill? <b>3</b> get beyond one's prime. <b>4</b> for feelings to fade. <i>Kanang prisyúha makaláwus (makapaláwus) giyud sa gána,</i> That price sure throws cold water on my desire. <i>Nagkalawus[**note: missing accent, error?] ang ákung pagláum nga maulì pa siya,</i> My hope for his return is wavering.

<p><b>láwut</b> <i>v</i> [B; a12] for liquids to become thick and gooey. <i>Magkalawut ang linúgaw madúgayng sinukgay,</i> The more porridge is stirred the thicker and more viscous it becomes. <i>a</i> <pb n=1223>thick and @gooey. <i>Láwut ning utána kay náay tugábang,</i> This vegetable dish is gooey because it contains <i>tugábang</i>.

<p><b>law-uy</b> <i>a</i> cooked vegetables without fish, meat, or fat. <i>Law-uy lang ning útan kay way subak,</i> This vegetable dish is cooked just plain because we have nothing to cook with it. <i>v</i> [A13B; a12] cook vegetables plain, be plain and tasteless.

<p><b>láya</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. shallow water cast net, conical in shape, made of fine sewing thread with a fine mesh. Weights are put on the mouth to spread the net when thrown, and when the net is lifted the weights cause the mouth to contract so that escape is impossible. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a2] catch fish with a <i>láya</i>. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make into a <i>láya</i>. <b>layaláya</b> <i>n</i> very thin membrane that envelopes the stomach, used as a wrapper for <i>murkun</i>.

<p><b>*láya</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ILÁYA</sc>.

<p><b>layà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fresh-water fish which grows 2' long and 6" wide, with big, silvery scales, spotted with black.

<p><b>láyà</b> <i>a</i> @dried, @withered up. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)] @dry, become dry or withered. <i>Unyà ra daúbi ang sagbut kun muláyà (maláyà) na,</i> Burn the leaves when they become dry. <i>Himalatyun na ning kahúya kay nagkalayà nag mga dáhun,</i> This tree is going to die because its leaves are withering. <b>2</b> [B2; b6] for the ears of corn to mature. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ang bágà</b> <i>v</i> [B2; a12] for the lungs to be damaged from drinking too much. <i>n</i> @{paper money} (slang). <b>(->)<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> dried up. <b>2</b> for ears of corn to be mature. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug bágà</b> having inflamed lungs from overindulgence in drinking. <b>4</b> <b>dáhung &mdash;</b> @{paper money} (slang).

<p><b>láyag<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @sail of a boat. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put up the sail. <i>Mularga na ang sakayan kay gilayágan na,</i> The boat is ready to sail because they have hoisted the sails. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> for a sailboat to sail. <b>1a</b> <b>lantaw ug &mdash;</b> sit idly by watching people that are working without lifting a finger to help (as if watching s.o. sailing). <i>Naglantawg naglayag bisag gikinahanglan kaáyu ang íyang pagtábang,</i> He just sits idly by watching, even though his help is badly needed. <b>2</b> for the ears to stick out. <i>Naglayag ang dunggan,</i> His ears stick out. <b>-an(->)</b> k.o. volute shell growing to 3" by 1½" with no operculum. Edible but bitter. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> boat with sails. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> favorable for sailing. <b>-un ug dátù</b> for a wind to be slow (lit. good only for rich people with plenty of time to sail with). <b>-um-an</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small squid, growing to 8" with a very reduced internal plate. <b>paN-um-an(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B; c] go to catch <i>lumayágan</i>. <b>panlumayaganan</b> <pb n=1224>place one can fish for <i>lumayágan</i>. <b>2</b> boat for fishing for <i>lumayágan</i>.

<p><b>láyag<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the missing of one's menstruation but not because of pregnancy. <i>v</i> [b4] miss one's period. <i>Ábi kug gilayágan ku, burus giyud diay,</i> I thought I just missed a period, but I was actually pregnant.

<p><b>láyag<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] join others who have food, drinks, or cigarettes to mooch off of them. <i>Way makaláyag níya kay adtu siya sa tágù magkaun,</i> He ate in seclusion because he didn't want anyone to mooch off of him.

<p><b>layangláyang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> awning or temporary @shelter made of four posts and a cloth or thatch covering. <b>2</b> principal rafters placed at the thwart edges of a roof which, in a thatched roof, hold the thatch in place. <i>v</i> [A; b] put a temporary shelter s.w.

<p><b>láyas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> leave a place to avoid s.t. unpleasant. <i>Miláyas siya sa dagmalan níyang inaína,</i> She escaped from her cruel stepmother. <i>Gilayásan siyag suluguun,</i> Her servant walked out on her. <b>2</b> get out of a place for any reason. <i>Láyas, animal,</i> Leave this home, you beast. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @escapee. <i>Siya layas sa Bilíbid,</i> He is an escapee from Bilibid prison.

<p><b>layat<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] @jump to a place: up, down, or over. <i>Milayat ang kabáyù sa kural,</i> The horse jumped over the fence. <i>Layata lang nang bintánà nga mubù,</i> Just jump down from that low window. <i>n</i> act of jumping.

<p><b>layat<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> large, edible tree fungus, shiny, dark-brown in color.

<p><b>láyaw</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for animals to roam about. <i>Muláyaw ang mga háyup nga buhían,</i> Domestic animals stray if you don't tether them. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> animal that has been allowed to stray. <i>Kinahanglang lamíngun ang manuk layaw kay langsag unud,</i> You have to keep stray chickens and feed them special food before you kill them; otherwise they have a terrible flavor. <b>1a</b> going out when one should not be doing so, person that has been allowed to stray. <i>Madisgrasya giyud ang babáying layaw,</i> A woman that gallivants about is likely to get into trouble. <b>1b</b> off the mark, far from correct. <i>Layaw kaáyu ang ímung pangagpas,</i> Your conjecture is way off the mark. <b>2</b> for a mixture to be too weak in consistency. <i>Layaw nga pintal,</i> Paint that's too thin. <b>3</b> <i>in phrases:</i> <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> @cowardly, lacking guts. <b>&mdash; ug hunàhúnà</b> given to sudden whims or fancies. <i>Way pundu ang táwung layaw ug hunàhúnà,</i> A person who is given to sudden whims or fancies is unstable. <b>&mdash; ug útuk</b> a dull person. <i>Ang táwung layaw ug útuk gáhing makasabut,</i> A dull <pb n=1225>person does not understand easily. <i>v</i> [B1] become a wanderer, one who gallivants around. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> open land where animals are allowed to roam and graze. <b>pina-</b> <i>a</i> @spoiled, left alone by parents to do as he pleases. <i>Way trabáhung makat-unan ang bátang pinalayaw,</i> A spoiled child that has been left to do as he pleases will not learn a trade.

<p><b>laybrari</b> <i>n</i> @library. <b>-yan</b> <i>n</i> @librarian. <i>v</i> [B16] be a librarian.

<p><b>laygay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a12] make s.o. @bedridden. <i>Sakit nga milaygay kaníya,</i> The sickness that incapacitated him. <i>Gilaygay siyag tísis,</i> He was bedridden with T.B. <b>2</b> [a4] be affected with great financial difficulty. <i>Mga kabus nga gilaygay sa kalisud,</i> Poor people who are wallowing in difficulty. <i>a</i> @incapacitating, leaving one bedridden. <i>Laygay sakíta nang paralisis,</i> Paralysis leaves one bedridden.

<p><b>layhan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*LAHAY</sc>.

<p><b>layi diantigwa</b> <i>n</i> old, outmoded laws or customs. <i>Sunud ka man ánang layi diantigwa. Kabag-úhan na run!</i> You're following old, out-moded ways. We're in the Twentieth Century now!

<p><b>láyì</b> <i>n</i> tool for cutting abaca fibers or buri strips, made of a thin, flat piece of <i>bagákay</i> bamboo, 3"-4" long.

<p><b>láyik</b> <i>v</i> [A12] have a @liking or crush for s.t. or s.o. (slang). <i>Nakasabut giyud ku nga nakaláyik nà si Idyun nímu,</i> I realize that Edion has taken a liking to you.

<p><b>layiku</b> <i>n</i> @layman, @laity. <i>Ang buluhatun sa layiku sa iglisya,</i> The role of the laity in the church.

<p><b>láyip</b> <i>n</i> @{life imprisonment}. <i>Gisintinsyahan siyag láyip,</i> He got life imprisonment.

<p><b>layit wit</b> <i>n</i> lightweight boxer or wrestler.

<p><b>laylay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @tired, @drooping from fatigue. <b>2</b> for plants to be limp or drooping. <i>Pangúhag laylay nga mais, itambug sa kabáyù,</i> Get the drooping corn leaves to feed the horses. <b>2a</b> for leaves to be colored red or yellow. <b>2b</b> people at the bottom strata of society. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [BN; a2b4] be @tired. <i>Milaylay (nalaylay) ang ákung abága ug pinas-an sa baskit,</i> My shoulders got tired from carrying the basket. <i>Wà mu layláyig tinindug,</i> Aren't you all exhausted from standing? <b>2</b> [AB; c1] @droop, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Naglaylay ang abaga,</i> His shoulders are drooping. <i>Layláya (ilaylay) ang sanga arun makab-ut ang búnga,</i> Bend the branch so you can reach the fruit. <b>2a</b> [AN; b] gather bent or discolored leaves. <b>ka-</b> @tiredness, feeling of being weak from fatigue. <i>n</i> yellowed leaves on trees that are about to drop.

<pb n=1226>

<p><b>laylay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] sing with no words other than meaningless syllables. <i>Naglaylay ang inahan nga nagpakatúlug sa bátà,</i> The mother is singing the baby to sleep. <i>n</i> song hummed or sung with syllables <i>la, la</i>.

<p><b>laylu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] not do s.t. one would normally do, esp. combat, because of some danger. <i>Manglaylu tag panágat kay nagdáut ang panahun,</i> We won't go out fishing because the weather is bad. <i>Manglaylu lang ku, kay náa ang amahan,</i> I won't visit her for the while because her father is home. <i>Wà na gániy bála, laylúhun (ilaylu) dáyun sa mga girilya ang ílang kalihúkan,</i> When the <corr sic=guerillas>guerrillas</corr> run out of bullets, they lie low for awhile.

<p><b>layning</b> <i>n</i> @lining or cloth used for lining. <i>v</i> [A; a] put a lining in s.t.

<p><b>laysul</b> <i>n</i> @lysol[**Lysol = brandname].

<p><b>Layti</b> <i>n</i> @Leyte.

<p><b>laytir</b> <i>n</i> cigarette @lighter. <i>v</i> [b(1)] light with a lighter.

<p><b>layu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] broil unhusked young corn over flames, cooking it half-way. <i>Layuhun (ilayu) nátù ang linghud arun dalì rang malútù,</i> Let's just pass the young corn unhusked through the flames so it won't take long to cook it.

<p><b>layù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @far, @distant. <i>Layù kaáyu ang Urúpa,</i> Europe is far away. Paryinti mi piru layù na, We are relatives but rather distant. <b>1a</b> far from being correct. <i>Layù ra kaáyu ang ímung tubag sa dyakpat kwistiyun,</i> Your answer to the jackpot question was far off the mark. <b>1b</b> <b>&mdash; ra sa tinái</b> for mishaps not to be serious (far from the intestines). <i>Gamay ning samára layù ra sa tinái,</i> It's a superficial wound. It's not serious. <b>1c</b> <b>&mdash; ra sa tinái sa manuk</b> for answers and guesses to be wide off the mark. <i>Ang ímung tubag sayup ug layù ra sa tinái sa manuk,</i> Your answer is wrong and is way off the mark. <b>2</b> comparatively far behind in some good trait. <i>Layù ra si Magsaysay ni Salungga sa abilidad,</i> Magsaysay can't hold a candle to Salonga. <i>v</i> [B25C; ab7c] be @far. <i>Ug mulayù ang tugdúnan sa búla, ipakúhà lang,</i> If the ball lands far away have s.o. go get it. <i>Ug makigláyù ka nákù, mingawun ku nímu,</i> If you want us to be far from each other, I'll miss you. <i>Layúun ta mu kay palaaway mu,</i> I'll keep you two far apart because you are quarrelsome. <i>Layui pa kay duul ra nà,</i> Move it farther away because it's too close. <b>dílì ig-(<-)</b> not distantly related by blood. <i>Dílì ta igláyù magtagsa ang átung inahan,</i> We are not distantly related because your mother is my mother's first cousin. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <pb n=1227>get to be far away. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] go far away, stay away from a place, hold s.t. at a distance. <i>Ngánung magpalayù ka man kanámù?</i> What makes you want to keep your distance from us? <i>Gipalay-an ni pagsiyát arun makúhà ang byú,</i> This picture was shot from a distance to get the view. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a3] go far away. <i>Tungud sa ákung kahiubus, magpahilayù ku,</i> I'm going away because I was terribly hurt. <b>linay-ánay, linay-anay</b> <i>v</i> [C] be far from one another. <b>-g-</b> = <sc>LAYÙ</sc> (plural). <b>ha-</b> = <sc>LAYÙ</sc>, <i>a</i> <i>1.</i> <b>gilay-un, kalay-un</b> <i>n</i> @distance. <i>Usa ka kilumitru ang gilay-un,</i> The distance is one kilometer. <b>kinalay-an</b> <i>a</i> @farthest.

<p><b>lay-u<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a body of standing water in low-lying areas formed by overflowing floodwaters or heavy rains. <i>Dúnay daghang isdà sa lay-u,</i> There are lots of fish stranded in the pool.

<p><b>lay-u<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B; a2] for plants to wither from being in the heat after being uprooted or damaged by wind. <i>Malay-u (mulay-u) ang mga tanum sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The plants will wither because of the strong wind. <i>Lay-úhun nang mga sagínga nga nangatumba sa ínit run,</i> The heat will wither those plants that were uprooted.

<p><b>layug</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; a2] <b>1</b> @grapple with s.o. <i>Giulang ku ang duha ka bátà nga nagláyug,</i> I intervened when the two boys were wrestling with each other. <i>Gilayug ku siya kay ákung giílug ang kutsilyu,</i> I wrestled with him to get the knife from him. <b>2</b> @wrestle with a woman in foreplay. <i>Daw may gilayug nga dalága,</i> It seems that s.o. was wrestling with a girl (to rape her). <b>tig-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fond of wrestling. <b>2</b> fond of mutilating plants by breaking off branches, flowers, etc. as if having wrestled with them. <i>Kining mga bátà dinhi muy tiglayug sa mga tanum,</i> It's the children that destroy the plants here.

<p><b>láyug</b> <i>a</i> @tall and quite straight. <i>Láyug kaáyu nang lubíha,</i> That coconut tree is very tall. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] become @tall. <i>Muláyug (maláyug) nang kahúya ug dì pul-úngan,</i> That tree will grow tall if you don't prune it. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @fly (usually said of fowls that keep to the ground). <i>Miláyug ang manuk nga gigúkud sa irù,</i> The chicken flew up when the dog chased it. <i>Taas ug gilayúgan ang manuk,</i> The rooster flew high up. <i>n</i> flight of birds or fowl. <i>Gisunud kug tan-aw ang láyug sa mga langgam,</i> I followed the flight of the birds with my eyes.

<p><b>lay-ug</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c1] for plants to be badly shaken by a strong wind, such that they are damaged and likely to die in hot weather. <pb n=1228><i>Kusug hángin ang milay-ug (mipalay-ug) sa mga tanum,</i> A strong wind caused severe damage to the plants. <i>Ug malay-ug ang mga lubi, madagdag ang mga búnga,</i> If a coconut tree is shaken by the wind, its fruit will fall off.

<p><b>layuglayug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible brown seaweed with a leaf-like structure.

<p><b>layun</b> <i>a</i> for bananas to be almost ripe, but still hard. <i>v</i> [B23(1); b6] for bananas to be almost ripe. <i>Hustung pritúhun ang kardábang malayun na,</i> Cooking bananas are best to fry when they are nearly ripe.

<p><b>láyus</b> <i>v</i> [B12; a12] for plants or fruits to @wither. <i>Nagkalayus[**note: missing acute accent] ang mga tanum kay dúgayng wà ulana,</i> The plants are withering gradually because it has not rained for a long time. <i>Naláyus ang mga utanun nga wà mangahálin,</i> The vegetables that were left unsold withered. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @withered (of plants or fruits).

<p><b>lí</b> <i>n</i> @lei, a garland of flowers hung on visitors' necks as a sign of welcome. <i>v</i> [A; c1] give, make a lei.

<p><b>líab</b> <i>n</i> @neckline of garment. <i>Ang íyang bistída mabà ug líab,</i> Her dress has a low neckline. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put a neckline. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] grab s.o. by the collar. <i>Bi, tan-áwun ta ug muliab ba giyud siya nákù!</i> Well, let's see if he dares grab me by the collar.

<p><b>liad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] bend or throw one's body backward. <i>Dílì makaliad ang bátà kay ákung gigunítan ang abága,</i> The baby can not throw his body backward because I'm holding onto his shoulder. <b>2</b> [A; a12P] be in a position with the stomach sticking out and shoulders back. <i>Dílì ka muliad ug maglakaw ka,</i> Don't walk with your stomach sticking out a in a position with the stomach sticking out and the shoulders back. <b>3</b> [B3(1); b6] for lumber to warp or twist. <i>Nagkalíad ang mga káhuy nga gibulad sa ínit,</i> The pieces of wood they dried under the heat of sun are getting warped. <b>liadlíad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] writhe about in pain. <i>Nagliadlíad siya sa kasakit,</i> He is writhing in pain. <b>2</b> [A13; c1] walk with a distended stomach due to pregnancy or obesity. <i>Nagliadlíad ang mabdus nga naglakaw sa karsáda,</i> The pregnant woman walked down the street with her stomach sticking out.

<p><b>líap</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] make a shot from under the goal in basketball. <i>n</i> a shot of this sort in basketball.

<p><b>liat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b(1)] @{skip over}, @by-pass. <i>Dì mu makaliat sa ámù kay mag-atang mi sa bintánà,</i> You could not miss our house because we will be watching for you at the window. <pb n=1229><i>Way giliatan ang íyang láwas sa labud,</i> His body is covered with welts. <i>Way giliatan sa kaláyu,</i> The fire got everything. <b>2</b> [A2] go, @pass by in time or space. <i>Muliat sa duha ka lungsud ang trín,</i> The train will pass through the two towns. <i>Mubáyad ku nímu sa dì pa makaliat ang usa ka simána,</i> I will pay you before a week goes by. <b>3</b> [A; a] take time out to go s.w. for a short while. <i>Muliat giyud nà siyag tábì bísag daghang búhat,</i> She takes time out for some quick gossip, even if she's very busy. <i>Liata ang kan-un ug lútù na ba,</i> Take a quick peep at the rice to see if it is cooked yet. <i>Iliat ni Nánay ning matam-is,</i> Run to Grandma's and give her these sweets.

<p><b>líawt</b> <i>n</i> proper, optimum disposition of things or component parts put s.w. <i>v</i> [A; c] put things in their proper relative positions. <i>Ilíawt úsà ang mga kuniksiyun úsà suldáha,</i> Lay the connections out in their proper disposition before you solder them.

<p><b>líb</b> <i>v</i> [ A2] go on @leave from a job. <i>Mulíb siya usa ka simána antis manganak,</i> She will take her maternity leave one week before she has her baby. <b>matirniti &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{maternity leave}. <b>sik &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{sick leave}.

<p><b>líbà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @ignorant, lacking knowledge of certain ways. <b>1a</b> disrupting by adding confusion to s.t. that is otherwise smooth and orderly. <i>Ay nà siyag paintraha sa dráma kay líbà,</i> Don't assign him a role in the play because he is a great bungler. <b>2</b> acting in a socially unacceptable way so as to cause resentment. <i>Líbà kaáyu nang maistráha, duha ray gipapasar,</i> That teacher really has a lot of nerve. She failed the whole class except two. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] be, become @ignorant, lacking in knowledge of certain ways. <i>Malíbà ka sa bag-ung dapit,</i> If you go to a new place, you will be ignorant of how things are there. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @fool, pull a trick on s.o. <i>Nakalíbà silag duha ka sapíang Insik,</i> They swindled two rich Chinese. <i>Malíbà kahà nà siya sa baráha?</i> Can anyone pull one over on him in cards?

<p><b>líbad pa</b> it's the same thing, it's just as good. <i>Samu lang ug di ku makaadtu sa parti. Tutal muadtu man ang ákung páris. Líbad pa,</i> Never mind if I can't attend the party. Anyway my husband will attend. That's just as good. <i>Dílì na ku makahuwat sa ímung bána. Líbad pa ug ikawy ákung tagáan sa kwarta?</i> I can't wait for your husband any longer. Wouldn't it be the same thing if I gave the money to you? <i>Bisag ása sa duha. Líbad pa,</i> Either one of the two. It's all the same.

<pb n=1230>

<p><b>libadúra</b> <i>n</i> leaven. <i>Pán nga way libadúra,</i> Unleavened bread.

<p><b>libagbag</b> = <b>*ALIBAGBAG.</b>

<p><b>libaghà</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b4N] <b>1</b> develop a rash on the skin. <i>Nanglibaghà (gipanglibagháan) ákung pánit human nákug káun ug bulad,</i> I broke out in a rash after I ate dried fish. <b>2</b> for an emotion to show itself to a great degree. <i>Sa íyang nawung nilibaghà ang kalísang,</i> A look of terror erupted on her face. <i>n</i> rash on the skin.

<p><b>libak</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1] backbite, say bad things about s.o. when his back is turned or cannot understand them. <i>Maáyung mudáyig sa atubángan, manlibak sa luyu,</i> She says nice things to your face, but turn your back, and you'll get it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] allow s.o. to backbite. <b>walà, dílì pa-</b> appear right after being spoken about. <i>Walà palibak si Duruy ug nakaabut sa ámung ínum,</i> Talk about the devil and there he is &mdash; Doroy arrived at our drinking session just as we were discussing him. <i>n</i> backbiting. <b>-iru(<-),</b> <b>maN-r-(<-), </b><b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> given to backbiting. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become fond of backbiting. <b>-ira(<-)</b> = <b>-IRU(<-)</b> (female).

<p><b>libákag</b> <i>v</i> [A2] stand up on its ends. <i>Mulibákag ang ákung balhíbu kung makadungug kug irù nga mag-ulang,</i> My hair stands on end whenever I hear a dog howling. <i>Milibákag ang ákung dalunggan sa pagkadungug ku sa íyang ísug nga sinultihan,</i> My ears perked up when I heard her commanding voice.

<p><b>liban</b> <i>v</i> [B126] <b>1</b> overlook s.t. inadvertently. <i>Naliban ku sa pagsukip sa kwarta,</i> I forgot to include the money in the letter. <b>2</b> be preoccupied and fail to notice s.t. <i>Naliban ku, wà ku kamatngun pag-ági níya,</i> I was preoccupied. I didn't notice her going by.

<p><b>libang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> activities or chores to keep one busy. <i>Dì ku makaatiman niánà kay daghan kug libang sa panimalay,</i> I have no time to take care of that because I have lots of chores to keep me busy at home. <i>a</i> having many things to attend to. <i>Libang siya kaáyu mau nga labihan kalimtánun</i>, She has so many things to attend to, she tends to forget details. <i>v</i> [B12; b3(1)] be busy attending to s.t.

<p><b>*libang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B125] @defecate. <i>Nalibang (mikalibang) ku hasta kalima kay naghibús ku</i>, I defecated five times because I had LBM. &mdash; <b>ang bàbà</b> [A] vomit (humorous and coarse). <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] defecate, move one's bowels. <i>Gikalibangan sa bátà ang íyang karsúnis, </i>The child defecated in his pants. <i>Gikalibang nákù ang lísu sa santul,</i> I expelled santol <pb n=1231>seeds when I defecated. <b>ka- ang bàbà</b> [B1236] vomit (humorous and coarse). <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B146] have diarrhea. <i>n</i> @{iarrhea. <i>Kalíbang ang namatyan sa bátà,</i> The child died of diarrhea. <b>súka ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> vomiting combined with diarrhea. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @toilet. <b>kina-</b> <i>n</i> @stools. <b>ka-un</b> <i>a</i> feel like defecating.

<p><b>libanta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36; b3(1)c1] for a dog's ears to prick up in alertness. <i>Mulibanta dáyun ang ámung irù ug náay kasíkas,</i> Our dog pricks up his ears when there is a slight noise. <b>sinta &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SINTA</sc>.

<p><b>libas</b> = <sc>ALABÍHID</sc>.

<p><b>libat</b> <i>a</i> @{cross-eyed}. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become cross-eyed. <i>Nalibat[** Nalíbat elsewhere] ang bátà kay nahagbung,</i> The child became cross-eyed because he had a fall. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a2] cross one's eyes. <i>Nalíbat siya pagkaigù sa ákung kúmù,</i> His eyes went to the center of his head when I hit him with my fist. <i>Libáta ímung mata arun ang mga bátà mangatáwa,</i> Cross your eyes to make the children laugh. <b>2</b> [B12] look at s.t. so hard one gets cross-eyed. <i>Nalíbat kug pangítà nímu,</i> I got cross-eyed looking for you. <i>Ang kadaghan sa gwápa nakalíbat (nakapalíbat) nákù,</i> I got cross-eyed looking at the pretty girls.

<p><b>libaung</b> <i>n</i> @potholes in a road. <i>v</i> [B12] get potholes in it. <i>Malibaung ang dálan ug muulan,</i> The road gets potholes in it when it rains. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be full of potholes. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having potholes.

<p><b>libayan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fish.

<p><b>libgaw</b> <i>n</i> small @anchovy, a kind of <i>bulinaw</i>: <b><i>Stolephorus commersonii</i></b>.

<p><b>libgus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible mushroom growing to a height of 3"-4", having a conical pileus around 2" in diameter, usually gray in hue and somewhat darker at the center. It is a good deal thinner than the <i>úhung</i> and thicker than the <i>uwáping</i>.

<p><b>libiláwu</b> = <sc>NIBILÁWU</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>NIBIL</sc>.

<p><b>libílu</b> <i>n</i> @libel.

<p><b>libinta</b> <i>v</i> [B2] for s.t. to give way because what is in it is too big for it. <i>Nilibinta ang sáku kay gidasuk ug maáyu ang sulud,</i> The sack ripped open because the contents were stuffed in too tight.

<p><b>libintadur</b> <i>n</i> @firecrackers.

<p><b>libiral<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @liberal, @generous. <i>Ang pilantrupu libiral kaáyu nga muhátag,</i> A philanthropist gives liberally. <b>2</b> permissive, not strict. <i>Libiral kaáyu nang amahána nga mudala sa ílang mga anak,</i> That father is very liberal in bringing up his children. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become generous or permissive.

<p><b>libiral<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> Liberal, member of the Liberal Party. <b>partídu &mdash;</b> the Liberal Party. <i>v</i> [B156] <pb n=1232>become a Liberal. <i>Ang Nasyunalista nga mayur naglibiral na,</i> The mayor, who was a Nacionalista, has crossed over to the Liberal party.

<p><b>libirasiyun, libirisyun</b> <i>n</i> the period following the ouster of the Japanese and the achieving of independence (end of 1944&ndash;1946). <i>v</i> [B1256] be the liberation time.

<p><b>libirt&acaron;d</b> <i>n</i> freedom. <i>Ang ákung bátà way libirt&acaron;d sa pagpílì sa íyang gustu,</i> She has no freedom to choose what she wants.

<p><b>libítus</b> = <sc>LUBÍTUS</sc>.

<p><b>libkas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB3(1)] for a trap to spring, for s.t. held back to be released suddenly; cause it to do so. <i>Milibkas na ang pas-ung, tingáli nakakuhà,</i> The trap sprung. Maybe it has caught s.t. <i>Milibkas ang kabli dihang napalus sa ligid,</i> The cable lashed out when it slipped off the wheel. <i>Hilibkasan ka bayà ánang bawug,</i> The spring pole might snap back on you. <b>1a</b> slip off under weight. <i>Ayúhag bángil ang tiil arun dì makalibkas,</i> Put the support under the leg carefully so that it won't slip off. <b>2</b> [B3] for s.t. to slip inadvertently out of the mouth. <i>Nalibkas sa bàbà ang tinúud, maung nahibaw-an sa tanan,</i>The truth inadvertently slipped out of my mouth so that everyone found out. <b>3</b> [A23] appear, occur all of a sudden. <i>Usa ka pahiyum milibkas sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile lit his face. <i>Nakapaúlì siya sa wà pa mulibkas ang gúbat,</i> He had a chance to go home before the war suddenly broke out. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> slingshot.

<p><b>libra<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> pound, a unit of weight. <i>Napúlù ka libra,</i> Ten pounds.<b> -s</b> = <b>LIBRA</b> (plural). <i>Diyis libras,</i> Ten pounds.

<p><b>libra<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the Libra in the horoscope.

<p><b>libri<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> free, not restricted. <i>Libri na ang binilanggù,</i> The prisoner is free. <i>Way pugsanay, libri sa gustu ang táwu,</i> There's no forcing. Each man is free to do as he wishes. <b>2</b> without cost or payment. <i>Libri ang íyang káun, libri siya sa káun,</i> He gets his meals free. <b>3</b> having clearance for passage. <i>Inig-ági sa trák sa gawang, tan-áwa ug libri ba ang kílid,</i> When the truck passes through the gate, see if both sides have clearance. <b>4</b> safe from destruction. <i>Libri na ang giupirahan,</i> The patient who was operated on is safe. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> give s.o. free use of s.t. by paying for him or not obliging him to pay. <i>Íya kung libríhun sa pasáhi,</i> She is going to pay for my fare. <i>Nalíbri ku sa plíti,</i> I got to ride free. <b>2</b> save from s.t. bad. <i>Ang balanghuy makalibri sa gútum,</i> Cassava can save you from starvation. <b>&mdash; kumída, pasáhi</b> <i>n</i> free meal(s), free passage. <i>Libri pasáhi ka sa barku  <pb n=1233>kay díay rikumindasiyun iadtu sa kapitan,</i> You get free passage on the boat because I have a recommendation for you to give to the captain. <b>librilibri</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. kick-the-can game. <i>v</i> [A12C; b(1)] play kick-the-can. <b>librihay, librihánay</b> <i>v</i> [C13] do s.t., each man for himself. <i>Maglibrihay (maglibrihánay) tag plíti,</i> Let's each pay his own fare.

<p><b>libri<sub>2</sub></b> <ix>humorous expression uttered upon hearing s.o. clearing his throat:</ix> &lsquo;spit it out&rsquo;.

<p><b>libriríya</b> <i>n</i> @library.

<p><b>libríta</b> = <sc>LIBRÍTU</sc>, 2.

<p><b>librítu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a small book containing magical prayers (<i>urasiyun</i>) which comes into a person's possession through the agency of a supernatural force. The uttering of the prayers by the owner of the book is thought to have special healing or protective powers. <b>2</b> any small @booklet. <b>&mdash; sa bangku</b> <i>n</i> @bank-*book. <b>&mdash; sa tíkit</b> <i>n</i> book of tickets.

<p><b>libru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @book. <b>2</b> subject one is enrolled in. <i>Tulu na lang ka libru ang íyang kúlang pára nga makagraduwar siya,</i> He lacks three courses to graduate. <b>3</b> @accounts. <b>tinidur di-</b> bookkeeper. <i>v</i> [A; a12] bind into books. <b>librulibru</b> = <sc>MANDUNGGU</sc>.

<p><b>líbu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> one @thousand. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] be a thousand. <i>Mulíbu na run ang sáka sa lubi,</i> The coconut trees now yield one thousand nuts. <b>2</b> [c1] do by the thousand. <i>Libúhun (ilíbu) ni nákù pag-ihap,</i> I'll count these by the thousands. <b>libulíbu</b> thousands and thousands. <b>-in-(->), ni-(->)</b> <i>n</i> by the thousand. <i>Linibu ang ílang gastu matag búlan,</i> They spend by the thousands every month. <i>v</i> [c1] do by the thousands. <b>kalibúan</b> <i>n</i> @thousands. <i>Kalibúan ang íyang gitabángan,</i> He has helped thousands of people. <b>libúhay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> about a thousand. <i>Libúhay ra ang íyang nagastu,</i> He spent about a thousand. <b>2</b> thousands of. <i>Libúhay ka mga túig,</i> Thousands of years.

<p><b>líbu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> carry a number in addition. <i>Singku imas utsu, trísi, líbu únu,</i> Five and eight is thirteen, carry your one. <i>v</i> [c6] carry a number. <i>Ug pilay ímung ilíbu isulat sa ibabaw sa numiru nga nagsunud,</i> Write the number you carry above the next column.

<p><b>líbud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{go around} a place. <i>Libúra úsà ang abúhan únà ka mulíbud sa kalibútan,</i> Don't tell me you're going around the world. You haven't even gone in back of your stove! <b>2</b> [A; ac] go, bring around to several places. <i>Ang bangkadur mauy mulíbud sa baráha,</i> The dealer will distribute the cards. <i>Libúrun ku ang mga saup arun patambúngun sa míting,</i> I will go around to all the tenants to have them attend the meeting.  <pb n=1234><i>Mani ang ákung ilíbud ugmà,</i> I'll go around selling peanuts tomorrow. <b>3</b> [B12] get to be round about. <i>a</i> round about. <i>Líbud na kaáyu ug muhapit pa mi sa inyu,</i> It will be a very long way out of the way if we go by your place first. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> church procession. <b>2</b> round in games. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LÍBUD</sc>, <i>a.</i> <b>(->)suruy</b> <i>n</i> tramp, one who wanders from place to place with no particular course or destination. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] become a roamer. <i>Maglibud suruy na lang ku ug wà na kuy trabáhu,</i> I'll just become a tramp when I have no more work. <b>libudlíbud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] roam around aimlessly.

<p><b>líbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1B1; a2b3(1)] confuse, be confused. <i>Naglíbug kug diin nákù ikabutang ang kwintas,</i> I'm at a loss to figure out where I could have put my necklace. <i>Ay kug tudlúi. Naglíbug ka lang nákù,</i> Don't try to teach me. You are just confusing me. <b>2</b> [AP; a2b3(1)] cause s.o. to go crazy through supernatural means or from natural causes. <i>Ang mga kalakíhan makamaung mulíbug (mupalíbug) sa úlu sa táwu,</i> People who possess supernatural powers can make people insane. <b>3</b> [A; a1b8] make the rounds, attending to each and every member of a group or assemblage. <i>Akuy naglíbug ug kík sa mga bisíta,</i> I was the one who passed the cake around to the visitors. <i>Libúga (libga) pagpangutána ang tanang mitambung sa míting,</i> Ask each and every one who attended the meeting. <i>a</i> perplexing. <i>Líbug kaáyu ning prublimáha,</i> This is a perplexing problem. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fuss or ado about s.t. <i>Way daghang libug mikúut siyag kwarta unyà gibayran ang manunúkut,</i> Without much ado he took the money out of his pocket and paid the bill collector. <b>2</b> be of mixed blood. <i>Libug kining batáa. Ang amahan Pilipínu ug ang ínahan Amirkána,</i> This child is of mixed blood. The father is a Filipino and the mother an American. <b>-an(->), libgánun</b> <i>a</i> prone to get confused. <i>Libugan (libgánun) kaáyu siya kay húmuk ra mawálà bisan sa kinasayunang iksplikasiyun,</i> She easily gets confused because she gets lost with the easiest of explanations. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. work bee wherein the members work for each other in turn and each member repays the people who worked for him with an equivalent amount of work. <i>v</i> [C] hold this sort of work bee. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> confusion. <b>ka-an, ka-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a crossbreed or person of mixed blood. <i>Ang anay pulantsína ug ang butakal dyirsi. Ang mga baktin kalibugan na,</i> The sow is a Poland China variety and the boar a Jersey. The offspring are a crossbreed. <i>v</i> [B126; a2]  <pb n=1235>become a crossbreed. <b>maka-r-</b> <i>a</i> causing confusion.

<p><b>lib-ug</b> <i>n</i> pool in the tidal flat, left when the tide goes out.

<p><b>libun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @tick. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get infested with ticks.

<p><b>libun<sub>2</sub>, líbun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @solid, not hollow. <i>Líbun ang ligid sa íyang bisiklíta,</i> His bicycle has solid rubber wheels. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256; a] be solid. <b>2</b> [B1256] for a boil not to come to a head. <i>Nalíbun ning hubága maung nagngutngut,</i> This boil hasn't come to a head; that's why it aches. <b>3</b> [AN; a12] in a game of <i>sungkà</i>: to take all of one's partner's stones without giving the opponent a chance to take his turn. <i>Sayun ang maglíbun ug tuluy sunug,</i> It is easy to get all of your opponent's stones when he has three empty holes.

<p><b>líbun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @thicket. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] become a thicket. <i>Mulibun (malibun) pagbálik ang kaíngin nga byáan,</i> The abandoned clearing will revert to a thicket. <b>2</b> [A; c] @reforest with small trees or shrubbery. <i>Byatilis mauy maáyung ilíbun sa mga yútà nga dagul,</i> Ipilipil is suitable for reforesting infertile lands. <b>ka-an(->)</b> = <sc>LÍBUN</sc>, <i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>líbur</b> <i>n</i> amount paid for the labor on a piece of work. <i>Mugastu ka sa mga matiryális lang. Walay lábut sa líbur,</i> Your only costs will be the materials. The labor is free. <b>&mdash; dí</b> <i>n</i> @{Labor Day}. <b>&mdash; yunyun</b> <i>n</i> @{labor union}.

<p><b>libúrus</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3(1); b6] have rashes or hives. <i>Milibúrus ang ákung buktun sa pinaakan sa mga namuk,</i> My arms are covered with @rash from the mosquito bites. <i>Til-as ang nakalibúrus (nakapalibúrus) sa ákung nawung,</i> The hairs of the caterpillar caused my face to break out.

<p><b>líbut<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] go, bring, put s.t. around a place. <i>Mulíbut siya sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> He'll go around the tree. <i>Siyay milíbut ug batu sa mga tanum,</i> She put stones around each plant. <i>Libúta ang pusti makalima, dì ka ba malílung,</i> Go around the post five times. See if you don't get dizzy. <i>Ákù siyang ilíbut sa syudad,</i> I'll take her around the city. <b>2</b> [A2S; b6(1)] @surround. <i>Dì makalíbut ning tirása sa líab,</i> This lace isn't enough to go all around the neckline. <i>Gilibútan ang mga sundáwu sa mga kaáway,</i> The soldiers were surrounded by the enemies. <i>n</i> action of going around. <b>&mdash; sa</b> @around. <i>Mudágan ku líbut sa plása,</i> I'll run around the plaza. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> @surroundings. <i>Limpiyu kaáyu ang inyung palíbut,</i> Your surroundings are very clean. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the @world, the @earth. <b>1a</b> <b>láing ka-an</b> the next world. <b>2</b> sexual activity (euphemism). <i>Ayaw mu pagpalábi  <pb n=1236>sa kalibútan,</i> Don't indulge in sexual activity too much. <b>ka-ánun</b> @worldly. <i>Kalibutánung mga kalípay,</i> Worldly pleasures.

<p><b>*líbut<sub>2</sub></b> <b>unsay ka-an</b> [<i>gen.</i>] what does [gen.] know about it? <i>Unsay kalibútan ku kun diin ka paingun?</i> How would I know where you went to? <b>walay ka-an</b> <b>1</b> @unconscious. <i>Gidá siya sa uspital nga way kalibútan,</i> They brought her to the hospital unconscious. <b>2</b> @unaware. <i>Way kalibútan ang ákung gipangulitawhan nga minyù na ku,</i> The girl I'm courting has no idea I'm married.

<p><b>libutug</b> <i>n</i> small @bulge, @swelling. <i>v</i> [B; b4] @swell, @bulge. <i>Mulibutug ang pinaakan sa lamuk ug kalútun,</i> Mosquito bites swell if you scratch them.

<p><b>libúu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible clam which buries itself into the mud of mangrove swamps. It has a thin, greyish shell, growing to 3".

<p><b>líbuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> handle of a plow. <b>2</b> @penis (humorous euphemism). <i>v</i> [A13; a] put, use as a plough.

<p><b>libwas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> put a new roof on a house. <i>Íyang gilibwásan ang tanang atup nga dáan,</i> He replaced all the old roofing. <b>1a</b> @replace anything. <i>Maáyung malibwásan mu ang ímung kinaíya,</i> You had better change your ways. <b>2</b> [B126] for one's savings to be used up (lit. get to the stage that it must be replenished). <i>Nalibwas ang tanan kung tinagúan karung Paskúha,</i> Christmas ate up all of our savings. <b>-únun</b> <i>a</i> needing a change of roof. <b>3</b> [B; b] for one generation to replace another. <i>Maglibwas ang táwu sa kalibútan,</i> A new generation will replace the old generation of people in the world. <b>libwaslibwas</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b] do s.t. several times. <i>Walà pa giyud ka mabusug nga naglibwaslibwas man kag káun?</i> Haven't you gotten your fill? You have eaten several times.

<p><b>líd<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{lead guitar}. <b>2</b> music performed by the lead guitar. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] play the lead guitar in a combo performance. <b>&mdash; gitar</b> = <sc>LÍD</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>líd<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @lead-projectile of a bullet.

<p><b>lidgid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @grate. <i>Lidgíra ang kamúti,</i> Grate the sweet potatoes. <b>2</b> [A; a] make the delicacy called <i>lidgid</i>. <i>n</i> sweet made of a mixture of finely grated cassava or sweet potato mixed with grated young coconut and sugar which is rolled, wrapped in banana leaves, and boiled. <b>ni-, -in-</b> = <sc>LIDGID</sc>. <b>lidgiran, lidgíran, lidgiránan</b> <i>n</i> @grater.

<p><b>lidibag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @ladybug commonly found on squash plants.

<p><b>lídir<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ward-leader or other person who can command a block of votes. <b>2</b> @leader of a group. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] be, become a political <pb n=1237>leader. <b>-atu(<-)</b> <i>n</i> political @leadership. <i>Kusgánun ang lidirátu ni Duránu sa Sugbu,</i> Durano has strong political influence in Cebu.

<p><b>lídir<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a @go-between or one who is the bearer of communications between lovers. <i>v</i> [B156; b8] make s.o. a go-between between lovers.

<p><b>lidirátu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÍDIR<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>*lídis</b> <b>&mdash; dringk</b> <i>n</i> a drink with only a small amount or no liquor for ladies to drink at a party. <b>&mdash; diyis</b> <i>n</i> a dance number where the ladies choose the men and the men have to pay ten centavos per dance, which goes to charity. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] make a dance number, one where the men have to pay ten cents. <b>&mdash; tsuys</b> ladies'-choice-dance number where the girls choose the partners. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] make a number a ladies' choice.

<p><b>lidlid</b> = <sc>LIDGID</sc>.

<p><b>liga, líga<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> s.t. added to s.t. to enhance its quality. <i>Táyid nga may ligang anyil,</i> Detergent with bluing added. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put an addition to s.t. <i>Ligahi ug suwà ang lána,</i> Put citrus juice into the coconut oil. <b>2</b> @adulterate. <i>Giligáhan ang tablíyag mani,</i> They adulterated the unsweetened chocolate with roasted peanuts. <b>&mdash; puul</b> <i>a</i> being enough to give one his fill until he tires of it. <i>Líga puul giyud ang súruy rung bakasiyun,</i> When I get my vacation I'm going to roam about until I get sick of it.

<p><b>líga<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @tournament. <i>Líga sa baskitbul,</i> Basketball tournament. <i>v</i> [A13] hold a tournament.

<p><b>líga<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> The @{League of Nations}.

<p><b>lígad<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c6] for people or animals to @{lie down}. <i>Ayaw ilígad ang ímung igsilimba,</i> Do not lie in your Sunday clothes.

<p><b>lígad<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b5] @pass, @{pass by}, @{go by}. <i>Wà kay gibúhat samtang nagligad ang úras?</i> You did nothing as the time went by? <i>Dì mu makalígad sa Argaw kun muadtu mu sa Baríli,</i> You do not go by Argao when you go to Barili. <i>Ligárun (ligáran) ta nang buntúra,</i> We will go beyond that mountain. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> afternoon, the time after the sun has passed the zenith until sunset. <i>n</i> crops that are left over after the harvest. <i>Nanghagdaw silag mga ligad sa mais,</i> They are gleaning the few ears of corn that were missed in the harvest. <b>(->) sa kasarángan</b> @excessively, more than normal. <i>Ligad sa kasarángan ang ímung pag-inum,</i> You drink excessively.

<p><b>ligadíra</b> = <sc>RIGADÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>ligal</b> <i>a</i> @legal, within the law. <b>-idad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @legality, @lawfulness. <i>Ang ligalidad sa ámut mauy ámung gilalísan,</i> The legality of the contribution <pb n=1238>was what we were arguing about. <b>2</b> the legal point in contention. <i>Ang ligalidad nga gikagubtan nagagikan sa pagsabut sa púlung &lsquo;dupa&rsquo;,</i> The legal point that is in contention lies in the interpretation of the word &lsquo;fathom&rsquo;. [+]

<p><b>ligas</b> <i>v</i> [B256; b4(1)] <b>1</b> for s.t. to @slip off of what it is placed on or for one's footing to slip. <i>Bangíla ug maáyu ang tiil sa lamísa arun dílì muligas (maligas),</i> Wedge the table leg carefully so it won't slip off. <i>Naligas ang ákung tiil sa hakhak,</i> My foot slipped out of the notch in the coconut tree. <b>2</b> commit a mistake. <i>Muligas (maligas) ka lang ug kas-a, itsapuyra dáyun ka,</i> If you make a single mistake, you will be fired at once. <i>Naligas ang ákung bàbà pagtug-an,</i> The truth slipped out of my mouth. <b>3</b> @fail, be @unsuccessful. <i>Sáyang, miligas ang átung plánu,</i> Too bad. Our plan failed. <b>4</b> be past the high noon mark. <i>Musúgud ta pagtrabáhu sa dílì pa muligas (maligas) ang adlaw,</i> We will start work before the sun gets past high noon. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> be past the zenith. <i>Ligas na ang bulan. Kay daktul, saylu na sa tungang gabíi,</i> The moon is past the zenith, and since it is full moon, it must be past midnight. <b>2</b> for a pig to be below the accepted standard weight (forty kilos) for wholesale shipment. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b] miss a number or proportion by a small amount. <i>Ug maglígas ang ímung timpla sa abúnu mamatay ang tanum,</i> If your fertilizer is not mixed in the right proportions, the plant will die. <i>Ang madaúgun nga tíkit ug ang ákù naglígas ug duha ka numiru,</i> My ticket was only two numbers off of the winning number. <b>2</b> [b3(1)] have differences over s.t. <i>Gamay ra gud nang inyung gikaligásan, sultíhun lang gud nà,</i> You are having a quarrel over such a small thing. You should talk it out. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] look for errors s.o. has made to justify harsh action against him. <i>Gipaligas ka lang sa ímung manidy&icaron;r arun maháwà ka,</i> The manager is just waiting for you to slip so he can fire you. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] provoke s.o. to provide the excuse to beat him up. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> the amount or extent to which one thing differs from another.

<p><b>lígas</b> <i>n</i> @garter to hold the stockings up.

<p><b>ligásun</b> <i>n</i> ribs in a boat frame to which the boards or steelplates which form the hull covering are attached.

<p><b>ligaw</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] do s.t. right by accident. <i>Nakaligaw ku ug bungat sa hustung tubag,</i> I happened to hit on the correct answer. <i>Nakaligaw ku sa hustung timpla,</i> I hit on the right mixture.

<pb n=1239>

<p><b>ligay</b> <i>n</i> swollen lymph node. <i>v</i> [B46; b4] get swollen lymph nodes. <i>Giligayan ku kay giansúyan ang ákung tunuk,</i> I have swollen lymph glands because my wound got infected.

<p><b>ligdas</b> <i>v</i> [A3] <b>1</b> lie any old place to sleep. <i>Nagligdas sa dálan ang hubug,</i> The drunk was lying in the road. <b>2</b> @die. <i>Muligdas mug way tawutáwug ikakuntra ninyu ang taga Pásil,</i> You'll be killed without even anybody knowing who did it if you make enemies with people from Pasil.

<p><b>ligdung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @upright. <i>Ligdung kaáyu siya sa íyang trabáhu. Dì manáwat ug suburnu,</i> He is very upright in his work. He won't accept bribes. <b>2</b> keeping in one's place, proper and refined in deportment. <i>Usa siya ka táwu nga ligdung ug dílì maakuakuhun,</i> He keeps in his place and is not presumptuous. <b>3</b> serene in demeanor, but dignified and reserved. <i>Ligdung kaáyu siyang manubagtubag,</i> She answers with very dignified reserve. <i>v</i> [B1; a12] be @upright, @refined, and stay in one's place. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> doing what is proper to one's station. <i>Ipakítang ímung kaligdung; pangáyug katahúran, ayaw ipabundak ang ngálan sa ímung isigkatáwu, ayawg tubagtubag sa mga tigúlang,</i> Show you know how to behave: greet people, don't address people without using a title, don't talk back to old people.

<p><b>lighut</b> (from <i>lihut</i>) <i>v</i> [A13; b6] @{sneak out}, leave surreptitiously. <i>Mulighut ta sa klási,</i> Let's sneak out of the class. <i>Milighut siya ug sakay sa ayruplánu,</i> He boarded the plane surreptitiously. <i>Mag-ábut nyà ta ug makalighut ku sa ámù,</i> I'll see you later if I can sneak out of the house.

<p><b>lígid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB2S6; c1] @roll, roll s.t. <i>Si Pidru mauy mulígid (mupalígid) sa búla,</i> Pedro will roll the ball. <i>Lígid dáyun ug masúnug ang sinínà,</i> Roll (on the ground) if your clothes are afire. <i>Ligírun (ligdun, ilígid) ku kanà kay nakaáli sa ákung agiánan,</i> I will roll it out of the way. <b>1a</b> [A23] for days, years, etc. to roll by (literary). <i>Túling milígid ang katuígan,</i> Years rolled by swiftly. <b>1b</b> [A] throw a tantrum by rolling on the floor. <i>Ngánung milígid ang bátà? Unsa na puy íyang gustu?</i> Why is the child throwing a tantrum? What does he want now? <b>2</b> [A] @{lie down}. <i>Mulígid siya dáyun igkahumag káun,</i> He lies down as soon as he finishes eating. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; sa banig</b> be @bedridden. <i>Tulu na ka túig siya nga naglígid sa banig,</i> She has been bedridden for three years. <b>3</b> [A; b6] @wallow. <i>Ang kábaw sa panahun sa ting-init mulígid sa tunaan,</i> On hot days the carabao wallows <pb n=1240>in the pond. <i>Kanang daginutána naglígid sa bahandì,</i> That miser is wallowing in riches. <i>Naglígid siya sa kasal-ánan,</i> She is sinking deep in sin. <b>4</b> [A; a1] do s.t. to s.o. mercilessly without letup. <i>Gilígid kug pangutána sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer cross-examined me. <i>Ang asáwa gilígid ug hawuk sa íyang bána,</i> The husband smothered his wife with kisses. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @wheel. <b>kaligiray</b> <i>v</i> [A13] @{roll around}. <i>Nagkaligiray si Duman sa túmang kasakit,</i> Duman rolled around in intense pain. <b>kaligiran</b> <i>v</i> [A13] roll head over heels. <i>Nagkaligiran ang táwung nadakin-as sa bakilid,</i> The man slipped on the slope and tumbled down head over heels. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> @hoop to play with.

<p><b>ligingliging</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be bulging all over from obesity. <i>Si Áyik Lusáda nagligingliging sa katambuk,</i> Ike Lozada is bulging all over from obesity.

<p><b>lígings</b> <i>n</i> @leggings worn with riding pants. <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> wear leggings. <b>2</b> wear stockings (humorous).

<p><b>ligis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] flatten or @mash s.t. into powder by pressing s.t. heavy on it. <i>Ligisa (ligsa) ang asin ug kutsára,</i> Pulverize the rock salt with a tablespoon. <b>2</b> [A; b2] for a vehicle to run over s.t. <i>Dariyut ku maligsi sa taksi,</i> The taxi nearly ran me over. <i>n</i> @pestle, @{rolling pin}, or anything else used for crushing things into fine particles. <b>ligsanan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. on which s.t. is crushed.

<p><b>ligitlígit</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] @knead, roll into a ball with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Naghunàhúnà siya samtang nagligitlígit sa íyang búngut,</i> As he was thinking, he twisted his beard with his fingers.

<p><b>ligngin</b> = <sc>LÍNGIN</sc> (plural).

<p><b>ligpit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] fasten s.t. temporarily by pressing it down with s.t. that holds it in place. <i>Bungbung amákang giligpítag dus pur dus,</i> Sawali walling that was held in place by two-by-two's. <i>Ligpíti ug kumpit ang mga hinayhay,</i> Clip the wash with clothespins. <b>2</b> [A; b2] press down on s.t. <i>Hiligpitan ang ákung tudlù sa sira,</i> My finger was caught in the door shutter. <i>Bug-at nga batu ang iligpit sa binanggud balanghuy,</i> Use a heavy stone to press out the juice of the grated cassava. <b>3</b> put pressure on s.o. <i>Gitug-an níya kay giligpítan siya sa pulis,</i> He revealed the truth because the police pressured him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clip to fasten s.t. <b>2</b> s.t. used to press s.t. in place.

<p><b>ligsì</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] for bamboo to crack along the grain under pressure. <i>Ayaw ug ibundak ang sag-ub kay muligsì (maligsì),</i> Set the bamboo tube water container down gently so it doesn't crack.

<p><b>ligsik</b> (from <i>lisik</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)46] @expel s.t. <pb n=1241>solid from within with a sudden force. <i>Muligsik ang lísu sa nangkà ug hugtun paggúnit,</i> The seed of the jackfruit will jump out if you grab the meat. <b>2</b> [B246] be wide-eyed with fear, amazement, surprise, etc. <i>Miligsik ang mga mata sa táwu sa kahibúlung,</i> The man's eyes became wide with amazement.

<p><b>ligtak</b> <i>v</i> [B26C; a12P] for the skull to crack. <i>Miligtak ang íyang úlu pagkabunsù sa simintu,</i> He cracked his skull when he fell, striking his head on the cement. <i>Ligtákun ku nang úlu mu,</i> I'll crack your skull wide open.

<p><b>ligtì</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] <b>1</b> for brittle things to crack due to sudden change of temperature. <i>Ang básu muligtì ug butangan ug pinabúkal nga túbig,</i> The tumbler will crack if you put boiling water in it. <i>Miligtì ang sundang kay dì maáyung pagkasubu,</i> The sword cracked because it was not well tempered. <b>2</b> [B26; a12] @crack s.t. <i>Ligtíun ku nang bagulbágul mu,</i> I'll crack your skull.

<p><b>ligtik</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] for s.t. to crack under pressure or sudden change of temperature. <i>Muligtik nang ímung tiyan ug magpalábi kag káun,</i> Your stomach will burst if you eat too much. <i>Muligtik (maligtik) ang sag-ub ug ímung ipusdak,</i> The bamboo water container will crack if you slam it down hard on the ground.

<p><b>ligtiw</b> <i>v</i> [B2346; b8] @{fly off} to a distance. <i>Naligtiwan ku sa aligatu sa nag-ismiril,</i> The sparks flew off from the sharpening stone and hit me.

<p><b>lígù</b> (from <i>dígù</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @bathe s.o. <i>Ang inahan naglígù sa bátà,</i> The mother is bathing the baby. <i>Ligúa ang irù.</i> Bathe the dog. <b>2</b> [B123S56] take a @bath, @{go swimming}. <i>Malígù (mukalígù) ta sa Talísay,</i> We'll go swimming at Talisay Beach. <i>Dì ta makaligù kay way túbig,</i> We cannot take a bath because there is no water. <b>2a</b> [B1256] (in proverbs) do s.t. to a certain extent. <i>Puslan mang malígù, manlúgud na lang giyud,</i> Since we took it on, we might as well go through with it. (We're bathing so we might as well rub the dirt off.) <i>Puslan mang mahumud, malígù na lang,</i> Since you took it on, you might as well go the whole hog. (Lit. You got wet, so you might as well bathe.) <b>walay (->)</b> <i>a</i> not having had a bath. <i>Húgaw batáa. Way ligù,</i> What a dirty child. He didn't take a bath. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6(1)] @{take a bath}. <i>Ayawg kaligúi ang banyu kay naistak-ap,</i> Do not take a bath in the bathroom because it is plugged up. <i>Ínit túbig ang ikalígù,</i> Bathe with hot water. <b>1a</b> [A123S] take a bath after being bedridden, and therefore be cured. <i>Makabalik ka na sa trabáhu kay nakaligù <pb n=1242>(nakakaligù) na ka</i>, You may go back to work because you are all better now. <b>2</b> [A123S] be wet all over, as in taking a bath. <i>Nakaligù (nakakaligù) ang nangharánag íhì,</i> The serenaders were bathed with urine. <i>n</i> action of taking a bath, going swimming. <b>ka-an(->), ka-anan</b> <i>n</i> place one bathes or goes swimming. [+]

<p><b>lig-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @strong, @sturdy, @durable. <i>Lig-un kaáyu ning baláya kay walà matumba sa bagyu,</i> This is a strong house because it was not blown down in the storm. <i>Lig-un ning panaptúna,</i> This is durable cloth. <b>2</b> firm in will or endurance. <i>Dílì ni makapahílak níya kay lig-un siya ug balatían,</i> You cannot make him cry with that because he is a strong child. <i>Nagsáad siya sa lig-un nga dì na muusab,</i> He firmly resolved never to do it again. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug kasingkásing</b> <i>a</i> @stouthearted. <i>Ang táwung lig-un ug kasingkásing dílì daling mahadluk ug mawad-ag pagláum,</i> A stouthearted man is not easily frightened nor easily discouraged. <b>3</b> strong, difficult to defeat. <i>Lig-un nga tím sa baskitbul,</i> A strong basketball team. <b>way &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> weak, not strong. <i>Way lig-un ning báya kay gabuk na ug halígi,</i> This house is not strong because it has weak posts. <i>v</i> [AB; a12] be, become strong, durable, sturdy; cause s.t. to become so. <i>Lig-úna ang ímung kaugalíngun. Ayaw paghílak,</i> Brace yourself. Don't cry. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @strength, @durability, @firmness. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> documents as evidence of a contract, agreement, and the like. <i>Dúna kay kalig-únan báhin sa íyang útang?</i> Do you have any evidence of her debt? <i>Kining singsing kalig-únan sa ákung gugma nímu,</i> This ring is a token of my love for you.

<p><b>ligung</b> = <sc>BINGA</sc>.

<p><b>ligutgut</b> = <sc>ALIGUTGUT</sc>.

<p><b>liguy</b> <i>a</i> trying to get out of work. <i>Ang maistrang liguy muatúbang ug klási nga way lísun plan,</i> The lazy teacher comes to class with no lesson plan. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] get out of work by being absent or simply not tending to it. <i>Ug dúnay mga bug-at nga buluhatun, muliguy siya,</i> When there are unpleasant things to do, he bugs out. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] play hooky. <i>Muliguy ku sa klási kay mutan-aw kug sini,</i> I will skip class to go to the movies. <b>liguylíguy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> loaf on the job. <i>Mauwaw kung muliguylíguy sa ákung trabáhu ug náa ang ákung ámu,</i> I am ashamed to loaf on the job when my boss is around. <b>2</b> be absent from school every once in a while. k<b>a-</b> <i>n</i> being a bug-out.

<p><b>ligwa</b> <i>n</i> measurement of distance: a league.

<p><b>ligwan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small wild honeybee, having <pb n=1243>black and light orange stripes, nesting inside trees or walls.

<p><b>ligwat</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] pry s.t. off or open. <i>Ligwáti lang ang kaban kay nasúd ang yáwi,</i> Just pry the trunk open because the key is inside. <i>Náay lansang sa bungbung muy iligwat sa pipsi,</i> There's a nail on the wall to open the Pepsi. <i>n</i> s.t. used to pry s.t. open. <b>pa- ug sulti</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make nasty allusions about s.o. <i>Pirmi siyang kakitag áway kay kusug mupaligwat ug sulti,</i> She tends to pick quarrels because she tends to make nasty allusions.

<p><b>líha</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] rub or smooth down s.t. with sandpaper or s.t. similar. <i>Ikay mulíha sa tabla ug akuy mupintal,</i> You sand the board, and I will paint it. <i>n</i> @sandpaper or s.t. used like sandpaper. <b>papil di-</b> = <sc>LÍHA</sc>.

<p><b>lihang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> vertical space made when two long things are not placed closely. <i>Ang tayùtù nakalusut sa lihang sa bungbung,</i> The lizard went through the space between the parts of the walling. <b>2</b> the space between teeth that are set somewhat apart.

<p><b>lihat</b> <i>v</i> [B126] do s.t. @inadvertently. <i>Ang kadaghan sa pumapálit mauy makalihat (makapalihat) nákù sa pagpanuklì,</i> I made mistakes in making change because there were so many customers. <i>Nalihat ang pulis patrul sa kutsi nga ílang gisunud,</i> The police patrol inadvertently lost track of the car they were following.

<p><b>lihay, líhay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @dodge, @evade a blow. <i>Ilihay ang ímung nawung, ayawg atras,</i> Pull your face away, but don't back off. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)] evade a question, wriggle out of s.t. <i>Maáyu siyang mulihay ug pangutána kay abugádu man,</i> He is good in evading questions because he is a lawyer. <i>Dì ka na giyud makalihay ánang mga pruyba,</i> There is no way you can wriggle out of it in the face of this evidence. <b>2a</b> escape one's obligations. <i>Buluhatun nga íyang gilihayan,</i> A job that he wriggled out of.

<p><b>lihi</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @inaugurate s.t. with the proper ceremonies or magical ingredients. <i>Maglihi sila sa iskuylahan,</i> They will have the school blessed. <i>Kámay mauy ilihi sa mag-anak,</i> When a woman is in labor, give her brown sugar to insure that she will recover quickly. <b>1a</b> bury s.t. with plants to insure a good harvest. <i>Lihian ug tablíya ang tabákù arun lugum ug kulur ang dáhun,</i> They plant chocolate together with tobacco seeds to assure that it will have dark-colored leaves. <b>1b</b> begin the new year with a certain action which is believed will then endure for the rest of the year. <i>Gilihian níla ang bag-ung túig ug áway,</i> They began the new year with a <pb n=1244>quarrel. <b>1c</b> use s.t. for the first time following the proper prohibitions or injunctions. <i>Lihian nátug simba ang bag-u nátung sapátus arun mulungtad,</i> Let's wear our new shoes to church so they will last. <b>2</b> [A1; b6(1)] crave s.t. in the first few months of pregnancy such that the appearance of the thing desired appears as a birthmark in the offspring. <i>Kun maglihi kag asin, putì kunu ang ímung bátà,</i> If you crave salt in your early months of pregnancy, your child will be white. <b>2a</b> [b4] for a child to get the appearance of a certain thing his mother craved while she was conceiving him. <i>Náay pula nga tap-ing sa íyang nawung kay gilihian siyag kundíman,</i> He has a purple splotch on his cheek because his mother craved red cloth in her pregnancy. <b>2b</b> [b4] get to have a certain characteristic by starting out in a certain way. <i>Bag-ung túig gánì, sayug mata arun dì ka lìhan pagkahingatulug,</i> Get up early on New Year's day so you won't get the characteristic of being a sleepyhead for the whole year. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> injunctions or prohibitions observed upon inaugurating s.t.; anything used as a magical means to insure success of s.t. inaugurated. <i>Ang lihi sa pagtanum ug mangga, asúkar,</i> They use sugar to plant with mangoes to insure sweet fruit. <b>2</b> birthmark which is thought invariably to be due to a mother's cravings in her early stages of pregnancy. <b>pistang ig-l-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> holiday of obligation in the Catholic Church.

<p><b>lihíru</b> <b>1</b> doing things with @agility and @rapidity. <i>Lihíru siyang sugúun,</i> When you tell him to do s.t. he does it quickly and without hesitation. <i>Lihíru siyang mulálag banig,</i> She's quick in weaving mats. <b>2</b> ready to do s.t. <i>Lihíru nga mangusì ning batáa sa íyang kadúlà,</i> This child is quick to pinch his play-*mates. <b>3</b> skillful. <i>Lihíru siyang mudúwag ahidris,</i> He's good in playing chess. <b>4</b> bright. <i>Dakù siyag grádu kay lihíru man,</i> He got high marks because he is intelligent. <b>4a</b> smart, resourcefully shrewd. <i>Dì kang kaliput ánang kumirsiyantíha kay lihíru nà,</i> You can't put one over on that shrewd businessman. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug kamut</b> <i>a</i> light-fingered. <i>Kinahanglang magbantay ang mga tindíra sa mga lihíru ug kamut,</i> The salesgirls had better watch out for light-fingered customers. <i>v</i> [B125] get to be expeditious, skillful. <i>Malihíru man lang ni si Puduy ug náay diyis,</i> Podoy will move if he knows he can get a dime out of it.

<p><b>lihisladur</b> <i>n</i> @legislator. <i>v</i> [B1456] be, become a legislator.

<p><b>lihislatíbu</b> <i>n</i> @legislative.

<pb n=1245>

<p><b>lihislatúra</b> <i>n</i> @legislature.

<p><b>lihiya, lihíya</b> <i>n</i> @lye: caustic soda or lye obtained from wood ashes. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make lye.

<p><b>líhù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] guide s.o. while he urinates or defecates. <i>Ang míd mauy mulíhù sa bátà sa bangkíyu,</i> The maid makes the child sit on the potty. <i>Ilíhù ang masakitun sa inudúru,</i> Guide the patient while he goes to the toilet.

<p><b>*lihug</b> <b>pa-</b> [**F1: p.o.s. missing?] <b>1</b> @please. <i>Palíhug, ikúhà akug túbig,</i> Please, get me some water. <b>2</b> work bee in which people are not paid for their labor. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] ask s.o. to do s.t. as a favor without pay. <i>Palihúgun ku siyag húlug ug suwat,</i> I will ask him to do me the favor of mailing a letter. <i>Dúna kuy ipalíhug nímu,</i> I have a favor to ask of you. <i>Ipalíhug kug kúhà ánà bisag wà kuy iháwun,</i> Please do me the favor of getting it, even though I have no pig to roast (from the notion that people who are asked to do a big job without pay are generally given a good meal). <b>2</b> [AN] hold a work bee in which people work for free except for food and drinks. <i>Mupalíhug (mamalíhug) kug paalsa sa ákung balay,</i> I'm having a work bee to move my house. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>. <b>2</b> favor asked. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> persons requested to help.

<p><b>líhuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] @move. <i>Búhì pa diay ang isdà kay naglihuk,</i> The fish is still alive because it is moving. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] cause s.t. to move. <i>Kinsay naglíhuk sa hárì áring damahan?</i> Who moved the king here on the checker-*board? <b>1b</b> [A2; a12] betake oneself to do s.t. <i>Dì mulíhuk ug dílì suburnúhan,</i> They won't make a move unless you bribe them. <b>2</b> [A2; b4] for a characteristic to make its appearance. <i>Ug mukatursi anyus na ang láki, mulíhuk na ang gána,</i> When a boy reaches fourteen years or so, he begins to feel his sexual drives. <i>Milíhuk na pud ang túlis,</i> Robbery cases are on the rise. <i>Gilihúkan na pud siya sa íyang kabúang,</i> His insanity is making its appearance again. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action, deed. <i>Katahápan ang íyang líhuk,</i> His actions are arousing suspicion. <b>2</b> one's turn to move a piece in a game. <b>hínay ug &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> timid, lacking aggressiveness. <i>Hínay nímug líhuk! Musugut na untà tu ug ímu pang giapríta,</i> You sure don't move! She would have accepted you had you pressed her. <b>2</b> slowpoke. <i>Hínay bayà nímug líhuk, wà man nímu mahuman nga udtu na man,</i> You sure are slow! You haven't finished and it's already noon! <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> movement, stirring. <i>Basta way irpákit, wà giyuy lihuk ang ayruplánu,</i> As long as there are no air pockets the airplane will fly smoothly. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> always moving,  <pb n=1246>unstable. <i>Lihuk kaáyung tabanúga,</i> An unstable kite. <i>Lihuk nga bátà,</i> A restless child. <b>2</b> for women to have excessive sexual desire. <i>Ang mga babáying lihuk bísag minyù na, manguríbut pa giyud,</i> Women who have excessive sexual desire fool around with men, even if they are married. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become s.t. that moves around too much or a woman of excessive desires. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A23; a12] set s.t. into motion. <i>Ubang pulitiku mupalíhuk dáyun sa ubras publikas sa panahun sa piliay,</i> Some politicians will set public works projects into motion during elections. <b>hag-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] be able to move. <i>Pwirti nákung lisánga. Wà ku mahaglihuk,</i> I was so frightened I couldn't move. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> given to moving around, restless. <i>Lihukan siyag kamut sa sinihan,</i> He has wandering hands in the movie house. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> way one acts. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> activities. <i>Unsay kalihúkan sa iskuylahan rung gabíi?</i> What is going on in school this evening? <i>Kalihúkang langyaw,</i> Foreign affairs. <b>2</b> movement, organized activities to gain a certain objective. <i>Kalihúkan sa pausbaw sa swildu,</i> Movement to increase wages. <b>ma-(->)</b> = <sc>LIHUK</sc>, a. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the way one carries himself. <i>Mga babáying artipisyal ang panlíhuk,</i> Women with artificial ways about them. <b>2</b> things to be done, chores to attend to. <b>-un(->)</b> = <b>PAN-</b>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>lihut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] take time out to do s.t. for a moment. <i>Bisag daghang trabáhu, mulihut giyud siyag dúaw dinhi,</i> In spite of all the things he has to attend to he still takes out time to come here. <i>Makalihut pa giyud siyag suwat bísan ug bísi,</i> She still found time to write to me even if she was busy. <b>2</b> [A2; c1] do s.t. secretly. <i>Kun maúlaw kang hidunggan, lihuta (ilihut) lang pagsulti,</i> If you are ashamed to let anyone hear it, just tell it secretly.

<p><b>likag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ray.

<p><b>likat</b> <i>v</i> [b8] overlook or miss s.t. <i>Nalikatan (hilikatan) níyag ihap ang usa ka libru,</i> He overlooked one book in counting them.

<p><b>likay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @avoid s.t., s.o.'s company. <i>Mulikay siya sa buluhatun,</i> He tries to avoid work. <i>Maglikay ka sa sámuk, ha?</i> You must keep away from trouble, understand? <i>Likayi nang tawhána kay palaaway siya,</i> Keep away from that man because he is quarrelsome. <i>Dílì kalikayan ang sayup,</i> You can't avoid making some mistakes. <b>1a</b> [a3] be delivered, safe from actual or feared evil. <i>Mag-ampù ta básin ug malikay siya sa kadaútan,</i> Let us pray and hope that he be kept safe from evil. <b>2</b> [A2; c] dodge s.t., duck out of the way. <i>Walà ku makalikay sa íyang <pb n=1247>suntuk,</i> I was not able to dodge his blows. <i>Naglikay sa bága, nahasugba sa síga,</i> Out of the frying pan, into the fire (lit. avoiding the coals, he got broiled in the fire).

<p><b>likbung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] put s.t. in the way to prevent passage. <i>Ikaw bay naglikbung ug síya sa pultahan?</i> Were you the one who placed a chair across the doorway? <i>n</i> anything placed across an opening or passageway to prevent passage.

<p><b>likhad</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); b(1)] for the brim of s.t. stiff and woven to open out. <i>Mulikhad (malikhad) ang daplin sa nígu ug wà pay liskug,</i> The sides of a winnowing tray will come out open if there's no ring to keep it in place.

<p><b>likì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2] @crack. <i>Mulikì ang yútà ug dúgay nga ulanun,</i> The earth cracks if there is no rain for a long time. <i>Ang ínit makalikì (makapalikì) sa tabla,</i> Heat can make boards crack. <i>Ang lapalapa mulikì ug dílì sapatúsan,</i> Your soles will crack if you don't wear shoes. <i>n</i> @crack. <b>bibingka nga usa ray &mdash;</b> female genitalia (humorous&mdash;lit. rice cake with a single crack). <b>&mdash; sa kawáyan</b> <i>n</i> of unknown origin. <b>a</b> illegitimate children. <i>Kanang mga anak mung gíkan sa likì sa kawáyan,</i> Those illegitimate children of yours (lit. who come from the cracks in bamboos). <b>b</b> appearing from nowhere. <i>Mu ra mag gíkan sa likì sa kawáyan nang tawhána. Nikalit lag tunga dinhi,</i> That man seems to have appeared out of nowhere. He just appeared in this place. a having a crack. <i>Sugung nga likì,</i> A bamboo container with a crack. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [a12] do s.t. to s.o. intensely. <i>Likíun (likiyun) kag búnal ni Pápa mu ug sakpan ka,</i> Your father will beat you mercilessly if he catches you. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cause a crack or s.t. like a crack to appear s.w. <i>Palikiun ku ang ákung hinápay,</i> I'll do my hair with a part (lit. cause my hairdo to have a crack). [+]

<p><b>likì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A12] take a liking to s.o. (humorous slang). <i>Nakalikì siya sa íyang bag-ung silíngan,</i> She took a liking to her new neighbor.

<p><b>líkid</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go around a winding path or road. <i>Kun milíkid na gánì sila dílì na nímu sila makit-an,</i> If they have already gone around the bend you won't see them any more. <i>Dúgay silang miabut sa ibabaw kay milíkid man sila,</i> It took them long to reach the top because they took the winding path up.

<p><b>likida, likidar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @liquidate, @kill. <i>Sinuhúlan ang milikidar sa kunggrisman,</i> The congressman was killed by a hired goon.

<p><b>líkids</b> <i>n</i> leakage in a government examination, <pb n=1248>where the answers are given to buyers. <i>May líkids matag iksámin sa Síbil Sirbis,</i> There is always a leakage every Civil Service exam. <i>v</i> [A12] obtain the answers in advance through leakage. <i>Nakalíkids man maung nakapasar,</i> He got the answers ahead, and that's why he passed.

<p><b>likidu</b> <i>n</i> @liquid, not solid.

<p><b>líkin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cigar made of finely crushed, roasted tobacco rolled in the <i>lungbuy</i> leaf or some other material formed into a tube. <b>2</b> the wrapper for this sort of cigar. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make, make into this sort of cigar. <b>(->), -an, -an(->)</b> = <sc>LÍKIN</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LÍKIN</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>líkis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13B; c] be wound around, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Didtuy dakung sawa nga naglíkis sa sanga,</i> There was a big snake wound around the branch. <i>Ilíkis ug hugut ang písì sa halígi,</i> Wind the rope tightly around the post. <b>2</b> [A; c] put s.t. all around s.t. <i>Akuy mulíkis aring mga batu líbut sa punúan sa tanum,</i> I'll put these stones around the base of the plants. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> the beam at the far end of the loom around which the warp threads are wound.

<p><b>líkit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] roll s.t. flat into a tight tube, or turn a tube to wind s.t. around it. <i>Maglíkit kug mga papil pára sa rípa,</i> I will roll pieces of paper up for the raffle. <i>Likta ug maáyu ang ímung tinustus arun dílì muhungaw,</i> Roll your cigar tightly so it will draw in air well. <i>n</i> tight roll. <i>Usa ka líkit nga kwarta,</i> A roll of paper bills. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LÍKIT</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>liklik</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] go along the edges of s.t. or round about, not straight across or in the center. <i>Nangliklik ku sa asíras kay nag-ulan,</i> I walked along the sidewalk (rather than in the street) because it was raining. <i>Mangliklik lang ta kay náay daghang buguy dihà sa agiánan,</i> Let's go around because there are lots of toughs on the road.

<p><b>likmù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] conceal s.t. so others will not know it. <i>Ilikmù nákù ang ákung daug,</i> I'll conceal the fact that I won. <i>Likmúi ang inahan nga namatay ang íyang anak,</i> Keep it hidden from the mother that her son died. <b>2</b> [A; a2] cheat s.o. by withholding part of the amount or number to be handed in. <i>Likmúun nákù ang katungà sa hálin,</i> I'll keep half of the proceeds to myself.

<p><b>liksi</b> <i>v</i> [A2] jump up or aside, usually by reflex action in fright or to avoid danger. <i>Miliksi siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped back with fright. <b>liksiliksi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] jump about violently. <i>Paknga ang isdà arun dílì muliksiliksi sulud sa baskit,</i> Knock the fish on the head so they won't thrash around in the basket.

<pb n=1249>

<p><b>liksiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{lesson in school}. <b>2</b> @{object lesson}, an event or experience that should teach one to do s.t. differently. <i>Kadtung baháa liksiyun nátù báhin sa pagpanagag káhuy,</i> That flood should be a lesson to us with regards to deforestation. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] assign, study a lesson. <i>Akuy muliksiyun ninyu run báhin sa paghúbad,</i> I will give you a translation exercise today. <i>Nagliksiyun mi báhin sa birbu,</i> We were having our lesson on verbs. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] make s.o. know the disagreeable consequence of an act. <i>Liksiyunun ta ka sa ímung binúang,</i> I will discipline you because of your foolishness.

<p><b>liktyur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lecture. <b>2</b> @scolding (humorous slang). <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> give a lecture. <b>2</b> @scold. <i>Sa sayu sa buntag nagliktyur na siya sa íyang mga suluguun,</i> It's early in the morning, but she is already reading her servants a lecture.

<p><b>likù, líkù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @turn, @{change directions}. <i>Mulikù ka sa wala padúlung sa pantalan,</i> Turn left towards the wharf. <i>Ilíkù ang dyíp dihang iskináha,</i> Turn the jeep at the corner. <b>2</b> [AB6; c1] bend, be wound around. <i>Nakalikù siya sa bakus sa líug sa irù,</i> She managed to get the belt around the dog's neck. <i>Kining karsadáha naglikù sa bungtud,</i> This road encircles the hill. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B; c1] for a way to be, become round about. <i>Mulíkù ang átung pagkaági ug manúbay ta sa karsáda,</i> Our way will be round about if we follow the road. <i>a</i> round about way. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a bent pipe for channelling gas in a lantern. <b>likùlíkù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @zigzagging. <b>2</b> not direct to the point, beating around the bush. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456] be, become zigzagging. <i>Mupahínay ka ug mulikùlíkù ang karsáda,</i> Slow down if the road starts to zigzag. <b>2</b> [A; c1] beat around the bush. <i>Sultíhi ku sa inyung túyù. Ay na lag ilikùlíkù (likùlikúa),</i> Tell me what it is you want. Don't hem and haw. <i>n</i> action of beating around the bush. <i>Sa way daghang likùlíkù mipadayag siya sa íyang túyù,</i> Without beating around the bush, he disclosed his intentions. <b>likùlikuan</b> <i>a</i> one who is inconsistent in what he says, unreliable. <i>Dílì kasalígan ang táwung likùlikuan,</i> A person who doesn't say the same thing twice can't be trusted. <i>v</i> [B12] become inconsistent and unreliable. <b>-an(->), -anan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> curve, bend of a road. <i>Náa ang íla sa may likúan,</i> Their place is near where the bend is. <b>2</b> place one turns off.

<p><b>likub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] place or put s.t. in the middle or across a path to prevent or obstruct passage. <i>Akuy mulikub ug batu áning agianána, bir ug kinsay muyawyaw,</i> I will <pb n=1250>put a rock in the middle of this pathway. Let's see who dares complain. <i>Ang kanal nalikban ug sagbut,</i> The ditch was blocked with trash. <i>n</i> anything in the way to obstruct passage.

<p><b>likud</b> [**F1: p.o.s. ?] <b>1</b> @behind, at the @{back of}. <i>Ang ámung balay náa sa likud sa simbahan,</i> Our house is behind the church. <i>Didtu siya maglingkud sa likud sa trák,</i> He sat in the back of the bus. <b>1a</b> one's back. <i>Palíhug kalúta ang ákung likud,</i> Please scratch my back. <b>2</b> coming after. <i>Likud sa íyang mga pag-antus miabut ang kalampúsan,</i> On the heels of his sufferings came success. <b>3</b> coexistent with but not readily apparent. <i>Likud sa íyang pahiyum nag-umidu ang kayugut,</i> There is a seething rancor behind her smile. <i>Didtuy mistiryu nga nahitágù sa likud sa kangitngit,</i> There was s.t. mysterious hidden in the midst of the darkness. <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @betray, turn one over to his enemies. <i>Gilikud si Taruk sa íyang sákup ngadtu sa Písi,</i> Taruc's men betrayed him to the P.C. <b>likuran</b> <i>n</i> place in back of s.t. <b>likudlíkud</b> <i>n</i> eve before a wedding. <i>Mikalit lang siyag kahánaw sa likudlíkud sa íyang kasal,</i> He suddenly disappeared on the eve of his wedding.

<p><b>likug</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] for s.t. long and thin to get crooked or curled. <i>Gilikug níla ang alambri sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> They tied the wire around the trunk of the tree. <i>a</i> @crooked, not straight. <i>Dì na magámit ang rúlir, kay likug na,</i> We can't use the ruler because it is bent.

<p><b>likulikuhan</b> = <sc>LIKÙLIKUAN</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LIKÙ</sc>.

<p><b>likung, líkung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make into a circle, coil. <i>Likúngun (ilíkung) ku ning alambri,</i> I will coil up the wire into a circular loop. <i>n</i> s.t. fashioned into a coil, loop. <i>Dúnay líkung nga gipátung níya sa íyang úlu silbing hapin sa íyang lukdúun,</i> She has a piece of cloth rolled into a coil which she placed on her head to cushion what she is going to carry. <i>Kuháang likung kay maghulahup ku,</i> Get me a hoop. I'm going to play hulahoop.

<p><b>likup, líkup</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a] @surround, @enclose. <i>Ang mga kaáway milíkup sa ílang kampu,</i> The enemies surrounded their camp. <i>Daghang mistiryu ang naglikup niíning hitabúa,</i> The event is shrouded in mystery. <i>Likpa (likupa, palikpi) ug kural ang balay,</i> Build a fence around the house. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> distance or measurement around s.t. <b>ka-an, pa-</b> <i>n</i> surroundings, environs.

<p><b>lik-up</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] close, cover a passage. <i>Dì mu makalik-up ning dalána kay agiánan man ni sa publiku,</i> You can't block this road because this is a public thoroughfare. <pb n=1251><i>Ákung gilik-úpan ang sapà arun muhubas ang ubus,</i> I'm damming up the brook so that the area below will dry up.

<p><b>likuplikup</b> <i>n</i> a climbing vine with whitish-yellow flowers and round, smooth leaves, belonging to the family <b><i>Dischidia</i></b>.

<p><b>líkus</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] be @{coiled around} s.t. <i>Sawa nga nagalíkus sa sanga,</i> A snake coiled around the branch. <i>Milíkus sa payag ang mga sundálu,</i> The soldiers surrounded the hut. <i>Dúnay paril nga naglíkus sa simbahan,</i> There is a stone wall that is surrounding the church. <i>Ílang giliksan sa púkut ang dakung duut sa isdà,</i> They encircled the big school of fish with the net. <i>n</i> measurement around s.t., perimeter. <b>(->), likuslikus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. itchy skin infection where eruptions of watery pustules appear in splotches around the body and later burst.

<p><b>likut</b> <i>a</i> @{slit-eyed}. <i>Likut siya kay kalíwat ug Insik,</i> He has narrow eyes. He is of Chinese extraction. <i>v</i> [B15] be, become slit-eyed.

<p><b>likuy, líkuy</b> <i>a</i> going in a curve. <i>Líkuy ang dágan sa búla kay walà man manibil ang mísa,</i> The ball is rolling crooked because the billiard table is not level. <i>v</i> [B2S] for a ball to curve or swerve. <i>Lisud saw-un ang búla nga naglikuy,</i> It is hard to catch a curve ball.

<p><b>likwa</b> <i>v</i> [c] buy stock with the proceeds of a day's sale. <i>Ígù rang ilikwa ang halin karung adláwa,</i> Today's sales are just enough to buy new stock. <b>likwalikwa</b> <i>n</i> the system of small-time buying and selling in which the entire capital is tied up in a single day's sales and the proceeds go for buying new goods. <i>v</i> [A12; c] operate a business on this method.

<p><b>likwad</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] cleverly deny s.t. or conceal a truth when accused. <i>Dì ka makalikwad kay nasáyud na ku,</i> Don't try to be clever and hide anything because I already know. <i>Ayawg ilikwad nákù ang hustung kítà,</i> Don't try to conceal exactly what the proceeds are. <i>a</i> cleverly denying or concealing s.t. when accused. <b>likwadlikwad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] investigate, cross-examine thoroughly, turning questions inside out. <i>Ug likwadlikwárun (ilikwadlikwad) ang mga pangutána, tingálig maluba ang giakusar,</i> If the questions are turned inside out in the course of the cross-examination, the accused will probably give in.

<p><b>likwála</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental palm with wide, round, accordion-like leaves and long, slender stalks lined with thorns at the sides: <b><i>Licuala spp.</i></b>

<p><b>likwang</b> <i>v</i> [A; b2c1] tilt or turn s.t. heavy over. <i>Likwángun (ilikwang) ku ang batu ug <pb n=1252>náa bay kinhasun sa iláwum,</i> I'll turn the stone over to see whether there are any shells under it. <i>Ilikwang (likwánga) ang baril arun mayabu ang súd,</i> Turn the barrel over to pour the water out.

<p><b>likyad</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); c6] curl up at the edges. <i>Milikyad ang playwud nga giparka sa sakayan,</i> The plywood they used to wall the boat curled at the edges. <i>Milikyad ang papil nga gipapilit sa bungbung kay natangtang ang ngilit,</i> The paper that had been pasted to the walls curled up because the edges got loose.

<p><b>líla</b> <i>a</i> @violet. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] color s.t. violet.

<p><b>lílang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. herring.

<p><b>lílas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> long strip, usually of young buri palm leaves, used in weaving mats or bags. <b>2</b> film on which movies are recorded. <b>2a</b> the motion picture industry or art form. <i>Sa kalibútan sa lílas,</i> In the world of film. <b>2b</b> @movie. <i>Lílas nga aksiyun,</i> An action film. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make s.t. into strips for weaving. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] make a movie out of a story. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> device for cutting s.t. into strips.

<p><b>lìlì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] peep at s.t. while hidden. <i>Ug malígù ka dihà, lìlíun kang Piduy,</i> If you bathe there, Pidoy will peep at you. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] take a look to see how things are. <i>Lìlía ang kan-un ug nahubsan na ba,</i> Take a look at the rice to see if the water has evaporated. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> small variety of eggplant, so called because one has to look under the leaves to see it.

<p><b>lilígan</b> <i>n</i> in a bamboo house, thin bamboo slats to which flooring slats (<i>salug</i>) or walling slats which hold the walling material (<i>lugpit</i>) are tied and which serve to hold them in place.

<p><b>lilinglíling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] circle around looking for s.t. <i>Mulilinglíling ang ayruplánu úsà mamumba,</i> An airplane circles over a target first before it begins dropping bombs. <i>Lilinglilínga ang ákung singsing nga nahúlug sa sílung,</i> Look around for my ring that fell under the house.

<p><b>lílit</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] for s.t. to bulge out through an opening. <i>Mililit ang tinái sa samad,</i> His guts were sticking out through the wound. <i>Naglilit ang íyang tiyan sa guut nga karsunsilyu,</i> His stomach is bulging through his tight shorts.

<p><b>lilítik</b> = <sc>HANDILÍTIK</sc>.

<p><b>lílù</b> <i>n</i> @whirlpool. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] form a whirlpool. <i>Mulílù ang túbig ug ang duha ka sulug magbanggà,</i> A whirlpool forms if two currents meet. <b>2</b> [A12] be agitated as if swirled in a whirlpool. <i>Naglílù ang ákung pagbátì tungud  <pb n=1253>sa kalíbug,</i> My feelings are all awhirl with confusion. <b>3</b> [A23] for a dimple to form a whirlpool-like depression. <i>Mulílù ang íyang kandíis ug mupahíyum siya,</i> Her dimples form whirlpool-like depressions when she smiles. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> place where there is a whirlpool.

<p><b>líluk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @carve. <i>Maáyung mulíluk ug istatúwa ang manlilíluk,</i> A sculptor carves statues well. <i>Maanindut nga dibúhu ang íyang gilíluk,</i> He carved a beautiful design in the wood. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> occupation of carving.

<p><b>lílung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] conceal, hide a true state of affairs. <i>Ayaw kug lilúngi, dukt&ucaron;r,</i> Do not conceal the truth from me, Doctor. <i>Ilílung nátù níya ang nahitabù,</i> We'll keep what happened from him.

<p><b>lílung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{making dizzy}. <i>Lílung sakyan ang tyubíbu,</i> It makes you dizzy to ride a merry-go-round. <i>n</i> @dizziness. <i>Ang táwung makaagwanta sa lílung puyding maastrunut,</i> A man who can stand dizziness can qualify as an astronaut. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become dizzy. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>n</i> dizzy spell, occasional feeling of dizziness. <i>Kasagáran sa magsabak batíug panglilung,</i> Most women experience dizzy spells in their early months of pregnancy. <b>panga-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be in a state of slight dizziness. <i>Nagpangalilung ku sa kagútum,</i> I'm somewhat dizzy from hunger.

<p><b>lima</b> <i>numeral</i> five. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TULU</sc>.

<p><b>limangkà</b> <i>v</i> [A3; c1] having the legs crossed at the ankles. <i>Milimangkà siya sa salug,</i> He sat on the floor with his legs crossed in front. <i>Niambak siya sa túbig nga naglimangkà arun pagtimpasaw,</i> He jumped into the water with his ankles crossed to make a big splash.

<p><b>límas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{bail water} out. <i>Ug dílì ka mulímas malúnud ta,</i> If you do not bail, we will sink. <b>2</b> empty a pool or a big container by bailing the water out. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used for bailing. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> water in the bottom of a boat, @{bilge water}.

<p><b>limátuk</b> = <sc>ALIMÁTUK</sc>.

<p><b>lim-aw</b> <i>n</i> small, shallow pool of water. <i>Mga lim-aw nga mahibilin inighunas,</i> Pools left after the tide has gone out. <i>Lim-aw human sa ulan,</i> Pools of water after the rain. <i>v</i> [B] form a small pool.

<p><b>limba</b> <i>v</i> = <sc>LIMBALIMBA</sc>. <b>limbalimba</b> <i>v</i> [A1] toss, roll around. <i>Ug muinum kug kapi maglimbalimba lang ku tibuuk gabíi,</i> If I drink coffee, I toss and turn the whole night.

<p><b>limbag</b> <i>v</i> [A] @writhe, @wriggle, esp. from stomach pain. <i>Bisag giunsa níya paglimbag, wà makabuhì,</i> No matter how he wriggled, he couldn't free himself. <i>Naglimbag siya kay <pb n=1254>gisirulan,</i> He was writhing in pain from his stomach cramps.

<p><b>limbáhun</b> <i>a</i> having a yellow color with a reddish cast. <i>Ang limbáhung bidlísiw sa nagsalup nga adlaw,</i> The pink rays of the setting sun. <i>n</i> fruits that have this color. <b>a</b> coconuts that have red or yellow-orange husks. <b>b</b> variety of shaddock (<i>buluungun</i>) with pinkish meat.

<p><b>limbákug</b> <i>v</i> [B456; c1] twist and squirm vigorously. <i>Naglimbákug sa kasakit ang táwu nga gisul-an sa tiyan,</i> The man was writhing in pain because of his stomach pains. <i>Naglimbákug ang bitin nga naputlan sa úlu,</i> The snake was writhing because his head was cut off.

<p><b>limbaruk</b> strong curse word expressing exasperation or irritation. <i>Limbaruk, dimálas baraháa,</i> Damn! What an unlucky card. <i>v</i> [a4] be cursed. <i>Mu rag gilimbaruk kining ámung kahimtang,</i> It looks as though we're completely out of luck.

<p><b>limbáruk</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b6] fall headlong. <i>Nalimbáruk ang bátà sa bintánà,</i> The child fell headlong out of the window.

<p><b>limbárut</b> = <sc>*LIMBÁWUT</sc>.

<p><b>limbas</b> = <sc>LINGBAS</sc>.

<p><b>*limbásug</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @{strive hard}, exert effort to accomplish s.t. <i>Nanglimbásug siya nga makabuhì,</i> She struggled to free herself. <i>Panlimbasúgan (panlimbasúgun) ku nga makapasar,</i> I will try my best to pass the course. <i>n</i> act of striving hard or exerting effort. <i>Ang panglimbásug dílì laksut basta dílì lang palabihan,</i> It is not a bad thing to strive hard as long as you don't overdo it. <b>mapaN-un</b> <i>a</i> characterized with assiduous work or effort. <i>Nagpúlaw siya sa mapanglimbasúgun nga tingúhà sa paglampus,</i> He works till late at night in his ardent desire for success.

<p><b>limbatiánun</b> (from <i>bátì<sub>1</sub></i>) <i>a</i> @heartfelt, @{with feeling} (literary). <i>Gugmang limbatiánun,</i> Deeply-felt love.

<p><b>limbáun</b> = <sc>LIMBÁHUN</sc>.

<p><b>*limbáwut</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] for hair to stand on end, get goose bumps. <i>Nanglimbáwut ákung balhíbu pagkadungug nákù sa isturya,</i> My hair stood on end when I heard the story.

<p><b>limbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> whirling current of wind. <i>Nadala sa limbu ang mga dáhung layà,</i> The dry leaves were whirled about in the wind. <b>2</b> place between heaven and hell to which unbaptized children are consigned. <b>3</b> <b>sa &mdash;</b> be up on the air, not certain. <i>Túa pa sa limbu ang ámung plánu,</i> Our plans are still up in the air. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P] for the wind to whirl around. <b>2</b> [A; c1] be blown about in the <pb n=1255>air. <i>Mulimbu ang asu ug huypun sa hángin,</i> Smoke moves rapidly through the air when the wind blows it. <i>Milimbu ang tabánug nga nakabugtù sa tugut,</i> The kite soared when its string broke.

<p><b>limbúkad</b> = <sc>ALIMBÚKAD</sc>.

<p><b>limbung</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @cheat, @deceive. <i>Ása gud nà siya mulimbung (manglimbung) nákù!</i> He would never cheat me! <i>Dílì ku makalimbung (makapanglimbung) sa paghigugma nímu,</i> I cannot commit deception by pretending to love you. <i>Gilimbúngan mu aku sa pag-undang mu ug iskuyla,</i> You deceived me when you stopped attending school. <i>n</i> action of cheating, deceiving. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> inclined to cheat or defraud. <i>Dílì ku makigdúlà nímu kay limbungan kaáyu ka,</i> I will not play with you because you cheat. <b>2</b> giving the illusion of being taller than it really is. <i>Limbungan ang babáyi nga naghayhil,</i> The woman gives the impression of being taller than she is because she is wearing high heels. ma-un a deceptive. <i>Dílì ku mamátì sa íyang malimbúngun nga mga sáad,</i> I will not listen to his deceptive promises. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @deception.

<p><b>limbu rak</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. dance, the limbo rock. <i>v</i> [A] dance the limbo rock.

<p><b>limbuwad, limbúwad</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; c] fall headlong, topple over; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Milimbúwad (nalimbúwad) ang kaang paghángin,</i> The flower pot toppled over in the wind. <i>Gilimbúwad ni Buy ang lamísa sa íyang kasukù,</i> Boy toppled the table over in his anger.

<p><b>limbúyuk</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be in chaotic confusion. <i>Nalimbúyuk ning ákung kaisípan sa túmang kalíbug,</i> My mind is whirling in confusion.

<p><b>límin</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b] wrap cloth around the body, @swaddle. <i>Lanahi ang pinútì unyà limíni ug lampin,</i> Put oil on the bolo then wrap it up in a diaper. <i>Dinhay masúsu nga gilimínan ug mga nuug,</i> There was an infant that was swaddled in rags. <b>2</b> [A; b6] pervade, envelop as if to cover entirely. <i>Kangitngit nga milímin sa kasilingánan,</i> Darkness that enveloped the neighborhood. <i>Ang íyang pagbátì nákù gilimínan sa mga duhadúha,</i> Doubt pervades her feelings toward me.

<p><b>liminlimin</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] be all jumbled, thrown together without order. <i>Muliminlimin (maliminlimin) nang búla sa hílu ug dì nímu baátan,</i> Those pieces of string will get all tangled up if you don't tie them together. <i>Ákung liminliminun (iliminlimin) ang mga bulingun,</i> I'll throw the dirty clothes in a bunch.

<p><b>límis</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b5] <b>1</b> @wrap, @envelop. <i>Nagkinahanglan kug dakung papil nga makalímis <pb n=1256>(makapalímis) niíning kartun,</i> I need a large sheet of paper to wrap this box in. <i>Limísa (limísi) sa tualya ang bátà ighumag kalígù,</i> Wrap the child in a towel after his bath. <i>Duha ka makusgánung buktun ang gilímis kaníya,</i> Two strong arms embraced her. <b>2</b> envelop completely with. <i>Nangamátay ang mga tanum kay nalímis (nalimisan) sa mga sagbut,</i> The plants died when they were completely covered with weeds. <b>3</b> shower with affection. <i>Gilímis (gilimísan) ku níyag hawuk,</i> She smothered me with kisses.

<p><b>limitar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] put a limit to. <i>Gilimitahan níya ang úras sa pagbisíta,</i> She put a limit to the visiting hours. <b>limitádu</b> <i>a</i> given in insufficient amounts, limited. <i>Ang pagkáun limitádu kaáyu sa kasirahan,</i> They serve an insufficient amount of food in the boarding house. <i>v</i> [B1256] be limited.

<p><b>limiti</b> <i>n</i> limit. <i>Way limiti ug pilay ímung gustung dad-un,</i> There is no limit to how many you may take. <i>v</i> [A; b6] set limits. <i>Dílì ku mulimiti sa ímung pagkáun,</i> I will set no limits as to how much you may eat.

<p><b>limpangug</b> (from <i>pangug</i>) <i>a</i> silly, stupid; lacking good judgment or common sense. <i>Ayaw na lang pagsalig nga matúman ang tanan mung súgù, limpangug kaáyu nang tawhána,</i> Don't expect that man to carry out your instructions properly, he is so stupid.

<p><b>limpísa</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] clean a mechanism. <i>Kamau kang mulimpísa ug karburadur sa awtu?</i> Do you know how to clean the carburator of a car? <i>Limpisáhi ang pitrumaks arun musíga,</i> Clean the pressure lantern so it will light. <i>n</i> cleaning of mechanical equipment.

<p><b>limpiya</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] polish shoes. <i>Nagkabítun ang ákung kamut kay naglimpiya ku sa ákung sapátus,</i> My hands have shoe polish on them because I was polishing my shoes. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> shoeshining as a business. <i>Kusug ang limpiya gikang mag-uwan,</i> After it rains we get plenty of business shining shoes. <b>2</b> materials for shining shoes. <b>way</b> &mdash; badly needing a shine. <i>Way limpiya ang ímung sapátus,</i> Your shoes need a shine. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] polish shoes for a living. <i>n</i> occupation of shining shoes. <b>&mdash; bútas</b> <i>n</i> bootblack. <b>mag-l-, maN-l-</b> <i>n</i> bootblack.

<p><b>limpiyáda</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to be neat and clean in her ways. <i>Hinlù ílang báy kay ang inahan limpiyáda,</i> Their house is clean because the mother is a demon for cleanliness. <i>v</i> [B1] be habitually neat and clean.

<p><b>limpiyu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> clean, devoid of dirt, sanitary. <i>Limpiyu kaáyu ang salug run,</i> The floor is very clean today. <i>Limpiyu ang ristawran nga ámung gikan-an,</i> The restaurant we ate <pb n=1257>in is sanitary. <b>1a</b> clean, without VD. <b>2</b> clear, unsullied. <i>Limpiyu ku ug kunsinsiya kay wà kuy salà,</i> I have a clear conscience because I am not guilty. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of cleaning. <i>Kahúgaw, way limpiyu,</i> How dirty it is! No one cleaned it! <b>2</b> clean clothes. <i>Wà kuy limpiyu isimba,</i> I have no clean clothes to wear to church. <b>3</b> amount gained clear. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ab] clean, rid s.t. of dirt, become clean. <i>Hugáwan siyang mulimpiyu sa kasilyas,</i> He thinks cleaning the toilet is dirty. <i>Malimpiyu ra nang kasilyas ug nía ku,</i> The only time that toilet is clean is when I'm around to watch you. <i>Limpiyúhun nátù ang átung trabáhu arun dílì ta maúlaw,</i> Let us do a clean job of our work so we won't be put to embarrassment. <i>Limpiyúhi ang kusína,</i> Clean the kitchen. <b>2</b> [A2, a12] make a net gain or income. <i>Nakalimpiyu kug kinsi sa ákung pamaráda karun,</i> I netted fifteen pesos in my driving today. <b>ig-l-</b> <i>n</i> thing used in cleaning. <b>mag-l-</b> <i>n</i> one who cleans.

<p><b>limu</b> <i>n</i> magical practices used to help a baby go through his various stages of development easily and successfully or to cure a grown person of a bad characteristic or to get rid of s.t. undesirable that is s.w. These practices may consist of having the baby or the afflicted adult perform an action analogous to the actions one wishes to develop or stop or may consist of special foods or potions together with magic words. <i>Ang limu sa bátang magngipun, ang lagus pahírag tái,</i> The ritual for a child that is teething: feces are rubbed on his gums. <i>v</i> [A; a] treat with <i>limu. Limuha ug sagu ang palaínum nímung bána,</i> Mix a dead man's saliva into your husband's drink to stop his vice.

<p><b>limù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] hide, keep s.t. a secret. <i>Naglimù ba ku nímu sa ákung makítà?</i> Do I hide my earnings from you? <i>Sa prubinsiya dì ka makalimù bisan gamayng sikrítu,</i> In the country you cannot keep the tiniest secret. <i>Ayaw ilimù sa ímung ginikánan ang ímung prublíma,</i> Do not keep your problems from your parents.

<p><b>limud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] deny, conceal s.t. upon being confronted. <i>Mulimud ka pa giyud nga kláru man ang pruyba!</i> You still dare to conceal it when the evidence is so clear! <i>Ayaw ug ilimud ang ímung pag-anhi,</i> Don't deny that you came here. <b>malimdánun</b> <i>a</i> given to denying or concealing the truth when confronted.

<p><b>limugmug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c1] rinse the mouth out. <i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug) giyud ku human ug káun,</i> I rinse my mouth after I eat. <b>1a</b> [A; b] slosh water around in the mouth <pb n=1258>to warm it and spit it out on s.t. to bathe it. <i>Limugmúgi ang sunuy matag buntag,</i> Bathe the cock every morning with water you slosh around in your mouth. <b>2</b> [AP; a] take a drink of liquor, usually in a large gulp (humorous slang). <i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug) siyag usa ka básung tubà,</i> He will gulp down a glass of toddy. <b>3</b> [c] be unconcerned about s.t. s.o. says or s.t. embarrassing that happens. <i>Way kapuslánan ang kasábà, gilimugmug lang,</i> No use scolding him. It runs off him like water off a duck's back. (Lit. He just gargles with it.) <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the oral cavity. <b>1a</b> by extension, the throat. <b>2</b> the outside of this area: the cheeks, including the lower part of the jaw and the base of the ear. <b>3</b> the place in a monkey's mouth where he stores food.

<p><b>*limúhag</b> <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> knowledge of how to do s.t. <i>Ayaw ku ug paayúha ug makina kay wà kuy kalimuhágan ánang mga butánga,</i> Don't ask me to repair engines because I have no knowledge of that sort of thing. <b>2</b> knowledge about or of what a thing is. <i>Manukutsukut ta sa mangingisdà arun makabatun tag kalimuhágan sa mga isdà,</i> Let's ask the fishermen so we can learn s.t. about fishes.

<p><b>limúk</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b6] give a look of anger or disgust with pursed lips, and make a humming sound. <i>Milimúk (nanlimúk) siya nákù kay wà man nákù pakapíha,</i> She gave me a sour look because I did not allow her to copy my work. <i>Íya kung gilimúkan, mu rag nakasalà ku níya,</i> She gave me a look of disgust, as if I had offended her.

<p><b>limukun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible shellfish of the depths, finned and similar to a crab, but without claws.

<p><b>limúkun</b> = <sc>ALIMÚKUN</sc>.

<p><b>limulímu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] hide, withhold s.t. from s.o. that he ought to know. <i>Kusug siyang mulimulímu sa íyang kalihúkan sa íyang bána,</i> She is fond of keeping her activities from her husband. <i>Gilimulímu níla sa ílang inahan ang kamatáyun sa ílang igsúun,</i> They concealed their brother's death from their mother.

<p><b>limun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hard candies.

<p><b>límun</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] roll and wrap s.t. up to conceal it, facilitate disposal, carrying, and the like. <i>Limúni (limúna) ang mga bulingun sa hábul,</i> Wrap the dirty clothes in the blanket.

<p><b>limunáda</b> <i>n</i> lemonade, usually made of calamondin juice <i>(limunsítu). v</i> [A13; a12] make lemonade. &mdash; <b>ruhi</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. purgative for children, prepared under physician's prescription and taken hot.

<p><b>limunglímung</b> = <sc>LIMULÍMU</sc>.

<pb n=1259>

<p><b>limunsítu, limunsítus</b> <i>n</i> calamondin, a small citrus tree bearing small, round, acid fruit, orange-colored when ripe, with an easily separable peel. It is the most widely sold sour citrus: <b><i>Citrus microcarpa.</i></b>

<p><b>limuruk, limúruk</b> = <sc>LAMURUK</sc>.

<p><b>limus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> alms. <b>2</b> a voluntary contribution to the family of a person who died. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] <b>1</b> give alms or a voluntary contribution to the family of a person who died. <i>Mulimus giyud ta inigdúaw sa namatyan,</i> We ought to give a little s.t. when we visit the family of the deceased. <i>Limusi ang makililímus nga buta,</i> Give alms to the blind beggar. <b>2</b> give s.t. of great value to the recipient but of little value to the owner. <i>Intáwun, Kurdaping. Anus-a pa man ku nímu limsig pahíyum?</i> Have pity, Cordaping. When will you bestow a smile on me? <b>3</b> give s.t. of little value, but unwillingly. <i>Ug dì níya bayran tung dus, ilimus na lang tu,</i> If he doesn't give me my two pesos back, forget it. I'll write it off as charity. <b>paki-</b> <i>v</i> [A] go begging for alms. <i>Magpakilimus na lang ta ug wà nay mahímù,</i> We'll have to go begging if there's no other way. <b>linimsan</b> <i>n</i> amount collected by begging. <b>maka-r-(<-), maki-r-(<-), paki-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> beggar.

<p><b>límut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B123S6; b8] forget. <i>Nalímut ku sa átung sábut,</i> I forgot our appointment. <i>Uy, nakalimut ka ug butúnis sa ímung karsúnis!</i> Hey! You forgot to button your pants! <i>Nalimtan nákù <corr sic=ag>ang</corr> ákung pitáka!</i> I forgot my wallet! <i>Kalimti ang nangági kanátù,</i> Forget what happened between us. <i>Dílì ku kalimtan tung nawnga bísan ug ása,</i> I will not forget that face anywhere. <b>2</b> [B126] lose consciousness. <i>Nalímut ku pagkapangkà sa ákung úlu,</i> I got unconscious when my head bumped into s.t. <b>3</b> = <sc>LIMUT</sc>, <i>v.</i> <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> anesthetic. <b>2</b> k.o. antidote to make s.o. stop a vice. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> give general anesthesia. <i>Dílì mulímut ang dukt&ucaron;r ug dúnay sakit sa kasingkásing,</i> A doctor won't administer anesthesia to s.o. with a heart disease. <i>Unsay ilimut sa bátang palaihì magabíi?</i> What antidote shall we use on a child that wets his bed? <b>2</b> hypnotize, dazzle s.o. to make him lose his sense of reason or see things in a different way. <i>Ingkantu ang milimut (naglimut) kaníya,</i> An enchanted being led him into a different world. <i>Limutun ka sa íyang katahum,</i> You will be dazzled by her beauty. <b>limutlímut</b> <i>v</i> [b6] forget s.t. at every occasion. <i>Íyang gilimutlimútan ug úlì ang bumba sa ligid,</i> He forgets to return the air pump every time. <b>hika-/haka-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b8] happen to forget. <i>Nahikalimut <pb n=1260>siya pagpalit ug sibúyas,</i> She forgot to buy onions. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [b1] <b>1</b> lose consciousness. <b>2</b> lose control of oneself. <i>Gipanlimútan siyang misagpà sa íyang asáwa,</i> He lost control of himself and hit his wife. <b>-a(<-)</b> how very forgetful. <i>Labihan nákung limúta uy!</i> Jesus, how forgetful I am! <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> action of forgetting s.t. <i>Way nagtuun sa kalímut,</i> No one learns how to forget. (You're born with that knowledge.) <b>ma-un, malimtánun, manggilimtánun, limtánun</b> <i>a</i> forgetful. <i>v</i> [B12] become forgetful. <b>pa-</b> = <sc>LIMUT</sc>, <i>n.</i>

<p><b>limúut</b> = <sc>ALIMÚUT</sc>.

<p><b>línà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a12] collect toddy before the normal time to gather it, most usually take the toddy in the evening instead of the following morning. <i>Maglínà ku sa dawat kay gustu kung muinum ug tam-is nga tubà,</i> I will take the toddy this evening because I want to drink sweet palm toddy. <i>Lináa ang tubà arun tam-is,</i> Gather the palm toddy early so that it will be sweet. <b>2</b> [A; a1] restore s.o.'s health by drinking fresh unfermented coconut toddy. <i>Gilínà ang bátà kay luyahun,</i> The child was given fresh toddy as a tonic because he was so weak. <i>n</i> sweet palm toddy. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LÍNÀ</sc>, <i>n.</i>

<p><b>*línà<sub>2</sub></b> <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a process of purification in folk medicine whereby some evil or bad effect is removed by exposing the victim to magical smoke, obtained from certain plants and compounds. <b>2</b> the material burned in the process of <i>palínà. v</i> [A; b6(1)] administer this treatment. <i>Gipalináan ug sagbut sa mintiryu ang gilubatan,</i> She became ill after attending a funeral and was treated with smoke from plants taken from the cemetery.

<p><b>línab</b> <i>n</i> woman born with a very narrow or no vaginal opening.

<p><b>línaw<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> calm, free of agitation. <i>Línaw ang dágat,</i> The sea is calm. <b>2</b> calm, free from excitement. <i>Línaw átung hunàhúnà ug walà tay mga suliran,</i> Your mind is calm if you don't have problems. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2S; b4(1)] be, become calm. <i>Naglínaw ang panahun,</i> The weather is calm. <i>Dúgay ming naabut kay nalináwan ang sakayan,</i> We arrived late because the boat was becalmed. <b>2</b> [B1; a12] be calm, undisturbed. <i>Dílì maglínaw ang ímung tanlag,</i> Your conscience will not be at peace. <i>Lináwa ang ímung kaugalíngun, ayaw ug katarantar,</i> Compose yourself. Don't panic. <i>n</i> peace, calm. <i>Walay línaw ning panimuyúa,</i> The way we're living, there is no peace and quiet. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> calmly, peacefully. <i>Malináwun siya nga namatay,</i> He died calmly. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LÍNAW</sc>, <i>n.</i>

<pb n=1261>

<p><b>línaw<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> pool, lake. <i>v</i> [A; b6] form into a pool, pond, or lake. <i>Mulínaw ang túbig sa sílung ug kusug ang ulan,</i> A lake forms under our house when it rains hard.

<p><b>lindag</b> <i>v</i> [B456] toss about restlessly in bed. <i>Naglindag ku sa higdaánan gabíi, wà giyud kung katulug,</i> I didn't sleep the whole night last night. I just kept tossing around in bed.

<p><b>lindug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> unbranching trunk of a tree. <i>Lindug sa lubi,</i> The trunk of a coconut tree. <b>1a</b> column in a building. <b>2</b> column in a newspaper or journal. <i>Lindug sa mga bálak,</i> Poetry section. <b>3</b> warp threads. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> columnist.

<p><b>linga, línga</b> (from <i>alinga</i>) <i>a</i> inattentive due to preoccupation with s.t. else. <i>Balikbalíka pag-isplikar kay linga kaáyu,</i> Repeat your explanation because he is very inattentive. <i>n</i> preoccupation that keeps one from concentrating. <i>Dì siya makatrabáhu kay daghan siyag linga,</i> He can't do work because he has lots of other things to think about. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b3] be inattentive. <i>Wà kung kabantay pag-ági níya. Nalinga lang ku,</i> I didn't see her go by. I wasn't paying attention. <i>Subrang dúwà ang nalingahan ánang batáa,</i> The child has nothing but play on his mind and thus is inattentive. <b>2</b> [A12; a] hold one's attention. <i>Nalinga kug tan-aw sa lamígas nga nanag-áway,</i> I was amused watching the ants fighting each other. <i>Lingaha ang gwardiya kay muipsut ku sa píkas,</i> Keep the guard occupied because I will slip through the other side. <b>3</b> [B1256] be so occupied. <i>Ang tindíra nalinga ug paninsíyu,</i> The salesgirl was so busy she couldn't make change properly. <b>maka-r-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> being easily diverted, distracted. <i>Pangidad nga makalilínga,</i> Age at which one has a short attention span.

<p><b>língab</b> <i>a</i> having the congenital defect of a narrow or no vaginal opening.

<p><b>lingabngab</b> <i>n</i> yawn. <i>v</i> [AN2] yawn. <i>Mulingabngab (manglingabngab) lang ku ug katulgun na ku,</i> I yawn when I feel sleepy.

<p><b>lingag</b> <i>a</i> lacking concentration, preoccupied with many other things so as to make stupid mistakes. <i>Lingag man maung bisag kurik girúngan,</i> She is so careless. She marked correct answers wrong. <i>Wà siya makatúman sa túgun kay lingag man,</i> She didn't do what she was told because she was careless. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become careless, preoccupied with other distracting activities. <i>Nagkalingag na ning draybir námù. Sígi na lang makabanggà,</i> Our chauffeur is getting careless. He keeps having accidents.

<p><b>lingagngag</b> = <sc>ALINGAGNGAG</sc>.

<pb n=1262>

<p><b>lingas</b> <i>a</i> unable to keep still but moving about all the time instead. <i>Lingas kaáyu ning batáa, dì mahimutang,</i> This boy is always moving about, he can't keep still. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be moving about always and not keeping still.

<p><b>língat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB24] for the eyes to rove, move the eyes. <i>Milíngat lang ang íyang mata pagsúd níya sa palasyu,</i> Her eyes popped out of her head when she went in the palace. <i>Naglíngat siya sa simbahan,</i> She looked around at the people in the church. <b>2</b> [A] behave badly, wildly when one is in a place where formal behavior is expected. <i>Mulíngat lang ning mga bátà kung túa sa láing báy,</i> My children act wild when they are in other people's houses. <i>Naglíngat lang siya didtu sa baylihan kay hubug man,</i> He acted wildly at the dance because he was drunk. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> careless, not paying attention to what one is about. <i>Hibyaan níya ang bág kay lingat man,</i> She left her bag because she was careless. <b>2</b> failing to behave modestly and composed in a place where one is expected to be on one's good behavior. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become careless. <i>Nalingat siya kay giapura,</i> She was careless because she was rushed.

<p><b>lingátung</b> <i>n</i> shrub or small tree having numerous stinging hairs, with magical uses to drive <i>unglù</i> away: <b><i>Laportea brunnea.</i></b> <i>v</i> [b4(1)] get the stinging hairs of this plant on one.

<p><b>lingaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] attract one's interest or attention. <i>Ákung lingawun si Máma ug ikay kúhà sa dulsi,</i> I'll keep Mom's attention while you get the candy. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] entertain, amuse. <i>Ang íyang kumidiya dílì makalingaw nákù,</i> His jokes don't amuse me. <i>Nalingaw ang bátà ug panakup ug apan,</i> The child is amused, occupying himself with catching grasshoppers. <i>n</i> thing to keep oneself busy with. <i>Ug wà kay lingaw, pagtuun,</i> If you don't have anything to do, you could study. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b6] do s.t. in one's spare time, spend one's time doing s.t. <i>Samtang nagpaábut ku, magkalingaw kug bása,</i> While I am waiting, I will pass the time reading. <b>lingawlíngaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] amuse, divert oneself. <i>Human sa trabáhu, maglingawlíngaw mi,</i> After work we amuse ourselves. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] spend one's spare time doing s.t. <i>Human dáyun ni kay ákung lingawlingáwan ug pintal human sa trabáhu,</i> It won't take long to get done painting because I'll do it in my spare time after work. <i>n</i> recreation, amusement. <i>Álang kaníya ang panulat usa ka lingawlíngaw,</i> For him writing is a form of relaxation. <b>palingawlíngaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <pb n=1263>pretend to be occupied or engrossed with s.t. to avoid confronting an embarrassing situation. <i>Nainsultuhan gud siya piru nagpalingawlíngaw lag hinábì sa uban,</i> She felt insulted but she just pretended to be engrossed in her conversation with other people. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> amusement. <i>Sa karnabalan daghang kalingáwan,</i> In the fair grounds there are lots of amusements. <b>maka-r-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> affording amusement.

<p><b>lingay, língay</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for the sun to move beyond the zenith and the shadows to lengthen in the afternoon. <i>Milingay na ang adlaw ug wà pa sila makapaniudtu,</i> The sun has moved beyond the zenith and they still have not taken their lunch. <i>Nakalingay ang anínu sa lubi gíkan sa kural apan ang aláyun wà pa makasúgud,</i> The shadow of the coconut tree has moved beyond the fence, but the work bee has not yet started.

<p><b>lingbas</b> <i>n</i> file.  <b>nga língin</b> rattail file. &mdash; <b>nga mídiya língin</b> half-round file. &mdash; <b>nga tris kantus</b> triangular file. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> file s.t. down, off. <b>2</b> make, make into a file. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> filings. <b>-in-an</b> <i>a</i> for the voice to be cutting and sharp. <i>Gitubag ku níya sa usa ka tíngug nga linimbásan,[**note: ng -> m]</i> She answered me in a sharp and cutting voice.

<p><b>lingbáhun</b> = <sc>LIMBÁHUN</sc>.

<p><b>linggà</b> <i>v</i> [B6; a12] for boats to roll. <i>Pag-ági sa barku gilinggà ang sakayan,</i> The fishing boat rolled in the wake of the ship.

<p><b>linggalingga</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] rock a vessel or vehicle from side to side. <i>Ayawg linggalinggáha ang búti kay mayabu,</i> Don't rock the life boat. It might overturn.

<p><b>linggánay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> church bell. <b>2</b> ringing of church bells. <i>v</i> [A] for church bells to ring. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> bell tower.

<p><b>linggawas</b> = <sc>LINGKAWAS</sc>.

<p><b>linggíru</b> <i>n</i> k.o. soldierfish.

<p><b>linggúkud</b> <i>n</i> the young of the <i>agápang</i> (k.o. mullet).

<p><b>lingguwáhi</b> <i>n</i> language.

<p><b>lingguwista</b> <i>n</i> linguist. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a linguist.

<p><b>lingguwita</b> = <sc>LANGGÍTA</sc>.

<p><b>linghud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> immature plants. <i>Aslum ang manggang linghud pa,</i> Mangoes are very sour when they are young. <i>Dílì maáyung isugnud ang linghud káhuy,</i> Green wood is no good for fuel. <b>2</b> young and immature. <i>Ang linghud níyang pangísip,</i> His immature mind. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> state or condition of being young and immature.

<p><b>língì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3S; a2b2] turn one's head to the side to look back. <i>Milíngì siya nákù,</i> He looked back at me. <i>Ayaw siyag lingía,</i> Don't <pb n=1264>turn to look at him. <b>2</b> [A2S; a12] give s.t. the attention it requires. <i>Ayawg ipanugal ímung kítà, lingía usab ang ímung mga anak,</i> Don't gamble away your earnings. You have your children to think of. <b>2a</b> [A23; a12] pay attention to s.t., recognize its existence. <i>Karun nga dátù na siya dílì na ta lingíun níya,</i> Now that he is rich, he will not take notice of us. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep looking back. <i>Nagpanglingì ku sa pagtan-aw ug náa bay nagsunud,</i> I kept looking back to see if anyone was following us.

<p><b>lingig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] bend the teeth of a saw alternately to the side to widen the kerf and to prevent sticking. <i>Lingigi ang gabas arun dakug ági,</i> Twist the teeth on your saw so it will have a wide kerf. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] get one's neck twisted. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> saw set, tool to give set to saw teeth. <b>2</b> set, the amount of bend imparted to saw teeth. <i>a</i> for the neck to be twisted to one side. <i>Mau ra nà siyag kanúnayng maglingì kay lingig man,</i> He looks like he is always looking to the side because he has a twisted neck.

<p><b>língin</b> <i>a</i> round, circular. <i>Língin kaáyu ang singsing (búla),</i> The ring (ball) is round. <b>&mdash; ang búla</b> still in the running, all is not lost. <i>Língin pa ang búla, puydi pag mabawì nákù sa paynals ang ákung grádu,</i> I still have a chance. Maybe I can make up for my failing grade in the finals. <i>n</i> money (slang). <i>v</i> [AB2S; a] form a circle or sphere, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Naglíngin ku áring tabla pára ligid sa duláan,</i> I am cutting this board into a circle as a wheel for the toy. <i>Ang naglíngin níyang mata,</i> Her round eyes. <i>Lingína ang bulabúla,</i> Form the meat into little balls. <i>Lingíni sa tungà ug human, gabsa ang tungà,</i> Make a circle in the middle and then saw out the middle portion. <i>n</i> circle. <b>-g-</b> = <sc>LÍNGIN</sc>, <i>a</i> (plural). <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> round. <b>2</b> <b>disgrasyang ma-</b> a most unlikely misfortune which nevertheless takes place, though the victim does not deserve it. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> roundish.

<p><b>lingiw</b> <i>v</i> [A2] look away. <i>Mulingiw siya ug ákung tan-áwun kay sad-an man siya,</i> He looks away when I look at him because he's guilty. <i>Ígù lang ku nga nakalingiw kay dì ku kaagwanta ug tan-aw,</i> All I could do was look away because I couldn't stand to look at him.

<p><b>lingka</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] uproot vines to clear a place. <i>Lingkáhun námù ning kamutihána kay tumus na,</i> We'll uproot this sweet potato patch because the potatoes have all been gathered.

<p><b>lingkáang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46N] for plants to spread out. <i>Milingkáang (nanglingkáang) ang lambáyung  <pb n=1265>sa baybáyun,</i> The vines spread out over the beach. <i>Dákit nga naglingkáang ang mga sanga,</i> A spreading banyan tree. <b>2</b> [BN; a1] for parts of the body to spread like a plant. <i>Tiil nga nanglingkáang kay dúgay nga wà kasapatúsi,</i> Spreading feet that hadn't worn shoes in ages. <i>Lingkaángun (ilingkáang) sa pábu ang íyang balhíbu ug duúlun,</i> A turkey will puff itself up if you get near it. <b>2a</b> for the ears or hair to stand up upon feeling an emotion. <i>Nanlingkáang ang íyang dawunggan pagkadungug sa isturya,</i> Her ears stood up when she heard the story. <i>Hutwang sa irù nga makalingkáang sa balhíbu,</i> The howling of a dog that can make your hair stand on end.

<p><b>lingkag</b> <i>a</i> having ears that stick out sidewards. <i>Lingkag kaáyug dalunggan ang kuníhu,</i> Rabbits have ears that stick out. <i>v</i> [B2] for the ears to prick up, esp. in surprise. <i>Nalingkag ang íyang dalunggan pagkadungug sa íyang ngálan,</i> His ears pricked up when he heard his name.

<p><b>lingkálang</b> = <sc>LINGKÁANG</sc>.

<p><b>lingkáng</b> = <sc>LINGKÁANG</sc>.

<p><b>lingkas</b> = <sc>LINGKA</sc>.

<p><b>lingkawas</b> <i>v</i> [APB3(1); b6] @escape. <i>Kinsay mulingkawas (mupalingkawas) nátù niíning kalisud?</i> Who will save us from our poverty? <i>Mulingkawas siyag dúnay buluhátun,</i> He escapes when there is work to do. <i>Dílì ka makalingkawas sa sílut sa kamatáyun,</i> You cannot escape the death penalty.

<p><b>lingkit</b> <i>a</i> for two things to be joined along their lengths. <i>Ang lingkit nga ságing isípung usa,</i> They count two bananas joined together as one. <i>Lingkit ang pán nga grasyúsa,</i> The graciosa bread comes linked. <b>bátà, kalúha nga &mdash;</b> @{Siamese twins}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126C3; b6] be joined along the lengths. <b>2</b> [A; c1] tie two or more coconuts together by joining them with a small piece of husk slashed from each of them.

<p><b>lingkúbaw</b> = <sc>LINTÚBAW</sc>.

<p><b>lingkud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6(1)] @{sit down}. <i>Ayaw ug lingkúri nang syáha kay basà pa ang pintal,</i> Don't sit on that chair because the paint is still wet. <i>Ayaw ug ilingkud nang ímung bag-ung inutaw nga karsúnis kay malum-it,</i> Do not sit down in your newly pressed pants because they will get crumpled. <b>2</b> [A; b6] assume, @{hold office} or position. <i>Mulingkud siya pagkaprisidinti sa kumpaníya ugmà,</i> He will assume office as president of the company tomorrow. <b>3</b> [b(1)] sit to give serious, full time and attention to a piece of work. <i>Kinahanglang lingkúran ning trabahúa,</i> This work must be given full time <pb n=1266>and attention. <b>4</b> [A] for a coconut to grow to the stage that its trunk shows. <i>Sa duha ka tuig dílì pa mulingkud ang lubi,</i> At two years the coconut still does not show its trunk. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [a3] fall down into a sitting position. <i>Nahisabiklan ku sa táwu ug napalingkud ku sa bangkù,</i> The man bumped into me and I fell down in a sitting position on the bench. <b>lingkuránan</b> <i>n</i> @seat, @chair, @bench. <b>lingkurun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> for an occupation to be sedentary. <b>2</b> the bride's family and guests at a wedding party (who sit and are served as opposed to the groom's friends and relatives, the <i>tindugun</i>, who do the work). <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> made to sit down. <b>pina- sa urinúla</b> toilet trained. <i>Ang bátà nga pinalingkud sa urinúla dílì mangíhì sa salug,</i> The child that is toilet trained doesn't urinate on the floor.

<p><b>lingkung</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long to be bent so that the middle part is higher than either end. <i>Lingkung kaáyu ning sundánga,</i> This bolo has a good curve. <i>Lingkung ang íyang buktun. Dì matuy-ud,</i> He has a bent arm. It won't straighten out any longer. <i>Lingkung siyag tiil ug mag-untul-untul siyang maglakaw,</i> He is club-footed and he walks with a bounce. <i>v</i> [B126] come out curved.

<p><b>lingkús</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] for s.t. long to curl up or come out in knotted form. <i>Mulingkús ang písì ug madúgay nang gámit,</i> The rope will curl up if it is used for a long time. <i>Nagkalingkús na ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga naláyà na,</i> The tobacco leaves are curling up now that they are withering.

<p><b>lingla</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] @deceive. <i>Milingla siya nákù pag-ingun nga ulitáwu siya,</i> He deceived me by saying he was a bachelor. <i>Gilingla ku níya sa pagpasugut sa kuntrátu,</i> He deceived me into accepting the contract. <b>2</b> [A; a1] divert one's attention to achieve one's purpose. <i>Akuy mulingla sa tindíra arun makúhà nímu ang sigarilyu,</i> I'll divert the storekeeper's attention while you filch the cigarettes. <i>n</i> @deceit. <b>malingláhun</b> <i>a</i> @deceitful.

<p><b>lingling</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] @peep. <i>Linglíngun ta ka inigkalígù nímu,</i> I'll peep at you when you take a bath.

<p><b>lingù</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] shake one's head to say no or in hopelessness or resignation. <i>Dílì tingáli siya musugut kay milingù tu siya,</i> He probably won't agree because he shook his head. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] keep shaking the head in hopelessness and resignation. <i>Nagpanglingù ang párì nga nagtan-aw sa nanagparisparis didtu sa plása,</i> The priest shook his head as he looked at the people paired off in the <pb n=1267>park.

<p><b>linguglingug</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b(1)P] @ignore s.t. by pretending not to hear; pay no attention to s.t. <i>Gilinguglingugan man lang nímu ang ákung gipangáyù,</i> You just pretend not to hear when I ask you for s.t. <i>Bisag unsáun nákug tambag mulinguglingug (mupalinguglingug) lang,</i> No matter how much I advise her, she pays no attention.

<p><b>lingugngug</b> = <sc>ALINGUGNGUG</sc>.

<p><b>ling-un</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @{small area}. <i>Ling-ung gitamnag mais,</i> A parcel planted to corn. <b>2</b> mass of people in a certain area. <i>Ang ling-un sa mga katawhan sa plása,</i> The mass of people in the square. <b>2a</b> a group of people, @{social class}. <i>Ling-un sa mga timáwà,</i> The poorest classes.

<p><b>linimintu</b> <i>n</i> @liniment. <i>v</i> [b6] apply liniment to s.t. <i>Linimintuhi ang pamául mu,</i> Apply liniment on your sore muscles.

<p><b>línin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{linen cloth}. <b>2</b> stationery having a linen finish. <b>swis &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fine cloth.

<p><b>línis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23B2; a12] @melt, @{wear down} or @{eat away}. <i>Ang ayis krim dalì mulínis sa ínit,</i> The ice cream will melt rapidly in the sun. <i>Nagkalinis ang kutsilyu pagbináid,</i> The knife is being worn down from being sharpened so often. <i>Linísa sa túbig ang tablítas,</i> Dissolve the tablets in water. <b>2</b> [A123; a3b4(1)] @digest food eaten. <i>Wà malínis ang ákung kináun, What I ate did not dissolve.</i> <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @{worn down}.

<p><b>línis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; b5] make s.t. @clean. <i>Ang dyanitur mauy mulínis sa mga lawak,</i> The janitor will clean the rooms. <i>Malínis na unyà ning sapatúsag kalimpyáhan,</i> These shoes will be clean once they are shined. <i>Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nímu ang báy pirmi,</i> You should always clean the house. <b>2</b> [APB12; b5] cleanse or purify the soul, reputation, etc.; become cleansed. <i>Ang paghinulsul mauy mulínis (mupalínis) sa ímung kunsinsiya,</i> Repentance will cleanse your conscience. <i>Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nátù ang átung banságun,</i> We must clear our family name. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> @clean, @pure.

<p><b>linlang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @deceive, @fool. <i>Naglinlang ka sa mga táwu ánang pagparìpárì mu,</i> You are deceiving the people by posing as a priest. <b>2</b> @distract, divert s.o.'s attention. <i>Dì ka makalinlang níya kun magtan-aw siyag tilibisyun,</i> You cannot divert his attention when he is watching TV.

<p><b>linsa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] string a guideline in construction. <i>Akuy mulinsa sa pagpinsa arun dì maghiwì,</i> I'll string a guideline for the fence so it won't come out crooked. <i>n</i> string used as a guide.

<pb n=1268>

<p><b>linsúwak</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] fall headlong. <i>Nalinsúwak siya gíkan sa bintánà,</i> He fell headlong from the window.

<p><b>lintà</b> <i>n</i> leech.

<p><b>lintar</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b3(1)c5] lose one's head, panic. <i>Nalintar siya maung gasulinadur hinúuy íyang gisikáran,</i> He panicked, so he stepped on the accelerator instead. <i>Wà pa gánì ka kasab-i nalintar na,</i> You haven't even got your scolding and you already panic. <b>lintádu</b> <i>a</i> tending to panic.

<p><b>linti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lens, magnifying glass. <b>2</b> searchlight. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b] use a magnifying glass on s.t. <i>Lintíhi ang mga litra arun sayun nga basáhun,</i> Use a magnifying glass on the letters so you can easily read them. <b>2</b> [A; b] beam with a searchlight. <i>Gilintíhan sa barku ang pantalan,</i> The ship beamed a searchlight on the wharf. <b>3</b> [A; a] make into a magnifying glass, searchlight.

<p><b>lintì</b> <i>n</i> lightning, thunderbolt. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be struck with a thunderbolt. <i>Lintian (lintían) kunu ang táwung makigminyù ug paryinti,</i> They say that a man who marries a relative will be struck with a thunderbolt. <b>2</b> get severe punishment. <i>Kay ímung gidáut nà, lintían kang Pápa,</i> Since you broke it, you'll get hell from Dad. <b>2a</b> [b4(1)] be in a very unpleasant situation. <i>Nahutdan ta ug gasulína ug layù tas lungsud, nalintían na ta áni,</i> We're out of gas and we're far from town. Now we are in trouble. <i>a</i> incorrigible in behavior. <i>Sa piyir náay daghang mga buguy nga lintì kaáyu,</i> There are lots of incorrigible bums at the waterfront.

<p><b>lintihuylas</b> = <sc>LINTUHÍLAS</sc>.

<p><b>lintúbaw</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] fall down headlong. <i>Nalintúbaw ang bátà ngadtu sa atábay,</i> The child toppled into the well.

<p><b>lintuhílas</b> <i>n</i> small sequins or spangles used as ornaments for clothing. <i>v</i> [A; b] put sequins on s.t.

<p><b>lintungánay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> principal source of s.t. <i>Lawum ug dulut ang gamut nga lintungánay,</i> Primary roots go deep. <i>Kanang ákung sanggutan mau ang lintungánay sa ákung katigayúnan karun,</i> Palm toddy is the source of my current wealth. <b>2</b> original. <i>Nagkahanaw na karun ang pinulungan nga lintungánayng binisayà,</i> The original and native Visayan is fast disappearing.

<p><b>lintúwad</b> (from <i>tuwad</i>) <i>v</i> [AB16; a12] <b>1</b> fall down, topple over, usually landing wrong side or tail end up; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Didtu sa kanal malintúwad ang awtu,</i> The car fell front-end first into the ditch. <i>Kinsay naglintúwad sa bukag nga gisudlan sa mangga?</i> Who turned over the basket with the <pb n=1269>mangoes in it? <b>2</b> be in utter disorder. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be in utter disorder. <i>Nagkalintúwad lang ang hugasun sa hugasan,</i> The sink is in utter disorder with all the dishes in it.

<p><b>lintuwang, lintúwang</b> (from <i>tuwang</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c1] turn s.t. over. <i>Akuy naglintuwang sa mga lingkuránan pag-uwan,</i> I turned the chairs over when it rained.

<p><b>linù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] slosh liquid around inside s.t. <i>Naglinù ku ug gasulína áring butilya arun makúhà ang asíti,</i> I am sloshing gasoline around inside the bottle to get the oil out. <i>Linui ug ínit túbig ang tirmus úsà sudli ug ínit nga kapi,</i> Slosh hot water around in the thermos before you put hot coffee in it. <i>n</i> pieces of dough collected from the mixing bowl by sloshing water around in it. <b>-in-an</b> = <sc>LINÚ</sc>, <i>n.</i>

<p><b>línug</b> <i>n</i> earthquake. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for there to be an earthquake. <i>Ug mulínug, hugnù giyud ning taytayána,</i> If there is an earthquake, this bridge will surely collapse. <i>Nangabut ang hinábang sa gilinúgan,</i> Aid arrived for the earthquake victims.

<p><b>linulyum</b> <i>n</i> linoleum. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] put a linoleum covering on s.t.

<p><b>linya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lines drawn or formed by things in a row or column. <i>Ang linya sa ímung papil hiwì,</i> The lines on your paper are crooked. <i>Ang linya sa mga táwu miabut ngadtu sa iskína,</i> The queue reached to the corner. <b>2</b> electric, telephone, telegraph lines. <i>Naputul ang linya sa tilipunu,</i> The telephone line was cut. <b>3</b> transportation line. <i>Barátu ang plíti kay duha ka linya nagkumpitinsiya,</i> The fare is cheap because the two lines are in competition. <b>3a</b> the route served by a line. <i>Ang ámung dapit may linya sa pasahiruan,</i> Our neighborhood is on a public transportation line. <b>4</b> the field of one's special knowledge, interest. <i>Dílì ákung linya ang pagkamagtutudlù,</i> Teaching is just not my line. <b>5</b> line of things similar to each other. <i>Ang bansíkul ug tulíngan paríhug hitsúra kay mau ra mang linyáha,</i> Tuna and mackerel are similar in appearance because they belong to the same family. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] line s.t. <i>Naglinya ku áring tabla pára damahan,</i> I am making lines for the checkerboard on this piece of wood. <b>2</b> [A; c1] form, put into lines. <i>Sayu nga mulinya ang mga táwu pagpalit ug tíkit sa sini,</i> The people queue up early to buy tickets to the movie. <i>Linyáha (ilinya) ang mga síya diri,</i> Put the chairs in line here.

<p><b>lipad</b> <i>v</i> [A23P] swerve or veer while in flight or traveling at very high speed. <i>Sa kusug nga dágan, ang gaan nga awtu mulipad,</i> Light cars swerve at high speeds. <i>Ang kapii <pb n=1270>sa bála mauy makapalipad sa íyang ági,</i> The bullet is deformed, so it won't go straight.

<p><b>lipaghà</b> = <sc>LIBAGHÀ</sc>.

<p><b>lipaghung</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] turn red in embarrassment or pique. <i>Nanglipaghung ákung nawung pagkabatì ku sa insultu,</i> My face flushed when I heard the insult.

<p><b>lipak</b> <i>n</i> bamboo slats. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] cut bamboo into slats. <i>Lipaka ang kawáyan pára ikural,</i> Cut the bamboo into slats to use for fencing. <b>2</b> [a12] strike with a bamboo slat. <i>Lipaka ang irù,</i> Strike the dog with a bamboo slat.

<p><b>lípak</b> <i>n</i> loud thunderclap. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] for there to be a loud thunderclap. <i>Bantayi ang irù ug mulípak, dì ba mukúrug,</i> Watch the dog when there is a thunderclap. He'll quiver. <b>1a</b> [b(1)] be struck by a thunderbolt. <i>Wà lipáki nang amahan nga nag-unay sa kaugalíngun níyang anak!</i> Surely the father was struck by lightning for having relations with his own daughter! <b>2</b> [b6] get a severe scolding, severely punished. <i>Lipákan kang Dádi mu ug hibaw-an ka,</i> You will get hell from Daddy if he finds out.

<p><b>lipakà</b> <i>n</i> itchy red splotches on the skin from allergies or insect bites. <i>v</i> [B6; b4] have splotches on the skin. <i>Naglipakà (gilipakaan) ang láwas sa bátà sa tipdas,</i> The child is covered with rash from his measles.

<p><b>lípang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] grow well and profusely. <i>Milípang ang mais human kaabunúhi,</i> The corn grew lush after it was fertilized. <i>Nanglípang ang láwas sa bátang pinainum ug litsi,</i> The child grew robust because they fed it milk. <b>2</b> [A3P] for emotions to intensify. <i>Milípang ang ílang panaghigugmaay human sa panag-úlì,</i> After they were reconciled, their love for each other grew more intense.

<p><b>lip-an rayit</b> <i>a</i> giving without discrimination or restraint. <i>Lip-an rayit silang naglamánu sa mga butanti,</i> They shook as many of the voters' hands as they possibly could. <i>v</i> [A13; c] give without discrimination or restraint. <i>Naglip-an rayit ug panghátag ang ahinti sa mga sampul,</i> The agent gave out samples left and right.

<p><b>lipárak</b> <i>v</i> [B2] be, become fat, pudgy. <i>Mulipárak giyud ka ug magpatúyang kag káun,</i> You'll surely get fat if you eat as much as you like. <i>Nagkaliparak ang bátà kay naayun sa litsi,</i> The baby is getting fat because the milk agrees with him.

<p><b>lípas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] not go directly over s.t., pass around. <i>Ilípas ang kutsi kay gubà ang taytáyan,</i> Take a detour because the bridge is out. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> gone beyond a point in time. <i>Lipas na ang úras sa pagkáun,</i> The time for <pb n=1271>eating has passed. <i>v</i> [B2; c1] get beyond a certain point in time. <i>Nilípas na ang búwan sa udtuhan,</i> The moon has passed the midpoint in the sky. <b>&mdash; ang gútum</b> for one's hunger to disappear after the time for eating has passed. <i>Ug kanúnay nímung lipasun (ilipas) ang ímung gútum ulsirun ka,</i> If you always fail to eat on time, you will develop ulcers. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> detour, place a route goes around s.t.

<p><b>lipat</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> make an error through inattention: lose track or forget what one was talking about. <i>Sa pag-ihap nalipat ku ug pila na tu,</i> I was counting, but I lost track how many there were. <i>Nalipat ku ug diin ikabutang ang hunsuy,</i> It slipped my mind where I put my pipe. <b>2</b> mistake s.o.'s identity. <i>Nalipat ku. Ingun ku ug si Nítuy ka,</i> I was mistaken. I thought you were Nitoy. <b>3</b> [B1256; b8] fail to notice s.t. <i>Nalipat ku ug walà ku makamatikud sa pag-ági sa bátà,</i> I failed to notice, and I was not aware of it when the child passed by. <i>Nalipatan ku ang usa ka linya ug kupya,</i> I missed a line when I was copying. <b>4</b> [A; a12] deceive s.o., causing him to fail to notice s.t. <i>Lipatun ka lang níya sa mga púlung nga tam-is,</i> He will just deceive you with sweet words. <b>pa-(<-), lipatlípat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sleight of hand, esp. a thimblerig game where a seed is hidden under one of the three thimble-shaped cups and is quickly shifted from one cup to another. The players gamble as to where the seed is located. <b>2</b> deception, chicanery. <i>Ang íyang pagdaug sa kuntrátu nahímù sa palípat,</i> He won the contract through chicanery. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] have a thimblerig game. <b>2</b> [A; a12] deceive with chicanery.

<p><b>lipáta, lipátà</b> = <sc>ALIPÁTÀ</sc>.

<p><b>lipatpat</b> = <sc>ALIPATPAT</sc>.

<p><b>lípay</b> <i>a</i> glad. <i>Lípay kaáyu kung midaug ka,</i> I'm very glad that you won. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] make s.o. happy. <i>Wà nay láing mulípay nákù kun dílì ikaw,</i> No one can make me happy but you. <b>2</b> [B156; c5] be happy, glad. <i>Nalípay ku nga nía ka,</i> I am glad that you're here. <i>Maglípay ta kay milampus ang átung plánu,</i> Let's be happy because our plans succeeded. <i>Gikalípay kug dakù ang ímung kalampúsan,</i> I am very happy at your success. <b>paha-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] congratulate, felicitate. <i>Usa aku sa mupahalípay nímu sa ímung kadaúgan,</i> I am one of those who will congratulate you on your victory. <i>n</i> congratulations. <i>Dawáta ang kinasingkásing kung pahalípay,</i> Accept my heartfelt congratulations. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> happy. <i>Malipáyun kaáyu siya nga misugut sa ákung hangyù,</i> He was happy  <pb n=1272>to comply with my request. <b>&mdash; nga pasku</b> Merry Christmas. <i>v</i> [A13] be happy. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> happiness. <i>Ang íyang pagkaasáwa walay kalípay,</i> She knows no happiness as a wife. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> the Holy Spirit as Comforter.

<p><b>liphuk</b> <i>n</i> left hook in boxing.

<p><b>lip-istik</b> = <sc>LIPSTIK</sc>.

<p><b>lip-it</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b2] put s.t. in between two flat surfaces. <i>Ilip-it ang mamísus sa libru,</i> Stick the peso bills in the book. <i>Didtu ra malip-iti ang dukumintu sa mga inutaw,</i> The document was right there, in between the ironed clothes.

<p><b>liplip</b> <i>n</i> k.o. matting used to wrap tobacco in bales or as walling, made of <i>nípà</i> or coconut leaflets laid flat side by side with some overlap and stitched together with fiber. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make into a matting of this sort.

<p><b>lipstik</b> <i>n</i> lipstick. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use a certain k.o. lipstick. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] put lipstick on.

<p><b>lipsut</b> = <sc>IPSUT</sc>.

<p><b>lipti</b> <i>n</i> painted grunter: <b><i>Plectorhinchus pictus.</i></b>

<p><b>lipting</b> <i>n</i> the violation in dribbling a basketball where the ball is not hit, but lifted slightly before being bounced. <i>v</i> [B126; b6(1)] commit this violation.

<p><b>liptung</b> <i>n</i> lake formed in a river by a dam or similar obstruction. <i>v</i> [B6, b5c1] gather into a pool, make into a dam, gather in a dam. <i>Naliptung (miliptung) ang sapà kay naalihan sa dakung káhuy nga natumba,</i> The water of the brook formed a pool because a fallen log obstructed its course. <i>Liptúngi (liptúnga, iliptung) ang sapà arun kalanguyan,</i> Make a dam in the river so we can swim in it.

<p><b>*lipu</b> <b>kalipuhan</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be hard-pressed by time or quantity of work. <i>Nagkalipuhan siya didtu sa kusína kay dúnay muabut nga bisíta,</i> She was very busy in the kitchen because there were visitors coming.

<p><b>lipudlípud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] hide s.t. by circumlocution or covering up. <i>Náay ímung tinagúan kay naglipudlípud ka sa pagtug-an nákù,</i> You must be hiding s.t. because you are beating around the bush instead of telling me right out. <i>Gilipudlípud sa inahan ang mga salà sa íyang mga anak ngadtu sa íyang bána,</i> The mother covered up for her children in front of the father. <i>n</i> action of concealing s.t. <i>Sa walay lipudlípud nga pagkasulti tikasan ka!</i> Let's call a spade a spade. You're a cheat!

<p><b>lipulipu</b> <i>v</i> [B16] be hard-pressed to do s.t. because of the quantity of work or the lack of time. <i>Naglipulipu mi karun kay umaábut <pb n=1273>ang supirbisur,</i> We are very busy now because the supervisor is about to come. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be very hard-pressed. <i>Nagkalipulipu siya pagpamatúnis pagbuthù sa mga bisíta,</i> He was in a dither trying to get his pants buttoned up when the visitors suddenly arrived.

<p><b>lípung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be, become dizzy, woozy. <i>Nalípung siya human makatimahù adtung báhù sa tambal,</i> He became woozy after he smelled the odor of the medicine. <i>Pwirting makalípung ang argulya,</i> The merry-go-round can get you real dizzy. <b>2</b> [A123P] be enormously high in price. <i>Biling makalípung,</i> A dizzyingly high price. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] undergo dizzy spells. <i>Nagpanglipung siya kay masakitun pa siya,</i> He has dizzy spells because he is still sick. <i>n</i> recurring dizziness. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> dizziness, giddiness.

<p><b>lipun-ug</b> = <b>TIPUN-UG.</b>

<p><b>liput<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] go behind s.t. <i>Ang kawatan miliput sa usang balay ug nawálà,</i> The thief ducked in back of the next house and disappeared. <i>Maigù untà ku sa batu ug wà pa ku makaliput sa baril,</i> I would have been hit with a stone if I had not ducked behind a barrel. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] catch s.t. by going the other way. <i>Lingawa siya kay muliput ku sa píkas arun ákung sakpan,</i> Hold his attention because I will go the other way around so I can catch him. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] doublecross, betray. <i>Ug mangispíya ka pára sa píkas, naglíput ka sa átung násud,</i> If you do espionage work for the other side, you are betraying our country. <b>2</b> [AN2; b6] fight unfairly by doing s.t. treacherous or taking unfair advantage. <i>Gilipútan siyag dugmak sa luyu,</i> S.o. treacherously stabbed him in the back. <i>n</i> treachery. <b>pa-, pa-(<-) ug pusta</b> <i>v</i> [A13; c6] secretly place a bet on the opposing cock (instead of one's own) or simply bet on an opposing cock in addition to one's own. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> treacherous, traitorous. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>LÍPUT</sc>, <i>n.</i> <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> anus (euphemism).

<p><b>liput<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. ray.

<p><b>lip-ut</b> <i>a</i> narrow in space or width. <i>v</i> [B; c1] for a space or width to be narrow. <i>Nalip-ut ang sayal kay gamay man ang sun-ut sa panaptun,</i> The skirt was made narrow because it was a narrow piece of cloth. <i>Ang mga butang mauy nakalip-ut (nakapalip-ut) sa lugar dinhi,</i> The space was too small because too many things were put in it.

<p><b>lipuwa paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23P] blush. <i>Nanglipuwa ang náwung ni Balúduy dihang giintrudy&ucaron;s siya sa usa ka maanyag,</i> How Balodoy blushed when he was introduced to a beauty.

<p><b>lipyà</b> <i>n</i> moldboard, a curved iron plate attached <pb n=1274>to a plowshare (punta) which lifts, turns, and pulverizes the soil. <i>v</i> [A; b] attach a moldboard on a plowshare.

<p><b>líra</b> <i>n</i> lyre.

<p><b>líraw</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6P] for the eyes to dart back and forth, roll. <i>Milíraw ang íyang mga mata sa kalamì,</i> Her eyes rolled because it was so delicious. <b>lirawliraw</b> <i>v</i> [B456] <b>1</b> for the eyes to roll continuously. <i>Naglirawliraw ang íyang mata mu rag dúnay gipangítà,</i> His eyes moved back and forth as if he were looking for s.t. <b>2</b> for the thoughts to move rapidly from place to place.

<p><b>lirì</b> <i>v</i> [B4] <b>1</b> split, tear open from fullness. <i>Ayaw nag daska ang sáku kay naglirì na sa kapunù,</i> Don't fill the sack further because it's so full it's bursting. <b>2</b> get obese as if about to split. <i>Milirì siya sa katambuk humag panganak,</i> She got terribly fat after she had her baby.

<p><b>liru</b> = <sc>RILU</sc>.

<p><b>liruliru</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for the eyes to roll. <i>Miliruliru (nagliruliru) lang ang íyang mga mata pagkutána nákù,</i> He just rolled his eyes when I questioned him.

<p><b>lírung</b> <i>a</i> circular, rounded. <i>Lírung ang pláka,</i> A record is round. <i>n</i> a shallow circular basket used for winnowing or as a container for vending fish or vegetables.

<p><b>liryu</b> <i>n</i> name given to several k.o. ornamental bulbs, some of which also occur wild: <b><i>Hymenocallis littorale, Zephyranthis rosea,</i></b> et al. In poetry, this flower symbolizes beauty.

<p><b>lís<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> lace. <i>v</i> [A1] wear lace. <i>Naglís siyag panti,</i> She is wearing lace panties.

<p><b>lís<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>kalípay, 2.</i>

<p><b>lisa</b> <i>v</i> [a3] sprain or dislocate a joint. <i>Nalisa ang íyang túhud pagkadagmà níya,</i> His knee was dislocated when he fell down. <i>n</i> sprain or dislocation.

<p><b>lísang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] terrify, frighten severely. <i>Nalísang ku pagkalintúwad sa kutsi,</i> I was terrified when the car somersaulted. <i>Ayaw kug lisánga ánà kay dílì na tinúud sawa.</i> You can't scare me with that because that's no real snake. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> ailment, usually fever, that results from intense fright. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> terror. <b>maka-r-</b> <i>a</i> terrifying. <i>Makalilísang kaáyu tung bagyúha kay hasta ang mga awtu nakulub,</i> That was a terrifying storm because it even turned cars over. <b> lisay</b> <i>n</i> lymph node. <i>v</i> [B; b4] have swollen lymph nodes. <i>Naglisay (gilisayan) ang ákung íluk kay náay hubag ang ákung kamut,</i> I have swollen lymph glands in the armpits because I have a swollen hand.

<p><b>lisik</b> <i>v</i> [A] stick out from a hidden or partly hidden position. <i>Milisik ang íyang mata sa <pb n=1275>kalágut,</i> His eyes bulged in anger. <i>Ang itlug sa tigúwang naglisik,</i> The old man's testicles are hanging out in view. <i>n</i> @testicles. <b>putì ug &mdash;</b> @cowardly.

<p><b>lisinsiya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @license, a document evidencing permission to engage in s.t. <b>2</b> @permission to do s.t. <i>Ayaw ug uban námù kay wà kay lisinsiya ni Pápa,</i> Don't go with us because you don't have Daddy's permission. <i>v</i> [AN2; b6] ask permission. <i>Walà ku lisinsiyáhi ug táwu nga magbayli áning baláya,</i> Nobody asked me permission to hold a dance here in this house. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. said or used to obtain permission. <b>-du(<-)</b> <i>n</i> having a license. <i>Ribulbir nga lisinsiyádu,</i> Licensed revolver.

<p><b>lísis</b> <i>n</i> @shoelace. <i>v</i> [A; c] tie the shoes. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] tie one's shoes.

<p><b>liskad</b> = <sc>LISKAG</sc>.

<p><b>liskag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. to come open. <i>Miliskag ang dáhun sa ságing nga gipustan sa bulad,</i> The banana leaves which the dried fish were wrapped in came undone. <i>Nagkaliskag ang sáku kay labihang dasúka,</i> The sack is coming apart because it was filled too full. <i>Liskága (iliskag) ang baat,</i> Untie the string. <b>1a</b> for s.t. woven to get undone. <i>Naliskag ang banig kay wà masapay,</i> The mat came undone because the edges weren't closed up. <b>2</b> [B2N] @{spread out}, @{stick out}. <i>Maliskag ang balhíbu sa pábung duúlun,</i> The turkey puffs up its feathers if you get near it. <i>Naliskag ang íyang dunggan pagkadungug sa íyang ng[=á]n,</i> Her ears perked up when she heard her name. <i>a</i> @{spread out}, @undone. <i>Liskag ug tiil,</i> Spreading feet.

<p><b>liskug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coil of rattan, wire, or anything stiff. <b>2</b> stiff band attached to the rim of a basket, tray, and the like to strengthen the rim. <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> @{coil up} s.t. stiff. <b>2</b> make, attach a reinforcing band on the rim of a basket or tray. <b>3</b> [B] for s.t. long to curl up at the ends. <i>Naliskug ang lipak kay nainitan,</i> The bamboo slats curled up because they were exposed to the sun.

<p><b>liskúhag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] @move, be stirred from an inactive or suppressed state. <i>Miliskúhag ang mga lútì sa baskit nga wà kalugpíti,</i> The bamboo strips on the rim of the basket came open because it wasn't clipped. <b>2</b> [A23] for a feeling or emotion to spring forth in one's inner self (literary). <i>Miliskúhag pagkalit sa ákung kasingkásing ang usa ka tawhánung pagbátì,</i> Some sort of human emotion emerged within me.

<p><b>lisngag</b> <i>a</i> having nostrils larger than would be ordinary for a given size of nose. <i>v</i> [B; c16] for the nostrils to be unusually large. <i>Naglisngag lang nang ilung mu mu rag kabáyung <pb n=1276>nasukù,</i> You have nostrils that are drawn up like the nose of an angry horse.

<p><b>lisngig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] turn the face away in scorn, disgust, and the like. <i>Milisngig dáyun ang kasíra sa pagkakità sa sud-an,</i> The boarder turned her face away in disgust when she saw the food. <b>2</b> [B6; c1] look, turn the face sideways, usually due to a defect. <i>Nalisngig ang íyang tinan-awan tungud sa íyang hubag sa líug,</i> She has to keep looking sideways because of the big boil on her neck.

<p><b>lispu</b> = <sc>PULIS</sc> (slang).

<p><b>lista<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @list. <i>Wà maapil ang ímung ngálan sa lista,</i> Your name is not on the list. <b>2</b> list of debts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] list, enumerate in writing, <i>Ilista ang palitúnun arun way makalimtan,</i> List the things to buy so we don't forget anything. <b>2</b> [A; c1] charge s.t. to one's account in a store, add to one's list of debts. <i>Hápit tanang pamilya sa sundáwu naglista sa kantína,</i> Almost all the soldiers' families charge all the goods they get from the canteen. <i>Listahun (ilista) lang ni, ha?</i> Just charge this, O.K.? <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @enroll s.o. or oneself in a course. <i>Dílì ku makapalista kay wà kuy kwarta,</i> I cannot enroll because I don't have any money. <b>listahan</b> = <sc>LISTA</sc>, <i>n1</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @enrollment.

<p><b>lista<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALISTU</sc> (female).

<p><b>listu</b> = <sc>ALISTU</sc>.

<p><b>listun<sub>1</sub> , list&ucaron;n</b> <i>n</i> @shoelace. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put, tie s.o.'s shoelaces. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] tie one's own shoelaces. <i>Huwat úsà kay nanglistun pa ku,</i> Just a second, I'm still tying my shoelaces.

<p><b>listun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @molding, a strip of wooden material for edging in a building or boat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put a molding s.w. <i>Ikaw bay mulistun sa mga daplin sa bungbung?</i> Will you be the one to attach the molding at the edges of the walling[** walls]? <i>Íyang gilistúnan ang mga piktiyur prim,</i> He attached the mouldings (around the sides) of the picture frame. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a wooden moulding. <i>Listúnun ku ning kahúya,</i> I'll make a moulding out of this piece of wood.

<p><b>lísu</b> <i>n</i> @seed. <b>makaagpas sa &mdash;</b> get the implication of s.t. spoken by indirection. <i>Wà ku makaagpas sa lísu adtung íyang pasumbíngay,</i> I did not get what he was driving at. <b>lisulisu, lisuhan</b> <i>a</i> for corn or rice to be half cooked, as if there were seeds in the center. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] for rice or corn to come out half-cooked. <b>lisúhan</b> <i>a</i> having seeds. <i>Kadaghánan sa mga prútas lisúhan,</i> Most fruits have seeds.

<p><b>lísù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2] turn, cause s.t. to rotate on its axis. <i>Pugngi ang twirka samtang maglísù ku sa pirnu,</i> Hold the nut in place while <pb n=1277>I turn the bolt. <i>Lisúa ang ímung síya ug atúbang diri,</i> Turn your chair around and face this way. <b>1a</b> <b>ma- pay buku sa kawáyan</b> impossible to change (lit. it would be easier to twist a bamboo node). <i>Malísù pay buku sa kawáyan kay sa ákung hukum,</i> I'll stick to my decision come hell or high water. <b>1b</b> [b4(1)] <b>&mdash; sa buut, kwirdas, pangísip, twirka, útuk</b> go off one's rocker. <i>Ang pubring inahan nalisúan sa pangísip pagkamatay sa íyang mga bátà,</i> The poor mother went crazy after her children died. <b>2</b> [A2; c6] twist one's body as if on an axis. <i>Milísù siya ug mitan-aw nákù,</i> He turned around and looked at me. <i>Ilísù ímung láwas ngadtu arun makaagi ku,</i> Turn your body that way so I can pass by. <b>2a</b> [A2] turn one's body over. <i>Ug pukáwun siya mulísù lang ug mubálik ug katúlug,</i> If you wake him, he just turns over and goes back to sleep. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> turning pegs of musical instrument. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LÍSÙ</sc>. <b>2</b> knob or switch one turns to turn s.t. on. <b>lisùlísù</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> @{turn around}. <i>Naglisùlísù siya sa silya nga nangítà nákù,</i> He was turning around in the chair looking for me. <b>2</b> @toss and turn. <i>Naglisùlísù siya tibuuk gabíi ug walà makatulug,</i> He was tossing all night and was not able to sleep. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B146] be very busy. <i>Naglisuay (nagkalisuay) ku íning trabáhu kay wà kuy katábang,</i> I'm up to my neck with work because I don't have anybody to help me.

<p><b>lisud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @difficult. <i>Lisud kaáyu ning liksiyúna,</i> This lesson is very difficult. <b>2</b> in short supply, requiring effort. <i>Lisud ang túbig sa ámù,</i> Water is hard to come by at our place. <i>Lisud ang dálan sa Tulídu,</i> The road in Toledo is difficult. <b>3</b> for a situation to be hard to save or remedy<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Lisud na ang kahimtang sa masakitun<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> The patient is in critical condition. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; a2] be, become @difficult. <i>Dílì nákù lisdun ang mga pangutána,</i> I won't make the questions difficult. <b>2</b> [B145; b6] have, encounter difficulty in doing s.t. <i>Naglisud ku ug paandar sa makina,</i> I am having difficulty starting the engine. <i>Wà ka ba lisuri (lisdi) sa pag-ílis ug ligid?</i> Did you have difficulty in changing the tire? <b>2a</b> [a12] put s.o. to great inconvenience. <i>Ug ímu kung lisdun, muundang ku sa trabáhu,</i> If you make things hard for me, I will quit this job. <b>3</b> [A13] be in bad shape financially or in health. <i>Naglisud si Lúlu mu,</i> Your grandfather is gravely ill. <i>Naglisud mi run kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We're hard up because I have no work. <i>n</i> thing that constitutes the hardship or difficulty. <i>Ang lisud mau nga dílì siya muadmitir nga utángan siya nímu,</i>  <pb n=1278>The difficult thing is that he won't admit that he is indebted to you. <b>(<-), ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Naglísud (nagkalísud) kug báyad,</i> I'm having a hard time paying. <b>ug magka-(<-)</b> if need be, if things get bad enough. <i>Ug magkalísud mubáyad na lang ku arun maariglu ang kásu,</i> If there is no other way, I'll just pay up so as to get rid of the case. <b>lisudlisud</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] <b>1</b> do s.t. the hard way. <i>Lisudlisurun man nímu ug limbas. Gabsa!</i> You are doing it the hard way with a file. Use a saw! <b>2</b> impose unnecessary work or difficulty on s.o. <i>Naglisudlisud ka lang nákù pagpatubig sa tanum nga muulan man run,</i> You are making me water the plants for nothing when it is going to rain. <b>kalisudlisud</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be hard up financially. <i>Nagkalisudlisud sila kay walay trabáhu ang amahan,</i> They are hard up because the father has no work. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> hardship. <i>Ang kalisud nga ímung masagubang,</i> The hardships you will encounter. <b>kalisdánan</b> <i>n</i> @hardships.

<p><b>lisuglisug</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b4] for the body to have cysts or cyst-like protrusions. <i>Mulisuglisug ang ákung íluk ug pamlúgan ku,</i> I get swollen glands in my armpit whenever I get a lymphatic infection.

<p><b>lísun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @{filled out}, @well-built in body. <i>Ang himsug nga bátà lísun kaáyug láwas,</i> The healthy child has a well-filled-out body. <i>Ságad sa mga trabahadur lísun kaáyug láwas,</i> Most workers have good bodies. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] for a body to be well-built, rounded. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> state of being well-built.

<p><b>lísun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> name given to various fleshy carangoid fish.

<p><b>lisun plan</b> <i>n</i> @{lesson plan} for schools. <i>v</i> [A; b] make a lesson plan.

<p><b>liswi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>HABASAN</sc>. <b>2</b> blood-mouthed conch.

<p><b>lisyinsiya</b> = <sc>LISINSIYA</sc>.

<p><b>lít</b> <i>a</i> @late, not on time. <i>Diin gud ka! Lít kaáyu ka,</i> Where have you been? You are very late. <i>v</i> [B126] be @late. <i>Ug malít ka sa klási, ay na lang ug sulud,</i> If you are late for class, don't attend.

<p><b>lit-ad</b> <i>a</i> bent or twisted from warping, @warped. <i>Lit-ad kaáyu ning tabláha kay dúgay nga nabulad sa ínit,</i> This piece of wood is all warped because it was left under the sun. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] get warped. <b>2</b> [A] bend the body backwards or writhe. <i>Ayúhag kúgus ang bátà kay mukalit ug lit-ad,</i> Hold the child firmly because he'll just suddenly throw himself backward. <b>lit-adlit-ad</b> <i>v</i> [A] @writhe, @wriggle. <i>Naglit-adlit-ad siya sa kalamì,</i> She writhed in ecstasy.

<pb n=1279>

<p><b>lit-ag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @snare with a running noose, actuated by a spring pole which is released when the quarry steps on the cross piece that holds it down. <b>&mdash; nga mubutu</b> @{booby trap}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a12] catch with this sort of snare. <i>Manglit-ag mi sa lasang ug ihálas manuk,</i> We will snare wild chickens in the forest. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] make into a snare.

<p><b>litaníya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @litany. <b>2</b> @enumeration of things in a series. <i>Túa na, gibungat ang litaníya sa ímung mga sayup,</i> There he goes, reciting the litany of all your faults. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] say the @litany. <b>2</b> [A13; a] say s.t. in an enumeration. <i>Wà ku katíngug dihang gilitanyáhan ku níya sa ákung mga salà,</i> I could not say a word when he enumerated my faults to me.

<p><b>litì</b> <i>n</i> @thunderbolt. <i>Usa ka makabungul nga litì milánug sa kagabhíun,</i> A deafening thunderbolt echoed in the night. <i>v</i> [A2] for a thunderbolt to crash. <b>&mdash; sa udtung tútuk</b> sudden and unexpected happening (like a bolt of lightning at high noon, a rare occurrence). <i>Ang pagbali sa sinalígan sa partídu ngadtu sa píkas mauy usa ka litì sa udtung tútuk,</i> The party leader's defection to the other side was a most unexpected move.

<p><b>litik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c1] @snap one's finger. <i>Nagpanglitik siya sa íyang tudlù sa higayun nga nalipatan,</i> He snapped his fingers in annoyance that he missed the opportunity. <i>Litki (litiki) ang irù arun mudúul,</i> Snap your fingers at the dog so it will come near. <b>2</b> [A; b] @flick s.t. with the fingers. <i>Litkan (liktan) ku nang dunggan mu ug dì ka mamínaw,</i> I'll flick your ears if you don't listen. <b>(<-)</b> = <sc>LITIKLITIK</sc>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v</i>. <b>litiklítik, litikay, litikánay, litkanay, liktanay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a game of flicking each other's knuckles to see who will surrender in pain. <b>2</b> game of detaching or scattering a bunch of knotted rubber bands by flicking with the thumb and middle finger. <i>v</i> [C] play a finger-flicking game or game scattering rubber bands.

<p><b>litiliti</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. in a container to be used up, very close to the bottom. <i>Litiliti na kaáyu ang túbig sa bangà,</i> The water in the jar is falling pretty close to the bottom. <i>v</i> [B36] <b>1</b> for s.t. to be used up, usually to the bottom of the container. <i>Nagkalitiliti ang átung bugas,</i> Our rice is getting close to the bottom of the bin. <b>2</b> be reduced to a very small amount. <i>Naglitiliti ang nanan-aw sa prugráma kay taligsik,</i> Only a small sparse crowd saw the program because it was drizzling.

<p><b>litíra</b> = <sc>RITÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>litiral</b> <i>a</i> @literal. <i>Litiral nga intirpritasiyun sa Biblíya,</i> A literal interpretation of the Bible. <pb n=1280><i>v</i> [a12] do s.t. literally.

<p><b>litiratúra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> literature. <b>2</b> literature carrying advertising or information.

<p><b>lítis</b> = <sc>LITSÚGAS</sc>, <i>1.</i>

<p><b>litra</b> <i>n</i> letter of the alphabet. <i>v</i> [A; b6] mark with a letter. <i>Litráhan ku ning ákung mga punda,</i> I will mark my pillowcases with my initials.

<p><b>litrátu</b> = <sc>RITRÁTU</sc>. <b>litratista</b> = <sc>RITRATISTA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>RITRÁTU</sc>.

<p><b>litru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> liter. <b>2</b> dry measure for grains and other items equal to one-third of a ganta. <i>Ipalit ku ug usa ka litru nga asin,</i> Buy me a liter of salt. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] measure s.t. by the liter. <b>litruhan</b> <i>n</i> a container used as a liter measure.

<p><b>litsi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> milk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6] put or add milk to s.t. <i>Gilitsihan ba nímu ang ákung kapi?</i> Did you put milk in my coffee? <b>2</b> [a12] raise s.t. or s.o. on milk other than the mother's. <i>Litsíhun ku ning itúya kay namatay ang inahan,</i> I will raise this puppy on canned milk because the mother died. <b>&mdash; plan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. custard baked or steamed in syrup. <b>kulur dí-</b> <i>a</i> cream-colored. <b>litsihan, litsíhan</b> <i>n</i> a unit of dry or liquid measure the size of a milk can.

<p><b>litsi<sub>2</sub></b> <b>1</b> mild cuss word uttered in annoyance or anger (euphemism for <ix>pisti</ix>). <i>Litsi! Gibálì na pud nà nímu,</i> Darn! You broke it again. <b>2</b> reference to s.o. one is annoyed at. <i>Giindiyan ku sa litsing dakù,</i> The son of a gun stood me up. <b>-ng yáwà</b> expression of strong anger. <i>Litsing yáwà! Aku pay hulaman ug libru ug aku pay pahatdun didtu sa íla!</i> Shit! He borrows a book from me and then I'm supposed to bring it to his house as well! <b>litsilitsi</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] say <ix>litsi</ix> to s.o. <i>Ayaw kug litsilitsíha,</i> Don't you say <ix>litsi</ix> to me!

<p><b>litsúgas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lettuce: <b><i>Lactuca sativa.</i></b> <b>2</b> mild cuss word uttered upon being annoyed (euphemism for <i>litsi</i>). <i>Litsúgas ning batáa, kanúnay rang mangáyù ug singku!</i> This darn child! He always asks for a nickel.

<p><b>litsun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pig roasted whole over coals. <b>2</b> by extension, fowl so roasted. <b>&mdash; dilitsi</b> roast suckling pig. <b>3</b> euphemism for <i>litsi,</i> a mild curse said when one is annoyed with s.o. <i>Litsun ning batáa samukan kaáyu,</i> Darn this child. He's such a nuisance. <i>v</i> [A; a2] roast a pig, have a roast pig or, by extension, a fowl. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> animal so roasted whole over coals. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> a pig in the stage of growth considered ideal for roasting.

<p><b>litu, lítu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] buy rice or corn for home consumption. <i>Lisud kaáyug hasta bugas litúhun  <pb n=1281>pa,</i> It's very difficult if we have to buy rice, too. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> sell corn grits or rice. <b>2</b> sell corn grits or rice on a rationed basis. <i>Magpalítug bugas mais ang arsii,</i> The RCA will sell corn meal on a rationed basis.

<p><b>litù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a12] for joints to crack, crack the joints. <i>Kamau ka nga mulitù sa ímung tudlù?</i> Do you know how to crack your knuckles? <b>2</b> [A; a12] rub a leaf over an angle to make the leaf pliant. <i>Lituun nímu ang dáhun sa lumbuy sa ngilit sa lamísa arun sayun nga lukútun,</i> Rub the <i>lumbuy</i> leaf over the edge of the table so it will be easy to roll. <b>-anan(<-)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. one can rub a leaf over to make it pliant.

<p><b>lítub</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible arc shell. <b>&mdash; sa amù</b> k.o. small arc shell (1/2") which clings to cliffs along the seashore. It is not eaten.

<p><b>lituglítug</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] <b>1</b> hide, refuse to tell the truth when asked. <i>Ayawg lituglítug, tug-an sa tinúud,</i> Don't try to hide s.t. Tell the truth. <i>Ayaw kug lituglitúgi. Háin ang kwarta?</i> Don't try to hide anything from me. Where's the money? <b>2</b> withhold s.t. which one is supposed to turn over. <i>Gilituglítug sa pyádu ang abut sa humay,</i> The man who was in charge didn't turn over all of the rice crop.

<p><b>lituk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] pronounce. <i>Kamau nang mulituk si Bíbut sa púlung &lsquo;Máma&rsquo;,</i> Bebot already knows how to say &lsquo;Mama&rsquo; distinctly. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] express, convey s.t. by speaking. <i>Naglituk siya sa íyang gugma ngadtu sa dalága,</i> He was expressing his love to the maiden. <i>Litukan ta ka sa prisyu nga walay makaparíhu,</i> I will quote you a price no one can match.

<p><b>lituk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> flick with the fingers. <i>v</i> [A; b] hit s.t. by flicking the fingers at it. <i>Ang tabian gilitukan sa maistru sa [=ú],</i> The teacher flicked the pupil on the head for talking in class.

<p><b>lítuk</b> <i>a</i> for rice plants to sprout fresh, lush leaves. <i>v</i> [B] for rice transplants to get lush new leaves. <i>Naglítuk ang íyang humay kay dinisibi man,</i> His rice plants are sprouting lush leaves because they are well cared for.

<p><b>litundan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>líu</b> = <sc>LÍHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>líug</b> <i>n</i> neck. <i>Butilyang taas ug líug,</i> A bottle with a long neck. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123S; a12] hit in the neck. <i>Liugun níya ug pusil ang liyun,</i> He will shoot the lion in the neck. <b>2 &mdash; sa bitik ni San Markus</b> <i>v</i> [a3] be hooked into marriage (lit. be caught in the neck by the noose of St. Mark). <i>Ígù lang kung migraduwar,  <pb n=1282>naliug dáyun ku sa bitik ni San Markus,</i> As soon as I graduated I got married. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] get thick at the neck. <i>Nanglíug siyag maáyu, mu rag bábuy,</i> He's got lots of fat around the neck like a pig. <b>panghi-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B2456] for a young bull to become fully mature, as shown by an enlargement of the neck. <i>Manungag ra ba nang turíyu nga manghiliug,</i> That young bull will gore you now that he's getting mature. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>n</i> in plowing with a water buffalo, a rope tied from one end of the yoke to the other, passing under the animal's neck, the purpose of which is to prevent the yoke from slipping off. <b>taga-(->)</b> <i>a</i> up to the neck. <i>Tagaliug ku sa mga útang,</i> I'm up to my neck in debt. <i>v</i> [B156] get to be up to the neck.

<p><b>liunduk</b> = <sc>TALIUNDUK</sc>.

<p><b>lius</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] pass by s.t. unnoticed. <i>Sa luyung pultahan siya mulius,</i> He passed thru the back door unnoticed. <b>1a</b> [C3; b5] fail to see s.t., skip over s.t. <i>Naglíus lang sila ug wà magkítà,</i> They passed each other without seeing each other and they failed to meet. <i>Giliusan (gilius) námù siya pagsilbi,</i> We skipped her when we were serving. <b>2</b> [A3B; a12] distract s.o.'s attention from s.t. <i>Akuy naglius sa irù; siya usab nangáwat,</i> I distracted the dog's attention, while he broke into the house. <b>3</b> [A12] for s.t. to come and go without being given adequate or passing attention. <i>Pila na ka Sabadu ang milius?</i> How many Saturdays have come and gone? <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] keep coming in succession. <i>Naglíus na man lang tung mga maáyung tanyag,</i> Those good offers have just been coming to you one after the other. <b>2</b> [A2; b5] wriggle through a tight opening. <i>Liúsa (liúsi) ang mga táwu arun maabut ka sa altar,</i> Wriggle through the throng so you can reach the altar. <b>liuslíus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> avoid being caught by changing direction and speed constantly. <i>Lisud siyang dakpun kay maáyung muliuslíus,</i> He is hard to catch because he is good in dodging. <b>2</b> manage to get through an argument or interrogation by evasive means. <i>Maáyu siyang muliuslíus sa katarúngan,</i> He is good at giving evasive reasons.

<p><b>líut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> squeeze one's way through. <i>Milíut siya sa daghang táwu,</i> He squeezed his way through the crowd. <i>Nasámad siya sa alambring íyang giliútan,</i> He sustained cuts from the barbed wire he squeezed through. <b>2</b> get out of a difficult spot by verbal cunning. <i>Bísag pit-un siya, makalíut pa giyug pangatarúngan,</i> Even if you push him against the wall, he will manage to <pb n=1283>come up with an answer that will somehow get him out of it.

<p><b>líwa</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] destroy mankind and rid the world of evils. <i>Ang lúnup mauy milíwa sa kalibútan,</i> The great deluge destroyed mankind and rid the world of evils.

<p><b>líwag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] move s.t. at one end to get it out of the way or make it change position. <i>Liwágun nátù ngadtu ning tabla arun dílì magbalabag sa dálan,</i> Let's push this board to one side so it won't be in the way. <b>2</b> [B6; c1] face a different direction. <i>Pastilan ug mulíwag nang kanyun,</i> If that cannon turns in this direction, we're in for it. <b>2a</b> shift one's direction in squatting without taking the soles off the ground. <i>Milíwag siya arun maduul sa íyang tiráhan nga dyúlin,</i> He pivoted around to get nearer to the target he was shooting his marble at.

<p><b>líwas</b> <i>n</i> period after a holiday or big occasion. <i>Sa líwas sa pyista,</i> After the fiesta. <i>Líwas sa gíra,</i> The post-war period. <i>v</i> [B256; b] for it to get to be the time after some period. <i>Mulíwas na lang ang pasku wà giyud kuy pinaskúhan,</i> Christmas will soon be over and I still haven't received a single Christmas gift. <i>Giliwásan giyud mi sa ting-ani didtu sa búkid,</i> We stayed in the mountains until after the harvest season.

<p><b>liwat</b> <i>a</i> @{taking after}. <i>Liwat siya sa amahan nga taas ug ilung,</i> He got his father's long nose. <b>&mdash; sa giliwatan</b> being exactly like the parents, a chip off the old block. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256N; b6] @{take after} s.o. <b>2</b> [A12] obtain or produce an offspring or young. <i>Maáyu na lang ug makaliwat (makapaliwat) ning sunúya kay dì na ikatárì,</i> This rooster is no good for fighting any more, but we can still use him as breeder. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @species, @breed of. <i>Ang dumánu liwat sa lubi nga inánu, Dumánu</i> is a species of dwarf coconut. <b>2</b> one's @children. <i>Pila nay ímung liwat karun?</i> How many children do you have now? <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c] @breed s.t. <i>Paliwatan (paliwatun) nákù ning ákung alumnus,</i> I will use this boar for breeding purposes. <i>Ug gustu kag maáyung nati, anhà ipaliwat sa ílang túru,</i> If you want to have a good calf, breed it from their bull. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] have an @offspring. <i>Ug mangliwat ímung bábuy, paambíta ta ug usa,</i> If your pig has a litter, let me have one. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @descendant. <i>Ang kalíwat ni Busyu mau ang mga adunáhan sa Karkar,</i> The wealthy families in Carcar are the descendants of Bosio. <b>2</b> @breed, @race, @species. <i>Kining mungaána kalíwat ug hingitlug,</i> This hen is an egg-laying breed. <i>Lubus nga kalíwat,</i> Purebred. <i>Mau ni ang kalíwat sa úhung nga <pb n=1284>gagmayun apan pinangità,</i> This species of mushroom is small but highly prized. <i>Tabúnung kalíwat,</i> The brown race. [+]

<p><b>liwayway</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name of a Tagalog weekly. <b>2</b> brand of cheap cigarettes.

<p><b>liwit</b> = <sc>DIWIT</sc>.

<p><b>liyalíya</b> <i>n</i> @{rocking chair}. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sit or be rocking in a chair. <i>Midiskansu siya, nagliyalíya,</i> He is sitting in his rocking chair, relaxing.

<p><b>liyinda</b> <i>n</i> @legend, a story handed down from early times by tradition and popularly regarded as historical.

<p><b>líyu</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] @circle around. <i>Milíyu ug katulu ang ayruplánu únà mutugpa,</i> The airplane circled three times before it landed. <i>n</i> things located in a circle around an area. <i>Mga balay nga líyu sa simbahan,</i> The houses surrounding the church.

<p><b>líyug</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long and slender to be @bent or @crooked, @warped. <i>Dílì magsirbi nà pára pálu kay líyug kaáyu,</i> This would not do for a mast because it is crooked. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] be @crooked or @bent. <i>Unsang klási sa mitrusána ni nga naglíyug man?</i> What kind of meter stick is this that it is so crooked? <b>2</b> [B246] for a missile to go crooked. <i>Mulíyug ang lapad nga batu ug ilábay,</i> A flat stone curves when you throw it. <b>liyuglíyug</b> <i>v</i> [A] bend back and forth. <i>Ug muliyuglíyug ang lubi, bagyu na nà,</i> If the coconut sways back and forth, it's a typhoon.

<p><b>líyuk</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c] be, go around s.t. <i>Mga bátang naglíyuk (nagliyuk) sa nag-ásuy,</i> Children sitting around the storyteller. <i>Makalíyuk ba ning písì sa paldu?</i> Will this rope go all around the bale? <i>Wà mi makasíbug dihang giliyúkan mi sa mga Hapun,</i> We were not able to retreat when the Japanese surrounded us. a being around. <i>Líyuk sa ílang balay may káhuy nga namúnga,</i> There are trees covered with fruit all around their house.

<p><b>liyun</b> <i>n</i> @lion.

<p><b>lú<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{law course}. <i>Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan,</i> He is taking up law.

<p><b>lú<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @{feel weak} and with no energy. <i>Mulú lang nang tawhána ug magdaut,</i> That man feels weak and lazy only if he is ill. <i>Ug ilú nímu ang plú, musamut,</i> Your flu will get worse if you give in to it.

<p><b>lúad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB126; a12] be @uprooted and fall on its side, @uproot s.t. <i>Bagyu Ámi ang naglúad ánang kasya,</i> Typhoon Amy felled that acacia tree. <i>Nalúad ang pusti nga naagian sa bahà,</i> The post was uprooted when the flood went through it. <b>2</b> [A; a12] for brothers to marry sisters. <i>Gilúad sa mga <pb n=1285>Plánas ang mga Bakalan,</i> The Planas brothers married the Bacalan sisters.

<p><b>luag</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> loose, not tightly attached or wound around. <i>Luag kaáyu pagkabaáta ang písì,</i> The rope is loosely tied. <i>Luag nga sapátus,</i> Shoes that are too big. <b>2</b> having ample space. <i>Ang bangkù luag pára lingkúran sa lima ka táwu,</i> The bench is big enough for five persons to sit on it. <i>Luag nga kalubinhan.</i> Large tracts of coconut land. <b>2a</b> for s.t. not to occupy a whole area. <i>Ípun diri ug lingkud kay luag pa mi kaáyu,</i> Sit with us because there's plenty of room here. <b>3</b> being in a comfortable situation. <i>Luag na ang átung panimuyù kay may trabáhu na silas Pápa ug Máma,</i> We have a comfortable life now that Dad and Mom both have jobs. <b>4</b> for emotions or a sickness to be relieved. <i>Luag na ang ákung ginháwa dihang naulì na ang bátà,</i> My anxiety has been relieved now that my daughter came home. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; a2] be loose, loosen. <i>Bi, akuy muluag (mupaluag) sa ímung kurbáta,</i> Here, I will loosen your necktie. <i>Hugti ug maáyu ang twirka arun dílì muluag,</i> Tighten the nut very well so it will not loosen. <i>Luagi ug báat ang ákung kamut,</i> Tie my hands loosely. <b>2</b> [B5; b6] be, become wide in area. <i>Nagkaluag ang ílang kahumayan kay nanáwat silag prinda,</i> They are getting more and more rice lands because they accept mortgages. <b>3</b> for one's financial or emotional situation to ease up. <b>ha-</b> = <sc>LUAG</sc>, <i>a2.</i> <b>luaglúag</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b(1)] for there to be a slackening of pressure, treat leniently. <i>Apikíha siya. Ayawg luagluági ang ímung paghangyù,</i> Pressure him. Don't ease up in your pleading. <i>Ug luagluágan nímu ang ímung mga anak, mangabusar nà,</i> If you are too lenient with your children, they will become abusive.

<p><b>luaryang, luaryung</b> (from <i>luag</i>) <i>a</i> for a woman to have a large vagina, no longer a virgin (coarse). <i>Mangasáwa ka ánang luaryang?</i> Are you going to marry that fallen woman? <i>v</i> [B126] be a fallen woman.

<p><b>lúas</b> <i>n</i> tiny sore in the gums or inside of the mouth. <i>v</i> [b4] have tiny sores in the mouth.

<p><b>luátan</b> <i>n</i> joints, a place of union between two separate bones.

<p><b>luay<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> leader in fishing with a line. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] attach a leader to a line.

<p><b>luay<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become weak and limp. <i>Muluay (maluay) ang láwas sa táwung kuyapan,</i> The body of a person who faints becomes limp. <i>Nagluay ang úlu sa bátà nga nakatúlug sa silya,</i> The child's head was hanging limply after he fell asleep in the chair. <i>a</i> flexible, limp. <i>Luay ang alambri,</i> <pb n=1286>Wire is flexible.

<p><b>luay<sub>3</sub></b> = <sc>DUL-AY</sc>.

<p><b>luba</b> <i>v</i> [B26] @{give way} under pressure, persecution, public opinion. <i>Dì muluba (maluba) ning ákung pagbátì bísan taliw[=à] sa pagtámay,</i> My love will not give way no matter how much scorn they may heap on me. <i>Ang lúhà sa íyang asáwa mauy nakapaluba (nakaluba) sa íyang hugut nga hukum,</i> His wife's tears moved him to back down from his firm decision.

<p><b>lúbà</b> <i>v</i> [A3S; a1] @stab. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakalúbà,</i> He was put in jail because he stabbed s.o.

<p><b>lubad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] @fade. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang púlu kay gibakhan,</i> The shirt faded because it was bleached in the sun. <i>Nagkalubad ang singsing pansi,</i> The imitation ring is fading. <b>2</b> [B246; b4] for colors to run. <i>Gilubdan ang putì nga giságul sa dikulur,</i> When the white and the colored clothing were washed together, the colors ran onto the white cloth. <b>3</b> [B2] for feelings, traits, etc. to @fade. <i>Ang panahun makapalubad (makalubad) sa panaghigalaay,</i> Time can make a friendship fade. <b>3a</b> [AB] change one's mind, cause s.o. to do so. <i>Dì giyud siya maglubad sa íyang hukum,</i> He never changes his decisions. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang íyang hunàhúnà pagkabuntag,</i> She changed her mind the following morning. <b>4</b> for the voice to break. <i>Ulitáwu ka na kay milubad nag ímung tíngug,</i> You are an adolescent now because your voice has started to break. a faded. <i>Sinínang lubad,</i> A faded shirt. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] shift the topic of conversation. <i>Mipalubad dáyun siya dihang ákù na untang sukmátan,</i> He changed the subject right away when I was about to confront him. <b>lubarun</b> <i>a</i> of a @faded sort. <i>Lubarun na ning pulúha, dáan na man gud,</i> This sport shirt is faded because it is already old.

<p><b>*lubag<sub>1</sub></b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] @{change the topic} of conversation, take s.t. back. <i>Mangumidiya siya, apan kun masukù na ang íyang kumidiyáhan, mupalubag (magpalubag) dáyun siya,</i> He teases, but when the fellow he is teasing gets angry, he immediately takes it back. <i>Báhin sa gugma ang íyang gipalubag,</i> He changed the topic of conversation to love.

<p><b>lúbag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB6; ab] @twist s.t., @wring s.t. out. <i>Lubágun ku nang líug mu, animála ka,</i> I will wring your neck, you beast. <i>Lubági ang linabhan arun daling mauga,</i> Wring out the clothes so they will dry quickly. <b>2</b> [A13] for flat boards to be @warped. <i>Naglúbag ang tabla kay dúgayng nabulad sa ínit,</i> The board is warped because it was left in the <pb n=1287>sun for a long time. <b>(->)<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> liquid obtained by squeezing plants for their sap. <i>Maáyung bubhu ang lubag sa bawnus,</i> The squeezings from the gogo vine make good shampoo. <i>v</i> [A2; c] <b>1</b> exude a juice, taste, color when soaked in water. <i>Pula ang ilubag sa tungug,</i> Mangrove bark gives off a red color. <b>2</b> for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milubag na ang íyang pangarmin. Napaangkan siya,</i> Her habit of always making herself up has borne fruit. Now she got pregnant. <b>3</b> [A2N] for dirt to loosen so that it comes out easily. <i>Ihúmul únà sa sabun nang mga bulingun bwáhan makalubag ang buling,</i> Soak the dirty clothes in soapy water so that the dirt can come loose. <b>lubaglúbag</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] writhe. <i>Naglubaglúbag siya sa katri sa kasakit,</i> He is writhing in pain on the bed. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> liquid or juice squeezed out of s.t. <i>Waswási pag linabhan kay lubug pag linúbag,</i> Rinse the clothes once more because the water you are wringing out is still dirty. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] cause s.t. to exude its juice or dirt to come out. <i>n</i> s.t. which can loosen dirt.

<p><b>lubak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] pound, beat heavily with s.t. <i>Tulu ka táwu ang mulubak (maglubak) sa humay,</i> Three persons will pound the rice. <i>Lubakun ku sa kúmù ang ímung nawung,</i> I will beat your face with my fists.

<p><b>lubakan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a coconut palm with the defect that its nuts and fronds easily break or fall off. <b>2</b> the way certain coconuts develop with a husk so thick that the nut looks very much bigger than the ordinary, but with an ordinary amount of meat. <i>v</i> [B1256] for a coconut tree to get to be so that the nuts and fronds break off easily.

<p><b>lubang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] transplant seedlings. <i>Kamiy mulubang sa mga lubi,</i> We will transplant the coconut seedlings. <i>n</i> seedling.

<p><b>lubang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B246] for pimples or rash to come out. <i>Mulubang ang mga butuybutuy ug mukáun siyag pasáyan,</i> She breaks out in rash if she eats shrimps.

<p><b>lúbang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. upland rice with big, round, reddish grains that ripen in five months.

<p><b>lub-ang<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] put all of s.t. in one container. <i>Kinsa may naglub-ang íning tanang ságing sa kúlun?</i> Who put all the bananas in the pot? <i>Ilub-ang ang tanang linabhan sa duwang,</i> Put all of the laundry in the basin.

<p><b>lub-ang<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pothole. <b>2</b> hole to plant seedlings in. <i>v</i> [B12] for potholes to develop. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> seedling ready for transplanting to holes dug for the purpose.

<p><b>lúbas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> heartwood of timber. <b>2</b> maturity, enough years to become seasoned (literary). <pb n=1288><i>v</i> [b4] have well-developed heartwood. <b>-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having well-developed heartwood. <b>2</b> @seasoned, @experienced. <i>Lubásan nga magbabalaud,</i> Seasoned lawmaker.

<p><b>lubat</b> <i>n</i> illness caused by a frightening experience, esp. contact with the dead. The cure is <ix>palínà</ix>. (<ix>see</ix> <sc>*LÍNÀ<sub>2</sub></sc>) <i>Kanang íyang gibátì lubat nà niadtung kalit nga pagdawugdug,</i> Her sickness is due to the intense fright she suffered from hearing the thunder. <i>v</i> [B246; b4] for an illness to develop or for s.t. that one has to get worse because of intense fright. <i>Mulubat ang kabahung basta iadtug mintiryu,</i> Sores get worse if you go to a cemetery when you have them. <i>Gilubatan ang bátà kay gidúul sa minatay,</i> The child got ill from fright because he was made to go near the corpse. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] startle s.o. by s.t. sudden&mdash;a shout or a sudden spring from a concealed position. <i>Palubatan nákù si Náti inigsúd sa kwartu,</i> I'll frighten Natie when she enters the room.

<p><b>lubaung</b>= <sc>LIBAUNG</sc>.

<p><b>lubay, lúbay</b> <i>a</i> @pliant, easily bent. <i>Lúbay ang kawáyan,</i> Bamboo bends. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] become @supple. <i>Mulúbay (malúbay) ímung láwas ug mukúhà kag bali,</i> Your body becomes supple if you take ballet lessons. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> tender string beans. <b>lubaylúbay</b> <i>v</i> [A1P; c16] move or do s.t. slowly with a wiggly body. <i>Maglubaylúbay (magpalubaylúbay) giyud nà siyang maglakaw, mu rag báyut,</i> He walks slowly wiggling his body like a fairy. <i>n</i> k.o. @wrasse.

<p><b>lubi</b> <i>n</i> @coconut: <b><i>Cocos nucifera</i></b>. <b>mugbù pa ang &mdash;</b> @{long ago}. <b>&mdash; nga lupísan</b> <i>n</i> variety with green husks. <b>&mdash; nga ugis</b> <i>n</i> variety with whitish nuts, used in making coconut oil for medicinal purposes. <i>v</i> [b(1)] mix milk extracted from coconut meat with s.t. <i>Nindut ang sabaw sa kinhasun ug lubihan,</i> A chowder of seashells tastes good if coconut milk is added to it. <b>lubilúbi</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] weed or clean the area around each coconut plant. <i>Ug dì nátù matibuuk paglimpiyu, lubilubíhun lang,</i> If we can't clean the whole area, just clean under each tree. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to various plants commonly found in coconut groves. <b>1a</b> k.o. shrub with no branches and reddish leaves growing at the tops. <b>1b</b> k.o. @{ground orchids}, e.g. the ornamental @orchid: <b><i>Spathoglottis plicata</i></b>. <b>2</b> name given to k.o. palm. <b>palubilúbi</b> <i>v</i> [A] play hard to get (from the notion that coconut meat is hard to extract from its shell). <i>Nagpalubilúbi siya ábig ákung lugítun,</i> She is playing hard to get. She thinks I'm going to try to extract her from the shell. <b>kalubihan,  <pb n=1289>kalubian, kalubinhan</b> <i>n</i> coconut grove. <b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> a system of trading in which the merchandise, esp. home-made food preparations as cakes, etc., are bartered for mature coconuts. <i>v</i> [c6] barter goods for coconuts. <i>Itagalubi ni nákung bibingka,</i> I'll barter these rice cakes for coconuts.

<p><b>lúbid</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] twist together, twine. <i>Nagkalúbid íyang dílà pagsinultig ininglis,</i> His tongue gets all twisted up in trying to speak English. <i>Lubíra ang duha ka wáyir arun lig-un giyud,</i> Twist the two wires together to make them really strong. <i>n</i> abaca twine. <b>lubiran</b> <i>n</i> device for twining rope. <b>lubidlúbid, -in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hard, crunchy pastry, fashioned like twine, sprinkled with flakes of sugar.

<p><b>lubing</b> <i>n</i> loop or noose of a lasso which tightens when pulled. <i>Dakua ang lubing kay dakù ug líug ang báka,</i> Make the loop large because the neck of the cow is large. <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> catch or ensnare using a lasso or noose which tightens when pulled. <i>Akuy mulubing (maglubing) sa mga báka,</i> I'll lasso the cows. <b>2</b> win s.o. through deceit or by fast talk. <i>Gilubing sa pulitiku ang publiku,</i> The politician had won the public support through his glib words.

<p><b>lubintadur</b> = <sc>LIBINTADUR</sc>.

<p><b>lubítus</b> <i>n</i> very small beads sewn on s.t. for decoration. <i>v</i> [A; b6] decorate s.t. with <i>lubítus.</i>

<p><b>lublub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;b(1)] bury oneself. <i>Kuykúya ang gilublúban sa hanlilítik,</i> Dig down to where the scorpion shrimp buried itself. <b>2</b> [A; b6] stay long in a place without much activity. <i>Naglublub lang siya sa íla kay way kwarta,</i> He just stays home because he doesn't have any money. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place where s.o. buries himself or stays long in. [+]

<p><b>lúbu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B26; c1P] for s.t. to be projected upwards at a sharp angle. <i>Ayawg ilúbu (lubúha ipalúbu, palubúha) inigsirbi kay sayun nang sagngun,</i> Don't serve it high because it will be easy to spike it. <i>a</i> projected at a sharp angle. <i>Lúbu ra nga pagkasirbi<corr>,</corr></i> Served too high. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> balloon. <b>2</b> hot-air balloon. <i>Misáka ang lúbu human kadagkuti ang pabílu,</i> The hot-air balloon rose after the wick was lit.

<p><b>lúbu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> wolf.

<p><b>lúbù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> remove grains of corn from the cob. <i>Lubúa nang mais arun ipagaling,</i> Remove the kernels so we can mill them. <b>2</b> remove teeth, serrations, or anything protruding in a series, like the grains of corn. <i>Malúbù run nang ngípun mug musúpak ka,</i> You'll be minus your teeth if you don't <pb n=1290>cooperate. <b>hangyù &mdash;</b> request made in such a way it cannot be turned down (so called from the notion that as one is asking for corn he is at the same time picking at the grains).

<p><b>lubug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> for a person to sit with the rump smack on the ground or for an animal to sit or lie with its limbs flat on the ground. <i>Milubug sa sawug ang irù,</i> The dog was stretched out on the floor. <b>1a</b> for the sun to be about to set. <i>Milubug na ang adlaw sa kasadpan,</i> The sun was about to set (lit. sitting on its rump in the west). <b>2</b> stay in a place for some time, but temporarily. <i>Duha na ku ka simánang lubug dinhi kay way kasakyan,</i> I have been stuck here for two weeks because there has been no transportation. <b>2a &mdash; sa banig</b> [A13] stay in bed due to illness. <i>Mutúig na siyang galubug sa banig,</i> He has been bedridden for almost a year. <b>lubganan</b> <i>n</i> place where animals habitually lie down.

<p><b>lúbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2; a] for liquid to get or be made murky with sediment. <i>Mulúbug (malúbug) ang subà ug mubahà,</i> The river becomes muddy during floods. <i>Ang nangaligúay mauy naglúbug sa subà,</i> The bathers made the river all muddy. <b>2</b> [AB12] for one's sight to become, be made blurry. <i>Bulug sa lúhà nga milúbug sa íyang mata,</i> A torrent of tears that blurred her sight. <b>3</b> [A; a12] make a wild disturbance so as to disrupt an activity. <i>Tagagawas ang naglúbug sa ámung parti,</i> Some outsiders disrupted our party. <i>a</i> murky, blurred. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>LÚBUG</sc>, <i>a.</i> <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> of a muddy, murky sort.

<p><b>lubuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] pound with a pestle. <i>Lubka (lukba) lang ang tipasì. Ayawg ipagaling,</i> Just pound the rice. Don't have it milled. <b>2</b> [A; a12] rain blows on the body. <i>Lubkun únà sa buksidur ang tiyan sa íyang kuntra,</i> The boxer pounds his opponent's stomach first. <b>lubkanan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place where pounding is done. <b>2</b> mortar.

<p><b>lubulúbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a bitter, inedible powdery material from buri palm flour, which is separated from the edible portion <i>(natuk)</i> and disposed of. <b>2</b> thin, white membranous covering on the inside surface of bamboo stems.

<p><b>lubun</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)] sink into s.t. soft. <i>Nalubun ang trák sa lápuk ug dì na makadúwal,</i> The truck is stuck in the mud and cannot move any further. <i>Nagkalubun na ning ákung singsing kay nagkadakù man ning ákung tudlù,</i> My ring is getting embedded more and more deeply in my finger because my finger is getting fatter. <i>Ilubun (lubunun)  <pb n=1291>pag-áyu ang batu sa aláhas arun dílì daling mulagput,</i> The stones are set deeply so that they can't fall out. <i>a</i> for stones to be set deep. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> meat or fish inserted into the boiled rice one carries s.w. as his lunch <i>(malutù).</i> <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> in weaving, a rod stuck into a groove made in the cloth beam <i>(likisan),</i>the purpose of which is to hold the woven cloth wound around the cloth beam in place and maintain tension on the warp.

<p><b>lubung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] bury. <i>Naglubung silag bahandì sa sílung,</i> They buried a treasure under the house. <i>Gipamisáhan ang háyà únà ilubung,</i> A mass was said for the dead man before he was buried. <b>1a</b> be beaten by an overwhelming victory in an election, contest, game. <i>Gilubung ang Libiral sa Nasyunalista,</i>The Nationalists defeated the Liberals by a landslide. <b>1b</b> bury fish in the sand to make them look fresh. <b>1c</b> embed a charm inside a part of the body. <i>Gilubung níya ang mutyà sa íyang brásu arun mahímu siyang kublan,</i> He embedded the magical pearl in his biceps to make himself invulnerable. <b>2</b> [AB6; cP] sink, drive s.t. into the ground; for s.t. to sink into the ground. <i>Milubung ákung tiil pagtámak nákù sa lápuk,</i> My foot sank when I stepped in the mud. <i>Naglubung silag mga trúsu sa pundasiyun,</i> They drove logs into the foundations. <b>&mdash; sa kalímut</b> <i>v</i> [c6] forget s.t. completely. <i>Ilubung sa kalímut ang ímung makauúlawng kaági,</i> Forget your shameful past. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> grave. <b>2</b> interment. <b>lubngánan</b> <i>n</i> place of interment. <i>Bawnun ku sa lubngánan ang ákung pagmáhay,</i> I will regret it to my dying day (lit. carry my regret to my grave). <b>lubnganan, kalubngan</b> <i>n</i> cemetery. <b>lubnganánun</b> <i>a</i> appropriate to the cemetery. <i>Lubnganánung kahílum,</i> A cemetery-like silence. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> fish buried in the sand near the shore so that they would look fresh.

<p><b>lubus</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] acquire a supernatural ability by means of undergoing a series of difficult tasks <i>(táhas)</i> in preparation for it. <i>Ug mulubus (manlubus) kag kaláki kinahanglang makatúman ka sa táhas,</i> If you want to acquire supernatural ability, you must be able to accomplish the series of difficult tasks. <i>Gilubus sa ákung apuhan ang kaláki ni Dun Liyun Kílat,</i> My grandfather acquired Don Leon Kilat's supernatural ability.

<p><b>lúbus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> entirely of one color and texture. <i>Ang ákung irù lúbus nga putì,</i> My dog is entirely white. <i>Ang kulur sa bistídu lúbus kaáyung pula,</i> My dress is colored a very pure red. <i>Lúbus pánit ákung bág,</i> My purse <pb n=1292>is all leather. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; kalíwat</b> @purebred. <i>Lúbus kalíwat Tiksas kining manúka,</i> This cock is a purebred Texas. <b>2</b> for a decision to be final. <i>Lúbus na ang ákung hukum,</i> My decision is final. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] be, become purely one color. <i>Ug usban nímug pintal, mulúbus (malúbus) ang kulur,</i> If you paint it once more, the color will be pure and even. <b>2</b> [B26; c1] be, become @decided.

<p><b>lúbus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @tied, wound around tight. <i>v</i> [a12] @tie s.t. tight. <i>Ayaw lubúsa pagbáat arun sayun badbárun,</i> Don't tie it tight so it will be easy to untie. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @tightness of a knot or the way s.t. was tied up.

<p><b>lubut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @anus, @rump. <i>Lúpig pay lubut sa himungáan sa katabian níya,</i> She's more talkative than a hen's behind (which keeps opening and closing). <b>walay &mdash;</b> having hips and buttocks far too forward. <i>Ayg tak-in kay wà kay lubut,</i> Don't tuck in your shirt because you have flat buttocks. <b>2</b> @vagina (euphemism). <i>Ang bátà anhà mulusut sa lubut sa babáyi,</i> A baby comes out through the mother's bottom. <b>3</b> bottom part of a container or receptacle. <i>Lubut sa baskit,</i> Bottom of the basket. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; sa básu</b> costume jewelry (lit. made from the bottom of a glass). <i>Daling mulubad ang singsing nga lubut sa básu,</i> A dimestore ring soon fades. <b>4</b> rear end of vehicles. <i>Ikarga sa lubut sa trák,</i> Load it at the back part of the truck. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; mu</b> <b>5a</b> expression of disbelief. <i>Lubut nímu! Kinsay mutúu,</i> My foot! Who'd believe that! <b>5b</b> expression of disgust. <i>&lsquo;Tagai kug dus ipamúwang.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dus sa ímung lubut. Hái kwartáhun?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let me have two pesos to go to the cockfights.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Two pesos. You must be nuts. We don't have any money!&rsquo; <b>6</b> <b>nakahikap sa &mdash;</b> s.t. must have happened to [subject] that he did s.t. nice since he doesn't usually do that. <i>Nanghátag mag kwarta ang tihik. Nakahikap sa lubut,</i> Suddenly the miser is giving out money. S.t. must have happened to him. (Lit. He must have gotten his hand on s.o.'s rear end.) <b>7</b> <b>mabaw ug &mdash;</b> easily angered. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ANC; c1] do s.t. at s.o.'s rear end. <i>Nanglubut siya ug suntuk,</i> He hit him on the buttocks. <i>Nagkalúbut mig higdà,</i> We lay with our buttocks touching each other. <i>Lubuta siya pagtindak,</i> Kick her in the arse. <b>2</b> [B; c] get to be at the rear or bottom. <i>Nagkalubut na man ku sa ámung klási,</i> I am gradually slipping to the bottom of my class. <i>Inay kay nag-una kug sakay, nalubut na hinúun,</i> I was the first to get on the bus, but I wound up in the rear end anyway. <i>Ilubut lang ning ákung karga,</i> Just place my baggage at the <pb n=1293>rear. <b>3</b> [A12N; a12] enter through the back way. <i>Lubtun lang nátug súd ang báy arung dì ta makit-an,</i> Let's go in through the back door so that nobody will see us. <b>&mdash; ug anay</b> <i>n</i> nutmeg shells (lit. sow's anus) so called because of the similarity of the lips of this shell to the anal lips of a sow. <b>lubutlubut</b> <i>v</i> [B4] have more work to do than one can handle. <i>Nagkalubutlubut kug laba,</i> I'm going crazy trying to do all this laundry. <i>Dílì man ka mutuktuk, magkalubutlubut man lang tag panábun sa átung láwas,</i> Why didn't you knock? I went wild trying to cover myself. <b>lubutlúbut</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c] @follow s.o. around. <i>Ayaw kug lubutlubúti,</i> Don't follow me around all the time.

<p><b>lubyuk</b> <i>v</i> [B] be, become @hollow, @sunken. <i>Kandíis nga naglubyuk sa íyang isig ka áping,</i> Dimples that are deeply set on each cheek. <i>Ang húmuk nga yútà malubyuk kun tumban,</i> Soft earth caves in when you step on it.

<p><b>lúd</b> <i>n</i> load of courses given to a teacher. <i>v</i> [A; c] have a certain teaching load. <i>Gamay ra kug makítà kay naglúd lang kug duha,</i> I don't earn much because I have only two courses. <i>Pilay ilúd nímu káda simistir?</i> How many courses are given you per semester?

<p><b>ludà</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] @spit, @{spit out}. <i>Giludà níya ang íyang giúsap,</i> He spat out what he was chewing, <i>n</i> @spittle, @saliva.

<p><b>ludábi</b> <i>n</i> name of Cebuano writers' organization, abbreviation of <ix>Lúbas sa Dágang Bisayà</ix>, &lsquo;The elite (lit. heartwood) of Visayan literature&rsquo;.

<p><b>lud-an</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LUWÀ</sc>.

<p><b>ludhan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LUHUD</sc>.

<p><b>lúgà</b> = <sc>LUGÀLÚGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>lugabu, lugábu</b> <i>n</i> dull hollow sound of impact. <i>Lugábu sa mga táwung nagsáyaw sa táas,</i> The thumping sound of the people dancing upstairs. <i>v</i> [A2S3] produce a dull hollow sound of impact. <i>Milugábu ang likud nga gisumbag,</i> His back resounded with a thump when I slapped him. <i>Naglugabu ang bawud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves pounded against the shore. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁBU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugabung</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] make a thumping sound. <i>Naglugabung ang mga lamísa ug síya nga gipatíran sa mga hubug,</i> The chairs and tables made a thumping sound as the drunken men kicked them.

<p><b>lugak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ab7] for s.t. which grips or is tied round s.t. to loosen. <i>Wà siya mulugak ug gakus nákù sa kahadluk nga byáan,</i> She did not let go of her embrace for fear of being left behind. <i>Lugaka ang ímung sinínà arun hayáhay,</i> Loosen your dress so it will <pb n=1294>be comfortable. <i>Lugaki ang turniki káda singku minútus,</i> Loosen the tourniquet every five minutes. <b>2</b> [B4; b(1)] @abate, @{slow down} from doing s.t. with energy. <i>Ang bag-ung dálan makalugak (makapalugak) sa trapiku dinhi,</i> The new street can relieve the traffic here. <i>Ayawg lugaki ang pagpanguyab níya,</i> Keep courting her for all you're worth. Don't let off. <b>3</b> [B2456N] for the knees to give way, for a person to budge from his convictions. <i>Dì siya mulugak sa íyang barugánan bísag hulgáun,</i> He won't budge from his stand even if you threaten him. <i>Nanglugak ang íyang mga túhud,</i> His knees gave way. <b>4</b> [b(1)] loosen one's control or discipline over. <i>Ug ímung lugakan ang ímung anak muabusar nà,</i> If you rear your child leniently he will become abusive.

<p><b>lugàlúgà</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] move s.t. in a hole back and forth. <i>Naglugàlúgà siya ug lipak sa nabúlit nga túbu,</i> He worked a stick back and forth in the tube that was stopped up.

<p><b>lugamak, lugámak</b> <i>v</i> [B456; c1P] fall with a crash, be thrown down with force. <i>Mulugamak ka giyud ug mahugnù nang ímung gitungtúngan,</i> You will fall with a crash if that thing you are standing on collapses. <i>Gilugamakan (gipalugamakan) ang mga búlak sa mga inibut nga sagbut,</i> They threw the uprooted weeds with force on top of the flowers. <i>Nalugamakan (nalugmakan) ku sa íyang kasábà,</i> I received the brunt of his scoldings. <i>Ímu man nang ilugamak (ipalugamak) ang ímung láwas bísag ása,</i> You throw yourself down anywhere. <i>n</i> sounds of s.t. falling with a crash. <b>(->)</b> [B126; b8] rush headlong into s.t. <i>Nalugamak siya sa usa ka byúda nga way kwarta,</i> He rushed into marriage with a penniless widow. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁMAK</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugan-ub</b> <i>n</i> @thundering, @reverberating sound. <i>v</i> [A3] produce a thunderous or loud reverberating sound. <i>Milugan-ub ang kabukíran nga gipabuthan ug dinamíta,</i> A deafening sound echoed through the mountains when the dynamite was exploded. <i>n</i> a thundering, reverberating sound. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGAN-UB</sc>.

<p><b>lugapak, lugápak</b> <i>n</i> @banging, @slapping, @cracking sound. <i>Ang lugapak sa kawáyan,</i> The cracking of the bamboo. <i>v</i> [A2S; ac] make a cracking, slapping, banging sound. <i>Milugapak ang pultahan nga gikalit pagsira,</i> The door was slammed with a bang. <i>Naglugapak ang samput sa íyang anak sa bakus,</i> The leather belt cracked over his son's buttocks. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁPAK</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugar<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> geographical place. <i>Nakaadtu na <pb n=1295>ku sa lainláing lugar sa kalibútan,</i> I have been to various places in the world. <b>1a</b> situation one is in. <i>Ikaw sa ákung lugar ug lalim ba,</i> You try being in my place and see if it is nice. <b>2</b> proper place, occasion for s.t. <i>Ibutang sa lugar ang ímung pagpangmik-ap,</i> Use make-up at the proper occasion. <i>Walà sa lugar tung ímung pagsaway níya kay daghang namínaw,</i> It was not the right time for you to criticise him because there were lots of people listening. <b>2a</b> proper place of vehicles in the flow of traffic. <i>Patuu. Wà ka sa lugar,</i> Move to the right. You're not in your lane. <b>3</b> vacant place. <i><corr sic="Dùna">Dúna</corr> pa bay lugar sa dyíp?</i> Is there room in the jeep? <b>4</b> available time for s.t. <i>Wà kuy lugar pagsúruy run,</i> I don't have time to go around now. <b>5</b> @chance or @opportunity to do s.t. <i>Way lugar pagdúul níya kay gwardiyádu,</i> There is no chance to get near him because he is guarded. <b>6</b> <b>primíru (ikaduha,</b> etc.) &mdash; in the first (second, etc.) @place. <i>Ayawg adtu. Primíru lugar istranyu ka,</i> Don't go there. In the first place, you are a stranger. <b>lugráha, lugaráha</b> <i>n</i> particular place, time, chance. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @{give way} or space to. <i>Milugar siya arun makalingkud ang babáyi,</i> He gave his place so the lady could sit. <i>Lugari ang Prisidinti inigsúut níya sa nanambung,</i> Give way to the President when he goes through the crowd. <b>2</b> [A3; b(1)] give the chance to do s.t. <i>Musabut giyug íyang pápa kay mulugar man inigpamisíta nákù,</i> Her father is sure understanding because he leaves us alone (lit. gives a chance) when I go visiting. <i>Ayaw siyag lugari nga muantug,</i> Don't give him the chance to shoot the ball. <b>3</b> [A12] <b>3a</b> get a chance to do s.t. <i>Hagki dáyun siya ug makalugar ka,</i> Kiss her as soon as you get the chance. <b>3b</b> have the time to. <i>Buháta ni ug makalugar ka,</i> Do this if you have the time to. <b>4</b> [A2; c6] pull over in a place proper for stopping a vehicle. <i>Ilugar ang dyip ug muhúnung ka,</i> Pull over to the side of the road when you stop. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having available space. <i>Kargáhi pa kay lugar pa kaáyu,</i> Put in more passengers because there's still plenty of space. <b>2</b> for there to be a chance. <i>Dì ku mangupya bísag lugar kaáyu,</i> I won't cheat even if I have a good chance to do so. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] give s.o. a chance to come near or touch one. <i>Di[typo: Dì] nà siya magbinúang bísag palugaran,</i> He won't do anything foolish even if given the chance. <b>tag-</b> <i>n</i> spirit inhabiting a particular place. <i>Gidaútan nà siya sa taglugar kay íyang giputul ang káhuy,</i> The spirit of the place made him ill when he cut the tree down.

<pb n=1296>

<p><b>lugar<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>KINTA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lugas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @grain. <i>Usa ka lugas humay,</i> A grain of rice. <i>Maáyu ang lugas sa igtalánum nga binhì,</i> The seeds for planting have well-formed grains. <b>1a</b> @drops (figurative). <i>Pipila ka lugas nga lúhà,</i> A few teardrops. <b>2</b> strand. <i>Usa ka lugas buhuk,</i> A strand of hair. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; lánut</b> a hair's breadth (lit. strand of abaca fiber) by which one is kept from death. <i>Usa ka lugas lánut ang nakauwang nákù sa kamatáyun,</i> I came within a hair's breadth of meeting my death. <b>3</b> word counter for people. <i>Pipila ka lugas táwu ang didtu sa sinihan,</i> There were only a few people in the movies. <b>4</b> word counter for things which can be counted but not concrete. <i>Pipila ka lugas púlung,</i> A few words. <i>Pipila ka lugas kanta,</i> A few songs. <i>Pipila ka lugas idíya,</i> A few ideas.

<p><b>lug-as</b> <i>v</i> [B12; a12] remove husk from rice or other grains. <i>Ang ímung linubkan dì makalug-as (makapalug-as) sa dáwa,</i> The way you are doing it won't get the husks off the millet. <i>a</i> already unhusked. <i>Taphi ang linubuk kay lug-as na,</i> Winnow the pounded rice because the husks are off now.

<p><b>lugátub</b> <i>n</i> deep, loud, hollow sound. <i>v</i> [A] resound with a deep loud, hollow sound. <i>Milugátub ang baril nga gilábayg batu,</i> The barrel went bonk when a stone was thrown at it. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁTUB</sc>.

<p><b>lúgaw</b> <i>n</i> @porridge from rice or corn grits. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] make porridge. <i>Bag-ung humay ang lugáwa,</i> Make porridge from the new rice. <b>2</b> [B12] turn to, become a mud puddle or mire. <i>Malúgaw ang dálan ug mag-úlan,</i> The path becomes slush during rainy days. <b>-in-, ni-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LÚGAW</sc>.

<p><b>*lugay</b> <b>-nan, -nun</b> <i>n</i> pertaining to politics and elections. <i>Bugnù nga lugaynun (lugaynan) diin napárut si Kirínu,</i> The political fight where Quirino lost.

<p><b>lugbak</b> <i>v</i> [B26] for organic matter to decay. <i>Malugbak ang prútas nga may tatsa,</i> The fruit will @rot if it has been damaged. <i>Bisan malugbak ang ímung bukug, dílì ka kabalus sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You can never repay your parents no matter how much time goes by (lit. even after your bones have rotted). <i>Mauy nakalugbak (nakapalugbak) sa káhuyng halígi ang kanúnayng paghúmul níini sa túbig,</i> The wooden post rotted because it was immersed too long in water.

<p><b>lugbáti</b> = <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.

<p><b>lugda</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] start, originate some foolishness or mild misbehavior. <i>Kinsa ninyuy naglugda ug kuriskuris sa bungbung?</i> Which one of you started making scratches on the <pb n=1297>wall?

<p><b>lugdang</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> settle to the bottom of a liquid. <i>Wà makalugdang ang húgaw kay pirming gikútaw,</i> The dirt would not settle because s.o. kept stirring the water. <i>Dúgayng milugdang ang íyang paun kay súg man,</i> It took his bait a long time to reach the bottom because there was a current. <b>2</b> for results of bad action to make themselves felt. <i>Milugdang ang íyang tinuntu. Nakalabus,</i> That is the fruit of his foolishness. He was sent to prison. <b>3</b> [B3(1)4] for tender rice grains to solidify. <i>Wà pa gánì makalugdang ang humay aníhun na nímu,</i> Are you going to harvest the rice when the grains haven't solidified yet? <b>-in-, ni-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. that settled. <b>2</b> results of bad action. <i>Kanang batáa linugdang sa ímung tinuntu,</i> The child is the fruit of your stupidity. <b>3</b> one's youngest child (humorous). <b>-in-an</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>lugdat</b> <i>v</i> [B46] for the eyes to bulge. <i>Milugdat ang íyang mata sa katingála,</i> Her eyes bulged with surprise. <i>Gwápa untà apan naglugdat lang ang mata,</i> She looks pretty but she has bulging eyes.

<p><b>lugdum, lugdung</b> <i>a</i> heavily @overcast, particularly with rain clouds. <i>v</i> [B46] be heavily overcast. <i>Dúnay taliábut nga unus kay naglugdung ang lángit,</i> A rainstorm is coming because the sky is heavily overcast.

<p><b>lúgì<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] extract dried coconut meat from shell. <i>Hustu nang lugíun ang gihudnu nga lubi,</i> The coconuts are dried and the meat can be extracted. <b>2</b> [A; a12] process coconut into copra, from harvesting to drying. <i>Maglúgì mi káda trimistri,</i> We make copra every three months. <i>n</i> @copra. <i>Isulud sa sáku ang lúgì,</i> Put the copra in the sack. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> instrument for extracting coconut meat from the shell.

<p><b>lúgì<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> being outsmarted, fooled (slang). <i>Lúgì ka kay mitúu kang mubáyad siyag útang,</i> You have been fooled for believing that he pays his debts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be tricked into s.t. (slang). <i>Nalúgì ku sa Múrus pagpalit sa imitasyung rúliks,</i> I was tricked by the Moro into buying a fake Rolex watch. <b>2</b> [B126; a12] for a business to fail, fold up. <i>Ang kalit nga pagbahar sa prisyu mauy nakalúgì (nakapalúgì) sa íyang nigusyu,</i> The sudden drop in prices caused his business to fail. <b>3</b> [A; a2b3(1)] defeat in a game or fight. <i>Ang manghud ra nákuy maglúgí níya sa ahidris,</i> Even my little brother could defeat him in chess. <i>Ang liphuk ni Prasyir mauy nalugian ni Klí,</i> It was Frazier's left hook that defeated Clay.

<p><b>lúging</b> <i>n</i> logging company, industry. <i>Náa ku <pb n=1298>sa lúging,</i> I work for a logging firm.

<p><b>lug-is</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; a1] @split or @break into smaller sizes. <i>Maglug-is kug kawáyan pára ikural,</i> I will split some bamboo for fencing. <i>Naglug-is ang pintal,</i> The paint is cracking.

<p><b>lúgit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @extract s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface with s.t. pointed or sharp. <i>Gilúgit ang bála gíkan sa íyang páa,</i> The slug was extracted from his thigh. <b>2</b> extract coconut meat from the shell in making copra. <i>Ang láhing ray lugítun,</i> Extract copra only from mature nuts. <b>3</b> force oneself or s.o. to dig deep for money when he is financially hard up. <i>Napugus ang pubri paglúgit sa íyang tinagúan,</i> The poor man was forced to dig into his savings. <b>4</b> ask for s.t. in a forceful way. <i>Milúgit siyag hangyù sa íyang bánang mulakaw siya,</i> She twisted her husband's arm to let her go out. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used to extract s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface, esp. an instrument to separate coconut meat from the shell. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] act unwilling to make s.o. trouble himself or plead. <i>Gustu túud siya, piru nagmagáhì kay magpalúgit giyud,</i> She actually wanted to, but she put up resistance because she wanted him to implore her.

<p><b>lugituk</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for cereals to be @half-cooked but moist. <i>Naglugituk ang linung-ag kay wà ayúhag síga,</i> The rice is half-cooked because the fire wasn't hot enough.

<p><b>lugitum</b> (from <i>itum</i>) <i>v</i> [B4] be dark, gloomy because of denseness. <i>Milugitum ang lángit sa kabagà sa dag-um,</i> The sky got dark with thick clouds. <i>Ang naglugitum nga kamaisan,</i> The dense and dark cornfields.

<p><b>lugkab</b> = <sc>LUNGKAB</sc>.

<p><b>lugkat</b> (from <i>lukat</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> pry off things that are nailed or stuck into s.t. <i>Nakalugkat siya sa dakung lansang nga nagtaup sa káhuy,</i> He managed to pull the large nail out of the wood. <i>Gilugkat ang mga dáang baldúsa,</i> They removed the old tiles. <b>2</b> @uproot, @fell, including roots and all. <i>Nalugkat ang pusti nga nadasmagan sa trák,</i> The truck rammed into the post and it knocked it over.

<p><b>luglug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] thrust s.t. long repeatedly into a narrow opening. <i>Luglúga ang kasilyas kay nasampúngan,</i> Thrust a stick into the toilet pipe because it is stopped up. <i>n</i> stick or the like used to thrust into a narrow opening.

<p><b>luglug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @slaughter an animal by slicing the neck. <i>Way sud-an, magluglug tag manuk,</i> We have nothing for dinner. Let's slaughter a chicken.

<p><b>*luglug<sub>3</sub></b> <b>pansit &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PANSIT</sc>.

<pb n=1299>

<p><b>lugmak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; a1] give way or break in the middle due to force or weight. <i>Mulugmak (malugmak) nang salúga kun tungtúngan ug daghan,</i> That floor will collapse if lots of people stand on it. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @trample on plants and destroy them. <i>Gilugmak sa bábuy ang mga buwak,</i> The pig trampled over the flowers.

<p><b>lugmaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @{show up} or @appear. <i>Ingug musultis Prisidinti Markus. Hái Markúsang milugmaw?</i> They said President Marcos would give a talk. But no Marcos appeared. <i>Gilugmáwan siyag dílì ingun nátù,</i> A supernatural being appeared to him. <b>2</b> [A2] for part of s.t. buried to be sticking out. <i>Giunsa man ninyu paglubung ang irù nga milugmaw man ang tiil?</i> How did you bury the dog when its feet are sticking out? <b>3</b> [A2N; b6] for tears to well up in the eyes. <i>Nalúbug ang ákung mata nga gilugmáwan sa lúhà,</i> My eyes were blurred with the tears that started to form.

<p><b>lugmay</b> = <sc>LUKMAY</sc>.

<p><b>lugmuk</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; a2b2] for structures or people to @collapse. <i>Ang línug mauy naglugmuk sa Rúbi Táwir,</i> The earthquake destroyed the Ruby Tower. <i>Nalugmuk sa simbahan ang táwung nakuyapan,</i> The man who fainted in church suddenly collapsed. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{tear down} structures. <i>Ipalugmuk sa gubyirnu ang mga bawungbáwung,</i> The government will tear the shacks down.

<p><b>lugmuy</b> = <sc>LUKMUY</sc>.

<p><b>lugnas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23P] for plants to die from disease or from being past the fruit-bearing age. <i>Gagmay nag búnga ang tamátis kay hápit na malugnas,</i> My tomato plants are bearing few fruits now because they will soon wither and die. <b>2</b> [B126] be brought to utter ruin. <i>Nalugnas ang íyang nigusyu kay miintra siya sa súgal,</i> His business was brought to utter ruin because he took to gambling. <b>3</b> [B1256] for structures to @{fall apart}. <i>Dílì na madúgay nga malugnas ang balay kay dáan na kaáyu,</i> It won't be long for the house to fall apart because it is very old.

<p><b>lugnut</b> v<i></i> [A2; c6] struggle to free oneself from s.t. that holds one. <i>Ayawg ilugnut ímung buktun ug gunítan ka paglabang,</i> Do not pull your arm away when I'm holding on to you to cross the street. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A1] struggle vigorously to get free. <i>Nagpanglugnut ang babáying gikidnap,</i> The girl struggled vigorously to get loose from her abductors.

<p><b>lugpad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LUPAD</sc>. <b>2</b> [A2] @{fly up}. <i>Milugpad ang abug paglabay sa trák,</i> Dust flew up <pb n=1300>when the truck passed by. <b>3</b> [A23] send s.o. reeling as though flying. <i>Mulugpad ka run ug suntúkun ta ka,</i> I'll send you reeling if I strike you.

<p><b>lugpit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] pin s.t. down tightly or between two things. <i>Tabángi kug lugpit sa kúgun íring duha ka lipak,</i> Help me fasten the grass thatch down with those two pieces of bamboo. <i>Lugpíti (lugpiti) ang libru sa íluk,</i> Hold your book tightly under your arm. <i>Hilugpitan ákung tudlù pagsira nákù sa húnus,</i> I caught my finger when I closed the drawer. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. used to clip or pin s.t. tightly down or against s.t. <b>2</b> chord on a guitar formed by pressing the finger straight across the strings. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] cause s.t. to be pinned down. <i>Puting kamisadintru nga íyang[**note: accent unclear] gipalugpítan (gipalugpitan),</i> A white shirt which he had tucked in.

<p><b>lugput</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b6] @{pop up} like a jack-in-the-box. <i>Milugput ku sa silya sa kakurat,</i> I shot up from my seat in my fright. <i>Layù siyag gilugpútan pagkalingkud níyag dágum,</i> He jumped a mile when he sat on a pin.

<p><b>lugru</b> <i>n</i> advantage given in betting where the odds are not even. <i>Ang lugru tris kuntra sa ímung dus,</i> The advantage is three to your two. <i>v</i> [A; b6] give advantage in betting, not said of tossing coins. <i>Lugrúhan ta sila ug singku tris arun mudáwat sila sa pusta,</i> We will give them an advantage of five to three so that they will take the bet.

<p><b>lugsad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] get to the ground or bottom. <i>Milugsad na ang ayruplánu sa tugpahánan,</i> The airplane has landed at the airport. <i>Naglugsad sila samtang kami nagtungas,</i> They were coming down the hill while we were going up. <b>2</b> [A; c] bring s.t. down. <i>Adúnay mulugsad (maglugsad) sa mga abut ngadtu sa lungsud,</i> S.o. will bring the produce down to the town.

<p><b>lugsung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB36; ac] go, bring downhill, to town. <i>Mantinir lang únà tag manuk kay wà mi makalugsung,</i> Let's just put up with chicken because we haven't had a chance to go down to town (to buy anything better). <i>Maglugsung sila sa ílang mga pruduktu ngadtu sa lungsud,</i> They bring their products down to the city. <i>Unsay ímung lugsúngun maduminggu?</i> What do you go to town for on Sundays? <b>2</b> [A1] eat canned fish (humorous). <i>n</i> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash; sa</b> @{down to}. <i>Kining kasagingan gíkan dinhi lugsung sa subà ákù,</i> This banana plantation from here down to the river is mine. <b>2</b> @{canned fish} (so called from the joke that mountaineers consider canned fish better than chicken because they have to go down to get it&mdash;see the first sentence <pb n=1301>under <i>v</i>). <b>-un, -un(->)</b> <i>a</i> @downhill.

<p><b>lugsut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] @eject s.t. with force. <i>Milugsut ang lísu dihang naligsan sa ligid,</i> The seed was ejected when the wheel ran over the fruit. <i>Milugsut ang ákù sa tantu níyang hamilhámil,</i> I ejaculated because she kept rubbing and rubbing it. <i>Nalugsutan ku sa asíti paghasù sa bumba,</i> Oil spurted onto me when he worked the pump.

<p><b>lugtab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] force a door open. <i>Wà nay kawatang makalugtab áning pultahána,</i> No thief can break this door open. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] cut a string or rope with a long slashing stroke of the blade. <i>Naglugtab siya sa tahì sa sinínang usbunun,</i> She is cutting the stitches of the dress she has to alter. <i>Lugtaba ang hukut arun malibri ang kabáyù,</i> Cut the tether rope to free the horse. <i>Hinglugtaban nákù ang halayhayan,</i> I accidentally cut the clothesline. <b>3</b> [A3P; a12] deprive s.o. of his power. <i>Unsay íyang pagabuhátun arun malugtab ang gahum sa ingkantu?</i> What shall he do to overcome the power of the spirit?

<p><b>lugtas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] break a rope, thread, string, etc. by pulling on it with force. <i>Naglugtas pa ku sa tahì sa ákung sinínà,</i> I am ripping out the stitches in my dress. <i>Kun dì mahúbad, lugtása lang,</i> If you can't untie it, just break it off. <b>2</b> [A; b4c1] @terminate, put an end to s.t. <i>Kaguul nga mulugtas sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> Sorrows that can terminate your life. <i>Lugtásun (ilugtas) ba lang nímu ang ímung mga damgu tungud lang sa usa ka babáyi?</i> Will you destroy your hopes and dreams all because of a woman? <b>3</b> [a12] @finish a task or job. <i>Kanang labhanan na lang ímung lugtásun karun.</i> All you have to finish is that laundry.

<p><b>lugtì</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a] for s.t. crisp or brittle to break, cause it to do so. <i>Milugtì ang básu nga gibùbúan sa túbig nga nagbukal,</i> The glass cracked when boiling water was poured into it. <i>Dì ku makalugtì niíning bukúga. Gáhì kaáyu,</i> I cannot break this bone. It's too hard. <i>Lugtía nang mitrusan,</i> Break that meter stick.

<p><b>lùgù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] shake a vessel with liquid in it to slosh the liquid around. <i>Lùgúi nang butilya kay namilit ang húgaw sa sulud,</i> Slosh water around in the bottle because there's dirt sticking to the sides.

<p><b>lúgud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a1] @rub the eyes. <i>Ayawg lugda ímung mata ug mapúling ka,</i> Don't rub your eyes when you get dirt in them. <b>2</b> [A; b] @rub the skin with a stone to remove dirt. <i>Lugdi ímung líug kay daghang buling,</i> Rub your neck because there's lots of dirt on it. <pb n=1302><b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] rub oneself with a stone to remove dirt. <i>Panlúgud, unyà human, panabun,</i> Scrub yourself, and after that, soap yourself. <i>Puslan pa mang malígù manlúgud gayud,</i> Since I've started, I might as well go the whole hog. (Lit. Since I am bathing I might as well scrub myself.) <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> stone used for scrubbing oneself to remove dirt.

<p><b>luguk, lúguk</b> <i>v</i> [B2456; b6] @{well up}. <i>Milúguk ang dugù sa tudlung nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> The blood welled up in his fingers when the hammer struck them. <i>Lúgus siyang kakità kay gilugúkan íyang mata sa lúhà,</i> She could hardly see because of the tears which welled up in her eyes.

<p><b>lugum</b> <i>v</i> [B2; ab7] make, become dark or deep in hue. <i>Mulugum ang kulur ug putì ang ipaluyu,</i> A color becomes deeper in hue if it is set off against a white background. <i>Luguma pagpintal arun matabunan ang suwatsúwat,</i> Paint it dark to cover the writing. a dark or deep in hue. <i>Hanap dì lugum ang ági sa drúwing pinsil,</i> Your pencil made light lines, not dark ones.

<p><b>lúgum</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6] for water to collect and form into a pool. <i>Maglúgum giyud ang túbig kay wà nay kaagásan,</i> The water will form a pool because there is no way for it to get out.

<p><b>lúgus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @force, force oneself. <i>Milúgus kug iskuyla bisag gihilantan ku,</i> I forced myself to go to school even though I had a fever. <i>Kinsay naglúgus ínig pasuk sa buhù bísag huut,</i> Who forced this into the hole even though it's too big? <i>Ayawg ilúgus (lugsa) ímung láwas ug dì giyud mahímù,</i> Don't force your body if you can't manage it. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @rape. <i>Gibítay ang naglúgus sa babáyi,</i> The man who raped the girl was hanged. <i>a</i> @hardly, @barely. <i>Tíngug nga lúgus mabátì,</i> A barely audible voice. <i>Lúgus gánì ming makapalit ug bugas,</i> We can scarcely afford to buy rice. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A] @barely do s.t. under difficult odds. <i>Naglugus giyug iskuyla bísag walay kwarta,</i> He managed to get through school despite his poverty. <b>linugsánay, lugsanay, lugsánay</b> = <sc>LÚGUS</sc>, <i>a</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @rape. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @rapist.

<p><b>lugut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @thicket, @woods. <i>Miadtu siya sa lugut arun pagkúhag talibugsuk,</i> He went to the woods to cut down stakes for fencing. <b>2</b> @ravine or @gully. <i>Túbig nga nag-ambak ngadtu sa lugut,</i> Water that leaps down into the ravine. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LUGUT</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>2</b> series of ravines or narrow valleys.

<p><b>lugwà</b> (from <i>gulà</i>) <i>v</i> [B3(1)6; b6] <b>1</b> be @{forced out}. <i>Wà makalugwà ang bítuk kay giundángan ang pagpurga,</i> The intestinal worms <pb n=1303>didn't come out because he stopped taking his medicine. <i>Mihuphup ang hubag human lugwái sa nánà,</i> The boil shrank after the pus had come out of it. <b>2</b> go out in general. <i>Way púlung nga milugwà sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not a word came out of his mouth.

<p><b>lugway</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] lengthen the rope on a tether. <i>Kinsay naglugway sa kábaw nga nakaábut man sa maisan.</i> Who gave the carabao enough rope to get to the cornfield? <i>Lugwáyi pa ang tabánug,</i> Give the kite more rope. <b>2</b> [AB; b] @extend, prolong time allotted, for time to be extended. <i>Ug mulugway ang ákung kinabúhì,</i> If my life is extended. <i>Lugwáyi ang panahun sa ákung pagbáyad,</i> Give me more time to pay. <b>3</b> [A] have enough of s.t. at one's disposal. <i>Kun makalugway ka sa pagdágan,</i> If you can stand to run for a long distance. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> length of rope used in tying s.t. that moves. <i>Mub-i ang lugway sa hiniktan,</i> Shorten the rooster's tether. <b>1a</b> length of rope in a fishing apparatus used in connecting one part with another to render moveability. <b>2</b> extra time allowance given. <i>Mangáyù tag lugway ug dì ni mahuman ugmà,</i> We will ask for an extension if this doesn't get done tomorrow. <b>3</b> length of s.t. one has at his disposal. <i>Dakù kug lugway sa pasinsiya,</i> I have a great deal of patience. <i>Bisag gastúhan nimug usa ka gatus, dúna pay lugway nga ikapalit ug sapátus,</i> Even if you spend a hundred of the money, there is still enough to buy shoes.

<p><b>lúhà</b> <i>n</i> @tears. <b>&mdash; sa bau</b> crocodile tears. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [AN] get tears in the eyes. <i>Nag-áway sigúru sila kay nagluhà íyang mata,</i> They must have had a quarrel because her eyes are moist. <i>Nangluhà siya pagkabatì sa sintimintal nga isturya,</i> She got misty-eyed upon hearing the sentimental story. <b>-an, -un(->)</b> <i>a</i> with tears<corr sic=",">.</corr> <b>walug sa gin-an</b> <i>n</i> the world, this vale of tears. <b>&mdash; sa dalága</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental hanging vine: <b><i>Dischidia oinantha</i></b>.

<p><b>luhag</b> <i>a</i> not still, @restless. <i>Luhag kaáyung kamut nang ímung uyab,</i> Your boy friend has restless hands. <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{move about}, not be still. <i>Way magluhag ug dúnay bisíta,</i> You sit still (lit. nobody move) when the visitors are here. <i>Ayaw nig luhaga kay igsaktu nang pagkatáud,</i> Don't move this an inch because it is just in the right place.

<p><b>luhàluhà</b> <i>n</i> @joints of the human or animal anatomy. <i>v</i> [A; a] cut up a chicken or slaughtered animal in the joints. <i>Luhàluhaa ang iníhaw nga manuk,</i> Cut up the slaughtered chicken in the joints.

<p><b>lúhit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] remove the meat of a sea shell with a pin or the like. <i>Luhíti ang bátà ug <pb n=1304>unud sa kinhasun,</i> Remove some of the meat from the sea shells for the child.

<p><b>lúhu</b> <i>a</i> with refinement and elegance in appearance. <i>Mutambung sigúru siyag parti kay lúhu kaáyug pamisti,</i> He must be going to a party because he is elegantly dressed. <i>Lúhung pagkabúhat nga tukadur,</i> A finely built dresser. <i>v</i> [B12(1); c1] be @elegant, luxurious in appearance.

<p><b>luhud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @kneel. <i>Nagluhud siya atubángan sa birhin,</i> She is kneeling before the Virgin Mary. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @worship. <i>Tahúra ang mga santus; ayawg ludhi,</i> Venerate the saints; don't worship them. <b>3</b> [A] @surrender. <i>Miluhud ang Hapun human bumbáhi sa atúmik bam,</i> Japan surrendered after the atomic bomb was dropped. <b>4</b> [A; b6] sponsor a wedding. <i>Daghan nang kasal ang ákung naludhan,</i> I have been a sponsor at many weddings. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] be made to @kneel. <b>2</b> [a3] be thrown to one's knees. <i>Napaluhud siya pagkaigù sa ákung krús,</i> He fell on his knees after being hit with my cross. <b>linudhan</b> <i>n</i> person sponsored in a wedding. <b>ludhanan, luhuránan</b> <i>n</i> rail one kneels on. <b>tali-</b> <i>n</i> about to kneel. <b>tik-</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TIKLUHUD</sc>.

<p><b>luhudluhud</b> <i>n</i> a prostrate, spreading herb found in wasteland and open spaces, bearing small blue flowers in an axilliary, peduncled, leaflike spathe: <b><i>Commelina diffusa</i></b>.

<p><b>luib</b> <i>n</i> small bits of cooked rice or other burnt or partially burnt food that stick to the corners and creases of leaves which line the bottom of a cooking vessel.

<p><b>lúib</b> <i>v</i> [A2S3S; b(1)] @betray, be @unfaithful to s.o. <i>Way mapyúsu nga makaluib sa mapya,</i> No Mafioso can betray the Mafia. <i>Giluíban siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> His wife was unfaithful to him. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @unfaithful, tending to betray. <i>n</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MALUÍBUN</sc>.

<p><b>luing</b> <i>a</i> having weak knees such that one can't stand. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become @weak-kneed. <i>Pulyu ang nakaluing (nakapaluing) nang batáa,</i> Polio has caused that child to have weak knees.

<p><b>lúka<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @uproot, pull s.t. out by the roots. <i>Átung lukáhun ang mga tanum nga way hinungdan,</i> We'll uproot the useless plants. <b>2</b> [a3] for two sisters to be married to two brothers. <i>Ang íyang duha ka anak dalága nalúka pagkaminyù sa magsúun,</i> His two daughters were married to the two brothers. <b>3</b> [A; a12] dislodge from power, put one's reign to an end. <i>Way makalúka ni Duránu sa únang puruk,</i> No one can dislodge Durano from his hold on the first district.  <pb n=1305><i>n</i> a case of marriage where brothers marry sisters. <b>lukahay</b> <i>v</i> [C23] for brothers to marry sisters.

<p><b>lúka<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>LÚKU</sc> (female).

<p><b>lukà</b> <i>n</i> short piece of bamboo tube, usually used as repository of documents, jewelry, or anything important. <i>v</i> [A; c] store s.t. in a <i>lukà</i> for safekeeping.

<p><b>lúkab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{pry open}. <i>Hiraminta nga ilúkab sa salug,</i> Tools to use in prying the floor up. <b>2</b> [A; b5] open a door or window shutter. <i>Nalúkab ang pultahan tungud sa kusug hángin,</i> The door came open in the strong wind. <i>Íyang gilukában (gilúkab) ang íyang tindáhan ug sayu,</i> She opened her store early. <b>2a</b> @burglarize. <i>Gilúkab (gilukában) ang ílang upisína ug nawad-an silag tayipraytir,</i> Their office was broken into and they lost a typewriter. <i>n</i> @opening. <i>Dakug lúkab ning tarúha,</i> This kerosene can has a wide opening.

<p><b>lúkad</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; a1] @uproot, @{dig out} from the ground. <i>Dalì malúkad (mulúkad) nang haligía kay dì lawum ang pagkalubung,</i> That post will get uprooted because it's not planted deep into the ground. <i>Naglúkad silag mga sáhà sa ságing,</i> They uprooted some banana shoots.

<p><b>lukal</b> <i>n</i> @local. <i>Iliksiyun nga lukal,</i> Local elections. <b>(<-) &mdash; mid</b> <i>n</i> locally made product.

<p><b>lukalúka</b> <i>n</i> the groin of animals, the area connecting the upper thigh and the body of the animal. <i>a</i> @detachable. <i>Lukalúka ang mga tiil sa lamísa,</i> The legs of the table are detachable.

<p><b>lúkap</b> <i>n</i> nightmare in which a person is unable to move or make a sound. Failure to wake up is said to lead to death. <i>v</i> [A12; a4] cause, have such a nightmare. <i>Kanang hilabihang kabusug únà matúlug mauy makalúkap,</i> Overeating before sleeping causes deathly nightmares.

<p><b>lukápa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26; b6] @stumble, be knocked down and hit the ground hard. <i>Milukápa (nalukápa) ang baksir,</i> The boxer hit the deck hard. <b>2</b> [B26] @fail in an exam or course. <i>Milukápa siya sa bár,</i> He flunked in the bar exam. <b>3</b> [B26] fall from power, be @ruined. <i>Nalukápa ang gahum sa ílang punduk sa pagkamatay sa ílang lídir,</i> After the death of their leader, their party lost its power.

<p><b>lukas</b> <i>v</i> [A123P; b] for laundry to become clean and white or for skin to become lighter in complexion. <i>Malukasan ang ímung pamánit ug dì ka magpainit,</i> Your skin will become lighter if you stay out of the sun.

<p><b>lukat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @redeem s.t. pawned or mortgaged.  <pb n=1306><i>Marimáti ang singsing ug dì nímu lukatun,</i> The ring will be foreclosed if you do not redeem it. <b>2</b> @ransom. <i>Gilukat na ang gikidnap,</i> The man that was kidnapped has been ransomed. <b>2a</b> @redeem, @save (figurative). <i>Malukat ku ra gihápun siya sa íyang kalisud,</i> I can save her from her difficulties. <b>2b</b> @redeem, @{compensate for}. <i>Ang íyang kaligdung makalukat sa kalaksut sa íyang dagway,</i> His good manners make up for his ugly face. <b>2c</b> <b>&mdash; sa signus</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a12] in folk belief, an occurrence or happening which spares a person's life by taking s.o. who dies in his stead. <i>Gituhúan nga lukatun ang signus sa tag-íya sa íyang mga buhì,</i> It is believed that domestic animals spare their owners from death by dying in their stead. <b>3</b> pay a fee and get s.t. back that one had fixed or reworked. <i>Lukata nag gipaáyu nímung rilu,</i> Go pick up the watch you had repaired now. <b>4</b> pay for tokens of privilege like tickets, licenses, etc. <i>Mularga giyud ku kay nakalukat na kug tíkit,</i> I'm really going to leave now because I already paid for my ticket. <i>Díay písus ilukat ug sidula,</i> Here is one peso to pay for a residence certificate. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug áway, lális</b> [A12] get involved in a dispute or fight. <i>Ayawg tambag ánang lantúgì kay makalukat kag lális,</i> Don't give advice to people who are arguing because you will just get trouble for yourself. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> amount for redemption or ransom. <b>2</b> fee for having s.t. made or repairs done. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>LUKAT</sc>, <i>n</i>. <i>Pila may ákung lukátan (lukat) ning sinináa?</i> How much do I pay to have this dress sewn?

<p><b>lúkat</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a1] @uproot s.t., @prying the roots out of the ground. <i>Ang bagyu mauy nakalúkat (nakapalúkat) sa lumbuy,</i> The typhoon uprooted the lumbuy tree. <i>Lukáta nang muhun ug ibalhin,</i> Dig out that buried landmark and move it.

<p><b>lukay</b> <i>n</i> coconut palm leaves. <b>lukaylúkay</b> <b>1</b> the bridge of the nose, including the central bony ridge that separates the nostrils. <b>2</b> = <sc>HANLULÚKAY</sc>. <b>han-r-(<-)</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HANLULÚK</sc>AY.

<p><b>lukba</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] uproot a finger or toenail. <i>Nagkalukba ang íyang kuku nga nalaswahan,</i> His toenail that got scalded is falling off. <i>Tug-an arun dì lukbáhun ímung kuku.</i> Confess so they don't pull your fingernails out.

<p><b>lukbun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LUBUK</sc>.

<p><b>lukdu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] carry a load on the head. <i>Mas sayun pag lukdúhun (lukdúun, ilukdu) nákù ang duwang,</i> It would be easier for me to carry the basin on my head. <b>2</b> [c6] for one to be so many years old. <i>Bísan pa sa <pb n=1307>katuígan nga íyang gilukdu batan-un siyang tan-áwun,</i> He carries his years well. He still looks young. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug kalbásà</b> [A] be held back a grade. <i>Makalukdu ka giyug kalbásà ug dì ka magtuun,</i> You will fail the grade if you don't study.

<p><b>lukdulukdu</b> <i>n</i> name given to many species of ornamental ferns.

<p><b>lukgaw</b> <i>n</i> the slender-billed cuckoo dove: <b><i>Macropygia phasianella</i></b>.

<p><b>lukguk</b> <i>a</i> @one-testicled, having one testicle not descended. <i>Ang lukguk dì kapamabdus,</i> A man with only one testicle cannot get a woman pregnant.

<p><b>lukim</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @{tuck in}, put in between two hugging surfaces. <i>Si Nánay pay mulukim sa ákung púlu,</i> Mother tucks my shirt in for me. <i>Ilukim ang kwarta sa libru arun mahúping,</i> Put the peso bill between the pages of the book to make it smooth. <b>2</b> [c6] give a little money to s.o. who would naturally refuse it in such a way that he will accept it (putting it into his pocket). <i>Ilukim lang ning písus dihà pára panigarilyu,</i> Here's a peso for cigarettes. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)] sew a fold into a garment. <i>Ákung gilukiman ang ákung sinínà kay taas ra kaáyu,</i> I sewed a fold in my dress to make it shorter because it was too long.

<p><b>lukimya</b> = <sc>LYUKIMYA</sc>.

<p><b>luking</b> <i>a</i> @knock-kneed. <i>Dáan na siyang luking sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> She has been knock-kneed since birth.

<p><b>lukip</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @enclose or @insert s.t. in a letter. <i>Ilukip ring bayinti sa birtdi kard,</i> Enclose this twenty-peso bill in the birthday card.

<p><b>lukluk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; c] go, put into a tight or hidden place. <i>Sawang naglukluk sa kakugnan,</i> A snake lurking in the grass. <i>Ilukluk ang kwarta sa sikrítu,</i> Put the money into your watch pocket. <b>2</b> [A; c] get s.o. into a job (slang). <i>Ang uyuan níyang kungrisman mauy naglukluk níya sa Kustum,</i> His uncle who is a Congressman got him into the Customs. <i>a</i> put in such a way that it is hidden or not easy to get at. <i>Lukluk kaáyung pagkabutang sa tutbrás sa iláwum sa bág,</i> The toothbrush was put way in the bottom of the bag.

<p><b>lukmay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; a12] for feelings to become or be made soft such that a person is persuaded. <i>Ang íyang tíngug mulukmay sa labing tig-a nga kasingkásing,</i> Her voice will soften the hardest of hearts. <i>Nagkalukmay ang íyang balatían sa tantu námung hinangyù,</i> Our imploring is gradually softening his feelings. <b>2</b> [B126N; c1] be @dejected. <i>Nanlukmay si Maryu pagkahibáwung nahagbung  <pb n=1308>siya sa burd,</i> Mario was dejected when he learned he had failed the board exam. <i>a</i> having a dejected look. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> having the quality of softening or soothing feelings.

<p><b>lukmuy</b> <i>a</i> having a crestfallen, dejected look on the face. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] get a dejected, crestfallen look on the face. <i>Malukmuy giyud si Nardu ug makahibáwu siyang nahagbung sa burd,</i> Nardo will surely be crestfallen when he learns that he flunked the board examination.

<p><b>luksu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @jump. <i>Miluksu ang ungguy sa kalípay,</i> The monkey jumped up and down with joy. <i>Luksúa lag kanal kay way latayan,</i> Just jump over the ditch because there is no span. <i>Bintánang íyang giluksúan,</i> The window he jumped down from. <b>2</b> [A2] @skip a grade in school. <i>Miluksu kanà siyag grádu mau nga naapsan ku níya,</i> He skipped a grade in school so he has caught up with me now. <i>n</i> distance or height jumped. <b>hi-/ ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] jump involuntarily. <i>Nahaluksu siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped involuntarily when he was startled.

<p><b>luktun</b> <i>n</i> young of a locust.

<p><b>lúku</b> <i>a</i> stupid in action. <i>Lúku. Ngánung mitug-an man ka nga wà ka pangutan-a?</i> You fool! Why did you let on when nobody even asked you? <i>v</i> [AN2; a2] @{make a fool} of s.o. <i>Ilára tits. Lukúha si Lúla mu,</i> Don't try to fool me, buddy. Fool your grandmother. <b>&mdash; diamur</b> <i>a</i> gone crazy because of love. <i>v</i> [B12] @{go crazy} from love. <i>Nalúku diamur ang ulitáwu sukad bulagi sa íyang trátu,</i> The young man went crazy after his girl friend left him. <b>lukuluku</b> <i>a</i> somewhat @stupid or @foolish. <b>kalukúhan</b> <i>n</i> foolish doings. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> one who makes a fool of people.

<p><b>lúkù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; c1] be @{curled up}. <i>Ilúkù (lukúa) ímung láwas arun masúd ka sa baril,</i> Curl your body up so you can get into the barrel. <b>1a</b> @loaf in bed. <i>Bísag taas na ang adlaw naglúkù lang gihápun siya,</i> The sun is high in the sky, but he is still lying around <corr sic=on>in</corr> bed. <b>2</b> [B1256] fall down in a curled up position. <i>Nalúkù (nahilúkù) siya sa kanal human ku patíri,</i> He fell curled up in the ditch after I kicked him. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> piece of cloth formed into a ring used as a cushion when carrying a load on the head. <i>v</i> [A; b] place a cushion of coiled cloth on the head. <i>Kinahanglang maglukù ka ug dúna kay lukdúhun,</i> You should put a cushion on your head when you carry a load on it. <b>lukùlúkù</b> <i>n</i> inside of the knee joints.

<p><b>lukub<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> close and lock. <i>Grábi sad nímung nakalukub sa pwirta dì na man maabli,</i>  <pb n=1309>You sure bolted the door hard. I can't get it open. <b>2</b> enclose s.t. in an area or by putting s.t. over it. <i>Pagsígig hílak kay lukban ta ka sa kasilyas,</i> Go on, keep crying and I'll lock you in the bathroom. <i>Lukbi ang kan-un arun dì tugdúnan sa lángaw,</i> Cover the rice so the flies won't get on it. <i>Gilukban ang lagwirtag paril,</i> The garden was enclosed inside a wall. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shutter. <b>2</b> @cover. <b>3</b> space enclosed. <i>Túa si Máma sa lukub sa kwartu,</i> Mother is inside the room. <b>4</b> k.o. fish corral for impounding fish in a receding tide.

<p><b>lukub<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. chisel with a curved (concave-convex) cutting edge. <i>Ang lukub mauy gamítun sa pagkúlit,</i> The curved chisel is used for carving.

<p><b>lúkub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6(1)] @{wrap up} in s.t. flat. <i>Naglúkub ku sa hábul kay gitugnaw ku,</i> I wrapped myself up in a blanket because I felt cold. <b>2</b> [A; b] for an atmospheric condition to @engulf an area. <i>Milúkub ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness engulfed the world.

<p><b>lukublukub</b> <i>n</i> k.o. starfish with poisonous spines.

<p><b>lúkud</b> = <sc>KULÚKUD</sc>.

<p><b>lukun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large shrimp with short and small claws.

<p><b>lúkun</b> <i>v</i> [AB456; a12] @{coil up}, coil s.t. up, usually in several coils. <i>Naglúkun siyag nuug arun himúung lukun paglukdu níya sa kahun,</i> He rolled a piece of cloth into a coil to cushion the box he was carrying on his head. <i>Dúnay sawa nga naglúkun sa tugkaran,</i> There is a large snake coiled up in the yard. <i>Lukúna ang hús ug hipúsa,</i> Coil the hose and put it away. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @coiled. <b>2</b> piece of coiled cloth used as a cushion for carrying a load on the head. <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> <i>n</i> @wreath. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> inside of the knees. <b>lukunlúkun</b> = <sc>-AN</sc>.

<p><b>lúkung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a @coil, form a circle from s.t. stiff. <i>Naglúkung kug alambring gihímung ríng,</i> I coiled a piece of wire to make into a basketball ring. <i>Lukúnga ang alambri ug isang-at,</i> Coil the wire and hang it up. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @coiled. <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> <i>n</i> @wreath. <b>lukunglúkung</b> <i>n</i> inside of the knees.

<p><b>lukup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2; a12] do s.t. to the entire area of s.t. <i>Mulukup sà kug súruy sa syudad,</i> I will wander all over the city. <i>Dì kang kalukup ug tanum sa lapad níyang yútà,</i> You can't plant every inch of his vast lands. <i>Nagkalukup na sa lungsud ang pisti,</i> The epidemic is spreading all over the town. <i>Lukpag silhig ang sawug,</i> Sweep the entire floor. <b>2</b> [B1256; a12] do s.t. to each and every <pb n=1310>one or thing. <i>Nalukup kug pangutána báhin nímu,</i> I asked just about everybody where to find you. <b>3</b> [B12] be up to the ears in debt. <i>Nalukup na kining átung balhíbu sa útang,</i> We're up to the ears in debt (lit. every single hair of our body is in debt). <b>lukuplúkup</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] go over almost the entire area of s.t. <i>Nalukuplúkup na níyag súruy ang mga dagkung syudad sa Amirika,</i> He has gone to almost all the big cities in America.

<p><b>lukut_<note n=1></note></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] leave a mark or cut into the flesh. <i>Milukut ang patiyan sa kabáyù,</i> The bellyband cut into the horse's flesh. <i>Naluktan ang íyang kamut sa gapus,</i> The bonds left a mark on his arms.

<p><b>lukut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> edible excretion from a k.o. sea cucumber called <i>dungsul</i>, similar in appearance to bean threads, but green, tightly curled up.

<p><b>lúkut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ac6] @{roll up}, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mulúkut ang dáhun inigkaláyà,</i> The leaf will roll up when it is withered. <i>Lukúta ang banig inigmata nímu,</i> Roll up the mat when you wake up. <i>Ilúkut ang panaptun sa káhuy,</i> Wrap the cloth around the wood. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa banig</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for political protegees to vacate a position when their political party loses. <b>2</b> [B126] for the body to get rolled over by some force. <i>Nalúkut siya uban sa bawud,</i> He rolled with the waves. <b>3</b> [B126] be beaten badly in a contest. <i>Nalúkut si Sirhing sa miáging iliksiyun,</i> Serging was crushed during the last election. <b>paN-, panga-, lukutlukut</b> <i>v</i> [A3] for dirt on the body to come off in rolls when scrubbed or rubbed. <i>À, nangalúkut (naglukutlukut, nanlúkut) man lang ágis íyang tagiptip nga gilúgud,</i> My! How the dirt on his body comes off in rolls when you rub it!

<p><b>lúla</b> (not without l) title for grandmother or any woman old enough to be one's grandmother. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>lúla</i>.

<p><b>lúlan</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @board, put on a vehicle. <i>Ilúlan ang bátà sa bisiklíta,</i> Put the child on the bicycle. <i>n</i> s.o. or s.t. aboard a vehicle.

<p><b>lúlaw</b> <i>v</i> [B] @{wake up} late, stay in bed long. <i>Ngánung naglúlaw ka man, nag-unsa ka man gabíi?</i> Why are you staying in bed long this morning? What did you do last night?

<p><b>lulhu</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @{roll up} sleeves or pants. <i>Makig-áway sigúru siya kay nanglulhu man,</i> He must be preparing to fight because he is rolling up his sleeves. <i>Lulhúa (ilulhu) ímung karsúnis iniglabang nátù sa subà,</i> Roll up your pants when we cross the stream.

<p><b>lúlid</b> <i>n</i> crippled due to a deformity or underdevelopment of the legs. <i>v</i> [B126] become a <pb n=1311>cripple. <i>Nalúlid siya kay gitakbúyag pulyu,</i> He was crippled after his bout with polio.

<p><b>lulingháyaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] take a @trip, @{go out} for leisure. <i>Ilulingháyaw nákù siya sa Hungkung,</i> I'll take her on a tour to Hongkong. <i>n</i> @leisure.

<p><b>lulipap</b> <i>n</i> @lollipop.

<p><b>lúlu</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) title for grandfather or any other man old enough to be one's grandfather with whom one is close. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. grandpa.

<p><b>lùlù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; abc] @masturbate. <i>Dì na muutug bísan pag lùlúun,</i> I can't get an erection, even if I masturbate. <i>Ug dì ka kaiyut níya lùlúi na lang,</i> If you can't have her, just think of her while you abuse yourself (lit. masturbate for her). <i>Ilùlù na lang ang ímung kahígal,</i> Just masturbate your craving away. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] use equipment improperly. <i>Kinsa na puy naglùlù áning makinilyang nagubà na man pud?</i> Who has been abusing my typewriter? It's broken again. <i>Hala, lùlúa arun makailis ka,</i> Go on abuse it so you can buy me a new one. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (coarse). <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; mu</b> expression of disgust at a person. <i>Lùlù nímu, ingun kag mukúyug ka, wà man lagi,</i> You SOB. You said you were coming along, but you didn't. <i>Diyis sa lùlù mu! Háin may kwartáhun ta run,</i> Hell, if I'll give you a dime. Where am I going to get the money from! <b>3</b> expression of disgust in general. <i>Lùlù! Pirmi lang patay way hárì,</i> Shit! It's always tails, never heads!

<p><b>lúlut</b> <i>a</i> @tender eyes or looks. <i>Lúlut nga mata sa inahan,</i> A mother's tender eyes. <i>v</i> [b8] for s.o. to be tenderly loved. <i>Nalulútan giyud ning batáa sa mga ginikánan kay bugtung,</i> The parents love this child dearly because he's an only child.

<p><b>lúluy</b> <i>a</i> sleepy, @dull eyes. <i>v</i> [A23B; b6] for the eyes to become drooping or dull. <i>Mulúluy (malúluy) giyud ang mata ug way túg,</i> Your eyes will start to droop if you have gone without sleep.

<p><b>lumà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23; b(1)] for a liquid to @{seep through} s.t. and stain it. <i>Milumà ang dugù sa bindáhi,</i> Blood seeped through the bandage and stained it. <i>Gilum-an nag buling ang kwilyu,</i> Dirt has stained the collar where sweat seeped into the cloth. <b>2</b> [b6] @{leave a mark}. <i>Milumà ang banig sa ímung nawung,</i> The mat you were lying on has left marks on your face. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> stain or dirt carried by liquid. <b>2</b> @mark. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @trace on s.t. to reproduce a copy. <i>Mupalumà ku sa ímung drúwing,</i> I'll trace your drawing.

<p><b>lúmà</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be overshadowed by s.t. else, put into the background (used by speakers <pb n=1312>influenced by Tagalog). <i>Malúmà nang púlu nímug isul-ub ku tung ákung mahalun,</i> Your sport shirt will be relegated to the background if I wear my expensive one.

<p><b>lúmad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] stay, stick long on.<i> Mulúmad kahà ku niánang trabahúa kun dì pa maáyu ug súhul?</i> Would I stick to that job if the pay wasn't good? <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> native, natural-born citizen. <b>-nun</b> <i>n</i> of native origin, make, or quality. <i>Lumadnun nga sáyaw,</i> Native dance.

<p><b>lumag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3(1); b6] for dirt, color to come off s.t. soaked in water. <i>Mulumag (malumag) ang buling ug ímung ihúmul úsà ang mga bulingun,</i> Some of the dirt will come out if the clothes are soaked in water. <i>Naglumag ug kulur úbi ang itum sinínà,</i> The black dress exuded violet color on the water. <b>2</b> [B3] for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milumag na ang pagsígig súruy, mimabdus na siya,</i> Now her habits of going out have <corr sic=born>borne</corr> fruit: she got pregnant. <i>n</i> colored juice that is squeezed out from s.t. that fades.

<p><b>*lumaluma</b> <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] undertake to do s.t. one is incapable of doing. <i>Ayawg palumalumag áyu sa radiyu kay musamut hinúun nag kadáut,</i> Don't take it on yourself to try and fix the radio. It'll just get worse. <b>palumalumahun, mapalumalumahun</b> <i>a</i> daring to take on s.t. which one may not be capable of doing.

<p><b>lumat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tubers left accidentally in the ground after the harvest which sprout again. <b>2</b> trait that is inherited in a family. <b>3</b> highly contagious skin eruptions or lesions on the soles of the feet which occur after an eruption of yaws (<i>tabukaw</i>). The <i>lumat</i> are roundish with small fleshy protuberances and continually emit watery pus. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] for tubers left in the ground by accident to sprout. <i>Mulumat ra gihápun ang mga unud sa úbing wà nátù makit-i,</i> The yams we failed to find will sprout again. <b>2</b> [A; b] for a certain trait to be inherited. <i>Basta kalíwat ug búang mulumat giyud,</i> If insanity runs in the family, it will sooner or later show in the children. <i>Kinsa may gilumatan niíning íyang batásang ngil-ad?</i> Who does she take after with her bad behavior? <b>3</b> [A; b4] for a bad character trait in a person to make its appearance. <i>Mulumat giyud ang íyang pagkamaldítu kun makainum,</i> His mischievous ways come out when he takes a drink. <b>4</b> [a4b4] get <i>lumat. Gilumat (gilumatan) si Markus,</i> Marcos has <i>lumat.</i>

<p><b>lumáwig</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LAWIG</sc>.

<p><b>lumay</b> <i>n</i> a magical love potion used to cause <pb n=1313>s.o. to be irresistibly drawn to the user. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] use a love potion on s.o. <i>Kinsa guy mulumay ánang húmuk ug ilung,</i> No need to use a love potion on her when she is so easy to conquer. <b>2</b> [A; a1] draw s.o. irresistibly with an attractive quality. <i>Ang íyang kabuútan mauy naglumay nákù ngadtu níya,</i> Her good attributes made me irresistibly attracted to her. <b>-an, -an(<-)</b> <i>a</i> having a <i>lumay</i>.

<p><b>*lúmay</b> <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> slow and <corr sic=effemininate>effeminate</corr> in speech. <i>Malúmay kaáyung musulti nà si Lusyu kay bayutun man gud,</i> Lucio speaks slow like a girl because he is effeminate.

<p><b>lumbà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2C; ac3] @race, have a race. <i>Lumbáun nátù. Ang mangíkug muy mubangka,</i> Let's race it out. The one who is last will pay. <i>Lumbáun nátù ang átung bakì,</i> Let's have our frogs race. <b>2</b> [b8] outrace. <i>Hilumbaan ku níyag kalígù kay wà siya manabun,</i> He beat me bathing because he didn't soap himself. <b>3</b> [C23] outdo each other, as if to see who can do it the more. <i>Naglumbà ug katúlug,</i> They are sleeping as if they were trying to outdo each other. <i>Naglumbà ug isturyag hambug,</i> Outdo each other in telling tall stories. <i>n</i> race. <b>-anay</b> <i>v</i> [C; c3] race with each other. <i>Naglumbaánay ang mga balud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves are racing against each other to the shore. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one's opponent in a race. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> @racetrack.

<p><b>lumbaglumbag</b> <i>v</i> [ASP] @writhe, twist in pain. <i>Naglumbaglumbag siya sa kasakit sa íyang tiyan,</i> He writhed in pain with his stomach-*ache.

<p><b>lumbágu</b> <i>n</i> @lumbago, a rheumatic pain in the joints of the lumbar region.

<p><b>lumban</b> <i>n</i> @{turban shells}, k.o. edible univalve. <b>mata ug &mdash;</b> the operculum of turban shells (which resembles an eye).

<p><b>lumbang</b> <i>n</i> large forest tree, cultivated for its fruit, the seed of which yields an oil similar to linseed oil: <b><i>Aleurites moluccana</i></b>.

<p><b>lumbay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> row or column of units. <b>2</b> k.o. tic-tac-toe game for two players. A square with nine dots (three on each side, one in the middle) is drawn and the players take turns putting down their stones on the dots. Whoever gets a row of three stones, wins. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] queue up, fall in line facing in the direction of the line; do, put in a row. <i>Naglumbay ang daghang pumapálit ug prankíyu,</i> Lots of people were queuing up to buy stamps. <i>Naglumbay siya sa mga pyísa,</i> He is lining up the spare parts. <i>Lumbáya ang pagtanum sa humay,</i> Plant the rice in rows. <i>Ilumbay ning silya sa únang lumbay,</i> Put this <pb n=1314>chair in the first row. <b>2</b> [AC] play <i>lumbay</i>. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a board for playing <i>lumbay</i>.

<p><b>lumbiya</b> <i>n</i> sago palm, the trunk of which is used to starch and the leaves for roofing: <b><i>Metroxylon sagus</i></b>.

<p><b>lumbuy</b> = <sc>LUNGBUY</sc>.

<p><b>lúmi</b> <i>n</i> dish of long Chinese noodles, usually served in broth.

<p><b>lumì</b> <i>n</i> @crease, @fold, @wrinkles. <i>v</i> [A; a] get to be all wrinkled, creased. <i>Ayawg lumia nang bag-ung inutaw,</i> Don't wrinkle your newly ironed shirt. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @wrinkled, @creased.

<p><b>lúmid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] wallow or roll in mud, flour, etc. <i>Ang bábuy mulúmid sa lápuk,</i> Pigs roll in the mud. <i>Ilúmid ang pinirítung ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the fried bananas in the sugar. <b>2</b> [B456] roll in sin, vice. <i>Naglúmid sa salà ang mga babáying nagbaligyà sa ílang dungug,</i> Women who sell their reputation are wallowing in sin.

<p><b>luminarya</b> <i>n</i> numerous lighted candles placed along the streets during religious processions or in the church during services. <i>v</i> [A; b] light candles for a religious procession or church service.

<p><b>lúming</b> <i>a</i> tender, soft voice or way of speaking. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] for the voice to become soft and tender. <i>Mulúming dáyun íyang tíngug ug ikasulti ang uyab,</i> Her voice suddenly becomes tender when she speaks with her boy friend.

<p><b>lumiru</b> = <sc>NUMIRU</sc>.

<p><b>lum-it</b> <i>n</i> @crease, @wrinkle. <i>Ang lum-it sa karsúnis nahíwì,</i> The crease in the trousers came out crooked. <i>v</i> [AB126; a1] crease, get creased. <i>Ayawg lum-íta ang bag-ung pinalansa nímung sayal,</i> Don't crease your skirt. You just ironed it. <i>a</i> creased.

<p><b>lumlum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] sit on eggs. <i>Wà pa mapisù ang gilumlúmang itlug,</i> The eggs the hen was brooding have not hatched yet. <b>1a</b> [b] sit on papers which need processing or attention. <i>Kadtung aplikisiyun nímu sa lún gilumlúman lang,</i> They are just sitting on your application for a loan. <b>2</b> [A13] stay inside s.t. <i>Dúgay na siyang lumlum sa íla kay maúlaw nga mupakítà,</i> He stayed cooped up in his house for a long time because he was ashamed to show himself. <b>2a</b> [A13] for feelings to be in the breast. <i>Ang kasína nga naglumlum sa íyang dughan,</i> Enviousness that is stored up in her heart. <i>Naglumlum sa dughan ni Kaluy ang kamíngaw kang Plúra,</i> Caloy feels loneliness for Flora.

<p><b>lumpag</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] <b>1</b> @{crumble down}; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nagkalumpag na ang paril,</i> The <pb n=1315>wall is crumbling. <i>Hilumpagan ku sa kinamádang láta,</i> The cans that were stacked up neatly came tumbling down on me. <b>2</b> bring to a downfall. <i>Ayawg lumpága ang íyang mga damgu,</i> Do not destroy her hopes. <i>Lumpágun nátù ang gahum sa impiryalismu,</i> We shall overcome the power of imperialism.

<p><b>lumpánug</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b6] flee suddenly and rapidly to a far place. <i>Milumpánug lagi pagkakità sa ákung pistúla,</i> He sure got out of there fast when he saw my gun. <i>Layù ang gilumpanúgan sa ákung hunàhúnà samtang namínaw sa diskursu,</i> My mind wandered as I was listening to the speech.

<p><b>lumpat</b> <i>v</i> [A2] bounce up suddenly. <i>Milumpat ákung kasingkásing sa kahikurat,</i> My heart leaped in sudden surprise. <b>lumpatlumpat</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] bounce up and down. <i>Naglumpatlumpat ang dyíp sa batsihun nga dálan,</i> The jeep was bouncing up and down on the bumpy road.

<p><b>lumpayat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] jump vigorously up and down. <i>Ngánung naglumpayat man ang mga bátà sa katri?</i> Why are the children jumping up and down vigorously on the bed? <b>2</b> [A; c] jump up and down to get free, tug against s.t. that restricts movement. <i>Milumpayat ang ungguy sa halwa pagkakità sa ságing,</i> The monkey jumped up and down in the cage upon seeing the banana. <i>Naglumpayat ang irù sa huktanan pagkakità sa iring,</i> The dog jumped up and down tugging against his leash upon seeing the cat.

<p><b>lumpì, lumping</b> <i>a</i> @dented, having a dent. <i>v</i> [A3P; a] @dent. <i>Ayawg lumpínga ang táru nga igbabaligyà,</i> Don't dent the kerosene can we're planning to sell. <i>Lumpíngi ang kílid sa láta,</i> Make a dent in the side of the can. <i>n</i> @dent.

<p><b>lumpiyà</b> <i>n</i> @{egg roll}, a dish consisting of a thin pancake filled with sauteed meat and vegetables. <b>&mdash; nga prisku</b>[**should have acute accent over i?] an egg roll with the pancake soft and pliant. <b>&mdash; nga prítu</b> an egg roll with the pancake fried crisp. <i>v</i> [A; ac] have, make egg rolls.

<p><b>lumpu</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a4] feel tired and sleepy after taking a swim. <i>Gilumpu (nalumpu) ang bátà human malígù,</i> The child felt tired and sleepy after taking a swim.

<p><b>lumpù</b> <i>a</i> @lame, @cripple. <i>Dì siya makalakaw kay lumpù,</i> He can't walk because he is lame. <i>v</i> [B12; b5] be, become lame.

<p><b>lumpung</b> <i>v</i> [AC3; a] <b>1</b> for s.t. concave to fit or be made to fit snugly in s.t. else convex. <i>Lumpúnga ang mga básu arun sayun dad-un,</i>  <pb n=1316>Put the glasses inside of one another to make them easy to carry. <i>Ilumpung ning basurahan sa láin,</i> Put this trash can on top of the other. <b>2</b> for two or more things to be or to take place at the same time when they should not be overlapping. <i>Lisud nang maglumpung átung uyab kay gastu,</i> It's hard to have several girl friends at the same time because it's expensive. <i>Bísag lumpúngun mung duha, káya gihápun mu nákù,</i> Even if it's two against one, I can still beat you.

<p><b>lumput</b> <i>n</i> home-woven cloth of a checkered design and with a plain weave. <i>v</i> [A13] wear clothing of this weave.

<p><b>lumu</b> <i>a</i> tender, gentle in personality. <i>Lumu nga kasingkásing ni Hisus,</i> Jesus' tender heart. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] become gentle, tender. <i>Nagkalumu íyang tíngug samtang nagkabugnaw ang íyang kasukù,</i> His voice got gentler as his anger cooled off. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> tenderloin cut of meat. <b>ma-</b> = <sc>LUMU</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>lúmù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] crush s.t. out of shape without breaking it. <i>Nalúmù ang munyíkang ákung natumban,</i> The plastic doll that I stepped on got crushed out of shape. <i>Ayaw lumúa nang láta kay ákung gamítun,</i> Don't crush that can because I'm going to use it.

<p><b>lumud</b> <i>n</i> k.o. porpoise.

<p><b>lúmud</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; c1] <b>1</b> be together with s.o. in a place designed for one. <i>Naglúmud silang tulu sa gamayng katri,</i> The three of them slept together in a small bed. <b>2</b> stay with s.o. in the same house. <i>Nakalúmud ku níla ug unum ka búlan,</i> I have lived with them for six months.

<p><b>lumuk</b> <i>a</i> for the hair to be oily after oil has been applied to it. <i>v</i> [B; a] be, become oily. <i>Ákung lumukun ímung buhuk sa hisù kay ákung hingut-an,</i> I'll put lots of hair oil in your hair to get rid of the lice.

<p><b>lúmun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c] live, keep together. <b>Milúmun ang bátang ílu sa íyang tiyù,</b> The orphaned child went to live with his uncle. <b>Naglúmun sila bísag wà pa makasal,</b> They lived together even though they weren't married. <b>Ayg ilúmun ang dunut nga mangga sa mga maáyu,</b> Don't put the rotten mangoes together with the good ones. <b>2</b> [A; a12] crumple or roll up a piece of cloth into a ball. <i>Naglúmun siyag nuug íyang gihímung tutuytútuy,</i> She made a ball out of the cloth to make a false breast.

<p><b>lúmung</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] for water to collect and form a pool. <i>Naglúmung ang túbig sa tugkaran kay way kagwaan,</i> The water formed a pool in the front yard because there was no way for it to exit.

<p><b>lumus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB16; b1] @{drown}, get drowned. <pb n=1317><i>Naglumus siya kay nadispirádu,</i> She drowned herself because she got frustrated in love. <i>Gidaghanun sa tubà nga makalumus (makapalumus),</i> Enough toddy to drown you. <i>Lumsan tikaw sa subà, animála ka,</i> I'll drown you in the river, you beast! <i>Subang nalumsan níya,</i> The river he drowned in. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa sabaw</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] disappear into thin air (usually said of a father deserting a family). <i>Nalumus sa sabaw ang amahan niíning batáa,</i> The father of this child disappeared into thin air. <b>2</b> [B1256] for an engine to get flooded with fuel. <i>Dì muandar ang makina kay nalumus,</i> The engine won't start because it's flooded. <b>3</b> [B126] suffocate, choke in an embrace. <i>Hápit ku malumus sa íyang gakus,</i> I almost suffocated to death in her embrace. <b>4</b> [A2; b(1)] overwhelm with feelings. <i>Kaguul nga milumus sa kasingkásing,</i> A heart drowned in grief.

<p><b>lumus<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>UNG-UNG</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>lúmut</b> <i>n</i> general term for @lichens or @algae of the sort that attach themselves. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be covered with moss or seaweed. <i>Gilumútan ang lubut sa tangki,</i> The water tank is covered with algae on the bottom. <b>2</b> be left idle (until moss covers it). <i>Gilumútan na lang siya, dága lang gihápun,</i> The years have come and gone, but she remains single. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> covered with moss or green seaweeds. <b>lumutlumut</b> <i>n</i> tiny lichens which grow on the trunks of palms and other trees, or on the sides of water containers not cleaned, greenish in color.

<p><b>lumuy, lúmuy</b> <i>a</i> soft and delicate, not rigid. <i>Lúmuy (lumuy) ang buktun sa way trabáhu,</i> One who doesn't work has soft arms. <i>Lumuy nga tsíku,</i> A soft sapodilla. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6] become soft and delicate, not rigid. <b>2</b> [BN26] become momentarily weak on experiencing a great emotion. <i>Nalúmuy ku pagkabatì nákung nakadaug ku sa swipstik,</i> My legs gave way when I heard that I won the sweepstakes. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a breed of pigs that easily grows fat, and with soft and thin skin. <b>lumyan</b> <i>n</i> variety of jackfruit (<i>nangkà</i>) the flesh of which is soft, sweet, and juicy with no dry pulp.

<p><b>lún<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @lawn. <b>-máwir</b> @{lawn mower}. <i>v</i> [A; a2] cut the grass with a lawn mower. <i>Nindut nag lún kay ákung gilunmáwir,</i> The lawn looks good now because I mowed it.

<p><b>lún<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @loan money from the bank. <i>v</i> [A; b6] loan from the bank. <i>Unsang bangkúha ang ímung gilúnan?</i> What bank did you get your loan from?

<p><b>-l-un</b> alternant for <i>-unun</i>, added to almost all the bases to which <i>-unun</i> is added, usually <pb n=1318>with no difference in meaning from <i>-unun</i>. <i>Kalan-un,</i> Things to eat. <i>Palalítun,</i>[**note: accent unclear] Things to buy.

<p><b>lúna</b> <i>n</i> @canvas. <i>Ang tulda hinímù sa lúna,</i> The tent is made of canvas.

<p><b>lunà</b> <i>n</i> @{vacant place} or area; piece of land. <i>Dúna pay lunà sa yútà nga kabalayan,</i> There is still space on the land to build a house. <i>May lunà pa ba ku sa ímung kasingkásing?</i> Do I still have a place in your heart? <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] happen to be in a position. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> be settled down to a place or position. <i>Dì ku mubalhin ug lingkuránan kay nahilúnà na ku diri,</i> I won't move to another seat because I am already settled here. <b>2</b> be at ease, not restless or nervous. <i>Wà siya mahilúnà nga nagpaábut sa nanganak níyang asáwa,</i> He couldn't sit still waiting for his wife to have her baby. <b>pahi-</b>/<b>paha-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put oneself or s.t. in proper or convenient position. <i>Mipahilúnà siyag lingkud únà musúgud ug káun,</i> He seated himself properly before he started to eat. <i>Ipahilúnag maáyu ang karga sa bisiklíta,</i> Put the load on the bicycle securely. <b>2</b> accommodate s.o. in a good position or job. <i>Ang manínuy níyang kunsihal mauy nagpahilúna níya sa sitihul,</i> Her godfather, who was a councilor, got her a job in City Hall.

<p><b>lúna dimiyil</b> <i>n</i> @honeymoon. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] have a honeymoon.

<p><b>lunag</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milunag na giyud ang kalaag ánang bayhána. Gipamabdúsan,</i> Now that woman's propensity for gadding about has borne fruit. She got herself pregnant.

<p><b>lúnang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @wallow. <i>Naglúnang ang gibunù sa kaugalíngung dugù,</i> The murder victim is wallowing in his own blood. <i>Ang gilunángan sa kábaw,</i> The place the carabao wallows. <b>2</b> [A] be in a bad state to an excessive degree. <i>Ang kalibútan nga naglúnang sa kasal-ánan,</i> The world that is wallowing in sin. Ang katawhan nga naglúnang sa katimáwà, People wallowing in poverty. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> mud pool for the water buffalo to wallow in.

<p><b>lunas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. smooth bamboo with a yellowish-green trunk: <b><i>Bambusa vulgaris</i></b>.

<p><b>lun-as</b> <i>v</i> [B12] for plants or flowers to become withered, faded, or dried up. <i>Ang kaínit mauy nakalun-as (nakapalun-as) sa mga rúsas,</i> The hot sun caused the rose plants to wither and dry up. <i>Ilísi ang mga búlak nga nagkalun-as na,</i> Replace those flowers since they are withering and fading.

<p><b>lunaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] cook chopped sweet potatoes with water. <i>Maglunaw ku áring kamúti <pb n=1319>pára miryinda,</i> I'll boil chopped up sweet potatoes for my afternoon snack. <i>n</i> chopped, boiled sweet potatoes. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lunay</b> <i>v</i> [B2] for pain or illness to subside. <i>Mulunay ang suul sa tiyan ug tambálan,</i> The stomach ache will subside if you take medicine.

<p><b>lundag</b> <i>v</i> [B; b] sink to the bottom. <i>Manggáwas ta sa dì pa mulundag ang barku,</i> Let's go over the side before the boat sinks.

<p><b>Lundris<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @London.

<p><b>lundris<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALUNDRIS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><b>lunduk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B345; b4] for the wind to stop blowing. <i>Human sa bagyu milunduk ang hángin,</i> The wind stopped blowing after the storm. <i>Gilundúkan mi sa hángin sa lawud,</i> We were becalmed in the middle of the sea.

<p><b>lunduk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AB3(1)6; a2] for things usually soft and having length to fall, settle down gathering in a heap; cause them to do so. <i>Milunduk (nalunduk) sa salug ang kurtína pagkaputul sa higut,</i> The curtain fell down in a heap on the floor when the string snapped. <i>Siyay naglunduk sa mga bulingun sa suuk,</i> She heaped the dirty clothes in the corner. <i>n</i> k.o. affliction where part of the intestine settles down into the scrotum. <i>a</i> having a large scrotum due to such an affliction.

<p><b>lunga<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{sesame seeds} used for tidbit decorations or flavoring on sweets: <b><i>Sesamium orientale</i></b>.

<p><b>lunga<sub>2</sub>, lungà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2C23; b(1)] give up doing s.t. which one had been doing with great expenditure of effort. <i>Wà siya mulungag pangítà sa nawálang anak,</i> He didn't give up in his search for the lost child. <i>Ayaw siya lung-i (lunghi) ug sugs[=ú]g hangtud muhílak,</i> Don't stop your relentless teasing until she cries. <b>2</b> [B26] stop from bothering, subside. <i>Mulunga lang ang íyang húbak kun mutumar siyag tambal,</i> Her asthma attacks do not stop until she takes her medicine. <i>a</i> not persisting in one's work, working off and on. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>LUNGÀ</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>lúngab</b> <i>n</i> @cave, @pit, or any large hole in the ground. <i>v</i> [AB12; b] dig a cave or pit, become one.

<p><b>lúngag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] dig, @{bore a hole}. <i>Maglúngag kug pára kumpus pit,</i> I will dig a hole for a compost pit. <i>Nalúngag ang atup nga nahulgan sa lubi,</i> The roof got a hole in it after a coconut fell through it. <i>Lungági ang láta sa litsi,</i> Punch a hole in the milk can. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @hole. <i>Lungag sa dágum,</i> Eye of a needle. <i>Lungag sa ilung,</i> Nostrils. <b>2</b> @vagina (euphemism).

<pb n=1320>

<p><b>lung-ag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] boil rice or any carbohydrate until the product is cooked and dry. <i>Lung-ága nang ságing hilaw pára pamáhaw,</i> Cook the green bananas for breakfast. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> staple being cooked. <i>Sigáig linung-ag,</i> Turn up the fire under the rice. <b>2</b> cereals or carbohydrates prepared by boiling, as opposed to any other way. <i>Linung-ag ságing palita ayaw nang minantikaan,</i> Buy the cooked bananas, not the fried ones.

<p><b>lungas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> given to much playing and moving around. <b>2</b> for females to be lacking in modesty and proper restraint. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] move, play around vigorously. <i>Ayaw mu palábig lungas kay mangadagmà unyà mu,</i> Don't keep running about; you might stumble and fall. <i>Magkalungas giyud ang bátà samtang magtubù,</i> A child gets to be terribly active as it grows bigger. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] for females to become wanting in modesty and proper restraint. <i>Nalungas ílang anak kay nagpúnayg kuyugkúyug ánang hustis,</i> Their daughter started to be immodest in her behavior because of her association with that hostess.

<p><b>lungay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @drooping, @{hanging loosely}. <i>Ang puya lungay ug líug,</i> A very young baby can't hold its head up. <b>2</b> unable to stand or flex physically defective muscles, as if without bones. <i>Ang lungay nga bátà nagsígi lag higdà kay dì man makabángun,</i> A crippled child lies in bed all his life for he cannot get up. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] @droop, hang in a drooping way. <i>Nalungay na ang ákung úlu sa kakatulugun,</i> My head is drooping from sleepiness. <i>Nagkalungay na ang sanga nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i> The branch is drooping down more and more because it is so laden with fruit. <b>2</b> [B126] turn out to have the defect of <i>lungay</i>, <i>a2</i>.

<p><b>lungbuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> small tree with elliptic leathery leaves 6&ndash;12 cm., bearing clusters of juicy, oval fruit, dark purple, 1.5&ndash;2 cm. long: <b><i>Syzygium cumini</i></b>. <b>2</b> the blunt-nosed lead of small-arm bullets which resemble <i>lungbuy</i> fruits (slang). <b>-in-</b> having the color of <i>lungbuy</i>. <b>lápis -in-</b> @{indelible pencil}. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of the color of <i>lungbuy</i>.

<p><b>lungdistans</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{long-distance call}. <b>2</b> long-distance passenger bus or trip. <i>Magsakit ákung likud ug byáhing lungdistans,</i> My back aches when I take long-distance trips. <b>3</b> long-distance shooting in basketball. <i>Maáyu siyang musiyát bísag lungdistans,</i> He is good even in long-distance shots. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] call by long-distance. <b>2</b> [A; c6] make a long shot in basketball. <b>3</b> [A; a12] masturbate (from the notion that one is getting sexual gratification thinking of s.o. not present). <pb n=1321><i>Gilungdistans níya si Maríya nga nalígù,</i> He masturbated thinking of Maria taking a bath.

<p><b>lunggù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @decapitate. <i>Gilunggúan sa mga magahat ang misiyuníru,</i> The head-*hunters beheaded the missionary.

<p><b>lunggub</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @grab, @wrest s.t. away from s.o. <i>Ayawg lunggúba ning ritrátu kay nagtan-aw pa ku,</i> Don't grab the picture away because I am still looking at it.

<p><b>lunggung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; c1] @{keep inside}, @imprison, @{lock up}. <i>Daghang trabáhung milunggung nákù sa upisína,</i> Lots of work kept me imprisoned in the office. <i>Lunggúnga (ilunggung) ang mga bábuy sa álad,</i> Lock the pigs up in a pen. <b>2</b> [A; c1] shake a container in the hand to shuffle things up. <i>Lunggúnga (ilunggung) únà sa kamut ang dáyis únà iitsa,</i> Shake the dice in your hand before you throw them. <b>3</b> [AC; b(1)] bet on dice thrown from a container. The one who bets on the number which comes out wins. <i>n</i> game of dice of this sort. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> the container in which the dice are shaken.

<p><b>lunggung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] @cheat to gain. <i>Gilunggung ku sa tindírang migámit ug gantangang way aríyus,</i> I was gypped by the vendor because she used uncertified measures. <i>Gilunggung ku nímu kay dì kung kamaung mupúkir,</i> You cheated me because I don't know how to play poker.

<p><b>lúngì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] wrench s.t. off to detach it. <i>Kinsay galúngì sa buktun sa munyíka?</i> Who wrenched the arm off the doll? <i>Lungía nang usa ka dawin ságing,</i> Get me a banana from the bunch.

<p><b>lúngib</b> <i>n</i> cave. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] form a cave or hole in the side of a slope. <i>Nalúngib ang kílid sa bungtud nga gikwári,</i> The side of the mountain that was quarried formed a cave.

<p><b>lúngis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{wrench off}, twist s.t. off its attachment. <i>Mulúngis kug usa ka dawin sa ímung ságing,</i> I'll take a banana from your bunch.

<p><b>lungkab</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] break s.t. open by prying so as to get into it. <i>Kawatan ang naglungkab sa ámung baul,</i> A robber broke our trunk open. <i>Lungkába ang kandádug way yáwi,</i> Pry the lock open if there is no key.

<p><b>lungkaub</b> <i>n</i> @{thumping sound}. <i>Ang lungkaub sa mga túnub,</i> The thumping sound of foot-*falls. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] make a thumping sound. <i>Naglungkaub ang mga balud nga mihasmag sa mga batu,</i> The waves beat against the stone with a thudding sound. <b>2</b> [A13] throb vigorously in the depths of one's feelings. <i>Ang kayugut nga naglungkaub sa íyang dughan,</i> Anger that is raging in his heart. <b>-in-, -in-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> heavy sound of thumping.

<pb n=1322>

<p><b>lungkì</b> <i>a</i> @limping, partially disabled in the leg, usually permanently. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] walk with a limp. <i>Naáyu túud siya sa pulyu apan nalungkì giyud intáwun,</i> He recovered from his polio, but now he walks with a limp.

<p><b>lunglayin</b> <i>n</i> @{longline fishing}.

<p><b>lungnik</b> <i>n</i> @{fifth of liquor}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] be a fifth full. <i>Hápit mulungnik (malungnik) ang písu nga idibul nga íyang gipalit,</i> He bought a peso's worth of cooking oil which nearly filled a fifth. <b>2</b> [c1] make it a fifth of liquor. <i>Lungnikun (ilungnik) na lang kay daghan man tang manginum,</i> Let us buy a fifth because a lot of us are going to drink.

<p><b>lungnus</b> <i>n</i> @{long-nosed pliers}.

<p><b>lungpli</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{long-playing record}. <b>2</b> lengthy monologue in a conversation. <i>v</i> [c1] record s.t. on a long-playing record. <i>Lungplihun (ilungpli) ug diritsu ang ímung únang pláka,</i> Make your first recording a long-playing record.

<p><b>lungslib</b> <i>n</i> @{long-sleeved shirt}. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear, make into a long-sleeved shirt.

<p><b>lungsud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @town. <b>2</b> @citizenry. <i>Tunug na sa tibuuk lungsud nga gipaangkan siya,</i> It has been bruited about town that she has had a child out of marriage. <b>háring &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> the @electorate, sovereign people. <b>kalungsúran</b> <i>n</i> @towns. <b>lungsuránun</b> <i>n</i> local citizen. <b>katagi-</b> <i>n</i> one from the same town. <b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> pertaining to s.t. civic. <i>Katungdánang lungsudnun sa matag lungsuránun,</i> Civic duty of each citizen. <b>2</b> pertaining to the town or municipality. <i>Mamahanding lungsudnun,</i> Municipal treasurer. <b>maki-, maki-nun</b> <i>a</i> @{civic-minded}.

<p><b>lungtad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] <b>1</b> @last for a period of time. <i>Makalungtad ug dúgay ang isdà ug aysan,</i> Fish will last long if you put them on ice. <i>Wà lungtári ug tris díyas ang ákung puása,</i> My fast didn't last for three days. <b>2</b> stay with, at s.t. for a long time. <i>Dì mu lungtáran ug míd ánang inyung taras,</i> No maid will stay long with you, the way you act. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make, cause to last. <i>Ayaw palungtára (ipalungtad) ug dúgay inyung dúmut,</i> Don't allow your desire for vengeance to last long. <b>malungtárun</b> <i>a</i> @durable.

<p><b>lung tíbul</b> <i>n</i> @wedding, with reference to the banquet (colloquial). <i>Anus-a man ang lung tíbul?</i> When are you getting hitched? <i>v</i> [A13] get married.

<p><b>lungùlungù</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] for one's head to sway or shake uncontrollably as when drunk or in old age. <i>Naglungùlungù na siya sa katigúlang,</i> His head tremors due to old age.

<p><b>lungun</b> <i>n</i> @coffin. <i>v</i> [c1] bury in a coffin, as <pb n=1323>opposed to other modes of burial.

<p><b>lungutlungut</b> <i>v</i> [B1456; b3] be @restless, moving about and talking in anger, exasperation, impatience to do s.t. <i>Naglungutlungut siyang makaapil sa banggà,</i> He was restless in his impatience to take part in the contest. <i>Ang gisibat níyang alkansíya mauy íyang gilungutlungutan,</i> She rushed about in anger on account of her piggy bank which got stolen.

<p><b>lunhat</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a2b3] have a @relapse, most often said of sprains or fractures or illness thought to be derived from them. <i>Nalunhat íyang piang kay nagpúnay siyag lungas,</i> His sprain came back because he kept moving around.

<p><b>lunhaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for growing things, not fruit, to be green. <i>Lunhaw nga sibsibánan,</i> Green pastures. <b>2</b> @recent, @young. <i>Sa lunhawng kinabúhì sa kabatan-un wà pa níya masinátì ang kapakyásan,</i> He was a callow youth, and had never experienced failure. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6] for growing things to be green and fresh. <i>Mulunhaw (malunhaw) ug bálik ang sagbut inig-abut sa ting-ulan,</i> The grass will become green again when the rains return. <b>2</b> [a12] bring back s.t. to make it recent, young again. <i>Tam-is lunháwun ang malipáyun tang kabatan-un,</i> It's nice to reminisce on our happy childhood.

<p><b>Lúnis<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @Monday. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BIRNIS</sc>. <b>pa-(->)</b> <b>n</b> work bee done on a Monday. <i>v</i> [A; b6] hold a work bee on a Monday. <i>Palunisi lang nang pagtúkud sa taytáyan,</i> Have the bridge built by a Monday work bee.

<p><b>lúnis<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{odd number}.

<p><b>lúnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] @{tweak the ears}. <i>Hinglunitan si Marta sa maistra kay nagtábì,</i> The teacher tweaked Martha's ears because she was talking. <i>n</i> action of tweaking.

<p><b>lunlun</b> <i>a</i> @{all of one kind}, no mixture. <i>Ang kinabúhì dì lunlun kalípay,</i> Life is not all happiness. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c16] have all in one kind, no mixture. <i>Sagúlig pinágud mais ang tablíya, ayawg ilunlun (lunlúna) nga kakaw,</i> Mix some roasted corn in the chocolate tablet, don't make it pure cacao. <b>2</b> [A12C; b] be all together in a place. <i>Dì ta makalunlun ug lingkud sa píkas lingkuránan kay kúlag hángin ang ligid,</i> We can't all stay on one side because the tire lacks air. <i>Dì ta maglunlun dinhis píkas kay malúnud unyà ta,</i> Let's not huddle on one side of the boat because it might capsize.

<p><b>lunsay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @pure, @unadulterated. <i>Lunsay nga gátas sa báka,</i> Pure cow's milk. <i>Lunsayng kaputlì nga wà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i> Unadulterated innocence that has not been <pb n=1324>polluted by experience. <b>2</b> simple, peaceful in way or outlook. <i>Lunsay kaáyu ang kinabúhing banikanhun,</i> Farm life is very simple and peaceful. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] be simple or peaceful in ways or outlook. <i>Ang maglunsay sa kinahanglan dílì magápus sa útang,</i> One who is simple with his needs won't get himself engulfed in debt. <i>Malunsay ang átung pamuyù ug mubíyà ka sa súgal,</i> Our life would get peaceful once you stop your gambling.

<p><b>lunsing</b> <i>n</i> k.o. very small, yellow banana, particularly delicious and sweet, but not commercially grown.

<p><b>lunsud</b> = <sc>LUNGSUD</sc>.

<p><b>luntad</b> = <sc>LUNGTAD</sc>.

<p><b>luntalunta</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] leap up and down in joy or to get free. <i>Miluntalunta ang kabáyù sa pagkakità sa bayi,</i> The horse struggled to get free when it saw the mare. <i>Mahugnù ang lantay ug inyung luntaluntáhan,</i> The bamboo bed will collapse if you jump up and down on it.

<p><b>luntud</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] for two things of about the same size to lie atop one another, cause them to do so. <i>Dì ka makaluntud ug libru sa Bibliya,</i> You can't put a book on top of the Bible. <i>Nagluntud silag higdà sa gip-ut kaáyung bangkù,</i> They lay on top of one another on the narrow bench. <i>Luntúra nang duha ka malíta,</i> Put those two suitcases on top of one another. <b>luntudluntud</b> <i>v</i> [AC23; c1] @{pile up}, be @{piled up}. <i>Nagluntudluntud ang mga sáku sa bugas,</i> Sacks of rice are piled up.

<p><b>lunu</b> <i>v</i> [A3N; b6] for an animal to shed its skin or shell. <i>Dinhay naglunu nga hálas dinhi kay dúnay lunu nga gibyáan,</i> A snake must have shed its skin here because there's an empty snakeskin left behind. <i>n</i> skin or shell shed. <b>linunhan</b> = <sc>LUNU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lun-ub</b> <i>v</i> [AB2; a12] for s.t. to get a big depression in it, cause it to do so. <i>Kinsay galun-ub sa palanggána? Gilingkúran tingáli,</i> Who made a big dent in the basin? S.o. must have sat on it. <i>Húmuk malun-ub ang hubun sa bátà,</i> A child's fontanel easily gets sunken. <i>n</i> rather large depression.

<p><b>lúnud<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{sink s.t.} <i>Ang maldítu mauy naglúnud sa sakayan nákung papil,</i> The meany sunk my paper boat. <b>2</b> [B12; c1] <b>&mdash; ang puhúnan</b> for capital to get used up. <i>Magkalunud ang puhúnan sa nigusyung way maáyung kwintáda,</i> Business without proper accounting gradually exhausts capital. <b>&mdash; ang buwan</b> <i>n</i> @{new moon}. <i>Hunas run kaáyu kay lúnud ang buwan,</i> We have an extra low tide today; it's new moon. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b4] for an illness to settle. It is believed that an <pb n=1325>illness to get better must come out in hives, rash, or the like, and if it does not do so, it settles, thus becoming worse. <i>Namatay siya kay nalunud (milunud) iyang dáp,</i> He died because his measles didn't come out. <i>Nabákul siya dihang nalunuran sa íyang buti,</i> He became a cripple after his smallpox sank. <i>a</i> causing illnesses to sink. <i>Makamatay nang lunud nga hilánat,</i> A fever that sinks can cause death. <b>udtung &mdash; ang búwan</b> half moon of the third quarter.

<p><b>lúnud<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] put s.t. together with s.t. else which is being processed. <i>Lundi nag bugas ang túbig,</i> Put some rice into the water now. <i>Ilúnud lag ímung bulingun sa ámù nga náa sa wásing masin,</i> Just put your dirty laundry together with ours that's already in the washing machine. <b>2</b> [A; c6] put in money, etc. to a pool. <i>Ilúnud ring ákung bayinti sa ímung pusta,</i> Here's my twenty pesos to put into your betting pool. <b>&mdash; palit</b> <i>n</i> in cockfighting, a purchase of the cock where the owner is not paid, but the value of the cock is made part of the bet. The purchaser then proceeds to fight the cock. If the cock wins, the owner is paid double the purchase price and the purchaser keeps the cock. If the cock loses the owner is given nothing (since his purchase price was his bet). <b>&mdash; pátay</b> <i>a</i> die-hard, inveterate. <i>Lúnud pátay (lunud pátay) nga Libiral,</i> A die-hard Liberal. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> way of cooking <i>adúbu</i> such that the meat is boiled first and then after it is boiled it is put into the bubbling fat. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make <i>adúbu</i> in this style.

<p><b>lunuglunug</b> <i>v</i> [B146] for the fat of meat, jelly, or the like to be soft, flabby, and quivering. <i>Naglunuglunug sa katambuk ang unud,</i> The meat is soft and shaking like jelly because it's all fat.

<p><b>lúnuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> brown, granular residue which remains after the oil has been cooked from the coconut. <b>2</b> an old man who has lost his virility (humorous). <i>Mamána ka ánang lagas nga wà nay lána, lúnuk na lang,</i> Are you going to marry that very old man, when he doesn't have any oil (sperm) left? He's all dried up. <i>v</i> [A2B12] form granules like <i>lúnuk</i>. <i>Sigíhi ug ukay ug mulúnuk na ang tunù,</i> Keep stirring when granules form in the coconut juice. <i>Nalúnuk ang sabun nga íyang gilútù kay sayup ang timpla,</i> The soap he cooked formed granules because he had the wrong mixture.

<p><b>lúnup</b> <i>v</i> [B456; b(1)] <b>1</b> @flood. <i>Pirmi lang maglúnup sa Butwan kay gipamúril ang kakahuyan,</i> There are always floods in Butuan because the mountains have been deforested.  <pb n=1326><b>2</b> for an emotion to flood over one. <i>Gilunúpan siya sa túmang kalípay,</i> He was overwhelmed with immense joy. <i>n</i> @flood. <i>Ang dakung lúnup sa tyimpu ni Nuwi,</i> The great flood in Noah's time.

<p><b>lúnus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a12] for fruits, vegetables, root crops to soften; cause them to do so. <i>Mulúnus (malúnus) ang tawung nga dílì lutúun dáyun,</i> Eggplants will soften and wither if you don't cook them right away. <i>Maglúnus kug ságing nga isugba,</i> I'll soften bananas for broiling. <b>2</b> [B126] get burned, heavily tanned from the sun. <i>Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy nakalúnus (nakapalúnus) sa pánit sa mag-uúma,</i> The heat of the sun scorched the farmer's back. <b>3</b> [B16; b4] be @starved, extremely @hungry (as if withered). <i>À, lunúsan man sad ta sa gútum ug pinaábut nímu,</i> I'm famished waiting for you. <i>n</i> @starvation. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> for fruits to be soft and withered. <i>Ságing nga lunus,</i> Softly cooked bananas.

<p><b>lun-us</b> = <sc>LUSNÙ</sc>.

<p><b>lun-ut</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ac] share a small space ordinarily occupied by one or two people. <i>Makiglun-ut siya nákug higdà kay tugnaw kunu,</i> She wants me to sleep in her bed because she says it's cold. <i>Lun-úta lag mga bátà sa baksit,</i> Just put the children together in the backseat.

<p><b>lunuy</b> <i>a</i> thoroughly soft and tender to touch. <i>v</i> [B2; a] become, make very soft and tender. <i>Nalunuy ang hinug ságing nga giban-ug,</i> The ripe banana got very soft and tender because it got bruised. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [BN] become weak to the point of near collapse. <i>Mulúnuy (manglúnuy) ku basta gutmun,</i> I become weak when I'm hungry. <i>Nalúnuy dáyun ku pagkahibalu sa íyang kamatáyun,</i> I felt weak all over when I learned of his death.

<p><b>lupa, lupà</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] be somewhat depressed below the surrounding land. <i>Giabunúhan níya ang mga dapit sa yútà nga naglupà,</i> He filled up all the places in his land which were depressed. <i>n</i> land that is below the level of the surrounding land. <i>Kanúnay bahaan ang íyang baul kay lupà man,</i> His farm is always flooded because it is located in a depression.

<p><b>lúpà</b> <i>v</i> [A] for one that is misbehaving to do it all the more. <i>Human siya tambági sa pagsúgal, milúpà hinúun,</i> After being cautioned about his gambling, he indulged in it all the more. <i>Ayawg labáni nang batáa arun dì mulúpà,</i> Don't take that child's part or he'll misbehave all the more. <b>&mdash; ang atay</b> <i>v</i> [B246] swell with pride. <i>Milúpà íyang atay pag-ingun  <pb n=1327>nákung gwápu siya,</i> He swelled with pride when I told him he was handsome.

<p><b>lupad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @fly, take a plane, be sent flying. <i>Lupdun lang sa ubang langgam ang láing kuntininti,</i> Some birds fly from one continent to another. <i>Pugngi ímung kálù kay tingálig ilupad sa hángin,</i> Hold on to your hat or the wind will blow it away. <b>2</b> [B2456] pass swiftly by. <i>Túling milupad ang mga túig,</i> The years passed swiftly by. <b>3</b> [b8] fly into a rage. <i>Hingluparan kus maistra kay nayabu ang tintà,</i> The teacher lost her temper at me because I spilled the ink. <b>4</b> [A2] @travel, go s.w. (humorous, mildly derogatory). <i>Mau pa gánì pag-abut milupad sad dáyun,</i> He just arrived then he immediately went away again. <i>n</i> act of @flying. <i>Kusug ang lupad sa dyit,</i> The jet flies fast. <b>kúyug, uban sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] keep up with the latest fad, with the in thing. <i>Dì siya magpaiwit. Muuban giyud sa lupad (panlúpad) sa mga dátù,</i> She does not want to be left behind. She keeps up with the rich. <b>mubù ug &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MUBÙ</sc>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> expanse of one's travel. <i>Taas nag lúpad nang tawhána. Nakaabut nas Lundun,</i> That man is widely travelled. He has gone to London. <b>taas ug &mdash;, (<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> always be out of one's home and be at places where he is not supposed to be. <i>Taas ug lúpad (lupad) bayhána. Ásang bayli túa,</i> This woman goes out too much. Wherever there's dance, she is bound to be there. <b>2</b> travelling a lot. <i>Dì ba didtu kas Dábaw, nía na man sab lagi ka sa Manílà. Taása pud nímug lupad uy,</i> You were in Davao, weren't you, and now here you are in Manila. You sure do travel. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> act of flying (plural). [+]

<p><b>lup-ad</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @{spit saliva}. <i>Kinsa ninyuy naglup-ad diri sa panghugasan?</i> Which one of you spat in the sink? <i>Gilup-aran ku níya,</i> He spat on me. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep spitting. <b>lup-aránan</b> <i>n</i> @spittoon.

<p><b>lupak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> poke or pound repeatedly with the end of a stick. <i>Naglupak ku sa túbu nga nasampungan,</i> I'm shoving a stick into the pipe that was stopped up. <i>Lupakun ku kanang ilagà nga náa sa sulud,</i> I'll shove a stick into the hole to flush the rat out. <b>2</b> pound to mash or pulverize s.t. <i>Milupak siya sa humay,</i> He pounded the rice. <i>Maglupak tag ságing,</i> We will mash bananas. <b>3</b> make <i>lupak</i>. <i>n</i> a k.o. sweet made out of pounded, cooked, unripe bananas, mixed with half-matured coconut, shredded, and sugared. <b>ni-, -in-</b> = <sc>LUPAK</sc>.

<p><b>lupak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the young of the rudderfish (<i>damagan</i>, <i>1</i>).

<p><b>lupasì</b> <i>a</i> @pallid in complexion. <i>Ang bátang bitúkun  <pb n=1328>lupasì ug pamánit,</i> A child infested with parasitic worms tends to have a pallid complexion. <i>v</i> [B] for the complexion to become pale.

<p><b>lupì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> turned down corner of a page. <b>2</b> = <sc>ALUPÌ</sc>. <i>v</i> [A; c1] turn down a corner of the leaf of a book. <i>Gilupian níya ang tumuy sa pahina nga íyang giundángan,</i> She turned down the corner of the page where she stopped.

<p><b>lúpig</b> <i>a</i> @inferior, @outclassed. <i>Lúpig ku siyag ínum,</i> He is no match for me when it comes to drinking. <i>Lúpig pa nímuy buguy,</i> You're worse than a hoodlum. <b>walay &mdash;</b> nothing is better than (lit. outclassed by). <i>Way lúpig sa mag-amping,</i> There's nothing better than being careful. <i>Lúpig pa níyay galingan mukáun,</i> He can consume more than a mill. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23S; a2b2] @overpower, @outclass. <i>Way makalupig sa íyang katabian,</i> Nobody can outdo her in talkativeness. <i>Mubangka ku ug lupígun ku nímug bú,</i> I will treat you if you beat me in arm wrestling. <b>2</b> [AN; b(1)] @exploit, take advantage over s.o. by cheating. <i>Kusug siyang mulúpig (manlúpig) sa uban salig kay abugádu siya,</i> Basing himself on his ability as a lawyer, he takes advantage of people. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> exploiting in a cruel way. <i>Malupígun ang mga Katsílà kaniadtu,</i> The Spaniards were oppressive in former times. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> taking advantage of s.o. and cheating him out of s.t.

<p><b>lúpir</b> <i>n</i> @{sport jacket}. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear a sport jacket.

<p><b>lúpis</b> <i>n</i> dried strips of abaca trunk or certain varieties of bananas which have not been processed into fibers, used for tying and other similar purposes.

<p><b>lup-it</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] press s.t. tight between two surfaces. <i>Naglup-it ug mga dáhung layà ang libru,</i> The book has some dead leaves pressed inside it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put s.t. in between two flat surfaces so as to press it. <i>Pusturáwu siyang tan-áwun ug magpalup-it sa púlu,</i> He looks good when he tucks his shirt in.

<p><b>lupnis</b> = <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.

<p><b>lupù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small blackish fish with lightly toxic dorsal spines, often found on the bottom in fresh or brackish waters: <b><i>Gymnapistes niger</i></b>.

<p><b>lupù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b6(1)] @{shut off}, @block a passage or flow. <i>Gúmun sa buhuk ang nakalupù (nakapalupù) sa labábu,</i> The wash basin was stopped up by some hair. <i>Ílang gilup-an (gilupuan) ang agiánan arun pagbanhig sa ílang mga kaáway,</i> They blocked the way so that they could ambush their enemy. <i>n</i> s.t. used to block the flow or passage.

<pb n=1329>

<p><b>lúpug<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> for the eyes to be smarting. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; b4] for the eyes to sting. <i>Bùbúig túbig ang bátà kay gilupúgan,</i> Pour water on the child because his eyes are stinging. <b>2</b> [B; b6] for tears to fill the eyes and blur the vision. <i>Nalúpug ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà,</i> Tears filled her eyes.

<p><b>lúpug<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] chase, run after s.t. that is running. <i>Mulúpug nang irúag mudágan ka,</i> That dog will chase you if you run. <i>Lupúgun ta ka run ug dílì ka muari,</i> I will run after you if you don't come here. <i>Hinglupugan siya kay nangáwat ug mangga,</i> He got himself chased because he stole some mangoes.

<p><b>lup-ug</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b6] slump down to one's feet. <i>Nadismáyu siya ug nalup-ug (milup-ug) sa yútà,</i> She fainted and slumped to the ground. <i>Dihà ra hibuntagi ang hubug sa íyang gilup-úgan,</i> Morning found the drunk lying where he had fallen.

<p><b>lúpuk</b> <i>n</i> young @locust.

<p><b>lúpus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B12] for a person to be @drenched. <i>Nalúpus siya sa singut,</i> He was drenched in sweat. <i>Diyútay rang túbig ikalígù. Dì gánì makalúpus,</i> This isn't enough water to bathe with. It won't even get me wet.

<p><b>lúpus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @bully. <i>Lupúsun lang mi nímu kay dakù man ka,</i> You bully us because you are bigger than us.

<p><b>luput</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); b4] <b>1</b> leave a mark on or injure the skin after winding, tying, etc. s.t. tightly on it. <i>Miluput ang písì sa tiil sa bábuy,</i> The rope was tied so tight around the pig's foot it left a mark. <b>2</b> leave a crease on a cloth upon folding or pressing. <i>Muluput (maluput) ang íyang inutawan,</i> She irons creases into the clothes. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mark left on the skin after tying s.t. tightly around it. <b>2</b> crease, fold on a cloth.

<p><b>lup-ut<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>LUPUT</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>lup-ut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AP; cP] @{tuck s.t. in} or under. <i>Ilup-ut (ipalup-ut) ang ímung púlu,</i> Tuck your shirt in.

<p><b>lup-ut<sub>3</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2C1; b6] share a space for sitting or sleeping with s.o. <i>Dì ta makalup-ut sa tihíras,</i> We can't sleep together on one small cot. <i>Naglup-ut ming duhag lingkud sa usa ka síya,</i> We sat together in one chair.

<p><b>lupuy</b> <i>n</i> the fry of <i>andúhaw</i>.

<p><b>lupyak</b> <i>v</i> [AB2; b6] <b>1</b> get, make a @dent in s.t. <i>Lupyákig gamay ang táru ágig timáan,</i> Put a small dent into the kerosene can to mark it. <b>2</b> for earth to sink, cause it to do so. <i>Ang yútang giabúnu sa bangag mulupyak ug ulanun,</i> The earth that was filled into the hole will collapse when it rains. <i>a</i> @sunken, @dented.  <pb n=1330><i>Lupyak ug áping ang níwang,</i> A thin person has sunken cheeks.

<p><b>*lupyù</b> (from <ix>puyù</ix>) <b>-um-r-, mu-</b> <i>n</i> @inhabitant, @resident of a locality. <i>Ang kasagáran sa mga lumulupyù (mulupyù) dinhi mangingisdà,</i> Most of the inhabitants here are fishermen.

<p><b>lurang</b> <i>v</i> [B24] <b>1</b> for a storm or some other natural force to @abate. <i>Milurang na ang bagyu,</i> The typhoon has let up. <b>2</b> for problems, anger, etc. to abate. <i>Wà giyuy paági nga makapalurang (makalurang) sa kagúbut sa midul-ist,</i> There seems to be no solution to the trouble in the Middle East.

<p><b>lúrat</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c1P] <b>1</b> open the eyes wide. <i>Papyúnga ang mata sa minatay kay naglurat,</i> Close the dead man's eyes because they are wide open. <i>Dì kang kakità? Luráta (ilúrat, paluráta, ipalúrat) ímung mata,</i> You can't see? Open your eyes wide. <b>2</b> @glower at s.o. to show angry disapproval. <i>Gilurátan sa maistru ang mga istudiyanting nagtábì,</i> The teacher glowered at the students who were talking. <i>n</i> act of @glowering. <i>Sa usa lang ka lúrat ni Tátay hílum ming tanan,</i> Father can silence us with just one look. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] have one's eyes pop wide open. <i>Nahalúrat siya sa kahibúlung,</i> Her eyes opened wide in surprise.

<p><b>lúray<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6] for a top to wobble as it spins to a stop. <i>n</i> wobbling of a top as it spins to a stop.

<p><b>lúray<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B2; c1P] for the voice to be affectionate with a slurring intonation. <i>Mulúray na gánì íyang tíngug dúna siyay ihangyù nímu,</i> When her voice gets sweet, she has a request to make. <i>a</i> affectionate with a slurring intonation. <b>pina-</b> <i>a</i> with an affectionate, slurring intonation. <i>Pinalúray ang íyang tíngug nga mihanggat nákù sa pagpangatúlug,</i> With an affectionate voice, she asked me to come to bed.

<p><b>lúrir</b> = <sc>RÚLIR</sc>.

<p><b>luru</b> <i>v</i> [B2N] for hair to fall out. <i>Mangluru (muluru) ang buhuk basta kaspahun,</i> If you have dandruff your hair will fall out. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> falling hair.

<p><b>lúrù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] be @drooping. <i>Milúrù ang sangang namungíngi sa mga búnga,</i> The branch was drooping, it was so laden with fruits. <i>Nalúrù ang babáying gikuyapan sa simbahan,</i> The lady fainted in church and sat there limp. <b>2</b> [B126] @{become dizzy}. <i>Nalúrù ku sa bangkà kay bawud,</i> I felt seasick in the boat because of the rough seas. <i>Tyubíbu ang nakalúrù (nakapalúrù) níya,</i> The merry-go-round made her dizzy.

<p><b>lúrung</b> <i>v</i> [B12; b3(1)] get dizzy from motion or from being poisoned or nauseated. <pb n=1331><i>Nalúrung ku humag tuyuktúyuk nákù,</i> I got dizzy after I turned myself round and round. <i>Ísug nga sigarilyu nga ákung nalurúngan,</i> The strong cigarettes made me dizzy.

<p><b>lús</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] lower the sail of a boat. <i>Lúsun (ilús) ang láyag ug línaw ang dágat,</i> The sail is lowered when the sea is calm.

<p><b>lusa, lusà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A13] stare unseeingly into space, usually due to lack of interest, comprehension. <i>Unsay ímung gihunàhúnà nga naglusa na man lang nang ímung mata?</i> What are you thinking about? You're just staring blankly into space.

<p><b>lúsa</b> <i>n</i> plate made of metal coated with enamel. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] eat from metal plates.

<p><b>lusà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @nit, the egg of a louse. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested with nits. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for lice to lay eggs. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> full of nits. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become full of nits.

<p><b>lúsad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] go, bring @down, @descend, @dismount. <i>Lugar bay. Anhi lang ku lúsad,</i> Stop, Driver. I'm going to get off here. <i>Milúsad siya sa hagdanan,</i> He went down the stairs. <i>Patábang ug lúsad sa pyánu ngadtu sa sílung,</i> Let some people help you bring the piano down. <i>Lusára ang búla sa sílung,</i> Go down and get the ball. <i>Ang walang tiil mauy ilúsad pag-úna,</i> Descend with the left foot first. <b>1a</b> [A2; a1c] go, bring to the sea to fish, bathe. <i>Mag-íhaw mig bábuy ug maglúsad mig panágat,</i> We slaughter a pig when we bring our fishing nets to the sea for the first time. <b>2</b> [A; b] launch one's or s.o.'s political candidacy. <i>Kadaghan na siya makalúsad, karun pa giyud kadaug,</i> He ran so many times, but this is the first time he won. <b>lusaránan</b> <i>n</i> place one descends onto or over.

<p><b>lusak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] pound s.t. by hitting it with the blunt end of a stick or with bombs. <i>Kusga paglusak ang halu nga náa sa lungag,</i> Poke the monitor lizard that is in the hole hard with the end of the stick. <i>Lusaka ang inad-ad nga báni pára sa bábuy,</i> Pound the sliced banana stem with a pestle for the pig. <i>Gilusak ang Hanuy sa mga bumba,</i> Hanoi was pounded with bombs. <b>2</b> [A; a] make <i>linusak</i>. <b>ni-, -in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. delicacy made of pounded cooked banana mixed with shredded coconut meat and sugar.

<p><b>lusay</b> <i>n</i> @{swollen lymph node}. <i>v</i> [B46; b4] have a swelling in the lymph nodes. <i>Milusay (gilusayan) ang íyang búgan,</i> She had a swollen lymph node in the groin. <b>lusaylusay</b> <i>n</i> small swollen lymph nodes. <i>v</i> [B4; b(1)] have a small swelling in the lymph nodes.

<p><b>lúsay</b> <i>n</i> @seaweed. <b>sáma sa &mdash;</b> not firm in one's <pb n=1332>convictions (drifting like seaweeds). <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> place where seaweeds abound.

<p><b>lusbà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB2; a12] for s.t. with an area to @collapse or @{cave in}. <i>Bumba ang naglusbà (nagpalusbà) sa atup sa simbahan,</i> The bomb caused the roof of the church to collapse. <i>Mulusbà (malusbà) ning salúga kun tungtúngan ug bayinti ka táwu,</i> This floor will collapse if twenty persons stand on it. <i>Lusbáa ang tayaung lubut sa baril,</i> Knock out the rusty bottom of the barrel. <b>2</b> [A; a1] press s.t. rounded or bulging to level it off or flatten it. <i>Dì ka makalusbà sa búla sa baskitbul kun dì kuháan ug hángin,</i> You cannot flatten a basketball if you do not let the air out.

<p><b>lusbak<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B26] for a horizontal surface to give way or yield to pressure above it. <i>Mulusbak (malusbak) ang taklub sa kaban ug tungtúngan ug bug-at,</i> The trunk lid will get a dent if s.t. heavy is put on top of it. <i>n</i> shallow depression, dent. <i>Daghang lusbak sa karsáda kay dílì pinisun,</i> The road has lots of holes because it has not been rolled.

<p><b>lusbak<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] cook very small fish in vinegar and garlic. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> very small fish to be cooked in such a manner. <b>ni-, -in-</b> <i>n</i> dish of small fish cooked in vinegar.

<p><b>lusbù</b> <i>v</i> [B16] <b>1</b> @sink, @sag, get a @dent on the top or simply give way. <i>Ayawg lingkúri ang táru kay malusbù,</i> Don't sit on the can because it will get a dent in it. <i>Nalusbù ang tánil,</i> The tunnel caved in. <i>Ang kabug-at sa sulud mauy nakalusbù (nakapalusbù) sa bulsíta,</i> The heavy contents caused the bottom of the paper bag to give way. <b>2</b> for a person to slump or the bones that hold him to get dislocated. <i>Nalusbù ákung háwak,</i> I got a dislocated hip.

<p><b>lusbug</b> <i>v</i> [APB; c] immerse oneself in s.t. <i>Milusbug siya sa túbig ug milanguy,</i> She immersed herself in the water and swam. <i>Ang lambay maglusbug sa balas,</i> A sea crab buries itself in the sand.

<p><b>lusgus</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a] rub s.t. rough vigorously against s.t. to clean it. <i>Akuy naglusgus sa kasíli arun pagkúhà sa danglug,</i> I rubbed the eel vigorously to get the slime off. <i>Lusgúsa ug maáyu ang takuling sa kaldíru,</i> Scrub the soot off the kettle.

<p><b>lúsì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] tweak or pinch with a twisting motion. <i>Milúsì kug usa ka dawin sa sipì nga ságing,</i> I twisted off a banana from the bunch. <i>Kagáhì mu karug úlu, lusíun ta giyud ka,</i> How hard-headed you are. I'm going to tweak your ears. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a1] <b>1</b> work on an itchy foreskin by pinching, twisting and turning it inside out. <i>Ang mga <pb n=1333>bátang pisut maglusì kay katlan man,</i> Uncircumcised boys rub their foreskin because it itches. <b>2</b> = <sc>LÙLÙ</sc> (humorous).

<p><b>luslus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. and is attached to it to slip off, esp. the foreskin. <i>Human na siya makaluslus sa unud gíkan sa mga bukug,</i> She managed to slip the meat off the bones to which it had been attached. <i>Naluslus na ang pánit sa íyang tintin, hustu nang tulíun,</i> He can pull his foreskin back, so he's ready to be circumcised. <b>2</b> [A; a12] use s.t. in a way that will destroy it. <i>Hala, luslúsa nang makinilya arun makailis ka,</i> Go on and use that typewriter in such a way as to break it so you can buy me a new one. <b>3</b> [AN; a] @swindle, make a fool of s.o. (coarse). <i>Giluslus ming Pidru. Inay ibáyad sa bangku ang kwartang gihátag námù, íya hinúung giláyas,</i> Pedro swindled us. Instead of paying the money we gave him to the bank, he skipped out of town. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (vulgar). <b>&mdash; mu, níya</b> <b>1a</b> expression of anger at s.o. Luslus mu! <i>Wà man gánì ku swildúi íni unyà kasab-ankasab-an pa,</i> Damn! You scold me but I'm working for you without pay! <b>1b</b> expression debunking s.o. <i>Maáyu sa luslus mu, nga húmuk rang mabálì!</i> Good, my eye! It breaks so easily!

<p><b>lusnù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; b8] for a structure to @collapse, @{crash down}. <i>Nalusnù ang taytáyan pagbagyu,</i> The bridge collapsed in the storm. <b>1a</b> [B1256] for a person to collapse. <i>Nalusnù siya pagkadungug sa aksidinti,</i> She collapsed upon hearing of the accident. <b>2</b> [B12] for feelings, hopes, and aspirations to collapse. <i>Nagkalusnù na ang ákung damgu sa kadaúgan,</i> My hopes for victory are gradually crumbling.

<p><b>luspad</b> <i>a</i> @pale, for a person to have lost his color. <i>v</i> [BN; a] be; become pale. <i>Nanluspad siya pagkadungug sa hukum,</i> She paled when she heard the decision. <b>lusparun</b> <i>a</i> of a pale sort. <i>Ang lusparung kaháyag sa búlan,</i> The pale light of the moon.

<p><b>luspì</b> <i>a</i> @pallid in complexion due to some physical deficiencies or sickness. <i>Luspì kaáyu ang masakitun,</i> The sick man is very pale. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] be, become pallid in complexion.

<p><b>lusù</b> <i>a</i> @hypocrite (slang). <i>Ang lusù nga dakù daw santus giyud nga ímung iatúbang, apan mangtas diay,</i> He is a terrible hypocrite. He looks like a paragon of virtue, but actually he's a monster.

<p><b>lúsù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (coarse). <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nímu, níya</b> <b>2a</b> expression of anger at s.o. <i>Lúsù nímu, ikay naghulam sa libru unyà akuy paulíun!</i> Nuts <pb n=1334>to you. You borrowed the book and you want me to return it! <b>2b</b> expression of disbelief. <i>Lúsù níya. Ayaw ku níyag patuhúa,</i> Hell! Don't try to make me believe him.

<p><b>lúsub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @attack, force one's way into s.t. <i>Gilúsub (gilusúban) sa milù ang tangkal sa manuk,</i> The civet broke into the chicken coop.

<p><b>lusug</b> <i>a</i> @stout, @corpulent, usually said of children. <i>v</i> [B2; b6(1)] grow stout. <i>Mulusug (malusug) ka ug mukáun kag kusug,</i> You'll grow stout if you eat a lot.

<p><b>lúsug</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c] ride together in tandem, usually on s.t. most often ridden by one. <i>Unsa! Maglúsug ta ánang pyangguy nga kabáyù?</i> What! Shall the two of us ride together on that scrawny horse?

<p><b>lusuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clove or segment of any fruit that has segments. U<i>sa ka lusuk áhus,</i> One garlic clove. <b>2</b> drops or beads of tears, perspiration, rain, and the like. <i>Pipila ka lusuk lúhà,</i> Some drops of tears. <i>Lusuk sa rusaryuhan,</i> Rosary beads. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] break off s.t. that comes in sections. <i>Lusuka úsà ang áhus úsà pa paníti,</i> Split the garlic into cloves first before you peel it. <b>1a</b> [A; a] gouge out an eye. <i>Luskun ku nang mata mu run,</i> I'll gouge out your eyes. <b>1b</b> [A13; a12] wrench s.o.'s feelings. <i>Gilusuk ang íyang dughan sa túmang kakulbà,</i> Her heart was wrenched with anxiety. <b>2</b> [B2N] form segments or similarly shaped things. <i>Milusuk (nanlusuk) ang mga lúhà sa íyang mga mata,</i> Drops of tears formed in her eyes. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> dangling earrings with little pellets at the bottom.

<p><b>Lusun</b> <i>n</i> @Luzon, the largest island in the Philippines.

<p><b>lusung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> large @mortar for pounding rice. <b>2</b> <i>a</i> @mortarful. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a mortar. <b>(<-)<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] pour grains into the mortar. <b>2</b> lower a coffin into the burial pit. <i>n</i> = <sc>LUSUNG</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>lúsung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @huddle, @{crowd close together}. <i>Dì ta makalúsung íning gamayng barútu kay súd ra nig duha ka táwu,</i> We can't all ride in this small boat because it is only good for two people. <i>Lusúnga (ilúsung) lang nang mga sinakung humay sa karumáta,</i> Just pile those sacks of rice in the cart.

<p><b>lusut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; ac] @pass, @{go through}. <i>Milusut ang kumagkù sa gisiung midiyas,</i> The big toe came out of the torn socks. <i>Dílì giyud ku makalusut (makapalusut) ug hílu sa dágum,</i> I can never thread a needle. <i>Kanang kupúa lutsun gihápun sa tun-ug,</i> Cold air can still pass through your cape. <b>2</b> [A2] go through, come out successful. <i>Magbluáwut ku basta makalusut sa burd,</i> I'll have a party <pb n=1335>if I hurdle the board exams. <b>3</b> [A2; b(1)] in basketball, drive through the defense. <i>Sayun ra kaáyung lusutan (lutsan) ang inyung dipinsa,</i> It is very easy to drive through your defense. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] squeeze in a witty remark in a conversation. <i>Maáyung mupalúsut nà siya,</i> He is good in making funny remarks in a conversation. <i>n</i> the act of squeezing in some witty remarks during a conversation. <b>lutsanan</b> <i>n</i> a way out.

<p><b>lusyun</b> <i>n</i> lotion for use as a cosmetic or cleansing the skin. <i>v</i> [A23; b] use a certain k.o. lotion. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] apply lotion on oneself.

<p><b>luta<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> nosepiece that is made to pass through the hole in the nose of domestic animals to which a tether rope is attached. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make a nosepiece. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] tie such a nosepiece onto s.t.

<p><b>luta<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @joints in the body. <i>Haplási ang mga luta (lutaluta, lutáhan) ug lána arun mawálà ang pamául,</i> Rub oil on the joints to relieve the pain. <b>lutaluta, lutalúta, lutáhan</b> = <sc>LUTA</sc>.

<p><b>lúta</b>, lutà <i>n</i> @imprints made by the pressure or weight of s.t. <i>Lúta sa ligid dihà sa lápuk,</i> Tire marks in the mud. <i>Lúta sa tudlù sa básu,</i> Finger marks on the glass. <i>v</i> [B6; b(1)] <b>1</b> make an @impression, mark on s.t. <i>Milutà (nalutà) ang íyang ngípun sa ákung buktun,</i> Her teeth left their mark on my skin. <b>2</b> be visible through s.t. <i>Milutà ang mamisus sa íyang nipis nga bulsa,</i> The peso bills were visible inside his shirt pocket.

<p><b>*lútab</b> <b>-an, -un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for fruits and sugar cane to be watery, lacking in sweetness. <b>2</b> for nípà or lumber to be too soft or have a tendency to rot. <i>v</i> [B12] become watery and lacking in sweetness.

<p><b>lutak</b> <i>n</i> @crack, a break usually without complete separation of parts. <i>Náa nay gamayng lutak sa básu,</i> There's a slight crack on the glass. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3(1)6] crack. <i>Ang yútà milutak sa paglínug,</i> The earth cracked in the earth-*quake. <b>2</b> rack one's brains. <i>Makalutak (makapalutak) sa úlu ning prublimáha,</i> This problem can crack one's brains.

<p><b>lutang</b> <i>v</i> [A2] surface in the water. <i>Ug walà mulutang ang bátang nalumus dílì untà makit-an,</i> If the body of the boy who was drowned had not floated on the surface, it would never have been found. <b>lutanglútang</b> <i>v</i> [A13] float freely in the water.

<p><b>lútang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @heal s.t. completely. <i>Manghihilut mauy naglútang sa ákung piang,</i> A bone setter set my dislocated bone. <i>Gilútang sa tambálan ang ákung sakit,</i> The folk doctor completely relieved me of my <pb n=1336>ailment. <b>2</b> [AB12; a1] @solve or clear up a problem, esp. a financial problem. <i>Ang pagdaug ra sa swipstik ang makalútang (makapalútang) sa átung mga suliran,</i> The sweepstakes are the only solution to our problems.

<p><b>lutaríya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lottery. <b>2</b> k.o. bingo game played with many players, where the cards have the figures of the Spanish cards in place of numbers, which are covered when the corresponding card is drawn. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] hold a lottery. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] play <i>lutaríya</i>.

<p><b>lutas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @overcome, @surmount. <i>Kinsay naglutas sa ímung galastuhan sa iskuylahan?</i> Who shouldered all your expenses in school? <i>Hápit na ku makalutas sa ákung pagtuun,</i> I am almost through with my studies.

<p><b>lútas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @wean. <i>Lutásun ang bátà ug manghúran na,</i> A baby is weaned when the next child is born. <b>2</b> [A; a12] have a boy or girl friend five years or more younger than oneself. <i>Ganáhan siyang mulútas ug hayiskul sa íya nang pagkálids,</i> He likes to go out with high-school girls though he is in college. <b>3</b> [a3] for a husband to be temporarily deprived of marital relations (humorous slang).

<p><b>lutaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @float. <i>Ang asyíti mulutaw sa túbig,</i> Oil floats on water. <b>1a</b> [AB] move gracefully as if floating on air. <i>Nindut tan-áwun ang maglíap nga maglutaw,</i> It is nice to see a basketball shot where the player just floats up to the basket as he sinks it in. <b>2</b> [A2] @show, @manifest itself. <i>Usa ka pahiyum milutaw sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile showed on his face. <b>2a</b> for a character trait, truth, and the like to come out. <i>Milutaw na ang tinúud níyang batásan,</i> His real character now came out. <i>Mulutaw ra ang tinúud,</i> The truth will eventually come out. <b>2b</b> <b>&mdash; ang ganansiya</b> [B3(1)4] for it to be clear that there is going to be a profit. <b>3</b> [A23] for fish to come to the surface. <i>Andáma ang báling kay hápit na mulutaw ang bansíkul,</i> Prepare the net because the mackerel are about to surface. <b>4</b> [A2] for fever or measles to come out and fully develop. <i>Walà nay kuyaw kun mulutaw (makalutaw) na ang dáp,</i> There is no more danger once the measles rash appears. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; sa hángin</b> [A13] a lacking awareness of s.t. <i>Dílì mahímung maglutaw sa hángin ang átung mga anak sa kalisud sa pangwarta,</i> Our children should know how hard it is to earn money. b having an uncertain outcome. <i>Naglutaw pa sa hángin ang ákung numramyintu,</i> My appointment is still up in the air. <i>n</i> freeboard.  <pb n=1337><i>Lagmit ta malúnud kay gamay ang lutaw sa sakayan,</i> We might sink because the boat has a small freeboard. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> glowing with a healthy pink color. <i>Lutaw ug dugù ang mga dugung Katsílà,</i> People who have Spanish blood have a healthy pinkish complexion. <b>&mdash; ang ganansiya</b> clearly affording a profit. <i>Lutaw ang ganansiya sa nigusyung bay-ansil,</i> You clearly will make a profit in the buying and selling business. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> low-lying place near the shore into which sea water enters, but separated from the main sea by a bar of dry land. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. to hasten the coming out of a rash or fever. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. @{rice cake} (<i>bibingka</i>) cooked by steam.

<p><b>lutay</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long to be @supple. <i>Lutay kaáyug láwas ang misáyaw sa bali,</i> The person who danced the ballet has a very supple body. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be @pliant, easily bent. <i>Mulutay (malutay) ang lipak ug nipsun ang paglútì,</i> Bamboo sticks will be pliant if they are stripped thin.

<p><b>luthang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @popgun made of a small bamboo stem which shoots seeds or paper pellets. <b>2</b> bamboo cannon that makes a loud retort using kerosene, used for noise-making during festive events. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> shoot with a native popgun or bamboo cannon. <b>1a</b> shoot s.o. with any gun. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakaluthang,</i> He went to prison for shooting a man. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] make s.t. into a <i>luthang</i>. <b>luthangluthang</b> <i>v</i> [A12C2] play games with <i>luthangs</i>.

<p><b>lúti</b> <i>n</i> @lot, a parcel of land, usually residential. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] divide land into lots for sale. <b>2</b> [A12] obtain a lot.

<p><b>lútì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] split a piece of bamboo, rattan, or <i>nítù</i> into narrow strips. <i>Lutíun ang kawáyan pára himúung búbù,</i> When they make a fish trap, they split narrow pieces of bamboo for it. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> thin strips of bamboo, rattan, or <i>nítù</i>.

<p><b>lutiríya</b> = <sc>LUTARÍYA</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>lutlut</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c6] squeeze s.t. extra into an area which has little room, be squeezed in. <i>Mulutlut lang ku áring mga karga arun lang makapaúlì ku,</i> I will just sit here in between the cargo, just so I can get home. <i>Unsang librúhang ímung gilutlútan sa sulat?</i> What book did you put the letter in? <i>Ilutlut lang ning lubi sa ilálum sa lingkuránan,</i> Just squeeze these coconuts under the seats.

<p><b>lutu, lutù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @blister gotten by rubbing. <i>v</i> [B23(1)6; b4] develop or form blisters. <i>Milutu (giluthan) ang íyang tudlù sa paglinúbù sa mais,</i> Blisters have formed on her fingers from shelling the corn.

<pb n=1338>

<p><b>lútu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b3] wear black clothes in mourning. <i>Kinsa may inyung gilutúhan?</i> Whom are you mourning? <b>2</b> [a12] make, sew into mourning clothes. <b>3</b> [b(1)] consider a member of the family or s.o. close to the family dead because of his rebellious or unforgiveable act. <i>Gilutúhan si Sunya sa íyang mga ginikánan kay nakigminyù siya sa ílang draybir,</i> Sonia's parents simply considered her dead when she married their driver. <i>n</i> @{mourning clothes}.

<p><b>lutù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB246N; a12P] crack one's knuckle(s); for the joints to crack. <i>Mulutù (manglutù) ang íyang lutáhan inigtindug níya,</i> His joints crack when he stands up. <b>2</b> [A13] stay idle doing nothing, twiddling the thumbs, cracking the knuckles, and the like. <i>Naglutù lang. Walà makahunàhunà unsay maáyung kurìkuriun,</i> He's just twiddling his thumbs. He hasn't thought of anything worthwhile to do. <b>2a</b> [A13; a12] do things at a slow and lazy pace. <i>Ug lutuun nátù ang átung líhuk magabin-an ta,</i> If we walk lazily, we will be overtaken by night. <i>n</i> sound produced by cracking the joints.

<p><b>lútù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; a] @cook. <i>Humut ang nagkalutung inasal,</i> The roast pig smelled delicious as it was cooking. <i>Lutúun nátù ang kík,</i> Let us cook the cake. <b>1a</b> [AB12; b6] make ice products. <i>Gáhì na ang áyis, nalútù na diay,</i> The ice has hardened; it is done. <b>2</b> [AP; a1] make s.t. tender. <i>Súkà ray mulútù (mupalútù) sa kinílaw,</i> Vinegar can get the raw fish tender. <i>Alkuhul ang naglútù sa atay niánang palaínum,</i> Alcohol is giving that drunkard a tender liver. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; dáan</b> [a12] have the outcome pre-planned. <i>Ang banggà gilútù dáan sa mga maghuhúkum,</i> The judges prejudged the contest. <b>4</b> [B; c6] become darkened. <i>Mulútù (malútù) ug samut ang ímung pánit ug magsígi kag painit,</i> Your skin will become darker if you keep staying in the sun. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cooked rice or corn grits. <i>Paghúkad ug lútù,</i> Bring some cooked rice to the table. <b>2</b> manner of cooking. <i>Kináham ku ang lútung binisayà,</i> I love Visayan cooking. a <b>1</b> done, cooked. <i>Ug lútù na ang kamúti átung kan-un,</i> If the sweet potatoes are done, let's eat them. <b>1a</b> for ice to be frozen. <b>2</b> dark in shade. <i>Ang blú sa dágat mas lútù ikumparar sa lángit,</i> The blue of the sea is darker than the blue of the sky. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; dáan</b> @prejudged. <i>Lútù na man dáan ang ákung grádu,</i> My grades are fixed. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga makaw</b> <b>a</b> dish prepared for short-order cooking. <b>b</b> shabbily made. <i>Lútung makaw ang pagkabúhat sa lamísa,</i> The table was poorly made. <b>c</b> prejudged. <i>Lútung makaw ang <pb n=1339>kumbinsiyun,</i> The convention was rigged. <b>(->)<sub>3</sub></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> well-fermented fish. <b>2</b> = <sc>LÚTÙ</sc>, <i>1a</i>. <i>v</i> [b3] become fermented fish paste. <i>Wà pa gánì makalutù ang ginamus nahurut na námug káun,</i> The fish paste had not even gotten fermented before we ate it up. <b>ni-, -in-</b> <i>n</i> food bought prepared. <i>Pagpalit ug linútù ug kabsan tag sud-an,</i> Buy some carry-out food if we run short. <b>ni-an(->), -in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> manner of cooking. <b>ma-(->)</b> <i>n</i> boiled rice usually wrapped in banana leaves carried as one's lunch. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] bring a lunch of this sort. <b>2</b> [A; a2] prepare a lunch of this sort.

<p><b>lútub</b> <i>v</i> [B2; b6] <b>1</b> form a blister from burning or rubbing. <i>Milútub (nalútub) ang ákung pasù,</i> My burn formed a blister. <b>2</b> for blood to form a black spot under a finger- or toe-*nail that has been injured. <i>Milútub ang dugù sa ákung tudlù nga hingdukdukan sa martilyu,</i> Blood formed a black spot on my fingers where I had hit them with a hammer.

<p><b>lut-ud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC23; ac] @{pile up} on top of one another. <i>Naglùt-ud[** ù typo?] ang mga plátu,</i> The plates are stacked on top of one another. <i>Lut-úra pagdala nang mga libru,</i> Carry the books in a pile on top of one another. <b>2</b> [B36] pile up, @accumulate. <i>Paspas uy kay naglut-ud na ning ímung mga buluhatun,</i> Faster! Your work is piling up. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @stacked up. <i>Tulu ka lut-ud nga libru,</i> Three stacks of books. <b>2</b> having several rows of petals. <i>Antuwángang lut-ud,</i> Hibiscus with several rows of petals.

<p><b>lutuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] put a finger into an orifice of s.t. living, usually to get at s.t. <i>Akuy mulutuk sa bàbà sa bátà arun makúhà ang singsing,</i> I will reach into the child's mouth to get the ring out. <i>Luktun ku nang mata mu,</i> I'll poke out your eyes. <b>2</b> [A; a] squeeze and pull off the edible flesh of jackfruit. <i>Dì ku makalutuk sa súuy sa nangkà,</i> I can't take out the edible flesh of the jackfruit.

<p><b>lútuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{stare at}. <i>Namula siyang gisalíhan nákug lútuk,</i> She blushed when I kept staring at her.

<p><b>lutung</b> <i>a</i> for fruits to be @{very ripe}, almost overripe. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become very ripe. <i>Mas lamì kan-un ang nangkà kun malutung na,</i> Jackfruit is most delicious to eat when it is very ripe.

<p><b>lútung</b> <i>n</i> contraction of the uterus during labor. <i>v</i> [A2] for the uterus to contract during labor. <i>Maggahìgáhì ang pus-un sa umaának ug mulútung na,</i> The stomach of a mother in labor hardens when her uterus is contracting.

<p><b>lutup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] for s.t. to show through s.t. <pb n=1340>translucent that touches it. <i>Milutup ang íyang tútuy sa nipis níyang bláwus,</i> Her breasts showed through her flimsy blouse. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)] for s.t. to give off a reproduction on s.t. that touches it. <i>Milutup ang banig nga íyang gihigdáan dihà sa íyang bukubuku,</i> The mat he lay on left an impression on his back. <b>2a</b> leave a crease in cloth upon folding or pressing. <i>Naglutup ang pinil-an sa sinínà,</i> There was a crease left on the dress where it was folded. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mark, imprint on the skin. <b>2</b> crease, fold on a cloth. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> reproduction of a picture made by rubbing it with a candle and then scratching a sheet of paper over it. <b>2</b> @tracing. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] reproduce a picture by rubbing or tracing.

<p><b>lútus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @chase or @{run after}. <i>Daghan kaáyung táwung milútus sa mangunguut,</i> A lot of people were chasing the pick-*pocket. <i>Bísag ása pa mutágù ang kriminal, lutúsun giyud sa baláud,</i> No matter where the criminal hides, the law will go after him. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @persecute. <i>Si Níru naglútus sa mga Kristiyánus,</i> Nero persecuted the Christians.

<p><b>lútus<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @lotus plant cultivated for ornamental purposes, flowers esp. used for decorating altars: <b><i>Nelumbium nelumbo</i></b>.

<p><b>lútuy</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3(1); b4] for the skin to swell and form a blister from being burnt with s.t. hot or cold. <i>Milútuy ang ákung buktun nga napiksan sa ínit nga mantíka,</i> Hot lard spattered on my arm and it swelled. <i>n</i> swelling on the skin caused by heat or acid.

<p><b>lutya, lutyà</b> = <sc>BISUL</sc>.

<p><b>lúub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> brood on eggs. <i>Luúban sa himungáan ang itlug,</i> The hen will sit on the eggs. <b>1a</b> stay around a place. <i>Dì ka ba pul-an ug lúub sa balay?</i> Aren't you sick of hanging around the house? <b>2</b> for emotions to be stored up in one. <i>Kasína nga naglúub sa ákung dughan,</i> The envy that dwelt in my breast.

<p><b>luud</b> <i>a</i> @nauseous, causing nausea. <i>Luud kan-un ang pagkáung pan-us,</i> Stale food is nauseous to eat. <i>v</i> [B2; a4] become, feel nauseous. <i>Nagkaluud ang báhù sa kasilyas,</i> The toilet is getting to smell more and more nauseous. <i>Lud-un giyud kung mamínaw sa ímung mga pasálig,</i> I really get nauseated listening to your promises. <b>lud-ánun, lud-unun</b> <i>a</i> easily given to feeling nauseous.

<p><b>*lúud</b> <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b3] @sulk by refraining from doing s.t. because of an offense or a wish not granted. <i>Dì na siya mukanta. Nanglúud nga wà pakpáki,</i> She won't sing any more. She is sulking because she didn't <pb n=1341>get enough applause. <b>luuray</b> <i>v</i> [C23] take offense at each other and sulk. <i>Way mahímù ang átung kláb kay nagluuray ang mga upisyális,</i> Our club won't achieve anything because the officers are constantly taking offense at each other and refraining from doing things. <b>luuran</b> <i>a</i> easily given to sulking, withdrawing from an activity.

<p><b>luug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @savage, @uncivilized. <b>2</b> @ignorant, lacking sophistication like a savage. <i>Ayg tudlùtudlúa nang mga trák. Luug ka man tingáli,</i> Don't point your finger at those vehicles. Are you ignorant? <i>v</i> [B12; a2] be, become ignorant, unsophisticated. <i>Maluug kag adtu ka magpuyù sa búkid,</i> You will grow up ignorant if you stay in the mountains. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> in the manner of a savage. <i>Linuug nga búhat ang panglúgus,</i> Rape is a savage act. <i>v</i> [A; c1] act like a savage. <b>-ing(<-)</b> = <sc>LUUG</sc>, <i>a2</i> (humorous euphemism).

<p><b>lúuk<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @strangle, esp. with two hands. <i>Luúkun ta ka dihag musúkul ka,</i> I'll strangle you if you fight back. <b>2</b> [AC2; a12] neck, pet to the point of or nearly to the point of intercourse (slang). <i>Gilúuk bítaw nákù, sugut lagi,</i> I got her over-excited, and you bet she gave in. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @strangler.

<p><b>lúuk<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @bay. <i>Pagbagyu mitágù ang lantsa sa may lúuk,</i> During the typhoon the launch took shelter in the bay. <b>luuklúuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] eat food alone by oneself. <i>Siya ray nagluuklúuk ug káun sa íyang bálun,</i> She was eating her lunch off in a corner by herself. <b>2</b> [A13] do the work alone by oneself without help from others. <i>Aku ra giyuy nagluuklúuk niíning trabahúa,</i> I did this work all alone by myself. <b>kina-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> inmost part of a bay.

<p><b>lúum</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] put s.t. entirely into the mouth. <i>Íyang gilúum ang usa ka buuk pán,</i> He put the whole piece of bread into his mouth. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] hold one's breath, stifle back one's breath. <i>Napakung ang íyang bitíis ug miluum siya sa kasakit,</i> He banged his shins and he held his breath in pain. <b>2</b> [A; c6] repress, keep to oneself or cry in a repressed way. <i>Miluum siyag hílak dihang ákù siyang gibyáan,</i> She cried softly when I left her. <i>Ayawg iluum ang ímung kayugut sa ímung amahan,</i> Don't repress your resentment at your father.

<p><b>lúun</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ac] <b>1</b> share a space to occupy it. <i>Naglúun mig sakay sa kábaw,</i> We rode on the carabao together. <i>Dì mahímung luúnun ang duha ka himungáan sa usa ka pugaran,</i> You can't put two hens in one nest. <b>2</b> live together in the same house or room. <i>Ayaw silag[**siyag] ilúun sa ámung kwartu kay hugawan,</i> <pb n=1342>Don't let him[**note: plural translated as singular] stay with us in our room because he is messy. <b>3</b> for an unmarried couple to live together. <i>Gilúun níyag íyang uyab,</i> He brought his girl to live with him. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put a buffer sheet over the mouth of a vessel between the mouth and the cover. <i>Lun-ig dáhun ang linung-ag kay hungaw ang takub,</i> Put some leaves as a buffer for the pot of rice because the cover is not airtight. <i>n</i> s.t. used as a buffer for a pot top. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one whom one shares a space with.

<p><b>luup</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] shut off or block a passage or flow. <i>Ílang gilup-an ang sapà ug mga dagkung batu,</i> They blocked one end of the stream with stones. <i>n</i> s.t. used to shut off or block a passage or flow.

<p><b>luus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> be constantly doing s.t. <i>Dílì ka makaluus ug lingkud dinhi kay binatunan ka,</i> You can't constantly sit around because you are supposed to be the maid. <i>Gilus-an níyag bása ang kúmiks,</i> She did nothing but read the comics. <b>2</b> stay long in a place. <i>Dì ku muluus sa baryu,</i> I will not stay in the village long.

<p><b>lúuy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @pitiful. <i>Lúuy kaáyu ang mga ílung tuwápus,</i> Orphans are very pitiful. <i>v</i> [B1256; b5c] have pity, mercy on s.o.; give s.t. out of pity. <i>Ayaw táwun kug patya, malúuy ka,</i> Don't kill me. Have mercy. <i>Limus, Dung, kaluy-i (kaluy-a) ang kabus,</i> Alms, lad. Have pity on the poor. <i>Ihátag lag suklì ikalúuy lang nà sa draybir,</i> Just give the change to the driver out of kindness. <b>paki-, pakima-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> beg for mercy. <i>Nagpakilúuy (nagpakimalúuy) sila sa asindírung hakug,</i> They beg for mercy from the greedy landowner. <b>2</b> @plead. <i>Mipakilúuy (mipakimalúuy) siya nga dì nákù byáan,</i> She begged me not to leave her. <i>n</i> pleading for mercy. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @pity, @mercy. <i>Kalúuy sa Diyus,</i> Thanks be to God. <b>maluluy-un</b> <i>a</i> @kind, @merciful. makalulúuy <i>a</i> inspiring pity.

<p><b>lúuy<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6; bc1] be, become @stagnant. <i>Malúuy (mulúuy) ang túbig dinhi kay wà may kanal,</i> Water stagnates here because there is no canal.

<p><b>luwa-</b> <ix>see also</ix> <sc>LULA-</sc>.

<p><b>luwa<sub>1</sub></b> a word of command for a carabao to halt. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] command a carabao to stop. <i>Paluwaha sà ang kábaw arun makapahúlay,</i> Stop the carabao so it can take a rest.

<p><b>luwa<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; ab2] @dismember a slaughtered animal. <i>Dalì siya nga nakaluwa sa kábaw nga giíhaw,</i> He dismembered the slaughtered water buffalo in no time. <i>n</i> piece cut off of a slaughtered animal.

<pb n=1343>

<p><b>lúwa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. poem, one of the forms used by the players in the <i>murumúru</i> play, consisting of short lines of around ten syllables, in rhyming couplets. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> recite the <i>lúwa</i>. <b>2</b> recite any poem from memory.

<p><b>luwà, lúwà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] @spit or eject from the mouth. <i>Giluwaan (gilud-an) níya ang sáwug,</i> He spat on the floor. <i>Iluwà nang kindi kay húgaw,</i> Spit out that candy. It's dirty. <b>1a</b> [AN; b(1)] spit to express contempt. <i>Nakaluwà (nakapangluwà) ku dihang nanghambug siya,</i> I couldn't help spitting when he started to boast. <b>2</b> [c6] for a processing machine to expel a solid by-product. <i>Inigsúd sa tubu, ang iluwà sa makina bagásu,</i> Sugarcane is fed into the crushers. Then it comes out as bagasse. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spit, @spittle. <b>2</b> action of spitting. <b>maabut sa &mdash;</b> near not far. <b>lud-anan, -anan</b> <i>n</i> @spittoon.

<p><b>luwàlúwà</b> <i>n</i> the reed suspender in a loom, two pieces of wood which suspend the reed (<i>suluran</i>) and allow it to swing back and forth, holding it in proper position with regard to the warp threads.

<p><b>luwag, lúwag</b> <i>n</i> @ladle. <b>duul sa &mdash;</b> be close to influential people such that one has pull. <i>v</i> [A2; a12] make into, hit with, use a ladle.

<p><b>luwak, lúwak</b> <i>n</i> the other side of s.t. elevated. <i>Ang ílang dápit luwak niánang bungtúra,</i> Their place is s.w. beyond that hill. <i>v</i> [A2; ac] <b>1</b> pass over a summit, go up to a pass and then come down, bring s.t. over a pass. <i>Gíkan dinhi muluwak ka pa ug duha ka bungtud,</i> From here you have to climb over two hills. <b>2</b> climb up and over s.t. elevated in coming down towards the other side. <i>Makaluwak ang bátà sa abatan,</i> The child can climb over the railing. <i>Nakaluwak ning baúla ngadtu sa tapun,</i> This field stretches over the mountain to the other side. <i>n</i> other side of a mountain or elevation.

<p><b>luwang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bilge, the rounded lower part of a ship's hull or hold. <i>Ákung hinubígan ang luwang sa sakayan,</i> I'll bail out the water from the bilge of the boat. <b>2</b> quadrilateral section of a rice paddy bounded by dikes. <i>Tulu ra ka luwang ang ákung nadáru,</i> I have plowed three sections of the rice paddy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] divide the rice paddy into sections. <b>2</b> [c1] harvest the rice partition by partition. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> by the section. <i>v</i> [A; c1] do by the section.

<p><b>luwas<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a1] <b>1</b> save, remove s.o. from harm. <i>Tambal ang nakaluwas (nakapaluwas) nímu,</i> Medicine has saved your life. <i>Ákung luwasun ang bátà sa balay nga nasúnug,</i> I'll <pb n=1344>save the child from the burning house. <b>1a</b> save from sin and death. <i>Maluwas ta sa kalisud ug makatrabahu na ku,</i> We will escape from our financial worries when I find a job. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> safe from danger. <b>2</b> free from debt, discomfort. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> safety, preservation from destruction. <b>2</b> salvation. <b>3</b> freedom from difficulties, problems, etc. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> saviour, esp. The Saviour, Jesus Christ.

<p><b>luwas<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> = <sc>HI-</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>hi-, hilwas</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] <b>1</b> @articulate, pronounce words or letters. <i>Dì makahilwas ug íri ang Insik,</i> The Chinese can't pronounce an <i>r</i>. <b>2</b> utter taboo words. <i>Sa íyang kasukù, nakahilwas siyag mga púlung nga law-ay,</i> In his anger he uttered profanity. a well articulated. <i>Hilwas na kaáyug sinultihan ang bátà,</i> The child can now speak very articulately. <b>-in-(<-), ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> one's full name. <i>Idut ang íyang anggà apan Prídu ang íyang kaluwásan (linúwas),</i> His nickname is Edot but his real name is Fredo.

<p><b>luwat<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @quit a job. <i>Muaplay ku sa trabáhu nga ímung giluwatan,</i> I'll apply for the job you quit. <b>2</b> [b2] accidentally let go of s.t. <i>Hiluwatan níya ang mga plátu nga íyang gidala,</i> She accidentally let go of the plates. <b>3</b> [A2B236; b] let out, cause to come out from within. <i>Nakaluwat siyag usa ka makahulugánung pahiyum,</i> She gave forth a meaningful smile. <i>Way usa ka púlung nga miluwat (naluwat) sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not a single word came out of his mouth. <b>3a</b> [A; b(1)] issue a press release, communiqué. <i>Mau ni ang balità nga giluwatan sa imbaháda,</i> This is the news issued by the embassy. <b>3b</b> [A; b(1)] issue for a purpose. <i>Miluwat ug kasugúan ang Prisidinti sa pagpadakup sa mga Huks,</i> The President gave out orders to capture the Huks.

<p><b>luwat<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] climb up and over s.t. elevated and come down to the other side. <i>Miluwat siyag tulu ka bungtud paingun nganhi,</i> He passed over three hills to get here. <i>Luwatun sa bátà nang mubù mung abatan,</i> The baby will climb over that low railing of yours.

<p><b>luwat<sub>3</sub></b> too, also (dialectal).

<p><b>lúwis, lúwist</b> <i>n</i> low waist, a style of trousers in which the waist line is cut comparatively low. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear, make trousers in this style.

<p><b>l[=ú]y</b> = <sc>LÚLUY</sc>.

<p><b>lúya</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @weak, or lacking in strength of body or muscle. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku gíkang nasakit,</i> I am very weak after my illness. <b>2</b> not active, aggressive enough. <i>Lúya man gud ka maung láin ang nadáwat,</i> You were slow. That's why s.o. else got the job. <b>3</b> weak in a <pb n=1345>subject. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku sa mát,</i> I'm weak in math. <i>v</i> [A1B12S; a12] be, become weak, tired out, make s.o. tired. <i>Dì kung katrabáhu kay nagluya ku,</i> I can't work because I'm weak. <i>Nalúya kug dinágan,</i> I got tired running. <i>Luyáha ang isdà úsà kubráha ang pasul,</i> Tire the fish out before you pull in the line. <b>maluyáhun, luyahun</b> <i>a</i> of a weak sort. <i>Luyahun (maluyáhun) nga tíngug,</i> A feeble voice.

<p><b>luy-a</b> <i>n</i> @ginger: <b><i>Zingiber officinale</i></b>. <b>&mdash; nga tapul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. purple ginger used medicinally. <i>v</i> [A3; b6] flavor with ginger. <b>luy-aluy-a</b> <i>n</i> k.o. herb similar to ginger: <b><i>Zinziber zerumbet</i></b>.

<p><b>lúyang</b> <i>n</i> sweet prepared of cooked plantains pounded and mixed with grated coconut and sugar. <i>v</i> [A; a] prepare this dish. <b>-in-, ni-</b> = <sc>LÚYANG</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>luyat, lúyat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> lacking in fullness and firmness. <i>Luyat ra kaáyu ning unlána,</i> This pillow is too soft. <i>Luyat kaáyu kug láwas,</i> I'm very flabby. <b>2</b> for bananas to be soft before getting mature. <i>Luyat kaáyu ang ságing kay linghud pagkapùpù,</i> The bananas are soft because they were immature when they were cut down. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> get to be @soft and @flabby. <b>2</b> for bananas to get soft before maturity.

<p><b>luyluy<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> @drooping, hanging limply. <i>Luyluy na ang íyang buktun sa túmang kakápuy,</i> His arms are limp from utter exhaustion. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become drooping or limply hanging. <i>Nagluyluy na ang mga sanga sa káhuy nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i> The branches of the tree are bending under the weight of the fruits.

<p><b>luyluy<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>luyu</b> <b>1</b> at the back of, @behind. <i>Tágù luyu sa batu,</i> Hide behind the rock. <i>Anáa luyu sa pangánud ang adlaw,</i> The sun is behind the clouds. <b>1a</b> behind what is shown, as an action or attitude. <i>Luyu sa íyang pahiyum anáa ang pagbudhì,</i> Treachery lurks behind her smile. <b>1b</b> one's back. <i>Kalúta ning ákung luyu,</i> Scratch my back. <b>2</b> on the other side of. <i>Luyu sa panaptun,</i> Reverse side of the cloth. <i>Luyu nga dágat,</i> Sea on the other side of the island. <i>Luyu nga bulsa,</i> Back pocket. <i>Luyung dunggan,</i> The other ear. <i>Luyung kwartu,</i> The adjacent room. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug &mdash;</b> both sides of. <i>Putì ang luyug luyu sa playwud,</i> The plywood is white on both sides. <b>3</b> @despite. <i>Luyu sa ákung pagsakripisyu way bili níla ang tanan,</i> Despite the sacrifices I had made, they counted it all for nothing. <i>v</i> [A; c1] assist s.o. in his work. <i>Nars ang miluyu sa dukt&ucaron;r pag-upira,</i> A nurse assisted the doctor in the operation. <i>Ikaw lay ákung iluyu  <pb n=1346>(luyuhun) sa trabáhu,</i> I'll have you be my assistant in my work. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] stay, put at the back. <i>Nagpaluyu ug lingkud ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The small fry sat at the back. <i>Ipaluyu nang ímung karga,</i> Put your baggage at the back. <b>1a</b> [A13] lurk, be behind s.t. as a cause. <i>Adúnay kahulugang nagpaluyu sa íyang pahiyum,</i> There is a hidden meaning lurking behind her smile. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] support from behind the scenes. <i>Ang kudita gipaluyuhan sa siay-i,</i> The coup d'état was backed up by the CIA. <b>luyulúyu</b> <i>n</i> @assistant. <b>luyhánun, taga-</b> <i>n</i> one living on the other side of the island. [+]

<p><b>lúyung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @sow seeds in a seedbed. <b>2</b> [A; c] @transplant. <i>Ilúyung ang mangga ngadtu sa luyu,</i> Transplant the mango tree in the back. <b>2a</b> [A; c1] dump corpses into a big pit. <i>Mga sundálu ang naglúyung sa ílang gipamatay,</i> The soldiers dumped the corpses of the people they massacred. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @seedling. <i>Ang átung luyung hustu nang ibalhin,</i> Our seedlings are ready to be transplanted. <b>2</b> s.t. transplanted. <b>tag-</b> <i>n</i> one who transplants.

<p><b>lúyut</b> <i>v</i> [B12] for s.t. not firm to sag out of shape under a weight. <i>Nalúyut ang bakat nga ákung gilingkúran,</i> The hamper I was sitting on sagged out of shape. <i>Nagkaluyut[**accent on first u?] ang dúyan nga pirming higdáan,</i> The hammock is sagging out of shape because it is constantly used. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> be out of shape.

<p><b>lyábi<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>YÁBI</sc>. <b>-ra, -ru</b> = <sc>YABÍRA</sc>, <sc>YABÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>lyábi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lock in judo or wrestling. <b>2</b> in Jai-alai, where one bets as to who comes out first and second place out of six players, bet twice: once that those numbers come out first and second place, respectively (e.g. <b>1</b> first place and <b>5</b> second place), and once that the same numbers come out in reverse order (i.e. <b>5</b> first place and <b>1</b> second place). <pb n=1347>Thus, one avoids betting on the right combination in the wrong order. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b4] get a lock on s.o. <b>2</b> [A13; c1] make a bet a <i>lyábi</i>.

<p><b>lyágay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. flying fish smaller than <i>barúnguy</i>.

<p><b>lyamáda</b> <i>n</i> home service for a haircut and shave. <i>v</i> [A; c1] request home service for a haircut and shave.

<p><b>lyamar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @summon, call s.o. to come or for s.t. to be brought. <i>Mulyamar ku ug lima ka saup arun patrabahúun sa pinsa,</i> I will summon five tenants to work on the fence. <i>Naglyamar na pagsúgud ang armi sa mga bayinti anyus,</i> The army is beginning to draft the twenty-year olds. <i>Ilyamar ku ug taksi,</i> Call me a taxi. <b>2</b> [A2; c] speak to s.o. to ask for s.t. <i>Milyamar si Pidru nga manghulam siya ug kwarta nákù,</i> Pedro called me to borrow money. <b>2a</b> [A] signify one's intention. <i>Milyamar ug pangasáwa ang ákung anak,</i> My son signified his intention of getting married. <b>3</b> [A2] for a disease or mania to show signs of recurring. <i>Milyamar na sad ang ákung mata. Magkibídu na giyud ku niíni,</i> My eyes are bothering me again. Now I really will have to wear eyeglasses. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ang tiyan</b> @{feel hungry}. <b>4</b> [A2] for a gear to engage. <i>Dílì mulyamar ang primíra sa ákung mutur,</i> My motorbike won't go into first. <b>4a</b> for one's ability or strategy to produce results. <i>Walà mulyamar ang ákung lung syát,</i> My long shots did not score. <b>5</b> [A2] for wind to change directions. <i>Milyamar ang hángin paingus habagatan,</i> The wind changed directions to the south. <i>n</i> @summons, order to start doing s.t. <b>lyamadur</b> <i>n</i> one who calls for bets at a cockfight.

<p><b>lyáwi</b> = <sc>YÁBI</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>lyukimya</b> <i>n</i> @leukemia. <i>v</i> [B1246; a4] be afflicted with leukemia.

<p><b>lyúpis</b> = <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.

<pb n=1348>

<p><b>ma</b> <i>n</i> short for the vocative of <ix>máma</ix>, &lsquo;mother&rsquo;.

<p><b>má</b> = <sc>MALA</sc>.

<p><b>m[=à]</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> onomatopoetic word for the lowing sound of a cow or a water buffalo. <b>2</b> a cow or water buffalo (child's talk). <i>v</i> [A; b6] low, produce a lowing sound.

<pb n=1349>

<p><b>ma-<sub>1</sub></b> future verb affix. (<i>Past</i>: <b>na-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>ma-</b>.) <b>1</b> potential of the direct passive. (<i>See</i> <b>-un<sub>1</sub></b> for meanings of the direct passive. See <i>maka-</i> for meanings of the potential.) <i>Mapalit nà nímu bísag ása,</i> You can buy that anywhere. <i>Wà ku pa mabása,</i> I haven't had a chance to read it. <i>Uy! Dì man diay <pb n=1350>ákù ning nadá nákung pitáka,</i> Heavens, I took s.o. else's purse by mistake. <b>2</b> potential of the instrumental passive. (See <i>i-<sub>1</sub></i> for meanings of the instrumental passive.) <i>Dì ni mabaligyà kay mahal da kaáyu ang prisyu,</i> You can't sell this because it's too expensive. <i>Wà pa nákù mahátag níya kay wà pa siya muabut,</i> I haven't had a chance to give it to him because he hasn't arrived. <i>Halá! Nabungat ra ba nákù ang sikrítu,</i> Oh God! I let out the secret. <b>3</b> <i>active of stative verbs</i>: may become [so-and-so]. <i>Ayaw nag hikápa. Magubà unyà nà,</i> Don't touch that. It might break. <i>Ilhan nga mulubad nang panaptúna ug mapula ang túbig,</i> You'll know the cloth runs if the water turns red. <i>Nawálà ang ákung singsing,</i> My ring got lost. <b>3a</b> <i>with roots that refer to nonvolitional actions</i>: [do]. <i>Matingála siya ug ngánu tu,</i> He will be amazed at why it should be so. <i>Wà ku mabaláka,</i> I am not worried. <i>Mah[=ú]g unyà ka ug mabálì ang sanga,</i> You will fall if the branch breaks. <i>Ug matúlug na sila,</i> When they are asleep. <i>Mahadluk ku,</i> I am afraid. <i>Dì ka ba malúuy níya?</i> Don't you feel sorry for him? <b>3b</b> <i>with nouns</i>: become [so-and-so]. <i>Ug maduktur ka na,</i> When you get to be a doctor. <b>3c</b> <i>with nouns which refer to a place</i>: wind up in [such-and-such] a place. <i>Malangit kag maimpirnu ba?</i> Will you go to heaven or will you go to hell? <i>Mauspital giyud kag pasagdan lang nà nímung sakíta,</i> You'll end up in the hospital if you let your sickness go. <b>3d</b> with nouns referring to time: get to be [such-and-such] a time. Ug maalas tris na gánì, mulakaw na ku, If it gets to be three o'clock, I'll leave. Ug magabíi nag wà pa siya, If it gets to be nightfall and he hasn't arrived. <b>3e</b> (only with the future) when [such-and-such] a time or season comes about. <i>Magkítà ra silag mapista,</i> They only see each other during fiestas. <i>Tábù dinhi ug maduminggu,</i> They hold market here on Sundays.

<p><b>ma-<sub>2</sub></b> <b>1</b> affix added to most adjective roots which do not refer to a measurement to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;very [so-and-so]&rsquo;. This formation is used in literary or formal styles. <i>Usa ka mapait nga pahíyum,</i> A very bitter smile. <b>2</b> added to some verbs to form adjectives meaning [do]ing, usually with a short penult. <i>Bátang mahilak,</i> A crybaby. <i>Matulug,</i> Of a sleepy sort. <i>Matawa,</i> Full of laughter.

<p><b>ma-ánun</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i>, used with some bases in place of <i>ma-un</i>. <i>Masuk-ánun,</i> Tending to get irritated.

<p><b>máas</b> <i>a</i> @old, @aged. <i>Bisan máas na siya tisar gihápung  <pb n=1351>mulakaw,</i> He may be old, but he still walks erect. <i>v</i> [B] @{become old}. <i>Kun mumáas na ang kalbásà dílì na maútan,</i> When a squash becomes too old, it is no longer good to eat.

<p><b>maáyu</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁYU</sc>.

<p><b>mabà</b> = <sc>MUBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mabaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @shallow. <i>Mabaw ra kaáyu nang ímung pangatarúngan,</i> Your reasoning is very shallow. <i>Dì kalanguyan nang subáa kay mabaw,</i> You can't swim in that river. It's too shallow. <i>Ang baskit nga mabaw ug lubut diyútayg sulud,</i> A shallow basket holds little. <i>Mabaw nga panaksan,</i> Shallow bowl. <b>2</b> <i>in set expressions</i>: <b>&mdash; ug lubut</b> @sensitive or quick to anger. <i>Muhílak diay bísag kumidiya ra. Kamabaw nímug lubut uy,</i> Why did you cry when it was just a joke? How sensitive you are! <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug salabútan</b> @unintelligent. <i>Dúgay siyang kasabut kay mabaw rag salabútan,</i> She doesn't understand readily because she is unintelligent. <i>v</i> [B; b7c1] become shallow. <i>Imabaw (mabwa) lang pagkálut ang tamnan ug kamúti,</i> Just make the hole for the sweet potatoes shallow. <b>hi-/ha-(->)</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HIMÁBAW</sc> <i>under</i> <sc>BABAW</sc>. <b>-g-</b> shallow (plural). <b>i-</b> <i>n</i> place above s.t. <i>Imabaw sa kaban nákù gibutang ang libru,</i> I put the book on top of the trunk. <b>-in-, -in-g-</b> <i>v</i> [a12] do in a shallow way. <i>Kun minagbáwun lang ni nátù pagsabut ang giisplikar sa maistru, dílì giyud ta makapasar,</i> If you fail to understand (lit. understand shallowly) what the teacher explained, you won't pass. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> half brother, sister. <i>Kamábaw ku siya kay paríhu mig inahan,</i> He is my half brother because we have the same mother. <i>v</i> [A23] be half brothers, sisters.

<p><b>mabdus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @pregnant. <b>2</b> for rice grains to be in the panicle. <i>Mabdus na ang humay,</i> The rice grains are forming. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] get, make pregnant. <i>Mimabdus si Maríya kay hagithagitun kaáyu,</i> Maria got pregnant because she was flirtatious. <b>1a</b> [A1; c] carry in the womb. <i>Gimabdus nà siya pagkamatay sa íyang amahan,</i> He was in his mother's womb when his father died. <b>2</b> [B] for rice grains to form in the panicle. <b>3</b> [B1] for borrowed things to have been kept too long. <i>Dúgay kaáyu nímung giúlì ang ákung libru. Mimabdus na nà,</i> You kept my book too long (lit. so long that it got pregnant). <b>4</b> [B1] <b>&mdash; sa pasálig</b> get fooled by assurances (lit. got pregnant because of promises). <i>Daghan nang mimabdus sa pasálig sa mga pulitiku,</i> Many people have been fooled by the politician's assurances. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c2] get s.o. pregnant. <i>Gipamabdus (gipamabdúsan) si Maríya ni <pb n=1352>Pidru</i>, Pedro got Maria pregnant.

<p><b>mabgas</b> = <sc>MALUBGAS</sc>.

<p><b>mabúlu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medium-sized tree of the primary forest, cultivated for its fruit. The wood is hard and used for furniture, the heartwood being nearly black: <b><i>Diospyros discolor</i></b>.

<p><b>mad-as</b> <i>a</i> land that has dried up. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become dry land. <i>Nagmad-as ang pilapilan nga walà na makultibar,</i> The rice paddies are dry after being left uncultivated.

<p><b>mádil</b> <i>n</i> @{fashion model}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c] model s.t. <b>2</b> [B156; a2] be a fashion model. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> having a body like a model.

<p><b>madrasta</b> <i>n</i> @stepmother.

<p><b>madri<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @nun. <b>&mdash; dipamilya</b> woman head of the family. <b>&mdash; supiryúra</b> @{mother superior}. <i>v</i> [B156; a] be, become a nun. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] pretend to be a nun, treat like a nun. <b>madrihun</b> <i>a</i> having ways or traits of a nun. <i>Madrihun kaáyug nawung bayhána, inusinti kaáyug dagway,</i> That woman is like a nun. Such an innocent face.

<p><b>madri<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> main frame of a door or window shutter. <i>v</i> [c1] make a main frame of a shutter.

<p><b>madri kakaw</b> <i>n</i> small ornamental tree flowering profusely with pink or lavender blooms, used for firewood and fencing: <b><i>Gliricidia sepium</i></b>.

<p><b>madri míya</b> an exclamation of alarm, surprise, or disgust mainly by speakers who have been under Spanish influence. <i>Madri míya, tingálig mah[=ú]g nang bátà,</i> My God! Watch out, the baby is going to fall. <i>Madri míya! Nabúhat nímu tu!</i> My God! You actually did that!

<p><b>madrína</b> <i>n</i> @godmother, the female sponsor at one's baptism, wedding, confirmation, or ordination. <i>v</i> [B136; c1] be, become the <i>madrína</i>.

<p><b>madyik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magic involving supernatural powers. <b>2</b> @{sleight-of-hand} trick. <i>Nalingaw ang mga bátà sa ákung madyik,</i> The children enjoyed my tricks. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a2] @{practice magic}. <b>2</b> [A; a] @steal s.t. small. <i>Huy, kinsay nagmadyik sa ákung bulpin diri?</i> Hey, who swiped my ball point pen? <b>-íru</b> <i>n</i> magician.

<p><b>madyung<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sandspurs, k.o. coarse grass growing about 1' that bears spikes with rows of round burrs, around 1/4" in diameter. <b>2</b> the burrs of this grass. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get sandspurs all over one.

<p><b>madyung<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @mahjong. <i>a</i> win the mahjong set. <i>Pung! Madyung ku, Bingo!</i> I get mahjong! <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; a] play mahjong. <i>Dílì na lang ta magdúlag baráha. Madyúngun ta na lang ni,</i> Let's not play cards. Let's just play <pb n=1353>mahjong. <b>2 [</b>A12] win at mahjong. <i>Wà pa ku makamadyung,</i> I haven't gotten mahjong yet. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mahjong den. <b>2</b> @{mahjong set}. <b>3</b> piece needed to get &lsquo;mahjong&rsquo;. <i>Ang madyungan ni Turuy tris sirkulu,</i> Toroy is waiting for the three circle piece. <b>-íru, <corr>-</cor>íra</b> <i>a</i> mahjong addict.

<p><b>madyurit</b> <i>n</i> @{drum majorette}. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be a majorette.

<p><b>mag-</b> durative active verbal affix, future. (<i>Past</i>: <b>nag-</b> <i>or</i> <b>ga-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>mag-</b>.) <i>Magmata sila árung urása,</i> They are awake at this time. <i>Nagmata (or gamata) pa ba kahà sila<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Do you think they are still awake? <i>Walà na sila magmata,</i> They are not awake any more. Verbs with <i>mag-</i>, <i>nag-</i> have the following meanings (as opposed to verbs with <i>mi-</i>, <i>mu-</i> &mdash; <ix>see</ix> <sc>MU-</sc>): <sc>1</sc> action not necessarily intentional. <i>Walà siya magsulti,</i> He didn't say. <i>Walà ku maghátag níya ánang librúha,</i> I didn't give him that book. <sc>2</sc> durative action, action or state continuing in time. <i>Wà na siya maghilak,</i> He isn't crying any more. <i>Ug magtindug ang mga táwu sa atubángan, dì mi makakità,</i> If the people in front are standing, we won't be able to see. <sc>2a</sc> added to nouns. <i>Ug magkalayu na ang kakugnan háyag kaáyu ang lángit,</i> When the fields are ablaze, the skies light up. <i>Human sa púlù ka gutlù, ang puthaw magbaga,</i> After ten seconds the steel will glow. <sc>3</sc> <i>added to verbs referring to a state</i>: be in [such-and-such] a state. <i>Ug mag-abri ang pultahan, musulud giyud ang lángaw,</i> If the door is open, the flies are sure to come in. <i>Walà na magtuyuk ang ligid,</i> The wheel is no longer turning. <sc>3a</sc> <ix>added to adjectives</ix>: be [adj.]. <i>Magmalipáyun ta,</i> Let us be happy. <i>Mawà kay hitsúra ug magpula nang ímung nawung,</i> You will not look good if your face is all red. <sc>3b</sc> added to words referring to a state of the weather. <i>Atúa giyud siya sa dágat, magbálud kinig maglínaw,</i> He is at sea, whether it is wavy or calm. <i>Mag-ulan kag mag-ínit,</i> Rain or shine (lit. whether you are rainy or shining). <sc>4</sc> <i>referring to an action which redounded on the agent</i>: do [so-and-so] to oneself. Mag-ílis pa ku, I will change my clothes. <i>Gustu kung maglumus,</i> I want to drown myself. <sc>4a</sc> <i>added</i> to nouns: become a [so-and-so]. <i>Magpárì ku,</i> I will become a priest. <i>Magsirkadur tingáli ning bataána,</i> This child probably wants to become a trapeze artist. <sc>5</sc> referring to an action which two or more people did with each other. (Verbs with <i>mag-</i> of this sort always have penultimate stress.) <i>Didtu sila mag-ábut,</i> They met in that place. <i>Magsákay ta,</i> <pb n=1354>Let us ride together. <i>Ug maglagyù pagkabutang ang mga balay,</i> If the houses are far apart from one another. <b>5a</b> <i>with nouns</i>: be in the [noun] relation. <i>Magkumpári kami ug akuy pakugúsun sa íyang anak,</i> We will be <i>kumpári's</i> if I become his child's god-*father. <i>Mag-amígu lang ta,</i> Let's be friends.

<p><b>maga-</b> alternative form for <i>mag-</i> in meanings <i>2</i>, <i>2a</i>, <i>3</i>, <i>3a</i>, <i>4</i>. Words with <i>maga-</i> can substitute for the examples there given.

<p><b>Magahat</b> <i>n</i> pagan non-Cebuano peoples in the mountains (applies to pagans in Negros and in Mindanao). <i>v</i> [A13] be very touchy. <i>Ug napildi ka ug dakù magmagahat diay ka?</i> You are touchy just because you lost heavily?

<p><b>magalyánis</b> <i>n</i> downtown shopping district of Cebu (after the name of Magallanes Street, which formerly was the principal shopping street in Cebu).

<p><b>magang, mágang</b> <i>v</i> [BN] for corn to flower. <i>Inigmagang sa mais, mugítib na ang lugas,</i> When the corn flowers, the grains begin to develop.

<p><b>magasin<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @magazine, @periodical.

<p><b>magasin<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{ammunition clip} for automatic firearms.

<p><b>magay</b> <i>n</i> @maguey, cultivated as a source of sisal fiber: <b><i>Agave cantala</i></b> or <b><i>sisalana</i></b>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A] make into sisal hemp. <b>magay mágay</b> <i>n</i> ornamental plant similar to the maguey but smaller in size: <b><i>Sansevieria spp.</i></b>

<p><b>magaya</b> = <sc>MALAGAYA</sc>.

<p><b>Magindánaw</b> <i>n</i> @Muslims of Cotabato and Zamboanga del Sur.

<p><b>magka-</b> <i>durative active future for verbs referring to a state</i>: be, becoming more and more [so-and-so]. (<i>Past</i>: <b>nagka-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>magka-</b>.) Verbs with this affix always have a stressed final syllable. <i>Imbis nga magkakusug, nagkahinay hinúun,</i> Instead of getting faster and faster, it was getting slower and slower. <i>Wà lagi magkaduul ang bapur nganhi, nagkalayù hinúun,</i> The boat is not coming nearer. It's actually getting further and further away.

<p><b>magka-(<-)</b> potential active verb affix, future. (Past: <b>nagka-</b>. Subjunctive: <b>magka-</b>.) Used with verbs referring to mutual actions (cf. <i>mag-<sub>1</sub></i>, <i>5</i>) but otherwise paralleling the potential meanings listed under <i>maka-</i>. <b>1</b> can [do] with each other. <i>Dì tang tanan magkasákay,</i> We cannot all ride together. <b>2</b> manage to [do] with each other. <i>Wà mi magkasábut,</i> We didn't manage to come to an agreement. <i>Nagkaábut sila sa tungàtúngà,</i> They met in the middle. <b>3</b> happen to [do] with each other. <i>Ug magkakítà gánì ang <pb n=1355>ímung babáyig asáwa,</i> If your mistress and your wife happen to run into each other.

<p><b>mag-l-</b> alternant of <i>mag-r-</i>, and usually in competition with it, but with some roots only <i>mag-r-</i> is frequent or the form with <i>mag-r-</i> has acquired a different nuance. <i>Magbalantay,</i> Watchman. <i>Magbuluhat ug mga mwiblis,</i> Furniture maker.

<p><b>maglalatik</b> <i>n</i> k.o. folk dance in which half coconut shells are knocked to the rhythm of the accompanying music.

<p><b>magnisya</b> <i>n</i> @{milk of magnesia}. <b>&mdash; simpli</b> a half dose of milk of magnesia (as opposed to <i>&mdash; dubli</i>, the full dose).

<p><b>magnit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magnet. <b>2</b> kissing scene (slang&mdash;from the notion that the faces come together as if magnetized). <i>Daghang magnit ánang salidáha,</i> There are plenty of kissing scenes in that movie. <b>3</b> <b>syúgar &mdash;</b> sugar magnate. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> pick up with a magnet. </b>2<b> @swipe, @steal, spirit away. <i>Kinsay nagmagnit sa ákung bálùn?</i> Who swiped my lunch? <b>3</b> [C] kiss one another usually in a show (slang). <i>a</i> won over. <i>Inigkanta nímu, magnit na silang tanan,</i> When you sing, they'll all be won over.

<p><b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> prefix added to verbs to form nouns which refer to one who does [verb] on a regular basis. <i>Magbabantay</i>, Watchman. <i>Magsusúlat</i>, Writer. Magpapatigayun, Businessman. <i>Magyuyutà</i>, Landowner or farmer. <i>Magbubúhat</i>, The Creator (God) or one who does.

<p><b>magsúun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*SÚUN</sc>.

<p><b>magtalisay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree similar in shape and appearance to the <i>talísay</i>, but with smaller leaves and harder wood: <b><i>Terminalia sp.</i></b>

<p><b>mágu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magi. <b>2</b> s.o. @outstanding, @expert. <i>Mágu sa kinablit,</i> A wizard at the guitar.

<p><b>mágù</b> <i>n</i> @tarsier.

<p><b>magus</b> = <sc>AMAGUS</sc>.

<p><b>máha</b> <i>n</i> name given to various puddings and confections. <b>&mdash; blangka</b> pudding made of kernels of young corn and coconut milk or just plain milk. <b>&mdash; diúbi</b> a pudding made of <i>úbi</i> and coconut milk. <b>&mdash; riyal</b> candy made out of peanuts, milk, and sugar.

<p><b>mahal</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dear, @expensive. <i>Mahal na kaáyu ang bugas karun,</i> Rice is very expensive now. <i>Magbáyad kag mahal sa ímung gibúhat,</i> You shall pay dearly for what you have done. <b>2</b> @beloved. <i>Siya ang ákung mahal (minahal) nga bána,</i> He is my beloved husband. <b>3</b> blessed (address to saints). <i>Pasalamáti ang Mahal nga Birhin,</i> Give thanks to the Blessed Virgin. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga adlaw</b> the days of the Lenten season. <b>5</b> <i>in set phrases</i>: very little, almost without. <b>&mdash; ug pahíyum</b> stingy with <pb n=1356>the smiles. <b>&mdash; ug tíngug</b> weak-voiced. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; ab7] become expensive, go up in price. <i>Basta Amirkánu mupalit, mahalun giyug baligyà,</i> For an American the price is always jacked up. <b>2</b> [A; a12] love. <i>Ang mga bayáni nagmahal sa ílang yútang natawhan,</i> Heroes love their native land. <i>Gimahal ku ikaw,</i> I love you. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @beloved, dear one. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> majesty (address to royalty). <i>Matúman ang ímung gihangyù, kamahálan,</i> Your order will be fulfilled, Your Majesty. <b>-l-un(<-)</b>, -un(<-) <i>a</i> @precious. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> dear or costly kind. <b>ma-in-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @loving, @affectionate.

<p><b>mahan</b> = <sc>MAN KAHÀ</sc> (dialectal). <ix>see</ix> <sc>MAN</sc>.

<p><b>maharlika</b> <i>n</i> the name given to the native nobles in pre-Hispanic times.

<p><b>máhay</b> <i>n</i> feelings of hurt and @regret at what s.o. did. <i>Arun walay máhay apúran ta kamung tanan,</i> So there will be no hurt feelings, I'll give you each one. <i>v</i> [A; b3c5] have feelings of hurt. <i>Nagmáhay kung napalit ku tung sapatúsa,</i> I'm sorry I bought those shoes. <i>Ikay ákung gimaháyan sa nahitabù,</i> I blame you for (lit. you are the reason I'm regretting) what happened. <i>Gikamaháyan ta ka kay wà ka mudúaw nákù,</i> You hurt me because you did not pay me a visit. <b>walay &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A13] there was nobody that felt bad, said in two situations: when people who attack on s.o. are beaten up instead (i.e., they cannot blame anyone but themselves), and when people who set on s.o. are unsuccessful (i.e., no one felt bad because they were successful).

<p><b>mahika</b> <i>n</i> @magic.

<p><b>mahiku</b> <i>n</i> word referring to an unknown location when asking or giving a location, usually used in anger. <i>Lupad ngadtu sa mahiku, animála ka,</i> Get out, I don't care where, you beast. <i>Ambut ásang mahikúha tu nákù ikabutang ang pisti nga hunsuy,</i> I don't know where the heck I left that blinkety-blank pipe.

<p><b>mahistrádu</b> <i>n</i> @judge. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be made, become a judge.

<p><b>mahugani</b> <i>n</i> @mahogany.

<p><b>maigang</b> <i>n</i> medium to large tree of the primary forest, with fruit similar in flavor and taste to <i>lungbuy</i>: <b><i>Eugenia polycephaloides</i></b>.

<p><b>mailúku</b> = <sc>MAMILÚKU</sc>.

<p><b>ma-in-un(<-), ma-in-ánun</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i> used with some bases in place of <i>ma-un</i>. <i>Matinabángun</i>, Helpful. <i>Masinabtánun</i>, Full of understanding.

<p><b>mais</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @maize, the @corn plant or any part of it. <b>1a</b> <b>bugas &mdash;</b> corn grits. <i>Mahal na ang prisyu sa bugas mais karun,</i> The price of corn grits has increased. <i>v</i> [A1] have corn <pb n=1357>grits as one's staple food. <i>Nagmais lang mi kay barátu man kay sa humay,</i> We had corn grits as our staple food because it is cheaper than rice. <b>-an, ka-an, -al</b> <i>n</i> @cornfield. <i>v</i> [A1; a12] have a cornfield. <b>maismáis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ornamental plant similar to the corn plant, and growing up to 3': <b><i>Dracaena sanderiana</i></b> and <b><i><corr> D. </corr>fragrans</i></b>. <b>2</b> folding knife with a handle that is made of sheet metal, molded into the form of an ear of corn. <b>3</b> name given to the largest species of flying fish (<i>bangsi</i>). <b>-un</b> = <sc>MAISMÁIS</sc>, <i>3</i>.

<p><b>maistra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{female teacher}. <b>1a</b> term of address or title for a teacher. <i>Nía na si Maistra Lúling,</i> Here is Mrs. Loling, the teacher. <b>2</b> education course. <i>Maistra ang gikúhang kursu ni Pirla,</i> Perla is majoring in Education. <b>(->)</b> <i>voc.</i> teacher, ma'am. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for a woman to teach. <i>Tunghaan nga gimaistráhan ni Sunya,</i> The school where Sonia is teaching. <b>2</b> [B156; a1] be a (female) teacher. <i>Maistráhun ku ning ákung anak,</i> I'll make my daughter into a teacher. <b>ubra &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>UBRA</sc>.

<p><b>maistru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1, 1a</b> = <sc>MAISTRA</sc> (male). <b>2</b> education course. <b>3</b> the leader or @instigator of activity, usually bad. <i>Ikay maistru sa tanang mga binúang,</i> You are the instigator of all the foolishness. <b>4</b> band or orchestra master. <i>Pasakalyi, maistru, kay mukanta ku,</i> Introduction, maestro. I shall sing now. <b>&mdash; ámu</b> @boatswain. <b>&mdash; kusiníru</b> @{chief cook}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @teach. <b>2</b> [B6; a1] be a @teacher. [+]

<p><b>maka-<sub>1</sub></b> potential active verb affix, future. (<i>Past</i>: <b>naka-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>maka-</b>. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>ka-</bx>.) <i>Dì ku makaalsa (kaalsa) niánà,</i> I cannot lift that. <i>Nakatilaw (katilaw) na ku niánà,</i> I have tried that. <i>Wà ku makasakay (kasakay),</i> I couldn't get a ride. <b>1</b> refers to an action s.o. has the capability of doing. (Only the future form is used in this meaning.) <i>Makamau na kung mukinatsilà sa nag-idad kug diyis,</i> I knew how to speak Spanish when I was ten years old. <b>2</b> refers to an action which one had the opportunity or managed to do. <i>Ug makaadtu ku sa inyu human sa paniudtu, muhapit ku,</i> If I get a chance to go to your place after lunch, I'll drop in. <i>Wà ku makalakaw kay síging abut ang mga bisíta,</i> I didn't have a chance to go out because we kept having visitors. <b>2a</b> <i>with nouns</i>: manage to get. <i>Ug trís ákung mahulbut run, makamadyung ku,</i> If I draw a three, I will get mahjong. <i>Niíning trabahúa hálus ta makasininà,</i> With this work I can hardly earn enough to buy a shirt. <b>3</b> refers to an accidental or unintentional action. <i>Diriyut siya makaihì sa dihang gilatigu siya sa íyang <pb n=1358>inahan,</i> Her mother whipped her so hard she nearly wet her pants. <i>Makaingun kag nindut ug makakità ka,</i> Once you see it, you won't be able to help exclaiming at how beautiful it is.

<p><b>maka-<sub>2</sub></b> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>ka-<sub>4</sub></bx> <i>n</i> affix added to numbers to form words which mean [do so-and-so] many times. <i>Makapila (kapila) ku na ikaw ingna?</i> How many times did I tell you? <i>Makaduha na ku malígù didtu,</i> I have gone swimming there twice. <i>Makadaghan na ku mabiktima,</i> I have been victimized many times.

<p><b>makahiyà</b> = <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KIPÌ</sc>.

<p><b>makalibri</b> = <sc>KALIBRI<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><b>makan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @macan, k.o. large-grained rice of wet fields, highly prized for ordinary eating. <b>2</b> k.o. very fat pig. <i>a</i> @obese. <i>Gwapahun untang bayhána apan makan lang,</i> She's quite beautiful, only she's fat.

<p><b>makapunù</b> (from <i>punù</i>) <i>n</i> variety of coconut which produces ordinary fruit and once in a while fruit which are completely full of soft meat, slightly harder near the shell. The <i>makapunù</i> fruit is highly esteemed and is used for sweets.

<p><b>maka-r-</b> affix added to verbs referring to a state to form adjectives which mean cause s.o. to get into [such-and-such] a state to a great extent. Forms with this affix usually have long penults. <i>Makasusúbung hitabù,</i> A very saddening event. <i>Makalulúuy</i>, Inspiring pity. <i>Makalalagut</i>, Angering.

<p><b>makarúni</b> <i>n</i> @macaroni. <i>v</i> [A13] cook a macaroni dish.

<p><b>Makaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Chinaman from Macao. <b>2</b> Chinaman in a restaurant business (so called because many cooks in Chinese restaurants immigrated from Macao). <b>lútung &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÚTÙ</sc>.

<p><b>máki<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a large, enamel-coated, round, metal platter, 18" or so in diameter for holding cooked rice or corn.

<p><b>máki<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> a Chinese dish of sliced meats, stewed and thickened with cornstarch.

<p><b>makig-(<-)</b> prefix added to bases with a prefix <ix>pakig-</ix> to indicate future, volitional active forms. <ix>Past</ix>: <bx>nakig-</bx>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>makig-</b>. No durative or potential forms. (<i>See</i> <sc>PAKIG-</sc> <i>for meanings</i>.) <ix>Short forms</ix>: <bx>kig-</bx> and <bx>tig-</bx>. <i>Makigkáun (kigkáun, tigkáun) siya nákù sa gawas,</i> He wants to take me out to eat. <i>Nakig-áway siyag dakung táwu,</i> He picked a fight with a large person. <i>Walà ku makigpustaánay níya,</i> I did not challenge him to bet.

<p><b>makina</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @machine. <b>2</b> engine. <i>Dílì na muandar ang makina sa awtu,</i> The automobile <pb n=1359>engine won't start. <b>3</b> sewing machine. <i>Ang makina kinahanglánun kaáyu sa sastri,</i> A sewing machine is a necessity to a dress-*maker. <b>4 &mdash; sa bugas</b> corn, rice mill. <b>&mdash; dimutur</b> <i>n</i> motorized machine, engine. <i>v</i> [a12] <b>1</b> do by machine. <i>Ayawg kinamuta nà pagtahì, makinaha nà,</i> Don't sew it with your hands. Do it by machine. <b>2</b> put an engine s.w.

<p><b>makinarya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> machinery, set of machinery put together for a specific use. <b>2</b> machinery, set of activities or groups organized to accomplish s.t. <i>Ang makinarya sa Partídu Libiral,</i> The machinery of the Liberal Party.

<p><b>makinilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> typewriter. <b>2</b> clipper to trim hair. <b>3</b> windlass. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] type. <i>Makinilyáhun giyud basta sulat nga aplikisiyun,</i> Letters of application should be typed. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] hit with a number of rapid blows, as if punching a typewriter. <i>Gimakinilya nákù siyag dyab,</i> I hit him with a rapid-*fire succession of jabs. <b>2</b> cut hair with a clipper. <b>-ádu, -in-</b> <i>a</i> typewritten.[+]

<p><b>makinista</b> <i>n</i> engine man, machine operator. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] become an engine man.

<p><b>makiníta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> process of embroidery done by pricking the needle over the design on the top side of the cloth until the whole design is completed, after which the design on the bottom side is trimmed. The top becomes the right side. <b>2</b> needle for this sort of embroidery. <i>v</i> [A; a2] embroider in this method.

<p><b>makmak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] pound s.t. hard with s.t. <i>Makmáka ang puthaw samtang ínit pa,</i> Pound the iron while it is hot. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] beat severely, pound. <b>2a &mdash; ug kasábà, sulti</b> [A; a12] scold severely, lambast. <i>Dì ka ángay mumakmak níyag kasábà kay dì ka ginikánan,</i> You have no right to scold him severely because you are not his father.

<p><b>makra</b> = <sc>MARKA</sc>.

<p><b>maksut</b> = <sc>LAKSUT</sc>.

<p><b>mákù</b> = <sc>DAKÙ</sc> (dialectal). <b>&mdash; dyamù</b> very big. <i>Mákù dyamù ang ílang báy,</i> They have a huge house.

<p><b>makúpa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small tree cultivated for its red, top-shaped fruits, with white, spongy meat and a mild flavor, a large meaty variety of the <i><b>Syzygium samarangense.</b></i> The same genus as <i>tambis,</i> but much firmer of flesh.

<p><b>mal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> in billiards, a false shot causing one to lose his turn. <b>2</b> unlucky number. <i>Daghang mahadluk sa numiru trísi kay mal kunu,</i> Lots of people are afraid of thirteen because it is said to be an unlucky number. <i>v</i> [B126] make a bad shot. <i>Mamal kag láin ang maigù sa bulamánu,</i> You lose your turn if you hit <pb n=1360>the wrong ball. <b>&mdash; numiru</b> = <sc>MAL</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>&mdash; tiráda</b> <i>n</i> in billiards, a shot that is not well executed. <i>Mal tiráda tung ímu kay layù ra kaáyu sa lungag ang ímung gitiráhan,</i> That was a bad shot. The target ball was a mile from the pocket.

<p><b>mala</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dry, not wet. <i>Mala na ang mga hinayhay,</i> The clothes that were hung up are dry now. <b>2</b> not displaying lively attention, @disinterested. <i>Tingálig dì siya muapil kay mala siya ug tinubagan,</i> He probably won't participate because he gave a disinterested answer. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; a2] @{dry up}, become @dried. <i>Mimala ang mga sapà,</i> The rivers dried up. <i>Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy mumala (mupamala) sa mga basakan,</i> The heat of the sun will dry the rice fields up. <i>Nag-úsik lang sa panahun ang nagmala (nagpamala) íning salúga,</i> Whoever dried this floor off was just wasting his time. <i>Tiil nga makamalag (makapamalag) basakan,</i> Big feet (lit. that can dry up a rice paddy). <i>Namad-an ug singut ang íyang bukubuku,</i> The sweat on his back has dried up. <b>2</b> [A13] be @uninteresting, @boring. <i>Wà ku mutiwas sa sini kay nagmala lang,</i> I did not see the movie to the end because it was boring. <b>2a</b> [b4] <b>&mdash; sa dugù</b> become @pale. <i>Pagpangutána sa pulis, gimad-an sa dugù ang nawung sa dalága,</i> The lady's face became pale when the policeman questioned her. <b>ma-</b> <i>n</i> @land. <i>Ang ubang bakì nagpuyù sa túbig, ug ang uban sa mamala,</i> Some frogs live in water and some on land. <b>tilapya sa ma-</b> <i>n</i> @prostitute (humorous). <b>kamad-an</b> <i>n</i> upland rice field.

<p><b>malabagákay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rattan used in house building.

<p><b>malabanu</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.

<p><b>malabutang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rattan used in construction.

<p><b>malagaya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white-husked rice with very small, roundish, white grains, used in preparation of medicinal rice cakes or mixed with medicinal plants in poultices.

<p><b>Malakanyan, Malakanyang</b> <i>n</i> Malacañang, the Philippine Presidential Palace.

<p><b>mal-am</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @old in age. <b>2</b> @{grown up}, but not doing things befitting one's age (derogatory). <i>Mal-am na, lubut gihápuy ilingkud,</i> He is already grown but he hasn't got anything upstairs (lit. all he does with his buttocks is sit on them&mdash;a readily understood circumlocution which avoids stating outright a hurtful truth).

<p><b>malangsi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @sardine or small herring, growing to 4" long and 1" wide.

<p><b>malapati</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @fish.

<p><b>malapi</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <b>kumpradur di-</b> <i>n</i> one <pb n=1361>who buys goods which he knows the seller has no right to dispose of. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a buyer of stolen goods. <i>Makumpradur dimalapi giyud ka kun makapalit ka niánang kináwat,</i> You'll be a buyer of stolen goods if you buy that stolen article.

<p><b>malapunti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. red deep-sea fish with big reddish scales, 2' by 6", similar to a snapper, but with a filament projecting from the tip of the tail.

<p><b>malarya</b> <i>n</i> malaria. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get, cause to get malaria. <i>Way lamuk nga makamalarya (makapamalarya) dinhi,</i> There are no mosquitoes here that cause malaria. <i>Tambáli ang gimalarya,</i> Give medicine to the man with malaria. <b>malaryahun</b> <i>a</i> having malaria.

<p><b>málas</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DIMÁLAS</sc>.

<p><b>malasádu, malasáwu</b> <i>a</i> soft-boiled, half-cooked. <i>Malasádung itlug,</i> Soft-boiled eggs. <i>Ang atay malasádu nga pagkalútù,</i> The liver was cooked rare. <i>v</i> [A1B26; a2] come out soft, rare, cause to do so.

<p><b>malasugi, malasúgi</b> <i>n</i> swordfish or sailfish: <i><b>Xiphias gladius,</b></i> et al.

<p><b>malatálu</b> <i>a</i> bananas that are almost full-grown (but still far from ripe). <i>Basta tinggutum tub-un na ang ságing bísag malatálu pa kaáyu,</i> In times of famine they cut down the bananas even before they mature. <i>v</i> [B3; b6] for bananas to reach this stage.

<p><b>malatinduk</b> <i>n</i> mackerel scad, k.o. carangoid fish, but long and fleshy like a <i>tinduk</i> banana.

<p><b>*málay</b> <b>walay &mdash;</b> innocently unaware, unknowing (slang). <i>Way málay ang asáwa nga may kabit ang íyang bána,</i> The wife was unaware that her husband had a mistress. <i>Wà silay málay nga gipitluk nag ílang manuk,</i> They were unaware that their chicken had been stolen.

<p><b>maláyang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fine, white rice introduced by the PACD.

<p><b>malaypálay</b> <i>n</i> poisonous part of the viscera and skin of a pufferfish, which is removed before eating.

<p><b>Maláyu</b> <i>n</i> Malay in race. <i>a</i> tending to have the features of the Malayan race.

<p><b>malbas</b> = <sc>MARBAS</sc>.

<p><b>maldisiyun</b> <i>n</i> malediction, a curse. <i>v</i> [A; b2c1] curse. <i>Imaldisiyun (maldisiyunun) siya sa párì,</i> The priest will pronounce a malediction on him.

<p><b>maldíta</b> = <sc>MALDÍTU</sc> (female).

<p><b>maldítu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> naughty, evil. <i>Kadtung maldítung bátà ang nagpapilit sa babulgam sa ímung sinínà,</i> That naughty child put bubble gum on your dress. <i>Daghang maldítu <pb n=1362>sa piyir,</i> There are lots of bad types at the waterfront. <b>2</b> having unexpected ability. <i>Maldítu! Natubag giyud ang dyakpat nga pangutána dà,</i> He's smart! He answered the jackpot question correctly. <b>&mdash; sa babáyi</b> one who deceives women. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become @naughty. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>a</i> in an evil way. <i>v</i> [A; b] do @mischief, evil, philander. <i>Makamau nang muminalditu ang gamay kung anak,</i> My little baby has already learned how to be naughty.

<p><b>mal-idukáda</b> = <sc>MAL-IDUKÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>mal-idukádu</b> <i>a</i> @ill-educated, @ill-mannered. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] be ill-educated or bad-mannered.

<p><b>malígas</b> = <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.

<p><b>malignu</b> <i>n</i> spirits of departed people who have not entered heaven and are doing their penance (<i>kundínu</i>). If they are not prayed for they may inflict sickness as a reminder. <b>ispiritu &mdash;</b> = <sc>MALIGNU</sc>. <i>v</i> [A1; a4] be sick with an illness sent by a <i>malignu</i>.

<p><b>malignù</b> = <sc>KARABALYAS</sc>.[**note: this and next entry refer to a minor entry that just refers again to KARBALYAS, better to refer directly]

<p><b>malimnu</b> = <sc>KARABALYAS</sc>.

<p><b>malingka</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HIMALINGKA</sc>.

<p><b>malisya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> awareness of sex. <i>Dúna na siyay malisya kay dì na man maghúbù ug malígù,</i> She is already aware of her sex because she won't bathe in the nude any longer. <b>2</b> bad thoughts regarding sex. <i>Ug way malisya, ngánung miagik-ik man ka?</i> If you are not harboring evil thoughts, why are you snickering? <b>3</b> @{ill will}. <i>Way malisya ang ákung paghátag niíni,</i> There's no ill intent in my giving this to you. <b>4</b> @{bad omen}, usually of death or misfortune. <i>v</i> [A13; b] send such an omen. <i>Nagmalisya siya únà mamatay. Nagpakítà únà siya sa íyang mga anak nga túa sa Amirika,</i> He sent an omen before he died. He appeared to his children in America. <b>malisyúsa</b> = <sc>MALISYÚSU</sc> (female). <b>malisyúsu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> conscious of sex in an unwholesome way. <i>Ngánung dì ka man pagúnit? Kamalisyúsu gud nímu!</i> Why don't you want me to touch your hands? How sex-conscious you are! <b>2</b> maliciously done, out of ill will. <i>Malisyúsung mga pasángil nga way gipasikáran,</i> Malicious and baseless accusations. <i>v</i> [B12; a2] <b>1</b> be, become sex conscious in an unwholesome way. <b>2</b> become malicious in behavior.

<p><b>málit</b> <i>n</i> @mallet.

<p><b>malíta</b> <i>n</i> @suitcase. <i>v</i> [A13] carry a suitcase. <i>Magmalíta lang ku kay daghan kug dalhunun,</i> I'll take a suitcase because I have so many things to take.

<p><b>malitin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a leather bag designed to hold medicine and some medical instruments. <b>2</b> <pb n=1363>a small suitcase.

<p><b>malmal<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [B1256; a12] be @taught, @rehearsed, or be @inculcated to a high degree. <i>Namalmal mig maáyu sa ininglis kay Amirkánu ámung maistru,</i> We were taught English thoroughly because our teacher was an American. <i>Malmálun nátù ang bátà sa bili sa pagdagínut,</i> We will inculcate the value of thrift in the children's minds.

<p><b>malmal<sub>2</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @beat s.o. up, usually in the mouth. <i>Akuy mimalmal sa irù nga mikáun sa isdà,</i> I gave the dog that ate the fish a sound beating. <b>2</b> [A; a12] use s.t. or @scold s.o. abusively. <i>Natural nagubà ang makinilya kay gimalmal,</i> Of course he broke the typewriter because he abused it. <i>Malmálun kag kasábà bísag gamayng sayup,</i> You get abusive scoldings for the slightest mistakes.

<p><b>malpagadur</b> <i>a</i> failing to pay one's debts. <i>v</i> [B1256] get to be a defaulter in one's debts. <i>Ug mamalpagadur ka, wà nay musálig pagpaútang nímu,</i> If you become a bad debtor, no one will dare allow you credit. <b>-a(<-)</b> = <sc>MALPAGADUR</sc> (female).

<p><b>maltabána</b> <i>n</i> glazed brown urn, about 2' high with a small mouth and handles at the shoulders. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make into, put in glazed clay jars.

<p><b>maltratar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @maltreat, @mistreat. <i>Maltratahun siya sa íyang amaáma,</i> His step-*father will maltreat him.

<p><b>*málu</b> <b>&mdash; pa ug</b> <b>1</b> on the chance that [such-and-such<corr>]</corr> a good thing happen. <i>Palit tag swipstik, málu pag makaswirti,</i> Let's buy a sweepstake ticket. We might just win. <b>2</b> [so-and-so] isn't bad, if that is what comes out. <i>Málu pa nà ug swildúhan kag bayinting adlaw?</i> Would it be bad if you were paid twenty pesos a day?

<p><b>malù<sub>1</sub> &mdash; [dat.]</b> serves [dat.] right. <i>Malù nímu nga gipagirawut kay tapulan ka,</i> Serves you right that you were fired because you are lazy.

<p><b>malù<sub>2</sub>, málù<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> pollen of corn. <i>v</i> [A1] grow pollen. <i>Dì na dúgayng masanggì ang mais basta magmalù na,</i> It won't be long before the corn can be harvested if there is pollen in the tassel.

<p><b>málù<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the one who is &lsquo;it&rsquo; in the game of <i>takyan</i> or marbles. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a person remain &lsquo;it&rsquo; for a long time. <i>Malúun kug maáyu si Huwan pinaági sa pagpátid sa takyan ug layù,</i> I'll make Juan be &lsquo;it&rsquo; for a long time by kicking the shuttlecock far away.

<p><b>malubgas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small anchovy with a dark blue dorsal region and silvery white on its ventral region, widely eaten preserved in salt.

<pb n=1364>

<p><b>maluíbun</b> <i>n</i> name given to ornamental climbing vines with dark green or yellow green cordate leaves, often grown indoors: <i><b>Scindapsus aureus</b></i> and <i><b>Philodendron oxycardium.</b></i>

<p><b>málung</b> <i>n</i> name of the sarong worn by the Muslims. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] wear a <i>málung.</i> <b>2</b> [a2] make into a <i>málung.</i>

<p><b>malunggay</b> = <sc>KALAMUNGGAY</sc>.

<p><b>málus<sub>1</sub></b> <i>a</i> highly fermented salted fish paste. <i>Málus na ang ginamus,</i> The salted fish paste is already highly fermented. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2] for salted fish to become highly fermented, cause it to do so. <b>2</b> [B] develop a horrible smell. <i>Kalígù na kay nagkamálus ka na,</i> Take a bath. You're beginning to smell awful.

<p><b>malyíti</b> <i>n</i> gavel.

<p><b>malyurka</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. liquor of low proof made from cane sugar, flavored with anise.

<p><b>mám</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ma'am, term of address to a teacher or woman of high station. <i>Maáyung buntag kanímu, mám,</i> Good morning, Ma'am. <b>2</b> lady teacher. <i>Usa sa mga mám nákù sa hayiskul mau si Mis Agápay,</i> One of my teachers in high school was Miss Agapay. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o. Ma'am.

<p><b>máma<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> mother. <i>v</i> [B13; a12] call s.o. <i>máma.</i>

<p><b>máma<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> mute. <i>v</i> [B12] become a mute. <i>Namáma nà siya tungud sa kalísang,</i> He was struck dumb by his great fright.

<p><b>mamà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> chew of betel nut <i>(búnga)</i> and piper betel leaves <i>(búyù)</i> with lime <i>(ápug)</i> and optionally tobacco. <b>2</b> action of chewing. <i>v</i> [AC12; a12] chew betel nut. <i>Dì ku makamamà kay hálang,</i> I can't chew betel because it burns the tongue. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <i>v</i> [A13; c] get a bloody mouth (lit. chew blood). <i>Magmamà ka giyug dugù ug hisumbagan ta ka,</i> You will have a bloody mouth if I punch you. <b>mam-anan, malam-an</b> <i>n</i> container for the lime, betel nut, and betel leaf. <b>malam-un</b> <i>n</i> set of complete ingredients ready for chewing. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of chewing betel.

<p><b>mamadur</b> <i>n</i> breast pump. <i>v</i> [b] use a breast pump.

<p><b>mámam</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> baby talk for <ix>inum</ix> &lsquo;drink&rsquo;. <b>2</b> drinking spree (humorous slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] drink (baby talk). <b>2</b> [AC; a] hold a drinking spree. <i>Puwa na ang tápay, nakamámam tingáli,</i> His ears are red. He must have had s.t. to drink.

<p><b>mamay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wet nurse. <b>2</b> any nursemaid. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] wet-nurse. <i>Gimamay ang bátà nga ílu,</i> The orphaned infant was wet-nursed. <b>2</b> [A; a] take care of a child. <i>Siyay nagmamay <pb n=1365>sa tanan námung mga bátà,</i> She took care of all our children.

<p><b>mambad</b> = <sc>MANBAD</sc>.

<p><b>mambu</b> <i>n</i> mambo, a Latin American dance and its music. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] dance the mambo. <b>2</b> [c1] play music in mambo rhythm.

<p><b>mámi<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> mommy. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] call s.o. mommy.

<p><b>mámi<sub>2</sub></b> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr>a Chinese dish consisting of soup and narrow egg noodles with meat. <i>v</i> [A; a] make mámi.

<p><b>mamilúku</b> <i>n</i> child's sunsuit, a one-piece romper with short pants and no sleeves. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] wear a sunsuit. <b>2</b> [c16] make into a sunsuit.

<p><b>maming</b> = <sc>LUBAYLÚBAY</sc>, n. <ix>see</ix> <sc>LUBAY</sc>.

<p><b>mampud</b> short for <ix>mánu man pud</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <b>NGÁNU</b> <i>and</i> <sc>UPUD</sc>.

<p><b>Mampur</b> <i>n</i> Montford, a person who is said to have lived in olden times. <b>karáan pa ni &mdash;</b> older than Montford. <i>Tabas sa íyang bistídu nga karáan pa ni Mampur,</i> Style of dress that dates back to Montford's time. <b>panahun pa ni &mdash;</b> very old, from Montford's time. <i>Sa panahun pa ni Mampur ang ákung radiyu ug wà pa giyud magubà,</i> My radio is as old as the hills and still in fine shape. <i>Sa panahun pa ni Mampur nang kumidiyáha,</i> That joke is as old as the hills.

<p><b>mamsà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to the large species of <i><b>Caranx,</b></i> a highly-prized food fish. <b>2 dakung &mdash;</b> influential, important person.

<p><b>mamsà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> schoolteacher, humorous word play on <i>mám. Ayaw mug sábà kay náa na si Mamsà,</i> Everybody shut up. The teacher is coming. <i>v</i> [B126] be a schoolmarm.

<p><b>mamun<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. sponge cake. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make, make into <i>mamun.</i>

<p><b>mamun<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fruit tree similar to a <i>gwayabanu</i> but with a smaller and rounder fruit: <i><b>Anona sp.</b></i>

<p><b>mámurd, mámurds</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> marbles without a flaw. <b>2</b> for girls to be well-rounded and smooth-skinned. <i>Mámurds kaáyu ang trátu ni Bin,</i> Ben's girl friend is very beautiful. <b>mamuray</b> <i>v</i> [C2] compare which is the smoothest, most well-rounded. <i>Mamuray tag dyúlin,</i> Let's compare our marbles to see which is the smoothest and best rounded.

<p><b>man</b> <b>1</b> because. <i>Kay ang íya dapit man sa dáhun, mamúnga dáyun,</i> Because his part was the part with the leaves, it would bear fruit quickly. <b>&mdash; ugud</b> because (giving an explanation). <i>Namatay ang tanum kay wà man gud bùbúi,</i> The plant died because no one watered it. <b>2</b> <i>after an interrogative:</i> particle to make the question not abrupt. <i>Háin man siya?</i>  <pb n=1366>Could you tell me where he is? <b>3</b> particle with a statement contradicting a previous statement or presumption. <i>Dì man nà mau,</i> That's not the one. <b>4</b> particle with a statement giving information. <i>Nía man si Pidru karung buntága,</i> Oh, Pedro is here this morning. <b>&mdash; diay</b> I notice that. <i>Nindut man diay ka kaáyung mukanta!</i> Oh, I see you sing very beautifully. <b>&mdash; kahà</b> [so-and-so] apparently is the case. <i>Kami man kahay muluhud, anus-a man ang kasal?</i> We are supposed to sponsor you, so when is the wedding going to be? <i>Dì lang ka tagáan. Dì man kahà ka gustu,</i> I won't give you any. You apparently won't want any, anyway. <b>&mdash; lagi</b> I notice [so-and-so] is the case, nevertheless. <i>Ingun siya dì ka muanhi. Nía ka man lagi,</i> He said you weren't coming, but here you are! <b>5</b> in other phrases: <b>ingun &mdash;</b> as well as. <i>Mubuhis ang tagasyudad ingun man ang tagabaryu,</i> The city people, as well as the barrio folks, pay taxes. <b>mau &mdash; gánì</b> that's why, despite what you would expect.... <i>Mau man gánì nga namula ang ákung pánit kay nabulad ku,</i> I have red skin, despite what you would expect, because I was out in the sun. <b>na &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>NA</sc>, <i>4.</i> <b>pála &mdash; run</b> that's flattery. <i>Pála man run ug dì pa tinúud,</i> That would have been flattery if it were not true. <b>túud &mdash;</b> and so, as one would expect. <i>Túud man miabut dáyun ang pulis,</i> And so, as one would expect, the police immediately arrived.

<p><b>maN-</b> <i>(see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol N)</i> prefix added to bases with a prefix <b>paN-</b> to indicate future volitional active forms. <i>(past</i> <b>naN-;</b> <i>subjunctive</i> <b>maN-.</b> <i>Durative forms: future and subjunctive</i> <b>magpaN-(->);</b> <i>past</i> <b>nagpaN-(->).</b> <i>Potential active: future and subjunctive</i> <b>makapaN-;</b> <i>past</i> <b>nakapaN-.)</b> <i>Mangutána ta kun háin siya,</i> Let us ask where he is. <i>Wà siya mangutána, He didn't ask. Nangutána ku piru way tubag,</i> I asked but there was no answer. <i>Nagpanguput siya sa kahadluk,</i> He held on with all his might for fright. <i>Walà ku makapangutána,</i> I didn't get a chance to ask. <i>Makapangasáwa ka na,</i> You can get married now.

<p><b>mana, mána<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> a title of respect to a female older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o. <i>mána.</i>

<p><b>mána<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. cultivated tree, the bark and leaves of which are used for spices.

<p><b>manáging</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white parrot, the racket-tailed parrot: <i><b>Prioniturus discurus.</b></i>

<p><b>manalabtan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SABAT.</sc>

<p><b>manámù</b> short for <sc>AMAHAN NÁMÙ</sc> <i>n</i> the Lord's Prayer.

<pb n=1367>

<p><b>mananabtan</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SABAT.</sc>

<p><b>manananggal</b> = <sc>ANANANGGAL</sc>.

<p><b>mananangkuy</b> <i>n</i> folk doctor (general term). <i>v</i> [B13; a12] become a healer.

<p><b>mananap</b> <i>n</i> animal, beast, insect. <i>a</i> brute, having the feelings of a beast. <i>Ikawng mananápa ka. Ngánung gibun-ug man nímu ang ákung anak?</i> You beast. Why did you beat my son? <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> beastly.

<p><b>manan-aw</b> <i>n</i> general name for ornamental air orchids.

<p><b>manandis</b> <i>a</i> henpecked husband. <i>v</i> [B2] become henpecked.

<p><b>manang, mánang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for elder sister. <b>2</b> title given to any woman older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o. <ix>manang.</ix> <b>(->)</b> voc. form. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nang.</bx>

<p><b>mananggíti</b> <i>n</i> toddy gatherer. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become a toddy gatherer.

<p><b>manánuy</b> <i>a</i> sweet-sounding, melodious. <i>Ang manánuyng tíngug sa langgam,</i> The sweet, melodious voice of the bird.

<p><b>manátad</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dove: the green-winged ground dove: <b><i>Chalcophaps indica.</i> túlin pa sa &mdash;</b> very swift.

<p><b>manau, manaul<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. parasitic air plant, with long linear lanceolate leaves radiating from the center: <i><b>Asplenium nidus.</b></i>

<p><b>manaul<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the white-breasted sea eagle: <i><b>Haliaetus leucogaster.</b></i>

<p><b>manay, mánay</b> <i>n</i> title for a female much older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o. <i>manáy.</i> <b>(->)</b> voc. form.

<p><b>maN-ay</b> regional alternant of <i>maN-r-.</i>

<p><b>manbad</b> (from <i>subad) n</i> <b>1</b> any large deep-sea fish. <b>2</b> usurer. <i>Nadátù siya kay mambad nga dakù,</i> He became rich because he was a great usurer. <b>3 dakung &mdash;</b> an important person of great influence. <i>Si Lawril dakung mambad sa pulitika,</i> Laurel is a big figure in politics. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fierce and grasping. <i>Púru mga mambad ang tagaadwána. Padug-un ka giyud ug táman,</i> The customs people are voracious beasts. They'll bleed you dry. <b>2</b> fierce, termagant woman. <i>Túa na pud, gitapuk-an na pud si Tiryu sa íyang mambad nga asáwa,</i> There goes Terio's shrewish wife at him again. <b>3</b> s.o. that is dangerous to women. <i>Ayawg túu níya kay mambad nà sa mga babáyi,</i> Don't believe him because he is dangerous to women. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> quality of being fierce and grasping. <i>Ang kamambad sa pamingkúngan,</i> The fierceness of a hammerhead shark.

<p><b>mandalúsa</b> = <sc>SALIMBÁNGUN.</sc>

<p><b>Mandalúyung</b> <i>n</i> a district in Rizal, Luzon. <b>taga-, gíkan sa &mdash;</b> crazy (lit. one who has been a patient at the mental hospital in <pb n=1368>Mandaluyong).

<p><b>mandamyintu diaristu</b> warrant of arrest.

<p><b>mand&acaron;r</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> command; word or phrase esp. in set form by which a command is given. <i>Ang mand&acaron;r sa kapitan pagpahúnung ug tíru,</i> The captain's command to cease fire. <b>2</b> order, a serving of food in a public eating place. <i>Unsa man tuy ímung mand&acaron;r, pipsi u kuk?</i> What did you order, Pepsi or Coke? <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> command, give an order to. <b>1a</b> command, order people around. <i>Nagmand&acaron;r na sad ang tapulan,</i> The lazy lout is giving orders again. <b>2</b> order, request a serving to be brought. <i>Nakamand&acaron;r na ba mu?</i> Have you ordered? <b>mandasiyun</b> <i>n</i> command. <i>Ang mga ultimu mutúman sa mandasiyun sa kábu,</i> The privates follow the commands of the corporal. <i>a</i> liking to give orders. <i>Mandasiyun kaáyu nang ákung maguwang unyà dì mutábang sa trabáhu,</i> My older brother loves to give orders, and yet he doesn't help with the work.

<p><b>mandasiyun</b> <ix>see</ix> <b>MAND&Acaron;R.</b>

<p><b>manday</b> <i>1</i> it's too late to be of use. <i>Manday human na ang baratilyu,</i> It's too late. The sale is over. <b>1a</b> just when s.t. happens that is too late or inconvenient, s.t. else happens. <i>Manday wà tay kwarta mu puy idaut sa mga bátà,</i> Just when we are broke, the children get sick. <i>Manday human ka nag káun mu pay ipanangpit,</i> You invite me to eat only after you're done? <i>Manday lumalarga na aku mu pay pagkaíla námù,</i> We got acquainted just as we were about to leave town. <b>2 &mdash; untà</b> instead of doing what was expected. <i>Manday untà masukù siya, mipahíyum hinúun,</i> Instead of he getting angry, he smiled. <b>2a</b> although, despite the fact that. <i>Manday daghang anak, gastadur hinúun,</i> Although she has lots of children, she spends money like mad.[+]

<p><b>mandi, manding</b> <i>n</i> a title of address for an elder sister or female relative much older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] call s.o. <i>manding.</i>

<p><b>mandù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] give an order, command. <i>Gimandúan ang mga tríni pagdágan líbut sa kampu,</i> The trainees were ordered to run around the camp. <b>2</b> [A; b6] rule or reign. <i>Siya ang hára nga mimandù sa pangílin,</i> She was the queen that reigned over the fiesta. <b>3</b> [A3; b6] prevail. <i>Human sa makusug nga litì ug bagyu mimandù ang túmang kalínaw,</i> After the fierce thunderstorm, quiet prevailed. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> order, command. <i>Tumána ang ákung mandù,</i> Carry out my order. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> ruler, commander. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> commanding. <i>&lsquo;Lakaw,&rsquo; tíngug ni Aldu nga mamandúun,</i>  <pb n=1369>&lsquo;Go!&rsquo; said Aldo in a commanding voice. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> area over which s.o. rules. <i>Ang kamandúan sa armi pinangulúhan ni Hiniral Riyis,</i> The Army Command is headed by General Reyes.

<p><b>mandunggu</b> <i>n</i> beef tripes. <b>mandunggáda</b> <i>n</i> dish made of blood and the internal organs of beef. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] make, make into a dish of blood and internal organs of beef.

<p><b>manga</b> <ix>always written</ix> <bx>mga.<bx> <b>1</b> particle optionally placed preceding a noun or adjective to indicate plurals, but referring only to things that are not all exactly alike. <i>Ang mga istudiyanti nanambung sa míting,</i> The various students attended the meeting. <i>Mga karáan kining mga libru,</i> These are all old books. <b>1a</b> particle preceding the name for parts of the body of which there are more than one. <i>Sakit ákung mga mata,</i> My eyes hurt. <b>2</b> preceding a form referring to time, measurement: about, approximately. <i>Mga alas utsu,</i> At around eight o'clock. <i>Mupalit kug kutsi, tingáli mga Iníru,</i> I will buy a car, probably around January. <i>Mga duha ka búwan kanhi,</i> About two months ago. <i>Mga duha ka pulgáda,</i> About two inches. <i>Mga dus písus,</i> Around two pesos.

<p><b>mangagat, mangágat</b> <i>n</i> snapper, name given to most species of <i><b>Lutianus.</b></i>

<p><b>mangágaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. annual, stiff-haired herb, much-branched from the base, with small flowers in dense axilliary clusters. The stem yields a white milky sap which is used to cure fevers: <i><b>Euphorbia pilulifera</b></i> and <i><b>hirta.</b></i>

<p><b>mangga</b> <i>n</i> mango: <b><i>Mangifera indica.</i> manggáhun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> plump in cheeks. <b>2</b> having red splotches like some varieties of mangoes. <b>manggahan</b> <i>n</i> mango orchard. <i>v</i> [A13] grow mangoes.

<p><b>manggad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> prized position, treasure, riches, wealth. <i>Náa sa baul ibutang ang ílang manggad,</i> Their treasures are placed inside a trunk. <b>2</b> dry goods. <i>Nabasà ang mga manggad nga íyang gisúruy,</i> The dry goods he was peddling got wet. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c] treasure, hold s.t. dear. <i>Wà sila magmanggad sa kabílin sa ílang katigulángan,</i> They do not value the things their ancestors left them. <i>Manggára (imanggad) ang íyang mga púlung,</i> Treasure his words. <b>2</b> [A] care for with devotion, lavish attention. <i>Way mumanggad sa ákung mga tanum ug mubyáhi ku,</i> No one will tend to my plants if I go on a trip. <b>manggaránun</b> <i>a</i> wealthy, rich. <i>Lagmit sa mga manggaránun mga garbúsu,</i> The rich are usually arrogant.

<p><b>manggas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sleeve, cuff. <i>Íyang gilúkut ang manggas sa íyang kamisadintru,</i> He rolled <pb n=1370>up his shirt sleeves. <b>2</b> bottom of trousers. <i>Bukad ug manggas ang bilbátum,</i> Bell-bottom trousers have wide trouser legs. <i>v</i> [A; a] provide with sleeves or cuffs.

<p><b>manggátus</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>GATUS</sc>.

<p><b>manggi-</b> the futural volitional active form of verbs with a prefix <sc>PANGGI-</sc>. <sc>Past</sc>: <b>nanggi-</b>. <i>Didtu sila sa sála manggidáma,</i> They were in the living room playing checkers.

<p><b>manggilis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet potato with light reddish peelings and white meat. Its rather dry meat makes it good eating.

<p><b>manggi-un(<-)</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i> used with some bases instead of <i>ma-un</i>. <i>Manggihatágun,</i> Generous.

<p><b>manggu</b> <i>n</i> handle of a pick, ax or a similar tool. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] make a handle of this sort.

<p><b>manggulimbaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrimp growing to 1&ndash;1/2" with one claw bigger than the other.

<p><b>manggustan</b> <i>n</i> @mangosteen.

<p><b>manghud</b> <i>n</i> younger brother, sister. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> younger in age than s.o. else. <i>Manghud ka nákug duha ka túig,</i> You are two years younger than I am. <b>2</b> less in intensity. <i>Ang íyang pátid manghud lag diyútay sa pátid sa kabáyung simarun,</i> His kick was just a little less than a wild horse's. <i>Ang ímung tíngug manghud lag diyútay sa hunghung,</i> Your voice is just a little softer than a whisper. <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] have a younger brother or sister. <i>Pilay idad sa nagmanghud ning batáa?</i> How old is the child just before this one? <i>Anus-a man nà siya manghúri?</i> When are you going to have another baby (lit. when is he going to have a younger brother or sister)? <b>ig-</b> <i>n</i> younger brother or sister. <i>Kanang mga gagmayng bátà pulus níya igmanghud,</i> Those little children are all his younger brothers and sisters. <b>kamanghúran, kinamanghúran</b> <i>n</i> youngest child.

<p><b>mangkay</b> <i>n</i> old maid. <i>Dílì tanang mangkay masulub-un,</i> Not all spinsters are lonely. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] become an old maid.

<p><b>mangkimangki</b> <i>n</i> fast dance characterized by monkey-like movements of the hands. <i>v</i> [A] dance the <i>mangkimangki</i>.

<p><b>mangku</b> <i>n</i> s.o. with an arm deformity characterized by being twisted at the elbow. <i>v</i> [B12] have a deformed arm. <i>Namangku siya dihang napíang íyang síku,</i> He got a deformed arm when he broke his elbow.

<p><b>mangkù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small mackerel with a maximum width of 3".

<p><b>mangkumu</b> = [+] <sc>MAGKUNU</sc>.

<p><b>mangliw, mangluy</b> = <sc>AMAMANGLUY</sc>.

<p><b>mangnu, mangnù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b2] @remember. <i>Hatági kug diyútay nga panahun tingálig <pb n=1371>mamangnuan (himangnuan) ku,</i> Give me a little time. Maybe I will remember it. <b>2</b> [AP] cause to notice, be aware of. <i>Ang pagbagting sa rilu mauy nagmangnù (nagpamangnù) nákù nga udtu na,</i> The ringing of the clock reminded me that it was already noon. <b>2a</b> [A] be careful. <i>Magmangnù (magmangnù) ka kanúnay arun dì ka masayup,</i> Be careful so that you won't commit any mistakes. <b>3</b> [A12; b2] come to. <i>Didtu na siya makamangnù sa huspital,</i> He regained consciousness in the hospital. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] advise, instruct s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Gipahimangnúan ku siya nga dílì pasudlag ínit ang pridyidir,</i> I have warned him against putting anything hot into the refrigerator. <i>n</i> @{instruction against}.

<p><b>mangsi</b> = <sc>MALANGSI</sc>.

<p><b>mangtas</b> <i></i>n <b>1</b> cruel, @{fierce beast}. <i>Ang táwung nalúnud gikaun sa usa ka mangtas sa dágat,</i> The drowning man was eaten up by the shark (lit. fierce beast of the sea). <b>2</b> fierce, @heartless in character. <i>Dílì makamaung malúuy sa pubri kanang mangtas nga adunáhan,</i> That heartless rich man does not know pity for the poor. <i>Mangtas nga katalagman,</i> A fearful calamity. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become fierce and devoid of tender feelings.

<p><b>mangù</b> <i>a</i> @brainless, @dull, @stupid. <i>Mangù ka man kahà kay dì ka man kasabut,</i> You must be brainless because you don't understand. <i>v</i> [B23; b6] be, become stupid.

<p><b>Mangyan</b> <i>n</i> non-Christian natives of Mindoro.

<p><b>manhak</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird.

<p><b>mani</b> <i>n</i> @peanuts. <b>&mdash; sa kasuy</b> <i>a</i> the edible nuts of the cashew. <b>manimani</b> <b>1</b> k.o. creeping herb similar to purslane (<i>ulasíman</i>) in appearance, used as pig feed. <b>2</b> k.o. <i>balat</i> found a few inches beneath the sand along the shore. It roughly resembles a peanut.

<p><b>*máni</b> <i>n</i> <b>dinuwin, gud &mdash;</b> during World War II, the name given to the prewar money as opposed to the Japanese <i>kurà</i> and the <i>imirdyinsi máni</i>. <b>girilya &mdash;</b> money issued by the guerilla authorities during the war. <b>imirdyinsi &mdash;</b> the emergency money issued after the outbreak of hostilities and prior to the Japanese occupation. <b>&mdash; urdir</b> @{money order}.

<p><b>manibila</b> = <sc>MANUBÍLA</sc>.

<p><b>mánids</b> <i>v</i> [A] manage a business. <b>-ir(->)</b> @manager. <b>-ir(->) hiniral</b> <i>n</i> @{general manager}. <i>n</i> manager of a business or boxer. <i>v</i> [AB156] be, become manager.

<p><b>maníhu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> drive a motor vehicle. <i>Ambi, aku lay mumaníhu sa dyíp,</i> Let me drive the jeep. <b>2</b> operate or manipulate a contraption. <i>Makamaníhu man nà siyag dagkung  <pb n=1372>makina,</i> He can operate big machines. <b>3</b> manage to make s.t. operate. <i>Manihúa ra ring pawuntin pin ug makahímù ka bag paági,</i> Try fooling around with this fountain pen and see if you can make it write. <b>3a</b> see to it that s.t. gets done. <i>Aku lay mumaníhu arun magmalampúsun ang átung prugráma,</i> I'll see to it that our program is successful. <b>3b</b> manage to do s.t. in a roundabout or underhanded way, where the usual methods won't work. <i>Makamaníhu ka ba pagpasulud nákù sa trabáhu?</i> Can you manage to get me into the job? <b>3c</b> do s.t. surreptitiously or secretly. <i>Lingawun ku ang tindíra manihúa pud ang káha,</i> While I keep the store clerk busy, you take care of the cash register.

<p><b>maniit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible, small crab of shallow waters with a thick shell and strong pincers. <i>a</i> @quarrelsome, esp. said of women.

<p><b>manikin</b> <i>n</i> @mannequin.

<p><b>manikiyur</b> <i>n</i> @{nail polish}. <i>v</i> [A; b] @manicure. <b>-ista</b> <i>n</i> a @manicurist. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a manicurist.

<p><b>Maníla, Manílà<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @Manila, the largest city in the Philippines. <b>&mdash; buy</b> boy who has grown up in Manila and is, therefore, sophisticated. <b>&mdash; pípar</b> @{Manila paper}. <i>v</i> [B1256] be in Manila. <b>manilan-un</b> <i>n</i> from Manila, of the Manila type. <b>manilinyu, -a</b> <i>n</i> one from Manila.

<p><b>manílà<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. striped grouper: <b><i>Grammistes sexlineatus</i></b>.

<p><b>maniN-</b> future volitional prefix of verbs with the base <b>paniN-</b>. (<i>Past</i>: <b>naniN-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>maniN-</b>.) <i>Manimalus giyud ku,</i> I will get revenge. <i>Walà ku manimúhì sa ákung gikuptan,</i> I didn't let go what I was holding on to.

<p><b>manínay</b> <i>n</i> @godmother, the female sponsor at one's wedding, and, by extension, the sponsor at one's baptism, confirmation, or ordination. <i>v</i> [A; a] become one's godmother.

<p><b>maniníyut</b> <i>n</i> @photographer. Word play on <i>maniníyat</i> to make it sound humorously risqué (recalling <i>iyut</i>, the taboo word for sexual intercourse).

<p><b>manínuy</b> <i>n</i> @godfather, the sponsor at one's wedding, and, by extension, at one's baptism, confirmation, or ordination. <i>v</i> [A; a] become one's godfather.

<p><b>manistil</b> = <sc>MISTIL</sc>.

<p><b>maniubra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @maneuver, skillful handling of a vehicle. <b>2</b> s.t. done in a secret and underhanded way. <i>Maniubra sa pulitika,</i> A political maneuver. <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> maneuver s.t. skillfully. <i>Maniubráha (imaniubra) pag-áyu ang sakayan arun dílì masángad,</i> Manipulate <pb n=1373>the boat skillfully so that it won't run aground. <b>2</b> contrive s.t. skillfully in an underhanded way. <i>Nakalusut dáyun ang ákung lún sa bangku kay gimaniubrag maáyu sa ákung amígu,</i> My loan went through OK because my friend maneuvered it skillfully.

<p><b>mankumunidad</b> <i>n</i> @commonwealth. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a commonwealth.

<p><b>maN-l-</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>MAN-r-</sc>, but used only regionally. <b>2</b> affix added to verbs referring to sorcery, praying, and other relations with the supernatural to form nouns which mean one who engages in this activity. <i>Manalagnà,</i> @Seer. <i>Manalabtan,</i> @Leader in prayers. <i>Mamalaktul,</i> One who practices the sorcery called <i>paktul</i>.

<p><b>manlà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible crustacean similar to a prawn but with pincers. It burrows under soft mud in swampy places.

<p><b>manlawud</b> (from <i>lawud</i>) <i>n</i> name given to fishes that are found in deep waters.

<p><b>manlulundà</b> = <sc>MANULUNDA</sc>.

<p><b>manlut<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>BANLUT</sc>.

<p><b>manlut<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, green grasshopper.

<p><b>maN-r-</b> affix added to verb bases to form a noun referring to a person who does [such-and-such] as an occupation. It is most commonly added to roots which form verbs by the addition of paN-. <i>Mangingisdà,</i> @Fisherman. <i>Mananabang,</i> @Midwife. <i>Manunúnud,</i> @Heir.

<p><b>maN-r-ay</b> regional alternant of <i>maN-r-</i>.

<p><b>mansa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stain. <i>Dílì makúhà ang mansa sa tubà,</i> Stains from palm toddy won't come out. <b>2</b> moral blemish, @dishonor. <i>Walay mansa ang ákung ngálan,</i> My name is unsullied. <i>v</i> [A; b25] <b>1</b> @stain. <b>2</b> stain one's honor. <i>Kaputlì nga walà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i> Purity that has not been stained by experience. <b>-du</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @stained. <i>Dì giyud nà siya musul-ub ug sinínà nga mansádu,</i> She never wears stained clothes. <b>2</b> easily stained. <i>Mansádu kaáyu ang sinínà nga putì,</i> A white dress easily gets dirty. <b>mansahun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having stains. <b>2</b> panty stained with blood. <i>Iladlad pag-áyu ang mga mansahun,</i> Bleach those stained panties very well.

<p><b>mansánas</b> <i>n</i> @apple.

<p><b>mansanilya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. perennial aromatic herb cultivated for ornamental and medicinal purposes: <b><i>Chrysanthemum indicum</i></b>.

<p><b>mansanítas</b> <i>n</i> small spreading tree of waste spaces, the bast fibers of which make rope in times of scarcity: <b><i>Muntingia calabura</i></b>.

<p><b>mansibádu</b> <i>n</i> @{common-law couple}. <i>v</i> [B16; a12] live as man and wife without the benefit of a church wedding.

<p><b>mansinítas</b> = <sc>MANSANÍTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mansiyun</b> <i>n</i> @mansion.

<pb n=1374>

<p><b>mansu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> break in a work animal. <i>Si Dyígu ray makamansu ning kabayúa,</i> Only Diego can tame this horse. <b>2</b> @train, @discipline s.o. <i>Namansu sa párì ang walay hibangkaágan nga bátà,</i> The priest trained the child that was innocent of all knowledge. <b>2a</b> give s.o. a lot of work to do. <i>Kining batáa namansu sa mga trabáhu sa balay,</i> The household chores were dumped on the child. <b>mansuhan, mansuhánan</b> <i>n</i> @{training ground}.

<p><b>mantágà</b> = <sc>MANTALÁGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>mantálà</b> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @herald, @announce. <i>Ang tuktugáuk sa sunuy nagmantálà sa umaábut nga kabuntágun,</i> The crowing of the rooster announces the approaching morning. <b>2</b> [A; c] @publish in a magazine or newspaper. <i>Gimantálà sa mantaláan ang umaábut nílang kasal,</i> Their approaching wedding was published in the papers. <b>3</b> [A13] @advertise. <i>Mga lúhà nga nagmantálà sa ákung kapildíhan,</i> Tears that advertised my defeat. <b>-an, paN-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @newspaper, @magazine. <b>2</b> @press. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @publisher. <b>tagapaN-</b> <i>n</i> @{press relations officer}. <b>tig-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> advertising man. <i>Milíhuk ang tigmantálà sa bag-ung kumpaníya,</i> The new company's ad man worked hard. <b>2</b> an @announcer, s.o. or s.t. who or that spreads talk or news around. <i>Kanang bayhána mauy tigmantálà sa tanang mahinabù dinhi,</i> That woman is the person who spreads the gossip of all that is going on around here. <b>3</b> @publisher.

<p><b>mantalágà</b> <i>n</i> @{giant octopus}.

<p><b>mantas</b> = <sc>MANGTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mantiának</b> = <sc>MANTIYÁNAK</sc>.

<p><b>mantíaw</b> interjection showing dismay and displeasure, but to be taken lightly. <i>Mantíaw ning batáa, muulì lag mukáun,</i> My! This child never comes home except to eat.

<p><b>mantíkà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lard, fat from flesh. <b>1a</b> <b>lúpig pay &mdash; kun matúlug</b> tending to sleep deeply (lit. better at sleeping than lard). <b>2</b> @{cooking oil}. <b>bugnaw ug &mdash;</b> derisive reference to one who has indolent habits or is a slowpoke. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] fry in lard. <i>Mantikai ang báhaw,</i> Fry the leftover food. <b>2</b> [A] exude lard or oil. <i>Haúna dáyun kun mumantikà na ang tambuk,</i> Take the pan out of the fire when lard comes out of the pork fat. <b>3</b> [A] for public transportation to move slowly and sluggishly at times that there are few passengers. <i>Wà giyuy pasahíru. Nagmantikà ang trák sa dálan,</i> There are few passengers, and the bus is moving slowly down the street empty. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> food fried in oil. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @greasy. <i>Sud-an nga mantikáun,</i> Greasy food. <b>2</b> @obese. <i>Babáying mantikáun,</i> An obese woman.

<pb n=1375>

<p><b>mantíka dikakaw</b> <i>n</i> @{cocoa butter}.

<p><b>mantikilya</b> <i>n</i> @butter or @margarine. <i>v</i> [A; c] spread butter on s.t.

<p><b>mantil</b> <i>n</i> @tablecloth. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put, use a tablecloth. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a tablecloth.

<p><b>mantilya</b> <i>n</i> veil used to cover a woman's head in church. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] wear a veil. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a veil.

<p><b>mantilyína</b> <i>n</i> @{head covering} for wearing inside a church. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear a head covering in church.

<p><b>mantinil, mantinir</b> <i>v</i> [A3; c] @{make do with}, content oneself with s.t. less than the best. <i>Magmantinil lang tag amútig way bugas,</i> We'll make do with sweet potatoes if there's no rice. <i>Nagmantinil lang siyag pangarga,</i> He just took a temporary job as a stevedore. <i>Mantiniri (mantinihi) lag kawáyan pára halígi ang balay,</i> Just use bamboo for the meantime as a post for the house. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> of makeshift or second choice sort.

<p><b>mantiw</b> <i>a</i> @{tall and lanky}. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become, make lanky.

<p><b>mantiyának</b> <i>n</i> supernatural being which preys on newborn infants. It drinks the blood from childbirth and tries to get at the newborn baby's liver. If the baby dies, he drinks the mother's milk without her knowledge and kills her thereby. It is pictured the size of a baby, with horns and fangs, with long pointed ears, dirty brown in color and angular in features. It has the ability to walk, change its appearance, and make itself invisible.

<p><b>mantsa</b> = <sc>MANSA</sc>.

<p><b>mantsinítas</b> = <sc>MANSANÍTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mantsúsu</b> <i>a</i> easily soiled or stained. <i>Mantsúsu kaáyu ang putì nga bistídu,</i> White clothing gets soiled easily. <i>v</i> [A3P; b6] be, become easily soiled.

<p><b>mánu<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [AC2; a] in ball games, play off one with another to determine who plays first or whose play it is. <i>Átung manúhun ug kinsay mayur,</i> I'll play it off with you to see who starts the game. <i>n</i> act of determining the order of who plays first. <b>manuhan</b> <i>n</i> a line from which s.t. is tossed to determine who is first.

<p><b>mánu<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> title of address for a male older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánu</i>.

<p><b>mánu<sub>3</sub></b> <i>n</i> hand of dried tobacco leaves containing 100 leaves. <i>v</i> [A; a12] bind tobacco leaves into hands.

<p><b>mánu<sub>4</sub></b> = <sc>NGÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>*mánu<sub>5</sub></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DIMÁNU</sc>, <sc>ARMAS DI-</sc>, <sc>BULA DI-</sc>, <sc>BUYNA &mdash;</sc>, <sc>SIGUNDA &mdash;</sc>. <b>manumánu</b> <i>v</i> [AC2; c1] do s.t. by human strength, hands alone. <i>Manumanúhun (imanumánu) lang ni nátug <pb n=1376>bira ang awtu,</i> Let's just push this car by hand. <i>n</i> fight with the hands. [+]

<p><b>manúbig</b> (from <i>túbig</i>) <i>n</i> k.o. crab of swamps and rivers lighter in color than the <i>kágang</i>.

<p><b>manubíla</b> <i>n</i> a mechanism one manipulates to steer: steering wheel, handle bars, etc. <i>v</i> [c1] make a steering mechanism.

<p><b>Manúbu, Manúbù</b> <i>n</i> name of an ethnic group in the mountains of eastern Mindanao.

<p><b>manugimpu, manugimpul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. parasitic plant which attaches itself to trees. It extends out a vine-like trunk which clings and covers the host.

<p><b>manuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chicken. <i>Pinirítung manuk,</i> Fried chicken. <b>1a</b> <b>layù ra sa tinái sa &mdash;</b> <b>1</b>a1 off the subject, not to the point. (Lit. far from the chicken's intestines.) <b>1a2</b> wound of no consequence, harmless scratch. <b>2</b> @gamecock. <b>2a</b> a protegé involved in any race or competition: politics, boxing, love, et al. <i>Napildi ang íyang manuk,</i> His candidate (protegé) was defeated. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] have chicken for one's meal. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make s.o. one's protegé, candidate in a competition. <i>Akuy mumanuk nímu ug dì ba sugut dáyun nang bayhána,</i> If I put you up as a candidate that girl will surely accept you. <i>Midaug siya kay gimanuk mang Sirhing,</i> He got elected because he was a protege of Serging's. <b>-an, -an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{poultry business}. <b>2</b> one who has lots of chickens. <i>v</i> [A1] have a poultry business. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> sleeping half-awake because of insomnia or because of a need to remain conscious. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sleep in such manner. <i>Magminanuk kug kat[=ú]g paghuwat sa pirs trip,</i> I'm just going to nap because I have to make it to the first trip. <b>-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> slightly cross-eyed. <i>Gwápa untang bayhána, ugáling manúkun lang,</i> That girl is beautiful, but she is cross-eyed. <i>n</i> = <sc>LUKGAW</sc>. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> = <sc>-UN(<-)</sc>, <i>a</i>. <i>n</i> the cow-nosed ray, so called because it moves like a bird in the water: <b><i>Rhinoptera javanica</i></b>.

<p><b>manukmánuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wind coming in strong gusts. <b>2</b> weather vane. <i>v</i> [B456; b4] be caught in gusting winds. <i>Piligrung ilawud ug magmanukmánuk ang hángin,</i> It's dangerous to set sail in gusty weather.

<p><b>manukúlu</b> <i>n</i> @monocle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] wear a monocle. <b>2</b> [A12] get a monocle.

<p><b>manul</b> <i>n</i> variety of jasmine of the same species as <i>sampagíta</i> but with double petals and rounded leaves: <b><i>Jasmimum spp.</i></b>

<p><b>manulunda, manulundà</b> <i>n</i> @angel. <i>Daw manulundà ang íyang kaanyag,</i> She has the beauty of an angel.

<p><b>manumbága</b> = <sc>TINUMBÁGA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>TUMBÁGA</sc>.

<p><b>manung, mánung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for an elder brother.  <pb n=1377><b>2</b> title of respect for a man older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánung</i>. <bx>(->)</bx> voc. form. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>nung</bx>.

<p><b>manunggal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree.

<p><b>manunggul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. limestone found in tidal flats, rough and irregular in surface, grey on the outside, but white on the inside. It is used for road surfacing, stone walls, or wherever a porous stone is desirable.

<p><b>mánus</b> = <sc>AMÁNUS</sc>.

<p><b>manútu</b> = <sc>MÁNU<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><b>mánuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for an elder brother or uncle. <b>2</b> expression used by a person who has been defeated in a scuffle to indicate submission. <i>Hala, mánuy arun dílì ku lubáun ning ímung buktun,</i> Go on, say &lsquo;uncle&rsquo; so I won't twist your arm. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánuy</i>. <b>(->)</b> voc. form. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>nuy</bx>.

<p><b>manwal</b> <i>n</i> @manual, @handbook.

<p><b>manya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fit of bad temper. <i>Ang paghilakhílak ánang batáa manya lang nà,</i> That child's persistent crying is just a tantrum. <b>2</b> @caprice, @fancy. <i>Manya lang tung pagpapalit níyag láing sapátus,</i> His asking for another pair of shoes was just out of caprice. <i>a</i> for a horse to tend to balk, move slow. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; c1] throw a @tantrum, act like a spoiled brat. <b>2</b> [A; b6] for a horse to throw a fit or just balk. <i>Dinhà giyud sa kinasang-an ang kabáyù magmanya, ug wà mulíhuk bísag unsáug búnal,</i> The horse balked right in the middle of the crossing and wouldn't move no matter how hard it was whipped. <b>3</b> [A; b5c1] @{move slowly}. <i>Ang mumanya ug tambung sa lamísa dì masalinan,</i> If you dilly-dally in getting to the table, nothing will be left for you.

<p><b>manyak</b> <i>a</i> having an uncontrollable urge to do things, esp. sexual. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become a @maniac. <i>Namanyak siya human makatilaw ug kausa,</i> She became a nympho after her first experience. <i>Ngánung namanyak man siya sa pangáwat nga sapían man?</i> Why did she become a kleptomaniac when she is so rich?

<p><b>manyampuk</b> = <sc>LÁWUNG</sc>.

<p><b>*manyána</b> <b>&mdash; ka lang, ka purin</b> you're out of it, you don't know what's going on. <i>Manyána ka lang (purin). Nagkúyug ímung trátug láin,</i> You don't know what's going on. Your boy friend is going out with other girls.

<p><b>manyang</b> <i>n</i> hard liquor distilled from fermented water obtained from the bud of the nipa palm.

<p><b>mápa</b> <i>n</i> @map. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] plan a course of action, esp. in committing a crime. <i>Nagmápa sila unsáun pagtúlis ang tindáhan,</i> They <pb n=1378>are planning how to rob the store. <b>2</b> [B36; b] for dirt or stains to form a map-like configuration on s.t. <i>Mimápa ang íyang buling sa líug,</i> The dirt formed map-like configurations on his neck. <i>Gimapáhan sa tintà ang ímung bulsa,</i> The ink has formed a map-like configuration on your pocket.

<p><b>máping<sub>1</sub></b> = <sc>MÁPA</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>mapunti</b> = <sc>MALAPUNTI</sc>.

<p><b>Mar.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <ix>Marsu</ix> &lsquo;March&rsquo;.

<p><b>marabal</b> <i>a</i> person or animal that has grown very large. <i>Kadakung marabal sa ilipanti,</i> What a giant that elephant is! <i>Kadakung marabal ning batáa,</i> What a giant this child has gotten to be.

<p><b>marabilyas</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. ornamental bush often called alas kwatru because its flowers open at around four o'clock in the afternoon: <b><i>Mirabilis jalapa</i></b>.

<p><b>marabya</b> = <sc>MURABYA</sc>.

<p><b>maragábit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rice suitable for planting in uplands or in paddies.

<p><b>maragáti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing whereby a line with several hooks baited only with decoys is dragged behind a boat.

<p><b>marákas</b> <i>n</i> @maracas. <i>v</i> [A3; a] play the maracas, make into maracas.

<p><b>maral</b> <i>n</i> k.o. carnivorous civet, dark gray in color, having a very offensive odor.

<p><b>máram</b> = <sc>MÁRANG</sc>.

<p><b>maramà, marámà</b> <i>a</i> @tough, @roughneck. <i>Ang marámà nga táwu ísug ug walay gikahadlúkan,</i> A tough guy is rough and is not afraid of anyone. <i>v</i> [B12] be tough and bad.

<p><b>Maranaw</b> <i>n</i> Lanao Muslims.

<p><b>marang</b> = <sc>MALASUGI</sc>.

<p><b>márang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large fruit tree, bearing fruit similar to the jackfruit (<i>nangkà</i>), but smaller and sweeter. Not commonly cultivated except in Mindanao: <b><i>Artocarpus odoratissima</i></b>.

<p><b>marapíta</b> <i>n</i> variety of banana with thick green peelings, 20 cm. long and <b>5</b> cm. wide coming to what looks like a nipple at the end, eaten cooked.

<p><b>maratun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @marathon race. <b>2</b> any long-distance or endurance contest. <i>v</i> [C2; c1] hold a marathon, compete in a marathon.

<p><b>marbas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. half-woody herb of waste places, with numerous medicinal uses: <b><i>Abutilon indicum</i></b>.

<p><b>margarin, margarína</b> <i>n</i> @margarine. <i>v</i> [A; b] put margarine on s.t.

<p><b>margáti</b> <i>n</i> system of planting rice which has increased the yield, whereby the bed is more carefully prepared and the seedlings planted further apart than is traditionally done.

<pb n=1379>

<p><b>mari</b> = <sc>KUMÁRI</sc>.

<p><b>maribágu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrub of the seashore: <b><i>Hibiscus tiliaceus</i></b>.

<p><b>maribuhuk</b> = <sc>AGÚHU</sc>.

<p><b>mariguld</b> = <sc>AHÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>marihwána</b> <i>n</i> @marijuana.

<p><b>márik</b> <i>n</i> @pickax. <i>v</i> [A; a] do s.t. with a pickax.

<p><b>marika</b> = <sc>UMARI KA</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>ARI</sc>.

<p><b>marína</b> <i>n</i> collar in a woman's dress. <i>Taúri unyag marína ang ákung sinínà,</i> Attach a collar to my dress. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] attach, make a collar. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a collar.

<p><b>mariníra</b> <i>n</i> sailor's collar or the middy collar on a woman's dress. <i>v</i> [A; c] make a middy collar.

<p><b>marínu</b> <i>n</i> @sailor on a merchant ship or in the navy or soldier assigned on a boat. <i>v</i> [B156] be a sailor. <i>Magmarínu kang dagatun ka man?</i> You want to be a sailor even if you easily get seasick? <b>asul &mdash;</b> @{navy blue}. <b>mariníru</b> = <sc>MARÍNU</sc>.

<p><b>maripúsa</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. orchid that has flowers that look like white butterflies, branching in sprays: <b><i>Phalaenopsis amabilis</i></b>.

<p><b>marísi</b> = <sc>MIRÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>Maríya</b> <i>name</i> @Mary. <b>&mdash; klára</b> <b>1</b> character in Rizal's Noli Me Tangere who embodied the traditionally praised feminine virtues of modesty and shyness. <b>2</b> traditional nineteenth century costume with a full skirt and low-cut blouse worn with a triangularly-folded kerchief. <i>v</i> [A; c16] behave like or act the role of Maria Clara. <b>2</b> wear the Maria Clara. <b>&mdash; Santisima</b> <i>n</i> The Blessed Virgin Mary. <b>Santa &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> mildly profane exclamation of discomfiture. <b>buhuk ni &mdash;</b> = <sc>MARIBUHUK</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>. [+]

<p><b>maríya buhuk</b> = <sc>MARIBUHUK</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mariyal</b> = <sc>MÁHA RIYAL</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MÁHA</sc>.

<p><b>marka</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a visible trace or impression on a surface. <i>Dúnay mga marka sa tiil sa kawatan didtu,</i> The burglar left footprints over there. <b>2</b> a @brand, @label or @sign printed, written, or stamped on s.t. <i>Unsay marka ánang ribintadúra?</i> What brand are those fire-*crackers? <b>3</b> grade in school. <i>Pagtuun pag-áyu arun muísa ang marka mu sa klási,</i> Study hard so that your grades will get better. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put a mark on. <i>Kinsay nagmarka áning ákung libru?</i> Who put a mark in my book? <i>Markáhan sa mga inspiktur ang karni únà ibaligyà,</i> The meat inspectors will first stamp a mark on the meat before having it sold. <b>2</b> [A] for a meter to give an indication, read. <i>Nagmarka nag utsinta ang dágan sa awtu,</i> The speedometer already read eighty. <b>3</b> [b] be eyed for a purpose. <pb n=1380><i>Gimarkáhang patyun,</i> Marked for assassination. <i>Sapátus nga gimarkáhan níyang palitun,</i> Shoes which he has long been having his eye on. <b>&mdash; bulkan</b> <i>n</i> twenty-peso bill (slang&mdash;so called from the picture of Mount Mayon that was on the back of the bill in former times). <b>&mdash; dimunyu</b> <i>n</i> strong liquor, so called from a brand of strong liquor which has the picture of the devil on it. <b>&mdash; kalabíra</b> <i>n</i> the skull markings on the container of highly poisonous matter. <i>v</i> [B26N] be dead (slang). <i>Biyà sa ínum arun dì ka mamarka kalabíra ug sayu,</i> Stop drinking or you will die young.

<p><b>markir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> marker or piece of paper to keep track of the lines. <b>2</b> marker put s.w. to indicate a location.

<p><b>markis</b> <i>n</i> @marquis. <i>v</i> [AB156; a12] be made or become a marquis. <b>-a(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @marchioness.

<p><b>*markit</b> <b>may (walay) &mdash;</b> @marriageable (not) marriageable. <i>Minyù nang tawhána, wà na nay markit,</i> That man is already married. He is not available any more. <b>walà ang &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a12] get to be unavailable for marriage or considered so to be.

<p><b>marku<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @{wall stud}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a wall stud.

<p><b>marku<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @breasts. <i>Nagbitay ang mga marku sa babáyi, mu rag búnga sa kapáyas,</i> The woman's breasts are hanging like papayas. <i>v</i> [A; a] nudge s.o. in the breast.

<p><b>markut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] propagate plants by marcotting. <i>n</i> propagation of plants by marcotting.

<p><b>marmul</b> <i>n</i> @marble. <i>Dúwang nga marmul,</i> A marble font. <i>v</i> [A12; a1] have marble, make into marble.

<p><b>marpil</b> <i>n</i> @{false teeth}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] have false teeth. <i>Kinahanglang marpílan ang ímung pangag,</i> You should have a bridge made for your missing tooth. <b>2</b> [A; a] make into false teeth.

<p><b>marsanti</b> = <sc>MARTSANTI</sc>.

<p><b>marsíku</b> = <sc>AMURSÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>marsiyal</b> <i>n</i> @marshall, a military commander. <i>Mag-una ang marsiyal ug may paráda,</i> The marshall leads a parade. <i>v</i> [A; b6] be, become a marshall.

<p><b>Marsu</b> <i>n</i> @March. <ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc> <i>for verb forms</i>.

<p><b>marsútu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. suiting material of high quality (from the brand name Marsotto). <i>v</i> [A1] wear clothing made of this cloth.

<p><b>martabána</b> = <sc>MALTABÁNA</sc>.

<p><b>Marti</b> <i>n</i> @Mars.

<p><b>martilyu</b> <i>n</i> @hammer. <b>&mdash; dikabra</b> <i>n</i> @{claw hammer}. <b>&mdash; dibúla</b> <i>n</i> @{ball peen hammer}. <i>v</i> [A; a1] hammer. <i>Martilyúha ang tabla arun matangtang,</i> Hit the piece of wood with a hammer to get it off.

<pb n=1381>

<p><b>martiníku</b> = <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>martir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @martyr. <b>&mdash; sa Gulgúta</b> @{Jesus Christ}. <b>2</b> one who has suffered like a martyr. <i>Si Lusíla usa ka martir tungud kay gisákit siyag maáyu sa íyang bána,</i> Lucila is a martyr because she is tortured by her husband. <i>v</i> [Ab16] make s.o. suffer like a martyr.

<p><b>Martis</b> <i>n</i> @Tuesday. <i>See</i> <sc>BIRNIS</sc> <i>for verb forms</i>. <b>&mdash; Santu</b> the Tuesday of the Holy Week.

<p><b>*marts</b> <b>un yur &mdash;, sagitsit, gu</b> command in a race: On your mark, get set, go!

<p><b>martsa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @march. <b>1a</b> attend one's graduation exercises. <b>2</b> [A; c1] dance a march or play a march number. <i>n</i> speed of an automotive transmission used at higher speed. <i>Kwarta, kinta martsa,</i> Fourth, fifth gear.

<p><b>martsanti</b> <i>n</i> middleman, one who buys and sells commodities between producers and retailers.

<p><b>martuníku</b> = <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>marubya</b> = <sc>MURABYA</sc>.

<p><b>marúnung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> wise to the ways of the world. <i>Dì nà maílad kay marúnung nà,</i> He knows what's coming off. You can't fool him. <b>2</b> have proficient knowledge or skill in s.t. <i>Katubag si Pidru sa lisud nga pangutána. Marúnung giyud,</i> Peter was able to answer the questions. He certainly is bright. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become sly or crafty. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] do s.t. in a cunning, sly way<corr>.</corr> <i>Minarununga (iminarunung) sad nà pagpaági arun ka makabalus,</i> Be cunning about it so you can get revenge.

<p><b>maruy</b> = <sc>MIRUY</sc>.

<p><b>marúya</b> <i>n</i> name given to a variety of sweets, all of which are formed into rounded patties and fried: <b>1</b> made of ground rice. <b>2</b> made of sliced bananas. ( [**del space?]= <sc>BANGDAYBANGDAY</sc>). <b>3</b> made of shredded sweet potatoes ( [**del space?]= <sc>BITSUBITSU</sc>). <i>v</i> [A; a] make <i>marúya</i>.

<p><b>maryánas</b> = <sc>BIYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>Maryúsip</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>HISUSMARYUSIP</sc>.

<p><b>*mas</b> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [adj.] @more [adj.]. <i>Ang ákung balay mas gamay sa imúha,</i> My house is smaller than your house. <i>Mas maáyu nga pritúhun ni kay sa tanukun,</i> It is much better to fry this than to boil it. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; báli</b> it is better to [do]. <i>Mas báli ihátag kay sa hulaman nga dílì iúlì,</i> I would rather give s.t. away than lend it and not get it back.

<p><b>mása<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] mix solids with a little liquid. <i>Kinsay mumása sa simintu?</i> Who'll mix the cement? <i>Masáha na nang himúung dúnat,</i> Mix the dough for the doughnuts now. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> dough or other mixture of solids with water. <b>2</b> proportions, things that make up a <pb n=1382>mixture. <i>Ang másang gigámit tris dus,</i> They use a mixture in proportions of three to two. <b>masahan</b> <i>n</i> place to mix dough or similar mixtures.

<p><b>mása<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the masses, common people. <b>&mdash; kumun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> common masses. <b>2</b> property owned in common by heirs.

<p><b>masáhi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @massage. <i>Masahían ta nang ímung páang gipamaúlan,</i> Let's massage your sore legs. <i>n</i> @massage. <b>-sta</b> <i>n</i> @masseur, @masseuse. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a masseur.

<p><b>masámung</b> <i>n</i> a man who is married into one's immediate family&mdash;i.e., is married to one's sister or daughter. <i>Masámung si Íki námù kay naminyù siyang Maríyang ákung manghud. Masámung sad siya sa ákung ginikánan,</i> Eke is a <i>masámung</i> to us because he married my sister Maria. He's also my parents' <i>masámung</i>. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] get as a son- or brother-in-law; be, become this relation.

<p><b>másang</b> <i>v</i> [A23; c1] hit s.t. directly with full impact. <i>Mimásang sa ákung nawung ang íyang kúmù,</i> His fist smashed into my face. <i>Imásang (masánga) ang garapun sa pusti,</i> Smash the glass jar against the post.

<p><b>masariyal</b> = <sc>MÁHA RIYAL</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MÁHA</sc>.

<p><b>mási</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet made from mashed taro or ground sticky rice formed into balls with peanuts. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make <i>mási</i>.

<p><b>*masig<sub>1</sub></b> <b>&mdash; ka</b> [<i>noun</i>] each of two or more in a group. <i>Nahiyusan ang masig ka ligid,</i> All of the wheels had a flat tire. <i>Nagdápat ang ílang masig ka áping,</i> Their two cheeks touched.

<p><b>masig<sub>2</sub></b> short for <i>maskin ug</i>. <i>See</i> <sc>BÍSAN</sc>.

<p><b>masimasi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] hurry s.o. to work. <i>Ug náay magmasimasi nátug patrabáhu, dì na hinúun tang katunung,</i> We make mistakes if we are always pressed to hurry our work. <i>Dílì kaáyu haum ang sinínà kay gimasimasi (gimasimasihan) man ang sastri ug pahuman,</i> The dress does not fit well because the dressmaker was pressed to finish it hurriedly. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be pressed to work in a frenzy. <i>Magkamasimasi mig panlútù basta pyista, mau nga dì mi makalingawlíngaw,</i> We get so busy cooking during fiestas we can't enjoy ourselves.

<p><b>masimási</b> <i>n</i> mashi-mashi, a k.o. dance. <i>v</i> [A] dance the mashi-mashi.

<p><b>masin-gan</b> = <sc>MASINGGAN</sc>.

<p><b>masinggan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{machine gun}. <b>2</b> k.o. rapid-firing bamboo popgun. <i>v</i> [A; a12] shoot with a machine gun. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> like a machine gun. <i>Kasábang minasinggan,</i> Scolding like a burst of machine gun fire.

<p><b>masítas</b> <i>n</i> small ornamental plants, a flower <pb n=1383>pot with a plant in it. <b>&mdash; sa ingkantu</b> = <sc>LUKDULUKDU</sc>. <i>v</i> [A12] obtain ornamental plants. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> flower pot. <b>masitíra</b> <i>n</i> flower pot.

<p><b>masiyar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> offer, quote a price in selling. <i>Ug mumasiyar siya sa kálù ug písus, palita,</i> If he offers the hat for a peso, buy it. <b>2</b> bet money on s.t. <i>Áning manúka mumasiyar ku ug mil písus,</i> On this cock I will bet a thousand pesos. <b>masyáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the amount placed as bet. <i>Gatus ang ákung masyáda apan sitinta ray gidáwat,</i> I wanted to bet one hundred, but they only accepted seventy. <b>2</b> total amount of money bet by both sides. <b>3</b> fee paid in playing a set of bowling, tennis, pingpong, and the like. <i>v</i> [A; b] pay this fee. <b>masyadur</b> <i>n</i> the person in cockfighting who calls out bets offered and matches them with other bets.

<p><b>maskáda</b> <i>n</i> bits of tobacco for chewing. <i>v</i> [A; a] chew tobacco.

<p><b>maskara</b> <i>n</i> @mask. <i>v</i> [A; b] wear a mask.

<p><b>maski, maskin</b> = <sc>BÍSAN</sc>.

<p><b>maskipap, maskipaps</b> <i>n</i> k.o. popular dance. <i>v</i> [A] do this dance.

<p><b>maskirid bul</b> <i>n</i> @{masquerade ball}. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] hold a masquerade ball.

<p><b>maskuláda</b> = <sc>MUSKULÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>maskuládu</b> = <sc>MUSKULÁDU</sc>.

<p><b>masputítu, masputítus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance, the mashed potatoes. <i>v</i> [A] do this dance.

<p><b>*mastir</b> <b>&mdash; kátir</b> <i>n</i> @{master cutter} of a tailoring shop. <b>&mdash; ki</b> <i>n</i> @{master key}. <b>&mdash; mayind</b> <i>n</i> @mastermind. <i>v</i> [A; a2] be the mastermind. <i>Pulis ang nagmastirmayind sa túlis,</i> A cop masterminded the robbery.

<p><b>masturbisyun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance wherein both hands are alternately used as if masturbating. <i>v</i> [A] do the masturbation dance.

<p><b>másu</b> <i>n</i> @{sledge hammer}. <i>v</i> [A; a1] do s.t. with, make into a sledge hammer.

<p><b>mas-uk</b> <i>v</i> [B126] @die, be @killed. <i>Nakrás ang ayruplánu ug namas-uk ang pilútu,</i> The plane crashed and the pilot got killed.

<p><b>masun</b> <i>n</i> @freemason. <i>v</i> [B156] become a freemason.

<p><b>masuy</b> <i>n</i> brand of mild liquor taken for medicinal purposes or for pleasure. <b>bínu uy &mdash;</b> = <sc>MASUY</sc>.

<p><b>masyáda</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MASIYAR</sc>.

<p><b>masyádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> being too much of s.t. <i>Kini si Tunyu masyádu na, dúgayng mukáun ug dì pa manghúgas sa plátu,</i> This Tonio is too much; he eats late and doesn't even do the dishes. <b>2</b> how very. <i>Masyádu kamahal!</i> How very expensive!

<p><b>masyadur</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>MASIYAR</sc>.

<p><b>masyaw</b> <i>n</i> @{yellow corn}.

<pb n=1384>

<p><b>mat</b> <i>n</i> @mat for gymnastics.

<p><b>mát</b> <i>n</i> @math, a subject in school.

<p><b>mata</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @eyes. <i>Nagluhang mga mata,</i> Eyes filled with tears. <b>1a</b> <b>tawutáwu sa &mdash;</b> the @pupil of the eyes. <b>2</b> @eyeglasses. <i>Nangítà ku sa ákung mata,</i> I'm looking for my glasses. <b>3</b> eyelets in the shoes. <b>4</b> any growth or structure in some way similar to the eyes. <b>&mdash; sa báling</b> mesh of the net.<b> &mdash; sa baskit</b> mesh of the basket. <b>&mdash; sa lubi</b> two spots in the coconut shell which resemble human eyes. <b>&mdash; sa gábi</b> a button-like outgrowth on the flesh of the taro rootstock. <b>&mdash; sa, ug lumban</b> an eye-like operculum found in turban shells. <b>&mdash; sa pinya</b> eyes of the pineapple, the hollow cavity found on the surface of the flesh of the pineapple fruit which contains seeds. <b>-g tikì</b> <i>n</i> small boil that has come to a head. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; sa ulitáwu (dalága)</b> expression used when playing with children to make them blink their eyes. <b>6</b> = <b>AY<sub>4</sub></b>. <b>7</b> <b>-mbáka</b> = <sc>MAT-AN</sc>, <i>5</i> (lit. cow-eyes). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] hit in the eye. <i>Mat-a pag-igù ang mantágà,</i> Hit the giant octopus on the eyes. <b>2</b> [A; a2b23] wake up, be awake. <i>Ngánung mimata ka mag sayu?</i> Why did you wake up early? <i>Nagmata ka na ba?</i> Are you awake now? <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug buntag</b> [A13] be unaware of what's going on (lit. be awake only in the morning). <i>Nagmata ka lag buntag sa gibúhat sa ímung asáwa,</i> You don't seem to know what's going on with your wife. <b>2b</b> <b>himat-an, hikatulgan</b> have s.t. constantly in one's mind, awake or asleep. <i>Himat-an hikatulgan ku ang ákung prublíma,</i> I am constantly thinking about my problem, day and night. <b>3</b> [b8] for a child to become aware of his surroundings. <i>Ang íyang namat-an nga pagmatutù mau ang kang Iyù Sinun,</i> The first parent he ever knew was Uncle Senon. <b>3a</b> be born s.w. (lit. aware of light). <i>Kining dapíta ang ákung namat-ag maháyag,</i> This is the place I was born. <b>4</b> [A; a12] for fats to liquify. <i>Mumata ang mantíkà kun inítun,</i> The lard will liquify when you heat it. <b>&mdash; pubri</b> <i>a</i> looking down upon others as not one's equal. <i>Mata pubri kaáyu. Dì mutagad sa mga kabus,</i> She looks down on others and pays no attention to the poor. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] estimate a measurement by inspection. <i>Wà nay kinahanglan ug pulgadíra, matáun na lang,</i> You don't need a measuring stick. You can estimate it just by inspection. <b>1a</b> look for s.t. simply with the eyes. <i>Matáun lang ang imbaw,</i> You can find clams by just looking at the water. <b>2</b> [AC; a1] say frankly, tell face to face. <i>Nagkamáta ang duha ka kandidátu sa platapurma,</i>  <pb n=1385>The two candidates had it out face to face on the platform. <i>Matáhun tikag sulti,</i> I'll talk to you frankly. <b>3</b> [A13] for bivalves to be active, as manifested by their being open or bubbling. <i>Magmáta na gáning mga imbaw sayun ra pagtultul,</i> When the clams are active it is easy to locate them. <b>matamata</b> <i>v</i> [a4] <b>1</b> see an illusion, mirage. <i>Gimatamata ug busay ang táwu sa disyirtu,</i> The man in the desert saw a mirage, a waterfall. <b>2</b> be unable to choose or decide wisely because of bedazzlement. <i>Wà giyud ku kapílì. Gimatamata ku sa kadaghang palítun,</i> I wasn't able to choose because there were so many beautiful things to buy. <b>matamáta</b> = <sc>MÁTA</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>hig-</b>/<b>hag-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> wake up accidentally. <i>Nahigmata ku kay sábà,</i> I woke up because it was so noisy. <b>2</b> become aware of s.t. <i>Karun pa ku mahigmata sa íyang kabangis,</i> For the first time I became aware of what a terrible person he was. <b>mat-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having eyes or an eye-like configuration. <b>2</b> artful, wily, cunning. <i>Ang mga Insik mat-an kaáyu sa nigusyu,</i> Chinese are very shrewd in business. <b>3</b> <b>mat-ay balíli, dunggánay gabíi</b> the walls have ears. (Lit. the grass has eyes and the night has ears.) <i>Hináya ang inyung sulti kay mat-an ra bay balíli ug dunggánay gabíi,</i> Talk quietly because the walls have ears. <b>4</b> <b>mat-an pa sa pinya</b> <i>a</i> wily, cunning (having more eyes than a pineapple). <i>Dì ka kaílad ni Dyú kay mat-an pa nà sa pinya,</i> You can't fool Joe. He is very alert. <i>n</i> k.o. fish with huge eyes: <b><i>Selar crumenophthalmos</i></b>. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>AY<sub>4</sub></sc>. <b>tagi-, tagli-, tagu-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. eye infection. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get this infection.

<p><b>matáda</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] divide the meat into portions. <b>2</b> [c16] sell meat by the portion. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>MATÁDA</sc>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>matadíra</b> = <sc>MATADÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>matadíru<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @butcher, one who slaughters and cuts up animals. <b>2</b> butcher who sells meat. <i>v</i> [B156; a] work as a butcher.

<p><b>matadíru<sub>2</sub></b> <i>a</i> @clever, skillfully shrewd in deception and trickery. <i>Ayawg kumpiyansahi nang tawhána kay matadíru kaáyu nà sa baráha,</i> Don't trust that man because he's very cunning in card games. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] become @cunning.

<p><b>matadur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>MATADÍRU<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i></sc>. <b>2</b> @matador. <b>3</b> @killer, @fierce. <i>Manuk nga matadur,</i> A killer gamecock. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a matador.

<p><b>matag</b> <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>word referring to time or day</i>] every. <i>Bisitáhan ku níya matag adlaw,</i> He visits me every day. <b>1b</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>verb base</i>] every time [so-and-so] is done. <i>Usa ka bandihádu ang <pb n=1386>mahurut níya matag káun,</i> Each time he ate he consumed a platter of rice. <b>&mdash; karun ug unyà</b> every now and then. <i>Tan-áwa ang linat-an matag karun ug unyà,</i> Take a look at the stew every now and then. <b>&mdash; usa</b> [<i>dat.</i>] each and every one of [dat.]. <i>Matag usa níla muámut ug singku písus,</i> Each and every one of them will contribute five pesos.

<p><b>matalak-un, matak-ánun</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TAKA</sc>.

<p><b>matang<sub>1</sub></b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>, exclamation.

<p><b>matang<sub>2</sub>, mátang</b> <i>a</i> @kind. <i>Ipiktíbu kining matánga sa midisína,</i> This k.o. medicine is effective. <i>Makasayaw siya sa tanang mátang sa tugtug,</i> She can dance to all kinds of music. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> of the same kind, alike. <i>Túa ra ang íyang kamátang nga mga mugbug lupad,</i> That's where you find her k.o. people, prostitutes.

<p><b>matansa</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @butcher an animal, @slaughter it or cut it up. <i>n</i> fee paid to the market authority for approval to slaughter animals.

<p><b>matansíra, matansíru</b> = <sc>MATADÍRA</sc>, <sc>MATADÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>matay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; b3(1)4(1)c5] @die. <i>Namatay si Simyun sa tísis,</i> Simeon died of tuberculosis. <i>Sakit nga makamatay,</i> A disease that kills. <i>Katigúlang ang íyang namatyan (gikamatyan),</i> He died of old age. <i>Namatyan silag bag-ung inanak,</i> They lost a newly-born child. <i>Ikamatay nákù ang ímung pagbíyà,</i> If you leave me I will die. <b>2</b> [B126] stop functioning. <i>Namatay ang rilu,</i> The watch stopped. <i>Namatay ang makina taliw[=à] sa lawud,</i> The engine went dead in the middle of the sea. <i>Namatay ang sugà pagbutu sa pyús,</i> The light went out when the fuse blew. <b>2a</b> [B12] for the moon to be in its invisible phase. <i>exclamation</i> <b>1</b> of displeasure. <i>Matay! Kabahù,</i> Jesus! What a smell! <i>Matayng mahála,</i> How expensive it is! <b>2</b> swearing as to the truth of s.t. <i>Matay! Ug wà pa ka, patay tà ku run,</i> Believe me. If it hadn't been for you, I'd be dead now. <i>Tinúud lagi nà. Matay pa,</i> It's true, so help me God. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [C2] for people to be killing each other. <i>Nagkamátay lang kanúnay ang mga nanagkaáway didtu sa Byitnam,</i> There is a lot of killing in this war in Vietnam. <i>n</i> mass death, killing on a vast scale. <i>Mahitabù ang kamátay tungud sa típus,</i> Typhus can mean mass death. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] <b>1</b> die for a cause. <i>Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan,</i> He gave his life for his country. <b>1a</b> commit suicide. <i>Magpakamatay siya kun mapakyas,</i> He will kill himself if he fails. <b>2</b> [a12] allow s.o. to die. <i>Pakamatyun lang mi ninyu sa gútum?</i> Will you let us die of <pb n=1387>hunger? <b>3</b> [b6] allow dirt to get deeply engrained. <i>Ang linadlad nga pakamatyan sa sabun kúling maputì,</i> If you bleach clothes under the sun without sprinkling (lit. allow the soap to die in the bleaching), it will never get white. <b>panga-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A23] die (plural). <i>Nangamátay ang ákung mga manuk,</i> My chickens died. <b>sa tanang nanga-</b> more [so-and-so] than anyone else (said of bad traits). <i>Tapulan ka sa tanang nangamátay,</i> You're the laziest of the lazy. <b>hi-un nga búlan</b> <i>n</i> @{last quarter}. <b>bispiras sa hi-un</b> the last day the moon can be seen before the new moon (<i>patay ang búwan</i>). <b>himalatyun</b> <i>a</i> dying. <i>Lúya na kaáyu ang himatyun níyang inahan,</i> His dying mother is already very weak. <i>Himatyun na ang sugà kay wà nay gás,</i> The lamp is dying down because the kerosene is all gone. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> human @corpse. <b>adlaw sa &mdash;</b> @{All Souls' Day}. <b>-in-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b3c] cry loudly, @wail, usually over the dead. <i>Ngánung nagminátay ka man, namatyan ka?</i> Why are you wailing so loud? Did s.o. die? <i>n</i> loud @wailing. <b>ka-</b> expression of strong @anger or @disgust. <i>Kamatay, wà giyud masúd ang tris dà, Damn!</i> The number three ball didn't go into the pocket! <b>kalamatyan, kinamatyan</b> <i>n</i> a fatal spot in the body. <i>Kalamatyan ang kasingkásing,</i> The heart is a fatal spot in the body. <b>ka-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> @death. <i>Kalit nga kamatáyun,</i> @{Sudden death}. <b>kina-un</b> <i>a</i> as if one is about to die. <i>Ngánung kinamatyun nang ímung trabáhu? Wà na bay ugma?</i> Why are you working as if you were going to die? Is there going to be no tomorrow? <b>mag-l-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> about to die. <i>Lawus na ang dáhun sa mangga kay magmalátay man,</i> The leaves on the mango tree are withering because they are dying. [+]

<p><b>máti</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @checkmate in chess. <i>Bantayi ang hárì kay matíhun tikaw,</i> Watch the king because I'm going to checkmate you. <i>n</i> @checkmate.

<p><b>matikmátik</b> <i>v</i> [A3; a12] do s.t. with careful reckoning and planning. <i>Aku lay magmatikmátik ug paági nga mabáwì ang yútà,</i> I will find means to get the lot back. <i>Matikmatíka pag-áyu arun dì ka maalkansi,</i> Figure it carefully so you don't lose.

<p><b>matikud</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] @notice, @{become aware of} s.t. <i>Karun pa aku makamatikud sa dakù kung sayup,</i> I just realized what a big mistake I had made. <i>Wà ku mamatikdi ang ímung pag-abut,</i> I didn't notice your arrival.

<p><b>matimáti</b> @wait for a while. <i>Matimáti úsà kay náa pay átung paabútun,</i> Wait awhile. We are expecting some more people to come. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1] finish slowly. <i>Átù lang ning matimatíhun  <pb n=1388>(imatimáti) pagkáun arun dúgay mahurut,</i> Let us eat it slowly so it can last a little longer. <b>2</b> [A; c1] make do with less equipment, or give s.t. less attention, disregarding the quality of the work. <i>Matimatíhun ku lang nig kinamut ang drúwing bísag way rúlir,</i> I'll just make a rough drawing by hand because there is no ruler.

<p><b>matimátiks</b> <i>n</i> @mathematics.

<p><b>mating</b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>, exclamation of displeasure. <i>Mating bug-áta ning ákung dá!</i> My! How heavy this is!

<p><b>matiriyal<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> particle or trace of truth in feelings and emotion. <i>May matiriyal sa katinuúran ang íyang púlung,</i> His words have some particles of truth. <i>v</i> [A] for feelings and emotions to start developing. <i>Mimatiriyal ang íyang pagdúda dihang kanúnay nang higabin-ag paúlì ang bána,</i> She developed suspicions when her husband started always coming home late nights. <i>Nakamatiriyal ang gugma sa ílang duha ka kasingkásing,</i> Love sprouted in their hearts.

<p><b>matiriyal<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> person's capability for a certain position. <i>Maáyu siyang matiriyal pagkaprisidinti,</i> He is a good presidential timber.

<p><b>matirniti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{maternity clinic}. <b>2</b> @{maternity dress}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; c16] wear, make a maternity dress. <b>2</b> [B1256] wind up in the maternity clinic&mdash;i.e. have a baby out of wedlock. <i>Mamatirniti ka giyung bayhána kag mag-unauna ka sa mga láki,</i> You'll end up in a maternity clinic if you are forward with men. <b>&mdash; lib</b> @{maternity leave}.

<p><b>matiryális</b> <i>n</i> materials used for constructing. <b>&mdash; pwirtis</b> <b>1</b> durable materials for construction. <b>2</b> for a woman to be well-built. <i>Maáyung pangasaw-un kay matiryális pwirtis,</i> She's a good prospect because she is well built.

<p><b>matmat<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @unravel, undo s.t. all tangled. <i>Aku ray mumatmat sa hílu nga nagubut,</i> I'll unravel the tangled thread. <b>2</b> [A; c] recount a story, events. <i>Ákung imatmat sa husgádu ang nahitabù,</i> I'll tell the judge what happened.

<p><b>matmat<sub>2</sub></b> = <sc>ALIMATMAT</sc>.

<p><b>matngà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] be hit full in the area intended with a big impact. <i>Namatngà pagkaigù ang langgam sa batu,</i> The stone hit the bird squarely. a hit square. <i>Matngà giyud pagkaigù ang lansang nga gimartilyu,</i> He hit the nail square on the head.

<p><b>matngun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b(1)] take care of by observing precautions, handle carefully. <i>Magmatngun ka arun dì ka madisgrasya,</i> Be careful so you don't meet an accident. <b>2</b> [A1; b(1)] pay attention, heed. <i>Wà mu <pb n=1389>magmatngun sa ákung tambag, ha?</i> You didn't heed my advice, did you? <b>3</b> [A12; b8] be aware of, realize. <i>Nakamatngun siya nga walà na ang íyang pitáka,</i> He noticed that his wallet was gone. <i>Namatngunan na níya nga walà diay salà ang bátà,</i> He has just realized that the child was innocent. <b>&mdash; ug buut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b8] be aware of, reach the age of reason. <i>Dinhi na ku ning baláya sukad ku makamatngun ug buut,</i> I have lived in this house since I saw light. <b>2</b> [A12] regain consciousness. <i>Didtu na siya makamatngun ug buut sa uspital,</i> He regained consciousness in the hospital. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @advise and @admonish. <i>Pahitmangúni siya báhin sa íyang pag-inum,</i> Advise him about his drinking. <i>n</i> @admonishment. <b>kahi-</b> <i>n</i> @awareness of s.t.

<p><b>matráka</b> <i>n</i> grager, used as a noisemaker in the procession on Good Friday. <b>matrakáhun ug bàbà</b> talking like a machine gun. <i>Báhu ning tabian matrakáhun ug bàbà,</i> This gossip! Her mouth goes like a machine gun.

<p><b>matrídu</b> = <sc>MATRÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>matrikula</b> <i>n</i> school fees. <i>v</i> [c6] pay @tuition.

<p><b>matrimunyal</b> <i>n</i> {double bed}.

<p><b>matríra</b> = <sc>MATRÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>matríru</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @wise to the ways of the world. <i>Dì na nà siya matuntu kay matríru,</i> You can't pull a fast one on him. He's wise to the ways of the world. <b>2</b> @wise, @tricky. <i>Matríru ang mga matansíru kay dílì hustu ang timbangan,</i> The meat sellers are very tricky because the scales are not honest. <b>3</b> for game to be shy and not easily approached by persons. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become wise to the ways of the world or tricky.

<p><b>matris<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> @uterus.

<p><b>matris<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @mattress.

<p><b>matrúna</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the head @maid in a wealthy household, the one in charge of running the household. <b>2</b> @housemother of a women's dormitory or boarding house. <i>a</i> @matronly-looking, old, and slightly stout. <i>v</i> [B136; c16] be, become a house mother or head maid; get to be @matronly in appearance.

<p><b>mats</b> <i>v</i> [B; c6] for wearing apparel to match. <i>Mimats ang ímung sapátus sa pitáka,</i> Your shoes match your purse.

<p><b>matsa</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c1] do s.t. in a relaxed and unhurried manner. <i>Ayaw matsaha (imatsa) nang ímung linaktan ug sugúun ka,</i> Don't take it so slow when you are told to do s.t.

<p><b>matsing<sub>1</sub></b> <i>n</i> small monkey. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> like a monkey in appearance. <b>2</b> @mischievous. <i>Matsing kaáyu ning batáa u, lukup lag panúngug sa uban,</i> This child is mischievous. He keeps on teasing the others. <i>v</i> [B145] look ugly <pb n=1390>like a monkey. <i>Nagmatsing lang nang dagway mu,</i> You have a monkey's face.

<p><b>matsing<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> matching type exam.

<p><b>matsuy</b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>, exclamation of displeasure. <i>Matsuy ning batáa, langas kaáyu,</i> My! What a nuisance this child is.

<p><b>mátud</b> [<i>gen.</i>] according to what [so-and-so] says. <i>Mátud níya, maáyu kanang klási,</i> According to him that is a good kind. <i>&lsquo;Adtu na ta,&rsquo; mátud níya,</i> He said, &lsquo;Let's go.&rsquo;

<p><b>matulì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>balat</i> (sea cucumber).

<p><b>matúmat</b> <i>v</i> [C; bc3] engage in a friendly, casual chat. <i>Dì ku makigmatúmat nímug dúgay kay nagdalì ku,</i> I can't chat with you for long because I'm in a hurry.

<p><b>matun</b> <i>n</i> @ruffian, @{tough guy}. <i>Daghang istambay nga matun sa piyir,</i> There are many ruffians hanging around at the pier. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become a tough guy.

<p><b>matutù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> take care of a child. <i>Kinsay nagmatutù sa ímung anak samtang walà ka?</i> Who took care of your child when you were gone? <b>2</b> @rear, @{bring up}. <i>Akuy nagmatutù kaníla hangtud sa ílang pagkaulitáwu,</i> I reared the boys until they were teen-agers. <b>2a</b> [A; b5c] inculcate with s.t. <i>Matutua (matutui) ang mga tinun-an sa nasyunalismu,</i> Teach the pupils nationalism. <b>3</b> nurture a feeling. <i>May gimatutù siyang pagdumut álang kanákù,</i> He is nursing a grudge against me. <i>n</i> @care, @guidance. <i>Matutù sa inahan,</i> Mother's guidance.

<p><b>matyag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] @observe, watch to @see. <i>Siyay mumatyag sa kamaisan nga dì kan-un sa mga amù,</i> He will watch the cornfield to see if the monkeys are getting at it. <i>Nakamatyag ka nag táwung giupirahan?</i> Have you ever watched a person being operated on? see also <sc>BATYAG</sc>.

<p><b>matyanak</b> = <sc>MANTIYÁNAK</sc>.

<p><b>mau</b> <ix>short forms</ix>: <bx>mu, maw</bx> is, are, was, were. <b>1a</b> preceding subject in sentences with nominal predicates. <i>Kadtung íyang gisulti mau ang nakapalágut nákù,</i> What he said was what angered me. <i>Ang kangihit sa tambal muy nakapataas sa prisyu,</i> The scarcity of medicine is what made prices high. <b>1b</b> <i>with no subject</i>: it's [predicate] which is the one. <i>Nagtúu giyud aku nga kanà mau,</i> I believe that that is the one. <i>Ug mau kanà, ang útang maimpas sunud búlan,</i> If that is the case, the debt will be paid off next month. <i>Ang ímung tubag dílì mau,</i> Your answer is not right. <b>&mdash; bítaw</b> that is so. <i>Kadakung trabáhu nu? Mau bítaw,</i> What a big job, isn't it? It certainly is! <b>&mdash; kaáyu</b> the very one. <i>Mau ni? Mau kaáyu,</i> Is this the <pb n=1391>one? Yes it is the very one. <b>&mdash; gayud</b> that is the way it is. <i>Mau giyud nà siya ug mahubug,</i> That is the way he is when drunk. <b>&mdash; gihápun</b> it's (it was) as usual. <i>Ang atup sa ámung balay mau gihápun, nípà,</i> The roof of our house is the usual kind&mdash;of palm thatch. <b>&mdash; lang</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁMANG</sc>, <i>2c1</i>. <b>&mdash; kini ug kini, &mdash; kanà ug kanà</b> <i>in giving excuses, reasons or alibis</i>: it is because of this, because of that. <b>1c</b> <i>in response to a question as to the identification of s.t.</i>: yes, it is the one. <i>Mau ba ni ang imúha? Dílì mau,</i> Is this yours? No, that is not the one. <i>Si Pidru na ba nà? Mau na,</i> Is that Peter now? It's him all right. <b>1d</b> yes, that is the case, said esp. in response to negative comments. <i>&lsquo;Kusug siyang manghulam mu rag kamaung muúlì.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;She likes to borrow things as if she knew enough to return them (which she doesn't).&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, that is so.&rsquo; <b>1e</b> <b>&mdash; nang, &mdash; na sa ginháwang [<i>verb</i>]</b> doing one's best, tiring oneself out doing [verb]. <i>Mau na nga pangítà nákù, (or mau na sa ginháwa nákung pangítà) ug sápì apan kamu nagsígi lang ug ínum,</i> I wear myself out earning money, and all you do is drink. <b>1f</b> <b>&mdash; ra pud núun</b> that's the only thing that's wrong with it. <i>&lsquo;Dì man pasulayan sa dì pa mapalit.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau ra pud núun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;It's good, but you can't try it out before you buy it.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;That's the only thing that is wrong with it.&rsquo; <b>1g</b> <b>-y (ang) pag-[<i>verb</i>], i-[<i>verb</i>]</b> is the time [so-and-so] happens. <i>Mauy ipanangpit níya manday human na,</i> He calls you after he's finished eating. <i>Pag-adtu níya mau say pag-adtu nákù,</i> When he went was the time I went, too. <b>1g1</b> <b>&mdash; pa</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>2e</i>, <i>8b</i>. <b>1h</b> <b>&mdash; nga [<i>noun</i>]</b> the aforementioned, said. <i>Wà ku makaila sa maung táwu,</i> I don't know that particular person. <b>1i</b> <b>&mdash; pay ... &mdash; pay</b> even though [such-and-such] is the case, [so-and-so] is true of the same person anyway. <i>Mu pay mangáyù mu pay mangísug,</i> He asks a favor, and yet he has the nerve to get angry. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nga [<i>sentence</i>]</b> therefore, consequently. <i>Sígi kung praktis, mau nà nga maáyu kung mubayli,</i> I always practice. That's why I dance well. <i>Sa ámù kanúnay nga mangísug si Máma. Mau gánì nga dílì layhang mupaúlì si Pápa,</i> Mother is always angry at home. That is why even Dad doesn't like to go home. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ra</b> no more, that's all. <i>&lsquo;Adúna pay láin?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau ra,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is there any more?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;That's all there is.&rsquo; <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ra nga</b> the same. <i>Mau rang klasíha nà. Purus tagdiyis,</i> Those are of the same class. They are all ten cents apiece. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; ra ug</b> <b>4a</b> it seems. <i>Mu rag láin nà,</i> It seems to be a different one. <pb n=1392><b>4b</b> rather. <i>Mu rag giuhaw ku,</i> I am rather thirsty. <i>Ang báhù dílì mangga, mau rag nangkà hinúun,</i> The smell is not that of the mango, it is rather like that of the jackfruit. <i>Mau ra ug nahuwasan na ku sa ákung kakulbà,</i> I feel a bit relieved from my fright. <b>4c</b> as if [so-and-so] were the case. <i>Nagpaduludiskursu siya mu rag si kinsa,</i> He took it upon himself to give a speech as though he were s.o. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] turn out to be correct. <i>Gisulaysuláyan kug duut ang usa sa mga timbri, namau bayà,</i> I tried pressing one of the buttons at random. It happened to be the right one. <b>2</b> [A13] be the same. <i>Bísan ug atbang ta sa pulitika magmau lang gihápun ang átung pagbinatiay,</i> Though we are opponents in politics, our feelings towards each other are still the same. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b8] know how to do s.t. <i>Makamau kang musulat?</i> Do you know how to write? <i>Wà kuy nakamauhan,</i> I don't know anything. <b>di-(<-)</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DIMÁU</sc>. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] pretend, consider s.t. as right or the one. <i>Ngánung pakamauhun man nímu nga ang ákù man ni?</i> Why do you insist this is the very one, when it is mine? <b>maumáu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> make temporary repairs by just trying things out, make do with s.t. less than what is really needed. <i>Ug maáyu kang mumaumáu ug áyu, mudágan giyud nang mutúra,</i> If you are good at fiddling around with your motorcycle, at least it will run. <b>2</b> fabricate, make s.t. not real. <i>Sa mga kumunista ang Diyus usa ka maumáu,</i> To the communists, God is a figment of man's imagination. <b>maumáu na sa ginháwa</b> = <sc>MAU</sc>, <i>1e</i>.

<p><b>ma-un(<-)</b> affix added to verbs and adjectives to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;having the characteristic of doing or becoming [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Malipáyun</i>, @Happy. <i>Maluyáhung tíngug,</i> In a weak voice. <i>Mapangilyupúung naghangyù sa Prisidinti nga luwasun ang íyang anak,</i> With pleas she implored the President to spare her son. <i>Mapasalígung balità,</i> Reassuring news. <i>Matuhùtuhúun,</i> @Gullible, @superstitious.

<p><b>maung</b> <i>n</i> blue @denim. <i>v</i> [A12] wear blue denim.

<p><b>mauraúra</b> somewhat similar. <i>Ang ibid mauraúra sa halu ug hitsúra, gáling may sílik lang sa líug,</i> The agamid lizard is somewhat similar to the monitor lizard, only it has a crest on its neck.

<p><b>maut</b> <i>a</i> @hypocrite, one who puts up a praise-*worthy, but completely false front. <i>Pagkamaut bayhána, manugilun nga hingatag piru labihan diayng hakúga,</i> What a hypocrite <pb n=1393>that woman is. She claims to be generous but actually she is a terrible tightwad. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become a hypocrite. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @hypocritical. <i>v</i> [A13; c1] act hypocritically. <i>Ayawg minaut kay nasáyud mi sa ímung pagkatáwu,</i> Don't be hypocritical. We know what you are.

<p><b>máut</b> (from <i>daut</i>) <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{not good}, @substandard in quality. <i>Máut ning ripridyiritúra kay dì muayis,</i> This refrigerator is no good because it won't produce ice. <b>2</b> @unfavorable condition or state. <i>Mubagyu tingáli kay máut man ang panahun,</i> There seems to be a typhoon because the weather is bad. <b>3</b> @unpleasant in ways. <i>Máut ug batásan,</i> @Disagreeable in his ways. <i>Máut bayà nang mamalíkas,</i> It's bad to curse. <b>4</b> unpleasant in looks, smell, and the like. <i>Máut kaáyu árung bahúa uy,</i> What a bad smell! <i>v</i> [B; a1] be, become bad, ugly, unpleasant to the senses, etc. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @badness, @ugliness, @defectiveness.

<p><b>mawu-</b> <i>for words with</i> <b>mawu-</b> <ix>see also</ix> <sc>MALU-</sc>.

<p><b>mawungmáwung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] cover up, hide one's feeling. <i>Dúnay mga táwu nga makamau giyung mumawungmáwung sa ílang kaguul,</i> There are people who know how to hide their grief.

<p><b>mawutpis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> boxer's @mouthpiece. <i>v</i> [A13] wear a mouthpiece.

<p><b>maw-uy</b> <i>a</i> @{arousing pity}, touching. <i>Maw-uy kaáyung tan-áwun ang bátà nga makalilímus,</i> The child beggar was a pitiful sight.

<p><b>may</b> <b>1</b> there is, are, was<corr>,</corr> were. <i>May tulu ka táwung nangítà nímu,</i> There were three persons looking for you. <i>Kun may isúgù,</i> At your service (lit. if there is an order to give). <b>2</b> @have. <i>May sigarilyu ka dihà?</i> Do you have any cigarettes on you? <b>2a</b> <b>may pagka-</b> be somewhat. <i>May pagkatabian ni si Áning,</i> Aning is somewhat talkative. <b>2b</b> <b>&mdash; idad</b> be of age. <i>May idad na siya ug makabutar na,</i> He is already of age and he can vote now. <b>3</b> near a place. <i>Didtu siya magtindug sa may pultahan,</i> He was standing there by the door. <b>4</b> some, [so-and-so] long ago, <i>May duha ka búwan na níyang trabáhu dinhi,</i> He's been working here for about two months now. <b>4a</b> <b>&mdash; mga</b> at about [such-and-such] a time. <i>Didtu siya sa may mga alas kwatru,</i> He was there at around four. <b>&mdash; láin pa</b> yes, of course (is there anything or anyone else). <i>Siya giyuy nagkúhà sa libru kay siya ra may dihà. May láin pa?</i> He must have taken the book because he was the only one there. Who else could have? <i>Kan-un giyud ni níya. May láin pa?</i> He'll eat this, don't worry. Would he fail to do so!

<pb n=1394>

<p><b>máya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small bird found in rice fields, the chestnut mannikin: <b><i>Lonchura malacca</i></b>. <b>&mdash; nga bungul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. brown-colored <i>maya</i> which is believed to be deaf because it is not easily disturbed or afraid of noise.

<p><b>mayà</b> <i>a</i> @happy and @cheerful in appearance. <i>v</i> [B4; c16] be, become @gay. <i>Pagmayà kay adlaw nímu run,</i> Be cheerful. Today is your birthday. <i>Imayà (mayaa) nang inyung panagway kay litratúhan na ta,</i> Put on a cheerful expression because they are going to take our picture. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @cheerfulness.

<p><b>mayáman</b> <i>a</i> @rich, @moneyed (colloquial). <i>Mayáman kaáyu ku run kay bag-ung swildu,</i> I am very rich now because I have just received my pay.

<p><b>mayamaya, mayamáya</b> <i>n</i> red snapper, <b><i>Lutianus spp.</i></b>

<p><b>mayánà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental herbs with variously colored green and purple leaves which have medicinal uses: <b><i>Coleus blumei</i></b>.

<p><b>mayáus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. thin-bodied slipmouth (<i>palutput</i>).

<p><b>maybay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, light green, cooking banana, only a little smaller than the <i>tinduk</i>.

<p><b>mayhu, mayhum</b> (from <i>humay</i>) <i>n</i> rice (humorous slang). <i>Ayay! Mayhum diay karun ang átung kan-un,</i> Goody. We are going to have rice today. <i>v</i> [A1] eat rice as one's staple.

<p><b>mayik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @microphone. <b>2</b> @{sound system} with an amplifier. <i>Mayik ang ílang gigámit sa bayli kay mahal ang musiku,</i> They used a sound system for the dance because an orchestra would be too expensive. <i>v</i> [A1] use a mike or sound system.

<p><b>maylab</b> <i>n</i> one's @sweetheart or loved one (humorous). <i>Ímu nang maylab ang ímung kúyug?</i> Was that your sweetheart that was with you?

<p><b>maymay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @advise, @admonish s.o. in a nice tone. <i>Maymáyi siyang dílì na maghubughúbug,</i> Advise and encourage him not to get drunk any more. <i>n</i> @advice or @admonition. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] listen to advice. <i>Ang táwung dì magpamaymay háyan mahitabù,</i> A person who does not listen to advice is likely to get into trouble. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @admonishing.

<p><b>maynur</b> <i>n</i> one's minor subject. <i>v</i> [A; a2] take as one's minor.

<p><b>maypáy</b> = <sc>MALAYPÁLAY</sc>.

<p><b>mayrun</b> <i>a</i> @{having money} (colloquial). <i>Mayrun tingáli ni dà, kay nangimbitar man,</i> You're probably in the clover today since you're inviting us.

<p><b>maytir</b> <i>n</i> @{miter joint}. <b>&mdash; baks</b> @{miter box}.

<p><b>Máyu</b> <i>n</i> @May. <ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc> <i>for verb forms</i>: <b>plúris di &mdash;</b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PLÚRIS</sc>.

<pb n=1395>

<p><b>mayukmuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{powdery soil}. <i>Ayaw pagdúlà sa mayukmuk kay abug kaáyu,</i> Don't play with the powdery soil because it's very dusty. <b>1a</b> @{river sediment}. <i>Ang mayukmuk sa subà nadala sa bahà,</i> The river sediment was carried off by the flood. <b>2</b> small fry: little children, anything small or lower in class. <i>Basta mga mayukmuk lagmit way púl,</i> If you are a small fry you have no influence. <i>Nangat[=ú]g na ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The kids are all asleep now. <i>v</i> [b2] get powdered soil on one. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get powdery soil all over one.

<p><b>máyung</b> <i>a</i> for the weather to be somewhat @overcast, @sunless. <i>v</i> [B] be, become overcast. <i>Maáyu rung ipasíyu sa bátà kay nagmáyung na,</i> It's a fine time to take the baby for a stroll. It is a little overcast.

<p><b>may-ung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C3; c6] have a @resemblance, make things @{look alike}. <i>Magkamay-ung ug panagway ang mag-ágaw,</i> The cousins have a resemblance. <i>Imay-ung ang ímung nawung sa kang Dulpi nga kataw-anan,</i> Make your face like Dolphy's funny face. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] recognize, be familiar to s.o. <i>Mu rag nakamay-ung ku sa ági niíning sulat,</i> I think I recognize the handwriting in this letter. <b>3</b> [A12; b2] notice s.t. <i>Namay-ungan níya nga may táwung misulud,</i> She noticed a man entering. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. which resembles s.t. else. <i>Kamay-ung ang ímung panagway ánang artistáha,</i> You have a resemblance to that actor.

<p><b>mayunis, mayunísa</b> <i>n</i> @mayonnaise. <i>v</i> [b] put, use mayonnaise.

<p><b>mayur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> municipal or city @mayor. <b>2</b> in a game, the one who has the first play or turn. <b>3</b> @{major chord or key}. <i>Du mayur,</i> C major. <b>&mdash; diidad</b> <i>a</i> of legal age. <i>v</i> [B256] be of legal age. <b>&mdash; dúma</b> = <sc>&mdash; DÚMU</sc> (female). <b>&mdash; dúmu</b> @majordomo of an estate, hotel, ship, or other large institutions requiring a chief steward. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become the majordomo. <i>For other phrases with</i> <b>mayur</b> <i>as the first word, see the entry under the second word.</i> <i>v</i> [A3; a2] be, become mayor. <i>Si Talyuks ang átung mayurun sa syudad,</i> Let's make Talyux the mayor in the city. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2C2; ac3] play off against one another to see who goes first in the game. <i>Átung mayúrun kun kinsay muúnag lábay sa búla,</i> Let's play it off to determine who will be the first to throw the ball.

<p><b>mayuríya</b> <i>n</i> @majority of a body convened. <i>Mibutar ang mayuríya sa musiyun,</i> The majority voted for the motion. <i>Si Usminya nakakuhag singkuwinta bútus nga mayuríya,</i> Osmeña got a majority of fifty votes. <i>v</i> [A] <pb n=1396>get a majority of votes.

<p><b>mayurù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white upland rice with long and slender grains, harvested after six months.

<p><b>mayuskula</b> <i>n</i> majuscule.

<p><b>mga</b> abbreviation for <sc>MANGA</sc>.

<p><b>mi<sub>1</sub></b> <ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMI</sc>.

<p><b>mi<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> the note mi. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> E major. <b>&mdash; minur</b> E minor.

<p><b>m[=ì]</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> representation for the sound made by a goat. <b>2</b> @goat (slang). <i>Mukáun kug m[=ì] piru dì kug aw-aw,</i> I eat goat meat but not dog.

<p><b>mi-</b> past punctual active verbal prefix. <ix>see</ix> <sc>MU-</sc>.

<p><b>míd</b> <i>n</i> a female household help. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a maid. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] hire oneself out as a maid.

<p><b>mídal</b> <i>n</i> @medal. <i>Nakadawat ug mídal ang balidikturyan,</i> The valedictorian was awarded a medal. <i>v</i> [A12; b(1)] receive a medal. <b>bruns, guld, silbir &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> bronze, gold, silver medal. <b>-ist(->)</b> <i>n</i> gold, bronze, silver @medalist. <i>v</i> [B1256] become a medal awardee.

<p><b>midalya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> medal. <b>2</b> religious medal worn by devotees. <b>2a</b> dried <i>palutput</i>, so called because of its resemblance to a medal (humorous). <i>v</i> [A1; c] wear, win, award s.o. a medal.

<p><b>midalyun</b> <i>n</i> @medallion. <i>v</i> [A1; c] wear, put a medallion on s.o.

<p><b>mídi</b> <i>n</i> @{midi skirt}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] wear a midi dress. <b>2</b> [c1] make a midi dress.

<p><b>midída</b> <i>n</i> cloth tape measure used in dress-*making.

<p><b>midikal</b> <i>a</i> connected with the practice or study of medicine.

<p><b>midikilyu</b> = <sc>MIRIKU</sc>.

<p><b>midiku</b> <i>n</i> @physician, @doctor. <b>&mdash; ligal</b> <i>n</i> legal physician who certifies the medical facts surrounding a death.

<p><b>mid-in dyapan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shoddy in workmanship or quality. <b>2</b> @weakling, @sickly. <i>Tambuk tan-áwun apan mid-in dyapan. Dalì rang mayasmì,</i> She looks fat, but she is weak. She easily gets sick.

<p><b>midisin</b> <i>n</i> course of medicine. <b>&mdash; kabinit</b> <i>n</i> @{medicine cabinet}. <b>&mdash; bag</b> <i>n</i> @{medicine bag}.

<p><b>midisína</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @medicine. <i>Pagpalit ug midisína sa butíka,</i> Buy medicine at the drugstore. <b>2</b> chemical for the processing of s.t. <i>Midisína sa kulung,</i> Chemicals for a permanent wave. <b>3</b> course in medical school.

<p><b>midiya</b> @half. <i>Midiya pulgáda ang gibag-un,</i> Half an inch thick. <i>Midiya ang bátà sa sinihan,</i> A child pays half fare in the movies. <i>Midiya kílu nga karni,</i> Half a kilo of meat. i- thirty minutes after the hour. <i>Alas dus imidiya,</i> Two thirty. <i>v</i> [B56] get to be to <pb n=1397>the half hour. <i>&lsquo;Alas singku na ba?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mumidiya na hinúun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is it already five o'clock?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It is nearly five thirty.&rsquo; <b>&mdash; agwa</b> <i>n</i> a roof projecting beyond the wall at a downward angle over the whole length or width of a house, or just over a window or door. <i>v</i> [A; b] add an overhang. <b>&mdash; bangku</b> <i>n</i> wind coming at a forty-five degree angle from directly in back of a boat. <i>Pabur gihápun sa sakayan ang hángin nga midiya bangku,</i> A wind which comes from the back but at an angle is still favorable to sailboats. <b>&mdash; díya</b> <i>n</i> half day. <i>Midiya díya ra ang trabáhu basta Sabadu,</i> We work half-day on Saturdays. <i>v</i> [A; c16] do s.t. half-day. <b>&mdash; nutsi</b> <i>n</i> the dinner served at midnight on Christmas. <b>&mdash; pága</b> <i>n</i> @{half fare}. <b>&mdash; táwu</b> <i>n</i> s.o. who is extraordinarily short. <b>midiyamidiya</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] do s.t. in a moderate way. <i>Midiyamidiyáhi lang pagpadágan arun dílì ta madisgrasya,</i> Drive at a moderate rate so we don't meet an accident. <i>Midiyamidiyáhi ug hugut ang twirka arun dílì maharùs,</i> Tighten the screw moderately so it won't get stripped. <b>midiyahan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a fifth, so called because it contains half the volume of a bottle which formerly was in wide use. <b>2</b> small train station between two main stations where a train can stop to take on or discharge passengers or freight but cannot issue tickets. [+]

<p><b>midiyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @socks, @stockings. <b>2</b> @condom (humorous euphemism). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put on, wear socks, stockings. <b>2</b> [A; c] use a condom. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> for an animal to have a different color on its legs so that it looks as if it is wearing stockings.

<p><b>midiyu &mdash;</b> [adj.] @somewhat, @{a little bit}. <i>Midiyu hubug ka dà,</i> You're a little bit drunk. <i>Midiyu língin ang purma,</i> It is somewhat roundish in shape.

<p><b>midiyus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @makeshift or @temporary means to accomplish s.t. <i>Pangitáan ta nig midiyus arun muand&acaron;r ang makina,</i> Let's look for some temporary way we can get this engine to run. <b>2</b> means of resolving a problem. <i>Kadtung íyang labad sa úlu midiyus lang tu sa paglikay sa trabáhu,</i> His headache was just an excuse to get out of doing work. <i>Wà kuy láing midiyus gawas sa pagpangútang,</i> I have no other way of resolving the problem except borrowing money. <i>Ang labing maáyung midiyus sa ímung ubu,</i> The best remedy for your cough.

<p><b>midtik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Medical Technology course. <i>Ang íyang gikúhà midtik,</i> He is taking up Med. Tech. <b>2</b> @housemaid (humorous and depreciatory word play on míd). <i>Naíbug ka ánang midtik man nà?</i> Did you fall for that girl <pb n=1398>when she's just a maid?

<p><b>midtirm</b> <i>n</i> @{mid-term exams}. <i>v</i> [A1] have the mid-term exams.

<p><b>mid-ub-ánur</b> <i>n</i> @{maid of honor} at a wedding. <i>v</i> [A12; c6] be, become the maid of honor.

<p><b>mídul kard</b> <i>n</i> name given to the pieces in mahjong from <b>2</b> through <b>8</b> as compared to the tirminális (1 and 9).

<p><b>midwayip</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> trained @midwife. <b>2</b> course of midwifery. <b>3</b> maid (humorous, deprecatory word play on míd). <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a midwife. <b>-iri</b> <i>n</i> @midwifery.

<p><b>midyur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> major in the military or police force. <b>2</b> major field of study in an academic course. <i>Sáyans ang íyang midyur,</i> She is a science major. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a12] be, make s.o. a major. <b>2</b> [A; c16] take a certain course as one's major.

<p><b>migkap</b> <i>v</i> [B146] be @{slothfully inactive}. <i>Ang táwung magmigkap dì madúgay niíning trabahúa,</i> A person who loafs will not last long on this job.

<p><b>migkat</b> = <sc>MIGKAP</sc>.

<p><b>migrupunu</b> = <sc>MIKRUPUNU</sc>.

<p><b>mihihì</b> = <sc>BAHÌHÌ</sc>.

<p><b>mihìmihì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for a child to whimper or cry softly from discomfort or naughtiness. <i>Nagmihìmihì na sab si Bíbi. Katulgun tingáli,</i> Baby is whimpering again. She probably is sleepy. <i>Ayaw kug mihìmihii ug dúna kay pangayúun,</i> Don't whimper at me if you want s.t.

<p><b>mihit</b> = <sc>NIHIT</sc>.

<p><b>mihúras</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @improvements. <i>Ang Mayur walay nahímung mihúras hangtud karun,</i> The Mayor has not made any improvements to this day. <i>Kining mangga usa lang sa daghang mihúras niíning yutáa,</i> This mango tree is only one of the many improvements on this land. <b>1a</b> favor of a financial nature. <i>Unsang mga mihúras ang ímung nahátag kaníya nga dakù man siyag útang buut nímu?</i> What have you done for him that he owes you a debt of gratitude? <b>2</b> @virtues, @{good qualities}. <i>Unsa may mga mihúras niánang bayhána nga nakagustu man ka níya?</i> What are the good qualities that made you like that woman? <b>3</b> @assets. <i>Kanang magtiayúna dakù kaáyug mihúras nga ikabílin sa ílang mga anak,</i> That couple has a large number of possessions to leave their children. <i>v</i> [A12] make improvements. <i>Dílì makamihúras kaaáyu ang mayur sa íyang lungsud kun kuntra partídu siya sa administrasiyun,</i> A town mayor can make few improvements in his municipality if he is not aligned with the administration.

<p><b>mík</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a Mexican copper coin worth one-hundredth  <pb n=1399>of the Mexican peso. Formerly circulated, it is now used only as offerings to spirits or used topically for medicinal purposes. <b>2</b> @{fake coin}.

<p><b>mikà</b> <i>a</i> @idle, not doing things. <i>v</i> [B145] <b>1</b> sit around lazily. <i>Magmikà lang ang babáying way hibangkaágan sa panimalay,</i> A girl who knows nothing about household work sits around lazily. <b>2</b> go about in low spirits. <i>Unsay nahitabù nga nagmikà ka man?</i> What happened that you are in such low spirits?

<p><b>mikanikal</b> <i>n</i> course of mechanic engineering. <b>&mdash; indyinir</b> <i>n</i> @{mechanical engineer}. <b>&mdash; indyiníring</b> = <sc>MIKANIKAL</sc>.

<p><b>mikaniku</b> <i>n</i> @mechanic. <i>v</i> [B156; a2b8] be, become a mechanic.

<p><b>mikanismu</b> <i>n</i> @mechanism, the workings of a machine.

<p><b>mik-ap<sub>1</sub></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make up a lacking subject or part of a subject in school. <i>Kinahángang mik-ápan ang absin,</i> You have to make up your absences.

<p><b>mik-ap<sub>2</sub></b> <i>n</i> @make-up, @cosmetics. <i>Bagà siyag mik-ap,</i> She had heavy make-up on. <i>v</i> [A; b] put make-up on s.o. or on oneself.

<p><b>míki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. large yellow noodle made of wheat flour. <b>2</b> dish made of such noodles. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] make, make into noodles. <b>2</b> [A13; b(1)] prepare a dish of noodles.

<p><b>mikrubyu</b> <i>n</i> @microbes.

<p><b>mikru krúm</b> <i>n</i> @mercurochrome.

<p><b>mikrupunu</b> <i>n</i> @microphone. <i>v</i> [A13] use a microphone.

<p><b>mikruskupyu</b> <i>n</i> @microscope. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] look at with a microscope.

<p><b>mikskla</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @mix solids or liquids. <i>Mikskláha ang pintal ug túbig,</i> Mix the paint and the water together. <i>Mikskláhi ug pulug ang minása nga simintu,</i> Mix dye into the cement mixture. <b>1a</b> [A1] prepare s.t. that has to be mixed. <i>Nakamikskla ka na ba ug ilimnun?</i> Have you prepared (mixed) the drinks? <i>n</i> @mixture, proportion in which s.t. is mixed. <i>Ispísung mikskla,</i> A thick mixture.

<p><b>mil</b> <i>n</i> @thousand. <i>Ang balur sa ákung awtu trayinta mil,</i> My car is worth thirty thousand pesos. <i>v</i> <ix>see</ix> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>. <b>&mdash; únu, dusyintus, etc.</b> One thousand one, two, etc. <b>milmíl</b> <i>a</i> valued in thousands. <i>Dì ku makaabut pagpalit niánang mga milmíl nga kantidad,</i> I cannot afford to buy things that cost in three figures.

<p><b>míl</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] post in the mail. <i>Imíl ba kining suwáta?</i> Shall I mail this letter?

<p><b>milagru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @miracle. <i>Milagru ray makaluwas sa masakitun,</i> Only a miracle can save the sick man. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> it would be a miracle if [so-and-so] were to happen. <i>Milagrug mutúgut  <pb n=1400>si Pápa mu pagpatan-aw nímug sini,</i> It will be a snowy day in May before your father will let you go to the show. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] perform miracles. <b>2</b> [A1] do s.t. which is completely unexpected. <i>Nagmilagru uruyng tihik nga nanghátag,</i> A miracle! The cheapskate is giving out money. <b>-sa</b> = <sc>MILAGRÚSU</sc> (female). <b>-su</b> <i>a</i> @miraculous. <i>Ang milagrúsung birhin sa Patíma,</i> The miraculous Virgin of Fatima. <i>v</i> [B1246] be, become miraculous.

<p><b>milàmilà</b> <i>v</i> [B146; a4] for eyes to be watery, full of pus. <i>Gimilàmilà (nagmilàmilà) ang mata sa palahúbug,</i> The drunkard's eyes are all watery.

<p><b>milangkuliya, milangkulíya</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a4] feel @melancholic, esp. from homesickness. <i>Gimilangkulíya nà siya sa íyang trátung túa sa Amirika,</i> She is homesick for her boy friend in the States.

<p><b>miláru</b> <i>n</i> thick syrup from brown sugar. <i>v</i> [A; a] make thick brown-sugar syrup.

<p><b>milbaks</b> <i>n</i> @mailbox.

<p><b>milibiki</b> <i>n</i> brace, a carpentry tool used for boring wood. <i>v</i> [A; a12] use this tool.

<p><b>miligrámu</b> <i>n</i> @milligram.

<p><b>miliguy</b> = <sc>KAWATKAWAT</sc>. <ix>see</ix> <sc>KÁWAT</sc>.

<p><b>milimitru</b> <i>n</i> @millimeter.

<p><b>milindris</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental shrub with white, pink, or purplish flowers growing on small terminal panicles: <b><i>Lagerstroemia indica</i></b>.

<p><b>milisya</b> <i>n</i> collective term for Filipino recruits during World War I. <b>-nu</b> <i>n</i> member of the Filipino militia. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] become a member of the Philippine militia.

<p><b>militar</b> <i>n</i> the @military, @soldiers. <i>Nanghilabut ang militar sa iliksiyun,</i> The military interfered with the election. <b>pwirsa &mdash;</b> @{military force}. <b>salúdu &mdash;</b> @{military salute}. <b>upisyal &mdash;</b> @{military officials}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] wear a military uniform. <i>Gimilitaran ang sundálung namatay,</i> The soldier who died was dressed in a military uniform. <b>2</b> [B1356; c1] become a military man. <b>3</b> [c1] be done in a military manner. <i>Militarun (imilitar) ang kasal sa ákung manghud kay níbi may íyang pamanhunun,</i> My younger sister will be married in a military wedding because the groom is a navy man.

<p><b>*milk</b> <b>pawdir &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{powdered milk}.

<p><b>milma</b>b <i>v</i> [B; a] @lessen, @{slow down}. <i>Bísan tigúlang na siya wà mumilma ang íyang kusug,</i> Even when he was old, his strength did not decrease. <i>Nagmilma na ang dágan sa trák,</i> The truck slowed down. <i>Hilánat ang nakamilma sa íyang gána sa pagkáun,</i> Fever has lessened his appetite. <i>Milmáhan ta ang paggastugastu,</i> We will go slow on spending. <pb n=1401><i>Unsa kahay imilma ku niánang íyang pagkahimabáyi,</i> I wonder what I can do to discourage his amorous activities.


</body>
<back id=backmatter>


<divGen id=toc type=toc>

<divGen type=Colophon>


</text>
</TEI.2>
