

<!-- Starting midway p 880 -->

drinking the wine of love.

<b>saruk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a wide-brimmed hat with a sharp
metal point at the center, tapering to the
brim, usually made of buri palm leaves and
black climbing fern (<hi>nítù</hi>), used as a protection
against the sun. <b>2</b> hat in general
(usage in areas which call the sun hat <hi>salukut</hi>).
<hi>v</hi> [A; a] @wear, make into a hat of this
sort. <b>saruksaruk</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. edible limpet, from
1"-3", so called because of its resemblance
to the <hi>saruk</hi>.

<b>sarul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> hoe with a short handle used for
breaking up soil. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] loosen the
soil with a hoe.

<b>sarul<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <b>TSARUL</b>.

<b>sarung,</b> <b>sárung</b> <hi>n</hi> @sarong, worn by Muslim
men and women. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] wear, make into
a sarong.

<b>sarunsuy</b> <hi>n</hi> sweet made of white rice cake
wrapped in banana leaves, steamed and
shaped like a canoe. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] make into
<hi>sarunsuy</hi>.

<b>sása</b> = <b>SALASA<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>.

<b>sàsà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12| crack and flatten bamboo
stems so as to make them resemble and
serve as boards for walling. <hi>n</hi> sheet of cracked
and flattened bamboo for walling, or the
walling of this sort of material.

<b>sasag</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. exterior walling made of bamboo
slats and palm thatch, nailed to wooden
studs.

<b>sásing</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. edible, white worm of the mud
near the seashore.

<b>sasirdúti</b> <hi>n</hi> priests of other religions than the
Roman Catholic. <b>labaw nga</b> &mdash; @{High Priest}.
<hi>v</hi> [A13; a12P] be a priest.

<b>sastri</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @seamstress, dressmaker. <b>2</b> @tailor. <hi>v</hi>
[B156] be, become a tailor or seamstress.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] go into the tailoring or
dressmaking business. <b>-ríya</b> <hi>n</hi> dress or tailor
shop.

<b>sátan</b> = <b>SALÁTAN</b>.

<b>satanas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @Satan. <b>2</b> @devil.

<b>satgan</b> <hi>n</hi> @shotgun. <hi>v</hi> [a12] fire at with a shotgun.

<b>satin</b> <hi>n</hi> @satin.

<b>satispitsu</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> satisfied with the way s.o. does
s.t. <hi>Satispitsu ku sa íyang ági</hi>, I'm satisfied
with his work. <b>2</b> satisfied, convinced by an
argument or explanation. <hi>v</hi> [B12] be satisfied
with work or an explanation. <hi>Kadtung
íyang iksplikasiyun walà makasatispitsu
(makapasatispitsu) ug diyútay kanákù</hi>, His
explanation did not convince me a bit.

<b>satsat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12; c1] @slurp, eat or drink in a
noisy sucking way. <b>2</b> [A; c3] @gossip, engage
in idle talk. <hi>Ayawg isatsat ang átung gisultíhan</hi>,
Don't go blabbing around what we
<pb n=881>have been talking about. <hi>n</hi> idle talk, esp.
@gossip. <b>-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [c] engage in idle gossip. <b>-íra</b> <hi>n</hi>
@gossip.

<b>sátu,</b> <b>sátum</b> <hi>n</hi> children's game played with
two sticks, in which one is flipped in the air
and struck a distance. The one who hits his
stick the shortest way is punished by being
made to run a certain distance shouting <hi>sátu</hi>
(<hi>sátum</hi>). <hi>v</hi> [A1; b6] play this game.

<b>satung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; c1] <b>1</b> rush off and do s.t. <hi>Napáwul
ang ránir nga misatung ug dágan sa
wà pay butu</hi>, The runner who started before
the go-signal was declared foul. <b>2</b> do
s.t. straight without pausing for breath. <hi>Dì
ku makasatung ug inum ug usa ka búl tubà</hi>,
I cannot drink a whole jarful of palm toddy
straight.

<b>sátung</b> (from <hi>satung</hi>) = <b>SÁTU</b>.

<b>saud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B256C3; c] press s.t. hard against
s.t. <hi>Walà nay kasibúgan ang lamísa kay misaud
(nasaud) nas bungbung</hi>, You can't
move the table any further because it is already
pressed against the wall. <hi>Nagsáud ang
katri ug ang síya</hi>, The bed and the chair are
pressed against each other. <b>2</b> [A; c] knock
s.t. hard against s.t. <hi>Ákung gisaud ang lubi
sa batu</hi>, I knocked the coconut against the
stone.

<b>saudsaud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] do, occur one after another
in rapid succession. <hi>Misaudsaud ang
dimálas níya</hi>, He was hit by bad luck without
letup. <hi>Labihang nakasaudsaud sa mga
pumapálit niánang buntag</hi>, The buyers came
steadily all morning long.

<b>saudsáud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23C] be on friendly, cooperative
terms, help each other when help is
needed. <hi>Nagsaudsáud ang mga managsúun
sa buluhatun sa balay</hi>, The brothers and sisters
cooperated with one another in doing
the household chores.

<b>sáug</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1] drag a boat ashore or back
to the sea. <hi>Tabangan tag sáug ang barútu</hi>,
Let's all help drag the boat ashore. <b>2</b> [A3; a12]
@move, carry away by an emotion (literary).
<hi>Gisáug siya sa usa ka tawhánung pagbátì</hi>,
She was carried away by an ecstatic
feeling. <b>-l-an(->)</b>, <b>-l-anan</b> n place where one
usually drags a boat in going ashore or back
to the sea.

<b>sául</b> <hi>n</hi> highest point of pain in labor when
the baby is expelled. <hi>v</hi> [b4] reach this point
in labor. <hi>Gisaúlan na ang babáying nagbatì</hi>,
The woman in labor is in acute pain now.

<b>saulì</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>ULÌ</b>.

<b>saulu</b> = <b>SAG-ULU</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>ÚLU</b>.

<b>saúlug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] celebrate the memory of
some event. <hi>Dílì ku musaúlug sa ákung adlaw</hi>,
I will not celebrate my birthday. <hi>Magsaúlug 
mi sa ámung pyista rung dúsi ning
bulána</hi>, We will celebrate our fiesta on the
twelfth of this month. <b>n</b> @celebration.

<b>sáun</b> short for <b>unsáun</b>. see <b>UNSA</b>.

<b>saup<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @sharecropper. <hi>Dílì ni ákung yútà, saup
lang ku dinhi</hi>, This is not my land. I'm
just a sharecropper here. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] work a
piece of land by sharecropping. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2;
b6] earn one's living as a sharecropper. <hi>n</hi>
@sharecropping.

<b>saup<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [b4] be in an angry mood. <hi>Gisaupan
ku kay gilabtan ag ákung butang</hi>, I was in a
bad mood because s.o. touched my things.

<b>sáup</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] for a liquid or water level to
be above the surface of s.t. <hi>Kinahanglang
musáup ang túbig sa karning lat-an</hi>, If you
boil meat, the water level should be above
it. <hi>Gisaúpan (gisáup) sa túbig ang dakung
pátag</hi>, The vast plain was flooded with water.
<b>2</b> [A; b(1)] flood with feelings[** suggest adding "@overwhelm" if possible]. <hi>Misáup
sa íyang dughan ang hilabihang kamíngaw</hi>,
She was overwhelmed with feelings of loneliness.
<hi>Gútum nga misáup sa balángay</hi>, A
famine which overwhelmed the village.

<b>sáuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] for all sorts of people to move
around in all directions in a certain place.
<b>sauysáuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] go back and forth over
a place. <hi>May táwu nga misauysáuy tungud
sa átù</hi>, There was a man who was going to
and fro in front of our house. <hi>Mga mamistáhay
nga nagsauysáuy sa kadalánan angat sa
pyista</hi>, People passing back and forth in
front of our house during the fiesta.

<b>sawa</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{large snake}. <b>2</b> @python. <b>&mdash; nga baksan</b>
banded python.

<b>saw-a</b> <hi>a</hi> feeling uneasy when one stops doing
things he usually does. <hi>Saw-a kaáyu ug
dì ku maggirdul</hi>, I feel uneasy if I don't wear
a girdle. <hi>v</hi> [b4] get this feeling of uneasiness.

<b>sawad</b> <hi>n</hi> the measure of corn (usually basketful)
left over after the crop has been divided.
<hi>Sawad nga tungà sa bukag</hi>, A remainder
of half a basketful after the crop had been
divided.

<b>sawáli</b> = <b>AMÁKAN</b>.

<b>sáwan</b> <hi>a</hi> giving a dizzying feeling from looking
down from heights. <hi>Sáwan ang walug gíkan
sa tumuy sa búkid</hi>, It is dizzying to look
down into the valley from the top of the
mountain. n intense fear or shock. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [b4]
get a dizzy feeling. <b>2</b> [A123P; a4] be intensely
frightened. <hi>Gisáwan ku sa butu sa
bumba</hi>, I was terribly frightened by the explosion
of the bomb. <b>-anan(->)</b> a prone to
intense fright.

<b>sáwang</b> <hi>n</hi> @{town proper}, the part of the town
where the people are concentrated.

<b>sawásid</b> = <b>SALUWÁSID</b>.

<pb n=882>

<b>saway</b> <hi>v</hi> 1 [AN; a1c] speak disparagingly about
s.t., mention bad qualities of s.t. <hi>Kadtung
magsaway áning panaptúna dílì swítu
sa panaptun</hi>, Whoever speaks disparagingly
of this cloth doesn't know anything about
cloth. <hi>Walà kuy ikasaway (ikapanaway) sa
íyang panglíhuk</hi>, I have nothing to criticize
about his deportment. <b>2</b> [A12] @disapprove,
consider s.t. improper. <hi>Nakasaway ku sa íyang
gisulti sa íyang diskursu</hi>, I think it's
improper what he said in his speech. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[B1256; b4(1)] @disapprove, consider s.t. as
improper. <hi>Unsa may nahinawayan nímu níya?</hi>
What do you disapprove of in him?
<b>-l-un(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> worthy of condemnation. <hi>Ang
paglibak usa ka búhat nga salawáyun</hi>, Speaking
ill of others is a contemptible act. <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
become contemptible. <b>hiN-un(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi>
fond of criticizing or disparaging. <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
be given to criticizing.

<b>sawi</b> <hi>a</hi> giving a feeling of uneasiness when s.t.
is new. <hi>Sawi kaáyu ang antiyúhus basta bag-u
pa</hi>, One doesn't feel comfortable wearing
glasses for the first time. <hi>v</hi> [b6] feel uncomfortable
with s.t. new. <hi>Sawihan kaáyu kus
marpil</hi>, I don't feel comfortable with my
new false teeth.

<b>saw-id</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23C3; a2] join two strands by
winding them around each other, hook the
fingers together. <hi>'Matay pa, tinúud lagi,' nanumpà
siya nga gisaw-id ang duha ka tudlù</hi>,
'So help me it's true,' she insisted, hooking
her two fingers together. <hi>Nagkasaw-id ang
hukut sa duha ka bábuy</hi>, The tether ropes
of the two pigs got tangled up in each other.

<b>sáwil</b> <hi>n</hi> children's game wherein objects are
placed in a circle for the players to hit out
of the circle using a piece designated to hit
other pieces. <hi>v</hi> [AC; a2] play this game.

<b>sawilik</b> (from <hi>wilik</hi>) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; c] @flick s.t. away
with the back of the hand. <hi>Ayaw ug isawilik
ang úlud diri nákù</hi>, Do not flick the
worm off on me. <b>2</b> [c] push or move aside
or away, as if flicking. <hi>Isawilik lang unyà
ang hábul ug galhaan ka</hi>, Just push the blanket
aside if you feel warm.

<b>saw-it</b> <hi>v</hi> [b8] be caught or snagged by s.t.
Walà masaw-iti ang kabli sa sáhid, The grapnel
did not catch on the cable.

<b>sawpan</b> = <b>SALÚPAN</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>SALUP</b>.

<b>sawsaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; c6] dunk s.t. into s.t. else
and shake it around. <hi>Kinsay nagsawsaw áring
túbig nga nahúgaw man?</hi> Who dunked
(his hand) into the water (and swished it around)?
It is dirty. <hi>Karing sukáa sawsáwi
sa sinugbang bábuy</hi>, Dunk your roast pork
and swish it around in this vinegar. <hi>Isawsaw
ang nuug sa túbig</hi>, Swish the rag around in
the water.

<b>sawsyung</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a player who inadvertently
gets more cards than the required number.
<b>2</b> a player who announces mahjong on a
false alarm, penalized if the other players
have displayed their hands.

<b>sawu-</b> for words with <hi>sawu-</hi> see also <b>SALU-</b>.

<b>sáwun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> sound system of a movie. <hi>Kláru
ug sáwun nang sinihána</hi>, That movie house
has a clear sound system. <b>2</b> <b>way &mdash;</b> saying
nothing in a group conversation (humorous).
<hi>Tíngug bay, wà ka may sáwun dihà</hi>,
Say s.t., pal. You haven't said a word yet.
<b>—- sirbis</b>, <b>sistim</b> @{public address system}.

<b>sáwut</b> = <b>SUR</b>.

<b>sawuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] feel weak and sickly from
bad health. <hi>Magsawuy giyud ku ug musakit
ang ákung ngípun</hi>, I feel ill whenever I have
a toothache.

<b>sáya</b> <hi>n</hi> skirt of the native dress, usually ankle-length
and generally having a tail, wound
around and tucked in front. <b>di-</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>ABAB</b>
<hi>and</hi> <b>ANDIR</b>. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] wear, make into a
skirt of this sort. <hi>Ayaw kadispirádu. Siya
ra bay nagsáya?</hi> Don't get desperate. Is she
the only fish in the sea (lit. only one wearing
a skirt)? <b>&mdash; sa búnga</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] for trees
to bear fruit in abundance. <hi>Nagsáya sa búnga
ang mangga nga maáyung pagkagalam</hi>,
A mango tree that is well taken care of
bears fruit in abundance.

<b>sayà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> being in a merry or joyful mood.
<hi>Ang dag-an sayag panagway</hi>, The winner
had a joyful expression on his face. <b>2</b> engendering
good feeling. <hi>Hílum ug sayà nga
kabuntágun</hi>, Quiet and pleasant morning. <hi>v</hi>
[A13B1] be, make merry. <hi>Magsayà ta kay
Pasku run</hi>, Let's be merry because it's
Christmas. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @mirth, @gaiety. <b>ka-an(<-)</b>, <b>kasayáhan</b>
<hi>n</hi> @entertainment. <hi>Kasayáhan (kasayáan)
sa karnabal</hi>, Entertainments at the
carnival. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> gay and lighthearted.

<b>*sayà<hi rend=sub>2</hi> pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] leave, @expose s.t. carelessly
for others to be able to see or touch
it. <hi>Nagpasayà silag háluk sa parki</hi>, They
kissed openly for all the world to see in the
park. <hi>Ayaw ipasayà nang sundang sa agiánan</hi>,
Don't just leave that bolo carelessly in
the passageway. <b>sayàsayà</b> <hi>v</hi> [c6] expose s.t.
carelessly or for public view. <hi>Musamut ang
ímung ubu kun isayàsayà mu ang ímung láwas
sa tun-ug</hi>, Your cold will persist if you
expose yourself in the draft.

<b>say-a<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1256; b6] for s.t. that fell to be
caught atop s.t. <hi>Nasay-a sa sandayung ang
búlang gilábay</hi>, The ball that was tossed
landed in the gutter. <b>2</b> [A; b8] @{wind up s.w.}
<hi>Ang táwung maantígung mutrabáhu makakaun 
<pb n=883>bisag ása musay-a</hi>, A man who knows
how to work can eat wherever he winds up.
<b>2a</b> stay in s.o. else's home temporarily. <hi>Makasay-a
kahà mi sa inyu ug magabin-an mi?</hi>
Can we stay at your place if we are overtaken
by night? <hi>Kamurúsan ang nasay-ahan
sa mga bakwit</hi>, The evacuees happened to
stay among the Muslims. <b>say-asay-a</b> = <b>SAY-A</b>,
<hi>2</hi>, <hi>2a</hi>.

<b>say-a<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)6; b6] @overflow from a container.
<hi>Nagsay-a ang isdà sa íyang sakayan</hi>,
His boat is filled to overflowing with his
catch. <hi>Napáwung ang káyu sa abúhan nga
gisay-ahan sa sabaw</hi>, The fire went out
when the soup spilled over on it.

<b>sayab</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. disease affecting chicks making
them droop. <hi>v</hi> [A13P] get this sickness.
<b>Magsayab ang mga pisù basta tinginit</b>, During
the hot season the wings of newly-hatched
chicks droop.

<b>sayad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] for the hem of a dress or
robe to touch the ground. <hi>Ang sidsid sa sutána
mauy únang mabuling kay mau may
musayad sa yútà</hi>, The hem of a soutane gets
dirty first because that is what touches the
ground.

<b>sayag</b> <hi>a</hi> cheerful or bright of countenance:
bright and clear. <hi>Sayag na ang lángit kay gipálid
na man ang dag-um</hi>, The heavens are
bright again because the clouds have been
blown away. <hi>v</hi> [B; c1] be, become cheerful
or bright and clear. <hi>Musayag ang dagway sa
mga maistra ug muabut ang tsíki</hi>, The teachers
get a bright look on their faces when
their paychecks arrive. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> having a happy
and cheerful countenance or disposition.

<b>sayal</b> <hi>n</hi> @skirt. <hi>Sayal ug bláwus ang íyang sinínà</hi>,
She wore a skirt and blouse. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c]
wear a skirt. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a skirt.

<b>sáyang</b> expression of regret at s.t. wasted or
an opportunity missed. <hi>Sáyang lang ang ákung
pag-anhi kay wà mi magkítà</hi>, I came
for nothing because we didn't meet. <hi>Sáyang
wà nákù madá ang ákung báting sut. Mangalígù
tà ta</hi>, Too bad I didn't bring my bathing
suit. We could have gone swimming. <hi>v</hi> [B1256;
b6] for s.t. to be a waste, consider it so.

<b>sáyans</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @science. <hi>Tungud sa sáyans nakaabut
ang táwu sa búlan</hi>, Science has allowed
man to reach the moon. <b>2</b> @{science course}.

<b>sayantis</b>, <b>sayantist</b> <hi>n</hi> @scientist. <hi>v</hi> [B156] be,
become a scientist.

<b>sayaw</b> <hi>n</hi> general name for @swifts: <hi>C<b>ollocalia
spp.</b></hi> <b>-in-</b> <hi>a</hi> having the form of a swift in
flight or of its tail.

<b>sáyaw</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC; c] @dance. <hi>Dì ku makigsáyaw
ug hubug</hi>, I won't dance with a drunk. <hi>Isáyaw
ta kag makaduha ug mamaúlì na ta</hi>, I
will dance with you twice, and then we'll
go home. <b>2</b> [A23] by extension, any movement
likened to dancing. <hi>Misáyaw ang mga
dáhun sa hángin</hi>, The leaves danced in the
breeze. <b>&mdash; ang kasingkásing</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] be
gladdened (literary). <hi>Misáyaw ang íyang kasingkásing
dihang gisugut siya</hi>, His heart
danced when the girl accepted him. <hi>n</hi> @dance.
<hi>Sáyaw sa mga karáan</hi>, The dance of the old-*timers.
<hi>Pistang way sáyaw</hi>, A fiesta with no
dance. <b>sayawsáyaw</b> <hi>n</hi> dance presentation,
esp. folk dance. <b>-an(->)</b>, <b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{dance hall},
@{dance floor}. <b>hiN-(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> fond of dancing. <b>-in-[**space?]an(->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> way of dancing. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @dancers.

<b>sayhanan</b> <hi>n</hi> @rack or anything flat on to which
or over which s.t. can be laid. <hi>Gibutang níya
ang awditíbu sa sayhanan</hi>, She put the
receiver down on the cradle.

<b>sayid-áwut</b> <hi>n</hi> in volleyball, the situation
where the serving team makes an error and
loses the serve.

<b>sayid bit</b> <hi>n</hi> an extra bet with an individual in
addition to the main bet of the game. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[AC; c] make a @{side bet}. <b>2</b> [A; a1] for a
husband to play around with other women.
<hi>Daug kaáyu siya sa asáwa. Dì giyud makasayidbit</hi>,
He is such a hen-pecked husband
he can never fool around.

<b>sayid layin</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sideline, s.t. one does in addition
to his usual occupation. <b>2</b> a married
man's @mistress (humorous). <hi>Dílì nà asáwa
uy, sayid layin lang nà</hi>, That's not his wife.
That's his mistress. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] have a sideline.
<b>2</b> [A13] maintain a mistress.

<b>sayid tru</b> <hi>n</hi> throw-in in basketball. <hi>v</hi> [A; c]
make a throw-in.

<b>sayidwuk</b> <hi>n</hi> @sidewalk, as the place where
things are sold. <hi>Didtu nákù palita sa sayidwuk</hi>,
I bought it from a sidewalk vendor. <b>&mdash; bindur</b>
<hi>n</hi> one who sells items displayed on
the sidewalk or the stand or stall selling
things on the sidewalk. [** @{sidewalk vendor}]

<b>sayin<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] shine, polish the shoes. <b>&mdash; syús</b>
expression uttered by shoeshine boys
in asking s.o. if he wants his shoes shined.
<b>&mdash; syu buy</b> n shoeshine boy.

<b>sayin<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @sign. <hi>Gisaynan na nákù ang
tsíki</hi>, I have signed the check.

<b>sayinburd</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @billboard. <b>2</b> sign indicating
where a vehicle is going.

<b>sayintist</b> = <b>SAYANTIS</b>.

<b>sayin-up</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] terminate a broadcast,
sign off for the day. <hi>n</hi> action of signing off
for the day.

<b>sayis<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>number</hi> @six. <hi>see</hi> <b>TRIS</b> for verb forms.

<b>sayit<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @cite s.t. in reference or evidence.
<hi>Musayit ka sa urdinansa pabur sa ímung 
<pb n=884>pitisiyun</hi>, You quote the ordinance
in favor of your petition.

<b>sayit<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] @sight, aim a firearm. <hi>n</hi> @sight
of a weapon.

<b>sayit<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> eyesight (humorous).

<b>saylà</b> = <b>SUYLÀ</b>.

<hi>saylins&icaron;r</hi> <hi>n</hi> @silencer, muffler of a combustion
engine or silencer of a weapon.

<b>saylu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2C3; c] @pass, bring by beyond
s.w., pass s.o. by. <hi>Musaylu ka man lang, mu
rag dì ta kaíla</hi>, You just pass me by as if we
didn't know each other. <hi>Musaylu ning karsadáha
sa Talísay?</hi> Does this road go beyond
Talisay? <hi>Atras. Nasayluan nátù ang
ámù</hi>, Back up. We passed by our house. <hi>Isaylu
lang ku sa unáhan sa taytáyan</hi>, Just
drop me a little way beyond the bridge. <b>2</b>
[A2; c6] do s.t. beyond a certain point in
space and time. <hi>Ug musaylu sa alas utsu ímung
pagpaúlì, dílì ka ablíhan sa pultahan</hi>,
If you come home after eight o'clock, they
won't open the door for you. <b>3</b> [A1; b(1)]
@omit, leave s.t. out. <hi>Ayawg saylui ang rúsas
ug magtubig ka sa mga tanum</hi>, When you
water the plants, don't forget the rosebush.
<hi>a</hi> farther up, beyond, or into. <hi>Ang íla saylu
pa kaáyu sa ámù</hi>, Their place is way beyond
my place. <b>saylusaylu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3C] pass s.w.
or each other repeatedly. <hi>Musaylusaylu ka
man lag ági sa balay. Dì ka man giyung kahapit</hi>,
You just keep going by our house,
but you never drop in. <hi>Nagsaylusaylu ang
mga trák</hi>, The buses kept passing each other.
<b>2</b> [c1] overlap each other in alternating
motion. <hi>Saylusaylúa (isaylusaylu) ang mga
tiil igsáyaw nímu</hi>, When you dance make
your left go over your right and then your
right over your left. <b>3</b> [b] @bypass. <hi>Gisaylusaylúan
lang ang ákung mga papílis kay wà
man ku muhátag ug bigay</hi>, My papers were
just bypassed, because I didn't give any
grease money. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @forgive, @pardon.
<hi>Ang prisidinti nagpasaylu ug dúsi ka
binilanggù karung Pasku</hi>, The president
pardoned twelve prisoners this Christmas. <b>n</b>
@forgiveness. <b>mapa-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @forgiving.

<b>saylub</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3C3; aP] <b>1</b> @overlap. <hi>Ang duha ka
tumuy nagsaylub ug mga dus purgádas</hi>, The
two ends overlap by about 2". <b>2</b> = <b>SAYLU</b>,
but not with <hi>pa-</hi>.

<b>saynus</b> <hi>n</hi> @sinusitis. <hi>v</hi> [a4] have sinusitis. <b>-un[**space?](->)</b>
<hi>a</hi> having sinusitis.

<b>saysay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @narrate, @relate. <hi>Saysáyan ta
ka unsay tinúud nga nahitabù</hi>, Let me tell
you what really happened. <hi>Isaysay níya nímu
ang mga paági sa pag-aplay</hi>, He will tell
you the procedure for applying. <hi>n</hi> @narration,
@declaration. <hi>Nakumbins&icaron;r siya sa mga saysay 
sa mga bakákun</hi>, He was convinced by
the false declarations. <b>lakbit &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> @synopsis.
<b>sagbat &mdash;</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] relate s.t. by cutting in
on a conversation. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @history, chain
of events. <hi>Mau tuy talagsaung hitabù sa kasaysáyan
sa ikaduhang gúbat</hi>, That was an
unusual event in the history of the Second
World War. <b>2</b> @legend, story handed down by
tradition. <hi>Kasaysáyan sa amù ug sa bau</hi>, The
tale of the monkey and the turtle. <b>-l-un</b> <hi>a</hi>
@eventful. <hi>Ang ílang kasal usa ka salaysáyung
hitabù sa ámung baryu</hi>, Their wedding was
an event of great moment in our village.
<b>maka-anun</b> <hi>a</hi> @historic, full of history. <hi>Manúaw
sila sa makasaysayánun nga pulù sa Kurihidur</hi>,
They will visit the historic island of
Corregidor.

<b>saysinta</b> <hi>numeral</hi> @sixty. <hi>see</hi> <b>DISIUTSU</b> for
verb forms.

<b>sayu</b> <hi>a</hi> @early. <hi>Sa sayung kabuntágun</hi>, In the
early part of the morning. <hi>Sayu ming míabut.
Dúgay pa ang prugrámang magsúgud</hi>,
We arrived early. The program won't begin
for some time. <hi>v</hi> [AB5; c1] be or do s.t.
early. <hi>Sayuhun (isayu) nímu ug híkay ang
pamáhaw arun makasayu ka sa iskuylahan</hi>,
Prepare breakfast early so you can get to
school early. <b>sayusayu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; c1] do s.t. a
little early, or a little too early.

<b>sáyud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1256; b4(1)] @know; have cognizance
or awareness of s.t. <hi>Nasáyud aku
nga usa ninyu namutbut</hi>, I know that one of
you is telling a lie. <hi>Wà ku masáyud kun háin
ang ílang balay</hi>, I don't know where their
house is. <b>2</b> [b(1)] tell s.o. about s.t., give
information, news, etc. <hi>Sayran ta kang dáan
nga si Binduy usa ka minyù</hi>, Let me inform
you beforehand that Bendoy is a married
man. <b>3</b> [A; b] hold the sáyud ceremony.
<hi>Human na mi makasáyud. Kasal na lay kúwang</hi>,
We have already held the formal betrothal
ceremony. Now only the wedding is
left. <hi>n</hi> the ceremony held after the <hi>pamaláyi</hi>
(in which the marriage proposal is made)
in which the prospective groom returns to
the bride's family to find out whether or
not they accept. In this ceremony all formal
agreements and terms are stated, and the
couple is engaged. <hi>a</hi> be thoroughly acquainted
with s.t. <hi>Sáyud aku sa mga kinaíya sa mga
táwu dinhi</hi>, I'm thoroughly acquainted with
what the people here are like. <b>paki-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13;
b(1)] ask information about s.t. <hi>Magpakisáyud
tag unsay nahitabù</hi>, Let's ask what
happened. <hi>n</hi> request for information. <b>sinayúran</b>
<hi>n</hi> a girl who is engaged and has gone
through the <hi>sáyud</hi> ceremony. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be
formally betrothed. <b>kasayúran</b> <hi>n</hi> @information. 
<pb n=885><b>masinayúrun</b> <hi>a</hi> @informative.

<b>sayukmù</b> <hi>v</hi> [B5; c1] for the chin and lower
jaw to jut out, esp. when one is pouting or
sulking. <hi>Musamut kag kangil-ad ug musayukmù
ang ímung suwang</hi>, You look more
ugly if you let your chin protrude. <hi>Ug way
marpil musayukmù ang suwang</hi>, If you do
not have false teeth your chin will jut out.
<hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> for the chin to be sticking out. <b>2</b> for the
face to be squat and wide.

<b>sayun</b> <hi>a</hi> @easy. <hi>Sayun kaáyu ang iksámin</hi>, The
test was very easy. <hi>Sayun man gung bayhána
maung pirming paangkan</hi>, That woman
is easily had. She has had several children
out of wedlock. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12B125; a2] be or
make s.t. easy. <hi>Sayun nà siya patuhúun</hi>, It's
easy to make him believe s.t. <hi>Ug gisayunan
ka sa iksámin, handrid giyud ka</hi>, If you consider
the test easy, you must have made a
hundred. <b>2</b> [b(1)] be too familiar with s.o.
so as to take him for granted. <hi>Ngánung
manggáwì ka man sa ákung mga butang?
Mu rag gisayunan ka nákù</hi>, Why do you use
my things? It seems as though you take me
for granted. <hi>sayunsáyun</hi> <hi>v</hi> [a12] 1 do s.t.
with great ease or facility. <hi>Gisayunsáyun
lang níya ug húbad ang 'Ultimu Adiyus,'</hi> He
just translated the 'Last Farewell' with the
greatest of ease. <b>2</b> take s.o. for granted. <hi>Sayunsayúnun
(sayunsayunun) lang ku ninyu
nu, ábi kay minsahíru ra man ku</hi>, You give
me orders just like that just because I'm a
mere messenger here. <b>paka-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12]
take s.o. or s.t. for granted. <hi>Nagpakasayun
ka lag kúhà sa ákung kinawus</hi>, You just help
yourself to the water I fetched. <hi>Gipakasayun
lang níla ang kaminyúun</hi>, They think
marriage is such an easy thing. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> ease,
@facility of doing s.t.

<b>sayup</b> <hi>a</hi> @wrong, @erroneous. <hi>Sayup kaáyu tung
ímung tubag</hi>, Your answer was wrong. <1>n</1> @error,
@mistake. <hi>Náay sayup sa ímung lista</hi>,
There is an error in your list. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B12; a2b2]
be wrong, make a mistake[** "@err"?]. <hi>Nasayup ku
sa ákung kalkúlu</hi>, I am wrong in my calculation.
<hi>Ug masayup ka bísag kas-a, payir-awtun
ta ka</hi>, Make just one mistake and you
are out. <hi>Mau ning prublimáha ákung nasaypan</hi>,
This is the problem I made the mistake
in. <b>1a</b> [b8] mistake s.o. for s.o. else.
<hi>Hisaypan ka unyà sa pagkapampam ug mau
nay ímung isul-ub</hi>, If that's what you wear
they'll mistake you for a prostitute. <b>2</b> [a12]
fail to avail oneself of an opportunity. <hi>Ayaw
ug saypa ang sunud nga yugtù sa maung isturya</hi>,
Don't miss the next installment of
the story. <b>3</b> [A23] @escape, avoid a trap. <hi>Kanang
lagsáwa dílì na giyud musayup áning
balag-únga</hi>, That deer will not escape this
trap for sure. <b>masalaypun</b>, <b>masaypánun</b> <hi>a</hi>
@erring. <hi>Ang íyang masalaypun (masaypánun)
nga bána nangáyù na pug pasaylu</hi>, Her erring
husband is now asking for forgiveness. <b>kasaypánan</b>,
<b>ka-an(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @wrong, moral infractions.
<hi>Ang kasaypánan nga ímung gihímù
sa ímung asáwa</hi>, The wrongs you have done
to your wife. <hi>see also</hi> <b>ISTÍPING</b>.

<b>sayúti</b>, <b>sayútis</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. vegetable, similar in
appearance to a pear, cooked and eaten
like squash, growing on a climbing vine with
squash-like leaves: <b>Sechium edule</b>.

<b>si<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> particle before names or titles of persons
used in constructions which require the
nominative. <hi>Si Pidru ákung ig-ágaw</hi>, Pedro
is my cousin. <hi>Si Tátay</hi>, Father. <b>&mdash; kinsa</b> who
does he think he is? <hi>Si kinsa ba[**bu?] siya nga
musulti sa ingun?</hi> Who does he think he is
to say that? <hi>Nagmandarmandar siya nákù
mau ra ug si kinsa</hi>, He was ordering me around
as though he were s.o. see also <b>NI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>
and <b>KANG<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>.

<b>si<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @{letter C}.

<b>sí</b> yes, used only in response by people who
are influenced by Spanish or jokingly by
people who know a smattering of Spanish.

<b>sì</b> <hi>n</hi> sound used to drive away dogs and other
small animals, but not fowls and pigs.

<b>síad</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B; b6] become distended or burst,
as from internal pressure. <hi>Misíad ang ligid
human bumbáhi</hi>, The tire became inflated
after air was pumped into it. <hi>Nasíad na ang
tiyan sa burus</hi>, The pregnant mother's abdomen
has become distended. <b>2</b> [B2; b6]
be, become luxuriant or lush in growth. <hi>Misíad
ang túbù sa tanum nga nating-ulan na</hi>,
The plants have become lush in their growth
now that the rainy season has set in.

<b>siak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] split s.t. along the grain.
<hi>Masiak ang tabla ug ibulad sa ínit</hi>, The
board will crack if you leave it under the
sun. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa úlu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12B1256] be a great
mental burden. <hi>Suliran nga makasiak sa ákung
úlu</hi>, A problem that can crack your[**my? P2]
head. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] disturb violently as if to
crack. <hi>Singgit nga misiak sa kahílum sa kagabhíun</hi>,
A shout that rent the stillness of
the night. <b>3</b> [b3(1)] be worried, angry, sad.
<hi>Masukù lang nà siya bísag way gikasiakan
(gikasik-an, gikasilik-an)</hi>, He gets angry even
without cause. <b>kasilik-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @enmity, @misunderstanding.

<b>siákù</b> short for <hi>unsa bay ákù</hi>. <hi>see</hi> <b>UNSA</b>, <hi>1d</hi>.

<b>siang</b> <hi>v</hi> [B34] <b>1</b> come out partly. <hi>Misiang na
ang adlaw</hi>, The sun is partly out now. <hi>Nagsiang
na ang bátà</hi>, The child is now coming
out. <b>2</b> for the vaginal opening to dilate. <hi>Sa
<pb n=886>dì pa makasiang ang pwirtu, tawga na ang
midwayip,</hi> Call the midwife before the vaginal
opening dilates.

<b>siátab</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>ÁTAB</sc>.

<b>siaw</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @mischievous, given to doing irresponsible
but harmless fun. <hi>Siaw kaáyu ning
batáa kay íyang gihuktan ug písì ang íkug sa
irù[** irù?],</hi> This child is very mischievous because
he tied a rope to the dog's tail. <b>2</b> @misbehaving.
<hi>Siaw batáa, way disiplína,</hi> A misbehaving,
undisciplined child. <b>&mdash; sa babáyi</b> @philandering.
<hi>v</hi> [B123; b6] be, become @mischievous,
misbehaving. (<-) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23] @{get worse};
grow more [adj.]. <hi>Ug pahilúmun siya, musíaw
<b>siya</b> hinúun,</hi> If he is told to keep quiet,
he gets noisier instead. <b>1a</b> be, become @worse,
more intense. <hi>Misíaw ang ilagà sa Mindanaw,</hi>
The rats are getting worse and worse in
Mindanao. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] @joke, play a @prank
on. <hi>Nagsíaw ka tingáli kay láin ang nutisya
nga ákung nadunggan,</hi> You must be joking
because I heard a different story. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1]
engage in mischief. <hi>Ug magpasíaw ka,
mabanhà ang klási,</hi> If you are mischievous,
the class will be noisy. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> characterized
with jocularity.

<b>siawan</b> = <sc>AWAYAN</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>ÁWAY</sc>.

<b>síay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3PC3] for different smells, tastes,
atmospheres to be mixed together in one
place. <hi>Ang tánang báhù nagsíay sa simbahan,</hi>
All different odors are mixed together
inside the church. <b>2</b> [A23C3] for different
smells or atmospheres to mix and contradict
each other. <hi>Magkasíay ang ginamus ug
kámay ug dungánun pagkáun,</hi> Fish paste
and brown sugar do not go well if you eat
them together.

<b>siay-is</b> <hi>n</hi> acronym for the Criminal Investigation
Service.

<b>siba</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> add @fuel to a fire to increase
it or keep it going. <b>2</b> @incite, get s.o. to do s.t.
bad. <hi>Siyay nagsiba sa mga istudiyanti pagdimunstrít,</hi>
He incited the students to demonstrate. [+]

<b>síbà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] sip nectar from a flower.
<hi>Mau niy klási sa búlak nga sibáan sa mga
alibangbang,</hi> This is the class of flowers the
butterflies sip nectar from. <b>-un(->), -I-un(->)[** -l-un(->) ?]</b>
<hi>n</hi> flowers that are attractive to birds and insects.

<b>sibakung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] cook a mixture of rice
and corn grits.

<b>síbang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @nick a blade. <b>(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> nicked.
<hi>n</hi> @nick in a blade.

<b>sibásid</b> = <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.

<b>sibat<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] get out of s.w., usually
without @leave. <hi>Musibat ta sa prugráma arun
dílì ta hingtawgan ug pakanta,</hi> Let us get
out of this place before we are called upon
to sing. <hi>Wà ka kinahanglána dinhi. Hala, sibat!</hi>
You are not wanted here, So, @scram!
<b>2</b> [A1; c1] take s.t. without permission. <hi>Sibatun
(isibat) ku ning libru ug walay magtan-aw,</hi>
I will take this book when nobody
is looking. [+]

<b>sibat<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> small fishing @spear, usually made of
wire as thick as a man's finger or bamboo
pointed at one tip. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] spear using
the <hi>sibat</hi>. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a <hi>sibat</hi>.

<b>síbaw</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b2] bounce from s.t. towards
s.t. <hi>Misíbaw nákù ang búla nga gilábay sa
bungbung,</hi> The ball was thrown against the
wall and bounced toward me. <b>2</b> [A3] for a
sound to @reverberate and be noisy so as to
rise above other sounds. <hi>Misíbaw ang butubutu
sa mga ribintadur,</hi> The explosion of
firecrackers @resounded. <b>3</b> [B246] rise to an
alarming proportion. <hi>Misíbaw karun pag-áyu
ang pangáwat,</hi> Robberies have increased
to alarming proportions. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @turmoil, confused
noises, tumultuous sounds.

<b>sibay</b> <hi>n</hi> an @extension room added to an already
existing dwelling, with the floor raised
some distance from the ground. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6]
add an extension to a house. <b>sibaysíbay</b> <hi>n</hi>
woman maintained by a married man. <hi>Ang
sibaysíbay sa íyang bána hustis,</hi> Her husband's
woman is a night-club hostess. <hi>v</hi> [A;
abc] for a married man to maintain a woman.

<b>sibáya</b> = <sc>KISIBÁYA</sc>.

<b>*sibika, *sibiku kapunúngang &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> @{civic organization}.
<b>hinábang nga &mdash;</b> @{civic aid}.

<b>sibil</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @civil, not by the church. <hi>Sa sibil lang
ta magpakasal,</hi> Let's make it a civil marriage.
<hi>Sibil nga mintiryu,</hi> Public cemetery. <b>2</b> =
<sc>GWARDIYA SIBIL</sc>. <hi>v</hi> [c1] have a civil wedding.
<b>gíra &mdash;</b> @{civil war}. <b>gwardiya &mdash;</b> Civil
Guard of the Philippines during Spanish
times. <b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] @punish s.o. heavily or
make s.o. do a lot of work rapidly (as the
Spanish civil guards do). <hi>Maáyung musinibil
ug súgù sa mga sinuhúlan apan dílì maáyung
mupakáun,</hi> Knows how to make farmhands
work hard but doesn't give them enough
food to eat. <hi>Dì na run magsinibil ug kastígu
ang mga maistra sa klási kay manúkul na
man run ang mga istudiyanti,</hi> Teachers do
not inflict heavy punishments in class any
more because nowadays the students fight
back.

<b>*síbil</b> <b>&mdash; sirbis</b> <hi>n</hi> @{civil service}. <b>&mdash; sirbis tist</b>
@{Civil Service test}.

<b>sibilisar</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @civilize. <b>sibilisádu</b> <hi>a</hi> @civilized,
@well-mannered. <hi>v</hi> [B12] be, become
civilized. <b>sibilisasiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @civilization.

<pb n=887>

<b>sibilsíbil</b> <hi>n</hi> game of @hide-and-seek played in
pairs. <hi>v</hi> [A12C; c1] play hide-and-seek in
pairs.

<b>sibilyan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @civilian. <b>2</b> ordinary clothes as
opposed to a uniform or frock. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1]
wear civilian attire or ordinary clothes as
opposed to a uniform or frock. <hi>Dì giyud
mailhan nga párì kay nagsibilyan man,</hi>
You'd never know he was a priest because
he was wearing ordinary clothes. <b>2</b> [a3] become
a civilian.

<b>síbin<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> wipe s.o.'s face or any
other part of the body with a moist cloth.
<b>2</b> @shave hair on the body. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6]
<b>1</b> wipe one's face with a wet cloth. <b>2</b> @shave
one's body hair.

<b>síbin<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [b4] be a @hermaphrodite. <hi>Gisibínan
ang anak ni Maríya,</hi> Maria's child had both
male and female genital organs. <b>-an</b> <hi>a</hi> hermaphrodite.

<b>sibin-ilíbin</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. dice game. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] <b>1</b> play
this game. <b>2</b> for males to @masturbate (slang).

<b>síbin pirs</b> = <sc>SÍTI PÁRIS</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÍTI</sc>.

<b>síbins gríd</b> <hi>n</hi> @{seventh grade} of elementary
schools. <hi>Karun wà nay síbins gríd,</hi> They
have abolished the seventh grade of elementary
schools. <hi>v</hi> [A3] be or get to be in the
seventh grade.

<b>sibintiit</b> <hi>n</hi> @{78 rpm record}.

<b>sibinti páak</b> <hi>n</hi> grade of seventy-five, the lowest
passing grade (humorous slang). <hi>v</hi> [A12]
get seventy-five.

<b>sibinti siks</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. rice introduced by the
PACD.

<b>sibit</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{safety pin}. <b>2</b> = <sc>PÁLUD</sc>. <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] <b>1</b>
fasten in with a safety pin. <hi>Sibta (sibti) ang
lampin,</hi> @Pin the diapers. <b>2</b> = <sc>PÁLUD</sc>. <b>-in-</b> =
<sc>PÁLUD</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>sibsib</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] for animals that graze
to @nibble at plants. <hi>Hingsibsiban ang rúsas
<b>sa</b> kanding</hi>, The goat nibbled at my rosebush.
<b>2</b> [AN; a] nibble at s.t. boney to get
at the meaty parts. <hi>Ákung sibsíbun ang mga
bukug kay nía man dinhi ang lamì[**?][**ì is right.  P2],</hi> I'll nibble
at the bones, for that is where the delicious
parts are. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] @graze. <hi>Didtu sa
lagúna nanibsib ang kabáyù,</hi> The horse was
grazing in the meadow. <b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> @pasture.

<b>síbu</b> <hi>n</hi> fat of bovine and other animals with
hooves, except pigs. <hi>v</hi> [B1245; b6] put @{beef
fat}. <hi>Nagkasíbu ang linat-an,</hi> The stew is full
of fat. <hi>Sibúhi ang ímung hiraminta arun dílì
tay-an,</hi> Smear beef fat on your tools so they
won't get rusty.

<b>síbù</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> fitting precisely, of exact dimension[** missing period]
<hi>Kining twirkáha síbù kaáyu sa pirnu,</hi> This
nut fits precisely into the bolt. <b>1a</b> @exactly
[so-and-so] long, at [such-and-such] a time.
<hi>Síbung duha ka túig,</hi> Exactly two years. <hi>Síbung
alas dúsi,</hi> At exactly twelve o'clock. <b>2</b>
timepiece @synchronized with another, musical
instrument @{tuned to} another. <hi>Dílì síbù
ang ákung rilu sa íyang rilu. Alas dus nas
íya apan walà pa diris ákù,</hi> My watch isn't
running at the same time as his. He has two
o'clock, but I don't. <b>3</b> harmonizing with, fittingly
with the personality. <hi>Ang íyang papil
sa dráma síbù kaáyu sa íyang pagkatáwu,</hi>
His role in the drama fits his personality
perfectly. <b>4</b> @commensurate, proper in kind.
<hi>Kadtung ímung tratamyintu níya síbù sa íyang
nabúhat,</hi> What you did to him is just
@appropriate for what he did to you. <b>5</b> for
the moon to be full. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2] fit into s.t. <b>1a</b>
[B56; a12] be @exactly [such-and-such] a
time. <b>2</b> [A1C3; ac] tune a musical instrument
to another, @synchronize a watch with
another. <hi>Sibúun ta ning duha ka sista,</hi> Let
us tune the two guitars to each other. <b>3</b> [B2C23;
c6] @{harmonize with}, fit a personality
or style. <hi>Kining kalúa musíbù sa bísan unsang
kurti sa nawung,</hi> This hat goes nicely
with any face. <b>4</b> [A; a2] borrow a quantity
of s.t. and return the same amount or multiples
thereof. <hi>Musíbù ku ug walu ka gantang
mais. Ulían ta ka ug dubli sa tingsanggì,</hi>
I will borrow eight gantas of corn, and I will
pay you back double during harvest time.
<b>5</b> [B245] for the moon to become full.

<b>síbug</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB3(1); c1P] back s.t. up, @{move
back}. <hi>Ug musíbug ka, matambug ka sa kanal,</hi>
If you step backward, you will fall into
the ditch. <hi>Kinsay nagsíbug sa lamísa?</hi> Who
moved the table back? <b>1a</b> [A23; b6] @{back
down} from s.t. <hi>Dílì ta ka sibúgan ug sumbagay,</hi>
I will not back down from you in a
fight. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] @{back out} of an agreement.
<b>2a</b> [A; c6] withdraw an application, candidacy,
case in court. <hi>Dílì ku musíbug sa
ákung kandidatúra,</hi> I will not withdraw my
candidacy. <hi>Ug musíbug ka sa ímung kíha,
ariglúhun ta lang ni,</hi> If you withdraw your
case, we will settle it amicably. <hi>Isíbug ku
ang ákung aplikasiyun,</hi> I will withdraw my
application. <b>3</b> [A1; c] move an event to an
earlier or to a later date. <hi>Átung isíbug ang
kasal ug tulu ka adlaw arun tukmà sa pyista,</hi>
Let's move the wedding ahead (or @postpone
it) three days so that it will coincide
with the fiesta. <b>4</b> [A2] @visit (dialectal). <hi>Musíbug
mis inyu rung pila ka adlaw,</hi> We'll visit
your place one of these days. <hi>n</hi> action of
@{moving back}, @{backing out}, @retreating. <hi>Pagsábut
nga way síbug,</hi> An agreement you can
not back out of.

<b>sibúkaw</b> <hi>n</hi> small tree with scattered prickles,
<pb n=888>the wood of which is used for nails in boat[**missing -? P2]
building: <hi><b>Caesalpinia sappan</b></hi>.

<b>sibul</b> = <sc>SUBUL</sc>.

<b>sibut</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. very small dip @net made of finely
meshed cloth. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a2b2] pick out with
a small dip net. <hi>Sibuta ang isdà. Ayaw ug
kab-a sa panaksan,</hi> Catch the fish with a dip
net. Don't scoop it out with a cup.

<b>síbut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3P; a1] @inspire s.o. with enthusiasm
to do s.t. <hi>Ang kanindut sa kahigayúnan
sa Amirika mauy nakasíbut (nakapasíbut)
nákù paglangyaw,</hi> I was inspired to go
to America by the attractive opportunities
that are available there. <hi>Gisíbut mi sa ámung
ginikánan pag-iskuyla,</hi> Our parents inspired
us to study. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @enthusiasm. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> full
of enthusiasm to do s.t.

<b>sibúyas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> general name for various kinds of
@onions and @leeks. <b>2</b> humorous name given
to Union cigarettes (where Union is pronounced
homophonous with onion in the
Philippines). <b>&mdash; amirikánu</b> @leeks with a
slightly larger bulb than the bisayà. <b>&mdash; bisayà</b>
@leeks with tiny red or white bulbs, the
tops of which are used. <b>&mdash; bumbay</b> @onions
with large bulbs. <hi>-un ug tíngug</hi> <hi>a</hi> @{squeaky-voiced}.

<b>sibuying</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small @onion or @leek, smaller
than <hi>sibúyas bisayà</hi>, with a small white
bulb and a flavor differing from ordinary
leeks.

<b>sibya</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN; c] peddle fish. <hi>Sibyáhan kug
lab-as nang mga báy dihà,</hi> I peddle fresh fish
around to those houses. <b>2</b> [A; c6] @broadcast.
<hi>Isibya ang anunsiyu sa tíbi,</hi> Broadcast
the announcement on T.V. <b>3</b> [A13; c6] @announce,
give notice of. <hi>Hinagtub nga nagsibya
sa íyang pag-abut,</hi> Footfalls that announced
his arrival. <b>mag-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{radio announcer}.

<b>sibyà</b> = <sc>SIBYA</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>, <hi>3</hi>.

<b>sída</b> <hi>n</hi> silk cloth. <hi>sidasida</hi> <hi>n</hi> name given to
<b>several</b> grasses with silky tufts.

<b>sidbaks</b> <hi>n</hi> box used as a seedbed for germinating
seeds. [+]

<b>sidhawus</b> <hi>n</hi> shed providing shade for seed
beds. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] construct such a shed.

<b>sidi</b> <hi>v</hi> [b(1)] receive favorably, @approve. <hi>Wà
sidihi sa huwis ang diklarasiyun sa sinumbung,</hi>
The judge didn't receive the allegations
of the accused favorably.

<b>sid-ing</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{look closely} at s.t. by
bringing one's face to it or putting it near
the face. <hi>Nagsid-ing ku áring pínung litra,</hi> I
am looking closely at this fine print. <b>2</b> [A1;
a12] look at s.t. out of the corner of the
eyes. <hi>Nasakpan ku siya nga nagsid-ing kang
Marta,</hi> I caught him regarding Martha out
of the corner of his eyes.

<b>sidlak</b> <hi>a</hi> @sparkling, @glittering. <hi>v</hi> [A] <b>1</b> @sparkle.
<hi>Diyamanting nagsidlak,</hi> A sparkling diamond.
<hi>Hingsidlakan aku sa adlaw,</hi> I woke
up after the sun had risen. <b>2</b> be glittering
in prominence. <hi>Misidlak ang íyang kabantug,
He reached glittering fame.</hi> <hi>n</hi> ray, beam. <b>-an[**blank here?]
(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @east. <hi>Layung sidlakan,</hi> The @{Far East}.
<hi>Duul nga sidlakan,</hi> The @{Near East}.

<b>sidlit</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b2] squirt out in a stream. <hi>Misidlit
ang nánà sa dihang gipislit ang hubag,</hi>
The pus squirted out in a stream when I
pressed the boil. <hi>Hingsidlitan ku sa íhì sa bátà,</hi>
The little boy urinated on me. <b>2</b> [A23]
for the sun to shine (literary). <hi>Sa walà pa
musidlit ang primírung bidlísiw[**hidlisiw? P2.,stet P3] sa adlaw,</hi>
Before the first rays of the sun shone.

<b>sidlut</b> = <sc>SIDLIT</sc>, <hi>v1</hi>.

<b>sidsarun</b> = <sc>SITSARUN</sc>.

<b>sidsid</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @hem, lower edge of dress, curtain,
or the like. <b>2</b> @edge, @border (literary). <hi>Ang
sidsid sa kapunawpunáwan,</hi> To the outer
reaches of space. <b>sidsiran</b> = <sc>SIDSID</sc>, <hi>2</hi>.

<b>sid-uk</b> <hi>n</hi> @hiccup. <hi>v</hi> [A2; a4] have the @hiccups.
<hi>Misid-uk si Lúlu, unyà miyupyup sa íyang
kwáku,</hi> Granddad hiccuped and then puffed
on his pipe. <hi>Inum ug usa ka básung túbig
ug sid-ukun ka,</hi> Take a glass of water if you
have the hiccups.

<b>sidula</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the head tax of the Spanish time
and now, the @{residence tax}. <b>2</b> the @{residence
certificate}, evidencing the payment of this
tax.

<b>síga<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> bright, giving off intense illumination.
<hi>Síga kaáyu ang sugà,</hi> The lamp is very
@bright. <b>2</b> @bright-eyed or having big round
eyes. <hi>Síga ug mata kining batáa paríha sa
íyang uyuan,</hi> This child has big, round eyes
like his uncle's. <hi>n</hi> @flame, light given off. <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [A2S; a2Pb7] @{burn bright}. <hi>Nagsiga pa ba
ang dáub?</hi> Is the fire still burning? <hi>Sigái
ang linung-ag,</hi> Turn up the fire under the
rice. <b>1a</b> for the lights to be on. <hi>Sigáha (pasigáha)
ang sugà kay ngitngit na,</hi> Put the lights
on because it is dark now. <b>2</b> [A2S; b6] for
the eyes to be big or bright. <hi>Misíga ang mga
mata sa kahikugang,</hi> Her eyes grew wide in
astonishment. <b>2a</b> for the eyes to be wide,
@glaring at s.o. <hi>Gisigáan ku níya sa kapungut,</hi>
He glared at me in anger.

<b>síga<hi rend=sub>2</hi>, sígà</b> <hi>n</hi> notorious @{tough guy}. <hi>v</hi> [B12;
b6] be, become a @tough. <b>sigasíga</b> = <sc>SÍGA<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>sigabu</b> <hi>n</hi> continuous, @thudding sound. <hi>v</hi> [A3]
be thudding, give a thudding sound. <hi>Musigabu
ang balud ug ting-amihan,</hi> Strong waves
dash against the shore when the northwind
blows. <hi>Unsa may nagsigabu sa táas? Mga
bátang nagdúlà?</hi> What is it that is thudding
<pb n=889>upstairs? Children playing?

<b>sigamnu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3; a12] @care, give @attention or
@concern to s.o.'s welfare or needs. <hi>Wà siya
magsigamnu sa idukasiyun sa íyang mga
anak,</hi> She doesn't concern herself with her
children's schooling. <hi>Sigamnúa ang ímung
láwas arun dì ka masakit,</hi> Take care of your
body so you won't get sick.

<b>sig-ang<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] put the pot on the fire.
<hi>Nagsig-ang na siya sa paniudtu,</hi> She is preparing
lunch now.

<b>sigarilyu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @cigarette. <hi>v</hi> [a12] make into a cigarette.
paN- <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6(1)] @smoke cigarettes,
ask s.o. for cigarettes or cigarette money.
<hi>Kamau na diay ka nga manigarilyu,</hi> So, you
already know how to smoke. <hi>Panigarilyúhan
nátù si Iduy kay nakadaug sa súgal,</hi> Let
us ask Edoy for cigarette money because
he won in gambling.[+]

<b>sigarit kís</b> <hi>n</hi> @{cigarette case}.

<b>sigaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @confess or tell s.t. which s.o.
wants to be kept secret (slang). <hi>Nadakpan
ang tanan kay misigaw ang usang nadakpan,</hi>
All of them were caught because one
of them @sang. <hi>Íyang gisigaw ang tinagúan sa
íyang inahan,</hi> She @revealed her mother's
secrets.

<b>sígaw</b> <hi>a</hi> @noisy, making a disturbance. <hi>n</hi> @shouts
and @noise. <hi>Ang sígaw sa nagsúgal dungug sa
ámù,</hi> You could hear the shouts of the
gamblers as far as our house. <hi>v</hi> [B1; b6] be
@noisy. <hi>Nagsígaw ang mga istudiyanti kay
way maistru sa klási,</hi> The students are all
in uproar because the teacher is not in the
room. <b>ka-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] be very noisy.

<b>sig-aw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b3] make a loud noise at the
top of one's lungs. <hi>Wà siya makasig-aw kay
ákung gikasab-an,</hi> He did not dare make
noise because I scolded him.

<b>sigay</b> <hi>n</hi> general name for small @cowries.

<b>sigbaw</b> formula uttered to prevent one from
being struck by lightning when making fun
of animals. <hi>Ang ungguy mu ra sigbaw ug
táwu,</hi> The monkey looks like man, may I
not be struck by lightning. <hi>Sigbaw ug paríha
ang táwu sa irù nga magpungutay,</hi> May
lightning not strike me, how would it feel
if people had intercourse like dogs.

<b>sigbin</b> <hi>n</hi> animal possessed by and at the service
of s.o. It has the power of making itself
invisible to a person other than the owner.
The <hi>sigbin</hi> can do good to the owner, transport
the owner, and will inflict fatal bites
on whomever the owner commands it to.
It cannot be killed as long as the owner can
see it. It is said to have long hind legs and
walks with the head looking back in between
the legs. Ownership is handed down
to relatives when the owner dies. A person
who refuses a <hi>sigbin</hi> is said to go mad. <b>-an</b>
<hi>n</hi> possessing a sigbin. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] get a <hi>sigbin</hi>
handed down to one.

<b>sígi</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b5c1] @continue or go on doing
s.t.; do s.t. @always. <hi>Ug magsígi ning ulána
háyan mubahà,</hi> If this rain keeps on, it's
likely to flood. <hi>Sigíhun (sigíhan, isígi) nímu
ug túyuk ang twirka hangtud muhugut,</hi>
Continue turning the screw until it gets
tight. <hi>Ngánung sigíhan man ku nímu ug tan-aw?</hi>
Why do you always look at me? <b>1a</b>
[A23] walk or @{go on} or @forward. <hi>Inig-abut
nímu sa iskína, musígi ka ug mga bayinti
mitrus,</hi> When you reach the corner, @{go ahead}
for about twenty meters. <b>1b</b> [A2; a12P]
proceed with one's studies. <hi>Dílì ku makasígi
karung sunud túig kay wà kuy kwarta,</hi>
I cannot proceed with my studies next
year because I have no money. <hi>exclamation:</hi>
<b>1</b> urging s.o. to do s.t. <hi>Sígi, káun na,</hi> @{Come
on}, eat! <b>2</b> expressing acquiescence. <hi>Ug walay
láin sígi na lang ta áning nía,</hi> If there is
no other, we will just have to make do with
this. <b>2a</b> @O.K. @Bye. <hi>'Adtu na ku.' 'Sígi,'</hi> 'I'm
going now.' 'O.K., Bye-bye.' <b>3</b> @always. <hi>Sígi
ka lang ug sulti, way búhat,</hi> You're always
talking. You never do anything. <b>&mdash; lang</b> <b>1</b>
never mind, it doesn't matter. <hi>Sígi lang ug
pubri, basta malipáyun,</hi> Never mind if I'm
poor as long as I am happy. <b>2</b> Oh, @please.
<hi>Sígi lang, tagái lang ku,</hi> Oh, please. Let me
have some! <b>(->)</b> = <sc>SÍGI</sc>, <hi>exclamation</hi>.

<b>sig-id</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @vine used for tying purposes:
<hi><b>Malaisia scandens</b></hi>.

<b>sigídas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @successive, @frequent. <hi>Lápuk kaáyu
sa ámù kay sigídas ang ulan,</hi> My place is
very muddy because it keeps raining. <b>2</b>
automatic, rapid-firing weapons. <b>3</b> @freewheeling,
such that the chain that links the
pedal gear to the wheel gear engages only
in the forward direction, and not in the
backward direction. <hi>Sigídas ang bisiklíta
nga rísir,</hi> A racing bicycle is freewheeling.
<b>3a</b> @{racing bicycle}. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] become @frequent
or @successive; do s.t. @successively or
@frequently. <hi>Nagsigídas ang ákung mga sulat
rung mga adláwa,</hi> I @keep getting letters one
after another these days. <hi>Sigidásun nímu ug
tindak ang pidal arun magsígi ug túyuk ang
ligid,</hi> Keep pumping the pedal so the wheels
will keep turning.

<b>sigidilyas</b> = <sc>KARABANSUS</sc>.

<b>sígin</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @net designed for taking out catch
from the fish corral. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] get the
fish out of the corral with a net.

<b>sigingsiging</b> an exclamation uttered together
with shaking s.o. emotionally upset by the
<pb n=890>shoulders. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> <hi>shake s.o. and say
<hi><corr sic=siging-siging>sigingsiging</corr>. Sa nagsigingsiging ku sa bátà,
mihínay ang íyang paghílak,</hi> After I had
shaken the child and said <hi>sigingsiging</hi> to
him, he began to stop crying. <b>2</b> make s.o.
hurry in doing s.t. <hi>Kinsa mang kustumíra
ang nagsigingsiging ug pagpakúha[**pagpakúhà? P2.] nímu ug
túbig?</hi> Who was the customer that made
you hurry in getting a glass of water?

<b>sigisígi</b> <hi>n</hi> name of a notorious gang of Tagalog
hoodlums as opposed to the <hi>uksu</hi> (<b><sc>OXO</sc></b>)
of the Visayans. <b>&mdash; gang</b> = <sc>SIGISÍGI</sc>.

<b>sigkat</b> = <sc>SIKLAT</sc>.

<b>sigking</b> = <sc>SIKGING</sc>.

<b>sigkit</b> = <sc>SÍKIT</sc>.

<b>siglu</b> <hi>n</hi> @century. <hi>Sa Siglu Katursi,</hi> In the
Fourteenth Century.

<b>sigmit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> seize by the arms or legs,
usually in a stealthy manner. <hi>Nakasigmit
kug manuk,</hi> I managed to catch a chicken
by the legs. <hi>Misáwum siya ug gisigmit ang
tiil sa dalága,</hi> He swam under the water and
seized the woman's legs. <b>2</b> @arrest s.o. wanted
by the law. <hi>Mga sikríta mauy nagsigmit
sa isnatsir,</hi> Plainclothesmen @nabbed the
snatcher.

<b>sigmuk<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a12] @swipe or @lift things of
small value. <hi>Dúnay nagsigmuk sa ákung bulpin,</hi>
S.o. swiped my ballpoint pen.

<b>sigmuk<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4] crave for food that
one has not eaten for a long time. <hi>Gisigmuk
na kug kinílaw tangígi,</hi> I crave for raw
Spanish mackerel.

<b>signal</b> <hi>n</hi> @signal. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] give a @signal. <hi>Signáli
ku sa busína,</hi> Blow your horn as a signal
to me.

<b>signit</b> = <sc>SIGMIT</sc>.

<b>signus</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> in folk belief, the preordained
agent through which one meets his death as
revealed by fortune-telling. P<hi>agkalúnud sa
barku wà siya mamatay kay kaláyu may íyang
signus,</hi> When the boat sunk he didn't
die because his fate was to die by fire. <b>2</b> =
<sc>AGNUS</sc>. <hi>v</hi> [A12; b8] be saved from unexpected
death because it is not one's <hi>signus</hi>
to die that way.

<b>sigpat</b> <hi>v</hi> [b8] get a glance stolen at one. <hi>Nasigpatan
ku siya nga nangupya sa iksámin,</hi>
I glanced at him copying during the test. <b>pa-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A; b6] steal a glance. <hi>Ayaw ug pasigpati
ang babáyi kay masakpan ka,</hi> Don't steal
glances at the woman because you might
get caught.

<b>sigpaw</b> <hi>n</hi> a small dip @net around 4&ndash;6" in diameter
with a handle used for scooping up
wrigglers, small bait, butterflies. <hi>v</hi> [AN2;
a12] gather, scoop up with his[**this? P2.] k.o. net.

<b>sigpit</b> (from <hi>sipit</hi>) <hi>a</hi> @narrow, not affording
easy passage. <hi>Sigpit kaáyu ang mga kalyi sa
ámung lungsud,</hi> The streets in my town are
very narrow. <hi>v</hi> [B125; b6] be, become narrow.

<b>sigsag</b> <hi>a</hi> @zigzagging, @winding road or course.
<hi>Sigsag kaáyu ang karsáda paingun sa búkid,</hi>
The road into the mountains is @zigzag. <hi>n</hi> zigzag
stitches; fancy stitches made at the
edge of cloth to keep it from getting unravelled.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] run a zigzag course.
<hi>Nagsigsag ku ug dágan sa dihang gitirúhan
ku,</hi> I ran in a zigzag course when they shot
at me. <b>2</b> [A; c1] make zigzag stitching. —-
<b>nga makina</b> <hi>n</hi> a k.o. @{sewing machine} that
can make zigzag stitching. <b>-in-an, -in-an(->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> having zigzag stitching sewn in it.

<b>sígu</b> <hi>a</hi> @tight or precise in fit. <hi>Gáhing ablíhan
ang pulta kay sígu kaáyu,</hi> The door is hard
to open because it is very tight in fit. <hi>Ang
sígu nga sinínà sa mga babáyi dílì ángay nga
isimba,</hi> Clothes that fit the body too tightly
are not appropriate for church. <hi>v</hi> [B] be,
become tight or precise in fit, cause s.t. to
be so. <hi>Sigúhun (pasigúhun) nímu ang sungsung
ngadtu sa bangag arun dílì muhunub
ang túbig,</hi> Make the stopper fit precisely so
the water won't seep through.

<b>sígù</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @fitting appropriately as words, action,
attire. <hi>Ang íyang pakigpúlung sígu[**sígù?] kaáyu
sa ukasiyun,</hi> His speech fits the occasion.
<b>2</b> @exact. <hi>Sígù na kung usa ka túig sa
ákung trabáhu,</hi> I'm @exactly one year in my
work. <hi>v</hi> [AC; c1] be @appropriate or exact.
<hi>Dílì musígù ag singsing sa ákung tudlù,</hi> The
ring doesn't @fit my finger. <hi>Sigúa (isígù) ang
ímung linihukan sa ímung idad,</hi> Act your
age.

<b>*sigun<hi rend=sub>1</hi> &mdash; sa</b> <b>1</b> @{according to}. <hi>Sigun sa ákung
hibatian dílì nà mau ang íyang gisulti,</hi> According
to what I have heard, that is not
what he said. <b>2</b> in @conformance with. <hi>Kining
ákung gása kanímu sigun sa ákung gisáad,</hi>
This gift of mine is @just what I have
promised you. <b>3</b> @{depends on}. <hi>Sigun lang sa
unsay náa,</hi> It depends on what is available.
<hi>Mu ra ug dílì nà ikatúgut, apan sigun lang
nà sa pagkumbins&icaron;r níya,</hi> It seems as if it
is not allowed, but actually it is just a matter
of convincing him.

<b>sigun<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a breed of @chicken raised for meat
purposes, referred to for their quality of
developing feathers on the neck, thighs,
and wings late in life.

<b>sigunda</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{second gear}. <b>2</b> the second player
in group games played by an[**superfluous?] individuals in
succession.</b> <b>3</b> the second voice in group
singing. <b>&mdash; mánu</b> <b>a</b> @{second hand}. <hi>Pridyidir
nga sigunda mánu,</hi> A second-hand refrigerator.
<pb n=891><b>b</b> a woman that has had sexual experiences
prior to marriage. <hi>Nakaasawag
sigunda mánu ang laláking himilì,</hi> He was
so choosy in the end he had to settle for
a @second-hand woman. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B26; b6] do,
happen after the first thing happened, was
done. <hi>Ang pagkasúnug sa ílang balay nasigunda
ang ílang Birtu,</hi> After their house
burnt, the same thing happened to Berto's.
<hi>Gisigundahan siya ug pátid human siya matumba,</hi>
After he fell, they kicked him. <b>2</b> [A;
c6] put in second gear. <hi>Isigunda ang makina
ug dulhugun,</hi> Put the car into second when
you are headed downhill. <b>-rya</b> = <sc>SIKUNDARYU</sc>.

<b>sigundu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> second to perform in group
games performed by players in a series. <b>2</b>
@second, one-sixtieth of a minute. <b>&mdash; anyu</b>
<b>second year</b> of college or secondary school.
<b>&mdash; upisyal</b> @{second mate}.

<b>sigurádu</b> @sure, [so-and-so] is true without a
doubt. <hi>Ug mugíkan ka ug alas sayis, sigurádu
nga túa ka sa mga alas unsi,</hi> If you leave
at six, you are sure to be there at about
eleven o'clock. <hi>Dílì katuhúan nutisyáha!
Sigurádu ka?</hi> That's unbelievable news! Are
you sure? <hi>'Muadtu kas bayli rung gabíi?—-'Sigurádu!'</hi>
'Will you go to the dance tonight?'&mdash;'Sure!'
<hi>v</hi> [B156] be sure. <hi>Nakabayad
kug sitinta apan nasigurádu na ang
ákung aplikasiyun,</hi> I paid seventy, but my
application is a @{sure thing}.

<b>siguridad</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @security, freedom from danger.
<hi>Ang gikasabútan naglakbit sa siguridad sa
átung násud,</hi> The agreement included the
security of our country. <b>2</b> assurance of compliance.
<hi>Kadtung panagsabúta way siguridad
sa pagtúman kay walay mga papílis,</hi>
There is no assurance that they will comply
because there are no documents.

<b>sigurista</b> <hi>a</hi> inclined to take the greatest possible
advantage from an agreement. <hi>Sigurista
kaáyu ka kay dì ka mupahulam ug kwarta
nga dílì kinuháan dáans pátung,</hi> You
drive too hard a bargain because you take
out the interest in advance when you lend
money. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] inclined to take undue
advantages.

<b>sigúru</b> <b>1</b> @sure. <hi>'Muadtu ka sa bayli rung gabíi?'&mdash;'Sigúru!'</hi>
'Will you go to the dance
tonight?'&mdash;'Sure!' <hi>Uu, sigúru kaáyu ku
nga mau nay íyang gisulti,</hi> Yes, I am very
sure that that is what he said. <hi>Way sigúru
ang ímung kaugmáun,</hi> Your future is uncertain.
<b>1a</b> <b>butang sa &mdash;</b> @{make sure} of s.t. <hi>Ug
makig-áway ka, ibutang sa sigúru nga náa
ka sa bintáhà,</hi> If you pick fights, make sure
you have the upper hand. <b>2</b> @{most likely},
@probably. <hi>Dì lang ku musulti apan muanhi
<b>sigúru</b> tu siya,</hi> I won't say for sure, but he
probably will come. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] do s.t.
@{without fail}; be sure of doing or obtaining
<b>s.t.</b> <hi>Musigúru (manigúru) ka ug anhi sa may
mga alas unsi,</hi> Come without fail at about
eleven o'clock. <hi>Sigurúun ta ni ug báwì kay
makalimut siya nyà ug úlì,</hi> Let's be sure to
take this back because he might forget to
return it. <b>2</b> [A12; a12] @{take for granted},
that s.t. will happen. <hi>Ayaw kug sigurúa, kay
wà ka kahibáwu sa ákung abilidad,</hi> Don't be
too sure of me because you don't know my
ability. <b>3</b> [A2N] be sure to do s.t. for oneself
not minding or considering others. <hi>Misigúru
(nanigúru) siyag lingkud kay daghang
pasahíru</hi>, He made sure to get himself a seat
because there were lots of passengers. <b>4</b> [A]
@insure s.t. <hi>Way kumpaníya musigúru sa ímung
balay nga dáan kaáyu,</hi> No company
will insure your house. It's so old. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @insurance.
<hi>Sitinta písus mátag túig ang ákung
balayran sa sigúru,</hi> My insurance is twenty
pesos a year. <b>&mdash; dibída</b> @{life insurance}. <b>2</b> @{insurance
company}. <hi>Ang Pil-am usa sa mga
dagkung sigúru dinhi sa Pilipínas,</hi> Phil-Am
is one of the big insurance companies in the
Philippines. <b>kasigurúhan, kasigurúan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @assurance.
<hi>Walay kasigurúan tung átung hangyù,</hi>
There's no assurance that our request
will be granted. <b>2</b> @protection, @safety from
s.t. <hi>Álang sa kasigurúan sa pangláwas mu,
inum sa Tunikun,</hi> For the protection of
your health, drink Tonicon.

<b>sigwálu</b> (from <hi>walu</hi>) <hi>n</hi> a deadly snake of shallow
sea water. A victim is generally given
only eight hours to live. If he survives he is
given another eight days, then eight weeks,
and so forth. <hi>Cf.</hi> <sc>TAGIWÁLU</sc> <hi>under</hi> <sc>WALU</sc>.

<b>*sigwar pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] show s.t. off. <hi>Mapagarbúhun
kaáyu siyang mipasigwar sa íyang
singsing brilyanti,</hi> She is proudly @{showing
off} her diamond ring.

<b>sihag</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @transparent or @translucent. <hi>Sihag
kaáyu siyag bláwus,</hi> She has a blouse on
you can see through. <b>2</b> clearly visible
through s.t. <hi>Sihag na ang kadaúgan,</hi> The
glow of victory is visible at the end of the
tunnel. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> be, become transparent
or translucent. <hi>Musihag ang papil ug duhígan
ug asíti,</hi> Paper becomes translucent if
oil is smeared on it. <b>1a</b> [B5; a] be, become
@apparent, @clear, @understandable. <hi>Kalit nga
misihag sa ákung panumdúman ang buut
níyang ipasabut,</hi> It suddenly @dawned on me
what she meant. <b>2</b> be visible through s.t.
<hi>Misihag ang lángit sa buslut sa atup,</hi> The
sky shone through the hole in the roof. <b>paN-</b>
<pb n=892><hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [b5] read the past, present, or future
through some magic article or power. <hi>Kahibáwu
man kung muabut mu kay gipanihag
(gipanihagan) man nákù,</hi> I knew that
you were coming because I saw it in my
crystal ball. <b>2</b> [A23] wear s.t. people can
see through. <hi>Uy nanihag ka kay wà ka tingáli
magkamisun,</hi> People can see right
through your clothes because you are apparently
not wearing a slip. <hi>n</hi> @{crystal ball} or
power by which one can read the past, future,
or a person's thoughts. <b>panihagsíhag
ang tutunlan</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] be very @beautiful (lit.
for the throat to be white and transparent).
<hi>Daghang mga laláki ang nabatubaláni sa babáying
nanihagsíhag ang tutunlan,</hi> Many
men became magnetized by that beautiful
woman. <b>sihagsíhag, sihagsihágan</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. very
tiny @fish made into salted preserves.

<b>sihì, síhì</b> <hi>n</hi> nerite @snails.

<b>sihud</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small fish trap made of flexible
vines, used to scoop small fish from shallow
waters. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a] fish with the <hi>sihud</hi>.
<hi>Kalita pagkabù ang isdà ug magsíhud ka,</hi>
Pull the trap up with a jerk when you fish
with a <hi>sihud</hi>.

<b>sii</b> = <sc>UGUD</sc>, except after <hi>ra</hi>.

<b>siin</b> <b>1</b> @where did or does? <hi>Siin man paingun
ag irù?</hi> Where did the dog go? <hi>Siin man
siya iskuyla?</hi> Where does he go to school?
<b>2</b> @which (of several)? <hi>Siin man íning duha
ímung gustu?</hi> Which of the two do you
like?

<b>sik.</b> abbreviation for <hi>sikritaryu</hi>, secretary.

<b>sikà</b> = <sc>SIKÀSIKÀ</sc>. <b>sikàsikà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] talk
harshly and loudly in giving commands. <hi>Gisikàsikaan
ang suluguun sa dunya,</hi> The lady
shouted at the maid, giving her one order
after another. <b>sikàsikaun</b> <hi>a</hi> @disrespectful in
speech.

<b>síkad</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] propel s.t. with the feet,
bending the knees and kicking the legs. <hi>Sikári
ang síya arun dílì na lang nákù kuháun,</hi>
@Kick the chair over here so I don't have to
get it. <b>2</b> [A; b] @pedal. <hi>Kumpása ug síkad
ang makina,</hi> Pedal the sewing machine
rhythmically. <b>3</b> [AC2; ac] have two fighting
cocks spar by holding them by the tail and
allowing their legs to scratch or kick the
ground. <hi>Kanúnayng isíkad ang manuk arun
lig-un ang tiil,</hi> Always have the cock spar to
make its legs strong. <b>3a</b> [A] <b>&mdash; ang manuk</b>
for a candidate for a woman's hand to say
his piece. <hi>Dílì maáyung musíkad ang ákung
manuk kay wà sugta,</hi> My man doesn't know
how to talk to women because he was unsuccessful.
<b>(->)</b> = <sc>ANINIKAD</sc>. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; bc]
base an argument or belief. <hi>Ayawg ipasíkad
ang ímung hukum sa mga tabìtábì</hi>, Don't
base your decision on gossip. <b>pina-</b> <hi>n</hi> based
on. <hi>Panglíhuk nga pinasíkad sa maáyung pamatásan</hi>,
Behavior that is based on good
manners. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] push with the feet
exerting effort. <b>2a</b> kick the ground, as if
eager to fight. <hi>Ag túru nagpanikad kay gustu
nang muhasmag nákù</hi>, The bull is pawing
the ground because it wants to charge
me. <b>2b</b> [A13] be very eager to do s.t. <hi>Nagpanikad
siya ug adtu sa Manílà</hi>, He is very
eager to go to Manila. <b>-um-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] originate,
start from. <hi>Ang ílang áway nagsumikad
sa pagbáhin sa irinsiya</hi>, Their quarrel
started from the apportioning of the inheritance.
<b>sikadsikad</b>. <b>aN-r-(->)</b> see <b>ANINIKAD</b>.

<b>síkan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @second in rank, prize, sequence.
<hi>Akuy síkan, bayinti ang ákung prayis</hi>, I was
the second. I got twenty pesos as a prize. <b>&mdash; bis</b>
@{second base} of baseball. <b>&mdash; grid</b> @{second
grade}. <b>&mdash; han</b> @{second hand}. <b>&mdash; hap</b> second
half of a game. <b>&mdash; plís</b> @{second place}. <b>&mdash; plísir</b>
one who placed second. <b>&mdash; rawun</b> second
round in boxing. <b>&mdash; yir</b> second year of high
school or college. <hi>v</hi> [A2] obtain, get to be
the second place. <b>&mdash; dimusyun</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)]
@{second the motion}.[+]

<b>sikandir</b> <hi>n</hi> a boxer's second.

<b>sikápat</b> (from <hi>upat</hi>) <hi>n</hi> a coin of Spanish times
originally worth a quarter of a peso, but
ten centavos in the 1900's.

<b>sikat<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> = <b>SIKLAT</b>.

<b>síkat</b> <hi>a</hi> @cocky, showing off one's good looks
or posture. <hi>Síkat kaáyu siya nga mulakaw</hi>,
He walks in a very flippant and cocky manner.
<b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> worthy of praise or envy. <hi>Sikat[** Síkat ?]
kaáyu siyag kutsi</hi>, He has a flashy car. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A; c] @{show off}. <hi>Mupasíkat dáyun siya ug
náay mga dalágang nagtan-aw</hi>, He shows off
if there are girls around.

<b>síkaw</b> <hi>a</hi> being in large numbers and moving
about noisily. <hi>Síkaw kaáyu ang mga táwu
didtu sa tabuan</hi>, There is a noisy, bustling
crowd in the market. <hi>v</hi> [B6] be noisy and
moving about in different directions.

<b>sikawalu</b> <hi>n</hi> coin worth half a sikápat.

<b>sikaysíkay</b> <hi>v</hi> 1 [A2; c1] strive to make a
move. <hi>Misikaysíkay (nanikaysíkay) pagbángun
ang hubug</hi>, The drunk strove to get up.
<b>2</b> [A2N] strive, struggle for existence. <hi>Basta
musikaysíkay (manikaysíkay) ang táwu, mabúhì
giyud</hi>, If a man struggles, he will survive.
<b>3</b> [AN] buzz about in some activity.
<hi>Sayu sa buntag nagsikaysíkay (nagpanikaysíkay)
nag mga kumpradur</hi>, Early in the
morning the dealers in produce were already
buzzing about.

<b>sikbat</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a12b2] for a fierce animal or
<pb n=893>an angry person to snarl at s.o. suddenly.
<hi>Gisikbat ang iring nga midúul sa irù nga nagkaun</hi>,
The dog snarled at the cat that came
near him while he was eating. <hi>Hingsikbatan
ku siya kay midúul man nákù ug nangáyù
ug itan-aw sa sini</hi>, I snapped at him when
he came to me asking for money to go to
the movies.

<b>sikbit</b> <hi>n</hi> @contiguous, located next to. <hi>Sikbit
siya nákug lingkud</hi>, He sat next to me. <hi>Nagsikbit
ang ámung lúti</hi>, Our lots are adjacent.
<b>ka-</b> s.o. who is located next to s.t.

<b>sikbut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] cut s.t. with a single
stroke toward the agent, esp. with a sickle.
<hi>Sikbuta lang ang písì arun maputul dáyun</hi>,
Just cut the rope to get it loose quickly. <b>2</b>
[AN; a12] @swipe. <hi>Nanikbut ang bátag lumbuy
sa tindíra</hi>, The little boy swiped a <hi>lumbuy</hi>
from the fruit seller. <b>3</b> pick out with a
small dip net. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sickle. <b>2</b> small dip net.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b1] finagle s.t. out of s.o. without
much fuss and bother. <hi>Manikbut siya ug
plíti sa mga amígu</hi>, He gets his friends to
pay his fare for him.

<b>sikdu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>, <b>sikdù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] scoop s.t. up quickly
by tossing, flipping up a container. <hi>Sikdúha
ang binlud. Ayawg iípun sa bugas</hi>, Remove
the fine meal by scooping it off as
you flip it. Don't put it together with the
grain. <b>n</b> @scoop. <b>(&mdash;)</b>, <b>ig-l-</b> = <b>SIKDU</b>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>sikdu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>, <b>sikdù<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1b2] @jab, @nudge. <hi>Sikdúun
ta lang kag makigpamaúlì na ku</hi>, I'll
just nudge you when I want to get home.

<b>sikdù<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> = <b>SID-UK</b>.

<b>sikdul</b> = <b>SIKDU<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>.

<b>sikging</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] snatch at s.t. live suddenly
to catch it. <hi>Biktun pa, pára ituy! Sikgínga
lang</hi>, You don't have to trap a puppy! Just
grab it!

<b>siki</b> <hi>n</hi> @fetlock, a thumb-like projection above
the foot in the legs of animals.

<b>sikil</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B3(1)46; bP] for s.t. long to @{jut
out}. <hi>Misikil ang bukug sa íyang síku sa íyang
pagkah[=ú]g</hi>, The bone in his elbow stuck out
when he fell down. <b>2</b> [A; a2b2] nudge s.o.,
esp. with the elbow. <hi>Musikil giyud siya nákù
inig-ági níya nákù</hi>, He nudges me every
time he passes by me. <b>2a</b> pierce with a horn
or tusk. <hi>Ang túru nga misikil sa mag-uúma</hi>,
The bull that gored the farmer. <hi>n</hi> @protuberance,
s.t. that juts out.

<b>síkit</b> <hi>a</hi> @close, with least distance. <hi>Síkit kaáyu
siya nga mubayli</hi>, He dances very close. <hi>Didtu
magtágù ang ilagà, síkit sa busaug</hi>, The
rat hid close to the floor joists. <hi>Síkit silang
mga higála</hi>, They are close friends. <hi>v</hi> [AC; ac]
be or get close to each other. <hi>Sikíta[** Síkita ?] ug
butang ang mga misitíra</hi>, Put the flower pots
close to each other.

<b>siklahun</b> <hi>a</hi> @scarce. <hi>Lisud makatrabahu ang táwung
siklahun ug ininglis</hi>, It's hard for people
whose English is limited to find work. <hi>v</hi>
[B] be scarce. <hi>Nagkasiklahun na run ang
bábuy ihálas</hi>, Wild pigs are getting scarce
now.

<b>si-klam</b> <hi>n</hi> @{C-clamp}.

<b>siklap</b> <hi>v</hi> [b4(1)] take a quick glance at. <hi>Nasiklapan
ku siya nga nagbaylu sa baráha</hi>, I
caught him switching the cards around. <b>pa-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A] take a glance at. <hi>Mupasiklap siya nákù
matag karun ug unyà</hi>, She takes a glance
at me now and then.

<b>siklat</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> fence or wall made of bamboo slats
woven through or nailed to two or more
horizontal slats. <b>2</b> one of the vertical slats
of such a fence. <hi>v</hi> [A1; b5] put siklat fencing.
<hi>Siklatun (siklatan) ku ang mga manuk</hi>,
I will enclose the chickens with a fence of
bamboo slats.

<b>siklib</b> <hi>n</hi> @{sick leave}. <hi>Way siklib ang ámung gitrabahúan</hi>,
There's no sick leave in the company
I'm working for. <hi>v</hi> [A2] @{take sick
leave}.

<b>siklista</b> <hi>n</hi> @cyclist, bicycle rider.

<b>siklit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; b4(1)] <b>1</b> get a glimpse of. <hi>Nakasiklit
ku sa íyang gisulat</hi>, I got a glimpse
of what he wrote. <b>2</b> come to notice by
chance. <hi>Hingsiklitan nákung dihay mihíkap
sa ákung bulsa</hi>, I was suddenly aware of s.o.
touching my pocket.

<b>siklut</b> <hi>n</hi> = <b>BALINSAY</b>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> = <b>BALINSAY</b>, <hi>v1</hi>.
<b>2</b> [A; c6] flip s.t. with the fingers by holding
the middle finger with the thumb and
letting it go with a snap. <b>3</b> [A12; b8] obtain
s.t. with ease. <hi>Usáhay makasiklut siyag
mamisus sa pamantayg awtu</hi>, Sometimes he
gets a peso for watching cars.

<b>sikma</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2N2; b6] @{blow one's nose}. <b>&mdash; ug
dugù</b> [A1] have a nosebleed. <hi>Nagsikma intáwun
ug dugù ang aláut sa kakusug sa sukmag
nga íyang nadáwat</hi>, The poor fellow
was hit so hard he had a nosebleed. <b>&mdash; ug
kusáhus</b> [A13] get a good punch in the
nose (lit. blow jerked meat out of the nose).
<b>&mdash; ug manintimus, trín</b> blow a long column
from the nose after crying. <hi>Tan-áwa lang
unyà ninyu dì ba manikmag manintimus kining
búang nga asáwa</hi>, Just watch if that
crazy wife of mine doesn't blow her nose
from crying.

<b>sikmat</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2N; b6] snarl at suddenly and
without warning. <hi>Takwáhaw lang kung gisikmátan
sa irù</hi>, The dog just suddenly
snarled at me.

<b>sikmul</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ac1] <b>1</b> touch s.t. lightly to the
mouth or the mouth lightly to it. <hi>Igù lang
<pb n=894>misikmul sa kan-unun ang irù ug milakaw</hi>,
The dog just sniffed at the food and walked
away. <hi>Sikmúla (isikmul) ang imáhin sa santus</hi>,
Touch the image of the saint lightly to
your lips. <b>2</b> touch s.t. to a child or baby animal's
mouth just before he begins to eat or
talk, an action which is thought to influence
the child's or animal's behavior for life. <hi>Sikmúla
(isikmul) ug hulmígas ang mga ituy arun
maísug</hi>, Give ants to the puppies before
you wean them to make them become
fierce. <b>3</b> hone s.t. by rubbing it back and
forth lightly over a sharpener. <b>n</b> the thing
put to a child's or young animal's mouth to
influence its future behavior. <hi>Ang sikmul
nga tamalà makapalistu sa paniil sa bátà, A
small octopus is a good inauguratory feed
for the child[**guess] because it will make him quick
on his feet</hi>.

<b>sikpaw</b> = <b>SIGPAW</b>.

<b>sikrit</b> = <b>SIKRIT KANG</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>KANG<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>. <b>&mdash; pákit</b> <b>1</b>
@{watch pocket}. <b>2</b> pocket sewn in the side of
a dress, esp. uniform at the seam. <hi>v</hi> [A; c]
in blackjack, take an additional card. <hi>Musikrit
ku kay layù ra sa bayntiúnu ang ákù</hi>,
Hit me because I'm miles away from twenty
one.

<b>sikríta</b> <hi>n</hi> @plainclothesman. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] be,
make one a plainclothesman.

<b>sikritári</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> secretary in an office. <b>2</b> an officer
of the government who administers a
department. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] be, appoint s.o.
as secretary.

<b>sikritarya</b> <hi>n</hi> lady secretary in an office. <hi>v</hi> [A13;
a12] be, make s.o. a secretary. <b>-l</b> <hi>n</hi> secretarial
course.

<b>sikritaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> = <b>SIKRITARYA</b> (male).

<b>sikrítu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @secret. <b>2</b> @{watch pocket}. <b>3</b> = <b>SIKRIT
KANG</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>KANG<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] do s.t. secretly.
<hi>Sikritúhan ta kag ingun arun ikaw
ray mahibalu</hi>, I will tell you secretly so that
you will be the only one to know.

<b>sikrítu diamur</b> = <b>AMUR SIKRÍTU</b>.

<b>siksbay siks</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. six-wheeled motor transport
with six driving wheels, used by the
armed forces. <hi>v</hi> [A13] travel in a six-by-six.

<b>siksi</b> <hi>a</hi> @sexy, stimulating erotic feelings. <hi>Si Ikang
siksi kaáyu nga mamustúra</hi>, Ikang is
very sexy when she dresses up. <hi>Kanang pilikuláha
siksi kunu kaáyu</hi>, That is supposed
to be an erotically stimulating film. <hi>v</hi> [B12;
a2] be, become sexy.

<b>siksik</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] <b>1</b> go over an area in systematic
detail to search for s.t., ignoring no inch.
<hi>Ang kanipáang ílang gisiksíkan sa bátang
nawálà</hi>, The nipa swamps they combed in
search of the lost child. <b>2</b> screen applicants
for a post. <hi>Átung siksíkun sila ug maáyu arun 
mapílì nátù ang kinamaayúhan</hi>, We will
screen them carefully to get the very best.
<b>3</b> = <b>HIN-</b>. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] for birds and fowls to
preen their feathers. <hi>n</hi> research, detailed investigation.
<b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN2; b6] search for nits
in the head by running the strands of hair
between thumb and forefinger. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi>
@researcher.

<b>siksiríkay</b> = <b>SITSIRÍKA<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>.

<b>siksiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> section of a certain grade in
school. <hi>Duha ka siksiyun ang tirsíru grádu</hi>,
There are two sections in the third grade. <b>2</b>
section in an article, chapter, law, and the
like. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] set up sections in school.

<b>siksrawundir</b> <hi>n</hi> boxer who fights in six-round
bouts preliminary to the main event. <hi>v</hi> [B126]
become a six-rounder.

<b>sikstináyin</b> <hi>n</hi> the @{sixty-nine} position in sexual
intercourse. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] do the @{sixty-nine}.

<b>sikstin kards</b> <hi>n</hi> a manner of playing mahjong
using sixteen pieces.

<b>sikstring</b> <hi>n</hi> 1 k.o. guitar with six strings. <hi>2</hi>
the particular tuning of such a guitar (D or
E, A, D, G, B, E). <hi>v</hi> [a12] tune a guitar in this
way.

<b>sikstu grádu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{sixth grade}.

<b>siks-uklák</b> <hi>n</hi> aim at six o'clock&mdash;i.e. slightly
below the target.

<b>sikswa</b> <hi>a</hi> sexy, said in humorous reference to
effeminate boys.

<b>siktur</b> <hi>n</hi> @sector, area appertaining to a certain
armed force.

<b>siku</b> = <b>GWAYABANU</b>. <b>&mdash; karabaw</b> = <b>SIKU</b>.
<b>&mdash; kapúti</b> = <b>TSÍKU</b>.

<b>síku<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @elbow. <b>2</b> a unit of measurement
reckoned from the tip of the middle finger
to the elbow, used to measure yarn. <b>(->)</b> v
[AN; a2] nudge with the elbow. <hi>Ug dì ku
nímu paagiun sikhun ta ka</hi>, If you do not
let me pass, I will hit you with my elbow.
<b>sikúhan</b> <hi>v</hi> [C] nudge each other with the elbows.
<b>sikuhan</b> <hi>n</hi> a needle used for mending
nets, made of a flat piece of bamboo about
6&ndash;10"[**inch symbol] long with a pointed end that has a U-shaped
slot and notch at the opposite end.
<b>maN-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> = <b>SÍKU<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>, <hi>n2</hi>.

<b>síku<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> (from <hi>risíku</hi>) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AP; a12P] boil off
water from s.t. as in making syrup. I<hi>kay
musíku (mupasíku) sa dugà arun maispísu</hi>,
Boil the water off from the juice so that it
will get thick. <b>2</b> [B2] for s.t. to be cooked
until it is thick and hard. <hi>Ilúnud ang pilit
kun musíku na ang latik</hi>, Put in the rice
when the syrup gets sticky. <hi>Lamì ang humay
nga sikúhun paglung-ag</hi>, Rice tastes
good when boiled hard. <b>n</b> s.t. cooked hard
or thick.

<b>síku<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> rigidly strict with an air of superiority 
<pb n=895>and unapproachability. <hi>v</hi> [B] be haughty.
<hi>Nagkasiku siya sukad makabana ug Katsílà</hi>,
She has become strict and haughty since
she married a Spaniard. <b>sikusíku</b> <hi>v</hi> [AP; b6]
act haughtily strict towards people. <hi>Ayaw
kug sikusikúhi kay suhítu ku sa ímung kaági</hi>,
Don't try to be haughty and stand-offish
to me because I know where you came from.

<b>sikuláti</b> = <b>SIKWÁTI</b>, <hi>n</hi>, <hi>v1</hi>.

<b>sikuluhíya</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @psychology. <b>2</b> the knack of
dealing with people to get them to perform
in a desired way, read their feelings. <hi>Ug may
sikuluhíya ka pa wà lang untà nímu palita
arun itanyag ug barátu</hi>, If you'd had a better
knowledge of human behavior, you
wouldn't have bought it right away so that
you could have gotten it cheap.

<b>sikundarya</b> <hi>n</hi> secondary school (grades seven
through ten).

<b>síkund grid</b> = <b>SÍKAN GRID</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>SÍKAN</b>.

<b>síkup<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN; a12] catch fish or shellfish
by running a net or hands along the bottom
of the water. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] arrest, usually after
a dragnet operation. <hi>Ug sikúpun ka sa
ipbiay walà kay iskapaturya</hi>, If the FBI institutes
a dragnet to find you, there is no
escape. <b>2a</b> trap an elusive bachelor into marriage.
<b>sinikpan</b> <hi>n</hi> fish or shellfish caught by
hand.

<b>síkup<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. bird of prey. <b>mata ug &mdash;</b> <hi>a</hi>
hawk-eyed.

<b>sikuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] steal s.t. not of great value
(slang). <hi>Kinsay nagsikuy sa ákung bulpin?</hi>
Who swiped my pen?

<b>sikwa</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. squash: <b><hi>Luffa cylindrica</hi></b>.

<b>sikwalu</b> = <b>SIKAWALU</b>.

<b>sikwáti</b> <hi>n</hi> chocolate, a beverage made of sugar
and ground roasted cacao beans, served hot
and thick. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; a12] make, have chocolate.
<b>2</b> [A123P; a12] defeat decisively. <hi>Sa
baskit nasikwáti mi</hi>, We were trounced in
the basketball game. <b>2a</b> punish severely.
<hi>Bantay ka lang ug sakpan kang Pápa kay
masikwáti ka giyud</hi>, Watch out if Daddy
catches you. You will get it. <b>2b</b> perform
badly. <hi>Pisti tung prublimáha. Mau tuy nakasikwáti
(nakapasikwáti) nákù</hi>, That damn
problem was my downfall in the exam. <b>2c</b>
be erotically stimulated to a high degree.
<hi>Ug muuban nang bayhána nákù sa sini, masikwáti
giyud</hi>, If that woman goes to the
show with me, I'll get her all hopped up.

<b>sikway</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab2] shove to the side with a
sweeping motion of the arms. S<hi>ígi siyang
sikway sa mga bugang pagsúut níya sa kalibunan</hi>,
He kept shoving away the weeds to
the sides as he went through the thicket.
<hi>Hisikwayan nákù ang básu maung nahúlug</hi>,
I happened to knock my arm against the
glass, and it fell.

<b>sikyuriti</b> <hi>n</hi> @{security guard}. <b>&mdash; gard</b> = <b>SIKYURITI</b>.

<b>síl</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; c] hold a bargain sale. <hi>Nagsíl karun
sa Wayitguld</hi>, They're having a sale at
the White Gold. <b>Krismas</b>, <b>prumusiyun</b>, <b>payir
dámids</b>, <b>watir dámids &mdash;</b> Christmas, promotional,
fire, water damage sale.

<b>sila</b> @they. <hi>Muadtu sila sa Mandáwi</hi>, They will
go to Mandaue. <b>&mdash; si</b>, <b>-ng</b> [<hi>name</hi>][**should this be bold? P2] [name]
and his friends or family. <hi>Túa na sila si (silang)
Prid</hi>, Fred and his friends have left.
<b>silahánun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> townmates. <hi>Mutábang giyud
si Pidru kang Husi kay silahánun ra</hi>, Pedro
will surely help José because they are townmates.
<b>2</b> @{distant relatives}. <hi>Silahánun si Piduy
ug Baldu kay mag-ágaw ílang isig ka apuhan</hi>,
Pedoy and Baldy are distantly related
because their grandfathers are cousins.
<b>níla</b> <b>1</b> <hi>gen.</hi>: of them, by them. <hi>Ang awtu níla
bag-u</hi>, Their car is new. <hi>Gibaligyà níla</hi>,
They sold it. <b>2</b> short for <b>kaníla</b>. <b>kaníla</b> <hi>dat.</hi>:
them. <hi>Wà ku kakità kaníla</hi>, I have not seen
them. <hi>Kanílang duha, kinsay mas taas?</hi> Of
the two of them, which one is taller? <b>íla</b>,
<b>iláha</b> <hi>preposed gen.</hi>: their, by them. <hi>Ang ílang
amahan</hi>, Their father. <hi>Ílang gipalit</hi>,
They bought it. <b>2</b> thing that's theirs. <hi>Ang
ákung awtu bag-u, ang íla (iláha) dáan</hi>, My
car is new. Theirs is old. <b>3</b> their home, place.
<hi>Háin man ang íla?</hi> Where is their house?
<hi>Adtu ku sa ílang (íla ka) Husi</hi>, I'm going to
José's house. <b>silasíla</b> <b>n</b> related to each other[** @relatives?].
<hi>Si Anuy ug si Badung? Ah, silasíla ra nà</hi>,
Anoy and Badong? Oh, they are related to
each other. <hi>v</hi> [A13] do s.t. by themselves.
<hi>Nagsilasíla ra sila ug pangáun, walà manawag</hi>,
They just ate by themselves. They did
not invite us. <b>ilaíla</b> = <b>SILASÍLA</b>, <hi>v</hi>. <b>ilahánun</b>
= <b>SILAHÁNUN</b>.

<b>silab<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] set fire to, put s.t. burning
close to s.t. else. <hi>Ayawg silabi ang ákung
balay</hi>, Don't set my house on fire. <hi>Silaban
ku áring sulù nang nawung ánang irúa</hi>, I
will put this burning torch to that dog's
face.

<b>silab<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @blade, the sharpened edge of a cutting
tool. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] put a blade on, make into
a blade. <hi>Gisilaban ni Ingku ang kawáyan</hi>,
Ingko made a cutting edge on the piece of
bamboo.

<b>sílab</b> <hi>v</hi> [B12] for the leaves of plants to become
reddish. <hi>Ang taas nga húlaw mauy nakasílab
(nakapasílab) sa dáhun sa lubi</hi>, The
coconut leaves became reddish because of
the long drought.

<b>silaba</b> <hi>n</hi> @syllable.

<pb n=896>

<b>silabi</b> = <b>SULÁBI</b>, <hi>2</hi>. <hi>see</hi> <b>LABI</b>.

<b>silabun</b> = <b>LABUN</b>, <hi>1</hi>.

<b>sílag</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256; b8] <b>1</b> be, become envious.
<hi>Kasilágan ka sa mga táwu ug ikaw ray mag-awtu</hi>,
The people will be envious of you if
you are the only one who drives a car. <b>2</b>
have an intense hatred for s.o. <hi>Nasílag siya
sa nagpildi níya</hi>, She came to hate the man
who stole her chastity. <hi>Gikasilágan ku ang
tanang Katsílà</hi>, I hate all Spaniards. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi>
@enmity, @hatred. K<hi>asílag nga lubngánan ray
kinutúban</hi>, A hatred that will end only in
the grave. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @envious.

<b>siláhis</b> <hi>n</hi> low-hanging, light-gray clouds, the
movement of which indicate the velocity
of the wind. <hi>Basta kusug ang siláhis may
bagyung muabut</hi>, Fast-moving clouds indicate
an approaching storm.

<b>silak</b>, <b>sílak<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @shellac. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @shellac s.t.

<b>sílak<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> for the sun to be shining clear and
bright. <hi>Sílak na, ay na lang pagpáyung</hi>, The
sun is out now. You don't need your umbrella.
<hi>v</hi> [A2] for it to be clear and bright.
<hi>Masilákun ang kaugmáun sa táwung buútan</hi>,
One who behaves well has a bright
future.

<b>sílang</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S; b4(1)] for heavenly bodies
to rise. <hi>Hingsilangan[**sílang??] mi sa adlaw kay dúgay
mi nga nangatúlug</hi>, We went to bed late and
got up after the sun rose. <b>2</b> [A23] appear,
become known with fame and honor. <hi>Usa
ka bantúgan nga magbabalak misílang kanátù</hi>,
A famed poet is born among us. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A; b6(1)] peep, peer through. <hi>Nagpasílang
sa largabista ang kapitan</hi>, The ship captain
is peeping through the binoculars. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi>
@east, general direction where the sun rises.
<b>halayù</b>, <b>layù nga &mdash;</b> @{Far East}. <b>kinatung-an
nga &mdash;</b> @{Middle East}. <b>duul nga &mdash;</b> @{Near East}.

<b>silangga</b> <hi>n</hi> body of water separating neighboring
islets.

<b>silanis</b> <hi>n</hi> @celanese.

<b>siláub</b> (from <hi>dáub</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A2S; b6] <b>1</b> burst into
flame, @{flare up} and burn brightly. <hi>Tayhúpa
ang mga bága arun musiláub</hi>, Blow on the
live coals so they will burst into flame. <b>2</b>
for emotions to flare up. <b>Hináya lang ug
sulti. Musiláub ka man lang dáyun</b>, Say it
calmly. Don't just flare up suddenly. <b>3</b> [B246]
for war to break out. <hi>Misiláub ang ikaduhang
gúbat sa kalibútan sa 1941</hi>, The
Second World War broke out in 1941.

<b>sílaw</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @ray, @beam of emitted light. <hi>Ang sílaw
sa adlaw</hi>, The sun's rays. <hi>Ang sílaw sa
sugà sa trák</hi>, The glare from the headlights
of the truck. <hi>v</hi> [A2S; b6] @shine, emit rays
of light. <hi>Nagsilaw ang ispat sa íyang nawung</hi>,
The flashlight was shining into his face. <b>ka-</b>
<hi>n</hi> @brilliance.

<b>silbátu</b> = <b>SIRBÁTU</b>.

<b>silbi</b>, <b>silbidur</b>, <b>silbidúra</b> = <b>SIRBI</b>, <b>SIRBIDUR</b>,
<b>SIRBIDÚRA</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>.

<b>silda</b> <hi>n</hi> @cell of a prison or convent.

<b>silhig</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN2; a] @sweep or @rake a surface
to remove dirt. <hi>Silhígun mu ang ginabas</hi>,
Sweep away the sawdust. <hi>Silhígan nátù ang
tugkaran</hi>, Let's rake the grass. <b>2</b> [a12] remove
from office in numbers. <hi>Kadtung walà
mubutar nákù silhígun sa katungdánan</hi>,
Those who did not vote for me will be removed
from office. <b>n</b> @broom. <b>&mdash; sa ngípun</b>
toothpick (humorous). <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @sweeper.

<b>síli</b> <hi>n</hi> @pepper: <b><hi>Capsicum spp.</hi></b> <b>&mdash; nga amirikánu</b>
a large yellow variety. <b>&mdash; nga ispáda</b> long
variety: <b><hi>Capsicum anuum var. longum</hi></b>. <b>&mdash; nga
kagùkù</b> the large sweet pepper which
turns red when ripe: <b><hi>Capsicum anuum</hi></b>. <b>&mdash; kulikut</b>
tiny, hot, red peppers: <b><hi>Capsicum
frutescens</hi></b>. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] use, put hot peppers
to, into s.t. <hi>Musili ka ba?</hi> Do you use
pepper in your food? <b>&mdash; kay gihángan</b> [A13]
for s.o. to get hurt by some indirect
hints which refer to what he was actually
doing (if the shoe fits, put it on). <hi>Nahimangud
si Líta sa ákung sulti. Nagsili tingáli
kay gihángan man</hi>, Lita was hurt by what I
said. It probably was true. (Lit. She must
be putting pepper in her food if she feels it
is too spicy.) <b>sinilian</b>, <b>sinilihan</b> <hi>a</hi> spiced with
hot peppers[** "@peppered"?].

<b>silib</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sunray <b>2</b> place where rain can come
in. <hi>Silib dihà sa bintánà kun mag-ulan</hi>, The
rain comes in the window when it rains. <b>v</b>
<b>1</b> [A2; b2] for the sun to shine from behind
s.t., for rain to come in. <hi>Maháyag ang
kwartu ug musilib ang adlaw gíkan sa kakahúyan</hi>,
The room will become bright when
the sun appears from behind the trees. <b>2</b>
[A23] appear as if coming out from hiding.
<hi>Pahíyum nga misilib sa íyang nawung</hi>, A
smile that appeared on her face. <b>3</b> [a12]
go and take a look. <hi>Ákung silbun ang kábaw
nga ákung gitugway</hi>, I will go and see the
carabao I put out in the pasture. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A;
b] @peep, look at while remaining hidden.
<hi>Ngánung nagpasilib man ka dihà luyu sa
kurtína?</hi> Why are you peeping from behind
the curtain? <b>2</b> [A3; c] look furtively out
of the corner of the eyes. <hi>Dílì siya mutárung
ug tan-aw. Mupasílib lang</hi>, He doesn't
look straight at you. He just looks furtively
from the corner of his eyes.

<b>silibr&acaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] @celebrate, observe the memory
of an event. <hi>Dílì siya musilibr&acaron;r sa íyang
adlaw</hi>, He will not celebrate his birthday.
<b>silibrasiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @celebration.

<pb n=897>

<b>silid</b> <hi>n</hi> @degree, a course of study or career.
<hi>Silid sa pagkadukt&ucaron;r</hi>, Medical course.

<b>sílid</b> <hi>n</hi> @bedroom, @room.

<b>sílik</b> <hi>n</hi> <hi>1</hi> @{dorsal fin} of fishes. <b>2</b> analogous
growth on reptiles. <b>3</b> crease along a trouser
leg. <b>4</b> in a hip roof, the junction of the
lateral and end slope which forms linear
edges somewhat in appearance like a dorsal
fin. <hi>v</hi> [B2456] for a crease to form along a
trouser leg. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi>[** typo <hi>a</hi>?] @crested, having a crest.

<b>silik-an</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>SIAK</b>, <hi>3</hi>.

<b>silin</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. one-stringed musical instrument,
played with a bow, resting on the ground,
high in pitch. The sound is produced by a
trumpet at the bottom.

<b>silindru</b> <hi>n</hi> cylinder of an engine.

<b>silindrun</b> = <b>SALINDRUN</b>.

<b>silindrus</b> = <b>SILINDRU</b> (plural).

<b>siling</b> = <b>INGUN<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> (dialectal).

<b>síling</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] fire shells, @bombard. <hi>n</hi> act of
shelling out.

<b>sil-ing</b> <hi>v</hi> 1 [A; a] look at s.t. closely to study
it. <hi>Gisil-ing níya ang títik nga milakra sa papil</hi>,
He studied the letters that appeared on
the page. <b>2</b> peep, look hard through a small
opening. <hi>Gisil-ing níya sa bungbung kung
kinsay nahiabut</hi>, He peeped through the slit
in the wall to see who was coming. <b>-an(->)</b>,
<b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> opening one can peep through.

<b>silíngan</b> <hi>n</hi> @neighbor. <hi>v</hi> [A2C; c3] <b>1</b> be, have
one for a neighbor. <hi>Lisud ikasilíngan ang
palaaway</hi>, It's difficult to happen to have
a quarrelsome person for a neighbor. <b>2</b> [A23]
@border, verge on. <hi>Ang ílang kinataw-an
musilíngan sa biaybíay</hi>, Their laughter borders
on derision. <b>-an(->)</b>, <b>ka-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @yard,
area surrounding the house. <b>2</b> @neighboring[** adjective!].
<hi>Kasilinganan (silinganan) nga lungsud</hi>, The
neighboring towns. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @neighborhood,
group of people composing a neighborhood.

<b>silinsiyu</b> <hi>a</hi> @silent, @quiet. <hi>Silinsiyu kaáyu ang
kurti pagpakanáug sa hukum</hi>, The court
became very silent when the decision was
handed down. <b>-su(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> for machines to be
noiseless. <hi>Silinsiyúsu kaáyu ning makináha</hi>,
This machine is noiseless. <hi>v</hi> [B; b6] for
machines to become noiseless.

<b>sílip</b>, <b>sil-ip</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @peep through a small
hole or opening. <hi>Misílip si Husi pagsúsi kun
kinsay náa sa gawas</hi>, Joseph peeped to see
who was outside. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. device in box
form with one side covered with glass, used
to look at s.t. under the water, held with
the bottom in the water while the user peers
into it. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] look at or for s.t. using
this device. <b>pa-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] peer slyly
or secretly; take a hasty furtive look. <hi>Nagpasilip
siya sa ákung baráha</hi>, He snuck a look
at my cards. <b>2</b> = <b>SÍLIP</b>, <hi>v</hi>.

<b>siliri</b> <hi>n</hi> @celery.

<b>silísi</b> = <b>SALÍSI</b>.

<b>sílit</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S; b26P] flow in a continuous
stream from where it is pent up. <hi>Misílit ang
túbig sa grípu</hi>, The water flowed from the
faucet. <b>2</b> [A23P; a12P] drive, move swiftly
forward. <hi>Unsa tung awtúha, misílit (mipasílit)
man lang?</hi> What car was that? It
just whizzed on by. <b>3</b> [A2S; a12P] for firecrackers
to fizzle or sputter. <hi>Usáhay ang ribintadur
dílì mubutu. Ígù ra nga musílit</hi>,
Sometimes the firecracker won't explode.
It just simply fizzles. <b>(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> @leaky. <hi>Silit kaáyu
ning tangkíha</hi>, This tank is very leaky.

<b>sil-it</b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)6; c1] come partly into view,
be seen or exposed partly. <hi>Misil-it na ang
adlaw sa ákung pagmata</hi>, The sun had already
started to rise when I woke up. <hi>Wà pa
makasil-it ang ngípun sa bátà</hi>, The baby
hasn't gotten any teeth yet. <hi>Ayaw sil-íta (isil-it)
ang ímung kwarta sa bulsa</hi>, Don't let
your money stick out of your pocket.

<b>silsil</b> <hi>n</hi> @{cold chisel}, a chisel for metal, stone.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] inscribe, work s.t. with a chisel.
<hi>Kinsay nagsilsil aring mga litra sa simintu</hi>,[** "?"?]
Who carved these letters into the concrete?
<b>1a</b> [A13; c6] fix in one's mind, @inculcate.
<hi>Mga sulti nga nasilsil sa íyang kaisípan</hi>,
Words that were chiseled into his mind. <b>2</b>
[A; a] remove s.t. with a chisel. <hi>Átung silsílun
ning kabilyáha</hi>, We will remove this reenforcement
bar with a cold chisel.

<b>silstuk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> sales talk. <b>2</b> glib talk to win over
or convince s.o. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] give s.o. a glib
line. <hi>Silstúkan na man pud ku sa íyang bakak,
mu rag mutúu ku</hi>, He is giving me his
line again, as if I could be taken in by it.

<b>sílu</b> <hi>n</hi> @cello. <hi>v</hi> [A] play the cello.

<b>silù</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126C23; a2] have hurt feelings. <hi>Nasilù
ku kay aku ray wà imbitaha</hi>, I was hurt
because I was the only one not invited. <hi>Mga
biaybíayng makasilù (makapasilù)</hi>, Words
of derision that can hurt the feelings. <hi>Nagsílù
ang managtrátu</hi>, The lovers are on bad
terms.

<b>silulúsa</b> <hi>n</hi> bagasse, sugar cane pulp left after
the juice has been extracted.

<b>sílung</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @downstairs. <hi>May duha ka kwartu
sa sílung</hi>, There are two bedrooms downstairs.
<b>1a</b> space underneath the house and
including the surrounding yard. <hi>Didtu níya
ihukut ang kanding sa sílung</hi>, He tethered
the goat under the house. <b>taas ug &mdash;</b> <hi>a</hi> standing
with the crotch comparatively high
above the ground (humorous). <hi>Kasagáran sa
mga Amirkánu taas ug sílung</hi>, Most of the
Americans are tall. <b>2</b> @protection, @care. <hi>Lisud
<pb n=898>ikíha ang usa ka táwu nga náa sa sílung sa
usa ka pulitiku</hi>, It is difficult to press
charges against a person under the aegis of
a politician. <b>3</b> building where domestic animals,
esp. cocks are kept. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN; b] take
shelter under. <hi>Anhi ku musílung (manílung)
sa iláwum sa káhuy</hi>, I'll take shelter under
the tree. <b>1a</b> [A; c] put into shelter in the
shade. <hi>Isílung ang kanding ug muulan</hi>, Take
the goat to shelter if it rains. <hi>Isílung pagtanum
ang mga kakaw sa lubi</hi>, Plant the cocoa
under the shade of the palms. <b>2</b> [A23] put
oneself under s.o.'s influence or protection.
<hi>Ang ílu misílung sa íyang uyuan</hi>, The orphan
was put under the care of his uncle.
<b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] plant a crop between the
rows of another crop that is taller. <hi>Musilung
kug mais sa kalubihan</hi>, I'll plant corn between
the rows of s.t. taller. <b>pa-</b> = <b>SÍLUNG</b>,
<hi>v1</hi>. <b>1a</b> <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] <b>1</b> for cocks to go to
another chicken yard, not the owner's. <hi>Manílung
ang sunuy kun way mungà sa íla</hi>, A
rooster will go to another house if there
are no hens in its own place. <b>2</b> for an adolescent
to begin or start visiting girls. <hi>Manílung
na ang íyang anak laláki</hi>, His son has
started visiting girls. <b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> @shelter or shade.

<b>silungsilung</b> <hi>n</hi> minor recurrence of measles
or chicken pox eruptions following a period
of quiescence. <hi>v</hi> [A23N; b4] for measles or
chicken pox to have a minor recurrence or
eruption. <hi>Natural giyud nà sa hanggà nga silungsilungan
(musilungsilung, manilungsilung)</hi>,
Chicken pox rash normally recurs in
a mild way.

<b>silupin</b> <hi>n</hi> @cellophane.

<b>sílus</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; b3] feel jealous, esp. of a beloved
one. <hi>Gisilúsan sa asáwa ang sikritarya
sa íyang bána</hi>, The wife was jealous of her
husband's secretary. <b>-a</b> <hi>a</hi> jealous (female). <hi>v</hi>
[B12] become jealous. <b>-u<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> jealous (male).

<b>silusíya</b> <hi>n</hi> @{venetian blinds}. <hi>v</hi> [c] put up venetian
blinds.

<b>silúsu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> for machine parts to be loose and
have too much free play. <hi>Piligru ning ímung
taksi kay silúsu kaáyu ang manabíla</hi>, Your
taxi is dangerous because it has a very loose
steering wheel. <hi>v</hi> [B123] get to be too loose.

<b>sílut<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> penalty for a crime. <hi>Ang sílut sa
pagpatay kinsi anyus</hi>, The penalty for murder
is fifteen years. <b>2</b> penalty in a game for
an infraction of the rule. <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] impose
a penalty for a crime or in sports.

<b>sílut<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> young coconut, the meat of which is
harder than the '<hi>butung</hi>' stage but softer
than the '<hi>ungul</hi>'.

<b>silúwid</b> <hi>n</hi> @celluloid.

<b>síluy</b> = <b>ASUSÍLUY</b>.

<b>silya</b> <hi>n</hi> @chair. <hi>v</hi> [a12] make into a chair. <b>&mdash; iliktrika</b>
@{electric chair}. <b>di-</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>DISILYA</b>. <b>silyíta</b>
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> saddle of a motorcycle or bicycle.
<b>2</b> small bamboo or rattan stool. <hi>v</hi> [b6] put,
attach a saddle. <b>-dur(->)</b>, <b>-dura</b> <hi>n</hi> leader of a
group of ten Roman Catholic lay people organized
for a devotion to the Most Sacred
Heart of Jesus. <hi>v</hi> [B36; a1] be, become the
<hi>silyadur</hi>.

<b>silyu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> postage or revenue @stamp. <b>2</b> seal,
put on s.t. to show that it has been inspected.
<b>3</b> seal to close an envelope. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6]
@seal or put a postage or revenue stamp on
s.t. <hi>Gibálik ang suwat kay wà silyúhi</hi>, The
letter was returned because there was no
stamp on it.

<b>símà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @barb. <b>2</b> @{glans penis} (euphemism). <hi>v</hi>
[A; b6] make, attach a barb. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi>[** typo <hi>a</hi>?] @barbed.

<b>símag</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @glow, brighten up. <hi>Musímag
ang mga aniníput inigkagabíi</hi>, Fireflies glow
in the evening. <hi>Nagsímag siya sa kaputì</hi>, She
is very fair. <hi>Gisimágan ang bátà sa maistra</hi>,
The teacher glared at the child.

<b>simalúna</b> <hi>a</hi> happening in an alternate fashion.
<hi>Simalúna ang hárì sa hantak gabíi</hi>, In the
coin tossing last night it was alternately
heads and tails all night long. <hi>Simalúna ang
úlan sa miáging simána</hi>, Last week the rains
came on alternate days. <hi>v</hi> [A3; c16] do s.t.
alternately.

<b>simána</b> <hi>n</hi> @week. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B2] get to be a week.
<hi>Musimána na lang wà mahiulì ang amahan</hi>,
A week passed, and the father had not returned.
<b>2</b> [a12] do s.t. by the week. <hi>Simanahun
ta ikaw ug suwildu</hi>, I will pay you
by the week. <b>3</b> [A; b] earn [so-and-so
much] every week. <hi>Gisimanáhan (nagsimána)
akug[** ak ug?] singkuwinta</hi>, I earned fifty a week.
<b>&mdash; Santa</b> <hi>n</hi> @{Holy Week}. <hi>v</hi> [A13N] spend
one's days during the Holy Week. <hi>Ása ka
man magsimána Santa (manimána Santa)?</hi>
Where are you going to spend Holy Week?
<b>-in-(&mdash;)</b>, <b>-l-(&mdash;)</b>, <b>tag-(&mdash;)</b> <hi>a</hi> @weekly, by the week.
<hi>Ang ámung swildu sinimana (simanal)</hi>, Our
salary is on a weekly basis. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] do
s.t. on a weekly basis. <b>Culu-</b> every week.
<hi>Duáwun tika sulusimána</hi>, I will visit you
every week. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b5] do every week.

<b>simang</b> <hi>v</hi> 1 [A; b6] change a course, turn off.
<hi>Inig-abut nímu sa iskína musimang ka sa
tuu</hi>, Upon reaching the corner, turn off to
the right. <b>2</b> [A23] deviate from a previous
course, track of conversation. <hi>Dílì usáhay
siya masabtan kay musimang siya sa unsay
gipanagsultíhan</hi>, Sometimes you can't understand
him because he deviates from what
he was talking about. <b>-l-an</b>, <b>-an</b>, <b>-anan(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi>
fork of a road or path.

<pb n=899>

<b>simaníya</b> <hi>n</hi> @chimney of a house, smokestack.

<b>simàsimà</b> = <b>SIMÙSIMÙ</b>.

<b>simba</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] <b>1</b> go to attend church services.
<hi>Musimba ku ugmà</hi>, I will attend church
services tomorrow. <b>2</b> @adore, regard with respect
and affection. <hi>Ang babáying ákung gisimba</hi>,
The woman I adore. <b>3</b> [A12; a3]
know s.o.'s innermost thoughts. <hi>Nasimba
ku na unsa ang ímung pagtan-aw kanákù</hi>, I
can read your thoughts of what you think
of me. <hi>n</hi> @{worship service}. <hi>Unsang urása ang
simba?</hi> What time is the service? <b>simbasimba</b>
<hi>n</hi> {@praying mantis}. <b>simbahan</b> <hi>n</hi> @church,
church building. <b>simbahan ni Pilátu</b> <hi>n</hi> female
genitalia (humorous). <b>-ku</b> exclamation
uttered upon remarking about s.t. bad to
keep it from happening to the speaker. <hi>Simbaku
ikaw lang untay mabúang, dílì aku</hi>,
God forbid that I go crazy, too. <b>-ku lagung</b>
<hi>humorous exclamation</hi>: May it not happen
to me! <hi>Simbaku lagung, paúlì sa namúlung</hi>,
I'm rubber, you're glue. Everything you say
to me bounces back and sticks to you. (Lit.
May it not happen to me, but go to the one
who said it.) <b>panimbaku</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] say <hi>simbaku</hi>.
<b>ig-l-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> what one wears to church. <b>2</b> special
girl friend. <hi>Daghan kug trátu, apan usa ra
giyuy igsilimba</hi>, I have lots of girl friends,
but I have only one special one. <b>-um-l-</b> <hi>n</hi>
about to go to church. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @churchgoers.
<sc>silimbáhun</sc> <hi>a</hi> worthy of adoration.

<b>simbal<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] add a piece of cloth or paper
to another piece to make it larger. <hi>Ákù
lang simbálan ang dapit sa íluk kay kúlang
ang panaptun</hi>, I'll add a piece of cloth to
the armpits because there isn't enough cloth.

<b>simbal<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @cymbal.

<b>simbu</b> <hi>a</hi> pubescent youngsters, esp. girls
who bloom into adulthood, developing
curves and stoutness. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] be strong
and healthy as a result of pubescence. <b>hiN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [B46] grow stout and healthy as one enters
adulthood. <hi>Maghinimbu na gánì ka dì
na madúgay nga madága ka na</hi>, If you grow
stout and healthy, it won't be long before
you're grown up.

<b>simbug</b> = <b>SAMBUG</b>.

<b>simbulu</b> <hi>n</hi> @symbol. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; c6] have or use
as a symbol. <b>2</b> [B1456] @symbolize. <hi>Ang pula
nagsimbulu sa pakigbísug</hi>, The red symbolizes
struggle.

<b>simburyu</b> <hi>n</hi> domed roof. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] construct
a dome.

<b>simhut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @smell, take a whiff. <b>2</b> [A12;
b2] be aware, @{get wind of}. <hi>Nía tus Baldu
ug makasimhut tus átung kumbira</hi>, Baldo
will be here if he gets wind of the party.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] @smell, @sniff. <hi>Dílì nà mamáak irúa. 
Manimhut lang nímu</hi>, That dog doesn't
bite. He will just sniff at you.

<b>simik</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] for any of a group to fail (usually
negative). <hi>Way misimik sa ákung kandidátu.
Lusut tanan</hi>, None of my candidates
lost. They all won. <hi>Way misimik sa ákung
antug. Púlus hárì</hi>, None of my tosses of the
coin failed. They all came out heads. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[a12] allow a single failure or miss. <hi>Ádik nà
siyag sini. Way pasimikun ánang salída</hi>, He
is a movie addict. He won't let a single picture
go by.

<b>similya</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @seedling, esp. for transplantation.
<b>1a</b> seeds used for propagation as opposed
to those used for consumption. <hi>Ayaw ni ipagaling
kay similya ning lisúha</hi>, Don't have
these seeds milled because we'll use them
for planting. <b>2</b> @fingerlings. <b>3</b> breed of domestic
animals used for food. <hi>Maáyu ug similya
ning babúya kay dagkuun</hi>, This pig is
of good breed because it is the big kind. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[c1] reserve seeds for planting purposes. <b>2</b>
[A; b6] plant seeds in a seedbed. <b>similyahan</b>
<hi>n</hi> @seedbed. <b>similyahun ug láwas</b> <hi>a</hi> for a
woman to be healthy (lit. a body fit to bear
children).

<b>siminar</b> <hi>n</hi> @seminar. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] hold a seminar.

<b>siminarista</b> <hi>n</hi> student in a seminary. <hi>v</hi> [B156]
be, become a seminarian.

<b>siminaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> @seminary.

<b>simintiryu</b> = <b>MINTIRYU</b>.

<b>simintu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @cement, @concrete. <hi>Balay nga simintu</hi>,
A concrete house. <b>2</b> the dikes around
a rice paddy. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] cement s.t.
<hi>Simintúhun ang mga karsáda sa prubinsiya</hi>,
They will cement the highways in the province.
<b>2</b> [A; a] put s.t. in plaster cast. <hi>Simintúhun
ang íyang buktun arun dílì makalíhuklíhuk</hi>,
His hand will be put in plaster
cast so he can't move it around. <b>3</b> [A13; b5]
construct a dike for a rice paddy. <b>4</b> [A; a]
fill the teeth cavities. <hi>Gisimintu ang lungag
sa ákung ngípun</hi>, I had my cavity filled.
<b>simintádu</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @cemented, @concrete. <b>2</b>
@{plaster-casted}.

<b>simirísir</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> medium-sized bicycle tire, larger
than a racer but smaller than the wide-tired
bicycle. <b>2</b> bicycle with a medium-sized tire.

<b>simistir</b>, <b>simistri</b> <hi>n</hi> @semester. <hi>v</hi> [b8] get to be
a semester.

<b>simpatika</b> = <b>SIMPATIKU</b> (female).

<b>simpatiku</b> <hi>a</hi> @charming, having an attractive
personality. <hi>Ang ímung anak simpatiku
(simpatika) kaáyu nga mupahíyum</hi>, Your
daughter smiles very charmingly. <hi>v</hi> [B12;
b6] be, become charming.

<b>simpatíya</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sympathy, the capacity to feel
<pb n=900>the problems of others. <hi>Dúna giyud na siyay
simpatíya sa mga tinun-an nga nagtrabáhu</hi>,
He has sympathy for working students. <b>2</b>
feeling of loyalty and tendency to favor s.t.
<hi>Ang mga hurn&acaron;l usáhay may simpatíya sa
mga kumunista</hi>, Day laborers often are
sympathetic to communism.

<b>simpì</b> = <b>SINGPÌ</b>.

<b>simpig</b> <hi>a</hi> @{close to}. <hi>v</hi> [AB6; c] go, put s.t. s.w.
near s.t. <hi>Musimpig ku sa bungbung arun musulud
ta sa katri</hi>, I'll keep close to the wall
so we can all sleep on the bed. <hi>Kinsay nagsimpig
áring parul diri sa baril sa gasulína?</hi>
Who put the lantern near the barrel of gasoline?
<hi>Isimpig ang ímung dunggan sa bungbung</hi>,
Put your ears next to the wall.

<b>*simpin</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>SINIMPIN</b>.

<b>simpís</b>, <b>simpiyis</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. ornamental fern: <b><hi>Nephrolepis
biserrata var. furcans</hi></b>.

<b>simplan</b> <hi>v</hi> [B246] be thrown to a distant
place after being hit by a strong blow. <hi>Musimplan
ka run ug butangan ta ka áring kúmù
ku</hi>, You will find yourself thrown to a
distance if I strike you with my fist.

<b>simpli</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @simple, without ornament, artifice,
or ostentation. <hi>Ang ílang kasal simpli kaáyu</hi>,
They had a simple wedding. <b>2</b> easy to
do, solve. <hi>Simpli kaáyung buhátun</hi>, It is
very easy to do. <hi>v</hi> [B; a] make s.t. simple,
become simple. <hi>Magsimpli tag káun arun
makadagínut</hi>, Let's eat simply so we can
save.

<b>simpul</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @simple, without affectation and
ostentation. <hi>Simpul ang ílang kasal</hi>, They
had a simple wedding. <b>2</b> @easy, uncomplicated
to do. <hi>Simpul ra ang suliran sa ámung
tíst</hi>, We were given simple problems in the
test. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] do s.t. simply, without
ostentation. <hi>Simpúla ra nang ákung sinínà</hi>,
Just make it a simple dress. 2 [A; c1] make
s.t. simple to do. <b>&mdash; líbing</b> <hi>n</hi> a simple way of
living. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] live simply. <hi>Magsimpul líbing
na ta run kay mahal na ang palalítun</hi>,
We'll have to live simply now that everything
is so expensive.

<b>simpun</b> = <b>SINGPUN</b>.

<b>simput</b> = <b>SINGPUT</b>.

<b>simsim<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. low herb similar in appearance
to purslane but with white axillary
flowers, soft pilose leaves, and a woody
stem.

<b>simsim<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a k.o. reed found in marshes, used
for decorative purposes.

<b>simsim<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] taste a liquid in small sips.
<hi>Ang mga buyug nagsimsim sa dugus</hi>, The
bees are sipping the nectar. <hi>Dì ku makasimsim
ug ínit nga sabaw sa luwag nga aluminum</hi>,
I can't sip hot broth from an aluminum 
ladle.

<b>simtum</b>, <b>simtúma</b> <hi>n</hi> @symptom.

<b>simúaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] sound boisterously. <hi>Sayu
pa gáning buntag nagsimúaw nas Maríya, nakamata
lang kug ahat</hi>, Maria was talking
loudly when it was still early in the morning
and I woke up. <hi>Unsa man say gisimúaw
ni Pidru?</hi> What is Pedro going on about
again?

<b>simud</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @snout of an animal. <b>2</b> the analogous
structure in a person (the lips and the
area adjacent that can be pushed forward).
<hi>Ayaw pabudlut sa ímung simud</hi>, Don't pout
(stick out your lips).

<b>sim-ung</b> <hi>a</hi> dark and @dreary. <hi>v</hi> [B] become
dark and dreary. <hi>Musim-ung ang kalibútan
basta magdag-um</hi>, The world becomes
gloomy when there is a heavy overcast.

<b>simùsimù</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] eat a little, esp. enough
to stave off hunger, but not be fully satiated.
<hi>Musimùsimù lang ta ígù nga isustinir
hasta paniudtu</hi>, Let's take a little of s.t.
enough to sustain us until lunchtime. <b>paN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2] nibble at grass leisurely.

<b>simyat</b> = <b>SIPYAT</b>.

<b>sin</b> = <b>UG</b>, <hi>1</hi>, <hi>2a</hi>, <hi>b</hi>, <hi>4a</hi>, <hi>b</hi> (dialectal).

<b>sín</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> galvanized sheet-iron roofing. <b>2</b> house
with sheet-iron roofing. <hi>Balay nga sín</hi>, A
house with sheet-metal roofing. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12]
put, construct with galvanized sheet-iron
roofing.

<b>sína<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B126; b3(1)] be envious. <hi>Nasína si
Dúdung sa ákung duláan</hi>, Dodong is envious
of my toy. <hi>Ang pagkaadunáhan lagmit kasináhan
sa uban</hi>, Other people are likely to
envy your wealth. <b>sinahan</b> <hi>a</hi> tending to be
envious. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @envy. <b>masináhun</b>, <b>manggisináhun</b>
<hi>a</hi> @envious.

<b>sina<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>see</hi> <b>MIRYINDA</b> <hi>and</hi> <b>SANTA</b>.

<b>sinádu</b> <hi>n</hi> the @senate. <b>-r(->)</b> @senator. <hi>v</hi> [B156;
a12] be, become a senator. <b>-ra</b> <hi>n</hi> lady
senator.

<b>sinagúga</b> <hi>n</hi> @synagogue.

<b>sinaguylas</b> = <b>SIRIGUYLAS</b>.

<b>sinamay</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>*SAMAY</b>.

<b>sinampangkung</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>*SAMPANGKUNG</b>.

<b>sinamun</b> <hi>n</hi> @cinnamon. <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6(1)] flavor
with cinnamon.

<b>sinaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> scenery as a background for a
stage. <hi>v</hi> [b6] use scenery. <b>sinaryuhan</b> <hi>n</hi>
@stage.

<b>sinátì</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @familiar. <hi>Daw sinátì nákù kaáyu
nang tingúga</hi>, It seems that I am very familiar
with that voice. <hi>Sinátì ku sa trabáhu dinhi</hi>,
I am very familiar with this job. <b>2</b> @{well-known}.
<hi>Ang paghíngus mauy usa ka sinátì
nga tilimad-un sa sip-un</hi>, Sniffling is a well-known
sign of colds. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1236] be familiar 
<pb n=901>with s.t. <b>2</b> [A12] @experience. <hi>Nakasinátì
kug kagútum sa gíra</hi>, I experienced hunger
during the war. <b>3</b> [C13] be acquainted with
each other. <hi>Wà pa kami magkasinátì kaáyu
mau nga dapítun ku siya karun</hi>, We are not
acquainted with each other so I am going
to invite her now. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @knowledge. <hi>Wà
kuy kasinatían báhin sa panglútù</hi>, I have no
knowledge of cooking. <b>2</b> @experience. <hi>Halandúmung
kasinatían</hi>, Memorable experience.

<b>sínaw</b> <hi>a</hi> @shiny, @glossy. <b>&mdash; ug úlu</b> @{bald-headed}
or head with the hair shaved off. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B26;
aP] be, become shiny. <hi>Musínaw (masínaw)
ang salug ug bagnúsan ug waks</hi>, The floor
will become shiny if you wax it. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)]
give an opponent zero. <hi>Ang ámung tím nagsínaw
sa iláha</hi>, Our team gave theirs a zero.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> zero score. <b>2</b> = <b>ISPÍHU</b>, <hi>3</hi>. <b>pa- sa lingkuránan</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A] keep sitting, not doing any
work. <hi>Ang tapulang asáwa pirmi lang magpasínaw
sa lingkuránan</hi>, A lazy wife does
nothing but sit idly.

<b>sindà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. illness which involves pain in a
local area, esp. a spot on the back which
may move to another area; or a @migraine, a
k.o. recurrent headache that affects the side
of the head. <b>2</b> k.o. eye ailment in which the
eyes become red and sometimes swollen
from too much work. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4b4]
have <hi>sindà</hi>. <hi>Pagpalit ug aspirína kay gisindà
(gisindáan) ku</hi>, Buy some aspirin because I
have an attack of <hi>sindà</hi> (headache or eye
fatigue).

<b>sindalan</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>DÁLAN</b>.

<b>sindi</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] light a pressure lantern. <hi>Nagsindi
si Tátay sa hásag kay ngitngit na</hi>, Father
is lighting the pressure lantern because
it's getting dark. <b>-dur(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> container from
which alcohol is poured to fire up the pressure
lantern.

<b>sindikátu</b> <hi>n</hi> @syndicate, a group of people
banded together for business or criminal
purposes. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] become a crime syndicate.

<b>sindul</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] kick away, nudge s.t.
with the toe of one's foot. <hi>Akuy musindul
sa láta, unyà manágù mu</hi>, I will kick the can,
and you all go hide. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] find, come
across s.t. <hi>Unsáun nákù pagbáyad ug dì ku
makasindul ug kwarta</hi>, How can I pay if I
do not happen to find some money. <hi>Tabì
nga ákung nasindulan sa tyanggihan</hi>, Gossip
I ran across in the market.

<b>sindúrut</b> = <b>SANDÚRUT</b>.

<b>sing-al</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> talk harshly. <hi>Ayaw kug
sing-áli</hi>, Don't shout at me. <b>2</b> sing loudly.
<hi>Mananaygun nga nagsing-al sa gawas</hi>, The
carolers singing loudly outside. <b>3</b> [A; b3]
@cry loudly, @bawl. <hi>Himì ka kay musing-al dáyun
ug gutmun,</hi> You're a cry-baby because
you bawl as soon as you're hungry. <hi>n</hi> harsh
talk, loud singing.

<b>sing-aling</b> <hi>n</hi> @shing-a-ling, a k.o. dance. <hi>v</hi> [A]
do the shing-a-ling.

<b>singán</b> = <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.

<b>singáni</b> = <sc>UNSA</sc> (dialectal).

<b>singári</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; abc] @{keep on} [do]ing, @always
do. <hi>Ug singaríhun nímu nà ug dukduk mabuak
nyà nà,</hi> If you keep pounding that, it
will break. <hi>Ayawg isingárig usar ang bag-u,</hi>
Don't always wear your new clothes.

<b>sing-aw</b> = <sc>SING-AL</sc>.

<b>singba</b> = <sc>SIMBA</sc>.

<b>singdalan</b> = <sc>SINDALAN</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>DÁLAN</sc>.

<b>singgáak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S; b6] @shout, @cry. <hi>Pára gamay
rang samad musinggáak ka[**uncertain] dáyun!</hi>
For such a small wound you @scream bloody
murder. <b>2</b> [A; bc1] shout, @snarl loudly at
s.o. in anger. <hi>Singgaákan níya ang bátà kun
kasab-an,</hi> He shouts at the child when he
scolds him.

<b>singgalung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. brownish @civet.

<b>singgapur</b> = <sc>KAMÚTING KÁHUY</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>KAMÚTI</sc>.

<b>singgaráyung</b> = <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.

<b>singgil</b> <hi>n</hi> strong @wire made of an alloy of copper,
tin, and some other metals.

<b>singgit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @shout, @yell at s.o. <hi>Gisinggitan
siya sa pulis nga pasurindírun,</hi> The police
shouted at him to surrender. <hi>n</hi> @shout.
<b>Ang &mdash; sa Balintawak</b> <hi>n</hi> the @Cry of Balintawak,
the signal for the Philippine Revolution
of 1896. <b>&mdash; awhag</b> goading and urging
done by shouting. <b>&mdash; pakitábang</b> cry for
help. <b>tubag &mdash;</b> answer given by shouting.
<b>ka-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> feel like shouting. <hi>Kasinggitun
ku sa kalágut,</hi> I felt like shouting in anger.

<b>singgul</b> <hi>a</hi> single-sized, good for one occupant
as opposed to a double one. <hi>Singgul nga
katri,</hi> @{Single bed}. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [a12] make s.t. a single
rather than double size. <b>2</b> [C2; ac3]
play @singles, make it singles instead of doubles.
<b>3</b> [A; c1] @goose. <hi>Ilang singgúlun ang
mutuwad,</hi> They will goose you if you bend
over.

<b>singgurayung, singguráyung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large Cerith
@shell, 4&ndash;5"[**inch symbol] long.

<b>singhag</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c] @snarl, talk harshly to. <hi>Ngánung
singhágan man ku nímu nga dílì man
ku bátà?</hi> Why do you snarl at me? I'm no
longer a child. <hi>Ayawg isinghag ang ímung
gustu,</hi> Don't say what you want with a
snarl. <hi>n</hi> harsh talk, s.t. said snarlingly. <b>-in-an</b>
<hi>n</hi> goods or articles acquired from inferiors
by virtue of one's influential position. <hi>Kanang
íyang mga ilimnun pulus sininghágan
<pb n=902>sa mga Insik,</hi> All those drinks were donated
free by Chinese businessmen.

<b>singhir</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @Singer brand sewing machines and
other appliances. <b>2</b> @{sewing machine}. <b>báyad
nga -in-</b> <hi>n</hi> @installment payments.

<b>singì</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] separate or take one piece off
from a bunch of fruit. <hi>Kinsay nagsingì ug
pipila ka dawin sa búlig nga ságing?</hi> Who
took several pieces from the banana bunch?
<hi>n</hi> space between the fingers and toes.

<b>singil</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN2; a2N] @{ask for} payment. <hi>Singlun
(paninglun) na ba nímu ag ákung útang?</hi>
Are you going to make me pay my debt? <b>2</b>
[A13N; a2N] exact payment for what one
has done, @collect on a promise. <hi>Magsingil
na ku sa íyang gibúhat nákù,</hi> I will now collect
for what he has done to me. <hi>Maningil
na ku níma[**nímu?] sa ímung gisáad nákù nga pinaskúhan,</hi>
Now I will ask for the Christmas
gift you promised me. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{bill collector}.
<b>singlunun, paninglunun</b> <hi>n</hi> amount collectible.

<b>singilugun</b> = <sc>ILUGUN</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>ÍLUG</sc>.

<b>síngin</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> fruits, ordinarily separate, joined
together in growth with a common continuous
skin. <b>2</b> @{Siamese twins}. <hi>v</hi> [C3] for
fruits to be joined as one.

<b>síngir</b> <hi>n</hi> @singer, @crooner. <hi>v</hi> [B156] be a singer.

<b>síngit<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> hand in mahjong and the analogous
situation in rummy where a single
number is missing to obtain a <hi>siyà</hi>. <b>2</b> the
missing number. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>SÍNGIT</sc>, <hi>2</hi>. <b>búnut
paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> drawing of the <hi>paníngit</hi>.

<b>síngit<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; c] include one's small
amount together with a larger amount belonging
to s.o. else. <hi>Misíngit kug písus sa íyang
pusta,</hi> I put in one peso together with
his bet. <hi>Nakasíngit kug lung-ag níla,</hi> I put
my small amount of rice together with the
rice they were cooking. <b>2</b> [A2; b] go in
with a group or with s.o. important to share
with their food, fun, etc. without sharing
in the expenses. <hi>Misíngit ku níla sa sini,</hi> I
tagged along to the movies with them.

<b>sing-it</b> = <sc>SALING-IT</sc>.

<b>*singit pa-, pa-(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3; a12] give s.o. cause
to goad him into a course of action. <hi>Pasingitun
ka lang níya arun magkaáway mu,</hi>
He will simply do s.t. to give you cause to
quarrel with him. <hi>n</hi> @goading.

<b>singka</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] speak harshly to s.o. <hi>Ayawg
isingka ang ímung tubag kay nangutána lang
ku,</hi> Don't shout your answer at me because
I was just asking. <hi>n</hi> s.t. said in a curt and
harsh way. <b>siningkáhan</b> <hi>n</hi> things s.o. obtains
from people under him by virtue of
his position.

<b>singkamas</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @vine cultivated for its fleshy
and juicy turnip-shaped root, widely eaten
raw and cooked: <hi><b>Pachyrrhizus erosus</b></hi>.

<b>singkámut</b> (from <hi>kamut</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [AN; b5] do one's
best, @strive. <hi>Musingkámut (maningkámut)
ku paglingkawas,</hi> I will strive to escape.
<hi>Singkamútan (singkamútun) kung mabalhin
ka,</hi> I'll do my best to have you transferred.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> @striving, @earnest, @{hard work}. <hi>Milampus
siya pinaági sa íyang kaugalíngung paningkámut,</hi>
He succeeded through his own
efforts. <b>mapaN-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @diligent, @industrious.

<b>singkaw</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @scythe. <b>2</b> have the arms bent
bow-shaped at the elbow like a scythe. <hi>v</hi>
[B126] for the elbow to get to be this way.
<b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [a12] hit with a scythe.

<b>singkiríbut</b> <hi>n</hi> @{sexual intercourse} (coarse
slang). <hi>v</hi> [AC; c1] @{have sexual intercourse}.

<b>singkit</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] tie two coconuts together
by their husks partly stripped off. <hi>Singkítun
ta ning duha ka lubi arun dílì magbúlag,</hi>
We will tie these two coconuts together
with their husks so they won't be separated.
2 [C3] for two separate things to be physically
@joined. <hi>Gitawag ug sayamis twins kanang
kalúha nga magsingkit,</hi> Twins that are
joined in flesh are called Siamese twins. <hi>n</hi>
two separate things joined in flesh. <hi>Usa ray
ihap sa ságing nga singkit,</hi> Joined bananas
are counted as one.

<b>singku</b> <hi>number</hi> five. <hi>n</hi> a @nickle. <hi>Tagái kug
singku,</hi> Let me have a nickle. <hi>v</hi> see <sc>TRÍS</sc>.

<b>singkul</b> <hi>n</hi> hard growth on the skin covering
bony parts, esp. on the ankles and elbows.
<hi>v</hi> [b4] develop a <hi>singkul</hi>. <hi>Sigun sa karáan,
<b>singkúlan</b> ka ug musúkul kag ginikánan,</hi> In
folk belief, one gets <hi>singkul</hi> if one talks
back to his parents.

<b>singkulyágas</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. sweet table @banana much
stouter than the <hi>tundan</hi>, with dark red peelings
and yellow-orange meat when ripe.

<b>singkuríbut</b> = <sc>SINGKIRÍBUT</sc>.

<b>singkurung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12b2] strike, knock the
head hard in a sweeping motion. <hi>Tungud sa
kalágut íyang gisingkurung ang bátà,</hi> He
smacked the child on the head in anger.

<b>singkurúyung</b> = <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.

<b>singkuung</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> well-curved on the sides. <hi>Singkuung
nga sanggut,</hi> A sickle with a well-curved
edge. <b>2</b> for the roof or the bottom
of a boat to be curved so that it affords little
room. <hi>v</hi> [B; c1] for the sides, roof, or
bottom to become well-curved.

<b>singkuwinta</b> <hi>number</hi> fifty. <hi>v</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.

<b>singkuy</b> <hi>a</hi> having the defect of horses where
the hocks knock against each other as they
move. <hi>Dílì maáyu nga mudágan ang ímung
kabáyù kay singkuy kaáyu,</hi> Your horse
doesn't run well because its hocks knock
<pb n=903>against each other. <hi>v</hi> [B156] get this defect.

<b>singpì</b> <hi>n</hi> clay cover for clay pots, roughly
conical in shape with a knob for a handle. <hi>v</hi>
[a12] make into a cover of this sort.

<b>singpun</b> <hi>a</hi> @{tightly woven}, with the threads
close together. <hi>Nipis ang panaptun kay dílì
singpun ang mga hílu,</hi> The cloth is thin because
the threads are not tightly woven. <hi>v</hi>
[B156; a12] get to be tightly woven.

<b>singput</b> <hi>a</hi> closely woven or fastened together,
not sparsely. <hi>Simput nga pagkatágik ang ámung
salug nga kawáyan,</hi> The bamboo slats
in our floor were put down very close to
each other. <hi>v</hi> [AB; a12] be closely woven,
put down; cause it to be so.

<b>singsing</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @ring. <hi>Singsing nga ingkantádu,
kahibulúngan,</hi> An enchanted, magic ring. <b>2</b>
any metal @band resembling a ring or small
@hoop. <b>3</b> short rope connecting the whipple-*tree
and the plow. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN2; a] wear, put a
ring on s.o. <b>2</b> [A; a] make into a ring. <b>3</b> [A;
b] firmly hook an orifice with a finger. <hi>Misúkul
siya piru dihang gisingsíngan nag iyáha,
nagpuyù lagi,</hi> She fought back, but
when I got my finger hooked into her vagina,
she stopped moving. <b>paN-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @{ring finger}.

<b>síngu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; a2b2] inhale a @smell or aroma.
<hi>Singúha ning kan-un ug maáyu pa ba,</hi> Smell
this food whether it is still good. <hi>Mu rag gás
tung nasinguhan nákù dinhà sa butilya,</hi> I
smelled s.t. like gas in the bottle.[+]

<b>síngud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @observe intently. <hi>Nagsíngud
siya kun nagtrabáhu ba mi,</hi> He was
watching us to see if we were working. <hi>Wà
ku makasíngud sa uma sa búkid,</hi> I did not
visit my field in the mountain to see how
they were doing. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] @listen intently.
<hi>Mupaníngud (maníngud) siyag sultíhan
apan dì lagi mutúman,</hi> He listens intently
to what you say, but he won't do it. <b>paningudsíngud</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2; a2] go get some news.
<hi>Paningudsíngud ug unsay nahitabù sa nakrás,</hi>
Go get some news about what happened
to the plane that crashed.

<b>singulu</b> (from úlu) <hi>v</hi> [A] for the child's head
to @crown in childbirth. <hi>Sakit sa ngatanan
kun musingulu na ang bátà,</hi> The pain is
most intense when the child's head crowns.

<b>singut</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @perspiration, @sweat. <b>2</b> @condensation
on an object cooler than the atmosphere.
<b>búngag &mdash;</b> @{prickly heat}. <hi>a</hi> @annoying, @irritating
to one's nerves. <hi>Gipul-an ku sa íyang
mga isturya, singut kaáyung pamináwun,</hi>
I'm bored with her stories. They're so annoying
to hear. <hi>Singut kaáyu nà siyang
manúgù nátù mu rag hárì,</hi> It really irritates
me the way she gives orders like a
queen. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B26; a4N] @perspire, @sweat. <hi>Ug
musingut ang kabáyù papahuwáya,</hi> If the
horse sweats, let it rest. <hi>Mupahúway ku ug
singtun (singutun) ku,</hi> I will stop working
if I perspire. <b>2</b> [A; a4] gather condensation.
pitcher[**Pitcher?] containing ice will get drops of water
on it. <b>3</b> [C123P] have a hard fight. <hi>Ug
gustu kang makigsíngut (makigpasíngut),
hala and&acaron;r,</hi> If you want to have a fight, <sc>O.K.</sc>
let's get to it. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [a4] <b>1</b> @sweat profusely.
2 for a sick person to break out in cold
sweat. <hi>Mukunhud ang hilánat ug paningtun
ka,</hi> The fever lowers if you break out in
cold sweat. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] be all covered
with sweat. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] do s.t. to make
oneself sweat. <hi>Wà mi magdúlà, nagpasíngut
lang mi,</hi> We didn't play, we just had a little
workout. <b>kadu-, du-(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] @sweat profusely.
<hi>Undang na ug dúlà kay nagkadusíngut
ka lang ug dágan,</hi> Stop playing now
because you are sweating profusely from
running around. <b>singtánun</b> <hi>a</hi> given to sweating
easily with the slightest exertion.

<b>sini</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{movie house}. <b>2</b> @{motion picture}. <b>3</b>
showing of motion pictures. <hi>Way sini run
kay Birnis Santu,</hi> There are no @movies today
because it's Good Friday. <b>4</b> love-making sight,
as seen by peeping (humorous
metaphor). <hi>Pirmi ming kakità ug sini inigpamisíta
sa íyang uyab,</hi> We always see a
'@movie' every time her boy friend comes. <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [A13] show a movie. <hi>Ang Yuis-ay-is magsíni
(magsini) sa iskuylahan karung gabíi,</hi>
The USIS will show a @film in the schoolhouse
tonight. <b>2</b> [a12] convert into a movie
house. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] <b>1</b> show a movie. <b>2</b>
display lovemaking. <hi>Nakakità ang mga bátà
nga nagsíni sila gabíi,</hi> The children peeped
at them necking last night. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] go
to the movies. <hi>Manini ta,</hi> Let's go to the
movies. <b>sinihan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{movie house}. <b>kasinihan</b> <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> @{movie houses} collectively. <b>2</b> @movies, as a
source of entertainment and as an art form.
<b>maki-, maki-(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> fond of movies. <hi>sinisíni</hi> <b>n</b>
<b>1</b> @slide-show. <b>2</b> free outdoor movie offered
by advertisement panels or mobile units.

<b>siniguylas</b> = <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc>.

<b>sinílas</b> <hi>n</hi> @slippers. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] wear, make into
slippers. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [a12] hit with slippers.

<b>sinimaskup</b> <hi>n</hi> @cinemascope or wide-screened
movie. <hi>v</hi> [B156] be in cinemascope.

<b>sinimpin</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. plain finger @ring with no
gems.

<b>sinínà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @dress. <b>2</b> @shirt. <b>3</b> = <sc>GÍNIT</sc>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A;
a] wear a shirt or dress. <hi>Nagsinínag pula,</hi>
Wearing a red shirt, dress. <hi>Sininái ang bátà,</hi>
Put a shirt on the child. <b>2</b> [A12] get a shirt.
<b>-un(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> cloth to be made into a shirt or
<pb n=904>dress.

<b>sinípit</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÍPIT</sc>.

<b>sinisíru</b> <hi>n</hi> @{ash tray}. <hi>Sa sinisíru ninyu ibutang
ang inyung upus,</hi> Put your cigarette butts
in the ash tray.

<b>siniyal</b> = <b>SINYAL</b>.

<b>siniyur</b> <hi>n</hi> title of address for men of high
station. <hi>short form:</hi> <b>nyur</b> <b>1</b> @Mr., @sir. <hi>Si Nyur
Pidru muabut rung hápun,</hi> Mr. Peter will
arrive this afternoon. <hi>Andam na ang ímung
awtu, nyur,</hi> Your car is ready, sir. <b>1a</b> form
of direct address between intimate male
friends. <hi>Kumusta, nyur!</hi> How are you,
@man! <b>2</b> in set usage for names of saints (not
<b>shortened).</b> <b>&mdash; San Pidru</b> @{St. Peter}. <b>&mdash; San Bisinti</b>
@{St. Vincent}. <b>&mdash; Santu Ninyu</b> the @{Holy
Child}. <b>pista sa &mdash;</b> @{Feast of the Holy Child}.[**Holy Child necessarily? P2]
<b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> detesting manual work. <hi>Ságad sa mga
dátù mga sinyurun ug kusug musúgù,</hi> Most
rich people are too good to do manual
work and tell people to do things for them.

<b>sinkuwínta</b> = <sc>SINGKUWINTA</sc>.

<b>sinsilyu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{small change}. <hi>Wà kuy sinsilyu diri,</hi>
I don't have any @change on me. <b>wà kuy
&mdash;</b> humorous way of answering a compliment
(implying one has no money to pay
the person for his flattery). <b>2</b> change given
back for a bill. <hi>Dúna kay sinsilyu áring písus?</hi>
Do you have change for this peso? <b>3</b>
@washer. <b>3a</b> metal rings found inside the hub
of wheels. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @{give change} or
break s.t. into change. <hi>Makasinsilyu ka áring
singkuhun?</hi> Can you @change this five
peso bill? <hi>Wà ku nímu sinsilyúhi (sinsilyúi),</hi>
You haven't given me my change! <b>2</b> [B1256]
be broken into fragments. <hi>Nasinsilyu
ang básu nga natambug sa simintu,</hi> The glass
was broken to pieces when it fell onto the
concrete. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] @{have children} (humorous).
<hi>Agad pay tibuuk, nagpasinsíyu giyud,</hi>
You were doing <sc>O.K.</sc> single (lit. a whole
bill). What did you have to go and have children
for (lit. make yourself into small
change)?[+]

<b>sinsíru</b> <hi>a</hi> @sincere.

<b>sinsitib, sinsitíbu</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @sensitive, easily offended.
<b>2</b> for electric equipment to be sensitive.
<hi>v</hi> [B12] be sensitive or easily offended and
irritated.

<b>sinsiya</b> <hi>n</hi> @science.

<b>sinsíyu</b> = <sc>SINSILYU</sc>.

<b>sinsu</b> <hi>n</hi> @census, an official enumeration of
population or some other statistics of an
area. <hi>v</hi> [A1; a12] have or hold a census.

<b>sinsur</b> <hi>n</hi> @censor. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] censor s.t. presented
to the public. <hi>Gisinsur ang báhin sa
salída nga dúnay naghúbù,</hi> The part where
there was a nude scene was censored out. <b>-s</b>
@censors (plural).

<b>sinsúru</b> <hi>n</hi> large, deep-sea fishing @net which
encircles the fish. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] fish with this
sort of net, esp. in harvesting fish from under
the <hi>páyaw</hi>. <b>sinsuradur</b> <hi>n</hi> one who operates
this sort of equipment.

<b>sinsus</b> = <sc>SINSU</sc>.

<b>sinta</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> for horses to @rear up. <hi>Pagbantay
kay musinta ang kabáyù!</hi> Watch
out! The horse will rear. <b>2</b> @{flare up} in anger,
raising the head. <hi>Ngánung musinta ka
man pára sa usa ka gamayng hangyù?</hi> Why
do you flare up for such a tiny request? <b>&mdash;
libanta</b> <hi>n</hi> a dog's trick where the dog can sit
or stand on its hind legs on command. <hi>v</hi> [A]
perform this trick. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be
@{taken aback} so as to jerk one's head back.
<hi>Nahasinta ku sa íyang tinubagan,</hi> I was taken
aback by the way he talked back.

<b>sintà</b> <hi>n</hi> pieces of wood or bamboo slats nailed
horizontally across posts as fence @railings,
to which small vertical slats are attached.
<hi>v</hi> [A; a] put up, make into this sort of
fence railing.

<b>sintábu</b> = <sc>SINTABUS</sc> (singular). <hi>Usa ka sintábu,</hi>
One @cent.

<b>sintábus</b> <hi>n</hi> @centavo. <hi>Singku sintábus,</hi> Five
centavos. <b>maN-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> one centavo coin. <b>2</b>
<b>s.t.</b> costing one centavo apiece. <hi>Kining gidak-úna
<b>sa</b> agridulsi manintabus,</hi> This size
of calamondin is one centavo apiece. <hi>v</hi> [A13;
a12] be one centavo apiece.

<b>sintak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] pull a fishline or a line attached
to a trap with a jerk. <hi>Sintákun nímu
ang pasul inigkubit sa isdà,</hi> The moment the
fish bites, pull the line with a jerk.

<b>sintas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> strip of silken ribbon or cord with
a religious medal worn around the neck as
an indication of one's devotion to a particular
saint. <b>2</b> @film-strip. <b>3</b> @story. <hi>Nagsulat siyag
sintas nga kawbuy,</hi> He wrote a cowboy
story. <b>4</b> @{shoe laces}. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; nga balátung</b> <hi>n</hi> variety
of very long <hi>balátung</hi>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; b6(1)]
wear a ribbon with a saint's picture. <b>2</b> [A;
c] @{lace shoes}.

<b>sintídu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @meaning, @implication of. <hi>Laksut
ug sangputánan ang sintídu sa íyang púlung,</hi>
His words carried the implication of unhappy
things to come. <b>2</b> final decision. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13]
have a meaning. <hi>Tambag nga nagsintídug
kasábà,</hi> Advice that was meant as a scolding.
<b>2</b> [A; c1] hit squarely or fatally. <hi>Nakasintídu[** Nakasintidu ?]
siya sa katapúsan níyang tíra,</hi> He made a
hit on his last shot. <b>3</b> [A; c] give one's final,
fixed decision or answer. <hi>Gisintidúhan na
ang ginikánan báhin sa kasal,</hi> The parents
have given their decision regarding the wedding.
<b>3a</b> [A; a12] @ask, find out one's answer
<pb n=905>or word. <hi>Nagsintídu ku kun mahinayun ba
ta,</hi> I want to get the final word from you as
to whether we are going as planned. <b>3b</b> [C13]
come to an @agreement. <hi>Nagkasintídu na
ang isig ka ginikánan báhin sa kasal,</hi> Both
parents have come to an agreement about
the wedding. <b>&mdash; kumun</b> <hi>n</hi> @{common sense}.

<b>sintimintal, sintimint&acaron;l</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @sentimental,
arousing tender sensibilities. <hi>Pilikulang sintimintal
nga nakapahílak,</hi> A sentimental picture
that made me cry. <b>2</b> having a sad expression
on the face. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1256; b6] be,
become sentimental. <b>2</b> [B456] put on a
<hi><b>sad</b></hi> face. <hi>Nagsintimintal siya kay napildi sa
madyung,</hi> He is wearing a long face because
he lost in mahjong. <b>-ista</b> <hi>a</hi> characterized by
being sentimental.

<b>sintimintu, sintimyintu</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SINT&Icaron;R</sc>.

<b>sintimitru</b> <hi>n</hi> @centimeter.

<b>sintimus</b> <hi>n</hi> one @centavo. <hi>Bísan sintimus dì ka
makaabut?</hi> You can't even afford a @penny?
<b>maN-</b> costing one centavo. <hi>see also</hi> <b>SIKMA</b>.

<b>sintinaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> @centenary. <hi>v</hi> [A1; b6] have or
celebrate a centenary.

<b>sintinil</b> = <sc>SINTINÍLA</sc>.

<b>sintiníla</b> <hi>n</hi> @sentinel. <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] act as sentinel.

<b>sintinsiya</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sentence in court. <hi>Ang sintinsiya
<b>sa</b> kurti nagpahamtang ug sílut nga lima
ka túig sa prisuhan,</hi> The judgment of the
court imposes a @penalty of five years in prison.
<b>2</b> obvious thing to do under the circumstances.
<hi>Usa ray sintinsiya ánang bátang
maldítu. Latiguha,</hi> There is just one thing
to do to a mischievous child. Whip him. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[A; b6] impose a sentence. <hi>Gisintinsiyáhan
<b>siya</b> ug kamatáyun,</hi> He was sentenced to
death. <b>2</b> [A23] have one's way as to how s.t.
is to be done. <hi>Pritúhun lang nà ug akuy musintinsiya
ánà,</hi> If I am to have the say, we'll
just fry it. <b>-du</b> <hi>n</hi> one who has been sentenced.

<b>sintinyal</b> <hi>n</hi> @centennial. <hi>v</hi> [B2456] be a @century.
<hi>Musintinyal nákung panguyab níya únà
mi magkatrátu,</hi> I courted her for nearly
a century before we became engaged.

<b>sintir</b> <hi>n</hi> @center player in games like baseball,
soccer, basketball, <hi>tubigtúbig</hi>. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1]
play center.

<b>sint&icaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B2; b3] feel @offended and hurt,
@{take offense}. <hi>Unsa may íyang gisintiran, ang
ákung gisulti u ag ákung gibúhat?</hi> What
did he feel offended at? Was it what I said,
or what I did? <b>2</b> [A23] @{rise to the bait}. <hi>Gidakup
ang asáwa ug anak básun musint&icaron;r
ang púga,</hi> The wife and the child were arrested
in the hope that the fugitive would
come out of hiding. <b>sintimintu, sintimyintu</b>
<hi>n</hi> feeling of @hurt, @offense. <hi>Naghambin siya
ug sintimintu mahitungud sa pagtratar níya,</hi>
She is nursing a hurt because of the way she
was treated. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] harbor a hurt feeling,
without rancor. <hi>Subù siya kay nagsintimintu
sa ímung pagkasábà níya,</hi> He is sad
because he was hurt by your scolding.

<b>sintral</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{central school} of a town. <b>2</b> @mill
for sugar cane. <b>3</b> [noun] <b>sintral</b> the dominant,
central [noun]. <hi>Bangku sintral,</hi> @{Central
Bank}.

<b>sintripugal, sintripyugal</b> <hi>n</hi> light {brown sugar}
obtained from @sugar cane, lower in quality
than the white refined sugar, but more refined
than the <hi>muskubádu</hi>.

<b>sintru</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @center, point in the very @middle.
<b>1a</b> @{central portion} of an area. <b>2</b> place where
certain activities are concentrated. <hi>Sintru
purikultúra,</hi> Puericulture center. <hi>Ang Sibu
sintru sa kumirsiyu sa Bisáyas,</hi> Cebu is the
center of commerce in the Visayas. <b>3</b> = <sc>SINTIR</sc>.
<hi>v</hi> [A1PB2; a1] be, put at the center.

<b>sintu-</b> (combining form) @{one hundred}. <hi>Sintudy&icaron;s,</hi>
One @hundred ten.

<b>sintún</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] push work off on one another.
<hi>Dì sila makasintún sa pagtrabáhu ug tagáag
asaynmint káda usa,</hi> They can't push
the work off on each other if each of them
has his own assignment.

<b>sintunádu, sintunáwu</b> <hi>a</hi> for a voice to be @flat,
lacking in tonality and pitch. <hi>v</hi> [B; a2] be,
become, make flat. <hi>Musintunáwu ákung tíngug
ug musáka ang túnu,</hi> My voice goes
flat when the song rises.

<b>sinturiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @centurion.

<b>sinturun</b> <hi>n</hi> @belt to hold trousers up. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2]
whip s.o. with a belt. <b>2</b> [A; c] wear
a belt.

<b>sin-u</b> = <sc>KINSA</sc> (dialectal).

<b>sinulug</b> <hi>n</hi> ritual dance performed at the altar
in fulfillment of a vow made to a saint or
the Holy Child. <hi>v</hi> [A; c5] do or dance the
ritual <hi>sinulug</hi>. <hi>Maáyu nang sakíta ug isinulug,</hi>
That disease will be cured if you vow
to dance the <hi>sinulug</hi> for it.

<b>sinuylas</b> = <sc>SINÍLAS</sc>.

<b>sinya,</b> sinyas = <sc>PLURDILIS</sc>.

<b>sinyadur</b> (from <hi>sinyal</hi>) <hi>n</hi> in logging, the person
who signals the directives of the foreman
to the hauling machine operator.

<b>sinyal</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> sign or mark thought to have significance.
<hi>Ang alum sa ngábil sinyal sa pagkatabian,</hi>
A mole on the lip is a sign of being
a gossip. <b>1a</b> @{storm signal}. <b>2</b> a scheme of
scale arrangement on the legs of gamecocks
which is thought to indicate the fighting ability.
<b>3</b> @birthmark. <b>-an</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> having a freakish
or odd physical characteristic. <hi>Sinyálan
nang batáa kay unsiy tudlù,</hi> That child is a
<pb n=906>@freak because he has eleven fingers. <b>2</b> having
an odd or unusual characteristic (slang).
<hi>Sinyálan tawhána kay mau ray ituun ug
way iksámin,</hi> That man is really @odd because
he studies only when there are no
exams.

<b>sinyas</b> <hi>n</hi> the movement of a part of the
body as a sign to indicate s.t. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)]
<b>signal</b> with the body. <hi>Sinyásan ta lang ka.
Paábut lang,</hi> I will give you a signal. Just
wait.

<b>sinyúra</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> <hi>short form:</hi> <b>nyúra</b>. <hi>term of address
for a married woman of high position:</hi>
@Mrs., @madam. <hi>Si Nyúra Pilang,</hi> Mrs. Pilang.
<b>2</b> in set usage before names of saints (not
shortened). <b>Nwistra &mdash; sa Patima</b> @{Our Lady
of Fatima}.[**. added] <b>Nwistra &mdash; sa Lurdis</b> @{Our Lady of
Lourdes}. <hi>a</hi> for a woman to demand solicitous
service. <hi>Sinyúra kaáyung bayhána kay
patágay pag túbig,</hi> She thinks herself a
grand dame. She even has to have s.o. come
to pour her water. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] call s.o.
<hi>sinyúra</hi>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1] move with measured
and unhurried steps. <hi>Makasinyúra nà siyag
lakaw kay daghan mag masúgù,</hi> She can afford
to move @leisurely because she has lots
of servants. <b>2</b> [A] not do any work. <hi>Ayawg
pakan-a ug magsinyúra sila,</hi> Don't feed them
if they don't do any work. <b>sinyurahun, sinyuranhun</b>
<hi>a</hi> of the <hi>sinyúra</hi> type.[+]

<b>sinyúris</b> <hi>n</hi> <hi>term used in direct address:</hi> @{ladies
and gentlemen} <hi>or</hi> @gentlemen. <hi>Atinsiyun,
mga sinyúris,</hi> Attention, ladies and gentlemen.

<b>sinyuríta</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> <hi>short form:</hi> <b>nyuríta</b>. term of address
to an unmarried lady of high station.
<hi>Si Nyuríta Maríya,</hi> Miss Mary. 2 lady's pistol,
small pistol made esp. for ladies to use,
usually of .22 caliber. <b>pistula, ribulbir nga
&mdash;</b> = <sc>SINYURÍTA</sc>, <hi>n2</hi>. <hi>a</hi> wanting solicitous
attention, considering oneself too classy to
do any sort of work. <hi>Sinyuríta kaáyu siya.
Paípis pa giyug kapi,</hi> She is very @{high class}.
She even has to have s.o. pour coffee for
her. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] call s.o. <hi>sinyuríta</hi>. <b>sinyuritahun</b>
<hi>a</hi> of the <hi>sinyuríta</hi> sort.

<b>sinyurítu</b> <hi>n</hi> <hi>short form:</hi> <b>nyurítu</b>. term of address
for young boys of high standing. <hi>Nía
tu run si Nyurítu Haymi,</hi> Master James will
be here presently. <hi>a</hi> considering oneself too
good for any sort of physical work. <hi>v</hi> [A13;
a12] call s.o. <hi>sinyurítu</hi>. <b>sinyurituhun</b> <hi>a</hi> of
the <hi>sinyurítu</hi> type.

<b>síp</b> <hi>a</hi> @safe in games. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be safe. <hi>Nasíp
ku kay nabuhian ag búla,</hi> I was safe because
he dropped the ball. <b>sipsíp</b> <hi>n</hi> @hide-and-seek.
<hi>v</hi> [A] play hide-and-seek. <b>-anan(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @{home
base} in hide-and-seek.

<b>sípà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> for a voice to be @loud and @resonant.
<hi>Ang magsisibya kinahanglan sípà ug tíngug,</hi>
An announcer must have a resonant voice.
<b>1a</b> loud and @piercing. <hi>Mu rag mukulíkut sa
dunggan nang tíngug nga sípà,</hi> The loud and
@sharp voice seems to pierce the ears. <b>2</b> @ear-*splitting,
@resounding and @sharp. <hi>Ang sípang
butu,</hi> The earsplitting explosion. <b>Sípang sagpà,</b>
@Resounding slap. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B26S; a12P] be,
become loud, resonant. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] give a
loud, sharp sound. <hi>Musípà ka run ug sagpáun
ta ka,</hi> You will resound with a @crack if I
hit you. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @loudness, @resonance. <hi>Ang kasípà
sa sista,</hi> The resonance of the guitar.
<b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> characterized with loudness, @resounding.
<hi>Masipáung haluk,</hi> A resounding
kiss.

<b>sípà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a @game played usually with a woven
rattan ball by participants standing in a circle.
The ball is kicked with the instep and
directed to another player, who in turn passes
it on, and so forth. The player who misses
the ball incurs a penalty. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] kick
s.o. with one's instep as one would do in a
game of <hi>sípà</hi>.

<b>sipak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2N] for plants to multiply by
developing bulbs, shoots, spreading tubers,
and the like. <hi>Ayaw kuhái ang sibúyas nga
wà pa musipak (manipak),</hi> Don't harvest
the leeks that haven't developed new bulbs.
<b>2</b> [A; a] remove new growths, or pieces of
tubers. <hi>Sipakun mu ang mga sáhà sa ságing,</hi>
Split off the banana shoots. <hi>n</hi> @shoots, @bulbs,
pieces of tubers. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> @shoots, @bulbs that
have been gathered.

<b>sip-ak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] split s.t. lengthwise along
the grain. <hi>Sip-ákun nákù ning uwáya ug tulu,</hi>
I will split this piece of rattan into three. <b>2</b>
[A2; a12] @disturb or @destroy s.t. as if rending
it. <hi>Kadtung mga pulúnga makasip-ak
(makapasip-ak) sa ákung pagtagad níya,</hi>
Those words can destroy my regard for him.
<hi>n</hi> s.t. that has been split lengthwise from a
bigger piece.

<b>sípan</b> <hi>n</hi> betel nut husk used as a toothbrush.
<hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] brush the teeth with this material.

<b>sipat</b> <hi>a</hi> @naughty, @mischievous, making a @nuisance.
<hi>Sipat kaáyu ning batáa kay maghingári
ug pabuyag,</hi> This child is very naughty
because he always makes a nuisance of
himself. <hi>Sipat ang mga lamuk dinhi kay
mamáak bísan ug adlaw pa,</hi> The mosquitoes
are a real nuisance here because they bite
even at daytime. <hi>v</hi> [B12] be, become
naughty or a nuisance. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [B6] become
@rampant. <hi>Misípat ang panúlis kay krísis sa
kwarta,</hi> Thievery is becoming rampant because
<pb n=907>of the scarcity of money.

<b>sípat</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2b] look with a sharp, piercing
look. <hi>Grábi siyang makasípat mu rag mudulut
ang mata,</hi> My, how fiercely he looked at
me, as if his eyes were piercing through me.

<b>siphag</b> <hi>v</hi> [B5; a12] for a group to @disperse
by running in different directions or for s.t.
in a piece to break into smithereens and be
thrown in all directions. <hi>Sa dihang mibutubutu
misiphag ang mga dimunstríturs,</hi> When
the shots rang out the demonstrators dispersed.
<hi>Nasiphag ang mga parti sa awtu pagbutu
niíni,</hi> The car parts flew in all directions
when it exploded. <hi>Siphágun nákù
nang ílang punduk,</hi> I am going to break
their group up. <b>-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [c] = <sc>SIPHAG</sc>.

<b>sipi</b> interjection used to drive away cats. <hi>Sipi!
Sámuk ning irínga,</hi> @Scat! What a bothersome
cat.

<b>sipì</b> <hi>n</hi> hand of bananas, a group of bananas
growing in one line in the bunch. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12]
separate into hands. <hi>Sip-a ang búligs ságing,</hi>
Separate the banana bunch into hands.

<b>sipii</b> <hi>n</hi> acronym for @CPA, @{Certified Public
Accountant}. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be a CPA. <b>&mdash; lúyir</b>
one licensed as a CPA and as a lawyer.

<b>sipilin</b> <hi>n</hi> @zeppelin. <hi>v</hi> [A13] do s.t. using a
zeppelin.

<b>sipilis</b> <hi>n</hi> @syphilis. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4] be affected
with syphilis.

<b>sipilya</b> <hi>n</hi> @plane for smoothing wood. <hi>v</hi> [A; ab]
smooth wood with, make into a plane.
<hi>Sipilyáhan nátù ning tabláha arun mahámis,</hi>
Let us plane this board to smoothen it. <b>-in-</b>
<hi>n</hi> shavings.

<b>sipilyu</b> <hi>n</hi> @toothbrush. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] brush s.o.'s
teeth. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; c] brush one's teeth.
<hi>Manipilyu giyud ta káda human ug káun,</hi>
We should brush our teeth after every meal.

<b>siping</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN; b] gather small bulbs, small
shoots for harvest or replanting. <hi>Magsiping
ku sa sibúyas,</hi> I'll get some onions. <b>2</b> [A2N;
b(1)] reproduce by growing new shoots or
bulbs. <hi>Misiping (naniping) na ang mga sibúyas,</hi>
The onions are multiplying. <hi>n</hi> new
@shoots or bulbs growing from a plant.

<b>síping<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AC; ac] @stay, put close by the side.
<hi>Musíping ku nímug lingkud inigtís,</hi> I will sit
@close to you during the exam. <hi>Isíping ning
takurì sa linung-ag arun maínit ning kapi,</hi>
Place the kettle next to the pot of rice to
make it warm.

<b>síping<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> rudimentary genital organ of the
opposite sex in addition to one's own genital
organ. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @hermaphrodite.

<b>síping<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @{shipping line}.

<b>sípir</b> <hi>n</hi> @zipper. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] put or attach a
zipper. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @zip s.t. up. <hi>Sipíri ra ring ákung 
likud,</hi> Please zip my back. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2]
zip oneself up.

<b>sipit<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @earwig, a shiny black bug abounding
in coconut trees about 1 cm. long with
large mandibles. It does not bite. <b>2</b> k.o.
small, blackish, scorpion-like @insect about
1/2&Prime; long which bites, found on furniture.

<b>sípit</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] carry s.t. between the arm
and body. <b>2</b> [A; b6] hold firmly between
the legs. <hi>Gisipítan ku níya sa duha níya ka
páa,</hi> She held me firmly between her legs.
<b>&mdash; ug diplúma</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1346] be a @degree holder.
<hi>Nagsípit na ku ug diplúma pagkaminyù
nákù,</hi> I already had my degree when I married.
<b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @pincer of a crab or lobster. <b>-in-</b>
<hi>n</hi> a simple @anchor made from a forked
branch in between which a stone is tied.

<b>siplà</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @{knock down} s.t. s.o. is holding.
<hi>Kalita pagsiplà ang gikaptan níyang búla,</hi>
Knock the ball out of his hand suddenly.
<b>2</b> [A; a1] @slap with the palm or an open
hand. <hi>Ákù siyang gisiplà kay nagsubìsubì,</hi> I
slapped her when she talked back.

<b>sipláag</b> <hi>v</hi> [APB6C3] @scatter over a wide area,
cause to do so. <hi>Kinsay nagsipláag (nagpasipláag)
áring mga pasì diri sa kwartu?</hi> Who
scattered the corn all over the room? <hi>Natigwaláan
ku siya dihang nagsipláag ang mga
táwu,</hi> I lost sight of him when people ran
away in every direction. <hi>Nagkasipláag ang
mga magsúun pagkamatay sa inahan,</hi> The
children were scattered when the mother
died.

<b>siplágay</b> = <sc>SUPLÁGAY</sc>.

<b>siplat</b> <hi>v</hi> [AP2N; b] @glance, take a furtive
look. <hi>Nasiplatan (hisiplatan) ta ka nga nanglìlì
sa lyabihánan,</hi> I caught you peeping
through the keyhole. <hi>Ákung gipasiplatan
siya ug mulíngì ba nákù,</hi> I glanced at him to
see if he would look my way.

<b>siplin</b> <hi>n</hi> @seaplane. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] travel by,
make into a seaplane.

<b>siplit</b> = <sc>SIPLAT</sc>.

<b>sipra</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @monogram, a mark showing ownership.
2 @sign, @label. <hi>Sakay sa dyip nga dúnay
siprang Lahug,</hi> Take a jeep which is marked
Lahug. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> put a @monogram on s.t. <b>2</b>
mark a sign, label.

<b>sipris</b> <hi>n</hi> @cypress tree.

<b>sipsáyid</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] dock on the side of another
ship. <hi>Musipsáyid na lang ang barkug wà nay
lunang kadunggúan sa pír,</hi> A ship docks on
the side of another ship if it can't find any
other berthing place.

<b>sipsip<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a12] cut s.t. with long sweeping
strokes with a bladed implement. <hi>Maáyung
kasab-an ang nagsipsip sa ákung mga
misítas,</hi> How I'd love to scold whoever cut
<pb n=908>down my ornamental plants.

<b>sipsip<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A2N; b6N] @{polish the apple} (euphemism
for <hi>supsup</hi>). <hi>Mupasar siya kay musipsip
(manipsip) man sa íyang maistru,</hi> He
will pass because he licks the teacher's
boots. <hi>n</hi> one who polishes the apple.
<b>bútù</b> @{apple polisher}.

<b>Sipt.</b> <hi>n</hi> abbreviation for <hi>Siptiyimbri</hi>, @September.

<b>sipti</b> <hi>v</hi> [c6] put s.t. in a place for @safekeeping.
<hi>Isipti nà sa sulud kay tingálig sibatun,</hi>
Put it inside for safekeeping because s.o.
might make off with it.

<b>Siptimbri</b> <hi>n</hi> @September. <hi>v</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>ABRIL</sc>.

<b>siptimu grádu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{seventh grade}. <hi>v</hi> [B56] be in
the seventh grade.

<b>siptinaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> a seven-day devotion, the @Septinary
for the Holy Ghost.

<b>sipu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] clean or clear an area of grasses,
bushes, and small trees, usually at the borders
of a cultivated area to prevent the
plants from being in the shade or to afford
a good view of the field.

<b>sípuk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b] @{gather around} s.t. <hi>Misípuk
ang mga táwu sa lamísa nga gibutangan sa
pagkáun,</hi> The people gathered around the
table where the food had been set. <b>2</b> [B6; a12P]
for the head to be @awhirl with too
many problems. <hi>Sipúkun (pasipúkun) mu
ang ákung [=ú] ning ímung mga binúang,</hi> You
are driving me mad with your foolishness.
<b>(->)</b> a having the head awhirl and being
short-tempered on that account. <hi>Ang táwung
daghag prublíma sipuk kaáyu ug úlu,</hi>
A person who has many problems is short-tempered.
<b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> of a short-tempered sort.

<b>sipukar</b> <hi>v</hi> [B16] for work to be @fast-paced.
<hi>Maáyung hinayhináyan ang trabáhu arun dílì
magsipukar kun hápit na kinahanglána,</hi>
Do the work little at a time so that you
won't have to do it in a great rush when the
need arises. <b>sipukádu, sipukáwu</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @short-tempered.
<hi>Sipukádu ang táwung daghag
prublíma,</hi> A person with many problems
gets to be short-tempered. <b>2</b> requiring a fast
pace of work. <hi>Sipukádu na kaáyu ning ámung
trabáhu kay dúna man miy didlayin,</hi>
We are working as fast as we can because
there is a deadline to meet. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1; a12]
be, become @short-tempered. <b>2</b> [B12; c1]
for work or a person to require a fast pace.

<b>sipul</b> <hi>n</hi> a @knife 3&ndash;5"[**inch symbol] long with a somewhat
humped back used to cut threads and fibers
in weaving. Instead of a handle it has a long
tang curved at the end forming an eye. <hi>v</hi> [a12]
make into, hit s.o. with a weaving knife.

<b>sipulkru</b> <hi>n</hi> @sepulcher.

<b>sipultíru</b> <hi>n</hi> caretaker of a cemetery. <hi>v</hi> [B156; c1] 
be the caretaker in a cemetery.

<b>sip-un</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{head cold}. <b>2</b> nasal @mucous. <hi>Pahíri
nang sip-un mu,</hi> Wipe your nose. <hi>v</hi> [A123P;
a14] <b>1</b> have a @cold. <hi>Ug sip-unun ka, inum
áring tambal,</hi> If you have a cold, take this
medicine. <b>2</b> have a @{runny nose}. <hi>Gisip-un ku
tungud sa abug,</hi> I have a runny nose from
the dust. <b>sip-unun</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> having a runny nose.
<b>1a</b> tender in age, at the age when one has a
runny nose. <b>2</b> @awkward and @ignorant.

<b>sípung</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] draw s.t. together, as a
net or mouth of a sack. <hi>Dílì ku makasípung
<b>sa</b> bàbà sa sáku kay punù kaáyu,</hi> I cannot
@gather the mouth of the sack because it is
very full. <hi>Sipúngun níya ang buhuk, unyà
pangkúun,</hi> She gathers up her hair and ties
it into a knot. <b>2</b> [A; c1] @join two ends or
sides together. <hi>Sulda ray makasípung sa isig
ka tumuy sa alambri,</hi> Only solder can join
the two pieces of wire. <b>3</b> [A; b] finish a
weave, terminating it. <hi>Magsípung na ku sa
kálù,</hi> I'll finish weaving the outer edges of
the brim of the hat. <b>3a</b> [A; c1] finish harvesting
the rice, usually the little remaining
part of the last part near the end of the
field. <b>-un(->), -unun</b> <hi>n</hi> last small remaining
part of the rice in the field to be harvested.[+]

<b>sípur</b> <hi>n</hi> C-4 @rice, a recently introduced variety
of white rice.

<b>sip-ut</b> <hi>a</hi> @narrow and @tight, affording little
space or freedom of movement. <hi>Sip-ut kaáyu
ang agiánan,</hi> The passageway is very
narrow. <hi>Sip-ut nga sayal,</hi> A tight skirt. <hi>v</hi> [B2]
be narrow and tight. <b>ma-</b> <hi>a</hi> @crowded,
thick with vegetation. <hi>Masip-ut nga kalibunan,</hi>
Thick underbrush.

<b>sipuy</b> = <sc>SIPUL</sc>.

<b>sipya</b> <hi>n</hi> @sepia in photography. <hi>v</hi> [A12] make
a print in sepia.

<b>sipyat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23] make a @mistake. <hi>Musipyat
ka lang ug kas-a, papahawáun ta giyud ka,</hi>
Just commit one mistake, and I'll fire you.
<b>2</b> [B26] @miss an aim, @fail in a plan. <hi>Dílì ku
musipyat ug akuy patirúhun sa langgam,</hi> If
I shoot the bird, I won't miss. <hi>Plánung dílì
masipyat,</hi> A plan that cannot fail. <b>3</b> [A23]
@overlook, fail to do s.t. <hi>Ug akuy pabasáhun
walay sayup nga musipyat,</hi> I won't overlook
a thing if I read it. <hi>Ayaw sipyáta pagbása
ang sunud gulà,</hi> Don't fail to read the next
issue. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @error committed. <hi>Way sipyat siyang
muantug,</hi> He never misses in his shots.
<b>2</b> failure to do s.t.

<b>sír</b> <hi>n</hi> term of address for male teachers and
other men of high status. <hi>Si Sir[**Sír?] Gabútin dílì
makaanhi sa iskuylahan run,</hi> Mr. Gabutin
cannot come to school today. <hi>Náay nagtawag
nímu sa tilipunu, sír,</hi> S.o. is calling you
<pb n=909>on the phone, sir. <hi>n</hi> [<hi>gen.</hi>] <b>&mdash;</b> my, your, etc.
teacher. <hi>Giingnan mi sa ámung sír,</hi> Our
teacher told us. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] address s.o. sir.

<b>sira</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b5c1] close a window or door.
<hi>Sirhun (sirhan, isira, sirahun, sirahan) ta
ning pwirta, ha?</hi> Let me close the door.
May I? <b>2</b> [ABN2] @close, cease to operate,
cause s.t. to do so. <hi>Anus-a musira (manira)
ang klási?</hi> When do classes close? <hi>Una lang
kay magsira (manira) pa ku sa tindáhan,</hi>
Just go ahead, because I will close the store.
<b>3</b> [A2; a12] @{wind up}, make @complete. <hi>Átung
sirhun ang nigusyu kay muadtu mi sa
Amirika,</hi> We will wind up the business because
we are going to America. <b>4</b> [A; b(1)]
lock s.o. or oneself in s.t. <hi>Ug magpabuyag
ka, akuy musira nímu sa kwartu,</hi> If you
make a nuisance of yourself, I will @lock you
in your room. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <hi>v</hi> [b4(1)] miss
several menstrual periods, usually for a long
span of time. <hi>Nagmulù siya kay nasirhan siya
ug dugù,</hi> She is worried because she has
missed several menstrual periods. <b>6</b> [AB12;
c1] plant fully with; be fully planted. <hi>Dì
makasira (makapasira) ning tagúra sa basakan,</hi>
These rice seedlings aren't enough to
fill all the rice paddies. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @door. <b>1a</b> @gate or
anything that closes. <b>2</b> window @shutter. <b>3</b>
end of school. <hi>Kanus-a inyung sira sa klási?</hi>
When do your classes end? <b>&mdash; gána</b> @dessert.
<hi>v</hi> [A; c1] have for dessert. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] <b>1</b> =
<sc>SIRA</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>. <b>2</b> lock oneself in a house or room.
<hi>Manira ta kay náay púsil sa gawas,</hi> Let's
close up because there is a gunfight outside.
<hi>Nanira ku kay naglágut ku,</hi> I locked myself
in my room because I was angry. <b>3</b> @zipper
or @button up one's clothes. <hi>Walà ku makapanira
sa ákung karsúnis,</hi> I did not zipper
my trousers. <b>karga siráda</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>KARGA</sc>. <b>sirádu</b>
<hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> tightly closed. <hi>Sirádu kaáyu ang
kwartu kay walay hángin makasulud,</hi> The
room is @{closed tight}, and no air can get in.
<b>2</b> @full, @filled to capacity. <hi>Dì ta makasakay
kay sirádu kaáyu ang trák,</hi> We can not get
on because the truck is completely full. <hi>v</hi>
[B1256; b6] <b>1</b> be tightly closed, close s.t.
tight. <b>2</b> filled to the last seating capacity.
<b>panirádu</b> = <sc>PANIRA</sc>, <hi>2</hi>. <b>siradúra</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> device
to close a door. <b>2</b> a lock for closing jewelry
or anything to close wearing apparel.

<b>sírà</b> <hi>n</hi> @{venereal disease} infection. <hi>v</hi> [B126]
be infected with a venereal disease (slang).

<b>siráli</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @fruit similar in appearance to
cherries, green or dark red when ripe, with
a single pit, growing in bunches on a small
wild or cultivated tree: <b><hi>Flacourtia jangomas</hi></b>.

<b>sirámiks</b> <hi>n</hi> @ceramics.

<b>sirapínis</b> <hi>n</hi> @seraphim.

<b>sirbandu</b> <hi>n</hi> servant (sarcastic usage). <hi>Sirbandu
ba ku nímu nga ímu kung sugúun niánà?</hi>
Am I your servant to make me do what you
command?

<b>sirbátu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @whistle producing a high shrill
noise. <b>2</b> @horn on a vehicle. <b>3</b> @notification,
word of intimation for an important event
(humorous). <hi>Nakasal na diay mu? Wà man
lang muy sirbátu!</hi> Why, you got married
without even giving us the slightest hint! <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [A; b6] @sound a whistle or horn. <hi>Gisirbatúhan
ka. Padaplin,</hi> He blew his whistle at
you. Go to the side. <b>2</b> [A] give word or notification
for an important event (humorous).

<b>sirbi<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <b>1</b> is @considered, @reckoned as. <hi>Kining
kwartáha sirbi swildu nímu,</hi> This money is
considered as your salary. <b>2</b> @{by way of}. <hi>Sirbi
ug pasalámat níay ákung gása álang nímu,</hi>
By way of thanks I have a present for you.
<b>walay &mdash;</b> @useless. <hi>Way sirbing pagkaanáka!
Tapulan,</hi> What a useless son! He's so lazy.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3] @{make do}, @serve. <hi>Magsirbi kahà ni
pára halígi?</hi> Will this @do for a post? <b>1a</b> [A13]
be of @use, @service. <hi>Ang ákung kahibalu
sa ininglis nagsirbi nákù sa ákung trabáhu,</hi>
My knolwedge[** typo: knowledge] of English stood me in good
stead in my work. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @serve in a
household. <hi>Adtung nagsirbi pa ku sa íla,</hi> At
the time when I was serving in their place.
<b>2a</b> @{work off} a debt by rendering menial
service or serve time for a penalty. <hi>Sa átù
pa, musirbi pa ku sa bayinti písus,</hi> In other
words, I will work off the twenty pesos by
serving you. <b>2b</b> @care, @{attend to}. <hi>Ikaw ba tu
ang nagsirbi nákù sa huspital?</hi> Were you
the one who attended to me in the hospital?
<b>2c</b> @serve in the mass. <b>3</b> @serve food. <hi>Isirbi na
ang panihápun,</hi> Serve supper now. <b>-dur(->),
-yinti</b> <hi>n</hi> @waiter. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be, become a waiter.
<b>-dúra, -yinta</b> <hi>n</hi> @waitress. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be, become
a waitress. <b>mag-l-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @waiter or @waitress.
<b>2</b> one who assists in saying the mass.
<b>-syu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> service, performance of a job in
one's line of duty. <hi>Sa dinhà pa ku sa sirbisyu
sa pulis,</hi> When I was working on the police
force. <b>2</b> @function, @purpose which s.t.
serves. <hi>Unsa may sirbisyu áning pidála?</hi>
What is the purpose of this pedal? <b>3</b> @{church
service}. <hi>Sa alas dyís ang sirbisyu,</hi> The service
starts at ten o'clock. <b>-syu Sibil</b> @{Civil
Service}. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13] @serve, perform a job or
duty in line of duty. <b>2</b> [b] serve or work
to pay one's debt. <hi>Sirbisyúhan ku lang ang
ákung útang,</hi> I will just work my debt off.
<b>3</b> [A; b6] hold a church service. <b>-syáwu</b> a
having rendered a great service, served well.
<pb n=910><hi>Gisì na ning payúnga apan sirbisyáwu kaáyu
ni kanákù,</hi> This umbrella is torn, but it has
served me well.

<b>sirbi<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @serve in tennis and other
games played with a net. <hi>n</hi> turn to serve,
action of serving the ball. <hi>Kinsa rung sirbi
(sirbisyu)?</hi> Whose serve is it? <b>-syu</b> <hi>n</hi> =
<sc>SIRBI</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>sirbilyíta<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @napkin. <hi>v</hi> [a] make into, provide
with napkins.

<b>sirbilyíta<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. compact, seedy cooking @banana,
yellow-orange when ripe.

<b>sirbis</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.t. set aside for a certain specific
use. <hi>Sirbis ning awtúha pára sa mga bisíta,</hi>
This car is for the special use of the visitors.
<hi>Maáyug sirbis tung ristawrána,</hi> That restaurant
gives good service. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] make
s.t. available for a specific use. <hi>Ayaw ug kabaláka
kay sirbísan ta mu ug dakung amplipáyir,</hi>
Don't worry because I will have a big
public system @available for you. <b>2</b> [A] @service,
provide maintenance for. <hi>Kinsa may
musirbis sa mga awtu?</hi> Who will service the
cars? <b>&mdash; diluks</b> <hi>n</hi> service in a de luxe manner.
<hi>Gihatdan man giyug pamáhaw. Sirbis
diluks man giyud,</hi> She was served breakfast
on[**in?] bed. De luxe service, I should say.

<b>sirbísa</b> <hi>n</hi> @beer. <b>sirbisahay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; a12] play a
game with beer as bets.

<b>sirbisyáwu</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>sirbisyu</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc> <hi>and</hi> <sc>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>sirbyinta</b> = <sc>SIRBIDÚRA</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>sirbyinti</b> = <sc>SIRBIDUR</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SIRBI<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>sirguylas</b> = <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc>.

<b>siriguylas</b> <hi>n</hi> small @tree cultivated for its sweet
and juicy fruits, yellow or reddish, similar
to plums: <hi><b>Spondias purpurea</b></hi>. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2;
b6] gather <hi>siriguylas</hi>.

<b>sirikinya</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @{flying fish} with a long nose.

<b>síril</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3; a12] look all around s.w. to find
s.t. <hi>Nagsíril mi sa mga kasilingánan pagpangítà
sa bátà,</hi> We were searching all over the
neighborhood looking for the child. <b>hasirilsíril</b>
<hi>v</hi> [B1256] go frantically looking for
s.t. everywhere.

<b>sirimunyas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @ceremony, prescribed procedure.
<hi>Ang sirimunyas sa pag-inugurar sa tulay,</hi>
The ceremony for the inauguration of
the bridge. <b>2</b> @fuss, @ado. <hi>Way daghang sirimunyas
gipapuyra siya,</hi> He was fired without
much ceremony. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] hold a ceremony.

<b>sirína<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @siren. <hi>Sirína sa bumbíru,</hi> Fire engine
siren. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] sound a siren.

<b>sirína<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a mythical sea creature said to be a
woman of some sort.

<b>sirináta</b> <hi>n</hi> an @{open air concert}. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6]
have, perform an open air concert.

<b>síring</b> = <b>SYÍRING</b>.

<b>siringsíring</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] go about in a circular
motion seeking or watching s.t. <hi>Misiringsíring
ang iruplánu úsà mutugpa,</hi> The plane
@circled before landing.

<b>sirínu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{night watchman}. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be a night
watchman.

<b>sirip<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @sheriff. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @attach property
for nonpayment of a debt on it. <hi>Ang bangku
mauy musirip sa yútà ug dílì kabayran
ang lún,</hi> The bank will attach the land if
the loan is not paid. <b>2</b> @confiscate. <hi>Ákung siripun
ang baráha kay dì mu magtuun,</hi> I will
confiscate the playing cards because you
don't study.

<b>sirip<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SILIP</sc>.

<b>siripinti</b> = <sc>SIRPINTI</sc>.

<b>síris</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{Christmas tree lights}. <b>2</b> @series connection
of bulbs or batteries. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] connect
several batteries or electric bulbs in a
series.

<b>sírit</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2P; a12P] rush swiftly with a
whooshing noise. <hi>Mipasírit (misírit) ug padágan
sa awtu,</hi> @Zoomed away in the car. <b>2</b>
[A2] do s.t. fast and with ease. <hi>Misírit siya
sa iksámin kay maáyu mang pagkaribyú,</hi> He
answered the examination @easily because he
had reviewed well. <hi>n</hi> hissing noise of s.t. released
under pressure. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] make a
hissing noise. <hi>Nagsirit[**Nagsírit ?] nga kaláyu,</hi> The hissing
flame.

<b>sirku</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3] fall @headlong, tumble down
into s.t. <hi>Misirku siya sa kanal pagkabanggà
sa mutur,</hi> He fell headlong into the ditch
when the motorcycle crashed. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
@flip, do tumbling. <hi>Human siya mudágan misirku
siya didtu sa túbig,</hi> He ran and then
@somersaulted into the water. <b>3</b> [A13] for
there to be a @circus. <hi>Magsirku didtu sa ámung
lungsud karung pista,</hi> There will be a
circus in our town this coming fiesta. <hi>n</hi> circus.
<b>sirkíru, sirkadur</b> <hi>n</hi> @{trapeze artist}, @acrobat.
<b>sirkíra, sirkadúra</b> <hi>n</hi> a lady trapeze artist,
acrobat. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be, become an acrobat.

<b>sirkul</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @circle. <b>2</b> the mahjong piece having
the design of a circle. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC23; c1] @encircle,
form a circle. <hi>Magsirkul na ta,</hi> Let's
form a circle. <hi>Nagsirkul ang mga girilya sa
kampu sa Hapun,</hi> The guerillas encircled
the Japanese camp. <hi>Gisirkulan ang mga sayup,</hi>
The mistakes were encircled. <b>2a</b> [A12;
b] draw a circle in mahjong. <b>2b</b> [B126] for
the piece drawn to turn out a circle.

<b>sirkular</b> <hi>n</hi> @circular, a directive distributed
from a head to lower ranking departments.

<b>sirkulasiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> periodical @circulation.

<b>sirkulu</b> = <sc>SIRKUL</sc>.

<b>sirkumpirinsiya</b> <hi>n</hi> @circumference.

<pb n=911>

<b>sirkumstansiya</b> <hi>n</hi> specific situation in which
s.t. happened. K<hi>ining hitabù usa ka sirkumstansiya
sa pangágaw sa katungdánan</hi>, The
happening is a specific instance of usurpation
of authority.

<b>sirkus</b> <hi>n</hi> @circus. <hi>v</hi> [A13] hold a circus.

<b>sirmun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sermon delivered by a clergyman.
<b>2</b> @scolding. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> deliver a sermon. <b>2</b>
give a scolding. <hi>Gisirmúnan siya ni Máma
kay tagdugay nga mupaúlì</hi>, Mom gave him
a scolding because he comes home late.

<b>sirpinti</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a mythological dragon or serpent
of stories. <b>2</b> a treacherous and malicious
person. <hi>v</hi> [B1256; b6] become, consider
one a serpent.

<b>sirta</b> = <b>SIRTU</b>.

<b>sirtipay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] @certify, make a written
declaration concerning s.t.

<b>sirtipikar</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] attest to the state or verity
of s.t. <hi>Musirtipikar ku sa pagkatinúud sa
íyang diklarasiyun</hi>, I will attest to the truth
of his declaration. <hi>Gisirtipikahan na ba ang
ímung tsiki?</hi> Has your check been certified?
<b>sirtipikádu</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. certified as true, valid. <hi>v</hi>
[B1256] be, become certified.

<b>sirtipíku</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> certification of having finished
a certain course or elementary grades. <b>2</b> a
formalized declaration of thanks. <b>3</b> a document
evidencing ownership of stock. <b>&mdash; sa
kandidatúra</b> certificate of candidacy.

<b>sirtu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; a12] @ascertain. <hi>Nakasirtu ka
ba unsay íyang súgù nákù?</hi> Have you ascertained
what it was he wanted me to do?
<b>2</b> [C; a12] come to final terms on an agreement.
<hi>Nagkasirtu na mi sa prisyu</hi>, We have
come to an agreement about the price. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
having come to an agreement. <b>2</b> expression
in an auction sale indicating that the bid is
closed.<hi> Dusintus! Ala úna! Alas dus! Alas
tris! Sirtu!</hi> Two hundred! Going once! Going
twice! Going thrice! Gone!

<b>síru</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @zero. <b>2</b> situation of having gotten
nothing. <hi>Dimálas ang ámung pangisdà run
kay síru</hi>, We had bad luck in our fishing because
we got nothing. <b>3</b> exactly in round
figures, no more, no less. <hi>Síru giyung kinsi
písus ang hálin</hi>, The sales was exactly fifteen
pesos. <hi>Síru nga siyam ka búlan ang íyang
pagmabdus way subrang adlaw</hi>, Her
pregnancy was exactly nine months, not a
day more or less. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] give a zero,
make s.o. come out with zero. <hi>Pagtuun kay
musíru giyud nang maistrúha</hi>, Study, because
that teacher will really give a zero. <hi>Gisirúhan
mi sa ámung kuntra</hi>, Our opponents
made us come out with zero. <b>2</b> [B256; c16]
put into round figures. <hi>Hustu nang aníhun
ug masíru nang duha ka túig</hi>, It's time to be
harvested when it gets to be exactly two
years.

<b>sirù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] feed s.o. who is weak from
childbirth or disease. <hi>Dì ku makalakat kay
nagsirù kug masakitun</hi>, I can't leave the
house because I'm feeding s.o. that is sick.
<hi>Sabaw sa báka ang isirù sa nagpatútuy</hi>, Give
the nursing mother beef broth. <b>2</b> [A; b]
give a dole or handout (deprecatory). <hi>Dì
mu mauwaw nga gubyirnu ang magsirù ninyu?</hi>
Are you not ashamed to receive handouts
from the government?

<b>siruhánu</b> <hi>n</hi> @surgeon. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12P] be, become
a surgeon.

<b>siruk</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @greedy, having a strong desire for
food. <hi>Siruk kaáyu ning irúa kay walà makakaun
ug tulu ka adlaw</hi>, This dog is very
greedy because it hasn't eaten for three
days. <b>2</b> fond of, having a strong liking for.
<hi>Siruk ug bayli ni si Pidru</hi>, Peter is crazy
about dancing. <b>3</b> one who is present at any
event where food is served, invited or not.
<hi>v</hi> [B12] be, become greedy or fond of s.t.
<b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] attend a party or feast uninvited,
just to eat the food prepared. <hi>Mga bagà
ug náwung nga misíruk sa híkay</hi>, Those
nervy people who went to the party uninvited.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] go s.w. to scrounge
for food. <hi>Adtu sa mga basúra magpaniruk
ang mga irù ug iring</hi>, The dogs and the cats
scrounge for food in garbage cans. <b>&mdash; buy</b> <hi>a</hi>
<b>1</b> attending banquets uninvited. <b>2</b> one starved
for food, entertainment, or sex without
scruples. <hi>v</hi> [B12] become a person of this
sort.

<b>síruks</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{xerox machine}. <b>2</b> a @{xerox copy}.
<hi>Síruks lay ihátag, dílì ang uridyinal</hi>, Just
turn in a xerox, not the original. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6]
@xerox s.t.

<b>sirul</b> <hi>n</hi> stomach cramps. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4] get
stomach cramps. <hi>Diyútay ray kan-a sa hilaw
nga mangga arun dílì ka sirulun</hi>, Don't eat
so many green mangoes so you don't get
cramps.

<b>sirumsirum</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. goby.

<b>sirung</b> <hi>v</hi> [B26; c1] for the eyebrows to be
knitted. <hi>Masirung (musirung) ang ímung kílay
ug masukù ka</hi>, You knit your eyebrows
when you are angry. <hi>a</hi> knitted eyebrows.[+]

<b>sírung</b> = <b>SINULUG</b>.

<b>sirutsu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{hand saw}. <b>&mdash; pára láras</b> @ripsaw. <hi>v</hi> [A13;
a12] cut with a saw.

<b>siryal</b> <hi>n</hi> installment in a serialized movie,
radio program, published stories. <hi>v</hi> [c6]
have s.t. appear in installments.

<b>siryal nambir</b> <hi>n</hi> @{serial number}.

<b>siryus</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @serious, @earnest in one's attitude
to things. <hi>Siryus siya kaáyu sa íyang trabáhu</hi>, 
<pb n=912>He is very serious in his work. <b>2</b> seriously
ill. <hi>Siryus na kaáyu ang masakitun</hi>, The
patient is very serious. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1; b6] be serious
and earnest. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] for an illness
to get serious. <b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] take things seriously.

<b>siryúsa</b> <hi>a</hi> serious-minded, not easy-going. <hi>Dì
siya katiáwan kay siryúsang pagkababáyi</hi>,
You can't fool around with her because she
is the serious type. <hi>v</hi> [B2] become serious-minded.

<b>siryúsu</b> <hi>a</hi> serious and earnest about what one
does, not joking. <hi>Siryúsu kaáyu ning ákung
ig-ágaw, panagsa ra mupahiyum</hi>, My cousin
is serious. He rarely smiles. <hi>Sigúru kang maánur
ug siryúsu ka sa ímung pagtuun</hi>, You
will get honors if you are serious with your
studies. <hi>v</hi> [B1] be serious.

<b>sís</b> <b>1</b> short for <hi>Mísis</hi>, term of address for a
married woman. <b>2</b> term of address to a sister.

<b>sisariyan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{caesarian section}. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] perform
or have a caesarian section.

<b>sisi</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small oysters.

<b>sìsì</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] make an incision on s.t., rip
s.t. open with a long tear. <hi>Sìsíun ta ning ímung
dintru arun maabut ku ang samad</hi>,
We'll have to rip your shirt so I can get at
your wound. <hi>Arun makúhà ang bála sìsían
ang dughan</hi>, We'll have to make an incision
in the chest to get the bullet out. <b>2</b> [B126;
a] for the edge of s.t. hard to have a tear in
it. <hi>Nasìsì ang kílay sa buksidur</hi>, The boxer
got a cut on his eyebrow. <hi>Sìsíun mu nang kílid
sa silya nga ablíhan mu nang kúk?</hi> Are
you going to rip the edge of the chair by
opening a coke on it? <b>2a</b> [b4(1)] have a
vaginal laceration. <hi>Ang bátà nga gilúgus nasìsían</hi>,
The child that was raped had a vaginal
laceration.

<b>sisig</b> = <b>ALIG-IG</b>, <hi>v1</hi>.

<b>sisik</b>, <b>sísik</b> <hi>n</hi> carapace of a sea turtle, or similar
material from a carabao horn, used for
making combs. <b>sudlayng &mdash;</b> turtle-shell
comb.

<b>sisinta</b> = <b>SAYSINTA</b>.

<b>sisip</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. tapered and thin, used as a wedge
to hold s.t. tightly in place. <hi>Ayaw ug nipsa
ang sisip arun dílì mahalù dáyun ang pul-an</hi>,
Don't make the wedge thin so the handle
will not come loose easily. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] put,
make into a small wedge.

<b>sista</b> <hi>n</hi> @guitar. <hi>v</hi> [A23N; a12] play a guitar.
<hi>Kaantígu kang musista (manista)?</hi> Do you
know how to play the guitar? <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> guitar
player. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> art of guitar playing.

<b>sisti</b> what really makes it bad is... <hi>Walà lang
untà tuy kásung gigisìgisì. Ang sisti (nakasisti) 
kay gisúnug man sab</hi>, It really wouldn't
have mattered if it had only been torn to
pieces, but the thing that really is bad is that
it was burnt too. <hi>Way kásu kanang samára,
ang sisti (nakasisti) lang, ug ímung pasagdan</hi>,
Don't worry about that wound. It's only
s.t. to worry about if you don't take care of
it. <hi>v</hi> [A12] = <b>SISTI</b>.

<b>sistíma</b> <hi>n</hi> @system, way in which s.t. is done.
<hi>Bag-ung sistíma sa pagtudlug ininglis</hi>, A new
system for teaching English. <hi>v</hi> [a12] do s.t.
in a sensible or systematic way. <hi>Sistimáha
nà ug búhat, unáhun ri, isunud tu</hi>, Do it in
a systematic way: This first, next that, and
so forth. <b>-tiku(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> done in a systematic,
sensible way.

<b>sistu</b> = <b>SISTUSUMYÁSIS</b>.

<b>sistusumyásis</b> <hi>n</hi> @schistosomiasis. <hi>v</hi> [A123P;
a4] be afflicted with schistosomiasis.

<b>sísu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{see-saw}. <hi>v</hi> [A1; a2] play on, make into
a see-saw.

<b>sisyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @session, the meeting of members of
a body to transact business. <hi>v</hi> [A1; b6]
hold a session.

<b>sít<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] set the hair. R<hi>úla ang ímung
buhuk usà isít (síta)</hi>, Roll your hair on curlers
before you set it.

<b>sít<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @set of dishes, furniture, mahjong, and
the like. <b>2</b> in mahjong a set of three consecutive
numbers (<hi>siyà</hi>) or a set of three pieces
of the same number (<hi>tríyu</hi>). <hi>v</hi> [A12] obtain
a set of s.t.

<b>sít<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> v [A; c] adjust the time of a timepiece.
<hi>Isít ang rilu inigpítu</hi>, Set the clock when the
siren sounds.

<b>síta</b> <hi>n</hi> letter @z.

<b>sitar</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] express or cite s.t. <hi>Nausab ang
íyang hunàhúnà human ku makasitar sa ákung
túyù</hi>, He changed his mind after I had
expressed my purpose. <hi>Bi, sitari ku ug usa
ka higayun diin walà ka mapildi</hi>, All right,
give me an instance where you did not lose.
<hi>Hala, isitar ang prisyu ug pila man gáling nà</hi>,
All right, tell me the price. How much could
it be.

<b>sitasiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @summons, an official order to appear
in court.

<b>sithaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [B] be embarrassed to the point of
blushing in shame. <hi>Musithaw ta ug hisakpan
tang mamakak</hi>, It is embarrassing to be
caught cheating. <hi>Nasithaw ang duha ka managtrátu
nga hinsakpang nagháluk</hi>, The couple
blushed with shame because they were
caught kissing.

<b>síti</b> <hi>number</hi> seven. Used only with words of
Spanish origin: dates, prices, time of day. <hi>v</hi>
<hi>see</hi> <b>TRIS</b>. <hi>n</hi> k.o. white rice with long and
slender grains that ripens in seven months.
<pb n=913><b>&mdash; Birnis</b> <hi>n</hi> aged palm toddy. <b>&mdash; duktúris</b> <hi>n</hi>
Christmas pageant concerning the life of
Christ, especially focusing on the debate
between Christ and the seven learned rabbis
in the temple. <b>&mdash; palabras</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the seven last
words of Christ before He died on the cross.
<b>2</b> a Good Friday ritual commemorating the
seven last words. <hi>v</hi> [A] perform this ritual.
<b>&mdash; páris</b> <hi>n</hi> a mahjong hand containing seven
pairs (see <hi>karnabal<hi rend=sub>2</hi></hi>). <hi>v</hi> [B36; c6] make, get
seven pairs.

<b>sitihul</b> <hi>n</hi> @{City Hall}.

<b>sitinta</b> <hi>numeral</hi> @seventy. <hi>v</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.

<b>sitlayit</b> <hi>n</hi> man-made satellite. <hi>v</hi> [b6] have a
satellite s.w.

<b>sitru</b> <hi>n</hi> @sceptre. <hi>Ang sitru mauy timailhan[**not sure][**timailhan? P2] sa
gahum</hi>, The sceptre is a symbol of power.

<b>sí tru</b> <hi>n</hi> see-through cloth, k.o. lace cloth
which one can see through. <hi>v</hi> [A; b] wear
s.t. of see-through cloth.

<b>sitsaru</b> <hi>n</hi> commercial name for peas or pea
pods. The plant (or the vegetable) is called
<b>GISANTIS</b>.

<b>sitsarun</b> <hi>n</hi> a tidbit made of hog skins fried
crisp[** "@{pork rinds}"?]. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] prepare, have <hi>sitsarun</hi>.

<b>sitsiríka_<note n=1></note></b> <hi>a</hi> gay, vivacious, and friendly. <hi>Lagmit
makatratu ning bayhána kay sitsiríka
kaáyu</hi>, This girl will likely get herself a boy
friend because she is very vivacious and
friendly. <b>2</b> dressing with verve, somewhat
wildly. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] get to be vivacious and
friendly.

<b>sitsiríka_<note n=2></note></b> = <b>KUMINTANG</b>.

<b>sitsiríku</b> <hi>a</hi> being vivacious and friendly with
the opposite sex, but not necessarily loose.

<b>sitsiríya</b>, <b>sitsiríyas</b> <hi>n</hi> miscellaneous goods for
everyday use. N<hi>amaligyà mi ug sitsiríyas
ingun sa asúkar, linata, panaptun, ug uban
pa</hi>, We sell various goods for everyday use
such as,[**unnecessary ,? P2] sugar, canned goods, cloth, and the
like.

<b>sitsit</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b(1)] attract s.o.'s attention by
hissing in short bursts: <hi>sst, sst</hi>.[**,?][** no, this is an example/demonstration and is at the end of the sentence] <hi>Mupatúu nà
siya ug akuy musitsit</hi>, He'll stop if I go sst,
sst to him. <hi>Sitsíti si Nítu kay nabyaan ang
íyang libru</hi>, Call Nito back because he left
his book behind. <hi>n</hi> a hissing call to attract
attention. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] hissing at s.o., call
done in this way.

<b>situn</b> this, that (nom. and dat.&mdash;dialectal).

<b>sitwasiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> state of health or well-being.
<hi>Sa ímung sitwasiyun dílì ka pa makalakaw</hi>,
In your delicate state of health you should
not walk. <b>2</b> @situation, the circumstances
that obtain[** pertain?] at a given moment. <hi>Ang sitwasiyun
sa pamulitika sa Ilúkus</hi>, The political
situation in Ilocos.

<b>sityu</b> <hi>n</hi> a territorial subdivision of a barrio,
having no political signification.

<b>síug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] press the abdomen downward
in childbirth. <hi>Gisiúgan sa mananabang ang
babáying nanganak</hi>, The midwife pressed
down on the abdomen of the woman who
was giving childbirth.[+]

<b>síut</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @crowded. <hi>Síut didtu sa sini kay maáyu
ang pilikula</hi>, It was crowded in the
movie house because it was a good film. <b>2</b>
full of weeds or grasses that obstruct. <hi>Bungayi
ang gardin kay síut na kaáyu</hi>, Weed
the garden because it is full of weeds. <b>3</b> littered
with trash. <b>n</b> trash, weeds. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; ac][**c?not sure]
force one's way with difficulty through
a crowd or thicket. <hi>Gisíut níya ang katawhan
pagpaduul sa intabládu</hi>, He forced his
way through the crowd to get near the
stage. <b>1a</b> for a sound to penetrate. <hi>Ang kabanhà
musíut sa ákung dalunggan</hi>, The
noise penetrates into my ears. <b>2</b> [B2] become
full of weeds. <b>3</b> [B126; a12] become
full of litter. <hi>Ginunting papil ang nakasíut
(nakapasíut) sa sála</hi>, Cut up[** "Cut-up"?] pieces of paper
littered the living room. <b>siutsiut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6]
scatter litter.

<b>siwag</b> <hi>a</hi> jutting out inconveniently. <hi>Siwag kaáyu
nang rúlir ilukluk sa bulsa</hi>, The ruler
protrudes inconveniently if you stick it in
your back pocket. <hi>v</hi> [A2S; c6] be, become
protuberant and inconvenient.

<b>siwagkang</b> <hi>v</hi> [B6; c1] stick out or be crookedly
placed. <hi>Dakù ang intráda sa ákung sapátus
kay nagsiwagkang ang ákung kumagkù</hi>,
I take a shoe with a very wide vamp because
my big toe sticks out to the side. <hi>Ayaw
siwagkánga (isiwagkang) ang ímung tiil
kay malukápa ta</hi>, Don't stick your legs out
because we'll stumble over them.

<b>siwakug</b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)6] be cumbersome and difficult
to carry due to its long length. <hi>Magsiwakug
dad-un ang tag-as nga mga lipak</hi>,
Long bamboo slats are cumbersome to carry.
<hi>a</hi> cumbersome to carry because of
length.

<b>síwang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] cut or split the lips. <hi>Siwángun
tikaw run ug dì ka magtárung</hi>, I'll split
your lips open if you don't behave. <b>(->)</b> <hi>a</hi>
@harelip. <hi>Dáan na nà siyang siwang sukad sa
gamay pa</hi>, She has been a harelip since
childhood.

<b>siwásid</b> = <b>SALUWASID</b>.

<b>siwil</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] for long slender things to stick
out. <hi>Misiwil ang lansang sa píkas bungbung</hi>,
The nail stuck out through the other side of
the wall. <hi>Punyal nga nagsiwil sa bulsa</hi>, A
dagger sticking out of the pocket.

<b>siwit</b> <hi>n</hi> @clitoris.

<b>siwitsiwit</b> <hi>n</hi> @gossip. <hi>v</hi> [AN; c1] @gossip; bear
<pb n=914>tales. <hi>Dì ta makasiwitsiwit ug daghan tag
búhat</hi>, We can't gossip if we're busy.

<b>siwsiw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] for blood to flow profusely.
<hi>Misiwsiw ang dugù sa dakù nga samad</hi>,
Blood flowed profusely from the wound.

<b>siya</b> @he, @she. <hi>Akù siyang igsúun</hi>, He is my
brother. She is my sister. <b>kanà</b>, <b>kini</b>, <b>kadtu &mdash;</b>
<b>1</b> him, her (used when speaking about
s.o., usually saying s.t. unpleasant). <hi>Tabian
nà siya</hi>, She is a gossip. <b>2</b> this, that thing.
<hi>Kari siya indángan. Kanà siya mamsà</hi>, This
is a surgeon fish. That is a crevally. <b>2a</b> that
umm... (used when one can't think of the
name of s.t.). <hi>Kanang instrumintu, kanà siyang
ibángag sa puthaw gánì</hi>, That instrument[** , ?]
that thing they make holes in iron
with, you know.... <b>siyasíya</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] do s.t.
all by himself, herself. <hi>Way mitábang níya
ug nagsiyasíya lang siya ug tuun</hi>, Nobody
helped him out and he studied all by himself.
<b>níya</b> <b>1</b> <hi>gen.</hi>: his, her. <hi>Ang libru níya</hi>,
Her book. <b>2</b> dat., short for <hi>kaníya</hi>. <b>kaníya</b>
<hi>dat.</hi>: him, her. <hi>Adtu kaníya ihátag</hi>, Give it
to her. <hi>see also</hi> <b>ÍYA</b>.

<b>síya</b> <hi>n</hi> @chair, @seat. <hi>v</hi> [a12] make into a chair.

<b>siyà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> in mahjong, a set of three consecutive
pieces of the same design. <b>2</b> act of obtaining
<hi>siyà</hi>. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] get <hi>siyà</hi>. <b>&mdash; ditirminális</b>
a <hi>siyà</hi> which has a terminal (<hi>tirminális</hi>).
<b>&mdash; minay</b> a winning hand which has one of
each of the winds (<hi>bintus</hi>), dragons (<hi>drágun</hi>)
and terminals (<hi>tirminális</hi>).

<b>siyam</b> <hi>numeral</hi> @nine. <hi>v</hi> <hi>see</hi> <b>TULU</b>. <b>&mdash; pa sa kamut</b>
not completely certain. (Lit. There are
still nine when you count it on the fingers
of the hand&mdash;from the notion that a newly
conceived baby is not certain because much
can happen in nine months). <hi>Bísag hinug
nag humay, siyam pa gihápun ni sa kamut
kay nía pa man sa yútà</hi>, Our rice is ripe, but
we can't be sure of the harvest because the
harvest hasn't been done yet. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @ninety.

<b>siyap<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A] peep, @chirp. <hi>Musiyap ang pisù
ug walà dihà ang mungáan</hi>, The chick will
peep if the hen is not there.

<b>siyap<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> shop, an establishment devoted to
repairing things or making things. <b>&mdash; sa makina</b>
machine shop.

<b>siyatsíyat</b> <hi>n</hi> shooting of the ball in basketball
for practice or for leisure. <hi>Sa siyatsíyat hingígù
siya, piru sa dúwà, sus lagyúa</hi>, In practice
shooting he is a good shot, but when it
comes to the actual game, his shots are way
off the mark. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] do practice shooting,
usually leisurely.<hi> Magsiyatsíyat únà ang mga
magduduwà sa dì pa sugdan ang baskit</hi>, The
players do practice shooting before the
game starts.

<b>siyin</b> one hundred, used only before words
of Spanish origin referring to measurements
or quantities. <hi>Siyin mil</hi>, One hundred thousand.
<hi>Siyin anyus</hi>, One hundred years. <hi>v</hi> see
<b>DISIUTSU</b>.

<b>síyuk<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S] @sputter. <hi>Ígù rang nakasíyuk
ang ribintadur ug walà makabutu</hi>, The firecracker
just sputtered and didn't explode.
<b>2</b> give a continuous hissing or screeching
sound. <hi>Ang hángin misíyuk sa mga alambri</hi>,
The wind hissed through the wires. <b>3</b> have
the sensation of being filled with a humming
sound, ring. <hi>Misíyuk ang ákung dalunggan
human sa butu</hi>, My ears rang after
the explosion. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. stone found in
chunks which crackles and sputters when
put into a fire. <b>2</b> hissing, sputtering sound.
<b>-in-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> = <b>SÍYUK</b>, <hi>n2</hi>.

<b>siyun</b> <hi>n</hi> a way of determining magically who
stole s.t. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] practice this sort of
magic. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> shaman who can help
find things that have been stolen.

<b>siyung</b> <hi>n</hi> a nickname, often used in address
to a hypothetical person in an exclamation
to indicate disbelief. <hi>Ámut siyung! Ipalit
níya ug dulsi sa iskuylahan unyà</hi>, My foot
he wants the money for school. He wants
to buy candy, that's all. <hi>Tuntúha siyung.
Maáyu mag karun pa ku ánà</hi>, Don't you
fool me, buddy roe. You think I haven't
heard that one before?

<b>siyut<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> lacking in good judgment or prudence.
<hi>Siyut kaáyu ning tawhána kay magswítir
bísan ug galhà</hi>, That man hasn't got a
brain in his head because he wears a sweater
no matter how hot it is. <hi>v</hi> |B12] be, become
lacking in good sense.

<b>siyut<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <b>SYÚT<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>.

<b>siyutsiyut</b> = <b>BATIWTIW</b>.

<b>stábus</b> <hi>short for</hi> <b>SINTÁBUS</b>.

<b>sts.</b> abbreviation for <hi>sintábus</hi> centavos.

<b>sú<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> word used to drive chickens away.

<b>sú<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @zoo.

<b>s[=ú]</b> = <b>SÚLÙ</b>.

<b>súag</b> <hi>v</hi> [B46; b4] feel nauseated. <hi>Musúag ang
ákung ginhawaan ug makabahù kug kanal</hi>, I
feel nauseated if I smell a ditch. <hi>Makasúag
(makapasúag) sa ákung ginhawaan ang tambuk
sa bábuy</hi>, Pork fat nauseates me.

<b>súb</b> <hi>n</hi> @{substitute teacher}.

<b>súba</b> = <b>SÚBAK</b>.

<b>subà</b> <hi>n</hi> @river. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> uterine hemorrhage. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[b4] have a uterine hemorrhage. <hi>Ang babáying
gisubáan sa dugù namatay</hi>, The woman
who had a uterine hemorrhage died. <b>2</b> [A2]
go upstream or to the hinterland. <hi>Kadaghánan
sa mga táwung nagpuyus ubus misúbà
sa panahun sa gúbat</hi>, Most of the people living
<pb n=915>along the coast went to the mountains
during the war. <hi>Walà makasúbà ang mga uwang
sa pagkagámay sa túbig</hi>, As the water
receded the shrimps could no longer proceed
upriver. <b>suban-un</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> person living
near the river. <b>2</b> the Subano, a non-Christian
tribe of Western Mindanao. <hi>a</hi> having
dirty habits, like the Subano's.

<b>subad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> devour a prey and swallow
it. <hi>Subarun ka sa dagkung isdà ug mahúlug
ka sa dágat</hi>, The big fish will devour
you if you fall in the sea. <b>2</b> eat (said humorously
of oneself or contemptuously of others).
<hi>Maáyu ka lang musubad ug pagkáun
apan tapulan ka</hi>, You're good at eating, but
when it comes to work you're no good. <hi>Musubad
kug bisan unsa</hi>, I'll eat anything. <b>3</b>
[A23; a12] be gullible enough to swallow
s.t. <hi>Musubad dáyun nà siyag hambúgan</hi>, She
believes any tall story told to her. <b>&mdash; nga
way paun</b> = <b>KUBIT NGA WAY PAUN</b>. <hi>see</hi>
<b>KUBIT</b>. <hi>n</hi> fish caught by hook and line. <b>(<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> the period when fish bite. <hi>Súbad run sa
núkus</hi>, This is the time the squids are biting.
<b>subadsúbad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3; b6] for fish to start to
bite. <hi>Misubadsúbad na ang isdà run</hi>, The
fish are starting to bite now. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] <b>1</b>
for fish to be biting. <hi>Dì pa manubad ang isdà
kay dì patay ang búlan</hi>, The fish are not
biting yet because the moon is still out
bright. <b>2</b> prey on, upon. <hi>Unsa may manubad
sa pisù, sawa u iring</hi>? What was preying on
the chicks? A snake or a cat? <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi>
wild animal that preys for its food. <hi>see also</hi>
<b>MANBAD</b>.

<b>súbak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] give a flavor to vegetables by
adding fish or meat. <hi>Maáyung isúbak ang
bulad sa munggus</hi>, Mung beans taste good if
cooked with a little dried fish. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> meat
or fish used with vegetables for flavor.

<b>subang</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b8] for heavenly bodies to
rise. <hi>Pagsalup sa adlaw misubang ang daktul</hi>,
When the sun set, the full moon rose. <b>1a</b>
[A] for it to be the first quarter. <hi>Mutári sila
sa ílang manuk inigsubang</hi>, They will wait
for the first quarter to fight their cocks. <b>2</b>
[A] appear, become known as s.o. distinguished.
<hi>Iládu na siya sa nakasubang na siya
sa pamálak</hi>, He was well-known after he had
distinguished himself in poetry. <b>3</b> [A23]
appear as if to rise. <hi>Usa ka pahiyum misubang
sa íyang dagway</hi>, A smile appeared in
her face. <hi>n</hi> moon of the first quarter. <hi>Primírung
subang</hi>, First day after the new moon.
<b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @east. <b>subangsúbang</b> = <b>SUBANG</b>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>subasku</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @squall. <b>2</b> a surge of emotion. <hi>Mu
ra siyag malumus adtung subasku sa kamíngaw</hi>,
It seems as though he would drown
in that wave of loneliness. <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] @squall.
<hi>Nabalían mi ug pálu kay hingsubaskuhan
mi</hi>, We had a broken mast because we were
caught in a squall.

<b>subasta</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] auction s.t. off. <hi>Isubasta
ang mga rilu nga walà malukat</hi>, They will
auction off the watches that were not redeemed.
<hi>n</hi> @auction.

<b>súbaw</b> <hi>n</hi> @{head cold}. <hi>v</hi> [A12; b4] catch a
cold. <hi>Gisip-un ku kay gisubáwan ku</hi>, I have
a runny nose because I have a cold.

<b>súbay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S; a2] follow, go along a certain
way. <hi>Musúbay ka sa dálan ug likù sa
tuu sa may mangga</hi>, Follow the path and
turn right near the mango tree. <hi>Ang karsáda
musúbay sa baybay</hi>, The road goes
along the beach. <hi>Subáya ang alambri arun
hibaw-an nímug háin ihukut</hi>, Follow the
wire up so you will know where it is tied.
<b>2</b> [A2; a12] imitate s.o. <hi>Maáyu siya nga
musúbay sa sinultian sa maistru</hi>, He is good
in mimicking the way the teacher speaks. <b>3</b>
[A; a12] go through the details of an event
to learn about it more clearly. <hi>Magsúbay ta
unsay nahitabù adtung gabhiúna</hi>, Let's discuss
what happened that night in detail. <b>3a</b>
trace a family tree. <hi>Subáya ang kagíkan sa
kaslúnun kay tingálig paryinti</hi>, Trace the
engaged couple's family tree, for they might
turn out to be related. <b>3b</b> go through accounts
in detail. <hi>Subáyun ta ang nakúhà gíkan
sa Hulyu</hi>, Let us review how much you
took, starting from July. <b>4</b> [A12S3; a12]
follow rules, customs, manners. <hi>Nagsubay
ka ba sa baláud</hi>? Are you observing the
law? <b>4a</b> be in accordance with. <hi>Ug subáyun
ang baláud sad-an siya</hi>, Under the law, he is
guilty. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> along, following a path. <hi>Lakaw
súbay sa karitíras</hi>, Go along the feeder road.
<b>2</b> in accordance with. <hi>Ang ákung gibúhat
súbay man sa baláud</hi>, What I did was in accordance
with the law. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12S] <b>1</b> relate
in detail. N<hi>aghinúbay (naghinubay) si
Pidru sa íyang mga kaági</hi>, Pedro related his
past experiences. <b>2</b> trace relationships. <b>pina-</b>
according to. <hi>Pinasúbay sa baláud dakù tà
kag buhis</hi>, According to the law, you should
pay a big tax.

<b>subdibáyid</b> <hi>v</hi> [a12] subdivide an area of land
into housing lots for commercial purposes.

<b>subdibisyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @{housing development}. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12]
make, make into a housing development.

<b>*súbid paN-</b>, <b>subidsúbid</b> <hi>n</hi> trolling with a
swiftly paddled one- or two-man boat. <hi>v</hi> [A2;
b6(1)] fish by trolling. <b>subiran</b> <hi>n</hi> a small
and narrow outriggered boat used for trolling
of this sort.

<pb n=916>

<b>subída</b> <hi>n</hi> @upgrade. <hi>v</hi> [A] go uphill, on an upgrade.
<hi>Ug musubída ang karsáda, isigunda</hi>,
When the road goes into an upgrade, shift
into second. <hi>Nangínit ang makina samtang
nagsubída ang trák</hi>, The motor overheated
while the truck was negotiating the upgrade.
subidahun <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @steep. <b>2</b> difficult, hard
to solve. <hi>Subidahun kaáyu ning sulirána</hi>,
This problem is very difficult. <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
be, become difficult or steep.

<b>subing<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> individual stalks of rice not ripe
during the harvest and left to be gleaned.
<hi>v</hi> [AN; b6] glean rice that was left to ripen.

<b>subing<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a one-string musical instrument
made of bagákay bamboo. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A] play
the <hi>subing</hi>. <b>2</b> [c1] make a <hi>subing</hi>.

<b>subir</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] increase in price or intensity.
<hi>Misubir ang prisyu sa mais</hi>, The price of
corn went up. <hi>Misubir ang íyanq hilánat</hi>,
His temperature went up. <b>subídu</b> <hi>a</hi> for prices
to be high or s.t. else to be high in numerical
quantity. <hi>Subídu ang íyang grádu</hi>, He
got high grades.

<b>subirbíya</b> = <b>SUBIRBÍYU</b> (female).

<b>subirbiyu</b>, <b>subirbíyu</b> <hi>a</hi> difficult to discipline,
insistent on doing as one likes. <hi>v</hi> [B12] be,
become recalcitrant. <hi>Masubirbiyu ang prísu
ug ímung lugaklugákan</hi>, A prisoner will become
unmanageable if you show him leniency.
<b>pubring &mdash;</b> <hi>a</hi> financially hard-up, but
insisting on one's wants. <hi>Pubring subirbiyu
kaáyu nang tawhána. Gitagáan gánig trabáhu,
dílì kay gustung magmanidy&icaron;r siya</hi>, That
man is a beggar but he won't work except
as manager.

<b>subìsubì</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b5] answer back when reprimanded.
<hi>Hílum! Ayaw kug subìsubia (subìsubii)</hi>,
Shut up! Don't you talk back to
me.

<b>sublì</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] do s.t. twice, again for the
second time around. <hi>Musublì ku ug káun
kay gigútum pa ku</hi>, I will eat again because
I am still hungry. <b>1a</b> [a12] @repeat, say s.t.
again. S<hi>ublíun ku lag kas-a ug památig maáyu</hi>,
I will repeat once. Now listen carefully.
<b>2</b> [A; a12] go over s.t. for errors. <hi>Sublíun
nákù nà ug makatulu arun walà giyuy mga
sayup</hi>, I will go over it three times so there
will be no mistakes. <b>3</b> [A13; b] @reelect s.o.
<hi>Sublían nátù si Anduy pagkamíyur</hi>, Let us
reelect Andoy for mayor. <hi>n</hi> repeated term
in office. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> reelection aimed at.

<b>submarínu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @submarine. <b>2</b> bedbug (humorous).
<hi>Unsáun pagkatúlug nga ayruplánu
sa táas submarínu sa ubus</hi>, How can you
sleep with lots of airplanes (mosquitoes)
above and submarines (bedbugs) underneath
you? <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12] travel by submarine.
<b>2</b> [A13; a12] sabotage an activity.<hi> Walà
mulampus ang ákung paági kay ímu man
nga gisubmarínu</hi>, My procedure did not
succeed because you sabotaged it.

<b>submasinggan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{submachine gun}. <hi>v</hi> [A13;
a12] shoot with a submachine gun.

<b>submit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] hand in or over. <hi>Kinsay
nagsubmit áring blangku nga papil?</hi> Who
submitted this blank piece of paper? <hi>Walà
pa ku makasubmit sa ripurt</hi>, I have not yet
handed in the report.

<b>submitir</b> = <b>SUMITIR</b>.

<b>subpína</b> <hi>n</hi> @subpoena. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] serve s.o.
with a subpoena.

<b>subra</b> <hi>a</hi> in excess, @{too many}, @{too much}. <hi>Subra
ra kaáyu ang túbig nga ímung gibutang sa
linat-an</hi>, You put much too much water
in the stew. <hi>Subra ra kaáyu ang ímung pag
tabakù</hi>, You smoke much too much. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[B46] be excessive. <b>2</b> [A] be more than a
certain amount. <hi>Ang íyang swildu musubra
ug gatus human ug báyad sa mga útang</hi>, His
salary will be a bit more than a hundred
after he pays off his debts. <b>2a</b> [A12] get a
little extra. <hi>Sa ákung pangisdà makasubra
ku ug diyútay nga ibaligyà human kuhái sa
pagkáun</hi>, I get a little extra from my fishing
after taking out what we use for food. <b>3</b> [A;
b(1)] set aside a bit for s.o. <hi>Subráhi (subrái)
ku ug diyútay nga dulsi, ha?</hi> Leave some
candy for me, will you? <b>n</b> the remainder
left over after what is needed has been taken,
the excess. <hi>Ang subra gibálik human ku
mukúhag tulu</hi>, I returned the remainder after
I took three. <hi>Iúlì ang subra kay kini ray
ákung gikinahanglan</hi>, Return the extra ones
because I only need this one. <b>&mdash; ibasta</b> <hi>a</hi>
done in excess. <hi>v</hi> [B; c1] be given, done in
excess. <hi>Dì na hinúun makamaung manikaysíkay
ang táwu ug magsubra ibasta ra ang
átung tábang kaníya</hi>, A man won't know
how to shift for himself if he is given more
help than necessary. <hi>Bísag unsay buhátun
basta masubra ibasta makadáut</hi>, Anything
done in excess is harmful. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6P]
be excessive, too much. <hi>Naghinubra ang
ímung pag-inum</hi>, You are drinking too
much. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] exaggerate a story. <hi>Wà
ra tuy kásu piru gipasubrahan ug sugílun</hi>, It
was nothing serious but he exaggerated
when he recounted it. <b>subraánay</b> <hi>a</hi> @excessive,
beyond the bounds of good taste. <hi>Subraánay
pud nga nakapamulbus si Pilang</hi>,
Pilang powders her face excessively.

<b>subri</b> <hi>n</hi> @envelope. <hi>v</hi> [A13; c1] place s.t. inside
an envelope.

<b>subrikáma</b> <hi>n</hi> @bedspread.[+]

<b>subrikargu</b> <hi>n</hi> purser on a vessel. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B156; a2] 
<pb n=917>be, become a purser. <b>2</b> [A1; c1] make
s.o. a purser.

<b>subsik</b>. abbreviation for <hi>subsikritaryu</hi> undersecretary.

<b>subsub</b> <hi>a</hi> @frequent. <hi>Kasubsub nímu nga mutan-aw
ug sini!</hi> How often you go to the
show! <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] do s.t. often. <hi>Subsúbun
nímu ug túbig ang tanum</hi>, Water the plants
frequently.

<b>subu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B23(1)46; b8] for s.t. boiling to
overflow. <hi>Ukbi ang kardíru kay misubu ang
inínit</hi>, Take the cover off of the pot because
water is overflowing. <b>2</b> [A; b] douse water
onto live embers. <hi>Subhi ang bága úsà ta
manglákaw</hi>, Pour water on the embers before
you leave. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)] temper, harden
iron or steel by heating it and then immersing
it in oil or water. <b>4</b> [A; b(1)] initiate a
series of activities or wear s.t. for the first
time. <hi>Ang prisidinti mauy musubu sa bayli</hi>,
The president will start the dance. <hi>Siyay
nakasubu ug sakay sa ayruplánu</hi>, He rode
the inaugural flight of the airplane. <hi>n</hi> temper
of metal. <b>walay &mdash;</b> inexperienced[** specific to courting, or add @?]. <hi>Ayawg
patugatuga ug pangulitáwung Maríya kay
wà kay subu</hi>, Don't try to court Mary because
you are inexperienced.

<b>subù</b> <hi>a</hi> @sad. <hi>Subù ug nawung</hi>, Having a sad
countenance. <hi>Subù nga palandúngun</hi>, Sad
to think about. <hi>v</hi> [A1; c5] be sad. <hi>Gikasubù
ku ang dílì kalikayan nga hitabù</hi>, I
very much regret the unavoidable incident.
<b>paha-</b> [A; b6] extend one's condolences. <hi>n</hi>
@condolences. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @sadness. <b>kasub-ánan</b> <hi>n</hi>
@grief, @sorrows. <hi>Kasub-ánan nga way katapúsan</hi>,
Sorrows without end. <b>masulub-un</b> <hi>a</hi>
<b>1</b> characterized with grief, @mournful. <hi>Usa
ka masulub-un nga bakhù</hi>, A mournful sob.
<b>2</b> @grieving. <hi>Ang masulub-ung kapíkas</hi>, The
grieving wife. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be, become sad.
<b>maka-r-(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> @saddening. <hi>Makasusúbung hitabù</hi>,
A saddening event.

<b>súbuk</b> <hi>n</hi> @pith. <b>subuksúbuk sa mais</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> pith of
cornstalks or pith-like substance in the middle
of a corncob. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> mostly pith. <hi>Dílì
lig-un ning kahúya kay subúkun kaáyu</hi>,
The piece of wood is not strong because
it is mostly pith.

<b>subul</b> <hi>n</hi> sprout from the ground, sprout of
hair or feathers. <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] @sprout. <hi>Makasubul
na sab ang mga balíli ug uwanun</hi>, The
grass will sprout if it rains. <hi>Gisubulan nag
balhíbu ang íyang íluk</hi>, Hair has sprouted in
his armpits.

<b>*subung</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>SUMBAN</b>.

<b>súbung<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AC; c] light a cigar or cigarette
from s.o. else's cigarette or cigar.

<b>*súbung<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> gold alloyed with other
metal. <hi>Sinúbung ning singsínga</hi>, This ring
is not pure gold. <hi>v</hi> [B126] be gold alloy.

<b>suburnu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @bribe. <hi>Madúgay ang papílis ug
way suburnu</hi>, The papers will take forever
if there is no bribe. <b>2</b> crime of bribery.
<hi>Ang suburnu nabúhat sa panahun sa prisidinti
pa si Makapagal</hi>, The bribery was
done when Macapagal was president. <hi>v</hi> [A;
c] give a @bribe.

<b>súbut</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126] be pricked, get a splinter in
one. <hi>Nasúbut siya pagpapha níya sa íyang
gisapilyáhan</hi>, He got a splinter in him when
he rubbed his hands over the board he was
planing.

<b>subwak</b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)4; b6] <b>1</b> for water to burst
out of a hole. <hi>Misubwak ang túbig sa tuburan</hi>,
The water gushed out of the source of
the spring. <b>2</b> for the contents to overflow
a container. <hi>Misubwak ang mga pasahíru
sa trák</hi>, The bus is overflowing with passengers.
<hi>Nagsubwak ang mga táwu sa sinihan</hi>,
The moviegoers spilled out of the
movie house.

<b>súd</b> = <b>SULUD</b>.

<b>súda</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{soda water}. <b>2</b> @{soda crackers}. <hi>v</hi> [b(1)]
mix s.t. with soda. <b>&mdash; krákirs</b> = <b>SÚDA</b>,
<hi>n2</hi>.

<b>sud-an</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>SULÀ</b>.

<b>sud-ip</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1246; b8] choke on s.t. that went
into the respiratory passage. <hi>Hingsud-ipan
ka ug muinum ka ug dalìdalì</hi>, You will
choke if you drink too fast. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. sweet
potato with reddish peelings and white
meat, so called because the meat is moist
and tends to stick in the throat.

<b>sudiyà</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN2; b(1)] point out to a person
that he was wrong or that he failed to do
s.t. <hi>Walà pa ku makasudiyà (makapanudiyà)
níya báhin sa íyang gisáad nákù</hi>, I have not
reminded him about what he promised me.
<hi>Sudiyái ku ug mahustu ka kay sigúru ku
nga sayup giyud tu</hi>, You may point it out
to me if it turns out you were right, because
I am sure that you are wrong. <b>ma-un</b>
<hi>a</hi> characterized with a remonstrating attitude.
<hi>Mitan-aw siya nákù sa usa ka masudiyáun
nga pagtan-aw</hi>, He looked at me
with a remonstrating look. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> the action
of pointing it out to a person that he
was wrong. <b>adlaw sa paN-</b> @{Judgment Day}.

<b>sudiyang<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a cone-like, tapering structure
used as an animal or fish trap into the
smaller end of which the animal enters with
ease, but which has tines, such that the
animal cannot back out. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] catch
or make into this sort of trap.

<b>sudiyang<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> large tree of the primary or
secondary forest producing hard, dark red
<pb n=918>lumber: <b><hi>Ctenolophon philippinense</hi></b>.

<b>sudlay</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @comb. <b>2</b> @harrow, a raft-like device
with toothed undersides pulled by a water
buffalo, used for raking off weeds and
breaking up the lumps of soil. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b>
@comb s.o.'s hair. <b>2</b> @harrow. <b>3</b> [a12] look
at s.t. from one point to the other with
deliberate care. <hi>Gisudlay níya pagtan-aw
ang babáyi gíkan sa úlu ngadtu sa tiil,</hi> She
@scrutinized the girl from head to foot. <b>paN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2] @comb one's hair. <hi>Wà ka makapanudlay,</hi>
You haven't combed your hair!

<b>sudlut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b2] @spurt, @{squirt out}. <hi>Misudlut
ang dugù sa samad,</hi> Blood spurted out
of the wound. <b>2</b> [B46; b6] @bulge or come
partially out of an opening. <hi>Nagsudlut na
ang bátà sa pag-abut sa mananabang,</hi> The
infant's head was already out when the
midwife arrived.

<b>sudsud<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> @{close together}. <hi>Sudsud kaáyu ang
kamátis nga pagkatanum,</hi> The tomatoes
are planted very close together. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13;
c1] place, or plant close together. <hi>Isudsud
(sudsúrun) nímu ug butang ang mga silya,</hi>
Place the chairs close together.

<b>sudsud<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{dig up} or @{turn up} the
earth by shoving with the tip of an instrument
or (by animals) with the snout. <hi>Sudsúra
ning mga balíli,</hi> Clear off this grass
(with a pushing motion). <hi>Ang gisudsúran
sa bábuy nga yútà nangalúngag,</hi> The place
where the pig had dug out the earth with
its snout is full of holes. <b>2</b> [AN; a] push
sand lightly with the feet in search of crabs.
<b>3</b> [A; a] catch fish with a <hi>sudsud</hi>. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
bladed instrument with a blunt end used to
remove weeds by shoving under the roots.
<b>2</b> k.o. small one-man fishing @net made of
coarse <hi>sinamay</hi> mounted on two poles,
pushed through shallow water to catch
shrimps or small fish. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] go fishing
with the <hi>sudsud</hi>.

<b>sud-uk</b> = <sc>SID-UK</sc>.

<b>sud-ung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; a] @look at s.t. or s.o. with
interest or intent. <hi>Sud-úngun ku ang ímung
ritrátu ug abutun ku ug kamíngaw,</hi> I will
@gaze at your picture if I feel lonesome. <b>pa-</b>
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] allow s.o. to see. <b>2</b> [a12] live
long enough to see the fruit of one's labor,
foolishness. <hi>Gipasud-ung ang amahan nga
nagsípit ug diplúma ang tanan níyang mga
anak úsà siya mamatay,</hi> The father lived
long enough to see all his children graduate
before he died. <b>2</b> [A13] live only long
enough to be seen. <hi>Ígù lang nagpasud-ung
tung batáa kay usa ra ka búwan sa maháyag,</hi>
That child lived only long enough to be
seen because it died a month after birth.

<b>súduy</b> = <sc>SÚRUY</sc>.

<b>suga</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] repolish rice that still has some
unhusked grains. <hi>Sugaha ang bugas arun
hanglas kan-un,</hi> Repolish the rice so that
it is smooth to eat.

<b>sugà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @lamp. <b>alambri sa &mdash;</b> electric wire.
<b>-ng dikumbáti</b> @{barn lantern}. <b>2</b> @{electric
lights}. <hi>Way sugà karung gabíi,</hi> There will be
no electricity tonight. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @light
lights. <hi>Sug-i ang altar kay mangadyì na ta,</hi>
Light the altar because we're going to pray.
<b>2</b> [A13; b(1)] use s.t. for light. <hi>Nagsugà
mi ug kandílà pagblak-áwut,</hi> We used candles
during the blackout. <b>2a</b> <b>ika- ang íhì</b>
for a woman to be very beautiful (lit. such
that her urine could be used to light a lamp).
<hi>Ikasugà ba ang íhì sa naasáwa sa ímung anak?</hi>
Is your son's wife beautiful? <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A2; b6] go fishing using lamps. <hi>Manugà mi
rung gabíi sa hunásan,</hi> We will hunt shellfish
in the tidal flats tonight with a lamp.
<b>sugàsugà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. marine @crab usually found
inhabiting rocks and shallow water, 3"[**inch symbol] across
and round with a thick shell. <b>2</b> name
given to dried <hi>lagaw</hi>.

<b>sugà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A] for corn plants to develop or
grow tassels. <hi>Malípay ku kun magsugà na
ang ámung mais,</hi> I am happy when our corn
plants begin to grow tassels.

<b>sugabin</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; bc] @add s.t. to the principal
thing. <hi>Sugabini ug kamúti ang kan-un,</hi> @Supplement
the rice with sweet potatoes. <hi>Isugabin
sa ímung sulat ang ákung pangumusta
kaníla,</hi> Give them my regards in your letter.
<b>2</b> [A; a] have a @sideline. <hi>Nakasugabin kug
tudlù magabíi gíkan sa upisína,</hi> I got a job
part-time teaching at night after office
hours.

<b>sugábu</b> <hi>v</hi> [B26; b6] dive or fall with a
splashing or thudding sound. <hi>Misugábu sa
lunangan ang hubug,</hi> The drunk splashed
into the mud puddle.

<b>sugákud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2] be up to doing s.t., keeping
up with s.t. <hi>Dílì ku musugákud ánang
trabahúa,</hi> I am not up to that job. <hi>Dì ku
makasugákud sa instulmin,</hi> I cannot keep
up with the installments. <b>2</b> [A12] @bear,
@endure. <hi>Dílì siya makasugákud sa katugnaw,</hi>
He cannot bear the cold.

<b>súgal</b> <hi>n</hi> @gambling. <hi>Ang súgal mauy nakapútu
níya,</hi> Gambling made him bankrupt. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[AC; c] @gamble. <hi>Ug isúgal nímu ang ímung
kwarta, náa ra nà nímu,</hi> If you want to
gamble your money away, it's up to you.
<b>2</b> [C3] @click, be in position to come to an
understanding with one another (humorous).
<hi>Ulitáwu ku ug dalága ka, magsúgal giyud
run ta niíni,</hi> I'm single and you are unmarried. 
<pb n=919>We would make an ideal pair. <hi>Dì ta
niíni magkasúgal kay nagkalainláin ang átung
mga iduluhíya,</hi> We can't have a meeting
of minds because we hold to different
ideologies. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23; b6] go ahead
with s.t. come what may. <hi>Musugal kag larga
bísag bagyu?</hi> Are you going to take
the risk and sail even though there's a typhoon?
<b>2</b> [A13; c6] @risk, expose s.t. of
value to loss. <hi>Nagsugal ka sa ímung kinabúhì
ánang trabahúa,</hi> You are risking your life
in that work. <b>3</b> [b6] pretend s.t. to serve as
an excuse or to mollify s.o. <hi>Gisugalan níya
si Pápa ug hilakhílak arun dì siya hilatiguhan,</hi>
She treated Daddy to her crocodile
tears to escape a spanking. <hi>Ayaw kug sugali
ánang baráhang dunut,</hi> Don't give me
those phoney excuses. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @{gambling den}.
<b>sugarul</b> <hi>n</hi> @gambler. <hi>v</hi> [B123] be, become a
gambler.

<b>sugála</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b] @bother or @annoy by doing
s.t. at a most inopportune time. <hi>Musug[=á]
(manug[=á]) ug sakit ang ákung riyúma ug
tingtugnaw,</hi> My rheumatism bothers me terribly
when the weather is cold. <hi>Ngánung
magsug[=á] ka bag pangáyug kwarta ug wà tay
kulirù?</hi> Why do you have to annoy me by
asking me for money at a time when I'm
broke?

<b>*sugamak hi-/ha-</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256; b8] <b>1</b> @{run into},
@collide. <hi>Ug didtu mahisugamak ang awtu sa
paril,</hi> And the car ran smack into the stone
wall. <b>2</b> run into s.t. to experience, meet. <hi>Ug
dílì ka mag-amping mahisugamak ka sa kasámuk,</hi>
If you are not careful, you will run
into trouble. <hi>Patrulyang íyang hisugamakan,</hi>
The patrol he ran into.

<b>sug-ang</b> <hi>n</hi> @{wood burner} composed of three
stones triangularly arranged or a heavy metal
ring or a clay @burner onto which pots are
set.</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; a12] put, make, make into
such a burner. <b>2</b> [A1; c6] set the dinner on
the burner. <hi>Nagsug-ang ku ug paniudtu kay
alas unsi na,</hi> I am putting the dinner on the
stove because it is eleven o'clock. <b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [C;
a12] be placed in a triangular arrangement
like the <hi>sug-ang</hi>. <hi>Nag-atúbang silang tulu ug
lingkud, nagsinug-ang,</hi> The three sat in a
circle facing each other. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>SUG-ANG</sc>,
<hi>n</hi>.

<b>sugapà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; a3b4(1)] @encounter s.t. by
accident. <hi>Nakasugapà mig bangkíti paglabay
námù sa íla,</hi> When we went by their house
we came upon them having a banquet. <hi>Dílì
ka untà masugapà sa kadaútan,</hi> I hope
you don't meet danger.

<b>sugarul</b> see <sc>SÚGAL</sc>.

<b>súgat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC; ac3] @meet, approach from
opposite directions. <hi>Dílì ka musúgat samtang
maglatay na ku sa tabla,</hi> Don't come
across in the opposite direction while I am
<b>still</b> walking along the plank. <hi>Nagkasúgat
kami sa Magalyánis,</hi> We happened to meet
downtown. <hi>Sugáta siya sa istasyunan,</hi> Meet
him at the bus terminal. <b>2</b> [a1] @welcome,
@greet heartily. <hi>Sugátun nátù siya sa usa ka
masipáung pakpak,</hi> Let's welcome him with
a resounding applause. <b>3</b> [A23] meet the
senses. <hi>Usa ka hínay nga hagíyus misúgat
sa íyang dalunggan,</hi> A low hissing sound
met his ears. <hi>n</hi> the Roman Catholic ritual
on Easter dawn which represents the meeting
of Christ and the Blessed Virgin. Two
groups start out from different houses, one
group of women, carrying the image of the
Holy Mother veiled on a cart, and the other,
a group of men carrying an image of
Christ on a cart. The two groups meet
where an arch has been erected in which a
child or several children dressed as angels
(<hi>alilúya</hi>) are suspended. Upon the meeting
of the two groups the angels are lowered
and white pigeons are released, and one of
the angels lifts the veil of the Holy Mother.
The decorations used in this ceremony are
gathered by the spectators for their magical
properties. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> presents brought by a
visitor.[+]

<b>sugatà</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12; b4(1)] @meet accidentally,
@{run into}. <hi>Ayaw ug súruy magabíi kay makasugatà
ka ug áway,</hi> Don't go around at night
because you may just run into a fight. <hi>Nasugat-an
nákù sila sa may taytáyan,</hi> I happened
to meet them near the bridge. <b>2</b> [a12]
experience, be met with difficulties or
misfortune. <hi>Nasugatà siya sa usa ka pait nga
katalagman,</hi> He was met with bitter calamity.

<b>sugba</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @broil over hot coals. <hi>Isugba
na ba ring karni?</hi> Shall I broil this meat
now? <b>2</b> put or throw into the fire to burn.
<hi>Akuy musugba sa ímung duláan ug dì ka
maghílum,</hi> I will throw your toys into the
fire if you aren't quiet. <b>aN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @moth. <b>sugbaánan</b>
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> an @{open fire} where meat is
broiled. <b>2</b> @forge. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> broiled meat or fish.

<b>Sugbu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> name of the island of @Cebu. <b>syudad
sa &mdash;</b> @{Cebu City}. <b>Sugbuánun</b> <hi>n</hi> @Cebuano,
from the island of Cebu. <b>sinugbuanun</b> <hi>n</hi>
@Cebuano. <hi>v</hi> [A] speak Cebuano.

<b>sugbu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; a3] @dive or jump into water.
<hi>Dì ku musugbu dihà sa mabaw,</hi> I won't dive
where it's too shallow. <hi>Nasugbu siya sa lunangan
sa kábaw,</hi> He fell into the puddle
where the water buffalo wallowed. <b>pa-</b> <hi>n</hi>
k.o. @fishing with a hand line for fishes that
<pb n=920>feed on the bottom, composed of a line,
sinker, and a hook with a long leader. The
equipment is lowered, and when the sinker
touches the bottom, it is raised so that the
hook is a couple of inches off the bottom,
and the line is held until s.t. bites.

<b>sugi</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @halfbeak with very fine scales.

<b>súgid</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN2; c6] @tell, @relate. <hi>Kinahanglan
nga musúgid ka sa tinúud nga nahitabù,</hi>
You must relate what really happened. <b>2</b>
[AN; c] @confess one's sin to a priest to obtain
absolution. <hi>Human siya makasúgid
(makapanúgid) gimaymáyan siya sa párì,</hi>
After he confessed his sins, the priest gave
him words of advice. <b>3</b> [c3] @{be heard of}.
<hi>Wà na igsúgid ang nangalúnud sa barku,</hi> The
passengers of the ship that sank were never
heard of again[**added a]. <hi>Ikasúgid ka pa kahag nakauban
ka pa sa Byitnam?</hi> Do you think you
would still be alive if you had been sent to
Vietnam? <b>paN-</b> [A2] = <sc>SÚGID</sc>, <hi>v1</hi>. <b>walay
paN-</b> @{wiped out}, @annihilated (lit. nobody
was left to tell the story). <hi>Way nanúgid sa
inasal nga gidá sa piknik,</hi> The roast pig that
was brought to the picnic was wiped out.
<b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12S; b(1)] tell stories at length.
<hi>Naghinugid siya sa mga primyu nga íyang
nadaug,</hi> He related in great length the prizes
he won. <b>sugilánun</b> <hi>n</hi> @{short story}. <b>magsusugilanun</b>
short story writer. <b>ig-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @confession.
<b>kasugíran</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @history, a related series of
past events. <b>2</b> @legend, s.t. handed down by
tradition. <hi>see also</hi> <sc>SUGÍLUN</sc>.[+]

<b>sugígi</b> <hi>n</hi> large @basket woven out of thin bamboo
slatting, used for storing large amounts
of grain. <hi>v</hi> [A12; a12] make, make into a
storage basket.

<b>sugilagming</b> <hi>n</hi> very short story (coined from
<hi>sugilánun</hi> and <hi>gagming</hi>).

<b>sugilakbit</b> <hi>n</hi> story in a summarized version of
a longer story (from <hi>súgid</hi> and <hi>lakbit</hi>).

<b>sugilambung</b> <hi>n</hi> @novel.

<b>sugilánun</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÚGID</sc>.

<b>sugílun</b> (from <hi>súgid</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [AN2; c] <b>1</b> @tell, @report.
<hi>Hilatiguhan ta ug musugílun (manugílun)
kang Pápa nga nangáun ta ug mangga,</hi>
We'll both get whipped if you tell Daddy
that we ate mangoes. <hi>Gisuginlan ka na ba sa
balità?</hi> Have you been told the news? <b>2</b>
enumeration of pertinent facts. <hi>May mga
<b>sugílun</b> nga midagsang diri nga minyù ka,</hi>
The story is going around that you are married.
<b>píla may &mdash;</b> to @{make a long story short}.
<hi>Píla may sugílun gipangasáwa níya ang babáyi,</hi>
To make a long story short, he married
the woman. <b>paN-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; c6] @tell s.t.
around. <hi>Nanugilun si Tasyu nga uyab na kunu
mu,</hi> Tasio is telling people that you're
his girl now. <b>hiN-</b> = <sc>HINÚGID</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÚGID</sc>.

<b>sugkay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] <b>1</b> @stir a mixture that contains
some solid. <hi>Sugkáya ang linúgaw,</hi> Stir
the porridge. <b>2</b> for the emotions to be stirred
up. <hi>Galamhan nga gisugkay sa túmang
pagbásul,</hi> Thoughts that were @disturbed by
extreme feelings of repentance.

<b>suglib</b> = <sc>SUGNIB</sc>.

<b>sugmat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b4] for a quiescent disease
to @recur, @{act up}. <hi>Misugmat na sab ang ákung
riyúma,</hi> My rheumatism is acting up
again. <b>2</b> [A2] for criminality to recur or be
on the rise. <hi>Misugmat na usab ang kúut karun,</hi>
Pickpocketing is on the rise again. <hi>n</hi> @recurrence
of an ailment.

<b>sugmaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3PB26; c1] <b>1</b> for a body to
@plunge into liquid, as a fly in coconut palm
toddy, hot metal in water. <hi>Kinsay nagsugmaw
<b>sa</b> ákung sapátus sa túbig?</hi> Who threw
my shoes into the water? <hi>Misugmaw ang
lángaw sa tubà,</hi> The fly plunged into the
coconut palm toddy. <b>2</b> plunge into s.t.
unpleasant. <hi>Nasugmaw siya sa mga útang,</hi>
She plunged herself into debt.

<b>sugmuy</b> <hi>a</hi> @dejected, with a slumping body.
<hi>Sugmuy kaáyung kandidátung napildi,</hi> The
candidate who lost was quite dejected. <hi>v</hi> [B126]
<b>1</b> become @crestfallen. <hi>Nasugmuy ang
ulitáwu kay gibastid,</hi> The young man was
dejected because he broke up with his girl.
<b>2</b> be @assuaged. <hi>Nasugmuy ang ákung kabaláka
dihang nakítà ku siya,</hi> My worry was @relieved
when I saw him.

<b>sugnib</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] set s.t. on fire or touch
a flaming brand to it. <hi>Ákù na ba ring sugníban
ang sagbut?</hi> Shall I @{set fire} to the trash?
<b>2</b> [A3P; b(1)] @incite s.o. into action, @enthuse
s.o. for s.t. <hi>Usa ka suliran nakasugnib
nákù sa pagsulat kanímu ning pila ka púlung,</hi>
A great problem @goaded me to write
you these few lines. <hi>Gisugníban níya ang
mga istudiyanti pagdimunstrít,</hi> He @goaded
the students into demonstrating.

<b>sugnud</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> wood for fuel. <b>2</b> @fuel for propulsion.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b] use s.t. as @firewood or fuel.
<hi>Dílì mi makasugnud ug bunut kay kusug
muasu,</hi> We cannot use coconut husks as fuel
because they give off too much smoke. <b>1a</b>
use fuel in an engine. <b>2</b> [A1; b(1)] add @fuel
to s.t. to increase the problem. <hi>Ang ímung
sulti nagsugnud sa ílang áway,</hi> Your statement
added fuel to their quarrel.

<b>sugpà</b> <hi>n</hi> vomitting or spitting of blood. <hi>Sugpà
ang namatyan sa gikuláta,</hi> The mauling
victim died of internal hemorrhage. <hi>v</hi> [B1463;
b3(1)] vomit or @{spit blood}. <hi>Nagsugpà
si Tiryu, ang tibíhun,</hi> Terio, the TB patient,
is spitting blood.

<pb n=921>

<b>sugpù</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB12; a1] put an end, @{cut short} s.t.
that is flourishing. <hi>Akuy musugpù sa íyang
dautang batásan,</hi> I will @{put an end to} her
ugly habits. <hi>Masugpù ang túbù sa bátà ug
pukáwun ug sayu,</hi> A child's growth gets
@stunted if he is made to get up early.

<b>sugpung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @tie two ends together, add
a span or length to s.t. <hi>Aku ray musugpung
<b>sa</b> hayhayan nga nabugtù,</hi> I'll tie the
clothesline that snapped back together. <hi>Ákung
sugpúngan ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà
nga mubù,</hi> I'll add a piece of cloth to the
bottom of my skirt because it is too short.
<hi>n</hi> @knot formed in a joint. <b>ka- ug tinái</b> <hi>n</hi>
one's @sibling. <hi>Kining batáa kasugpung ku ug
tinái,</hi> This child is my @brother. <b>ka- ug kasingkásing</b>
<hi>n</hi> one's @lover. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. made
at the end of things to join them to s.t.
else.

<b>sugput</b> (from <hi>suput</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [B26; b8] @squirt or
@{pop out}. <hi>Misugput ag kitsup dihang gipikpik
nákù ang samput sa butilya,</hi> The catsup
squirted out when I tapped the bottom of
the bottle. <hi>Nasugput ang sungsung sa syampín,</hi>
The cork popped out of the champagne.

<b>sugpuy<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @calm s.t. down. <hi>Mga
púlung nga makasugpuy sa kaínit sa úlu,</hi>
Words that can calm one's anger. <hi>Masugpuy
ang hilánat ug butangag yílu ang úlu,</hi> It will
lower his fever if you put ice on his head. <b>2</b>
[B126] @stunt the growth. <hi>Kakúlang sa sustansiya
ang nakasugpuy (nakapasugpuy) sa
tinubuan sa bátà,</hi> Undernourishment stunted
the child's growth.

<b>sugpuy<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> feverish feeling in which the temperature
of the upper part of the body is
warm and the lower part is cold, esp. of
children during teething. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4]
have such an affliction.

<b>sugpuy<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> = <sc>SUGMUY</sc>.

<b>sugsug</b> = <sc>SALUGSUG</sc>.

<b>sugsúg</b> = <sc>SULUGSÚLUG</sc>.

<b>súgù</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a1c] tell s.o. to do s.t. <hi>Sugúun
ta ka ug[**manually stricken?] pagpalit ug gasulína,</hi> I will send
you to buy gasoline. <hi>Unsa may isúgù nímu
nákù?</hi> What do you want me to do? <hi>Aku
si Husi dila Krus ug dúnay isúgù,</hi> I am José
de la Cruz at your service. <b>-a ku ninyu</b> forgive
me for leaving the table while you are
eating (lit. tell me to go fetch s.t. so I may
leave the table). <b>2</b> [a12] in pool, hit a target
ball in such a manner that it knocks
another ball towards the pocket. <hi>Sugúa
nang nuybi arung masúd ang kinsi,</hi> Knock
the number nine ball towards the number
fifteen ball to knock it into the pocket (lit.
order the number nine ball to make the
fifteen go in). <b>3</b> [A; a12] use a water buffalo
for plowing. <hi>Dì pa masúgù ang turíti,</hi>
You can't use a young water buffalo for
plowing. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> things one was told to do. <hi>Gitúman
ba nímu ang ákung mga súgù?</hi> Have
you done the things I told you to do? <b>&mdash; sa
Diyus napúlù</b> the @{Ten Commandments}. <b>2</b>
specific @duties in an organization, group activity.
<hi>Unsa may íyang súgù ánang kapunungána?</hi>
What are his duties in that organization?
<b>3</b> <hi>in phrases:</hi> <b>&mdash; sa láwas</b> things one
has to do out of biological necessity and
cannot avoid: urinate, sleep, and the like. &mdash;
<b>sa panahun</b> exigency resulting from a state
of weather. <b>&mdash; sa pálad</b> decree of fate. <b>&mdash; sa
papil</b> according to the script. <b>&mdash; sa pagbátì</b>
needs arising from some emotion. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13;
b6] send s.o. s.w. to convey a message.
<hi>Pasugúan ta ka ug magsúgud na ang dúlà,</hi> I
will send s.o. over to notify you when the
game starts. <b>balin-an(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> fond of giving orders,
not liking to do things oneself. <hi>Balinsuguan
bayhána dì mulíhuk sa íyang kaugalíngun,</hi>
<b>She is fond of giving orders to other
people. She does not do things for herself.
<hi>v</hi> [B12] be fond of giving orders. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> one
sent on an errand. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @orders, set of @regulations.
<b>-l-un(->), -l-un</b> household @help, @servant.
<b>pa-l-un, pa-l-un(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] hire oneself
out as a servant.

<b>*sug-u pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> do s.t. with dark looks
in order to hurt or put to shame s.o. who
ought to do it or at least help do it. <hi>Nagpasug-u
ang agálun pagpanglaba,</hi> The mistress
is doing the laundry to put her servant to
shame. <b>2</b> do s.t. bad for oneself in order to
spite s.o. and make him feel he was the one
that led the agent into doing it. <hi>Nagpasug-u
siyag inum-ínum sukad nímu bulagi,</hi> He
started drinking for spite since you left him.
<b>pahiN-</b> = <sc>SUG-U</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>.

<b>sugub<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)6; b6] @sprout from the earth
or skin. <hi>Misugub (nagsugub) na ang ákung
pugas mais,</hi> The corn I sowed has sprouted.
<hi>Gisuguban na ang íluk nga íyang giibtan sa
balhíbu,</hi> Hair has sprouted in her armpit
where she had pulled it out. <hi>n</hi> new growths
of hair, feathers, or sprouts from the earth.

<b>sugub<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SUGUD</sc>.

<b>sugud</b> <hi>n</hi> @sting of an insect. <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] for poisonous
insects to bite leaving a stinger in
the thing bitten. <hi>Tánga ang misugud sa ákung
bábuy,</hi> A scorpion bit my pig.

<b>súgud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] @start, @begin s.t.; begin doing
s.t. <hi>Nagsúgud ug kapakpak ang pintal,</hi> The
paint is starting to flake off. <hi>Sugdun (sugdan)
nátù ug limpiyu dinhi,</hi> Let us start
cleaning here. <hi>n</hi> @start, @beginning. <hi>Ang hagwà 
<pb n=922>mauy súgud (sinugdánan) sa áway,</hi>
Horseplay is the beginning of a quarrel. <hi>Súgud
ugmà wà nay byáhi sa Buhul,</hi> Starting
tomorrow there will be no more trips to Bohol.
<b>sugudsúgud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] start s.t.
with no intention of finishing it. <hi>Nagsugudsúgud
ka man ug túkud ug balay nga walà
ka may kwartang ikagastu,</hi> You are starting
to construct a house when you don't have
money to finish it. <b>2</b> [b6] begin s.t. with a
slow start. <b>sinugdan, sinugdánan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @start,
@beginning. <b>2</b> beginning from which s.t. results.

<b>súguk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1P] for liquid to rush and
gather s.w. <hi>Ang túbig sa mga sapà musúguk
ngadtu sa dágat,</hi> The water from the streams
rushes into the sea. <hi>Gipasúguk (gisúguk) níla
sa lungug ang túbig,</hi> They let the water
rush into the hole and gather there. <b>2</b> [A2;
b4] for blood to rush to the heart or head.
<hi>Ang mamatay sa alta prisiyun ingnun nga
gisugúkan sa dugù sa [=ú],</hi> If a man dies of
high blood pressure, it is said that he suffered
from a rush of blood into the head. <b>3</b>
[A2; ac] go, bring through a dense growth
of vegetation. <hi>Dì ta makasúguk niánang kalibunan,</hi>
We can not pass through that underbrush.
<hi>n</hi> <b>&mdash; sa dugù</b> rush of blood.

<b>sugung<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a liquid container fashioned out of
a section of a bamboo stem, the node of
which serves as the bottom. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12]
make, make into this sort of container. <b>2</b>
[A; b] get a cutting for propagation and
put it in a bamboo section with rooting
medium. <b>-in-</b> <b>1</b> @cuttings propagated in this
way, ready for planting. <b>2</b> style of cutting
trousers with narrow legs.

<b>sugung<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B246] become more, @{grow worse}.
<hi>Misugung siyag kasukù pagsugsúg námù,</hi> He
got angrier when we teased him. <hi>Kakúlang
sa káun ang nakasugung (nakapasugung) sa
íyang sakit,</hi> Lack of food made his illness
worse.

<b>sugut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] agree to do s.t., @acquiesce.
<hi>Musugut siya ug akuy mupakúhà níya
sa libru,</hi> He will agree to do it if I will send
him to get the book. <hi>Ug sugtun nímu nang
matánga sa pagbáhin, maalkansi ka,</hi> If you
@accept that division, you will be at a disadvantage.
<b>1a</b> [A23] agree to let s.o. do s.t.
<hi>Musugut ba si Máma mu nga mutan-aw ka
ug sini?</hi> Will your mother agree to let you
go to the show? <b>2</b> [A2; a12] accept as one's
fiancee. <hi>Dì siya musugut ni Pidru kay sugarul,</hi>
She will not say yes to Pedro because
he is a gambler. <hi>a</hi> @willing to accept or comply.
<b>Sugut kag dì ka bahínan?</b> Are you willing
not to take a share? <b>masinugtánun</b> <hi>a</hi>
@amenable to requests.

<b>súgut</b> <hi>n</hi> edges all around s.t. <hi>Gitamnan ug lubi
ang súgut sa uma,</hi> The farm had coconut
trees planted all around the borders.

<b>sugwak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @gush out in large quantities.
<hi>Misugwak ang asu pag-abli níya sa pultahan,</hi>
Smoke gushed out when he opened
the door. <hi>Nagyánang ang dálan human sugwáki
sa túbig,</hi> The path is flooded after the
water gushed out on it. <b>2</b> [A] spread beyond
bounds, @{spill over}. <hi>Sa amatiyur misugwak
ang mga táwu didtu sa karsáda,</hi> The
audience of the singing contest spilled over
into the streets. <b>3</b> [A13] for emotions to
appear with suddenness and intensity. <hi>Nagsugwak
ang íyang kalípay,</hi> He was overflowing
with happiness.

<b>sugyut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @mention s.t. in a casual
manner. <hi>Musugyut lang kung Pidru báhin
sa ímung tanyag,</hi> I will just mention your
offer to Pedro casually. <b>2</b> @suggest, put an
idea into the mind. <hi>Gisugyútan ku siya sa
paglún sa bangku,</hi> I suggested that he get a
loan at the bank. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> thing mentioned casually.
<b>2</b> @suggestion.

<b>súhà</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [C; c1] for objects having length to
be in disarray, with the ends pointing in different
directions. <hi>Nagsúhà ang mga bátà
nga nangatúlug sa katri,</hi> The children were
asleep on the bed with their heads in all different
directions. <b>2</b> [A2D; ac] @{go against},
@disagree. <hi>Makasúhà ka ba sa gustu sa ímung
ginikánan?</hi> Could you go against your parents'
wishes?

<b>suhì</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @contrary, @opposite. <hi>Suhì sa ímung
pagtúu siya hinúuy mitábang kanákù,</hi> He
helped me, contrary to what you think. <b>2</b>
for babies to be born feet first. <hi>Suhì nga
pagkatáwu ang bátà,</hi> The baby was born
feet first. <hi>v</hi> [A1C; c1] put s.t. the wrong
way around. <hi>Kinsay nagsuhì áning bangkù?</hi>
Who put the bench the wrong way around?
<hi>Nagsúhì ang ímung sapátus,</hi> You have your
shoes on backwards.

<b>suhid</b> <hi>n</hi> oil extracted on Good Friday from a
coconut growing as the only fruit on a tree.
It is said to possess magical powers for curing
various kinds of skin diseases. <hi>v</hi> [c1]
treat with <hi>suhid</hi>. <hi>Suhira (isuhid) nang bun-íha,
dì ba muhúnung nag lakaw,</hi> Try treating
that ringworm with suhid. See if it
doesn't stop spreading.

<b>súhid</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @copy, @mimic. <hi>Suhíra ang
mápa sa libru,</hi> Copy the map in the book.
<hi>Sayun ra ning baylíha ug suhírun lang nímu
ang ákung lákang,</hi> This dance is easy if you
follow my steps. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] watch s.t. intensely
while it recedes out of view. <hi>Suhíra
<pb n=923>giyud siya arun hibaw-an nátù háin baláya
siya misulud</hi>, Watch him carefully so we
will know what house he went into. <b>3</b> [A3;
a12] retrace a course one has just passed.
<hi>Nagsúhid ku sa ákung giagian kay nahúlug
ang ákung pitáka</hi>, I am going back the way I
came because I dropped my wallet. <b>4</b> [A;
a12] scan, search thoroughly. <hi>Pulis ang nagsúhid
sa ílang kalawásan</hi>, The police searched
their bodies thoroughly. <hi>Ílang suhírun
ang mga lasang sa Mindanaw</hi>, They will explore
the forests of Mindanao. <b>suhiran</b> <hi>a</hi>
given to copying or imitating.

<b>suhildu</b> = <sc>SWILDU</sc>.

<b>suhítu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> = <sc>SWÍTU</sc>.

<b>suhítu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @unmarried member in a group of
brothers and sisters. <hi>Tulu nay naminyù</hi>. <hi>Usa
na lay suhítu</hi>, Three are married now.
Only one is left unmarried.

<b>súhul</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @hire for wages, pay a certain
@wage. <hi>Musúhul ku nímu ug písus matag adlaw</hi>,
I will pay you a peso a day. <hi>Nagsúhul
ku ug panday</hi>, I hired a carpenter. <hi>n</hi> wages.
<hi>Pílay ímung súhul adtung trabahúa</hi>, How
much were you paid for that work. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi>
workers paid on a wage basis. <b>pa-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A]
work on a hired basis. <hi>Kay wà ka may grádu
ígù ka lang magpasuhul</hi>, Because you
don't have an education, all you can do is
unskilled labor.

<b>suhung</b>, <b>súhung</b> <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] for charms and
magical powers to become ineffective. <hi>Napildi
ku kay nasuhung (nasúhung) ang ákung
bangil</hi>, I lost because my amulet has
become ineffective.

<b>suhup</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [APB; a12] for liquids to @penetrate
or @percolate into s.t., cause them to do
so. <hi>Mawálà ang lim-aw ug musuhup (masuhup)
na ang túbig sa yútà</hi>, The pool will disappear
when the water seeps into the
ground. <hi>Tintà nga suphun dáyun sa barut
nga papil</hi>, Ink that is readily absorbed by
cheap paper. 2 [A2; a12] for feelings to get
into one's being. <hi>Dakung kalúuy nga misuhup
sa ákung dughan</hi>, Great pity that permeated
my heart (lit. permeated into my
heart). <b>suhupsuhup</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3N; b(1)] permeate
throughout. <hi>Ang íyang dugù misuhupsuhup
(nanuhupsuhup) sa íyang áping</hi>, The blood
in her vessels penetrated through to the skin
so that you could see them in her cheeks.
<hi>Ang lála sa uhípan nakasuhupsuhup na sa ákung
láwas</hi>, The poison of the centipede has
penetrated through my body.

<b>suhut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] clean an area by cutting down
trees and weeds. <hi>Suhutun ku ning mga tanum
nga nakaáwung sa gardin</hi>, I'll clear off
the plants that are shading the garden.
<b>-anan(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> place to be cleared.

<b>súhut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] go into or pass through a
place, esp. with tall trees or grasses. <hi>Pagbantay
<b>sa</b> limátuk ug musúhut mu sa lasang,</hi>
Watch out for leeches when you go through
the forest. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] enter a trap under
water. <hi>Gisuhútan ang búbù ug pawíkan,</hi>
The fish trap caught a sea turtle. <hi>n</hi> catch
from a fish trap. <b>kusug, walay &mdash; (ang báling)</b>
having a brisk (slow) business (lit. having
lots of [no] catch in the net). <hi>Nagmíngaw
ílang tindáhan. Way súhut ang báling,</hi>
Their store is deserted. Business is slow. <hi>Kusug
kaáyu ang súhut. Nagkapulíkì siyag atindir
sa íyang kustumir,</hi> Business is good.
She is very busy attending her customers.
<b>(->) bágun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.o. whose origin is not
known. <b>2</b> @vagabond, one who just roams
about and does nothing. <hi>v</hi> [B1] be, become
an idle @wanderer. <hi>Nagsuhut bágun nang tawhána
kay tapulan man mangítag trabáhu,</hi>
That man became a vagabond because he's
too lazy to look for work. <b>suhutsúhut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2N;
b(1)] for odors to @diffuse, be present
in a diffuse way. <b>Alimyun sa búlak nga musuhutsúhut
(manuhutsúhut) sa huyúhuy,</b>
The fragrance of flowers diffused by the
breeze. <hi>Karning may tambuk nga nanuhutsúhut
sa unud,</hi> Meat with fat running
throughout it. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> muscular @ache resulting
from exposure to damp or draft, esp.
during sleep. <hi>v</hi> [A23P; b5] get muscle ache.
<hi>Lagmit makapanúhut ang pagkatúlug nga
dílì maghábul,</hi> Sleeping without a blanket
can cause muscle ache.

<b>suik</b> a diagonal, oblique thrust. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12]
execute a stroke or throw from an angle.
<hi>Suikun nákù pagbundul arun maigù ang búnga,</hi>
I will poke at the fruit from an angle
so it will fall.

<b>súka</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2S; c] @vomit. <hi>Gisúka sa pasyinti
ang tambal,</hi> The patient vomited out his
medicine. <b>2</b> [A2] @squeal, @divulge a secret.
<hi>Misúka na ang mangunguut ug nahibalu ta
ug kinsay íyang kaúban,</hi> The pickpocket
<b>squealed</b> and we know who his companions
were. <hi>n</hi> @vomit, the contents expelled from
the stomach. <b>&mdash; kalíbang</b> <hi>n</hi> intestinal disorder
of vomiting combined with diarrhea. v
[A13P] be affected with this disorder. <b>kasukaun</b>
<hi>a</hi> feel like vomiting.

<b>súkà</b> <hi>n</hi> @vinegar. <hi>v</hi> [A12B12; a12] become,
make into vinegar. <hi>Nagkasúkà na ang tubà,</hi>
The palm toddy is becoming vinegar. <b>(->)</b>
[A; b6] season s.t. with vinegar. <b>ka-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13]
get vinegar all over it.

<b>sukad &mdash; sa</b> [<hi>dat.</hi>] <b>1</b> @from s.w. <hi>Sukad sa íla
nganhi may mga dusintus mitrus,</hi> It's about
<pb n=924>two hundred meters from their house to
here. <b>2</b> @since, @from [dat.] on forward. <hi>Sukad
karun dì na giyud ku makigsulti nímu,</hi>
@{From now on} I will never speak to you
again. <hi>Sukad niadtu,</hi> From that time on. <hi>Sukad
pa sa alas utsu kung hinulat nímu,</hi> I
have been waiting for you since eight
o'clock. <b>&mdash; mabakì</b> since birth (humorous).
<b>&mdash; masukad</b> <b>1</b> <hi>in negative statements:</hi> @never
ever. <hi>Wà pa giyud ku makakità ug babáyi
ingun kagwápa sukad masukad,</hi> I have never,
in all my born days, seen a woman so
beautiful. <b>2</b> since, far back beyond the
reach of memory. <hi>Dinhi na ang ílang katigulángan
<b>sukad</b> masukad,</hi> Their ancestors
have been here since the beginning of time.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13N; b6N] @start, @originate from. <hi>Tan-áwa
ug unsang kuniksiyúna ang gisukaran
(gipanukaran) áning alambríha,</hi> See where
this wire originates. <b>2</b> [AN; b6] @{rest on}, be
based on a certain support. <hi>Dílì untà muun-un
ang balay ug didtu pa makasukad (makapanukad)
sa batu nga tiúnay,</hi> The house
would not have sagged had it rested on bedrock.
<b>2a</b> [A13N; cN] @base, @found. <hi>Tubag
nga gisukad (gipanukad) sa usa ka katarúngan
nga dílì malális,</hi> An answer based on
an indisputable reason. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6]
start movement from a certain point. <hi>Ang
prusisiyun adtu manukad sa kapilya,</hi> The
procession will @{begin at} the chapel. <b>2</b> have a
@foothold on s.t. <hi>Dílì ka makadusù kay balas
ang ímung gipanukaran,</hi> You can't push because
you are standing on sand. <b>2a</b> [A2]
get a good foothold, @steady oneself. <hi>Nanukad
siya úsà muluksu,</hi> He steadied himself
before he leapt. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @poise, standing @posture.
<hi>Ang trátu ni Iyay may panukad labi na kay
taas ug gwápu,</hi> Eyay's boy friend has poise,
esp. because he is tall and handsome. <hi>Maáyu
ug panukad ning manúka háyan maáyung
muáway,</hi> The cock has a good posture. Most
likely it fights well. <b>2</b> way of placing one's
feet while standing, action of gaining a
foothold. <b>sukaránan, panukaránan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @base,
s.t. which supports or sustains s.t. immaterial.
<hi>Ang ímung pangatarúngan walay sukaránan
(panukaránan) sa baláud,</hi> Your reasoning
has no basis in law. <b>2</b> @runway for airplanes.

<b>súkad</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] take food out of a container
or pot and set it on the table. <hi>Nagsúkad
na si Máma sa pamáhaw,</hi> Mother is
putting the breakfast on the table now. <b>2</b>
[b6] @profer[**F1 proffer?]. <hi>Gisukáran siya nákù sa usa ka
madaníhung pahiyum,</hi> I gave her a very engaging
smile. <b>sukaran, sukaránan</b> <hi>n</hi> round
platter to hold rice and corn. <b>&mdash; nga bastus</b>
= <sc>SUKARAN</sc>.

<b>sukalsukal</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1456] be @overflowing in fulness.[**fullness]
<hi>Nagsukalsukal sa kapunù ang húngut
sa tubà,</hi> The toddy glass is overflowing with
toddy.

<b>sukalu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> cement @foundation under a house.
<b>2</b> low cement fence surrounding a yard,
made to prevent the water from getting inside.
<hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] make a cement foundation
or low walling around a house.

<b>sukam-ag</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1236; b8] walk or @{fall forward}
onto. <hi>Nasukam-ag ku níya kay napandul
ag ákung tiil sa batu,</hi> I fell forward onto
him because my foot tripped on a stone.
<hi>Mau ning siyáha ákung nasukam-ágan sa
ngitngit gabíi,</hi> This is the chair I @{bumped
into} last night in the dark.

<b>sukámang</b> (from kámang) <hi>v</hi> [B126; b6] fall
forward sprawled on the stomach. <hi>Nasukámang
<b>siya</b> sa kusug nga sumbag,</hi> He fell forward
under the impact of the blow he received.

<b>sukámud</b> <hi>v</hi> [B12] @{fall forward} on the ground.
<hi>Nasukámud ku kay nakatunub ku ug pálut
sa ságing,</hi> I @{fell down} on my nose because I
stepped on a banana peel.

<b>sukárap</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1216] stagger and then fall.
<hi>Didtu siya masukárap sa suuk dihang nabunalan
ang íyang úlu sa ulísi,</hi> He was pummeled
by a cane and he staggered and fell
into the corner. <b>2</b> [B12S6] @grope around.
<hi>Nagsukarap ku nga nagsaka sa hagdan sa
ngitngit,</hi> I groped my way up the stairs in
the dark. <b>2a</b> [B12S6; b8] @{bump into} s.t. in
the dark. <hi>Silyay ákung hisukarapan sa ngitngit,</hi>
I bumped into a chair in the dark.

<b>súkat</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b] confront s.o. to make him
prove or disprove s.t. which he previously
said. <hi>Mu ra tag mabastus ug musúkat (manúkat)
tag tabì,</hi> It makes you cheap when
you confront a gossipmonger to prove or
disprove his allegations.

<b>sukbut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] join by letting the edges
touch each other. <hi>Nagsukbut kug upat ka
síya nga katulgan,</hi> I put four chairs together
to sleep on.

<b>sukdip</b> <hi>v</hi> [B6; c1] for the eyes to roll upward
so that only the white can be seen. <hi>Misukdip
ang mata sa bátang gihilantan,</hi> The eyes
of the child with high fever were turned upward
into his head.

<b>súki</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for horses to prance and
refuse to pull or be ridden. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)]
@defy a command or authority. <hi>Misúki ang
mga kadíti kay istriktu ra kaáyu ang sarhintu,</hi>
The cadets @rebelled because the commandant
was too strict. <hi>Misúki na giyud kining
ákung láwas sa tambal,</hi> My body seems
<pb n=925>to be rebelling against the medicine. <b>masukíhun</b>
<hi>a</hi> of a @disobedient, @rebellious sort.
<b>sukihan</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> given to prancing and refusing
to pull. <b>2</b> @rebellious in behavior. <b>3</b> for hair
to be unmanageable. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be, become
given to rebelliousness.

<b>súkì</b> <hi>n</hi> @{steady customer} or seller. <hi>short form
in address:</hi> <b>kì</b>. <hi>Ákung súking butíka,</hi> The
drug store I always buy at. <hi>v</hi> [A2C; a2] be
in the <hi>súkì</hi> relation, i.e. that of a seller and
buyer. <hi>Magsúkì na ta. Dì ku mupalit sa láin,</hi>
From now on I'll be a steady customer of
yours and I won't buy from anyone else.

<b>súkib</b> <hi>a</hi> @lower in elevation than the surroundings.
<hi>Anhi magtígum ang túbig kay súkib
kaáyu ning lugára,</hi> Water collects here because
this place is very @depressed. <hi>v</hi> [B1; a12]
be, become depressed.

<b>sukip</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @include s.t. together with
s.t. sent. <hi>Isukip ring dukumintu sa ímung
aplikisyun,</hi> @Enclose this document with
your application. <b>1a</b> [A13] for a legal document
to include a special clause. <hi>Ang kuntrátu
nagsukip sa mátang sa pagbáyad,</hi> The
contract stipulates the manner of payment.
<b>2</b> put closely in between two things or inside
s.t. <hi>Sukipi nang bulsa ug sápì, dì ba
mulusut ang papílis,</hi> Put a little money in
his pocket and see if the papers don't get
processed immediately.

<b>sukit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] @ask a question that requires
a specific answer. <hi>Sukita siya kun háin ang
kwarta,</hi> Ask him where the money is. <b>sukitsukit</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @interrogate, pester with
questions. <hi>Sukitsukitun nátù siya básin ug
mutug-an sa kadugáyan,</hi> Let's keep pestering
him with questions in hopes that in the
end he talks. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>a</hi> @inquisitive. <hi>Hinukit ning
batáa mu ra ug sayun tubagun ang íyang
mga pangutána,</hi> This child is very inquisitive
as though his questions were easy to answer.

<b>suklat</b> <hi>v</hi> [b4(1)] be struck accidentally with
the end of a stick or finger. <hi>Nasuklatan ang
ákung tuu nga mata sa íyang tudlù,</hi> He accidentally
poked his finger in my eye.

<b>suklay</b> = <sc>SUDLAY</sc>, <hi>n, v1, 2, paN-</hi>.

<b>suklì</b> <hi>n</hi> @change given after paying for a purchase
with a larger bill. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] give s.o.
his change. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] @{answer back}, give
back talk. <hi>Musuklì ka man ug kasab-an,</hi> You
@{talk back} when you are scolded. <b>3</b> [A23;
c] do s.t. in return. <hi>Gisuklían kug kidhat
ang íyang pahiyum,</hi> I winked at her when
she smiled at me. <b>-in-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [C] do back and
forth to each other. <hi>n</hi> action of doing back
and forth. <hi>Sinuklíay sa binutubutu sa mga
pusil,</hi> The @exchange of gunfire.

<b>sukmag</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12b2] @box with the fist.
<hi>Hingsukmagan ang íyang apapángig ug nawad-an
siya sa panimúut,</hi> He was hit in the
jaw and lost consciousness. <hi>n</hi> blow with
the fist. <b>-ay(->), -in-ay(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @fistfight. <hi>v</hi> [C]
have a fistfight.

<b>sukmat</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b5] <b>1</b> @confront s.o. asking
him about s.t. <hi>Sukmátan (sukmátun) ku siyag
tinúud ba,</hi> I'll confront him and ask him
if it is true or not. <b>1a</b> ask s.o. whether or
not he intends to do s.t. <hi>Nagpanukmat siyag
muadtu ba giyud ku,</hi> He kept asking
me if I would really go. <hi>Ug sukmátun kag
sumbagay, ayaw ug súkul,</hi> If s.o. challenges
you to a fight, don't take him on. <hi>n</hi> act of
confronting s.o. with a question or challenging s.o.

<b>sukmil</b> = <sc>SIKMUL</sc>, <hi>n, v2</hi>.

<b>suknà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] @press a person for an answer
on whether or not he intends to do s.t. <hi>Ayaw
kug suknáa. Ingnun ta ra kag mupalit
ku,</hi> Don't press me. I'll tell you if I intend
to buy one. <hi>n</hi> question ascertaining the permissibility
or feasibility of s.t.

<b>suknib</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] set s.t. on @fire. <hi>Akuy
misuknib sa mga sagbut sa baul,</hi> I @{set fire}
to the pile of grasses in the field. <b>2</b> [A; b]
@incite s.o. to do s.t. bad. <hi>Ikaw bay nagsuknib
sa íyang kalágut?</hi> Did you incite him
to anger?

<b>suksuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB; c] go or put s.t. into or in between
s.t. else. <hi>Misuksuk ang bátà sa bilahan
sa íyang inahan,</hi> The child snuggled between
her mother's legs. <hi>Kinsay nagsuksuk
<b>sa</b> kálù luyu sa pyánu?</hi> Who stuck the hat
behind the piano?

<b>sukù</b> <hi>a</hi> @angry, @mad but not such that one is
impelled to take action. <hi>Labihang sukúa níya
pagkadungug sa balità,</hi> He got real mad
when he heard the news. <hi>v</hi> [B12; ab3(1)c5]
be, get angry. <hi>Masukù ku ug mamakak ka,</hi>
I will get angry if you tell a lie. <hi>Gikasuk-an
ku ni Pápa kay nawálà ang libru,</hi> Daddy got
mad at me because I lost the book. <b>masuk-*ánun</b>
<hi>a</hi> full of anger. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be angry. <b>ka-</b>
<hi>n</hi> @anger. <hi>Dílì magdúgay ang íyang kasukù,</hi>
His anger won't last.

<b>súkub</b> <hi>v</hi> [C12] for s.o. who ought to receive
less to try to get an equal share. <hi>Ang anak
sa gawas nakigsúkub sa mga tinúud anak báhin
sa irinsiya,</hi> The illegitimate child wanted
to have a share of the inheritance equal to
that of the legitimate children.

<b>sukud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] take @measurements. <hi>Nagsukud
kug pila ka dupa ring písì,</hi> I am @measuring
how long this piece of rope is. <hi>Gisukdan
akug karsúnis,</hi> I had the measurements
taken for my pants. <b>2</b> [A13C; a12] test ability
against each other. <hi>Nagsukud lang tu
<pb n=926>siya sa ímung pasyinsiya, He was just @trying
you to see how patient you were. <hi>Magsúkud
ta ug kinsa giyuy ísug nátù,</hi> Let's @{have it
out} which of us is the bravest. <hi>Sukdun nákù
ang ímung ginháwa ug muagwanta ka ba,</hi> I
will test your mettle to see if you can take
it. <b>3</b> [A12SN; b6] distribute @{land grants}.
<hi>Nanukud ang gubyirnu ug yútà álang sa
mga bitiránu,</hi> The government is distributing
parcels of land to the veterans. <b>3a</b> [A12]
receive a land grant. <b>4</b> [C3; b6] be of
the same size of fit. <hi>Nagsúkud ang ámung
sapátus,</hi> Our shoes are of the same size. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
the @measurements of s.t. <hi>Unsay sukud sa
ímung sapátus?</hi> What @size of shoes do you
wear? <b>2</b> extent to which s.t. is done (literary).
<hi>Wayji[**??][**Wáy? P2][**need rescan] sukud sa báwus,</hi> Revenge that
knows no limit. <b>3</b> {land grant} distributed by
the government. <b>sukdanan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> thing on the
basis of which other things are measured:
stick, cup, and the like. <hi>Ang kaangáyan mau
untay sukdanan sa átung panglíhuk,</hi> We
should use fairness as the @yardstick for our
actions. <b>2</b> = <sc>SUKUD</sc>, <hi>n2</hi>. <b>mag-r-(<-), maN-r-(<-)
sa yútà</b> <hi>n</hi> land @surveyor. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> @meter
of verse. <hi>Ang íyang mga bálak kanúnay nga
naghambin sa panukud,</hi> His verses are always
with meter. <b>-in-</b> <hi>a</hi> @measured, @slow and
@deliberate. <hi>Sa sinukud nga lákang,</hi> With
measured steps. <b>hiN-, kahiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] for
s.t. to be @properly done. <hi>Dílì magkahinúkud
ang ákung káun ug náay maghilak,</hi> I can't
eat properly if there is s.o. crying.

<b>sukul</b> n young @mushroom that has not opened
yet. <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> gather young mushrooms.
<b>1a</b> add or mix young mushrooms to
s.t. <b>2</b> [AN] have body growths protruding
on the skin. <hi>Nanukul na ang íyang dughan,</hi>
Her @breast has developed now. <hi>Gisuklan ang
íyang nawung sa dagkung bugas,</hi> She has
big @pimples on her face. <hi>Way limpiyu ang
nakasukul (nakapasukul) nímu,</hi> Your unsanitary
habits caused you to have @pustules.

<b>súkul</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b] @{fight back} against, stand
up. <hi>Sa sumbagay musúkul siya kang bisan
kinsa,</hi> He will @{stand up to} anyone who challenges
him to a fight. <hi>Pagsúkul sa ginikánan
kanang pagtubagtubag,</hi> You are rebelling
against your parents when you talk back.
<b>1a</b> [A23] react, @{snap back} into place as if
offering resistance. <hi>Bísan ug unsáun ug dukduk
musúkul,</hi> No matter how much I
pound it, it snaps back into place. <b>1b</b> @{play
against} or engage in any activity where people
are pitted against each other. <hi>Suklan ta
kag tínis bisan anus-a,</hi> I'll take you up on
tennis any time. <b>1c</b> @tackle s.t. to be accomplished.
<hi>Way misúkul sa tambuk,</hi> No
one had the stomach to take the pork fat.
<b>2</b> @resist, @endure. <hi>Musúkul sa ínit sa adlaw
ning pintála,</hi> This paint resists the heat of
the sun. <b>2a</b> endure and do the same in return.
<hi>Ayaw siya ug kumidiyáhi kay dì siya
musúkul ug kumidiya,</hi> Don't rib him because
he can't take jokes. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; sa kábu</b> [A2]
be @rebellious. <hi>Húnit ang prumusiyun sa magtutudlung
musúkul sa kábu,</hi> It takes a long
time for a rebellious teacher to get promoted.
<b>&mdash; dágan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{guerrilla warfare}. <hi>Súkul dágan
ang gigámit nga inawayan sa mga sundálung
Pilipinhun bátuk sa Hapun,</hi> The Filipino
soldiers used guerrilla warfare against the
Japanese. <hi>v</hi> [A2] employ guerrilla warfare.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] for gamecocks to be in a
state ready to contend in a cockfight. <hi>Bísan
ug tulu pa ka búlan nga sunúya manúkul
na,</hi> This rooster is only three months old,
but he is ready to contend in a cockfight.

<b>sukut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @ask a question regarding
s.t. specific. <hi>Misukut ang maistra,</hi> The teacher
asked. <hi>Suktun ku siya báhin sa ímung
hangyù,</hi> I will ask him regarding your request.
<b>2</b> [AN; b5] ask to collect payment.
<hi>Akuy musukut (manukut) sa íyang útang,</hi>
I'll ask him to pay me his debt. <b>3</b> [A; c]
ask a certain price. <hi>Gisuktan kug mahal sa
tindíra,</hi> The salesgirl charged me a very
high price. <b>4</b> [A; b5] challenge to a fight.
Gisuktan aku níyag áway, He challenged
me to a fight. <b>sukutsukut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] make
@inquiries in great detail. <hi>Dinhay mga imbistigadur
nga misukutsukut báhin sa buhis,</hi>
There were investigators that made inquiries
regarding the taxes. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{bill collector}.
<b>masuktánun</b> <hi>a</hi> questioning.

<b>sukwahì</b> @contrary. <hi>Sukwahì sa ímung pagtúu,
ang anak sa gawas may báhin sa irihinsiya,</hi>
Contrary to what you believe, the illegitimate
child gets a share of the inheritance.
<hi>Ang ímung gibúhat sukwahì kaáyu sa maáyung
pamatásan,</hi> What you did is very
much @against good manners. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B56] be
contrary, @backwards. <hi>Nagkasukwáhì ang ámung
mga hunàhúnà,</hi> Our ideas are @opposed
to one another. <hi>Ang písa nasukwahì nímu
ug butang,</hi> You put the piece in backwards.
<b>2</b> [B5; a12] be in @error. <hi>Nasukwahì ang
katapúsan mung tubag,</hi> Your last answer
was in error.

<b>sul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> name of a @dance or music for it. <hi>v</hi> [A]
do this dance.

<b>sul<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> the note @sol.

<b>súla</b> <hi>n</hi> unopened terminal stem of plants
that are sharp, e.g. of cogon or <hi>lagnub</hi>. <b>suláhan</b>
<hi>n</hi> k.o. nose @fish, a delicious fish with a
sharp projection in front of the eyes: <hi><b>Naso
<pb n=927>spp.</b></hi>

<b>sulà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] eat s.t. together with the
staple. <hi>Asin ray ámung gisuwà,</hi> The only
thing we had to go with our rice was salt.
<hi>n</hi> = <sc>SUD-AN</sc>. <b>sud-an</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. eaten with the
staple. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] use to eat with one's
staple. <hi>Laming sud-ánun ang sikwáti,</hi> Chocolate
is good to eat with your rice. <b>panud-an</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2] search for or obtain s.t. to eat with
one's food. <hi>Ari mi sa tyanggi kay manud-an
mi pára sa panihápun,</hi> We're off to the market
to look for s.t. to go with the rice for
supper. <hi>n</hi> action of searching for food to go
with the rice. <b>sud-anun</b> <hi>n</hi> things to be cooked
for the food to go with the rice. <b>ig-l-(<-)</b>
= <sc>SUD-AN</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>sulà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B1456] @stare blankly. <hi>Nagsulà lang
ang mata sa táwung nasakit ug amnisya,</hi>
The amnesia victim is staring blankly.

<b>súlà</b> = <sc>SÚLA</sc>.

<b>sulab</b> <hi>n</hi> @blade, @{cutting edge} of an instrument.
<hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] put or make a blade.

<b>súlab</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3P; b4] cause one to be @addicted
or crazy over s.t. <hi>Ang madyung makasúlab
(makapasúlab) sa táwu,</hi> It is easy to get addicted
to mahjong. <hi>Gisulában ka na sa pagtabakù
sa upyum,</hi> You are already addicted
to smoking opium.

<b>sulábi</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>LABI</sc>.

<b>sulad, súlad</b> <hi>n</hi> @hell, a place of much wickedness
and turmoil. <hi>v</hi> [B126] wind up in hell.
<b>-nun</b> <hi>a</hi> @evil. <hi>Suladnun kang pagkatáwu,</hi> You
are a @devilish man. <hi>v</hi> [B12] become devilish.

<b>sulagmà</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>a</hi> @chance, @coincidence.
<hi>Usa lang ka sulagmà nga nag-ábut mi
karun dinhi,</hi> It is a coincidence that we met
each other here today. <hi>v</hi> [A12; b8] do s.t.
correctly by coincidence. <hi>Salámat nga nakasulagmà
ku sa pagtubag sa pangutána,</hi>
Thank heavens, I @chanced to answer the
question correctly.

<b>sulambì</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> an @extension to a house, appended
to a side or end, usually used for storage.
<b>2</b> @paramour. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] make an extension
room for the house.

<b>sulaminti</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <b>1</b> one's very @own,
[so-and-so] oneself. <hi>Sulaminting mga ginikánan
níya nagpakabuta bungul sa íyang
kalisud,</hi> His very own parents turned a deaf
ear to his needs. <b>2</b> the @only one. <hi>Sulaminti
nga anak,</hi> An only child. <b>2a</b> <b>walà &mdash;</b> not even
a single one. <hi>Way sulaminting usa ka díyut
ang íyang gitábang nákù,</hi> He didn't give me
a bit of help, not a half a cent. <hi>Way sulaminting
paryinti nga midúul sa minatay,</hi>
Not a single relative came to stay by the
corpse.

<b>sulampatid</b> (from <hi>pátid</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [B6; a12] walk
snagging one foot on the other. <hi>Nagsulampatid
si Duruy kay hubug siya,</hi> Doroy kept
catching his feet on each other because he
was drunk.

<b>sulang</b> <hi>n</hi> chin and jaw bones. -un(->) a having
a prominent jaw and chin bones.

<b>sulanggà</b> = <sc>KALAMANTÍGÌ</sc>.

<b>sulápid</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @braid, @plait. <b>2</b> [B2S]
walk crossing the feet over each other. <hi>Íning
dápit sa sáyaw ang lákang magsulápid,</hi> In
this part of the dance the feet cross over in
front of each other. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ang dílà</b> [B] be @inarticulate
in speech. <hi>Sa nagkahubug ku nagkasulápid
(nagkasulapid) ákung dílà,</hi> The
drunker I got, the more inarticulate my
speech became.

<b>sular</b> <hi>n</hi> @yard or @lawn immediately contiguous
to the house. <hi>v</hi> [A12; a2] have an open
space next to the house for a lawn. <hi>Makasular
kag dakùdakù niíning gidak-úna sa lúti,</hi>
With this size of a lot you can have a good-sized
space for a yard.

<b>sulat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @write s.t. <hi>Ngánung gisulatan
man nímu ang bungbung,</hi> Why did you write
on the wall? <hi>Pagkúhà ug papil ug isulat ri,</hi>
Get a piece of paper and write this down. <b>2</b>
[A; a] write a @letter, @story. <hi>Ákù pang sulatun
ring ákung humwurk,</hi> I still have to
@{write out} my homework. <hi>Gisulatan siya nákù,</hi>
I wrote him a letter. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @letter, @mail. <b>2</b>
written or printed message. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> entry of
the parties' name into marriage records. <b>pa-[**space?](<-)</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A1] have entries made for marriage
records. <b>-anan(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @{writing desk}. <b>ka-an(<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> collection of writings. <b>baláang &mdash;</b> @{Holy
Scriptures}. <b>2</b> set of written @records. <b>mag-r-[**space?](<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> @writer. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> @writing as an avocation
or profession. <b>tag-, tag-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @author.

<b>sulatuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] stare blankly without blinking
the eyes. <hi>Nagsulatuk lang ang búang nga
wà kasabut,</hi> The idiot just stared blankly
because he didn't understand.

<b>sulaw</b> a <b>1</b> @glaring, shining with a harsh and
uncomfortably bright light. <hi>Sulaw kaáyu
ang sugà sa awtu,</hi> His car has glaring headlights.
<b>2</b> @disconcerting, causing loss of composure.
<hi>Sulaw kaáyu nga ikúyug nátù ang
usa ka higála nga átung gikaáway,</hi> It is very
disconcerting to have s.o. we just had a
quarrel with come along with us. <hi>n</hi> @glare,
intensely shining light. <hi>Ang sulaw makadáut
sa mata,</hi> Glare can damage the eyes. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A;
b6(1)] give off a @glare. <hi>Musulaw ang línaw
inigsílang sa adlaw,</hi> The pool gives off a
glare when the sun shines. <hi>Nagsulaw diri nákù
ang ispíhu ug kasilingan sa adlaw,</hi> The
looking glass is giving off a glare from the
sun. <b>2</b> [A123P; b4c5] @{feel bad} about s.t.
<pb n=928>bad s.o. else did to a third party. <hi>Akuy gisulawan
sa gibúhat sa ákung asáwa. Siya walà
magpakabanà,</hi> I felt bad at what my wife
did, but it didn't bother her. (<-) <hi>v</hi> [C; b3]
be on bad terms with s.o., glaring at each
other. <hi>Bísan ug nagkasúlaw ta wà man kuy
pagdumut nímu,</hi> Though we have been on
bad terms I don't harbor a grudge against
you. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> = <sc>SULAW</sc>, n. <b>2</b> @{bad relationship}.

<b>sulay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] @try doing s.t. <hi>Sulayan
ta ug paandar ang makina,</hi> Let us try starting
the engine. <hi>Isulay ring sapatúsa ug maarang
ba,</hi> Try putting these shoes on to see
if they fit:[**.? P2] <b>1a</b> put s.t. to a test. <hi>Ang Diyus
dílì musulay nátù labaw sa átung maantus,</hi>
God doesn't try us beyond what we can
bear. <hi>Gisulayan ta lang kag kahibáwu ba giyud
ka,</hi> I was only testing you whether you
really were good at it. <b>2</b> [a3] get s.t. distasteful,
e.g. a beating. <hi>Hala, balía lang nà
arun masulay kang pápa mu,</hi> Go ahead and
break that so you can get hell from your
father. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @try. <hi>Sulay lang tung ákù ug mahímù
ba giyud,</hi> I just tried it out to see if I
could really do it. <b>2</b> expression challenging
s.o. in a taunting way to see if he has the
guts to do s.t. bad for him or try to prevent
him from doing it. <hi>Mukáun giyud ka íni?
Suway man ug magkalíbang,</hi> You sure you
want to eat it? Watch if it doesn't give you
diarrhea. (<-)<hi rend=sub>1</hi> <hi>v</hi> [C; a12] have it out, clear
a matter of contention with a fight. <hi>Suláyun
nátù ug kinsay ísug nátung duha,</hi> Let's
have it out to see which of us has guts.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23] @tempt s.o. to do s.t. he
won't ordinarily have done. <hi>Dì tà ku mupalit
ánà apan nanulay siya nákù pagpalit ug
usa lang,</hi> I would not have bought it, but he
tempted me to buy one. <b>2</b> [b6] be @possessed
of a devil. <hi>Gipanulayan nà siya dihang
patábug na siya ug pamusil sa mga táwu,</hi> He
must have been possessed of a devil to shoot
indiscriminately at the people. <b>3</b> [a12P]
get a dose of disciplinary action. <hi>Panulayun
ta ka nyà ug ímu nang daútun,</hi> I'll give
you hell if you break that. <hi>n</hi> devil. <hi>Ug luwasa
kami sa mga panulay amin.</hi> And deliver
us from evil. Amen. <b>pag-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @trial of one's
virtue. <hi>Kining mga hitabúa mga pagsulay
lang sa átung pagsálig sa Diyus,</hi> These events
are but trials of our faith in God. <b>2</b> @experiment,
testing out of s.t. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1 =
paN-.</b> <b>2</b> a person who tempts s.o. into doing
s.t. bad.

<b>súlay<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a1] @brace, prop s.t. standing
to prevent it from collapsing. <hi>Suláyun nátù
ang ságing arun dílì matumba sa kabug-at sa
íyang búnga,</hi> Let's brace this banana tree
before it falls from the weight of its bananas.
<hi>n</hi> @brace, prop placed against s.t. vertical.

<b>sulaybagyu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. @{dwarf banana} growing
to 4´, with a large bunch of fruit similar to
the búngan, eaten when ripe. <b>2</b> @hornfish.

<b>sulbad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @solve, find a @solution or
@answer. <hi>Átung sulbárun ning kahimtánga
kay dì ni madala nátù ug hilakhílak,</hi> We will
find a solution because we cannot get it over
with by crying. <b>2</b> @undo a knot. <hi>Nasulbad
ang baligtus sa písi,</hi> The knot of the rope
came undone. <hi>n</hi> @solution to a problem. <hi>Dì
siya manug-an sa sulbad sa tanghágà,</hi> He
won't tell us the solution to the puzzle. <hi>a</hi>
solved. <b>sulbaran</b> n swivel in a fishline, a revolving
link placed between the line and
leader to prevent kinking. <b>kasulbáran, kasulbarun</b>
<hi>n</hi> solution reached. Walay kasulbáran
ning sulirána,</hi> There's no solution to
this problem.

<b>sulb&acaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @solve a personal problem
or puzzle. <hi>Dílì ku masulb&acaron;r king mga prublíma
ku,</hi> I can't find a solution to my problems.

<b>sulbung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b8] splash up, @rise rapidly.
<hi>Pagbutu sa bumba sa dágat misulbung ang
daghang túbig,</hi> When the bomb exploded in
the sea, a lot of water splashed into the air.
<hi>Nagsulbung pa ang asu sa súnug pag-abut
námù,</hi> The smoke of the fire was still gushing
upwards when we arrived. <hi>a</hi> for the
voice, fever to rise. <hi>Singgit sa kahadluk misulbung
gíkan sa nanan-aw,</hi> A cry of fear
rose from the spectators. <hi>Pastilang nakasulbung
sa prisyu!</hi> My, how the prices have
risen!

<b>sulda</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @solder. <hi>n</hi> solder. <b>-dur(->)</b> <hi>n</hi>
@{soldering iron} or gun. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @solderer.

<b>suldádu</b> <hi>n</hi> @soldier. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] be, become
a soldier.

<b>súli</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2b2] <b>1</b> @{look at} s.t. to find s.t. out.
<hi>Sulíha ang pitákag dúna bay kwarta,</hi> Look
into the wallet to see if there is any money.
<hi>Hisulihan siya nga patay na,</hi> He was found
dead. <b>2</b> @{look for} s.t. <hi>Nagsúli ku sa ákung kábaw
nga nakabuhì,</hi> I'm looking for my carabao
which got loose. <b>sulisúli</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] @peep[**missing .? P2]
<hi>Hilabihan níyang nakasulisúli nímu sa lyabihánan!</hi>
How he peeped at you through the
keyhole!

<b>sulì</b> = <sc>SUHÌ</sc>.

<b>sulib</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] put fire to s.t. <hi>Nasakpan
na ang nagsulib sa katubhan,</hi> They have apprehended
the man who set the sugar cane
field on fire.

<b>sulibag</b> <hi>a</hi> @crooked, not straight, @askew. <hi>Sulibag
kaáyu ang ákung gibadlis,</hi> The line I
<pb n=929>drew is too crooked. <hi>v</hi> [AB; c1] come out
crooked, cause s.t. to do so. <hi>Ikay nagsulibag
sa linya,</hi> You made the line crooked. <hi>Musulibag
(masulibag) giyud ning ákung sinulatan
ug way linyang subáyan,</hi> My writing
comes out all crooked when I don't have
lines to follow. <b>(<-)</b> = <sc>SULIBAG</sc>, <hi>v</hi>.

<b>súlid<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> small @twine, @thread of two or more
strands twisted together. <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] make a
thread of this sort. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>SÚLID</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>súlid<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> name given to fish of the genus <b><hi>Caesio</hi></b>
which are rounded (but not so broad as
the <hi>bilásun</hi>).

<b>sulíkat</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @glare at s.o. with the eyes
wide open. <hi>Musulíkat gánì ku, paháwà dáyun,</hi>
If I glare, better beat it at once. <b>2</b> [A2S;
<hi>c</hi>] for the eyeballs to roll up into the
forehead. <hi>Misulíkat ang mata sa bátang nagkumbulsiyun,</hi>
The child's eyes rolled up into
his forehead when he had convulsions.
(->) <hi>a</hi> for the eyes to be rolled up into the
forehead. <hi>Ang táwung sulikat ug mata mu
rag pirming maghangad,</hi> A person with rolled-up
eyes always seems to be looking up.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a defect of the eyes where the eyelids
don't close from disease or injury. <hi>Dì siya
ilhan ug natúlug ba kay sulikat siya ug mata,</hi>
You never know whether he is asleep or
not because his eyes don't close. <b>2</b> one with
such an eye defect. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] get this defect.

<b>sulimaw</b> <hi>a</hi> having one eye looking off in a direction
it shouldn't, e.g. when one has one
weak eye which fails to move. <hi>v</hi> [B; c1]
develop this defect.

<b>sulimbad</b> <hi>a</hi> having the eyes in the wrong position
in the head: crossed, rolled upwards,
one eye out of focus, and the like. <hi>v</hi> [B; c1P]
get this defect. <hi>Musulimbad ang íyang
mata ug makuyawan siya,</hi> She becomes
cross-eyed when she gets scared. <hi>Gisulimbad
níya ang íyang mga mata timáan nga
wà siya makaayun,</hi> He rolled his eyes up as[**double as, remove 1?]
as a sign that he did not like it.

<b>sulimni</b> <hi>a</hi> @{solemn ceremony} or event. <hi>v</hi> [B126;
c1] for an event to be made solemn. <hi>Masulimni
giyud ang ukasiyun sa paghandum
sa átung mga bayáni,</hi> It should be a solemn
occasion when we remember our heroes.
<b>mísa</b> &mdash; see <sc>MÍSA</sc>.

<b>sulindir</b> = <sc>SURINDIR</sc> (colloquial).

<b>súling</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN2; a12] @peep. <hi>Ang táwu nga
musúling (manúling) sa lyawihánan way batásan,</hi>
A person who peeps through keyholes
has no manners. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @peer, look
closely at s.t. to examine it. <hi>Sulínga ang ágig
kang kinsa nà,</hi> @{Look at} the handwriting to
see whose it is. <b>sulingsúling</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] look
with careful attention from a distance. <hi>Táwung
nagsulingsúling sa gít,</hi> A man standing
at the gate, peering inside.

<b>sulínga</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c1] <b>1</b> look askance with contempt
or anger. <hi>Nasukù tu siya nímung nanulínga
man?</hi> Why did she look at you with
scorn? Was it that she was angry with you?
<b>2</b> make faces at s.o. jokingly. <hi>Misulínga siya
nákù dihang giingnan nákù siyang gwápa,</hi>
She made a face at me when I told her she
was pretty. <b>3</b> [A; b6] growl in distrust or
disobedience. <hi>Musulínga siya ug pakab-un
ug túbig,</hi> He will growl if he is told to fetch
water. <b>masulingáhun</b> <hi>a</hi> having a scorning or
disbelieving look on the face. <hi>Hilum, apan
masulingáhun kaáyu siyang namátì sa diskursu,</hi>
He was quiet, but he listened to the
speech with disbelief all over his face.

<b>sulípat<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] @glower at s.o. to show anger
or disapproval. <hi>Ákù siyang gisulipátan
kay nagsábà man,</hi> I glowered at her because
she was being noisy.

<b>sulípat<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] blink the eyes in the water
to remove a foreign body lodged in it. <hi>Ákung
gisulípat ang ákung mata sa túbig arun
pagkúhà sa puling,</hi> I blinked my eyes in
the water to remove the speck in them.

<b>suliping</b>, <b>sulíping</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>SALIPÌ</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>SALIPING</sc>.

<b>sulip-it</b> = <sc>SALIP-IT</sc>.

<b>sulírab</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2P; c] @glower, stare fiercely with
an angry frown. <hi>Gisulirában sa kapatas ang
mga kaminíru nga nagpataypátay,</hi> The foreman
glowered at the street cleaners that
were dilly-dallying on the job.

<b>suliran</b> <hi>n</hi> @problem, an unsettled condition or
situation that requires a solution. <hi>Suliran
nákù ang pagpakáun sa ákung pamilya,</hi> It is
a problem for me to feed my family. <hi>v</hi> [A13]
have a problem.

<b>sulírap<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] for the eyeballs to move up
so that they are almost hidden by the upper
eyelid. <hi>Basta taas ang hilánat, musulírap
ang mata,</hi> If the fever is high, the eyeballs
move up into the forehead.

<b>sulírap<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> matting made out of woven coconut
palm fronds. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] weave coconut
fronds into matting.

<b>sulírat</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB6; c1] for the eyes to open wide
in anger; cause them to do so. <hi>Mihílum ang
mga bátà dihang ákung gisulirátan,</hi> The children
kept quiet when I glared at them.

<b>sulisilit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] @solicit contributions
(humorous&mdash;from <hi>sulisit</hi>).

<b>sulísit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @solicit contributions, donations.
<hi>Nagsulisit ang maistrag hinábang sa
nasunúgan,</hi> The teachers were soliciting
contributions for the fire victims.

<b>sulisitadur</b> <hi>a</hi> @prying or maliciously inquisitive.
<pb n=930>Sulisitadur kaáyung bayhána, nangutána
kun pilay ákung swildu, What a @nosey
woman. She asked me how much I earn.

<b>sulisitur hiniral</b> <hi>n</hi> @{Solicitor General}, an officer
of the Justice Department that handles
government cases.

<b>sulit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] set s.t. @afire or @ablaze. <hi>Sulitan
nákù ang kakugnan,</hi> I'll set the grass field
on fire.

<b>*súlit pa-</b> <hi>n</hi> @test, @examination. <hi>v</hi> [A13] hold
an @exam.

<b>sulitaryu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @solitaire card game. <b>2</b> @{solitaire
ring} with a single gem. <hi>v</hi> [A1] <b>1</b> play a game
of solitaire. <b>2</b> wear a solitaire ring.

<b>suliut</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. giant @clam with yellow coloring
around the edges of the mouth.

<b>sulíut</b> (from <hi>líut</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] force oneself
through a crowd or s.t. similar. <hi>Misulíut siya
sa katawhan arun makadúul sa intabládu,</hi>
She forced her way through the crowd to
get near the stage.

<b>sulíyaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] for a crowd to shout either
in @applause or derision. Misulíyaw ang
mga táwu pagdiskursu sa pulitiku, The people
@booed when the politician delivered a
speech. <hi>Misulíyaw ang mga táwu pagkabatì
sa balità sa kadaúgan,</hi> The people shouted
upon hearing the news of victory. <hi>n</hi> shouts
of a crowd.

<b>sulpa</b> <hi>n</hi> @sulfa drugs.

<b>sulpà</b> <hi>n</hi> container for jewelry or important
documents used in former times, made of a
<b>short</b> bamboo tube, 1&ndash;2´ long, having another
cover of bamboo which fits over it
and reaches its base. <hi>v</hi> [c1] place s.t. in a
sulpà.

<b>sulput</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @{issue forth} suddenly,
@{pop out} of. <hi>Misulput ang sungsung ug miágay
ang súkà,</hi> The stopper popped, and the
vinegar flowed out. <hi>Misulput lang ang bátà
pag-anak níya,</hi> The baby just popped out
when she gave birth. <b>2</b> [A23] leave suddenly,
move with speed. <hi>Nây,[**questionable accent. P2] misulput siya ug
mipaúlì nga way tingugtíngug,</hi> Well! He got
up and went home without saying a word.

<b>sulsul</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] @urge, @egg s.o. into doing s.t.
bad. <hi>Gisulsúlan sa mga iyaan ang mga bátà
sa pagpasúkul sa ílang inaína,</hi> The children's
aunts incited them into rebelling against
their stepmother. <hi>n</hi> @urgings, @incitement.

<b>sultáda</b> <hi>n</hi> a match in @cockfights. <hi>v</hi> [A13] for
there to be a cockfight match. <hi>Ug magsultáda
ug bayinti sa hápun, dì na hínay ang tárì,</hi>
If there are twenty matches in the afternoon,
cockfighting is doing all right. <b>sultadur</b>
<hi>n</hi> handler who releases fighting cocks in
a match.

<b>sultan</b> <hi>n</hi> @sultan, the name given the chief of
some Muslim groups.

<b>sultána</b> <hi>n</hi> a sultan's wife.

<b>sulti</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; c] @tell, @speak. <hi>Way láin nga makagsulti
báhin níya kun dílì ang amahan,</hi> No
one can @say that about him but the father.
<hi>Sultían ku pa siya ug musugut ba,</hi> I still
have to tell him to see if he would agree. <hi>Ayaw
nag isulti níya!</hi> Don't tell him that! <b>1a</b>
[C; abc3] talk s.t. over together. <hi>Dúnay makigsulti
nímu sa tilipunu,</hi> S.o. wants to talk
to you on the telephone. <hi>Sultíun (sultíhun)
nátù ni. Dì ta mistil maglális,</hi> Let's talk this
out. We don't have to fight. <hi>Gipanagsultíhan
pa námù ang nahitabù,</hi> We are still @discussing
the events. <hi>Gipakigsultíhan mu na ba siya?</hi>
Have you gone to see him to @{talk it over}?
<hi>Gikasulti ku na si Pápa,</hi> I've already
talked it over with Dad. <b>2</b> [A2] @utter s.t.,
@speak. <hi>Makasulti na ang ákung anak,</hi> My
daughter knows how to talk. <b>3</b> [A23] deliver
a @speech. <hi>Maáyu musulti tung kandidatúha,</hi>
That candidate speaks quite well. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
word of @caution or @advice. <hi>Usa ka sulti hustu
na,</hi> One word is enough. <b>2</b> thing said as
@news, @gossip. <hi>Unsa man nang sulti nga nabátì
ku nga wà ka na mutunghà?</hi> What is that
talk I hear that you are not attending classes?
<b>3</b> @speech or talk delivered. <hi>Daghang nakasaway
<b>sa</b> ímung sulti,</hi> A lot of people criticized
your speech. <b>sultisulti</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6]
@chat, @converse. <hi>Nagsultisulti mi báhin sa ámung
gradwisyun nga umaábut,</hi> We are conversing
about our forthcoming graduation.
<hi>n</hi> @gossip, @rumor. <hi>Mga sultisulti nà nga dílì
katuhúan kay gíkan sa mga tabian,</hi> That is
gossip not worth believing because it originates
from the gossipmongers. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23]
<b>1</b> @circulate gossip or news. <hi>Ikaw may nanulti
ánang tabía,</hi> You were the one who
spread that gossip. <b>2</b> speak in a certain way.
<hi>Sakit kaáyu siya nga manulti,</hi> He speaks in
a very hurting way. <b>sultiánay, sultihánay</b> <hi>v</hi>
[C; c3] have a conversation. <hi>n</hi> @conversation.

<b>sultiánan</b> <hi>n</hi> subject of conversation. <hi>Ang nahitabù
nahímung sultiánan sa mga táwu,</hi>
What happened became a subject of conversation
for the people. <b>hinultihun</b> <hi>a</hi> @talkative.
<hi>Dì siya hinultihun ug dì pa níya sinátì
ang táwu,</hi> He doesn't say much if he does
not know the person well. <hi>v</hi> [B12] be, become
talkative. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> person with whom
one is talking. <b>sinultihan</b> <hi>n</hi> manner of
@speech, @language. <b>panultihun, sultihúnun</b> <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> @saying, @proverb. <b>2</b> thing usually said or
spoken. <hi>Kanang mga pulúnga mauy panultihun
ug táwung buangbuang,</hi> That is the
k.o. thing crazy people say.

<b>sultid bins</b> <hi>n</hi> canned @{salted beans}. <hi>v</hi> [A1]
<pb n=931>have salted beans for food.

<b>sultíra</b> = <sc>SULTÍRU</sc> (female).

<b>sultíru</b> <hi>n</hi> @single, @unmarried male.

<b>súlu</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> sing a @solo.
<hi>Sulúhun ku lang ang kanta,</hi> I will make this
song a solo. <b>2</b> do s.t. @alone by oneself. <hi>Musúlu
lang ku ug trabáhu kay aku ra may nía,</hi>
I will just work by myself because I am the
only one around. <b>2a</b> <b>sulúha</b> expression of
harsh rejection when s.o. ask[**asks?] for one's
company. <hi>'Manan-aw tag sini.'&mdash;'Sulúha!'</hi>
'Let's go to the movies.'&mdash;'Go by yourself!'
<hi>n</hi> vocal solo. <b>sulusúlu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; b5] do s.t. @alone.
<hi>Magsulusúlu lang kag adtu sa parti?</hi>
Are you going to the party alone? <b>&mdash; pláyit</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A1] go s.w. @alone. <hi>Magsúlu pláyit siya ig-adtu
sa Mindanaw,</hi> He will go to Mindanao
alone. <b>-wist, -wista</b> <hi>n</hi> @soloist, @{lead singer} or
player of a group. <hi>v</hi> [a12] be, be made the
soloist.

<b>sulù</b> <hi>n</hi> @torch made of a dry palm frond bound
tightly at regular intervals along its length
to make it burn slowly. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make
into a torch of this sort. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] use a
torch in doing s.t., or illuminate one's way
with a torch. <hi>Sul-un ku tung langgáma rung
gabíi,</hi> I will catch that bird tonight lighting
my way with a torch. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] go
hunting or fishing at night with torchlight.

<b>súlù</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S] make a sizzling, hissing sound.
<hi>Ug musúlù ang mantíkà ilúnud ang sibúyas,</hi>
When the fat @sizzles, put the onions in. <hi>Basà
ang pabílu kay síging nagsulù,</hi> The wick
must be wet because it keeps @sizzling.

<b>sul-ub</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @insert s.t. into s.t. that it
fits into. <hi>Palíhug rag sul-ub ug bálik ánang
húnus sa lamísa,</hi> Please put the drawers
back into the table. <hi>Isul-ub ring argulya sa
usuk,</hi> Insert this metal ring over the stake.
<b>2</b> @{put on}, @wear. <hi>Sul-úbi ang bátà sa putì níya
nga sinínà,</hi> Let the child wear her white
dress. <hi>Isul-ub ang ímung singsing,</hi> Wear your
ring. <hi>n</hi> @{wedding dress}. <hi>Malagmit dílì mahinayun
ang kasal ug isukud ang sul-ub,</hi> It's
likely that the wedding won't go through if
the bride tries on the gown beforehand.

<b>sulud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] @{go in}, into. <hi>Dílì ta makasulud
sa sini saylu sa alas nuybi,</hi> We cannot
@{get into} the movies after nine o'clock. <hi>Guwà
dihà sa kwartu kay ug dílì ka, sudlun ku ikaw,</hi>
Get out of the room because if you
don't I will go in after you. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa úlu</b> [ac]
for s.t. to have entered the head. <hi>Unsay
nasulud sa ímung úlu sa pagbúhat sa ingun?</hi>
What got into your head to make you do
such a thing? <hi>Isulud nis ímung úlu, ayaw giyud
ug lisúa ning twirkáha,</hi> Get this into
your head. Don't ever turn this screw. <b>1b</b>
[a3] @understand s.t. <hi>Dílì masulud sa ákung
úlu ang liksiyun,</hi> I cannot understand the
lesson. <b>1c</b> [b8] be @pregnant, esp. in the early
stages. <hi>Sa pagkasal níla nasudlan na ang
babáyi,</hi> When they were married, the girl
was already pregnant. <b>1d</b> [b8] be under the
influence of alcohol. <hi>Nanghágit nas Pidru ug
áway, nasudlan na tingáli,</hi> Pedro was challenging
people to a fight. He must be @drunk.
<b>1e</b> [A2] for the gears of an engine to @engage.
<hi>Musulud (makasulud) ang primíra apan
dílì mulyamar,</hi> The first gear will engage,
but it won't function. <b>1f</b> [A2; c6] be
sent into a game. <hi>Misúd si Basilan pagkasíkan
hap,</hi> Basilan was sent into the game in
the second half. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @enter, take a job
as. <hi>Musulud siya sa pagkapárì,</hi> He will enter
the priesthood. <b>Unsang trabahúa ímung sudlan?</b>
What k.o. job are you going to take?
<b>3</b> [A; c] put s.t. inside s.t. else. <hi>Nagsulud
ku aring mga linata sa kahun,</hi> I am putting
the canned goods in the box. <hi>Isulud ni sa
kumúda,</hi> Put this in the drawer. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; sa bulsa</b>
<hi>see</hi> <sc>BULSA</sc>. <b>3b</b> [A; c6] in weaving: @sley,
arrange the threads of a warp in a reed. <b>4</b>
[A2] @accommodate, @hold. <hi>Kining baríla musulud
ug nuybinta ka litru,</hi> This barrel will
hold ninety liters. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @contents. <hi>Way sulud
ang pitaka,</hi> The wallet was empty. <b>1a</b> @capacity
to hold. <b>2</b> place within. <hi>Túa siya sa sulud
sa awtu,</hi> He is @inside the car. <b>2a</b> @within,
inside a period of time. <hi>Sulud sa tulu ka túig
mupaúlì ku,</hi> Within three years I'll go
home. <hi>Lat-i sulud sa tulu ka úras,</hi> Boil for
three hours. <b>&mdash; sa búyut</b> @{in the bag}, absolutely
@assured. <hi>Sulud sa búyut ang ímung kadaúgan,</hi>
Your victory is already in the bag. <b>2b</b>
an extra room in a house: a bedroom or a
storeroom. <b>sulud guwà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> go @{in
and out}. <hi>Ngánung nagsulud guwà ka man?
Wà kay láing lingaw?</hi> Why do you keep going
in and out? Have you nothing else to
do? <b>2</b> shift one's allegations in one's tack
of reasoning. <hi>Nagsulud guwà kas ímung sulti
maung dì ka katuhúan,</hi> You keep changing
your story. That's why no one can believe
you. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] give a job or recommend
s.o. for a job. <hi>Pasudlun ta kag trabáhu
iggradwar nímu,</hi> I'll arrange for you to
get a job when you graduate. <b>suludsúlud</b> <hi>n</hi>
small room for storage. <b>sudlanan</b> <hi>n</hi> @container.
<b>suluran</b> <hi>n</hi> the @reed in weaving, which has
the purpose of slamming the weft threads
tightly together, so called from the fact that
the warp threads go through it. <b>sinudlan</b> <hi>n</hi>
having a @filling. <hi>Pan nga sinudlan,</hi> Bread
with a filling baked inside. <b>sudlunun</b> <hi>a</hi> way
back off the road or usual route (lit. a place
<pb n=932>you have to go into to get to). <hi>Sudlunun
kaáyu ang ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,</hi>
Their house is far back from the road. <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
be way back from the usual route.

<b>súlud</b> <hi>n</hi> fine-toothed @comb with two parallel
rows of teeth, used to rid the hair of lice. v
<b>1</b> [A; a12] comb with the <hi>súlud</hi>. <b>2</b> [a12]
make into a <hi>súlud</hi>. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] comb one's
own hair with the <hi>súlud</hi>.

<b>sulug</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @current. <hi>Ang kabáyù naánud sa sulug,</hi>
The horse was swept away by the current.
<b>2</b> @onrush of s.t. as if brought with the
current. <hi>Usa ka sulug sa pagbátì mikánap
kaníya,</hi> An onrush of emotion engulfed
him. <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> flowing with a swift current. <hi>Sulug
kaáyu ang túbig sa subà,</hi> The water in the
river is swift. <b>2</b> flowing copiously. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B2]
be, become @swift. <hi>Masulug man lang ning
<b>subáa</b> sa ting-ulan,</hi> This river only becomes
swift during the rainy season. <hi>Ang musulug
nga kasukù,</hi> The onrush of anger. <b>2</b> [b4]
have a copious blood flow. <hi>Gisulgan siya
kay nakuháan,</hi> She had profuse bleeding because
she had a miscarriage.

<b>sulugsúlug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @tease, @harass s.o. by
irritating actions or remarks, or by poking
fun at him. <hi>Ayg sugsúga si Maríya kay pikun,</hi>
Don't tease Maria because she easily
cries. <b>2</b> @annoy, @bother with persistence. <hi>Sa
kahapúnun ang lamuk na puy musulugsúlug
nákù,</hi> The mosquitoes annoy persistently in
the evening. <hi>n</hi> action of @teasing. <b>-an(->)</b> a
given to teasing.

<b>suluksuluk</b> <hi>n</hi> = <sc>KUTUKUTU[**KUTU KUTU?]</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>KUTU</sc>.

<b>sulum</b> = <sc>PALA</sc>.

<b>sulumilyu</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> loin of beef or
pork, esp. the upper portion.

<b>sulung</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A] @see, @{look at}. <hi>Musulung ku sa
ímung baligyà,</hi> Let me take a @look at the
things you are selling. <b>2</b> [cP] @show s.t. <hi>Isulung
(ipasulung) nákù ninyu ang ákung bag,</hi>
I will show you my bag. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ac] show.
<hi>Íya kung pasulúngun sa íyang bag-ung sapátus,</hi>
She'll let me see her new shoes.

<b>súlung<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{set against}, @attack. <hi>Sulúngun
nátù ang Hapun rung gabíi,</hi> We will
attack the Japs tonight. <b>2</b> [AN2; a12] go
s.w. to look for trouble. <hi>Ug sulúngun (sulngun)
ka níya sa iskuylahan, itug-an siya sa
maistru,</hi> If he goes to school to pick a fight
with you, report him to the teacher. <b>3</b> [A2N; a12]
go s.w. to do s.t. <hi>Musúlung (manúlung)
ta ug baskit sa Talísay,</hi> We will go to
Talisay to play basketball. <hi>n</hi> @attack. <hi>Ang súlung
idungan sa bumbardíyu,</hi> The attack
will be synchronized with the bombardment.
<b>dasmag &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> rush attack or @assault.
<b>maN-r-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @attacker, @invader.

<b>súlung<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] stare directly at s.t. dazzling.
<hi>Mu ra kag mahálap ug musúlung kas adlaw,</hi>
You get blinded if you stare directly into
the sun. <b>sulnganay, sinulnganay</b> <hi>v</hi> [C] communicate
by looking at each other without
exchanging words (literary). <hi>Nagsinulnganay
(nagsulnganay) si Hisukristu ug ang Íyang
Mahal nga Inahan kay dílì matúkib sa
púlung ang ílang gibátì,</hi> Jesus Christ and
His Blessed Mother looked at each other
with emotions words could not express.

<b>sul-ung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b4] for an illness or some personality
quirk that recurs ever[**every?][**i think it's fine. P2,P3] so often to
make its appearance. <hi>Musul-ung ang íyang
<b>sáput</b> kun magdugù,</hi> She gets her tantrums
when she menstruates. <b>sul-ungsul-ung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3]
recur in intervals.[+]

<b>sulup</b> <hi>a</hi> @dark, @lightless. <hi>Wà kuy nakítà sa lángub
kay sulup kaáyu,</hi> I did not see anything
in the cave because it was very dark.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> early evening, just after the sun has
gone down. <hi>Sulup na sa paggíkan nákù sa
búkid,</hi> It was already @dusk when I started
home from the mountains. <b>2</b> @jungle, @thicket.
<b>bábuyng &mdash;</b> @{wild pig}. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B] become dark.
<hi>Misulup ang lawak sa pagkapálung sa sugà,</hi>
The room became dark when the lamp was
put out. <b>2</b> [A; b6] disappear into the forest
or tall grass. <hi>Duha ka táwu ang misulup
sa bagang lugut,</hi> Two men disappeared into
the thick brush. <b>3</b> [b6] be @overgrown with
brush.

<b>sulusiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @solution, @answer to a problem.
<hi>Ang sulusiyun sa prublíma sayun ra,</hi> The
solution to the problem is very simple. <b>2</b> a
drug or chemical solution. <hi>Gipailísan nákù
ang sulusiyun sa batiríya,</hi> I had the battery
solution changed.

<b>súlut<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> giving a @piercing look, @staring hard.
<hi>Sulut kaáyu ug tinan-awan ang íyang mga
mata,</hi> His eyes gave a piercing look. <hi>v</hi> [A2S;
b6] look at piercingly. <hi>Gisulútan ákung bátà
kay nagpabuyag,</hi> She stared hard at my
daughter because she was being naughty.

<b>súlut<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> a tightly wound @rope. <hi>v</hi> [a12] be, become,
make @tight. <hi>Sulútun nákù pagpísì arun
dílì dalì nga mabugtù,</hi> I will make the
rope tight so it cannot break easily. <b>sutanan</b>
<hi>n</hi> a device used in rope-making having two
or three cranks which impart an appropriate
degree of twist to the individual strands after
which the strands are twisted collectively
into the rope.

<b>sul-ut</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c6] fit s.t. precisely over, around,
or into s.t. else. <hi>Sul-útag plastik ang
alambri dikuryinti,</hi> @Encase the electric wire
in plastic. <b>2</b> [c6] put s.t. on, @wear. <hi>Isul-ut
ang sapátus ug maarang ba,</hi> Try on the pair
<pb n=933>of shoes whether they fit. <hi>Kanang putì isul-ut
<b>sa</b> parti,</hi> Wear your white dress to the
party. <b>sul-utsul-ut</b> = <sc>SAL-UTSAL-UT</sc>. <hi>see</hi>
<sc>SAL-UT</sc>.

<b>suluwist, suluwista</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÚLU</sc>.

<b>sulyà</b> = <sc>SUYLÀ<hi rend=sub>1,2</hi></sc>.

<b>súm</b> = <sc>SULUM</sc>.

<b>súma</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @total up, @reckon the final amount.
<hi>Kinsay nagsúma sa pátung sa mga
sápì nga gihulaman?</hi> Who is reckoning the
interest on the money we lent? <hi>n</hi> figure arrived
after calculation. <hi>Ang súma diri nákù
mil syitisyintus,</hi> The @sum total I get is one
thousand, seven hundred. -da = SÚMA.

<b>sum[=à]</b> = <sc>SUMÁLÀ</sc>.

<b>súmad</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the day exactly one year after a
certain event. <hi>Ang súmad sa kamatáyun sa
ímung amahan mahiatul ug Byirnis Santu,</hi>
The day exactly one year after your father's
death will fall on Good Friday. <hi>Súmad niá-*run[**spurious -? P2]
túa na ku sa Amirika,</hi> A year from now
I will be in America. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; nga Lúnis, usa ka
<b>simána,</b> etc.</b> it was exactly one Monday, one
week, etc. after a certain event. <hi>Súmad nga
usa ka búwan rung pitsa dús sukad sa íyang
paggíkan,</hi> On the second it will be exactly
one month since he left. <b>2</b> @anniversary. <hi>Ang
súmad sa átung kagawásan saulúgun karung
Duminggu,</hi> The anniversary of our independence
will be celebrated this Sunday. <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [A2; b8] get to be a week, month, etc. after
s.t. <hi>Musúmad na karung Lúnis ang ákung
pagkasakit,</hi> It will be exactly one week on
Monday since I got ill. <b>2</b> [A1; c] celebrate
an anniversary. <b>sumadsúmad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] do
s.t. @yearly. <hi>Musumadsúmad siya ug palit ug
awtu kay dátù siya,</hi> He buys a new car every
year because he is rich. <b>kasumáran</b> <hi>n</hi> @birthday.
<hi>Ása man ta magsaúlug sa ímung kasumáran?</hi>
Where will we celebrate your birthday?

<b>sumagang</b> <hi>n</hi> second-class[**second-class] tobacco leaves
somewhat smaller than the first class, not
perfectly mature, and having minor tears.

<b>sumálà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <b>1</b> @{according to}. <hi>Náa kunuy bagyu sumálà
sa balità,</hi> @According to the news there's
going to be a storm. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<hi>gen.</hi>] it's @{up to}
[gen.]. <hi>Sumálà gud nímu ug muadtu ka ba,</hi>
It's up to you whether you go. <b>2a</b> it is up
to you. <hi>'Mangalígù ba ta?'&mdash;'Sumálà!'</hi>
'How about going swimming?'&mdash;'It's up to
you.'

<b>sumálà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>dílì mag-</b> regret not doing s.t.
which one had been warned to do. <hi>Padad-un
kag bálun, dì ka. Dì ka magsumálà ug
gutmun ka,</hi> I told you to bring your lunch,
but you didn't. Now you will regret it if
you go hungry.

<b>sumalabit</b>, <b>sumalabits</b> = <sc>SALUMABITS</sc>.

<b>súman</b> <hi>n</hi> = <sc>BUDBUD</sc>, <hi>v3</hi>; <hi>n3</hi>. <hi>v</hi> [A1; a12] cook,
make into <hi>súman.</hi> &mdash; <b>nga hilaw</b> the @penis
(humorous).

<b>sumángil</b> see *<sc>SÁNGIL</sc>.

<b>sumarínu</b> = <sc>SUBMARÍNU</sc>.

<b>sumat<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @ask for one's answer. <hi>Misumat
ang dalága sa laláki kun kanus-a sila pakasal,</hi>
The girl asked the man when they
would get married. <hi>Wà pa ku makasumat níya
kun muuban ba siya nátù,</hi> I have not yet
asked him whether he would go with us or
not. <b>2</b> @remind s.o. of s.t. <hi>Sumati siya sa íyang
sáad,</hi> Remind him of his promise.

<b>sumat<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A23N] for an unpleasant characteristic
to be due to inheritance from forebears.
<hi>Kanang kangil-ad sa batásan ánang
batáa túa musumat (manumat) s[**can't identify][**sa? P2][**sa says a Boholana F1] apuhang
babáyi,</hi> That child's nasty character is inherited
from her grandmother.

<b>sumatin</b> <hi>n</hi> @policeman.

<b>súmay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @repeat what s.o. said. <hi>Sumáya
ug makadaghan hangtud larínu ka na
nga mulituk,</hi> Repeat it over several times
until you can say it fluently. <b>sumaysúmay</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A; a12] ape, @mimic. <hi>Ug musumaysúmay
ka sa ákung sinultian, sukmágun ta ka,</hi> If
you ape my way of speaking, I will strike
you.

<b>sumbag</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN; a12b2] strike with the fist,
box. <hi>Nagpanumbag siyas bungbung sa kapungut,</hi>
He banged his fist against the wall
in anger. <b>2</b> [C; a12] have a fistfight with
s.o. <hi>n</hi> blow with the fist. <b>-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [C] <b>1</b> =
<sc>SUMBAG</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>. <b>2</b> &mdash; <b>ang kwarta</b> (humorous)
have plenty of money. <hi>Nagsumbagay ang
kwarta ánang tihíka,</hi> That miser has loads
of money. <b>-in-ay(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @fistfight. <hi>Ang sinumbagay
dílì makasulbad sa inyung panagbángì,</hi>
Your differences cannot be resolved by
fisticuffs. <b>sumbagsumbag</b> <hi>v</hi> [b5c] @dunk, @dip
food in s.t. to add more flavor to it (humorous).
<hi>Pagkúhà ug unà nga átung sumbagsumbágun
(sumbagsumbágan) sa ságing,</hi>
Get some fish paste sauce to dip the cooked
bananas into.

<b>sumbalihuk</b> (coined from <hi>sumbalik</hi> and <hi>líhuk</hi>)
<hi>n</hi> @reaction.

<b>sumbalik</b> (from <hi>bálik</hi>) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; ac] bounce
back on, boomerang. <hi>Misumbalik kaníya
ang batung íyang gilábay,</hi> The stone he
threw bounced back at him. <hi>Ayaw ug bugtawg
irung búang kay sumbalikun ka,</hi> Don't
chase a mad dog because he will turn back
on you. <hi>Kanang ímung pangutána ákung
isumbalik ug pangutána nímu,</hi> I'm going to
turn around and ask you the same thing
you asked me. <b>2</b> [B26] turn out to be the
<pb n=934>exact @opposite. <hi>n</hi> the exact @opposite. <hi>Ang íyang
nawung sumbalik sa linawas kay sa laráwan,</hi>
In real life his face is the exact opposite
of what it is in the picture. <b>&mdash; dasdas</b>
<hi>n</hi> @counterattack. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] counterattack.
<hi>Gisumbalik dasdas sa mga Aliman ang atáki
sa mga Rúsu,</hi> The Germans counterattacked
the Russians.

<b>sumbaling</b> = <sc>TUMBÁLING</sc>.

<b>sumban</b> (from *<hi>subung</hi>) <b>gisumban/sumban/sumbi</b>
<hi>v</hi> make s.t. modelled after s.t. else.
<hi>Ritrátu ray ákung gisumban paggamà nákù
áning dulaána,</hi> I made this toy by copying
a picture. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [b(1)] allow s.t. to go
on without doing anything about it, happy
that it is being done or resigned to it. <hi>Ikaw
ray madáut ug pasumban mu ang ímung
ka[** m? can't identify][**just guessing: kabuguy? P2],</hi> You will suffer if you just allow
yourself to drift along doing nothing all
the time. <hi>Gipasumban lang sa babáyi ang
pagpanghikap sa íyang hinigugma,</hi> The girl
just allowed her boy friend to keep on caressing
her. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @model, @pattern. <hi>Sumbanan
ni paghímù ug mga kartun,</hi> This is
the pattern in making cardboard boxes. <b>2</b>
@code, @regulations on which actions are based.
<hi>Ang kaangáyan mauy sumbanan sa íyang
pakigdáit,</hi> He bases his personal relations
on fairness. <hi>Sumbanang baláud,</hi> @{Civil
Code}. <b>2a</b> @basis on which one acts. <hi>Panimalus
mauy sumbanan sa íyang panglíhuk,</hi> His actions
are @motivated by a desire for revenge.
<b>-un(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. that runs in a family. <hi>Ang pagkabúang
sumbanun ánang pamilyáha,</hi> Insanity
is @hereditary in that family.

<b>sumbil</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> make a piece of cloth larger
by sewing another piece to it. <hi>Tinábas
lay isumbil sa ubus arun mataastaas,</hi> Just
add some remnants to the bottom to make
it longer. <b>2</b> @light one's cigar or cigarette
from s.o. <hi>Lisud nga sumbílan ang mubù nga
sigarilyu,</hi> It's difficult to light one's cigarette
on a shorter one.

<b>sumbíngay</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @parable, @allegory. <hi>Ang sumbíngay
sa magpupúgas,</hi> The parable of the
sower. <b>2</b> @hint, s.t. said in asking for s.t. indirectly.
<hi>v</hi> [AP; cP] @{give hints} for s.o. to do
s.t., ask for s.t. indirectly. <hi>Ákung gipasumbingáyan
(gisumbingáyan) ang táwu nga dì
na pabalíkun sa balay,</hi> I gave the man @hints
not to come back to the house again. <b>pa-</b> =
<sc>SUMBÍNGAY</sc>.

<b>sumbríya</b> <hi>n</hi> @culvert. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] put or construct
a culvert.

<b>sumbuhan</b> <hi>n</hi> @barrel of firearm or ordnance.

<b>sumbung</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @{tell on} s.o., @report. <hi>Isumbung
ta kang Pápa,</hi> I will tell Father on you.
<b>1a</b> [A2; c] tell s.o. about oneself in private.
<hi>Ug makasumbung pa lang untà ku níya ning
ákung gugma,</hi> If I could only tell her how
much I loved her. <b>2</b> [A; b] @accuse s.o. in
court, file a complaint. <hi>Isumbung ta ka ug
pangáwat,</hi> I will accuse you of theft. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @report,
tale s.o. tattled. <hi>Wà panumbalínga sa
supirintindinti ang sumbung,</hi> The superintendent
did not heed the report. <b>2</b> @complaint
filed in court. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> the accused person.
<b>-íra</b> = <sc>SUMBUNGÍRU</sc> (female). <b>-íru, mag-r-[**magr- ?]</b>
<hi>n</hi> @tattle-tale, @informer.

<b>súmil</b> <hi>n</hi> @sawmill.

<b>sumitir</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @{turn in} for consideration,
@submit homework. <hi>Unsa mang upisináha sumitihan
sa aplikisyun?</hi> What office will the
application be submitted to? <hi>Isumitir ang
ímung humwurk run,</hi> Submit your homework
now. <b>2</b> [A23] @submit, @yield to a
stronger force. <hi>Dinhay pila ka táwu nga walà
musumitir sa gahum sa kaáway,</hi> There
were a few persons that did not submit to
the power of the enemy. <b>3</b> [A2] agree that
a certain thing is right. <hi>Walay but-an nga
makasumitir ánang ímung paági,</hi> No sane
person could @accede to that procedure of
yours. <b>4</b> [B26; b3] be immensely @impressed
with s.o.'s ability. <hi>a</hi> be impressed by s.o.'s
ability. <hi>Sumitir kaáyu ku nímung mudiskursu,</hi>
I take my hat off to you for your
oratorical ability.

<b>sumpà</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. to counteract s.t. evil before it
happens, usually of a magical nature. <hi>Sumpà
sa ulan,</hi> S.t. to keep it from raining.
<hi>Sumpà sa dápaw,</hi> S.t. to keep itchy trichomes
from affecting one. <hi>Sumpà sa tunglu,</hi>
S.t. to render a curse ineffective. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1]
render s.t. ineffective, counteract some
evil before it happens. <hi>Sumpáun ang bábuy
arun dílì mahurut sa mamistáhay,</hi> They will
put a special charm on the pig so that it
won't be all eaten up at the fiesta. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A; c] @swear, make an @oath to do s.t. or
that s.t. will happen. <hi>Manumpà kung tinúud
kini,</hi> I swear this is true. <hi>Gipanumpà níya
nga manimalus siya,</hi> He swore he would get
revenge. <hi>Ayaw ipanumpà ang ngálan sa Diyus
sa pasipála,</hi> Don't take God's name in
vain (make oaths in God's name for light
situations). <hi>n</hi> @oath, solemn @declaration of
truth or one's intention. <b>ig-l-</b> <hi>n</hi> = <sc>SUMPÀ</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>sumpákì</b> <hi>n</hi> @disagreement, @dispute. <hi>Dì ta na
lang painítun ang átung mga sumpákì,</hi> We
won't let our disagreements get heated. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b>
[A23C; b3] @contradict, @disagree. <hi>Musumpákì
giyud nà siya sa bísan unsay ákung isulti,</hi>
He contradicts whatever I say. <hi>Nagkasumpákì
ang ámung hunàhúnà,</hi> Our ideas are
not in agreement. <b>2</b> [C; b3] have a disagreement, 
<pb n=935>small @argument.

<b>sumpay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @join things together to
make them larger. <hi>Sumpáyun ta ning duha
ka mubung písì arun mataas,</hi> Let us join
these two short pieces of rope together so
it will be long enough. <hi>Nagsumpay mi sa
pantalan ug mga bayinti mitrus,</hi> We are @adding
about twenty meters to the wharf. <b>2</b> [A2;
b6] @add, saying s.t. to s.t. previously said.
<hi>Sumpáyan pa giyud níya ug kumidiya bísan
ug unsay ákung isulti,</hi> He always adds jokes
to whatever I say. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the additional span
or length added. <b>2</b> succeeding installment
of a serial. <b>ápas &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> @sequel. <hi>Kining sugilanúna
ápas sumpay sa isturya sa bau ug ungguy,</hi>
This story is a sequel to the story of the
monkey and the turtle. <b>ka- ug tinái</b> <hi>n</hi> @brother
or @sister. <b>ka- sa kasingkásing</b> <hi>n</hi> s.o. close
to one's heart. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @joint, place s.t.
has been added or tied to s.t. else.

<b>sumpit</b> = <sc>SUNGPIT</sc>.

<b>sumpù</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @{put an end to} s.t. bad.
<hi>Sumpúun ku nang ímung pagkatabian,</hi> I will
put an end to your gossiping. <b>2</b> @check development.
<hi>Tambal nga musumpù dáyun sa
ubu,</hi> Medicine that checks a cough instantly.
<hi>Kanang bisyúha makasumpù sa túbù,</hi>
That vice @stunts the growth.

<b>sumpung</b> <hi>v</hi> [B246; a4] be in one of one's
bad moods, have one's sickness or fit come
over one. <hi>Misumpung na sag sáput ni Lúla
kay nagyawyaw man,</hi> Grandma must be in
one of her ugly moods again because she is
grumbling. <hi>Gisumpung siya sa íyang kabúang,</hi>
She had her fit of madness again.

<b>sumput</b> = <sc>SUNGPUT</sc>.

<b>sumsum</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c2] eat s.t. with drinks. <hi>Isumsum
(sumsuman) nátù ning surísu ug bír,</hi>
Let's have sausages with our beer. <b>2</b> [b6] be
the subject of gossip. <hi>Aku na puy gisumsúman
ninyu ug tabì,</hi> This time I am the subject
of your gossip. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> thing eaten along
with drinks. <b>2</b> action of having food with
liquor. <hi>Dúnay sumsum sa ka Kardu rung gabíi,</hi>
There's going to be drinks with eating
at Cardo's tonight. <b>-ay(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> eating and
drinking spree. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> = <sc>SUMSUM</sc>. <b>2</b> subject
of gossip. <hi>v</hi> [A13] have an eating and drinking
spree.

<b>sumu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> a for tobacco to burn poorly. <hi>Sumu
kaáyu ning tabakúa ug mabálaw tag yupyup,</hi>
This tobacco is so hard to get to burn,
and you go crazy trying to suck on it. <hi>v</hi> [B126;
b6] be slow-burning.

<b>sumu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> @boring, tired of s.t. due to its frequency
and repetition. <hi>Sumu kaáyu ning
kinabuhía!</hi> What a boring life this is! <hi>Sumu
pamináwun ang sirmun nga gabalikbálik</hi>. 
It's boring to have to listen to the same
lecture over and over again. <hi>v</hi> [b4] be @{fed
up} with s.t. <hi>Gisumhan ku sa íyang pangatarúngan,</hi>
I was bored with his reasoning. <hi>Gisumhan
na kug kináun ug bábuy,</hi> I am @{sick
of} eating pork.

<b>sum-uk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2b2] go into a mass of s.t.
<hi>Nakasum-uk na ang ayruplánu sa mga pangánud,</hi>
The plane disappeared into the
clouds. <hi>Ayaw ug sum-úka ang kasagbutan
kay náay sawa dihà,</hi> Don't go into the undergrowth
because there are snakes. <b>2</b> [A2;
a12] @try, @venture into s.t. <hi>Wà ku makasum-uk
ánang mga mátang sa panarbáhu,</hi> I have
not tried my hand at that k.o. work.

<b>sum-ul</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> for food to be @unpalatable from
having been served too often. <hi>Sum-ul ang
bábuyng isígig sirbi,</hi> You can get @{fed up}
with pork if you have it all the time. <b>2</b> @boring,
@tiresome. <hi>Sum-ul kaáyung pamatíun
nang isturyáha,</hi> I'm fed up with hearing that
story. <b>&mdash; ug nawung</b> <hi>a</hi> having a nice face, but
not one so beautiful people can't get enough
of looking at it. <hi>v</hi> [B1; b6] <b>1</b> be, become
@repulsive and @unpalatable. <b>2</b> become
@boring. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> feeling of repulsive @dislike for
food eaten too often.

<b>suna</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] inquire of s.o. whether he is
amenable to s.t., but without putting pressure
on him, esp. asking for a second time.
<hi>Nagsuna si Husi ug mahinayun ba ang piknik,</hi>
Jose is asking whether the picnic will
go on as scheduled.

<b>súna</b> <hi>n</hi> @zone, @area particularly designated.
<hi>Ang Sibu gihímù nga súna libri, bisag kinsang
tawhána makalansar,</hi> Cebu has been
made a free zone. Anyone may launch his
candidacy. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] divide into zones.

<b>sun-ad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] <b>1</b> boil young corn on the
cob. <b>2</b> boil root crops or staple food. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> boiled young corn on the cobs. <b>2</b> any
starchy food boiled. <b>sun-arun</b> <hi>n</hi> the young
corn ready for boiling.

<b>sunánuy</b> = <sc>SUNÍTU</sc>.

<b>sunáta</b> <hi>n</hi> musical @number, usually instrumental.
<hi>Mau rag nakadungug na ku ánang sunatáha,</hi>
It seems as if I have already heard that
@song.<hi> Pagtukar ug sunáta. Ayaw nang mga
bag-ung sunghit,</hi> Play a classical number,
not one of those new song hits. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A]
play an instrumental number. <b>2</b> [A13] for
a baby to @cry (humorous). <hi>Nagsunáta na
pud ang anak ni Iska,</hi> Eska's baby is crying
again.

<b>sunaup</b> a low, dark, and damp places. <hi>v</hi> [B12]
for an area to be, become depressed and
watery. <hi>Nasunaup ang ámung yútà kay naunlud
human sa línug,</hi> Our land became depressed
<pb n=936>and watery because it sank after
the earthquake.

<b>sunda<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] @insert s.t. having length into
a hole or cavity. <hi>Gisunda níya sa íyang
tudlù ang íyang ilung,</hi> He inserted his finger
into his nose. <hi>Masunda giyud ka ug dì ka
makaihì,</hi> You'll be catheterized if you can't
urinate. <hi>n</hi> s.t. of any size but with length to
insert into s.t., e.g. a catheter.

<b>sunda<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SÁYUD</sc>, <hi>n, v3</hi>.

<b>sundalísa</b> <hi>n</hi> a letter sent by a boy's parents
requesting an audience with a girl's parents
for the formal marriage proposal (<hi>pamaláyi</hi>).
<hi>v</hi> [A; b] send this letter.

<b>sundálu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @soldier. <b>2</b> worms found in salted
fish preserves (humorous). <hi>Náay daghang
sundálus ginamus,</hi> There are lots of worms
in the salted fish. <b>kasundalúhan</b> <hi>n</hi> group of
soldiers or soldiers in general. <hi>Ang átung kasundalúhan
giila pud nga ísug,</hi> Our soldiers
have also shown themselves to be brave.

<b>sundang</b> <hi>n</hi> @bolo, the general name for large
knives, machetes, and swords used for heavy
cutting work and as weapons. <hi>v</hi> [a12] make
into a bolo. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [a12] strike with a bolo.

<b>sundanun</b> = <sc>SANDANUN</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SANDANAY</sc>.

<b>*sunding</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>PASUNDING</sc>.

<b>sundug</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a2] @copy, @follow s.o.'s way
of doing s.t. <hi>Dì ku musundug (manundug)
sa bag-ung alut,</hi> I will not follow the new
style of cutting the hair. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. copied or
adapted from.

<b>súng</b> = <sc>SÚLUNG</sc>.

<b>sungad</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the upper @snout of animals. <hi>Sungad
ang ikálut sa amúti sa bábuy,</hi> The pig
uses its snout to dig up sweet potatoes. <b>2</b>
the area around the mouth of a person from
the nose to the chin (humorous and derogatory).
<b>3</b> the @point of s.t. <hi>Sungad sa dáru,</hi>
The @tip of the plow.

<b>sungag</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @horn, strike or @butt with
the horn. <hi>Sungagun ka ánang kanding ug
mudúul ka,</hi> That goat will butt you if you
go near it. <b>1a</b> [C; ac3] for animals to fight
with their horns. <hi>Nagkasúngag ang duha ka
kábaw,</hi> The two carabaos are @goring each
other. <b>2</b> [A; ac3] ram against s.o. with the
head. <hi>Napáwul ang usang buksidur kay misungag
sa kuntra,</hi> One of the boxers was penalized
because he @butted his opponent. <b>2a</b>
[A; a1] @bulldoze s.t. <hi>Sungagun sa buldúsir
ang pangpang human dinamitáha,</hi> After
they dynamite the cliff, they will bulldoze
it. <b>3</b> [AN; a12] hit the jaw with the fist.
<hi>Makasungag giyud ku run ug magbinúang
ka,</hi> I'll hit you in the jaw if you do anything
foolish. <b>4</b> [A; a12] go against the
wind or current. <hi>Ug musungag ta sa hángin,
dúgay ta muabut,</hi> If we go against the wind,
it will take us a long time to arrive. <b>5</b> [A12;
a12] plane against the grain in wood. <hi>Dì ka
makasungag ug sipilya kay dílì hámis ang ági,</hi>
You cannot plane against the grain because
it won't come out smooth. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi>
fight between horned animals.

<b>sung-ag</b> = <sc>LUNG-AG</sc>.

<b>sungasung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @brave adverse weather
or conditions to do s.t. or get s.w. <hi>Ngánung
misungasung ka mag anhi nga ulan kaáyu?</hi>
Why did you brave the downpour to get
here? <hi>Aku ang misungasung sa mga kasukù
sa mga ginikánan sa babáyi,</hi> I had to @face
the anger of the girl's parents.

<b>súngay<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @horn. <hi>v</hi> [AN; ab2] @butt, @gore. <hi>Ug
mudúul ka sa kábaw sungáyun giyud ka,</hi> If
you go near the water buffalo, you will be
gored. <b>-an</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> animal with horns. <b>2</b> the @devil.
<b>3</b> one like a @devil. <hi>Ag sungáyan nagpabuyag
na sab,</hi> The little devil is making a nuisance
of himself again.

<b>súngay<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> one's lineal or collateral descendants
of the fifth generation: grandchild,
grandnephew, or grandniece of a great
grandchild, grandnephew or grandniece. <b>apu
sa &mdash;</b> = <sc>SÚNGAY</sc>. <b>apuhan sa &mdash;</b> grandparent,
granduncle or grandaunt of a great-grandparent,
uncle, or aunt.

<b>sung-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c16] <b>1</b> carry s.o. on one's
shoulder, esp. with legs astraddle the neck.
<hi>Dì ku makasung-ay nímu kay sakit ang ákung
abága,</hi> I cannot carry you on my
shoulders because they are sore. <b>2</b> assume a
financial burden, esp. for a political candidacy.
<hi>Sung-áyun níya ang kandidatúra ni
Kabaybay</hi>, He will support Kabaybay's candidacy.

<b>sungban</b> = <sc>SUMBAN</sc>.

<b>sunggal</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] come to @disturb or @harass
s.o. <hi>Kanúnayng musunggal sa íyang kunsinsiya
ang dakù níyang kasal-ánan,</hi> The wrong
he had done always disturbs his conscience.
<hi>Hawu ang nagsunggal sa íyang manukan,</hi> A
monitor lizard @raided his chicken yard.

<b>sunggat</b> = <sc>SALUNGGAT</sc>.

<b>sunggaw</b> = <sc>SUNGGAL</sc>.

<b>sunggu</b> <hi>n</hi> @nosebleed. <hi>v</hi> [B16; a4] suffer nosebleed.
<hi>Nagsunggu (gisunggu) ang buksidur
pagkaigù sa ilung,</hi> The boxer got a bloody
nose when he was hit in the nose.

<b>sunghan</b> <hi>n</hi> a very itchy k.o. @scabies with tiny
scales on top. <hi>see also</hi> <sc>SUNGU</sc>.

<b>sunghit, sunghits</b> <hi>n</hi> booklet in which the
words to popular songs are printed.

<b>súngì<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; a12] for the teeth of a comb,
nails, and other projections that are somewhat
flexible to break off. <b>(->)</b> having teeth
<pb n=937>broken off. <hi>Ilábay nang sudlay nga sungì,</hi>
Throw away that comb with the broken
teeth.

<b>súngì<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B126] for the feelings to be @hurt.
<hi>Nasungì ku sa ímung gisulti,</hi> I was hurt by
what you said. <b>2</b> [C13; b3(1] have bad feelings
toward one another. <hi>Gikasungían níla
ang pagbáhin sa yútà,</hi> They had a misunderstanding
about the division of the land. <hi>a</hi>
having hurt feelings. <hi>Súngì kaáyu ákung buut
kay wà ku imbitaha,</hi> My feelings were
badly hurt because I wasn't invited. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi>
@misunderstanding.

<b>súngil</b> = <sc>SIKMUL</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>.

<b>sungisuk</b> <hi>a</hi> @bulldog-faced: snub-nosed, having
pudgy cheeks, and overhanging bones on
the brow.

<b>sungkà</b> <hi>n</hi> a @game for two played with a board
and pieces, the object of which is to get as
many pieces as possible. The board consists
of two rows of five or seven holes each,
each row assigned to one of the two players,
and a hole at either end, each assigned
as a home base (<hi>balay</hi> or <hi>balayan</hi>) of one of
the players. One player picks up a given
number of the pieces and distributes them
on the board, one piece in each hole. At
whatever hole the last piece is dropped, the
player picks up all the pieces in it and continues
on dropping pieces until he runs out,
picks up the pieces in the hole where he
ran out, and so forth until he comes to a
hole with nothing in it, in which case the
opponent gets the turn. Pieces are gained in
three ways: (1) a stone is gained each time
the home base is passed; (2) when the pieces
run out in the player's row opposite a hole
in the opponent's row with pieces in it,
they go to the player (<hi>hantuk</hi>); or (3) when
the throw ends in the hole immediately before
the home base the pieces in that hole
revert to the player (<hi>sáka, 4</hi>). <hi>v</hi> [A12] play
<hi>sungkà</hi>. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> board for playing this
game.

<b>sungkab</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a 12] get at food by breaking
open the place where it is kept. <b>-an(->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> an animal that steals food by forcing open
the place in which it is kept.

<b>sungkad</b> <hi>a</hi> @exact in fit. <hi>Ang íyang bistídu
sungkad kaáyu nákù,</hi> Her dress fits me perfectly.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2C] @fit, @{fit into}. <b>2</b> [A12; b(1)]
make s.t. according to certain measurements.
<hi>Unsang gidak-únag ímung gisungkaran,</hi>
What size box did you take the measurements
from? <b>sungkaran</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. from
which s.t. can be copied, from which the
measurements can be taken.

<b>sungkil</b> <hi>n</hi> growth on the body resembling
ginger roots, esp. on the joints, which appear
after an infection of yaws. <hi>v</hi> [B246N;
b4] get these growths.

<b>sungkip</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] patch a thatch roof. <hi>Pára
mantinil, kartun lay átung isungkip sa atup,</hi>
We will use cardboard as a make-shift patch
for the roof.

<b>sungkit</b> <hi>n</hi> @pole or @stick, usually with a hook
at the end used to get s.t. out of reach. <hi>v</hi>
[A; a] get s.t. out of reach with a <hi>sungkit</hi>.
<hi>Sungkítun nákù ang mga prútas nga dì maabut,</hi>
I'll get the fruits that are out of reach
down with a pole.

<b>sungkiub</b> = <sc>SINGKUUNG</sc>.

<b>sungkù</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @reach up to a point. <hi>Musungkù
ang Krismas tri sa pisami,</hi> The Christmas
tree touches the ceiling. <hi>Isungkù ang
kural sa kílid sa balay,</hi> Have the fence reach
the side of the house. <b>1a</b> [a3b2] bump one's
head against s.t. above. <hi>Gi! Nasungkù ang
ákung úlu sa sanga,</hi> Ouch! I bumped my
head against the branch. <b>2</b> [A; a12] go to
see s.o. for a purpose. <hi>Akuy musungkù sa
mga táwu arun sila mahibalu nga may trabáhu
ugmà,</hi> I will go notify the people that
there will be work tomorrow. <hi>Gisungkù ku
ang ákung inahan arun papuy-un dinhi sa
Sugbu,</hi> I went to fetch my mother to have
her live here in Cebu. <b>&mdash; sa</b> reaching as far
as. <hi>Sungkù sa lángit ang ákung kalípay,</hi> My
happiness knows no bounds (lit. reaches
the heavens).

<b>sungkud<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @cane, @crutch. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] use a
@{walking stick} or crutch. <b>2</b> [A; a1] make into
a cane. <b>3</b> [a12] hit with a cane.

<b>sungkud<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @great-grandchild, nephew, or
niece. <b>apu sa &mdash;</b> = <sc>SUNGKUD<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>. <b>apuhan sa &mdash;</b>
@great-grandparent, @granduncle, or aunt. v
[b6] have a great-grandchild. <b>sungkuran</b> <hi>n</hi>
great-grandparent (uncle or aunt) or great-grandchild
(nephew or niece).

<b>sungkudsungkud</b> <hi>n</hi> auger @shells and other
long stick-shaped shells.

<b>sungkul</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. smooth @herb coming in two
varieties or species: <b>&mdash; putì</b>, with green
leaves, and <b>&mdash; pula</b> with purple bottom surface:
<hi><b>Clerodendron sp.</b></hi>

<b>sunglug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @tease, @provoke to anger
with words or actions. <hi>Dì siya musunglug
nákù kay dì man ku masukù,</hi> He does not
tease me because I don't get mad. <b>2</b> for circumstances
to mock one, as if teasing. <hi>Naplát
pa ta, giulan pa giyud. Gisúngug giyud
ta sa panahun,</hi> We had a flat and got caught
in the rain. Circumstances were conspiring
against us. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> given to teasing.

<b>sungpit</b> <hi>n</hi> @blowgun or s.t. used to squirt liquid.
<hi>v</hi> [A; b5] @squirt liquid or blow pellets
<pb n=938>with a blowgun. <hi>Kinsay nagsungpit nímu
ug túbig?</hi> Who squirted water on you?

<b>sungput</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC; ac] put things in line, end
to end. <hi>Isumput ning lamisáha sa usa arun
ímung kahigdáan,</hi> Put this table next to the
other one so you can sleep on it. <b>2</b> [A2]
join a @queue. <hi>Ngánung musumput ka man
dihas tungà sa linya?</hi> Why do you butt in
at the middle of the @line? <b>3</b> [A23; b2] @appear
from nowhere. <hi>Misumput lang siya, wà
gánì magtiligráma,</hi> He just appeared suddenly.
He didn't even send a telegram. <b>-ay</b> <hi>n</hi>
@tailgating.

<b>sungsung<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @{stop up} or @stuff s.t. into
a tube or mouth of a bottle. <hi>Nagsungsung
ku ug tabákù sa ákung hunsuy,</hi> I am stuffing
tobacco into my pipe. <hi>Nasungsungan
ang labábu,</hi> The washbasin got @{stopped up}.
<hi>Sungsúngi ang bàbà sa butilya,</hi> Put a cork
into the mouth of the bottle. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @stopper. <b>2</b>
pinch of pipe tobacco, enough to put in the
pipe. <b>3</b> k.o. @{posthole digger} made of a bamboo
pole which is forced into the ground
and then pulled out with the dirt stopped
up inside it.

<b>sungsung<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SALUNGSUNG</sc>.

<b>sungu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @bill, @beak of fowl or birds. <b>2</b> similar
structure in other animals: @trunk of elephants
or the @proboscis of mosquitoes. <b>3</b>
the whitish triangular lower structure of a
grain of corn that attaches it to the cob. <b>3a</b>
by extension, the tough, somewhat transparent
covering of the corn kernel. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [C;
a12] in cockfighting, set the cocks and let
them peck at each other before fighting
them or determining the winner. <hi>n</hi> action
of having cocks peck at each other. <b>sungusúngu
sa mais</b> = <sc>SUNGU</sc>, <hi>n3a</hi>. <b>sunghan</b> =
<sc>SULÁHAN</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>SÚLA</sc>.

<b>súngug</b> = <sc>SUNGLUG</sc>.

<b>sung-un</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SUUNG</sc>.

<b>sungut,</b> súngut <hi>a</hi> @acrid in smell. <hi>Sungut kaáyu
ang báhù sa purmalin,</hi> Formaline smells acrid.
<b>(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> @irritating, @irksome. <hi>Súngut kaáyu
ning tawhána kay samukan,</hi> This man is
very irritating because he always meddles
in my affairs. <hi>v</hi> [A3P; b4] be, become @irritated
or @irked. <b>-an(<-), masungtánun</b> <hi>a</hi> @irritable,
easily irritated.

<b>súnguy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] for an illness, bad trait,
public disorders, and the like to make their
appearance in large quantities. <hi>Musúnguy
ang ákung ubu ug hitun-ugan ku,</hi> My cough
sets in when I get exposed to damp. <hi>Nagsúnguy
ang panúlis run,</hi> Robberies are @rampant
now. <hi>Gisúnguy (gisungúyan) ug balatían
ang ákung manukan,</hi> A chicken epidemic
attacked my poultry.

<b>sunítu</b> <hi>n</hi> @sonnet.

<b>sunluk</b> <hi>n</hi> sprain or dislocation caused by
bending the limb backwards or knocking
the bone on its end. <hi>v</hi> [AP; ab3(1)] sprain
or dislocate bones in this way. <hi>Sunlukun ku
nang ímung líug pinaági sa pagbunsù</hi>, I'll
dislocate your neck by banging you down
onto the ground head first. <hi>Búla ang nasunlukan
sa íyang tudlù</hi>, He sprained his finger
when it was knocked backwards with a ball.

<b>sunlut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] peel off, draw off the skin
or skin-like covering. <hi>Ákù nang gisunlut (gisunlútan)
ang mga tiil sa manuk sa mga pánit</hi>,
I have taken the outer skin off the legs
of the chickens. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> the sea cucumber
stripped of its skin and innards, ready for
consumption.

<b>sunsun</b> <hi>a</hi> @{close together} or to each other.
<hi>Sunsun kaáyu ang pagtanum sa mga lubi</hi>,
The coconuts are planted very close to each
other. <hi>Sunsun nga pag-ubu</hi>, Coughing fits in
rapid succession. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] be close to
each other or together. <hi>Bagà ning panaptúna
kay nagsunsun ang mga hulug</hi>, This cloth
is thick because the weft threads are close
to each other.

<b>sunting</b> = <b>ASUNTING</b>.

<b>suntuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; a] strike with the fist, @box.
<hi>Nagpanuntuk siya sa bungbung sa kalágut</hi>,
He banged his fists on the wall in anger. <b>-ay[**space?](->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> @fistfight.

<b>súnù</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. medium-sized, red grouper (<hi>pugápu</hi>).

<b>sunub</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] for liquids to penetrate,
seep into or through. <hi>Gáhì musunub ang túbig
sa yútang kúnun</hi>, Water doesn't seep
easily into clay soil. <hi>Dì makasunub ang uwan
íning páyung</hi>, The rain can't penetrate
this umbrella. <b>2</b> [A; b] add a small amount
of juice pressed from coconut meat to a
stew of meat, fish, or vegetables and cook
it. <b>(<-)</b> = <b>SUNUB</b>, <hi>2</hi>. <b>-in-an</b>, <b>-in-an(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> food
cooked with coconut juice.

<b>sunud</b> <hi>v</hi> <hi>1</hi> [A; ab26] @follow, go behind s.o.
<hi>Sunda tung awtúha!</hi> Follow that car! <b>1a</b>
[A23; c] do s.t. later as the next thing.<hi> Pamáhaw
na mu kay musunud ra ku</hi>, Eat your
breakfast now because I'll eat next. <hi>Silhígi
ang salug kay akuy musunud ug lampásu</hi>,
Sweep the floor because I will follow it up
with scrubbing. <hi>Isunud ni pagmakinilya</hi>,
Type this the next thing. <b>1b</b> [A; a2P] do
s.t. right after having done s.t. else. <b>2</b> follow,
imitate. <hi>Dílì siya musunud sa bag-ung
múda</hi>, She doesn't imitate the new styles.
<hi>Ayaw ug sunda nang batasána</hi>, Don't imitate
that sort of manners. <hi>Ayawg sunda ímung
maguwang nga balirúsu</hi>, Don't be
<pb n=939>headstrong like your elder brother. <b>3</b> [A2N]
@inherit. <hi>Siyay musunud (manunud) sa ákung
kabtángan,</hi> He will inherit my property.
<b>3a</b> [A2; b6] @succeed in office. <hi>Ang bísi
mauy musunud ingkásug mamatay ang
prisidinti,</hi> The vice-president succeeds in office
if the president dies. &mdash; <b>ug kasal</b> [AN]
@sponsor a wedding. <hi>Gubirnadur ang nagsunud
sa ámung kasal,</hi> A governor sponsored
our wedding. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{the next}, the one following.
<hi>Sunud simána,</hi> Next week. <hi>Sunud ugmà,</hi>
The day after tomorrow. <b>1a</b> the next
thing done. <hi>Sunud ilúnud ang balátung human
sa karni,</hi> After the meat, put the beans
in next. <b>2</b> following, according to the. <hi>Sunud
sa naandan nga batásan,</hi> Following the
usual custom. <b>3</b> @next. <hi>Sunud simána,</hi> Next
week. <hi>Sunud gulà,</hi> Next issue. <hi>Siya ang sunud
nga prisidinti,</hi> He will be the next president.
(<-) <hi>v</hi> [C; a12] be close to each other
in a @series, line or @succession. <hi>Sunúra ang
mga misitíra nga púlus pula,</hi> Put the red
pots next to each other in line. <b>sunudsunud</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A] do s.t. one after another, following
each other in rapid succession. <hi>Musunudsunud
ug pangaláyà ang dáhun sa tinghulaw,</hi>
The leaves withered one after another during
the drought. <b>sunudsúnud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12]
keep following, tagging along after. <hi>Kining
irua musunudsúnud bisan ása ku mulakaw,</hi>
This dog keeps following me around wherever
I go. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] set an example. <hi>Ikaw
kay magulang, ikay mupasunud sa ímung
mga manghud,</hi> You are the elder brother,
so you should set an example for your
younger brothers and sisters to follow. <hi>n</hi> in
consecutive order. <hi>Hinganlan nákù pasunud
ang ngálan sa mga táwu sa laráwan gíkan sa
wala ngadtu sa túu,</hi> I will name the people
in the picture in order from left to right. <b>pa-[**space?](<-)</b>
= <sc>PA</sc>-, <hi>n</hi>. <b>sundánun</b> <hi>a</hi> tending to have
offspring closely spaced. <b>masunúrun</b>, <b>masundánun</b>,
<b>masinundánun</b> <hi>a</hi> @obedient. <b>maN-[**space?]r-(<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> @heir. <b>-um-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{the following}, @{as enumerated}.
<b>-um-r-(<-)</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>MAN-R-</sc>. <b>2</b> @followers
of a certain leader, belief, or religion.
<b>sulundun</b> <hi>a</hi> @exemplary, worth imitating. <b>panulundun</b>
<hi>n</hi> s.t. which is inherited. <hi>Pagtúung
panulundun sa katigulángan,</hi> A belief
inherited from one's ancestors. <hi>Panulundun
sa ílang pamilyang pagkaunglù,</hi> The curse
of needing to suck human blood is passed
down from generation to generation in their
family. <b>salang panulundun</b> <b>1</b> @{original sin}. <b>2</b>
act of @coitus (euphemism).

<b>sunug<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> small room added to a house, usually
to a small shack. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] make such a
small room.

<b>súnug</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] burn s.t. up. <hi>Sunúgun nátù
ning mga sagbut</hi>, Let us burn these weeds.
<hi>Ang mga nasunúgan</hi>, The people whose
houses burnt down. <b>2</b> [A] be burnt, destroyed
by heat. <hi>Gisúnug man nímu ang dukut</hi>,
You burnt the rice. <hi>Nasúnug ang tanum
sa ínit sa húlaw</hi>, The sun burnt up the
plants in the drought. <b>2a</b> roast s.t. that one
uses slightly burnt. <hi>Sunúga ang dáhun, kupúga,
ug ibutíbut sa samad</hi>, Burn the leaves,
pulverize them, and spread them over the
wound. <b>n</b> @fire, @conflagration. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.t.
slightly burnt. <hi>Sunug man ning mani</hi>, These
peanuts are burnt! <b>2</b> in a game of <hi>sungkà</hi>,
any of the lateral holes which do not have
pieces in them. <b>-an<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <b>SUNUG</b>, <hi>n2</hi>.

<b>sunugan<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> flathead fishes.

<b>sun-uk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @insert, dump s.t. under s.t.
to hide or protect it. <hi>Gisun-uk níyag ribulbir
iláwum sa unlan</hi>, He hid the revolver under
the pillow. <b>2</b> [A2; b2] push through an
area with obstacles. <hi>Dì ka makasun-uk dihà
kay tunukun</hi>, You can't pass through that
thicket because it is thorny. <b>2a</b> go s.w.
through great difficulty. <hi>Hisun-ukan ku ang
tanang kalisud sa kinabúhì</hi>, I have gone
through all kinds of difficulties in life.

<b>sun-an</b>, <b>sun-un</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>SUUN<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>.

<b>sun-ut</b> <hi>n</hi> width of the opening around the
hem of a skirt. <hi>v</hi> [b5c1] add to the opening
of the skirt. <hi>Sun-úti (sun-úta, isun-ut) ang
ákung sayal arun dì ku maglisud ug líhuk</hi>,
Add to the opening at the bottom of the
skirt so I can move without encumbrance.

<b>sunuy</b> <hi>n</hi> @rooster, @cock.

<b>supa</b> <hi>n</hi> @sofa.

<b>súpa</b> <hi>n</hi> @soup. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] have, make soup. <b>supíra</b>
<hi>n</hi> @{soup tureen}.

<b>supà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] feed s.o. pre-chewed food.
<hi>Ug ubhun ang inahan hitakdan ang bátang
gisup-an</hi>, If the mother has cough the baby
is likely to get it if he is given pre-chewed
food. <hi>n</hi> pre-chewed food. <b>-in-</b> = <b>SUPÀ</b>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>súpak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @{go against}, violate. <hi>Dílì
ku musúpak sa súgù sa maistru</hi>, I will not
disobey the teacher's orders. <b>1a</b> [B1256; a1c]
cut against the grain in wood working.
<hi>Ayaw ug isúpak ang tumung sa tigib arun
dílì gáhì nga ihandus</hi>, Don't chisel against
the grain or it will be hard to push. <b>2</b> [AC2;
a12] @oppose, be contrary to each other.
<hi>Musúpak ku sa ímung plánu</hi>, I will oppose
your plans. <hi>Nagsúpak ang ámung mga paminsar</hi>,
Our opinions are contrary to each
other. <b>n</b> <hi>1</hi> person opposed. <hi>Kadtung súpak
muísa sa ílang kamut</hi>, Those who are opposed,
raise their hands. <b>2</b> s.t. contrary, against.
<hi>Supak sa ákung kabubut-un nga mulakaw 
<pb n=940>ka sa walay pananghid,</hi> It is against
my will if you go without asking my permission
first. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> @rebuttal. <b>rigla sa paN-</b>
rebuttal technique. <b>ma-in-un</b>, <b>-iru</b> <hi>a</hi> disobedient,
tending to oppose. <b>-ira</b> = <sc>SUPAKÍRU</sc>
(female).

<b>sup-ak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @split s.t. lengthwise, esp.
along the grain. <hi>Ákù úsang sup-ákun ang
káhuy arun masulud sa pugun,</hi> I will split
the wood first so it will go into the stove.
<hi>n</hi> the long piece split off from a bigger piece.
<hi>Tulu ka sup-ak nga kawáyan,</hi> Three slats of
bamboo.

<b>súpan</b> = <sc>SALÚPAN</sc>. see <sc>SALUP</sc>.

<b>súpang</b> <hi>a</hi> fat and healthy. <hi>v</hi> [B2N; b6] be,
become fat and healthy. <hi>Musúpang (manúpang)
ang bátà ug sígi siyang inum ug gátas,</hi>
The child will become fat and healthy if he
keeps drinking milk. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> state of being fat
and healthy.

<b>súpas<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @crackers or @cookies. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12]
make, have crackers or cookies.

<b>súpas<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SÚPA</sc>.

<b>súpat</b> <hi>n</hi> grain in wood that is irregular and
intertwined. <hi>Ang súpat makapalisud sa pagsipilya
sa káhuy</hi>, The irregular grain makes
the wood difficult to plane. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> full of
irregular grains. <b>2</b> be hard to split because
of irregular grain. <hi>Káhuyng supátun kaáyung
bugháun,</hi> Wood that is very difficult
to split. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be wood of this sort.

<b>supbul</b> <hi>n</hi> @softball. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] play softball.

<b>sup dringk</b> <hi>n</hi> @{soft drinks}. <hi>v</hi> [A1] have soft
drinks.

<b>súpi</b> <hi>n</hi> a peso (slang).

<b>súpil</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23; b6] go against what s.o. wants
one to do. <hi>Ug supílan mu ang tambag sa ímung
amahan, gabáan ka,</hi> If you disobey
your father's advice, you will get your just
desserts. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @rebellious, @disobedient. <hi>v</hi>
[A13] be, become rebellious.

<b>supíra</b> see <sc>SÚPA</sc>.

<b>supirbaysing</b> <hi>n</hi> teacher in charge of the administration
of a whole school, one rank above
the principal.

<b>supirbaysur</b> = <sc>SUPIRBISUR</sc>.

<b>supirbisar</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @supervise, @superintend.
<hi>Supirbisahi (supirbisari) ang mutsatsang nagdigámu,</hi>
Supervise the maid while she is
preparing dinner.

<b>supirbisur</b> <hi>n</hi> supervisor of a school district. <hi>v</hi>
[A13; a12] be made, become the supervisor.

<b>supirbisúri</b> <hi>n</hi> supervisory position. <hi>v</hi> [A13; c1]
hold a supervisory position. <hi>Dalì rang
magsupirbisúri ang mga inhinyíru sa mína,</hi>
It's easy for mine engineers to get supervisory
positions in the mining company.

<b>supirbisiyun</b>, <b>supirbisyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @supervision.

<b>supirintindint</b>, <b>supirintindinti</b> <hi>n</hi> @superintendent
of the public schools in a city or in a
whole province.

<b>supir istár</b> <hi>n</hi> superstar of the movies. v [B1256]
be, become a superstar.

<b>supiriyur</b> <hi>a</hi> of a @{high quality}. <hi>Supiriyur kaáyu
ning panaptúna sa ímung napalit,</hi> This
cloth is very much better in quality than
the cloth you bought. <hi>n</hi> one's superior in an
organization or in rank.

<b>supirmarkit</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> name of one of the public
markets in Cebu. <b>2</b> @supermarket.

<b>supiryúra</b> <hi>n</hi> @{mother superior}. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12]
be, be made the mother superior. <b>madri &mdash;</b>
= <sc>SUPIRYÚRA</sc>.

<b>supla</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] arrest the motion of dice
or coins that have been thrown. <hi>Ákung supláhun
(suplahun) ang dayis ug dílì maáyung
pagkalábay,</hi> I will arrest the dice if they are
not thrown properly. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @interrupt
s.o.'s speech, usually with a question. <hi>Makasupla
ba ta sa nagsulti?</hi> May I put a question
to the speaker? <b>3</b> [A; a12] check vice,
bad manners. <hi>Ángay nga supláhun nang tarása
nga laksut,</hi> That bad trait should be
put to a halt. <hi>n</hi> violation of the rules in certain
games. <hi>Sa dáma ubligádu ka pagkáun sa
ákung batu. Ug dì ka mukáun, supla ka,</hi> In
checkers you are obliged to take my piece.
If you do not, you violate the rules. <b>supládu</b>
<hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @curt, @laconic to the point of rudeness.
<hi>Supládu kaáyu siya ug sinultihan,</hi> He
is very curt in speech. <b>2</b> characteristically
bent on going against advice, orders, or instructions.
<hi>Dì masápì ang supládu sa siminaryu,</hi>
A disobedient person doesn't fit in
the seminary. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B125] be @{rudely laconic}.
<b>2</b> [B2] become characteristically inclined
to disobey. <b>supláda</b> = <sc>SUPLÁDU</sc> (female).

<b>suplágay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a3] be @dispersed into various
directions, cause s.t. to be dispersed.
<hi>Kinsay nagsuplágay sa mga húlin diri sa
kwartu?</hi> Who scattered the marbles all over
the room? <hi>Nasuplágay na mi human mamatay
ang ámung inahan,</hi> We were scattered
after our mother died. <b>2</b> [B2; a12P] @disperse,
run in every direction. <hi>Pagbutu sa pusil,
misuplágay ang mga táwu,</hi> When the gun
fired, the people scattered in all direcions[**directions].

<b>suplimintu</b> <hi>n</hi> @supplement to a publication, to
a diet. <hi>v</hi> [A13; c] take or add s.t. as a supplement.
<hi>Pagkáung gisuplimintúhag bitamína,</hi>
Food supplemented with vitamins.

<b>supl&icaron;r</b> = <sc>SUPR&Icaron;R</sc>.

<b>suplíti</b> <hi>n</hi> @blowtorch. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] use a blowtorch.

<b>suprímu</b> <hi>n</hi> title of the leaders of some organizations.
<hi>Si Suprímu Luis Taruk pangúlu sa
<pb n=941>Kumunista kanhi</hi>, Supreme Chief Luis Taruc
was the leader of the communists formerly.

<b>supr&icaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @substitute for s.o., substitute
s.t. for s.t. else. <hi>Ug mupalta ka sa trabáhu
dúna bay musupr&icaron;r nímu?</hi> If you're absent
from work do you have s.o. to substitute
for you? <hi>Way hingpit nga makasupr&icaron;r sa
gátas sa inahan</hi>, There is nothing that can
substitute perfectly for mother's milk.

<b>supsup</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] @suck, take s.t. in by sucking.
<hi>Ang búwak sa antuwángang dinukduk
kusug musupsup ug nánà sa hubag</hi>, Crushed
hibiscus flowers suck the pus from boils.
<hi>Supsúpun sa limátuk ang dugù</hi>, Leeches
suck the blood. <b>1a</b> [A; b5] suck s.o. off. <b>2</b>
[A2N] fawn, suck up to (somewhat coarse).
<hi>Musupsup (manupsup) siya sa mga táwung
íyang kapangayúan ug pabur</hi>, He sucks up
to people he wants to ask favors from. <b>&mdash;
bútù</b> <hi>n</hi> apple polisher (coarse).

<b>supsupun</b> <hi>n</hi> saxophone (word play on <hi>supsup</hi>
and <hi>saksupun</hi>&mdash;humorous).

<b>supu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] embarrass s.o. by proving
his allegations false. <hi>Dílì ka makasupu nákù
kay tinúud ang ákung gisulti</hi>, You cannot
prove me wrong because what I said is true.
<b>2</b> [A12; a3] discard a card or mahjong
piece that allows an opponent to win the
game. <hi>Dì ku masupu kay magbantay man
ku sa mga karta nga ilábay</hi>, I don't discard
pieces that would allow anyone to go mahjong
because I keep an eye on the pieces
that have been discarded.

<b>supurt&acaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] <b>1</b> provide s.o. with sustenance,
@support. <hi>Pila ka kirída ang íyang
masupurtaan?</hi> How many mistresses can he
support? <b>2</b> provide support to an attacking
unit. <hi>Ang atáki sa dágat supurtahan ug tulu
ka bapur digíra</hi>, The sea assault will be supported
by three battleships. <b>3</b> [A13; b6]
support a certain weight. <hi>Unum ka halíging
simintu nagsupurt&acaron;r sa taytáyan</hi>, Six concrete
columns supported the bridge. <b>4</b> [A;
b6] endorse, support a candidate. <hi>Dì siya
musupurtar sa ákung kandidátu</hi>, He would
not support my candidate.

<b>supurtir</b> <hi>n</hi> @{athletic supporter}. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)]
wear, use an athletic supporter.

<b>suput</b> v [A; a12] <hi>1</hi> shoot with a blowgun.
<hi>Kinsay nagsuput sa ákung manuk?</hi> Who killed
my chicken with a blowgun? <b>2</b> force s.t.
out from a tight hole by hammering in s.t.
in its place. <hi>Supta nang lansang ug láing lansang</hi>,
Force out the nail by banging in another
nail on top of it. <b>3</b> [A23; c] soar up
as if shot from a blowgun. <hi>Mu rag misuput
ang íyang kalípay ngadtu sa kawanángan</hi>, It
seemed as though his happiness soared up
into space. <b>3a</b> do s.t. with speed, as if shot
from a blowgun. <hi>Misuput siyag dágan pagkakità
sa ákung pistúla,</hi> He ran like all get
out when he saw my gun. <hi>Misuput siya ug
usa ka pangutána sa tsirman,</hi> He shot a question
at the chairman. <hi>n</hi> blowgun or a dart
shot from a blowgun.

<b>súput</b> <hi>n</hi> general name for bags, esp. paper
bags. v [c6] put in a @bag. <hi>Isúput lang nang
kámay,</hi> Place the sugar in the @{paper bag}.

<b>sup-ut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> fit s.t. tightly over, in, or
around s.t. else. <hi>Nagsup-ut ku áring plastik
nga túbu sa bára,</hi> I am fitting this plastic
tube over the iron rod. <b>2</b> @{put on} a piece of
clothing wear. <hi>Nagsup-ut siya ug bag-ung
bistídu,</hi> She was wearing a new dress.

<b>sur<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> mahjong, the south piece, one of
the winds (<hi>bintus</hi>). <b>2</b> the player at the right
of the dealer. <b>3</b> the second round (<hi>ráwun</hi>)
in a game.[+]

<b>sur<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> title for nuns. <hi>Sur Matildi,</hi> @Sister Matilde.

<b>súra<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] <b>1</b> @tease, @ridicule a person for
a defect. <hi>Suráhi (suráha) siya nga pisut,</hi>
Tease him for being uncircumcized. <b>2</b> @bother,
@annoy. <hi>Ngánung inyung gisúra ang bátà
nga natúlug?</hi> Why did you bother the child?
She was sleeping so nicely. <b>3</b> ask a person to
buy one s.t. <hi>Musúra na pud ning ákung bátà
ug sapátus kay gradwisyun na,</hi> My son will
ask me to buy him a pair of shoes because
it will be graduation. <b>masuráhun</b> <hi>a</hi> @teasing.

<b>súra<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A] @dance with the hands, feet, and
body. <hi>Pwirting nakasúra sa bátà arun hatágan
siyag singku,</hi> How the child danced to
earn a nickle.

<b>súrab</b> <hi>v</hi> [AP; c1P] flash a fierce look of anger,
hate. <hi>Surábun (isúrab, pasurábun, ipasúrab)
níya ang íyang mga mata ug masukù,</hi>
She flashes her eyes when she is angry.

<b>suraban</b> <hi>a</hi> greedy eater that eats another's
share as well as his own. <hi>Gipaulahi pagpakáun
ang suraban nga baktin,</hi> The greedy piglet
was fed last. <hi>v</hi> [B12] become a greedy
grabber of food.

<b>surambaw</b> <hi>n </hi>1 @{double-cross}, tamper with a
game so that the outcome is fixed. <hi>Way dalag-an
ang átung pusta kay surambaw kaáyu
tung duláa,</hi> We didn't have a chance with
our bet because the game was completely
fixed. <b>2</b> name of a child's game played with
rubber bands knotted tightly together. <hi>v</hi>
[A; a12] throw a game, double-cross. <hi>Kadtung
nagsurambaw sa baskit dílì na paapilun
unyà,</hi> Those who threw the basketball game
will not be allowed to participate next time.
<hi>Dílì gihápun ku mapildi sa iliksiyun bísag imu
kung surambáwun,</hi> I will not lose in the
election anyway, even if you double-cross
<pb n=942>me.[+]

<b>surangsurang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @pester, @annoy s.o.
that is in a bad mood to start out with. <hi>Ayaw
bayà ku surangsuranga kay ínit ning ákung
úlu,</hi> Don't anybody pester me because
I'm in a bad mood as it is.

<b>surbi</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @survey land. <b>2</b> @inspect a
place to see how it is. <hi>Musurbi úsà ku ánang
yutáa úsà ku mudisidir,</hi> I'll inspect that land
first before making any decision. <b>3</b> make a
survey or @poll. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> survey of land, inspection
of how s.t. is. <b>2</b> survey, poll. <b>-yur(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi>
land @surveyor. <hi>v</hi> [B156] be a surveyor.

<b>surbíti</b> <hi>n</hi> @{ice cream}. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] make,
make into ice cream. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] have
ice cream. <b>-ru</b> <hi>n</hi> ice-cream vendor. <b>-s</b> = <sc>SURBÍTI</sc>.

<b>surihir</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] make a @suggestion. <hi>Sa míting
karun musurihir ku nga multáhan ang dílì
mutambung,</hi> At the meeting today I will
@move that absentees be fined.

<b>suriksurik</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b5] @inquire searchingly,
@search for s.t. meticulously. <hi>Ug musuriksurik
(manuriksurik) kag trabáhu, makakità
ka giyud,</hi> If you're serious in looking for a
job, you'll surely find one. <hi>Ang sikríta nagsuriksurik
ug pangutána sa kasilingánan sa
mamumúnù báhin kaníya,</hi> The detective inquired
in great detail about the criminal
from his neighbors. <hi>Ang ákung maistra pwirting
makasuriksurik (makapanuriksurik) ug
buling sa suuk,</hi> My teacher searches the
corners meticulously for dust.

<b>surindir</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @surrender, give oneself
up to proper authorities or a stronger power.
<hi>Misurindir ang mga Hapun sa mga Alyádu,</hi>
The Japanese surrendered to the Allies. <b>2</b>
[A23] @yield, @concede defeat. <hi>Ug áway lang,
dì ku musurindir nímu,</hi> I will never surrender
to you in a fight. <b>3</b> [A23; b6] stop
eating due to satiation. <hi>Dihà ku sa ayis krim
musurindir,</hi> When we got to the ice cream,
I had to stop eating.

<b>suringiw</b> <hi>a</hi> one who never does a thing right
when sent on an errand. <hi>Suringiw kaáyu
ning batáang sugúun tungud sa kalinga,</hi> This
child never does a thing right when he is
sent on an errand because he is so inattentive.
<hi>v</hi> [B] fail to follow instructions. <hi>Ngánung
musuringiw ka mag sugúun?</hi> Why
don't you follow instructions when you are
sent on an errand?

<b>surísu</b> <hi>n</hi> Spanish @sausage made of pork. <b>&mdash;
di Bilbaw</b> k.o. imported Spanish sausage.
<b>&mdash; sa Insik</b> Chinese sausage. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2]
make sausage. <b>2</b> [A13; b6] cook s.t. with
sausage as a spice.

<b>súrit</b> <hi>n</hi> home-made @rifle that uses empty bullet 
shells reloaded with broken nails and
gunpowder. <b>suritsúrit</b> <hi>n</hi> bamboo squirt gun.

<b>surku</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] plow between rows of corn
to loosen the soil and remove weeds (done
usually once about halfway to the harvest
time). surkuhúnun <hi>n</hi> corn plants at about
2&ndash;3´ high, ready for weeding.

<b>surpan</b> = <sc>SURTPAN</sc>.

<b>surplas</b> <hi>n</hi> leftover military supplies and equipment
sold to the civilian population.

<b>surprísa</b> <hi>n</hi> @surprise, surprise gift. <hi>Dúna kuy
surprísa pára nímu, píyung úsà,</hi> I have a
surprise for you, close your eyes (first).
<hi>v</hi> [c6] give s.t. as a surprise gift.

<b>sursi</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN2; b6] @darn, mend by darning.
<hi>Sursíhan nátù ang samput sa ímung karsúnis,</hi>
Let us @stitch over the seat of your
pants. <b>&mdash; tápak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] put a piece of
cloth under a tear and run stitches over it
to strengthen the mend. <hi>n</hi> method of mending
in this way. <b>sinursihan</b> <hi>n</hi> place that has
been darned on a garment having been
mended with darning stitches.

<b>surtídus</b> <hi>a</hi> of different sorts. <hi>Surtídus ang
kulur sa pintal sa balay,</hi> The house is painted
with all different colors. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a k.o. folk
@dance performed by at least six pairs of
male and female dancers. Each dance figure
is to a different tune. <b>2</b> assorted sweets
sold packaged.

<b>surtpan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{short pants}. <hi>v</hi> [A3; a12] wear,
make into short pants.

<b>súrù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> young of freshwater shrimp. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A2; b6] gather small freshwater shrimps.

<b>súruk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S] for the blood to boil in anger.
<hi>Nagsuruk pa ning ákung dugù sa kalágut,</hi>
My blood is still boiling in anger.

<b>surup, súrup</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b5] <b>1</b> for air to penetrate
through the body causing gas pains. <hi>Musurup
(manurup) ang tun-ug,</hi> Draft causes gas
pains. <hi>Surupun (surupan) ka ug dì ka maghábul
nga matúlug,</hi> You will have gas pains
if you sleep without covering yourself. <b>2</b>
for feelings to flow through one (literary).

<b>surusúru</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. spiny @shrub with fleshy
tongue-shaped leaves of strong astringent
effect, the young leaves of which are used
to spice paklay: <b><hi>Euphorbia neriifolia</hi></b>.

<b>súruy</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; ac] @{go about}, @stroll. <hi>Diin ka
musúruy gabíi?</hi> Where did you @go to last
night? <hi>Isúruy ang bátà sa parki,</hi> Take the
child for a stroll in the park. <b>1a</b> <b>ika-</b> @presentable
(lit. can be worn for strolling). <hi>Dílì ku
mauwaw sa ákung uyab kay ikasúruy man
pud,</hi> I am not ashamed to be seen with my
girl friend because she is @pretty. <b>2</b> [A; c1]
bring s.t. around. <hi>Nagsúruy siyag isdà,</hi> She
@peddles fish. <hi>Isúruy ang mga ilimnun sa
<pb n=943>mga bisíta,</hi> Bring the drinks around to the
visitors. <b>libud &mdash;</b> <hi>a</hi> given to wandering about
with no useful purpose. <hi>v</hi> [B1] become a
vagabond. <b>(->) bagduy</b> = <sc>LIBUD SÚRUY</sc>.
<b>suruysúruy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] <b>1</b> @promenade, take
a pleasure stroll. <hi>Magsuruysúruy ta sa baybáyun,</hi>
Let's take a @walk by the beach. <b>2</b>
roam about uselessly. <hi>Nagpúnay lang siyag
suruysuruy ug way nahímù,</hi> All he ever did
was roam about and never accomplished
anything. <b>sinurúyan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.t. gained as a result
of going about. <b>2</b> a woman's child
born out of wedlock (lit. s.t. obtained as a
result of reckless wandering). <b>2a</b> one's eldest
child (humorous). <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @peddler.

<b>sus</b> = <sc>HISUS</sc>, <hi>n2</hi>. <b>&mdash; maryusip</b> = <sc>HISUSMARYUSIP</sc>.

<b>súsa</b> <hi>n</hi> @{sodium hydroxide} in white powder
form used for making laundry soap.

<b>susáyid</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3; b3] commit @suicide. <hi>Nagsusáyid
siya kay dispirádu,</hi> He committed
suicide because he was disappointed in love.
<b>2</b> [A23; bc] do s.t., gamble against very
great odds (lit. commit suicide). <hi>Mususáyid
lang kug kúhà sa tist bísag wà ku katuun,</hi>
I'll just take a long chance on the
examination, even if I didn't study. <hi>Isusáyid
kug siyut ning tanan kung kwarta,</hi> I'll
bet all my money, come what may. <b>2a</b> in
rummy, pick up a card one needs but for
which must also pick up a large number of
other cards which will be a burden.

<b>súsi</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @{look into} s.t., @{go and see} to
find s.t. out. <hi>Nagsúsi mi sa mangga human
<b>sa</b> bagyu,</hi> We went to see what became of
the mango tree after the storm.[**:?] <hi>Wà ku makasúsi
ug dúna pa bay túbig ang bangà,</hi> I
have not gone to see if there is still water
in the jar. <b>1a</b> [a12] @{look into}, @investigate.
<hi>Susíhun sa Inbíay ang anumalíya sa Iltísi,</hi>
The NBI will look into the LTC anomalies.
<b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; b2] <b>1</b> @{come across} s.t., inadvertently
find s.t. out. <hi>Hingsusihan námù
<b>sila</b> nga nagtabakù ug ampiyun,</hi> We @discovered
them smoking opium. <b>2</b> come into information
about s.t. <hi>Nakasusi giyud ku ánang
mga makina kay dúgay kung trabáhu
sa taliyir,</hi> I got to learn s.t. about engines because
I worked in a shop for a long time.
<b>susisusi</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3N; a12] make inquiries about
s.o.'s life, doings, habits, and the like, usually
maliciously. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; c6] have a medical
examination. <hi>Ipasúsi ang bátà sa dukt&ucaron;r,</hi>
Have the child examined by the doctor.
<b>paki-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] ask for information, inquire.
<hi>Didtu mi ni Kaduy magpakisúsi báhin
sa yútang ibaligyà,</hi> We asked for information
from Cadoy about the land for sale.
<hi>n</hi> @investigation, @inquiry.

<b>suskribir</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] @subscribe to a periodical.
<hi>Gustu ka bang mususkribir sa Tayims?</hi> Do
you want to subscribe to the Times?

<b>suskrisiyun</b> <hi>n</hi> @subscription.

<b>suskritur</b> <hi>n</hi> @subscriber.

<b>susmaríya</b> (from <hi>Hisus</hi> and <hi>Maríya</hi>) interjection
<b>1</b> expressing helpless frustration at s.t.
which happened or about which nothing
can be done. <hi>Susmaríya ning batáa! Giyabu
na pud ag gátas sa lamísa,</hi> @Goodness, this
child! He spilled the milk all over the table
again. <b>2</b> expressing reaction to fright. <hi>Susmaríya,
pwirting kuráta nákù,</hi> @Heavens! I
sure was frightened.

<b>suspi</b> <hi>n</hi> @peso or one peso (slang).

<b>suspind&icaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @suspend from office
or privilege. <hi>Suspindihun ka ug [**can't identify]makítà[**corrected: makita. P2][** ?akítà, P3] ka
nga sad-an,</hi> You will be suspended if you
are found guilty. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] cause an action
or practice to cease for the time being.
<hi>Suspindihun ang klási sa Lúnis ug Martis,</hi>
The class will be suspended on Monday and
Tuesday.

<b>suspinsu</b> <hi>n</hi> @suspension from office, school. <hi>v</hi>
[A3P; a12] @suspend s.o. from office, school.
<hi>Ang prisidinti mauy mususpinsu níya sa íyang
katungdánan,</hi> The president will suspend
him from office.

<b>suspíru, suspírus</b> <hi>n</hi> @{sugar candy}. <b>&mdash; dimani</b>
k.o. sugar @candy into which peanuts have
been thrown. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] make sugar candy.

<b>suspitsa, suspits&acaron;r</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] @suspect. <hi>Walay
mususpits&acaron;r nátù áning kawáta,</hi> Nobody
will suspect us of this robbery.

<b>suspitsu</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] @suspect, regard s.t. in a
certain way without proof. <hi>Nagsuspitsu ku
nga walà ning batáa magtunghà karun,</hi> I am
beginning to suspect that this child is not
attending school. <hi>Siyay gisuspitsuhan nga
mauy nagkúhà sa kwarta,</hi> I suspect him of
being the one who took the money. <hi>n</hi> @suspicion.
<b>-sa</b> = <sc>SUSPITSÚSU</sc>, <b>2</b> (female). <b>-su</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b>
arousing suspicion. <hi>Suspitsúsu ug líhuk ang
istranyu,</hi> The stranger's behavior is @suspicious.
<b>2</b> suspicious of others. <hi>Asáwang suspitsúsu
sa íyang bána,</hi> A wife suspicious of
her husband.

<b>sustansiya</b> <hi>n</hi> @nutriment. <hi>Daghang sustansiya
ang útan,</hi> Vegetables are very @nutritious.
<b>ma-, masustansiyáhun</b> <hi>a</hi> @nutritious. <hi>Ang ayis
krim nga Magnulya masustansiya (masustansiyáhun)
kaáyu,</hi> Magnolia ice cream is
very nutritious. <hi>v</hi> [A13] be nutritious.

<b>sustinídu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @sharp, a note one-half step higher.
<hi>Pa sustinídu,</hi> @{F sharp}. <b>2</b> a sharp cord.

<b>sustinídu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SUSTINIR</sc>.

<b>sustinir</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @last, manage to keep up
<pb n=944>with some work. <hi>Musustinir ka nákù ug
buksing ug mga lima ka ráwun?</hi> Can you
last five rounds boxing against me? <hi>Sustinihan
ku nang trabahúa,</hi> I will keep on with
that work. <b>1a</b> [A; c] @withstand weight or
pressure, @sustain. <hi>Ang sanga dì na makasustinir
<b>sa</b> gibug-atun sa mga búnga,</hi> The
branch cannot withstand the weight of the
fruits. <b>2</b> [A3; b6] @{stick to} a line of reasoning
or allegation. <hi>Musustinir ka sa ímung gisulti?</hi>
Will you stick to your story? <b>3</b> [a2]
@{make do} with s.t. less in quality or quantity.
<hi>Gisustinihan ku níya ug sulti sa íyang kinawayan
nga ininglis,</hi> He made do, speaking
to me in broken English. <hi>Ságing nga isustinir
<b>sa</b> tinggutum,</hi> Bananas which we make
do with in times of famine. <b>sustinídu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b>
@assiduous, @{sticking to} s.t. <hi>Kadtung sustinídu
<b>sa</b> ílang trabáhu pag-usbáwan ug swildu,</hi>
Those who are assiduous in their work will
be given a raise in salary. <b>2</b> having the capaccity[**capacity]
to endure, carry on with work. <hi>Sustinídu
kaáyu siya ug kálut ug kanal kay dagkù
<b>siyag</b> buktun,</hi> He has the capacity to dig
ditches because he has muscular arms.

<b>sustintu</b> <hi>n</hi> money for one's @sustenance. <hi>Ang
sustintu nga ipadala sa íyang bána ígù ra sa
pagkáun,</hi> The sustenance her husband sends
is enough for food. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] give money
for sustenance. <hi>Dì na ku musustintu nímu
ug magminyù ka,</hi> I will not @support you any
more if you get married.

<b>súsu</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @breast, the mammary gland or its
analogous formation in males. <b>2</b> angular
corners of pillows, sacks, and the like which
can be taken hold of. <b>-g agtà</b> <hi>n</hi> @{hornet's nest}
hanging from a tree (lit. an <hi>agtà</hi>'s breast). <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [A2S; b(1)] @suckle. <hi>Ang tútuy nga walà
sus-i dílì bitay,</hi> Breasts that have not suckled
a baby do not sag. <b>2</b> [a12] hit in the
chest, underneath the breasts toward the
arm. <hi>Ug sushun (susuhun) ug dunggab ang
táwu, matigbak,</hi> If a man is stabbed on the
side next to his breast, he will die right
away. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ac] feed with the breast or
bottle. <hi>Ayaw ni ipasúsu sa bátà kay dáan
ning gatása,</hi> Don't give the baby this milk
because it is not fresh. <b>sus-an</b> <hi>a</hi> having a
mammary gland or s.t. like it. <hi>Bitin nga sus-an
ang gipakítà sa karnabal,</hi> They showed a
snake with mammary glands in the carnival.
<b>2</b> mother with a nursing infant. <b>úmang sus-an</b>
<hi>see</hi> <sc>ÚMANG</sc>. <b>ma-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @infant.

<b>susù</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. smooth cerith @shell of fresh waters,
black, dark green, or brown. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A2; b6] gather <hi>susù</hi>.

<b>sùsù</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1b2] <b>1</b> @pound s.t. usually with
short and moderately heavy strokes. <hi>Sùsúun 
nímu pag-áyu ang pánit arun mahúmuk,</hi>
Pound the leather well so it will get soft. <b>2</b>
knock s.t. on the surface and @bruise it without
breaking the surface. <hi>Sùsúun ku nang
ngábil mu ug mutubag ka pa,</hi> I'll bruise
your lips if you answer back again.

<b>susun</b> <hi>a</hi> @{close together}, in rapid succession.
<hi>Susun ang mga balay sa syudad,</hi> The houses
in the city are close to each other. <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)6;
b6c1] do, situate in rapid or close succession.
<hi>Misusun siya sa íyang inahan ug kamatay,</hi>
She died soon after her mother died.

<b>susut</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @stunted in growth. <hi>Pulus susut ang
mga tanum,</hi> The plants are all stunted. <b>2</b>
@scarce. <hi>Susut ang taksi árung urása,</hi> Taxis
are scarce round about this time. <hi>v</hi> [B; b6]
<b>1</b> be, become stunted or @runty. <hi>Mususut
ang mga bátà kun paalsáhun ug bug-at,</hi>
Children will grow up to be stunted if they
are made to carry heavy loads. <hi>Nagsusut
ang mga tanum tungud kay wà abunúhi,</hi>
The plants were stunted in growth because
they weren't fertilized. <b>2</b> be, become scarce.
<hi>Nasusut ang mga isdà tungud sa dinamíta,</hi>
Fish have become scarce because of the dynamite
fishing.

<b>susyádu</b> (from <hi>susyu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></hi>) <hi>a</hi> having a @defect on
the surface. <hi>Dì na mahálin ang mga prútas
nga susyádu,</hi> Fruit with defects on the skin
is hard to sell. <hi>Dì na siyang patabak-un kay
susyádu nag bágà,</hi> He is not allowed to
smoke any more because he has @defective
lungs. <hi>v</hi> [B126] be, become defective.

<b>susyal</b> <hi>a</hi> fond of attending @social functions. <hi>v</hi>
[B12] be, become fond of attending social
gatherings. <hi>Burung niadtu si Lurna, karun
nasusyal na,</hi> Lorna used to be shy but now
she has become fond of parties.

<b>susyalayit</b> <hi>n</hi> @socialite. <hi>v</hi> [B1] be, become a
socialite.

<b>susyidad</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @society. <hi>Susyidad nga maut,</hi>
Hypocritical society. <b>2</b> society, @club. <hi>Susyidad
sa mga kababayin-an,</hi> Women's society.
<b>alta &mdash;</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>*ALTA</sc>.

<b>susyu<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @partnership. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [C; b6] be @partners
with, make a @partner of s.o. <hi>Magsusyu mi si
Inting ug ristawrant,</hi> Inting and I are partners
in a restaurant. <b>2</b> [A13; a1c] organize,
contribute to a partnership. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @partner in
business.

<b>susyu<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @defect or @imperfection in a fruit.
<b>Kining mga mangga nga may susyu laina
kay dílì ibaligyà,</b> Separate these mangoes
with imperfections because we won't sell
them. <b>2</b> @mark, imperfection in s.t. that is
supposed to be smooth. <hi>Kutsing way susyu,</hi>
A car without a @scratch.

<b>sút</b> = <sc>SÚLUT<hi rend=sub>1,2</hi></sc>.

<pb n=945>

<b>súta<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a coat coloration of animals consisting
usually of half black and half white fur.

<b>súta<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{stable boy}, @groom. <b>2</b> the @jack of
the Spanish cards (number 10). <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B156;
a12] be, become a groom. <b>2</b> [A12; b8]
draw a jack.

<b>sútà</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; a2b2] go to @{find out} or @verify
s.t. <hi>Sutáa didtu ug pilay baligyà sa íyang kabáyù,</hi>
Go and see how much he wants to sell
his horse for. <b>2</b> [C; a1c3] have it out with
s.o. to find out who is really who. <hi>Sutáun
nátù ug kinsay talawan nátung duha,</hi> We
will have it out and see which of us two is a
coward.

<b>sutána</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> priest's @cassock, the @soutane. <b>2</b>
the priestly office. <hi>Ánang ímung gibúhat wà
lang gánì ka maghunàhúnà sa ímung sutána,</hi>
When you did that you completely forgot
that you were a priest. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] wear,
make into a soutane.

<b>sutanghun</b> <hi>n</hi> @{bean threads} or dish made of
bean threads. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] make <hi>sutanghun</hi>.

<b>sutil<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> = <sc>LIMUNSÍTU</sc>.

<b>sutil<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> rebelliously @stubborn. <hi>Layhan kung
mulatigu ánang sutil kaáyu nga bátà,</hi> I'd like
to whip that stubborn child. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6]
be, become rebelliously stubborn.

<b>sutsut</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; c1] <b>1</b> @slurp, eat or drink noisily
in a sucking way. <hi>Íya lang gisutsut ang
usa ka panaksang sabaw,</hi> He simply slurped
down one bowl of soup. <b>2</b> [AN; b6] attract
s.o.'s attention with a low interrupted hissing
sound, either to call him or reprimand
him. <hi>n</hi> the hissing or slurping sound of this
sort. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> act of @hissing at s.o.

<b>sutuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] <b>1</b> leave immediately without
looking back or saying anything. <hi>Misutuy
siya ug lakaw kay nangísug tu nákù,</hi> He
walked straight away without looking back
because he was mad at me. <b>2</b> zoom or @{shoot
off} like a projectile. <b>3</b> for a child to slip out
easily on delivery. <hi>Misutuy lang ang bátà sa
pagsakit sa íyang tiyan,</hi> The mother had a
pain in her stomach, and the baby just slipped
out.

<b>suub<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> pointed @stake made of a length of
thinnish species of bamboo (<hi>bagákay</hi>) put
in the bottom of pit traps. <b>2</b> a @spear fashioned
in the same way. <hi>v</hi> [a12] make into
a stake or spear.

<b>súub</b> = <sc>SUL-UB</sc>, <hi>v</hi>. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SUL-UB</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>suud</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @close in space or time. <hi>Suud na kaáyu
ang adlaw sa kasal,</hi> The wedding day is
@near. <hi>Ang baril sa gasulína suud ra kaáyu sa
dapug,</hi> The gasoline barrel is a bit too near
the stove. <b>2</b> @intimate. <hi>Suud kaáyu ming amígu,</hi>
We are very intimate friends. <hi>v</hi> [ABC; a]
place, be set closely. <hi>Suúrun ta nig butang
arun dílì magkabulagbulag,</hi> Let's place these
close together so they won't get separated.
<b>2</b> [BC; a12] be, become @intimate, @close to.
<hi>Dílì ku makigsúud sa tabian,</hi> I don't want
to be intimate with a gossip. <b>ka- banay</b> <hi>n</hi>
close relative. <hi>Ákù gihápun siyang kasúud
bánay kay mag-ágaw mi,</hi> He is still a close
relative because we are cousins.

<b>suudsúud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @mimic s.o. usually to
make fun of him. <hi>Nagsuudsúud ang bátà sa
nagdiskursu,</hi> The child is mimicking the
man delivering a speech. <hi>Suudsuúrun ku siya
arun manuyù,</hi> I'll mimic her so she'll get
angry.

<b>suuk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @corner, the @inside space. <hi>Suuk sa kaban,</hi>
Corner of a trunk. <b>2</b> a remote secluded
place. <hi>Suuk tung íla sa iskwátir[**not sure if it is "r"][**it is. P2],</hi> They live
deep in the squatter area. <b>3</b> in @recesses of
one's thoughts. <hi>Sa mga suuk sa ímung kunsyinsiya,</hi>
In the recesses of your conscience.
<b>4</b> @{foul smell} characteristic of a dank, dirty
corner. <hi>Pag-ílis gánig sinínà, nanimáhù ka
lang suuk dà,</hi> Change into s.t. clean. You
smell like a dank and dirty corner. <hi>v</hi> [c] be
put at the corner or in a remote secluded
place. <b>paN-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @{wisdom tooth}. <hi>v</hi> [b4]
grow a wisdom tooth. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @remote out-of-the-way
places of s.t. <hi>Íyang gisangyaw
ang balità sa kasuukan sa ginharían,</hi> He
spread the news to the remote corners of
the kingdom.

<b>suul</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b4] for an illness or bad behavior
that recurs at intervals to @recur. <hi>Misuul
na pud ang íyang kabúang,</hi> His foolishness
is showing itself again. <hi>Gisul-an na pud siya
sa íyang húbak,</hi> He is having an attack of
asthma again. <b>2</b> [A; b4] have a @{stomach
ache}. <hi>Ug magsuul pa nang ímung tiyan, tumar
áning tambal,</hi> If your stomach still
hurts, take this medicine. <hi>n</hi> @{stomach pain}.
<b>&mdash; sa irù</b> very painful stomach cramps believed
to be a <hi>kabúhì</hi> which has found its
way into the pit of the stomach. <b>sulul-an,
sul-ánun</b> a prone to having recurring sicknesses
or emotional derangements.

<b>súul</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @wear, put s.t. on. <hi>Ngánung nagsúul
ka mag bulingun?</hi> Why are you wearing
dirty clothes?

<b>suun<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] @imitate, @adopt a fad or
mannerism. <hi>Dílì ku musuun sa mga bag-ung
múda sa pamisti,</hi> I will not @follow the new
dress styles. <hi>Sayun ra ning baylíha, sun-a
lang ang ákung lákang,</hi> This dance is easy;
just follow my steps. <b>2</b> [A; c16] wear s.t.
belonging to s.o. else. <hi>Sun-un ang ákung sinínà
<b>sa</b> ákung manghud,</hi> My younger sister
will wear my dress.

<pb n=946>

<b>suun<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> fill up a hole, cavity with
solid objects. <hi>Siyay misuun ug balas sa ímung
sapátus,</hi> He filled your shoes with
sand. <hi>Sun-ig batu ang mga láta,</hi> Fill the cans
with stones. <b>2</b> = <sc>SUL-UT</sc>, <hi>2</hi>.

<b>*súun ig-</b> <hi>n</hi> @brother or @sister. <b>ig- sa inahan,
amahan</b> <hi>n</hi> @half-sister or brother on one's
mother's or father's side. <b>ig- sa ngálang ig-</b> a
brother in the real sense of the word. <hi>v</hi> [A123S]
have as a brother or sister. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2;
c1] consider s.o. as a brother or sister.
<hi>Ug ang Muslim na gániy makapangigsúun
nímu, unúngan ka giyud,</hi> When a Muslim
considers you a brother, he is loyal to you.
<b>mag-, manag-</b> <hi>n</hi> @siblings. <hi>v</hi> [A13; c] do s.t.
together as siblings. <hi>Imagsuun níla ang ílang
nigusyu,</hi> The siblings will do business
together. <b>mag- sa lamísa apan dílì sa
bulsa</b> each must pay his own way, whether
or not they are brothers (lit. brothers at the
table but not with the pocketbook). <hi>Bayran
giyud nímu ang ímung útang nákù kay bísan
túud ug magsúun ta sa lamísa, dílì man
sa bulsa,</hi> You should pay me what you owe
because though we are brothers, we have
different pocketbooks. <b>inig-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> in a @brotherly,
@sisterly fashion. <hi>Inigsuung tambag,</hi>
Sisterly advice.

<b>suung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] go, swim under s.t. that is
not far above one's head. <hi>Misuung siya sa
awtu pagtan-aw ug wà ba mabálì ang mwilyi,</hi>
He crawled under the car to see if the
spring hadn't broken. <hi>Dílì ka makasuung sa
pantalan kay daghang sisi didtu,</hi> You can
not swim under the wharf because there are
lots of sharp shellfish there. <b>sung-anay</b> <hi>n</hi>
method of punishing the losers in a group
game by making them crawl between the
legs of the winners standing in a line. <hi>v</hi> [A1]
impose this punishment on the loser.
<b>suungsúung</b> = <sc>SUNG-ANAY</sc>. <b>sung-unun</b> <hi>a</hi>
for s.t. to be so low one has to bend his
head passing under it.

<b>súung</b> = <sc>SUL-UNG</sc>.

<b>suup</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23N; b6N] look and hear covertly
to gather information. <hi>Hadluk ka nga musuup
(manuup) sa ímung asáwa,</hi> You're scared
to @{spy on} your wife. <hi>Unsay ímung gipanupan
dihà?</hi> What are you spying on there?

<b>suut</b> <hi>n</hi> @{arthritic pains}, usually in the finger
joints. <hi>v</hi> [b4] have arthritic pains, esp. in
the finger joints.

<b>súut<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] pass or force one's way
through tall objects. <hi>Dílì ta makasúut dihà
kay bagà ang mga bágun,</hi> We cannot get
through there because the vines are very
thick. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] @penetrate, pass through
pores. <hi>Ang bulà sa Rinsu musúut giyud sa
lugas sa panaptun,</hi> Rinso suds really penetrate
the fibers of the cloth.

<b>súut<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SUL-UT</sc>.

<b>súuy</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the edible flesh of the jackfruit
(<hi>nangkà</hi>) which encloses the seed. <b>1a</b> name
given in some localities to the @jackfruit itself.
<b>2</b> the inedible pulp of the jackfruit
which surrounds the edible flesh. <b>2a</b> undeveloped
seed of fruit which is small and flat,
and analogous to the inedible pulp of the
jackfruit.

<b>suwa</b> <hi>n</hi> word to drive away chickens.

<b>suwà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> general term for various sour, fragrant
@{citrus fruits} with a taste similar to
lime and thick peels that adhere to the
flesh, varying in size from the tiny <hi>samuyaw</hi>
to the <hi>byásung</hi>. <b>suwàsuwà</b> <hi>n</hi> @bush bearing
leaves with an odor like citrus and small
mucilagenous berries, red when ripe: <hi><b>Triphasia
trifolia</b></hi>.

<b>suwà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SULÀ<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>suwa-</b> for words with <hi>suwa-</hi> see also <sc>SULA-</sc>
and <sc>SWA-</sc>.

<b>súwal</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] for a sickness to recur (said of
sicknesses for which it is possible to prevent
recurrences). <hi>Nakasúwal ang íyang pamutu
kay nag-abusar man siya sa babáyi,</hi> His skin
disease came back because he indulged in
women.

<b>suwat<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> a remark uttered by s.o. upon hearing
s.o. else sneezing, as a way of preventing s.t.
worse from happening (said as a <hi>sumpà</hi>).

<b>suwat<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SULAT</sc>.

<b>súwat</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] pull up s.t. lightly rooted on
the ground. <hi>Átung suwátun ang mga tag-as
nga sagbut,</hi> We'll just pull up the tall weeds.

<b>suway bagyu</b> = <sc>SULAYBAGYU</sc>.

<b>súwing gam</b> <hi>n</hi> @{chewing gum}.

<b>suwits</b> <hi>n</hi> @switch; a device for opening or closing
an electric circuit. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c6] switch s.t.
on. <hi>Isuwits ang sugà bi,</hi> Switch the lights on
please. <b>2</b> [A23] shift from one course of
study to another.

<b>súyà</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126; b3] feel @dislike towards s.o.
out of envy or because of an overbearing,
braggart sort of personality. <hi>Makasúyà man
nang ímung pagkahambugíru,</hi> Your bragging
makes people @resent you. <hi>Nasúyà siya nákù
kay dílì man giyud siya makalupig,</hi> He resents
it that he can never beat me.

<b>suyágit</b> = <sc>SYÁGIT</sc>.

<b>súyak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] put a spike, thorn, or anything
pointed on a path to pierce a foot or
tire. <hi>Suyákan nátù ang kadaplínan sa gardin,</hi>
Let's put pointed stakes all around the
edges of the garden. <hi>n</hi> = <sc>SUYAK</sc>. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> nail,
tack or the like, to pierce the foot.

<b>suylà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab7] <b>1</b> @overflow, @{spill over}. <hi>Kun
<pb n=947>mag-ulan, ang túbig musuylà sa kanal,</hi> When
it rains, the water @{spills out} of the ditch. <hi>Sa
prugráma ang mga táwu misuylà ngadtu sa
karsáda,</hi> The people who attended the program
spilled over into the street. <hi>Gisuylà
níla ang mga prútas sa lamísa,</hi> They put
fruit on the table until it spilled over the
edges. <b>1a</b> splash up as a result of pressure or
impact. <hi>Dílì makasuylà ang tubà kay gamay
ug bàbà ang sudlanan,</hi> The palm toddy cannot
splash out because the container has a
small mouth. <b>2</b> [A3] for an emotion to be
extremely great. <hi>Misuylà ang ákung kalípay
pagkadungug nákù sa balità,</hi> I was @overflowing
with happiness when I heard the news.

<b>suylan</b> = <sc>KAMÚNING</sc>.

<b>suylas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> small @tacks of the sort used to nail
the straps of clogs to the wooden sole. <b>2</b>
side of the heels of men's shoes. <hi>v</hi> [b] nail
with <hi>suylas</hi>.

<b>suysuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] pound a small amount of
rice with a pestle. <hi>Magsuysuy lang kug pára
lugáwun,</hi> I'll pound just enough rice for
porridge.

<b>suyud</b> <hi>n</hi> @{bee stinger}. <hi>v</hi> [A2N; b8] @sting. <hi>Dílì
makasuyud (makapanuyud) ang buyug ug
kuptan sa pakù,</hi> Wasps can't sting if you
hold them by the wings.

<b>súyup</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S; a12] <b>1</b> @{suck in}, @{draw in} air or
liquid. <hi>Ug suyúpun ang túbig sa bumba, maáyu
pa nang bumba,</hi> As long as the pump
sucks in the water, it is still good. <b>1a</b> @absorb,
draw by capillary action. <hi>Ang naylun kúlì
musúyup ug singut,</hi> Nylon does not absorb
sweat well. <b>1b</b> for magnets to @draw. <hi>Ang
lansang mutaput ug suyúpun sa batubaláni,</hi>
The nail will stick if it is @attracted by the
magnet. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] use up money as if it
were sucked away. <hi>Ang gastu sa gasulína
musúyup ug dakù sa ímung kítà,</hi> The cost
of gasoline just @{sucks away} a large portion
of your earnings. <hi>n</hi> action of @sucking, @absorbing,
pulling by a magnet.

<b>swá</b> <hi>n</hi> acronym for the @SWA, @{Social Welfare
Administration}.

<b>swábi<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @bland, not irritating. <hi>Sa mga tambal
sa ubu, kiniy swábi,</hi> Of all the cough
medicines this is the one that is blandest. <b>2</b>
socially @graceful, @smooth. <hi>Swábi kaáyu siya
ug binaylihan,</hi> He dances very @smoothly. <b>3</b>
slow but perceptible in effect or outcome.
<hi>Maáyu ning tambála kay swábi ug ipiktu,</hi>
This medicine is good because it has a slow
but perceptible effect. <hi>v</hi> [B2] be, become
bland, smooth, not so harsh in effect.

<b>swábi<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>SULÁBI</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>LABI</sc>.

<b>swágir</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. loose @blouse used by pregnant
women. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] wear, make into a blouse
of this sort.

<b>swágit</b> = <sc>SYÁGIT</sc>.

<b>swakan</b> <hi>a</hi> eating anything that comes one's
way. <hi>Nagsakit ang tiyan sa bátà kay swakan
man kaáyug bàbà,</hi> That child has a stomach-*ache
because he eats anything and everything
that he can get his hands on.

<b>swákì</b> = <sc>SALUWÁKÌ</sc>.

<b>swángit</b> (from <hi>swápang</hi> and <hi>pángit</hi>) <hi>a</hi> @greedy
and @ugly.

<b>swápang</b> <hi>a</hi> oppressively @opportunistic, @{taking
advantage}. <hi>Swápang insíka. Maáyu lang
manghuwam, piru dílì magpahuwam nákù,</hi>
That Chinese is a no good opportunist. He's
great at borrowing, but when it comes to
lending, forget it. <hi>Swápang nímu uy. Ikay
nagswildu, akuy mubangka,</hi> You are so inconsiderate.
You get the salary and I have
to pay the bill.

<b>swásid</b> = <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.

<b>swíbil</b> <hi>n</hi> a joint that pivots freely and is attached
between two lengths of line or chain
to prevent kinking. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a2] make into,
attach a @swivel.

<b>swildu</b> <hi>n</hi> @salary, fixed compensation paid regularly
for services done. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3N2; c] pay
a salary. <hi>Ug siyay nagswildu nímu adtu ka
magsirbisyu níya,</hi> If he pays your salary,
you work for him. <b>2</b> [A; b] get a certain
salary. <hi>Anhà na ku mangasáwa ug magswildu
na kug míl,</hi> I will get married when I
have a salary of a thousand a month. <b>swilduánan</b>
<hi>n</hi> persons who are to receive their
salary. <b>di-, swildádu</b> <hi>n</hi> having a salary, @{wage
earner}. <hi>Sa púlù ka magsúun, walu ang swildádu
(diswildu),</hi> Of the ten brothers, eight
are wage earners. <hi>Kusug kaáyu kang mugastu.
Mu ra kag diswildu (swildádu),</hi> You sure
do spend, as if you were earning money. <hi>v</hi>
[B1256] be a wage earner. <b>ting-, tingpaN-</b>
<hi>n</hi> @payday. <hi>Lamì pud ta ug pagkáun sa tingswildu
(tingpanwildu),</hi> We have delicious
food on payday.

<b>swiltu</b> a free to do anything. <hi>Swiltu kaáyu
nà siya sa paglakawlákaw kay daghan mag
masúgù,</hi> She's free to go anywhere she
wants to because she has lots of servants. <hi>v</hi>
[B123(1); b6] be, become free to do anything.
<hi>Ang kadakù sa aláwans sa istudiyanti
mauy makaswiltu (makapaswiltu) niíni ug
gastu,</hi> A student spends money freely if he
gets a big allowance.

<b>swing</b> <hi>n</hi> @{swing music}. <hi>v</hi> [B1235; a12] play
in @swing time.

<b>swíng</b> <hi>n</hi> @swing to swing on.

<b>swípir</b> <hi>n</hi> @sweeper, the child assigned by the
teacher to sweep. <hi>v</hi> [B156; a12] be the
sweeper. <b>-unun</b> <hi>n</hi> one's turn to be the
<pb n=948>sweeper.

<b>swipstik</b> <hi>n</hi> @sweepstakes, the national @lottery,
the winners of which are usually determined
by horse races. <hi>v</hi> [A13] hold the sweepstakes.

<b>swirti</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @luck, @{good fortune}. <hi>Ug may swirti
ka makahálin ka ug tulu ka tíbi ang simána,</hi>
With luck you can sell three TV sets a
week. <hi>Swirti nga nahitabù tu kay nahibaw-an
ang íyang binúang,</hi> It was a good thing
that that happened because I found out
what he had been doing. <b>2</b> @fate, @fortune. <hi>Íyang
swirti nga maminyù ug bálu,</hi> It is her
fate to marry a widower. <hi>Swirti nga naabut
ang amahan ug naabtan sila,</hi> Unfortunately
the father arrived and they were caught in
the act. <hi>v[**P2: on Cornell copy]</hi> <b>1</b> [A12; b8] do s.t. @lucky by
chance. <hi>Nakaswirti ku ug pílì sa únang ganti,</hi>
@{By luck} I picked the one that won first
prize. <b>2</b> [A23; a4] be, get to be lucky. <hi>Muswirti
usáhay pud ang ákung pangisdà,</hi>
Sometimes I turn out lucky in my fishing.
<b>swirtiswirti</b> <hi>a</hi> @chancy, a matter of luck. <hi>Swirtiswirti
kanúnay ang panágat ug maáyu nga
mangítà ka ug trabáhu,</hi> Fishing is a chancy
occupation, and you would do better to
look for work. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a4] be, get to be
lucky at times.

<b>swis línin</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. finely woven imported @cloth.

<b>swít</b> <hi>n</hi> @{slow music}. <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] dance to slow
music. <b>swit myúsik</b> = <sc>SWÍT</sc>.

<b>swítik</b> a clever, smart and mischievous at the
same time. <hi>Swítik kaáyung batáa, kay mangáyù
nákù bisag natagaan na siyang Máma,</hi>
What a clever rascal. He asks me for money
when his Mother already gave him some. v
<b>1</b> [B125] be clever and haughty. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
deceive with sleight of hand, esp. in
cards. <hi>Ug wà pa tu switíka sa nagbangka,
alas untà tuy ákung madáwat,</hi> If the dealer
hadn't cheated, I would have gotten an ace.

<b>swítir</b> <hi>n</hi> @sweater, @sweatshirt. <hi>v</hi> [A12; a12]
wear, make into a sweater or sweatshirt.

<b>swítu</b> a <b>1</b> @{know how} to do s.t. <hi>Swítu kaáyu
siya sa panágat,</hi> He knows all about fishing.
<b>2</b> @{familiar with} a place. <hi>Swítu kaáyu siya ug
ásang pampaman,</hi> He knows where all the
bawdy houses are. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B125; b8] come to
know s.t. <hi>Naswítu na ku sa inyung sikrítu,</hi> I
have @{found out} your secret. <b>2</b> [a12] go s.w.
to find out s.t. <hi>Switúha didtu ug naunsa
nang ílang ámut,</hi> Go and find out what happened
to their contribution.

<b>syágit</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S; b6(1)] @shout. <hi>Walà siya makasyágit
kay gitiúnan ug pusil,</hi> She wasn't able
to shout because a gun was pointed at her.
<hi>Isyágit ang ímung tubag,</hi> Shout out your
answer. <hi>n</hi> @shout.

<b>syákuy</b> <hi>n</hi> tidbit made of flour, and optionally
eggs, formed into long slender pieces and
deep fried in fat. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] make, make
into <hi>syákuy</hi>.[+]

<b>syálan</b> = <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.

<b>syampu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{hair shampoo}. <hi>v</hi> [AN; c] @shampoo.
<hi>Dì ku musyampu (manyampu) kay manglarut
ang ákung buhuk,</hi> I don't use shampoo
because I am losing my hair.

<b>syánga</b> = <sc>PANTÍHAN</sc>.

<b>syáping</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] go shopping for dry
goods. <hi>Magsyáping ka sa Wayit Guld?</hi> Will
you go shopping in the White Gold (department
store)? <b>2</b> [A; b6] @window-shop.

<b>syapirun</b> = <sc>TSAPIRUN</sc>.

<b>syápù</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @shrub of waste places, the bark
of which makes a weak rope.

<b>syápul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] @shuffle cards, mahjong
pieces.

<b>syápul<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A2C23; b5] for a cock to fight
by making thrusts with the feet. <hi>Syapúlun
(syapúlan) dáyun nang inyung manuk sa akúa,</hi>
My cock will attack yours with his feet
instantly. <hi>n</hi> action of fighting, making
thrusts with the feet. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> manner of
fighting in this way.

<b>syárap</b> @{shut up}! <hi>Syárap! Dì giyud ka pul-an
ug sulti!</hi> Shut up! You never get tired of
talking, do you!

<b>syarpsyútir</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sharpshooter. <b>2</b> one who consistently
puts the ball into the goal or hole.
<hi>v</hi> [B12] be, become a sharpshooter or consistent
scorer.

<b>syáru &mdash; ug</b> expression of disbelief: it's @impossible.
<hi>Syáru ug mahúbad ning pagkabaáta,</hi>
It is impossible that it should come undone
the way it was tied. <hi>Wà giyud kay ikahátag?
<b>Syáru</b> ug wà kay diyis!</hi> You can't give a
penny? Surely you can let me have ten!&mdash;[<hi>name</hi>, <hi>pronoun</hi>]
How could [noun or pronoun]
do such a thing! <hi>Syáru sab ka Tina.
Wà na lang makapakáun sa bátà!</hi> Tina, how
could you! You haven't even thought of
feeding the child!

<b>syát</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] <b>1</b> shoot the ball into the basket
or hole to score a point. <b>2</b> take a still
photograph. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> point or goal scored by
shooting the ball. <b>2</b> a @shot of liquor. <b>3</b> @shot,
single exposure on a roll of film. <b>-ir</b> <hi>a</hi> one
who is a good shot or good at throwing in
games that require aiming. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] become
a good shot. <b>maniníyat</b> <hi>n</hi> @photographer
(humorous). <b>-gan</b> <hi>n</hi> @shotgun. <hi>v</hi> [A12; b2]
fire a shotgun at.

<b>syátir</b> <hi>a</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>SYÁT</sc>. <hi>n</hi> @shutter of a camera.

<b>syáuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S; b6] long, drawn out @shout,
<pb n=949>@shriek. <hi>Misyáuk ang bumbíru sa pagpaingun
sa kaláyu,</hi> The fire truck went to the fire
with @screaming sirens. <hi>Intáwun ang bátà
nagsiyauk sa kasakit,</hi> The poor boy was
shrieking in pain. <hi>n</hi> loud, long-drawn sound,
@shriek.

<b>syáwir</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @shower for bathing. <b>2</b> @{shower
bath}. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [a2] install a shower. <b>2</b> [A] take
a shower.

<b>syáwir parti</b> <hi>n</hi> @shower for brides. <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)]
give a bridal shower.

<b>syíding</b> <hi>n</hi> @shading of s.t. drawn or letters. <hi>v</hi>
[A; a1b] shade s.t. drawn.

<b>syílak</b> = <sc>SÍLAK<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>syimpri</b> expression indicating an obvious and
unavoidable consequence. <hi>Syimpri, ímu giyud
tung bayran kay ikay mikáun sa mangga,</hi>
@{Of course} you must pay for the mango
because you ate it.

<b>syinsiya</b> = <sc>SINSIYA<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>syintipiku</b> <hi>n</hi> @scientist. <hi>a</hi> done in a @scientific
way. <hi>Gigamà ni sa syintipiku nga paági,</hi>
This was made in a scientific way. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1]
be a scientist. <b>2</b> [a12] do s.t. @scientifically.

<b>syintu</b> combining form for counting one
@hundred between 101 and 199. <hi>Syintu diyis,</hi>
One hundred ten. <b>-s</b> @hundreds, used only
after the numbers of Spanish origin except
<hi>singku</hi> 'five'. <hi>Dus syintus,</hi> Two hundred.
<hi>v</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>TRIS</sc>.

<b>syíring</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1] sew s.t. with @shirring. <b>2</b>
[A; b6] wear s.t. with shirring. <hi>n</hi> s.t. sewn
with shirring.

<b>syirtu</b> = <sc>SIRTU</sc>.

<b>syista</b> <hi>n</hi> @siesta, a brief nap after lunch. <hi>v</hi> [A]
take a siesta.

<b>syíti</b> = <sc>SÍTI</sc>.

<b>syúap</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23] @{show up} as expected. <hi>Dì na
tingáli musyúap ang ímung dít kay lawum
nang gabíi,</hi> Your date is probably not going
to show up any more because it is already
quite late. <b>2</b> [A2] @shine in a field of activity.
<hi>Ingun ug bráyit. Wà man lagi siya musyúap
sa klási,</hi> They say she is very @bright.
Why didn't she show up in class?

<b>syudad</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @city. <b>2</b> @{pubic region} (humorous).
<hi>Ug daghang táwu sa baryu, labi na sa syudad,</hi>
There are plenty of people in the village
(i.e., hair in the beard). How many more
there must be in the city (i.e., hair in the
pubic region)! <hi>v</hi> [B12; a12] be, become,
make into a city. <b>-nun</b> <hi>n</hi> city resident. <hi>a</hi>
like one from the city. <hi>v</hi> [B125] become
@citified in one's ways.

<b>syukang kaw</b> <hi>n</hi> action of winning in mahjong
where a player has obtained an <hi>úpin
kang</hi> (see <sc>KANG<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>) and the fourth piece
which made the <hi>kang<hi rend=sub>2</hi></hi>.

<b>syuktung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. cheap commercial @{alcoholic
drink}, called after the brand name Se Hoc
Tong.

<b>syúmuy</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. game of marbles in which
the marbles are thrown toward five small
holes such that only one marble gets in. If
none does, the player hits a marble designated
by the opponent without hitting any of
the others. Hitting more than one marble
or putting more than one marble in the hole
nullifies the play. <b>2</b> action of putting the
marble in a hole. <b>3</b> @intercourse (humorous).
<hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> play <hi>syúmuy</hi>. <b>2</b> shoot the marbles
into the hole. <b>3</b> [AC; c] have intercourse
(stick it in&mdash;humorous).

<b>syúpaw</b> <hi>n</hi> snack made of rice flour filled
with meat, eggs, and spices, and cooked in
steam. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] make, have <hi>syúpaw</hi>.

<b>syurtkat</b> <hi>n</hi> @short-cut route, shortest way to
reach a place. <hi>Kining karsáda mauy syurtkat
<b>sa</b> Talísay,</hi> This road is a @shortcut to
Talisay. <hi>v</hi> [A2; a2] take a shortcut. <hi>Nagsyurtkat
mi sa baul,</hi> We took a shortcut
through the field.

<b>syurt pants, syurts</b> = <sc>SURTPAN</sc>.

<b>syút<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> go ahead ask the question. <hi>Ug andam
ka na sa ímung pangutána, syút!</hi> If you
are ready with your question, go ahead,
@shoot!

<b>syút<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] put all the money one has
on one bet. <hi>Isyút ang ímung pusta, daug
lagi,</hi> Shoot your money. We'll win, you can
count on it.

<b>syúting</b> <hi>n</hi> @filming of a motion picture. <b>wà pa
mahuman ang &mdash;</b> a humorous phrase used in
referring to a man with long hair, from the
notion that actors wear long hair throughout
the duration of the filming of s.t. <hi>v</hi> [A1;
b6] <b>1</b> @film a motion picture. <b>2</b> @{take pictures}.
<hi>Magsyúting mi sa baybay,</hi> We'll take
pictures at the beach.

<b>syútis</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>ASYÚTIS</sc>. <b>2</b> = <sc>SAYÚTI</sc>.






<pb n=950>
<div1>
<head>T</head>


<b>ta<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> see <sc>KITA</sc>.

<b>ta<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TALA<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>tà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> short for <sc>UNTÀ</sc>.

<b>tà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> short for <sc>TÁTÀ</sc>.

<b>táak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] @{step on}, @tread. <hi>Ngánung
gitaákan man nímu ang ákung sabud?</hi> Why
did you step on my seedbed? <b>2</b> [A2; a]
come to a place for the first time. <hi>Nakatáak
(nakataak) na kug Amirika,</hi> Now, I have set
foot in America. <hi>Taákun ku bisag impirnu
pagpangítà nímu,</hi> I'll go to hell and back in
my search for you.

<b>taal</b> <hi>a</hi> @genuine, @pure. <hi>Sáyaw nga taal Pilipínu,</hi>
Native Filipino dance. <hi>Taal nà siyang Árab,</hi>
He is a full-blooded Arab. <b>2</b> @mellow and
@{well-aged}. <hi>a</hi> said of root crops that have
been left to mature in the ground. <hi>Kamúting
taal,</hi> Mature sweet potatoes. <hi>b</hi> said of
wine or vinegar. <hi>Súkà nga taal,</hi> Fully-aged
vinegar. <hi>v</hi> [B3(1); a2] become well-aged.

<b>taan</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c] set a trap of any sort. <hi>Itaan
ang búbu, lit-ag,</hi> Set the fish trap, the noose.
<b>taantáan</b> <hi>n</hi> method of fishing with a hook
and line in shallow waters where the fisherman
looks in the water with a <hi>silip</hi> or goggles
at the same time as he holds his line and
maneuvers his boat. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] fish in this
way.

*<b>taantaan pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] let s.t. happen to
s.t. or oneself a while longer. <hi>Magpataantaan
pa ku ug bulad sa adlaw,</hi> I'll stay out in
the sun just a bit longer. <hi>Ákung gipataantaanan
ang lúgaw sa kaláyu,</hi> I let the porridge
cook on the fire just a little longer.

<b>taas</b> <hi>a</hi> @long, @tall, @high. <hi>&mdash; ug ilung</hi> not see s.t.
right in front of one's nose. <hi>Taas kag ilung
kay wà ka kakità sa lápis sa ímung atubángan,</hi>
You're blind because you didn't see
the pencil right in front of your nose. <b>&mdash; ug
tinuntu</b> @{extremely naughty}. <b>&mdash; ug lupad</b> see
<sc>LUPAD</sc>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B3(1); b6] grow, appear long,
tall. <hi>Mutaas ka kun maghayhil,</hi> You'll appear
tall if you wear heels. <hi>Wà makataas
ang káhuy kay giawngan,</hi> The tree didn't
grow tall because it was stifled by other
trees. <b>2</b> [A; b] add more length, height.
<hi>Tas-i ang lamísa,</hi> Make the table higher
(longer). <b>3</b> [a] do s.t. in a long way. <hi>Ayaw
tas-a ímung ampù,</hi> Don't make your prayers
long. <b>4</b> [B23(1)4; b6] rise in temperature,
pressure, and other quantities. <hi>Nagkataas
ang íyang hilánat,</hi> His fever is getting higher
and higher. <hi>n</hi> fifth bottle (slang). <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1);
a1] be @stretched long, @tall. <hi>Mitáas íyang
líug ug pinangítà nákù,</hi> She @craned her neck
looking for me. <hi>n</hi> = <b>I-</b>. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @raise.
<hi>Magpataas sa kamut ang dúnay pangutána,</hi>
Anyone who has a question should raise his
hand. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] @lengthen, increase the
length. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @upward. <hi>Isíbug ang kwadru pataas,</hi>
Move the picture upwards. <b>2</b> @length-*wise,
<b>-g-</b> @high, @tall, @long (plural). <b>gitas-un</b> <hi>n</hi>
@height, @length. <b>ha-</b> <hi>a</hi> very @long, @high. <hi>Hataas
nga panahun,</hi> A very long time. <b>i-, i-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi>
@upstairs. <b>katas-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @uplands. <b>kahitas-an</b> <b>1</b>
@sky, @heavens. <b>2</b> @God. <hi>Ihangad sa kahitas-an
ang ímung suliran,</hi> Look to God for the solution
to your problems. <b>mapahitas-un, mahatas-un,
mahitas-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @haughty. <hi>Mapahitas-un
ang mga dátù,</hi> The rich people are haughty.
<hi>v</hi> [B16] become haughty. <b>kamapahitas-un,
kahatas-un</b> <hi>n</hi> @haughtiness.

<b>taay</b> = <sc>TAYÀ<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>t[=á]b</b> = <sc>TÁLAB</sc>.

<b>tabà</b> <hi>n</hi> @{pork fat}.

<b>tabaghak</b> = <sc>BALÁHAK</sc>, <hi>n</hi>, <hi>v</hi>.

<b>tabagnul</b> <hi>n</hi> a disease of bananas and root
crops characterized by the appearance of
hard masses of dark spores which sometimes
break up into fine dust. <hi>v</hi> [a4] be affected
with @rust. <b>-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> @blighted with fruit rust.

<b>tabagsak</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @sardine, slightly fatter than
the <hi>tagnípis</hi>: <b><hi>Sardinella sp.</hi></b>

<b>tabagsuy</b> = <sc>TIBAGSUY</sc>.

<b>tabak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13P; b6P] @give, @furnish s.o. with
s.t. that can be worn on one's person for a
purpose. <hi>Kinsay nagtabak (nagpatabak) nímu
ánang tráhi?</hi> Who furnished you that
suit? <hi>Walà siya mahadluk kay gitabakan
(gipatabakan) ug pistúla,</hi> He was not afraid
because he was furnished a pistol.

<b>tab-ak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] cover s.t. or s.o. by heaping
or dumping s.t. onto it. <hi>Daghan kaáyung trabáhu
ang gitab-ak ni bus sa sikritarya,</hi> The
boss @heaped a pile of work on the secretary.

<b>tabakalíra[**</b> accent or smudge?] <hi>n</hi> large warehouse belonging to
the Tabacalera organization where farmers
sell their products.

<b>tabákù</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> tobacco. <b>2</b> piece of @tobacco rolled
for smoking. (->) <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @smoke. <hi>Ang
<pb n=951>dáhun sa lumbuy maáyu tabak-un sa hubákun,</hi>
<hi>Lungbuy</hi> leaves are good for asthmatics
to smoke. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; c6] be @smoking.
<hi>Wà gánì tay ipanabákù, sini na núun,</hi> I don't
even have money for smoking much less for
movies. <b>tabakun-an, -an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> tobacco field.

<b>tabal</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] preserve large fish by salting
but not drying under the sun. <b>2</b> [a12] keep
a piece of gossip. <hi>Gitabal nákù ang íyang
pagkadisgrasyáda,</hi> I kept it a @secret that she
once had a baby out of wedlock. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> fish
preserved with salt.

<b>tabal-ak</b> <hi>n</hi> a k.o. large woven @sack, usually
made of buri leaves, commonly used for
holding brown sugar or salt. <hi>Usa ka tabal-ak
kámay,</hi> A buri bag full of brown sugar. <hi>a</hi>
for a woman to be fat and shapeless like a
<hi>tabal-ak</hi>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] make this k.o. container.
<b>2</b> [c1] do by the <hi>tabal-ak</hi>. <b>3</b> [B1256]
get to look like a <hi>tabal-ak</hi>. <hi>Lawásan pa nà
run, apan manghinap[=û][** this does not appear as an acute in the text] ka túig karun matabal-ak
na pud nà,</hi> She may have a good
body, but give her ten years and she will
look like a sack. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> put in the <hi>tabal-ak</hi>. <hi>v</hi>
= <sc>TABAL-AK</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>.

<b>tában</b> (from <hi>talában</hi>) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC; a12] @elope.
<hi>Nagtában ang duha ug wà na lang pakasal,</hi>
The two eloped and did not get married
formally. <b>2</b> = <sc>TALÁBAN</sc>. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> give,
put s.t. miscellaneous along with the thing
of primary interest. <hi>Magpatában siyag kwarta
matag sulat níya,</hi> He @encloses money each
time he writes. <hi>Gipatabánan ug midiyas ang
gipalit kung sapátus,</hi> A pair of socks went
together with the shoes I bought. <b>2</b> do s.t.
additional, do s.t. but not without making
unwanted remarks. <hi>Muhátag lagi, apan patabánan
ug sirmun,</hi> Sure, she'll give you
some but not without reading you a lecture.
<hi>n</hi> s.t. @enclosed or put along with.

<b>tabanaw</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @whore, @prostitute. <b>2</b> @fake. <hi>Dì ku
mudáwat niánang tabanaw nga kwarta,</hi> I
won't accept that fake money. <hi>v</hi> [B16; a1c1]
be a prostitute.

<b>tábang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] @help, give a hand. <hi>Tabángi
siya,</hi> Help her. <hi>Kun may ikatábang ku
sangpit lang,</hi> If I can do s.t., just call on me.
(->) <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b> @rescue, attend to s.o. suddenly
ill. <hi>Tabanga siya kay hápit na malumus,</hi>
Rescue him because he's drowning. <b>2</b>
[a] be @helped, @remedied. <hi>Matabang pa kahà
ning dakù mag sayup,</hi> Can this big error still
be @corrected? <b>3</b> manage to do all of s.t. <hi>Dì
na matabang ning kadaghanúna,</hi> I can't
manage to do this much work. <b>4</b> [A3; b(1)]
gang up to do s.t. together. <hi>Nap[=û][**again, this does not appear as an acute] ang mitabang
nákug sumbagay,</hi> Ten people ganged
up to fight against me. <hi>Tabangan nátù nig
káun kay daghan,</hi> Let's all of us help eat
this because there's so much. <b>5</b> [A; a1]
hook in a big catch with a @gaff. <hi>Tabanga ang
íyang kuhà arun dì makabuhì,</hi> Hook in his
catch with a gaff so that it can't get away.
<hi>n</hi> a @gaff attached to a handle used to help
pull in a big fish caught on a fishline. <b>paN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] assist in child delivery. <hi>Akuy nanábang
pagpanganak níya,</hi> I delivered her
baby. <hi>n</hi> @help, @aid. <b>-ay, -in-ay</b> <hi>v</hi> [C2] help
each other. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c5] send aid (usually
material assistance). <hi>Gihinabángan ang Byapra
sa Ridkrus,</hi> Biafra is receiving @aid from
the Red Cross. <hi>n</hi> @aid, @assistance sent. <b>paki-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2S3] ask for help. <hi>Nakitábang (mipakitábang)
ang kundinádu sa kinataliwad-an sa
íyang kaguul,</hi> The condemned man called
out for help in the midst of h[** ?his] sorrows.
<hi>Nagpakitábang (nagpakitabang) ang babáying
gilúgus,</hi> The woman who was being
raped cried for help. <b>singgit paki-</b> <hi>n</hi> cry for
help. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> medically untrained mid-*wife.
<b>maN-r-(->) ug sanggì</b> harvest help. <b>tabangtábang,
ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @helper, @assistant. <b>ma-in-un,
pahiN-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @helpful.

<b>tab-ang</b> <hi>a</hi> @flat in taste, lacking sugar or salt.
<hi>Pun-ig kámay ang kapi kay tab-ang ra,</hi> Put
more sugar in the coffee because it tastes
flat. <hi>Ang isdà sa dágat dílì mabúhì sa túbig
tab-ang,</hi> Marine fishes do not live in fresh
water. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B; a2] be flat in taste. <b>2</b> [b4]
for a man or woman to feel cool toward his
sweetheart. <hi>Nagbúlag ang managtrátu kay
gitab-angan na ang usag-usa kaníla,</hi> The
sweethearts separated because they got tired
of each other. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> mentally deficient.
<hi>Wà giyud magtúnu ang íyang gipanulti, mu
ra giyug táwung tab-angan,</hi> The things he
says do not make sense. He seems to be a
stupid fool.

<b>tabangkà</b> = <sc>KAGÙKÙ<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>tabangkù</b> <hi>n</hi> young @barracuda (<hi>rumpi kandádu</hi>
<hi>see</hi> <sc>RUMPI</sc>).

<b>tabánug</b> = <sc>TALABÁNUG</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>BANUG</sc>.

<b>tábas</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a1] cut lengthwise or through
s.t. flat. <hi>Gitábas ang trúsu nga himúung
tabla,</hi> The log was cut into boards. <b>1a</b> go
over a surface as if cutting it. <hi>Ang gamayng
sakayan nitábas sa mabalud nga lawud,</hi> The
small boat plowed through the stormy seas.
<b>2</b> [A] make a dress. <b>&mdash; sa nawung</b> <hi>n</hi> shape
of the face. <hi>Nindut kaáyug tábas ang íyang
nawung,</hi> She has a finely-shaped face. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> style of dress. <hi>Minugbù ang tabas sa sinínà
karun,</hi> Short dresses are the @style now. <b>2</b>
k.o. cock feather coloration of a splotch of
darker color on a light field. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> the
style of a particular article of clothing.

<pb n=952>

<b>tábaw</b> <hi>n</hi> @joist, parallel board to which the
floor boards are nailed. <hi>v</hi> [A3; c] put in
joists. <hi>Ang báhì sa pugáhan lig-un itábaw,</hi>
The core of the pugáhan palm make strong
joists.

<b>tabawung</b> <hi>n</hi> @trunkfish: <hi><b>Ostracion spp.</b></hi>

<b>tábay</b> = <sc>ATÁBAY</sc>.

<b>tabáyag</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. edible @squash, round in shape
with a knob-like protrusion at the top. The
shell becomes hard when mature and is used
as a container: <hi><b>Lagenaria leucantha var.</b></hi>

<b>tabì</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c6] @gossip, spread secrets. <hi>Ayaw
siya suginli kay mutabì (manabì) dáyun,</hi>
Don't tell her because she gives away secrets.
<hi>Ayaw ni itabì (ipanabì) kay makauúlaw,</hi>
Don't gossip about this because it's
embarrassing. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @talk, @chat. <b>2</b> unpleasant
@gossip. <b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</hi>, hiN-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> action of gossiping
or chatting. <hi>Tábì (hinábì) ray inyung mahímù
ug wà matiwas ang trabáhu,</hi> All you can
do is @blah-blah, and you never finish any
work. <hi>v</hi> [A13C] engage in gossip or chatting.
<hi>Túa na ang duha, nagtábì (naghinábì)
na pud,</hi> There they are, shooting off their
mouths again. <b>-an</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @talkative, @loquacious.
<b>2</b> @gossiper.

<b>tábì<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <b>1</b> <hi>particle of courtesy used to ask permission
<b>to</b> leave for a second, ask a question,
pass in front of s.o.:</hi> @{excuse me}. <hi>Tábì,
kinsay ímung ngálan?</hi> Excuse me, what's
your name? <hi>Tábì úsà, byáan tikawg kadiyut,</hi>
Excuse me, I have to leave you a second.
<b>2</b> particle telling s.o. to get out of the
way rather brusquely. <hi>Tábì diha u sikáran
tika,</hi> Get out of the way or I'll kick you. <b>&mdash;
iskína</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> name of news column and radio
program that exposes anomalies. <b>2</b> child
<b>that</b> has a young sibling (and this[** thus ?] is shunted
off to the corner). <b>3</b> woman beyond her
prime (and not yet married). <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1256;
a12] be aired in this program or column. <b>2</b>
[B35] wind up a spinster. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6]
say excuse me.

<b>tabíbì</b> = <sc>TÍBÌ</sc>.

<b>tabid<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B346; c1] @trickle, @drip, flowing
down a side. <hi>Magtabid nang íyang láway ug
matúlug,</hi> Her saliva trickles from her lips as
she sleeps.

<b>tabid<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @braid the hair. <hi>Tabira
nang buhuk mu, ayaw ipunitil,</hi> Braid your
hair instead of having it in ponytail. <b>2</b> [A13;
a12] make into a <hi>tabid</hi>. <hi>n</hi> k.o. @hamper
for containing clothes woven from bamboo
strips around 20&prime; by 20&prime;, with a cover. <b>-in-</b>
<hi>n</hi> braided hair.

<b>tabig</b> = <sc>TABID<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>, <hi>v2, n</hi>.

<b>tabígì</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @mangrove, the bark of which
yields a red dye used for strengthening fish-*lines, 
nets or coloring the floor of a house:
<b><hi>Xylocarpus granatum</hi></b>.

<b>tabíki</b> <hi>n</hi> houses in Spanish times made of
stones evenly piled and plastered smoothly
with lime. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] build structures of <hi>tabíki</hi>.

<b>tabikung</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3; c1] sit on s.t. @straddling it.
<hi>Mitabikung siya sa baksit sa bisiklíta,</hi> She
sat on the backseat of the bicycle, straddling
it. <b>2</b> [A; b(1)] have sexual intercourse
(euphemism). <hi>Mihanà ang laki pagtabikung
sa bayi,</hi> The male set out to mount the female.

<b>tábil</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> put up a curtain in order to
conceal s.t. <hi>Gitabílan ang katri sa pasyinting
gilígù,</hi> They put a curtain around the bed
of the patient while he was being given a
bath. <b>2</b> @blanket, @engulf (literary). <hi>Ang kangitngit
mitábil na sa kalibútan,</hi> Darkness
covered the earth. <hi>n</hi> curtain for covering
s.t. <b>puting &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{movie screen}. <b>2</b> world of
the movies. <b>(->)</b> = <sc>TÁBIL</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>tabiláwan</b> (coined from tábil and laráwan) <hi>n</hi>
@{stage curtain}, @backdrop.

<b>tabili</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. lizard, about 1&ndash;1/2´ long with shining
yellow and green skin, found out-of-doors.
<b>&mdash; sa dágat</b> <hi>n</hi> lizard fish, a k.o. fish
around 6"[**inch symbol?] long, living on sandy bottoms of
shallow waters.

<b>tabílis</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S] @flow, @drip continuously. <hi>Mitabílis
ang túbig sa tangking nabuslut,</hi> Water
flowed continuously from the water
tank that had a hole in it. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{continuous
flow}, @dripping, @trickling.

<b>tabilung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. rounded slipmouth of two
species: one with fine, black scales which
peel off easily, and the other a smooth,
rounded and silvery species: <b><hi>Leiognathus
spp</hi></b>.

<b>tabilus</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. slipmouth with a small mouth
which could be elongated when stretched:
<b><hi>Leiognathus sp</hi></b>.

<b>tabing</b> = <sc>MARBAS</sc>.

<b>tabírak</b> = <sc>BINIGNIT</sc>.

<b>tabirnakulu</b> <hi>n</hi> @tabernacle.

<b>tabirwak</b> <hi>n</hi> @vagina, said of women who have
given birth to one or more children.

<b>tabisay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] @flow down vertically in a
thin stream, usually touching a surface.
<hi>Nagtabisay ang dugù gíkan sa kílay nga nasìsì,</hi>
Blood flowed from the cut eyebrow.
<hi>Ang íyang suwang gitabisayan sa láway,</hi> Saliva
dribbled down his chin.

<b>tabíwis</b> = <sc>TABÍLIS</sc>.

<b>tabla<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @draw, @tie. <hi>Tabla ang risulta sa iliksiyun,</hi>
The election ended in a draw. <b>2</b>
having experienced an equal amount of
s.t., usually unpleasant. <hi>Tabla ta. Púlus hilatusan</hi>,
<pb n=953>We both came out the same. We
both got a whipping. <b>3</b> just like, just as if.
<hi>Ang ímung pagluib nákù tabla ra sa ímu
akung gipatay</hi>, When you betrayed me it
was just as though you had killed me. <hi>Tabla
ka ug búang ánang ímung taas nga buhuk</hi>,
You are like a madman with your long
hair. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; a 12] declare a game a draw,
end in a draw. <hi>Tabláhun ta na lang ni kay
ngitngit na</hi>, Let's call the game a draw because
it's getting dark. <b>2</b> [A12] play s.o.
to a draw. <hi>Maáyu nag makatabla kag kampiyun</hi>,
It would be good enough if you
could play a champion to a draw. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A2; c6] give one's life to get revenge. <hi>Kay
nadisgrasya na ku manabla na lang ku níya</hi>,
Because he has violated me, I'll give my life
to kill him.

<b>tabla<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @board, a piece of sawed lumber,
made of lumber. <hi>Muskitírung tabla</hi>, @coffin
(lit. mosquito net of wood). <b>2</b> pieces of
cloth cut ready for sewing. <hi>Upat ka tabla
ang karsúnis</hi>, Trousers are sewn from four
pieces of cloth cut according to the measurements.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a12] saw into boards. <b>2</b>
[a12] cut cloth for sewing. <b>-in-</b> <hi>a</hi> gore, a
style of skirt. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] wear, make into a
gore style skirt.

<b>tabla<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] make off with s.t. that belongs
to s.o. else. <hi>Nakatabla siyag duha ka
líbu nga kubransa</hi>, He made off with two
thousand pesos that he had collected.

<b>tabládu</b> = <b>INTABLÁDU</b>.

<b>tablaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126; a12] get a big enough quantity
of s.t. pleasant not to desire any more.
<hi>Dì ku matablaw pagtinan-aw nímu</hi>, I can't
get enough of looking at you. <hi>Makatablaw
(makapatablaw) sad tung inyung híkay</hi>,
Your dinner was more than filling.

<b>tablíta</b>, <b>tablítas</b> <hi>n</hi> tablet, @capsule.

<b>tablíya</b> <hi>n</hi> ground cacao pressed into solid
pieces. <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] mold cacao into pieces.
<b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> molded into cubes or bricks. <hi>Nangismágul
siyag tinablíyang buláwan</hi>, He smuggles
gold bullion. <hi>Tinablíya nga batu</hi>, Stone
blocks.

<b>tablug</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB; c] @swing, make a swinging
motion. <hi>Mutablug ang kawáyan kun hangínun</hi>,
The bamboo poles swing to and fro
when the wind blows them. <hi>Siyay nagtablug
sa dúyan nákù sa gamay pa ku</hi>, She
rocked my cradle when I was young. <b>2</b> [A;
c] throw s.t. out with a swinging motion.
<hi>Gitablug níla sa barku ang mga patay</hi>, They
threw the dead men overboard. <hi>Tablúgan
ta unyà ka ug inínit</hi>, I'll throw hot water
on you, if you don't watch out. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> rope
or cloth that holds up a hammock. <b>tablugtablug</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A] @dangle as a result of almost being
cut off. <hi>Nagtablugtablug ang íyang tudlù
nga hápit maputul,</hi> His finger that was
almost cut is dangling.

<b>tablun</b> <hi>n</hi> a log squared off and ready for sawing
into boards. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @{square off} a log.

<b>tabtab</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] hack s.t. off with several
blows. <hi>Siyay nagtabtab sa písing gibugkus
sa kaban,</hi> He cut off the rope that bound
the trunk.

<b>tábù</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @meet s.o. <hi>Tabúun nátù siya
sa piyir,</hi> We'll meet him at the pier. <hi>Pirmi
lang kasábà ímung itábù inig-abut nákù,</hi>
You always meet me with nagging when I
come home. <b>1a</b> [C; c3] meet each other on
the way. <hi>Ambut ása siya. Gikatábù man tu
nákù,</hi> I don't know where he'[** "s"?] going. We
met on the way. <b>1b</b> [AC; a2] assemble,
meet, cause people to do so. <hi>Ang mayur
mauy mitábù sa mga draybir,</hi> The mayor
assembled the drivers. <hi>Magtábù ta sa simbahan,</hi>
We will assemble in church. <b>2</b> [C3;
c1] for two ends to meet, make them meet.
<hi>Tabúa (itábù) ang masig ka tumuy arun glúhan,</hi>
Make both ends meet so they can be
glued. <b>3</b> [A13] converge at a place for
market. <hi>Magtábù dinhi malúnis,</hi> They hold
market here on Mondays. <hi>n</hi> periodical converging
to hold market. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] @{go
shopping}, esp. at a periodical market. <hi>Manábù
ku sa Mantalúngun,</hi> I'll attend the
market day in Mantalongon. <b>hi-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
<b>1</b> @happen, @{take place}. <hi>Nahitabù nga nagkasákay
mi,</hi> It so happened that we rode on
the same vehicle. <b>2</b> for s.t. bad to happen.
<hi>Ug magpadáyun kag paíbug nákù mahitabù
ra man ta,</hi> If you keep on flirting with me
s.t. will happen between us. <hi>Dúna tingaliy
nahitabù sa báy kay gikulbaan man ku,</hi> S.t.
bad must have happened at home because I
feel uneasy. <hi>n</hi> @incident, @happening. <hi>Gisaysay
níya ang hitabù,</hi> He told about the incident.
<b>ha-</b>/<b>hiN-</b>/<b>haN-(->)</b> = <sc>HITABÙ</sc> (but not as
frequent). <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [C3; c3] @meet s.o. by
chance. <hi>Na, kay naglikay ku, nagkahinábù
na hinúun mi,</hi> I was trying to avoid him,
but instead we ran into each other. <b>tabùtábù</b>
<hi>n</hi> small @market. <b>tabuan</b> <hi>n</hi> place where
periodic markets are held. <b>-in</b><b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @gift given
by s.o. who arrives from a trip.

<b>tabudlung</b> = <sc>BUDLUNG<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>tabudyus</b> <hi>a</hi> @cylindrical. <hi>Tabudyus ang panghaw
sa barku,</hi> The ship's chimney is cylindrical.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> the fry of the <hi>gisaw</hi>. <b>2</b> sweet made
of starch from the trunk of buri palm
mixed with grated coconut meat, sugar, and
<pb n=954>water, wrapped in banana leaves and rolled
to cylinders the size of a child's arm, about
7&Prime; long, and roasted. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c1] roll into a
cylinder, tube. <hi>Nagtabudyus siyag sín nga
himúung túbu sa túbig</hi>, He rolled a galvanized
sheet into a cylinder to make a water
pipe. <b>2</b> [A; a] prepare <hi>tabudyus</hi>.

<b>tabug</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> = <b>TABLUG</b>, <hi>n</hi>. <b>2</b> beehive hanging
from a tree branch shaped like a mammary
gland. <b>tabugtabug</b> = <b>TABLUGTABLUG</b>. <hi>see</hi>
<b>TABLUG</b>.

<b>tábug<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; 1] drive, send away. <hi>Tabúga
ang bábuy nga misulud sa kural</hi>, Drive the
pig that got into our yard away. <b>2</b> [A; c]
throw s.t. away to dispose of it. <hi>Itabug tikas
bintánà</hi>, I'll throw you out the window.

<b>tábug<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AP; b6] <b>1</b> do s.t. in excess, way
beyond reasonable bounds. <hi>Nagtábug (nagpatábug)
ka man lag prisyu sa ímung baligyà!</hi>
You are pricing your merchandise
ridiculously high! <hi>Nakapatábug kug sulti
tungud sa ákung kalágut</hi>, I said a lot of
things I should not have because of my anger.
<b>2</b> do s.t. without forethought. <hi>Nagpatábug
lag tíru, lagmit makaigù</hi>, The way he
is just shooting so carelessly, he might just
hit s.o. <b>3</b> do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly.
<hi>Dì ku makapatábug ug lútù sa sud-an</hi>, I
can't cook the food hurriedly and poorly.

<b>tábug<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> = <b>TABLUG</b>.

<b>tabugsuk<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large spider conch.

<b>tabugsuk<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>see</hi> <b>BUGSUK</b>.

<b>tabuguk</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small octopus, larger than the
<hi>tamalà</hi>, smaller than the <hi>kugíta</hi>.

<b>tabuk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @{cross over}, bring s.t. across
to the opposite side. <hi>Mutabuk na ta sa karsáda</hi>,
Let's cross the street. <hi>Kuyaw tabukun
ning subáa kay sulug</hi>, This river is dangerous
to cross because the current is strong. <hi>Itabuk
ning asin sa píkas p[=û]</hi>, Bring the salt across
to the other island. <b>1a</b> [A2; a] emigrate
to another island. <hi>Mitabuk siya sa Mindanaw
pamásin nga muasinsu</hi>, He migrated to
Mindanao in the hope that he would be successful
there. <b>2</b> [A2; b6] move from one
group or affiliation to a rival one. <hi>Ang Libiral
nga diputádu mitabuk ngadtu sa Nasyunalista</hi>,
The Liberal congressman crossed
over to the Nacionalista Party. <b>n</b> area on
the other side, across the street. <hi>Túa siya
manarabáhu sa tabuk</hi>, He works on the
other island (other bank). <b>-anan(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @ferryboat.
<b>2</b> small, make-shift bridge. <b>-anun(<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> people from across the street, the other
island. <b>-l-un</b> <hi>a</hi> to be reached by crossing a
body of water.

<b>tabukaw</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. yaws, swelling with an oozing
opening in the center, growing to 1&Prime;, after
which <hi>sungkil</hi> develops.

<b>Tabúli</b> <hi>n</hi> a pagan ethnic group of Cotabato.

<b>tábun<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @cover s.t. to protect or
conceal it. <hi>Tabúni ang kan-un arun dílì
langawun,</hi> Cover the food so it won't get
flies on it. <b>2</b> @{cover up} for s.o.'s mistakes.
<hi>Nagdasà siya kay mutábun ang ginikánan
sa íyang binúang,</hi> He is abusive because his
parents cover up for his foolishness. <b>3</b> @{drown
out} a sound. <hi>Hápit tabúni ang íyang tíngug
sa makusug nga áwit,</hi> Her voice was almost
drowned out by the loud song. <hi>n</hi> <b>&mdash; sa láyag</b>
@{Passion Sunday}, the second Sunday before
Easter when it was the custom to cover the
tabernacle and statue with a piece of purple
cloth. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @cover. <hi>Hápit walay tabun ang
íyang dughan,</hi> Her breast was almost uncovered.
<b>tabuntábun</b> = <sc>TÁBUN</sc>, <hi>v2</hi>. <b>tabuntábun,
tabuntabun</b> <hi>n</hi> @eyelid.

<b>tábun<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> = <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.

<b>tábung</b> = <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.

<b>tab-ung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ac1] keep fruits in a dark,
warm place to hasten ripening. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> 1
fruit ripened in this way. <b>2</b> unsavory secrets
about one's past experiences.

<b>tabunuk</b> <hi>n</hi> @fertile. <hi>Tabunuk ang yútà sa pátag,</hi>
The soil in the plains is fertile. <hi>Káda túig
man manganak, tabunuk giyung matrísa,</hi>
She gives birth every year. She has a fertile
womb. <hi>v</hi> [B] become fertile.

<b>tabúnun</b> <hi>a</hi> @brown-skinned. <hi>n</hi> the @{brown race}.
<hi>Si Risal garbu sa yútang tabúnun,</hi> Rizal is
the pride of the land of the brown race.

<b>tabunus</b> <hi>n</hi> a covered @receptacle esp. for soiled
clothes about 2&ndash;3´ long, made of sawali.

<b>taburíti</b> <hi>n</hi> wooden or rattan @chair with a
backrest.

<b>tabuylug<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AB; b2c1] @swing, @spin around;
cause s.t. to do so. <hi>Mitabuylug ang bátà sa
písì,</hi> The child hung to a rope and swung
around. <hi>Nagtabuylug ang tyubíbu,</hi> The merry-go-round
is spinning around.

<b>tabuylug<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AC; c1] @{go together}. <hi>Magtabuylug
ta ngadtu sa sini,</hi> Let us go to the
show together. <hi>Gitabuylug níya paghigut
ang mga bábuy,</hi> He tied the pigs together
on one peg. <hi>n</hi> constant companion. <hi>Íyang
anak ang ákung tabuylug,</hi> His son is my
constant companion. <b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1] walk together
in groups; walk side by side together.
<hi>Dílì kita makatinabuylug sa pagpanglákaw
niíning pit-us nga dálan,</hi> We can not walk
@abreast on this narrow path.

<b>tabyáyung</b> = <sc>BALANTÍYUNG</sc>.

<b>tabyug</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB456; a1] swing s.t. suspended.
<hi>Mitabyug ang písing ákung gikumbibátan,</hi>
The rope I was clinging to swung. <hi>Kinsay
nagtabyug sa dúyan?</hi> Who swung the hammock?
<pb n=955><hi>Tabyúga ang butùbútù sa kampána,</hi>
Swing the clapper of the big bell. <hi>n</hi> s.t. used
to swing a hammock, such as a string.

<b>tabyun</b> = <sc>KULABYUN</sc>.

<b>tabyus</b> = <sc>KADYUS</sc>.

<b>tád</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small, slippery @fishes of various
colors, with large scales, found in seaweeds.

<b>tadhan</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>TAHUD</sc>.

<b>tadiyà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] throw a knife such that
the point sticks in at impact. <hi>Hingígù ka
giyud ug makatadiyà ka ánang irung nagdagan,</hi>
You're really a marksman if you can
sink a knife into that running dog. <hi>n</hi> @{knife
throwing}.

<b>tadiyaw</b> <hi>n</hi> large earthen jar to hold liquids.
<b>-in-</b> a shaped like a <hi>tadiyaw</hi>. <hi>Ang íyang kasing
tinadiyaw,</hi> His top is @egg-shaped.

<b>tadlas</b> @across an area. <hi>Midágan siya tadlas sa
uma,</hi> He ran across the farm. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @{go
across} a broad area. <hi>Tadlásun ku ang kadagátan
pagpangítà nímu,</hi> I'll @cross the oceans
searching for you. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> center player of
the defensive team in <hi>tubigtúbig</hi>.

<b>tadlip</b> = <sc>ADLIP</sc>.

<b>tadluk</b> <hi>n</hi> coconut seedling. <hi>Pilía ang tambuk
nga tadluk,</hi> Choose a healthy seedling. <hi>v</hi> [A;
a12] let coconuts sprout for seedlings. <hi>Mutadluk
(magtadluk) tag pila ka buuk,</hi> We
will let a few coconuts sprout into seedlings.

<b>tadlung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23; a12] go or walk straight to
a place. <hi>Tadlúnga lang tung kahúya kay hilabyan
mu ang tábay,</hi> Just walk straight to
that tree and you will pass the well.

<b>tadlungan</b> <hi>n</hi> black-finned @shark: <hi><b>Carcharias
melanopterus</b></hi>.

<b>tadluy</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> small @funnel for solids, used to
get rice out of sacks to see what the contents
are. <b>2</b> a k.o. @fish with a round, tapered
body growing about 5"[**inch symbol] or 6"[**do] in length, about
an inch in diameter, white belly and
darker back, with fine scales. a straight, in
line with. <hi>Syárug dílì ka kapasulud sa numiru
dyís nga tadluy man ni kaáyu ngadtus
bangag,</hi> Surely you can get the number ten
ball in because it is directly in line with
the hole.

<b>tadtad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @chop into bits. <hi>Nagtadtad siyag
tinái arun himúung dugùdugù,</hi> He is
chopping entrails into bits for the blood
stew. <b>2</b> [A; a2b2] have @{sexual intercourse}
(slang). <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> action of @cutting. <b>2</b> @{sexual intercourse}.
<b>maáyu lang tayáda way &mdash;</b> all talk
and no action. <b>tadtaran</b> <hi>n</hi> @{chopping board}.
<b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> dish consisting primarily of chopped
entrails and blood.

<b>tadyak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] @kick hard with the foot.
<hi>Tadyáki ang irung náa sa iláwum sa lamísa,</hi>
Kick that dog under the table.

<b>tadyaw</b> = <sc>TADIYAW</sc>.

<b>tadyus</b> = <sc>KADYUS</sc>.

<b>tadyùtù</b> = <sc>TAYÙTÙ</sc>.

<b>tág</b> <hi>n</hi> @tag, a piece of paper identifying s.t. <hi>v</hi>
[b6(1)] put a @tag on s.t.

<b>tag-<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> affix forming nouns which refer to the
agent of a particular action or to the particular
person concerned. <hi>Si Risal ang tagsúlat
(tagsulat) sa Núli Mi Tanghiri,</hi> Rizal was the
author of Noli Me Tangere. <hi>Ang tagsalà,</hi>
The one who committed the sin. <hi>Tagbalay
(tagbálay),</hi> Owner of the house.

<b>tag-<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <b>1</b> prefix added to numbers and numerals
to form numerals which mean [so-and-so]
many apiece. <hi>Tag singku ang pan
disal,</hi> Rolls cost five cents each. <hi>Tagsa ka sáku,
tagurha ka sáku ang palitun káda palit
níya,</hi> He buys a sack, two sacks at a time. <b>2</b>
<hi>added to other parts of speech:</hi> [such-and-such]
@{each time}. <hi>Tagdugay siyang mupaúlì,</hi>
He comes home late each time. <hi>Taglagyù
siyag byáhi,</hi> He travels long distances each
time.

<b>tagà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @fishhook. <hi>v</hi> [a3b2] caught, snagged
on a fishhook. <hi>Hitag-an na bayà apan nakabuhì,</hi>
It was already caught on the hook,
but it broke free. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [a12] catch with
a hook and line.

<b>tagà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] @{cut down} trees. <hi>Siyay nagtaga
sa ímung tanum,</hi> He cut your plant
down. <hi>Tagaa ang punúan sa ságing,</hi> Cut the
trunk of the banana tree down. <hi>n</hi> action of
@felling trees. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @woodcutter.

<b>*tágà</b> suppletive form for <hi>hátag</hi> used optionally
for suffixed forms.<hi> Tagáan (hatágan)
ta ka ug dulsi,</hi> I will give you candy.
<hi>Pagbinuutan kay básig hitagaan kag gása,</hi>
Be good because you might get a present.
<b>-l-an(->), -anan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.t. one is obliged to give.
<b>2</b> person to whom given. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> one to
whom s.t. is given. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> manner of
giving. <b>ka-un</b> <hi>a</hi> on the verge of giving. <b>ma-in-un</b>
<hi>a</hi> @generous, liking to give. <b>-l-un, -unun[**space?](->)</b>
= <sc>TAGAANAN</sc>, <hi>1</hi>.

<b>taga-</b> prefix added to words that refer to a
place to form nouns which mean: <b>1</b> one
who is from [such-and-such] a place. <hi>Tagamanílà
diay ka,</hi> So, you are from Manila.
<hi>Tagaámù,</hi> One who is from my hometown.
<b>2</b> one who is associated with a certain
group. <hi>Tagakustum</hi>, People in the @Customs.
<b>Tagakíim,</b> One of the members of the <sc>K.M.</sc>'s
(<hi>Kabatáang Makabáyan</hi>, Patriotic Youth).

<b>taga-(->)</b> prefix added to words referring to
parts of the body to form words meaning
'up to [so-and-so]'. <hi>Tagaliug ku sa útang,</hi>
I'm up to my neck in debts.

<b>tagábung<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> strands of hair formed into a
<pb n=956>@wig to reinforce a chignon. <hi>v</hi> [A1; a] make
into a hairpiece of this sort.

<b>tagábung<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TUGÁBUNG</sc>.

<b>tagad</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{give attention to}, @mind. <hi>Wà
na siya magtagad sa íyang pangláwas,</hi> She
stopped paying attention to her health. <hi>Wà
ku makatagad nímu dáyun,</hi> I wasn't able to
@{attend to} you at once. <hi>Walà ni Li tagda ang
ákung pakilúuy,</hi> Lee did not heed my pleading.
<b>1a</b> [A; c] @{pay attention to} s.o. showing
warmth, concern. <hi>Mutagad lang siya kun unáhan,</hi>
He is friendly to others only when
they speak to him first. <hi>Nagtagad pa giyud
kag andam dà,</hi> You shouldn't have bothered
fixing anything to eat. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @{wait
for}. <hi>Ása ta magtagad ug sakyanan?</hi> Where
shall we wait for the bus? <hi>n</hi> action of @caring.
<hi>Wà siyay tagad sa íyang pagkáun,</hi> He is
not particular about his food. <b>(<-)</b> = <sc>TAGAD</sc>,
<hi>v2</hi>. <b>tagdanay, tinagdanay</b> <hi>v</hi> [C2] be on
friendly terms with each other. <b>-in-</b> <hi>a</hi> @{looked
up to}, @respected, considered important. <hi>Usa
siya sa mga tinagad nga táwu sa lungsud,</hi> He
is one of the respected people in the town.
<hi>v</hi> [A13N] treat s.o. as worthy of attention.
<hi>Magtinagad (maninagad) ka man niánang
bastus,</hi> Why do you mind those rowdy fellows?
<b>-anan, tagaranan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{waiting place}. <b>tinagdan</b>
<hi>n</hi> manner of attending to s.t. <hi>Lahì
ang íyang tinagdan (pagtagad) kanákù karun
sa kaniadtu,</hi> She treats me differently
from the way she used to. <b>matinagdánun</b> <hi>a</hi>
@attentive. <b>pag-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @attention. <hi>Ang íyang líhuk
nakadani sa ákung pagtagad,</hi> The way
she acted caught my attention. <b>2</b> = <sc>TINAGDAN</sc>.

<b>tagadtad</b> <hi>a</hi> for the meat of fleshy fruits and
tubers to have hardened parts. <hi>Tagadtad
kaáyu ang kamúti nga guwang,</hi> Matured
sweet potatoes have hardened portions. <hi>v</hi>
[B2] get to have hardened portions. <hi>Sakit
ang nakatagadtad (nakapatagadtad) sa ságing,</hi>
A blight caused the bananas to develop
hardened lumps.

<b>tagak<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] join strands of abaca at the
ends to make a long thread. <b>-an, -an(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi>
k.o. @basket, cylindrical in shape and with a
large mouth, used to hold joined strands of
abaca. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> joined abaca fibers.

<b>tágak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; ac] cause s.t. to fall straight
down. <hi>Matágak ang mga dáhun,</hi> The leaves
will fall. <hi>Tagákun ku nang langgam sa usa
ka tíru,</hi> I'll knock that bird down in one
shot. <hi>Namatay siya kay hitagakan sa lubi,</hi>
He died because a coconut fell on his head.
<hi>Itágak nang sapátus kay naglisud ka pagsaka,[**pagsakà? P2]</hi>
Kick off your shoes because you're having
trouble climbing. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @fail in
school. <hi>Tagáka siya kay absiníru,</hi> Fail him
because he's always absent. <b>3</b> [A2; c1] for
coconuts to yield. <hi>Kanang kalubihána mutágak
ug usa ka líbu,</hi> That coconut plantation
yields one thousand nuts. <b>4</b> [B1267; b8]
suffer a @miscarriage. <hi>Natagákag makaduha,</hi>
She has had two miscarriages. <b>5</b> [a3]
for the curtain to fall signifying the end of
a presentation (metaphorical). <hi>Ug dinhi natágak
ang tabil sa átung sugilánun,</hi> And so,
here our story ends. <b>6</b> <b>&mdash; ang kwarta</b> [a3]
spend money. <hi>Natágak ang kwarta sa way
hinungdan,</hi> The money was just wasted. n
yield of coconuts. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> fallen leaves of
fruits. <b>2</b> fallen pieces, pieces which fell or
spilled out of a container. <hi>Tagak sa kupras,
mais,</hi> Extra pieces of copra, corn grain. <b>tagaktagak</b>
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B6; c16] drop down in spurts
or drips. <hi>Nagtagaktagak ang tái sa bátang
nagkalíbang,</hi> The child with the diarrhea
kept having his BM's in spurts. <b>2</b> [A13; b6]
drop things around, @mess. <hi>Mauy musilhig
sa sawug ang nagtagaktagak ug kan-un,</hi> Whoever
throws rice all over the floor is going
to have to pick it up. <b>3</b> [B145; c1] fail to
do s.t. in unison. <hi>Dungána pagrisayit. Ayaw
tagaktagaka (itagaktagak),</hi> Recite it together
in unison, not raggedly. <hi>a</hi> not in unison.
<b>-in-(->)</b> = <sc>TAGAKTAGAK</sc>, <hi>3</hi>.

<b>tagaktak<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @clacking or @banging sound, but
not resounding, e.g. that of slapping s.t.
with wood. <hi>v</hi> [A2; c6] make such a sound.
<hi>Mitagaktak ang sín pagbundak sa ulan,</hi> The
metal roof made a banging noise when the
rain came down hard. <hi>Ayawg itagaktak ang
bakyà sa simintu,</hi> Don't bang your wooden
slippers on the concrete.

<b>tagaktak<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. crunchy @sweet made of a
thick dough of ground rice or sweet potatoes
and sugar passed through a sieve to
form fine threads, fashioned into triangles
or other shapes, and fried brown. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6]
make <hi>tagaktak</hi>.

<b>tagal</b> <hi>n</hi> stipulated length or @period of time to
do s.t. <hi>Ang tagal sa pagbáyad sa útang tulu
ka búlan,</hi> The stipulated period for paying
the debt is three months. <hi>Ugmà ang íyang
tagal nga mubálik,</hi> He set tomorrow as the
day he'll be back. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] stipulate a period
of time within which or at which s.t. is to
be done. <hi>Gitagalan ang masakitun ug lima
ka adlaw,</hi> The patient was given five days
to live. <hi>Daghang burúka ang gikatagal niánang
adláwa,</hi> Many cases had been set for
that day.

<b>tagála</b> <hi>n</hi> a woman from the Tagalog region.

<b>tagalubi</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>LUBI</sc>.

<b>Tagálug</b> <hi>n</hi> @Tagalog language, people. <b>-in-(->)</b>
<pb n=957><hi>n</hi> Tagalog language, way. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @{speak Tagalog}.

<b>tagalúla</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @rattan used in tying bamboo
floor slats.

<b>tagam</b> <hi>v</hi> [B25; b2] @refrain from repeating an
act as a result of an unpleasant experience
previously undergone. <hi>Mitagam (natagam)
siyag pangáwat human maprísu,</hi> He didn't
steal again after he was put in prison once.
<hi>Balikbálik, ayaw pagtagam,</hi> Come see us
again (lit. don't learn a lesson). <hi>Hitagman
kag bisíta kun dì ka mutagad,</hi> People will
not come to visit you again if you don't entertain
them. <b>káun ug &mdash;</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12] experience
s.t. bad so as to feel that one doesn't ever
want to repeat it. <hi>Nakakaun ka bag tagam
nga dì na ka muadtu sa ámù?</hi> Did s.t. bad
happen to you that you don't want to come
back to our place? <b>katalagman</b> <hi>n</hi> @calamity.
<hi>Nahiágum sa katalagman ang Pilipínas paggúbat,</hi>
The Philippines experienced great
calamities during the war.

<b>tagamtam</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12; a12b2] have a taste, @experience,
feel of s.t., usually s.t. abstract.
<hi>Nakatagamtam kug lángit uban nímu,</hi> I have
tasted heaven with you. <hi>Tagamtáma ang ákung
panimalus,</hi> Get a taste of my revenge.

<b>tag-an</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a2b2] <b>1</b> @guess. <hi>Akuy tag-an sa
sulud sa bangà,</hi> I'll guess what's inside the
jar. <hi>Hitag-anan nákung ikaw tung nagmaskara,</hi>
I guessed right that you were the one
wearing a mask. <b>2</b> @foretell. <hi>Tag-ánun níya
ang ímung kapaláran,</hi> He will tell your fortune.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @guess. <b>2</b> fortune told. <b>tag-antag-an</b>
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> any k.o. guessing game. <b>2</b> @guesswork. <hi>v</hi>
<b>1</b> [C] play a guessing game. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @conjecture,
@guess. <hi>Wà ku makasigúru sa íyang
panuígun.[**2nd letter "e"?not sure][[** it's likely a. corrected.  P2] Átù lang tag-antag-ánun</hi>, I can't
be sure of her age. Let's just guess it. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>a</hi>
good guesser. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{fortune-teller}.

<b>tagána</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; c] set s.t. aside for future use,
prepare s.t. beforehand for s.t. <hi>Nagtagána
kug aslúnun pára sa pista,</hi> I reserved a pig
to be roasted for the fiesta. <hi>Itagána ku ang
kwarta sa inyung pagtuun,</hi> I am setting this
money aside for your studies. <hi>Ulì na kay gitagan-an
kag latus ni Tátay,</hi> Come home because
Father is preparing a whipping for
you. <hi>a</hi> @prepared. <hi>Andam ug tagána na síya
sa iksámin,</hi> He is ready and prepared for
the examination. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. prepared for s.o.
esp. for a special occasion. <hi>Dakung bábuy
ang ákung tagana sa pista,</hi> I prepared a huge
pig for the fiesta. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b3c] do s.t.
as a precaution just in case. <hi>Pagdág pistúla.
Maáyu nang managána,</hi> Bring a gun. It's a
good precaution. <b>2</b> [A2S3; b3] @hesitate to
do s.t., have reservations about doing s.t.
<hi>Nagpanagana kung mamisíta níya kay istrikta,</hi>
I hesitate to visit her because she's a difficult
person. <b>mapanagan-un</b> <hi>a</hi> characterized
with cautious hesitation.

<b>taganas</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small @waterfall where the water
glides along a sloping stone cliff, or the
smooth, stone slope the water glides over.

<b>tágas</b> <hi>v</hi> = <sc>TÁGAK</sc>. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> = <sc>TÁGAK</sc>, <hi>n</hi>. <b>2</b> egg accidentally
laid by a hen while walking.

<b>tagasak</b>, <b>tagásak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] make the sound
of cascading water hitting s.t. <hi>Nagtagasak
ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung,</hi> The rain made
a splashing sound as it poured from the
gutter. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> splashing sound.

<b>tagasanta</b>, <b>tagasantu</b> see *<sc>ISTÍGI</sc>.

<b>tagáuk</b> = <sc>TUKTUGÁUK</sc>.

<b>tagaw</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @wander, @roam. <hi>Nakatagaw
na siya sa íyang mga saup,</hi> He has already
made the rounds of his tenants. <b>2</b> [B; c6]
@{deviate from}, @{go separately}. <hi>Sa pag-ikskursiyun
námù mitagaw silang duha,</hi> During
our excursion the two of them got separated
from us. <hi>Mangulitáwu gánì nà siya, itagaw
ang sulti,</hi> If he begins talking about
love, change the subject. <b>3</b> [B] be @boorish,
@ignorant in one's ways. <hi>Makatagaw man diay
ning subra ra sa paghigpit,</hi> I found out
that being too strict with a child makes him
develop into a shy, socially poor sort. <b>4</b> [A;
b3c] @talk, @speak out loudly. <hi>Mitagaw siya
sa mikrupunu,</hi> He spoke loud over the microphone.
<hi>a</hi> ignorant and boorish. <hi>Giinum
sa tagaw nga dakù ang patis, ábi níyag kuka-*kúla,</hi>
The oaf drank the soy sauce thinking
it was coca-cola. <hi>n</hi> @vagabond, @wanderer. <hi>Dì
ku mamánag tagaw,</hi> I won't marry a vagabond.
<b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [B; a] be in confusion. <hi>Mutágaw
(matágaw) ang panagsulti ug muintra
na siya,</hi> If he takes part, the conversation
will get utterly confused. <hi>Tagáwun ku ang
ílang panimuyù,</hi> I'll cause confusion in their
home. <b>la-</b> see <sc>LATAGAW</sc>.

<b>tagawtaw</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; c6] talk nonsense to oneself.
<hi>Kabuangun nà siya kay síging magtagawtaw,</hi>
He is going crazy because he keeps
talking nonsense to himself. <b>2</b> [A] @nag and
@scold in a long rambling way. <hi>Nagtagawtaw
ang asáwa kay nahubug siya,</hi> His wife kept
nagging him because he was drunk. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @nonsense
one speaks. <b>2</b> uninterrupted nagging
talk. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> @nagger.

<b>tágay</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @pour alcoholic drinks into
a drinking vessel. <hi>Ikay tágay kay ímu ning
silibrasiyun,</hi> You pour the drinks because
it's your celebration. <b>2</b> [C2; c3] @{drink together}.
<hi>Makigtágay aku níya,</hi> I will drink
together with him. <b>2a</b> indulge in sensual
pleasure together. <hi>Nagtágay sila sa kinawatkawat 
<pb n=958>nga kalípay,</hi> They shared stolen moments
of joy. <b>3</b> [b6] be proferred s.t. <hi>Gitagáyan
siyag madaníhun nga pahíyum,</hi> He
was proferred a winsome smile. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> drink
poured. <b>2</b> drinking party. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> vessel
one drinks liquor from.

<b>tagaylu</b> <hi>v</hi> [AC] @barter, exchange one commodity
for another. <hi>Nakatagaylu kug humay
ug rilip,</hi> I bartered some relief clothes
for rice. <hi>n</hi> act of bartering.

<b>tagaytay</b> (from <hi>taytay</hi>) <hi>n</hi> @{mountain ridge}.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] go along the mountain ridges.
<hi>Managaytay lang ta kay gibahaan ang ubus,</hi>
Let's travel along the ridge because the valleys
are flooded.

<b>tagbagu</b> = <sc>TALAGBAGU</sc>.

<b>tagbak<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @herring: <hi><b>Ilisha hoevenii</b></hi>.

<b>tagbak<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. herbaceous plant of cool,
damp places, with lanceolate leaves, similar
to banana, growing to 1&ndash;1/2 - 2[** 1½-2 option?] meters: <hi><b>Kolowratia
elegans</b></hi>.

<b>tagbaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [AP1B16; a12] <b>1</b> @satisfy to the
point of satiety. <hi>Didtu siya sa Rílis, nagtagbaw
(nagpatagbaw) sa kaugalíngun,</hi> He was
in the red light district, satisfying his sexual
needs. <hi>Manggáwas ta kay natagbaw na kug
tíbi,</hi> Let's go out. I've had enough TV. <b>2</b>
get enough of s.t. to make one tired of it.
<hi>Ang nawung ni Imilda dílì makatagbaw,</hi>
One can't get tired of looking at Imelda's
face. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> state of being satisfied, having
had enough. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> satisfaction at s.t.
done. <hi>Pagsirbisyu nga makahátag dakung
katagbáwan,</hi> Service that can give great satisfaction.
<b>2</b> = <sc>KA-UN(->)</sc>. <b>ka-un(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> satisfaction
reached. <hi>Way katagbawung bayhána,</hi>
An insatiable woman.

<b>tagbaya<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> ulcer in the corners of the mouth.
<hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4] have a mouth ulcer. <hi>Gitagbaya
siya kay way kalígù,</hi> He has sores in
the corner of his mouth because he hasn't
bathed. <b>tagbayahun</b> <hi>a</hi> having ulcers in the
corners of the mouth. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] develop
this condition.

<b>tagbaya<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. bird, the Philippine bulbul:
<hi><b>Hypsipetes philippinus</b></hi>.

<b>tagbù</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{work bee} on a community project.
<hi>Tagbù sa pagpúu sa ilagà,</hi> A work bee to exterminate
mice. <b>2</b> = <sc>SÚGAT</sc>, <hi>n</hi>. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
hold a work bee. <b>2</b> = <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>, <hi>v1</hi>, <hi>2</hi>. <b>hiN-</b> =
<sc>HINABÙ</sc>. see <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>. <b>tagbùtagbù</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12C2;
c1] @meet in a clandestine manner. <hi>Dì na
sila makatagbùtagbù kay nasakpan na ang
ílang rilasiyun sa bána,</hi> They can no longer
continue with their trysting because the
woman's husband found out about it. <b>2</b> [C3]
keep passing by one another. <hi>Magtagbùtagbù
lang ang nagkalainláing mga sakyanan
sa kadalánan</hi>, All different vehicles keep
passing each other on the streets. <b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi>
trysting place. <b>-in-an</b> s.t. s.o. brings when
arriving from a trip.

<b>tagduk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A46; c] <b>1</b> for s.t. pointed to pierce
and stick into s.t. <hi>Gitagduk níya sa punúan
sa káhuy ang bára</hi>, He stuck the iron bar
into the trunk of the tree. <hi>Tagdúki ang yútà
ug kahiktan sa báka</hi>, Plant a stake into the
ground to tie the cow to. <b>2</b> @prick, make a
small hole like a dot. <hi>Siyay mitagduk sa pabúrut</hi>,
He punctured the balloon. <b>n</b> @puncture,
prick. <hi>Pilía ang síng walay mga tagduk</hi>,
Choose iron sheets that have no punctures.

<b>tagduy</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] for s.t. pointed to pierce and
stick into s.t. <hi>Mitagduy ang panà sa íyang
dughan</hi>, The arrow pierced and stuck in his
breast. <hi>Gitagdúyan sa tunuk ang íyang lapalapa</hi>,
He got a thorn stuck in his sole.

<b>tagdyaw</b> = <b>TADIYAW</b>.

<b>taghap</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; a] @guess. <hi>Taghápa ang ákung
ngálan</hi>, Guess my name. <b>2</b> [A12; b8] hit on
the right thing accidentally. <hi>Unsay kahibáwu!
Hitaghapan ku lang</hi>, I didn't know! I
just guessed it. <hi>n</hi> @guess. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] do
s.t. in a guessing way. <hi>Gipanaghapan níyag
áyu ang radiyu</hi>, He took a stab at fixing the
radio. <hi>n</hi> @guess, wild try. <b>taghaptaghap</b> <hi>n</hi> hit
and miss procedure. <hi>v</hi> [A1; b8] do s.t. by
a hit and miss procedure.

<b>taghud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] throw s.t. bulky s.w. with
the intent of keeping others from finding
out about it. <hi>Diin nímu itaghud ang nangkà
nga ímung gikáwat?</hi> Where did you dump
the jackfruit that you stole?

<b>taghuy</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; ac] @whistle, whistle at s.o.
<hi>Taghúya ang túnu ánang kantáha</hi>, Whistle
the tune of that song. <hi>Nasukù siya kay gitaghúyan</hi>,
She got angry because s.o. whistled
at her. <hi>n</hi> @whistling.

<b>tagibanwa</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>BANWA</b>.

<b>tagidiyut</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>DIYUT</b>.

<b>tágik</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; ac1] tie things together carefully
in construction. <hi>Nagtágik siya sa mga nípà
didtu sa katsaw</hi>, He was tying the nipa
strips to the rafters. <hi>Gitágik níya ang duha
ka bulus kawáyan</hi>, He tied two bamboo
poles together. <b>2</b> [A; a] create s.t. literary
or musical.<hi> Maáyu siyang mutágik ug sugilánun
nga kulbà hínam</hi>, He is good in composing
suspenseful stories. <b>2a</b> [a12] organize
or arrange words or ideas. <hi>Tagíka (itágik)
únà pag-áyu ang ímung mga púlung nga
igsusulti</hi>, Compose what you are going to
say carefully. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. used to tie things
together. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. constructed by tying.
<b>mag-r-(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @composer of poems or songs.

<b>tagiktik</b> <hi>n</hi> @ticking, clicking. <hi>Tinagiktik sa rilu</hi>,
<pb n=959>Ticking of the clock. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] make the
sound of tick-tick, pink-pink, or click-click.
<hi>Mitagiktik ang bildu nga nahúgan sa lansang</hi>,
The glass went pink-pink when the
nails fell on it. <hi>Hastang nakatagiktik sa íyang
makinilya</hi>, My! Her typewriter went
clickity-clack.

<b>tagilhus</b> = <b>TAGULHUS</b>.

<b>tagilhaw</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>HILAW</b>.

<b>tagilma</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>LIMA</b>.

<b>tagilpù</b> = <b>TAKILPÙ</b>.

<b>tagiltil</b> <hi>n</hi> short, high-pitched somewhat resonant
sounds: clink-clink. <hi>Tinagiltil sa kutsára</hi>,
Clinking of spoons. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] make a
clinking sound. <hi>Mitagiltil ang tigib nga gimartilyu</hi>,
The chisel went clink-clink when
he hit it with a hammer.

<b>tagilumbuy</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. tree of the second growth
forest: <b><hi>Eugenia sp.</hi></b>

<b>tagiluyluy</b> = <b>BYATILIS</b>.

<b>tagíma</b> = <b>TAGILMA</b>.

<b>tagimata</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>MATA</b>.

<b>tagimtim<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> discoloration of teeth or surface
roughness on metals, concrete, stone,
due to exposure to the elements. <b>2</b> very
tiny seashells found attached to stones or
the bottoms of logs that have lain in the
sand for a long time. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [b4] be discolored
and dirtied by the elements. <hi>Munyumintu
nga gitagimtiman na</hi>, A monument that has
been discolored by the elements. <b>2</b> [a4b4]
stay long s.w. (as if long enough to develop
<hi>tagimtim</hi>). <hi>Gitagimtim (gitagimtiman) na
lang ang lubut ug paninda, apan wà giyud
muirug</hi>, He has been in business for a long
time, but he has never prospered.

<b>tagimtim<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. tiny oyster found adhering
in clumps on rocks along the shore, similar
in flavor to <hi>sisi</hi>.

<hi>tagingting</hi> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> jingling or clanging sound. <b>2</b>
@resounding, ringing of voice. <hi>Tagingting ang
mandù sa sultan</hi>, The sultan's command resounded.
<hi>v</hi> [A; c1] go ting-ting or clang-clang.
<hi>Nabátì níya ang tinagingting sa panagsingkì
sa duha ka kris</hi>, She heard the
cling-clang of the two swords. <hi>Tagingtínga
(itagingting) ang kwarta kun minì ba</hi>, Make
the coin jingle to see if it's fake. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23]
for harsh words to ring in one's ears.
<hi>Nanagingting sa íyang dalunggan ang kasábà
sa amahan</hi>, Her father's scolding rang in her
ears.

<b>taginhus</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] go away from or arrive at
a place, one by one or in small numbers.
<hi>Nagtaginhus pag-abut ang mga mananagat
sa baybáyun</hi>, The fishermen arrived at the
shore one by one. <b>Culu-</b> = <b>TAGINHUS</b>.

<b>tagiptip</b> <hi>n</hi> dirt, grime that is stuck hard on
s.t. <hi>v</hi> [b4] have dirt sticking hard on s.t. <hi>Gitagiptipan
ang labábu</hi>, The sink was covered
with grime. <b>-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> dirty, grimy with
dirt stuck to it.

<b>tagitági</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] do s.t. little by little. <hi>Madúgayng
tagitági ug búhat ánà, mahuman ra
man nà</hi>, That work will get done if you do
it [** a] little at a time. <hi>Tagitagíhun nákù pagbáyad
ang útang</hi>, I'll pay the debt off a little
at a time.

<b>tagìtì</b>[**not sure] <hi>n</hi> tartar that sticks on the teeth or tobacco
tars formed from smoking. <hi>v</hi> [B6N;
a4b4] be incrusted with tartar or tobacco
tars. <hi>Nanagìtì[**not sure] ang hunsuy sa hinabákù</hi>, He
smokes constantly so his pipe is incrusted
with tars.

<b>tagiwálu</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>WALU</b>.

<b>tag-íya</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>ÍYA</b>.

<b>tagkus</b> = <b>TAKGUS</b>.

<b>tagmaya</b> = <b>TAGBAYA<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b>.

<b>tagming</b> = <b>TAGNING</b>.

<b>tagmuk</b> = <b>TAGNUK</b>.

<b>tagnà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12b2] <b>1</b> @predict, @prophesy. <hi>Si
Amus nagtagnà nga mahúlug ang Samarya</hi>,
Amos prophesied that Samaria would fall.
<hi>Hitagnaan níya nga patyun si Kinidi</hi>, She
predicted that Kennedy would be killed. <b>2</b>
@guess. <hi>Tagnáag unsay ákung surprísa</hi>, Guess
what my surprise is. <hi>n</hi> @guess, @prediction,
@prophecy. <b>maN-r-/l-</b> <hi>n</hi> one who has power
to predict, @prophet. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> @guesswork. <hi>Púlus
lang panagnà ang íyang panambal</hi>, His
treatment was pure guesswork. <b>paN-l-</b> <hi>n</hi>
@prophecy.

<b>tagning</b> <hi>a</hi> resonant and high-pitched quality
of voice. <hi>v</hi> [B] become resonant and high-pitched.
<hi>Nagkatagning ang íyang tíngug kay
síging praktis</hi>, Her voice is getting resonant
and high-pitched because she constantly
practices.

<b>tagnipà</b> = <b>SIRBILYÍTA<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b>.

<b>tagnípis</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>NIPIS</b>.

<b>tagnuk</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. gnat, tiny swarming insects of
rice fields that bite. <hi>v</hi> [a4] be infested with
this k.o. gnat.

<b>tagpas</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; a2] @permeate, penetrate
through material. <hi>Mitagpas ang ulan sa tulda</hi>,
The rain permeated through the tent.
<b>2</b> [b1] be splotched with menstrual blood
from menstruation. <hi>Wà mutindug ang babáyi
kay gitagpasan diay</hi>, The woman didn't
want to get up because her menstrual blood
had seeped through her skirt.

<b>tagpilaw</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>PILAW</b>.

<b>tagpis</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; c1P] slice s.t. thinly. <hi>Tagpísun
(itagpis) nákug hiwà ang kasahusun nga
karni</hi>, I'll slice the meat thin to make it into
jerked meat. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] be skinny
<pb n=960>and slim. <hi>Natagpis nà siya kay masakitun</hi>,
He is skinny because he is sickly.

<b>tagpud</b> <hi>a</hi> crisp, brittle and easily breaking into
small pieces like glass or like dry and
mealy sweet potatoes. <hi>Ang tagpud nga kamúti
kun lútù, uga ug unud nga húmuk mapulpug</hi>,
A powdery sweet potato is dry
when it is cooked and has meat that crumbles
readily. <hi>Ang biskwit nga bag-ung lútù
tagpud</hi>, Newly baked biscuits are crisp. <hi>v</hi>
[B; a] become crisp or brittle. <hi>Nagtagpud
ang íyang ngípun</hi>, His teeth are crumbling.

<b>tagsa</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>USA</b>.

<b>tagsaun</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. thick rattan used as a rope.

<b>tagsikan</b> <hi>n</hi> coconuts that are beginning to
turn brown, but not completely matured.

<b>tagsip</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab7] cut s.t. off of s.t., cut in
thin, long pieces (narrow or broad). <hi>Halus
makatagsip sa pánit sa káhuy ning sundánga</hi>,
This machete can hardly cut the bark
off a tree. <hi>Tagsípa ang kamúti</hi>, Slice the
yams into thin pieces. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> only a few of
a large number. <hi>Tinagsip lang ang makapasar
sa bár</hi>, Only a small percentage passes
the bar. <b>2</b> thin chippings or slices.

<b>tagsuk</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB16; ac] pack elongated things
tightly in an upright position using every
bit of space. <hi>Nagtagsuk ang mga táwu sa
trak dikarga</hi>, People were jampacked into
the truck. <hi>Tagsukun níya ang butilya sa sáku</hi>,
He will pack the bottles tightly into the
sack. <hi>Itagsuk ang putput sa alat</hi>, Pack the
sticks tightly in an upright position into the
basket. <b>2</b> [A; c] @pierce, plant into but not
through. <hi>Kinsay nagtagsuk ning sundang sa
báni?</hi> Who stuck the bolo into the banana
trunk?

<b>tagù</b> <hi>a</hi> for fibrous materials to be weak, not
strong and durable. <b>&mdash; ug kasingkásing, balatían</b>
<hi>a</hi> easily moved emotionally. <hi>Tagù ug
kasingkásing (balatían) ang mga babáyi. Dalì
da kaáyung madala sa pakilúuy</hi>, Women
are soft-hearted. They easily get carried
away with pity. <b>&mdash; ug mata</b> <hi>a</hi> shedding tears
easily.<hi> Tagù siyag mata. Bísan diyútay lang
kaguul, muhílak dáyun,</hi> She cries at the
slightest provocation. Let anything go
wrong and she bursts into tears. <hi>v</hi> [B2] for
fibrous materials to become weak. <hi>Mutagù
(matagù) ang sinínà kun sigíhag klúruks</hi>,
Clothes become weak if you keep washing
them with chlorox. <b>-un(->)</b> a of a weak sort.

<b>tágù</b> <hi>a</hi> hidden from view. <hi>Tágù kaáyu ílang
balay gíkan sa karsáda</hi>, Their house is well
hidden from view from the road. <b>sa &mdash;</b> in secret.
<hi>Nahigugma siya nímu sa tágù</hi>, She
loves you in secret. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B1256] be hidden
from view. <b>2</b> [AB3; b5c2] @hide, keep away
from view or knowledge. <hi>Didtu siya mutágù
luyu sa kamálig</hi>, He hid behind the barn.
<hi>Makatágù ka bag sikrítu?</hi> Can you keep a
secret? <hi>Walà ku tagúa (tagúi, itágù) ang sulat</hi>,
I did not hide the letter. <b>3</b> [A; b5c2]
put away in a safe place for future use. <hi>Nagtágù
ka ug sud-an pára ugmà?</hi> Did you put
away some food for tomorrow? <b>tagùtagù</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A] hide away in fear, do in secret. <hi>Nagtagùtagù
silag panagtagbù kay minyù man ang
babáyi</hi>, They have their meetings secretly
because the woman is married. <b>tagùtágù</b>,
<b>tagùtaguay</b> <hi>n</hi> game of @hide-and-seek. <hi>v</hi> [A;
b6] play hide-and-seek. <b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> hiding
place; hideout. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. hidden. <b>Kristung
-in-</b> a religious sect, the ceremonies of which
are strictly private. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> [** <b>1</b>] @secret. <hi>Nasáyud
na ku sa ímung tinagúan</hi>, I know your secret.
<b>2</b> s.t. kept from being lost or used up. <hi>Gastúha
na lang ang ímung tinagúan</hi>, Just spend
your savings. <b>ma-in-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @secretive. <b>ka-un(->)</b>
<hi>a</hi> feel very much like hiding oneself. <b>-um-r-</b>,
<b>-um-l-</b> <hi>n</hi> be about to hide.

<b>taguangkan</b> (from <hi>tágù</hi> and <hi>anak</hi>) <hi>n</hi> womb,
esp. of animals.

<b>tagubtub</b> <hi>n</hi> deep, resonant, thumping sound
produced by pounding. <hi>v</hi> [A] emit a boomp
boomp sound. <hi>Mitagubtub ang íyang likud
nga gisumbag</hi>, His back went thump when
it was struck. <b>Bul-ánung &mdash;</b> <hi>n</hi> pure Boholano
(humorous). <hi>Bul-ánung tagubtub, pakisabaw,
pakibahug, usa ka buuk itlug, sabwag
pitu ka sag-ub</hi>, A pure Boholano is so fond
of soup and food mixed with soup that he
uses seven bamboo containers full of water
to boil one egg.

<b>tágud<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] plant in a seedbed, esp.
rice, but also other plants. <hi>Magtágud na ta
pára pangulílang</hi>, Let's plant the seedbed
now for the second crop. <hi>Itágud sa kahun
ang kamátis</hi>, Plant the tomatoes in the box.
<b>1a</b> [B2456] for a rice field to have a certain
capacity. <hi>Mutágud ning basáka ug usa ka bákid</hi>,
This rice field is big enough to have
one cavan[** italicize?] planted on it. <b>2</b> [A; c] drop in
several numbers. <hi>Nagtágud siyag lima ka pasul</hi>,
He dropped four hooks and lines. <hi>Gitágud
ang mga bumba sa syudad</hi>, The bombs
were dropped on the city. 3 [B125] be covered
with wounds, sores. <hi>Natágud sa núka
ang makililímus</hi>, The beggar is covered with
sores. <hi>n</hi> rice seedlings. <b>taguran</b> <hi>n</hi> @seedbed.[+]

<b>tágud<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] cut or slice into small, but
not fine, pieces. <hi>Gitágud ang kamúti nga giságul
sa kan-un</hi>, The potatoes that were
boiled with the rice were sliced into small
pieces. <b>2</b> [AB125; a] tear into pieces. <hi>Bátà
ang mitágud sa piryudiku</hi>, It was the child
<pb n=961>who tore the newspaper into pieces. <hi>Nagkatagud
ang tualya,</hi> The towel is being reduced
to tatters. <b>tagudtagud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] <b>1</b> @cut s.t.
small into many pieces. <b>2</b> cut s.t. with short,
fast chopping strokes. <hi>Tagudtagurun ta ka
rung tikasána ka!</hi> I will chop you to bits,
you cheat, you!

<b>tagudtud</b> <hi>a</hi> having the quality of being @rubbery
when bitten by the teeth but yielding
when subjected to increased pressure. <hi>Ang
unud sa budyung tagudtud apan lamì,</hi> The
meat of the conch shell is rubbery but delicious.
<hi>Tagudtud kan-un ang hilawhílaw nga
linung-ag,</hi> Inadequately cooked rice is not
soft enough. <hi>v</hi> [B; b6] be rubbery in consistency.

<b>taguk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @sticky sap of plants and fruits.
<b>2</b> sticky, thin, membranous substance that
sticks on the body of a newly-delivered
child. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b8] give off sap. <hi>Mutaguk ang
kapáyas ug tigbásun,</hi> The papaya will give
off sap if it is cut. <hi>Hingtagukan ang ákung
sinínà,</hi> My shirt got smeared with sap. <b>1a</b>
[A2; b6(1)] for s.t. to be sticky with sap.
<hi>Dì na nà makataguk kay uga na,</hi> That sap
won't stick because it is dry. <b>1b</b> [B] for sap
to get sticky. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] catch s.t. with a
sticky substance, esp. the sap of a plant.
<hi>Tagukun ku nang langgáma</hi>, I'll catch that
bird with sticky sap. <b>3</b> [b(1)] remove, gather
the sticky sap. <hi>Ákung tagukan ning púsù
úsà utánun,</hi> I'll remove the sap from this
banana blossom before I cook it. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A13] have sticky substance all over it.
<hi>Nagkatáguk ang bátà nga bag-ung natáwu,</hi>
The newborn baby had sticky substance all
over it. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> a child having thin sticky
substance on him at birth. <b>2</b> producing
plenty of sticky sap. <hi>Tagukun kaáyung gumáha,</hi>
Rubber tree producing lots of latex.
<b>3</b> having lots of sticky sap on it.

<b>taguktuk</b> (from <hi>tuktuk</hi>) <hi>n</hi> knocking, thumping
sound. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] make a knocking sound.
<hi>Mitaguktuk ku sa pultahan apan way miabli,</hi>
I knocked at the door, but nobody opened.
<hi>Ayawg itaguktuk ang sapátus,</hi> Don't let
your shoes thump.

<b>taguláki</b> = <sc>TAGURALÁKI</sc>.

<b>tagulhus</b> (from <hi>ulhus</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A1; c1] do s.t.,
come out @{in turns} or @alternately. <hi>Nagtagulhus
ang háguk sa duha ka táwu,</hi> The two
men were snoring alternately with each other.
<hi>Itagulhus (tagulhusun) sila pagpabantay
sa masakitun,</hi> They will be assigned to
watch the sick man in turns.

<b>tagulílung</b> (from <hi>tágù</hi> and <hi>lílung</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o.
@charm which enables a person to appear
and disappear at will, said to be the egg of
a k.o. bird (the <hi>tuktur</hi>) which flies only after
dusk when he can be heard but not seen.
The egg is also invisible but obtainable
through magical procedures. <b>2</b> person who
possesses this charm. <b>2a</b> one who disappears
as suddenly as he appeared. <hi>Mabáwu man
tag pangítà nímu. Mu ra man kag tagulílung,</hi>
I've been going crazy looking for you. You
are harder to find than a <hi>tagulílung</hi>. <b>3</b> name
also given to the <hi>tuktur</hi> bird.

<b>tagultul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a signalling device made of a
nodule of bamboo having the nodes covering
both ends and a slit on the side. <b>2</b>
thonking sound. <hi>v</hi> [A; a2] beat this @{bamboo
resounder} or produce a similar sound. <hi>Mutagultul
siya arun pagtawag sa mga silíngan,</hi>
He sounds the bamboo resounder to call the
neighbors.<hi> Mutagultul ang likiun nga kawáyan
kun dukdúkun sa káhuy,</hi> A cracked
bamboo tube will make the sound of thonk-thonk
if you beat it with a stick.

<b>tagultul<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TAGAWTAW</sc>.

<b>tagul-ul</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. bird.

<b>tágum</b> <hi>n</hi> @indigo: <hi><b>Indigofera suffruticosa</b></hi>. <b>panimáhung
&mdash;</b> for leafy vegetables to develop
a fetid smell when they wither. <hi>Ngánung
nagpalit ka ánang kamunggay nga nanimáhù
nang tágum?</hi> Why did you buy <hi>kamunggay</hi>
that isn't fresh? <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] @dye s.t.
dark or @stain s.t. <hi>Ang nayabung tintà mitágum
sa mantil,</hi> The ink spilled and blackened
the tablecloth. <hi>Gitágum níya ang pughaw
níyang sinínà,</hi> She dyed her faded dress
black. <b>2</b> [B] become dark, black. <hi>Mutágum
ka kun magpúnay kag kalígù sa dágat,</hi> You
will become dark if you keep going swimming.
<hi>Nagtágum ang lángit, muulan tingáli,</hi>
The sky is getting dark. Maybe it is going to
rain. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> having the smell of indigo
leaves (not fresh). <b>2</b> @dark, @gloomy, @{dirty-looking}.

<b>tagumbul</b> <hi>v</hi> [B3(1)46; a12] produce a deep,
thudding sound. <hi>Mitagumbul ang bungbung
nga naigù sa lamísa nga gitulud,</hi> The wall
made a @thud when the table was pushed
against it.

<b>tágun</b> <hi>a</hi> @patient, @{long-suffering}. <hi>v</hi> [A; a12]
endure with patience. <hi>Mitágun giyud siyag
bantay bísag gikapuy siya,</hi> He endured the
long hours of the vigil even though he was
very tired. <hi>Tagúna lang ang kasakit, kadalì
ra lagi,</hi> Just endure the pain. It won't last, I
assure you. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @patience, @endurance.

<b>tagungtung</b> <hi>n</hi> short, vibrant, low-pitched
sound, such as that produced by a small
closed gong. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] make a <hi>tung-tung</hi>
sound. <hi>Tagungtúngun (itagungtung) ni pára
sa sáyawng Muslim,</hi> This gong will be clanged
<pb n=962>during the Moslem dance.

<b>taguntun<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> half the value of a domestic animal.
<hi>Bayinti písus mauy taguntun sa ákung
bábuy nga íyang gibatunan,</hi> He took care of
my pig for which I gave him half the value,
twenty pesos[**full stop . ?] <hi>Baktin mauy ákung taguntun
sa katungà sa litsun níya,</hi> I exchanged a piglet
for one-half of his roast pig. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1]
give one-half the value of a domestic animal.
<hi>Ákù na ning bábuy kay nakataguntun na
ku,</hi> I've given for half the value of this pig
for raising it, so it is all mine now.

<b>taguntun<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @swellings around the legs or
swollen glands in the joints, groin, axilla. <hi>v</hi>
[AN; b4N] suffer this sort of swelling.

<b>taguraláki</b> (from laki) <hi>n</hi> male @papaya (that
bears no fruit, but bears male flowers).

<b>tagurha</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>DUHA</sc>.

<b>tag-usà</b> = <sc>TALAGSA</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>USA</sc>.

<b>tagustus</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB; c1] for rope to @unwind,
get undone. <hi>Usba pagbúbud ang písì kay
nagtagustus na,</hi> Wind the rope again because
it is @unreeling. <hi>Itagustus (tagustúsa) ang mga
lánut nga gibugkus,</hi> Undo the abaca fibers
that had been tied in place. <b>2</b> [AP; c1P] pay
out a line slowly. <hi>Ikay tagustus (patagustus)
sa láyag inigkusug sa hángin,</hi> Lower the sails
slowly when the wind begins to blow hard.
<hi>Tagustúsi ang tabánug. Taas bítaw ang lambu,</hi>
Give the kite more line. Anyway it has
a long line.

<b>tagùtù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @chop rapidly with short
strokes so that the result comes out finely
minced. <hi>Átung tagùtúun ang dabung nga iságul
sa kinílaw,</hi> Let's chop the young bamboo
shoots into fine pieces to mix them
with the salad. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. @minced finely.

<b>tagùtù<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> clicking of the tongue. <b>2</b> = <sc>TALÙTÙ</sc>.
<hi>v</hi> [A] click the tongue. <hi>Kahibáwu
kang mutagùtù?</hi> Do you know how to click
your tongue? <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b3] click the
tongue in exasperation, dejection, anger.
<hi>Nagpanagùtù siya kay napildi,</hi> He kept
clicking his tongue in dejection because he
lost. <hi>n</hi> action of clicking the tongue.

<b>tagùtù<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> = <sc>TALÙTÙ<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>tagutungan</b> = <sc>DUTÙ</sc>.

<b>tagyaw</b> = <sc>TADIYAW</sc>.

<b>tagyum</b> = <sc>LALUM</sc> <hi>1, 3, 4</hi> (dialectal).

<b>tahà</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256; b3(1)] feel shyness or inhibition
in the presence of s.o. who commands
distant respect. <hi>Matahà siyang mudúul
ug dagkung táwu,</hi> He is afraid to approach
big shots. <hi>Paríhu ra nátù nang ímung
gikatahaan,</hi> You feel shy in his presence,
but he is just like us. <b>panahàtáhà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23]
hesitate to do s.t. due to reservation, tact,
or shyness. <hi>Manahàtáhà pa giyud nà siyag
sampit sa ákung ng[=á]n,</hi> Why does he hesitate
to address me by name? <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> shyness due
to respect. <b>ka-an, ka-an(<-)</b> a worthy of distant
respect. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <hi>a</hi> shy due to respect.

<b>tahal</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] sharpen a pencil. <hi>Talhi <corr sic="(ta
"></corr>(tahali) ang lápis,</hi> Sharpen the pencil. <hi>n</hi> @{pencil
sharpener}. <b>talhanan</b> <hi>n</hi> pencil or s.t. which
needs sharpening.

<b>tahan</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] <b>1</b> offer part of the body in
anticipation. <hi>Íyang gitahan ang náwung níya
arun hagkan,</hi> She put her face forward
to be kissed. <b>2</b> @offer, @{render up}, @{offer up} in
trust. <hi>Itahan ku kining k[**can't identify][**P2 guesses kinabuhì.] sa kahitas-*an,</hi>
I'll @entrust my life to the Almighty. <b>3</b>
offer without reservation. <hi>Itahan[**can't identify][**corrected. P2] sa kaáway
ang pagpasaylu,</hi> Offer forgiveness to the enemy.
<b>4</b> for bets to be placed or handed over
usually before the start of the game. <hi>Itahan
nang ímung pusta arun sugdan ang dúlà,</hi>
Place your bets so that the game may start.
<b>5</b> [A; c] offer a @bond, @security. <hi>Itahan ku
ang ákung yútà sa salapì nga hulaman ku
nímu,</hi> I will put up my land as security for
the money that I will borrow from you. <hi>n</hi>
@bond, @guarantee. <hi>Ímu na kining singsing silbing
tahan sa ákung pagmahal nímu,</hi> Take
this ring as a guarantee of my love for you[**full stop . ?]

<b>táhap</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256N; b3(1] be @suspicious. <hi>Nanagána
siya kay natáhap sa ákung túyù,</hi> She
hesitated because she was suspicious of my
motives. <hi>Siya ang gikatahápang tulisan,</hi> He
is the @suspected robber. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b6(1)]
assume s.o. to be guilty without good evidence.
<hi>Kung manáhap ka, tinúa únà,</hi> If you
presume s.o. guilty, be sure to ascertain the
facts first. <hi>n</hi> @suspicion. <hi>Ang ákung panáhap
nga minyù tung tawhána natinúud giyud,</hi>
My suspicion that that man was married
came out true. <b>ka-an</b> = <sc>PAN-</sc>, <hi>n</hi>. <b>ma-un,
manggi-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @suspicious.

<b>táhas</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> task or duty one must fulfill prior
to acquiring possession of supernatural powers.
<hi>Dúnay táhas únà makahuput ug urasiyun,</hi>
You must perform a task before you
may acquire a magic formula. <b>2</b> @mission one
is bound by vow or otherwise to accomplish.
<hi>Matag táwu adúnay táhas sa kalibútan,</hi>
Each man has a mission on this earth.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; c5] make a vow to accomplish s.t.
<hi>Tahásun ku ang pagtúman sa íyang túgun,</hi>
I will make it my mission to fulfill her commands.
<b>2</b> [c] assign as a mission. <hi>Akuy gitahásan
pagpatay nímu,</hi> I was entrusted with
a mission to kill you. <b>3</b> [A12] able to be in
some place alone without fear. <hi>Makatáhas
ka bag mintiryu?</hi> Do you dare go to the
cemetery alone?

<b>tahì</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @sew, @stitch. <hi>Kinahanglang tahiun 
<pb n=963>ning samad,</hi> This wound requires stitches.
<hi>Gitahian ku níyag birmúda,</hi> He sewed a pair
of bermuda shorts for me. <hi>n</hi> @stitches. <b>-anan[** space ?](<-)</b>
<hi>n</hi> @dress, @{tailor shop}. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> @seamstress,
@dressmaker. <b>-unun(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> pieces of
cloth to be made into s.t.

<b>tahirig</b> (from hirig) <hi>v</hi> [B; c1] @lean, @tilt to one
side. <hi>Nagtahirig ang lubi padúlung sa karsáda,</hi>
The coconut tree is leaning towards the
road. <hi>Tahiriga (itahirig) pagtanum ang páka
sa tubu,</hi> Plant the cuttings of sugar cane
stalks in a leaning position.

<b>tahisyan, tahisyan bird</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @dance wherein
the buttocks wiggle like the tail of a bird. v
[A] perform this dance.

<b>tahu, tahù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @{ginger tea}. <hi>v</hi> [A1] have ginger
tea.

<b>tahù<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @notify, @inform. <hi>Itahù kini níya
arun siya mahibáwu,</hi> Inform him of this
so that he will know. <hi>n</hi> @reports about an event.
<b>tahùtáhù</b> <hi>n</hi> idle @gossip, @reports passed
around to instigate a quarrel. <hi>Nagpalákat silag
tahùtáhù arun magkadisgustu ta,</hi> They
are spreading idle gossip to make us quarrel.

<b>tahud</b> <hi>n</hi> @spur of fowls and birds. <hi>v</hi> [b4] <b>1</b>
get one's spurs. <hi>Walà pa tadhi ang sunuy,</hi>
The rooster hasn't gotten his spurs yet. <b>2</b>
become @experienced. <b>tadhan</b> <hi>a</hi> @experienced
and @authoritative in one's line of work. <hi>Tadhan
siyang kusiníru,</hi> He is an experienced
cook. <b>tahudtahud</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> growths on the body,
usually near the joints, which look like the
spurs of the rooster. <b>2</b> small boils on small
children's heads.

<b>táhud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23; a12] @obey. <hi>Tahúra úsà ang
ákung gipabúhat úsà magdúwà,</hi> Do what I
tell you to before you play. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @respect.
<hi>Tahúra ang ímung ginikánan,</hi> Respect
your parents. <b>2a</b> [A3; c6] use an address of
respect to an elder. <hi>Nagtáhud siya nákug
Tiyù,</hi> He @addresses me as Uncle. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @respect.
<b>2</b> address of respect. <hi>Púpuy ang ámung táhud
níya,</hi> We addressed him as Grandpa.
<b>pa-(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] be @arrogant, demanding of
more respect than one has the right to. <hi>À,
mu pay muhangyù mau pay mupatáhud!</hi>
Hm, here you go acting as if you want me
to kiss your feet when you are asking me
for a favor! <b>tahuray</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13] respect each
other. <hi>Ángay magtahuray ang managsúun,</hi>
Brothers must respect each other. <b>katahúran,
pangatahúran</b> <hi>n</hi> words of greeting. <hi>Nangáyù
mig pangatahúran (katahúran) apan
way mitubag nga tagbalay,</hi> We called out
@greetings but no one in the house answered.
<b>pangatahúran</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] say words of respect
or greetings. <hi>Nangatahúran sila paglabay sa
párì,</hi> When the priest passed by they @greeted
him. <b>matinahúrun</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @respectful. <b>2</b> <hi>short
for</hi> <b>kanímu matinahúrun</b> <hi>in the complimentary
closing of a letter:</hi> '@{Respectfully yours}'.
<b>talahúrun</b> <hi>n</hi> term of address to a person of
distinction. <hi>Duha sila ka táwu, talahúrun,</hi>
There were two of them, @sire.

<b>tahum</b> <hi>a</hi> @beautiful. <hi>v</hi> [B24; a12] be beautiful.
<hi>Mutahum ka pa kun mangarmin,</hi> You'll be
more beautiful if you wear make-up. <hi>Nagkatahum
ang kalibútan sukad ku ikaw makítà,</hi>
The world has become a more beautiful
place since I met you. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] make
oneself up. <b>pa-, pangpa-</b> <hi>n</hi> @{beauty products}.
<b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @beauty, @loveliness. <b>ka-an</b> <hi>n</hi> great @beauty
(literary). <b>ma-</b> <hi>a</hi> @beautiful, @lovely.

<b>tàhung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] put s.t. over and around s.t.
else or hang it over. <hi>Akuy nagtàhung ug kawit
dihà sa palwa,</hi> I was the one that hung a
toddy container over the palm frond. <hi>Gitàhúngan
níya ang kingki,</hi> He put a shade over
the kerosene lamp. <hi>Láta ang itàhung sa
pusti arun dílì dáyun magabuk sa ulan,</hi> Slip
paint cans over the posts so they will not
rot in the rain.

<b>tahup</b> <hi>n</hi> @chaff of cereals. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] separate
the @husk from husked grains. <hi>Taphi
nang linubuk,</hi> @Winnow the pounded rice.
<b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> full of chaff, @chaffy. <hi>Ayúha paglimpiyu
ang bugas kay tahupun,</hi> Clean the rice
well. It's still full of chaff. <b>taphanan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
ground cereals to be winnowed. <b>2</b> place
where winnowing is done.

<b>tahur</b> <hi>a</hi> having the @imposing posture of s.o.
rich or of high rank. <hi>Tahur kaáyu siyang
tan-áwun, apan nanghulam ra diayg bisti,</hi>
He looks very imposing, but in reality he's
wearing borrowed clothes. <hi>n</hi> big-time, professional
gambler. <b>sugarul nga &mdash;</b> = <sc>TAHUR</sc>,
<hi>n</hi>. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; c] make oneself look imposing
so as to appear rich or of high rank.

<b>tahuri, tahúri, tahurì, tahúris</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. edible
@bean slightly bigger than the mung and
rusty brown in color, growing wild and cultivated:
<hi><b>Phaseolus calcaratus</b></hi>. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6]
have <hi>tahuri</hi>.

<b>tahusyu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{soy beans} preserved in soy sauce.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a2] cook with preserved soy beans.
<b>2</b> [A1] have <hi>tahusyu</hi> as the only food to
eat with the staple.

<b>tahuy<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] make a clay pot nonporous
by heating it and then putting shredded
coconut or vinegar in it. <hi>Kinahanglan tahuyun
úsà ang kúlun únà gawía,</hi> You must
treat the pot before you use it.

<b>tahuy<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @soup made of sweet potatoes cut
into small pieces boiled in water with nothing
else. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] fix this soup.

<b>tái</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @feces of people and animals. <b>2</b> in the
<pb n=964>game of <hi>bíku</hi>, the act of stepping on the
line. <b>3</b> @dross from molten metal. <hi>Tigúma
ang tái sa kalbúru kay ipintal ta sa batu,</hi>
Keep the dross of melted carbide because
we can use it to paint the stones. <b>dakung &mdash;</b>
<hi>see</hi> <sc>DAKÙ</sc>. <hi>v</hi> [b4(1)] get feces on it. <hi>Mataíhan
(mataihan) nang hapin ug iságul sa
taíhun,</hi> That diaper will get feces on it if
you put it with the dirty ones. <b>taitai</b> <hi>v</hi>
[B145S; c1] <b>1</b> do s.t. with difficulty and
turn out poor results. <hi>Nagtaitai kus iksámin.
Hagbung ku adtu,</hi> I found the examination
hard. I'll probably fail it. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; ang
búhat</b> do one piece of work after another
and leave most everything unfinished. <hi>Dì
ku gustung magtaitai ang ákung búhat,</hi> I
don't want to begin another job before I
finish the work at hand. <b>2</b> for a pen not to
function well, resulting in dirty penmanship.
<b>3</b> [B; b6] for plants to be growing at
different heights in one field or bed. <hi>Init
ang nakataitai (nakapataitai) pagtúbu sa
mga maís[** mais ?],</hi> The heat of the sun caused the
corn plants to grow at different heights.
<b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] <b>1</b> take out entrails of animals.
<b>2</b> clean the entrails of feces. <hi>Paghinái nákù
sa bábuy, napisà ang apdu,</hi> When I took the
pig's entrails, I squashed the gall bladder. <b>3</b>
have a woman for sexual intercourse. <b>ka-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A13] get feces all over it. <b>taíhun</b> <hi>a</hi> dirty
with feces. <b>-in-</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>TINÁI</sc>.

<b>taka</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b4] get tired of doing s.t. and
thus cease. <hi>Mitaka na siya,</hi> wà na maghilak,
He got sick of crying so he stopped. <hi>Gitak-an
kug hinuwat nímu, maung mipaúlì lang
ku,</hi> I got tired waiting for you so I just
went home. <b>2</b> [c5] not like to do s.t. <hi>Kun
dì mu ikataka palíhug buháta kini,</hi> If you
don't @mind, please do this for me. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi>
feeling of @boredom or of being @{fed up}. <b>ma-</b>
<hi>a</hi> @boring, @tiresome, <b>tak-ánun, matak-ánun,
matalak-un</b> <hi>a</hi> easily bored, tending to lose
interest.

<b>*takà, *tákà pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] do s.t. without
really knowing how to do it, without regards
as to how he is doing it. <hi>Maghibús ka
kun magpatákà (magpatakà) kag káun,</hi> You
will have diarrhea if you eat indiscriminately.
<hi>Patakai lag ansir. Sambahan lagi,</hi> Just
answer them at random. You'll guess some
right. <b>2</b> [A1] tell s.t. untrue, inaccurate.
<hi>Nagpatákà lang bisag siyay nánguna,</hi> He's
@lying. He started the fight.

<b>takaba, takabà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> wrap a piece of
cloth or the like around the body, esp. the
torso. <hi>Human kag kalígù magtakaba kag
tualya kay musihag ang sinínà,</hi> After you
swim, you should put a towel around you
because you can see through your dress. <b>2</b>
use as a shield or cover for any part of the
body. <hi>Nagtakaba siyag papil tungud sa ínit,</hi>
She put a piece of paper over her head to
protect her from the heat of the sun. <b>3</b> [A;
c1] carry s.t. on the back or shoulders by
tying it. <b>3a</b> carry s.o. on the back or shoulders
not tied. <hi>Gitakaba ni Mulit ang íyang
manghud,</hi> Mulit carried his little brother
@pick-a-back. <b>4</b> [A; aP] for animals to @mate.
<b>4a</b> have @intercourse (derogatory). <hi>Mitakaba
ka uruy ánang mubug lupad,</hi> You went to
bed with that pig of a woman. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> wrap-*around
cloth. <b>2</b> s.t. to cover one's head or
shoulders.

<b>takad</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] step on a line or specific
area. <hi>Dì ka mutakad sa bágis kay páwul ka,</hi>
If you step on the line, you are foul. <hi>Kining
batúha ímung takaran (takdan) arun makaabut
ka sa búnga,</hi> Step on this stone so
that you can reach the fruit. <b>takdanan</b> <hi>n</hi> in
games, the line on which one steps at the
start or any phase of the game.

<b>tákal<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @volume, @contents. <hi>Ang garapun dakug
tákal kay sa básu,</hi> A jar holds more
than a glass. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] @measure out in a
certain volume. <hi>Gitákal níla sa bukag ang
kamúti,</hi> They measured the sweet potatoes
by baskets. <b>2</b> [AB; c] for a measure to become
full, cause it to do so. <hi>Lainláing butang
ang nagtákal sa íyang pitáka,</hi> Her bag
was @filled with all different things. <hi>Nagkatakal
ang baldi sa hinayhínayng túlù sa túbig,</hi>
The pail is slowly @{filling up} with water
dripping into it. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> a measuring box,
basket, or can of any convenient size.

<b>tákal<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AC2; b(1)] for male pigs to @mount
another animal; by extension, for humans
to do so (derogatory). <hi>Kaduha takáling anáya
únà mumabdus,</hi> This sow was mounted
twice before it got pregnant. <b>bu-(->)</b> <hi>see</hi>
<sc>BUTAKAL</sc>.

<b>tak-al</b> <hi>v</hi> [B; c16] for a cover not to be closed
tight, door to be @ajar. <hi>Ang kaban nga labihang
kapunù mitak-al,</hi> The trunk was part
open because it was too full.

<b>takam, tákam</b> <hi>a</hi> ravenous. <hi>Ang táwung takam
mukáun bísan unsa,</hi> A ravenous person will
eat anything. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B] be @hungry, ravenous.
<hi>Kinsay dílì mutakam (matakam) nga tulu
ka adlaw wà miy káun gawas sa prútas,</hi>
Who wouldn't become ravenous when for
three days we did not have anything to eat
except fruits. <b>2</b> [A; c1] take a large bite,
@chew. <hi>May nagtakam sa kík kay gamay na
lang ang nahibilin,</hi> S.o. took a big bite
from the cake because only a small portion
of it is left. <hi>Itakam (takama) ug maáyu ang
<pb n=965>kan-un únà tunla,</hi> Chew the food well before
you swallow it. <b>takamtakam</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13;
c16] @{smack the lips}. <hi>Nagtakamtakam ang
bátà kay miángay sa lamì sa gátas,</hi> The child
is smacking his lips because he likes the
milk. <b>2</b> [A13] await eagerly. <hi>Nagtakamtakam
na ku sa lamì sa mga sud-an,</hi> I am
eagerly @anticipating the delicious food.

<b>takandal</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3P] for vehicles to run with
a jouncing, bouncing motion. <hi>Mutakandal
na pud ang trák kun mulabang sa kabatuan,</hi>
The truck will bounce again when it crosses
the stony area. <b>2</b> [B46; c1] make a
@clacking, banging sound. <hi>Mitakandal ang
bakyà sa simintádung dálan,</hi> The wooden
slippers went clickety clack over the cemented
walk. <hi>Ang táru nga way sulud mitakandal
kay ákung hipatiran,</hi> The empty
can @rattled when I kicked it.

<b>tákang</b> = <sc>LÁKANG</sc>.

<b>tak-ang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] put a pot or kettle on the
stove. <hi>Itak-ang na ang lung-agúnun,</hi> Put the
rice on the stove. <b>tak-angánan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @stove. <b>2</b>
pot or kettle rest.

<b>tákas</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2S; ac] <b>1</b> @{go up} an incline. <hi>Takásun
pa nátù ang pitu ka bungtud úsà muabut
sa píkas baybay,</hi> We still have to @ascend
seven hills before we get to the other side
of the island. <hi>Kining bakilíra dílì katakásan
ug gamayng awtu,</hi> A small car cannot negotiate
this slope. <b>2</b> go @ashore. <hi>Ang pawíkan
mutákas arun mangitlug,</hi> The sea turtles @{go
ashore} to lay their eggs. <hi>Dì ta makatákas
kay balud kaáyu,</hi> We can't go ashore because
the sea is very rough. <b>2a</b> [A; b6] land
from a sea attack. <b>3</b> [A2; b(1)] escape
from prison. <hi>Tulu na ka prisuhan ang ílang
gitakásan,</hi> They have already escaped from
three prisons.

<b>takba</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b] lean forward on s.t. or s.o.
and cling to it. <hi>Mitakba siya sa bukubuku
sa íyang bána nga nagkaun,</hi> She @{leaned on}
her husband's back while he was eating.
<hi>Maáyu kay nakatakba siyag bátang pagkalúnud
sa barku,</hi> Luckily he was able to
cling to a log for support when the boat
sunk. <b>2</b> [A; a12] carry a child closely in
one's arms with the child facing one. <hi>Takbáha
ang bátà kun butdan sa tiyan,</hi> Carry
the child with his stomach pressed against
you if he has gas in the stomach. <b>3</b> [AC;
b(1)] @mount for copulation, as if for copulation.
<hi>Mitakba na ang butù apan dì gustu
ang bayi,</hi> The male mounted, but the female
did not like it. <b>3a</b> for humans to @{have intercourse}
(coarse). <b>4</b> [A; b] wrap a part of
the body with s.t. <hi>Gitakbahan níyag dyákit
ang bukubuku sa dalága,</hi> He covered the
girl's back with a jacket.

<b>takbas</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] <b>1</b> swing a bolo or a similar
bladed instrument. <hi>Mitakbas siyag bálus
apan lúya na siya,</hi> He swung a bolo to retaliate
but he was already too weak. <b>2</b> sever
with a swing of the bolo. <hi>Si Simyun ang
mitakbas sa gamayng punúan sa ságing,</hi> Simeon
cut down the small banana trunk in
one stroke.

<b>takbuy</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b] @hug, @cling closely in order
not to fall. <hi>Mitakbuy ang tikì sa bukubuku
sa manananggut,</hi> The gecko clung tightly to
the toddy gatherer's back. <hi>Nakatakbuy ang
anak sa láwas sa inahan dihang midugdug,</hi>
The child clung to his mother when it
thundered. <b>2</b> [A2; b4] @infect with a disease.
<hi>Tíbi ang mitakbuy níya,</hi> He @contracted T.B.
<b>3</b> [A23P; b(1)] stay with s.o., usually as a
dependent. <hi>Siyay ákung gitakbúyan ug dúgay
kay kwartáhan man,</hi> I stayed long at
her house because she was wealthy.

<b>takdà</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @schedule, set a date. <hi>Átung
itakdà ang sunud nátung tígum,</hi> We will set
the date for our next meeting. <b>2</b> [A; c] @sign,
put a @mark on. <hi>Siyay mitakdà (nagtakdà)
sa sulat,</hi> He signed the letter. <hi>Takdái ug íkis
ang punúan sa lubi,</hi> Mark the trunks of the
coconut trees with an X. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @signature,
@mark. <b>2</b> @reminder; s.t. that is used as a reminder.
<hi>Ang anínu sa pusti mauy ákung takdà
sa úras,</hi> The shadow of the post is my
reminder of the time. <b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>TAKDÀ</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>takdang</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab2] <b>1</b> hack or lodge a blade
laterally into s.t. <hi>Ang amul wà makatakdang
sa punúan sa káhuy,</hi> The dull bolo did
not cut the trunk of the tree. <b>2</b> make
@notches, @nick. <hi>Ang bátà mauy mitakdang
sa tiil sa silya,</hi> The child made notches on
the legs of the chair. <b>3</b> [A; b] strike the
forehead with s.t. heavy. <hi>Akuy mutakdang
ug puthaw sa ímung agtang,</hi> I'll strike your
forehead with an iron rod.

<b>takdù</b> @exactly, no more and no less. <hi>Takdù
karung diyis anyus ang átung kaminyúun,</hi>
We have been married for exactly ten years
today. <hi>Takdù sa gikasabútan,</hi> In exact accordance
with their agreement. <hi>Takdù giyud
sa nahitabù ang íyang tahù,</hi> His report turned
out to be exactly in agreement with
what had happened. <b>&mdash; ang búwan</b> for the
moon to be full. <hi>v</hi> [AB256C3; c1] <b>1</b> for
things that are joined to fit exactly at their
point of junction, make s.t. fit. <hi>Walà mutakdù
ang takub sa kaban,</hi> The cover of the
trunk doesn't fit squarely. <hi>Takdúa (itakdù)
ang duha ka iskína arun tíkup,</hi> Have the
corners meet and fit to make it tight. <b>2</b>
@coincide, be in agreement with each other;
<pb n=966>make things be in agreement. <hi>Ang íyang
kamatáyun ug ang ímung damgu nagkatakdù
lang,</hi> His death and your dream were
just a @coincidence. <hi>Itakdù ang ímung bakak
sa akúa arun katuúhan,</hi> Make your lie be in
@accordance with mine so they will be plausible.
<b>3</b> be @appropriate. <hi>Kinahanglang mutakdù
ang ímung isul-ub sa ukasiyun,</hi> Your
attire must @fit the occasion. <b>3a</b> [C3] be on
compatible terms with each other. <hi>Nagkatakdù
ang duha ka buringug,</hi> The two fools
@{hit it off} nicely. <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> point of junction,
place s.t. meets.

<b>takdul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> = <sc>DAKTUL</sc>.

<b>takduy</b> = <sc>TAGDUY</sc>.

<b>takgus</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ac] <b>1</b> @fasten s.t. to s.t. with a
knotted cord. <hi>Palíhug rag takgus sa ríbun
sa ákung[**not sure, whether letter is missing][**P2, P3 thinks it's just a stray mark.] buhuk,</hi> Please tie my hair up for
me with a ribbon. <hi>Takgúsun na silang duha
sa talikálà sa kaminyúun,</hi> They are going
to be @bound together in wedlock. <hi>Ang salug
nga kawáyan takgúsan ug uway ngadtu sa
busaug,</hi> The bamboo flooring is @tied to the
joists with rattan. <b>2</b> tie into a loop that
easily gets undone. <hi>Takgúsa ang list&ucaron;n sa
ákung sapátus,</hi> Tie my shoelace. <b>3</b> tie s.t.
around s.t. <hi>Nagtakgus siyag sundang sa háwak,</hi>
He strapped a bolo around his waist.
<hi>Itakgus ang tarì sa tiil sa hiniktan,</hi> Tie the
gaff around the cock's leg. <hi>n</hi> s.t. that is
fastened to s.t. else by entwining or the
like. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> the knotted part of s.t.
tied. <hi>Tan-áwa nga dílì mailhan ang tinakgusan,</hi>
See to it that the knotted part does
not show.

<b>takiang</b> (from <hi>kiang</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A; c16] walk limpingly.
<hi>Nagtakiang siya kay nalisa ang tiil,</hi>
He is @limping because he sprained his foot.

<b>tákig</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @malaria. <b>2</b> any disease characterized
by chills and shaking. <b>2a</b> fit of shivering
due to illness. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; b4] <b>1</b> be afflicted
with malaria. <b>2</b> have the @chills. <hi>Gitakígan
ang masakitun,</hi> The patient had the
chills. <b>-un(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> one afflicted with malaria.

<b>takigrapíya</b> <hi>n</hi> @stenography, @shorthand.

<b>takigrapu</b> <hi>n</hi> @stenographer. <hi>v</hi> [B156; a2] be,
become a stenographer.

<b>takihud, takíhud</b> (from <hi>kihud</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A13; c1]
@limp. <hi>Nagtakihud siya tungud sa pulyu,</hi> He
limps because he had polio.

<b>takílid</b> (from <hi>kílid</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A2S; c1] <b>1</b> @tilt, @{turn
over} on the side. <hi>Nilísù siya kay mutakílid
siya paghigdà,</hi> He turned over to lie on his
side. <hi>Ang agúkuy magtakilid nga maglakaw,</hi>
The fiddler crab walks @sideways. <hi>Ayaw itakílid
(takilíra, takilda), mayabu,</hi> Don't tilt
it. It might spill. <b>2</b> @veer, change directions.
<hi>Mitakílid ang barku sa tuu,</hi> The ship veered
off to the right. <b>3</b> [A23] get money from
one's pocket (lit. lean over to stick the
hands in the pocket). <hi>Mutakílid siya dáyun
ug pangayúag kwarta,</hi> He immediately
reaches in his pocket if anyone asks him
for money.

<b>takilpù</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126] for one's foot to slip to its
side, ankles to give way. <hi>Natakilpù siya sa
íyang bag-ung hayhil,</hi> Her foot slipped on
its side on her new high heels.

<b>takilya</b> <hi>n</hi> @{box office}, a place where admission
tickets are sold. <hi>Si Klint Istwud gihugúpan
pag-áyu sa takilya,</hi> Clint Eastwood is very
popular at the box office. <b>takilyíra</b> <hi>n</hi> @{ticket
seller} (female). <hi>v</hi> [B156; a2] be a @{ticket
vendor}. <b>takilyíru</b> <hi>n</hi> @{ticket seller} (male).

<b>takin</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] strap s.t. around the waist.
<hi>Nagtakin siya ug sundang kay mangáhuy,</hi>
He's strapping a bolo on his waist to gather
firewood. <hi>Itakin ang baskit kun mangáni,</hi>
Strap the basket around the waist when you
harvest rice. <hi>n</hi> basket fastened to the waist,
used in harvesting rice.

<b>tak-in</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @tuck-in one's shirt. <hi>Angayan
kang magtak-in kay dì sapyut,</hi> You look
nice with your shirt @{tucked in} because your
buttocks are not flat.

<b>takinding</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3] roll with a clatter. <hi>Pagkahúlug
níya ang plátung íyang gidala mitakinding
sa ubus,</hi> When he fell, the plates he
was carrying rolled with a clatter.

<b>takingking</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @hop on one leg. <hi>Takingkínga
kútub ngadtu,</hi> Hop up to there on
one leg.

<b>takinhud</b> = <sc>TANGKIHUD</sc>.

<b>takip</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @include along with, do to
s.t. at the same time as one does it to s.t.
else. <hi>Kinsay nagtakip sa ákung ngálan sa lista?</hi>
Who included my name in the list?
<hi>Nagtakip kug ritrátu sa ákung sulat,</hi> I @enclosed
a picture in my letter. <hi>Gikatakip nákug
gastu ang ímung kwarta,</hi> I spent your
money @{along with} mine. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1c] join
flat things one on top of the other or at
their edges. <hi>Takípa nang duha ka papil arun
madakù (mabagà),</hi> Join those two sheets of
paper to make them bigger (or Paste them on
top of one another to make them thicker).

<b>taklà</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] make a clicking, clacking
noise with the tongue. <hi>Taklái siya kay mau
nay ámung sinyas,</hi> Clack your tongue at
him because that's our signal. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> clacking
of the tongue. <b>2</b> a k.o. small, dark-hued
@shrimp 2&ndash;3 cm. long which emits a loud
clicking sound similar to tongue clacking.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b3] make a clacking noise with
the tongue in exasperation, dejection, or
admiration. <hi>Nanaklà siya kay hibyaan sa
<pb n=967>bus</hi>, He clacked his tongue because he missed the bus.

<b>taklap</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @spread, @lay s.t. flat over s.t.
so as to cover it. <hi>Itaklap ring hábul sa lamísa,</hi>
Spread this blanket over the table. <b>2</b> [B2456]
@cover as if enveloping. <hi>Mitaklap ang
kangitngit sa kalibútan,</hi> Darkness covered
the world. <hi>n</hi> s.t. spread over s.t. to cover it.

<b>taklas</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for dogs to jump all over
s.o. <hi>Nabuling ang ákung sinínà kay gitaklásan
ku sa irù,</hi> My clothes got dirty because
the dog jumped all over me. <b>2</b> [A; b5]
climb, clamber up on s.t. not affording a
good foothold. <hi>Hipaakan tà ku sa irù ug wà
pa ku makataklas sa kináma nga mga kahun,</hi>
I would have been bitten by the dog had I
not clambered on the stacked boxes.

<b>taklay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; c] hang s.t. loose around the
neck. <hi>Dílì maáyu nga magsuruysúruy sa kalying
magtaklay ug tualya,</hi> It is not good to
go around the streets having a towel draped
around one's neck.

<b>taklì</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B2] draw one's attention away
from where it should be focused. <hi>Ang nakataklì
(nakapataklì) sa íyang intiris sa panulat
mau ang súgal,</hi> Gambling drew away his
interest from writing. <hi>Nataklì ang atinsiyun
ni Míla ngadtu sa íyang katúpad,</hi> Mila's attention
was drawn away from me towards
her seatmate. <b>2</b> [c] transfer temporary
ownership of land from one mortgage-holder
to another. <hi>Ang pinirindang yútà gitaklì
pagprinda diri kanákù,</hi> The mortgaged lot
was transferred to me.

<b>taklíad</b> (from <hi>liad</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A2; c1] bend the body
backward to the extent that the head is at
<b>the</b> same level as the chest or lower. <hi>Bantáyi
nga dì mataklíad ang bátà,</hi> Watch out
that the baby doesn't throw himself backwards.
<hi>Ákung itaklíad (takliárun) ug maáyu
ang ákung láwas sa sáyawng limburak,</hi> I
bend way back when I dance the limbo
rock.

<b>taklid</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] pin, tie s.o.'s hands behind
his back. <hi>Gitaklid ang mga dinakpan,</hi> The
prisoners had their hands tied behind their
backs. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AN] fold one's hands behind
the back. <hi>Mihinaklid siyang nagdiskursu,</hi>
He folded his hands behind his back
while speaking. <b>2</b> [AN; bN] do s.t. difficult
with ease. <hi>Panghinaklíran (hinaklíran) lang
níya nang bungtúra,</hi> He will climb that
mountain with ease.

<b>taklíma</b> <hi>v</hi> [B126] wrench the ankle or the
foot. <hi>Nataklíma ang ákung tiil sa danglug
nga batu,</hi> I wrenched my foot on a slippery
stone.

<b>taklub</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] cover s.t. over with s.t. enclosing 
it. <hi>Akuy mutaklub sa basurahan,</hi> I'll
put the lid on the garbage can. <hi>Ingun kug
nawálà ang ituy apan natakluban diay sa
kahun,</hi> I thought the puppy got lost, but
actually it had just gotten under the box. <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> @lid. <b>2</b> basket-like pen for fowl.

<b>taklúbu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{giant clams}, esteemed for food,
large specimens of which furnish shells for
baptismal fonts.

<b>taklung</b> <hi>v</hi> [b8] be caught by being covered
by s.t. which falls. <hi>Ang iring nataklungan sa
kahun,</hi> The cat was caught by a box that
fell on it.

<b>taklus</b> = <sc>TAKGUS</sc>.

<b>takmag</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] for a male animal to
@mount on the female. <hi>Basta mangúlag ang
anay, mutakmag giyud ang butù,</hi> If the sow
is in heat, the male will mount her.

<b>takmù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [a3b8] hit one's chin on s.t. <hi>Natakmù
ku sa kurdísu pagkatumba nákù,</hi> I hit
my chin on the window sill when I fell
down.
[**F1 Why takmù<hi rend=sub>1</hi> if there's no takmù<hi rend=sub>2</hi>?]

<b>takmul</b> <hi>a</hi> drawing the lips in or biting the
lower lip in defiance, anger, or when making
an effort. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6] for the lips to @purse.
<hi>Nagtakmul ang íyang simud,</hi> He drew in his
mouth. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] draw in the lips,
bite the lower lip. <hi>Nanakmul siyang nag-alsa
sa kahun,</hi> He bit his lower lip while heaving
the box.

<b>takna</b> = <sc>TAKNÀ</sc>, <hi>n2, 2a</hi>.

<b>taknà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{identifying mark}. <hi>Ang sáku nga
may taknà átù,</hi> The sack that has an identifying
mark on it is ours. <b>1a</b> notch as an
identifying mark. <b>2</b> @hour. <b>2a</b> @moment. <hi>Sa
taknang pul-an ka, byái siya,</hi> The moment
you get tired of her, leave her. <hi>v</hi> [A; b] <b>1</b>
put an identifying sign or label. <hi>Kinahanglang
taknáan ang mga garápa sa tambal,</hi> We
should @label bottles containing medicine. <b>2</b>
put a notch as an identifying mark. <b>-an(->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> @timepiece, @watch.

<b>taksay</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. fishing @net, cast in shallow water
and dragged by four people towards the
shore. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [N] go fishing with the <hi>taksay</hi>
net.

<b>taksi</b> <hi>n</hi> @taxi. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] <b>1</b> take a taxi. <hi>Mataksi
ang pantalan gíkan dinhi,</hi> We can take
a taxi to the wharf from here. <b>2</b> make into
a taxi.

<b>taksì<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a game in which objects placed inside
a circle are knocked out of the area.
The ones displaced from the circle belong
to the player that hit them. <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6]
play <hi>taksì</hi>.

<b>taksì<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] strip abaca, buri palm leaves,
and the like of vegetable matter to get the
fiber. <hi>n</hi> instrument for stripping. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> abaca 
<pb n=968>stripper. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> stripped stalks.

<b>taksikab</b> = <sc>TAKSI</sc>.

<b>taksinilya</b> <hi>n</hi> humorous word for <hi>tartanilya</hi>,
used in contexts where one says he doesn't
have money to take the taxi. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] take
the <hi>tartanilya</hi>. <hi>Taksinilya lang ta,</hi> Let's just
take the <hi>tartanilya</hi> brand of taxi.

<b>taktak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB26; ac] for small things or
s.t. fastened or stuck to s.t. to detach and
drop; cause to drop. <hi>Kinsay nagtaktak ug
ágiw sa sawug?</hi> Who knocked cigarette
ashes on the floor? <hi>Nataktak ang íyang pilukpíluk
sa sawug,</hi> Her false eyelashes fell
to the floor. <hi>Taktáka ang mga tambis,</hi>
Knock the fruits off the tree. <hi>Wà kataktákig
balhíbu,</hi> It was unharmed. (Lit. Not a feather
was knocked off of it.) <b>2</b> [b4(1)] have a
@miscarriage. <hi>Nataktakan siya sa dihang nadakin-as,</hi>
She had a miscarriage after she
slipped and fell. <b>3</b> [A; c] cast a fishing net.
<hi>Itaktak ang púkut kay dúnay duut,</hi> Cast
the net because there's a school of fish. <b>4</b>
[A; c1] drop from a list. <hi>Taktáka (itaktak)
sa listahan ang mining bitiránu,</hi> Drop the
fake veterans from the list. <b>4a</b> @fire from a
position. <hi>Mutaktak nà siyag impliyádung
tapulan,</hi> He fires lazy employees. <b>4b</b> drop
a charge. <hi>Ang sumbung gitaktak sa huwis,</hi>
The accusation was dropped by the judge.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> s.t. which has been detached and dropped.
<b>2</b> action of casting a fishing net. <b>-an(->)</b>
<hi>n</hi> designated place where the fishing net is
emptied of catch. <b>-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> for coconuts to
be mature enough for harvesting. <hi>Hustu na
sak-un nang mga lubíha kay taktakun na,</hi>
Now is the time to gather the coconuts because
they are mature.[+]

<b>taktakun</b> <hi>n</hi> a k.o. edible starshell having a
thin dark brown operculum.

<b>taktika</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @strategy, @tactics. <b>2</b> @scheme, @ruse.
<hi>Taktika lang tu nákù arun malipat siya,</hi> It
was just a ruse to deceive him. <hi>v</hi> [a12]
make a clever plan. <hi>Taktikaha giyug maáyu
nga makumbins&icaron;r siya,</hi> Make a clever plan
to convince him.

<b>taktikal</b> <hi>n</hi> examination given by military officers
<hi><b>to</b> c</hi>adets. <hi>v</hi> [A13] have a @{tactical inspection}.
<b>&mdash; inspiksiyun</b> = <sc>TAKTIKAL</sc>.

<b>táku</b> <hi>n</hi> @{billiard cue}.

<b>takúan</b> = <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.

<b>takub</b> <hi>n</hi> a cover or lid of s.t. which has a different
shape from the thing it is put over
and is not attached. <hi>Ang takub sa pawuntin
pin,</hi> The fountain pen cover. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; b6]
put a cover on. <hi>Kinsay nagtákub sa kahun?</hi>
Who put the lid on the box? <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
@pseudonym, @alias. <hi>Ang</hi> 'O. Henry' <hi>takuban
ni Wilyam Sidni Purtir,</hi> 'O. Henry' is the
@{pen name} of William Sidney Porter. <b>2</b> @disguise.
<hi>v</hi> [A13; c6] <b>1</b> use an assumed or pen
name. <b>2</b> wear a disguise. <hi>Nagtakuban nga
makililímus ang ditiktib,</hi> The detective disguised
himself as a beggar. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>-AN</sc>, <hi>v</hi>.

<b>takúb</b> = <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.

<b>takubu</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. used to cover the roof ridge. <hi>v</hi>
[A; c] put a cover over a roof ridge. <hi>Sín itakubu,</hi>
Use galvanized iron sheets to cover
the ridge of the roof.

<b>takúbu</b> = <sc>TAKLÚBU</sc>.

<b>takubù</b> = <sc>TIKUBÙ</sc>.

<b>takud</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC; ac] @attach s.t. to s.t. else, put
it right next to s.t. so that it touches. <hi>Nagtákud[**Nagtákuá?][**Nagtakud. corrected. P2][**Magtákud?]
ang duha ka daplin sa lamísa,</hi> The
two edges of the table @are touching each
other. <hi>Takúra ang duha ka daplin sa panaptung
himúung hábul,</hi> Attach the two pieces
of cloth at the ends to make them into a
blanket. <hi>Itakud ang kwadru sa bungbung,</hi>
Attach the picture to the wall. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
@harness an animal, @hitch it for work. <hi>Ayaw
takdi nang bakáha ug balsa kay gamay pa
nà,</hi> Don't harness the cow to a sled because
it is still too small. <b>3</b> [A2; b4(1)] @infect
with disease. <hi>Makatakud nang hanggà,</hi>
Chicken pox is @contagious. <hi>Hitakdan kag
mudúul sa tibíhun,</hi> You'll get infected if
you go near a tubercular person. <b>3a</b> [C3]
contaminate each other. <hi>Nag-úsa lang mug
unlan magtákud giyud nang inyung mga kútu,</hi>
You're both lying on the same pillow, so
you'll get each other's lice. <b>3b</b> [A12] arouse
or @spread to s.o. else as if a contagious disease.
Nahimuut siyang namínaw sa makatakud
nga katáwa ni Rúsi, He was amused listening
to Rosie's contagious laughter. <b>3c</b> [A12;
b4(1)] influence so as to become like
one. <hi>Natakdan ku sa kahinúun níya,</hi> I was
influenced by his diligence in study. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi>
[A13; b4] pass a supernatural attribute on
to another person upon death. <hi>Úngù na siya
kay gipatakdan sa tigúlang úngù,</hi> He is a
vampire now because the old man passed his
supernatural power on to him. <b>takdanan</b> <hi>n</hi> an
animal trained to take the harness. <b>maN-r-[**space?](<-),
matakdánun</b> <hi>a</hi> @contagious, tending to
spread from person to person.

<b>tákud</b> <hi>v</hi> [A12] @manage to do s.t. that requires
strength or money. <hi>Dì na siya makatákud
ug alsa ug bug-at,</hi> She can't manage
to lift heavy things. <hi>Makatákud kahà kag
patunghà sa ímung anak?</hi> Can you manage
to send your child to school?

<b>takúg</b> = <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.

<b>takúgan</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @chiton of rocks in tidal flats.

<b>takúkung</b> = <sc>SARUK</sc>, <hi>n1, v</hi>.

<b>tákul</b> <hi>v</hi> [B46] for the chin to tremble causing
<pb n=969>the teeth to chatter. <hi>Nagtákul ang ákung
suwang sa katugnaw,</hi> My chin is chattering
with cold.

<b>takuláhaw</b> <b>1</b> @{all of a sudden}. <hi>Sa takuláhaw lamang
siya natumba,</hi> @Suddenly he collapsed.
<b>2</b> not very long, just a few minutes ago. <hi>Takuláhaw
pa tu siyang milakaw. Maapsan pa
tingáli nímu kun ímung sundan,</hi> He left just
a few minutes ago. You might still catch up
with him if you go after him.

<b>takuling<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. stout @vine commonly found
on coconut trees, with glossy, deep green,
runcinate leaves and dark brown roots that
anchor the plant to the tree: <hi><b>Rhaphidophora
merrillii</b></hi>.

<b>takuling<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> burned food particles sticking to
the insides of cooking utensils. <hi>v</hi> [a4] have
burnt food particles. <hi>Ug sigáhan nímu ug kusug,
takulingun ang kaldíru,</hi> If you turn the
fire high, the pot will have burnt particles.
<b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> encrusted with burnt food particles.

<b>tak-um</b> <hi>v</hi> [B46; a12] close the mouth or lips.
<hi>Gihagkan ku ang nagtak-um níyang ngábil,</hi> I
kissed her tightly pursed lips. <b>2</b> @{keep silent}.
<hi>Kwarta ray makatak-um (makapatak-um)
sa íyang bàbà,</hi> Only money can keep his
mouth shut. <hi>a</hi> closed mouth or lips.

<b>takumba</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @lean-to, @hut. <b>2</b> @roof of a single
pitch. <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] @pitch s.t. as a protection.
<hi>Nagtakumba silag hábul ug didtu sila mangatúlug,</hi>
They pitched a blanket and slept
under it. <hi>Gitakumbáhan níyag playwud ang
irù arun dì mahumud sa ulan,</hi> He set up a
piece of plywood for the dog to get under
to keep out of the rain. <b>-in-</b> <hi>n</hi> @lean-to or s.t.
set up with a single-pitched roof.

<b>takun</b> <hi>n</hi> heel of shoes. <hi>v</hi> [A; c] put a heel on
shoes.

<b>tákung</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> sheath of coconut fruits. <b>2</b> sheath-*like
covering similar to that of coconuts.
<b>takungtákung</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>TÁKUNG</sc>, <hi>2</hi>. <b>2</b> the sheath-like
covering on the back of grasshoppers
and similar insects or the wing sheath of
coleopterous insects.

<b>takup</b> = <sc>TAK-UP</sc>. <b>talakpun</b> <hi>n</hi> @shutters.

<b>tak-up</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB26; b] <b>1</b> @close, be @closed. <hi>Kinsay
nagtak-up sa pultahan nga mipákà man?</hi>
Who closed the door banging it? <hi>Tak-úpi
ang bintánà kay tugnaw,</hi> Close the window
because it's cold. <b>2</b> for schools or business
establishments to @close. <hi>Mutak-up ang klási
karung Abril,</hi> Classes will close in April. <hi>n</hi>
lid that fits flat over or a shutter. <hi>a</hi> @closed.

<b>takúpis</b> <hi>n</hi> an oval-shaped, large but not tall
@basket with a cover, made of pieces of bamboo
and rattan or <hi>nítù</hi> vine, used as a container
for clothing.

<b>takurì</b> <hi>n</hi> @kettle.

<b>takus</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] @measure with a measuring
vessel. <hi>Taksa ang bugas arun hibaw-an pílay
gibaylu,</hi> Measure the rice so we'll know how
much they borrowed. <b>2</b> [A; a12] measure
s.o.'s capability. <hi>Gitakus níya ang ákung kahibalu
kun madáwat ba,</hi> He tested my
knowledge to see if I was qualified. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi>
[C; c3] @vie with one another, @fight it out in
a test of strength. <hi>Makigtákus ku nímu kun
kinsay hárì dinhi,</hi> Let's fight it out to see
who's the king here. <hi>n</hi> a @measureful. <hi>Gái
kug duha ka takus kámay,</hi> Give me two
@measures of sugar. <hi>a</hi> @worthy. <hi>Dì ku takus sa
ímung gugma,</hi> I'm not worthy of your love.
<b>paka-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] claim to be, consider
worthy. <hi>Nagpakatakus aku sa pagdápit kanímu,</hi>
May I invite you? (Lit. I presume to
consider myself worthy of inviting you.)
<b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi> @capability. <b>panaksan</b> <hi>n</hi> @bowl. <b>talaksan,
taksanan</b> <hi>n</hi> @{measuring vessel}. <b>tinaksánay</b> <hi>n</hi>
test of strength. <hi>v</hi> [C] = <sc>TÁKUS</sc>, <hi>v</hi>.

<b>tákut</b> <hi>n</hi> @{coral reefs}. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> full of coral reefs.

<b>takuyan, takúyan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a seed container used
to hold corn when planting, usually from a
short length of bamboo, and worn around
the waist. <b>2</b> round-mouthed cylindrical container
for farm products woven from buri
strips. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] make into a <hi>takuyan</hi>.

<b>takwáhaw</b> = <sc>TAKULÁHAW</sc>.

<b>takwal, takwar</b> <hi>n</hi> @money (word play on <hi>kwarta,
kwalta</hi>).

<b>takway</b> = <sc>BUKWAY</sc>, <hi>n1</hi>.

<b>takyab</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> cast a small fishing net into
the sea, usually in the shallows. <hi>Dakung
duut sa isdà ang íyang gitakyában sa láya,</hi>
He cast the net on a big school of fish. <b>2</b>
throw s.t. on and over s.t. as if casting a
small net or throw s.t. with a similar motion.
<hi>Ákung gitakyában ug hábul ang káma,</hi>
I spread a blanket over the bed. <hi>Ákù ta kang
takyában sa tahup ug anhà ka lingkud dihà,</hi>
The chaff will fall off on you as I winnow
it, if you sit there. <b>3</b> flap s.t. to shake s.t.
off it. <hi>Gitakyab níya ang sinínà kay abugun
kaáyu,</hi> She flapped her dress because it was
so dusty.

<b>takyan</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> toy which is similar to a shuttlecock
in badminton and kicked with the instep
of the foot. <b>2</b> game played with this
shuttlecock which involves kicking it with
the instep of the foot. A server is chosen by
kicking the <hi>takyan</hi> a required number of
times without missing. The one who misses
is the server. The other player (or team) has
to kick the <hi>takyan</hi> when it is served. If the
server catches it, he serves the next player,
and so forth, until all the players have been
served, at which point the game starts again.
<pb n=970>If he fails to catch it he must serve the same
player again. If he is able to return the <hi>takyan</hi>
kicking it, the person whom he returned
it to must take his place. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
play <hi>takyan</hi>. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] kick as one would
a <hi>takyan</hi>.

<b>takyap</b> <hi>v</hi> [AB2456; c] spread over so as to
@cover. <hi>Mitakyap ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</hi>
Darkness covered the earth. <hi>Wà ka bisag
tualyang ikatakyap sa ímung láwas?</hi>
Don't you even have a towel to cover your
body?

<b>tál</b> @full-fledged, @genuine, @{through and
through}. <hi>Tál nà siyang abugádu kay nakapasar
sa bar,</hi> He is a full-fledged lawyer because
he passed the bar. <hi>Tál nà siyang Árab,</hi>
He is a @full-blooded Arab. <hi>Mau nay tál nga
amígu, maúnung,[**2nd letter "a"?][** muúnung ?,P3]</hi> That's what I call a real
friend. He stands by you.

<b>tala<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> @{let's go}. <b>&mdash; na</b> <hi>short forms:</hi> <b>tána, tana</b>
let's go now. <hi>Tala na (tana) kay malít ta,</hi>
Let's go now. We'll be late.

<b>tala<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>a</hi> out of one's right
senses. <hi>v</hi> [B12] get to be @crazy. <hi>Natala ka.
Ngánung asin may ímung giságuls kapi?</hi>
Are you crazy? Why did you put salt in
the coffee?

<b>talà</b> <hi>n</hi> a small surface depression on a toy
top made by the nail tip of another top, pit
mark. <hi>Way kaláki ang ímung kasing kay daghan
ug talà,</hi> Your top is no good because it
has lots of pit marks. <hi>v</hi> [b8] for a top to
get a pit mark in it.

<b>tálà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b4(1)] @{set foot} in a place. <hi>Nakatálà
na ba ka ánang bukíra?</hi> Have you
set foot on that mountain? <b>2</b> [A; c] @step,
@tread on. <hi>Dì ka mutálà sa lápuk, ha?</hi> Do
not step on the mud puddle, O.K.?

<b>tálà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @{list down}. <hi>Itálà ang mga ngálan
sa aplikanti,</hi> @List the names of the applicants.
<b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1] @enroll. <hi>Ása man kang
iskuylahána magpatálà?</hi> In what school will
you enroll? <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @list. <b>talaadláwan</b> <hi>n</hi> @diary.

<b>tálab</b> <hi>n</hi> @{pen shells}.

<b>talaba</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @oyster.

<b>talában</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3P; c1] for a force to carry s.t.
along with it. <hi>Nalumus siya kay natában sa
sulug,</hi> He drowned because he got carried
away by the current. <hi>see also</hi> <sc>TÁBAN</sc>.

<b>talabánug</b> <hi>n</hi> <hi>see</hi> <sc>BANUG</sc>.

<b>talábun, talábung</b> = <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.

<b>tálad</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @table. <b>2</b> table in parliamentary
usage. <hi>Si Husi P. Lawril mauy
nangúlu sa tálad,</hi> José P. Laurel was the
presiding officer.

<b>taladru</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. @drill with
grooves along which a handle is pushed up
and down, causing the bit to turn. <b>2</b> a
wooden @eggbeater made like the <hi>taladru</hi>
drill. <hi>v</hi> [a12] use a <hi>taladru</hi> drill or eggbeater.

<b>talagabung</b> = <sc>TUGÁBUNG</sc>.

<b>talagbagu</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. delicious salt-water @fish, yellowish-brown
in color. It is flat-shaped and
is as big as a palm, similar in appearance
and taste to the <hi>kítung</hi>.

<b>talagsa</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>USA</sc>.

<b>talaguy</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> one who keeps going
out and neglects the chores at home. <hi>v</hi>
[B12] become fond of going out. <hi>Natalaguy
siya tungud sa barkáda,</hi> He started going out
and neglected his duties because of his gang.

<b>taláhib</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> coarse, erect perennial
@grass with snowy white panicles which,
like cogon, takes over lands denuded of forest
cover: <hi><b>Saccharum spontaneum</b></hi>.

<b>taláid</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] do s.t. in an
@orderly manner covering progressively the
area worked on. <hi>Talaíra ug sanggì ang mais
arun walay hisayluan,</hi> Harvest the corn @methodically,
covering it square by square, so
that you miss nothing.

<b>talakítuk</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> k.o. @fish, name
given to @jacks and other good-sized carangoid
fish.

<b>talalak</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> k.o. @bird: the white-billed
hornbill: <hi><b>Aceros leucocephalus</b></hi>.

<b>talampad</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A13; a1] place things in a row
across s.t. <hi>Magtalampad tag butilya sa paril
kay magpunta blangku ta,</hi> Let us arrange
bottles in a row because we will have target
practice. <hi>Italampad ning mga batu sa yanang
arun náay átung katumban,</hi> Arrange these
rocks in a row across the mud puddle so we
have s.t. to step on. <b>2</b> [A; ac] @compare.
<hi>Tampárun nátù sila ug kinsay kinagwapahan,</hi>
Let us compare them and see who is
the prettiest. <hi>Ayawg itampad ang ákung pinintal
sa kang Amursúlu,</hi> Don't compare
my paintings with those of Amorsolo. <b>tamparay</b>
<hi>v</hi> [C; c3] compare with each other.
<hi>Makigtamparay siya sa ákung núts,</hi> He wanted
to compare notes with me.

<b>tálang</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256] <b>1</b> be @embarrassed. <hi>Natálang
ku sa ákung tubag kay sayup kaáyu,</hi> I was
embarrassed because my answer was completely
wrong. <b>2</b> @blunder or lose one's way
into. <hi>Natálang siya ngadtu sa iskuylahan sa
mga babáyi,</hi> He blundered into a girl's
school. <b>paN-</b> <hi>n</hi> trick coin with two heads. v
[a12] make into a trick coin.

<b>talangígù</b> = <sc>HINGÍGÙ</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>ÍGÙ</sc>.

<b>talantar</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) = <sc>TARANT&Acaron;R</sc>.

<b>talantun</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> @talent, the unit of
weight (Biblical).

<b>talapya</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) = <sc>TILAPYA</sc>.

<b>tálas</b> = <sc>PATÁLAS</sc>.

<pb n=971>

<b>talatala</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>a</hi> @foolish, slightly crazy.
<hi>Talatala, ngánung giusíkan nímu,</hi> @Stupid!
Why are you wasting it? <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. small
@frog about 2"[**inch symbol], of marshy areas, often seen
in trees. <b>2</b> one who is constantly chattering
about unimportant things sounding like the
<hi>talatala</hi> frog. <hi>v</hi> [B126] become @crazy. <hi>Natalatala
siya human bulagi,</hi> He became crazy
when his girl left him.

<b>taláuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A] @crow. <hi>Sayu pa tu; nagtaláuk pa
ang mga manuk,</hi> It was still early; the cocks
were still crowing. <hi>n</hi> the sound of @crowing.
<hi>Ang taláuk sa manuk timailhan nga saylu
na sa tungang gabíi,</hi> The cock's crow means
that it is past midnight.

<b>tálaw</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [B456] @{back off}, be
afraid to do s.t. for lacking nerve. <hi>Mitálaw
siya maung wà musúkul,</hi> He was afraid, so
he didn't fight back. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23] be @cowardly.
<hi>Dì siya mangamural ni Biyay kay nanálaw
siya,</hi> He can't bring himself to propose
to Biyay because he is a @coward. <b>-an[**space?](->)</b>
<hi>a</hi> @cowardly. <hi>v</hi> [B1256] be, become
cowardly.

<b>talay</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A; c] put or sit next
to. <hi>Kinsa man tu nga nagtalay nímu?</hi> Who
was that who sat beside you? <hi>Italay ni sa baril,</hi>
Put this beside the drum. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a loaf of
bread made of easily separable sections baked
together in a row in one mold. <b>2</b> one @beside
s.o. else. <hi>Kinsa man tung ímung talay
sa sini?</hi> Who was it you were sitting next to
in the movies? <b>(<-)</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [C; a] sit, set next to
each other. <hi>Nagtálay mi ug lingkud sa bátang,</hi>
We sat beside each other on the log.
<hi>Taláyun ta ning duha ka lamísa,</hi> Let's put
these two tables next to each other. <b>2</b> [A; ac]
fall, put in line. <hi>Nagtálay ang mamalítay ug
arsii,</hi> Buyers of RCA rice are forming a line.
<hi>Gwápa siya kun itálay sa mga maksut,</hi> She's
pretty if you put her next to the ugly ones.
<hi>n</hi> @line, @row of people or things. <b>hi-</b> <hi>v</hi> [B1256]
belong to a distinct group. <hi>Nahitálay
siya sa hataas nga katilingban,</hi> She belongs
to the upper class.

<b>tálay</b> <hi>n</hi> in hopscotch or basketball, the violation
of stepping on the line. <hi>v</hi> [B126] step
on the line.

<b>talaytay</b> (from <hi>taytay</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] arrange
things in a @row. <hi>Talaytáyun (italaytay) ta
ning mga batu sa daplin,</hi> Let's arrange the
stones in a row along the edges.

<b>talayung</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> a length of tubing
used to convey water from a spring that
flows out from a slope. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] attach,
make into a tube spout for a spring.

<b>talhà</b> a <b>1</b> splitting easily due to its parallel
grain. <b>2</b> root crops that are dry and crumble
easily in the mouth.

<b>talhung</b> <hi>a</hi> @shady, so as to retard the growth
of trees. <hi>v</hi> [A13P; b4(1)] @shade s.t. over.
<hi>Ang mangga mutalhung (mupatalhung) sa
kamaisan,</hi> The mango tree will shade the
cornfield. <hi>Natalhungan ang ákung sibuyasan
sa mga ságing,</hi> My onion bed is in the @shadow
of the banana plants.

<b>tali</b> <hi>v</hi> [A23; a12] for fowl to wean their
chicks, letting them go off on their own.
<hi>Ug sayu nga mutali ang mungáan sa pisù,
dalì pud nga mangitlug,</hi> If a hen lets her
chicks get independent early, she will also
lay eggs sooner. <hi>n</hi> chick that has gotten independent
of the mother.[+]

<b>táli<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> for root crops and the flesh of fish to
be soft and moist. <hi>v</hi> [B] get to be soft and
moist. <hi>Mutáli (matáli) ang kamúti[**not sure: last <b>2</b> letters "ti"?][**yes. P2] basta itanum
sa yútà nga basà,</hi> Sweet potatoes become
soft and watery if they are planted in
wet ground.

<b>táli<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TÁLÌ<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>táli<hi rend=sub>3</hi>, tálì<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] @tally, @mark. <hi>Dì ku makatáli
kay kandidátu ku,</hi> I can't do the @tallying
because I'm a candidate. <hi>Gitálì ku ang
ímung palta,</hi> I have @recorded your absences.
<b>2</b> [A13; a3] have a note of a certain emotion.
Ang íyang pagtubag daw sa nagtálì ug
kasukù, His reply seemed to have a note of
anger.

<b>tálì<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @tie, @bind. <hi>Mga kawatan ang mitálì
kaníla sa halígi,</hi> The robbers tied them
to the post. <hi>Nakatálì na siya sa mga putus,</hi>
She has bound the packages. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> between,
concerning two people or groups. <hi>Tandugun
ang rilasiyun tálì sa Amirika ug Pilipínas,</hi>
The relations between the U.S. and the
Philippines are touchy. <b>2</b> @concerning, @{with
regards to}. <hi>Gisukutsukut siya níla talì sa
nahitabù,</hi> They interrogated him @about the
incident. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @bond, @tie.

<b>tali-</b> prefix to a verb forming adjectives meaning
'@{about to} [do]'. <hi>Talilarga na ku sa Amirika,</hi>
I'm ready to leave for America. <hi>Taliának,</hi>
About to give birth.

<b>taliadlaw</b> (from <hi>adlaw</hi>) <hi>n</hi> @{hot season}. <hi>v</hi> [B56]
be the hot season.

<b>tálib</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] trim off or smooth around
the end or the mouth of a container. <hi>Talíbi
ang bàbà sa plastik nga sudlanan,</hi> Trim the
mouth of the plastic container to make it
even. <b>(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>walay &mdash;</b> untrimmed around the
mouth or at the ends.

<b>talibud</b> (from líbud) a fond of going about
the neighborhood. <hi>v</hi> [B126] be fond of going
about the neighborhood. <hi>Ang pagkatabian
mauy nakatalibud (nakapatalibud) níya,</hi>
She is fond of going about because she
<pb n=972>likes to spread gossip.

<b>talibugsuk</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>BUGSUK</sc>.

<b>talibwag</b> (from <hi>bulag</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A13P] @disperse,
run in different directions. <hi>Nagtalibwag
pagdágan ang kabatáan kay nahadluk sa búang,</hi>
The kids ran in all directions because
they were afraid of the mad man.

<b>talidhay</b> <hi>n</hi> loud, prolonged, high-pitched
@laughter. <hi>v</hi> [A; b3c] laugh in a loud, high-pitched
way. <hi>Mitalidhay ang mga babáyi sa
kataw-anan níyang isturya,</hi> The ladies laughed
at his funny stories.

<b>talidngan</b> = <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.

<b>talidúngan</b> = <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.

<b>taligamà</b> <hi>v</hi> [b8] @overlook. <hi>Dúnay mga sayup
sa íyang tím nga ákung hitaligam-an,</hi> There
were lots of mistakes in his theme that I
overlooked.

<b>taligátus</b> (from gatus) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. small @mouse
with a long snout. <b>2</b> k.o. roundish @{sweet
potatoes} with light pink skin and yellowish,
sweet meat (so called because it produces
an abundance of tubers).

<b>taligmata</b> <hi>n</hi> @hallucination or @vision where
one sees s.t. not actually present. <hi>Nakit-an
nákù si Pidru apan walà man siya dinhi. Taligmata
diay tu,</hi> I saw Pedro, but he is not
here. So it was just a hallucination. <hi>v</hi> [b5]
have a vision or hallucination.

<b>taligngan</b> = <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.

<b>taligráma</b> = <sc>TILIGRÁMA</sc>.

<b>taligsik</b> <hi>n</hi> large raindrops which fall in a scattered
way, usually before or after a tropical
rainstorm. <hi>v</hi> [A3; b4] rain in large scattered
drops. <hi>Bukasa ang hinayhay kay mitaligsik
na,</hi> Bring in the laundry because it is @raining.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] fall in large scattered
drops. <hi>Manaligsik íyang láway kun musulti,</hi>
He sprays saliva when he speaks.

<b>taligsuy</b> <hi>a</hi> long and tapering. <hi>Taligsuy kaáyu
ka ug ilung,</hi> You have a long, tapering nose.
<hi>v</hi> [B3; b6] be, become long and tapering.
<hi>Mutaligsuy ang pálu ug usa ka tumuy ra ang
sipilyáhan,</hi> The mast will come out long and
tapering if only one end is planed.

<b>talíis</b> = <sc>TILÍIS</sc>.

<b>talikála, talikalà, talikálà</b> (from <hi>tálì</hi>) <hi>n</hi> @chain,
@fetter. <hi>Hugut ang talikalà sa ámung pagminahalay,</hi>
Our love is held together by a
strong bond.

<b>talikìtikì</b> (from <hi>tikì</hi>) = <sc>TABILI SA DÁGAT</sc>.

<b>talikud<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> (from <hi>likud</hi>) <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [aP1] turn the
back, turn s.o. around. <hi>Gwápa siyag magtalikud,
pirug mag-atubang pastilan,</hi> She's
pretty when she turns her back, but when
she's facing you, ouch! <hi>Italikud (ipatalikud,
talikda) nang ispíkir kay mabúngul ta,</hi>
Turn that speaker around or it will deafen
us. <b>1a</b> <b>(<-)</b> [C2; c6] stay, put two things
with the backs against each other. <hi>Nagtalíkud
silag lingkud arun isig sandig sila,</hi> They
are sitting with their backs against each
other so they can lean on each other. <b>2</b> [A2;
b(1)] @{go away} from. <hi>Bag-u pa siyang mitalikud
pag-abut níla,</hi> She had just @left when
they arrived. <b>2a</b> @{pass away}, @die. <hi>Maanyag
nga bálu ang íyang gitalikdan,</hi> He left behind
a beautiful widow. <b>2b</b> @abandon, turn
one's back on. <hi>Talikdan ku ang bisyu,</hi> I will
abandon my vices. <b>3</b> [A; b6] @decline a good
opportunity. <hi>Ug mutalikud ka ánang trabahúa
dì ka na makakità ug láin,</hi> If you do not
take that job, you will not find another one
like it. <b>(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> eye of a fish hook to which
the leader or line is attached, facing in a
direction opposite to the barb.

<b>talikud<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> a variety of @banana, smooth-skinned,
similar in form to the <hi>alitundan</hi> but
bigger, consumed uncooked and particularly
tasty.

<b>talimughat</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>BUGHAT</sc>.

<b>talínga</b> <hi>n</hi> @ear (dialectal). (->) <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] <b>1</b>
@notice, pay @heed. <hi>Gisampit ku níya piru wà
ku mutalinga,</hi> He called me but I didn't pay
him any mind. <hi>Nakatalinga ku nga dinhay
táwu sa ákung luyu,</hi> I noticed there was s.o.
in back of me. <b>2</b> @{look after}, @{pay attention}
to. <hi>Kinsay mutalinga sa mga manuk kun wà
ka,</hi> Who will @{take care of} the chickens while
you're away?

<b>talinggab</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a12] cut, chip or saw off s.t.
long at an angle so that the end is pointed.
<hi>Talinggába pagsapsap ang káhuy arun mutalínis
ang tumuy,</hi> Cut the piece of wood at
an angle so the end will come out pointed.
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> a cut made so that the result is pointed.
<b>2</b> s.t. cut at a diagonal with a pointed tip.

<b>*talinghug pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] @listen, @heed. <hi>Patalinghúgi
ang púlung sa tigúlang,</hi> Listen to
the words of your elders.

<b>talingting</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] separate the very fine
corn starch (tiktik) from the grits by shaking
in a winnower, or separate the very fine
grains from coarser ones. <hi>Nagtalingting pa
ku sa ginaling,</hi> I'm still separating the corn
starch from the grits. <hi>n</hi> the very fine corn
starch that sticks to the winnower.

<b>talingtíngun<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> long-legged, medium-sized
@bird frequently found in tidal flats. It feeds
on small fish.

<b>talingtíngun<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. stinging @fish of shallow
waters.

<b>talínis</b> a <b>1</b> @sharp-pointed. <b>2</b> @shrill in voice or
sound. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug luyug luyu</b> one who reports
whatever @gossip he hears from one person
and then relays it to others (lit. sharp at
<pb n=973>both ends). <hi>Ayawg kumpiyansahi nang bayhána
kay talínis nà ug luyugluyu,[**in previous page, these are two words. P2]</hi> Don't
trust that woman because she's a snake. <b>&mdash;
maglúyu</b> <hi>n</hi> @two-faced, @double-dealing. <hi>n</hi>
pointed portion of s.t. <hi>v</hi> [A; b] make s.t.
sharp pointed. <hi>Talinsi nang lagduk únà itagsuk,</hi>
@Sharpen the peg before sticking it into
the ground. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> of a @pointed type.

<b>talintu</b> <hi>n</hi> @talent, @ability.

<b>talinugù</b> (from dugù) <hi>n</hi> uterine hemorrhage.
<hi>v</hi> [b4] suffer a uterine hemorrhage. <hi>Talinug-an
giyud ka basta mangusug ka human
ug anak,</hi> You'll suffer a uterine hemorrhage
if you exert effort too soon after delivery.

<b>talínum</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. small @shrub with thick, lanceolate,
pale-green leaves, planted as an ornamental
and for its leaves which are used as
a vegetable: <hi><b>Talinum triangulare</b></hi>.

<b>talinupsan</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>TUPUS<hi rend=sub>1</hi></sc>.

<b>talinùtinù</b> = <sc>ALUNDRIS<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>tálip</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a] slice root crops into thin strips
to dry them under the sun. <hi>Talípa ang kamúti
arun ibulad,</hi> Slice the sweet potatoes
to be dried in the sun.

<b>talipsay<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [B356; b4] <b>1</b> @{glance off}. <hi>Mitalipsay
ang bála nga mitámà sa puthaw,</hi> The
bullet glanced off when it hit the metal. <hi>Hitalipsayan
ku sa pákul pagbughà nákù,</hi> The
hatchet glanced off on me while I was chopping
firewood. <b>2</b> slip in talking. <hi>Mitalipsay
giyud sa íyang bàbà ang matúud nga kantidad,</hi>
He let the actual price slip out of his
mouth.

<b>talipsay<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TULIPSAY<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>taliptip</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> tip or peak of a roof or mountain.
<b>2</b> @tip of s.t. pointed. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] @sharpen
s.t. to make it pointed. <hi>Way mitaliptip sa
mga káhuy nga himúung bagduk,</hi> Nobody
sharpened the wooden sticks to make into
pegs. <hi>Taliptípun ku ang mga tumuy,</hi> I will
make the tips pointed.

<b>talirúngan</b> (from <hi>dúngan</hi>) <hi>n</hi> people of the
same age. <hi>v</hi> [C23] be of the same age. <b>ka-</b> <hi>n</hi>
one who is the same age as s.o. else.

<b>talis</b> <hi>n</hi> @maggots, larvae of housefly. <hi>v</hi> [a4] be
infested with maggots. <hi>Gitalis ang patay nga
irù,</hi> The dead dog has maggots crawling
over it.

<b>talísay</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large @tree similar to an almond
tree, growing by the seashore, bearing edible
nuts: <hi><b>Terminalia catappa</b></hi>. <b>-un</b> <hi>n</hi> @rooster with
black, dark green, and dirty white splotches.

<b>talisik</b> = <sc>TALIGSIK</sc>.

<b>talithi, talithì</b> <hi>n</hi> very fine @drizzle. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3; b4]
@drizzle. <hi>Tána, nagtalithi ra bítaw,</hi> Let's
go, it's just drizzling. <b>2</b> [AN; b6] @spit with
force, usually in derision. <hi>Gitalithian (gitalithían,
gipanalithían) lang ku níya pag-abla
nákù,</hi> She just spat derisively at me when I
proposed to her.

<b>taliti</b> = <sc>TALITHI</sc>.

<b>talìtì</b> <hi>n</hi> @encrustation of sediments, @tartar
sticking to a surface. <hi>v</hi> [B2; a4b4] be @encrusted
with sediments. <hi>Gitalìtian (gitalìtì)
ang takurì tungud kay gisigíhag gámit nga
way hugashúgas,</hi> The kettle is encrusted
with sediment because they kept using it
without washing it. <hi>Ngípun nga nagkatalìtì
sa tantung tinabakù,</hi> Teeth covered with
tartar from smoking so much. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> encrusted
with tartar and tobacco tars.

<b>taliunduk</b> (from <hi>unduk</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [B3(1); c1] be
@heaped up. <hi>Nagtaliunduk ang labhanan,</hi> The
soiled clothes are @piled up high. <hi>Ayawg italiunduk
(taliundúka) ang kan-un sa ímung
kutsára,</hi> Don't put so much food on your
spoon at one time. <hi>Akuy nataliundukan sa
tanang búhat sa balay,</hi> All the housework
was heaped on me. <hi>n</hi> @heap of s.t.

<b>taliwálà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @middle, @center part. <hi>Ig-a ang taliw[=â][**note the accent. P2]
sa targit,</hi> Hit the center of the target.
<hi>Taliwálà sa kakuyaw nangaliyúpù siya,</hi> In
the @midst of her danger, she prayed. <b>&mdash; sa
kámay</b> in the height of excitement or ecstacy[**typo: ecstasy],
esp. sexual intercourse. <hi>Bahálà nang mamatay
basta taliwálà sa kámay,</hi> I don't care
if I die as long as it's at the height of sexual
excitement. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [b6] be situated @{in between},
<b>the</b> middle of. Gitaliwad-an kug lingkud
sa ákung mga badigard, I was seated in
@between my bodyguards. <b>2</b> [c1] do s.t. to
s.t. at its center, in its middle part. <hi>Taliwáa
(taliwad-a) ug bángag ang kwarta,</hi> Make a
hole in the coin at the center. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c6]
go, stay at the center or middle. <hi>Mipataliwálà
sila sa baylihan ug nagsáyaw,</hi> They
went to the center of the floor and danced.
<hi>Ipataliw[=â][**note the accent. P2] siya paglingkud arun way makatupad,</hi>
Seat her in between us so that no one
else can sit beside her. <b>2</b> [A] put oneself
between people fighting. <hi>Mipataliw[=â][**note the accent. P2] ang amahan
paghúnung sa áway,</hi> The father cut
in to stop the fight. <b>kinataliwad-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @{very
middle} of s.t.

<b>talíwan</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [a3] for work to be disposed of
or finished. <hi>Ayaw ug súgud ug láin ug dì pa
matalíwan kanang ímu rung gitrabáhu,</hi>
Don't start anything else as long as you
haven't finished what you started there. 2
[A23] for feelings to vanish (literary). <hi>Mitalíwan
kanákù ang kalípay pagtalikud nímu,</hi>
When you left, all the joys of life departed
with you. <b>3</b> [B2346] for a person to
@{pass away}. <hi>Mitalíwan na ang ákung mga ginikánan,</hi>
My parents have passed away.
<b>-um-r-</b> <hi>a</hi> about to disappear or vanish. <hi>Tumatalíwan 
<pb n=974>nga kaháyag sa kahapúnun,</hi> A
@fading afternoon sunlight.

<b>taliwtiw</b> <hi>a</hi> elongated and @pointed with tapering
sides. <hi>v</hi> [B26] become pointed with tapering
sides. <hi>Mutaliwtiw (mataliwtiw) ang
tumuy sa wating mag-aginud,</hi> The end of
the earthworm becomes pointed and tapering
when it stretches forward. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> pointed
and @tapering. <b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b4] for the nose
to become narrower and pointed. <hi>Manaliwtiw
ang ilung sa táwung himatyun,</hi> The
nose of a dying person gets narrow and
pointed.

<b>taliyir</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{repair shop}. <b>2</b> tailor, @{dressmaking
shop}.

<b>taliyuk</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] turn the body around. <hi>Taliyuk
kunu. Átung tan-áwun ug haum ba nímu
ang [**can't identify first <b>2</b> letters]amirkána,[**amirkana.  corrected. P2]</hi> @{Turn around}. Let's see if
your jacket fits you.

<b>talyir</b> = <sc>TALIYIR</sc>.

<b>talku</b> <hi>n</hi> @talc.

<b>taltag</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> set out, forth several things
in order, one at a time. <b>2</b> deduct a debt
from one's wages. <hi>Bayinti ang italtag sa ákung
swildu,</hi> Deduct twenty pesos from my
salary. <b>3</b> [A; b] tap s.t. off, esp. the ashes.
<hi>Aku ray mutaltag sa bága sa agipu,</hi> I'll tap
off the embers from the firebrand myself.
<b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @raddle, a rod with pegs used to
separate the warp threads and guide them
into the desired position around the warp
beam. <b>2</b> @{ash tray}.

<b>taltal</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; a] knock off s.t. that is attached
or set. <hi>Taltáli ang ligid sa karitun sa yapak
nga nakakápal niánà,</hi> Scrape off the
mud from the wheels of your pushcart. <b>2</b>
[A; c] deduct from one's wages to pay for
a debt. <hi>Taltálig diyis ang íyang swildu arun
siya kabayad,</hi> Deduct ten pesos from his
salary so that he can pay his debt. <b>3</b> [c]
divide land, property informally among prospective
heirs without legal papers. <hi>Ang tibuuk
datag tampi sa subà mauy báhin nga
gitaltal álang kanákù,</hi> All the level land along
the riverbank was my share of the inheritance.

<b>*talu</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>), <b>talutalu, talúun</b> <hi>a</hi> having
or showing little sense or judgement. v
[B12] become @stupid.

<b>tálu</b> (not without l) <hi>n</hi> @tallow, the hard fat in
animals or the wax from beehives, used for
making candles, soap, et al. <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)]
gather or obtain tallow. <b>talúun</b> <hi>n</hi> @sticky,
like tallow. <hi>Yútang talúun,</hi> @{Clay soil}.

<b>talù</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @scratch, dot, impression
made by scratching lightly. <b>2</b> marks
made to keep a record of petty purchases
on credit. <hi>Tan-áwa sa listahan ug pilay ákung 
talù,</hi> Look it up to see how much I
owe. <hi>v</hi> [A1] <b>1</b> make scratches, dots. <hi>Kinsang
kasing nakatalù niíni?</hi> Whose top made
the impressions on this one? <b>2</b> make small
purchases on credit. <hi>Nakatalù ku sa tindáhan
gabíi,</hi> I bought s.t. on credit at the store
last night. <b>-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> marked with dents all
over.

<b>talubig</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>&mdash;from <hi>túbig</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
small yellowish pustules appearing individually
on the skin. <b>2</b> other watery and itchy
eruptions on the skin. <hi>v</hi> [b4] have a pustule
of this sort. <hi>Dílì ku makasulat kay gitalubigan
ang ákung tudlù,</hi> I cannot write because
my finger has a pustule on it.

<b>taludtud</b> <hi>n</hi> the lower portion of the human
spinal column. <hi>Sakit ákung taludtud kay
nahapalingkud ku sa asíras,</hi> The bottom
part of my spine hurts because I fell down
on my buttocks on the sidewalk.

<b>talukbuy<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c6] hand s.t. to s.o. <hi>Italukbuy
ra ning suwat níya,</hi> Please hand this
letter to her.

<b>talukbuy<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>BALUYBUY</sc>.

<b>taluktuk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @peg, @stake. <hi>Gilibutan níyag taluktuk
ang bag-ung turuk nga lísu,</hi> He put
stakes all around the bed of the newly
sprouted seedlings. <b>2</b> bar for gathering sweet
potatoes. <b>3</b> in dugout boats, reinforcing
studs stuck into the sides to which additional
planking is nailed to make the hull
higher. <b>4</b> top of a hill, cliff. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A1; b6(1)]
enclose stakes. <b>2</b> [A1; a2] make a peg or
stake. <b>3</b> [A; a] attach studs into the sides
of a dugout. <b>4</b> [B; c1] be, become @steep.
<hi>Ug mutaluktuk ang dálan, dílì na makaági
ang dyíp,</hi> If the road gets too steep, the jeep
won't go any further. <hi>a</hi> @steep. <hi>Taluktuk nga
pangpang,</hi> A steep cliff. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @summit.

<b>*talulu</b> = <sc>*TALU</sc>.

<b>talumbang</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> a length of
bamboo with holes at both ends used to
keep a pig from getting his tether rope
hopelessly entwined. One end of the bamboo
is attached to a short piece of the rope
tied to the feet, and the other end of the
bamboo is attached to a rope tied to the
stake. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] put, make into a <hi>talumbang</hi>.

<b>talumtum</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @mildew. <b>2</b> @freckle. <hi>v</hi> [b4] get
@mildewed. <hi>Gitalumtuman ang hinamugan
kay wà tiwasag utaw,</hi> The moistened clothes
got mildewed because they were left unironed.
<b>-un(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> mildewed, freckled.

<b>talumus</b> (from <hi>lumus</hi>&mdash;not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> anything
used to cover the body when bathing.
<hi>v</hi> [A; c1] put on s.t. during bath. <hi>Dílì magtalumus
ang mga bátang mangalígù,</hi> Children
don't put on anything when they swim.

<pb n=975>

<b>talun</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> pad of paper. <b>2</b> @booklet of s.t. <hi>Gihurut
kug palit ang usa ka talun nga tíkit
sa swipstik,</hi> I bought a whole booklet of
sweepstake tickets.

<b>talung</b> <hi>n</hi> @eggplant: <hi><b>Solanum melongena</b></hi>. <b>-an</b>
<hi>n</hi> @{eggplant patch}. <b>talungtalung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @shrub
planted for its ornamental orange or yellow
fruit: <hi><b>Solanum mammosum</b></hi>. <b>-un</b> <hi>n</hi> wild
@shrub similar to eggplant, producing a spiked
inedible fruit, used as a protection around
the trunk of the coconut tree (hulud): <hi><b>Solanum
sp.</b></hi> <b>-un(->)</b> = <sc>KATYUBUNG</sc>.

<b>talungan</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>n</hi> @{pipe stem}. <hi>v</hi> [A;
a] make a pipe stem. <hi>Makatalungun ka sa
bukug nga may lungag sa tungà,</hi> You can
make a pipe stem out of a bone that has a
hole in its center.

<b>talúnung</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A2S; b3] momentarily
stop from one's work to give
close thought or attention to s.t. <hi>Usa ka
manánuyng sunáta ang gitalunúngan sa mga
trabahanti,</hi> The workers stopped to listen
to the sweet music. <b>hi-</b> <hi>v</hi> [BP1256] stop,
pause when taken back. <hi>Nahitalúnung (nahipatalúnung)
aku pagkakità sa abling kaha,</hi>
I was @{taken aback} when I saw the open safe.

<b>tal-up</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] cover or block the opening
of a tube-like structure. <hi>Lápuk ang nagtal-up
sa imburnal,</hi> Mud is blocking the end
of the culvert. <hi>Tal-úpi ang íyang ilung arun
malumus,</hi> Cover his nose so he'll suffocate.
<hi>n</hi> @{trumpet mute}.

<b>talupì</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) = <sc>TUBIGTÚBIG</sc>.

<b>talusì</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @hornbill: <hi><b>Penelopides panini</b></hi>.

<b>talùtalù</b> (not without <hi>l</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [AN; b(1)] @flatter
s.o. to get him to do s.t. for one. <hi>Dì ka makatalùtalù
(makapanalùtalù) ánang tigulánga
sa íyang kwarta,</hi> You can't flatter money
out of that old man. <hi>Kahibáwu kung mutrabáhu
nag talùtaluan,</hi> I know he will work
if you give him @{sweet talk}. <hi>a</hi> @{mentally weak},
@stupid.

<b>taluthu</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c] <b>1</b> @{spit out} what one has in
the mouth in an explosive manner. <hi>Ayaw
nag italuthu nang ímung gikaun dihà sa salug,</hi>
Don't spit what you're eating out on
the floor. <b>2</b> shoot with a pellet from a blowgun.
3 [A; b(1)] cure s.o. with <hi>taluthu</hi>. <hi>n</hi> 1
treatment for skin ailments or swellings of
natural or supernatural origins whereby a
sorcerer chews ingredients and spits them
out on the afflicted area as he utters magical
prayers. <b>2</b> pellet from a blowgun. <b>maN- n</b>
sorcerer who can cure with <hi>taluthu</hi>.

<b>talùtù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. house @lizard.

<b>talùtù<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large @tree of secondary forests.

<b>taluut</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large spreading ficus @tree.

<b>talyáda</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> putting on a lot and highly made
up. <b>2</b> @effeminate, @homosexual. <hi>Ang mga talyáda
dinaugdáug sa katilingban,</hi> Society
treats @fairies with contempt.

<b>tama</b> <hi>v</hi> [A123P; b4] be, become tired, sick
or @{fed up} with. <hi>Natamhan (hitamhan) na
tingáli sa íyang pagkaulitáwu maung nagminyù,</hi>
He must have become @{tired of} being
single so he finally got married. <hi>Gitamhan
na kug kináug inasal,</hi> I'm @{sick of} eating
roast pig all the time.

<b>tamà</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @imprint or @mark left on. <hi>Kining
uwáta ang tamà sa ímung pagkatampásan,</hi>
This scar is a mark of your cruelty. <b>2</b> identifying
@sign or mark. <b>3</b> = <sc>TAMLÀ</sc>. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)]
leave a mark on. <hi>Mitamà ang latigu níya
sa ákung láwas,</hi> His whip left a mark on
my body. <b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <b>1</b> put an identifying mark
on. <hi>Akuy mitámà sa ámung kargamintu[**ka[**can't identify]amintu][**corrected. P2],</hi> I
@marked our cargoes. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAMLÀ</sc>, <hi>v</hi>. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi>
@marker or identifying sign.

<b>támà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A23; c1] for s.t. to hit squarely
on s.t. <hi>Mitámà ang suntuk sa apapángig sa
buksiyadur,</hi> The fist hit the boxer squarely
on the jaw. <hi>Tamáa (itámà) pagdukduk ang
martilyu sa lansang,</hi> Hit the nail squarely on
the head. <b>2</b> [A23C3; c1] be just exactly on
time. <hi>Mitámà ang pyista sa ámung lungsud
sa ákung adlaw,</hi> The fiesta of our town fell
exactly on my birthday. <b>3</b> [c1] make s.t.
@fit. <hi>Tamáa (itámà) pag-áyu ang sinínà sa
ákung sukud arun dì ku magyàyà,</hi> Fit my
dress according to my measurements so that
it won't hang loosely on me. <b>4</b> [c1] stop
doing s.t. bad. <hi>Tamáa (itámà) na nang ímung
pagpamabáyi,</hi> Put a stop to your romantic
exploits. <hi>a</hi> squarely hit, @{on time}, @fitting perfectly.
<b>&mdash; na</b> @{that's enough}. <hi>Támà na ánang
ímung binúang,</hi> That's enough of your foolishness.

<b>tamâ</b> <hi>see</hi> <sc>TAMALÀ</sc>.

<b>tamad</b> <hi>v</hi> [b4] feel too lazy to do s.t. <hi>Gitamaran
kung muadtu sa dawuntáwun kay ínit,</hi>
I don't feel like going downtown because it
is too hot. <b>tamaran</b> <hi>a</hi> @lazy. <hi>Tamaran, gustu
lag síging katúlug,</hi> He is lazy. All he likes to
do is sleep. <hi>v</hi> [B12] become lazy and @indolent.

<b>tamáing</b> = <b>LIGWAN</b>.

<b>támak</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A3S; b] @{step on} s.t. <hi>Aruy! Ímung
gitamákan ang ákung kalyu,</hi> Ouch!
You stepped on my corn. <b>2</b> [A23S; a12]
@{come to}, @{set foot on} a place. <hi>Wà matámak
sa mga Katsílà ang kamurúsan,</hi> The Spaniards
never set foot on Muslim soil. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)]
@trample down by abuse of position or
authority. <hi>Tamákan ka kun magpaubus ka,</hi>
People will step on you if you don't assert
your rights. <b>&mdash; sa dungug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b(1)] @dishonor,
<pb n=976>@insult. <hi>Ang ímung pagkadisgrasya
nagtámak sa átung dungug,</hi> Your pregnancy
has brought dishonor to us. <b>pa-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b]
place s.t. beneath a religious image in the
belief that the saint will do to the owner of
<hi><b>the</b> obje</hi>ct whatever the person who put the
object there prayed for him to do (good or
bad). <b>-in-an</b> <hi>n</hi> s.t. placed beneath a saint's
image in this belief. <b>-l-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> @doormat.

<b>tam-ak<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> @dump, throw a large quantity
of s.t. in a heap s.w. <hi>Dì ka makatam-ak
ug sagbut sa agiánan,</hi> You can't dump the
rubbish in the street. <b>2</b> fill up a hole in the
ground. <hi>Íyang gitam-ákan ang atábay ug
mga sagbut,</hi> He filled the well with trash. <b>3</b>
heap work, blame, abuse on s.o. <hi>Akuy natam-akan
sa tanang kasábà,</hi> All the abuse
was heaped on me.

<b>tam-ak<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A2; b5] @{wind up} s.w. one
would not expect to be. <hi>Ngánung mitam-ak
ka ning dapíta?</hi> How come you wound up
in this place? <hi>Sa panahun sa kampanya gitam-ak
(gitam-ákan) níla ang kinahilitang
baryu,</hi> During the campaign they penetrated
to the remotest villages. <b>2</b> [A12; b8]
@{come across} by chance. <hi>Nakatam-ak siyag
bahandì pagkálut níyag lubung,</hi> He @discovered
a treasure while digging a grave. <hi>Hitam-akan
námù ang duut sa isdà,</hi> We came across
a school of fish.

<b>tamalà</b> <hi>n</hi> very small @octopus the head of
which is less than an inch in diameter. <b>paN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] go catch <hi>tamalà</hi>.

<b>tamális</b> <hi>n</hi> dish of ground roasted rice and
peanuts mixed with coconut milk, meat,
eggs, and other ingredients, wrapped in a
banana leaf and boiled. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] make, have
<hi>tamális</hi>.

<b>táman</b> <b>1</b> @until, @{up to} a certain part. <hi>Lakaw
táman sa kural,</hi> Walk up to the fence. <hi>Butangi
ug túbig táman sa pagkapunù,</hi> Fill it up
with water until it is full. <b>&mdash; sa ginháwa, kusug</b>
to the limit of one's capacity. <hi>Dágan táman
sa ginháwa,</hi> Run as fast as you can (lit.
your breath allows). <b>2</b> be only up to doing
s.t. less than one wants to. <hi>Táman ra ka sa
tan-aw ug dì ka mudíga,</hi> You'll only get to
look if you don't propose. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; na</b> it is
@enough. <hi>Táman na ang usa ka bukag,</hi> One
basket is enough. <hi>Táman na sa paghílak,</hi>
That's enough crying. <b>4</b> [verb] <b>ug &mdash;</b> [do]
@exceedingly. <hi>Mikáun ug táman sa útan,</hi> He
ate @lots and lots of vegetables. <hi>v</hi> [b(1)] do
more than what is usually necessary. <hi>Íyang
gitamánan ug kálut íyang buktun,</hi> He
scratched his arm @{too much}.

<b>tamaraw</b> <hi>n</hi> tamaraw, a k.o. wild @{water buffalo}.

<b>tamarindu</b> <hi>n</hi> @{tamarind preserves}. <hi>v</hi> [A1; a]
make tamarind preserves. <b>tamarinduhun</b> <hi>n</hi>
tamarinds good for making into preserves.

<b>tamarung</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. carangoid @fish with a tuna-shaped
body, green dorsal and white ventral
portion.

<b>*támas panamastámas</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] <b>1</b> @despise, @insult.
<hi>Daghang nanamastámas sa bag-u níyang
tinuúhan,</hi> Many people heap insults on him
for his new faith. <b>2</b> @molest physically. <hi>Naghíkug
ang babáying gipanamastamásan,</hi> The
girl that was @raped committed suicide. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
@slander, @insult. <b>2</b> physical @molestation. <b>mapanamastamásun</b>
<hi>a</hi> @slandering, @molesting.

<b>tamasak</b> = <sc>TAMBASÁKAN</sc>.

<b>tamásuk</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> rot affecting jackfruit caused by
insect larvae. <b>2</b> k.o. @worm that infests the
wooden parts of ships. <hi>v</hi> [a4] be infested
with @rot or @shipworm. <hi>a</hi> infested with this
sort of rot.

<b>tamátis</b> = <sc>KAMÁTIS</sc>. <b>(->)</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3] for a baby's
feces to be like squashed tomatoes. <hi>Mutamatis
ang tái sa bátà ug magngipun,</hi> The baby's
<sc>B.M.</sc> is like tomato juice when it teethes.

<b>támay</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3S; a12] @despise, @{look down on},
usually with derision. <hi>Gitámay siyang pubri,</hi>
He was despised because of his poverty.
<b>-l-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @contemptible. <hi>Talamáyun ang ímung
pagpanápaw,</hi> Your adulterous affair is
@shameful. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @scornful, @contemptuous.

<b>tamba</b> = <sc>TANGBA</sc>.

<b>tambag</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @advise. <hi>Mitambag ang duktur
nga mupahúlay siya,</hi> The doctor advised
him to rest. <hi>n</hi> @advice, @counsel. <b>paki-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A3]
ask for advice. <hi>Nagpakitambag siya báhin sa
íyang suliran,</hi> He asked for advice about his
problem. <b>-l-un, paN-un</b> <hi>n</hi> piece of @advice.
<b>mag-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> giver of advice.

<b>tambagísa, tambagísà</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @shrub of waste
places, the leaves of which are used as a
poultice: <hi><b>Cassia sp.</b></hi>

<b>tambak</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] @dump a large number of
things in or over s.t. <hi>Siyay nagtambak sa
basúra sa ámung duwaánan,</hi> She dumped
garbage over our playground. <hi>Gitambakan
ug yútà ang atábay,</hi> The well was filled with
soil. <hi>Itambak ku ning mga kartun nganhà
nímu,</hi> I'll push this pile of cardboard boxes
over on you. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{dumping ground}.
<hi>Ang Hungkung mau ang tambakan sa mga
upyum,</hi> Hong Kong is the dumping ground
of opium. <b>2</b> @{gathering place}. <hi>Ang bwangan
mauy tambakan sa mga táwu matag Duminggu,</hi>
The cockpit is where the people
gather on Sundays.

<b>tambal</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b] @treat an illness, wound.
<hi>Tambáli (tambali) nang ímung samad,</hi> @Dress
your wound. <b>2</b> [A; b2] @reform, @correct s.o.
<pb n=977><hi>Unsay itambal ning íyang katapulan,</hi> What
@remedy is there for his laziness? <b>2a</b> [b8]
get punished as a cure for being naughty.
<hi>Hingtambalan ka lagi human ka latiguhi,</hi>
Your whipping was just what the doctor
ordered. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @medicine. <b>2</b> @{remedial measures}.
<b>paN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] @{practice medicine}. <b>maN-r-</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b>
medical @doctor. <b>2</b> = <sc>TAMBÁLAN</sc>. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi> @{folk
doctor}, specializing in diseases of supernatural
origin. <hi>v</hi> [B156] become a <hi>tambálan</hi>.
<b>-anan</b> <hi>n</hi> @hospital, @clinic. <b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> @medicinal.

<b>tambalígay</b> = <sc>BALANTÍYUNG</sc>.

<b>tambaliyug</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @blenny, greyish in color
with large eyes, which jumps about.

<b>tambalíyung</b> <hi>n</hi> club-shaped, edible @squash:
<hi><b>Lagenaria leucantha var.</b></hi>

<b>tambalùlù, tambaluslus</b> (from <hi>lùlù</hi> and <hi>luslus</hi>)
<hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> supernatural being in human form that
has lips so large that they turn inside out
covering the face when he laughs. <b>2</b> @jerk,
a stupid, contemptible guy. <hi>Pagkadakung
tambaluslus nímu. Wà nímu syáta,</hi> You jerk!
You didn't make the basket.

<b>tamban</b> <hi>n</hi> name given to @sardines of several
species. <b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A13; c1] solve a problem by
counting or by looking at and manipulating
s.t. representing the thing counted (analogous
to the way <hi>tamban</hi> are sold&mdash;by counting
out each piece individually). <hi>Tinambana
(itinamban) pagkwinta,</hi> @Reckon it by tallying
or counting on your fingers. <hi>n</hi> method
of counting by manipulation of pieces. <b>paN-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A2; b6] fish for <hi>tamban</hi>. <hi>n</hi> occupation
of fishing for <hi>tamban</hi>. <b>panalamban, pangtamban</b>
 = <sc>PAN-</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>tambangúngu</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large, fleshy @catfish living
in marine estuaries.

<b>tambasákan</b> <hi>n</hi> @mudskipper, a k.o. small fish
that lives in shallow water, salt or fresh,
with protruding eyes and spiny fins. It
crawls out of the water, may travel considerable
distance over land and is often
perched on mangrove branches: <hi><b>Periophthalmus
sp.</b></hi>

<b>tambaúlì</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. @{magic oil} for open wounds
which is said to make the wound close instantly.
<b>2</b> condition in which a circumcised
penis gets covered over again.

<b>tambaw</b> = <sc>TAMBAL</sc>.

<b>tambawu</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @frog that thrives on land.

<b>tambayáwan</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. @spider found in and inhabiting
thickets, 3"-5"[**inch symbols] in diameter including
the feet, mottled green and black in
color.

<b>tambayáyung</b> (from <hi>yáyung</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [A1C; b(1)]
work together sharing the labor, share in
expenses. <hi>Dílì siya mutambayáyung sa buluhatun
sa balay,</hi> He does not @{help out} with
household chores. <hi>Nagtambayáyung mi sa
ábang,</hi> We each pay a share of the rent. <hi>n</hi>
one whom one works together with to accomplish
s.t. <b>ka-</b> = <sc>TAMBAYÁYUNG</sc>, <hi>n</hi>.

<b>tambid</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AC2; c] lay s.t. long across s.t.
else. <hi>Nagtambid ang duhang nangatúlug,</hi>
The two put their legs over each other as
they slept. <hi>Itambid nang lipak sa láin, kurus
na,</hi> Lay a stick across another, and you
get a cross. <b>2</b> [A1; c] carry a child astraddle
one's side. <hi>Ayawg itambid nang bátà
kay mapakaw,</hi> Don't carry the child on
your hips. He might become bowlegged.
<b>-in-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] sit with an ankle crossing
each other or one on the other knee. <hi>Makítà
ang gising midiyas ug magtinambid ka,</hi>
Everyone will be able to see your torn socks
if you sit with your ankle on your knee.
<b>-in- ságing</b> <hi>n</hi> fried banana fritters consisting
of bananas cut lengthwise and laid across
one another. <b>hiN-</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] sit with legs
crossed at the knees. <b>tambiray</b> <hi>n</hi> game of
rubber bands in which one band is flicked
with the fingers over another band.

<b>tambilagaw</b> = <sc>TAGILHAW</sc>.

<b>tambilágaw</b> <hi>a</hi> for the vision to be blurred.
<hi>Tambilágaw íyang panan-aw sa lúhà,</hi> Her vision
is all blurred from the tears. <hi>v</hi> [B; b6]
for the vision to become blurred.

<b>tambis</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. fruit tree with bell-shaped,
pinkish fruits, about 2"[**inch symbol] long: <hi><b>Eugenia
aquea</b></hi>. <b>&mdash; nga putì</b> variety with white fruit.
<hi>v</hi> [B56] for the external genitalia of a sow
that is in the heat to redden like a <hi>tambis</hi>
fruit. <b>-un</b> <hi>n</hi> full and pinkish. <hi>Tambísun ang
íyang ngábil,</hi> She has full and red lips.

<b>tambiyúlu</b> = <sc>KAMBIYÚLU</sc>.

<b>tambling</b> <hi>n</hi> @tumbling. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] do tumbling.
<hi>Maáyu siyang mutambling kúmu sirkadur,</hi>
He's good in tumbling being an acrobat. <hi>Gitamblíngan
lang níya ang íyang pagkahúlug,</hi>
He broke his fall by tumbling.

<b>tambù<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; c] appear, lean out of a window
or s.t. similar. <hi>Mitambù (nanambu)[**missing accent? P2] siya
sa bintánà,</hi> He was in the window. <hi>Lúhà
nga nanambù (mitambù) sa íyang mga mata,</hi>
Tears that formed in her eyes. <hi>Itambù ang
bátà sa bintánà,</hi> Put the child in the window.
<b>-l-an, -anan</b> <hi>n</hi> @window.

<b>tambù<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> = <sc>TANGBÙ<hi rend=sub>2</hi></sc>.

<b>tambúbu</b> <hi>n</hi> a building used for storing ears
of corn. <hi>v</hi> [A13; a12] construct, make into
a @granary.

<b>tambubúan</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. large @wasp.

<b>tambubúkag</b> = <sc>HAMBUBÚKAG</sc>.

<b>tambud</b> = <sc>TABILI SA DÁGAT</sc>. <hi>see</hi> <sc>TABILI</sc>.

<b>tambug</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] <b>1</b> throw s.t. heavy or bulky
into s.t. deep. <hi>Silay mitambug sa gipatay sa
<pb n=978>dágat</hi>, They threw the murder victim into
the sea. <hi>Maáyu itambug sa pangpang ning
gubaung kutsi</hi>, Better throw this rickety
car over the cliff. <b>2</b> give animals feed or
fodder. <hi>Tambúgi lang ug pakpak ang kábaw</hi>,
Just give corn husks to the carabao. <b>2a</b> drop
a coin into a piggy bank. <b>3</b> [B12; b8] @fall.
<hi>Ubang búnga matambug ug mahinug</hi>, Some
fruits fall when ripe. <hi>Natambug ang bátà sa
hagdanan</hi>, The child fell down the stairs.

<b>tambuk<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @fat. <hi>Bábuyng tambuk</hi>, A fat pig.
<hi>Paridy&ucaron;s kay tambuk ka ra</hi>, Go on a diet
because you're too fat. <hi>Tambuk pay dyís,
miswa</hi>, Thinner than a dime, a noddle[** noodle?]. <b>2</b>
fertile soil. <hi>Tambuk ang yútang daplin sa
subà</hi>, The soil near the riverbank is fertile.
3 growing vigorously, lush. <hi>Tambuk ang tanum
inabunúhan</hi>,[**not sure: "b"? 2 words?] Fertilized plants are vigorous.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [BN; b3(1)] get fat. <b>2</b> [B; b3(1)]
become fertile, vigorous in growth. <hi>Makahayblad
ang pagsingárig káug tambuk</hi>, You
can get high blood pressure from eating fat
all the time. <b>&mdash; nga nagdág luib</b> <hi>a</hi> fat but
sickly person. <b>&mdash; ug, ang sulti, manulti</b> <hi>a</hi> exaggerating,
bragging. <hi>Dílì katuúhan nang
tawhána kay tambuk nà ug sulti</hi>, You can't
believe him because he is a braggart. <hi>v</hi> [A12;
a12] @brag or @exaggerate.

<b>tambuk<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b6] throw s.t. out. <hi>Kinsay
nagtambuk ug basúra dinhi?</hi> Who disposed
of his garbage here?

<b>tambukàkà</b>, <b>tambukákà</b> <hi>n</hi> fat (derisive). <hi>v</hi>
[B] become obese. N<hi>agkatambukàkà siya
human maminyù</hi>, She turned into a fat
slob after she got married.

<b>tambukíkuy</b> <hi>a</hi> plump and chubby. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6]
become plump and chubby.

<b>tambúku</b> <hi>n</hi> k.o. grass of waste spaces bearing
white tassels: <hi><b>Kyllinga monocephala</b></hi>. <hi>see
also</hi> <b>BULUBUTÚNIS</b> <hi>under</hi> <b>BUTÚNIS</b>.

<b>tambul<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{bass drum}. <b>2</b> pregnant woman
(humorous). <hi>v</hi> [B26; b6] become pregnant.
<b>-in-</b> <hi>a</hi> s.t. made in the shape of a bass drum,
more or less. <b>-iru(<-)</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> drumbeater. <b>2</b> one
who beats the drums (is an apologist) for a
politician. <hi>Kanang kumintadúra tambulíru
sa administrasiyun</hi>, That radio commentator
is an apologist for the administration.

<b>tambul<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c] dam, put s.t. across a
stream to stop the flow of water. <hi>Ayaw ug
tambúli ang sapà kay mawalay túbig sila sa
ubus</hi>, Don't dam the brook because they
will have no water downstream. <hi>n</hi> @dam.

<b>tambula</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> k.o. play performed during
Christmas depicting the Nativity, performed
by an all-male cast wearing masks. It is
in verse and accompanied by music. <b>2</b> participants
of such a play.

<b>tambúli</b>, <b>tambúlì</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @melongena, k.o. conch.
<b>2</b> horn made from the horn of a water buffalo
or a conch. <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] call with a
<hi>tambúlì</hi>. <b>2</b> [A; a2] make a <hi>tambúlì</hi> horn.

<b>tambulingaw</b> (from <hi>lingaw</hi>) <hi>v</hi> [B126] overlook
s.t. due to preoccupation or distraction.
<hi>Natambulingaw siyag panuklì tungud
sa kadaghan sa mamalítay</hi>, She got mixed
up in giving change because there were so
many customers.

<b>tambúluk</b> <hi>n</hi> the hackles of roosters.

<b>tambun</b> v [A; b6] cover over, fill up with
soil. <hi>Ayúhag tambun ang gamut arun sigúrung
mutúbù</hi>, Cover the roots well so that
they will be sure to grow. <hi>Tambúni ang písak
arun dílì maghítak</hi>, Throw sand in the
puddle so it will not turn into a mire. <b>-an</b> <hi>n</hi>
k.o. small bamboo fish trap placed on the
sea floor with its top covered with corals
and stones. <b>paN-an</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2] catch, trap fish
using such a fish trap.

<b>tambung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A2; b] attend a gathering. <hi>Mutambung
ta sa íyang lubung</hi>, Let's attend
his funeral.

<b>tambur</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> = <b>TAMBUL</b>. <b>2</b> cylinder of a revolver.
<b>pistúla nga di-</b> @revolver.

<b>tamburábug</b> = <b>TAMBUKÀKÀ</b>.

<b>tamburabuy</b> = <b>BABUYBABUY</b>, <hi>1</hi>.

<b>tamburábuy</b> = <b>TAMBUKÀKÀ</b>.

<b>tamburin</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @tambourine. <b>2</b> round fancy
earrings or necklace in tambourine shape
or highly ornate filigree. <hi>v</hi> [A] wear earrings
of this sort.

<b>tambutsu</b> <hi>n</hi> exhaust pipe of motor vehicles.
<hi>v</hi> [A; a] use, attach an exhaust pipe.

<b>tam dyuns</b> <hi>n</hi> men's long hair style patterned
after the singer, Tom Jones. <hi>v</hi> [A13] wear
one's hair in the Tom Jones style.

<b>tamhan</b> <hi>see</hi> <b>TAMA</b>.

<b>tamhang</b> <hi>a</hi> carelessly inattentive, @neglectful.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] be careless, neglectful. <hi>Labihan
nímung nakatamhang sa ímung pamilya!</hi>
How you have been neglecting your family!
<hi>Gitamhángan níya ang íyang pagmaníhu maung
nadisgrasya</hi>, He was careless when he
drove so he had an accident. <b>2</b> [A; b] damage,
destroy maliciously. <hi>Gitamhángan sa
mga ilagà ang mga libru</hi>, The rats destroyed
the books. <b>-an(->)</b> <hi>a</hi> bent on destroying,
breaking things. <hi>Ang dúlun tamhangan sa
tanum</hi>, Locusts are destructive to plants. <hi>v</hi>
[B12] become destructive.

<b>tamhung</b> <hi>v</hi> [A1; b2] make a plant be in the
shade. <hi>Dakung káhuy nga nagtamhung sa
mga tanum</hi>, The tall tree that shades the
plants.

<b>támì</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> sticky and moist. <hi>Támì nga armirul</hi>,
Sticky laundry starch. <hi>Támì nga panahun</hi>,
<pb n=979>Humid weather. <b>2</b> dirt-soaked. <hi>Támì nga sinínà</hi>,
Soiled clothing. <b>3</b> wet and muddy. <hi>Támì
ang ílang tugkaran kun mag-ulan</hi>, Their
yard becomes wet and muddy when it rains.
<hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [B; b5] become sticky and moist, dirt-soaked,
or muddy. <hi>Mutámì (matámì) ang
kalámay kun hitun-ugan</hi>, Brown sugar becomes
moist and sticky when exposed to
damp. <b>2</b> [A] for rain to fall. <hi>Nagtámì na
sad</hi>, It's raining again. <b>-un</b> <hi>a</hi> moist or partially
melted brown sugar.

<b>tamíaw</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b5] visit s.o. or a place. <hi>Gitamiáwan
(gitamíaw) nákù ang ákung apuhan</hi>,
I visited my grandparents.

<b>tamíhid</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b] stick out the lower lip in
derision. <hi>Nahiubus ang nangulitáwu nímu
kay ímung gitamihíran</hi>, Your suitor was
hurt because you stuck out your lower lip
at him. <b>matamihírun</b>, <b>matinamihírun</b> <hi>a</hi> characterized
with derision[** "@derisive"?]. <hi>Napikal ku sa íyang
matamihírun nga katáwa</hi>, I got irked at her
derisive laughter.

<b>tamilì</b> = <b>HIMILÌ</b>. <hi>see</hi> <b>PÍLÌ</b>.

<b>tamíluk<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @shipworms, edible marine mollusks
that bore into wood. <b>2</b> k.o. edible insect
grub, usually found in rotten logs. <hi>v</hi>
[a12] be infested with shipworms.

<b>tamíluk<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> mucous discharge when one has
colds. <hi>v</hi> [A123P; a4] have a cold.

<b>taming</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @shield. <b>2</b> s.t. used as defense. <hi>v</hi>
[A13; c6] use a shield. <hi>Naigù siya kay wà
magtaming</hi>, He was hit because he didn't
use a shield.

<b>tam-is</b> <hi>a</hi> @sweet. <hi>v</hi> [B26; a2] become, make
sweet. <hi>Mutam-is (matam-is) ang prútas kun
lihian kinig kámay</hi>, Fruits become sweet if
sugar is injected into the tree when young.
<hi>n</hi> sweets, such as candy, jam, et al. <b>paka-</b>
<hi>v</hi> [a12] consider an unpleasant experience
sweet (literary). <hi>Pakatam-ísun kung mamatay
álang sa bulawánung tingúhà</hi>, I would
consider it sweet to die for a lofty cause.
<b>ma-un</b> <hi>a</hi> sweet in a figurative sense. <hi>Matam-ísung
yuhum</hi>, A sweet smile.

<b>tamislat</b> <hi>n</hi> [** <b>1</b>] k.o. brachiopod found burrowing
in the sand, used in soup. <b>2</b> facetious term
for s.o. with a flat nose. <hi>Tamislat kaáyu
ning ákung palangging</hi>, My little darling has
a flat nose.

<b>tamlà</b> <hi>n</hi> @fingerprint, @thumbprint. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)]
affix the thumbprint. <hi>Gawas sa pirma tamláan
pa giyud</hi>, You have to sign and affix
your thumbprint as well.

<b>tampa</b>, <b>tampà<hi rend=sub>1</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; a1] put a ladle into s.t.
that is boiling over to settle it. <hi>Way nitampà
sa linúgaw pagbúkal</hi>, Nobody came to
take care of the porridge when it boiled
over.

<b>tampà<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A; c] cover or patch an opening
with a flat sheet. <hi>Tampái lang ug kartun
ang lungag</hi>, Just cover the hole with a piece
of cardboard. <b>2</b> [A3P; c1] lay s.t. flat over
another flat surface. <hi>Ang lubut sa aparadur
wà mutampà sa salug</hi>, The bottom part of
the cabinet did not lay flat on the floor. <b>3</b>
[A; a1] flatten or strike with the palm of
the hand. <hi>Tampáun ta ang íyang dughan
kun nagginhawa pa ba</hi>, Let us press the
palm of our hands to his breast to see if he
is still breathing.

<b>tampà<hi rend=sub>3</hi></b> <hi>n</hi> @{bride price}. <hi>v</hi> [A; b6(1)] give, pay
the bride price. <hi>Gitampáan siya ug usa ka
balay ug usa ka lunà nga yútà</hi>, They paid
a house and a piece of land for her.

<b>tampad</b> = <b>TALAMPAD</b>.

<b>tampak</b> <hi>a</hi> square, straight on the path[**pa?] or focus
of. <hi>Nahúlug ang butung tampak sa íyang
úlu</hi>, The coconut fell smack on his
head. <hi>Tampak sa habágat ang baybáyun sa
Talísay</hi>, The southwest wind blows squarely
across the beach at Talisay.

<b>tampal</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; b] overlay a patch on clothing
at places of great wear to add strength. <hi>Gitampálan
nákù ang samput sa purul</hi>, I put a
patch on the seat of the short pants.

<b>tampálas</b> <hi>v</hi> [AN; b(1)] maltreat severely.
<hi>Mutampálas (manampálas) sa asáwa ang bánang
palahúbug</hi>, A drunkard husband maltreats
his wife. <b>-an</b> <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> s.o. who maltreats. <b>2</b>
@foul-mouthed, obscene in speech. <hi>Tampásan
siyang manulti báhig babáyi</hi>, He speaks
obscenely about women. <hi>v</hi> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> become
severely abusive toward s.o. <hi>Nagkatampásan
ang way uwaw nga inaína</hi>, The
shameless stepmother is getting more and
more abusive. <b>2</b> become foul-mouthed.

<b>tampaling</b> <hi>v</hi> [A; ab2] slap the face. <hi>Walà kay
katungud mutampaling nákù</hi>, You had no
right to slap me in the face. <hi>Kaáyu giyud
níyang tampalingun</hi>, How nice it would be
to slap her in the face. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @{slap in the face}.
<b>2</b> insult like a slap in the face.

<b>tampalung</b> = <b>TAMPALING</b>.

<b>tamparus</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [A12; c1] do s.t. hurriedly and
carelessly. <hi>Ug tamparusun (itamparus) ninyu
pagtáud ang bungbung mangatangtang
lang nà dáyun</hi>, If you put the wall up hurriedly
and carelessly, it will get loose right
away. <b>2</b> [A; ab2] slap the face hard. Tamparusun
ta kag magtubagtubag ka, I'll slap
you in the face if you talk back. <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> hard
slap in the face. <b>2</b> @insult. <hi>Tamparus álang
kanátù ang íyang pagbalíbad</hi>, His refusal is
a slap on the face.

<b>tampi</b> <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> bank of a body of water. <b>2</b> edge of
a surface. <hi>a</hi> <b>1</b> @nearby, close by. <hi>Ang kumbintu 
<pb n=980>tampi sa simbahan</hi>, The convent is
near the church. <b>2</b> close to the edge. <hi>Tampi
ra kaáyung pagbutang mu sa básu sa lamísa.
Mah[=ú]g</hi>, You put the glass much too close
to the edge of the table. It's going to fall.

<b>tampì_<note n=1></note></b> = <b>TAMPI</b>, <hi>n1</hi>, <hi>2</hi>.

<b>tampì<hi rend=sub>2</hi></b> <hi>v</hi> [A; c1] tuck a piece of cloth into
another to hold it in place, e.g. a shirt that
sticks out or s.t. wrapped around the waist.
<hi>Tampía (itampì) ang karsúnis kay luag ang
hawakan</hi>, Fold your trousers and tuck in
the folds because they are loose at the
waist.

<b>tampihak</b> (from <hi>pihak</hi>) <hi>n</hi> <b>1</b> @temple of the
head. <b>2</b> severe headache on one side of the
head. <hi>v</hi> [a4b4] get a headache of this sort.

<b>tampil</b> <hi>n</hi> milled or pounded rice. <hi>v</hi> [A; a]
cook rice. <hi>Nakatampil ka nag ipaniudtu?</hi>
Have you cooked rice for lunch? <hi>Dì nátù
tampílun ang paniudtu kay dì paígù ang
usa ka litru</hi>, Let's not have rice for lunch
because a liter isn't enough.

<b>tamping</b> <hi>n</hi> flat cake made of fine corn flour
(<hi>tiktik</hi>) or buri flour (<hi>unaw</hi>) mixed with
coconut milk and sugar. It is either fried in
coconut oil or wrapped in banana leaves
and put over live embers. <hi>v</hi> [A; a] make
this sort of cake.

<b>tampípì</b> <hi>n</hi> a covered wicker suitcase. <hi>v</hi> [c1]
make into a wicker suitcase.

<b>tampiri</b> <hi>v</hi> [B; c1] @lean, @tilt. <hi>Mitampiri (natampiri)
ang lubi sa paghángin ug kusug</hi>,
The coconut tree tilted during the strong
wind. <hi>Kun magtanum kag kamúting káhuy,
tampiriha (itampiri) ang láwas sa yútà</hi>, When
you plant cassava, plant the stem into the
ground at an angle.

<b>tampu</b> <hi>v</hi> <b>1</b> [AB3C; ac] join in a group, @{put
together}. <hi>Kinsay nagtampu íning bulingun
sa inutaw?</hi> Who put this dirty laundry together
with the ironed things? <hi>Tampúha
lang ang tanan arun usa ray sudlanan</hi>, Put
them all together so there will be just one
container. <hi>Itampu nang bakláa sa mga babáyi</hi>,
Put that sissy together with the girls.
<b>2</b> [A; c] give a contribution. <hi>Magtampu
(magtampuhay) ta pára sa parti</hi>, Let's contribute
for the party. <b>3</b> [A; c] contribute
to a publication. <hi>Sugilánun ákung itampu
sa sunud gulà</hi>, I'll contribute a short story
for the next issue. <b>3a</b> [A; c] send in an
entry to a contest. <hi>Gitampu námù ang basíyung
káha sa sigarilyu</hi>, We sent the empty
cigarette packs as entries to the contest. <hi>n</hi>
<b>1</b> @contribution. <b>2</b> entry in a contest. <b>tampuhan</b>
<hi>v</hi> [A13] contribute to s.t. regularly.
<hi>Magtampuhan siya sa Bisayà</hi>, He contributes
regularly to Bisaya. <b>tampuhay</b> <hi>v</hi> = <b>TAMPU</b>.
