
<pb n=1201>
in boiling water. <i>Lapwáhi ang útuk sa túbig
nga may asin,</i> Parboil the brain in salted
water.

<p><b>lapya</b> <i>n</i> lapping or dashing of waves, sound
of waves coming onto the shore. <i>Ang lapya
sa mga balud sa baybáyun,</i> The lapping of
the waves on the shore. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for the
waves to strike the shore. <b>lapyahan, lapyahánan</b>
<i>n</i> the place where the waves strike
the shore. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> sound of waves striking the
shore.

<p><b>lapyà</b> <i>a</i> @broad in face, flattened out. <i>Lapyag
nawung,</i> A broad, @flat face. <i>v</i> [B] be, become
flattened out. <i>Nalapyà ang nígu nga
naligsan sa trák,</i> The winnowing tray is flattened
out because the truck drove over it.

<p><b>lapyat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @fat and @flabby. <i>Dalágang úlay kunu
piru lapyat na ug dughan,</i> She's supposed
to be a virgin but she has sagging breasts. <b>2</b>
slow and languid in movement. <i>Lapyat nga
manlihuklihuk,</i> Moving sluggishly. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; a2]
be, become flabby or lacking in fullness.
<i>Wà kay iksirsayis maung nagkalapyat ang
ímung buktun,</i> You lack exercise. No wonder
your arms are getting flabby. <b>2</b> [B; a2]
move without energy. <i>Dì giyud mahuman
ang ímung trabáhu ug maglapyat ka,</i> Your
work will never get done if you work slow.

<p><b>lapyù</b> <i>a</i> @young and @tender. <i>Ang lapyung bágu
mauy maáyung utánun,</i> Young and tender
<i>bágu</i> leaves make an excellent vegetable
stew. <i>Lapyù nga kaisípan,</i> Young and tender
minds.

<p><b>lárag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] for leaves to yellow. <i>Nagkalarag
ang mga tanum kay way ulan,</i> The
plants are becoming yellow because there
hasn't been any rain. <b>1a</b> [B12] for leaves or
flowers to wither and fall off. <i>Nalárag ang
mga dáhun sa lawus nga kamunggay,</i> The
withered kamunggay leaves dropped off. <b>2</b>
[B12] be faded. <i>Nalárag na ang íyang kaanyag,</i>
Her beauty has faded. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ang búlak,
pagkabúlak</b> lose one's virginity (for the
flower to fade). <i>Nalárag ang íyang pagkabúlak
sa dihang gipaangkan siya,</i> She lost her
chaste beauty when she became pregnant. <b>3</b>
[B] get completely drunk. <i>Sa ílang pag-ínum
gabíi si Tunyu ang únang nalárag,</i> In
their spree last night Tonio was the first
one to get under the table. <b>3a</b> [B12; a1] be
fascinated with s.o. <i>Ang íyang kaanyag mauy
nakalárag (nakapalárag) nákù,</i> Her beauty
fascinated me. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> withered, yellowed
leaves, flowers, faded beauty, unchaste. <i>Gipangasáwa
siya bísan usa na siya ka larag
nga búlak,</i> S.o. married her even though she
was a faded flower (no longer a virgin). <i>n</i>
fallen leaves.

<pb n=1202>

<p><b>láran</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] @beat, @outdo. <i>Dakù túud
si Klí apan walà siya makaláran ni Prísir,</i>
Clay may be big but he couldn't beat Frazier.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3] allow oneself to be outdone.
<b>2</b> [A13] allow oneself to get carried
away with his emotions. <i>Magpaláran ka gánis
ímung kaguul, masakit ka giyud,</i> If you
allow yourself to get carried away with
your emotions, you will surely get sick.

<p><b>lárang</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> stew s.t. with coconut
milk and nothing else but spices. <i>Lamì ang
kyampaw ug ilárang (larángun),</i> The best
way to cook ray is by stewing it in coconut
juice. <b>2</b> reheat s.t. to remove the fat.
<i>Laránga ang adúbu arun dílì kaáyu ngilngig,</i>
Heat the <i>adúbu</i> so it won't be so greasy. <i>n</i>
dish stewed in coconut milk, usually stingray.

<p><b>láras</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @saw along the length. <i>Larásun
nátù ang átung giputul nga káhuy,</i> We'll
saw the log into lumber. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> do
s.t. to all of a group. <i>Ang huramintádu nga
milaras ug patay sa tibuuk pamilya,</i> The
amok who killed all the members of the
family. <i>Ayaw mi larasa (ilaras) ug kasábà
kay usa ray nakasâ[** ^?],</i> Don't include us all in
the scolding because only one of us did
anything wrong. <i>Gilaras ku pagsuruysúruy
ang mga dálan dinhi,</i> I wandered through
all of the streets. <b>2</b> do s.t. to a larger number
of a group than would ordinarily be expected.
<i>Gilaras níyag pangulitáwu ang duha
ka magsúun,</i> He courted two of the sisters
at the same time. <i>n</i> ripsaw, saw for cutting
with the grain. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> sawhorse. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i>
boards sawed off with a ripsaw.

<p><b>láraw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab] @{make plans} to do s.t. <i>Nagláraw
ang prisidinti nga magdiktadur,</i> The
president is planning to become a dictator.
<i>Dúna siyay gilárawng buhátun nímu,</i> He is
plotting to do s.t. against you. <i>Ikay gilaráwan
níyang patyun,</i> He is planning to kill
you. <b>2</b> [A; a2] plan how and where s.t. is
to be built. <i>Magláraw ta sa átung balayan,</i>
We're going to map out the place where the
house is to be built. <i>n</i> plan, plot. <i>Wà kuy láraw
sa pagbiyáhi,</i> I have no plans to travel.
<b>-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> picture. <b>2</b> graven image (Biblical).
<i>Dílì ka magsimba sa mga laráwan,</i> Thou
shalt not worship graven images. <b>3</b> image,
likeness of. <i>Laráwan ka sa ímung inahan,</i>
You are your mother's image. <b>4</b> typical example.
<i>Laráwan sa kakúgi ug kabuútan,</i> Paragon
of industry and virtue. <i>Laráwan sa kahimsug,</i>
A picture of health. <i>v</i> [A; a] showing
clearly, picture s.t. <i>Ang ílang kahimtang
naglaráwan sa túmang kakabus,</i> The condition
shows what utter poverty is. <i>Nalaráwan
<pb n=1203>sa íyang panagway ang kahadluk,</i> Fear was
etched on her face. <i>Larawána kunúhay ang
lángit,</i> Try to picture heaven in your mind.

<p><b>laray<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] sing a song with meaningless
syllables (<i>la la la</i>). <i>Naglaray siya sa bátà
nga git[=ú]g,</i> She hummed the child to sleep.
<i>n</i> song sung with meaningless syllables.

<p><b>láray</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] be in a @row or @line; cause s.t.
to be so. <i>Siyay miláray sa mga masitíra sa
agiánan,</i> She lined the path with flower
pots. <i>Nagláray ang mga patyunun atúbang
sa payring iskwad,</i> The condemned men
were lined up before the firing squad. <i>n</i>
line, row. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>LÁRAY</sc>, <i>n. v</i> [A; ac] display
goods for sale on the sidewalks or in
open booths in the public market. <i>Adtu tas
tábù tan-áwun tag unsay gilaray,</i> Let's go to
the market and see what is being displayed.

<p><b>larga</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36] for a passenger vehicle to
leave. <i>Milarga (nalarga) ang trák binyáan
ang kunduktur,</i> The bus went off, leaving
the conductor behind. <b>1a</b> leave for a distant
place. <i>Mularga mi ugmà pára Butwan,</i> We'll
leave for Butuan tomorrow. <i>Ug malarga na
mi mahibáwu ka ra,</i> You'll surely know it if
we have gotten off. <b>1b</b> used in commands
only: go ahead, start. <i>Ug muingun kung
'larga', dágan ... Na, larga na,</i> When I say
'OK', run ... OK, run! <b>&mdash; manuk</b> = <sc>LARGA</sc>,
<i>1b.</i> <b>3</b>[**typo: 2, image is smudged, or manually proofread] [A3P; b] allow, permit s.o. to do
s.t. freely. <i>Kinsa may naglarga nímu nga ipatandug
nang trabahúa?</i> Who gave you a
free hand to touch that work? <b>2a</b> [A; b]
meet a price offered, agree to do s.t. for a
certain price offered. <i>Mularga ku ánà sa bayinti,</i>
I'll let it go for twenty. <b>3</b> [A; b7]
pay out the line. <i>Ayaw palabii ug larga sa
tugut ang tabánug,</i> Don't pay out the string
of your kite too much. <i>Largahi ang pasul,</i>
Pay out the fishline. <b>4</b> [A; bc] let cocks go
for a fight. <i>Largáhan na gánì nang duha ka
manuk, súgud na ang búlang,</i> When those
two cocks are released, that means the game
is on. <b>4a</b> [B; b] set on s.o. <i>Gilargahan siya
sa mga buguy,</i> The bullies set on him. <b>-da</b> <i>n</i>
all set to go, well-prepared, showing confidence
as one goes into a fight, examination,
or contest. <i>Hustu sa largáda si Klí. Walà giyud
magpakítag kahadluk,</i> Clay was all set
to go with complete confidence. He didn't
show a trace of fear. <b>-dur(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> one who
releases cocks in cockfighting. <b>2</b> one who
formally announces the candidacy of s.o.
running for an elective office.

<p><b>largabista</b> <i>n</i> @binoculars. <i>v</i> [A; b5] look at s.t.
with binoculars.

<p><b>largu</b> lead directly to. <i>Kining dalána largu sa
subà,</i> The path leads directly to the river. <i>v</i>
<pb n=1204><b>1</b> [A2; ac] go straight, take a straight course.[** . = scanno]
s.w. <i>Mulargu lang ku ngadtu sa íla,</i> I'll just
go straight to their place. <b>2</b> [A2; abc] do
s.t. directly straight away. <i>Mulargu ka lang
ug hílak bísan gipangutána ka lang,</i> You cry
right away even though I only asked you.
<i>Dílì ka makalargu ug sulud,</i> You can't just
go straight in. <i>Ay na lang ug sukda. Largúha
na lang pagputul,</i> Never mind measuring
it. Just cut it right off. <i>Largúhi lang siyag
ingun nga wà kay gustu,</i> Just tell him directly
that you don't like him. <i>Ayaw ilargug
hátag,</i> Don't give it to him directly. <b>2a</b> [A2]
happen fast without any previous indication.
<i>Milargu ug butu ang ribintadur ug
wà gánì musíyù,</i> The firecracker exploded
right away and it didn't even sizzle. <b>3</b> [B16; c1]
be, become straight. <i>Naglargu lang ning
sinináa mu rag sáku,</i> This dress is straight at
the sides like a sack. <b>larguhánan</b> <i>n</i> short, direct
route toward. <b>di-, pantalun di-</b> <i>n</i> long
pants.

<p><b>láring</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @sword similar to the <i>kanduwálì</i>
but with a slight curve to the blade.

<p><b>larínu</b> <i>a</i> speaking clearly and fluently. <i>Larínu
kaáyu nang Kanúa mubinisayà,</i> That American
speaks Cebuano very fluently. <i>v</i> [B12; c1]
speak clearly and fluently.

<p><b>láruk</b> = <sc>LAGDUK</sc>, <i>in all meanings except 1a.</i>

<p><b>larut</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a] <b>1</b> @{pull up} by the roots. <i>Maglarut
kug mani pára lapwáan,</i> I'll pull up
some peanuts to boil. <i>Íyang larutun ning tangúha,</i>
He'll pull this tooth out. <b>2</b> pull s.t.
off from its moorings, as if uprooting it.
<i>Bagyu ang nakalarut (nakapalarut) sa mga
barungbárung,</i> The typhoon knocked the
shanties over. <b>3</b> [B12N; b3] lose one's hair.
<i>Nanglarut ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is falling
out. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> hair that has fallen out. <i>Matag
kalígù níya dúnay daghang larut,</i> Every time
he takes a bath he loses a lot of hair. <b>2</b> bad
luck, allegedly brought on by s.o. <i>Ngánung
miduwà pa giyud ka, napildi na núun ta. Ikaw
lay nagdá sa larut,</i> Why did you have
to play with us? Now we lost. You must
have brought this bad luck. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab7]
take rice seedlings out from their bed ready
for transplanting. <i>Larútun na nátù ang similya
kay andam na ang basak,</i> Let's take
the seedlings out of the seedbed now because
the field is ready for planting.

<p><b>laruylaruy, laruyláruy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @roam idly,
aimlessly about instead of doing s.t. <i>Gilaruylarúyan
níya ang íyang pagtuun maung
nahagbung,</i> He wandered about instead of
studying, so he failed.

<p><b>laryang</b> <i>n</i> meaningless word used in singing
a song without words.

<pb n=1205><p><b>las</b> [**part of speech missing] for the @last time. <i>Hatági pa ku bi, las na
lang,</i> Please let me have one more. This is
the last one, for sure.

<p><b>lása<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @oil floating on top of liquids. <i>Lása kaáyu
ang sabaw sa linat-ang manuk,</i> The
chicken soup is oily because the chicken is
fat. <i>v</i> [B2S] for oil to appear on liquids.
<i>Naglasa ang dágat tungud sa gasulína,</i> The
sea is covered with a film of oil from the
gasoline leak.

<p><b>lása<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @taste. <i>Tayam ang lása sa ílang túbig
imnunun,</i> Their drinking water has a salty
taste. <i>v</i> [B2346; c5] be @tasty. <i>Dì mulása ang
útan ug daghan ang sabaw,</i> Vegetable stew
does not taste good if there's too much water.
<i>n</i> spices. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6c1] add or use
spices. <i>Mulasa kug tanglad sa linat-ang manuk,</i>
I use lemon grass to spice chicken stew.

<p><b>las-ag</b> <i>n</i> @puddle, esp. a dirty one.

<p><b>lasak</b> <i>n</i> @money contained in s.t. (slang). <i>Pilay
lasak sa pitákang inyung gilunggub?</i> How
much was in the bag you snatched?

<p><b>lasang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @forest, @jungle. <b>2</b> the trees on such
land. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become a forest. <i>Malasang
(mulasang) ning yutáa ug dì nímu trabahúun,</i>
This land will become a forest if
you don't cultivate it. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> forests. <b>-nun</b>
<i>a</i> from the forest. <i>Lasangnun nga mga mananap,</i>
Jungle animals. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] clear
the forest. <i>Nangahánaw ang mga Suban-un
sa dihang gilásang (gilasángan) na ang ílang
lugar,</i> The Subanos disappeared when their
land was deforested.

<p><b>lásaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for liquids to @flow or @spread
all over. <i>Mulásaw ang ámung sílung ug mag-ulan,</i>
Water flows under our house when it
rains. <i>Mu rag túbig ang álak nga naglásaw sa
kumbira,</i> Wine flowed like water at the party.
<b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> diluted, watery. <i>Lasaw ang miskla
sa simintu,</i> The cement is watery. <i>v</i> [AB; b7]
dilute s.t., make a mixture thin. <i>Ayaw
lasawa ang kapi,</i> Don't make the coffee so
weak. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <i>a</i> cowardly. <i>Ang lasaw ug
dugù níyang manghud wà muambak,</i> His
brother was too chicken to jump.

<p><b>las-ay</b> <i>a</i> lacking flavor. <i>Las-ay ang sabaw, kúwag
útan,</i> The soup is @tasteless because it
lacks vegetables. <i>v</i> [B; c1] get to be tasteless.
<i>Ang manggang ahat pagkahinug las-ayg
lamì,</i> Mangoes which are not tree-ripened
have an insipid taste.

<p><b>lasbi &mdash; ug</b> @rather than that [so-and-so] happen
(s.t. else is better). <i>Maáyu pa ug bayran
nímu ang buhis, lasbi ug mamurúsu ang yútà!</i>
Pay your taxes. It's @better than to have
your land foreclosed. <i>Dawáta na lang ning
diyis, lasbig wâ[** â ?],</i> Just accept this dime. It's
better than nothing. <i>Gihátag na lang nákù,
<pb n=1206>lasbig kawátun</i>, I just gave it to him. Better
than having him steal it.

<p><b>lasgas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for a smooth surface to be @rough
with tiny scratches, such that it would make
a grating sound if s.t. were rubbed over it. <b>2</b>
for corn to be mature (for the husks to become
dry and @rough). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a] for a
smooth surface to @{get roughened}, cause it
to do so. <i>Nalasgas ang imabaw sa lamísa kay
gikuriskurisan</i>, The table top got all scratched
because s.o. rubbed on[**typo: 'on' redundant] s.t. sharp over it.
<b>2</b> [A13] get a k.o. scaly formation on the
skin, caused by contact with contaminated
water. <i>Naglasgas ang ákung pánit kay nagtrabáhu
mi sa kanal</i>, My skin is infected
with scales because we have been working
in the ditch. <b>3</b> [B12] for corn to mature
(from the notion that the husks get @rough
and wrinkled when the fruit is mature).

<p><b>lasib</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @slice into long, thin pieces or
slice a thin portion off a larger slab. <i>Lamì
ang hamun ug nipsun paglasib</i>, Ham tastes
better if you slice it thin. <i>Aku na lay mulasib
íning karni nga ipanugba</i>, I will slice off
portions from this meat to broil. <i>Basta mag-apritáda
lasibun ang karni</i>, <i>Apritáda</i> is made
with meat cut into slivers.

<p><b>lasid</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @involve, include with the
others, esp. in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Ang kastígu
sa Diyus mulasid sa tanan</i>, Everybody gets
involved in God's punishment. <i>Bísag usa ray
makasalà, lasirun (ilasid) ming tanan ug búnal
ni Máma</i>, Mother whips everybody even
if only one of us does s.t. wrong.

<p><b>lásik</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b8] @{be thrown off} in[** in &mdash;> for] a distance
under a forceful impact. <i>Milásik (nalásik)
ug layù ang búla nga íyang gipatíran</i>, He
kicked the ball and it went far. <i>Hilasikan
(nalasikan) siya sa lápuk</i>, She got mud
splashed on her.

<p><b>lasing</b> <i>a</i> @drunk. <i>Kusug na nà siya muisturya
ug lasing na kaáyu</i>, He becomes talkative
when he is very groggy. <i>v</i> [A13B12; a] @{get
drunk}, cause s.o. to do so.

<p><b>laski</b> <i>a</i> @{be fast}, sprightly in doing s.t. <i>Laski
mulakaw</i>, A fast walker. <i>Laski ang láwas</i>, A
body that is active and full of energy. <i>Laski
siyang muhímug kálù</i>, He is energetic in
making hats. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be fast or brisk in
doing s.t. <i>Mulaski (malaski) nà siyang sugúun
ug suhúlan</i>, She'll run an errand with
alacrity if you pay her. <i>Nagkalaski na ang
nagluyang mga manuk</i>, The chickens were
weak, but they are regaining their strength
now.

<p><b>laskúta</b> <i>n</i> guy @rope: <b>1</b> a rope, chain, or rod to
guide a carabao in plowing. 2 a rope tied
from the boom of a sail to the stern to control
<pb n=1207>the sail. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] use or attach a
guy rope to a carabao or to a sail. <b>2</b> [A; a2]
make into a guy rope.

<p><b>laslas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @cut s.t. with a sawing motion
to make a @slash in it or to remove leaves and
small twigs. <i>Gilaslas níya ang mga lukay,</i> He
cut off the leaflets from the palm frond. <i>Gilaslasan
sa kawatan ang ákung bag,</i> The
thief made a gash in my bag. <i>Malaslas na
lang nang ímung bàbà ug tinambag, dílì gayud
pamatíun,</i> You can give him advice till
you're blue in the face (lit. you can rip
your mouth giving him advice), but he
won't listen to you. <i>n</i> slash, cracks like
slashes.

<p><b>lasmu</b> <i>a</i> having the fishy odor of stagnant water
or a body of a person who has not bathed
in weeks. <i>Lasmu kaáyu ang kabù kay
walà kahugási,</i> The dipper smells bad because
it hasn't been washed. <i>Lasmu kaáyu
ang isdà sa batu,</i> Fishes that live in rocks
tend to have a revolting smell. <b>way &mdash;</b> <i>a</i>
without making a fuss or bother (colloquial).
<i>Wà giyud nay lasmung amahána. Muhátag
dáyun bísag unsay pangayúun sa anak,</i> That
father never makes a fuss. Whatever his son
asks for he gets. <i>v</i> [B; b6] smell fishy or revolting
like stagnant water. <i>Mulasmu ang
plátung dì sabunan inighugas,</i> Plates develop
a fishy smell if you don't wash them
with soap.

<p><b>lasnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @tear s.t. that sticks or is attached
off with force. <i>Akuy milasnit sa
ngil-ad ritrátu nga ímung gipilit sa bungbung,</i>
I stripped off the indecent picture
that you had pasted on the wall. <i>Gilasnítan
níyag pánid ang nutbuk,</i> He tore a page out
of his notebook.

<p><b>laspa</b> <i>v</i> [AB126; c1] do s.t. which brings ill
or good to s.t. else besides the thing for
which it was intended. <i>Ang inyung binúang
nakalaspa (nakapalaspa) ug daghang táwu,</i>
Your foolishness has involved lots of people.
<i>Kay dihà man ku pagpanghátag sa mga
kindi, gilaspa hasta aku,</i> When they gave
out the candy, I also got some because I
happened to be there. <i>Íyang gilaspa ug larut
ang tanum uban sa sagbut,</i> He uprooted
the plant together with the weeds.

<p><b>last<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> in table tennis, one point away from
winning. <i>Ug makapuntus siyag kausa daug
na, kay last na man ang íyang iskur,</i> If he
makes one more point, he wins because he
needs only one point. <i>v</i> [B56] be a point
away from winning.

<p><b>last<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>LAS</sc>.

<p><b>lastats</b> <i>n</i> in basketball, the one who was the
last to touch a ball which went out of
<pb n=1208>bounds. <i>Inyu ang búla kay lastats man ang
inyung kuntra,</i> It's your ball because your
opponents touched the ball last. <i>v</i> [B1236]
be the @last to touch a ball which went out
of bounds.

<p><b>last díl</b> <i>n</i> @{last deal} in a mahjong or card game
before quitting. <i>v</i> [c1] be the last deal in a
mahjong or card game. <i>Last dílun (ilast díl)
na ni nátù kay buntag na,</i> Let's make this
our last deal because it's already morning.

<p><b>lasti</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> @carry, @ride with s.o. on a bike
or other vehicle meant for one. <i>Dílì ka makalasti
kay kúlang ug hángin ang gúma,</i> You
cannot ride double with me because there
isn't enough air. <b>2</b> @tie a rock to leaves or
fronds which hang down from a raft to keep
them from floating. <i>Ang palwa sa lubi gilastíhag
batu arun dílì mulutaw,</i> The palm
fronds have rocks tied to them so they
won't float.

<p><b>lastiku</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{rubber band}. <b>2</b> @slingshot made of
a rubber strip. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6] @bind or @fasten with
a rubber band. <i>Ákung gilastikuhan ang usa
ka bugkus lápis,</i> I bound the bundle of pencils
with a rubber band. <b>2</b> [A; a1] @shoot
with a slingshot. <i>Lastikuhun lang ang kaimítu,</i>
Get the star apple with a slingshot. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] go hunting with a slingshot.
<i>Manglastiku ku ug manuk ihálas,</i> I'll go
hunting wild chickens with a slingshot. <b>di-</b>
having an elastic garter. <i>Dilastiku ang ákung
panti,</i> I am wearing a pantie[**panty? P2] with an elastic
garter.

<p><b>lastrip</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{last trip} of the day by passenger
vehicles or trains. <b>2</b> one's trip to the cemetery
(humorous). <b>3</b> last chance to get married.
<i>Nangartig maáyu si Marta arun dì hibyaan
sa lastrip,</i> Martha makes herself up
carefully in the hope that she can still make
the last train. <i>Bisag lastrip basta pransit,</i> It
does not matter if it's the last trip (last
chance to get married), so long as it's the
front seat (that is, a rich husband). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c]
take the last trip, be the last trip. <i>Mulastrip
ku rung hápun,</i> I'll take the last trip
this afternoon. <i>Ug malastrip na ni, musakay
na lang ku,</i> If this is the last trip, I'll just
take it. <b>2</b> [B26] @die (humorous slang).

<p><b>lásu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ribbon, @bow. <b>2</b> @lasso. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @tie
into a bow. <i>Lasúha ang listun, ayawg balitùtúa,</i>
Lace the shoelace, don't tie it into a
knot. <i>Gilasúhan níya ang íyang dalága,</i> She
tied a ribbon in her little girl's hair. <b>2</b> @lasso.
<i>Lasúha ang kábaw nga nakabuhì,</i> Lasso the
carabao that escaped. <b>3</b> [a3] get entangled
in a rope or vines. <i>Nalásu ang mangangayam
sa daghang bágun,</i> The hunter got entangled
in the vines.

<pb n=1209>

<p><b>lasù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @masturbate (coarse). <b>2</b> [A; a]
@misuse s.t. so as to break it. <i>Hala, lasua nang
bisiklíta kay ikaw mauy mupaáyu,</i> OK, fool
around with that bicycle, and you will have
to fix it.

<p><b>las-u</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] heat s.t. by pouring boiling
water on it. <i>Wà pa ku makalas-u sa gikan-an
sa pasyinti,</i> I haven't poured boiling water
over the patient's eating utensils. <b>2</b> [B126; b4]
get @burnt with s.t. very hot. <i>Nalas-u
(nalas-úhan) ang ákung kamut sa bágang ákung
nahikapan,</i> I burnt my hand with the
coals that I touched.

<p><b>lasugas</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] @expose oneself to the elements.
<i>Ngánung naglasugas ka man íning
ulan nga dakù?</i> Why are you going out in
this heavy rain? <i>Dì maáyung lasugasun nátù
ang ínit,</i> It is not good to expose yourself
to the sun.

<p><b>las-ung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @catch with a noose. <i>Maglas-ung
tag tamsi pinaági íning láang,</i> Let's catch
a small bird with this noose. <i>Las-únga nang
kabáyung idlas,</i> Catch that wild horse with
a lasso. <i>n</i> @lasso or @noose that tightens when
you pull it.

<p><b>las-ut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @bad, @ugly. <i>Las-ut kaáyug batásan
nang bayhána,</i> That woman has a very bad
character. <i>Las-ut ug dagway,</i> Ugly in face.
<b>2</b> @shoddy, badly done, poor in quality. <i>Las-ut
kaáyung pagkabúhat ning trabahúa,</i> This
piece of work is very badly done. <i>Las-ut nga
klási sa panaptun,</i> A lousy k.o. cloth. <i>v</i> [B12; a2]
get to be bad, ugly, poor in quality,
do s.t. badly. <i>Ang kadaghan sa adurnu mauy
nakalas-ut (nakapalas-ut) sa íyang sinínà,</i>
Her dress was spoiled by the excessive decorations.
<i>Ayaw las-úta ning ímung ági,</i> Don't
make your penmanship poor.

<p><b>las-ut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>LAP-UT<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>

<p><b>laswa</b> <i>v</i> [AB; b5] pour boiling liquid on.
<i>Ákung gilaswáan (gilaswáhan) ang giíhaw
nga manuk arun himulbúlan,</i> I poured hot
water on the slaughtered chicken to get the
feathers off. <i>Pagbutukbutuk sa mantíkà nalaswahan
(nalaswa) ku,</i> When the fat popped,
I got burnt.

<p><b>lasyu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @canal for diverting water. <b>2</b> grooving
plane. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] divert water with a
canal. <i>Lasyúha (lasyuha) ang túbig sa tubud
arun ipatubig,</i> Divert the water from
the river for irrigation. <b>2</b> [A; b6] cut a
groove. <b>3</b> [A13; a12] make into a grooving
plane. <b>lasyadur</b> <i>n</i> grooving plane.

<p><b>lat</b> = <sc>USAB</sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>láta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tin @can. <i>Láta sa gátas,</i> Can of milk. <b>2</b>
a canful of. <i>Usa ka látang biskwit,</i> A canful
of biscuits. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> canned goods. <i>Karni
nga linata,</i> Canned meat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b1c1]
<pb n=1210>prepare canned food for a meal. <i>Maglinata
lang ta kay kápuy ilútù,</i> Let's just have canned
foods because I'm too lazy to cook. 1
[A] can s.t. di- = <b>LINATA. abri-</b> <i>n</i> can opener.
<b>batu-</b> <i>n</i> game of kick-the-can.

<p><b>latà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for fruits to be extremely soft or
rotten. <i>Ipásaw ang mga latà nga prútas,</i>
Feed the rotten fruits to the pigs. <b>1a</b> decayed,
rotted. <i>Latà na ang halígi,</i> The posts
are rotten. <b>2</b> for foods to be cooked, well-done,
and soft, <i>Latà na ang linúgaw,</i> The
porridge is soft now. <b>3</b> rotten in character.
<i>Ang latà nga pamunúan ni Markus,</i> The rotten
Marcos administration. <b>3a</b> for a woman
to have been had so often she is putrid
(coarse). <b>4</b> slow in action as well as thinking
power. <i>Unsáun nátù pagkadaug nga latà
kaáyu ang kuts?</i> How can we win with a
rotten coach? <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12] become rotten or
very soft. <i>Náay ilagà nga nalatà sa tangki</i>,
There's a dead rat that has rotted in the water
tank. <i>Nagkalatà ang mga nuug nga pirming
gihúmul</i>, The cloth is rotting because
it is always kept in water. <b>2</b> [A; ab] boil
food until it is tender. <i>Ayawg lat-a paglútù
ang kamúti kay mawálà ang lamì,</i> Don't
cook the sweet potatoes too soft or they
will lose their flavor. <i>Lat-i ang karni úsà adubúha,</i>
Boil the meat tender before you
fry it. <b>3</b> [B12] be crushed to flatness. <i>Malatà
giyud ka ug hiligsan ka sa pisun,</i> You'll
be crushed flat if you are run over by a
steam roller. <b>4</b> [A3P; b] maul, gang upon
s.o. viciously with blows. <i>Ang kawatan kun
hisakpan lat-an sa mga táwu,</i> The people
will maul the thief if they catch him. <b>4a</b> [b1]
defeat badly. <i>Gilat-an ang bangà nílang
tím,</i> Their lousy team got a sound thrashing.
<b>4b</b> [b] subject to vigorous questions or criticisms.
<i>Gilat-an ang tistígus sa abugádu,</i> The
lawyer absolutely pulverized the witness.
<i>Pirming lat-an si Markus sa piryudiku,</i> The
newspapers always lambast Marcos. <b>ka-</b>(<-)
<i>v</i> [A13] be present in huge quantities. <i>Nagkalátà
lang ang sayup sa íyang papil,</i> There
were plenty of mistakes on his paper. <i>Nagkalátà
ang lansúnis didtu sa Misámis,</i> There
are plenty of lanzones in Misamis. <b>nilat-an,
linat-an</b> <i>n</i> s.t. stewed.

<p><b>látab</b> <i>n</i> name given to young <i>samúk</i>: <b>Gerres
spp.</b>

<p><b>látab</b><hi rend=sub>1</i> <i>v</i> [B6; b] for liquids to have oil, usually
edible, floating on top. <i>Ang sabaw naglátab
sa mantíkà,</i> The soup has streaks of
oil floating on top of it.

<p><b>látab</b><hi rend=sub>2</i> <i>v</i> [A13] for liquor to be present in
inexhaustible quantities. <i>Maglátab ang tubà
sa ámù maduminggu,</i> The toddy simply
<pb n=1211>flows at our place on Sundays.

<p><b>látad</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] spread s.t. out under the sun.
<i>Ilátad ang mais (kupras) arun mauga,</i> Spread
the corn (copra) under the sun. <i>Ilátad ang
putì,</i> Bleach the white clothes under the
sun. <b>lataran</b> <i>n</i> place one spreads things out
under the sun.

<p><b>látag</b> = <sc>LÁTAD</sc>.

<p><b>latagaw</b> (from <i>tagaw</i>) a @wanderer, rambling
about without destination. <i>Ang latagaw dílì
mahimuyù,</i> A vagabond won't stay in one
place. <i>Latagaw ang ílang isturya,</i> Their conversation
wandered from one topic to another.
<i>Latagaw ug mata,</i> Having eyes which
rove all over. <i>v</i> [A13B2; b(1)] wander aimlessly
about, without destination. <i>Mulatagaw
(malatagaw) ang irù ug dílì pakan-un,</i>
A dog roves about if you don't feed it. <i>Síging
yawyaw ang maistra piru naglatagaw
ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> The teacher kept talking
away but my mind wandered. <i>Bisan unsang
dapíta ang íyang gilatagawan karun,</i>
He roams about any place he feels like going.

<p><b>latak</b> <i>a</i> standing out @clear. <i>Latak kaáyu ang
panti,</i> You can clearly see her panties
(through her skirt). <i>Latak kaáyu ang litra sa
aybiim,</i> The <sc>IBM</sc> typewriter types clearly.
<i>v</i> [B3(1)] for a mark, outline or imprint to
stand out clear.

<p><b>látak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36] for fruits, flowers, or leaves
to fall. <i>Malátak ang mga mangga kun hinug
na,</i> Mangoes fall off the tree when they are
ripe. <b>2</b> [AN] lower (not cast) fishing equipment
into the sea. <i>Anhi ta dinhi manlátak
sa báling,</i> We'll lower the net in this place.

<p><b>latang</b> <i>a</i> soft and @ripe to the point just prior
to getting rotten. <i>Tam-is kaáyu ang búngan
ug latang na,</i> The green table bananas are
very sweet when they are ripened soft. <i>v</i>
[B12] become very ripe.

<p><b>lat-ang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @miss or @skip a chance
in a series. <i>Ug makalat-ang kag tumar sa tablítas,
maburus ka dáyun,</i> If you miss taking
a pill you will get pregnant. <i>Lat-angig
duha ka linya úsà isulat ang uluhan,</i> Leave
two lines before writing the title. <b>2</b> [A; c]
for s.t. to be placed in between s.t. else. <i>Upisína
sa prinsipal ang nakalat-ang sa ámung
duha ka kwartu,</i> The principal's office is
between our two rooms. <i>Lat-ángi ug munggus
ang mga tudling sa mais,</i> Plant mung
beans between the rows of corn. <b>lat-anglat-ang</b>[**retain hyphen]
<i>v</i> [A13; c1] for things to be in a series
so that they alternate; put them so. <i>Naglat-anglat-ang[**retain hyphen]
ang mga babáyi ug láki paglingkud,</i>
The boys and girls are seated alternately.

<p><b>latas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @cross or @{pass through}. <i>Latasun 
<pb n=1212>nímu nang subáa padúng sa íla,</i> You
have to cross that river to their place. <b>2</b> pass
or go through experiences. <i>Mga kalisud nga
íyang gilatas,</i> Difficulties he passed through.
<b>&mdash; sa</b> @across. <i>Mipánaw aku latas sa kadagátan,</i>
I travelled across oceans. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> s.t.
to be crossed.

<p><b>lat-as</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b5c] <b>1</b> go straight across s.t.,
take a @{short cut}. <i>Milat-as (nanglat-as) kug
ági sa plása arun maapsan ka,</i> I walked
across the plaza to catch up with you. <i>Dílì
mahímung lat-asan ang lún,</i> You're not allowed
to take a short cut across the lawn.
<b>2</b> @{go across}. <i>Mulat-as úsà kag subà adisir ka
muabut sa íla,</i> You have to cross a river before
you get to their house. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> path,
road for taking a short cut.

<p><b>látay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S; b5c] go over a narrow walkway.
<i>Milátay sa andamyu ang mga pasahíru,</i>
The passengers walked over the gangplank.
<i>Usa ka gamayng alambri ang gilatáyan (gilátay)
sa sirkadur,</i> It was only a small piece
of wire the acrobat walked over. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; sa usa
ka lugas lánut</b> be precarious (passing over
a single strand). <i>Ang kahimtang sa gikidnap
naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The kidnap
victim's life is hanging by a thread. <b>2</b> [A2S; b(1)]
run, flow through a tube or tube-like
thing. <i>Dúnay dugung Aliman nga naglatay
sa íyang kaugatan,</i> There is German
blood running in her veins. <b>2a</b> [A2; b(1)]
for a feeling to creep through. <i>Ang kabugnaw
sa íyang nahikapan milátay sa íyang
tudlù ngadtu sa íyang buktun,</i> The coldness
of what he touched crept from his fingers
up to his arm. <b>3</b> [A23; c] add a new debt
to one's current account. <i>Ilátay na lang ning
útang sa ákung ristanti,</i> Just add this debt
to my bill. <i>n</i> small wooden bridge for pedestrian
or vehicles. <b>-an(->), -anan</b> <i>n</i> narrow
bridge or passageway to walk over.

<p><b>latbù</b> <i>a</i> @fast-growing. <i>Latbù kaáyug tinubuan
ang bátà nga daghang sustansiya,</i> A child
grows fast if he gets good food. <i>v</i> [B2; b6]
grow or develop fast. <i>Mulatbù (malatbù)
ang tinubuan sa tanum ug abunúhan,</i> Plants
grow fast if they are fertilized. <i>Nagkalatbù
kining syudára,</i> This city is growing by
leaps and bounds.

<p><b>latbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] throw or knock s.t. heavy,
using force, usually with an initial backward
swing. <i>Tabangan nátug latbug ang patayng
irù sa dágat,</i> Let's all help throw the
dead dog into the sea. <b>2</b> [b6] for the mind
to wander away from the subject or situation
at hand. <i>Samtang nagklási mi, layù ug
gilatbúgan ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> My mind
wandered far while we were in class.

<pb n=1213>

<p><b>lathang</b> <i>n</i> space between two adjacent teeth
which are not close together. <i>Ayaw ug ngísi
kay ngil-ad tan-áwun ang lathang,</i> Don't
smile because the spaces between your
teeth are ugly.

<p><b>lati</b> = <sc>NATI</sc>.

<p><b>latíba</b> = <sc>LABATÍBA</sc>.

<p><b>látid</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @line which delineates an area or
@boundary. <i>Sa taliwálà sa dálan dúnay látid
nga putì,</i> A white line is drawn in the middle
of the road. <i>Sapà ang látid sa duha ka
lungsud,</i> A river is the boundary between
the two towns. <b>2</b> path, plan by which s.t. is
carried out. <b>3</b> rules, laws. <i>Dúnay mga látid
ang pagdúlag baskitbul,</i> Basketball is played
according to set rules. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> delineate
an area, esp. where s.t. is to be built.
<i>Pagkúhà ug lambu kay maglátid ta sa ámung
balayan,</i> Get some string because we will
stake out where the walls for the house are
to be put. <b>2</b> plan or arrange a method to
be followed or done. <i>Ang mga Libiral naglátid
sa ílang buhátun sa kampanya,</i> The
Liberals were laying out plans for their campaign.
<i>Mauy átung pagasubáyun ang nalátid
sa átung kapaláran,</i> What fate has decreed
for us to do is what we must follow. <b>3</b> establish
laws or rules.

<p><b>latigu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @whip. <i>Latigu sa kabáyù,</i> Horsewhip.
<b>2</b> punishment inflicted with a whip.
<i>Nakadawat ug latigu kay nakasalà man,</i> He
got a whipping because he did s.t. <b>3</b> k.o.
aerial orchid with small, violet flowers and
long, whip-like projections. <i>v</i> [A; ab2] <b>1</b>
whip. <i>Gilatigu sa kutsíru ang kabáyù kay
misúki,</i> The rig driver flogged his horse because
it balked. <b>2</b> attack with scathing criticism.
<i>Ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun milatigu
sa kaatbang,</i> The opposition candidate lashed
out at his opponent.

<p><b>latik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @syrup made of sugar and water or
sugar and coconut milk. <b>2</b> sweet prepared
from seedless breadfruit (<i>kulu</i>) cooked in
syrup mixed with coconut milk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1B23(1); a]
make syrup, for syrup to develop.
<i>Ilúnud ang ságing kun mulatik (malatik) na
ang gipabúkal nga kámay,</i> Put in the bananas
when the sugar turns into syrup. <b>2</b> [b(1)]
put syrup on food. <b>3</b> [A; a2] prepare the
<i>latik</i> made from breadfruit. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LATIK</sc>,
<i>n2</i>.

<p><b>látik</b> <i>v</i> [A13] for a school of fish to swim
near the surface and disturb it. <i>Andáma ang
inyung pasul kay nía na ang bansíkul naglátik,</i>
Prepare your lines because there is a
school of mackerel thrashing around on the
surface.

<p><b>latin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @Latin. <b>1a</b> special k.o. prayer with
<pb n=1214>magical effects. <i>May nakat-unan kung latin
nga sumpà sa kasukù,</i> I know of a special
prayer that works against anger. <b>2</b> a tongue-lashing.
<i>Ayaw paglangaylángay ug paúlì kay
ang latin sa ímung asáwa taas ra ba kaáyu,</i>
Don't tarry on your way home. Your wife's
tongue-lashings are no joke. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2]
speak Latin. <b>1a</b> utter a special magical
prayer. <b>2</b> [A1; c] give s.o. a tongue-lashing.
<i>Gilatinan ku ni Máma pagpaúlì nákù,</i> Mother
gave me a good tongue-lashing when I
got home.

<p><b>lating</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b4(1)] for a missile to @ricochet.
<i>Ang bála dílì makalating kay húmuk ang
yútà,</i> The bullet cannot bounce off because
the ground is soft. <i>Nalatingan ku sa bála,</i>
The bullet ricocheted off on me.

<p><b>láting</b> <i>v</i> [B246] for a wound or other injury
to @swell because of an infection. <i>Muláting
ang samad ug ibuwad sa ínit,</i> A wound
swells if you let the sun get on it.

<p><b>látu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a2] have so much of s.t. that
one loses pleasure in it or it fails to have the
normal effect. <i>Latúhun ta kag pakáun ug
mangga,</i> I'll give you so many mangoes you
will get sick of them. <i>Nalátu na ku sa ímung
pangatarúngan,</i> I can't believe your sob
stories any longer. <b>2</b> [A2PB12; a1] feel
nauseated from exposure to s.t., cause s.t.
to do so. <i>Dugà sa tabákù ang ilátu sa tamalà,</i>
Stupefy the octopus with tobacco-leaf
juice.

<p><b>latù</b> <i>n</i> a branching, semi-transparent @seaweed,
greenish in color and edible. It has small,
rounded growths on the branches which
pop when pressed.

<p><b>latuk<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A3; b(1)] have a blank and stupid
look on the face. <i>Naglatuk lang ang tuntu.
Wà makasabut,</i> The idiot just stared blankly.
He didn't understand. <i>Gilatukan lang ku sa
íyang mata dihang ákung gisultíhan,</i> She just
stared at me blankly when I talked to her.

<p><b>latuk<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @{cassava flour}, very fine, white sediment
from cassava juice.

<p><b>latun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cylindrical @pail with the mouth as
big as the bottom. <b>2</b> drum for petroleum
products.

<p><b>latundan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>latung</b> <i>a</i> very @ripe, bordering on over-ripeness.
<i>Húmuk na kaáyu ang kapáyas kay latung
na man,</i> The papaya has turned soft because
it is very ripe. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become
very ripe.

<p><b>latungdan</b> = <sc>ALITUNDAN</sc>.

<p><b>latus</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] <b>1</b> @whip with anything flexible.
<i>Dílì giyud tu mulatus ang ámung amahan
apan mahadluk giyud mi níya,</i> My father
never whipped us but we feared him.
<pb n=1215><i>Ang mga madri maglatus sa ílang kaugalíngun
inigka Byirnis Santu arun pagsakripisyu,</i>
The nuns flog themselves on Good Fridays
to mortify themselves. <b>2</b> attack, criticize
severely. <i>Kanúnay níyang latusun si
Markus sa íyang lindug,</i> He always criticizes
Marcos in his column.

<p><b>latuy</b> <i>a</i> for edible beans or pea pods to be
tender. <i>v</i> [b6] cook s.t. together with tender
pods. <i>Latuyi ang linat-an nga báka,</i> Put
tender string beans into the beef stew.

<p><b>lau</b> = <sc>LALAU</sc>.

<p><b>laubláub</b> <i>a</i> increasing and diminishing in intensity
periodically. <i>Laubláub ang hilánat
íning batáa,</i> This child's fever rises and falls.
<i>v</i> [B456] for s.t. to increase and diminish
in intensity periodically. <i>Mulaubláub giyud
ang nigusyu,</i> Business @fluctuates, as you
would expect. <i>Maglaubláub ang pagguwà
íning tabuguk,</i> <i>Tabuguk</i> octopuses appear
in great numbers from time to time. <i>Ang
tilíik sa sirína naglaubláub,</i> The wailing of
the siren rises and falls.

<p><b>laud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @tie s.t. to s.t. letting the rope
go around it several times before knotting
it. <i>Ang kunduktur mauy mulaud sa mga
kargamintu sa stipburd,</i> The conductor ties
loads to the running board. <i>Ang táwung gikastígu
gilaud sa halígi ug gipahulmigasan,</i>
The offender was tied to a post and left to
the ants.

<p><b>laug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @liking s.t. very much and, therefore,
disliking to share it. <i>Laug kaáyu kug ayis
krim,</i> I'm very fond of ice cream. <i>Laug siyag
bayli,</i> She loves to dance. <b>2</b> @selfish. <i>Laug
nga batáa, dílì manghátag,</i> What a selfish
child. She won't give anything to anyone
else. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be @greedy. <b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</i></b>[**i.e. láug<hi rend=sub>1</i>] [B12]
take a strong liking to s.t. <i>Nía rag ímung
libru. Way naláug,</i> Here's your damn book.
Who wants it anyway (lit. no one has taken
a liking to it).

<p><b>láug<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> go out to go about with no
particular purpose. <i>Unsay ímung giláug didtu?
Dúna kay gibisitáhan?</i> What did you
stroll over to their place for? Did you visit
s.o.? <b>2</b> get out of a place, @flee. <i>Miláug ang
manuk,</i> The chicken flew the coop. <i>Laúgan
ka sa ímung mga sákup kun mag-inistriktu
ka,</i> Your employees will leave you if you
are too strict. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> tending to go out to
roam about. <i>v</i> [B12] get to be a roamer.

<p><b>laugdu</b> (from <i>ugdu</i>) <i>v</i> [B; c1] @pile, @heap up.
<i>Nagkalaugdu ang mga sagbut nga wà kuháa
sa mga basuríru,</i> The garbage is piling up
because it hasn't been collected by the garbage
men.

<p><b>láum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @expect s.t. hopefully.
<pb n=1216><i>Nagláum ku nga mausab pa siya,</i> I still have
hopes that he'll change. <i>Laúmi ang íyang
pagbálik,</i> Hope for his return. <b>2</b> [A; bc5]
rely. <i>Makaláum ba ku sa ímung sáad?</i> Can I
trust your promises? <i>Kining lúti ang bugtung
námung gilaúman sa panginabúhì,</i> This
small lot is our sole means of support. <b>ka-an,
pag-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @hope. <i>Nawad-an na siyag pagláum
sa kinabúhì,</i> He has lost hope in life. <i>Kini
rang midisináha ang ákung pagláum,</i> This
medicine is my only hope. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> full of
hope.

<p><b>laumlaum</b> <i>v</i> [A1; b(1)] prolong one's @stay in
a certain place for a purpose. <i>Naglaumláum
ang mga batan-un human sa pangadyì tungud
sa bayli,</i> The young men who joined
the prayers stayed late for the dance. <i>Gilaumlaúman
nákù sa Manílà ang pagpaluap sa
ákung apuyintmint,</i> I stayed in Manila for
some time to follow up on my appointment.

<p><b>laun</b> <i>a</i> @aged: <b>1</b> for s.t. that gets better as it
grows old to be mature. <b>1a</b> mellowed, aged.
<i>Bínung laun,</i> Aged wine. <i>Tabákung laun,</i>
Mellowed tobacco. <b>1b</b> for a plant or animal
commonly found immature to grow to its
full extent and thus improve. <i>Laun nga aháan
ang midáwi kaníya,</i> He caught a full-grown
giant snapper. <b>2</b> old stock left over
from the previous harvest. <i>Unáhug dispatsar
ang laun,</i> Get rid of the old stock first. <b>3</b>
old maid (humorous). <i>v</i> [B3; b4(1)] for s.t.
to age. <i>Ang kamúti nga malaun (mulaun) sa
uma dagkù ug tam-is,</i> If you leave sweet
potatoes in the ground to maturity, they
will be big and sweet. <i>Wà makalaun ang tabákù
kay anam,</i> The tobacco didn't get a
chance to age because they kept smoking it
as it matured. <i>Ug subra ka kaistrikta, hilaunan
kag dalága,</i> If you are too strict, your
daughter is going to turn into an old maid
on you.

<p><b>launduk</b> = <sc>TALIUNDUK</sc>.

<p><b>laung</b> = <sc>INGUN<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc> (dialectal).

<p><b>laus</b> <i>a</i> past one's peak or popularity. <i>Laus na
ang buksidur,</i> The boxer is past his prime. <i>v</i>
[B12] be past one's peak or popularity.

<p><b>laúsag</b> <i>v</i> [B4] for undesirable characteristics
to @worsen. <i>Milaúsag ang íyang kakiriwan,</i>
His thievery got @worse. <i>Naglaúsag ang pagkapilyu
sa bátà,</i> The child misbehaved more
and more.

<p><b>lauy</b> <i>a</i> @lacking @sleep. <i>Lauy ku kay nagbilar
ku gabíi,</i> I lack sleep because I kept vigil
last night. <i>v</i> [B126; b6] lack sleep. <b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i>
[A13] stay up late at night. <i>Nagláuy siya
tungud sa íyang paynals,</i> He is staying up
late to study for his finals.

<p><b>láuy<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] go, see to @visit or to see how
<pb n=1217>s.t. is doing. <i>Muláuy (magláuy) ku sa ákung
higála sa uspital,</i> I will visit my friend in the
hospital. <i>Laúyun (iláuy) nátù ang kamaisan
sa walug kun túa na ta sa búkid,</i> While we
are in the mountains we will go see how the
corn we planted in the valley is doing.

<p><b>láwà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a @spider. <b>lawàlawà</b> <i>n</i> @{spider web}, @cobweb.
<i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be filled with cobwebs. <i>Gilawàlawaan
na lang ang ímung makinilyang
way gáwì,</i> Your typewriter is all covered
with cobwebs because it's never used. <b>2</b> for
a dying man's eyes to become dull and
blurred (lit. have cobwebs in one's eyes).

<p><b>láwà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> (from <i>walà</i>) not have (slang). <i>Láwà
nu siyay takwal,</i> He says he's out of dough.

<p><b>lawáan</b> <i>n</i> name given to a number of forest
trees producing inexpensive timber, widely
used in construction: <b><i>Pentacme</i></b> and <b><i>Shorea
spp.</i></b> <b>&mdash; nga putì</b>: <b><i>Pentacme contorta</i></b>. <b>&mdash; pula</b>:
<b><i>Shorea negrosensis</i></b>.

<p><b>láwag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing with lights. Several boats
illuminate a wide area and when the fish appear,
the boats gradually converge, drawing
the fish into a small area from which
they can be scooped up with a net.

<p><b>lawak</b> <i>n</i> @room in a house or building. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
make a room. <i>Gilawakan ku ang sílung
pára sa mga gamit,</i> I made a room in the
basement for the tools.

<p><b>láwang</b> <i>a</i> for an area to be @wide, @spacious.
<i>Mas láwang ang tinisan kay sa baskitan,</i> A
tennis court is wider than a basketball
court. <i>n</i> space across, width. <i>Pila ka mitrus
ang láwang sa kalsáda?</i> How many meters
wide is the road? <i>v</i> [B23] be, become wide
or spacious. <b>lawanglawang, lawangláwang</b> <i>v</i>
[B4] <b>1</b> have too much space for the amount
of material put in. <i>Naglawanglawang ang
trák padúlung sa syudad kay way pasahíru,</i>
The truck went to the city nearly empty
because there were no passengers. <b>2</b> be in a
place which is too spacious. <i>Maglawanglawang
ta sa dakung balay,</i> We've got room
to burn in that huge house. <b>3</b> [c1] make s.t.
wider. <i>Gilawanglawang ang silya sa manidy&icaron;r,</i>
The manager's chair was given a wider
seat.

<p><b>lawanlawan</b> = <sc>LAWANGLAWANG</sc>. <i>see</i>
<sc>LAWANG</sc>.

<p><b>láwas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @body of human or animal. <b>taput &mdash;</b>
the clothes on one's back. <i>Ang ákung nasalb&acaron;r
sa súnug ang taput láwas,</i> All I could
save from the fire was the clothes on my
back. <b>2</b> the frame or main part of a structure.
<i>Láwas sa ayruplánu,</i> Fuselage of the
plane. <i>Ang láwas sa angkla,</i> The shank of
the anchor. <b>3</b> one's turn in a game where
the players perform one at a time in succession.
<pb n=1218><i>Sa bíku kamuy páris ug aku rang usa,
apan duhay láwas ku,</i> It'll be you two
against me in hopscotch, but I get two
turns. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; ug katarúngan</b> body and reasoning,
all one arms oneself in fighting for justice
(as opposed to money, weapons). <i>Láwas
ug katarúngan ang ákung iatúbang sa
ímung lantúgì,</i> I come here not to fight, but
to talk it out (offer my reasoning). <b>5</b> one
who takes another person's place, performing
his functions in his absence. <i>Ang kinamagulángang
babáyi mauy láwas sa íyang
inahang patay na,</i> The eldest daughter took
the mother's place when she died. <b>6</b> tantamount
to, as good as. <i>Sa pag-insultu nímu
sa ákung bána láwas ug aku ang ímung gipasakitan,</i>
If you insult my husband it is the
same as if you hurt me. <i>Bisag usa ray ákung
anak, láwas gihápun ug tulu kay duha may
ákung binuhì,</i> I have only one child, but it
is good as three because I have two adopted
ones. <b>6a</b> good for. <i>Miurdir kug pagkáun láwas
ug tulu ka táwu,</i> I'll order food enough
for three persons. <b>7a</b> physical strength, resistance.
<i>Tungud niíning ákung sakit walà
na akuy láwas nga ikatrabáhu,</i> Because of
my illness I do not have the strength to
work. <b>7b</b> one's single body, all that one has
to dispose of in working (and no more). <i>Ug
ákù ang tanan, unsa pa may ákung láwas?</i>
How could I possibly do everything. I don't
have but two hands. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B145] have a certain
k.o. body. <i>Kaniadtu nagláwas sab kug
sáma kalísun kanímu karun,</i> Formerly, I
had as nice a body as you have now. <b>2</b> [A2; c]
make a body for some structure. <i>Kining
kahúya ígù rang makaláwas sa píkas kílid sa
sakayan,</i> These boards are only enough to
make one side of the boat. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @internode,
section of a plant stem between two
successive nodes. <i>Tag-as kaáyug lawas kining
ímung tubu,</i> Your sugar cane stalks
have long internodes. <b>2</b> strands of hair above
the base. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] be in the upper part of
the strands of hair. <i>Kasagáran manlawas ang
lusà basta mamusà na,</i> Usually nits stay in
the upper part of the strands of hair when
they hatch. <b>-in-, -in-(->)</b> <i>n</i> in person, one's
physical presence. <i>v</i> [A; a1] appear personally.
<i>Mulinawas pagsalída si Súsan Rúsis,</i>
Susan Roces will appear personally. <b>hi-</b> <i>v</i>
[ANC12; bN] have sexual intercourse outside
of marriage. <i>Dì mahilangit kadtung
manghiláwas,</i> Those who @fornicate will not
go to heaven. <i>Dì ka makighiláwas sa mga
way bunyag,</i> Lie not with the heathen. <b>panghi-</b>
<i>n</i> @fornication. <b>makighi-un</b> <i>a</i> @fornicator.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>a</i> physically @well-built, @stocky. <b>ka-an</b>
<pb n=1219><i>n</i> the whole body. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @health; general
well-being of a person or animal. <b>tagi-, tag-</b>
<i>n</i> one's person, what k.o. body one has. <i>Náa
ra sa tagiláwas ug makaagwanta ba sa bug-at
nga trabáhu,</i> It depends on the person if he
can stand hard work. <b>lawasnun</b> <i>a</i> pertaining
to the body or flesh. <i>Lawasnun nga kalimpiyu,</i>
Cleanliness of the body. <i>Lawasnun
nga kahínam,</i> Desires of the flesh.

<p><b>láway</b> <i>n</i> @saliva. <b>— ray puhúnan</b> <i>n</i> @{persuasive
talk} (lit. spit was all that was used). <i>Láway
ray ákung puhúnan áni kay ákù siyang giulug-ulúgan,</i>
I got this by fast talk because I
soft-soaped him in giving it to me. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B46] @drool. <i>Milaway dáyun ákung bàbà
pagkakità nákù sa hilawng mangga,</i> My
mouth watered when I saw the green mangoes.
<i>Maglaway siya nga matúlug,</i> He drools
when he sleeps. <b>2</b> [B1456] feel very desirous
of s.t. one cannot have. <i>Maglaway ta áning
mga dátù nga makapalit bísag unsa,</i> All
we can do is drool at what rich people have.
<b>pa-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A3; a1] make s.o. desire s.t. strongly
which he cannot have. <i>Dì úsà ku magminyù,
magpalaway ku úsà sa mga laláki,</i> I
won't get married yet. I'll just let men drool
over me. <i>Ímu lang kung gipalaway sa ímung
tíbi,</i> You were just making me envious of
your TV set. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a folk doctor who
treats patients with his saliva. <b>2</b> k.o. carangoid
fish, shiny-white in color, that spits
a transparent, sticky liquid. <b>lawaylaway</b> <i>n</i>
name given to various whelks.

<p><b>law-ay</b> <i>a</i> offensive to decency, revolting to
the taste. <i>Gisinsur ang law-ay nga libru,</i> The
obscene book was censored. <i>Law-ay kaáyung
tan-áwun ang dakù nga magbinátà,</i> It's
disgusting to see a grown-up act like a child.
<i>v</i> [B12; b6] be @lewd, @obscene. <i>Nagkalaw-ay
ang mga sini karun,</i> Movies are all lewd
nowadays. <i>Gilaw-ayan ku sa báhù sa patay,</i>
The odor of the corpse was revolting to me.

<p><b>lawgaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @touch, stir up s.t. with
the bare hands. <i>Panghunaw kay milawgaw
ka man sa pasaw,</i> Wash your hands because
you stirred the slop with them. <i>Ayawg lawgáwa
nang túbig imnunun,</i> Don't stick your
hands in the drinking water. <b>2</b> [B1] be all
mixed up, @confused. <i>Naglawgaw ang iksplikasiyun.
Wà kung kasabut,</i> His explanation
was all mixed up. I couldn't understand it.
<b>2a</b> get to be no good. <i>Nalawgaw ang ílang
sáyaw kay yabag ang dúyug,</i> Their dance
number was unsuccessful because the music
was out of tune. <b>3</b> [AN] mix into s.t. and
disturb its orderly performance. <i>Ngánung
gilawgaw man nímu si Pidru nga nangamural?</i>
Why did you butt in on Pedro just
<pb n=1220>when he was proposing? <i>a</i> <b>1</b> falling below
good standards. <i>Lawgaw tawhána puru lang
sáad,</i> He is no good. He is all promises. <b>2</b>
@{mixed up} and @chaotic. <i>Lawgaw tung iliksiyúna,
dúnay pálit,</i> The election was chaotic
with rampant vote-buying. <b>3</b> creating
disturbance or confusion in an otherwise orderly
performance. <i>Ay siyag paintraha sa
sáyaw kay lawgaw,</i> Don't let him take part
in the folk dance because he tends to bungle.
<b>maN-r-</b> <i>n</i> one who habitually creates
trouble and confusion in otherwise smooth
and peaceful proceedings.

<p><b>láwi, láwì</b> <i>n</i> @{sickle feather}, one of the long
curved feathers in the tail of domestic
cocks. <b>lawiláwi</b> s.t. like a tail feather. <i>Lawiláwi
sa kúgun,</i> The flower of the cogon
grass. <b>lawían, lawíhan</b> <i>n</i> name given to fish
of various families that have filamentous
projections, usually from the fins.

<p><b>lawig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @pasture livestock. <i>Ilawig ang
kábaw sa lagúna,</i> Pasture the carabao in the
meadow. <b>1a</b> give an additional length of
line. <i>Lawigi ang tugut sa tabánug,</i> Pay out
more string to the kite. <i>Lawigi ang kábaw
arun daghan ang masabsab,</i> Give the carabao
more rope so that it can graze over a wide
area. <b>1b</b> [A; b] tie an anchor to a boat. <i>Lawigi
ang sakayan arun dì madala sa sulug,</i>
Keep the boat anchored so the current
won't carry it away. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @sail. <i>Naglawig
na ang barku pagdasmag sa unus,</i> The
boat was on the high seas when a storm hit
us. <i>Kadagátan nga gilawigan sa barku,</i> The
seas the ship sailed across. <b>2a</b> @travel in general.
<i>Bag-u ka pa gánì nahiulì mulawig na
pud ka?</i> You have just arrived and now
you are going to take another trip? <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
cord tied to s.t. <b>1a</b> @{anchor rope}. <b>1b</b> tether
@rope. <b>1c</b> cord wound around the neck. <i>Taas
ug lawig ang íyang pag-antus,</i> She has a long
chain of suffering tied around her neck. <b>2</b>
@tentacles. <b>-an</b> place s.t. is tethered. <b>-l-an(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> @province (lit. place one sails to). <b>-um-(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> a slender thread which, in folk belief, attaches
the placenta (<i>inunlan</i>) to the womb
(<i>matris</i>) s.w. in the vicinity of the umbilical
cord (<i>púsud</i>) and is the passageway for food
from the mother to the baby. The <i>lumáwig</i>
is considered very delicate, and if there is
intense bleeding during childbirth it is believed
due to a rupture of the <i>lumáwig</i>. <i>v</i> [b4]
have one's <i>lumáwig</i> ruptured and then
suffer intense bleeding.

<p><b>lawìláwi</b>[**note: grave accent unclear] <i>n</i> variety of croton (<i>kalípay</i>).

<p><b>lawis</b> <i>n</i> @spit, a point of low land extending
from the shore into the water. <i>v</i> [B6] @{jut
out}. <i>May unud nga daw tudlù ang milawis
<pb n=1221>sa kumagkù sa táwu,</i> A finger-like growth is
sticking out from the man's thumb. <i>Nasungkù
aku sa naglawis nga kawáyan,</i> I bumped
my head on a piece of bamboo that was
sticking out. <i>Gibaligyà ang yútà nga nalawis
sa kinadak-an sa yútà,</i> They sold the lot
that was jutting out from the main portion
of their land.

<p><b>lawiswis</b> = <sc>ALAWISWIS</sc>.

<p><b>lawit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456] for s.t. almost cut off to
dangle. <i>Naglawit ang ákung tudlù kay nabakgutan
sa sanggut,</i> My finger is dangling
because I nearly cut it off with a sickle. <b>2</b>
[A; b6] hang, cling barely or precariously
to s.t. <i>Naglawit ang kinabúhì sa masakitun
sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The patient's life is
hanging by a single thread. <b>lawitlawit</b> <i>n</i>
pieces of tissue hanging from cuts of meat.

<p><b>lawitan</b> <i>n</i> the two boats holding the ends of
the net in a k.o. fishing with a large net (<i>sinsúru</i>)
where the fish are driven into a small
area by small boats (<i>buntúlan</i>) converging.

<p><b>lawlaw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @slacken a line. <i>Maglawlaw
ku áning mikubit arun dì mabugtù ang
pasul,</i> I am paying out extra fishing line so
the line won't break. <i>Ayaw ilawlaw (lawláwa)
ang hayhayan,</i> Don't make the clothesline
so loose it sags. <b>1a</b> [B] get to be loose,
@sagging. <i>Mulawlaw ang kurtína kun luagun
ang hílu,</i> The curtain will sag if you make
the string loose. <b>1b</b> [AB] for trousers to be
cut loose at the crotch, wear trousers cut
loose at the crotch. <i>Ságad sa tigúlang maglawlaw
ang kinarsunisan,</i> Most old people
wear pants loose at the crotch. <b>2</b> [AN; b3]
go round the edge of s.t. instead of directly
across or along it. <i>Manglawlaw tag ági diri
kay dì man katadlasan ang ílang baul,</i> We'll
have to go around this way because they
won't let people cut across their field. <i>a</i> be
cut loose at the crotch. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] let
time pass idly by. <i>Ang nagpalawlaw sa panahun
way maáni,</i> Those who waste their time
doing nothing will have nothing to harvest.

<p><b>lawlaw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> sardines which have been preserved
in a large quantity of salt, such that
not all the salt is dissolved in the juices of
the fish, and the result is a dry fish enveloped
with fishy grains of salt.

<p><b>lawngun</b> = <sc>LALUNGUN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>LÁLUNG</sc>.

<p><b>lawril</b> <i>n</i> @{bay leaves} used as a spice.

<p><b>lawriyat</b> <i>n</i> k.o. Chinese banquet with ten or
more courses tendered on special occasions.

<p><b>lawsi</b> <b>1</b> poor, @sloppy, bad in quality or appearance.
<i>Lawsi siya mamisti,</i> She dresses
poorly. <i>Lawsi kadtung pagkáun,</i> That was
lousy food. <b>2</b> @boring and @uninteresting.
<i>Lawsing parti,</i> A lousy party. <i>Lawsi tung salidáha,</i> 
<pb n=1222>That was a lousy movie. <i>v</i> [B12; a12b6]
be, become lousy.

<p><b>lawting</b> <i>n</i> attic consisting of a shelf built underneath
a roof and which runs part of the
distance covered by the roof. It is used as a
storage place or sleeping area. <i>v</i> [A1; a]
make a <i>lawting</i>.

<p><b>lawud</b> <i>n</i> deep open @sea. <b>pitu ka &mdash;</b> @{seven seas}.
<i>see</i> <sc>LÁBANG</sc>. <i>v</i> [A2NP; a] <b>1</b> go out into the
@{deep sea}, usually to fish. <i>Ug maáyu ang panahun
mulawud (manglawud) ku karung
gabíi,</i> If the weather is good, I will go out
to sea tonight. <i>Kinahanglang lawrun ta giyud
ang malasugi,</i> You have to go to the
deep to get the sailfish. <b>2</b> [A13] = <sc>LAWUDLÁWUD</sc>.
<b>lawudláwud</b> <i>v</i> [A] be like a sea.
<i>Naglawudláwud ang halapad nga humayan,</i>
The vast rice field is like a sea. <b>i-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> place
toward town and away from rural areas. <i>v</i>
[AP; ac6P] go, bring s.t. toward town. <b>i-</b> =
<sc>ILÁWUD</sc>, <i>v.</i>[**note: ILÁWUD has no v subentry?] <b>kalawran</b> <i>n</i> @seas. <b>kinalawran</b> <i>n</i>
deepest part of the sea. <b>lawudnun</b> <i>n</i> of the
seas.

<p><b>láwug</b> <i>v</i> [A2SB] for stiff and long things to
warp or bend. <i>Miláwug ang tabla human initi,</i>
The board warped after having been exposed
to the sun. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> long bent things.

<p><b>láwung</b> <i>n</i> @lionfish, a brightly colored fish of
coral reefs with very poisonous dorsal fins:
<b><i>Pterois spp.</i></b>

<p><b>lawus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @withered. <i>Ngánung lawus ang utanung
ímung gipalit?</i> Why did you buy withered
vegetables? <b>2</b> withered or @wizened
from age or sickness. <i>Lawus na si Glurya
Rumíru, gúwang na man gud,</i> Gloria Romero
is faded now. She is quite old. <b>3</b> past
one's prime. <i>Lawus nang pagkabuksingíru
si Ilurdi,</i> Elorde is over his peak as a boxer.
<b>4</b> for feelings to have faded. <i>Lawus na ang
ímung pagbátì nákù,</i> Your love for me has
faded. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [B2S; b6] <b>1</b> get @withered. <i>Ang
búlak muláwus (maláwus) ug initan,</i> Flowers
wither if you expose them to heat. <i>Nagkalawus
na ang tanum kay wà katubigi,</i> The
plants are getting withered because they
were not watered. <b>2</b> @{get old} and shriveled.
<i>Naglawus ka man. May balatían ka?</i> You
look shrunken. Are you ill? <b>3</b> get beyond
one's prime. <b>4</b> for feelings to fade. <i>Kanang
prisyúha makaláwus (makapaláwus) giyud
sa gána,</i> That price sure throws cold water
on my desire. <i>Nagkalawus[**note: missing accent, error?] ang ákung pagláum
nga maulì pa siya,</i> My hope for his return
is wavering.

<p><b>láwut</b> <i>v</i> [B; a12] for liquids to become thick
and gooey. <i>Magkalawut ang linúgaw madúgayng
sinukgay,</i> The more porridge is stirred
the thicker and more viscous it becomes. <i>a</i>
<pb n=1223>thick and @gooey. <i>Láwut ning utána kay náay
tugábang,</i> This vegetable dish is gooey
because it contains <i>tugábang</i>.

<p><b>law-uy</b> <i>a</i> cooked vegetables without fish,
meat, or fat. <i>Law-uy lang ning útan kay
way subak,</i> This vegetable dish is cooked
just plain because we have nothing to cook
with it. <i>v</i> [A13B; a12] cook vegetables
plain, be plain and tasteless.

<p><b>láya</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. shallow water cast net, conical
in shape, made of fine sewing thread with a
fine mesh. Weights are put on the mouth to
spread the net when thrown, and when the
net is lifted the weights cause the mouth to
contract so that escape is impossible. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a2]
catch fish with a <i>láya</i>. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
make into a <i>láya</i>. <b>layaláya</b> <i>n</i> very thin membrane
that envelopes the stomach, used as a
wrapper for <i>murkun</i>.

<p><b>*láya</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ILÁYA</sc>.

<p><b>layà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fresh-water fish which grows 2'
long and 6" wide, with big, silvery scales,
spotted with black.

<p><b>láyà</b> <i>a</i> @dried, @withered up. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)] @dry,
become dry or withered. <i>Unyà ra daúbi ang
sagbut kun muláyà (maláyà) na,</i> Burn the
leaves when they become dry. <i>Himalatyun
na ning kahúya kay nagkalayà nag mga dáhun,</i>
This tree is going to die because its
leaves are withering. <b>2</b> [B2; b6] for the ears
of corn to mature. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ang bágà</b> <i>v</i> [B2; a12]
for the lungs to be damaged from drinking
too much. <i>n</i> @{paper money} (slang). <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b>
dried up. <b>2</b> for ears of corn to be mature. <b>3</b>
<b>&mdash; ug bágà</b> having inflamed lungs from overindulgence
in drinking. <b>4</b> <b>dáhung &mdash;</b> @{paper
money} (slang).

<p><b>láyag<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @sail of a boat. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put up
the sail. <i>Mularga na ang sakayan kay gilayágan
na,</i> The boat is ready to sail because
they have hoisted the sails. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b>
for a sailboat to sail. <b>1a</b> <b>lantaw ug &mdash;</b> sit idly
by watching people that are working without
lifting a finger to help (as if watching
s.o. sailing). <i>Naglantawg naglayag bisag gikinahanglan
kaáyu ang íyang pagtábang,</i> He
just sits idly by watching, even though his
help is badly needed. <b>2</b> for the ears to stick
out. <i>Naglayag ang dunggan,</i> His ears stick
out. <b>-an(->)</b> k.o. volute shell growing to 3"
by 1½" with no operculum. Edible but bitter.
<b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> boat with sails. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> favorable
for sailing. <b>-un ug dátù</b> for a wind to be
slow (lit. good only for rich people with
plenty of time to sail with). <b>-um-an</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
small squid, growing to 8" with a very reduced
internal plate. <b>paN-um-an(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B; c]
go to catch <i>lumayágan</i>. <b>panlumayaganan</b>
<pb n=1224>place one can fish for <i>lumayágan</i>. <b>2</b> boat
for fishing for <i>lumayágan</i>.

<p><b>láyag<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the missing of one's menstruation
but not because of pregnancy. <i>v</i> [b4] miss
one's period. <i>Ábi kug gilayágan ku, burus
giyud diay,</i> I thought I just missed a period,
but I was actually pregnant.

<p><b>láyag<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] join others who have
food, drinks, or cigarettes to mooch off of
them. <i>Way makaláyag níya kay adtu siya sa
tágù magkaun,</i> He ate in seclusion because
he didn't want anyone to mooch off of him.

<p><b>layangláyang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> awning or temporary @shelter
made of four posts and a cloth or thatch
covering. <b>2</b> principal rafters placed at the
thwart edges of a roof which, in a thatched
roof, hold the thatch in place. <i>v</i> [A; b] put
a temporary shelter s.w.

<p><b>láyas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> leave a place to avoid s.t.
unpleasant. <i>Miláyas siya sa dagmalan níyang
inaína,</i> She escaped from her cruel stepmother.
<i>Gilayásan siyag suluguun,</i> Her servant
walked out on her. <b>2</b> get out of a place
for any reason. <i>Láyas, animal,</i> Leave this
home, you beast. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @escapee. <i>Siya layas
sa Bilíbid,</i> He is an escapee from Bilibid
prison.

<p><b>layat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] @jump to a place: up, down,
or over. <i>Milayat ang kabáyù sa kural,</i> The
horse jumped over the fence. <i>Layata lang
nang bintánà nga mubù,</i> Just jump down
from that low window. <i>n</i> act of jumping.

<p><b>layat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> large, edible tree fungus, shiny, dark-brown
in color.

<p><b>láyaw</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for animals to roam about. <i>Muláyaw
ang mga háyup nga buhían,</i> Domestic
animals stray if you don't tether them. <b>(->)</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> animal that has been allowed to stray.
<i>Kinahanglang lamíngun ang manuk layaw
kay langsag unud,</i> You have to keep stray
chickens and feed them special food before
you kill them; otherwise they have a terrible
flavor. <b>1a</b> going out when one should
not be doing so, person that has been allowed
to stray. <i>Madisgrasya giyud ang babáying
layaw,</i> A woman that gallivants about is
likely to get into trouble. <b>1b</b> off the mark,
far from correct. <i>Layaw kaáyu ang ímung
pangagpas,</i> Your conjecture is way off the
mark. <b>2</b> for a mixture to be too weak in
consistency. <i>Layaw nga pintal,</i> Paint that's
too thin. <b>3</b> <i>in phrases:</i> <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> @cowardly,
lacking guts. <b>&mdash; ug hunàhúnà</b> given to sudden
whims or fancies. <i>Way pundu ang táwung
layaw ug hunàhúnà,</i> A person who is
given to sudden whims or fancies is unstable.
<b>&mdash; ug útuk</b> a dull person. <i>Ang táwung
layaw ug útuk gáhing makasabut,</i> A dull
<pb n=1225>person does not understand easily. <i>v</i> [B1]
become a wanderer, one who gallivants around.
<b>-an</b> <i>n</i> open land where animals are
allowed to roam and graze. <b>pina-</b> <i>a</i> @spoiled,
left alone by parents to do as he pleases.
<i>Way trabáhung makat-unan ang bátang pinalayaw,</i>
A spoiled child that has been left
to do as he pleases will not learn a trade.

<p><b>laybrari</b> <i>n</i> @library. <b>-yan</b> <i>n</i> @librarian. <i>v</i> [B16]
be a librarian.

<p><b>laygay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; a12] make s.o. @bedridden.
<i>Sakit nga milaygay kaníya,</i> The sickness
that incapacitated him. <i>Gilaygay siyag tísis,</i>
He was bedridden with T.B. <b>2</b> [a4] be affected
with great financial difficulty. <i>Mga
kabus nga gilaygay sa kalisud,</i> Poor people
who are wallowing in difficulty. <i>a</i> @incapacitating,
leaving one bedridden. <i>Laygay sakíta
nang paralisis,</i> Paralysis leaves one bedridden.

<p><b>layhan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*LAHAY</sc>.

<p><b>layi diantigwa</b> <i>n</i> old, outmoded laws or customs.
<i>Sunud ka man ánang layi diantigwa.
Kabag-úhan na run!</i> You're following old,
out-moded [**no - ?] ways. We're in the Twentieth
Century now!

<p><b>láyì</b> <i>n</i> tool for cutting abaca fibers or buri
strips, made of a thin, flat piece of <i>bagákay</i>
bamboo, 3"-4" long.

<p><b>láyik</b> <i>v</i> [A12] have a @liking or crush for s.t.
or s.o. (slang). <i>Nakasabut giyud ku nga nakaláyik
nà si Idyun nímu,</i> I realize that
Edion has taken a liking to you.

<p><b>layiku</b> <i>n</i> @layman, @laity. <i>Ang buluhatun sa layiku
sa iglisya,</i> The role of the laity in the
church.

<p><b>láyip</b> <i>n</i> @{life imprisonment}. <i>Gisintinsyahan siyag
láyip,</i> He got life imprisonment.

<p><b>layit wit</b> <i>n</i> lightweight boxer or wrestler.

<p><b>laylay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @tired, @drooping from fatigue. <b>2</b>
for plants to be limp or drooping. <i>Pangúhag
laylay nga mais, itambug sa kabáyù,</i> Get the
drooping corn leaves to feed the horses. <b>2a</b>
for leaves to be colored red or yellow. <b>2b</b>
people at the bottom strata of society. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[BN; a2b4] be @tired. <i>Milaylay (nalaylay)
ang ákung abága ug pinas-an sa baskit,</i> My
shoulders got tired from carrying the basket.
<i>Wà mu layláyig tinindug,</i> Aren't you all
exhausted from standing? <b>2</b> [AB; c1]
@droop, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Naglaylay ang abaga,</i>
His shoulders are drooping. <i>Layláya
(ilaylay) ang sanga arun makab-ut ang búnga,</i>
Bend the branch so you can reach the
fruit. <b>2a</b> [AN; b] gather bent or discolored
leaves. <b>ka-</b> @tiredness, feeling of being weak
from fatigue. <i>n</i> yellowed leaves on trees
that are about to drop.

<pb n=1226>

<p><b>laylay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] sing with no words other
than meaningless syllables. <i>Naglaylay ang
inahan nga nagpakatúlug sa bátà,</i> The mother
is singing the baby to sleep. <i>n</i> song hummed
or sung with syllables <i>la, la</i>.

<p><b>laylu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] not do s.t. one would normally
do, esp. combat, because of some
danger. <i>Manglaylu tag panágat kay nagdáut
ang panahun,</i> We won't go out fishing because
the weather is bad. <i>Manglaylu lang
ku, kay náa ang amahan,</i> I won't visit her
for the while because her father is home.
<i>Wà na gániy bála, laylúhun (ilaylu) dáyun
sa mga girilya ang ílang kalihúkan,</i> When
the guerillas[**guerrillas ?] run out of bullets, they lie low
for awhile.

<p><b>layning</b> <i>n</i> @lining or cloth used for lining. <i>v</i>
[A; a] put a lining in s.t.

<p><b>laysul</b> <i>n</i> @lysol[**Lysol = brandname].

<p><b>Layti</b> <i>n</i> @Leyte.

<p><b>laytir</b> <i>n</i> cigarette @lighter. <i>v</i> [b(1)] light with
a lighter.

<p><b>layu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] broil unhusked young corn
over flames, cooking it half-way. <i>Layuhun
(ilayu) nátù ang linghud arun dalì rang malútù,</i>
Let's just pass the young corn unhusked
through the flames so it won't take long
to cook it.

<p><b>layù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @far, @distant. <i>Layù kaáyu ang Urúpa,</i>
Europe is far away. Paryinti mi piru layù
na, We are relatives but rather distant. <b>1a</b>
far from being correct. <i>Layù ra kaáyu ang
ímung tubag sa dyakpat kwistiyun,</i> Your
answer to the jackpot question was far off
the mark. <b>1b</b> <b>&mdash; ra sa tinái</b> for mishaps not
to be serious (far from the intestines). <i>Gamay
ning samára layù ra sa tinái,</i> It's a
superficial wound. It's not serious. <b>1c</b> <b>&mdash; ra
sa tinái sa manuk</b> for answers and guesses
to be wide off the mark. <i>Ang ímung tubag
sayup ug layù ra sa tinái sa manuk,</i> Your
answer is wrong and is way off the mark. <b>2</b>
comparatively far behind in some good
trait. <i>Layù ra si Magsaysay ni Salungga sa
abilidad,</i> Magsaysay can't hold a candle to
Salonga. <i>v</i> [B25C; ab7c] be @far. <i>Ug mulayù
ang tugdúnan sa búla, ipakúhà lang,</i> If the
ball lands far away have s.o. go get it. <i>Ug
makigláyù ka nákù, mingawun ku nímu,</i> If
you want us to be far from each other, I'll
miss you. <i>Layúun ta mu kay palaaway mu,</i>
I'll keep you two far apart because you are
quarrelsome. <i>Layui pa kay duul ra nà,</i> Move
it farther away because it's too close. <b>dílì
ig-(<-)</b> not distantly related by blood. <i>Dílì ta
igláyù magtagsa ang átung inahan,</i> We are
not distantly related because your mother is
my mother's first cousin. <b>hi-/ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256]
<pb n=1227>get to be far away. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; bc] go far away,
stay away from a place, hold s.t. at a distance.
<i>Ngánung magpalayù ka man kanámù?</i>
What makes you want to keep your distance
from us? <i>Gipalay-an ni pagsiyát arun makúhà
ang byú,</i> This picture was shot from
a distance to get the view. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a3]
go far away. <i>Tungud sa ákung kahiubus,
magpahilayù ku,</i> I'm going away because I
was terribly hurt. <b>linay-ánay, linay-anay</b> <i>v</i>
[C] be far from one another. <b>-g-</b> = <sc>LAYÙ</sc>
(plural). <b>ha-</b> = <sc>LAYÙ</sc>, <i>a</i> <i>1.</i> <b>gilay-un, kalay-un</b>
<i>n</i> @distance. <i>Usa ka kilumitru ang gilay-un,</i>
The distance is one kilometer. <b>kinalay-an</b> <i>a</i>
@farthest.

<p><b>lay-u<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a body of standing water in low-lying
areas formed by overflowing floodwaters
or heavy rains. <i>Dúnay daghang isdà sa
lay-u,</i> There are lots of fish stranded in the
pool.

<p><b>lay-u<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B; a2] for plants to wither from
being in the heat after being uprooted or
damaged by wind. <i>Malay-u (mulay-u) ang
mga tanum sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The plants
will wither because of the strong wind. <i>Lay-úhun
nang mga sagínga nga nangatumba sa
ínit run,</i> The heat will wither those plants
that were uprooted.

<p><b>layug</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; a2] <b>1</b> @grapple with s.o. <i>Giulang
ku ang duha ka bátà nga nagláyug,</i> I
intervened when the two boys were wrestling
with each other. <i>Gilayug ku siya kay
ákung giílug ang kutsilyu,</i> I wrestled with
him to get the knife from him. <b>2</b> @wrestle
with a woman in foreplay. <i>Daw may gilayug
nga dalága,</i> It seems that s.o. was wrestling
with a girl (to rape her). <b>tig-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fond
of wrestling. <b>2</b> fond of mutilating plants by
breaking off branches, flowers, etc. as if
having wrestled with them. <i>Kining mga bátà
dinhi muy tiglayug sa mga tanum,</i> It's the
children that destroy the plants here.

<p><b>láyug</b> <i>a</i> @tall and quite straight. <i>Láyug kaáyu
nang lubíha,</i> That coconut tree is very tall.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] become @tall. <i>Muláyug (maláyug)
nang kahúya ug dì pul-úngan,</i> That tree will
grow tall if you don't prune it. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
@fly (usually said of fowls that keep to the
ground). <i>Miláyug ang manuk nga gigúkud sa
irù,</i> The chicken flew up when the dog chased
it. <i>Taas ug gilayúgan ang manuk,</i> The
rooster flew high up. <i>n</i> flight of birds or
fowl. <i>Gisunud kug tan-aw ang láyug sa mga
langgam,</i> I followed the flight of the birds
with my eyes.

<p><b>lay-ug</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c1] for plants to be badly
shaken by a strong wind, such that they are
damaged and likely to die in hot weather.
<pb n=1228><i>Kusug hángin ang milay-ug (mipalay-ug) sa
mga tanum,</i> A strong wind caused severe
damage to the plants. <i>Ug malay-ug ang mga
lubi, madagdag ang mga búnga,</i> If a coconut
tree is shaken by the wind, its fruit will
fall off.

<p><b>layuglayug</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible brown seaweed with
a leaf-like structure.

<p><b>layun</b> <i>a</i> for bananas to be almost ripe, but
still hard. <i>v</i> [B23(1); b6] for bananas to be
almost ripe. <i>Hustung pritúhun ang kardábang
malayun na,</i> Cooking bananas are best
to fry when they are nearly ripe.

<p><b>láyus</b> <i>v</i> [B12; a12] for plants or fruits to
@wither. <i>Nagkalayus[**note: missing acute accent] ang mga tanum kay dúgayng
wà ulana,</i> The plants are withering
gradually because it has not rained for a
long time. <i>Naláyus ang mga utanun nga wà
mangahálin,</i> The vegetables that were left
unsold withered. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> @withered (of plants
or fruits).

<p><b>lí</b> <i>n</i> @lei, a garland of flowers hung on visitors'
necks as a sign of welcome. <i>v</i> [A; c1] give,
make a lei.

<p><b>líab</b> <i>n</i> @neckline of garment. <i>Ang íyang bistída
mabà ug líab,</i> Her dress has a low neckline.
<i>v</i> [A; b6] put a neckline. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12]
grab s.o. by the collar. <i>Bi, tan-áwun ta
ug muliab ba giyud siya nákù!</i> Well, let's
see if he dares grab me by the collar.

<p><b>liad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] bend or throw one's body
backward. <i>Dílì makaliad ang bátà kay ákung
gigunítan ang abága,</i> The baby can not
throw his body backward because I'm holding
onto his shoulder. <b>2</b> [A; a12P] be in a
position with the stomach sticking out and
shoulders back. <i>Dílì ka muliad ug maglakaw
ka,</i> Don't walk with your stomach sticking
out a in a position with the stomach sticking
out and the shoulders back. <b>3</b> [B3(1); b6]
for lumber to warp or twist. <i>Nagkalíad
ang mga káhuy nga gibulad sa ínit,</i> The
pieces of wood they dried under the heat of
sun are getting warped. <b>liadlíad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13]
writhe about in pain. <i>Nagliadlíad siya sa kasakit,</i>
He is writhing in pain. <b>2</b> [A13; c1]
walk with a distended stomach due to pregnancy
or obesity. <i>Nagliadlíad ang mabdus
nga naglakaw sa karsáda,</i> The pregnant
woman walked down the street with her
stomach sticking out.

<p><b>líap</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] make a shot from under the
goal in basketball. <i>n</i> a shot of this sort in
basketball.

<p><b>liat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b(1)] @{skip over}, @by-pass. <i>Dì mu
makaliat sa ámù kay mag-atang mi sa bintánà,</i>
You could not miss our house because
we will be watching for you at the window.
<pb n=1229><i>Way giliatan ang íyang láwas sa labud,</i> His
body is covered with welts. <i>Way giliatan sa
kaláyu,</i> The fire got everything. <b>2</b> [A2] go,
@pass by in time or space. <i>Muliat sa duha ka
lungsud ang trín,</i> The train will pass through
the two towns. <i>Mubáyad ku nímu sa dì pa
makaliat ang usa ka simána,</i> I will pay you
before a week goes by. <b>3</b> [A; a] take time
out to go s.w. for a short while. <i>Muliat giyud
nà siyag tábì bísag daghang búhat,</i> She takes
time out for some quick gossip, even if she's
very busy. <i>Liata ang kan-un ug lútù na ba,</i>
Take a quick peep at the rice to see if it is
cooked yet. <i>Iliat ni Nánay ning matam-is,</i>
Run to Grandma's and give her these
sweets.

<p><b>líawt</b> <i>n</i> proper, optimum disposition of
things or component parts put s.w. <i>v</i> [A; c]
put things in their proper relative positions.
<i>Ilíawt úsà ang mga kuniksiyun úsà
suldáha,</i> Lay the connections out in their
proper disposition before you solder them.

<p><b>líb</b> <i>v</i> [ A2] go on @leave from a job. <i>Mulíb siya
usa ka simána antis manganak,</i> She will take
her maternity leave one week before she
has her baby. <b>matirniti &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{maternity leave}.
<b>sik &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{sick leave}.

<p><b>líbà</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @ignorant, lacking knowledge of certain
ways. <b>1a</b> disrupting by adding confusion
to s.t. that is otherwise smooth and
orderly. <i>Ay nà siyag paintraha sa dráma kay
líbà,</i> Don't assign him a role in the play because
he is a great bungler. <b>2</b> acting in a socially
unacceptable way so as to cause resentment.
<i>Líbà kaáyu nang maistráha, duha
ray gipapasar,</i> That teacher really has a lot
of nerve. She failed the whole class except
two. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b6] be, become @ignorant,
lacking in knowledge of certain ways. <i>Malíbà
ka sa bag-ung dapit,</i> If you go to a new
place, you will be ignorant of how things
are there. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @fool, pull a trick on s.o.
<i>Nakalíbà silag duha ka sapíang Insik,</i> They
swindled two rich Chinese. <i>Malíbà kahà nà
siya sa baráha?</i> Can anyone pull one over
on him in cards?

<p><b>líbad pa</b> it's the same thing, it's just as good.
<i>Samu lang ug di ku makaadtu sa parti. Tutal
muadtu man ang ákung páris. Líbad pa,</i>
Never mind if I can't attend the party.
Anyway my husband will attend. That's just
as good. <i>Dílì na ku makahuwat sa ímung bána.
Líbad pa ug ikawy ákung tagáan sa
kwarta?</i> I can't wait for your husband any
longer. Wouldn't it be the same thing if I
gave the money to you? <i>Bisag ása sa duha.
Líbad pa,</i> Either one of the two. It's all the
same.

<pb n=1230>

<b>libadúra</b> <i>n</i> leaven. <i>Pán nga way libadúra,</i> Unleavened
bread.

<p><b>libagbag</b> = <b>*ALIBAGBAG.</b>

<p><b>libaghà</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b4N] <b>1</b> develop a rash on
the skin. <i>Nanglibaghà (gipanglibagháan) ákung
pánit human nákug káun ug bulad,</i> I
broke out in a rash after I ate dried fish.
<b>2</b> for an emotion to show itself to a great
degree. <i>Sa íyang nawung nilibaghà ang kalísang,</i>
A look of terror erupted on her face.
<i>n</i> rash on the skin.

<p><b>libak</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a1] backbite, say bad things about
s.o. when his back is turned or cannot
understand them. <i>Maáyung mudáyig sa atubángan,
manlibak sa luyu,</i> She says nice
things to your face, but turn your back, and
you'll get it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ac] allow s.o. to
backbite. <b>walà</b>, <b>dílì pa-</b> appear right after
being spoken about. <i>Walà palibak si Duruy
ug nakaabut sa ámung ínum,</i> Talk about
the devil and there he is &mdash; Doroy arrived at
our drinking session just as we were discussing
him. <i>n</i> backbiting. <b>-iru(<-),</b> <b>maN-r-(<-),
</b><b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> given to backbiting. <i>v</i> [B12]
be, become fond of backbiting. <b>-ira(<-)</b> =
<b>-IRU(<-)</b> (female).

<p><b>libákag</b> <i>v</i> [A2] stand up on its ends. <i>Mulibákag
ang ákung balhíbu kung makadungug
kug irù nga mag-ulang,</i> My hair stands on
end whenever I hear a dog howling. <i>Milibákag
ang ákung dalunggan sa pagkadungug
ku sa íyang ísug nga sinultihan,</i> My ears
perked up when I heard her commanding
voice.

<p><b>liban</b> <i>v</i> [B126] <b>1</b> overlook s.t. inadvertently.
<i>Naliban ku sa pagsukip sa kwarta,</i> I forgot
to include the money in the letter. <b>2</b> be
preoccupied and fail to notice s.t. <i>Naliban
ku, wà ku kamatngun pag-ági níya,</i> I was
preoccupied. I didn't notice her going by.

<p><b>libang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> activities or chores to keep one
busy. <i>Dì ku makaatiman niánà kay daghan
kug libang sa panimalay,</i> I have no time to
take care of that because I have lots of
chores to keep me busy at home. <i>a</i> having
many things to attend to. <i>Libang siya kaáyu
mau nga labihan kalimtánun</i>, She has so
many things to attend to, she tends to forget
details. <i>v</i> [B12; b3(1)] be busy attending
to s.t.

<p><b>*libang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> v [B125] defecate. <i>Nalibang (mikalibang)
ku hasta kalima kay naghibús ku</i>, I
defecated five times because I had LBM. &mdash;
<b>ang bàbà</b> [A] vomit (humorous and coarse).
<b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] defecate, move one's bowels.
<i>Gikalibangan sa bátà ang íyang karsúnis,
</i>The child defecated in his pants. <i>Gikalibang
nákù ang lísu sa santul,</i> I expelled santol
<pb n=1231>seeds when I defecated. <b>ka- ang bàbà</b> [B1236]
vomit (humorous and coarse). <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i>
[B146] have diarrhea. <i>n</i> @{iarrhea. <i>Kalíbang
ang namatyan sa bátà,</i> The child died of
diarrhea. <b>súka ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> vomiting combined
with diarrhea. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @toilet. <b>kina-</b> <i>n</i>
@stools. <b>ka-un</b> <i>a</i> feel like defecating.

<p><b>libanta</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B36; b3(1)c1] for a dog's ears
to prick up in alertness. <i>Mulibanta dáyun
ang ámung irù ug náay kasíkas,</i> Our dog
pricks up his ears when there is a slight
noise. <b>sinta &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>SINTA</sc>.

<p><b>libas</b> = <sc>ALABÍHID</sc>.

<p><b>libat</b> <i>a</i> @{cross-eyed}. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become cross-eyed.
<i>Nalibat[** Nalíbat elsewhere] ang bátà kay nahagbung,</i> The
child became cross-eyed because he had a
fall. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; a2] cross one's eyes. <i>Nalíbat
siya pagkaigù sa ákung kúmù,</i> His eyes
went to the center of his head when I hit
him with my fist. <i>Libáta ímung mata arun
ang mga bátà mangatáwa,</i> Cross your eyes
to make the children laugh. <b>2</b> [B12] look at
s.t. so hard one gets cross-eyed. <i>Nalíbat kug
pangítà nímu,</i> I got cross-eyed looking for
you. <i>Ang kadaghan sa gwápa nakalíbat (nakapalíbat)
nákù,</i> I got cross-eyed looking at
the pretty girls.

<p><b>libaung</b> <i>n</i> @potholes in a road. <i>v</i> [B12] get
potholes in it. <i>Malibaung ang dálan ug muulan,</i>
The road gets potholes in it when it
rains. <b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be full of potholes.
<b>-un</b> <i>a</i> having potholes.

<p><b>libayan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fish.

<p><b>libgaw</b> <i>n</i> small @anchovy, a kind of <i>bulinaw</i>:
<b><i>Stolephorus commersonii</i></b>.

<p><b>libgus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible mushroom growing to a
height of 3"-4", having a conical pileus around
2" in diameter, usually gray in hue
and somewhat darker at the center. It is a
good deal thinner than the <i>úhung</i> and thicker
than the <i>uwáping</i>.

<p><b>libiláwu</b> = <sc>NIBILÁWU</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>NIBIL</sc>.

<p><b>libílu</b> <i>n</i> @libel.

<p><b>libinta</b> <i>v</i> [B2] for s.t. to give way because
what is in it is too big for it. <i>Nilibinta ang
sáku kay gidasuk ug maáyu ang sulud,</i> The
sack ripped open because the contents were
stuffed in too tight.

<p><b>libintadur</b> <i>n</i> @firecrackers.

<p><b>libiral<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @liberal, @generous. <i>Ang pilantrupu
libiral kaáyu nga muhátag,</i> A philanthropist
gives liberally. <b>2</b> permissive, not strict. <i>Libiral
kaáyu nang amahána nga mudala sa ílang
mga anak,</i> That father is very liberal in
bringing up his children. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be,
become generous or permissive.

<p><b>libiral<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> Liberal, member of the Liberal
Party. <b>partídu &mdash;</b> the Liberal Party. <i>v</i> [B156]
<pb n=1232>become a Liberal. <i>Ang Nasyunalista nga mayur
naglibiral na,</i> The mayor, who was a
Nacionalista, has crossed over to the Liberal
party.

<p><b>libirasiyun, libirisyun</b> <i>n</i> the period following
the ouster of the Japanese and the achieving
of independence (end of 1944&ndash;1946). <i>v</i> [B1256]
be the liberation time.

<p><b>libirt&acaron;d</b> <i>n</i> freedom. <i>Ang ákung bátà way libirt&acaron;d
sa pagpílì sa íyang gustu,</i> She has no
freedom to choose what she wants.

<p><b>libítus</b> = <b>LUBÍTUS.</b>

<p><b>libkas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB3(1)] for a trap to spring, for
s.t. held back to be released suddenly; cause
it to do so. <i>Milibkas na ang pas-ung, tingáli
nakakuhà,</i> The trap sprung. Maybe it has
caught s.t. <i>Milibkas ang kabli dihang napalus
sa ligid,</i> The cable lashed out when it
slipped off the wheel. <i>Hilibkasan ka bayà ánang
bawug,</i> The spring pole might snap
back on you. <b>1a</b> slip off under weight. <i>Ayúhag
bángil ang tiil arun dì makalibkas,</i> Put
the support under the leg carefully so that
it won't slip off. <b>2</b> [B3] for s.t. to slip inadvertently
out of the mouth. <i>Nalibkas sa bàbà
ang tinúud, maung nahibaw-an sa tanan,</i>The truth inadvertently slipped out of my
mouth so that everyone found out. 3 [A23]
appear, occur all of a sudden. <i>Usa ka pahiyum
milibkas sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile lit
his face. <i>Nakapaúlì siya sa wà pa mulibkas
ang gúbat,</i> He had a chance to go home before
the war suddenly broke out. <b>pa-</b> n
slingshot.

<p><b>libra<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> pound, a unit of weight. <i>Napúlù ka
libra,</i> Ten pounds.<b> -s</b> = <b>LIBRA</b> (plural). <i>Diyis
libras,</i> Ten pounds.

<p><b>libra<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the Libra in the horoscope.

<p><b>libri<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> free, not restricted. <i>Libri na ang
binilanggù,</i> The prisoner is free. <i>Way pugsanay,
libri sa gustu ang táwu,</i> There's no
forcing. Each man is free to do as he wishes.
<b>2</b> without cost or payment. <i>Libri ang íyang
káun, libri siya sa káun,</i> He gets his meals
free. <b>3</b> having clearance for passage. <i>Inig-ági
sa trák sa gawang, tan-áwa ug libri ba ang
kílid,</i> When the truck passes through the
gate, see if both sides have clearance. <b>4</b> safe
from destruction. <i>Libri na ang giupirahan,</i>
The patient who was operated on is safe. <i>v</i>
[A; a1] <b>1</b> give s.o. free use of s.t. by paying
for him or not obliging him to pay. <i>Íya kung
libríhun sa pasáhi,</i> She is going to pay for
my fare. <i>Nalíbri ku sa plíti,</i> I got to ride
free. <b>2</b> save from s.t. bad. <i>Ang balanghuy
makalibri sa gútum,</i> Cassava can save you
from starvation. <b>&mdash; kumída, pasáhi</b> <i>n</i> free
meal(s), free passage. <i>Libri pasáhi ka sa barku 
<pb n=1233>kay díay rikumindasiyun iadtu sa kapitan,</i>
You get free passage on the boat because
I have a recommendation for you to
give to the captain. <b>librilibri</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. kick-the-can
game. <i>v</i> [A12C; b(1)] play kick-the-can.
<b>librihay, librihánay</b> <i>v</i> [C13] do s.t.,
each man for himself. <i>Maglibrihay (maglibrihánay)
tag plíti,</i> Let's each pay his own
fare.

<p><b>libri<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>humorous expression uttered upon
hearing s.o. clearing his throat:</i> 'spit it out'.

<p><b>libriríya</b> <i>n</i> @library.

<p><b>libríta</b> = <sc>LIBRÍTU</sc>, 2.

<p><b>librítu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a small book containing magical
prayers (<i>urasiyun</i>) which comes into a person's
possession through the agency of a
supernatural force. The uttering of the
prayers by the owner of the book is thought
to have special healing or protective powers.
<b>2</b> any small @booklet. <b>&mdash; sa bangku</b> <i>n</i> @bank-*book.
<b>&mdash; sa tíkit</b> <i>n</i> book of tickets.

<p><b>libru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @book. <b>2</b> subject one is enrolled in.
<i>Tulu na lang ka libru ang íyang kúlang pára
nga makagraduwar siya,</i> He lacks three
courses to graduate. <b>3</b> @accounts. <b>tinidur di-</b>
bookkeeper. <i>v</i> [A; a12] bind into books.
<b>librulibru</b> = <sc>MANDUNGGU</sc>.

<p><b>líbu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> one @thousand. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] be a thousand.
<i>Mulíbu na run ang sáka sa lubi,</i> The
coconut trees now yield one thousand nuts.
<b>2</b> [c1] do by the thousand. <i>Libúhun (ilíbu)
ni nákù pag-ihap,</i> I'll count these by the
thousands. <b>libulíbu</b> thousands and thousands.
<b>-in-(->), ni-(->)</b> <i>n</i> by the thousand. <i>Linibu
ang ílang gastu matag búlan,</i> They
spend by the thousands every month. <i>v</i> [c1]
do by the thousands. <b>kalibúan</b> <i>n</i> @thousands.
<i>Kalibúan ang íyang gitabángan,</i> He has helped
thousands of people. <b>libúhay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> about
a thousand. <i>Libúhay ra ang íyang nagastu,</i>
He spent about a thousand. <b>2</b> thousands of.
<i>Libúhay ka mga túig,</i> Thousands of years.

<p><b>líbu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> carry a number in addition. <i>Singku
imas utsu, trísi, líbu únu,</i> Five and eight is
thirteen, carry your one. <i>v</i> [c6] carry a
number. <i>Ug pilay ímung ilíbu isulat sa ibabaw
sa numiru nga nagsunud,</i> Write the
number you carry above the next column.

<p><b>líbud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{go around} a place. <i>Libúra
úsà ang abúhan únà ka mulíbud sa kalibútan,</i>
Don't tell me you're going around the
world. You haven't even gone in back of
your stove! <b>2</b> [A; ac] go, bring around to
several places. <i>Ang bangkadur mauy mulíbud
sa baráha,</i> The dealer will distribute the
cards. <i>Libúrun ku ang mga saup arun patambúngun
sa míting,</i> I will go around to all
the tenants to have them attend the meeting. 
<pb n=1234><i>Mani ang ákung ilíbud ugmà,</i> I'll go
around selling peanuts tomorrow. <b>3</b> [B12]
get to be round about. <i>a</i> round about. <i>Líbud
na kaáyu ug muhapit pa mi sa inyu,</i> It
will be a very long way out of the way if we
go by your place first. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> church procession.
<b>2</b> round in games. <b>(->)</b> = <b>LÍBUD,</b> <i>a.</i> <b>(->)suruy</b>
<i>n</i> tramp, one who wanders from place
to place with no particular course or destination.
<i>v</i> [B1; b6] become a roamer. <i>Maglibud
suruy na lang ku ug wà na kuy trabáhu,</i>
I'll just become a tramp when I have
no more work. <b>libudlíbud</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] roam
around aimlessly.

<p><b>líbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1B1; a2b3(1)] confuse, be confused.
<i>Naglíbug kug diin nákù ikabutang ang
kwintas,</i> I'm at a loss to figure out where I
could have put my necklace. <i>Ay kug tudlúi.
Naglíbug ka lang nákù,</i> Don't try to teach
me. You are just confusing me. <b>2</b> [AP; a2b3(1)]
cause s.o. to go crazy through supernatural
means or from natural causes. <i>Ang
mga kalakíhan makamaung mulíbug (mupalíbug)
sa úlu sa táwu,</i> People who possess
supernatural powers can make people insane.
<b>3</b> [A; a1b8] make the rounds, attending
to each and every member of a group or
assemblage. <i>Akuy naglíbug ug kík sa mga
bisíta,</i> I was the one who passed the cake
around to the visitors. <i>Libúga (libga) pagpangutána
ang tanang mitambung sa míting,</i>
Ask each and every one who attended the
meeting. <i>a</i> perplexing. <i>Líbug kaáyu ning
prublimáha,</i> This is a perplexing problem.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fuss or ado about s.t. <i>Way daghang
libug mikúut siyag kwarta unyà gibayran
ang manunúkut,</i> Without much ado he took
the money out of his pocket and paid the
bill collector. <b>2</b> be of mixed blood. <i>Libug
kining batáa. Ang amahan Pilipínu ug ang
ínahan Amirkána,</i> This child is of mixed
blood. The father is a Filipino and the
mother an American. <b>-an(->), libgánun</b> <i>a</i>
prone to get confused. <i>Libugan (libgánun)
kaáyu siya kay húmuk ra mawálà bisan sa
kinasayunang iksplikasiyun,</i> She easily gets
confused because she gets lost with the
easiest of explanations. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>n</i> k.o. work
bee wherein the members work for each
other in turn and each member repays the
people who worked for him with an equivalent
amount of work. <i>v</i> [C] hold this sort
of work bee. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> confusion. <b>ka-an, ka-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> a crossbreed or person of mixed blood.
<i>Ang anay pulantsína ug ang butakal dyirsi.
Ang mga baktin kalibugan na,</i> The sow is a
Poland China variety and the boar a Jersey.
The offspring are a crossbreed. <i>v</i> [B126; a2] 
<pb n=1235>become a crossbreed. <b>maka-r-</b> <i>a</i> causing
confusion.

<p><b>lib-ug</b> <i>n</i> pool in the tidal flat, left when the
tide goes out.

<p><b>libun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @tick. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get infested
with ticks.

<p><b>libun<hi rend=sub>2</i>, líbun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @solid, not hollow. <i>Líbun ang
ligid sa íyang bisiklíta,</i> His bicycle has solid
rubber wheels. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256; a] be solid. <b>2</b>
[B1256] for a boil not to come to a head.
<i>Nalíbun ning hubága maung nagngutngut,</i>
This boil hasn't come to a head; that's why
it aches. <b>3</b> [AN; a12] in a game of <i>sungkà</i>:
to take all of one's partner's stones without
giving the opponent a chance to take his
turn. <i>Sayun ang maglíbun ug tuluy sunug,</i>
It is easy to get all of your opponent's
stones when he has three empty holes.

<p><b>líbun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @thicket. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] become a thicket.
<i>Mulibun (malibun) pagbálik ang kaíngin nga
byáan,</i> The abandoned clearing will revert
to a thicket. <b>2</b> [A; c] @reforest with small
trees or shrubbery. <i>Byatilis mauy maáyung
ilíbun sa mga yútà nga dagul,</i> Ipilipil is
suitable for reforesting infertile lands. <b>ka-an(->)</b>
= <sc>LÍBUN</sc>, <i>n</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>líbur</b> <i>n</i> amount paid for the labor on a piece
of work. <i>Mugastu ka sa mga matiryális lang.
Walay lábut sa líbur,</i> Your only costs will
be the materials. The labor is free. <b>&mdash; dí</b> <i>n</i>
@{Labor Day}. <b>&mdash; yunyun</b> <i>n</i> @{labor union}.

<p><b>libúrus</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3(1); b6] have rashes or hives.
<i>Milibúrus ang ákung buktun sa pinaakan sa
mga namuk,</i> My arms are covered with
@rash from the mosquito bites. <i>Til-as ang
nakalibúrus (nakapalibúrus) sa ákung nawung,</i>
The hairs of the caterpillar caused
my face to break out.

<p><b>líbut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] go, bring, put s.t. around
a place. <i>Mulíbut siya sa punúan sa káhuy,</i>
He'll go around the tree. <i>Siyay milíbut ug
batu sa mga tanum,</i> She put stones around
each plant. <i>Libúta ang pusti makalima, dì
ka ba malílung,</i> Go around the post five
times. See if you don't get dizzy. <i>Ákù siyang
ilíbut sa syudad,</i> I'll take her around
the city. <b>2</b> [A2S; b6(1)] @surround. <i>Dì makalíbut
ning tirása sa líab,</i> This lace isn't
enough to go all around the neckline. <i>Gilibútan
ang mga sundáwu sa mga kaáway,</i>
The soldiers were surrounded by the enemies.
n action of going around. <b>&mdash; sa</b> @around.
<i>Mudágan ku líbut sa plása,</i> I'll run around
the plaza. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> @surroundings. <i>Limpiyu kaáyu
ang inyung palíbut,</i> Your surroundings
are very clean. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the @world, the
@earth. <b>1a</b> <b>láing ka-an</b> the next world. <b>2</b> sexual
activity (euphemism). <i>Ayaw mu pagpalábi 
<pb n=1236>sa kalibútan,</i> Don't indulge in sexual
activity too much. <b>ka-ánun</b> @worldly. <i>Kalibutánung
mga kalípay,</i> Worldly pleasures.

<p><b>*líbut<hi rend=sub>2</i> unsay ka-an</b> [<i>gen.</i>] what does [gen.]
know about it? <i>Unsay kalibútan ku kun
diin ka paingun?</i> How would I know where
you went to? <b>walay ka-an</b> <b>1</b> @unconscious.
<i>Gidá siya sa uspital nga way kalibútan,</i> They
brought her to the hospital unconscious.
<b>2</b> @unaware. <i>Way kalibútan ang ákung gipangulitawhan
nga minyù na ku,</i> The girl I'm
courting has no idea I'm married.

<p><b>libutug</b> <i>n</i> small @bulge, @swelling. <i>v</i> [B; b4]
@swell, @bulge. <i>Mulibutug ang pinaakan sa lamuk
ug kalútun,</i> Mosquito bites swell if you
scratch them.

<p><b>libúu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible clam which buries itself
into the mud of mangrove swamps. It has a
thin, greyish shell, growing to 3".

<p><b>líbuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> handle of a plow. <b>2</b> @penis (humorous
euphemism). <i>v</i> [A13; a] put, use as a
plough.

<p><b>libwas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> put a new roof on a house.
<i>Íyang gilibwásan ang tanang atup nga dáan,</i>
He replaced all the old roofing. <b>1a</b> @replace
anything. <i>Maáyung malibwásan mu ang ímung
kinaíya,</i> You had better change your
ways. <b>2</b> [B126] for one's savings to be used
up (lit. get to the stage that it must be replenished).
<i>Nalibwas ang tanan kung tinagúan
karung Paskúha,</i> Christmas ate up all
of our savings. <b>-únun</b> a needing a change of
roof. <b>3</b> [B; b] for one generation to replace
another. <i>Maglibwas ang táwu sa kalibútan,</i>
A new generation will replace the old generation
of people in the world. <b>libwaslibwas</b>
<i>v</i> [A13; b] do s.t. several times. <i>Walà pa
giyud ka mabusug nga naglibwaslibwas man
kag káun?</i> Haven't you gotten your fill?
You have eaten several times.

<p><b>líd<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{lead guitar}. <b>2</b> music performed by
the lead guitar. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] play the lead
guitar in a combo performance. <b>&mdash; gitar</b> =
<sc>LÍD</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>líd<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @lead-projectile of a bullet.

<p><b>lidgid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @grate. <i>Lidgíra ang kamúti,</i>
Grate the sweet potatoes. <b>2</b> [A; a] make
the delicacy called <i>lidgid</i>. <i>n</i> sweet made of
a mixture of finely grated cassava or sweet
potato mixed with grated young coconut
and sugar which is rolled, wrapped in banana
leaves, and boiled. <b>ni-, -in-</b> = <sc>LIDGID</sc>. <b>lidgiran,
lidgíran, lidgiránan</b> <i>n</i> @grater.

<p><b>lidibag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @ladybug commonly found on
squash plants.

<p><b>lídir<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @ward-leader or other person who
can command a block of votes. <b>2</b> @leader of
a group. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] be, become a political 
<pb n=1237>leader. <b>-atu(<-)</b> <i>n</i> political @leadership.
<i>Kusgánun ang lidirátu ni Duránu sa Sugbu,</i>
Durano has strong political influence in
Cebu.

<p><b>lídir<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> a @go-between or one who is the
bearer of communications between lovers. <i>v</i>
[B156; b8] make s.o. a go-between between
lovers.

<p><b>lidirátu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÍDIR<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>*lídis &mdash; dringk</b> <i>n</i> a drink with only a small
amount or no liquor for ladies to drink at a
party. <b>&mdash; diyis</b> <i>n</i> a dance number where the
ladies choose the men and the men have to
pay ten centavos per dance, which goes to
charity. <i>v</i> [A1; c1] make a dance number,
one where the men have to pay ten cents.
<b>&mdash; tsuys</b> ladies'-choice-dance number where
the girls choose the partners. <i>v</i> [A1; c1]
make a number a ladies' choice.

<p><b>lidlid</b> = <sc>LIDGID</sc>.

<p><b>liga, líga<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> s.t. added to s.t. to enhance its
quality. <i>Táyid nga may ligang anyil,</i> Detergent
with bluing added. <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put an
addition to s.t. <i>Ligahi ug suwà ang lána,</i>
Put citrus juice into the coconut oil. <b>2</b> @adulterate.
<i>Giligáhan ang tablíyag mani,</i> They
adulterated the unsweetened chocolate with
roasted peanuts. <b>&mdash; puul</b> <i>a</i> being enough to
give one his fill until he tires of it. <i>Líga puul
giyud ang súruy rung bakasiyun,</i> When I
get my vacation I'm going to roam about
until I get sick of it.

<p><b>líga<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @tournament. <i>Líga sa baskitbul,</i> Basketball
tournament. <i>v</i> [A13] hold a tournament.

<p><b>líga<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> The @{League of Nations}.

<p><b>lígad<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c6] for people or animals to
@{lie down}. <i>Ayaw ilígad ang ímung igsilimba,</i>
Do not lie in your Sunday clothes.

<p><b>lígad<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2S; b5] @pass, @{pass by}, @{go by}. <i>Wà
kay gibúhat samtang nagligad ang úras?</i> You
did nothing as the time went by? <i>Dì mu
makalígad sa Argaw kun muadtu mu sa Baríli,</i>
You do not go by Argao when you go
to Barili. <i>Ligárun (ligáran) ta nang buntúra,</i>
We will go beyond that mountain. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i>
afternoon, the time after the sun has passed
the zenith until sunset. <i>n</i> crops that are left
over after the harvest. <i>Nanghagdaw silag
mga ligad sa mais,</i> They are gleaning the
few ears of corn that were missed in the
harvest. <b>(->) sa kasarángan</b> @excessively, more
than normal. <i>Ligad sa kasarángan ang ímung
pag-inum,</i> You drink excessively.

<p><b>ligadíra</b> = <sc>RIGADÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>ligal</b> <i>a</i> @legal, within the law. <b>-idad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @legality,
@lawfulness. <i>Ang ligalidad sa ámut mauy ámung
gilalísan,</i> The legality of the contribution
<pb n=1238>was what we were arguing about. <b>2</b>
the legal point in contention. <i>Ang ligalidad
nga gikagubtan nagagikan sa pagsabut sa
púlung 'dupa',</i> The legal point that is in
contention lies in the interpretation of the
word 'fathom'. [+]

<p><b>ligas</b> <i>v</i> [B256; b4(1)] <b>1</b> for s.t. to @slip off of
what it is placed on or for one's footing to
slip. <i>Bangíla ug maáyu ang tiil sa lamísa arun
dílì muligas (maligas),</i> Wedge the table leg
carefully so it won't slip off. <i>Naligas ang ákung
tiil sa hakhak,</i> My foot slipped out of
the notch in the coconut tree. <b>2</b> commit a
mistake. <i>Muligas (maligas) ka lang ug kas-a,
itsapuyra dáyun ka,</i> If you make a single
mistake, you will be fired at once. <i>Naligas
ang ákung bàbà pagtug-an,</i> The truth slipped
out of my mouth. <b>3</b> @fail, be @unsuccessful.
<i>Sáyang, miligas ang átung plánu,</i> Too bad.
Our plan failed. <b>4</b> be past the high noon
mark. <i>Musúgud ta pagtrabáhu sa dílì pa muligas
(maligas) ang adlaw,</i> We will start work
before the sun gets past high noon. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> be
past the zenith. <i>Ligas na ang bulan. Kay daktul,
saylu na sa tungang gabíi,</i> The moon is
past the zenith, and since it is full moon, it
must be past midnight. <b>2</b> for a pig to be below
the accepted standard weight (forty
kilos) for wholesale shipment. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b]
miss a number or proportion by a small
amount. <i>Ug maglígas ang ímung timpla sa
abúnu mamatay ang tanum,</i> If your fertilizer
is not mixed in the right proportions, the
plant will die. <i>Ang madaúgun nga tíkit ug
ang ákù naglígas ug duha ka numiru,</i> My
ticket was only two numbers off of the winning
number. <b>2</b> [b3(1)] have differences
over s.t. <i>Gamay ra gud nang inyung gikaligásan,
sultíhun lang gud nà,</i> You are having
a quarrel over such a small thing. You
should talk it out. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] look for
errors s.o. has made to justify harsh action
against him. <i>Gipaligas ka lang sa ímung manidy&icaron;r
arun maháwà ka,</i> The manager is just
waiting for you to slip so he can fire you.
<b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] provoke s.o. to provide the
excuse to beat him up. <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> the amount
or extent to which one thing differs from
another.

<p><b>lígas</b> <i>n</i> @garter to hold the stockings up.

<p><b>ligásun</b> <i>n</i> ribs in a boat frame to which the
boards or steelplates which form the hull
covering are attached.

<p><b>ligaw</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] do s.t. right by accident.
<i>Nakaligaw ku ug bungat sa hustung tubag,</i>
I happened to hit on the correct answer.
<i>Nakaligaw ku sa hustung timpla,</i> I hit on the
right mixture.

<pb n=1239>

<p><b>ligay</b> <i>n</i> swollen lymph node. <i>v</i> [B46; b4] get
swollen lymph nodes. <i>Giligayan ku kay giansúyan
ang ákung tunuk,</i> I have swollen
lymph glands because my wound got infected.

<p><b>ligdas</b> <i>v</i> [A3] <b>1</b> lie any old place to sleep.
<i>Nagligdas sa dálan ang hubug,</i> The drunk
was lying in the road. <b>2</b> @die. <i>Muligdas mug
way tawutáwug ikakuntra ninyu ang taga
Pásil,</i> You'll be killed without even anybody
knowing who did it if you make enemies
with people from Pasil.

<p><b>ligdung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @upright. <i>Ligdung kaáyu siya sa
íyang trabáhu. Dì manáwat ug suburnu,</i> He
is very upright in his work. He won't accept
bribes. <b>2</b> keeping in one's place, proper and
refined in deportment. <i>Usa siya ka táwu nga
ligdung ug dílì maakuakuhun,</i> He keeps in
his place and is not presumptuous. <b>3</b> serene
in demeanor, but dignified and reserved.
<i>Ligdung kaáyu siyang manubagtubag,</i> She
answers with very dignified reserve. <i>v</i> [B1; a12]
be @upright, @refined, and stay in one's
place. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> doing what is proper to one's
station. <i>Ipakítang ímung kaligdung; pangáyug
katahúran, ayaw ipabundak ang ngálan
sa ímung isigkatáwu, ayawg tubagtubag sa
mga tigúlang,</i> Show you know how to behave:
greet people, don't address people
without using a title, don't talk back to old
people.

<p><b>lighut</b> (from <i>lihut</i>) <i>v</i> [A13; b6] @{sneak out},
leave surreptitiously. <i>Mulighut ta sa klási,</i>
Let's sneak out of the class. <i>Milighut siya
ug sakay sa ayruplánu,</i> He boarded the
plane surreptitiously. <i>Mag-ábut nyà ta ug
makalighut ku sa ámù,</i> I'll see you later if I
can sneak out of the house.

<p><b>lígid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB2S6; c1] @roll, roll s.t. <i>Si Pidru
mauy mulígid (mupalígid) sa búla,</i> Pedro
will roll the ball. <i>Lígid dáyun ug masúnug
ang sinínà,</i> Roll (on the ground) if your
clothes are afire. <i>Ligírun (ligdun, ilígid) ku
kanà kay nakaáli sa ákung agiánan,</i> I will
roll it out of the way. <b>1a</b> [A23] for days,
years, etc. to roll by (literary). <i>Túling milígid
ang katuígan,</i> Years rolled by swiftly.
<b>1b</b> [A] throw a tantrum by rolling on the
floor. <i>Ngánung milígid ang bátà? Unsa na
puy íyang gustu?</i> Why is the child throwing
a tantrum? What does he want now? <b>2</b> [A]
@{lie down}. <i>Mulígid siya dáyun igkahumag káun,</i>
He lies down as soon as he finishes eating.
<b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; sa banig</b> be @bedridden. <i>Tulu na ka
túig siya nga naglígid sa banig,</i> She has been
bedridden for three years. <b>3</b> [A; b6] @wallow.
<i>Ang kábaw sa panahun sa ting-init mulígid
sa tunaan,</i> On hot days the carabao wallows
<pb n=1240>in the pond. <i>Kanang daginutána naglígid sa
bahandì,</i> That miser is wallowing in riches.
<i>Naglígid siya sa kasal-ánan,</i> She is sinking
deep in sin. <b>4</b> [A; a1] do s.t. to s.o. mercilessly
without letup. <i>Gilígid kug pangutána
sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer cross-examined me.
<i>Ang asáwa gilígid ug hawuk sa íyang bána,</i>
The husband smothered his wife with kisses.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> @wheel. <b>kaligiray</b> <i>v</i> [A13] @{roll around}.
<i>Nagkaligiray si Duman sa túmang kasakit,</i>
Duman rolled around in intense pain. <b>kaligiran</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] roll head over heels. <i>Nagkaligiran
ang táwung nadakin-as sa bakilid,</i> The
man slipped on the slope and tumbled down
head over heels. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> @hoop to play with.

<p><b>ligingliging</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] be bulging all over
from obesity. <i>Si Áyik Lusáda nagligingliging
sa katambuk,</i> Ike Lozada is bulging all over
from obesity.

<p><b>lígings</b> <i>n</i> @leggings worn with riding pants. <i>v</i>
[A13] <b>1</b> wear leggings. <b>2</b> wear stockings
(humorous).

<p><b>ligis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] flatten or @mash s.t. into powder
by pressing s.t. heavy on it. <i>Ligisa (ligsa)
ang asin ug kutsára,</i> Pulverize the rock salt
with a tablespoon. <b>2</b> [A; b2] for a vehicle
to run over s.t. <i>Dariyut ku maligsi sa taksi,</i>
The taxi nearly ran me over. <i>n</i> @pestle, @{rolling
pin}, or anything else used for crushing
things into fine particles. <b>ligsanan</b> <i>n</i> s.t. on
which s.t. is crushed.

<p><b>ligitlígit</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] @knead, roll into a ball
with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Naghunàhúnà
siya samtang nagligitlígit sa íyang búngut,</i>
As he was thinking, he twisted his
beard with his fingers.

<p><b>ligngin</b> = <sc>LÍNGIN</sc> (plural).

<p><b>ligpit</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] fasten s.t. temporarily
by pressing it down with s.t. that holds it in
place. <i>Bungbung amákang giligpítag dus pur
dus,</i> Sawali walling that was held in place
by two-by-two's. <i>Ligpíti ug kumpit ang mga
hinayhay,</i> Clip the wash with clothespins. <b>2</b>
[A; b2] press down on s.t. <i>Hiligpitan ang ákung
tudlù sa sira,</i> My finger was caught in
the door shutter. <i>Bug-at nga batu ang iligpit
sa binanggud balanghuy,</i> Use a heavy stone
to press out the juice of the grated cassava. <b>3</b>
put pressure on s.o. <i>Gitug-an níya kay giligpítan
siya sa pulis,</i> He revealed the truth because
the police pressured him. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clip to
fasten s.t. <b>2</b> s.t. used to press s.t. in place.

<p><b>ligsì</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] for bamboo to crack along
the grain under pressure. <i>Ayaw ug ibundak
ang sag-ub kay muligsì (maligsì),</i> Set the
bamboo tube water container down gently
so it doesn't crack.

<p><b>ligsik</b> (from <i>lisik</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B23(1)46] @expel s.t.
<pb n=1241>solid from within with a sudden force. <i>Muligsik
ang lísu sa nangkà ug hugtun paggúnit,</i>
The seed of the jackfruit will jump out if
you grab the meat. <b>2</b> [B246] be wide-eyed
with fear, amazement, surprise, etc. <i>Miligsik
ang mga mata sa táwu sa kahibúlung,</i> The
man's eyes became wide with amazement.

<p><b>ligtak</b> <i>v</i> [B26C; a12P] for the skull to crack.
<i>Miligtak ang íyang úlu pagkabunsù sa simintu,</i>
He cracked his skull when he fell, striking
his head on the cement. <i>Ligtákun ku
nang úlu mu,</i> I'll crack your skull wide open.

<p><b>ligtì</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] <b>1</b> for brittle things to
crack due to sudden change of temperature.
<i>Ang básu muligtì ug butangan ug pinabúkal
nga túbig,</i> The tumbler will crack if you put
boiling water in it. <i>Miligtì ang sundang kay
dì maáyung pagkasubu,</i> The sword cracked
because it was not well tempered. <b>2</b> [B26; a12]
@crack s.t. <i>Ligtíun ku nang bagulbágul
mu,</i> I'll crack your skull.

<p><b>ligtik</b> <i>v</i> [B26; a12] for s.t. to crack under
pressure or sudden change of temperature.
<i>Muligtik nang ímung tiyan ug magpalábi kag
káun,</i> Your stomach will burst if you eat
too much. <i>Muligtik (maligtik) ang sag-ub ug
ímung ipusdak,</i> The bamboo water container
will crack if you slam it down hard on
the ground.

<p><b>ligtiw</b> <i>v</i> [B2346; b8] @{fly off} to a distance.
<i>Naligtiwan ku sa aligatu sa nag-ismiril,</i> The
sparks flew off from the sharpening stone
and hit me.

<p><b>lígù</b> (from <i>dígù</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @bathe s.o. <i>Ang
inahan naglígù sa bátà,</i> The mother is bathing
the baby. <i>Ligúa ang irù.</i> Bathe the dog.
<b>2</b> [B123S56] take a @bath, @{go swimming}.
<i>Malígù (mukalígù) ta sa Talísay,</i> We'll go
swimming at Talisay Beach. <i>Dì ta makaligù
kay way túbig,</i> We cannot take a bath because
there is no water. <b>2a</b> [B1256] (in
proverbs) do s.t. to a certain extent. <i>Puslan
mang malígù, manlúgud na lang giyud,</i> Since
we took it on, we might as well go through
with it. (We're bathing so we might as well
rub the dirt off.) <i>Puslan mang mahumud,
malígù na lang,</i> Since you took it on, you
might as well go the whole hog. (Lit. You
got wet, so you might as well bathe.) <b>walay
(->)</b> <i>a</i> not having had a bath. <i>Húgaw batáa.
Way ligù,</i> What a dirty child. He didn't take
a bath. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6(1)] @{take a bath}. <i>Ayawg
kaligúi ang banyu kay naistak-ap,</i> Do
not take a bath in the bathroom because it
is plugged up. <i>Ínit túbig ang ikalígù,</i> Bathe
with hot water. <b>1a</b> [A123S] take a bath after
being bedridden, and therefore be cured.
<i>Makabalik ka na sa trabáhu kay nakaligù
<pb n=1242>(nakakaligù) na ka</i>, You may go back to
work because you are all better now. <b>2</b> [A123S]
be wet all over, as in taking a bath.
<i>Nakaligù (nakakaligù) ang nangharánag íhì,</i>
The serenaders were bathed with urine. <i>n</i>
action of taking a bath, going swimming.
<b>ka-an(->)</b>, <b>ka-anan</b> <i>n</i> place one bathes or
goes swimming. [+]

<p><b>lig-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @strong, @sturdy, @durable. <i>Lig-un kaáyu
ning baláya kay walà matumba sa bagyu,</i>
This is a strong house because it was
not blown down in the storm. <i>Lig-un ning
panaptúna,</i> This is durable cloth. <b>2</b> firm in
will or endurance. <i>Dílì ni makapahílak níya
kay lig-un siya ug balatían,</i> You cannot
make him cry with that because he is a
strong child. <i>Nagsáad siya sa lig-un nga dì
na muusab,</i> He firmly resolved never to do
it again. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug kasingkásing</b> <i>a</i> @stouthearted.
<i>Ang táwung lig-un ug kasingkásing dílì daling
mahadluk ug mawad-ag pagláum,</i> A
stouthearted man is not easily frightened
nor easily discouraged. <b>3</b> strong, difficult to
defeat. <i>Lig-un nga tím sa baskitbul,</i> A strong
basketball team. <b>way &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> weak, not strong.
<i>Way lig-un ning báya kay gabuk na ug halígi,</i>
This house is not strong because it has
weak posts. <i>v</i> [AB; a12] be, become strong,
durable, sturdy; cause s.t. to become so.
<i>Lig-úna ang ímung kaugalíngun. Ayaw paghílak,</i>
Brace yourself. Don't cry. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
@strength, @durability, @firmness. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> documents
as evidence of a contract, agreement,
and the like. <i>Dúna kay kalig-únan báhin sa
íyang útang?</i> Do you have any evidence of
her debt? <i>Kining singsing kalig-únan sa ákung
gugma nímu,</i> This ring is a token of
my love for you.

<p><b>ligung</b> = <sc>BINGA</sc>.

<p><b>ligutgut</b> = <sc>ALIGUTGUT</sc>.

<p><b>liguy</b> <i>a</i> trying to get out of work. <i>Ang maistrang
liguy muatúbang ug klási nga way lísun
plan,</i> The lazy teacher comes to class
with no lesson plan. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] get out
of work by being absent or simply not
tending to it. <i>Ug dúnay mga bug-at nga buluhatun,
muliguy siya,</i> When there are unpleasant
things to do, he bugs out. <b>2</b> [A2; b6]
play hooky. <i>Muliguy ku sa klási kay mutan-aw
kug sini,</i> I will skip class to go to the
movies. <b>liguylíguy</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> loaf on the
job. <i>Mauwaw kung muliguylíguy sa ákung
trabáhu ug náa ang ákung ámu,</i> I am ashamed
to loaf on the job when my boss is
around. <b>2</b> be absent from school every once
in a while. k<b>a-</b> <i>n</i> being a bug-out.

<p><b>ligwa</b> <i>n</i> measurement of distance: a league.

<p><b>ligwan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small wild honeybee, having
<pb n=1243>black and light orange stripes, nesting inside
trees or walls.

<p><b>ligwat</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] pry s.t. off or open. <i>Ligwáti
lang ang kaban kay nasúd ang yáwi,</i> Just
pry the trunk open because the key is inside.
<i>Náay lansang sa bungbung muy iligwat
sa pipsi,</i> There's a nail on the wall to open
the Pepsi. <i>n</i> s.t. used to pry s.t. open. <b>pa-
ug sulti</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make nasty allusions about
s.o. <i>Pirmi siyang kakitag áway kay kusug mupaligwat
ug sulti,</i> She tends to pick quarrels
because she tends to make nasty allusions.

<p><b>líha</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] rub or smooth down s.t. with
sandpaper or s.t. similar. <i>Ikay mulíha sa tabla
ug akuy mupintal,</i> You sand the board,
and I will paint it. <i>n</i> @sandpaper or s.t. used
like sandpaper. <b>papil di-</b> = <sc>LÍHA</sc>.

<p><b>lihang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> vertical space made when two
long things are not placed closely. <i>Ang tayùtù
nakalusut sa lihang sa bungbung,</i> The
lizard went through the space between the
parts of the walling. <b>2</b> the space between
teeth that are set somewhat apart.

<p><b>lihat</b> <i>v</i> [B126] do s.t. @inadvertently. <i>Ang kadaghan
sa pumapálit mauy makalihat (makapalihat)
nákù sa pagpanuklì,</i> I made mistakes
in making change because there were
so many customers. <i>Nalihat ang pulis patrul
sa kutsi nga ílang gisunud,</i> The police patrol
inadvertently lost track of the car they were
following.

<p><b>lihay</b>, <b>líhay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @dodge, @evade a blow.
<i>Ilihay ang ímung nawung, ayawg atras,</i> Pull
your face away, but don't back off. <b>2</b> [A2; b(1)]
evade a question, wriggle out of s.t.
<i>Maáyu siyang mulihay ug pangutána kay abugádu
man,</i> He is good in evading questions
because he is a lawyer. <i>Dì ka na giyud
makalihay ánang mga pruyba,</i> There is no
way you can wriggle out of it in the face of
this evidence. <b>2a</b> escape one's obligations.
<i>Buluhatun nga íyang gilihayan,</i> A job that
he wriggled out of.

<p><b>lihi</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @inaugurate s.t. with the proper
ceremonies or magical ingredients. <i>Maglihi
sila sa iskuylahan,</i> They will have the school
blessed. <i>Kámay mauy ilihi sa mag-anak,</i>
When a woman is in labor, give her brown
sugar to insure that she will recover quickly.
<b>1a</b> bury s.t. with plants to insure a good
harvest. <i>Lihian ug tablíya ang tabákù arun
lugum ug kulur ang dáhun,</i> They plant chocolate
together with tobacco seeds to assure
that it will have dark-colored leaves. <b>1b</b> begin
the new year with a certain action which
is believed will then endure for the rest of
the year. <i>Gilihian níla ang bag-ung túig ug
áway,</i> They began the new year with a
<pb n=1244>quarrel. <b>1c</b> use s.t. for the first time following
the proper prohibitions or injunctions.
<i>Lihian nátug simba ang bag-u nátung sapátus
arun mulungtad,</i> Let's wear our new
shoes to church so they will last. <b>2</b> [A1; b6(1)]
crave s.t. in the first few months of
pregnancy such that the appearance of the
thing desired appears as a birthmark in the
offspring. <i>Kun maglihi kag asin, putì kunu
ang ímung bátà,</i> If you crave salt in your
early months of pregnancy, your child will
be white. <b>2a</b> [b4] for a child to get the appearance
of a certain thing his mother
craved while she was conceiving him. <i>Náay
pula nga tap-ing sa íyang nawung kay gilihian
siyag kundíman,</i> He has a purple splotch
on his cheek because his mother craved red
cloth in her pregnancy. <b>2b</b> [b4] get to have
a certain characteristic by starting out in a
certain way. <i>Bag-ung túig gánì, sayug mata
arun dì ka lìhan pagkahingatulug,</i> Get up
early on New Year's day so you won't get
the characteristic of being a sleepyhead for
the whole year. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> injunctions or prohibitions
observed upon inaugurating s.t.; anything
used as a magical means to insure success
of s.t. inaugurated. <i>Ang lihi sa pagtanum
ug mangga, asúkar,</i> They use sugar to
plant with mangoes to insure sweet fruit. <b>2</b>
birthmark which is thought invariably to be
due to a mother's cravings in her early stages
of pregnancy. <b>pistang ig-l-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> holiday of
obligation in the Catholic Church.

<p><b>lihíru</b> <b>1</b> doing things with @agility and @rapidity.
<i>Lihíru siyang sugúun,</i> When you tell
him to do s.t. he does it quickly and without
hesitation. <i>Lihíru siyang mulálag banig,</i>
She's quick in weaving mats. <b>2</b> ready to do
s.t. <i>Lihíru nga mangusì ning batáa sa íyang
kadúlà,</i> This child is quick to pinch his play-*mates.
<b>3</b> skillful. <i>Lihíru siyang mudúwag
ahidris,</i> He's good in playing chess. <b>4</b> bright.
<i>Dakù siyag grádu kay lihíru man,</i> He got
high marks because he is intelligent. <b>4a</b>
smart, resourcefully shrewd. <i>Dì kang kaliput
ánang kumirsiyantíha kay lihíru nà,</i>
You can't put one over on that shrewd businessman.
<b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug kamut</b> <i>a</i> light-fingered. <i>Kinahanglang
magbantay ang mga tindíra sa
mga lihíru ug kamut,</i> The salesgirls had better
watch out for light-fingered customers.
<i>v</i> [B125] get to be expeditious, skillful. <i>Malihíru
man lang ni si Puduy ug náay diyis,</i>
Podoy will move if he knows he can get a
dime out of it.

<p><b>lihisladur</b> <i>n</i> @legislator. <i>v</i> [B1456] be, become
a legislator.

<p><b>lihislatíbu</b> <i>n</i> @legislative.

<pb n=1245>

<p><b>lihislatúra</b> <i>n</i> @legislature.

<p><b>lihiya</b>, <b>lihíya</b> <i>n</i> @lye: caustic soda or lye obtained
from wood ashes. <i>v</i> [A; a2] make
lye.

<p><b>líhù</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] guide s.o. while he urinates or
defecates. <i>Ang míd mauy mulíhù sa bátà sa
bangkíyu,</i> The maid makes the child sit on
the potty. <i>Ilíhù ang masakitun sa inudúru,</i>
Guide the patient while he goes to the toilet.

<p><b>*lihug pa-</b> [**F1: p.o.s. missing?] <b>1</b> please. <i>Palíhug, ikúhà akug túbig,</i>
Please, get me some water. <b>2</b> work bee
in which people are not paid for their labor.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] ask s.o. to do s.t. as a favor
without pay. <i>Palihúgun ku siyag húlug ug
suwat,</i> I will ask him to do me the favor of
mailing a letter. <i>Dúna kuy ipalíhug nímu,</i> I
have a favor to ask of you. <i>Ipalíhug kug
kúhà ánà bisag wà kuy iháwun,</i> Please do
me the favor of getting it, even though I
have no pig to roast (from the notion that
people who are asked to do a big job without
pay are generally given a good meal).
<b>2</b> [AN] hold a work bee in which people
work for free except for food and drinks.
<i>Mupalíhug (mamalíhug) kug paalsa sa ákung
balay,</i> I'm having a work bee to move my
house. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>. <b>2</b> favor asked. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i>
persons requested to help.

<p><b>líhuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2S] move. <i>Búhì pa diay ang isdà
kay naglihuk,</i> The fish is still alive because
it is moving. <b>1a</b> [A; a12] cause s.t. to move.
<i>Kinsay naglíhuk sa hárì áring damahan?</i>
Who moved the king here on the checker-*board?
<b>1b</b> [A2; a12] betake oneself to do
s.t. <i>Dì mulíhuk ug dílì suburnúhan,</i> They
won't make a move unless you bribe them.
<b>2</b> [A2; b4] for a characteristic to make its
appearance. <i>Ug mukatursi anyus na ang láki,
mulíhuk na ang gána,</i> When a boy reaches
fourteen years or so, he begins to feel his
sexual drives. <i>Milíhuk na pud ang túlis,</i>
Robbery cases are on the rise. <i>Gilihúkan na
pud siya sa íyang kabúang,</i> His insanity is
making its appearance again. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action,
deed. <i>Katahápan ang íyang líhuk,</i> His actions
are arousing suspicion. <b>2</b> one's turn to
move a piece in a game. <b>hínay ug &mdash;</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> timid,
lacking aggressiveness. <i>Hínay nímug líhuk!
Musugut na untà tu ug ímu pang giapríta,</i>
You sure don't move! She would
have accepted you had you pressed her. <b>2</b>
slowpoke. <i>Hínay bayà nímug líhuk, wà man
nímu mahuman nga udtu na man,</i> You sure
are slow! You haven't finished and it's already
noon! <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> movement, stirring. <i>Basta
way irpákit, wà giyuy lihuk ang ayruplánu,</i>
As long as there are no air pockets the
airplane will fly smoothly. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> always moving, 
<pb n=1246>unstable. <i>Lihuk kaáyung tabanúga,</i> An
unstable kite. <i>Lihuk nga bátà,</i> A restless
child. <b>2</b> for women to have excessive sexual
desire. <i>Ang mga babáying lihuk bísag minyù
na, manguríbut pa giyud,</i> Women who have
excessive sexual desire fool around with
men, even if they are married. <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
be, become s.t. that moves around too much
or a woman of excessive desires. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A23; a12]
set s.t. into motion. <i>Ubang pulitiku
mupalíhuk dáyun sa ubras publikas sa panahun
sa piliay,</i> Some politicians will set public
works projects into motion during elections.
<b>hag-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] be able to move.
<i>Pwirti nákung lisánga. Wà ku mahaglihuk,</i>
I was so frightened I couldn't move. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>a</i> given to moving around, restless. <i>Lihukan
siyag kamut sa sinihan,</i> He has wandering
hands in the movie house. <b>-in-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> way
one acts. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> activities. <i>Unsay kalihúkan
sa iskuylahan rung gabíi?</i> What is going
on in school this evening? <i>Kalihúkang langyaw,</i>
Foreign affairs. <b>2</b> movement, organized
activities to gain a certain objective. <i>Kalihúkan
sa pausbaw sa swildu,</i> Movement to increase
wages. <b>ma-(->)</b> = <sc>LIHUK</sc>, a. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
the way one carries himself. <i>Mga babáying
artipisyal ang panlíhuk,</i> Women with artificial
ways about them. <b>2</b> things to be done,
chores to attend to. <b>-un(->)</b> = <b>PAN-</b>, <i>n2</i>.

<p><b>lihut</b> <i>v</i> 1 [A2] take time out to do s.t. for a
moment. <i>Bisag daghang trabáhu, mulihut giyud
siyag dúaw dinhi,</i> In spite of all the
things he has to attend to he still takes out
time to come here. <i>Makalihut pa giyud siyag
suwat bísan ug bísi,</i> She still found time
to write to me even if she was busy. <b>2</b> [A2; c1]
do s.t. secretly. <i>Kun maúlaw kang hidunggan,
lihuta (ilihut) lang pagsulti,</i> If you
are ashamed to let anyone hear it, just tell
it secretly.

<p><b>likag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ray.

<p><b>likat</b> <i>v</i> [b8] overlook or miss s.t. <i>Nalikatan
(hilikatan) níyag ihap ang usa ka libru,</i> He
overlooked one book in counting them.

<p><b>likay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @avoid s.t., s.o.'s company.
<i>Mulikay siya sa buluhatun,</i> He tries to avoid
work. <i>Maglikay ka sa sámuk, ha?</i> You must
keep away from trouble, understand? <i>Likayi
nang tawhána kay palaaway siya,</i> Keep
away from that man because he is quarrelsome.
<i>Dílì kalikayan ang sayup,</i> You can't
avoid making some mistakes. <b>1a</b> [a3] be
delivered, safe from actual or feared evil.
<i>Mag-ampù ta básin ug malikay siya sa kadaútan,</i>
Let us pray and hope that he be kept
safe from evil. <b>2</b> [A2; c] dodge s.t., duck
out of the way. <i>Walà ku makalikay sa íyang
<pb n=1247>suntuk,</i> I was not able to dodge his blows.
<i>Naglikay sa bága, nahasugba sa síga,</i> Out of
the frying pan, into the fire (lit. avoiding
the coals, he got broiled in the fire).

<p><b>likbung</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] put s.t. in the way to prevent
passage. <i>Ikaw bay naglikbung ug síya
sa pultahan?</i> Were you the one who placed
a chair across the doorway? <i>n</i> anything
placed across an opening or passageway to
prevent passage.

<p><b>likhad</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1); b(1)] for the brim of s.t.
stiff and woven to open out. <i>Mulikhad (malikhad)
ang daplin sa nígu ug wà pay liskug,</i>
The sides of a winnowing tray will come
out open if there's no ring to keep it in
place.

<p><b>likì<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B2] @crack. <i>Mulikì ang yútà ug dúgay
nga ulanun,</i> The earth cracks if there is no
rain for a long time. <i>Ang ínit makalikì (makapalikì)
sa tabla,</i> Heat can make boards
crack. <i>Ang lapalapa mulikì ug dílì sapatúsan,</i>
Your soles will crack if you don't wear
shoes. <i>n</i> @crack. <b>bibingka nga usa ray &mdash;</b> female
genitalia (humorous&mdash;lit. rice cake
with a single crack). <b>&mdash; sa kawáyan</b> <i>n</i> of unknown
origin. <b>a</b> illegitimate children. <i>Kanang
mga anak mung gíkan sa likì sa kawáyan,</i>
Those illegitimate children of yours
(lit. who come from the cracks in bamboos).
<b>b</b> appearing from nowhere. <i>Mu ra mag gíkan
sa likì sa kawáyan nang tawhána. Nikalit
lag tunga dinhi,</i> That man seems to have
appeared out of nowhere. He just appeared
in this place. a having a crack. <i>Sugung nga
likì,</i> A bamboo container with a crack. <b>(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [a12] do s.t. to s.o. intensely. <i>Likíun (likiyun)
kag búnal ni Pápa mu ug sakpan ka,</i>
Your father will beat you mercilessly if he
catches you. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] cause a crack or
s.t. like a crack to appear s.w. <i>Palikiun ku
ang ákung hinápay,</i> I'll do my hair with a
part (lit. cause my hairdo to have a crack). [+]

<p><b>likì<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A12] take a liking to s.o. (humorous
slang). <i>Nakalikì siya sa íyang bag-ung silíngan,</i>
She took a liking to her new neighbor.

<p><b>líkid</b> <i>v</i> [A2] go around a winding path or
road. <i>Kun milíkid na gánì sila dílì na nímu
sila makit-an,</i> If they have already gone
around the bend you won't see them any
more. <i>Dúgay silang miabut sa ibabaw kay
milíkid man sila,</i> It took them long to reach
the top because they took the winding path
up.

<p><b>likida</b>, <b>likidar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @liquidate, @kill. <i>Sinuhúlan
ang milikidar sa kunggrisman,</i> The
congressman was killed by a hired goon.

<p><b>líkids</b> <i>n</i> leakage in a government examination,
<pb n=1248>where the answers are given to buyers.
<i>May líkids matag iksámin sa Síbil Sirbis,</i>
There is always a leakage every Civil Service
exam. <i>v</i> [A12] obtain the answers in advance
through leakage. <i>Nakalíkids man maung
nakapasar,</i> He got the answers ahead,
and that's why he passed.

likidu <i>n</i> @liquid, not solid.

<p><b>líkin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cigar made of finely crushed, roasted
tobacco rolled in the <i>lungbuy</i> leaf or
some other material formed into a tube. <b>2</b>
the wrapper for this sort of cigar. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
make, make into this sort of cigar. <b>(->)</b>, <b>-an</b>,
<b>-an(->)</b> = <sc>LÍKIN</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LÍKIN</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>líkis</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13B; c] be wound around, cause
s.t. to do so. <i>Didtuy dakung sawa nga naglíkis
sa sanga,</i> There was a big snake wound
around the branch. <i>Ilíkis ug hugut ang písì
sa halígi,</i> Wind the rope tightly around the
post. <b>2</b> [A; c] put s.t. all around s.t. <i>Akuy
mulíkis aring mga batu líbut sa punúan sa
tanum,</i> I'll put these stones around the base
of the plants. <b>-an(->)</b> n the beam at the far
end of the loom around which the warp
threads are wound.

<p><b>líkit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] roll s.t. flat into a tight tube,
or turn a tube to wind s.t. around it. <i>Maglíkit
kug mga papil pára sa rípa,</i> I will roll
pieces of paper up for the raffle. <i>Likta ug
maáyu ang ímung tinustus arun dílì muhungaw,</i>
Roll your cigar tightly so it will draw
in air well. <i>n</i> tight roll. <i>Usa ka líkit nga
kwarta,</i> A roll of paper bills. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LÍKIT</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>liklik</b> v [A2N] go along the edges of s.t. or
round about, not straight across or in the
center. <i>Nangliklik ku sa asíras kay nag-ulan,</i>
I walked along the sidewalk (rather than in
the street) because it was raining. <i>Mangliklik
lang ta kay náay daghang buguy dihà sa
agiánan,</i> Let's go around because there are
lots of toughs on the road.

<p><b>likmù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] conceal s.t. so others will
not know it. <i>Ilikmù nákù ang ákung daug,</i>
I'll conceal the fact that I won. <i>Likmúi ang
inahan nga namatay ang íyang anak,</i> Keep
it hidden from the mother that her son
died. <b>2</b> [A; a2] cheat s.o. by withholding
part of the amount or number to be handed
in. <i>Likmúun nákù ang katungà sa hálin,</i> I'll
keep half of the proceeds to myself.

<p><b>liksi</b> <i>v</i> [A2] jump up or aside, usually by
reflex action in fright or to avoid danger.
<i>Miliksi siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped back
with fright. <b>liksiliksi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] jump about
violently. <i>Paknga ang isdà arun dílì muliksiliksi
sulud sa baskit,</i> Knock the fish on the
head so they won't thrash around in the
basket.

<pb n=1249>

<p><b>liksiyun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{lesson in school}. <b>2</b> @{object lesson},
an event or experience that should teach
one to do s.t. differently. <i>Kadtung baháa
liksiyun nátù báhin sa pagpanagag káhuy,</i>
That flood should be a lesson to us with regards
to deforestation. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] assign,
study a lesson. <i>Akuy muliksiyun ninyu run
báhin sa paghúbad,</i> I will give you a translation
exercise today. <i>Nagliksiyun mi báhin
sa birbu,</i> We were having our lesson on verbs.
<b>2</b> [A12; a12] make s.o. know the disagreeable
consequence of an act. <i>Liksiyunun ta
ka sa ímung binúang,</i> I will discipline you
because of your foolishness.

<p><b>liktyur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lecture. <b>2</b> @scolding (humorous
slang). <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> give a lecture. <b>2</b> @scold.
<i>Sa sayu sa buntag nagliktyur na siya sa íyang
mga suluguun,</i> It's early in the morning,
but she is already reading her servants
a lecture.

<p><b>likù</b>, <b>líkù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; c] @turn, @{change directions}.
<i>Mulikù ka sa wala padúlung sa pantalan,</i>
Turn left towards the wharf. <i>Ilíkù ang
dyíp dihang iskináha,</i> Turn the jeep at the
corner. <b>2</b> [AB6; c1] bend, be wound
around. <i>Nakalikù siya sa bakus sa líug sa
irù,</i> She managed to get the belt around
the dog's neck. <i>Kining karsadáha naglikù sa
bungtud,</i> This road encircles the hill. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i>
[B; c1] for a way to be, become round
about. <i>Mulíkù ang átung pagkaági ug manúbay
ta sa karsáda,</i> Our way will be round
about if we follow the road. <i>a</i> round about
way. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a bent pipe for channelling gas
in a lantern. <b>likùlíkù</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @zigzagging. <b>2</b> not
direct to the point, beating around the
bush. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B456] be, become zigzagging.
<i>Mupahínay ka ug mulikùlíkù ang karsáda,</i>
Slow down if the road starts to zigzag. <b>2</b>
[A; c1] beat around the bush. <i>Sultíhi ku sa
inyung túyù. Ay na lag ilikùlíkù (likùlikúa),</i>
Tell me what it is you want. Don't hem and
haw. <i>n</i> action of beating around the bush.
<i>Sa way daghang likùlíkù mipadayag siya sa
íyang túyù,</i> Without beating around the
bush, he disclosed his intentions. <b>likùlikuan</b>
<i>a</i> one who is inconsistent in what he says,
unreliable. <i>Dílì kasalígan ang táwung likùlikuan,</i>
A person who doesn't say the same
thing twice can't be trusted. <i>v</i> [B12] become
inconsistent and unreliable. <b>-an(->)</b>.[**,? P2]
<b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> curve, bend of a road. <i>Náa ang íla
sa may likúan,</i> Their place is near where the
bend is. <b>2</b> place one turns off.

<p><b>likub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] place or put s.t. in the
middle or across a path to prevent or obstruct
passage. <i>Akuy mulikub ug batu áning
agianána, bir ug kinsay muyawyaw,</i> I will
<pb n=1250>put a rock in the middle of this pathway.
Let's see who dares complain. <i>Ang kanal
nalikban ug sagbut,</i> The ditch was blocked
with trash. n anything in the way to obstruct
passage.

<p><b>likud</b> [**F1: p.o.s. ?] <b>1</b> @behind, at the @{back of}. <i>Ang ámung
balay náa sa likud sa simbahan,</i> Our house
is behind the church. <i>Didtu siya maglingkud
sa likud sa trák,</i> He sat in the back of the
bus. <b>1a</b> one's back. <i>Palíhug kalúta ang ákung
likud,</i> Please scratch my back. <b>2</b> coming after.
<i>Likud sa íyang mga pag-antus miabut
ang kalampúsan,</i> On the heels of his sufferings
came success. <b>3</b> coexistent with but not
readily apparent. <i>Likud sa íyang pahiyum
nag-umidu ang kayugut,</i> There is a seething
rancor behind her smile. <i>Didtuy mistiryu
nga nahitágù sa likud sa kangitngit,</i> There
was s.t. mysterious hidden in the midst of
the darkness. <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @betray, turn one
over to his enemies. <i>Gilikud si Taruk sa íyang
sákup ngadtu sa Písi,</i> Taruc's men betrayed
him to the P.C. <b>likuran</b> <i>n</i> place in
back of s.t. <b>likudlíkud</b> <i>n</i> eve before a wedding.
<i>Mikalit lang siyag kahánaw sa likudlíkud
sa íyang kasal,</i> He suddenly disappeared
on the eve of his wedding.

<p><b>likug</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c1] for s.t. long and thin to get
crooked or curled. <i>Gilikug níla ang alambri
sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> They tied the wire
around the trunk of the tree. <i>a</i> @crooked, not
straight. <i>Dì na magámit ang rúlir, kay
likug na,</i> We can't use the ruler because it is
bent.

<p><b>likulikuhan</b> = <sc>LIKÙLIKUAN</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>LIKÙ</sc>.

<p><b>likung</b>, <b>líkung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make into a circle,
coil. <i>Likúngun (ilíkung) ku ning alambri,</i> I
will coil up the wire into a circular loop. <i>n</i>
s.t. fashioned into a coil, loop. <i>Dúnay líkung
nga gipátung níya sa íyang úlu silbing
hapin sa íyang lukdúun,</i> She has a piece
of cloth rolled into a coil which she placed
on her head to cushion what she is going to
carry. <i>Kuháang likung kay maghulahup ku,</i>
Get me a hoop. I'm going to play hulahoop.

<p><b>likup</b>, <b>líkup</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; a] @surround, @enclose.
<i>Ang mga kaáway milíkup sa ílang kampu,</i>
The enemies surrounded their camp. <i>Daghang
mistiryu ang naglikup niíning hitabúa,</i>
The event is shrouded in mystery. <i>Likpa
(likupa, palikpi) ug kural ang balay,</i> Build a
fence around the house. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> distance or
measurement around s.t. <b>ka-an</b>, <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> surroundings,
environs.

<p><b>lik-up</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] close, cover a passage. <i>Dì
mu makalik-up ning dalána kay agiánan
man ni sa publiku,</i> You can't block this
road because this is a public thoroughfare.
<pb n=1251><i>Ákung gilik-úpan ang sapà arun muhubas
ang ubus,</i> I'm damming up the brook so
that the area below will dry up.

<p><b>likuplikup</b> <i>n</i> a climbing vine with whitish-yellow
flowers and round, smooth leaves,
belonging to the family <b><i>Dischidia</i></b>.

<p><b>líkus</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] be @{coiled around} s.t. <i>Sawa
nga nagalíkus sa sanga,</i> A snake coiled around
the branch. <i>Milíkus sa payag ang mga
sundálu,</i> The soldiers surrounded the hut.
<i>Dúnay paril nga naglíkus sa simbahan,</i> There
is a stone wall that is surrounding the
church. <i>Ílang giliksan sa púkut ang dakung
duut sa isdà,</i> They encircled the big school
of fish with the net. <i>n</i> measurement around
s.t., perimeter. <b>(->)</b>, <b>likuslikus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. itchy
skin infection where eruptions of watery
pustules appear in splotches around the
body and later burst.

<p><b>likut</b> <i>a</i> @{slit-eyed}. <i>Likut siya kay kalíwat ug
Insik,</i> He has narrow eyes. He is of Chinese
extraction. <i>v</i> [B15] be, become slit-eyed.

<p><b>likuy</b>, <b>líkuy</b> <i>a</i> going in a curve. <i>Líkuy ang dágan
sa búla kay walà man manibil ang mísa,</i>
The ball is rolling crooked because the billiard
table is not level. <i>v</i> [B2S] for a ball to
curve or swerve. <i>Lisud saw-un ang búla nga
naglikuy,</i> It is hard to catch a curve ball.

<p><b>likwa</b> <i>v</i> [c] buy stock with the proceeds of
a day's sale. <i>Ígù rang ilikwa ang halin karung
adláwa,</i> Today's sales are just enough
to buy new stock. <b>likwalikwa</b> <i>n</i> the system
of small-time buying and selling in which
the entire capital is tied up in a single day's
sales and the proceeds go for buying new
goods. <i>v</i> [A12; c] operate a business on
this method.

<p><b>likwad</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] cleverly deny s.t. or conceal
a truth when accused. <i>Dì ka makalikwad
kay nasáyud na ku,</i> Don't try to be
clever and hide anything because I already
know. <i>Ayawg ilikwad nákù ang hustung kítà,</i>
Don't try to conceal exactly what the
proceeds are. <i>a</i> cleverly denying or concealing
s.t. when accused. <b>likwadlikwad</b> <i>v</i>
[A; c1] investigate, cross-examine thoroughly,
turning questions inside out. <i>Ug likwadlikwárun
(ilikwadlikwad) ang mga pangutána,
tingálig maluba ang giakusar,</i> If the
questions are turned inside out in the course
of the cross-examination, the accused will
probably give in.

<p><b>likwála</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental palm with wide,
round, accordion-like leaves and long, slender
stalks lined with thorns at the sides:
<b><i>Licuala spp.</i></b>

<p><b>likwang</b> <i>v</i> [A; b2c1] tilt or turn s.t. heavy
over. <i>Likwángun (ilikwang) ku ang batu ug
<pb n=1252>náa bay kinhasun sa iláwum,</i> I'll turn the
stone over to see whether there are any
shells under it. <i>Ilikwang (likwánga) ang baril
arun mayabu ang súd,</i> Turn the barrel
over to pour the water out.

<p><b>likyad</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); c6] curl up at the edges.
<i>Milikyad ang playwud nga giparka sa sakayan,</i>
The plywood they used to wall the
boat curled at the edges. <i>Milikyad ang papil
nga gipapilit sa bungbung kay natangtang
ang ngilit,</i> The paper that had been pasted
to the walls curled up because the edges
got loose.

<p><b>líla</b> <i>a</i> @violet. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] color s.t. violet.

<p><b>lílang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. herring.

<p><b>lílas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> long strip, usually of young buri
palm leaves, used in weaving mats or bags.
<b>2</b> film on which movies are recorded. <b>2a</b>
the motion picture industry or art form.
<i>Sa kalibútan sa lílas,</i> In the world of film.
<b>2b</b> @movie. <i>Lílas nga aksiyun,</i> An action
film. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] make s.t. into strips for
weaving. <b>2</b> [A13; a12] make a movie out of
a story. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> device for cutting s.t. into
strips.

<p><b>lìlì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] peep at s.t. while hidden. <i>Ug
malígù ka dihà, lìlíun kang Piduy,</i> If you
bathe there, Pidoy will peep at you. <b>2</b> [A13; a12]
take a look to see how things are. <i>Lìlía
ang kan-un ug nahubsan na ba,</i> Take a
look at the rice to see if the water has evaporated.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> small variety of eggplant,
so called because one has to look under the
leaves to see it.

<p><b>lilígan</b> <i>n</i> in a bamboo house, thin bamboo
slats to which flooring slats (<i>salug</i>) or walling
slats which hold the walling material
(<i>lugpit</i>) are tied and which serve to hold
them in place.

<p><b>lilinglíling</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] circle around looking
for s.t. <i>Mulilinglíling ang ayruplánu úsà mamumba,</i>
An airplane circles over a target
first before it begins dropping bombs. <i>Lilinglilínga
ang ákung singsing nga nahúlug
sa sílung,</i> Look around for my ring that fell
under the house.

<p><b>lílit</b> <i>v</i> [A2S] for s.t. to bulge out through an
opening. <i>Mililit ang tinái sa samad,</i> His guts
were sticking out through the wound. <i>Naglilit
ang íyang tiyan sa guut nga karsunsilyu,</i>
His stomach is bulging through his tight
shorts.

<p><b>lilítik</b> = <sc>HANDILÍTIK</sc>.

<p><b>lílù</b> <i>n</i> @whirlpool. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] form a whirlpool.
<i>Mulílù ang túbig ug ang duha ka sulug magbanggà,</i>
A whirlpool forms if two currents
meet. <b>2</b> [A12] be agitated as if swirled in a
whirlpool. <i>Naglílù ang ákung pagbátì tungud 
<pb n=1253>sa kalíbug,</i> My feelings are all awhirl
with confusion. <b>3</b> [A23] for a dimple to
form a whirlpool-like depression. <i>Mulílù ang
íyang kandíis ug mupahíyum siya,</i> Her dimples
form whirlpool-like depressions when
she smiles. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> place where there is a whirlpool.

<p><b>líluk</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @carve. <i>Maáyung mulíluk ug istatúwa
ang manlilíluk,</i> A sculptor carves
statues well. <i>Maanindut nga dibúhu ang íyang
gilíluk,</i> He carved a beautiful design in
the wood. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> occupation of carving.

<p><b>lílung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] conceal, hide a true state of
affairs. <i>Ayaw kug lilúngi, dukt&ucaron;r,</i> Do not
conceal the truth from me, Doctor. <i>Ilílung
nátù níya ang nahitabù,</i> We'll keep what
happened from him.

<p><b>lílung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> @{making dizzy}. <i>Lílung sakyan ang
tyubíbu,</i> It makes you dizzy to ride a merry-go-round.
<i>n</i> @dizziness. <i>Ang táwung makaagwanta
sa lílung puyding maastrunut,</i> A man
who can stand dizziness can qualify as an
astronaut. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become dizzy. <b>paN-(->)</b>[**moved up (->)]
<i>n</i> dizzy spell, occasional feeling of dizziness.
<i>Kasagáran sa magsabak batíug panglilung,</i>
Most women experience dizzy spells
in their early months of pregnancy. <b>panga-</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] be in a state of slight dizziness.
<i>Nagpangalilung ku sa kagútum,</i> I'm somewhat
dizzy from hunger.

<p><b>lima</b> <i>numeral</i> five. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>TULU</sc>.

<p><b>limangkà</b> <i>v</i> [A3; c1] having the legs crossed
at the ankles. <i>Milimangkà siya sa salug,</i> He
sat on the floor with his legs crossed in
front. <i>Niambak siya sa túbig nga naglimangkà
arun pagtimpasaw,</i> He jumped into the
water with his ankles crossed to make a big
splash.

<p><b>límas</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @{bail water} out. <i>Ug dílì ka mulímas
malúnud ta,</i> If you do not bail, we will
sink. <b>2</b> empty a pool or a big container by
bailing the water out. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. used for
bailing. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> water in the bottom of a
boat, @{bilge water}.

<p><b>limátuk</b> = <sc>ALIMÁTUK</sc>.

<p><b>lim-aw</b> <i>n</i> small, shallow pool of water. <i>Mga
lim-aw nga mahibilin inighunas,</i> Pools left
after the tide has gone out. <i>Lim-aw human
sa ulan,</i> Pools of water after the rain. <i>v</i> [B]
form a small pool.

<p><b>limba</b> v = <sc>LIMBALIMBA</sc>. <b>limbalimba</b> <i>v</i> [A1]
toss, roll around. <i>Ug muinum kug kapi maglimbalimba
lang ku tibuuk gabíi,</i> If I drink
coffee, I toss and turn the whole night.

<p><b>limbag</b> <i>v</i> [A] @writhe, @wriggle, esp. from stomach
pain. <i>Bisag giunsa níya paglimbag, wà
makabuhì,</i> No matter how he wriggled, he
couldn't free himself. <i>Naglimbag siya kay
<pb n=1254>gisirulan,</i> He was writhing in pain from his
stomach cramps.

<p><b>limbáhun</b> <i>a</i> having a yellow color with a reddish
cast. <i>Ang limbáhung bidlísiw sa nagsalup
nga adlaw,</i> The pink rays of the setting
sun. <i>n</i> fruits that have this color. <b>a</b> coconuts
that have red or yellow-orange husks. <b>b</b>
variety of shaddock (<i>buluungun</i>) with pinkish
meat.

<p><b>limbákug</b> <i>v</i> [B456; c1] twist and squirm vigorously.
<i>Naglimbákug sa kasakit ang táwu
nga gisul-an sa tiyan,</i> The man was writhing
in pain because of his stomach pains. <i>Naglimbákug
ang bitin nga naputlan sa úlu,</i> The
snake was writhing because his head was cut
off.

<p><b>limbaruk</b> strong curse word expressing exasperation
or irritation. <i>Limbaruk, dimálas
baraháa,</i> Damn! What an unlucky card. <i>v</i> [a4]
be cursed. <i>Mu rag gilimbaruk kining ámung
kahimtang,</i> It looks as though we're
completely out of luck.

<p><b>limbáruk</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b6] fall headlong. <i>Nalimbáruk
ang bátà sa bintánà,</i> The child fell
headlong out of the window.

<p><b>limbárut</b> = <sc>*LIMBÁWUT</sc>.

<p><b>limbas</b> = <sc>LINGBAS</sc>.

<p><b>*limbásug paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @{strive hard}, exert
effort to accomplish s.t. <i>Nanglimbásug siya
nga makabuhì,</i> She struggled to free herself.
<i>Panlimbasúgan (panlimbasúgun) ku nga makapasar,</i>
I will try my best to pass the course.
<i>n</i> act of striving hard or exerting effort. <i>Ang
panglimbásug dílì laksut basta dílì lang palabihan,</i>
It is not a bad thing to strive hard
as long as you don't overdo it. <b>mapaN-un</b>
<i>a</i> characterized with assiduous work or effort.
<i>Nagpúlaw siya sa mapanglimbasúgun
nga tingúhà sa paglampus,</i> He works till
late at night in his ardent desire for success.

<p><b>limbatiánun</b> (from <i>bátì<hi rend=sub>1</i></i>) <i>a</i> @heartfelt, @{with
feeling} (literary). <i>Gugmang limbatiánun,</i>
Deeply-felt love.

<p><b>limbáun</b> = <sc>LIMBÁHUN</sc>.

<p><b>*limbáwut paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b4] for hair to stand
on end, get goose bumps. <i>Nanglimbáwut
ákung balhíbu pagkadungug nákù sa isturya,</i>
My hair stood on end when I heard the
story.

<p><b>limbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> whirling current of wind. <i>Nadala
sa limbu ang mga dáhung layà,</i> The dry
leaves were whirled about in the wind. <b>2</b>
place between heaven and hell to which
unbaptized children are consigned. <b>3</b> <b>sa &mdash;</b>
be up on the air, not certain. <i>Túa pa sa limbu
ang ámung plánu,</i> Our plans are still up
in the air. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P] for the wind to whirl
around. <b>2</b> [A; c1] be blown about in the
<pb n=1255>air. <i>Mulimbu ang asu ug huypun sa hángin,</i>
Smoke moves rapidly through the air when
the wind blows it. <i>Milimbu ang tabánug nga
nakabugtù sa tugut,</i> The kite soared when
its string broke.

<p><b>limbúkad</b> = <sc>ALIMBÚKAD</sc>.

<p><b>limbung</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @cheat, @deceive. <i>Ása gud
nà siya mulimbung (manglimbung) nákù!</i>
He would never cheat me! <i>Dílì ku makalimbung
(makapanglimbung) sa paghigugma
nímu,</i> I cannot commit deception by pretending
to love you. <i>Gilimbúngan mu aku
sa pag-undang mu ug iskuyla,</i> You deceived
me when you stopped attending school. <i>n</i>
action of cheating, deceiving. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> inclined
to cheat or defraud. <i>Dílì ku makigdúlà
nímu kay limbungan kaáyu ka,</i> I will not
play with you because you cheat. <b>2</b> giving
the illusion of being taller than it really is.
<i>Limbungan ang babáyi nga naghayhil,</i> The
woman gives the impression of being taller
than she is because she is wearing high heels.
ma-un a deceptive. <i>Dílì ku mamátì sa íyang
malimbúngun nga mga sáad,</i> I will not listen
to his deceptive promises. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @deception.

<p><b>limbu rak</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. dance, the limbo rock. <i>v</i>
[A] dance the limbo rock.

<p><b>limbuwad</b>, <b>limbúwad</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; c] fall headlong,
topple over; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Milimbúwad
(nalimbúwad) ang kaang paghángin,</i>
The flower pot toppled over in the wind.
<i>Gilimbúwad ni Buy ang lamísa sa íyang kasukù,</i>
Boy toppled the table over in his anger.

<p><b>limbúyuk</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be in chaotic confusion.
<i>Nalimbúyuk ning ákung kaisípan sa túmang
kalíbug,</i> My mind is whirling in confusion.

<p><b>límin</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b] wrap cloth around the
body, @swaddle. <i>Lanahi ang pinútì unyà limíni
ug lampin,</i> Put oil on the bolo then wrap
it up in a diaper. <i>Dinhay masúsu nga gilimínan
ug mga nuug,</i> There was an infant that
was swaddled in rags. <b>2</b> [A; b6] pervade, envelop
as if to cover entirely. <i>Kangitngit nga
milímin sa kasilingánan,</i> Darkness that enveloped
the neighborhood. <i>Ang íyang pagbátì
nákù gilimínan sa mga duhadúha,</i> Doubt
pervades her feelings toward me.

<p><b>liminlimin</b> <i>v</i> [B6; c1] be all jumbled, thrown
together without order. <i>Muliminlimin (maliminlimin)
nang búla sa hílu ug dì nímu baátan,</i>
Those pieces of string will get all tangled
up if you don't tie them together. <i>Ákung
liminliminun (iliminlimin) ang mga
bulingun,</i> I'll throw the dirty clothes in a
bunch.

<p><b>límis</b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b5] <b>1</b> @wrap, @envelop. <i>Nagkinahanglan
kug dakung papil nga makalímis
<pb n=1256>(makapalímis) niíning kartun,</i> I need a large
sheet of paper to wrap this box in. <i>Limísa
(limísi) sa tualya ang bátà ighumag kalígù,</i>
Wrap the child in a towel after his bath. <i>Duha
ka makusgánung buktun ang gilímis kaníya,</i>
Two strong arms embraced her. <b>2</b> envelop
completely with. <i>Nangamátay ang
mga tanum kay nalímis (nalimisan) sa mga
sagbut,</i> The plants died when they were
completely covered with weeds. <b>3</b> shower
with affection. <i>Gilímis (gilimísan) ku níyag
hawuk,</i> She smothered me with kisses.

<p><b>limitar</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] put a limit to. <i>Gilimitahan
níya ang úras sa pagbisíta,</i> She put a limit
to the visiting hours. <b>limitádu</b> <i>a</i> given in insufficient
amounts, limited. <i>Ang pagkáun
limitádu kaáyu sa kasirahan,</i> They serve an
insufficient amount of food in the boarding
house. <i>v</i> [B1256] be limited.

<p><b>limiti</b> <i>n</i> limit. <i>Way limiti ug pilay ímung gustung
dad-un,</i> There is no limit to how many
you may take. <i>v</i> [A; b6] set limits. <i>Dílì ku
mulimiti sa ímung pagkáun,</i> I will set no
limits as to how much you may eat.

<p><b>limpangug</b> (from <i>pangug</i>) <i>a</i> silly, stupid; lacking
good judgment or common sense. <i>Ayaw
na lang pagsalig nga matúman ang tanan
mung súgù, limpangug kaáyu nang tawhána,</i>
Don't expect that man to carry out your
instructions properly, he is so stupid.

<p><b>limpísa</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] clean a mechanism. <i>Kamau
kang mulimpísa ug karburadur sa awtu?</i> Do
you know how to clean the carburator of a
car? <i>Limpisáhi ang pitrumaks arun musíga,</i>
Clean the pressure lantern so it will light. <i>n</i>
cleaning of mechanical equipment.

<p><b>limpiya</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] polish shoes. <i>Nagkabítun
ang ákung kamut kay naglimpiya ku sa ákung
sapátus,</i> My hands have shoe polish
on them because I was polishing my shoes.
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> shoeshining as a business. <i>Kusug ang
limpiya gikang mag-uwan,</i> After it rains we
get plenty of business shining shoes. <b>2</b> materials
for shining shoes. <b>way</b> &mdash; badly
needing a shine. <i>Way limpiya ang ímung
sapátus,</i> Your shoes need a shine. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i>
[A2; b6] polish shoes for a living. <i>n</i> occupation
of shining shoes. <b>&mdash; bútas</b> <i>n</i> bootblack.
<b>mag-l-, maN-l-</b> <i>n</i> bootblack.

<p><b>limpiyáda</b> <i>a</i> for a woman to be neat and clean
in her ways. <i>Hinlù ílang báy kay ang inahan
limpiyáda,</i> Their house is clean because the
mother is a demon for cleanliness. <i>v</i> [B1]
be habitually neat and clean.

<p><b>limpiyu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> clean, devoid of dirt, sanitary.
<i>Limpiyu kaáyu ang salug run,</i> The floor is
very clean today. <i>Limpiyu ang ristawran
nga ámung gikan-an,</i> The restaurant we ate
<pb n=1257>in is sanitary. <b>1a</b> clean, without VD. <b>2</b> clear,
unsullied. <i>Limpiyu ku ug kunsinsiya kay
wà kuy salà,</i> I have a clear conscience because
I am not guilty. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> action of cleaning.
<i>Kahúgaw, way limpiyu,</i> How dirty it is!
No one cleaned it! <b>2</b> clean clothes. <i>Wà kuy
limpiyu isimba,</i> I have no clean clothes to
wear to church. <b>3</b> amount gained clear. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[AB; ab] clean, rid s.t. of dirt, become
clean. <i>Hugáwan siyang mulimpiyu sa kasilyas,</i>
He thinks cleaning the toilet is dirty.
<i>Malimpiyu ra nang kasilyas ug nía ku,</i> The
only time that toilet is clean is when I'm
around to watch you. <i>Limpiyúhun nátù ang
átung trabáhu arun dílì ta maúlaw,</i> Let us
do a clean job of our work so we won't be
put to embarrassment. <i>Limpiyúhi ang kusína,</i>
Clean the kitchen. <b>2</b> [A2, a12] make a
net gain or income. <i>Nakalimpiyu kug kinsi
sa ákung pamaráda karun,</i> I netted fifteen
pesos in my driving today. <b>ig-l-</b> <i>n</i> thing used
in cleaning. <b>mag-l-</b> <i>n</i> one who cleans.

<p><b>limu</b> <i>n</i> magical practices used to help a baby
go through his various stages of development
easily and successfully or to cure a
grown person of a bad characteristic or to
get rid of s.t. undesirable that is s.w. These
practices may consist of having the baby or
the afflicted adult perform an action analogous
to the actions one wishes to develop or
stop or may consist of special foods or potions
together with magic words. <i>Ang limu
sa bátang magngipun, ang lagus pahírag tái,</i>
The ritual for a child that is teething: feces
are rubbed on his gums. <i>v</i> [A; a] treat with
<i>limu. Limuha ug sagu ang palaínum nímung
bána,</i> Mix a dead man's saliva into your
husband's drink to stop his vice.

<p><b>limù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] hide, keep s.t. a secret. <i>Naglimù
ba ku nímu sa ákung makítà?</i> Do I hide
my earnings from you? <i>Sa prubinsiya dì ka
makalimù bisan gamayng sikrítu,</i> In the
country you cannot keep the tiniest secret.
<i>Ayaw ilimù sa ímung ginikánan ang ímung
prublíma,</i> Do not keep your problems from
your parents.

<p><b>limud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] deny, conceal s.t. upon being
confronted. <i>Mulimud ka pa giyud nga kláru
man ang pruyba!</i> You still dare to conceal
it when the evidence is so clear! <i>Ayaw ug
ilimud ang ímung pag-anhi,</i> Don't deny that
you came here. <b>malimdánun</b> <i>a</i> given to denying
or concealing the truth when confronted.

<p><b>limugmug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c1] rinse the mouth out.
<i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug) giyud ku human
ug káun,</i> I rinse my mouth after I eat.
<b>1a</b> [A; b] slosh water around in the mouth
<pb n=1258>to warm it and spit it out on s.t. to bathe it.
<i>Limugmúgi ang sunuy matag buntag,</i> Bathe
the cock every morning with water you
slosh around in your mouth. <b>2</b> [AP; a] take
a drink of liquor, usually in a large gulp
(humorous slang). <i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug)
siyag usa ka básung tubà,</i> He will gulp
down a glass of toddy. <b>3</b> [c] be unconcerned
about s.t. s.o. says or s.t. embarrassing
that happens. <i>Way kapuslánan ang kasábà,
gilimugmug lang,</i> No use scolding him. It
runs off him like water off a duck's back.
(Lit. He just gargles with it.) <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the
oral cavity. <b>1a</b> by extension, the throat. <b>2</b>
the outside of this area: the cheeks, including
the lower part of the jaw and the base
of the ear. <b>3</b> the place in a monkey's mouth
where he stores food.

<p><b>*limúhag ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> knowledge of how to do
s.t. <i>Ayaw ku ug paayúha ug makina kay wà
kuy kalimuhágan ánang mga butánga,</i> Don't
ask me to repair engines because I have no
knowledge of that sort of thing. <b>2</b> knowledge
about or of what a thing is. <i>Manukutsukut
ta sa mangingisdà arun makabatun
tag kalimuhágan sa mga isdà,</i> Let's ask the
fishermen so we can learn s.t. about fishes.

<p><b>limúk</b> <i>v</i> [A2N; b6] give a look of anger or
disgust with pursed lips, and make a humming
sound. <i>Milimúk (nanlimúk) siya nákù
kay wà man nákù pakapíha,</i> She gave me a
sour look because I did not allow her to
copy my work. <i>Íya kung gilimúkan, mu rag
nakasalà ku níya,</i> She gave me a look of disgust,
as if I had offended her.

<p><b>limukun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible shellfish of the depths,
finned and similar to a crab, but without
claws.

<p><b>limúkun</b> = <b>ALIMÚKUN.</b>

<p><b>limulímu</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] hide, withhold s.t. from
s.o. that he ought to know. <i>Kusug siyang
mulimulímu sa íyang kalihúkan sa íyang bána,</i>
She is fond of keeping her activities
from her husband. <i>Gilimulímu níla sa ílang
inahan ang kamatáyun sa ílang igsúun,</i> They
concealed their brother's death from their
mother.

<p><b>limun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hard candies.

<p><b>límun</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] roll and wrap s.t. up to conceal
it, facilitate disposal, carrying, and the
like. <i>Limúni (limúna) ang mga bulingun sa
hábul,</i> Wrap the dirty clothes in the blanket.

<p><b>limunáda</b> <i>n</i> lemonade, usually made of calamondin
juice <i>(limunsítu). v</i> [A13; a12]
make lemonade. &mdash; <b>ruhi</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. purgative
for children, prepared under physician's
prescription and taken hot.

<p><b>limunglímung</b> = <b>LIMULÍMU.</b>

<pb n=1259>

<p><b>limunsítu, limunsítus</b> <i>n</i> calamondin, a small
citrus tree bearing small, round, acid fruit,
orange-colored when ripe, with an easily
separable peel. It is the most widely sold
sour citrus: <b><i>Citrus microcarpa.</i></b>

<p><b>limuruk, limúruk</b> = <b>LAMURUK.</b>

<p><b>limus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> alms. <b>2</b> a voluntary contribution
to the family of a person who died. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
<b>1</b> give alms or a voluntary contribution
to the family of a person who died. <i>Mulimus
giyud ta inigdúaw sa namatyan,</i> We
ought to give a little s.t. when we visit the
family of the deceased. <i>Limusi ang makililímus
nga buta,</i> Give alms to the blind beggar.
<b>2</b> give s.t. of great value to the recipient but
of little value to the owner. <i>Intáwun, Kurdaping.
Anus-a pa man ku nímu limsig pahíyum?</i>
Have pity, Cordaping. When will you
bestow a smile on me? <b>3</b> give s.t. of little
value, but unwillingly. <i>Ug dì níya bayran
tung dus, ilimus na lang tu,</i> If he doesn't
give me my two pesos back, forget it. I'll
write it off as charity. <b>paki-</b> <i>v</i> [A] go begging
for alms. <i>Magpakilimus na lang ta ug
wà nay mahímù,</i> We'll have to go begging if
there's no other way. <b>linimsan</b> <i>n</i> amount
collected by begging. <b>maka-r-(<-), maki-r-(<-),
paki-r-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> beggar.

<p><b>límut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B123S6; b8] forget. <i>Nalímut ku
sa átung sábut,</i> I forgot our appointment.
<i>Uy, nakalimut ka ug butúnis sa ímung karsúnis!</i>
Hey! You forgot to button your
pants! <i>Nalimtan nákù ag[**typo: ang] ákung pitáka!</i> I
forgot my wallet! <i>Kalimti ang nangági kanátù,</i>
Forget what happened between us.
<i>Dílì ku kalimtan tung nawnga bísan ug ása,</i>
I will not forget that face anywhere. <b>2</b> [B126]
lose consciousness. <i>Nalímut ku pagkapangkà
sa ákung úlu,</i> I got unconscious
when my head bumped into s.t. <b>3</b> = <b>LIMUT,</b>
<i>v.</i> <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> anesthetic. <b>2</b> k.o. antidote to
make s.o. stop a vice. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> give general
anesthesia. <i>Dílì mulímut ang dukt&ucaron;r ug
dúnay sakit sa kasingkásing,</i> A doctor won't
administer anesthesia to s.o. with a heart
disease. <i>Unsay ilimut sa bátang palaihì magabíi?</i>
What antidote shall we use on a child
that wets his bed? <b>2</b> hypnotize, dazzle s.o.
to make him lose his sense of reason or see
things in a different way. <i>Ingkantu ang milimut
(naglimut) kaníya,</i> An enchanted being
led him into a different world. <i>Limutun
ka sa íyang katahum,</i> You will be dazzled
by her beauty. <b>limutlímut</b> <i>v</i> [b6] forget s.t.
at every occasion. <i>Íyang gilimutlimútan ug
úlì ang bumba sa ligid,</i> He forgets to return
the air pump every time. <b>hika-/haka-(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[B1256; b8] happen to forget. <i>Nahikalimut
<pb n=1260>siya pagpalit ug sibúyas,</i> She forgot to buy
onions. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [b1] <b>1</b> lose consciousness.
<b>2</b> lose control of oneself. <i>Gipanlimútan siyang
misagpà sa íyang asáwa,</i> He lost control
of himself and hit his wife. <b>-a(<-)</b> how very
forgetful. <i>Labihan nákung limúta uy!</i> Jesus,
how forgetful I am! <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> action of forgetting
s.t. <i>Way nagtuun sa kalímut,</i> No one
learns how to forget. (You're born with that
knowledge.) <b>ma-un, malimtánun, manggilimtánun,
limtánun</b> <i>a</i> forgetful. <i>v</i> [B12]
become forgetful. <b>pa-</b> = <b>LIMUT,</b> <i>n.</i>

<p><b>limúut</b> = <b>ALIMÚUT.</b>

<p><b>línà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; a12] collect toddy before
the normal time to gather it, most usually
take the toddy in the evening instead of the
following morning. <i>Maglínà ku sa dawat kay
gustu kung muinum ug tam-is nga tubà,</i> I
will take the toddy this evening because I
want to drink sweet palm toddy. <i>Lináa ang
tubà arun tam-is,</i> Gather the palm toddy
early so that it will be sweet. <b>2</b> [A; a1] restore
s.o.'s health by drinking fresh unfermented
coconut toddy. <i>Gilínà ang bátà kay
luyahun,</i> The child was given fresh toddy as
a tonic because he was so weak. n sweet
palm toddy. <b>(->)</b> = <b>LÍNÀ,</b> <i>n.</i>

<p><b>*línà<hi rend=sub>2</i> pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a process of purification in
folk medicine whereby some evil or bad effect
is removed by exposing the victim to
magical smoke, obtained from certain plants
and compounds. <b>2</b> the material burned in
the process of <i>palínà. v</i> [A; b6(1)] administer
this treatment. <i>Gipalináan ug sagbut sa
mintiryu ang gilubatan,</i> She became ill after
attending a funeral and was treated with
smoke from plants taken from the cemetery.

<p><b>línab</b> <i>n</i> woman born with a very narrow or
no vaginal opening.

<p><b>línaw<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> calm, free of agitation. <i>Línaw ang
dágat,</i> The sea is calm. <b>2</b> calm, free from
excitement. <i>Línaw átung hunàhúnà ug walà
tay mga suliran,</i> Your mind is calm if
you don't have problems. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2S; b4(1)]
be, become calm. <i>Naglínaw ang panahun,</i>
The weather is calm. <i>Dúgay ming naabut
kay nalináwan ang sakayan,</i> We arrived late
because the boat was becalmed. <b>2</b> [B1; a12]
be calm, undisturbed. <i>Dílì maglínaw ang ímung
tanlag,</i> Your conscience will not be
at peace. <i>Lináwa ang ímung kaugalíngun,
ayaw ug katarantar,</i> Compose yourself.
Don't panic. <i>n</i> peace, calm. <i>Walay línaw
ning panimuyúa,</i> The way we're living, there
is no peace and quiet. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> calmly,
peacefully. <i>Malináwun siya nga namatay,</i>
He died calmly. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> = <b>LÍNAW,</b> <i>n.</i>

<pb n=1261>

<p><b>línaw<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> pool, lake. <i>v</i> [A; b6] form into a
pool, pond, or lake. <i>Mulínaw ang túbig sa
sílung ug kusug ang ulan,</i> A lake forms under
our house when it rains hard.

<p><b>lindag</b> <i>v</i> [B456] toss about restlessly in bed.
<i>Naglindag ku sa higdaánan gabíi, wà giyud
kung katulug,</i> I didn't sleep the whole night
last night. I just kept tossing around in bed.

<p><b>lindug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> unbranching trunk of a tree. <i>Lindug
sa lubi,</i> The trunk of a coconut tree. <b>1a</b>
column in a building. <b>2</b> column in a newspaper
or journal. <i>Lindug sa mga bálak,</i>
Poetry section. <b>3</b> warp threads. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i>
columnist.

<p><b>linga, línga</b> (from <i>alinga</i>) <i>a</i> inattentive due
to preoccupation with s.t. else. <i>Balikbalíka
pag-isplikar kay linga kaáyu,</i> Repeat your
explanation because he is very inattentive.
<i>n</i> preoccupation that keeps one from concentrating.
<i>Dì siya makatrabáhu kay daghan
siyag linga,</i> He can't do work because he has
lots of other things to think about. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B12; b3]
be inattentive. <i>Wà kung kabantay
pag-ági níya. Nalinga lang ku,</i> I didn't see
her go by. I wasn't paying attention. <i>Subrang
dúwà ang nalingahan ánang batáa,</i>
The child has nothing but play on his mind
and thus is inattentive. <b>2</b> [A12; a] hold
one's attention. <i>Nalinga kug tan-aw sa lamígas
nga nanag-áway,</i> I was amused watching
the ants fighting each other. <i>Lingaha ang
gwardiya kay muipsut ku sa píkas,</i> Keep
the guard occupied because I will slip
through the other side. <b>3</b> [B1256] be so
occupied. <i>Ang tindíra nalinga ug paninsíyu,</i>
The salesgirl was so busy she couldn't make
change properly. <b>maka-r-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> being easily
diverted, distracted. <i>Pangidad nga makalilínga,</i>
Age at which one has a short attention
span.

<p><b>língab</b> <i>a</i> having the congenital defect of a
narrow or no vaginal opening.

<p><b>lingabngab</b> <i>n</i> yawn. <i>v</i> [AN2] yawn. <i>Mulingabngab
(manglingabngab) lang ku ug katulgun
na ku,</i> I yawn when I feel sleepy.

<p><b>lingag</b> <i>a</i> lacking concentration, preoccupied
with many other things so as to make stupid
mistakes. <i>Lingag man maung bisag kurik
girúngan,</i> She is so careless. She marked
correct answers wrong. <i>Wà siya makatúman
sa túgun kay lingag man,</i> She didn't do what
she was told because she was careless. <i>v</i> [B1]
be, become careless, preoccupied with
other distracting activities. <i>Nagkalingag na
ning draybir námù. Sígi na lang makabanggà,</i>
Our chauffeur is getting careless. He
keeps having accidents.

<p><b>lingagngag</b> = <b>ALINGAGNGAG.</b>

<pb n=1262>

<p><b>lingas</b> <i>a</i> unable to keep still but moving
about all the time instead. <i>Lingas kaáyu
ning batáa, dì mahimutang,</i> This boy is always
moving about, he can't keep still. <i>v</i>
[B; b6] be moving about always and not
keeping still.

<p><b>língat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB24] for the eyes to rove, move
the eyes. <i>Milíngat lang ang íyang mata pagsúd
níya sa palasyu,</i> Her eyes popped out
of her head when she went in the palace.
<i>Naglíngat siya sa simbahan,</i> She looked around
at the people in the church. <b>2</b> [A]
behave badly, wildly when one is in a place
where formal behavior is expected. <i>Mulíngat
lang ning mga bátà kung túa sa láing báy,</i>
My children act wild when they are in other
people's houses. <i>Naglíngat lang siya didtu
sa baylihan kay hubug man,</i> He acted wildly
at the dance because he was drunk. <b>(->)</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> careless, not paying attention to what
one is about. <i>Hibyaan níya ang bág kay lingat
man,</i> She left her bag because she was
careless. <b>2</b> failing to behave modestly and
composed in a place where one is expected
to be on one's good behavior. <i>v</i> [B12; b6]
be, become careless. <i>Nalingat siya kay giapura,</i>
She was careless because she was
rushed.

<p><b>lingátung</b> <i>n</i> shrub or small tree having numerous
stinging hairs, with magical uses to drive
<i>unglù</i> away: <b><i>Laportea brunnea.</i></b> <i>v</i> [b4(1)]
get the stinging hairs of this plant on one.

<p><b>lingaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] attract one's interest or
attention. <i>Ákung lingawun si Máma ug ikay
kúhà sa dulsi,</i> I'll keep Mom's attention
while you get the candy. <b>2</b> [A2; a12] entertain,
amuse. <i>Ang íyang kumidiya dílì makalingaw
nákù,</i> His jokes don't amuse me. <i>Nalingaw
ang bátà ug panakup ug apan,</i> The
child is amused, occupying himself with
catching grasshoppers. <i>n</i> thing to keep oneself
busy with. <i>Ug wà kay lingaw, pagtuun,</i>
If you don't have anything to do, you
could study. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A3; b6] do s.t. in one's
spare time, spend one's time doing s.t. <i>Samtang
nagpaábut ku, magkalingaw kug bása,</i>
While I am waiting, I will pass the time reading.
<b>lingawlíngaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] amuse, divert
oneself. <i>Human sa trabáhu, maglingawlíngaw
mi,</i> After work we amuse ourselves. <b>2</b>
[A13; b6] spend one's spare time doing s.t.
<i>Human dáyun ni kay ákung lingawlingáwan
ug pintal human sa trabáhu,</i> It won't take
long to get done painting because I'll do it
in my spare time after work. <i>n</i> recreation,
amusement. <i>Álang kaníya ang panulat usa
ka lingawlíngaw,</i> For him writing is a form
of relaxation. <b>palingawlíngaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6]
<pb n=1263>pretend to be occupied or engrossed with
s.t. to avoid confronting an embarrassing
situation. <i>Nainsultuhan gud siya piru nagpalingawlíngaw
lag hinábì sa uban,</i> She felt
insulted but she just pretended to be engrossed
in her conversation with other people.
<b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> amusement. <i>Sa karnabalan
daghang kalingáwan,</i> In the fair grounds
there are lots of amusements. <b>maka-r-(<-)</b> <i>a</i>
affording amusement.

<p><b>lingay, língay</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for the sun to move
beyond the zenith and the shadows to
lengthen in the afternoon. <i>Milingay na ang
adlaw ug wà pa sila makapaniudtu,</i> The sun
has moved beyond the zenith and they still
have not taken their lunch. <i>Nakalingay ang
anínu sa lubi gíkan sa kural apan ang aláyun
wà pa makasúgud,</i> The shadow of the
coconut tree has moved beyond the fence,
but the work bee has not yet started.

<p><b>lingbas</b> <i>n</i> file. — <b>nga língin</b> rattail file. &mdash; <b>nga
mídiya língin</b> half-round file. &mdash; <b>nga tris kantus</b>
triangular file. <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> file s.t. down,
off. <b>2</b> make, make into a file. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> filings.
<b>-in-an</b> <i>a</i> for the voice to be cutting and
sharp. <i>Gitubag ku níya sa usa ka tíngug nga
linimbásan,[**note: ng -> m]</i> She answered me in a sharp
and cutting voice.

<p><b>lingbáhun</b> = <b>LIMBÁHUN.</b>

<p><b>linggà</b> <i>v</i> [B6; a12] for boats to roll. <i>Pag-ági
sa barku gilinggà ang sakayan,</i> The fishing
boat rolled in the wake of the ship.

<p><b>linggalingga</b> <i>v</i> [A; c16] rock a vessel or vehicle
from side to side. <i>Ayawg linggalinggáha
ang búti kay mayabu,</i> Don't rock the life
boat. It might overturn.

<p><b>linggánay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> church bell. <b>2</b> ringing of church
bells. <i>v</i> [A] for church bells to ring. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i>
bell tower.

<p><b>linggawas</b> = <b>LINGKAWAS.</b>

<p><b>linggíru</b> <i>n</i> k.o. soldierfish.

<p><b>linggúkud</b> <i>n</i> the young of the <i>agápang</i> (k.o.
mullet).

<p><b>lingguwáhi</b> <i>n</i> language.

<p><b>lingguwista</b> <i>n</i> linguist. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become
a linguist.

<p><b>lingguwita</b> = <b>LANGGÍTA.</b>

<p><b>linghud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> immature plants. <i>Aslum ang
manggang linghud pa,</i> Mangoes are very
sour when they are young. <i>Dílì maáyung
isugnud ang linghud káhuy,</i> Green wood is
no good for fuel. <b>2</b> young and immature.
<i>Ang linghud níyang pangísip,</i> His immature
mind. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> state or condition of being
young and immature.

<p><b>língì</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3S; a2b2] turn one's head to the
side to look back. <i>Milíngì siya nákù,</i> He
looked back at me. <i>Ayaw siyag lingía,</i> Don't
<pb n=1264>turn to look at him. <b>2</b> [A2S; a12] give s.t.
the attention it requires. <i>Ayawg ipanugal
ímung kítà, lingía usab ang ímung mga anak,</i>
Don't gamble away your earnings. You have
your children to think of. <b>2a</b> [A23; a12]
pay attention to s.t., recognize its existence.
<i>Karun nga dátù na siya dílì na ta lingíun níya,</i>
Now that he is rich, he will not take
notice of us. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep looking
back. <i>Nagpanglingì ku sa pagtan-aw ug
náa bay nagsunud,</i> I kept looking back to
see if anyone was following us.

<p><b>lingig</b> <i>v</i> 1 [A; b6] bend the teeth of a saw
alternately to the side to widen the kerf
and to prevent sticking. <i>Lingigi ang gabas
arun dakug ági,</i> Twist the teeth on your saw
so it will have a wide kerf. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] get
one's neck twisted. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> saw set, tool to give
set to saw teeth. <b>2</b> set, the amount of bend
imparted to saw teeth. <i>a</i> for the neck to be
twisted to one side. <i>Mau ra nà siyag kanúnayng
maglingì kay lingig man,</i> He looks
like he is always looking to the side because
he has a twisted neck.

<p><b>língin</b> <i>a</i> round, circular. <i>Língin kaáyu ang
singsing (búla),</i> The ring (ball) is round. &mdash;
<b>ang búla</b> still in the running, all is not lost.
<i>Língin pa ang búla, puydi pag mabawì nákù
sa paynals ang ákung grádu,</i> I still have a
chance. Maybe I can make up for my failing
grade in the finals. <i>n</i> money (slang). <i>v</i> [AB2S; a]
form a circle or sphere, cause s.t. to
do so. <i>Naglíngin ku áring tabla pára ligid sa
duláan,</i> I am cutting this board into a circle
as a wheel for the toy. <i>Ang naglíngin níyang
mata,</i> Her round eyes. <i>Lingína ang bulabúla,</i>
Form the meat into little balls. <i>Lingíni
sa tungà ug human, gabsa ang tungà,</i> Make
a circle in the middle and then saw out the
middle portion. <i>n</i> circle. <b>-g-</b> = <b>LÍNGIN,</b> <i>a</i>
(plural). <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> round. <b>2 disgrasyang ma-</b>
a most unlikely misfortune which nevertheless
takes place, though the victim does not
deserve it. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> roundish.

<p><b>lingiw</b> <i>v</i> [A2] look away. <i>Mulingiw siya ug
ákung tan-áwun kay sad-an man siya,</i> He
looks away when I look at him because he's
guilty. <i>Ígù lang ku nga nakalingiw kay dì ku
kaagwanta ug tan-aw,</i> All I could do was
look away because I couldn't stand to look
at him.

<p><b>lingka</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] uproot vines to clear a place.
<i>Lingkáhun námù ning kamutihána kay tumus
na,</i> We'll uproot this sweet potato
patch because the potatoes have all been
gathered.

<p><b>lingkáang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B46N] for plants to spread
out. <i>Milingkáang (nanglingkáang) ang lambáyung 
<pb n=1265>sa baybáyun,</i> The vines spread out
over the beach. <i>Dákit nga naglingkáang ang
mga sanga,</i> A spreading banyan tree. <b>2</b> [BN; a1]
for parts of the body to spread like a
plant. <i>Tiil nga nanglingkáang kay dúgay nga
wà kasapatúsi,</i> Spreading feet that hadn't
worn shoes in ages. <i>Lingkaángun (ilingkáang)
sa pábu ang íyang balhíbu ug duúlun,</i>
A turkey will puff itself up if you get near
it. <b>2a</b> for the ears or hair to stand up upon
feeling an emotion. <i>Nanlingkáang ang íyang
dawunggan pagkadungug sa isturya,</i> Her
ears stood up when she heard the story.
<i>Hutwang sa irù nga makalingkáang sa balhíbu,</i>
The howling of a dog that can make
your hair stand on end.

<p><b>lingkag</b> <i>a</i> having ears that stick out sidewards.
<i>Lingkag kaáyug dalunggan ang kuníhu,</i> Rabbits
have ears that stick out. <i>v</i> [B2] for the
ears to prick up, esp. in surprise. <i>Nalingkag
ang íyang dalunggan pagkadungug sa íyang
ngálan,</i> His ears pricked up when he heard
his name.

<p><b>lingkálang</b> = <sc>LINGKÁANG</sc>.

<p><b>lingkáng</b> = <sc>LINGKÁANG</sc>.

<p><b>lingkas</b> = <sc>LINGKA</sc>.

<p><b>lingkawas</b> <i>v</i> [APB3(1); b6] @escape. <i>Kinsay
mulingkawas (mupalingkawas) nátù niíning
kalisud?</i> Who will save us from our poverty?
<i>Mulingkawas siyag dúnay buluhátun,</i> He
escapes when there is work to do. <i>Dílì ka
makalingkawas sa sílut sa kamatáyun,</i> You
cannot escape the death penalty.

<p><b>lingkit</b> <i>a</i> for two things to be joined along
their lengths. <i>Ang lingkit nga ságing isípung
usa,</i> They count two bananas joined together
as one. <i>Lingkit ang pán nga grasyúsa,</i>
The graciosa bread comes linked. <b>bátà</b>, <b>kalúha
nga &mdash;</b> @{Siamese twins}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126C3; b6]
be joined along the lengths. <b>2</b> [A; c1] tie
two or more coconuts together by joining
them with a small piece of husk slashed
from each of them.

<p><b>lingkúbaw</b> = <sc>LINTÚBAW</sc>.

<p><b>lingkud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6(1)] @{sit down}. <i>Ayaw ug
lingkúri nang syáha kay basà pa ang pintal,</i>
Don't sit on that chair because the paint is
still wet. <i>Ayaw ug ilingkud nang ímung bag-ung
inutaw nga karsúnis kay malum-it,</i> Do
not sit down in your newly pressed pants
because they will get crumpled. <b>2</b> [A; b6]
assume, @{hold office} or position. <i>Mulingkud
siya pagkaprisidinti sa kumpaníya ugmà,</i>
He will assume office as president of the
company tomorrow. <b>3</b> [b(1)] sit to give
serious, full time and attention to a piece
of work. <i>Kinahanglang lingkúran ning trabahúa,</i>
This work must be given full time
<pb n=1266>and attention. <b>4</b> [A] for a coconut to grow
to the stage that its trunk shows. <i>Sa duha
ka tuig dílì pa mulingkud ang lubi,</i> At two
years the coconut still does not show its
trunk. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [a3] fall down into a sitting
position. <i>Nahisabiklan ku sa táwu ug napalingkud
ku sa bangkù,</i> The man bumped
into me and I fell down in a sitting position
on the bench. <b>lingkuránan</b> <i>n</i> @seat, @chair,
@bench. <b>lingkurun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> for an occupation to
be sedentary. <b>2</b> the bride's family and guests
at a wedding party (who sit and are served
as opposed to the groom's friends and relatives,
the <i>tindugun</i>, who do the work). <b>pina-</b>
<i>n</i> made to sit down. <b>pina- sa urinúla</b>
toilet trained. <i>Ang bátà nga pinalingkud sa
urinúla dílì mangíhì sa salug,</i> The child that
is toilet trained doesn't urinate on the
floor.

<p><b>lingkung</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long to be bent so that
the middle part is higher than either end.
<i>Lingkung kaáyu ning sundánga,</i> This bolo
has a good curve. <i>Lingkung ang íyang buktun.
Dì matuy-ud,</i> He has a bent arm. It
won't straighten out any longer. <i>Lingkung
siyag tiil ug mag-untul-untul siyang maglakaw,</i>
He is club-footed and he walks with a
bounce. <i>v</i> [B126] come out curved.

<p><b>lingkús</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] for s.t. long to curl up or
come out in knotted form. <i>Mulingkús ang
písì ug madúgay nang gámit,</i> The rope will
curl up if it is used for a long time. <i>Nagkalingkús
na ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga naláyà
na,</i> The tobacco leaves are curling up
now that they are withering.

<p><b>lingla</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] @deceive. <i>Milingla siya
nákù pag-ingun nga ulitáwu siya,</i> He deceived
me by saying he was a bachelor. <i>Gilingla
ku níya sa pagpasugut sa kuntrátu,</i>
He deceived me into accepting the contract.
<b>2</b> [A; a1] divert one's attention to achieve
one's purpose. <i>Akuy mulingla sa tindíra arun
makúhà nímu ang sigarilyu,</i> I'll divert
the storekeeper's attention while you filch
the cigarettes. <i>n</i> @deceit. <b>malingláhun</b> <i>a</i> @deceitful.

<p><b>lingling</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a2] @peep. <i>Linglíngun ta ka
inigkalígù nímu,</i> I'll peep at you when you
take a bath.

<p><b>lingù</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] shake one's head to say no
or in hopelessness or resignation. <i>Dílì tingáli
siya musugut kay milingù tu siya,</i> He
probably won't agree because he shook his
head. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A] keep shaking the head in
hopelessness and resignation. <i>Nagpanglingù
ang párì nga nagtan-aw sa nanagparisparis
didtu sa plása,</i> The priest shook his head as
he looked at the people paired off in the
<pb n=1267>park.

<p><b>linguglingug</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b(1)P] @ignore s.t. by pretending
not to hear; pay no attention to
s.t. <i>Gilinguglingugan man lang nímu ang ákung
gipangáyù,</i> You just pretend not to
hear when I ask you for s.t. <i>Bisag unsáun
nákug tambag mulinguglingug (mupalinguglingug)
lang,</i> No matter how much I advise
her, she pays no attention.

<p><b>lingugngug</b> = <sc>ALINGUGNGUG</sc>.

<p><b>ling-un</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a @{small area}. <i>Ling-ung gitamnag
mais,</i> A parcel planted to corn. <b>2</b>
mass of people in a certain area. <i>Ang ling-un
sa mga katawhan sa plása,</i> The mass of
people in the square. <b>2a</b> a group of people,
@{social class}. <i>Ling-un sa mga timáwà,</i> The
poorest classes.

<p><b>linimintu</b> <i>n</i> @liniment. <i>v</i> [b6] apply liniment
to s.t. <i>Linimintuhi ang pamául mu,</i> Apply
liniment on your sore muscles.

<p><b>línin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{linen cloth}. <b>2</b> stationery having a
linen finish. <b>swis &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fine cloth.

<p><b>línis<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23B2; a12] @melt, @{wear down} or
@{eat away}. <i>Ang ayis krim dalì mulínis sa ínit,</i>
The ice cream will melt rapidly in the sun.
<i>Nagkalinis ang kutsilyu pagbináid,</i> The knife
is being worn down from being sharpened
so often. <i>Linísa sa túbig ang tablítas,</i> Dissolve
the tablets in water. <b>2</b> [A123; a3b4(1)]
@digest food eaten. <i>Wà malínis ang ákung kináun,
What I ate did not dissolve.</i> <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i>
@{worn down}.

<p><b>línis<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; b5] make s.t. @clean. <i>Ang
dyanitur mauy mulínis sa mga lawak,</i> The
janitor will clean the rooms. <i>Malínis na unyà
ning sapatúsag kalimpyáhan,</i> These shoes
will be clean once they are shined. <i>Kinahanglang
linísun (linísan) nímu ang báy pirmi,</i>
You should always clean the house. <b>2</b>
[APB12; b5] cleanse or purify the soul,
reputation, etc.; become cleansed. <i>Ang paghinulsul
mauy mulínis (mupalínis) sa ímung
kunsinsiya,</i> Repentance will cleanse your
conscience. <i>Kinahanglang linísun (linísan)
nátù ang átung banságun,</i> We must clear
our family name. <b>ma-</b> <i>a</i> @clean, @pure.

<p><b>linlang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] <b>1</b> @deceive, @fool. <i>Naglinlang
ka sa mga táwu ánang pagparìpárì mu,</i> You
are deceiving the people by posing as a
priest. <b>2</b> @distract, divert s.o.'s attention. <i>Dì
ka makalinlang níya kun magtan-aw siyag
tilibisyun,</i> You cannot divert his attention
when he is watching TV.

<p><b>linsa</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] string a guideline in construction.
<i>Akuy mulinsa sa pagpinsa arun dì
maghiwì,</i> I'll string a guideline for the fence
so it won't come out crooked. <i>n</i> string used
as a guide.

<pb n=1268>

<p><b>linsúwak</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] fall headlong. <i>Nalinsúwak
siya gíkan sa bintánà,</i> He fell headlong
from the window.

<p><b>lintà</b> <i>n</i> leech.

<p><b>lintar</b> <i>v</i> [B126; b3(1)c5] lose one's head,
panic. <i>Nalintar siya maung gasulinadur hinúuy
íyang gisikáran,</i> He panicked, so he
stepped on the accelerator instead. <i>Wà pa
gánì ka kasab-i nalintar na,</i> You haven't
even got your scolding and you already
panic. <b>lintádu</b> <i>a</i> tending to panic.

<p><b>linti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lens, magnifying glass. <b>2</b> searchlight.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b] use a magnifying glass on s.t. <i>Lintíhi
ang mga litra arun sayun nga basáhun,</i>
Use a magnifying glass on the letters so you
can easily read them. <b>2</b> [A; b] beam with a
searchlight. <i>Gilintíhan sa barku ang pantalan,</i>
The ship beamed a searchlight on the
wharf. <b>3</b> [A; a] make into a magnifying
glass, searchlight.

<p><b>lintì</b> <i>n</i> lightning, thunderbolt. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be
struck with a thunderbolt. <i>Lintian (lintían)
kunu ang táwung makigminyù ug paryinti,</i>
They say that a man who marries a relative
will be struck with a thunderbolt. <b>2</b> get severe
punishment. <i>Kay ímung gidáut nà, lintían
kang Pápa,</i> Since you broke it, you'll
get hell from Dad. <b>2a</b> [b4(1)] be in a very
unpleasant situation. <i>Nahutdan ta ug gasulína
ug layù tas lungsud, nalintían na ta áni,</i>
We're out of gas and we're far from town.
Now we are in trouble. <i>a</i> incorrigible in behavior.
<i>Sa piyir náay daghang mga buguy
nga lintì kaáyu,</i> There are lots of incorrigible
bums at the waterfront.

<p><b>lintihuylas</b> = <b>LINTUHÍLAS.</b>

<p><b>lintúbaw</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] fall down headlong. <i>Nalintúbaw
ang bátà ngadtu sa atábay,</i> The
child toppled into the well.

<p><b>lintuhílas</b> <i>n</i> small sequins or spangles used
as ornaments for clothing. <i>v</i> [A; b] put
sequins on s.t.

<p><b>lintungánay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> principal source of s.t. <i>Lawum
ug dulut ang gamut nga lintungánay,</i>
Primary roots go deep. <i>Kanang ákung sanggutan
mau ang lintungánay sa ákung katigayúnan
karun,</i> Palm toddy is the source of
my current wealth. <b>2</b> original. <i>Nagkahanaw
na karun ang pinulungan nga lintungánayng
binisayà,</i> The original and native Visayan is
fast disappearing.

<p><b>lintúwad</b> (from <i>tuwad</i>) <i>v</i> [AB16; a12] <b>1</b> fall
down, topple over, usually landing wrong
side or tail end up; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Didtu
sa kanal malintúwad ang awtu,</i> The car
fell front-end first into the ditch. <i>Kinsay
naglintúwad sa bukag nga gisudlan sa mangga?</i>
Who turned over the basket with the
<pb n=1269>mangoes in it? <b>2</b> be in utter disorder. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] be in utter disorder. <i>Nagkalintúwad
lang ang hugasun sa hugasan,</i> The sink is in
utter disorder with all the dishes in it.

<p><b>lintuwang, lintúwang</b> (from <i>tuwang</i>) <i>v</i> [A; c1]
turn s.t. over. <i>Akuy naglintuwang sa mga
lingkuránan pag-uwan,</i> I turned the chairs over
when it rained.

<p><b>linù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] slosh liquid around inside s.t.
<i>Naglinù ku ug gasulína áring butilya arun
makúhà ang asíti,</i> I am sloshing gasoline
around inside the bottle to get the oil out.
<i>Linui ug ínit túbig ang tirmus úsà sudli ug
ínit nga kapi,</i> Slosh hot water around in the
thermos before you put hot coffee in it. <i>n</i>
pieces of dough collected from the mixing
bowl by sloshing water around in it. <b>-in-an</b>
= <b>LINÚ,</b> <i>n.</i>

<p><b>línug</b> <i>n</i> earthquake. <i>v</i> [A; b6] for there to be
an earthquake. <i>Ug mulínug, hugnù giyud
ning taytayána,</i> If there is an earthquake,
this bridge will surely collapse. <i>Nangabut
ang hinábang sa gilinúgan,</i> Aid arrived for
the earthquake victims.

<p><b>linulyum</b> <i>n</i> linoleum. <i>v</i> [A13; b6] put a linoleum
covering on s.t.

<p><b>linya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lines drawn or formed by things in
a row or column. <i>Ang linya sa ímung papil
hiwì,</i> The lines on your paper are crooked.
<i>Ang linya sa mga táwu miabut ngadtu sa iskína,</i>
The queue reached to the corner. <b>2</b>
electric, telephone, telegraph lines. <i>Naputul
ang linya sa tilipunu,</i> The telephone line was
cut. <b>3</b> transportation line. <i>Barátu ang plíti
kay duha ka linya nagkumpitinsiya,</i> The fare
is cheap because the two lines are in competition.
<b>3a</b> the route served by a line. <i>Ang
ámung dapit may linya sa pasahiruan,</i> Our
neighborhood is on a public transportation
line. <b>4</b> the field of one's special knowledge,
interest. <i>Dílì ákung linya ang pagkamagtutudlù,</i>
Teaching is just not my line. <b>5</b> line
of things similar to each other. <i>Ang bansíkul
ug tulíngan paríhug hitsúra kay mau ra
mang linyáha,</i> Tuna and mackerel are similar
in appearance because they belong to
the same family. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] line s.t. <i>Naglinya
ku áring tabla pára damahan,</i> I am making
lines for the checkerboard on this piece
of wood. <b>2</b> [A; c1] form, put into lines.
<i>Sayu nga mulinya ang mga táwu pagpalit ug
tíkit sa sini,</i> The people queue up early to
buy tickets to the movie. <i>Linyáha (ilinya)
ang mga síya diri,</i> Put the chairs in line here.

<p><b>lipad</b> <i>v</i> [A23P] swerve or veer while in flight
or traveling at very high speed. <i>Sa kusug
nga dágan, ang gaan nga awtu mulipad,</i>
Light cars swerve at high speeds. <i>Ang kapii
<pb n=1270>sa bála mauy makapalipad sa íyang ági,</i> The
bullet is deformed, so it won't go straight.

<p><b>lipaghà</b> = <b>LIBAGHÀ.</b>

<p><b>lipaghung</b> <i>v</i> [A2N] turn red in embarrassment
or pique. <i>Nanglipaghung ákung nawung
pagkabatì ku sa insultu,</i> My face
flushed when I heard the insult.

<p><b>lipak</b> <i>n</i> bamboo slats. <i>v</i> 1 [A; a1] cut bamboo
into slats. <i>Lipaka ang kawáyan pára
ikural,</i> Cut the bamboo into slats to use for
fencing. <b>2</b> [a12] strike with a bamboo slat.
<i>Lipaka ang irù,</i> Strike the dog with a bamboo
slat.

<p><b>lípak</b> <i>n</i> loud thunderclap. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] for there
to be a loud thunderclap. <i>Bantayi ang irù
ug mulípak, dì ba mukúrug,</i> Watch the dog
when there is a thunderclap. He'll quiver.
<b>1a</b> [b(1)] be struck by a thunderbolt. <i>Wà
lipáki nang amahan nga nag-unay sa kaugalíngun
níyang anak!</i> Surely the father was
struck by lightning for having relations with
his own daughter! <b>2</b> [b6] get a severe
scolding, severely punished. <i>Lipákan kang
Dádi mu ug hibaw-an ka,</i> You will get hell
from Daddy if he finds out.

<p><b>lipakà</b> <i>n</i> itchy red splotches on the skin from
allergies or insect bites. <i>v</i> [B6; b4] have
splotches on the skin. <i>Naglipakà (gilipakaan)
ang láwas sa bátà sa tipdas,</i> The child is
covered with rash from his measles.

<p><b>lípang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] grow well and profusely. <i>Milípang
ang mais human kaabunúhi,</i> The corn
grew lush after it was fertilized. <i>Nanglípang
ang láwas sa bátang pinainum ug litsi,</i> The
child grew robust because they fed it milk.
<b>2</b> [A3P] for emotions to intensify. <i>Milípang
ang ílang panaghigugmaay human sa panag-úlì,</i>
After they were reconciled, their love
for each other grew more intense.

<p><b>lip-an rayit</b> <i>a</i> giving without discrimination
or restraint. <i>Lip-an rayit silang naglamánu
sa mga butanti,</i> They shook as many of the
voters' hands as they possibly could. <i>v</i> [A13; c]
give without discrimination or restraint.
<i>Naglip-an rayit ug panghátag ang
ahinti sa mga sampul,</i> The agent gave out
samples left and right.

<p><b>lipárak</b> <i>v</i> [B2] be, become fat, pudgy. <i>Mulipárak
giyud ka ug magpatúyang kag káun,</i>
You'll surely get fat if you eat as much as
you like. <i>Nagkaliparak ang bátà kay naayun
sa litsi,</i> The baby is getting fat because the
milk agrees with him.

<p><b>lípas</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] not go directly over s.t., pass
around. <i>Ilípas ang kutsi kay gubà ang taytáyan,</i>
Take a detour because the bridge is
out. <b>(->)</b> a gone beyond a point in time. <i>Lipas
na ang úras sa pagkáun,</i> The time for
<pb n=1271>eating has passed. <i>v</i> [B2; c1] get beyond a
certain point in time. <i>Nilípas na ang búwan
sa udtuhan,</i> The moon has passed the midpoint
in the sky. <b>&mdash; ang gútum</b> for one's
hunger to disappear after the time for eating
has passed. <i>Ug kanúnay nímung lipasun
(ilipas) ang ímung gútum ulsirun ka,</i> If you
always fail to eat on time, you will develop
ulcers. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> detour, place a route goes
around s.t.

<p><b>lipat</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> make an error through inattention:
lose track or forget what one was
talking about. <i>Sa pag-ihap nalipat ku ug pila
na tu,</i> I was counting, but I lost track how
many there were. <i>Nalipat ku ug diin ikabutang
ang hunsuy,</i> It slipped my mind where
I put my pipe. <b>2</b> mistake s.o.'s identity. <i>Nalipat
ku. Ingun ku ug si Nítuy ka,</i> I was mistaken.
I thought you were Nitoy. <b>3</b> [B1256; b8]
fail to notice s.t. <i>Nalipat ku ug walà
ku makamatikud sa pag-ági sa bátà,</i> I failed
to notice, and I was not aware of it when
the child passed by. <i>Nalipatan ku ang usa
ka linya ug kupya,</i> I missed a line when I
was copying. <b>4</b> [A; a12] deceive s.o., causing
him to fail to notice s.t. <i>Lipatun ka lang
níya sa mga púlung nga tam-is,</i> He will just
deceive you with sweet words. <b>pa-(<-), lipatlípat</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> sleight of hand, esp. a thimblerig
game where a seed is hidden under one of
the three thimble-shaped cups and is quickly
shifted from one cup to another. The
players gamble as to where the seed is located.
<b>2</b> deception, chicanery. <i>Ang íyang pagdaug
sa kuntrátu nahímù sa palípat,</i> He won
the contract through chicanery. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13]
have a thimblerig game. <b>2</b> [A; a12] deceive
with chicanery.

<p><b>lipáta, lipátà</b> = <b>ALIPÁTÀ.</b>

<p><b>lipatpat</b> = <b>ALIPATPAT.</b>

<p><b>lípay</b> <i>a</i> glad. <i>Lípay kaáyu kung midaug ka,</i>
I'm very glad that you won. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12]
make s.o. happy. <i>Wà nay láing mulípay nákù
kun dílì ikaw,</i> No one can make me happy
but you. <b>2</b> [B156; c5] be happy, glad.
<i>Nalípay ku nga nía ka,</i> I am glad that you're
here. <i>Maglípay ta kay milampus ang átung
plánu,</i> Let's be happy because our plans
succeeded. <i>Gikalípay kug dakù ang ímung
kalampúsan,</i> I am very happy at your success.
<b>paha-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] congratulate, felicitate.
<i>Usa aku sa mupahalípay nímu sa ímung kadaúgan,</i>
I am one of those who will congratulate
you on your victory. <i>n</i> congratulations.
<i>Dawáta ang kinasingkásing kung pahalípay,</i>
Accept my heartfelt congratulations.
<b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> happy. <i>Malipáyun kaáyu siya
nga misugut sa ákung hangyù,</i> He was happy 
<pb n=1272>to comply with my request. <b>&mdash; nga pasku</b>
Merry Christmas. <i>v</i> [A13] be happy. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
happiness. <i>Ang íyang pagkaasáwa walay kalípay,</i>
She knows no happiness as a wife.
<b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> the Holy Spirit as Comforter.

<p><b>liphuk</b> <i>n</i> left hook in boxing.

<p><b>lip-istik</b> = <b>LIPSTIK.</b>

<p><b>lip-it</b> <i>v</i> [AP; b2] put s.t. in between two flat
surfaces. <i>Ilip-it ang mamísus sa libru,</i> Stick
the peso bills in the book. <i>Didtu ra malip-iti
ang dukumintu sa mga inutaw,</i> The document
was right there, in between the ironed
clothes.

<p><b>liplip</b> <i>n</i> k.o. matting used to wrap tobacco in
bales or as walling, made of <i>nípà</i> or coconut
leaflets laid flat side by side with some overlap
and stitched together with fiber. <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
make into a matting of this sort.

<p><b>lipstik</b> <i>n</i> lipstick. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] use a certain
k.o. lipstick. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] put lipstick
on.

<p><b>lipsut</b> = <b>IPSUT.</b>

<p><b>lipti</b> <i>n</i> painted grunter: <b><i>Plectorhinchus pictus.</i></b>

<p><b>lipting</b> <i>n</i> the violation in dribbling a basketball
where the ball is not hit, but lifted
slightly before being bounced. <i>v</i> [B126; b6(1)]
commit this violation.

<p><b>liptung</b> <i>n</i> lake formed in a river by a dam or
similar obstruction. <i>v</i> [B6, b5c1] gather into
a pool, make into a dam, gather in a
dam. <i>Naliptung (miliptung) ang sapà kay
naalihan sa dakung káhuy nga natumba,</i>
The water of the brook formed a pool because
a fallen log obstructed its course. <i>Liptúngi
(liptúnga, iliptung) ang sapà arun kalanguyan,</i>
Make a dam in the river so we
can swim in it.

<p><b>*lipu kalipuhan</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be hard-pressed by
time or quantity of work. <i>Nagkalipuhan siya
didtu sa kusína kay dúnay muabut nga
bisíta,</i> She was very busy in the kitchen
because there were visitors coming.

<p><b>lipudlípud</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] hide s.t. by circumlocution
or covering up. <i>Náay ímung tinagúan
kay naglipudlípud ka sa pagtug-an nákù,</i>
You must be hiding s.t. because you are
beating around the bush instead of telling
me right out. <i>Gilipudlípud sa inahan ang
mga salà sa íyang mga anak ngadtu sa íyang
bána,</i> The mother covered up for her children
in front of the father. <i>n</i> action of concealing
s.t. <i>Sa walay lipudlípud nga pagkasulti
tikasan ka!</i> Let's call a spade a spade.
You're a cheat!

<p><b>lipulipu</b> <i>v</i> [B16] be hard-pressed to do s.t.
because of the quantity of work or the lack
of time. <i>Naglipulipu mi karun kay umaábut
<pb n=1273>ang supirbisur,</i> We are very busy now because
the supervisor is about to come. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] be very hard-pressed. <i>Nagkalipulipu
siya pagpamatúnis pagbuthù sa mga bisíta,</i>
He was in a dither trying to get his pants
buttoned up when the visitors suddenly
arrived.

<p><b>lípung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be, become dizzy, woozy.
<i>Nalípung siya human makatimahù adtung
báhù sa tambal,</i> He became woozy after he
smelled the odor of the medicine. <i>Pwirting
makalípung ang argulya,</i> The merry-go-round
can get you real dizzy. <b>2</b> [A123P]
be enormously high in price. <i>Biling makalípung,</i>
A dizzyingly high price. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[A13] undergo dizzy spells. <i>Nagpanglipung
siya kay masakitun pa siya,</i> He has dizzy
spells because he is still sick. <i>n</i> recurring
dizziness. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> dizziness, giddiness.

<p><b>lipun-ug</b> = <b>TIPUN-UG.</b>

<p><b>liput<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] go behind s.t. <i>Ang kawatan
miliput sa usang balay ug nawálà,</i> The
thief ducked in back of the next house and
disappeared. <i>Maigù untà ku sa batu ug wà
pa ku makaliput sa baril,</i> I would have been
hit with a stone if I had not ducked behind
a barrel. <b>2</b> [A3; a12] catch s.t. by going the
other way. <i>Lingawa siya kay muliput ku sa
píkas arun ákung sakpan,</i> Hold his attention
because I will go the other way around so I
can catch him. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] doublecross,
betray. <i>Ug mangispíya ka pára sa píkas, naglíput
ka sa átung násud,</i> If you do espionage
work for the other side, you are betraying
our country. <b>2</b> [AN2; b6] fight unfairly by
doing s.t. treacherous or taking unfair advantage.
<i>Gilipútan siyag dugmak sa luyu,</i>
S.o. treacherously stabbed him in the back.
<i>n</i> treachery. <b>pa-, pa-(<-) ug pusta</b> <i>v</i> [A13; c6]
secretly place a bet on the opposing
cock (instead of one's own) or simply bet
on an opposing cock in addition to one's
own. <b>ma-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> treacherous, traitorous.
<b>paN-</b> = <b>LÍPUT,</b> <i>n.</i> <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> anus (euphemism).

<p><b>liput<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. ray.

<p><b>lip-ut</b> <i>a</i> narrow in space or width. <i>v</i> [B; c1]
for a space or width to be narrow. <i>Nalip-ut
ang sayal kay gamay man ang sun-ut sa panaptun,</i>
The skirt was made narrow because
it was a narrow piece of cloth. <i>Ang mga butang
mauy nakalip-ut (nakapalip-ut) sa lugar
dinhi,</i> The space was too small because
too many things were put in it.

<p><b>lipuwa paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A23P] blush. <i>Nanglipuwa
ang náwung ni Balúduy dihang giintrudy&ucaron;s
siya sa usa ka maanyag,</i> How Balodoy blushed
when he was introduced to a beauty.

<p><b>lipyà</b> <i>n</i> moldboard, a curved iron plate attached
<pb n=1274>to a plowshare (punta) which lifts,
turns, and pulverizes the soil. <i>v</i> [A; b] attach
a moldboard on a plowshare.

<p><b>líra</b> <i>n</i> lyre.

<p><b>líraw</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6P] for the eyes to dart back
and forth, roll. <i>Milíraw ang íyang mga mata
sa kalamì,</i> Her eyes rolled because it was so
delicious. <b>lirawliraw</b> <i>v</i> [B456] <b>1</b> for the eyes
to roll continuously. <i>Naglirawliraw ang íyang
mata mu rag dúnay gipangítà,</i> His eyes
moved back and forth as if he were looking
for s.t. <b>2</b> for the thoughts to move rapidly
from place to place.

<p><b>lirì</b> <i>v</i> [B4] <b>1</b> split, tear open from fullness.
<i>Ayaw nag daska ang sáku kay naglirì na sa
kapunù,</i> Don't fill the sack further because
it's so full it's bursting. <b>2</b> get obese as if
about to split. <i>Milirì siya sa katambuk humag
panganak,</i> She got terribly fat after she
had her baby.

<p><b>liru</b> = <b>RILU.</b>

<p><b>liruliru</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for the eyes to roll. <i>Miliruliru
(nagliruliru) lang ang íyang mga mata
pagkutána nákù,</i> He just rolled his eyes
when I questioned him.

<p><b>lírung</b> <i>a</i> circular, rounded. <i>Lírung ang pláka,</i>
A record is round. <i>n</i> a shallow circular basket
used for winnowing or as a container
for vending fish or vegetables.

<p><b>liryu</b> <i>n</i> name given to several k.o. ornamental
bulbs, some of which also occur wild: <b><i>Hymenocallis
littorale, Zephyranthis rosea,</i></b> et
al. In poetry, this flower symbolizes beauty.

<p><b>lís<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> lace. <i>v</i> [A1] wear lace. <i>Naglís siyag
panti,</i> She is wearing lace panties.

<p><b>lís<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>kalípay, 2.</i>

<p><b>lisa</b> <i>v</i> [a3] sprain or dislocate a joint. <i>Nalisa
ang íyang túhud pagkadagmà níya,</i> His knee
was dislocated when he fell down. <i>n</i> sprain
or dislocation.

<p><b>lísang</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] terrify, frighten severely.
<i>Nalísang ku pagkalintúwad sa kutsi,</i> I was
terrified when the car somersaulted. <i>Ayaw
kug lisánga ánà kay dílì na tinúud sawa.</i>
You can't scare me with that because that's
no real snake. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> ailment, usually fever,
that results from intense fright. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> terror.
<b>maka-r-</b> <i>a</i> terrifying. <i>Makalilísang kaáyu
tung bagyúha kay hasta ang mga awtu nakulub,</i>
That was a terrifying storm because
it even turned cars over.
<b>
lisay</b> <i>n</i> lymph node. <i>v</i> [B; b4] have swollen
lymph nodes. <i>Naglisay (gilisayan) ang ákung
íluk kay náay hubag ang ákung kamut,</i> I
have swollen lymph glands in the armpits
because I have a swollen hand.

<p><b>lisik</b> <i>v</i> [A] stick out from a hidden or partly
hidden position. <i>Milisik ang íyang mata sa
<pb n=1275>kalágut,</i> His eyes bulged in anger. <i>Ang itlug
sa tigúwang naglisik,</i> The old man's testicles
are hanging out in view. <i>n</i> @testicles. <b>putì ug
&mdash;</b> @cowardly.

<p><b>lisinsiya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @license, a document evidencing
permission to engage in s.t. <b>2</b> @permission to
do s.t. <i>Ayaw ug uban námù kay wà kay lisinsiya
ni Pápa,</i> Don't go with us because
you don't have Daddy's permission. <i>v</i> [AN2; b6]
ask permission. <i>Walà ku lisinsiyáhi
ug táwu nga magbayli áning baláya,</i> Nobody
asked me permission to hold a dance here
in this house. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. said or used to obtain
permission. <b>-du(<-)</b> <i>n</i> having a license.
<i>Ribulbir nga lisinsiyádu,</i> Licensed revolver.

<p><b>lísis</b> <i>n</i> @shoelace. <i>v</i> [A; c] tie the shoes. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2] tie one's shoes.

<p><b>liskad</b> = <sc>LISKAG</sc>.

<p><b>liskag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. to
come open. <i>Miliskag ang dáhun sa ságing
nga gipustan sa bulad,</i> The banana leaves
which the dried fish were wrapped in came
undone. <i>Nagkaliskag ang sáku kay labihang
dasúka,</i> The sack is coming apart because it
was filled too full. <i>Liskága (iliskag) ang baat,</i>
Untie the string. <b>1a</b> for s.t. woven to get
undone. <i>Naliskag ang banig kay wà masapay,</i>
The mat came undone because the edges
weren't closed up. <b>2</b> [B2N] @{spread out},
@{stick out}. <i>Maliskag ang balhíbu sa pábung
duúlun,</i> The turkey puffs up its feathers if
you get near it. <i>Naliskag ang íyang dunggan
pagkadungug sa íyang ng[=á]n,</i> Her ears perked
up when she heard her name. <i>a</i> @{spread out},
@undone. <i>Liskag ug tiil,</i> Spreading feet.

<p><b>liskug</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @coil of rattan, wire, or anything
stiff. <b>2</b> stiff band attached to the rim of a
basket, tray, and the like to strengthen the
rim. <i>v</i> [A; ab] <b>1</b> @{coil up} s.t. stiff. <b>2</b> make,
attach a reinforcing band on the rim of a
basket or tray. <b>3</b> [B] for s.t. long to curl up
at the ends. <i>Naliskug ang lipak kay nainitan,</i>
The bamboo slats curled up because
they were exposed to the sun.

<p><b>liskúhag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] @move, be stirred from an
inactive or suppressed state. <i>Miliskúhag ang
mga lútì sa baskit nga wà kalugpíti,</i> The
bamboo strips on the rim of the basket
came open because it wasn't clipped. <b>2</b> [A23]
for a feeling or emotion to spring forth
in one's inner self (literary). <i>Miliskúhag pagkalit
sa ákung kasingkásing ang usa ka tawhánung
pagbátì,</i> Some sort of human emotion
emerged within me.

<p><b>lisngag</b> <i>a</i> having nostrils larger than would be
ordinary for a given size of nose. <i>v</i> [B; c16]
for the nostrils to be unusually large. <i>Naglisngag
lang nang ilung mu mu rag kabáyung
<pb n=1276>nasukù,</i> You have nostrils that are drawn
up like the nose of an angry horse.

<p><b>lisngig</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] turn the face away in scorn,
disgust, and the like. <i>Milisngig dáyun ang
kasíra sa pagkakità sa sud-an,</i> The boarder
turned her face away in disgust when she
saw the food. <b>2</b> [B6; c1] look, turn the face
sideways, usually due to a defect. <i>Nalisngig
ang íyang tinan-awan tungud sa íyang hubag
sa líug,</i> She has to keep looking sideways
because of the big boil on her neck.

<p><b>lispu</b> = <sc>PULIS</sc> (slang).

<p><b>lista<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @list. <i>Wà maapil ang ímung ngálan sa
lista,</i> Your name is not on the list. <b>2</b> list of
debts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] list, enumerate in writing,
<i>Ilista ang palitúnun arun way makalimtan,</i>
List the things to buy so we don't forget
anything. <b>2</b> [A; c1] charge s.t. to one's account
in a store, add to one's list of debts.
<i>Hápit tanang pamilya sa sundáwu naglista
sa kantína,</i> Almost all the soldiers' families
charge all the goods they get from the canteen.
<i>Listahun (ilista) lang ni, ha?</i> Just
charge this, O.K.? <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @enroll s.o.
or oneself in a course. <i>Dílì ku makapalista
kay wà kuy kwarta,</i> I cannot enroll because
I don't have any money. <b>listahan</b> = <sc>LISTA</sc>,
<i>n1</i>. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> @enrollment.

<p><b>lista<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>ALISTU</sc> (female).

<p><b>listu</b> = <sc>ALISTU</sc>.

<p><b>listun<hi rend=sub>1</i> , list&ucaron;n</b> <i>n</i> @shoelace. <i>v</i> [A; b6] put, tie
s.o.'s shoelaces. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] tie one's own
shoelaces. <i>Huwat úsà kay nanglistun pa ku,</i>
Just a second, I'm still tying my shoelaces.

<p><b>listun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @molding, a strip of wooden material
for edging in a building or boat. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b]
put a molding s.w. <i>Ikaw bay mulistun sa
mga daplin sa bungbung?</i> Will you be the
one to attach the molding at the edges of
the walling[** walls]? <i>Íyang gilistúnan ang mga piktiyur
prim,</i> He attached the mouldings (around
the sides) of the picture frame. <b>2</b> [a12]
make into a wooden moulding. <i>Listúnun
ku ning kahúya,</i> I'll make a moulding out
of this piece of wood.

<p><b>lísu</b> <i>n</i> @seed. <b>makaagpas sa &mdash;</b> get the implication
of s.t. spoken by indirection. <i>Wà ku
makaagpas sa lísu adtung íyang pasumbíngay,</i>
I did not get what he was driving at.
<b>lisulisu, lisuhan</b> <i>a</i> for corn or rice to be half
cooked, as if there were seeds in the center.
<i>v</i> [B126; b6] for rice or corn to come out
half-cooked. <b>lisúhan</b> <i>a</i> having seeds. <i>Kadaghánan
sa mga prútas lisúhan,</i> Most fruits
have seeds.

<p><b>lísù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12b2] turn, cause s.t. to rotate
on its axis. <i>Pugngi ang twirka samtang maglísù
ku sa pirnu,</i> Hold the nut in place while
<pb n=1277>I turn the bolt. <i>Lisúa ang ímung síya ug atúbang
diri,</i> Turn your chair around and face
this way. <b>1a</b> <b>ma- pay buku sa kawáyan</b> impossible
to change (lit. it would be easier to
twist a bamboo node). <i>Malísù pay buku sa
kawáyan kay sa ákung hukum,</i> I'll stick to
my decision come hell or high water. <b>1b</b> [b4(1)]
<b>&mdash; sa buut, kwirdas, pangísip, twirka,
útuk</b> go off one's rocker. <i>Ang pubring inahan
nalisúan sa pangísip pagkamatay sa íyang
mga bátà,</i> The poor mother went crazy
after her children died. <b>2</b> [A2; c6] twist
one's body as if on an axis. <i>Milísù siya ug
mitan-aw nákù,</i> He turned around and looked
at me. <i>Ilísù ímung láwas ngadtu arun
makaagi ku,</i> Turn your body that way so I
can pass by. <b>2a</b> [A2] turn one's body over.
<i>Ug pukáwun siya mulísù lang ug mubálik
ug katúlug,</i> If you wake him, he just turns
over and goes back to sleep. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> turning
pegs of musical instrument. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> =
<sc>LÍSÙ</sc>. <b>2</b> knob or switch one turns to turn
s.t. on. <b>lisùlísù</b> <i>v</i> [A13] <b>1</b> @{turn around}. <i>Naglisùlísù
siya sa silya nga nangítà nákù,</i> He
was turning around in the chair looking for
me. <b>2</b> @toss and turn. <i>Naglisùlísù siya tibuuk
gabíi ug walà makatulug,</i> He was tossing all
night and was not able to sleep. <b>-ay(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B146]
be very busy. <i>Naglisuay (nagkalisuay)
ku íning trabáhu kay wà kuy katábang,</i> I'm
up to my neck with work because I don't
have anybody to help me.

<p><b>lisud</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @difficult. <i>Lisud kaáyu ning liksiyúna,</i>
This lesson is very difficult. <b>2</b> in short
supply, requiring effort. <i>Lisud ang túbig sa
ámù,</i> Water is hard to come by at our place.
<i>Lisud ang dálan sa Tulídu,</i> The road in Toledo
is difficult. <b>3</b> for a situation to be hard
to save or remedy,[**typo: period, not comma] <i>Lisud na ang kahimtang
sa masakitun.</i>[**typo: comma, not period] The patient is in critical
condition. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; a2] be, become @difficult.
<i>Dílì nákù lisdun ang mga pangutána,</i> I
won't make the questions difficult. <b>2</b> [B145; b6]
have, encounter difficulty in doing
s.t. <i>Naglisud ku ug paandar sa makina,</i> I am
having difficulty starting the engine. <i>Wà ka
ba lisuri (lisdi) sa pag-ílis ug ligid?</i> Did you
have difficulty in changing the tire? <b>2a</b> [a12]
put s.o. to great inconvenience. <i>Ug ímu
kung lisdun, muundang ku sa trabáhu,</i> If
you make things hard for me, I will quit
this job. <b>3</b> [A13] be in bad shape financially
or in health. <i>Naglisud si Lúlu mu,</i> Your
grandfather is gravely ill. <i>Naglisud mi run
kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We're hard up because
I have no work. <i>n</i> thing that constitutes
the hardship or difficulty. <i>Ang lisud mau
nga dílì siya muadmitir nga utángan siya nímu,</i> 
<pb n=1278>The difficult thing is that he won't admit
that he is indebted to you. <b>(<-), ka-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Naglísud
(nagkalísud) kug báyad,</i> I'm having a
hard time paying. <b>ug magka-(<-)</b> if need be,
if things get bad enough. <i>Ug magkalísud
mubáyad na lang ku arun maariglu ang kásu,</i>
If there is no other way, I'll just pay up
so as to get rid of the case. <b>lisudlisud</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
<b>1</b> do s.t. the hard way. <i>Lisudlisurun
man nímu ug limbas. Gabsa!</i> You are doing
it the hard way with a file. Use a saw! <b>2</b> impose
unnecessary work or difficulty on s.o.
<i>Naglisudlisud ka lang nákù pagpatubig sa
tanum nga muulan man run,</i> You are making
me water the plants for nothing when it
is going to rain. <b>kalisudlisud</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be
hard up financially. <i>Nagkalisudlisud sila kay
walay trabáhu ang amahan,</i> They are hard
up because the father has no work. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
hardship. <i>Ang kalisud nga ímung masagubang,</i>
The hardships you will encounter.
<b>kalisdánan</b> <i>n</i> @hardships.

<p><b>lisuglisug</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b4] for the body to have
cysts or cyst-like protrusions. <i>Mulisuglisug
ang ákung íluk ug pamlúgan ku,</i> I get swollen
glands in my armpit whenever I get a
lymphatic infection.

<p><b>lísun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @{filled out}, @well-built in body. <i>Ang
himsug nga bátà lísun kaáyug láwas,</i> The
healthy child has a well-filled-out body. <i>Ságad
sa mga trabahadur lísun kaáyug láwas,</i>
Most workers have good bodies. <i>v</i> [B2; b6]
for a body to be well-built, rounded. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i>
state of being well-built.

<p><b>lísun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> name given to various fleshy carangoid
fish.

<p><b>lisun plan</b> <i>n</i> @{lesson plan} for schools. <i>v</i> [A; b]
make a lesson plan.

<p><b>liswi</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>HABASAN</sc>. <b>2</b> blood-mouthed
conch.

<p><b>lisyinsiya</b> = <sc>LISINSIYA</sc>.

<p><b>lít</b> <i>a</i> @late, not on time. <i>Diin gud ka! Lít kaáyu
ka,</i> Where have you been? You are very
late. <i>v</i> [B126] be @late. <i>Ug malít ka sa klási,
ay na lang ug sulud,</i> If you are late for class,
don't attend.

<p><b>lit-ad</b> <i>a</i> bent or twisted from warping, @warped.
<i>Lit-ad kaáyu ning tabláha kay dúgay nga
nabulad sa ínit,</i> This piece of wood is all
warped because it was left under the sun. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A2] get warped. <b>2</b> [A] bend the body
backwards or writhe. <i>Ayúhag kúgus ang bátà
kay mukalit ug lit-ad,</i> Hold the child
firmly because he'll just suddenly throw
himself backward. <b>lit-adlit-ad</b> <i>v</i> [A] @writhe,
@wriggle. <i>Naglit-adlit-ad siya sa kalamì,</i> She
writhed in ecstasy.

<pb n=1279>

<p><b>lit-ag</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @snare with a running noose, actuated
by a spring pole which is released
when the quarry steps on the cross piece
that holds it down. <b>&mdash; nga mubutu</b> @{booby
trap}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a12] catch with this sort of
snare. <i>Manglit-ag mi sa lasang ug ihálas manuk,</i>
We will snare wild chickens in the forest.
<b>2</b> [A13; a12] make into a snare.

<p><b>litaníya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @litany. <b>2</b> @enumeration of things
in a series. <i>Túa na, gibungat ang litaníya sa
ímung mga sayup,</i> There he goes, reciting
the litany of all your faults. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] say
the @litany. <b>2</b> [A13; a] say s.t. in an enumeration.
<i>Wà ku katíngug dihang gilitanyáhan
ku níya sa ákung mga salà,</i> I could not say a
word when he enumerated my faults to me.

<p><b>litì</b> <i>n</i> @thunderbolt. <i>Usa ka makabungul nga
litì milánug sa kagabhíun,</i> A deafening
thunderbolt echoed in the night. <i>v</i> [A2]
for a thunderbolt to crash. <b>&mdash; sa udtung tútuk</b>
sudden and unexpected happening (like
a bolt of lightning at high noon, a rare occurrence).
<i>Ang pagbali sa sinalígan sa partídu
ngadtu sa píkas mauy usa ka litì sa udtung
tútuk,</i> The party leader's defection
to the other side was a most unexpected
move.

<p><b>litik</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c1] @snap one's finger. <i>Nagpanglitik
siya sa íyang tudlù sa higayun nga
nalipatan,</i> He snapped his fingers in annoyance
that he missed the opportunity. <i>Litki
(litiki) ang irù arun mudúul,</i> Snap your fingers
at the dog so it will come near. <b>2</b> [A; b]
@flick s.t. with the fingers. <i>Litkan (liktan)
ku nang dunggan mu ug dì ka mamínaw,</i>
I'll flick your ears if you don't listen. <b>(<-)</b> =
<sc>LITIKLITIK</sc>, <i>n2</i>, <i>v</i>. <b>litiklítik, litikay, litikánay,
litkanay, liktanay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a game of flicking
each other's knuckles to see who will
surrender in pain. <b>2</b> game of detaching or
scattering a bunch of knotted rubber bands
by flicking with the thumb and middle finger.
<i>v</i> [C] play a finger-flicking game or
game scattering rubber bands.

<p><b>litiliti</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. in a container to be used up,
very close to the bottom. <i>Litiliti na kaáyu
ang túbig sa bangà,</i> The water in the jar is
falling pretty close to the bottom. <i>v</i> [B36]
1 for s.t. to be used up, usually to the bottom
of the container. <i>Nagkalitiliti ang átung
bugas,</i> Our rice is getting close to the bottom
of the bin. <b>2</b> be reduced to a very small
amount. <i>Naglitiliti ang nanan-aw sa prugráma
kay taligsik,</i> Only a small sparse crowd
saw the program because it was drizzling.

<p><b>litíra</b> = <sc>RITÍRA</sc>.

<p><b>litiral</b> <i>a</i> @literal. <i>Litiral nga intirpritasiyun sa
Biblíya,</i> A literal interpretation of the Bible.
<pb n=1280><i>v</i> [a12] do s.t. literally.

<p><b>litiratúra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> literature. <b>2</b> literature carrying
advertising or information.

<p><b>lítis</b> = <b>LITSÚGAS,</b> <i>1.</i>

<p><b>litra</b> <i>n</i> letter of the alphabet. <i>v</i> [A; b6] mark
with a letter. <i>Litráhan ku ning ákung mga
punda,</i> I will mark my pillowcases with my
initials.

<p><b>litrátu</b> = <b>RITRÁTU. litratista</b> = <b>RITRATISTA.</b>
<i>see</i> <b>RITRÁTU.</b>

<p><b>litru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> liter. <b>2</b> dry measure for grains and
other items equal to one-third of a ganta.
<i>Ipalit ku ug usa ka litru nga asin,</i> Buy me a
liter of salt. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] measure s.t. by
the liter. <b>litruhan</b> <i>n</i> a container used as a
liter measure.

<p><b>litsi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> milk. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6] put or add milk to s.t.
<i>Gilitsihan ba nímu ang ákung kapi?</i> Did
you put milk in my coffee? <b>2</b> [a12] raise
s.t. or s.o. on milk other than the mother's.
<i>Litsíhun ku ning itúya kay namatay ang inahan,</i>
I will raise this puppy on canned milk
because the mother died. <b>&mdash; plan</b> <i>n</i> k.o. custard
baked or steamed in syrup. <b>kulur dí-</b> <i>a</i>
cream-colored. <b>litsihan, litsíhan</b> <i>n</i> a unit of
dry or liquid measure the size of a milk can.

<p><b>litsi<hi rend=sub>2</i> 1</b> mild cuss word uttered in annoyance
or anger (euphemism for <i>pisti</i>). <i>Litsi! Gibálì
na pud nà nímu,</i> Darn! You broke it
again. <b>2</b> reference to s.o. one is annoyed at.
<i>Giindiyan ku sa litsing dakù,</i> The son of a
gun stood me up. <b>-ng yáwà</b> expression of
strong anger. <i>Litsing yáwà! Aku pay hulaman
ug libru ug aku pay pahatdun didtu sa
íla!</i> Shit! He borrows a book from me and
then I'm supposed to bring it to his house
as well! <b>litsilitsi</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] say <i>litsi</i> to
s.o. <i>Ayaw kug litsilitsíha,</i> Don't you say
<i>litsi</i> to me!

<p><b>litsúgas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lettuce: <b><i>Lactuca sativa.</i> 2</b> mild
cuss word uttered upon being annoyed (euphemism
for <i>litsi</i>). <i>Litsúgas ning batáa, kanúnay
rang mangáyù ug singku!</i> This darn
child! He always asks for a nickel.

<p><b>litsun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pig roasted whole over coals. <b>2</b> by
extension, fowl so roasted. <b>&mdash; dilitsi</b> roast
suckling pig. <b>3</b> euphemism for <i>litsi,</i> a mild
curse said when one is annoyed with s.o.
<i>Litsun ning batáa samukan kaáyu,</i> Darn this
child. He's such a nuisance. <i>v</i> [A; a2] roast
a pig, have a roast pig or, by extension, a
fowl. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> animal so roasted whole over
coals. <b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> a pig in the stage of growth
considered ideal for roasting.

<p><b>litu, lítu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] buy rice or corn for home
consumption. <i>Lisud kaáyug hasta bugas litúhun 
<pb n=1281>pa,</i> It's very difficult if we have to
buy rice, too. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> sell corn
grits or rice. <b>2</b> sell corn grits or rice on a rationed
basis. <i>Magpalítug bugas mais ang arsii,</i>
The RCA will sell corn meal on a rationed
basis.

<p><b>litù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a12] for joints to crack, crack
the joints. <i>Kamau ka nga mulitù sa ímung
tudlù?</i> Do you know how to crack your
knuckles? <b>2</b> [A; a12] rub a leaf over an angle
to make the leaf pliant. <i>Lituun nímu
ang dáhun sa lumbuy sa ngilit sa lamísa arun
sayun nga lukútun,</i> Rub the <i>lumbuy</i>
leaf over the edge of the table so it will be
easy to roll. <b>-anan(<-)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. one can rub a
leaf over to make it pliant.

<p><b>lítub</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible arc shell. <b>&mdash; sa amù</b> k.o.
small arc shell (1/2") which clings to cliffs
along the seashore. It is not eaten.

<p><b>lituglítug</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] <b>1</b> hide, refuse to tell
the truth when asked. <i>Ayawg lituglítug, tug-an
sa tinúud,</i> Don't try to hide s.t. Tell the
truth. <i>Ayaw kug lituglitúgi. Háin ang kwarta?</i>
Don't try to hide anything from me.
Where's the money? <b>2</b> withhold s.t. which
one is supposed to turn over. <i>Gilituglítug sa
pyádu ang abut sa humay,</i> The man who
was in charge didn't turn over all of the rice
crop.

<p><b>lituk<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] pronounce. <i>Kamau nang
mulituk si Bíbut sa púlung 'Máma',</i> Bebot
already knows how to say 'Mama' distinctly.
<b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] express, convey s.t. by
speaking. <i>Naglituk siya sa íyang gugma
ngadtu sa dalága,</i> He was expressing his love
to the maiden. <i>Litukan ta ka sa prisyu nga
walay makaparíhu,</i> I will quote you a price
no one can match.

<p><b>lituk<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> flick with the fingers. <i>v</i> [A; b] hit
s.t. by flicking the fingers at it. <i>Ang tabian
gilitukan sa maistru sa [=ú],</i> The teacher flicked
the pupil on the head for talking in class.

<p><b>lítuk</b> <i>a</i> for rice plants to sprout fresh, lush
leaves. <i>v</i> [B] for rice transplants to get lush
new leaves. <i>Naglítuk ang íyang humay kay
dinisibi man,</i> His rice plants are sprouting
lush leaves because they are well cared for.

<p><b>litundan</b> = <b>ALITUNDAN.</b>

<p><b>líu</b> = <b>LÍHÙ.</b>

<p><b>líug</b> <i>n</i> neck. <i>Butilyang taas ug líug,</i> A bottle
with a long neck. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123S; a12] hit
in the neck. <i>Liugun níya ug pusil ang liyun,</i>
He will shoot the lion in the neck. <b>2 &mdash; sa bitik
ni San Markus</b> <i>v</i> [a3] be hooked into
marriage (lit. be caught in the neck by the
noose of St. Mark). <i>Ígù lang kung migraduwar, 
<pb n=1282>naliug dáyun ku sa bitik ni San Markus,</i>
As soon as I graduated I got married. <b>paN-</b>
<i>v</i> [A2] get thick at the neck. <i>Nanglíug siyag
maáyu, mu rag bábuy,</i> He's got lots of fat
around the neck like a pig. <b>panghi-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B2456]
for a young bull to become fully mature,
as shown by an enlargement of the
neck. <i>Manungag ra ba nang turíyu nga manghiliug,</i>
That young bull will gore you now
that he's getting mature. <b>paN-(->)</b> <i>n</i> in plowing
with a water buffalo, a rope tied from
one end of the yoke to the other, passing
under the animal's neck, the purpose of
which is to prevent the yoke from slipping
off. <b>taga-(->)</b> <i>a</i> up to the neck. <i>Tagaliug ku
sa mga útang,</i> I'm up to my neck in debt. <i>v</i>
[B156] get to be up to the neck.

<p><b>liunduk = TALIUNDUK.</b>

<p><b>lius</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2] pass by s.t. unnoticed. <i>Sa luyung
pultahan siya mulius,</i> He passed thru
the back door unnoticed. <b>1a</b> [C3; b5] fail
to see s.t., skip over s.t. <i>Naglíus lang sila ug
wà magkítà,</i> They passed each other without
seeing each other and they failed to
meet. <i>Giliusan (gilius) námù siya pagsilbi,</i>
We skipped her when we were serving. <b>2</b> [A3B; a12]
distract s.o.'s attention from s.t.
<i>Akuy naglius sa irù; siya usab nangáwat,</i> I
distracted the dog's attention, while he
broke into the house. <b>3</b> [A12] for s.t. to
come and go without being given adequate
or passing attention. <i>Pila na ka Sabadu ang
milius?</i> How many Saturdays have come
and gone? <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] keep coming in
succession. <i>Naglíus na man lang tung mga
maáyung tanyag,</i> Those good offers have
just been coming to you one after the other.
<b>2</b> [A2; b5] wriggle through a tight opening.
<i>Liúsa (liúsi) ang mga táwu arun maabut ka
sa altar,</i> Wriggle through the throng so you
can reach the altar. <b>liuslíus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> avoid
being caught by changing direction and
speed constantly. <i>Lisud siyang dakpun kay
maáyung muliuslíus,</i> He is hard to catch
because he is good in dodging. <b>2</b> manage to
get through an argument or interrogation
by evasive means. <i>Maáyu siyang muliuslíus
sa katarúngan,</i> He is good at giving evasive
reasons.

<p><b>líut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> squeeze one's way through.
<i>Milíut siya sa daghang táwu,</i> He squeezed
his way through the crowd. <i>Nasámad siya
sa alambring íyang giliútan,</i> He sustained
cuts from the barbed wire he squeezed
through. <b>2</b> get out of a difficult spot by
verbal cunning. <i>Bísag pit-un siya, makalíut
pa giyug pangatarúngan,</i> Even if you push
him against the wall, he will manage to
<pb n=1283>come up with an answer that will somehow
get him out of it.

<p><b>líwa</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] destroy mankind and rid the
world of evils. <i>Ang lúnup mauy milíwa sa
kalibútan,</i> The great deluge destroyed mankind
and rid the world of evils.

<p><b>líwag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] move s.t. at one end to get
it out of the way or make it change position.
<i>Liwágun nátù ngadtu ning tabla arun
dílì magbalabag sa dálan,</i> Let's push this
board to one side so it won't be in the way.
<b>2</b> [B6; c1] face a different direction. <i>Pastilan
ug mulíwag nang kanyun,</i> If that cannon
turns in this direction, we're in for it.
<b>2a</b> shift one's direction in squatting without
taking the soles off the ground. <i>Milíwag siya
arun maduul sa íyang tiráhan nga dyúlin,</i>
He pivoted around to get nearer to the target
he was shooting his marble at.

<p><b>líwas</b> <i>n</i> period after a holiday or big occasion.
<i>Sa líwas sa pyista,</i> After the fiesta. <i>Líwas sa
gíra,</i> The post-war period. <i>v</i> [B256; b] for
it to get to be the time after some period.
<i>Mulíwas na lang ang pasku wà giyud kuy pinaskúhan,</i>
Christmas will soon be over and
I still haven't received a single Christmas
gift. <i>Giliwásan giyud mi sa ting-ani didtu sa
búkid,</i> We stayed in the mountains until after
the harvest season.

<p><b>liwat</b> <i>a</i> @{taking after}. <i>Liwat siya sa amahan
nga taas ug ilung,</i> He got his father's long
nose. <b>&mdash; sa giliwatan</b> being exactly like the
parents, a chip off the old block. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256N; b6]
@{take after} s.o. <b>2</b> [A12] obtain or
produce an offspring or young. <i>Maáyu na
lang ug makaliwat (makapaliwat) ning sunúya
kay dì na ikatárì,</i> This rooster is no good
for fighting any more, but we can still use
him as breeder. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @species, @breed of. <i>Ang
dumánu liwat sa lubi nga inánu, Dumánu</i> is
a species of dwarf coconut. <b>2</b> one's @children.
<i>Pila nay ímung liwat karun?</i> How many
children do you have now? <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5c]
@breed s.t. <i>Paliwatan (paliwatun) nákù ning
ákung alumnus,</i> I will use this boar for
breeding purposes. <i>Ug gustu kag maáyung
nati, anhà ipaliwat sa ílang túru,</i> If you
want to have a good calf, breed it from
their bull. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] have an @offspring.
<i>Ug mangliwat ímung bábuy, paambíta ta ug
usa,</i> If your pig has a litter, let me have one.
<b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @descendant. <i>Ang kalíwat ni Busyu
mau ang mga adunáhan sa Karkar,</i> The
wealthy families in Carcar are the descendants
of Bosio. <b>2</b> @breed, @race, @species. <i>Kining
mungaána kalíwat ug hingitlug,</i> This hen is
an egg-laying breed. <i>Lubus nga kalíwat,</i>
Purebred. <i>Mau ni ang kalíwat sa úhung nga
<pb n=1284>gagmayun apan pinangità,</i> This species of
mushroom is small but highly prized. <i>Tabúnung
kalíwat,</i> The brown race. [+]

<p><b>liwayway</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name of a Tagalog weekly. <b>2</b>
brand of cheap cigarettes.

<p><b>liwit</b> = <sc>DIWIT</sc>.

<p><b>liyalíya</b> <i>n</i> @{rocking chair}. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sit or be
rocking in a chair. <i>Midiskansu siya, nagliyalíya,</i>
He is sitting in his rocking chair, relaxing.

<p><b>liyinda</b> <i>n</i> @legend, a story handed down from
early times by tradition and popularly regarded
as historical.

<p><b>líyu</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6(1)] @circle around. <i>Milíyu ug
katulu ang ayruplánu únà mutugpa,</i> The
airplane circled three times before it landed.
n things located in a circle around an area.
<i>Mga balay nga líyu sa simbahan,</i> The houses
surrounding the church.

<p><b>líyug</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long and slender to be @bent or
@crooked, @warped. <i>Dílì magsirbi nà pára pálu
kay líyug kaáyu,</i> This would not do for a
mast because it is crooked. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] be
@crooked or @bent. <i>Unsang klási sa mitrusána
ni nga naglíyug man?</i> What kind of meter
stick is this that it is so crooked? <b>2</b> [B246]
for a missile to go crooked. <i>Mulíyug ang lapad
nga batu ug ilábay,</i> A flat stone curves
when you throw it. <b>liyuglíyug</b> <i>v</i> [A] bend
back and forth. <i>Ug muliyuglíyug ang lubi,
bagyu na nà,</i> If the coconut sways back and
forth, it's a typhoon.

<p><b>líyuk</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c] be, go around s.t. <i>Mga bátang
naglíyuk (nagliyuk) sa nag-ásuy,</i> Children
sitting around the storyteller. <i>Makalíyuk
ba ning písì sa paldu?</i> Will this rope go
all around the bale? <i>Wà mi makasíbug dihang
giliyúkan mi sa mga Hapun,</i> We were
not able to retreat when the Japanese surrounded
us. a being around. <i>Líyuk sa ílang
balay may káhuy nga namúnga,</i> There are
trees covered with fruit all around their
house.

<p><b>liyun</b> <i>n</i> @lion.

<p><b>lú<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @{law course}. <i>Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan,</i>
He is taking up law.

<p><b>lú<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] @{feel weak} and with no energy.
<i>Mulú lang nang tawhána ug magdaut,</i> That
man feels weak and lazy only if he is ill. <i>Ug
ilú nímu ang plú, musamut,</i> Your flu will
get worse if you give in to it.

<p><b>lúad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB126; a12] be @uprooted and fall
on its side, @uproot s.t. <i>Bagyu Ámi ang naglúad
ánang kasya,</i> Typhoon Amy felled
that acacia tree. <i>Nalúad ang pusti nga naagian
sa bahà,</i> The post was uprooted when
the flood went through it. <b>2</b> [A; a12] for
brothers to marry sisters. <i>Gilúad sa mga
<pb n=1285>Plánas ang mga Bakalan,</i> The Planas brothers
married the Bacalan sisters.

<p><b>luag</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> loose, not tightly attached or wound
around. <i>Luag kaáyu pagkabaáta ang písì,</i>
The rope is loosely tied. <i>Luag nga sapátus,</i>
Shoes that are too big. <b>2</b> having ample
space. <i>Ang bangkù luag pára lingkúran sa
lima ka táwu,</i> The bench is big enough for
five persons to sit on it. <i>Luag nga kalubinhan.</i>
Large tracts of coconut land. <b>2a</b> for
s.t. not to occupy a whole area. <i>Ípun diri
ug lingkud kay luag pa mi kaáyu,</i> Sit with
us because there's plenty of room here. <b>3</b>
being in a comfortable situation. <i>Luag na
ang átung panimuyù kay may trabáhu na
silas Pápa ug Máma,</i> We have a comfortable
life now that Dad and Mom both have jobs.
<b>4</b> for emotions or a sickness to be relieved.
<i>Luag na ang ákung ginháwa dihang naulì na
ang bátà,</i> My anxiety has been relieved now
that my daughter came home. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; a2]
be loose, loosen. <i>Bi, akuy muluag (mupaluag)
sa ímung kurbáta,</i> Here, I will loosen
your necktie. <i>Hugti ug maáyu ang twirka
arun dílì muluag,</i> Tighten the nut very
well so it will not loosen. <i>Luagi ug báat ang
ákung kamut,</i> Tie my hands loosely. <b>2</b> [B5; b6]
be, become wide in area. <i>Nagkaluag
ang ílang kahumayan kay nanáwat silag
prinda,</i> They are getting more and more
rice lands because they accept mortgages. <b>3</b>
for one's financial or emotional situation
to ease up. <b>ha-</b> = <b>LUAG,</b> <i>a2.</i> <b>luaglúag</b> <i>v</i>
[B26; b(1)] for there to be a slackening of
pressure, treat leniently. <i>Apikíha siya. Ayawg
luagluági ang ímung paghangyù,</i> Pressure
him. Don't ease up in your pleading.
<i>Ug luagluágan nímu ang ímung mga anak,
mangabusar nà,</i> If you are too lenient with
your children, they will become abusive.

<p><b>luaryang, luaryung</b> (from <i>luag</i>) <i>a</i> for a woman
to have a large vagina, no longer a virgin
(coarse). <i>Mangasáwa ka ánang luaryang?</i>
Are you going to marry that fallen woman?
<i>v</i> [B126] be a fallen woman.

<p><b>lúas</b> <i>n</i> tiny sore in the gums or inside of the
mouth. <i>v</i> [b4] have tiny sores in the mouth.

<p><b>luátan</b> <i>n</i> joints, a place of union between two
separate bones.

<p><b>luay<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> leader in fishing with a line. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
attach a leader to a line.

<p><b>luay<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become weak and limp.
<i>Muluay (maluay) ang láwas sa táwung kuyapan,</i>
The body of a person who faints
becomes limp. <i>Nagluay ang úlu sa bátà nga
nakatúlug sa silya,</i> The child's head was
hanging limply after he fell asleep in the
chair. <i>a</i> flexible, limp. <i>Luay ang alambri,</i>
<pb n=1286>Wire is flexible.

<p><b>luay<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> = <sc>DUL-AY</sc>.

<p><b>luba</b> <i>v</i> [B26] @{give way} under pressure, persecution,
public opinion. <i>Dì muluba (maluba)
ning ákung pagbátì bísan taliw[=à] sa pagtámay,</i>
My love will not give way no matter
how much scorn they may heap on me.
<i>Ang lúhà sa íyang asáwa mauy nakapaluba
(nakaluba) sa íyang hugut nga hukum,</i> His
wife's tears moved him to back down from
his firm decision.

<p><b>lúbà</b> <i>v</i> [A3S; a1] @stab. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakalúbà,</i>
He was put in jail because he stabbed
s.o.

<p><b>lubad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2] @fade. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang
púlu kay gibakhan,</i> The shirt faded because
it was bleached in the sun. <i>Nagkalubad ang
singsing pansi,</i> The imitation ring is fading.
<b>2</b> [B246; b4] for colors to run. <i>Gilubdan
ang putì nga giságul sa dikulur,</i> When the
white and the colored clothing were washed
together, the colors ran onto the white
cloth. <b>3</b> [B2] for feelings, traits, etc. to
@fade. <i>Ang panahun makapalubad (makalubad)
sa panaghigalaay,</i> Time can make a
friendship fade. <b>3a</b> [AB] change one's
mind, cause s.o. to do so. <i>Dì giyud siya
maglubad sa íyang hukum,</i> He never changes
his decisions. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang íyang
hunàhúnà pagkabuntag,</i> She changed her
mind the following morning. <b>4</b> for the voice
to break. <i>Ulitáwu ka na kay milubad nag
ímung tíngug,</i> You are an adolescent now
because your voice has started to break.
a faded. <i>Sinínang lubad,</i> A faded shirt. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i>
[A; c6] shift the topic of conversation. <i>Mipalubad
dáyun siya dihang ákù na untang
sukmátan,</i> He changed the subject right away
when I was about to confront him. <b>lubarun</b>
<i>a</i> of a @faded sort. <i>Lubarun na ning
pulúha, dáan na man gud,</i> This sport shirt is
faded because it is already old.

<p><b>*lubag<hi rend=sub>1</i> pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] @{change the topic} of
conversation, take s.t. back. <i>Mangumidiya
siya, apan kun masukù na ang íyang kumidiyáhan,
mupalubag (magpalubag) dáyun siya,</i>
He teases, but when the fellow he is teasing
gets angry, he immediately takes it back.
<i>Báhin sa gugma ang íyang gipalubag,</i> He
changed the topic of conversation to love.

<p><b>lúbag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB6; ab] @twist s.t., @wring s.t. out.
<i>Lubágun ku nang líug mu, animála ka,</i> I will
wring your neck, you beast. <i>Lubági ang linabhan
arun daling mauga,</i> Wring out the
clothes so they will dry quickly. <b>2</b> [A13]
for flat boards to be @warped. <i>Naglúbag ang
tabla kay dúgayng nabulad sa ínit,</i> The
board is warped because it was left in the
<pb n=1287>sun for a long time. <b>(->)<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> liquid obtained
by squeezing plants for their sap. <i>Maáyung
bubhu ang lubag sa bawnus,</i> The squeezings
from the gogo vine make good shampoo. <i>v</i>
[A2; c] <b>1</b> exude a juice, taste, color when
soaked in water. <i>Pula ang ilubag sa tungug,</i>
Mangrove bark gives off a red color. <b>2</b> for
the results of bad behavior to come out.
<i>Milubag na ang íyang pangarmin. Napaangkan
siya,</i> Her habit of always making herself
up has borne fruit. Now she got pregnant.
<b>3</b> [A2N] for dirt to loosen so that it
comes out easily. <i>Ihúmul únà sa sabun nang
mga bulingun bwáhan makalubag ang buling,</i>
Soak the dirty clothes in soapy water
so that the dirt can come loose. <b>lubaglúbag</b>
<i>v</i> [A; c6] writhe. <i>Naglubaglúbag siya sa
katri sa kasakit,</i> He is writhing in pain on
the bed. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> liquid or juice squeezed out
of s.t. <i>Waswási pag linabhan kay lubug pag
linúbag,</i> Rinse the clothes once more because
the water you are wringing out is still
dirty. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] cause s.t. to exude its
juice or dirt to come out. <i>n</i> s.t. which can
loosen dirt.

<p><b>lubak</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] pound, beat heavily with s.t.
<i>Tulu ka táwu ang mulubak (maglubak) sa
humay,</i> Three persons will pound the rice.
<i>Lubakun ku sa kúmù ang ímung nawung,</i> I
will beat your face with my fists.

<p><b>lubakan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a coconut palm with the defect
that its nuts and fronds easily break or fall
off. <b>2</b> the way certain coconuts develop
with a husk so thick that the nut looks very
much bigger than the ordinary, but with an
ordinary amount of meat. <i>v</i> [B1256] for a
coconut tree to get to be so that the nuts
and fronds break off easily.

<p><b>lubang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] transplant seedlings. <i>Kamiy
mulubang sa mga lubi,</i> We will transplant
the coconut seedlings. <i>n</i> seedling.

<p><b>lubang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B246] for pimples or rash to
come out. <i>Mulubang ang mga butuybutuy
ug mukáun siyag pasáyan,</i> She breaks out in
rash if she eats shrimps.

<p><b>lúbang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. upland rice with big, round,
reddish grains that ripen in five months.

<p><b>lub-ang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c] put all of s.t. in one container.
<i>Kinsa may naglub-ang íning tanang
ságing sa kúlun?</i> Who put all the bananas
in the pot? <i>Ilub-ang ang tanang linabhan sa
duwang,</i> Put all of the laundry in the basin.

<p><b>lub-ang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> pothole. <b>2</b> hole to plant seedlings
in. <i>v</i> [B12] for potholes to develop.
<b>-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> seedling ready for transplanting to
holes dug for the purpose.

<p><b>lúbas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> heartwood of timber. <b>2</b> maturity,
enough years to become seasoned (literary).
<pb n=1288><i>v</i> [b4] have well-developed heartwood. <b>-an</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> having well-developed heartwood. <b>2</b>
@seasoned, @experienced. <i>Lubásan nga magbabalaud,</i>
Seasoned lawmaker.

<p><b>lubat</b> <i>n</i> illness caused by a frightening experience,
esp. contact with the dead. The cure
is <i>palínà</i>. (<i>see</i> <sc>*LÍNÀ<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>) <i>Kanang íyang gibátì
lubat nà niadtung kalit nga pagdawugdug,</i>
Her sickness is due to the intense fright she
suffered from hearing the thunder. <i>v</i> [B246; b4]
for an illness to develop or for s.t.
that one has to get worse because of intense
fright. <i>Mulubat ang kabahung basta iadtug
mintiryu,</i> Sores get worse if you go to a
cemetery when you have them. <i>Gilubatan
ang bátà kay gidúul sa minatay,</i> The child
got ill from fright because he was made to
go near the corpse. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] startle s.o.
by s.t. sudden&mdash;a shout or a sudden spring
from a concealed position. <i>Palubatan nákù
si Náti inigsúd sa kwartu,</i> I'll frighten Natie
when she enters the room.

<p><b>lubaung</b>= <sc>LIBAUNG</sc>.

<p><b>lubay, lúbay</b> <i>a</i> @pliant, easily bent. <i>Lúbay ang
kawáyan,</i> Bamboo bends. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] become
@supple. <i>Mulúbay (malúbay) ímung láwas
ug mukúhà kag bali,</i> Your body becomes
supple if you take ballet lessons. <b>(->)</b>
<i>n</i> tender string beans. <b>lubaylúbay</b> <i>v</i> [A1P; c16]
move or do s.t. slowly with a wiggly
body. <i>Maglubaylúbay (magpalubaylúbay)
giyud nà siyang maglakaw, mu rag báyut,</i>
He walks slowly wiggling his body like a
fairy. <i>n</i> k.o. @wrasse.

<p><b>lubi</b> <i>n</i> @coconut: <b><i>Cocos nucifera</i></b>. <b>mugbù pa
ang &mdash;</b> @{long ago}. <b>&mdash; nga lupísan</b> <i>n</i> variety
with green husks. <b>&mdash; nga ugis</b> <i>n</i> variety with
whitish nuts, used in making coconut oil
for medicinal purposes. <i>v</i> [b(1)] mix milk
extracted from coconut meat with s.t. <i>Nindut
ang sabaw sa kinhasun ug lubihan,</i> A
chowder of seashells tastes good if coconut
milk is added to it. <b>lubilúbi</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] weed
or clean the area around each coconut
plant. <i>Ug dì nátù matibuuk paglimpiyu, lubilubíhun
lang,</i> If we can't clean the whole
area, just clean under each tree. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name
given to various plants commonly found in
coconut groves. <b>1a</b> k.o. shrub with no
branches and reddish leaves growing at the
tops. <b>1b</b> k.o. @{ground orchids}, e.g. the ornamental
@orchid: <b><i>Spathoglottis plicata</i></b>. <b>2</b>
name given to k.o. palm. <b>palubilúbi</b> <i>v</i> [A]
play hard to get (from the notion that coconut
meat is hard to extract from its shell).
<i>Nagpalubilúbi siya ábig ákung lugítun,</i> She
is playing hard to get. She thinks I'm going
to try to extract her from the shell. <b>kalubihan, 
<pb n=1289>kalubian, kalubinhan</b> <i>n</i> coconut grove.
<b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> a system of trading in which the
merchandise, esp. home-made food preparations
as cakes, etc., are bartered for mature
coconuts. <i>v</i> [c6] barter goods for coconuts.
<i>Itagalubi ni nákung bibingka,</i> I'll barter
these rice cakes for coconuts.

<p><b>lúbid</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] twist together, twine.
<i>Nagkalúbid íyang dílà pagsinultig ininglis,</i>
His tongue gets all twisted up in trying to
speak English. <i>Lubíra ang duha ka wáyir
arun lig-un giyud,</i> Twist the two wires together
to make them really strong. <i>n</i> abaca
twine. <b>lubiran</b> <i>n</i> device for twining rope. <b>lubidlúbid,
-in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. hard, crunchy pastry,
fashioned like twine, sprinkled with flakes
of sugar.

<p><b>lubing</b> <i>n</i> loop or noose of a lasso which tightens
when pulled. <i>Dakua ang lubing kay dakù
ug líug ang báka,</i> Make the loop large
because the neck of the cow is large. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
<b>1</b> catch or ensnare using a lasso or
noose which tightens when pulled. <i>Akuy
mulubing (maglubing) sa mga báka,</i> I'll lasso
the cows. <b>2</b> win s.o. through deceit or
by fast talk. <i>Gilubing sa pulitiku ang publiku,</i>
The politician had won the public support
through his glib words.

<p><b>lubintadur = LIBINTADUR.</b>

<p><b>lubítus</b> <i>n</i> very small beads sewn on s.t. for
decoration. <i>v</i> [A; b6] decorate s.t. with <i>lubítus.</i>

<p><b>lublub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A;b(1)] bury oneself. <i>Kuykúya
ang gilublúban sa hanlilítik,</i> Dig down to
where the scorpion shrimp buried itself. <b>2</b>
[A; b6] stay long in a place without much
activity. <i>Naglublub lang siya sa íla kay way
kwarta,</i> He just stays home because he
doesn't have any money. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> place
where s.o. buries himself or stays long in. [+]

<p><b>lúbu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B26; c1P] for s.t. to be projected
upwards at a sharp angle. <i>Ayawg ilúbu (lubúha
ipalúbu, palubúha) inigsirbi kay sayun
nang sagngun,</i> Don't serve it high because
it will be easy to spike it. <i>a</i> projected
at a sharp angle. <i>Lúbu ra nga pagkasirbi[**typo: missing comma]</i>
Served too high. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> balloon. <b>2</b> hot-air balloon.
<i>Misáka ang lúbu human kadagkuti
ang pabílu,</i> The hot-air balloon rose after
the wick was lit.

<p><b>lúbu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> wolf.

<p><b>lúbù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> remove grains of corn from
the cob. <i>Lubúa nang mais arun ipagaling,</i>
Remove the kernels so we can mill them. <b>2</b>
remove teeth, serrations, or anything protruding
in a series, like the grains of corn.
<i>Malúbù run nang ngípun mug musúpak ka,</i>
You'll be minus your teeth if you don't
<pb n=1290>cooperate. <b>hangyù &mdash;</b> request made in such
a way it cannot be turned down (so called
from the notion that as one is asking for
corn he is at the same time picking at the
grains).

<p><b>lubug</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> for a person to sit with
the rump smack on the ground or for an
animal to sit or lie with its limbs flat on the
ground. <i>Milubug sa sawug ang irù,</i> The dog
was stretched out on the floor. <b>1a</b> for the
sun to be about to set. <i>Milubug na ang adlaw
sa kasadpan,</i> The sun was about to set
(lit. sitting on its rump in the west). <b>2</b> stay
in a place for some time, but temporarily.
<i>Duha na ku ka simánang lubug dinhi kay
way kasakyan,</i> I have been stuck here for
two weeks because there has been no transportation.
<b>2a &mdash; sa banig</b> [A13] stay in bed
due to illness. <i>Mutúig na siyang galubug sa
banig,</i> He has been bedridden for almost a
year. <b>lubganan</b> <i>n</i> place where animals habitually
lie down.

<p><b>lúbug</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2; a] for liquid to get or be
made murky with sediment. <i>Mulúbug (malúbug)
ang subà ug mubahà,</i> The river becomes
muddy during floods. <i>Ang nangaligúay
mauy naglúbug sa subà,</i> The bathers
made the river all muddy. <b>2</b> [AB12] for
one's sight to become, be made blurry. <i>Bulug
sa lúhà nga milúbug sa íyang mata,</i> A
torrent of tears that blurred her sight. <b>3</b>
[A; a12] make a wild disturbance so as to
disrupt an activity. <i>Tagagawas ang naglúbug
sa ámung parti,</i> Some outsiders disrupted
our party. <i>a</i> murky, blurred. <b>(->) =
LÚBUG,</b> <i>a.</i> <b>-un(->)</b> <i>a</i> of a muddy, murky
sort.

<p><b>lubuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] pound with a pestle. <i>Lubka
(lukba) lang ang tipasì. Ayawg ipagaling,</i>
Just pound the rice. Don't have it milled.
<b>2</b> [A; a12] rain blows on the body. <i>Lubkun
únà sa buksidur ang tiyan sa íyang kuntra,</i>
The boxer pounds his opponent's stomach
first. <b>lubkanan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> place where pounding
is done. <b>2</b> mortar.

<p><b>lubulúbu</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a bitter, inedible powdery material
from buri palm flour, which is separated
from the edible portion <i>(natuk)</i> and
disposed of. <b>2</b> thin, white membranous covering
on the inside surface of bamboo stems.

<p><b>lubun</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1)] sink into s.t. soft. <i>Nalubun
ang trák sa lápuk ug dì na makadúwal,</i>
The truck is stuck in the mud and cannot
move any further. <i>Nagkalubun na ning ákung
singsing kay nagkadakù man ning ákung
tudlù,</i> My ring is getting embedded
more and more deeply in my finger because
my finger is getting fatter. <i>Ilubun (lubunun) 
<pb n=1291>pag-áyu ang batu sa aláhas arun dílì
daling mulagput,</i> The stones are set deeply
so that they can't fall out. <i>a</i> for stones to
be set deep. <b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> meat or fish inserted into
the boiled rice one carries s.w. as his lunch
<i>(malutù).</i> <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> in weaving, a rod stuck
into a groove made in the cloth beam <i>(likisan),</i>the purpose of which is to hold the
woven cloth wound around the cloth beam
in place and maintain tension on the warp.

<p><b>lubung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] bury. <i>Naglubung silag bahandì
sa sílung,</i> They buried a treasure under
the house. <i>Gipamisáhan ang háyà únà
ilubung,</i> A mass was said for the dead man
before he was buried. <b>1a</b> be beaten by an
overwhelming victory in an election, contest,
game. <i>Gilubung ang Libiral sa Nasyunalista,</i>The Nationalists defeated the Liberals
by a landslide. <b>1b</b> bury fish in the
sand to make them look fresh. <b>1c</b> embed a
charm inside a part of the body. <i>Gilubung
níya ang mutyà sa íyang brásu arun mahímu
siyang kublan,</i> He embedded the magical
pearl in his biceps to make himself invulnerable.
<b>2</b> [AB6; cP] sink, drive s.t. into the
ground; for s.t. to sink into the ground. <i>Milubung
ákung tiil pagtámak nákù sa lápuk,</i>
My foot sank when I stepped in the mud.
<i>Naglubung silag mga trúsu sa pundasiyun,</i>
They drove logs into the foundations. <b>&mdash; sa
kalímut</b> <i>v</i> [c6] forget s.t. completely. <i>Ilubung
sa kalímut ang ímung makauúlawng
kaági,</i> Forget your shameful past. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> grave.
<b>2</b> interment. <b>lubngánan</b> <i>n</i> place of interment.
<i>Bawnun ku sa lubngánan ang ákung
pagmáhay,</i> I will regret it to my dying day
(lit. carry my regret to my grave). <b>lubnganan,
kalubngan</b> <i>n</i> cemetery. <b>lubnganánun</b> <i>a</i>
appropriate to the cemetery. <i>Lubnganánung
kahílum,</i> A cemetery-like silence. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> fish
buried in the sand near the shore so that
they would look fresh.

<p><b>lubus</b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] acquire a supernatural
ability by means of undergoing a series of
difficult tasks <i>(táhas)</i> in preparation for it.
<i>Ug mulubus (manlubus) kag kaláki kinahanglang
makatúman ka sa táhas,</i> If you
want to acquire supernatural ability, you
must be able to accomplish the series of
difficult tasks. <i>Gilubus sa ákung apuhan
ang kaláki ni Dun Liyun Kílat,</i> My grandfather
acquired Don Leon Kilat's supernatural
ability.

<p><b>lúbus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> entirely of one color and texture.
<i>Ang ákung irù lúbus nga putì,</i> My dog is
entirely white. <i>Ang kulur sa bistídu lúbus
kaáyung pula,</i> My dress is colored a very
pure red. <i>Lúbus pánit ákung bág,</i> My purse
<pb n=1292>is all leather. <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash; kalíwat</b> @purebred. <i>Lúbus
kalíwat Tiksas kining manúka,</i> This cock is
a purebred Texas. <b>2</b> for a decision to be
final. <i>Lúbus na ang ákung hukum,</i> My decision
is final. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; c1] be, become purely
one color. <i>Ug usban nímug pintal, mulúbus
(malúbus) ang kulur,</i> If you paint it
once more, the color will be pure and even.
<b>2</b> [B26; c1] be, become @decided.

<p><b>lúbus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> @tied, wound around tight. <i>v</i> [a12]
@tie s.t. tight. <i>Ayaw lubúsa pagbáat arun sayun
badbárun,</i> Don't tie it tight so it will
be easy to untie. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @tightness of a knot
or the way s.t. was tied up.

<p><b>lubut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @anus, @rump. <i>Lúpig pay lubut sa himungáan
sa katabian níya,</i> She's more talkative
than a hen's behind (which keeps
opening and closing). <b>walay &mdash;</b> having hips
and buttocks far too forward. <i>Ayg tak-in
kay wà kay lubut,</i> Don't tuck in your shirt
because you have flat buttocks. <b>2</b> @vagina
(euphemism). <i>Ang bátà anhà mulusut sa lubut
sa babáyi,</i> A baby comes out through
the mother's bottom. <b>3</b> bottom part of a
container or receptacle. <i>Lubut sa baskit,</i>
Bottom of the basket. <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; sa básu</b> costume
jewelry (lit. made from the bottom of a
glass). <i>Daling mulubad ang singsing nga lubut
sa básu,</i> A dimestore ring soon fades. <b>4</b>
rear end of vehicles. <i>Ikarga sa lubut sa trák,</i>
Load it at the back part of the truck. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash;
mu</b> <b>5a</b> expression of disbelief. <i>Lubut nímu!
Kinsay mutúu,</i> My foot! Who'd believe
that! <b>5b</b> expression of disgust. <i>'Tagai kug
dus ipamúwang.'&mdash;'Dus sa ímung lubut.
Hái kwartáhun?'</i> 'Let me have two pesos
to go to the cockfights.'&mdash;'Two pesos. You
must be nuts. We don't have any money!'
<b>6</b> <b>nakahikap sa &mdash;</b> s.t. must have happened
to [subject] that he did s.t. nice since he
doesn't usually do that. <i>Nanghátag mag
kwarta ang tihik. Nakahikap sa lubut,</i> Suddenly
the miser is giving out money. S.t.
must have happened to him. (Lit. He must
have gotten his hand on s.o.'s rear end.) <b>7</b>
<b>mabaw ug &mdash;</b> easily angered. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [ANC; c1]
do s.t. at s.o.'s rear end. <i>Nanglubut siya ug
suntuk,</i> He hit him on the buttocks. <i>Nagkalúbut
mig higdà,</i> We lay with our buttocks
touching each other. <i>Lubuta siya pagtindak,</i>
Kick her in the arse. <b>2</b> [B; c] get to be
at the rear or bottom. <i>Nagkalubut na man
ku sa ámung klási,</i> I am gradually slipping
to the bottom of my class. <i>Inay kay nag-una
kug sakay, nalubut na hinúun,</i> I was
the first to get on the bus, but I wound up
in the rear end anyway. <i>Ilubut lang ning ákung
karga,</i> Just place my baggage at the
<pb n=1293>rear. <b>3</b> [A12N; a12] enter through the back
way. <i>Lubtun lang nátug súd ang báy arung
dì ta makit-an,</i> Let's go in through the back
door so that nobody will see us. <b>&mdash; ug anay</b>
<i>n</i> nutmeg shells (lit. sow's anus) so called
because of the similarity of the lips of this
shell to the anal lips of a sow. <b>lubutlubut</b> <i>v</i>
[B4] have more work to do than one can
handle. <i>Nagkalubutlubut kug laba,</i> I'm going
crazy trying to do all this laundry. <i>Dílì
man ka mutuktuk, magkalubutlubut man
lang tag panábun sa átung láwas,</i> Why didn't
you knock? I went wild trying to cover
myself. <b>lubutlúbut</b> <i>v</i> [AP; c] @follow s.o.
around. <i>Ayaw kug lubutlubúti,</i> Don't follow
me around all the time.

<p><b>lubyuk</b> <i>v</i> [B] be, become @hollow, @sunken.
<i>Kandíis nga naglubyuk sa íyang isig ka áping,</i>
Dimples that are deeply set on each
cheek. <i>Ang húmuk nga yútà malubyuk kun
tumban,</i> Soft earth caves in when you step
on it.

<p><b>lúd</b> <i>n</i> load of courses given to a teacher. <i>v</i> [A; c]
have a certain teaching load. <i>Gamay ra
kug makítà kay naglúd lang kug duha,</i> I
don't earn much because I have only two
courses. <i>Pilay ilúd nímu káda simistir?</i> How
many courses are given you per semester?

<p><b>ludà</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c] @spit, @{spit out}. <i>Giludà níya
ang íyang giúsap,</i> He spat out what he was
chewing, <i>n</i> @spittle, @saliva.

<p><b>ludábi</b> <i>n</i> name of Cebuano writers' organization,
abbreviation of <i>Lúbas sa Dágang Bisayà</i>,
'The elite (lit. heartwood) of Visayan
literature'.

<p><b>lud-an</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LUWÀ</sc>.

<p><b>ludhan</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LUHUD</sc>.

<p><b>lúgà</b> = <sc>LUGÀLÚGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>lugabu, lugábu</b> <i>n</i> dull hollow sound of impact.
<i>Lugábu sa mga táwung nagsáyaw sa
táas,</i> The thumping sound of the people
dancing upstairs. <i>v</i> [A2S3] produce a dull
hollow sound of impact. <i>Milugábu ang likud
nga gisumbag,</i> His back resounded with
a thump when I slapped him. <i>Naglugabu
ang bawud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves pounded
against the shore. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁBU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugabung</b> <i>v</i> [B1456] make a thumping sound.
<i>Naglugabung ang mga lamísa ug síya nga
gipatíran sa mga hubug,</i> The chairs and tables
made a thumping sound as the drunken
men kicked them.

<p><b>lugak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ab7] for s.t. which grips or is
tied round s.t. to loosen. <i>Wà siya mulugak
ug gakus nákù sa kahadluk nga byáan,</i> She
did not let go of her embrace for fear of
being left behind. <i>Lugaka ang ímung sinínà
arun hayáhay,</i> Loosen your dress so it will
<pb n=1294>be comfortable. <i>Lugaki ang turniki káda
singku minútus,</i> Loosen the tourniquet every
five minutes. <b>2</b> [B4; b(1)] @abate, @{slow
down} from doing s.t. with energy. <i>Ang bag-ung
dálan makalugak (makapalugak) sa trapiku
dinhi,</i> The new street can relieve the
traffic here. <i>Ayawg lugaki ang pagpanguyab
níya,</i> Keep courting her for all you're
worth. Don't let off. <b>3</b> [B2456N] for the
knees to give way, for a person to budge
from his convictions. <i>Dì siya mulugak sa íyang
barugánan bísag hulgáun,</i> He won't
budge from his stand even if you threaten
him. <i>Nanglugak ang íyang mga túhud,</i> His
knees gave way. <b>4</b> [b(1)] loosen one's control
or discipline over. <i>Ug ímung lugakan
ang ímung anak muabusar nà,</i> If you rear
your child leniently he will become abusive.

<p><b>lugàlúgà</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12] move s.t. in a hole
back and forth. <i>Naglugàlúgà siya ug lipak
sa nabúlit nga túbu,</i> He worked a stick back
and forth in the tube that was stopped up.

<p><b>lugamak, lugámak</b> <i>v</i> [B456; c1P] fall with a
crash, be thrown down with force. <i>Mulugamak
ka giyud ug mahugnù nang ímung gitungtúngan,</i>
You will fall with a crash if
that thing you are standing on collapses.
<i>Gilugamakan (gipalugamakan) ang mga búlak
sa mga inibut nga sagbut,</i> They threw
the uprooted weeds with force on top of
the flowers. <i>Nalugamakan (nalugmakan) ku
sa íyang kasábà,</i> I received the brunt of his
scoldings. <i>Ímu man nang ilugamak (ipalugamak)
ang ímung láwas bísag ása,</i> You throw
yourself down anywhere. <i>n</i> sounds of s.t.
falling with a crash. <b>(->)</b> [B126; b8] rush
headlong into s.t. <i>Nalugamak siya sa usa ka
byúda nga way kwarta,</i> He rushed into marriage
with a penniless widow. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁMAK</sc>,
<i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugan-ub</b> <i>n</i> @thundering, @reverberating sound.
<i>v</i> [A3] produce a thunderous or loud reverberating
sound. <i>Milugan-ub ang kabukíran
nga gipabuthan ug dinamíta,</i> A deafening
sound echoed through the mountains
when the dynamite was exploded. <i>n</i> a thundering,
reverberating sound. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGAN-UB</sc>.

<p><b>lugapak, lugápak</b> <i>n</i> @banging, @slapping, @cracking
sound. <i>Ang lugapak sa kawáyan,</i> The
cracking of the bamboo. <i>v</i> [A2S; ac] make
a cracking, slapping, banging sound. <i>Milugapak
ang pultahan nga gikalit pagsira,</i> The
door was slammed with a bang. <i>Naglugapak
ang samput sa íyang anak sa bakus,</i> The
leather belt cracked over his son's buttocks.
<b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁPAK</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lugar<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> geographical place. <i>Nakaadtu na
<pb n=1295>ku sa lainláing lugar sa kalibútan,</i> I have
been to various places in the world. <b>1a</b> situation
one is in. <i>Ikaw sa ákung lugar ug lalim
ba,</i> You try being in my place and see
if it is nice. <b>2</b> proper place, occasion for s.t.
<i>Ibutang sa lugar ang ímung pagpangmik-ap,</i>
Use make-up at the proper occasion. <i>Walà
sa lugar tung ímung pagsaway níya kay daghang
namínaw,</i> It was not the right time for
you to criticise him because there were lots
of people listening. <b>2a</b> proper place of vehicles
in the flow of traffic. <i>Patuu. Wà ka sa
lugar,</i> Move to the right. You're not in your
lane. <b>3</b> vacant place. <i>Dùna[**typo: Dúna] pa bay lugar sa
dyíp?</i> Is there room in the jeep? <b>4</b> available
time for s.t. <i>Wà kuy lugar pagsúruy
run,</i> I don't have time to go around now. <b>5</b>
@chance or @opportunity to do s.t. <i>Way lugar
pagdúul níya kay gwardiyádu,</i> There is no
chance to get near him because he is guarded.
<b>6</b> <b>primíru (ikaduha,</b> etc.) &mdash; in the first
(second, etc.) @place. <i>Ayawg adtu. Primíru
lugar istranyu ka,</i> Don't go there. In the
first place, you are a stranger. <b>lugráha, lugaráha</b>
<i>n</i> particular place, time, chance. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b(1)] @{give way} or space to. <i>Milugar siya
arun makalingkud ang babáyi,</i> He gave
his place so the lady could sit. <i>Lugari ang
Prisidinti inigsúut níya sa nanambung,</i> Give
way to the President when he goes through
the crowd. <b>2</b> [A3; b(1)] give the chance to
do s.t. <i>Musabut giyug íyang pápa kay mulugar
man inigpamisíta nákù,</i> Her father is
sure understanding because he leaves us
alone (lit. gives a chance) when I go visiting.
<i>Ayaw siyag lugari nga muantug,</i> Don't give
him the chance to shoot the ball. <b>3</b> [A12]
<b>3a</b> get a chance to do s.t. <i>Hagki dáyun siya
ug makalugar ka,</i> Kiss her as soon as you
get the chance. <b>3b</b> have the time to. <i>Buháta
ni ug makalugar ka,</i> Do this if you have the
time to. <b>4</b> [A2; c6] pull over in a place
proper for stopping a vehicle. <i>Ilugar ang
dyip ug muhúnung ka,</i> Pull over to the
side of the road when you stop. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having
available space. <i>Kargáhi pa kay lugar pa kaáyu,</i>
Put in more passengers because there's
still plenty of space. <b>2</b> for there to be a
chance. <i>Dì ku mangupya bísag lugar kaáyu,</i>
I won't cheat even if I have a good chance
to do so. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] give s.o. a chance
to come near or touch one. <i>Di[typo: Dì] nà siya magbinúang
bísag palugaran,</i> He won't do anything
foolish even if given the chance. <b>tag-</b>
<i>n</i> spirit inhabiting a particular place. <i>Gidaútan
nà siya sa taglugar kay íyang giputul
ang káhuy,</i> The spirit of the place made him
ill when he cut the tree down.

<pb n=1296>

<p><b>lugar<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>KINTA<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>lugas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @grain. <i>Usa ka lugas humay,</i> A grain
of rice. <i>Maáyu ang lugas sa igtalánum nga
binhì,</i> The seeds for planting have well-formed
grains. <b>1a</b> @drops (figurative). <i>Pipila
ka lugas nga lúhà,</i> A few teardrops. <b>2</b> strand.
<i>Usa ka lugas buhuk,</i> A strand of hair. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash;
lánut</b> a hair's breadth (lit. strand of abaca
fiber) by which one is kept from death. <i>Usa
ka lugas lánut ang nakauwang nákù sa kamatáyun,</i>
I came within a hair's breadth of
meeting my death. <b>3</b> word counter for people.
<i>Pipila ka lugas táwu ang didtu sa sinihan,</i>
There were only a few people in the
movies. <b>4</b> word counter for things which
can be counted but not concrete. <i>Pipila ka
lugas púlung,</i> A few words. <i>Pipila ka lugas
kanta,</i> A few songs. <i>Pipila ka lugas idíya,</i> A
few ideas.

<p><b>lug-as</b> <i>v</i> [B12; a12] remove husk from rice
or other grains. <i>Ang ímung linubkan dì makalug-as
(makapalug-as) sa dáwa,</i> The way
you are doing it won't get the husks off the
millet. <i>a</i> already unhusked. <i>Taphi ang linubuk
kay lug-as na,</i> Winnow the pounded
rice because the husks are off now.

<p><b>lugátub</b> <i>n</i> deep, loud, hollow sound. <i>v</i> [A] resound
with a deep loud, hollow sound. <i>Milugátub
ang baril nga gilábayg batu,</i> The
barrel went bonk when a stone was thrown
at it. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUGÁTUB</sc>.

<p><b>lúgaw</b> <i>n</i> @porridge from rice or corn grits. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a] make porridge. <i>Bag-ung humay ang
lugáwa,</i> Make porridge from the new rice. <b>2</b>
[B12] turn to, become a mud puddle or
mire. <i>Malúgaw ang dálan ug mag-úlan,</i> The
path becomes slush during rainy days. <b>-in-,
ni-</b> <i>n</i> = <sc>LÚGAW</sc>.

<p><b>*lugay-nan, -nun</b> <i>n</i> pertaining to politics and
elections. <i>Bugnù nga lugaynun (lugaynan)
diin napárut si Kirínu,</i> The political fight
where Quirino lost.

<p><b>lugbak</b> <i>v</i> [B26] for organic matter to decay.
<i>Malugbak ang prútas nga may tatsa,</i> The
fruit will @rot if it has been damaged. <i>Bisan
malugbak ang ímung bukug, dílì ka kabalus
sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You can never repay
your parents no matter how much time goes
by (lit. even after your bones have rotted).
<i>Mauy nakalugbak (nakapalugbak) sa káhuyng
halígi ang kanúnayng paghúmul níini
sa túbig,</i> The wooden post rotted because
it was immersed too long in water.

<p><b>lugbáti</b> = <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.

<p><b>lugda</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] start, originate some foolishness
or mild misbehavior. <i>Kinsa ninyuy
naglugda ug kuriskuris sa bungbung?</i> Which
one of you started making scratches on the
<pb n=1297>wall?

<p><b>lugdang</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] <b>1</b> settle to the bottom of
a liquid. <i>Wà makalugdang ang húgaw kay
pirming gikútaw,</i> The dirt would not settle
because s.o. kept stirring the water. <i>Dúgayng
milugdang ang íyang paun kay súg
man,</i> It took his bait a long time to reach
the bottom because there was a current. <b>2</b>
for results of bad action to make themselves
felt. <i>Milugdang ang íyang tinuntu. Nakalabus,</i>
That is the fruit of his foolishness. He
was sent to prison. <b>3</b> [B3(1)4] for tender
rice grains to solidify. <i>Wà pa gánì makalugdang
ang humay aníhun na nímu,</i> Are you
going to harvest the rice when the grains
haven't solidified yet? <b>-in-</b>, <b>ni-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. that
settled. <b>2</b> results of bad action. <i>Kanang batáa
linugdang sa ímung tinuntu,</i> The child
is the fruit of your stupidity. <b>3</b> one's youngest
child (humorous). <b>-in-an</b> = <sc>-IN-</sc>, <i>1</i>.

<p><b>lugdat</b> <i>v</i> [B46] for the eyes to bulge. <i>Milugdat
ang íyang mata sa katingála,</i> Her eyes
bulged with surprise. <i>Gwápa untà apan naglugdat
lang ang mata,</i> She looks pretty but
she has bulging eyes.

<p><b>lugdum</b>, <b>lugdung</b> <i>a</i> heavily @overcast, particularly
with rain clouds. <i>v</i> [B46] be heavily
overcast. <i>Dúnay taliábut nga unus kay naglugdung
ang lángit,</i> A rainstorm is coming
because the sky is heavily overcast.

<p><b>lúgì<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] extract dried coconut meat
from shell. <i>Hustu nang lugíun ang gihudnu
nga lubi,</i> The coconuts are dried and the
meat can be extracted. <b>2</b> [A; a12] process
coconut into copra, from harvesting to drying.
<i>Maglúgì mi káda trimistri,</i> We make
copra every three months. <i>n</i> @copra. <i>Isulud
sa sáku ang lúgì,</i> Put the copra in the sack.
<b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> instrument for extracting coconut
meat from the shell.

<p><b>lúgì<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> being outsmarted, fooled (slang). <i>Lúgì
ka kay mitúu kang mubáyad siyag útang,</i>
You have been fooled for believing that he
pays his debts. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126] be tricked into
s.t. (slang). <i>Nalúgì ku sa Múrus pagpalit sa
imitasyung rúliks,</i> I was tricked by the Moro
into buying a fake Rolex watch. <b>2</b> [B126; a12]
for a business to fail, fold up. <i>Ang kalit
nga pagbahar sa prisyu mauy nakalúgì (nakapalúgì)
sa íyang nigusyu,</i> The sudden
drop in prices caused his business to fail. <b>3</b>
[A; a2b3(1)] defeat in a game or fight. <i>Ang
manghud ra nákuy maglúgí níya sa ahidris,</i>
Even my little brother could defeat him in
chess. <i>Ang liphuk ni Prasyir mauy nalugian
ni Klí,</i> It was Frazier's left hook that defeated
Clay.

<p><b>lúging</b> <i>n</i> logging company, industry. <i>Náa ku
<pb n=1298>sa lúging,</i> I work for a logging firm.

<p><b>lug-is</b> <i>v</i> [AB6; a1] @split or @break into smaller
sizes. <i>Maglug-is kug kawáyan pára ikural,</i> I
will split some bamboo for fencing. <i>Naglug-is
ang pintal,</i> The paint is cracking.

<p><b>lúgit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @extract s.t. buried or fastened
hard to a surface with s.t. pointed or
sharp. <i>Gilúgit ang bála gíkan sa íyang páa,</i>
The slug was extracted from his thigh. <b>2</b>
extract coconut meat from the shell in
making copra. <i>Ang láhing ray lugítun,</i> Extract
copra only from mature nuts. <b>3</b> force
oneself or s.o. to dig deep for money when
he is financially hard up. <i>Napugus ang pubri
paglúgit sa íyang tinagúan,</i> The poor
man was forced to dig into his savings. <b>4</b> ask
for s.t. in a forceful way. <i>Milúgit siyag hangyù
sa íyang bánang mulakaw siya,</i> She twisted
her husband's arm to let her go out. <b>(->)</b>
<i>n</i> s.t. used to extract s.t. buried or fastened
hard to a surface, esp. an instrument to separate
coconut meat from the shell. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i>
[A] act unwilling to make s.o. trouble himself
or plead. <i>Gustu túud siya, piru nagmagáhì
kay magpalúgit giyud,</i> She actually
wanted to, but she put up resistance because
she wanted him to implore her.

<p><b>lugituk</b> <i>v</i> [B46; b6] for cereals to be @half-cooked
but moist. <i>Naglugituk ang linung-ag
kay wà ayúhag síga,</i> The rice is half-cooked
because the fire wasn't hot enough.

<p><b>lugitum</b> (from <i>itum</i>) <i>v</i> [B4] be dark, gloomy
because of denseness. <i>Milugitum ang lángit
sa kabagà sa dag-um,</i> The sky got dark with
thick clouds. <i>Ang naglugitum nga kamaisan,</i>
The dense and dark cornfields.

<p><b>lugkab</b> = <sc>LUNGKAB</sc>.

<p><b>lugkat</b> (from <i>lukat</i>) <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> pry off things
that are nailed or stuck into s.t. <i>Nakalugkat
siya sa dakung lansang nga nagtaup sa káhuy,</i>
He managed to pull the large nail out
of the wood. <i>Gilugkat ang mga dáang baldúsa,</i>
They removed the old tiles. <b>2</b> @uproot,
@fell, including roots and all. <i>Nalugkat ang
pusti nga nadasmagan sa trák,</i> The truck
rammed into the post and it knocked it
over.

<p><b>luglug<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] thrust s.t. long repeatedly
into a narrow opening. <i>Luglúga ang kasilyas
kay nasampúngan,</i> Thrust a stick into the
toilet pipe because it is stopped up. <i>n</i> stick
or the like used to thrust into a narrow
opening.

<p><b>luglug<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] @slaughter an animal by slicing
the neck. <i>Way sud-an, magluglug tag
manuk,</i> We have nothing for dinner. Let's
slaughter a chicken.

<p><b>*luglug<hi rend=sub>3</i> pansit &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PANSIT</sc>.

<pb n=1299>

<p><b>lugmak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; a1] give way or break in the
middle due to force or weight. <i>Mulugmak
(malugmak) nang salúga kun tungtúngan
ug daghan,</i> That floor will collapse if
lots of people stand on it. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @trample
on plants and destroy them. <i>Gilugmak sa
bábuy ang mga buwak,</i> The pig trampled
over the flowers.

<p><b>lugmaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6] @{show up} or @appear. <i>Ingug
musultis Prisidinti Markus. Hái Markúsang
milugmaw?</i> They said President Marcos
would give a talk. But no Marcos appeared.
<i>Gilugmáwan siyag dílì ingun nátù,</i> A supernatural
being appeared to him. <b>2</b> [A2]
for part of s.t. buried to be sticking out. <i>Giunsa
man ninyu paglubung ang irù nga milugmaw
man ang tiil?</i> How did you bury
the dog when its feet are sticking out? <b>3</b>
[A2N; b6] for tears to well up in the eyes.
<i>Nalúbug ang ákung mata nga gilugmáwan
sa lúhà,</i> My eyes were blurred with the tears
that started to form.

<p><b>lugmay</b> = <sc>LUKMAY</sc>.

<p><b>lugmuk</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; a2b2] for structures or
people to @collapse. <i>Ang línug mauy naglugmuk
sa Rúbi Táwir,</i> The earthquake destroyed
the Ruby Tower. <i>Nalugmuk sa simbahan
ang táwung nakuyapan,</i> The man
who fainted in church suddenly collapsed.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @{tear down} structures. <i>Ipalugmuk
sa gubyirnu ang mga bawungbáwung,</i>
The government will tear the shacks down.

<p><b>lugmuy</b> = <sc>LUKMUY</sc>.

<p><b>lugnas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23P] for plants to die from disease
or from being past the fruit-bearing
age. <i>Gagmay nag búnga ang tamátis kay hápit
na malugnas,</i> My tomato plants are bearing
few fruits now because they will soon
wither and die. <b>2</b> [B126] be brought to utter
ruin. <i>Nalugnas ang íyang nigusyu kay
miintra siya sa súgal,</i> His business was
brought to utter ruin because he took to
gambling. <b>3</b> [B1256] for structures to @{fall
apart}. <i>Dílì na madúgay nga malugnas ang
balay kay dáan na kaáyu,</i> It won't be long
for the house to fall apart because it is very
old.

<p><b>lugnut</b> v<i></i> [A2; c6] struggle to free oneself
from s.t. that holds one. <i>Ayawg ilugnut ímung
buktun ug gunítan ka paglabang,</i> Do
not pull your arm away when I'm holding
on to you to cross the street. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A1]
struggle vigorously to get free. <i>Nagpanglugnut
ang babáying gikidnap,</i> The girl struggled
vigorously to get loose from her abductors.

<p><b>lugpad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LUPAD</sc>. <b>2</b> [A2] @{fly up}. <i>Milugpad
ang abug paglabay sa trák,</i> Dust flew up
<pb n=1300>when the truck passed by. <b>3</b> [A23] send s.o.
reeling as though flying. <i>Mulugpad ka run
ug suntúkun ta ka,</i> I'll send you reeling if I
strike you.

<p><b>lugpit</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] pin s.t. down tightly or between
two things. <i>Tabángi kug lugpit sa kúgun
íring duha ka lipak,</i> Help me fasten the
grass thatch down with those two pieces of
bamboo. <i>Lugpíti (lugpiti) ang libru sa íluk,</i>
Hold your book tightly under your arm.
<i>Hilugpitan ákung tudlù pagsira nákù sa húnus,</i>
I caught my finger when I closed the
drawer. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. used to clip or pin s.t. tightly
down or against s.t. <b>2</b> chord on a guitar
formed by pressing the finger straight across
the strings. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; ab] cause s.t. to be
pinned down. <i>Puting kamisadintru nga íyang[**note: accent unclear]
gipalugpítan (gipalugpitan),</i> A white
shirt which he had tucked in.

<p><b>lugput</b> <i>v</i> [B246; b6] @{pop up} like a jack-in-the-box.
<i>Milugput ku sa silya sa kakurat,</i> I shot
up from my seat in my fright. <i>Layù siyag
gilugpútan pagkalingkud níyag dágum,</i> He
jumped a mile when he sat on a pin.

<p><b>lugru</b> <i>n</i> advantage given in betting where the
odds are not even. <i>Ang lugru tris kuntra sa
ímung dus,</i> The advantage is three to your
two. <i>v</i> [A; b6] give advantage in betting,
not said of tossing coins. <i>Lugrúhan ta sila
ug singku tris arun mudáwat sila sa pusta,</i>
We will give them an advantage of five to
three so that they will take the bet.

<p><b>lugsad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] get to the ground or bottom.
<i>Milugsad na ang ayruplánu sa tugpahánan,</i>
The airplane has landed at the airport.
<i>Naglugsad sila samtang kami nagtungas,</i>
They were coming down the hill while we
were going up. <b>2</b> [A; c] bring s.t. down. <i>Adúnay
mulugsad (maglugsad) sa mga abut
ngadtu sa lungsud,</i> S.o. will bring the produce
down to the town.

<p><b>lugsung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB36; ac] go, bring downhill, to
town. <i>Mantinir lang únà tag manuk kay wà
mi makalugsung,</i> Let's just put up with
chicken because we haven't had a chance to
go down to town (to buy anything better).
<i>Maglugsung sila sa ílang mga pruduktu ngadtu
sa lungsud,</i> They bring their products
down to the city. <i>Unsay ímung lugsúngun
maduminggu?</i> What do you go to town for
on Sundays? <b>2</b> [A1] eat canned fish (humorous).
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash; sa</b> @{down to}. <i>Kining kasagingan
gíkan dinhi lugsung sa subà ákù,</i> This
banana plantation from here down to the
river is mine. <b>2</b> @{canned fish} (so called from
the joke that mountaineers consider canned
fish better than chicken because they have
to go down to get it&mdash;see the first sentence
<pb n=1301>under <i>v</i>). <b>-un, -un(->)</b> <i>a</i> @downhill.

<p><b>lugsut</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b8] @eject s.t. with force. <i>Milugsut
ang lísu dihang naligsan sa ligid,</i> The
seed was ejected when the wheel ran over
the fruit. <i>Milugsut ang ákù sa tantu níyang
hamilhámil,</i> I ejaculated because she kept
rubbing and rubbing it. <i>Nalugsutan ku sa
asíti paghasù sa bumba,</i> Oil spurted onto
me when he worked the pump.

<p><b>lugtab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b5] force a door open. <i>Wà
nay kawatang makalugtab áning pultahána,</i>
No thief can break this door open. <b>2</b> [A; ab2]
cut a string or rope with a long slashing
stroke of the blade. <i>Naglugtab siya sa tahì
sa sinínang usbunun,</i> She is cutting the
stitches of the dress she has to alter. <i>Lugtaba
ang hukut arun malibri ang kabáyù,</i> Cut
the tether rope to free the horse. <i>Hinglugtaban
nákù ang halayhayan,</i> I accidentally cut
the clothesline. <b>3</b> [A3P; a12] deprive s.o.
of his power. <i>Unsay íyang pagabuhátun arun
malugtab ang gahum sa ingkantu?</i> What
shall he do to overcome the power of the
spirit?

<p><b>lugtas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] break a rope, thread, string,
etc. by pulling on it with force. <i>Naglugtas
pa ku sa tahì sa ákung sinínà,</i> I am ripping
out the stitches in my dress. <i>Kun dì mahúbad,
lugtása lang,</i> If you can't untie it, just
break it off. <b>2</b> [A; b4c1] @terminate, put
an end to s.t. <i>Kaguul nga mulugtas sa ímung
kinabúhì,</i> Sorrows that can terminate
your life. <i>Lugtásun (ilugtas) ba lang nímu
ang ímung mga damgu tungud lang sa
usa ka babáyi?</i> Will you destroy your hopes
and dreams all because of a woman? <b>3</b> [a12]
@finish a task or job. <i>Kanang labhanan na
lang ímung lugtásun karun.</i> All you have to
finish is that laundry.

<p><b>lugtì</b> <i>v</i> [AB; a] for s.t. crisp or brittle to
break, cause it to do so. <i>Milugtì ang básu
nga gibùbúan sa túbig nga nagbukal,</i> The
glass cracked when boiling water was poured
into it. <i>Dì ku makalugtì niíning bukúga.
Gáhì kaáyu,</i> I cannot break this bone. It's
too hard. <i>Lugtía nang mitrusan,</i> Break that
meter stick.

<p><b>lùgù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] shake a vessel with liquid in it
to slosh the liquid around. <i>Lùgúi nang butilya
kay namilit ang húgaw sa sulud,</i> Slosh
water around in the bottle because there's
dirt sticking to the sides.

<p><b>lúgud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; a1] @rub the eyes. <i>Ayawg lugda
ímung mata ug mapúling ka,</i> Don't rub
your eyes when you get dirt in them. <b>2</b> [A; b]
@rub the skin with a stone to remove dirt.
<i>Lugdi ímung líug kay daghang buling,</i> Rub
your neck because there's lots of dirt on it.
<pb n=1302><b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c6] rub oneself with a stone to
remove dirt. <i>Panlúgud, unyà human, panabun,</i>
Scrub yourself, and after that, soap
yourself. <i>Puslan pa mang malígù manlúgud
gayud,</i> Since I've started, I might as well go
the whole hog. (Lit. Since I am bathing I
might as well scrub myself.) <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> stone
used for scrubbing oneself to remove dirt.

<p><b>luguk, lúguk</b> <i>v</i> [B2456; b6] @{well up}. <i>Milúguk
ang dugù sa tudlung nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i>
The blood welled up in his fingers when
the hammer struck them. <i>Lúgus siyang kakità
kay gilugúkan íyang mata sa lúhà,</i> She
could hardly see because of the tears which
welled up in her eyes.

<p><b>lugum</b> <i>v</i> [B2; ab7] make, become dark or
deep in hue. <i>Mulugum ang kulur ug putì
ang ipaluyu,</i> A color becomes deeper in hue
if it is set off against a white background.
<i>Luguma pagpintal arun matabunan ang suwatsúwat,</i>
Paint it dark to cover the writing.
a dark or deep in hue. <i>Hanap dì lugum ang
ági sa drúwing pinsil,</i> Your pencil made
light lines, not dark ones.

<p><b>lúgum</b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6] for water to collect and
form into a pool. <i>Maglúgum giyud ang túbig
kay wà nay kaagásan,</i> The water will
form a pool because there is no way for it
to get out.

<p><b>lúgus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] @force, force oneself. <i>Milúgus
kug iskuyla bisag gihilantan ku,</i> I forced
myself to go to school even though I had a
fever. <i>Kinsay naglúgus ínig pasuk sa buhù
bísag huut,</i> Who forced this into the hole
even though it's too big? <i>Ayawg ilúgus
(lugsa) ímung láwas ug dì giyud mahímù,</i>
Don't force your body if you can't manage
it. <b>2</b> [A; a2] @rape. <i>Gibítay ang naglúgus sa
babáyi,</i> The man who raped the girl was
hanged. <i>a</i> @hardly, @barely. <i>Tíngug nga lúgus
mabátì,</i> A barely audible voice. <i>Lúgus gánì
ming makapalit ug bugas,</i> We can scarcely
afford to buy rice. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A] @barely do s.t.
under difficult odds. <i>Naglugus giyug iskuyla
bísag walay kwarta,</i> He managed to get
through school despite his poverty. <b>linugsánay,
lugsanay, lugsánay</b> = <sc>LÚGUS</sc>, <i>a</i>. <b>paN-</b>
<i>n</i> @rape. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @rapist.

<p><b>lugut</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @thicket, @woods. <i>Miadtu siya sa lugut
arun pagkúhag talibugsuk,</i> He went to
the woods to cut down stakes for fencing.
<b>2</b> @ravine or @gully. <i>Túbig nga nag-ambak
ngadtu sa lugut,</i> Water that leaps down into
the ravine. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>LUGUT</sc>, <i>1</i>. <b>2</b> series
of ravines or narrow valleys.

<p><b>lugwà</b> (from <i>gulà</i>) <i>v</i> [B3(1)6; b6] <b>1</b> be @{forced
out}. <i>Wà makalugwà ang bítuk kay giundángan
ang pagpurga,</i> The intestinal worms
<pb n=1303>didn't come out because he stopped taking
his medicine. <i>Mihuphup ang hubag human
lugwái sa nánà,</i> The boil shrank after the
pus had come out of it. <b>2</b> go out in general.
<i>Way púlung nga milugwà sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not
a word came out of his mouth.

<p><b>lugway</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] lengthen the rope on a
tether. <i>Kinsay naglugway sa kábaw nga nakaábut
man sa maisan.</i> Who gave the carabao
enough rope to get to the cornfield?
<i>Lugwáyi pa ang tabánug,</i> Give the kite more
rope. <b>2</b> [AB; b] @extend, prolong time allotted,
for time to be extended. <i>Ug mulugway
ang ákung kinabúhì,</i> If my life is extended.
<i>Lugwáyi ang panahun sa ákung pagbáyad,</i>
Give me more time to pay. <b>3</b> [A] have enough
of s.t. at one's disposal. <i>Kun makalugway
ka sa pagdágan,</i> If you can stand to
run for a long distance. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> length of rope
used in tying s.t. that moves. <i>Mub-i ang lugway
sa hiniktan,</i> Shorten the rooster's tether.
<b>1a</b> length of rope in a fishing apparatus
used in connecting one part with another to
render moveability. <b>2</b> extra time allowance
given. <i>Mangáyù tag lugway ug dì ni mahuman
ugmà,</i> We will ask for an extension if
this doesn't get done tomorrow. <b>3</b> length of
s.t. one has at his disposal. <i>Dakù kug lugway
sa pasinsiya,</i> I have a great deal of patience.
<i>Bisag gastúhan nimug usa ka gatus,
dúna pay lugway nga ikapalit ug sapátus,</i>
Even if you spend a hundred of the money,
there is still enough to buy shoes.

<p><b>lúhà</b> <i>n</i> @tears. <b>&mdash; sa bau</b> crocodile tears. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i>
[AN] get tears in the eyes. <i>Nag-áway sigúru
sila kay nagluhà íyang mata,</i> They must
have had a quarrel because her eyes are
moist. <i>Nangluhà siya pagkabatì sa sintimintal
nga isturya,</i> She got misty-eyed upon
hearing the sentimental story. <b>-an, -un(->)</b> <i>a</i>
with tears,[**typo: .] <b>walug sa gin-an</b> <i>n</i> the world, this
vale of tears. <b>&mdash; sa dalága</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental
hanging vine: <b><i>Dischidia oinantha</i></b>.

<p><b>luhag</b> <i>a</i> not still, @restless. <i>Luhag kaáyung kamut
nang ímung uyab,</i> Your boy friend has
restless hands. <i>v</i> [A; c1] @{move about}, not
be still. <i>Way magluhag ug dúnay bisíta,</i> You
sit still (lit. nobody move) when the visitors
are here. <i>Ayaw nig luhaga kay igsaktu nang
pagkatáud,</i> Don't move this an inch because
it is just in the right place.

<p><b>luhàluhà</b> <i>n</i> @joints of the human or animal
anatomy. v [A; a] cut up a chicken or
slaughtered animal in the joints. <i>Luhàluhaa
ang iníhaw nga manuk,</i> Cut up the slaughtered
chicken in the joints.

<p><b>lúhit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] remove the meat of a sea shell
with a pin or the like. <i>Luhíti ang bátà ug
<pb n=1304>unud sa kinhasun,</i> Remove some of the
meat from the sea shells for the child.

<p><b>lúhu</b> <i>a</i> with refinement and elegance in appearance.
<i>Mutambung sigúru siyag parti kay
lúhu kaáyug pamisti,</i> He must be going to a
party because he is elegantly dressed. <i>Lúhung
pagkabúhat nga tukadur,</i> A finely
built dresser. <i>v</i> [B12(1); c1] be @elegant,
luxurious in appearance.

<p><b>luhud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] @kneel. <i>Nagluhud siya atubángan
sa birhin,</i> She is kneeling before the
Virgin Mary. <b>2</b> [A; b6] @worship. <i>Tahúra
ang mga santus; ayawg ludhi,</i> Venerate the
saints; don't worship them. <b>3</b> [A] @surrender.
<i>Miluhud ang Hapun human bumbáhi
sa atúmik bam,</i> Japan surrendered after
the atomic bomb was dropped. <b>4</b> [A; b6]
sponsor a wedding. <i>Daghan nang kasal ang
ákung naludhan,</i> I have been a sponsor at
many weddings. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] be made to
@kneel. <b>2</b> [a3] be thrown to one's knees. <i>Napaluhud
siya pagkaigù sa ákung krús,</i> He
fell on his knees after being hit with my
cross. <b>linudhan</b> <i>n</i> person sponsored in a
wedding. <b>ludhanan, luhuránan</b> <i>n</i> rail one
kneels on. <b>tali-</b> <i>n</i> about to kneel. <b>tik-</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>TIKLUHUD</sc>.

<p><b>luhudluhud</b> <i>n</i> a prostrate, spreading herb
found in wasteland and open spaces, bearing
small blue flowers in an axilliary, peduncled,
leaflike spathe: <b><i>Commelina diffusa</i></b>.

<p><b>luib</b> <i>n</i> small bits of cooked rice or other
burnt or partially burnt food that stick to
the corners and creases of leaves which line
the bottom of a cooking vessel.

<p><b>lúib</b> <i>v</i> [A2S3S; b(1)] @betray, be @unfaithful
to s.o. <i>Way mapyúsu nga makaluib sa mapya,</i>
No Mafioso can betray the Mafia. <i>Giluíban
siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> His wife was unfaithful
to him. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @unfaithful, tending
to betray. <i>n</i> <i>see</i> <sc>MALUÍBUN</sc>.

<p><b>luing</b> <i>a</i> having weak knees such that one
can't stand. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become @weak-kneed.
<i>Pulyu ang nakaluing (nakapaluing)
nang batáa,</i> Polio has caused that child to
have weak knees.

<p><b>lúka<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @uproot, pull s.t. out by the
roots. <i>Átung lukáhun ang mga tanum nga
way hinungdan,</i> We'll uproot the useless
plants. <b>2</b> [a3] for two sisters to be married
to two brothers. <i>Ang íyang duha ka anak dalága
nalúka pagkaminyù sa magsúun,</i> His
two daughters were married to the two
brothers. <b>3</b> [A; a12] dislodge from power,
put one's reign to an end. <i>Way makalúka ni
Duránu sa únang puruk,</i> No one can dislodge
Durano from his hold on the first district. 
<pb n=1305><i>n</i> a case of marriage where brothers
marry sisters. <b>lukahay</b> <i>v</i> [C23] for brothers
to marry sisters.

<p><b>lúka<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>LÚKU</sc> (female).

<p><b>lukà</b> <i>n</i> short piece of bamboo tube, usually
used as repository of documents, jewelry,
or anything important. <i>v</i> [A; c] store s.t. in
a <i>lukà</i> for safekeeping.

<p><b>lúkab</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @{pry open}. <i>Hiraminta nga
ilúkab sa salug,</i> Tools to use in prying the
floor up. <b>2</b> [A; b5] open a door or window
shutter. <i>Nalúkab ang pultahan tungud sa
kusug hángin,</i> The door came open in the
strong wind. <i>Íyang gilukában (gilúkab) ang
íyang tindáhan ug sayu,</i> She opened her
store early. <b>2a</b> @burglarize. <i>Gilúkab (gilukában)
ang ílang upisína ug nawad-an silag
tayipraytir,</i> Their office was broken into
and they lost a typewriter. <i>n</i> @opening. <i>Dakug
lúkab ning tarúha,</i> This kerosene can
has a wide opening.

<p><b>lúkad</b> <i>v</i> [AB26; a1] @uproot, @{dig out} from the
ground. <i>Dalì malúkad (mulúkad) nang haligía
kay dì lawum ang pagkalubung,</i> That
post will get uprooted because it's not
planted deep into the ground. <i>Naglúkad silag
mga sáhà sa ságing,</i> They uprooted some
banana shoots.

<p><b>lukal</b> <i>n</i> @local. <i>Iliksiyun nga lukal,</i> Local elections.
<b>(<-) [**remove space?]&mdash; mid</b> <i>n</i> locally made product.

<p><b>lukalúka</b> <i>n</i> the groin of animals, the area
connecting the upper thigh and the body of
the animal. <i>a</i> @detachable. <i>Lukalúka ang mga
tiil sa lamísa,</i> The legs of the table are detachable.

<p><b>lúkap</b> <i>n</i> nightmare in which a person is unable
to move or make a sound. Failure to
wake up is said to lead to death. <i>v</i> [A12; a4]
cause, have such a nightmare. <i>Kanang
hilabihang kabusug únà matúlug mauy makalúkap,</i>
Overeating before sleeping causes
deathly nightmares.

<p><b>lukápa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26; b6] @stumble, be knocked
down and hit the ground hard. <i>Milukápa
(nalukápa) ang baksir,</i> The boxer hit the
deck hard. <b>2</b> [B26] @fail in an exam or
course. <i>Milukápa siya sa bár,</i> He flunked in
the bar exam. <b>3</b> [B26] fall from power, be
@ruined. <i>Nalukápa ang gahum sa ílang punduk
sa pagkamatay sa ílang lídir,</i> After the
death of their leader, their party lost its
power.

<p><b>lukas</b> <i>v</i> [A123P; b] for laundry to become
clean and white or for skin to become lighter
in complexion. <i>Malukasan ang ímung pamánit
ug dì ka magpainit,</i> Your skin will
become lighter if you stay out of the sun.

<p><b>lukat</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> @redeem s.t. pawned or mortgaged. 
<pb n=1306><i>Marimáti ang singsing ug dì nímu lukatun,</i>
The ring will be foreclosed if you do
not redeem it. <b>2</b> @ransom. <i>Gilukat na ang gikidnap,</i>
The man that was kidnapped has
been ransomed. <b>2a</b> @redeem, @save (figurative).
<i>Malukat ku ra gihápun siya sa íyang kalisud,</i>
I can save her from her difficulties. <b>2b</b> @redeem,
@{compensate for}. <i>Ang íyang kaligdung
makalukat sa kalaksut sa íyang dagway,</i> His
good manners make up for his ugly face. <b>2c</b>
<b>&mdash; sa signus</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a12] in folk belief, an
occurrence or happening which spares a person's
life by taking s.o. who dies in his
stead. <i>Gituhúan nga lukatun ang signus sa
tag-íya sa íyang mga buhì,</i> It is believed that
domestic animals spare their owners from
death by dying in their stead. <b>3</b> pay a fee
and get s.t. back that one had fixed or reworked.
<i>Lukata nag gipaáyu nímung rilu,</i>
Go pick up the watch you had repaired
now. <b>4</b> pay for tokens of privilege like tickets,
licenses, etc. <i>Mularga giyud ku kay nakalukat
na kug tíkit,</i> I'm really going to
leave now because I already paid for my
ticket. <i>Díay písus ilukat ug sidula,</i> Here is
one peso to pay for a residence certificate.
<b>5</b> <b>&mdash; ug áway, lális</b> [A12] get involved in a
dispute or fight. <i>Ayawg tambag ánang lantúgì
kay makalukat kag lális,</i> Don't give advice
to people who are arguing because you
will just get trouble for yourself. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> amount
for redemption or ransom. <b>2</b> fee for having
s.t. made or repairs done. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>LUKAT</sc>,
<i>n</i>. <i>Pila may ákung lukátan (lukat) ning sinináa?</i>
How much do I pay to have this
dress sewn?

<p><b>lúkat</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a1] @uproot s.t., @prying the
roots out of the ground. <i>Ang bagyu mauy
nakalúkat (nakapalúkat) sa lumbuy,</i> The
typhoon uprooted the lumbuy tree. <i>Lukáta
nang muhun ug ibalhin,</i> Dig out that buried
landmark and move it.

<p><b>lukay</b> <i>n</i> coconut palm leaves. <b>lukaylúkay</b> <b>1</b>
the bridge of the nose, including the central
bony ridge that separates the nostrils. <b>2</b> =
<sc>HANLULÚKAY</sc>. <b>han-r-(<-)</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HANLULÚK</sc>AY.

<p><b>lukba</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] uproot a finger or toenail.
<i>Nagkalukba ang íyang kuku nga nalaswahan,</i>
His toenail that got scalded is falling off.
<i>Tug-an arun dì lukbáhun ímung kuku.</i> Confess
so they don't pull your fingernails out.

<p><b>lukbun</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LUBUK</sc>.

<p><b>lukdu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] carry a load on the head.
<i>Mas sayun pag lukdúhun (lukdúun, ilukdu)
nákù ang duwang,</i> It would be easier for me
to carry the basin on my head. <b>2</b> [c6] for
one to be so many years old. <i>Bísan pa sa
<pb n=1307>katuígan nga íyang gilukdu batan-un siyang
tan-áwun,</i> He carries his years well. He still
looks young. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug kalbásà</b> [A] be held
back a grade. <i>Makalukdu ka giyug kalbásà
ug dì ka magtuun,</i> You will fail the grade if
you don't study.

<p><b>lukdulukdu</b> <i>n</i> name given to many species of
ornamental ferns.

<p><b>lukgaw</b> <i>n</i> the slender-billed cuckoo dove:
<b><i>Macropygia phasianella</i></b>.

<p><b>lukguk</b> <i>a</i> @one-testicled, having one testicle
not descended. <i>Ang lukguk dì kapamabdus,</i>
A man with only one testicle cannot get a
woman pregnant.

<p><b>lukim</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @{tuck in}, put in between
two hugging surfaces. <i>Si Nánay pay mulukim
sa ákung púlu,</i> Mother tucks my shirt
in for me. <i>Ilukim ang kwarta sa libru arun
mahúping,</i> Put the peso bill between the
pages of the book to make it smooth. <b>2</b> [c6]
give a little money to s.o. who would
naturally refuse it in such a way that he will
accept it (putting it into his pocket). <i>Ilukim
lang ning písus dihà pára panigarilyu,</i> Here's
a peso for cigarettes. <b>3</b> [A; b(1)] sew a fold
into a garment. <i>Ákung gilukiman ang ákung
sinínà kay taas ra kaáyu,</i> I sewed a fold in
my dress to make it shorter because it was
too long.

<p><b>lukimya</b> = <sc>LYUKIMYA</sc>.

<p><b>luking</b> <i>a</i> @knock-kneed. <i>Dáan na siyang luking
sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> She has been knock-kneed
since birth.

<p><b>lukip</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @enclose or @insert s.t. in a letter.
<i>Ilukip ring bayinti sa birtdi kard,</i> Enclose
this twenty-peso bill in the birthday card.

<p><b>lukluk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; c] go, put into a tight or
hidden place. <i>Sawang naglukluk sa kakugnan,</i>
A snake lurking in the grass. <i>Ilukluk
ang kwarta sa sikrítu,</i> Put the money into
your watch pocket. <b>2</b> [A; c] get s.o. into a
job (slang). <i>Ang uyuan níyang kungrisman
mauy naglukluk níya sa Kustum,</i> His uncle
who is a Congressman got him into the
Customs. <i>a</i> put in such a way that it is hidden
or not easy to get at. <i>Lukluk kaáyung
pagkabutang sa tutbrás sa iláwum sa bág,</i>
The toothbrush was put way in the bottom
of the bag.

<p><b>lukmay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB12; a12] for feelings to become
or be made soft such that a person is
persuaded. <i>Ang íyang tíngug mulukmay sa
labing tig-a nga kasingkásing,</i> Her voice will
soften the hardest of hearts. <i>Nagkalukmay
ang íyang balatían sa tantu námung hinangyù,</i>
Our imploring is gradually softening his
feelings. <b>2</b> [B126N; c1] be @dejected. <i>Nanlukmay
si Maryu pagkahibáwung nahagbung 
<pb n=1308>siya sa burd,</i> Mario was dejected when
he learned he had failed the board exam. <i>a</i>
having a dejected look. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> having the
quality of softening or soothing feelings.

<p><b>lukmuy</b> <i>a</i> having a crestfallen, dejected look
on the face. <i>v</i> [B126; c1] get a dejected,
crestfallen look on the face. <i>Malukmuy giyud
si Nardu ug makahibáwu siyang nahagbung
sa burd,</i> Nardo will surely be crestfallen
when he learns that he flunked the
board examination.

<p><b>luksu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @jump. <i>Miluksu ang ungguy
sa kalípay,</i> The monkey jumped up and
down with joy. <i>Luksúa lag kanal kay way
latayan,</i> Just jump over the ditch because
there is no span. <i>Bintánang íyang giluksúan,</i>
The window he jumped down from. <b>2</b> [A2]
@skip a grade in school. <i>Miluksu kanà siyag
grádu mau nga naapsan ku níya,</i> He skipped
a grade in school so he has caught up with
me now. <i>n</i> distance or height jumped. <b>hi-/
ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] jump involuntarily. <i>Nahaluksu
siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped involuntarily
when he was startled.

<p><b>luktun</b> <i>n</i> young of a locust.

<p><b>lúku</b> <i>a</i> stupid in action. <i>Lúku. Ngánung mitug-an
man ka nga wà ka pangutan-a?</i> You
fool! Why did you let on when nobody
even asked you? <i>v</i> [AN2; a2] @{make a fool}
of s.o. <i>Ilára tits. Lukúha si Lúla mu,</i> Don't
try to fool me, buddy. Fool your grandmother.
<b>&mdash; diamur</b> <i>a</i> gone crazy because of
love. <i>v</i> [B12] @{go crazy} from love. <i>Nalúku
diamur ang ulitáwu sukad bulagi sa íyang
trátu,</i> The young man went crazy after his
girl friend left him. <b>lukuluku</b> <i>a</i> somewhat
@stupid or @foolish. <b>kalukúhan</b> <i>n</i> foolish doings.
<b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> one who makes a fool of
people.

<p><b>lúkù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6; c1] be @{curled up}. <i>Ilúkù (lukúa)
ímung láwas arun masúd ka sa baril,</i> Curl
your body up so you can get into the barrel.
<b>1a</b> @loaf in bed. <i>Bísag taas na ang adlaw naglúkù
lang gihápun siya,</i> The sun is high in
the sky, but he is still lying around on[** in] bed. <b>2</b>
[B1256] fall down in a curled up position.
<i>Nalúkù (nahilúkù) siya sa kanal human ku
patíri,</i> He fell curled up in the ditch after I
kicked him. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> piece of cloth formed into
a ring used as a cushion when carrying a
load on the head. <i>v</i> [A; b] place a cushion
of coiled cloth on the head. <i>Kinahanglang
maglukù ka ug dúna kay lukdúhun,</i> You
should put a cushion on your head when
you carry a load on it. <b>lukùlúkù</b> <i>n</i> inside of
the knee joints.

<p><b>lukub<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] <b>1</b> close and lock. <i>Grábi sad
nímung nakalukub sa pwirta dì na man maabli,</i> 
<pb n=1309>You sure bolted the door hard. I can't
get it open. <b>2</b> enclose s.t. in an area or by
putting s.t. over it. <i>Pagsígig hílak kay lukban
ta ka sa kasilyas,</i> Go on, keep crying
and I'll lock you in the bathroom. <i>Lukbi
ang kan-un arun dì tugdúnan sa lángaw,</i>
Cover the rice so the flies won't get on it.
<i>Gilukban ang lagwirtag paril,</i> The garden
was enclosed inside a wall. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shutter. <b>2</b>
@cover. <b>3</b> space enclosed. <i>Túa si Máma sa lukub
sa kwartu,</i> Mother is inside the room.
<b>4</b> k.o. fish corral for impounding fish in a
receding tide.

<p><b>lukub<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. chisel with a curved (concave-convex)
cutting edge. <i>Ang lukub mauy gamítun
sa pagkúlit,</i> The curved chisel is used
for carving.

<p><b>lúkub</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6(1)] @{wrap up} in s.t. flat.
<i>Naglúkub ku sa hábul kay gitugnaw ku,</i> I
wrapped myself up in a blanket because I
felt cold. <b>2</b> [A; b] for an atmospheric condition
to @engulf an area. <i>Milúkub ang kangitngit
sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness engulfed the
world.

<p><b>lukublukub</b> <i>n</i> k.o. starfish with poisonous
spines.

<p><b>lúkud</b> = <sc>KULÚKUD</sc>.

<p><b>lukun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large shrimp with short and
small claws.

<p><b>lúkun</b> <i>v</i> [AB456; a12] @{coil up}, coil s.t. up,
usually in several coils. <i>Naglúkun siyag nuug
arun himúung lukun paglukdu níya sa kahun,</i>
He rolled a piece of cloth into a coil to
cushion the box he was carrying on his
head. <i>Dúnay sawa nga naglúkun sa tugkaran,</i>
There is a large snake coiled up in the
yard. <i>Lukúna ang hús ug hipúsa,</i> Coil the
hose and put it away. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @coiled. <b>2</b>
piece of coiled cloth used as a cushion for
carrying a load on the head. <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> <i>n</i>
@wreath. <b>-an</b> <i>n</i> inside of the knees. <b>lukunlúkun</b>
= <sc>-AN</sc>.

<p><b>lúkung</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a @coil, form a circle
from s.t. stiff. <i>Naglúkung kug alambring gihímung
ríng,</i> I coiled a piece of wire to
make into a basketball ring. <i>Lukúnga ang
alambri ug isang-at,</i> Coil the wire and hang
it up. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> s.t. @coiled. <b>&mdash; sa búlak</b> <i>n</i> @wreath.
<b>lukunglúkung</b> <i>n</i> inside of the knees.

<p><b>lukup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2; a12] do s.t. to the entire
area of s.t. <i>Mulukup sà kug súruy sa syudad,</i>
I will wander all over the city. <i>Dì kang kalukup
ug tanum sa lapad níyang yútà,</i> You
can't plant every inch of his vast lands. <i>Nagkalukup
na sa lungsud ang pisti,</i> The epidemic
is spreading all over the town. <i>Lukpag
silhig ang sawug,</i> Sweep the entire floor.
<b>2</b> [B1256; a12] do s.t. to each and every
<pb n=1310>one or thing. <i>Nalukup kug pangutána báhin
nímu,</i> I asked just about everybody
where to find you. <b>3</b> [B12] be up to the
ears in debt. <i>Nalukup na kining átung balhíbu
sa útang,</i> We're up to the ears in debt
(lit. every single hair of our body is in debt).
<b>lukuplúkup</b> <i>v</i> [A12; a12] go over almost
the entire area of s.t. <i>Nalukuplúkup na níyag
súruy ang mga dagkung syudad sa Amirika,</i>
He has gone to almost all the big cities
in America.

<p><b>lukut_<note n=1></note></b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] leave a mark or cut into
the flesh. <i>Milukut ang patiyan sa kabáyù,</i>
The bellyband cut into the horse's flesh.
<i>Naluktan ang íyang kamut sa gapus,</i> The
bonds left a mark on his arms.

<p><b>lukut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> edible excretion from a k.o. sea cucumber
called <i>dungsul</i>, similar in appearance
to bean threads, but green, tightly
curled up.

<p><b>lúkut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; ac6] @{roll up}, cause s.t. to do
so. <i>Mulúkut ang dáhun inigkaláyà,</i> The leaf
will roll up when it is withered. <i>Lukúta ang
banig inigmata nímu,</i> Roll up the mat when
you wake up. <i>Ilúkut ang panaptun sa káhuy,</i>
Wrap the cloth around the wood. <b>1a</b>
<b>&mdash; sa banig</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] for political protegees
to vacate a position when their political
party loses. <b>2</b> [B126] for the body to get
rolled over by some force. <i>Nalúkut siya uban
sa bawud,</i> He rolled with the waves. <b>3</b>
[B126] be beaten badly in a contest. <i>Nalúkut
si Sirhing sa miáging iliksiyun,</i> Serging
was crushed during the last election. <b>paN-,
panga-, lukutlukut</b> <i>v</i> [A3] for dirt on the
body to come off in rolls when scrubbed or
rubbed. <i>À, nangalúkut (naglukutlukut, nanlúkut)
man lang ágis íyang tagiptip nga gilúgud,</i>
My! How the dirt on his body comes
off in rolls when you rub it!

<p><b>lúla</b> (not without l) title for grandmother or
any woman old enough to be one's grandmother.
<i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>lúla</i>.

<p><b>lúlan</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] @board, put on a vehicle. <i>Ilúlan
ang bátà sa bisiklíta,</i> Put the child on the
bicycle. n s.o. or s.t. aboard a vehicle.

<p><b>lúlaw</b> <i>v</i> [B] @{wake up} late, stay in bed long.
<i>Ngánung naglúlaw ka man, nag-unsa ka man
gabíi?</i> Why are you staying in bed long this
morning? What did you do last night?

<p><b>lulhu</b> <i>v</i> [AN; c1] @{roll up} sleeves or pants.
<i>Makig-áway sigúru siya kay nanglulhu man,</i>
He must be preparing to fight because he is
rolling up his sleeves. <i>Lulhúa (ilulhu) ímung
karsúnis iniglabang nátù sa subà,</i> Roll up
your pants when we cross the stream.

<p><b>lúlid</b> <i>n</i> crippled due to a deformity or underdevelopment
of the legs. <i>v</i> [B126] become a
<pb n=1311>cripple. <i>Nalúlid siya kay gitakbúyag pulyu,</i>
He was crippled after his bout with polio.

<p><b>lulingháyaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] take a @trip, @{go out} for
leisure. <i>Ilulingháyaw nákù siya sa Hungkung,</i>
I'll take her on a tour to Hongkong.
<i>n</i> @leisure.

<p><b>lulipap</b> <i>n</i> @lollipop.

<p><b>lúlu</b> (not without <i>l</i>) title for grandfather or
any other man old enough to be one's
grandfather with whom one is close. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
call s.o. grandpa.

<p><b>lùlù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; abc] @masturbate. <i>Dì na muutug
bísan pag lùlúun,</i> I can't get an erection,
even if I masturbate. <i>Ug dì ka kaiyut níya
lùlúi na lang,</i> If you can't have her, just
think of her while you abuse yourself (lit.
masturbate for her). <i>Ilùlù na lang ang ímung
kahígal,</i> Just masturbate your craving away.
<b>2</b> [A13; a12] use equipment improperly.
<i>Kinsa na puy naglùlù áning makinilyang nagubà
na man pud?</i> Who has been abusing
my typewriter? It's broken again. <i>Hala, lùlúa
arun makailis ka,</i> Go on abuse it so you
can buy me a new one. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (coarse). <b>2</b>
<b>&mdash; mu</b> expression of disgust at a person. <i>Lùlù
nímu, ingun kag mukúyug ka, wà man lagi,</i>
You SOB. You said you were coming
along, but you didn't. <i>Diyis sa lùlù mu!
Háin may kwartáhun ta run,</i> Hell, if I'll give
you a dime. Where am I going to get the
money from! <b>3</b> expression of disgust in
general. <i>Lùlù! Pirmi lang patay way hárì,</i>
Shit! It's always tails, never heads!

<p><b>lúlut</b> <i>a</i> @tender eyes or looks. <i>Lúlut nga mata
sa inahan,</i> A mother's tender eyes. <i>v</i> [b8]
for s.o. to be tenderly loved. <i>Nalulútan giyud
ning batáa sa mga ginikánan kay bugtung,</i>
The parents love this child dearly because
he's an only child.

<p><b>lúluy</b> <i>a</i> sleepy, @dull eyes. <i>v</i> [A23B; b6] for
the eyes to become drooping or dull. <i>Mulúluy
(malúluy) giyud ang mata ug way túg,</i>
Your eyes will start to droop if you have
gone without sleep.

<p><b>lumà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23; b(1)] for a liquid to @{seep
through} s.t. and stain it. <i>Milumà ang dugù
sa bindáhi,</i> Blood seeped through the bandage
and stained it. <i>Gilum-an nag buling ang
kwilyu,</i> Dirt has stained the collar where
sweat seeped into the cloth. <b>2</b> [b6] @{leave a
mark}. <i>Milumà ang banig sa ímung nawung,</i>
The mat you were lying on has left marks
on your face. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> stain or dirt carried by
liquid. <b>2</b> @mark. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)] @trace on
s.t. to reproduce a copy. <i>Mupalumà ku sa
ímung drúwing,</i> I'll trace your drawing.

<p><b>lúmà</b> <i>v</i> [B126] be overshadowed by s.t. else,
put into the background (used by speakers
<pb n=1312>influenced by Tagalog). <i>Malúmà nang púlu
nímug isul-ub ku tung ákung mahalun,</i> Your
sport shirt will be relegated to the background
if I wear my expensive one.

<p><b>lúmad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] stay, stick long on.<i> Mulúmad
kahà ku niánang trabahúa kun dì pa
maáyu ug súhul?</i> Would I stick to that job
if the pay wasn't good? <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> native, natural-born
citizen. <b>-nun</b> <i>n</i> of native origin,
make, or quality. <i>Lumadnun nga sáyaw,</i>
Native dance.

<p><b>lumag</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3(1); b6] for dirt, color to come
off s.t. soaked in water. <i>Mulumag (malumag)
ang buling ug ímung ihúmul úsà ang mga
bulingun,</i> Some of the dirt will come out if
the clothes are soaked in water. <i>Naglumag
ug kulur úbi ang itum sinínà,</i> The black
dress exuded violet color on the water. <b>2</b>
[B3] for the results of bad behavior to
come out. <i>Milumag na ang pagsígig súruy,
mimabdus na siya,</i> Now her habits of going
out have born[**typo: borne] fruit: she got pregnant. <i>n</i> colored
juice that is squeezed out from s.t.
that fades.

<p><b>*lumaluma pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] undertake to do s.t.
one is incapable of doing. <i>Ayawg palumalumag
áyu sa radiyu kay musamut hinúun
nag kadáut,</i> Don't take it on yourself to try
and fix the radio. It'll just get worse. <b>palumalumahun,
mapalumalumahun</b> <i>a</i> daring to
take on s.t. which one may not be capable
of doing.

<p><b>lumat</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> tubers left accidentally in the
ground after the harvest which sprout again.
<b>2</b> trait that is inherited in a family. <b>3</b> highly
contagious skin eruptions or lesions on the
soles of the feet which occur after an eruption
of yaws (<i>tabukaw</i>). The <i>lumat</i> are
roundish with small fleshy protuberances
and continually emit watery pus. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; b6]
for tubers left in the ground by accident
to sprout. <i>Mulumat ra gihápun ang
mga unud sa úbing wà nátù makit-i,</i> The
yams we failed to find will sprout again. <b>2</b>
[A; b] for a certain trait to be inherited.
<i>Basta kalíwat ug búang mulumat giyud,</i> If
insanity runs in the family, it will sooner or
later show in the children. <i>Kinsa may gilumatan
niíning íyang batásang ngil-ad?</i> Who
does she take after with her bad behavior?
<b>3</b> [A; b4] for a bad character trait in a person
to make its appearance. <i>Mulumat giyud
ang íyang pagkamaldítu kun makainum,</i> His
mischievous ways come out when he takes
a drink. <b>4</b> [a4b4] get <i>lumat. Gilumat (gilumatan)
si Markus,</i> Marcos has <i>lumat.</i>

<p><b>lumáwig</b> <i>see</i> <b>LAWIG.</b>

<p><b>lumay</b> <i>n</i> a magical love potion used to cause
<pb n=1313>s.o. to be irresistibly drawn to the user. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b5] use a love potion on s.o. <i>Kinsa guy
mulumay ánang húmuk ug ilung,</i> No need
to use a love potion on her when she is so
easy to conquer. <b>2</b> [A; a1] draw s.o. irresistibly
with an attractive quality. <i>Ang íyang
kabuútan mauy naglumay nákù ngadtu níya,</i>
Her good attributes made me irresistibly
attracted to her. <b>-an</b>, <b>-an(<-)</b> <i>a</i> having a
<i>lumay</i>.

<p><b>*lúmay ma-</b> <i>a</i> slow and effemininate[** effeminate?] in
speech. <i>Malúmay kaáyung musulti nà si
Lusyu kay bayutun man gud,</i> Lucio speaks
slow like a girl because he is effeminate.

lumbà <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2C; ac3] @race, have a race.
<i>Lumbáun nátù. Ang mangíkug muy mubangka,</i>
Let's race it out. The one who is
last will pay. <i>Lumbáun nátù ang átung bakì,</i>
Let's have our frogs race. <b>2</b> [b8] outrace.
<i>Hilumbaan ku níyag kalígù kay wà siya manabun,</i>
He beat me bathing because he
didn't soap himself. <b>3</b> [C23] outdo each
other, as if to see who can do it the more.
<i>Naglumbà ug katúlug,</i> They are sleeping as
if they were trying to outdo each other.
<i>Naglumbà ug isturyag hambug,</i> Outdo each
other in telling tall stories. <i>n</i> race. <b>-anay</b> <i>v</i>
[C; c3] race with each other. <i>Naglumbaánay
ang mga balud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves
are racing against each other to the shore.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one's opponent in a race. <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> @racetrack.

<p><b>lumbaglumbag</b> <i>v</i> [ASP] @writhe, twist in pain.
<i>Naglumbaglumbag siya sa kasakit sa íyang
tiyan,</i> He writhed in pain with his stomach-*ache.

<p><b>lumbágu</b> <i>n</i> @lumbago, a rheumatic pain in the
joints of the lumbar region.

<p><b>lumban</b> n @{turban shells}, k.o. edible univalve.
<b>mata ug &mdash;</b> the operculum of turban shells
(which resembles an eye).

<p><b>lumbang</b> <i>n</i> large forest tree, cultivated for its
fruit, the seed of which yields an oil similar
to linseed oil: <b><i>Aleurites moluccana</i></b>.

<p><b>lumbay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> row or column of units. <b>2</b> k.o.
tic-tac-toe game for two players. A square
with nine dots (three on each side, one in
the middle) is drawn and the players take
turns putting down their stones on the dots.
Whoever gets a row of three stones, wins. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A; ac] queue up, fall in line facing in the
direction of the line; do, put in a row. <i>Naglumbay
ang daghang pumapálit ug prankíyu,</i>
Lots of people were queuing up to buy
stamps. <i>Naglumbay siya sa mga pyísa,</i> He is
lining up the spare parts. <i>Lumbáya ang pagtanum
sa humay,</i> Plant the rice in rows. <i>Ilumbay
ning silya sa únang lumbay,</i> Put this
<pb n=1314>chair in the first row. <b>2</b> [AC] play <i>lumbay</i>.
<b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> a board for playing <i>lumbay</i>.

<p><b>lumbiya</b> <i>n</i> sago palm, the trunk of which is
used to starch and the leaves for roofing:
<b><i>Metroxylon sagus</i></b>.

<p><b>lumbuy</b> = <sc>LUNGBUY</sc>.

<p><b>lúmi</b> <i>n</i> dish of long Chinese noodles, usually
served in broth.

<p><b>lumì</b> <i>n</i> @crease, @fold, @wrinkles. v [A; a] get
to be all wrinkled, creased. <i>Ayawg lumia
nang bag-ung inutaw,</i> Don't wrinkle
your newly ironed shirt. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> @wrinkled,
@creased.

<p><b>lúmid</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] wallow or roll in mud,
flour, etc. <i>Ang bábuy mulúmid sa lápuk,</i>
Pigs roll in the mud. <i>Ilúmid ang pinirítung
ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the fried bananas in
the sugar. <b>2</b> [B456] roll in sin, vice. <i>Naglúmid
sa salà ang mga babáying nagbaligyà sa
ílang dungug,</i> Women who sell their reputation
are wallowing in sin.

<p><b>luminarya</b> <i>n</i> numerous lighted candles placed
along the streets during religious processions
or in the church during services. <i>v</i> [A; b]
light candles for a religious procession
or church service.

<p><b>lúming</b> <i>a</i> tender, soft voice or way of speaking.
<i>v</i> [B2; b6] for the voice to become soft
and tender. <i>Mulúming dáyun íyang tíngug
ug ikasulti ang uyab,</i> Her voice suddenly
becomes tender when she speaks with her
boy friend.

<p><b>lumiru</b> = <sc>NUMIRU</sc>.

<p><b>lum-it</b> <i>n</i> @crease, @wrinkle. <i>Ang lum-it sa karsúnis
nahíwì,</i> The crease in the trousers came
out crooked. <i>v</i> [AB126; a1] crease, get
creased. <i>Ayawg lum-íta ang bag-ung pinalansa
nímung sayal,</i> Don't crease your skirt.
You just ironed it. <i>a</i> creased.

<p><b>lumlum</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] sit on eggs. <i>Wà pa mapisù
ang gilumlúmang itlug,</i> The eggs the
hen was brooding have not hatched yet. <b>1a</b>
[b] sit on papers which need processing or
attention. <i>Kadtung aplikisiyun nímu sa lún
gilumlúman lang,</i> They are just sitting on
your application for a loan. <b>2</b> [A13] stay
inside s.t. <i>Dúgay na siyang lumlum sa íla
kay maúlaw nga mupakítà,</i> He stayed cooped
up in his house for a long time because
he was ashamed to show himself. <b>2a</b> [A13]
for feelings to be in the breast. <i>Ang kasína
nga naglumlum sa íyang dughan,</i> Enviousness
that is stored up in her heart. <i>Naglumlum
sa dughan ni Kaluy ang kamíngaw kang
Plúra,</i> Caloy feels loneliness for Flora.

<p><b>lumpag</b> <i>v</i> [AB12; a] <b>1</b> @{crumble down}; cause
s.t. to do so. <i>Nagkalumpag na ang paril,</i> The
<pb n=1315>wall is crumbling. <i>Hilumpagan ku sa kinamádang
láta,</i> The cans that were stacked up
neatly came tumbling down on me. <b>2</b> bring
to a downfall. <i>Ayawg lumpága ang íyang
mga damgu,</i> Do not destroy her hopes.
<i>Lumpágun nátù ang gahum sa impiryalismu,</i>
We shall overcome the power of imperialism.

<p><b>lumpánug</b> <i>v</i> [A23; b6] flee suddenly and
rapidly to a far place. <i>Milumpánug lagi pagkakità
sa ákung pistúla,</i> He sure got out of
there fast when he saw my gun. <i>Layù ang
gilumpanúgan sa ákung hunàhúnà samtang
namínaw sa diskursu,</i> My mind wandered
as I was listening to the speech.

<p><b>lumpat</b> <i>v</i> [A2] bounce up suddenly. <i>Milumpat
ákung kasingkásing sa kahikurat,</i> My
heart leaped in sudden surprise. <b>lumpatlumpat</b>
<i>v</i> [A; b6] bounce up and down. <i>Naglumpatlumpat
ang dyíp sa batsihun nga dálan,</i>
The jeep was bouncing up and down
on the bumpy road.

<p><b>lumpayat</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b6] jump vigorously up
and down. <i>Ngánung naglumpayat man ang
mga bátà sa katri?</i> Why are the children
jumping up and down vigorously on the
bed? <b>2</b> [A; c] jump up and down to get
free, tug against s.t. that restricts movement.
<i>Milumpayat ang ungguy sa halwa
pagkakità sa ságing,</i> The monkey jumped
up and down in the cage upon seeing the
banana. <i>Naglumpayat ang irù sa huktanan
pagkakità sa iring,</i> The dog jumped up and
down tugging against his leash upon seeing
the cat.

<p><b>lumpì</b>, <b>lumping</b> <i>a</i> @dented, having a dent. <i>v</i> [A3P; a]
@dent. <i>Ayawg lumpínga ang táru nga
igbabaligyà,</i> Don't dent the kerosene can
we're planning to sell. <i>Lumpíngi ang kílid
sa láta,</i> Make a dent in the side of the can.
<i>n</i> @dent.

<p><b>lumpiyà</b> <i>n</i> @{egg roll}, a dish consisting of a thin
pancake filled with sauteed meat and vegetables.
<b>&mdash; nga prisku</b>[**should have acute accent over i?] an egg roll with the
pancake soft and pliant. <b>&mdash; nga prítu</b> an egg
roll with the pancake fried crisp. <i>v</i> [A; ac]
have, make egg rolls.

<p><b>lumpu</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a4] feel tired and sleepy after
taking a swim. <i>Gilumpu (nalumpu) ang
bátà human malígù,</i> The child felt tired and
sleepy after taking a swim.

<p><b>lumpù</b> <i>a</i> @lame, @cripple. <i>Dì siya makalakaw
kay lumpù,</i> He can't walk because he is
lame. <i>v</i> [B12; b5] be, become lame.

<p><b>lumpung</b> <i>v</i> [AC3; a] <b>1</b> for s.t. concave to fit
or be made to fit snugly in s.t. else convex.
<i>Lumpúnga ang mga básu arun sayun dad-un,</i> 
<pb n=1316>Put the glasses inside of one another to
make them easy to carry. <i>Ilumpung ning basurahan
sa láin,</i> Put this trash can on top of
the other. <b>2</b> for two or more things to be or
to take place at the same time when they
should not be overlapping. <i>Lisud nang maglumpung
átung uyab kay gastu,</i> It's hard to
have several girl friends at the same time
because it's expensive. <i>Bísag lumpúngun
mung duha, káya gihápun mu nákù,</i> Even if
it's two against one, I can still beat you.

<p><b>lumput</b> <i>n</i> home-woven cloth of a checkered
design and with a plain weave. <i>v</i> [A13]
wear clothing of this weave.

<p><b>lumu</b> <i>a</i> tender, gentle in personality. <i>Lumu
nga kasingkásing ni Hisus,</i> Jesus' tender
heart. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] become gentle, tender.
<i>Nagkalumu íyang tíngug samtang nagkabugnaw
ang íyang kasukù,</i> His voice got gentler
as his anger cooled off. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> tenderloin cut
of meat. <b>ma-</b> = <sc>LUMU</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>lúmù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] crush s.t. out of shape without
breaking it. <i>Nalúmù ang munyíkang ákung
natumban,</i> The plastic doll that I stepped
on got crushed out of shape. <i>Ayaw lumúa
nang láta kay ákung gamítun,</i> Don't
crush that can because I'm going to use it.

<p><b>lumud</b> <i>n</i> k.o. porpoise.

<p><b>lúmud</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; c1] <b>1</b> be together with s.o.
in a place designed for one. <i>Naglúmud silang
tulu sa gamayng katri,</i> The three of
them slept together in a small bed. <b>2</b> stay
with s.o. in the same house. <i>Nakalúmud ku
níla ug unum ka búlan,</i> I have lived with
them for six months.

<p><b>lumuk</b> <i>a</i> for the hair to be oily after oil has
been applied to it. <i>v</i> [B; a] be, become oily.
<i>Ákung lumukun ímung buhuk sa hisù kay
ákung hingut-an,</i> I'll put lots of hair oil in
your hair to get rid of the lice.

<p><b>lúmun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC; c] live, keep together. <b>Milúmun
ang bátang ílu sa íyang tiyù,</b> The orphaned
child went to live with his uncle.
<b>Naglúmun sila bísag wà pa makasal,</b> They
lived together even though they weren't
married. <b>Ayg ilúmun ang dunut nga mangga
sa mga maáyu,</b> Don't put the rotten mangoes
together with the good ones. <b>2</b> [A; a12]
crumple or roll up a piece of cloth into
a ball. <i>Naglúmun siyag nuug íyang gihímung
tutuytútuy,</i> She made a ball out of the
cloth to make a false breast.

<p><b>lúmung</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] for water to collect and
form a pool. <i>Naglúmung ang túbig sa tugkaran
kay way kagwaan,</i> The water formed a
pool in the front yard because there was no
way for it to exit.

<p><b>lumus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB16; b1] @{drown}, get drowned.
<pb n=1317><i>Naglumus siya kay nadispirádu,</i> She drowned
herself because she got frustrated in love.
<i>Gidaghanun sa tubà nga makalumus (makapalumus),</i>
Enough toddy to drown you.
<i>Lumsan tikaw sa subà, animála ka,</i> I'll
drown you in the river, you beast! <i>Subang
nalumsan níya,</i> The river he drowned in. <b>1a</b>
<b>&mdash; sa sabaw</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] disappear into thin
air (usually said of a father deserting a family).
<i>Nalumus sa sabaw ang amahan niíning
batáa,</i> The father of this child disappeared
into thin air. <b>2</b> [B1256] for an engine to get
flooded with fuel. <i>Dì muandar ang makina
kay nalumus,</i> The engine won't start because
it's flooded. <b>3</b> [B126] suffocate,
choke in an embrace. <i>Hápit ku malumus sa
íyang gakus,</i> I almost suffocated to death in
her embrace. <b>4</b> [A2; b(1)] overwhelm with
feelings. <i>Kaguul nga milumus sa kasingkásing,</i>
A heart drowned in grief.

<p><b>lumus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>UNG-UNG</sc>, <i>n1</i>.

<p><b>lúmut</b> <i>n</i> general term for @lichens or @algae of
the sort that attach themselves. <i>v</i> [b4] <b>1</b> be
covered with moss or seaweed. <i>Gilumútan
ang lubut sa tangki,</i> The water tank is covered
with algae on the bottom. <b>2</b> be left idle
(until moss covers it). <i>Gilumútan na lang siya,
dága lang gihápun,</i> The years have come
and gone, but she remains single. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> covered
with moss or green seaweeds. <b>lumutlumut</b>
<i>n</i> tiny lichens which grow on the trunks
of palms and other trees, or on the sides of
water containers not cleaned, greenish in
color.

<p><b>lumuy</b>, <b>lúmuy</b> <i>a</i> soft and delicate, not rigid.
<i>Lúmuy (lumuy) ang buktun sa way trabáhu,</i>
One who doesn't work has soft arms.
<i>Lumuy nga tsíku,</i> A soft sapodilla. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6]
become soft and delicate, not rigid. <b>2</b>
[BN26] become momentarily weak on experiencing
a great emotion. <i>Nalúmuy ku
pagkabatì nákung nakadaug ku sa swipstik,</i>
My legs gave way when I heard that I won
the sweepstakes. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> a breed of pigs that
easily grows fat, and with soft and thin skin.
<b>lumyan</b> <i>n</i> variety of jackfruit (<i>nangkà</i>) the
flesh of which is soft, sweet, and juicy with
no dry pulp.

<p><b>lún<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @lawn. <b>-máwir</b> @{lawn mower}. <i>v</i> [A; a2]
cut the grass with a lawn mower. <i>Nindut
nag lún kay ákung gilunmáwir,</i> The lawn
looks good now because I mowed it.

<p><b>lún<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @loan money from the bank. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
loan from the bank. <i>Unsang bangkúha ang
ímung gilúnan?</i> What bank did you get
your loan from?

<p><b>-l-un</b> alternant for <i>-unun</i>, added to almost all
the bases to which <i>-unun</i> is added, usually
<pb n=1318>with no difference in meaning from <i>-unun</i>.
<i>Kalan-un,</i> Things to eat. <i>Palalítun,</i>[**note: accent unclear] Things
to buy.

<p><b>lúna</b> <i>n</i> @canvas. <i>Ang tulda hinímù sa lúna,</i>
The tent is made of canvas.

<p><b>lunà</b> <i>n</i> @{vacant place} or area; piece of land.
<i>Dúna pay lunà sa yútà nga kabalayan,</i> There
is still space on the land to build a house.
<i>May lunà pa ba ku sa ímung kasingkásing?</i>
Do I still have a place in your heart? <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b>
<i>v</i> [B1256] happen to be in a position. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b> be settled down to a
place or position. <i>Dì ku mubalhin ug lingkuránan
kay nahilúnà na ku diri,</i> I won't
move to another seat because I am already
settled here. <b>2</b> be at ease, not restless or
nervous. <i>Wà siya mahilúnà nga nagpaábut
sa nanganak níyang asáwa,</i> He couldn't sit
still waiting for his wife to have her baby.
<b>pahi-</b>/<b>paha-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> put oneself or s.t.
in proper or convenient position. <i>Mipahilúnà
siyag lingkud únà musúgud ug káun,</i> He
seated himself properly before he started to
eat. <i>Ipahilúnag maáyu ang karga sa bisiklíta,</i>
Put the load on the bicycle securely. <b>2</b> accommodate
s.o. in a good position or job.
<i>Ang manínuy níyang kunsihal mauy nagpahilúna
níya sa sitihul,</i> Her godfather, who
was a councilor, got her a job in City Hall.

<p><b>lúna dimiyil</b> <i>n</i> @honeymoon. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
have a honeymoon.

<p><b>lunag</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for the results of bad behavior
to come out. <i>Milunag na giyud ang kalaag
ánang bayhána. Gipamabdúsan,</i> Now that
woman's propensity for gadding about has
borne fruit. She got herself pregnant.

<p><b>lúnang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @wallow. <i>Naglúnang ang
gibunù sa kaugalíngung dugù,</i> The murder
victim is wallowing in his own blood. <i>Ang
gilunángan sa kábaw,</i> The place the carabao
wallows. <b>2</b> [A] be in a bad state to an excessive
degree. <i>Ang kalibútan nga naglúnang
sa kasal-ánan,</i> The world that is wallowing
in sin. Ang katawhan nga naglúnang sa katimáwà,
People wallowing in poverty. <b>-an(->)</b>
<i>n</i> mud pool for the water buffalo to wallow
in.

<p><b>lunas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. smooth bamboo with a yellowish-green
trunk: <b><i>Bambusa vulgaris</i></b>.

<p><b>lun-as</b> <i>v</i> [B12] for plants or flowers to become
withered, faded, or dried up. <i>Ang kaínit
mauy nakalun-as (nakapalun-as) sa mga
rúsas,</i> The hot sun caused the rose plants to
wither and dry up. <i>Ilísi ang mga búlak nga
nagkalun-as na,</i> Replace those flowers since
they are withering and fading.

<p><b>lunaw</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] cook chopped sweet potatoes
with water. <i>Maglunaw ku áring kamúti
<pb n=1319>pára miryinda,</i> I'll boil chopped up sweet
potatoes for my afternoon snack. <i>n</i> chopped,
boiled sweet potatoes. <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUNAW</sc>,
<i>n</i>.

<p><b>lunay</b> <i>v</i> [B2] for pain or illness to subside.
<i>Mulunay ang suul sa tiyan ug tambálan,</i> The
stomach ache will subside if you take medicine.

<p><b>lundag</b> <i>v</i> [B; b] sink to the bottom. <i>Manggáwas
ta sa dì pa mulundag ang barku,</i> Let's
go over the side before the boat sinks.

<p><b>Lundris<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @London.

<p><b>lundris<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>ALUNDRIS<hi rend=sub>1</i></sc>.

<p><b>lunduk<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B345; b4] for the wind to stop
blowing. <i>Human sa bagyu milunduk ang hángin,</i>
The wind stopped blowing after the
storm. <i>Gilundúkan mi sa hángin sa lawud,</i>
We were becalmed in the middle of the sea.

<p><b>lunduk<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AB3(1)6; a2] for things usually
soft and having length to fall, settle down
gathering in a heap; cause them to do so.
<i>Milunduk (nalunduk) sa salug ang kurtína
pagkaputul sa higut,</i> The curtain fell down
in a heap on the floor when the string snapped.
<i>Siyay naglunduk sa mga bulingun sa
suuk,</i> She heaped the dirty clothes in the
corner. <i>n</i> k.o. affliction where part of the
intestine settles down into the scrotum. <i>a</i>
having a large scrotum due to such an affliction.

<p><b>lunga<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @{sesame seeds} used for tidbit decorations
or flavoring on sweets: <b><i>Sesamium
orientale</i></b>.

<p><b>lunga<hi rend=sub>2</i></b>, <b>lungà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2C23; b(1)] give up doing
s.t. which one had been doing with great
expenditure of effort. <i>Wà siya mulungag
pangítà sa nawálang anak,</i> He didn't give up
in his search for the lost child. <i>Ayaw siya
lung-i (lunghi) ug sugs[=ú]g hangtud muhílak,</i>
Don't stop your relentless teasing until she
cries. <b>2</b> [B26] stop from bothering, subside.
<i>Mulunga lang ang íyang húbak kun mutumar
siyag tambal,</i> Her asthma attacks do
not stop until she takes her medicine. <i>a</i> not
persisting in one's work, working off and
on. <b>-an(<-)</b> = <sc>LUNGÀ</sc>, <i>a</i>.

<p><b>lúngab</b> <i>n</i> @cave, @pit, or any large hole in the
ground. <i>v</i> [AB12; b] dig a cave or pit, become
one.

<p><b>lúngag</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] dig, @{bore a hole}. <i>Maglúngag
kug pára kumpus pit,</i> I will dig a hole for a
compost pit. <i>Nalúngag ang atup nga nahulgan
sa lubi,</i> The roof got a hole in it after a
coconut fell through it. <i>Lungági ang láta sa
litsi,</i> Punch a hole in the milk can. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
@hole. <i>Lungag sa dágum,</i> Eye of a needle.
<i>Lungag sa ilung,</i> Nostrils. <b>2</b> @vagina (euphemism).

<pb n=1320>

<p><b>lung-ag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] boil rice or any carbohydrate
until the product is cooked and dry. <i>Lung-ága
nang ságing hilaw pára pamáhaw,</i> Cook
the green bananas for breakfast. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> staple
being cooked. <i>Sigáig linung-ag,</i> Turn up
the fire under the rice. <b>2</b> cereals or carbohydrates
prepared by boiling, as opposed to
any other way. <i>Linung-ag ságing palita ayaw
nang minantikaan,</i> Buy the cooked bananas,
not the fried ones.

<p><b>lungas</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> given to much playing and moving
around. <b>2</b> for females to be lacking in modesty
and proper restraint. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B; b6] move,
play around vigorously. <i>Ayaw mu palábig
lungas kay mangadagmà unyà mu,</i> Don't
keep running about; you might stumble and
fall. <i>Magkalungas giyud ang bátà samtang
magtubù,</i> A child gets to be terribly active
as it grows bigger. <b>2</b> [B12; b6] for females
to become wanting in modesty and proper
restraint. <i>Nalungas ílang anak kay nagpúnayg
kuyugkúyug ánang hustis,</i> Their daughter
started to be immodest in her behavior
because of her association with that hostess.

<p><b>lungay</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @drooping, @{hanging loosely}. <i>Ang
puya lungay ug líug,</i> A very young baby
can't hold its head up. <b>2</b> unable to stand or
flex physically defective muscles, as if without
bones. <i>Ang lungay nga bátà nagsígi lag
higdà kay dì man makabángun,</i> A crippled
child lies in bed all his life for he cannot get
up. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B] @droop, hang in a drooping way.
<i>Nalungay na ang ákung úlu sa kakatulugun,</i>
My head is drooping from sleepiness. <i>Nagkalungay
na ang sanga nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i>
The branch is drooping down more
and more because it is so laden with fruit.
<b>2</b> [B126] turn out to have the defect of
<i>lungay</i>, <i>a2</i>.

<p><b>lungbuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> small tree with elliptic leathery
leaves 6&ndash;12 cm., bearing clusters of juicy,
oval fruit, dark purple, 1.5&ndash;2 cm. long: <b><i>Syzygium
cumini</i></b>. <b>2</b> the blunt-nosed lead of
small-arm bullets which resemble <i>lungbuy</i>
fruits (slang). <b>-in-</b> having the color of <i>lungbuy</i>.
<b>lápis -in-</b> @{indelible pencil}. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> of the
color of <i>lungbuy</i>.

<p><b>lungdistans</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{long-distance call}. <b>2</b> long-distance
passenger bus or trip. <i>Magsakit ákung
likud ug byáhing lungdistans,</i> My back
aches when I take long-distance trips. <b>3</b> long-distance
shooting in basketball. <i>Maáyu siyang
musiyát bísag lungdistans,</i> He is good
even in long-distance shots. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] call
by long-distance. <b>2</b> [A; c6] make a long
shot in basketball. <b>3</b> [A; a12] masturbate
(from the notion that one is getting sexual
gratification thinking of s.o. not present).
<pb n=1321><i>Gilungdistans níya si Maríya nga nalígù,</i> He
masturbated thinking of Maria taking a bath.

<p><b>lunggù</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @decapitate. <i>Gilunggúan sa
mga magahat ang misiyuníru,</i> The head-*hunters
beheaded the missionary.

<p><b>lunggub</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] @grab, @wrest s.t. away from
s.o. <i>Ayawg lunggúba ning ritrátu kay nagtan-aw
pa ku,</i> Don't grab the picture away
because I am still looking at it.

<p><b>lunggung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; c1] @{keep inside}, @imprison,
@{lock up}. <i>Daghang trabáhung milunggung
nákù sa upisína,</i> Lots of work kept me
imprisoned in the office. <i>Lunggúnga (ilunggung)
ang mga bábuy sa álad,</i> Lock the pigs
up in a pen. <b>2</b> [A; c1] shake a container in
the hand to shuffle things up. <i>Lunggúnga
(ilunggung) únà sa kamut ang dáyis únà iitsa,</i>
Shake the dice in your hand before you
throw them. <b>3</b> [AC; b(1)] bet on dice
thrown from a container. The one who bets
on the number which comes out wins. <i>n</i>
game of dice of this sort. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> the container
in which the dice are shaken.

<p><b>lunggung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AN; a12] @cheat to gain. <i>Gilunggung
ku sa tindírang migámit ug gantangang
way aríyus,</i> I was gypped by the vendor
because she used uncertified measures.
<i>Gilunggung ku nímu kay dì kung kamaung
mupúkir,</i> You cheated me because I don't
know how to play poker.

<p><b>lúngì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] wrench s.t. off to detach it.
<i>Kinsay galúngì sa buktun sa munyíka?</i> Who
wrenched the arm off the doll? <i>Lungía
nang usa ka dawin ságing,</i> Get me a banana
from the bunch.

<p><b>lúngib</b> <i>n</i> cave. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] form a cave or hole
in the side of a slope. <i>Nalúngib ang kílid sa
bungtud nga gikwári,</i> The side of the mountain
that was quarried formed a cave.

<p><b>lúngis</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @{wrench off}, twist s.t. off its
attachment. <i>Mulúngis kug usa ka dawin sa
ímung ságing,</i> I'll take a banana from your
bunch.

<p><b>lungkab</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1] break s.t. open by prying
so as to get into it. <i>Kawatan ang naglungkab
sa ámung baul,</i> A robber broke our
trunk open. <i>Lungkába ang kandádug way
yáwi,</i> Pry the lock open if there is no key.

<p><b>lungkaub</b> <i>n</i> @{thumping sound}. <i>Ang lungkaub
sa mga túnub,</i> The thumping sound of foot-*falls.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] make a thumping sound. <i>Naglungkaub
ang mga balud nga mihasmag sa
mga batu,</i> The waves beat against the stone
with a thudding sound. <b>2</b> [A13] throb vigorously
in the depths of one's feelings. <i>Ang
kayugut nga naglungkaub sa íyang dughan,</i>
Anger that is raging in his heart. <b>-in-</b>, <b>-in-(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> heavy sound of thumping.

<pb n=1322>

<p><b>lungkì</b> <i>a</i> @limping, partially disabled in the leg,
usually permanently. <i>v</i> [B16; c1] walk with
a limp. <i>Naáyu túud siya sa pulyu apan nalungkì
giyud intáwun,</i> He recovered from
his polio, but now he walks with a limp.

<p><b>lunglayin</b> <i>n</i> @{longline fishing}.

<p><b>lungnik</b> <i>n</i> @{fifth of liquor}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B256] be a
fifth full. <i>Hápit mulungnik (malungnik) ang
písu nga idibul nga íyang gipalit,</i> He bought
a peso's worth of cooking oil which nearly
filled a fifth. <b>2</b> [c1] make it a fifth of liquor.
<i>Lungnikun (ilungnik) na lang kay daghan
man tang manginum,</i> Let us buy a fifth
because a lot of us are going to drink.

<p><b>lungnus</b> <i>n</i> @{long-nosed pliers}.

<p><b>lungpli</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{long-playing record}. <b>2</b> lengthy
monologue in a conversation. <i>v</i> [c1] record
s.t. on a long-playing record. <i>Lungplihun
(ilungpli) ug diritsu ang ímung únang pláka,</i>
Make your first recording a long-playing
record.

<p><b>lungslib</b> <i>n</i> @{long-sleeved shirt}. <i>v</i> [A; c1] wear,
make into a long-sleeved shirt.

<p><b>lungsud</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @town. <b>2</b> @citizenry. <i>Tunug na sa
tibuuk lungsud nga gipaangkan siya,</i> It has
been bruited about town that she has had a
child out of marriage. <b>háring &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> the @electorate,
sovereign people. <b>kalungsúran</b> <i>n</i>
@towns. <b>lungsuránun</b> <i>n</i> local citizen. <b>katagi-</b>
<i>n</i> one from the same town. <b>-nun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> pertaining
to s.t. civic. <i>Katungdánang lungsudnun
sa matag lungsuránun,</i> Civic duty of
each citizen. <b>2</b> pertaining to the town or
municipality. <i>Mamahanding lungsudnun,</i>
Municipal treasurer. <b>maki-</b>, <b>maki-nun</b> <i>a</i> @{civic-minded}.

<p><b>lungtad</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b(1)] <b>1</b> @last for a period of
time. <i>Makalungtad ug dúgay ang isdà ug aysan,</i>
Fish will last long if you put them on
ice. <i>Wà lungtári ug tris díyas ang ákung puása,</i>
My fast didn't last for three days. <b>2</b>
stay with, at s.t. for a long time. <i>Dì mu
lungtáran ug míd ánang inyung taras,</i> No
maid will stay long with you, the way you
act. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] make, cause to last. <i>Ayaw
palungtára (ipalungtad) ug dúgay inyung
dúmut,</i> Don't allow your desire for vengeance
to last long. <b>malungtárun</b> <i>a</i> @durable.

<p><b>lung tíbul</b> <i>n</i> @wedding, with reference to the
banquet (colloquial). <i>Anus-a man ang lung
tíbul?</i> When are you getting hitched? <i>v</i> [A13]
get married.

<p><b>lungùlungù</b> <i>v</i> [B46; c1] for one's head to
sway or shake uncontrollably as when
drunk or in old age. <i>Naglungùlungù na siya
sa katigúlang,</i> His head tremors due to old
age.

<p><b>lungun</b> <i>n</i> @coffin. <i>v</i> [c1] bury in a coffin, as
<pb n=1323>opposed to other modes of burial.

<p><b>lungutlungut</b> <i>v</i> [B1456; b3] be @restless, moving
about and talking in anger, exasperation,
impatience to do s.t. <i>Naglungutlungut siyang
makaapil sa banggà,</i> He was restless in
his impatience to take part in the contest.
<i>Ang gisibat níyang alkansíya mauy íyang gilungutlungutan,</i>
She rushed about in anger
on account of her piggy bank which got
stolen.

<p><b>lunhat</b> <i>v</i> [B126; a2b3] have a @relapse, most
often said of sprains or fractures or illness
thought to be derived from them. <i>Nalunhat
íyang piang kay nagpúnay siyag lungas,</i> His
sprain came back because he kept moving
around.

<p><b>lunhaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for growing things, not fruit, to
be green. <i>Lunhaw nga sibsibánan,</i> Green
pastures. <b>2</b> @recent, @young. <i>Sa lunhawng kinabúhì
sa kabatan-un wà pa níya masinátì
ang kapakyásan,</i> He was a callow youth,
and had never experienced failure. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B2; b6]
for growing things to be green and
fresh. <i>Mulunhaw (malunhaw) ug bálik ang
sagbut inig-abut sa ting-ulan,</i> The grass will
become green again when the rains return.
<b>2</b> [a12] bring back s.t. to make it recent,
young again. <i>Tam-is lunháwun ang malipáyun
tang kabatan-un,</i> It's nice to reminisce
on our happy childhood.

<p><b>Lúnis<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @Monday. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>BIRNIS</sc>. <b>pa-(->)</b> <b>n</b>
work bee done on a Monday. <i>v</i> [A; b6]
hold a work bee on a Monday. <i>Palunisi lang
nang pagtúkud sa taytáyan,</i> Have the bridge
built by a Monday work bee.

<p><b>lúnis<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @{odd number}.

<p><b>lúnit</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] @{tweak the ears}. <i>Hinglunitan
si Marta sa maistra kay nagtábì,</i> The
teacher tweaked Martha's ears because she
was talking. <i>n</i> action of tweaking.

<p><b>lunlun</b> <i>a</i> @{all of one kind}, no mixture. <i>Ang kinabúhì
dì lunlun kalípay,</i> Life is not all happiness.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c16] have all in one kind,
no mixture. <i>Sagúlig pinágud mais ang tablíya,
ayawg ilunlun (lunlúna) nga kakaw,</i> Mix
some roasted corn in the chocolate tablet,
don't make it pure cacao. <b>2</b> [A12C; b] be
all together in a place. <i>Dì ta makalunlun ug
lingkud sa píkas lingkuránan kay kúlag hángin
ang ligid,</i> We can't all stay on one side
because the tire lacks air. <i>Dì ta maglunlun
dinhis píkas kay malúnud unyà ta,</i> Let's not
huddle on one side of the boat because it
might capsize.

lunsay <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @pure, @unadulterated. <i>Lunsay nga
gátas sa báka,</i> Pure cow's milk. <i>Lunsayng
kaputlì nga wà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i>
Unadulterated innocence that has not been
<pb n=1324>polluted by experience. <b>2</b> simple, peaceful
in way or outlook. <i>Lunsay kaáyu ang kinabúhing
banikanhun,</i> Farm life is very simple
and peaceful. <i>v</i> [B1; c1] be simple or peaceful
in ways or outlook. <i>Ang maglunsay sa
kinahanglan dílì magápus sa útang,</i> One who
is simple with his needs won't get himself
engulfed in debt. <i>Malunsay ang átung pamuyù
ug mubíyà ka sa súgal,</i> Our life would
get peaceful once you stop your gambling.

<p><b>lunsing</b> <i>n</i> k.o. very small, yellow banana, particularly
delicious and sweet, but not commercially
grown.

<p><b>lunsud</b> = <sc>LUNGSUD</sc>.

<p><b>luntad</b> = <sc>LUNGTAD</sc>.

<p><b>luntalunta</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] leap up and down in
joy or to get free. <i>Miluntalunta ang kabáyù
sa pagkakità sa bayi,</i> The horse struggled to
get free when it saw the mare. <i>Mahugnù ang
lantay ug inyung luntaluntáhan,</i> The bamboo
bed will collapse if you jump up and
down on it.

<p><b>luntud</b> <i>v</i> [AC; ac] for two things of about
the same size to lie atop one another, cause
them to do so. <i>Dì ka makaluntud ug libru
sa Bibliya,</i> You can't put a book on top of
the Bible. <i>Nagluntud silag higdà sa gip-ut
kaáyung bangkù,</i> They lay on top of one
another on the narrow bench. <i>Luntúra nang
duha ka malíta,</i> Put those two suitcases on
top of one another. <b>luntudluntud</b> <i>v</i> [AC23; c1]
@{pile up}, be @{piled up}. <i>Nagluntudluntud
ang mga sáku sa bugas,</i> Sacks of rice are
piled up.

<p><b>lunu</b> <i>v</i> [A3N; b6] for an animal to shed its
skin or shell. <i>Dinhay naglunu nga hálas dinhi
kay dúnay lunu nga gibyáan,</i> A snake
must have shed its skin here because there's
an empty snakeskin left behind. <i>n</i> skin or
shell shed. <b>linunhan</b> = <sc>LUNU</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>lun-ub</b> <i>v</i> [AB2; a12] for s.t. to get a big depression
in it, cause it to do so. <i>Kinsay galun-ub
sa palanggána? Gilingkúran tingáli,</i>
Who made a big dent in the basin? S.o.
must have sat on it. <i>Húmuk malun-ub ang
hubun sa bátà,</i> A child's fontanel easily gets
sunken. <i>n</i> rather large depression.

<p><b>lúnud<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @{sink s.t.} <i>Ang maldítu mauy
naglúnud sa sakayan nákung papil,</i> The
meany sunk my paper boat. <b>2</b> [B12; c1] <b>&mdash;
ang puhúnan</b> for capital to get used up.
<i>Magkalunud ang puhúnan sa nigusyung way
maáyung kwintáda,</i> Business without proper
accounting gradually exhausts capital. <b>&mdash;
ang buwan</b> <i>n</i> @{new moon}. <i>Hunas run kaáyu
kay lúnud ang buwan,</i> We have an extra low
tide today; it's new moon. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b4]
for an illness to settle. It is believed that an
<pb n=1325>illness to get better must come out in hives,
rash, or the like, and if it does not do so, it
settles, thus becoming worse. <i>Namatay siya
kay nalunud (milunud) iyang dáp,</i> He died
because his measles didn't come out. <i>Nabákul
siya dihang nalunuran sa íyang buti,</i> He
became a cripple after his smallpox sank. <i>a</i>
causing illnesses to sink. <i>Makamatay nang
lunud nga hilánat,</i> A fever that sinks can
cause death. <b>udtung &mdash; ang búwan</b> half
moon of the third quarter.

<p><b>lúnud<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] put s.t. together with s.t.
else which is being processed. <i>Lundi nag bugas
ang túbig,</i> Put some rice into the water
now. <i>Ilúnud lag ímung bulingun sa ámù nga
náa sa wásing masin,</i> Just put your dirty
laundry together with ours that's already in
the washing machine. <b>2</b> [A; c6] put in money,
etc. to a pool. <i>Ilúnud ring ákung bayinti
sa ímung pusta,</i> Here's my twenty pesos to
put into your betting pool. <b>&mdash; palit</b> <i>n</i> in
cockfighting, a purchase of the cock where
the owner is not paid, but the value of the
cock is made part of the bet. The purchaser
then proceeds to fight the cock. If the cock
wins, the owner is paid double the purchase
price and the purchaser keeps the cock. If
the cock loses the owner is given nothing
(since his purchase price was his bet). <b>&mdash; pátay</b>
<i>a</i> die-hard, inveterate. <i>Lúnud pátay (lunud
pátay) nga Libiral,</i> A die-hard Liberal.
<b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> way of cooking <i>adúbu</i> such that the
meat is boiled first and then after it is boiled
it is put into the bubbling fat. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
make <i>adúbu</i> in this style.

<p><b>lunuglunug</b> <i>v</i> [B146] for the fat of meat,
jelly, or the like to be soft, flabby, and
quivering. <i>Naglunuglunug sa katambuk ang
unud,</i> The meat is soft and shaking like
jelly because it's all fat.

<p><b>lúnuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> brown, granular residue which remains
after the oil has been cooked from
the coconut. <b>2</b> an old man who has lost his
virility (humorous). <i>Mamána ka ánang lagas
nga wà nay lána, lúnuk na lang,</i> Are you going
to marry that very old man, when he
doesn't have any oil (sperm) left? He's all
dried up. <i>v</i> [A2B12] form granules like <i>lúnuk</i>.
<i>Sigíhi ug ukay ug mulúnuk na ang tunù,</i>
Keep stirring when granules form in the
coconut juice. <i>Nalúnuk ang sabun nga íyang
gilútù kay sayup ang timpla,</i> The soap he
cooked formed granules because he had the
wrong mixture.

<p><b>lúnup</b> <i>v</i> [B456; b(1)] <b>1</b> @flood. <i>Pirmi lang
maglúnup sa Butwan kay gipamúril ang kakahuyan,</i>
There are always floods in Butuan
because the mountains have been deforested. 
<pb n=1326><b>2</b> for an emotion to flood over one. <i>Gilunúpan
siya sa túmang kalípay,</i> He was
overwhelmed with immense joy. <i>n</i> @flood.
<i>Ang dakung lúnup sa tyimpu ni Nuwi,</i> The
great flood in Noah's time.

<p><b>lúnus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; a12] for fruits, vegetables,
root crops to soften; cause them to do so.
<i>Mulúnus (malúnus) ang tawung nga dílì lutúun
dáyun,</i> Eggplants will soften and
wither if you don't cook them right away.
<i>Maglúnus kug ságing nga isugba,</i> I'll soften
bananas for broiling. <b>2</b> [B126] get burned,
heavily tanned from the sun. <i>Ang kaínit sa
adlaw mauy nakalúnus (nakapalúnus) sa pánit
sa mag-uúma,</i> The heat of the sun
scorched the farmer's back. <b>3</b> [B16; b4] be
@starved, extremely @hungry (as if withered).
<i>À, lunúsan man sad ta sa gútum ug pinaábut
nímu,</i> I'm famished waiting for you. <i>n</i>
@starvation. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> for fruits to be soft and
withered. <i>Ságing nga lunus,</i> Softly cooked
bananas.

<p><b>lun-us</b> = <sc>LUSNÙ</sc>.

<p><b>lun-ut</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ac] share a small space ordinarily
occupied by one or two people. <i>Makiglun-ut
siya nákug higdà kay tugnaw kunu,</i>
She wants me to sleep in her bed because
she says it's cold. <i>Lun-úta lag mga bátà
sa baksit,</i> Just put the children together
in the backseat.

<p><b>lunuy</b> <i>a</i> thoroughly soft and tender to touch.
<i>v</i> [B2; a] become, make very soft and tender.
<i>Nalunuy ang hinug ságing nga giban-ug,</i>
The ripe banana got very soft and tender
because it got bruised. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [BN] become
weak to the point of near collapse. <i>Mulúnuy
(manglúnuy) ku basta gutmun,</i> I become
weak when I'm hungry. <i>Nalúnuy dáyun
ku pagkahibalu sa íyang kamatáyun,</i> I
felt weak all over when I learned of his
death.

<p><b>lupa</b>, <b>lupà</b> <i>v</i> [B; b6] be somewhat depressed
below the surrounding land. <i>Giabunúhan
níya ang mga dapit sa yútà nga naglupà,</i> He
filled up all the places in his land which
were depressed. <i>n</i> land that is below the level
of the surrounding land. <i>Kanúnay bahaan
ang íyang baul kay lupà man,</i> His farm is always
flooded because it is located in a depression.

<p><b>lúpà</b> <i>v</i> [A] for one that is misbehaving to do
it all the more. <i>Human siya tambági sa pagsúgal,
milúpà hinúun,</i> After being cautioned
about his gambling, he indulged in it all the
more. <i>Ayawg labáni nang batáa arun dì mulúpà,</i>
Don't take that child's part or he'll
misbehave all the more. <b>&mdash; ang atay</b> <i>v</i> [B246]
swell with pride. <i>Milúpà íyang atay pag-ingun 
<pb n=1327>nákung gwápu siya,</i> He swelled with
pride when I told him he was handsome.

<p><b>lupad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] @fly, take a plane, be sent
flying. <i>Lupdun lang sa ubang langgam ang
láing kuntininti,</i> Some birds fly from one
continent to another. <i>Pugngi ímung kálù
kay tingálig ilupad sa hángin,</i> Hold on to
your hat or the wind will blow it away. <b>2</b>
[B2456] pass swiftly by. <i>Túling milupad
ang mga túig,</i> The years passed swiftly by.
<b>3</b> [b8] fly into a rage. <i>Hingluparan kus maistra
kay nayabu ang tintà,</i> The teacher lost
her temper at me because I spilled the ink.
<b>4</b> [A2] @travel, go s.w. (humorous, mildly
derogatory). <i>Mau pa gánì pag-abut milupad
sad dáyun,</i> He just arrived then he immediately
went away again. <i>n</i> act of @flying. <i>Kusug
ang lupad sa dyit,</i> The jet flies fast. <b>kúyug,
uban sa &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] keep up with the
latest fad, with the in thing. <i>Dì siya magpaiwit.
Muuban giyud sa lupad (panlúpad) sa
mga dátù,</i> She does not want to be left behind.
She keeps up with the rich. <b>mubù ug
&mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MUBÙ</sc>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> expanse of one's travel.
<i>Taas nag lúpad nang tawhána. Nakaabut nas
Lundun,</i> That man is widely travelled. He
has gone to London. <b>taas ug &mdash;</b>, <b>(<-)</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> always
be out of one's home and be at places
where he is not supposed to be. <i>Taas ug lúpad
(lupad) bayhána. Ásang bayli túa,</i> This
woman goes out too much. Wherever there's
dance, she is bound to be there. <b>2</b> travelling
a lot. <i>Dì ba didtu kas Dábaw, nía na man
sab lagi ka sa Manílà. Taása pud nímug lupad
uy,</i> You were in Davao, weren't you,
and now here you are in Manila. You sure
do travel. <b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> act of flying (plural). [+]

<p><b>lup-ad</b> <i>v</i> [AN; b6] @{spit saliva}. <i>Kinsa ninyuy
naglup-ad diri sa panghugasan?</i> Which one
of you spat in the sink? <i>Gilup-aran ku níya,</i>
He spat on me. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] keep spitting.
<b>lup-aránan</b> <i>n</i> @spittoon.

<p><b>lupak<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> poke or pound repeatedly
with the end of a stick. <i>Naglupak ku sa túbu
nga nasampungan,</i> I'm shoving a stick
into the pipe that was stopped up. <i>Lupakun
ku kanang ilagà nga náa sa sulud,</i> I'll shove
a stick into the hole to flush the rat out. <b>2</b>
pound to mash or pulverize s.t. <i>Milupak siya
sa humay,</i> He pounded the rice. <i>Maglupak
tag ságing,</i> We will mash bananas. <b>3</b>
make <i>lupak</i>. <i>n</i> a k.o. sweet made out of
pounded, cooked, unripe bananas, mixed
with half-matured coconut, shredded, and
sugared. <b>ni-</b>, <b>-in-</b> = <sc>LUPAK</sc>.

<p><b>lupak<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the young of the rudderfish (<i>damagan</i>,
<i>1</i>).

<p><b>lupasì</b> <i>a</i> @pallid in complexion. <i>Ang bátang bitúkun 
<pb n=1328>lupasì ug pamánit,</i> A child infested
with parasitic worms tends to have a pallid
complexion. <i>v</i> [B] for the complexion to
become pale.

<p><b>lupì</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> turned down corner of a page. <b>2</b> =
<sc>ALUPÌ</sc>. <i>v</i> [A; c1] turn down a corner of the
leaf of a book. <i>Gilupian níya ang tumuy sa
pahina nga íyang giundángan,</i> She turned
down the corner of the page where she
stopped.

<p><b>lúpig</b> <i>a</i> @inferior, @outclassed. <i>Lúpig ku siyag
ínum,</i> He is no match for me when it comes
to drinking. <i>Lúpig pa nímuy buguy,</i> You're
worse than a hoodlum. <b>walay &mdash;</b> nothing is
better than (lit. outclassed by). <i>Way lúpig
sa mag-amping,</i> There's nothing better than
being careful. <i>Lúpig pa níyay galingan mukáun,</i>
He can consume more than a mill. <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A23S; a2b2] @overpower, @outclass. <i>Way
makalupig sa íyang katabian,</i> Nobody can
outdo her in talkativeness. <i>Mubangka ku ug
lupígun ku nímug bú,</i> I will treat you if you
beat me in arm wrestling. <b>2</b> [AN; b(1)] @exploit,
take advantage over s.o. by cheating.
<i>Kusug siyang mulúpig (manlúpig) sa uban
salig kay abugádu siya,</i> Basing himself on
his ability as a lawyer, he takes advantage of
people. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> exploiting in a cruel way.
<i>Malupígun ang mga Katsílà kaniadtu,</i> The
Spaniards were oppressive in former times.
<b>paN-</b> <i>n</i> taking advantage of s.o. and cheating
him out of s.t.

<p><b>lúpir</b> <i>n</i> @{sport jacket}. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear a sport
jacket.

<p><b>lúpis</b> <i>n</i> dried strips of abaca trunk or certain
varieties of bananas which have not been
processed into fibers, used for tying and
other similar purposes.

<p><b>lup-it</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] press s.t. tight between two
surfaces. <i>Naglup-it ug mga dáhung layà ang
libru,</i> The book has some dead leaves pressed
inside it. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put s.t. in between
two flat surfaces so as to press it. <i>Pusturáwu
siyang tan-áwun ug magpalup-it sa púlu,</i>
He looks good when he tucks his shirt in.

<p><b>lupnis</b> = <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.

<p><b>lupù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. small blackish fish with lightly
toxic dorsal spines, often found on the bottom
in fresh or brackish waters: <b><i>Gymnapistes
niger</i></b>.

<p><b>lupù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A3P; b6(1)] @{shut off}, @block a passage
or flow. <i>Gúmun sa buhuk ang nakalupù
(nakapalupù) sa labábu,</i> The wash basin
was stopped up by some hair. <i>Ílang gilup-an
(gilupuan) ang agiánan arun pagbanhig sa ílang
mga kaáway,</i> They blocked the way so
that they could ambush their enemy. <i>n</i> s.t.
used to block the flow or passage.

<pb n=1329>

<p><b>lúpug<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> a for the eyes to be smarting. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A123P; b4]
for the eyes to sting. <i>Bùbúig túbig
ang bátà kay gilupúgan,</i> Pour water on the
child because his eyes are stinging. <b>2</b> [B; b6]
for tears to fill the eyes and blur the vision.
<i>Nalúpug ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà,</i>
Tears filled her eyes.

<p><b>lúpug<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] chase, run after s.t.
that is running. <i>Mulúpug nang irúag mudágan
ka,</i> That dog will chase you if you run.
<i>Lupúgun ta ka run ug dílì ka muari,</i> I will
run after you if you don't come here. <i>Hinglupugan
siya kay nangáwat ug mangga,</i> He
got himself chased because he stole some
mangoes.

<p><b>lup-ug</b> <i>v</i> [B26; b6] slump down to one's
feet. <i>Nadismáyu siya ug nalup-ug (milup-ug)
sa yútà,</i> She fainted and slumped to the
ground. <i>Dihà ra hibuntagi ang hubug sa íyang
gilup-úgan,</i> Morning found the drunk
lying where he had fallen.

<p><b>lúpuk</b> <i>n</i> young @locust.

<p><b>lúpus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B12] for a person to be @drenched.
<i>Nalúpus siya sa singut,</i> He was drenched in
sweat. <i>Diyútay rang túbig ikalígù. Dì gánì
makalúpus,</i> This isn't enough water to bathe
with. It won't even get me wet.

<p><b>lúpus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @bully. <i>Lupúsun lang mi
nímu kay dakù man ka,</i> You bully us because
you are bigger than us.

<p><b>luput</b> <i>v</i> [B23(1); b4] <b>1</b> leave a mark on or
injure the skin after winding, tying, etc. s.t.
tightly on it. <i>Miluput ang písì sa tiil sa bábuy,</i>
The rope was tied so tight around the
pig's foot it left a mark. <b>2</b> leave a crease on
a cloth upon folding or pressing. <i>Muluput
(maluput) ang íyang inutawan,</i> She irons
creases into the clothes. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mark left on
the skin after tying s.t. tightly around it. <b>2</b>
crease, fold on a cloth.

<p><b>lup-ut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>LUPUT</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>lup-ut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [AP; cP] @{tuck s.t. in} or under. <i>Ilup-ut
(ipalup-ut) ang ímung púlu,</i> Tuck your
shirt in.

<p><b>lup-ut<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2C1; b6] share a space for sitting
or sleeping with s.o. <i>Dì ta makalup-ut
sa tihíras,</i> We can't sleep together on
one small cot. <i>Naglup-ut ming duhag lingkud
sa usa ka síya,</i> We sat together in one
chair.

<p><b>lupuy</b> <i>n</i> the fry of <i>andúhaw</i>.

<p><b>lupyak</b> <i>v</i> [AB2; b6] <b>1</b> get, make a @dent in s.t.
<i>Lupyákig gamay ang táru ágig timáan,</i> Put
a small dent into the kerosene can to mark
it. <b>2</b> for earth to sink, cause it to do so. <i>Ang
yútang giabúnu sa bangag mulupyak ug ulanun,</i>
The earth that was filled into the hole
will collapse when it rains. <i>a</i> @sunken, @dented. 
<pb n=1330><i>Lupyak ug áping ang níwang,</i> A thin
person has sunken cheeks.

<p><b>*lupyù</b> (from puyù) <b>-um-r-</b>, <b>mu-</b> <i>n</i> @inhabitant,
@resident of a locality. <i>Ang kasagáran sa mga
lumulupyù (mulupyù) dinhi mangingisdà,</i>
Most of the inhabitants here are fishermen.

<p><b>lurang</b> <i>v</i> [B24] <b>1</b> for a storm or some other
natural force to @abate. <i>Milurang na ang bagyu,</i>
The typhoon has let up. <b>2</b> for problems,
anger, etc. to abate. <i>Wà giyuy paági
nga makapalurang (makalurang) sa kagúbut
sa midul-ist,</i> There seems to be no solution
to the trouble in the Middle East.

<p><b>lúrat</b> <i>v</i> [A2S; c1P] <b>1</b> open the eyes wide. <i>Papyúnga
ang mata sa minatay kay naglurat,</i>
Close the dead man's eyes because they are
wide open. <i>Dì kang kakità? Luráta (ilúrat,
paluráta, ipalúrat) ímung mata,</i> You can't
see? Open your eyes wide. <b>2</b> @glower at s.o.
to show angry disapproval. <i>Gilurátan sa maistru
ang mga istudiyanting nagtábì,</i> The
teacher glowered at the students who were
talking. <i>n</i> act of @glowering. <i>Sa usa lang ka
lúrat ni Tátay hílum ming tanan,</i> Father can
silence us with just one look. <b>hi-</b>/<b>ha-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256]
have one's eyes pop wide open. <i>Nahalúrat
siya sa kahibúlung,</i> Her eyes opened
wide in surprise.

<p><b>lúray<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6] for a top to wobble as it
spins to a stop. <i>n</i> wobbling of a top as it
spins to a stop.

<p><b>lúray<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B2; c1P] for the voice to be affectionate
with a slurring intonation. <i>Mulúray
na gánì íyang tíngug dúna siyay ihangyù nímu,</i>
When her voice gets sweet, she has a request
to make. <i>a</i> affectionate with a slurring
intonation. <b>pina-</b> <i>a</i> with an affectionate,
slurring intonation. <i>Pinalúray ang íyang tíngug
nga mihanggat nákù sa pagpangatúlug,</i>
With an affectionate voice, she asked me to
come to bed.

<p><b>lúrir</b> = <sc>RÚLIR</sc>.

<p><b>luru</b> <i>v</i> [B2N] for hair to fall out. <i>Mangluru
(muluru) ang buhuk basta kaspahun,</i> If you
have dandruff your hair will fall out. <b>paN-</b>
<i>n</i> falling hair.

<p><b>lúrù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B6] be @drooping. <i>Milúrù ang sangang
namungíngi sa mga búnga,</i> The
branch was drooping, it was so laden with
fruits. <i>Nalúrù ang babáying gikuyapan sa
simbahan,</i> The lady fainted in church and
sat there limp. <b>2</b> [B126] @{become dizzy}. <i>Nalúrù
ku sa bangkà kay bawud,</i> I felt seasick
in the boat because of the rough seas. <i>Tyubíbu
ang nakalúrù (nakapalúrù) níya,</i> The
merry-go-round made her dizzy.

<p><b>lúrung</b> <i>v</i> [B12; b3(1)] get dizzy from motion
or from being poisoned or nauseated.
<pb n=1331><i>Nalúrung ku humag tuyuktúyuk nákù,</i> I got
dizzy after I turned myself round and
round. <i>Ísug nga sigarilyu nga ákung nalurúngan,</i>
The strong cigarettes made me dizzy.

<p><b>lús</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] lower the sail of a boat. <i>Lúsun
(ilús) ang láyag ug línaw ang dágat,</i> The sail
is lowered when the sea is calm.

<p><b>lusa</b>, <b>lusà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A13] stare unseeingly into
space, usually due to lack of interest, comprehension.
<i>Unsay ímung gihunàhúnà nga
naglusa na man lang nang ímung mata?</i>
What are you thinking about? You're just
staring blankly into space.

<p><b>lúsa</b> <i>n</i> plate made of metal coated with enamel.
<i>v</i> [A13; b6] eat from metal plates.

<p><b>lusà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @nit, the egg of a louse. <i>v</i> [a4] be infested
with nits. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2] for lice to lay
eggs. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> full of nits. <i>v</i> [B126] be, become
full of nits.

<p><b>lúsad</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ac] go, bring @down, @descend,
@dismount. <i>Lugar bay. Anhi lang ku lúsad,</i>
Stop, Driver. I'm going to get off here. <i>Milúsad
siya sa hagdanan,</i> He went down the
stairs. <i>Patábang ug lúsad sa pyánu ngadtu
sa sílung,</i> Let some people help you bring
the piano down. <i>Lusára ang búla sa sílung,</i>
Go down and get the ball. <i>Ang walang tiil
mauy ilúsad pag-úna,</i> Descend with the left
foot first. <b>1a</b> [A2; a1c] go, bring to the sea
to fish, bathe. <i>Mag-íhaw mig bábuy ug maglúsad
mig panágat,</i> We slaughter a pig when
we bring our fishing nets to the sea for the
first time. <b>2</b> [A; b] launch one's or s.o.'s
political candidacy. <i>Kadaghan na siya makalúsad,
karun pa giyud kadaug,</i> He ran so
many times, but this is the first time he
won. <b>lusaránan</b> <i>n</i> place one descends onto
or over.

<p><b>lusak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] pound s.t. by hitting it with
the blunt end of a stick or with bombs.
<i>Kusga paglusak ang halu nga náa sa lungag,</i>
Poke the monitor lizard that is in the hole
hard with the end of the stick. <i>Lusaka ang
inad-ad nga báni pára sa bábuy,</i> Pound the
sliced banana stem with a pestle for the pig.
<i>Gilusak ang Hanuy sa mga bumba,</i> Hanoi
was pounded with bombs. <b>2</b> [A; a] make
<i>linusak</i>. <b>ni-</b>, <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. delicacy made of
pounded cooked banana mixed with shredded
coconut meat and sugar.

<p><b>lusay</b> <i>n</i> @{swollen lymph node}. <i>v</i> [B46; b4]
have a swelling in the lymph nodes. <i>Milusay
(gilusayan) ang íyang búgan,</i> She had a
swollen lymph node in the groin. <b>lusaylusay</b>
<i>n</i> small swollen lymph nodes. <i>v</i> [B4; b(1)]
have a small swelling in the lymph
nodes.

<p><b>lúsay</b> <i>n</i> @seaweed. <b>sáma sa &mdash;</b> not firm in one's
<pb n=1332>convictions (drifting like seaweeds). <b>ka-an</b>
<i>n</i> place where seaweeds abound.

<p><b>lusbà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB2; a12] for s.t. with an area
to @collapse or @{cave in}. <i>Bumba ang naglusbà
(nagpalusbà) sa atup sa simbahan,</i> The
bomb caused the roof of the church to collapse.
<i>Mulusbà (malusbà) ning salúga kun
tungtúngan ug bayinti ka táwu,</i> This floor
will collapse if twenty persons stand on it.
<i>Lusbáa ang tayaung lubut sa baril,</i> Knock
out the rusty bottom of the barrel. <b>2</b> [A; a1]
press s.t. rounded or bulging to level it
off or flatten it. <i>Dì ka makalusbà sa búla sa
baskitbul kun dì kuháan ug hángin,</i> You
cannot flatten a basketball if you do not let
the air out.

<p><b>lusbak<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B26] for a horizontal surface to
give way or yield to pressure above it. <i>Mulusbak
(malusbak) ang taklub sa kaban ug
tungtúngan ug bug-at,</i> The trunk lid will
get a dent if s.t. heavy is put on top of it.
n shallow depression, dent. <i>Daghang lusbak
sa karsáda kay dílì pinisun,</i> The road has
lots of holes because it has not been rolled.

<p><b>lusbak<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] cook very small fish in
vinegar and garlic. <b>-unun</b> <i>n</i> very small fish
to be cooked in such a manner. <b>ni-</b>, <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i>
dish of small fish cooked in vinegar.

<p><b>lusbù</b> <i>v</i> [B16] <b>1</b> @sink, @sag, get a @dent on the
top or simply give way. <i>Ayawg lingkúri ang
táru kay malusbù,</i> Don't sit on the can because
it will get a dent in it. <i>Nalusbù ang
tánil,</i> The tunnel caved in. <i>Ang kabug-at sa
sulud mauy nakalusbù (nakapalusbù) sa bulsíta,</i>
The heavy contents caused the bottom
of the paper bag to give way. <b>2</b> for a person
to slump or the bones that hold him to get
dislocated. <i>Nalusbù ákung háwak,</i> I got a
dislocated hip.

<p><b>lusbug</b> <i>v</i> [APB; c] immerse oneself in s.t. <i>Milusbug
siya sa túbig ug milanguy,</i> She immersed
herself in the water and swam. <i>Ang
lambay maglusbug sa balas,</i> A sea crab
buries itself in the sand.

<p><b>lusgus</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a] rub s.t. rough vigorously
against s.t. to clean it. <i>Akuy naglusgus sa
kasíli arun pagkúhà sa danglug,</i> I rubbed
the eel vigorously to get the slime off. <i>Lusgúsa
ug maáyu ang takuling sa kaldíru,</i>
Scrub the soot off the kettle.

<p><b>lúsì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a1b2] tweak or pinch with a twisting
motion. <i>Milúsì kug usa ka dawin sa sipì
nga ságing,</i> I twisted off a banana from the
bunch. <i>Kagáhì mu karug úlu, lusíun ta giyud
ka,</i> How hard-headed you are. I'm going
to tweak your ears. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A1; a1] <b>1</b>
work on an itchy foreskin by pinching,
twisting and turning it inside out. <i>Ang mga
<pb n=1333>bátang pisut maglusì kay katlan man,</i> Uncircumcised
boys rub their foreskin because
it itches. <b>2</b> = <sc>LÙLÙ</sc> (humorous).

<p><b>luslus</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c1] for s.t. that wraps s.t. and
is attached to it to slip off, esp. the foreskin.
<i>Human na siya makaluslus sa unud gíkan
sa mga bukug,</i> She managed to slip the
meat off the bones to which it had been
attached. <i>Naluslus na ang pánit sa íyang
tintin, hustu nang tulíun,</i> He can pull his
foreskin back, so he's ready to be circumcised.
2 [A; a12] use s.t. in a way that will
destroy it. <i>Hala, luslúsa nang makinilya arun
makailis ka,</i> Go on and use that typewriter
in such a way as to break it so you can buy
me a new one. <b>3</b> [AN; a] @swindle, make a
fool of s.o. (coarse). <i>Giluslus ming Pidru.
Inay ibáyad sa bangku ang kwartang gihátag
námù, íya hinúung giláyas,</i> Pedro swindled
us. Instead of paying the money we
gave him to the bank, he skipped out of
town. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (vulgar). <b>&mdash; mu</b>, <b>níya</b> <b>1a</b> expression
of anger at s.o. Luslus mu! <i>Wà
man gánì ku swildúi íni unyà kasab-ankasab-an
pa,</i> Damn! You scold me but I'm
working for you without pay! <b>1b</b> expression
debunking s.o. <i>Maáyu sa luslus mu,
nga húmuk rang mabálì!</i> Good, my eye!
It breaks so easily!

<p><b>lusnù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; b8] for a structure to @collapse,
@{crash down}. <i>Nalusnù ang taytáyan
pagbagyu,</i> The bridge collapsed in the
storm. <b>1a</b> [B1256] for a person to collapse.
<i>Nalusnù siya pagkadungug sa aksidinti,</i> She
collapsed upon hearing of the accident. <b>2</b>
[B12] for feelings, hopes, and aspirations
to collapse. <i>Nagkalusnù na ang ákung damgu
sa kadaúgan,</i> My hopes for victory are gradually
crumbling.

<p><b>luspad</b> <i>a</i> @pale, for a person to have lost his
color. <i>v</i> [BN; a] be; become pale. <i>Nanluspad
siya pagkadungug sa hukum,</i> She paled
when she heard the decision. <b>lusparun</b> <i>a</i> of a
pale sort. <i>Ang lusparung kaháyag sa búlan,</i>
The pale light of the moon.

<p><b>luspì</b> <i>a</i> @pallid in complexion due to some
physical deficiencies or sickness. <i>Luspì kaáyu
ang masakitun,</i> The sick man is very
pale. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] be, become pallid in complexion.

<p><b>lusù</b> <i>a</i> @hypocrite (slang). <i>Ang lusù nga dakù
daw santus giyud nga ímung iatúbang, apan
mangtas diay,</i> He is a terrible hypocrite. He
looks like a paragon of virtue, but actually
he's a monster.

<p><b>lúsù</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @penis (coarse). <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nímu</b>, <b>níya</b> <b>2a</b>
expression of anger at s.o. <i>Lúsù nímu, ikay
naghulam sa libru unyà akuy paulíun!</i> Nuts
<pb n=1334>to you. You borrowed the book and you
want me to return it! <b>2b</b> expression of disbelief.
<i>Lúsù níya. Ayaw ku níyag patuhúa,</i>
Hell! Don't try to make me believe him.

<p><b>lúsub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] @attack, force one's way into
s.t. <i>Gilúsub (gilusúban) sa milù ang tangkal
sa manuk,</i> The civet broke into the chicken
coop.

<p><b>lusug</b> <i>a</i> @stout, @corpulent, usually said of children.
<i>v</i> [B2; b6(1)] grow stout. <i>Mulusug
(malusug) ka ug mukáun kag kusug,</i> You'll
grow stout if you eat a lot.

<p><b>lúsug</b> <i>v</i> [AC; c] ride together in tandem, usually
on s.t. most often ridden by one. <i>Unsa!
Maglúsug ta ánang pyangguy nga kabáyù?</i>
What! Shall the two of us ride together
on that scrawny horse?

<p><b>lusuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> clove or segment of any fruit that
has segments. U<i>sa ka lusuk áhus,</i> One garlic
clove. <b>2</b> drops or beads of tears, perspiration,
rain, and the like. <i>Pipila ka lusuk lúhà,</i>
Some drops of tears. <i>Lusuk sa rusaryuhan,</i>
Rosary beads. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] break off s.t. that
comes in sections. <i>Lusuka úsà ang áhus úsà
pa paníti,</i> Split the garlic into cloves first
before you peel it. <b>1a</b> [A; a] gouge out an
eye. <i>Luskun ku nang mata mu run,</i> I'll
gouge out your eyes. <b>1b</b> [A13; a12] wrench
s.o.'s feelings. <i>Gilusuk ang íyang dughan sa
túmang kakulbà,</i> Her heart was wrenched
with anxiety. <b>2</b> [B2N] form segments or
similarly shaped things. <i>Milusuk (nanlusuk)
ang mga lúhà sa íyang mga mata,</i> Drops of
tears formed in her eyes. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> dangling
earrings with little pellets at the bottom.

<p><b>Lusun</b> <i>n</i> @Luzon, the largest island in the Philippines.

<p><b>lusung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> large @mortar for pounding rice.
<b>2</b> <i>a</i> @mortarful. <i>v</i> [a12] make into a mortar.
<b>(<-)<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] pour grains into the mortar.
<b>2</b> lower a coffin into the burial pit. <i>n</i> =
<sc>LUSUNG</sc>, <i>2</i>.

<p><b>lúsung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] @huddle, @{crowd close together}.
<i>Dì ta makalúsung íning gamayng
barútu kay súd ra nig duha ka táwu,</i> We
can't all ride in this small boat because it is
only good for two people. <i>Lusúnga (ilúsung)
lang nang mga sinakung humay sa karumáta,</i>
Just pile those sacks of rice in the cart.

<p><b>lusut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3P; ac] @pass, @{go through}. <i>Milusut
ang kumagkù sa gisiung midiyas,</i> The big
toe came out of the torn socks. <i>Dílì giyud
ku makalusut (makapalusut) ug hílu sa dágum,</i>
I can never thread a needle. <i>Kanang
kupúa lutsun gihápun sa tun-ug,</i> Cold air
can still pass through your cape. <b>2</b> [A2] go
through, come out successful. <i>Magbluáwut
ku basta makalusut sa burd,</i> I'll have a party
<pb n=1335>if I hurdle the board exams. <b>3</b> [A2; b(1)]
in basketball, drive through the defense.
<i>Sayun ra kaáyung lusutan (lutsan) ang inyung
dipinsa,</i> It is very easy to drive through
your defense. <b>pa-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2; c] squeeze in
a witty remark in a conversation. <i>Maáyung
mupalúsut nà siya,</i> He is good in making
funny remarks in a conversation. <i>n</i> the act
of squeezing in some witty remarks during
a conversation. <b>lutsanan</b> <i>n</i> a way out.

<p><b>lusyun</b> <i>n</i> lotion for use as a cosmetic or
cleansing the skin. <i>v</i> [A23; b] use a certain
k.o. lotion. <b>paN-</b> <i>v</i> [A2; b6] apply lotion
on oneself.

<p><b>luta<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> nosepiece that is made to pass through
the hole in the nose of domestic animals to
which a tether rope is attached. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12]
make a nosepiece. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] tie such a
nosepiece onto s.t.

<p><b>luta<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @joints in the body. <i>Haplási ang mga
luta (lutaluta, lutáhan) ug lána arun mawálà
ang pamául,</i> Rub oil on the joints to relieve
the pain. <b>lutaluta</b>, <b>lutalúta</b>, <b>lutáhan</b> =
<sc>LUTA</sc>.

<p><b>lúta</b>, lutà <i>n</i> @imprints made by the pressure or
weight of s.t. <i>Lúta sa ligid dihà sa lápuk,</i>
Tire marks in the mud. <i>Lúta sa tudlù sa
básu,</i> Finger marks on the glass. <i>v</i> [B6; b(1)]
<b>1</b> make an @impression, mark on s.t. <i>Milutà
(nalutà) ang íyang ngípun sa ákung buktun,</i>
Her teeth left their mark on my skin. <b>2</b> be
visible through s.t. <i>Milutà ang mamisus sa
íyang nipis nga bulsa,</i> The peso bills were
visible inside his shirt pocket.

<p><b>*lútab -an</b>, <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> for fruits and sugar cane
to be watery, lacking in sweetness. <b>2</b> for
nípà or lumber to be too soft or have a tendency
to rot. <i>v</i> [B12] become watery and
lacking in sweetness.

<p><b>lutak</b> <i>n</i> @crack, a break usually without complete
separation of parts. <i>Náa nay gamayng
lutak sa básu,</i> There's a slight crack on the
glass. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B3(1)6] crack. <i>Ang yútà milutak
sa paglínug,</i> The earth cracked in the earth-*quake.
<b>2</b> rack one's brains. <i>Makalutak (makapalutak)
sa úlu ning prublimáha,</i> This
problem can crack one's brains.

<p><b>lutang</b> <i>v</i> [A2] surface in the water. <i>Ug walà
mulutang ang bátang nalumus dílì untà makit-an,</i>
If the body of the boy who was
drowned had not floated on the surface, it
would never have been found. <b>lutanglútang</b>
<i>v</i> [A13] float freely in the water.

<p><b>lútang</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] @heal s.t. completely.
<i>Manghihilut mauy naglútang sa ákung piang,</i>
A bone setter set my dislocated bone.
<i>Gilútang sa tambálan ang ákung sakit,</i> The
folk doctor completely relieved me of my
<pb n=1336>ailment. <b>2</b> [AB12; a1] @solve or clear up a
problem, esp. a financial problem. <i>Ang pagdaug
ra sa swipstik ang makalútang (makapalútang)
sa átung mga suliran,</i> The sweepstakes
are the only solution to our problems.

<p><b>lutaríya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lottery. <b>2</b> k.o. bingo game played
with many players, where the cards have the
figures of the Spanish cards in place of
numbers, which are covered when the corresponding
card is drawn. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] hold a
lottery. <b>2</b> [A; b6(1)] play <i>lutaríya</i>.

<p><b>lutas</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @overcome, @surmount. <i>Kinsay
naglutas sa ímung galastuhan sa iskuylahan?</i>
Who shouldered all your expenses
in school? <i>Hápit na ku makalutas sa ákung
pagtuun,</i> I am almost through with my
studies.

<p><b>lútas</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @wean. <i>Lutásun ang bátà ug
manghúran na,</i> A baby is weaned when the
next child is born. <b>2</b> [A; a12] have a boy or
girl friend five years or more younger than
oneself. <i>Ganáhan siyang mulútas ug hayiskul
sa íya nang pagkálids,</i> He likes to go out
with high-school girls though he is in college.
<b>3</b> [a3] for a husband to be temporarily
deprived of marital relations (humorous
slang).

<p><b>lutaw</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @float. <i>Ang asyíti mulutaw
sa túbig,</i> Oil floats on water. <b>1a</b> [AB] move
gracefully as if floating on air. <i>Nindut tan-áwun
ang maglíap nga maglutaw,</i> It is nice
to see a basketball shot where the player
just floats up to the basket as he sinks it in.
<b>2</b> [A2] @show, @manifest itself. <i>Usa ka pahiyum
milutaw sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile
showed on his face. <b>2a</b> for a character trait,
truth, and the like to come out. <i>Milutaw na
ang tinúud níyang batásan,</i> His real character
now came out. <i>Mulutaw ra ang tinúud,</i>
The truth will eventually come out. <b>2b</b> <b>&mdash;
ang ganansiya</b> [B3(1)4] for it to be clear
that there is going to be a profit. <b>3</b> [A23]
for fish to come to the surface. <i>Andáma ang
báling kay hápit na mulutaw ang bansíkul,</i>
Prepare the net because the mackerel are
about to surface. <b>4</b> [A2] for fever or measles
to come out and fully develop. <i>Walà
nay kuyaw kun mulutaw (makalutaw) na
ang dáp,</i> There is no more danger once the
measles rash appears. <b>5</b> <b>&mdash; sa hángin</b> [A13]
a lacking awareness of s.t. <i>Dílì mahímung
maglutaw sa hángin ang átung mga anak sa
kalisud sa pangwarta,</i> Our children should
know how hard it is to earn money. b having
an uncertain outcome. <i>Naglutaw pa sa
hángin ang ákung numramyintu,</i> My appointment
is still up in the air. <i>n</i> freeboard. 
<pb n=1337><i>Lagmit ta malúnud kay gamay ang
lutaw sa sakayan,</i> We might sink because
the boat has a small freeboard. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b>
glowing with a healthy pink color. <i>Lutaw
ug dugù ang mga dugung Katsílà,</i> People
who have Spanish blood have a healthy
pinkish complexion. <b>&mdash; ang ganansiya</b> clearly
affording a profit. <i>Lutaw ang ganansiya
sa nigusyung bay-ansil,</i> You clearly will
make a profit in the buying and selling business.
<b>(<-)</b> <i>n</i> low-lying place near the shore
into which sea water enters, but separated
from the main sea by a bar of dry land. <b>pa-</b>
<i>n</i> s.t. to hasten the coming out of a rash or
fever. <b>pina-</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. @{rice cake} (<i>bibingka</i>)
cooked by steam.

<p><b>lutay</b> <i>a</i> for s.t. long to be @supple. <i>Lutay kaáyug
láwas ang misáyaw sa bali,</i> The person
who danced the ballet has a very supple
body. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be @pliant, easily bent. <i>Mulutay
(malutay) ang lipak ug nipsun ang
paglútì,</i> Bamboo sticks will be pliant if they
are stripped thin.

<p><b>luthang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @popgun made of a small bamboo
stem which shoots seeds or paper pellets. <b>2</b>
bamboo cannon that makes a loud retort
using kerosene, used for noise-making during
festive events. <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> shoot with a
native popgun or bamboo cannon. <b>1a</b> shoot
s.o. with any gun. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakaluthang,</i>
He went to prison for shooting a
man. <b>2</b> [A1; a12] make s.t. into a <i>luthang</i>.
<b>luthangluthang</b> <i>v</i> [A12C2] play games with
<i>luthangs</i>.

<p><b>lúti</b> <i>n</i> @lot, a parcel of land, usually residential.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] divide land into lots for sale.
<b>2</b> [A12] obtain a lot.

<p><b>lútì</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] split a piece of bamboo, rattan,
or <i>nítù</i> into narrow strips. <i>Lutíun ang kawáyan
pára himúung búbù,</i> When they
make a fish trap, they split narrow pieces
of bamboo for it. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> thin strips of bamboo,
rattan, or <i>nítù</i>.

<p><b>lutiríya</b> = <sc>LUTARÍYA</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>lutlut</b> <i>v</i> [AB; c6] squeeze s.t. extra into an
area which has little room, be squeezed in.
<i>Mulutlut lang ku áring mga karga arun lang
makapaúlì ku,</i> I will just sit here in between
the cargo, just so I can get home. <i>Unsang
librúhang ímung gilutlútan sa sulat?</i> What
book did you put the letter in? <i>Ilutlut lang
ning lubi sa ilálum sa lingkuránan,</i> Just
squeeze these coconuts under the seats.

<p><b>lutu</b>, <b>lutù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @blister gotten by rubbing. <i>v</i> [B23(1)6; b4]
develop or form blisters. <i>Milutu
(giluthan) ang íyang tudlù sa paglinúbù
sa mais,</i> Blisters have formed on her fingers
from shelling the corn.

<pb n=1338>

<p><b>lútu</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b3] wear black clothes in mourning.
<i>Kinsa may inyung gilutúhan?</i> Whom
are you mourning? <b>2</b> [a12] make, sew into
mourning clothes. <b>3</b> [b(1)] consider a
member of the family or s.o. close to the
family dead because of his rebellious or
unforgiveable act. <i>Gilutúhan si Sunya sa
íyang mga ginikánan kay nakigminyù siya
sa ílang draybir,</i> Sonia's parents simply considered
her dead when she married their
driver. <i>n</i> @{mourning clothes}.

<p><b>lutù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB246N; a12P] crack one's
knuckle(s); for the joints to crack. <i>Mulutù
(manglutù) ang íyang lutáhan inigtindug níya,</i>
His joints crack when he stands up. <b>2</b>
[A13] stay idle doing nothing, twiddling
the thumbs, cracking the knuckles, and the
like. <i>Naglutù lang. Walà makahunàhunà unsay
maáyung kurìkuriun,</i> He's just twiddling
his thumbs. He hasn't thought of anything
worthwhile to do. <b>2a</b> [A13; a12] do things
at a slow and lazy pace. <i>Ug lutuun nátù ang
átung líhuk magabin-an ta,</i> If we walk lazily,
we will be overtaken by night. <i>n</i> sound
produced by cracking the joints.

<p><b>lútù</b> v <b>1</b> [AB12; a] @cook. <i>Humut ang nagkalutung
inasal,</i> The roast pig smelled delicious
as it was cooking. <i>Lutúun nátù ang kík,</i> Let
us cook the cake. <b>1a</b> [AB12; b6] make ice
products. <i>Gáhì na ang áyis, nalútù na diay,</i>
The ice has hardened; it is done. <b>2</b> [AP; a1]
make s.t. tender. <i>Súkà ray mulútù (mupalútù)
sa kinílaw,</i> Vinegar can get the raw
fish tender. <i>Alkuhul ang naglútù sa atay niánang
palaínum,</i> Alcohol is giving that
drunkard a tender liver. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; dáan</b> [a12]
have the outcome pre-planned. <i>Ang banggà
gilútù dáan sa mga maghuhúkum,</i> The judges
prejudged the contest. <b>4</b> [B; c6] become
darkened. <i>Mulútù (malútù) ug samut ang
ímung pánit ug magsígi kag painit,</i> Your
skin will become darker if you keep staying
in the sun. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> cooked rice or corn grits.
<i>Paghúkad ug lútù,</i> Bring some cooked rice
to the table. <b>2</b> manner of cooking. <i>Kináham
ku ang lútung binisayà,</i> I love Visayan cooking.
a <b>1</b> done, cooked. <i>Ug lútù na ang kamúti
átung kan-un,</i> If the sweet potatoes
are done, let's eat them. <b>1a</b> for ice to be
frozen. <b>2</b> dark in shade. <i>Ang blú sa dágat
mas lútù ikumparar sa lángit,</i> The blue of
the sea is darker than the blue of the sky.
<b>3</b> <b>&mdash; dáan</b> @prejudged. <i>Lútù na man dáan ang
ákung grádu,</i> My grades are fixed. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga
makaw</b> <b>a</b> dish prepared for short-order cooking.
<b>b</b> shabbily made. <i>Lútung makaw ang
pagkabúhat sa lamísa,</i> The table was poorly
made. <b>c</b> prejudged. <i>Lútung makaw ang
<pb n=1339>kumbinsiyun,</i> The convention was rigged.
<b>(->)<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> well-fermented fish. <b>2</b> = <sc>LÚTÙ</sc>, <i>1a</i>.
<i>v</i> [b3] become fermented fish paste. <i>Wà pa
gánì makalutù ang ginamus nahurut na námug
káun,</i> The fish paste had not even gotten
fermented before we ate it up. <b>ni-</b>, <b>-in-</b>
<i>n</i> food bought prepared. <i>Pagpalit ug linútù
ug kabsan tag sud-an,</i> Buy some carry-out
food if we run short. <b>ni-an(->)</b>, <b>-in-an(->)</b> n
manner of cooking. <b>ma-(->)</b> <i>n</i> boiled rice
usually wrapped in banana leaves carried as
one's lunch. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A] bring a lunch of this
sort. <b>2</b> [A; a2] prepare a lunch of this sort.

<p><b>lútub</b> <i>v</i> [B2; b6] <b>1</b> form a blister from burning
or rubbing. <i>Milútub (nalútub) ang ákung
pasù,</i> My burn formed a blister. <b>2</b> for blood
to form a black spot under a finger- or toe-*nail
that has been injured. <i>Milútub ang dugù
sa ákung tudlù nga hingdukdukan sa
martilyu,</i> Blood formed a black spot on my
fingers where I had hit them with a hammer.

<p><b>lut-ud</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AC23; ac] @{pile up} on top of one
another. <i>Naglùt-ud[** ù typo?] ang mga plátu,</i> The
plates are stacked on top of one another.
<i>Lut-úra pagdala nang mga libru,</i> Carry the
books in a pile on top of one another. <b>2</b> [B36]
pile up, @accumulate. <i>Paspas uy kay naglut-ud
na ning ímung mga buluhatun,</i> Faster!
Your work is piling up. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> s.t. @stacked up.
<i>Tulu ka lut-ud nga libru,</i> Three stacks of
books. <b>2</b> having several rows of petals. <i>Antuwángang
lut-ud,</i> Hibiscus with several
rows of petals.

<p><b>lutuk</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a12] put a finger into an orifice
of s.t. living, usually to get at s.t. <i>Akuy
mulutuk sa bàbà sa bátà arun makúhà ang
singsing,</i> I will reach into the child's mouth
to get the ring out. <i>Luktun ku nang mata
mu,</i> I'll poke out your eyes. <b>2</b> [A; a]
squeeze and pull off the edible flesh of
jackfruit. <i>Dì ku makalutuk sa súuy sa nangkà,</i>
I can't take out the edible flesh of the
jackfruit.

<p><b>lútuk</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] @{stare at}. <i>Namula siyang gisalíhan
nákug lútuk,</i> She blushed when I kept
staring at her.

<p><b>lutung</b> <i>a</i> for fruits to be @{very ripe}, almost
overripe. <i>v</i> [B12] be, become very ripe. <i>Mas
lamì kan-un ang nangkà kun malutung na,</i>
Jackfruit is most delicious to eat when it is
very ripe.

<p><b>lútung</b> <i>n</i> contraction of the uterus during
labor. <i>v</i> [A2] for the uterus to contract
during labor. <i>Maggahìgáhì ang pus-un sa
umaának ug mulútung na,</i> The stomach of
a mother in labor hardens when her uterus
is contracting.

<p><b>lutup</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] for s.t. to show through s.t.
<pb n=1340>translucent that touches it. <i>Milutup ang
íyang tútuy sa nipis níyang bláwus,</i> Her
breasts showed through her flimsy blouse.
<b>2</b> [A2; b(1)] for s.t. to give off a reproduction
on s.t. that touches it. <i>Milutup ang banig
nga íyang gihigdáan dihà sa íyang bukubuku,</i>
The mat he lay on left an impression
on his back. <b>2a</b> leave a crease in cloth upon
folding or pressing. <i>Naglutup ang pinil-an
sa sinínà,</i> There was a crease left on the
dress where it was folded. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mark, imprint
on the skin. <b>2</b> crease, fold on a cloth.
<b>pa-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> reproduction of a picture made by
rubbing it with a candle and then scratching
a sheet of paper over it. <b>2</b> @tracing. <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
reproduce a picture by rubbing or tracing.

<p><b>lútus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; ab2] @chase or @{run after}. <i>Daghan
kaáyung táwung milútus sa mangunguut,</i>
A lot of people were chasing the pick-*pocket.
<i>Bísag ása pa mutágù ang kriminal,
lutúsun giyud sa baláud,</i> No matter where
the criminal hides, the law will go after
him. <b>2</b> [A; a12] @persecute. <i>Si Níru naglútus
sa mga Kristiyánus,</i> Nero persecuted the
Christians.

<p><b>lútus<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @lotus plant cultivated for ornamental
purposes, flowers esp. used for decorating
altars: <b><i>Nelumbium nelumbo</i></b>.

<p><b>lútuy</b> <i>v</i> [B2S3(1); b4] for the skin to swell
and form a blister from being burnt with s.t.
hot or cold. <i>Milútuy ang ákung buktun nga
napiksan sa ínit nga mantíka,</i> Hot lard spattered
on my arm and it swelled. <i>n</i> swelling
on the skin caused by heat or acid.

<p><b>lutya</b>, <b>lutyà</b> = <sc>BISUL</sc>.

<p><b>lúub</b> <i>v</i> [A; b(1)] <b>1</b> brood on eggs. <i>Luúban
sa himungáan ang itlug,</i> The hen will sit on
the eggs. <b>1a</b> stay around a place. <i>Dì ka ba
pul-an ug lúub sa balay?</i> Aren't you sick of
hanging around the house? <b>2</b> for emotions
to be stored up in one. <i>Kasína nga naglúub
sa ákung dughan,</i> The envy that dwelt in
my breast.

<p><b>luud</b> <i>a</i> @nauseous, causing nausea. <i>Luud kan-un
ang pagkáung pan-us,</i> Stale food is nauseous
to eat. <i>v</i> [B2; a4] become, feel nauseous.
<i>Nagkaluud ang báhù sa kasilyas,</i> The
toilet is getting to smell more and more
nauseous. <i>Lud-un giyud kung mamínaw sa
ímung mga pasálig,</i> I really get nauseated
listening to your promises. <b>lud-ánun</b>, <b>lud-unun</b>
<i>a</i> easily given to feeling nauseous.

<p><b>*lúud paN-</b> v [A2; b3] @sulk by refraining
from doing s.t. because of an offense or a
wish not granted. <i>Dì na siya mukanta.
Nanglúud nga wà pakpáki,</i> She won't sing
any more. She is sulking because she didn't
<pb n=1341>get enough applause. <b>luuray</b> <i>v</i> [C23] take
offense at each other and sulk. <i>Way mahímù
ang átung kláb kay nagluuray ang mga
upisyális,</i> Our club won't achieve anything
because the officers are constantly taking
offense at each other and refraining from
doing things. <b>luuran</b> <i>a</i> easily given to sulking,
withdrawing from an activity.

<p><b>luug</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @savage, @uncivilized. <b>2</b> @ignorant, lacking
sophistication like a savage. <i>Ayg tudlùtudlúa
nang mga trák. Luug ka man tingáli,</i>
Don't point your finger at those vehicles.
Are you ignorant? <i>v</i> [B12; a2] be, become
ignorant, unsophisticated. <i>Maluug kag adtu
ka magpuyù sa búkid,</i> You will grow up
ignorant if you stay in the mountains. <b>-in-</b>
<i>a</i> in the manner of a savage. <i>Linuug nga
búhat ang panglúgus,</i> Rape is a savage act.
<i>v</i> [A; c1] act like a savage. <b>-ing(<-)</b> = <sc>LUUG</sc>,
<i>a2</i> (humorous euphemism).

<p><b>lúuk<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @strangle, esp. with two
hands. <i>Luúkun ta ka dihag musúkul ka,</i> I'll
strangle you if you fight back. <b>2</b> [AC2; a12]
neck, pet to the point of or nearly to the
point of intercourse (slang). <i>Gilúuk bítaw
nákù, sugut lagi,</i> I got her over-excited, and
you bet she gave in. <b>maN-r-(->)</b> <i>n</i> @strangler.

<p><b>lúuk<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @bay. <i>Pagbagyu mitágù ang lantsa sa
may lúuk,</i> During the typhoon the launch
took shelter in the bay. <b>luuklúuk</b> v <b>1</b> [A1]
eat food alone by oneself. <i>Siya ray nagluuklúuk
ug káun sa íyang bálun,</i> She was eating
her lunch off in a corner by herself. <b>2</b> [A13]
do the work alone by oneself without
help from others. <i>Aku ra giyuy nagluuklúuk
niíning trabahúa,</i> I did this work all alone
by myself. <b>kina-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> inmost part of a
bay.

<p><b>lúum</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] put s.t. entirely into the
mouth. <i>Íyang gilúum ang usa ka buuk pán,</i>
He put the whole piece of bread into his
mouth. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A23] hold one's breath,
stifle back one's breath. <i>Napakung ang íyang
bitíis ug miluum siya sa kasakit,</i> He
banged his shins and he held his breath in
pain. <b>2</b> [A; c6] repress, keep to oneself or
cry in a repressed way. <i>Miluum siyag hílak
dihang ákù siyang gibyáan,</i> She cried softly
when I left her. <i>Ayawg iluum ang ímung
kayugut sa ímung amahan,</i> Don't repress
your resentment at your father.

<p><b>lúun</b> <i>v</i> [A2C; ac] <b>1</b> share a space to occupy
it. <i>Naglúun mig sakay sa kábaw,</i> We rode on
the carabao together. <i>Dì mahímung luúnun
ang duha ka himungáan sa usa ka pugaran,</i>
You can't put two hens in one nest. <b>2</b> live
together in the same house or room. <i>Ayaw
silag[**siyag] ilúun sa ámung kwartu kay hugawan,</i>
<pb n=1342>Don't let him[**note: plural translated as singular] stay with us in our room because
he is messy. <b>3</b> for an unmarried couple
to live together. <i>Gilúun níyag íyang uyab,</i>
He brought his girl to live with him.
<b>(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] put a buffer sheet over the
mouth of a vessel between the mouth and
the cover. <i>Lun-ig dáhun ang linung-ag kay
hungaw ang takub,</i> Put some leaves as a buffer
for the pot of rice because the cover is
not airtight. <i>n</i> s.t. used as a buffer for a pot
top. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> one whom one shares a space with.

<p><b>luup</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] shut off or block a passage or
flow. <i>Ílang gilup-an ang sapà ug mga dagkung
batu,</i> They blocked one end of the
stream with stones. <i>n</i> s.t. used to shut off
or block a passage or flow.

<p><b>luus</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] <b>1</b> be constantly doing s.t. <i>Dílì
ka makaluus ug lingkud dinhi kay binatunan
ka,</i> You can't constantly sit around because
you are supposed to be the maid. <i>Gilus-an
níyag bása ang kúmiks,</i> She did nothing
but read the comics. <b>2</b> stay long in a
place. <i>Dì ku muluus sa baryu,</i> I will not
stay in the village long.

<p><b>lúuy<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @pitiful. <i>Lúuy kaáyu ang mga ílung
tuwápus,</i> Orphans are very pitiful. <i>v</i> [B1256; b5c]
have pity, mercy on s.o.; give s.t.
out of pity. <i>Ayaw táwun kug patya, malúuy
ka,</i> Don't kill me. Have mercy. <i>Limus,
Dung, kaluy-i (kaluy-a) ang kabus,</i> Alms,
lad. Have pity on the poor. <i>Ihátag lag suklì
ikalúuy lang nà sa draybir,</i> Just give the
change to the driver out of kindness. <b>paki-</b>,
<b>pakima-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> beg for mercy. <i>Nagpakilúuy
(nagpakimalúuy) sila sa asindírung hakug,</i>
They beg for mercy from the greedy
landowner. <b>2</b> @plead. <i>Mipakilúuy (mipakimalúuy)
siya nga dì nákù byáan,</i> She begged
me not to leave her. <i>n</i> pleading for mercy.
<b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @pity, @mercy. <i>Kalúuy sa Diyus,</i> Thanks
be to God. <b>maluluy-un</b> <i>a</i> @kind, @merciful.
makalulúuy <i>a</i> inspiring pity.

<p><b>lúuy<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [B3(1)6; bc1] be, become @stagnant.
<i>Malúuy (mulúuy) ang túbig dinhi kay wà
may kanal,</i> Water stagnates here because
there is no canal.

<p><b>luwa-</b> <i>see also</i> <sc>LULA-</sc>.

<p><b>luwa<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> a word of command for a carabao to
halt. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] command a carabao to
stop. <i>Paluwaha sà ang kábaw arun makapahúlay,</i>
Stop the carabao so it can take a rest.

<p><b>luwa<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> v [A; ab2] @dismember a slaughtered
animal. <i>Dalì siya nga nakaluwa sa kábaw
nga giíhaw,</i> He dismembered the slaughtered
water buffalo in no time. <i>n</i> piece cut off
of a slaughtered animal.

<pb n=1343>

<p><b>lúwa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. poem, one of the forms used by
the players in the <i>murumúru</i> play, consisting
of short lines of around ten syllables, in
rhyming couplets. v [A; c] <b>1</b> recite the <i>lúwa</i>.
<b>2</b> recite any poem from memory.

<p><b>luwà</b>, <b>lúwà</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AN; c] @spit or eject from
the mouth. <i>Giluwaan (gilud-an) níya ang
sáwug,</i> He spat on the floor. <i>Iluwà nang kindi
kay húgaw,</i> Spit out that candy. It's
dirty. <b>1a</b> [AN; b(1)] spit to express contempt.
<i>Nakaluwà (nakapangluwà) ku dihang
nanghambug siya,</i> I couldn't help spitting
when he started to boast. <b>2</b> [c6] for a
processing machine to expel a solid by-product.
<i>Inigsúd sa tubu, ang iluwà sa makina
bagásu,</i> Sugarcane is fed into the crushers.
Then it comes out as bagasse. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @spit,
@spittle. <b>2</b> action of spitting. <b>maabut sa &mdash;</b>
near not far. <b>lud-anan</b>, <b>-anan</b> <i>n</i> @spittoon.

<p><b>luwàlúwà</b> <i>n</i> the reed suspender in a loom,
two pieces of wood which suspend the reed
(<i>suluran</i>) and allow it to swing back and
forth, holding it in proper position with regard
to the warp threads.

<p><b>luwag</b>, <b>lúwag</b> <i>n</i> @ladle. <b>duul sa &mdash;</b> be close to
influential people such that one has pull. <i>v</i>
[A2; a12] make into, hit with, use a ladle.

<p><b>luwak</b>, <b>lúwak</b> <i>n</i> the other side of s.t. elevated.
<i>Ang ílang dápit luwak niánang bungtúra,</i>
Their place is s.w. beyond that hill. <i>v</i> [A2; ac]
<b>1</b> pass over a summit, go up to a pass
and then come down, bring s.t. over a pass.
<i>Gíkan dinhi muluwak ka pa ug duha ka
bungtud,</i> From here you have to climb over
two hills. <b>2</b> climb up and over s.t. elevated in
coming down towards the other side. <i>Makaluwak
ang bátà sa abatan,</i> The child can
climb over the railing. <i>Nakaluwak ning baúla
ngadtu sa tapun,</i> This field stretches over
the mountain to the other side. <i>n</i> other side
of a mountain or elevation.

<p><b>luwang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> bilge, the rounded lower part of
a ship's hull or hold. <i>Ákung hinubígan ang
luwang sa sakayan,</i> I'll bail out the water
from the bilge of the boat. <b>2</b> quadrilateral
section of a rice paddy bounded by dikes.
<i>Tulu ra ka luwang ang ákung nadáru,</i> I have
plowed three sections of the rice paddy. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a2] divide the rice paddy into sections.
<b>2</b> [c1] harvest the rice partition by partition.
<b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> by the section. <i>v</i> [A; c1] do by
the section.

<p><b>luwas<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A3P; a1] <b>1</b> save, remove s.o. from
harm. <i>Tambal ang nakaluwas (nakapaluwas)
nímu,</i> Medicine has saved your life. <i>Ákung
luwasun ang bátà sa balay nga nasúnug,</i> I'll
<pb n=1344>save the child from the burning house. <b>1a</b>
save from sin and death. <i>Maluwas ta sa kalisud
ug makatrabahu na ku,</i> We will escape
from our financial worries when I find a
job. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> safe from danger. <b>2</b> free from debt,
discomfort. <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> safety, preservation
from destruction. <b>2</b> salvation. <b>3</b> freedom
from difficulties, problems, etc. <b>maN-r-(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> saviour, esp. The Saviour, Jesus Christ.

<p><b>luwas<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> = <sc>HI-</sc>, <i>v</i>. <b>hi-</b>, <b>hilwas</b> v [A12; a12] <b>1</b>
@articulate, pronounce words or letters. <i>Dì
makahilwas ug íri ang Insik,</i> The Chinese
can't pronounce an <i>r</i>. <b>2</b> utter taboo words.
<i>Sa íyang kasukù, nakahilwas siyag mga púlung
nga law-ay,</i> In his anger he uttered profanity.
a well articulated. <i>Hilwas na kaáyug
sinultihan ang bátà,</i> The child can now
speak very articulately. <b>-in-(<-)</b>, <b>ka-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i>
one's full name. <i>Idut ang íyang anggà apan
Prídu ang íyang kaluwásan (linúwas),</i> His
nickname is Edot but his real name is Fredo.

<p><b>luwat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] @quit a job. <i>Muaplay ku
sa trabáhu nga ímung giluwatan,</i> I'll apply
for the job you quit. <b>2</b> [b2] accidentally let
go of s.t. <i>Hiluwatan níya ang mga plátu nga
íyang gidala,</i> She accidentally let go of the
plates. <b>3</b> [A2B236; b] let out, cause to
come out from within. <i>Nakaluwat siyag usa
ka makahulugánung pahiyum,</i> She gave
forth a meaningful smile. <i>Way usa ka púlung
nga miluwat (naluwat) sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not a
single word came out of his mouth. <b>3a</b> [A; b(1)]
issue a press release, communiqué.
<i>Mau ni ang balità nga giluwatan sa imbaháda,</i>
This is the news issued by the embassy.
<b>3b</b> [A; b(1)] issue for a purpose. <i>Miluwat
ug kasugúan ang Prisidinti sa pagpadakup sa
mga Huks,</i> The President gave out orders to
capture the Huks.

<p><b>luwat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> [A2; a] climb up and over s.t. elevated
and come down to the other side. <i>Miluwat
siyag tulu ka bungtud paingun nganhi,</i>
He passed over three hills to get here.
<i>Luwatun sa bátà nang mubù mung abatan,</i>
The baby will climb over that low railing of
yours.

<p><b>luwat<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> too, also (dialectal).

<p><b>lúwis</b>, <b>lúwist</b> <i>n</i> low waist, a style of trousers
in which the waist line is cut comparatively
low. <i>v</i> [A; b6] wear, make trousers in this
style.

<p><b>l[=ú]y</b> = <sc>LÚLUY</sc>.

<p><b>lúya</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @weak, or lacking in strength of body
or muscle. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku gíkang nasakit,</i>
I am very weak after my illness. <b>2</b> not active,
aggressive enough. <i>Lúya man gud ka
maung láin ang nadáwat,</i> You were slow.
That's why s.o. else got the job. <b>3</b> weak in a
<pb n=1345>subject. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku sa mát,</i> I'm weak in
math. <i>v</i> [A1B12S; a12] be, become weak,
tired out, make s.o. tired. <i>Dì kung katrabáhu
kay nagluya ku,</i> I can't work because
I'm weak. <i>Nalúya kug dinágan,</i> I got tired
running. <i>Luyáha ang isdà úsà kubráha ang
pasul,</i> Tire the fish out before you pull in
the line. <b>maluyáhun</b>, <b>luyahun</b> <i>a</i> of a weak
sort. <i>Luyahun (maluyáhun) nga tíngug,</i> A
feeble voice.

<p><b>luy-a</b> <i>n</i> @ginger: <b><i>Zingiber officinale</i></b>. <b>&mdash; nga tapul</b>
<i>n</i> k.o. purple ginger used medicinally. <i>v</i>
[A3; b6] flavor with ginger. <b>luy-aluy-a</b> <i>n</i> k.o.
herb similar to ginger: <b><i>Zinziber zerumbet</i></b>.

<p><b>lúyang</b> <i>n</i> sweet prepared of cooked plantains
pounded and mixed with grated coconut
and sugar. <i>v</i> [A; a] prepare this dish.
<b>-in-</b>, <b>ni-</b> = <sc>LÚYANG</sc>, <i>n</i>.

<p><b>luyat</b>, <b>lúyat</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> lacking in fullness and firmness.
<i>Luyat ra kaáyu ning unlána,</i> This pillow
is too soft. <i>Luyat kaáyu kug láwas,</i> I'm
very flabby. <b>2</b> for bananas to be soft before
getting mature. <i>Luyat kaáyu ang ságing kay
linghud pagkapùpù,</i> The bananas are soft
because they were immature when they
were cut down. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] <b>1</b> get to be @soft
and @flabby. <b>2</b> for bananas to get soft before
maturity.

<p><b>luyluy<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> @drooping, hanging limply. <i>Luyluy
na ang íyang buktun sa túmang kakápuy,</i>
His arms are limp from utter exhaustion. <i>v</i>
[B; b6] be, become drooping or limply
hanging. <i>Nagluyluy na ang mga sanga sa káhuy
nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i> The branches
of the tree are bending under the weight of
the fruits.

<p><b>luyluy<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>luyu</b> <b>1</b> at the back of, @behind. <i>Tágù luyu sa
batu,</i> Hide behind the rock. <i>Anáa luyu sa
pangánud ang adlaw,</i> The sun is behind the
clouds. <b>1a</b> behind what is shown, as an action
or attitude. <i>Luyu sa íyang pahiyum anáa
ang pagbudhì,</i> Treachery lurks behind
her smile. <b>1b</b> one's back. <i>Kalúta ning ákung
luyu,</i> Scratch my back. <b>2</b> on the other side
of. <i>Luyu sa panaptun,</i> Reverse side of the
cloth. <i>Luyu nga dágat,</i> Sea on the other side
of the island. <i>Luyu nga bulsa,</i> Back pocket.
<i>Luyung dunggan,</i> The other ear. <i>Luyung
kwartu,</i> The adjacent room. <b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug &mdash;</b> both
sides of. <i>Putì ang luyug luyu sa playwud,</i>
The plywood is white on both sides. <b>3</b> @despite.
<i>Luyu sa ákung pagsakripisyu way bili
níla ang tanan,</i> Despite the sacrifices I had
made, they counted it all for nothing. <i>v</i> [A; c1]
assist s.o. in his work. <i>Nars ang miluyu
sa dukt&ucaron;r pag-upira,</i> A nurse assisted the
doctor in the operation. <i>Ikaw lay ákung iluyu 
<pb n=1346>(luyuhun) sa trabáhu,</i> I'll have you be
my assistant in my work. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c]
stay, put at the back. <i>Nagpaluyu ug lingkud
ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The small fry sat at
the back. <i>Ipaluyu nang ímung karga,</i> Put
your baggage at the back. <b>1a</b> [A13] lurk,
be behind s.t. as a cause. <i>Adúnay kahulugang
nagpaluyu sa íyang pahiyum,</i> There is
a hidden meaning lurking behind her smile.
<b>2</b> [A; b(1)] support from behind the scenes.
<i>Ang kudita gipaluyuhan sa siay-i,</i> The coup
d'état was backed up by the CIA. <b>luyulúyu</b>
<i>n</i> @assistant. <b>luyhánun</b>, <b>taga-</b> <i>n</i> one living on
the other side of the island. [+]

<p><b>lúyung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c] @sow seeds in a seedbed. <b>2</b>
[A; c] @transplant. <i>Ilúyung ang mangga ngadtu
sa luyu,</i> Transplant the mango tree in the
back. <b>2a</b> [A; c1] dump corpses into a big
pit. <i>Mga sundálu ang naglúyung sa ílang gipamatay,</i>
The soldiers dumped the corpses
of the people they massacred. <b>(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @seedling.
<i>Ang átung luyung hustu nang ibalhin,</i>
Our seedlings are ready to be transplanted.
<b>2</b> s.t. transplanted. <b>tag-</b> <i>n</i> one who transplants.

<p><b>lúyut</b> <i>v</i> [B12] for s.t. not firm to sag out of
shape under a weight. <i>Nalúyut ang bakat
nga ákung gilingkúran,</i> The hamper I was
sitting on sagged out of shape. <i>Nagkaluyut[**accent on first u?]
ang dúyan nga pirming higdáan,</i> The hammock
is sagging out of shape because it is
constantly used. <b>(->)</b> <i>a</i> be out of shape.

<p><b>lyábi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>YÁBI</sc>. <b>-ra</b>, <b>-ru</b> = <sc>YABÍRA</sc>, <sc>YABÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>lyábi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> lock in judo or wrestling. <b>2</b> in Jai-alai,
where one bets as to who comes out
first and second place out of six players, bet
twice: once that those numbers come out
first and second place, respectively (e.g. 1
first place and 5 second place), and once
that the same numbers come out in reverse
order (i.e. 5 first place and 1 second place).
<pb n=1347>Thus, one avoids betting on the right combination
in the wrong order. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b4] get a
lock on s.o. <b>2</b> [A13; c1] make a bet a <i>lyábi</i>.

<p><b>lyágay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. flying fish smaller than <i>barúnguy</i>.

<p><b>lyamáda</b> <i>n</i> home service for a haircut and
shave. <i>v</i> [A; c1] request home service for a
haircut and shave.

<p><b>lyamar</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; c6] @summon, call s.o. to
come or for s.t. to be brought. <i>Mulyamar
ku ug lima ka saup arun patrabahúun sa pinsa,</i>
I will summon five tenants to work on
the fence. <i>Naglyamar na pagsúgud ang armi
sa mga bayinti anyus,</i> The army is beginning
to draft the twenty-year olds. <i>Ilyamar ku
ug taksi,</i> Call me a taxi. <b>2</b> [A2; c] speak to
s.o. to ask for s.t. <i>Milyamar si Pidru nga
manghulam siya ug kwarta nákù,</i> Pedro called
me to borrow money. <b>2a</b> [A] signify
one's intention. <i>Milyamar ug pangasáwa ang
ákung anak,</i> My son signified his intention
of getting married. <b>3</b> [A2] for a disease or
mania to show signs of recurring. <i>Milyamar
na sad ang ákung mata. Magkibídu na giyud
ku niíni,</i> My eyes are bothering me again.
Now I really will have to wear eyeglasses.
<b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ang tiyan</b> @{feel hungry}. <b>4</b> [A2] for a
gear to engage. <i>Dílì mulyamar ang primíra
sa ákung mutur,</i> My motorbike won't go into
first. <b>4a</b> for one's ability or strategy to
produce results. <i>Walà mulyamar ang ákung
lung syát,</i> My long shots did not score. <b>5</b>
[A2] for wind to change directions. <i>Milyamar
ang hángin paingus habagatan,</i> The
wind changed directions to the south. <i>n</i>
@summons, order to start doing s.t. <b>lyamadur</b>
<i>n</i> one who calls for bets at a cockfight.

<p><b>lyáwi</b> = <sc>YÁBI</sc>, <i>n1</i>, <i>v</i>.

<p><b>lyukimya</b> <i>n</i> @leukemia. <i>v</i> [B1246; a4] be afflicted
with leukemia.

<p><b>lyúpis</b> = <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.

<pb n=1348>

<p><b>ma</b> <i>n</i> short for the vocative of <i>máma</i>, 'mother'.

<p><b>má</b> = <sc>MALA</sc>.

<p><b>m[=à]</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> onomatopoetic word for the lowing
sound of a cow or a water buffalo. <b>2</b> a cow
or water buffalo (child's talk). <i>v</i> [A; b6]
low, produce a lowing sound.

<pb n=1349>

<p><b>ma-<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> future verb affix. (<i>Past</i>: <b>na-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>:
<b>ma-</b>.) <b>1</b> potential of the direct passive.
(<i>See</i> <b>-un<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> for meanings of the direct passive.
See <i>maka-</i> for meanings of the potential.)
<i>Mapalit nà nímu bísag ása,</i> You can buy
that anywhere. <i>Wà ku pa mabása,</i> I haven't
had a chance to read it. <i>Uy! Dì man diay
<pb n=1350>ákù ning nadá nákung pitáka,</i> Heavens, I
took s.o. else's purse by mistake. <b>2</b> potential
of the instrumental passive. (See <i>i-<hi rend=sub>1</i></i> for
meanings of the instrumental passive.) <i>Dì ni
mabaligyà kay mahal da kaáyu ang prisyu,</i>
You can't sell this because it's too expensive.
<i>Wà pa nákù mahátag níya kay wà pa siya
muabut,</i> I haven't had a chance to give
it to him because he hasn't arrived. <i>Halá!
Nabungat ra ba nákù ang sikrítu,</i> Oh God!
I let out the secret. <b>3</b> <i>active of stative verbs</i>:
may become [so-and-so]. <i>Ayaw nag hikápa.
Magubà unyà nà,</i> Don't touch that. It
might break. <i>Ilhan nga mulubad nang panaptúna
ug mapula ang túbig,</i> You'll know
the cloth runs if the water turns red. <i>Nawálà
ang ákung singsing,</i> My ring got lost. <b>3a</b>
<i>with roots that refer to nonvolitional actions</i>:
[do]. <i>Matingála siya ug ngánu tu,</i> He
will be amazed at why it should be so. <i>Wà
ku mabaláka,</i> I am not worried. <i>Mah[=ú]g unyà
ka ug mabálì ang sanga,</i> You will fall if
the branch breaks. <i>Ug matúlug na sila,</i>
When they are asleep. <i>Mahadluk ku,</i> I am
afraid. <i>Dì ka ba malúuy níya?</i> Don't you
feel sorry for him? <b>3b</b> <i>with nouns</i>: become
[so-and-so]. <i>Ug maduktur ka na,</i> When you
get to be a doctor. <b>3c</b> <i>with nouns which refer
to a place</i>: wind up in [such-and-such]
a place. <i>Malangit kag maimpirnu ba?</i> Will
you go to heaven or will you go to hell?
<i>Mauspital giyud kag pasagdan lang nà nímung
sakíta,</i> You'll end up in the hospital
if you let your sickness go. <b>3d</b> with nouns
referring to time: get to be [such-and-such]
a time. Ug maalas tris na gánì, mulakaw na
ku, If it gets to be three o'clock, I'll leave.
Ug magabíi nag wà pa siya, If it gets to be
nightfall and he hasn't arrived. <b>3e</b> (only
with the future) when [such-and-such] a
time or season comes about. <i>Magkítà ra silag
mapista,</i> They only see each other during
fiestas. <i>Tábù dinhi ug maduminggu,</i>
They hold market here on Sundays.

<p><b>ma-<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <b>1</b> affix added to most adjective roots
which do not refer to a measurement to
form adjectives which mean 'very [so-and-so]'.
This formation is used in literary or
formal styles. <i>Usa ka mapait nga pahíyum,</i>
A very bitter smile. <b>2</b> added to some verbs
to form adjectives meaning [do]ing, usually
with a short penult. <i>Bátang mahilak,</i> A
crybaby. <i>Matulug,</i> Of a sleepy sort. <i>Matawa,</i>
Full of laughter.

<p><b>ma-ánun</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i>, used with some
bases in place of <i>ma-un</i>. <i>Masuk-ánun,</i> Tending
to get irritated.

<p><b>máas</b> <i>a</i> @old, @aged. <i>Bisan máas na siya tisar gihápung 
<pb n=1351>mulakaw,</i> He may be old, but he
still walks erect. <i>v</i> [B] @{become old}. <i>Kun
mumáas na ang kalbásà dílì na maútan,</i>
When a squash becomes too old, it is no
longer good to eat.

<p><b>maáyu</b> <i>see</i> <sc>ÁYU</sc>.

<p><b>mabà</b> = <sc>MUBÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mabaw</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @shallow. <i>Mabaw ra kaáyu nang ímung
pangatarúngan,</i> Your reasoning is very
shallow. <i>Dì kalanguyan nang subáa kay mabaw,</i>
You can't swim in that river. It's too
shallow. <i>Ang baskit nga mabaw ug lubut diyútayg
sulud,</i> A shallow basket holds little.
<i>Mabaw nga panaksan,</i> Shallow bowl. <b>2</b> <i>in
set expressions</i>: <b>&mdash; ug lubut</b> @sensitive or
quick to anger. <i>Muhílak diay bísag kumidiya
ra. Kamabaw nímug lubut uy,</i> Why did
you cry when it was just a joke? How sensitive
you are! <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ug salabútan</b> @unintelligent.
<i>Dúgay siyang kasabut kay mabaw rag
salabútan,</i> She doesn't understand readily
because she is unintelligent. <i>v</i> [B; b7c1]
become shallow. <i>Imabaw (mabwa) lang pagkálut
ang tamnan ug kamúti,</i> Just make the
hole for the sweet potatoes shallow. <b>hi-/ha-(->)</b>
<i>see</i> <sc>HIMÁBAW</sc> <i>under</i> <sc>BABAW</sc>. <b>-g-</b> shallow
(plural). <b>i-</b> n place above s.t. <i>Imabaw sa
kaban nákù gibutang ang libru,</i> I put the
book on top of the trunk. <b>-in-</b>, <b>-in-g-</b> <i>v</i> [a12]
do in a shallow way. <i>Kun minagbáwun
lang ni nátù pagsabut ang giisplikar sa maistru,
dílì giyud ta makapasar,</i> If you fail to
understand (lit. understand shallowly) what
the teacher explained, you won't pass. <b>ka-(<-)</b>
n half brother, sister. <i>Kamábaw ku siya
kay paríhu mig inahan,</i> He is my half brother
because we have the same mother. <i>v</i> [A23]
be half brothers, sisters.

<p><b>mabdus</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @pregnant. <b>2</b> for rice grains to be
in the panicle. <i>Mabdus na ang humay,</i> The
rice grains are forming. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B26] get, make
pregnant. <i>Mimabdus si Maríya kay hagithagitun
kaáyu,</i> Maria got pregnant because she
was flirtatious. <b>1a</b> [A1; c] carry in the
womb. <i>Gimabdus nà siya pagkamatay sa íyang
amahan,</i> He was in his mother's womb
when his father died. <b>2</b> [B] for rice grains
to form in the panicle. <b>3</b> [B1] for borrowed
things to have been kept too long. <i>Dúgay
kaáyu nímung giúlì ang ákung libru. Mimabdus
na nà,</i> You kept my book too long (lit.
so long that it got pregnant). <b>4</b> [B1] <b>&mdash; sa
pasálig</b> get fooled by assurances (lit. got
pregnant because of promises). <i>Daghan nang
mimabdus sa pasálig sa mga pulitiku,</i> Many
people have been fooled by the politician's
assurances. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c2] get s.o. pregnant.
<i>Gipamabdus (gipamabdúsan) si Maríya ni
<pb n=1352>Pidru</i>, Pedro got Maria pregnant.

<p><b>mabgas</b> = <sc>MALUBGAS</sc>.

<p><b>mabúlu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. medium-sized tree of the primary
forest, cultivated for its fruit. The
wood is hard and used for furniture, the
heartwood being nearly black: <b><i>Diospyros
discolor</i></b>.

<p><b>mad-as</b> <i>a</i> land that has dried up. <i>v</i> [B1] be,
become dry land. <i>Nagmad-as ang pilapilan
nga walà na makultibar,</i> The rice paddies
are dry after being left uncultivated.

<p><b>mádil</b> <i>n</i> @{fashion model}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; c] model s.t.
<b>2</b> [B156; a2] be a fashion model. <b>-un(->)</b>
a having a body like a model.

<p><b>madrasta</b> <i>n</i> @stepmother.

<p><b>madri<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @nun. <b>&mdash; dipamilya</b> woman head of
the family. <b>&mdash; supiryúra</b> @{mother superior}. <i>v</i>
[B156; a] be, become a nun. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12]
pretend to be a nun, treat like a nun.
<b>madrihun</b> <i>a</i> having ways or traits of a nun.
<i>Madrihun kaáyug nawung bayhána, inusinti
kaáyug dagway,</i> That woman is like a nun.
Such an innocent face.

<p><b>madri<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> main frame of a door or window
shutter. <i>v</i> [c1] make a main frame of a
shutter.

<p><b>madri kakaw</b> <i>n</i> small ornamental tree flowering
profusely with pink or lavender blooms,
used for firewood and fencing: <b><i>Gliricidia
sepium</i></b>.

<p><b>madri míya</b> an exclamation of alarm, surprise,
or disgust mainly by speakers who have
been under Spanish influence. <i>Madri míya,
tingálig mah[=ú]g nang bátà,</i> My God! Watch
out, the baby is going to fall. <i>Madri míya!
Nabúhat nímu tu!</i> My God! You actually
did that!

<p><b>madrína</b> <i>n</i> @godmother, the female sponsor at
one's baptism, wedding, confirmation, or
ordination. <i>v</i> [B136; c1] be, become the
<i>madrína</i>.

<p><b>madyik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magic involving supernatural
powers. <b>2</b> @{sleight-of-hand} trick. <i>Nalingaw
ang mga bátà sa ákung madyik,</i> The children
enjoyed my tricks. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; a2] @{practice
magic}. <b>2</b> [A; a] @steal s.t. small. <i>Huy, kinsay
nagmadyik sa ákung bulpin diri?</i> Hey, who
swiped my ball point pen? <b>-íru</b> <i>n</i> magician.

<p><b>madyung<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @sandspurs, k.o. coarse grass
growing about 1' that bears spikes with
rows of round burrs, around 1/4" in diameter.
<b>2</b> the burrs of this grass. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13]
get sandspurs all over one.

<p><b>madyung<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @mahjong. <i>a</i> win the mahjong
set. <i>Pung! Madyung ku, Bingo!</i> I get mahjong!
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A3; a] play mahjong. <i>Dílì na lang
ta magdúlag baráha. Madyúngun ta na lang
ni,</i> Let's not play cards. Let's just play
<pb n=1353>mahjong. <b>2 [</b>A12] win at mahjong. <i>Wà pa
ku makamadyung,</i> I haven't gotten mahjong
yet. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> mahjong den. <b>2</b> @{mahjong set}.
<b>3</b> piece needed to get 'mahjong'. <i>Ang madyungan
ni Turuy tris sirkulu,</i> Toroy is waiting
for the three circle piece. <b>-íru</b>, <b>[** -]íra</b> <i>a</i>
mahjong addict.

<p><b>madyurit</b> <i>n</i> @{drum majorette}. <i>v</i> [B16; a2] be
a majorette.

<p><b>mag-</b> durative active verbal affix, future.
(<i>Past</i>: <b>nag-</b> <i>or</i> <b>ga-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>mag-</b>.) <i>Magmata
sila árung urása,</i> They are awake at
this time. <i>Nagmata (or gamata) pa ba kahà
sila,[** , should be: ?]</i> Do you think they are still awake? <i>Walà
na sila magmata,</i> They are not awake any
more. Verbs with <i>mag-</i>, <i>nag-</i> have the following
meanings (as opposed to verbs with
<i>mi-</i>, <i>mu-</i> &mdash; <i>see</i> <sc>MU-</sc>): <sc>1</sc> action not necessarily
intentional. <i>Walà siya magsulti,</i> He
didn't say. <i>Walà ku maghátag níya ánang
librúha,</i> I didn't give him that book. <sc>2</sc> durative
action, action or state continuing in
time. <i>Wà na siya maghilak,</i> He isn't crying
any more. <i>Ug magtindug ang mga táwu sa
atubángan, dì mi makakità,</i> If the people in
front are standing, we won't be able to see.
<sc>2a</sc> added to nouns. <i>Ug magkalayu na ang
kakugnan háyag kaáyu ang lángit,</i> When the
fields are ablaze, the skies light up. <i>Human
sa púlù ka gutlù, ang puthaw magbaga,</i> After
ten seconds the steel will glow. <sc>3</sc> <i>added
to verbs referring to a state</i>: be in [such-and-such]
a state. <i>Ug mag-abri ang pultahan,
musulud giyud ang lángaw,</i> If the door
is open, the flies are sure to come in. <i>Walà
na magtuyuk ang ligid,</i> The wheel is no
longer turning. <sc>3a</sc> <i>added to adjectives</i>: be
[adj.]. <i>Magmalipáyun ta,</i> Let us be happy.
<i>Mawà kay hitsúra ug magpula nang ímung
nawung,</i> You will not look good if your
face is all red. <sc>3b</sc> added to words referring
to a state of the weather. <i>Atúa giyud siya sa
dágat, magbálud kinig maglínaw,</i> He is at sea,
whether it is wavy or calm. <i>Mag-ulan kag
mag-ínit,</i> Rain or shine (lit. whether you are
rainy or shining). <sc>4</sc> <i>referring to an action
which redounded on the agent</i>: do [so-and-so]
to oneself. Mag-ílis pa ku, I will change
my clothes. <i>Gustu kung maglumus,</i> I want
to drown myself. <sc>4a</sc> <i>added</i> to nouns: become
a [so-and-so]. <i>Magpárì ku,</i> I will become
a priest. <i>Magsirkadur tingáli ning bataána,</i>
This child probably wants to become
a trapeze artist. <sc>5</sc> referring to an action
which two or more people did with each
other. (Verbs with <i>mag-</i> of this sort always
have penultimate stress.) <i>Didtu sila mag-ábut,</i>
They met in that place. <i>Magsákay ta,</i>
<pb n=1354>Let us ride together. <i>Ug maglagyù pagkabutang
ang mga balay,</i> If the houses are far
apart from one another. <b>5a</b> <i>with nouns</i>: be
in the [noun] relation. <i>Magkumpári kami
ug akuy pakugúsun sa íyang anak,</i> We will
be <i>kumpári's</i> if I become his child's god-*father.
<i>Mag-amígu lang ta,</i> Let's be friends.

<p><b>maga-</b> alternative form for <i>mag-</i> in meanings
<i>2</i>, <i>2a</i>, <i>3</i>, <i>3a</i>, <i>4</i>. Words with <i>maga-</i> can substitute
for the examples there given.

<p><b>Magahat</b> <i>n</i> pagan non-Cebuano peoples in
the mountains (applies to pagans in Negros
and in Mindanao). <i>v</i> [A13] be very touchy.
<i>Ug napildi ka ug dakù magmagahat diay ka?</i>
You are touchy just because you lost heavily?

<p><b>magalyánis</b> <i>n</i> downtown shopping district of
Cebu (after the name of Magallanes Street,
which formerly was the principal shopping
street in Cebu).

<p><b>magang</b>, <b>mágang</b> <i>v</i> [BN] for corn to flower.
<i>Inigmagang sa mais, mugítib na ang lugas,</i>
When the corn flowers, the grains begin to
develop.

<p><b>magasin<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @magazine, @periodical.

<p><b>magasin<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @{ammunition clip} for automatic
firearms.

<p><b>magay</b> <i>n</i> @maguey, cultivated as a source of
sisal fiber: <b><i>Agave cantala</i></b> or <b><i>sisalana</i></b>. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i>
[A] make into sisal hemp. <b>magay mágay</b> <i>n</i>
ornamental plant similar to the maguey but
smaller in size: <b><i>Sansevieria spp.</i></b>

<p><b>magaya</b> = <sc>MALAGAYA</sc>.

Magindánaw <i>n</i> @Muslims of Cotabato and
Zamboanga del Sur.

<p><b>magka-</b> <i>durative active future for verbs referring
to a state</i>: be, becoming more and
more [so-and-so]. (<i>Past</i>: <b>nagka-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>:
<b>magka-</b>.) Verbs with this affix always
have a stressed final syllable. <i>Imbis nga magkakusug,
nagkahinay hinúun,</i> Instead of getting
faster and faster, it was getting slower
and slower. <i>Wà lagi magkaduul ang bapur
nganhi, nagkalayù hinúun,</i> The boat is not
coming nearer. It's actually getting further
and further away.

<p><b>magka-(<-)</b> potential active verb affix, future.
(Past: <b>nagka-</b>. Subjunctive: <b>magka-</b>.)
Used with verbs referring to mutual actions
(cf. <i>mag-<hi rend=sub>1</i></i>, <i>5</i>) but otherwise paralleling the
potential meanings listed under <i>maka-</i>. <b>1</b>
can [do] with each other. <i>Dì tang tanan
magkasákay,</i> We cannot all ride together. <b>2</b>
manage to [do] with each other. <i>Wà mi
magkasábut,</i> We didn't manage to come to
an agreement. <i>Nagkaábut sila sa tungàtúngà,</i>
They met in the middle. <b>3</b> happen to [do]
with each other. <i>Ug magkakítà gánì ang
<pb n=1355>ímung babáyig asáwa,</i> If your mistress and
your wife happen to run into each other.

<p><b>mag-l-</b> alternant of <i>mag-r-</i>, and usually in
competition with it, but with some roots
only <i>mag-r-</i> is frequent or the form with
<i>mag-r-</i> has acquired a different nuance. <i>Magbalantay,</i>
Watchman. <i>Magbuluhat ug mga
mwiblis,</i> Furniture maker.

<p><b>maglalatik</b> <i>n</i> k.o. folk dance in which half
coconut shells are knocked to the rhythm
of the accompanying music.

<p><b>magnisya</b> <i>n</i> @{milk of magnesia}. <b>&mdash; simpli</b> a half
dose of milk of magnesia (as opposed to <i>&mdash;
dubli</i>, the full dose).

<p><b>magnit</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magnet. <b>2</b> kissing scene (slang&mdash;from
the notion that the faces come together
as if magnetized). <i>Daghang magnit
ánang salidáha,</i> There are plenty of kissing
scenes in that movie. <b>3</b> <b>syúgar &mdash;</b> sugar magnate.
<i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> pick up with a magnet. </b>2<b>
@swipe, @steal, spirit away. <i>Kinsay nagmagnit
sa ákung bálùn?</i> Who swiped my lunch? <b>3</b>
[C] kiss one another usually in a show
(slang). <i>a</i> won over. <i>Inigkanta nímu, magnit
na silang tanan,</i> When you sing, they'll all
be won over.

<p><b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> prefix added to verbs to form nouns
which refer to one who does [verb] on a
regular basis. <i>Magbabantay</i>, Watchman.
<i>Magsusúlat</i>, Writer. Magpapatigayun, Businessman.
<i>Magyuyutà</i>, Landowner or farmer.
<i>Magbubúhat</i>, The Creator (God) or
one who does.

<p><b>magsúun</b> <i>see</i> <sc>*SÚUN</sc>.

<p><b>magtalisay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree similar in shape and
appearance to the <i>talísay</i>, but with smaller
leaves and harder wood: <b><i>Terminalia sp.</i></b>

mágu <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @magi. <b>2</b> s.o. @outstanding, @expert.
<i>Mágu sa kinablit,</i> A wizard at the guitar.

<p><b>mágù</b> <i>n</i> @tarsier.

<p><b>magus</b> = <sc>AMAGUS</sc>.

<p><b>máha</b> <i>n</i> name given to various puddings and
confections. <b>&mdash; blangka</b> pudding made of
kernels of young corn and coconut milk or
just plain milk. <b>&mdash; diúbi</b> a pudding made of
<i>úbi</i> and coconut milk. <b>&mdash; riyal</b> candy made
out of peanuts, milk, and sugar.

<p><b>mahal</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dear, @expensive. <i>Mahal na kaáyu
ang bugas karun,</i> Rice is very expensive now.
<i>Magbáyad kag mahal sa ímung gibúhat,</i> You
shall pay dearly for what you have done.
<b>2</b> @beloved. <i>Siya ang ákung mahal (minahal)
nga bána,</i> He is my beloved husband. <b>3</b>
blessed (address to saints). <i>Pasalamáti ang
Mahal nga Birhin,</i> Give thanks to the Blessed
Virgin. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; nga adlaw</b> the days of the
Lenten season. <b>5</b> <i>in set phrases</i>: very little,
almost without. <b>&mdash; ug pahíyum</b> stingy with
<pb n=1356>the smiles. <b>&mdash; ug tíngug</b> weak-voiced. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B; ab7] become expensive, go up in price.
<i>Basta Amirkánu mupalit, mahalun giyug baligyà,</i>
For an American the price is always
jacked up. <b>2</b> [A; a12] love. <i>Ang mga bayáni
nagmahal sa ílang yútang natawhan,</i> Heroes
love their native land. <i>Gimahal ku ikaw,</i>
I love you. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> @beloved, dear one. <b>ka-an(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> majesty (address to royalty). <i>Matúman
ang ímung gihangyù, kamahálan,</i> Your
order will be fulfilled, Your Majesty. <b>-l-un(<-)</b>,
-un(<-) <i>a</i> @precious. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> dear or costly
kind. <b>ma-in-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> @loving, @affectionate.

<p><b>mahan</b> = <sc>MAN KAHÀ</sc> (dialectal). <i>see</i> <sc>MAN</sc>.

<p><b>maharlika</b> <i>n</i> the name given to the native
nobles in pre-Hispanic times.

<p><b>máhay</b> <i>n</i> feelings of hurt and @regret at what
s.o. did. <i>Arun walay máhay apúran ta kamung
tanan,</i> So there will be no hurt feelings,
I'll give you each one. <i>v</i> [A; b3c5]
have feelings of hurt. <i>Nagmáhay kung napalit
ku tung sapatúsa,</i> I'm sorry I bought
those shoes. <i>Ikay ákung gimaháyan sa nahitabù,</i>
I blame you for (lit. you are the reason
I'm regretting) what happened. <i>Gikamaháyan
ta ka kay wà ka mudúaw nákù,</i> You
hurt me because you did not pay me a visit.
<b>walay &mdash;</b> <i>v</i> [A13] there was nobody that
felt bad, said in two situations: when people
who attack on s.o. are beaten up instead
(i.e., they cannot blame anyone but themselves),
and when people who set on s.o.
are unsuccessful (i.e., no one felt bad because
they were successful).

<p><b>mahika</b> <i>n</i> @magic.

<p><b>mahiku</b> <i>n</i> word referring to an unknown location
when asking or giving a location, usually
used in anger. <i>Lupad ngadtu sa mahiku,
animála ka,</i> Get out, I don't care where,
you beast. <i>Ambut ásang mahikúha tu nákù
ikabutang ang pisti nga hunsuy,</i> I don't
know where the heck I left that blinkety-blank
pipe.

<p><b>mahistrádu</b> <i>n</i> @judge. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be made,
become a judge.

<p><b>mahugani</b> <i>n</i> @mahogany.

<p><b>maigang</b> <i>n</i> medium to large tree of the primary
forest, with fruit similar in flavor and
taste to <i>lungbuy</i>: <b><i>Eugenia polycephaloides</i></b>.

<p><b>mailúku</b> = <sc>MAMILÚKU</sc>.

<p><b>ma-in-un(<-)</b>, <b>ma-in-ánun</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i>
used with some bases in place of <i>ma-un</i>.
<i>Matinabángun</i>, Helpful. <i>Masinabtánun</i>, Full
of understanding.

<p><b>mais</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @maize, the @corn plant or any part
of it. <b>1a</b> <b>bugas &mdash;</b> corn grits. <i>Mahal na ang
prisyu sa bugas mais karun,</i> The price of
corn grits has increased. <i>v</i> [A1] have corn
<pb n=1357>grits as one's staple food. <i>Nagmais lang mi
kay barátu man kay sa humay,</i> We had corn
grits as our staple food because it is cheaper
than rice. <b>-an</b>, <b>ka-an</b>, <b>-al</b> <i>n</i> @cornfield. <i>v</i> [A1; a12]
have a cornfield. <b>maismáis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ornamental
plant similar to the corn plant, and
growing up to 3': <b><i>Dracaena sanderiana</i></b> and
<b><i>fragrans[**s/b: D. fragrans]</i></b>. <b>2</b> folding knife with a handle that
is made of sheet metal, molded into the
form of an ear of corn. <b>3</b> name given to the
largest species of flying fish (<i>bangsi</i>). <b>-un</b> =
<sc>MAISMÁIS</sc>, <i>3</i>.

<p><b>maistra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{female teacher}. <b>1a</b> term of address
or title for a teacher. <i>Nía na si Maistra
Lúling,</i> Here is Mrs. Loling, the teacher. <b>2</b>
education course. <i>Maistra ang gikúhang kursu
ni Pirla,</i> Perla is majoring in Education.
<b>(->)</b> <i>voc.</i> teacher, ma'am. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] for a
woman to teach. <i>Tunghaan nga gimaistráhan
ni Sunya,</i> The school where Sonia is
teaching. <b>2</b> [B156; a1] be a (female) teacher.
<i>Maistráhun ku ning ákung anak,</i> I'll
make my daughter into a teacher. <b>ubra &mdash;</b>
<i>see</i> <sc>UBRA</sc>.

<p><b>maistru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>, <b>1a</b> = <sc>MAISTRA</sc> (male). <b>2</b> education
course. <b>3</b> the leader or @instigator of
activity, usually bad. <i>Ikay maistru sa tanang
mga binúang,</i> You are the instigator of all
the foolishness. <b>4</b> band or orchestra master.
<i>Pasakalyi, maistru, kay mukanta ku,</i> Introduction,
maestro. I shall sing now. <b>&mdash; ámu</b>
@boatswain. <b>&mdash; kusiníru</b> @{chief cook}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a]
@teach. <b>2</b> [B6; a1] be a @teacher. [+]

<p><b>maka-<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> potential active verb affix, future.
(<i>Past</i>: <b>naka-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>maka-</b>. <i>Short
form</i>: <b>ka-</b>.) <i>Dì ku makaalsa (kaalsa) niánà,</i>
I cannot lift that. <i>Nakatilaw (katilaw) na ku
niánà,</i> I have tried that. <i>Wà ku makasakay
(kasakay),</i> I couldn't get a ride. <b>1</b> refers to
an action s.o. has the capability of doing.
(Only the future form is used in this meaning.)
<i>Makamau na kung mukinatsilà sa nag-idad
kug diyis,</i> I knew how to speak Spanish
when I was ten years old. <b>2</b> refers to an action
which one had the opportunity or
managed to do. <i>Ug makaadtu ku sa inyu
human sa paniudtu, muhapit ku,</i> If I get a
chance to go to your place after lunch, I'll
drop in. <i>Wà ku makalakaw kay síging abut
ang mga bisíta,</i> I didn't have a chance to go
out because we kept having visitors. <b>2a</b> <i>with
nouns</i>: manage to get. <i>Ug trís ákung mahulbut
run, makamadyung ku,</i> If I draw a three,
I will get mahjong. <i>Niíning trabahúa hálus
ta makasininà,</i> With this work I can hardly
earn enough to buy a shirt. <b>3</b> refers to an
accidental or unintentional action. <i>Diriyut
siya makaihì sa dihang gilatigu siya sa íyang
<pb n=1358>inahan,</i> Her mother whipped her so hard
she nearly wet her pants. <i>Makaingun kag
nindut ug makakità ka,</i> Once you see it,
you won't be able to help exclaiming at
how beautiful it is.

<p><b>maka-<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>short form</i>: <b>ka-<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> <i>n</i> affix added to
numbers to form words which mean [do
so-and-so] many times. <i>Makapila (kapila)
ku na ikaw ingna?</i> How many times did I
tell you? <i>Makaduha na ku malígù didtu,</i> I
have gone swimming there twice. <i>Makadaghan
na ku mabiktima,</i> I have been victimized
many times.

<p><b>makahiyà</b> = <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>KIPÌ</sc>.

<p><b>makalibri</b> = <sc>KALIBRI<hi rend=sub>2</i></sc>.

<p><b>makan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @macan, k.o. large-grained rice of
wet fields, highly prized for ordinary eating.
<b>2</b> k.o. very fat pig. <i>a</i> @obese. <i>Gwapahun untang
bayhána apan makan lang,</i> She's quite
beautiful, only she's fat.

<p><b>makapunù</b> (from <i>punù</i>) <i>n</i> variety of coconut
which produces ordinary fruit and once in
a while fruit which are completely full of
soft meat, slightly harder near the shell.
The <i>makapunù</i> fruit is highly esteemed and
is used for sweets.

<p><b>maka-r-</b> affix added to verbs referring to a
state to form adjectives which mean cause
s.o. to get into [such-and-such] a state to a
great extent. Forms with this affix usually
have long penults. <i>Makasusúbung hitabù,</i> A
very saddening event. <i>Makalulúuy</i>, Inspiring
pity. <i>Makalalagut</i>, Angering.

<p><b>makarúni</b> <i>n</i> @macaroni. <i>v</i> [A13] cook a macaroni
dish.

<p><b>Makaw</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Chinaman from Macao. <b>2</b> Chinaman
in a restaurant business (so called because
many cooks in Chinese restaurants
immigrated from Macao). <b>lútung &mdash;</b> <i>see</i>
<sc>LÚTÙ</sc>.

<p><b>máki<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a large, enamel-coated, round, metal
platter, 18" or so in diameter for holding
cooked rice or corn.

<p><b>máki<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> a Chinese dish of sliced meats,
stewed and thickened with cornstarch.

<p><b>makig-(<-)</b> prefix added to bases with a prefix
<i>pakig-</i> to indicate future, volitional active
forms. <i>Past</i>: <b>nakig-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>: <b>makig-</b>.
No durative or potential forms. (<i>See</i>
<sc>PAKIG-</sc> <i>for meanings</i>.) <i>Short forms</i>: <b>kig-</b> and
<b>tig-</b>. <i>Makigkáun (kigkáun, tigkáun) siya nákù
sa gawas,</i> He wants to take me out to eat.
<i>Nakig-áway siyag dakung táwu,</i> He picked
a fight with a large person. <i>Walà ku makigpustaánay
níya,</i> I did not challenge him to
bet.

<p><b>makina</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @machine. <b>2</b> engine. <i>Dílì na muandar
ang makina sa awtu,</i> The automobile
<pb n=1359>engine won't start. <b>3</b> sewing machine. <i>Ang
makina kinahanglánun kaáyu sa sastri,</i> A
sewing machine is a necessity to a dress-*maker.
<b>4 &mdash; sa bugas</b> corn, rice mill. <b>&mdash; dimutur</b>
<i>n</i> motorized machine, engine. <i>v</i> [a12][**joined a1 &amp; 2]
<b>1</b> do by machine. <i>Ayawg kinamuta nà
pagtahì, makinaha nà,</i> Don't sew it with
your hands. Do it by machine. <b>2</b> put an engine
s.w.

<p><b>makinarya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> machinery, set of machinery
put together for a specific use. <b>2</b> machinery,
set of activities or groups organized to accomplish
s.t. <i>Ang makinarya sa Partídu Libiral,</i>
The machinery of the Liberal Party.

<p><b>makinilya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> typewriter. <b>2</b> clipper to trim
hair. <b>3</b> windlass. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a2] type. <i>Makinilyáhun
giyud basta sulat nga aplikisiyun,</i>
Letters of application should be typed. <b>1a</b>
[A; a12] hit with a number of rapid blows,
as if punching a typewriter. <i>Gimakinilya
nákù siyag dyab,</i> I hit him with a rapid-*fire
succession of jabs. <b>2</b> cut hair with a
clipper. <b>-ádu, -in-</b> <i>a</i> typewritten.[+]

<p><b>makinista</b> <i>n</i> engine man, machine operator.
<i>v</i> [B16; a2] become an engine man.

<p><b>makiníta</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> process of embroidery done by
pricking the needle over the design on the
top side of the cloth until the whole design
is completed, after which the design on the
bottom side is trimmed. The top becomes
the right side. <b>2</b> needle for this sort of embroidery.
<i>v</i> [A; a2] embroider in this method.

<p><b>makmak</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] pound s.t. hard with s.t.
<i>Makmáka ang puthaw samtang ínit pa,</i>
Pound the iron while it is hot. <b>2</b> [A; ab2]
beat severely, pound. <b>2a &mdash; ug kasábà, sulti</b>
[A; a12] scold severely, lambast. <i>Dì ka ángay
mumakmak níyag kasábà kay dì ka
ginikánan,</i> You have no right to scold him
severely because you are not his father.

<p><b>makra = MARKA.</b>

<p><b>maksut = LAKSUT.</b>

<p><b>mákù = DAKÙ</b> (dialectal). <b>&mdash; dyamù</b> very
big. <i>Mákù dyamù ang ílang báy,</i> They have
a huge house.

<p><b>makúpa</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small tree cultivated for its
red, top-shaped fruits, with white, spongy
meat and a mild flavor, a large meaty variety
of the <i><b>Syzygium samarangense.</b></i> The same
genus as <i>tambis,</i> but much firmer of flesh.

<p><b>mal</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> in billiards, a false shot causing one
to lose his turn. <b>2</b> unlucky number. <i>Daghang
mahadluk sa numiru trísi kay mal kunu,</i> Lots
of people are afraid of thirteen because it is
said to be an unlucky number. <i>v</i> [B126]
make a bad shot. <i>Mamal kag láin ang maigù
sa bulamánu,</i> You lose your turn if you hit
<pb n=1360>the wrong ball. <b>&mdash; numiru</b> = <sc>MAL</sc>, <i>n2</i>. <b>&mdash; tiráda</b>
<i>n</i> in billiards, a shot that is not well
executed. <i>Mal tiráda tung ímu kay layù ra
kaáyu sa lungag ang ímung gitiráhan,</i> That
was a bad shot. The target ball was a mile
from the pocket.

<p><b>mala</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @dry, not wet. <i>Mala na ang mga hinayhay,</i>
The clothes that were hung up are
dry now. <b>2</b> not displaying lively attention,
@disinterested. <i>Tingálig dì siya muapil kay
mala siya ug tinubagan,</i> He probably won't
participate because he gave a disinterested
answer. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [APB; a2] @{dry up}, become
@dried. <i>Mimala ang mga sapà,</i> The rivers
dried up. <i>Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy mumala
(mupamala) sa mga basakan,</i> The heat of
the sun will dry the rice fields up. <i>Nag-úsik
lang sa panahun ang nagmala (nagpamala)
íning salúga,</i> Whoever dried this floor off
was just wasting his time. <i>Tiil nga makamalag
(makapamalag) basakan,</i> Big feet (lit.
that can dry up a rice paddy). <i>Namad-an ug
singut ang íyang bukubuku,</i> The sweat on
his back has dried up. <b>2</b> [A13] be @uninteresting,
@boring. <i>Wà ku mutiwas sa sini kay
nagmala lang,</i> I did not see the movie to the
end because it was boring. <b>2a</b> [b4] <b>&mdash; sa dugù</b>
become @pale. <i>Pagpangutána sa pulis, gimad-an
sa dugù ang nawung sa dalága,</i> The
lady's face became pale when the policeman
questioned her. <b>ma-</b> <i>n</i> @land. <i>Ang ubang bakì
nagpuyù sa túbig, ug ang uban sa mamala,</i>
Some frogs live in water and some on
land. <b>tilapya sa ma-</b> <i>n</i> @prostitute (humorous).
<b>kamad-an</b> <i>n</i> upland rice field.

<p><b>malabagákay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rattan used in house
building.

<p><b>malabanu</b> = <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.

<p><b>malabutang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rattan used in construction.

<p><b>malagaya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white-husked rice with very
small, roundish, white grains, used in preparation
of medicinal rice cakes or mixed
with medicinal plants in poultices.

<p><b>Malakanyan, Malakanyang</b> <i>n</i> Malacañang, the
Philippine Presidential Palace.

<p><b>mal-am</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @old in age. <b>2</b> @{grown up}, but not
doing things befitting one's age (derogatory).
<i>Mal-am na, lubut gihápuy ilingkud,</i> He
is already grown but he hasn't got anything
upstairs (lit. all he does with his buttocks
is sit on them&mdash;a readily understood circumlocution
which avoids stating outright
a hurtful truth).

<p><b>malangsi</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @sardine or small herring,
growing to 4" long and 1" wide.

<p><b>malapati</b> <i>n</i> k.o. @fish.

<p><b>malapi</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <b>kumpradur di-</b> <i>n</i> one
<pb n=1361>who buys goods which he knows the seller
has no right to dispose of. <i>v</i> [B1256] be a
buyer of stolen goods. <i>Makumpradur dimalapi
giyud ka kun makapalit ka niánang kináwat,</i>
You'll be a buyer of stolen goods if
you buy that stolen article.

<p><b>malapunti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. red deep-sea fish with big
reddish scales, 2' by 6", similar to a snapper,
but with a filament projecting from
the tip of the tail.

<p><b>malarya</b> <i>n</i> malaria. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4] get, cause
to get malaria. <i>Way lamuk nga makamalarya
(makapamalarya) dinhi,</i> There are no
mosquitoes here that cause malaria. <i>Tambáli
ang gimalarya,</i> Give medicine to the
man with malaria. <b>malaryahun</b> <i>a</i> having malaria.

<p><b>málas</b> <i>see</i> <b>DIMÁLAS.</b>

<p><b>malasádu, malasáwu</b> <i>a</i> soft-boiled, half-cooked.
<i>Malasádung itlug,</i> Soft-boiled eggs. <i>Ang
atay malasádu nga pagkalútù,</i> The liver was
cooked rare. <i>v</i> [A1B26; a2] come out soft,
rare, cause to do so.

<p><b>malasugi, malasúgi</b> <i>n</i> swordfish or sailfish:
<i><b>Xiphias gladius,</b></i> et al.

<p><b>malatálu</b> <i>a</i> bananas that are almost full-grown
(but still far from ripe). <i>Basta tinggutum
tub-un na ang ságing bísag malatálu pa kaáyu,</i>
In times of famine they cut down the
bananas even before they mature. <i>v</i> [B3; b6]
for bananas to reach this stage.

<p><b>malatinduk</b> <i>n</i> mackerel scad, k.o. carangoid
fish, but long and fleshy like a <i>tinduk</i> banana.

<p><b>*málay walay &mdash;</b> innocently unaware, unknowing
(slang). <i>Way málay ang asáwa nga
may kabit ang íyang bána,</i> The wife was unaware
that her husband had a mistress. <i>Wà
silay málay nga gipitluk nag ílang manuk,</i>
They were unaware that their chicken had
been stolen.

<p><b>maláyang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fine, white rice introduced
by the PACD.

<p><b>malaypálay</b> <i>n</i> poisonous part of the viscera
and skin of a pufferfish, which is removed
before eating.

<p><b>Maláyu</b> <i>n</i> Malay in race. <i>a</i> tending to have
the features of the Malayan race.

<p><b>malbas = MARBAS.</b>

<p><b>maldisiyun</b> <i>n</i> malediction, a curse. <i>v</i> [A; b2c1][**joined b2 &amp; c1]
curse. <i>Imaldisiyun (maldisiyunun) siya
sa párì,</i> The priest will pronounce a malediction
on him.

<p><b>maldíta = MALDÍTU</b> (female).

<p><b>maldítu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> naughty, evil. <i>Kadtung maldítung
bátà ang nagpapilit sa babulgam sa
ímung sinínà,</i> That naughty child put bubble
gum on your dress. <i>Daghang maldítu
<pb n=1362>sa piyir,</i> There are lots of bad types at the
waterfront. <b>2</b> having unexpected ability.
<i>Maldítu! Natubag giyud ang dyakpat nga
pangutána dà,</i> He's smart! He answered
the jackpot question correctly. <b>&mdash; sa babáyi</b>
one who deceives women. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] become
@naughty. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>a</i> in an evil way. <i>v</i>
[A; b] do @mischief, evil, philander. <i>Makamau
nang muminalditu ang gamay kung
anak,</i> My little baby has already learned
how to be naughty.

<p><b>mal-idukáda</b> = <sc>MAL-IDUKÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>mal-idukádu</b> <i>a</i> @ill-educated, @ill-mannered. <i>v</i>
[B126; b6] be ill-educated or bad-mannered.

<p><b>malígas</b> = <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.

<p><b>malignu</b> <i>n</i> spirits of departed people who
have not entered heaven and are doing their
penance (<i>kundínu</i>). If they are not prayed
for they may inflict sickness as a reminder.
<b>ispiritu &mdash;</b> = <sc>MALIGNU</sc>. <i>v</i> [A1; a4] be sick
with an illness sent by a <i>malignu</i>.

<p><b>malignù</b> = <sc>KARABALYAS</sc>.[**note: this and next entry refer to a minor entry that just refers again to KARBALYAS, better to refer directly]

<p><b>malimnu</b> = <sc>KARABALYAS</sc>.

<p><b>malingka</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HIMALINGKA</sc>.

<p><b>malisya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> awareness of sex. <i>Dúna na siyay
malisya kay dì na man maghúbù ug malígù,</i>
She is already aware of her sex because she
won't bathe in the nude any longer. <b>2</b> bad
thoughts regarding sex. <i>Ug way malisya,
ngánung miagik-ik man ka?</i> If you are not
harboring evil thoughts, why are you snickering?
<b>3</b> @{ill will}. <i>Way malisya ang ákung
paghátag niíni,</i> There's no ill intent in my
giving this to you. <b>4</b> @{bad omen}, usually of
death or misfortune. <i>v</i> [A13; b] send such
an omen. <i>Nagmalisya siya únà mamatay.
Nagpakítà únà siya sa íyang mga anak nga
túa sa Amirika,</i> He sent an omen before he
died. He appeared to his children in America.
<b>malisyúsa</b> = <sc>MALISYÚSU</sc> (female). <b>malisyúsu</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> conscious of sex in an unwholesome
way. <i>Ngánung dì ka man pagúnit?
Kamalisyúsu gud nímu!</i> Why don't you
want me to touch your hands? How sex-conscious
you are! <b>2</b> maliciously done, out
of ill will. <i>Malisyúsung mga pasángil nga
way gipasikáran,</i> Malicious and baseless accusations.
<i>v</i> [B12; a2] <b>1</b> be, become sex
conscious in an unwholesome way. <b>2</b> become
malicious in behavior.

<p><b>málit</b> <i>n</i> @mallet.

<p><b>malíta</b> <i>n</i> @suitcase. <i>v</i> [A13] carry a suitcase.
<i>Magmalíta lang ku kay daghan kug dalhunun,</i>
I'll take a suitcase because I have so
many things to take.

<p><b>malitin</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a leather bag designed to hold
medicine and some medical instruments. <b>2</b>
<pb n=1363>a small suitcase.

<p><b>malmal<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [B1256; a12] be @taught, @rehearsed,
or be @inculcated to a high degree. <i>Namalmal
mig maáyu sa ininglis kay Amirkánu
ámung maistru,</i> We were taught English
thoroughly because our teacher was an
American. <i>Malmálun nátù ang bátà sa bili
sa pagdagínut,</i> We will inculcate the value
of thrift in the children's minds.

<p><b>malmal<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @beat s.o. up, usually in
the mouth. <i>Akuy mimalmal sa irù nga mikáun
sa isdà,</i> I gave the dog that ate the fish
a sound beating. <b>2</b> [A; a12] use s.t. or @scold
s.o. abusively. <i>Natural nagubà ang makinilya
kay gimalmal,</i> Of course he broke the
typewriter because he abused it. <i>Malmálun
kag kasábà bísag gamayng sayup,</i> You get
abusive scoldings for the slightest mistakes.

<p><b>malpagadur</b> <i>a</i> failing to pay one's debts. v
[B1256] get to be a defaulter in one's
debts. <i>Ug mamalpagadur ka, wà nay musálig
pagpaútang nímu,</i> If you become a bad
debtor, no one will dare allow you credit.
<b>-a(<-)</b> = <sc>MALPAGADUR</sc> (female).

<p><b>maltabána</b> <i>n</i> glazed brown urn, about 2' high
with a small mouth and handles at the
shoulders. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] make into, put in
glazed clay jars.

<p><b>maltratar</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @maltreat, @mistreat. <i>Maltratahun
siya sa íyang amaáma,</i> His step-*father
will maltreat him.

<p><b>*málu &mdash; pa ug</b> <b>1</b> on the chance that [such-and-such[**] ]
a good thing happen. <i>Palit tag
swipstik, málu pag makaswirti,</i> Let's buy a
sweepstake ticket. We might just win. <b>2</b>
[so-and-so] isn't bad, if that is what comes
out. <i>Málu pa nà ug swildúhan kag bayinting
adlaw?</i> Would it be bad if you were paid
twenty pesos a day?

<p><b>malù<hi rend=sub>1</i> &mdash; [dat.]</b> serves [dat.] right. <i>Malù nímu
nga gipagirawut kay tapulan ka,</i> Serves
you right that you were fired because you
are lazy.

<p><b>malù<hi rend=sub>2</i>, málù<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> pollen of corn. <i>v</i> [A1] grow
pollen. <i>Dì na dúgayng masanggì ang mais
basta magmalù na,</i> It won't be long before
the corn can be harvested if there is pollen
in the tassel.

<p><b>málù<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the one who is 'it' in the game of
<i>takyan</i> or marbles. <i>v</i> [A; a12] make a person
remain 'it' for a long time. <i>Malúun kug
maáyu si Huwan pinaági sa pagpátid sa takyan
ug layù,</i> I'll make Juan be 'it' for a long
time by kicking the shuttlecock far away.

<p><b>malubgas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small anchovy with a dark
blue dorsal region and silvery white on its
ventral region, widely eaten preserved in
salt.

<pb n=1364>

<p><b>maluíbun</b> <i>n</i> name given to ornamental climbing
vines with dark green or yellow green
cordate leaves, often grown indoors: <i><b>Scindapsus
aureus</b></i> and <i><b>Philodendron oxycardium.</b></i>

<p><b>málung</b> <i>n</i> name of the sarong worn by the
Muslims. <i>v</i> [A13; b6(1)] wear a <i>málung.</i> 2
[a2] make into a <i>málung.</i>

<p><b>malunggay = KALAMUNGGAY.</b>

<p><b>málus<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>a</i> highly fermented salted fish paste.
<i>Málus na ang ginamus,</i> The salted fish paste
is already highly fermented. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB2] for
salted fish to become highly fermented,
cause it to do so. <b>2</b> [B] develop a horrible
smell. <i>Kalígù[**Kalígù? P2|yes -P3] na kay nagkamálus ka na,</i>
Take a bath. You're beginning to smell awful.

<p><b>malyíti[**malyíti? P2|yes -P3]</b> <i>n</i> gavel.

<p><b>malyurka</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. liquor of low proof made
from cane sugar, flavored with anise.

<p><b>mám</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> ma'am, term of address to a teacher
or woman of high station. <i>Maáyung buntag
kanímu,[**kanímu? P2 |yes -P3] mám,</i> Good morning, Ma'am. <b>2</b>
lady teacher. <i>Usa sa mga mám nákù sa hayiskul
mau si Mis Agápay,</i> One of my teachers
in high school was Miss Agapay. <i>v</i> [A13;
a12] call s.o. Ma'am.

<p><b>máma<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> mother. <i>v</i> [B13; a12] call s.o. <i>máma.</i>

<p><b>máma<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> mute. <i>v</i> [B12] become a mute. <i>Namáma
nà siya tungud sa kalísang,</i> He was
struck dumb by his great fright.

<p><b>mamà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> chew of betel nut <i>(búnga)</i> and
piper betel leaves <i>(búyù)</i> with lime <i>(ápug)</i>
and optionally tobacco. <b>2</b> action of chewing.
<i>v</i> [AC12; a12] chew betel nut. <i>Dì ku
makamamà kay hálang,</i> I can't chew betel
because it burns the tongue. <b>&mdash; ug dugù</b> <i>v</i>
[A13; c] get a bloody mouth (lit. chew
blood). <i>Magmamà ka giyug dugù ug hisumbagan
ta ka,</i> You will have a bloody mouth
if I punch you. <b>mam-anan, malam-an</b> <i>n</i>
container for the lime, betel nut, and betel
leaf. <b>malam-un</b> <i>n</i> set of complete ingredients
ready for chewing. <b>hiN-</b> <i>a</i> fond of
chewing betel.

<p><b>mamadur</b> <i>n</i> breast pump. <i>v</i> [b] use a breast
pump.

<p><b>mámam</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> baby talk for <i>inum</i> 'drink'. <b>2</b>
drinking spree (humorous slang). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A]
drink (baby talk). <b>2</b> [AC; a] hold a drinking
spree. <i>Puwa na ang tápay, nakamámam tingáli,</i>
His ears are red. He must have had s.t.
to drink.

<p><b>mamay</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wet nurse. <b>2</b> any nursemaid. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; a] wet-nurse. <i>Gimamay ang bátà nga
ílu,[**ílu? P2 |yes -P3]</i> The orphaned infant was wet-nursed. <b>2</b>
[A; a] take care of a child. <i>Siyay nagmamay
<pb n=1365>sa tanan námung mga bátà,</i> She took care
of all our children.

<p><b>mambad = MANBAD.</b>

<p><b>mambu</b> <i>n</i> mambo, a Latin American dance
and its music. <i>v</i> 1 [A; a12] dance the mambo.
<b>2</b> [c1] play music in mambo rhythm.

<p><b>mámi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> mommy. <i>v</i> [A3; a12] call s.o.
mommy.

<p><b>mámi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> [**missing POS 'n'] a Chinese dish consisting of soup and
narrow egg noodles with meat. <i>v</i> [A; a]
make mámi.

<p><b>mamilúku</b> <i>n</i> child's sunsuit, a one-piece romper
with short pants and no sleeves. <i>v</i> 1 [A; a]
wear a sunsuit. <b>2</b> [c16] make into a sunsuit.

maming = LUBAYLÚBAY, n. see LUBAY.

<p><b>mampud</b> short for <i>mánu man pud. see</i>
<b>NGÁNU</b> <i>and</i> <b>UPUD.</b>

<p><b>Mampur</b> <i>n</i> Montford, a person who is said to
have lived in olden times. <b>karáan pa ni &mdash;</b>
older than Montford. <i>Tabas sa íyang bistídu
nga karáan pa ni Mampur,</i> Style of dress
that dates back to Montford's time. <b>panahun
pa ni &mdash;</b> very old, from Montford's time.
<i>Sa panahun pa ni Mampur ang ákung radiyu
ug wà pa giyud magubà,</i> My radio is as old
as the hills and still in fine shape. <i>Sa panahun
pa ni Mampur nang kumidiyáha,</i> That
joke is as old as the hills.

<p><b>mamsà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> name given to the large species
of <i><b>Caranx,</b></i> a highly-prized food fish. <b>2 dakung
&mdash;</b> influential, important person.

<p><b>mamsà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> schoolteacher, humorous word
play on <i>mám. Ayaw mug sábà kay náa na
si Mamsà,</i> Everybody shut up. The teacher
is coming. <i>v</i> [B126] be a schoolmarm.

<p><b>mamun<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. sponge cake. <i>v</i> [A; a12]
make, make into <i>mamun.</i>

<p><b>mamun<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. fruit tree similar to a <i>gwayabanu</i>
but with a smaller and rounder fruit:
<i><b>Anona sp.</b></i>

<p><b>mámurd, mámurds</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> marbles without a
flaw. <b>2</b> for girls to be well-rounded and
smooth-skinned. <i>Mámurds kaáyu ang trátu
ni Bin,</i> Ben's girl friend is very beautiful.
<b>mamuray</b> <i>v</i> [C2] compare which is the
smoothest, most well-rounded. <i>Mamuray
tag dyúlin,</i> Let's compare our marbles to
see which is the smoothest and best rounded.

<p><b>man 1</b> because. <i>Kay ang íya dapit man sa dáhun,
mamúnga dáyun,</i> Because his part was
the part with the leaves, it would bear fruit
quickly. <b>&mdash; ugud</b> because (giving an explanation).
<i>Namatay ang tanum kay wà man gud
bùbúi,</i> The plant died because no one watered
it. <b>2</b> <i>after an interrogative:</i> particle to
make the question not abrupt. <i>Háin man siya?</i> 
<pb n=1366>Could you tell me where he is? <b>3</b> particle
with a statement contradicting a previous
statement or presumption. <i>Dì man nà
mau,</i> That's not the one. <b>4</b> particle with a
statement giving information. <i>Nía man si
Pidru karung buntága,</i> Oh, Pedro is here
this morning. <b>&mdash; diay</b> I notice that. <i>Nindut
man diay ka kaáyung mukanta!</i> Oh, I see
you sing very beautifully. <b>&mdash; kahà</b> [so-and-so]
apparently is the case. <i>Kami man kahay
muluhud, anus-a man ang kasal?</i> We are
supposed to sponsor you, so when is the
wedding going to be? <i>Dì lang ka tagáan. Dì
man kahà ka gustu,</i> I won't give you any.
You apparently won't want any, anyway.
<b>&mdash; lagi</b> I notice [so-and-so] is the case, nevertheless.
<i>Ingun siya dì ka muanhi. Nía ka
man lagi,</i> He said you weren't coming, but
here you are! <b>5</b> in other phrases: <b>ingun &mdash;</b>
as well as. <i>Mubuhis ang tagasyudad ingun
man ang tagabaryu,</i> The city people, as well
as the barrio folks, pay taxes. <b>mau &mdash; gánì</b>
that's why, despite what you would expect....
<i>Mau man gánì nga namula ang ákung
pánit kay nabulad ku,</i> I have red skin, despite
what you would expect, because I
was out in the sun. <b>na &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <b>NA,</b> <i>4.</i> <b>pála &mdash;
run</b> that's flattery. <i>Pála man run ug dì pa tinúud,</i>
That would have been flattery if it
were not true. <b>túud &mdash;</b> and so, as one would
expect. <i>Túud man miabut dáyun ang pulis,</i>
And so, as one would expect, the police
immediately arrived.

<p><b>maN-</b> <i>(see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol N)</i>
prefix added to bases with a prefix
<b>paN-</b> to indicate future volitional active
forms. <i>(past</i> <b>naN-;</b> <i>subjunctive</i> <b>maN-.</b> <i>Durative
forms: future and subjunctive</i> <b>magpaN-(->);</b>
<i>past</i> <b>nagpaN-(->).</b> <i>Potential active:
future and subjunctive</i> <b>makapaN-;</b> <i>past</i> <b>nakapaN-.)</b>
<i>Mangutána ta kun háin siya,</i> Let us
ask where he is. <i>Wà siya mangutána, He
didn't ask. Nangutána ku piru way tubag,</i> I
asked but there was no answer. <i>Nagpanguput
siya sa kahadluk,</i> He held on with all
his might for fright. <i>Walà ku makapangutána,</i>
I didn't get a chance to ask. <i>Makapangasáwa
ka na,</i> You can get married now.

<p><b>mana, mána<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> a title of respect to a female
older than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call
s.o. <i>mána.</i>

<p><b>mána<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. cultivated tree, the bark and
leaves of which are used for spices.

<p><b>manáging</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white parrot, the racket-tailed
parrot: <i><b>Prioniturus discurus.</b></i>

<p><b>manalabtan</b> <i>see</i> <b>SABAT.</b>

<p><b>manámù</b> short for <b>AMAHAN NÁMÙ</b> <i>n</i> the
Lord's Prayer.

<pb n=1367>

<p><b>mananabtan</b> <i>see</i> <b>SABAT.</b>

<p><b>manananggal = ANANANGGAL.</b>

<p><b>mananangkuy</b> <i>n</i> folk doctor (general term).
<i>v</i> [B13; a12] become a healer.

<p><b>mananap</b> <i>n</i> animal, beast, insect. <i>a</i> brute,
having the feelings of a beast. <i>Ikawng mananápa
ka. Ngánung gibun-ug man nímu
ang ákung anak?</i> You beast. Why did you
beat my son? <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> beastly.

<p><b>manan-aw</b> <i>n</i> general name for ornamental air
orchids.

<p><b>manandis</b> <i>a</i> henpecked husband. <i>v</i> [B2] become
henpecked.

<p><b>manang, mánang</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for elder sister. <b>2</b>
title given to any woman older than the
speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o. <i>manang.</i> <b>(->)</b>
voc. form. <i>short form:</i> <b>nang.</b>

<p><b>mananggíti</b> <i>n</i> toddy gatherer. <i>v</i> [B156] be,
become a toddy gatherer.

<p><b>manánuy</b> <i>a</i> sweet-sounding, melodious. <i>Ang
manánuyng tíngug sa langgam,</i> The sweet,
melodious voice of the bird.

<p><b>manátad</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dove: the green-winged
ground dove: <b><i>Chalcophaps indica.</i> túlin pa
sa &mdash;</b> very swift.

<p><b>manau, manaul<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. parasitic air plant,
with long linear lanceolate leaves radiating
from the center: <i><b>Asplenium nidus.</b></i>

<p><b>manaul<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the white-breasted sea eagle: <i><b>Haliaetus
leucogaster.</b></i>

<p><b>manay, mánay</b> <i>n</i> title for a female much older
than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A13; a12] call s.o.
<i>manáy.</i> <b>(->)</b> voc. form.

<p><b>maN-ay</b> regional alternant of <i>maN-r-.</i>

<p><b>manbad</b> (from <i>subad) n</i> <b>1</b> any large deep-sea
fish. <b>2</b> usurer. <i>Nadátù siya kay mambad nga
dakù,</i> He became rich because he was a
great usurer. <b>3 dakung &mdash;</b> an important person
of great influence. <i>Si Lawril dakung
mambad sa pulitika,</i> Laurel is a big figure in
politics. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> fierce and grasping. <i>Púru mga
mambad ang tagaadwána. Padug-un ka giyud
ug táman,</i> The customs people are voracious
beasts. They'll bleed you dry. <b>2</b>
fierce, termagant woman. <i>Túa na pud, gitapuk-an
na pud si Tiryu sa íyang mambad
nga asáwa,</i> There goes Terio's shrewish wife
at him again. <b>3</b> s.o. that is dangerous to
women. <i>Ayawg túu níya kay mambad nà
sa mga babáyi,</i> Don't believe him because
he is dangerous to women. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> quality of
being fierce and grasping. <i>Ang kamambad
sa pamingkúngan,</i> The fierceness of a hammerhead
shark.

<p><b>mandalúsa = SALIMBÁNGUN.</b>

<p><b>Mandalúyung</b> <i>n</i> a district in Rizal, Luzon.
<b>taga-, gíkan sa &mdash;</b> crazy (lit. one who has
been a patient at the mental hospital in
<pb n=1368>Mandaluyong).

<p><b>mandamyintu diaristu</b> warrant of arrest.

<p><b>mand&acaron;r</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> command; word or phrase esp.
in set form by which a command is given.
<i>Ang mand&acaron;r sa kapitan pagpahúnung ug tíru,</i>
The captain's command to cease fire. <b>2</b>
order, a serving of food in a public eating
place. <i>Unsa man tuy ímung mand&acaron;r, pipsi u
kuk?</i> What did you order, Pepsi or Coke?
<i>v</i> [A; c] <b>1</b> command, give an order to. <b>1a</b>
command, order people around. <i>Nagmand&acaron;r
na sad ang tapulan,</i> The lazy lout is giving orders
again. <b>2</b> order, request a serving to be
brought. <i>Nakamand&acaron;r na ba mu?</i> Have you
ordered? <b>mandasiyun</b> <i>n</i> command. <i>Ang
mga ultimu mutúman sa mandasiyun sa kábu,</i>
The privates follow the commands of
the corporal. <i>a</i> liking to give orders. <i>Mandasiyun
kaáyu nang ákung maguwang unyà dì
mutábang sa trabáhu,</i> My older brother
loves to give orders, and yet he doesn't help
with the work.

<p><b>mandasiyun</b> <i>see</i> <b>MAND&Acaron;R.</b>

<p><b>manday</b> <i>1</i> it's too late to be of use. <i>Manday
human na ang baratilyu,</i> It's too late. The
sale is over. <b>1a</b> just when s.t. happens that
is too late or inconvenient, s.t. else happens.
<i>Manday wà tay kwarta mu puy idaut
sa mga bátà,</i> Just when we are broke, the
children get sick. <i>Manday human ka nag káun
mu pay ipanangpit,</i> You invite me to eat
only after you're done? <i>Manday lumalarga
na aku mu pay pagkaíla námù,</i> We got acquainted
just as we were about to leave
town. <b>2 &mdash; untà</b> instead of doing what was
expected. <i>Manday untà masukù siya, mipahíyum
hinúun,</i> Instead of he getting angry,
he smiled. <b>2a</b> although, despite the fact
that. <i>Manday daghang anak, gastadur hinúun,</i>
Although she has lots of children, she
spends money like mad.[+]

<p><b>mandi, manding</b> <i>n</i> a title of address for an
elder sister or female relative much older
than the speaker. <i>v</i> [B2; a12] call s.o.
<i>manding.</i>

<p><b>mandù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6(1)] give an order, command.
<i>Gimandúan ang mga tríni pagdágan
líbut sa kampu,</i> The trainees were ordered
to run around the camp. <b>2</b> [A; b6] rule or
reign. <i>Siya ang hára nga mimandù sa pangílin,</i>
She was the queen that reigned over the
fiesta. <b>3</b> [A3; b6] prevail. <i>Human sa makusug
nga litì ug bagyu mimandù ang túmang
kalínaw,</i> After the fierce thunderstorm,
quiet prevailed. <i>n</i> <b>1</b> order, command. <i>Tumána
ang ákung mandù,</i> Carry out my order.
<b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> ruler, commander. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> commanding.
<i>'Lakaw,' tíngug ni Aldu nga mamandúun,</i> 
<pb n=1369>'Go!' said Aldo in a commanding
voice. <b>ka-an</b> <i>n</i> area over which s.o. rules.
<i>Ang kamandúan sa armi pinangulúhan ni
Hiniral Riyis,</i> The Army Command is headed
by General Reyes.

<p><b>mandunggu</b> <i>n</i> beef tripes. <b>mandunggáda</b> <i>n</i>
dish made of blood and the internal organs
of beef. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] make, make into a
dish of blood and internal organs of beef.

<p><b>manga</b> <i>always written</i> <b>mga. 1</b> particle optionally
placed preceding a noun or adjective to
indicate plurals, but referring only to things
that are not all exactly alike. <i>Ang mga istudiyanti
nanambung sa míting,</i> The various
students attended the meeting. <i>Mga karáan
kining mga libru,</i> These are all old books. <b>1a</b>
particle preceding the name for parts of the
body of which there are more than one. <i>Sakit
ákung mga mata,</i> My eyes hurt. <b>2</b> preceding
a form referring to time, measurement:
about, approximately. <i>Mga alas utsu,</i>
At around eight o'clock. <i>Mupalit kug kutsi,
tingáli mga Iníru,</i> I will buy a car, probably
around January. <i>Mga duha ka búwan kanhi,</i>
About two months ago. <i>Mga duha ka pulgáda,</i>
About two inches. <i>Mga dus písus,</i>
Around two pesos.

<p><b>mangagat, mangágat</b> <i>n</i> snapper, name given
to most species of <i><b>Lutianus.</b></i>

<p><b>mangágaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. annual, stiff-haired herb,
much-branched from the base, with small
flowers in dense axilliary clusters. The stem
yields a white milky sap which is used to
cure fevers: <i><b>Euphorbia pilulifera</b></i> and <i><b>hirta.</b></i>

<p><b>mangga</b> <i>n</i> mango: <b><i>Mangifera indica.</i> manggáhun</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> plump in cheeks. <b>2</b> having red
splotches like some varieties of mangoes.
<b>manggahan</b> <i>n</i> mango orchard. <i>v</i> [A13] grow
mangoes.

<p><b>manggad</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> prized position, treasure, riches,
wealth. <i>Náa sa baul ibutang ang ílang manggad,</i>
Their treasures are placed inside a
trunk. <b>2</b> dry goods. <i>Nabasà ang mga manggad
nga íyang gisúruy,</i> The dry goods he was
peddling got wet. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [AB; c] treasure, hold
s.t. dear. <i>Wà sila magmanggad sa kabílin sa
ílang katigulángan,</i> They do not value the
things their ancestors left them. <i>Manggára
(imanggad) ang íyang mga púlung,</i> Treasure
his words. <b>2</b> [A] care for with devotion,
lavish attention. <i>Way mumanggad sa ákung
mga tanum ug mubyáhi ku,</i> No one will
tend to my plants if I go on a trip. <b>manggaránun</b>
<i>a</i> wealthy, rich. <i>Lagmit sa mga manggaránun
mga garbúsu,</i> The rich are usually
arrogant.

<p><b>manggas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> sleeve, cuff. <i>Íyang gilúkut ang
manggas sa íyang kamisadintru,</i> He rolled
<pb n=1370>up his shirt sleeves. <b>2</b> bottom of trousers.
<i>Bukad ug manggas ang bilbátum,</i> Bell-bottom
trousers have wide trouser legs. <i>v</i> [A; a]
provide with sleeves or cuffs.

<p><b>manggátus</b> <i>see</i> <sc>GATUS</sc>.

<p><b>manggi-</b> the futural volitional active form of
verbs with a prefix <sc>PANGGI-</sc>. <sc>Past</sc>: <b>nanggi-</b>.
<i>Didtu sila sa sála manggidáma,</i> They were
in the living room playing checkers.

<p><b>manggilis</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet potato with light reddish
peelings and white meat. Its rather dry
meat makes it good eating.

<p><b>manggi-un(<-)</b> alternant of <i>ma-un</i> used with
some bases instead of <i>ma-un</i>. <i>Manggihatágun,</i>
Generous.

<p><b>manggu</b> <i>n</i> handle of a pick, ax or a similar
tool. <i>v</i> [b6(1)] make a handle of this sort.

<p><b>manggulimbaw</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrimp growing to 1&ndash;1/2"
with one claw bigger than the other.

<p><b>manggustan</b> <i>n</i> @mangosteen.

<p><b>manghud</b> <i>n</i> younger brother, sister. <i>a</i> <b>1</b>
younger in age than s.o. else. <i>Manghud ka
nákug duha ka túig,</i> You are two years
younger than I am. <b>2</b> less in intensity. <i>Ang
íyang pátid manghud lag diyútay sa pátid sa
kabáyung simarun,</i> His kick was just a little
less than a wild horse's. <i>Ang ímung tíngug
manghud lag diyútay sa hunghung,</i> Your
voice is just a little softer than a whisper. <i>v</i>
[A1; b(1)] have a younger brother or sister.
<i>Pilay idad sa nagmanghud ning batáa?</i> How
old is the child just before this one? <i>Anus-a
man nà siya manghúri?</i> When are you going
to have another baby (lit. when is he going
to have a younger brother or sister)? <b>ig-</b> <i>n</i>
younger brother or sister. <i>Kanang mga gagmayng
bátà pulus níya igmanghud,</i> Those
little children are all his younger brothers
and sisters. <b>kamanghúran</b>, <b>kinamanghúran</b>
<i>n</i> youngest child.

<p><b>mangkay</b> <i>n</i> old maid. <i>Dílì tanang mangkay
masulub-un,</i> Not all spinsters are lonely. <i>v</i>
[B1; c1] become an old maid.

<p><b>mangkimangki</b> <i>n</i> fast dance characterized by
monkey-like movements of the hands. <i>v</i>
[A] dance the <i>mangkimangki</i>.

<p><b>mangku</b> <i>n</i> s.o. with an arm deformity characterized
by being twisted at the elbow. <i>v</i>
[B12] have a deformed arm. <i>Namangku siya
dihang napíang íyang síku,</i> He got a deformed
arm when he broke his elbow.

<p><b>mangkù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small mackerel with a maximum
width of 3".

<p><b>mangkumu</b> = [+] <sc>MAGKUNU</sc>.

<p><b>mangliw</b>, <b>mangluy</b> = <sc>AMAMANGLUY</sc>.

<p><b>mangnu</b>, <b>mangnù</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A12; b2] @remember.
<i>Hatági kug diyútay nga panahun tingálig
<pb n=1371>mamangnuan (himangnuan) ku,</i> Give me a
little time. Maybe I will remember it. <b>2</b> [AP]
cause to notice, be aware of. <i>Ang pagbagting
sa rilu mauy nagmangnù (nagpamangnù)
nákù nga udtu na,</i> The ringing of
the clock reminded me that it was already
noon. <b>2a</b> [A] be careful. <i>Magmangnù (magmangnù)
ka kanúnay arun dì ka masayup,</i>
Be careful so that you won't commit any
mistakes. <b>3</b> [A12; b2] come to. <i>Didtu na
siya makamangnù sa huspital,</i> He regained
consciousness in the hospital. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6(1)]
advise, instruct s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Gipahimangnúan
ku siya nga dílì pasudlag ínit
ang pridyidir,</i> I have warned him against
putting anything hot into the refrigerator.
<i>n</i> @{instruction against}.

<p><b>mangsi</b> = <sc>MALANGSI</sc>.

<p><b>mangtas</b> <i></i>n <b>1</b> cruel, @{fierce beast}. <i>Ang táwung
nalúnud gikaun sa usa ka mangtas sa dágat,</i>
The drowning man was eaten up by the
shark (lit. fierce beast of the sea). <b>2</b> fierce,
@heartless in character. <i>Dílì makamaung malúuy
sa pubri kanang mangtas nga adunáhan,</i>
That heartless rich man does not know
pity for the poor. <i>Mangtas nga katalagman,</i>
A fearful calamity. <i>v</i> [B2; b6] be, become
fierce and devoid of tender feelings.

<p><b>mangù</b> <i>a</i> @brainless, @dull, @stupid. <i>Mangù ka
man kahà kay dì ka man kasabut,</i> You must
be brainless because you don't understand.
<i>v</i> [B23; b6] be, become stupid.

<p><b>Mangyan</b> <i>n</i> non-Christian natives of Mindoro.

<p><b>manhak</b> <i>n</i> k.o. bird.

<p><b>mani</b> <i>n</i> @peanuts. <b>&mdash; sa kasuy</b> <i>a</i> the edible nuts
of the cashew. <b>manimani</b> <b>1</b> k.o. creeping
herb similar to purslane (<i>ulasíman</i>) in appearance,
used as pig feed. <b>2</b> k.o. <i>balat</i>
found a few inches beneath the sand along
the shore. It roughly resembles a peanut.

<p><b>*máni</b> <i>n</i> <b>dinuwin</b>, <b>gud &mdash;</b> during World War II,
the name given to the prewar money as opposed
to the Japanese <i>kurà</i> and the <i>imirdyinsi
máni</i>. <b>girilya &mdash;</b> money issued by the
guerilla authorities during the war. <b>imirdyinsi
&mdash;</b> the emergency money issued after
the outbreak of hostilities and prior to the
Japanese occupation. <b>&mdash; urdir</b> @{money order}.

<p><b>manibila</b> = <sc>MANUBÍLA</sc>.

<p><b>mánids</b> <i>v</i> [A] manage a business. <b>-ir(->)</b> @manager.
<b>-ir(->) hiniral</b> <i>n</i> @{general manager}. <i>n</i>
manager of a business or boxer. <i>v</i> [AB156]
be, become manager.

<p><b>maníhu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a2] <b>1</b> drive a motor vehicle.
<i>Ambi, aku lay mumaníhu sa dyíp,</i> Let me
drive the jeep. <b>2</b> operate or manipulate a
contraption. <i>Makamaníhu man nà siyag dagkung 
<pb n=1372>makina,</i> He can operate big machines.
<b>3</b> manage to make s.t. operate. <i>Manihúa ra
ring pawuntin pin ug makahímù ka bag paági,</i>
Try fooling around with this fountain
pen and see if you can make it write. <b>3a</b> see
to it that s.t. gets done. <i>Aku lay mumaníhu
arun magmalampúsun ang átung prugráma,</i>
I'll see to it that our program is successful.
<b>3b</b> manage to do s.t. in a roundabout or
underhanded way, where the usual methods
won't work. <i>Makamaníhu ka ba pagpasulud
nákù sa trabáhu?</i> Can you manage to get
me into the job? <b>3c</b> do s.t. surreptitiously
or secretly. <i>Lingawun ku ang tindíra manihúa
pud ang káha,</i> While I keep the store
clerk busy, you take care of the cash register.

<p><b>maniit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible, small crab of shallow
waters with a thick shell and strong pincers.
<i>a</i> @quarrelsome, esp. said of women.

<p><b>manikin</b> <i>n</i> @mannequin.

<p><b>manikiyur</b> <i>n</i> @{nail polish}. <i>v</i> [A; b] @manicure.
<b>-ista</b> <i>n</i> a @manicurist. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be a
manicurist.

<p><b>Maníla</b>, <b>Manílà<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @Manila, the largest city in
the Philippines. <b>&mdash; buy</b> boy who has grown
up in Manila and is, therefore, sophisticated.
<b>&mdash; pípar</b> @{Manila paper}. <i>v</i> [B1256] be in Manila.
<b>manilan-un</b> <i>n</i> from Manila, of the Manila
type. <b>manilinyu</b>, <b>-a</b> <i>n</i> one from Manila.

<p><b>manílà<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. striped grouper: <b><i>Grammistes
sexlineatus</i></b>.

<p><b>maniN-</b> future volitional prefix of verbs with
the base <b>paniN-</b>. (<i>Past</i>: <b>naniN-</b>. <i>Subjunctive</i>:
<b>maniN-</b>.) <i>Manimalus giyud ku,</i> I will get revenge.
<i>Walà ku manimúhì sa ákung gikuptan,</i>
I didn't let go what I was holding on
to.

<p><b>manínay</b> <i>n</i> @godmother, the female sponsor
at one's wedding, and, by extension, the
sponsor at one's baptism, confirmation, or
ordination. <i>v</i> [A; a] become one's godmother.

<p><b>maniníyut</b> <i>n</i> @photographer. Word play on
<i>maniníyat</i> to make it sound humorously
risqué (recalling <i>iyut</i>, the taboo word for
sexual intercourse).

<p><b>manínuy</b> <i>n</i> @godfather, the sponsor at one's
wedding, and, by extension, at one's baptism,
confirmation, or ordination. <i>v</i> [A; a]
become one's godfather.

<p><b>manistil</b> = <sc>MISTIL</sc>.

<p><b>maniubra</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @maneuver, skillful handling of
a vehicle. <b>2</b> s.t. done in a secret and underhanded
way. <i>Maniubra sa pulitika,</i> A political
maneuver. <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> maneuver s.t.
skillfully. <i>Maniubráha (imaniubra) pag-áyu
ang sakayan arun dílì masángad,</i> Manipulate
<pb n=1373>the boat skillfully so that it won't run
aground. <b>2</b> contrive s.t. skillfully in an underhanded
way. <i>Nakalusut dáyun ang ákung
lún sa bangku kay gimaniubrag maáyu sa
ákung amígu,</i> My loan went through OK
because my friend maneuvered it skillfully.

<p><b>mankumunidad</b> <i>n</i> @commonwealth. <i>v</i> [B1256]
become a commonwealth.

<p><b>maN-l-</b> <b>1</b> = <sc>MAN-r-</sc>, but used only regionally.
2 affix added to verbs referring to sorcery,
praying, and other relations with the supernatural
to form nouns which mean one who
engages in this activity. <i>Manalagnà,</i> @Seer.
<i>Manalabtan,</i> @Leader in prayers. <i>Mamalaktul,</i>
One who practices the sorcery called <i>paktul</i>.

<p><b>manlà</b> <i>n</i> k.o. edible crustacean similar to a
prawn but with pincers. It burrows under
soft mud in swampy places.

<p><b>manlawud</b> (from <i>lawud</i>) <i>n</i> name given to
fishes that are found in deep waters.

<p><b>manlulundà</b> = <sc>MANULUNDA</sc>.

<p><b>manlut<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>BANLUT</sc>.

<p><b>manlut<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, green grasshopper.

<p><b>maN-r-</b> affix added to verb bases to form a
noun referring to a person who does [such-and-such]
as an occupation. It is most commonly
added to roots which form verbs by
the addition of paN-. <i>Mangingisdà,</i> @Fisherman.
<i>Mananabang,</i> @Midwife. <i>Manunúnud,</i>
@Heir.

<p><b>maN-r-ay</b> regional alternant of <i>maN-r-</i>.

<p><b>mansa</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @stain. <i>Dílì makúhà ang mansa sa
tubà,</i> Stains from palm toddy won't come
out. <b>2</b> moral blemish, @dishonor. <i>Walay mansa
ang ákung ngálan,</i> My name is unsullied.
<i>v</i> [A; b25] <b>1</b> @stain. <b>2</b> stain one's honor. <i>Kaputlì
nga walà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i>
Purity that has not been stained by experience.
<b>-du</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @stained. <i>Dì giyud nà siya musul-ub
ug sinínà nga mansádu,</i> She never
wears stained clothes. <b>2</b> easily stained. <i>Mansádu
kaáyu ang sinínà nga putì,</i> A white
dress easily gets dirty. <b>mansahun</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having
stains. <b>2</b> panty stained with blood. <i>Iladlad
pag-áyu ang mga mansahun,</i> Bleach those
stained panties very well.

<p><b>mansánas</b> <i>n</i> @apple.

<p><b>mansanilya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. perennial aromatic herb
cultivated for ornamental and medicinal
purposes: <b><i>Chrysanthemum indicum</i></b>.

<p><b>mansanítas</b> <i>n</i> small spreading tree of waste
spaces, the bast fibers of which make rope
in times of scarcity: <b><i>Muntingia calabura</i></b>.

<p><b>mansibádu</b> <i>n</i> @{common-law couple}. <i>v</i> [B16; a12]
live as man and wife without the benefit
of a church wedding.

<p><b>mansinítas</b> = <sc>MANSANÍTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mansiyun</b> <i>n</i> @mansion.

<pb n=1374>

<p><b>mansu</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] <b>1</b> break in a work animal. <i>Si
Dyígu ray makamansu ning kabayúa,</i> Only
Diego can tame this horse. <b>2</b> @train, @discipline
s.o. <i>Namansu sa párì ang walay hibangkaágan
nga bátà,</i> The priest trained the child
that was innocent of all knowledge. <b>2a</b> give
s.o. a lot of work to do. <i>Kining batáa namansu
sa mga trabáhu sa balay,</i> The household
chores were dumped on the child.
<b>mansuhan</b>, <b>mansuhánan</b> <i>n</i> @{training ground}.

<p><b>mantágà</b> = <sc>MANTALÁGÀ</sc>.

<p><b>mantálà</b> (not without <i>l</i>) <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] @herald,
@announce. <i>Ang tuktugáuk sa sunuy nagmantálà
sa umaábut nga kabuntágun,</i> The
crowing of the rooster announces the approaching
morning. <b>2</b> [A; c] @publish in a
magazine or newspaper. <i>Gimantálà sa mantaláan
ang umaábut nílang kasal,</i> Their approaching
wedding was published in the
papers. <b>3</b> [A13] @advertise. <i>Mga lúhà nga
nagmantálà sa ákung kapildíhan,</i> Tears that
advertised my defeat. <b>-an</b>, <b>paN-an</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @newspaper,
@magazine. <b>2</b> @press. <b>mag-r-</b> <i>n</i> @publisher.
<b>tagapaN-</b> <i>n</i> @{press relations officer}. <b>tig-</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
advertising man. <i>Milíhuk ang tigmantálà sa
bag-ung kumpaníya,</i> The new company's
ad man worked hard. <b>2</b> an @announcer, s.o.
or s.t. who or that spreads talk or news around.
<i>Kanang bayhána mauy tigmantálà
sa tanang mahinabù dinhi,</i> That woman is
the person who spreads the gossip of all
that is going on around here. <b>3</b> @publisher.

<p><b>mantalágà</b> <i>n</i> @{giant octopus}.

<p><b>mantas</b> = <sc>MANGTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mantiának</b> = <sc>MANTIYÁNAK</sc>.

<p><b>mantíaw</b> interjection showing dismay and
displeasure, but to be taken lightly. <i>Mantíaw
ning batáa, muulì lag mukáun,</i> My!
This child never comes home except to eat.

<p><b>mantíkà</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @lard, fat from flesh. <b>1a</b> <b>lúpig pay
&mdash; kun matúlug</b> tending to sleep deeply (lit.
better at sleeping than lard). <b>2</b> @{cooking oil}.
<b>bugnaw ug &mdash;</b> derisive reference to one who
has indolent habits or is a slowpoke. <b>(->)</b> <i>v</i>
<b>1</b> [A; b] fry in lard. <i>Mantikai ang báhaw,</i>
Fry the leftover food. <b>2</b> [A] exude lard or
oil. <i>Haúna dáyun kun mumantikà na ang
tambuk,</i> Take the pan out of the fire when
lard comes out of the pork fat. <b>3</b> [A] for
public transportation to move slowly and
sluggishly at times that there are few passengers.
<i>Wà giyuy pasahíru. Nagmantikà
ang trák sa dálan,</i> There are few passengers,
and the bus is moving slowly down the
street empty. <b>-in-an</b> <i>n</i> food fried in oil. <b>-un</b>
<i>a</i> <b>1</b> @greasy. <i>Sud-an nga mantikáun,</i> Greasy
food. <b>2</b> @obese. <i>Babáying mantikáun,</i> An
obese woman.

<pb n=1375>

<p><b>mantíka dikakaw</b> <i>n</i> @{cocoa butter}.

<p><b>mantikilya</b> <i>n</i> @butter or @margarine. <i>v</i> [A; c]
spread butter on s.t.

<p><b>mantil</b> <i>n</i> @tablecloth. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put, use a
tablecloth. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a tablecloth.

<p><b>mantilya</b> <i>n</i> veil used to cover a woman's
head in church. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] wear a veil. <b>2</b>
[a12] make into a veil.

<p><b>mantilyína</b> <i>n</i> @{head covering} for wearing inside
a church. <i>v</i> [A; c] wear a head covering
in church.

<p><b>mantinil</b>, <b>mantinir</b> <i>v</i> [A3; c] @{make do with},
content oneself with s.t. less than the best.
<i>Magmantinil lang tag amútig way bugas,</i>
We'll make do with sweet potatoes if there's
no rice. <i>Nagmantinil lang siyag pangarga,</i>
He just took a temporary job as a stevedore.
<i>Mantiniri (mantinihi) lag kawáyan pára halígi
ang balay,</i> Just use bamboo for the
meantime as a post for the house. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> of
makeshift or second choice sort.

<p><b>mantiw</b> <i>a</i> @{tall and lanky}. <i>v</i> [B; b6] be, become,
make lanky.

<p><b>mantiyának</b> <i>n</i> supernatural being which preys
on newborn infants. It drinks the blood
from childbirth and tries to get at the newborn
baby's liver. If the baby dies, he drinks
the mother's milk without her knowledge
and kills her thereby. It is pictured the size
of a baby, with horns and fangs, with long
pointed ears, dirty brown in color and angular
in features. It has the ability to walk,
change its appearance, and make itself invisible.

<p><b>mantsa</b> = <sc>MANSA</sc>.

<p><b>mantsinítas</b> = <sc>MANSANÍTAS</sc>.

<p><b>mantsúsu</b> <i>a</i> easily soiled or stained. <i>Mantsúsu
kaáyu ang putì nga bistídu,</i> White clothing
gets soiled easily. <i>v</i> [A3P; b6] be, become
easily soiled.

<p><b>mánu<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [AC2; a] in ball games, play off one
with another to determine who plays first
or whose play it is. <i>Átung manúhun ug kinsay
mayur,</i> I'll play it off with you to see
who starts the game. <i>n</i> act of determining
the order of who plays first. <b>manuhan</b> <i>n</i> a
line from which s.t. is tossed to determine
who is first.

<p><b>mánu<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> title of address for a male older
than the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánu</i>.

<p><b>mánu<hi rend=sub>3</i></b> <i>n</i> hand of dried tobacco leaves containing
100 leaves. <i>v</i> [A; a12] bind tobacco
leaves into hands.

<p><b>mánu<hi rend=sub>4</i></b> = <sc>NGÁNU</sc>.

<p><b>*mánu<hi rend=sub>5</i></b> <i>see</i> <sc>DIMÁNU</sc>, <sc>ARMAS DI-</sc>, <sc>BULA DI-</sc>,
<sc>BUYNA &mdash;</sc>, <sc>SIGUNDA &mdash;</sc>. <b>manumánu</b> <i>v</i> [AC2; c1]
do s.t. by human strength, hands alone.
<i>Manumanúhun (imanumánu) lang ni nátug
<pb n=1376>bira ang awtu,</i> Let's just push this car by
hand. <i>n</i> fight with the hands. [+]

<p><b>manúbig</b> (from <i>túbig</i>) <i>n</i> k.o. crab of swamps
and rivers lighter in color than the <i>kágang</i>.

<p><b>manubíla</b> <i>n</i> a mechanism one manipulates
to steer: steering wheel, handle bars, etc. <i>v</i>
[c1] make a steering mechanism.

<p><b>Manúbu</b>, <b>Manúbù</b> <i>n</i> name of an ethnic group
in the mountains of eastern Mindanao.

<p><b>manugimpu</b>, <b>manugimpul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. parasitic
plant which attaches itself to trees. It extends
out a vine-like trunk which clings and
covers the host.

<p><b>manuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @chicken. <i>Pinirítung manuk,</i> Fried
chicken. <b>1a</b> <b>layù ra sa tinái sa &mdash;</b> <b>1</b>a1 off the
subject, not to the point. (Lit. far from the
chicken's intestines.) <b>1a2</b> wound of no consequence,
harmless scratch. <b>2</b> @gamecock. <b>2a</b>
a protegé involved in any race or competition:
politics, boxing, love, et al. <i>Napildi ang
íyang manuk,</i> His candidate (protegé) was
defeated. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] have chicken for one's
meal. <b>2</b> [A; a12] make s.o. one's protegé,
candidate in a competition. <i>Akuy mumanuk
nímu ug dì ba sugut dáyun nang bayhána,</i>
If I put you up as a candidate that girl
will surely accept you. <i>Midaug siya kay gimanuk
mang Sirhing,</i> He got elected because
he was a protege of Serging's. <b>-an</b>, <b>-an(<-)</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{poultry business}. <b>2</b> one who has
lots of chickens. <i>v</i> [A1] have a poultry business.
<b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> sleeping half-awake because of
insomnia or because of a need to remain
conscious. <i>v</i> [A; c1] sleep in such manner.
<i>Magminanuk kug kat[=ú]g paghuwat sa pirs
trip,</i> I'm just going to nap because I have to
make it to the first trip. <b>-un(<-)</b> <i>a</i> slightly
cross-eyed. <i>Gwápa untang bayhána, ugáling
manúkun lang,</i> That girl is beautiful, but
she is cross-eyed. <i>n</i> = <sc>LUKGAW</sc>. <b>-un</b> <i>a</i> =
<sc>-UN(<-)</sc>, <i>a</i>. <i>n</i> the cow-nosed ray, so called
because it moves like a bird in the water:
<b><i>Rhinoptera javanica</i></b>.

<p><b>manukmánuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> wind coming in strong
gusts. <b>2</b> weather vane. <i>v</i> [B456; b4] be
caught in gusting winds. <i>Piligrung ilawud
ug magmanukmánuk ang hángin,</i> It's dangerous
to set sail in gusty weather.

<p><b>manukúlu</b> <i>n</i> @monocle. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1] wear a monocle.
<b>2</b> [A12] get a monocle.

<p><b>manul</b> <i>n</i> variety of jasmine of the same species
as <i>sampagíta</i> but with double petals
and rounded leaves: <b><i>Jasmimum spp.</i></b>

<p><b>manulunda</b>, <b>manulundà</b> <i>n</i> @angel. <i>Daw manulundà
ang íyang kaanyag,</i> She has the beauty
of an angel.

<p><b>manumbága</b> = <sc>TINUMBÁGA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>TUMBÁGA</sc>.

<p><b>manung</b>, <b>mánung</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for an elder brother. 
<pb n=1377><b>2</b> title of respect for a man older than
the speaker. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánung</i>.
(->) voc. form. <i>Short form</i>: <b>nung</b>.

<p><b>manunggal</b> <i>n</i> k.o. tree.

<p><b>manunggul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. limestone found in tidal
flats, rough and irregular in surface, grey
on the outside, but white on the inside. It
is used for road surfacing, stone walls, or
wherever a porous stone is desirable.

<p><b>mánus</b> = <sc>AMÁNUS</sc>.

<p><b>manútu</b> = <sc>MÁNU<hi rend=sub>3</i></sc>.

<p><b>mánuy</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> title for an elder brother or uncle.
<b>2</b> expression used by a person who has been
defeated in a scuffle to indicate submission.
<i>Hala, mánuy arun dílì ku lubáun ning ímung
buktun,</i> Go on, say 'uncle' so I won't twist
your arm. <i>v</i> [A; a12] call s.o. <i>mánuy</i>. <b>(->)</b>
voc. form. <i>Short form</i>: <b>nuy</b>.

<p><b>manwal</b> <i>n</i> @manual, @handbook.

<p><b>manya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> fit of bad temper. <i>Ang paghilakhílak
ánang batáa manya lang nà,</i> That
child's persistent crying is just a tantrum.
<b>2</b> @caprice, @fancy. <i>Manya lang tung pagpapalit
níyag láing sapátus,</i> His asking for another
pair of shoes was just out of caprice. <i>a</i>
for a horse to tend to balk, move slow. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[B; c1] throw a @tantrum, act like a spoiled
brat. <b>2</b> [A; b6] for a horse to throw a fit
or just balk. <i>Dinhà giyud sa kinasang-an
ang kabáyù magmanya, ug wà mulíhuk bísag
unsáug búnal,</i> The horse balked right
in the middle of the crossing and wouldn't
move no matter how hard it was whipped.
<b>3</b> [A; b5c1] @{move slowly}. <i>Ang mumanya
ug tambung sa lamísa dì masalinan,</i> If you
dilly-dally in getting to the table, nothing
will be left for you.

<p><b>manyak</b> <i>a</i> having an uncontrollable urge to
do things, esp. sexual. <i>v</i> [B12; b6] be, become
a @maniac. <i>Namanyak siya human makatilaw
ug kausa,</i> She became a nympho
after her first experience. <i>Ngánung namanyak
man siya sa pangáwat nga sapían man?</i>
Why did she become a kleptomaniac when
she is so rich?

<p><b>manyampuk</b> = <sc>LÁWUNG</sc>.

<p><b>*manyána &mdash; ka lang, ka purin</b> you're out of
it, you don't know what's going on. <i>Manyána
ka lang (purin). Nagkúyug ímung trátug
láin,</i> You don't know what's going on.
Your boy friend is going out with other
girls.

<p><b>manyang</b> <i>n</i> hard liquor distilled from fermented
water obtained from the bud of the
nipa palm.

<p><b>mápa</b> <i>n</i> @map. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b(1)] plan a course of
action, esp. in committing a crime. <i>Nagmápa
sila unsáun pagtúlis ang tindáhan,</i> They
<pb n=1378>are planning how to rob the store. <b>2</b> [B36; b]
for dirt or stains to form a map-like configuration
on s.t. <i>Mimápa ang íyang buling
sa líug,</i> The dirt formed map-like configurations
on his neck. <i>Gimapáhan sa tintà ang
ímung bulsa,</i> The ink has formed a map-like
configuration on your pocket.

<p><b>máping<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> = <sc>MÁPA</sc>, <i>v1</i>.

<p><b>mapunti</b> = <sc>MALAPUNTI</sc>.

<p><b>Mar.</b> <i>n</i> abbreviation for <i>Marsu</i> 'March'.

<p><b>marabal</b> <i>a</i> person or animal that has grown
very large. <i>Kadakung marabal sa ilipanti,</i>
What a giant that elephant is! <i>Kadakung
marabal ning batáa,</i> What a giant this child
has gotten to be.

<p><b>marabilyas</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. ornamental bush often
called alas kwatru because its flowers open
at around four o'clock in the afternoon:
<b><i>Mirabilis jalapa</i></b>.

<p><b>marabya</b> = <sc>MURABYA</sc>.

<p><b>maragábit</b> <i>n</i> k.o. rice suitable for planting
in uplands or in paddies.

<p><b>maragáti</b> <i>n</i> k.o. fishing whereby a line with
several hooks baited only with decoys is
dragged behind a boat.

<p><b>marákas</b> <i>n</i> @maracas. <i>v</i> [A3; a] play the maracas,
make into maracas.

<p><b>maral</b> <i>n</i> k.o. carnivorous civet, dark gray in
color, having a very offensive odor.

<p><b>máram</b> = <sc>MÁRANG</sc>.

<p><b>maramà</b>, <b>marámà</b> <i>a</i> @tough, @roughneck. <i>Ang
marámà nga táwu ísug ug walay gikahadlúkan,</i>
A tough guy is rough and is not afraid
of anyone. <i>v</i> [B12] be tough and bad.

<p><b>Maranaw</b> <i>n</i> Lanao Muslims.

<p><b>marang</b> = <sc>MALASUGI</sc>.

<p><b>márang</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large fruit tree, bearing fruit
similar to the jackfruit (<i>nangkà</i>), but smaller
and sweeter. Not commonly cultivated
except in Mindanao: <b><i>Artocarpus odoratissima</i></b>.

<p><b>marapíta</b> <i>n</i> variety of banana with thick green
peelings, 20 cm. long and 5 cm. wide coming
to what looks like a nipple at the end,
eaten cooked.

<p><b>maratun</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @marathon race. <b>2</b> any long-distance
or endurance contest. <i>v</i> [C2; c1] hold
a marathon, compete in a marathon.

<p><b>marbas</b> <i>n</i> k.o. half-woody herb of waste
places, with numerous medicinal uses: <b><i>Abutilon indicum</i></b>.

<p><b>margarin</b>, <b>margarína</b> <i>n</i> @margarine. <i>v</i> [A; b]
put margarine on s.t.

<p><b>margáti</b> <i>n</i> system of planting rice which has
increased the yield, whereby the bed is
more carefully prepared and the seedlings
planted further apart than is traditionally
done.

<pb n=1379>

<p><b>mari</b> = <sc>KUMÁRI</sc>.

<p><b>maribágu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. shrub of the seashore: <b><i>Hibiscus
tiliaceus</i></b>.

<p><b>maribuhuk</b> = <sc>AGÚHU</sc>.

<p><b>mariguld</b> = <sc>AHÍTU</sc>.

<p><b>marihwána</b> <i>n</i> @marijuana.

<p><b>márik</b> <i>n</i> @pickax. <i>v</i> [A; a] do s.t. with a pickax.

<p><b>marika</b> = <sc>UMARI KA</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>ARI</sc>.

<p><b>marína</b> <i>n</i> collar in a woman's dress. <i>Taúri unyag
marína ang ákung sinínà,</i> Attach a collar
to my dress. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [b6(1)] attach, make a
collar. <b>2</b> [a12] make into a collar.

<p><b>mariníra</b> <i>n</i> sailor's collar or the middy collar
on a woman's dress. <i>v</i> [A; c] make a middy
collar.

<p><b>marínu</b> <i>n</i> @sailor on a merchant ship or in the
navy or soldier assigned on a boat. <i>v</i> [B156]
be a sailor. <i>Magmarínu kang dagatun ka
man?</i> You want to be a sailor even if you
easily get seasick? <b>asul &mdash;</b> @{navy blue}. <b>mariníru</b>
= <sc>MARÍNU</sc>.

<p><b>maripúsa</b> <i>n</i> a k.o. orchid that has flowers
that look like white butterflies, branching
in sprays: <b><i>Phalaenopsis amabilis</i></b>.

<p><b>marísi</b> = <sc>MIRÍSI</sc>.

<p><b>Maríya</b> <i>name</i> @Mary. <b>&mdash; klára</b> <b>1</b> character in
Rizal's Noli Me Tangere who embodied
the traditionally praised feminine virtues of
modesty and shyness. <b>2</b> traditional nineteenth
century costume with a full skirt and
low-cut blouse worn with a triangularly-folded
kerchief. <i>v</i> [A; c16] behave like or
act the role of Maria Clara. <b>2</b> wear the Maria
Clara. <b>&mdash; Santisima</b> <i>n</i> The Blessed Virgin
Mary. <b>Santa &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> mildly profane exclamation
of discomfiture. <b>buhuk ni &mdash;</b> = <sc>MARIBUHUK</sc>.
<i>see</i> <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>. [+]

<p><b>maríya buhuk</b> = <sc>MARIBUHUK</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>.

<p><b>mariyal</b> = <sc>MÁHA RIYAL</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MÁHA</sc>.

<p><b>marka</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a visible trace or impression on a
surface. <i>Dúnay mga marka sa tiil sa kawatan
didtu,</i> The burglar left footprints over
there. <b>2</b> a @brand, @label or @sign printed, written,
or stamped on s.t. <i>Unsay marka ánang
ribintadúra?</i> What brand are those fire-*crackers?
<b>3</b> grade in school. <i>Pagtuun pag-áyu
arun muísa ang marka mu sa klási,</i> Study
hard so that your grades will get better. <i>v</i> <b>1</b>
[A; b] put a mark on. <i>Kinsay nagmarka áning
ákung libru?</i> Who put a mark in my
book? <i>Markáhan sa mga inspiktur ang karni
únà ibaligyà,</i> The meat inspectors will
first stamp a mark on the meat before having
it sold. <b>2</b> [A] for a meter to give an
indication, read. <i>Nagmarka nag utsinta ang
dágan sa awtu,</i> The speedometer already
read eighty. <b>3</b> [b] be eyed for a purpose.
<pb n=1380><i>Gimarkáhang patyun,</i> Marked for assassination.
<i>Sapátus nga gimarkáhan níyang palitun,</i>
Shoes which he has long been having
his eye on. <b>&mdash; bulkan</b> <i>n</i> twenty-peso bill
(slang&mdash;so called from the picture of Mount
Mayon that was on the back of the bill in
former times). <b>&mdash; dimunyu</b> <i>n</i> strong liquor,
so called from a brand of strong liquor which
has the picture of the devil on it. <b>&mdash; kalabíra</b>
<i>n</i> the skull markings on the container of
highly poisonous matter. <i>v</i> [B26N] be dead
(slang). <i>Biyà sa ínum arun dì ka mamarka
kalabíra ug sayu,</i> Stop drinking or you will
die young.

<p><b>markir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> marker or piece of paper to keep
track of the lines. <b>2</b> marker put s.w. to indicate
a location.

<p><b>markis</b> <i>n</i> @marquis. <i>v</i> [AB156; a12] be made
or become a marquis. <b>-a(<-)</b> <i>n</i> @marchioness.

<p><b>*markit may (walay) &mdash;</b> @marriageable (not)
marriageable. <i>Minyù nang tawhána, wà na
nay markit,</i> That man is already married.
He is not available any more. <b>walà ang &mdash;</b> <i>v</i>
[B126; a12] get to be unavailable for marriage
or considered so to be.

<p><b>marku<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @{wall stud}. <i>v</i> [A; a] make a wall
stud.

<p><b>marku<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @breasts. <i>Nagbitay ang mga marku
sa babáyi, mu rag búnga sa kapáyas,</i> The
woman's breasts are hanging like papayas.
<i>v</i> [A; a] nudge s.o. in the breast.

<p><b>markut</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] propagate plants by marcotting.
<i>n</i> propagation of plants by marcotting.

<p><b>marmul</b> <i>n</i> @marble. <i>Dúwang nga marmul,</i> A
marble font. <i>v</i> [A12; a1] have marble,
make into marble.

<p><b>marpil</b> <i>n</i> @{false teeth}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] have false
teeth. <i>Kinahanglang marpílan ang ímung pangag,</i>
You should have a bridge made for
your missing tooth. <b>2</b> [A; a] make into
false teeth.

<p><b>marsanti</b> = <sc>MARTSANTI</sc>.

<p><b>marsíku</b> = <sc>AMURSÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>marsiyal</b> <i>n</i> @marshall, a military commander.
<i>Mag-una ang marsiyal ug may paráda,</i> The
marshall leads a parade. <i>v</i> [A; b6] be, become
a marshall.

<p><b>Marsu</b> <i>n</i> @March. <i>see</i> <sc>ABRIL</sc> <i>for verb forms</i>.

<p><b>marsútu</b> <i>n</i> k.o. suiting material of high quality
(from the brand name Marsotto). <i>v</i> [A1]
wear clothing made of this cloth.

<p><b>martabána</b> = <sc>MALTABÁNA</sc>.

<p><b>Marti</b> <i>n</i> @Mars.

<p><b>martilyu</b> <i>n</i> @hammer. <b>&mdash; dikabra</b> <i>n</i> @{claw hammer}.
<b>&mdash; dibúla</b> <i>n</i> @{ball peen hammer}. <i>v</i> [A; a1]
hammer. <i>Martilyúha ang tabla arun
matangtang,</i> Hit the piece of wood with a
hammer to get it off.

<pb n=1381>

<p><b>martiníku</b> = <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>martir</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @martyr. <b>&mdash; sa Gulgúta</b> @{Jesus Christ}.
<b>2</b> one who has suffered like a martyr. <i>Si Lusíla
usa ka martir tungud kay gisákit siyag
maáyu sa íyang bána,</i> Lucila is a martyr because
she is tortured by her husband. <i>v</i> [Ab16]
make s.o. suffer like a martyr.

<p><b>Martis</b> <i>n</i> @Tuesday. <i>See</i> <sc>BIRNIS</sc> <i>for verb
forms</i>. <b>&mdash; Santu</b> the Tuesday of the Holy
Week.

<p><b>*marts un yur &mdash;, sagitsit, gu</b> command in a
race: On your mark, get set, go!

<p><b>martsa</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6] @march. <b>1a</b> attend one's
graduation exercises. <b>2</b> [A; c1] dance a
march or play a march number. <i>n</i> speed of
an automotive transmission used at higher
speed. <i>Kwarta, kinta martsa,</i> Fourth, fifth
gear.

<p><b>martsanti</b> <i>n</i> middleman, one who buys and
sells commodities between producers and
retailers.

<p><b>martuníku</b> = <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.

<p><b>marubya</b> = <sc>MURABYA</sc>.

<p><b>marúnung</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> wise to the ways of the world.
<i>Dì nà maílad kay marúnung nà,</i> He knows
what's coming off. You can't fool him. <b>2</b>
have proficient knowledge or skill in s.t.
<i>Katubag si Pidru sa lisud nga pangutána.
Marúnung giyud,</i> Peter was able to answer
the questions. He certainly is bright. <i>v</i> [B12]
be, become sly or crafty. <b>-in-(->)</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1]
do s.t. in a cunning, sly way[** .] <i>Minarununga
(iminarunung) sad nà pagpaági arun
ka makabalus,</i> Be cunning about it so you
can get revenge.

<p><b>maruy</b> = <sc>MIRUY</sc>.

<p><b>marúya</b> <i>n</i> name given to a variety of sweets,
all of which are formed into rounded patties
and fried: <b>1</b> made of ground rice. <b>2</b>
made of sliced bananas. ( [**del space?]= <sc>BANGDAYBANGDAY</sc>).
<b>3</b> made of shredded sweet potatoes
( [**del space?]= <sc>BITSUBITSU</sc>). <i>v</i> [A; a] make <i>marúya</i>.

<p><b>maryánas</b> = <sc>BIYATILIS</sc>.

<p><b>Maryúsip</b> <i>see</i> <sc>HISUSMARYUSIP</sc>.

<p><b>*mas</b> <b>1</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [adj.] @more [adj.]. <i>Ang ákung
balay mas gamay sa imúha,</i> My house is
smaller than your house. <i>Mas maáyu nga
pritúhun ni kay sa tanukun,</i> It is much better
to fry this than to boil it. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; báli</b> it is
better to [do]. <i>Mas báli ihátag kay sa hulaman
nga dílì iúlì,</i> I would rather give s.t.
away than lend it and not get it back.

<p><b>mása<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; a] mix solids with a little liquid.
<i>Kinsay mumása sa simintu?</i> Who'll mix the
cement? <i>Masáha na nang himúung dúnat,</i>
Mix the dough for the doughnuts now. <i>n</i> <b>1</b>
dough or other mixture of solids with water.
<b>2</b> proportions, things that make up a
<pb n=1382>mixture. <i>Ang másang gigámit tris dus,</i> They
use a mixture in proportions of three to
two. <b>masahan</b> <i>n</i> place to mix dough or
similar mixtures.

<p><b>mása<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the masses, common people. <b>&mdash; kumun</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> common masses. <b>2</b> property owned
in common by heirs.

<p><b>masáhi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @massage. <i>Masahían ta nang
ímung páang gipamaúlan,</i> Let's massage
your sore legs. <i>n</i> @massage. <b>-sta</b> <i>n</i> @masseur,
@masseuse. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a masseur.

<p><b>masámung</b> <i>n</i> a man who is married into one's
immediate family&mdash;i.e., is married to one's
sister or daughter. <i>Masámung si Íki námù
kay naminyù siyang Maríyang ákung manghud.
Masámung sad siya sa ákung ginikánan,</i>
Eke is a <i>masámung</i> to us because he
married my sister Maria. He's also my parents'
<i>masámung</i>. <i>v</i> [A12; a12] get as a son-
or brother-in-law; be, become this relation.

<p><b>másang</b> <i>v</i> [A23; c1] hit s.t. directly with full
impact. <i>Mimásang sa ákung nawung ang íyang
kúmù,</i> His fist smashed into my face.
<i>Imásang (masánga) ang garapun sa pusti,</i>
Smash the glass jar against the post.

<p><b>masariyal</b> = <sc>MÁHA RIYAL</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>MÁHA</sc>.

<p><b>mási</b> <i>n</i> k.o. sweet made from mashed taro or
ground sticky rice formed into balls with
peanuts. <i>v</i> [A; c1] make <i>mási</i>.

<p><b>*masig<hi rend=sub>1</i> &mdash; ka</b> [<i>noun</i>] each of two or more
in a group. <i>Nahiyusan ang masig ka ligid,</i>
All of the wheels had a flat tire. <i>Nagdápat
ang ílang masig ka áping,</i> Their two cheeks
touched.

<p><b>masig<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> short for <i>maskin ug</i>. <i>See</i> <sc>BÍSAN</sc>.

<p><b>masimasi</b> <i>v</i> [A; b5] hurry s.o. to work. <i>Ug
náay magmasimasi nátug patrabáhu, dì na
hinúun tang katunung,</i> We make mistakes if
we are always pressed to hurry our work.
<i>Dílì kaáyu haum ang sinínà kay gimasimasi
(gimasimasihan) man ang sastri ug pahuman,</i>
The dress does not fit well because
the dressmaker was pressed to finish it hurriedly.
<b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] be pressed to work in a
frenzy. <i>Magkamasimasi mig panlútù basta
pyista, mau nga dì mi makalingawlíngaw,</i>
We get so busy cooking during fiestas we
can't enjoy ourselves.

<p><b>masimási</b> <i>n</i> mashi-mashi, a k.o. dance. <i>v</i> [A]
dance the mashi-mashi.

<p><b>masin-gan</b> = <sc>MASINGGAN</sc>.

<p><b>masinggan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{machine gun}. <b>2</b> k.o. rapid-firing
bamboo popgun. <i>v</i> [A; a12] shoot
with a machine gun. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> like a machine
gun. <i>Kasábang minasinggan,</i> Scolding like a
burst of machine gun fire.

<p><b>masítas</b> <i>n</i> small ornamental plants, a flower
<pb n=1383>pot with a plant in it. <b>&mdash; sa ingkantu</b> =
<sc>LUKDULUKDU</sc>. <i>v</i> [A12] obtain ornamental
plants. <b>-an(->)</b> <i>n</i> flower pot. <b>masitíra</b> n
flower pot.

<p><b>masiyar</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] <b>1</b> offer, quote a price in
selling. <i>Ug mumasiyar siya sa kálù ug písus,
palita,</i> If he offers the hat for a peso, buy
it. <b>2</b> bet money on s.t. <i>Áning manúka mumasiyar
ku ug mil písus,</i> On this cock I will
bet a thousand pesos. <b>masyáda</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the
amount placed as bet. <i>Gatus ang ákung
masyáda apan sitinta ray gidáwat,</i> I wanted
to bet one hundred, but they only accepted
seventy. <b>2</b> total amount of money bet by
both sides. <b>3</b> fee paid in playing a set of
bowling, tennis, pingpong, and the like. <i>v</i>
[A; b] pay this fee. <b>masyadur</b> <i>n</i> the person
in cockfighting who calls out bets offered
and matches them with other bets.

<p><b>maskáda</b> <i>n</i> bits of tobacco for chewing. <i>v</i>
[A; a] chew tobacco.

<p><b>maskara</b> <i>n</i> @mask. <i>v</i> [A; b] wear a mask.

<p><b>maski</b>, <b>maskin</b> = <sc>BÍSAN</sc>.

<p><b>maskipap</b>, <b>maskipaps</b> <i>n</i> k.o. popular dance. <i>v</i>
[A] do this dance.

<p><b>maskirid bul</b> <i>n</i> @{masquerade ball}. <i>v</i> [A1; c1]
hold a masquerade ball.

<p><b>maskuláda</b> = <sc>MUSKULÁDU</sc> (female).

<p><b>maskuládu</b> = <sc>MUSKULÁDU</sc>.

<p><b>masputítu</b>, <b>masputítus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance, the
mashed potatoes. <i>v</i> [A] do this dance.

<p><b>*mastir &mdash; kátir</b> <i>n</i> @{master cutter} of a tailoring
shop. <b>&mdash; ki</b> <i>n</i> @{master key}. <b>&mdash; mayind</b> <i>n</i> @mastermind.
<i>v</i> [A; a2] be the mastermind. <i>Pulis
ang nagmastirmayind sa túlis,</i> A cop masterminded
the robbery.

<p><b>masturbisyun</b> <i>n</i> k.o. dance wherein both
hands are alternately used as if masturbating.
<i>v</i> [A] do the masturbation dance.

<p><b>másu</b> <i>n</i> @{sledge hammer}. <i>v</i> [A; a1] do s.t.
with, make into a sledge hammer.

<p><b>mas-uk</b> <i>v</i> [B126] @die, be @killed. <i>Nakrás ang
ayruplánu ug namas-uk ang pilútu,</i> The
plane crashed and the pilot got killed.

<p><b>masun</b> <i>n</i> @freemason. <i>v</i> [B156] become a
freemason.

<p><b>masuy</b> <i>n</i> brand of mild liquor taken for medicinal
purposes or for pleasure. <b>bínu uy &mdash;</b>
= <sc>MASUY</sc>.

<p><b>masyáda</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MASIYAR</sc>.

<p><b>masyádu</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> being too much of s.t. <i>Kini si
Tunyu masyádu na, dúgayng mukáun ug dì
pa manghúgas sa plátu,</i> This Tonio is too
much; he eats late and doesn't even do the
dishes. <b>2</b> how very. <i>Masyádu kamahal!</i> How
very expensive!

<p><b>masyadur</b> <i>see</i> <sc>MASIYAR</sc>.

<p><b>masyaw</b> <i>n</i> @{yellow corn}.

<pb n=1384>

<p><b>mat</b> <i>n</i> @mat for gymnastics.

<p><b>mát</b> <i>n</i> @math, a subject in school.

<p><b>mata</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @eyes. <i>Nagluhang mga mata,</i> Eyes
filled with tears. <b>1a</b> <b>tawutáwu sa &mdash;</b> the @pupil
of the eyes. <b>2</b> @eyeglasses. <i>Nangítà ku sa
ákung mata,</i> I'm looking for my glasses. <b>3</b>
eyelets in the shoes. <b>4</b> any growth or structure
in some way similar to the eyes. <b>&mdash; sa
báling</b> mesh of the net.<b> &mdash; sa baskit</b> mesh of
the basket. <b>&mdash; sa lubi</b> two spots in the coconut
shell which resemble human eyes. <b>&mdash; sa
gábi</b> a button-like outgrowth on the flesh
of the taro rootstock. <b>&mdash; sa, ug lumban</b> an
eye-like operculum found in turban shells.
<b>&mdash; sa pinya</b> eyes of the pineapple, the hollow
cavity found on the surface of the flesh
of the pineapple fruit which contains seeds.
<b>-g tikì</b> <i>n</i> small boil that has come to a head.
<b>5</b> <b>&mdash; sa ulitáwu (dalága)</b> expression used
when playing with children to make them
blink their eyes. <b>6</b> = <b>AY<hi rend=sub>4</i></b>. <b>7</b> <b>-mbáka</b> =
<sc>MAT-AN</sc>, <i>5</i> (lit. cow-eyes). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [a12] hit in
the eye. <i>Mat-a pag-igù ang mantágà,</i> Hit the
giant octopus on the eyes. <b>2</b> [A; a2b23]
wake up, be awake. <i>Ngánung mimata ka
mag sayu?</i> Why did you wake up early?
<i>Nagmata ka na ba?</i> Are you awake now?
<b>2a</b> <b>&mdash; ug buntag</b> [A13] be unaware of
what's going on (lit. be awake only in the
morning). <i>Nagmata ka lag buntag sa gibúhat
sa ímung asáwa,</i> You don't seem to
know what's going on with your wife. <b>2b</b>
<b>himat-an, hikatulgan</b> have s.t. constantly in
one's mind, awake or asleep. <i>Himat-an hikatulgan
ku ang ákung prublíma,</i> I am constantly
thinking about my problem, day
and night. <b>3</b> [b8] for a child to become
aware of his surroundings. <i>Ang íyang namat-an
nga pagmatutù mau ang kang Iyù
Sinun,</i> The first parent he ever knew was
Uncle Senon. <b>3a</b> be born s.w. (lit. aware of
light). <i>Kining dapíta ang ákung namat-ag
maháyag,</i> This is the place I was born. <b>4</b>
[A; a12] for fats to liquify. <i>Mumata ang
mantíkà kun inítun,</i> The lard will liquify
when you heat it. <b>&mdash; pubri</b> <i>a</i> looking down
upon others as not one's equal. <i>Mata pubri
kaáyu. Dì mutagad sa mga kabus,</i> She looks
down on others and pays no attention to
the poor. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A2; a12] estimate a measurement
by inspection. <i>Wà nay kinahanglan
ug pulgadíra, matáun na lang,</i> You don't
need a measuring stick. You can estimate it
just by inspection. <b>1a</b> look for s.t. simply
with the eyes. <i>Matáun lang ang imbaw,</i> You
can find clams by just looking at the water.
<b>2</b> [AC; a1] say frankly, tell face to face.
<i>Nagkamáta ang duha ka kandidátu sa platapurma,</i> 
<pb n=1385>The two candidates had it out face
to face on the platform. <i>Matáhun tikag sulti,</i>
I'll talk to you frankly. <b>3</b> [A13] for bivalves
to be active, as manifested by their
being open or bubbling. <i>Magmáta na gáning
mga imbaw sayun ra pagtultul,</i> When the
clams are active it is easy to locate them.
<b>matamata</b> <i>v</i> [a4] <b>1</b> see an illusion, mirage.
<i>Gimatamata ug busay ang táwu sa disyirtu,</i>
The man in the desert saw a mirage, a waterfall.
<b>2</b> be unable to choose or decide
wisely because of bedazzlement. <i>Wà giyud
ku kapílì. Gimatamata ku sa kadaghang palítun,</i>
I wasn't able to choose because there
were so many beautiful things to buy. <b>matamáta</b>
= <sc>MÁTA</sc>, <i>v1</i>. <b>hig-</b>/<b>hag-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256] <b>1</b>
wake up accidentally. <i>Nahigmata ku kay sábà,</i>
I woke up because it was so noisy. <b>2</b> become
aware of s.t. <i>Karun pa ku mahigmata
sa íyang kabangis,</i> For the first time I became
aware of what a terrible person he
was. <b>mat-an</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> having eyes or an eye-like
configuration. <b>2</b> artful, wily, cunning. <i>Ang
mga Insik mat-an kaáyu sa nigusyu,</i> Chinese
are very shrewd in business. <b>3</b> <b>mat-ay balíli,
dunggánay gabíi</b> the walls have ears. (Lit.
the grass has eyes and the night has ears.)
<i>Hináya ang inyung sulti kay mat-an ra bay
balíli ug dunggánay gabíi,</i> Talk quietly because
the walls have ears. <b>4</b> <b>mat-an pa sa
pinya</b> <i>a</i> wily, cunning (having more eyes
than a pineapple). <i>Dì ka kaílad ni Dyú kay
mat-an pa nà sa pinya,</i> You can't fool Joe.
He is very alert. <i>n</i> k.o. fish with huge eyes:
<b><i>Selar crumenophthalmos</i></b>. <b>paN-</b> = <sc>AY<hi rend=sub>4</i></sc>. <b>tagi-</b>,
<b>tagli-</b>, <b>tagu-</b> <i>n</i> k.o. eye infection. <i>v</i> [A123P; a4]
get this infection.

<p><b>matáda</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] divide the meat into portions.
<b>2</b> [c16] sell meat by the portion. <b>-in-</b>
= <sc>MATÁDA</sc>, <i>v2</i>.

<p><b>matadíra</b> = <sc>MATADÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>matadíru<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @butcher, one who slaughters
and cuts up animals. <b>2</b> butcher who sells
meat. <i>v</i> [B156; a] work as a butcher.

<p><b>matadíru<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>a</i> @clever, skillfully shrewd in deception
and trickery. <i>Ayawg kumpiyansahi
nang tawhána kay matadíru kaáyu nà sa baráha,</i>
Don't trust that man because he's very
cunning in card games. <i>v</i> [B1; b6] become
@cunning.

<p><b>matadur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> = <sc>MATADÍRU<hi rend=sub>1, 2</i></sc>. <b>2</b> @matador. <b>3</b>
@killer, @fierce. <i>Manuk nga matadur,</i> A killer
gamecock. <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become a matador.

<p><b>matag</b> <b>1a</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>word referring to time or day</i>]
every. <i>Bisitáhan ku níya matag adlaw,</i> He visits
me every day. <b>1b</b> <b>&mdash;</b> [<i>verb base</i>] every time
[so-and-so] is done. <i>Usa ka bandihádu ang
<pb n=1386>mahurut níya matag káun,</i> Each time he ate
he consumed a platter of rice. <b>&mdash; karun ug
unyà</b> every now and then. <i>Tan-áwa ang linat-an
matag karun ug unyà,</i> Take a look at
the stew every now and then. <b>&mdash; usa</b> [<i>dat.</i>]
each and every one of [dat.]. <i>Matag usa níla
muámut ug singku písus,</i> Each and every
one of them will contribute five pesos.

<p><b>matalak-un</b>, <b>matak-ánun</b> <i>see</i> <sc>TAKA</sc>.

<p><b>matang<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>,
exclamation.

<p><b>matang<hi rend=sub>2</i></b>, <b>mátang</b> <i>a</i> @kind. <i>Ipiktíbu kining matánga
sa midisína,</i> This k.o. medicine is effective.
<i>Makasayaw siya sa tanang mátang
sa tugtug,</i> She can dance to all kinds of music.
<b>ka-(<-)</b> <i>a</i> of the same kind, alike. <i>Túa ra
ang íyang kamátang nga mga mugbug lupad,</i>
That's where you find her k.o. people,
prostitutes.

<p><b>matansa</b> <i>v</i> [A; a] @butcher an animal, @slaughter
it or cut it up. <i>n</i> fee paid to the market
authority for approval to slaughter animals.

<p><b>matansíra</b>, <b>matansíru</b> = <sc>MATADÍRA</sc>, <sc>MATADÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>matay</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; b3(1)4(1)c5] @die. <i>Namatay
si Simyun sa tísis,</i> Simeon died of tuberculosis.
<i>Sakit nga makamatay,</i> A disease
that kills. <i>Katigúlang ang íyang namatyan
(gikamatyan),</i> He died of old age. <i>Namatyan
silag bag-ung inanak,</i> They lost a newly-born
child. <i>Ikamatay nákù ang ímung pagbíyà,</i>
If you leave me I will die. <b>2</b> [B126]
stop functioning. <i>Namatay ang rilu,</i> The
watch stopped. <i>Namatay ang makina taliw[=à]
sa lawud,</i> The engine went dead in the middle
of the sea. <i>Namatay ang sugà pagbutu
sa pyús,</i> The light went out when the fuse
blew. <b>2a</b> [B12] for the moon to be in its invisible
phase. <i>exclamation</i> <b>1</b> of displeasure.
<i>Matay! Kabahù,</i> Jesus! What a smell! <i>Matayng
mahála,</i> How expensive it is! <b>2</b> swearing
as to the truth of s.t. <i>Matay! Ug wà pa
ka, patay tà ku run,</i> Believe me. If it hadn't
been for you, I'd be dead now. <i>Tinúud lagi
nà. Matay pa,</i> It's true, so help me God. <b>ka-(<-)</b>
<i>v</i> [C2] for people to be killing each
other. <i>Nagkamátay lang kanúnay ang mga
nanagkaáway didtu sa Byitnam,</i> There is a
lot of killing in this war in Vietnam. <i>n</i> mass
death, killing on a vast scale. <i>Mahitabù ang
kamátay tungud sa típus,</i> Typhus can mean
mass death. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; b6] <b>1</b> die for a
cause. <i>Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan,</i>
He gave his life for his country. <b>1a</b>
commit suicide. <i>Magpakamatay siya kun
mapakyas,</i> He will kill himself if he fails. <b>2</b>
[a12] allow s.o. to die. <i>Pakamatyun lang
mi ninyu sa gútum?</i> Will you let us die of
<pb n=1387>hunger? <b>3</b> [b6] allow dirt to get deeply engrained.
<i>Ang linadlad nga pakamatyan sa
sabun kúling maputì,</i> If you bleach clothes
under the sun without sprinkling (lit. allow
the soap to die in the bleaching), it will
never get white. <b>panga-(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A23] die
(plural). <i>Nangamátay ang ákung mga manuk,</i>
My chickens died. <b>sa tanang nanga-</b>
more [so-and-so] than anyone else (said of
bad traits). <i>Tapulan ka sa tanang nangamátay,</i>
You're the laziest of the lazy. <b>hi-un nga
búlan</b> <i>n</i> @{last quarter}. <b>bispiras sa hi-un</b> the
last day the moon can be seen before the
new moon (<i>patay ang búwan</i>). <b>himalatyun</b>
a dying. <i>Lúya na kaáyu ang himatyun níyang
inahan,</i> His dying mother is already
very weak. <i>Himatyun na ang sugà kay wà
nay gás,</i> The lamp is dying down because
the kerosene is all gone. <b>-in-</b> <i>n</i> human
@corpse. <b>adlaw sa &mdash;</b> @{All Souls' Day}. <b>-in-(<-)</b> <i>v</i>
[A; b3c] cry loudly, @wail, usually over the
dead. <i>Ngánung nagminátay ka man, namatyan
ka?</i> Why are you wailing so loud? Did
s.o. die? <i>n</i> loud @wailing. <b>ka-</b> expression of
strong @anger or @disgust. <i>Kamatay, wà giyud
masúd ang tris dà, Damn!</i> The number three
ball didn't go into the pocket! <b>kalamatyan,
kinamatyan</b> <i>n</i> a fatal spot in the body. <i>Kalamatyan
ang kasingkásing,</i> The heart is a
fatal spot in the body. <b>ka-un(->)</b> <i>n</i> @death.
<i>Kalit nga kamatáyun,</i> @{Sudden death}. <b>kina-un</b>
<i>a</i> as if one is about to die. <i>Ngánung kinamatyun
nang ímung trabáhu? Wà na
bay ugma?</i> Why are you working as if you
were going to die? Is there going to be no
tomorrow? <b>mag-l-(<-)</b> <i>n</i> about to die. <i>Lawus
na ang dáhun sa mangga kay magmalátay
man,</i> The leaves on the mango tree are
withering because they are dying. [+]

<p><b>máti</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] @checkmate in chess. <i>Bantayi
ang hárì kay matíhun tikaw,</i> Watch the king
because I'm going to checkmate you. <i>n</i>
@checkmate.

<p><b>matikmátik</b> <i>v</i> [A3; a12] do s.t. with careful
reckoning and planning. <i>Aku lay magmatikmátik
ug paági nga mabáwì ang yútà,</i> I will
find means to get the lot back. <i>Matikmatíka
pag-áyu arun dì ka maalkansi,</i> Figure it
carefully so you don't lose.

<p><b>matikud</b> <i>v</i> [A12; b8] @notice, @{become aware
of} s.t. <i>Karun pa aku makamatikud sa dakù
kung sayup,</i> I just realized what a big mistake
I had made. <i>Wà ku mamatikdi ang ímung
pag-abut,</i> I didn't notice your arrival.

<p><b>matimáti</b> @wait for a while. <i>Matimáti úsà kay
náa pay átung paabútun,</i> Wait awhile. We
are expecting some more people to come.
<i>v</i> <b>1</b> [c1] finish slowly. <i>Átù lang ning matimatíhun 
<pb n=1388>(imatimáti) pagkáun arun dúgay
mahurut,</i> Let us eat it slowly so it can last
a little longer. <b>2</b> [A; c1] make do with less
equipment, or give s.t. less attention, disregarding
the quality of the work. <i>Matimatíhun
ku lang nig kinamut ang drúwing bísag
way rúlir,</i> I'll just make a rough drawing by
hand because there is no ruler.

<p><b>matimátiks</b> <i>n</i> @mathematics.

<p><b>mating</b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>,
exclamation of displeasure. <i>Mating bug-áta
ning ákung dá!</i> My! How heavy this is!

<p><b>matiriyal<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> particle or trace of truth in feelings
and emotion. <i>May matiriyal sa katinuúran
ang íyang púlung,</i> His words have some
particles of truth. <i>v</i> [A] for feelings and
emotions to start developing. <i>Mimatiriyal
ang íyang pagdúda dihang kanúnay nang
higabin-ag paúlì ang bána,</i> She developed
suspicions when her husband started always
coming home late nights. <i>Nakamatiriyal ang
gugma sa ílang duha ka kasingkásing,</i> Love
sprouted in their hearts.

<p><b>matiriyal<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> person's capability for a certain
position. <i>Maáyu siyang matiriyal pagkaprisidinti,</i>
He is a good presidential timber.

<p><b>matirniti</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{maternity clinic}. <b>2</b> @{maternity
dress}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; c16] wear, make a maternity
dress. <b>2</b> [B1256] wind up in the maternity
clinic&mdash;i.e. have a baby out of wedlock.
<i>Mamatirniti ka giyung bayhána kag
mag-unauna ka sa mga láki,</i> You'll end up
in a maternity clinic if you are forward with
men. <b>&mdash; lib</b> @{maternity leave}.

<p><b>matiryális</b> <i>n</i> materials used for constructing.
<b>&mdash; pwirtis</b> <b>1</b> durable materials for construction.
<b>2</b> for a woman to be well-built. <i>Maáyung
pangasaw-un kay matiryális pwirtis,</i>
She's a good prospect because she is well
built.

<p><b>matmat<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a1] @unravel, undo s.t. all
tangled. <i>Aku ray mumatmat sa hílu nga nagubut,</i>
I'll unravel the tangled thread. <b>2</b>
[A; c] recount a story, events. <i>Ákung imatmat
sa husgádu ang nahitabù,</i> I'll tell the
judge what happened.

<p><b>matmat<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> = <sc>ALIMATMAT</sc>.

<p><b>matngà</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] be hit full in the area intended
with a big impact. <i>Namatngà pagkaigù
ang langgam sa batu,</i> The stone hit the
bird squarely. a hit square. <i>Matngà giyud
pagkaigù ang lansang nga gimartilyu,</i> He hit
the nail square on the head.

<p><b>matngun</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13; b(1)] take care of by
observing precautions, handle carefully.
<i>Magmatngun ka arun dì ka madisgrasya,</i> Be
careful so you don't meet an accident. <b>2</b>
[A1; b(1)] pay attention, heed. <i>Wà mu
<pb n=1389>magmatngun sa ákung tambag, ha?</i> You
didn't heed my advice, did you? <b>3</b> [A12; b8]
be aware of, realize. <i>Nakamatngun siya
nga walà na ang íyang pitáka,</i> He noticed
that his wallet was gone. <i>Namatngunan na
níya nga walà diay salà ang bátà,</i> He has
just realized that the child was innocent.
<b>&mdash; ug buut</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b8] be aware of, reach
the age of reason. <i>Dinhi na ku ning baláya
sukad ku makamatngun ug buut,</i> I have
lived in this house since I saw light. <b>2</b> [A12]
regain consciousness. <i>Didtu na siya makamatngun
ug buut sa uspital,</i> He regained
consciousness in the hospital. <b>pahi-</b> <i>v</i> [A; c]
@advise and @admonish. <i>Pahitmangúni siya báhin
sa íyang pag-inum,</i> Advise him about
his drinking. <i>n</i> @admonishment. <b>kahi-</b> <i>n</i> @awareness
of s.t.

<p><b>matráka</b> <i>n</i> grager, used as a noisemaker in the
procession on Good Friday. <b>matrakáhun ug
bàbà</b> talking like a machine gun. <i>Báhu ning
tabian matrakáhun ug bàbà,</i> This gossip!
Her mouth goes like a machine gun.

<p><b>matrídu</b> = <sc>MATRÍRU</sc>.

<p><b>matrikula</b> <i>n</i> school fees. <i>v</i> [c6] pay @tuition.

<p><b>matrimunyal</b> <i>n</i> {double bed}.

<p><b>matríra</b> = <sc>MATRÍRU</sc> (female).

<p><b>matríru</b> <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @wise to the ways of the world.
<i>Dì na nà siya matuntu kay matríru,</i> You
can't pull a fast one on him. He's wise to
the ways of the world. <b>2</b> @wise, @tricky. <i>Matríru
ang mga matansíru kay dílì hustu ang
timbangan,</i> The meat sellers are very tricky
because the scales are not honest. <b>3</b> for
game to be shy and not easily approached
by persons. <i>v</i> [B1] be, become wise to the
ways of the world or tricky.

<p><b>matris<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> @uterus.

<p><b>matris<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @mattress.

<p><b>matrúna</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> the head @maid in a wealthy
household, the one in charge of running the
household. <b>2</b> @housemother of a women's
dormitory or boarding house. <i>a</i> @matronly-looking,
old, and slightly stout. <i>v</i> [B136; c16]
be, become a house mother or head
maid; get to be @matronly in appearance.

<p><b>mats</b> <i>v</i> [B; c6] for wearing apparel to match.
<i>Mimats ang ímung sapátus sa pitáka,</i> Your
shoes match your purse.

<p><b>matsa</b> <i>v</i> [A1; c1] do s.t. in a relaxed and unhurried
manner. <i>Ayaw matsaha (imatsa)
nang ímung linaktan ug sugúun ka,</i> Don't
take it so slow when you are told to do s.t.

<p><b>matsing<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>n</i> small monkey. <i>a</i> <b>1</b> like a monkey
in appearance. <b>2</b> @mischievous. <i>Matsing kaáyu
ning batáa u, lukup lag panúngug sa
uban,</i> This child is mischievous. He keeps
on teasing the others. <i>v</i> [B145] look ugly
<pb n=1390>like a monkey. <i>Nagmatsing lang nang dagway
mu,</i> You have a monkey's face.

<p><b>matsing<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> matching type exam.

<p><b>matsuy</b> humorous euphemism for <sc>MATAY</sc>,
exclamation of displeasure. <i>Matsuy ning batáa,
langas kaáyu,</i> My! What a nuisance this
child is.

<p><b>mátud</b> [<i>gen.</i>] according to what [so-and-so]
says. <i>Mátud níya, maáyu kanang klási,</i>
According to him that is a good kind. <i>'Adtu
na ta,' mátud níya,</i> He said, 'Let's go.'

<p><b>matulì</b> <i>n</i> k.o. <i>balat</i> (sea cucumber).

<p><b>matúmat</b> <i>v</i> [C; bc3] engage in a friendly,
casual chat. <i>Dì ku makigmatúmat nímug
dúgay kay nagdalì ku,</i> I can't chat with you
for long because I'm in a hurry.

<p><b>matun</b> <i>n</i> @ruffian, @{tough guy}. <i>Daghang istambay
nga matun sa piyir,</i> There are many ruffians
hanging around at the pier. <i>v</i> [B2; b6]
be, become a tough guy.

<p><b>matutù</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12] <b>1</b> take care of a child.
<i>Kinsay nagmatutù sa ímung anak samtang
walà ka?</i> Who took care of your child when
you were gone? <b>2</b> @rear, @{bring up}. <i>Akuy
nagmatutù kaníla hangtud sa ílang pagkaulitáwu,</i>
I reared the boys until they were
teen-agers. <b>2a</b> [A; b5c] inculcate with s.t.
<i>Matutua (matutui) ang mga tinun-an sa nasyunalismu,</i>
Teach the pupils nationalism. <b>3</b>
nurture a feeling. <i>May gimatutù siyang pagdumut
álang kanákù,</i> He is nursing a grudge
against me. <i>n</i> @care, @guidance. <i>Matutù sa inahan,</i>
Mother's guidance.

<p><b>matyag</b> <i>v</i> [A; a12b2] @observe, watch to @see.
<i>Siyay mumatyag sa kamaisan nga dì kan-un
sa mga amù,</i> He will watch the cornfield to
see if the monkeys are getting at it. <i>Nakamatyag
ka nag táwung giupirahan?</i> Have
you ever watched a person being operated
on? see also <sc>BATYAG</sc>.

<p><b>matyanak</b> = <sc>MANTIYÁNAK</sc>.

<p><b>mau</b> <i>short forms</i>: <b>mu</b>, <b>maw</b> is, are, was, were.
<b>1a</b> preceding subject in sentences with nominal
predicates. <i>Kadtung íyang gisulti mau
ang nakapalágut nákù,</i> What he said was
what angered me. <i>Ang kangihit sa tambal
muy nakapataas sa prisyu,</i> The scarcity of
medicine is what made prices high. <b>1b</b> <i>with
no subject</i>: it's [predicate] which is the
one. <i>Nagtúu giyud aku nga kanà mau,</i> I
believe that that is the one. <i>Ug mau kanà,
ang útang maimpas sunud búlan,</i> If that is
the case, the debt will be paid off next
month. <i>Ang ímung tubag dílì mau,</i> Your
answer is not right. <b>&mdash; bítaw</b> that is so. <i>Kadakung
trabáhu nu? Mau bítaw,</i> What a big
job, isn't it? It certainly is! <b>&mdash; kaáyu</b> the
very one. <i>Mau ni? Mau kaáyu,</i> Is this the
<pb n=1391>one? Yes it is the very one. <b>&mdash; gayud</b> that is
the way it is. <i>Mau giyud nà siya ug mahubug,</i>
That is the way he is when drunk. <b>&mdash;
gihápun</b> it's (it was) as usual. <i>Ang atup sa
ámung balay mau gihápun, nípà,</i> The roof
of our house is the usual kind&mdash;of palm
thatch. <b>&mdash; lang</b> <i>see</i> <sc>LÁMANG</sc>, <i>2c1</i>. <b>&mdash; kini ug
kini</b>, <b>&mdash; kanà ug kanà</b> <i>in giving excuses, reasons
or alibis</i>: it is because of this, because of
that. <b>1c</b> <i>in response to a question as to the
identification of s.t.</i>: yes, it is the one. <i>Mau
ba ni ang imúha? Dílì mau,</i> Is this yours?
No, that is not the one. <i>Si Pidru na ba nà?
Mau na,</i> Is that Peter now? It's him all
right. <b>1d</b> yes, that is the case, said esp. in
response to negative comments. <i>'Kusug siyang
manghulam mu rag kamaung muúlì.'&mdash;'Mau,'</i>
'She likes to borrow things as if
she knew enough to return them (which
she doesn't).'&mdash;'Yes, that is so.' <b>1e</b> <b>&mdash; nang</b>,
<b>&mdash; na sa ginháwang [<i>verb</i>]</b> doing one's best,
tiring oneself out doing [verb]. <i>Mau na nga
pangítà nákù, (or mau na sa ginháwa nákung
pangítà) ug sápì apan kamu nagsígi
lang ug ínum,</i> I wear myself out earning
money, and all you do is drink. <b>1f</b> <b>&mdash; ra pud
núun</b> that's the only thing that's wrong
with it. <i>'Dì man pasulayan sa dì pa mapalit.'&mdash;'Mau
ra pud núun,'</i> 'It's good, but you
can't try it out before you buy it.'&mdash;'That's
the only thing that is wrong with it.' <b>1g</b> <b>-y
(ang) pag-[<i>verb</i>]</b>, <b>i-[<i>verb</i>]</b> is the time [so-and-so]
happens. <i>Mauy ipanangpit níya
manday human na,</i> He calls you after he's
finished eating. <i>Pag-adtu níya mau say pag-adtu
nákù,</i> When he went was the time I
went, too. <b>1g1</b> <b>&mdash; pa</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>2e</i>, <i>8b</i>. <b>1h</b> <b>&mdash;
nga [<i>noun</i>]</b> the aforementioned, said. <i>Wà
ku makaila sa maung táwu,</i> I don't know
that particular person. <b>1i</b> <b>&mdash; pay ... &mdash; pay</b>
even though [such-and-such] is the case, [so-and-so]
is true of the same person anyway.
<i>Mu pay mangáyù mu pay mangísug,</i> He asks
a favor, and yet he has the nerve to get angry.
<b>2</b> <b>&mdash; nga [<i>sentence</i>]</b> therefore, consequently.
<i>Sígi kung praktis, mau nà nga maáyu
kung mubayli,</i> I always practice. That's
why I dance well. <i>Sa ámù kanúnay nga mangísug
si Máma. Mau gánì nga dílì layhang
mupaúlì si Pápa,</i> Mother is always angry at
home. That is why even Dad doesn't like to
go home. <b>3</b> <b>&mdash; ra</b> no more, that's all. <i>'Adúna
pay láin?'&mdash;'Mau ra,'</i> 'Is there any more?'&mdash;'That's
all there is.' <b>3a</b> <b>&mdash; ra nga</b> the
same. <i>Mau rang klasíha nà. Purus tagdiyis,</i>
Those are of the same class. They are all
ten cents apiece. <b>4</b> <b>&mdash; ra ug</b> <b>4a</b> it seems. <i>Mu
rag láin nà,</i> It seems to be a different one.
<pb n=1392><b>4b</b> rather. <i>Mu rag giuhaw ku,</i> I am rather
thirsty. <i>Ang báhù dílì mangga, mau rag
nangkà hinúun,</i> The smell is not that of the
mango, it is rather like that of the jackfruit.
<i>Mau ra ug nahuwasan na ku sa ákung kakulbà,</i>
I feel a bit relieved from my fright.
<b>4c</b> as if [so-and-so] were the case. <i>Nagpaduludiskursu
siya mu rag si kinsa,</i> He took
it upon himself to give a speech as though
he were s.o. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B1256] turn out to be
correct. <i>Gisulaysuláyan kug duut ang usa
sa mga timbri, namau bayà,</i> I tried pressing
one of the buttons at random. It happened
to be the right one. <b>2</b> [A13] be the same.
<i>Bísan ug atbang ta sa pulitika magmau lang
gihápun ang átung pagbinatiay,</i> Though we
are opponents in politics, our feelings towards
each other are still the same. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [B1256; b8]
know how to do s.t. <i>Makamau
kang musulat?</i> Do you know how to write?
<i>Wà kuy nakamauhan,</i> I don't know anything.
<b>di-(<-)</b> <i>see</i> <sc>DIMÁU</sc>. <b>paka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a12]
pretend, consider s.t. as right or the one.
<i>Ngánung pakamauhun man nímu nga ang
ákù man ni?</i> Why do you insist this is the
very one, when it is mine? <b>maumáu</b> v [A; a12]
<b>1</b> make temporary repairs by just trying
things out, make do with s.t. less than
what is really needed. <i>Ug maáyu kang mumaumáu
ug áyu, mudágan giyud nang mutúra,</i>
If you are good at fiddling around
with your motorcycle, at least it will run. <b>2</b>
fabricate, make s.t. not real. <i>Sa mga kumunista
ang Diyus usa ka maumáu,</i> To the
communists, God is a figment of man's imagination.
<b>maumáu na sa ginháwa</b> = <sc>MAU</sc>,
<i>1e</i>.

<p><b>ma-un(<-)</b> affix added to verbs and adjectives
to form adjectives which mean 'having the
characteristic of doing or becoming [so-and-so]'.
<i>Malipáyun</i>, @Happy. <i>Maluyáhung tíngug,</i>
In a weak voice. <i>Mapangilyupúung
naghangyù sa Prisidinti nga luwasun ang
íyang anak,</i> With pleas she implored the
President to spare her son. <i>Mapasalígung
balità,</i> Reassuring news. <i>Matuhùtuhúun,</i>
@Gullible, @superstitious.

<p><b>maung</b> <i>n</i> blue @denim. <i>v</i> [A12] wear blue
denim.

<p><b>mauraúra</b> somewhat similar. <i>Ang ibid mauraúra
sa halu ug hitsúra, gáling may sílik
lang sa líug,</i> The agamid lizard is somewhat
similar to the monitor lizard, only it has a
crest on its neck.

<p><b>maut</b> <i>a</i> @hypocrite, one who puts up a praise-*worthy,
but completely false front. <i>Pagkamaut
bayhána, manugilun nga hingatag piru
labihan diayng hakúga,</i> What a hypocrite
<pb n=1393>that woman is. She claims to be generous
but actually she is a terrible tightwad. <i>v</i> [B12]
be, become a hypocrite. <b>-in-</b> <i>a</i> @hypocritical.
<i>v</i> [A13; c1] act hypocritically. <i>Ayawg
minaut kay nasáyud mi sa ímung pagkatáwu,</i>
Don't be hypocritical. We know
what you are.

<p><b>máut</b> (from <i>daut</i>) <i>a</i> <b>1</b> @{not good}, @substandard
in quality. <i>Máut ning ripridyiritúra kay dì
muayis,</i> This refrigerator is no good because
it won't produce ice. <b>2</b> @unfavorable condition
or state. <i>Mubagyu tingáli kay máut
man ang panahun,</i> There seems to be a typhoon
because the weather is bad. <b>3</b> @unpleasant
in ways. <i>Máut ug batásan,</i> @Disagreeable
in his ways. <i>Máut bayà nang mamalíkas,</i>
It's bad to curse. <b>4</b> unpleasant in looks,
smell, and the like. <i>Máut kaáyu árung bahúa
uy,</i> What a bad smell! <i>v</i> [B; a1] be, become
bad, ugly, unpleasant to the senses,
etc. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @badness, @ugliness, @defectiveness.

<p><b>mawu-</b> <i>for words with</i> <b>mawu-</b> <i>see also</i>
<sc>MALU-</sc>.

<p><b>mawungmáwung</b> <i>v</i> [A; c1] cover up, hide
one's feeling. <i>Dúnay mga táwu nga makamau
giyung mumawungmáwung sa ílang kaguul,</i>
There are people who know how to
hide their grief.

<p><b>mawutpis</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> boxer's @mouthpiece. <i>v</i> [A13]
wear a mouthpiece.

<p><b>maw-uy</b> <i>a</i> @{arousing pity}, touching. <i>Maw-uy
kaáyung tan-áwun ang bátà nga makalilímus,</i>
The child beggar was a pitiful sight.

<p><b>may</b> <b>1</b> there is, are, was[** ,] were. <i>May tulu ka
táwung nangítà nímu,</i> There were three persons
looking for you. <i>Kun may isúgù,</i> At
your service (lit. if there is an order to give).
<b>2</b> @have. <i>May sigarilyu ka dihà?</i> Do you have
any cigarettes on you? <b>2a</b> <b>may pagka-</b> be
somewhat. <i>May pagkatabian ni si Áning,</i>
Aning is somewhat talkative. <b>2b</b> <b>&mdash; idad</b> be
of age. <i>May idad na siya ug makabutar na,</i>
He is already of age and he can vote now. <b>3</b>
near a place. <i>Didtu siya magtindug sa may
pultahan,</i> He was standing there by the
door. <b>4</b> some, [so-and-so] long ago, <i>May
duha ka búwan na níyang trabáhu dinhi,</i>
He's been working here for about two
months now. <b>4a</b> <b>&mdash; mga</b> at about [such-and-such]
a time. <i>Didtu siya sa may mga alas
kwatru,</i> He was there at around four. <b>&mdash; láin
pa</b> yes, of course (is there anything or anyone
else). <i>Siya giyuy nagkúhà sa libru kay
siya ra may dihà. May láin pa?</i> He must have
taken the book because he was the only
one there. Who else could have? <i>Kan-un giyud
ni níya. May láin pa?</i> He'll eat this,
don't worry. Would he fail to do so!

<pb n=1394>

<p><b>máya</b> <i>n</i> k.o. small bird found in rice fields,
the chestnut mannikin: <b><i>Lonchura malacca</i></b>.
<b>&mdash; nga bungul</b> <i>n</i> k.o. brown-colored <i>maya</i>
which is believed to be deaf because it is
not easily disturbed or afraid of noise.

<p><b>mayà</b> <i>a</i> @happy and @cheerful in appearance. <i>v</i>
[B4; c16] be, become @gay. <i>Pagmayà kay
adlaw nímu run,</i> Be cheerful. Today is your
birthday. <i>Imayà (mayaa) nang inyung panagway
kay litratúhan na ta,</i> Put on a cheerful
expression because they are going to
take our picture. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> @cheerfulness.

<p><b>mayáman</b> <i>a</i> @rich, @moneyed (colloquial). <i>Mayáman
kaáyu ku run kay bag-ung swildu,</i> I
am very rich now because I have just received
my pay.

<p><b>mayamaya</b>, <b>mayamáya</b> <i>n</i> red snapper, <b><i>Lutianus
spp.</i></b>

mayánà <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental herbs with variously
colored green and purple leaves which
have medicinal uses: <b><i>Coleus blumei</i></b>.

<p><b>mayáus</b> <i>n</i> k.o. thin-bodied slipmouth (<i>palutput</i>).

<p><b>maybay</b> <i>n</i> k.o. large, light green, cooking banana,
only a little smaller than the <i>tinduk</i>.

<p><b>mayhu</b>, <b>mayhum</b> (from <i>humay</i>) <i>n</i> rice (humorous
slang). <i>Ayay! Mayhum diay karun
ang átung kan-un,</i> Goody. We are going to
have rice today. <i>v</i> [A1] eat rice as one's
staple.

<p><b>mayik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @microphone. <b>2</b> @{sound system} with
an amplifier. <i>Mayik ang ílang gigámit sa
bayli kay mahal ang musiku,</i> They used a
sound system for the dance because an orchestra
would be too expensive. <i>v</i> [A1]
use a mike or sound system.

<p><b>maylab</b> <i>n</i> one's @sweetheart or loved one (humorous).
<i>Ímu nang maylab ang ímung kúyug?</i>
Was that your sweetheart that was
with you?

<p><b>maymay</b> <i>v</i> [A; b] @advise, @admonish s.o. in a
nice tone. <i>Maymáyi siyang dílì na maghubughúbug,</i>
Advise and encourage him not
to get drunk any more. <i>n</i> @advice or @admonition.
<b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A3] listen to advice. <i>Ang táwung
dì magpamaymay háyan mahitabù,</i> A
person who does not listen to advice is likely
to get into trouble. <b>ma-un</b> <i>a</i> @admonishing.

<p><b>maynur</b> <i>n</i> one's minor subject. <i>v</i> [A; a2]
take as one's minor.

<p><b>maypáy</b> = <sc>MALAYPÁLAY</sc>.

<p><b>mayrun</b> <i>a</i> @{having money} (colloquial). <i>Mayrun
tingáli ni dà, kay nangimbitar man,</i> You're
probably in the clover today since you're
inviting us.

<p><b>maytir</b> <i>n</i> @{miter joint}. <b>&mdash; baks</b> @{miter box}.

<p><b>Máyu</b> <i>n</i> @May. <i>see</i> <sc>ABRIL</sc> <i>for verb forms</i>: <b>plúris
di &mdash;</b> <i>see</i> <sc>PLÚRIS</sc>.

<pb n=1395>

<p><b>mayukmuk</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @{powdery soil}. <i>Ayaw pagdúlà
sa mayukmuk kay abug kaáyu,</i> Don't play
with the powdery soil because it's very
dusty. <b>1a</b> @{river sediment}. <i>Ang mayukmuk
sa subà nadala sa bahà,</i> The river sediment
was carried off by the flood. <b>2</b> small fry:
little children, anything small or lower in
class. <i>Basta mga mayukmuk lagmit way púl,</i>
If you are a small fry you have no influence.
<i>Nangat[=ú]g na ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The
kids are all asleep now. <i>v</i> [b2] get powdered
soil on one. <b>ka-</b> <i>v</i> [A13] get powdery
soil all over one.

<p><b>máyung</b> <i>a</i> for the weather to be somewhat
@overcast, @sunless. <i>v</i> [B] be, become overcast.
<i>Maáyu rung ipasíyu sa bátà kay nagmáyung
na,</i> It's a fine time to take the baby
for a stroll. It is a little overcast.

<p><b>may-ung</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [C3; c6] have a @resemblance,
make things @{look alike}. <i>Magkamay-ung ug
panagway ang mag-ágaw,</i> The cousins have
a resemblance. <i>Imay-ung ang ímung nawung
sa kang Dulpi nga kataw-anan,</i> Make
your face like Dolphy's funny face. <b>2</b> [A12; b8]
recognize, be familiar to s.o. <i>Mu rag
nakamay-ung ku sa ági niíning sulat,</i> I think
I recognize the handwriting in this letter.
<b>3</b> [A12; b2] notice s.t. <i>Namay-ungan níya
nga may táwung misulud,</i> She noticed a
man entering. <b>ka-</b> <i>n</i> s.t. which resembles s.t.
else. <i>Kamay-ung ang ímung panagway ánang
artistáha,</i> You have a resemblance to that
actor.

<p><b>mayunis</b>, <b>mayunísa</b> <i>n</i> @mayonnaise. <i>v</i> [b] put,
use mayonnaise.

<p><b>mayur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> municipal or city @mayor. <b>2</b> in a
game, the one who has the first play or
turn. <b>3</b> @{major chord or key}. <i>Du mayur,</i> C
major. <b>&mdash; diidad</b> <i>a</i> of legal age. <i>v</i> [B256] be
of legal age. <b>&mdash; dúma</b> = <sc>&mdash; DÚMU</sc> (female).
<b>&mdash; dúmu</b> @majordomo of an estate, hotel,
ship, or other large institutions requiring a
chief steward. <i>v</i> [B156] be, become the
majordomo. <i>For other phrases with</i> <b>mayur</b>
<i>as the first word, see the entry under the
second word.</i> <i>v</i> [A3; a2] be, become mayor.
<i>Si Talyuks ang átung mayurun sa syudad,</i>
Let's make Talyux the mayor in the
city. <b>(<-)</b> <i>v</i> [A2C2; ac3] play off against
one another to see who goes first in the
game. <i>Átung mayúrun kun kinsay muúnag
lábay sa búla,</i> Let's play it off to determine
who will be the first to throw the ball.

<p><b>mayuríya</b> <i>n</i> @majority of a body convened.
<i>Mibutar ang mayuríya sa musiyun,</i> The majority
voted for the motion. <i>Si Usminya nakakuhag
singkuwinta bútus nga mayuríya,</i>
Osmeña got a majority of fifty votes. <i>v</i> [A]
<pb n=1396>get a majority of votes.

<p><b>mayurù</b> <i>n</i> k.o. white upland rice with long
and slender grains, harvested after six
months.

<p><b>mayuskula</b> <i>n</i> majuscule.

<p><b>mga</b> abbreviation for <sc>MANGA</sc>.

<p><b>mi<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>see</i> <sc>KAMI</sc>.

<p><b>mi<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> the note mi. <b>&mdash; mayur</b> E major. <b>&mdash; minur</b>
E minor.

<p><b>m[=ì]</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> representation for the sound made by
a goat. <b>2</b> @goat (slang). <i>Mukáun kug m[=ì] piru
dì kug aw-aw,</i> I eat goat meat but not dog.

<p><b>mi-</b> past punctual active verbal prefix. <i>see</i>
<sc>MU-</sc>.

<p><b>míd</b> <i>n</i> a female household help. <i>v</i> [B156; a12]
be, become a maid. <b>pa-</b> <i>v</i> [A] hire oneself
out as a maid.

<p><b>mídal</b> <i>n</i> @medal. <i>Nakadawat ug mídal ang balidikturyan,</i>
The valedictorian was awarded a
medal. <i>v</i> [A12; b(1)] receive a medal.
<b>bruns</b>, <b>guld</b>, <b>silbir &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> bronze, gold, silver
medal. <b>-ist(->)</b> <i>n</i> gold, bronze, silver @medalist.
<i>v</i> [B1256] become a medal awardee.

<p><b>midalya</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> medal. <b>2</b> religious medal worn
by devotees. <b>2a</b> dried <i>palutput</i>, so called
because of its resemblance to a medal (humorous).
<i>v</i> [A1; c] wear, win, award s.o. a
medal.

<p><b>midalyun</b> <i>n</i> @medallion. <i>v</i> [A1; c] wear, put
a medallion on s.o.

<p><b>mídi</b> <i>n</i> @{midi skirt}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A13] wear a midi
dress. <b>2</b> [c1] make a midi dress.

<p><b>midída</b> <i>n</i> cloth tape measure used in dress-*making.

<p><b>midikal</b> <i>a</i> connected with the practice or
study of medicine.

<p><b>midikilyu</b> = <sc>MIRIKU</sc>.

<p><b>midiku</b> <i>n</i> @physician, @doctor. <b>&mdash; ligal</b> <i>n</i> legal
physician who certifies the medical facts
surrounding a death.

<p><b>mid-in dyapan</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @shoddy in workmanship
or quality. <b>2</b> @weakling, @sickly. <i>Tambuk tan-áwun
apan mid-in dyapan. Dalì rang mayasmì,</i>
She looks fat, but she is weak. She easily
gets sick.

<p><b>midisin</b> <i>n</i> course of medicine. <b>&mdash; kabinit</b> <i>n</i>
@{medicine cabinet}. <b>&mdash; bag</b> <i>n</i> @{medicine bag}.

<p><b>midisína</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @medicine. <i>Pagpalit ug midisína
sa butíka,</i> Buy medicine at the drugstore. <b>2</b>
chemical for the processing of s.t. <i>Midisína
sa kulung,</i> Chemicals for a permanent wave.
<b>3</b> course in medical school.

<p><b>midiya</b> @half. <i>Midiya pulgáda ang gibag-un,</i>
Half an inch thick. <i>Midiya ang bátà sa sinihan,</i>
A child pays half fare in the movies.
<i>Midiya kílu nga karni,</i> Half a kilo of meat.
i- thirty minutes after the hour. <i>Alas dus imidiya,</i>
Two thirty. <i>v</i> [B56] get to be to
<pb n=1397>the half hour. <i>'Alas singku na ba?'&mdash;'Mumidiya
na hinúun,'</i> 'Is it already five o'clock?'&mdash;'It
is nearly five thirty.' <b>&mdash; agwa</b> <i>n</i> a roof
projecting beyond the wall at a downward
angle over the whole length or width of a
house, or just over a window or door. <i>v</i> [A; b]
add an overhang. <b>&mdash; bangku</b> <i>n</i> wind coming
at a forty-five degree angle from directly
in back of a boat. <i>Pabur gihápun sa sakayan
ang hángin nga midiya bangku,</i> A wind
which comes from the back but at an angle
is still favorable to sailboats. <b>&mdash; díya</b> <i>n</i> half
day. <i>Midiya díya ra ang trabáhu basta Sabadu,</i>
We work half-day on Saturdays. <i>v</i> [A; c16]
do s.t. half-day. <b>&mdash; nutsi</b> <i>n</i> the dinner
served at midnight on Christmas. <b>&mdash; pága</b> <i>n</i>
@{half fare}. <b>&mdash; táwu</b> <i>n</i> s.o. who is extraordinarily
short. <b>midiyamidiya</b> <i>v</i> [b(1)] do s.t. in a
moderate way. <i>Midiyamidiyáhi lang pagpadágan
arun dílì ta madisgrasya,</i> Drive at a
moderate rate so we don't meet an accident.
<i>Midiyamidiyáhi ug hugut ang twirka
arun dílì maharùs,</i> Tighten the screw moderately
so it won't get stripped. <b>midiyahan</b>
<i>n</i> <b>1</b> a fifth, so called because it contains half
the volume of a bottle which formerly was
in wide use. <b>2</b> small train station between
two main stations where a train can stop to
take on or discharge passengers or freight
but cannot issue tickets. [+]

<p><b>midiyas</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @socks, @stockings. <b>2</b> @condom (humorous
euphemism). <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b] put on,
wear socks, stockings. <b>2</b> [A; c] use a condom.
<b>-an(<-)</b> <i>n</i> for an animal to have a different
color on its legs so that it looks as if
it is wearing stockings.

<p><b>midiyu &mdash;</b> [adj.] @somewhat, @{a little bit}. <i>Midiyu
hubug ka dà,</i> You're a little bit drunk.
<i>Midiyu língin ang purma,</i> It is somewhat
roundish in shape.

<p><b>midiyus</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @makeshift or @temporary means
to accomplish s.t. <i>Pangitáan ta nig midiyus
arun muand&acaron;r ang makina,</i> Let's look for
some temporary way we can get this engine
to run. <b>2</b> means of resolving a problem.
<i>Kadtung íyang labad sa úlu midiyus lang tu
sa paglikay sa trabáhu,</i> His headache was
just an excuse to get out of doing work. <i>Wà
kuy láing midiyus gawas sa pagpangútang,</i> I
have no other way of resolving the problem
except borrowing money. <i>Ang labing maáyung
midiyus sa ímung ubu,</i> The best remedy
for your cough.

<p><b>midtik</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> Medical Technology course. <i>Ang
íyang gikúhà midtik,</i> He is taking up Med.
Tech. <b>2</b> @housemaid (humorous and depreciatory
word play on míd). <i>Naíbug ka ánang
midtik man nà?</i> Did you fall for that girl
<pb n=1398>when she's just a maid?

<p><b>midtirm</b> <i>n</i> @{mid-term exams}. <i>v</i> [A1] have
the mid-term exams.

<p><b>mid-ub-ánur</b> <i>n</i> @{maid of honor} at a wedding.
<i>v</i> [A12; c6] be, become the maid of honor.

<p><b>mídul kard</b> <i>n</i> name given to the pieces in
mahjong from 2 through 8 as compared to
the tirminális (1 and 9).

<p><b>midwayip</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> trained @midwife. <b>2</b> course of
midwifery. <b>3</b> maid (humorous, deprecatory
word play on míd). <i>v</i> [B156; a12] be, become
a midwife. <b>-iri</b> <i>n</i> @midwifery.

<p><b>midyur</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> major in the military or police
force. <b>2</b> major field of study in an academic
course. <i>Sáyans ang íyang midyur,</i> She is a
science major. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [B126; a12] be, make
s.o. a major. <b>2</b> [A; c16] take a certain
course as one's major.

<p><b>migkap</b> <i>v</i> [B146] be @{slothfully inactive}. <i>Ang
táwung magmigkap dì madúgay niíning trabahúa,</i>
A person who loafs will not last long
on this job.

<p><b>migkat</b> = <sc>MIGKAP</sc>.

<p><b>migrupunu</b> = <sc>MIKRUPUNU</sc>.

<p><b>mihihì</b> = <sc>BAHÌHÌ</sc>.

<p><b>mihìmihì</b> <i>v</i> [A; b6] for a child to whimper or
cry softly from discomfort or naughtiness.
<i>Nagmihìmihì na sab si Bíbi. Katulgun tingáli,</i>
Baby is whimpering again. She probably
is sleepy. <i>Ayaw kug mihìmihii ug dúna kay
pangayúun,</i> Don't whimper at me if you
want s.t.

<p><b>mihit</b> = <sc>NIHIT</sc>.

<p><b>mihúras</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @improvements. <i>Ang Mayur walay
nahímung mihúras hangtud karun,</i> The
Mayor has not made any improvements to
this day. <i>Kining mangga usa lang sa daghang
mihúras niíning yutáa,</i> This mango tree is
only one of the many improvements on this
land. <b>1a</b> favor of a financial nature. <i>Unsang
mga mihúras ang ímung nahátag kaníya nga
dakù man siyag útang buut nímu?</i> What
have you done for him that he owes you a
debt of gratitude? <b>2</b> @virtues, @{good qualities}.
<i>Unsa may mga mihúras niánang bayhána
nga nakagustu man ka níya?</i> What are the
good qualities that made you like that woman?
<b>3</b> @assets. <i>Kanang magtiayúna dakù kaáyug
mihúras nga ikabílin sa ílang mga anak,</i>
That couple has a large number of possessions
to leave their children. <i>v</i> [A12] make
improvements. <i>Dílì makamihúras kaaáyu ang
mayur sa íyang lungsud kun kuntra partídu
siya sa administrasiyun,</i> A town mayor can
make few improvements in his municipality
if he is not aligned with the administration.

<p><b>mík</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> a Mexican copper coin worth one-hundredth 
<pb n=1399>of the Mexican peso. Formerly
circulated, it is now used only as offerings
to spirits or used topically for medicinal
purposes. <b>2</b> @{fake coin}.

<p><b>mikà</b> <i>a</i> @idle, not doing things. <i>v</i> [B145] <b>1</b> sit
around lazily. <i>Magmikà lang ang babáying
way hibangkaágan sa panimalay,</i> A girl who
knows nothing about household work sits
around lazily. <b>2</b> go about in low spirits. <i>Unsay
nahitabù nga nagmikà ka man?</i> What
happened that you are in such low spirits?

<p><b>mikanikal</b> <i>n</i> course of mechanic engineering.
<b>&mdash; indyinir</b> <i>n</i> @{mechanical engineer}. <b>&mdash; indyiníring</b>
= <sc>MIKANIKAL</sc>.

<p><b>mikaniku</b> <i>n</i> @mechanic. <i>v</i> [B156; a2b8] be,
become a mechanic.

<p><b>mikanismu</b> <i>n</i> @mechanism, the workings of a
machine.

<p><b>mik-ap<hi rend=sub>1</i></b> <i>v</i> [A; b] make up a lacking subject
or part of a subject in school. <i>Kinahángang
mik-ápan ang absin,</i> You have to make up
your absences.

<p><b>mik-ap<hi rend=sub>2</i></b> <i>n</i> @make-up, @cosmetics. <i>Bagà siyag
mik-ap,</i> She had heavy make-up on. <i>v</i> [A; b]
put make-up on s.o. or on oneself.

<p><b>míki</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> k.o. large yellow noodle made of
wheat flour. <b>2</b> dish made of such noodles. v
<b>1</b> [A; a2] make, make into noodles. <b>2</b> [A13; b(1)]
prepare a dish of noodles.

<p><b>mikrubyu</b> <i>n</i> @microbes.

<p><b>mikru krúm</b> <i>n</i> @mercurochrome.

<p><b>mikrupunu</b> <i>n</i> @microphone. <i>v</i> [A13] use a
microphone.

<p><b>mikruskupyu</b> <i>n</i> @microscope. <i>v</i> [A1; b6] look
at with a microscope.

<p><b>mikskla</b> <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; a] @mix solids or liquids.
<i>Mikskláha ang pintal ug túbig,</i> Mix the paint
and the water together. <i>Mikskláhi ug pulug
ang minása nga simintu,</i> Mix dye into the
cement mixture. <b>1a</b> [A1] prepare s.t. that
has to be mixed. <i>Nakamikskla ka na ba ug
ilimnun?</i> Have you prepared (mixed) the
drinks? <i>n</i> @mixture, proportion in which s.t.
is mixed. <i>Ispísung mikskla,</i> A thick mixture.

<p><b>mil</b> <i>n</i> @thousand. <i>Ang balur sa ákung awtu trayinta
mil,</i> My car is worth thirty thousand
pesos. <i>v</i> <i>see</i> <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>. <b>&mdash; únu, dusyintus,
etc.</b> One thousand one, two, etc. <b>milmíl</b> <i>a</i>
valued in thousands. <i>Dì ku makaabut pagpalit
niánang mga milmíl nga kantidad,</i> I
cannot afford to buy things that cost in
three figures.

<p><b>míl</b> <i>v</i> [A; c6] post in the mail. <i>Imíl ba kining
suwáta?</i> Shall I mail this letter?

<p><b>milagru</b> <i>n</i> <b>1</b> @miracle. <i>Milagru ray makaluwas
sa masakitun,</i> Only a miracle can save the
sick man. <b>2</b> <b>&mdash; ug</b> it would be a miracle if
[so-and-so] were to happen. <i>Milagrug mutúgut 
<pb n=1400>si Pápa mu pagpatan-aw nímug sini,</i>
It will be a snowy day in May before your
father will let you go to the show. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A; b6]
perform miracles. <b>2</b> [A1] do s.t. which
is completely unexpected. <i>Nagmilagru uruyng
tihik nga nanghátag,</i> A miracle! The
cheapskate is giving out money. <b>-sa</b> = <sc>MILAGRÚSU</sc>
(female). <b>-su</b> <i>a</i> @miraculous. <i>Ang milagrúsung
birhin sa Patíma,</i> The miraculous
Virgin of Fatima. <i>v</i> [B1246] be, become
miraculous.

<p><b>milàmilà</b> <i>v</i> [B146; a4] for eyes to be watery,
full of pus. <i>Gimilàmilà (nagmilàmilà) ang
mata sa palahúbug,</i> The drunkard's eyes are
all watery.

<p><b>milangkuliya</b>, <b>milangkulíya</b> <i>v</i> [A13; a4] feel
@melancholic, esp. from homesickness. <i>Gimilangkulíya
nà siya sa íyang trátung túa sa Amirika,</i>
She is homesick for her boy friend
in the States.

<p><b>miláru</b> <i>n</i> thick syrup from brown sugar. <i>v</i>
[A; a] make thick brown-sugar syrup.

<p><b>milbaks</b> <i>n</i> @mailbox.

<p><b>milibiki</b> <i>n</i> brace, a carpentry tool used for
boring wood. <i>v</i> [A; a12] use this tool.

<p><b>miligrámu</b> <i>n</i> @milligram.

<p><b>miliguy</b> = <sc>KAWATKAWAT</sc>. <i>see</i> <sc>KÁWAT</sc>.

<p><b>milimitru</b> <i>n</i> @millimeter.

<p><b>milindris</b> <i>n</i> k.o. ornamental shrub with white,
pink, or purplish flowers growing on small
terminal panicles: <b><i>Lagerstroemia indica</i></b>.

<p><b>milisya</b> <i>n</i> collective term for Filipino recruits
during World War I. <b>-nu</b> <i>n</i> member of the
Filipino militia. <i>v</i> [B156; c1] become a
member of the Philippine militia.

<p><b>militar</b> <i>n</i> the @military, @soldiers. <i>Nanghilabut
ang militar sa iliksiyun,</i> The military interfered
with the election. <b>pwirsa &mdash;</b> @{military
force}. <b>salúdu &mdash;</b> @{military salute}. <b>upisyal &mdash;</b>
@{military officials}. <i>v</i> <b>1</b> [A1; b6] wear a military
uniform. <i>Gimilitaran ang sundálung namatay,</i>
The soldier who died was dressed in
a military uniform. <b>2</b> [B1356; c1] become
a military man. <b>3</b> [c1] be done in a military
manner. <i>Militarun (imilitar) ang kasal sa ákung
manghud kay níbi may íyang pamanhunun,</i>
My younger sister will be married in
a military wedding because the groom is a
navy man.

<p><b>*milk pawdir &mdash;</b> <i>n</i> @{powdered milk}.

<p><b>milma</b>b <i>v</i> [B; a] @lessen, @{slow down}. <i>Bísan tigúlang
na siya wà mumilma ang íyang kusug,</i>
Even when he was old, his strength did not
decrease. <i>Nagmilma na ang dágan sa trák,</i>
The truck slowed down. <i>Hilánat ang nakamilma
sa íyang gána sa pagkáun,</i> Fever has
lessened his appetite. <i>Milmáhan ta ang paggastugastu,</i>
We will go slow on spending.
